古文：三年，卒，年六十八，特赠太子少师。尧佐进士及第，历魏县、中牟尉，为《海喻》一篇，人奇其志。
现代文：陈尧佐字希元，其先辈为河朔人。高祖陈翔，为蜀州新井县令，因而安家在那里，于是为阆州阆中人。陈尧佐进士及第，历任魏县、中牟县尉，撰《海喻》一篇，人们对他的志向表示惊奇。
English: Chen Xizao, whose ancestors were from Hexuo, and his great-great-grandfather Chen Xiang, who was the governor of Xinjing County in Shuzhou and therefore settled there, were both from Yanzhong County in Ganzhou. Chen Xizao, who was the second and third generation of Wei County and Zhongmou County officers, wrote an article for "Hai Yu," and people were surprised by his ambition.

古文：以试秘书省校书郎知朝邑县，会其兄尧叟使陕西，发中人方保吉罪，保吉怨之，诬尧佐以事，降本县主簿。
现代文：以试秘书省校书郎的身份知朝邑县，恰逢其兄陈尧叟出使陕西，揭发宦官方保吉的罪行，方保吉怨恨他，以事诬陷尧佐，降为朝邑县主簿。
English: He knew Chaoyu County as a probationary secretary of the provincial school scribe, which coincided with the time when his brother Chen Yu sent an envoy to Shaanxi to expose the crimes of the official Bao Ji. Fang Bao Ji resented him, framed him for the incident, and was demoted to the chief accountant of Chaoyu County.

古文：徙下邽，迁秘书郎、知真源县，开封府司录参军事，迁府推官。
现代文：移任下圭阝县主簿，升任秘书郎、真源知县，任开封府司录参军事，升开封府推官。
English: He was transferred to the post of the chief bookkeeper of Guizhou County, promoted to the post of secretary of Lang and Zhenyuan County, served as the secretary of Kaifeng Prefecture, participated in the military, and was promoted to the deputy of Kaifeng Prefecture.

古文：坐言事忤旨，降通判潮州。
现代文：因言事忤逆谕旨，降为潮州通判。
English: Due to the fact that the verdict was reversed, it was downgraded to the Chaozhou general verdict.

古文：修孔子庙，作韩吏部祠，以风示潮人。
现代文：修建孔子庙，造作韩吏部祠，以讽劝潮州人民。
English: He built a Confucius Temple and a Korean cadre's shrine, using irony to persuade the people of Chaozhou.

古文：民张氏子与其母濯于江，鳄鱼尾而食之，母弗能救。
现代文：百姓张氏子与其母亲在江中洗澡，鳄鱼尾随而吃掉其子，母亲不能救助。
English: Mr. Zhang and his mother were bathing in the river. The crocodile followed them and ate their son. The mother was unable to save him.

古文：尧佐闻而伤之，命二吏拏小舟操网往捕。
现代文：尧佐听说后为之伤心，命令二吏划小船拿着网前去捕捉。
English: Hearing of this, Yuasa was heartbroken and ordered the two officials to row a small boat with a net to catch the fish.

古文：鳄至暴，非可网得，至是，鳄弭受网，作文示诸市而烹之，人皆惊异。
现代文：鳄鱼最为凶暴，不能网到，到这时，鳄鱼顺服被网住，尧佐写文章把鳄鱼示众街市而烹之，人们都感到惊异。
English: The crocodile is the most ferocious and cannot be caught by the net. At this time, the crocodile was obediently caught by the net. Xun Zuo wrote an article to show the crocodile to the public and cooked it. People were surprised.

古文：召还，直史馆、知寿州。
现代文：召尧佐回朝廷，任直史馆、知寿州。
English: He was summoned back to the imperial court and appointed to the direct history museum in Chishushu.

古文：岁大饥，出奉米为糜粥食饿者，吏人悉献米至，振数万人。
现代文：当年大饥荒，尧佐拿出俸米做成粥供饥饿的人吃，吏人都献出大米，赈济几万人。
English: During that year's great famine, 佐 took out rice to make porridge for the hungry to eat, and officials donated rice to help tens of thousands of people.

古文：徙庐州，以父疾请归，提点开封府界事，后为两浙转运副使。
现代文：移任庐州，因父亲患病请求辞官回家，提点开封府界事，后来为两浙转运副使。
English: He was transferred to Bozhou, requested to return home due to his father's illness, raised a point to open the boundary between the two provinces, and later became the deputy envoy for transportation between the two provinces.

古文：钱塘江篝石为堤，堤再岁辄坏。
现代文：钱塘江用竹笼装石为堤，堤第二年就毁坏。
English: The Qiantang River used bamboo cages loaded with stones as dikes, and the dikes were destroyed the following year.

古文：尧佐请下薪实土乃坚久，丁谓不以为是，徙京西转运使，后卒如尧佐议。
现代文：尧佐请求放进柴薪装满泥土才坚固耐久，丁谓不以为是，尧佐移任京西转运使，后终于按尧佐的建议实行。
English: He requested that they put in firewood and fill it with soil to make it strong and durable. However, they didn't think it was necessary. He was transferred to the post of the Beijing-Western transfer envoy, and finally, it was implemented according to his suggestion.

古文：徙河东路，以地寒民贫，仰石炭以生，奏除其税。
现代文：移任河东路转运使，以河东土地贫瘠百姓贫困，依靠石炭为生，奏请朝廷免除税收。
English: He was transferred to the post of the transporter of the Hedong Road, and petitioned the imperial court to exempt the tax from the barren land and poverty-stricken people of Hedong, who depended on coal for their livelihood.

古文：又减泽州大广冶铁课数十万。
现代文：又减少泽州大广冶铁课税几十万。
English: In addition, the tax levied on Zezhou Dagangye Iron and Steel was reduced by several hundred thousand yuan.

古文：徙河北，母老祈就养，召纠察在京刑狱，为御试编排官，坐置等误降官，监鄂州茶场。
现代文：移任河北，母亲年老请求就近侍养，召他纠察在京刑狱，为御试编排官，因安排等次失误被降官，监鄂州茶场。
English: He was transferred to Hebei Province, and his elderly mother asked him to stay close to her, calling him to picket the Beijing Penal Prison, to serve as a probationary officer, to be demoted due to a series of mistakes in arrangements, and to supervise the Huzhou tea garden.

古文：天禧中，河决，起知滑州，造木龙以杀水怒，又筑长堤，人呼为 陈公堤 。
现代文：天禧年中，黄河决口，起用滑州知州，制造木笼以减除水怒，又修筑长堤，人们称作 陈公堤 。
English: In the middle of the Jubilee Year, when the Yellow River burst its banks, the governor of Luzhou, Chizhou, was employed to make wooden cages to reduce the fury of the water, and to build a long embankment, known as the Chen Gong Embankment.

古文：初营永定陵，复徙京西转运使，入为三司户部副使，徙度支，同修《真宗实录》。
现代文：开始营造永定陵，又移任京西转运使，入为三司户部副使，移任度支副使，同修《真宗实录》。
English: He began to build the Yongding Mausoleum, and was transferred to the West Beijing Relocation Envoy, and became the Deputy Envoy of the Third Division of the Household Department, the Deputy Envoy of the Second Division of the Household Department, and a practitioner of the "Real Record of the True Sect."

古文：不试中书，特擢知制诰兼史馆修撰，知通进、银台司。
现代文：没有应试中书，特地提升为知制诰兼史馆修撰、知通进银台司。
English: There was no middle school textbook for the exam, so he was specially promoted to be a scholar and a historian, and a scholar and a member of the Bank of Taiwan.

古文：进枢密密直学士、知河南府，徙并州。
现代文：进升枢密直学士、知河南府，移任并州。
English: He was promoted to the direct bachelor of the Privy Council, and transferred to Henan Province.

古文：每汾水暴涨，州民辄忧扰，尧佐为筑堤，植柳数万本，作柳溪，民赖其利。
现代文：每次汾水暴涨，并州百姓往往忧虑，尧佐替他们修筑堤防，栽植柳树几万株，修造柳溪，百姓赖其利。
English: Every time the flood water surges, and the people of the state are often worried, Xing Zuo builds a dike for them, plants tens of thousands of willow trees, builds a willow stream, and the people rely on it.

古文：召同修《三朝史》，代弟尧咨同知开封府，累迁右谏议大夫，为翰林学士，遂拜枢密副使。
现代文：召他同修《三朝史》，代理弟弟陈尧咨同知开封府，累迁右谏议大夫，为翰林学士，于是授官枢密副使。
English: He was called to study the "History of the Three Dynasties" together with his acting younger brother, Chen Bingzhe, who had the same knowledge of the opening of the feudal government, and was successively moved to the right to be a doctor, and was a scholar of Hanlin, so he was awarded the post of Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：祥符知县陈诂治严急，吏欲罪诂，乃空县逃去，太后果怒。而诂连吕夷简亲，执政以嫌不敢辨。
现代文：祥符知县陈诂治理严厉苛刻，官吏打算加罪陈诂，就使县为之一空逃去，太后果然愤怒；但陈诂与吕夷简连亲，执政大臣以嫌不敢争辩。
English: Xiangfu knew that the governance of Chen Xi in the county was strict and harsh. The officials intended to add a crime to Chen Xi, so they made the county flee empty-handed. The emperor was furious; however, Chen Xi and Lv Yijian were relatives, and the ruling minister did not dare to argue.

古文：事下枢密院，尧佐独曰： 罪诂则奸吏得计，后谁敢复绳吏者？ 诂由是得免。
现代文：事情传送至枢密院，尧佐一个人说： 惩处陈诂则奸吏得计，以后谁敢再约束胥吏呢？ 陈诂因此得以免罪。
English: The matter was referred to the Privy Council, and one of the Privy Councillors said, "If Chen Xi is punished, then the traitors will succeed. Who will dare to restrain the traitors in the future? Chen Xi was thus exonerated."

古文：以给事中参知政事，迁尚书吏部侍郎。
现代文：尧佐以给事中的身份参予朝廷政事，升任尚书吏部侍郎。
English: Shinsuke participated in the affairs of the imperial court as an aide-de-camp, and was promoted to the position of chamberlain of the Imperial Secretariat.

古文：太后崩，执政多罢，以户部侍郎知永兴军。
现代文：太后去世，执政大臣多被免除职务，尧佐以户部侍郎的身份知永兴军。
English: When the empress dowager died, most of the ruling ministers were relieved of their duties, and sa assumed the identity of the steward of the household and became known as Yongxingjun.

古文：过郑，为郡人王文吉以变事告，下御史中丞范讽劾治，而事乃辨。
现代文：经过郑州，被郡人王文吉以反叛事告发，传送御史中丞范讽弹劾处理，而事情才辨明。
English: After passing through Zhengzhou, he was denounced as a rebel by Wang Wenji, a county official, and was sent to be impeached and dealt with, and only then was the matter clarified.

古文：改知庐州，徙同州，复徙永兴军。
现代文：改任庐州知州，移任同州，又移任永兴军。
English: He was transferred to Zhangzhou Zhizhou, transferred to Tongzhou, and transferred to Yongxing Army.

古文：初，太后遣宦者起浮图京兆城中，前守姜遵尽毁古碑碣充砖甓用，尧佐奏曰： 唐贤臣墓石，今十亡七八矣。
现代文：开始，太后派宦官在京兆城中起造佛塔，前任长官姜遵把古碑古碣全部毁掉充作砖瓦用，尧佐奏说： 唐代贤臣墓碑，现在已损失十分之七八了。
English: At the beginning, the empress dowager sent eunuchs to build a pagoda in the capital city of Beijing. The previous governor, Jiang Zun, destroyed all the ancient monuments and used them as bricks and tiles. Yu Zasao said: The tombstones of the wise men of the Tang Dynasty have now lost seven or eight out of ten.

古文：子孙深刻大书，欲传之千载，乃一旦与瓦砾等，诚可惜也。
现代文：子孙深深地镌刻大字，是想传之千载，一旦与瓦砾等同，实在是可惜。
English: Descendants deeply engraved large characters, is to be passed down for thousands of years, once equated with rubble, it is a pity.

古文：其未毁者，愿敕州县完护之。 徙郑州。
现代文：那些没有被毁坏的，希望敕令州县完整保护。 移任郑州。
English: Those that haven't been destroyed, I hope will be completely protected by Lingzhou County and transferred to Zhengzhou.

古文：会作章惠太后园陵，州供张甚严，赐书褒谕。
现代文：恰逢修造章惠太子园陵，郑州陈设之物很严格，赐书褒谕。
English: It coincided with the renovation of the garden of Prince Hui, and the decoration of Zhengzhou was very strict, and the book was highly praised.

古文：既而拜同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：不久授任同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Shimohei Shoji and the title of Shikenden Daigaku Shoshi.

古文：以灾异数见，罢为淮康军节度使、同中书门下平章事、判郑州。
现代文：因灾异几次出现，罢为淮康军节度使、同中书门下平章事、判郑州。
English: Due to the occurrence of disasters several times, Zhengzhou was designated as the military envoy of the Huai-Kang Dynasty, and was awarded the honorary title of Zhengzhou.

古文：以太子太师致仕，卒，赠司空兼侍中，谥文惠。
现代文：以太子太师的身份退休，去世后，赠司空兼侍中，谥号文惠。
English: He retired as crown prince and grand master, and after his death, he was given the title of tsukasa and chamberlain, and the posthumous name of Munhye.

古文：尧佐少好学，父授诸子经，其兄未卒业，尧佐窃听已成诵。
现代文：尧佐从小爱好学习，父亲教授众子经书，其兄长没有完成学业，尧佐偷听已成诵。
English: His father taught his children the scriptures, but his brother did not complete his studies. He has learned to recite by eavesdropping.

古文：初肄业锦屏山，后从种放于终南山，及贵，读书不辍。
现代文：开始肄业锦屏山，后师从种放于终南山，等到显贵，读书没有中断。
English: He began his studies in Jinping Mountain, and his successor was placed in Nanshan from the seed to the end, and until he was distinguished, he did not interrupt his studies.

古文：善古隶八分，为方丈字，笔力端劲，老犹不衰。
现代文：善于古隶八分，写一丈见方的字，笔力端正遒劲，年老还是不衰。
English: He is good at the ancient eight-point system, can write square characters, and his penmanship is correct and vigorous. He is still vigorous in old age.

古文：尤工诗。
现代文：尤其工于诗。
English: Zou is particularly good at writing poetry.

古文：性俭约，见动物，必戒左右勿杀，器服坏，随辄补之，曰： 无使不全见弃也。 号 知余子 。
现代文：性情勤俭节约，看见动物必定告诫左右侍人不要杀害。器物衣服坏了，随时就缝补，说 ：无非是使之不全部被丢弃。 号称 知馀子 。
English: His disposition is diligent, frugal, and thrifty, and when he sees an animal, he will certainly admonish the attendants around him not to kill it. If the utensils or clothes are broken, he will sew them up at any time, saying, "It's just so that they won't all be thrown away." He is known as Chiyuzo.

古文：即召渐至京师，授颍州长史。丁谓等知其无他，得改凤州团练推官，迁耀州节度推官。
现代文：自己写墓志说 ：年寿八十二不为夭折，官一品不为低贱，使相接受俸禄不为耻辱，这三者大略可以归息于父亲栖神之地了。 陈抟曾对他的父亲说： 您三个儿子都当为将相，惟有中子显贵而且年寿高。 
English: Writing his own epitaph, he said, "To live to the age of eighty-two is not to die young, to be an official is not to be lowly, to receive a salary is not to be humiliated, these three things can be roughly attributed to the land of the father's god." Chen Xi once said to his father, "Your three sons should all be generals, but only the middle son is distinguished and has a high life expectancy."

古文：卒，有文集十五卷，自号金龟子。
现代文：后来果像陈抟所说的那样。尧佐有《集》三十卷，又有《潮阳编》、《野庐编》、《愚丘集》、《遣兴集》。
English: Later, it turned out to be as Chen Yao said. He had the "Collection" of thirty volumes, as well as the "Chaoyang Collection," the "Wild Goose Collection," the "Fool's Column Collection" and the "Juan Xing Collection."

古文：宋庠，字公序，安州安陆人，后徙开封之雍丘。
现代文：宋庠，字公序，安州安陆人，后来迁居开封雍丘。
English: Song Xi, Zi Gongzhu, Anzhou Anlu people, later moved to Kaifeng Yongqiu.

古文：父杞，尝为九江掾，与其妻钟祷于庐阜。
现代文：他的父亲宋王己，曾任九江掾，与妻子钟氏在庐阜祈祷。
English: His father, Song Wangqi, was once the governor of Jiujiang, and he and his wife, Zhong, prayed in Suifu.

古文：钟梦道士授以书曰： 以遗尔子。 视之，《小戴礼》也，已而庠生。
现代文：钟氏梦见道士授给她书说 ：把它送给你儿子。 一看，是《小戴礼》，不久宋庠出生。
English: Ms. Zhong had a dream that a Taoist priest gave her a book and said, "Give it to your son." At first glance, it was Xiao Dai Li. Soon after, Song Tao was born.

古文：他日见许真君像，即梦中见者。
现代文：一天看见许真君的像，就是她梦中所见到的。
English: One day, she saw the image of Xu Zhenjun, which was what she had seen in her dream.

古文：庠天圣初举进士，开封试、礼部皆第一，擢大理评事、同判襄州。
现代文：宋庠，天圣初年，举进士，开封府试、试礼部都是第一名，提拔任大理评事、同判襄州。
English: Song Qi, the first year of Tian Sheng, was promoted to the first place in the examination and ceremonial department of Kaifeng Prefecture. He was promoted to the position of Dali critic and co-judge of Xiangzhou.

古文：召试，迁太子中允、直史馆，历三司户部判官，同修起居注，再迁左正言。
现代文：皇帝召他考试，升为太子中允、直史馆，历任三司户部判官，同修起居注，又升左正言。
English: The emperor summoned him to take an examination, and he was promoted to the position of the Prince's Middle Advisor, the Direct History Museum, the three successive judges of the Household Department, the practitioner's living note, and the left righteous speech.

古文：郭皇后废，庠与御史伏阁争论，坐罚金。
现代文：郭皇后被废，宋庠与御史伏在官署争辩，被处以罚金。
English: Empress Guo was deposed, and Song Tao and Gu Shifu argued at the government office and were fined.

古文：久之，知制诰。
现代文：过了很久，宋庠又任知制诰。
English: After a long time, Song Tao was appointed to the position of chihsiao.

古文：时亲策贤良、茂才等科，而命与武举人杂视。
现代文：当时仁宗亲自考试策问贤良、茂才等科，而命令他们与武举人混杂一起考察。
English: At that time, Emperor Nanzong personally examined and questioned the virtuous, the talented, and other subjects, and ordered them to investigate together with the people of Wuhu.

古文：庠言： 非所以待天下士，宜如本朝故事，命有司设次具饮膳，斥武举人令别试。 诏从之。
现代文：宋庠说 ：这不是所用以对待天下士人的方法，宜按本朝的先例，命令有关部门设放用具饮食，斥退武举人令他们另外考试。 
English: Song Tao said: This is not the method used to treat the world's scholars. It is appropriate to follow the precedent of this dynasty and order the relevant departments to set up equipment and meals, reject martial law and order them to take another exam.

古文：兼史馆修撰、知审刑院。
现代文：仁宗下诏按他的建议办。宋庠兼任史馆修撰、知审刑院。
English: Emperor Jinzong issued an edict to do as he suggested, and Emperor Songzong concurrently served as the editor of the History Museum and the Censor of the Penal Colony.

古文：密州豪王澥私酿酒，邻人往捕之，澥绐奴曰： 盗也。 尽使杀其父子四人。
现代文：密州土豪王氵解私自酿酒，邻居前往捕捉他，王氵解欺骗奴仆说： 他们是强盗。 叫来所有奴仆杀邻居父子四人。
English: A local tyrant in the state of Michoacán tricked his slaves into drinking his home-brewed liquor. His neighbors went to catch him. The tyrant tricked his slaves and said, "They are robbers." He called all his slaves to kill four of his neighbors, a father and his son.

古文：州论奴以法，澥独不死。
现代文：密州官府按法律将奴仆判罪，王氵解独没判死罪。
English: The Misshou government convicted the slave according to the law, but did not sentence Wang Lijie Du to death.

古文：宰相陈尧佐右澥，庠力争，卒抵澥死。
现代文：宰相陈尧佐庇护王氵解，宋庠力争要治罪，终于判王氵解死罪。
English: Prime Minister Chen Yingza sheltered Wang Xie, Song Ying struggled to punish him, and finally sentenced Wang Xie to death.

古文：改权判吏部流内铨，迁尚书刑部员外郎。
现代文：宋庠改判吏部流内铨，升尚书刑部员外郎。
English: Song Xuan changed his sentence to the Inner Palace of the Ministry of Justice and promoted Gao Rong, a member of the Ministry of Justice, to the Ministry of Justice.

古文：仁宗欲以为右谏议大夫、同知枢密院事，中书言故事无自知制诰除执政者，乃诏为翰林学士。
现代文：仁宗想任命宋庠为右谏议大夫、同知枢密院事，中书说本朝先例没有从知制诰授宰相职务者，于是诏宋庠为翰林学士。
English: Emperor Renzong wanted to appoint Song Jie as the doctor of right eunuch's deliberation, and Tongzhi Privy Councillor, but the Chinese text said that there was no precedent in this dynasty for conferring the position of prime minister from the eunuch, so he appointed Song Jie as the scholar of Hanlin.

古文：帝遇庠厚，行且大用矣。
现代文：仁宗对待宋庠很看重，行将重用他。
English: Rinzong attaches great importance to Song Tao and will continue to make use of him.

古文：庠初名郊，李淑恐其先己，以奇中之，言曰： 宋，受命之号；郊，交也。
现代文：宋庠起初叫宋郊，李淑担心他领先自己，以命运不好中伤他，上奏说： 宋，是朝廷接受天命的称号；郊，就是交。
English: At first, Song Xuan was called Song Jiao. Li Shu was worried that he was ahead of himself and slandered him with a bad fate. He said: Song is the title that the imperial court accepts the fate of heaven; Jiao is to communicate.

古文：合姓名言之为不祥。 帝弗为意，他日以谕之，因改名庠。
现代文：把姓名合在一起来说是不吉祥。 仁宗没有当作一回事，有一天，仁宗把这事告诉了宋庠，于是就改成现名宋庠。
English: It is not auspicious to put the names together, and Rinzong did not take it seriously. One day, Rinzong told this to Song Tao, so he changed his name to his current name, Song Tao.

古文：宝元中，以右谏议大夫参知政事。
现代文：宝元年间，宋庠以右谏议大夫衔参知政事。
English: In the first year of the Hōgen era, Song Xuan participated in the political affairs of the government as the right-hand eunuch.

古文：庠为相儒雅，练习故事，自执政，遇事辄分别是非。
现代文：宋庠任宰相，学问深湛，气度雍容，熟练通晓旧时的事，自从他执政，碰上事情动辄要分辨是非对错。
English: Song Tao was the prime minister. He was well-educated, good-natured, and well-versed in ancient history. Since he came to power, he had to distinguish between right and wrong.

古文：尝从容论及唐入阁仪，庠退而上奏曰：
现代文：他曾从容评论唐朝人入礼节，宋庠退朝后上奏说：
English: He once calmly commented on the Tang Dynasty people entering the etiquette festival, and the Song Dynasty retiring, saying:

古文：入阁，乃有唐只日于紫宸殿受常朝之仪也。
现代文： 入，乃是唐朝逢单日在紫宸殿接受平常朝见的礼节。
English: It is the etiquette of the Tang Dynasty to receive the usual morning greeting at the Courtyard of the Purple Pagoda on a single day.

古文：唐有大内，又有大明宫，宫在大内之东北，世谓之东内，高宗以后，天子多在。
现代文：唐代有大内，又有大明宫，大明宫在大内的东北，世人称之为东内，唐高宗以后，天子多住在东内。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was Dainai and Daming Palace. Daming Palace was in the northeast of Dainai, which was called Dong Nai by the world. After Emperor Gaozong of the Tang Dynasty, most emperors lived in Dong Nai.

古文：大明宫之正南门曰丹凤门，门内第一殿曰含元殿，大朝会则御之；第二殿曰宣政殿，谓之正衙，朔望大册拜则御之；第三殿曰紫宸殿，谓之上阁，亦曰内衙，只日常朝则御之。
现代文：大明宫的正南门叫丹凤门，丹凤门内第一殿叫含元殿，大朝会时皇帝就使用它；丹凤门内第二殿叫宣政殿，称作正衙，每月朔望日大册封拜官时皇帝就使用它；丹凤门内第三殿叫紫宸殿，称作上，也叫内衙，逢单日大臣朝见，皇帝就使用它。
English: The main south gate of the Daming Palace is called the Danfeng Gate. The first hall inside the Danfeng Gate is called the Hangyuan Hall, and the emperor uses it during the Grand Imperial Conference. The second hall inside the Danfeng Gate is called the Xuanzheng Hall, and is called the Zhengqi Hall. The emperor uses it when he pays homage to officials on the New Year's Day. The third hall inside the Danfeng Gate is called the Zijian Hall, and is called the Shang, and is also called the Neiqi Hall. The emperor uses it every single day when ministers meet for the first time.

古文：天子坐朝，须立伏于正衙殿，或乘舆止御紫宸，即唤仗自宣政殿两门入，是谓东、西上阁门也。
现代文：天子坐朝，必须在正衙殿前设立仪仗队，或者乘车只到紫宸殿，就唤仪仗从宣政殿两个门口进来，这叫作东、西上门。
English: When the Son of Heaven sits in the morning, a guard of honor must be set up in front of the main hall, or if you only go to the purple hall by car, you can call the guard of honor to come in from the two doors of the Xuan Zheng Hall, which are called the east and west doors.

古文：以本朝宫殿视之：宣德门，唐丹凤门也；大庆殿，唐含元殿也；文德殿，唐宣政殿也；紫宸殿，唐紫宸殿也。
现代文： 以本朝宫殿来看：宣德门，相当唐朝的丹凤门；大庆殿，相当于唐朝含元殿；文德殿，相当唐朝宣政殿；紫宸殿相当唐朝紫宸殿。
English: Looking at the palaces of this dynasty: Xuande Gate, equivalent to the Tang Dynasty's Danfeng Gate; Daqing Hall, equivalent to the Tang Dynasty's Huan Yuan Hall; Wende Hall, equivalent to the Tang Dynasty's Xuan Zheng Hall; Zijian Hall, equivalent to the Tang Dynasty's Zijian Hall.

古文：今欲求入阁本意，施于仪典，须先立仗文德庭，如天子止御紫宸，即唤仗自东、西阁门入，如此则差与旧仪合。
现代文：如今想要求取入本来的含意，在仪典中实行，必须先在文德殿设立仪仗，如同天子只到紫宸殿，就唤仪仗从东、西门进来，像这样就比较与旧礼节相合。
English: Nowadays, if you want to ask for the original meaning to be taken and implemented in the ceremony, you must first set up a ceremonial battle in the Wende Hall, as if the Son of Heaven only came to the Purple Pagoda and called the ceremonial battle from the east and west gates. This is more in line with the old etiquette.

古文：但今之诸殿，比于唐制南北不相对尔。
现代文：只是现在的各殿，与唐制比较南北不相对称。
English: However, compared to the Tang Dynasty, the current halls are not symmetrical from north to south.

古文：又按唐自中叶以还，双日及非时大臣奏事，别开延英殿，若今假日御崇政、延和是也。
现代文：又考唐自中叶以来，逢双日以及大臣不定时奏议大事，另开延英殿，好像现今假日皇帝到崇政殿、延和殿。
English: In addition, since the middle of the Tang Dynasty, every two days, as well as the minister's occasional report on major events, the Yan Ying Hall was opened, as if the emperor was going to the Su Zheng Hall and the Yan He Hall on holidays.

古文：乃知唐制每遇坐朝日，即为入阁，其后正衙立仗因而遂废，甚非礼也。
现代文：于是可知唐制度每遇上朝日，就是入，此后正衙设立仪仗因而逐渐废弃了，很不符礼制。 
English: As a result, it can be seen that the Tang system was to enter whenever the morning sun appeared, after which the ceremonial battle was set up in the main hall and was gradually abandoned, which was very inconsistent with the etiquette system.

古文：庠与宰相吕夷简论数不同，凡庠与善者，夷简皆指为朋党，如郑戩、叶清臣等悉出之，乃以庠知扬州。
现代文：宋庠与宰相吕夷简的主张屡次不相同，凡是宋庠与之友好的，吕夷简都指为朋党，如郑戬、叶清臣等人全部被降职，就以宋庠为扬州知州。
English: The claims of Song Tao and the prime minister Lyu Yijian were repeatedly different. Whenever Song Tao was friendly with Lyu Yijian, Lyu Yijian was referred to as a friend of the party. For example, when Zheng Tao and Ye Qingchen were all demoted, Song Tao was referred to as Yangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：未几，以资政殿学士徙郓州，进给事中。
现代文：没多久，宋庠以资政殿学士衔调职郓州，升为给事中。
English: Not long after, Song Jun was transferred to Ganzhou with the title of "Bachelor of the House of Councillors" and promoted to "Middle Manager."

古文：参知政事范仲淹去位，帝问宰相章得象，谁可代仲淹者，得象荐宋祁。
现代文：参知政事范仲淹离开宰相位，仁宗问宰相章得象，谁是可以替代范仲淹的人，章得象推荐宋祁。
English: When the chief councillor, Fan Zhongyan, left the position of prime minister, Rinzong asked the prime minister, Zhang Dexiang, who could replace Fan Zhongyan. Zhang Dexiang recommended Song Xi.

古文：帝雅意在庠，复召为参知政事。
现代文：仁宗向来在意宋庠，又召他任参知政事。
English: Renzong has always been concerned about Song Tao, and also called him to serve as a member of the Council of State.

古文：庆历七年春旱，用汉灾异策免三公故事，罢宰相贾昌朝，辅臣皆削一官，以庠为右谏议大夫。
现代文：庆历七年春旱，沿用汉朝灾异时罢免三公的旧例，罢免宰相贾昌朝，辅佐大臣均削去官职一级，以宋庠任右谏议大夫。
English: In the spring drought of the seventh year of Qing Lian, the old example of removing the three grand dukes when the Han Dynasty was plagued by disasters was followed, the prime minister Jia Chang Dynasty was removed, the assistant minister was reduced to the first level of the official post, and Song Xi was appointed as the doctor of the right wing.

古文：帝尝召二府对资政殿，出手诏策以时事，庠曰： 两汉对策，本延岩穴草莱之士，今备位政府而比诸生，非所以尊朝廷，请至中书合议条奏。 时陈执中为相，不学少文，故夏竦为帝画此谋，意欲困执中也。
现代文：仁宗曾召中书省和枢密院二府在资政殿回答问题。仁宗出示手诏策问时事，宋庠说： 两汉时回答策问，本是引进居于岩穴草莱的隐士，如今把政府官员放在与那些考生相比的位置上，这不是用来尊敬朝廷的，请求到中书省一起商议逐条上奏。 当时陈执中任宰相，他没有学问缺少礼乐典章制度方面的文化知识，所以夏竦替仁宗策划此计谋，意图想使陈执中困窘。
English: Renzong had summoned the Chinese Ministry of Education and the two offices of the Privy Council to answer questions at the Capital Affairs Building. Renzong showed his hand to ask questions about current affairs, and Song Tao said: In the Han Dynasty, when answering questions, it was originally the hermit who lived in the rock cave of So Lai who was introduced, and now the government officials are placed in a position comparable to those candidates. This is not to respect the court, and it is requested to go to the Chinese Ministry of Education and Culture to discuss and record the questions one by one. At that time, Chen Jizhong was the prime minister. He did not have the education and lacked the cultural knowledge of

古文：论者以庠为知体。
现代文：议论者认为宋庠懂规章制度。
English: Commentators believe that Song Min does not understand the rules and regulations.

古文：明年，除尚书工部侍郎，充枢密使。
现代文：第二年，宋庠拜官工部侍郎，充任枢密使。
English: In the following year, Song Yibai became a chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry and was appointed as a privy councilor.

古文：皇祐中，拜兵部侍郎、同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：皇年间，宋庠拜官兵部侍郎、同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: During the reign of the emperor, Song Zhibai was a waiter of the military department, a scholar of the same school, and a scholar of Jixian Palace.

古文：享明堂，迁工部尚书。
现代文：宴享明堂，升工部尚书。
English: The banquet was a great success, and he was promoted to the engineering department.

古文：尝请复群臣家庙，曰： 庆历元年赦书，许文武官立家庙，而有司终不能推述先典，因循顾望，使王公荐享，下同委巷，衣冠昭穆，杂用家人，缘偷袭弊，甚可嗟也。
现代文：他曾请求恢复诸大臣的家庙，说： 庆历元年赦书，允许文武官员建立家庙，而有关部门终究不能从以前的典章制度中推寻根据，因而遵循旧例观望不决，致使王公进献祭品祭祀；到同一个曲折小巷子里去，衣冠昭穆，混杂在普通人家中，依照这样得过且过沿袭着弊病，很令人叹息。
English: He once asked for the restoration of the ministers' family temples, saying: "In the celebration of the first year of the year, the amnesty was issued, allowing the civil and military officials to establish family temples. However, the relevant departments could not find a basis from the previous award system, so they followed the old example of watching and waiting, causing the prince to go to the sacrifice and worship; to go to the same winding alley, the clothes were shabby, mixed in the homes of ordinary people, and according to this, the maladies continued. It was very sad.

古文：请下有司论定施行。 而议者不一，卒不果复。
现代文：请皇上下令有关部门议定执行。 但大臣议论不一致，终未能恢复家庙。
English: The emperor was asked to order the relevant departments to agree on the implementation, but the ministers disagreed and ultimately failed to restore the family temple.

古文：三年，祁子与越国夫人曹氏客张彦方游。
现代文：皇三年，宋祁的儿子与越国夫人曹氏的门客张彦方游玩。
English: In the third year of the reign of the emperor, the son of Song Zheng visited Zhang Yanfang, a disciple of Cao, the wife of Yue.

古文：而彦方伪造敕牒，为人补官，论死。
现代文：而张彦方伪造皇帝敕牒，替人补选官职，被判死罪。
English: Zhang Yanfang, on the other hand, forged an imperial edict to fill a vacancy, and was sentenced to death.

古文：谏官包拯奏庠不戢子弟，又言庠在政府无所建明，庠亦请去。
现代文：谏官包拯奏说宋庠没能严格要求子弟，又说宋庠在朝廷没有什么建树，宋庠请去职。
English: Eunuch Bao Zhengsuo said that Song Tao failed to strictly require his son, and also said that Song Tao had no achievements in the imperial court, and that Song Tao should leave his post.

古文：乃以刑部尚书、观文殿大学士知河南府，后徙许州，又徙河阳，再迁兵部尚书。
现代文：于是命宋庠以刑部尚书、观文殿大学士的头衔知河南府，后调许州任职，又调到河阳，再升兵部尚书。
English: As a result, Song Xi was ordered to visit Henan Province with the title of the Penal Department's Senior Secretary and the title of the Academy's Senior Secretary. Later, he was transferred to work in Huzhou, then to Heyang, and then promoted to the Military Department's Senior Secretary.

古文：入觐，诏缀中书门下班，出入视其仪物。
现代文：宋庠朝见皇帝，诏令他的服饰、等级同同中书门下侍郎，出入朝廷看他的仪物。
English: When Song Tao went to see the emperor, he ordered his clothing and rank to be the same as that of the junior attendant, and he went in and out of the court to see his ceremonial objects.

古文：以检校太尉、同平章事充枢密使，封莒国公。
现代文：他以检校太尉、同平章事的头衔充任枢密使，封为莒国公。
English: He served as a privy councilor with the titles of inspector of schools, captain, and peer of the realm, and was given the title of Duke of Shandong.

古文：数言： 国家当慎固根本，畿辅宿兵常盈四十万，羡则出补更戍，祖宗初谋也，不苟轻改。 既而与副使程戡不协，戡罢，而御史言庠昏惰，乃以河阳三城节度、同平章事判郑州，徙相州。以疾召还。
现代文：他多次说 ：国家应当谨慎固守根本，京师地区的卫戍兵平常要满四十万，剩余的兵力就外调补充更戍，祖宗当初的谋略，不能苟且随便改变。 不久他与副枢密使程戡不和，程戡罢职，而御史说宋庠糊涂懈怠，仁宗于是命他任河阳三城节度使、同平章事、判郑州，又调相州任职，因病召回京城。
English: He repeatedly said: the country should be cautious and stick to the fundamentals, the number of guardsmen in the Beijing division area should normally reach 400,000, and the remaining troops should be supplemented by external transfers, and the ancestor's original strategy should not be changed arbitrarily. Soon he was at odds with the deputy privy councilor Cheng Xuan, Cheng Xuan resigned, and the historian said that Song Xuan was sluggish and slack. Ren Zong then ordered him to serve as the festival envoy of the three cities of Heyang, Tongping chapter, Zhengzhou, and also to serve as the provincial governor, and was recalled to Beijing due to illness.

古文：英宗即位，移镇武宁军，改封郑国公。
现代文：宋英宗登帝位，宋庠改镇武宁军，改封郑国公。
English: Song Yingzong ascended to the throne, Song Xi changed the town of Wu Ning Army, and changed the title of Zheng Guogong.

古文：庠在相州，即上章请老，至是请犹未已。
现代文：宋庠任职相州时，就向皇帝上书请求辞官回家养老，到这时还不停地请求回家养老。
English: When Song Jun was in the position of Sangju, he wrote to the emperor to ask the official to go home for retirement. At this time, he also constantly asked the official to go home for retirement.

古文：帝以大臣故，未忍遽从，乃出判亳州。
现代文：英宗因为大臣的缘故，不忍心马上答应，就让宋庠出判亳州。
English: Because of the minister, Yingzong did not have the heart to agree right away, so he let Song Xuan issue the sentence to Zhangzhou.

古文：庠前后所至，以慎静为治，及再登用，遂沉浮自安。
现代文：宋庠前后所到的地方，他以慎重清静的方式治理地方，等到再受朝廷起用，就不管沉浮自求快乐。
English: Wherever Song Tao went, he governed the place in a prudent and calm manner. When he was appointed by the imperial court, he did not care about the ups and downs and sought happiness.

古文：晚爱信幼子，多与小人游，不谨。
现代文：他晚年痛爱信任幼子，多与小人游玩，行为不检点。
English: In his later years, he loved and trusted his young son, played with villains, and behaved in an undisciplined manner.

古文：御史吕晦请敕庠不得以二子随，帝曰： 庠老矣，奈何不使其子从之。 至亳，请老益坚，以司空致仕。
现代文：御史吕晦请英宗下令不准宋庠的两个儿子跟随他，英宗说： 宋庠年老了，为什么不让他的儿子跟随他呢？ 宋庠到亳州，他请求回家养老的态度更坚决，以司空职衔退休。
English: Goshiryuyu asked Yingzong to order that Song Tao's two sons not be allowed to follow him. Yingzong said: Song Tao is old, why not let his son follow him? When Song Tao went to Ganzhou, he was more resolute in his request to go home to retire, and retired with the title of Sikyong.

古文：卒，赠太尉兼侍中，谥元献。
现代文：去世后，朝廷赠其太尉兼侍中，谥号元献。
English: After his death, the Imperial Court presented him with the rank of captain and chamberlain, and the posthumous title of Yuan Xian.

古文：帝为篆其墓碑曰 忠规德范之碑 。
现代文：英宗为宋庠用篆文撰写墓碑曰 忠规德范之碑 。
English: Yingzong wrote a tombstone for Song Zheng with the inscription: "The monument of loyalty and virtue."

古文：庠自应举时，与祁俱以文学名擅天下，俭约不好声色，读书至老不倦。
现代文：宋庠从应考举人时，与宋祁以文章学问名扬天下，他生活节俭不好声色犬马之类，读书读到老也不厌倦。
English: Song Tao was famous for his essays on history when he was a candidate for the civil service examination. He lived a frugal life and did not like dogs and horses. He never got tired of reading books.

古文：善正讹谬，尝校定《国语》，撰《补音》三卷。又辑《纪年通谱》，区别正闰，为十二卷。
现代文：他擅长考证书中的讹谬，曾校定《国语》，撰写《补音》三卷，又编辑《纪年通谱》，用以区别正闰年月，该书为十二卷。
English: He is good at the fallacy in the examination certificate. He has calibrated the "National Language," written three volumes of "Complementary Sounds," and edited the "Chronological General Spectrum" to distinguish leap years. The book is twelve volumes.

古文：《掖垣丛志》三卷，《尊号录》一卷，别集四十卷。
现代文：还有《掖垣丛志》三卷，《尊号录》一卷，《别集》四十卷。
English: There are also three volumes of the "Higaki Collection," one volume of the "Honor Roll," and forty volumes of the "Other Collection."

古文：天资忠厚，尝曰： 逆诈恃明，残人矜才，吾终身不为也。 沈邈尝为京东转运使，数以事侵庠。
现代文：他天性忠厚，曾说： 叛逆狡诈、依恃神灵、残害他人、恃才傲物，我终生不做呵。 沈邈曾任东京转运使，多次以事欺负宋庠。
English: He was loyal by nature, and once said: "I will never do anything treacherous, cunning, clinging to gods, harming others, or being arrogant." Shen Yi was once the Tokyo envoy, and bullied Song Xi many times.

古文：及庠在洛，邈子监曲院，因出借县人负物，杖之，道死实以他疾。
现代文：至宋庠在洛阳时，沈邈的儿子监院，因把东西出借而县人欠下东西，他用杖打人，人死在路上，实际上是由于其他的病所致。
English: When Song Tao was in Luoyang, Shen Tao's son, Jian Yuan, owed the county people something because he had lent them something. He beat people with a cane. People died on the road, but it was actually caused by other illnesses.

古文：而邈子为府属所恶，欲痛治之以法，庠独不肯，曰： 是安足罪也！ 人以此益称其长者。
现代文：而沈邈之子为府吏所憎恨，府吏想要按法律从严处理他，宋庠独独不同意，他说： 这怎么够得上治罪呢！ 
English: But the son of Shen Yi was hated by the government officials. The government officials wanted to deal with him strictly according to the law, but Song Yi did not agree. He said, "How can this be punished as a crime?"

古文：弟祁。祁字子京，与兄庠同时举进士，礼部奏祁第一，庠第三。
现代文：人们根据这件事愈加称他是年高有德的人。他的弟弟叫宋祁。宋祁字子京，安州安陆人。与兄长宋庠同时考中进士，礼部奏宋祁第一名，宋庠第三名。
English: According to this incident, people increasingly said that he was a person of high age and virtue. His younger brother was named Song Xuan. Song Xuan was from Anzhou and Anlu. He and his elder brother Song Xuan took the junior high school entrance examination at the same time. Song Xuan won the first place in the ceremony department, and Song Xuan won the third place.

古文：章献太后不欲以弟先兄，乃擢庠第一，而置祁第十。
现代文：章献太后不想以弟在兄长之前，就提拔宋庠第一名，而置宋祁第十名。
English: The Empress Dowager Zhang Xian did not want her younger brother to be ahead of his elder brother, so she promoted Song Tao to the first place and placed Song Tao in the tenth place.

古文：人呼曰 二宋 ，以大小别之。
现代文：人们称呼他们叫 二宋 ，以大宋、小宋来分别。
English: People call them the Second Song Dynasty, which is divided into the Great Song Dynasty and the Little Song Dynasty.

古文：释褐复州军事推官。
现代文：宋祁被任命为复州军事推官。
English: Song Tao was appointed as the military governor of Fuzhou.

古文：孙奭荐之，改大理寺丞、国子监直讲。
现代文：孙推荐他，改任大理寺丞、国子监直讲。
English: Sun recommended him, and he was transferred to the post of Daliji no jo and the direct supervision of the provincial governors.

古文：召试，授直史馆，再迁太常博士、同知礼仪院。
现代文：皇帝召试，授直史馆，再升太常博士、同知礼仪院。
English: He was called for an examination by the emperor, and was awarded the direct history museum. He was then promoted to the doctor of the imperial court and the Tongzhi Ceremonial Academy.

古文：有司言太常旧乐数增损，其声不和。
现代文：官吏说太常旧乐几次增损，其声律不协调。
English: Officials said that the old music was too frequent and several times damaged, and its vocal rhythm was not coordinated.

古文：诏祁同按试。
现代文：诏命宋祁同按试。
English: The imperial edict ordered Song Xuan to try the same.

古文：李照定新乐，胡瑗铸钟磬，祁皆典之，事见《乐志》。
现代文：李照定新乐，胡瑗铸造钟磬，宋祁都予以掌管，事见《乐志》。
English: Li Zhaoding's new music, Hu Yao's casting of bell gongs, and Song Yao's were all under his control, according to "Music History."

古文：预修《广业记》成，迁尚书工部员外郎、同修起居注、权三司度支判官。
现代文：他参与编修《广业记》完成，升尚书工部员外郎、同修起居注、权三司度支判官。
English: He participated in the editing of "Guangye Ji" and completed it. He was promoted to the member of the book department, the member of the same department, and the judge of the three departments of power.

古文：方陕西用兵，调费日蹙，上疏曰：
现代文：此时正是陕西用兵打仗，调度费用日益紧张，宋祁上疏说：
English: At this time, it was Shaanxi that used soldiers to fight, and the dispatching cost was increasingly tight. Song Yuxiang said:

古文：兵以食为本，食以货为资，圣人一天下之具也。
现代文： 兵以食为本，食以财货为资用，这是圣人统一天下之具。
English: Soldiers are food-oriented, and food is funded by wealth and goods. This is a tool for the unification of saints.

古文：今左藏无积年之镪，太仓无三岁之粟，尚方冶铜匮而不发。承平如此，已自凋困，良由取之既殚、用之无度也。
现代文：现在左藏库没有积年的银子，太仓没有三年的粮食，南方冶坑铜缺乏而不能发掘，承平的时候是这样，已经自己凋敝困乏，这确是由于取之既尽，用之无度。
English: At present, the Zuo repository does not have the accumulated silver, the Taicang does not have the three-year grain, and the Nanfang smelter pit lacks copper and cannot be excavated. This was the case in the Heping period, and it has withered and exhausted itself. This is indeed due to the fact that it has been exhausted and used to no end.

古文：朝廷大有三冗，小有三费，以困天下之财。
现代文：朝廷大的方面有三冗，小的方面有三费，以困天下之财。
English: The large aspects of the imperial court have three redundancies, and the small aspects have three expenses, in order to save the world's wealth.

古文：财穷用褊，而欲兴师远事，诚无谋矣。
现代文：财用困乏，而想要兴兵边事，确实是没有计谋了。
English: If you are short of money and you want to get involved in military affairs, there is really no way around it.

古文：能去三冗、节三费，专备西北之屯，可旷然高枕矣。
现代文：如果能够除去三冗、节制三费，专门备西北之屯，那么可以放心高枕无忧了。
English: If we can eliminate the three redundancies, the three excesses and the three excesses, and specially prepare the northwest town, then we can rest assured and have no worries.

古文：何谓三冗？
现代文： 什么叫三冗？
English: What is Sanzhuang?

古文：天下有定官无限员，一冗也；天下厢军不任战而耗衣食，二冗也；僧道日益多而无定数，三冗也。
现代文：天下有限定的官职而没有限定的官员数目，这是一冗；天下厢军不任战事而消耗衣食，这是二冗；和尚道士日益增多而没有定数，这是三冗。
English: The world has a finite number of official positions, but no fixed number of officials, which is a redundancy; the world's van army does not engage in warfare and consumes food and clothing, which is a redundancy; and the number of monks and Taoists is increasing without a fixed number, which is a redundancy.

古文：三冗不去，不可为国。
现代文：三冗不除去，不可以治理国家。
English: It is impossible to govern a country without eliminating redundancy.

古文：请断自今，僧道已受戒具者姑如旧，其他悉罢还为民，可得耕夫织妇五十余万人，一冗去矣。
现代文：请陛下决断从现在开始，僧道已经受戒具的姑且照旧，其他的全部废除为百姓，可以得到耕田的农夫织布的妇女五十多万人，一冗就除去了。
English: I ask Your Majesty to decide that from now on, those who have been ordained as monks will be allowed to remain as they are, and all others will be abolished as commoners. The more than half a million farmers and weaver women who can get farmland will be eliminated one by one.

古文：天下厢军不择孱小尫弱而悉刺之，才图供役，本不知兵，又且月支廪粮，岁费库帛，数口之家，不能自庇，多去而为盗贼，虽广募之，无益也。
现代文：天下厢军不论怯懦瘦弱而全都采取，只图供使奴役，本来不懂军事，而且每月支领廪粮，每年花费的库帛，几口之家，不能自理，多离去而为盗贼，即使广加招募，这也没有益处。
English: Regardless of the cowardice and weakness of the world's caravans, they are all taken, they only seek to serve and enslave, they do not understand the military, and they support the monthly grain, the annual expenditure of the treasury, the family of several, they cannot take care of themselves, they leave more and become thieves, even if they recruit widely, this is of no benefit.

古文：其已在籍者请勿论，其他悉驱之南亩，又得力耕者数十万，二冗去矣。
现代文：其已经在军籍的不论，其他的人全都驱赶到田野，又得力耕者几十万，二冗除去了。
English: Regardless of whether they were already in the military, everyone else was driven out to the fields, and hundreds of thousands of hard-working farmers were removed.

古文：国家郡县，素有定官，譬以十人为额，常以十二加之，即迁代、罪谪，随取之而有。
现代文：国家郡县，向来有固定的官职，譬如以十八人为额，常常以十二加之，即使迁代、罪谪，随时取之而有官位。
English: National counties and counties have always had a fixed number of officials, for example, with eighteen people, often with twelve, even if they are transferred or fined, they can be taken at any time and have official positions.

古文：今一官未阙，群起而逐之，州县不广于前，而官五倍于旧，吏何得不苟进，官何得不滥除？
现代文：现在没有一个官职空阙，群起而追逐，州县不比以前扩大，而官员却是过去的五倍，胥吏怎么会不苟且进用，官员怎么会不滥加任命。
English: Nowadays, there is not a single vacant official post, and officials are chasing after them in droves. The number of prefectures and counties is not larger than before, but the number of officials is five times that of the past. How can officials be used carefully, and how can officials be appointed without abuse?

古文：请诏三班审官院内诸司、流内铨明立限员，以为定法。
现代文：请求诏命三班审官院内诸司、流内铨明确定立限员，作为不变的制度。
English: Request the imperial edict to order the three classes of examiners in the departments and schools of the academy to clearly determine the limit, as an unchanged system.

古文：其门荫、流外、贡举等科，实置选限，稍务择人，俟有阙官，计员补吏，三冗去矣。
现代文：其门荫、流外、贡举等科，实置选限，逐渐致力于选择人才，等待有阙官，计员补吏，三冗除去了。
English: In the fields of eunuchs, exiles, tribute and other disciplines, the selection limit was set, and the selection of talents was gradually carried out, waiting for eunuchs, auditors and supplementary officers, and the three redundancies were eliminated.

古文：何谓三费？
现代文： 什么叫三费？
English: What are the three fees?

古文：一曰道场斋醮，无有虚日，且百司供亿，至不可赀计。
现代文：一是道场斋本醮，没有虚日，而且官府供亿，至于不可计量。
English: First, there are no false days at the Saipan dojo, and the government has provided hundreds of millions of yen, which is immeasurable.

古文：彼皆以祝帝寿、奉先烈、祈民福为名，臣愚以为此主者为欺盗之计尔。
现代文：这些都以祝祷皇帝福寿、供奉先烈、祈求百姓福运为名，我愚蠢认为这是主持的人为欺盗之计而已。
English: All of this was done in the name of wishing the emperor a happy birthday, honoring the martyrs, and praying for the people's good fortune. I foolishly thought that this was just a trick of the person in charge.

古文：陛下事天地、宗庙、社稷、百神，牺牲玉帛，使有司端委奉之、岁时荐之，足以竦明德、介多福矣，何必希屑屑之报哉？
现代文：陛下事奉天地、宗庙、社稷、百神，祭祀用百牲玉帛，使官吏穿着礼服恭敬尊奉，每年的季节时令祭献，足以肃敬明德、接近多福了，何必希求烦细的报答呢？
English: Your Majesty has served heaven and earth, ancestral temples, shrines, and hundreds of gods. He has used hundreds of sacrificial animals to make offerings. He has made officials wear ceremonial clothes to show respect and reverence. The annual seasonal offerings are enough to pay respect to wisdom and virtue, and are close to many blessings. Why do you need to ask for detailed rewards?

古文：则一费节矣。
现代文：那么一费节省了。
English: Well, that's one less expense.

古文：二曰京师寺观，或多设徒卒，添置官府，衣粮率三倍他处。
现代文：二是京城寺院宫观，有的多设置步兵，增置官府，衣服粮食都是其他地方的三倍。
English: Second, the view of the imperial palace from the temples in the capital, some of which have more infantry, more government offices, and three times more clothing and food than other places.

古文：居大屋高庑，不徭不役，坐蠹齐民，其尤者也。
现代文：居住大屋高廊，不服徭役，坐着侵蚀百姓，这是特别严重的。
English: It is particularly serious to live in a large house with a high gallery, refuse to serve as a bailiff, and sit around and encroach on the people.

古文：而又自募民财，营建祠庙，虽曰不费官帑，然国与民一也，舍国取民，其伤一焉，请罢去之，则二费节矣。
现代文：而且又自行招募民财，营建祠庙，虽然说不花费官钱，但国家与百姓是同一的，舍国取民，其伤害是一样的，请朝廷废除它，那么二费节省了。
English: Moreover, he recruited people's money on his own and built temples and shrines. Although he said that he would not spend government money, the country and the people are the same. If you give up the country and take the people, the harm is the same. Please ask the court to abolish it, then the two fees will be saved.

古文：三曰使相节度，不隶藩要。
现代文：三是使相节度，不隶属州郡。
English: Thirdly, it is a special administrative region and is not affiliated with any prefecture or county.

古文：夫节相之建，或当边镇，或临师屯，公用之设，劳众而飨宾也。
现代文：大概节度使相的建立，或者在边镇，或者临近军队驻扎的地方，公家用度的设立，是为了慰劳众人而款待宾客。
English: Presumably, the establishment of a ceremonial envoy, or the establishment of a public house in a border town, or a place close to where the army is stationed, is to entertain guests in order to comfort everyone.

古文：今大臣罢黜，率叨恩除，坐靡邦用，莫此为甚。
现代文：现在大臣被罢免贬退，都贪恩典除授，坐着消耗国家财用，没有比这更为严重的。
English: There is nothing more serious than the current situation where ministers are dismissed and demoted, all of whom are greedy for favors, and sit back and consume the country's finances.

古文：请自今地非边要、州无师屯者，不得建节度；已带节度，不得留近藩及京师，则三费节矣。
现代文：请朝廷从今以后不是边郡要地、没有军队驻扎的州，不得建立节度；已经带节度，不得留在近郡及京城，那么三费节省了。
English: From now on, please ask the imperial court not to set up a festival if it is not an important place in a border county or a prefecture where there is no army stationed; if it has already set up a festival, it must not stay in a nearby county or the capital, then the three expenses will be saved.

古文：臣又闻之，人不率则不从，身不先则不信。
现代文： 我又听说，人不率教则不被服从，不先身体力行则不被信任。
English: And I have heard that he who does not first teach is not obeyed, and he who does not first practice is not trusted.

古文：陛下能躬服至俭，风示四方，衣服起居，无逾旧规，后宫锦绣珠玉，不得妄费，则天下响应，民业日丰，人心不摇，师役可举，风行电照，饮马西河。
现代文：陛下能够亲身最为节俭，讽示四方，衣服起居，不逾越原来的规模，后宫锦锈珠玉，不得妄加花费，那么天下响应，百姓生业日益丰厚，人心不动摇，军事战役可以发动，风行电照，饮马河西。
English: His Majesty can personally be the most frugal, caricature the four directions, clothes and living do not exceed the original scale, the harem is adorned with rust and jewels, no need to spend more, then the world responds, the people's livelihood is increasingly rich, the people's hearts are unshakable, military campaigns can be launched, electric lighting is popular, drinking horse west.

古文：蠢尔戎首，在吾掌中矣！
现代文：愚蠢的戎人首领，在我手掌中了。 
English: Stupid troop leader, in the palm of my hand.

古文：徙判盐铁勾院，同修礼书。
现代文：移任盐铁勾院判官，同修礼书。
English: He was transferred to the position of judge of the Salt and Iron High Court, and received a certificate of initiation.

古文：次当知制诰，而庠方参知政事，乃以为天章阁待制，判太常礼院、国子监，改判太常寺。
现代文：按次第应为知制诰，但宋庠正任参知政事，于是以他为天章阁待制，判太常礼院、国子监，改判太常寺。
English: According to the rules, he should have been awarded the title of Chisei, but Song Xi was a member of the Chisei government, so he was awarded the title of Tenshangkaku, he was awarded the title of Taijō-Rekiin, he was awarded the title of Kokushi no kami, and he was awarded the title of Taijō-ji.

古文：庠罢，祁亦出知寿州，徙陈州。
现代文：宋庠被罢免，宋祁也出外任寿州知州，移任陈州知州。
English: Song Tao was removed from his post, and Song Tao was also transferred to Chenzhou Chizhou from Shoushu Chizhou.

古文：还，知制诰、权同判流内铨，以龙图阁直学士知杭州，留为翰林学士。
现代文：回朝廷任知制诰，权同判流内铨，以龙图阁直学士的身份知杭州，留用为翰林学士。
English: He returned to the imperial court to be appointed as a scholar, and he was appointed to Hangzhou as a Longtu Ge direct scholar, and was retained as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：提举诸司库务，数厘正弊事，增置勾当公事官，其属言利害者，皆使先禀度可否，而后议于三司，遂著为令。
现代文：提举诸司库务，几次订正弊端之事，增置勾当公事官，其部属言利弊的，都让先禀告估计可不可以，然后在三司议论，于是著为法令。
English: If the treasurer's affairs are proposed, the shortcomings are revised several times, and a public official is added, and his subordinates say whether it is good or bad, let the obituary first estimate whether it is acceptable, and then discuss it in the three departments, and then write it as a decree.

古文：徙知审官院兼侍读学士。
现代文：移知审官院兼侍读学士。
English: He is also a transfer examiner and a bachelor's student.

古文：庠复知政事，罢祁翰林学士，改龙图学士、史馆修撰，修《唐书》。
现代文：宋庠恢复参知政事，罢宋祁为翰林学士，改龙图阁学士、史馆修撰，修撰《唐书》。
English: Song Juan resumed his political activities as a councillor, and Song Juan became a scholar of Hanlin, a scholar of Longtu Ge, a compiler of history, and a compiler of "Tang Shu."

古文：累迁右谏议大夫，充群牧使。
现代文：累迁右谏议大夫，充任群牧使。
English: He was successively transferred to the position of doctor of the Right Division of the Council of Elders, and assumed the position of group herdsman.

古文：庠为枢密使，祁复为翰林学士。
现代文：宋庠任枢密使，宋祁又为翰林学士。
English: Song Tao was a Privy Counsellor, and Song Tao was a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：景祐中，诏求直言，祁奏： 人主不断是名乱。
现代文：景年中，皇帝诏求直言，宋祁奏： 人主不果断这是叫作乱。
English: In the middle of the year of Jing, the emperor made a direct appeal to the emperor, and the Song Dynasty played: If the ruler is not decisive, it is called chaos.

古文：《春秋》书： 殒霜，不杀菽。
现代文：《春秋》书： 降霜，不能伤害豆类。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" book: Decrease frost, do not harm beans.

古文：天威暂废，不能杀小草，犹人主不断，不能制臣下。 又谓： 与贤人谋而与不肖者断，重选大臣而轻任之，大事不图而小事急，是谓三患。 其意主于强君威，别邪正，急先务，皆切中时病。
现代文：天威暂时停废，不能伤害小草，就像人主不果断，不能控制臣下。 又认为 ：让贤明的人谋划而让不贤能的人决断，重视选择大臣但轻视任用他，大事不图谋但小事急，这叫作三患。 宋祁的意思是主张强化君主的权威，分别邪恶正直，急首先必须做的事，都切中时弊。
English: Heaven's power is temporarily suspended and cannot harm the grass, just as the human master is indecisive and cannot control his vassals. He also believes that: let the wise man plan and let the incompetent man decide, attach importance to the selection of the minister but despise the appointment of him, do not try to do big things but do small things urgently, which is called the three evils. Song Xi's meaning is to advocate strengthening the authority of the monarch, distinguishing evil and honesty, and urgently doing what must be done first, all of which are in the middle of the times.

古文：会进温成皇后为贵妃。
现代文：恰逢进温成皇后为贵妃。
English: Coincidentally, the Empress Jinwencheng was crowned as empress.

古文：故事，命妃皆发册，妃辞则罢册礼。
现代文：按照过去的旧例，任命妃子都发封册，妃辞谢就免去册封之礼。
English: According to the old practice in the past, a seal was issued for the appointment of concubines, and if the concubine resigned, she was exempted from the seal.

古文：然告在有司，必俟旨而后进。
现代文：但文告在官员手里，必须等待谕旨然后进献。
English: But the communique is in the hands of officials, who must wait for the decree and then present it.

古文：又凡制词，既授阁门宣读，学士院受而书之，送中书，结三少衔，官告院用印，乃进内。
现代文：又凡是诏书，既授予门宣读，学士院接受而书写，送到中书省，具结三省头衔，官告院盖印，才进呈宫内。
English: In addition, the imperial rescript is not presented to the imperial court until it has been read aloud at the palace, accepted by the Academy, written, sent to the Chinese Ministry of Literature, given the titles of the three provinces, and stamped by the Court of Appeals.

古文：祁适当制，不俟旨，写诰不送中书，径取官告院印用之，亟封以进。
现代文：宋祁正好执掌制书，不等谕旨，写文告送中书省，直接取官告院的印章盖上，迅速封口进呈。
English: Song Xi happened to be in charge of book production, so he did not wait for the order, wrote a message to the Chinese Book Ministry, directly took the seal of the official court, sealed it, and quickly submitted it.

古文：后方爱幸，觊行册礼，得告大怒，掷于地。
现代文：皇后正受到宠爱，希望举行册封礼仪，得到文告大怒，把它抛到地上。
English: The queen, who was being pampered and wanted to hold a canonization ceremony, was so enraged that she threw it to the ground.

古文：祁坐是出知许州。
现代文：宋祁因为这样出知许州。
English: As a result, Song Tao was banished to Huzhou.

古文：甫数月，复召为侍读学士、史馆修撰。
现代文：刚刚几个月，又召为侍读学士、史馆修撰。
English: Just a few months ago, he was also called to serve as an attendant bachelor and to write for the history museum.

古文：祀明堂，迁给事中兼龙图阁学士。
现代文：祭祀明堂，升任给事中，兼龙图阁学士。
English: He was a member of the Sacred Rites Ming-tang, promoted to middle-ranking official, and also received a bachelor's degree from Longtu Pavilion.

古文：坐其子从张彦方游，出知亳州。
现代文：因他的儿子跟从张彦方游学牵连，出知亳州。
English: Because of his son's involvement with Zhang Yanfang's study tour, he was expelled from Zhangzhou.

古文：兼集贤殿修撰。
现代文：兼任集贤殿修撰。
English: He also served as the editor of the Shisen-den.

古文：岁余，徙知成德军，迁尚书礼部侍郎。
现代文：一年多后，移任成德军知军，升尚书礼部郎。
English: A little more than a year later, he was transferred to the position of the chieftain of the Chengde Army and promoted to the position of the secretary of protocol.

古文：请弛河东、陕西马禁，又请复唐驮幕之制。
现代文：宋祁请求朝廷放松河东、陕西马禁，又请求恢复唐代在沙漠用畜负载的制度。
English: Song Xi requested the imperial court to relax the horse ban in Hedong and Shaanxi, and also requested the restoration of the Tang Dynasty's system of loading animals in the desert.

古文：居三月，徙定州，又上言：
现代文：居住三个月后，移任定州知州。又上书说：
English: After living there for three months, he was transferred to Dingzhou Zhizhou. He also wrote:

古文：天下根本在河北，河北根本在镇、定，以其扼贼冲，为国门户也。
现代文：天下根本在于河北，河北根本在于镇、定州，因为它扼制敌人的要冲，是国家的门户。
English: The world is fundamentally located in Hebei, and Hebei is fundamentally located in Zhen and Dingzhou, because it stifles the enemy's main thrust and is the gateway to the country.

古文：且契丹摇尾五十年，狼态猘心，不能无动。
现代文：而且契丹五十年来仰食于我国，像狼一样的姿态和疯狗一样的心思，不能没有动静。
English: Moreover, the Khitan has been feeding on our country for 50 years. With a wolf-like posture and a mind like a mad dog, it cannot remain motionless.

古文：今垂涎定、镇，二军不战，则薄深、赵、邢、洺，直捣其虚，血吻婪进，无所顾藉。
现代文：现在契丹垂涎定、镇州，双方军队不必交战，就已逼近深、赵、邢、氵名州，直捣我国腹地，这种人血抹唇吻，贪功冒进，没有什么顾惜凭借。
English: Now the Khitans covet Ding and Zhenzhou. The armies of the two sides do not need to fight, they have already approached Shen, Zhao, Handan and Annam, and directly hit the hinterland of our country. This kind of blood-stained lips kiss, greedy for success, and there is nothing to worry about.

古文：臣窃虑欲兵之强，莫如多谷与财；欲士训练，莫如善择将帅；欲人乐斗，莫如赏重罚严；欲贼顾望不敢前，莫如使镇重而定强。
现代文：我私下考虑想要使军队强大，不如多积谷物和钱财；想要训练士兵，不如好好地挑选将帅；想要使人乐意战斗，不如重赏严罚；想要使敌人观望不敢向前，不如使镇州坚固而且定州强大。
English: Privately, I considered that to make the army strong, it is better to accumulate more grain and money; to train soldiers, it is better to choose generals well; to make people willing to fight, it is better to reward and punish severely; to make the enemy afraid to move forward, it is better to make the town-state strong and the county-state strong.

古文：夫耻怯尚勇，好论事，甘得而忘死：河北之人，殆天性然。
现代文：以怯懦为耻辱，崇尚勇敢，喜欢论事，甘得而舍生忘死：河北人，大概天性是这样。
English: Taking cowardice as a disgrace, advocating bravery, liking to discuss things, being willing to give up life and forget death: Hebei people are probably like this by nature.

古文：陛下少励之，不忧不战。
现代文：陛下稍加勉励，不担心不能战斗。
English: Your Majesty, with a little encouragement, is not worried about not being able to fight.

古文：以欲战之士，不得善将，虽斗犹负。
现代文：以想要作战的士兵，如果没有得到良将，即使战斗还是失败。
English: If soldiers who want to fight are not given good generals, even if they fight, they will still fail.

古文：无谷与财，虽金城汤池，其势必轻。
现代文：没有谷物和钱财，即使是金城汤池，其势必轻。
English: Without grain and money, even if it is a golden city, it is bound to be light.

古文：今朝廷择将练卒，制财积粮，乃以陕西、河东为先，河北为后，非策也。
现代文：现在朝廷选将练兵，守财积粮，却以陕西、河东为先，河北为后，这不是良策。
English: At present, the imperial court selects generals to train soldiers, save money and accumulate grain, but Shaanxi and Hedong are first, and Hebei is last. This is not a good policy.

古文：西贼兵锐士寡，不能深入，河东天险，彼惮为寇。
现代文：西边敌人军队精锐而少，不能深入，河东天险，敌人惧怯于由此处入侵。
English: In the west, the enemy's army is elite and few, and cannot penetrate deeply. In the east of the river, there is a natural hazard, and the enemy is afraid to invade from there.

古文：若河北不然，自蓟直视，势同建瓴，贼鼓而前，如行莞衽。
现代文：像河北就不一样，从蓟州直接临视，势同居高临下不可阻遏，敌人击鼓而向前，如同在床席上行走。
English: It is not the same as Hebei. It is directly visible from Zhangzhou. It is irresistible. The enemy beats the drum and moves forward, as if walking on a bed.

古文：故谋契丹者当先河北，谋河北者舍镇、定无议矣。
现代文：因此谋划契丹的应以河北为先，谋划河北舍弃镇、定州就不要议论了。
English: Therefore, those who plan for Khitan should take Hebei as the first, and those who plan to abandon Hebei and Dingzhou should not be discussed.

古文：臣愿先入谷镇、定，镇、定既充，可入谷余州。
现代文：我希望输谷镇、定州，镇、定州既已充足，可以输谷其余州郡。
English: I hope to export Guzhen and Dingzhou. There are enough towns and counties in Dingzhou to export Guzhen and the remaining counties.

古文：列将在陕西、河东有功状者，得迁镇、定，则镇、定重。
现代文：众将在河北、河东有功劳情状的，必须迁往镇、定州，那么镇、定州就分量大了。
English: Those who will have meritorious achievements in Hebei and Hedong must move to towns and Dingzhou, then towns and Dingzhou will have greater weight.

古文：天下久平，马益少，臣请多用步兵。
现代文：天下平定很久，马越来越少，我请求多使用步兵。
English: The country has been pacified for a long time, there are fewer and fewer horses, and I request the use of more infantry.

古文：夫云奔飚驰，抄后掠前，马之长也；强弩巨梃，长枪利刀，什伍相联，大呼薄战，步之长也。
现代文：大概腾奔风驰，抄后掠前，这是马的长处；强弩巨杖，长枪利刀，什伍互相联结，大呼近战，这是步兵的长处。
English: It is probably the horse's strength to gallop with the wind and to run ahead of the pursuit; it is the infantry's strength to have a strong scepter, a long gun and a sharp sword, and to be able to close with each other in close combat.

古文：臣料朝廷与敌相攻，必不深入穷追，殴而去之，及境则止，此不特马而步可用矣。
现代文：我估计朝廷与敌人相攻击，一定不会深入穷追，驱逐而使敌人离去，到边境上就停止，这是不必用马而步兵可以使用了。
English: I estimate that if the imperial court attacks the enemy, it will certainly not pursue the enemy in depth, expel and make the enemy leave, and stop at the border. It is not necessary to use horses, but infantry can be used.

古文：臣请损马益步，故马少则骑精，步多则斗健，我能用步所长，虽契丹多马，无所用之。
现代文：我请求减少马匹增加步兵，所以马少而骑兵精锐，步兵多则以健勇来取胜，我能够使用步兵的长处，即使契丹马多，也没有什么用场。
English: I asked to reduce the number of horses and increase the number of infantry, so there are fewer horses, but the cavalry is more elite, and the infantry is more courageous to win. I can use the strengths of the infantry, even if there are more Khitan horses, there is no use.

古文：夫镇、定一体也，自先帝以来为一道，帅专而兵不分，故定揕其胸，则镇捣其肋，势自然耳。
现代文：镇、定州是结为一体的，从先帝以来同属一道，主帅专任而兵力不分散，所以定州刺其胸部，镇州捣其胁部，形势自然明了。
English: The town and Dingzhou are integrated. They have belonged together since the last emperor. The commander is full-time and the troops are not dispersed. Therefore, Dingzhou stabbed its chest, and the town and state stabbed its bulwark. The situation is naturally clear.

古文：今判而为二，其显显有害者，屯砦山川要险之地裂而有之，平时号令文移不能一，贼脱叩营垒，则彼此不相谋，尚肯任此责邪！
现代文：现在判而为二，其明显有害处的，屯砦山川险要之地被分裂的有之，平时号令文移不能统一，敌人出来攻打营垒，就彼此不相谋划，还肯承担这责任吗？
English: Now it has been judged to be two, and its obvious harmfulness is that the fortified towns, the mountains and rivers, and the critical areas have been divided. In peacetime, the order and the documents cannot be unified, and the enemy has come out to attack the camp, so they do not plan with each other. Are you still willing to bear this responsibility?

古文：请合镇、定为一路，以将相大臣领之，无事时以镇为治所，有事则迁治定，指授诸将，权一而责有归，策之上也。
现代文：请求合并镇、定州为一路，以将相大臣掌领，没事的时候以镇州为治所，有事时就以定州为治所，指挥授权众将，权力统一而职责有所归属，这是策略的上等。
English: Requesting the merger of towns and Dingzhou is the way to go, with the minister in charge, when there is no problem, the town and state will be the jurisdiction, when there is a problem, Dingzhou will be the jurisdiction, command and authorize the generals, unified power and assigned responsibilities, this is a superior strategy.

古文：陛下当居安思危，熟计所长，必待事至而后图之，殆矣。
现代文：陛下应居安思危，审慎计议所长，一定等到事情来到然后图谋，就危险了。
English: Your Majesty should live with a sense of danger, be prudent and prudent, wait until things come and then plot, it will be dangerous.

古文：河东马强，士习善驰突，与镇、定若表里，然东下井陉，不百里入镇、定矣。
现代文：河东马军强大，士兵习惯于擅长驰马奔突，与镇、定州相互为表里，然而东下井陉，不到一百里进入镇、定州了。
English: The horse army in the east of the river was strong, and the soldiers were used to being good at galloping horses. They were on the same level as the towns and Dingzhou. However, when they went to the east, they were less than a hundred miles away from the towns and Dingzhou.

古文：贼若深入，以河东健马佐镇、定兵，掩其惰若归者，万出万全，此一奇也。
现代文：敌人如果深入，以河东健马佐助镇、定州的军队，掩袭其懈怠思归之兵，万出万全，这是一个奇迹。
English: If the enemy penetrates deeply, and uses the army of Hedong Jianma Zosu Town and Dingzhou to cover up its slack soldiers, it will be a miracle.

古文：臣闻事切于用者，不可以文陈，臣所论件目繁碎，要待刀笔吏委曲可晓，臣已便俗言之，辄别上择将畜财一封，乞下枢密院、三司裁制之。
现代文：我听说事情切于时用的，不能够用文章陈述，我所论述的条目繁多琐碎，要待办理文书的官吏曲意迁就才可以知道，我以便利风俗言之，就另外上呈选择将领积蓄财物一封，请求传送枢密院、三司裁决。
English: I was told that the matter was so urgent that it could not be stated in an article, and that the items I had discussed were so numerous and trivial that it would be necessary for the officials who handled the documents to know about them. In order to facilitate the custom, I sent another letter to the Minister of Finance to request that the Privy Council and the three departments make a ruling.

古文：又上《御戎论》七篇。
现代文：又上呈《御戎论》七篇。
English: In addition, seven articles of "Goroku-ron" were submitted.

古文：加端明殿学士，特迁吏部侍郎、知益州。
现代文：加官端明殿学士，特别升任吏部侍郎、知益州。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Duanmingdian Baccalaureate, and was specially promoted to the position of cadre chamberlain and Zhiyi Prefecture.

古文：寻除三司使。
现代文：不久被任命为三司使。
English: He was soon appointed to the Third Division.

古文：右司谏吴及尝言祁在定州不治，纵家人贷公使钱数千缗，在蜀奢侈过度。
现代文：右司谏吴及曾经说宋祁在定州没有治理好，放纵家人借贷公钱几千缗，在蜀地奢侈过度。
English: The Right Reverend Father Gong Wu once said that Song Han did not govern well in Dingzhou, indulged his family in borrowing thousands of baht of public money, and was excessively extravagant in Shu.

古文：既而御史中丞包拯亦言祁益部多游燕，且其兄方执政，不可任三司。
现代文：不久御史中丞包拯也说宋祁鼓励部下多游乐宴饮，而且他的兄长正执掌朝政，不能任三司使。
English: Not long after, Grand Historian Bao Zheng also said that Song Xi encouraged his subordinates to have more entertainment and banquets, and that his brother was in charge of the imperial government and could not serve as the third envoy.

古文：乃加龙图阁学士、知郑州。
现代文：于是加官龙图阁学士、知郑州。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the rank of Longtu Ge bachelor and learned Zhengzhou.

古文：《唐书》成，迁左丞，进工部尚书。
现代文：《唐书》修成，升左丞，进工部尚书。
English: Completed "Tangshu" and was promoted to the Third Rank of Junior Middle Officer. Entered the Ministry of Industry and Commerce.

古文：以羸疾，请便医药，入判尚书都省。
现代文：因体弱生病请求就便医治，入判尚书都省。
English: Due to infirmity, he was treated at the request of the sick, and was sentenced to Shudu Province.

古文：逾月，拜翰林学士承旨，诏遇入直，许一子主汤药。
现代文：过了一个月，拜授翰林学士承旨，诏命入宫禁值班准许一个儿子负责汤药。
English: A month later, Hanlin was awarded a bachelor's degree, and the imperial edict forbade him from entering the palace and allowed one of his sons to be in charge of the soup.

古文：复为群牧使，寻卒。
现代文：又为群牧使，不久去世。
English: He was also a herdsman and died soon after.

古文：遗奏曰： 陛下享国四十年，东宫虚位，天下系望，人心未安。
现代文：宋祁遗留下来的奏书说 ：陛下享国四十年，东宫虚位，天下关心期望，人心没有安定。
English: The report left behind by Song Tao said: His Majesty has ruled the country for forty years, the East Palace is empty, the world is concerned about expectations, and the people's hearts are not stable.

古文：为社稷深计，莫若择宗室贤材，进爵亲王，为匕鬯之主。
现代文：为国家大计，不如挑选宗室贤才，进封亲王官爵，为宗庙之主。
English: For the country's overall plan, it is better to select the ancestral house of the sages, the prince of the prince, and the master of the ancestral temple.

古文：若六宫有就馆之庆，圣嗣蕃衍，则宗子降封郡王，以避正嫡，此定人心、防祸患之大计也。 
现代文：如果六宫有生养之庆，圣嗣繁衍，那么宗子降封郡王，以回避正宗嫡子，这是安定人心、防止祸患的大计。 
English: If there is a celebration of birth and rearing in the Sixth Palace, and holy heirs are propagated, then the grandchild will be demoted to the county king to avoid the legitimate son of the legitimate father. This is a grand plan to stabilize people's hearts and prevent disasters.

古文：又自为志铭及《治戒》以授其子： 三日敛，三月葬，慎无为流俗阴阳拘忌也。
现代文：又自己写墓志铭及《治戒》以授给他的儿子 ：三天殓尸，三月埋葬，小心不要为流俗阴阳束缚忌讳。
English: He also wrote his own epitaph and "Precepts" to bestow on his son: three days dead, buried in March, be careful not to be a taboo for the vulgar ying and yang.

古文：棺用杂木，漆其四会，三涂即止，使数十年足以腊吾骸、朽衣巾而已。
现代文：棺材用杂木，漆其四面，油漆三次就停止，使几十年足以干我的尸骨、腐朽衣服手巾而已。
English: The coffin is made of miscellaneous wood, it is painted on all four sides, and the painting is stopped three times, so it takes decades to dry my bones, rotten clothes and hand towels.

古文：毋以金铜杂物置冢中。
现代文：不要以黄金、铜、杂物放在坟中。
English: Do not place gold, copper, or other objects in the grave.

古文：且吾学不名家，文章仅及中人，不足垂后。
现代文：而且我学不名家，文章仅仅及于中等人，不足垂范后世。
English: Moreover, I am not a famous scholar, and my articles only reach the average person, and are not enough to be a model for future generations.

古文：为吏在良二千石下，勿请谥，勿受赠典。
现代文：为官吏在二千石下，不要请求谥号，不要接受赠典。
English: If you are a government official under 2,000 koku, don't ask for a nickname, don't accept a gift certificate.

古文：冢上植五株柏，坟高三尺，石翁仲他兽不得用。
现代文：坟上种植五棵柏树，坟高三尺，石翁仲及其他兽像不得用。
English: Five cypress trees are planted on the grave, the grave is three feet high, and stone statues and other animal statues may not be used.

古文：若等不可违命。
现代文：你们不可违命。
English: You can't disobey orders.

古文：若等兄弟十四人，惟二孺儿未仕，以此诿莒公。
现代文：你们兄弟十四人，只有二个小儿子没有当官，以此委托莒公。
English: Of your fourteen brothers, only your two youngest sons do not hold public office, and so they are entrusted to you.

古文：莒公在，若等不孤矣。 后赠尚书。
现代文：莒公在世，你们不孤了。 后赠尚书。
English: You're not alone now that Shoko is alive. I'll give you his book later.

古文：祁兄弟皆以文学显，而祁尤能文，善议论，然清约庄重不及庠，论者以祁不至公辅，亦以此云。
现代文：宋祁兄弟都以文学显贵，而宋祁尤其擅长文章，善于议论，但清约庄重赶不上宋庠，议论的人认为宋祁没有到公卿辅臣的职位，也是因为这个原因。
English: Both of the Song brothers were distinguished for their literature, but Song Yao was particularly good at writing and was good at discussion. However, he was not as solemn as Song Yao. The people who discussed this thought that this was also the reason why Song Yao did not get the position of court noble and assistant minister.

古文：修《唐书》十余年，自守亳州，出入内外尝以稿自随，为列传百五十卷。
现代文：修撰《唐书》十多年，从守卫亳州开始，出入内外常以书稿自随，撰写列传一百五十卷。
English: He has been compiling "Tang Shu" for more than ten years. Starting from the guarding of Bozhou, he often goes in and out with the manuscript, and has written one hundred and fifty volumes.

古文：预修《籍田记》、《集韵》。
现代文：参与编修《籍田记》、《集韵》。
English: He participated in the editing of "Kemidenki" and "Shurimu."

古文：又撰《大乐图》二卷，文集百卷。
现代文：又撰写《大乐图》二卷，文集一百卷。
English: He also wrote two volumes of the "Great Music Map" and a hundred volumes of anthologies.

古文：祁所至，治事明峻，好作条教。
现代文：宋祁所到之处，治事明白严峻，喜欢制作条条框框。
English: Wherever Song Tao goes, the situation is obviously grim, and he likes to make rules and regulations.

古文：其子遵《治戒》不请谥，久之，学士承旨张方平言祁法应得谥，谥曰景文。
现代文：他的儿子遵守《治戒》没有请求朝廷谥号，过了很长时间，翰林学士承旨张方平说宋祁按法令应该得到谥号，谥号叫景文。
English: His son did not ask for the imperial title in compliance with the "Precepts." After a long time, Hanlin Scholar Zhang Fangping said that Song Tao should get the title according to the law, and the title is Jingwen.

