古文：昔在颛顼，命南正重司天，火正黎司地。
现代文：从前在颛顼统治时期，命南正重掌管天文，命火正黎掌管地理。
English: Once upon a time, during the reign of Zhou, Min Nan Zheng Rong was in charge of astronomy, and Mok Hui Zheng Li Rong was in charge of geography.

古文：唐、虞之际，绍重、黎之后，使复典之，至于夏、商，故重、黎氏世序天地。
现代文：唐尧虞舜统治时期，继续命重和黎的后代掌管天文和地理，一直到夏朝和商朝，所以姓重的姓黎的世代掌管天文地理。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yunyang of Tang Dynasty, the descendants of Shigong and Li continued to be in charge of astronomy and geography, all the way to the Xia Dynasty and the Shang Dynasty, so the generation with the surname Li was in charge of astronomy and geography.

古文：其在周，程伯林甫其后也。
现代文：在西周时，封为程伯的休甫是他们的后代。
English: During the Western Zhou Dynasty, Xiu Fu, who was given the title of Cheng Bo, was their descendant.

古文：当宣王时，官失其守而为司马氏。
现代文：到了周宣王的时候，他们失去了主管天文地理的官职，而为司马氏。
English: By the time of Zhou Xuanwang, they had lost the official post in charge of astronomy and geography, and were replaced by the Sima clan.

古文：司马氏世典周史。
现代文：司马氏世代主管周朝的历史。
English: Sima's generation is in charge of Zhou history.

古文：惠、襄之间，司马氏适晋。
现代文：在周惠王和周襄王之际，司马氏到了晋国。
English: On the occasion of King Zhou Hui and King Zhou Xiang, Sima arrived in Jin.

古文：晋中军随会奔魏，而司马氏入少梁。
现代文：晋国的中军元帅随会逃奔到魏国，司马氏也随之来到了少梁。
English: The Chinese marshal of Jin fled to Wei, and Sima also came to Shaoliang.

古文：自司马氏去周适晋，分散，或在卫，或在赵，或在秦。
现代文：自从司马氏家族离周到晋国后，他们就分散开来，有的在卫国，有的在赵国，有的在秦国。
English: After the Sima clan moved from Zhou to Jin, the tribesmen were scattered all over the country, some in the State of Wei, some in the State of Zhao and some in the State of Qin.

古文：其在卫者，相中山。
现代文：在卫国的，后来作了中山国的相。
English: In the defense of the country, it has become the face of the country in the mountains.

古文：在赵者，以传剑论显，蒯聩其后也。
现代文：在赵国的，由于传播有关剑术的理论而声名显赫，蒯聩就是他们的后代。
English: In Zhaoguo, they were famous for spreading the theory of swordsmanship, and Zou was their descendant.

古文：在秦者错，与张仪争论，于是惠王使错将兵伐蜀，遂拔，因而守之。
现代文：在秦国的司马错，曾舆张仪争论伐蜀的事，秦惠王采纳了他的建议，让他率兵伐蜀。
English: In the Sima Errors of Qin, Zhang Yi once disputed the matter of felling Shu. Qin Hui Wang adopted his suggestion and let him lead the troops to felling Shu.

古文：错孙蕲，事武安君白起。
现代文：他取得胜利并被任命为蜀郡守。司马错的孙子司马蕲是武安君白起的部下。
English: He won the victory and was appointed as the governor of Shu County. Sima Zhe, the grandson of Sima Zhe, was a subordinate of Wu'an Jun Baiqi.

古文：而少梁更名夏阳。
现代文：这时的少梁改名为夏阳。
English: At this time, Shaoliang changed his name to Xiayang.

古文：蕲与武安君坑赵长平军，还而与之俱赐死杜邮，葬于华池。
现代文：司马蕲舆武安君白起在长平坑杀趟国的军队，回到秦国后，他与白起都被秦王赐死于杜邮，葬在华池。
English: Sima Qianwu Anjun Baiqi was killed in the Changping pit of the army of the Tang Dynasty. After returning to Qin, both he and Baiqi were given by the Qin King to die in Duyong and buried in Huachi.

古文：蕲孙昌，为秦王铁官。
现代文：司马蕲之孙名司马昌，在秦国任铁官。
English: Sima Qian's grandson, Sima Chang, became an iron official in Qin.

古文：当始皇之时，蒯聩玄孙卬为武信君将而徇朝歌。
现代文：在秦始皇时，蒯聩的玄孙司马卬是武信君的将领，领兵攻占了朝歌。
English: In the time of Qin Shi Huang, Zou's great-great-grandson Sima Zou was the general of Wu Xinjun, and led the troops to capture the morning song.

古文：诸侯之相王，王卬于殷。
现代文：在项羽封十八诸侯时，封司马卬为殷王。
English: In the time when Xiang Yu was the vassal of 18 princes, the vassal Ma Jun was the king of Yin.

古文：汉之伐楚，卬归汉，以其地为河内郡。
现代文：在汉王刘邦讨伐楚王项羽时，司马卬归附了汉，汉王改司马卬统治区为河内郡。
English: When the Han king Liu Bang attacked the Chuba king Xiang Yu, Sima Yi was relegated to the Han king, and Han Yingdi became Hanoi County.

古文：昌生毋怿，毋怿为汉市长。
现代文：司马吕生司马毋惮，司马毋惮任汉朝长安的市长。
English: Sima Liusheng Sima Bezooru, Sima Bezooru served as the mayor of Chang'an in the Han Dynasty.

古文：毋怿生喜，喜为五大夫，卒，皆葬高门。
现代文：司马毋恽生司马喜，司马喜曾为五大夫，他们死后，都埋葬在高门。
English: Sima was the son of Sima Xi, Sima Xi had five husbands, and after their death, they were all buried in Gaomen.

古文：喜生谈，谈为太史公。
现代文：司马喜生司马谈，司马谈曾任太史公。
English: Sima Xisheng talked about Sima, and Sima talked about doing too much history.

古文：太史公学天官于唐都，受《易》于杨何，习道论于黄子。
现代文：太史公向唐都学习天文学，在杨何处学《周易》，在黄子处学道论。
English: Taishi Gong learned astronomy from Tang Du, "Zhou Yi" from Yang Kuo, and Taoism from Huang Zi.

古文：太史公仕于建元、元封之间，愍学者不达其意而师悖，乃论六家之要指曰：
现代文：太史公在汉武帝建元至元封年间做官，他忧虑学习先秦各家学说的人，未能了解各家学说的原意，盲目信奉一些荒谬的说法，就论述六家学说的主要精神道：
English: Tai Shigong was an official during the reign of Emperor Jianyuan of the Han Dynasty to the reign of Emperor Yuanfu. He was worried that people who studied the pre-Qin doctrines failed to understand the original meaning of the doctrines and blindly believed in some absurd sayings. He discussed the main spiritual way of the six doctrines:

古文：《易大传》： 天下一致而百虑，同归而殊涂。 
现代文：《易大传》说： 天下人的方向一致，可是想法却多种多样，目标相同，可所走的道路却不相同。 
English: "The Great Biography of Yi" says: People all over the world have the same direction, but their thoughts are diverse, their goals are the same, but the paths they take are different.

古文：夫阴阳、儒、墨、名、法、道德，此务为治者也。直所从言之异路，有省不省耳。
现代文：阴阳家、儒家、墨家、名家、法家、道德家，这些学派都是以治理国家为要务的，但是他们的学说却不同，有省与不省而已。
English: Yin and Yang, Confucianism, Buddhism, Confucianism, law, morality, these schools are to govern the country as a priority, but their doctrines are different, there are provinces and no provinces.

古文：尝窃观阴阳之术，大详而众忌讳，使人拘而多畏，然其叙四时之大顺，不可失也。
现代文：我认为阴阳家的学说，崇尚祥瑞而忌讳繁多，常常使人受到限制而产生许多畏惧，然而它所排列的一年四季的顺序是不能废弃的。
English: I think that the doctrine of yin and yang, which advocates auspiciousness and has many taboos, often makes people feel restricted and produces a lot of fear, but the order of the four seasons it arranges cannot be abandoned.

古文：儒者博而寡要，劳而少功，是以其事难尽从，然其叙君臣、父子之礼，列夫妇、长幼之别，不可易也。
现代文：儒家学说广博而缺少要领，费力不少而功效不大，因此它所提倡的难以完全照办。然而它所规定的君臣父子之间的礼仪，夫妇长幼之间的区别，是不能改变的。
English: The Confucian doctrine is extensive but lacks essentials, it requires a lot of effort but has little effect, so it is difficult to fully comply with what it advocates. However, the etiquette between father and son, the difference between husband and wife, and the difference between parents and children, which it prescribes, cannot be changed.

古文：墨者俭而难遵，是以其事不可偏循；然其强本节用，不可废也。
现代文：墨家主张节俭却难以遵从，因此墨家主张之事不能全部采用。然而墨家关于加强本业发展和厉行节约的主张则是不可丢弃的。
English: The Mo family advocated frugality, but it was difficult to comply with, so the Mo family's proposal could not be fully adopted. However, the Mo family's proposal to strengthen the development of the industry and implement austerity could not be discarded.

古文：法家严而少恩，然其正君臣上下之分，不可改也。
现代文：法家的主张严厉苛刻、缺少恩谊。然而他们端正君臣上下的名分这一点是不可改变的。
English: The principles of the legalists are harsh and harsh, and they lack kindness. However, the fact that they are correcting the status of the ruler and the subordinate is unchangeable.

古文：名家使人俭而善失真，然其正名实，不可不察也。
现代文：名家过于拘于形式而容易丧失对事物的正确认识，然而它辩证名与实的关系问题则不能不予以认真考虑。
English: It is easy to lose the correct understanding of things when a famous person is too attached to form, but the relationship between its dialectical name and reality cannot but be seriously considered.

古文：道家使人精神专一，动合无形，澹足万物。
现代文：道家使人精神合一，行动合乎无形的 道 ，使得万物丰足完美。
English: Taoism makes people one in spirit, and their actions conform to the invisible Tao, making all things abundant and perfect.

古文：其为术也，因阴阳之大顺，采儒、墨之善，撮名、法之要，与时迁徙，应物变化，立俗施事，无所不宜，指约而易操，事少而功多。
现代文：他们的学说，因循了阴阳排列四时的顺序，吸取了儒、墨两家的长处，总取了名、法两家的精华，随着时间来转移，顺着事物而变化，这样来立定常规和处理事务，没有不相适宜的，并且意旨简明而易于掌握，办的事情虽不多，而功效却很大。
English: Their doctrine follows the four-hour sequence of yin and yang, absorbs the strengths of Confucianism and Buddhism, and always takes the name and essence of the two schools of law. It shifts over time and changes along with things. In this way, there is nothing inappropriate in establishing a routine and handling affairs, and the intention is concise and easy to grasp. Although there are not many things to do, the effect is great.

古文：儒者则不然，以为人主天下之仪表也，君唱臣和，主先臣随。
现代文：儒家则不是这样，他们认为君主是天下的表率，凡事君主倡导而臣下应和，君主先行而臣下随从。
English: This is not the case with Confucians. They believe that the monarch is the leader of the world. In all things, the monarch advocates and the vassals follow. The monarch leads and the vassals follow.

古文：如此，则主劳而臣佚。
现代文：像这样，则君主劳累而臣下安逸。
English: In this way, the monarch is exhausted and the subjects are at ease.

古文：至于大道之要，去健羡，黜聪明，释此而任术。
现代文：至于伟大道家理论的精髓，既去掉了刚强和贪欲，又废黜了聪明与智慧。儒家却丢开了这些而任用儒术进行统治。
English: As for the quintessence of the great Taoist theory, not only did it take away strength and greed, but it also dethroned intelligence and wisdom. Confucianism, however, left these things behind and appointed Confucianism to rule.

古文：夫神大用则竭，形大劳则敝；神形蚤衰，欲与天地长久，非所闻也。
现代文：精神用的过分就会枯竭，身体过度劳累就会损坏；精神和身体过早的衰竭，而想与天地共长久，这事还从未听说过。
English: Excessive mental exertion will be exhausted, excessive physical exertion will be damaged; premature mental and physical exhaustion, but want to be with heaven and earth for a long time, this has never been heard of.

古文：夫阴阳，四时、八位、十二度、二十四节各有孝令，曰 顺之者昌，逆之者亡 ，未必然也，故曰 使人拘而多畏 。
现代文：阴阳学说对于一年四季、八卦方位、十二星次、二十四节气都有各自的规定与禁忌，说顺着这些就会昌盛，违背这些就会灭亡，其实未必如此，所以说 使人受到限制而产生许多畏惧 。
English: The theory of yin and yang has its own rules and taboos for the four seasons of the year, the eight directions, the twelve constellations, and the twenty-four solar terms. It says that if you follow these rules, you will prosper, and if you go against these rules, you will perish. In fact, this is not necessarily the case, so it is said that it restricts people and creates a lot of fear.

古文：夫春生、夏长、秋收、冬藏，此天道之大经也，弗顺，则无以为天下纪纲。
现代文：至于春生、夏长、秋收、冬藏，这是大自然运行的规律，若不遵从它就没有可以作为天下法则的。
English: As for spring growth, summer growth, autumn harvest, and winter storage, this is the law of nature's operation, and if it is not followed, it cannot be regarded as the law of the world.

古文：故曰 四时之大顺，不可失也 。
现代文：所以说，它所规定的 一年四时的运行顺序是不能丢掉的 。
English: Therefore, the four-hours-a-year running order it prescribes cannot be discarded.

古文：夫儒者，以六艺为法，六艺经传以千万数，累世不能通其学，当年不能究其礼。
现代文：儒家用六艺作为准则，六艺的经传文字以千万计，人们连续几代都不能弄通它的学说，一辈子也不能完全通晓它的礼仪。
English: Confucianism uses the six arts as its standard. There are tens of thousands of transmitted words of the six arts. People cannot understand its doctrine for several generations in a row, nor can they fully understand its etiquette for a lifetime.

古文：故曰 博而寡要，劳而少功 。
现代文：所以说儒学 广博而缺少要领，费力不少而功效很小 。
English: Therefore, Confucianism is extensive but lacks essentials. It requires a lot of effort but has little effect.

古文：若夫列君臣、父子之礼，序夫妇、长幼之别，虽百家弗能易也。
现代文：至于儒家序列君臣父子之间的礼仪，夫妇长幼之间的区别，这是各家学说也不能改变的。
English: As for the etiquette between father and son in the Confucian order of princes and ministers, and the difference between husband and wife and the elder and younger generations, this is something that cannot be changed by any school of thought.

古文：墨者亦上尧、舜，言其德行，曰 堂高三尺，土阶三等，茅茨不剪，采椽不斫；饭土簋，歠土刑，粝梁之食，藜藿之羹；夏日葛衣，冬日鹿裘。 
现代文：墨家也崇尚尧舜，称述尧舜的德行说： 他们住在三尺高的殿堂裹，土筑的台阶有三层，茅草房顶不修剪，柞木屋椽不雕饰；盛饭用陶簋，装汤用瓦盆，吃的是糙米饭，喝的是豆叶汤；夏天穿葛衣，冬日披鹿皮。 
English: They live in a three-foot-high palace, the steps of the earthwork have three layers, the roof of the thatch house is not trimmed, the eucalyptus roof is not carved; the pottery is used for serving rice, the tile pot is used for soup, the brown rice is eaten, and the bean leaf soup is drunk; the summer is dressed in a quince coat, and the winter is dressed in a deerskin.

古文：其送死，桐棺三寸，举音不尽其哀。
现代文：他们埋葬死人，用三寸薄的桐木板棺材，哭的声音也不悲哀。
English: The Mo family only made a pair of paulownia coffins, only three inches thick, to bury the dead. The mourners cried and could not fully express their grief.

古文：教丧礼，必以此为万民率。
现代文：教育人民遵循葬礼，一定以此为标准。
English: Educating people to follow funerals must be the standard.

古文：故天下法若此，则尊卑无别也。
现代文：要使天下都像这样，那么就没有尊贵和卑下的区别了。
English: If the whole world were to be like this, there would be no distinction between the high and the low.

古文：夫世异时移，事业不必同，故曰 俭而难遵 也。
现代文：世道不同，时代变了，事业不必相同，所以说 墨家所倡导的节俭人们却难以遵循 。
English: The world is different, the times have changed, the cause does not have to be the same, so the frugality advocated by the Mo family is difficult for people to follow.

古文：要曰 强本节用 ，则人给家足之道也。
现代文：总之，墨家主张强本节用，则是引导家富人足的办法。
English: In short, the Mohists advocated the strong use of this section, which is a way to guide the rich.

古文：此墨子之所长，虽百家不能废也。
现代文：可以用它作为临时措施，但不能长期施用。
English: It can be used as a temporary measure, but cannot be applied long-term.

古文：法家不别亲疏，不殊贵贱，一断于法，则亲亲尊尊之恩绝矣，可以行一时之计，而不可长用也，故曰 严而少恩 。
现代文：因此说法家 严厉苛刻而缺少恩谊 。至于法家主张使君王尊贵使臣子卑下，明确职分界限不得相逾越，这是各家学说也不能更改的。
English: As for the legalists, they advocate the humbling of kings, dignitaries, and courtiers, and make it clear that the boundaries of positions must not be crossed, which cannot be changed by any school of thought.

古文：若尊主卑臣，明分职不得相逾越，虽百家不能改也。名家苛察缴绕，使人不得反其意，剸决于名，时失人情，故曰 使人俭而善失真 。
现代文：名家烦琐细碎、纠缠不清，使人不能推求它的真意，专注于名词概念的推理，反而失去了易于掌握的常理。所以说名家 使人受约束而容易丧失对事物的正确认识 。
English: Famous names are tedious, detailed and entangled, making people unable to deduce its true meaning, focusing on the reasoning of the noun concept, but losing the common sense that is easy to grasp. Therefore, famous names make people constrained and easy to lose the correct understanding of things.

古文：若夫控名责实，参伍不失，此不可不察也。
现代文：至于它循名责实，综合考察事物的本质这一点，倒是不可不予以认真考虑的。
English: As for the name-based responsibility, it is required to compare the name with the actual verification, which must be carefully examined.

古文：道家无为，又曰无不为，其实易行，其辞难知。
现代文：道家宣扬无为，又说无所不为，其实际主张是容易实行的，而其言辞却难于理解。
English: Taoists talk about "doing nothing" and "doing nothing but doing nothing," and their practical propositions are easy to implement, while their words are subtle and difficult to understand.

古文：其术以虚无为本，以因循为用。
现代文：其学说以虚无为理论基础，以顺应自然为实践原则。
English: Its theory is based on nothingness, and its practical principle is to conform to nature.

古文：无成势，无常形，故能究万物之情。
现代文：既没有既成不变之势，也没有固定不变之形，所以能够推究万物的实情。
English: There is neither an established and unchanging trend, nor a fixed and unchanging form, so it is possible to deduce the reality of all things.

古文：不为物先后，故能为万物主。
现代文：既不走在事物的前边，也不落在事物的后边，因此能够成为万物的主宰。
English: Neither walking in front of things, nor falling behind things, so it can become the master of all things.

古文：有法无法，因时为业；有度无度，因物兴舍。
现代文：法则的有无，顺应时势来确定；制度的兴废，根据事物的变化来决定。
English: The existence or non-existence of laws should be determined in accordance with the current situation; the rise and fall of the system should be determined according to the changes of things.

古文：故曰 圣人不巧，时变是守 。
现代文：所以说 圣人不巧取，顺应时势而变通 。
English: That's why sages are said to be adaptable, adapting to the times.

古文：虚者，道之常也；因者，君之纲也。
现代文：虚无是道家的核心，因循是君主统治的纲领。
English: Nothingness is the core of Taoism, and following it is the program of monarchical rule.

古文：群臣并至，使各自明也。
现代文：群臣一齐上朝，君主让他们各自表明自己的才干。
English: When a group of courtiers come before you, the sovereign should let each of them clarify his or her position.

古文：其实中其声者谓之端，实不中其声者谓之款。
现代文：其实际情况与名声相符的叫做端；其实际情况与名声不相符的叫做空。
English: If its reality is consistent with its reputation, it is called an end; if its reality is inconsistent with its reputation, it is called a void.

古文：款言不听，奸乃不生，贤不肖自分，白黑乃形。
现代文：君主不听空而不实的话，奸邪就不会产生，贤与不肖就自然分清了，黑白也就自然分明了。
English: If the monarch does not listen to empty and untrue words, treachery and evil will not arise. Virtue and vice will naturally be distinguished, and black and white will naturally be distinguished.

古文：在所欲用耳，何事不成！
现代文：造就在于君主如何使用他们了，这样做还有什么事情办不到呢！
English: It's up to the monarch how they use them, and there's nothing you can't do with them!

古文：乃合大道，混混冥冥。光耀天下，复反无名。
现代文：这样就合乎大道，看起来混混沌沌，而光明却照耀天下，又返回到无名的境界。
English: In this way, it fits the road, looks chaotic and chaotic, but the light shines all over the world, and returns to the nameless realm.

古文：凡人所生者神也，所托者形也。
现代文：人所赖以生存的是精神，所依托的是形体。
English: What people rely on for survival is the spirit, and what they rely on is the body.

古文：神大用则竭，形大劳则敝，形神离则死。
现代文：精神用得过分就会枯竭，形体过分劳累就要损坏，形体与精神分离人就会死亡。
English: If the spirit is overused, it will be exhausted, if the body is overworked, it will be exhausted, and if the form and God are separated, it will die.

古文：死者不可复生，离者不可复合，故圣人重之。
现代文：死去的人不能再生，形神分离就不会复合，因此圣人重视这一问题。
English: A dead person cannot be reborn, and the separation of form and spirit will not be compounded, so the sage attaches great importance to this issue.

古文：由此观之，神者生之本，形者生之俱。
现代文：由此看来，精神是人生存的根本，形体是人生存的器具。
English: From this point of view, the spirit is the foundation of human existence, and the body is the instrument of human existence.

古文：不先定其神形，而曰 我有以治天下 ，何由哉？
现代文：如果不首先安定自己的精神和形体，却说什么 我有办法治理天下 ，凭藉什么呢？
English: If you do not first stabilize your own spirit and body, but say, "I have the means to rule the world," by what means?

古文：太史公既掌天官，不治民。
现代文：太史公职掌天文工作，不管民事。
English: Too much history of public officials in charge of astronomy, regardless of civil.

古文：有子曰迁。
现代文：他有个儿子叫司马迁。
English: Taishi's son's name was changed.

古文：迁生龙门，耕牧河山之阳。
现代文：司马迁生在龙门，在龙门山南麓过着农耕放牧生活。
English: Sima Qian was born in Longmen and lived a life of farming and animal husbandry in the north of the Yellow River and the south of Longmen Mountain.

古文：年十岁则诵古文。
现代文：十岁时已能识读古文著作。
English: At only ten years old, he had already learned to recite ancient texts.

古文：二十而南游江、淮，上会稽，探禹穴，窥九疑，浮沅、湘。
现代文：二十岁南游江淮，他登上会稽山，探访禹穴，到九疑山，考察舜的遣迹，泛舟沅、湘水间。
English: At the age of 20, he traveled to the south of the Yangtze River and Huai River. He ascended Heji Mountain, visited Yu An, and went to Jiuzhishan Mountain to investigate the history of rafts, rafting, and Hunan water.

古文：北涉汶、泗，讲业齐鲁之都，观夫子遗风，乡射邹峄；厄困蕃、薛、彭城，过梁、楚以归。
现代文：北渡汶水、泅水，在齐、鲁之都研讨学业，观察孔子教化的遣风，还在邹峰学习乡射礼节；在游历蕃、薛、彭城等地的时候，一度遭受危困，经过梁、楚之地后回到长安。
English: In Beidu, Wenshui and Liushui, he studied his studies in the cities of Qi and Lu, and observed the wind of Confucius's enlightenment. He also studied the etiquette of shooting in his hometown in Shufeng. When he traveled to the cities of Handan, Xue and Pengcheng, he once suffered a crisis and returned to Chang'an after passing through the cities of Liang and Chu.

古文：于是迁仕为郎中，奉使西征巴、蜀以南，略邛、莋、昆明，还报命。
现代文：于是司马迁做了郎中，奉朝廷之命出使西征巴蜀以南的地区，略定了邛、榨、昆明之后，回到长安向朝廷覆命。
English: As a result, Sima Qian became a vassal, and under the order of the imperial court, he was dispatched to the area south of Bashu to conquer the west, and after briefly determining the location of Kunming, he returned to Chang'an to appeal to the imperial court.

古文：是岁，天子始建汉家之封，而太史公留滞周南，不得与从事，发愤且卒。
现代文：这一年，天子开始举行汉朝的封禅典礼，而太史公被留在周南，不能参与其事，因此心中愤懑得病将要死去。
English: In this year, the emperor began to hold the Han Dynasty's Feudal Zen ceremony, and Taishi was left in Zhounan, unable to participate in the event, so he was so angry that he was about to die.

古文：而子迁适反，见父于河、洛之间。
现代文：他的儿子司马迁恰巧在这时出使返回，在洛阳见到了父亲。
English: His son Sima Qian happened to return from a mission at this time and met his father in Luoyang.

古文：太史公执迁手而泣曰： 予先，周室之太史也。
现代文：太史公抓着司马迁的手流着泪说： 我们的祖先，是周朝的太史。
English: Mr. Taishi grasped Sima Qian's hand and said with tears streaming down his face, "Our ancestors are the Taishi of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：自上世尝显功名虞、夏，典天官事。
现代文：远在上古虞舜夏禹时就取得过显赫的功名，主管天文工作。
English: As far back as the time of the ancient statesman Yu Xiayu, he achieved a distinguished reputation and was in charge of astronomical work.

古文：后世中衰，绝于予乎？
现代文：后来衰落了，难道要断送在我这裹吗？
English: Then it declined, is it going to die with me?

古文：汝复为太史，则续吾祖矣。
现代文：你继为太史，就可以接续我们祖先的事业了。
English: After you have made history, you will carry on the work of our ancestors.

古文：今天子接千岁之统，封泰山，而予不得从行，是命也夫！
现代文：如今天子继承汉朝千年一统的大业，到泰山封禅，而我不得从行，这是命中注定的啊！
English: If today's child inherits the great cause of unifying the Han Dynasty for a thousand years, and goes to Mount Tai to practice Zen, and I am not allowed to go, this is destined by fate!

古文：命也夫！予死，尔必为太史；为太史，毋忘吾所欲论著矣。
现代文：我死以后，你一定会做太史；做了太史，你千万不要忘记我要编写的论着啊。
English: After my death, you will certainly make too much history; when you have made too much history, you must not forget the treatise I am going to write.

古文：且夫孝，始于事亲，中于事君，终于立身；扬名于后世，以显父母，此孝之大也。
现代文：况且孝，是从侍奉双亲开始的，中间经过事奉君主，最终能够在社会上立足，扬名于后世，光耀父母，这是孝中最主要的。
English: Moreover, filial piety begins with serving one's parents, passes through serving the monarch in the middle, and finally can gain a foothold in society, make a name for oneself in future generations, and shine for one's parents. This is the most important part of filial piety.

古文：夫天下称周公，言其能论歌文、武之德，宣周、召之风，达大王、王季思虑，爰及公刘，以尊后稷也。
现代文：天下称颂周公，是说他能够歌颂周文王、武王的功德，宣扬周、召的遣风，使人懂得周太王、王季的思想以及公刘的功业，以使始祖后稷受到尊崇。
English: The world praises Zhou Gong, which means that he is able to sing the merits of King Zhou Wen and King Wu, propagate the sending wind of Zhou and Zhao, and make people understand the thoughts of King Zhou and King Ji and the work of King Liu, so that the ancestor Houyi is revered.

古文：幽、厉之后，王道缺，礼乐衰，孔子修旧起废，论《诗》、《书》，作《春秋》，则学者至今则之。
现代文：周幽王、厉王以后，王道衰落，礼乐损坏，孔子研究、整理旧有的文献典籍，振兴被废弃了的王道和礼乐。整理《诗》、《书》，著作《春秋》，直到今天，学者们仍以此为法则。
English: After Zhou Yu Wang and Li Wang, the royal road declined and the ritual music was damaged. Confucius studied and sorted out the old literature and classics, and revitalized the abandoned royal road and ritual music. He sorted out "Poetry" and "Books" and wrote "Spring and Autumn." To this day, scholars still use this as a rule.

古文：自获麟以来四百有余岁，而诸侯相兼，史记放绝。
现代文：从鲁哀公获麟到现在四百多年了，其间由于诸侯兼并混战，史书丢散、记载中断。
English: It has been more than four hundred years since Rui Gong gained Lin. During this time, the history books were scattered and records were interrupted due to the feudal annexation scuffles.

古文：今汉兴，海内一统，明主贤君，忠臣义士，予为太史而不论载，废天下之文，予甚惧焉，尔其念哉！ 
现代文：如今汉朝兴起，海内统一，贤明的君主，忠义的臣子的事迹，我作为太史而不予评论记载，中断了国家的历史文献，对此我感到十分不安，你可要记在心裹啊！ 
English: Nowadays, the rise of the Han Dynasty, the unification of China, the deeds of a wise monarch and a loyal vassal, I, as a historian, do not comment on the records, interrupting the country's historical documents. I feel very uneasy about this. You should keep it in mind!

古文：迁俯首流涕曰： 小子不敏，请悉论先人所次旧闻，不敢阙。 
现代文：司马迁低下头流着泪说： 小于虽然不聪明，一定把父亲编纂历史的计划全部完成，不敢有丝毫的缺漏。 
English: Sima Qian lowered his head and said with tears streaming down his face: Although Xiao Yu is not smart, he will definitely complete all of his father's plans to compile history, and dare not have the slightest omission.

古文：卒三岁，而迁为太史令，史记石室金鐀之书。五年而当太初元年，十一月甲子朔旦冬至，天历始改，建于明堂，诸神受记。
现代文：太史公死后三年，司马迁作了太史令，他阅读和摘抄了石室金柜收藏的图书档案，又过了五年，正当太初元年，卜一月甲子初一凌晨冬至，开始改用太初历，新的历法在明堂上公布，诸神受到记识。
English: Three years after the death of Taishikong, Sima Qian made the Taishireng, he read and copied the book archives of the stone room gold cabinet collection, and five years later, just after the first year of the year, in the early morning of the winter solstice on the first day of the month of January, he began to use the lunar calendar. The new calendar was announced in the bright hall, and the gods were remembered.

古文：太史公曰： 先人有言  自周公卒五百岁而有孔子，孔子至于今五百岁，有能绍而明世，正《易传》，继《春秋》，本《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《乐》之际。 
现代文：太史公说： 先父曾说过： 从周公死后五百年而有孔子，从孔子到现在又五百年了，到了继承并光大孔子的事业，修正《易传》，续作《春秋》，根据《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《乐》衡量一切的时候了。 
English: Taishikong said, "My father once said, 'Five hundred years after the death of Zhou Gong, there was Confucius, and five hundred years have passed since Confucius. Now is the time to inherit and magnify the cause of Confucius, revise "I Chuan" and continue with "Spring and Autumn," and measure everything according to "Poetry," "Book," "Rite" and "Music."

古文：意在斯乎！
现代文：意思就在于此吧！
English: How dare I refuse?

古文：意在斯乎！
现代文：意思就在于此吧！
English: How dare I refuse?

古文：小子何敢攘焉！ 
现代文：我怎敢推辞呢！ 
English: How dare I refuse!

古文：上大夫壶遂曰： 昔孔子为何作《春秋》哉？ 
现代文：上大夫壶遂问： 当初孔子为什么作《春秋》呢？ 
English: Shangdafu Jug then asked: Why did Confucius write Spring and Autumn in the first place?

古文：太史公曰： 余闻之董生： 周道衰废，孔子为司寇，诸侯害之，大夫壅之。
现代文：太史公答道： 我听董先生说： 周朝的王道衰微了，孔子作鲁国的司寇，想振兴王道，可是诸侯陷害他，大夫阻挠他。
English: Taishi replied: I heard Mr. Dong say: The royal way of the Zhou Dynasty has waned. Confucius, as the governor of Lu, wanted to revitalize the royal way, but the princes framed him and the doctors obstructed him.

古文：孔子知言之不用，道之不行也，是非二百四十二年之中，以为天下仪表，贬天子，退诸侯，讨大夫，以达王事而已矣。 子曰： 我欲载之空言，不如见之于行事之深切著明也。 
现代文：孔子知道自己的主张在当时不会被采纳，王道不能推行，于是便把自己的是非褒贬寓于《春秋》所记的二百四十二年历史之中，作为天下的准则。他贬斥僭礼的诸侯，声讨犯上的大夫，衹不过是为了实行王道罢了，孔子说： 我想与其用空洞的说教去教育别人，还不如记载具体历史事件，因事见义，更为深切显明。 
English: Confucius knew that his ideas would not be accepted at the time, and that the way of kings could not be implemented, so he embedded his own values in the 242-year history recorded in "Spring and Autumn," as the world's standard. He rebuked the princes who rebelled, accused the doctors who committed crimes, and said that it was only for the purpose of practicing the royal way. Confucius said: I think that instead of using empty preaching to educate others, it is better to record specific historical events, and it is more profound and clear to see the truth.

古文：《春秋》上明三王之道，下辨人事之经纪，别嫌疑，明是非，定犹与，善善恶恶，贤贤贱不肖，存亡国，继绝世，补弊起废，王道之大者也。
现代文：《春秋》一书，上能阐明三王之道，下能分辨人事的伦理纲常，判别嫌疑明辨是非，论定犹豫难决之事，表彰善良，贬斥丑恶，尊重贤能者，贱视不肖之徒，保存已灭亡国家的史迹，接续已断绝了的世系，弥补残缺，振兴衰废，这些都是王道中的要点。
English: "Spring and Autumn" is a book that can clarify the way of the three kings at the top, and can distinguish the ethical standards of personnel affairs at the bottom, judge suspicions, distinguish right and wrong, discuss things that are difficult to decide, commend kindness, disparage ugliness, respect the virtuous, and despise the unscrupulous, preserve the historical sites of countries that have perished, continue the lineage that has been cut off, make up for shortcomings, and revitalize decay. These are all important points in the royal way.

古文：《易》，著天地、阴阳、四时、五行，故长于变；《礼》，纲纪人伦，故长于行；《书》，记先王之事，故长于政；《诗》，记山川、溪谷、禽兽、草木、牝牡、雌雄，故长于风；《乐》，乐所以立，故长于和；《春秋》，辩是非，故长于治人。
现代文：《易》是专讲天地、阴阳、四时、五行的，所以长于变化；《礼》是规范人伦的，所以长于行事；《书》是记载先王事迹的，所以长于政事；《诗》是记载山川、溪谷、禽兽、草木、牝牡、雌雄的，所以长于风土人情；《乐》是论述音乐经典的，所以长于和谐；《春秋》明辨是非，所以长于治人。
English: "Yi" is about heaven and earth, yin and yang, the four seasons, and the five elements, so it is longer than change; "Li" is about regulating human ethics, so it is longer than action; "Shu" is about recording the deeds of the previous king, so it is longer than politics; "Poetry" is about recording mountains, rivers, valleys, animals, plants, animals, and men and women, so it is longer than customs; "Le" is about classical music, so it is longer than harmony; "Spring and Autumn" is about distinguishing right from wrong, so it is longer than governing people.

古文：是故《礼》以节人，《乐》以发和，《书》以道事，《诗》以达意，《易》以道化，《春秋》以道义。
现代文：由此可见，《礼》用以节制人欲，《乐》用以发扬和气，《书》用以指导政事，《诗》用以表达思想感情，《易》用以阐明事物的变化，《春秋》用以指导人们遵守道义。
English: It can be seen that "Li" is used to restrain human desires, "Le" is used to promote harmony, "Shu" is used to guide political affairs, "Poetry" is used to express thoughts and feelings, "Yi" is used to clarify changes in things, and "Spring and Autumn" is used to guide people to abide by morality.

古文：拨乱世反之正，莫近于《春秋》。
现代文：治理乱世，使它走向正轨，没有比《春秋》再合适不过的了。
English: There is nothing more suitable than "Spring and Autumn" to govern the chaotic world and make it go on the right track.

古文：《春秋》文成数万，其指数千。万物之散聚皆在《春秋》。
现代文：《春秋》文字数万，旨意数千，万物的离散聚合都集中在《春秋》裹面。
English: "Spring and Autumn" has tens of thousands of characters, thousands of purposes, and the discrete aggregation of all things are concentrated in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：《春秋》之中，弑君三十六，亡国五十二，诸侯奔走不得保社稷者不可胜数。
现代文：在《春秋》中，记载着三十六起杀君事件和五十二个亡国事件，诸侯奔走逃亡不能保其国家的，简直无法统计。
English: In "Spring and Autumn," thirty-six cases of regicide and fifty-two cases of national subjugation are recorded. It is simply impossible to count the number of princes who fled to save their country.

古文：察其所以，皆失其本已。
现代文：考察其所以如此，都是由于失去了礼义这个根本。
English: Examining the reasons for its chaotic downfall, they all lost the Spring and Autumn Great Righteousness as the foundation of the state.

古文：故《易》曰 差以豪氂，谬以千里 。故 臣弑君，子弑父，非一朝一夕之故，其渐久矣 。
现代文：所以《易》说 失之毫厘，差以千里，因此 臣弑君、子杀父，并不是一朝一夕的缘故，而是逐步发展而来的 。
English: Therefore, "Yi" said that the loss of a millimeter is a difference of a thousand miles, so the reason for the son killing his father is not an overnight cause, but has developed gradually.

古文：有国者不可以不知《春秋》，前有谗而不见，后有贼而不知。
现代文：做国君的不能不通晓《春秋》，否则前面有进谗言的则看不见，后面有奸贼作乱也不知道。
English: A sovereign must be familiar with "Spring and Autumn," otherwise, he will not be able to see the insults in front of him, and he will not know that there are traitors behind him.

古文：为人臣者不可以不知《春秋》，守经事而不知其宜，遭变事而不知其权。
现代文：作人臣的不能不通晓《春秋》，否则就不知道日常事务怎么处理才得当，遇到突变就不能采取权宜之计去应对。
English: It is essential for a minister to be familiar with "Spring and Autumn," otherwise he or she will not know how to properly handle daily affairs, and will not be able to take expedient measures to deal with sudden changes.

古文：为人君父者而不通于《春秋》之义者，必蒙首恶之名。
现代文：作人君、人父的，不能通晓《春秋》大义的，一定会蒙上首恶的罪名。
English: If you are a writer or a father, if you cannot understand the great meaning of "Spring and Autumn," you will surely be accused of the most evil.

古文：为人臣子不通于《春秋》之义者，必陷篡弑诛死之罪。
现代文：作人臣、人子的。不通晓《春秋》大义的，一定会陷于篡弑的罪名而被诛杀。
English: He was a statesman and a man's son. Anyone who did not understand the great meaning of "Spring and Autumn" would certainly be accused of usurpation and killed.

古文：其实皆为善为之，而不知其义，被之空言不敢辞。
现代文：其实他们都以为是在做好事，却因为不知其道义所在，以致被加上了空洞的罪名也不敢推卸。
English: In fact, they all thought they were doing a good deed, but because they didn't know the morality of it, they were charged with empty accusations and didn't dare to shirk it.

古文：夫不通礼义之指，至于君不君，臣不臣，父不父，子不子。
现代文：不通晓礼义的宗旨，就会弄到君主不像君主、巨子不像臣子、父亲不像父亲、儿子不像儿子的地步。
English: If you do not understand the purpose of etiquette, you will get to the point where the monarch is not like the monarch, the giant is not like the vassal, the father is not like the father, and the son is not like the son.

古文：夫君不君则犯，臣不臣则诛，父不父则无道，子不子则不孝：此四行者，天下之大过也。
现代文：君主不像君主，就会受到臣下的干犯，臣子不像臣子就会被诛杀，父亲不像父亲，就没有人伦之道，儿子不像儿子就会忤逆不孝，这四种行为是天下最大的罪过。
English: A monarch who is not like a monarch will be offended by his subjects, a vassal who is not like a vassal will be killed, a father who is not like a father will have no ethics, and a son who is not like a son will be rebellious and unfilial. These four actions are the greatest sins in the world.

古文：以天下大过予之，受而不敢辞。
现代文：把天下最大罪过的罪名加在他们头上，他们也衹能接受而不敢推辞。
English: The charge of the greatest crime in the world was put on their heads, and they could not accept it and did not dare to refuse.

古文：故《春秋》者，礼义之大宗也。
现代文：因此说，《春秋》一书是礼义的根本。
English: Therefore, the book "Spring and Autumn" is the foundation of etiquette.

古文：夫礼禁未然之前，法施已然之后；法之所为用者易见，而礼之所为禁者难知。 
现代文：礼义的作用是禁绝坏事的发生，法律的作用是在坏事发生之后进行制裁；法律所起的作用显而易见，而礼义所起的防止作用却不易被人了解。 
English: The role of etiquette is to prohibit the occurrence of bad things, and the role of law is to impose sanctions after the occurrence of bad things; the role played by law is obvious, but the preventive role played by etiquette is not easy to understand.

古文：壶遂曰： 孔子之时，上无明君，下不得任用，故作《春秋》，垂空文以断礼义，当一王之法。
现代文：壶遂说： 孔子的时候，上面没有圣明的君主，下面的臣子不被重用，所以才作《春秋》，留下议论，以裁断礼义，作为统一的王法。
English: Kettle then said, "In the time of Confucius, there was no divine ruler above, and the vassals below were not given much importance. That's why he wrote "Spring and Autumn," leaving the discussion to decide the etiquette as a unified royal law.

古文：今夫子上遇明天子，下得守职，万事既具，咸各序其宜，夫子所论，欲以何明？ 
现代文：如今您上遇圣明的君主，下得当官任职，万事备，各得其所，您所论述的，将要阐明什么呢？ 
English: Now that you have met the Holy Son of God, now that you are able to serve as an official, everything is ready, and everything is in its place and appropriate, what is it that you want to write about?

古文：太史公曰： 唯唯，否否，不然。
现代文：太史公答道： 啊啊，不不，不是这样。
English: "Yes, yes, no, no, it's not exactly like that," Mr. Tai said.

古文：余闻之先人曰： 伏羲至纯厚，作《易》八卦。
现代文：我听父亲说： 伏羲最为纯厚，他作了《易》八卦。
English: I heard my father say: Fuxi is the most pure, he made "Yi" eight tales.

古文：尧、舜之盛，《尚书》载之，礼乐作焉。
现代文：尧舜道德之盛，《尚书》予以记载，礼乐由此而兴。
English: When morality was at its peak, "Shang Shu" recorded it, and the ritual music flourished as a result.

古文：汤、武之降，诗人歌之。
现代文：商汤、周武功业兴隆，受到诗人的歌颂。
English: Shang Tang and Zhou Wu flourished and were praised by poets.

古文：《春秋》采善贬恶，推三代之德，褒周室，非独刺讥而已也。 
现代文：《春秋》扬善贬恶，推崇夏、商、周三代的盛德，褒扬周王室，不仅仅是讽刺而已。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" is not just a satire, promoting the virtues of Xia, Shang and the third generation, and praising the Zhou royal family.

古文：汉兴已来，至明天子，获符瑞，封禅，改正朔，易服色，受命于穆清，泽流罔极，海外殊俗，重译款塞，请来献见者，不可胜道。
现代文：从汉朝建立到今圣明天子，这期间获得了吉祥的符瑞，举行了封惮大典，改革了历法，更换了衣物的颜色，受命于天，天子的恩泽滋润无边，海外异俗之地的国家也辗转翻译叩关入境，请求献礼、朝见，这样的事情多得说不完。
English: From the establishment of the Han Dynasty to the present day, during this period, the auspicious Fu Rui was obtained, the sealing ceremony was held, the calendar was reformed, the color of the clothing was changed, and it was ordered by heaven. The grace of the heavenly son is boundless, and countries in foreign countries have also come and gone to request gifts and to see the emperor. There are too many things to talk about.

古文：臣下百官，力诵圣德，犹不能宣尽其意。
现代文：臣下百官极力颂扬天子的圣德，还不能完全表达自己的心意。
English: The hundreds of officials under his command tried their best to extol the holiness of the Son of God, but they could not fully express their thoughts.

古文：且士贤能矣，而不用，有国者耻也；主上明圣，德不布闻，有司之过也。
现代文：况且，天下有贤能的人得不到重用，是国君的耻辱；主上圣明，而其恩德不能传扬天下，这是主管官员的过错。
English: Moreover, it is the disgrace of the sovereign that the most capable people in the world are not used more often; it is the fault of the officials in charge that the Lord is holy and His grace cannot be spread throughout the world.

古文：且余掌其官，废明圣盛德不载，灭功臣、贤大夫之业不述，堕先人所言，罪莫大焉。
现代文：何况我担任史官工作，如果撇开天子的圣明功德不去记载，埋没了功臣、贤大夫的功业不去论述，背弃了我父亲的嘱咐，这是极大的罪过。
English: What's more, I am a historian. It would be a great sin to ignore the sacred merits of the heavenly sons and not record them, to bury the exploits of heroes and sages and not discuss them, and to betray my father's instructions.

古文：余所谓述故事，整齐其世传，非所谓作也，而君比之《春秋》，谬矣。 
现代文：我所写的不过是记述历史故事，整理、归纳世代相传的史料，不是人们所说的著作，而您把它比作《春秋》就不对了。 
English: What I have written is merely a record of historical stories, a collation and summary of historical materials handed down from generation to generation. It is not what people call a work, and your comparison of it to Spring and Autumn is incorrect.

古文：于是论次其文。
现代文：于是按次序论述和编写其书。
English: Therefore, his books were discussed and compiled in order.

古文：十年而遭李陵之祸，幽于累绁。
现代文：写作的第十年，遭受李陵之祸，被关进了监狱。
English: In the tenth year of writing, he suffered the calamity of Li Ling and was put in prison.

古文：乃喟然而叹曰： 是余之罪夫！
现代文：在狱中长叹道： 这是我的罪过啊！
English: In prison, he sighed, "This is my fault!"

古文：身亏不用矣。 
现代文：身体残废没有用了。 
English: It's no use being crippled.

古文：退而深惟曰： 夫《诗》、《书》隐约者，欲遂其志之思也。 
现代文：事后仔细思量道： 《诗》、《书》的文义之所以含蓄隐约，是作者藉以更好地表现自己的深沉思想。 
English: After careful consideration, he said: The reason why the meaning of "Poetry" and "Book" is implicit and vague is that the author uses it to better express his deep thoughts.

古文：卒述陶唐以来，至于麟止，自黄帝始。
现代文：他终于着手记述从黄帝开始，直到武帝获麟为止的历史。其篇目为：
English: He finally began to write about the history from the Yellow Emperor to the Emperor Wu. The title of the article is:

古文：《五帝本纪》第一，《夏本纪》第二，《殷本纪》第三，《周本纪》第四，《秦本纪》第五，《始皇本纪》第六，《项羽本纪》第七，《高祖本纪》第八，《吕后本纪》第九，《孝文本纪》第十，《孝景本纪》第十一，《今上本纪》第十二。
现代文：《五帝本纪》第一，《夏本纪》第二，《殷本纪》第三，《周本纪》第四，《秦本纪》第五，《始皇本纪》第六，《项羽本纪》第七，《高祖本纪》第八，《吕后本纪》第九，《孝文本纪》第十，《孝景本纪》第十一，《今上本纪》第十二。
English: The Five Emperor's Classic is the first, the Summer Classic is the second, the Yin Classic is the third, the Zhou Classic is the fourth, the Qin Classic is the fifth, the First Emperor's Classic is the sixth, the Xiang Yu Classic is the seventh, the Gaozu Classic is the eighth, the Lü Hou Classic is the ninth, the Xiaowen Classic is the tenth, the Xiaojing Classic is the eleventh, and the Jin Shang Classic is the twelfth.

古文：《三代世表》第一，《十二诸侯年表》第二，《六国年表》第三，《秦楚之际月表》第四，《汉诸侯年表》第五，《高祖功臣年表》第六，《惠景间功臣年表》第七，《建元以来侯者年表》第八，《王子侯者年表》第九，《汉兴以来将相名臣年表》第十。
现代文：《三代世表》第一，《十二诸侯年表》第二，《六国年表》第三，《秦楚之际月表》第四，《汉诸侯年表》第五，《高祖功臣年表》第六，《惠景间功臣年表》第七，《建元以来侯者年表》第八，《王子侯者年表》第九，《汉兴以来将相名臣年表》第十。
English: "Third Generation Chronology" is the first, "Twelve Princes Chronology" is the second, "Six Kingdoms Chronology" is the third, "Qin Chu Era Chronology" is the fourth, "Han Princes Chronology" is the fifth, "Gao Zu Heroes Chronology" is the sixth, "Beneficiaries Chronology" is the seventh, "Heroes Chronology Since the Founding of the People's Republic of China" is the eighth, "Prince Heroes Chronology" is the ninth, and "Famous Vassals Chronology Since the Han Dynasty" is the tenth.

古文：《礼书》第一，《乐书》第二，《律书》第三，《历书》第四，《天官书》第五，《封禅书》第六，《河渠书》第七，《平准书》第八。
现代文：《礼书》第一，《乐书》第二，《律书》第三，《历书》第四，《天官书》第五，《封惮书》第六，《河渠书》第七，《平准书》第八。
English: "The Book of Rites" is the first, "The Book of Music" is the second, "The Book of Laws" is the third, "The Book of Calendars" is the fourth, "The Book of Heavenly Officials" is the fifth, "The Book of Seals" is the sixth, "The Book of Canals" is the seventh, and "The Book of Leveling" is the eighth.

古文：《吴太伯世家》第一，《齐太公世家》第二，《鲁周公世家》第三，《燕召公世家》第四，《管蔡世家》第五，《陈杞世家》第六，《卫康叔世家》第七，《宋微子世家》第八，《晋世家》第九，《楚世家》第十，《越世家》第十一，《郑世家》第十二，《赵世家》第十三，《魏世家》第十四，《韩世家》第十五，《田完世家》第十六，《孔子世家》第十七，《陈涉世家》第十八，《外戚世家》第十九，《楚元王世家》第二十，《荆燕王世家》第二十一，《齐悼惠王世家》第二十二，《萧相国世家》第二十三，《曹相国世家》第二十四，《留侯世家》第二十五，《陈丞相世家》第二十六，《绛侯世家》第二十七，《梁孝王世家》第二十八，《五宗世家》第二十九，《三王世家》第三十。
现代文：《吴太伯世家》第一，《齐太公世家》第二，《鲁周公世家》第三，《燕召公世家》第四，《管蔡世家》第五，《陈杞世家》第六，《卫康叔世家》第七，《宋微子世家》第八，《晋世家》第九，《楚世家》第十，《越世家》第十一，《郑世家》第十二，《赵世家》第十三，《魏世家》第十四，《韩世家》第十五，《田完世家》第十六，《孔子世家》第十七，《陈涉世家》第十八，《外戚世家》第十九，《楚元王世家》第二十，《荆燕王世家》第二十一，《齐悼惠王世家》第二十二，《萧相国世家》第二十三，《曹相国世家》第二十四，《留侯世家》第二十五，《陈丞相世家》第二十六，《绛侯世家》第二十七，《梁孝王世家》第二十八，《五宗世家》第二十九，《三王世家》第三十。
English: "Wu Tai Bo family" first, "Qi Tai Gong family" second, "Lu Zhou family" third, "Yan Zhao family" fourth, "Guan Cai family" fifth, "Chen Zi family" sixth, "Weikang uncle family" seventh, "Song Weizi family" eighth, "Jin family" ninth, "Chu family" tenth, "Yue family" eleventh, "Zheng family" twelfth, "Zhao family" thirteenth, "Wei family" fourteenth, "Han family" fifteenth, "Tian Wan family" sixteenth, "Confucius family" seventeenth, "Chen

古文：《伯夷列传》经一，《管晏列传》第二，《老子韩非列传》第三，《司与穰苴列传》第四，《孙子吴起列传》第五，《伍子胥列传》第六，《仲尼弟子列传》第七，《商君列传》第八，《苏秦列传》第九，《张仪列传》第十，《樗里甘茂列传》第十一，《穰侯列传》第十二，《白起王翦列传》第十三，《孟子荀卿列传》第十四，《平原虞卿列传》第十五，《孟尝君列传》第十六，《魏公子列传》第十七，《春申君列传》第十八，《范睢蔡泽列传》第十九，《乐毅列传》第二十，《廉颇蔺相如列传》第二十一，《田单列传》第二十二，《鲁仲连列传》第二十三，《屈原贾生列传》第二十四，《吕不韦列传》第二十五，《刺客列传》第二十六，《李斯列传》第二十七，《蒙恬列传》第二十八，《张耳陈馀列传》第二十九，《魏豹彭越列传》第三十，《黥布列传》第三十一，《淮阴侯韩信列传》第三十二，《韩王信卢绾列传》第三十三，《田儋列传》第三十四，《樊郦滕灌列传》第三十五，《张丞相仓列传》第三十六，《郦生陆贾列传》第三十七，《傅靳崩阝成侯列传》第三十八，《刘敬叔孙通列传》第三十九，《季布栾布列传》第四十，《爰盎朝错列传》第四十一，《张释之冯唐列传》第四十二，《万石张叔列传》第四十三，《田叔列传》第四十四，《扁鹊仓公列传》第四十五，《吴王濞列传》第四十六，《魏其武安列传》第四十七，《韩长孺列传》第四十八，《李将军列传》第四十九，《卫将军骠骑列传》第五十，《平津主父列传》第五十一，《匈奴列传》第五十二，《南越列传》第五十三，《闽越列传》第五十四，《朝鲜列传》第五十五，《西南夷列传》第五十六，《司马相如列传》第五十七，《淮南衡山列传》第五十八，《循吏列传》第五十九，《汲郑列传》第六十，《儒林列传》第六十一，《酷吏列传》第六十二，《大宛列传》第六十三，《游侠列传》第六十四，《佞幸列传》第六十五，《滑稽列传》第六十六，《日者列传》第六十七，《龟策列传》第六十八，《货殖列传》第六十九。
现代文：《伯夷列传》第一，《管晏列传》第二，《老子韩非列传》第三，《司马穣苴列传》第四，《孙子吴起列传》第五，《伍子胥列传》第六，《仲尼弟子列传》第七，《商君列传》第八，《苏秦列传》第九，《张仪列传》第十，《樗里甘茂列传》第十一，《穣侯列传》第十二，《白起王翦列传》第十三，《孟子荀卿列传》第十四，《平原虞卿列传》第十五，《孟尝君列传》第十六，《魏公子列传》第十七，《春申君列传》第十八，《范睢蔡泽列传》第十九，《乐毅列传》第二十，《廉颇蔺相如列传》第二十一，《田单列传》第二十二，《鲁仲连列传》第二十三，《屈原买生列传》第二十四，《吕不韦列传》第二十五，《刺客列传》第二十六，《李斯列传》第二十七，《蒙恬列传》第二十八，《张耳陈余列传》第二十九，《魏豹彭越列传》第三十，《黥布列传》第三十一，《淮阴侯韩信列传》第三十二，《韩王信卢绾列传》第三十三，《田儋列传》第三十四，《樊郦滕灌列传》第三十五，《张丞相仓列传》第三十六，《郦生陆买列传》第三十七，《傅靳挪成侯列传》第三十八，《刘敬叔孙通列传》第三十九，《季布乐布列传》第四十，《袁盎晁错列传》第四十一，《张释之冯唐列传》第四十二，《万石张叔列传》第四十三，《田叔列传》第四十四，《扁鹊仓公列传》第四十五，《吴王濞列传》第四十六，《魏其武安列传》第四十七，《韩长孺列传》第四十八，《李将军列传》第四十九，《卫将军骠骑列传》第五十，《平津主父列传》第五十一，《匈奴列传》第五十二，《南越列传》第五十三，《闽越列传》第五十四，《朝鲜列传》第五十五，《西南夷列传》第五十六，《司马相如列传》第五十七，《淮南衡山列传》第五十八，《循吏列传》第五十九，《汲郑列传》第六十，《儒林列传》第六十一，《酷吏列传》第六十二，《大宛列传》第六十三，《游侠列传》第六十四，《佞幸列传》第六十五，《滑稽列传》第六十六，《曰者列传》第六十七，《龟策列传》第六十八，《货殖列传》第六十九。
English: 

古文：惟汉继五帝末流，接三代绝业。
现代文：汉朝继承了五帝遣业，接续被中断了的三代事业。
English: The Han Dynasty succeeded the five emperors who were dismissed from their posts, and the three-generation career that had been interrupted successively.

古文：周道既废，秦拨去古文，焚灭《诗》、《书》，故明堂、石室、金鐀、玉版图籍散乱。
现代文：周朝王道衰微，秦朝毁弃了古代文化典籍，焚毁了《诗》、《书》，所以造成明堂、石室金柜中的玉版图籍散乱了。
English: As the Zhou Dynasty waned, the Qin Dynasty destroyed ancient cultural classics, incinerated "Poetry" and "Books," which resulted in the jade picture books in the Ming Hall and the stone cabinet being scattered.

古文：汉兴，萧何次律令，韩信申军法，张苍为章程，叔孙通定礼仪，则文学彬彬稍进，《诗》、《书》往往间出。
现代文：汉朝建立，萧何颁布了律令，韩信整顿了军法，张苍制定了章程，叔孙通制订了礼仪。于是品学兼优的文入学者逐渐被启用，《诗》、《书》之类的典籍，在各地不断被发现。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, Xiao He promulgated the Ritsuryo, Han Xin rectified the military law, Zhang Cang formulated the regulations, and Sun Tzu formulated the etiquette. As a result, scholars with excellent academic qualifications were gradually admitted, and classics such as poems and books were continuously discovered all over the country.

古文：自曹参荐盖公言黄、老，而贾谊、韩错明申、朝，公孙弘以儒显，百年之间，天下遗文古事靡不毕集。
现代文：自从曹参荐用盖公，提倡黄老学说，贾谊、晁错通晓申不害、韩非的法家学说，公孙弘因儒学而显达，一百年来，天下的遣文旧事无不汇集于太史公处。
English: Since Cao San recommended the use of gui guo, advocated the theory of Huang Lao, Jia Yi, Zou Er Tong Xiao Shen Nong Hui, the legal theory of Han Fei, and Gongsun Hong was revealed by Confucianism, in the past 100 years, all the old things of the world have been gathered in the Taishi Public Office.

古文：太史公仍父子相继■其职，曰： 於戏！
现代文：太史公父子相继担任这一职务，太史公说： 啊！
English: Tai Shikong and his son successively held this position. Tai Shikong said: Ah!

古文：余维先人尝掌斯事，显于唐、虞；至于周，复典之。故司马氏世主天宫，至于余乎，钦念哉！ 
现代文：扶持正义，慷慨超群之士，他们不使自己失去时机，而立功名于天下，为他们作了七十列传。
English: For those who uphold justice and are generous beyond measure, who do not allow themselves to be deprived of the opportunity to make a name for themselves in the world, I have compiled seventy biographies.

古文：网罗天下放失旧闻，王迹所兴，原始察终，见盛观衰，论考之行事，略三代，录秦、汉，上记轩辕，下至于兹，著十二本纪；既科条之矣，并时异世，年差不明，作十表；礼乐损益，律历改易，兵权、山川、鬼神，天人之际，承敝通变，作八书；二十八宿环北辰，三十辐共一毂，运行无穷，辅弼股肱之臣配焉，忠信行道以奉主上，作三十世家；扶义俶傥，不令己失时，立功名于天下，作七十列传：凡百三十篇，五十二万六千五百字，为《太史公书》。
现代文：全书总共一百三十篇，五十二万六千五百字，这就是《太史公书》。
English: The whole book has a total of one hundred and thirty articles, with five hundred and twenty-six thousand five hundred words. This is "The Book of Space History."

古文：序略，以拾遗补蓺，成一家言，协《六经》异传，齐百家杂语，臧之名山，副在京师，以俟后圣君子。
现代文：本篇《自序》概括地阐明述作宗旨，就是拾取遣佚的史事以补充六艺之缺，成为一家之言。它协调了有关六经》的各种不同解释，整齐了百家杂说。把正本藏在名山，副本留在京师，以等待后世的圣人君子观览。
English: The purpose of this "self-sequence" is to pick up the historical events of the Yuan Dynasty to supplement the lack of the six arts and become a family word. It has coordinated the various interpretations of the "Six Classics" and tidied up hundreds of miscellaneous sayings. The original is hidden in the famous mountain, and the copy is left in the Beijing division to wait for the future generations of saints and gentlemen to watch.

古文：第七十，迁之自叙云尔。
现代文：列传的第七十篇，是司马迁的自叙。
English: The 70th chapter listed is Sima Qian's autobiography.

古文：而十篇缺，有录无书。
现代文：然而在一百三十篇中缺少了十篇，有目录而无内容。
English: However, out of one hundred and thirty articles, ten are missing, with a table of contents but no content.

古文：迁既被刑之后，为中书令，尊宠任职。
现代文：司马迁受刑以后，做了中书令，职高位尊。
English: After Sima Qian was sentenced, he was made a high-ranking official.

古文：故人益州刺史任安予迁书，责以古贤臣之义。
现代文：他的旧友益州刺史任安写信给他，用古贤臣的标准要求他。
English: His old friend, Ikshoushi Ren'an, wrote to him, asking him to live up to the standards of an ancient sage.

古文：迁报之曰：
现代文：司马迁回信说：
English: Sima Qian wrote back saying:

古文：少卿足下：曩者辱赐书，教以慎于接物，推贤进士为务。
现代文：少卿足下：早些时候承蒙您写信给我，教我谨慎地接人待物，并担负起向皇帝举荐人才的应尽义务。
English: Shaoxing Foot: Earlier, you had the courtesy to write to me, instructing me to be prudent in receiving gifts and to assume the duty of recommending talents to the emperor.

古文：意气勤勤恳恳，若望仆不相师用，而流俗人之言。仆非敢如是也。
现代文：信中情真意切，好像责备我没遵从您的意见行事，而听从了世俗流言，我是不敢这样的。
English: The letter is very earnest, as if reproaching me for not acting in accordance with your advice, but for listening to popular gossip, which I dare not do.

古文：虽罢驽，亦尝侧闻长者遗风矣。
现代文：我虽然才能平庸，但也聆听过德高望重的长者的遣教。
English: Despite my mediocre ability, I have also listened to the teachings of highly respected elders.

古文：顾自以为身残处秽，动而见尤，欲益反损，是以抑郁而无谁语。谚曰： 谁为为之，孰令听之？ 
现代文：衹是自己认为身体已经残废，而又处于低贱的地位，稍有举动就会受到责难，主观上想有所作为，客观上反而会招致损害，因此情绪苦闷而又找不到知心的朋友去诉说。俗话说： 为了谁而这样做，又有谁来听我说呢？ 
English: It is because they think that their bodies have been crippled, but they are in a lowly position, any action will be criticized, subjectively they want to make a difference, but objectively it will cause damage, so they are emotionally distressed and can't find a close friend to tell. As the saying goes: For whom is this done, and who will listen to me?

古文：盖钟子期死，伯牙终身不复鼓琴。
现代文：所以，钟子期一死，伯牙终生不再鼓琴。
English: Therefore, once Zhong Zi Shi died, Bao Ya would not play the drum for the rest of his life.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：士为知已用，女为说己容。
现代文：因为士为知己者而效力；女子为喜爱自己的人而打扮。
English: For men dress for their friends, and women for those who love them.

古文：若仆大质已亏缺，虽材怀随、行，行若由、夷，终不可以为荣，适足以发笑而自点耳。
现代文：像我这样身体残废的人，即使怀有随侯珠、和氏璧那样的可贵之材，有如许由、伯夷那样的高尚品德，终究也不能引以为荣，相反恰好遭人耻笑而使自己更加污秽。
English: A physically disabled person like me, even if he or she is a valuable person like Su Houzhu and He Shi Bi, and has a noble character like Xu You and Bo Yi, can't be proud after all. On the contrary, he or she is just being ridiculed, which makes him or her even more dirty.

古文：书辞宜答，会东从上来，又迫贱事，相见日浅，卒卒无须臾之间得竭指意。
现代文：早该给你回信了，刚好随从皇帝东巡归来，又忙着烦琐的事务，彼此相见的日子越来越少了，而我又匆匆忙忙没有一点儿空闲得以详尽说明我的心意。
English: I should have replied to you long ago. I had just returned from the emperor's eastern tour, and I was busy with tedious affairs. The days of seeing each other were getting fewer and fewer, and I was in a hurry and had no free time to explain my thoughts in detail.

古文：今少卿抱不测之罪，涉旬月，迫季冬，仆又薄从上上雍，恐卒然不可讳。
现代文：现在你身遭大难，再过一个月就接近行刑日期了，我又将随从皇帝去雍地，恐怕转眼之间你就会遭到不幸。
English: Now you are in great trouble, and in another month you will be close to the date of execution. I will follow the emperor to the Yangtze River, and I am afraid that you will suffer misfortune in the blink of an eye.

古文：是仆终已不得舒愤懑以晓左右，则长逝者魂魄私恨无穷。
现代文：这样，我将最终不可能向你抒发内心的愤懑，而你在九泉之下的魂灵也会抱恨无穷。
English: In this way, I will eventually not be able to express my inner anger to you, and your soul under the nine springs will have endless hatred.

古文：请略陈固陋。
现代文：请允许我说说自己的固陋见解吧。
English: Allow me to offer my own unorthodox opinion.

古文：阙然不报，幸勿过。
现代文：好久没给你回信，请原谅。
English: I haven't replied to your letter for a long time. Please forgive me.

古文：仆闻之：修身者，智之府也；爱施者，仁之端也；取予者，义之符也；耻辱者，勇之决也；立名者，行之极也：士有此五者，然后可以托于世，列于君子之林矣。
现代文：我听说过：加强自身修养是智慧的象征；乐于施舍是仁德的开端；取舍得当是道义的表现；正确对待耻辱是判断勇敢的标准；树立好的名声是品行的最高准则。士人衹有具备了这五条，才能在社会上立足，从而进入君子的行列。
English: I have heard it said that self-cultivation is the symbol of wisdom; the willingness to give alms is the beginning of benevolence; the ability to make the right choice is the manifestation of morality; the correct treatment of shame is the criterion for judging bravery; and the establishment of a good reputation is the highest standard of conduct.

古文：故祸莫忄朁于欲利，悲莫痛于伤心，行莫丑于辱先，而诟莫大于宫刑。
现代文：所以最惨的灾祸，莫过于贪图私利；最痛苦的悲哀，莫过于伤了自尊心；最丑恶的行为，莫遇于辱没祖先；最大的耻辱，莫过于遭受宫刑。
English: Therefore, the worst calamity is nothing more than greed for personal gain; the most painful sorrow is nothing more than injured self-esteem; the ugliest behavior is nothing more than insulting ancestors; the greatest shame is nothing more than suffering palace punishment.

古文：刑余之人，无所比数，非一世也，所从来远矣！
现代文：受过宫刑的人，就没有人愿意和他在一起，这不是一朝一代的事，而是由来已久了。
English: No one wants to be with someone who has been subjected to palace punishment. This is not a once-in-a-generation thing, but has been going on for a long time.

古文：昔卫灵公与雍渠载，孔子适陈；商鞅因景监见，赵良寒心；同子参乘，爰丝变色：自古而耻之。
现代文：从前，卫灵公与闯入雍渠同坐一辆车，陪坐的孔子感到耻辱，便离开卫国到了陈国；商鞅依靠闯入景监的引荐，得到秦孝公的重用，赵良为此感到恐惧；宦官赵谈为文帝参乘，袁盎怒而争谏。自古以来宦官就被视为可耻之徒。
English: Once upon a time, Wei Ling Gong rode in the same carriage as the man who broke into the Yongqu Canal. Confucius, who accompanied him, felt humiliated and left Wei Guo for Chen Guo. Shang Qi relied on the introduction of the scene inspector who broke into the scene to get the re-use of Qin Xiaogong, which made Zhao Liang feel afraid. The eunuch Zhao talked about the participation of Emperor Wen, and Yuan Wang was angry and quarreled. Since ancient times, eunuchs have been regarded as shameful.

古文：夫中材之人，事关于宦竖，莫不伤气，况忼慨之士乎！
现代文：就是一般的人，涉及有关宦官的事，没有不挫伤锐气的，何况那些慷慨激昂的士人呢！
English: There is no ordinary person who does not lose heart when it comes to matters concerning eunuchs, let alone those impassioned statesmen!

古文：如今朝虽乏人，奈何令刀锯之余荐天下豪隽哉！
现代文：如今朝廷虽然缺乏人才，可怎能让一个受遇宫刑的人去举荐天下的英雄豪杰呢？
English: Nowadays, although the imperial court lacks talent, how can a person who has been sentenced to imprisonment be allowed to recommend the world's heroes?

古文：仆赖先人绪业，得待罪辇毂下，二十余年矣。
现代文：我靠着父亲的余业，得以在京师任职，已有二十多年了。
English: I have been able to work as a teacher in Beijing for more than 20 years thanks to my father's part-time job.

古文：所以自惟：上之，不能纳忠效信，有奇策材力之誉，自结明主；次之，又不能拾遗补阙，招贤进能，显岩穴之士；外之，不能备行伍，攻城野战，有斩将搴旗之功；下之，不能累日积劳，取尊官厚禄，以为宗族交游光宠。
现代文：平日自己常想：对上，我没能竭尽忠诚，取得奇策高材的美誉，以博得圣明君主的赏识；其次，我又没能替皇帝拾遣补阙、招贤进能，以显露那些隐士的才干；对外，我也没能参加军队去攻城野战，取得斩将拔旗的功绩；对下，我也没能用积年的劳苦换来高官厚禄，以使宗族朋友争光得宠。
English: In my daily life, I often think: On the one hand, I have not been able to be loyal to the best of my ability and gain the reputation of a brilliant strategist to win the appreciation of the Holy Emperor; on the other hand, I have not been able to gather and recruit talents for the emperor to reveal the talents of those hermits; on the other hand, I have not been able to join the army to attack the city and field battle and achieve the feat of raising the flag; on the other hand, I have not been able to exchange the years of hard work for the high rank and rich reward, so that my clan friends can win the favor.

古文：四者无一遂，苟合取容，无所短长之效，可见于此矣。
现代文：这四者，没有一件成功的，只不过是得过且过，受到皇帝的收容而已。
English: Of these four, none were successful, but only managed to get by and were received by the emperor.

古文：乡者，仆亦尝厕下大夫之列，陪外廷末议。
现代文：我没有一点可称道的长处，从这些就可以看出来。过去，我也曾居于下大夫的行列，事奉于朝堂之上，发表些微不足道的议论。
English: I don't have any praiseworthy merits, as you can see from these. In the past, I was also in the ranks of junior doctors, serving at the top of the court and making some insignificant comments.

古文：不以此时引维纲，尽思虑，今已亏形为扫除之隶，在阘茸之中，乃欲卬首信眉，论列是非，不亦轻朝廷，羞当世之士邪！
现代文：可我没有在那个时候捍卫国家的法度，为国竭尽智谋，如今身体残废了，做了一个扫除的奴仆，处于这样卑贱的地位，却要扬眉吐气、议论是非，这不是轻蔑朝廷、羞辱当今的士人吗？唉！唉！
English: But I did not defend the country's laws and regulations at that time, I did my best for the country, and now my body is crippled, I have become a slave to sweep away, I am in such a lowly position, but I have to raise my eyebrows and talk about right and wrong. Isn't this contempt for the court and humiliation of today's scholars? Alas! Alas!

古文：嗟乎！嗟乎！
现代文：像我这样的人，还有什么可说呢？
English: For someone like me, what else is there to say?

古文：如仆，尚何言哉！
现代文：还有什么可说呢？
English: What else is there to say?

古文：尚何言哉！且事本末未易明也。
现代文：况且，事情的原委足不容易说清楚的。
English: Moreover, it is not easy to clarify the cause of the incident.

古文：仆少负不羁之才，长无乡曲之誉，主上幸以先人之故，使得奉薄技，出入周卫之中。
现代文：我年少的时候，才华横溢，长大成人后却不能博得乡里的称誉，幸好皇帝因为我父亲的关系使我得以贡献微薄的才能，出入戒备森严的宫禁之中。
English: When I was young, I was very talented, but when I became an adult, I could not win the praise of the village. Fortunately, the emperor, because of my father's relationship, allowed me to contribute my meager talent and enter and leave the heavily guarded palace.

古文：仆以为戴盆何以望天，故绝宾客之知，忘室家之业，日夜思竭其不肖之材力，务壹心营职，以求亲媚于主上。
现代文：我以为头顶着盆子是看不到天空的，所以我就断绝了朋友的交往，把家庭的私事抛在一边，夜想着竭尽我微薄的才能，专心致力于本职工作，以博得皇帝的宠信。
English: I thought that I could not see the sky with a bowl on my head, so I broke off my friendships, put aside the private affairs of the family, and at night I thought about exhausting my meager talents and devoting myself to my work in order to win the favor of the emperor.

古文：而事乃有大谬不然者。
现代文：然而事情竟会出现与此完全相反的情况。
English: However, the exact opposite happens.

古文：夫仆与李陵俱居门下，素非相善也，趣舍异路，未尝衔杯酒接殷勤之欢。
现代文：我和李陵同在宫中任职，平时并不相要好，思想志趣也不同，更没在一起饮过酒，交过朋友。
English: Li Ling and I both served in the imperial court. We didn't get along well at ordinary times, and our thoughts and interests were different. What's more, we didn't drink wine together or make friends.

古文：然仆观其为人自奇士，事亲孝，与士信，临财廉，取予义，分别有让，恭俭下人，常思奋不顾身以徇国家之急。
现代文：可是我观察他的为人，是个能自守节操的出众人物。他侍奉父母很孝，结交士入讲信用，对待财货廉洁奉公，取舍之间重德义，能分别尊卑长幼而有礼让，谦恭自约，礼贤下士，又常常想着奋不顾身，为国家的危难而献身。
English: However, I observed him as a person. He was an outstanding person who was able to maintain self-discipline. He served his parents with great filial piety, earned the trust of his friends, treated wealth and goods with integrity and served the public, valued virtue and righteousness, was able to distinguish between the superior and the inferior, and was courteous, humble and self-disciplined. He was also a corporal, and often thought about sacrificing himself for the country's peril.

古文：其素所畜积也，仆以为有国士之风。
现代文：从他平时的修养品德来看，我认为他具有国家杰出人才的风度。
English: Judging from his usual cultivated character, I think he has the demeanor of an outstanding national talent.

古文：夫人臣出万死不顾一生之计，赴公家之难，斯已奇矣。
现代文：作为臣子，出于宁肯万死，不求一生的考虑，奔赴国家的危难，这已是很了不起的了！
English: As a courtier, to rush to the country's peril out of consideration for life rather than death, is quite remarkable!

古文：今举事壹不当，而全躯保妻子之臣随而媒孽其短，仆诚私心痛之！
现代文：如今因他一件事情做得不对，那些贪生怕死，衹顾保全身家性命的臣子，就随意构陷，夸大他的罪名，对此我感到十分痛心。
English: Now, because he did one thing wrong, I feel very sorry that those courtiers who are greedy for life and death and disregard the preservation of their own lives will arbitrarily frame him and exaggerate his crime.

古文：且李陵提步卒不满五千，深践戎马之地，足历王庭，垂饵虎口，横挑强胡，卬亿万之师，与单于连战十余日，所杀过当。
现代文：况且，李陵衹率领不到五千步兵，就长驱直入战地，足迹到达匈奴的王庭。他的这支部队，虽然不过是诱虎之师，但他却能主动出击，四处挑战，仰攻强敌，与单于的军队连战十几天，所杀的敌人超过了自己的军队的损失。
English: Moreover, Li Lingyao led less than five thousand infantrymen and drove straight into the battlefield, reaching the royal court of the Xiongnu. Although his army was just a tiger-baiting division, he was able to take the initiative to attack, challenge everywhere, attack the strong enemy, and fight against the single army for more than ten days. The enemy killed exceeded the loss of his own army.

古文：虏救死扶伤不给，旃裘之君长咸震怖，乃悉征左右贤王，举引弓之民，一国共攻而围之。
现代文：杀得敌军连救死扶伤都顾不上。匈奴的君长都震惊了，于是征调了左、右贤王的所属部队，发动了全部能拉弓打仗的人，用全国的力量来围攻他们。
English: The Hun rulers were shocked, so they conscripted the troops belonging to the left and right wise kings, launched all those who could draw a bow and fight, and besieged them with the strength of the whole country.

古文：转斗千里，矢尽道穷，救兵不至，士卒死伤如积。
现代文：李陵军转战千里，箭矢已尽，无路可走，而救兵又不到，死伤的士卒堆积如山。
English: Li Ling's army has been fighting for thousands of miles, the arrows have been exhausted, there is no way to go, and the rescuers are not coming, the dead and wounded soldiers are piled up like a mountain.

古文：然李陵一呼劳军，士无不起，躬流涕，沫血饮泣，张空弮，冒白刃，北首争死敌。
现代文：就是在这种情况下，李陵一声令下，疲惫的士卒便无不奋起，他们噙着泪，血流满面，咽下泪水，举起空弓，留着敌人的兵刃，向北争着与敌人决一死战。
English: It was under these circumstances that Li Ling gave an order, and the exhausted soldiers all rose to their feet. With tears in their eyes and blood streaming down their faces, they swallowed their tears, raised their empty bows, kept their enemy's blades, and headed north to fight the enemy to the death.

古文：陵未没时，使有来报，汉公卿王侯皆奉觞上寿。
现代文：李陵军未覆没时，有使者来报战况，朝廷上的公卿王侯都向皇帝举杯祝贺。
English: When Li Ling's army was still alive, an envoy came to report on the state of the war, and the court nobles and princes at the court all raised their glasses to congratulate the emperor.

古文：后数日，陵败书闻，主上为之食不甘味，听朝不怡。大臣忧惧，不知所出。
现代文：可是过了几天，李陵兵败的消息传来，皇帝吃饭不香，听朝不悦，大臣们担忧害怕，不知如何是好。
English: However, a few days later, the news of Li Ling's defeat came. The emperor did not eat well and was not pleased to hear it. The ministers were worried and afraid and did not know what to do.

古文：仆窃不自料其卑贱，见主上惨凄怛悼，诚欲效其款款之愚。
现代文：我不自量地位的卑下，看到主上极度悲伤的情绪，实在想对皇帝竭忠尽智。
English: I do not underestimate the lowliness of my position, and seeing the extremely sad mood of the Lord, I really want to be loyal to the emperor.

古文：以为李陵素与士大夫绝甘分少，能得人之死力，虽古名将不过也。
现代文：我以为李陵一向对将士们绝甘分少，因而也能得到部下的拼死出力，就是古代名将也赶不上他。
English: I thought that Li Ling had always been extremely generous to generals, so he could also get the desperate efforts of his subordinates. Even the ancient famous generals could not catch up with him.

古文：身虽陷败，彼观其意，且欲得其当而报汉。
现代文：李陵虽然失败被俘，我看他的心意，是想在匈奴立功报汉，以抵当他败降之罪。
English: Although Li Ling failed and was captured, I think his intention was to repay the Huns for their service, in order to atone for his defeat.

古文：事已无可奈何，其所摧败，攻亦足以暴于天下。
现代文：事情到了这种地步已无法挽回，但深入敌阵、摧败敌人的功劳，也足以光耀天下了。
English: Things have reached such a point that there is no turning back, but the achievement of penetrating the enemy's lines and destroying the enemy is also enough to shine in the world.

古文：仆怀欲陈之，而未有路，适会召问，即以此指推言陵功，欲以广主上之意，塞睚眦之辞。
现代文：我抱着这些想法想向主上陈说，而没有机会。恰好主上召问，我就本着上述意思论说李陵的功绩，想以此宽慰主上，堵塞那些陷害李陵的谗言。
English: With these thoughts in mind, I wanted to speak to the Lord, but there was no opportunity. Just as the Lord called me, I spoke of Li Ling's exploits in the spirit of the above, hoping to comfort the Lord and stop the slander that framed Li Ling.

古文：未能尽明，明主不深晓，以为仆沮贰师，而为李陵游说，遂下于理。
现代文：可是由于没说清楚，圣明的主又没深加推究，以为我是在诋毁贰师将军而替李陵开脱罪责，于是就把我交给大理寺治罪。
English: However, since I didn't make it clear and the Lord of the Sacred Light didn't investigate further, he thought I was slandering General Gongshi and absolved Li Ling of guilt, so he handed me over to Dali Temple to be punished.

古文：拳拳之忠，终不能自列。因为诬上，卒从吏议。
现代文：我的诚恳忠心始终没有机会表白，落了个欺君诬上的罪名，主上终于同意了法吏的判决。
English: I never had a chance to confess my sincerity and loyalty. I was falsely accused of cheating the emperor, and the emperor finally agreed with the magistrate's verdict.

古文：家贫，财赂不足以自赎，交游莫救，左右亲近不为一言。
现代文：我家贫穷，没钱赎罪，朋友们没有谁来营救，主上身边的亲信也不替我说一句话。
English: My family is poor, I have no money to atone for my sins, my friends have no one to come to my rescue, and my close friends around the Lord do not say a word for me.

古文：身非木石，独与法吏为伍，深幽囹圄之中，谁可告诉者！
现代文：我的身体不是草木石头，独自和法官打交道，被关进深深的监狱裹，能向谁诉说我的苦处呢！
English: My body is not made of wood and stone, I have to deal with the judge alone, I am locked up in a deep prison, who can I tell about my suffering!

古文：此正少卿所亲见，仆行事岂不然邪？
现代文：这些正是你亲眼看到的，我的遭遇难道不是这样的吗？
English: That's what you saw with your own eyes. Isn't that what happened to me?

古文：李陵既生降，颓其家声，而仆又茸以蚕室，重为天下观笑。
现代文：李陵已投降了匈奴，败坏了他家的名声，而我却被处以宫刑住在蚕室中蒙受耻辱，着实被天下人所耻笑。
English: Li Ling had already surrendered to the Xiongnu, ruining the reputation of his family, while I was sentenced to palace punishment, living in a silkworm cell, suffering humiliation, and being laughed at by the whole world.

古文：悲夫！
现代文：可悲呀！
English: How sad!

古文：悲夫！
现代文：可悲呀！
English: How sad!

古文：事未易一二为俗人言也。
现代文：有些事情是不容易对世俗的人一一说清楚的。
English: There are some things that are not easy to explain to worldly people.

古文：仆之先人，非有剖符丹书之功，文史、星历，近乎卜祝之间，固主上所戏弄，倡优畜之，流俗之所轻也。
现代文：我的祖先没有立下受赐剖符丹书那样的功劳，而掌管文、史、星、历的官与卜官、祝官的地位相似，本来就是供皇上驱使，如同豢养的优伶一样，是被世俗所轻视的宫职。
English: My forefathers did not do the merit of being bestowed with papyri, but the position of the official in charge of literature, history, the stars, and the calendar is similar to that of the diviner and the celebrant. Originally, it was for the emperor to drive, just like the high-ranking eunuch, it is a palace post that is despised by the world.

古文：假令仆伏法受诛，若九牛亡一毛，与蝼蚁何异！
现代文：假如我伏法就死，好似九牛身上失去一根毫毛而微不足道，和一只蝼蛀、蚂蚁被踩死有什么区别呢？
English: What is the difference between me being trampled to death and a grasshopper or an ant, compared to losing a single hair on the body of a cow?

古文：而世又不与能死节者比，特以为智穷罪极，不能自免，卒就死耳。
现代文：而舆论也不能把我视为是为气节正义而死的，衹不过认为我智虑穷尽，罪大恶极，不能自我解脱，终于被杀而已。
English: And the public opinion cannot regard me as having died for the sake of justice, but only as having exhausted all my wisdom, having committed the most heinous crime, unable to free myself, and finally being killed.

古文：何也？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: What is it for?

古文：素所自树立使然。
现代文：平素自己所从事的职业必然使人们有这种看法。
English: It's just the nature of the profession that you're in that makes people think that way.

古文：人固有一死，死有重于泰山，或轻于鸿毛，用之所趋异也。
现代文：人总是要死的，有的死得重于泰山，有的死得轻于鸿毛，这是因为他们在死的作用方面有所不同。
English: People always have to die, some die heavier than Mount Tai, some die lighter than a feather, this is because they are different in the role of death.

古文：太上不辱先，其次不辱身，其次不辱理色，其次不辱辞令，其次诎体受辱，其次易服受辱，其次关木索被箠楚受辱，其次剔毛发婴金铁受辱，其次毁肌肤断支体受辱，最下腐刑，极矣。传曰 刑不上大夫 ，此言士节不可不厉也。
现代文：一个人，最好是不使祖先受辱，其次是自身不受辱，再次是脸面不受辱，又其次是不因言辞而受辱，更次的是遭受捆绑之辱，更要次之的是穿上赭衣的耻辱，比这还要次的是遭受戴刑具、被拷打、剃头发、戴铁锁的耻辱，还有比这更次一等的是遭受毁坏肌体的耻辱，最下等的是遭受腐刑的耻辱，腐刑使耻辱达到了顶点。《礼记》上说： 对大夫以上的人不加刑辱。 
English: It is best for a man not to dishonor his ancestors; next, not to dishonor himself; next, not to dishonor his face; next, not to be dishonored by words; next, not to be shackled; next, not to be clothed in sackcloth; next, not to be put in irons; next, not to be put in irons; next, not to be beaten; next, not to be shaved; next, not to be put in chains; next, not to be mutilated; next, not to be mutilated; next, not to be mutilated; next, not to be mutilated; next, not to be mutil

古文：猛虎处深山，百兽震恐，及其在阱槛之中，摇尾而求食，积威约之渐也。
现代文：造就是说士人不能不严格保持操守。猛虎在深山裹，百兽感到恐惧，可它一旦落入陷阱和笼子裹，便摇头摆尾向人求食，这种屈服于人的威势的习性是逐渐形成的。
English: This is to say that a scholar cannot but maintain a strict code of conduct. A fierce tiger is wrapped in the deep mountains, and all the beasts feel fear, but once it falls into a trap and a cage, it will shake its head and wag its tail to ask for food. This habit of yielding to the power of man is gradually formed.

古文：故士有画地为牢势不入，削木为吏议不对，定计于鲜也。
现代文：所以有这样的士人，在地上画个圈儿作监牢他也不敢进去，削根木头作法吏他也不敢抬头答话，而是决计在受辱之前自杀。
English: Therefore, there is such a scholar who, drawing a circle on the ground to make a prison, he does not dare to enter, he does not dare to raise his head to answer when he is chopping wood as a legal officer, but he is determined to commit suicide before he is humiliated.

古文：今交手足，受木索，暴肌肤，受榜箠，幽于圜墙之中，当此之时，见狱吏则头枪地，视徒隶则心惕息。
现代文：现在，我被捆绑手脚，戴上了刑具，剥掉衣服被鞭打，关在四面高墙的监狱之中。这个时候见到狱吏就知叩头，碰上狱卒就胆颤心惊。为什么呢？
English: Now, I am bound hand and foot, put on a torture device, stripped of my clothes and whipped, locked up in a four-walled prison. At this time, when I see the warden, I kowtow, and when I meet the warden, I tremble. Why?

古文：何者？积威约之势也。
现代文：因为逐渐积累了对狱吏威势的恐怖所造成的。
English: It was caused by the gradually accumulating fear of the power of the guards.

古文：及已至此，言不辱者，所谓强颜耳，曷足贵乎！
现代文：已经到了这种地步，却说自己没有受辱，岂不是厚着脸皮，哪裹还有什么尊贵可言呢？
English: Having reached this point, to say that he has not been humiliated, is it not impudent, and what dignity is there in that?

古文：且西伯，伯也，拘牖里；李斯，相也，具五刑；淮阴，王也，受械于陈；彭越、张敖，南乡称孤，系狱具罪；绛侯诛诸吕，权倾五伯，囚于请室；魏其，大将也，衣赭，关三木；季布为朱家钳奴；灌夫受辱居室；此人皆身至王侯将相，声闻邻国，及罪至罔加，不能引决自财。
现代文：况且西伯，作为一方诸侯，也曾被关在羡里；李斯，曾是丞相，也身遭五种刑罚；淮阴侯本为王，却在陈地被逮捕；彭越、张敖曾南向称王，同样因罪被关在监狱裹；绛侯周勃灭掉诸吕，权势超过春秋五霸，结果被关请室之中；魏其侯是员大将，也穿上赭衣、戴上刑具；季布自受钳刑给朱家作奴隶；灌夫也被下狱受辱。这些人都曾是王侯将相，声名远扬，及至犯罪落入法网，不能够及早自杀。
English: Moreover, Xibe, as one of the princes, was also imprisoned in envy; Li Si, who was the prime minister, also suffered five kinds of punishments; Huaiyin, who was originally the king, was arrested in Chen; Peng Yue and Zhang Ye, who had proclaimed the king to the south, were also imprisoned for the same crime; Zhou Bo, the prince of Zhou, destroyed Zhu Lu, and his power exceeded the Spring and Autumn Five Dynasties, and as a result, he was imprisoned in the guest room; Wei Ji, the prince, was a general, and he also put on the imperial robe and torture instruments; Qibu, the prince of Zhou, was

古文：在尘埃之中，古今一体，安在其不辱也！
现代文：落入尘埃之中的人，从古到今都是一样，哪裹有什么不受辱的呢？
English: All who go down to the dust are the same, from ancient times even until now; for who is there that does not offend?

古文：由此言之，勇怯，势也；强弱，形也。审矣，曷足怪乎！
现代文：由此说来，勇怯强弱都是由形势决定的，明白了这个道理，还有什么可奇怪的呢？
English: From this it follows that courage, strength and weakness are all determined by the situation. Having understood this principle, what else is there to be surprised about?

古文：且人不能蚤自财绳墨之外，已稍陵夷至于鞭箠之间，乃欲引节，斯不亦远乎！
现代文：一个人不能早在法律制裁之前自尽，稍一迟疑，等情况恶化、鞭子落到自己身上以后，才想为气节而死，不是太晚了吗？
English: Is it not too late for a person to commit suicide before the legal sanction, to hesitate a little, to wait for the situation to deteriorate, for the whip to fall on oneself, and then to want to die for the sake of virtue?

古文：古人所以重施刑于大夫者，殆为此也。
现代文：古人难于对大夫施刑的原因大概就是由于这个缘故吧。
English: This is probably why the ancients found it difficult to punish doctors.

古文：夫人情莫不贪生恶死，念亲戚，顾妻子，至激于义理者不然，乃有不得已也。
现代文：说到人之常情，没有不贪生怕死，怀恋父母兄弟、妻子儿女的，衹有那些被义理所激发的人们例外，然而也有不得已的情况。
English: When it comes to human nature, there is no one who is not greedy for life and afraid of death, who cherishes his parents and brothers, his wife and children, with the exception of those who are inspired by righteousness, but there are also cases of last resort.

古文：今仆不幸，蚤失二亲，无兄弟之亲，独身孤立，少卿视仆于妻子何如哉？
现代文：现在我很不幸，父母早已死了，又没有兄弟，孤独自身。少卿你看我对妻子儿女怎样呢？
English: Now I am very unhappy, my parents are long dead, I have no brothers, and I am all alone. My lord, how do I treat my wife and children?

古文：且勇者不必死节，怯夫慕义，何处不勉焉！
现代文：勇敢的人不一定为名节而死，怯懦的人如果仰慕节义，也会处处勉励自己的。
English: Brave people do not necessarily die for the sake of fame, and cowardly people, if they admire righteousness, will also encourage themselves everywhere.

古文：仆虽怯耎欲苟活，亦颇识去就之分矣，何至自湛溺累绁之辱哉！
现代文：我虽软弱，也想苟且偷生，但也十分清楚舍生就义的份量的。何必要遭受坐监牢的耻辱呢！
English: Although I am weak and want to steal my own life, I am also fully aware of the weight of sacrificing my own life for righteousness. Why do I have to suffer the shame of being imprisoned?

古文：且夫臧获婢妾犹能引决，况若仆之不得已乎！
现代文：况且奴仆婢妾尚能赴义死节，更何况像我要处于迫不得已环境中的人呢！
English: Moreover, slaves can still go to the Day of the Dead, let alone people like me who are in a desperate situation!

古文：所以隐忍苟活，函粪土之中而不辞者，恨私心有所不尽，鄙没世而文采不表于后也。
现代文：我之所以忍辱苟活下来，甚至陷入粪土之中也不推辞，是因为遗憾自己的意志还没有表达出来，如果默默地死去，我的文章著述就不能流传于后世了。
English: The reason why I have endured the indignity of surviving, even sinking into the muck, is because I regret that my will has not yet been expressed. If I die silently, my articles and writings will not be passed on to future generations.

古文：古者富贵而名摩灭，不可胜记，唯俶傥非常之人称焉。
现代文：古代有许多身为富贵而声名堙没无闻的人，多得无法统计，衹有卓越非凡的人物才流芳后世。
English: In ancient times, there were many people who were rich and famous, but remained unknown. There are too many to count. Only outstanding and extraordinary people can be loved by future generations.

古文：盖西伯拘而演《周易》；仲尼厄而作《春秋》；屈原放逐，乃赋《离骚》；左丘失明，厥有《国语》，孙子膑脚，《兵法》修列；不韦迁蜀，世传《吕览》；韩非囚秦，《说难》、《孤愤》。
现代文：周文王被囚于羡里，推演出《周易》；孔子受困穷，著作了《春秋》；屈原被放逐，写出了《离骚》；左丘明双目失明，写出《国语》；孙子受膑刑，论着了《兵法》；吕不韦被放逐蜀，其《吕览》流传于后世；韩非在秦国被捕入狱，写出《说难》、纰愤》。
English: Zhou Wen Wang was imprisoned in envy and promoted the performance of "Zhou Yi"; Confucius was poor and wrote "Spring and Autumn"; Qu Yuan was exiled and wrote "Leaving Soao"; Zuo Quming was blind in both eyes and wrote "National Language"; Sun Zi was beaten and wrote "Law of War"; Lü Buwei was exiled to Shu, and his "Luzhang" was passed down to future generations; Han Fei was arrested and imprisoned in Qin and wrote "Difficult to Speak" and "Anger."

古文：《诗》三百篇，大氐贤圣发愤之所为作也。
现代文：《诗》三百篇，大都是圣贤抒发愤懑的作品。
English: There are three hundred "poems," most of which are the works of sages expressing their anger.

古文：此人皆意有所郁结，不得通其道，故述往事，思来者。
现代文：这些人都是因为心裹有所郁结，理想又得不到实现，所以才论述往事，以寄希望于未来的人。
English: These people are all people who discuss the past in order to pin their hopes on the future because their hearts are somewhat depressed and their ideals cannot be realized.

古文：及如左丘无目，孙子断足，终不可用，退论书策以舒其愤，思垂空文以自见。
现代文：就像左丘明双目失明，孙子被废去双足，终生再也不能为世所用了，于是引退著书，以抒发内心的愤懑期望文章能流传后世，使自己的心意得到表白。
English: Just as Zuo Quming lost his eyesight and his grandson lost his legs, he could no longer serve the world for the rest of his life, so he retired from writing books to express his inner indignation and hope that the article could be passed down to future generations, so that his heart could be expressed.

古文：仆窃不逊，近自托于无能之辞，网罗天下放失旧闻，考之行事，稽其成败兴坏之理，凡百三十篇，亦欲以究天人之际，通古今之变，成一家之言。
现代文：近年来，我自不量力，也把自己的思想表现在浅薄的文章中，搜罗天下散失的遣闻旧事，考核历史事实，研究事业成败的原因，探索朝代兴衰的道理，共一百三十篇，也想用它来反映自然和社会的关系，通晓从古到今的变化，形成一家学说。
English: In recent years, in spite of my own efforts, I have also expressed my thoughts in a series of shallow articles, collecting old stories that have been lost to the world, assessing historical facts, studying the causes of career success and failure, and exploring the reason for the rise and fall of dynasties, a total of one hundred and thirty articles. I also want to use it to reflect the relationship between nature and society, understand the changes from ancient times to the present, and form a doctrine.

古文：草创未就，适会此祸，惜其不成，是以就极刑而无愠色。
现代文：初稿还没有完成，恰逢这场灾祸。我痛惜全书没有完成，因此遭受极刑而没有怨恨的表现。
English: The first draft had not been completed when this calamity occurred, and I deplored the fact that the whole book had not been completed, so I suffered the extreme punishment without showing any resentment.

古文：仆诚已著此书，藏之名山，传之其人，通邑大都，则仆偿前辱之责，虽万被戮，岂有悔哉！
现代文：我果真完成了这部书的写作，把它收藏在名山之中，传给通都大邑中志同道合的人，这样就可以偿还以前我所遭受耻辱的债了，即使万一被杀，我也绝不后悔！
English: I have indeed completed the writing of this book, stored it among the famous mountains, and passed it on to like-minded people in Tongdu County, so that I can repay the debt of the humiliation I suffered before, even if I am killed, I will never regret it!

古文：然此可为智者道，难为俗人言也。
现代文：然而这些衹能对有学识的人讲，很难对浅薄的俗人诉说。
English: However, these things can be told to learned people, but it is difficult to tell them to shallow laymen.

古文：且负下未易居，下流多谤议。
现代文：而且，背着坏的名声，在社会上是难于立足的，自己卑贱的地位也常常遭到毁谤。
English: Moreover, with a bad reputation, it is difficult to gain a foothold in society, and one's lowly status is often slandered.

古文：仆以口语遇遭此祸，重为乡党戮笑，污辱先人，亦何面目复上父母之丘墓乎？
现代文：我因为发表议论而遭受这场灾祸，着实被乡里人所讥笑，污辱了自己的祖先，还有什么面目到父母坟墓上去祭奠呢？
English: I have suffered this calamity because of my speech, I have been ridiculed by the villagers, I have insulted my ancestors, how can I go to my parents' grave to pay homage?

古文：虽累百世，垢弥甚耳！
现代文：即使经过百代，耻辱仍会越来越深重！
English: Even after a hundred generations, the shame will still grow deeper and deeper!

古文：是以肠一日而九回，居则忽忽若有所亡，出则不知所如往。
现代文：因此，我整天心绪不宁，呆在家裹恍恍惚惚像丢失了什么；走到外边，又不知要往哪裹去。
English: As a result, I was restless all day, staying at home wrapped in a trance as if I had lost something; when I went outside, I didn't know where to wrap myself.

古文：每念斯耻，汗未尝不发背沾衣也。
现代文：每当想到这一耻辱，冷汗就浸透了衣裳。
English: Cold sweat soaked his clothes whenever he thought of the shame.

古文：身直为闺阁之臣，宁得自引深臧于岩穴邪！故且从俗浮湛，与时俯仰，以通其狂惑。
现代文：我衹不过是宫中的臣仆，哪能隐居在深山呢！所以只好暂且随波逐流，得过且过地活下去，以抒发自己内心的郁结。
English: I'm just a servant in the palace, how can I live in seclusion in the mountains! So I just have to go with the flow for the time being, to live through and through, to express my inner sadness.

古文：今少卿乃教以推贤进士，无乃与仆之私指谬乎？
现代文：现在少卿教我推荐贤士，这恐怕是和我个人的想法相违背吧！
English: Now Shaoqing is telling me to recommend a sage, which is probably contrary to my personal thoughts!

古文：今虽欲自雕瑑，曼辞以自解，无益，于俗不信，只取辱耳。
现代文：如今即使我想装饰自己，用美好的言辞来自我解脱，也没有用，世俗的人是不会相信我的，相反衹能招来耻辱。
English: Nowadays, even if I want to decorate myself and use beautiful words to liberate myself, it's no use. Secular people won't believe me. On the contrary, it can bring shame.

古文：要之死日，然后是非乃定。
现代文：总之，衹有到了死的那一天，是非才会有定论。
English: In short, it is only when you reach the day of your death that there will be a final verdict on the rights and wrongs.

古文：书不能尽意，故略陈固陋。
现代文：这封信不能详尽地表达我的心意，衹是粗略地说说我浅薄的见解。
English: This letter is not an exhaustive expression of my thoughts, but a rough outline of my shallow opinions.

古文：迁既死后，其书稍出。
现代文：司马迁死后，他的书渐渐流传开来。
English: After Sima Qian's death, his book gradually spread.

古文：宣帝时，迁外孙平通侯杨惲祖述其书，遂宣布焉。
现代文：宣帝时，司马迁的外孙平通侯杨惮最先开始陈述司马迁的著作，于是得以公布开来。
English: When Emperor Xuan was proclaimed, Sima Qian's grandson, Pingtong Hou Yang Shuo, was the first to begin to present Sima Qian's works, and was thus able to publish them.

古文：王莽时，求封迁后，为史通子。
现代文：到了王莽的时候，有人请求封司马迁的后人，于是封其后人为史通子。
English: When it came to Wang Mang, someone requested that the descendants of Sima Qian be sealed, so the descendants of Sima Qian were sealed.

古文：赞曰：自古书契之作而有史官，其载籍博矣。
现代文：赞曰：从古人有文字开始就有了史官，并写下了许多史书。
English: Zang said: Historians have existed since the ancients began to write, and many history books have been written.

古文：至孔氏籑之，上断唐尧，下讫秦缪。
现代文：到了孔子整理史书，上自唐尧时期，下止秦穆公时期。
English: Confucius arranged the history books, starting with the Tang Dynasty and ending with the Qin Dynasty.

古文：唐、虞以前，虽有遗文，其语不经，故言黄帝、颛顼之事未可明也。
现代文：唐尧、虞舜以前的情况虽然有留下来的文字，但那些算不上经典，所说关于黄帝、颛顼的事迹就不那么清楚。
English: Although there are surviving texts from before the time of Emperor Tang and Emperor Yu, they are not considered classics, and the stories about the Yellow Emperor and Emperor Gong are not as clear.

古文：及孔子因鲁史记而作《春秋》，而左丘明论辑其本事以为之传，又籑异同为《国语》。
现代文：到孔子依据鲁国的史书著作《春秋》，左丘明阐述整理有关史实来给《春秋》作传，又编撰了与此相异同的史料而成为《国语》。
English: Confucius based on Lu Guo's historical book "Spring and Autumn," Zuo Qiuming elaborated and organized the relevant historical facts to write a biography of "Spring and Autumn," and compiled historical materials that were different from this and became "National Language."

古文：又有《世本》，录黄帝以来至春秋时帝王、公、侯、卿、大夫祖世所出。
现代文：又有《世本》，记录了黄帝以来至春秋时期帝王、公侯、卿大夫的先祖、世系的由来。
English: There is also the "World Book," which records the ancestors and lineage of emperors, princes, and noble doctors from the time of the Yellow Emperor to the Spring and Autumn Period.

古文：春秋之后，七国并争，秦兼诸侯，有《战国策》。
现代文：春秋以后，七国争雄，最后秦国兼并了各诸侯国，记述这段历史的史书有《战国策》。
English: After the Spring and Autumn Period, the Seven Kingdoms fought for supremacy, and finally the Qin State annexed all the vassal states. The history book "Strategy of Warring States" describes this period of history.

古文：汉兴伐秦定天下，有《楚汉春秋》。
现代文：汉朝兴起推翻秦朝，平定天下，记载这段历史的是《楚汉春秋》。
English: The rise of the Han Dynasty overthrew the Qin Dynasty and pacified the world. This period of history is recorded in the "Chu Han Spring and Autumn."

古文：故司马迁据《左氏》、《国语》，采《世本》、《战国策》，述《楚汉春秋》，接其后事，讫于天汉。
现代文：所以司马迁根据《左氏春秋》、《国语》，采用《世本》、《战国策》的一些史料，陈述《楚汉春秋》的史实，接续记载其后的史事，截止于天汉年间。
English: Therefore, Sima Qian presented the historical facts of "Chu Han Spring and Autumn" based on "Zuo's Spring and Autumn" and "National Language" and used some historical materials from "World Book" and "Warring States," and successively recorded the subsequent historical events, ending in the Tianhan period.

古文：其言秦、汉，详矣。
现代文：所讲的秦、汉时期的历史十分详尽。
English: The history of the Qin and Han dynasties is very detailed.

古文：至于采经摭传，分散数家之事，甚多疏略，或有抵梧。
现代文：至于采录、摘取经传，分别记述几家的史事，有许多地方粗疏简略，有的互相矛盾。
English: As for the collection and extraction of scriptures, the historical events of several families were recorded separately, many parts were rough and concise, and some contradicted each other.

古文：亦其涉猎者广博，贯穿经传，驰骋古今，上下数千载间，斯以勤矣。
现代文：还有他涉猎的范围广博，贯通经传，驰骋于古今上下几千年之间，这是他勤奋努力的结果。
English: Also, the wide range of his dabbling, penetrating the scriptures, and galloping between the past and the present for thousands of years, is the result of his diligent efforts.

古文：又，其是非颇缪于圣人，论大道而先黄、老而后六经，序游侠则退处士而进奸雄，述货殖则崇势利而羞贱贫，此其所蔽也。
现代文：再有他的是非观和圣人非常不同，论说大道则以黄老学说为主，而以六经为辅；叙述游侠，则贬退隐士而推举奸雄；记述经济活动，则崇尚权势财利，而羞辱贫贱，这些是他的短处。
English: In addition, his view of right and wrong is very different from that of a saint. In his discussion of the Great Way, Huang Lao's theory is the main one, supplemented by the Six Classics; in his description of the Ranger, he degrades the hermit and promotes the villain; in his description of economic activities, he advocates power, wealth and profit, and humiliates the poor. These are his shortcomings.

古文：然自刘向、扬雄博极群书，皆称迁有良史之材，服其善序事理，辨而不华，质而不俚，其文直，其事核，不虚美，不隐恶，故谓之实录。
现代文：然而，从刘向到扬雄，这些人博览群书，他们都称赞司马迁有良史之才，佩服他善于序说事物的道理，明辨而不华丽，质朴而不鄙俗，他的文章秉笔直书，他所记述的史事真实不做虚假的赞美，不掩饰丑恶的东西，所以称作实录。唉！
English: However, from Liu Xiang to Yang Xiong, these people are well-read. They all praised Sima Qian's talent for good history, admired his ability to preface the truth of things, clear but not gorgeous, simple but not vulgar, his articles are straightforward, the historical events he described are true and do not make false praise, do not cover up ugly things, so they are called true records. Alas!

古文：乌呼！以迁之博物洽闻，而不能以知自全，既陷极刑，幽而发愤，书亦信矣。
现代文：以司马迁的博学广闻，却不能靠智慧保全自己，已经遭受极刑仍在狱中发愤写作，他给任安的信中所陈述的也是可信的。
English: The erudition of Isima Qian is widely known, but he cannot rely on wisdom to save himself. He has already suffered capital punishment and is still writing angrily in prison. What he stated in his letter to Ren An is also credible.

古文：迹其所以自伤悼，《小雅》巷伯之伦。
现代文：究察其所以哀伤自己，是属于《诗经。小雅》中巷伯一类的人。
English: Investigating the reasons for feeling sorry for oneself is a person who belongs to the class of Xiangbo in the "Poetic Classic. Xiao Ya."

古文：夫唯《大雅》 既明且哲，能保其身 ，难矣哉！
现代文：像《诗经。大雅》所说的 既明辨又聪明，还能保全自己 ，这太难了！
English: It's so hard to be both discerning and intelligent, and still be able to protect yourself, as "Shijing. Daya" says!

