古文：张果女华妃郭知运王光本幽州衙将韦氏女崔尚河湄人中官王鑑李令问僧韬光僧仪光尼员智杨元英
现代文：张果女华妃郭知运王光本幽州衙将韦氏女崔尚河湄人中官王鑑李令问僧韬光僧仪光尼员智杨元英
English: Zhang Guo, the daughter of Guo Zhiyun, the daughter of Guo Zhiyun, the daughter of Guo Zhiyun, the daughter of Guo Zhiyun, the daughter of Guo Zhiyun, the daughter of Guo Zhiyun, the daughter of Guo Zhiyun, the daughter of Guo Zhiyun, the daughter of Guo Zhiyun, the daughter of Guo Zhiyun

古文：张果女
现代文：张果女
English: Zhang Guomen

古文：开元中，易州司马张果女，年十五，病死。
现代文：开元年间，易州司马张果的女儿，十五岁那年，得病死了。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, the daughter of Yizhou Sima Zhang Guo, who was 15 years old, fell ill and died.

古文：不忍远弃，权瘗于东院阁下。
现代文：张果不忍把女儿葬在远处，就暂埋葬在东院房中。
English: Zhang Guo couldn't bear to bury her daughter far away, so she temporarily buried her in the east courtyard.

古文：后转郑州长史，以路远须复送丧，遂留。
现代文：张果后来转任郑州长史，因为路太远来回运这女子不方便，就留在了这里。
English: Zhang Guo was later transferred to Zheng Guoshi, because the road was too far and it was inconvenient to transport the woman back and forth, so she stayed here.

古文：俄有刘乙代之。
现代文：时间不长就有刘乙代替了他住在这里。
English: It didn't take long for Liu B to replace him and live here.

古文：其子常止阁中，日暮仍行门外，见一女子，容貌丰丽，自外而来。
现代文：刘乙的儿子常到这房子里来。太阳落山的时候他常在门外走动，有一天刘看见一个女子，容貌很美丽，从外面进来。
English: Liu Yi's son often came to this house. When the sun went down, he often walked around outside the door. One day, Liu Yi saw a beautiful woman come in from outside.

古文：刘疑有相奔者，即前诣之，欣然款浃。
现代文：刘以为她是个私奔的，就大胆地上前到女子身边去试探，双方都非常高兴，都有诚意，就一同留在卧房共住。
English: Liu thought she was an elopement, so he boldly went to the woman's side to explore. Both sides were very happy and sincere, so they stayed in the bedroom together.

古文：同留共宿，情态缠绵，举止闲婉。刘爱惜甚至，后暮辄来，达曙方去。经数月，忽谓刘曰：我前张司马女，不幸夭没，近殡此阁。命当重活，与君好合。后三日，君可见发，徐候气息，慎无横见惊伤也。
现代文：女子感情缠绵，举止闲静温顺，刘非常怜爱她，以后每天日落就来到卧房，到天亮才离去，过了几个月，女子忽然对刘说：我是以前张司马的女儿，不幸早死，就近殡葬在这个楼阁，命里注定应当重新复活，与您融洽相处，过三天，您可以挖掘棺木，慢慢地等候气息，您千万不要无端地惊慌和悲伤。
English: The woman was full of emotion, her demeanor was quiet and meek, and Liu was very fond of her. After that, she came to the bedroom every day at sunset and did not leave until dawn. After a few months, the woman suddenly said to Liu: I am the daughter of Zhang Sima. Unfortunately, I died early and was buried near this mansion. I am destined to be reborn and get along well with you. After three days, you can dig up the coffin and slowly wait for breath. You must not panic and grieve for no reason.

古文：指其所瘗处而去。
现代文：她指着她的葬地而离去。
English: She pointed to her grave and left.

古文：刘至期甚喜，独与左右一奴夜发，深四五尺，得一漆棺。徐开视之，女颜色鲜发，肢体温软，衣服汝梳，无污坏者。
现代文：刘等到约定的日子非常高兴，自己与身边的一个奴仆在夜里挖掘墓地，深五、六尺，找到一个漆棺，慢慢地打开看看里面，见一个女子面容非常新鲜，四肢温软。
English: Liu was very happy to wait until the agreed day. He and a servant around him excavated the cemetery at night, five or six feet deep, found a lacquer coffin, slowly opened it to look inside, and saw a woman with a very fresh face and soft limbs.

古文：举置床上，细细有鼻气。少顷，口中有气，灌以薄糜，少少能咽，至明复活，渐能言语坐起。
现代文：衣服、头发、妆饰都没有损坏的地方，抬起她放在床上，微微有鼻气，不一会儿，嘴里也有气，用稀粥喂她，稍稍能下咽，等到天亮就复活了，渐渐能坐起来说话。
English: There was no damage to her clothes, hair, or makeup. He lifted her up and put her on the bed. She had a slight runny nose, and soon she had gas in her mouth. He fed her with gruel, and she was able to swallow a little. When morning came, she was revived, and gradually she was able to sit up and talk.

古文：数日，始恐父母之知也，因辞以习书，不便出阁，常使赍饮食诣阁中。
现代文：过几天，刘才担心父母知道这回事，于是用练画不方便出楼阁作借口，常派人把饭菜送到楼阁中。
English: After a few days, Liu was worried that his parents knew about this, so he used the excuse that it was inconvenient to go out of the mansion to practice painting, and often sent people to deliver meals to the mansion.

古文：乙疑子有异，因其在外送客，窃视其房，见女存焉。
现代文：刘乙疑心儿子有些怪异，趁儿子到楼阁外送客，偷偷地看他的房屋，忽然看见一个女子在那里，问她从哪里来，她全都告诉了刘乙。
English: Liu Yi suspected that his son was a bit strange. He took advantage of his son to send guests outside the mansion, secretly looked at his house, suddenly saw a woman there, asked her where she came from, and she told Liu Yi everything.

古文：问其所由，悉具白，棺木尚在床下，乙与妻歔欷曰：此既冥期至感，何不早相闻？
现代文：此时棺材还在床下。刘乙和妻子叹息说：这既然是阴间最感动人的事，为什么不尽快早使我们知道？
English: At this time, the coffin was still under the bed. Liu B and his wife sighed and said: Since this is the most moving thing in the underworld, why not let us know as soon as possible?

古文：遂匿于堂中。儿不见女，甚惊。父乃谓曰：此既申契殊会，千载所无，白我何伤乎？
现代文：于是将女子藏在堂屋中，儿子不见女子，很吃惊，父亲便对儿子说：这既是阴阳间特别的相会，是千载所没有的，告诉我又有什么伤害？
English: So he hid the woman in the hall. His son was surprised to not see the woman. The father said to his son, "This is a special meeting between yin and yang, something that hasn't happened in thousands of years. Tell me, what's the harm?"

古文：而过为隐蔽。
现代文：你何必做得这么隐蔽。
English: You don't have to do it so covertly.

古文：因遣使诣郑州，具以报果，因请结婚。父母哀感惊喜，则尅日赴婚，遂成嘉偶，后产数子。
现代文：于是刘乙派人到郑州，把这件事全都报告给张果，借机请求结婚，女子的父母由悲哀转为惊喜，便约定日子同意结婚，于是刘乙的儿子和张果的女儿结成好夫妻，以后生了几个孩子。
English: So Liu Yi sent someone to Zhengzhou to report the whole matter to Zhang Guo and take the opportunity to ask for marriage. The woman's parents turned from sadness to surprise and agreed on a date to agree to marry. So Liu Yi's son and Zhang Guo's daughter married and later had several children.

古文：华妃
现代文：华妃
English: Huafei

古文：开元初，华妃有宠，生庆王琮，薨葬长安。
现代文：开元初，华妃得宠，生下庆三琮，死后葬在长安。
English: At the beginning of the 19th century, Hua Fei became a favorite. She was born in Qing Sanlu and was buried in Chang'an.

古文：至二十八年，有盗欲发妃冢，遂于茔外百余步，伪筑大坟，若将葬者。乃于其内潜通地道，直达冢中。
现代文：到开元二十八年，有盗贼想要挖华妃墓，于是在原来坟墓的旁边一百多步的地方，伪筑了一个大坟墓，像要埋葬似的，又在坟内暗通地道，直通到原来的坟墓中。
English: In the 28th year of the first century, some thieves wanted to dig up Hua Fei's tomb, so they forged a large tomb more than a hundred paces away from the original tomb. As if they wanted to bury her, they dug a secret tunnel inside the tomb, which led directly to the original tomb.

古文：剖棺，妃面如生，四肢皆可屈伸，盗等恣行凌辱。仍截腕取金钏，兼去其舌。恐通梦也，侧立其尸，而于阴中置烛。悉取藏内珍宝，不可胜数，皆徙置伪冢。
现代文：剖开棺木一看，她面容如活人，四肢都可以弯曲伸直，盗贼等恣行凌辱，还截断手腕拿下金钏，同时又割掉她的舌头，又害怕她托梦，把尸体侧立起来，而且在里面放上蜡烛，把棺内的珍宝全都取走了，不可胜数，都放在伪筑的坟墓中。
English: When they opened the coffin, they saw that her face was like that of a living person, that all her limbs could be bent and stretched, that the thieves had abused her, had cut off her wrists and taken the gold chain, had also cut out her tongue, and were afraid that she was dreaming, and had set the body on its side and placed a candle inside, and had taken away all the treasures in the coffin, which were countless, and had placed them in a false grave.

古文：乃于城中，以辆车载空棺会。日暮，便宿墓中，取诸物置魂车及送葬车中，方掩而归。
现代文：于是在城中用辆车装上空棺材，等到日落，便住在墓中，取出各种东西放在魂车和送葬的车中，才这样遮掩着回来。
English: So they loaded an empty coffin with a car in the city, waited until sunset, lived in the grave, took out all kinds of things and put them in the hearse and funeral car, and then came back covered like this.

古文：其未葬之前，庆王梦妃被发裸形，悲泣而来曰：盗发吾冢，又加截辱，孤魂幽枉，如何可言。然吾必伺其败于春明门也。
现代文：在没等他们去送葬之前，庆王就梦见华妃披发裸体，悲伤哭泣而来说：盗贼挖了我的坟墓，再加上截断我的手腕，侮辱我，我的魂冤枉，怎么可以说出来，但是我一定等他在春明门毁败。
English: Before waiting for them to go to the funeral, Qing Wang dreamed of Hua Fei wearing her hair naked, weeping with grief and said: "The thief dug up my grave, plus cut off my wrists, insulted me, my soul was wronged, how can I say it, but I must wait for him to be defeated at the Spring Gate."

古文：因备说其状而去。
现代文：于是详尽地说明了他们的形貌就离去了。
English: Then he described their appearance in detail and left.

古文：王素至孝，忽惊起涕泣。明旦入奏，帝乃召京兆尹万年令，以物色备盗甚急。
现代文：庆王一向非常孝顺，忽然惊起流泪哭泣，第二天早晨入朝奏明情况，皇帝便召集京兆尹万年令调集精干人员去紧急捕捉盗贼。
English: Qing Wang, who had always been very dutiful, suddenly burst into tears and wept. The next morning, when he entered the imperial court and reported the situation, the emperor summoned Jing Zhaoyun and ordered him to mobilize the elite personnel to urgently catch the thieves.

古文：及盗载物归也，欲入春明门，门吏诃止之，乃搜车中，皆诸宝物，尽收群盗。
现代文：万年令等人专门等盗贼装上东西回去，再抓获。这些盗贼想要进入春明门，门吏呵止他们，就搜查车中，全是各种各样的宝物，全部抓获群盗，拷打他们，他们立即就招服了。
English: These thieves wanted to enter the Chunming Gate, but the gatekeepers stopped them and searched the car, which was full of all kinds of treasures. They caught all the thieves, tortured them, and they immediately complied.

古文：拷掠即服，逮捕数十人，皆贵戚子弟无行检者。王乃请其魁帅五人，得亲报仇，帝许之。
现代文：逮捕了几十个人，都是些无品行的豪门亲戚子弟，庆王请求严惩他们为首的五个人，得以亲自报仇，皇帝答应了他。
English: He arrested dozens of people, all of whom were the sons and daughters of wealthy relatives with no moral standards. Qingwang asked that the five people they led be severely punished, so that he could take revenge personally. The emperor agreed.

古文：皆探取五脏，烹而祭之，其余尽榜杀于京兆门外。
现代文：他把这五个人的五脏都拿出来，烹饪他们，用以祭典华妃，其余盗贼都在京兆门外公布名单斩首，改葬贵妃。
English: He took out the entrails of these five people, cooked them, and used them to celebrate Huafei. The rest of the thieves announced the list outside the Jingzha Gate, beheaded, and reburied Guifei.

古文：改葬贵妃，王心丧三年。
现代文：庆王哀伤了三年。
English: Qingwang mourned for three years.

古文：郭知运
现代文：郭知运
English: Guo Zhiyun

古文：开元中，凉州节度郭知运出巡，去州百里，于驿中暴卒。其魂遂出，令驿长锁房勿开，因而却回府，徒从不知也。
现代文：开元年中，凉州节度使郭知运出去巡察，离开凉州百里地，郭知运在驿站暴死，他的魂就离开了身体，让驿长锁住房门不打开，他的魂就返回府衙中，他的随从都不知道。
English: In the middle of the first year of the year, the Liangzhou Festival made Guo Zhiming go out for inspection. He left the Liangzhou Hundred Miles. Guo Zhiming died violently at the station. His soul left his body. If he did not open the long-locked door of the house, his soul would return to the house. His followers did not know.

古文：至舍四十余日，处置公私事毕，遂使人往驿，迎己丧。既至，自看其殓。殓讫，因与家人辞诀，投身入棺，遂不复见。
现代文：郭知运回到家里四十多天，处理安排公私事结束，就派人去驿站迎回自己的尸体，棺到了以后，亲自看自己的尸体装殓，装殓完毕，就和家人告辞诀别，投身入棺，于是不再出现。
English: More than forty days after Guo Zhiyun returned home, after dealing with and arranging public and private affairs, he sent someone to the station to receive his body. After the coffin arrived, he personally saw his body decorated. After the decoration was completed, he said goodbye to his family and threw himself into the coffin, so he did not appear again.

古文：王光本
现代文：王光本
English: Wang Guangben

古文：王光本，开元时为洛州别驾。春月，刺史使光本行县。去数日，其妻李氏暴卒。
现代文：王光本，开元年时做洛州别驾，春季，刺史让王光本去县里，离家几天，王妻李氏突然死去。
English: Wang Guangben, at the beginning of the first year of the year, did not drive to Los Angeles. In the spring, the prince asked Wang Guangben to go to the county. A few days away from home, Wang's wife Li died suddenly.

古文：闻君哀哭恸之甚，某在泉途，倍益凄感。
现代文：王光本得噩耗后返回洛州家中，后悔因没能亲自请医购药使妻子死去，认为是白白地死了，在那儿总是痛哭，哀痛感动了四邻。
English: After the bad news, Wang Guang returned to his home in Lozhou, regretting that he had not been able to personally request a doctor to buy medicine, causing his wife to die. He thought that he had died in vain. He was always crying there, and his grief moved the four neighbors.

古文：语云： 生人过悲，使幽壤不安。信斯言也。自兹以往，不欲主君如是，以累幽冥耳。因付嘱家人，度女为尼，放婢为平人，事事有理。留一食许，谓光本曰：人鬼道殊，不宜久住，此益深恨。
现代文：过了十多天，连部下所有人全都痛哭，光本因为太痛苦又放声痛哭一阵，忽然看见李氏从帏帐中走出来，穿着漂亮的衣服，有超过平常的美丽，王光本停止了痛哭，问她死的事，李氏说：我还没有离开这里，还在这个大堂，听到您痛哭，痛哭得很厉害，我在黄泉路上，倍加凄感，听人说，活人过于悲痛，使幽魂不安，我信了这句话，从此以后，不想让您象这样难过，而牵累阴间。于是李氏嘱咐家人，让女儿念经拜佛成尼姑，散放婢女为平民，件件事都有条理，过一顿饭左右时间，李氏对王光本说：人与鬼道路不同，不适合长久呆在这里，在这里会越来越遗憾。
English: After more than ten days, even all of his subordinates were weeping bitterly. Because he was in so much pain, Guangben cried loudly for a while. Suddenly, he saw Ms. Li coming out of the bank, wearing beautiful clothes, more beautiful than usual. Wang Guangben stopped crying bitterly and asked her about her death. Ms. Li said, "I haven't left here yet, I'm still in this lobby, I heard you crying bitterly, crying bitterly. I'm on the road to hell, feeling doubly terrible. I've heard people say that the living are too sad, making ghosts uneasy. I believe this sentence. From now on, I don'

古文：言讫，入堂中遂灭。男女及他人，但闻李氏言，唯光本见耳。
现代文：说完，进入堂中就不见了，儿女与其他人，只听见李氏说话，只有王光本看见罢了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared into the hall. His children and others only heard Mr. Li speak, and only Wang Guangben saw him.

古文：幽州衙将
现代文：幽州衙将
English: Yuzhou Shosho

古文：开元中，有幽州衙将姓张者，妻孔氏，生五子而卒。
现代文：开元年间，有个幽州衙将姓张的，他有妻子孔氏，生了五个孩子，后来死了。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, there was a man in Yuzhou with the surname Zhang. He had a wife, Kong, who gave birth to five children and later died.

古文：后娶妻李氏，悍妒狠戾，虐遇五子，且鞭捶之。五子不堪其苦，哭于其母墓前，母忽于冢中出，抚其子，悲恸久之。因以白布巾题诗赠张曰：不忿成故人，掩涕每盈巾。
现代文：张后来又娶了个妻子李氏，她凶暴蛮横，虐待五个孩子，每天用鞭子打他们，五个孩子受不了过分的痛苦，就去他们母亲坟墓前哭泣，母亲忽然从坟墓里出来，抚摸她的孩子，悲痛哭泣了很久，于是在白布巾上写诗赠给张某说：不忿成故人，掩涕每盈巾。
English: Zhang later married another wife, Li. She was violent and rude, abused five children, and beat them with a whip every day. The five children could not bear the excessive pain, so they went to their mother's grave to cry. The mother suddenly came out of the grave, touched her children, and cried for a long time in grief. So she wrote a poem on a white cloth and gave it to Zhang, saying: "Don't be angry with the deceased, cover up every towel."

古文：死生今有隔，相见永无因。
现代文：死生今有隔，相见永无因。
English: There is a gap between life and death now, and there is never a reason to see each other.

古文：匣里残汝粉，留将与后人。
现代文：匣里残妆粉，留将与后人。
English: The leftover makeup powder in the box will remain with future generations.

古文：黄泉无用处，恨作冢中尘。
现代文：黄泉无用处，恨作冢中尘。
English: Hell hath no fury like a woman scorned.

古文：有意怀男女，无情亦任君。
现代文：有意怀男女，无情亦任君。
English: There are men and women with intentions, but they are also ruthless.

古文：欲知肠断处，明月照孤坟。
现代文：欲知肠断处，明月照孤坟。
English: The bright moon shines on the lonely grave at the crossroads of desire and knowledge.

古文：五子得诗，以呈其父。其父恸哭，诉于连帅，帅上闻，勅李氏决一百，流岭南，张停所职。
现代文：五个孩子得到诗，来献给他的父亲，他的父亲向连帅痛哭诉说这事，连帅听到这件事，又上报皇上。皇上下诏，判决李氏受刑一百然后流放到岭南去。张某的职事也被停止。
English: Five children received poems to dedicate to their father. His father cried and told this to Lian Shuai. Lian Shuai heard about this and reported it to the emperor. The emperor issued an edict, sentencing Li to 100 years in prison and banishing him to Lingnan. Zhang Mou's job was also suspended.

古文：韦氏女
现代文：韦氏女
English: Wei's Maiden

古文：洛阳韦氏，有女殊色。少孤，与兄居。
现代文：洛阳韦氏有一个女儿，容貌出众，年少就成了孤儿，和哥哥住在一起。
English: Mr. Luo Yangwei has a daughter, outstanding in appearance, who became an orphan at a young age and lives with her brother.

古文：邻有崔氏子，窥见悦之。厚赂其婢，遂令通意，并有赠遗。
现代文：邻居有个崔氏的儿子，偷偷看见韦氏的女儿，很喜欢她，用厚礼贿赂她的婢女，于是让她说明他的意思，并有赠送的礼品。
English: A neighbor had a son of Cui, who secretly saw Wei's daughter and liked her very much. He bribed her maid with a heavy gift, so she asked her to explain what he meant, and there was a gift.

古文：女亦素知崔有风调，乃许之，期于竹间红亭之中。
现代文：女子也一向知道崔氏的儿子有风情，便答应他，约定在竹林间红亭之中见面。
English: The woman had always known that Mr. Cui's son had a penchant, so she agreed to meet him in the middle of the red pavilion between the bamboo groves.

古文：忽有曳履声，疑崔将至，遂前赴之。乃见一人，身长七尺，张口哆唇，目如电光，直来擒女。女奔走惊叫，家人持火视之，但见白骨委积，血流满地。兄乃诘婢得实。杀其婢而剪其竹也。
现代文：等候时忽然听到有脚步声，猜想崔某将要到了，于是上前赴约，突然就看见一个人，身长七尺，张嘴哆嗦嘴唇，目光如电光，直奔来抓她，女子奔跑惊叫，家人拿火把看看情况，只看见白骨落成一堆，血流满地，韦氏女的哥哥便拷问婢女，得到了情况真实后，杀了那个婢女，并且砍断了那里的竹子。
English: While waiting, she suddenly heard footsteps and guessed that Cui Mou was about to arrive, so she went forward to make an appointment. Suddenly, she saw a person, seven feet long, lips open, eyes like lightning, running straight to catch her. The woman ran and screamed. The family took torches to see the situation. They only saw white bones falling into a pile and blood flowing all over the ground. The brother of Wei's daughter interrogated the maid. After getting the true situation, he killed the maid and cut the bamboo there.

古文：崔尚
现代文：崔尚
English: Cui Shang

古文：开元时，有崔尚者，著《无鬼论》，词甚有理。
现代文：开元年间，有个叫崔尚的，著有《无鬼论》，论述很有道理，已经成书。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, there was a man named Cui Shang, who wrote a book called "On the Absence of Ghosts."

古文：既成，将进之。
现代文：准备向上进献这书。
English: Ready to take this book to the next level.

古文：忽有道士诣门，求见其论。
现代文：忽然有个道士到他家门前，请求看看那本书。
English: Suddenly, a Taoist monk came to his door and asked to see the book.

古文：读竟，谓尚曰：词理甚工，然天地之间，若云无鬼，此谬矣。
现代文：道士读完，对崔尚说：说理很严密，但是天地之间，如果说没有鬼，这是错误的。
English: After reading it, the moralist said to Cui Shanghuang, "The reasoning is very strict, but between heaven and earth, if there is no ghost, it is wrong.

古文：尚谓：何以言之？
现代文：崔尚对他说：凭什么这么说？
English: Cui Shang said to him, "Why do you say that?

古文：道士曰：我则鬼也，岂可谓无？
现代文：道士说：我就是鬼，怎么能说没有？
English: The Taoist said: I am a ghost, how can I say no?

古文：君若进本，当为诸鬼神所杀。不如焚之。
现代文：您如果进献此书，一定会被鬼神杀害，不如烧了书。
English: If you donate this book, you will surely be killed by ghosts and gods. It is better to burn the book.

古文：因而不见，竟失其本。
现代文：说完就不见了。同时失去那书。
English: And then it was gone. And I lost the book.

古文：河湄人
现代文：河湄人
English: The Mekong people

古文：开元六年，有人泊舟于河湄者，见岸边枯骨，因投食而与之。
现代文：开元六年，有个乘船到河湄的人，看见岸边白骨，于是扔些吃的东西给它。
English: Six years after the founding of the year, a man who took a boat to Hemae, saw a whitebone on the shore, so he threw some food to it.

古文：俄闻空中愧谢之声，及诗曰：我本邯郸士，祗役死河湄。
现代文：不一会听到空中惭愧感谢之声，还有诗道：我本邯郸士，祗役死河湄。
English: Soon I heard the voice of shame-faced gratitude in the air, as well as a poem: I am a monk, and I have served the dead river Mae.

古文：不得家人哭，劳君行路悲。
现代文：不得家人哭，劳君行路悲。
English: If the family members are not allowed to cry, the laborer will have a sad journey.

古文：及至举酒，赋诗聊句，末即崔常侍之词也。中官将起，四人相顾，哀啸而去，如风雨之声。及视其户，扃闭如旧，但见酒樽及诗在。中官异之，旦馆吏云：里人有会者，失其酒樽。
现代文：不一会儿，又有一个人跟着进来，凄楚的样子有离别的情态，大概是崔常侍，最后一句就是崔常侍的词句。中官将要起来，四个人互相看了看，哀叹长啸而去，象风雨之声，等到再看那个门，关闩象原来的样子，只见酒樽和诗还在，中官很奇怪，天亮时馆吏说：乡里的人有个要见您的，丢了他的酒樽。
English: Not long after, another person came in, with a forlorn look and a parting gesture, probably Cui Changzhi, and the last sentence was Cui Changzhi's words. The liaison officer was about to get up, and the four people looked at each other, lamented and roared away, like the sound of wind and rain. When they looked at the door again, the gate was as it had been, only the wine bottle and the poem were still there. The liaison officer was very strange. At dawn, the librarian said: A man from the countryside wants to see you, and he has lost his wine bottle.

古文：中官出示之，乃里人所失者。聊句歌曰：床头锦衾斑复斑，架上朱衣殷复殷。
现代文：中官拿出酒杯给他看，竟是他所丢失的，写的诗歌是：床头锦衾斑复斑，架上朱衣殷复殷。
English: The lieutenant-general took out a wine glass to show him what he had lost. The poem he had written was: On the bed, the brocade is mottled and patchy. On the shelf, the vermilion clothes are getting more and more mottled.

古文：空庭朗月闲复闲，夜长路远山复山。
现代文：空庭朗月闲复闲，夜长路远山复山。
English: In the empty courtyard, the moon is idle and idle, and at night, the long road and the distant mountains are idle and idle.

古文：王鑑
现代文：王鑑
English: Wangjian

古文：兖州王鑑，性刚鸷，无所惮畏，常陵侮鬼神。
现代文：兖州王鑑，性格刚直，无所惧怕，经常辱骂鬼神。
English: Zhangzhou Wangjian, character upright, fearless, often abuse ghosts and gods.

古文：开元中，乘醉往庄，去郭三十里。鑑不涉此路，已五六年矣。行十里已来，会日暮。长林下见一妇人，问鑑所往。请寄一袱，而忽不见。
现代文：开元年间，趁着酒醉骑马去了村庄，离城里三十里地，王鑑已有五六年不走这条路了，走了不到十里路，正赶上日落黄昏，高高的树林下出现一个妇人，她问王鑑去哪里，请他寄送一个包裹，就忽然不见了。
English: During the first year of the year, Wang Jian took advantage of being drunk to ride to the village, thirty miles away from the city. Wang Jian had not taken this road for fifty-six years. He walked less than ten miles. Just as the sun was setting, a woman appeared under the tall trees. She asked Wang Jian where he was going and asked him to send a parcel, and suddenly disappeared.

古文：乃开袱视之，皆纸钱枯骨之类。鑑笑曰：愚鬼弄尔公。
现代文：王鑑便打开包裹一看，里面都是纸钱和白骨之类的东西，王鑑笑着说：蠢鬼戏弄你的老公。
English: Wang Jian then opened the package and saw that it was full of paper money and white bones and other things. Wang Jian smiled and said, "The idiot is teasing your husband."

古文：策马前去，忽遇十余人聚向火。时天寒，日已昏，鑑下马诣之。话适所见，皆无应者。鑑视之，向火之人半无头，有头者皆有面衣。鑑惊惧，上马驰去。夜艾，方至庄，庄门已闭。频打无人出，遂大叫骂。
现代文：他就骑着马继续向前走，忽然遇到十多个人围着一堆火在烤火，当时天气很冷，天色已晚，王鑑下马也到那里去，说了刚才所见到的情况，却没有一个人应和的，王鑑看着他们，对着火的人一半没有头，有头的人都戴着面纱，王鑑惊恐，上马飞奔离去，天亮前，才到村庄，可村庄门已关上，不断地敲打也没人出来，于是大叫大骂。
English: He rode on ahead and suddenly encountered more than ten people around a fire. The weather was very cold and it was late in the day. Wang Jian dismounted and went there. He told them what he had just seen, but there was no one to agree with him. Wang Jian looked at them. Half of the people who were on fire had no heads, and those who had heads were wearing veils. Wang Jian panicked and got on his horse and galloped away. He did not reach the village until dawn, but the village gate was closed and no one came out, so he shouted and cursed.

古文：俄有一奴开门，鑑问曰：奴婢辈今并在何处？
现代文：不一会儿，有一个奴仆开门，王鑑问道：奴婢们现在都在什么地方？
English: After a while, a servant opened the door, and Wang Jian asked: "Where are all the slaves now?"

古文：令取灯而火色青暗，鑑怒，欲挞奴，奴云：十日来，一庄七人疾病，相次死尽。
现代文：王鑑让那奴仆拿出油灯，可是火光黯淡。王鑑大怒，想要鞭打奴仆，奴婢说：十天来，一个庄园七个人患病，一个接一个都死光了。
English: Wang Jian asked the slave to take out an oil lamp, but the light was dim. Wang Jian was furious and wanted to whip the slave. The slave said: "For the past ten days, seven people in one manor have fallen ill and died one after another.

古文：鑑问：汝且如何？
现代文：王鑑问道：那你怎么样？
English: Wang Gan asked: How about you?

古文：答曰：亦已死矣。
现代文：奴仆回答道：我也已经死了。
English: And the servant said, I am dead also.

古文：向者闻郎君呼叫，起尸来耳。
现代文：刚才听到郎君您呼叫，就站起来了。
English: Just now, when I heard you call, I stood up.

古文：因忽颠仆，既无气矣。
现代文：说完便忽然颠倒下去，就没有气了。
English: After saying that, he suddenly fell backwards, and lost his temper.

古文：鑑大惧，走投别村而宿。周岁，发疾而卒。
现代文：王鑑非常恐惧，跑到别村住宿了，一年以后，他也发病死了。
English: Wangjian was very afraid and went to stay in another village. A year later, he also fell ill and died.

古文：李令问
现代文：李令问
English: Li Lingqian

古文：李令问，开元中为秘书监，左迁集州长史。
现代文：李令问，开元年间做秘书监，以后提升为集州长史。
English: Li Lingqian worked as a secretary supervisor during the first year of the year, and was later promoted to be the chief historian.

古文：令问好服玩饮馔，以奢闻于天下。
现代文：令问喜好吃喝玩乐，以奢侈闻名天下。
English: He is known for his extravagant lifestyle, with a penchant for eating, drinking and partying.

古文：其炙驴罂鹅之属，惨毒取味。
现代文：他烧烤驴肉、腌制鹅肉之类，招法狠毒地品其味道。
English: He grills donkey meat, marinated goose meat and the like, using methods to savor their flavor.

古文：天下言服馔者，莫不祖述李监，以为美谈。
现代文：天下讲究吃喝的人，没有不效法李监的，把这件事称为美谈。
English: People who pay attention to eating and drinking in the world, there is no one who does not follow the example of Li Jian, and call this matter a beautiful talk.

古文：令问至集州，染疾，久之渐笃。
现代文：李令问到集州，患了疾病，过了很久，病重了。
English: Li Ling asked about Jizhou and fell ill. After a long time, she became seriously ill.

古文：刺史以其名士，兼是同宗，恒令夜开城门，纵令问家人出入。
现代文：刺史因为他是名士，同时又是同一宗族，经常派人夜间打开城门，放李令问家人出入城门。
English: Because he was a famous person and a member of the same clan, he often sent people to open the city gate at night and let Li Ling ask his family members to enter and leave the city gate.

古文：刺史之子，尝夜与奴私出游。
现代文：刺史之子，曾经夜间和奴仆偷偷地出去游玩。
English: The son of a barber, he used to sneak out at night to play with his servants.

古文：至城门，遥见甲仗数百人，随一火车，当街而行。惊曰：不闻有兵，何得此辈？
现代文：到了城门，很远便看见几百名卫士，跟着一辆带火焰的车，正当街行进，便惊讶地问道：没听说有兵事，为什么来这些人？
English: When he arrived at the city gate, he saw hundreds of guardsmen in the distance, following a car with flames, marching down the street. He asked in surprise, "Haven't you heard there's a war going on? Why are all these people here?"

古文：意欲驰告父，且复伺其所之。
现代文：想要回奔告诉父亲，又探察他们所到的地方。
English: He wanted to run back and tell his father, and explore where they had gone.

古文：寻而已至城壕，火车从水上过，曾不渍灭，方知是鬼。
现代文：不久已到了护城河，带火的车从水上经过，不曾被浸灭，才知道是鬼。
English: Soon they reached the moat. A car with a fire passed through the water, but it was not extinguished, and only then did they know it was a ghost.

古文：走投其门，门已闭。不得归，遂奔令问门中处之。
现代文：跑着找到城门，城门已关闭，不能回家，于是逃奔到李令问屋里停留。
English: He ran to find the city gate. The gate was closed, so he couldn't go home. So he ran to the interrogation room of Li Ling and stayed there.

古文：既入，火车亦至令问中门外。其子虽恐惧，仍窃窥之。
现代文：进去以后，带火的车也到了李令问中门外，刺史的儿子虽然恐惧，仍然偷偷看外面。
English: After entering, the car with fire also arrived outside the middle gate of Li Lingtao. Although he was afraid, Zushi's son still peeked outside.

古文：忽闻堂中十余人诵经，甲仗等迟回良久。
现代文：忽然听到屋里十多人念诵经书，穿铠甲的士兵在那里逗留了很久。
English: Suddenly, I heard more than ten people in the room chanting scriptures. Armored soldiers lingered there for a long time.

古文：有一朱衣鬼，径三踢关，声如雷震，经声未绝。
现代文：有一个穿红衣服的鬼，一直连踢那个门闩，声如雷霆。
English: There's a ghost in a red dress who's been kicking that deadbolt like it's thunder.

古文：火车移上堂阶，遥见堂中灯火清静，尚有十余人侍疾。
现代文：读经书的声音也不停，带火的车也移上堂前的台阶，很远地看见屋中点着灯火，非常清静，还有十多个人侍候病人。
English: The sound of scripture reading also continued, and the cart with the fire moved up the steps in front of the hall. In the distance, I could see the lights on in the room, very quiet, and more than ten people attending to the sick.

古文：朱衣鬼又抉窗棂，其声如前，令问左右者皆走散。鬼自门持令问出，遂掷于火车中，群鬼拥之而去。
现代文：穿红衣服的人，又戳坏了窗棂，那声音象刚才的一样，李令问左右的人都走散了，鬼从门那儿领着令问出来，于是把他放到带火的车中，群鬼簇拥着离去了。
English: The man in red again broke the windowpane, and the sound was the same as before. Li Lingqian's right and left sides were scattered. The ghost led Lingqian out from the door, and then put him in a car with fire, and the ghosts swarmed and left.

古文：其子还舍，述其事。
现代文：刺史的儿子回到屋里，陈述刚才的事。
English: Tashi's son came back into the room to explain what had just happened.

古文：刺史明日令人问疾。令问家中余口，无敢起者。使者叫呼方出，云：昨夜被惊，至今战惧未已。令问尸为鬼所掷，在堂西北陈重床之下。
现代文：刺史第二天，派人问令问的病情，令问家里其他人没有敢站起来的，刺史使者叫喊他们才出来，说：昨夜被惊吓，到现在惊吓都没消除，令问尸体被鬼扔掉，在堂屋西北角停放在床下。
English: On the second day, they sent someone to inquire about his condition. The rest of the family did not dare to stand up. The messenger called them out and said, "I was frightened last night, and the fright has not been eliminated to this day. The body was thrown away by the ghost and parked under the bed in the northwest corner of the hall."

古文：家人乃集而哭焉。
现代文：家人才聚集而哭。
English: Family members gathered and wept.

古文：僧韬光
现代文：僧韬光
English: Sanghyeonggwang

古文：青龙寺僧和众、韬光，相与友善。韬光富平人，将归，谓和众曰：吾三数月不离家，师若行，必访我。
现代文：青龙寺僧和众、韬光，相互友好，韬光是富平人，将要回家，对和众说：我几个月不离开家，师傅如果去，一定去看望。
English: The monks and the people of Qinglong Temple and Gongguang are friendly with each other. Gongguang is a Fuping, and when he was about to go home, he said to the people: "I won't leave home for several months. If my master goes, I will definitely visit him."

古文：和众许之，逾两月余。和众往中都，道出富平，因寻韬光。
现代文：和众答应他了。过了两个多月，和众去中都，路过富平，就去找韬光。
English: After more than two months, he and the others went to Zhongdu, passed through Fuping, and went to find Yu Guang.

古文：和众日暮至，离居尚远，而韬光来迎之曰：劳师相寻，故来迎候。
现代文：和众日落时到了，离韬光居住的地方还很远，可韬光就亲自来迎接和众说：烦劳师傅找我，所以就来迎候您。
English: When it was time for the sun to set, it was still far away from the place where Yu Guang lived. However, Yu Guang came in person to greet the crowd and said, "Master has been looking for me, so I have come to greet you."

古文：与行里余，将到家。谓和众曰：北去即是吾家，师但入须我，我有少务，要至村东，少选当还。
现代文：走了一里多地，将要到家，对和众说：向北去就是我家，师傅只进去等我，我有一点事情，溜跶到村东，稍等候一会就当回来。
English: After walking more than a mile, he was about to reach home, and he said to the others: "Going north is my home. The master is just waiting for me. I have something to do. I'll walk to the east of the village, wait for a while, and then come back."

古文：言已东去。和众怪之，窃言曰：彼来迎候，何预知也？
现代文：说完已向东去，和众对此感到奇怪，自言自语道：他来迎候我，怎么会预先知道呢？
English: Having said this, he went to the east. The others were surprised at this and said to themselves: How could he have known in advance that he was coming to meet me?

古文：欲到家舍吾，何无情也？
现代文：想要到他家却扔下我，为什么这样无情？
English: If you want to go to his house and leave me behind, why are you so heartless?

古文：至其家扣门，韬光父哭而出曰：韬光师不幸，亡来十日，殡在村东北。常言师欲来，恨不奉见。
现代文：到了他家，敲他家门，韬光父亲哭着出来说：韬光师傅不幸，过世十多天，葬在村东北边，他常说您想来，遗憾不能见面。
English: When we arrived at his house, we knocked on his door, and his father came out crying and said, "Unfortunately, Master Gongguang passed away more than ten days ago and was buried in the northeastern part of the village. He often said, "If you want to come, I'm sorry I can't meet you."

古文：和众吊唁毕，父引入，于韬光常所居房舍之。和众谓韬光父曰：吾适至村，而韬光师自迎吾来，相与谈话里余。欲到，指示吾家而东去。云要至村东，少闲当返。
现代文：和众吊唁完毕，韬光父亲带他进入室内，在韬光常住的屋子里，和众对韬光父亲说：我刚才到村子里，可韬光师傅亲自迎接我来的，互相说着话，走一里多地，想要到您府上，他指着哪个是您家就向东去了，说要到村东，稍稍隔一会儿就当回来。
English: After the condolence meeting was over, Gongguang's father took him into the room. In the room where Gongguang usually lived, he said to Gongguang's father: "I just came to the village, but Master Gongguang came to meet me in person. They talked to each other and walked more than a mile. They wanted to go to your house. He pointed to which was your house and went to the east, saying that he wanted to go to the east of the village and would be back in a little while.

古文：吾都不知是鬼，适见父，方知之。
现代文：我不知道是鬼，正好碰到您，才知道是鬼。
English: I didn't know it was a ghost until I bumped into you.

古文：韬光父母惊谓和众曰：彼既许来，来当执之。
现代文：韬光父母吃惊地对和众说：他既然答应回来，回来就当拦住他，我想看到他。
English: Surprised, Yu Guang's parents said to the others, "Since he promised to come back, you should stop him when he comes back. I want to see him."

古文：吾欲见也。于是夜久，韬光复来，入房谓和众曰：贫居客来，无以供给。
现代文：于是深夜，韬光又来了，进入房内对和众说：我因贫困客居此地，没有什么给你们的。
English: So late at night, Hao Guang came again, entered the room and said to the others: "I am a guest here because of poverty, and I have nothing to give you.

古文：和众请同坐，因执之叫呼。
现代文：和众请求同坐，于是拉着他喊人。
English: They asked him to sit with them, so they dragged him out and shouted at him.

古文：其父与家人并至，秉烛照之，形言皆韬光也。
现代文：他的父亲和家里人一同到了，拿着蜡烛照亮，相貌、说话都是韬光。
English: His father arrived with the rest of the family, holding a candle and lighting it. His face and speech were dazzling.

古文：纳之瓮中，以盆覆之。瓮中忽哀诉曰：吾非韬光师，乃守墓人也。
现代文：把他放到大罈子里，用盆盖上他，罈子里忽然有哀痛诉说声：我不是韬光师傅，是守墓的人。
English: They put him in a large urn and covered him with a basin. Suddenly, there was a mournful voice in the urn saying: "I am not a master urn maker, I am a tomb guard.

古文：知师与韬光师善，故假为之。如不相烦，可恕造次，放吾还也。
现代文：知道师傅您和韬光师傅很好，所以假装是韬光，如果不麻烦您，可容我鲁莽，放我回去吧。
English: I know that you and Shouguang are good friends, so I'll pretend to be Shouguang. If it doesn't bother you, you can let me be reckless and let me go back.

古文：其家不开之，瓮中密祈请转苦。
现代文：他家里人不打开盖子，罈子里的鬼就频繁请求诉苦。
English: If his family members did not open the lid, the ghost in the cocoon would frequently make complaints.

古文：日出后却覆，如惊飏飞去，而和众亦还。后不复见焉。
现代文：日出后拿开盖子，象急风吹走一样，可是和众也回去了，以后不再见到他。
English: And when the sun was up, he took the vail off, and went away as a storm of wind: and they that were with him went their way, and saw him no more.

古文：僧仪光
现代文：僧仪光
English: The monk Jiguang

古文：青龙寺禅师仪光，行业至高。
现代文：青龙寺禅师仪光，修持极其高深。
English: Seiryu-ji Temple's Zen master, Jikoh, is an extremely advanced practitioner.

古文：开元十五年，有朝士妻丧，请之至家修福。师往其家数日，居于庑前，大申供养。
现代文：开元十五年时，有个朝士的妻子死了，请仪光到他家修福，仪光师傅住在他家几天，住在厢房，大加供养。
English: In the fifteenth year of the first century, the wife of a courtier died, and he invited Yi Guang to his home to pray for good luck. Master Yi Guang stayed in his home for a few days, living in the guest room, and made a large offering.

古文：俗每人死谒巫，即言其杀出日，必有妨害，死家多出避之。
现代文：风俗有人死了都要拜问巫师，巫师说出死煞出现的时日，怕有妨害举动，死人家大多出去躲避。
English: The custom is that anyone who has died should consult a sorcerer. The sorcerer will tell the time and date of the appearance of the dead. For fear of interference, most of the dead go out to hide.

古文：其夜，朝士家皆出北门潜去，不告师。
现代文：那天夜里，这家人都从北门出去了，没有告诉禅师。
English: That night, the whole family left through the north gate without telling the Zen master.

古文：师但于堂明灯诵经，忽见二人侍之。
现代文：禅师只在正屋里点灯念经，忽然看见有两个人侍奉他。
English: The Zen master was just lighting a lamp and chanting a sutra in the main room when he suddenly saw two people serving him.

古文：夜将半，忽闻堂中人起取衣开门声，有一妇人出堂，便往厨中营食，汲水吹火。
现代文：快到半夜的时候，忽然听到正屋里有人站起来，有拿衣服开门的声音，有一个妇人走出正屋，就到厨房里准备吃的，打水弄火。
English: It was nearly midnight when they suddenly heard someone standing up in the main room, and the sound of someone taking clothes and opening the door. A woman came out of the main room and went to the kitchen to prepare food, make water and light a fire.

古文：师以为家人，不之怪也。
现代文：师傅以为是家里主人，没有对此感到奇怪。
English: The master thought that he was the master of the house and did not feel strange about it.

古文：及将曙，妇人进食，捧盘来前，独带面衣，徒跣。再拜言曰：劳师降临，今家人总出，恐斋粥失时，弟子故起，为师造之。
现代文：等到快要天亮，妇人吃饭，端着盘子上前来，只戴着面纱，光着脚，又拜见说：烦劳师傅来到，现在家人都已出去，恐怕斋粥没准了，所以弟子起来给师傅送饭。
English: When it was almost dawn, the woman was eating. She came with a plate, wearing only a veil and bare feet. She bowed and said, "Master has come, and now my family has gone out. I'm afraid the porridge is not ready. So my disciple got up to bring my master his meal."

古文：师知是亡人，乃受其献。
现代文：师傅知道这是已亡之人，就接受她的进献。
English: Knowing that it was from a dead person, the master accepted her offering.

古文：方祝，祝未毕，闻开堂北户声。妇人惶遽曰：儿子来矣。
现代文：才祷告，祷告没完，听到正屋北门有声响，妇人恐惶，立即说：儿子来了。
English: When she heard a noise at the north gate of the main house, the woman was alarmed and immediately said, "My son has come."

古文：因奔赴堂内，则闻哭。哭毕，家人谒师，问安否。
现代文：于是奔跑到正屋内，就听到有哭声，哭声停止，家里人拜见师傅，问他安否。
English: So he ran to the main house, where he heard crying. When the crying stopped, the family members went to see the master and asked him if he was all right.

古文：见盘中粥，问师曰：弟子等夜来实避殃祸，不令师知，家中无人，此粥谁所造？
现代文：看见盘里的粥，问师傅说：弟子们夜晚离开这里躲避灾祸，不让师傅知道，家里没有人，这粥是谁做的呢？
English: Seeing the porridge on the plate, he asked the master: "The disciples left here at night to avoid disaster, not letting the master know that there was no one at home. Who made this porridge?

古文：何谓也？师乃指所造粥以示之，其家惊异焉。
现代文：师傅笑着不回答，屋内婢女惊讶地说：死了的人忽然夜间尸体横卧，手上有面迹，脚上沾有泥土，是为什么呢？师傅就指着所做的粥来告诉他，那家人非常惊讶。
English: The master laughed and did not answer, and the maid in the house said in surprise: Why is it that dead people suddenly lie dead at night, with their hands stained and their feet covered in mud? The master pointed to the porridge he had made and told him that the family was very surprised.

古文：尼员智
现代文：尼员智
English: Ni Jianzhi

古文：广敬寺尼员智，尝与同侣于终南山中结夏。
现代文：广敬寺有个尼僧叫员智，曾经和同伴，在终南山中欢度夏天归去。
English: There is a nun at Guangjing Temple called Yan Zhi, who used to spend the summer with her companions in the mountains.

古文：夏夜月明下，有哭而来者，其声雄大，甚悲。
现代文：夏天月夜中，忽然传来一阵哭声，那声音宏大，很是悲凉。
English: In the middle of the summer moonlit night, a sudden cry came from the crane. The sound was huge and very sad.

古文：既至，乃一人，长八尺余，立于庐前。
现代文：等哭声渐近到这里，竟是一个人，长八尺多，站在屋前，哭声不断。
English: As the cries got closer and closer, there was actually a man, more than eight feet long, standing in front of the house, crying incessantly.

古文：声不辍，遂至夜半，声甚呜咽，涕泪横流。
现代文：于是到了半夜，哭声很是幽咽低沉，泪流满面。
English: So by midnight, the crying was very muffled, with tears streaming down her face.

古文：尼等执心正念不惧，而哭者竟不言而去。
现代文：尼僧等人潜心念经，毫无惧色，可哭着的人竟然不出言语就消失了。
English: The nuns and others immersed themselves in chanting the sutras, without fear, but those who were crying actually disappeared without a word.

古文：杨元英
现代文：杨元英
English: Yang Yuanying

古文：杨元英，则天时为太常卿，开元中，亡已二十载。其子因至冶成坊削家，识其父圹中剑。
现代文：杨元英，武则天时做太常卿，开元年间，过世已有二十年，他的儿子因为到冶成坊削家，突然发现了他父亲坟墓中的剑。
English: During the first year of the 21st century, twenty years after the death of Yang Yuanying, Wu Zetian's predecessor as Tai Changqing, his son suddenly found the sword in his father's grave because he went to the smelting workshop to whittle down the family.

古文：心异之，问削师：何得此剑？
现代文：心里感到奇怪，问削家。怎么得到这把宝剑。
English: Puzzled, he asked the hewer how he got the sword.

古文：云：有贵人形状衣服，将令修理，期明日五时来取。
现代文：答道：有个穿戴高贵衣服的人，他让人修理，说等到明天中午来取。
English: He replied, "There was a man who wore expensive clothes. He had it repaired and said to come tomorrow at noon to pick it up."

古文：子意是父授，复疑父冢为人所开。
现代文：杨元英的儿子料想是父亲给的，又怀疑父亲的坟墓被人挖开。
English: Yang Yuanying's son thought his father had given it to him, and suspected that his father's grave had been dug up.

古文：至日，与弟同往削师家室中，伺之。至时取剑，乃其父也，骑白马，衣服如生时，从者五六人。
现代文：到了第二天，他和弟弟一同去削师家里，等候那人，到了取剑时间，竟是他的父亲，骑着白马，穿的衣服都象活时穿的一样，有五六个随从。
English: The next day, he and his brother went to the hewer's house to wait for the man, and when it was time to take the sword, it turned out to be his father, riding a white horse, wearing the same clothes as when he was alive, with five or six followers.

古文：兄弟出拜道左，悲涕久之。元英取剑下马，引诸子于僻处，分处家事。末问：汝母在家否？
现代文：兄弟俩在道左出来拜见父亲，悲泣了很久，元英拿剑下马，引领两个儿子到偏僻的地方，分别交代了家里的事，最后问他们的母亲在家没有。
English: The two brothers went out to meet their father on the left side of the road and cried for a long time. Yuan Ying dismounted with a sword, led the two sons to a remote place, told them about the family separately, and finally asked if their mother was at home.

古文：云：合葬已十五年。
现代文：他们说：合葬已十五年了。
English: They said: "It's been fifteen years since we were buried together.

古文：元英言：我初不知。
现代文：元英说：我当时不知道。
English: "I didn't know at the time," Motohide said.

古文：再三叹息，谓子曰：我有公事，不获久住。
现代文：再三叹息，对儿子说：我有公事，不能久住。
English: He sighed repeatedly and said to his son, "I have a job, so I can't stay long."

古文：明日，汝等可再至此，当取少资，助汝辛苦。
现代文：明天，你们可以再到这，应当拿走一点钱财，帮助你们过艰辛的生活。
English: Tomorrow, you can come here again, and you should take some money to help you live a hard life.

古文：子如期至，元英亦至，得三百千，诫之云：数日须用尽。
现代文：儿子按期来到了，元英也到了，儿子拿到三百千银两，父亲告诫他们说：几天内一定要用完钱。
English: His son arrived on schedule, and Yuan Ying also arrived. His son got three hundred thousand silver, and his father warned them: they must run out of money within a few days.

古文：言讫诀去，子等随行涕泣。
现代文：说完要诀别离去。
English: Say goodbye and leave.

古文：元英又谓子曰：汝等不了此事，人鬼路殊，宁有百年父子耶？
现代文：儿子们就跟随哭泣，元英又对儿子说：你们不懂这事，人鬼道路不一样，哪里有百年父子的呢？
English: The sons followed crying, and Yuan Ying said to his son: "You don't understand this matter. The paths of ghosts and humans are different. Where are the fathers and sons of a hundred years ago?

古文：言讫诀去。子随骋出上东门，遥望入邙山中，数十步忽隐不见。
现代文：说完就急忙诀别离去，儿子跟着骑上马出走到东门，遥望父亲进入邙山中，又几十步忽然隐藏不见了。
English: After saying this, he hurriedly said goodbye and left. His son rode out to the east gate, watched his father enter the mountains, and suddenly disappeared after a few dozen steps.

古文：数日，市具都尽。三日后，市人皆得纸钱。
现代文：过几天，买东西把钱用光了，三天后，商人所得都变成了纸钱。
English: After a few days, the merchant ran out of money to buy things, and after three days, the merchant's income was all turned into paper money.

