古文：◎礼十四
现代文：礼十四
English: After the fourteenth salute

古文：谒祭陵庙忌辰受蕃国王讣奏仪为王公大臣举哀仪临王公大臣丧仪中宫为父祖丧仪遣使临吊仪遣使册赠王公大臣仪赐祭葬丧葬之制碑碣赐谥品官丧礼士庶人丧礼服纪
现代文：谒祭陵庙忌辰受蕃国王讣奏仪为王公大臣举哀仪临王公大臣丧仪中宫为父祖丧仪遣使临吊仪遣使册赠王公大臣仪赐祭葬丧葬之制碑碣赐谥品官丧礼士庶人丧礼服纪
English: 

古文：谒祭陵庙
现代文：谒祭陵庙
English: Gongsai Mausoleum Temple

古文：洪武元年三月，遣官致祭仁祖陵，二年，加号英陵。
现代文：洪武元年三月，派遣官吏祭祀仁祖陵墓。洪武二年，加陵号英陵。
English: In March of the first year of Hongwu, officials were dispatched to offer sacrifices at the mausoleum of the benevolent ancestor. In the second year of Hongwu, the imperial mausoleum named "Kalingo" was built.

古文：礼部尚书崔亮请下太常行祭告礼。
现代文：礼部尚书崔亮请求命令太常举行祭告礼。
English: Choe Ryong, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, requested an order to hold the memorial service more frequently.

古文：博士孙吾与言： 山陵之制，莫备于汉，初未有祭告之礼。
现代文：博士孙吾与说： 陵墓的制度，没有哪个朝代比汉代更齐备的了，最初没有祭告的礼制。
English: Dr. Sun Wujie said: The system of mausoleums, no dynasty is more complete than the Han Dynasty. At first, there was no ritual system.

古文：盖庙号、陵号不同。
现代文：庙号、陵号不同。
English: The temple name and mausoleum name are different.

古文：庙号易大行之号，必上册谥，告之神明，陵号则后嗣王所以识别先后而已，愿罢英陵祭告。 
现代文：庙号是改变对大行皇帝的称呼，必定记上册谧，告之于神明，陵号却是后代罐位帝王用来识别先后而已。希望罢除英陵的祭告。 
English: The temple name is a change of the name of the Emperor Da Xing, which must be recorded and announced to the gods, but the tomb name is only used by the descendants of the emperor to identify successively. It is hoped that the announcement of the tomb will be removed.

古文：亮言： 汉光武加先陵曰昌，宋太祖加高、曾、祖、考陵曰钦、康、定、安。
现代文：崔亮说： 漠光武帝加先人陵号为昌，宋太祖加高、曾、祖、父的陵号为钦、康、定、安。
English: Cui Liang said, "The tomb name of the Emperor Muguangwu and his predecessors is Chang, and the tomb names of the Song Emperor Gao, Zeng, Zu and his father are Qin, Kang, Ding and An.

古文：盖尊祖考由尊其陵，尊其制则必以告，礼缘人情，告之是。 
现代文：因为尊崇父辈、祖辈，就应当尊崇父辈、祖辈的陵墓，尊崇父辈、祖辈的陵墓就必定要祭告，礼根据人情确定，祭告为对。 
English: Since we should respect our fathers and ancestors, we should also respect the mausoleums of our fathers and ancestors. If we respect the mausoleums of our fathers and ancestors, we must make offerings. The rite is determined according to people's feelings, and the offering is right.

古文：廷议皆是亮。从之。
现代文：朝廷议论都认为崔亮对，便听从他的请求。
English: The court argued that Cui Liang was right, and obeyed his request.

古文：熙祖陵，每岁正旦、清明、中元、冬至及每月朔望，本署官供祭行礼。
现代文：熙祖的陵墓，每年正月初一日、清明、中元、冬至以及每月的朔日和望日，本署官吏供给祭品举行祭礼。
English: On the first day of the first month of each year, the Qingming, the Mid-Yuan, the winter solstice, as well as the New Year's Day and the Day of the Dead of each month, the officials of this department held a festival with offerings.

古文：又即其地望祭德祖、懿祖二陵。
现代文：又在那个地方迢望祭祀德祖、懿祖二陵墓。
English: In that place, there are two mausoleums for revering and worshiping the patriarchs.

古文：英陵后改称皇陵，多孟冬一祭，俱署官行礼；朔望，中都留守司官行礼。
现代文：英陵后来改称皇陵，增加十月祭祀一次，都是本署官举行祭礼；朔日、望日，由中都留守司官吏举行祭礼。
English: The Imperial mausoleum was later renamed the Imperial mausoleum, and the October ritual was added once. This ceremony was held by the officials of the Imperial mausoleum; the New Year's Day and the Day of the Dead were held by the officials left behind in the capital.

古文：八年，诏翰林院议陵寝朔望节序祭祀礼。
现代文：洪武八年，下诏命令翰林院讨论皇帝陵墓朔日、望日、节令祭祀的礼仪。
English: In the eighth year of Hongwu, Hanlin Academy was ordered by imperial edict to discuss the etiquette of the New Year's Day, Day of the Dead, and festival sacrifices at the emperor's tomb.

古文：学士乐韶凤等言： 汉诸庙寝园有便殿，日祭于寝，月祭于庙，时祭于便殿。
现代文：学士乐韶凤等人说： 汉代各庙陵园有便殿，日祭在寝，月祭在庙，季节祭祀在便殿。
English: The scholar Le Qifeng and others said: In the Han Dynasty, every temple and cemetery had a latrine. The sun festival was held in the latrine, the moon festival in the temple, and the seasonal sacrifice in the latrine.

古文：后汉都洛阳，以关西诸陵久远，但四时用特牲祀。
现代文：后汉建都洛阳，因关西各陵墓久速，只是四季用特牲祭祀。
English: After the Han Dynasty, Luoyang was built as the capital, but because of the rapid growth of Kansai's mausoleums, special animal sacrifices were used only during the four seasons.

古文：每西幸，即亲诣。
现代文：每次皇帝临幸关西，便亲自拜谒。
English: Every time the emperor visited Kansai, he personally paid homage.

古文：岁正月祀郊庙毕，以次上洛阳诸陵。
现代文：每年正月祭祀郊庙结东，依次祭奠洛阳各陵墓。
English: In the first month of each year, the suburb temple of Jiedong is dedicated, followed by the mausoleums of Luoyang.

古文：唐园陵之制，皇祖以上陵，皆朔望上食，元日、冬至、寒食、伏腊、社各一祭。
现代文：唐代园陵的制度，皇祖以上的陵墓，都是朔日、望日献上祭品，元日、冬至、寒食、伏腊、社日等节日各祭祀一次。
English: The Tang Dynasty garden system, mausoleums of emperors and above, offered sacrifices on the New Year's Day and the Day of the Dead, and once on festivals such as the New Year's Day, the Winter Solstice, the Mid-Autumn Festival, the Spring Festival, and the Day of the Dead.

古文：皇考陵，朔望及节祭日进食，又荐新于诸陵。
现代文：皇父的陵墓，朔日、望日以及节气祭日进献祭品，又在各陵墓进献时新祭品。
English: The mausoleum of the emperor's father, the New Year's Day, the Day of Hope, and the solar terms festival, and the new offerings at the time of offering in each mausoleum.

古文：永徽二年，定献陵朔望、冬夏至、伏腊、清明、社等节，皆上食。
现代文：永徽二年，规定献陵朔日、望日、冬至、夏至、伏日、腊日、清明、社日等节日，都献上祭品。
English: In the second year of Yonghui, it was stipulated that the New Year's Day, the Mid-Autumn Festival, the Winter Solstice, the Summer Solstice, the Mid-Autumn Festival, the New Year's Day, the Tomb-Sweeping Day, the Mid-Autumn Festival, the Tomb-Sweeping Day, the Company Day and other festivals should be offered.

古文：开元中，敕献、昭、乾、定、桥、恭六陵，朔望上食，冬至、寒食各设一祭。
现代文：开元年间，敕命献、昭、干、定、桥、恭六陵，朔日、望日献上祭品，冬至、寒食各自设一次祭祀。
English: During the first year of the year, offerings were made at the Tombs of Jianmei, Zhao, Gan, Ding, Qiao and Qionglong, as well as at the Tombs of New Year's Day and Day of the Dead, and there was one offering at each of the Winter Solstice and Cold Food Festivals.

古文：宋每岁春秋仲月，遣太常宗正卿朝诸陵。
现代文：宋代每年春季、秋季的第二月，派遣太常宗正卿朝拜各陵墓。
English: During the Song Dynasty, every year in the spring and the second month of autumn, Emperor Taizhong Zhengxing would send emissaries to visit each mausoleum.

古文：我朝旧仪，每岁元旦、清明、七月望、十月朔、冬至日，俱用太牢，遣官致祭。
现代文：我大明朝旧有礼仪，每年元旦、清明、七月望日、十月朔日、冬至日，都用太牢礼，派遣官员祭祀。
English: In the Ming Dynasty, there used to be an etiquette. Every New Year's Day, Ching Ming Day, the first day of the seventh month, the first day of the tenth month, and the winter solstice, officials would be dispatched to perform the ritual with the Taiyokei.

古文：白塔二处，则用少牢，中官行礼，今拟如旧仪，增夏至日用太牢，其伏腊、社、每月朔望，则用特羊，祠祭署官行礼。
现代文：白塔二处，便用少牢礼，由宦官举行祭礼。现在拟定按照旧有礼仪，增加夏至日用太牢礼，其它伏日、腊日、社日、每月朔日及望日。便用特羊即一只羊，由祠祭署官员举行祭礼。
English: According to the old etiquette, it is now proposed to increase the number of summer solstice days to use the Tai Rong Rai, and the other days to use the Fu Rong, La Rong, Social Day, Lunar New Year's Day and Wang Rong. The special sheep, that is, a sheep, will be used, and the festival will be held by the officials of the ancestral hall festival office.

古文：如节与朔望、伏腊、社同日，则用节礼。 
现代文：如果节日与朔日、望日、伏日、腊日、社日同一天，便用节气礼。 
English: If the festival falls on the same day as the New Year's Day, the Day of Hope, the Lord's Day, the Day of the Wolf, or the Company's Day, then the solar terms are used.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从此议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十六年，孝陵殿成，命皇太子以牲醴致祭。
现代文：洪武十六年，孝陵殿完工，命令皇太子用祭牲醴酒进行祭祀。
English: In the 16th year of Hongwu, the Xiaoling Hall was completed, and the crown prince was ordered to use sacrificial animals and wine to perform the ritual.

古文：清晨陈祭仪毕，皇太子、亲王由东门入，就殿中拜位，皆四拜。
现代文：清晨陈列祭仪结东，皇太子、亲王从东门进入，到殿中拜位，都是拜四拜。
English: In the early morning, the display ceremony was held in the east, and the crown prince and prince entered from the east gate and bowed to the throne in the hall. They all bowed four times.

古文：皇太子少前，三上香，奠酒，读祝曰： 园陵始营，祭享之仪未具。
现代文：皇太子稍微靠前，上三道香，祭奠酒，朗读祝辞说： 园陵刚刚开始营建，祭享的礼仪没有具备。
English: The crown prince stepped forward a little and offered three incense sticks, a libation of wine, and read out a congratulatory speech, saying: The construction of the garden has just begun, and the etiquette for celebrating is not yet in place.

古文：今礼殿既成，奉安神位，谨用祭告。 
现代文：现在礼殿已经建成，供奉安放神位，恭敬地祭告。 
English: Now the ceremonial hall has been completed, dedicated to the installation of the divine throne, and reverently dedicated.

古文：遂行亚献、终献礼，皇太子以下皆四拜，执事行礼皆内官。
现代文：于是举行第二次献酒、最后一次献酒的礼仪，皇太子以下都拜四拜，执事行礼都是内官。
English: As a result, the second wine offering and the last wine offering ceremony were held. The crown prince and his entourage all bowed four times, and the deacons all bowed.

古文：二十六年令，车马过陵，及守陵官民入陵者，百步外下马，违者以大不敬论。
现代文：洪武二十六年下令，车马经过陵墓，以及守护皇陵的官吏平民进入陵墓，在百步以外下马，违犯的以大不敬判罪。
English: In the 26th year of Hongwu's reign, he issued an order that chariots and horses should pass by the mausoleum, and that the officials and commoners guarding the imperial mausoleum should enter the mausoleum and dismount a hundred paces away. Violators would be found guilty of great disrespect.

古文：建文初，定孝陵每岁正旦、孟冬、忌辰、圣节，俱行香，清明、中元、冬至，俱祭祀。
现代文：建文初年，规定孝陵每年正月旦日、孟冬、死之日、生之日，都要上香。清明、中元、冬至，都要祭祀。
English: In the first year of the Jianwen era, it was stipulated that the Xiaoling should be incensed every year on the first day of the first month, Meng Dong, the day of death, and the day of life. Qingming, Zhongyuan, and Winter Solstice should be sacrificed.

古文：勋旧大臣行礼，文武官陪祀。
现代文：由有功勋的故旧大臣举行礼仪，文武官员陪伴祭祀。
English: The ceremony was held by the meritorious former minister, and the cultural and military officials accompanied the ritual.

古文：若亲王之藩，过京师者谒陵。
现代文：如果亲王到藩国，经过京城的要拜谒陵墓。
English: If the prince comes to the domain, he must visit the imperial mausoleum after passing through the capital.

古文：官员以公事至，入城者谒陵，出城者辞陵。
现代文：官员因公事到京，入城的要拜谒陵墓，出城的要拜辞陵墓。
English: When officials come to Beijing on official business, they have to pay homage to the imperial mausoleum when they enter the city and to the imperial mausoleum when they leave the city.

古文：国有大事，遣官祭告。
现代文：国家有大事，派遣官员祭告。
English: When there is a major event in the country, officials are dispatched to announce it.

古文：懿文太子陵在孝陵左，四孟、清明、中元、冬至、岁暮及忌辰，凡九祭。
现代文：懿文太子的陵墓在孝陵的左面，四季的第一个月、清明、中元、冬至、每年的最后一天以及死之日，一共九次祭祀。
English: The mausoleum of Prince Gongwen is on the left side of the Xiaoling Mausoleum. There are a total of nine offerings for the first month of the four seasons, Qingming, Mid-year, Winter Solstice, the last day of the year, and the day of death.

古文：永乐元年，工部以泗州祖陵黑瓦为言。
现代文：永乐元年，工部因泗州祖陵用黑色瓦提出议论。
English: In the first year of the Yongle era, the Ministry of Industry and Trade raised the issue of using black tiles for the ancestral mausoleum in Zhangzhou.

古文：帝命易以黄，如皇陵制。
现代文：皇帝命令用黄瓦改换，如同皇陆的样式。
English: The emperor ordered that the roof be replaced with yellow tiles, just like the Emperor's palace.

古文：宣宗即位，遣郑王谒祭孝陵。
现代文：宣宗即位，派遣郑王拜谒祭祀孝陵。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, and sent King Zheng to pay homage and offer sacrifices at the Xiaoling Mausoleum.

古文：正统二年谕，天寿山陵寝，剪伐树木者重罪，都察院榜禁，锦衣卫官校巡视，工部钦天监官环山立界，十年，谒三陵，谕百官具浅色衣服，如洪武、永乐例。
现代文：正统二年训谕，天寿山陵寝，砍伐树木的从重治罪，都察院张榜禁止，锦衣卫官校巡察，工部钦天监官员环山立地界。正统十年，拜谒三陵墓，告谕百官穿浅色衣服，如同洪武、永乐时期的规定。
English: In the second year of orthodoxy, it was decreed that those who slept in the tombs of Tian Shou and cut down trees would be severely punished, and it was forbidden by the Duka Academy to display banners. The Jin clothing guardsmen's school was inspected, and the officials of the Qin Heavenly Supervision of the Ministry of Industry surrounded the mountain and set up a territorial boundary. In the tenth year of orthodoxy, they paid homage to the three mausoleums, and ordered all officials to wear light-colored clothes, just like the provisions of the Hongwu and Yongle periods.

古文：南京司礼太监陈祖圭言： 魏国公徐俌每祭孝陵，皆由红券门直入，至殿内行礼，僣妄宜改。 
现代文：南京司礼太监陈祖圭说： 魏国公徐佣每次祭祀孝陵，都从红券门直接进入，到殿内行礼，僭越妄为，应该改正。 
English: Chen Zougui, the eunuch of Nanjing, said: Wei Guogong Xu's servants entered directly from the Red Ticket Gate to the hall and performed the ritual every time they offered a sacrifice to the Xiaoling. This was an act of arrogance and should be corrected.

古文：俌言： 入由红券门者，所以重祖宗之祭，尊皇上之命。
现代文：徐俩说： 从红券门进入的原因，是重视祖宗的祭祀，尊崇皇上的命令。
English: Xu Duo said: The reason for entering through the Red Ticket Gate is to pay attention to the ancestor's sacrifice and respect the emperor's order.

古文：出由小旁门者，所以守臣下之分。
现代文：从小旁门退出的原因，是遵守臣下的本分。
English: The reason for withdrawing from the small side door is to comply with the duty of a vassal.

古文：循守故事，几及百年，岂敢擅易。 
现代文：遵守旧例，将近一百年，哪里敢擅自改易。 
English: For nearly a hundred years, we have followed the old practice, and no one dares to arbitrarily change wages.

古文：下礼部议，言： 长陵及太庙，遣官致祭，所由之门与孝陵事体相同，宜如旧。 
现代文：下交礼部讨论，说： 长陵和太庙，派官吏致上祭祀，经过的门与孝陵的体制相同，应该按照旧制。 
English: After discussing with the ceremonial department, he said: Changling and Taimiao are the same, officials are sent to offer sacrifices, and the door passing through is the same as the system of Xiaoling, it should be in accordance with the old system.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从其议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：弘治元年，遣内官监护凤阳皇陵，凡官员以公事经过者俱谒陵。
现代文：弘治元年，派遣内官监护风阳皇陵，凡是官员因公事经过的，都要拜谒陵墓。
English: In the first year of the Hongzhi era, an official was sent to supervise the Fengyang Emperor's tomb. All officials passing by on official business were required to pay homage to the tomb.

古文：十七年，更裕陵神座。
现代文：弘治十七年，变更裕陵神位牌。
English: In the 17th year of the Konji era, the Yuryo Shinto shrine plaque was changed.

古文：初，议以孝肃太皇太后祔葬裕陵，已遣官分告诸陵及天寿山后土，而钦天监以为岁杀在北，方向不利。
现代文：当初，议定以孝肃太皇太后陪葬裕陵，已经派遣官员分别告祭诸陵以及天寿山地神，而钦天监因为此年的凶神在北方，方向不吉利。
English: At first, it was agreed that Empress Dowager Xiaoshu would accompany and bury Yuling, and officials were dispatched to announce the offering of the mausoleums and Tianshou Mountain Gods, while Qin Tianjun was in the north because the evil god was in the north this year, and the direction was not auspicious.

古文：内官监亦谓英庙陵寝，难以轻动，遂议别建庙，奉安神主。
现代文：内官监也说英庙的陵寝，难以轻易移动，于是讨论另外建庙，供奉安放神位牌。
English: The procurator also said that the mausoleum of the Ying Temple was difficult to move easily, so they discussed the construction of another temple to enshrine and place the shrine plaque.

古文：帝心未慊，卒移英庙居中，孝庄居左，孝肃祔其右云。
现代文：皇帝心中不悦，最终移动英庙居中，孝庄处在左，孝肃附在右。
English: Unhappy in his heart, the emperor eventually moved Yingmiao to the middle, Xiaozhuang to the left, and Xiaoshu to the right.

古文：正德间，定长陵以下诸陵，各设神宫监并卫及祠祭署。
现代文：正德年间，规定长陵以下各陵墓，各设神宫监和卫以及祠祭署。
English: During the Zhengde era, it was stipulated that all the mausoleums below the Long Mausoleum would be set up, as well as the shrine overseers and guards, and the ancestral hall and festival office.

古文：凡清明、中元、冬至，俱分遣驸马都尉行礼，文武官陪祭。
现代文：凡是清明、中元、冬至日，都分别派遣驸马都尉举行祭礼，文武官员陪伴祭祀。
English: On every Qingming, Mid-Autumn Festival, and Winter Solstice, the commander of the imperial horse was dispatched separately to hold the festival, and the civil and military officials accompanied the sacrifice.

古文：忌辰及正旦、孟冬、圣节，亦遣驸马都尉行礼。
现代文：忌日以及正月初一、十月、生日，也派遣驸马都尉举行祭礼。
English: On the day of death, as well as on the first day of the first month of the year, October, and birthdays, they also send the horses to hold the festival.

古文：亲王之藩，诣诸陵辞谒。
现代文：亲王到藩国，到各陵拜辞。
English: The prince went to the domain and to each mausoleum to pay his respects.

古文：恭让章皇后陵，清明、中元、冬至、忌辰内官行礼。
现代文：恭让章皇后陵墓，清明、中元、冬至、死的日子由内官举行祭礼。
English: At the mausoleum of Empress Gongzhangzhang, ceremonies were held by officials on the days of Qingming, Zhongyuan, Winter Solstice, and the day of her death.

古文：西山景皇帝陵，祭期如上，仪宾行礼。
现代文：西山景皇帝陵墓，祭祀日期如同上面，仪宾举行祭礼。
English: Emperor Xishanjing's mausoleum, the date of the ritual is the same as above, and the guests of honor hold a ceremony.

古文：初，成祖易黄土山名天寿山。
现代文：当初，成祖改黄土山为天寿山。
English: At first, Cheng Zu changed the name of Loess Mountain to Tianshou Mountain.

古文：嘉靖十年，名祖陵曰基运山，皇陵曰翌圣山，孝陵曰神烈山，显陵曰纯德山，及天寿山，并方泽从祀，所在有司祭告各陵山祇。
现代文：嘉靖十年，给祖陵命名为基运山，皇陵名翌圣山，孝陵名神烈山，显陵为纯德山，以及天寿山，各山都在方丘大泽从祀地只，各处主管官吏祭告各陵墓的山神。
English: In the 10th year of Jiajing, the ancestral mausoleum was named Qiyun Mountain, the imperial mausoleum was named Holy Mountain, the filial mausoleum was named Holy Mountain, the imperial mausoleum was named Pure Mountain, and Tianshou Mountain. Each mountain was enshrined in Fangqiu and Osawa, and the officials in charge of each place worshipped the mountain gods of each mausoleum.

古文：礼官因奏： 神祇坛每年秋祭，有钟山、天寿山之神，今宜增基运等山。 
现代文：礼官于是上奏说： 神祇坛每年秋天祭祀，有钟山、天寿山之神，现在应该增加基运等山。 
English: The etiquette officer then piped up and said, "Every autumn, the deity altar has a sacrifice, and there are gods of Bell Mountain and Tianshou Mountain. Now we should add mountains such as Ji Yun."

古文：从之。
现代文：听从其奏。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十四年，谕礼部尚书夏言： 清明节既遣官上陵，内殿复祭，似涉烦复。 
现代文：嘉靖十四年，训谕礼部尚书夏言： 清明节派遣官吏到祖宗陵墓祭祀以后，内殿又祭祀，似显得烦琐重复。 
English: In the 14th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the precept of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Shangshu Xiayan, said: After dispatching officials to the ancestral mausoleum for the Qingming Festival, the inner hall was also sacrificed, which seemed to be tedious and repetitive.

古文：言因言： 我朝祀典，如特享、时享、祫享、禘祭，足应经义，可为世法。
现代文：夏言说： 我朝祭祀的典制，如特享、时享、袷祭、柿祭，足以与经义相应，可以为后世效法。
English: Natsugen said, "The ceremonial system of My Morning Rituals, such as the special offering, the time offering, the burnt offering, and the persimmon offering, are sufficient to correspond to the meaning of the sutras, and can be emulated by future generations.

古文：惟上陵及奉先殿多沿前代故事。
现代文：只有到祖先陵墓祭祀以及奉先殿多沿用前代的旧例。
English: Only the ancestral mausoleum and the hall of ancestors are still used, which is the same as in previous generations.

古文：上陵之祀，每岁清明、中元、冬至凡三。
现代文：到祖先陵墓的祭祀，每年清明、中元、冬至日共三次。
English: The ritual to the ancestral mausoleum is held three times a year on the Qingming, Mid-Autumn, and Winter Solstice.

古文：中元俗节，事本不经。
现代文：中元是俗问节日，事情本来不合经义。
English: Zhongyuan is a popular festival, and things are not in accordance with the scriptures.

古文：往因郊祀在正首，故冬至上陵，盖重一气之始，伸报本之义。
现代文：以往因为郊祀在每年的第一个月，所以冬至日到祖先陵墓进行祭祀，是因为重视一气的开始，伸张报答根本的意思。
English: In the past, because the suburb worship was held in the first month of each year, so the winter solstice day to the ancestor's mausoleum for sacrifice, because of the importance of the beginning of one breath, the fundamental meaning of the reward.

古文：今冬至既行大报配天之礼，则陵事为轻。
现代文：现在冬至日已经举行大祭天神而以先祖配祭的礼仪，那么陵墓祭祀之事便轻了。
English: Now, on the winter solstice, the grand festival of Tenjin has been held, and the ritual of matching the offerings with the ancestors is in full swing, so the matter of the mausoleum sacrifice is lighter.

古文：况有事南郊，乃辍陪祀臣僚，远出山陵，恐于尊祖配天之诚未尽。
现代文：何况有南郊的祭祀，却停止臣僚陪祭，远到山陵祭祀，恐怕对尊崇祖宗配祭天神的真诚没有尽心。
English: What's more, there are sacrifices in the southern suburbs, but they have stopped accompanying the sacrifices with their ministers, and have gone as far as offering sacrifices in the mountains. I'm afraid they haven't been sincere about honoring the ancestors and offering sacrifices to the gods.

古文：可罢冬至上陵，而移中元于霜降，惟清明如旧。
现代文：可以罢除冬至日到祖宗陵墓祭祀，而改移中元日于霜降日，只有清明日的祭祀照旧进行。
English: It is possible to cancel the winter solstice day to the ancestral mausoleum sacrifice, and change the mid-January day to the frost date, only the Qingming day sacrifice will be carried out as before.

古文：盖清明礼行于春，所谓雨露既濡，君子履之，有怵惕之心者也。
现代文：因为淆明的祭礼举行于春季，这就是所说的雨露既已沾润，君子履行，有警惕畏惧之心。
English: Because the Wuzhiming Festival is held in the spring, this is the so-called rain and dew has been dipped, the gentleman performs, and there is vigilance and fear.

古文：霜降礼行于秋，所谓霜露既降，君子履之，有凄怆之心者也。
现代文：霜降的祭礼举行于秋季，这就是所说的霜露已降，君子履行，有凄恻悲怆之心。
English: The Frost Festival is held in autumn, which means that the frost dew has fallen, the gentleman has performed, and there is a sad and sad heart.

古文：二节既遣官上陵，则内殿之祭，诚不宜复。 
现代文：二节气既已派官到祖宗陵墓举行祭祀，那么内殿的祭祀，实在不应该重复。 
English: Since the second solar terms have already sent officials to the ancestral mausoleum to hold sacrifices, then the sacrifices of the inner hall should really not be repeated.

古文：遂著为令。
现代文：于是写成文字定为法令。
English: It was then passed into law.

古文：十五年，谕言曰： 庙重于陵，其礼严。
现代文：嘉靖十五年，训谕夏言说： 庙比陵重要，它的礼仪庄重。
English: In the 15th year of Jiajing, the preceptor Xia Yan said: The temple is more important than the mausoleum, and its etiquette is solemn.

古文：故庙中一帝一后，陵则二三后配葬。
现代文：所以庙中一皇帝一皇后，陵墓便是二三后配葬。
English: Therefore, one emperor and one empress in the temple, the mausoleum is buried two or three times.

古文：今别建奉慈殿，不若奉主于陵殿为宜。
现代文：现在另外建奉慈殿，不如供奉神位牌于陵殿为宜。
English: Now that the Hall of Mercy has been built separately, it would be better to place the tablet of devotion in the mausoleum.

古文：且梓宫配葬，而主乃别置，近于黜之，非亲之也。 
现代文：并且灵柩配葬，而神主牌便另外安置，接近于废黜，而不是亲近。 
English: Moreover, the coffin was buried together, and the main god was placed separately, close to the dethronement, but not close.

古文：乃迁孝肃、孝穆、孝惠三后神主于陵殿。
现代文：于是迁移孝肃、孝穆、孝惠三后的神位牌于陵殿。
English: As a result, the shrine plaques of the three emperors, Kosen, Konomu, and Kokei, were moved to the mausoleum.

古文：又谕言曰： 三后神主称皇太后、太皇太后者，乃子孙所奉尊称。
现代文：又训谕夏言说： 三后神位牌称皇太后、太皇太后，乃是子孙所尊奉的尊称。
English: He also instructed Xia Yan, saying, "The Three Empresses are called Empress Dowager and Grand Empress Dowager, which are honorific titles held in reverence by their descendants.

古文：今既迁陵殿，则名实不准。 
现代文：现在既已迁移陵殿，便名与实不相称。 
English: Now that the mausoleum has been moved, the name is no longer appropriate.

古文：言等议曰： 三后神主，礼不祔庙，义当从祧。
现代文：夏言等人议论说： 三后神位牌，按礼不拊祭于庙，按义应当从祧庙。
English: Natsugen and others argued: According to the rite, the three deities should not be enshrined in a temple, but should be enshrined in a temple.

古文：迁奉陵殿，深合典礼。
现代文：迁移供奉于陵殿，很符合古制古礼。
English: The relocation of the offering to the mausoleum is very much in line with ancient rites.

古文：其称皇太后、太皇太后者，乃子孙所上尊号。
现代文：称为皇太后、太皇太后，乃是子孙所奉上的尊号。
English: Known as the Empress Dowager and the Grand Empress Dowager, it is the honorific title given to the descendants.

古文：今已迁奉于陵，则当从夫妇之义，改题孝肃神主，不用睿字，孝穆、孝惠神主，俱不用纯字，则嫡庶有别，而尊亲并隆矣。 
现代文：现在已经迁移供奉于陵殿，便应当依从夫妇的礼义，改题名为孝肃神位牌，不用睿字，孝穆、孝惠神位牌，都不用纯字，那么嫡与庶有区别，而尊崇亲近都推重了。 
English: Now that it has been moved to be enshrined in the mausoleum, it should follow the etiquette of the couple and change the title to "Koshu Shrine Plaque" and not use the word "Rei." The "Kohmu" and "Kohui Shrine Plaques" do not use the word "Rei," so there is a difference between "Chaku" and "Shaku," and respect and closeness are more important.

古文：命如拟行。
现代文：命令按照这样拟定施行。
English: The order is to be implemented as drafted.

古文：又谕： 祭告长陵等七陵俱躬叩拜，恭让章皇后、景皇帝陵亦展拜一次，以慰追感之情。 
现代文：又训谕：祭告长陵等七陵都亲自叩拜，恭让章皇后、景皇帝陵墓也行跪拜礼一次，以慰藉追念的情意。
English: It was also ordered that all the seven mausoleums, including the Long Mausoleum, should be worshipped in person, and the mausoleums of Empress Gongzhang and Emperor Jing should also be worshipped on their knees once to comfort and remember.

古文：十七年，改陵殿曰祾恩殿，门曰祾恩门。
现代文：嘉靖十七年，改陵殿为棱恩殿，改门焉棱恩门。
English: In the 17th year of Jiajing, the mausoleum hall was changed to Ren En Hall, and the door was changed to Ren En Gate.

古文：又建成祖圣迹亭于平台山，率从官行祭礼。
现代文：又在平台山建立成祖圣迹亭，率领从官举行祭祀礼。
English: He also established the Chengzu Sacred Relic Pavilion on Platform Mountain and led the officials to hold a sacrificial ceremony.

古文：二十一年，工部尚书顾璘请以帝所上显陵圣制歌诗，制为乐章，享献陵庙。
现代文：嘉靖二十一年，工部尚书顾璘请求把皇帝所献显陵圣制歌诗，制成乐章，祭享献陵庙。
English: In the 21st year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Shang Shuxu Gu Jun of the Ministry of Works requested that the sacred poems dedicated by the emperor to reveal the tomb be made into music and offered to the mausoleum.

古文：礼部言： 天寿山诸陵，岁祀皆不用乐。 
现代文：礼部说： 天寿山各陵，每年一定时间的祭祀都不用音乐。 
English: The Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies said: All the tombs on Tianshou Mountain do not use music for a certain period of time each year.

古文：已而承天府守备太监傅霖乞增显陵岁暮之祭。
现代文：随后承天府守备太监傅霖请求增加显陵年终的祭祀。
English: Subsequently, Fu Lin, the eunuch guarding Chengtenfu, requested to increase the year-end sacrifices at Xianling.

古文：部议言： 诸陵皆无岁暮祀典。 
现代文：礼部讨论说： 各陵墓都没有年终的祭祀典礼。 
English: The ritual department discussed: Each mausoleum does not have a year-end ritual.

古文：诏并从部议。
现代文：下诏一并依从礼部的提议。
English: The following Imperial Rescript follows the proposal of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：隆庆二年，帝诣天寿山春祭。
现代文：隆庆二年，皇帝到天寿山举行春祭。
English: In the second year of the Longqing, the emperor held the Spring Festival in Tianshou Mountain.

古文：前一日，告世宗几筵及奉先、弘孝、神霄殿。
现代文：前一天，告祭世宗的灵座以及奉先、弘孝、神霄殿。
English: The day before, the Sect's shrine, as well as the halls of Bongsen, Hongxiao, and Shenxiao, were dedicated.

古文：驾至天寿山红门降舆，由左门入，升舆，驻跸感思殿。
现代文：皇帝车驾到天寿山红门，下乘舆，从左门进入，登上乘舆，停留在感思殿。
English: The emperor drove to the Tianshoushan Red Gate, got off at Myu, entered from the left gate, got on at Myu, and stayed at the Hall of Thoughts.

古文：越二日，质明行礼。
现代文：过了两天，天刚亮时举行祭祀礼。
English: Two days later, at first light, a ritual was held.

古文：帝青袍，乘板舆至长陵门外，东降舆，由殿左门入，至拜位，上香，四拜。
现代文：皇帝穿青袍，乘着人抬的板舆到长陵门外，在东面下板舆，从殿的左门进入，到达礼拜位置，上侠香，拜四拜。
English: The emperor, wearing a blue robe, rode a palanquin carried by a person to the outside of the Changling Gate, lowered the palanquin on the east side, entered from the left door of the hall, reached the worship position, put on the chivalrous incense, and worshiped for four days.

古文：至神御前献帛、献爵讫，复位。
现代文：到先朝帝王的肖像前面献上帛、献上爵，完毕之后，复返原位。
English: In front of the portraits of the emperors of the previous dynasty, they presented the imperial scepter and the title of nobility. After the ceremony, they returned to their original positions.

古文：亚献、终献，令执爵者代，复四拜。
现代文：行亚献礼，行终献礼，命令执爵的人代替，又拜四拜。
English: Perform the Asian offering, perform the final offering, order the steward to take his place, and bow four times.

古文：馀如常祭之仪。
现代文：其余如同常祭的礼仪。
English: The rest is like the ritual of a regular festival.

古文：随诣永陵行礼。
现代文：随后到永陵举行祭礼。
English: Afterwards, a festival was held in Yongling.

古文：是日遣官六员，俱青服，分祭六陵。
现代文：这一天派遣官员六人，都穿青色服装，分别祭祀六座陵墓。
English: On this day, six officials were dispatched, all wearing blue clothing, to separately offer sacrifices at six mausoleums.

古文：万历八年，谒陵礼如旧。
现代文：万历八年，拜谒陵墓的礼仪照旧。
English: After eight years, the etiquette of the Baigan Mausoleum remains the same.

古文：十一年，复谒陵。
现代文：万历十一年，又拜谒陵墓。
English: Eleven years have passed, and the mausoleum is once again venerated.

古文：礼部言： 宜遵世宗彝宪，酌分二日，以次展拜。 
现代文：礼部说： 应该遵循世宗的常法，斟酌分成两天，依次行跪拜礼。 
English: The ritual department said: It is necessary to follow the normal law of the sect, divide it into two days, and kneel and worship in turn.

古文：乃定长、永、昭三陵，上香，八拜，亲奠帛。
现代文：于是规定长、永、昭三陵，上香，拜八拜，亲自祭献帛。
English: Therefore, the three mausoleums of Chang, Yong and Zhao were prescribed, incense was offered, eight prayers were offered, and the urns were personally offered.

古文：初献，六陵二寝，上香，四拜。
现代文：行初献礼，六座陵墓二座寝殿，上供香，拜四拜。
English: The first-day offering, six mausoleums, two mausoleums, offering incense, and four prostrations.

古文：其奠帛三献，俱执事官代。
现代文：其它祭奠帛行三次进献礼，都是主管官代替。
English: For the other three times of the offering procession, the officials in charge took the lead.

古文：十四年，礼部言： 诸妃葬金山诸处者，嘉靖中俱配享各陵殿，罢本坟祭。
现代文：万历十四年，礼部说： 各帝妃埋葬在金山等处的，嘉靖年间都配享各陵殿，罢除本坟的祭祀。
English: In the 14th year of Wanli, the ritual department said: The empresses were buried in Jinshan and other places, and during the Jiajing period, they were all allocated to each mausoleum, and the sacrificial rites of this tomb were abolished.

古文：今世庙诸妃安厝西山者，宜从其例。
现代文：现在世庙众妃安葬在西山的，应该依从此例。
English: Now that the empresses of the world's temples are buried in the West Mountain, we should follow this example.

古文：至陵祭品物，九陵、恭让、恭仁之陵止于酒果，而越、靖诸王及诸王妃则又有牲果祝文，反从其厚者，盖以九陵帝后，岁暮已祫祭于庙，旬日内且复有孟春之享，故元旦陵殿止用酒果，非俭也；诸王诸妃则祫祭春祭皆不与，元旦一祭不宜从简，故用牲帛祝文，非丰也。
现代文：至于陵墓祭祀的物品，九陵、恭让、恭仁的陵墓只用酒醴果品，而越、靖诸王以及诸王妃则又有牺牲果品和祝祷文，反而用丰厚的祭品，因为九陵皇帝皇后，年终已经在太庙举行大合祭，十天之内将又有孟春的祭享。所以元旦陵殿祭祀祇用酒醴果品，并非俭啬；诸王诸妃则年终大合祭、春祭都不参与，元旦祭祀一次不应该从简，所以用牺牲、东帛和祝梼文，不是丰厚。
English: As for the objects of the mausoleum sacrifice, the tombs of Jiu Ling, Gongzhang and Gongren only used wine and fruits, while the Yue and Jing kings and queens also had sacrificial fruits and prayers. Instead, they used rich offerings, because the Emperor and Empress of Jiu Ling had already held the year-end festival in the Great Temple, and within ten days they would enjoy the Mengchun festival. Therefore, the New Year's Day mausoleum sacrifice only used wine and fruits, which was not frugal; the kings and queens did not participate in the year-end festival and spring festival. The New Year's Day sacrifice should not be simple, so

古文：特恭让、恭仁既不与祫享于庙中，又不设牲帛于陵殿，是则礼文之缺，宜增所未备。
现代文：只是恭让、恭仁既不参与在太庙中的大合祭，又不在陵殿设置牺牲、东帛，这便是礼文的阙失，应该增加未曾备办的祭品。
English: However, the fact that Gongzhan and Gongren did not participate in the Great Wreath-Laying Ceremony in the Great Temple, nor did they set up a sacrificial altar in the mausoleum, is a violation of the ritual, and the offerings that have not been prepared should be increased.

古文：而诸王诸妃祝文，尚仍安厝时所用，宜改叙岁时遣官之意，则情顺礼安。 
现代文：而诸王诸妃的祝祷文，还仍然是安葬时所用，应该改叙每年的一定时节派官祭祀的意思，那么便情顺礼安。 
English: But the prayers of kings and queens are still used at funerals, and should be reclassified as the meaning of a certain time of the year to send officials to offer sacrifices, then it's all right.

古文：报可。
现代文：回报同意。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：凡山陵规制，有宝城，长陵最大，径一百一丈八尺。
现代文：凡是山陵规矩制度，有陵墓四周的短垣，长陵最大，长一百零一丈八尺。
English: In the usual system of rules for tombs, there is a short wall around the tomb, and the longest tomb is the largest, with a length of one hundred and eight feet.

古文：次永陵，径八十一丈。
现代文：其次是永陵，长八十一丈。
English: Next is Yongling, which is 81 meters long.

古文：各陵深广丈尺有差。
现代文：各陵墓长宽的面积有差别。
English: The length and width of each mausoleum vary.

古文：正前为明楼，楼中立帝庙谥石碑，下为灵寝门。
现代文：正前方是陵墓前的明楼，楼中立有刻着皇帝庙号谧号的石碑，下面是灵寝门。
English: Directly in front is the Ming Lou in front of the mausoleum. In the middle of the building, there is a stone monument engraved with the emperor's temple number, and below is the Ling Ximen Gate.

古文：惟永陵中为券门。左右墙门各一楼。明楼前为石几筵，又前为祾恩殿、祾恩门。
现代文：只有永陵中间是拱门，左右墙门各一座楼陵前明楼前面是石制灵座，又前面是棱恩殿、棱恩门。
English: Only the middle of Yongling is an arch, and there is a door on each side of the wall. In front of the Ming Tomb, there is a stone shrine, and in front of it is the Ren'en Hall and Ren'en Gate.

古文：殿惟长陵重檐九间，左右配殿各十五间。
现代文：只有长陵殿两层屋檐的正殿九间，左右配殿各十五间。
English: Only the main hall of the Choryoden with two-story eaves has nine rooms, while the side halls have fifteen rooms each.

古文：永陵重檐七间，配殿各九间。
现代文：永陵殿的正殿两层屋檐七问，配殿各九间。
English: The two-story main hall of Yongling Hall has seven eaves and nine rooms in each side hall.

古文：诸陵俱殿五间，配殿五间。
现代文：其余各陵都是正殿五问，配殿五问。
English: The rest of the mausoleums ask five questions about the main hall and five questions about the side halls.

古文：门外神库或一或二，神厨宰牲亭，有圣迹碑亭。
现代文：门外储藏祭品的库房有一座或二座，有神厕宰牲亭，有圣迹碑亭。
English: Outside the gate, there are one or two storehouses for the storage of sacrificial offerings, a sacred toilet, a sacrificial pavilion, and a sacred monument pavilion.

古文：诸陵碑俱设门外，率无字。
现代文：各陵墓的碑都设在门外，大都没有字。
English: The monuments of each mausoleum are located outside the gate, and most of them are not inscribed.

古文：长陵迤南有总神道，有石桥，有石像人物十八对，擎天柱四，石望柱二。
现代文：长陵向南有总墓道，有石桥，有石像人物八对，有擎天柱四根，石望柱二根。
English: To the south of the Changling Mausoleum, there is a general cemetery road, a stone bridge, eight pairs of stone statues, four pillars, and two stone pillars.

古文：长陵有《神功圣德碑》，仁宗御撰，在神道正南。
现代文：长陵有《神功圣德碑》，由仁宗撰写，在神道正南面。
English: Changling Mausoleum has the "Shingon Sanctity Monument," written by Rinzong, just south of the Shinto shrine.

古文：南为红门，门外石牌坊一。
现代文：南面是红门，门外石牌坊一座。
English: To the south is the Red Gate, with a stone archway outside.

古文：门内有时陟殿，为车驾更衣之所。
现代文：门内有时陟殿，是皇帝更衣之处。
English: Inside the gate is sometimes the throne room, where the emperor changed clothes.

古文：永陵稍东有感思殿，为驻跸之所。
现代文：永陵稍微向东有感思殿，是皇帝停留暂住的地方。
English: A little to the east of Yongling is the Hall of Thoughts, where the emperor stayed for a while.

古文：殿东为神马厂。
现代文：殿的东面是神马厂。
English: To the east of the hall is the Shinnamafactory.

古文：忌辰
现代文：忌辰
English: The Day of the Dead

古文：洪武八年四月，仁祖忌日，太祖亲诣皇陵致祭。
现代文：洪武八年四月，是仁祖死的日子，即忌日。太祖亲自到皇陵祭祀。
English: In April of the eighth year of Hongwu, it was the day of the death of the benevolent ancestor, that is, the day of his death. The great-grandfather personally went to the imperial mausoleum to offer sacrifices.

古文：永乐元年，礼部尚书李至刚等奏定，高皇帝忌辰前二日，帝服浅淡色衣，御西角门视事。
现代文：永乐元年，礼部尚书李至刚等上奏确定，高皇帝忌日前二日，皇帝穿浅淡色衣服，驾临西角门处理政事。
English: In the first year of Yongle, the Ministry of Ceremonies Shangshu Li Zhigang et al. determined that two days before Emperor Gao's death, the emperor wore light-colored clothes and drove to the West Corner Gate to deal with political affairs.

古文：不鸣钟鼓，不行赏罚，不举音乐，禁屠宰。
现代文：不敲击钟鼓，不实行赏赐处罚，不奏音乐，禁止屠宰牲口。
English: Do not strike the bell and drum, do not implement rewards and punishments, do not play music, and prohibit the slaughter of livestock.

古文：百官浅淡色衣、黑角带朝参。
现代文：百官穿浅淡色衣服，饰黑角带朝拜参见。
English: Officials wear light-coloured clothes, adorned with a black sash, and pay homage to the emperor.

古文：至日，亲祀于奉先殿，仍率百官诣孝陵致祭。
现代文：到逭一天，皇帝亲自在奉先殿祭祀，仍然率领百官到孝陵祭祀。
English: On the following day, the emperor himself led hundreds of officials to offer sacrifices at the Imperial mausoleum.

古文：高皇后忌辰如之。
现代文：高皇后忌日如同这样办理。
English: The day of the death of Empress Gao was handled in the same way.

古文：宣德四年令，凡遇忌辰，通政司、礼科、兵马司勿引囚奏事。
现代文：宣德四年命令，凡是遇到皇帝、皇后忌日，通政司、礼科、兵马司不准审问囚犯奏事。
English: In the fourth year of the Xuande Emperor, it was ordered that whenever an emperor or empress died, the departments of communication, etiquette, and the army and navy were not allowed to interrogate the prisoners.

古文：五年，敕百官朝参辍奏事仪。
现代文：宣德五年，敕令百官在皇帝、皇后忌日朝见参拜停止奏事仪式。
English: In the fifth year of Xuande's reign, the emperor ordered hundreds of officials to visit and pay homage to the emperor and empress on the morning of their death to stop the memorial ceremony.

古文：英宗即位，召礼臣及翰林院议忌辰礼。
现代文：英宗即位，召见礼官和翰林院讨论皇帝、皇后忌日用什么礼仪。
English: When Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne, he summoned the etiquette officials and the Hanlin Academy to discuss what etiquette should be used on the day of the Emperor and Empress's death.

古文：大学士杨士奇、杨荣，学士杨溥议： 每岁高庙帝后、文庙帝后、仁宗忌辰，服浅淡色服，不鸣钟鼓，于奉天门视事。
现代文：大学士杨士奇、杨荣，学士杨溥提议： 每年高庙皇帝和皇后、文庙皇帝和皇后以及仁宗的忌日，穿浅淡色服装，不敲击钟鼓，在奉天门处理政事。
English: College students Yang Shichi, Yang Rong, and bachelor Yang Hui proposed: Every year, on the day of the death of the Emperor and Empress of Gaomiao, the Emperor and Empress of Wenmiao, and the Emperor and Empress of Renzong, wear light-colored clothing, do not strike the bell and drum, and handle political affairs at the Gate of Heaven.

古文：宣宗忌辰，小祥之日，于西角门视事。 
现代文：宣宗忌日，一周年行小祥祭的这天，在西角门处理政事。 
English: On the day of the death of Emperor Xuan Zong, the day of the first anniversary of the Xiao Xiang Festival, political affairs were handled at the West Corner Gate.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从其议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：弘治十四年令，凡遇忌辰，朝参官不得服纻丝纱罗衣。
现代文：弘治十四年命令，凡是遇到皇帝、皇后忌日，朝拜参见的官吏不能穿纡丝纱罗衣。
English: In the 14th year of the Hongzhi era, it was ordered that officials who met the emperor and empress on the day of their death and attended the morning worship could not wear silk sarongs.

古文：景皇帝、恭让皇后忌辰，遇节令，服青丝花样。
现代文：景皇帝、恭让皇后忌日，遇到节气，穿青丝花样衣。
English: On the day of the death of Emperor Jing and Empress Gongzhan, when the solar terms occurred, they wore blue silk patterned clothes.

古文：宣宗忌辰，遇祭祀，服红。
现代文：宣宗忌日，遇到祭祀，穿红衣。
English: On the day of the death of Emperor Xuanzong, if there is a religious service, wear red.

古文：十六年八月，吏部尚书马文升言： 宣德间，仁宗忌辰，诸司悉免奏事。
现代文：弘治十六年八月，吏部尚书马文升说： 宣德年间，仁宗忌日，各司全部免去奏事。
English: In August of the 16th year of the Hongzhi era, Shang Shuma Wensheng of the cadre department said: During the Xuande era, on the day of the death of Ninsong, all departments were exempted from reporting.

古文：自太祖至仁宗生忌，俱辍朝。
现代文：从太祖到仁宗的生日和忌日，都停止朝拜。
English: From the time of Taizu to the day of Rinzong's birth and death, worship stopped.

古文：其后不知何时，仁宗忌辰，依前奏事。
现代文：此后不知什么时候，仁宗忌日，依照先前一样奏事。
English: After that, I don't know when, the day of Rinzong's death, the same thing happened as before.

古文：惟太祖至宪宗忌辰，百官浅淡色服、黑角带。
现代文：只有太祖至宪宗忌日，百官穿浅淡色服饰，饰黑角带。
English: Only on the anniversary of the death of the great-grandfather, Emperor Jianzong, do officials wear light-colored clothing with a black sash.

古文：朝廷亦出视朝，鸣钟鼓，奏事。
现代文：皇帝也出来处理朝事，敲击钟鼓，奏事。
English: The emperor also came out to deal with the morning business, beat the bell and drum, and report the matter.

古文：臣思自仁至宪，世有远近，服有隆杀。
现代文：我想，从仁宗到宪宗，世代有远近，服丧有隆重碱省之分。
English: I think that from the Rinzong to the Jianzong, the generations are far and near, and there is a grand ceremony for the funeral.

古文：请自仁宗忌辰、英宗生忌日，视朝，鸣钟鼓。
现代文：请求从仁宗忌日、英宗生日忌日，处理朝事，敲击钟鼓。
English: Request the day of the death of Rinzong, the day of the death of Yingzong's birthday, deal with morning matters, and beat the bell and drum.

古文：若遇宪宗及孝穆皇太后忌日，不视朝，著浅淡服，进素膳，不预他事。
现代文：如果遇上宪宗以及孝穆皇太后忌日，不处理朝事，穿浅淡包服饰，吃素食，不做别的事。
English: If you encounter the day of the death of Emperor Kenzong and Empress Dowager Xiaomu, do not deal with court affairs, wear light clothing, eat vegetarian food, and do not do anything else.

古文：或遵宣宗时例，自太祖至宪宗生忌，俱辍朝一日。
现代文：或遵循宣宗时的规定，从太祖到宪宗生日忌日，都停止朝拜一天。
English: or follow the regulations at the time of the proclamation of the sect, and stop worshipping for one day from the birthday of the founder to the day of the death of the founder.

古文：宪宗、孝穆忌日，如臣所拟。 
现代文：宪宗、孝穆忌日，按照臣所拟定的办理。 
English: On the day of the death of Kenzong and Xiaomu, it will be handled in accordance with the plan drawn up by the minister.

古文：帝下礼部议。
现代文：皇帝下发礼部讨论。
English: The emperor sent the ceremonial department to discuss.

古文：部臣言： 经传所载，忌日为亲死之日。
现代文：礼部大臣说： 经傅所记载，忌日是亲人死的日子。
English: The Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies said: According to the records of Fu, the day of death is the day of the death of a relative.

古文：则死日为忌，非谓生辰也。
现代文：那么死日为忌，并不是说出生的日子。
English: It is the day of death that is to be feared, not the day of birth.

古文：其曰忌日不用，不以此日为他事也。
现代文：上面说忌日不用，是不在这一天做别的事。
English: It says that there is no need to do anything else on the day of death.

古文：曰忌日不乐，是不可举吉事也，此日当专意哀思父母，余事皆不举。
现代文：说忌日不奏乐，是说不能举行吉事。这一天应当专心专意哀悼思念父母，其余的事都不做。
English: To say that no music is played on the day of death is to say that no auspicious events can be held. On this day, you should concentrate on mourning and missing your parents, and do nothing else.

古文：但先朝事例，迄今见行，未敢更易。 
现代文：但是前朝事例，直到现在还在施行，不敢改变。 
English: However, the precedent of the previous day, which is still in effect, has not dared to change.

古文：帝乃酌定以浅淡服色视事。
现代文：皇帝于是酌情规定穿浅淡色服饰处理政事。
English: The emperor then made it a discretionary rule to wear light-colored clothing to deal with political affairs.

古文：嘉靖七年令，忌辰只祭本位。
现代文：嘉靖七年命令，皇帝、皇后忌日，只祭祀本位。
English: In the seventh year of the Jiajing Emperor's reign, the emperor and empress's death anniversary was decreed to be a day of worship only.

古文：十八年令，高庙帝后忌辰祭于景神殿，列圣帝后忌辰祭于永孝殿。
现代文：嘉靖十八年命令，高庙皇帝、皇后忌日在景神殿祭祀，历代皇帝、皇后忌日在永孝殿祭祀。
English: In the 18th year of the Jiajing Emperor's reign, it was ordered that the emperor and empress of Gaomiao should be enshrined in the Jing Temple on the day of their death, and the emperors and empresses of all ages should be enshrined in the Yongxiao Hall on the day of their death.

古文：二十四年令，仍祭于奉先殿。
现代文：嘉靖二十四年命令，仍然在奉先殿祭祀。
English: In the 24th year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, the temple is still being worshipped.

古文：乘舆受蕃国王讣奏仪
现代文：乘舆受蕃国王讣奏仪
English: by the king's harp.

古文：凡蕃国王薨，使者讣奏至，于西华门内壬地设御幄，皇帝素服乘舆诣幄。
现代文：凡是番国王死。使者报丧的奏疏到达，在西华门内北方设皇帝用的帏幄。皇帝穿素服乘舆到帏幄。
English: When a king dies, an envoy arrives with the obituary notice, and a coffin for the emperor is set up in the northern part of the West China Gate. The emperor wears plain clothes and rides a horse to the coffin.

古文：太常卿奏： 某国世子遣陪臣某官某，奏某国王臣某薨。 
现代文：太常卿上奏： 某国世子派遣番国大臣某官某人，上奏某国王臣某死。 
English: Taizhongqing played up: the heir of a certain country dispatched the minister of a certain country, the official of a certain country, and the king of a certain country died.

古文：承制官至使者前宣制曰： 皇帝致问尔某国王某，得何疾而逝。 
现代文：承制官到使者面前宣读制命说： 皇帝询问你某国王某，得什磨病而死？ 
English: The coroner came to the envoy and read out the coroner's order, saying: "The emperor asks you about a certain king, how did he die of a disease?

古文：使者答故。
现代文：使者回答死亡的原因。
English: The messenger answered the cause of death.

古文：其仪大略如临王公大臣丧仪，但不举哀。
现代文：它的礼仪大致如同吊王公大臣丧事的礼仪，只是不号哭致哀。
English: Its etiquette is roughly the same as the etiquette for the funeral of a crown prince, except that there is no wailing.

古文：凡塞外都督等官讣至，永乐间遣官赍香钞谕祭。
现代文：凡是塞外都督等官报丧到京，永乐年间派遣官员带着香和银钞下旨祭奠。
English: All foreign governors and other officials reported their mourning to Beijing, and during the Yongle era, officials were dispatched with incense and silver banknotes to pay their respects.

古文：后定例，因其奏请，给与表里祭文，令携归自祭。
现代文：后来制定规程，因其上奏请求，给与表彰威仪文辞、德行忠信的祭文，命令带回自己祭奠。
English: Later, the regulations were formulated, and because of his request to play, he was given the commendation of the speech of the ceremony, the ritual of virtue and faithfulness, and ordered to bring back his own memorial.

古文：来京病故者，遣官谕祭或赐棺赐葬。
现代文：来京城病死的，派遣官员下旨祭奠或者赐予棺材赐葬。
English: If you die of illness in Beijing, officials will be dispatched to pay tribute or give you a coffin for burial.

古文：后定年终类奏，遣官祭之。
现代文：后来规定年终类总上奏，派遣官员祭奠。
English: Later, it was stipulated that the year-end general report would be made and officials would be dispatched to pay tribute.

古文：若在边殁于战阵者，不拘此例。
现代文：如果在边防战阵中战死，不限于此例。
English: If he was killed in action on the frontier, it is not limited to this case.

古文：凡外国使臣病故者，令所在官司赐棺及祭，或欲归葬者听。
现代文：凡是外国使臣病死的，命令所在主管官吏赐给棺材并且祭奠，有想送回安葬的准许。
English: Whenever a foreign envoy dies of illness, the competent officials in charge of the place are ordered to give the coffin and pay tribute, and there is permission to send it back for burial.

古文：乘舆为王公大臣举哀仪
现代文：乘舆为王公大臣举哀仪
English: A memorial service was held in my honor for Minister Wang

古文：洪武二年，开平王常遇春卒于军。
现代文：洪武二年，开平王常遇春死于军中。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, King Kaiping died in the army.

古文：讣至，礼官请如宋太宗为赵普举哀故事。
现代文：报丧到京，礼官请求按照宋太袒为趟普号哭哀悼的旧例。
English: When the mourning was reported to Beijing, the etiquette official requested that the old custom of weeping and mourning for Song Tae-hyun be followed.

古文：遂定制，凡王公薨，讣报太常司，示百官，于西华门内壬地设御幄，陈御座，置素褥。
现代文：于是规定制度，凡是王公死，丧耗报太常司，晓示百官，在西华门内北面的地方设置皇帝用的帏幄，陈设皇帝座位，放置素色褥。
English: As a result, the system was established that whenever the king died, the loss would be reported to the Grand Steward, and the officials would be notified. In the area north of the West China Gate, the emperor's throne would be set up, the emperor's seat would be set up, and the plain-colored gong would be placed.

古文：设讣者位于前，设百官陪哭位东西向，奉慰位于讣者位北，北向。
现代文：设报丧人的位置于前面，东西向设百官陪哭位，慰问位在报丧者位置的北面，面向北。
English: The location of the mourner is set in the front, the crying place is set in the east-west direction, and the condolence place is set in the north of the mourner's position, facing north.

古文：赞礼二人，位于讣者位之北，引讣者二人，位于赞礼之南，引百官四人，位于陪位之北，皆东西向。
现代文：赞唱礼仪的二人，位置在报丧者位置的北面，导引报丧者二人，位置在赞唱礼仪的人的南面，导引百官的四人，位置在陪哭的北面，都东西向。
English: The two chanters of the etiquette are located to the north of the mourners, the two guides of the mourners are located to the south of the chanters of the etiquette, and the four guides of the eunuchs are located to the north of the mourners, all facing east and west.

古文：其日，备仪仗于奉天门迎驾。
现代文：那一天，在奉天门准备仪仗迎驾。
English: On that day, a ceremonial parade was held in front of the Gate of Heaven.

古文：皇帝素服乘舆诣幄，乐陈于幄之南，不作。
现代文：皇帝穿素服乘舆到帏幄，乐陈列在帏幄的南面，不奏乐。
English: The emperor wore plain clothes and rode a mule to the gong. Music was displayed on the south side of the gong, but no music was played.

古文：太常卿奉： 某官来讣，某年月日，臣某官以某疾薨，请举哀。 
现代文：太常卿上奏： 某官来报丧，某年月日，臣某官因某疾病死，请号哭哀悼。 
English: Tai Changqing intoned: A certain official came to report the death, a certain date, a certain official died due to a certain disease, please cry and mourn.

古文：皇帝哭，百官皆哭。
现代文：皇帝哭，百官都哭。
English: When the emperor cries, all the officials cry.

古文：太常卿奏止哭，百官奉慰讫，分班立。
现代文：太常卿上奏停止哭，百官报名拜慰完毕，分班站立。
English: Mr. Tai Changqing stopped crying at the beginning of the recital. After the hundreds of officials had signed up, they stood up in shifts.

古文：讣者四拜退，太常卿奏礼毕。
现代文：报丧的人拜四拜退下，太常卿上奏说礼仪结东。
English: The mourners bowed and retreated, and the Grand Master delivered the etiquette speech.

古文：乘舆还宫，百官出。
现代文：皇帝返回宫中，百官出幄。
English: The emperor returned to the palace, and hundreds of officials came out.

古文：东宫为王公举哀仪同，但设幄于东宫西门外，陪哭者皆东宫属。
现代文：东宫太子为王公号哭哀悼的礼仪相同，祇是设帏幄于柬宫西门外，陪哭的人都是东官的属官。
English: It is the same etiquette for the Crown Prince of the East Palace to weep and mourn for Wang Gong, except that it is set up outside the west gate of the Cambodian Palace, and the people who accompany the weeping are subordinate officials of the East official.

古文：乘舆临王公大臣丧仪
现代文：乘舆临王公大臣丧仪
English: On the occasion of the death of His Majesty the King

古文：凡王公大臣讣奏，太史监择皇帝临丧日期。
现代文：凡是王公大臣报丧奏闻，太史监选择皇帝亲临丧礼的日期。
English: Whenever the prince's minister reported the news of the funeral, the imperial historian selected the date for the emperor to attend the funeral in person.

古文：拱卫司设大次于丧家大门外，设御座于正厅中。
现代文：拱卫司设大篷帐在死丧人家的大门外，设置皇帝座位在正厅中。
English: Gong Weishi set up a large tent outside the gate of the deceased's house, and set up the emperor's seat in the main hall.

古文：有司设百官次于大次之左右。
现代文：主管官吏设百官的篷帐在大篷帐的左右。
English: And the officers that were in charge of the work pitched their tents round about the tabernacle.

古文：侍仪司设百官陪立位于厅前左右，引礼四人位于百官之北，东西向。
现代文：侍仪司设百官的陪立位置在厅前的左右，导引礼仪的四人，位置在百官的北面，东西向。
English: The Office of the Master of Ceremonies set up the accompanying positions of the eunuchs on the left and right in front of the hall, and four people to guide the etiquette, located on the north side of the eunuchs, east to west.

古文：设丧主以下拜位于厅前，主妇以下哭位于殡北幔中。
现代文：设丧事主持人以下的拜位于厅的前面，主妇以下的哭位在灵柩北面的帏幔中。
English: The funeral director's or lower place of worship is in the front of the hall, and the housewife's or lower place of weeping is in the coffin on the north side of the coffin.

古文：其日，銮驾至大次，降辂，升舆，入易素服。
现代文：这一天，皇帝銮驾到大篷帐，从辖车上下来，登上乘舆，进入大篷帐换素服。
English: On this day, the emperor drove to the tent, got off the carriage, boarded the carriage, and entered the tent to change into plain clothes.

古文：百官皆易服，先入就厅前，分班侍立。
现代文：百官都换服，先进入到厅前，分班列陪侍站立。
English: All the officials changed their clothes, entered the hall first, and stood in shifts to accompany the attendants.

古文：御舆出次。
现代文：垒帝的乘舆出大篷帐。
English: The Emperor's carriage pulls out a large tent.

古文：丧主以下免绖去杖，衰服，出迎于大门外。
现代文：丧主以下除去缠于头、腰的麻带，去掉丧杖，服衰服，出来在大门外迎候。
English: After the death of the deceased, remove the linen band wrapped around the head and waist, remove the funeral cane, put on mourning clothes, and come out to greet the mourners outside the gate.

古文：望见乘舆，止哭，再拜，入于门内之西。
现代文：远远看见皇帝的乘舆，停止哭泣，拜两拜，进入门内处于西面。
English: Far away, I saw the emperor's carriage, stopped crying, bowed twice, and entered the gate in the west.

古文：乘舆入门，将军四人前导，四人后从。
现代文：乘舆入门，将军四人在前面引导，四人在后面跟从。
English: At the entrance, the four generals led the way in front, and the four others followed behind.

古文：入至正厅，降舆，升诣灵座前，百官班于后。
现代文：进入到正厅。皇帝从乘舆上下来，上到灵座前面，百官列班在后面。
English: Enter the main hall. The emperor descends from the chariot and goes up to the front of the sepulchre, while the eunuchs file in behind.

古文：皇帝哭，百官皆哭。
现代文：皇帝哭，百官都哭。
English: When the emperor cries, all the officials cry.

古文：太常卿奏止哭，三上香，三祭酒。
现代文：太常卿上奏停止哭，上三遍香，祭三巡酒。
English: Lord Taizang stopped crying at the beginning of the performance, incense was offered three times, and wine was offered three times.

古文：出至正厅御座，主丧以下诣厅下拜位，再拜。
现代文：出来到正厅的御座，丧主以下的人到厅下的拜位，拜两拜。
English: Come out to the throne in the main hall, and those who are below the mourners go to the place of worship under the hall, and worship twice.

古文：承制官诣丧主前云 有制 。
现代文：承制官到丧主前面说 有制命 。
English: The undertaker came to the front of the mourners and said, "We have an order."

古文：丧主以下皆跪。
现代文：丧主以下的人都跪下。
English: Everyone below the mourners kneel down.

古文：宣制讫，皆再拜，退立于厅西。
现代文：宣读皇帝制命完毕，都拜两拜，退下立在厅的西面。
English: After the emperor's order was read out, everyone bowed twice and stood on the west side of the hall.

古文：太常卿奏礼毕，皇帝升舆，出就大次，易服。
现代文：太常卿上奏说礼仪结东，皇帝登上乘舆，出来到大篷帐中，改换服装。
English: Emperor Taizong gave a speech on etiquette and etiquette, and the emperor boarded the carriage, came out to the tent, and changed his clothes.

古文：御舆出，丧主以下诣前再拜退。
现代文：皇帝的乘舆出大篷帐，丧主以下的人到前面拜两拜退下。
English: The emperor's carriage rolled out of the large tent, and the mourners below bowed to the front and retreated.

古文：皇帝降舆升辂，丧主杖哭而入。
现代文：皇帝从乘舆上下来登上辖车，丧主人扶着杖哭着进入。
English: The emperor climbed down from the chariot and boarded the carriage. The bereaved entered holding his cane and weeping.

古文：诸仪卫赞唱，大略如常。
现代文：众仪卫赞唱，大致如常仪。
English: The crowd sings the praises of the guards, roughly as usual.

古文：其公、侯卒葬辍朝礼，洪武二十三年定。
现代文：那些公、侯死、葬停止上朝的礼仪，洪武二十三年制定。
English: Those etiquettes of court, death, burial and ascension were established in the 23rd year of Hongwu.

古文：凡公、侯卒于家者，闻丧辍朝三日。
现代文：凡是公、侯死在家中的，听到丧耗停止上朝三天。
English: When a husband or father-in-law dies at home, the wailing stops for three days in the morning.

古文：下葬，一日。
现代文：下葬，停止上朝一天。
English: Buried, stopped for a day in the morning.

古文：卒于外者，闻丧，一日。
现代文：死在外地的，听到丧耗，停止上朝一天。
English: To die in the field, to hear of loss, to cease to rise in the morning.

古文：柩至京，三日。
现代文：灵柩到京城，停止上朝三天。
English: The coffin arrived in the capital and was left there for three days.

古文：下葬，仍一日。
现代文：下葬，仍停止上朝一天。
English: Burial, still stopped in the morning for a day.

古文：凡辍朝之日，不鸣钟鼓，各官浅淡色衣朝参。
现代文：凡是停止上朝的日子，不敲钟鼓，各官穿浅淡色衣服朝见参拜。
English: On days when the rising of the sun has been suspended, no bells or drums are rung, and all officials wear light-colored clothes when they visit the shrine.

古文：初制，都督至都指挥卒，辍朝二日。
现代文：最初制度，从都督到都指挥死，停止上朝两天。
English: Initially, the system, from the governor to the death of the commander, stopped for two days.

古文：永乐后更定，惟公、侯、驸马、伯及一品官，辍朝一日。
现代文：永乐以后重新制定，只有公、侯、驸马、伯以及一品官去世，停止上朝一天。
English: After Yongle, it was re-enacted, and only the death of a prince, marquess, prince's equerry, great-uncle, and first-ranked official stopped the reign of the emperor for one day.

古文：中宫为父祖丧仪
现代文：中宫为父祖丧仪
English: The Imperial Family attends the funeral of an ancestor

古文：凡中宫父母薨，讣报太常寺，转报内使监。
现代文：凡是中宫皇后的父母死，丧事报太常寺，转报内使监。
English: When the parents of the Empress Dowager died, the funeral was reported to the Taizho-ji Temple, which in turn reported it to the Naishi Jikken.

古文：前期，设荐于别殿东壁下，为皇后举哀位及内命妇以下哭位。
现代文：此前，在别殿的东壁下设垫褥，作为皇后号哭哀悼的位置以及内受封号妇女以下哭奠的位置。
English: Previously, a cushion was set up under the east wall of the hall, as a place for the empress to cry and mourn, as well as a place for the women to cry and pay tribute.

古文：皇后出诣别殿，内使监令奏： 考某官以某月某日薨 ，母则云 妣某夫人 ，祖考、妣同。
现代文：皇后出来到别殿，内使监令上奏说， 考某官在某月某日死 ，如果是母亲死就说 妣某夫人 ，祖父、祖母死与此同。
English: The empress came out to the hall of residence, and the imperial envoy made a report saying that a certain official died in a certain month on a certain day, and if it was the death of the mother, it was said that it was the death of a certain lady, and the death of the grandfather and grandmother was the same.

古文：皇后哭，内命妇以下皆哭尽哀。
现代文：皇后哭，内受封号妇女以下都号哭，竭尽哀思。
English: The empress wept, and all the women below her wept and mourned with all their might.

古文：皇后问故，又哭尽哀。
现代文：皇后讯问死因，又号哭竭尽哀思。
English: The empress inquired about the cause of death and wept bitterly.

古文：乃素服，内命妇皆素服，止哭，还宫。
现代文：于是穿素服，内受封号妇女都穿素服，停止号哭，返回宫中。
English: So they put on plain clothes, and all the women who had been sealed inside put on plain clothes, stopped crying, and returned to the palace.

古文：内使监令奏闻。
现代文：内使监令奏报皇帝。
English: The envoy was ordered to report to the emperor.

古文：得旨： 皇后奔丧。 
现代文：得到圣旨： 皇后赶回吊丧。 
English: Received the sacred will: The empress hurried back to the funeral.

古文：丧家设荐席于丧寝之东，从临内命妇哭位于其下，主丧以下哭位于丧寝之西，主妇以下哭位于丧寝之北幔下。
现代文：遭丧之家在停丧的屋子东面设垫席，在下面设随从哭临的内受封号妇女哭奠的位置，主丧人以下的哭位在停丧屋子的西面，主妇以下的哭位在停丧屋子的北面帏幔下。
English: The bereaved family set up a cushion on the east side of the house where the mourning was stopped, and set up a place for the women to weep and pay tribute below the weeping woman. The crying place below the main mourner was on the west side of the house where the mourning was stopped, and the crying place below the housewife was on the north side of the house where the mourning was stopped.

古文：至日，内使监进垩车，备仪仗导引。
现代文：到这一天，内使监进呈涂有白色的服丧车，准备仪仗导引。
English: On this day, the internal affairs inspector presented a white-painted funeral car and prepared a ceremonial guide.

古文：皇后素服出宫，升舆，三面白布行帷。至阁外，降舆，升垩车。
现代文：皇后穿着素服出官，登上乘舆，三面用白布作帷，到阁外，下乘舆，登上涂有白色的服丧车。
English: The empress came out of the palace in her plain clothes, boarded the funeral carriage, which was covered with white cloth on three sides, went outside the palace, boarded the funeral carriage, which was covered with white, and then boarded the funeral carriage.

古文：至丧家大门内，降车哭入，仍以行帷围护。
现代文：到遭丧之家的大门内，从车上下来哭着进入，仍然用行帷围绕保护。
English: Inside the gates of the house of the dead, she got out of the car and wept as she entered, still using the curtains for protection.

古文：从临者皆哭入。
现代文：随从哭临的人都哭着进入。
English: The mourners entered weeping.

古文：丧主以下，降诣西阶下立哭。
现代文：丧主以下，下到西阶下面站着号哭。
English: After the funeral, they went down to the west steps and stood there crying.

古文：皇后升自东阶，进至尸东，凭尸哭。从临者皆哭。
现代文：皇后从东阶登上，进入来到停尸骸的东面，靠着尸骸号哭，跟从吊丧的人都哭。
English: The empress ascended from the east steps, entered and came to the east side of the mortuary, leaning against the corpse and crying, and the mourners were crying.

古文：丧主升自西阶，俱哭于尸西。
现代文：丧主从西阶登上，都在尸骸的西面号哭。
English: The bereaved ascended from the west steps, all crying loudly at the west face of the corpse.

古文：皇后至哭位，内使监令跪请止哭。
现代文：皇后到奖奠位置，内使监令跪着请求停止号哭。
English: When the empress arrived at the place of the award ceremony, the imperial envoy ordered her to kneel down and beg her to stop crying.

古文：应奉慰者诣皇后前，奉慰如常礼。
现代文：应该进名拜慰的到皇后面前，按通常礼仪进名拜慰。
English: Those who are to be presented to the Queen are presented to her according to the usual etiquette.

古文：如皇后候成服，则从临命妇应还者先还。
现代文：如皇后要等候穿好丧服，随从哭临的受封号妇女中应该返回的便先返回。
English: If the queen has to wait for the mourning clothes to be put on, the women who should return from the wailing procession will return first.

古文：如本日未即奔丧，则是晡复哭于别殿。
现代文：如果当天没有立即赶回吊丧，便在这天的申时又在别殿号哭。
English: If the mourners do not come back immediately on the day of the funeral, they will cry again in the hall of farewell on the day of the funeral.

古文：尚服制皇后齐衰及从临命妇孝服，俟丧家成服日进之。
现代文：尚服官裁制皇后齐衰和跟从吊丧的受封号妇女的孝服，等到遭丧事之家服丧服的日子进呈。
English: The filial piety of women who still wear the official dress of the Empress Qiwen and the women who follow the funeral, until the day of the funeral, will be presented.

古文：诣灵前再拜，上香，复位，再拜。
现代文：到灵座前拜两拜，上香，复返原位，拜两拜。
English: Two prostrations before going to the prayer seat, incense, returning to the original position, two prostrations.

古文：如为诸王外戚举哀，仍于别殿南向，不设荐位。
现代文：如果为诸王外戚号哭哀悼，仍然在别殿面向南，不设垫褥。
English: If you cry and mourn for the maternal relatives of the kings, you will still face south in the other hall, without a cushion.

古文：遣使临吊仪
现代文：遣使临吊仪
English: Send in the Hangman

古文：太常司奉旨遣吊。
现代文：太常司奉圣旨派遣使者吊丧。
English: At the behest of His Holiness, the Grand Master sent an envoy to pay his respects.

古文：前期，设宣制位于丧家正厅之北，南向；丧主受吊位于南，北向；妇人立哭位于殡北幕下。
现代文：此前，在遭丧之家的正厅北面设置宣读制命的位置，面向南；丧主接受吊丧的位置在南面，面向北；妇人站着号哭的位置在灵柩北面的帷幕下面。
English: Previously, in the north of the main hall of the bereaved family, the position of the reading of the death warrant was set, facing south; the position of the mourner receiving the funeral was in the south, facing north; the position of the woman standing and crying was under the curtain on the north side of the coffin.

古文：其日，使者至。
现代文：这一天，使者到达。
English: On this day, the messenger arrived.

古文：丧主去杖，免绖衰服，止哭，出迎于中门外。复先入，就厅前拜位。
现代文：丧主去掉丧杖，除去麻带，穿衰服，停止号哭，出来在中门外迎候，又先进入，到厅前的拜祭位。
English: The mourners remove the crosier, remove the bandage, put on mourning clothes, stop crying, come out to meet outside the middle door, and enter first, to the altar in front of the hall.

古文：内外止哭，使者入，就位称有制。
现代文：内外停止号哭，使者进入，到宣制位称有皇帝制命。
English: At home and abroad to stop crying, the envoy entered, to the position of the proclamation of the emperor's command.

古文：丧主以下再拜跪。
现代文：丧主以下拜两拜跪下。
English: Kneel down two times after the funeral.

古文：宣制曰； 皇帝闻某官薨，遣臣某吊。 
现代文：宣读制命说： 皇帝听到某官死，派遣臣某人吊丧。 
English: The imperial edict read: "When the emperor heard of the death of a certain official, he sent a vassal to pay his respects.

古文：丧主以下复再拜。
现代文：丧主以下又拜雨拜。
English: The mourners bowed to the rain.

古文：礼毕，内外皆哭。
现代文：吊丧礼结东，内外都号哭。
English: The funeral rites ended, and both inside and outside were crying.

古文：使者出，丧主至中门外，拜送，杖哭而入。
现代文：使者出来，丧主到中门外，拜送，扶丧杖号哭进入。
English: The messenger comes out, the mourners go outside the middle gate, pay their respects, and the mourners enter crying.

古文：宫使则称有令。
现代文：如是宫使便称有令。
English: If it's an envoy from the Imperial Court, it's called an order.

古文：至遣使赙赠及致奠，其仪节亦相仿云。
现代文：至于派遣使者赠送助葬物以及致上祭奠，它的仪式也相仿。
English: As for sending emissaries to present funerary objects and pay tribute, the ceremony is similar.

古文：赙赠之典，一品米六十石，麻布六十匹。
现代文：赠送助葬物的典制，一品官米六十石，麻布六十匹。
English: The system of presenting funerary goods, a dish of rice of 60 koku, and linen of 60 horses.

古文：二品以五，三品、四品以四，五品、六品以三，公侯则以百。
现代文：二品官米五十石，麻布五十匹，三品、四品官米四十石，麻布四十匹，五品、六品官米三十石，麻布三十匹，公侯则米一百石，麻布一百匹。
English: Second-grade official rice was 50 koku, and linen was 50 koku; third-grade and fourth-grade official rice was 40 koku, and linen was 40 koku; fifth-grade and sixth-grade official rice was 30 koku, and linen was 30 koku; princely rice was 100 koku, and linen was 100 koku.

古文：永乐后定制，公、侯、驸马、伯皆取上裁。
现代文：永乐以后规定制度，公、侯、驸马、伯都取决于皇上裁定。
English: After Yongle, the system was established, and the title of prince, lord, knight, and knight depended on the emperor's decision.

古文：凡阵亡者全支，边远守御出征及出海运粮病故半支。
现代文：凡是阵亡的全部支付，边远地区守御出征以及出海运粮病死的支付一半。
English: Full payment for all who died in battle, half payment for those who died defending outlying areas, and for those who went to sea to transport grain or died of disease.

古文：其遣百官会王公大臣丧仪。前期，有司于丧家设位次。
现代文：派遣百官会聚为王公大臣吊丧的仪式，在此之前，主管官吏在遭丧之家设立位次。
English: Before sending hundreds of officials to gather for the funeral ceremony of Wang Gongjin, the officials in charge set up a rank in the house of the deceased.

古文：其日，百官应会吊者素服至。
现代文：这一天，应聚会吊丧的百官穿素服到达。
English: On this day, hundreds of officials wearing plain clothes arrived at the funeral.

古文：丧主以下就东阶哭位，主妇以下就殡北哭位。
现代文：丧主以下到东阶的哭位，主妇以下到灵柩北面的哭位。
English: The mourners go down to the crying place on the east step, and the housewives go down to the crying place on the north side of the coffin.

古文：百官入，就殡前位哭，主丧主妇以下皆哭。
现代文：百官进入，到灵柩前的位置号哭，丧主、主妇以下都哭。
English: All the officials entered and stood in front of the coffin, crying. The mourners, the housewives and others were also crying.

古文：止哭，再拜，主丧以下答拜。
现代文：停止号哭，拜两拜，主丧主妇以下都答拜。
English: Stop crying, bow twice, and all the mourners, from the chief mourner on down, bow.

古文：班首诣丧主前展慰毕，百官出，丧主拜送，杖哭而入。
现代文：众官之首到丧主前面进名拜慰完毕，百官退出，丧主拜送，扶丧杖号哭着进入。
English: After the first of the officials came to the front of the mourners to pay their respects, the hundred officials withdrew, the mourners left, and the mourners entered crying.

古文：会葬仪同。
现代文：聚会送葬仪式相同。
English: The gathering and funeral rites are the same.

古文：遣使册赠王公大臣仪
现代文：遣使册赠王公大臣仪
English: The envoy's book presented to the crown prince and the prime minister

古文：前期，礼部奏请制册，翰林院取旨制文，中书省礼部奏请某官为使。
现代文：在具体日期之前，礼部上奏请求制簿册，翰林院取得圣旨写赠文，中书省礼部上奏请求某官作使者到这一天，祠祭司设置龙亭、香亭在午门前的正中。
English: Prior to the specific date, the ceremonial department made a request to make a book, the Hanlin Academy obtained the holy will to write a gift, the Ministry of Culture and Literature made a request to make an official as an envoy to this day, and the priest of the ancestral hall set up a dragon pavilion and a fragrant pavilion in the middle in front of the gate.

古文：其日，祠祭司设龙亭、香亭于午门前正中，执事于受册者家设宣制官位于正厅之东北，南向；丧主代受册命者位于厅前，北向。礼部官封册文，以盝匣盛之，黄袱裹置龙亭中。
现代文：主管官在接受册命的家中正厅的东北设置宣制官位，面向南；丧主代受册命者的位置在厅前面，面向北。礼部官封好册文，用尽匣装盛，用黄的帕袱裹着放置在龙亭中。
English: The person in charge will set up the official position in the northeast of the main hall of the family receiving the ordination, facing south; the position of the person ordained on behalf of the deceased will be in front of the hall, facing north. The etiquette official will seal the book, fill the box, and wrap it in a yellow parcel and place it in the Longting.

古文：仪仗、鼓乐前导，至其家。
现代文：仪仗、鼓乐在前面引导，到达丧者家。
English: Ceremonial dances and drumming lead the way to the home of the deceased.

古文：代受册者出迎于大门外。
现代文：代受册命的人出来在大门外迎候。
English: Those who had been ordained on his behalf came out to greet him outside the gate.

古文：执事舁龙亭置厅上正中，使者入，立于东北。
现代文：主管官抬着龙亭放置在厅上的正中，使者进入，站立在东北。
English: The supervisor carried the Longting and placed it in the middle of the hall. The messenger entered and stood in the northeast.

古文：代受册者就拜位，再拜。
现代文：代受册命的人走上拜位，拜两拜。
English: Those who have been ordained go up to their seats and bow twice.

古文：使者稍前，称 有制 。
现代文：使者稍稍向前，声称 有皇帝制命 。
English: The messenger stepped forward a little and announced that the emperor had given the order.

古文：代受册者跪。
现代文：代受册命者跪下。
English: Kneel down, you who are about to be ordained.

古文：宣制曰： 皇帝遣臣某，册赠故某官某为某勋某爵。 
现代文：宣读制命说： 皇帝派遣臣某人，册命赠死去的某官某人为某勋某爵。 
English: The imperial edict read: The emperor has sent a certain vassal to record the death of a certain official as a certain lord.

古文：宣讫，代受册者复再拜。
现代文：宣读完毕，代受册命的人又拜两拜。
English: At the end of the reading, those who had been ordained in his place bowed twice more.

古文：使者取册授之，代受册者捧置灵座前。
现代文：使者取册命交给他，代受册命的人捧着放置在灵座前。
English: The messenger took the book of life and gave it to him. The one who received the book of life on his behalf held it in his hand and placed it in front of the sepulcher.

古文：使者出，代受册者送至大门外。
现代文：使者出来，代受册命的人送到大门外。
English: And the messengers went out, and brought them without the gate for them that were bidden.

古文：如不用册者，吏部用诰命，丧家以册文录黄，设祭仪于灵前。
现代文：如果不用册，吏部用诰命，遭丧之家把册文腊录在黄纸上，在灵座前设祭祀仪节。
English: If the register is not used, the clerk will use a chopstick to mark the death, and the bereaved family will write the register on yellow paper and set up a sacrificial ceremony in front of the shrine.

古文：代受册者再拜，执事者展黄立读于左。
现代文：代受册命的人拜两拜，主管官在左面展陈黄卷站着宣读。
English: The person receiving the appointment on his behalf bowed twice, and the officer in charge read from the scroll of Chen Huang standing on the left.

古文：丧主以下皆再拜，焚黄。
现代文：丧主以下都拜两拜，焚烧黄卷。
English: Everyone below the mourners bowed twice and burned the yellow scroll.

古文：赐祭葬
现代文：赐祭葬
English: Give them a proper burial

古文：洪武十四年九月，衍圣公孔希学卒，遣官致祭。
现代文：洪武十四年九月，衍圣公孔希学去世。官员进行祭奠。
English: In September of the 14th year of Hongwu, the holy priest Kong Xixue passed away. Officials held a memorial service.

古文：其后，群臣祭葬，皆有定制。
现代文：此后，群臣的祭葬都有确定的制度。
English: Since then, there has been a definite system for the funerals of ministers.

古文：太祖谕祭群臣文，多出御笔。
现代文：太祖下圣旨祭祀群臣的文章，多出自皇帝亲笔。
English: Most of the articles on the sacred rites and sacrifices performed by the emperor's vassals under his great-grandfather's will were written by the emperor himself.

古文：嘉靖中，世宗为礼部尚书席书、兵部尚书李承勋亲制祭文。
现代文：嘉靖年间，世宗为礼部尚书席书、兵部尚书李承勋亲自写祭文。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jiajing, King Sejong personally wrote dedicatory texts for the Sejong of the Ceremonial Department and the Sejong of the Military Department.

古文：皆特典，非常制也。
现代文：都是特殊恩典，不是经常性的制度。
English: It's all a special grace, not a regular system.

古文：隆庆元年十二月，礼部议上恤典条例：凡官员祭葬，有无隆杀之等，悉遵《会典》。
现代文：隆庆元年十二月，礼部提议上呈抚恤条例。凡是官员祭葬，有没有隆重减损的等级，全部遵循《会典》。
English: In December of the first year of the Year of the Dragon, the Ministry of Ceremonies proposed a pension regulation. All official funerals, whether or not there is a level of grand derogation, all follow the "Code."

古文：其特恩，如侍从必日侍讲读、军功必躬履行阵、东宫官必出阁讲授有劳者。
现代文：那些特殊恩赐，如侍从官必须每天陪侍讲读、军功必须亲自参加战阵、东宫的官属必须是太子出阁讲授有功劳的。
English: Those special gifts, such as the attendant must accompany the attendant to read every day, the military merit must personally participate in the battle, and the official staff of the East Palace must be the prince who has the merit of teaching.

古文：据嘉靖中事例，祭葬加一等，无祭者与祭一坛，无葬者给半葬，半葬者给全葬。
现代文：根据嘉靖年间的事例，祭葬加一等，没有祭奠的给与祭奠一坛，没有葬仪的给予半葬仪，半葬仪的给与全葬仪。
English: According to the cases during the Jiajing period, the funerals were given a higher grade, and those without a memorial were given a memorial altar, those without a memorial were given a half memorial, and those with a half memorial were given a full memorial.

古文：讲读官五品本身有祭，四品及父母，三品及妻。
现代文：讲读官五品本身有祭奠，四品官施及父母，三品官施及妻子。
English: There is a memorial service for the five reading officials, four for the parents, and three for the wife.

古文：军功四品得祭葬，三品未满及父母。
现代文：战争中立功的四品官得到祭葬，三品官任期未满施及父母。
English: The four-rank officer who distinguished himself in the war was given a ceremonial funeral, and the parents of the three-rank officer whose term of office had not yet expired were also given a funeral.

古文：讲读年久、启沃功多、军旅身歼、勋劳茂著者，恩恤加厚，临期请旨。
现代文：任讲读官年岁久、尽心开导辅佐功劳多、战争中身亡、功劳显着的，抚恤增加隆厚。举哀之期请求皇上决定。
English: If a lecturing officer has been in office for a long time, has devoted himself to enlightening and assisting others, and has made a great deal of merit, and has been killed in the war, and his merit is significant, the pension will be increased and made more generous.

古文：《会典》，凡一品官，祭九坛。
现代文：《会典》，凡是一品官，祭祀九坛。
English: According to the "Charter," there is usually one official and nine altars for worship.

古文：父母妻加祭。或二坛、一坛，或妻止一坛者，恩难预拟，遇有陈乞，酌拟上请。
现代文：父母妻子增加祭奠，或者二坛、一坛，有的妻子只有一坛的，恩恤难以预先拟定，遇到有陈奏请求，酌情拟定往高等乞请。
English: If the parents and wife add a memorial service, or if there are two altars or one altar, or if some wives only have one altar, it is difficult to prepare the grace in advance, and if there is a request for recital, it is appropriate to prepare a request for higher education.

古文：二品，二坛。
现代文：二品，二坛。
English: Two dishes, two altars.

古文：加东宫三少，或兼大学士赠一品者，至四坛，父母妻俱一坛，致仕加三少者加一坛，加太子太保者加三坛，妻未封夫人者不祭。
现代文：加官柬宫的少保、少傅、少师，或者兼任大学士赠一品的，达到四坛，父母妻子都一坛，退休加官少保、少傅、少师的加一坛，加官太子太保的如三坛，妻子没有夫人封号的不与祭奠。
English: If a younger brother, a younger brother-in-arms, a younger brother-in-arms, a younger brother-in-arms, or a younger brother-in-arms of a high-ranking official of the Cambodian Royal Palace, or a person who concurrently serves as a university scholar, presents a dish, it will reach four altars, the parents and wife will both receive one altar, the retired younger brother-in-arms, younger brother-in-arms, and younger brother-in-arms will receive one altar, the senior brother-in-arms of a high-ranking official of the Cambodian Royal Palace will receive three altars, and the wife who does not have a wife's seal

古文：三品祭葬，在任、致仕俱一坛，兼学士赠尚书者二坛，未及考满病故者一坛减半。
现代文：三品祭葬，在任的和退休的都是一坛，兼学士追赠尚书的二坛，没有到任官期满病死的一坛减半。
English: There will be three offerings and three funerals. There will be one altar for those in office and those who have retired, two altars for those who have been awarded posthumous diplomas, and one altar will be halved for those who did not reach the end of their term of office and died of illness.

古文：造葬悉如旧例。
现代文：到埋葬时全部按照旧例。
English: At the time of burial, everything was done according to the old rules.

古文：四、五品官不得重封。
现代文：四、五品官不能加封两号。
English: Fourth and fifth grade officials cannot add two numbers.

古文：故四品官由六七品升者，父母有祭。
现代文：所以四品官由六七品升任的，父母有祭奠。
English: Therefore, the parents of those who were promoted to Shihonkan from Jushichihon have a memorial service.

古文：由五品升者，以例不重封，遂不得祭。
现代文：由五品升任的，按例不加封两号，于是不能得到祭奠。
English: Those who are promoted from the Fifth Rank do not receive the second seal as usual, so they cannot receive the tribute.

古文：今定四品官，凡经考满者，父母虽止授五品封，亦与祭一坛。
现代文：现在定为四品官，凡是经过考满的，父母虽然只授予五品封号，也给祭奠一坛。
English: Now it is set as the fourth grade official, and although parents only grant the fifth grade seal number to those who have passed the examination, they also give a memorial altar.

古文：四品以上官，本身及父母恩典，必由考满而后得。
现代文：四品以上的官，本身和父母恩典，必定由考核期满而后获得。
English: Officials with four or more medals, themselves and their parents' grace, must be obtained after the end of the assessment period.

古文：然有二品、三品共历四五年，父母未授三品封，终不得沾一祭者，宜并叙年资。
现代文：然而有二品、三品官共经历四五年，父母没有授予三品封号，最终不能受恩一祭的，应该一并按规定等级顾及年资。
English: However, there are two-grade and three-grade officials who have been promoted for a total of four or five years, and their parents have not granted three-grade sealing number. If they cannot receive the final blessing, they should take into account their seniority according to the prescribed level.

古文：二品、三品共历三年以上者，虽未考三品满，本身及父母俱与三品祭葬。
现代文：二品、三品一共经历三年以上的，虽然没有考绩满三品，本身以及父母都给予三品祭葬。
English: Two prizes and three prizes have been awarded for a total of more than three years. Although they did not complete the three prizes, they and their parents were given three prizes.

古文：三品四品，共历三年以上者，虽未考四品满，本身用三品未考满例，祭一坛半，葬父母祭一坛。
现代文：三品、四品，共经历三年以上的，虽然没有考绩满四品，本身用三品没有考绩期满例，祭奠一坛半，葬父母祭奠一坛。
English: Three awards, four awards, a total of more than three years have passed, although there is no performance appraisal of four awards, there is no performance appraisal expiration date for the three awards themselves, one and a half altar is dedicated, and one altar is dedicated to the parents.

古文：凡被劾闲住者，虽遇覃恩，复致仕，仍不给祭葬。
现代文：凡是被弹劾闲住的，虽然遇到皇帝广施恩泽，又退休的，仍然不给与祭葬。
English: All those who were impeached for idleness, and retired despite the emperor's extensive favors, were still not given funerals.

古文：勋臣祭葬，皇亲出自上裁。
现代文：功勋大臣的祭葬，皇亲出自皇上裁定。
English: The funeral rites of the Minister of Merit and the Imperial Prince were decided by the Emperor.

古文：驸马都尉祭十五坛。
现代文：驸马都尉祭十五坛。
English: The 15th altar of the Horse Captain's Festival.

古文：公、侯、伯在内掌府事坐营、在外总兵有殊勋加太子太保以上者，遵《会典》。
现代文：公、侯、伯在京内执掌府事坐营、在外总兵有特殊功勋加太子太保以上的，遵照《会典》办。
English: Princes, lords, and great lords in charge of the prefectural affairs in Kyoto, and soldiers with special merits abroad, as well as the Crown Prince Taibo and above, shall be appointed in accordance with the "Code."

古文：公、侯十六坛，伯十五坛，掌府坐营总兵有勋劳者七坛，掌府坐营年劳者五坛，掌府坐营而政迹未著者四坛，管事而被劾勘明闲住者二坛，被劾未经勘实者一坛。
现代文：公、侯十六坛，伯十五坛，执掌府事坐营总兵有功劳的七坛，执掌府事坐营有年数和劳绩的五坛，执掌府事坐营而政绩不显著的四坛，管事而被弹劾，勘察明白闲住的二坛，被弹劾没有经过勘察核实的一坛。
English: There are 16 altars for the king and princes, 15 altars for the nobles, 7 altars for the generals who presided over the government affairs camp and were meritorious, 5 altars for those who presided over the government affairs camp and had years of service, 4 altars for those who presided over the government affairs camp and did not have significant political achievements, 2 altars for those who presided over the government affairs camp and were impeached, 2 altars for those who were found to be idle after investigation, and 1 altar for those who were impeached without investigation and verification.

古文：勘实罪重者，并本爵应得祭葬皆削。
现代文：勘察核实罪重的，连同本爵位应得的祭葬都削除。
English: Investigating and verifying the seriousness of the crime, along with the funeral rites that deserve the title of nobility, were deleted.

古文：又正德间，公、侯、伯本祭俱三坛，嘉靖间二坛。
现代文：又，正德年间，公、侯、伯本身祭奠都是三坛，嘉靖年问二坛。
English: In addition, during the Zhengde era, the three altars were used to pay homage to princes, lords, and townsmen, and the two altars were used in the year of Jiajing.

古文：今遵嘉靖例，以复《会典》之旧。
现代文：现在遵照嘉靖年问条例，以恢复《会典》的旧制。
English: Now, in accordance with the regulations of the Jiajing New Year's Eve, the old system of the "Code" has been restored.

古文：武臣祭葬，遵正德、嘉靖例，都督同知佥事、锦衣卫指挥祭三坛，署都督同知佥事一坛，馀推类行之。
现代文：武官祭葬，遵照正德、嘉靖条例，都督同知愈事、锦衣卫指挥祭奠三坛，代理都督同知愈事一坛，其余类推施行。
English: In accordance with the Zhengde and Jiajing regulations, three altars were set up for the military commander's funeral, with the governor leading the ceremony, the grand marshal leading the ceremony, the acting governor leading the ceremony, and the others following suit.

古文：帝从其议。
现代文：皇帝依从礼部的议定。
English: The emperor followed his advice.

古文：万历六年更定，凡致仕养病终养听用等官，祭葬俱与现任官同。
现代文：万历六年重新制定丧葬善后礼仪，凡是退休、养病、供养父母以终天年、听候任用等官，祭奠都与现任官相同。
English: In the past six years, the funeral and aftercare etiquette has been reformulated. For officials who have retired, recovered from illness, provided for their parents for the rest of their lives, or are waiting to be appointed, the memorial service is the same as for current officials.

古文：十二年续定，被劾自陈致仕官，有日久论定原无可议者，仍给祭葬，父母妻视本身为差等。
现代文：万历十二年，继续规定，被弹劾自我陈请退休的官员，有很久以后论定原来没有可以议罪的，仍然给与祭葬，父母妻子的，祭奠比照官员本身也享受不同等级待遇。
English: In the 12th year of Wanli, it was further stipulated that the officials who were impeached and retired voluntarily would still be given a ceremonial funeral if it was determined long after that there was no crime to be discussed, and the officials themselves would also enjoy different levels of treatment according to their parents and wives.

古文：丧葬之制
现代文：丧葬之制
English: Funeral system

古文：洪武五年定。
现代文：洪武五年制定。
English: formulated in the fifth year of Hongwu.

古文：凡袭衣，三品以上三，四品、五品二，六品以下一。
现代文：凡是尸衣，三品以上三层，四品、五品二层，六品以下一层。
English: For all clothing, there are three layers for items three and above, two layers for items four and five, and one layer for items six and below.

古文：饭含，五品以上饭稷含珠，九品以上饭粱含小珠。
现代文：饭含即纳物于死者口中的丧礼，五品以上纳稷含珠，九品以上纳粱含小珠。
English: The funeral includes rice, which is the offering in the mouth of the deceased, and more than five dishes contain pearls, and more than nine dishes contain small pearls.

古文：铭旌、绛帛，广一幅，四品以上长九尺，六品以上八尺，九品以上七尺。
现代文：旗幡、绛帛，宽一幅，四品官以上长九尺，六品官以上八尺，九品官以上七尺。
English: Flags and banners, one wide, nine feet long over four ranks, eight feet over six ranks, and seven feet over nine ranks.

古文：敛衣，品官朝服一袭，常服十袭，衾十番。
现代文：殓尸衣，有品级的官朝服一套，平常服装十套，盖尸单被十层。
English: A zombie suit, a grade-one official court dress, ten sets of ordinary clothing, and a ten-layer corpse blanket.

古文：灵座设于柩前，作白绢结魂帛以依神。
现代文：灵座设置在灵柩前面，用白色绢结魂帛以依神灵。
English: The hearse is set up in front of the coffin, and the soul is tied with a white knot to follow the spirit.

古文：棺椁，品官棺用油杉朱漆，椁用土杉。
现代文：内棺外椁，品级官内棺用油杉制造用朱红漆涂刷，外棺用土杉制成。
English: The inner coffin and outer coffin, grade official inner coffin made of oil cedar brushed with vermilion paint, outer coffin made of soil cedar.

古文：墙翣，公、侯六，三品以上四，五品以上二。
现代文：扇形棺饰，公、侯六柄，三品官以上四柄，五品官以上二柄。
English: A fan-shaped coffin ornament, six handles for noble and court officials, four handles for officials of the third class and above, and two handles for officials of the fifth class and above.

古文：明器，公、侯九十事，一品、二品八十事，三品、四品七十事，五品六十事，六品、七品三十事，八品、九品二十事。
现代文：随葬器物，公、侯九十件，一品、二品官八十件，三品、四品官七十件，五品六十件，六品、七品三十件，八品、九品二十件。
English: The funerary ware included 90 pieces for the lord and lady-in-waiting, 80 pieces for the first- and second-ranked officials, 70 pieces for the third- and fourth-ranked officials, 60 pieces for the fifth-ranked officials, 30 pieces for the sixth- and seventh-ranked officials, and 20 pieces for the eighth- and ninth-ranked officials.

古文：引者，引车之绋也；披者，以纁为之，击于輀车四柱，在旁执之，以备倾覆者也；铎者，以铜为之，所以节挽歌者。
现代文：引，是牵引灵车时使用的绳索；披，是用浅绛色带制成的，拴系在载灵柩的车的四根柱上，在旁边执着，以防备倾侧翻倒；铎用铜制造，用来调节挽歌节拍的铃铎。
English: The lead is the rope used to pull the hearse; the cape is made of light indigo ribbon, the cymbals are attached to the four pillars of the car carrying the cymbals and are attached next to it to prevent it from tipping over; the cymbals are made of copper and are used to adjust the beat of the dirge.

古文：公、侯四引六披，左右各八铎。
现代文：公、侯用四条引六条披，左右各八个铃铎。
English: There are four bells for the lord and six for the vassal, with eight bells on each side.

古文：一品、二品三引四披，左右各六铎。
现代文：一品、二品官用三条引四条披，左右各六个铃铎。
English: The first-class and second-class officers wear three-stringed and four-stringed capes, with six bells on each side.

古文：三品、四品二引二披，左右各四铎。
现代文：三品、四品官用二条引二条披，左右各四个铃铎。
English: The third-grade and fourth-grade officials use two strings to pull two bells, and there are four bells on each side.

古文：五品以下，二引二披，左右各二铎。
现代文：五品以下，用二条引二条披，左右各二个铃铎。
English: For five items or less, use two pulls to make two pulls, and two bells on each side.

古文：羽幡竿长九尺，五品以上，一人执之以引柩，六品以下不用。
现代文：以羽为饰的旗旖竿长九尺，五品以上，一个人手持着以牵引灵柩，六品以下不使用。
English: The feather-adorned flagpole is nine feet long, with more than five banners, and a person holds it in their hand to pull the coffin. Banners with less than six banners are not used.

古文：功布，品官用之，长三尺。
现代文：迎神的功布，有品级的官使用，长三尺。
English: A ceremonial cloth for welcoming the gods, used by dignified officials, three feet long.

古文：方相，四品以上四目，七品以上两目，八品以下不用。
现代文：驱除疫鬼和山川精怪的方相，四品以上的官用的方相有四只眼睛，七品以上两只眼睛，八品官以下不使用方相。
English: In order to drive away the pestilence and the strange faces of mountains and rivers, the official faces with four or more faces have four eyes, the official faces with seven or more faces have two eyes, and the official faces with eight or fewer faces do not use faces.

古文：柳车上用竹格，以彩结之，旁施帷幔，四角重流苏。
现代文：丧车上用竹格，用彩帛结扎，旁边施挂帷幔，四角垂挂着穗状垂饰物。
English: A bamboo lattice was used on the funeral car, tied with colored ribbons, drapes were hung next to it, and spike-shaped hanging ornaments hung from the four corners.

古文：志石二片，品官皆用之。其一为盖，书某官之墓；其一为底，书姓名、乡里、三代、生年、卒葬月日及子孙、葬地。
现代文：墓志石头二片，有品级的官都使用，其中一片作盖，书写某官的坟墓；一片作为底，书写姓名、乡里、三代、出生年、死葬月日以及子孙、埋葬地点。
English: Two pieces of tombstone, officials with grades are used. One of them is used as a cover to write the grave of a certain official; one is used as a base to write the name, town, three generations, year of birth, date of death and burial, as well as descendants and burial place.

古文：妇人则随夫与子孙封赠。
现代文：妇人便随同丈夫与子孙的封赠。
English: The woman went with her husband and their children and grandchildren.

古文：二石相向，铁束埋墓中。
现代文：二石相向，用铁东埋在坟墓中。
English: Two stones facing each other, buried in a grave with an iron dong.

古文：祭物，四品以上羊豕，九品以上豕。
现代文：祭祀物品，四品以上官用羊猪，九品以上官用猎。
English: Sacrificial items, more than four official sheep and pigs, more than nine official hunting.

古文：初，洪武二年，敕葬开平王常遇春于钟山之阴，给明器九十事，纳之墓中。
现代文：当初，洪武二年敕命埋葬开平王常遇春趁钟山的北面，给与随葬物九十件，放入墓中。
English: At first, Hongwu buried Kaiping Wang Changyu Chun on the north side of Zhongshan in the second year of his life, giving him ninety pieces of funerary objects and putting them in the grave.

古文：钲二，鼓四，红旗，拂子各二，红罗盖、鞍、笼各一，弓二，箭三，灶、釜、火炉各一，俱以木为之。
现代文：钮二件，鼓四件，红旗、拂子各二件，红罗盖、鞍、笼各一件，弓二把，箭三枝，灶、釜、火炉各一件，都用木头制成。
English: Two buttons, four drums, two red flags and two whistles, one red cap, one saddle and one cage, two bows and three arrows, one stove, one kettle and one oven are all made of wood.

古文：水罐、甲、头盔、台盏、杓、壶、瓶、酒瓮、唾壶、水盆、香炉各一，烛台二，香盒、香匙各一，香箸二，香匙箸瓶、茶钟、茶盏各一，箸二，匙二，匙箸瓶一，碗二，楪十二，橐二，俱以锡造，金裹之。
现代文：水罐、镗甲、头盔、台盏、杓、壶、瓶、酒瓮、唾壶、水盆、香炉各一件，烛台二件，香盒、香匙各一件，香箸二件，香匙箸瓶、茶锺、茶盏各一件，箸二件，匙二件，匙箸瓶一件，碗二件，碟十二件，橐二件，都用锡制造，用金包裹。
English: A pitcher, a coat of mail, a helmet, a table, a jar, a jug, a bottle, a wine jug, a spittoon, a basin, an incense burner, two candlesticks, an incense box, an incense spoon, two incense sticks, an incense spoon, a jug, a jug, a jar, a bottle, a jug, a bottle, a jug, a spittoon, a jug, a jug, a jug, an incense burner, two candlesticks, an incense box, an incense spoon, an incense spoon, an incense spoon

古文：班剑、牙仗各一，金裹立瓜、骨朵戟、响节各二，交椅、脚踏、马杌各一，诞马六，枪、剑、斧、弩、食桌、床、屏风、柱杖、箱、交床、香桌各一，凳二，俱以木为之。
现代文：班剑、牙仗各一件，金裹立瓜、骨朵戟、响节各二件，交椅、脚踏、马杌各一件，诞马六件，枪、剑、斧、弩、食桌、床、屏风、拄杖、箱、交床、香桌各一件，登二件，都用木头制成。
English: A team sword and a battle-axe each, a gold-wrapped melon, a bone gourd and a rattlesnake each two pieces, a chair, a footstool and a stirrup each one piece, a Christmas horse six pieces, a gun, a sword, an axe, a ploughshare, a dining table, a bed, a screen, a cane, a box, a bedstead and an incense table each one piece, a shelf two pieces, are all made of wood.

古文：乐工十六，执仪伏二十四，控士六，女使十，青龙、白虎、朱雀、玄武神四，门神二，武士十，并以木造，各高一尺。
现代文：仿造的乐工十六人，执仪仗二十四人，控士六人，女使十人，青龙、白虎、朱雀、玄武神四样，门神二人，武士十人，都用木头制造，各高一尺。
English: Sixteen imitation musicians, twenty-four ceremonial warriors, six auditors, ten maidservants, four dragons, a white tiger, a red-breasted peregrine falcon, and a god of war, two door gods, and ten warriors, all made of wood, each one foot high.

古文：杂物，翣六，璧一，筐、笥、楎、椸、衿、鞶各一，笣二，筲二，粮浆瓶二，油瓶一，纱厨、暖帐各一。
现代文：杂物有，娶六件，璧一件，筐、笥、挥、榄、衿、击各一件，筏二件，筲箕二件，粮浆瓶二件，油瓶一件，纱厨、暖帐各一件。
English: Miscellaneous items include: six pieces of brooms, one piece of broomsticks, one piece of basket, spade, whisk, olive, pestle and mortar, two pieces of pestle, two pieces of pestle, two pieces of mortar bottle, one piece of oil bottle, one piece of gauze and one piece of heating pad.

古文：束帛青三段，纁二段，每段长一丈八尺。
现代文：成东的绢帛青色的三段，绛紫色的二段，每段长一丈八尺。
English: Chengdong's three indigo-colored segments and two indigo-purple segments are each eight feet long.

古文：后定制，公、侯九十事者准此行之。余以次减杀。
现代文：后来制定制度，公、侯九十件的以此为标准施行，其余的依次减少。
English: Later, a system was set up, and 90 cases of public and official duties were implemented according to this standard, and the rest were reduced in turn.

古文：碑碣
现代文：碑碣
English: Memorial plaque

古文：明初，文武大臣薨逝，例请于上，命翰林官制文，立神道碑。
现代文：明朝初年，文武大臣死，按例向皇上请示，皇上命令翰林官写祭文，立神道碑。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the Minister of Education and Martial Arts died. As usual, he asked the emperor for instructions. The emperor ordered the Hanlin official to write an offering and erect a Shinto monument.

古文：惟太祖时中山王徐达、成祖时荣国公姚广孝及弘治中昌国公张峦治先茔，皆出御笔。
现代文：只有太祖时期中山王徐达、成祖时期荣国公姚广孝以及弘治年问昌国公张峦修葺先人坟茔，墓文都出自皇帝亲笔。
English: Only Sun Yat-sen King Xu Da during the Taizu period, Rongguo Yao Guangxiao during the Chengzu period, and Hongzhi asked Changguo Zhang Xi to repair the graves of his ancestors, and the tombstones were written by the emperor himself.

古文：其制自洪武三年定。
现代文：它的制度，从洪武三年制定。
English: Its system was established three years after Hongwu.

古文：五品以上用碑，龟趺螭首。
现代文：五品官以上用方顶石碑，碑下用龟形石座，碑额用螭龙头像。
English: For officials of the Fifth Rank and above, a square-topped stone monument was used, a turtle-shaped stone base was used under the monument, and a dragon head image was used for the monument.

古文：六品以下用碣，方趺圆首。
现代文：六品官以下用圆顶石碑，方形碑座圆形碑额。
English: Below the rank of Ropponkan, a domed stone monument and a square monument with a round base are used.

古文：五年，复详定其制。
现代文：洪武五年，又详细制定碑碣制度。
English: In the fifth year of Hongwu's reign, a detailed system of memorial plaques was established.

古文：功臣殁后封王，螭首高三尺二寸，碑身高九尺，广三尺六寸，龟趺高三尺八寸。
现代文：功臣死后封王，螭形碑额高三尺二寸，碑身高九尺，宽三尺六寸，龟形石座高三尺八寸。
English: After the death of the meritorious subject, the seal-shaped monument is 3 feet 2 inches high, the monument is 9 feet high, 3 feet 6 inches wide, and the turtle-shaped stone seat is 3 feet 8 inches high.

古文：一品螭首，二品麟凤盖，三品天禄辟邪盖，四品至七品方趺。
现代文：一品官为螭形碑额，二品官为麟凤形盖，三品官为天禄辟邪盖，四品至七品官为方形碑座。
English: The first-ranked official is a skull-shaped monument, the second-ranked official is a unicorn-phoenix-shaped lid, the third-ranked official is a heavenly lotus, and the fourth-ranked official to the seventh-ranked official is a square monument.

古文：首视功臣殁后封王者，递杀二寸，至一尺八寸止。
现代文：碑额比照功臣死后封王的，依次递减二寸，到一尺八寸止。
English: The height of the monument will be reduced by two centimeters to one and a half meters in accordance with the death of the meritorious subject.

古文：碑身递杀五寸，至五尺五寸止。
现代文：碑身依次递减五寸，到五尺五寸止。
English: The height of the monument was successively reduced by five inches, to five feet and five inches.

古文：其广递杀二寸，至二尺二寸止。
现代文：它的宽度递减二寸，到二尺二寸止。
English: And the breadth of it was two cubits, and two cubits was the length thereof.

古文：趺递杀二寸，至二尺四寸止。
现代文：碑座递减二寸，到二尺四寸止。
English: The monument base decreased by two inches, to two feet four inches.

古文：坟茔之制，亦洪武三年定。
现代文：坟茔制度，也是洪武三年制定。
English: The graveyard system was also established in the third year of Hongwu.

古文：一品，茔地周围九十步，坟高一丈八尺。
现代文：一品官坟茔地周边九十步，坟高一丈八尺。
English: There are ninety steps around the Ippon official grave, and the grave is eight feet high.

古文：二品，八十步，高一丈四尺。
现代文：二品官，八十步，高一丈四尺。
English: Second-class official, eighty paces, height one point four feet.

古文：三品，七十步，高一丈二尺。
现代文：三品官，七十步，高一丈二尺。
English: Third-ranked official, seventy paces, two feet higher than Ijo.

古文：以上石兽各六。
现代文：以上石兽各六件。
English: Each of the above stone beasts is worth six points.

古文：四品，四十步。
现代文：四品官，四十步。
English: Four ranks, forty paces.

古文：七品以下二十步，高六尺。
现代文：七品官以下二十步，高六尺。
English: Twenty paces below the rank of Shichihonkan, six feet high.

古文：五年重定。
现代文：洪武五年，重新制定。
English: Hongwu five years, reformed.

古文：功臣殁后封王，茔地周围一百步，坟高二丈，四围墙高一丈，石人四，文武各二，石虎、羊、马、石望柱各二。
现代文：功臣死后封王，坟茔地周边一百步，坟高二丈，四周坟墙高一丈，石人四件，文武各二件，石虎、羊、马、石望柱各二件。
English: After the death of the meritorious subject, the king was sealed, the surrounding area of the grave was one hundred paces, the grave was two stories high, the surrounding grave wall was one story high, there were four stone people, two each of literature and martial arts, and two each of stone tigers, sheep, horses, and stone watchtowers.

古文：一品至六品茔地如旧制，七品加十步。
现代文：一品官至六品官坟茔地如同旧有制度，七品官增加十步。
English: From one grade official to six grade official, the graveyard is the same as the old system, and the seven grade official is increased by ten steps.

古文：一品坟高一丈八尺，二品至七品递杀二尺。
现代文：一品官坟高一丈八尺，二品官到七品官各递减二尺。
English: A grade one official grave is eight feet high, and a grade two official grave is two feet higher than a grade seven official grave.

古文：一品坟墙高九尺，二品至四品递杀一尺，五品四尺。
现代文：一品官坟墙高九尺，二品官到四品官各递减一尺，五品官四尺。
English: The wall of the grave of a first-grade official is nine feet high, that of a second-grade official to a fourth-grade official decreases by one foot, and that of a fifth-grade official increases by four feet.

古文：一品、二品石人二，文武各一，虎、羊、马、望柱各二。
现代文：一品官、二品官石人二件，文武各一件，石虎、羊、马、石望柱各二件。
English: There are two pieces of Ipponkan, two pieces of Ipponkan Shihonin, one piece of Monbu, two pieces of Shihotora, two pieces of Shihotora, two pieces of Shihotora, two pieces of Shihotora, and two pieces of Shihotora.

古文：三品四品无石人，五品无石虎，六品以下无。
现代文：三品官、四品官没有石人，五品官没有石虎，六品以下什么也没有。
English: The third and fourth grade officials do not have stone people, the fifth grade officials do not have stone tigers, and there is nothing below the sixth grade.

古文：当太祖时，盱眙扬王坟置守户二百一十，宿州徐王坟置坟户九十三，滁州滁阳王坟亦置坟户。
现代文：在太祖时期，盱眙扬王坟设置守坟户二百一十户，宿州徐王坟设置守坟户九十三户，滁州滁阳王坟也设置守坟户。
English: During the Taizu period, 210 households were set up to guard the tombs of the Yang Wang Tombs, 93 households were set up to guard the tombs of the Xu Wang Tombs in Suzhou, and households were also set up to guard the tombs of the Shenyang Wang Tombs in Luzhou.

古文：四年，又赐功臣李善长、徐达、常茂、冯胜坟户百五十，邓愈、唐胜宗、陆仲亨、华云龙、顾时、陈德、耿炳文、吴桢、孙恪、郭兴坟户百。
现代文：洪武四年，又赏赐功臣李善长、徐达、常茂、冯胜守坟户一百五十户，邓愈、唐胜宗、陆仲亨、华云龙、顾时、陈德、耿炳文、昊桢、孙恪、郭兴守坟户一百户。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu, he also rewarded the meritorious vassals Li Shanchang, Xu Da, Chang Mao, and Feng Shengshu with 150 cemetery households, and Deng Yu, Tang Shengzong, Lu Zhongheng, Hua Yunlong, Gu Shih, Chen De, Geng Bingwen, Hao Wei, Sun Gu, and Guo Xingshu with 100 cemetery households.

古文：成化十五年，南京礼部言： 常遇春、李文忠等十四人勋臣坟墓，俱在南京城外，文忠曾孙萼等，以岁久颓坏为言，请命工修治。 
现代文：成化十五年，南京礼部说： 常遇春、李文忠等十四人功勋大臣的坟墓，都在南京城外，李文忠曾孙李萼等人，以年岁久远颓坏上言，请求命令工人整修。 
English: In the fifteenth year of Chenghua, the Nanjing Ministry of Ceremonies said: The tombs of fourteen meritorious ministers, including Changyu Chun and Li Wenzhong, are all outside Nanjing City. Li Wenzhong's great-grandson Li Cale and others, citing their age and long-standing bad reputation, requested that workers be ordered to renovate.

古文：帝可其奏，且令无子孙者，复墓旁一人守护之。赐谥
现代文：皇帝同意南京礼部的上奏。并且命令没有子孙的，免除墓旁一人的赋税让他守护。赐谥
English: The emperor agreed to the performance of the Nanjing ceremony. And he ordered that if there were no descendants, he would exempt one person next to the tomb from paying taxes and let him guard it.

古文：亲王例用一字；郡王二字，文武大臣同。
现代文：亲王按例赐谧用一个字；郡王用二个字，文武大臣相同。
English: As a rule, the prince uses one character; the county king uses two characters, and the minister of education and armed forces uses the same.

古文：与否自上裁。
现代文：是否赐谧号，由皇上裁定。
English: It is up to the Emperor to decide whether or not to bestow the title.

古文：若官品未高而侍从有劳，或以死勤事者，特赐谥，非常例。
现代文：如果官员的品级不高而陪侍跟从皇上有功劳，或者因尽心职事而死的，特别赐给谧号，不是常例。
English: If the rank of an official is not high, but there is merit in accompanying and following the emperor, or if he died because of his dedication to his duties, he was specially given a nickname, which is not usual.

古文：洪武初，有应得谥者，礼部请旨，令礼部行翰林院拟奏。
现代文：洪武初年，有应该获谧号的，礼部请示圣旨，命令礼部行文令翰林院拟定上奏。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies requested the imperial decree and ordered the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies to issue an order to the Hanlin Academy to prepare a recital.

古文：弘治十五年定制，凡亲王薨，行抚、按，郡王病故，行本府亲王及承奉长史，核勘以奏，乃议谥。
现代文：弘治十五年制定制度，凡是亲王死，行文令巡抚、巡按，郡王病死，行文令本王府亲王以及承奉长史，审核勘定上奏，于是商议赐谧。
English: In the 15th year of the Hongzhi era, a system was established. In the event of the death of a prince, a written order was issued to appoint a procurator and inspectors. In the event of the death of a county prince due to illness, a written order was issued to the prince of the royal court and the heir to a long history, and the accounts were audited and submitted to the emperor.

古文：文武大臣请谥，礼部取旨，行吏兵部考实责。
现代文：文武大臣请求赐谧，由礼部在皇帝那里取得圣旨，行文令吏兵部考核实际功绩。
English: At the request of the minister of literature and armed forces, the imperial edict was obtained from the emperor by the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the actual merits were evaluated by the officers of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：礼部定三等，行业俱优者为上，颇可者为中，行实无取者为下，送翰林院拟谥。
现代文：礼部定二等，品行业绩都优秀的为上等，基本上可以的焉中等，品行实绩无可取的为下等，送到翰林院拟定谧号。
English: The etiquette department set the second grade, the product performance was excellent, basically the middle grade, and the performance was inferior, and it was sent to the Hanlin Academy to draw up the nickname.

古文：有应谥而未得者，抚、按、科道官以闻。
现代文：有应该赐谧而没有得到赐谧的，由巡抚、巡按、科道官上报。
English: Those who should have been awarded and were not, shall be reported by the governor, the inspector, and the science and technology officer.

古文：按明初旧制，谥法自十七字至一字，各有等差。
现代文：按照明朝初年的旧有制度，谧法从十七个字到一个字，各有等级差别。
English: According to the old system in the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the number of characters in the Chinese characters was increased from seventeen to one, each with a grade difference.

古文：然终高帝世，文臣未尝得谥，武臣非赠侯伯不可得。
现代文：但是整个高祖一世，文臣不曾得到赐谧，武臣如果不是赠侯伯，不可得到赐谧。
English: However, throughout the reign of Emperor Gaozu I, civil servants were not given a title of nobility, and warriors were not given a title of nobility if they were not given a title of nobility.

古文：鲁、秦二王曰荒、曰愍。
现代文：鲁、秦二王谧焉荒、愍。
English: Ru, the second king of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：至建文谥王祎，成祖谥胡广，文臣始有谥。
现代文：到建文帝赐王樟谧，成祖赐胡广谧，文臣开始有谧号。
English: By the time Emperor Jianwen bestowed the title of Wang Qian, and Emperor Chengzu bestowed the title of Hu Guangyong, the title of Wencheng began to have a nickname.

古文：迨世宗则滥及方士，且加四字矣。
现代文：到世宗便滥施至方术之士，并且加了四个字。
English: Zu Xizong then gave it indiscriminately to the people of Fang, and added four words.

古文：定例，三品得谥，词臣谥 文 。
现代文：固定的条例，三品官得到赐谧，文学词章之臣谧 文 。
English: According to the fixed regulations, the three grade officers were awarded the title, and the literary word chapter officers were awarded the title.

古文：然亦有得谥不止三品，谥 文 不专词臣者，或以勋劳，或以节义，或以望实，破格崇褒，用示激劝。
现代文：然而也有得到赐谧不止三品官，谧 文 不专赐文学词章之臣的，有的因为功勋勤劳，有的因为节概礼义，有的因为声望实绩，破格推崇褒奖，以示激励劝勉。
English: However, there are also those who have been awarded more than three grade officers, and those who have been awarded the title of literature minister, some because of their hard work, some because of their courtesy, and some because of their reputation and actual performance. They are encouraged and exhorted.

古文：其冒滥者，亦间有之。
现代文：那些冒充遇滥的，也问或有。
English: Those who pretend to be abused, also ask or have.

古文：万历元年，礼臣言： 大臣应得谥者，宜广询严核。
现代文：万历元年，礼官说： 大臣应该得谧的，应广泛咨询严格核实。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, the etiquette official said: If a minister should be awarded a gong, it should be widely consulted and strictly verified.

古文：应谥而未请者，不拘远近，抚、按、科道举奏，酌议补给。 
现代文：应该赐谧而没有请求的，不拘泥远近，巡抚、巡按、科道官举蔫上奏，酌情讨论补给。 
English: If there is no request, the governor, the inspector, and the science and technology official shall raise the gong, and discuss the supply as appropriate.

古文：十二年，礼臣言： 大臣谥号，必公论允服，毫无瑕疵者，具请上裁。
现代文：万历十二年，礼官说： 大臣的谧号，必须获公论诚服，一点也没有毛病的，备文请求皇上裁定。
English: In the twelfth year of Wanli, the etiquette official said: The nickname of the minister must be approved by the public, there is no problem at all, and the emperor was requested to make a ruling.

古文：如行业平常，即官品虽崇，不得概予。 
现代文：如品行业绩平常，即使官阶品级崇高，也不能一概赐予。 
English: Even if the official rank is high, it cannot be given to everyone.

古文：帝皆从之。
现代文：皇帝都依从。
English: Taizong all adopted it.

古文：三十一年，礼部侍郎郭正域请严谥典。
现代文：万历三十一年，礼部侍郎郭正域请求严格赐谧典制。
English: In the 31st year of the lunar calendar, Guo Zhengwei, the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, requested that the imperial edict system be strictly implemented.

古文：议夺者四人：许论、黄光升、吕本、范廉；应夺而改者一人：陈瓒；补者七人：伍文定、吴悌、鲁穆、杨继宗、邹智、杨源、陈有年。
现代文：提议夺去赐谧的四人，即许论、黄光升、吕本、范谦；应夺去赐谧而改谧的一人，即陈瓒；补谧的七人，即伍文定、昊悌、鲁穆、杨继宗、邹智、杨源、陈有年。
English: It is proposed to take away the four people who bestowed the gongs, namely Xu On, Huang Guangsheng, Lu Ben and Fan Qian; the one person who bestowed the gongs and changed the gongs, namely Chen Qi, should be taken away; and the seven people who supplemented the gongs, namely Wu Wenzing, Hao Qi, Rumu, Yang Jizong, Xizhi, Yang Yuan and Chen Younian.

古文：阁臣沈一贯、朱赓力庇吕本，不从其议。
现代文：内阁大臣沈一贯、朱赓竭力庇护吕本，不听其议。
English: Cabinet ministers Shen Zhengang and Zhu Xiurong tried their best to protect Lüpeng and did not listen to his advice.

古文：未几，御史张邦俊请以吕柟从祀孔庙，而论应补谥者，雍泰、魏学曾等十四人。
现代文：不久，御史张邦俊请求以吕楠陪祀孔庙，而议论应该补赐谧号的，有雍泰、魏学曾等十四人。
English: Not long after, Grand Historian Zhang Bangjun requested that Lü Nan accompany him to the Confucius Temple, and there were fourteen people, including Yongtai and Wei Xuezen, who argued that the imperial name should be added.

古文：部议久之，共汇题先后七十四人，留中不发。
现代文：礼部议论了很久，共汇集同样内容奏章先后达七十四人，扣留在官中不下发。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies discussed the matter for a long time, and a total of seventy-four people were detained in the government office and not released.

古文：天启元年，始降旨俞允，又增续请者十人，而邦俊原请九人不与。
现代文：天启元年，纔降圣旨允诺，又增加续请的十人，而张邦俊原来请求赐谧的九人不给与。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, the emperor abrogated the imperial edict and promised to grant the imperial edict, and also added ten people who had been repeatedly requested, while the nine people Zhang Bangjun had originally asked to grant the imperial edict were not given.

古文：正域所请伍文定等亦至是始定。
现代文：郭正域所请伍文定等赐谧也到这时纔定下来。
English: Guo Zhengyi invited Wu Wending and others to settle down at this time.

古文：凡八十四人。
现代文：一共八十四人。
English: A total of eighty-four people.

古文：其官卑得谥者，邹智、刘台、魏良弼、周天佐、杨允绳、沈炼、杨源、黄巩、杨慎、周怡、庄鹔、冯应京皆以直谏，孟秋、张元忭、曹端、贺钦、陈茂烈、马理、陶望龄皆以学行，张铨以忠义，李梦阳以文章，鲁穆、杨继宗、张朝瑞、朱冠、傅新德、张允济皆以清节，杨慎之文宪，庄鹔之文节，则又兼论文学云。
现代文：那些官位低得到谧号的，有邹智、刘台、魏良弼、周天佐杨允绳、沈炼、杨源、黄巩、杨慎、周怡、庄呆、冯应京都因为直谏，孟秋、张元忭、曹端、贺钦、陈茂烈、马理、陶望龄都因为学问品行，张铨因为忠义，李梦阳因为文章，鲁穆、杨继宗、张朝瑞、朱冠、傅新德、张允济都因为清雅节操而得谧，杨慎谧文宪，庄泉谧文节，则又兼论文词学问了。
English: Those low-ranking officials who were awarded the honorary title were Shizhi, Liu Tai, Wei Liangqian, Zhou Tiansa, Yang Yunzhe, Shen Zhen, Yang Yuan, Huang Gong, Yang Sheng, Zhou Yi, Zhuang Deli, Feng Ying Kyoto because of Naosuke, Meng Qiu, Zhang Yuanqian, Cao Duan, He Qin, Chen Maorong, Ma Li and Tao Wangling all because of their academic performance, Zhang Qiu because of his loyalty, Li Mengyang because of his articles, Rumu, Yang Jizong, Zhang Chaorui, Zhu Guan, Fu Xinde and Zhang Yunji all because

古文：三年，礼部尚书林尧俞言： 谥典五年一举，自万历四十五年至今，蒙恤而未谥者，九卿台省会议与臣部酌议。 
现代文：天启三年，礼部尚书林尧俞说： 赐谧的典制五年举行一次，从万历四十五年到现在，蒙受抚恤而没有赐谧的，九卿台省会同商议与臣所掌礼部斟酌议定。 
English: In the third year of the Apocalypse, the Minister of Rites and Ceremonies, Shang Shuling, said: "The ceremony of conferring the imperial pallium is held once every five years. From the 45th year of Wanli to the present, the provincial council of Jiuyingtai deliberated and agreed with the Minister of Rites and Ceremonies.

古文：帝可之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: The emperor agreed to his request.

古文：然是时，迟速无定。
现代文：然而这个时候，赐谧的快慢没有定准。
English: However, at this time, the speed of the cormorant fishing is not fixed.

古文：六年，礼科给事中彭汝楠言： 耳目近则睹记真，宜勿逾五年之限。 
现代文：天启六年，礼科给事中彭汝楠说： 近的事便看到的和记载的都更加真实，应该不要超过五年的期限。 
English: In the sixth year of the apocalypse, Peng Runan said: Recent events are more real than what we have seen and recorded, and should not exceed the five-year period.

古文：又谓： 三品以上为当予谥，而建文诸臣之忠义，陶安等之参帷幄，叶琛等之殉行间，皆宜补谥。 
现代文：又说： 三品官以上为应当赐予谧号，而建文众臣的忠义，陶安等人的参谋于帷幄，叶琛等人的殉难于战争，都应该补谧号。 
English: He also said: Three-rank officials and above should be given the honorary title, and the loyalty of Jianwen's ministers, the staff of Tao An and others in the curtain, and the martyrdom of Ye Xuan and others in the war should be supplemented with the honorary title.

古文：事下礼部，以建文诸臣未易轻拟，不果行。
现代文：事情下发礼部，因建文众臣不容易轻率拟谧，终于役有施行。
English: Under the circumstances, the Ministry of Ceremonies, because it was not easy for the ministers to make light-hearted imitations, finally enforced it.

古文：至福王时，始从工科给事中李清言，追谥开国功臣李善长等十四人，正德谏臣蒋钦等十四人，天启惨死诸臣左光斗等九人，而建文帝之弟允熥、允熞、允熙，子文奎，亦皆因清疏追补。
现代文：到福王时，纔听从工科给事中李清的奏言，追谧开国功臣李善长等十四人，正德时期的谏官蒋钦等十四人，天启时期惨死的众臣左光斗等九人，而建文帝的弟弟朱允烟、朱允煌、朱允燃，儿子朱文奎，也都因为李清上疏而追补谧号。
English: When he arrived at Fu Wang, he listened to Li Qing's speech on engineering, and chased down fourteen people including Li Shanchang, a meritorious minister who opened the country, fourteen people including Jiang Qin, a eunuch during the Zhengde period, and nine people including Zuo Guangdou, a minister who died a tragic death during the Apocalypse period, while Emperor Jianwen's younger brothers Zhu Yunyan, Zhu Yunhuang, Zhu Yunyan, and his son Zhu Wenkui also chased down the number because Li Qing was absent.

古文：品官丧礼
现代文：品官丧礼
English: Corporal's funeral

古文：品官丧礼载在《集礼》、《会典》者，本之《仪礼·士丧》，稽诸《唐典》，又参以朱子《家礼》之编，通行共晓。
现代文：品级官的丧礼记载在《集礼》、《会典》的，本源于《仪礼土丧礼》，考察《唐典》，又参照朱子《家礼》的篇卷，通行天下共同知晓。
English: The funeral rites of the class officers are recorded in the "Collection of Rites" and the "Society Code," which originated from the "Rituals and Funerals," the study of the "Tang Dynasty," and also refer to the volume of Zhu Zi's "Family Rites," which is common knowledge all over the world.

古文：兹举大要，其仪节不具录。
现代文：现在举其主要的内容，它的仪节不详细记录。
English: Let me now quote its main content. Its ceremonies are not recorded in detail.

古文：凡初终之礼，疾病，迁于正寝。
现代文：所有初终的礼仪，病重，迁移到正寝。
English: All the rites of the beginning and end, the sick, migrate to the bed.

古文：属纩，俟绝气乃哭。
现代文：置新绵于鼻前，察其是否断气，等待断气纔号哭。
English: Place a fresh sponge in front of the nose, check whether it is out of breath, and wait for it to cry.

古文：立丧主、主妇，护丧以子孙贤能者。
现代文：确立丧主、主妇，以子孙贤能者护丧。
English: Establish mourners, housewives, and take care of the mourners with their children and grandchildren.

古文：治棺讣告。
现代文：准备棺材报告丧事。
English: Prepare the coffin for the funeral report.

古文：设必尸床、帷堂，掘坎。
现代文：设置尸床、帷堂，掘地坎。
English: Set up the corpse bed, the curtain hall, and the ditch.

古文：设沐具，沐者四人，六品以下三人，乃含。
现代文：设置沐浴用具，洗沐的四人，六品官以下三人，便举行饭含礼。
English: Set up bathing utensils, wash four people, six officers and below three people, then hold a meal including a ceremony.

古文：置虚座，结魂帛，立铭旌。
现代文：设置虚座，结魂帛，树立标明死者官职、姓名的铭旌。
English: An empty seat is set up to mourn the dead, and an inscribed urn with the deceased's official position and name is set up.

古文：丧之明日乃小敛，又明日大敛，盖棺，设灵床于柩东。
现代文：死丧的第二天纔给死者沐浴、穿衣、覆衾，行小殓礼，又第二天行大殓礼，装入棺材，盖上棺材，在灵柩的东面设置灵床。
English: On the second day of the funeral, the coffin bearer should bathe, dress, and wrap the deceased, perform the small funeral rites, and the next day perform the grand funeral rites, load the coffin, cover the coffin, and set up the casket on the east side of the coffin.

古文：又明日，五服之人各服其服，然后朝哭相吊。
现代文：又第二天，五服内的人各自穿其丧服，然后朝哭吊丧。
English: The next day, the people in the five suits each wear their own mourning clothes, and then cry and mourn in the morning.

古文：既成服，朝夕奠，百日而卒哭。
现代文：穿上丧服后，早晚祭奠，一百天而行卒哭礼。
English: After putting on the mourning clothes, they will hold a memorial service in the morning and evening, and perform the wailing ceremony for one hundred days.

古文：乃择地，三月而葬。
现代文：于是选择葬地，三月而埋葬。
English: So they chose a burial site and buried him in March.

古文：告后土，遂穿圹。
现代文：告祭地神，于是挖坟坑。
English: They worshipped the earth god and dug a grave.

古文：刻志石，造明器，备大举，作神主。
现代文：镑刻墓志石，制造随葬器物，准备大舆车，制作神位牌。
English: Pound engraved tombstones, made funeral objects, prepared a large hearse, and made a shrine plaque.

古文：既发引，至墓所，乃窆。
现代文：发丧之后，到填地，便放棺材入墓穴。
English: After the funeral, the coffin is placed into the grave at the landfill.

古文：施铭旌志石于圹内，掩圹复土，乃祠后土于墓。
现代文：施放标明死者官职、姓名的铭旌、墓志石到坟坑内，掩盖坟坑盖上土，便在墓旁祭祀地神。
English: The official position of the deceased, the name of the inscription, and the epitaph stone are placed in the grave, the grave is covered with soil, and the earth god is sacrificed next to the grave.

古文：题主，奉安。
现代文：题写神位牌，供奉安放好。
English: Inscribe the altar plaque and place the offering.

古文：升车，反哭。
现代文：登上车，返回号哭。
English: Get on the bus, go back and cry.

古文：凡虞祭，葬之日，日中而虞，柔日再虞，刚日三虞。
现代文：凡是虞祭，安葬这天，中午举行祭祀，逢天干的乙、丁、巳、辛、癸偶日举行第二次虞祭，逢甲、丙、戊、庚、壬奇日举行第三次虞祭。
English: On the day of burial, a ritual is held at noon, and the second yu festival is held on the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh days of the lunar calendar.

古文：若去家经宿以上，则初虞于墓所行之。
现代文：如果离家经过一夜以上，那磨初次虞祭就在坟墓所在地举行。
English: If you have been away from home for more than one night, then the first Yugo Matsuri is held at the grave site.

古文：墓远，途中遇柔日，亦于馆所行之。
现代文：如果坟墓远，途中遇到干支的乙、丁、巳、辛、癸偶日，也在客馆所在地举行第二次虞祭。
English: If the grave is far away, and the zodiac signs of B, D, M, S, and N are encountered on the way, the second cone festival will also be held at the location of the guest house.

古文：若三虞，必俟至家而后行。
现代文：如果是葬后第三次虞祭，必定要等待到家之后举行。
English: If it is the third state festival after the funeral, it must be held after arriving home.

古文：三虞后，遇刚日卒哭。明日祔家庙。
现代文：第三次祭祀以后，遇到甲、丙、戊、庚、壬奇日则行卒哭祭，停止无定时的哭悼，变成早晚哭悼一次。第二天柑祭于家庙。
English: After the third ritual, if the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth days are encountered, the wailing ritual is performed, and the crying and mourning without a fixed time is stopped, and it becomes a morning and evening crying and mourning. The next day, the mandarin festival is held at the family temple.

古文：期而小祥。
现代文：一年后举行小祥祭祀。
English: A year later, the Kosho ritual was held.

古文：丧至此凡十三月，不计闰。
现代文：丧事到此时共十三个月，不计闰月。
English: A total of thirteen months have passed since the death, not including leap months.

古文：古卜日祭，今止用初忌，丧主乃易练服。
现代文：古代占卜日祭，现在只在去世后的第一个忌日，丧主于是改换练服。
English: The ancient divination day festival is now only on the first day of death after death, so the mourners change their training clothes.

古文：再期而大祥。
现代文：两周年举行大祥祭。
English: The grand jubilee festival is held on the second anniversary.

古文：丧至此凡二十五月，亦止用第二忌日祭。
现代文：丧事到此时一共二十五个月，也只用第二个忌日祭祀。
English: A total of twenty-five months have passed since the funeral, and only the second anniversary of the death has been used for the memorial service.

古文：陈禫服，告迁于祠堂。
现代文：陈列禅祭到吉祭之间的服丧期，祭告迁入祠堂。
English: During the mourning period between the Zen festival and the auspicious festival, the festival was moved to the ancestral hall.

古文：改题神主，递迁而西，奉神主入于祠堂。
现代文：改题神位牌，递迁向西，捧神位牌进入祠堂。
English: Change the theme of the shrine plaque, gradually move to the west, hold the shrine plaque to enter the ancestral hall.

古文：彻灵座，奉迁主埋于墓侧。
现代文：撤去灵座，捧迁神位牌埋在坟墓的旁边。
English: The shrine was removed, and the memorial tablet was buried next to the grave.

古文：大祥后，间一月而禫。
现代文：两周年的祭祀后，间隔一月而举行除丧服的禅祭。
English: After the two-year anniversary ceremony, a Zen festival to remove mourning clothes is held every other month.

古文：丧到此计二十有七月。
现代文：丧事到此时共计二十七个月。
English: A total of 27 months have passed since the death.

古文：卜日，丧主禫服诣祠堂，祗荐禫事。
现代文：卜日，丧主在禅祭到吉祭之间的服丧期到祠堂，只举行超度亡灵除丧服的祭祀。
English: On the day of the funeral, the mourners go to the ancestral hall during the mourning period between the Zen festival and the auspicious festival, and only the ritual of removing the mourning clothes from the deceased is held.

古文：其在远闻丧者，始闻，易服，哭而行。
现代文：那些在远地听到报丧的人，开始听到丧事，改换服饰，号哭出行。
English: Those who heard the news of the funeral in the distance began to hear the funeral, change their clothes, cry and travel.

古文：至家，凭殡哭，四日而成服。
现代文：到家，凭靠殡柩号哭。四天后穿丧服。
English: When I got home, I cried with the funeral trumpet. Four days later, I put on my mourning clothes.

古文：若未得行，则设位，四日而变服。
现代文：如果不能启程，就设灵位，四天后改变服饰。
English: If you can't make the trip, set a bedtime and change your clothes after four days.

古文：若既葬，则先哭诸墓，归诣灵座前哭，四日成服。
现代文：如果已经埋葬，便先在坟墓号哭，回来后到灵座前号哭，四天后穿丧服。
English: If they have already been buried, they first cry at the grave marker, then cry at the front of the hearse when they return, and wear mourning clothes four days later.

古文：齐衰以下闻丧，为位而哭。
现代文：齐衰以下的人听到报丧，设灵位而哭。
English: People below the level of Qi Fen heard the news of the funeral, set a spiritual position and cried.

古文：若奔丧，则至家成服。
现代文：如果是赶回料理丧事，便到家就穿丧服。
English: If you have to rush home to prepare for a funeral, wear your mourning clothes when you get home.

古文：若不奔丧，四日成服。
现代文：如果不赶回料理丧事，便四天后穿丧服。
English: If you don't get back in time for the funeral, you have to wear your mourning clothes four days later.

古文：凡有改葬者，孝子以下及妻、妾、女子子，俱緦麻服，周亲以下素服。
现代文：凡是有另择葬地安葬的，孝子以下及妻、妾、女子的儿女，都用细麻布制成孝服，服丧三个月，至亲以下素服。
English: If there is an alternative burial site, the children and grandchildren of the deceased, as well as the wife, concubine, and female children, are made into filial piety clothes with fine linen, and are buried for three months, while the nearest relatives are buried in plain clothes.

古文：不设祖奠，无反哭，无方相魌头，余如常葬之仪。
现代文：不设出殡前夜的祖奠，没有反哭之礼，没有设驱除疫鬼山精的神灵和打鬼驱疫时扮神者戴的面具，其余如同平常埋葬死者的仪式。
English: There is no commemoration of the ancestors on the eve of the funeral, no ceremony of weeping, no exorcism of the spirits of the mountain elves and the masks worn by those who play the role of gods during the exorcism, and the rest is just a ritual of burying the dead.

古文：既葬，就吉帷灵座前一虞。
现代文：安葬之后，在吉帷的灵座前举行第一次虞祭。
English: After the burial, the first geese festival was held in front of Yoshikata's shrine.

古文：孝子以下，出就别所，释緦服素服而还。
现代文：孝子以下，出来到别的地方，脱下细麻布制成的丧服，穿素服而返回。
English: Filial sons and daughters, go out to another place, take off the mourning clothes made of fine linen, wear plain clothes and return.

古文：洪武二十六年四月，除期服奔丧之制。
现代文：洪武二十六年四月，罢除服一周年丧的人从外地赶回吊丧的制度。
English: In April of the 26th year of Hongwu, the system of returning mourners from other places after the first anniversary of the funeral was abolished.

古文：先是百官闻祖父母、伯叔、兄弟丧，俱得奔赴。
现代文：此前，百官听到祖父母、伯叔、兄弟丧事，都要返回吊丧。
English: Previously, when officials heard of the death of a grandparent, uncle or sibling, they would all return to pay their respects.

古文：至是吏部言： 祖父母、伯叔、兄弟皆系期年服。
现代文：到这时吏部说： 祖父母、伯叔、兄弟都属于服一周年的丧。
English: At this time, the cadre said: Grandparents, uncles and brothers all belong to the first year of mourning.

古文：若俱令奔丧守制，或一人连遭五六期丧，或道路数千里，则居官日少，更易繁数，旷官废事。
现代文：如果都令他们返回吊丧守孝，有的一人连续遭遇五六个周年丧，或者道路数千里，那么任职办事的日子少，替代频繁，空着官位荒废政事。
English: If all of them are forced to return to mourning and filial piety, and some of them have suffered five or six consecutive anniversaries of mourning, or thousands of miles on the road, then the days of office are few, the replacement is frequent, and the official position is empty and the political affairs are wasteful.

古文：今后除父母、祖父母承重者丁忧外，其余期丧不许奔，但遣人致祭。 
现代文：今后除了承受宗庙与丧祭重任的人对父母、祖父母离职服丧以外，其余服一周年丧的人不准许赶回吊丧，只是派人致上祭奠。 
English: In the future, in addition to those who bear the heavy responsibilities of the ancestral temple and the funeral rites for their parents and grandparents, the remaining people who are mourning the first anniversary of the funeral are not allowed to rush back to the funeral, but only send people to pay tribute.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从吏部的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：士庶人丧礼
现代文：士庶人丧礼
English: A commoner's funeral

古文：《集礼》及《会典》所载，大略仿品官制，稍有损益。
现代文：《集礼》以及《会典》所记载，大致仿照有品级官员的制度，稍微有一些增加或减少。
English: The records of the "Collection of Rites" and the "Code of the Association" are roughly modeled on the system of officials with ranks, with some slight increase or decrease.

古文：洪武元年，御史高元侃言： 京师人民，循习旧俗。
现代文：洪武元年，御史高元侃说： 京城的百姓，遵循习惯于旧有礼俗。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the Grand Historian Gao Yuanqian said: The people of Beijing are accustomed to the old customs.

古文：凡有丧葬，设宴，会亲友，作乐娱尸，竟无哀戚之情，甚非所以为治。
现代文：凡是有丧葬，便摆设宴席，会聚亲朋好友，奏乐使死人欢乐，竟然没有悲悼哀戚的心情，不是治理国家的好办法。
English: Whenever there is a funeral, they set up a banquet, gather relatives and friends, play music to make the dead happy, and there is no mood for mourning. This is not a good way to govern the country.

古文：乞禁止以厚风化。 
现代文：请求禁止，以淳厚风俗教化。 
English: It is forbidden to ask for it, and it is to be educated in the customs of the Junpo.

古文：乃令礼官定民丧服之制。
现代文：于是命令礼官制定平民丧服的制度。
English: So he ordered the etiquette officer to establish a system for civilian funeral attire.

古文：五年诏定： 庶民袭衣一称，用深衣一、大带一、履一双，裙袴衫袜随所用。
现代文：洪武五年，下诏规定： 平民袭衣一套，上衣下裳相连缀的衣服一件，用素或练制成的礼服带一条，鞋一双，裙裤衫袜随意穿。
English: In the fifth year of Hongwu's reign, the following edict was issued: Civilians were to wear one set of clothing, one piece of clothing with the upper and lower garments connected, one dress belt made of plain or embroidered fabric, one pair of shoes, and skirt, pants, shirt, and socks at will.

古文：饭用粱，含钱三。
现代文：死尸口中的饭用粱，含物用钱三枚。
English: In the mouth of the corpse was a rice bowl and three pieces of money.

古文：铭旌用红绢五尺。
现代文：标明死者身份姓名的铭旌用红色的绢五尺。
English: The inscription indicating the identity and name of the deceased is surrounded by five feet of red ink.

古文：敛随所有，衣衾及亲戚禭仪随所用。
现代文：装殓随意用自己所有的布帛，尸衣盖被以及亲属向死者赠送衣被的仪节都随意使用。
English: You are free to use all your own cloths for decoration, and you are free to use the corpse quilt cover and the ritual of relatives giving quilts to the deceased.

古文：棺用坚木，油杉为上，柏次之，土杉松又次之。
现代文：棺材用坚硬的木材，油杉马上等，柏次等，土杉松又次一等。
English: The coffin is made of hard wood, such as oil cedar, cypress, and the next best is the tussac pine.

古文：用黑漆、金漆，不得用朱红。
现代文：使用黑漆、金漆，不准用朱红。
English: Use black paint, gold paint, and do not use vermilion.

古文：明器一事。
现代文：随葬品一件。
English: One piece of funerary goods.

古文：功布以白布三尺引柩。
现代文：迎神的布用白布三尺导引灵柩。
English: The cloth used to welcome the god is a white cloth of three feet to guide the coffin.

古文：柳车以衾覆棺。
现代文：丧车用单被覆盖棺材。
English: The hearse was covered with a single coffin.

古文：志石二片，如官之仪。
现代文：墓志的石头二片，如同官员的仪式。
English: Two pieces of tombstone, like an official ceremony.

古文：茔地围十八步。
现代文：坟地周边十八步。
English: There are eighteen steps around the cemetery.

古文：祭用豕，随家有无。 
现代文：祭祀用猪，根庭有无而定。 
English: As for the pigs used in religious rites, it depends on whether there is a garden or not.

古文：又诏： 古之丧礼，以哀戚为本，治丧之具，称家有无。
现代文：又下诏： 古代的丧礼，以哀伤悲戚为根本，办理丧事的器具，与家庭的有或没有相适应。
English: He also issued the following edict: Ancient funerals are based on sorrow and grief, and the equipment for handling funerals is suitable for families with or without children.

古文：近代以来，富者奢僣犯分，力不足者称贷财物，夸耀殡送，及有惑于风水，停柩经年，不行安葬。
现代文：近代以来，富裕的奢侈僭越违犯名分，力量不足的借贷财物，出殡送丧炫耀声势，以及有的被风水所迷惑，停放灵柩待葬多年，不进行安葬。
English: Since modern times, wealthy extravagant urns have been in violation of the law, borrowing property with insufficient strength, showing off the funeral and mourning, and some have been confused by feng shui, parking the coffin for many years to be buried, and not carrying out burial.

古文：宜令中书省臣集议定制，颁行遵守，违者论罪。 
现代文：应该命令中书省大臣召集商议制定制度，颁布施行让人民遵照办理，违犯的判罪。 
English: The Minister of the Ministry of Education and Culture should be ordered to convene a consultation to formulate a system, promulgate and implement it, let the people follow it, and convict the violators.

古文：又谕礼部曰： 古有掩骼埋胔之令，近世狃元俗，死者或以火焚，而投其骨于水。
现代文：又训谕礼部说： 古代有掩埋尸骸的命令，近来习惯于元代风俗，死去的人有的用火焚烧，而把烧剩的骨头投到水中。
English: He also said: "In ancient times, there was an order to bury the remains of the dead. Recently, we have become accustomed to the customs of the Yuan Dynasty. Some of the dead were burned with fire, and the burned bones were thrown into the water.

古文：伤恩败俗，莫此为甚。其禁止之。
现代文：损伤恩义，败坏风俗，没有什么比这更严重的，应该禁止这种作法。
English: There is nothing more serious than damaging goodwill and corrupting customs, and such practices should be prohibited.

古文：若贫无地者，所在官司择宽闲地为义冢，俾之葬埋。
现代文：如果是贫困没有土地的，所在地的主管官吏选择宽广空闲之地作为义冢，把他们埋葬。
English: If they are poor and have no land, the local officials will choose a wide open space as a place of worship and bury them.

古文：或有宦游远方不能归葬者，官给力费以归之。 
现代文：或者有到远方作官死后不能返回安葬的，官府供给运送费送回家乡。 
English: Or if an official who died in a distant place cannot be returned for burial, the government will provide transportation fees to send him back to his hometown.

古文：服纪
现代文：服纪
English: Discipline

古文：明初颁《大明令》，凡丧服等差，多因前代之旧。
现代文：明朝初年颁布《大明令》，所有丧服等级差别，多因袭前代的旧制度。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the "Great Ming Decree" was promulgated, and all the differences in funeral attire were mostly due to the old system of the previous generation.

古文：洪武七年，《孝慈录》成，复图列于《大明令》，刊示中外。
现代文：洪武七年，《孝慈录》写成，又计划列入《大明令》，刊布告示朝廷内外。
English: In the seventh year of Hongwu, the "Record of filial piety" was written, and it was also planned to be included in the "Great Decree" and published as a notice inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：先是贵妃孙氏薨，敕礼官定服制。
现代文：此前，贵妃孙氏死，敕命礼官制定丧服制度。
English: Previously, after the death of Guifei Sun, the etiquette officials worked hard to establish a mourning dress system.

古文：礼部尚书牛谅等奏曰： 周《仪礼》，父在，为母服期年，若庶母则无服。 
现代文：礼部尚书牛谅等人上奏说： 周代的《仪礼》，父亲在，为母亲服丧一周年，如果是父亲的小妾便没有服丧关系。 
English: Shang Shuxiu Rong and others from the Ministry of Ceremonies said: In Zhou Dynasty's "Rituals," the father is present, and it is the first anniversary of the mother's funeral. If it is the father's concubine, there is no mourning relationship.

古文：太祖曰： 父母之恩一也，而低昂若是，不情甚矣。 
现代文：太祖说： 父母的恩德是一样的，而像这样高低不同，太不合情理了。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "The benevolence of parents is the same, but it is unreasonable to have such a difference between high and low.

古文：乃敕翰林院学士宋濂等曰； 养生送死，圣王大政。
现代文：于是敕命翰林院学士宋濂等人说： 供养生者礼送死者，是圣明帝王的大的政体。
English: As a result, Song Tao, a scholar of the Hanlin Academy, and others said, "Offering gifts to the living to send to the dead is the great political system of Emperor Shengming.

古文：讳亡忌疾，衰世陋俗。
现代文：忌讳死亡疾病，是衰微社会的鄙陋习俗。
English: The taboo of death and disease is a despicable custom of a declining society.

古文：三代丧礼散失于衰周，厄于暴秦。
现代文：三代的丧礼在衰微的晚周散失，在暴虐的秦朝遭到厄运。
English: The funerals of the three generations were dispersed in the waning twilight, and suffered bad luck in the tyrannical Qin Dynasty.

古文：汉、唐以降，莫能议此。
现代文：汉、唐以来，没有人能议论此事。
English: Since the Han Dynasty and the Tang Dynasty, no one has been able to discuss this matter.

古文：夫人情无穷，而礼为适宜。
现代文：人的惰性无穷，而礼要适合惰性。
English: People's inertia is infinite, and etiquette should be suitable for inertia.

古文：人心所安，即天理所在。
现代文：人心安适的地方，就是天理存在的地方。
English: The place where the human heart is at ease is the place where Tenri exists.

古文：尔等其考定丧礼。 
现代文：你们要考察制定丧礼。 
English: You'll have to look into funeral arrangements.

古文：于是濂等考得古人论服母丧者凡四十二人，愿服三年者二十八人，服期年者十四人。
现代文：于是宋濂等人考察得知古人论说为母亲服丧的一共有四十二人，愿意服丧三年的二十八人，服丧一周年的十四人。
English: As a result, Song Tao and others learned from their investigation that the ancients said that a total of 42 people mourned for their mothers, 28 people were willing to mourn for three years, and 14 people were willing to mourn for the first year.

古文：太祖曰： 三年之丧，天下通丧。
现代文：太祖说： 三年的丧期，是天下的通行丧礼。
English: The great-grandfather said, "The three-year mourning period is a universal funeral rite.

古文：观愿服三年，视愿服期年者倍，岂非天理人情之所安乎？ 
现代文：考察愿意服丧三年，比愿意服丧一周年的多一倍，难道不是天理人情所乐意的吗？ 
English: Isn't it human nature to want to mourn for three years, which is twice as long as the first year?

古文：乃立为定制。
现代文：于是确立成固定的制度。
English: As a result, a fixed system was established.

古文：子为父母，庶子为其母，皆斩衰三年。
现代文：儿子为父母，妾所生的儿子为他的母亲，都服斩衰三年。
English: A son is to his father as a father, and a son born of a concubine is to his mother, and both are to be cut off for three years.

古文：嫡子、众子为庶母，皆齐衰杖期。
现代文：正妻所生的长子、嫡子以外的儿子为父亲的妾，都服齐衰杖期丧一年。
English: The eldest son born to a legal wife, and the son born to a father's concubine other than the legitimate son, all serve a one-year mourning period.

古文：仍命以五服丧制，并著为书，使内外遵宁。
现代文：仍然命令按五服的服丧制度，一并写成文字编为书籍，使朝廷内外遵守。
English: He still ordered that the mourning system of the five sets of clothing be written down and compiled into books so that it could be observed both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：其制服五。
现代文：丧服有五等。
English: There are five grades of mourning clothes.

古文：曰斩衰，以至粗麻布为之，不缝下边。
现代文：一是斩衰，用最粗的麻布制成，不缝下面的衣边。
English: First, it was made of the thickest linen, with no seam at the bottom hem.

古文：曰齐衰，以稍粗麻布为之，缝下边。
现代文：二是齐衰，用稍粗的麻布制成，缝下面的衣边。
English: The second is the zizhe, made of slightly thick linen, with the hem of the bottom seam.

古文：曰大功，以粗熟布为之。
现代文：三是大功，用粗而经过加工的布制成。
English: The third is a great achievement, made of coarse but processed cloth.

古文：曰小功，以稍粗熟布为之。
现代文：四是小功，用稍粗而经过加工的布制成。
English: The fourth is a small work, made with a slightly coarse and processed cloth.

古文：曰緦麻，以稍细熟布为之。
现代文：五是鳃麻，用稍细而经过加工的布制成。
English: The fifth is nettle, made from a slightly finer, processed cloth.

古文：其叙服有八。
现代文：叙服有八等。
English: There are eight grades for awarding uniforms.

古文：曰斩衰三年者：子为父母，庶子为所生母，子为继母，谓母卒父命他妾养己者，子为养母，谓自幼过房与人者；女在室为父母，女嫁被出而反在室为父母；嫡孙为祖父母承重及曾高祖父母承重者；为人后者为所后父母，及为所后祖父母承重；夫为后则妻从服，妇为舅姑；庶子之妻为夫之所生母；妻妾为夫。
现代文：一是斩衰三年的丧服：儿子为父母，妾所生的儿子为亲生母亲，儿子为继母服丧；儿子为捻育自己的庶母，说的是生身母死后父亲命别的妾养育自己的人，儿子焉有抚养关系的非生身母，说的是自幼过继给人为嗣的人服丧；女儿没有出嫁为父母，女儿出嫁后被遣弃而返回没有出嫁焉父母服丧；嫡孙在父死后为祖父母服丧以及曾高祖父母服丧；抱给人作后代的人为养父母，以及养父母死为养祖父母服丧；丈夫为别人的后嗣则妻随丈夫服丧，妇为公婆服丧；小妾所生的儿子的妻子为丈夫的生身母亲服丧；妻妾焉丈夫服丧。
English: First, the three-year mourning dress: the son is the parent, the son born of the concubine is the biological mother, the son is the stepmother; the son is the common-law mother who raised him, that is, the concubine who was ordered by the father to raise herself after the death of the biological mother; the son is the non-biological mother who does not have a child-rearing relationship, that is, the person who was adopted from infancy to the person who is the heir; the daughter did not marry as a parent, the daughter was dismissed after marriage and returned without marrying; the parents mourned; the grandchild mourned the grandparents after the death of the

古文：曰齐衰杖期者：嫡子众子为庶母；嫡子众子之妻为夫之庶母，为嫁母、出母、父卒继母改嫁而已从之者；夫为妻。
现代文：二是齐衰杖期一年的丧服：嫡子、嫡子以外的儿子焉父亲的妾服丧；嫡子、嫡子以外的儿子的妻为丈夫的庶母，为出嫁的母亲、被遗弃的母亲、父亲死后继母改嫁而自己跟从前去的人服丧；丈夫为妻子服丧。
English: The second is the one-year mourning period: the legitimate son, the son other than the legitimate son, and the father's concubine are mourned; the legitimate son, the wife of the son other than the legitimate son is the husband's stepmother, the married mother, the abandoned mother, the stepmother after the death of the father and the remarriage; the husband is mourned for his wife.

古文：曰齐衰不杖期者：父母为嫡长子及众子，父母为女在室者，继母为长子及众子，慈母为长子及众子；孙为祖父母，孙女虽适人不降，高曾皆然；为伯叔父母；妾为夫之长子及众子，为所生子；为兄弟，为兄弟之子及兄弟之女在室者，为姑及姊妹在室者；妾为嫡妻；嫁母、出母为其子；女在室及虽适人而无夫与子者，为其兄弟及兄弟之子；继母改嫁为前夫之子从己者；为继父同居两无大功之亲者；妇人为夫亲兄弟之子，妇人为夫亲兄弟子女在室者；女出嫁为父母；妾为其父母；为人后者为其父母；女适人为兄弟之为父后者；祖为嫡孙；父母为长子妇。
现代文：三是：衰不杖期一年的丧服：父母为嫡长子以及嫡长子以外的儿子，父母焉没有出嫁的女儿，继母为长子以及长子以外的儿子，抚育自己的庶母为长子以及长子以外的儿子服丧；孙子为祖父母，孙女虽许婚而没有出嫁，为高曾祖服丧都这样；为伯、叔父母服丧；妾为丈夫的长子以及长子以外的儿子，为自己生的儿子服丧；为兄弟，为兄弟的儿子以及兄弟没有出嫁的女儿服丧；为姑以及姊妹没有出嫁的服丧；妾为嫡妻服丧；改嫁的母亲、被遣弃的母亲为她的儿子服丧；女子没有出嫁以及虽然嫁了人而役有丈夫与儿子的人，为她的兄弟以及兄弟的儿子服丧；继母改嫁为跟从自己的前夫的儿子服丧；为继父同居两边都没有服丧九月的亲属关系的人服丧；妇人为丈夫亲兄弟的儿子，妇人为丈夫亲兄弟的没有出嫁的女儿服丧；女儿出嫁为父母服丧；妾为她的父母服丧；作别人的后嗣的人为他的父母服丧；出嫁女子为作父亲后嗣的兄弟服丧；祖为嫡孙服丧；父母为长子的媳妇服丧。
English: The third is: a year-long mourning period: the parents are the eldest son and the son other than the eldest son, the parents are unmarried daughters, the stepmother is the eldest son and the son other than the eldest son, the stepmother who raised herself is the eldest son and the son other than the eldest son; the grandchildren are the grandparents, the granddaughter is married but not married, and the great-great-grandparents are mourned; the uncle and the uncles are mourned; the concubine is the husband's eldest son and the son other than the eldest son, mourned for her own son; the brother, the brother's son and the brother's unmarried daughter

古文：曰齐衰五月者：为曾祖父母。
现代文：四是齐衰服丧五月的：为曾祖父母服丧。
English: The fourth is the mourning of May: the mourning of the great-grandparents.

古文：曰齐衰三月者：为高祖父母，为继父昔同居而今不同者，为继父虽同居而两有大功以上亲者。
现代文：五是齐衰服丧三月的：为高祖父母，为过去同居而现在不同居的继父，为虽同居而两方有服丧九月以上亲属关系的继父服丧。
English: The fifth is the mourning of March: for the great-grandparents, for the stepfather who used to live together and now lives separately, for the stepfather who lived together and the two parties had a relationship of more than nine months.

古文：曰大功九月者：为同堂兄弟及姊妹在室者，为姑及姊妹及兄弟之女出嫁者；父母为众子妇，为女之出嫁者；祖为众孙；为兄弟之子妇；妇人为夫之祖父母，为夫之伯叔父母，为夫之兄弟之子妇，为夫兄弟之女嫁人者；女出嫁为本宗伯叔父母，及为兄弟与兄弟之子，为姑姊妹及兄弟之女在室者；为人后者为其兄弟及姑姊妹在室者；妻为夫本生父母；为兄弟之子为人后者。
现代文：六是大功服丧九月的：为同祖父兄弟以及没有出嫁的姊妹，为姑姑以及姊妹以及出嫁了的兄弟的女儿服丧；父母为众儿子的媳妇，为出嫁的女儿服丧；祖父为众孙儿服丧；为兄弟的儿子的媳妇服丧；妇人为丈夫的祖父母，为丈夫的伯、叔父母，为丈夫的兄弟的儿子的媳妇，为丈夫的兄弟已嫁人的女儿服丧；女子出嫁为本宗族的伯、叔父母，以及为兄弟与兄弟的儿子，为姑姊妹以及兄弟没有出嫁的女儿服丧；作别人的后嗣的人为他的兄弟以及没有出嫁的姑姊妹服丧；妻子为丈夫的亲生父母服丧；为兄弟的儿子作别人的后嗣的人服丧。
English: The sixth month is the month of mourning. In September, people mourn for their grandfathers, brothers, unmarried sisters, aunts, sisters, and married brothers' daughters; parents mourn for their sons' daughters-in-law and married daughters; grandfathers mourn for their grandchildren; brothers mourn for their sons' daughters-in-law; women mourn for their husbands' grandparents, husbands' uncles and uncles, husbands' brothers' sons' daughters-in-law, husbands' brothers' sons' daughters-in-law, husbands' brothers' sons' daughters-in-law; women mourn for their brothers' uncles and uncles, brothers' sons, sisters-in-

古文：曰小功五月者：为伯叔祖父母，为同堂伯叔父母，为再从兄弟及再从姊妹在室者，为同堂兄弟之子，为祖姑在室者，为从祖姑在室者，为同堂兄弟之女在室者，为兄弟之妻；为人后者为其姑姊妹适人者；为嫡孙妇，为同堂姊妹之出嫁者，为孙女适人者，为兄弟之孙及兄弟之女孙在室者，为外祖父母，为母之兄弟姊妹，为同母异父之兄弟姊妹，为姊妹之子；妇人为夫之姑及夫之姊妹，为夫之兄弟及夫兄弟之妻，为夫兄弟之孙及夫兄弟之女孙在室者，为夫同堂兄弟之子及同堂兄弟之女在室者。
现代文：七是小功服丧五月的：为伯、叔祖父母，为同祖父的伯、叔父母，为再堂兄弟以及没有出嫁的再堂姊妹，为同祖父兄弟的儿子，为没有出嫁的祖姑，为没有出嫁的堂祖姑，为没有出嫁的同祖兄弟的女儿，为兄弟的妻子；作别人的后嗣的人为他的出嫁了的姑姊妹服丧；为嫡孙媳妇，为出嫁了的同祖姊妹，为已嫁人的孙女，为兄弟的孙子以及兄弟的没有出嫁的孙女，为外祖父母，为母亲的兄弟姊妹，为同母不同父的兄弟姊妹，为姊妹的儿子服丧；妇人为丈夫的姑姑以及丈夫的姊妹，为丈夫的兄弟以及兄弟的妻子，为丈夫的兄弟的孙子以及丈夫的兄弟的没有出嫁的孙女，为丈夫同祖兄弟的儿子以及同祖兄弟的没有出嫁的女儿服丧。
English: Seven are the lesser feats of mourning in May: for uncles and great-uncles, for uncles and great-uncles, for second cousins and unmarried second cousins, for the son of a grandfather's brother, for an unmarried great-aunt, for an unmarried great-aunt, for an unmarried great-uncle's daughter, for a brother's wife; for someone who is someone else's heir, for his married sister-in-law; for a granddaughter-in-law, for a married great-aunt, for a married granddaughter, for a brother's grandson and a brother's unmarried granddaughter, for maternal grandparents

古文：曰緦麻三月者：为族曾祖父母，为族伯叔祖父母，为族父母，为族兄弟及族姊妹在室者，为族曾祖姑在室者，为族祖姑及族姑在室者，为兄弟之曾孙，女在室同，为曾孙玄孙，为同堂兄弟之孙，女在室同，为再从兄弟之子，女在室同，为祖姑、从祖姑及从祖姊妹之出嫁者，为兄弟之孙女出嫁者，为同堂兄弟之女出嫁者，为乳母，为舅之子，为姑之子，为姨之子，为外孙，为婿，为妻之父母，为兄弟孙之妇，为同堂兄弟子之妇，为同堂兄弟之妻，为外孙妇，为甥妇；妇人为夫之曾祖、高祖父母，为夫之叔伯祖父母，为夫之同堂伯叔父母，为夫兄弟之曾孙，为夫之同堂兄弟，为夫同堂兄弟之孙，孙女同，为夫再从兄弟之子，为夫兄弟之孙妇，为夫同堂兄弟子之妇，为夫同堂兄弟之妻，为夫同堂姊妹，为夫之外祖父母，为夫之舅及姨，为夫之祖姑及从祖姑在室者；女出嫁为本宗叔伯祖父母，为本宗同堂叔伯父母，为本宗同堂兄弟之子女，为本宗祖姑及从祖姑在室者，为本宗同堂姊妹之出嫁者；为人后者为本生外祖父母。
现代文：八是总麻服丧三月的：为同族曾祖父母，为同族伯、叔祖父母，为同族父母，为同族兄弟以及没有出嫁的同族姊妹，为没有出嫁的同族曾祖姑，为同族祖姑以及没有出嫁的同族姑，为兄弟的曾孙，曾孙女没有出嫁的相同，为曾孙、玄孙，为同祖兄弟的孙子，孙女没有出嫁的相同，为再堂兄弟的儿子，女儿没有出嫁的相同，为祖姑、从祖姑以及出嫁的从祖姊妹，为出嫁了的兄弟的孙女，为同祖兄弟的出镓了的女儿，为乳母，为舅的儿子，为姑姑的儿子，为姨的儿子，为外孙，为女婿，为妻子的父母，为兄弟的孙子的媳妇，为同祖兄弟的儿子的媳妇，为同祖兄弟的妻子，为外孙的媳妇，为外甥的媳妇服丧；妇人为丈夫的曾祖、高祖父母，为丈夫的伯、叔祖父母，为丈夫的同祖伯、叔父母，为丈夫的兄弟的曾孙，为丈夫的同祖兄弟，为丈夫的同祖兄弟的孙子，孙女相同，为丈夫的再堂兄弟的儿子，为丈夫的兄弟的孙儿的媳妇，为丈夫的同祖兄弟的儿子的媳妇，为丈夫的同祖兄弟的妻子，为丈夫的同祖姊妹，为丈夫的外祖父母，为丈夫的舅以及姨，为丈夫的祖姑以及没有出嫁的堂祖姑服丧；女子出嫁为本宗族叔伯祖父母，焉本宗族同祖叔伯父母，为本宗族同祖兄弟的子女，为本宗族祖姑以及没有出嫁的堂祖姑，为本宗族同祖的出嫁了的姊妹服丧；作别人的后嗣的人为亲生的外祖父母服丧。
English: The eighth month is the month of mourning: for the great-grandparents of the same race, for the uncles and uncles and grandparents of the same race, for the parents of the same race, for the brothers and sisters of the same race who did not marry, for the great-grandmothers of the same race who did not marry, for the great-grandmothers of the same race who did not marry, for the great-grandchildren and great-granddaughters of the same race who did not marry, for the great-grandchildren and great-great-grandchildren of the same race who did not marry, for the sons and grandsons of the same race who did not marry, for the

古文：嘉靖十八年正月，谕辅臣： 昨居丧理疾，阅《礼记·檀弓》等篇，其所著礼仪制度俱不归一，又不载天子全仪。
现代文：嘉靖十八年正月，皇帝训谕辅臣： 往日服丧治病，阅读《礼记檀弓》等篇，书中所著礼仪制度都不统一，又不记载天子的全部礼仪。
English: In the first month of the 18th year of Jiajing, the emperor issued an edict to his aide-de-camp: to wear mourning clothes, cure diseases, and read "The Book of Etiquette and Etiquette," etc. The etiquette system written in the book is not uniform, and does not record all the etiquette of the emperor.

古文：虽曰 三年之丧，通乎上下 ，而今昔亦有大不同者。
现代文：虽然说三年的丧服，贯通于上下位，而现在和过去相比也有很不相同的地方。
English: Although the three-year mourning period is said to have permeated the upper and lower ranks, there are also very different places now compared to the past.

古文：皇祖所定，未有全文，每遇帝后之丧，亦未免因仍为礼。
现代文：皇祖制定的礼仪，没有全文，每次遇到皇帝、皇后的丧事，也不免因袭举行礼仪。
English: There is no full text of the etiquette established by the emperor's ancestors. Every time there is a funeral for the emperor or empress, the etiquette is inevitably held.

古文：至于冠裳衰绖，所司之制不一，其与礼官考定之。
现代文：至于衣冠衰绖，主管部门的制作也不统一，希望与礼一起考定。
English: As for the crown, the production of the competent department is not uniform, and it is hoped that it will be evaluated together with the ceremony.

古文：自初丧至除服，冠裳轻重之制具为仪节，俾归至当。 
现代文：从开始治丧到服丧结东，衣冠轻重的制作都定出仪节，使之达到最恰当的地步。 
English: From the beginning of the mourning period to the end of the mourning period, the production of important clothes and crowns have set the ceremony, so that it can reach the most appropriate level.

古文：于是礼部议丧服诸制奏之。
现代文：于是礼部讨论丧服的各种制度进呈。
English: As a result, the Ministry of Ceremonies discussed the various systems of funeral attire.

古文：帝令更加考订，画图注释，并祭葬全仪，编辑成书备览。
现代文：皇帝命令进一步加以考察订正，画出图加上注释，与祭葬的全部礼仪，编辑成书以备查览。
English: The emperor ordered that it be further examined and revised, and that a diagram be drawn with annotations, and the entire etiquette of sacrifice and burial be compiled into a book for inspection.

