古文：初，汉元、成之世，先识之士有言曰： 魏年有和，当有开石于西三千余里，系五马，文曰： 大讨曹。  
现代文：当初，在汉元帝、汉成帝的时代，有预见的人士曾说过这样的话： 魏朝的年号有太和，那时候在西边三千多里的地方会有裂开的石头，上面有五匹马的图案，石头上还有文字，那文字是 大讨曹 。 
English: At the beginning, in the era of Emperor Hanyuan and Emperor Hancheng, someone with foresight once said the following: The era name of the Wei Dynasty was Taihe. At that time, in a place more than three thousand miles to the west, there would be a cracked stone with a pattern of five horses on it. There would also be writing on the stone. The writing would be 大讨曹.

古文：及魏之初兴也，张掖之柳谷，有开石焉：始见于建安，形成于黄初，文备于太和，周围七寻，中高一仞，苍质素章：龙、马、鳞、鹿、凤凰、仙人之象，粲然咸着。
现代文：等到魏国刚兴起的时候，张掖郡的柳谷有裂开的石头。这石头在建安年间开始出现，在黄初年间形成，在太和年间花纹图象就齐备了。它的周长有七寻，当中高一仞。青色的质地，白色的花纹，龙、马、麟、鹿、凤凰、仙人的图象，都清楚地附着在上面。
English: When the State of Wei was just emerging, there was a cracked stone in Liugu, Zhangye County. This stone began to appear in the Jian'an period, formed in the early Yellow period, and the pattern images were complete in the Taihe period. It has a circumference of seven fathoms, of which one is high. The blue texture, white pattern, dragon, horse, unicorn, deer, phoenix, and fairy images are clearly attached to it.

古文：此一事者，魏、晋代兴之符也。
现代文：这一情况，是魏朝废替、晋朝兴起的符命。
English: This situation is the fate of the abolition of the Wei Dynasty and the rise of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：至晋泰始三年，张掖太守焦胜上言：以留郡本国图，校今石文，文字多少不同，谨具图上。
现代文：到晋朝泰始三年，张掖郡太守焦胜上奏说： 拿留在郡府的本国图谶校对现在石头上的花纹图形，文字的多少不同。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Jin Dynasty, Jiao Sheng, the governor of Zhangye County, said in his report: Take the map of the country left in the county seat and check the pattern on the stone. The text is somewhat different.

古文：案其文有五马象：其一，有人平上帻，执戟而乘之。其一，有若马形而不成，其字有金，有中，有大司马，有王，有大吉，有正，有开寿。其一，成行，曰：金当取之。
现代文：现在我谨把这些花纹都描摹在此，呈上请阅。 考察那花纹图形，可以看到有五匹马的形象：其中一匹马，有一个人戴着平上帻、手握着矛朝骑在它身上；其中一匹，有点象马的形状，但又不完全象马。那图上的字有 金 ，有 中 ，有 大司马 ，有 王 ，有 大吉 ，有 正 ，有 开寿 ；其中有一些字排成一行，那是 金当取之 。
English: Now I would like to draw all these patterns here and present them for your perusal. Examining the pattern, you can see the image of five horses: one of the horses has a person wearing a flat bridle, holding a spear and riding on it; one of them is a bit like a horse, but not exactly like a horse. The characters on the picture are Jin, Zhong, Dasima, Wang, Dagi, Zheng, and Kaishu; some of the characters are in a row, that is, Jin should be taken.

古文：晋武帝泰始初，衣服上俭，下丰，着衣者皆厌腰。
现代文：晋武帝泰始初年，衣服上身做得短小、下身做得长大，穿上衣的人都把腰身做得很小。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Jin Dynasty, the upper body of the clothes was made short and small, the lower body was made long, and people who put on the clothes made the waist very small.

古文：此君衰弱，臣放纵之象也。
现代文：这是君主衰弱、臣下放纵的象征。
English: This is a symbol of the weakness of the monarch and the indulgence of his subjects.

古文：至元康末，妇人出两裆，加乎交领之上。此内出外也。
现代文：到元康末年，女人把背心穿在外面，加在有领的衣服上，这是内装穿到了外装上。
English: Towards the end of the Yuan and Kang dynasties, women wore their waistcoats on the outside and added them to their collared dresses, which meant that the inner garment was worn over the outer garment.

古文：为车乘者，苟贵轻细，又数变易其形，皆以白篾为纯。盖古丧车之遗象。
现代文：那时做车子的，草率地迎合世俗而崇尚轻小，又屡次改变它的形状，都用白色的竹篾为镶边，这是古代灵车留下来的形制。
English: At that time, those who made the car carelessly catered to the secular and advocated lightness, and repeatedly changed its shape. They all used white bamboo shoots for the edging, which is the shape left by the ancient hearse.

古文：晋之祸征也。
现代文：这些都是晋朝将要遭受灾难的征兆。
English: These are all signs that the Jin Dynasty is about to suffer a disaster.

古文：胡床，貊盘，翟之器也。羌煮，貊炙，翟之食也。
现代文：马札、貊盘，是北狄的器具；羌煮、烤肉，是北狄的食物。
English: The horse trough and the ladle are the tools of Bei Di; stewing and grilling meat are the food of Bei Di.

古文：自太始以来，中国尚之。
现代文：从晋武帝泰始年间以后，中国推崇这些东西。
English: Since the reign of Emperor Taizu, China has revered these things.

古文：贵人，富室，必畜其器。吉享嘉宾，皆以为先。
现代文：贵族豪富之家，一定备有马札、貊盘等器具；祭祀请客，都把羌煮、烤肉等先端出来。
English: The homes of aristocrats and wealthy people are sure to have horse harnesses, stewing dishes, and other utensils; sacrificial guests will be served stew and grilled meat.

古文：戎翟侵中国之前兆也。
现代文：这是西戎、北狄入侵中国的先兆。
English: This was a precursor to the invasion of China by the Western and Northern Dynasties.

古文：晋太康四年，会稽郡蟛蚑及蟹，皆化为鼠。
现代文：晋武帝太康四年，会稽郡的螃蜞和蟹都变成了老鼠。
English: In the four years of Emperor Taikang, the crabs and crabs in Heji County all turned into mice.

古文：其众覆野。大食稻，为灾。
现代文：这众多的老鼠遍布田野，大量啮食水稻，造成了严重的灾荒。
English: This large number of mice spread all over the fields, eating a large amount of rice, causing a serious disaster.

古文：始成，有毛肉而无骨，其行不能过田，数日之后，则皆为牝。
现代文：它们刚变成老鼠的时候，有毛有肉而没有骨头，它们爬行起来还不能越过田埂。几天以后，便都变成了雌老鼠。
English: When they first turned into mice, they had hair and flesh but no bones, and they couldn't crawl across the field yet. A few days later, they all turned into female mice.

古文：太康五年正月，二龙见武库井中。
现代文：晋武帝太康五年正月，有两条龙出现在武库的井里。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taikang, two dragons appeared in the well of the arsenal.

古文：武库者，帝王威御之器，所宝藏也；屋宇邃密，非龙所处。
现代文：武库，是储藏帝王威武之器的宝地，房屋幽深隐蔽，不是龙呆的地方。
English: The arsenal is a treasure trove for storing the emperor's mighty weapons, and the house is deep and hidden, not a place for a dragon to stay.

古文：是后七年，藩王相害；二十八年，果有二胡，僭窃神器，皆字曰龙。
现代文：这事发生后七年，诸侯王互相残害。二十八年后，果然有两个胡人石勒、石虎超越本分窃取了帝位，他们的字都是 龙 。
English: Seven years after this happened, the princes killed each other. Twenty-eight years later, there were indeed two Hu people, Shi Le and Shi Hu, who overstepped their duty and stole the imperial throne. Their characters were both dragons.

古文：晋武帝太康六年，南阳获两足虎。
现代文：晋武帝太康六年，南阳郡有人猎取到两只脚的老虎。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, someone in Nanyang County hunted down a two-legged tiger.

古文：虎者，阴精而居乎阳，金兽也。
现代文：老虎，是处于阳间的阴气之精，是金兽。
English: The tiger is the spirit of gloom in the sun, it is a golden beast.

古文：南阳，火名也。
现代文：南阳，顾名思义，就是南方的太阳，所以它是火的名称。
English: Nanyang is a brand name.

古文：金精入火，而失其形，王室乱之妖也。
现代文：金的精气进入火而丧失了它原有的形状，这是晋王室变乱的凶兆。
English: If a goldfinch is set on fire and its body is damaged, it is a sign that the royal family will suffer turmoil and the appearance of a monster.

古文：其七年十一月景辰，四角兽见于河间。
现代文：太康七年十一月丙辰日，在河间国出现四只角的野兽。
English: On the seventh day of the 11th month of the 7th year of Taikang, a beast with four horns appeared in the country of Hema.

古文：天戒若曰： 角，兵象也。四者，四方之象。
现代文：上天的禁戒这样说： 角，是用兵的象征；四，是四方的象征。
English: Heaven's precepts say: The horn is the symbol of a soldier; the four is the symbol of the four directions.

古文：当有兵革起于四方 ，后河间王遂连四方之兵，作为乱阶。
现代文：所以一定会有战乱发生在四方。 后来河间王司马颙于是连结四方的军队，成了祸乱的来源之一。
English: Therefore, there was bound to be war in the four directions. Later, King Sima Qian of Kawama then linked the armies of the four directions and became one of the sources of the calamity.

古文：太康九年，幽州塞北有死牛头语。
现代文：晋武帝太康九年，幽州边塞之北有死亡的牛头说话。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, there was a dead bull's head north of the Yuzhou border fortress.

古文：时帝多疾病，深以后事为念，而付托不以至公，思瞀乱之应也。
现代文：当时晋武帝经常生病，深深地挂念他的后事，但他却不以大公无私的态度来托付治国大权。
English: At that time, Emperor Jinwu was often ill and was deeply concerned about his future, but he did not entrust the power to govern the country with a selfless attitude.

古文：太康中，有鲤鱼二枚，现武库屋上。
现代文：这死牛头说话就是他思想昏乱的应验。太康年间，有两条鲤鱼出现在武库的屋面上。
English: During the Taikang years, two eels appeared on the roof of the arsenal.

古文：武库，兵府；鱼有鳞甲，亦是兵之类也。
现代文：武库是藏兵器的库房；鱼有鳞甲，也是兵器的象征。
English: The arsenal is the storehouse of Tibetan weapons; the fish with scales and armor is also a symbol of weapons.

古文：鱼既极阴，屋上太阳，鱼现屋上，象至阴以兵革之祸干太阳也。
现代文：鱼是极盛的阴气，而屋面上是极盛的阳气，鱼出现在屋面上，象征极阴因为兵乱的灾祸而冲犯了极阳。
English: The fish is the peak of yin, and the rooftop is the peak of yang. The fish appears on the rooftop, symbolizing the peak of yin because of the calamity of the mutiny and the impact of the peak of yang.

古文：及惠帝初，诛皇后父杨骏，矢交宫阙，废后为庶人，死于幽宫。
现代文：到晋惠帝初年，诛杀晋武帝杨皇后父亲杨骏，乱箭在宫殿之中飞来飞去，又把杨皇后废黜为平民，把她害死在隐蔽的宫室中。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinhui, Emperor Jinwu killed Queen Yang's father, Yang Hui, and arrows flew around the palace. He also deposed Queen Yang as a commoner and killed her in a hidden palace room.

古文：元康之末，而贾后专制，谤杀太子，寻亦诛废。
现代文：元康末年，贾后独擅大权，诽谤并杀害了太子，不久贾后也被废黜杀死。
English: In the last years of the Yuan Kang, Jia Hou monopolized power, slandered and killed the crown prince, and shortly after, Jia Hou was deposed and killed.

古文：十年之间，母后之难再兴，是其应也。
现代文：十年之间，皇后的灾难发生了两次，这便是鱼出现在武库屋上的应验。
English: In the space of ten years, the Empress's calamity occurred twice, and this was the fulfillment of the fish appearing on the roof of the arsenal.

古文：自是祸乱构矣。
现代文：从那个时候起，晋王朝的祸乱便已造成了。
English: Since then, a disastrous situation has developed.

古文：京房易妖曰： 鱼去水，飞入道路，兵且作。 
现代文：京房《易妖》说： 鱼离开了水，飞到道路上，将会有兵乱发生。 
English: Jingfang "Yi Ying" said: The fish left the water and flew onto the road, there will be a riot.

古文：初，作屐者：妇人圆头，男子方头。
现代文：开始做木展的，把妇女的做成圆头，把男人的做成方头。
English: began to make woodblock prints, making women's heads round and men's heads square.

古文：盖作意欲别男女也。
现代文：这样制作大概是想把男、女区别开来。
English: This production is probably intended to differentiate between men and women.

古文：至太康中，妇人皆方头屐，与男无异，此贾后专妒之征也。
现代文：到太康年间，妇女都做方头的木屐，与男人没有什么两样。这是贾后专制嫉妒的征兆。
English: By the Taikang years, women were making square-headed wooden rafts, no different from men. This was a sign of Jia's autocratic jealousy.

古文：晋时，妇人结发者，既成，以缯急束其环，名曰 撷子髻 。
现代文：晋朝的时候，妇女梳发髻的，已梳成，又用丝绸紧扎发环，人们把它叫做撷子髻。
English: In the time of the Jin Dynasty, when women combed their hair, it was already combed, and the hair ring was tightly tied with silk. People called it a hairpin.

古文：始自宫中，天下翕然化之也。
现代文：这种发髻开始出现在皇宫内，后来全国都效仿它。
English: This kind of bun began to appear in the royal palace, and later the whole country followed suit.

古文：其末年，遂有怀、惠之事。
现代文：到那晋朝末年，就有怀帝、愍帝被杀之事。
English: Towards the end of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Huai and Emperor Xing were killed.

古文：太康中，天下为 晋世宁 之舞。
现代文：太康年间，天下都跳《晋世宁》的舞蹈。
English: During the Taikang years, the whole world danced the dance of "Jin Shining."

古文：其舞，抑手以执杯盘，而反复之。歌曰： 晋世宁舞，杯盘反复。 
现代文：这种舞蹈，手向下拿着杯盘再把杯盘颠来倒去，口中唱道： 晋代安宁，舞弄杯盘。 
English: In this dance, the hand holds the cup and saucer down and then turns the cup and saucer upside down, singing: "Jindai Anning, dance with the cup and saucer."

古文：至危也。
现代文：颠来倒去，是极其危险的。
English: It is extremely dangerous to go backwards and forwards.

古文：杯盘，酒器也，而名曰 晋世宁 者，言时人苟且饮食之间，而其智不可及远，如器在手也。
现代文：杯盘，是饮酒用的器具。把这种舞叫做 晋世宁 ，是说当时的人只图吃喝玩乐，他们的智谋不可能考虑到远大的事情，就像酒器握在手中那样。
English: The cups and plates are drinking utensils. The dance is called Jin Shining, which means that people at that time only wanted to eat, drink and have fun, and their wisdom could not take into account lofty things, like holding a drinking vessel in their hands.

古文：太康中，天下以毡为絔头，及络带裤口。
现代文：太康年间，天下都用毛毡做头巾和腰带、裤脚口。
English: During the Taikang era, the whole world used felt to make headscarves, belts and trouser cuffs.

古文：于是百姓咸相戏曰： 中国其必为胡所破也。
现代文：于是老百姓都开玩笑说： 中国一定要被胡人打败了。 
English: So the common people joked: China must have been defeated by the Hu people.

古文：夫毡，胡之所产者也，而天下以为絔头，带身，裤口，胡既三制之矣，能无败乎？ 
现代文：毛毡，是北胡出产的东西，而天下人拿它来做头巾、腰带、裤脚口，头、颈、脚三者都已被胡人控制了，能不失败吗？
English: The felt is a product of the Northern Goose, and people around the world use it to make headscarves, belts, trouser legs, and the head, neck, and feet have all been controlled by the Goose. Can it not fail?

古文：太康末，京、洛为 折杨柳 之歌。其曲始有兵革苦辛之辞，终以擒获斩截之事。
现代文：太康末年，洛阳唱《折杨柳》歌，那曲子开始有关于战争、苦难的歌词，最后以擒捉斩杀的事情结束。
English: At the end of Taikang's life, Luo Yang sang "Folding Poplars" song. The song began with lyrics about war and suffering, and finally ended with the matter of killing and killing.

古文：自后扬骏被诛，太后幽死，杨柳之应也。
现代文：从这以后，杨骏被杀，太后被软禁至死，这是 折杨柳 的应验啊。
English: Since then, Yang Mi has been killed and the empress dowager has been under house arrest until her death. This is the fulfillment of the willow tree.

古文：晋武帝太熙元年，辽东有马生角，在两耳下，长三寸。
现代文：晋武帝太熙元年，辽东郡有马长角，长在两只耳朵下面，长三寸。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taishi, Liaodong County had horse long horns, growing under two ears, three inches long.

古文：及帝宴驾，王室毒于兵祸。
现代文：到晋武帝逝世，朝廷便遭到了兵乱的毒害。
English: By the time of Emperor Jinwu's death, the imperial court had been poisoned by the turmoil.

古文：晋惠帝元康中，妇人之饰有五佩兵。
现代文：晋惠帝元康年间，妇女的饰品有仿照五种兵器形状而制成的发饰五佩兵。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jingu, women's accessories included hair ornaments that were modeled after the five types of weapons.

古文：又以金、银、象、角、玳瑁之属，为斧、钺、戈、戟而载之，以当笄。
现代文：又用金、银、象牙、兽角、玳瑁之类，做成斧、钺、戈、戟而佩带它，把它当作簪子。
English: And he made of gold, and of silver, and of ivory, and of the horns of beasts, and of the hoofs, an axe, and a scepter, and a club, and wore it as a belt.

古文：男女之别，国之大节故服食异等。
现代文：男女之间的分别，是国家的重大礼节，所以穿的吃的男女都不同。
English: The distinction between men and women is an important national etiquette, so both men and women dress differently.

古文：今妇人而以兵器为饰，盖妖之甚者也。
现代文：现在妇女以兵器作为饰品，这是极其反常的事。
English: It is extremely abnormal that women now use weapons as ornaments.

古文：于是遂有贾后之事。
现代文：因此便有贾后荒淫暴虐的事情。
English: As a result, Jia Hou's debauchery and brutality took place.

古文：晋元康三年闰二月，殿前六钟皆出涕，五刻乃止。
现代文：晋元康三年闰二月，洛阳太极殿前的六只大钟都流泪，到五刻时才停止。
English: In February of the third year of the reign of Jin Yuan Kang, the six large clocks in front of the Luoyang Taiji Temple were in tears, and only stopped at five o'clock.

古文：前年，贾后杀杨太后于金墉城，而贾后为恶不悛，故钟出涕，犹伤之也。
现代文：前一年贾后把杨太后杀死在金塘城，而贾后做了恶事不思悔改，所以大钟流泪，还在为之伤心。
English: The previous year, Jia Hou had killed the Empress Dowager Yang in Jintang City, and Jia Hou did evil things without thinking of repentance, so Dazhong shed tears and was still sad about it.

古文：惠帝之世，京、洛有人，一身而男女二体，亦能两用人道，而性尤好淫。
现代文：晋惠帝的时候，洛阳有个人，一个身体上长着男、女二种器官，既能与女人进行交媾，也能与男人进行交媾，而他的本性格外好淫。
English: At the time of Emperor Jinhui, there was a man in Luoyang who had both male and female organs on his body. He could have sexual intercourse with both women and men, and he was extremely horny.

古文：天下兵乱，由男女气乱，而妖形作也。
现代文：天下的战乱，是由于男、女的元气昏乱和怪现象出现的缘故。
English: The world's wars are due to the dizziness of men and women and the appearance of strange phenomena.

古文：惠帝元康中，安丰有女子，曰周世宁，年八岁，渐化为男。
现代文：晋惠帝元康年间，安丰郡有个女子叫周世宁，八岁的时候，逐渐变成男人。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jingu, there was a girl in Anfeng County named Zhou Shining. When she was eight years old, she gradually turned into a man.

古文：至十七八，而气性成。女体化而不尽，男体成而不彻，畜妻而无子。
现代文：到十七八岁，她的气质性情发育成熟，她身上的女性器官变化了但没有完全化除，而男性器官长成了却没有完全长好，结果娶了妻子而没有子女。
English: By the age of seventeen or eighteen, her temperament and disposition had matured, the female organs in her body had changed but were not completely eliminated, and the male organs had grown but were not fully grown. As a result, she married a wife but had no children.

古文：元康五年三月，临淄有大蛇，长十许丈，负二小蛇，入城北门，径从市入汉阳城景王祠中，不见。
现代文：元康五年三月，临淄县出现一条大蛇，长十多丈，背着两条小蛇，游进临淄县城的北门，径直穿过街市进入汉阳城景王祠中，便不见了。
English: In March of the fifth year of the Yuan Kang, a large snake appeared in Linyi County. It was more than ten meters long and carried two small snakes on its back. It swam into the north gate of the city of Linyi County, went straight through the city market and entered the Jingwang Shrine in Hanyang City, and then disappeared.

古文：元康五年三月，吕县有流血，东西百余步，其后八载，而封云乱徐州，杀伤数万人。
现代文：元康五年三月，吕县出现一条血流，从东到西长一百多步。那以后第八年，封云起兵攻打徐州，杀伤了几万人。
English: In March of the fifth year of the Yuan Kang, a stream of blood appeared in Lu County, stretching more than a hundred paces from east to west. In the eighth year after that, Fengyun raised an army to attack Xuzhou, killing and wounding tens of thousands of people.

古文：元康七年，霹雳破城南高禖石。
现代文：元康七年，霹雳击破了洛阳城南的高禖坛石。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Kang Dynasty, the dragonfly broke through the high-pitched altar stone in the south of Luoyang.

古文：高禖，宫中求子祠也。
现代文：高禖，是宫中求子的祠庙。
English: Takatsuki is the ancestral temple of the imperial concubine.

古文：贾后妒忌，将杀怀、愍，故天怒贾后将诛之应也。
现代文：当时贾后妒忌，将要杀掉怀帝、愍帝，所以老天怨恨贾后，这霹雳击石便是将要诛死她相应的。
English: At that time, Empress Jia was jealous and was going to kill Emperor Huai and Emperor Xuan. Therefore, God resented Empress Jia, and this stone was going to strangle her accordingly.

古文：元康中，天下始相效为乌杖，以柱掖其后，稍施其镦，住则植之。
现代文：元康年间，天下的人开始互相仿效制作长的拐杖，用来支撑胳肢窝。那拐杖的末端稍微冒上一个平底的铜套，立住时就用它支撑着。
English: During the Yuan and Kang dynasties, people all over the world began to imitate each other in making a long crutch to support the armpit. The end of the crutch is slightly raised by a flat-bottomed copper sleeve, and it is used to support it when standing.

古文：及怀、愍之世，王室多故，而中都丧败，元帝以藩臣树德东方，维持天下，柱掖之应也。
现代文：到怀帝、愍帝的时候，皇室多难，洛阳也沦陷了。晋元帝原来是个藩臣，由于他在东方树立了威信，才由他维持了天下。支撑胳肢窝的乌杖，就是与此相应的。
English: By the time of Emperor Huai and Emperor Jie, the imperial family was in great difficulties, and Luoyang had also fallen. Emperor Jin Yuan was originally a vassal, and because he established prestige in the East, he was able to maintain the world. The black cane supporting the groove of the limbs corresponds to this.

古文：元康中，贵游子弟，相与为散发，裸身之饮，对弄婢妾。
现代文：元康年间，那些不担任官职的王公贵族子弟互相结伙、披头散发、赤身裸体来喝酒，调戏玩弄婢女小妾。
English: During the Yuan and Kang dynasties, the sons of princes and aristocrats who did not hold official positions, banded together, wore beards, came naked to drink, and flirted with their female servants and concubines.

古文：逆之者伤好，非之者负讥。希世之士，耻不与焉。
现代文：不顺从他们的就伤害情谊，责怪他们的就遭到讽刺，迎合世俗的人士，都以此为耻辱而不参预这种事。
English: To disobey them is to offend sensibilities, to blame them is to be caricatured, and to pander to the mundane is to disgrace oneself by failing to anticipate such things.

古文：胡狄侵中国之萌也。
现代文：这是胡人、北狄侵略中国的苗头。
English: This was the beginning of the invasion of China by the Hu people and the Northern Di.

古文：其后遂有二胡之乱。
现代文：那以后就有两个胡人的作乱。
English: Since then, there have been two disturbances caused by the Hu people.

古文：惠帝太安元年，丹阳湖熟县夏架湖，有大石浮二百步而登岸，百姓惊叹相告曰： 石来寻。 
现代文：晋惠帝太安元年，在丹阳郡湖熟县夏架湖，有块大石头漂浮了二百步又登上湖岸。百姓惊叹不已，互相传话说： 石头来了！ 
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taian, in Xiajia Lake, Hukuru County, Danyang County, a large stone floated 200 paces and landed on the lake shore. The people were amazed and said to each other: The stone has come!

古文：而石冰入建邺。
现代文：不久，张昌的部将石冰攻进了建邺。
English: Soon after, Zhang Chang's troops broke through the ice into Jianye.

古文：太安元年四月，有人自云龙门入殿前，北面再拜，曰： 我当作中书监。 
现代文：太安元年四月，有个人从云龙门进官一直来到大殿之前，朝北拜了两次说： 我应该任中书监。 
English: In April of the first year of the Taian era, a person bowed to the north twice and said, "I should be appointed as the Central Library Supervisor," before he went all the way from Yunlongmen to the Great Hall.

古文：即收斩之。
现代文：朝廷马上就把他逮住杀了。
English: At that time he was arrested and killed.

古文：禁庭尊秘之处，今贱人竟入，而门卫不觉者，宫室将虚，下人踰上之妖也。
现代文：宫廷是尊严秘密的地方，现在下贱的人竟能闯进去而守门人没发觉，这是宫廷将空虚、下贱的人将超越皇上的凶兆。
English: The court is a place of dignified secrecy, and now a lowly person can break into it without the gatekeeper noticing. This is a bad omen that the court will be empty and the lowly person will surpass the emperor.

古文：是后帝迁长安，宫阙遂空焉。
现代文：后来晋惠帝迁徙到长安，皇宫果然空虚了。
English: Later, Emperor Jinhui migrated to Chang'an, and the palace was indeed empty.

古文：太安中江夏功曹张骋所乘牛，忽言曰： 天下方乱，吾甚极为，乘我何之？ 
现代文：太安年间，江夏郡功曹张骋拉车的牛忽然说道： 天下将乱，我很急。你让我拉了车到什么地方？ 
English: During the Taian era, the cow pulling the cart of Jiangxia County Gong Cao Zhang Ye suddenly said: The world will be in chaos, I am in a hurry. Where did you let me pull the cart to?

古文：骋及从者数人皆惊怖。
现代文：张骋和他的几个随从都惊恐万状，就哄骗它说： 让你回去，你别再说话了。 
English: Zhang Ye and several of his attendants were terrified, so they coaxed it and said, "Let you go back, don't talk anymore."

古文：因绐之曰： 令汝还，勿复言。 乃中道还，至家，未释驾。又言曰： 归何早也？ 
现代文：于是就半路而回。回到家中，还没有卸下车驾，牛又说道： 为什么要这么早就回来呢？ 
English: So he turned back halfway. Back at home, before he had unloaded the cart, the cow said again: Why do you have to come back so early?

古文：骋益忧惧，秘而不言。
现代文：张骋更加害怕了，便沉默不言。
English: Zhang Yao was even more afraid and worried, but did not tell anyone about it.

古文：安陆县有善卜者，骋从之卜。
现代文：安陆县有个善于占卜的人，张骋去叫他占卜。
English: There is a person in Anlu County who is good at divination. Zhang Ye went to ask him to tell fortunes.

古文：卜者曰： 大凶。
现代文：占卜的人说： 非常不吉利。
English: The soothsayer said: Very unlucky.

古文：其秋张昌贼起。先略江夏，诳曜百姓，以汉祚复兴，有凤凰之瑞，圣人当世。
现代文：这不是一家一户的灾难，而是国家将有战乱发生，整个郡都要毁灭啊！ 张骋回到家里，牛又象人一样站起来行走，百姓都来围观。那年秋天，张昌起兵造反，先占据了江夏郡，欺骗迷惑老百姓。说什么因为汉朝的国统又要兴盛了，所以有凤凰来临的吉兆，圣人将要当道。
English: This is not a disaster of one family, but the country will have a war, and the whole county will be destroyed! Zhang Ye returned home, the cattle stood up and walked like people, and the people all came to watch. That autumn, Zhang Chang rebelled and first occupied Jiangxia County, deceiving and confusing the people. What do you say? Because the Han Dynasty's national unification will flourish again, there is a good omen of the coming of the phoenix, and the sage will be the way.

古文：从军者皆绛抹头，以彰火德之祥，百姓波荡，从乱如归。骋兄弟并为将军都尉。未几而败。
现代文：参军的人都戴红头巾，用来显示火德的吉兆。老百姓人心动荡，跟着他造反就象国家一样平常，张骋兄弟两人都任将军都尉的职务，不久就失败了。
English: People who joined the army wore red bandanas, which were used to show the auspicious signs of fire and virtue. The people's hearts were in turmoil, and it was as common for them to rebel as it was for the country. Both of the Zhangye brothers were appointed as generals and captains, and they soon failed.

古文：于是一郡破残，死伤过半，而骋家族矣。
现代文：于是整个郡都被摧毁，死伤的人数超过了一半，而张骋一家被灭族了。
English: As a result, the entire county was destroyed, the number of dead and injured exceeded half, and the Zhang Ye family was exterminated.

古文：京房易妖曰： 牛能言，如其言占吉凶。 
现代文：京房《易妖》说： 牛能说话，按照它的话，能预测吉凶。 
English: Jingfang "Yixiang" said: Cows can speak, and according to its words, it can predict good and bad luck.

古文：元康、太安之间，江、淮之域，有败屩自聚于道，多者至四五十量。
现代文：元康、太安年间，长江、淮河流域，有破麻鞋自己积聚在道路上，多的地方竟达四五十双。
English: During the Yuan Kang and Taian dynasties, broken hemp shoes accumulated on the roads in the Yangtze River and Huaihe River basins. In many places, there were as many as forty or fifty pairs of shoes.

古文：人或散去之，投林草中，明日视之，悉复如故。
现代文：人们有时把它们丢散开来，扔进树林草丛中。明天再去看看它，又全部恢复成老样子。
English: People sometimes scatter them and throw them into the trees and bushes. The next day they go and look at it and it's all back to normal.

古文：或云： 见猫衔而聚之。 
现代文：有人说看见野猫衔了把它积聚在一起。
English: Some people said that they saw a wild cat and gathered it together.

古文：世之所说： 屩者，人之贱服。而当劳辱下民之象也。
现代文：社会上的说法是： 麻鞋，是人的低下的服装，应当劳苦受辱，它是平民百姓的象征。
English: The social saying is: Hemp shoes are the low clothing of human beings, and they should work hard and suffer humiliation. It is a symbol of the common people.

古文：败者，疲弊之象也。
现代文：破，是穷乏破败的象征。
English: Broken is a symbol of poverty and ruin.

古文：道者，地里四方所以交通，王命所由往来也。
现代文：道路，是土地的纹理，各地靠它来交往，帝王的命令靠它来传送。
English: Roads are the texture of the land. All parts of the country rely on them to communicate, and the emperor's orders rely on them to be transmitted.

古文：今败屩聚于道者，象下民疲病，将相聚为乱，绝四方而壅王命也。 
现代文：现在破麻鞋积聚在道路上，象征着老百姓疲乏困苦，将互相聚集起来造反，断绝各地的交往而堵住圣旨的传达啊。 
English: Now broken shoes are piling up on the roads, symbolizing the people's weariness and hardship. They will gather together to rebel, cut off communication from all over the country, and block the transmission of God's will.

古文：晋惠帝永兴元年，成都王之攻长沙也，反军于邺，分外陈兵。
现代文：晋惠帝永兴元年，成都王司马颖攻占长沙，又带兵返回邺城，城内城外部陈列了兵器。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongxing of the Jin Dynasty, Chengdu Wang Sima Ying captured Changsha, and returned to Lucheng with soldiers. Weapons were displayed inside and outside the city.

古文：是夜，戟锋皆有火光，遥望如悬烛，就视，则亡焉。
现代文：这天夜里，兵器的锋刃上都有火光，远看象挂着的蜡烛，走近看便没有了。
English: On this night, there was fire on the edge of the weapon, which looked like a hanging candle from a distance, but disappeared when it got closer.

古文：其后终以败亡。
现代文：后来他终于失败被杀。
English: He eventually failed and was killed.

古文：晋怀帝永嘉元年，吴郡吴县万详婢，生一子，鸟头，两足，马蹄，一手，无毛，尾黄色，大如碗。
现代文：晋怀帝永嘉元年，吴郡吴县石详的婢女生了一个孩子，长着鸟的头，两只脚，脚形如马蹄，一只手，没有毛，尾巴黄色，象碗一样大。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Huai of the Jin Dynasty, the maidservant of Shizhu of Wuxi County, Wuxi County, had a child with a bird's head, two feet, feet shaped like horseshoes, one hand, no hair, a yellow tail, as big as a bowl.

古文：永嘉五年，枹罕令严根婢，产一龙，一女，一鹅。
现代文：永嘉五年，抱罕县县令严根的婢女生了一条龙、一个女孩、一只鹅。
English: In the fifth year of Yongjia, the maidservants of Yangen, the prefectural governor of Bukhan County, had a dragon, a girl, and a goose.

古文：京房易传曰： 人生他物，非人所见者，皆为天下大兵。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 人生下其他的东西，不是人们所看见的，都是天下有大战的征兆。 
English: Kyobo's "Easy Biography" said: Other things in life, not what people see, are signs of a world war.

古文：时帝承惠帝之后，四海沸腾，寻而陷于平阳，为逆胡所害。
现代文：当时晋怀帝继承晋惠帝的皇位之后，国内如同沸水翻滚，不久便陷落在平阳，被叛逆的胡人杀害了。
English: At that time, after Emperor Jinhuai succeeded the throne of Emperor Jinhui, the country was like boiling water, and soon fell to Pingyang and was killed by the rebellious Hu people.

古文：永嘉五年，吴郡嘉兴张林家，有狗忽作人言曰： 天下人俱饿死 于是果有二胡之乱，天下饥荒焉。
现代文：永嘉五年，吴郡嘉兴县张林的家中，有条狗忽然说起人的话来，说天下的人都要饿死。于是果然有两个胡人的兵乱，国内出现了饥荒。
English: In the fifth year of Yongjia, in the home of Zhang Lin of Jiaxing County, Wuxi County, a dog suddenly spoke of people, saying that everyone in the world would starve to death. As a result, there was indeed a war between two dogs, and there was a famine in the country.

古文：永嘉五年十一月，有蝘鼠出延陵，郭璞筮之，遇临之益，曰： 此郡之东县，当有妖人欲称制者。
现代文：永嘉五年十一月，有鼹鼠出现在延陵县。郭璞为此占了个卦，遇到的是 临 卦与 益 卦。就说： 这郡的东边县内，会出现想称帝的妖孽之人，不久也就自取灭亡。 
English: In November of the fifth year of Yongjia, a mole appeared in Yanling County. Guo Ying therefore made up a riddle, encountering a riddle and a riddle. He said: In the eastern county of this county, there will be a witch who wants to be emperor, and will soon perish.

古文：寻亦自死矣。 永嘉六年正月，无锡县欻有四枝茱萸树，相樛而生，状若连理。
现代文：永嘉六年正月，无锡县忽然有四棵茱萸树相互缠绕而长，形状如同枝于连生的连理枝。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of Yongjia, Wuxi County suddenly had four dogwood trees entwined with each other and grew up, shaped like branches in a chain.

古文：先是，郭璞筮延陵蝘鼠，遇临之益，曰： 后当复有妖树生，若瑞而非，辛螫之木也。
现代文：在这以前，郭璞曾给延陵县的鼹鼠算卦，遇到 临 卦与 益 卦，便说： 以后还会有怪树长出来，好象是吉祥的征兆，实际上却不是，而是带毒刺的树木。
English: Before this, Guo Zhe had given the weasels in Yanling County a fortune-telling game, and when he encountered a Linga and a Yiguana, he said: In the future, there will be strange trees growing, as if they were auspicious signs, but in fact they are not, but trees with poisonous thorns.

古文：傥有此，东西数百里，必有作逆者。 
现代文：如果有这种树出现，在它东西几百里之内便一定会出现叛逆的人。 
English: If such a tree were to appear, within a few hundred miles of it there would certainly appear a rebellious person.

古文：及此生木，其后吴兴徐馥作乱，杀太守袁琇。
现代文：到这时真的长出了这种树木，那以后，便有吴兴郡功曹徐馥起兵造反，杀了太守袁琇。
English: By this time, these trees had really grown, and after that, Cao Xuqi, the gong of Wuxing County, rebelled and killed the governor Yuan Shao.

古文：永嘉中寿春城内有豕生人，两头而不活。
现代文：永嘉年间，寿春城内有头猪生下一个人，这人两个头，但不活。
English: During the Yongjia era, a pig in Shuchun Town gave birth to a two-headed man, but he did not live.

古文：周馥取而观之。
现代文：周馥曾取来观看。
English: Zhou Ye took the two dead pigs to take a closer look.

古文：识者云： 豕，北方畜，胡狄象。
现代文：有见识的人说： 猪，是北方的牲畜，胡、狄的象征。
English: Those with insight say: Pigs are the cattle of the north, the symbol of Hu and Di.

古文：两头者，无上也。
现代文：两个头，是没有皇上的象征。
English: Two ends, no top.

古文：生而死，不遂也。 
现代文：生下来就死，是不成功的象征。
English: You can't be born and die.

古文：天戒若曰： 易生专利之谋，将自致倾覆也。 
现代文：上天的禁戒这样说： 容易想出专门利己的计谋，将自招灭亡。  
English: Heaven's precepts say: It is easy to come up with special self-serving schemes that will bring about one's own demise.

古文：俄为元帝所败。
现代文：不久，胡、狄就被晋元帝打败了。
English: Soon after, Emperor Jin Yuan defeated Hu and Di.

古文：永嘉中，士大夫竞服生笺单衣。
现代文：永嘉年间，士大夫都争着穿生丝细布做的单衣。
English: During the Yongjia era, the scholar-officials all competed to wear a single garment made of raw silk fabric.

古文：识者怪之，曰： 此古练纕之布，诸侯所以服天子也。
现代文：有见识的人对此感到很奇怪，说： 这是古代做丧服的布，是诸侯为天子服丧时穿的啊。
English: People with insight felt very strange about this and said: This is the cloth that was used to make mourning clothes in ancient times, and it was worn by princes when they mourned the heavenly son.

古文：今无故服之，殆有应乎！ 
现代文：现在没有发生什么事故却穿它，恐怕会有报应的吧！ 
English: Wearing something like that now, for no reason, is bound to backfire!

古文：其后怀、愍晏驾。
现代文：后来怀帝、愍帝就死了。
English: Later, Emperor Huai and Emperor Xizong died.

古文：昔魏武军中无故作白帢，此缟素凶丧之征也。
现代文：过去魏武帝的军队中，无缘无故地做起白色便帽来。这是白色的丧服，是不吉利的征兆。
English: In the past, the troops of Emperor Wu of Wei wore white capes for no reason. This was a white mourning dress, a sign of bad luck.

古文：初，横缝其前以别后，名之曰 颜帢， 传行之。
现代文：开始做这种白帽子的时候，横向缝住它的前面用来与它的后面相区别，大家把它称为有帽舌头的便帽，当时便流行这种帽子。
English: When they started making these white hats, they sewed the front of the hat sideways to distinguish it from the back, and people called it a cap-tongue cap, which was popular at the time.

古文：至永嘉之间，稍去其缝，名 无颜帢， 而妇人束发，其缓弥甚，紒之坚不能自立，发被于额，目出而已。无颜者，愧之言也。覆额者，惭之貌也。
现代文：到永嘉年间，渐渐地不做那种缝了，并把它叫做没有帽舌头的便帽。而妇女扎头发，那宽松的程度更厉害，发髻的硬度不能使自己竖立，头发都披在前额上，只有眼睛露出来而已。 无面 ，是惭愧之辞，盖住了前额，是惭愧的容貌。
English: By the Yongjia era, they gradually stopped making that kind of stitching, and called it a cap without a cap-tongue. And women tie their hair, the looseness is more severe, the hardness of the bun can not make themselves stand up, the hair is draped on the forehead, only the eyes are exposed. Faceless, is a word of shame, covering the forehead, is a shameful look.

古文：其缓弥甚者，言天下亡礼与义，放纵情性，及其终极，至于大耻也。
现代文：那宽松的程度更厉害，是说天下已没有礼制和合宜的道德规范，随心所欲，及至到那终极，会受到奇耻大辱。
English: More loosely, it means that there is no sense of propriety in the world, the indulgence of nature has reached the extreme, and as for the great shame.

古文：其后二年，永嘉之乱，四海分崩，下人悲难，无颜以生焉。
现代文：从那以后才二年，永嘉时期的战乱，便使国家分崩离析，老百姓悲苦遭殃，没有面子再生活在那社会里了。
English: Only two years after that, the war and turmoil of the Yongjia period caused the country to fall apart, and the common people suffered miserably. They no longer had the face to live in that society.

古文：晋愍帝建兴四年，西都倾覆，元皇帝始为晋王四海宅心。
现代文：晋愍帝建兴四年，西都长安覆灭，晋元帝开始当晋朝皇帝，国内归心。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jin, the western capital Chang'an was destroyed, and Emperor Jin Yuan became the emperor of the Jin Dynasty. The country came to its senses.

古文：其年十月二十二日，新蔡县吏任乔妻胡氏年二十五，产二女，相向，腹心合，自腰以上，脐以下。各分。
现代文：那年十月二十二日，新蔡县县吏任乔的妻子胡氏，二十五岁，生下两个女儿，互相面对着，腹部和心都合在一起，从腰以上、脐以下，各人分开。
English: On October 22 of that year, Hu Shi, the 25-year-old wife of Ren Qiao, a county official in Xin Cai County, gave birth to two daughters, facing each other, abdomen and heart together, separated from the waist up and below the navel.

古文：此盖天下未一之妖也。
现代文：这大概是天下不统一的凶兆。
English: This is probably the result of the world not being unified.

古文：时内史吕会上言： 按瑞应图云： 异根同体，谓之连理。异亩同颍，谓之嘉禾。 
现代文：当时内史吕会禀告说： 按《瑞应图》上说： 不同的根而同长一个枝干，叫做连理；不同的禾苗合长一个穗子，叫做嘉禾。 
English: At that time, the Inner History Lu Society obituary said: According to the "Ruiyang Map": Different roots grow together with a branch, called Lianli; different seedlings grow together with a spike, called Jiahe.

古文：草木之属，犹以为瑞；今二人同心，天垂灵象。故易云： 二人同心，其利断金。 
现代文：草木之类，尚且把它看作是吉祥的征兆，现在两个人同一个心，这是上天降下来的神异现象，所以《易经》说： 两个人同心，那锋利的程度可以斩断金属。 
English: Even though plants and trees regard it as an auspicious sign, two people with the same heart is a miraculous phenomenon sent down from heaven, so the I Ching says: Two people with the same heart, the sharpness of which can cut through metal.

古文：休显见生于陈东之中，盖四海同心之瑞。
现代文：吉利的征兆出现在陕陌以东的封地，这大概是国内同心的吉兆。
English: The signs of auspiciousness appeared in the fiefs east of Shaanmen, which is probably a good sign of domestic concentricity.

古文：不胜喜跃。谨画图上。 
现代文：我压不住喜悦和激动的心情，谨把这两个女孩的形状画成图呈上。 
English: I can't contain my joy and excitement, and I'd like to draw a picture of the two girls.

古文：时有识者哂之。
现代文：当时有见识的人都笑他。
English: At the time, anyone with any sense laughed at him.

古文：君子曰： 知之难也。
现代文：君子评论说： 通晓事理实在很难啊。
English: The gentleman commented, "It's really hard to understand things.

古文：以臧文仲之才，独祀爰居焉。
现代文：用臧文仲的才智去办事，尚且祭祀那海鸟。
English: Using the wisdom of Shao Wenzhong to do business, and still worship the seabird.

古文：布在方册，千载不忘。
现代文：这种事记录在书籍上，千年万代永远不会被人们忘记。
English: Such things are recorded in books and will never be forgotten for thousands of years.

古文：故士不可以不学。
现代文：所以人不能不学习。
English: So you can't help but learn.

古文：古人有言：木无枝谓之瘣，人不学谓之瞽。
现代文：古代的人说过这样的话： 树木没有枝叶叫做瘣，人不学习叫做瞎。 
English: The ancients said something like this: A tree without leaves and branches is called a lame tree, and a person who does not learn is called blind.

古文：当其所蔽，盖阙如也。可不勉乎？ 
现代文：对自己不了解的东西，就该留着不下判断。人可以不努力学习吗。 
English: People should not judge what they do not understand. Can people not study hard?

古文：晋元帝建武元年六月，扬州大旱；十二月，河东地震。
现代文：晋元帝建武元年六月，扬州大旱。十二月，河东郡地震。
English: In June of the first year of Emperor Jianwu of the Jin Dynasty, there was a drought in Yangzhou. In December, there was an earthquake in Hedong County.

古文：去年十二月，斩督运令史淳于伯，血逆深上柱二丈三尺，旋复下深四尺五寸。
现代文：去年十二月，斩杀督运令史淳于伯，他的血倒流，喷上柱子二丈三尺，接着又向下流淌了四尺五寸。
English: In December last year, the executioner ordered the execution of Shi Junyubo, and his blood flowed backwards, sprayed onto a pillar two and a half feet high, and then flowed down four feet and five inches.

古文：是时淳于伯冤死，遂频旱三年。刑罚妄加，群阴不附，则阳气胜之。
现代文：这时淳于伯冤屈而死，所以就连旱三年，刑罚滥用，各种阴气就不归附，那么阳气就胜过它了。
English: At this time, Chunyu Bo died of grievances, so even the drought of three years, the abuse of punishment, all kinds of yin qi will not attach, then the yang qi will prevail over it.

古文：罚，又冤气之应也。
现代文：连旱三年的惩罚，也就是那冤气的报应。
English: The punishment of three consecutive years of drought, that is, the retribution of that anger.

古文：晋元帝建武元年七月，晋陵东门，有牛生犊，一体两头。
现代文：晋元帝建武元年七月，在普陵城的东门有头牛生了一头小牛，一个身体两个头。
English: In July of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jianwu of the Jin Dynasty, a cow gave birth to a calf with two heads and one body at the east gate of Pudong.

古文：京房易传曰： 牛生子，二首，一身，天下将分之象也。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 牛生小牛，两个头一个身体，是天下将分裂的征兆。 
English: Jing Fang's "I Chuan" said: A cow giving birth to a calf, two heads and one body, is a sign that the world is about to split.

古文：元帝太兴元年四月，西平地震，涌水出。
现代文：元帝太兴元年四月，西平郡地震，水往上冒出来。
English: In April of the first year of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, Xiping earthquake, water gushed out.

古文：十二月，庐陵、豫章、武昌、西陵地震，涌水出，山崩。
现代文：十二月，庐陵郡、豫章郡、武昌郡、西陵渡口地震，水往上冒出来，山岭崩塌。
English: In December, the earthquakes in Fuling, Yuzhang, Wuchang and Xiling caused water to gush out and landslides.

古文：此王敦陵上之应也。
现代文：这是王敦陵驾于皇上的应验。
English: This is the fulfillment of Wang Dunling's visit to the emperor.

古文：太兴元年，三月武昌太守王谅，有牛生子，两头，八足，两尾，共一腹。
现代文：太兴元年三月，武昌郡太守王谅有头母牛生下一头小牛，两个头八条腿，两条尾巴长在同一个腹部上。
English: In March of the first year of the Taixing Dynasty, Wuchang County Governor Wang Yuanzhang had a cow give birth to a calf, with two heads, eight legs, and two tails growing on the same abdomen.

古文：不能自生，十余人以绳引之。
现代文：这母牛分娩时不能自己生产，十多个人便用绳子把小牛拉了出来。
English: More than a dozen people used ropes to pull the calf out of the cow, which was unable to give birth on its own.

古文：子死，母活。
现代文：结果小牛死了，母牛活下来了。
English: As a result, the calf died and the cow survived.

古文：其三年后，苑中有牛生子，一足三尾，生而即死。
现代文：太兴三年，后苑中有头牛生小牛，一只脚三条尾巴，生下来就死了。
English: Three years ago in Taixing, there was a cow giving birth to a calf in the backyard. The calf had three tails and one foot, and died after birth.

古文：太兴二年，丹阳郡吏濮阳演马生驹，两头，自项前别。生而死。
现代文：太兴二年，丹阳县小吏濮阳郡人杨演的马生下一匹小马，两个头，在脖子的前面分开，生下来就死了。
English: In the second year of Taixing, Yang Yuanma, a minor official of Danyang County and a native of Fenyang County, gave birth to a pony with two heads, separated at the front of the neck, and died at birth.

古文：此政在私门二头之象也。
现代文：这是政权落到权贵手中、有两个元首的象征。
English: It's a symbol of power falling into the hands of the powerful, and of two heads of state.

古文：其后王敦陵上。
现代文：那以后便有王敦陵驾于皇上。
English: Later, Wang Dun cheated the emperor.

古文：太兴初，有女子，其阴在腹，当脐下。
现代文：太兴初年，有个女子，她的阴户长在腹部，正对肚脐底下。
English: In the early years of Taixing, there was a woman whose pussy grew in the abdomen, right under the navel.

古文：自中国来，至江东。其性淫而不产。
现代文：她从中原来到江南，她生性淫乱而不生孩子。
English: She came from the Central Plains to the south of the Yangtze River. She was sexually promiscuous and had no children.

古文：又有女子，阴在首。居在扬州。亦性好淫。
现代文：那时还有一个女子，阴户长在头上，住在扬州，她的本性也是喜欢纵欲淫乱。
English: At that time, there was also a woman with a pussy on her head, who lived in Yangzhou. Her nature was also to indulge in debauchery.

古文：京房易妖曰： 人生子，阴在首，则天下大乱。若在腹，则天下有事。若在背，则天下无后。 
现代文：京房《易妖》说： 人生下女儿：阴户长在头上，那么国家就会大乱；如果长在腹部，那么国家就有事故发生；如果长在背上，那么国家就没有继承人了。 
English: Jingfang "Yi Ying" said: When a daughter is born: if the pussy grows on the head, then the country will be in chaos; if it grows on the abdomen, then the country will have an accident; if it grows on the back, then the country will have no heir.

古文：太兴中王敦镇武昌，武昌灾，火起，兴众救之，救于此，而发于彼，东西南北数十处俱应，数日不绝，旧说所谓 滥灾妄起，虽兴师不能救之 之谓也。
现代文：大火燃烧起来，王敦便发动群众救火，但这儿扑灭了，那儿却又燃烧起来，四画八方几十个地方都烧起来了，烧了几天也没熄灭。这就是过去所说的 泛滥的灾祸胡乱地发生，即使发动军队也无法挽救 的情况吧。
English: When the fire broke out, Wang Dun mobilized the masses to put out the fire, but it was extinguished here and there. Dozens of places in all directions were burned, and the fire did not go out for several days. This is the situation of what used to be called the "flooding disaster" that occurs randomly and cannot be saved even if the army is mobilized.

古文：此臣而行君，亢阳失节。
现代文：这是臣下行君主之事、阳气太盛失去了节制而造成的。
English: This was a matter of a vassal-turned-monarch, and was caused by the yang qi becoming too strong and losing control.

古文：是时王敦陵上，有无君之心，故灾也。
现代文：这时王敦陵驾于皇上，有无视君主的野心，所以才发生这样的火灾。
English: At this time, Wang Dunling drove the emperor and had the ambition to ignore the monarch, which is why such a fire occurred.

古文：太兴中兵士以绛囊缚紒。
现代文：太兴年间，士兵用红布袋束住发髻。
English: During the Taiching era, soldiers tied their hair in red cloth bags.

古文：识者曰： 紒在首，为干，君道也，囊者，为坤，臣道也。
现代文：有见识的人说： 发髻在头上为乾，象征君道。口袋为坤，象征臣道。
English: Those with insight say: A hair bun on the head is dry, symbolizing the way of the king. A pocket is empty, symbolizing the way of the vassal.

古文：今以朱囊缚紒，臣道侵君之象也，为衣者上带短纔至于掖；着帽者，又以带缚项，下逼上，上无地也。
现代文：现在用红布袋束住发髻，这是臣下侵犯君主的征兆。 当时做衣服的，上边的衣带做得很短，才到达胳肢窝；戴帽子的，又用帽带缚住脖子。这是下面逼迫上面，上面无地自容的象征。
English: Now, a red cloth bag is used to tie up the hairpin, which is a sign that the vassals are encroaching on the monarch; when making clothes, the upper belt is made very short, only reaching the armpit; when wearing a hat, it is tied around the neck with a hat band. This is a symbol of the bottom persecuting the top, and the top having no self-respect.

古文：为裤者，直幅，无口，无杀，下大之象也。 
现代文：当时做裤子的，直接用整幅宽的布做裤脚口，从裤腿到裤脚口尺寸不减小，这是下边壮大的象征。
English: When trousers were made at that time, the crotch of the trousers was directly made of a full-width wide cloth, and the size from the trouser leg to the crotch of the trousers was not reduced, which was a symbol of growth at the bottom.

古文：寻而王敦谋逆，再攻京师。
现代文：不久王敦策划叛乱，又攻打京城，这便是这些奇装异服的应验啊。
English: Soon after, Wang Dun plotted a rebellion and attacked Kyoto twice.

古文：太兴四年，王敦在武昌，铃下仪仗生花，如莲花，五六日而萎落。
现代文：太兴四年，王敦在武昌的时候，帅府的仪仗上开出花来，那花朵象莲花，过了五六天就凋谢了。
English: Four years ago, when Wang Dun was in Wuchang, flowers bloomed at the ceremonial battle of Shuaifu. The flowers were like lotuses, but they withered after five or six days.

古文：说曰： 易说： 枯杨生花，何可久也。 
现代文：有人解说道： 《易经》的象辞解释说， 干枯的杨树开花，哪能长久呢？
English: Some people said: "The imagery of the I Ching explains, the dried poplar tree blooms, how can it last long?

古文：今狂花生枯木，又在铃阁之间，言威仪之富，荣华之盛，皆如狂花之发，不可久也。 
现代文：现在失常的奇花长在干枯的木头上，又在帅府中，这是说礼仪之多，荣华之盛，都象失常之花的开放，不可能长久的。 
English: Now the abnormal flowers grow on the dry wood, and also in the palace. This means that the abundance of etiquette and the prosperity are like the opening of the abnormal flowers, which cannot last long.

古文：其后王敦终以逆，命加戮其尸。
现代文：后来王敦终于因为违抗晋明帝之命，死后尸体还受了刑戮。
English: Later, Wang Dun's body was tortured and killed after his death for defying Emperor Jinming's order.

古文：旧为羽扇柄者，刻木象其骨形，列羽用十，取全数也。
现代文：过去做羽毛扇的柄，把木头刻成扇子的骨架，编排的羽毛用十根，这是采用完备的数字。
English: In the old days, feather fan handles were made, carved wood was used as a skeleton, and ten feathers were arranged, taking the meaning of the whole number.

古文：初，王敦南征，始改为长柄，下出，可捉。而减其羽，用八。
现代文：当初，王敦向南出征的时候，开始把扇柄改为长柄，下端突出一段以便用手握住，而旦减少了扇子的羽毛，只用八根。
English: At first, when Wang Dun went to the south, he began to change the fan handle to a long handle, with the lower end protruding a section so that he could hold it with his hand, and he reduced the feathers of the fan, using only eight.

古文：识者尤之曰： 夫羽扇，翼之名也。
现代文：有见识的人非议说： 羽毛扇，是一个表示羽翼的名称。
English: People with insight criticized: "Feather fan is the name of a feather.

古文：创为长柄，将执其柄以制其羽翼也。改十为八，将未备夺已备也。
现代文：王敦创造出长柄，是要握住扇柄，来控制它的羽翼；把十根改成八根，是让未完备的数字取代已经完备的数字。
English: When Wang Dun created the long handle, it was to hold the fan handle to control its wings; when he changed the ten to eight, it was to let the incomplete number replace the already complete number.

古文：此殆敦之擅权，以制朝廷之柄，又将以无德之材，欲窃非据也。 
现代文：这大概是暗示着王敦独擅大权，来控制朝廷的所有权力；又凭他那没有德行的才能，想窃取他不该占据的地位。 
English: This is probably an allusion to the fact that Wang Dun had monopolized power to control all the power of the court; and with his talent without virtue, he wanted to steal the position he should not occupy.

古文：晋明帝太宁初，武昌有大蛇，常居故神祠空树中，每出头从人受食。
现代文：晋明帝太宁初年，武昌有条大蛇，曾经栖息在旧神庙的树洞中，经常探出头来，从祭祀的人那里收受食物。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taining of the Jin and Ming Dynasties, there was a big snake in Wuchang. It often hid in the hollow tree of the old temple, and every time it stretched out its head to receive food from people.

古文：京房易传曰： 蛇见于邑，不出三年，有大兵，国有大忧。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 蛇在城中出现，不出三年，就会有大的战乱，国家会有大的忧患。 
English: The "Easy Biography" of Beijing Fang said: If a snake appears in the city, there will be a major war within three years, and the country will be in great trouble.

古文：寻有王敦之逆。
现代文：不久就有王敦的叛逆。
English: Soon there was the Wang Dun Rebellion.

