古文：二十有八年春，王三月甲寅，齐人伐卫。
现代文：二十八年春季，周历三月甲寅日，齐国攻打卫国。
English: In the spring of the 28th year, on the third day of the third month of the lunar calendar, Qi attacked and defended the country.

古文：卫人及齐人战，卫人败绩。
现代文：卫国人与齐国交战，卫国被打败。
English: The defenders fought against Qi, and the defenders were defeated.

古文：夏四月丁未，邾子琐卒。
现代文：夏季四月丁未日，邾子琐去世。
English: In the summer, on the eve of April Fool's Day, Zou Zizou passed away.

古文：秋，荆伐郑。
现代文：秋季，楚国攻打郑国。
English: In autumn, Chu attacked Zheng.

古文：公会齐人、宋人救郑。
现代文：鲁庄公联合齐国、宋国一起援救郑国。
English: Prince Luzhong united with Qi and Song to rescue Zheng.

古文：冬，筑郿。
现代文：冬季，在郿地筑城。
English: In winter, they build a city in the ploughed fields.

古文：大无麦禾。
现代文：发生饥荒。
English: Famine ensued.

古文：臧孙辰告籴于齐。
现代文：大夫臧孙辰向齐国购买粮食。
English: Doctor Sun Sunchen buys grain from Qi Province.

古文：二十八年春，齐侯伐卫，战，败卫师，数之以王命，取赂而还。
现代文：二十八年春季，齐桓公讨伐卫国，作战，打败了卫军，用周天子的名义责备卫国，取得了财货回国。
English: In the spring of the 28th year, Qi Kuan Gong led a crusade to defend the country, fought, defeated the guards, rebuked the defenders in the name of Zhou Tianzi, and returned home with wealth and goods.

古文：晋献公娶于贾，无子。
现代文：晋献公从贾国娶了妻子，没生儿子。
English: Prince Jianxian married a woman from Jia Province, but had no son.

古文：烝于齐姜，生秦穆夫人及大子申生。
现代文：他和齐姜私通，生了秦穆夫人和太子申生。
English: He and Qi Jiang had an affair and had Lady Qin Mu and Prince Shen Sheng.

古文：又娶二女于戎，大戎狐姬生重耳，小戎子生夷吾。
现代文：又在戎娶了两个女人，大戎狐姬生了重耳，小戎子生了夷吾。
English: He also married two women in Eon, and the eldest daughter, Eon Fox, gave birth to a son, Eon Heavy-ear, and the younger son, Eon Son, gave birth to a son, Eon I.

古文：晋伐骊戎，骊戎男女以骊姬。归生奚齐。其娣生卓子。
现代文：晋国攻打骊戎，骊戎男把骊姬献给晋献公，回国后生了奚齐，她的妹妹生了卓子。
English: Jin attacked Qiong Rong, Qiong Rong's man gave Qiong Ji to Jin, and after returning to China, Qiong Qi was born, and her sister gave birth to Zhuo Zi.

古文：骊姬嬖，欲立其子，赂外嬖梁五与东关嬖五，使言于公曰： 曲沃，君之宗也。蒲与二屈，君之疆也。不可以无主。
现代文：骊姬受到宠爱，想立自己的儿子为太子，贿赂男宠梁五和东关嬖五，让他们对晋献公说： 曲沃是君王的宗邑，蒲地和二屈是君王的边疆，不可以没有强大的地方官。
English: She wanted to make her son the crown prince, so she bribed her male favorites, Liang Wu and Dongguan Wu Wu Wu, to say to Jin Xianguo: Quwo is the hometown of the king, Puti and Erqu are the borderlands of the king, and it is not possible without powerful local officials.

古文：宗邑无主则民不威，疆埸无主则启戎心。
现代文：宗邑缺乏有力的主管，百姓就不会畏惧；边疆没有有力的主管，就会勾引戎狄侵犯的念头。
English: In the absence of a strong leader in the fatherland, the people will not be afraid; in the absence of a strong leader in the frontier, the idea of invasion will be attracted.

古文：戎之生心，民慢其政，国之患也。
现代文：戎狄有侵犯的念头，百姓就会轻视政令，这是国家的祸患。
English: Ambitions arise in the army, and the people despise the imperial court. This is a great danger for the country.

古文：若使大子主曲沃，而重耳、夷吾主蒲与屈，则可以威民而惧戎，且旌君伐。 
现代文：如果让太子主管曲沃，又让重耳、夷吾主管蒲地和二屈，就可以使百姓畏惧、戎狄害怕，而且可以表彰君王的功绩。 
English: If you let the crown prince be in charge of Quwo, and let Chong Er and Yi Wu be in charge of Pu Di and Er Qu, you can make the people afraid, the army afraid, and you can commend the king's achievements.

古文：使俱曰： 狄之广莫，于晋为都。
现代文：又让这两个人一起对晋献公说： 狄人广漠的土地，如果归属晋国，可以在那里开疆辟土。
English: And let the two men together say to Jin Xian Gong: If the vast and desolate land of the Di people belongs to Jin, they can open up the frontier and dig up the soil there.

古文：晋之启土，不亦宜乎？ 
现代文：晋国开疆辟土，不也恰当吗？ 
English: Isn't it also appropriate for Jin to break new ground?

古文：晋侯说之。
现代文：晋侯很高兴。
English: I am very happy to be promoted.

古文：夏，使大子居曲沃，重耳居蒲城，夷吾居屈。
现代文：夏季，让太子住在曲沃，重耳住在蒲地，夷吾住在屈地。
English: In summer, let the prince live in Quwo, the heavy ear live in Pu Di, and the eagle live in Qu Di.

古文：群公子皆鄙，唯二姬之子在绛。
现代文：别的公子也都住在边境上，只有骊姬和她妹妹的儿子在绛城。
English: All the other nobles live on the border. Only Yan Ji and her sister's son live in Lucheng.

古文：二五卒与骊姬谮群公子而立奚齐，晋人谓之 二五耦 。
现代文：两个五梁五和东关嬖五最终和骊姬诬陷了公子们而立了奚齐为太子，晋国人称他们为 两个名叫五的狼狈朋比 。
English: The two princes, Wuliang Wulang and Dongguan Wulang Wulang, eventually framed the princes and set up Wuliang Wulang as the prince. The people of Jin Province called them the two wolves named Wulang Wulang.

古文：楚令尹子元欲蛊文夫人，为馆于其宫侧而振《万》焉。
现代文：楚国的令尹子元想诱惑文王夫人，在她的宫旁造了房舍，在里边摇铃铎跳万舞。
English: Yin Zi Yuan, the ruler of Chu, wanted to seduce Lady Wen Wang, so he built a house next to her palace and danced with bells inside.

古文：夫人闻之，泣曰： 先君以是舞也，习戎备也。
现代文：夫人听到了，哭着说： 先君让人跳这个舞蹈，是用来演习战备的。
English: When his wife heard this, she wept and said, "My forefather had people dance this dance to practice for battle.

古文：今令尹不寻诸仇雠，而于未亡人之侧，不亦异乎！ 
现代文：现在令尹不用于仇敌而用于一个寡妇的旁边，不也是奇怪吗？ 
English: Now, isn't it strange that Yin should be used next to a widow instead of an enemy?

古文：御人以告子元。
现代文：侍者告诉了子元。
English: The waiter told Zi Yuan.

古文：子元曰： 妇人不忘袭雠，我反忘之！ 
现代文：子元说： 女人不忘记袭击仇敌，我反倒忘了。 
English: Ziyuan said, "A woman does not forget to attack the enemy, but I did.

古文：秋，子元以车六百乘伐郑，入于桔柣之门。
现代文：秋季，子元带领六百辆战车进攻郑国，进入桔柣之门。
English: In autumn, Zi Yuan led six hundred chariots to attack Zheng Guo and entered the gate of Jiuquan.

古文：子元、鬥御强、鬥梧、耿之不比为旆，鬥班、王孙游、王孙喜殿。
现代文：子元、鬬御彊、鬬梧、耿之不比率领前军，鬬班、王孙游、王孙喜在后面。
English: Zi Yuan, Yao Mi Yao, Yao Wu, and Geng Zhi Bi led the front line, while Zi Ban, Wang Sun You, and Wang Sun Xi followed behind.

古文：众车入自纯门，及逵市。
现代文：车队从纯门进去，到达大路上的市场。
English: The motorcade enters through the pure gate and arrives at the market on the main road.

古文：县门不发，楚言而出。
现代文：内城的闸门没有放下。楚国人用楚国方言说了一阵就退出去了。
English: The gates of the inner city were not opened. The Chu people spoke in the Chu dialect for a while and then left.

古文：子元曰： 郑有人焉。 
现代文：子元说： 郑国有人才。 
English: Zi Yuan said: Zheng Guo has talent.

古文：诸侯救郑，楚师夜遁。
现代文：诸侯救援郑国，楚军就夜里溜走了。
English: The princes rescued Zheng Guo, and the Chu army slipped away in the night.

古文：郑人将奔桐丘，谍告曰： 楚幕有乌。 
现代文：郑国人已经准备逃往桐丘，间谍报告说： 楚国的帐篷上有乌鸦。 
English: The Zheng people were already preparing to flee to Tongqiu, and the spy reported: There are crows in the tents of the Chu people.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是就停止逃跑。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：冬，饥。
现代文：冬季，发生饥荒。
English: In winter, there is famine.

古文：臧孙辰告籴于齐，礼也。
现代文：鲁国的大夫臧孙辰向齐国购买粮食，这是合于礼的。
English: It is proper for the doctor of the State of Lu to buy grain from the State of Qi.

古文：筑郿，非都也。
现代文：鲁国筑郿邑，因为郿不是都市。
English: Lu Province built Xingyi, because Xingyi is not a city.

古文：凡邑有宗庙先君之主曰都，无曰邑。
现代文：凡是城邑，有宗庙和先君神主的叫做 都 ，没有的叫做 邑 。
English: All cities and towns with ancestral temples and patriarchs are called metropolises, and those without are called towns.

古文：邑曰筑，都曰城。
现代文：建造邑叫做 筑 ，建造都叫做 城 。
English: The construction of the town is called construction, and the construction is called the city.

