古文：《齐民要术》：兰香， 罗勒 也。
现代文：《齐民要术》：兰香，即 罗勒 。
English: "Qi Min Yaoshu": Lan Xiang, that is, Basil.

古文：中国为石勒讳，故改，今人因以名焉。
现代文：中原地方为避石勒的名讳，改称，现在人们就沿用了这个名称。
English: The Central Plains used to be known as Yushile, but the name was changed, and people continue to use this name today.

古文：且兰香之目，美于罗勒之名；故即而用之。
现代文：况且兰香这个名字比罗勒好听，所以这里就采用了这个名字。
English: Moreover, the name "Lanxiang" sounds better than "Basil," so this name was used here.

古文：三月中，候枣叶始生，乃种兰香。
现代文：三月中旬的时候，等枣树开始萌芽，就可以开始种兰香了。
English: In mid-March, when the jujube trees begin to sprout, you can start planting orchids.

古文：早种者，徒费子耳，天寒不生。
现代文：种早了，就会白白浪费种子，天气冷绝对不会出苗。
English: If you plant early, you will waste seeds in vain, and cold weather will definitely not produce seedlings.

古文：治畦下水，一同葵法。
现代文：作畦、灌水等，皆和种葵的方法一样。
English: Making straw, watering, etc. are all the same as the method of planting sunflowers.

古文：及水散子讫；水尽，蓰熟粪，仅得盖子便止。
现代文：趁着水还没有耗尽的时候，将种子撒下去；等水渗完后，筛上些熟粪，把种子稍微覆盖一下，便要停止。
English: Take advantage of the fact that the water has not yet run out and scatter the seeds. When the water has run out, sift some cooked manure over the seeds to cover them a little and then stop.

古文：厚则不生，弱苗故也。
现代文：覆土厚了，也不会出苗，因为苗非常柔弱。
English: If there is a thick layer of soil, there will be no seedlings, because seedlings are very tender.

古文：昼日箔盖，夜即去之；昼日不用见日，夜须受露气。
现代文：白天要用箔盖上，夜间便要掀开。白天不可见太阳，夜间却要接受露水和潮气。
English: During the day it should be covered with foil, and at night it should be opened. During the day the sun cannot be seen, but at night it should receive dew and moisture.

古文：生即去箔。
现代文：出苗后便可将箔撤去。
English: After the seedlings have emerged, the foil can be removed.

古文：常令足水。
现代文：要经常保持足够的水分。
English: Always stay well hydrated.

古文：六月连雨，拔栽之。
现代文：六月的时候，下连阴雨的时候，拔出来栽植。
English: In June, when there is continuous rain, the plants are pulled out and planted.

古文：掐心栽泥巾，亦活。
现代文：掐下苗心，插入泥中，也可以存活。
English: The heart of the seedling under the arm, inserted into the mud, can also survive.

古文：作菹及干者，九月收。
现代文：准备作菹和作干菜用的，九月的时候便要收。
English: The sprouts, which are used for making soup and dried vegetables, are harvested in September.

古文：晚即干恶。
现代文：收晚了，便要变干枯，味道也要变坏。
English: If it is closed late, it will become dry and withered, and the taste will deteriorate.

古文：作干者，天晴时，薄地刈取，布地曝之。干乃挼取末，瓮中盛，须则取用。
现代文：作干菜的，趁天晴时，贴着地面刈下，摊在地上曝晒；晒干后，随即搓成粉末，放在瓮中，遇有需要随时取用。
English: For dried vegetables, take advantage of the sunny weather, mow them close to the ground, spread them on the ground and expose them to the sun; after drying, immediately grind them into powder, place them in a pan, and use them at any time if necessary.

古文：拔根悬者，哀烂，又有雀粪尘土之患。
现代文：连根拔起悬挂起来的，容易霉烂，又有落上雀粪和尘土的麻烦。
English: If it is uprooted and hung up, it is prone to mildew, and there is also the trouble of falling on bird droppings and dust.

古文：取子者，十月收。
现代文：采取种子的，十月间收。
English: Take the seeds, harvest between October.

古文：自余杂香菜不列者，种法悉与此同。
现代文：其余各种作调味品用的香菜，没有专门讲述的，种植方法，都和兰香一样。
English: The rest of the various cilantro used as condiments, not specifically described, planting methods, are the same as orchids.

古文：《博物志》曰：烧马蹄羊角成灰，春散著湿地，罗勒乃生。
现代文：《博物志》说：将马蹄和羊角烧成灰，春季的时候，撒在潮湿的地上，便会生长出罗勒。
English: "Natural History" says: burn horses' hooves and sheep's horns to ashes, and in the spring, sprinkle them on the damp ground, and basil will grow.

古文：《博闻录》：香菜：常以洗鱼水浇之，则香而茂；沟泥水、米泔尤佳。
现代文：《博闻录》：香菜，常常用洗鱼的血水浇灌，气味既香而且生长也很茂盛，若用水沟中的泥水和淘米的泔水浇灌，则更好。
English: "Houwen Biographies": Coriander, often watered with the blood of washed fish, smells fragrant and grows luxuriantly. If watered with muddy water from the ditch and the salty water of steamed rice, it is better.

