古文：郑畋，字台文，系出荥阳。
现代文：郑畋的字叫台文，家族来自荥阳。
English: Zheng Yi's first name is Taiwanese, and his family is from Shenyang.

古文：父亚，字子佐。
现代文：他父亲郑亚的字叫子佐。
English: His father Zheng Ya's nickname was Zi Zuo.

古文：爽迈有文，举进士、贤良方正、书判拔萃，三中其科。
现代文：豪放有文才，考中了进士、贤良方正、书判拔萃，连中三科。
English: Gao Fang is a talented writer. He passed the entrance examination and was awarded the title of "Jinshi," "Xianlu Fangzheng" and "Shujian Yuanshu," which are the top three subjects in middle school.

古文：李德裕为翰林学士，高其才，及守浙西，辟署幕府。
现代文：李德裕任翰林学士，欣赏他的才能，到镇守浙西时，就请他到府中任职。
English: Li Deyu served as a scholar of Hanlin, appreciated his talent, and invited him to serve in the prefectural government when he went to the town of West Zhejiang.

古文：擢监察御史，李回任中丞，荐为刑部郎中知杂事，拜给事中。
现代文：后升任监察御史，李回任御史中丞，推荐他任刑部郎中知杂事，又升任给事中。
English: After that, he was promoted to Supervisor of History, and Li returned to the position of Vice-Minister of History, recommending him to be appointed as Vice-Minister of Justice in charge of miscellaneous affairs, and was also promoted to Vice-Minister of Affairs.

古文：德裕罢宰相，出为桂管观察使，坐吴湘狱不能直冤，贬循州刺史，死于官。
现代文：李德裕被罢免了宰相，他出朝任桂管观察使，牵连吴湘案不能申冤，被贬为循州刺史，死在任上。
English: Li Deyu was removed from the post of prime minister, he was appointed to the post of Gui Guan observation envoy, he was implicated in the Wu Xiang case and could not seek redress, he was relegated to following the history of the state, and he died in office.

古文：畋举进士，时年甚少，有司上第籍，武宗疑，索所试自省，乃可。
现代文：郑畋考中了进士，当时年龄很小，有关部门上报录取名册，唐武宗疑心，把他的试卷要去自己看，才批准了。
English: Zheng Jun passed the entrance examination. At that time, he was very young. The relevant department reported the enrollment roster. Tang Wuzong was suspicious and wanted to see his examination paper for himself before approving it.

古文：奏为宣武推官，以书判拔萃擢渭南尉。
现代文：曾任宣武节度推官，后又考中了书判拔萃升任渭南县尉。
English: He once served as the Xuanwu Festival Presiding Officer, and was later promoted to the position of the commander of Yinan County after he passed the examination.

古文：父丧免。
现代文：因给父亲守丧免职。
English: He was relieved of his duties due to his father's death.

古文：宣宗时，白敏中、令狐綯继当国，皆怨德裕，其宾客并废斥，故畋不调几十年，外更帅镇幕府。
现代文：唐宣宗时，白敏中、令狐相继掌权，都恨李德裕，他的故旧都受排斥，因此郑畋几十年没升官，在朝外各藩镇府中任职。
English: When Tang Xuanzong, Bai Minzhong, and Lingfuxu successively took power, they all hated Li Deyu, and his ancestors were all ostracized. Therefore, Zheng He did not get promoted for decades, and served in all the townships outside the country.

古文：綯去位，始为虞部员外郎。
现代文：令狐被免职，他才担任了虞部员外郎。
English: It was only after Linghu was removed from his post that he took up the post of a member of the State Council.

古文：右丞郑薰诬畋罪，不可任郎官，出之。
现代文：尚书右丞郑薰诬告他有罪，不能担任郎官，把他调出了朝廷。
English: Shang Shuyuan Zheng Guan falsely accused him of being guilty, he could not serve as a vassal, and he was transferred out of the imperial court.

古文：久乃入为刑部员外郎。
现代文：很久以后才调他进朝廷任刑部员外郎。
English: It was not until much later that he was transferred to the imperial court to serve as a member of the criminal investigation department.

古文：刘瞻为宰相，荐授户部郎中，入翰林为学士，俄知制诰。
现代文：刘瞻任宰相，推荐任命他为户部郎中，又进入翰林院任学士，不久任知制诰官。
English: Liu Zhan served as prime minister, and was recommended to be appointed as a member of the household department, and entered the Hanlin Academy as a bachelor, and soon became a eunuch.

古文：会讨徐州贼庞勋，书诏纷委，畋思不淹晷，成文粲然，无不切机要，当时推之。
现代文：遇上讨伐徐州叛贼庞勋，诏书都需草拟，他构思不费时间，文章漂亮，全部说中了要害，当时人都推崇他。
English: When Pang Xun, the traitor of Xuzhou, was defeated, the edict needed to be drafted. He did not take much time to conceive, the article was beautiful, and everything was said to the point. At that time, everyone respected him.

古文：勋平，以户部侍郎进学士承旨。
现代文：庞勋被讨平后，他以户部侍郎身份升任学士承旨官。
English: After Pang Xun was subdued, he was promoted to the post of bachelor's degree appointment officer with the status of household attendant.

古文：瞻以谏迕懿宗，赐罢，畋草制书多褒言，韦保衡等怨之，以为附下罔上，贬梧州刺史。
现代文：刘瞻因劝谏得罪了唐懿宗，被罢相，郑畋起草诏书写了很多好话，韦保衡等人恨他，认为他讨好刘瞻欺骗皇帝，贬他任梧州刺史。
English: Liu Zhan offended Tang Xizong and was dismissed from the position of minister, Zheng He drafted the imperial edict and wrote a lot of good words. Wei Baoheng and others hated him, believing that he deceived the emperor by pleasing Liu Zhan and demoted him to the post of Wuzhou historian.

古文：僖宗立，内徙郴、绛二州，以右散骑常侍召还。
现代文：唐僖宗即位，他调近任彬、绛两州刺史，后召回朝廷任右散骑常侍。
English: When Emperor Tang Xizong ascended to the throne, he transferred Ren Bin and Zou Zhisheng to the two states, and then recalled them to the imperial court to serve as the right-hand rider's attendant.

古文：故事，两省转对延英，独常侍不与。
现代文：按旧例，两省官员轮流在延英殿奏事，只有常侍官不参加。
English: According to the old practice, officials from the two provinces took turns to attend the ceremony at Yan Ying Palace. Only the regular attendants did not attend.

古文：畋建言宜备顾问，诏可，遂著于令。
现代文：郑畋建议应参加回答皇帝问题，有诏同意了，就成了制度。
English: Zheng Yao suggested that they should take part in answering the emperor's questions, and once they agreed, it became a system.

古文：以兵部侍郎进同中书门下平章事。
现代文：他后以兵部侍郎身份任同中书门下平章事。
English: Later, he was appointed as the attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs under the command of the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.

古文：故时，宰相驺哄联数坊，呵止行人。
现代文：过去，宰相开路的侍从要排几条街，禁止行人通行。
English: In the past, when the prime minister opened a road, his attendants had to line up several streets and prohibit pedestrians from passing.

古文：畋敕导者止百步，禁百官仆史不得擅至宰相府。
现代文：郑畋命开路的只到前面一百步远，对群臣及其仆人下令不能擅自到宰相府去。
English: Zheng Rong only opened the way a hundred paces ahead, and ordered the courtiers and their servants not to go to the prime minister's office without permission.

古文：交、广、邕南兵，旧取岭北五道米往饷之，船多败没。
现代文：交州府、广州、邕南地区的军队，过去运南岭北面五道的粮食供应，很多船只沉没了。
English: In the past, the armies of Jiaozhou, Guangzhou, and the southern Fujian region transported grain supplies to the five provinces north of Nanling, and many ships sank.

古文：畋请以岭南盐铁委广州节度使韦荷，岁煮海取盐直四十万缗，市虔、吉米以赡安南，罢荆、洪等漕役，军食遂饶。
现代文：郑畋请求将岭南道盐铁专卖事务交给广州节度使韦荷，每年煮海水产盐价值四十万贯钱，买虔、吉州的米来供应安南，免除了荆州、洪州等地的漕运，军队粮食也充足了。
English: Zheng Rong requested that the salt and iron monopoly business of Lingnan Road be handed over to Guangzhou Jiedu to Wei He. The salt produced by boiling seawater is worth 400,000 yuan each year, and rice from Qian and Jizhou is bought to supply Annan. In addition, the transportation of Jingzhou, Hongzhou and other places is exempted, and the army has enough grain.

古文：后以王师甫为岭南供军副使，师甫请兼总兵，而岁加献钱二十万缗。
现代文：后来任命王师甫为岭南供军副使，王师甫请求兼管军队，每年增加进贡二十万贯钱。
English: Later, Wang Shifu was appointed as the deputy envoy of Lingnan to supply the army. Wang Shifu requested to be in charge of the army and to increase the annual tribute by two hundred thousand crowns.

古文：畋曰： 荷且有功，而师甫以利啖朝廷，谋夺其兵，不可。 
现代文：郑畋说 ：韦荷立有功劳，但王师甫用好处引诱朝廷，想夺他的兵权，不行。 
English: Zheng Qi said: Wei Holi has merits, but Wang Shifu cannot use benefits to lure the imperial court and try to seize his military power.

古文：罢之。
现代文：罢免了王师甫。
English: and dismissed him.

古文：再迁门下侍郎，封荥阳郡侯。
现代文：郑畋两次升官后任门下侍郎，被封为荥阳郡侯。
English: After Zheng Qi was promoted twice, he served as a footman and was named the Marquis of Fenyang County.

古文：以星变求去位，不许。
现代文：他因星象变化请求免职，没批准。
English: He asked to be relieved of his duties because of the change in the astrological situation, but it was not approved.

古文：乾符六年，黄巢势浸盛，据安南，腾书求天平节度使。
现代文：乾符六年，黄巢势力越来越大，占据了安南，送信要求任天平节度使。
English: In just six years, Huang Chao's influence has grown more and more, occupying Annan, and sending requests at any time.

古文：帝令群臣议，咸请假节以纾难。
现代文：皇帝命百官讨论，大家都请求借封官缓和灾难。
English: The emperor's order was discussed by hundreds of officials, and everyone asked to borrow officials to alleviate the disaster.

古文：畋欲因授岭南节度使，而卢携方倚高骈，使立功，乃曰： 骈才略无双，淮南天下劲兵，又诸道之师方至，蕞尔贼，奈何舍之，令四方解体邪？ 
现代文：郑畋想就近封为岭南节度使，但卢携正重用高骈，想让他建功，就说 ：高骈谋略独一无二，所率淮南军是全国的精兵，加上各地的军队快到了，小小毛贼，为什么要放了他，使各地军队离心呢？ 
English: Zheng Qi wanted to be appointed as the Lingnan Festival envoy, but Lu Cizheng used Gao Qi, and wanted him to make a contribution, he said: Gao Qi's strategy is unique, the Huainan Army led by him is the elite soldier of the whole country, and the troops from all over the country are about to arrive. Little petty thief, why release him and make the troops from all over the country centrifugal?

古文：畋曰： 不然。巢之乱本于饥，其众以利合，故能兴江、淮，根蔓天下。
现代文：郑畋说： 不对，黄巢反叛起于饥荒，他的军队靠钱财纠合，所以能从长江、淮河起兵，扰乱全国。
English: Zheng Yao said, "That's not right. Huang Chao's rebellion was triggered by famine, and his army was supported by money and wealth. That's why he was able to raise an army from the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River and disrupt the whole country.

古文：国家久平，士忘战，所在闭垒不敢出。
现代文：国家长期太平，兵将不会作战，各地闭关不敢出战。
English: The country has been at peace for a long time, the soldiers will not fight, and all parts of the country will not dare to go to war.

古文：如以恩释罪，使及岁丰，其下思归，众一离，巢即机上肉耳，法谓不战而屈人兵也。
现代文：如果降恩免罪，等到丰年他的部下想回家，军队离散，黄巢就成了砧板上的肉，这是兵法所说的不用战斗就制服对方军队的谋略。
English: If he is pardoned by surrendering, his subordinates will want to return home in a good year, the army will be dispersed, and the Yellow Nest will become meat on the chopping block. This is the strategy of subduing the opposing army without fighting, as stated in the laws of war.

古文：今不伐以谋，而怖以兵，恐天下忧未艾也。 
现代文：现不靠计谋，而靠军队攻打，我担心国家的担忧不会了结。 
English: I am afraid that the country's worries will not end.

古文：仆射于琮言： 南海以宝产富天下，如与贼，国藏竭矣。 
现代文：左仆射于琮说： 岭南因出产宝物比全国各地富裕，如果给了反贼，国家的财源就枯竭了。 
English: Zuo minion Zhaoyu said: Lingnan is richer than the rest of the country due to the production of treasures. If it is given to the anti-thieves, the country's financial resources will be exhausted.

古文：天子内亦属骈，乃然携议。
现代文：皇帝心里也指望高骈，就赞同卢携的意见。
English: The emperor was also counting on Gao Gan in his heart, so he agreed with Lu Cui's opinion.

古文：畋曰： 安危属吾等，而公倚淮南用兵，吾不知所税驾。 
现代文：郑畋对卢携说 ：国家安危靠我们，但你指望淮南兵作战，我不知道结局会怎样。 
English: Zheng Rong said to Lu Zhizhu: The safety of the country depends on us, but you are counting on Huainan soldiers to fight, I don't know what the outcome will be.

古文：会骈奏： 南蛮方强，请如西戎，以公主下嫁。 
现代文：遇上高骈上奏说 ：南方盗贼力量正强，请求到西方异族去，将公主嫁给他们借兵。 
English: When he met Gao Yao, Shang Zuo said, "The Southern thieves are very powerful, and they have asked me to go to the Western barbarians and marry the princess to them as a borrowed soldier."

古文：携又议从之。
现代文：卢携又说要采纳这意见。
English: Lu Tzu also said that this opinion should be adopted.

古文：畋以为损国威灵，不可，即抗论，至相诟嫚。
现代文：郑畋认为这损害国家威望，不同意，就极力争辩，以至于互相对骂。
English: Zheng Rong thought that this would damage the country's prestige. When he disagreed, they argued so hard that they cursed each other.

古文：携怒，拂衣去，裾衊于砚，因抵之。
现代文：卢携发怒了，一甩袖子要离开，衣服飘到砚台里，就向郑畋甩过去。
English: Lu Zhitong was angry. As soon as he flung off his sleeves to leave, his clothes floated into the ring, and he flung them at Zheng Yulong.

古文：帝以大臣争口语，无以示百官，乃俱罢，以畋为太子宾客，分司东都。
现代文：皇帝因宰相争论辱骂，不能做群臣的表率，就把他们都罢了官，任命郑畋为太子宾客，分管洛阳分署。
English: The emperor could not set an example for his ministers because the prime ministers argued and insulted each other, so he dismissed them all and appointed Zheng Qi as a guest of the crown prince, in charge of the Luoyang branch.

古文：俄召拜吏部尚书。
现代文：不久又召回任命为吏部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was recalled and appointed to the Ministry of Personnel.

古文：明年，为凤翔陇西节度使，募锐兵五百，号 疾雷将 ；境中盗不敢发，发辄得。
现代文：第二年，他担任凤翔、陇西节度使，召募了五百精兵，号称 迅雷兵 ，辖境中盗贼不敢闹事，闹事就被抓住了。
English: In the second year, he served as the Fengxiang and Shaanxi Festival envoy, and recruited five hundred elite soldiers, known as Xunlei soldiers. The thieves in the jurisdiction did not dare to make trouble, and the trouble was caught.

古文：会巢陷东都，遣兵戍京师，以家财劳行，妻自纟任戎衣给战士。
现代文：遇上黄巢攻占了洛阳，他派兵去守卫京城，用家中财产犒劳出征士兵，他妻子亲自做军装供应兵将。
English: When Huang Chao captured Luoyang, he sent soldiers to guard the capital. He used his family's property to pay soldiers to go to war, and his wife personally supplied soldiers with uniforms.

古文：帝出梁、洋，畋上谒斜谷，泣曰： 将相误国，臣请死以惩无状。 
现代文：皇帝逃到梁州、洋州去，郑畋在斜谷拜见皇帝，哭着说： 文武官员害了国家，我请求被处死来警告失职的。 
English: The emperor fled to Liangzhou and Yangzhou. Zheng Rong met the emperor in the valley and cried: "Civil and military officials have harmed the country. I ask to be executed to warn those who have failed in their duties."

古文：帝劳遣之，且曰： 公谨扼贼冲，无令得西向。 
现代文：皇帝慰劳打发了他，并说： 您守好反贼进兵的关口，不让他们往西边来。 
English: The emperor comforted him and sent him on his way, saying, "You must guard the gate through which the anti-thieves enter the army, and not let them come to the west.

古文：畋曰： 方艰虞时，事有机急，不可中覆，请便宜从事，臣当以死报国。 
现代文：郑畋说 ：在这艰难的时候，碰到机会和紧急情况，不能请示，请求允许按方便处理事务，我将用生命报效国家。 
English: Zheng Wei said: In this difficult time, when there are opportunities and emergencies, I cannot ask for instructions, request permission to handle affairs as convenient, I will use my life to serve the country.

古文：帝曰： 利社稷，无不可。 
现代文：皇帝说： 只要对国家有利，没有不行的。 
English: The emperor said: As long as it is beneficial to the country, nothing is impossible.

古文：畋还，搜士卒，缮器械，浚城隍，使于梁者道相属。
现代文：郑畋回去后，召募士兵，修理兵器，修缮城池，派到梁州去的使者一个接一个。
English: After Zheng Hui returned, he recruited soldiers, repaired weapons, repaired the city, and sent emissaries to Liangzhou one after another.

古文：俄而贼使至，诸将皆欲附贼，畋开谕不可，即悉出金帛，请得脱身去，复不听。
现代文：不久黄巢的使者来了，众将都想投降黄巢，郑畋劝告他们不能这样，当下拿出所有财产，请求放他离开，他们也不同意。
English: Soon after, an emissary from the Yellow Nest arrived. The generals all wanted to surrender to the Yellow Nest. Zheng Qi advised them not to do so. They should immediately take out all their property and request that he be allowed to leave. They also did not agree.

古文：而使以伪赦令示军中乃去。
现代文：黄巢使者在军中宣布他们的赦免命令后才离去。
English: The Yellow Nest emissaries left only after they had announced their pardon order in the army.

古文：明日，诏使至，畋召监军袁敬柔以逆顺晓诸将，乃听命，刺血以盟。
现代文：第二天，皇帝的使臣来了，郑畋召来监军袁敬柔用君臣之义劝告众将，他们才听从了命令，一起取血宣誓。
English: The next day, the emperor's envoys arrived. Zheng Yi summoned Yuan Jing Rong, the supervisor of the army, to advise the generals with the righteousness of princes and ministers. Only then did they obey the order and take the blood oath together.

古文：畋遣子凝绩从帝，有诏进同中书门下平章事。
现代文：郑畋派儿子郑凝跟随皇帝，皇帝下诏提升他任同中书门下平章事。
English: Zheng Rong sent his son Zheng Rong to follow the emperor, and the emperor issued an edict elevating him to the position of the second-ranked scholar.

古文：贼将又至，畋斩于军，余党数百人皆捕诛之。
现代文：反贼的将领又来了，郑畋在军营中把他杀了，他的同伙几百人都被抓获处死了。
English: The anti-thief general came again. Zheng Rong killed him in the military camp. Hundreds of his comrades were captured and executed.

古文：迁检校尚书右仆射、西面行营都统。
现代文：后升任检校尚书右仆射、西面行营都统。
English: After that, he was promoted to the position of inspector of schools.

古文：军中承制除拜。乃以前灵武节度使唐弘夫为行军司马。
现代文：有诏允许他在军中任命官员，他就任命过去的灵武节度使唐弘夫为行军司马。
English: An imperial edict allowed him to appoint officials in the army, and he appointed Tang Hongfu, the former Lingwu commander, as marshal.

古文：中和元年，贼将王璠率众三万来攻，畋使弘夫设伏以待。
现代文：中和元年，反贼将领王率三万军队来进攻，郑畋派唐弘夫设埋伏等待他们。
English: In the first year of the Middle Kingdom, the anti-thief general Wang led 30,000 troops to attack, and Zheng He sent Tang Hongfu to set up an ambush to wait for them.

古文：璠内轻畋儒柔，纵步骑鼓而前，畋以锐卒数千当贼，疏阵而多旗帜，乘高伐鼓，贼不测众寡，阵未整，伏发，众皆嚣。
现代文：王心里轻视郑畋文弱，放任步、骑兵击鼓前进，郑畋派几千精锐士兵抵挡敌军，稀疏列阵多树旗帜，占据高处击鼓，敌军不知兵力多少，敌阵没列好，伏兵杀出，敌军都乱了。
English: In the king's heart, he despised Zheng Xuanwen's weakness and allowed the cavalry to advance at their own pace and beat drums. Zheng Xuan sent several thousand elite soldiers to resist the enemy army, sparsely lined up with many flags, occupying high places to beat drums. The enemy army did not know how many soldiers they had, the enemy line was not well lined up, the ambush soldiers were killed, and the enemy army was in chaos.

古文：日暮，军四合，鏖战龙尾坡，杀贼二万级，积尸数十里，多获铠仗，璠遁去，禽璠子斩之，威动京师。
现代文：到傍晚，唐军从四面合围，在龙尾坡激战，杀敌头两万颗，尸体堆积了几十里，缴获了很多铠甲器械。王逃跑了，他把王的儿子抓住杀了，军威震动了京城。
English: By the evening, the Tang army was surrounded from all sides and fought fiercely in Longwei slope, killing the first 20,000 of the enemy, the bodies piled up for dozens of miles, and captured a lot of armor equipment. Wang fled, he caught and killed Wang's son, and the military power shook the capital.

古文：时诸镇兵在寰内尚数万，无所归，畋招来之，厚加慰结。
现代文：当时各地军队在关中还有几万人，没人指挥，郑畋把他们召去，慰劳优厚并和他们结交。
English: At that time, there were still tens of thousands of troops from all over the country in Guanzhong, and no one was in command. Zheng He summoned them, consoled them generously, and made friends with them.

古文：乃与泾原程宗楚、秦州仇公遇、鄜延李孝恭、夏州拓拔思恭约盟，传檄天下。
现代文：于是和泾原节度使程宗楚、秦州节度使仇公遇、延节度使李孝恭、夏州节度使拓跋思恭约会盟誓，向全国发檄文。
English: As a result, he made an oath with the prime minister of Hebei Province, Cheng Zongchu, the prime minister of Qin Province, Zhou Enfei, the prime minister of Yan Province, Li Xiaogong, and the prime minister of Xia Province, Tuobao Siogong, to issue a proclamation to the whole country.

古文：时王命不出剑门，四方谓王室微，不能复兴；及畋檄至，远近咸耸，各治兵思立功，奔问行在。
现代文：当时皇帝的命令没从剑门发出，各地认为皇帝力量衰弱，不能再振作了，到郑畋的檄文到了，远近感到震动，都招兵想建功，派人到皇帝驻地问候。
English: At that time, the emperor's orders were not issued from the Jianmen Gate, and various regions believed that the emperor's strength was weak and could no longer be invigorated. When Zheng Xuan's imperial edict arrived, people from near and far were shocked. They all recruited soldiers to make contributions and sent people to the emperor's residence to greet him.

古文：巢大惧，不敢西谋。
现代文：黄巢很害怕，不敢打西进的主意。
English: Huang Chao was very scared and did not dare to go west.

古文：当此时，微畋，天子几殆。
现代文：在这时，没有郑畋，皇帝几乎危险了。
English: At this time, without Zheng Xuan, the emperor was almost in danger.

古文：帝闻捷曰： 朕知畋不尽，儒者之勇乃尔！ 
现代文：皇帝听到捷报后说 ：我对郑畋了解不够，儒生竟然这样勇敢！ 
English: After hearing the good news, the emperor said, "I don't know enough about Zheng He. How could a Confucian scholar be so brave!"

古文：弘夫取咸阳，以桴济兵渭水。
现代文：唐弘夫攻占了咸阳，乘筏子运兵渡过渭河。
English: Tang Hongfu conquered Xianyang and crossed the Fenhe River by mule.

古文：贼伏甲伪走，弘夫与宗楚乘胜入都门，为贼所覆。
现代文：敌军埋伏军队假装逃跑，唐弘夫和程宗楚乘战胜攻进京城城门，被敌军消灭了。
English: The enemy ambush troops pretended to escape, and Tang Hongfu and Cheng Zongchu took advantage of the victory to enter the gate of the capital city and were eliminated by the enemy.

古文：畋数敕无轻进，二人不听，果败。
现代文：郑畋多次下令不要轻率进兵，两人不听从，果然战败了。
English: Zheng Yao repeatedly ordered not to enter the army rashly, but the two disobeyed and were defeated.

古文：以鄜、夏兵屯东渭桥。
现代文：郑畋命延、夏州军队驻扎在东渭桥。
English: Zheng Rong's life was prolonged, and the Xiazhou army was stationed in Dongluo Bridge.

古文：再进司空、兼门下侍郎、京城四面行营都统，赐御袍犀带。
现代文：他两次升官后任司空、兼任门下侍郎、京城四面行营都统，被赐御袍犀带。
English: After he was promoted twice, he served as Siku, concurrently as a servant of his disciple, and was given the imperial robe and sash.

古文：拜而不贺。
现代文：他任官后没有庆贺。
English: There was no celebration after his appointment.

古文：行军司马李昌言者屯兴平，遣麾下求为南面都统，辄引兵趋府。
现代文：行军司马李昌言驻扎在兴平，派部下请求担任南面都统，立刻率军进逼郑畋的官府。
English: Marching Sima Li Changyan stationed in Xingping, sent his subordinates to request to serve as the southern capital, and immediately led the army into the government office of Zheng He.

古文：畋不意见袭，登城好语曰： 吾方入朝，公能戢兵爱人，为国灭贼乎？
现代文：郑畋没提防被袭击。登上城楼好好对他说： 我正要到朝廷去，您能够镇抚军队爱护人民，为国家消灭反贼吗？
English: Zheng He did not expect to be attacked. He climbed the tower and said to him: I am about to go to the imperial court. Can you pacify the army, protect the people, and eliminate the anti-thieves for the country?

古文：能，则守此矣。 
现代文：如果能，就任这职务吧。 
English: If you can, run for office.

古文：遂委军去。
现代文：他于是将军队交出来离去了。
English: He then handed over his army and left.

古文：昌言自为留后，卫畋出境。
现代文：李昌言自封留后，护送郑畋离开防区。
English: Li Changyan escorted Zheng Yao out of the defense zone after he had stayed behind.

古文：既半道，内惭负，即辞疾。
现代文：走到半路，郑畋心里惭愧，就称病辞职。
English: Halfway through, Zheng Rong felt ashamed and resigned, saying he was ill.

古文：诏授太子少傅，分司东都，便医于兴元。
现代文：有诏任命他为太子少傅，分管洛阳分署，就便在兴元治病。
English: An imperial edict appointed him as the prince's junior tutor, in charge of the Luoyang branch, and he began to treat the disease in Xingyuan.

古文：明年，召至行在，以王鐸将兵，复拜畋司空、门下侍郎、平章事，军务一以咨决。
现代文：第二年，把他召到皇帝驻地，命王铎带兵，又任命郑畋为司空、门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，军队事务都听他的。
English: The next year, he was summoned to the emperor's residence, ordered Wang Xi to lead the troops, and appointed Zheng Xi as the Siku, the under-secretary, and the under-secretary of the middle school. He was in charge of military affairs.

古文：兴州戍将孙鄴坐赃抵死，畋奏言： 方关辅失守，鄴护褒斜有功，请免死。
现代文：兴州守将孙邺贪赃要被处死，郑畋上奏说 ：在关中失守时，孙邺保卫褒斜有功劳，请求免于处死。
English: When the governor of Xingzhou, Sun Yat-sen, was about to be executed, Zheng Rong said in his report: When he lost control of the border, Sun Yat-sen had the merit of defending the border and requested to be exempted from execution.

古文：陈秋儿保嵯峨山拒贼，农不废耕，请以检校散骑常侍隶奉天军。 
现代文：陈秋儿保卫嵯峨山抵御反贼，使农民能耕种，请求任命为检校散骑常侍隶属奉天军。 
English: Chen Qiu'er defended Mount Saga against anti-thieves, enabled farmers to cultivate, and requested to be appointed as a regular attendant of school inspection and horseback riding, belonging to the Feng Tian Army.

古文：制皆可。
现代文：有诏都同意了。
English: They all agreed.

古文：旧制，使府校书郎以上，满三岁迁；监察御史里行至大夫、常侍，满三十月迁。
现代文：过去的法令规定，使府校书郎以上的官，满三年提升；监察御史里行到大夫、常侍官，满三十个月提升。
English: According to past laws and regulations, officials above prefectural school scribes were promoted after three years; inspectors were promoted to doctors and regular attendants after 30 months.

古文：虽节度兼宰相，亦不敢越。
现代文：即使任节度使兼任宰相，也不敢越轨。
English: Even if he were to hold the post of prime minister concurrently, he would not dare to deviate from the path.

古文：自军兴，有岁内数迁者，畋以为不可，请： 行营节度，繇里行至大夫，许满二十月迁；校书郎以上，满二岁乃奏。
现代文：自从为供军用征集财物以来，有一年间几次提升的，郑畋认为不行，请求说： 行营节度，从里行到大夫，准许满二十个月提升；校书郎以上官，满两年才提升。
English: Since he had been promoted several times in one year since he had been promoted to collect money and materials for the military, Zheng Yao thought it was not possible, and requested: "In the camp festival, from the ranks to the doctor, it is allowed to be promoted after twenty months; in the position of school scribe or higher, it is only promoted after two years."

古文：非军兴者如故事。 
现代文：不属供军用征集财物的按旧制。 
English: It does not apply to the collection of property by the military according to the old system.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝采纳了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：时田令孜恃权有所干请，畋不应。
现代文：当时田令孜依仗权力，有事拜托，郑畋没有理会。
English: At that time, Tian Lingzhe relied on power. If you have something to say, please say it. Zheng He did not pay attention.

古文：陈敬瑄欲以官品居宰相上，畋曰： 外宰相安得论品乎？ 
现代文：陈敬蠧想使自己的级别在其他宰相之上，郑畋说： 朝外的宰相怎能讲级别呢？ 
English: Chen Jingyao wants to make his level higher than other prime ministers, Zheng Yao said: How can foreign prime ministers talk about level?

古文：卒不肯处其下。
现代文：始终不肯比他级别低。
English: He always refused to be ranked lower than him.

古文：令孜、敬瑄内常衔之。
现代文：田令孜、陈敬蠧心里总恨他。
English: Tian Lingzi and Chen Jingyao always hated him in their hearts.

古文：贼平，帝将还，而李昌言自以袭畋而夺之镇，今畋当国，内不喜，故三人相结，而遣客上畋过咎。
现代文：黄巢平定后，皇帝要回京，李昌言因为自己是袭击郑畋夺了他的职务，现郑畋在朝中掌权，内心不高兴。因此三个人互相勾结，派使者告发郑畋的过错。
English: After Huang Chao was pacified, the emperor wanted to return to Beijing. Li Changyan attacked Zheng He and took over his position. Zheng He is now in power in the court and is not happy. Therefore, the three people colluded with each other and sent an envoy to denounce Zheng He's fault.

古文：帝得其情，不许。
现代文：皇帝知道事情的实情，没理睬。
English: The emperor knew the truth of the matter and ignored it.

古文：畋乃引疾去位，入见帝曰： 乘舆东还，繇大散关幸凤翔，供张顿峙，一委昌言，乃可安。
现代文：郑畋就称病离职，进宫拜见皇帝说 ：皇上东归，从大散关到凤翔，布置供应，全靠李昌言，才能平安。
English: Zheng Yi claimed to be ill and left his post. When he went to the palace to visit the emperor, he said, "The emperor has returned to the East. From Daxangguan to Fengxiang, the layout and supply are all dependent on Li Changyan, in order to be safe."

古文：臣若以宰相从，彼且猜阻，非所以靖反侧也。
现代文：我如任宰相跟随，他将猜疑阻拦，这不是使心中不踏实的人安心的办法。
English: If I follow him as prime minister, he will discourage suspicion. This is not the way to reassure people who are not sure in their hearts.

古文：请以散官养疾。
现代文：我请求任闲官养病。
English: I request the idle official to recover from his illness.

古文：或群臣有疑，愿出臣章示之，使知天子于臣无纤芥者。 
现代文：如果百官疑心，希望将我的奏章给他们看，让他们知道皇上和我没有一点隔阂。 
English: If the officials are suspicious, I hope to show them my score, so that they know that the Emperor and I are not at all estranged.

古文：帝以其诚，乃授检校司徒、太子太保，罢政事。
现代文：皇帝见他心诚，就任命他为检校司徒、太子太保，罢免了宰相。
English: The emperor saw his sincerity and appointed him as the inspector of the school, the prince's guardian, and dismissed the prime minister.

古文：以凝绩为壁州刺史，留养。
现代文：任命郑凝绩为壁州刺史，留下侍奉他。
English: He appointed Zheng Geng Rong as the governor of Bishu Province and left him to serve him.

古文：徙龙州，卒，年六十三，赠太尉。
现代文：郑凝绩调任龙州刺史，郑畋就去世了，享年六十三岁，赠官太尉。
English: Zheng Genshi was transferred to Longzhou Zhishi, and Zheng Yao died at the age of sixty-three, promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：后帝思畋忠力，又赠太傅。
现代文：后来皇帝思念他的忠心和功劳，又赠官为太傅。
English: Later, the emperor thought of his loyalty and merit, and gave him the position of Taifu.

古文：凝绩数岁亦卒。
现代文：郑凝绩几年后也去世了。
English: Zheng Genshi also passed away a few years later.

古文：始，李茂贞以博野裨将戍奉天，畋召隶麾下，委以游逻，厚礼之。
现代文：当初，李茂贞任博野偏将守卫奉天，郑畋把他召来隶属帐下，命他管巡逻，对他礼节优厚。
English: At first, Li Maozhen was assigned to guard Bongtian as the general of Bono, and Zheng Yi called him to be under his charge, ordered him to patrol, and treated him with great courtesy.

古文：茂贞感其饰擢，及畋还葬郑，表为请谥曰文昭。
现代文：李茂贞感激他的恩遇和提拔，到他被送回郑州安葬时，上奏为他请求赐谥号叫文昭。
English: Li Maozhen was grateful for his favor and promotion, and when he was sent back to Zhengzhou for burial, he asked to be given the posthumous name Wen Zhao.

古文：天复初，与李思恭配飨僖宗庙廷，又赠宗楚、弘夫官。
现代文：天复初年，他和李思恭被供到唐僖宗庙里接受祭祀，又给程宗楚、唐弘夫赠了官。
English: In the first year of Tianfu, he and Li Sikyong were offered to Tang Xizong Temple to receive sacrifices, and they also presented officials to Cheng Zongchu and Tang Hongfu.

古文：畋为人仁恕，姿采如峙玉。
现代文：有人说郑畋生性仁爱宽大，姿态神采很帅。
English: Some people say that Zheng Bingsheng is benevolent and generous, and his attitude is very handsome.

古文：凡与布衣交，至贵无少易。
现代文：没做官时结交的朋友，到当了大官态度一点不变。
English: The friends I made when I wasn't an official didn't change at all when I became a high-ranking official.

古文：郑縠者，薰子也。
现代文：郑谷是郑薰的儿子。
English: Zheng Gu is the son of Zheng Gong.

古文：乾符中，王仙芝来攻，镣拒之，自督勇士与别将董汉勋守南、北门。
现代文：在郑畋当权时，被提升为给事中，直到当了侍郎。他以德报怨都和这一样。
English: When Zheng He was in power, he was promoted to be in charge of giving things, until he became a waiter.

古文：城陷，汉勋力战死，镣贬韶州司马。终太子宾客。
现代文：黄巢攻占京城后，他在各军中首先打败反贼，虽然没有完成大业，但回朝廷任皇帝宰相，在朝中筹划，终于能够收复了京城。
English: After Huang Chao captured the capital, he was the first in the army to defeat the anti-thieves. Although he did not complete the great cause, he returned to the imperial court as the emperor's prime minister, planned in the middle of the court, and finally was able to recover the capital.

古文：王徽，字昭文，京兆人。
现代文：王徽的字叫昭文，是京兆人。
English: The character of Wang Hui is called Zhaowen. He is a citizen of Beijing.

古文：第进士，授校书郎。
现代文：他考中了进士，被任命为校书郎。
English: He passed the entrance examination and was appointed school librarian.

古文：沈询判度支，徐商领盐铁，皆辟署使府。
现代文：沈询任度支，徐商管盐铁，都任命他为幕僚。
English: Shen Ying Ren Du Zhi and Xu Shang Guan Yan Tie both appointed him as a staff member.

古文：始，宣宗诏宰相选可尚主者，或以徽闻。
现代文：开始唐宣宗命宰相选可以娶公主的，有人提王徽。
English: At the beginning of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Xuanzong ordered the selection of a prime minister who could marry a princess. Some people mentioned Wang Hui.

古文：徽本澹声利，闻不喜，往见宰相刘彖曰： 徽年过四十，又多病，不应在选。 
现代文：他从来不热衷名声钱财，知道后不高兴，去见宰相刘王彖说： 我年龄已过了四十，又有很多病，不应该入选。 
English: He had never been keen on fame and money, and was not happy when he found out. He went to see the Prime Minister, Liu Wangyu, and said: I am over forty years old and have many illnesses, so I should not be selected.

古文：彖为言，乃罢。
现代文：刘王彖帮他说话，才算了。
English: Liu Wangyao helped him to speak, and then it was over.

古文：从令狐綯署宣武、淮南掌书记，召授右拾遗。
现代文：他又跟随令狐任宣武、淮南掌书记，后被召到朝廷任命为右拾遗。
English: He also followed Linghu Ren Xuanwu, secretary of Huainan, and was later summoned to the imperial court to be appointed as the Right Reverend.

古文：书二十余上，言无回忌，公议浩然归重。
现代文：呈上奏章二十多次，敢于说话，大家都推崇他。
English: He presented more than 20 pieces of music, dared to speak, and everyone admired him.

古文：徐商罢政事，守江陵，心欲表徽在幕府，恐其不乐外，忍不言。徽自往曰： 公知徽，安得不从？ 
现代文：徐商罢相后，去镇守江陵，心里想任命他为幕僚，怕他不想出京任官，不忍心说，他自己登门说 ：您赏识我，我怎会不去？ 
English: After Xu Shang retired, he went to the town of Jiangling. In his heart, he wanted to appoint him as a staff member. Afraid that he did not want to go to Beijing to take up the post, he could not bear to say. He went to the door and said: You appreciate me, how can I not go?

古文：商大喜，表为殿中侍御史，署节度府判官。御史中丞高湜荐知杂事，进考功员外郎。
现代文：徐商很高兴，呈表任命他为殿中侍御史、节度府判官，后御史中丞高推荐他任知杂事，又升任考功员外郎。
English: Xu Shang was very pleased, and he appointed him as the court historian and the judge of the palace, and the court historian recommended him to be in charge of miscellaneous affairs, and he was also promoted to the post of the examiner.

古文：故事，考簿以硃注上下为殿最，岁久易漫，吏辄窜易为奸。
现代文：按惯例，考绩簿用红笔在旁边注上下来分等级，时间长了容易看不清，官吏们就窜改谋私。
English: According to the usual practice, the performance appraisal book is marked with a red pen on the side to indicate the grade. If the time is long, it is easy to see clearly, and the officials will tamper with it for personal gain.

古文：徽始用墨，遂绝妄欺。
现代文：他开始用墨书写，就杜绝了窜改。
English: When he began to write in ink, he put an end to the forgery.

古文：擢翰林学士。
现代文：后升任翰林学士。
English: Later, he was promoted to Hanlin Scholar.

古文：广明元年，卢携罢宰相，以徽为户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：广明元年，卢携被罢相，任命王徽为户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the first year of the Guangming Dynasty, Lu Jizhe was dismissed from the post of minister, and Wang Hui was appointed as the head of the household and the second-ranking official in the book department.

古文：是日，黄巢入关，僖宗西狩，冒夜出。
现代文：这天，黄巢攻进潼关，唐僖宗向西逃跑，夜里出发了。
English: On this day, Huang Chao invaded Shaoguan, and Tang Xizong fled westward, setting out in the night.

古文：徽与崔沆、豆卢彖、仆射于琮诘朝乃知，追帝不及，堕崖樾间，为贼所执，迫还，将污以官。
现代文：他和崔沆、豆卢王彖和仆射于琮早晨才知道，追皇帝没追上，摔倒在岩石树林里，被起义军抓住，强迫回京，想任命他官职。
English: It was only in the morning that he, Cui Yao, Doulu Wang Yao and Pu Yao realized that they had failed to catch up with the emperor, fell down in the rocky woods, were caught by the rebels, forced to return to Beijing, and wanted to appoint him to an official post.

古文：徽阳喑不答，以刃环胁，卒不动。
现代文：他装哑不答话，他们围着用刀威胁，他始终不怕。
English: He pretended to be mute and did not answer, they surrounded him and threatened him with a knife, but he was never afraid.

古文：贼令归第，使医护视。
现代文：他们叫他回家，派医生给他看病。
English: They told him to go home and sent a doctor to see him.

古文：久之，守者懈，乃奔河中，裂缣书章，遣人间走蜀。
现代文：时间长了，看守的人懈怠了，他就逃到河中，用绢写奏章，派人抄小路送到蜀地。
English: As time went on and the guards slacked off, he fled to the river, where he wrote music in cymbals and sent people to find a path to Shu.

古文：诏拜兵部尚书、京城四面宣慰催阵使。
现代文：有诏任命他为兵部尚书、京城四面宣慰催阵使。
English: An imperial edict appointed him as the envoy of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and he went to all four corners of the capital to comfort and urge the troops.

古文：昭义高浔与贼战石桥，败绩。
现代文：昭义节度使高浔和起义军在石桥作战，战败了。
English: Takahata and the insurgents were defeated in the Battle of Ishibashi by Akiyoshi Seito.

古文：其将刘广擅还，据潞州。
现代文：他的将领刘广擅自回师，占据了潞州。
English: His general Liu Guang returned to his division without permission and occupied Zhangzhou.

古文：别将孟方立杀广，因取邢、洺、磁三州贰于己。
现代文：偏将孟方立杀死了刘广，又命邢、洛、磁三州隶属自己。
English: General Meng Fangli killed Liu Guang, and ordered the Three Provinces to be subordinated to him.

古文：昭义所隶，唯泽一州。
现代文：昭义军管辖的只有泽州一个州。
English: Zhezhou is the only prefecture under the jurisdiction of the Shao Yi Army.

古文：帝以兵部侍郎郑昌图权守潞，士心多附方立，昌图不能制。
现代文：皇帝派兵部侍郎郑昌图镇守潞州，兵将多附和孟方立，郑昌图控制不了。
English: The emperor sent Zheng Changtu, the attendant of the military department, to guard Bozhou. The soldiers were mostly attached to Meng Fangli, and Zheng Changtu could not control them.

古文：朝议以大臣镇抚，即授徽检校尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事，领昭义节度使。
现代文：朝廷建议派重臣去镇守、安抚，就任命王徽为检校尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事、昭义节度使。
English: The imperial court proposed to send a senior minister to the town guard and pacify the situation, and appointed Wang Hui as the inspector of the school, the left-hand man of the school, the left-hand man of the school, the left-hand man of the school, the left-hand man of the school, the left-hand man of the school, the left-hand man of the school, the left-hand man of the school, the left-hand man of the school, the left-hand man of the school, the left-hand man of the school, the left-hand man of the school, the left-hand man of the school, the left-hand man of the school

古文：是时，李克用亦争泽、潞，徽商朝廷力未能以兵抗之，奉表固辞，诏可。
现代文：当时，李克用也争夺泽州、潞州，王徽估计朝廷不能用军队和他们对抗，上奏坚持辞职，有诏同意了。
English: At that time, Li Keqin was also competing for Zhezhou and Zhangzhou, and Wang Hui estimated that the imperial court could not use the army to confront them. He insisted on resigning, and Deng agreed.

古文：更为诸道租庸供军使。
现代文：改任诸道租庸供军使。
English: He was appointed as the military envoy of the various provinces.

古文：因说行营都监杨复光，请赦沙陀罪，令赴难。
现代文：他向行营都监杨复光建议，请求赦免沙陀的罪，命他们救国难。
English: He proposed to Yang Fuguang, the governor of Xingyuan, to pardon Shado's crime and order them to save the country.

古文：其夏，沙陀会诸军，遂平京师，徽助为多，迁右仆射。
现代文：这年夏天，沙陀会合各军，收复了京城，王徽功劳最多，升任右仆射。
English: In the summer of that year, Shado rallied the armies and recaptured the capital. Wang Hui received the most credit and was promoted to the position of right-hand man.

古文：大乱之后，宫观焚残，园陵皆发掘，鞠为丘莽，乘舆未有东意，诏徽充大明宫留守、京畿安抚制置脩奉使。
现代文：京城遭劫后，宫殿被烧残破，皇陵都被挖掘开，弄成了乱土堆，皇帝没有东归的打算。下诏命他为大明宫留守，京畿安抚制置修奉使。
English: After the capital was plundered, the palace was burned and destroyed, and the imperial tombs were all dug up and turned into heaps of rubble. The emperor had no intention of returning to the East. The next edict ordered him to stay at the Daming Palace, and to appoint a Buddhist envoy for the pacification of Gyeonggi.

古文：徽外调兵食，内抚绥流亡，逾年，稍稍完聚，兴复殿寝，裁制有宜，即奉表请帝东还。
现代文：他对外调动军队和粮草，对内安抚流亡百姓，过了一年，城墙修筑、粮食积蓄逐渐好转，又修复了宫殿，安排好了，就上表请皇帝东归。
English: He mobilized troops and grain and grass outside the country, and pacified the exiled people inside the country. After a year, the city wall was built, grain reserves gradually improved, and the palace was restored and arranged. He invited the emperor to return to the east.

古文：又进检校司空、御史大夫，仍权京兆尹。
现代文：后升任检校司空、御史大夫，仍旧兼任京兆尹。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of school inspector, and still concurrently held the position of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：宦要家争遣人治第，侵冒齐民，讼诉满前，徽不屈势幸，一平以法，繇是为帝左右所憎，以其党薛杞为少尹，轻其权。
现代文：达官要人家争着派人修宅院，侵犯平民，大家都到他这里来告状，他不怕权贵，全按法律判决，为这被皇帝的亲信们仇视，派他们的党羽薛杞任京兆少尹，来削减他的权力。
English: The high-ranking officials wanted to send people to repair the residential compound and violate the civilians, and everyone came to him to sue. He was not afraid of the nobility, and everything was decided according to the law. Because of this, he was hated by the emperor's cronies, and they sent their henchmen Xue Ying as Jing Zhao Shao Yin to reduce his power.

古文：杞方居丧，徽奏止不使到府。
现代文：薛杞正在服丧，王徽上奏不要他上任。
English: Xue Yao is in mourning. Wang Hui has asked him not to take up the post.

古文：众忿，共谮罢徽，令赴行在。
现代文：他们很生气，都说王徽的坏话，并命他到皇帝驻地去。
English: They were very angry. They all spoke ill of Wang Hui and ordered him to go to the emperor's residence.

古文：俄授太子少师。
现代文：不久任命他为太子少师。
English: He was soon appointed as the prince's junior teacher.

古文：徽遂移疾河中，满百日免。
现代文：他称病到了河中，过了一百天被免职了。
English: He claimed to have fallen ill and was relieved of his duties after 100 days.

古文：帝还京师，复申前授，称疾不任奉谒。
现代文：皇帝回到京城，又命他任太子少师，他称病不能上朝。
English: When the emperor returned to the capital, he ordered him to serve as the prince's tutor. He said that he was too ill to go to the imperial court.

古文：宰相疾其怨望，贬集州刺史。
现代文：宰相们恨他心怀不满，贬他任集州刺史。
English: The chancellors hated him and were dissatisfied with him, and relegated him to the role of a footnote in the history of Jishu.

古文：会帝避沙陀，出次宝鸡。
现代文：遇到皇帝躲避沙陀，逃到宝鸡。
English: When he met the emperor, he avoided Shado and fled to Baoji.

古文：帝念徽无罪，拜吏部尚书，封琅邪郡侯。
现代文：皇帝考虑他没有过错，任命他为吏部尚书，封为琅邪郡侯。
English: The emperor considered that he did not make a mistake and appointed him as the official of Shangshu, and named him as the Marquis of Zhaozha County.

古文：未行而嗣襄王煴作乱，帝进次汉中。
现代文：他没有上任嗣襄王李占就叛乱了，皇帝逃到汉中。
English: When he did not take up his position as the heir of Xiang Wang, Li Zhan rebelled, and the emperor fled to Hanzhong.

古文：煴逼召徽，以尪废自言。
现代文：李占强迫召见他，他自称病瘫了。
English: Li Zhan forced him to see him, and he claimed to be paralysed.

古文：及煴僭号，迫群臣作誓牒，徽托手弱，卒不肯署。
现代文：到李占称帝，强迫百官签署誓词，他借口手无力，最终不肯签署。
English: When Li Zhanzhong proclaimed himself emperor and forced hundreds of officials to sign the oath, he eventually refused to sign on the pretext that he did not have the strength.

古文：煴平，帝至凤翔，召徽为御史大夫，固辞足痹，复拜太子少师。
现代文：李占被讨平后，皇帝到了凤翔，召王徽任御史大夫，他称腿瘫坚决推辞，又任命他任太子少师。
English: After Li Zhan was subdued, the emperor came to Fengxiang and summoned Wang Hui to serve as the imperial historian. He said that he firmly rejected the leg paralysis and appointed him as the prince's young teacher.

古文：昭宗立，见便殿，进对详洽，帝顾宰相曰： 徽神气尚强，可用。 
现代文：唐昭宗即位，在便殿召见他，他奏事详细学识渊博，皇帝对宰相们说： 王徽精神还很好，可以任用。 
English: When Tang Zhaozong ascended to the throne, he was summoned to the throne hall. He was very knowledgeable about the details of the matter. The emperor said to the prime ministers: Wang Hui's spirit is still very good, and he can be appointed.

古文：乃复授吏部尚书。
现代文：就又任命为吏部尚书。
English: He was also appointed as a member of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：是时，铨选失序，吏肆为奸，补调重复不可检。
现代文：那时候，选拔官吏不按成绩，吏部官员随意乱来，任命重复难以核查。
English: At that time, the selection of officials was not based on merit, officials from the personnel department came and went at will, and it was difficult to verify repeated appointments.

古文：徽为手籍，一验实之，遂无奸滞。
现代文：他编了本手册，一查就清楚了，后再没有取巧和出问题的了。
English: He compiled this manual, and it was clear upon inspection, and there were no more tricks or problems.

古文：进右仆射。
现代文：又升任右仆射。
English: He was also promoted to the post of right-hand man.

古文：大顺元年卒，赠司空，谥曰贞。
现代文：大顺元年去世了，赠官司空，赐谥号叫贞。
English: Dashun died in the first year of the year, and was given the official title of Siku, and the posthumous name Zhen.

古文：谱言其先本魏诸公子，秦灭魏，至汉徙关中霸陵，以其故王家，为王氏。
现代文：家谱记载他的祖先是东周魏国的公子，秦灭了魏国后，到汉代迁到关中霸陵。因为他家原是王族，就姓王。
English: The family tree records that his ancestor was a noble son of the Eastern Zhou Wei Kingdom. After the Qin Dynasty destroyed the Wei Kingdom, he moved to Guanzhong Bailing in the Han Dynasty. Because his family was originally a royal family, his surname was Wang.

古文：十世祖罴，仕周为同州刺史，死葬咸阳凤政原，子孙因家杜陵。
现代文：他的十代祖王罴，在北周任同州刺史，死后埋葬在咸阳凤政原，后代因此就住在杜陵。
English: His 10th-generation ancestor, Wang Qian, was buried in Xianyang Feng Zheng Yuan after his death. As a result, his descendants live in Du Ling.

古文：曾祖择从，昆弟四人，曰易从、朋从、言从，皆擢进士第。至凤阁舍人者三人，故号 凤阁王氏 。
现代文：他的曾祖王择从，兄弟共四人，还有易从、朋从、言从，都考中了进士，官当到凤阁舍人的有三个，因此人称 凤阁王家 。
English: His great-grandfather, Wang Zizong, had a total of four brothers, including Yi Zizong, Po Zizong, and Yan Zizong, all of whom passed the entrance examination for officers. There were three officials who went to Fengge, so they were known as the Fengge royal family.

古文：行瑜诛，乃追复官爵，许其家收葬，赠太尉。
现代文：从那时到大中年，他家考中进士的有十八人，官当到朝廷部门和州郡首长的有三十多人。
English: From that time until his middle age, there were eighteen people who entered his family's middle school examination, and more than thirty people who became officials in the imperial court department and the head of the state and county.

古文：张浚，字禹川，本河间人。
现代文：王徽有很高的威望，但任宰相一天后京城就被攻占了，所以治国措施没有可说的。
English: Wang Hui had a high reputation, but the capital was occupied one day after he was appointed prime minister, so there was nothing to say about the measures for governing the country.

古文：性通脱无检，泛知书史，喜高论，士友摈薄之。
现代文：张浚的字叫禹川，本来是河间人。生性洒脱不检点，博览图书史籍，喜欢高谈阔论，士人、朋友们都排斥、看不起他。
English: Zhang Jun's character is called Yu Chuan, and he was originally from Kawama. By nature, he is free-wheeling and indiscreet, he reads books and history, and likes to talk a lot. Scholars and friends all reject and look down on him.

古文：不得志，乃羸服屏居金凤山，学从横术，以捭阖干时。
现代文：他不能升官，就穿贫民衣服隐居金凤山，学纵横家的学说，用权术应变来希望得到重用。
English: Unable to be promoted, he dressed in poor people's clothes and lived in seclusion in Jinfeng Mountain, learning the doctrine of the vertical and horizontal, and hoping to be reused by using power and skill.

古文：枢密使杨复恭遇之，以处士荐为太常博士，进度支员外郎。
现代文：枢密使杨复恭遇到了他，从隐士推荐他任太常博士，又升任度支员外郎。
English: A confidential envoy, Yang Fuqiong, met him and recommended him to be promoted from a hermit to a doctor of medicine, and then to a member of the imperial court.

古文：黄巢之乱，称疾，挟其母走商山。
现代文：黄巢造反，他称病，带着他母亲逃到商山。
English: When Huang Chao rebelled, he claimed to be ill and fled to Shangshan with his mother.

古文：僖宗西出，卫士食不给，汉阴令李康献糗饵数百驮，士皆厌给。
现代文：唐僖宗西逃，卫兵没有食物，汉阴县令李康送来几百驮干粮，士兵都有粮食吃了。
English: Tang Xuan fled to the west, the guards had no food, Hanyin County ordered Li Kang to send several hundred bushels of dry grain, and the soldiers all ate the grain.

古文：帝异之，曰： 尔乃及是乎？ 
现代文：皇帝感到惊奇，说： 您怎么竟然想到这了呢？ 
English: The emperor was surprised and said, "How could you have thought of that?

古文：对曰： 臣安知为此，张浚教臣也。 
现代文：他回答说 ：我哪里知道办这事，是张浚教我的。 
English: He replied, "I don't know how to do this, but Zhang Jun taught me."

古文：乃急召浚至行在，再进谏议大夫。
现代文：皇帝于是急忙召张浚到驻地去，两次升官后任谏议大夫。
English: The emperor then hurriedly summoned Zhang Jun to the residence, and he was promoted twice to the post of doctor of the imperial court.

古文：宰相王鐸任行营都统，奏署都统判官。
现代文：宰相王铎当行营都统，任命他为都统判官。
English: The prime minister, Wang Bing, went to the capital of the capital and appointed him as the judge of the capital.

古文：时王敬武在平卢，军最强，累召不肯应。
现代文：当时王敬武在平卢，军队最强大，皇帝多次征召他都不肯派兵。
English: At that time, Wang Jingwu was in Pinglu, and the army was the strongest. The emperor summoned him many times, but he refused to send troops.

古文：浚往说之，而敬武已臣贼，不迎使者。
现代文：张浚去劝说他，但他已经对黄巢称臣，不迎接皇帝使臣。
English: Zhang Jun went to persuade him, but he had already praised Huang Chao and did not welcome the emperor's envoy.

古文：浚责之曰： 公为天子守籓，今使者赍诏至，不北面俯伏而敢侮慢，公乃未识君臣大分，何以长吏民哉？ 
现代文：张浚责备他说 ：你为皇上镇守一块地方，现使者带着诏令来了，你不按礼节接诏却敢不恭敬，不知道君臣大义，怎么能掌管官吏、百姓呢？ 
English: Zhang Jun reproached him, saying, "You have been guarding a place for the emperor, and now an envoy has come with an imperial edict. You do not receive the imperial edict according to etiquette, but you dare not show respect. You do not know the great justice of the emperor and the people. How can you control the officials and the people?

古文：敬武愕眙愧谢。
现代文：王敬武吃惊并惭愧地道了歉。
English: Wang Jingwu was surprised and apologized with shame.

古文：浚宣诏已，士按兵默默。
现代文：张浚宣读诏令后，将领们拿着武器都不说话。
English: After Zhang Jun read out the edict, the generals held their weapons and did not speak.

古文：浚召将佐至鞠场，倡言： 忠义之士当审利害。
现代文：他把将领们都叫到球场，对他们号召说： 忠义的人应明辨利和害。
English: He summoned his generals to the stadium and called out to them: "Loyal people should clearly distinguish between benefit and harm.

古文：黄巢，贩盐虏耳。舍天子而臣之，何利邪？
现代文：黄巢是一个贩卖私盐的奴才，舍弃皇帝去臣属他，有什么好处呢？
English: Huang Chao is a slave who sells stolen salt. What is the benefit of abandoning the emperor and becoming his vassal?

古文：今诸侯勤王者踵相接，公等据一州以观成败，后贼平，将安往？
现代文：现各地保卫皇帝的军队源源不断，你们占据一州观望成败，反贼平定后，你们怎么办呢？
English: At present, there is a steady stream of troops from all over the country to defend the emperor. You occupy one state and wait for success or failure. After the anti-thieves are pacified, what will you do?

古文：诚能此时共诛大盗，迎天子，功名富贵可反手而取。
现代文：如能这时一起平定反贼，迎回皇帝，得功名富贵易如反掌。
English: If we can defeat the rebels and welcome back the emperor at this time, it will be easy to gain fame and fortune.

古文：吾怜公等舍安而蹈危也。 
现代文：我可怜你们放弃安宁而陷于危难。 
English: I pity you for giving up your peace and falling into peril.

古文：诸将杂然曰： 谏议语是！ 
现代文：众将领纷纷说： 你说得对！ 
English: The generals said one after another: You're right!

古文：敬武即引军从浚西。
现代文：王敬武就率军跟着他西进。
English: Wang Jingwu led the army to follow him westward.

古文：擢浚为会军使。
现代文：皇帝提升他任会军使。
English: The emperor promoted him to the position of military envoy.

古文：贼平，以户部侍郎判度支。
现代文：反贼平定后，他以户部侍郎身份管度支。
English: After the anti-thieves were subdued, he took on the role of head of the household as a steward.

古文：后再狩山南，拜同中书门下平章事，仍判度支。
现代文：皇帝后来又逃到山南，他被任命为同中书门下平章事，仍旧任度支职。
English: Later, the emperor fled to Shannan again. He was appointed to the position of Tongzhong Shumen Shimo Pingzhang, and still held the position of Zhuo Shifu.

古文：浚始繇复恭进，复恭中失权，更依田令孜，故复恭衔之。
现代文：张浚开始靠杨复恭升官，杨复恭中间一度丧失了权力，张浚又投靠了田令孜，所以杨复恭恨张浚。
English: Zhang Jun began to rely on Yang Fuqiong for promotion, Yang Fuqiong once lost power in the middle, Zhang Jun also relied on Tian Lingzi, so Yang Fuqiong hated Zhang Jun.

古文：及为中尉，数被离间。
现代文：到他当了神策护军中尉，多次离间张浚。
English: Until he became a lieutenant of the Divine Defense Force, Zhang Jun was separated many times.

古文：昭宗即位，复恭恃援立功，专任事，帝稍不平。
现代文：唐昭宗登基，他仗着拥立皇帝的功劳，独揽大权，皇帝逐渐不高兴了。
English: When Tang Zhaozong ascended to the throne, he took advantage of the merit of supporting the emperor and monopolized power. The emperor gradually became unhappy.

古文：当时多言浚有方略，善处大计，乃复见委信，尝问致治之要，对曰： 在强兵。
现代文：当时人多数说张浚有谋略，善于处理大事，他就又受重用了，皇帝曾问他治国的关键，他回答说： 在于使军队强大。
English: At that time, most people said that Zhang Jun had a strategy and was good at handling major events. He was also heavily used. The emperor once asked him the key to governing the country, and he replied: It is to make the army strong.

古文：兵强，天下服矣。 
现代文：军队强大，全国就服从了。 
English: When the army is strong, the whole country obeys.

古文：是时，硃全忠威振关东，而安居受杀李克恭，以潞州归全忠。
现代文：皇帝从此一心治理军队。后来皇帝和他谈论古今政事，他就说： 汉朝和晋朝过去的事不必说，皇帝年纪不大，天赋很高，内受宦官欺负，外遭藩镇威胁，所以不得安宁，这是我感到非常痛心的。 
English: Later, when the emperor was talking with him about ancient and modern political affairs, he said: Needless to say about the past of the Han Dynasty and the Jin Dynasty, the emperor is not old, he is very talented, he is bullied by eunuchs inside and threatened by the towns outside, so he cannot be at peace. This is very painful for me.

古文：全忠乃与幽州李匡威、云州赫连鐸上言： 先帝幸梁，繇李克用与硃玫连和，请举兵诛之，愿帅兵为掎角。 
现代文：那时候，朱全忠称雄中原，安居受杀死了李克恭，率潞州投降了朱全忠。朱全忠就和幽州节度使李匡威、云州节度使赫连铎上奏说： 故世皇帝逃到梁地，是因为李克用和朱玫相勾结，请求派兵消灭李克用，我们愿意率兵配合。 
English: At that time, Zhu Quanzhong claimed to be the hero of the Central Plains, killed Li Keqiang, and led Zhangzhou to surrender to Zhu Quanzhong. Zhu Quanzhong and the Yuzhou Festival sent Li Kuangwei, and the Yunnan Festival sent Hereng Yao, saying: The late emperor fled to Liangdi because Li Kegui colluded with Zhu Meixiang and requested the dispatch of troops to eliminate Li Kegui. We are willing to lead the troops to cooperate.

古文：帝诏文武四品以上议，皆言： 王室未宁，虽得太原，犹非所有。 
现代文：皇帝令四品以上的文武官讨论，大家都说： 国家还不安宁，即使攻下了太原，也不能控制。 
English: The emperor ordered the civil and military officers of four grades and above to discuss, and everyone said: The country is still restless, and even if Taiyuan is conquered, it cannot be controlled.

古文：浚固争： 先帝时，身播屯乱，盖克用、全忠不相下也。
现代文：张浚坚持争论说： 先帝在世时，外逃多难，就因为李克用、朱全忠互相争斗。
English: Zhang Jun insisted on arguing: When the former emperor was alive, it was very difficult to escape because Li Kegui and Zhu Quanzhong fought with each other.

古文：请因其弱讨之，断两雄势。 
现代文：请求乘李克用衰弱时讨伐他，改变两强争雄的局面。 
English: The request is to take advantage of Li Ke's weakness to fight him and change the situation of the two strong contenders.

古文：帝曰： 平巢，克用功第一。今乘危伐之，天下其谓我何？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：讨平黄巢，李克用的功劳最大，现趁他危难讨伐他，全国人会怎么说我呢？ 
English: The emperor said: Li Ke took the greatest credit for leveling the Yellow Nest, and now he is taking advantage of his peril to fight him. What will the people of the whole country say about me?

古文：久不决。
现代文：长时间没做决断。
English: I didn't make a decision for a long time.

古文：孔纬曰： 浚言万世之利，陛下所顾一时事尔。
现代文：孙纬说 ：张浚说的是能长期受益的事，皇上顾虑的是短时间的事。
English: Sun Wei said: Zhang Jun is talking about something that can benefit for a long time, but the emperor is concerned about a short time.

古文：臣见师度河，贼必破。
现代文：我认为军队渡过黄河后，敌军一定会被消灭。
English: I think that after the army crosses the Yellow River, the enemy army will definitely be eliminated.

古文：今军中费尚足支数年，幸听勿疑。 
现代文：现军队的经费还能用几年，希望听张浚的不要怀疑。 
English: The funds of the current army can still be used for several years, and those who wish to listen to Zhang Jun should not doubt it.

古文：既浚、纬相倡和，帝乃决出师，诏浚为河东行营兵马招讨制置使，京兆尹孙揆为昭义节度使副之，韩建为供军使；以全忠、匡威、鐸并为招讨使，枢密使骆全諲为行营都监，以汴甲三千为帐下；发五十二军，邠、宁、鄜、夏杂虏合五万。
现代文：张浚、孔纬互相呼应，皇帝才决定出兵，下诏命张浚任河东行营兵马招讨制置使，京兆尹孙揆任昭义节度使做他的副手，韩建任供军使；命朱全忠、李匡威、赫连铎同任招讨使，枢密使骆全任行营都监；用三千汴州军队做卫兵；调集五十二军和、宁？夏各异族兵总共五万人马。
English: Zhang Jun and Kong Wei responded to each other, and the emperor finally decided to send troops. The imperial edict ordered Zhang Jun to serve as the envoy to recruit and place soldiers and horses for the campaign in the east of the river, Jing Zhao, Yin Sun Rong, and Zhao Yi Jiedu to serve as his deputy, and Han Jian to serve as the envoy; Zhu Quanzhong, Li Kuangwei, and Herieng to serve as the envoy to recruit and place soldiers and horses for the campaign, and Luo Quanzhong, the imperial envoy, to serve as the inspector of the campaign in the capital; the army of 3,000 counties was used as

古文：帝置酒安喜楼临饯，浚饮酣，泣下曰： 陛下逼于贼，臣愿以死除之。 
现代文：皇帝在安喜楼亲临饯行，张浚喝到兴头上流下眼泪说： 皇上被坏人威逼，我愿拼死除掉他。 
English: The emperor personally visited him at Anxi Building, and Zhang Jun was so moved that he shed tears and said, "The emperor is being bullied by bad people. I am willing to fight to the death to get rid of him."

古文：复恭闻不怿，率中尉等饯长乐坂，以酒属浚，浚不肯举。
现代文：杨复恭听了不高兴，率领神策护军中尉等人在长乐坂为他饯行，劝张浚喝酒，他不肯拿酒杯。
English: Yang Fuxiong was not happy to hear this. He led the lieutenant of the Divine Protection Corps and others to walk for him in Changle Slope to persuade Zhang Jun to drink, but he refused to take a glass.

古文：是役也，浚外幸成功，而内制复恭，故衔之。
现代文：这次出征，张浚希望在外面成功后，到朝内来制服杨复恭，所以不买他的账。
English: In this expedition, Zhang Jun hoped to subdue Yang Fookong in the North after his success outside, so he did not buy his account.

古文：先是，汴、华、邠、岐兵绝河会平阳。
现代文：此前，汴、华？岐的军队渡过了黄河聚集在平阳。
English: Previously, the armies of the Han and Chinese had crossed the Yellow River and gathered in Pingyang.

古文：汴将硃崇节已戍潞，浚虑汴人遂据有之，乃令揆分兵趋潞，以中人韩归范持节护送至军。
现代文：汴州将领朱崇节已占领了潞州，张浚担心他们占据在那里，就命孙揆率领部分军队到潞州去，命宦官韩归范出使护送他去。
English: The Bozhou general Zhu Chongqing had already occupied Bozhou. Zhang Jun was worried that they would occupy there, so he ordered Sun Quan to lead part of the army to Bozhou and ordered the eunuch Han Gui Fan to send an envoy to escort him.

古文：会太原将李存孝方攻潞，揆至长子，为存孝所禽，汴人亦弃城去。
现代文：遇到太原将领李存孝正进攻潞州，孙揆走到长子，被李存孝抓住了，汴州军队也放弃州城离开了。
English: When Li Cunxiao, the Taiyuan general, was attacking Ganzhou, Sun Yat-sen went to the eldest son and was caught by Li Cunxiao. The Ganzhou army also abandoned the state capital and left.

古文：浚次阴地关，诸军壁平阳。
现代文：张浚抵达阴地关，众军在平阳扎营。
English: Zhang Jun arrived at Yinji Pass, and the troops encamped in Pingyang.

古文：存孝击之，皆大北，委仗械去。
现代文：李存孝进攻他们，他们都大败，丢掉军械逃跑。
English: Li Cunxiao attacked them, they were all defeated, threw away their weapons and fled.

古文：浚敛众夜遁，比明，军失太半。
现代文：张浚召集军队夜晚逃跑，到天亮，军队丢了一大半。
English: Zhang Jun rallied the army to flee in the night, and by dawn, most of the army was gone.

古文：存孝进掠晋、绛、慈、隰，其锋甚盛。
现代文：李存孝进军掳掠晋、绛、慈、隰州，所向披靡。
English: Li Cunxiao marched to capture and plunder Jin, Qi, Ci, and Zhangzhou, and was victorious.

古文：浚间道出王屋，奔河清，桴而济，麾下略尽。
现代文：张浚从王屋山小路逃出来，逃到河清，扎木筏渡过了黄河，部队差不多丢光了。
English: Zhang Jun escaped from the Wangya Mountain Trail and fled to Heqing. Zhamu Yao crossed the Yellow River, and his troops were almost wiped out.

古文：全諲饮药死，建遁去。
现代文：骆全服毒自杀了，韩建逃跑了。
English: Luo Quan poisoned himself and Han Jian ran away.

古文：克用上书请罪，其辞悖慢，因韩归范以闻。
现代文：李克用上奏请求处分，语句傲慢，派韩归范送来。
English: Li Ke used the upbeat request for punishment, the arrogant statement, and sent Han Hui Fan.

古文：朝廷震动，即日下诏罢浚为武昌军节度使，三贬绣州司户参军。
现代文：朝廷感到震惊，当天下令贬张浚为武昌军节度使，三次贬官后任绣州司户参军。
English: The imperial court was shocked. On the same day, Zhang Jun was demoted to the post of military attaché to the Wuchang Army, and after three demotions, he joined the army as the governor of Zhouzhou.

古文：全忠为申请，诏听使便。浚乃至蓝田依韩建。
现代文：朱全忠为他请求，有诏随便他去哪里，他就到蓝田去投靠韩建。
English: Zhu Quanzhong pleaded for him, saying that wherever he went, he would go to Lantian to help Han Jian.

古文：及韦昭度死，复用纬为宰相，故浚亦拜兵部尚书，领天下租庸使。
现代文：韦昭度去世后，又任用孔纬为宰相，所以张浚也被任命为兵部尚书、天下租庸使。
English: After the death of Wei Zhaodu, he also appointed Kong Wei as the prime minister, so Zhang Jun was also appointed as the secretary of the military department and the world's rent yong envoy.

古文：将复用，克用上言： 若朝以浚为相，暮请以兵见。 
现代文：皇帝还想再重用他，李克用上奏说： 如果早晨任命张浚为宰相，晚上我就派兵来。 
English: The emperor still wanted to re-employ him, and Li Ke said with a flourish: If you appoint Zhang Jun as prime minister in the morning, I will send troops in the evening.

古文：乃止。
现代文：这才算了。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：乾宁中，罢使，拜尚书右仆射。
现代文：乾宁年间，他被免去使职，任尚书右仆射。
English: During Qianning's reign, he was relieved of his duties and appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：上疏乞骸骨，迁左仆射致仕，居洛长水墅。
现代文：他上奏请求退休，升任左仆射后退休了。住在洛阳长水墅。
English: He appealed for retirement, was promoted to left-hand man and retired. He lives in Luoyang Changshui Villa.

古文：虽自屏处，然朝廷得失，时时言之。
现代文：虽然住在山野中，但朝政对错，他不时上表议论。
English: Although he lives in the middle of the mountains and fields, he is always debating whether the imperial government is right or wrong.

古文：刘季述乱，浚徒步入洛，泣谕张全义，并致书诸籓，请谋王室之难。
现代文：刘季述叛乱，他步行到洛阳，哭着劝张全义，又写信各藩镇，请求救国难。
English: Liu Ji recounted the rebellion. He walked to Luoyang, crying to persuade Zhang Quanyi, and wrote letters to all the provinces and towns, asking for help to save the country.

古文：王师范起兵青州，欲取浚为谋主，不克。
现代文：王师范在青州出兵，想请他去当主要谋划者，没成功。
English: Wang Shifan sent troops to Qingzhou and tried to invite him to be the main planner, but without success.

古文：全忠胁帝东迁，浚闻曰： 乘舆卜洛，则大事去矣。 
现代文：朱全忠胁迫皇帝迁到东边去，张浚知道后说： 皇帝到了洛阳，国家就完了。 
English: Zhu Quanzhong coerced the emperor to move to the east, and Zhang Jun said after knowing this: When the emperor arrives in Luoyang, the country is finished.

古文：盖知其将篡也。
现代文：大概知道朱全忠要篡位。
English: He probably knew that Zhu Quanzhong wanted to usurp the throne.

古文：全忠畏浚构它镇兵，使全义遣牙将如盗者夜围墅杀之，屠其家百余人，实天复二年十二月。
现代文：朱全忠怕他召唤别的藩镇来讨伐，命张全义派将领扮成强盗夜晚包围他的住处把他杀害了，共杀死了他家一百多人。当时是天复三年十二月。
English: Zhu Quanzhong was afraid that he would summon other towns to fight against him, so the generals of the Kuomintang surrounded his residence at night dressed as robbers and killed him, killing more than a hundred members of his family. It was December of the third year of the Heian period.

古文：始，浚素厚永宁史叶彦，彦知其谋，以告浚子格。
现代文：当初，张浚一向和永宁县官吏叶彦要好，叶彦知道了这阴谋，告诉了他的儿子张格。
English: At first, Zhang Jun had always been friendly with Ye Yan, a Yongning County official. Ye Yan found out about the plot and told his son Zhang Ge.

古文：浚度不免，父子相持泣曰： 留则俱死，不如去以存吾嗣。 
现代文：他估计自己跑不脱，父子俩拉着手哭着说： 留下都会死，不如逃走保存我家的后代。 
English: He didn't think he could run away, so the father and son held hands and cried, "If we stay, we'll both die. It's better to run away and save the future generations of my family."

古文：格拜而辞，彦率士三十人送之，溯汉入蜀，后事王建。
现代文：张格跪拜后离去了，叶彦率二十名士兵送他，顺汉水上游到了蜀地，后来在王建手下当官。
English: Zhang Ge kneeled down and left. Ye Yan led twenty soldiers to see him off. He swam up the Shunhan River to Shudi and later became an official under Wang Jianlu.

古文：少子播，间道走淮南，依杨行密。
现代文：张浚的小儿子张播，走小路逃到淮南，投靠杨行密。
English: Zhang Jun's youngest son, Zhang Bo, took a back road and fled to Huainan to seek refuge with Yang Xingmi.

古文：时行密得承制除拜，播请每除吏，必紫极宫玄宗像前致制诰于案，乃出之，示不忘朝廷，且欲雪家冤而不克。
现代文：当时杨行密能禀承皇帝旨意任命官员，张播请求每次任命官员，一定要把皇帝诏令放到紫极宫唐玄宗像前的香案上，再拿出来宣布，表示不忘记朝廷，他还想洗雪家庭的冤屈但没能如愿。
English: At that time, Yang Xingmi was able to appoint officials in accordance with the emperor's will, and Zhang Bi requested that every time an official was appointed, the emperor's edict must be placed on the incense case in front of the statue of Tang Xuan Zong in the Purple Palace, and then announced, indicating that he would not forget the imperial court. He also wanted to wash the grievances of the Xue family but failed to do so.

古文：终广陵。
现代文：后来死在广陵。
English: He later died in Guangling.

