古文：苍龙曹凤张鲁女江陵姥甘宗南鄩国龙场五色石震泽洞梁武后刘甲
现代文：苍龙曹凤张鲁女江陵姥甘宗南鄩国龙场五色石震泽洞梁武后刘甲
English: Canglong Cao Feng Zhang Lu Female Jiangling Grandma Gan Zong Nanlu Country Dragon Field Five-colored Stone Zhenze Cave Liang Wu Hou Liu Jia

古文：宋云蔡玉李靖
现代文：宋云蔡玉李靖
English: Song Yun Cai Yu Li Jing

古文：苍龙
现代文：苍龙
English: Soryu

古文：孔子当生之夜，二苍龙亘天而下，来附徵在之房，因而生夫子。
现代文：孔子要出生的那天夜里，两条苍龙横贯上天而降下，来依附着颜徵的居室，因而生了孔子。
English: On the night when Confucius was about to be born, two dragons descended from the sky and attached themselves to the room in which he was born.

古文：有二神女擎香露，空中而来，以沐浴徵在。
现代文：有两位仙女手擎香露从空中而来，用香露让颜徵沐浴。
English: Two fairies came from the sky with fragrant dew in their hands and used it to bathe Yan Xun.

古文：曹凤
现代文：曹凤
English: Cao Feng

古文：后汉建武中，曹凤字仲理，为北地太守。政化尤异。
现代文：后汉建武年中，曹凤字仲理是北地太守，政治风化优异。
English: In the middle of the Jianwu era of the Later Han Dynasty, Cao Fengzhe Zhongli was the governor of the North, with excellent political manners.

古文：黄龙见于九里谷高冈亭，角长二丈，大十围，梢至十余丈。
现代文：在九里谷高冈亭出现一条黄龙，角长二丈，粗十围，尾巴也足有十几丈。
English: A yellow dragon appeared in Gao Gangting, Jiuli Valley. Its horn is two meters long, ten meters thick, and its tail is also more than ten meters long.

古文：天子嘉之，赐帛百匹，加秩中二千石。
现代文：天子赞美这件事，赐给曹凤一百匹帛，增加俸禄二千石。
English: The Son of Heaven praised this event and gave Cao Feng a hundred horses and a donkey, and increased his salary by two thousand koku.

古文：张鲁女
现代文：张鲁女
English: Zhang Lujian

古文：张鲁之女，曾浣衣于山下，有白雾濛身，因而孕焉。
现代文：张鲁的女儿，曾经在山下洗衣服，有濛濛白雾围在她的周围，因而怀了孕。
English: Zhang Lu's daughter used to wash clothes at the foot of the mountain. A thick white fog surrounded her, and she became pregnant.

古文：耻之自裁。
现代文：张氏女耻辱难以忍受，就自杀了。
English: Unable to bear the shame of being a Zhang woman, she committed suicide.

古文：将死，谓其婢曰： 我死后，可破腹视之。 
现代文：临死的时候，她对她的婢女说： 我死了之后，可以打开肚子看看。 
English: On her deathbed, she said to her maid: "When I die, you can open my stomach and see."

古文：婢如其言，得龙子一双，遂送于汉水。
现代文：婢女照她的话去做了，得到两条小龙子，就把龙子送到汉水里去了。
English: The maidservant did as she was told, and when she had two little dragons, she took them to Hanshui.

古文：既而女殡于山。
现代文：然后把张氏女埋葬在山上。
English: They then buried Zhang's daughter on the mountain.

古文：后数有龙至，其墓前成蹊。
现代文：后来多次有龙来，那墓前形成一条小路。
English: Later, there were many dragons, and a path was formed in front of the tomb.

古文：江陵姥
现代文：江陵姥
English: Gangneung granny

古文：江陵赵姥以沽酒为业。
现代文：江陵的赵姥以卖酒为主。
English: Zhao Baba in Gangneung mainly sells alcohol.

古文：义熙中，居室内忽地隆起，姥察为异。
现代文：义熙年中，她的居室内地面忽然凸起来了。
English: In the middle of the year, the floor of her living room suddenly bulged.

古文：朝夕以酒酹之。
现代文：赵姥看了认为挺怪，早晚用酒祭奠它。
English: Grandma Zhao saw it and thought it was very strange. Sooner or later, she would celebrate it with wine.

古文：尝见一物出头似驴，而地初无孔穴。
现代文：曾经看见一个东西从地里出来，它的头像驴。但是地上当初就没有窟窿。
English: I once saw something come out of the ground with a head like a donkey, but there was no hole in the ground to begin with.

古文：及姥死，家人闻土下有声如哭。
现代文：等到赵姥死了，家人听到土下有声音，像哭声。
English: After Grandma Zhao died, the family heard a sound underground, like crying.

古文：后人掘地，见一异物蠢然，不测大小，须臾失之。
现代文：后来人们把地挖开，看到一个挺蠢的怪物。这东西很难说有多大，很快就没了。
English: Then they dug up the ground and found a rather stupid monster, it's hard to say how big it was, but it soon disappeared.

古文：俗谓之土龙。
现代文：一般叫它为土龙。
English: It is commonly called the mud dragon.

古文：甘宗
现代文：甘宗
English: Gansong

古文：秦使者甘宗所奏西域事云，外国方士能神咒者，临川禹步吹气，龙即浮出。
现代文：秦使者甘宗禀奏的关于西域的事说，外国能通神咒语的方士，登临河川，走禹步步法吹气，龙就能浮出来。
English: Qin's emissary, Gan Zongqiao, said about the western region that foreign magicians who could channel divine spells would go to the rivers, walk and blow, and dragons would float out.

古文：初出，乃长数十丈。
现代文：龙刚出来的时候，是几十丈长。
English: When the dragon first came out, it was tens of feet long.

古文：方士吹之，一吹则龙辄一缩。至长数寸，乃取置壶中，以少水养之。
现代文：方士吹它，一吹它就一缩，缩到几寸长，就捉住它放到壶里，用很少一点水养着。
English: Fangshi blew on it, and as soon as he blew, it shrank. When it shrank to a few inches long, he caught it, put it in a pot, and kept it with very little water.

古文：外国常苦旱灾，于是方士闻有旱处，便赍龙往，出卖之。
现代文：外国常常苦于旱灾。于是方士听说有干旱的地方，就带着龙前往。把它卖掉。
English: Foreign countries often suffer from droughts. So when the monks heard of a drought, they took the dragon with them. They sold it.

古文：一龙直金数十斤。
现代文：一条龙价值几十斤黄金。
English: A dragon is worth dozens of pounds of gold.

古文：举国会敛以顾之。
现代文：全国都会聚集起来观看。
English: The whole country will gather to watch.

古文：直毕，乃发壶出龙，置渊中。复禹步吹之，长数十丈。须臾雨四集矣。
现代文：直到最后，才把壶打开，放到湖泊里，又走禹步步法吹它，它长到几十丈长，片刻之间便乌云四起，下起雨来。
English: Only at the end did he open the pot, put it in the lake, and blow it again, and it grew to dozens of feet long. Within a few moments, dark clouds gathered and it began to rain.

古文：南鄩国
现代文：南鄩国
English: Nanluo County

古文：南鄩国有洞穴阴源，其下通地脉，中有毛龙毛鱼。
现代文：南鄩国有暗藏在洞穴中的水源，它的下边通向地脉，其中有毛龙和毛鱼。
English: Nanluo has a hidden source of water in a cave, the bottom of which leads to a vein, among which are the woolly dragon and the woolly fish.

古文：时蜕骨于旷泽之中。
现代文：毛龙和毛鱼时常蜕骨在空旷的水泽之中。
English: Hairy dragons and hairy fish often have their jaws hanging out in the open water.

古文：鱼龙同穴而处。
现代文：鱼和龙在一个洞穴里相处。
English: A fish and a dragon live together in a cave.

古文：其国献毛龙一于殷。殷置豢龙之官。
现代文：这个南鄩国曾经向殷商献过一条毛龙。殷商那时候设有养龙的官职。
English: This Nanxun country once presented a woolly dragon to Yin Shang. At that time, Yin Shang had the official position of raising dragons.

古文：至夏代不绝。因以命族。
现代文：到夏代这种官职还有保留，因而用它作为一个部族的命名。
English: Until the Xia Dynasty, this kind of official position was still reserved, so it was used as a tribal name.

古文：至禹导川，及四海会同，乃放于洛汭。
现代文：到大禹治水，四海会同到一起，就把那条毛龙放到洛水里了。
English: By the time of Dayu's flood control, the four seas would come together, and the woolly dragon would be placed in Luoshui.

古文：龙场
现代文：龙场
English: Dragon Dance

古文：《王子年拾遗》曰：方丈山东有龙场，地方千里，龙皮骨如山阜，布散百余顷。
现代文：《王子年拾遗》上说： 方丈山之东有一个龙场，方圆一千里，龙皮龙骨堆积如山，布散一百多顷。 
English: "The Year of the Prince" said: There is a dragon farm in the east of Mount Hojo, with a radius of one thousand miles. Dragon skins and keels are piled up like a mountain, spreading over more than one hundred hectares.

古文：《述异记》： 晋宁县有龙葬洲。
现代文：《述异记》： 晋宁县有一个龙葬洲。
English: "Story of a Stranger": There is a dragon burial ground in Jinning County.

古文：父老云，龙蜕骨于此洲，其水今犹多龙骨。
现代文：老人们讲，龙在这个洲上蜕骨，那水里至今还多有龙骨。
English: The ancients said that dragons had their jaws on this continent, and there are still many keels in the water.

古文：按山阜冈岫，能兴云雨者。皆有龙骨。
现代文：考察那里的山岭峰峦，凡是能兴云雨的地方，都有龙骨。
English: Investigate the mountains, peaks and ridges there. Wherever it can rain, there is a keel.

古文：或深或浅，多在土中。
现代文：有的深，有的浅，大多在土里边。
English: Some are deep, some are shallow, mostly in the soil.

古文：齿角尾足，宛然皆具。
现代文：齿、角、尾、足，都很像。
English: The teeth, the horns, the tail, the feet, they all look alike.

古文：大者数十丈，或盈十围。小者才一二尺，或三四寸。体皆具焉。
现代文：大的几十丈，有的粗满十围；小的才一二尺，有的三四寸，体形都具备。
English: The big ones are several tens of meters tall, and some are as thick as ten centimeters; the small ones are only one or two feet tall, and some are three or four inches tall.

古文：尝因采取见之。 
现代文：曾经借采取的机会见过。 
English: I've seen it happen before.

古文：《论衡》云： 蝉生于腹育，开背而出，必因雨而蜕，如蛇之蜕皮云。 
现代文：《论衡》说： 蝉在肚子里生长发育，破开背爬出来，一定要借着雨天来蜕变，就像蛇蜕皮一样。 
English: "On balance" said: "The cicada grows and develops in the stomach, breaks its back and crawls out, and must be transformed by the rainy day, just like a snake shedding its skin.

古文：近蒲洲人家，拆草屋，于栋上得龙骨长一丈许，宛然皆具。
现代文：近来蒲洲有一个人家拆草屋，在梁栋上得到一根龙骨，长一丈左右，什么部位都很完备。
English: Recently, there was a demolition of a grass house in Puzhou, and a keel was obtained on the beam building, about a meter long, and all parts were complete.

古文：五色石
现代文：五色石
English: Five-coloured stones

古文：天目山人全文猛于新丰后湖观音寺西岸，获一五色石大如斗。
现代文：天目山人全文猛，在新丰后湖观音寺的西岸，得到一块斗那么大的五色石头。
English: Tenmoku mountain people were so fierce that on the west coast of Shin-Fengou Lake Guanyin Temple, they got a five-colored stone as big as a bucket.

古文：文彩盘蹙，如有夜光。
现代文：石头的纹彩盘旋紧蹙，好像有夜光。
English: The patterns of the stone swirl around tightly, as if there were night lights.

古文：文猛以为神异，抱献之梁武。
现代文：全文猛以为是神奇之物，就抱着它献给了梁武帝。
English: He thought it was a magical thing and held it in his arms and dedicated it to Emperor Wu.

古文：梁武喜，命置于大极殿侧。
现代文：梁武帝很高兴，让把它放在大极殿旁边。
English: Emperor Liangwu was so pleased that he had it placed next to the Great Pole Hall.

古文：将年余，石忽光照廊庑，有声如雷。
现代文：将近一年多一点的时间，这块石头忽然光芒四射，发出雷一样的响声。
English: After a little more than a year, this stone suddenly shines brightly and emits a thunderous sound.

古文：帝以为不祥，召杰公示之。
现代文：梁武帝认为是不祥之兆，就召来杰公，把这石头给他看。
English: Emperor Liang Wu thought it was an ominous sign, so he summoned Jie Gong and showed him the stone.

古文：对曰： 此上界化生龙之石也，非人间物。
现代文：杰公说： 这是上界的活龙变成的石头，不是人间的东西。
English: Jie Gong said: This is a stone turned into a living dragon from the upper world, not an earthly thing.

古文：若以洛水赤砺石和酒合药，煮之百余沸，柔软可食。
现代文：如果用洛水的赤砺石和上酒，合成一种药，用这药把这石头煮沸一百次，这石头就变得柔软可吃了。
English: If one were to use the red ochre from the Luo River and wine to synthesize a medicine, and use this medicine to boil the stone a hundred times, the stone would become soft enough to eat.

古文：琢以为饮食之器，令人延寿。
现代文：把它雕琢成饮食器皿，能使人延长寿命。
English: Carving it into eating utensils can make people live longer.

古文：福德之人，所应受用。
现代文：这是有福有德的人才享用得了的。
English: This is something only the blessed and virtuous can enjoy.

古文：有声者，龙欲取之。 
现代文：其中有声的，龙就要下来取它。 
English: If there is a sound, the dragon will come down to get it.

古文：帝令驰取赤石。如其法，命工琢之以为瓯，各容五斗之半，以盛御膳。
现代文：梁武帝派人骑马去取来赤色砺石，就像杰公说的办法那样，命工匠把石头雕琢成盆，用来盛御膳。
English: Emperor Liangwu sent a man on horseback to fetch the red ocher. Just as Jie Gong said, he ordered a craftsman to carve the stone into a basin to serve the royal meal.

古文：香美殊常。
现代文：用这种盆盛的饭菜，格外香美，与众不同。
English: With this bowlful of food, it is extraordinarily fragrant and different.

古文：以其余屑，置于旧处。
现代文：把雕琢剩下的石屑，又放到原来的地方。
English: Put the stone chips left over from the carving back in their original place.

古文：忽有赤龙，扬须鼓鬣，掉尾入殿，拥石腾跃而去。
现代文：忽然有一天，一条红色的龙，张牙舞爪地掉尾进入大极殿，抱着那些石头就腾跃而去。
English: All of a sudden, one day, a red dragon entered the Great Pole Hall with its tail between its teeth and claws, hugging the stones as it pranced away.

古文：帝遣推验。乃是普通二年，始平郡石鼓村，斗龙所竞之石。
现代文：梁武帝派人推求查验此事，原来这块五色之石是普通二年，始平郡石鼓村，斗龙竞赛用的石头。
English: Emperor Liangwu sent someone to investigate the matter, and it turned out that this five-colored stone was a stone used in a dragon-fighting competition in Shigu village, Xiping County, two years earlier.

古文：其瓯遭侯景之乱，不知所之。
现代文：雕成的那个盆，遭到侯景之乱以后，就不知道哪儿去了。
English: After the Houjing Disturbance, the pot that was carved did not know where to go.

古文：震泽洞
现代文：震泽洞
English: Shenzawa-dong

古文：震泽中，洞庭山南有洞穴深百余尺。
现代文：太湖之中，洞庭山南有一个一百多尺深的洞穴。
English: In the middle of Taihu Lake, south of Dongting Mountain, there is a cave more than a hundred feet deep.

古文：有长城乃仰公睺误堕洞中，旁行，升降五十余里，至一龙宫。
现代文：有一个叫仰公睺的人无意掉到洞里，向旁边走，升升降降五十多里，来到一所龙宫。
English: A man named Yang Gongjun unintentionally fell into the cave, walked to the side, climbed up and down for more than fifty miles, and arrived at a dragon palace.

古文：周围四五里，下有青泥至膝，有宫室门阙。
现代文：龙宫周围四五里，下边有齐膝深的青泥，宫室门户样样不少。
English: It is four or five miles around the Dragon Palace, and there is knee-deep green mud at the bottom, and there are many samples of the palace portal.

古文：龙以气辟水，霏如轻雾，昼夜光明。遇守门小蛟龙，张鳞奋爪拒之，不得入。
现代文：他来到宫门前。守门的是一条小蛟龙。小蛟龙张鳞奋爪地阻止他，他进不去。
English: He came to the front of the palace gate. The gatekeeper was a small dragon. The small dragon clawed at him, and he couldn't get in.

古文：公睺在洞百有余日，食青泥，味若粳米。
现代文：他在这洞中一百多天，吃青泥，味道象稻米。
English: He had been in the cave for more than 100 days, eating mud that tasted like rice.

古文：忽仿佛说得归路，寻出之。
现代文：忽然有一天好像找到了一条回家的路，顺着那路就出来了。
English: Suddenly, one day, it seemed that I had found a way home, and I followed that path to get out.

古文：为吴郡守时，乃具事闻梁武帝。
现代文：他做吴郡太守的时候，把这事详细地告诉过梁武帝。
English: When he was the governor of Wu County, he told Emperor Liangwu about this in detail.

古文：帝问杰公。
现代文：梁武帝就向杰公问起这事。
English: Emperor Liangwu asked Jie about this.

古文：公曰： 此洞穴有四枝：一通洞庭湖西岸，一通蜀道青衣浦北岸，一通罗浮两山间穴溪，一通枯桑岛东岸。
现代文：杰公说： 这个洞穴分四条通道。一条通向洞庭湖西岸；一条通向蜀道青衣浦北岸；一条通向罗浮两山间的穴溪；一条通向枯桑岛东岸。
English: Jie Gong said: This cave is divided into four channels. One leads to the west coast of Dongting Lake; one leads to the north shore of Shu Road Qingyi Pu; one leads to the hole between the two mountains of Luo Fu; one leads to the east coast of Karesong Island.

古文：益东海龙王第七女掌龙王珠藏，小龙千数卫护此珠。
现代文：东海龙王第七个女儿掌管龙王的珠藏，一千多条小龙在那里卫护这些珍珠。
English: The seventh daughter of the Dragon King of the East Sea presides over the Dragon King's pearl hoard, where more than a thousand little dragons guard the pearls.

古文：龙畏蜡，爱美玉及空青而嗜燕。
现代文：龙怕蜡，喜欢美玉和空青石，嗜吃燕子。
English: The dragon is afraid of wax, likes jade and amethyst, and is fond of swallows.

古文：若遣使信，可得宝珠。 
现代文：如果能派人前去，可以得到宝珠。 
English: If you can send someone forward, you can get the pearl.

古文：帝闻大嘉。
现代文：梁武帝听了非常赞赏，就下诏征求能去的人。
English: Emperor Liangwu was very appreciative and issued an edict to solicit people who could go.

古文：乃诏有能使者，厚赏之。有会稽郡鄮县白水乡郎庾毗罗请行。
现代文：要重赏。会稽郡鄮县白水乡有一个叫庾毗罗的青年男子要去。
English: There is a young man from Baishui Township, Weixian County, Heibei County, who goes by the name of Zou Viro.

古文：杰公曰： 汝五世祖烧杀鄮县东海谭之龙百余头，还为龙所害。
现代文：杰公说： 你上五辈的爷爷烧杀鄮县东海潭的龙一百多头，回来的路上被龙害死。
English: Jie Gong said: Your grandfather of the last five generations burned and killed more than a hundred dragons in Donghaitang, Handan County, and was killed by a dragon on the way back.

古文：汝龙门之宄也，可行乎？ 
现代文：你是龙家族的仇人，能去吗？ 
English: You are an enemy of the dragon family. Can you go?

古文：毗罗伏实，乃止。
现代文：毗罗承认这是事实，就拉倒了。
English: Viro concedes this is true and pulls away.

古文：于是合浦郡洛黎县瓯越罗子春兄弟二人，上书自言： 家代于陵水罗水龙为婚，远祖矜能化恶龙。
现代文：这时候合浦郡洛黎县的瓯越族人罗子春兄弟两个，上书说： 我家世代与陵水龙罗水龙通婚，我的祖先能驯化恶龙。
English: At this time, two Luo Zichun brothers from Luo Li County, Hepu County, who belonged to the Yueyue ethnic group, wrote a letter saying: My family has intermarried with the Lingshui dragon for generations. My ancestors were able to tame the evil dragon.

古文：晋简文帝以臣祖和化毒龙。
现代文：晋简文帝就让我爷爷驯化过毒龙。
English: Emperor Jinjianwen allowed my grandfather to tame a poisonous dragon.

古文：今龙化县，即是臣祖住宅也。
现代文：现在的龙化县，就是我爷爷的住宅。
English: What is now Longhua County was my grandfather's home.

古文：象郡石龙，刚猛难化，臣祖化之。
现代文：像郡的石龙，刚烈凶猛难以驯化，我爷爷把它驯化了。
English: Like the county stone dragon, my grandfather domesticated it.

古文：化石龙县是也。
现代文：化石龙县就是因为这事得名的。
English: Fossil Dragon County got its name because of this.

古文：东海南天台湘川彭蠡铜鼓石头等诸水大龙，皆识臣宗祖，亦知臣是其子孙。
现代文：东海南天台、汀川的彭蠡、石头等名水中的大龙，都认识我的宗祖。也知道我是他们的子孙。
English: The South Tiantai of the East China Sea, the Pengye of the Ting River, the great dragon in the famous water such as the stone, all know my ancestors. They also know that I am their descendant.

古文：请通帝命。 
现代文：请让我去传达皇帝的命令。 
English: Please let me convey the emperor's order.

古文：杰公曰： 汝家制龙石尚在否？ 
现代文：杰公说： 你家的朱龙石还在吗？ 
English: Jie Gong said: Is your family's Zhu Longshi still around?

古文：答曰： 在在。
现代文：罗子春说： 在，在。
English: Luo Zichun said, "Yes, yes."

古文：谨赍至都，试取观之。 
现代文：已经带来了。 他就取出来给人看。
English: He took it out and showed it to the people.

古文：公曰： 汝石但能制微风雨召戎虏之龙，不能制海王珠藏之龙。 
现代文：杰公说： 你的这石头只能制住一般的龙，不能制那为龙王藏珠的龙。 
English: Jie Gong said, "This stone of yours can only hold back an ordinary dragon, it cannot hold back the dragon that is the Dragon King's treasure."

古文：又问曰： 汝有西海龙脑香否？ 
现代文：又问道： 你有西海龙脑香吗？ 
English: He also asked: Do you have West Sea Dragon Brain Incense?

古文：曰： 无。 
现代文：罗子春说： 没有。 
English: Luo Zichun said: No.

古文：公曰： 奈之何御龙？ 
现代文：杰公说： 那你凭什么制服龙呢？ 
English: Jie Gong said, "Then on what basis did you subdue the dragon?"

古文：帝曰： 事不谐矣。 
现代文：梁武帝说： 事情还不大好办呢。 
English: Liang Wudi said, "It's still not easy to do.

古文：公曰： 西海大船，求龙脑香可得。
现代文：杰公说： 乘大船到西海，可以找到龙脑香。
English: Jie Gong said: If you take a big boat to the West Sea, you can find Longnian Xiang.

古文：昔桐柏真人数扬道义，许谧、茅容乘龙，各赠制龙石十斤。今亦应在，请访之。 
现代文：从前桐柏真人宏扬道义，许谧、茅容乘龙，各得到桐柏真人赠送的制龙石十斤，现在还应该有，请派人求访。 
English: Once upon a time, Tong Baizhen was a man of lofty morals, and Xu Xi and Mao Rong rode dragons. Each of them received a gift of ten catties of dragon stone from Tong Baizhen. They should still have it now. Please send someone to ask for it.

古文：帝敕命求之。于茅山华龙隐居陶弘景得石两片。
现代文：于是梁武帝命令四处求访，在隐居在茅山华龙的陶弘景那里弄到两片制龙石。
English: As a result, Emperor Liangwu ordered to visit everywhere and get two pieces of dragon stone from Tao Hongjing, who lived in seclusion in Huarong, Mao Shan.

古文：公曰： 是矣。 
现代文：杰公看后说： 就是这种东西。 
English: After looking at it, Jie Gong said, "It's this kind of thing."

古文：帝敕百工，以于阗舒河中美玉，造小函二，以桐木灰发其光，取宣州空青，汰其甚精者，用海鱼胶之，成二缶。
现代文：梁武帝命令百工，用于阗舒河里的美玉，雕制了两个小匣，用桐木灰把它磨光，找来宣州的空青，选出最好的，用海龟胶成两个缶，用火烧一烧。
English: Emperor Liangwu ordered a hundred craftsmen to carve two small boxes for the gems in the Lingshu River, polish it with paulownia ash, find the blue sky of Xuanzhou, choose the best, use turtle glue to make two cans, and burn them with fire.

古文：火烧之，龙脑香寻亦继至。杰公曰： 以蜡涂子春等身及衣佩。 
现代文：不久又弄到了龙脑香。杰公说： 把蜡涂抹到罗子春兄弟二人的身上和衣佩上。 
English: Jie Gong said, "Apply the wax to the bodies and coats of the two Luo Zichun brothers."

古文：又乃赍烧燕五百枚入洞穴，至龙宫。
现代文：然后又让兄弟二人带上五百只烤好的燕子上路。
English: Then he asked the two brothers to take five hundred roasted swallows on the road.

古文：守门小蛟闻蜡气，俯伏不敢动。
现代文：二人来到龙宫，守门的小蛟龙闻到蜡气，趴在那里不敢动。
English: The two of them came to the Dragon Palace. The gatekeeper's little dragon smelled the wax and lay there, not daring to move.

古文：乃以烧燕百事赂之，令其通问。
现代文：二人就拿出一百只烤燕子贿赂他们，让它们往里通报。
English: The two of them took out a hundred roasted swallows and bribed them to let them in.

古文：以其上上者献龙女，龙女食之大嘉。
现代文：二人把最好的烤燕子献给龙女。龙女吃过之后大加赞赏。
English: The two of them offered the best roasted swallows to the dragon maiden, who was very appreciative after eating them.

古文：又上玉函青缶，具陈帝旨。
现代文：二人又把玉匣和青缶献上，详细陈述了梁武帝的意思。
English: The two also presented the jade box and the blue can, and detailed the meaning of Emperor Liangwu.

古文：洞中有千岁龙能变化，出入人间，有善译时俗之言。
现代文：洞中有一千岁的龙，可以变成人出入人间，完全可以听懂时俗语言。
English: There is a thousand-year-old dragon in the cave, which can turn into a human and enter the human world. It can fully understand the contemporary language.

古文：龙女知帝礼之，以大珠三、小珠七、杂珠一石，以报帝。
现代文：龙女知道梁武帝这是以礼相待，就把三颗大珠，七颗小珠，一石杂珠送给梁武帝作为回报。
English: Knowing that Emperor Liang Wudi treated her with courtesy, the Dragon Maiden gave Emperor Liang Wudi three large beads, seven small beads, and one stone of mixed beads in return.

古文：命子春乘龙，载珠还国，食顷之间便至。
现代文：她让罗子春兄弟二人乘着龙载着这些珠子回国，一顿饭的工夫就到了。
English: She asked the two Luo Zichun brothers to carry these beads back to China on a dragon, and it was time for a meal.

古文：龙辞去，子春荐珠。
现代文：龙回洞，罗子春献珠。
English: Dragon's Back Cave, Luo Zi spring offering beads.

古文：帝大喜。
现代文：梁武帝大喜。
English: Emperor Liangwu was overjoyed.

古文：得聘通灵异，获天人之宝。
现代文：能派使者与灵异来往，获得天人的宝物，他当然高兴。
English: Of course, he is happy to be able to send emissaries to interact with spirits and gain access to heavenly treasures.

古文：以珠示杰公。
现代文：他把珠子给杰公看。
English: He showed the beads to Jie Gong.

古文：杰公曰： 三珠，其一是天帝如意珠之下者，其二是骊龙珠之中者。七珠，二是虫珠，五是海蚌珠，人间之上者。杂珠是蚌蛤等珠，不如大珠之贵。 
现代文：杰公说： 那三颗大珠，其中一颗是天帝如意珠之下等珠，一颗是骊龙珠之中等珠；那七颗小珠，两颗是虫珠，五颗是海蚌珠，是人间的上等珠；那一石杂珠，是蚌蛤等珠，不如大珠值钱。 
English: Jie Gong said, "The three large beads, one of which is the lower-order bead of the Heavenly Emperor's Desire Bead, one is the middle-order bead of the Dragon Bead; the seven small beads, two are insect beads, five are seagull beads, which are the highest-order beads in the human world; the one stone mixed bead, which is the middle-order bead, is not as valuable as the large bead.

古文：帝遍示百僚，朝廷咸谓杰公虚诞，莫不诘之。
现代文：梁武帝让所有的官员都来看。百官都说杰公说得荒诞不实，没有不追问的。
English: Emperor Liangwu asked all the officials to come and see. Hundreds of officials said that what Jie Gong said was absurd and untrue.

古文：杰公曰： 如意珠上上者，夜光照四十余里；中者十里；下者一里。
现代文：杰公说： 如意珠中最好的，夜光能照出四十多里；中等的能照十里；下等的照一里。
English: Jie Gong said, "The best of the wish beads can shine more than forty miles; the middle one can shine ten miles; and the lower one can shine one mile.

古文：光之所及，无风雨雷电水火刀兵诸毒厉。
现代文：所照到的地方，没有风雨、雷电、水火、刀兵等各种毒疠。
English: In the places illuminated, there are no storms, thunder and lightning, water and fire, swords and soldiers, and other poisonous beasts.

古文：骊珠上者，夜光百步；中者十步；下者一室。
现代文：骊珠中最好的，夜光能照一百步。中等的十步；下等的只照亮一间屋子。
English: The best of them can illuminate a hundred paces at night, the middle ones ten paces, and the inferior ones only illuminate one room.

古文：光之所及，无蛇虺豸之毒。
现代文：光所照到的地方，没有虫蛇之毒。
English: Where the light shines, there is no snake venom.

古文：虫珠，七色而多赤，六足二目，当其凹处，有臼如铁鼻。
现代文：虫珠，七种颜色，而多半是赤色，六条腿两只眼，在它的凹陷处，有铁鼻状的臼。
English: A beetle, seven colours, but mostly red, with six legs, two eyes, and, in its hollow, an iron nose.

古文：蚌珠五色。皆有夜光，及数尺。
现代文：蚌珠五种颜色，都有夜光，只能照出几尺。
English: There are five colors of dragonfly beads, all of which have night light, and can only illuminate a few feet.

古文：无瑕者为之上，有瑕者为下。
现代文：没有斑点的是上品，有斑点的是下品。
English: The speckle-free ones are superior, the speckled ones are inferior.

古文：珠蚌五，于时与月盈亏。
现代文：五只珠蚌，可以同月一起盈亏。
English: Five pearl mussels can make a profit and a loss in the same month.

古文：蛇珠所致，隋侯哙参，即其事也。 
现代文：蛇珠能罗致来珠子。所谓隋侯之珠，群珠来聚，说的便是此事。
English: Snake bead can attract beads. The so-called Sui Hou's bead, group of beads coming together, is what this is all about.

古文：又问蛇鹤之异。
现代文：人们又问蛇珠与鹤珠有什么不同。
English: People also ask what is the difference between snake bead and crane bead.

古文：对曰： 使其自适。 
现代文：杰公说： 让它们自己来表明吧。 
English: Jie Gong said: Let them show themselves.

古文：帝命杰公记蛇鹤二珠。
现代文：梁武帝让杰公记一下哪些是蛇珠，哪些是鹤珠。
English: Emperor Liangwu asked Jie Gong to remember which were snake beads and which were crane beads.

古文：斗余杂珠，散于殿前。
现代文：一斗多杂珠，散放在殿前。
English: A bucketful of mixed beads, scattered in front of the hall.

古文：取大黄蛇玄鹤各十数，处布珠中间。
现代文：弄来大黄蛇十条，黑鹤十只，把它们布置在珠子中间。
English: He brought ten large yellow snakes and ten black cranes and arranged them in the middle of the beads.

古文：子春在龙宫得食，如花如药。如青如饴，食之香美。
现代文：罗子春在龙宫吃的东西，如花似药，如青似饴，吃起来特别香美。
English: The things that Luo Zichun ate in the Dragon Palace, such as flowers like medicine, such as lilies of the valley, are particularly delicious.

古文：赍食至京师，得人间风日，乃坚如石，不可咀咽。
现代文：他带回来一些，让人间的阳光一晒，热风一吹，竟然像石头一样坚硬，不能咬动了。
English: He brought some back with him, so that when the sun shines and the hot wind blows, they are as hard as stone and can't be bitten.

古文：帝令秘府藏之。拜子春为奉车都尉，二弟为奉朝请，赐布帛各千匹。
现代文：梁武帝命人把这些东西藏到秘府里，让罗子春做了奉车都尉，让他弟弟做了奉朝请，赐给他们各一千匹布帛。
English: Emperor Liangwu ordered the people to hide these things in the secret palace, let Luo Zichun be the captain of the carriage, let his brother do the invitation, and gave them each a thousand pieces of cloth.

古文：追访公睺往不为龙害之由，为用麻油和蜡，以作照鱼衣，乃身有蜡气故也。
现代文：后又追访仰公鄮到龙宫去而没被龙害的原因，原来他用麻油和蜡做了照鱼衣，是身上有蜡气的原因。
English: Later, they also investigated the reason why Yang Gongjun went to the Dragon Palace and was not harmed by the dragon. It turned out that he used hemp oil and wax to make a fish suit, which was the reason why he had wax on his body.

古文：梁武后
现代文：梁武后
English: Liang Wu Hou

古文：梁武郗皇后性妒忌。
现代文：梁武郗皇后性情妒忌。
English: Empress Liang Muxuan is jealous.

古文：武帝初立，未及册命，因忿怒。忽投殿庭井中。
现代文：武帝刚登基，还没有来得及办理册封的事，于是郗皇后便非常愤怒，忽地投到宫殿庭院里的一口井中。
English: Emperor Wu had just ascended the throne and had not yet had time to deal with the matter of canonization, so Empress Zou was very angry and suddenly threw herself into a well in the palace courtyard.

古文：众趋井救之，后已化为毒龙，烟焰冲天，人莫敢近。
现代文：大伙跑过去救她时，她已经变成一条毒龙，烟焰冲天，谁也不敢靠近。
English: When everyone ran to save her, she had turned into a poisonous dragon. Flames were shooting into the sky, and no one dared to approach.

古文：帝悲叹久之，因册为龙天王，便于井上立祠。
现代文：武帝悲叹了好久，就册封她为 龙天王 ，就在井上立了供奉她的祠堂。
English: Emperor Wu lamented for a long time, then canonized her as the Dragon King, and built an ancestral hall dedicated to her in Inoue.

古文：刘甲
现代文：刘甲
English: Liu Jia

古文：宋刘甲居江陵。
现代文：宋刘甲住在江陵。
English: Song Liu Jia lives in Jiangling.

古文：元嘉中，女年十四，姿色端丽，未尝读佛经，忽能暗诵法华经。
现代文：元嘉年中，他的女儿十四岁，姿色端庄秀丽。她没有读过佛经，有一天却忽然能暗暗地背诵《法华经》。
English: In the middle of the Yuan Jia year, his daughter was fourteen years old, with a dignified and beautiful appearance. She had not read any Buddhist scriptures, but one day she was suddenly able to secretly recite the "Law of the Lotus Sutra."

古文：女所住屋，寻有奇光。
现代文：她住的屋里，不久便出现奇异的光。
English: A strange light soon appeared in the room where she was staying.

古文：女云，已得正觉，宜作二七日斋。
现代文：她说，她已经得了正觉，应该做二七日的斋戒。
English: She said she had come to her senses and should fast for 27 days.

古文：家为置高座，设宝帐。
现代文：她家为她设置了高座，设立了宝帐。
English: Her family set up a high seat for her, set up a treasure account.

古文：女登座，讲论词玄。
现代文：她登上宝座，讲的话都很深奥。
English: When she ascended to the throne, her words were profound.

古文：又说人之灾祥，诸事皆验。
现代文：又讲人的灾祥祸福，各种事都很灵验。
English: It also talks about people's misfortune, fortune and misfortune, and all kinds of things are very effective.

古文：远近敬礼，解衣投宝，不可胜数。
现代文：远近的人都很敬佩她。解衣投宝的，不可胜数。
English: People from near and far admire her. There are an infinite number of people who would do anything for her.

古文：衡阳王在镇，躬率参佐观之。
现代文：衡阳王在镇，亲自率领僚属来观看。
English: Hengyang Wang was in town, and he personally led his colleagues and relatives to watch.

古文：经十二日，有道士史玄真曰： 此怪邪也。 
现代文：经过十二天之后，有一个叫史玄真的道士说，这是一种怪邪现象。
English: After twelve days, a Taoist named Shi Xuan Zhen said that this was a strange phenomenon.

古文：振褐往焉。
现代文：他急急忙忙地赶来。
English: He arrived in a hurry.

古文：女即已知，遣人守门。云： 魔邪寻至，凡着道服，咸勿纳之。 
现代文：她已经知道了，派人守住门，说： 不久将有妖邪之类到来，凡是穿道服的，全都不让进来！ 
English: She already knew, and sent someone to guard the door, saying, "Soon there will be evil spirits and the like arriving, and anyone wearing a robe will not be allowed to enter!"

古文：真变服奄入。
现代文：史玄真换了衣服突然进入。
English: Shi Xuanzhen changed his clothes and suddenly entered.

古文：女初犹喝骂，真便直前，以水洒之，即顿绝，良久乃苏。
现代文：她起初还大声地喝骂。史玄真便直接走上前去，把水洒到她身上。她顿然气绝，过了许久才醒。
English: At first, she swore loudly. Shi Xuanzhen walked straight up to her and sprinkled water on her. She suddenly lost her breath and did not wake up for a long time.

古文：问以诸事，皆云不识。
现代文：醒后人们再问她各种事情，她便什么都说不记得了。
English: After she woke up, people asked her all kinds of questions, and she couldn't remember anything.

古文：真曰： 此龙魅也。 
现代文：史玄真说，这是被龙魔住了。
English: Shi Xianzhen said that this was caused by the Dragon Demon.

古文：自是复常，嫁为宣氏妻。
现代文：从此以后她恢复正常，嫁给宣氏为妻。
English: She has since recovered and is now married to Mr. Xuan.

古文：宋云
现代文：宋云
English: Song Yun

古文：后魏宋云使西域，至积雪山，中有池，毒龙居之。
现代文：后魏时，宋云出使西域。走到积雪山，见山中有大池，池中有毒龙。
English: After the Wei Dynasty, Song Yun sent an envoy to the western region. When he walked to the snow-capped mountains, he saw a large pond in the mountains and a poisonous dragon in the pond.

古文：昔三百商人止宿池侧，值龙忿怒，泛杀商人。
现代文：以前三百商人在这池边止宿，正赶上毒龙愤怒，就把这三百人全都泛水淹死了。
English: Three hundred merchants used to camp by this pool, but when they were overtaken by the fury of the dragon, all three hundred were drowned.

古文：果阤王闻之，舍位与子，向鸟场国学婆罗门咒。
现代文：果阤王听说这事以后，把王位让给儿子，自己到鸟场国去学婆罗门咒语。
English: After hearing about this, King Gokarna abdicated the throne to his son and went to the Bird's Nest Kingdom to learn the Brahman mantra.

古文：四年之中，善得其术。还复王位，就池咒龙。
现代文：四年之中，他很好地掌握了那咒语的法术，就归国恢复了王位，到池边去咒那毒龙。
English: In four years, he had mastered the magic of the spell, returned to the country and resumed the throne, and went to the pond to curse the poisonous dragon.

古文：龙化为人，悔过向王。
现代文：毒龙变成人，向国王表示悔过，国王就把他放了。
English: The dragon turned into a man and repented to the king, who set him free.

古文：王即从之。蔡玉
现代文：蔡玉
English: Cai Yuping

古文：弘农郡太守蔡玉以国忌日于崇敬寺设斋。忽有黑云甚密，从东北而上，正临佛殿。
现代文：弘农郡太守蔡玉，在全国的忌日这一天到崇敬寺设斋，忽然有浓密的黑云从东北而上，正临近佛堂。
English: Cai Yu, the dean of Hongnong County, went to the Chongye Temple to hold a fast on the day of the nation's death. Suddenly, a dense black cloud moved up from the northeast and was approaching the Buddhist temple.

古文：云中隐隐雷鸣。
现代文：云中有隐隐的雷鸣。
English: There was a faint rumble of thunder in the clouds.

古文：官属犹未行香，并在殿前，聚立仰看。
现代文：官属们还没有行香，一齐站在殿前，仰着头往云上看。
English: The officials and their families had not yet offered incense, but stood together in front of the hall, looking up at the clouds with their heads bowed.

古文：见两童子赤衣，两童子青衣，俱从云中下来。
现代文：他们看见两个红衣童子和两个青衣童子，都从云中下来。
English: And they saw two young men in red, and two young men in blue, coming down out of the cloud.

古文：赤衣二童子先至殿西南角柱下，抽出一白蛇身长丈余，仰掷云中。
现代文：两个红衣童子先来到殿西南角的柱子下，抽出一条一丈多长的白蛇。
English: Two boys in red first came to the south-west corner of the hall, under a pillar, and pulled out a long white snake.

古文：雷声渐渐大而下来。
现代文：他们把蛇仰掷到云中，雷声渐渐变大而滚动下来。
English: They tossed the snake into the clouds, and the thunder grew louder as it rolled down.

古文：少选之间，向白蛇从云中直下，还入所出柱下。
现代文：不多一会儿，刚才扔上去的那条白蛇从云中直贯下来，回到所出的柱子下。
English: In a few moments, the white snake that had just been thrown up came straight down from the clouds and returned to the pillar from which it had come.

古文：于是云气转低着地。
现代文：于是云气变低，着地。
English: As a result, the cloud became lower and fell to the ground.

古文：青衣童子乃下就住，一人捧殿柱，离地数寸。
现代文：青衣童子就下来走边柱子，一个人把柱子捧起来，让柱子离地几寸。
English: The boy in blue came down and walked alongside the pillar. One man held the pillar up, leaving it a few inches off the ground.

古文：一童子从下又拔出一白蛇长二丈许，仰掷云中。
现代文：另一个人就从柱子下又拔出一条两丈左右长的白蛇，也仰掷到云中。
English: Another person pulled out a white snake about two meters long from under the pillar and threw it into the clouds.

古文：于是四童子亦一时腾上，入云而去。
现代文：于是四个童子也同时腾身而起，隐入云中。
English: As a result, the four boys also rose to their feet at the same time and disappeared into the clouds.

古文：云气稍高，布散遍天。
现代文：云气渐渐升高，布散满天。
English: The clouds gradually rise and spread across the sky.

古文：至夜。雷雨大霪，至晚方霁。
现代文：到了夜晚，雷雨大作，一直下到第二天晚上才晴天。
English: In the evening, there was a thunderstorm, and it didn't clear up until the next evening.

古文：后看殿柱根，乃蹉半寸许，不当本处。
现代文：后来人们去看那殿柱的根部，竟偏离半寸左右，没有回到原来的位置。
English: Later, when people went to see the base of the pillar, it had actually deviated by about half an inch and had not returned to its original position.

古文：寺僧谓此柱腹空。
现代文：庙里的和尚说，这桩子是空的。
English: The monk in the temple said that the pile was empty.

古文：乃凿柱至心，其内果空，为龙藏隐。
现代文：于是就凿柱子到柱心，一看，果然是空的，是龙的隐藏之所。
English: So he chiseled a pillar to the center of the pillar, and when he looked, he saw that it was empty, the dragon's hiding place.

古文：李靖
现代文：李靖
English: Li Jing

古文：唐卫国公李靖，微时，尝射猎灵山中，寓食山中。
现代文：唐卫国公李靖，地位低下时，曾经到灵山中打猎，吃住都在山中。
English: When Li Jing, the Emperor of the Tang Dynasty, was in a lowly position, he used to go hunting in the Lingshan Mountains, and lived and ate in the mountains.

古文：村翁奇其为人，每丰馈焉，岁久益厚。
现代文：山村里的老人们对他的为人感到惊奇，常常给他一些丰厚的馈赠，年头越久馈赠越多。
English: The old people in the mountain village are surprised by his personality, and often give him some rich gifts. The older he gets, the more gifts he gets.

古文：忽遇群鹿，乃遂之。
现代文：有一天他忽然遇上一群鹿，就去追赶。
English: One day he suddenly came across a herd of deer and went to chase them.

古文：会暮，欲舍之不能。俄而阴晦迷路，茫然不知所归，怅怅而行，因闷益甚。
现代文：追到天黑，要舍不追又不能，不多时便在阴晦中迷失了道路，茫茫然不知何处是归路。他怅然而行，心里就非常沉闷。
English: He chases until dark, he can't help but chase, and not infrequently he loses his way in the gloom and doesn't know where to turn. He walks in a daze, and his heart is very dull.

古文：极目有灯火光，因驰赴焉。
现代文：忽然望见远处有灯火，就急忙驰马过去。
English: Suddenly, he saw a light in the distance, so he quickly galloped over.

古文：既至，乃朱门大第，墙宇甚峻。
现代文：到那一看，竟是朱门大户，墙宇煞是高峻。
English: At that glance, it turned out to be Zhumen Daifu, and the walls were very high.

古文：扣门久之，一人出问。
现代文：叩门叩了好半天，有一人出来问他干什么。
English: After knocking on the door for half a day, a man came out and asked him what he was doing.

古文：靖告迷道，且请寓宿。
现代文：李靖便说迷失了道路，想借住一宿。
English: Li Jing then said that he had lost his way and wanted to borrow a room for the night.

古文：人曰： 郎君已出，独太夫人在。宿应不可。 
现代文：那人说： 我家郎君出去了，只有太夫人在家，留宿应该说是不行的。 
English: The man said: My husband has gone out, and only my wife is at home. It is not possible to stay overnight.

古文：靖曰： 试为咨白。 
现代文：李靖说： 请问一下试试。 
English: Li Jing said: Please give it a try.

古文：乃入告。
现代文：那人便进门去报告。
English: The man went through the door to report it.

古文：复出曰： 夫人初欲不许，且以阴黑，客又言迷，不可不作主人。 
现代文：接着又出来说： 夫人起先不想答应，但是因为天气阴黑，你又说迷了路，就不能不留你了。 
English: Then she came out again and said, "At first, madame did not want to agree, but since it is dark and you say you have lost your way, I cannot help but keep you.

古文：邀入厅中。
现代文：于是邀李靖进了客厅。
English: So he invited Li Jing into the living room.

古文：有顷，一青衣出曰： 夫人来。 
现代文：过了一会儿，一位婢女出来说： 夫人来了。 
English: After a while, one of the maids came out and said, "Madame is here."

古文：年可五十余，青裙素襦，神气清雅，宛若士大夫家。
现代文：他一看那夫人，年纪有五十多岁，青裙素袄，神气清雅，宛如士大夫之家。
English: When he looked at the lady, she was in her fifties, with a blue dress and a demure, elegant demeanor. It looked like a doctor's home.

古文：靖前拜之。
现代文：李靖上前拜见。
English: Li Jing, please come forward.

古文：夫人答拜曰： 儿子皆不在，不合奉留。今天色阴晦，归路又迷，此若不容，遣将何适。
现代文：夫人答拜说： 两个儿子都不在家，不该留宿，但是现在天色阴晦，又迷失归路，这儿不留你，还让你上哪儿去呢？
English: His wife replied, "Both of our sons are not at home, and we should not have stayed overnight, but now that the weather is cloudy and we have lost our way home, we can't leave you here, so where should you go?"

古文：然此乃山野之居，儿子还时，或夜到而喧，勿以为愳。 
现代文：但是这是山野人家，儿子回来时，也许是半夜，而且还大吵大叫，你可别怕。 
English: But this is a wild family. When my son comes home, it may be in the middle of the night, and he will still be yelling. Don't be afraid.

古文：既而食。
现代文：然后就吃饭。
English: And then we eat.

古文：颇鲜美，然多鱼。
现代文：饭菜都很鲜美，但是多半是鱼。
English: The food is delicious, but it's mostly fish.

古文：食毕，夫人入宅。
现代文：吃完饭，夫人进屋，两个婢女送来床席被褥。
English: After the meal, the lady entered the house, and two maids brought the bed and bedding.

古文：二青衣送床席裀褥，衾被香洁，皆极铺陈，闭户系之而去。
现代文：这些东西都带香味，富丽奢华。二婢女铺好床闭户而去。
English: These things are fragrant, rich and luxurious. Two maidservants made a bed and closed the door.

古文：靖独念山野之外，夜到而闹者何物也？
现代文：李靖想到了山外，夜里到来又吵闹的是什么东西呢？
English: Li Jing thought outside the mountain, what is it that comes at night and is noisy?

古文：惧不敢寝，端坐听之。
现代文：越想越怕，不敢入睡，端坐在那里听外面的动静。
English: The more I think about it, the more afraid I am. I don't dare to fall asleep. I just sit there and listen to the sounds outside.

古文：夜将半，闻扣门声甚急。又闻一人应之，曰： 天符，报大郎子当行雨。
现代文：将近夜半，听到很急的敲门声，又听一个人答应，说： 天符，报大郎君应该行雨。
English: It was nearly midnight when I heard a very urgent knock on the door, and then heard a person promise, saying, "Heaven's sign, it should rain on my birthday."

古文：周此山七百里，五更须足。无慢滞，无暴厉。 
现代文：此山周围七百里，五更天下足，不要迟慢，不要暴厉。 
English: There are seven hundred miles around this mountain, five more to go. Don't be slow, don't be violent.

古文：应者受符入呈。
现代文：应者接过天符进屋呈报。
English: The respondent took the talisman and went into the house to report.

古文：闻夫人曰： 儿子二人未归，行雨符到，固辞不可。
现代文：听夫人说： 两个儿子都没有回来，行雨的符到了，绝对推辞不得。
English: Listen to the lady: Both sons have not returned, the rain signal has arrived, absolutely can not be denied.

古文：违时见责。
现代文：不按时就被责罚。
English: If you don't come on time, you'll be punished.

古文：纵使报之，亦以晚矣。
现代文：即使去报告，也已经晚了。
English: It's too late to report it.

古文：盍请乎？ 
现代文：僮仆没有担当专职的道理，该怎么办呢？ 
English: What should I do if my servant does not have a full-time job?

古文：夫人喜。因自扣其门曰： 郎觉否？
现代文：一个小婢女说： 适才见客厅里的客人不是一般人，何不去求他呢？ 夫人挺高兴，亲自来叩门说： 您醒着吗？
English: A little servant girl said, "It just occurred to me that the guest in the drawing room is not an ordinary person, so why don't you go and ask him?" The lady was very pleased and knocked on the door herself to say, "Are you awake?"

古文：请暂出相见。 
现代文：请暂且出来一下。 
English: Please step outside for a moment.

古文：靖曰： 诺。 遂下阶见之。
现代文：李靖答应着，从阶上走下来。
English: Li Jing agreed and came down from the steps.

古文：夫人曰： 此非人宅，乃龙宫也。
现代文：夫人对他说： 这不是人的住处，是龙宫。
English: His wife said to him, "This is not a human residence, it is a dragon palace.

古文：妾长男赴东海婚礼，小男送妹，适奉天符，次当行雨。
现代文：我大儿子到东海去参加一个婚礼，小儿子去送他妹妹去了。恰好接到天符，按次序应该行雨。
English: My eldest son went to the East China Sea to attend a wedding, and my youngest son went to see off his sister. It just so happened that I received a heavenly sign that it should rain in that order.

古文：计两处云程，合逾万里。
现代文：总计两处的云程，合起来超过一万里。
English: In total, there are two cloud paths, which add up to more than ten thousand miles.

古文：报之不及，求代又难，辄欲奉烦顷刻间。
现代文：去报告来不及，求别人代替又很难求到，就想要麻烦您一小会儿，怎样呢？ 
English: It's too late to report, and it's hard to ask someone else to take your place, so I'd like to bother you for a moment. How about that?

古文：如何？ 靖曰： 靖俗人，非乘云者。奈何能行雨？有方可教，即唯命耳。 
现代文：李靖说： 我是俗人，不是能乘云驾雾的，怎么能行雨，有办法可以教给我，我听吩咐就是了。 
English: Li Jing said, "I am a layman, I can't ride on the clouds to drive the fog, how can I make it rain, there is a way to teach me, I just follow orders."

古文：夫人曰： 苟从吾言，无有不可也。 
现代文：夫人说： 如果能照我的话做，没有不行的。 
English: My wife said, "If you can do what I say, anything goes."

古文：遂勅黄头，靸青骢马来。
现代文：于是就命人备好青骢马牵过来，又命人取来雨器。
English: So he ordered someone to prepare a young horse and bring it, and also ordered someone to fetch a raincoat.

古文：又命取雨器，乃一小瓶子，系于鞍前。
现代文：原来雨器就是一个小瓶。这小瓶被系在马鞍之前。
English: Originally, the raincoat was a small bottle, which was tied to the front of the saddle.

古文：戒曰： 郎乘马，无勒衔勒，信其行。
现代文：夫人嘱咐说： 您骑马，不要勒马的衔勒，要让它随便走。
English: His wife said, "When you ride a horse, don't pull the reins, let it go wherever it wants to go.

古文：马跑地嘶鸣，即取瓶中水一滴，滴马鬃上。
现代文：马跑的时候，地上发出嘶鸣声，你就从瓶中取出一滴水，滴到马鬃上。
English: When the ground hisses as the horse runs, you take a drop of water from the bottle and drop it on the stirrup.

古文：慎勿多也。 
现代文：一定不要滴多了。 
English: Be sure not to drip too much.

古文：于是上马腾腾而行，倏勿渐高，但讶其隐疾，不自知其云上也。
现代文：于是李靖上马腾腾而行，越走越高，不知不觉已来到云层之上。
English: As a result, Li Jing walked on the horse, getting higher and higher, and unknowingly came to the top of the clouds.

古文：风急如箭，雷霆起于步下。
现代文：风急如箭飞，暴雷脚下响。
English: The wind is swift as an arrow, thunderstorms rumble underfoot.

古文：于是随所跃，辄滴之。
现代文：于是他就随着马的跳跃，就开始滴水。
English: So he followed the horse's gallop and started dripping water.

古文：既而电掣云开，下见所憩村。
现代文：然后就闪电大作，乌云拨开，他望见了他寄住的那个小山村。
English: Then the lightning struck, the clouds parted, and he could see the small mountain village where he was staying.

古文：思曰： 吾扰此村多矣。方德其人，计无以报。今久旱，苗稼将悴。而雨在我手，宁复惜之？ 
现代文：他想： 我打扰这个村太多了，正感他们的恩德，愁没办法报答，现在很久没下雨了，庄稼苗将旱死，而雨就在我手里，难道还能舍不得给吗？ 
English: He thought: I've disturbed this village too much, I'm feeling their kindness, I can't repay their kindness, it hasn't rained for a long time now, the crop seedlings will die of drought, and the rain is in my hands, how can I not give it?

古文：顾一滴不足濡，乃连下二十滴。
现代文：想到一滴不好干什么，就连下了二十滴。
English: Thinking of what to do with one bad drop, he immediately put down twenty drops.

古文：俄顷雨毕，骑马复归。
现代文：不大一会儿就下完了。他骑马回来，见到夫人在厅里哭了。
English: It was over in a few moments. He rode back and found his wife crying in the hall.

古文：夫人者泣于厅曰： 何相误之甚！
现代文：夫人说： 你怎么错得这么厉害？
English: She said, "How did you get it so wrong?"

古文：本约一滴，何私下二十尺之雨？
现代文：本来约好了下一滴，为什么私自下了二十尺雨？
English: The next drop was scheduled, so why did I get twenty feet of rain?

古文：此一滴，乃地上一尺雨也。
现代文：这一滴，就是地上的一尺雨啊！
English: This drop is a foot of rain on the ground!

古文：此村夜半，平地水深二丈。岂复有人？
现代文：这个村半夜的时候，忽然间平地水深二丈，哪还有人？
English: When it's the middle of the night in this village, all of a sudden, the water is two stories deep on the flat ground. Where are the people?

古文：妾已受谴，杖八十矣。 
现代文：我已经受到责罚，挨了八十大板了！ 
English: I've been punished, I've been given eighty lashes!

古文：但视其背，血痕满焉。
现代文：但见她的后背，满是血痕。
English: But look at her back, it's covered in blood.

古文：儿子亦连坐。
现代文：她的儿子也被连坐。
English: Her son was also arrested.

古文：奈何？
现代文：怎么办？
English: What to do?

古文：靖惭怖，不知所对。
现代文：李靖又惭愧又害怕，不知如何是好。
English: Li Jing was ashamed and afraid, and didn't know what to do.

古文：夫人复曰： 郎君世间人，不识云雨之变，诚不敢恨。
现代文：夫人又说： 您是人世间的凡人，不懂得云雨的变化，实在不能怨您。
English: Madam also said: You are an ordinary person in the human world, you don't understand the changes in the clouds and rain, I really can't blame you.

古文：只恐龙师来寻，有所惊恐，宜速去此。然而劳烦，未有以报，山居无物，有二奴奉赠。
现代文：只怕龙的军队来找吓着你，您应该马上离去，但是如此麻烦您，没有什么报答您，山里没有别的，有两个小奴送给您吧。
English: Even if an army of dragons were to come and frighten you, you should leave immediately. However, there is no reward for troubling you like this. There is nothing else in the mountain. Let me give you two little slaves.

古文：总取亦可，取一亦可。
现代文：一块领走也可以，单领一个也可以。
English: It is also possible to take away a piece of collar, and a single collar is also possible.

古文：唯意所择。 
现代文：由您选择吧！ 
English: The choice is yours!

古文：于是命二奴出来。
现代文：于是让二奴出来。
English: So let them come out.

古文：一奴从东廊出，仪貌和悦，怡怡然。一奴从西廊出，愤气勃然，拗怒而立。
现代文：一个从东廊下走出来，仪表容貌和悦可亲；一个从西廊下走出来，愤气勃然，怒目而立。
English: One came out from under the east porch, looking handsome and amiable; one came out from under the west porch, angry and glaring.

古文：靖曰： 我猎徒，以斗猛事。
现代文：李靖心里想： 我是一个打猎的，不怕斗猛之事。
English: Li Jing thought to himself: I'm a hunter, I'm not afraid of anything fierce.

古文：今但取一奴，而取悦者，人以我为怯也。 
现代文：现在只领一奴，要是领那个笑脸的，人家就会以为我胆小。 
English: Right now, I only have one, but if I had that smiley face, people would think I was a coward.

古文：因曰： 两人皆取则不敢。夫人既赐，欲取怒者。 
现代文：于是他说： 两个都领却不敢，夫人既然相赠，我就领这个生气的吧。 
English: Then he said, "Both of them took it, but I didn't dare. Since my wife gave it to me, I'll take the angry one."

古文：夫人微笑曰： 郎之所欲乃尔。 
现代文：夫人笑着说： 您的欲求也就这样了。 
English: My wife smiled and said, "That's what you want.

古文：遂揖与别，奴亦随去。
现代文：于是就作揖与他告别。那小奴也跟着他走出来。
English: So he bade him farewell, and the young man followed him out.

古文：出门数步，回望失宅，顾问其奴，亦不见矣。
现代文：出门才几步，回头看宅舍全无。又扭头去问小奴，小奴也不见了。
English: Just a few steps from the door, I looked back and saw that the house was completely gone. I turned around to ask the servant, and the servant was gone.

古文：独寻路而归。
现代文：他只好独自寻路而归。
English: He had to find his way back on his own.

古文：及明，望其村，水已极目，大树或露梢而已，不复有人。
现代文：等到天明，望一眼那个小村，汪然一片大水。大树只露出树梢，不再有人。
English: Wait until dawn, take a look at that small village, a vast expanse of water. Large trees only reveal the treetops, no longer people.

古文：其后竟以兵权静寇难，功盖天下。
现代文：这以后，李靖居然当了大官，指挥军队平定了贼寇之难，立下了盖世的大功。
English: After this, Li Jing actually became a high-ranking official, commanded the army to quell the difficulties of the bandits, and made a great contribution to the world.

古文：而终不及于相。
现代文：但是他始终没达到相位。
English: But he never quite got into his stride.

古文：岂非取奴之不得乎？
现代文：只怕是没领到那小奴的原因吧？
English: Maybe that's why they didn't get the little bastard?

古文：世言关东出相，关西出将，岂东西喻邪？
现代文：人们都说 关东出相，关西出将 ，难道那二奴一个从东廊出一个从西廊出是暗喻将相？
English: People say that the Kanto region is on the way up and the Kansai region is on the way down. Are those two guys walking from the east corridor to the west corridor a metaphor for the way things are going to be?

古文：所以言奴者，亦下之象。向使二奴皆取，即极将相矣。
现代文：之所以叫做奴，也是人位在下的象征，假如把两个小奴都领走，那就将既做将又做相了。
English: The reason why he is called a slave is also a symbol of inferiority. If you take away both slaves, then you will be both a slave and a slave.

