古文：饬令，则法不迁；法平，则吏无奸。
现代文：整饬法令，法令就不会随意改变；法令公正，官吏就没有奸邪的行为。
English: Rectify the laws, and the laws will not be changed arbitrarily; the laws are just, and the officials will not commit treason.

古文：法已定矣，不以善言售法。
现代文：法令既经确定，就不要因为善良言论来损害法令。
English: Once the law has been determined, don't damage the law with kind words.

古文：任功，则民少言；任善，则民多言。
现代文：按功劳来任用，民众就会祟尚空谈。
English: If appointments are made on the basis of merit, the public will have nothing to talk about.

古文：行法曲断，以五里断者王，以九里断者强，宿治者削。
现代文：执行法令，实行乡里断案制度。以五个乡里为断案单位的国家，能够称王天下；以九个乡里为断案单位的国家，能够强盛起来；而案子得不到及时处理的国家就会削弱。
English: A country with five townships as the decision-making unit can be called the king of the world; a country with nine townships as the decision-making unit can become strong; and a country where cases are not handled in a timely manner will be weakened.

古文：以刑治，以赏战、厚禄，以用术。
现代文：要用刑罚来治理国家，用赏赐来鼓励作战，实行厚禄制度，注意政治策略。
English: It is necessary to use criminal punishment to govern the country, use rewards to encourage war, implement the bonus system, and pay attention to political strategy.

古文：行都之过，则都无奸市。
现代文：巡查都邑中的违法行为，都邑中就没有违法买卖。
English: Inspecting the illegal activities in the capital city, there is no illegal trade in the capital city.

古文：物多者众，农弛奸胜，则国必削。
现代文：物品繁多，从事工商业的人多，农事就荒废了，奸邪势盛，国家就必定会被削弱。
English: If there are too many goods and too many people engaged in industry and commerce, agriculture will be in ruins, and treachery and evil will be rampant, and the country will inevitably be weakened.

古文：民有余食，使以粟出爵，必以其力，则震不怠。
现代文：民众有了余粮，就让他们用粮食捐取官爵；官爵的取得一定要凭自己的力量，农事就不会懈怠了。
English: If the people have surplus grain, let them use the grain to donate to the nobility; the acquisition of nobility must be based on their own strength, and they will not slack off in agricultural affairs.

古文：三寸之管毋当，不可满也。授官爵出利禄不以功，是无当也。
现代文：三寸长的竹管如果没有底子，是无法装满的；授给官爵和俸禄如果不根据功劳，也像没有底的管子。
English: A three-inch-long bamboo tube cannot be filled without a base; the award of peerage and salary without merit is like a tube without a bottom.

古文：国以功授官与爵，此谓以成智谋，以威勇战，其国无敌。
现代文：国家根据功劳授予官和爵，这叫做用成绩来集中智谋，用威势来鼓励勇敢作战，这样的国家是无敌的。
English: The country awards officers and knights on the basis of merit, which is called using achievements to concentrate wisdom and using authority to encourage brave combat. Such a country is invincible.

古文：国以功授官与爵，则治见者省，言有塞，此谓以治去治，以言去言，以功与爵者也。
现代文：国家根据功劳授予官和爵，治理国家就省事了，空话就被杜绝了，这叫做以简明法治排除繁琐人治，以法律条文排除无用言论，因为是按功劳授予官爵的。
English: The state awards officials and knighthoods on the basis of merit, which saves the trouble of governing the country and eliminates empty talk. This is called eliminating the cumbersome rule of man with a concise rule of law, and eliminating useless speech with legal provisions, because knighthoods are awarded on the basis of merit.

古文：故国多力，而天下莫之能侵也。
现代文：正因如此，国家就实力雄厚，天下就没有谁能够侵犯它。
English: Because of this, the country is so powerful that no one in the world can encroach on it.

古文：兵出必取，取必能有之；案兵不攻必当。
现代文：出兵一定有所攻取。攻取以后一定能够长期占有；按兵不动的话，国家就一定会富强。
English: Troops must be sent out to conquer something. After the conquest, they must be able to occupy it for a long time; if the soldiers do not move, the country will certainly become rich and strong.

古文：朝廷之事，小者不毁，效功取官爵，廷虽有辟言，不得以相干也，是谓以数治。
现代文：朝廷上的政事，小的方面也不准诽谤，只有立功才能取得官爵。朝廷中即使有人说坏话，也不能干扰这种做法。
English: It is not allowed to slander the small aspects of the court's political affairs, and only meritorious service can earn a peerage. Even if someone speaks ill of the court, this practice cannot be interfered with.

古文：以力攻者，出一取十；以言攻者，出十丧百。
现代文：这叫做用法术治国。国家凭实力进攻敌人，出分力可取得十分的成果；凭空话进攻敌人，出一份力反而会遭到百分的损失。
English: This is called using magic to govern the country. The country attacks the enemy by virtue of strength, and the output force can achieve sufficient results; attack the enemy by empty words, and the output force will suffer a hundred percent loss.

古文：国好力，此谓以难攻；国好言，此谓以易攻。
现代文：国家崇尚实力，这叫做从难处着眼准备进攻；国家崇尚空谈，这叫做从易处着眼准备进攻。
English: The country advocates strength, which is called preparing an attack from a difficult point of view; the country advocates empty talk, which is called preparing an attack from an easy point of view.

古文：重刑少赏，上爱民，民死赏；多赏轻刑，上不爱民，民不死赏。
现代文：加重刑罚，减少赏赐，这是君主爱护臣民，臣民就会拼死立功求赏；加重赏赐，减轻刑罚，这是君主不爱护臣民，臣民就不会拼死去争取奖赏。
English: Increase the punishment, reduce the reward, this is the monarch loves the subjects, the subjects will fight to the death for the reward; increase the reward, reduce the punishment, this is the monarch does not love the subjects, the subjects will not fight to the death for the reward.

古文：利出一空者，其国无敌；利出二空者，其兵半用；利出十空者，民不守。
现代文：赏赐的出于君主一个人，这个国家就天下无敌；赏赐的来源一分为二，军队就只有一半听君主任用；赏赐出于十个地方，民众就不会守护自己的君主了。
English: If the reward comes from the monarch alone, the country will be invincible; if the source of the reward is divided into two, only half of the army will be used by the monarch; if the reward comes from ten places, the people will not guard their monarch.

古文：重刑明民，大制使人，则上利。
现代文：用严厉的刑罚促使民众明白取舍，用大的法制驱使人们为国家尽力，对君主就有利。
English: It is advantageous for the monarch to use severe punishments to encourage the people to make a clear choice, and to use the great legal system to drive people to do their best for the country.

古文：行刑，重其轻者，轻者不至，重者不来，此谓以刑去刑。
现代文：执行刑罚的时候，对轻罪要重罚，这样人们对于轻罪就不敢在犯了，重罪吏不敢碰。这叫做 以刑除刑 。
English: When enforcing punishments, heavy punishments should be given for minor crimes, so that people will not dare to commit minor crimes, and serious criminals will not dare to touch them. This is called "removal of punishment by punishment."

古文：罪重而刑轻。刑轻则事生，此谓以刑致刑，其国必削。
现代文：要是对重罪用轻刑的话，刑罚轻了，犯法的事就容易发生。这叫做 以刑招刑 ，而这样的国家必致削弱。
English: If you use light punishment for serious crimes, the lighter the punishment, the easier it is to commit crimes. This is called punishment by punishment, and such a country will inevitably weaken.

