古文：陆象先元载董晋裴度于頔武元衡李绅卢携归崇敬夏侯孜陈敬瑄葛周
现代文：陆象先元载董晋裴度于頔武元衡李绅卢携归崇敬夏侯孜陈敬瑄葛周
English: Lu Xiang, the founder of the Yuan Dynasty, Dong Jin, Baidu, Zou Wu, Yuan Heng, Li Shenglu, Gui Zong, Xi Houzhi, Chen Jing, and Ge Zhou

古文：陆象先
现代文：陆象先
English: Land elephants first

古文：唐陆兖公象先为同州刺史，有家僮遇参军不下马，参军欲贾其事，鞭背见血，曰：卑吏犯公，请去。
现代文：唐朝陆象先做同州刺史。他的家僮在路上走的时候遇到了参军，他的家僮没有下马。参军想把这件事张扬出去，拿马鞭子把这个家僮脊背打出了血，而后说：卑职得罪刺使了，请放我走吧。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Lu Xiang first made a stabbing history of the same prefecture. When his family met the soldiers on the road, his family did not get off the horse. The soldiers wanted to publicize this matter, and the whip beat the blood out of this family's spine and back, and then said: I have been stabbed for the crime of inferiority, please let me go.

古文：兖公从容谓之曰：奴见官人不下马，打也得，不打也得。
现代文：陆象先从容地说：奴才见了参军不下马，打也行，不打也行。
English: Lu Xiang first said calmly: "When a slave sees that he can't get off his horse to join the army, he can fight or not fight.

古文：官人打了，去也得，不去也得。
现代文：参军既已把他打了，走也行，不走也行。
English: After joining the army, he has already been beaten, he can go or not go.

古文：参军不测而退。
现代文：参军摸不透他的意思，自行退去。
English: Joining the army, unable to fathom his meaning, he retreated on his own.

古文：元载
现代文：元载
English: Originally uploaded by

古文：鱼朝恩于国子监高坐讲易，尽言鼎卦，以挫元载、王缙。
现代文：宦官鱼朝恩在国子监高坐在上面讲《易经》，洋洋洒洒地大谈八卦。
English: The eunuch fish Chao En sat on the top floor of the Guozi Supervision High School and spoke about the "I Ching" and talked about the gossip.

古文：是日，百官皆在，缙不堪其辱，载怡然。
现代文：其用意在于羞辱这方面的学者元载和王缙。当时，很多官员都在场。王缙受不住污辱，表现出愤怒的样子。而元载却怡然自得，满面微笑。
English: The intention was to humiliate scholars in this field, Yuan Zai and Wang Xuan. At that time, many officials were present. Wang Zai could not bear the insults and showed anger, while Yuan Zai was self-satisfied and smiling.

古文：朝恩退曰：怒者常情，笑者不可测也。董晋
现代文：鱼朝恩讲完了易退下来说：王缙发怒，是人之常情；而元载微笑，却深不可测。董晋
English: After Yu Chaon finished his speech, Yi stepped back and said: Wang Yao's anger is normal, but Yuan Zai's smile is unfathomable.

古文：董晋与窦参同列，时政事决在窦参，晋但奉诏唯诺而已。
现代文：唐德宗时，董晋和窦参同做宰相。所有的大事都由窦参决定，董晋唯唯服从。
English: When Tang Dezong was in power, Dong Jin and Dou Sheng were both prime ministers. All important matters were decided by Dou Sheng, and Dong Jin only obeyed.

古文：既而窦参骄盈犯上，德宗渐恶之。
现代文：逐渐窦参自满傲慢，德宗不满意他。
English: Gradually Dou Zhen became complacent and arrogant, and Dezong was dissatisfied with him.

古文：参讽晋，奏给事中窦申为吏部侍郎。
现代文：窦参嘱咐董晋，要他向皇帝奏请给事中窦申做吏部侍郎。
English: Dou San ordered Dong Jin to appeal to the emperor to give Dou Shin a job as an attendant in the personnel department.

古文：上正色曰：岂不是窦参遣卿奏也？
现代文：德宗严肃地说：这是不是窦参的主意？
English: Desong said seriously, "Is this Dou Sang's idea?"

古文：晋不敢隐讳。
现代文：董晋不敢隐讳，以实话相告。
English: Dong Jin did not dare to hide and told the truth.

古文：上因问参过失，晋具奏之。
现代文：德宗就问窦参的过失，董晋一一回禀。
English: Desong asked Dou Sang about his mistake, and Dong Jin gave him a beating.

古文：旬日，参贬官。
现代文：不久，窦参便被贬了官。
English: Soon after, Dou Sang was demoted.

古文：晋累上表辞官，罢相，受兵部尚书。寻除东都留守。
现代文：董晋也好几次上表要求辞官，德宗罢了他的宰相职务，任命他为兵部尚书，接着又使命他为东都留守。
English: Dong Jin also asked for his resignation several times. De Zong dismissed him from the post of prime minister, appointed him as the secretary of the military department, and then sent him to stay in Dongdu.

古文：会汴州节度使李万荣疾甚，其子乃为乱。
现代文：正赶上汴州节度使李万荣病重，他的儿子作乱。
English: Just in time for the Chenzhou Festival, Li Wan Rong fell seriously ill, and his son started a riot.

古文：以晋为汴州节度使。
现代文：朝迁就任命董晋为汴州节度使。
English: In the morning, Dong Jin was appointed as the envoy of the Bozhou Festival.

古文：时晋既授命，唯将判官傔从十数人，都不召集兵马。既至郑，瑄武将吏都无至者。
现代文：董晋接到命令，只带了判官等十几个人，没有召集兵马，到了郑州，瑄武军方面没有人来接他。
English: After receiving the order, Dong Jin only brought a dozen people, including judges, and did not call up soldiers and horses. When he arrived in Zhengzhou, no one from the Yanwu Army came to pick him up.

古文：晋将吏及郑州官吏皆惧，共劝晋云：都虞候邓惟恭合来迎候。
现代文：董晋的部下和郑州的官吏都很害怕，都劝董晋说：汴州节度府的都虞侯邓惟恭是应该来迎接的。
English: Dong Jin's subordinates and Zhengzhou officials were very afraid, and they all advised Dong Jin to say: Deng Weigong, the prefectural governor of Zhangzhou, should come to meet.

古文：承万荣疾甚，遂总领军事，今相公到此，尚不使人迎候，其情状岂可料耶？
现代文：他不仅没有来，还乘着李万荣病重，攫取了兵权。现在节度使到了这里，他还不来迎接你，他的心里已经很明白。
English: Not only did he not come, he also took advantage of Li Wanrong's serious illness to seize military power. Now that the festival has come here, he has not yet come to greet you, his heart is already very clear.

古文：恐须且回避，以候事势。
现代文：恐怕咱们得暂时回避一下，以便等待时机。
English: I'm afraid we're going to have to step back for the time being and wait for the right moment.

古文：晋曰：某奉诏为汴州节度使，准敕赴任，何可妄为逞留。
现代文：董晋说：我奉命做节度使，只能按时到任，怎么可以逗留不前？
English: Dong Jin said, "I was ordered to be the dispatching officer, I can only arrive on time, how can I stay behind?

古文：人皆忧其不测，晋独恬然。
现代文：大家都担心他有危险，唯独董晋自己恬然自处。
English: Everyone was worried that he was in danger, but Dong Jin kept to himself.

古文：来自汴州数十里，邓惟恭方来迎候，晋俾其不下马。
现代文：到了离汴州几十里的地方，邓惟恭才来迎接。董晋看到邓惟恭连马都没下，记在心里。
English: When he arrived dozens of miles away from Zhangzhou, Deng Weigong came to meet him. Dong Jin saw that Deng Weigong did not even get off the horse, and kept it in mind.

古文：既入，仍委惟恭以军众。
现代文：到了节度衙门，仍然让邓惟恭主持军务。
English: When it came to the festival, Deng Weigong was still allowed to preside over military affairs.

古文：惟恭探晋何如事体，而未测浅深。
现代文：邓惟恭只知道董晋是朝廷派来做节度使的，但摸不清他会怎样做。
English: Deng Weigong only knew that Dong Jin had been sent by the imperial court to do the ceremonial duties, but he couldn't figure out what he would do.

古文：初万荣既逐刘士宁，代为节度使，委兵于惟恭。
现代文：当初，李万荣赶跑了前节度使刘士宁，取而代之。并且把兵权交给邓惟恭。
English: At first, Li Wanrong chased away the former military governor Liu Shining and replaced him, and gave military power to Deng Weigong.

古文：及疾甚，李乃归朝廷。
现代文：等到他病重，李万荣才表示接受朝廷的节制。
English: It was not until he was seriously ill that Li Wanrong said he accepted the restraint of the imperial court.

古文：惟恭自以当便代居其位，故不遣候吏，以疑惧晋心，冀其不敢进。
现代文：邓惟恭本以为他自己应当接替李万荣做节度使，故意不派人接董晋，企图让他害怕，希望董晋不敢到汴州来。
English: Originally, Deng Weigong thought that he should succeed Li Wanrong as the chief envoy, and deliberately did not send anyone to meet Dong Jin, in an attempt to make him afraid, hoping that Dong Jin would not dare to come to Ganzhou.

古文：不虞晋之速至。
现代文：没有想到董晋会来得这样神速。
English: I didn't expect Dong Jin to come so quickly.

古文：晋之速至留以近。方迎，然心常怏怏。
现代文：董晋这么快地来了，临近了汴州，邓惟恭只好去迎接，但心里怀着鬼胎。
English: Dong Jin came so quickly, approaching Zhangzhou, Deng Weigong had to go to meet him, but she was pregnant with a ghost fetus.

古文：惟恭以骄盈慢法，潜图不轨，配流岭南，朝廷恐晋柔懦，寻以汝州刺史陆长源，为晋行军司马。
现代文：董晋以邓惟恭傲慢无礼，图谋不轨的罪名，把邓惟恭发配到岭南。朝廷担心董晋柔弱，又派汝州刺史陆长源做他的行军司马，协助他管理军务。
English: Dong Jin sent Deng Weigong to Lingnan on the charge that he was arrogant and impolite, and that he was scheming to make mischief. The imperial court was worried about Dong Jin's weakness, and sent Lu Changyuan, the governor of Ruzhou, to be his marching steward to assist him in managing military affairs.

古文：晋宽厚，谦恭简俭，每事因循多可，兵粗安。
现代文：董晋性格宽厚，待人谦和。每做事，多按照过去的规矩办，部队逐渐地安定下来。
English: Dong Jin's character was generous and he treated people with modesty. Whenever he did something, he mostly followed the rules of the past, and the troops gradually settled down.

古文：长源性滋彰云为，请改易旧事，务从峭刻。
现代文：陆长源性好动，在处理军务上，请求按他的方案来办，要求严格。
English: Lu Changyuan is very active. When it comes to dealing with military affairs, he requests that it be done according to his plan, and the requirements are strict.

古文：晋初皆许之，及案牍已成，晋乃且罢。
现代文：开始，董晋答应了他，陆长源要实施的方案已经制定出来，董晋改变了初衷，暂未实行。
English: At first, Dong Jin agreed with him. The plan to be implemented by Lu Changyuan had already been worked out, but Dong Jin changed his mind and did not implement it for the time being.

古文：又委钱谷支计于判官孟叔度，轻佻，好慢易军人，人皆恶之。
现代文：董晋把管钱粮的事，委派给判官孟叔度。节度判官孟叔度是一个轻浮的人，不尊重军人，大家都恨他。
English: Dong Jin delegated the management of money and grain to the judge Meng Shudu. The judge Meng Shudu is a frivolous person, does not respect the military, and everyone hates him.

古文：晋卒于位。
现代文：董晋在汴州节度使任上逝世。
English: Dong Jin died in office on the day of the Chenzhou Festival.

古文：卒后十日，汴州大乱，杀长源、叔度，军人脔食之。
现代文：他逝世后十天，汴州大乱，乱军杀死了行军司马陆长源和节度判官孟叔度。
English: Ten days after his death, the Bozhou Rebellion broke out, and the rebels killed the marshal Ma Lu Changyuan and the judge Meng Shudu.

古文：长源轻言无威仪，自到汴州，不为军州所礼重。
现代文：并且把他们的肉煮成粥来吃。陆长源这个人随便说话，没有威仪，从到汴州后，地方官和部将都没人尊重他。
English: Lu Changyuan was a man of loose speech, without dignity, and from the time he arrived in Zhangzhou, local officials and ministers had no respect for him.

古文：及董晋疾亟，令之节度晋后事，长源便扬言：文武将吏多驰慢，不可执守宪章，当尽以法绳之。
现代文：董晋病重的时候，委托他主持军务。他就扬言说，汴州的文官武将吊儿郎当，不做正事，不守法规，应该依法惩治。
English: When Dong Jin was seriously ill, he entrusted him to preside over the military affairs. He threatened that the civil and military commanders of Zhangzhou should be punished according to law if they did not do their duty and abide by the laws and regulations.

古文：由是人人怨惧。
现代文：因此，人们怨恨他又惧怕他。
English: As a result, he is resented and feared.

古文：叔度性亦苛刻，又纵恣声色，数至乐营，与诸妇人戏，自称孟郎。
现代文：而孟叔度为人苛薄，特别贪恋女色，常到妓馆里和女人调笑，自称孟郎，人们都看不起他、恨他。
English: Meng Shudu, on the other hand, was a harsh person, especially greedy for women, often went to brothels to flirt with women, and called himself Meng Lang. People despised and hated him.

古文：由是人轻而恶之。裴度
现代文：裴度
English: Pei Du

古文：裴晋公度为门下侍郎，过吏部选人官，谓同过给事中曰：吾徒侥幸至多，此辈优一资半级，何足问也。
现代文：裴度做门下侍郎到吏部去选官佐。
English: Pei Du went to the cadre department to select a vice-minister as a footman.

古文：一生注定未曾退量。
现代文：跟同路一起去的给事中说：我这个人升官，有很多侥幸。
English: He said, "I've had a lot of luck getting promoted.

古文：公不信术数，不好服食。
现代文：这些人升个一级半级很难，不如我的机遇。
English: It's hard for these people to move up a level and a half, they don't have the same opportunities as me.

古文：每语人曰：鸡猪鱼蒜，逢著则吃，生老病死，时至即行。
现代文：我一生都没有想到过贬官的的事。裴度不相信抽签爻卦，也不贪图穿得好，吃得好。经常和人家说，鸡肉和猪肉，有了就吃，生老病死，顺其自然。
English: All my life, I have never thought about demeaning officials. Baidu does not believe in drawing lots, nor does it covet to dress well and eat well. I often say to people, chicken and pork, eat when you have it, old age and death, let nature take its course.

古文：其器抱弘达皆此类。
现代文：该死了，也不能抗拒。
English: Damn it, I can't resist.

古文：又晋公在中书，左右忽白以印失所在，闻之者莫不失色。
现代文：他的度量，大致这样。他做中书令，忽然有人说官印丢了，在场的人都惊慌失措。
English: His measurements are roughly as follows. He was writing a letter, when suddenly someone said that the official seal had been lost, and everyone present panicked.

古文：度即命张筵举乐，人不晓其故，窃怪之。
现代文：裴度却叫人设宴，跳舞唱歌。谁都不明白他为什么这样做，私下认为他很奇怪。夜深了，下属禀报说官印还在，并没有丢失。
English: Pei Du, however, had people hold a banquet, dance and sing. No one understood why he did this and privately thought he was very strange. Late at night, a subordinate reported that the official seal was still there and had not been lost.

古文：夜半宴酣，左右复白印存，度不答，极欢而罢。
现代文：裴度也不答理，尽欢而散。有人问，印都丢了，你为什么还这样镇定？
English: Pei Du did not reply, and they parted happily. Someone asked, "Hindu lost, why are you still so calm?"

古文：或问度以其故，度曰：此徒出于胥吏辈盗印书券耳。缓之则存，急之则投诸水火，不复更得之矣。
现代文：裴度说，这准是下面的小官拿去私自盖印，慢一点处理，印就可以送回来，处理急了，他肯定给你丢到水里、火里，就没有办法找到了。
English: Pei Du said that it must have been the junior official below who took it to seal it privately. If you take a little longer to process it, the seal can be sent back. If you are in a hurry to process it, he will definitely throw it into the water or fire, and there will be no way to find it.

古文：时人伏其弘量，临事不挠。
现代文：当时的人都称赞他的大度，遇事很镇静。
English: People at the time praised him for his generosity and his calmness in the face of adversity.

古文：于頔
现代文：于頔
English: Yu Zhen

古文：郑傲倪自若，似无郡使之礼。
现代文：郑太穆做金州刺史，写信给司空于頔。他的信写得很随便，不讲礼貌。
English: Zheng Taimu, a historian of Jinzhou, wrote a letter to Sikuo Yuxuan. His letter was very casual and impolite.

古文：书曰：阁下为南溟之大鹏，作中天之一柱。骞腾则日月暗，摇动则山岳颓。
现代文：信中说，你如南海的大鹏鸟，如天之砥柱，飞起来日月都会被遮掩，扇动翅膀，山岳也要倾倒。
English: The letter said that you are like the great pengcun in the South China Sea, like the pillar of heaven, when you fly, the sun and the moon will be covered, and when you flap your wings, the mountains will fall.

古文：真天子之爪牙，诸侯之龟镜也。
现代文：是皇上的重臣，各地官员的楷模。
English: He was the emperor's chief minister and a role model for local officials.

古文：太穆孤幼二百余口，饥冻两京。
现代文：我郑太穆一家二百多口人，分住在东西两京，挨饿受冻。
English: I, Zheng Taimu, am one of a family of more than 200 people, living in the east and west of Beijing, starving and freezing.

古文：小郡俸薄，尚为衣食之节。
现代文：我管理的地盘小，薪俸少，节衣缩食。
English: I manage a small site, receive a small salary, and have to cut back on food and clothing.

古文：赐钱一千贯，绢一千疋，器物一千两，米一千石，奴婢各十人。
现代文：现在，请你给我一千贯钱、一千疋绢、一千两买东西的银子、一千石米，再给我十名女婢、十名男仆。
English: Now therefore, I pray thee, give me a thousand talents, and a thousand talents of silver, and a thousand talents of silver, and a thousand talents of stone, and ten women servants, and ten men servants.

古文：且曰：分千树一叶之影，即是浓阴。减四海数滴之泉，便为膏泽。
现代文：而且说：这对于你，不过是千树之一叶，但这一叶对于我，足以遮荫，对于你，又如大海的几滴水，对我，那就是一片大泽了。
English: And he said: "For you, this is just one leaf of a thousand trees, but for me, this leaf is enough to shade, for you, it is like a few drops of water from the ocean, for me, it is a piece of daze."

古文：于公览书，亦不嗟讶。
现代文：于頔读了信，没有叹息，也无惊讶。
English: Yu Zhen read the letter, there was no sigh, no surprise.

古文：曰：郑使君所须，各依来数一半，以戎费之际，不全副其本望也。
现代文：只是说：郑太穆要的东西，依次各给一半。因为当时军费开支很大，所以不能全给。
English: He only said, "I'll give you half of what Zheng Taimou wants, one at a time. Since military spending was very high at the time, I can't give you all of it."

古文：又有匡庐符戴山人，遣三尺童子赍数尺之书，乞买山钱百万。公遂与之，仍如纸墨衣服等。
现代文：匡卢地方又有一个叫符戴的山人差了一个小童子持信到于頔那里去，要求给钱一百万，把匡卢山买下来，于頔不但照给，外赠纸墨、布帛。
English: In the Kuanglu area, another mountaineer named Fudei sent a young boy with a letter to Yu Qi, asking for one million in money to buy Kuanglu Mountain. Yu Qi not only gave him the money, but also gave him paper, ink and cloth.

古文：又有崔郊秀才者寓居于汉上，蕴积文艺，而物产罄县。
现代文：还有一个叫崔郊的读书人，擅长文艺，住在一个穷县。
English: There is also a reader named Cui Jiao, who is good at literature and art, and lives in a poor county.

古文：无何与姑婢通，每有阮咸之纵。其婢端丽，饶音伎之能，汉南之最姝也。
现代文：崔郊跟他姑姑的婢女私通。那婢女天生丽质，歌舞弹唱都能，是汉南一带最美的女子。
English: Cui Jiao is having an affair with his aunt's maid. The maid is naturally beautiful, can sing and dance, and is the most beautiful woman in Hannan.

古文：姑贫，鬻婢于连帅，连帅爱之。以类无双，给钱四十万，宠盼弥深。
现代文：崔郊的姑姑家境不好，把这个婢女卖给于頔，于頔非常喜欢这个婢女，给钱四十万枚，备加宠爱。
English: Cui Jiao's aunt, whose family was not well off, sold the maid to Yu Yao. Yu Yao was very fond of the maid and gave her 400,000 coins as a gift.

古文：郊思慕无已，即强亲府署，愿一见焉。
现代文：崔郊对这个女子思念不已，跑到于頔府的附近，盼望能见到女子一面。
English: Cui Jiao pined for this woman and ran to the vicinity of Yuyao, hoping to see a female side.

古文：其婢因寒食果出，值郊立于柳阴，马上连泣，誓若山河。
现代文：女子在寒食节那天果然出了门，崔郊等在柳树下，两个相见，饮泣不已，发誓终生相爱。
English: On the day of the Cold Food Festival, the woman did indeed go out, and Cui Jiao waited under a willow tree. The two met, wept uncontrollably, and swore to love each other forever.

古文：崔生赠之以诗曰：公子王孙逐后尘，绿珠垂泪滴罗巾。
现代文：崔郊赠女子一诗：公子王孙逐后尘，绿珠垂泪滴罗巾。
English: Cui Qiao presented a poem to the woman: Prince Wang and grandson are dust one after another, green beads shed tears and drop scarves.

古文：侯门一入深如海，从此萧郎是路人。
现代文：侯门一入深如海，从此萧郎是路人。
English: As soon as Houmen fell into the deep sea, Xiao Lang became a passerby.

古文：或有嫉郊者，写诗于座。
现代文：从行中有人生崔郊的气，就把这首诗写下来，贴在厅里。
English: Some people in the procession were angry with Cui Jiao, so they wrote down the poem and posted it in the hall.

古文：于公睹诗，令召崔生，左右莫之测也。
现代文：于頔看到这首诗，叫人把崔郊召到府上，左右的人猜不出他的用意。
English: When Yu Yao saw the poem, he had someone call Cui Jiao to his residence. People around him could not guess what he was up to.

古文：郊甚忧悔而已，无处潜遁也。
现代文：崔郊也提心吊胆，但逃不掉，只好去。
English: Cui Jiao was also apprehensive, but he couldn't escape and had to go.

古文：及见郊，握手曰：侯门一入深如海，从此萧郎是路人。
现代文：于頔见了崔郊，握着他的手说：侯门一入深如海，从此肖郎是路人。
English: When Yu Zou saw Cui Jiao, he shook his hand and said, "As soon as Houmen went as deep as the sea, Xiao Lang has been a passerby ever since."

古文：便是公制作也？
现代文：是先生写的呀？
English: Did you write this?

古文：四百千小哉，何惜一书，不早相示。
现代文：四十万是一笔小钱，怎能抵得上你这首诗呢？
English: Four hundred thousand is a small sum, how can it be worth your poem?

古文：遂命婢同归。
现代文：你应该早一些写信告诉我。
English: You should have written to me earlier.

古文：至帏幌奁匣，悉为增饰之，小阜崔生矣。
现代文：马上让两个有情人一起归去，并且赠送了很丰厚的妆奁，崔郊夫妻也算小富。
English: Immediately let the two lovers return together, and presented a very rich makeup bag, Cui Jiao and his wife are also considered small rich.

古文：初有客自零陵来，称戎昱使君席上有善歌者，襄阳公遽命召焉。
现代文：当初，有从零陵来的人说，在太守戎昱家的酒席上看到了一个歌唱得很漂亮的女子。
English: At first, some people who came from Luling said that they saw a beautiful woman singing at a banquet at the residence of Emperor Ebisun.

古文：戎使君不敢违命，逾月而至。
现代文：于頔就让人召她来，戎昱官小不敢抗命，拖了一个多月，把那女子送来了。
English: Yu Yao asked someone to summon her, and the eunuch did not dare to disobey the order, so he delayed for more than a month and sent the woman.

古文：及至，令唱歌，歌乃戎使君送伎之什也。
现代文：于頔就叫她唱歌，那女子唱的歌词，就是戎昱所写，所弹乐器，也是戎昱所赠。
English: He asked her to sing, and the lyrics the woman sang were written by Eunsoo, and the musical instrument she played was also a gift from Eunsoo.

古文：公曰：丈夫不能立功业，为异代之所称，岂有夺人姬爱，为己之嬉娱。
现代文：于頔说：唉，大丈夫应该建功立业，为后世楷模，岂能夺人所爱，为自己来玩乐？
English: Yu Yao said: Alas, it's all right to build a career and set an example for future generations. Can you win people's love and have fun for yourself?

古文：遂多以缯帛赠行，手书逊谢于零陵之守也。
现代文：于是，赠给很丰厚的礼品，亲自写信向戎昱道歉。
English: As a result, he gave her a very generous gift and personally wrote a letter of apology to her.

古文：云溪子曰：王敦驱女乐以给军士，杨素归德言妻。临财莫贪，于色不吝者罕矣。时人用为雅谈。
现代文：云溪子说：晋朝王敦把乐伎送给士兵、隋朝杨素送还赵德言的妻子，都是不贪财、不爱色的榜样，这是少有的，被称为雅谈。
English: Yun Xizi said: Wang Dun of the Jin Dynasty gave the soldiers the rickshaws, and Yang Su of the Sui Dynasty gave back the wife of Zhao Deyan, both of which are examples of not being greedy for money and not loving color. This is rare and is called elegant talk.

古文：历观相国挺特英雄，未有于襄阳公者也。
现代文：历代做宰辅的人，没有超越于頔这种大器量的。
English: The people who have served as vice-premiers throughout the ages have never surpassed the great power of the yakitori.

古文：戎使君诗曰：宝钿香娥翡翠裙，装成掩泣欲行云。
现代文：戎昱作的歌词是：宝钿香娥翡翠裙，妆成掩泣欲行云。
English: The lyrics composed by Eunsoo are: Baojun Xiang'e jade skirt, make-up into a crying cloud.

古文：殷勤好取襄王意，莫向阳台梦使君。
现代文：殷勤好取襄王意，莫向阳台梦使君。
English: Be diligent to win the king's favor, and do not go to the balcony to make the king dream.

古文：武元衡
现代文：武元衡
English: Take Motohira

古文：武黄门之西川，大宴。
现代文：黄门侍郎武元衡到西川去，地方官宴请他。
English: The Yellow Gate waiter, Take Motohira, went to Nishikawa and was invited to a banquet by local officials.

古文：从事杨嗣复狂酒，逼元衡大觥，不饮，遂以酒沐之，元衡拱手不动。
现代文：西川从事杨嗣喝得大醉，强逼武元衡用大酒杯喝酒。武元衡不喝，杨嗣就把酒浇在他身上，并声称我用酒来给你洗澡。
English: Nishikawa got Yang Shih very drunk and forced Wu Yuan Hei to drink from a large wine glass. When Wu Yuan Hei refused to drink, Yang Shih poured the wine over him and claimed that I was using the wine to bathe you.

古文：沐讫，徐起更衣，终不令散宴。
现代文：武元衡一动不动，任他浇完了酒，才缓缓地站起来，换了一身衣服，又参加酒会。
English: Wu Yuanheng remained motionless, and after he finished pouring the wine, he slowly stood up, changed his clothes, and joined the party.

古文：李绅
现代文：李绅
English: Li Sheng

古文：李相绅镇淮南。
现代文：李绅做淮南节度使，有姓张的人在江南郡守的任上罢官。
English: Li Sheng was appointed as the envoy of Huainan Festival, and a person with the surname Zhang was dismissed from the post of Jiangnan County Governor.

古文：张郎中又新罢江南郡，素与李隙，事具别录。
现代文：这个人和李绅一向不和，做什么事都对着来。
English: This person and Li Sheng have always been at odds, and do everything against each other.

古文：时于荆溪遇风，漂没二子，悲戚之中，复惧李之仇己，投长笺自首谢。
现代文：其人罢官后还乡，遇风翻船，淹死了两个儿子。身遭不幸，非常悲痛，又担心李绅会报复他。便给李绅写了很长的一封信，表示自己的歉疚。
English: After his dismissal, he returned to his hometown. The boat capsized in a storm, drowning his two sons. He was very saddened by his misfortune and worried that Li Sheng would take revenge on him. He wrote a long letter to Li Sheng, expressing his remorse.

古文：李深悯之，复书曰：端溪不让之词，愚罔怀怨。
现代文：李绅很同情他，便在回信中说，过去争论的话，我怎么能记恨？
English: Li Sheng felt very sorry for him, and said in his reply letter, "If we had an argument in the past, how could I hold a grudge?

古文：荆浦沈沧之祸，鄙实悯然。
现代文：互相之间不对的地方，我早忘光了。
English: I'd forgotten all about the things that were wrong with each other.

古文：既厚遇之，殊不屑意。
现代文：这样对待张郎中，李绅还觉得不够。
English: Treating Zhang Langzhong in this way, Li Sheng still felt it was not enough.

古文：张感涕致谢，释然如旧交，与张宴饮，必极欢醉。
现代文：张郎中非常感激，亲自面谢，两人释嫌和好，同旧时是朋友一样。
English: Zhang Langzhong was very grateful and thanked him in person. The two men were reconciled and reconciled, just like old friends.

古文：张尝为广陵从事，有酒妓尝好致情，而终不果纳。
现代文：两人经常一起高高兴兴地痛饮。张郎中曾经做过广陵从事，和一位风尘女子很要好，但相爱而不成眷属。
English: The two of them often drank together happily. Zhang Langzhong had once worked in Guangling, and was very close to a woman, but they loved each other and did not become relatives.

古文：至是二十年，犹在席。
现代文：二十年后，在李绅家喝酒，恰好相逢。
English: Twenty years later, drinking at Li Sheng's house, they just happened to meet.

古文：目张悒然，如将涕下。
现代文：四目相对，泪将欲下。
English: Eyes on opposite sides, tears welling up.

古文：李起更衣，张以指染酒，题词盘上，妓深晓之。
现代文：李绅去换衣服，张郎中用手指蘸着酒，写词在木盘上，女子记住了词。
English: Li Sheng went to change clothes, Zhang Langzhong sipped wine with her fingers, wrote the words on a wooden plate, and the woman memorized the words.

古文：李既至，张持杯不乐。
现代文：李绅回来，张郎中端着酒杯发愁。
English: When Li Sheng returned, Zhang Lang was worried with a wine glass in his hand.

古文：李觉之，即命妓歌以送酒。
现代文：李绅感觉出来，就叫女子唱歌佐酒。
English: Sensing this, Li Sheng asked the girl to sing and make sake.

古文：遂唱是词曰：云雨分飞二十年，当时求梦不曾眠。
现代文：女子便唱了张郎中刚写的词：云雨分飞二十年，当时求梦不曾眠。
English: The girl then sang the words that Zhang Langzhong had just written: "It's been twenty years since the clouds and rain parted. At that time, I never slept.

古文：今来头白重相见，还上襄王玳瑁筵。
现代文：今来头白重相见，还上襄王玳瑁筵。
English: Now they are seeing each other for the first time, and they are still on the same wavelength.

古文：张醉归，李令妓随去。
现代文：张郎中喝得大醉，李绅让女子和他一起归去。
English: Zhang Langzhong was very drunk, and Li Sheng asked the woman to return with him.

古文：又李绅
现代文：又李绅
English: Li Sheng again

古文：刘尚书禹锡罢和州，为主客郎中。
现代文：刘禹锡从和州任上罢官，改任主客郎中。
English: Liu Yuxi resigned from the position of Hezhou and was appointed as a guest of honor.

古文：集贤学士李绅罢镇在京，慕刘名，尝邀至第中，厚设饮馔。
现代文：李绅也从淮南节度使任上罢归，做集贤学士。仰慕刘禹锡的大名，邀请到家里，设了很丰盛的酒席宴请他。
English: Li Sheng also returned from the Huainan Festival to serve as a scholar. He admired Liu Yuxi's daimyo, invited him to his home, and set up a very sumptuous banquet to invite him.

古文：酒酣，命妙妓歌以送之。
现代文：喝完了酒，李绅让一个非常美貌的歌妓唱歌献给刘禹锡。
English: After drinking wine, Li Sheng asked a very beautiful singer to sing a song dedicated to Liu Yuxi.

古文：刘于座上赋诗曰：髤髤梳头宫样妆，春风一曲杜韦娘。
现代文：刘禹锡旋即即席赋诗说：髤髤梳头宫样妆，春风一曲杜韦娘。
English: Liu Yuxi immediately said in an impromptu poem: Zou combed her hair and put on makeup like a queen. Du Wei's daughter sang a song of spring breeze.

古文：司空见惯浑闲事，断尽江南刺史肠。
现代文：司空见惯浑闲事，断尽江南刺史肠。
English: It is commonplace to see idle chatter, and the South of the Yangtze River is full of it.

