古文：子言之： 归乎！
现代文：孔子说： 回去吧！
English: Confucius said: Go back!

古文：君子隐而显，不矜而庄，不厉而威，不言而信。 
现代文：德行高尚的人即使隐居山野，他的名声也会远扬；不必故作矜持而自然端庄，不必故作严厉而威仪自然使人敬畏，不必多讲话却自然会得到别人的信任。 
English: Even if a virtuous person lives in seclusion, his reputation will spread far and wide; he does not have to pretend to be reserved, but is naturally dignified; he does not have to pretend to be strict, but is naturally awe-inspiring; he does not have to speak much, but will naturally gain the trust of others.

古文：子曰： 君子不失足于人，不失色于人，不失口于人，是故君子貌足畏也，色足惮也，言足信也。
现代文：孔子说： 德行高尚的君子，对人的一举一动没有不得体的地方；对人的一颦一笑没有不合适的地方；对人的一言一语没有失礼的地方。所以君子的容貌足以使人敬畏，君子的脸色足以令人畏惧，君子的讲话足以令人信服。
English: Confucius said: A virtuous and noble gentleman has nothing improper about a person's every move; there is nothing improper about a person's every smile; there is nothing improper about a person's every word. Therefore, a gentleman's appearance is enough to be feared, a gentleman's face is enough to be feared, and a gentleman's speech is enough to be convincing.

古文：《甫刑》曰： 敬忌而罔有择言在躬。  子曰： 裼袭之不相因也，欲民之毋相渎也。 子曰： 祭极敬，不继之以乐；朝极辨，不继之以倦。 
现代文：《甫刑》上说： 外表恭敬，内心戒慎，要使别人在自己身上找不到一点可以挑剔的话。 ，孔子说： 在行礼过程中，有时以露出锡衣为敬，有时以掩好上服不露出惕衣为敬，这样做的目的，是要民众不要襄读了礼。 
English: Confucius said: In the process of performing the ritual, sometimes it is respectful to expose the tin robe, and sometimes it is respectful to cover up the outer robe and not expose the robe. The purpose of doing this is to ask the public not to participate in the ceremony.

古文：子曰： 君子慎以辟祸，笃以不掩，恭以远耻。 
现代文：孔子说： 祭祀要尽量表达敬意，虽有饮酒之事，但也不能以欢乐告终；朝廷上的事情一定要尽力处理好，不可因为劳神而最后草草了事。 
English: Confucius said: Sacrifices should express respect as much as possible. Although there is drinking, it should not end in joy. Matters at court must be handled well as much as possible, and they should not be rushed because of God's work.

古文：子曰： 君子庄敬日强，安肆日偷。
现代文：孔子说： 德行高尚的人，用谨慎行事来避免灾祸，用修养笃厚来避免受窘，用恭以待人来避免耻辱。 
English: Confucius said: "A virtuous man avoids calamity by prudence, avoids disgrace by virtue, and avoids disgrace by courtesy."

古文：君子不以一日使其躬儳焉，如不终日。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子总是庄重恭敬，所以意志一天比一天强；如小人总是安乐淫逸，所以才一天比一天苟且萎靡。
English: Confucius said: A gentleman is always serious and respectful, so his will is stronger day by day; if a villain is always happy and lecherous, so his will is weaker day by day.

古文：子曰： 齐戒以事鬼神，择日月以见君，恐民之不敬也。 
现代文：君子一天也不让自己的所作所为被人瞧不起，如同小人的无礼而惶惶不可终曰。 孔子说： 斋戒以后才敬事鬼神，挑选日子去朝见君主，这样做，是因为担心人民失去恭敬之心。 
English: A gentleman does not allow his actions to be looked down on for a single day, just as a villain's rudeness and panic cannot be allowed to last.Confucius said: "It is only after fasting that one should pay respect to ghosts and gods, and one should choose the day to meet the sovereign.

古文：子曰： 狎侮，死焉而不畏也。 
现代文：孔子说： 在上位的人如果轻狎侮慢而失去庄重恭敬之心，那么即使用 死 来威胁下民，下民也不会因此而畏惧的。 
English: Confucius said, "If those at the top lose their sense of dignity and reverence by being contemptuous, even if they threaten the people at the bottom with death, the people at the bottom will not be afraid.

古文：子曰： 无辞不相接也，无礼不相见也；欲民之毋相亵也。
现代文：孔子说： 朝聘聚会的时候，如果没有用言辞来互通情意，就不能互相交接；如果没有用见面礼来表达自己的真诚感情，就不能相见。
English: Confucius said, "When there is a gathering of court nobles, if you do not use words to communicate your feelings, you cannot meet each other; if you do not use a greeting to express your sincere feelings, you cannot meet each other.

古文：《易》曰： 初筮告，再三渎，渎则不告。  
现代文：之所以这样做，是要百姓不要忽视礼数而对对方失敬。《易经》上说： 第一次占笠，神告诉你是吉是凶；如果不信，又进行第二次、第三次占签聋那就是对神的衰读。
English: The reason for this is that the people should not ignore the number of rites and disrespect the other party. "I Ching" says: The first time you cast lots, God will tell you whether you are lucky or unlucky; if you do not believe, the second and third time you cast lots, you will be deaf and that is a bad reading of God.

古文：子言之： 仁者，天下之表也；义者，天下之制也；报者，天下之利也。 
现代文：襄读了神，神就不再告诉吉凶了。 孔子说： 仁是天下的仪表，义是评定天下事物的准则；礼尚往来是天下的大利。 
English: Confucius said: Benevolence is the hallmark of the world, righteousness is the criterion for evaluating things in the world, and courtesy is the great benefit of the world.

古文：子曰： 以德报德，则民有所劝；以怨报怨，则民有所惩。《诗》曰： 无言不雠，无德不报。 
现代文：孔子说： 用恩惠来报答别人给自己的恩惠，这样百姓就会有所劝勉而友好相处。以怨恨回报别人对自己的怨恨，这样百姓就会两败俱伤。《诗经》上说： 出言未有不答，施德未有不报。 
English: Confucius said: "Repay the favors of others with favors, so that the people will be encouraged and friendly with each other. Repay the resentment of others with resentment, so that the people will lose both. "The Book of Songs" said: "There is no answer without a word, and there is no reward without a deed."

古文：《太甲》曰： 民非后无能胥以宁；后非民无以辟四方。  
现代文：《尚书 太甲》篇说： 百姓没有国君，就不能得到安宁；国君没有百姓，也无法君临四方。  
English: "Shangshu Taijia" says: "Without a sovereign, the people cannot have peace; without a sovereign, the people cannot have peace; without a sovereign, the people cannot have peace."

古文：子曰： 以德报怨，则宽身之仁也；以怨报德，则刑戮之民也。 
现代文：孔子说： 用恩惠来报答别人对自己的怨恨，这是委曲求全的人；用怨恨来报答别人给自己的恩惠，这是应该绳之以法的人。 
English: Confucius said, "Those who use their kindness to repay the grudges of others should be punished. Those who use their grudges to repay the kindness of others should be brought to justice."

古文：子曰： 无欲而好仁者，无畏而恶不仁者，天下一人而已矣。
现代文：孔子说： 不是为了满足私欲而喜好仁的人，也不是因为畏惧才厌恶不仁的人，这样的人在普天之下很少很少。
English: Confucius said: There are very few people in the world who do not love benevolence for the sake of satisfying their selfish desires, and do not hate those who are not benevolent out of fear.

古文：是故君子议道自己，而置法以民。 
现代文：所以君子在议论原则时是以自己为准，在制定法律时是以百姓能做到的为准。 
English: Therefore, when discussing principles, a gentleman takes himself as the standard, and when making laws, he takes what the people can do as the standard.

古文：子曰： 仁有三，与仁同功而异情。
现代文：孔子说： 仁的实行有三种情况：一是安于行仁，二是为了利益而行仁，三是勉勉强强而行仁。
English: Confucius said: There are three conditions for the practice of benevolence: one is to be satisfied with benevolence, the second is to do benevolence for profit, and the third is to do benevolence reluctantly.

古文：与仁同功，其仁未可知也；与仁同过，然后其仁可知也。仁者安仁，知者利仁，畏罪者强仁。
现代文：在行仁时遇到了挫折，这时候就可以看出它是属于哪种仁了。真正的仁人，不论在什么情况下都安于行仁；自以为是的人，看到有利可图才去行仁；害怕犯罪受罚的人，是迫不得已而勉强行仁。
English: When one encounters a setback in the practice of benevolence, one can see which type of benevolence one belongs to. A truly benevolent person is content to practice benevolence under any circumstances; a self-righteous person only practices benevolence when he sees profit; a person who is afraid of being punished for a crime is forced to practice benevolence out of necessity.

古文：仁者右也，道者左也。
现代文：仁好比是右手，道好比是左手。
English: Benevolence is likened to the right hand, and virtue to the left.

古文：仁者人也，道者义也。
现代文：仁，体现在爱人上；道，体现在义理上。
English: Benevolence is embodied in love; virtue is embodied in righteousness.

古文：厚于仁者薄于义，亲而不尊；厚于义者薄于仁，尊而不亲。
现代文：在仁的方面做的多，在义的方面做的少，其结果是赢得了亲近而没有赢得尊敬；在义的方面做的多，在仁的方面做的少，其结果是赢得了尊敬而没有赢得亲近。
English: Doing more in the way of benevolence and less in the way of righteousness results in gaining closeness but not respect; doing more in the way of righteousness and less in the way of benevolence results in gaining respect but not closeness.

古文：道有至、有义、有考。至道以王，义道以霸，考道以为无失。 
现代文：道有兼行仁义的至道，有只行义而不行仁的义道，有采取仁义的一部分而行之的考道。行至道可以称王，行义道可以称霸，行考道可以避免过失。 
English: There is the supreme path of simultaneously practicing benevolence and righteousness, there is the righteous path of only practicing righteousness and not practicing benevolence, and there is the test path of taking a part of benevolence and righteousness. Walking the supreme path can be praised, walking the righteous path can be praised, and walking the test path can avoid mistakes.

古文：子言之： 仁有数，义有长短小大。
现代文：孔子说： 仁有多少、长短、大小之分，义也有多少、长短、大小之别。
English: Confucius said: How much benevolence there is depends on the length, shortness, and size, and how much righteousness there is depends on the length, shortness, and size.

古文：中心憯怛，爱人之仁也；率法而强之，资仁者也。
现代文：对别人的不幸有恻隐之心，这是天性同情他人的仁。遵循法律而勉强行仁，这是以行仁为手段而企图达到个人目的。
English: To have compassion for the misfortunes of others is the benevolence of nature to sympathize with others. To follow the law and reluctantly practice benevolence is to use benevolence as a means to try to achieve personal goals.

古文：《诗》云： 丰水有芑，武王岂不仕！
现代文：《诗经》上说： 正如丰水之有芭，武王岂不考虑天下长治久安之计。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Just as there is abundance of water, King Wu will not consider the long-term peace and stability of the world.

古文：诒厥孙谋，以燕翼子，武王烝哉！ 
现代文：留下了安邦治国的好谋略，庇护他的子孙享国久长。武王真伟大啊！ 
English: He left behind a good strategy for governing the country, and protected his children and grandchildren for a long time. King Wu is really great!

古文：数世之仁也。
现代文：这是惠及后世几代的仁。
English: This is a benevolence that will benefit generations to come.

古文：国风曰： 我今不阅，皇恤我后。 终身之仁也。 
现代文：《国风》上说： 我现在自身还难保，哪里有功夫为后代着想呢尸这是终竟自己一生的仁。  
English: In "National Style," he said, "I am still insecure about myself, where is the effort to think about future generations? After all, this is the benevolence of my life.

古文：子曰： 仁之为器重，其为道远，举者莫能胜也，行者莫能致也，取数多者仁也；夫勉于仁者不亦难乎？
现代文：孔子说： 仁，作为器物，非常非常之重；作为道路，非常非常之远。作为器物，没有人能够把它举得起来；作为道路，没有人能够走得完。
English: Confucius said: Ren, as a tool, is very, very heavy; as a road, it is very, very far. As a tool, no one can lift it; as a road, no one can walk it.

古文：是故君子以义度人，则难为人；以人望人，则贤者可知已矣。 
现代文：我们只能看谁举得较重，走得较远，以数量多的，算作仁了。
English: We can only look at who lifts more weight, goes farther, and counts more as a number.

古文：子曰： 中心安仁者，天下一人而已矣。大雅曰： 德輶如毛，民鲜克举之；我仪图之，惟仲山甫举之，爱莫助之。  
现代文：像这样地勉力于仁，难度够大的了！所以君子如果用先王的标准来衡量人，那么做人就很难达到标准；如果用今天一般人的标准去要求别人，那么就可以知道谁是贤人了。 孔子说： 天性乐于行仁的人，天下非常的少。《大雅》上说： 虽然道德轻如鸿毛，但是很少有人能够把它举得起来。我揣度，只有仲山甫能够举得起来，可惜时人没有能够帮助他的。 
English: Therefore, if a gentleman uses the standard of the former king to measure people, it will be difficult to meet the standard; if you use the standard of today's ordinary people to ask others, then you can know who is a wise man.Confucius said: People who are naturally willing to do benevolence are very few in the world. "Daya" said: Although morality is as light as a feather, few people can lift it up. I guessed that only Zhongshan Fu could lift it up, but unfortunately people were not able to help him.

古文：小雅曰： 高山仰止，景行行止。 
现代文：《小雅》上说： 高山则可仰慕，大道则可行走。 ，孔子说： 《诗》是如此地爱好仁。
English: Confucius said, "Poetry is so fond of benevolence.

古文：子曰： 《诗》之好仁如此；乡道而行，中道而废，忘身之老也，不知年数之不足，俛焉日有孳孳，毙而后已。 
现代文：向着仁的大道前进，走到半路，实在没有力气了，才不得已停顿下来，忘掉了身体已经衰老，也忘掉了徐曰不多；仍然孜孜不懈，奋力向前，死而后已。 
English: Heading towards the road of Ren, halfway there, I really didn't have the strength, and then I had to pause, forgetting that my body had aged, and also forgetting that Xu was not much; still tirelessly, struggling forward, and then died.

古文：子曰： 仁之难成久矣！
现代文：孔子说： 仁的难以成功，由来已久了！
English: Confucius said: It has been a long time since benevolence has been so difficult to achieve.

古文：人人失其所好；故仁者之过易辞也。 
现代文：因为人的能力有限，很难全部做到，所以仁者所犯的过失是容易得到解释的。 
English: Because human ability is limited, it is difficult to do everything, so the mistakes made by benevolent people are easy to explain.

古文：子曰： 恭近礼，俭近仁，信近情，敬让以行此，虽有过，其不甚矣。
现代文：孔子说： 恭敬接近于礼，谦逊接近于仁，诚信接近于人情；如果能以恭敬谦让的态度做人行事，即便有什么过失，也不会是什么大的过失。
English: Confucius said: "Respect is close to courtesy, modesty is close to benevolence, and sincerity is close to humanity; if you can behave with respect and humility, even if there is a mistake, it will not be a big mistake.

古文：夫恭寡过，情可信，俭易容也；以此失之者，不亦鲜乎？
现代文：做到恭敬就会少犯过失，近乎人情就会让人信赖，为人谦逊就容易被人接受。这样做人而犯错误，不是少有的事吗！
English: If you are respectful, you will commit fewer mistakes, if you are almost human, you will be trustworthy, and if you are humble, you will be easily accepted by others. It is not uncommon for people to make mistakes in this way!

古文：《诗》曰： 温温恭人，惟德之基。  子曰： 仁之难成久矣，惟君子能之。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 温和恭敬的人，是道德的基石。 ，孔子说： 仁的难以成功由来已久，只有君子能够成功。
English: "The Book of Songs" said: "A gentle and respectful person is the cornerstone of morality.", Confucius said: "It has long been difficult for humanity to succeed, and only a gentleman can succeed."

古文：是故君子不以其所能者病人，不以人之所不能者愧人。
现代文：所以君子不以自己所能做到的事去责备别人，也不以别人做不到的事便让人家感到惭愧。
English: Therefore, a gentleman does not blame others for what he can do, nor does he make people feel ashamed for what others cannot do.

古文：是故圣人之制行也，不制以己，使民有所劝勉愧耻，以行其言。
现代文：所以圣人在制定行为标准时，不是以自己为标准，而是以中等水平的人为标准，使知道努力的人有所劝勉，不知道努力的人有所愧耻，以便共同实行圣人的教诲。
English: Therefore, when the sage sets the standard of conduct, he does not take himself as the standard, but takes the medium-level people as the standard, so that those who know how to work hard will be encouraged, and those who do not know how to work hard will be ashamed, so as to jointly implement the teachings of the sage.

古文：礼以节之，信以结之，容貌以文之，衣服以移之，朋友以极之，欲民之有壹也。小雅曰： 不愧于人，不畏于天。 
现代文：用礼来约束他们，用诚信来团结他们，用冶当的仪容来文饰他们，用合乎身份的衣服来影响他们，用朋友之间的劝勉来鼓励他们，这都是为了使他们专一于为善。《小雅》上说： 难道人前不惭愧？难道不怕天报应？ 
English: To restrain them with propriety, to unite them with honesty, to adorn them with a dignified appearance, to influence them with clothes befitting their status, to encourage them with exhortations between friends, all of this is to make them concentrate on doing good. "Xiao Ya" said: Aren't you ashamed in front of others? Aren't you afraid of heavenly retribution?

古文：是故君子服其服，则文以君子之容；有其容，则文以君子之辞；遂其辞，则实以君子之德。
现代文：所以君子穿上了君子的服装，还要用君子的仪容来加以文饰；有了君子的仪容，还要用君子的谈吐来加以文饰；谈吐高雅了，还要用君子的道德来加以充实。
English: Therefore, when a gentleman puts on a gentleman's dress, he should also adorn it with a gentleman's appearance; when he has a gentleman's appearance, he should also adorn it with a gentleman's conversation; when he has a gentleman's conversation, he should also enrich it with a gentleman's morality.

古文：是故君子耻服其服而无其容，耻有其容而无其辞，耻有其辞而无其德，耻有其德而无其行。
现代文：所以君子对于穿上君子服装而无君子仪容感到羞耻，对于只有君子仪容而无君子谈吐感到羞耻，对于只有君子谈吐而无君子道德感到羞耻，对于只有君子道德而无君子行为感到羞耻。
English: Therefore, a gentleman is ashamed of putting on a gentleman's dress without a gentleman's appearance, ashamed of only a gentleman's appearance without a gentleman's talk, ashamed of only a gentleman's talk without a gentleman's morality, ashamed of only a gentleman's morality without a gentleman's behavior.

古文：是故君子衰绖则有哀色；端冕则有敬色；甲胄则有不可辱之色。
现代文：所以君子穿上了丧服就会有悲哀的神色，穿上了朝服就会有恭敬的神色，穿上了军服就会有不可侵犯的神色。
English: Therefore, when a gentleman puts on mourning clothes, he will have a sad look, when he puts on a court uniform, he will have a respectful look, and when he puts on a military uniform, he will have an inviolable look.

古文：《诗》云： 惟鹈在梁，不濡其翼；彼记之子，不称其服。  
现代文：《诗经》上说： 弟乌鹏鸟儿立河梁， 居然未曾湿翅膀。那些没有德行的官员们，真不配他们穿的那身衣裳。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "The little wren-birds build the beams of the river, yet their wings are never wet. Those officials without virtue are not worthy of the clothes they wear."

古文：子言之： 君子之所谓义者，贵贱皆有事于天下；天子亲耕，粢盛秬鬯以事上帝，故诸侯勤以辅事于天子。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子的所谓 义 是说一个人无论身份贵贱，都要为天下做出应有的贡献。譬如天子，虽然至尊至贵，也要亲耕藉田，生产出集盛，制造出柜色，以祭祀上天；所以诸侯也要勤勉地辅佐天子。 
English: Confucius said: "The so-called righteousness of a gentleman means that a person, regardless of his status, must make his due contribution to the world. For example, although the Son of Heaven is the most precious, he must personally cultivate the fields, produce the collection, make the cabinet color, and worship the heaven. Therefore, the princes must also diligently support the Son of Heaven.

古文：子曰： 下之事上也，虽有庇民之大德，不敢有君民之心，仁之厚也。
现代文：孔子说： 在下位的事奉在上位的，虽然有了庇护民众的大德，也不敢有统治民众的念头，这是仁厚的表现。
English: Confucius said: It is a manifestation of benevolence that those who are lower in rank serve those who are higher, and although they have the great virtue of protecting the people, they dare not have the idea of ruling the people.

古文：是故君子恭俭以求役仁，信让以求役礼，不自尚其事，不自尊其身，俭于位而寡于欲，让于贤，卑己尊而人，小心而畏义，求以事君，得之自是，不得自是，以听天命。
现代文：所以君子恭敬谦逊以求做到仁，诚信谦让以求做到礼；不自己夸耀自己做过的事，不自己抬高自己的身价；在地位面前表现出谦逊，在名利面前表现出淡泊，让于贤人；贬低自己而推崇别人，小心谨慎而唯恐不得其当，要求自己用这样的态度事奉国君；得意时自行此道，不得意时也自行此道，一切听天由命，绝不改变信仰以邀取利禄。
English: Therefore, a gentleman is respectful and humble in order to achieve benevolence, honest and humble in order to achieve courtesy; he does not boast of what he has done, he does not raise his own worth; he shows humility in the face of status, shows indifference in the face of fame and fortune, and gives in to the wise; he belittles himself and promotes others, he is careful and cautious in order to avoid being taken advantage of, and requires himself to serve the king with such an attitude; when he is proud, he will do this by himself, and when he is not, he will do this by himself, everything is subject to fate, and he will never change his faith in order to win

古文：《诗》云： 莫莫葛藟，施于条枚；凯弟君子，求福不回。 其舜、禹、文王、周公之谓与！
现代文：《诗经》上说： 茂茂密密的葛藤，缠绕着树干和树枝。平易近人的君子，不走邪道把福求，大概说的就是舜、禹、文王、周公吧！
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Lush and dense tangles, entwined with tree trunks and branches. Approachable gentlemen, do not go the wrong way to seek blessings, roughly speaking, are Yu, Yu, King Wen, and Zhou Gong!

古文：有君民之大德，有事君之小心。
现代文：他们都有治理民众的大德，又有事奉君主的小心。 
English: They all have the great virtue of governing the people, and the caution of serving the monarch.

古文：《诗》云： 惟此文王，小心翼翼，昭事上帝，聿怀多福，厥德不回，以受方国。  
现代文：《诗经》上说： 周文王小心翼翼，明白怎样敬奉上天，得到了许多福佑。他的德行叫人挑不出毛病，最终得到了天下诸侯的拥戴。  
English: "The Book of Songs" says: King Zhouwen was careful and knew how to worship the heavens, and received many blessings. His virtue made people unable to find faults, and he eventually won the support of the princes of the world.

古文：子曰： 先王谥以尊名，节以壹惠，耻名之浮于行也。
现代文：孔子说： 大臣死了，先王给他加上一个谥号，以表彰他的一生。
English: Confucius said, "When a minister died, the previous king gave him a nickname in recognition of his life.

古文：是故君子不自大其事，不自尚其功，以求处情；过行弗率，以求处厚；彰人之善而美人之功，以求下贤。
现代文：死者在一生中尽管做了许多好事，但在定谥号时，只节取死者一生中最突出的一点作为依据，其余的都略而不提，这是因为耻于使名声超过实际做过的事。所以君子不夸大自己做过的事，不吹嘘自己的功劳，以求合乎实际；有了过失，不再重犯，以求待人宽厚；表彰别人的优点，赞美别人的功劳，以求贤者能够居于上位。
English: Although the deceased did many good things in his life, only the most prominent point in the life of the deceased was taken as the basis for the funeral, and the rest were omitted, because it was shameful to make the reputation exceed the actual deed. Therefore, the gentleman does not exaggerate what he has done, does not boast of his own merits, in order to be realistic; if there is a fault, do not repeat it, in order to treat people with leniency; recognize the merits of others, praise the merits of others, in order for the wise to be able to stay on top.

古文：是故君子虽自卑，而民敬尊之。 
现代文：这样一来，君子尽管自己贬低自己，而民众对他却十分尊敬。 
English: As a result, the gentleman, despite his self-deprecation, is held in high esteem by the populace.

古文：子曰： 后稷，天下之为烈也，岂一手一足哉！
现代文：孔子说： 后租这个人，建立的是盖世无双的功业，得到他的好处的岂止是一两个人？
English: Confucius said, "This man, Houyan, has built up an unparalleled achievement. Is it not just one or two people who have benefited from him?

古文：唯欲行之浮于名也，故自谓便人。 子言之： 君子之所谓仁者其难乎！
现代文：只是由于他想使实际做过的事超过名声，所以自称是一个懂得种庄稼的人。 孔子说： 君子的所谓 仁 做起来是相当难的呀！
English: But because he wanted to make what he had actually done exceed his reputation, he claimed to be a person who knew how to grow crops.Confucius said: The so-called benevolence of a gentleman is quite difficult to do!

古文：《诗》云： 凯弟君子，民之父母。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 快乐平易的君子，是民众的父母。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Happy and easy-going gentlemen are the parents of the people.

古文：凯以强教之；弟以说安之。
现代文：君子以快乐教人，使人自强不息；以平易安民，使人感到喜悦。
English: A gentleman teaches people with happiness, making people self-reliant; with peace and tranquility, making people feel joyful.

古文：乐而毋荒，有礼而亲，威庄而安，孝慈而敬。使民有父之尊，有母之亲。如此而后可以为民父母矣，非至德其孰能如此乎？
现代文：使人民快乐而不荒废事业，彬彬有礼而相亲相爱，威严庄重而安宁，孝顺慈爱而恭敬，使人民像尊敬父亲一样尊敬自己，像亲近母亲一样亲近自己，这样做了以后才可以成为民众的父母，如果不具备至高的德行，谁能做到这一点呢？
English: To make the people happy without abandoning the cause, to be courteous and kind to each other, to be dignified and peaceful, to be filial and kind and respectful, to make the people respect themselves as they respect their father, to be close to themselves as they are close to their mother. Only after doing this can they become the parents of the people. Who can do this if they do not have the highest virtues?

古文：今父之亲子也，亲贤而下无能；母之亲子也，贤则亲之，无能则怜之。
现代文：现在父亲的亲爱儿子，儿子贤能他就亲，儿子无能他就看不起：母亲的亲爱儿子，儿子贤能她就亲，儿子无能她就怜惜。
English: Now the father's dear son, he kisses when the son is capable, he looks down on when the son is incapable: the mother's dear son, she kisses when the son is capable, she pities when the son is incapable.

古文：母，亲而不尊；父，尊而不亲。
现代文：所以母亲可亲而不可尊，父亲可尊而不可亲。
English: Therefore, the mother can be loved but not respected, and the father can be respected but not loved.

古文：水之于民也，亲而不尊；火，尊而不亲。
现代文：对于人们来说，水是可亲而不可尊，火是可尊而不可亲。
English: For people, water is lovable but not lovable, fire is lovable but not lovable.

古文：土之于民也，亲而不尊；天，尊而不亲。
现代文：对于人们来说，土地是可亲而不可尊，天是可尊而不可亲。
English: For people, land is something to be cherished but not respected, and heaven is something to be cherished but not loved.

古文：命之于民也，亲而不尊；鬼，尊而不亲。 
现代文：对于人们来说，国君的教令可亲而不可尊，鬼神可尊而不可亲。 
English: For people, the emperor's edicts can be loved but not respected, and ghosts and gods can be respected but not loved.

古文：子曰： 夏道尊命，事鬼敬神而远之，近人而忠焉，先禄而后威，先赏而后罚，亲而不尊；其民之敝：蠢而愚，乔而野，朴而不文。
现代文：孔子说： 夏人的治国之道是尊重君上的政教，虽然敬奉鬼神但却不把它当作政教的内容，接近人情而忠诚，把俸禄放在第一位而把威严放在第二位，把赏赐放在第一位而把刑罚放在第二位，所以他们的政教可亲而不可尊；到了政教衰败的时候，它的百姓就变得愚蠢而无知，骄横而粗野，朴陋而缺乏修养。
English: Confucius said: The Xia people's way of governing the country is to respect the monarch's politics and religion. Although they worship ghosts and gods, they do not regard it as the content of politics and religion. They are close to human feelings and loyal. They put salary first and dignity second. They put rewards first and punishments second. Therefore, their politics and religion are amiable but not respectable. When politics and religion decline, its people will become stupid and ignorant, arrogant and rough, simple and lacking cultivation.

古文：殷人尊神，率民以事神，先鬼而后礼，先罚而后赏，尊而不亲；其民之敝：荡而不静，胜而无耻。
现代文：殷人尊崇鬼神，君上率领百姓敬事鬼神，把鬼神放在第一位而把礼仪放在第二位，把刑罚放在第一位而把赏赐放在第二位，所以他们的政教可尊而不可亲；到了政教衰败的时候，它的百姓就变得心意放荡而不安静，争强好胜而不知羞耻。
English: People respect ghosts and gods, the ruler leads the people to respect ghosts and gods, puts the ghosts and gods in the first place and puts the etiquette in the second place, puts the punishment in the first place and puts the reward in the second place, so their politics and religion can be respected but not loved; when the politics and religion are in decline, its people will become wild and restless, competitive and not ashamed.

古文：周人尊礼尚施，事鬼敬神而远之，近人而忠焉，其赏罚用爵列，亲而不尊；其民之敝：利而巧，文而不惭，贼而蔽。 
现代文：周人尊崇礼法，贵尚施惠，虽然敬奉鬼神但却不把它当作政教的内容，接近人情而忠诚，它的赏罚办法既不同于夏，又不同于殷，唯以爵位的高低作为轻重的标准，所以他们的政教可亲而不可尊；到了政教衰败的时候，它的百姓就变得贪利而取巧，花言巧语而大言不惭，互相残害，互相欺骗。 
English: Zhou people respect etiquette, are noble and benevolent, although they worship ghosts and gods, they do not regard it as the content of politics and religion, they are close to human feelings and loyal, and their reward and punishment methods are different from both Xia and Yin. However, they use the level of knighthood as a weighty standard, so their politics and religion are amiable but not respectable. When politics and religion decline, its people will become greedy and devious, flamboyant and blatant, and they will harm and deceive each other.

古文：子曰： 夏道未渎辞，不求备，不大望于民，民未厌其亲；殷人未渎礼，而求备于民；周人强民，未渎神，而赏爵刑罚穷矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 夏代的政令清简，对人民不苛求责备，赋税较轻，人民尚怀有亲上之心。殷人的礼法还算简约，但对人民苛求责备，赋税较重。周人设教，强迫人民遵循礼仪，虽尚未袭读鬼神，而赏赐、进爵、施刑之类的规定就已经穷极繁多了。 
English: Confucius said: Xia Dynasty's decrees were simple and concise, the people were not harshly reprimanded, the taxes were light, and the people still had a kindred spirit. Yin people's etiquette was still simple, but the people were harshly reprimanded and the taxes were heavy. Zhou people set up teachings and forced the people to follow etiquette. Although they had not yet read ghosts and gods, the rules for rewards, promotion to peerage, and punishment were already extremely complex.

古文：子曰： 虞夏之道，寡怨于民；殷周之道，不胜其敝。 
现代文：孔子说： 虞夏的政令清简，老百姓很少怨恨的。殷周的政令繁杂，老百姓受不了它的繁琐。 
English: Confucius said: Yu Xia's decrees are simple and simple, and the people rarely resent them. Yin Zhou's decrees are complicated, and the people can't stand it.

古文：子曰： 虞夏之质，殷周之文，至矣。
现代文：孔子说： 虞夏的质朴，殷周的文饰，都达到了极点。
English: Confucius said: The simplicity of Yu Xia and the ornamentation of Yin Zhou have both reached their peak.

古文：虞夏之文不胜其质；殷周之质不胜其文。 
现代文：虞夏虽然也有文饰，但没有它的质朴多；殷周虽然也有质朴，但没有它的文饰多。 
English: Although Yu Xia also has literary decoration, it is more rustic without it; although Yin Zhou also has rustic decoration, it is more rustic without it.

古文：子言之曰： 后世虽有作者，虞帝弗可及也已矣。
现代文：孔子说： 后世虽有明王复起，也赶不上虞舜那么好了。
English: Confucius said, "In the future, even if there is a revival of the Ming Dynasty, it will not be as good as that of the Yu Dynasty.

古文：君天下，生无私，死不厚其子；子民如父母，有憯怛之爱，有忠利之教；亲而尊，安而敬，威而爱，富而有礼，惠而能散；其君子尊仁畏义，耻费轻实，忠而不犯，义而顺，文而静，宽而有辨。
现代文：他君临天下，活着时没有半点私心，死了也不把帝位传给儿子；爱护百姓就像父母爱护子女，既有哀其不幸的慈爱，也有为其带来实惠的教育；既有母亲之亲，又有父亲之尊，安详而受到尊敬，严厉而受到亲爱，富有四海而彬彬有礼，施惠于民而无所偏向。他手下的大臣也都尊敬仁义，以光说不做为可耻，重人而轻财，尽心于君而不犯上，尽君臣之义而又顺从，文雅而又稳重，宽容而有分寸。
English: When he came to the throne, he did not have the slightest selfishness when he was alive, and when he died, he would not pass the throne to his son; he loved the people like parents love their children, both with compassion to mourn their misfortune and with education to bring them real benefits; he had the mother's relatives and the father's respect, he was respected peacefully, he was loved strictly, he was rich and courteous, and he benefited the people without any bias. The ministers under him also respected benevolence and righteousness, it was shameful to say or do nothing, they valued people and despised money, they devoted themselves to you and did not commit crimes, they were obedient

古文：《甫刑》曰： 德威惟威，德明惟明。 非虞帝其孰能如此乎？ 
现代文：《甫刑》上说： 道德的威严使人敬畏，道德的光明使人尊敬，除了虞舜还有哪一个能做到这种地步？ 
English: "Final Punishment" said: The majesty of morality makes people fear, and the brightness of morality makes people respect. In addition to Gu Yao, who else can achieve this level?

古文：子言之： 事君先资其言，拜自献其身，以成其信。是故君有责于其臣，臣有死于其言。
现代文：孔子说： 臣下事奉君主，要先考虑好自己的建议，然后拜见君主，亲自向君主进言；君主采纳以后，臣下就要全力以赴地促其实现，兑现自己的诺言。
English: Confucius said: When a vassal serves the sovereign, he should first consider his own suggestion, then visit the sovereign and personally advise the sovereign; after the sovereign accepts, the vassal should do his best to promote its realization and fulfill his promise.

古文：故其受禄不诬，其受罪益寡。 子曰： 事君大言入则望大利，小言入则望小利；故君子不以小言受大禄，不以大言受小禄。《易》曰： 不家食，吉。  
现代文：所以君主可以责成臣下，而臣下应当为实现自己的诺言而鞠躬尽瘁死而后已；所以臣下的受禄不是无功受禄，言行相符，受到惩罚的可能性也就很小。 孔子说： 事奉君主，大的建议被采纳，就可以指望得到重赏；小的建议被采纳，就只能指望得到轻赏。所以君子不因小建议被采纳而接受重赏，也不因大建议被采纳而接受轻赏。《易经》上说： 国君有大蓄积，不仅与家人分享，而且与贤人分享，吉利。  
English: Therefore, the sovereign can command his vassals, and the vassals should bow down and die for the realization of his promise; therefore, the reward of his vassals is not without merit, the words and deeds are consistent, and the possibility of being punished is very small. Confucius said: Serving the sovereign, if the big suggestion is accepted, you can expect to get a heavy reward; if the small suggestion is accepted, you can only expect to get a light reward. Therefore, the gentleman does not accept a heavy reward because the small suggestion is accepted, nor does he accept a light reward because the big suggestion is accepted. "I Ching" said: The sovereign has a large accumulation, not only

古文：子曰： 事君不下达，不尚辞，非其人弗自。
现代文：孔子说： 事奉君主，不应该以私人的事情去麻烦国君，不说华而不实的话，不是正派人的引见就不谋求进身。
English: Confucius said, "When serving the sovereign, one should not trouble the sovereign with personal matters. One should not speak pompous and untrue words, and should not seek advancement unless he is introduced by a respectable person.

古文：小雅曰： 靖共尔位，正直是与；神之听之，式谷以女。  
现代文：《小雅》上说： 认真做好本职工作，只和正派的人亲近。
English: Xiao Ya said: Do your job well and only get close to decent people.

古文：子曰： 事君远而谏，则谄也；近而不谏，则尸利也。 
现代文：神明听到这些，就会赐给你福禄。 ，孔子说： 事奉国君，如果是疏远小臣而越级进谏、那就有馅媚之嫌；如果是国君身边的大臣而不进谏，那就是尸位素餐。 
English: When the gods hear this, they will give you a blessing., Confucius said: When you serve the sovereign, if you alienate your vassals and overstep your bounds, there is a suspicion of flattery; if you are a minister around the sovereign and do not advance, it is a vegetarian meal.

古文：子曰： 迩臣守和，宰正百官，大臣虑四方。 
现代文：孔子说： 近臣要辅佐国君，不使道德有亏；家宰负责整伤百官，各部大臣负责考虑四方的事。 
English: Confucius said, "Close vassals should assist the sovereign without compromising their morals; the steward is responsible for rectifying the injuries of officials, and the ministers are responsible for considering the affairs of the four quarters."

古文：子曰： 事君欲谏不欲陈。
现代文：孔子说： 事奉国君，对国君的过失可以进谏，但不可以到外边宣扬。
English: Confucius said, "When you serve the sovereign, you may criticize the sovereign's faults, but you must not go abroad to publicize them.

古文：《诗》云： 心乎爱矣，瑕不谓矣；中心藏之，何日忘之。  
现代文：《诗经》上说： 心里爱着君子，为什么不讲出来？
English: "The Book of Songs" says: If you love a gentleman, why not tell him?

古文：子曰： 事君难进而易退，则位有序；易进而难退则乱也。
现代文：内心深处总是希望他好，何尝有一天忘掉？ ，孔子说： 事奉国君，如果是提拔困难而降级容易，那么臣下的贤与不肖就区分清楚了乡如果是提拔容易而降级困难，那么臣下的贤与不肖就混淆无别了。
English: Confucius said: "In serving the sovereign, if it is difficult to promote and easy to demote, then there is a clear distinction between the virtuous and the vile subjects. In serving the hometown, if it is easy to promote and difficult to demote, then there is no difference between the virtuous and the vile subjects.

古文：故君子三揖而进，一辞而退，以远乱也。 
现代文：所以君子作客，一定要三次揖让之后才随着主人进门，而告辞一次就可离去，这就是为了避免出现混乱。 
English: Therefore, a gentleman guest must enter the door with the host after three concessions, and can leave after one farewell, in order to avoid confusion.

古文：子曰： 事君三违而不出竟，则利禄也；人虽曰不要，吾弗信也。 
现代文：孔子说： 事奉君主，如果多次与君主意见不合，还不肯辞职出国，那肯定是贪图俸禄。即令有人说他没有这个念头，我也不信。 
English: Confucius said: "If, while serving the monarch, one repeatedly disagrees with the monarch and still refuses to resign and leave the country, then he must be greedy for a salary. Even if someone says that he has no such intention, I do not believe it.

古文：子曰： 事君慎始而敬终。 
现代文：孔子说： 事奉君主，要以谨慎开始，以恭敬告终。 
English: Confucius said: In the service of the sovereign, one should begin with prudence and end with reverence.

古文：子曰： 事君可贵可贱，可富可贫，可生可杀，而不可使为乱。 
现代文：孔子说： 事奉君主，君主可以使臣下升官，可以使臣下降级，可以使臣下富有，可以使臣下贫穷，可以使臣下活着，可以使臣下死去，但就是不可以使臣下做出非礼之事。 
English: Confucius said, "When serving the sovereign, the sovereign may promote a vassal, demote a vassal, enrich a vassal, impoverish a vassal, keep a vassal alive, or cause a vassal to die, but he must not make a vassal do anything improper.

古文：子曰： 事君，军旅不辟难，朝廷不辞贱；处其位而不履其事则乱也。
现代文：孔子说： 事奉君主，接受任务时，如果是在军旅之中，就应不避艰险；女口果是在朝廷之上，就应不辞微贱。处于某种职位而不履行相应的职责，那就乱了套了。
English: Confucius said: When serving the monarch and accepting tasks, if it is in the middle of a military expedition, it should not avoid hardships and dangers; if the woman's mouth is above the court, it should be humble. If you are in a certain position and do not perform the corresponding duties, it is out of order.

古文：故君使其臣得志，则慎虑而从之；否，则孰虑而从之。
现代文：所以国君派给臣下差使，臣下认为是力所能及的就应加以慎重考虑而从命；臣下认为不是力所能及的就应加以深思熟虑而从命。
English: Therefore, when the sovereign sends an envoy to a vassal, if the vassal thinks it is within his power, he should consider it carefully and follow the order; if the vassal thinks it is not within his power, he should consider it carefully and follow the order.

古文：终事而退，臣之厚也。
现代文：完成了差使以后就辞职退位，这表现了臣下的忠厚之处。
English: After completing his mission, he resigned and abdicated, which showed the loyalty of his subjects.

古文：《易》曰： 不事王侯，高尚其事。  子曰： 唯天子受命于天，士受命于君。
现代文：《易经》上说： 不再事奉王侯，王侯还称赞臣下所作之事。 ，孔子说： 天子受命于天，臣下受命于天子。
English: "I Ching" said: "No longer serve the prince, the prince also praised the things done by his vassals.",Confucius said: "The son of heaven is ordered by heaven, and the vassals are ordered by the son of heaven.

古文：故君命顺则臣有顺命；君命逆则臣有逆命。
现代文：如果天子顺应夫命，那么臣下也就跟着顺应天命；如果天子违背天命，那么臣下也就跟着违背天命。
English: If the heavenly son obeys the husband's order, then the vassal will also obey the heavenly order; if the heavenly son violates the heavenly order, then the vassal will also violate the heavenly order.

古文：《诗》曰： 鹊之姜姜，鹑之贲贲；人之无良，我以为君。  
现代文：《诗经》上说： 大鸟争斗于上、小鸟也跟着争斗于下。做人而无好品行，还要把他当国君。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Big birds fight at the top, and small birds also fight at the bottom. If a man is not of good moral character, he should still be regarded as the king of the country.

古文：子曰： 君子不以辞尽人。
现代文：孔子说： 君子评价一个人，不是仅仅根据他的言辞。
English: Confucius said: A gentleman does not judge a man by his words alone.

古文：故天下有道，则行有枝叶；天下无道，则辞有枝叶。
现代文：所以在天下有道的太平盛世，天下无道的衰乱之世，人们注重实际行动的多，说漂亮话的少；在人们注重说漂亮话的多，付诸实际行动的少。
English: Therefore, in the prosperous and peaceful world with Tao, and in the decadent world without Tao, people pay more attention to practical actions and less attention to fine words; in the prosperous and peaceful world with Tao, people pay more attention to fine words and less attention to practical actions.

古文：是故君子于有丧者之侧，不能赙焉，则不问其所费；于有病者之侧，不能馈焉，则不问其所欲；有客，不能馆，则不问其所舍。
现代文：所以君子和有丧事的人在一起，如果无力资助他办丧事，就不要问他办理丧事所需的费用；和有病的人在一起，如果无力馈赠他，就不要问他需要些什么；有客远道来访，如果自家不能留宿，就不要问他在什么地方落脚。
English: Therefore, when a gentleman is with a mourner, if he cannot afford to pay for the funeral, he should not ask for the funeral expenses; when he is with a sick person, if he cannot afford to give him a gift, he should not ask for what he needs; when a guest comes from far away, if he cannot stay at home, he should not ask where he can stay.

古文：故君子之接如水，小人之接如醴；君子淡以成，小人甘以坏。
现代文：所以君子之交，其淡如水；小人之交，其浓如醛。君子之交虽然其淡如水，但能相辅相成；小人之交虽然其甜如醛，但曰久必然败坏。
English: Therefore, the friendship of a gentleman is light as water; the friendship of a small person is thick as aldehyde. Although the friendship of a gentleman is light as water, it can complement each other; although the friendship of a small person is sweet as aldehyde, it will inevitably deteriorate over time.

古文：小雅曰： 盗言孔甘，乱是用餤。  
现代文：《小雅》上说： 坏人说话非常甜，所以乱子更增添。  
English: "Xiao Ya" said: The villain speaks very sweetly, so the chaos increases.

古文：子曰： 君子不以口誉人，则民作忠。
现代文：孔子说： 君子不以华而不实的话恭维人，这样就会在百姓中间形成忠实的风气。
English: Confucius said: A gentleman does not flatter people with pompous words, and this will create a loyal culture among the people.

古文：故君子问人之寒，则衣之；问人之饥，则食之；称人之美，则爵之。
现代文：所以，君子询间人家是否寒冷，就要送衣服给人家穿；询问人家是否饥饿，就要送食物给人家吃；称赞人家的优点，就要给人家加官进爵。
English: Therefore, if a gentleman inquires whether a person is cold, he should give clothes to wear; if he inquires whether a person is hungry, he should give food to eat; if he praises a person's merits, he should promote the person to higher ranks.

古文：国风曰： 心之忧矣，于我归说。  子曰： 口惠而实不至，怨菑及其身。
现代文：《国风》上说： 心忧他人无所倚，同我一道回家去休息。 ，孔子说： 嘴上已经许给人家的好处，就是不兑现，这样就会给自己带来怨恨或灾祸。
English: "Confucius" said: "If you are worried about others, go home and rest with me.", Confucius said: "If you have promised benefits to others, but do not fulfill them, you will bring resentment or disaster to yourself."

古文：是故君子与其有诺责也，宁有已怨。
现代文：所以，君子与其对人负有承诺的责任，还不如承受拒绝承诺的埋怨。
English: Therefore, it is better for a gentleman to bear the grudge of refusing to promise than to bear the responsibility of commitment to others.

古文：国风曰： 言笑晏晏，信誓旦旦，不思其反；反是不思，亦已焉哉！  
现代文：《国风》上说： 从前你言笑多温柔，既是发誓又赌咒。现在你又变了心，海誓山盟全忘完，从此一刀就两断！ ，孔子说： 君子不用虚假的表情去讨好别人。
English: "National Style" said: Once upon a time, you spoke and laughed so gently, both swearing and cursing. Now you have changed your mind again, you have completely forgotten the oath, and from now on you will be cut in two!, Confucius said: A gentleman does not have to flatter others with a false expression.

古文：子曰： 君子不以色亲人；情疏而貌亲，在小人则穿窬之盗也与？ 
现代文：如果感情疏远而外表上看起来非常亲密，拿小人来作比方，不就是钻墙洞的小偷吗！ 
English: If the feelings are distant but outwardly look very close, take a villain as an example, isn't it a thief who drills holes in the wall!

古文：子曰： 情欲信，辞欲巧。 
现代文：孔子说： 内心的情要追求真实，嘴上的话要讲究技巧。 
English: Confucius said: Pursue truth in your heart, and pay attention to skill in your speech.

古文：子言之： 昔三代明王皆事天地之神明，无非卜筮之用，不敢以其私，亵事上帝。
现代文：孔子说: 以前夏、殷、周三代的圣明天子都奉事天地神明，一切事情都由卜筮决定，不敢以私意亵渎上帝。
English: Confucius said: In the past, Xia, Yin, and the third generation of the holy sons of heaven and earth all served the gods of heaven and earth. Everything was decided by Bo Xilai, and they did not dare to blaspheme God with their own will.

古文：是故不犯日月，不违卜筮。
现代文：所以不冲犯不吉利的日子，不违背卜筮的旨意。
English: Therefore, do not offend the unlucky day, do not violate the will of Bu Wei.

古文：卜筮不相袭也。
现代文：用卜就不再用筮，二者不相重复。
English: If you use, you don't use  anymore, and the two don't repeat.

古文：大事有时日；小事无时日，有筮。
现代文：大的祭祀要在规定的日子和时刻；小的祭祀就没有规定的时间了，只用筮。
English: Large sacrifices are to be made on a specified day and time; small sacrifices do not have a specified time, only using the pestle.

古文：外事用刚日，内事用柔日。
现代文：外事要用刚日，内事要用柔日。
English: Foreign affairs should be handled on the first day of the month, while domestic affairs should be handled on the second day.

古文：不违龟筮。 
现代文：这些都不能违背龟筮的指示。 
English: None of this can go against the instructions of the turtle.

古文：子曰： 牲牷礼乐齐盛，是以无害乎鬼神，无怨乎百姓。 
现代文：孔子说: 祭牲、各种礼仪、乐舞以及黍稷等祭品，这些都适合于鬼神，鬼神降福，所以百姓也无怨。 
English: Confucius said, "Sacrificial animals, various rituals, music and dance, and sacrificial items such as gongs are all suitable for ghosts and gods, and ghosts and gods are blessed, so the people have no complaints.

古文：子曰： 后稷之祀易富也；其辞恭，其欲俭，其禄及子孙。
现代文：孔子说: 祭祀后稷是很容易置办完备的。因为他言辞恭敬，欲望简单，而且他的福禄都施及子孙了。
English: Confucius said: It is easy to arrange and complete a sacrificial altar, because his words are respectful, his desires are simple, and his blessings are given to his descendants.

古文：《诗》曰： 后稷兆祀，庶无罪悔，以迄于今。  
现代文：《诗》说: 自从后稷开始祭祀，幸蒙神灵保佑，没有什么灾祸和缺憾，直到现在还是这样。  
English: "Poem" said: Since Houyi began to offer sacrifices, fortunately blessed by the gods, there has been no disaster or lack of regret, and it is still like this.

古文：子曰： 大人之器威敬。
现代文：孔子说: 居高位的人用龟筮都是很恭敬的。
English: Confucius said: People in high places are very respectful when they use the turtle beak.

古文：天子无筮；诸侯有守筮。
现代文：天子用卜不用筮，诸侯在国居守，有事才用筮。
English: The Son of Heaven does not need a scepter to use divination. Princes live in the country and use the scepter only when there is a need.

古文：天子道以筮；诸侯非其国不以筮。
现代文：天子出行，在路上用筮，而诸侯不在自己的封国内不用筮。
English: When the emperor travels, he uses a shovel on the road, but princes do not use a shovel when they are not in their own fiefdoms.

古文：卜宅寝室。
现代文：改换居室寝宫要用卜。
English: It's not easy to change your living room into a bedroom.

古文：天子不卜处大庙。 
现代文：天子出巡，住在诸侯的太庙里就不必再用卜了。 
English: The Son of God is on a tour of duty. If you live in the imperial temple of the princes, you no longer need to use divination.

古文：子曰： 君子敬则用祭器。
现代文：孔子说: 君子为了表示恭敬，在朝聘及款待宾客时就用祭祀的器皿。
English: Confucius said: In order to show respect, a gentleman should use sacrificial vessels when entertaining and entertaining guests.

古文：是以不废日月，不违龟筮，以敬事其君长，是以上不渎于民，下不亵于上。 
现代文：所以臣下都按着规定来卜筮谒见君长的日子，绝对不违背龟筮的指示，恭敬地事奉他们的君长。所以在上位的人对人民有尊严，在下位的人也不敢对上有所怠慢。 
English: Therefore, all the subjects follow the rules when they come to see the monarch, never disobey the instructions of the turtle, and respectfully serve their monarchs. Therefore, those in power have dignity for the people, and those in power dare not neglect the people.

