古文：张桢张桢，字约中，汴人。
现代文：张桢字约中，汴梁人。
English: Zhang Liang is the middle of the word "about," and Liang Liang is the last.

古文：幼刻苦读书，登元统元年进士第，授彰德路录事，辟河南行省掾。
现代文：幼年刻苦读书，登元统元年进士及第，授彰德路录事，征召为河南行省属官。
English: He studied hard in his childhood, and was promoted to the first grade in the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, awarded the Record of the Road of Virtue, and was conscripted as a provincial official in Henan Province.

古文：桢初娶祁氏，祁生贵富家，颇骄纵，见桢贫，不为礼。合卺逾月，即出之。
现代文：桢初娶祁氏，祁生于富贵之家，自命不凡，见桢贫穷，不以礼相待，结婚一月将她离弃。
English: She was born into a wealthy family, was pretentious, saw her as poor, did not treat her with courtesy, and abandoned her in the first month of marriage.

古文：祁之兄讼于官，且污桢以黯昧事，左右司官听之，桢因移疾不出，滞案俱积。平章政事月鲁帖木儿怒曰： 张桢，刚介士也，岂汝曹所当议耶！ 
现代文：祁的兄长向官府控告，并且污蔑桢有不可告人之事，左右司官信以为真，桢因此称病不到任视事，以致积案堆积很多，平章政事月鲁帖木儿愤怒地说 ：张桢是刚强正直之士，岂是你们能议论的么？ 
English: Zou's brother complained to the government and slandered Zou as having something to hide, which the magistrates believed to be true. As a result, Zou said that he was too ill to handle the case, resulting in a large backlog of cases. Lu Timur, a politician from Pingzhang, angrily said: Zhang Zou is a strong and honest person, can you discuss this?

古文：郎中虎者秃谒而谢之，乃起。
现代文：郎中虎者秃拜谒谢罪，这才上任视事。
English: It was only after the vultures had feasted on the sins of the tiger's son-in-law that he took office to oversee the situation.

古文：范孟为乱，矫杀月鲁帖木儿等，城中大扰，桢暮夜缒城出，得免。
现代文：范孟作乱，杀害月鲁帖木儿等，城中大乱，桢深夜逃出城外，得幸免。
English: Fan Meng caused a riot, killed Yue Lütjelmuer, and so on. There was a big riot in the city, and Zou fled out of the city in the middle of the night, but he was spared.

古文：守城千户狗儿妻崔氏，为其小妇所谮，虐死，其鬼凭七岁女诣县诉桢，备言死状，尸见瘗舍后。桢率吏卒即其所，发土得尸，拘狗儿及小妇，鞫之，皆伏辜，人以为神明焉。
现代文：过了一年，授高邮县尹，县民没有因私情拜谒他的。县民张提领，以侠义自任，以威势擅自决断乡里是非。一日，到县有所托，桢将他逮住，弄清了他的全部罪行，乡里中受他压抑的人都来控诉，于是对他施以杖刑并流放，人们都称快。守城千户狗儿妻崔氏，被她家的小老婆说坏话，虐待而死，其鬼魂依附于七岁女孩到县向桢控诉，拘留狗儿及其小妾，审问都认罪，人们以为桢是神明。
English: One year later, Yin was awarded the title of Gaoyou County, and the people of the county did not worship him because of his private feelings. The people of the county nominated Zhang, and he used chivalry and arrogance to arbitrarily solve the problems in the village. One day, he was entrusted to the county, and the magistrate arrested him and clarified all his crimes. The people in the village who were oppressed by him came to complain, so he was punished with a cane and exiled, and people were happy. The wife of the guardian of the city of a thousand dogs, Cui, was abused and abused by her little wife, and died. Her ghost was attached to a seven

古文：累除中政院判官，至正八年，拜监察御史，劾太尉阿乞剌欺罔之罪，并言： 明里董阿、也里牙、月鲁不花，皆陛下不共戴天之仇，伯颜贼杀宗室嘉王、郯王一十二口，稽之古法，当伏门诛，而其子兄弟尚仕于朝，宜急诛窜。
现代文：任中政院判官，至正八年，拜监察御史，弹劾太尉阿乞剌欺蒙皇上之罪，并说： 明里董阿、也里牙、月鲁不花，都是陛下不共戴天之仇，伯颜贼杀害皇室嘉王、郯王一十二口人，根据古代法律，应全家抄斩，而今他的儿子兄弟还在朝廷任官职，应赶快杀掉或放逐。
English: In the eighth year of his term as a judge of the Central Council of State, he went to inspect the imperial history and impeached the lieutenant Ah Qianqian for the crime of defrauding the emperor, and said: Mingli Donga, Yiliya, and Yue Lu did not spend, all of which were the vengeance of His Majesty, and the thieves killed the twelve members of the royal family, Ji Wang and Zhi Wang. According to the ancient law, the whole family should be beheaded, but now his son and brother are still serving in the imperial court, they should be killed or exiled as soon as possible.

古文：别儿怯不花阿附权奸，亦宜远贬。
现代文：别儿怯不花依附权势，也应迅速贬官远逐。
English: Those who are too cowardly to cling to power should be quickly demoted and banished.

古文：今灾异迭见，盗贼蜂起，海寇敢于要君，阃帅敢于玩寇，若不振举，恐有唐末藩镇噬脐之祸。 不听。
现代文：现在灾害异常不断，盗贼蜂起，海寇敢于欺君，边防统帅敢于轻视寇情，若不整顿，可能会有唐末藩镇之祸，后悔不及。 
English: Now, disasters are constantly occurring. Thieves are rising up, pirates dare to deceive the king, and the border guard commander dares to despise piracy. If this is not rectified, there may be the disaster of the late Tang Dynasty, and it is too late to regret.

古文：及毛贵陷山东，上疏陈十祸，根本之祸有六，征讨之祸有四，历数其弊：一曰轻大臣，二曰解权纲，三曰事安逸，四曰杜言路，五曰离人心，六曰滥刑狱，所谓根本之祸六也。
现代文：皇上不听。待毛贵攻陷山东，上奏疏陈述十祸，其中根本之祸有六，征讨之祸有四，历数其弊端：一是轻大臣，二是权纲不振，三是图安逸，四是杜绝言路，五是人心涣散，六是滥施刑狱，这都是根本的祸害。
English: The emperor did not listen. When Mao Gui invaded Shandong, he made a report on the ten evils, of which there were six fundamental evils and four evils to be discussed. He enumerated their drawbacks: one was a light minister, the second was a lack of power, the third was to seek comfort, the fourth was to prevent speech, the fifth was to disperse the people, and the sixth was to indiscriminately impose prison sentences. These were all fundamental evils.

古文：其言事安逸之祸，略曰： 臣伏见陛下以盛年入纂大统，履艰难而登大宝，因循治安，不预防虑，宽仁恭俭，渐不如初。
现代文：至于他说的图安逸的祸大意是 ：臣伏见陛下在盛年时，继承王位，经历艰难而登大宝，因循治安，没有预先防忧，宽厚、仁爱、恭敬、节俭，渐不如初。
English: As for what he said about the misfortune of Tu An Yat, the gist of it was: His Majesty was in his prime, he succeeded to the throne, he experienced hardships and became a great treasure, he followed public security, he did not prevent worries in advance, he was generous, benevolent, respectful, and frugal, and he gradually became inferior to the beginning.

古文：今天下可谓多事矣，海内可谓不宁矣，天道可谓变常矣，民情可谓难保矣，是陛下警省之时，战兢惕厉之日也。
现代文：现在天下问题很多，国内可算是不安宁了，天道可说是反常了，民情可说是难保了，是陛下猛省之时，小心谨戒危机发生之日。
English: At present, there are many problems in the world. The country can be said to be restless, the heavenly way can be said to be abnormal, and the people's situation can be said to be difficult to protect. It is the time for His Majesty to take drastic measures, and be careful to avoid the day of the crisis.

古文：陛下宜卧薪尝胆，奋发悔过，思祖宗创业之难，而今日坠亡之易，于是而修实德，则可以答天意，推至诚，则可以回人心。
现代文：陛下宜卧薪尝胆，奋发悔过，思念祖宗创业的艰难，而今天坠亡之容易。从此实行政德，就可以答谢天意，对百姓诚心诚意，就可以挽回人心。
English: His Majesty should lie down and try his courage, repent hard, and think about the hardships of his ancestors' entrepreneurship, but today it is easy to fall to death. From now on, if you practice administrative virtue, you can thank God, and if you are sincere to the people, you can save people's hearts.

古文：凡土木之劳，声色之好，燕安鸩毒之戒，皆宜痛撤勇改。
现代文：凡是土木的兴建，声色的爱好，饮酒取乐之事，都应勇于痛改。
English: All civil engineering construction, vocal hobbies, and drinking for pleasure should be changed.

古文：有不尽者，亦宜防微杜渐，而禁于未然，黜宫女，节浮费，畏天恤人。
现代文：有未指出的地方，也应防微杜渐，在未发生前就予以制止。废除宫女，节省浮费，敬畏天地，抚恤百姓。
English: There are places that are not pointed out, and it is also necessary to prevent micro-eruptions and stop them before they occur. Abolish concubines, save floating expenses, revere heaven and earth, and support the people.

古文：而陛下乃安焉处之，如天下太平无事时，此所谓根本之祸也。 
现代文：然而陛下还是安然处之，如同天下太平无事时一样，这就是所说的根本之祸。 
English: However, His Majesty is still at peace, as if nothing had happened. This is the fundamental evil.

古文：至若不慎调度，不资群策，不明赏罚，不择将帅，所谓征讨之祸四也。
现代文：至于不慎于调度，不依靠群策群力，不明赏罚，不善于选择将帅，这就是征讨方面的四种大祸。
English: As for being careless in scheduling, not relying on group strategy, unclear rewards and punishments, and not good at selecting generals, these are the four major disasters in recruiting.

古文：其言不明赏罚之祸，略曰： 臣伏见调兵六年，初无纪律之法，又无激劝之宜，将帅因败为功，指虚为实，大小相谩，上下相依，其性情不一，而邀功求赏则同。
现代文：所谓不明赏罚之祸，他说： 臣伏见调兵六年，开始没有规定纪律之法则，又没有激励劝慰的措施，将帅中败而报功，指虚为实，大小相欺骗，上下相依赖，其性情不一，而邀功求赏之心相同，因而有使军队覆没之将，残害民众之将，胆小怕死之将，贪婪之将。
English: Regarding the so-called unknown rewards and punishments, he said: In the first six years of the transfer of troops, there were no rules of discipline, no measures of encouragement and consolation, the commander-in-chief was defeated and rewarded, the false was true, the small was deceived, and the upper and lower were dependent. Their temperaments were different, but the desire to seek rewards was the same. Therefore, there was a leader who would destroy the army, a leader who would destroy the people, a leader who was afraid of death, and a leader who was greedy.

古文：及其面谀游说，反以克复受赏。
现代文：对他们没有惩罚、警戒，军队所到之处，鸡犬抢劫一空，财货抢尽。及其当面奉承，反而受赏。
English: For them, there is no punishment, no warning, and wherever the army goes, the chickens and dogs are robbed, and the goods are robbed. Instead, they are flattered and rewarded.

古文：今克复之地，悉为荒墟，河南提封三千余里，郡县星罗棋布，岁输钱谷数百万计，而今所存者，封丘、延津、登封、偃师三四县而已。
现代文：现在克复的地方，皆为荒墟之地，河南的封地三千余里，郡县星罗棋布，每年税收钱粮以数百万计算，而今天所存的仅封丘、延津、登封、偃师三四个县。
English: The places that are now recovered are all in ruins. Henan has more than 3,000 miles of fiefs, and counties and counties are scattered everywhere. The annual tax money and grain is calculated in millions, and today there are only three or four counties: Fengqiu, Yanjin, Dengfeng, and Shishi.

古文：两淮之北，大河之南，所在萧条。
现代文：两淮之北，大河之南，到处萧条。
English: North of the two Huai, south of the big river, everywhere is depressed.

古文：夫有土有人有财，然后可望军旅不乏，馈饷不竭。今寇敌已至之境，固不忍言，未至之处，尤可寒心，如此而望军旅不乏，馈饷不竭，使天雨粟，地涌金，朝夕存亡且不能保，况以地方有限之费，而供将帅无穷之欲哉！
现代文：众所周知，有土有人有财，然后才可希望军不缺人，粮饷不缺，现在寇敌所到之处，固然不忍心去说它，即使未到之处，尤可寒心，像这样而希望不缺乏军队，不缺粮饷，除非使老天下雨长庄稼，地里涌出金子。如今朝不保夕，何况以地方有限之财力，而去供给将帅无穷之贪欲呢？
English: As we all know, some people have land and some people have wealth. Only then can we hope that there will be no shortage of soldiers and no shortage of grain. Wherever the enemy invades now, of course, we can't bear to say it. Even if we don't get there, we are especially cold-hearted. In this way, we hope that there will be no shortage of troops and no shortage of grain, unless we make it rain and grow crops, and gold will gush out of the ground. Nowadays, it is not safe day and night, let alone using the limited financial resources of the place to supply the endless greed of the generals.

古文：其为自启乱阶，亦已危矣。陛下事佛求福，饭僧消祸，以天寿节而禁屠宰，皆虚名也。
现代文：这就是祸乱的来由。陛下供佛求福，养着僧人祈求消除祸灾，天寿节禁止屠宰，这些都是虚名。
English: This is the reason for the calamity. His Majesty's offering of camels to the Buddha to seek blessings, raising monks to pray for the elimination of calamities, and prohibiting slaughter on the Day of the Dead are all false names.

古文：今天下杀人矣，陛下泰然不理，而曰吾将以是求福，福何自而至哉？
现代文：现在天下已在杀人，陛下泰然不理，而说我将以这样的方式求福，可是福从哪儿来呢？
English: Now that the whole world is killing people, Your Majesty calmly ignores it, and says that I will seek happiness in this way, but where does happiness come from?

古文：颍上之寇，始结白莲，以佛法诱众，终饰威权，以兵抗拒，视其所向，骎骎可畏，其势不至于亡吾社稷、烬吾国家不已也。
现代文：颍州之寇，开始时勾结白莲教，以佛法诱惑众人，终于形成权威，以兵抗拒，观其动向，迅速可畏，其势非亡我国家不可。
English: The invasion of Bozhou, at the beginning, colluded with the White Lotus Religion, tempted everyone with Buddhism, and finally formed an authority, resisted with soldiers, watched its movement, was swift and formidable, and its potential was bound to destroy our country.

古文：堂堂天朝，不思靖乱，而反为阶乱，其祸至惨，其毒至深，其关系至大，有识者为之扼腕，有志者为之痛心，此征讨之祸也。 
现代文：堂堂天朝，不思平乱，反而成祸乱的根源，其祸极惨，其毒极深，关系最大，有识之人为之惋惜，有志之人为之痛心，这就是征讨祸啊。 
English: The emperor does not think of pacifying the chaos, but becomes the root cause of the calamity. Its calamity is extremely tragic, its poison is extremely deep, and the relationship is the greatest. The knowledgeable person is sorry for it, and the motivated person is saddened by it. This is to solicit the calamity.

古文：疏奏，不省。权臣恶其讦直。
现代文：奏疏进呈后，皇帝并没有省悟，权臣讨厌他的鲠直而无法容忍。
English: After the report was submitted, the emperor did not reflect, and the powerful minister hated his straightforwardness and could not tolerate it.

古文：二十一年，除佥山南道肃政廉访司事，至则劾中书参知政事也先不花、枢密院副使脱脱木儿、治书侍御史奴奴弄权误国之罪，又不报。
现代文：二十一年任山南道肃政廉访佥事，到了那里就弹劾中书参知政事也先不花、枢密院副使脱脱木儿、治书侍御史奴奴弄权误国之罪，这些劾奏均没有答复。
English: In the twenty-first year of his appointment, he made a visit to Shannan Province to investigate political corruption, and when he arrived there, he impeached the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, the Vice-Minister of

古文：方是时，孛罗帖木儿驻兵大同，察罕帖木儿驻兵洛阳，而毛贵据山东，势逼京畿，二将玩寇不进，方以争晋、冀为事，构兵相攻，互有胜负。朝廷乃遣也先不花、脱脱木儿、奴奴往解之，既受命，不前进。
现代文：正当此时，孛罗帖木儿驻兵大同，察罕铁木儿驻兵洛阳，而毛贵占据山东，势力向京畿逼近，二将坐视寇贼不进军，正在以争夺晋、冀为其能事，相互交战，互有胜负，朝廷派遣也先不花、脱脱木儿、奴奴前往解劝，接受命令后，又不前进。
English: Just at this time, Miao Luo Timur was stationed in Datong, Chahan Tiemur was stationed in Luoyang, and Mao Gui occupied Shandong, with forces approaching Gyeonggi. The two generals sat back and watched the bandits not march into the army. They were competing for Jin and Hebei, and were fighting with each other, and there were mutual victories and defeats. The imperial court also dispatched soldiers to dissuade them. After receiving the order, they did not advance.

古文：桢又言其 贪懦庸鄙，苟怀自安之计，无忧国致身之忠。
现代文：桢又说他们 贪婪、软弱、昏庸、卑鄙，心怀苟且偷安之计，无忧国献身之忠。
English: He also said that they were greedy, weak, stupid, and despicable, and that they were devout and devoted to the country.

古文：朝廷将使二家释憾，协心讨贼，此国之大事，谓宜风驰电走，而乃迂回退慑，枉道延安以西，绕曲数千里，迟迟而行，使两军日夜仇杀，黎庶肝脑涂地，实此三人之所致也，宜急殛之，以救时危。 
现代文：朝廷要二家消除仇恨，协力讨伐盗贼，这是国家之大事，应风驰电掣般地迅速前去，而他们却迂回退缩，绕道延安以西，绕曲数千里，迟迟而行，使两军日夜仇杀，黎民百姓肝脑涂地，实际是这三个人造成的。应马上杀掉他们，以挽救危险的时局。 
English: The imperial court wanted the two families to eliminate hatred and work together to fight against thieves. This was a matter of national importance, and they should advance swiftly and swiftly. However, they retreated in a roundabout way. They took a detour to the west of Yan'an, circled thousands of miles, and delayed their march. This caused the two armies to fight each other day and night, and the people of Lai to be brainwashed. It was actually caused by these three people. They should be killed immediately to save the dangerous situation.

古文：亦不报。
现代文：这奏疏也无答复。
English: There was no answer to that either.

古文：桢乃慨然叹曰： 天下事不可为矣。 
现代文：桢慨然叹息说 ：天下事不可挽救了。 
English: With a sigh of exasperation, Zou said, "The world is beyond saving."

古文：即辞去，居河中安邑山谷间，结茅仅容膝。有访之者，不复言时事，但对之流涕而已。
现代文：辞职而去，居住河中安邑山间，盖茅屋仅能容膝，有来访问的人，不再谈时事，只是对他们流泪罢了。
English: Resigned and left, living in the middle of the river, in the mountains of Ami, the cottage can only accommodate knees, and those who come to visit, no longer talk about current affairs, but only shed tears for them.

古文：二十四年，孛罗帖木儿犯阙，皇太子出居冀宁，奏除赞善，又除翰林学士，皆不起。
现代文：二十四年，孛罗帖木儿进犯朝廷，皇太子出走冀宁，奏请任桢为赞善，又委为翰林学士，他都不出任。
English: In the twenty-fourth year, Miao Luo Timur attacked the imperial court, the crown prince fled Jining, and he was invited to be appointed as a Zanzan, and he was also appointed as a scholar of Hanlin, but he did not take office.

古文：孔子曰： 君君臣臣父父子子。 
现代文：扩廓帖木儿将辅佐皇太子讨伐孛罗帖木儿，遣使臣传皇太子旨，赐桢上等美酒，并询问时事。
English: Enlarged Timur will assist the crown prince in his crusade against Nero Timur, send envoys to convey the will of the crown prince, give him fine wine, and inquire about current affairs.

古文：今九重在上者如寄，青宫在下者如寄，生民之忧，国家之忧也，可不深思而熟计之哉！ 
现代文：张桢在给扩廓帖木儿的复信中，详细陈述和分析了当前国家形势，提出保君父、保社稷、保人民的希望。
English: In his letter of reply to Zhang Ye, Zhang Ye made a detailed statement and analysis of the current national situation, and put forward the hope of protecting the king and father, protecting the society and protecting the people.

古文：扩廓帖木儿深纳其说，是用事克有成。后三年，卒。
现代文：扩廓帖木儿采纳了他的意见。三年后，张桢去世。
English: Zhang Xi passed away three years later.

古文：归旸归，旸字彦温，汴梁人。
现代文：归旸字彦温，汴梁人。
English: Go back to Yan Yan, Yan Liang.

古文：将生，其母杨氏梦朝日出东山上，有轻云来掩之，故名旸。
现代文：将出生时，母亲梦见朝阳从东山出来，有薄云掩盖，所以取名旸。
English: When he was born, his mother dreamed that the morning sun came out from the East Mountain and was covered by a thin cloud, so he was named Zou.

古文：学无师传，而精敏过人。
现代文：旸学习未经老师传授，而其聪敏才智超过常人。
English: Their learning is untaught, and their intelligence surpasses that of mortals.

古文：登至顺元年进士第，授同知颍州事，鉏奸击强，人不敢以年少易之。
现代文：至顺元年考上进士，授予同知颍州事，去除奸害，打击强人的能力很强，人们不敢因年少而轻视他。
English: In the first year of Shun, he was awarded the title of "Candidate of the Year" and was awarded the title of "Comrade of the Year" by his classmates. He had a strong ability to eliminate corruption and fight against strongmen. People did not dare to despise him because he was young.

古文：山东盐司遣奏差至颍，恃势为不法，旸执以下狱。
现代文：山东盐司奉差至颍州，仗势为非作歹，旸将他捕获投入狱中。
English: Shandong Salt Division was sent to Zhangzhou, the situation was not good, he was captured and put in prison.

古文：时州县奉盐司甚谨，颐指气使，辄奔走之，旸独不为屈。
现代文：当时州县侍奉盐司都很谨慎，要他干什么他就干什么，只有旸不屈服。
English: At that time, all of the prefectural and county officials who served as salt masters were very cautious. They did whatever they wanted to him, but he would not give in.

古文：转大都路儒学提举，未上。
现代文：转任大都路儒学提举，未就任。
English: He was promoted to the post of Metropolitan Confucius, but did not take up the post.

古文：至元五年十一月，杞县人范孟谋不轨，诈为诏使，至河南省中，杀平章月鲁帖木儿、左丞劫烈、廉访使完者不花、总管撒里麻，召官属及去位者，署而用之，以段辅为左丞，使旸北守黄河口。
现代文：至元五年十一月，杞县人范孟图谋不轨，伪称是诏使，到河南省杀平章月鲁帖木儿、左丞劫烈、廉访使完者不花、总管撒里麻，把那些已离职的官属召来，签署使用，以段辅为左丞，使旸北守黄河口，旸坚决不从。
English: In November of the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Fan Mengtu, a man from Min County, plotted to go to Henan Province and kill Ping Zhangyue, Lu Telmu'er, Zuo Rongyi, Zhihuang Rongyi, Zhihuang Rongyi, Zhihuang Rongyi, Zhihuang Rongyi, Zhihuang Rongyi, Zhihuang Rongyi, Zhihuang Rongyi, Zhihuang Rongyi, Zhihuang Rongyi, Zhihuang Rongyi, Zhihuang Rongyi, Zhihuang Rongyi, Zhi

古文：明年，转国子博士，拜监察御史。
现代文：范孟大怒，将他关入狱中，众人不知他们要干什么，都感不安，而旸毫无惧色。
English: Fan Meng flew into a rage and put him in jail. People were unsure of what to do and felt uneasy, but Yao was fearless.

古文：及入谢，台臣奏曰： 此即河南抗贼者也。 
现代文：不久，范孟失败，顺从范孟的人都被办罪，只有归旸得免。第二年，转国子博士，拜为监察御史，进朝廷致谢时，台臣奏禀皇上说： 他就是黄河抵抗贼寇的人。 
English: Soon, Fan Meng failed, and those who obeyed Fan Meng were all punished, but only those who returned were spared. The following year, when Dr. Guo Guozi, who had been turned into a prince, went to the imperial court to thank the emperor for supervising the imperial history, Emperor Taizong said: He is the person who resisted the bandits in the Yellow River.

古文：帝曰： 好事卿宜数为之。 
现代文：帝说 ：对于好事应该多做。 
English: The emperor said, "More should be done for good deeds."

古文：赐以上尊。
现代文：赐予上尊美酒。
English: Bestowed with the honor of fine wine.

古文：已而辞官归，养亲汴上，亲既殁，家食久之。
现代文：不久，辞官归故里，在汴侍奉父母，双亲去世后，在家中住了很久。
English: Not long after, he returned to his hometown, where he served his parents. After his parents passed away, he lived at home for a long time.

古文：至正五年，除佥河南廉访司事，行部西京，以法绳赵王府官属之贪暴者，王三遣使请，不为动。
现代文：至正五年任河南廉访司佥事，巡查西京地方，对赵王府官属中贪暴者绳之以法，王三次派人去说情，不为所动。
English: In the fifth year of Wang Zhao's reign, he appointed Henan Liang as a visiting magistrate, inspected the West Beijing region, and brought the corrupt officials of the Zhao Wang government to justice. Wang sent people to intercede three times, but he was not moved.

古文：宣宁县有杀人者，蔓引数十人，一谳得其情，尽释之。
现代文：宣宁县有杀人者，牵连数十人，经审查得其实情，受牵连者全部释放。
English: In Xuanning County, there were murderers, and dozens of people were implicated. After examination, the facts were verified, and all those implicated were released.

古文：沁州民郭仲玉，为人所杀，有司以蒲察山儿当之，旸察其诬，踪迹得其杀人者，山儿遂不死。
现代文：沁州平民郭仲玉，被人杀害，有司以薄察山儿抵罪，旸得知是诬罪，跟踪索迹侦察得知杀人罪犯，山儿免死。
English: Guo Zhongyu, a civilian in Zhangzhou, was killed by someone, and the police charged him with murder. It was found out that it was a false charge, and the tracing and reconnaissance found out the murderer, and the mountain boy was spared from death.

古文：六年，转佥淮东廉访司事，改宣文阁监书博士，兼经筵译文官。
现代文：六年，转淮东廉访司佥事，改宣文阁监书博士，兼经筵译文官。
English: Six years later, he was transferred to Huadong Liangzhi Jianji, changed to Xuanwen Cabinet Supervisor Doctor, and also became a translator and clerk.

古文：顺江酋长乐孙求内附，请立宣抚司，及置郡县一十三处，旸曰： 古人有言：鞭虽长，不及马腹。
现代文：七年，迁右司都事，顺江酋长乐孙请求归附，请立宣抚司及置郡县一十三处，旸认为 ：古人说过，鞭长莫及。
English: In the seventh year, with the relocation of the Right Division to the capital, Shunjiang chieftain Letsun requested that it be annexed, asking for the establishment of the Propaganda and Guidance Division and the establishment of thirteen counties. He thought: The ancients said that the whip was too long.

古文：使郡县果设，有事不救，则孤来附之意，救之，则罢中国而事外夷，所谓获虚名而受实祸也。 
现代文：假如郡县都设立了，有事不救，就辜负了来归附的意义。救之，就放下了中国的事而去侍奉外夷，徒获虚名而实受祸害。 
English: If counties and counties are established, if they do not save anything, they will fail to live up to the meaning of coming to attach. If they are saved, they will give up China's affairs and go to serve foreign countries, and they will suffer the misfortune of receiving a false name.

古文：与左丞吕思诚抗辨甚力。丞相太平笑曰： 归都事善戆如此，何相抗乃尔邪！
现代文：与左丞吕思诚激烈抗辩，丞相太平笑着说道： 归都事善良憨厚如此，为何如此相抗呀？
English: After a heated argument with the left-hand senator Lv Shicheng, the prime minister Taiping said with a smile: "It's all about being kind and generous. If that's the case, why are they so opposed to each other?"

古文：然其策果将焉出？ 
现代文：然而你将拿出什么良策？ 
English: But what are you going to do about it?

古文：旸曰： 其酋长可授宣抚，勿责其贡赋，使者赐以金帛，遣归足矣。 
现代文：旸说 ：他们的酋长可以授宣抚，不要求他们交纳贡赋。对其使者赐以金银丝绸，遣送回去足够了。 
English: Zou said, "Their chiefs can issue proclamations without requiring them to pay tribute, and it is enough to send back their envoys with gold, silver, and silk."

古文：卒从旸言。
现代文：于是依从旸之言。
English: Therefore, he followed the words of Shun.

古文：京师苦寒，有丐诉丞相马前，丞相索皮服予之，仍核在官所藏皮服之数，悉给贫民。
现代文：京师苦于寒冷，有乞丐在丞相的马前诉苦，丞相要来一件皮服给他，又核实官藏皮服数量，全部给予贫民。
English: The mayor of Beijing was suffering from the cold, and a beggar complained to the prime minister. The prime minister wanted to give him a fur coat, and he verified the number of fur coats the officials had hidden, and gave them all to the poor.

古文：旸曰： 宰相当以广济天下为心，皮服能几何，而欲给之邪！
现代文：旸说 ：宰相之心应当是广救天下之人，皮服能有多少，而用来供给他们？
English: Zou said: The heart of a prime minister should be to save the world. How many leather clothes can be used to supply them?

古文：莫若录寒饥者，稍赈之耳。 
现代文：不如调查饥寒者，赈济他们。 
English: It is better to seek out the hungry and feed them.

古文：丞相悟而止。
现代文：丞相领悟。
English: The prime minister understood.

古文：云南死可伐叛，诏以元帅述律遵道往喻之；未几，命平章政事亦都浑将兵讨之，事久无功。
现代文：云南死可伐反叛，下诏让元帅述律遵道前往说服；不久，命平章政事亦都浑率兵讨伐，虽费时很久却未见功效。
English: Yunnan could fight the rebellion to the death, and issued an edict that the marshal should follow the rules and go to persuade; soon, the commander-in-chief also led the soldiers to fight, although it took a long time but did not see any effect.

古文：二人上疏纷纭，中书欲罪述律，旸曰： 彼事未白，而专罪一人，岂法意乎？
现代文：二人上奏，说法不一，中书要对述律问罪，旸说： 他们的事情未弄明白，而要办一人之罪，岂是法律所应该的么？
English: The two of them began to play, but their accounts differed. The Chinese scribe wanted to find fault with the narrator, saying, "Is it proper for the law to deal with the sin of one person without understanding what happened to them?"

古文：况一谕之而一讨之，彼将何所适从？然亦非使者之罪也。 
现代文：况且一个是前往说服，一个是征讨，他们何所适从，而且也不是使者之罪。 
English: Moreover, one is to go to persuade, one is to solicit, whichever they prefer, and it is not the fault of the messenger.

古文：湖广行省左丞沙班卒，其子沙的方为中书掾，请奔丧，丞相以沙的有兄弟，不许，旸曰： 孝者，人子之同情，以其有兄弟而沮其请，非所以孝治天下也。 
现代文：湖广行省左丞沙班死，其子沙的刚刚任中书掾，请假奔丧，丞相以沙的有兄弟，不许，旸说 ：孝亲，是为人子的共同心情，以他有兄弟而不准假，这不是以孝治天下。 
English: Zuo Zhaopan, the governor of Hukanghang Province, died. His son Zhaoming, who had just been appointed to the post of middle school secretary, asked for leave to attend the funeral. Zhaopan, who had a brother named Zhaopan, was not allowed to attend. Zhaoming said, "Being filial is a common feeling for all human beings. If you have a brother, you are not allowed to take leave. This is not ruling the world with filial piety."

古文：遂从之。
现代文：于是允假。
English: So the midwife followed his advice.

古文：广海猺贼入寇，诏朵儿只班将思播杨元帅军以讨之，旸曰： 易军而将不谙教令，恐不能决胜。
现代文：广海瑶族人民反叛，下诏命朵儿只班率领思播杨元帅的军队讨伐，旸说 ：调换军队而将不熟悉教令，恐怕不能决胜。
English: When the Guanghai Yi people rebelled, the imperial edict ordered Du Er to lead the army of Marshal Shibang Yang in the crusade, saying, "If you change the army and are not familiar with the edict, I'm afraid you can't win a decisive victory."

古文：若命杨就统其众，彼悦于恩命，必能自效，所谓以夷狄攻夷狄，中国之利也。 
现代文：假如命令杨统帅他的部队，他们感于恩命，一定能自动效力，所谓以夷狄攻夷狄，有利于中国。 
English: If Commander Yang orders his troops to march, they will feel obliged to do so and will certainly be able to act automatically. The so-called use of force against force is beneficial to China.

古文：帝不从，后竟无功。
现代文：帝不听，后来果然无功效。
English: The emperor didn't listen, and later it really didn't work.

古文：八年，升左司员外郎。
现代文：八年，升左司员外郎。
English: Eight years later, he was promoted to the position of secretary.

古文：中书用旸言，损河间余盐五万引以裕民。
现代文：中书采用旸的意见，减少河间多征的五万担盐以有利于民。
English: The Chinese version adopts the opinion of Yu to reduce the 50,000 tons of salt that is often levied between rivers in order to benefit the people.

古文：楮币壅不行，廷议出楮币五百万锭易银实内藏，旸复持不可曰： 富商大贾，尽易其钞于私家，小民何利哉！ 
现代文：楮币不能发行流通，朝廷打算拿出楮币五百万锭换银藏入国库，旸又说不可 ：富商大贾，都为自己换钞，对平民有何利益？ 
English: The imperial court intends to take out five million shillings of shillings to exchange for silver to be stored in the national treasury, but it is not possible to issue and circulate shillings. What is the benefit to the common people if rich businessmen exchange banknotes for themselves?

古文：六月，迁参议枢密院事。
现代文：六月迁调参议枢密院事。
English: In June, he was transferred to the Privy Council.

古文：时方国珍未附，诏江浙行省参知政事朵儿只班讨之，一军皆没，而朵儿只班被执，将罪之，旸曰： 将之失利，其罪固当，然所部皆北方步骑，不习水战，是驱之死地耳。
现代文：当时方国珍未归附，皇帝下诏命江浙行省参知政事朵儿只班讨伐，全军覆没，拘捕朵儿只班，朝廷将问罪，旸说 ：将帅战败，当然应该办罪，然而他的部队都是北方步骑兵，不熟悉水战，这等于是驱他们去死。
English: At that time, Fang Guozhen did not accede, and the emperor issued a decree ordering Jiangsu and Zhejiang to go to the province to fight against the government, the whole army was annihilated, and only a small number of people were arrested. The court would ask for a crime, and Zou said: "The general was defeated, of course, he should commit a crime, but his troops were northern infantrymen, unfamiliar with water warfare, which was tantamount to driving them to death."

古文：宜募海滨之民习水利者擒之。 
现代文：应该招募海滨之民熟悉水利的人去擒拿。 
English: People from the coastal areas who are familiar with water conservancy should be recruited to retrieve it.

古文：既而国珍遣人从朵儿只班走京师请降，旸曰： 国珍已败我王师，又拘我王臣，力屈而来，非真降也。
现代文：后来国珍遣人随同朵儿只班去京师请降，旸说： 国珍已战败我王师，又拘留我王臣，他是无力再战了，并非是真降。
English: Later, Guo Zhen sent a person to go to the Beijing division with Dore to ask for a surrender. Zou said: Guo Zhen has defeated my Wang division and detained my Wang minister. He is powerless to fight again. This is not a true surrender.

古文：必讨之以令四方。 
现代文：必须进行讨伐，以号令四方。 
English: There must be a crusade, a rallying cry.

古文：时朝廷方事姑息，卒从其请，后果屡叛，如旸言。
现代文：当时朝廷同意方的请降，后来果然如旸所说，多次叛变。
English: At that time, the imperial court agreed to the surrender of the party, and later, as Zou said, there were many mutinies.

古文：迁御史台都事，俄复参议枢密院事，十二月，升枢密院判官。
现代文：迁御史台都事，不久又任参议枢密院事，十二月，升枢密院判官。
English: He was soon appointed to the Privy Council, and in December he was promoted to the Privy Council.

古文：九年正月，转河西廉访使，未上，改礼部尚书。
现代文：九年正月，转河西廉访使，未上任，改任礼部尚书。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, he was transferred to the Hexi Lian Envoy, and before taking office, he was transferred to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：会开端本堂，皇太子就学，召旸为赞善。
现代文：不久设立端本堂，皇太子就学，召旸为赞善。
English: Soon, the end of the hall was set up, the crown prince went to school, and Zhaojun was praised.

古文：未几，迁翰林直学士、同修国史，仍兼前职。
现代文：不久，转任翰林直学士、同修国史，仍兼前述职务。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the post of Hanlin Zhihuang Baccalaureate, a fellow student of national history, still holding the above-mentioned position.

古文：旸言： 师傅当与皇太子东西相向授书，其属亦以次列坐，虚其中座，以待至尊临幸，不然，则师道不立矣。 
现代文：旸说： 师傅应当与皇太子东西相向授书，其他随从，按等级入位，中间位置空着，以待皇上驾临，否则尊师之道不能建立。 
English: Zou said: The master should confer with the crown prince from east to west, and the other attendants should be placed according to rank, with the middle position vacant, waiting for the emperor to arrive, otherwise the way of respecting the teacher cannot be established.

古文：时众言人人殊，卒从旸议。
现代文：当时众人意见不一，终于依旸的议论。
English: At that time, everyone had different opinions, and finally there was a discussion.

古文：俄以疾辞，帝遣左司郎中赵琏赐白金文绮，不受。
现代文：不久，因病辞职，帝派遣左司郎中赵琏赐白金、丝绸，未受。
English: Not long after, he resigned due to illness, and the emperor dispatched his left-hand man, Zhao Jun, to bring platinum and silk, but he did not receive them.

古文：初，旸在上都时，脱脱自甘州还，且入相，中书参议赵期颐、员外郎李稷谒旸私第，致脱脱之命，属草诏，旸辞曰： 丞相将为伊、周事业，入相之诏，当命词臣视草，今属笔于旸，恐累丞相之贤也。 
现代文：原先，旸在上都时，脱脱从甘州回朝廷，且任宰相，中书参议赵期颐、员外郎李稷，到旸家拜访，转达脱脱之命令，嘱咐他草拟诏书，旸推辞说 ：丞相将为伊、周之业，入朝任宰相的诏书，应当让词臣考虑草拟，现在嘱旸执笔，恐怕有累于丞相的贤能。 
English: Originally, when Zhai was in Shangdu, he escaped from Ganzhou and returned to the imperial court, and was appointed as the prime minister. Zhao Zhisheng, the councillor of the Central Committee, and Li Yan, the foreign minister, visited Zhai's house to convey the order of escape, and ordered him to draft the imperial edict. Zhou said, "The imperial edict that the prime minister will be the career of Yi and Zhou, and enter the imperial court as the prime minister, should be drafted by the courtiers. Now I am writing it, I am afraid it is too much for the prime minister's ability."

古文：期颐曰： 若帝命为之，奈何？ 
现代文：期颐说 ：假如是皇帝命你写，会怎样呢？ 
English: He said, "If you were ordered by the emperor to write, what would happen?"

古文：旸曰： 事理非顺，亦当固辞。 
现代文：旸说： 事理不顺，当然也应该推辞。 
English: Zou said, "Things are not going well, so of course we should decline.

古文：期颐知不可屈，乃已。
现代文：期颐知道旸是不会屈服的，只得作罢了。
English: Knowing that he would not give in, he had no choice but to give up.

古文：十年正月，迁四川行省参知政事，十二年，除刑部尚书，十五年，再除刑部尚书，凡三迁，皆以疾辞。
现代文：十年正月，迁四川行省参知政事，十二年，授予刑部尚书之职，十五年，再授刑部尚书职位，经三次转换，都以病辞退。
English: In the first month of the 10th year, he was transferred to Sichuan to serve as the governor of the province, in the 12th year, he was awarded the post of the secretary of the Department of Criminal Law, and in the 15th year, he was awarded the post of the secretary of the Department of Criminal Law. After three changes, he was dismissed due to illness.

古文：十七年，授集贤学士，兼国子祭酒，使者迫之，旸舆疾至京师，卧于南城不起。时海内多故，旸上三策：一曰振纪纲，二曰选将材，三曰审形势。
现代文：十七年授集贤学士，兼国子祭酒，使臣催他上任，旸抱病登车至京师，病倒于南城，当时国内多事故，旸上疏三策：一是振兴纲纪，二是挑选将才，三是审察形势。
English: In the 17th year of his reign, he was awarded the title of "Bachelor of Merit" and was also given the "National Child Sacrifice Wine," and the envoys urged him to take up the post. He got sick and boarded a train to Beijing Division, and fell ill in Nancheng. At that time, there were many accidents in China. He adopted three measures: one was to revitalize discipline, the second was to select generals, and the third was to examine the situation.

古文：亹亹数千言，时以为老生常谈，不能用。
现代文：长达数千言，当时以为是老生常谈，不能用。
English: It was thousands of words long, and at the time I thought it was a cliché and couldn't be used.

古文：十一月，以集贤学士、资德大夫致仕，给半俸终身，辞不受。
现代文：十一月，以集贤学士、资德大夫辞职隐退，享用终身半俸，推辞未受。
English: In November, he resigned from his position as a scholar and doctor, and retired to enjoy a half-salary for life. His resignation was not accepted.

古文：明年，乞骸骨，侨居弘州，徙蔚州，又徙宣德，皆间关避兵。
现代文：第二年，请求辞官，侨居弘州，后迁蔚州，又迁宣德，都是为了逃避兵灾。
English: In the second year, he asked the dictionary officer to let him live in Hongzhou, and later moved to Ulshu and Xuande, all in order to escape the war.

古文：寻抵大同。及关陕小宁，来居解之夏县。
现代文：不久又抵达大同及关陕小住，又迁到解州之夏县。
English: Soon after, he arrived in Datong and Guanshan to live in a small house, and then moved to Zhouzhou's Xia County.

古文：皇太子出冀宁，强起之，居数月，复还夏县。
现代文：皇太子出巡冀宁，强行起用他，过了几个月又回到夏县。
English: The crown prince went on a tour of Jining, forcibly appointed him to Maru, and after a few months he returned to Xia County.

古文：曹鉴，字克明，宛平人。
现代文：至正二十七年去世，年六十三岁。曹鉴字克明，宛平人。
English: He died at the age of 63 in the 27th year of the Taisho era.

古文：颖悟过人，举止异常儿，既冠，南游，具通《五经》大义。
现代文：聪颖超人，举止不同于一般的儿童。二十岁后，到南方游览，通晓《五经》大义。
English: He is brilliant and superhuman, and his behavior is different from that of an ordinary child. After he turned 20, he went on a tour to the south and became familiar with the Five Classics.

古文：大德五年，用翰林侍讲学士郝彬荐，为镇江淮海书院山长。
现代文：大德五年，经翰林侍讲学士郝彬推荐，任镇江淮海书院山长。
English: In the fifth year of Dade, he was appointed as the president of Zhenjiang Huaihai College after being recommended by Hanlin's attendant, lecturer and bachelor Yu Bin.

古文：十一年，南行台中丞廉恒辟为掾史。
现代文：十一年，南行台中丞廉恒聘为掾史。
English: In the eleventh year of Nanhangdaizhongzheng, Lianheng was appointed as the chief historian.

古文：丁内艰，复起，补掾史，除兴文署。
现代文：母亲去世，服孝期满，授兴文署。命其伴送安南使者，沿途使者向他提出许多疑问，他应答如流。
English: After his mother passed away and his term of filial piety expired, he was appointed by the Korean Cultural Heritage Agency to accompany the Annan envoy. Along the way, the envoy asked him many questions, and he answered them fluently.

古文：命伴送安南使者，沿途问难倡和，应答如响，使者叹服，以为中国有人。
现代文：使者叹服，认为中国有人才。
English: The envoy was impressed and thought that China had talent.

古文：至治二年，授江浙行省左右司员外郎。
现代文：至治二年，授江浙行省左右司员外郎。
English: In the second year of his reign, he was given the title of the left and right secretary of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province.

古文：明年，奉旨括释氏白云宗田，稽检有方，不数月而事集，纤毫无扰。
现代文：第二年，奉旨核查佛教白云宗的田产，由于稽查得法，不到几个月时间，事已完成，对百姓毫无侵扰。
English: In the second year, he was ordered to inspect the farms of the Buddhist Baiyun sect. Since the inspection was legal, it took less than a few months to complete, and there was no intrusion on the people.

古文：泰定七年，迁湖广行省左右司员外郎。
现代文：泰定年间，调任湖广左右司员外郎。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taiding, he was transferred to the post of secretary of the Hukang Left and Right Divisions.

古文：时丞相忽剌歹怙势恣纵，妄为威福，僚属多畏避，鉴遇事徇理辄行，独不为回挠。
现代文：当时的丞相忽剌歹仗势为所欲为，他的下属官员都因害怕而回避，曹鉴遇事遵循事理而行，独不回避。
English: At that time, the prime minister of the time, Qu Rong, did whatever he wanted, and his subordinate officials were afraid and evaded. Cao Jian followed the facts and did not evade.

古文：湖北廉访司举鉴宜居风纪，不报。
现代文：湖北廉访司举荐曹鉴任监察官。但未上报。
English: The Hubei Independent Investigation Department recommended Cao Jian to be appointed as an inspector. However, it was not reported.

古文：天历元年，调江浙财赋府副总管。
现代文：天历元年，调江浙财赋府副总管。
English: In the first year of the calendar, he was transferred to the vice-governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province.

古文：属淮、浙大水，民以灾告，鉴损其赋什六七，势家因而诡免者，鉴核实，谕令首输。
现代文：所属淮、浙地区大水，民众报告灾情，鉴减赋税十之六七，有钱有势之家用诡计获免赋税的，鉴核实之后，下令让他们首先交纳。
English: If there is a big flood in the Huaihe and Zhejiang regions, and the people report the disaster situation, the tax will be reduced by 67%. If the rich and powerful family uses tricks to get tax exemption, after verification, they will be ordered to pay first.

古文：元统二年，升同佥太常礼仪院，鉴习典故，达今古，凡礼乐、度数、名物，罔不周知。
现代文：元统二年，升同佥太常礼仪院，鉴熟悉典故，达古通今，凡礼乐、度数、名物制度，没有不知晓的。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to the Tongzhu Taizhong Rite Academy. He was familiar with the allusions and stories of ancient times. Today, he knows everything about ceremonial music, degrees, and the famous product system.

古文：因集议明宗皇后祔庙事，援礼据经，辩析详明，君子多之。
现代文：因而召集大臣们议论，刚死的明宗皇后附祭于先祖之事，鉴引礼据经，辨析详细明确，君子都称赞他。
English: Therefore, he summoned the ministers to discuss the matter of the recently deceased Mingsong Empress's offering to the ancestors, quoted the etiquette, and made a detailed and clear analysis. The gentlemen all praised him.

古文：至元元年，以中大夫升礼部尚书，俄感疾而卒，年六十五。追封谯郡侯，谥文穆。
现代文：至元元年，由中大夫升礼部尚书，不久，因生病而卒，终年六十五岁，追封谯君侯，谥号文穆。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Shang Shu was promoted from junior doctor to the Ministry of Ceremonies. Soon after, he passed away due to illness. He was sixty-five years old. He was posthumously awarded the title of prince and his posthumous name was Wen Mu.

古文：鉴天性纯孝，亲族贫乏者，周恤恐后。
现代文：鉴天性纯朴孝顺，对亲族中贫困者，接济惟恐太晚。
English: They are simple and filial by nature, and are afraid to help the poor among their relatives until it is too late.

古文：历官三十余年，僦屋以居。
现代文：当官三十多年，仍住着旧屋。
English: Officials for more than thirty years still live in the old house.

古文：殁之日，家无余赀，唯蓄书数千卷，皆鉴手较定。
现代文：逝世时，家中没有积蓄，只有数千卷书，都是经过他亲自校定的。
English: At the time of his death, there were no savings in the family, only thousands of volumes, all of which were calibrated by himself.

古文：鉴为诗赋，尚《骚》、《雅》，作文法西汉，每篇成，学者争相传诵。
现代文：鉴写诗、写赋，崇拜《离骚》、《尔雅》，写文章都效法西汉，每成一篇，学者都争相传诵。
English: In judging and writing poems, in writing endowments, in worshiping "Issao" and "Erya," and in writing articles, they all follow the example of Western Han, and scholars are competing to recite every single article.

古文：有文集若干卷，藏于家。
现代文：家中藏有他的文集若干卷。
English: There are several volumes of his collected works at home.

古文：半载后，因欲合药剂，命取视之，乃有黄金三两杂其中，鉴惊叹曰： 渊伯以我为何如人也！ 
现代文：鉴任湖广员外郎时，有一故旧下属叫顾渊伯，赠送他一包辰砂。鉴随手放进一个小箱子中，半年后因要用辰砂合药，命人取出一看，其中夹杂了三两黄金。鉴惊叹地说 ：渊伯以为我是怎样一个人啊！ 
English: When Jian was appointed as the vice-governor of Hukang, a former subordinate named Gu Yuanbo once presented him with a package of cinnabar. Jian put it into a small box, and half a year later, because he wanted to use cinnabar as a medicine, he ordered someone to take it out. It contained three or two pieces of gold. Jian said in amazement: What kind of person did Yuanbo think I was!

古文：渊伯已殁，鉴呼其子归之。
现代文：渊伯已死，鉴把他的儿子叫来，还给他黄金。
English: Yuan Bo had already died, so Jing called his son and gave him back the gold.

古文：其廉慎不欺如此。
现代文：其廉洁、谨慎到此程度。
English: This is the extent of his integrity and prudence.

