古文：太公望吕尚者，东海上人。
现代文：太公望吕尚，是东海边上的人。
English: Tai Gongwang Lushang is a person on the edge of the East China Sea.

古文：其先祖尝为四岳，佐禹平水土甚有功。
现代文：他的先祖曾做四岳之官，辅佐夏禹治理水，立下很大的功劳。
English: His ancestors once served as officials of the four mountains, assisted Xia Yu in water management, and made great contributions.

古文：虞夏之际封于吕，或封于申，姓姜氏。
现代文：舜、禹时被封在吕，有的被封在申，姓姜。
English: Yu and Yu Shi were sealed in Lv, and some were sealed in Shen, surnamed Jiang.

古文：夏商之时，申、吕或封枝庶子孙，或为庶人，尚其后苗裔也。
现代文：夏、商两代，申、吕这两个地方有的封给旁支子孙，也有的后代沦为平民，吕尚就是他们的后代。
English: Xia and Shang had two generations, while Shen and Lv had two generations. In these two places, some were given to the descendants of Binzhi, and some descendants became commoners. Lv Shang was their descendant.

古文：本姓姜氏，从其封姓，故曰吕尚。
现代文：吕尚本姓姜，因为以其封地之名为姓，所以被叫做吕尚。
English: Lushang's original family name was Jiang. Because his family name was derived from the name of his fief, he was called Lushang.

古文：吕尚盖尝穷困，年老矣，以渔钓奸周西伯。
现代文：吕尚曾经非常，他年老的时候，借钓鱼的机会求见周西伯。
English: When he was very old, Lushang used the opportunity of fishing to meet Zhou Xibe.

古文：西伯将出猎，卜之，曰 所获非龙非彨，非虎非罴，所获霸王之辅 。
现代文：西伯在出外狩猎之前，占卜一卦，卦辞说： 所得猎物非龙非螭，非虎非熊；所得乃是成就霸王之业的辅臣。 
English: Before Xibe went out hunting, he divined a riddle. The riddle said: The prey is not a dragon, not a dragonet, not a tiger, not a bear; the income is an assistant to the achievement of the overlord's business.

古文：于是周西伯猎，果遇太公于渭之阳，与语大说，曰： 自吾先君太公曰 当有圣人适周，周以兴 。
现代文：于是西伯侯便外出打猎，果然在渭河北岸遇到太公，与太公谈论后西伯大喜，说： 早就听我国先君太公说： 定有圣人来周，周会因此兴旺。 
English: As a result, Sibeho went out hunting and met the grand duke on the north bank of the Wei River. After talking with the grand duke, Sibeho was overjoyed and said, "I have long heard our forefather, the grand duke, say, 'There is bound to be a saint coming to Zhou, and Zhou will prosper as a result.'

古文：子真是邪？
现代文：说的就是您吧？
English: You're the one who said that, right?

古文：吾太公望子久矣。 
现代文：我们的太公盼望您已经很久啦。 
English: Our grandfather has been waiting for you for a long time.

古文：故号之曰 太公望 ，载与俱归，立为师。
现代文：所以便称吕尚为 太公望 ，二人一同乘车而归，尊为军师。
English: Therefore, he called Lü Shang "too ambitious," and the two of them rode back together, honoring him as a military strategist.

古文：或曰：太公博闻，尝事纣。
现代文：有人说，太公博学多闻，曾经辅佐商纣王。
English: Some people said that Taigong was well-educated and well-informed, and had once assisted the merchant Shao Wang.

古文：纣无道，去之。
现代文：因为纣王无道，太公就离开了。
English: Because the king had no choice, the grand duke left.

古文：游说诸侯，无所遇，而卒西归周西伯。
现代文：他四处游说列国诸侯，未得知遇之君，最终西行归附周西伯。
English: He lobbied the princes of all countries everywhere, and did not know the prince of the encounter, and eventually went west to join Zhou Xibe.

古文：或曰，吕尚处士，隐海滨。
现代文：有人说，吕尚乃一处士，隐居在海边。
English: Some people say that Lushang is a hermit who lives in seclusion by the sea.

古文：周西伯拘羑里，散宜生、闳夭素知而招吕尚。
现代文：周西伯被纣王囚禁在羑里时，西伯之臣散宜生、闳夭原来就知道吕尚，于是便请他出山。
English: When Zhou Xibe was imprisoned by the king of Yao in Yili, Xibe's vassal, Sanyi, knew Lushan, so he invited him out of the mountain.

古文：吕尚亦曰 吾闻西伯贤，又善养老，盍往焉 。
现代文：吕尚也这样说： 听说西伯贤德，又一贯尊重关心老年人，何不前往？ 
English: Lushang also said this: I heard that Xi Bo Xiande, and always respect and care for the elderly, why not go?

古文：三人者为西伯求美女奇物，献之于纣，以赎西伯。
现代文：此三人为了营救西伯，寻找美女奇宝，献给纣王，以赎取西伯。
English: In order to rescue Sybil, the three of them search for a beautiful treasure, which they offer to the king to ransom Sybil.

古文：西伯得以出，反国。
现代文：西伯因此得以被释放，返回周国。
English: As a result, Xibe was able to be released and returned to Zhou.

古文：言吕尚所以事周虽异，然要之为文武师。
现代文：虽然吕尚归周的传说各异，但大旨都认为他是文王、武王的师辅之臣。
English: Although the legends of Lü Shangguizhou are different, they all agree that he was the tutor and assistant of King Wen and King Wu.

古文：周西伯昌之脱羑里归，与吕尚阴谋修德以倾商政，其事多兵权与奇计，故后世之言兵及周之阴权皆宗太公为本谋。
现代文：周西伯昌从羑里脱身归国后，和吕尚暗中策划如何推行德政，以推翻商朝统治，其中很多是用兵的权谋和奇计，所以后代谈论用兵之道和周朝的隐秘权术的都尊法太公的基本策略。
English: After Zhou Xibeichang escaped from Baoli and returned to China, he and Lu Shang secretly plotted how to implement German politics in order to overthrow the rule of the Shang Dynasty. Many of them were military strategies and stratagems. Therefore, future generations talk about the way of using soldiers and the secret power tactics of the Zhou Dynasty, but they all respect the basic strategy of law and justice.

古文：周西伯政平，及断虞芮之讼，而诗人称西伯受命曰文王。
现代文：周西伯为正清平，尤其在明断虞、芮二国的国土争讼后，被人称道为膺受天命的文王。
English: Zhou Xibo was Zheng Qingping, and especially after the territorial dispute between the two countries was clearly resolved, he was known as the king of literature who received the mandate of heaven.

古文：伐崇、密须、犬夷，大作丰邑。
现代文：西伯又讨伐了崇国、密须和犬夷，大规模建设丰邑。
English: Xibe also fought against Chongguo, Misu and Inui, and carried out large-scale construction of Fengyur.

古文：天下三分，其二归周者，太公之谋计居多。
现代文：天下三分之二的诸侯都归心向周，多半是太公谋划筹策的结果。
English: Two-thirds of the world's lords have been converted to Zhou, mostly as a result of Tai Gong's planning.

古文：文王崩，武王即位。
现代文：文王去世后，武王即位。
English: After the death of King Wen, King Wu ascended the throne.

古文：九年，欲修文王业，东伐以观诸侯集否。
现代文：九年，武王想继续完成文王的大业，东征商纣以观察诸侯是否云集响应。
English: In the ninth year, King Wu wanted to continue to complete the great cause of King Wen, and went to the East for negotiations to observe whether the princes were gathering to respond.

古文：师行，师尚父左杖黄钺，右把白旄以誓，曰： 苍兕ì苍兕，总尔众庶，与尔舟楫，后至者斩！ 
现代文：军队出师之际，被尊称为 师尚父 的吕尚左手拄持黄钺，右手握秉白旄誓师，说： 苍兕苍兕，统领众兵，集结船只，迟者斩首。 
English: On the occasion of the army's departure, Lushang, who was revered as "Teacher Shangfu," held a yellow scepter in his left hand and a white scepter in his right hand. He said: "Heron Heron, lead the soldiers, gather the ships, and behead the latecomers."

古文：遂至盟津。
现代文：于是大军到了盟津。
English: As a result, the large army arrived at Meitsu.

古文：诸侯不期而会者八百诸侯。诸侯皆曰： 纣可伐也。 武王曰： 未可。 
现代文：不召自来的诸侯有八百之多。诸侯都说： 可以征伐商纣了。 武王说： 还不行。 
English: There were as many as eight hundred lords who had not been summoned. The lords all said, "We can conquer the merchants." King Wu said, "Not yet."

古文：还师，与太公作此《太誓》。
现代文：班师而还，与太公同写了《太誓》。
English: In addition to being a teacher, he also co-wrote "The Great Oath" with the Grand Duke.

古文：居二年，纣杀王子比干，囚箕子。
现代文：又过二年，商纣杀死王子比干，囚禁了箕子。
English: Two years later, Shang Zhao killed Prince Bi Gan and imprisoned Zang Zi.

古文：武王将伐纣，卜龟兆，不吉，风雨暴至。
现代文：武王又准备征伐商纣，占卜一卦，龟兆显示不吉利，风雨突至。
English: King Wu is also preparing to conquer the merchants, soothsayers, and diviners. The signs of the turtle are ominous, and the storm is imminent.

古文：群公尽惧，唯太公强之劝武王，武王于是遂行。
现代文：群臣恐惧，只有太公强劝武王进军，武王于是率兵出征。
English: The courtiers were afraid, and only the Grand Duke strongly advised King Wu to march into the army, whereupon King Wu led his troops into battle.

古文：十一年正月甲子，誓于牧野，伐商纣。
现代文：十一年正月甲子日，武王在牧野誓师，进伐商纣。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the year, King Wu swore an oath in Makino and marched into the market.

古文：纣师败绩。
现代文：商纣的军队彻底崩溃。
English: Shangguan's army completely collapsed.

古文：纣反走，登鹿台，遂追斩纣。
现代文：商纣回身逃跑，登上鹿台，于是追兵杀了纣王。
English: Shang Yao turned around and ran away, climbed onto Deer Terrace, whereupon the pursuing soldiers killed Shao Wang.

古文：明日，武王立于社，群公奉明水，卫康叔封布采席，师尚父牵牲，史佚策祝，以告神讨纣之罪。
现代文：第二天，武王立于社坛之上，群臣手捧明水，卫康叔封铺好彩席，师尚父牵来祭祀的牲畜，史佚按照策书祈祷，向神祇禀告讨伐罪恶商纣之事。
English: On the second day, King Wu stood on the altar, the courtiers held the holy water in their hands, Uncle Weikang set up the banquet table, Master Shang brought the sacrificial animals, and Shi Yan prayed according to the prayer book, telling the gods to fight against the evil.

古文：散鹿台之钱，发钜桥之粟，以振贫民。
现代文：散发商纣积聚在鹿台的钱币，发放商纣屯积在钜桥的粮食，用以赈济贫民。
English: Distribute the money accumulated by merchants in Lutetia and distribute the grain accumulated by merchants in Qianqiao to help the poor.

古文：封比干墓，释箕子囚。
现代文：培筑加高比干之墓，释放被囚禁的箕子。
English: Cultivate the tomb of Gao Bi Gang, and release the imprisoned cripple.

古文：迁九鼎，修周政，与天下更始。
现代文：把象征天下最高权力的九鼎迁往周国，修治周朝政务，与天下之人共同开始创造新时代。
English: He moved Jiuding, the symbol of the highest power in the world, to Zhou, governed the Zhou government, and began to create a new era together with the people of the world.

古文：师尚父谋居多。
现代文：上述诸事多半是采用师尚父的谋议。
English: Most of the above-mentioned matters were based on the advice of Master Shangfu.

古文：于是武王已平商而王天下，封师尚父于齐营丘。
现代文：此时武王已平定商纣，成为天下之王，就把齐国营丘封赏给师尚父。
English: At this time, King Wu had settled the dispute and became the king of the world, so he awarded the Qi Guoying Hill to his teacher Shangfu.

古文：东就国，道宿行迟。
现代文：师尚父东去自己的封国，边行边住，速度很慢。
English: Master Shang Fudong went to his own fiefdom, traveling and living at the same time, the speed was very slow.

古文：逆旅之人曰： 吾闻时难得而易失。
现代文：客舍中的人对他说： 我听说时机很难得到却容易失去。
English: The people in the inn said to him, "I have heard that opportunities are hard to come by and easy to lose.

古文：客寝甚安，殆非就国者也。 
现代文：这位客人睡得这样安稳，恐怕不是去封国就任的吧。 
English: This guest is sleeping so soundly, I'm afraid he didn't go to the country to take office.

古文：太公闻之，夜衣而行，犁明至国。
现代文：太公听了此言，连夜穿衣上路，黎明就到达自己的封国。
English: On hearing this, the great-grandfather put on his clothes and set out overnight, arriving at his fief at dawn.

古文：莱侯来伐，与之争营丘。
现代文：正遇莱侯带兵来攻，想与太公争夺营丘。
English: Just then, Lai Hou led an army to attack and wanted to fight for the camp hill with the Grand Duke.

古文：营丘边莱。
现代文：营丘毗邻莱国。
English: Yingqiu is adjacent to Laos.

古文：莱人，夷也，会纣之乱而周初定，未能集远方，是以与太公争国。
现代文：莱人是夷族，趁商纣之乱而周朝刚刚安定，还没有安抚边远地区的时机，因此和太公争夺国土。
English: The Lai people were barbarians. They took advantage of the Shang and Zhou dynasties, which had just been stabilized by the Shang and Zhou dynasties, and did not have the opportunity to pacify the outlying areas. Therefore, they competed with the Taigong for land.

古文：大公至国，修政，因其俗，简其礼，通商工之业，便鱼盐之利，而人民多归齐，齐为大国。
现代文：太公到了自己的封国之后，修明政事，顺其风俗，简化礼仪，开放工商之业，发展渔业盐业优势，因而人民多归附齐国，齐国也成为了大国。
English: After the grand duke came to his vassal state, he clarified the political affairs, followed its customs, simplified the etiquette, opened up the industry and commerce, and developed the advantages of the fishery and salt industry. As a result, most of the people were attached to Qi, and Qi also became a big country.

古文：及周成王少时，管蔡作乱，淮夷畔周，乃使召康公命太公曰： 东至海，西至河，南至穆陵，北至无棣，五侯九伯，实得征之。 
现代文：到周成王年幼即位之时，管叔、蔡叔作乱，淮夷也背叛周朝，成王派召康公命令太公说： 东至大海，西至黄河，南至穆陵，北至无棣，此间五等诸侯，各地官守，如有罪愆，命你讨伐。 
English: When Zhou Cheng Wang ascended the throne at a young age, Guanzhong and Cai Shuzhong made a disturbance, and Huaiyi also betrayed the Zhou Dynasty. Cheng Wang sent Zhao Kang to order Taigong to say: East to the sea, west to the Yellow River, south to the Muling, north to the Muxian, between these five princes, officials from all over the country, if you are guilty, I order you to fight.

古文：齐由此得征伐，为大国。都营丘。
现代文：齐因此可以征讨各国，形成大国、定都营丘。
English: As a result, all countries can be conquered to form a great power and a permanent capital.

古文：盖太公之卒百有余年，子丁公吕伋立。
现代文：太公去世的时候已经一百余岁，他的儿子丁公吕伋继位。
English: At the time of his death, the grand duke was already more than a hundred years old, and his son Ding Gong Lyu Wei succeeded to the throne.

古文：丁公卒，子乙公得立。
现代文：丁公去世，他的儿子乙公得继位。
English: Ding Gong died, and his son, Yi Gong, succeeded to the throne.

古文：乙公卒，子癸公慈母立。
现代文：乙公去世，他的儿子癸公慈母继位。
English: Emperor A died and was succeeded by his son, Emperor Gongzimu.

古文：癸公卒，子哀公不辰立。
现代文：癸公去世，他的儿子哀公不辰继位。
English: Shigong died, and his son Shigong lost his succession.

古文：哀公时，纪侯谮之周，周烹哀公而立其弟静，是为胡公。
现代文：哀公在位的时候，纪侯向周王诬陷哀公，周王用大鼎煮死哀公，而立哀公的弟弟静为齐君，就是胡公。
English: When Aigong was on the throne, Ji Hou slandered Aigong to King Zhou. King Zhou boiled Aigong to death with a large wooden spoon, and set up Aigong's younger brother Jing as Qi Jun, that is, Hu Gong.

古文：胡公徙都薄姑，而当周夷王之时。
现代文：胡公迁都于薄姑，这是周夷王时候的事。
English: Hu Gong moved his capital to Bo Gu, which happened during the reign of King Zhou Yi.

古文：哀公之同母少弟山怨胡公，乃与其党率营丘人袭攻杀胡公而自立，是为献公。
现代文：哀公同母少弟山怨恨胡公，就与自己党徒带领营丘人袭击杀死胡公自立为齐君，就是献公。
English: Lai Gong's younger brother Shan, who shared the same mother, resented Hu Gong, so he and his party members led the camp hill people to attack and kill Hu Gong, and became independent as Qi Jun, that is, dedication.

古文：献公元年，尽逐胡公子，因徙薄姑都，治临菑。
现代文：献公元年，全部驱逐胡公诸子，借机把首都从薄姑迁到临淄。
English: In the year of Xian, all the sons of Hu Gong were expelled, taking the opportunity to move the capital from Bo Gu to Linyi.

古文：九年，献公卒，子武公寿立。
现代文：九年，献公死，其子武公寿继位。
English: Nine years later, he died and was succeeded by his son, Takehisa.

古文：武公九年，周厉王出奔，居彘。
现代文：武公九年，周厉王逃亡，住在彘邑。
English: In the ninth year of King Wukong, King Zhou Li fled and went to live in Yaoyu.

古文：十年，王室乱，大臣行政，号曰 共和 。
现代文：十年，周王室大乱，大臣们主持国政，号称 共和 。
English: Ten years later, the Zhou royal family was in turmoil, and ministers presided over state affairs, known as the Republic.

古文：二十四年，周宣王初立。
现代文：二十四年，周宣王即位。
English: In 24 years, King Zhou Xuan ascended the throne.

古文：二十六年，武公卒，子厉公无忌立。
现代文：二十六年，武公去世，他的儿子厉公无忌继位。
English: Twenty-six years later, King Wu passed away, and his son, King Li, inevitably succeeded to the throne.

古文：厉公暴虐，故胡公子复入齐，齐人欲立之，乃与攻杀厉公。
现代文：厉公残暴肆虐，所以胡公之子又返回齐国，齐人想立胡公之子为君，就一同攻杀厉公。
English: Li Gong's brutality raged, so Hu Gong's son returned to Qi. Qi people wanted to make Hu Gong's son the ruler, so they attacked and killed Li Gong together.

古文：胡公子亦战死。
现代文：胡公的儿子也战死。
English: Hu Gong's son also died in the battle.

古文：齐人乃立厉公子赤为君，是为文公，而诛杀厉公者七十人。
现代文：齐人于是立厉公之子赤为齐君，就是文公，他斩掉七十多个攻杀厉公的人。
English: As a result, the Qi people chose the son of Li Li Gong as Qi Jun, that is, Wengong, who killed more than seventy people who attacked and killed Li Li Gong.

古文：文公十二年卒，子成公脱立。
现代文：文公十二年去世，他的儿子成公脱继位。
English: In the twelfth year of King Wen's reign, he died and was succeeded by his son, King Cheng.

古文：成公九年卒，子庄公购立。
现代文：成公九年去世，他的儿子庄公购继位。
English: He died nine years after his accession to the throne, and his son Zhuang Gongpang succeeded him.

古文：庄公二十四年，犬戎杀幽王，周东徙雒。
现代文：庄公二十四年，犬戎杀死幽王，周王室东迁都到洛邑。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of King Zhuang, Injun Rong killed King You, and the Zhou royal family moved the capital to Luoyang.

古文：秦始列为诸侯。
现代文：秦国开始列位于诸侯。
English: Qin began to be listed as a vassal.

古文：五十六年，晋弑其君昭侯。
现代文：五十六年，晋人杀死他们国君晋昭侯。
English: In fifty-six, the Jin people killed their sovereign, Jin Zhaohou.

古文：六十四年，庄公卒，子厘公禄甫立。
现代文：六十四年，庄公去世，其子釐公禄甫继位。
English: In 64, Prince Zhuang died, and his son, Prince Lu Fu, succeeded to the throne.

古文：厘公九年，鲁隐公初立。
现代文：釐公九年，鲁隐公即位。
English: In the ninth year of King Min's reign, King Luyin ascended the throne.

古文：十九年，鲁桓公弑其兄隐公而自立为君。
现代文：十九年，鲁桓公杀其兄隐公而自立为鲁君。
English: In the 19th year, Lu Kuan killed his brother, Hinkong, and became Lu Jun.

古文：二十五年，北戎伐齐。
现代文：二十五年，北戎攻伐齐国。
English: In the 25th year, the Northern Army invaded Qi Province.

古文：郑使太子忽来救齐，齐欲妻之。
现代文：郑国派太子忽来援救齐国，齐侯想把自己的女儿嫁给他。
English: Zheng Guo suddenly sent the prince to rescue Qi Guo, and Qi Hou wanted to marry his daughter to him.

古文：忽曰： 郑小齐大，非我敌。 
现代文：太子忽说： 郑国小齐国大，我配不上您的女儿。 
English: The prince suddenly said: Zheng Guoqiao Qi Guoda, I am not worthy of your daughter.

古文：遂辞之。
现代文：就谢绝了。
English: I declined.

古文：三十二年，厘公同母弟夷仲年死。
现代文：三十二年，釐公同母弟夷仲年去世。
English: Thirty-two years later, his maternal half-brother, Yi Zhongnian, passed away.

古文：其子曰公孙无知，厘公爱之，令其秩服奉养比太子。
现代文：他的儿子名叫公孙无知，釐公宠爱他，给他的级别车服生活待遇和太子一样。
English: His son's name was Gongsun Wuzhong, and Gonggong doted on him, giving him the same social status as the crown prince.

古文：三十三年，厘公卒，太子诸儿立，是为襄公。
现代文：三十三年，釐公去世，太子诸儿即位，就是襄公。
English: Thirty-three years later, Prince Ye passed away, and Prince Xiang ascended to the throne.

古文：襄公元年，始为太子时，尝与无知斗，及立，绌无知秩服，无知怨。
现代文：襄公元年，襄公原来还是太子时，曾与无知争斗，即位以后，便降低无知的俸禄车马服饰的等级，无知心中十分怨恨。
English: In the year of Xiang, when Xiang Gonglu was still a prince, he fought against ignorance. After he ascended the throne, he lowered the level of ignorance's clothing. Ignorance was very resentful.

古文：四年，鲁桓公与夫人如齐。
现代文：四年，鲁桓公和夫人来到齐国。
English: In four years, Prince Lu Huan and his wife came to Qi Province.

古文：齐襄公故尝私通鲁夫人。
现代文：齐襄公过去曾与鲁夫人私通。
English: In the past, Prince Qixiang had sexual intercourse with Mrs. Lu.

古文：鲁夫人者，襄公女弟也，自厘公时嫁为鲁桓公妇，及桓公来而襄公复通焉。
现代文：鲁夫人是襄公的妹妹，在齐釐公时嫁给鲁桓公做夫人，此次与鲁桓公来齐国又与襄公通奸。
English: Lady Lu is the younger sister of Prince Xiang. She was married to Prince Lu Huan when he was the Prince of Qi. This time, she came to Qi with Prince Lu Huan and committed adultery with Prince Xiang.

古文：鲁桓公知之，怒夫人，夫人以告齐襄公。
现代文：鲁桓公发现此事，怒责夫人，夫人告诉了齐襄公。
English: Lu Huan found out about this and scolded his wife, who then told Qi Xiang.

古文：齐襄公与鲁君饮，醉之，使力士彭生抱上鲁君车，因拉杀鲁桓公，桓公下车则死矣。
现代文：齐襄公宴请鲁桓公，把桓公灌醉，派大力士彭生把鲁桓公抱上车，接着折断桓公的肋骨杀死桓公，桓公下车时就已经死了。
English: Qixiang invited Lu Huan to a public banquet, got Huan drunk, sent the strongman Peng Sheng to carry Lu Huan onto the car, and then broke Huan's ribs to kill Huan. Huan was already dead when he got off the car.

古文：鲁人以为让，而齐襄公杀彭生以谢鲁。
现代文：鲁国人为此责备齐国，齐襄公杀死彭生以向鲁国谢罪赎过。
English: The people of Lu reproached Qi for this, and Prince Qixiang killed Peng Sheng to atone for his sin.

古文：八年，伐纪，纪迁去其邑。
现代文：八年，齐国征伐纪国，纪国被迫迁都。
English: In the eighth year, Qi conquered Ji Province, and Ji Province was forced to move the capital.

古文：十二年，初，襄公使连称、管至父戍葵丘，瓜时而往，及瓜而代。
现代文：十二年，早先襄公派连称、管至父驻守葵丘，约定七月瓜熟时前去，第二年瓜熟时派人去替换他们。
English: Twelve years earlier, Xiang Gong sent a company of soldiers, headed by his father, to guard Kwai Chung. They agreed to go in July, when the melons were ripe, and to send someone to replace them the following year, when the melons were ripe.

古文：往戍一岁，卒瓜时而公弗为发代。
现代文：他们前去驻守一年，瓜熟时期已过襄公仍不派人去替换。
English: They went to stay for a year, and even after the melons were ripe, Xiang Gong still did not send anyone to replace them.

古文：或为请代，公弗许。
现代文：有人在襄公面前请求派人替换他们，襄公不答应。
English: In front of Prince Xiang, someone asked him to send someone to replace them, but Prince Xiang did not agree.

古文：故此二人怒，因公孙无知谋作乱。
现代文：所以二人生气，通过公孙无知策划叛乱。
English: So the two of them got angry and plotted a rebellion through the ignorance of their grandson.

古文：连称有从妹在公宫，无宠，使之间襄公，曰 事成以女为无知夫人 。
现代文：连称有一堂妹在襄公宫内，不被宠幸，就让她暗中监视襄公，对她说： 事成以后让你做公孙无知的夫人。 
English: Lian said that he had a cousin in Prince Xiang's palace, but she was not favored, so he asked her to secretly monitor Prince Xiang and said to her: "Let you be the ignorant wife of the grandson after the matter is settled."

古文：冬十二月，襄公游姑棼，遂猎沛丘。
现代文：冬十二月，襄公到姑棼游玩，又到沛丘打猎。
English: In the winter of December, Prince Xiang went to Guzheng to play, and then to Peiqiu to hunt.

古文：见彘，从者曰 彭生 。
现代文：他看见一只野猪，侍从说 是彭生 。
English: He saw a wild boar, which the waiter said was Peng Sheng.

古文：公怒，射之，彘人立而啼。
现代文：襄公大怒，用箭射去，那只野猪便像人一样站立而叫。
English: Mr. Xiang flew into a rage, shot him with an arrow, and the wild boar stood up like a human and screamed.

古文：公惧，坠车伤足，失屦ù。
现代文：襄公非常害怕，从车上摔下伤了脚，鞋子也掉了。
English: Mr. Xiang was very scared. He fell from the car and hurt his foot. His shoes also fell off.

古文：反而鞭主屦者茀三百。
现代文：回去后把管鞋的名叫 茀 的人鞭打三百下。
English: When he returned, he gave the man, whose name was Cormac, three hundred lashes.

古文：茀出宫。
现代文：茀出宫。
English: He left the palace.

古文：而无知、连称、管至父等闻公伤，乃遂率其众袭宫。
现代文：无知、连称、管至父等人闻知襄公受伤，就带领部众来攻袭襄公宫。
English: Ignorant, jointly named, controlled by father and others, when they heard that Prince Xiang was injured, they led their followers to attack Prince Xiang's palace.

古文：逢主屦茀，茀曰： 且无入惊宫，惊宫未易入也。 
现代文：正好遇到伺候襄公穿鞋的茀，茀说： 先不要进去以免惊动宫中，惊动宫中后就不易再攻进去了。 
English: Just as he met the toad who was waiting for Prince Xiang to put on his shoes, the toad said, "Don't go in first, so as not to alarm the palace. Once you've alarmed the palace, it won't be easy to break in again."

古文：无知弗信，茀示之创，乃信之。
现代文：无知不信此言，茀让他验看自己的伤痕，无知这才相信。
English: Ignorance does not believe this, let him examine his own scars, and ignorance will believe it.

古文：待宫外，令茀先入。
现代文：他们等在宫外，让茀先进去探听。
English: They waited outside the palace and let the baboon go ahead to investigate.

古文：茀先入，即匿襄公户间。
现代文：茀先入后，马上把襄公藏在屋门后。
English: After entering first, she immediately hid Xiang Gong in the back of the door.

古文：良久，无知等恐，遂入宫。
现代文：过了很长时间，无知等人有些害怕，就进宫去。
English: After a long time had passed, Ignorance and the others, a little afraid, went into the palace.

古文：茀反与宫中及公之幸臣攻无知等，不胜，皆死。
现代文：茀反而和宫中之人以及襄公的亲信之臣反攻无知等人，未能得胜，全被杀死。
English: On the other hand, the people in the palace and Prince Xiang's trusted vassals who fought back against Ignorance failed to win and were all killed.

古文：无知入宫，求公不得。
现代文：无知进宫，找不到襄公。
English: Ignorance enters the palace, and the prince is nowhere to be found.

古文：或见人足于户间，发视，乃襄公，遂弑之，而无知自立为齐君。
现代文：有人见屋门下露着人脚，开门一看，门后正是襄公，就杀死襄公，无知自立为齐君。
English: Some people saw human feet exposed under the door of the house, and when they opened the door, they saw that it was Xiang Gong behind the door, so they killed Xiang Gong. Ignorance became Qijun.

古文：桓公元年春，齐君无知游于雍林。
现代文：桓公元年春，齐君无知到雍林游玩。
English: In the spring of the year of Huan, Qi Jun ignorantly went to Yonglin to play.

古文：雍林人尝有怨无知，及其往游，雍林人袭杀无知，告齐大夫曰： 无知弑襄公自立，臣谨行诛。
现代文：雍林有人曾怨恨无知，等到无知去游玩时，雍林人偷袭杀死无知，向齐国大夫宣告说： 无知杀死襄公自立为君，我已将他处死。
English: Some people in Yonglin once resented ignorance. When ignorance went to play, the people of Yonglin made a surprise attack to kill ignorance. They announced to Dr. Qi Guo that: Ignorance killed Xiang Gong for standing up for himself. I have put him to death.

古文：唯大夫更立公子之当立者，唯命是听。 
现代文：请大夫们改立其他公子中该即位的，我唯命是听。 
English: Ask the doctors to nominate one of the other nobles to take the throne, I'm all ears.

古文：初，襄公之醉杀鲁桓公，通其夫人，杀诛数不当，淫于妇人，数欺大臣，群弟恐祸及，故次弟纠奔鲁。其母鲁女也。
现代文：当初，襄公将鲁桓公灌醉杀死，与鲁夫人通奸，还屡屡杀罚不当，沉迷女色，多次欺侮大臣，他的几个弟弟害怕祸患牵连，因此襄公的二弟公子纠逃亡鲁国，他母亲是鲁国之女。
English: At first, Prince Xiang killed Lu Huan in a drunken rage, committed adultery with Lu's wife, repeatedly killed and punished improperly, indulged in womanizing, repeatedly bullied ministers, and several of his younger brothers were afraid of being implicated in the disaster. Therefore, Prince Xiang's second brother Gu fled Lu, and his mother was a daughter of Lu.

古文：管仲、召忽傅之。
现代文：管仲、召忽辅佐他。
English: Guanzhong and Zhaogu assisted him.

古文：次弟小白奔莒，鲍叔傅之。
现代文：襄公的三弟公子小白逃亡莒国，鲍叔牙辅佐他。
English: Prince Xiang's third brother, Prince Xiao Bai, fled the country, and Bao Shuga assisted him.

古文：小白母，卫女也，有宠于厘公。
现代文：小白的母亲是卫国国君的女儿，很得齐釐公宠幸。
English: Xiao Bai's mother was the daughter of Emperor Wei, and she was very lucky to be favored by Emperor Qi.

古文：小白自少好善大夫高傒。
现代文：小白从小与大夫高傒交好。
English: Xiao Bai has been friends with Dr. Gao Yao since childhood.

古文：及雍林人杀无知，议立君，高、国先阴召小白于莒。
现代文：雍林人杀死无知后，大臣们商议立君之事，高氏、国氏抢先暗中从莒国召回小白。
English: After the Yonglin people killed Ignorance, the ministers discussed the matter of enthronement, and Gao and Guo first secretly recalled Xiao Bai from Shandong.

古文：鲁闻无知死，亦发兵送公子纠，而使管仲别将兵遮莒道，射中小白带钩。
现代文：鲁国闻知无知已死，也派兵护送公子纠返齐，并命管仲另带军队遏阻莒国通道，管仲一箭射中小白腰部的衣带钩。
English: Knowing that he was dead, the State of Lu also sent soldiers to escort him back to Qi, and ordered Guanzhong to bring another army to block the passage of Guanzhong, and Guanzhong shot the belt hook at Xiao Bai's waist with an arrow.

古文：小白详死，管仲使人驰报鲁。
现代文：小白假装死了，管仲便派人飞报鲁国。
English: Xiao Bai pretended to be dead, and Guanzhong sent someone to fly to Lu.

古文：鲁送纠者行益迟，六日至齐，则小白已入，高傒立之，是为桓公。
现代文：鲁国护送公子纠的部队速度就放慢了，六天才至齐国，而小白已先入齐国，高傒立其为君，就是桓公。
English: The speed of Lu's escorting troops slowed down, and it took them six days to reach Qi. Xiao Bai had entered Qi first, and Gao Xing stood up for him, that is, Huan Gong.

古文：桓公之中钩，详死以误管仲，已而载温车中驰行，亦有高、国内应，故得先入立，发兵距鲁。
现代文：桓公当时被射中衣带勾之后，装死以迷惑管仲，然后藏在温车中飞速行进，也因为有高氏国氏二大家族为内应，所以能够先入齐国即位，派兵抵御鲁军。
English: At that time, Prince Kan was shot in the middle of his robe and tied with a hook, he pretended to be dead to confuse the authorities, and then hid in a warm car and sped away. Also, because there were two large families of Gao Guo, he was able to first enter Qi and ascend to the throne and send troops to resist the Lu army.

古文：秋，与鲁战于干时，鲁兵败走，齐兵掩绝鲁归道。
现代文：秋天，齐兵与鲁兵在乾时作战，鲁兵败逃，齐兵又切断鲁兵的退路。
English: In autumn, the Qi soldiers and the Lu soldiers fought in the dry season, the Lu soldiers were defeated and fled, and the Qi soldiers cut off the retreat of the Lu soldiers.

古文：齐遗鲁书曰： 子纠兄弟，弗忍诛，请鲁自杀之。
现代文：齐国写信给鲁国说： 子纠是我兄弟，不忍亲手杀他，请鲁国将他杀死。
English: Qi Guo wrote to Lu Guo saying: Zi Guo is my brother, I can't bear to kill him with my own hands, I ask Lu Guo to kill him.

古文：召忽、管仲雠也，请得而甘心醢之。不然，将围鲁。 
现代文：召忽、管仲是我仇敌，我要求活着交给我，让我把他们剁成肉酱才甘心。不然，齐兵要围攻鲁国。 
English: Zhaohui and Guanzhong are my enemies. I demand that they be handed over to me alive, and only then will I be willing to make mincemeat of them. Otherwise, Qi soldiers will lay siege to Lu.

古文：鲁人患之，遂杀子纠于笙渎。召忽自杀，管仲请囚。
现代文：鲁人害怕，就在笙渎杀死子纠。召忽自杀而死，管仲要求囚禁。
English: The people of Lu were afraid, so they killed their son in a brawl. Zhao Hui committed suicide and died, and Guanzhong demanded that he be imprisoned.

古文：桓公之立，发兵攻鲁，心欲杀管仲。
现代文：桓公即位时，派兵攻鲁，本欲杀死管仲。
English: When Emperor Kan ascended the throne, he sent troops to attack Lu, intending to kill Guanzhong.

古文：鲍叔牙曰： 臣幸得从君，君竟以立。
现代文：鲍叔牙说： 我有幸跟从您，您终于成为国君。
English: Bao Shouya said: I am fortunate to follow you, you have finally become the king.

古文：君之尊，臣无以增君。
现代文：您的尊贵地位，我已无法再帮助您提高。
English: Your stature, I can no longer help you raise.

古文：君将治齐，即高傒与叔牙足也。
现代文：您如果只想治理齐国，有高傒和我也就够了。
English: If you only want to govern Qi, Gao Gan and I are enough.

古文：君且欲霸王，非管夷吾不可。
现代文：您如果想成就霸王之业，没有管夷吾不行。
English: If you want to achieve the overlord's career, you can't do it without control.

古文：夷吾所居国国重，不可失也。 
现代文：夷吾所居之国，其国必强，不能失去这个人才。 
English: The country I live in must be strong and cannot lose this talent.

古文：于是桓公从之。
现代文：于是桓公听从此言。
English: As a result, Lord Kan listened to this advice.

古文：乃详为召管仲欲甘心，实欲用之。
现代文：就假装召回管仲以报仇雪恨，实际是想任他为政。
English: He pretended to recall Guanzhong to take revenge, but in fact he wanted to let him govern.

古文：管仲知之，故请往。
现代文：管仲心里明白，所以要求返齐。
English: Guan Zhong understood in his heart, so he asked for a refund.

古文：鲍叔牙迎受管仲，及堂阜而脱桎梏，斋祓而见桓公。
现代文：鲍叔牙迎接管仲，一到齐国境内的堂阜就给管仲除去桎梏，让他斋戒沐浴而见桓公。
English: Bao Shuji greeted Guanzhong, and as soon as he arrived in the Qi territory, Dongfu removed Guanzhong's shackles and allowed him to fast and bathe before seeing Guanzhong.

古文：桓公厚礼以为大夫，任政。
现代文：桓公赏以厚礼任管仲为大夫，主持政务。
English: Emperor Kan rewarded Atsurei by appointing him as a doctor to preside over government affairs.

古文：桓公既得管仲，与鲍叔、隰朋、高傒修齐国政，连五家之兵，设轻重鱼盐之利，以赡贫穷，禄贤能，齐人皆说。
现代文：桓公得到管仲后，与鲍叔、隰朋、高傒共同修治齐国政事，推行以五家为基层单位的兵役制度，开发商业流通、渔业盐业优势，用以赈济贫困的人，奖励贤能之士，齐国人人欢欣。
English: After Huan Gong was given the position of Guanzhong, he worked with Bao Shu, Yu Peng, and Gao Qi to jointly govern Qi, implement the military service system with five families as the basic unit, develop commercial circulation and the advantages of the fishery and salt industry, and use them to help the poor and reward the talented. Everyone in Qi was delighted.

古文：二年，伐灭郯，郯子奔莒。
现代文：桓公二年，齐国征讨并灭掉了郯国，郯国的国君逃奔莒国。
English: In the second year of King Kan, Qi conquered and destroyed Min, and the king of Min fled to Min.

古文：初，桓公亡时，过郯，郯无礼，故伐之。
现代文：早年桓公逃亡的时候，曾经到过郯国，郯国的国君对桓公无礼，因此讨伐它。
English: In the early years, when Prince Kan fled, he had been to Shikoku. The ruler of Shikoku was rude to Prince Kan, so he went to fight him.

古文：五年，伐鲁，鲁将师败。
现代文：五年，征伐鲁国，鲁军眼看失败。
English: In the fifth year, the conquest of the Lu country began, and the Lu army was defeated.

古文：鲁庄公请献遂邑以平，桓公许，与鲁会柯而盟。
现代文：鲁庄公请求献出遂邑来媾和，桓公允诺，与鲁人在柯地盟会。
English: At the request of Lu Zhuang, he offered Suyi to make peace, and Huan promised to make an alliance with Lu people in Keji.

古文：鲁将盟，曹沫以匕首劫桓公于坛上，曰： 反鲁之侵地！ 
现代文：将要盟誓之际，鲁国的曹沫在祭坛上用匕首劫持齐桓公，说： 归还鲁国被侵占的土地！ 
English: On the occasion of taking the oath, Cao Miao of Lu used a dagger to abduct Qi Huan on the altar, saying: Return the occupied land of Lu!

古文：桓公许之。
现代文：桓公答应。
English: Lord Kan agreed.

古文：已而曹沫去匕首，北面就臣位。
现代文：然后曹沫扔掉匕首，回到面向北方的臣子之位。
English: Then Cao Miao threw away the dagger and returned to the position of the vassal facing the north.

古文：桓公后悔，欲无与鲁地而杀曹沫。
现代文：桓公后悔，想不归还鲁国被占领土并杀死曹沫。
English: King Kan regretted not wanting to return the occupied territory of Lu and killed Cao Mo.

古文：管仲曰： 夫劫许之而倍信杀之，愈一小快耳，而弃信于诸侯，失天下之援，不可。 
现代文：管仲说： 如果被劫持时答应了人家的要求，然后又背弃诺言杀死人家，是满足于一件小小的快意之事，而在诸侯中却失去了信义，也就失去了天下人的支持，不能这样做。 
English: Guanzhong said, "If, when you were kidnapped, you agreed to the demands of others, and then reneged on your promise to kill them, you are satisfied with a small pleasure, but you have lost the trust of the princes and the support of the people of the world. You cannot do this.

古文：于是遂与曹沫三败所亡地于鲁。
现代文：桓公于是就把曹沫三次战败所丢的全部领土归还给鲁国。
English: King Kan then returned all the territory lost in the three defeats of Cao Miao to Lu.

古文：诸侯闻之，皆信齐而欲附焉。
现代文：诸侯闻知，都认为齐国守信而愿意归附。
English: All the princes knew that Qi had kept his word and were willing to be annexed.

古文：七年，诸侯会桓公于甄ē，而桓公于是始霸焉。
现代文：七年，诸侯与齐恒公在甄地盟会，齐桓公从此成为天下诸侯的霸主。
English: In the seventh year, the lords and Qi Henggong held a land survey meeting, and Qi Huangong became the overlord of the lords in the world.

古文：十四年，陈厉公子完，号敬仲，来奔齐。
现代文：十四年，陈厉公的儿子陈完，号敬仲，逃亡来到齐国。
English: In the 14th year, Chen Li Gong's son, Chen Gan, fled to Qi Province, calling himself Jing Zhong.

古文：齐桓公欲以为卿，让；于是以为工正。
现代文：齐桓公想任命他为卿，他谦让推辞了；于是让他担任主管百工的工正。
English: Prince Qi Kuan wanted to appoint him as a lord, but he humbly declined; so he made him the foreman in charge of the hundred workers.

古文：田成子常之祖也。
现代文：这就是田成子田常的祖先。
English: This is the ancestor of Nariko Tanaka.

古文：二十三年，山戎伐燕，燕告急于齐。
现代文：二十三年，山戎侵伐燕国，燕向齐国告急。
English: In 233, Shan Rong invaded Yan Guo, Yan Xiang Qi Guo was in a hurry.

古文：齐桓公救燕，遂伐山戎，至于孤竹而还。
现代文：齐桓公派兵救燕，接着讨伐山戎，到达孤竹后才班师。
English: Qi Kuan Gong sent soldiers to save Yan, and then went on a crusade to conquer Mt. Rong, arriving at Lone Bamboo before the division arrived.

古文：燕庄公遂送桓公入齐境。
现代文：燕庄王又送桓公进入齐国境内。
English: King Yanzhuang also sent King Kuan into the territory of Qi.

古文：桓公曰： 非天子，诸侯相送不出境，吾不可以无礼于燕。 
现代文：桓公说： 除了天子，诸侯之间相送不出自己国境，我不能对燕无礼。 
English: King Kan said, "Except for the Son of Heaven, lords cannot give each other their own borders. I cannot be rude to Yan."

古文：于是分沟割燕君所至与燕，命燕君复修召公之政，纳贡于周，如成康之时。
现代文：于是把燕君所至的齐国领土用沟分开送给燕国，让燕君重修召公之政，向周王室进贡，就象周成王、康王时代一样。
English: As a result, the territory of Qi that Yanzhong came to was divided by a ditch and given to Yanzhong, and Yanzhong was allowed to resume public administration and pay tribute to the Zhou royal family, just as in the times of King Zhoucheng and King Kang.

古文：诸侯闻之，皆从齐。
现代文：诸侯闻知后，都服从齐国。
English: After hearing this, all the lords obeyed Qi Guo.

古文：二十七年，鲁愍公母曰哀姜，桓公女弟也。
现代文：二十七年，鲁湣公之母叫哀姜，是齐桓公的妹妹。
English: In the 27th year of King Lu Xun's reign, Lu Xun's mother's name was Ai Jiang, and she was the younger sister of King Qi Kuan.

古文：哀姜淫于鲁公子庆父，庆父弑愍公，哀姜欲立庆父，鲁人更立厘公。
现代文：哀姜与鲁公子庆父私通，庆父杀死湣公，哀姜想立庆父为国君，鲁人改立起釐公。
English: Lai Jiang and Lu Gongzi celebrate his father's adultery, celebrate his father's killing of Shao Gong, Lai Jiang wants to establish his father as the king, Lu people want to establish Shao Gong.

古文：桓公召哀姜，杀之。
现代文：桓公把哀姜召回齐国，杀了哀姜。
English: King Kan called Aikang back to Qi and killed him.

古文：二十八年，卫文公有狄乱，告急于齐。
现代文：二十八年，卫文公被狄人侵伐，向齐国告急。
English: In the 28th year, Weiwen Gong was invaded by the Di people, and he was in a hurry to Qi.

古文：齐率诸侯城楚丘而立卫君。
现代文：齐国率领诸侯在楚丘筑成城池，安置卫君在那里。
English: Qigong led the lords to build a castle in Chuqiu, and placed the guards there.

古文：二十九年，桓公与夫人蔡姬戏船中。
现代文：二十九年，恒公与夫人蔡姬乘船游玩。
English: In 1929, Prince Heng and his wife Cai Ji went on a boat trip.

古文：蔡姬习水，荡公，公惧，止之，不止，出船，怒，归蔡姬，弗绝。
现代文：蔡姬熟悉水性，摇晃船只颠簸桓公。桓公害怕，命她停止，她仍不停，下船之后，桓公恼怒，把蔡姬送回了蔡国，但又不断绝婚姻关系。
English: Cai Ji is familiar with the nature of water, rocking the boat and jolting Huan Gong. Huan Gong was afraid and ordered her to stop, but she still did not stop. After disembarking, Huan Gong was angry and sent Cai Ji back to Cai Guo, but she kept breaking the marriage relationship.

古文：蔡亦怒，嫁其女。
现代文：蔡国的国君也十分生气，就又把蔡姬另嫁给别人。
English: The sovereign of Tsai's country was also very angry, so he married Tsai Ji to someone else.

古文：桓公闻而怒，兴师往伐。
现代文：桓公听说后更加生气，兴兵讨伐蔡国。
English: After hearing this, King Kan became even more angry and raised an army to fight against Tsai.

古文：三十年春，齐桓公率诸侯伐蔡，蔡溃。
现代文：三十年前春，齐桓公率领诸侯讨伐蔡国，蔡国大败。
English: In the spring of 30 years ago, Prince Qi Kuan led the lords to fight against Cai Guo, and Cai Guo was defeated.

古文：遂伐楚。
现代文：桓公又接着伐楚。
English: Kan went on to beat Chu.

古文：楚成王兴师问曰： 何故涉吾地？ 
现代文：楚成王领兵迎敌，问： 为什么进入我的国土？ 
English: Chu Cheng Wang led the troops to meet the enemy and asked: Why did you enter my country?

古文：管仲对曰： 昔召康公命我先君太公曰： 五侯九伯，若实征之，以夹辅周室。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 过去召康公命令我先君太公： 五等诸侯，各地守官，你有权征伐，以辅佐周室。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "In the past, Zhao Kang ordered my predecessor, Jun Taigong, to say, 'Fifth lords, provincial governors, you have the right to invade and support the Zhou court.

古文：赐我先君履，东至海，西至河，南至穆陵，北至无棣ì。
现代文：赐给我先君有权征伐的疆界，东至大海，西至黄河，南至穆陵，北至无棣。
English: Give me the borders that my forefathers had the right to conquer, east to the sea, west to the Yellow River, south to Muling, and north to Muxing.

古文：楚贡包茅不入，王祭不具，是以来责。
现代文：楚国应该进贡的包茅没有进献，导致天子祭祀用品不完备，因此前来问责。
English: The tribute that should have been paid by the State of Chu to Baomao was not paid, which led to the fact that the sacrificial items for the heavenly son were not complete. Therefore, they came to be held accountable.

古文：昭王南征不复，是以来问。 
现代文：从前周昭王南征不归死在南方，因此前来问罪。 
English: The previous Zhou Zhao Wang did not return from the Southern Expedition and died in the south, so he came to ask for punishment.

古文：楚王曰： 贡之不入，有之，寡人罪也，敢不共乎！
现代文：楚王说： 贡品没有进献，确实如此，是我的罪过，今后不敢不奉上。
English: King Chu said, "It is indeed true that no tribute has been offered. It is my fault, and I dare not fail to offer it in the future."

古文：昭王之出不复，君其问之水滨。 
现代文：至于周昭王一去不归，并未在我楚国领土，请您到汉水边上去问罪。 
English: As for Zhou Zhao Wang not returning home, and not being in our Chu territory, please go to the Han River to ask for punishment.

古文：齐师进次于陉。
现代文：齐军继续行进于陉地。
English: The Qi army continued to march on Xizang.

古文：夏，楚王使屈完将兵扞齐，齐师退次召陵。
现代文：夏，楚王命屈完率军抵抗齐军，齐军退驻召陵。
English: In the summer, Chu Wang led the army to resist the Qi army, and the Qi army withdrew to Zhaoling.

古文：桓公矜屈完以其众。
现代文：桓公会见屈完，向他炫耀兵多将广。
English: At the end of the meeting, Kankong showed off to him how many soldiers he had.

古文：屈完曰： 君以道则可；若不，则楚方城以为城，江、汉以为沟，君安能进乎？ 
现代文：屈完说： 您合于正义才能胜利；如果不然，楚国就以方城山为城墙，以长江、汉江为护城河，您如何能攻进来呢？ 
English: Qu finally said: You can only win if you are righteous; if not, Chu will use Fangcheng Mountain as a city wall, and the Yangtze River and the Han River as moats. How can you break in?

古文：乃与屈完盟而去。
现代文：齐桓公就与屈完订立协约，然后领兵撤退了。
English: Prince Qi Huan concluded an agreement with Qu Gan, and then led the troops to retreat.

古文：过陈，陈袁涛涂诈齐，令出东方，觉。
现代文：途径陈国，陈国大夫袁涛塗欺骗桓公，让齐军走东线难行之路，被齐国发觉。
English: Through Chen Guo, Chen Guo's doctor Yuan Tao Tu deceived Huan Gong and let the Qi army take the difficult road of the Eastern Front, which was discovered by Qi Guo.

古文：秋，齐伐陈。
现代文：秋天，齐国讨伐陈国。
English: In the autumn, the Qigu fought against the Chen.

古文：是岁，晋杀太子申生。
现代文：这一年，晋国君杀死了太子申生。
English: That year, Jin Guojun killed Crown Prince Shen Sheng.

古文：三十五年夏，会诸侯于葵丘。
现代文：三十五年夏，桓公与诸侯在葵丘盟会。
English: In the summer of thirty-five, Lord Kan and the lords met at the Kwai Chuk League.

古文：桓公欲许之，管仲曰 不可 ，乃下拜受赐。
现代文：周襄王派宰孔赏赐给桓公祭祀文王武王的福肉、丹彩装饰的弓箭、天子乘用的车乘，而且特许桓公不要下拜谢恩。桓公本想答应，管仲说： 不可 。
English: King Zhou Xiang sent Zaikon to reward Huan Gong with the blessed meat of the sacrificial animal of King Wenwu, the bow and arrow decorated with red and white, and the carriage used by the heavenly son. Moreover, he specially allowed Huan Gong not to bow down in gratitude. Huan Gong originally wanted to agree, but Guanzhong said, "No."

古文：秋，复会诸侯于葵丘，益有骄色。
现代文：桓公于是下拜接受赏物。秋天，再次与诸侯在葵丘盟会，齐桓公愈发面有骄傲之色。
English: Prince Kan therefore bowed down to accept the reward. In the autumn, he met again with the lords in Kwai Chuk, and Prince Qikhan's face became more and more proud.

古文：周使宰孔会。
现代文：周王派宰孔参加盟会。
English: Zhou Wang sent Zaikon to participate in the alliance.

古文：诸侯颇有叛者。
现代文：诸侯见桓公如此也使有些人离心。
English: The princes' meeting with Lord Kan also caused some people to lose heart.

古文：晋侯病，后，遇宰孔。
现代文：晋君病重，上路迟了，正逢宰孔。
English: Jinjun was seriously ill and was late to start his journey.

古文：宰孔曰： 齐侯骄矣，弟无行。 
现代文：宰孔说： 齐桓公骄傲了，尽管不去也没什么关系。 
English: Zai Kong said, "Qi Kuan Gong is proud, but it doesn't matter if he doesn't go.

古文：从之。
现代文：晋君听从此言未去盟会。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：是岁，晋献公卒，里克杀傒齐、卓子，秦穆公以夫人入公子夷吾为晋君。
现代文：此年，晋献公死，里克杀死献公少子奚齐和卓子，秦穆公因为自己夫人是晋公子夷吾的姐姐，所以武力护送夷吾返晋为君。
English: In this year, Jin Xiangguo died, and Rick killed Jin Xiangguo's young sons Yu Qi and Zhuo Zi. Qin Mu Gong, because his wife was the elder sister of Jin Xiangguo, escorted Iguo back to Jin for him.

古文：桓公于是讨晋乱，至高梁，使隰朋立晋君，还。
现代文：桓公也讨伐晋国内之乱，到达高梁地方，派隰朋立起夷吾为晋国君，然后撤军。
English: King Kan also fought against the internal turmoil in Jin, and when he reached the Gaoliang region, he sent his followers to rise up and make Igo the ruler of Jin, and then withdrew his army.

古文：是时周室微，唯齐、楚、秦、晋为强。
现代文：此时周朝王室衰微，天下只有齐、楚、秦、晋四国强盛。
English: At this time, the Zhou royal family was in decline, and only Qi, Chu, Qin, and Jin were strong.

古文：晋初与会，献公死，国内乱。
现代文：晋国的晋献公刚刚参加完盟会，不久便去世了，国内大乱。
English: Jin Xianguo of Jin Province had just participated in the alliance, and he died soon after, causing great turmoil in the country.

古文：秦穆公辟远，不与中国会盟。
现代文：秦穆公处地偏远，不参加中原诸侯的会盟。
English: Qin Mu Gong is located in a remote area and does not participate in the alliance of the Central Plains princes.

古文：楚成王初收荆蛮有之，夷狄自置。
现代文：楚成王刚刚将荆蛮之地占为己有，认为自己是夷狄之邦。
English: King Chu Cheng had just occupied the land of the Jing barbarians as his own and considered himself to be the state of the barbarians.

古文：唯独齐为中国会盟，而桓公能宣其德，故诸侯宾会。
现代文：只有齐国能够召集中原诸侯盟会，齐桓公又充分宣示出其盛德，所以各国诸侯无不宾服，来参加会盟。
English: Only the State of Qi was able to convoke the League of Centralized Former Princely States, and the Prince of Qi and Kuan fully demonstrated his great virtue, so the princes of all countries were all welcome to participate in the League.

古文：于是桓公称曰： 寡人南伐至召陵，望熊山；北伐山戎、离枝、孤竹；西伐大夏，涉流沙；束马悬车登太行，至卑耳山而还。
现代文：因此桓公宣称： 寡人南征至召陵，望到了熊耳山；北伐山戎、离枝、孤竹国；西征大夏，远涉流沙；包缠马蹄，挂牢战车登上太行险道，直达卑耳山才返回。
English: Therefore, Huan Gong declared: Many people went to the south to summon the mausoleum and looked at Mount Xiong'er; in the north, the mountains were cut down, the branches were cut off, and the country was left alone; in the west, it was a great summer, and the sand was carried far away; the horses' hooves were wrapped, and the chariot was fastened to the Taihang Highway, and it did not return until it reached Mount Bi'er.

古文：诸侯莫违寡人。
现代文：诸侯无人违抗寡人。
English: None of the lords resisted.

古文：寡人兵车之会三，乘车之会六，九合诸侯，一匡天下。
现代文：寡人召集兵车盟会三次，乘车盟会六次，会合诸侯九次，匡正天下于一统。
English: Many people have convened the Military Vehicle Association three times, the Passenger Vehicle Association six times, and the Municipalities Association nine times.

古文：昔三代受命，有何以异于此乎？
现代文：过去三代承受天命之时，和我现在又有什么区别？
English: What's the difference between the past three generations when they were born into a predestined life and me now?

古文：吾欲封泰山，禅梁父。 
现代文：我想要封祭泰山，禅祭梁父。 
English: I want to hold a memorial service for Mount Tai and a Zen ceremony for Liang Chih.

古文：管仲固谏，不听；乃说桓公以远方珍怪物至乃得封，桓公乃止。
现代文：管仲极力劝阻，桓公不听从；管仲于是介绍封禅之礼要等远方各种奇珍异物具备才能举行，桓公才作罢。
English: Guanzhong tried his best to dissuade him, but Kuan didn't listen; Guanzhong then introduced the idea that the ceremony of sealing the zen would have to wait until all kinds of strange and rare things from far away had the ability to be held, and Kuan would have to give up.

古文：三十八年，周襄王弟带与戎、翟合谋伐周，齐使管仲平戎于周。
现代文：三十八年，周襄王之弟带与戎人、翟人合谋侵周，齐国派管仲到周去为双方讲和。
English: In the 38th year, Zhou Xiang Wang's younger brother and his entourage conspired with the Eunomians and Huns to invade Zhou, and the State of Qi sent Guan Zhong to Zhou to negotiate peace for both sides.

古文：周欲以上卿礼管仲，管仲顿首曰： 臣陪臣，安敢！ 
现代文：周天子想用上卿之礼接待管仲，管仲叩头而拜说： 我是陪臣，怎么敢受此礼遇！ 
English: Zhou Tianzi wanted to receive Guanzhong with the courtesy of a nobleman. Guanzhong kowtowed and said: I am a vassal, how dare I accept this courtesy!

古文：三让，乃受下卿礼以见。
现代文：谦让再三，才接受以下卿之礼拜见天子。
English: Humble yourself again and again, only to accept the following Lord's Prayer to see the Son of God.

古文：三十九年，周襄王弟带来奔齐。
现代文：三十九年，周襄王之弟王子带逃亡到齐国。
English: In the 39th year, Zhou Xiang Wang's brother, Prince Wu, fled to Qi.

古文：齐使仲孙请王，为带谢。
现代文：齐国派仲孙请求周襄王，替带谢罪。
English: The State of Qi sent Zhongsun to ask King Zhou Xiang to take the blame.

古文：襄王怒，弗听。
现代文：周襄王很生气，不答应。
English: Zhou Xiang Wang was very angry and did not agree.

古文：四十一年，秦穆公虏晋惠公，复归之。
现代文：四十一年，秦穆公俘获晋惠公，不久之后又放他回国。
English: In 1941, Qin Mu Gong was captured by Jin Huigong, but he was soon released and allowed to return to China.

古文：是岁，管仲、隰朋皆卒。
现代文：这一年，管仲、隰朋都去世了。
English: This year, both Guanzhong and Zou Peng passed away.

古文：管仲病，桓公问曰： 群臣谁可相者？ 
现代文：管仲病重之后，齐桓公问他： 你死后群臣之中谁可做相国？ 
English: After Guan Zhong fell seriously ill, Qi Kuan Gong asked him: Who among your vassals can be your consort after your death?

古文：管仲曰： 知臣莫如君。 
现代文：管仲说： 知臣莫如君。 
English: Guanzhong said, "There is no friend like you."

古文：公曰： 易牙如何？ 
现代文：桓公说： 易牙这人怎么样？ 
English: King Kan said, "What about this man Iga?"

古文：对曰： 杀子以适君，非人情，不可。 
现代文：回答说： 他杀死自己的儿子来迎合国君，不合人情，不能任用。 
English: He replied, "He killed his own son to please the king. He is not worthy and cannot be appointed."

古文：公曰： 开方如何？ 
现代文：桓公问： 开方这人怎么样？ 
English: Kan Gong asked: How is Kaifang this person?

古文：对曰： 倍亲以适君，非人情，难近。 
现代文：回答说： 他抛弃双亲来迎合国君，不合人情，不可接近。 
English: He replied, "He abandoned his parents in order to please the sovereign. He is not human and should not be approached."

古文：公曰： 竖刀如何？ 
现代文：桓公说： 竖刀这人怎么样？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "What about this person, the swordsman?

古文：对曰： 自宫以适君，非人情，难亲。 
现代文：回答说： 阉割自己来迎合国君，不合人情，不可亲信。 
English: He replied: "To emasculate oneself to please the sovereign is not human, and cannot be trusted."

古文：管仲死，而桓公不用管仲言，卒近用三子，三子专权。
现代文：管仲死后，桓公不听管仲之言，还是亲近任用这三人，三人专权。
English: After the death of Guanzhong, Kuan Gong did not listen to Guanzhong's words, but still appointed these three people closely, and the three people had exclusive power.

古文：四十二年，戎伐周，周告急于齐。齐令诸侯各发卒戍周。
现代文：四十二年，戎人伐周，周向齐国告急，齐国命各诸侯分别派兵戍卫周王室。
English: In forty-two years, the imperial army attacked Zhou, Zhou was in a hurry to Qi, and Qi ordered all the lords to send soldiers to defend the Zhou royal family.

古文：是岁，晋公子重耳来，桓公妻之。
现代文：此年，晋公子重耳来齐国，齐桓公把本族之女嫁给重耳为妻。
English: In the same year, Prince Jin and Prince Jiu came to Qi, and Prince Qi married a daughter of his own family to Prince Jiu.

古文：四十三年。
现代文：四十三年。
English: Forty-three years.

古文：初，齐桓公之夫人三：曰王姬、徐姬、蔡姬，皆无子。
现代文：当初，齐桓公有三位夫人：分别叫王姬、徐姬、蔡姬，他们都没有生下儿子。
English: At first, Prince Qi Huan had three wives: Wang Ji, Xu Ji, and Cai Ji. None of them gave birth to a son.

古文：桓公好内，多内宠，如夫人者六人，长卫姬，生无诡；少卫姬，生惠公元；郑姬，生孝公昭；葛嬴，生昭公潘；密姬，生懿公商人；宋华子，生公子雍。
现代文：桓公好色，有很多宠爱的妾，其中地位等同于夫人的就有六位，长卫姬，生的无诡；少卫姬，生的惠公元；郑姬，生的孝公昭；葛嬴，生的孝公潘；密姬，生的懿公商人；宋华子，生的公子雍。
English: King Huan was a womanizer and had many favorite concubines. Among them, there were six who had the same status as his wife. They were Chang Wei Ji, born Wu Rong; Shao Wei Ji, born Hui Jia; Zheng Ji, born Xiao Gong Zhao; Ge Wei, born Xiao Gong Pan; Mi Ji, born Shao Gong merchant; Song Huazi, born Gongzi Yong.

古文：桓公与管仲属孝公于宋襄公，以为太子。
现代文：齐桓公和管仲曾把孝公昭托付给宋襄公，立为太子。
English: Prince Qi Huan and Prince Guanzhong once entrusted Prince Xiaogong Zhao to Prince Song Xiang and made him the crown prince.

古文：雍巫有宠于卫共姬，因宦者竖刀以厚献于桓公，亦有宠，桓公许之立无诡。
现代文：易牙受到桓公长卫姬的宠幸，又通过宦者竖刁送给桓公厚礼，所以也受到桓公宠幸，桓公答应易牙立无诡为太子。
English: Iga was favored by King Kan's eldest daughter, Eiki, and also sent a gift to King Kan through a messenger. Therefore, he was also favored by King Kan, and King Kan agreed to make Iga the crown prince.

古文：管仲卒，五公子皆求立。
现代文：管仲死后，五位公子都要求立为太子。
English: After the death of Guanzhong, the five princes all demanded to be crown prince.

古文：冬十月乙亥，齐桓公卒。
现代文：冬十月乙亥日，齐桓公死。
English: In the winter of October, on the day of the second boar, King Qi Huan died.

古文：易牙入，与竖刀因内宠杀群吏，而立公子无诡为君。
现代文：易牙进宫，与竖刀借助宫内宠臣杀死诸大夫，立公子无诡为齐君。
English: Iga entered the palace, and with the help of the palace's favorite vassal, he killed all the doctors with the help of a vertical knife.

古文：太子昭奔宋。
现代文：太子昭逃亡到宋国。
English: Prince Akira fled to Song.

古文：桓公病，五公子各树党争立。
现代文：桓公病重的时候，五位公子各自结党要求立为太子。
English: When Prince Kan was gravely ill, the five princes each formed a party to demand that he be made crown prince.

古文：及桓公卒，遂相攻，以故宫中空，莫敢棺。
现代文：桓公去世后，就互相攻战，以致宫中无人，也没人敢去把桓公装殓入棺。
English: After the death of Prince Kan, they fought against each other, so that no one in the palace, and no one dared to put Prince Kan into the coffin.

古文：桓公尸在床上六十七日，尸虫出于户。
现代文：桓公尸体停在床上六十七天，尸体上生的蛆虫都爬到了门外。
English: Huan Gong's corpse stayed on the bed for sixty-seven days, and the maggots that grew on the corpse crawled out of the door.

古文：十二月乙亥，无诡立，乃棺赴。
现代文：十二月乙亥日，无诡即位，才装棺并向各国报丧。
English: On December 1st, the day he ascended the throne, he had his coffin packed and announced his death to the world.

古文：辛巳夜，敛殡。
现代文：辛巳日夜晚，才穿衣入敛，停柩于堂。
English: On the evening of the third day, he finally got dressed and stopped in the hall.

古文：桓公十有余子，要其后立者五人：无诡立三月死，无谥；次孝公；次昭公；次懿公；次惠公。
现代文：桓公十多个儿子，总计前后五人曾登君位：无诡即位后，过了三个月就死了，没有谥号；接着是孝公；接着是昭公；再接下去是懿公；最后是惠公。
English: There were more than ten sons of King Kan, and a total of five of them ascended to the throne: after he ascended the throne, he died three months later, without a title; followed by Prince Takahito; followed by Prince Akihito; followed by Prince Shoko; and finally Prince Megumi.

古文：孝公元年三月，宋襄公率诸侯兵送齐太子昭而伐齐。
现代文：孝公元年三月，宋襄公率领诸侯军队送齐太子昭归国并攻打齐国。
English: In March of the year of Xiao, Song Xianggong led the armies of the princes to send Qi Prince Zhao back to the country and attack Qi.

古文：齐人恐，杀其君无诡。
现代文：齐人害怕，杀死了他们的国君无诡。
English: The Qi people were afraid, and killed their sovereign without hesitation.

古文：齐人将立太子昭，四公子之徒攻太子，太子走宋，宋遂与齐人四公子战。
现代文：齐人将要立太子昭为齐君时，其余四公子的部众又攻打太子，太子逃到宋国，宋国与齐国四公子的军队作战。
English: When the Qi people were about to establish the Prince Zhao as the Prince of Qi, the remaining four princes attacked the prince again. The prince fled to Song, and Song fought against the army of the four princes of Qi.

古文：五月，宋败齐四公子师而立太子昭，是为齐孝公。
现代文：五月，宋军打败四公子的军队立太子昭为君，就是齐孝公。
English: In May, the Song Army defeated the armies of the four princes and installed Prince Zhao as ruler, that is, Qi Xiaogong.

古文：宋以桓公与管仲属之太子，故来征之。
现代文：宋君是因为桓公和管仲曾经将太子托付给他，所以前来征伐作乱的四公子。
English: Song Jun, because Prince Kan and Guanzhong had entrusted the prince to him, came to conquer the four boys who had caused the disturbance.

古文：以乱故，八月乃葬齐桓公。
现代文：因为战乱，一直到八月才将齐桓公安葬。
English: Because of the war, it took until August to bury Qi Huan's body.

古文：六年春，齐伐宋，以其不同盟于齐也。
现代文：六年春，齐国伐宋，因为宋国不参加在齐国的盟会。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the Song Dynasty was defeated by the Qi Dynasty, because the Song Dynasty did not participate in the alliance in Qi.

古文：夏，宋襄公卒。
现代文：夏，宋襄公去世。
English: In summer, Song Xianggong passed away.

古文：七年，晋文公立。
现代文：七年，晋文公即位。
English: In the seventh year, Emperor Jinwen ascended the throne.

古文：十年，孝公卒，孝公弟潘因卫公子开方杀孝公子而立潘，是为昭公。
现代文：十年，孝公去世，孝公之弟潘让公子开方杀死孝公之子而立潘为君，就是昭公。
English: Ten years later, Takakuko died, Takakuko's brother, Pan, ordered his son to kill Takakuko's son and set up Pan as the ruler, that is, Shoko.

古文：昭公，桓公子也，其母曰葛嬴。
现代文：昭公是桓公的儿子，其母名叫葛嬴。
English: Akihiro is the son of Kanko, and his mother's name is Katsura.

古文：昭公元年，晋文公败楚于城濮，而会诸侯践土，朝周，天子使晋称伯。
现代文：昭公元年，晋文公在城濮大败楚军，召集诸侯在践土盟会，朝见周天子，天子让晋做诸侯的霸主。
English: In the year of Zhao, Prince Jinwen defeated the Chu army in the battle of Chenghuang and summoned the lords in the earth-moving alliance, and met Zhou Tianzi in the morning. Tianzi asked Jin to be the overlord of the lords.

古文：六年，翟侵齐。
现代文：六年，入侵齐国。
English: Six years later, they invaded Qi.

古文：晋文公卒。
现代文：晋文公去世。
English: Prince Jinwen passed away.

古文：秦兵败于殽。
现代文：秦兵在殽地兵败。
English: The Qin soldiers were defeated at the Battle of Longji.

古文：十二年，秦穆公卒。
现代文：十二年，秦穆公去世。
English: In the twelfth year, Qin Mu Gong passed away.

古文：十九年五月，昭公卒，子舍立为齐君。
现代文：十九年五月，昭公死，他的儿子舍被立为齐君。
English: In May of the 19th year, Zhaogong died, and his son She was appointed as Qi Jun.

古文：舍之母无宠于昭公，国人莫畏。
现代文：舍的母亲不受昭公宠爱，所以齐国人都不怕他。
English: Xie's mother was not favored by Zhaogong, so the people of Qi were not afraid of him.

古文：昭公之弟商人以桓公死争立而不得，阴交贤士，附爱百姓，百姓说。
现代文：昭公的弟弟商人当年因为桓公死后未能争立为君，暗中结交贤士，抚恤存爱百姓，所以很受百姓爱戴。
English: Akimoto's younger brother, a merchant, was loved by the people that year because he was unable to compete for the throne after the death of Prince Kan. He secretly made friends with sages, received their patronage and loved the people.

古文：及昭公卒，子舍立，孤弱，即与众十月即墓上弑齐君舍，而商人自立，是为懿公。
现代文：昭公去世后，他的儿子舍继位，势单力薄，商人就与众人于十月在昭公坟前杀死齐君舍，商人自立为君，就是懿公。
English: After the death of Zhaogong, his son Xie succeeded to the throne, and the situation was weak. The merchant and the others killed Qijun Xie in October in front of Zhaogong's grave. The merchant himself became the ruler, that is, Zhaogong.

古文：懿公，桓公子也，其母曰密姬。
现代文：懿公，是桓公的儿子，他的母亲名叫密姬。
English: Shoko is the son of Kanoko, and his mother's name is Mikichi.

古文：懿公四年春，初，懿公为公子时，与丙戎之父猎，争获不胜。及即位，断丙戎父足，而使丙戎仆。
现代文：懿公四年春，当初，懿公还是公子的时候，与丙戎的父亲一同打猎，互相争夺猎物，懿公未争到，即位以后，懿公斩断丙戎父亲的脚，又让丙戎为自己驾车。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of King Gong's reign, when Gong Gong was still a young man, Gong Gong went hunting with Gong Rong's father and competed with each other for prey. Gong Gong Gong did not compete, but after the enthronement, Gong Gong cut off Gong Rong's father's foot and let Gong Rong drive the car for himself.

古文：庸职之妻好，公内之宫，使庸职骖乘。
现代文：庸职的妻子很美，懿公就将她抢入宫中，还让庸职做自己的陪乘。
English: The commoner's wife was very beautiful, so the lord of the castle took her into the palace and let the commoner act as his escort.

古文：五月，懿公游于申池，二人浴，戏。职曰： 断足子！ 
现代文：五月，懿公在申池游玩，丙戎和庸职洗澡时互相开玩笑。
English: In May, Xing Gong went to play in Shenchi Pond, and Bong Rong and Yang Rong joked with each other while taking a bath.

古文：戎曰： 夺妻者！ 
现代文：庸职说丙戎是 砍脚人的儿子，丙戎说庸职是 被人夺妻的丈夫 。
English: Yongbok said that Heungbok was the son of a man who cut off his foot, and Yongbok said that Heungbok was a husband whose wife had been taken from him.

古文：二人俱病此言，乃怨。
现代文：两人都为这些话感到耻辱，共同怨恨懿公。
English: Both of them felt humiliated by these words, and they shared a common grudge against Xing Gong.

古文：谋与公游竹中，二人弑懿公车上，弃竹中而亡去。
现代文：于是他们两个人谋划懿公到竹林中去游玩，二人在车上把懿公杀死，把尸体抛在竹林中逃跑。
English: So the two of them plotted to lure Zou Gong into the bamboo forest to play. They killed Zou Gong in the car and left his body in the bamboo forest to escape.

古文：懿公之立，骄，民不附。
现代文：懿公即位后，为人骄横，百姓都不归附他。
English: After the enthronement of the Duke of Xing, he was arrogant, and the people did not belong to him.

古文：齐人废其子而迎公子元于卫，立之，是为惠公。
现代文：齐国人废黜懿公的儿子而从卫国迎接公子元回齐，立为国君，就是惠公。
English: When the people of Qi deposed the son of the dethroned prince and welcomed the prince Yuan Hui from the defense of the country and established him as the ruler of the country, it was Huigong.

古文：惠公，桓公子也，其母卫女，曰少卫姬，避齐乱，故在卫。
现代文：惠公，是桓公之子。他的母亲是卫国之女，名叫少卫姬，因躲避齐国内乱，所以逃往卫国。
English: Huigong was the son of Prince Huan. His mother was a daughter of Emperor Wei, named Shao Wei Ji, who fled to Emperor Wei to escape the civil war in Qi.

古文：惠公二年，长翟来，王子城父攻杀之，埋之于北门。
现代文：惠公二年，长翟来齐，王子城父攻杀长翟，把他埋在北门。
English: In the second year of Emperor Huigong's reign, Nagatoro came to a stalemate. The prince's father attacked and killed Nagatoro and buried him at the north gate.

古文：晋赵穿弑其君灵公。
现代文：晋国大夫赵穿杀死国君晋灵公。
English: The Jin state doctor Zhao Zang killed the prince Jin Linggong.

古文：十年，惠公卒，子顷公无野立。
现代文：十年，惠公死，其子顷公无野继位。
English: Ten years later, Huigong died, and his son ascended to the throne.

古文：初，崔杼有宠于惠公，惠公卒，高、国畏其逼也，逐之，崔杼奔卫。
现代文：当初，崔杼曾得到惠公宠幸，等到惠公死后，高氏、国氏怕受他胁迫，把崔杼驱逐出国，崔杼逃到卫国。
English: At first, Choe Hee was favored by King Huigong. After King Huigong's death, the Gao and Guo clans, afraid of being coerced by him, expelled Choe Hee from the country, and Choe Hee fled to the north of the country.

古文：顷公元年，楚庄王强，伐陈；二年，围郑，郑伯降，已复国郑伯。
现代文：顷公元年，楚庄王强大起来，征伐陈国；二年，楚国围攻郑国，郑伯投降，不久后又让郑伯复国。
English: In the first year of the Common Era, the king of Chu Zhuang became powerful and conquered the State of Chen; in the second year, the State of Chu besieged the State of Zheng, Zheng Bo surrendered, and soon after, Zheng Bo was allowed to recover the country.

古文：六年春，晋使郄克于齐，齐使夫人帷中而观之。
现代文：六年春，晋国派郤克出使齐国，齐顷公让他的母亲坐在帷幕中观看。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the State of Jin sent an envoy to the State of Qi, and the Prince of Qi let his mother sit in the curtain to watch the parade.

古文：郄克上，夫人笑之。
现代文：郤克上阶，夫人看到他是个驼背，便笑话他。
English: As he climbed the stairs, his wife saw that he was a hunchback and laughed at him.

古文：郄克曰： 不是报，不复涉河！ 
现代文：郤克说： 此辱不报，誓不再渡黄河！ 
English: Yan Ke said, "I won't report this humiliation. I swear I won't cross the Yellow River again!"

古文：归，请伐齐，晋侯弗许。
现代文：回国后，请求晋君伐齐，晋君不答应。
English: After returning to China, he asked Jinjun to make war with him, but Jinjun did not agree.

古文：齐使至晋，郄克执齐使者四人河内，杀之。
现代文：齐国的使者到了晋国，郤克在河内捉住齐国使者四人，将他们全部杀死。
English: The envoys from Qi arrived in Jin, and Yan Ke caught the four envoys from Qi in Hanoi and killed them all.

古文：八年。晋伐齐，齐以公子强质晋，晋兵去。
现代文：八年，晋国伐齐，齐国让公子强到晋国做人质，晋军才离去。
English: Eight years later, the Jin army was defeated in the Battle of Jin, and the Jin army only left after the Qi army allowed Prince Qiang to go to Jin as a hostage.

古文：十年春，齐伐鲁、卫。
现代文：十年春，齐国征伐鲁国、卫国。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, Qi conquered Lu and Wei.

古文：鲁、卫大夫如晋请师，皆因郄克。
现代文：鲁、卫二国大夫到晋国求援，都是通过郤克。
English: Dr. Lu and Dr. Wei both went to Jin Province to ask for help, and both of them went through Zengke.

古文：晋使郄克以车八百乘为中军将，士燮将上军，栾书将下军，以救鲁、卫，伐齐。
现代文：晋国派郤克率领战车八百乘，做中军之将，士燮率领上军，栾书率领下军，去援救鲁国和卫国，攻打齐国。
English: Jin sent Yan Ke to lead the 800 cavalry chariots to be the commander of the Chinese army, Shi Yan to lead the upper army, and Jishu to lead the lower army, to rescue Lu and defend the country, and to attack Qi.

古文：六月壬申，与齐侯兵合靡笄下。
现代文：六月壬申日，晋军与齐军在靡笄山下交兵。
English: On Jinshin Day in June, the Jin and Qi armies clashed at the foot of Mt. Meili.

古文：癸酉，陈于鞍。
现代文：癸西日，两军在鞍地排列成阵。
English: On the day of Shaanxi, the two armies lined up in the saddle.

古文：逄丑父为齐顷公右。
现代文：逄丑父做齐顷公的车右武士。
English: His ugly father was a right-hand samurai.

古文：顷公曰： 驰之，破晋军会食。 
现代文：顷公说： 冲上去，击破晋军后会餐。 
English: Hao Gong said: Rush up, break through the Jin army, and then have a meal.

古文：射伤郄克，流血至履。
现代文：齐国射伤郤克，血流到脚。
English: Qi Guo shot and wounded Yan Ke, blood flowed to his feet.

古文：克欲还入壁，其御曰： 我始入，再伤，不敢言疾，恐惧士卒。愿子忍之。 遂复战。
现代文：郤克想退回营垒，他战车的驭手说： 我从进入战斗后，已两次负伤，我不敢说疼痛，因为害怕使士卒恐惧，希望您忍痛继续战斗。 
English: The driver of his chariot said: I have been wounded twice since I entered the battle. I dare not say pain, for fear of frightening the soldiers. I hope you will continue to fight with patience.

古文：战，齐急，丑父恐齐侯得，乃易处，顷公为右，车絓于木而止。
现代文：于是郤克又投入战斗。战斗进行中，齐军形势危急，逄丑父怕齐顷公被活捉，就互相交换了位置，顷公成为车右武士，战车绊在树上抛锚。
English: During the battle, the situation of the Qi army was critical, and the ugly father was afraid that Qi Haogong would be captured alive, so they exchanged positions with each other. Haogong became the right-hand knight of the chariot, and the chariot stumbled and broke anchor on the tree.

古文：晋小将韩厥伏齐侯车前，曰 寡君使臣救鲁、卫 ，戏之。
现代文：晋国小将韩厥拜伏在齐顷公战车之前，说： 我们晋君派我来救援鲁、卫。 
English: Han Jue, a junior general of the Jin Dynasty, prostrated himself in front of Qi He's official chariot and said, "We, the Jin Dynasty, sent me to rescue Lu and Wei.

古文：丑父使顷公下取饮，因得亡，脱去，入其军。
现代文：他这是在讥讽齐侯。丑父装成顷公，让装成车右武士的顷公下车取水来喝，顷公借此得以逃脱，跑回齐军阵中。
English: He was mocking Qi Hou. Ugly father pretended to be Hao Gong, and let Hao Gong, who pretended to be a right-handed samurai, get out of the car to get water to drink. Hao Gong took advantage of this to escape and ran back to the Qi army.

古文：晋郄克欲杀丑父。丑父曰： 代君死而见僇，后人臣无忠其君者矣。 
现代文：晋国的郤克要杀丑父，丑父说： 我替国君死而被杀，以后为人臣子的就不会有忠于国君的人了。 
English: Zhang Ke of Jin wanted to kill Ugly Father. Ugly Father said, "I died for the sovereign and was killed. From now on, as a subject, there will be no one loyal to the sovereign."

古文：克舍之，丑父遂得亡归齐。
现代文：郤克就放了他，丑父于是能逃归齐军。
English: Yan Ke released him, and Ugly Father was able to escape to the Qi army.

古文：于是晋军追齐至马陵。
现代文：晋军追赶齐军直到马陵。
English: The Jin army chased the Qi army all the way to Maling.

古文：齐侯请以宝器谢，不听；必得笑克者萧桐叔子，令齐东亩。
现代文：齐顷公请求献上宝器谢罪，郤克不答应，一定要得到耻笑郤克的萧桐叔子，还命令齐国把田垅一律改成东西方向。
English: Qigong requested to present a treasure to express his gratitude, but Yan Ke did not agree. He had to get Xiao Tong, the uncle of the infamous Yan Ke. He also ordered Qigong to change the direction of the fields to the east and west.

古文：对曰： 叔子，齐君母。
现代文：齐人回答说： 萧桐叔子，是齐顷公的母亲。
English: Qi Ren replied, "Uncle Xiao Tong is the mother of Grand Duke Qi He.

古文：齐君母亦犹晋君母，子安置之？
现代文：齐君的母亲就犹如晋君的母亲一样地位，您得到她打算怎么处置她？
English: Qi's mother is in the same position as Jin's mother. If you get her, what are you going to do with her?

古文：且子以义伐而以暴为后，其可乎？ 
现代文：而且您是以正义之师伐齐，却以暴虐无礼来结束，难道可以这样做吗？ 
English: And you start out as a champion of justice and end up as a bully, is that acceptable?

古文：于是乃许，令反鲁、卫之侵地。
现代文：于是郤克答应了他们，只让齐国归还侵占的鲁、卫二国的领土。
English: Therefore, Yan Ke agreed to them, only allowing Qi to return the occupied territories of Lu and Wei.

古文：十一年，晋初置六卿，赏鞍之功。
现代文：十一年，晋开始设置六卿，用以封赏鞍地战争中的有功人员。
English: In the eleventh year of the Jin Dynasty, the Six Lords were established to reward meritorious personnel in the Saddle War.

古文：齐顷公朝晋，欲尊王晋景公，晋景公不敢受，乃归。
现代文：齐顷公朝见晋君，想用朝见天子的礼节拜见晋景公，晋景公不敢承受，齐君乃回国。
English: Qigong met Jinjun in the morning, and wanted to use the etiquette of meeting the emperor in the morning to meet Jinjing. Jinjing could not bear it, and Qigun returned home.

古文：归而顷公弛苑囿，薄赋敛，振孤问疾，虚积聚以救民，民亦大说。
现代文：回国后顷公开放自己游猎的园林，减轻赋税，赈济孤寡吊问残疾，拿出国家积蓄来解救人民，人民也十分高兴。
English: After returning to the country, he immediately opened his hunting garden, reduced taxes, helped the poor and disabled, and took out the national savings to save the people. The people were also very happy.

古文：厚礼诸侯。
现代文：齐顷公还给诸侯厚礼。
English: Prince Qi He returned the courtesy to the lords.

古文：竟顷公卒，百姓附，诸侯不犯。
现代文：直到顷公去世，百姓归附，诸侯没有侵犯齐国的。
English: The lords did not encroach on the territory of Qi until the death of Emperor He.

古文：十七年，顷公卒，子灵公环立。
现代文：十七年，顷公死，其子灵公环继位。
English: Seventeen years later, he died suddenly and was succeeded by his son, Ling Gonghuan.

古文：灵公九年，晋栾书弑其君厉公。
现代文：灵公九年，晋大夫栾书杀了他的国君晋厉公。
English: In the ninth year of Linggong, Jin doctor Xinshu killed his sovereign, Jin Liguo.

古文：十年，晋悼公伐齐，齐令公子光质晋。
现代文：十年，晋悼公讨伐齐国，齐侯让公子光到晋国做人质。
English: Ten years later, Jin mourned the death of the prince who fought against Qi, and Qi allowed the prince to go to Jin as a hostage.

古文：十九年，立子光为太子，高厚傅之，令会诸侯盟于钟离。
现代文：十九年，齐侯立公子光为太子，让高厚辅佐他，派他到钟离参加诸侯盟会。
English: In the 19th year, the prince of Qihou became the crown prince. Gao Hou assisted him and sent him to Zhongli to participate in the League of Princes.

古文：二十七年，晋使中行献子伐齐。
现代文：二十七年，晋国派中行献子攻打齐国。
English: In the 27th year, Jin sent Zhongxing to attack Qi.

古文：齐师败，灵公走入临菑。
现代文：齐军战败，灵公逃到了临淄城。
English: The Qi army was defeated, and Ling Gong fled to Linyi City.

古文：晏婴止灵公，灵公弗从。
现代文：晏婴劝阻灵公不可逃走，灵公不听。
English: The baby egret advised the spirit lord not to run away, but the spirit lord did not listen.

古文：曰： 君亦无勇矣！ 
现代文：晏子说： 我们国君太没有勇气了。 
English: The cripple said, "Our sovereign has no courage."

古文：晋兵遂围临菑，临菑城守不敢出，晋焚郭中而去。
现代文：晋兵合围临淄，齐人守内城不敢出击，晋军把外城内烧光后撤兵离去。
English: Jin soldiers encircled Linyi, Qi people guarding the inner city did not dare to attack, Jin troops burned out the outer city and withdrew.

古文：二十八年，初，灵公取鲁女，生子光，以为太子。
现代文：二十八年，当初，灵公娶鲁国之女，生下儿子光，立为太子。
English: In 28 years, at the beginning, Ling Gong married the daughter of Lu, gave birth to a son, Guang, and became the crown prince.

古文：仲姬，戎姬。
现代文：后又娶仲姬、戎姬。
English: Later, he married Nakahime and Ebisuhime.

古文：戎姬嬖，仲姬生子牙，属之戎姬。
现代文：戎姬受宠，仲姬生儿子名叫牙，托付给戎姬抚养。
English: Eunji was favored, and her son, whose name was Toa, was entrusted to Eunji to raise.

古文：戎姬请以为太子，公许之。
现代文：戎姬请求立牙为太子，灵公答应了。
English: Rong Ji asked Ling Gong to make him crown prince, and Ling Gong agreed.

古文：仲姬曰： 不可。
现代文：仲姬说： 不行。
English: Nakaji said, "No, I can't."

古文：光之立，列于诸侯矣，今无故废之，君必悔之。 
现代文：光立为太子，已经名列诸侯，现在无故废黜他，您必定会后悔。 
English: Ever since he was crowned crown prince, he has been ranked as a vassal lord. If you depose him now without reason, you will surely regret it.

古文：公曰： 在我耳。 
现代文：灵公说： 废立全在于我。 
English: Ling Gong said, "It's all up to me whether or not to stand up.

古文：遂东太子光，使高厚傅牙为太子。
现代文：于是把太子光迁往东部，让高厚辅佐牙为太子。
English: As a result, the crown prince was moved to the east, and Gao Hou Fu Sa'a became the crown prince.

古文：灵公疾，崔杼迎故太子光而立之，是为庄公。
现代文：灵公患病，崔杼迎接原来的太子光立为国君，就是庄公。
English: When Ling Gong fell ill, Cui Yao welcomed the former crown prince Guang Li as the sovereign, that is, Zhuang Gong.

古文：庄公杀戎姬。
现代文：庄公杀死戎姬。
English: Zhuangong killed Rongji.

古文：五月壬辰，灵公卒，庄公即位，执太子牙于句窦之丘，杀之。
现代文：五月壬辰日，灵公死，庄公即位，在句窦丘捉住太子牙杀死。
English: On Imjin Day in May, Ling Gong died and Zhuang Gong ascended the throne. He caught the crown prince and killed him.

古文：八月，崔杼杀高厚。
现代文：八月，崔杼杀死高厚。
English: In August, Choe Son killed Gao Hou.

古文：晋闻齐乱，伐齐，至高唐。
现代文：晋国闻知齐国内乱，伐齐，到达高唐。
English: In Jin, Wenzhi and Qi had a civil war and fought against each other until they reached Gaotang.

古文：庄公三年，晋大夫栾盈奔齐，庄公厚客待之。
现代文：庄公三年，晋国大夫栾盈逃亡到齐国，庄公待以隆重客礼。
English: In the third year of Zhuang Gong's reign, the governor of Jin fled to Qi. Zhuang Gong received him with a grand reception.

古文：晏婴、田文子谏，公弗听。
现代文：晏婴、田文子极力劝阻，庄公不听。
English: Chuanying and Tianwenzi tried their best to dissuade him, but Zhuang didn't listen.

古文：四年，齐庄公使栾盈间入晋曲沃为内应，以兵随之，上太行，入孟门。
现代文：四年，齐庄公派栾盈秘密进入曲沃做齐国内应，齐国大兵随后，上太行山，进入孟门关口。
English: In four years, Qizhuang Public Security sent Zou Ying to secretly enter Quwo to deal with the internal affairs of Qizhou, and the soldiers of the State of Qizhou then went to Taihang Mountain and entered Mengmen Pass.

古文：栾盈败，齐兵还，取朝歌。
现代文：栾盈败露，齐军撤军回国，夺取了晋国的朝歌城。
English: Shanying was defeated, the Qi army withdrew and returned to the country, and captured the morning song city of Jin Province.

古文：六年，初，棠公妻好，棠公死，崔杼取之。
现代文：六年，当初，棠公之妻和没，棠公去世后，崔杼娶了她。
English: Six years ago, at the beginning, Mr. Tang's wife did not have any children. After Mr. Tang's death, Cui Rong married her.

古文：庄公通之，数如崔氏，以崔杼之冠赐人。
现代文：庄公又与她通奸，多次去崔杼家，还把崔杼的冠赐给别人。
English: Zhuang Gong also committed adultery with her, went to Cui Yao's house many times, and gave Cui Yao's crown to others.

古文：待者曰： 不可。 
现代文：庄公的侍从说： 不能这样。 
English: Zhuangguo's attendant said, "It can't be done.

古文：崔杼怒，因其伐晋，欲与晋合谋袭齐而不得间。
现代文：崔杼十分恼怒，借庄公伐晋之机，想与晋国合谋袭击庄公但未得机会。
English: Cui Yu was very angry and took the opportunity to attack Zhuangguo and Jin. He wanted to conspire with Jin Guo to attack Zhuangguo, but he didn't get the chance.

古文：庄公尝笞宦者贾举，贾举复侍，为崔杼间公以报怨。
现代文：庄公曾经鞭打宦官贾举，贾举又被任为内侍，替崔杼寻找庄公的漏隙来报复仇怨。
English: Zhuang Gong once whipped the eunuch Jia Jiu, and Jia Jiu was appointed as a chamberlain to find a loophole for Zhuang Gong to avenge the grudge.

古文：五月，莒子朝齐，齐以甲戌飨之。
现代文：五月，莒国国君莒子朝见齐君，齐庄公在甲戌日宴请莒君。
English: In May, the prince of Qizhuang and the prince of Qizhuang visited Qi Jun in the morning, and the prince of Qizhuang invited Qi Jun to a banquet on Armor Day.

古文：崔杼称病不视事。
现代文：崔杼以患病为由不去上朝。
English: Cui Wei did not go to the Imperial Palace on the grounds of illness.

古文：乙亥，公问崔杼病，遂从崔杼妻。
现代文：乙亥日，庄公探望崔杼病情，接着追嬉崔杼妻子。
English: On the second day of the year of the boar, Zhuang Gong visited Cui Yao's illness, and then chased Cui Yao's wife.

古文：崔杼妻入室，与崔杼自闭户不出，公拥柱而歌。
现代文：崔杼的妻子走进内室，与崔杼同把屋门关上不出来，庄公在前堂抱柱唱歌。
English: Cui Yao's wife went into the inner room, but she and Cui Yao could not close the door together. Zhuang Gong held onto a pillar in the front hall and sang.

古文：宦者贾举遮公从官而入，闭门，崔杼之徒持兵从中起。
现代文：这时宦官贾举把庄公的侍从拦在外面而自己进入院子，把院门从里边关上。崔杼的徒众手执兵器一拥而上。
English: At this time, the eunuch Jia You stopped Zhuangguo's attendants outside and entered the courtyard himself, closing the courtyard door from the inside. Cui Yao's bare hands held weapons and rushed up.

古文：公登台而请解，不许；请盟，不许；请自杀于庙，不许。
现代文：庄公登上高高的庭台请求和解，被拒绝；庄公又请求盟誓定约，也被拒绝，庄公最后请求让他到自己的祖庙里去自杀，众人仍不允许。
English: Zhuang Gong ascended to the high court to ask for reconciliation, which was rejected; Zhuang Gong also asked to swear an oath, which was also rejected. Zhuang Gong finally asked to go to his ancestral temple to commit suicide, which was still not allowed.

古文：皆曰： 君之臣杼疾病，不能听命。
现代文：大家说： 国君之臣崔杼病重，无法亲自来听候您的命令。
English: Everyone said, "The Emperor's vassal Choe Hee is seriously ill and cannot come in person to receive your order."

古文：近于公宫。陪臣争趣有淫者，不知二命。 
现代文：这里离宫廷很近，我们只知道捉拿淫色之徒，不会听从崔杼以外其他人的命令。 
English: It's very close to the palace, and we only know how to catch lewd people, and we won't follow anyone else's orders except Choi Min's.

古文：公逾墙，射中公股，公反坠，遂弑之。
现代文：庄公跳墙想逃，被人射中大腿，反坠墙里，于是被杀。
English: Zhuang Gong jumped the wall to escape, was shot in the thigh, fell back into the wall, and was killed.

古文：晏婴立崔杼门外，曰： 君为社稷死则死之，为社稷亡则亡之。
现代文：晏婴站在崔杼院门之外，说： 国君为社稷而死则臣子应为他殉死，国君为社稷而逃亡则臣子应随他流亡。
English: Standing outside the gate of Cui Beiyuan, Zou Ying stood up and said, "If the sovereign dies for the community, the vassal should die for him. If the sovereign flees for the community, the vassal should follow him into exile."

古文：若为己死己亡，非其私昵ì，谁敢任之！ 
现代文：国君为自己私利而死而逃，除了他的宠幸私臣，别人不会为此殉死逃亡的。 
English: The sovereign died for his own selfish interests and fled. Except for his favorite vassal, no one else would have died for this and fled.

古文：门开而入，枕公尸而哭，三踊而出。
现代文：晏子等打开大门进入院内，把庄公之尸枕放在自己的大腿上抚尸而哭，起来后三次顿足以示哀痛然后走出院子。
English: Zou Zi opened the gate to enter the courtyard, put Zhuang Gong's body pillow on his lap, stroked the corpse and cried. After getting up, he paused three times to show his sorrow and then walked out of the courtyard.

古文：人谓崔杼： 必杀之。 
现代文：别人对崔杼说： 一定杀死晏婴！ 
English: Others said to Cui Yao: Be sure to kill the baby baboon!

古文：崔杼曰： 民之望也，舍之得民。 
现代文：崔杼说： 他是众望所归的人，放过他我们会争取民心。 
English: Cui Wei said: He is a person who is highly regarded. If we let him go, we will win the hearts of the people.

古文：丁丑，崔杼立庄公异母弟杵臼，是为景公。
现代文：丁丑日，崔杼立起庄公异母弟杵臼为君，就是景公。
English: On the day of Ding Jiu, Cui Jian stood up and took Zhuang Gong's half-brother, Jiusu, as his vassal, that is, Jing Gong.

古文：景公母，鲁叔孙宣伯女也。
现代文：景公母亲，是鲁国大夫叔孙宣伯之女。
English: Jinggong's mother was the daughter of Lu Guodao's great-uncle Sun Xuanbo.

古文：景公立，以崔杼为右相，庆封为左相。
现代文：景公即位后，让崔杼当右相，庆封当左相。
English: After the enthronement of King Gyeonggong, Choe Son was appointed as the right minister and Gyeongbokgung as the left minister.

古文：二相恐乱起，乃与国人盟曰： 不与崔庆者死！ 
现代文：二位国相怕国内动乱不稳，就与国人盟誓说： 谁不跟从崔庆谁就别活！ 
English: The two countries are afraid of domestic turmoil and instability, so they have sworn with their compatriots: Whoever does not follow Cui Qing will not live!

古文：晏子仰天曰： 婴所不获唯忠于君利社稷者是从！ 不肯盟。
现代文：晏子仰天长叹说： 我做不到，我只跟从忠君利国的人！ 不肯参加盟誓。
English: The cripple looked up to heaven and sighed, "I can't do it, I only follow those who are loyal to the king and benefit the country! I refuse to take the oath."

古文：庆封欲杀晏子，崔杼曰： 忠臣也，舍之。 
现代文：庆封想杀晏子，崔杼说： 他是忠臣，放过他。 
English: When Qingfeng wanted to kill Xunzi, Cui Yao said: He is a loyal subject, let him go.

古文：齐太史书曰： 崔杼弑庄公。 崔杼杀之。
现代文：齐太史记载在简策上 崔杼杀庄公 ，崔杼把太史杀死。
English: Qi Taishi records that Cui Gan killed Zhuang Gong, and Cui Gan killed Taishi.

古文：其弟复书，崔杼复杀之。
现代文：太史之弟又一次记载上，崔杼又杀了他。
English: Taishi's younger brother was once again recorded as having been killed by Choe Ryong.

古文：少弟复书，崔杼乃舍之。
现代文：太史的小弟又记载上，崔杼放过了他。
English: Taishi's younger brother was also recorded as having been released by Cui Lan.

古文：景公元年，初，崔杼生子成及强，其母死，取东郭女，生明。
现代文：景公元年，起初，崔杼生有儿子成、强，他们的母亲去世以后，崔杼又娶了东郭氏之女，生下明。
English: In the year of Jing, at first, Cui Yao had sons Cheng and Qiang. After their mother died, Cui Yao married a daughter of the Dongguo clan, and gave birth to Xiao Ming.

古文：东郭女使其前夫子无咎与其弟偃相崔氏。
现代文：东郭氏女让她前夫之子无咎、她自己的弟弟东郭偃辅佐崔杼。
English: Dongguo's daughter absolved her ex-husband's son and blamed her own brother, Dongguo's assistant Choi Min.

古文：成有罪，二相急治之，立明为太子。
现代文：成犯了罪过，无咎和东郭偃两位家相立即严治成，把明立为太子。
English: Cheng committed a crime, and the two family heads of Guanming and Dongguo immediately severely punished Cheng and made Ming Li the crown prince.

古文：成请老于崔，崔杼许之，二相弗听，曰： 崔，宗邑，不可。 
现代文：成请求到崔邑告老还乡，崔杼答应，二相不肯，说： 崔邑是崔氏宗庙所在之地，成不能去。 
English: Cheng requested to return to his hometown in Cui County to visit his family, Cui Yao agreed, but the two sides disagreed, saying: Cui County is where the ancestral temple of the Cui family is located, Cheng cannot go there.

古文：成、强怒，告庆封。
现代文：成、强恼怒，将这件事告知庆封。
English: Cheng, infuriated, reported the matter to Qingfeng.

古文：庆封与崔杼有郄，欲其败也。
现代文：庆封与崔杼有矛盾，希望崔氏败落。
English: Qingfeng is in conflict with Cui Gan and hopes that Cui will be defeated.

古文：成、强杀无咎、偃于崔杼家，家皆奔亡。
现代文：成、强在崔杼家中杀死无咎和东郭偃，家中的人四散奔逃。
English: Cheng and Qiang killed Muxin and Dongguo Yao in Cui Yao's home, and the family members fled in all directions.

古文：崔杼怒，无人，使一宦者御，见庆封。
现代文：崔杼大怒，但身边却没有人，只好让一个宦官为他驾车，去见庆封。
English: Cui Rong was furious, but there was no one around, so he had to let a eunuch drive him to see Qingfeng.

古文：庆封曰： 请为子诛之。 
现代文：庆封说： 让我为您杀掉成、强。 
English: Qingfeng said, "Let me kill Cheng and Qiang for you."

古文：使崔杼仇卢蒲嫳攻崔氏，杀成、强，尽灭崔氏，崔杼妇自杀。
现代文：于是派崔杼的仇人卢蒲嫳攻打崔氏，杀死成、强，崔氏一族灭门，崔杼的妻子自杀。
English: So he sent Lu Bupu, an enemy of Cui Gan, to attack the Cui clan, killing Cheng and Qiang, exterminating the entire Cui clan, and Cui Gan's wife committed suicide.

古文：崔杼毋归，亦自杀。
现代文：崔杼无家可归，也自杀了。
English: Homeless, Cui Yao also committed suicide.

古文：庆封为相国，专权。
现代文：庆封当上相国，大权在握。
English: Qingfeng was the senior vassal state and held all the power.

古文：三年十月，庆封出猎。
现代文：三年十月，庆封外出打猎。
English: In October of the third year, Qingfeng went out hunting.

古文：初，庆封已杀崔杼，益骄，嗜酒好猎，不听政令。
现代文：当初，庆封杀死崔杼以后，愈发骄横，酗酒游猎，不理政务。
English: At first, after Qingfeng killed Cui Yao, he became more and more arrogant, drank too much, went hunting, and neglected government affairs.

古文：庆舍用政，已有内郄。
现代文：其子庆舍执政，内部已有矛盾。
English: His son, Qingxiao, is in power, and there are already internal contradictions.

古文：田文子谓桓子曰： 乱将作。 
现代文：田文子对田桓子说： 动乱将起。 
English: Tian Fumiko said to Tian Huan Zi: Unrest will start.

古文：田、鲍、高、栾氏相与谋庆氏。
现代文：田、鲍、高、栾四家族联合谋划消灭庆氏。
English: The four families of Tian, Bao, Gao and Zou jointly plotted to eliminate Qing.

古文：庆舍发甲围庆封宫，四家徒共击破之。
现代文：庆舍派出甲兵围护庆封的宫室，四家族的徒众共同击破庆氏之家。
English: Qingshe dispatched armored soldiers to surround and protect the palace of Qingfeng, and the four families of followers jointly defeated the Qing family home.

古文：庆封还，不得入，奔鲁。
现代文：庆封归来，不能进家，逃亡到鲁国。
English: When Qingfeng returned, he could not enter his home and fled to Lu.

古文：齐人让鲁，封奔吴。
现代文：齐人责备鲁国，庆封又逃到吴国。
English: Qi rebuked Lu, and Qingfeng fled to Wu.

古文：吴与之朱方，聚其族而居之，富于在齐。
现代文：吴国把朱方之地赏给庆封，庆封与族人居此，比在齐国时还富有。
English: The State of Wu awarded Zhu Fang's land to Qingfeng, and Qingfeng and the tribesmen living here are even richer than they were in Qi.

古文：其秋，齐人徙葬庄公，僇崔杼尸于市以说众。
现代文：此年秋，齐人移葬庄公，而把崔杼尸体示众于市以泄民愤。
English: In the autumn of this year, Qi people moved to bury Zhuang Gong, and showed the body of Cui Gan to the public in the city to vent the people's anger.

古文：九年，景公使晏婴之晋，与叔向私语曰： 齐政卒归田氏。
现代文：九年，景公派晏婴出使晋国，晏婴私下对叔向说： 齐国政权最终将归田氏。
English: In the ninth year, Jing Gong sent Xing Ying as an envoy to Jin Province. Xing Ying privately said to his uncle: The political power of Qi will eventually return to the Tian clan.

古文：田氏虽无大德，以公权私，有德于民，民爱之。 
现代文：田氏虽无大的功德，但能借公事施私恩，有恩德于民，百姓拥戴。 
English: Although the Tian clan does not have great merits, it can use public affairs to extend personal favors, have benevolence to the people, and be supported by the people.

古文：十二年，景公如晋，见平公，欲与伐燕。
现代文：十二年，景公到晋国，会见晋平公，想共同讨伐燕国。
English: In the twelfth year, Jing Gong went to Jin Province, met with Jin Ping Gong, and wanted to jointly fight against Yan Province.

古文：十八年，公复如晋，见昭公。
现代文：十八年，景公再次前往晋国，会见了晋昭公。
English: In 18 years, Jing Gong went to Jin Province again and met with Jin Zhao Gong.

古文：二十六年，猎鲁郊，因入鲁，与晏婴俱问鲁礼。
现代文：二十六年，景公在鲁国郊外打猎，接着进入鲁国都，同晏婴一起咨询鲁国的礼制。
English: In the twenty-sixth year, Jing Gong went hunting in the suburbs of Lu, then entered the capital of Lu, and consulted the etiquette of Lu with the infant.

古文：三十一年，鲁昭公辟季氏难，奔齐。
现代文：三十一年，鲁昭公躲避季氏叛乱，逃亡到齐国。
English: In the 31st year, Lu Zhaogong evaded the Ji rebellion and fled to Qi.

古文：齐欲以千社封之，子家止昭公，昭公乃请齐伐鲁，取郓以居昭公。
现代文：景公想封给昭公千社人家连同土地，子家劝阻昭公不要接受，昭公就请求齐国出兵讨伐鲁国，攻取郓邑，攻取了郓邑给鲁昭公居住。
English: Jing Gong wanted to give Zhaokong Qiansha's family and land to Zhaokong, but his children dissuaded him from accepting. Zhaokong then asked Qi to send troops to fight against Lu, to capture Jieyi, and to capture Jieyi for Lu Zhaokong to live in.

古文：三十二年，彗星见。
现代文：三十二年，天空出现慧星。
English: Thirty-two years ago, a comet appeared in the sky.

古文：景公坐柏寝，叹曰： 堂堂！
现代文：景公坐在柏寝台上叹息说： 堂皇的亭台，终归谁手呢？ 
English: King Jing, sitting on the cypress bed, sighed and said, "This magnificent pavilion, whose hands will it eventually fall into?

古文：谁有此乎？ 
现代文：群臣忧然泪下。
English: The ministers burst into tears.

古文：群臣皆泣，晏子笑，公怒。
现代文：晏子反而笑起来，景公很恼怒。
English: On the contrary, the cripple laughed, and King Jing was very angry.

古文：晏子曰： 臣笑群臣谀甚。 
现代文：晏子说： 我笑群臣过于谄谀了。 
English: The cripple said, "I am laughing because the ministers are too shy."

古文：景公曰： 彗星出东北，当齐分野，寡人以为忧。 
现代文：景公说： 慧星出现在东北天空，正是对着齐国的地域位置，寡人为此而担忧。 
English: Jing Gong said: The comet appeared in the northeastern sky, just in line with the regional position of Qi, and many people are worried about it.

古文：晏子曰： 君高台深池，赋敛如弗得，刑罚恐弗胜，茀星将出，彗星何惧乎？ 
现代文：晏子说： 您筑高台凿深池，多收租税唯恐得的少，滥施刑罚唯恐不严苛，最凶的茀星将出现，您怕什么慧星呢？ 
English: The cripple said, "You build a high platform and dig a deep pool, you collect more taxes but fear to get less, you impose excessive punishment but fear not to be harsh, the most ferocious meteor will appear, what are you afraid of?

古文：公曰： 可禳否？ 
现代文：景公说： 可以用祭祷禳除慧星吗？ 
English: Jing Gong said, "Can I use the prayer to drive away the comet?"

古文：晏子曰： 使神可祝而来，亦可禳而去也。
现代文：晏子说： 如果祝祷可以使神明降临，那么祈禳也可以使它离去。
English: The cripple said, "If prayers can make the gods come, then prayers can also make them go away."

古文：百姓苦怨以万数，而君令一人禳之，安能胜众口乎？ 
现代文：但百姓愁苦怨恨的成千上万，而您让一个人去祈禳，怎么能胜过众口怨声呢？ 
English: But there are thousands of people who are grieving and resentful, and how can you let one person go to pray, how can you win over the complaints of the masses?

古文：是时景公好治宫室，聚狗马，奢侈，厚赋重刑，故晏子以此谏之。
现代文：当时景公好大造宫室，多养狗马，奢侈无度，税重刑酷，所以晏子借机谏止齐景公。
English: At that time, Jing Gong liked to build a large palace, keep more dogs and horses, indulge in extravagance, and impose heavy taxes. Therefore, the mule took the opportunity to stop Qi Jing Gong.

古文：四十二年，吴王阖闾伐楚，入郢。
现代文：四十二年，吴王阖闾攻伐楚国，攻入楚都郢。
English: In forty-two years, King Wu of Wu invaded the State of Chu and invaded Chu Duyun.

古文：四十七年，鲁阳虎攻其君，不胜，奔齐，请齐伐鲁。
现代文：四十七年，鲁国大夫阳虎攻打鲁君，失败，逃亡齐国，请求齐国攻打鲁。
English: In the 47th year, Lu's doctor Yang Hu attacked Lu Jun, failed, fled Qi, and asked Qi to attack Lu.

古文：鲍子谏景公，乃囚阳虎。
现代文：鲍子谏止景公，于是景公把阳虎囚禁起来。
English: Bao Zi stopped Jing Gong, so Jing Gong imprisoned Yang Hu.

古文：阳虎得亡，奔晋。
现代文：阳虎找到机会逃脱，逃到晋国。
English: Yanghu found an opportunity to escape and fled to Jin Province.

古文：四十八年，与鲁定公好会夹谷。
现代文：四十八年，景公与鲁定公在夹谷盟会修好。
English: In the 48th year, Jing Gong and Luding Gong made peace at the valley meeting.

古文：犁锄曰： 孔丘知礼而怯，请令莱人为乐，因执鲁君，可得志。 
现代文：犁锄说： 孔丘深通礼仪但怯懦不刚，请允许让莱人表演歌舞，我们趁机捉住鲁君，可以让鲁满足我们的要求。 
English: Zou said: Kongqiu is well versed in etiquette, but he is not cowardly. Please allow the Lai people to perform the song and dance. We will seize the opportunity to catch Lu Jun and let Lu meet our requirements.

古文：景公害孔丘相鲁，惧其霸，故从犁锄之计。
现代文：景公担心孔子做鲁相，害怕鲁国成就霸业，所以听从犁锄之计。
English: Jing Gong was worried that Confucius would do the same thing as Lu, and was afraid that Lu would achieve hegemony, so he followed Shun's plan.

古文：方会，进莱乐，孔子历阶上，使有司执莱人斩之，以礼让景公。
现代文：盟会时，齐国献上莱人乐舞，孔子登阶上台，命有关人员捉住莱人斩首，随后又引用礼制谴责景公。
English: At the alliance meeting, Qi offered the Lai people music and dance, Confucius climbed the stage, ordered the relevant personnel to catch and behead the Lai people, and then cited the etiquette to condemn Jing Gong.

古文：景公惭，乃归鲁侵地以谢，而罢去。
现代文：景公很惭愧，就归还了侵占的鲁国领土以谢罪，然后就离开了。
English: King Jing was very ashamed, so he returned the occupied territory of the Russian Empire as a gesture of thanks, and then left.

古文：是岁，晏婴卒。
现代文：这一年，婴晏去世。
English: In the same year, the baby died.

古文：五十五年，范、中行反其君于晋，晋攻之急，来请粟。
现代文：五十五年，晋国大夫范氏、中行氏反叛其国君，晋君攻二氏吃紧，他们就派人到齐国来借粮。
English: In the 55th year of the Jin Dynasty, Dr. Fan and Dr. Zhongxing rebelled against their sovereign, and since it was difficult for the sovereign to attack the Second Dynasty, they sent people to Qi to borrow grain.

古文：田乞欲为乱，树党于逆臣，说景公曰： 范、中行数有德于齐，不可不救。 
现代文：田乞想要作乱，想和晋国叛臣结党，就劝景公说： 范氏、中行氏多次对齐国有恩，不可不救。 
English: Tian Qian wanted to make a disturbance and wanted to form a party with the traitors of Jin, so he advised Jing Gong, saying: The Fan clan and the Zhong Xing clan have aligned themselves with the state many times, and they must be saved.

古文：乃使乞救而输之粟。
现代文：景公便派田乞去救援，并供给他们粮食。
English: King Jing sent Tianmiao to rescue them and provided them with grain.

古文：五十八年夏，景公夫人燕姬适子死。
现代文：五十八年夏，景公夫人燕姬的嫡子去世。
English: In the summer of 58, the legitimate son of Jing Gong's wife Yan Ji passed away.

古文：景公宠妾芮姬生子荼，荼少，其母贱，无行，诸大夫恐其为嗣，乃言愿择诸子长贤者为太子。
现代文：景公的宠妾芮姬生有儿子荼，荼年幼，他的母亲出生微贱，荼又行为不端，诸位大夫担心荼成为太子，就向景公进言，说希望在诸公子中选择年长贤德者做太子。
English: Jinggong's favorite concubine, Zou Ji, had a son, Zou, who was very young. His mother was born lowly, and Zou also misbehaved. The doctors were worried that Zou would become the prince, so they suggested to Jinggong that they hoped to choose an older virtuous man among the princes to be the prince.

古文：景公老，恶言嗣事，又爱荼母，欲立之，惮发之口，乃谓诸大夫曰： 为乐耳，国何患无君乎？ 
现代文：景公年事已高，讨厌谈论里太子的事，又宠爱荼的母亲，想立荼当太子，又不愿亲自主动提出，就对大夫们说： 及时行乐吧，国家还怕没有君主吗？ 
English: Jing Gong was very old, he hated to talk about the crown prince's affairs, and he was fond of Zou's mother. He wanted to make Zou the crown prince, but he did not want to do it himself. So he said to the doctors: "Let's have fun in time. Is the country still afraid of not having a monarch?"

古文：秋，景公病，命国惠子、高昭子立少子荼为太子，逐群公子，迁之莱。
现代文：秋天，景公病重，命令国惠子、高昭子立幼子荼立为太子，驱逐其他公子，迁居到莱地。
English: In autumn, King Jing was gravely ill and ordered Guo Huizi and Gao Zhaozi to set up a young prince as crown prince, expel other princes, and move to Laiji.

古文：景公卒，太子荼立，是为晏孺子。
现代文：景公去世，太子荼为国君，就是晏孺子。
English: When Prince Jing died, the crown prince became the ruler of the country, that is, Xunzi.

古文：冬，未葬，而群公子畏诛，皆出亡。
现代文：冬天，齐景公还未埋葬，其他公子害怕被杀，都逃亡国外。
English: In winter, Prince Qi Jing had not yet been buried, and the other princes were afraid of being killed and fled abroad.

古文：荼诸异母兄公子寿、驹、黔奔卫，公子驵、阳生奔鲁。
现代文：荼的异母兄寿、驹、黔逃到卫国，公子驵、阳生逃到鲁国。
English: Zou's half-brothers Shou, Zou, and Zou fled to Wei, while his brothers Zou and Yang Sheng fled to Lu.

古文：莱人歌之曰： 景公死乎弗与埋，三军事乎弗与谋，师乎师乎，胡党之乎？ 
现代文：莱人为此唱道： 景公葬礼不能参加，国家军事不让谋划。众公子的追随者呀，你们将去往何处。 
English: The people of Lai therefore sang: Jing Gong's funeral cannot be attended, the national military does not allow planning. Followers of all princes, where will you go?

古文：晏孺子元年春，田乞伪事高、国者，每朝，乞骖乘，言曰： 子得君，大夫皆自危，欲谋作乱。 
现代文：晏孺子元年春，田乞伪装忠于高氏、国氏，每次二氏上朝，田乞为他们骖乘，进言说： 您得到君王信任，群大夫都人人自危，想图谋叛乱。 
English: In the spring of the first year of the Heian period, Tian Qian pretended to be loyal to the Gao clan and the Guo clan. Every time the two clans came to court, Tian Qian gave them a ride and said, "You have gained the trust of the king. The doctors are all worried and want to plot a rebellion."

古文：又谓诸大夫曰： 高昭子可畏，及未发，先之。 
现代文：又对群大夫说： 高昭子太可怕了，趁他还没开始行动迫害我们，我们抢先搞掉他。 
English: He also said to the doctors: Gao Akiko is so terrible, let's get rid of him before he starts persecuting us.

古文：大夫从之。
现代文：大夫们都听从他。
English: The doctors listen to him.

古文：六月，田乞、鲍牧乃与大夫以兵入公宫，攻高昭子。
现代文：六月，田乞、鲍牧与众大夫带兵进入宫中，攻打高昭子。
English: In June, Tian Qian, Bao Mu and many doctors led soldiers into the palace to attack Gao Akiko.

古文：昭子闻之，与国惠子救公。
现代文：昭子听说，与国惠子共救国君。
English: When Akiko heard about this, she and Kunihiko went to rescue Kuniakimi.

古文：公师败，田乞之徒追之，国惠子奔莒，遂反杀高昭子。
现代文：国君兵败，田乞的徒众追击，国惠子逃到莒国，田乞回来又杀死高昭子。
English: The sovereign was defeated and pursued by Tian Miao's followers. Guo Keizi fled to Shandong Province, and Tian Miao returned and killed Gao Akiko.

古文：晏圉奔鲁。
现代文：晏圉逃到鲁国。
English: The infant's son fled to the country of Lu.

古文：八月，齐秉意兹。
现代文：八月，齐大夫秉意兹逃往鲁国。
English: In August, Dr. Qi escaped to Russia.

古文：田乞败二相，乃使人之鲁召公子阳生。
现代文：田乞击败高、国二相，就派人到鲁国迎回公子阳生。
English: When Tian Qi defeated Gao and Gu Ersheng, he sent someone to Lu Province to welcome back Prince Yang Sheng.

古文：阳生至齐，私匿田乞家。
现代文：阳生到齐后，暗藏在田乞家中。
English: After Yang Sheng arrived in Qi, he hid in a beggar's home.

古文：十月戊子，田乞请诸大夫曰： 常之母有鱼菽之祭，幸来会饮。 
现代文：十月戊子日，田乞邀请各位大夫说： 尝儿的母亲今天在家将操持菲薄的祭礼，敬请光临饮酒。 
English: On October Boshi Day, Tian Qiao invited all the doctors to come and say, "The mother of our child will hold a small festival at home today. Please come and drink alcohol."

古文：会饮，田乞盛阳生橐中，置坐中央，发橐出阳生，曰： 此乃齐君矣！ 
现代文：会餐饮酒时，田乞事先把阳生装在大口袋里，放在座席中央，然后打开口袋放出阳生，说： 这就是齐国之君！ 
English: When drinking at the banquet, Tian Qian put Yang Sheng in a large pocket in advance and placed it in the center of the seat, then opened the pocket and released Yang Sheng, saying: This is the king of Qi!

古文：大夫皆伏谒。
现代文：众大夫就地拜见。
English: The doctors all bowed their heads.

古文：将与大夫盟而立之，鲍牧醉，乞诬大夫曰： 吾与鲍牧谋共立阳生。 
现代文：接着要与众大夫盟誓而立阳生为君，此时鲍牧已醉，田乞就欺骗大家说： 我和鲍牧谋划一致立阳生为君。 
English: Next, he wanted to swear an oath with all the doctors to make Yang Sheng his king. At this time, Bao Mu was already drunk, so Tian Qian deceived everyone and said, "Bao Mu and I are planning to make Yang Sheng our king."

古文：鲍牧怒曰： 子忘景公之命乎？ 
现代文：鲍牧恼怒说： 您忘记了景公立荼为君的遗命了吗？ 
English: Annoyed, Bao Mu said, "Have you forgotten the last words of King Gyeongbokgung?"

古文：诸大夫相视欲悔，阳生前，顿首曰： 可则立之，否则已。 
现代文：众大夫面面相觑想反悔，阳生上前，叩头而拜说： 对于我可立则立，否则作罢。 
English: All the doctors looked at each other in disbelief. Yang Sheng stepped forward, bowed down and said, "As far as I'm concerned, you can either stand up or not stand up.

古文：鲍牧恐祸起，乃复曰： 皆景公子也，何为不可！ 
现代文：鲍牧也怕惹起祸乱，就又说： 都是景公的儿子，有什么不可的。 
English: Bao Mu was also afraid of stirring up trouble, so he also said, "They are all the sons of King Jing, there is nothing we can't do."

古文：乃与盟，立阳生，是为悼公。
现代文：就与众盟誓，立阳生为齐君，就是悼公。
English: He swore with everyone that to make Yang Sheng a Qijun was to mourn for the emperor.

古文：悼公入宫，使人迁晏孺子于骀，杀之幕下，而逐孺子母芮子。
现代文：悼公进入宫中，派人流放晏孺子去骀，于途中设帐幕将晏孺子杀死在里面，驱逐了孺子之母芮子。
English: Yue Gong entered the palace and sent someone to exile the mule to the mule. On the way, he set up a tent to kill the mule inside and expelled the mule's mother, the mule.

古文：芮子故贱而孺子少，故无权，国人轻之。
现代文：芮子本来微贱而孺子又幼小，所以无权势，国人轻视他们。
English: The mule was originally lowly and the mule was small, so they had no power, and the Chinese despised them.

古文：悼公元年，齐伐鲁，取讙、阐。
现代文：悼公元年，齐国讨伐鲁，攻取讙、阐二地。
English: In commemoration of the year of the Christian era, the State of Qi launched a crusade against the Lu, capturing and reclaiming two provinces.

古文：初，阳生亡在鲁，季康子以其妹妻之。
现代文：起初，阳生逃亡在鲁，季康子把妹妹嫁给他为妻。
English: At first, Yang Sheng fled to Lu, and Ji Kang Zi married his sister to him.

古文：及归即位，使迎之。
现代文：阳生归国即位后，便派人到鲁国迎接妻子。
English: After Yang Sheng returned to China and ascended to the throne, he sent someone to Lu to welcome his wife.

古文：季姬与季鲂侯通，言其情，鲁弗敢与，故齐伐鲁，竟迎季姬。
现代文：其妻季姬与季鲂侯私通，向家人说出真情，鲁人不敢把季姬给齐国，所以齐国攻打鲁国，终于把季姬接到齐。
English: His wife, Ji Ji, had an illicit affair with Ji Shun Hou and told her family the truth. Lu people did not dare to give Ji Ji to Qi, so Qi attacked Lu and finally brought Ji Ji to Qi.

古文：季姬嬖，齐复归鲁侵地。
现代文：季姬受悼公宠爱，齐国就又把侵占的鲁国土地归还。
English: Ji Ji was loved by the mourning public, and the State of Qi returned the occupied land of Lu.

古文：鲍子与悼公有郄，不善。
现代文：鲍子与悼公有矛盾，关系不睦。
English: There is a conflict between Baozi and Eiko, and their relationship is not harmonious.

古文：四年，吴、鲁伐齐南方。
现代文：四年，吴国、鲁国攻打齐国南部。
English: In the fourth year, Wu and Lu attacked the southern part of Qi.

古文：鲍子弑悼公，赴于吴。
现代文：鲍子杀死悼公，向吴国报丧。
English: Bao Zi killed the mourner and reported his death to the State of Wu.

古文：吴王夫差哭于军门外三日，将从海入讨齐。
现代文：吴王夫差按礼仪在军门外哭吊三日，将要从海路进军讨伐齐国。
English: According to the etiquette, Wu Wangfusha cried and hung outside the military gate for three days. He was going to march from the sea to fight against Qi.

古文：齐人败之，吴师乃去。
现代文：齐军战胜吴军，吴军撤退。
English: The Qi army defeated the Wu army, and the Wu army retreated.

古文：晋赵鞅伐齐，至赖而去。
现代文：晋国赵鞅攻打齐国，到达赖地后撤军。
English: Zhao Wei of Jin attacked Qi, but withdrew after reaching Laiji.

古文：齐人共立悼公子壬，是为简公。
现代文：齐人一致拥立悼公的儿子壬为齐君，就是简公。
English: Qi people unanimously supported the son of Yigong, Ren, as Qi Jun, that is, Jian Gong.

古文：简公四年春，初，简公与父阳生俱在鲁也，监止有宠焉。
现代文：简公四年春，起初，齐简公和他的父亲悼公同在鲁国时，宠幸大夫监止。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Jian Gong, at first, when Qi Jian Gong and his father mourned Jian Gong together in Lu, he was supervised by Dr. Zhaoxing.

古文：及即位，使为政。
现代文：简公即位后，便让他主持国政。
English: After Emperor Jiankuo ascended the throne, he allowed him to preside over state affairs.

古文：田成子惮之，骤顾于朝。
现代文：田成子对此很担忧，几次上朝打探情况。
English: Shigeko Tanaka was very worried about this and went to the North several times to investigate the situation.

古文：御鞅言简公曰： 田、监不可并也，君其择焉。 
现代文：简公的御手田鞅向简公进言说： 田、监不能并存，你要选择其中一个。 
English: Jian Gong's mistress, Tian Yao, said to Jian Gong: Tian and Jian cannot coexist, you have to choose one of them.

古文：弗听。
现代文：简公不听。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：子我夕，田逆杀人，逢之，遂捕以入。
现代文：监止有次晚朝，正好遇到田逆杀人，就把田逆逮捕进宫。
English: Once, in the late morning, when the supervisor happened to come across the murder of Tian Qi, he arrested Tian Qi and took him to the palace.

古文：田氏方睦，使囚病而遗守囚者酒，醉而杀守者，得亡。
现代文：田氏宗族这时正非常团结，就让被囚禁的田逆伪装病重，借机由家人探监送酒给看守，看守醉后被杀掉，田逆逃脱。
English: At that time, the Tian clan was very united. They let the imprisoned Tian Qi disguise himself as seriously ill, and took the opportunity to have his family visit the prison to give wine to the guards. After the guards got drunk, they were killed, and Tian Qi escaped.

古文：子我盟诸田于陈宗。
现代文：监止与田氏在田氏宗祠盟誓将此事和解。
English: Jianzhong vowed to reconcile the matter with the Tian clan at the ancestral shrine of the Tian clan.

古文：初，田豹欲为子我臣，使公孙言豹，豹有丧而止。
现代文：起初，田豹想做监止的家臣，让大夫公孙向监止荐举，正逢田豹服丧就作罢了。
English: At first, the cheetah wanted to be a vassal of the overseer, let the doctor's grandson recommend him to the overseer, and just do it when the cheetah was in mourning.

古文：后卒以为臣，幸于子我。
现代文：之后终于做了监止家臣，而且受到监止的宠任。
English: After that, he finally became a vassal of Guanzhong and was favored by Guanzhong.

古文：子我谓曰： 吾尽逐田氏而立女，可乎？ 
现代文：监止对田豹说： 我要把田氏全部驱逐而让你当田氏之长，可以吗？ 
English: The supervisor said to the leopard, "I'm going to expel the entire Tian clan and make you the head of the Tian clan, is that okay?

古文：对曰： 我远田氏矣。且其违者不过数人，何尽逐焉！ 
现代文：田豹回答说： 我只不过是田氏族中的疏远旁支，而且田氏族中不服从您的不过几个人，何必全都驱逐呢！ 
English: The Leopard replied, "I am only an estranged branch of the Tian clan, and there are only a few who disobey you in the Tian clan. Why should I expel them all?"

古文：遂告田氏。
现代文：田豹于是将这件事告知了田氏。
English: The leopard then reported the incident to Mr. Tian.

古文：子行曰： 彼得君，弗先，必祸子。 
现代文：田逆说： 他正得君主宠任，你田常如不先下手，必遭其祸。 
English: Tian Tuo said, "He is being favored by the monarch. If you do not act first, you will suffer his misfortune."

古文：子行舍于公宫。
现代文：田逆就住在国君宫中以便接应。
English: In order to accommodate them, Tago lived in the sovereign's palace.

古文：夏五月壬申，成子兄弟四乘如公。
现代文：夏五月壬申日，田常兄弟乘四辆车见简公。
English: On Jinshin Day in the summer of May, the Tian Chang brothers took four cars to see Jian Gong.

古文：子我在幄，出迎之，遂入，闭门。
现代文：监止正在帏帐之中，出来迎接他们，他们一进去就把宫门关闭。
English: The overseer, who was in a hurry, came out to meet them, and as soon as they entered, he shut the gate of the palace.

古文：宦者御之，子行杀宦者。
现代文：宦官们抵抗田氏，田逆杀死宦官。
English: The eunuchs resisted the Tian clan, and the eunuchs were killed by the Tian rebels.

古文：公与妇人饮酒于檀台，成子迁诸寝。
现代文：简公正与妻妾在檀台上饮酒，田常把他带至寝宫。
English: Jian Zheng and his wife and concubine were drinking alcohol on the balcony, and Tian Zheng took him to his bedroom.

古文：公执戈将击之，太史子余曰： 非不利也，将除害也。 
现代文：简公拿起戈要反击，太史子余说： 田尝不是要谋害您，而是要为您除害。 
English: Jian Gong picked up the sword to fight back, and Grand Historian Zi Yu said: Tian Yu is not trying to kill you, but to remove the harm for you.

古文：成子出舍于库，闻公犹怒，将出，曰： 何所无君！ 
现代文：田尝出宫住进武库，听说简公还在发怒，就想要逃走，并说： 哪里没有国君！ 
English: Tian Tan went out of the palace to live in the arsenal, and when he heard that Jian Gong was still angry, he wanted to run away, and said: Where is there no sovereign!

古文：子行拔剑曰： 需，事之贼也。
现代文：田逆拔剑说： 犹豫迟疑，是坏事的祸根。
English: Tian Qi pulled out his sword and said, "Hesitation is the root of all evil."

古文：谁非田宗？
现代文：我们这些姓田的人谁不能做田氏的宗主？
English: Those of us with the surname Tian, who can't be the head of the Tian clan?

古文：所不杀子者有如田宗。 
现代文：你如怯懦出逃不顾大家，我要不杀死你，祖宗不饶。 田尝才留下。
English: If you cowardly run away in defiance of everyone, I will not kill you, the ancestors will not spare you.

古文：乃止。子我归，属徒攻闱与大门，皆弗胜，乃出。
现代文：监止跑回家，聚集徒众进攻宫城大小各门，都没有成功，就出逃而走。
English: The overseer ran home and gathered followers to attack all the gates of Miyagi, large and small, but they were not successful, so they fled.

古文：田氏追之。
现代文：田氏族人紧追不舍。
English: The Tian clansmen are in hot pursuit.

古文：丰丘人执子我以告，杀之郭关。
现代文：丰丘有人抓住监止并报告，田氏在郭门把监止杀死。
English: Someone in Fengqiu caught the guard and reported that Mr. Tian killed the guard at the gate.

古文：成子将杀大陆子方，田逆请而免之。
现代文：田常要杀大陆子方，田逆为他求情才被赦免。
English: Tian Chang wanted to kill the mainlander, but he was pardoned only after Tian Chou pleaded for him.

古文：以公命取车于道，出雍门。
现代文：以简公的名义在路上截车，驰出雍门。
English: In the name of Jian Gong, he stopped the car on the road and drove out of Yongmen.

古文：田豹与之车，弗受，曰： 逆为余请，豹与余车，余有私焉。
现代文：田豹给他车，他不要，说： 田逆为我说情，田豹给我车辆，人家会以为我与田氏有私交。
English: Tianbao gives him a car, but he doesn't want it, saying: "Tianchuang intercedes for me, Tianbao gives me a vehicle, people will think that I have a personal relationship with Tian."

古文：事子我而有私于其雠，何以见鲁、卫之士？ 
现代文：我是监止的家臣却与他的仇人私下有所勾结，还有何面目逃亡去见鲁、卫的士人呢？ 
English: I am the overseer's vassal, yet I have secretly colluded with his enemies. How else could I have fled to the priests of Lu and Wei?

古文：庚辰，田常执简公于俆州。
现代文：庚辰日，田常在俆州逮捕简公。
English: On the day of Geng Chen, Tian Chang arrested Jian Gong in Zhangzhou.

古文：公曰： 余蚤从御鞅言，不及此。 
现代文：简公说： 我要是早听田鞅之言，不会落到今天地步。 
English: Janko said, "If I had listened to Tian Ye's words earlier, I wouldn't have ended up where I am today.

古文：甲午，田常弑简公于俆州。
现代文：甲午日，田常在俆州杀死简公。
English: On the afternoon of the second day, Tian Chang killed Jian Gong in Zhangzhou.

古文：田常乃立简公弟骜，是为平公。
现代文：田常立简公之弟鳌为齐君，就是平公。
English: Tian Changli Jian Gong's younger brother Zou Wei Qi Jun, that is, Ping Gong.

古文：平公即位，田常相之，专齐之政，割齐安平以东为田氏封邑。
现代文：平公即位后，田常为相国，专擅齐国大权，划割齐国安平以东广大国土为田氏封疆范围。
English: After the enthronement of the Taira clan, the Tian family became the sovereign of the neighboring country, and gained the supreme power of the Qi country. The territory of the Anping and Eastern Guangxi provinces of the Qi country was divided into the territory of the Tian family's fiefdom.

古文：平公八年，越灭吴。
现代文：平公八年，越国灭掉吴国。
English: In the 8th year of the Heian period, the State of Yue conquered the State of Wu.

古文：二十五年卒，子宣公积立。
现代文：二十五年平公死去，其子宣公积继位。
English: Twenty-five years later, TAIRA no Kimi died, and his son, Nobuko, succeeded to the throne.

古文：宣公五十一年卒，子康公贷立。
现代文：宣公五十一年，宣公去世，他的儿子康公贷继位。
English: In the 51st year of Xuan Gong, Xuan Gong died and was succeeded by his son Kang Gong Lian.

古文：田会反廪丘。
现代文：田会在廪丘叛乱。
English: The farmers' association rebelled in Shizuoka.

古文：康公二年，韩、魏、赵始列为诸侯。
现代文：康公二年，韩、赵、魏开始成为诸侯。
English: In the second year of Kang Gong, Han, Zhao, and Wei began to become princes.

古文：十九年，田常曾孙田和始为诸侯，迁康公海滨。
现代文：十九年，田常曾孙田和开始成为诸侯，把康公流放到海滨。
English: In the 19th year, Tian Chang's great-grandson Tian He began to become a vassal, and exiled Kang Gong to the seashore.

古文：二十六年，康公卒，吕氏遂绝其祀。
现代文：二十六年，康公去世，吕氏就断绝了祭祀。
English: In the twenty-sixth year, Kangong died, and the Lv clan broke off the sacrificial rites.

古文：田氏卒有齐国，为齐威王，强于天下。
现代文：田氏终于占有齐国，到齐威王时，称雄于天下。
English: The Tian clan finally occupied Qi, and by the time of King Qi Wei, they were the most powerful in the world.

古文：太史公曰：吾适齐，自泰山属之琅邪，北被于海，膏壤二千里，其民阔达多匿知，其天性也。
现代文：太史公说：我到齐国，看到齐地西起泰山，东连琅邪，北至大海，其间沃土两千里，其人民心胸阔达而又深沉多智，这是他们的天性。
English: Taishigong said, "When I went to Qi Province, I saw that the land of Qi stretches from Mount Tai in the west, along the Yangtze River in the east, to the sea in the north. There are two thousand miles of fertile land between them. Its people are broad-minded, deep and wise. This is their nature.

古文：以太公之圣，建国本，桓公之盛，修善政，以为诸侯会盟，称伯，不亦宜乎？
现代文：由于太公的圣明，树好立国根基，由于桓公的盛德，施行善政，以此召集诸侯会盟，成为霸主，不是顺理成章吗？
English: Because of the wisdom of the great-grandfather, the foundation of the country was well established, and because of the virtue of the great-grandfather, the good governance was carried out, and the alliance of the princes was convened to become the overlord. Isn't it a logical conclusion?

古文：洋洋哉，固大国之风也！
现代文：广盛博大呀，确实有大国的风范！
English: Vast and vast, it really has the demeanor of a big country!

