古文：黄帝坐明堂，始正天纲，临观八极，考建五常。
现代文：黄帝坐在宣明正教的明堂里，开始厘正天之纲纪，面对八方目极之所在，考校建立阴阳五行运行的常理。
English: The Yellow Emperor sat in the Ming Hall of the Xuanming Orthodox Church and began to clarify the principles of heaven. Faced with the extreme of the eight directions, the examination established the common sense of the operation of yin and yang and the five elements.

古文：请天师而问之曰：论言天地之动静，神明为之纪；阴阳之升降，寒暑彰其兆。
现代文：向天师岐伯请问到：在以前的医论中曾经言道，天地的动静，是以自然界中变化莫测的物象为纲纪；阴阳升降，是以寒暑的更换显示它的征兆。
English: Ask the heavenly teacher Qibo: In the previous medical theory, he once said that the movement of heaven and earth is based on the vagaries of the natural world; the rise and fall of yin and yang is the change of cold and heat, showing its signs.

古文：余闻五运之数于夫子，夫子之所言，正五气之各主岁耳，首甲定运，余因论之。
现代文：我也听先生讲过五运的规律，先生所讲的仅是五运之气各主一年。关于从甲子年开始定六十年运气的问题，我又与鬼叟区做了进一步地讨论。
English: I have also listened to my teacher talk about the law of the five unlucky days, and what he said was only that the five unlucky days would each last one year. Regarding the issue of determining the luck of sixty years from the year of Jia, I had further discussions with the ghost district.

古文：鬼臾区曰： 土主甲己，金主乙庚，水主丙辛，木主丁壬，火主戊癸。
现代文：鬼叟区说： 土运主甲已年，金运主乙庚年，水运主丙辛年，木运主丁壬年，火运主戊癸年。
English: Onitsuka Ward said: the year of the earth movement is A, the year of the money movement is B, the year of the water movement is C, the year of the wood movement is D, and the year of the fire movement is E.

古文：子午之上，少阴主之；丑未之上，太阴主之；寅申之上，少阳主之；卯酉之上，阳明主之；辰戌之上，太阳主之；巳亥之上，厥阴主之。 不合阴阳，其故何也？岐伯曰：是明道也。
现代文：子午年是少阴司天，丑未年是太阴司天，寅申年是少阳司天，卯酉年阳明司天，辰戌年是太阳司天，巳亥年是厥阴司天。 这些，与你以前所论的阴阳不怎么符合，是什么道理呢？
English: The year of the meridian is the year of the lesser yin, the year of the lesser evil is the year of the greater yin, the year of the lesser evil is the year of the lesser evil, the year of the lesser evil is the year of the lesser evil, the year of the lesser evil is the year of the lesser evil, the year of the lesser evil is the year of the lesser evil, the year of the lesser evil is the year of the lesser evil, the year of the lesser evil is the year of the lesser evil, the year of the lesser evil is the year of the lesser evil, the year of the lesser evil is the year of the lesser evil, the year of the lesser evil is the

古文：此天地之阴阳也。
现代文：岐伯说：通常的道理，这里指的是天地运气的阴阳变化。
English: Qibo said: the usual reason, here refers to the yin and yang changes of heaven and earth luck.

古文：夫数之可数者，人中之阴阳也。
现代文：我所说的阴阳之数，是可以数的，是人身体中的阴阳。
English: What I call the number of yin and yang, is countable, is the yin and yang in the human body.

古文：然所合，数之可得者也。
现代文：所以相符合的，是可以数得出的阴阳之数。
English: Therefore, what is consistent is the number of yin and yang that can be counted.

古文：夫阴阳者，数之可十，推之可百，数之可千，推之可万。
现代文：至于阴阳的变化，可以从十而推演至百，可以从千而推演至万。
English: As for the changes in yin and yang, they can be extrapolated from ten to one hundred, and from one thousand to ten thousand.

古文：天地阴阳者，不以数推，以象之谓也。
现代文：所以天地阴阳的变化，不能用数字去类推，只能从自然万象的变化中去推求。
English: Therefore, the changes in the yin and yang of heaven and earth cannot be analogized with numbers, but can only be inferred from the changes in nature.

古文：帝曰：愿闻其所始也。
现代文：黄帝说：我想听听运气学说是怎样创始的。
English: Huang Di said: I want to hear how the luck theory was founded.

古文：岐伯曰：昭乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯说：你提这个问题很高明的啊！
English: Qibo said: Your question is very clear!

古文：臣览《太始天元册》文，丹天之气经于牛女戊分，黅天之气经于心尾己分，苍天之气经于危室柳鬼，素天之气经于亢氐昴毕，玄天之气经于张翼娄胃。
现代文：我曾看到《太始天元册》文记载，红色的天气，经过牛、女二宿及西北方的戊分；黄色的天气，经过心、尾二宿及东南方的己分；青色的天气，经过危、室二宿与柳、鬼二宿之间；白色的天气，经过亢、氐二宿与昴、毕二宿之间；黑色的天气，经过张、翼二宿与娄、胃二宿之间。
English: I once saw a record in the "Book of the Elements of the First Day of Heaven" that the red weather passed through the ox, the female second house and the northwest pentagon; the yellow weather passed through the heart, the tail second house and the southeast pentagon; the blue weather passed through the danger, the room second house and the willow, the ghost second house; the white weather passed through the beak, the beak second house and the beak, the beak second house; the black weather passed through the Zhang, the wing second house and the beak, the stomach second house.

古文：所谓戊己分者，奎壁角轸，则天地之门户也。
现代文：所谓，戊分即奎、壁二宿所在处；己分即角、轸二宿所在处，所以是天地阴阳的门户。
English: So-called, wubun is kui, and the wall is where the two lodgings are located; shibun is the corner, and the gong is where the two lodgings are located, so it is the portal of heaven and earth, yin and yang.

古文：夫候之所始，道之所生，不可不通也。帝曰：善。
现代文：这是推演气候的开始，自然规律的所在，不可以不通。黄帝说：好。
English: This is the beginning of the deduction of the climate, where the laws of nature are, it can not be misunderstood. Huangdi said: Good.

古文：论言，天地者万物之上下，左右者阴阳之道路，未知其所谓也。
现代文：在《天元纪大论》中曾说：天地是万物的上下，左右是阴阳的道路，不知道是什么意思？
English: In the "Grand Theory of the Celestial Epoch," he said: Heaven and earth are the upper and lower of all things, and the left and right are the paths of yin and yang. I don't know what that means.

古文：岐伯曰：所谓上下者，岁上下见阴阳之所在也。
现代文：岐伯说：这里所说的 上下 指的是，从该年的司天、在泉，以见阴阳所在的位置。
English: Qibo said, "The above-and-below mentioned here refers to the location of yin and yang from that year's siding, in the spring, to see.

古文：左右者，诸上，见厥阴，左少阴，右太阳；见少阴，左太阴，右厥阴；见太阴，左少阳，右少阴；见少阳，左阳明，右太阴；见阳明，左太阳，右少阳；见太阳，左厥阴，右阳明。
现代文：所说的 左右 指的是，司天的左、右间气，凡是：厥阴司天，左间气是少阴，右间气是太阳；少阴司天，左间气是太阴，右间气是厥阴；太阴司天，左间气是少阳，右间气是少阴；少阳司天，左间气是阳明，右间气是太阴；阳明司天，左间气是太阳，右间气是少阳；太阳司天，左间气是厥阴，右间气是阳明。
English: What is meant by "left and right" is that the air between the left and right sides of the heaven is generally: the left side of the heaven is the sun, the right side is the sun; the left side of the heaven is the sun, the right side is the sun; the left side of the heaven is the sun, the right side is the sun; the left side of the heaven is the sun, the right side is the sun; the left side of the heaven is the sun, the right side is the sun; the left side of the heaven is the sun, the right side is the sun; the left side of the heaven is the sun, the right side is the sun; the left side of

古文：所谓面北而定其位，言其见也。
现代文：这里说的左右，是面向北方所见的位置。黄帝说：什么叫做 在泉 ？
English: The left and right mentioned here are the positions seen facing north. Huangdi said: What is called in the spring?

古文：帝曰：何谓下？岐伯曰：厥阴在上，则少阳在下，左阳明，右太阴；少阴在上，则阳明在下，左太阳，右少阳；太阴在上，则太阳在下，左厥阴，右阳明；少阳在上，则厥阴在下，左少阴，右太阳；阳明在上，则少阴在下，左太阴，右厥阴；太阳在上，则太阴在下，左少阳，右少阴。
现代文：岐伯说：厥阴司天，则少阳在泉，在泉的左间气是阳明，右间气是太阴；少阴司天，则阳明在泉，在泉的左间气是太阳，右间气是少阳；太阴司天，则太阳在泉，在泉的左间气是厥阴，右间气是阳明；少阳司天，则厥阴在泉，在泉的左间气是少阴，右间气是太阳；阳明司天，则少阴在泉，在泉的左间气是太阴，右间气是厥阴；太阳司天，则太阴在泉，在泉的左间气是少阳，右间气是少阴。
English: Qibo said, "When the sky is cloudy, the sun is low in the spring, and the air to the left of the spring is bright, and the air to the right is too cloudy. When the sky is low, the sun is bright in the spring, and the air to the left of the spring is the sun, and the air to the right is low in the spring. When the sky is too cloudy, the sun is in the spring, and the air to the left of the spring is cloudy, and the air to the right is bright. When the sky is low in the spring, the air to the left of the spring is low in the spring, and the air to the right

古文：所谓面南而命其位，言其见也。
现代文：这里所说的左右，是面向南方所见的位置。
English: The left and right mentioned here are the positions seen from the south.

古文：上下相遘，寒暑相临，气相得则和，不相得则病。
现代文：客气和主气互相交感，客、主之六气互相加临，若客、主之气相得的就属平和，不相得的就要生病。
English: The guest's and the host's qi are compatible with each other. If the guest and the host's qi are compatible, there will be peace. If they are not compatible, there will be illness.

古文：帝曰：气相得而病者，何也？
现代文：黄帝说：若客、主之气相得而生病，是什么原因呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "If a guest gets sick because of the Lord's anger, what is the reason?

古文：岐伯曰：以下临上，不当位也。
现代文：岐伯说：以下临上，属于不当其位。
English: Qi Bo said, "The following enthronement is improper.

古文：帝曰：动静何如？
现代文：黄帝说：天地的动静是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said: What is the movement of heaven and earth?

古文：岐伯曰：上者右行，下者左行，左右周天，余而复会也。
现代文：岐伯说：天在上，自东而西是向右运行；地在下，自西而东是向左运行，左行和右行，当一年的时间，经周天三百六十五度及其余数四分之一度，而复会于原来的位置。
English: Qibo said: The sky above, from east to west, is moving to the right; the earth below, from west to east, is moving to the left, left and right, when a year's time passes through 365 degrees and the remaining quarter of a degree, and returns to its original position.

古文：帝曰：予闻鬼臾区曰： 应地者静。 
现代文：黄帝说：我听到鬼臾区说： 应地之气是静止而不动的 。
English: Huang Di said: I heard the ghost of the district saying: The spirit of the place is static and does not move.

古文：今夫子乃言下者左行，不知其所谓也。
现代文：现在先生乃说： 地气向左运行 ，不明白你的意思，我想听听是什么道理。
English: Now the teacher is saying: The earth's atmosphere is moving to the left, I don't understand what you mean, I want to hear what the reason is.

古文：愿闻何以生之乎？岐伯曰：天地动静，五行迁复，虽鬼臾区其上候而已，犹不能遍明。
现代文：岐伯说：天地的运动和静止，五行的递迁和往复，鬼臾区虽然知道了天的运行情况，但是没有全面的了解。
English: Qibo said: The movement and stillness of heaven and earth, the progression and reciprocation of the five elements, although the ghost-haunted area knows the operation of heaven, it does not have a comprehensive understanding.

古文：夫变化之用，天垂象，地成形，七曜纬虚，五行丽地。
现代文：关于天地变化的相互作用，天显示的是日月二十八宿等星象，地生成了有形的物质，七星围绕在苍穹之中，五行附着在大地之上。
English: Regarding the interaction of the changes in heaven and earth, the sky shows the stars such as the sun, the moon and the twenty-eight constellations, the earth has produced tangible matter, the seven stars surround the sky, and the five elements are attached to the earth.

古文：地者，所以载生成之形类也。虚者，所以列应天之精气也。
现代文：所以，大地承载各类有形的物质，苍穹散布日月五星的精气。
English: Therefore, the earth carries all kinds of tangible materials, and the sky spreads the essence of the sun, moon and stars.

古文：形精之动，犹根本之与枝叶也。
现代文：地之形质与天之精气的运动，就像树根与枝叶的关系。
English: The relationship between the nature of the earth and the movement of the spirit of heaven is like that between the roots of a tree and its branches and leaves.

古文：仰观其象，虽远可知也。
现代文：仰望天象，虽然距离很远，仍然可以知晓它们的情况。
English: Looking up at the celestial bodies, even though they are far away, we can still know their condition.

古文：帝曰：地之为下否乎？
现代文：黄帝说：大地是不是在苍穹的下面呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Is the earth under the sky?

古文：岐伯曰：地为人之下，太虚之中者也。
现代文：岐伯说：应该说大地是在人的下面，在苍穹的中间。
English: Kibo said: It should be said that the earth is below man, in the middle of the sky.

古文：帝曰：凭乎？
现代文：黄帝说：它在苍穹中间依靠的是什么呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What does it rely on to fly in the middle of the sky?"

古文：岐伯曰：大气举之也。
现代文：岐伯说：是苍穹的大气把它举升起来的。
English: Qibo said: It was the atmosphere of the sky that lifted it up.

古文：燥以干之，暑以蒸之，风以动之，湿以润之，寒以坚之，火以温之。
现代文：燥气使它干燥，暑气使它蒸发，风气使它动荡，湿气使它滋润，寒气使它坚实，火气使它温暖。
English: Dry air makes it dry, hot air makes it evaporate, wind makes it turbulent, moisture makes it moist, cold air makes it solid, and fire makes it warm.

古文：故风寒在下，燥热在上，湿气在中，火游行其间，寒暑六入，故令虚而化生也。
现代文：所以风寒在于下，燥热在于上，湿气在于中，火气游行于中间，一年之内，寒暑湿燥风火六气下临于大地，由于它感受了六气的影响而化生出万物。
English: Therefore, wind and cold are below, heat and dryness are above, humidity is in the middle, and fire and gas are in the middle. Within a year, cold, heat, humidity, dryness, wind and fire come to the earth under the influence of the six elements, and everything is born because it feels the influence of the six elements.

古文：故燥胜则地干，暑胜则地热，风胜则地动，湿胜则地泥，寒胜则地裂，火胜则地固矣。
现代文：所以燥气太过地就干燥，暑气太过地就炽热，风气太过地就动荡，湿气太过地就泥泞，寒气太过地就坼裂，火气太过地就坚固。
English: Therefore, the dry air is too dry, the hot air is too hot, the culture is too turbulent, the humidity is too muddy, the cold is too cold, and the fire is too strong.

古文：帝曰：天地之气，何以候之？
现代文：黄帝说：司天在泉之气，对人的影响，从脉上怎样诊候呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Siten is in the air of the spring, the influence on people, how to diagnose from the pulse?

古文：岐伯曰：天地之气，胜复之作，不形于诊也。
现代文：岐伯说：司天在泉之气，胜气和复气的发作，不表现于脉诊上。
English: Qi Bo said: Siten is in the spring of qi, and the attacks of qi and qi are not manifested in pulse diagnosis.

古文：《脉法》曰： 天地之变，无以脉诊。 
现代文：《脉法》上说： 司天在泉之气的变化，不能根据脉象进行诊察。 
English: "Pulse Method" said: Siten is in the changes of the spring qi, and can not be diagnosed according to the pulse.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：就是这个意思。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：帝曰：间气何如？
现代文：黄帝说：间气的反应怎样呢？
English: Huang Di said: What is the reaction of the interstitial gas?

古文：岐伯曰：随气所在，期于左右。
现代文：岐伯说：可以随着每年间气应于左、右手的脉搏去测知。
English: Qi Bo said: It can be detected according to the pulse of the left and right hands that should be breathed in every year.

古文：帝曰：期之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：怎样测知呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "How can I detect it?"

古文：岐伯曰：从其气则和，逢其气则病。不当其位者病，迭移其位者病，失守其位者危，尺寸反者死，阴阳交者死。
现代文：岐伯说：脉气与岁气相应的就平和，脉气与岁气相违的就生病，相应之脉不当其位而见于他位的要生病，左、右脉互移其位的要生病，相应之脉位反见于克贼脉象的则病情危重，两手尺脉和寸脉相反的就要死亡，左、右手阴阳互相交见的也要死亡。
English: Qi Bo said: the pulse qi corresponding to the year qi is peaceful, the pulse qi contrary to the year qi is sick, the corresponding pulse is inappropriate and should be sick, the left and right pulse interchanges its position, the corresponding pulse position is in critical condition, the two-handed ruler pulse and inch pulse are opposite, and the left and right yin and yang intersecting each other should also die.

古文：先立其年，以知其气，左右应见，然后乃可以言死生之逆顺。
现代文：首先要确立每年的运气，以测知岁气与脉象相应的正常情况，明确左、右间气应当出现的位置，然后才可以预测人的生死和病情的逆顺。
English: First of all, it is necessary to establish the luck of each year, to measure the normal situation corresponding to the year qi and pulse image, and to clarify the position where the left and right qi should appear, and then it is possible to predict the life and death of a person and the reversal of the disease.

古文：帝曰：寒暑燥湿风火，在人合之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：寒暑燥湿风火六气，与人体是怎样应和的呢？
English: Huangdi said: cold, hot, dry, wet and windy, how does it fit with the human body?

古文：其于万物何以生化？
现代文：对于万物的生化，又有什么关系呢？
English: What does this have to do with the biochemistry of all things?

古文：岐伯曰：东方生风，风生木，木生酸，酸生肝，肝生筋，筋生心。
现代文：岐伯说：东方生风，春风能使木类生长，木气生酸味，酸味滋养肝脏，肝滋养筋膜，肝气输于筋膜，其气又能滋养心脏。
English: Qi Bo said: the East is windy, the spring wind can make wood grow, the wood gas is sour, the sour nourishes the liver, the liver nourishes the fascia, the liver gas is transferred to the fascia, and its gas can nourish the heart.

古文：其在天为玄，在人为道，在地为化。
现代文：六气，在太空深远无边，在人为认识事物的变化规律，在地为万物的生化。
English: The six airs are far-reaching and boundless in space, in the artificial understanding of the law of change of things, and in the earth for the biochemistry of all things.

古文：化生五味，道生智，玄生神，化生气。
现代文：生化然后能生成五味，认识了事物的规律，然后能生成智慧，深远无边的宇宙，生成变化莫测的神，变化而生成万物之气机。
English: Biochemistry can then generate five tastes, recognize the laws of things, and then generate wisdom, a far-reaching and boundless universe, generate unpredictable gods, and generate the gas engine of all things by changing.

古文：神在天为风，在地为木，在体为筋，在气为柔，在脏为肝。
现代文：神的变化，具体表现为：在天应在风，在地应在木，在人体应在筋，在气应在柔和，在脏应在肝。
English: God's changes are specifically manifested as: in heaven it should be wind, on earth it should be wood, in the human body it should be sinew, in the air it should be soft, and in the heart it should be liver.

古文：其性为暄，其德为和，其用为动，其色为苍，其化为荣，其虫毛，其政为散，其令宣发，其变摧拉，其眚为陨，其味为酸，其志为怒。
现代文：其性为温暖，其德为平和，其功用为动，其色为青，其生化为繁荣，其虫为毛虫，其政为升散，其令为宣布舒发，其变动为摧折败坏，其灾为陨落，其味为酸，其情志为怒。
English: Its nature is warmth, its virtue is peace, its function is movement, its color is blue, its biochemistry is prosperity, its insect is caterpillar, its politics is rise and dispersion, its order is announcement of relief, its change is destruction, its disaster is downfall, its taste is sour, and its emotion is anger.

古文：怒伤肝，悲胜怒；风伤肝，燥胜风；酸伤筋，辛胜酸。
现代文：怒能伤肝，悲哀能抑制怒气；风气能伤肝，燥气能克制风气；酸味能伤筋，辛味能克制酸味。
English: Anger can hurt the liver, sadness can restrain anger; culture can hurt the liver, dryness can restrain culture; sourness can hurt the muscle, pungency can restrain sourness.

古文：南方生热，热生火，火生苦，苦生心，心生血，血生脾。
现代文：南方生热，热盛则生火，火气能生苦味，苦味入心，滋养心脏，心能生血，心气通过血以滋养脾脏。
English: The south generates heat, the prosperous heat generates fire, the hot gas generates bitterness, the bitterness penetrates the heart and nourishes the heart, the heart generates blood, and the heart energy nourishes the spleen through the blood.

古文：其在天为热，在地为火，在体为脉，在气为息，在脏为心。
现代文：变化莫测的神，其具体表现为：在天应在热，在地应在火，在人体应在脉，在气应在阳气生长，在脏应在心。
English: The concrete manifestation of the unpredictable god is: in heaven, it should be hot, in the earth, it should be on fire, in the human body, it should be in the veins, in the qi, it should grow in the yang, and in the organs, it should be in the heart.

古文：其性为暑，其德为显，其用为躁，其色为赤，其化为茂，其虫羽，其政为明，其令郁蒸，其变炎烁，其眚燔焫，其味为苦，其志为喜。
现代文：其性为暑热，其德为显现物象，其功用为躁动，其色为赤，其生化为茂盛，其虫为羽虫，其政为明显，其令为热盛，其变动为炎热灼烁，其灾为热灼焚烧，其味为苦，其情志为喜。
English: Its nature is heat, its virtue is the appearance of things, its function is agitation, its color is red, its biochemistry is flourishing, its insect is a winged insect, its government is obvious, its order is flourishing, its change is scorching, its disaster is burning, its taste is bitter, and its emotion is joy.

古文：喜伤心，恐胜喜；热伤气，寒胜热；苦伤气，咸胜苦。
现代文：喜能伤心，恐惧能抑制喜气；热能伤气，寒能克制热气；苦味能伤气，咸味能克制苦味。
English: Happiness can hurt, fear can suppress happiness; heat can hurt, cold can restrain heat; bitterness can hurt, salt can restrain bitterness.

古文：中央生湿，湿生土，土生甘，甘生脾，脾生肉，肉生肺。
现代文：中央生湿，湿能生土，土气能生甘味，甘味入脾，能滋养脾脏，脾能滋养肌肉，脾气通过肌肉而滋养肺脏。
English: The center produces moisture, moisture can produce soil, soil can produce sweetness, sweetness enters the spleen, can nourish the spleen, the spleen can nourish the muscles, and the spleen can nourish the lungs through the muscles.

古文：其在天为湿，在地为土，在体为肉，在气为充，在脏为脾。
现代文：变化莫测的神，其具体表现为：在天应于湿，在地应于土，在人体应于肉，在气应于物体充盈，在脏应于脾。
English: An unpredictable god, whose specific manifestations are: in the sky, it should be wet, in the earth, it should be soil, in the human body, it should be flesh, in the air, it should be filled with objects, and in the intestines, it should be spleen.

古文：其性静兼，其德为濡，其用为化，其色为黄，其化为盈，其虫倮，其政为谧，其令云雨，其变动注，其眚淫溃，其味为甘，其志为思。
现代文：其性安静能兼化万物，其德为濡润，其功用为生化，其色黄，其生化为万物盈满，其虫为倮虫，其政为安静，其令为布化云雨，其变化为久雨不止，其灾为湿雨土崩，其味为甘，其情志为思。
English: Its nature is quiet and can transform all things, its virtue is moist, its function is biochemical, its color is yellow, its biochemical is the fullness of all things, its insect is the aphid, its politics is quiet, its order is to spread clouds and rain, its change is long rain, its disaster is wet rain and landslide, its taste is sweet, its sentiment is thought.

古文：思伤脾，怒胜思；湿伤肉，风胜湿；甘伤脾，酸胜甘。
现代文：思能伤脾，怒能抑制思虑；湿能伤肌肉，风能克制湿气；甘味能伤脾，酸味能克制甘味。
English: Thought can wound the spleen, anger can restrain thought; dampness can wound the muscles, wind can restrain moisture; sweetness can wound the spleen, sourness can restrain sweetness.

古文：西方生燥，燥生金，金生辛，辛生肺，肺生皮毛，皮毛生肾。
现代文：西方生燥，燥能生金，金气能生辛味，辛味入肺而能滋养肺脏，肺能滋养皮毛，肺气通过皮毛而又能滋养肾脏。
English: The West is dry, dryness can produce gold, gold gas can produce pungent, pungent enters the lungs and can nourish the lungs, the lungs can nourish the fur, and the lung gas can nourish the kidneys through the fur.

古文：其在天为燥，在地为金，在体为皮毛，在气为成，在脏为肺。
现代文：变化莫测的神，其具体表现为：在天应于燥，在地应于金，在人体应于皮毛，在气应于万物成熟，在脏应于肺。
English: An unpredictable god, whose specific manifestation is: in heaven, it should be dry, in the earth, it should be gold, in the human body, it should be fur, in the air, it should be the maturity of all things, and in the intestines, it should be the lungs.

古文：其性为凉，其德为清，其用为固，其色为白，其化为敛，其虫介，其政为劲，其令雾露，其变肃杀，其眚苍落，其味为辛，其志为忧。
现代文：其性为清凉，其德为洁净，其功用为坚固，其色为白，其生化为收敛，其虫为介虫，其政为刚劲，其令为雾露，其变动为严酷摧残，其灾为植物凋落，其味为辛，其情志为忧愁。
English: Its nature is cool, its virtue is clean, its function is firm, its color is white, its biochemistry is convergence, its insect is parasite, its politics is vigor, its order is mist, its change is severe destruction, its disaster is plant decline, its taste is bitter, and its emotion is sadness.

古文：忧伤肺，喜胜忧；热伤皮毛，寒胜热；辛伤皮毛，苦胜辛。
现代文：忧能伤肺，喜能抑制忧愁；热能伤皮毛，寒能克制热气；辛味能伤皮毛，苦味能克制辛味。
English: Sorrow can hurt the lungs, joy can suppress sorrow; heat can hurt the fur, cold can restrain the heat; pungent can hurt the fur, bitter can restrain the pungent.

古文：北方生寒，寒生水，水生咸，咸生肾，肾生骨髓，髓生肝。
现代文：北方生寒，寒能生水，水气能生咸味，咸味入肾而能滋养肾脏，肾能滋养骨髓，肾气通过骨髓而能滋养肝脏。
English: The north produces cold, cold can produce water, water vapor can produce salty taste, salty taste enters the kidney and can nourish the kidney, the kidney can nourish the bone marrow, and the kidney gas can nourish the liver through the bone marrow.

古文：其在天为寒，在地为水，在体为骨，在气为坚，在脏为肾。
现代文：变化莫测的神，其具体表现为：在天应于寒，在地应于水，在人体应于骨，在气应于物体坚实，在脏应于肾。
English: An unpredictable god, whose specific manifestations are: in heaven it should be cold, in the earth it should be water, in the human body it should be bones, in the air it should be solid objects, and in the intestines it should be kidneys.

古文：其性为凛，其德为寒，其用为脏，其色为黑，其化为肃，其虫鳞，其政为静，其令霰雪，其变凝冽，其眚冰雹，其味为咸，其志为恐。
现代文：其性为严凛，其德为寒冷，其功用为闭藏，其色为黑，其生化为整肃，其虫为鳞虫，其政为平静，其令为霰雪，其变动为水冰气寒，其灾为冰雹，其味为咸，其情志为恐。
English: Its nature is austere, its virtue is cold, its function is seclusion, its color is black, its biochemistry is purification, its insects are scale insects, its government is calm, its order is snow removal, its change is water ice and gas cold, its disaster is hailstorm, its taste is salty, and its emotion is fear.

古文：恐伤肾，思胜恐；寒伤血，燥胜寒；咸伤血，甘胜咸。
现代文：恐能伤肾，思能抑制恐惧；寒能伤血，燥能克制寒气；咸味能伤血，甘味能克制咸味。
English: Fear can hurt the kidneys, thought can suppress fear; cold can hurt the blood, dryness can restrain the cold; salty can hurt the blood, sweetness can restrain the salty.

古文：五气更立，各有所先，非其位则邪，当其位则正。帝曰：病生之变何如？
现代文：五行之气交替更换，各自主管时令的变化并遵循一定的规律，如果没有遵循一定的次序，就要出现异常的邪气，万物就要有灾祸；如果遵循一定的次序，就是正气，万物的生化也就正常。黄帝说：邪气致病所发生的变化是怎样的呢？
English: The five elements of qi alternate and change, each responsible for seasonal changes and following a certain law. If a certain order is not followed, abnormal evil qi will appear, and all things will be plagued. If a certain order is followed, it is righteous qi, and the biochemistry of all things will be normal. Huangdi said: What are the changes caused by evil qi?

古文：岐伯曰：气相得则微，不相得则甚。
现代文：岐伯说：客气与主时之气方位相合，则病情轻微；客气与主时之气方位不相合，则病情严重。
English: Qi Bo said, "If your qi is in line with your master's qi, then your illness is mild; if your qi is out of line with your master's qi, then your illness is severe."

古文：帝曰：主岁何如？
现代文：黄帝说：五气主岁是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is the nature of the five elements?

古文：岐伯曰：气有余则制己所胜而侮所不胜，其不及则己所不胜侮而乘之，己所胜轻而侮之。
现代文：岐伯说：凡气有余，则能克制自己能克制的气，而又能欺侮克制自己的气；气不足，则克制自己的气趁其不足而来欺侮，自己所能克制的气也轻蔑地欺侮自己。
English: Qibo said: "If one has more than enough qi, one can restrain one's qi that can be restrained, and at the same time, one can bully and restrain one's qi; if one lacks qi, one's qi that can be restrained will take advantage of one's lack of qi to bully, and the qi that one can restrain will also bully one's self with contempt.

古文：侮反受邪，侮而受邪，寡于畏也。
现代文：由于本气有余而进行欺侮或乘别气之不足而进行欺侮的，也往往要受邪，是因为它无所畏忌，而缺少防御的能力。
English: Those who bully because they have more than enough natural energy or take advantage of the lack of other energy to bully, often suffer from evil, because they are fearless and lack the ability to defend themselves.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：好。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

