古文：屈原者，名平，楚之同姓也。
现代文：屈原，名平，和楚国王族同姓。
English: Qu Yuan, also known as Ping, has the same surname as the Chu royal family.

古文：为楚怀王左徒。
现代文：担任楚怀王的左徒。
English: He served as Chu Huai Wang's right-hand man.

古文：博闻强识，明於治乱，娴于辞令。
现代文：屈原见闻广博，记忆力强，深明国家安定与动乱的道理，擅长辞令。
English: Qu Yuan is well-informed, has a strong memory, understands the principle of national stability and turmoil, and is good at rhetoric.

古文：入则与王图议国事，以出号令；出则接遇宾客，应对诸侯。
现代文：屈原在朝内就和楚怀王商议国家大事，以便颁发号召命令；在朝外就接待宾客，应付诸侯。
English: Within the court, Qu Yuan discussed national affairs with King Chu Huai in order to issue a call to order; outside the court, he received guests and dealt with princes.

古文：王甚任之。
现代文：楚怀王十分信任他。
English: King Chu Huai trusted him very much.

古文：上官大夫与之同列，争宠而心害其能。
现代文：而上官大夫和屈原职位相同，他为了能得到怀王的宠信，很嫉妒屈原的才能。
English: However, Shangguan Daifu held the same position as Qu Yuan. In order to gain the favor of King Huai, he was very jealous of Qu Yuan's talent.

古文：怀王使屈原造为宪令，屈平属草稿未定。
现代文：有一次，怀王命屈原制定国家法令，屈原刚写完草稿，还没最后修定完成。
English: Once upon a time, King Huai ordered Qu Yuan to formulate a national decree. Qu Yuan had just finished writing the draft, but had not yet completed the final revision.

古文：上官大夫见而欲夺之，屈平不与，因谗之曰： 王使屈平为令，众莫不知，每一令出，平伐其功，以为 非我莫能为 也。 
现代文：上官大夫见到之后想夺为己有，但屈原不肯给他。他就和楚怀王说屈原的坏话： 大王您让屈原制定法令，上下没有人不知道这件事，每颁布一条法令，屈原就自夸其功，说是 除了我之外，谁也做不出来 。 
English: After the Shangguan doctor saw it, he wanted to take it for himself, but Qu Yuan refused to give it to him. He spoke ill of Qu Yuan to King Chu Hui: "Great King, you asked Qu Yuan to make a decree. No one knew about it. Every time a decree was issued, Qu Yuan boasted about his work, saying that no one could do it but me."

古文：王怒而疏屈平。
现代文：怀王听了，非常生气，因此就对屈原疏远了。
English: Huai Wang was very angry when he heard this, so he distanced himself from Qu Yuan.

古文：屈平疾王听之不聪也，谗谄之蔽明也，邪曲之害公也，方正之不容也，故忧愁幽思而作离骚。
现代文：屈原对怀王听闻失灵而不能分辨是非，视线被谗佞谄媚之徒所蒙蔽而不能辨明真伪，致使邪恶伤害了公道，正直的人不被朝廷所容，感到万分痛心，所以才忧愁苦闷，沉郁深思而写成《离骚》。
English: Qu Yuan was unable to distinguish between right and wrong when he heard about King Huai, his sight was blinded by flatterers and he could not distinguish between truth and falsehood. As a result, evil harmed justice, and honest people were not tolerated by the court. He felt very sad, and that is why he wrote "The Parting."

古文：离骚者，犹离忧也。
现代文：所谓 离骚 ，就是遭遇忧患之意。
English: The so-called 离骚 means to encounter sorrow.

古文：夫天者，人之始也；父母者，人之本也。
现代文：上天是人的原始；父母是人的根本。
English: Heaven is the origin of man; parents are the foundation of man.

古文：人穷则反本，故劳苦倦极，未尝不呼天也；疾痛惨怛，未尝不呼父母也。
现代文：人在处境窘迫的时候，就要追念根本，所以在劳累困苦到极点时，没有不呼叫上天的；在受到病痛折磨无法忍受时，没有不呼叫父母的。
English: When one is in a predicament, one must remember the fundamentals. Therefore, when one is overworked, overburdened, and suffering to the extreme, one cannot but call out to the heavens; when one is suffering from unbearable pain, one cannot but call out to one's parents.

古文：屈平正道直行，竭忠尽智以事其君，谗人间之，可谓穷矣。
现代文：屈原坚持公证，行为耿直，对君王他一片忠心，竭尽才智，但是却受到小人的挑拨离间，其处境可以说是极端困窘了。
English: Qu Yuan insisted on notarization, his behavior was upright, he was loyal to the king, and he tried his best, but he was provoked by villains. His situation can be said to be extremely embarrassing.

古文：信而见疑，忠而被谤，能无怨乎？
现代文：因诚心为国而被君王怀疑，因忠心事主而被小人诽谤，怎能没有悲愤之情呢？
English: To be doubted by a king because of one's sincerity as a country, to be slandered by a villain because of one's loyalty to one's master, how can there not be feelings of sorrow and indignation?

古文：屈平之作离骚，盖自怨生也。
现代文：屈原写作《离骚》，正是为了抒发这种悲愤之情。
English: Qu Yuan wrote "Leaving So" precisely to express this feeling of sadness and indignation.

古文：国风好色而不淫，小雅怨诽而不乱。若离骚者，可谓兼之矣。
现代文：《诗经·国风》虽然有许多描写男女恋情之作，但却不是乱；《诗经·小雅》虽然表露了百姓对朝政的诽谤愤怨之情，但却不主张公开反叛。而像屈原的《离骚》，可以说是兼有以上两者的优点。
English: Although there are many works that describe the love affair between a man and a woman, "Shisho: Kokufu" is not chaotic; although "Shisho: Xiaoya" reveals the people's feelings of slander and resentment against the imperial government, it does not advocate open rebellion. And like Qu Yuan's "Leaving So," it can be said to have the advantages of both of the above.

古文：上称帝喾，下道齐桓，中述汤武，以刺世事。
现代文：屈原在《离骚》中，往上追述到帝喾的事迹，近世赞扬齐桓的伟业，中间叙述商汤、周武的德政，以此来批评时政。
English: In "Leaving So," Qu Yuan criticizes the politics of the time by recounting the deeds of the imperial family, praising the great deeds of Qi Huan in modern times, and describing the moral government of Shang Tang and Zhou Wu in the middle.

古文：明道德之广崇，治乱之条贯，靡不毕见。
现代文：阐明道德内容的广博深远，治乱兴衰的因果必然，这些都讲得非常详尽。
English: The broad and far-reaching moral content and the inevitable cause and effect of the rise and fall of the turmoil are all explained in great detail.

古文：其文约，其辞微，其志絜，其行廉，其称文小而其指极大，举类迩而见义远。
现代文：其语言简约精炼，其内容却托意深微，其情志高洁，其品行廉正，其文句虽写的是细小事物，而其意旨却极其宏大博深，其所举的虽然都是眼前习见的事例，而所寄托的意义却极其深远。
English: Its language is concise and refined, but its content is subtle, its sentiments are noble, its conduct is upright, and although its words are written about small things, its meaning is extremely broad and profound. Although the examples it cites are examples learned at first hand, the meaning it holds is extremely far-reaching.

古文：其志絜，故其称物芳。
现代文：其情志高洁，所以喜欢用香草作譬喻。
English: His sentiments are noble and pure, so he likes to use vanilla as a metaphor.

古文：其行廉，故死而不容。
现代文：其品行廉正，所以至死也不放松对自己的要求。
English: He was a man of integrity, and he never relaxed his standards until the day he died.

古文：自疏濯淖汙泥之中，蝉蜕於浊秽，以浮游尘埃之外，不获世之滋垢，皭然泥而不滓者也。
现代文：身处污泥浊水之中而能洗涤干净，就像蝉能从混浊污秽中解脱出来一样，在尘埃之外浮游，不被世俗的混浊所玷污，清白高洁，出污泥而不染。
English: Just as a cicada can extricate itself from muddy filth, it floats outside the dust, is not tarnished by worldly muddiness, is pure and clean, and does not stain when it comes out of mud.

古文：推此志也，虽与日月争光可也。
现代文：推论其高尚情志，就是说与日月争辉也是恰宜的。
English: It is also appropriate to deduce its noble sentiments, that is, to compete with the sun and the moon.

古文：屈平既绌，其後秦欲伐齐，齐与楚从亲，惠王患之，乃令张仪详去秦，厚币委质事楚，曰： 秦甚憎齐，齐与楚从亲，楚诚能绝齐，秦原献商、於之地六百里。 
现代文：屈原已经被贬，此后秦国打算攻打齐国，齐国跟楚国合纵相亲，秦惠王忧虑这件事，就派遣张仪假装离开秦国，带了丰厚的礼物去投靠侍奉楚国，说道： 秦国很憎恨齐国，齐国跟楚国合纵相亲，楚国如果确实能跟齐国断交，秦国愿意献出商、于一带六百里土地。 
English: Qu Yuan had been dethroned. After that, Qin planned to attack Qi. Qi was allied with Chu. Worried about this, Qin Hui Wang sent Zhang Yi to pretend to leave Qin, bringing a rich gift to serve Chu. He said: Qin hated Qi very much. Qi was allied with Chu. If Chu could indeed break off diplomatic relations with Qi, Qin would be willing to donate 600 miles of land in the area.

古文：楚怀王贪而信张仪，遂绝齐，使使如秦受地。
现代文：楚怀王贪心地听信了张仪的话，就跟齐国断交，并派遣使者到秦国去接受土地。
English: King Chu Huai eagerly listened to Zhang Yi's words, broke off diplomatic relations with Qi, and sent an envoy to Qin to accept the land.

古文：张仪诈之曰： 仪与王约六里，不闻六百里。 
现代文：张仪诈骗楚国的使者说： 我张仪跟楚怀王约定的是六里，没有听说过六百里。 
English: Zhang Yi cheated the emissary of the State of Chu and said: I, Zhang Yi, agreed with the King of Chu and Huai on six miles, but I have never heard of six hundred miles.

古文：楚使怒去，归告怀王。
现代文：楚国使者愤怒地离开秦国，回国报告楚怀王。
English: Envoys from the State of Chu angrily left the State of Qin and returned to report to King Chu Huai.

古文：怀王怒，大兴师伐秦。
现代文：楚怀王恼怒，大肆兴兵攻打秦国。
English: King Chu Huai was furious and attacked Qin.

古文：秦发兵击之，大破楚师於丹、淅，斩首八万，虏楚将屈匄，遂取楚之汉中地。
现代文：秦国出兵迎击楚军，在丹水、淅水一带把楚军打得大败，斩杀八万楚兵，俘虏了楚军将领屈，乘势夺取了楚国汉中一带地区。
English: Qin dispatched troops to meet the Chu army, defeated the Chu army in the areas of Danshui and Surabaya, killed 80,000 Chu soldiers, captured the Chu army generals, and seized the opportunity to seize the central Hanzhong area of Chu.

古文：怀王乃悉发国中兵以深入击秦，战於蓝田。
现代文：楚怀王就出动全国兵力，来深入攻击秦国，在蓝田交战。
English: King Chuhai then sent out troops from all over the country to attack Qin in depth and engage in battle in Lantian.

古文：魏闻之，袭楚至邓。
现代文：魏国听到这个讯息，发兵袭击楚国，一直深入到邓邑。
English: Wei heard this message and sent troops to attack Chu, reaching as far as Dengyun.

古文：楚兵惧，自秦归。
现代文：楚国军队恐惧，就从秦国撤军回国。
English: Fearing the Chu army, they withdrew from Qin and returned home.

古文：而齐竟怒不救楚，楚大困。
现代文：而齐国终因恼怒而不肯援救楚国，楚国大为困迫。
English: In the end, Qi refused to come to the rescue of Chu because of his anger, and Chu was in great trouble.

古文：明年，秦割汉中地与楚以和。楚王曰： 不原得地，原得张仪而甘心焉。 
现代文：第二年，秦国提出割让汉中一带土地和楚国讲和，但楚怀王说： 我不希望得到土地，只想得到张仪就甘心了。 
English: In the second year, Qin proposed to cede the land around Hanzhong to make peace with Chu, but King Chu Huai said, "I don't want to get the land, I just want to get Zhang Yi, so I'm willing to do it."

古文：张仪闻，乃曰： 以一仪而当汉中地，臣请往如楚。 
现代文：张仪听到这话，就说： 用我一个张仪来抵汉中之地，请大王答应我去楚国。 
English: When Zhang Yi heard this, she said: Use one Zhang Yi of mine to reach the land of Hanzhong, and ask the great king to allow me to go to Chu.

古文：如楚，又因厚币用事者臣靳尚，而设诡辩於怀王之宠姬郑袖。怀王竟听郑袖，复释去张仪。
现代文：张仪到楚国之后，又给楚国掌权的大臣靳尚送上厚礼，并用花言巧语欺骗怀王的宠姬郑袖，怀王竟然听信了郑袖的话，把张仪又给放跑了。
English: After Zhang Yi arrived in Chu, he also sent a gift to the powerful minister of Chu, Yu Shang, and deceived the king's favorite concubine, Zheng So, with flattering words. The king actually believed Zheng So's words and let Zhang Yi go.

古文：是时屈平既疏，不复在位，使於齐，顾反，谏怀王曰： 何不杀张仪？ 
现代文：这时屈原已被疏远，不再担任重要官职，刚被派到齐国出使，回来之后，向怀王进谏说： 大王您为什么不杀了张仪呢？ 
English: At this time, Qu Yuan had become estranged and no longer held an important official position. He had just been sent to Qi Province as an envoy. After his return, he said to King Huai, "Why didn't you kill Zhang Yi?

古文：怀王悔，追张仪不及。
现代文：怀王感到很后悔，派人去追赶，但已经来不及了。
English: Huai Wang felt very regretful and sent someone to chase him, but it was too late.

古文：其後诸侯共击楚，大破之，杀其将唐眛。
现代文：在此之后，各诸侯国联合攻打楚国，大败楚军，杀死了楚国大将唐眛。
English: After this, the various states jointly attacked Chu, defeated the Chu army, and killed the general of Chu, Tang Jun.

古文：时秦昭王与楚婚，欲与怀王会。怀王欲行，屈平曰： 秦虎狼之国，不可信，不如毋行。 
现代文：当时秦昭王和楚国结为姻亲，想和楚怀王见见面，楚怀王想要前往，屈原劝谏说： 秦国是虎狼一般贪暴的国家，是不能信任的，还是不去为好。 
English: At that time, Qin Zhao Wang and Chu Guo were in-laws and wanted to meet with Chu Hui Wang. Chu Hui Wang wanted to go, and Qu Yuan advised him: Qin Guo is a country where tigers and wolves are generally violent. If you can't trust it, it's better not to go.

古文：怀王稚子子兰劝王行： 柰何绝秦欢！ 
现代文：可是怀王的小儿子子兰劝怀王前去，他说： 为什么要断绝了秦王的好意呢？ 
English: But Zilan, the youngest son of King Huai, urged King Huai to go forward. He said: "Why should we break the goodwill of King Qin?

古文：怀王卒行。
现代文：怀王最终还是去了。
English: In the end, Huai Wang went anyway.

古文：入武关，秦伏兵绝其後，因留怀王，以求割地。
现代文：但他刚一进武关，秦朝的伏兵就斩断了他的归路，把怀王扣留，为的是让他答应割让土地。
English: But as soon as he entered Wuguan, the Qin ambush cut off his return route and detained Huai Wang in order to get him to agree to cede the land.

古文：怀王怒，不听。
现代文：怀王大怒，不肯应允。
English: King Huai was furious and refused to agree.

古文：亡走赵，赵不内。
现代文：逃到赵国，但赵国拒绝接纳。
English: He fled to Zhao Province, but Zhao Province refused to accept him.

古文：复之秦，竟死於秦而归葬。
现代文：然后又来到秦国，最终死在秦国，尸体运回楚国安葬。
English: Then he came to Qin again, and finally died in Qin, and his body was transported back to Chu for burial.

古文：长子顷襄王立，以其弟子兰为令尹。
现代文：怀王的大儿子顷襄王继位，任命他的弟弟子兰为令尹。
English: When the eldest son of King Huai, King Xiang, succeeded to the throne, he appointed his younger brother and disciple, Lan, as his regent.

古文：楚人既咎子兰以劝怀王入秦而不反也。
现代文：因子兰劝怀王入秦而最终死在秦国，楚国人都把此事的责任归罪于子兰。
English: Because Zilan persuaded King Huai to enter Qin and eventually died in Qin, the people of Chu all blamed Zilan for this.

古文：屈平既嫉之，虽放流，睠顾楚国，系心怀王，不忘欲反，冀幸君之一悟，俗之一改也。
现代文：屈原对子兰的所作所为，也非常痛恨。虽然身遭放逐，却依然眷恋楚国，怀念怀王，时刻惦记着能重返朝廷，总是希望国王能突然觉悟，不良习俗也为之改变。
English: Qu Yuan also hated Zilan's actions very much. Although he was exiled, he still loved the State of Chu, missed the King, and always thought about returning to the Imperial Court. He always hoped that the King would suddenly come to his senses, and that bad customs would change.

古文：其存君兴国而欲反覆之，一篇之中三致志焉。
现代文：他总是不忘怀念君王，复兴国家，扭转局势，所以在一篇作品中多次流露此种心情。
English: He always remembered the memory of the king, revived the country, and turned the situation around, so he expressed this feeling many times in one work.

古文：然终无可柰何，故不可以反，卒以此见怀王之终不悟也。
现代文：然而终究无可奈何，所以也不可能再返朝廷，于此也可见怀王最终也没有醒悟。
English: However, in the end, there was nothing he could do, so he could not return to the imperial court. This also shows that King Huai did not wake up in the end.

古文：人君无愚智贤不肖，莫不欲求忠以自为，举贤以自佐，然亡国破家相随属，而圣君治国累世而不见者，其所谓忠者不忠，而所谓贤者不贤也。
现代文：作为国君，不管他聪明还是愚蠢，有才还是无才，都希望找到忠臣和贤士来辅佐自己治理国家，然而亡国破家之事却不断发生，而圣明之君、太平之国却好多世代都未曾一见，其根本原因就在于其所谓忠臣并不忠，其所谓贤士并不贤。
English: As a sovereign, whether he is clever or stupid, talented or untalented, he hopes to find loyal subjects and sages to assist him in governing the country. However, the destruction of the country and the destruction of the family are constantly occurring, and the holy prince and the country of peace have not been seen for many generations. The fundamental reason for this is that his so-called loyal subjects are not loyal, and his so-called sages are not wise.

古文：怀王以不知忠臣之分，故内惑於郑袖，外欺於张仪，疏屈平而信上官大夫、令尹子兰。
现代文：怀王因不知晓忠臣之职分，所以在内被郑袖所迷惑，在外被张仪所欺骗，疏远屈原而信任上官大夫和令尹子兰。
English: Because King Huai did not know the duties of a loyal subject, he was deceived by Zheng So on the inside and deceived by Zhang Yi on the outside. He distanced himself from Qu Yuan and trusted Shangguan Daifu and Yin Zilan.

古文：兵挫地削，亡其六郡，身客死於秦，为天下笑。
现代文：结果使军队惨败，国土被侵占，失去了六郡地盘，自己还流落他乡，客死秦国，被天下人所耻笑。
English: As a result, the army suffered a crushing defeat, the country was invaded and occupied, six counties of land were lost, and he himself was exiled to another village, died a guest of Qin, and was ridiculed by the world.

古文：此不知人之祸也。
现代文：这是由于不知人所造成的灾祸。
English: This is a man-made disaster.

古文：易曰： 井泄不食，为我心恻，可以汲。
现代文：《易经》上说： 井已经疏浚干净，却没人来喝水，这是令人难过的事。
English: "The well has been dredged clean, but no one has come to drink the water, which is a sad thing," the I Ching said.

古文：王明，并受其福。 
现代文：国君若是圣明，大家都可以得到幸福。 
English: If the sovereign is a saint, everyone can be happy.

古文：王之不明，岂足福哉！
现代文：而怀王是如此不明，那里配得到幸福啊！
English: And the King of Wai is so unknown, where is happiness to be found!

古文：令尹子兰闻之大怒，卒使上官大夫短屈原於顷襄王，顷襄王怒而迁之。
现代文：令尹子兰听到以上情况勃然大怒，最终还是让上官大夫去向顷襄王说屈原的坏话，顷襄王一生气，就把屈原放逐了。
English: Upon hearing the above, Yin Zilan flew into a rage. In the end, he asked the Shangguan doctor to speak ill of Qu Yuan to King Xiang. When King Xiang became angry, he banished Qu Yuan.

古文：屈原至於江滨，被发行吟泽畔。
现代文：屈原来到江边，披头散发在荒野草泽上一边走，一边悲愤长吟。
English: Qu Yuan came to the edge of the river, walking on the grass in the wilderness with his head bowed, chanting a long sad and angry song.

古文：颜色憔悴，形容枯槁。
现代文：脸色憔悴，形体干瘦。
English: His face was gaunt, his body thin and withered.

古文：渔父见而问之曰： 子非三闾大夫欤？
现代文：一位渔翁看到他，就问道： 您不就是三闾大夫吗？
English: A fisherman saw him and asked, "Aren't you Dr. Samye?"

古文：何故而至此？ 
现代文：为什么到这里来呢？ 
English: Why did you come here?

古文：屈原曰： 举世混浊而我独清，众人皆醉而我独醒，是以见放。 
现代文：屈原说： 全社会的人都污浊而只有我是干净的，大家都昏沉大醉而只有我是清醒的，所以我才被放逐了。 
English: Qu Yuan said: The whole society is filthy and only I am clean, everyone is drunk and only I am sober, so I was banished.

古文：渔父曰： 夫圣人者，不凝滞於物而能与世推移。举世混浊，何不随其流而扬其波？
现代文：渔翁说： 一个道德修养达到最高境界的人，对事物的看法并非一成不变，而是能随着世俗风气而转移，全社会的人都污浊，你为什么不在其中随波逐流？
English: The fisherman said: A person who has reached the highest level of moral cultivation, the view of things is not immutable, but can be transferred with the secular culture, the whole society is dirty, why don't you go with the flow?

古文：众人皆醉，何不餔其糟而歠其醨？
现代文：大家都昏沉大醉，你为什么不在其中吃点残羹剩酒呢？
English: Everyone is so drunk, why don't you eat some of the leftover wine?

古文：何故怀瑾握瑜而自令见放为？ 
现代文：为什么要保持美玉一般的品德，而使自己讨了个被流放的下场呢？ 
English: Why should you maintain the general character of a beautiful ball, but make yourself an exile?

古文：屈原曰： 吾闻之，新沐者必弹冠，新浴者必振衣，人又谁能以身之察察，受物之汶汶者乎！
现代文：屈原回答说： 我听说过，刚洗过头的人一定要弹去帽子上的灰尘，刚洗过身躯的人一定要把衣服上的尘土抖干净，人们又有谁愿意以清白之身，而受外界污垢的玷染呢？
English: Qu Yuan replied, "I have heard that a person who has just washed his head must shake the dust off his hat, and a person who has just washed his body must shake the dust off his clothes. After all, who wants to be tarnished by external dirt with a clean body?

古文：宁赴常流而葬乎江鱼腹中耳，又安能以皓皓之白而蒙世俗之温蠖乎！ 
现代文：我宁愿跳入江水长流之内，葬身鱼腹之中，也不让自己的清白品德蒙受世俗的污染！ 
English: I would rather jump into the long stream of the river and bury myself in the belly of the fish, rather than allow my pure moral character to be polluted by the world!

古文：乃作怀沙之赋。
现代文：于是，屈原写下了作品《怀沙》，其中这样写道：
English: As a result, Qu Yuan wrote the work "Waisha," in which he wrote:

古文：其辞曰：陶陶孟夏兮，草木莽莽。
现代文：阳光强烈的初夏呀，草木茂盛地生长。
English: In the early summer, when the sun is strong, the plants grow luxuriantly.

古文：伤怀永哀兮，汩徂南土。
现代文：悲伤总是充满胸膛啊，我急匆匆来到南方。
English: Sadness always fills my chest, I hurried to the south.

古文：眴兮窈窈，孔静幽墨。
现代文：眼前是一片茫茫啊，沉寂得毫无声响。
English: There is a vast expanse in front of me. It is so quiet that there is no sound.

古文：冤结纡轸兮，离愍之长鞠；抚情效志兮，俯诎以自抑。
现代文：我的心情沉郁悲慨啊，这令人伤心日子又实在太长。抚心反省而无过错啊，蒙冤自抑而无惧。
English: My mood is gloomy and sad, it's a sad day that's been too long. I'm reflecting without guilt, I'm self-controlled without fear.

古文：刓方以为圜兮，常度未替；易初本由兮，君子所鄙。
现代文：想把方木削成圆木啊，但正常法度不可改易。抛开正路而走斜径啊，那将为君子所鄙弃。
English: If you want to cut a square log into a round log, you can't change the normal rules. If you abandon the right path and take a slanting path, it will be despised by a gentleman.

古文：章画职墨兮，前度未改；内直质重兮，大人所盛。
现代文：明确规范，牢记法度啊，往日的初衷决不反悔。品性忠厚，心地端正，为君子所赞美。
English: Clear norms, keep in mind the law, never regret the original intention of the past. Loyal character, upright heart, praised by gentlemen.

古文：巧匠不斫兮，孰察其揆正？
现代文：巧匠不挥动斧头砍削啊，谁能看出是否合乎标准。
English: If a craftsman does not wield an axe to cut wood, who can tell whether it is up to standard.

古文：玄文幽处兮，矇谓之不章；离娄微睇兮，瞽以为无明。
现代文：黑色的花纹放在幽暗之处啊，盲人会说花纹不鲜明；离娄稍微一瞥就看得非常清楚啊，盲人反说他是失明无光。
English: A black pattern in a dark place, a blind man would say that the pattern is not clear; a slight glance from the eyelid is very clear, but the blind man says that he is blind.

古文：变白而为黑兮，倒上以为下。
现代文：事情竟是如此的黑白混淆啊，上下颠倒。
English: Things are so black and white, upside down.

古文：凤皇在笯兮，鸡雉翔舞。
现代文：凤凰被关进笼子里啊，鸡和野雉却在那里飞跳。
English: The phoenix is locked up in a cage, but the chicken and the pheasant are flying there.

古文：同糅玉石兮，一而相量。
现代文：美玉和粗石被掺杂在一起啊，竟有人认为二者也差不了多少。
English: Gems and rough stones are mixed together, and some people actually think that the two are not much different.

古文：夫党人之鄙妒兮，羌不知吾所臧。
现代文：那些帮派小人卑鄙嫉妒啊，全然不了解我的高尚情操。
English: Those gang villains are mean and jealous. They don't understand my noble sentiments at all.

古文：任重载盛兮，陷滞而不济；怀瑾握瑜兮，穷不得余所示。
现代文：任重道远负载太多啊，沉陷阻滞不能向前。身怀美玉品德高啊，处境困窘向谁献？
English: The heavy load is too much, the sinking block can not move forward. With high moral character, to whom is the predicament dedicated?

古文：邑犬群吠兮，吠所怪也；诽骏疑桀兮，固庸态也。
现代文：城中群狗胡乱叫啊，以为少见为怪就叫唤。诽谤英俊疑豪杰啊，这本来就是小人的丑态。
English: The dogs in the city howl at random, thinking that it is a rare occurrence. Slandering the handsome and doubting the heroic, this is the ugly state of the clown.

古文：文质疏内兮，众不知吾之异采；材朴委积兮，莫知余之所有。
现代文：外表粗疏内心朴实啊，众人不知我的异彩。未雕饰的材料被丢弃啊，没人知道我所具有的知慧和品德。
English: Outwardly crude, inwardly simple, people do not know my brilliance. Undecorated materials are discarded, no one knows my wisdom and character.

古文：重仁袭义兮，谨厚以为丰；重华不可牾兮，孰知余之从容！
现代文：我注重仁与义的修养啊，并把恭谨忠厚来加强。虞舜已不可再遇啊，又有谁知道我从容坚持自己的志向。
English: I pay attention to the cultivation of benevolence and righteousness, and strengthen the respect and loyalty. I can no longer meet the yakitori, and who knows if I can stick to my ambition.

古文：古固有不并兮，岂知其故也？
现代文：古代的圣贤也难得同世而生啊，又有谁能了解其中缘由？
English: It is rare for ancient sages to be born in the same world, and who can understand the reasons for this?

古文：汤禹久远兮，邈不可慕也。
现代文：商汤夏禹距今是何其久远啊，渺茫无际难以追攀。
English: What a long way Shangtang Xayu is from now, it is difficult to catch up.

古文：惩违改忿兮，抑心而自彊；离湣而不迁兮，原志之有象。
现代文：强压住悲愤不平啊，抑制内心而使自己更加坚强。遭受忧患而不改变初衷啊，只希望我的志向成为后人效法的榜样。
English: Forcibly suppressing grief and anger, suppressing my heart and making myself stronger. Suffering from sorrow without changing my original intention, I only hope that my ambition will become a role model for future generations.

古文：进路北次兮，日昧昧其将暮；含忧虞哀兮，限之以大故。
现代文：我又顺路北行啊，迎着昏暗将尽的阳光。含忧郁而强作欢颜啊，死亡就在前面不远的地方。
English: I follow the road north again, facing the dusk of the sun. With melancholy and forced joy, death is not far ahead.

古文：乱曰：浩浩沅湘兮，分流汩兮。
现代文：尾声：浩荡的沅江、湘江水啊，不停地流淌翻涌着波浪。
English: Epilogue: The mighty Lijiang River and the Xiangjiang River water, flowing ceaselessly and surging with waves.

古文：脩路幽拂兮，道远忽兮。
现代文：道路漫长而又昏暗啊，前程又是何等的恍忽渺茫。
English: The road is long and dark, and the future is dim and uncertain.

古文：曾唫恆悲兮，永叹慨兮。
现代文：我怀着长久的悲伤歌吟不止啊，慨然叹息终此世。
English: I will not stop singing with long-lasting sadness, sighing with emotion for the rest of my life.

古文：世既莫吾知兮，人心不可谓兮。
现代文：世上没人了解我啊，谁能听我诉衷肠？
English: No one in the world understands me, who can listen to my heart?

古文：怀情抱质兮，独无匹兮。
现代文：情操高尚品质美啊，芬芳洁白世无双。
English: The sentiment is noble, the quality is beautiful, and the fragrance is unsurpassed.

古文：伯乐既殁兮，骥将焉程兮？
现代文：伯乐早已死去啊，千里马谁能识别它是骏良？
English: Bo Le died long ago. Who can identify it as Hailiang?

古文：人生禀命兮，各有所错兮。
现代文：人生一世秉承命运啊，各有各的不同安排。
English: Adhering to one's destiny for one's whole life, everyone has their own different arrangements.

古文：定心广志，馀何畏惧兮？
现代文：内心坚定心胸广啊，别的还有什么值得畏惧！
English: Firm of heart and broad of mind, what else is there to fear!

古文：曾伤爰哀，永叹喟兮。
现代文：重重忧伤长感慨啊，永世长叹无尽哀。
English: Long sorrow, long lamentation, endless lamentation forever and ever.

古文：世溷不吾知，心不可谓兮。
现代文：世道混浊知音少啊，人心叵测内难猜。
English: The world is chaotic, there are few familiar voices, and it is difficult to guess what is in people's hearts.

古文：知死不可让兮，原勿爱兮。明以告君子兮，吾将以为类兮。
现代文：人生在世终须死啊，对自己的生命就不要太珍爱。明白告知世君子啊，我将永为人模楷。
English: Life in the world must eventually die, so don't be too precious about your own life. Tell the world, gentlemen, that I will always be a role model.

古文：於是怀石遂自汨罗以死。
现代文：于是，屈原就怀抱石头，投入汨罗江自杀而死。
English: As a result, Qu Yuan committed suicide by embracing a stone and plunging into the Minya River.

古文：屈原既死之後，楚有宋玉、唐勒、景差之徒者，皆好辞而以赋见称；然皆祖屈原之从容辞令，终莫敢直谏。
现代文：屈原死后，楚国有宋玉、唐勒、景差等人，他们都爱好文学而以擅长辞赋著名。但他们都只学习了屈原辞令委婉含蓄的一面，而最终没人敢像屈原那样直言劝谏。
English: After Qu Yuan's death, the state of Chu had Song Yu, Tang Le, and Jiefu, all of whom loved literature and were famous for being good at rhetoric. However, they only learned the euphemistic and subtle side of Qu Yuan's rhetoric, and in the end, no one dared to speak out like Qu Yuan.

古文：其後楚日以削，数十年竟为秦所灭。
现代文：此后楚国一天比一天弱小，几十年之后终于被秦国消灭。
English: After that, Chu became weaker and weaker day by day, and after several decades, it was finally destroyed by Qin.

古文：自屈原沈汨罗後百有馀年，汉有贾生，为长沙王太傅，过湘水，投书以吊屈原。
现代文：自从屈原沉江而死一百多年之后，汉朝有个贾生，在担任长沙王太傅时，经过湘水，写一篇辞赋投入江中，以此祭吊屈原。
English: More than a hundred years after Qu Yuan's death in the sinking of the Yangtze River, there was a Jia Sheng in the Han Dynasty. When he served as the Changsha King Taifu, he passed through the Xiangshui River, wrote a speech and threw it into the river as a sacrifice to Qu Yuan.

古文：贾生名谊，雒阳人也。
现代文：贾生名叫贾谊，是洛阳人。
English: Jia Sheng's name is Jia Yi, and he is from Luoyang.

古文：年十八，以能诵诗属书闻於郡中。
现代文：在十八岁时就因诵读诗书会写文章而闻名当地。
English: At the age of eighteen, he became known locally for reciting poetry and writing articles.

古文：吴廷尉为河南守，闻其秀才，召置门下，甚幸爱。
现代文：吴廷尉担任河南郡守时，听说贾谊才学优异，就把他召到衙门任职，并非常器重。
English: When Lieutenant Wu Ting was in charge of the Henan County Guard, he heard that Jia Yi Cai was an excellent student, so he called him to Shimen to serve, and he was very serious.

古文：孝文皇帝初立，闻河南守吴公治平为天下第一，故与李斯同邑而常学事焉，乃徵为廷尉。
现代文：汉文帝刚即位时，听说河南郡守吴公政绩卓著，为全国第一，而且和李斯同乡，又曾向李斯学习过，于是就征召他担任廷尉。
English: When Emperor Hanwen ascended the throne, he heard that Wu Gongzheng, the county governor of Henan Province, was the first in the country, and that he was a fellow villager of Li Si and had learned from Li Si, so he conscripted him as a courtier.

古文：廷尉乃言贾生年少，颇通诸子百家之书。
现代文：吴廷尉就推荐贾谊年轻有才，能精通诸子百家的学问。
English: Lieutenant Wu Ting recommended Jia Yi as a young and talented person who could master the knowledge of hundreds of schools.

古文：文帝召以为博士。
现代文：这样，汉文帝就征召贾谊，让他担任博士之职。
English: In this way, Emperor Hanwen conscripted Jia Yi and let him serve as a doctor.

古文：是时贾生年二十馀，最为少。
现代文：当时贾谊二十有余，在博士中最为年轻。
English: At that time, Jia Yi was more than 20 years old, and he was the youngest among the doctors.

古文：每诏令议下，诸老先生不能言，贾生尽为之对，人人各如其意所欲出。
现代文：每次文帝下令让博士们讨论一些问题，那些年长的老先生们都无话可说，而贾谊却能一一回答，人人都觉得说出了自己想说的话。
English: Every time Emperor Wen ordered the doctors to discuss some issues, the elderly gentlemen had nothing to say, but Jia Yi was able to answer one by one, and everyone felt that they had said what they wanted to say.

古文：诸生於是乃以为能，不及也。
现代文：博士们都认为贾生才能杰出，无与伦比。
English: The doctors all agree that Jia Sheng's talent is outstanding and unparalleled.

古文：孝文帝说之，超迁，一岁中至太中大夫。
现代文：汉文帝也非常喜欢他，对他破格提拔，一年之内就升任太中大夫。
English: Emperor Hanwen also liked him very much and gave him an unprecedented promotion. Within a year, he was promoted to the position of Tai Zhong Daifu.

古文：贾生以为汉兴至孝文二十馀年，天下和洽，而固当改正朔，易服色，法制度，定官名，兴礼乐，乃悉草具其事仪法，色尚黄，数用五，为官名，悉更秦之法。
现代文：贾谊认为从西汉建立到汉文帝时已有二十多年了，天下太平，正是应该改正历法、变易服色、订立制度、决定官名、振兴礼乐的时候，于是他草拟了各种仪法，崇尚黄色，遵用五行之说，创设官名，完全改变了秦朝的旧法。
English: Jia Yi thought that it had been more than 20 years since the establishment of the Western Han Dynasty to the time of Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty, and the world was peaceful. It was time to correct the calendar, change the dress, establish a system, decide on the official name, and revitalize the music. Therefore, he drafted various ceremonies and methods, advocated yellow, followed the five elements, created official names, and completely changed the old law of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：孝文帝初即位，谦让未遑也。
现代文：汉文帝刚刚即位，谦虚退让而来不及实行。
English: Emperor Hanwen had just ascended to the throne, and he was too modest to concede.

古文：诸律令所更定，及列侯悉就国，其说皆自贾生发之。
现代文：但此后各项法令的更改，以及诸侯必须到封地去上任等事，这都是贾谊的主张。
English: However, subsequent changes to various laws and decrees, as well as the fact that lords had to go to their fiefdoms to take office, were all Jia Yi's idea.

古文：於是天子议以为贾生任公卿之位。
现代文：于是汉文帝就和大臣们商议，想提拔贾谊担任公卿之职。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwen discussed with the ministers and wanted to promote Jia Yi to the post of court noble.

古文：绛、灌、东阳侯、冯敬之属尽害之，乃短贾生曰： 雒阳之人，年少初学，专欲擅权，纷乱诸事。 
现代文：而绛侯周勃、灌婴、东阳侯、冯敬这些人都嫉妒他，就诽谤贾谊说： 这个洛阳人，年纪轻而学识浅，只想独揽大权，把政事弄得一团糟。 
English: However, Zhou Bo, Gan Zi, Dongyang, and Feng Jing, all of whom were jealous of him, slandered Jia Yi, saying, "This Luoyang man, young and uneducated, only wanted to monopolize power and made a mess of politics.

古文：於是天子後亦疏之，不用其议，乃以贾生为长沙王太傅。
现代文：此后，汉文帝于是就疏远了贾谊，不再采纳他的意见，任命他为长沙王太傅。
English: After that, Emperor Hanwen alienated Jia Yi, no longer accepted his opinion, and appointed him as the Changsha King Taifu.

古文：贾生既辞往行，闻长沙卑湿，自以寿不得长，又以適去，意不自得。
现代文：贾谊向文帝告辞之后，前往长沙赴任，他听说长沙地势低洼，气侯潮湿，自认为寿命不会很长，又是因为被贬至此，内心非常不愉快。
English: After Jia Yi said goodbye to Emperor Wen, he went to Changsha to take office. He heard that Changsha is low-lying and humid. He thought that his life would not be very long, and because he was relegated to this place, he was very unhappy.

古文：及渡湘水，为赋以吊屈原。其辞曰：共承嘉惠兮，俟罪长沙。
现代文：在渡湘水的时候，写下一篇辞赋来凭吊屈原，赋文这样说：我恭奉天子诏命，带罪来到长沙任职。
English: When he was crossing the Xiangshui River, he wrote a letter to the emperor, in which he said, "I have come to Changsha to take up my duties in obedience to the emperor's command.

古文：侧闻屈原兮，自沈汨罗。
现代文：曾听说过屈原啊，是自沉汨罗江而长逝。
English: Ever heard of Qu Yuan? He drowned himself in the Luo River and died a long time ago.

古文：造讬湘流兮，敬吊先生。
现代文：今天我来到湘江边上，托江水来敬吊先生的英灵。
English: Today, I came to the edge of the Hunan River, carrying water from the river to pay my respects to the spirit of Mr. Zhou.

古文：遭世罔极兮，乃陨厥身。
现代文：遭遇纷乱无常的社会，才逼得您自杀失去生命。啊呀，太令人悲伤啦！
English: It took a tumultuous society to drive you to take your own life. How sad!

古文：呜呼哀哉，逢时不祥！
现代文：正赶上那不幸的年代。
English: It's catching up with that unfortunate era.

古文：鸾凤伏窜兮，鸱枭翱翔。
现代文：鸾凤潜伏隐藏，鸱枭却自在翱翔。
English: The chrysanthemum and phoenix lurk and hide, while the dragonfly soars freely.

古文：阘茸尊显兮，谗谀得志；贤圣逆曳兮，方正倒植。
现代文：不才之人尊贵显赫，阿谀奉承之辈得志猖狂；圣贤都不能顺随行事啊，方正的人反屈居下位。
English: Untalented people are honored and distinguished, flatterers are wildly ambitious; sages cannot follow suit, and upright people are relegated to a lower position.

古文：世谓伯夷贪兮，谓盗跖廉；莫邪为顿兮，铅刀为銛。
现代文：世人竟称伯夷贪婪，盗跖廉洁；莫邪宝剑太钝，铅刀反而是利刃。
English: The world actually called Bo Yi greedy, thieving and dishonest; no evil sword is too blunt, but the lead knife is a sharp blade.

古文：于嗟嚜嚜兮，生之无故！
现代文：唉呀呀！先生您真是太不幸了，平白遭此横祸！
English: Alas, sir, you are so unlucky to have suffered this misfortune for nothing!

古文：斡弃周鼎兮宝康瓠，腾驾罢牛兮骖蹇驴，骥垂两耳兮服盐车。
现代文：丢弃了周代传国的无价鼎，反把破瓠当奇货。驾着疲惫的老牛和跛驴，却让骏马垂着两耳拉盐车。
English: He discarded the priceless treasure handed down from generation to generation, and instead treated the broken donkey as a rare commodity. He drove the tired old cow and donkey, but let the horse pull the salt cart with both ears hanging down.

古文：章甫荐屦兮，渐不可久；嗟苦先生兮，独离此咎！
现代文：好端端的礼帽当鞋垫，这样的日子怎能长？哎呀，真苦了屈先生，唯您遭受这飞来祸！尾声：算了吧！
English: A well-cut top hat as a shoe insole, how can such a day last? Oh dear, how sad, Mr. Qu, but you have suffered this misfortune! Ending: forget it!

古文：讯曰：已矣，国其莫我知，独堙郁兮其谁语？
现代文：既然国人不了解我，抑郁不快又能和谁诉说？
English: Since the Chinese people don't understand me, who can I talk to about my depression and unhappiness?

古文：凤漂漂其高遰兮，夫固自缩而远去。
现代文：凤凰高飞远离去，本应如此自引退。
English: Fenghuang Gaofei walked away, he should have retired.

古文：袭九渊之神龙兮，沕深潜以自珍。
现代文：效法神龙隐渊底，深藏避祸自爱惜。
English: Follow the example of the divine dragon to the bottom of the abyss, hide deeply to avoid misfortune, and cherish oneself.

古文：弥融爚以隐处兮，夫岂从螘与蛭螾？
现代文：韬光晦迹来隐处，岂能与蚂蚁、水蛭、蚯蚓为邻居？
English: Can ants, leeches, and maggots be neighbors?

古文：所贵圣人之神德兮，远浊世而自藏。
现代文：圣人品德最可贵，远离浊世而自隐匿。
English: The virtue of a saint is the most precious. He hides himself away from the world.

古文：使骐骥可得系羁兮，岂云异夫犬羊！
现代文：若是良马可拴系，怎说异于犬羊类！
English: If it is a good horse, how can it be said to be different from dogs and sheep!

古文：般纷纷其离此尤兮，亦夫子之辜也！
现代文：世态纷乱遭此祸，先生自己也有责。
English: He himself is to blame for the turmoil in the world.

古文：瞝九州而相君兮，何必怀此都也？
现代文：游历九州任择君，何必对故都恋恋不舍？
English: Traveling in Kyushu is optional, why do you have to fall in love with everything?

古文：凤皇翔于千仞之上兮，览德军而下之；见细德之险兮，摇增翮逝而去之。
现代文：凤凰飞翔千仞上，看到有德之君才下来栖止。一旦发现危险兆，振翅高飞远离去。
English: The phoenix flies on a thousand wings, and only comes down to perch when it sees a virtuous person. Once it detects a danger sign, it flies away with wings aloft.

古文：彼寻常之汙渎兮，岂能容吞舟之鱼！
现代文：狭小污浊的小水坑，怎能容得下吞舟大鱼？
English: How can a small, narrow, filthy puddle hold a big fish that can swallow a boat?

古文：横江湖之鳣鲟兮，固将制於蚁蝼。
现代文：横绝江湖的大鱼，最终还要受制于蝼蚁。
English: The largest fish in the world is ultimately controlled by ants.

古文：贾生为长沙王太傅三年，有鸮飞入贾生舍，止于坐隅。
现代文：贾谊在担任长沙王太傅的第三年，一次有一支鸮鸟飞进他的住宅，停在了座位旁边。
English: In Jia Yi's third year as the Changsha King Taifu, an ostrich once flew into his house and stopped next to the seat.

古文：楚人命鸮曰 服 。
现代文：楚国人把鸮叫做 服 。
English: The people of Chu call the yakitori "fuku."

古文：贾生既以適居长沙，长沙卑湿，自以为寿不得长，伤悼之，乃为赋以自广。
现代文：贾谊原来就是因被贬来到长沙，而长沙又地势低洼，气候潮湿，所以自认为寿命不长，悲痛伤感，就写下了一篇赋来自我安慰。
English: Jia Yi originally came to Changsha because he was demoted, and Changsha is low-lying and humid, so he thought that life was not long, sad and sad, so he wrote down a piece of self-consolation.

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：赋文写道：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：单阏之岁兮，四月孟夏，庚子日施兮，服集予舍，止于坐隅，貌甚间暇。异物来集兮，私怪其故，发书占之兮，筴言其度。
现代文：丁卯年四月初夏，庚子日太阳西斜的时分，有一支猫头鹰飞进我的住所，它在座位旁边停下，样子是那样的自在安闲。
English: In the early summer of April in the year of Ding Yu, when the sun was setting in the west on the day of Geng Zi, an owl flew into my residence. It stopped next to the seat, looking so relaxed and at ease.

古文：曰 野鸟入处兮，主人将去 。
现代文：奇怪之鸟进我家，私下疑怪是为啥。打开卦书来占卜，上面载有这样的话， 野鸟飞入住舍呀，主人将会离开家 。
English: A strange bird came into my house, and I privately wondered why. I opened a book of divination and read that if a wild bird flew into the house, the owner would leave.

古文：请问于服兮： 予去何之？
现代文：请问鸟啊， 我离开这里将去何方？
English: Excuse me, Ostrich, where will I go from here?

古文：吉乎告我，凶言其菑。
现代文：是吉，就请告我；是凶，也请告我是什么祸殃。
English: If it is good, let him call upon me; if it is evil, let him also call upon me.

古文：淹数之度兮，语予其期。 
现代文：生死迟速有定数啊，请把期限对我说端详。 
English: There is a certain amount of delay between life and death. Please tell me the time limit in detail.

古文：服乃叹息，举首奋翼，口不能言，请对以意。
现代文：鸟听罢长叹息，抬头振翅已会意。嘴巴不能说话，请以意相示自推度。
English: After listening to the long sigh, the ostrich raised its head and fluttered its wings to show that it had understood. The stork could not speak, so please use gestures to show that you understand.

古文：万物变化兮，固无休息。
现代文：天地万物长变化，本来无有终止时。
English: All things in heaven and on earth are subject to change, and there is no such thing as an end.

古文：斡流而迁兮，或推而还。
现代文：如涡流旋转，反复循环。
English: As the vortex rotates, the cycle repeats.

古文：形气转续兮，变化而嬗。
现代文：外形内气转化相续，演变如蝉蜕化一般。
English: The internal and external gas transformations are sequential, and the evolution is like that of a cicada.

古文：沕穆无穷兮，胡可胜言！
现代文：其道理深微无穷，言语哪能说得周遍。
English: The reason for this is so profound that it cannot be expressed in words.

古文：祸兮福所倚，福兮祸所伏；忧喜聚门兮，吉凶同域。
现代文：祸当中傍倚着福，福当中也埋藏着祸。忧和喜同聚一起，吉和凶同在一个领域。
English: In the midst of misfortune, there is blessing, and in the midst of blessing, there is also misfortune. Sorrow and joy come together, and good luck and bad luck are in the same realm.

古文：彼吴彊大兮，夫差以败；越栖会稽兮，句践霸世。
现代文：当年吴国是何等的强大，但吴王夫差却以此而败亡。越国败处会稽，勾践以此称霸于世。
English: At that time, the state of Wu was very powerful, but the king of Wu, Wangfuchai, was defeated by it. The defeated state of Yue would learn from it and practice it in order to dominate the world.

古文：斯游遂成兮，卒被五刑；傅说胥靡兮，乃相武丁。
现代文：李斯游秦顺利成功，却终于遭受五刑。傅说原为一刑徒，后来却成武丁相。
English: Li Si successfully toured Qin, but finally suffered five punishments. Fu said that he was originally a convict, but later became Wu Dingxiang.

古文：夫祸之与福兮，何异纠纆。
现代文：祸对于福来说，与绳索互相缠绕有什么不同？
English: For fortune, what is the difference between misfortune and ropes twisted around each other?

古文：命不可说兮，孰知其极？
现代文：天命无法详解说，谁能预知它的究竟？
English: Destiny cannot be explained in detail, who can predict its ultimate outcome?

古文：水激则旱兮，矢激则远。
现代文：水成激流来势猛，箭遇强力射得远。
English: The torrent of water was fierce, and the arrows were shot far away.

古文：万物回薄兮，振荡相转。
现代文：万物循环往复长激荡，运动之中相互起变化。
English: All things cycle back and forth in a long agitation, changing each other in the process.

古文：云蒸雨降兮，错缪相纷。
现代文：云升雨降多反复，错综变幻何纷繁。
English: The clouds rise and rain repeatedly, and the intricate changes are numerous.

古文：大专槃物兮，坱轧无垠。
现代文：天地运转造万物，漫无边际何浩瀚。
English: The movement of heaven and earth creates all things. How vast and boundless they are.

古文：天不可与虑兮，道不可与谋。
现代文：天道高深不可预测，凡人思虑难以谋算。
English: Heaven and earth are unpredictable, and it is difficult to calculate the thoughts of ordinary people.

古文：迟数有命兮，恶识其时？
现代文：生死的迟早都由命，谁能知其到来时？
English: Sooner or later, life and death are at the mercy of fate. Who knows when it will come?

古文：且夫天地为炉兮，造化为工；阴阳为炭兮，万物为铜。
现代文：何况天地为巨炉，自然本为司炉工。阴阳运转是炉炭，世间万物皆为铜。
English: Moreover, heaven and earth are huge furnaces, and nature is the foreman of the furnace. Yin and yang operation is the coal of the furnace, and everything in the world is copper.

古文：合散消息兮，安有常则；千变万化兮，未始有极。
现代文：其中聚散或生灭，哪有常规可寻踪？错综复杂多变化，未曾见过有极终。
English: Among them, whether it is concentration and dispersion or birth and death, there is no standard to be found. It is intricate, complex and ever-changing, and it has never seen an ultimate end.

古文：忽然为人兮，何足控抟；化为异物兮，又何足患！
现代文：成人亦为偶然事，不足珍爱慕长生。纵然死去化异物，又何足忧虑心胆惊！
English: Adults are also a matter of chance, and they do not cherish and yearn for eternal life. Even if they die of a foreign body, how worried they are!

古文：小知自私兮，贱彼贵我；通人大观兮，物无不可。
现代文：小智之人顾自己，鄙薄外物重己身。通人达观何大度，死生祸福无不宜。
English: Small-minded people care about themselves, despise others, and are self-important. No matter how great a person's attainment is, it is not inappropriate to be born with misfortune and death.

古文：贪夫徇财兮，烈士徇名；夸者死权兮，品庶冯生。
现代文：贪夫为财赔性命，烈士为名忘死生。喜好虚名者为权势而死，平民百姓又怕死贪生。
English: The greedy man lives for money, the martyr lives for fame. Those who love fame die for power, and the common people live for fear of death.

古文：述迫之徒兮，或趋西东；大人不曲兮，亿变齐同。
现代文：而被名利所诱惑、被贫贱所逼迫的人，为了钻营而奔走西东。而道德修养极高的人，不被物欲所屈服，对千百万化的事物等量齐观。
English: On the other hand, those who are tempted by fame and fortune, and persecuted by poverty and inferiority, run to the west and east for drilling camps, while those with extremely high moral cultivation are not subjugated by material desires, and are equally attentive to millions of things.

古文：拘士系俗兮，羖如囚拘；至人遗物兮，独与道俱。
现代文：愚夫被俗累羁绊，拘束得如囚徒一般。有至德的人能遗世弃俗，只与大道同存在。
English: Fools are bound by the shackles of the world, and are restrained like prisoners. People of virtue can forsake the world and the world, and exist only with the road.

古文：众人或或兮，好恶积意；真人淡漠兮，独与道息。
现代文：天下众人迷惑不解，爱憎之情积满胸臆。有真德的人恬淡无为，独和大道同生息。
English: People all over the world are puzzled, and feelings of love and hate have accumulated in their hearts. People with true morals are indifferent and do nothing, and they live side by side.

古文：释知遗形兮，超然自丧；寥廓忽荒兮，与道翱翔。
现代文：舍弃智慧忘形骸，超然物外不知有己。在那空旷恍惚的境界里，和大道一起共翱翔。
English: Abandoning the wisdom of oblivion, the transcendental object does not know what it is. In that empty, trance-like realm, it soars together with the avenue.

古文：乘流则逝兮，得坻则止；纵躯委命兮，不私与己。
现代文：乘着流水任意行，碰上小洲就停止。将身躯托付给命运，不把它看作私有之体。
English: Ride the flowing water as far as you want, and stop when you hit a small island. Entrust your body to fate, and do not regard it as a private body.

古文：其生若浮兮，其死若休；澹乎若深渊之静，氾乎若不系之舟。
现代文：活着如同寄于世，死了是长休息。内心宁静就如无波的深渊，浮游就如不系缆绳的小舟。
English: To live is to linger, to die is to take a long rest. Inner peace is like an abyss without a wave, floating is like a boat without a rope.

古文：不以生故自宝兮，养空而浮；德人无累兮，知命不忧。
现代文：不因活着重已命，修养空灵之性不拘泥。至德之人无俗累，乐天知命复何忧！
English: It is not because of being alive that one values one's life. Cultivating the nature of the ethereal spirit is not constrained. A truly virtuous person is never tired. Heaven knows how to restore one's life!

古文：细故粦兮，何足以疑！
现代文：鸡毛蒜皮区区小事，哪里值得忧虑生疑！
English: Trivial trifles are nothing to worry about!

古文：後岁馀，贾生徵见。
现代文：一年多之后，贾谊被召回京城拜见皇帝。
English: More than a year later, Jia Yi was called back to Beijing to meet the emperor.

古文：孝文帝方受釐，坐宣室。
现代文：当时汉文帝正坐在宣室，接受神的降福保佑。
English: At that time, Emperor Hanwen was sitting in the prayer room, receiving God's blessing.

古文：上因感鬼神事，而问鬼神之本。
现代文：因文帝有感于鬼神之事，就向贾谊询问鬼神的本原。
English: Because Emperor Wen was impressed by the ghosts and gods, he asked Jia Yi about the origin of ghosts and gods.

古文：贾生因具道所以然之状。
现代文：贾谊也就乘机周详地讲述了所以会有鬼神之事的种种情形。
English: Jia Yi also took the opportunity to thoroughly explain the various circumstances of why there would be ghosts and gods.

古文：至夜半，文帝前席。既罢，曰： 吾久不见贾生，自以为过之，今不及也。 
现代文：到半夜时分，文帝已听得很入神，不知不觉地在座席上总往贾谊身边移动。听完之后，文帝慨叹道： 我好长时间没见贾谊了，自认为能超过他，现在看来还是不如他。 
English: By the middle of the night, Emperor Wen had listened attentively and unconsciously moved to Jia Yi's side on the seat. After listening, Emperor Wen sighed: I haven't seen Jia Yi for a long time, I thought I could surpass him, but now it seems I'm still not as good as him.

古文：居顷之，拜贾生为梁怀王太傅。
现代文：过了不久，文帝任命贾谊为粱怀王太傅。
English: Not long after, Emperor Wen appointed Jia Yi as the Grand Prince of Xinghuai.

古文：梁怀王，文帝之少子，爱，而好书，故令贾生傅之。
现代文：粱怀王是汉文帝的小儿子，受文帝宠爱，又喜欢读书，因此才让贾谊当他老师。
English: King Gong Huai was the youngest son of Emperor Hanwen. He was favored by Emperor Wen and liked to read, so he asked Jia Yi to be his teacher.

古文：文帝复封淮南厉王子四人皆为列侯。
现代文：汉文帝又封淮南厉王的四个儿子都为列候。
English: The four sons of Huainan Li Wang, who was also appointed by Emperor Hanwen, are waiting in line.

古文：贾生谏，以为患之兴自此起矣。
现代文：贾谊劝谏，认为国家祸患的兴起就要从这里开始了。
English: Jia Yi advised that the rise of the national scourge would begin from here.

古文：贾生数上疏，言诸侯或连数郡，非古之制，可稍削之。文帝不听。
现代文：贾谊又多次上疏皇帝，说有的诸侯封地太多，甚至多达几郡之地，和古代的制度不符，应该逐渐削弱他们的势力，但是汉文帝不肯听从。
English: Jia You repeatedly petitioned Emperor Zuo, saying that some princes had too many fiefs, even up to several counties, which was inconsistent with the ancient system and should gradually weaken their power, but Emperor Hanwen refused to listen.

古文：居数年，怀王骑，堕马而死，无後。
现代文：几年之后，粱怀王因骑马不慎，从马上掉下来摔死了，没有留下后代。
English: A few years later, King Gong Huai fell from his horse and died, leaving no descendants.

古文：贾生自伤为傅无状，哭泣岁馀，亦死。
现代文：贾谊认为这是自己作太傅没有尽到责任，非常伤心，哭泣了一年多，也死去了。
English: Jia Yi thought that this was because he did not fulfill his duty as a Taifu. He was very sad, cried for more than a year, and died.

古文：贾生之死时年三十三矣。
现代文：死的时候年仅三十三岁。
English: He was only thirty-three years old when he died.

古文：及孝文崩，孝武皇帝立，举贾生之孙二人至郡守，而贾嘉最好学，世其家，与余通书。
现代文：后来汉文帝去世，汉武帝即位，提拔贾谊的两个孙子任郡守。其中贾嘉最为好学，继承了贾谊的家业，曾和我有过书信往来。
English: Later, Emperor Hanwen died, Emperor Hanwu ascended to the throne, and promoted Jia Jia's two grandsons to serve as county governors. Among them, Jia Jia was the most studious, inherited Jia Jia's family business, and had correspondence with me.

古文：至孝昭时，列为九卿。
现代文：到汉昭帝时，他担任九卿之职。
English: By the time of Emperor Han Zhao, he held the position of Jiuqing.

古文：太史公曰：余读离骚、天问、招魂、哀郢，悲其志。
现代文：太史公说：我读了《离骚》《天问》《招魂》《哀郢》之后，很哀怜屈原的心志。
English: Taishikong said, "After I read "The Parting of the Ways," "Questions from Heaven," "The Summoning of the Spirits" and "The Lamentation," I felt very sorry for Qu Yuan's heart.

古文：適长沙，观屈原所自沈渊，未尝不垂涕，想见其为人。
现代文：来到长沙，游览了屈原投江自沉的地方，不禁流下眼泪，想念他的为人。
English: When I came to Changsha and visited the place where Qu Yuan threw himself into the river and drowned, I couldn't help but shed tears and miss him as a person.

古文：及见贾生吊之，又怪屈原以彼其材，游诸侯，何国不容，而自令若是。
现代文：等到读了贾生吊念屈原的赋，又私下怪屈原凭着他那样的才能，如果去游说诸侯，哪个国家不会容纳他呢？而竟然使自己落到这样的境地！
English: Wait until you read Jia Sheng's recollection of Qu Yuan's feats, and privately wonder if Qu Yuan, with his talent like that, lobbied the lords, which country would not accommodate him? And he even got himself into this situation!

古文：读服乌赋，同死生，轻去就，又爽然自失矣。
现代文：读了《服鸟赋》之后，领悟到死生可等同视之，身世的浮沉也不足重视，我不禁茫然若失了。
English: After reading "Clothed Bird Fu," I realized that life and death can be equated, and the ups and downs of life are not taken seriously enough. I couldn't help but feel at a loss.

