古文：椒举娶于申公子牟，子牟有罪而亡，康王以为椒举遣之，椒举奔郑，将遂奔晋。
现代文：椒举娶了申公子牟的女儿，子牟犯罪逃亡，楚康王认为是椒举放他走的，椒举就逃亡到郑国，又打算逃亡到晋国去。
English: Jiao Hui married the daughter of Shen Gong Zimou. Zimou committed a crime and fled. King Chu Kang believed that Jiao Hui let him go. Jiao Hui fled to Zheng and planned to flee to Jin.

古文：蔡声子将如晋，遇之于郑，飨之以璧侑，曰： 子尚良食，二先子其皆相子，尚能事晋君以为诸侯主。 
现代文：蔡声子将出使晋国，在郑国遇见了椒举，拿出璧玉劝他进食，说： 您努力加餐饭，我俩的先人在天之灵都会帮助你，你还能事奉晋君成为诸侯的盟主。 
English: Cai Shengzi will send an envoy to Jin. In Zheng, he met Jiao Zhu, and took out the gems to persuade him to eat, saying: You work hard to add meals, our ancestors will help you in the spirit of heaven, and you can also serve Jin to become the leader of the princes.

古文：辞曰： 非所愿也。
现代文：椒举辞谢说： 这不是我的愿望。
English: "This is not my wish," Pepper said, waving his hand in resignation.

古文：若得归骨于楚，死且不朽。 
现代文：如果我的尸骨能回到楚国，那死了也是不朽的。 
English: If my bones can return to the state of Chu, then death is also immortal.

古文：声子曰： 子尚良食，吾归子。 
现代文：声子说： 您努力加餐饭，我设法让你回到楚国去。 
English: Shoko said, "You have worked hard to improve your diet. I will try to get you to go back to Chu."

古文：椒举降三拜，纳其乘马，声子受之。
现代文：椒举下堂拜谢了三次，送给声子四匹马，声子接受了。
English: He bowed three times and gave four horses to Sonoko, who accepted them.

古文：还见令尹子木，子木与之语，曰： 子虽兄弟于晋，然蔡吾甥也，二国孰贤？ 
现代文：声子回到楚国后会见令尹子木，子木和他谈话，说： 你虽然和晋国是同姓兄弟，但蔡君是我们楚君的外甥，你看晋、楚两国谁好呢？ 
English: After Shoko returned to Chu, he met with Ling Yin Zi Mu. Zi Mu talked with him and said, "Although you and Jin Guo are brothers with the same surname, Cai Jun is the nephew of our Chu Jun. Who do you think is better, Jin or Chu?"

古文：对曰： 晋卿不若楚，其大夫则贤，其大夫皆卿材也。
现代文：声子回答说： 晋国的正卿不如楚国的令尹，但是晋国的大夫却很贤明，他们都是当卿的人才。
English: Shoko replied, "The Zhengqing of Jin is not as good as the Lingyin of Chu, but the doctors of Jin are very wise, and they are all talented people.

古文：若杞梓、皮革焉，楚实遗之，虽楚有材，不能用也。 
现代文：就像杞木、梓木和皮革一样，都是楚国送给晋国的，虽然楚国有人才，却是晋国在使用他们。 
English: Just like camphor wood, azuki wood and leather, they were all given to Jin by the State of Chu. Although Chu has talents, Jin is using them.

古文：子木曰： 彼有公族甥、舅，若之何其遗之材也？ 
现代文：子木说： 难道晋国没有公族和甥、舅之类的亲戚当大夫吗，为什么还要送给他们人才呢？ 
English: Ziki said, "Doesn't the state of Jin have officials and relatives such as nephews and uncles who are doctors? Why should we give them talented people?"

古文：对曰： 昔令尹子元之难，或谮王孙启于成王，王弗是，王孙启奔晋，晋人用之。
现代文：声子回答说： 以前令尹子元遇难，有人对楚成王说他儿子王孙启的坏话，成王不能正确审理，王孙启就逃到了晋国，晋国任用了他。
English: Shoko replied, "In the past, Yin Zi Yuan was killed, and someone spoke ill of his son Wang Sunqi to Chu Chengwang. Chengwang could not judge correctly, so Wang Sunqi fled to Jin Province, and Jin Province appointed him.

古文：及城濮之役，晋将遁矣，王孙启与于军事，谓先轸曰： 是师也，唯子玉欲之，与王心违，故唯东宫与西广实来。
现代文：等到城濮之战的时候，晋军将要撤退，王孙启当时参与军事谋划，对先轸说： 这次出兵，只是子玉想打，他和楚王的想法不一致，所以只有东宫和西广两支部队前来参战。
English: By the time of the Battle of Chenghuang, the Jin army was about to retreat. Wang Sunqi, who was involved in military planning at the time, said to Xianlong: This time, Ziyu only wanted to fight. His and King Chu's thoughts were not consistent, so only the Eastern Palace and Western Guang troops came to fight.

古文：诸侯之从者，叛者半矣，若敖氏离矣，楚师必败，何故去之！ 
现代文：诸侯随从来的，背叛的有半数以上，连子玉的同族若敖氏都不想打了，楚军一定要失败，为什么要撤退呢！ 
English: More than half of the princes followed and betrayed Zidama. Even Zidama's compatriots, the Wakatsuki clan, did not want to fight. The Chu army must fail. Why retreat?

古文：先轸从之，大败楚师，则王孙启之为也。
现代文：先轸听从了他的意见，大败楚军，这是王孙启干的。
English: Xian Ye listened to his advice and defeated the Chu army, which was done by Wang Sunqi.

古文： 昔庄王方弱，申公子仪父为师，王子燮为傅，使师崇、子孔帅师以伐舒。
现代文： 以前楚庄王还未成年，申公子仪父任太师，王子燮任太傅，派师崇和子孔率领军队去讨伐舒国。
English: In the past, Chu Zhuang Wang was still a minor, and his father, Shen Gongzi Yi, was appointed as the Grand Master, and his father, Prince Zou, was appointed as the Grand Master, and he sent his teachers, Chong and Zikong, to lead the army to fight against Shu.

古文：燮及仪父施二帅而分其室。
现代文：王子燮和仪父给两人施加罪名，瓜分了两家的财产。
English: Prince Zou and his father-in-law imposed criminal charges on the two and divided the property of the two families.

古文：师还至，则以王如庐，庐戢黎杀二子而复王。
现代文：军队回国，他们带着庄王跑到庐城。庐城大夫戢黎杀了王子燮和仪父，将庄王送回都城。
English: When the troops returned to China, they took Zhuang Wang with them and ran to the city of Handan. The doctor of Handan, Zou Li, killed the prince and his father-in-law and sent Zhuang Wang back to the capital city.

古文：或谮析公臣于王，王弗是，析公奔晋，晋人用之。
现代文：有人对庄王说析公臣的坏话，庄王不能正确审理，析公逃亡到晋国，晋国任用了他。
English: Some people said bad things about Zhuang Wang, Zhuang Wang could not judge correctly, the analyst fled to Jin Province, and Jin Province appointed him.

古文：实谗败楚，使不规东夏，则析公之为也。
现代文：这些谗言后来导致楚国打了败仗，使它不再占有东夏，这是析公臣干的。
English: These criticisms later led to the defeat of the Chu state, so that it no longer occupied Eastern Xia, which was done by the analytic statesman.

古文： 昔雍子之父兄谮雍子于恭王，王弗是，雍子奔晋，晋人用之。
现代文： 以前雍子的父兄对楚恭王说雍子的坏话，恭王不能正确审理，雍子逃亡到晋国，晋国任用了他。
English: In the past, Yasuko's father and brother had spoken ill of Yasuko to King Chukyong. King Chukyong was unable to judge the matter properly, and Yasuko fled to Jin Province, which appointed him.

古文：及鄢之役，晋将遁矣，雍子与于军事，谓栾书曰： 楚师可料也，在中军王族而已。
现代文：等到鄢陵之战的时候，晋军将要撤退，雍子当时参与军事谋划，对栾书说： 楚军可以预测，它的主力只是在中军的王族亲兵罢了。
English: By the time of the Battle of Fuling, the Jin army was about to retreat. At that time, Yongzi was involved in military planning and said to Ying Shu: The Chu army can be predicted, its main force is only the royal family soldiers of the Chinese army.

古文：若易中下，楚必歆之。
现代文：如果我们调换中军和下军的，楚军必然贪利中计。
English: If we replace the middle army with the lower army, the Chu army will inevitably be greedy for profit.

古文：若合而臽吾中，吾上下必败其左右，则三萃以攻其王族，必大败之。 
现代文：如果他们来交战，就会遭遇我们的中军，我们上下两军必然打败他们的左右两军，然后我们结集中军、上军、下军和新军攻打他们的王族亲兵，一定将它们打败。 
English: If they come to fight, they will encounter our Chinese troops. Our two armies up and down the line will inevitably defeat their two armies on the left and right. Then, we will combine the centralized army, the up-army, the down-army and the new army to attack their royal family soldiers, and will surely defeat them.

古文：栾书从之，大败楚师，王亲面伤，则雍子之为也。
现代文：栾书听从了他的意见，大败楚军，恭王眼睛被射伤，这是雍子干的。
English: Rongshu listened to his advice and defeated the Chu army. King Gong was shot in the eye. This was done by Yongzi.

古文： 昔陈公子夏为御叔娶于郑穆公，生子南。
现代文： 以前陈公子夏给御叔娶了郑穆公的女儿，生了子南。
English: In the past, Chen Gongzi Xia married the daughter of Zheng Mu Gong to his uncle and gave birth to Zi Nan.

古文：子南之母乱陈而亡之，使子南戮于诸侯。
现代文：子南的母亲夏姬给陈国造成了祸乱，导致陈国灭亡，使子南被诸侯所杀。
English: Zi Nan's mother, Xia Ji, caused a calamity to Chen Guo, leading to the demise of Chen Guo, causing Zi Nan to be killed by the princes.

古文：庄王既以夏氏之室赐申公巫臣，则又界之子反，卒于襄老。
现代文：楚庄王把夏姬赏赐给申公巫臣，接着又赏给子反，最后又给了襄老。
English: The king of Chu Zhuang gave Xia Ji to Shengong Witches and Wizards, then to Zifan, and finally to Xiang Lao.

古文：襄老死于邲，二子争之，未有成。
现代文：襄老在邲地战役中死去，巫臣和子反两人争夺夏姬，没有个结果。
English: Xiang Lao died in the Battle of Ploughshares, and the two Wiccans and Zi Han fought over her to no avail.

古文：恭王使巫臣聘于齐，以夏姬行，遂奔晋。
现代文：恭王派巫臣出使齐国，巫臣带着夏姬同行，于是逃亡到晋国。
English: King Gong sent an envoy of Wiccans to Qi Province, and the Wiccans took Xia Jie with them, and fled to Jin Province.

古文：晋人用之，实通吴晋。
现代文：晋国任用了他，沟通了吴国和晋国的关系。
English: The State of Jin appointed him to communicate the relationship between the State of Wu and the State of Jin.

古文：使其子狐庸为行人于吴，而教之射御，导之伐楚。
现代文：巫臣派他的儿子狐庸在吴国当外交官，并且教吴人驾车射箭，引导吴国进攻楚国。
English: The sorcerer sent his son Fu Yong to be a diplomat in Wu, and taught Wu people to drive and shoot arrows to guide Wu to attack Chu.

古文：至于今为患，则申公巫臣之为也。
现代文：一直到今天还成为祸患，这是申公巫臣干的。
English: It has become a scourge to this day, and this was done by Shin Gong Witches and Wizards.

古文： 今椒举娶于子牟，子牟得罪而亡，执政弗是，谓椒举曰： 女实遣之。 
现代文： 现在椒举娶了子牟的女儿，子牟犯罪逃亡了，执政的不能正确审理，对椒举说： 是你放他跑的。 
English: Now Joho has married Zimou's daughter, and Zimou has fled the country. The government can't judge correctly, and says to Joho: "You let him run away."

古文：彼惧而奔郑，缅然引领南望，曰： 庶几赦吾罪。 
现代文：椒举害怕而逃亡到郑国，远远地伸长脖子望着南方，说： 也许能赦免我的罪。 
English: He was so afraid that he fled to Zheng and craned his neck to the south, saying, "Perhaps my sins can be forgiven."

古文：又不图也，乃遂奔晋，晋人又用之矣。
现代文：楚国如不处置好这件事，他就会逃亡到晋国，晋国又将任用他了。
English: If Chu did not handle the matter well, he would flee to Jin, and Jin would appoint him again.

古文：彼若谋楚，其亦必有丰败也哉。 
现代文：他假如谋取楚国，那又势必会给楚国造成惨败。 
English: If he were to try to take over Chu, he would be sure to fail miserably.

古文：子木愀然，曰： 夫子何如，召之其来乎？ 
现代文：子木听了很发愁，说： 对他怎么办，召他能回来吗？ 
English: Zigi was very worried and said, "What should we do with him? Can we call him back?"

古文：对曰： 亡人得生，又何不来为。 
现代文：声子回答说： 逃亡的人得到一条生路，又怎么能不回来呢。 
English: Shoko replied, "If a fugitive is given a way to live, how can he not return?"

古文：子木曰： 不来，则若之何？ 
现代文：子木说： 假如他不回来，那怎么办？ 
English: Zogi said, "What if he doesn't come back?

古文：对曰： 夫子不居矣，春秋相事，以还轸于诸侯。
现代文：声子回答说： 椒举不在楚国了，他将一年四季要奉命出去聘问，乘车往返于诸侯各国。
English: The voice replied: "Jiao Zhuo is no longer in Chu. He will be ordered to go out to ask questions all year round, and travel by car to and from various provinces.

古文：若资东阳之盗使杀之，其可乎？
现代文：如果出钱买通东阳大盗杀了他，可以吗？
English: If you offer money to buy access to Dongyang Bandit and kill him, is that okay?

古文：不然，不来矣。 
现代文：不这样，他是不会回来的。 
English: Otherwise, he won't come back.

古文：子木曰： 不可。
现代文：子木说： 不行。
English: Zogi said, "No, I can't."

古文：我为楚卿，而赂盗以贼一夫于晋，非义也。
现代文：我作为楚国的卿，却买通大盗到晋国去杀一个人，这是不义。
English: As the Lord of Chu, it is unjust for me to bribe a thief to go to Jin to kill a man.

古文：子为我召之，吾倍其室。 
现代文：您替我召回他，我加倍给他家产。 
English: Call him back for me and I'll double his wages.

古文：乃使椒鸣召其父而复之。
现代文：于是就派椒鸣召他的父亲回国，恢复了他的职位。
English: So he sent his father back to China and restored his position.

