古文：三年春，王正月，郊。牛之口伤，改卜牛，牛死，乃不郊。
现代文：三年春季，周历正月，鲁宣公三年，春季，周历正月，祭祀天的牛 之 嘴受伤了，重新占卜一头牛来祭天，这头牛死了，于是就不祭祀天了。
English: In the spring of the third year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Lu Xuan Gong was three years old. In the spring, the first month of the lunar calendar, the mouth of the cow that was sacrificed to the heavens was injured, and the divination of a cow to sacrifice to the heavens was restarted. The cow died, so they did not sacrifice to the heavens.

古文：犹三望。
现代文：但仍然祭祀泰山、黄河和东海。
English: However, they still worship Mount Tai, the Yellow River and the East Sea.

古文：葬匡王。
现代文：安葬匡王。
English: King Kuang is buried peacefully.

古文：楚子伐陆浑之戎。
现代文：楚庄王发兵攻打陆浑的戎人。
English: The king of Chu Zhuang sent troops to attack the soldiers of Lu Hun.

古文：夏，楚人侵郑。
现代文：夏季，楚国入侵郑国。
English: In the summer, Chu invaded Zheng.

古文：秋，赤狄侵齐。
现代文：秋季，赤狄入侵齐国。
English: In autumn, the Red Di invaded Qi.

古文：宋师围曹。
现代文：宋国军队包围曹国。
English: The Song army encircled Cao.

古文：冬十月丙戌，郑伯兰卒。
现代文：冬季十月丙戌，郑伯兰去世。
English: In the winter of October, Zheng Bolan passed away.

古文：葬郑穆公。
现代文：安葬郑穆公。
English: Zheng Mu Gong was buried peacefully.

古文：三年春，不郊而望，皆非礼也。
现代文：三年春季，没有举行郊祭却举行望祭，这都不合于礼。
English: In the spring of the third year, there was no suburb festival, but a memorial festival was held, which was not proper.

古文：望，郊之属也。不郊亦无望，可也。
现代文：望祭，是属于郊祭的一种，不举行郊祭，也不必举行望祭了。
English: The festival is a kind of suburban festival. If the suburban festival is not held, there is no need to hold the festival.

古文：晋侯伐郑，及郔。
现代文：晋成公发兵攻打郑国，到达郔地。
English: Jincheng sent an army to attack Zheng and arrived at Fengtian.

古文：郑及晋平，士会入盟。
现代文：郑国和晋国讲和，士会到郑国地结盟约。
English: Zheng and Jin declared peace, and the statesmen would come to Zheng to conclude an alliance.

古文：楚子伐陆浑之戎，遂至于雒，观兵于周疆。
现代文：楚庄王发兵攻打陆浑的戎人，到达雒水，在周朝的直辖地域陈兵示威。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang sent troops to attack Luhun's eunuchs, reached Surabaya, and staged a demonstration in the region directly under the jurisdiction of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：定王使王孙满劳楚子。
现代文：周定王派遣王孙满慰劳楚庄王。
English: Zhou Dingwang sent Wang Sunman to console the exhausted Chu Zhuangwang.

古文：楚子问鼎之大小轻重焉。
现代文：楚庄王问起九鼎的大小轻重如何。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang asked about the importance of the size of Jiuding.

古文：对曰： 在德不在鼎。
现代文：王孙满回答说： 鼎的大小轻重在于德而不在于鼎本身。
English: Wang Sunman replied: The importance of the size of the ring lies in the virtue and not in the ring itself.

古文：昔夏之方有德也，远方图物，贡金九牧，铸鼎象物，百物而为之备，使民知神奸。
现代文：从前夏朝正是有德的时候，把远方的东西画成图像，让九州的长官进贡铜器，铸造九鼎并且把图像铸在鼎上，所有物像都具备在上面了，让百姓知道神物和怪物。
English: Once upon a time, during the reign of Emperor Xia, when there was virtue, distant things were drawn into images, and the governors of Kyushu were asked to pay tribute to bronze ware, to cast nine tripods and to cast the image on the tripod, and all the images were on the top, so that the people knew the gods and monsters.

古文：故民入川泽山林，不逢不若。
现代文：所以百姓进入川泽山林，就不会碰上不利于自己的东西。
English: Therefore, when people go into the forest in Kawazawa, they will not encounter anything that is not good for them.

古文：螭魅罔两，莫能逢之，用能协于上下以承天休。
现代文：螭魅魍魉这些鬼怪都不会遇上，因而能够使上下和谐，以承受上天的福佑。
English: These ghosts will not meet, so they can make the upper and lower harmony, so as to bear the blessing of heaven.

古文：桀有昏德，鼎迁于商，载祀六百。
现代文：夏桀昏乱，把鼎迁到了商朝，前后六百年。
English: Xia Yao was confused and moved Ding to the Shang Dynasty, about 600 years ago.

古文：商纣暴虐，鼎迁于周。德之休明，虽小，重也。
现代文：商纣暴虐，鼎又迁到了周朝，德行如果美善光明，鼎虽然小，也是重的。
English: The merchants were oppressive, and Ding moved to the Zhou Dynasty. If virtue is beautiful and bright, Ding, although small, is also heavy.

古文：其奸回昏乱，虽大，轻也。
现代文：如果奸邪昏乱，鼎虽然大，也是轻的。
English: If the treachery of evil is confused, the tripod, although large, is also light.

古文：天祚明德，有所厎止。
现代文：上天赐福给明德的人，是有一定期限的。
English: There is a time limit for those who are blessed with wisdom and virtue.

古文：成王定鼎于郏鄏，卜世三十，卜年七百，天所命也。
现代文：成王把九鼎固定在郏鄏，占卜的结果是传世三十代，享国七百年，这是上天所命令的。
English: Cheng Wang fixed the nine tripods on the yakitori, and the result of the divination was that it would be passed down for 30 generations and the country would enjoy 700 years of prosperity. This was ordered by heaven.

古文：周德虽衰，天命未改，鼎之轻重，未可问也。 
现代文：周朝的德行虽然衰微，天命并没有改变。鼎的轻重，是不能询问的。 
English: Although the virtue of the Zhou Dynasty has waned, the destiny of heaven has not changed. The importance of the tripod cannot be inquired.

古文：夏，楚人侵郑，郑即晋故也。
现代文：夏季，楚国人入侵郑国，这是由于郑国倾向晋国的缘故。
English: In the summer, the Chu people invaded Zheng, which was due to Zheng's tendency to move to Jin.

古文：宋文公即位，三年杀母弟须及昭公子，武氏之谋也。
现代文：宋文公即位的第三年，杀了同胞弟弟须和昭公的儿子，这是出于武氏的谋划。
English: In the third year of his accession to the throne, Song Wengong killed the son of his younger brother, Su He Zhaogong, which was planned by the Wu clan.

古文：使戴、桓之族攻武氏于司马子伯之馆，尽逐武、穆之族。
现代文：于是就让戴公、桓公的族人在司马子伯的客馆里攻打武氏，把武公、穆公的族人全部驱赶出国。
English: As a result, the clansmen of Dai Gong and Kan Gong were allowed to attack the Take clan in Sima Zibo's guest house and drive all the clansmen of Take Gong and Mu Gong out of the country.

古文：武、穆之族以曹师伐宋。
现代文：武公、穆公的族人用曹国的军队攻打宋国。
English: The clansmen of Wu Gong and Mu Gong used the army of Cao to attack Song.

古文：秋，宋师围曹，报武氏之乱也。
现代文：秋季，宋国军队包围曹国，以报复武氏的叛乱。
English: In the autumn, the Song army encircled Cao to avenge the rebellion of the Wu.

古文：冬，郑穆公卒。
现代文：冬季，郑穆公去世。
English: In winter, Zheng Mu Gong passed away.

古文：初，郑文公有贱妾曰燕姞，梦天使与己兰，曰： 余为伯鯈。
现代文：当初，郑文公有一个贱妾名叫燕姞，梦见天使给她一支兰花，说： 我是伯鯈。
English: At first, Zheng Wengong had a concubine named Yan Xuan. He dreamed that an angel gave her an orchid and said, "I am Bo Xuan."

古文：余，而祖也，以是为而子。
现代文：我，是你的祖先，把兰作为你的儿子。
English: I, your ancestor, took Lan as your son.

古文：以兰有国香，人服媚之如是。 
现代文：因为兰花的香味在全国数第一，佩带着它，别人就会像爱它一样地爱你。 
English: Because the fragrance of orchids is the number one in the country, wearing it, others will love you as they love it.

古文：既而文公见之，与之兰而御之。
现代文：不久以后，文公见到燕姞，给她一支兰花而让她侍寝。
English: Soon after, Wen Gong saw Yan Xuan, gave her an orchid and let her sleep.

古文：辞曰： 妾不才，幸而有子，将不信，敢征兰乎？ 公曰： 诺。 
现代文：燕姞告诉文公说： 我的地位低贱，侥幸怀了孩子。如果别人不相信，敢请把兰花用来作为信物。 文公说： 好。 
English: Yan Xun told Wengong: My status is low, I was lucky to conceive a child. If others do not believe, dare to use the orchid as a token. Wengong said: Good.

古文：生穆公，名之曰兰。
现代文：生了穆公，取名叫兰。
English: Mu Gong was born and named Lan.

古文：文公报郑子之妃，曰陈妫，生子华、子臧。
现代文：郑文公奸淫了郑子的妃子叫做陈妫的，生了子华、子臧。
English: Zheng Wenkong fornicated with Zheng Zi's concubine, whose name was Chen Yao, and she gave birth to Zi Hua and Zi Yao.

古文：子臧得罪而出。
现代文：子臧得了罪而离开了郑国。
English: His son committed a crime and left Zheng.

古文：诱子华而杀之南里，使盗杀子臧于陈、宋之间。
现代文：郑文公将子华诱骗到南里并杀死了他，又派坏人把子臧杀死在陈、宋两国之间。
English: Zheng Wen lured Zi Hua to Nanli and killed him, and sent a villain to kill Zi Yao between the two countries of Chen and Song.

古文：又娶于江，生公子士。
现代文：又在江国娶妻，生了公子士。
English: He also married a woman in Jiang Province and had a son.

古文：朝于楚，楚人酖之，及叶而死。
现代文：公子士到楚国朝见，楚国人给他喝了毒酒，到叶地就死了。
English: The prince went to see the emperor in Chu, the people of Chu gave him poisoned wine to drink, and he died in the fields.

古文：又娶于苏，生子瑕、子俞弥。
现代文：又在苏国娶妻，生了子瑕、子俞弥。
English: He also married a woman in Soviet Russia and had a son, Koke, and a son, Kimi.

古文：俞弥早卒。
现代文：俞弥早死。
English: Shinya died early.

古文：洩驾恶瑕，文公亦恶之，故不立也。
现代文：泄驾讨厌子瑕，郑文公也讨厌他，所以没有立为太子。
English: Prince Zheng also disliked him, so he did not become crown prince.

古文：公逐群公子，公子兰奔晋，从晋文公伐郑。
现代文：郑文公赶走公子们，公子兰逃亡到晋国，跟随晋文公攻打郑国。
English: Zheng Wengong chased away the nobles, and Lan fled to Jin Province and followed Jin Wengong to attack Zheng Province.

古文：石癸曰： 吾闻姬、姞耦，其子孙必蕃。
现代文：石癸说： 我听说姬、姞两姓适合于成为配偶，他们的子孙必定蕃衍。
English: Shi Hao said, "I have heard that the two surnames of Ji and Yao are suitable for becoming a spouse, and their offspring will certainly be Yao Yang.

古文：姞，吉人也，后稷之元妃也。
现代文：姞，就是吉人的意思，是后稷的嫡妻。
English: Yu, which means "good luck," is Hou Yu's legitimate wife.

古文：今公子兰，姞甥也。天或启之，必将为君，其后必蕃，先纳之可以亢宠。 
现代文：现在公子兰是姞氏的外甥，上天或许要使他光大，必然会做国君，他的后代必然蕃盛。如果先接纳他为国君，就可以保持他的宠信。 
English: Now Gongzilan is the nephew of Mr. Zou. Heaven may want to make him great. He will surely become the king, and his descendants will surely prosper. If you first accept him as the king, you can keep his favor.

古文：与孔将鉏、侯宣多纳之，盟于大宫而立之。以与晋平。
现代文：于是石癸就和孔将鉏、侯宣多收纳了公子兰，在大宫里盟誓以后而立了公子兰为国君，以此与晋国讲和。
English: As a result, Sekiguchi, along with Kong Jang-soo and Hou Xuan-duo, received Kojiran and, after taking an oath in the Grand Palace, established Kojiran as the ruler of the country, thereby making peace with Jin.

古文：穆公有疾，曰： 兰死，吾其死乎，吾所以生也。 
现代文：郑穆公有病，说： 兰花死了，我也许要死了吧！
English: Zheng Mu Gong was ill and said, "The orchid is dead, I may be dying!"

古文：刈兰而卒。
现代文：我是靠着它出生的。 
English: I was born with it.

