古文：孝静纪孝静皇帝，讳善见，清河文宣王亶之世子也。母曰胡妃。
现代文：孝静皇帝，名元善见，是清河文宣王亶之的世子，母亲是胡妃。
English: Emperor Xiaojing, whose name means "good-natured," was the son of the Qing Dynasty's King Wenxuan, and his mother was Princess Hu.

古文：永熙三年，拜通直散骑侍郎。八月，为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：永熙三年，被任命为通直散骑侍郎，八月，担任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the 3rd year of Yongxi, he was appointed as the general equestrian attendant, and in August, he served as the general equestrian attendant, the keeper of the imperial residences, and the third secretary.

古文：出帝既入关，齐献武王奉迎不克，乃与百僚会议，推帝以奉肃宗之后，时年十一。
现代文：出帝进关后，齐献武王迎接没成功，于是同百官集会商议，推举皇帝来继承肃宗为其后嗣，这年十一岁。
English: After the emperor's entry into the pass, Qi Xianwu did not succeed in welcoming the king, so he consulted with a hundred officials to elect an emperor to succeed Su Zong as his heir, who was eleven years old.

古文：冬十月丙寅，即位于城东北，大赦天下，改永熙三年为天平元年。
现代文：冬十月丙寅，在城东北登位，大赦天下，改永熙三年为天平元年。
English: In the winter of October, He Yin ascended to the throne in the northeast of the city and became the world's great general. He changed the three years of Yongxi into the first year of Tianping.

古文：庚午，以太师、赵郡王谌为大司马，以司空、咸阳王坦为太尉，以开府仪同三司高盛为司徒，以开府仪同三司高昂为司空。
现代文：庚午，任命太师、赵郡王元谌为大司马。任命司空、咸阳王元坦为太尉，任命开府仪同三司高盛为司徒，任命开府仪同三司高昂为司空。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the Taishi and the Zhaogun Wang Yuanzhang were appointed as the chief steward, the Siku and the Xianyang Wang Yuanzhang were appointed as the first lieutenants, the Kaifu Yi and the three Goldman Sachs were appointed as the stewards, and the Kaifu Yi and the three Gaoang were appointed as the Siku.

古文：壬申，有事于太庙。
现代文：壬申，在太庙祭祀。
English: In Jinshin, a ritual is held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：诏曰： 安安能迁，自古之明典；所居靡定，往昔之成规。
现代文：下诏说： 平静安稳能够迁移，是自古以来的明确典章；居住没有定所，是往日的现成规矩。
English: The following edict said: It has been a clear rule since ancient times that people can move about in a calm and stable manner; living without a fixed place is a ready-made rule of the past.

古文：是以殷迁八城，周卜三地。
现代文：所以殷朝迁移八座城镇，周朝卜居三处地方。
English: Therefore, the Yin Dynasty moved eight towns, and the Zhou Dynasty moved three places.

古文：吉凶有数，隆替无恆。
现代文：吉凶有定数，兴衰无定准。
English: Fortune and misfortune have a fixed number, and rise and fall have no fixed standard.

古文：事由于变通，理出于不得已故也。
现代文：这是事情由于变通，道理出于不得已的缘故。
English: This is due to the fact that things are flexible, and the reason is out of necessity.

古文：高祖孝文皇帝式观乾象，俯协人谋，发自武州，来幸嵩县。魏虽旧国，其命惟新。
现代文：高祖孝文皇帝仰观天象，俯合于人谋，从武州出发，前来嵩县，魏虽然是旧国，命运却是新生的。
English: Emperor Gaozhu Xiaowen looked up at the celestial body and bowed to the human plot. He set out from Wuzhou and came to Song County. Although Wei was an old country, its destiny was new.

古文：及正光之季，国步孔棘，丧乱不已，寇贼交侵，俾我生民，无所措手。
现代文：等到正光末年，国运艰难，死丧祸乱不断，寇贼交相侵犯，使我民众，无处放手。
English: By the end of the Ming Dynasty, the country was in a difficult situation, with constant death and disaster, and the bandits were encroaching on each other, leaving my people with nowhere to go.

古文：今远遵古式，深验时事，考龟袭吉，迁宅漳滏。
现代文：现在远遵古代规程，深入验证时事，考察占卜因袭吉祥，迁居到漳水滏水。
English: Now, they follow the ancient regulations, thoroughly verify current affairs, investigate divination for auspicious reasons, and move to Surabaya.

古文：庶克隆洪基，再昌宝历。
现代文：希望能兴起宏大基业，再度昌盛帝业。
English: It is hoped that a grand foundation will rise, and the empire will once again flourish.

古文：主者明为条格，及时发迈。 
现代文：主管者明确订立条例，按时出发。 
English: The person in charge shall clearly stipulate the regulations and set off on time.

古文：丙子，车驾北迁于鄴。
现代文：丙子，皇帝向北迁到邺城。
English: Cixi, the emperor moved north to Shicheng.

古文：诏齐献武王留后部分。
现代文：诏令齐献武王留在后面指挥。
English: The emperor ordered Qi Xianwu to stay behind and take command.

古文：改司州为洛州，以卫大将军、尚书令元弼为骠骑大将军、仪同三司、洛州刺史，镇洛阳。
现代文：改司州为洛州。任命卫大将军、尚书令元弼为骠骑大将军、仪同三司、洛州刺史，镇守洛阳。
English: He changed Shizhou to Luozhou, appointed General Wei, Shang Shuling to make Yuan Xuan the cavalry general, the three departments of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, the history of Luozhou, and the town guard of Luoyang.

古文：诏从迁之户，百官给复三年，安居人五年。
现代文：诏令随从迁移的家庭，百官给他们免除三年赋役，安居的民众免除五年赋役。
English: According to the edict, the officials exempted the families who followed the migration from three years of forced labor, and the people who lived safely were exempted from five years of forced labor.

古文：十有一月，兗州刺史樊子鹄、南青州刺史大野拔据瑕丘反。
现代文：十一月，兖州刺史樊子鹄、南青州刺史大野拔占据瑕丘反叛。
English: In November, Zhangzhou Zhishi, Hanzi and Nanqing Zhishi revolted and occupied Kejiu.

古文：庚寅，车驾至鄴，居北城相州之廨。
现代文：庚寅，皇帝到达邺城，居住在北城相州的官署。
English: Goyin, the emperor arrived in Handan, residing in the government office of Beicheng Xiangzhou.

古文：改相州刺史为司州牧，魏郡太守为魏尹，徙鄴旧人西径百里，以居新迁之人。分鄴置临漳县，以魏郡、林虑、广平、阳丘、汲郡、黎阳、东濮阳、清河、广宗等郡为皇畿。
现代文：改相州刺史为司州牧，魏郡太守为魏尹，迁徙邺城以西一百里的旧民以居住新迁的人，分割邺县设置临漳县，将魏郡、林虑、广平、阳丘、汲郡、黎阳、束濮阳、清河、广宗等郡作为京郊地区。
English: The history of Xiangzhou was changed to Sizhou Maki, the governor of Wei County was changed to Wei Yin, the old people who lived a hundred miles west of Handan were moved to live with the newly moved people, Handan County was divided and Linyi County was set up, and Wei County, Linxian, Guangping, Yangqiu, Ku County, Liyang, Sokhuangyang, Qinghe, Guangzong and other counties were used as suburbs of Beijing.

古文：十有二月丁卯，燕郡王贺拔允薨。
现代文：十二月丁卯，燕郡王贺拔允逝世。
English: In December Dingwu, Yan County Wang He Bajong passed away.

古文：庚午，诏内外解严，百司悉依旧章，从容雅服，不得以矛钐从事。
现代文：庚午，诏令内外解除戒严，百官都依旧曰典章，悠闲穿上朝服，不能带着兵器办事。
English: In the afternoon of the 14th, the Emperor issued an edict to lift the martial law both at home and abroad. All the officials still wore ceremonial robes, leisurely put on the imperial robes, and could not carry weapons to work.

古文：丙子，遣侍中封隆之等五人为大使，巡谕天下。
现代文：丙子，派遣侍中封隆之等五人为大使，巡视告示天下民众。
English: He dispatched five ambassadors, including the chamberlain Fong Long, to inspect and inform the people of the world.

古文：丁丑，赦畿内。
现代文：丁丑，赦免京城内囚犯。
English: Ding Jiu pardoned all the prisoners in Beijing.

古文：闰月，萧衍以元庆和为镇北将军、魏王，入据平濑乡。
现代文：闰月，萧衍任命元庆和为镇北将军、魏王，进据平濑乡。
English: In the leap month, Xiao Yan appointed Yuan Qinghe as the general of Zhenbei, the king of Wei, and advanced to Pingyao Township.

古文：宇文黑獭既害出帝，乃以南阳王宝炬僭尊号。
现代文：字文黑獭害死出帝后，就使南阳王宝炬僭越称帝。
English: After the Emperor was killed by the Black Death, the Nanyang King Bao Jue became Emperor.

古文：初置四中郎将，于僵石桥置东中，蒲泉置西中，济北置南中，洛水置北中。
现代文：开始设置四中郎将，在礓石桥设置东中郎将，在蒲泉设置西中郎将，在济北设置南中郎将，在沼水设置北中郎将。
English: Four middle schools will be set up at the beginning, the East Middle School will be set up at Shizeki Bridge, the West Middle School will be set up at Puquan, the South Middle School will be set up at Jeju North, and the North Middle School will be set up at Numazu.

古文：二年春正月，宝炬渭州刺史可朱浑道元拥部来降，齐献武王迎纳之，赈其廪食。
现代文：二年春正月，宝炬的渭州刺史可朱浑道元率领部属前来投降，齐献武王迎接安置他们，赈济他们的粮。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, Zhu Hun Dogen, the torchbearer of Zhangzhou, led his subordinates to surrender, and they all presented gifts to King Wu to welcome and settle them, and to provide them with grain.

古文：己巳，诏以齐献武王为相国，假黄钺，剑履上殿，入朝不趋，余悉如故。
现代文：己巳，下诏任命齐献武王为相国，赐予黄娥，带剑穿鞋上殿，入朝不用快步急行，其余都照旧。
English: Now, the following edict appoints Qi Xianwu Wang as the country's consort, bestows Huang E, takes a sword to wear shoes to the palace, and does not need to hurry to enter the court, and the rest are as before.

古文：王固让不受。
现代文：齐献武王执意推让不接受。
English: Qi Xianwu stubbornly refused to accept the concession.

古文：乙亥，兼尚书右仆射、东南道行台元晏讨元庆和，破走之。
现代文：乙亥，兼尚书右仆射、东南道行台元晏讨伐元庆和，打败赶走了他。
English: Yi Hai, concurrently with Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, shot and defeated Yuan Qinghe, and drove him away.

古文：二月壬午，以太尉、咸阳王坦为太傅，以司州牧、西河王忭为太尉。
现代文：二月壬午，任命太尉、咸阳王元坦为太傅，任命司州牧、西河王元惊为太尉。
English: In the afternoon of February, he appointed the first lieutenant, Xianyang Wangyuan Tan, as the taifu, and appointed Sizhou Maki and Xihe Wangyuan Qian as the second lieutenant.

古文：己丑，前南青州刺史大野拔斩樊子鹄以降，兗州平。
现代文：己丑，前壶直丛刺史去墅送杀死望王鹄投降，查业平定。
English: He was so ugly that he was sent to the villa to be killed, and Wang Yao surrendered, and the investigation was settled.

古文：戊戌，萧衍司州刺史陈庆之寇豫州，刺史尧雄击走之。
现代文：戊戌，萧衍的司州刺史陈庆之侵犯豫州，刺史尧雄出击赶走了他。
English: Wuzhong, Xiao Yan's Sizhou stabbed Chen Qing's invasion of Yuzhou, stabbed Shixiong and drove him away.

古文：三月辛酉，以司徒高盛为太尉，以司空高昂为司徒，济阴王晖业为司空。
现代文：三月辛酉，任命司徒高盛为太尉，任命司空高昂为司徒，任命济阴王晖业为司空。
English: In March, Emperor Xinzheng appointed Siu-tsu Gao-sheng as the first lieutenant, Siu-tsu Gao-ang as Siu-tsu, and Zi-yin Wang Shao-ye as Siu-tsu.

古文：齐献武王讨平山胡刘蠡升，斩之。
现代文：齐麸武王讨伐平定山胡刘蠡升，杀死了他。
English: King Qianwu of Qi conquered and killed Hu Liusheng of Dingshan.

古文：其子南海王复僭帝号，献武王进击，破擒之，及其弟西海王、皇后、夫人已下四百人，并逋逃之人二万余户。
现代文：他的儿子南海王又僭越称帝号，献武王进军攻打，打败擒获了他，以及他的弟弟西海王、皇后、夫人以下四百人，加上逃亡的人二万多户。
English: His son Nanhai Wang also assumed the title of emperor, and sent troops to attack, defeat and capture him, as well as his brother Xihai Wang, his queen, his wife and four hundred people, plus more than twenty thousand families who fled.

古文：辛未，以旱故，诏京邑及诸州郡县收瘗骸骨。
现代文：辛未，因天旱的缘故，诏令京城和各州郡县收集掩埋尸骨。
English: In recent years, due to the drought, the government ordered the capital and all prefectures and counties to collect and bury the bones.

古文：是春，高丽、契丹并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这个春季，高丽、契丹都派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: This spring, both Goryeo and Khitan sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：夏四月，前青州刺史侯渊反，攻掠青齐。
现代文：夏四月，前壹州刺史堡绷反叛，攻打劫掠壹州齐州。
English: In the summer of April, the former Yizhou Zhishi Castle rebelled violently and attacked and plundered Yizhou Qizhou.

古文：癸未，济州刺史蔡俊讨平之。
现代文：癸未，济州刺史蔡俊讨伐平定了他。
English: However, he was defeated by Jeju thug Cai Jun.

古文：壬辰，降京师见囚。
现代文：壬辰，对京城在押囚徒减刑。
English: Imjin, commuted the sentence of a prisoner in custody in Beijing.

古文：五月，大旱，勒城门、殿门及省、府、寺、署、坊门浇人，不简王公，无限日，得雨乃止。
现代文：五月，天大旱，勒令城门、殿门以及省、府、寺、署、坊门用水浇人，王公也不例外，没有限定日期，得到雨水后才停止。
English: In May, due to the severe drought, the city gate, the palace gate, and the provincial, prefectural, temple, police station, and temple gate were ordered to pour water on people. Wanggu is no exception. There is no limited date, and it will only stop after it receives rainwater.

古文：六月，元庆和寇南豫州，刺史尧雄大破之。
现代文：六月，元庆和侵犯南豫州，刺史尧雄将他打得大败。
English: In June, Yuan Qinghe invaded South Yuzhou and was soundly defeated by Zhang Shixiong.

古文：秋七月甲戌，封汝南王悦孙绰为琅邪王。
现代文：秋七月甲戌，封汝南王元悦的孙子元绰为琅邪王。
English: In the autumn and July of Jiajing, the grandson of Yuan Yue, the King of Southern Ru, was named the King of Evil.

古文：八月辛卯，司空、济阴王晖业坐事免。
现代文：八月辛卯，司空、济阴王晖业因事获罪免官。
English: In August, Xin Wu, Siku and Jijin Wang Xie were exonerated for their actions.

古文：甲午，发众七万六千人营新宫。
现代文：甲午，调发民众七万六千人建造新宫殿。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, 76,000 people were sent to build a new palace.

古文：九月，齐献武王以治民之官多不奉法，请选朝士清正者，州别遣一人，问疾苦。
现代文：九月，齐献武王因治理民众的官吏多不奉行法令，请求挑选清廉正派的朝廷官员，州中另派遣一人，询问民众疾苦。
English: In September, King Qi Xianwu, because most of the officials who governed the people did not follow the law, requested the selection of a clean and honest court official, and another person was sent from the state to inquire about the hardships of the people.

古文：丁巳，以开府仪同三司、襄城王旭为司空。
现代文：丁巳，任命开府仪同三司、襄城王元旭为司空。
English: Ding Si appointed Kaifu Yi Tong San Si and Xiangcheng Wang Yuanxu as Siku.

古文：冬十有一月丁未，萧衍将柳仲礼寇荆州，刺史王元击破之。
现代文：冬十一月丁未，萧衍的将领柳仲礼侵犯荆州，刺史王元打败了他。
English: In the winter of November, Xiao Yan's general Liu Zhongli invaded Jingzhou, and Wang Yuan defeated him.

古文：癸丑，祀圆丘。
现代文：癸丑。祭祀圆丘。
English: Ugly. Sacrificial round mound.

古文：甲寅，阊阖门灾，龙见并州人家井中。
现代文：甲寅，阎阖门发生火灾，龙出现在并州人家水井中。
English: A fire broke out in Yan'an Gate, and a dragon appeared in a well of a local family.

古文：丙寅，诏齐文襄王起家为散骑常侍、骠骑大将军、左光禄大夫、仪同三司、太原郡开国公，食邑三千户。
现代文：丙寅，诏令齐文襄王出任散骑常侍、骠骑大将军、左光禄大夫、仪同三司、太原郡开国公，食邑为三千户。
English: He ordered Qibunxiang Wang to serve as straggler, cavalry general, doctor of the Left Guanglu, the third secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and the founding father of Taiyuan County, with a total of 3,000 households.

古文：十有二月壬午，车驾狩于鄴东。
现代文：十二月壬午，皇帝在邺城东狩猎。
English: At noon of December, the emperor went hunting in the east of Fucheng.

古文：甲午，文武百官，量事各给禄。
现代文：甲午，文武百官，各根据职事供给俸禄。
English: In the first half of the 19th century, there were hundreds of civil and military officials, each of whom was provided with a salary according to their duties.

古文：三年春正月癸卯朔，飨群臣于前殿。
现代文：三年春正月癸卯初一，在前殿宴请群臣。
English: On the first day of spring in the third year, he held a banquet for his retainers in the vestibule.

古文：戊申，诏百官举士，举不称才者两免之。
现代文：戊申，诏令百官推举士人，推举不称职的两相免职。
English: According to Wu Shen, the imperial edict ordered all officials to nominate candidates, and the two incompetent candidates were removed from office.

古文：齐献武王袭宝炬西夏州，克之。
现代文：齐献武王袭击宝炬的西夏州，攻下来了。
English: Qi Xianwu attacked Baotong's Western Xia Province and took it.

古文：诏加齐献武王九锡之礼，侍中元子思敦谕，固让乃止。
现代文：韶令加给齐献武王九锡的礼仪，侍中丞：工墨敦促告谕。执意推让才作罢。
English: The imperial edict added the etiquette of presenting the King of Wu and Juxi to Qi, and the chamberlain: the imperial edict urged the imperial edict. Perseverance is the only way to make concessions.

古文：二月丁未，萧衍光州刺史郝树以州内附。
现代文：二月丁未，萧衍的光州刺史轻树献出州城归附。
English: In February of Ding Wei, Xiao Yan's Gwangju Zhishi Light Tree presented the state capital to attach.

古文：丁酉，诏加齐文襄王使持节、尚书令、大行台、大都督，以鲜卑、高车酋庶皆隶之。
现代文：丁酉，下韶加授齐文襄王为使持节、尚书令、大行台、大都督，将鲜卑、直重的首领部众都隶属于他。
English: Ding Xuan, the lower echelon of the Qibun Emperor, was the envoy, the commander, the great leader, and the great governor, and all the leaders and subordinates were subordinate to him.

古文：三月甲寅，以开府仪同三司、华山王鸷为大司马。
现代文：三月甲寅，任命开府仪同三司、华山王元惊为大司马。
English: In March, Jia Yin appointed Kaifu Yi as the third secretary and Huashan Wang Yuanjun as the chief secretary.

古文：丁卯，阳夏太守卢公纂据郡南叛，大都督元整破之。
现代文：丁卯，阳夏太守卢全迈占据郡城向南叛变，大都督元整打败了他。
English: Dingwu, Yangxia governor Lu Quanmai occupied the county seat to the south of the mutiny, the great governor Yuan Zheng defeated him.

古文：夏四月丁酉，昌乐王诞薨。
现代文：夏四月丁酉，昌乐王元诞逝世。
English: In the summer of April, Ding Xi, the birth of Changle Wangyuan, passed away.

古文：五月癸卯，赐鳏寡孤独贫穷者衣物各有差。
现代文：五月癸卯，赏赐衣物给鳏寡孤独贫穷的人多少不等。
English: In May, clothing is given to widows, widowers, lonely and poor people in varying amounts.

古文：丙辰，以录尚书事、西河王忭为司州牧。
现代文：丙辰，任命录尚书事、西河王元惊为司州牧。
English: Hsin-Chen, the appointment record, and Wang Yuan-Chen of the West River were appointed as the provincial governors.

古文：戊辰，大尉高盛薨。
现代文：戊辰，太尉直盛逝世。
English: Boshin, Second Lieutenant Naomori passed away.

古文：六月辛巳，赵郡王谌薨。
现代文：六月辛巳，赵郡王元谌逝世。
English: In June, Zhao County's Wang Yuanjun passed away.

古文：秋七月庚子，大赦天下。
现代文：秋七月庚子，大赦天下。
English: In the autumn and July, Geng Zi was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：萧衍夏州刺史田独鞞、颍川防城都督刘鸾庆并以州内附。
现代文：萧衍的夏州刺史田狸鲤、题川防城都督刘鸾庆都献州城归附。
English: Xiaoyan's Xiazhou Zhi Tian Cucumber, and Liu Yingqing, the governor of Heichuan Defense City, were both attached to Xianzhou City.

古文：八月，并、肆、汾、建四州陨霜，大饥。
现代文：八月，韭、壁、进、建四州降霜，发生大饥荒。
English: In August, frosts fell in Shizhou, Qianmen, Jinshan and Jiancheng, and a great famine occurred.

古文：九月壬寅，以定州刺史侯景兼尚书右仆射、南道行台，节度诸军南讨。
现代文：九月壬寅，任命定州刺史谜为兼尚书右仆射、南道行台，调度各军向南讨伐。
English: In September, Jinyin appointed Dingzhou Zhishimen as his right-hand man and commander of the Southern Expedition, and ordered his armies to march southward.

古文：丙辰，阳平人路季礼聚众反。
现代文：丙辰，垦旺人堕至擅聚集民众反叛。
English: At the same time, the Sui and Wang people fell into the trap of arbitrarily gathering the people to rebel.

古文：辛酉，御史中尉窦泰讨平之。
现代文：辛酉，御史中尉宜台讨伐平定了他。
English: Xin Yao and Lieutenant Mishi fought against Yitai and defeated him.

古文：冬十有一月戊申，诏尚书可遣使巡检河北流移饥人，邢陉、滏口所经之处，若有死尸，即为藏掩。
现代文：冬十一月戊申，诏令尚书派遣使者巡视检查黄河以北流浪迁移的饥民，邢陉、滏口所经过的地方，如果有死尸，就加以掩埋。
English: In the winter of November, Emperor Taizong sent an envoy to inspect the starving people who had migrated north of the Yellow River. If there were any dead bodies, they were to be buried in the places where they had passed through.

古文：勿使灵台枯骨，有感于通梦；广汉露骸，时闻于夜哭。
现代文：不要使灵台的枯骨，在梦中相感应；广漠暴露的尸体，在夜晚时而听到哭声。
English: Do not make the dead bones of the hearse resonate in your dreams; the cries of the corpses exposed in the vastness of the desert can sometimes be heard at night.

古文：侯景攻克萧衍楚州，获刺史桓和。
现代文：侯景攻克萧衍的楚州，擒获刺史桓和。
English: Hou Jing conquered the Chuzhou of Xiao Yan, and won the victory of Zhang Shihuang.

古文：十有二月，以并州刺史尉景为太保。
现代文：十二月，任命并州刺史尉景为太保。
English: In December, he appointed the state's most senior official, Shih Rongjing, as Taibao.

古文：辛未，遣使者板假老人官，百岁已下各有差。
现代文：辛未，派遣使者板授老人官职，一百岁以下的各有等级。
English: Xinwei dispatched an envoy to confer senior official positions on the elders, who were all under the age of one hundred.

古文：壬申大司马、清河王亶薨。
现代文：壬申，大司马、清河王元宜逝世。
English: Jinshin, Daishima, Qinghe Wang Yuan Yi passed away.

古文：丁丑，齐献武王自晋阳西讨，次于蒲津，司徒公、大都督高敖曹趋上洛，车骑大将军窦泰入自潼关。
现代文：丁丑，齐献武王从晋阳向西讨伐，停驻在蒲津，司徒公、大都督高敖曹赶往上洛，车骑大将军窦泰从潼关进入。
English: Ding Yuxiu and Qi Xianwu marched westward from Jinyang and stopped in Pudong. Prince Szu and the Grand Duke Gao Bing Cao rushed to Shangluo, and the cavalry general Dou Tai entered from Shaoguan.

古文：癸未，以太傅、咸阳王坦为太师。
现代文：癸未，任命太傅、咸阳王元坦为太师。
English: At the same time, he appointed the Grand Master, Xianyang Wangyuan Tan, as the Grand Master.

古文：乙酉，勿吉国遣使朝贡。
现代文：乙酉，勿吉国派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: At that time, the country of Bekichi sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：是岁，高丽国遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，高丽国派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: That year, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：四年春正月，禁十五日相偷戏。
现代文：四年春正月，禁止十五日互相偷盗的游乐。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of spring in the fourth year, it is forbidden to steal each other's amusement.

古文：窦泰失利自杀。
现代文：窦泰失败自杀。
English: Dou Tai failed and committed suicide.

古文：丁巳，高敖曹攻上洛，克之，擒宝炬骠骑大将军、洛州刺史泉企。
现代文：丁巳，高敖曹攻打上洛，攻下来了，擒获宝炬的骠骑大将军、洛州刺史泉企。
English: Ding Si, Gao Bing Cao attacked up to Luo, attacked down, captured the torch of the cavalry general, Luozhou Zhishi Quanqi.

古文：以汝阳王暹为录尚书事。
现代文：任命汝阳王元暹为录尚书事。
English: Appointed Ruyang Wang Yuan Sie as the secretary.

古文：夏四月辛未，迁七帝神主入新庙，大赦天下，内外百官普进一阶。
现代文：夏四月辛未，迁移七帝的牌位进入新庙，大赦天下，内外百官普升一级。
English: In the summer of April, the card rank of the seven emperors was moved to the new temple, the world was amnestied, and one hundred officials at home and abroad were promoted to the first level.

古文：先是，荥阳人张俭等聚众反于大騩山，通宝炬。
现代文：在这以前，荣阳人张俭等在大瑰山聚集民众反叛，和宝炬交往。
English: Before this, the Rongyang people, such as Zhang Jian, gathered the people to rebel in the Daxu Mountain and interacted with the torch.

古文：壬辰，武卫将军高元盛讨破之。
现代文：壬辰，武卫将军高元盛讨伐打败他们。
English: In Imjin, Wuwei General Gao Yuan Sheng led a crusade to defeat them.

古文：六月己巳，幸华林园理讼。
现代文：六月己巳，前往华林园审理诉讼。
English: In June, he went to Hualin Garden to hear the lawsuit.

古文：辛未，诏尚书掩骼埋胾，推录囚徒。
现代文：辛未，韶令尚书掩埋尸骨腐肉，讯问囚徒。
English: Xinwei ordered Shangshu to bury the corpses, bones and carrion, and interrogate the prisoners.

古文：壬午，阊阖门灾。
现代文：壬午，间阖门发生火灾。
English: In the morning, a fire broke out at the lattice gate.

古文：先是，萧衍因益州刺史傅和请通好。
现代文：在这以前，萧衍通过益州刺史傅和请求交往友好。
English: Prior to this, Xiao Yan had been in friendly contact with Marong through Yizhou Zhishifu.

古文：秋七月甲辰，遣兼散骑常侍李谐、兼吏部郎中卢元明、兼通直散骑常侍李鄴使于萧衍。
现代文：秋七月甲辰，派遣兼散骑常侍李谐、兼吏部郎中卢元明、兼通直散骑常侍李邺出使萧衍。
English: In the autumn of July, Jia Chen dispatched Li Jini, the errand boy of the errand boy department, Lu Yuanming, the errand boy of the errand boy department, and Xiao Yan, the errand boy of the errand boy of the errand boy department.

古文：八月，宝炬、宇文黑獭寇陕州，城陷，刺史李徽伯为黑獭所杀。
现代文：八月，宝炬、宇文黑獭侵犯陕州，城池沦陷，刺史李徽伯被黑獭杀害。
English: In August, Baotong and Yuwen Heiqi invaded Shaanxi, the city fell, and the assassin Li Huibo was killed by Heiqi.

古文：九月，侍中元子思与其弟子华谋西入，并赐死。
现代文：九月，侍中元于思和他弟弟子华密谋进入西部地区，都被赐令自杀。
English: In September, the chamberlain, Yuan Yusi, and his younger brother, the disciple Hua, conspired to enter the western region, and were both ordered to commit suicide.

古文：闰月乙丑，卫将军、右光禄大夫蒋天乐谋反，伏诛。
现代文：闰月乙丑，卫将军、右光禄大夫蒋天乐图谋反叛，受死刑。
English: On the second day of the leap month, General Wei and the doctor of the Right Guanglu, Jiang Tianle, plotted to rebel and were sentenced to death.

古文：禁京师酤酒。
现代文：禁止京城卖酒。
English: The sale of alcohol has been banned in the capital.

古文：冬十月，以咸阳王坦为录尚书事。
现代文：冬十月，任命咸阳王元坦为绿尚书事。
English: In the winter of October, Xianyang Wangyuan Tan was appointed as the leader of Green Shang Shujie.

古文：壬辰，齐献武王西讨，至沙苑，不克而还。
现代文：壬辰，齐献武王向西讨伐，到达沙苑，没取胜而返回。
English: In Imjin, Qi Xianwu marched westward, reached Shayuan, but did not win and returned.

古文：己酉，宝炬行台宫景寿、都督杨白驹寇洛州，大都督韩延大破之。
现代文：己酉，实炬的行台宫景寿、都督杨白驹侵犯洛州，大都督韩贤大败他们。
English: Emperor Jizong, Emperor Jing Shou of the Tang Dynasty, and Yang Bailuan, the governor of Taizhou, invaded Luozhou, and Han Xian, the great governor, defeated them.

古文：宝炬又遣其子大行台元季海、大都督独孤如愿逼洛州，刺史广阳王湛弃城退还。季海、如愿遂据金墉。
现代文：宝炬又派遣他的儿子大行台元季海、大都督独孤如愿进逼洛州，刺史广阳王元湛放弃城池撤退返回，季海、如愿于是占据金墉。
English: Bao Tuo also sent his son, Da Xing Tai Yuan Ji Hai, and Da Du Du Du Du Du Du Lone into Luozhou as he wished, and sent his son, Guanyang Wang Yuan Tan, to abandon the city and retreat back. Ji Hai then occupied Jinlu as he wished.

古文：颍州长史贺若微执刺史田迅西叛，引宝炬都督梁回据城。
现代文：颖州长史贺若微拘捕刺史田迅向西叛变，招引实炬的都督梁回占据城池。
English: Ying governor Shi He Ruo Wei arrested and arrested Shi Tian Xun for westward rebellion, and invited the real torch of the governor Liang Wei to occupy the city.

古文：宝炬又遣其都督赵继宗、右丞韦孝宽等攻陷豫州。
现代文：实炬又派遣他的都督趟继宗、右丞韦孝宽等人攻克豫州。
English: Shitake also dispatched his governor, Wanzong, his right-hand man, Wei Xiaokang, and others to conquer Yuzhou.

古文：十有一月丙子，以骠骑大将军、仪同三司万俟普为太尉。
现代文：十一月丙子，任命骠骑大将军、仪同三司万俟普为太尉。
English: In November, he was appointed as the cavalry general and the third secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Wan Rongpu, was appointed as the first lieutenant.

古文：十有二月甲寅，萧衍遣使朝贡。
现代文：十二月甲寅，萧衍派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In December, Xiao Yan sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：河间人邢摩纳、范阳人卢仲礼等各聚众反。
现代文：河间人邢摩纳、范阳人卢仲礼等各自聚集民众反叛。
English: Kawama's Mana, Fanyang's Lu Zhongli, and others each gathered the people to rebel.

古文：是岁，高丽、蠕蠕国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，高丽、蠕蠕国都派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the same year, both Goryeo and the Korean Peninsula sent envoys to pay tribute to the court.

古文：元象元年春正月，有巨象自至易郡陂中，南兗州获送于鄴。
现代文：元象元年春正月，有一头大象自己到场郡池塘中，南兖州擒获后送到邺城。
English: In the first month of spring in the year of the elephant, an elephant found itself in the county pond. It was captured in southern Luzhou and brought to Lucheng.

古文：丁卯，大赦，改元。
现代文：丁卯，大赦天下，改年号。
English: Dingwu, amnesty to the world, change the year.

古文：大都督贺拔仁攻宝炬南汾州。己卯，拔之，擒其刺史韦子粲。
现代文：大都督贺拔仁攻打实炬南面的汾州，己卯，攻下来了，擒获他的刺史韦子粲。
English: Grand Duke He Bairin attacked Zhangzhou in the south of Sichuan Province. He was defeated and captured by his rival, Shi Wei Zi.

古文：行台任祥率豫州刺史尧雄等与大行台侯景、司徒高敖曹、大都督万俟受洛干等于北豫相会，俱讨颍州。
现代文：行台任祥率领豫州刺史尧雄等人和大行台侯景、司徒高敖曹、大都督万俟受洛干等人在北豫州相会合，一起讨伐颖州。
English: Gangtai Renxiang, led by Yingzhou Zhi Shixiong and others, and Da Gangtai Houjing, Sittu Gaozhong Cao, Grand Governor Wanxu Luo Gan and others met in North Yingzhou to fight against Yingzhou.

古文：梁回等弃城遁走。颍州平。
现代文：梁回等人放弃城池逃跑，颖州平定。
English: Liang Hui and others abandoned the city and fled, and Yingzhou was pacified.

古文：二月，豫州刺史尧雄攻扬州，拔之，擒宝炬义州刺史韩显、扬州长史丘岳，送京师。
现代文：二月，豫州刺史尧雄攻打扬州，攻下来了，擒获宝炬的义州刺史韩显、扬州长史丘岳，送到京城。
English: In February, Yan Xiong, the governor of Yuzhou, attacked Yangzhou, and was defeated. Han Xian, the governor of Yizhou, and Shi Qiuyue, the governor of Yang, who won the torch, were sent to Beijing.

古文：丙辰，遣兼散骑常侍郑伯猷使于萧衍。
现代文：丙辰，派遣兼散骑常侍郑伯猷出使萧衍。
English: Bing Chen dispatched Zheng Boqin, who was also a knight errant and a regular attendant, to dispatch the envoy Xiao Yan.

古文：三月，齐献武王固请解大丞相，诏从之。
现代文：三月，齐献武王坚决请求解除大丞相职务，下诏依从他。
English: In March, Qi Xianwu resolutely requested that Wang be relieved of his duties as grand chancellor, and the emperor obeyed him.

古文：夏四月庚寅，曲赦畿内。
现代文：夏四月庚寅，赦免京城囚犯。
English: In the summer of April, Goiin pardoned the prisoners in Beijing.

古文：壬辰，齐献武王还晋阳，请开酒禁。
现代文：壬辰，齐献武王返回晋阳，请求解除卖酒的禁令。
English: In Imjin, Qi Xianwu returned to Jinyang to request the lifting of the ban on the sale of alcohol.

古文：六月壬辰，帝幸华林都堂听讼。
现代文：六月壬辰，皇帝前往华林都堂听取诉讼。
English: In June of the same year, the emperor went to the Waring Palace to listen to the lawsuit.

古文：是夏，山东大水，虾蟆鸣于树上。
现代文：这个夏季，太行山以束发生大水灾，虾蟆在树上呜叫。
English: This summer, there was a big flood in the mountains of Taihang, and shrimps were crying in the trees.

古文：秋七月乙亥，高丽国遣使朝贡。
现代文：秋七月乙亥，高丽国派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the autumn of July, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：行台侯景、司徒公高敖曹围宝炬将独孤如愿于金墉，宝炬、宇文黑獭并来赴救。
现代文：行台侯景、司徒公高敖曹在金墉包围实炬的将领独孤如愿，宝炬、宇文黑獭都赶来救援。
English: The generals who surrounded the real torch in Jinyuan, including Gao Jiao Cao, Gao Jiao Cao, Gao Jiao Cao, and Gao Jiao, all came to the rescue.

古文：大都督库狄于率诸将前驱，齐献武王总众继进。
现代文：大都督库狄干率领众将领做前锋，齐献武王统领大军随后进发。
English: Grand Governor Ku Dickan led the generals as the vanguard, and King Wu led the army to march forward.

古文：八月辛卯，战于河阴，大破之。
现代文：八月辛卯，在河阴交战，大败宝炬的军队。
English: August Xinwu, in the river Yin war, defeated the torch army.

古文：斩其大都督、仪同三司寇洛生等二十余人，俘获数万。
现代文：杀死他的大都督、仪同三司寇洛生等二十多人，俘获几万人。
English: He killed more than twenty people, including the grand governor, the grand marshal, and the three colossi, and captured tens of thousands of people.

古文：司徒公高敖曹、大都督李猛、宋显并战没。
现代文：司徒公高敖曹、大都督李猛、宋显都战死。
English: Stukong Gao Rong Cao, Grand Governor Li Meng, and Song Xian all died in the battle.

古文：宝炬留其将长孙子彦守金墉。
现代文：宝炬留下他的将领长孙子彦守卫金墉。
English: He left the torch to his general, the eldest grandson, to guard the golden scepter.

古文：壬辰，齐献武王济河，子彦弃城走。
现代文：壬辰，齐献武王渡过黄河，子彦放弃城池逃跑。
English: Imjin, Qi Xianwu crossed the Yellow River, Zihiko abandoned the castle and fled.

古文：九月，大都督贺拔仁击邢摩纳、卢仲礼等，破平之。
现代文：九月，大都督贺拔仁攻打邢摩纳、卢仲礼等人，打败平定他们。
English: In September, the Grand Duke He Bairin attacked and defeated the followers of Gong Mona, Lu Zhongli and others to pacify them.

古文：冬十月，萧衍遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬十月，萧衍派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the winter of October, Xiao Yan sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：十有一月庚寅，遣陆操使于萧衍。
现代文：十一月庚寅，派遣陆操出使萧衍。
English: In November, Gyeongin dispatched the Chinese envoy Xiao Yan.

古文：齐献武王来朝。
现代文：齐献武王前来朝见。
English: They all came to see the king.

古文：十有二月甲辰，还晋阳。
现代文：十二月甲辰。回到晋阳。
English: December Jia Chen. Returned to Jinyang.

古文：兴和元年春正月辛酉，以尚书令孙腾为司徒。
现代文：兴和元年春正月辛酉，任命尚书令孙腾为司徒。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Xinghe era, Shang Shuling appointed Sun Teng as a disciple.

古文：三月甲寅朔，封常山郡王劭第二子曜为陈郡王。
现代文：三月甲寅初一，封常山郡王元况的第二个儿子元曜为陈郡王。
English: On the first day of March, the second son of Wang Yuanjun of Changshan County was named Chen County King.

古文：夏五月，齐文襄王来朝。
现代文：夏五月，齐文襄王前来朝见。
English: In the summer of May, King Qi Wenxiang came to see me.

古文：甲戌，立皇后高氏。
现代文：甲戌，立皇后高氏。
English: Kuching, the founding empress of the Gao dynasty.

古文：乙亥，大赦天下。
现代文：乙亥，大赦天下。
English: Eihei, amnesty to the world.

古文：是月，高丽国遣使朝贡。
现代文：这月，高丽国派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the same month, envoys from Korea came to pay tribute.

古文：六月乙酉，以尚书左仆射司马子如为山东黜陟大使，寻为东北道大行台，差选勇士。
现代文：六月乙酉，任命尚书左仆射司马子如为山东黜陟大使，不久担任东北道大行台，选拔勇敢的兵士。
English: In June of the same year, he appointed Shangshu's left-hand man, Jie Sima Ziru, as the ambassador of Shandong Province, and soon he served as the governor of Northeastern Province, selecting brave soldiers.

古文：庚寅，前颍州刺史奚思业为河南大使，简发勇士。
现代文：庚寅，前颖州刺史奚思业担任河南大使，挑选调发勇敢的兵士。
English: Geng Yin, the former Yingzhou governor, served as the ambassador of Henan Province, and selected and dispatched brave soldiers.

古文：丁酉，萧衍遣使朝贡。
现代文：丁酉，萧衍派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: Ding Xi and Xiao Yan sent envoys to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：戊申，开府仪同三司、汝阳王暹薨。
现代文：戊申，开府仪同三司、汝阳王元暹逝世。
English: Wushin, Kaifu Yi and the three officials, Ruyang Wang Yuan Sie, passed away.

古文：秋七月丁丑，诏以齐献武王为相国、录尚书事、大行台。固辞相国。
现代文：秋七月丁丑，下诏任命齐献武王为相国、录尚书事、大行台，执意推辞相国。
English: In the autumn and July of Dingwu, the following edict appointed Qi Xianwu Wang as the sister country, recorded the records, and the grand march, and insisted on withdrawing from the sister country.

古文：八月壬辰，兼散骑常侍王元景、兼通直散骑常侍魏收使于萧衍。
现代文：八月壬辰，兼散骑常侍王元景、兼通直散骑常侍魏收出使萧衍。
English: In August, Jintian, who was also the equerry of Wang Yuanqing, and Wei, who was also the equerry of Wei, sent Xiao Yan.

古文：九月甲子，发畿内民夫十万人城鄴城，四十日罢。
现代文：九月甲子，调发京郊内男丁十万人修筑邺城，四十天完工。
English: In September of the same year, 100,000 men from the suburbs of Beijing were dispatched to build Shicheng, which was completed in 40 days.

古文：辛未，曲赦畿内死罪以下各有差。
现代文：辛未，赦免京郊内死罪以下囚犯多少不等。
English: According to Xin Wei, the number of prisoners in the suburbs of Beijing who were pardoned for crimes punishable by death or less varied.

古文：冬十有一月癸亥，以新宫成，大赦天下，改元。
现代文：冬十一月癸亥，因新宫殿建成，大赦天下，改年号。
English: In the winter of November, because the new palace was built, the emperor pardoned the world and changed the year.

古文：八十以上赐绫帽及杖，七十以上赐帛，及有疾废者赐粟帛。
现代文：八十岁以上的赐予绫帽和手杖，七十岁以上的赐予布帛，以及有疾病残废的赐予谷粟布帛。
English: Those over the age of 80 were given a skullcap and cane, those over the age of 70 were given a cloth cape, and those who were sick or disabled were given a millet cloth cape.

古文：筑城之夫，给复一年。
现代文：修筑城池的男丁，免除一年的赋役。
English: A man who builds a castle is exempt from military service for one year.

古文：二年春正月壬申，以太保尉景为太傅，以骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司库狄于为太保。
现代文：二年春正月壬申，任命太保尉景为太傅，任命骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司犀狄干为太保。
English: In the first month of the second year of spring, in Jinshin, the Tai Po lieutenant Jing was appointed as the Tai Fu, and the general of the imperial cavalry, Kaifu Yi, and the three rhinoceroses were appointed as the Tai Po.

古文：丁丑，徒御新宫，大赦，内外百官普进一阶，营构主将别优一阶。
现代文：丁丑，迁居到新宫殿，大赦天下，内外百官普升一级，营造的主将另外优评一级。
English: Ding Yuxi, moved to a new palace, amnestied the world, promoted a hundred officials at home and abroad to the first level, and the master builder will be awarded another first level.

古文：三月己卯，萧衍遣使朝贡。
现代文：三月己卯，萧衍派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In March, Xiao Yan sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：夏五月己酉，西魏行台宫延和、陕州刺史宫元庆率户内属，置之河北。
现代文：夏五月己酉，西魏的行台宫延和、陕州刺史宣五庆率领所属人户归附，安置在董回以北。
English: In the summer and May of the same year, the Western Wei Dynasty's Yangdai Palace Yanhe and the Shaanxi Province's Zhishi Xuanwuqing led their subordinate households to be attached and placed in the north of Donghui.

古文：新附赈廪各有差。
现代文：新归附者赈济口粮多少不等。
English: The amount of food rations given to newly-annexed people varies.

古文：壬子，遣兼散骑常侍李象使于萧衍。
现代文：壬子，派遣兼散骑常侍奎象山使蕴鱼。
English: Imoko, dispatching and horseback riding attendant Kuei Xiangshan to bring back fish.

古文：闰月己丑，封皇兄景植为宜阳王，皇弟威为清河王，谦为颍川王。
现代文：闰月己丑，封皇帝的哥哥：墓殖为宣堕王，皇帝的弟弟五盛为渣回王，互谧为题王。
English: The leap month is ugly, the emperor's elder brother: the tomb propagation is the proclamation of the fallen king, the emperor's younger brother Wusheng is the slag king, and the mutual exchange is the theme king.

古文：六月壬子，大司马华山王鸷薨。
现代文：六月壬子，大司马茎山王丞盏逝世。
English: In June, Jinshi, the grand secretary Ma Juzhishan Wang Zhenling passed away.

古文：冬十月丁未，萧衍遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬十月丁未，萧衍派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the winter of October, Xiao Yan sent an envoy to pay tribute to the court.

古文：十有二月乙卯，遣兼散骑常侍崔长谦使于萧衍。
现代文：十二月乙卯，派遣兼散骑常侍崔长谦出使萧衍。
English: On the second day of December, Cui Changqian sent his messenger Xiao Yan.

古文：是岁，蠕蠕、高丽、勿吉国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，蠕蠕、高丽、勿吉国都派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the same year, Goukou, Sengli, and Nuxuanli all sent emissaries to pay tribute to the court.

古文：三年春二月甲辰，阿至罗出吐拔那浑大率部来降。
现代文：三年春二月甲辰，阿至罗出吐拔那浑大率领部落前来投降。
English: In the spring of the third year, in the second month of the second month, Ah Zi Luo led the tribe to come and surrender.

古文：三月己酉，梁州人公孙贵宾聚众反，自号大王。
现代文：三月己酉，梁州人公孙贵宾聚集民众反叛，自称为天王。
English: In March, Liangzhou people's great-grandson guests gathered the people to rebel, calling himself the king of heaven.

古文：阳夏镇将讨擒之。
现代文：阳夏镇将讨伐擒获丫他。
English: Yangxia Town won the battle.

古文：夏四月戊申，阿至罗国主融伏罗越居子去宾来降，封为高车王。
现代文：夏四月戊申，阿至罗国主副伏罗越居的儿子圭宾前来投降，封为直直至。
English: In the summer of April in Boshin, Guibin, the son of the deputy governor of Ajiro, Furo Yueju, came to surrender, and he was given the title of emperor.

古文：六月乙丑，萧衍遣使朝贡。
现代文：六月乙丑，芦扭派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the second month of June, the emperor sent an envoy to pay tribute to the court.

古文：秋七月，齐文襄王如晋阳。
现代文：秋七月，齐文襄王前往晋阳。
English: In autumn and July, Qibun Xiangwang went to Jinyang.

古文：己卯，宜阳王景植薨。
现代文：己卯，宜阳王星擅逝世。
English: I, too, wish for the death of Uranus.

古文：八月甲子，遣兼散骑常侍李骞使于萧衍。
现代文：八月甲子，派遣兼散骑常侍李骞出使萧鱼。
English: In August, Emperor Go-Shirakawa dispatched the imperial envoy Xiao Yu, who was also a knight errant.

古文：冬十月癸卯，齐文襄王自晋阳来朝。
现代文：冬十月癸卯，齐文襄王从晋阳前来朝见。
English: In the winter of October, Qibun Xiang Wang came from Jinyang to see the morning.

古文：先是，诏文襄王与群臣于麟趾阁议定新制，甲寅，班于天下。
现代文：在这以前，诏令文襄王和群臣在毖旦蝈商议决定新制度，甲寅，颁布到全国各地。
English: Prior to this, King Wenxiang and his courtiers discussed and decided on a new system, "Kao Yin," and promulgated it throughout the country.

古文：己巳，发夫五万人筑漳滨堰，三十五日罢。
现代文：己巳，调发民工五万人修筑连遗堰，三十五天完工。
English: At that time, 50,000 migrant workers were dispatched to build the Lianye Weir, which was completed in 35 days.

古文：癸亥，车驾狩于西山。
现代文：癸亥，皇帝在玺山狩猎。
English: The emperor went hunting in Lushan Mountain.

古文：十有一月戊寅，还宫。
现代文：十一月戊寅，回宫。
English: In November, Wu Yin returned to the palace.

古文：丙戌，以开府仪同三司、彭城王韶为太尉，以度支尚书胡僧敬为司空。
现代文：丙戌，任命开府仪同三司、茎越王五超为太尉，任命度支尚书胡僧敬为司空。
English: He appointed Kaifu Yi Tong as the third secretary and Zhu Yue Wang Wuchao as the first lieutenant, and appointed Du Shishang Shu Hu Sang Kei as the second secretary.

古文：是岁，蠕蠕、高丽、勿吉国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，鳄魉、产丽、纽宣厘都派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the same year, Goukou, Sengli, and Nuxuanli all sent emissaries to pay tribute to the court.

古文：四年春正月丙辰，萧衍遣使朝贡。
现代文：四年春正月丙辰，萧衍派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Spring, Xiao Yan sent an envoy to pay tribute to the court.

古文：夏四月丙寅，遣兼散骑常侍李绘使于萧衍。
现代文：夏四月丙寅，派遣兼散骑常侍李绘出使萧衍。
English: In the summer of April, Cui Yin, dispatched and horseback riding attendant Li painted the envoy Xiao Yan.

古文：乙酉，以侍中、广阳王湛为太尉，以尚书右仆射高隆之为司徒，以太尉、彭城王韶为录尚书事。
现代文：乙酉，任命侍中、广阳王丞逦为太尉，任命尚书右仆射高隆之为司徒，任命太尉、彭城王元韶为录尚书事。
English: He appointed the chamberlain, Guangyang Wang Zhenxuan, as the first lieutenant, appointed the secretary's right-hand man, Sha Gaolong, as the secretary, and appointed the secretary, Pengcheng Wang Yuanxuan, as the secretary.

古文：丁亥，太傅尉景坐事降为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：丁亥，太傅尉景因事获罪降为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Ding Hai, Taifu Lieut. Jing was convicted and demoted to the rank of General of Cavalry, Kaifu Yi and Sanji.

古文：辛卯，以太保库狄于为太傅，以领军将军娄昭为大司马，封祖裔为尚书右仆射。
现代文：辛卯，任命太保库狄干为太傅，任命领军将军娄昭为大司马，封祖裔为尚书右仆射。
English: Xinwu, appointed the eunuch Ku Dickan as the eunuch, appointed the leading general Zou Zhao as the grand steward, and appointed the ancestral descendant as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：五月辛巳，齐献武王来朝，请令百官月一面敷政事，明扬仄陋，纳谏屏邪，亲理狱讼，褒黜勤怠；牧守有愆，节级相坐；椒掖之内，进御以序；后园鹰犬，悉皆放弃。
现代文：五月辛巳，齐献武王前来朝见，请求下令百官每月一次当面陈述政事，推举隐匿的贤人，接受规劝摒弃邪恶的人，亲自审理诉讼，褒奖勤劳罢黜懈怠的人；州牧郡守有罪，逐级受连累；后宫以内，按次序进奉交接；后园的鹰犬，全都放走。
English: In May, King Wu came to the imperial court and requested that the hundred officials be ordered to make a face-to-face presentation of political affairs once a month, nominate hidden sages, accept exhortation and abandon evil people, personally hear lawsuits, reward those who work hard and dismiss slackers; the county magistrate was guilty and was implicated step by step; within the harem, he was handed over in order; the eagle dogs in the backyard were all released.

古文：六月，还晋阳。
现代文：六月，回到晋阳。
English: In June, he returned to Jinyang.

古文：丙申，复前侍中、乐浪王忠爵。
现代文：丙申，恢复前侍中、乐浪王元忠的爵位。
English: Bishin, restored the title of the former chamberlain, Le Lang Wang Yuanzhong.

古文：丁酉，复陈留王景皓、常山王绍宗、高密王永业爵。
现代文：丁酉，恢复陈留王景皓、常山王绍忠、高密王永业的爵位。
English: Ding Jun, the titles of Chen Liu Wang Jingjun, Changshan Wang Shao Zhong and Gaomi Wang Yongjian were restored.

古文：秋八月庚戌，以开府仪同三司、吏部尚书侯景为兼尚书仆射、河南行台，随机讨防。
现代文：秋八月庚戌，任命开府仪同三司、吏部尚书侯景为兼尚书仆射、河南行台，根据形势讨伐防守。
English: In the autumn and August of Geng Zi, Kaifu Yi and the three departments and the personnel department of Shang Shuhoujing were appointed to be concurrently Shang Shuhoujing and Henan Xingtai, and according to the situation, they would fight and defend.

古文：冬十月甲寅，萧衍遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬十月甲寅，萧衍派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the winter of October, Xiao Yan sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：齐献武王围宝炬玉壁。
现代文：齐献武王包围宝炬的玉壁。
English: Together, they offered a tribute to the jade wall surrounding King Wu's torch.

古文：十有一月壬午，班师。
现代文：十一月壬午，撤军。
English: At noon of November, the troops were withdrawn.

古文：骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、青州刺史、西河王忭薨。
现代文：骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、青州刺史、西河王元惊逝世。
English: General Zou Jie, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, Qingzhou Zhishi, and West River Wang Yuan Qi all passed away.

古文：十有二月辛亥，遣兼散骑常侍阳斐使于萧衍。
现代文：十二月辛亥，派遣兼散骑常侍阳斐出使萧衍。
English: In December of Xinhai, dispatched and rode out Yangfei's envoy Xiao Yan.

古文：是岁，蠕蠕、高丽、吐谷浑国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，蠕蠕、高丽、吐谷浑国都派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In that year, the provinces of Cm Cm, Goryeo, and Tubo Hun all sent emissaries to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：武定元年春正月壬戌朔，大赦天下，改元。
现代文：武定元年春正月壬戌初一，大赦天下。改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of Wuding, there was a general amnesty.

古文：己巳，车驾搜于邯郸之西山；癸酉，还宫。
现代文：己巳，皇帝在邯郸的西山阅兵；癸酉，回宫。
English: Suddenly, the emperor held a military parade in the West Mountain of Shandong; suddenly, he returned to the palace.

古文：二月壬申，北豫州刺史高仲密据虎牢西叛。
现代文：二月壬申，北豫州刺史高仲密占据虎牢向西叛变。
English: In February, in Jinshin, Gao Zhongmi, a member of the North Henan Provincial Revolutionary Committee, occupied the Tiger's Stronghold and mutinied westward.

古文：三月，宝炬遣其子突与宇文黑獭率众来援仲密。
现代文：三月，实炬派遣他的儿子元突和宇文黑獭率领军队来援助仲密。
English: In March, Shichoku dispatched his sons, Mototuki and Uwenhei, to lead an army to aid Jomitsu.

古文：庚子，围河桥南城。
现代文：庚子，包围河桥南城。
English: Geng Zi, surround the southern city of Heqiao.

古文：丙午，帝亲纳讼。
现代文：丙午，皇帝亲自听取诉讼。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, the emperor personally heard the lawsuit.

古文：戊申，齐献武王讨黑獭，战于邙山，大破之，擒宝炬兄子临洮王森，蜀郡王荣宗，江夏王升，钜鹿王阐，谯郡王亮，骠骑大将军、仪同三司、太子詹事赵善，督将参僚等四百余人，俘斩六万余，甲仗牛马不可胜数。
现代文：戊申，齐献武王讨伐黑獭，在亡山交战，大败黑獭，擒获宾炬哥哥的儿子临洮王元森，蜀郡王荣宗，江夏王元升，堑尘王五翅，谯郡王五童，骠骑大将军、仪同三司、太子詹事赵善，都督将领参谋僚属等四百多人，俘获斩首六万多人，兵器车马不计其数。
English: According to Wu Shen, they all dedicated to King Wu to fight against the Black Kite, fought in the dead mountain, defeated the Black Kite, captured the son of the elder brother of Bin Hu, Linyi King Yuan Sen, Shu County King Rong Zong, Jiangxia King Yuan Sheng, Shandong King Five Wings, Shandong County King Five Children, Shandong General, Yidong Third Division, Prince Zhan Zhi Zhao Shan, the general of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the

古文：豫洛二州平。
现代文：豫洛二州平定。
English: The two prefectures of Henan and Luo were pacified.

古文：齐献武王追奔至恆农而还。
现代文：齐献武王追赶到恒农才返回。
English: Qi Xianwu chased Wang to Hengnong before returning.

古文：夏四月，封彭城王韶弟袭为武安王。
现代文：夏四月，封彭城王互塑的弟弟五垄为亘造主。
English: In the summer of April, Feng Peng's younger brother Wu Reng, who was a mutual sculptor, became the eternal creator.

古文：五月壬辰，以克复虎牢，降天下死罪以下囚。
现代文：五月壬辰，因收复虚空，减轻天下死罪以下囚犯的刑罚。
English: In May, because of the recovery of the void, the punishment of prisoners under the death penalty was reduced.

古文：乙未，以吏部尚书侯景为司空。
现代文：乙未，任命吏部尚书谴为司空。
English: B, the appointment of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre.

古文：六月乙亥，萧衍遣使朝贡。
现代文：六月乙亥，芦面派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In June of the second year of the Heian period, the emperor sent an envoy to pay tribute to the court.

古文：戊寅，封前员外散骑侍郎元长春为南郡王。
现代文：戊寅，封前员外散骑侍郎元旦画为卢登王。
English: On New Year's Day, Wu Yin, a former member of the imperial court, was depicted as the King of Luden.

古文：秋八月乙未，以汾州刺史斛律金为大司马。
现代文：秋八月乙未，任命没业刺史魁健垒为大司马。
English: In the autumn and August of the same year, he appointed the unemployed thorn in the side of history, Kui Jian Rong, as the chief secretary.

古文：壬午，遣兼散骑常侍李浑使于萧衍。
现代文：壬午，派遣兼散骑常侍李浑出使萧衍。
English: In the morning of the second day of the third month, Li Huning sent Xiao Yan, who was also a knight errant.

古文：是月，齐献武王召夫五万于肆州北山筑城，西自马陵戍，东至土隥。
现代文：这月，齐献武王召集民工五万人在壁蛆的北山建筑城池，西起马陵戍，束到堕。
English: This month, King Qi Xianwu called for 50,000 migrant workers to build a city on the north hill of the alcove, and a horse mausoleum on the west hill.

古文：四十日罢。
现代文：四十天完工。
English: It was completed in forty days.

古文：冬十有一月甲午，车驾狩于西山。
现代文：冬十一月甲午，皇帝在西山狩猎。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of November in winter, the emperor went hunting in the West Mountain.

古文：乙巳，还宫。
现代文：乙巳，回宫。
English: Now, let's go back to the palace.

古文：是岁，吐谷浑、高丽、蠕蠕国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，吐谷浑、高丽、蠕蠕国都派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In that year, the states of Tugu, Goryeo, and Cnidus all sent emissaries to pay tribute to the court.

古文：二年春正月，地豆于国遣使朝贡。
现代文：二年春正月，地豆于国派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, the country sent an envoy to pay tribute to the court.

古文：二月丁卯，徐州人刘乌黑聚众反。
现代文：二月丁卯，徐州人刘乌黑聚集民众反叛。
English: In February, Dingwu and Liu Wuhai, a native of Xuzhou, rallied the people to rebel.

古文：遣行台慕容绍宗讨平之。
现代文：派遣行台慕容绍宗讨伐平定他们。
English: He dispatched Emperor Taizong Murong Shaosong to fight and subdue them.

古文：三月，萧衍遣使朝贡。
现代文：三月，萧衍派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In March, Xiao Yan sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：以旱故，宥死罪以下囚。
现代文：以天旱的缘故，宽免死罪以下囚犯。
English: Due to the drought, prisoners below the death penalty were pardoned.

古文：丙午，以开府仪同三司孙腾为太保。
现代文：丙午，任命开府仪同三司孙腾为太保。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd, Kaifu Yi and San Si Sun Teng were appointed as Tai Po.

古文：壬子，以齐文襄王为大将军，领侍中，其文武职事、赏罚众典，询禀之。
现代文：壬子，任命齐文襄王为大将军，兼领侍中，凡文武职责事务、赏罚的各种典章，都询问禀报他。
English: Jin Zi appointed Qibun Xiang Wang as the general and concurrently the leader of the attendants, and inquired about and reported to him on all matters related to the duties of literature and military affairs, and various awards and punishments.

古文：中书监元弼为录尚书，左仆射司马子如为尚书令，以今上为右仆射。
现代文：中书监元弼担任录尚书，左仆射司马子如担任尚书令，任命当今皇上为右仆射。
English: The chief scrivener of the Chinese emperors, Yuan Zi, served as the recorder of the imperial records, and the left-hand servant, Jie Sima Zi, served as the recorder of the imperial records, appointing the current emperor as the right-hand servant of Jie.

古文：夏四月，室韦国遣使朝贡。
现代文：夏四月，室韦国派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the summer of April, the state of Muromachi dispatched an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：五月甲午，遣散骑常侍御季景使于萧衍。
现代文：五月甲午，派遣散骑常侍魏季景出使萧衍。
English: In the afternoon of May 1st, Wei Jiqing sent his envoy, Xiao Yan, on horseback.

古文：丁酉，太尉、广阳王湛薨。
现代文：丁酉。太尉、广阳王元湛逝世。
English: Ding Rong. Tai Li, Guangyang Wang Yuan Zhan passed away.

古文：秋八月癸酉，尚书令司马子如坐事免。
现代文：秋八月癸酉，尚书令司马子如因事获罪免官。
English: In the autumn of August, Shangshu ordered Sima Zi to be removed from office if he was found guilty.

古文：九月甲申，以开府仪同三司、济阴王晖业为太尉。
现代文：九月甲申，任命开府仪同三司、济阴王晖苤为太尉。
English: In September, Jiaxun appointed Kaifu Yidong as the third secretary and Jiyin Wangtao as the first lieutenant.

古文：太师、咸阳王坦坐事免，以王还第。
现代文：太师、咸阳王重担因事获罪免官，以王的身份回到宅第。
English: Daishi and Xianyang Wang Chongran were exonerated for the crime and returned to their homes as kings.

古文：冬十月丁巳，太保孙腾、大司马高隆之各为括户大使，凡获逃户六十余万。
现代文：冬十月丁巳，太保孙腾、司徒高隆之各自担任括户大使，共获逃税户六十多万。
English: In the winter of October, Taiho Sunteng and Satoru Takahashi each served as a bracketed ambassador, and a total of more than 600,000 tax evaders were caught.

古文：十有一月，西河地陷，有火出。
现代文：十一月。西回发生地裂，有火喷出来。
English: In November, the ground cracked in the West Bay, and fire erupted.

古文：甲申，以司徒高隆之为尚书令，以前大司马娄昭为司徒。
现代文：甲申，任命司徒高隆之为尚书令，任命前大司马娄昭为司徒。
English: Gaoshen, Gao Long Ding was appointed as the chief magistrate, and Ma Ying Zhao, the former chief magistrate, was appointed as the chief magistrate.

古文：齐文襄王如晋阳。
现代文：齐文襄王前往置肠。
English: Qibun Xiang Wang went to the intestines.

古文：庚子，车驾有事于圜丘。
现代文：庚子，皇帝在圆丘祭祀。
English: Geng Zi, the emperor, is worshipped at the round mound.

古文：辛丑，萧衍遣使朝贡。
现代文：辛丑，萧堑派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: Sin ugly, Xiao Wei sent an envoy to pay tribute to the court.

古文：壬寅，齐文襄王从献武王讨山胡，破之，俘获一万余户，分配诸州。
现代文：壬寅，齐文襄王跟随献武王讨伐山翅，打败他们，俘获一万多户，分别配置给各州。
English: Ren Yin, Qi Wen Xiang Wang followed Xian Wu Wang to fight the mountain wings, defeated them, captured more than ten thousand households, and allocated them to each state separately.

古文：是岁，吐谷浑、高丽、蠕蠕、勿吉国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，吐釜运、直丽、鳄鳄、勿直迩都派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In this year, Tukamun, Naori, Gokuraku, and Mochitsuna all sent emissaries to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：三年春正月丙申，遣兼散骑常侍李奖使于萧衍。
现代文：三年春正月丙申，派遣兼散骑常侍奎堕出使芦堑。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Spring, he dispatched the equestrian attendant Kui, who also rode horseback, to serve the reeds.

古文：丁未，齐献武王请于并州置晋阳宫，以处配没之口。
现代文：丁未，齐献武王请求在差业设置置屡宣，来居住流配没入的入门。
English: Ding Wei, Qi Xianwu and Wang Zheng repeatedly requested to be placed in the work setting, to live in the flow of immersion.

古文：二月庚申，吐谷浑国奉其从妹以备后庭，纳为容华嫔。
现代文：二月庚申，吐谷浑国献上自己的堂妹来充实后宫，被接受委任为容华嫔。
English: In February of Goshun, Tugu Hunkoku offered his own cousin to enrich the harem, and was appointed as the leader of the Yonghwa clan.

古文：夏五月甲辰，大赦天下。
现代文：夏五月甲辰，大赦天下。
English: Summer, May, and June are the most auspicious months.

古文：秋七月庚子，萧衍遣使朝贡。
现代文：秋七月庚子，萧衍派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In autumn and July, Geng Zi and Xiao Yan sent envoys to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：冬十月，遣中书舍人尉瑾使于萧衍。
现代文：冬十月，派遣中书舍人尉瑾出使萧衍。
English: In the winter of October, Xiao Yan, the envoy of the Chinese Academy of Letters, was dispatched.

古文：乙未，齐献武王请邙山之俘，释其桎梏，配以人间寡妇。
现代文：乙未，齐献武王请求优待亡口山的俘虏，解开他们的刑具，将民间的寡妇许配给他们。
English: On the second day, Qi Xianwu asked the king to treat the prisoners of Death's Mouth Mountain better, to untie their instruments of torture, and to marry them to the widows of the common people.

古文：十有二月，以司空侯景为司徒，以中书令韩轨为司空。
现代文：十二月，任命司空侯景为司徒，任命中书令韩轨为司空。
English: In December, he appointed Sikuo Houjing as Sitoru, and appointed Han Zhaoli as Sikuo.

古文：戊子，以太保孙腾为录尚书事。
现代文：戊子，任命太保孙腾为录尚书事。
English: Satoshi, appoint Taiho Sunten as the head of record keeping.

古文：是岁，高丽、吐谷浑、蠕蠕国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，高丽、吐谷浑、蠕蠕国都派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the same year, Goryeo, Tukgukgun, and Goryeo all sent emissaries to pay tribute to the court.

古文：四年夏五月壬寅，萧衍遣使朝贡。
现代文：四年夏五月壬寅，萧衍派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the summer and May of the fourth year, Ren Yin and Xiao Yan sent envoys to pay tribute to the court.

古文：六月庚子，以司徒侯景为河南大行台，应机讨防。
现代文：六月庚子，任命司徒侯景为河南大行台，依据形势讨伐防守。
English: In June, Geng Zi appointed Szeto Hou Jing as the Henan Grand Marching Band, according to the situation to fight and defend.

古文：秋七月壬寅，遣兼散骑常侍元廓使于萧衍。
现代文：秋七月壬寅，派遣兼散骑常侍元廓出使萧衍。
English: In the autumn and July, Emperor Jintao dispatched the imperial envoy Xiao Yan, who was also a horseback-riding retainer.

古文：八月，移洛阳汉魏《石经》于鄴。
现代文：八月，迁移洛阳漠魏时期的《石经》到邺城。
English: In August, the "Stone Sutra" of Luoyang during the Wei Dynasty was moved to Shicheng.

古文：齐献武王自鄴帅众西伐，文襄王会于晋州。
现代文：齐献武王从邺城率领军队向西征伐，文襄王在置丛会合。
English: King Qi Xianwu led an army from Lucheng to conquer the west, and King Wenxiang gathered in Jixu.

古文：九月，围玉壁以挑之，宝炬、黑獭不敢应。
现代文：九月，包围王壁挑战，宜担、墨猩不敢应战。
English: In September, the encirclement of Wangbi was a challenge, and Yidan and Moruo did not dare to meet the challenge.

古文：冬十有一月，齐献武王有疾，班师。文襄王如晋阳。
现代文：冬十一月，齐献武王患病，撤军。文襄王前往置堡。
English: In the winter of November, King Qi Xianwu fell ill and withdrew his troops. King Wenxiang went to set up a fortress.

古文：是岁，室韦、勿吉、地豆于、高丽、蠕蠕国，并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，室韦、勿吉、地豆于、高丽、蠕蠕国都派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In that year, the provinces of Muroto, Bekichi, Jidozuyu, Goryeo, and Juche all sent envoys to pay tribute to the court.

古文：五年春正月丙午，齐献武王薨于晋阳，秘不发丧。
现代文：五年春正月丙午，齐献武王在晋阳逝世，秘密不公布丧事。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of spring in the fifth year, King Qi Xianwu died in Jinyang. The funeral was kept secret.

古文：辛亥，司徒侯景反，颍州刺史司马世云以城应之。
现代文：辛亥，司徒侯景反叛，颖州刺史司马世云献出州城响应他。
English: Xinhai, Sitou Houjing rebelled, Yingzhou stabbed Sima Shiyun and offered the state capital in response to him.

古文：景入据颍城，诱执豫州刺史高元成、襄州刺史李密、广州刺史暴显等。
现代文：递进据题球，诱骗拘捕逸蛆刺史直至盛、塞丛刺史奎蜜、庐丛刺史星题等人。
English: Gradually advancing the ball, luring and arresting Yizhong stabbing history until Sheng, Jiecong stabbing history, Guiming stabbing history, Xingtao and others.

古文：遣司空韩轨，骠骑大将军、仪同三司贺拔胜、可朱浑道元，左卫将军刘丰等帅众讨之。
现代文：派遣司空整轨，骠骑大将军、仪同三司贺拔胜、可朱浑道元，左卫将军型丰等人率领军队讨伐侯景。
English: He dispatched Siku to straighten the railway, and led the army to fight against Houjing with the help of the General of Cavalry, the General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the

古文：景乃遣使降于宝炬，请师救援。
现代文：侯景于是派遣使者投降宝炬，请求出兵救援。
English: Hou Jing then sent an envoy to surrender the torch and request the dispatch of troops for rescue.

古文：宝炬遣其将李景和、王思政帅骑赴之。
现代文：实炬派遣他的将领李景和、王思政率领骑兵赶赴支援。
English: He dispatched his generals, Li Jinghe and Wang Sizheng, and led his cavalry to rush to their aid.

古文：思政等入据颍川，景乃出走豫州。
现代文：思政等人进据颖川，侯景于是出城逃到豫州。
English: Shizheng and others advanced to Yingchuan, and Houjing fled the city to Yuzhou.

古文：乙丑，萧衍遣使朝贡。
现代文：乙丑，萧衍派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: Second Ugly, Xiao Yan sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：二月，侯景复背宝炬，归于萧衍。
现代文：二月，鳄又背叛室炬，归附芦翅。
English: In February, the crocodile betrayed the beetle and attached the reed wing.

古文：衍署景河南大将军，承制。
现代文：芦蛮委任侯景为河南大将军，秉承制命行事。
English: He appointed Hou Jing as the great general of Henan Province, and acted in accordance with his command.

古文：夏四月壬申，大将军齐文襄王来朝。
现代文：夏四月壬申，大将军变塞塞王前来朝见。
English: In the summer of April in Jinshin, the general-turned-king came to see the emperor.

古文：甲午，遣兼散骑常侍李纬使于萧衍。
现代文：甲午，派遣兼散骑常侍奎纬出使芦堑。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, he dispatched his equestrian attendant, Kui Wei, to lead the reed procession.

古文：五月丁酉朔，大赦天下。戊戌，以尚书右仆射、襄城王旭为太尉。
现代文：五月丁酉初一，大赦天下戊戌，任命尚书右仆射、襄城王元旭为太尉。
English: On the first day of Ding Hui's reign in May, the emperor pardoned the whole country and appointed Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Ya and Xiangcheng's Wang Yuanxu as lieutenant generals.

古文：甲辰，以太原公今上为尚书令，领中书监，余如故，询以政事。
现代文：甲辰，任命太原公当今皇上为尚书令，兼领中书监，其余职位照旧，向他询问政事。
English: Jia Chen appointed Taiyuan Gong Cang, the current emperor, as the chief librarian, and also led the middle librarian, the rest of the positions as before, and asked him about politics.

古文：以青州刺史尉景为大司马，以开府仪同三司库狄于为太师，以录尚书事孙腾为太傅，以汾州刺史贺仁为太保，以司空韩轨为司徒，以领军将军可朱浑道元为司空，以司徒高隆之录尚书事，以除州刺史慕容绍宗为尚书左仆射，高阳王斌为右仆射。
现代文：任命青州刺史尉景为大司马，任命开府仪同三司库狄干为太师，任命录尚书事孙腾为太傅，任命汾州刺史贺拔仁为太保，任命司空韩轨为司徒，任命领军将军可朱浑道元为司空，任命司徒高隆之为录尚书事，任命徐州刺史慕容绍宗为尚书左仆射，高阳王元斌为右仆射。
English: He appointed Qingzhou's Zhang Shizhi Qianjing as the chief secretary, appointed Kaifu Yi and the third secretary Ku Dickan as the grand master, appointed Sun Teng as the grand master, appointed Zhang Shizhi He Bajin as the grand tutor, appointed Zhang Shizhi Hanluo as the grand tutor, appointed the leading general Ke Zhuhundo Yuan as the grand master, appointed Zhang Shizhi Gaolong as the grand master, appointed Xuzhou's Zhang Shizhi Murong Shaosong as the grand master, and appointed Gaoyang's Wang Yuanbin as the grand master.

古文：戊午，大司马尉景薨。
现代文：戊午，大司马尉量逝世。
English: In the afternoon, Senior Sub-Lieutenant Ma Jiao passed away.

古文：六月，司徒韩轨、司空可朱浑道元等自颍州班师。
现代文：六月，司徒整翘、司空可朱浑道元等人从塑业撤军。
English: In June, Sito Seiga, Siku Kaku, Zhu Hun Dogen and others withdrew from the plastics industry.

古文：乙酉，帝为齐献武王举哀于东堂，服缌缞。
现代文：乙酉，皇帝在塞堂为齐献武王举行丧事，穿细麻布丧服。
English: At the same time, the emperor held a funeral for Qi Xianwu in the Great Hall of the People, wearing a fine linen mourning dress.

古文：诏尚书右仆射、高阳王斌兼大鸿胪卿，赴晋阳监护丧事；太尉、襄城王旭兼尚书令，奉诏宣慰。
现代文：诏令尚书右仆射、产肠王丞避兼任大鸿胪卿，赶往置墨督察料理丧事；太尉、襄城王互胆兼任尚书令，奉诏令慰问。
English: The imperial edict ordered Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Zang Di Wang Zheng, to avoid concurrently serving as the Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great

古文：秋七月戊戌，诏赠王假黄钺、使持节、相国、都督中外诸军事、齐王玺绂，辒辌车、黄屋、左纛、前后羽葆、鼓吹、轻车介士，兼备九锡之礼，谥曰献武王。
现代文：秋七月戊戌，下诏赠予王假黄铁、使持节、相国、都督中外诸军事、齐王印玺丝带，丧车、黄缯车盖、车左边的装饰物、前后仪仗、鼓吹、轻便车的武士，全用九锡的礼仪，谧号为献武王。
English: In the autumn and July, the imperial edict gave the king the gift of the yellow iron, the festival of the envoys, the neighboring countries, the military of the central and foreign governors, the king's seal ribbons, the funeral car, the yellow car cover, the decorations on the left side of the car, the front and rear ceremonial, the propaganda, the light car of the samurai, all with the etiquette of Jiuxi, and the nickname is the king of dedication.

古文：以齐文襄王为使持节、大丞相、都督中外诸军事、录尚书事、大行台、勃海王。
现代文：任命齐文襄王为使持节、大丞相、都督中外诸军事、录尚书事、大行台、勃海王。
English: He appointed Qibun Xiang Wang as the envoy of Ji Jie, the grand minister of war, the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, the secretary of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, the Grand Marshal of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, and the King of Bohai.

古文：壬寅，诏王摄理军国，遣中使敦谕。
现代文：壬寅，诏令文襄王代理军国事务，派遣宫中使者敦促告谕。
English: Jinyin issued an edict ordering King Wenxiang to take charge of military affairs, and sent an envoy to the palace to urge him to issue the edict.

古文：八月，齐文襄王入朝，固辞丞相，诏复授大将军，余如故。
现代文：八月，齐文襄王入宫朝见，执意推辞丞相，诏令再授任为大将军，其余职位照旧。
English: In August, King Qibun Xiang went to the palace for a meeting with the emperor, and insisted on resigning as chancellor, and was reappointed as grand general by imperial decree. The rest of the positions remained unchanged.

古文：甲申，葬齐献武王于鄴城西北，车驾祖于漳滨。
现代文：甲申，在邺城西北安葬齐献武王，皇帝在漳水边祭祀路神。
English: In Jiaxing, King Qi Xianwu was buried in the northwest of Handan City, and the emperor worshipped the Road God at the edge of Handan River.

古文：九月，齐文襄王还晋阳。辛酉，萧衍遣其兄子贞阳侯渊明帅众寇徐州，堰泗水于寒山，灌彭城，以应侯景。
现代文：九月，齐文襄王返回晋阳辛酉，萧衍派遣他哥哥的儿子贞阳侯渊明率领军队侵犯徐州，在寒山拦泅水作堰塘，流入彭城，来接应侯景。
English: In September, Qi Wenxiang Wang returned to Jinyang Hsinchu, and Xiao Yan sent his brother's son, Zhenyang Houyunming, to invade Xuzhou at the head of an army, block the water in the mountains to make a dam, and flow into Pengcheng to meet Houjing.

古文：冬十月乙酉，以尚书左仆射慕容绍宗为东南道行台，与骠骑大将军、仪同三司、大都督高岳，潘相乐讨渊明。
现代文：冬十月乙酉，任命尚书左仆射慕容绍宗为东南道行台，和骠骑大将军、仪同三司、大都督高鱼，逻扭銮讨伐逦塱。
English: In the winter of October, he appointed Shangshu's left-hand man, Sha Murong Shaozong, as the governor of the Southeastern Province, and he and his cavalry general, the three departments of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and the great governor Gao Yu, logically fought against the invasion.

古文：十有一月，大破之，擒渊明及其二子瑀、道，将帅二百余人，俘斩五万级，冻乏赴水死者不可胜数。
现代文：十一月，将他打得大败，擒获渊明和他的两个儿子萧踽、萧道，将帅二百多人，俘获斩首五万人，受冻困乏跳入水中死的不计其数。
English: In November, he was soundly defeated and Yuanming and his two sons, Xiao Yuanzhang and Xiao Dao, were captured. More than two hundred generals were captured, fifty thousand people were beheaded, and countless people froze to death by jumping into the water.

古文：十有二月乙亥，萧渊明至阙，帝御阊阖门让而宥之。
现代文：十二月乙亥，萧渊明到朝廷，皇帝前往闾阖门责让而宽恕了他。
English: In December, Xiao Yuanming went to the imperial court. The emperor went to the imperial court to ask for forgiveness and forgave him.

古文：岳等回师讨侯景。
现代文：高岳等人返回车队讨伐侯景。
English: Gao Yue and others returned to the convoy to fight Hou Jing.

古文：是岁，高丽、勿吉国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，高丽、勿吉国都派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the same year, Goryeo and Baekje both sent envoys to pay tribute to the court.

古文：六年春正月己亥，大都督高岳等于涡阳大破侯景，俘斩五万余人，其余溺死于涡水，水为之不流。
现代文：六年春正月己亥，大都督高岳等人在涡阳大败侯景，俘获斩首五万多人，其余的淹死在涡水，水因之不能流动。
English: On the first day of spring in the 6th year of Ji Hai, the great governor Gao Yue and others defeated Hou Jing in the whirlpool, captured and beheaded more than 50,000 people, and drowned the rest in the whirlpool, so the water could not flow.

古文：景走淮南。
现代文：侯景逃到淮水以南。
English: Hou Jing fled to the south of Huai Shui.

古文：己未，齐文襄王来朝，请以寒山获士赐百官及督将等，各有差。
现代文：己未，齐文襄王前来朝见，请求将寒山获取的俘虏赐给百官和都督将领等，各有等级。
English: Before long, King Qi Wenxiang came to see the emperor and requested that the captives taken from the Cold Mountain be given to hundreds of officials and governors-general, each with their own rank.

古文：二月己卯，萧衍遣使款阙乞和，并修书吊齐文襄王。
现代文：二月己卯，萧衍派遣使者到朝廷求和，并写信慰问齐文襄王。
English: In February, Xiao Yan sent an envoy to the imperial court to sue for peace, and wrote a letter of condolence to King Qi Wenxiang.

古文：文襄王还晋阳。
现代文：文襄王回到晋阳。
English: King Wenxiang returned to Jinyang.

古文：三月癸巳，以太尉、襄城王旭为大司马，以开府仪同三司高岳为太尉。
现代文：三月癸巳，任命太尉、襄城王元旭为大司马，任命开府仪同三司高岳为太尉。
English: In March, Wang Yuanxu of Xiangcheng was appointed captain, and Kaifu Yi and Gao Yue of Sanji were appointed captains.

古文：辛亥，以冬春亢旱，赦罪人各有差。
现代文：辛亥，囚冬春大旱，赦免罪人各有差别。
English: There is a difference between Xinhai, the imprisonment of winter and the drought of spring, and the pardon of sinners.

古文：夏四月甲子，吏部令史张永和、青州人崔阔等伪假人官，事觉，纠检，首者六万余人。
现代文：夏四月甲子，吏部令史张永和、青州人崔阔等作伪赐予别人官职，事情被发觉，纠举审察，告发的有六万多人。
English: Xia Yizhong's son Xia Yizhong, the head of the cadre department, Zhang Yonghe, and the Qingzhou man Cui Guo, etc. falsely awarded official positions to others. The matter was discovered, investigated, and more than 60,000 people were reported.

古文：秋八月甲戌，以尚书左仆射慕容绍宗为大行台，与太尉高岳、司徒韩轨、大都督刘丰等讨王思政于颍川，引洧水灌其城。
现代文：秋八月甲戌，任命尚书左仆射慕容绍宗为大行台，和太尉高岳、司徒韩轨、大都督刘丰等人在颖川讨伐王思政，引洧水流入城池。
English: In the autumn and August of Jiajing, he appointed Shangshu's left-hand man, Sha Murong Shaozong, to be the grand marshal, and he, together with the lieutenant Gao Yue, the scholar Hanluo, the grand governor Liu Feng and others, fought against Wang Sizheng in Yingchuan, and diverted water into the city pond.

古文：九月乙酉，萧衍遣使朝贡。
现代文：九月乙酉，萧衍派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In September, Xiao Yan sent an envoy to pay tribute to the court.

古文：冬十月戊申，侯景济江，推萧衍弟子临贺王正德为主，以攻建业。
现代文：冬十月戊申，侯景渡过长江，推举萧衍弟弟的儿子临贺王正德为君主，攻打建业。
English: In the winter of October in Boushen, Hou Jing crossed the Yangtze River and promoted Lin He Wang Zhengde, the son of Xiao Yan's younger brother, as the monarch to attack Jianye.

古文：是岁，高丽、室韦、蠕蠕、吐谷浑国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，高丽、室韦、蠕蠕、吐谷浑国都派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In that year, the states of Goryeo, Muroto, Jingu, and Togakushi all sent emissaries to pay tribute to the court.

古文：七年春正月戊辰，萧衍弟子北徐州刺史、封山侯萧正表以钟离内属，封兰陵郡开国公、吴郡王。
现代文：七年春正月戊辰，萧衍弟弟的儿子北徐州刺史、封山侯萧正表献出钟离归附，封他为兰陵郡开国公、吴郡王。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of Spring, in Wucheng, Xiao Yan's younger brother's son, Bei Xuzhou Zishi and Fengshan Hou Xiao Zheng, presented Zhongli to the emperor, and he was named Lanling County's founding father and the king of Wu County.

古文：三月丁卯，侯景克建业，还以萧衍为主。
现代文：三月丁卯，侯景攻克建业，仍以萧衍为君主。
English: In March, Dingwu and Houjing defeated Jianye, but Xiao Yan was still the monarch.

古文：衍弟子北兗州刺史、定襄侯萧祗，相谭侯萧退来降。
现代文：萧衍弟弟的儿子北兖州刺史、定襄侯萧祗，相谭侯萧退前来投降。
English: Xiao Yan's younger brother's sons, Beibei Zhouzhou Shishi, Dingxiang Hou Xiaojun, and Guotan Hou Xiaowei, came forward to surrender.

古文：衍江北郡国皆内属。
现代文：萧衍长江以北的郡国都归附魏国。
English: Xiao Yan The counties north of the Yangtze River were all annexed to Wei.

古文：夏四月，大行台慕容绍宗、大都督刘丰遇暴风，溺水死。
现代文：夏四月，大行台慕容绍宗、大都督刘丰遇到暴风，落入水中而死。
English: In the summer of April, Murong Shaosong, the Grand Marshal of the Taihang, and Liu Feng, the Grand Governor, encountered a storm, fell into the water and died.

古文：甲辰，诏以齐文襄王为相国、齐王，绿綟绶，赞拜不名，入朝不趋，剑履上殿，食冀州之勃海、长乐、安德、武邑，瀛州之河间五郡，邑十五万户，余如故。
现代文：甲辰，下诏任命齐文襄王为相国、齐王，用绿色丝带，拜见时不称名，进朝廷不用小步急行，带剑穿鞋上殿，享有冀州的勃渣、长乐、安德、武邑，瀛州的河间五个郡，封邑十五万户，其余的照旧。
English: Jia Chen issued an imperial edict to appoint Qibun Xiang Wang as a peer of the state, Qi Wang, with a green ribbon, not to use his name when greeting, to enter the court without taking a short express, to wear shoes with a sword, to enjoy Jizhou's Bozhang, Changle, Ande, Wuyi, and the five counties of Hema in Ganzhou, and 150,000 households in fiefs, and the rest as before.

古文：王固让。
现代文：文襄王执意推让。
English: King Wenxiang insisted on making concessions.

古文：是月，侯景杀萧衍，立子纲为主。
现代文：这月，侯景杀萧衍，立萧衍的儿子萧纲为君主。
English: This month, Hou Jing killed Xiao Yan and made Xiao Yan's son Xiao Gang the monarch.

古文：五月，齐文襄王师众自鄴赴颍川。
现代文：五月，齐文襄王率领军队从邺城赶往缤川。
English: In May, Qi Wenxiang Wang led the army to rush from Lucheng to Luchuan.

古文：六月丙申，克颍州，擒宝炬大将军、尚书左仆射、东道大行台、太原郡开国公王思政，颍州刺史皇甫僧显等，及战士一万余人，男女数万口。
现代文：六月丙申，攻克题州，擒获宣炬的大将军、尚书左仆射、束道大行台、本愿璺开国公王思政，堕业刺史皇甫僧显等人，以及士兵一万多人，男女老少几万人。
English: June Bishen, conquered Chizhou, won the torch of the great general, Shang Shuxi Zuofu shooting, Shokudo Daigandai, the original intention to open the country's prince Sisi, the fallen industry stabbed Shi Huangfusangxian and others, as well as more than ten thousand soldiers, tens of thousands of men and women.

古文：齐文襄王遂如洛州。
现代文：齐文襄王于是前往渔业。
English: Qi Wenxiang Wang then went fishing.

古文：秋七月，齐文襄王至自南讨，请宥思政之罪。
现代文：秋七月，齐文襄王从南讨前线返回，请求宽恕思政的罪过。
English: In autumn and July, King Qiwenxiang returned from the front line of the Southern Expedition and asked for forgiveness for the sin of thinking about politics.

古文：八月辛卯，诏立皇子长仁为皇太子。
现代文：八月辛卯，诏令立皇子长仁为皇太子。
English: In August, Emperor Hirohito decreed that Prince Nagahito would be crown prince.

古文：齐文襄王薨于第，秘不发丧。
现代文：齐文襄王在宅第逝世，秘密不公布丧事。
English: King Qibun Xiang died at home, but the funeral was kept secret.

古文：癸巳，大赦天下，内外百官并加二级。
现代文：癸巳，大赦天下，内外百官都加二级。
English: Now, amnesty has been granted to the whole world, and all officials at home and abroad have been raised to the second level.

古文：甲午，齐王如晋阳。
现代文：甲午，齐王到晋阳。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, King Qi arrived in Jinyang.

古文：冬十月癸未，以开府仪同三司、咸阳王坦为太傅。
现代文：冬十月癸未，任命开府仪同三司、咸阳王元坦为太傅。
English: In the winter of October, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si and Xianyang Wangyuan Tan were appointed as taifu.

古文：甲午，以开府仪同三司潘相乐为司空。
现代文：甲午，任命开府仪同三司潘相乐为司空。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the month, Kaifu Yi and San Shi Pan Xiang Le were appointed as Sikyu.

古文：十有二月甲辰，吴郡王萧正表薨。
现代文：十二月甲辰，吴郡王萧正表逝世。
English: In December, King Xiaozheng of Wu County passed away.

古文：己酉，以并州刺史彭乐为司徒。
现代文：己酉，任命并州刺史彭乐为司徒。
English: and appointed the state magistrate Spengler as the magistrate.

古文：是岁，蠕蠕、地豆于、室韦、高丽、吐谷浑国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，蠕蠕、地豆于、室韦、高丽、吐谷浑国都派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In that year, the provinces of Cm Cm, Cm Du, Su V, Goryeo, and Tuyn Hn all sent emissaries to pay tribute to the court.

古文：八年春正月辛酉，帝为齐文襄王举哀于东堂。
现代文：八年春正月辛酉，皇帝在东堂为齐文襄王举行丧事。
English: In the first month of the spring of the eighth year, the emperor held a funeral for King Qiwenxiang in the East Hall.

古文：丁卯，诏赠齐文襄王假黄钺、使持节、相国、都督中外诸军事、齐王玺绶，辒辌车、黄屋、左纛、前后部羽葆、鼓吹、轻车介士，备九锡之礼，谥曰文襄王。
现代文：丁卯，下韶赠予齐文襄王假黄铁、使持节、相国、都督中外诸军事、齐王印玺丝带，丧车、黄缯车盖、车左边的装饰物、前后仪仗、鼓吹、轻便车的武士，全用九锡的礼仪，谧号为文襄王。
English: On the day of Dingwu, the emperor presented Qi Wenxiang with fake yellow iron, the festival of envoys, the neighboring countries, the military of the central and foreign governors, Qi Wang's printed ribbon, the funeral car, the yellow car cover, the decorations on the left side of the car, the front and rear ceremonial, the propaganda, the light car of the samurai, all with the etiquette of Jiuxi, and the nickname is Wenxiang Wang.

古文：戊辰，诏齐王为使持节、丞相、都督中外诸军事、录尚书事、大行台、齐郡王，食邑一万户。
现代文：戊辰，韶令齐王担任使持节、丞相、都督中外诸军事、录尚书事、大行台、齐郡王，封邑一万户。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu ordered King Qi to serve as envoy, chancellor, and military governor of both China and foreign countries, as well as record official records, organize grand processions, and be the king of Qi County, with ten thousand households in fiefdoms.

古文：甲戌，地豆于、契丹国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：甲戌，地豆于、契丹国都派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: Armor, beans, and Khitan countries all sent emissaries to pay tribute to the court.

古文：二月甲申，葬齐文襄王，车驾祖于漳滨。
现代文：二月甲申，安葬齐文襄王，皇帝在漳水边祭祀路神。
English: In February of Jiaxun, King Qibunxiang was buried, and the emperor went to worship the god of the road at the edge of Surabaya.

古文：庚寅，以尚书令高隆之为太保。
现代文：庚寅，任命尚书令高隆之为太保。
English: Gyeong-in, appointed Gao Rongjin, the highest-ranking official of the Song Dynasty, as Taipo.

古文：三月庚申，进齐郡王爵为齐王。
现代文：三月庚申，升齐郡王的爵位为齐王。
English: In March of Goshun, the title of the county king of Qi was raised to King of Qi.

古文：夏四月乙巳，蠕蠕遣使朝贡。
现代文：夏四月乙巳，蠕蠕国派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: At the end of the summer in April, the country sent an envoy to pay tribute to the court.

古文：五月甲寅，诏齐王为相国，总百揆，封冀州之勃海、长乐、安德、武邑，瀛州之河间、高阳、章武，定州之中山、常山、博陵十郡，二十万户，备九锡之礼；以齐国太妃为王太后，王妃为王后。
现代文：五月甲寅，诏令齐王担任相国，总领百官，封冀州的勃海、长乐、安德、武邑，瀛州的河间、高阳、章武，定州的中山、常山、博陵十个郡，二十万户，全用九锡的礼仪；封齐国太妃为王太后，王妃为王后。
English: In May, Emperor Zhao decreed that King Qi would serve as the head of the whole country and the leader of hundreds of officials. He fenced Bohai, Changle, Ande, and Wuyi in Hebei Province, Hema, Gaoyang, Zhangwu in Zhangzhou, and Zhongshan, Changshan, and Boling in Dingzhou, with 200,000 households in ten counties, all using the Jiuxi etiquette. King Qi's wife Taifei was the queen mother and his wife was the queen.

古文：丙辰，诏归帝位于齐国，即日逊于别宫。
现代文：丙辰，下诏将帝位交给齐国，当天迁居到另外的宫室。
English: Hsin-Chen issued an imperial edict to hand over the throne to Qi, and moved to another palace on the same day.

古文：齐天保元年五月己未，封帝为中山王，邑一万户；上书不称臣，答不称诏，载天子旌旗，行魏正朔，乘五时副车；封王诸子为县公，邑各一千户；奉绢三万匹，钱一千万，粟二万石，奴婢三百人，水碾一具，田百顷，园一所；于中山国立魏宗庙。
现代文：齐天保元年五月己未，封皇帝为中山王，封邑一万户；上奏疏不自称为臣下，回答不称诏令，使用天子的旌旗，行用魏国的历法，乘坐天子侍从车辆；封王的各个儿子为县公，封邑各一千户；一年俸绢二万匹，钱一干万，粟二万石，奴婢三百人，水碾一套，农田一百顷，园囿一处；在中山国建立魏国的宗庙。
English: In May of the first year of Qi Tianbo, the emperor was the king of Zhongshan, and there were ten thousand households in the fief villages; Shang Song So did not call himself a vassal, did not answer the imperial edict, used the banner of the son of heaven, used the calendar of the state of Wei, and rode in the vehicle of the son of heaven; each son of the king was a county official, and there were one thousand households in the fief villages; the annual salary was twenty thousand horses, the money was one hundred and ten thousand, the grain was twenty thousand, the slaves were three hundred, the water mill was one, the farmland was one hundred hectares, and

古文：二年十二月己酉，中山王殂，时年二十八。
现代文：二年十二月己酉，中山王逝世，这年二十八岁。
English: In December of the second year, Zhongshan Wang died at the age of twenty-eight.

古文：三年二月，奉谥曰孝静皇帝，葬于漳西山岗。
现代文：三年二月，奉上谧号为孝静皇帝安葬在漳水西面的山岗。
English: In February of the third year, Emperor Xiaozhing was given the posthumous name of Emperor Xiaozhing and was buried in the mountains to the west of Surabaya.

古文：其后发之，陵崩，死者六十人。
现代文：后来发掘，陵墓倒塌，死亡的有六十人。
English: Later, during excavations, the mausoleum collapsed, killing sixty people.

古文：帝好文学，美容仪。
现代文：皇帝爱好文学，仪表英俊。
English: The emperor loved literature and had a handsome appearance.

古文：力能挟石师子以逾墙，射无不中。
现代文：力气能挟着石狮子翻越墙壁，射箭没有射不中的。
English: He can climb over a wall holding a stone lion with all his strength, and he can shoot an arrow.

古文：嘉辰宴会，多命郡臣赋诗，从容沉雅，有孝文风。
现代文：良辰宴会。常命令群臣赋诗，舒缓儒雅，有孝文帝的风采。
English: He often ordered his retainers to perform poetry, which was soothing and elegant, and had the style of Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：齐文襄王嗣事，甚忌焉，以大将军中兵参军崔季舒为中书黄门侍郎，令监察动静，小大皆令季舒知。
现代文：齐文襄王接掌政事，十分忌惮，委派大将军中兵参军崔季舒为巾书黄门侍郎，命他监督皇帝的行动，大小事情都要让季舒知道。
English: King Qibun Xiang took over the government and was very cautious. He appointed General Choi Ji Shu, who was a soldier in the army, as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and ordered him to supervise the emperor's actions. He had to let Ji Shu know everything, big and small.

古文：文襄与季舒书曰： 痴人复何似？
现代文：文襄王给季舒写信说： 痴人近况如何?
English: Wen Xiangwang wrote to Ji Shu Rong and said, "How is Ducheng these days?

古文：痴势小差未？ 
现代文：痴病稍微好转没有? 
English: You should check and double-check with your heart.

古文：帝尝与猎于鄴东，驰逐如飞。
现代文：皇帝曾经和文襄王在邺城东狩猎，奔驰如同飞翔。
English: The emperor once went hunting with King Wenxiang in the east of Fucheng, and the horse-drawn carriage seemed to fly.

古文：监卫都督乌那罗受工伐从后呼帝曰： 天子莫走马，大将军怒。 
现代文：监卫都督乌那罗受工伐从后面呼叫皇帝说： 天子不要纵马飞奔，大将军发怒了。 
English: When the guard of the governor, Unaro, was attacked by the workmen, he called out to the emperor from behind and said, "Son of heaven, don't let your horse gallop. The general is angry."

古文：文襄尝侍饮，大举觞曰： 臣澄劝陛下酒。 
现代文：文襄王曾经侍奉饮酒，高举酒杯说： 臣下高澄劝陛下饮酒。 
English: King Wenxiang once served alcohol, raised his glass and said: His vassal Gao Cheng advised His Majesty to drink alcohol.

古文：帝不悦，曰： 自古无不亡之国，朕亦何用此活！ 
现代文：皇帝不高兴，说： 自古没有不灭亡的国家，朕也用不着这样活着! 
English: The emperor was not pleased and said, "Since ancient times, there has never been a country that did not perish. I do not have to live like this!

古文：文襄怒曰： 朕！朕！狗脚朕！ 
现代文：文襄王发怒说： 朕朕狗脚朕! 
English: King Wenxiang said angrily, "I am a dog's foot!"

古文：文襄使季舒殴帝三拳，奋衣而出。
现代文：文襄王命季舒殴打皇帝三拳，拂袖而出去。
English: King Wenxiang ordered Ji Shu to beat the emperor with three fists, and he went out with a whip.

古文：明日，文襄使季舒劳帝，帝亦谢焉。
现代文：第二天，文襄王派季舒慰问皇帝，皇帝也表示歉意。
English: The next day, King Wenxiang sent Ji Shu to console the emperor, and the emperor also expressed his apologies.

古文：赐绢，季舒未敢受，以启文襄，文襄使取一段。
现代文：赐予绢，季舒不敢接受，禀报给文襄王，文襄王命他接受一段。
English: Ji Shu did not dare to accept the award, so he reported the award to King Wenxiang, who ordered him to accept a paragraph.

古文：帝束百匹以与之，曰： 亦一段耳！ 
现代文：皇帝捆了一百匹绢给予季舒，说： 这也是一段而已! 
English: The emperor tied up a hundred mules and gave them to Ji Shu to ride, saying: "This is just a stage!

古文：帝不堪忧辱，咏谢灵运诗曰： 韩亡子房奋，秦帝鲁连耻。
现代文：皇帝忍受不了忧痛耻辱，吟咏谢灵运的诗句说： 经厘灭亡王盅图奋起，童厘称帝昼连以为耻。
English: The emperor could not bear the sorrow, pain and shame. He sang a poem to express his gratitude for his good fortune, saying: "After the death of the emperor, the emperor rose up, and Tongli was ashamed to call himself the emperor."

古文：本自江海人，忠义动君子。 
现代文：本来出自江海人，忠诚义烈感君子。 
English: Originally from the Jianghai people, he was a loyal and virtuous gentleman.

古文：常侍侍讲荀济知帝意，乃与华山王大器、元瑾密谋，于宫内为山，而作地道向北城。
现代文：常侍侍讲苟济知道皇帝的心意，就和华山王大器、亘瑾密谋，在宫内建造假山，而暗中修地道到北城。
English: Knowing the emperor's intentions, the regular attendant, the attendant, and the lecturer, Gojie, conspired with Huashan Wang Daqi and Watanabe to build a rockery in the palace, and secretly built a tunnel to the north city.

古文：至千秋门，门者觉地下响动，以告文襄。
现代文：到了千秋门，守门的人感觉到地下有响动，报告给塞塞王。
English: When they arrived at the Qianqiu Gate, the gatekeeper felt a noise underground and reported it to King Xie Xie.

古文：文襄勒兵入宫，曰： 陛下何意反邪！
现代文：文襄王统领兵士进宫，说： 陛下为什么要谋反呢?
English: King Wenxiang led the soldiers into the palace and said, "Why does Your Majesty want to rebel?

古文：臣父子功存社稷，何负陛下邪！ 
现代文：臣下父子功在国家，哪会辜负陛下呢? 
English: Our father and son have the merit of preserving the country. What is there to be sorry for, Your Majesty?

古文：将杀诸妃嫔。
现代文：将要杀死妃子们。
English: He's going to kill the princesses.

古文：帝正色曰： 王自欲反，何关于我？
现代文：皇帝义正词严地说： 王自己要谋反，与我有什么关系?
English: The emperor said solemnly, "What does it have to do with me if the king wants to rebel?

古文：我尚不惜身，何况妃嫔！ 
现代文：我还不顾惜生命，何况是妃子? 
English: I don't care about life, let alone a concubine?

古文：文襄下床叩头，大啼谢罪。
现代文：文襄王下床叩头，大声哭着认罪。
English: King Wenxiang got out of bed, prostrated himself, and confessed with loud crying.

古文：于是酣饮，夜久乃出。
现代文：于是大摆酒席，到深夜才出宫。
English: As a result, they drank heavily together, and Takasumi did not leave the Imperial Palace until late at night.

古文：居三日，幽帝于含章堂，大器、瑾等皆见烹于市。
现代文：过了三天，将皇帝囚禁在含章堂，大器、元瑾都在街市被烹死。
English: After three days, the emperor was imprisoned in Hangzhang Hall, and both Daiqi and Yuan Zang were cooked to death in the street market.

古文：及将禅位于文宣，襄城王旭及司徒潘相乐、侍中张亮、黄门郎赵彦琛等求入奏事。
现代文：等到将要让位给文宣王，襄城王元旭和司徒潘相乐、侍中张亮、黄门郎趟彦琛等人请求进宫奏事。
English: When it was time to give up the throne to King Munhsun, King Yuanxu of Xiangcheng, Sitoru Pan Sangle, chamberlain Zhang Liang, Huangmen Lang and Wabi Hikone requested to enter the palace to make a report.

古文：帝在昭阳殿见之。旭曰： 五行递运，有始有终。
现代文：皇帝在昭阳殿接见他们，元旭说： 五行交相运行，有始有终。
English: The emperor received them at the Zhoyang Palace, and Yuan Xu said: "The five elements of communication have a beginning and an end.

古文：齐王圣德钦明，万姓归仰。
现代文：齐王圣明的德行普照，万民归向敬仰。
English: The virtuous conduct of King Saint Ming of Qi shines brightly, and is revered by all people.

古文：臣等昧死闻奏，愿陛下则尧禅舜。 
现代文：臣下等人冒死罪进奏，希望陛下仿效尧让位于舜。 
English: His subjects and others risked their lives to join in, hoping that His Majesty would follow the example of  and give way to.

古文：帝便敛容答曰： 此事推挹已久，谨当逊避。 
现代文：皇帝于是严肃地回答说： 这件事拖延已久，将恭谨避让。 
English: The emperor then replied gravely: This matter has been delayed for a long time, and I will respectfully decline.

古文：又云： 若尔，须作诏书。 
现代文：又说： 如果这样，需要写一道诏书。 
English: He also said: If this is the case, an imperial edict needs to be written.

古文：侍郎崔劭、裴让之奏云： 诏已作讫。 
现代文：侍郎崔劭、裴让之上奏说： 诏书已经写好。 
English: The chamberlains, Cui Wei and Pei Jang, read from the document and said, "The imperial edict has been written.

古文：即付杨愔，进于帝，凡十条。
现代文：就交给杨情，呈给皇帝，共十条。
English: He gave it to Yang Zi and presented it to the emperor, a total of ten articles.

古文：书讫，帝曰： 将安朕何所？
现代文：书写完后，皇帝说： 将要把我安置在何处?
English: When he had finished writing, the emperor said, "Where will you put me?

古文：复若为而去？ 
现代文：又如何离开? 
English: How do you leave?

古文：杨愔对曰： 在北城别有馆宇，还备法驾，依常仗卫而去。 
现代文：杨惰回答说： 在北城另有房舍，仍然准备皇帝车辆，依照往常的仪仗离开。 
English: Yang Lian replied: There is another house in Beicheng, still prepare the emperor's vehicle, and leave in accordance with the usual ceremony.

古文：帝乃下御座，步就东廊，口咏范尉宗《后汉书赞》云： 献生不辰，身播国屯。
现代文：皇帝于是走下皇帝座位，步行到束廊，随吟诵范蔚宗《后汉书》中的《赞》文说： 献帝生不逢时，遭遇国运艰难。
English: The emperor then stepped down from the emperor's seat, walked to the vestibule, and recited the "Zan" text from Fan Weizong's "Post-Han Shu," saying: "It is not a good time to offer the emperor's birthday, and the national fortune is difficult.

古文：终我四百，永作虞宾。 
现代文：结束我四百年天下，永做帝王宾客。 
English: The 400-year-old Han dynasty was finally destroyed at his hands, and he could only be the guest of Cao Cao, the Wei emperor, just as Emperor Zhao's son, Dan Zhu, was the guest of Emperor Zhao.

古文：所司奏请发，帝曰： 古人念遗簪弊履，欲与六宫别，可乎？ 
现代文：主管官员奏请出发，皇帝说： 古人对遗弃的簪于穿破的鞋子尚且留恋，我想和六宫告别，可以吗? 
English: The official in charge asked them to leave, and the emperor said, "The ancients are still nostalgic about the abandoned horseshoe and worn-out shoes. I want to say goodbye to the Six Court, is that okay?

古文：高隆之曰： 今天下犹陛下之天下，况在后宫。 
现代文：高隆之说： 现在的天下还是陛下的天下，何况是在后宫? 
English: Gao Longzhi said: Is the world of today still the world of His Majesty, let alone in the harem?

古文：乃与夫人妃嫔已下诀，莫不欷歔掩涕。
现代文：于是和夫人妃嫔以下告别，无不叹息流泪。
English: So he bade farewell to his wife and his concubines, all of them with sighs and tears.

古文：嫔赵国李氏诵陈思王诗云： 王其爱玉体，俱享黄发期。 
现代文：妃嫔赵国人李氏吟诵陈思王的诗句说： 大王珍爱尊贵体，一起享受高寿期。 
English: Princess Li, a native of Zhao, recited a poem by King Chen Si, saying, "The great king cherishes the noble body and enjoys a long life together.

古文：皇后已下皆哭。
现代文：皇后以下都哭泣。
English: Everyone from the Queen down was crying.

古文：直长赵德以故犊车一乘候于东上阁。
现代文：直长赵德用一辆过去的牛车在东上合等候。
English: Zhao De, the immediate superintendent, used an old ox-drawn cart to wait at the east gate.

古文：帝上车，德超上车持帝。
现代文：皇帝上车，赵德跳上车挟持皇帝。
English: The emperor got on the car, Zhao De jumped on the car and held the emperor hostage.

古文：帝肘之曰： 朕畏天顺人，授位相国，何物奴，敢逼人！ 
现代文：皇帝用胳膊肘撞他说： 我敬畏上天顺从人心，传位给相国，哪来的奴才，竟敢逼迫我! 
English: The emperor nudged him with his elbow and said, "I fear the heavens, obey the people, and pass on the throne to my countrymen. How dare these slaves persecute me!

古文：赵德尚不下。
现代文：趟德还是不下车。
English: He still wouldn't get off the train.

古文：及出云龙门，王公百僚衣冠拜辞。帝曰： 今日不减常道乡公、汉献帝。 
现代文：等到出云龙门，王公百官穿着礼服叩拜告辞，皇帝说： 今日的场面不差于当年的常道乡公、汉献帝。 
English: When they arrived at the Izumo Dragon Gate, hundreds of Wang Gong officials dressed in ceremonial clothes bowed and bid farewell. The emperor said, "Today's scene is no worse than that of the year of Changdao Township and Han Xianti.

古文：众皆悲怆，高隆之泣洒。
现代文：众人都悲伤，高隆之流下眼泪。
English: Everyone was sad, and Takahashi shed tears.

古文：遂入北城下司马子如南宅。
现代文：于是进入北城下司马子如南面的住宅。
English: So he entered the south house of Sima Ziru in Beicheng.

古文：及文宣行幸，常以帝自随。
现代文：到文宣皇帝出行时，常常带着皇帝跟随自己。
English: When traveling to Emperor Wenxuan, he often took the emperor along with him.

古文：帝后封太原公主，常为帝尝食以护视焉。
现代文：皇后被封为太原公主，时常为皇帝尝试食物来保护照顾。
English: The empress was given the title of Princess of Taiyuan, and she often tasted food for the emperor to protect and care for him.

古文：竟遇酖而崩。
现代文：最终遭遇毒酒而逝世。
English: He eventually died after drinking poisoned wine.

