古文：起著雍摄提格八月，尽十二月，不满一年。
现代文：起著雍摄提格八月，尽十二月，不满一年。
English: The monsoon season lasts from August to the end of December, less than a year.

古文：高祖神尧大圣光孝皇帝上之中
现代文：高祖神尧大圣光孝皇帝上之中
English: Gao Zu Shen  Da Sheng Guangxiao Emperor Zongzhong

古文：武德元年戊寅，公元六一八年八月，薛举遣其子仁果进围宁州，刺史胡演击却之。
现代文：唐高祖武德元年八月，薛举派他的儿子薛仁果进军围攻宁州，唐宁州刺史胡演击退了薛仁果。
English: In August of the first year of Emperor Wu of Tang Gao, Xue Qiu sent his son Xue Rengo to besiege Ningzhou. Xue Rengo was repulsed by Hu Ying, the governor of Tangning.

古文：郝瑗言于举曰： 今唐兵新破，关中骚动，宜乘胜直取长安。 
现代文：郝瑗对薛举说： 现在唐兵刚刚战败，关中骚动不安，应当乘胜直接攻取长安。 
English: Yao said to Xueju: Now that the Tang soldiers have just been defeated and Guanzhong is in turmoil, we should take advantage of the victory to directly capture Chang'an.

古文：举然之，会有疾而止。辛巳，举卒。
现代文：薛举同意他的意见，恰巧生了病没有实行。辛巳，薛举去世。
English: Xue Jiu agreed with his opinion, but coincidentally fell ill and did not carry it out. Soon after, Xue Jiu passed away.

古文：太子仁果立，居于折墌城，谥举曰武帝。
现代文：太子薛仁果继位，居住在折城，追谥薛举为武帝。
English: Prince Xue Rengguo succeeded to the throne, lived in Oricheng, and followed Emperor Xue as Emperor Wu.

古文：上欲与李轨共图秦、陇，遣使潜诣凉州，招抚之，与之书，谓之从弟。
现代文：唐高祖打算和李轨共同谋取秦、陇的薛举父子，派使节秘密地到凉州，招抚李轨，致李轨的书信，称李轨为堂弟。
English: Tang Gaozu planned to work with Li Liao to win the father and son of Qin and Zhou, and sent envoys secretly to Liangzhou to cajole Li Liao and write letters to Li Liao, saying that Li Liao was his cousin.

古文：轨大喜，遣其弟懋入贡。
现代文：李轨非常高兴，派遣弟弟李懋入贡于唐。
English: Li Rail was very happy and sent his younger brother Li Jie to Tang as a tribute.

古文：上以懋为大将军，命鸿胪少卿张俟德册拜轨为凉州总管，封凉王。
现代文：高祖任命李懋为大将军，命鸿胪少卿张俟德册拜李轨为凉州总管，封为凉王。
English: Gaozu appointed Li Jie as the grand general, and ordered Hongjie Shaoqing Zhang Rongde to recruit Li Rail as the head of Liangzhou and crown him as the King of Liangzhou.

古文：初，朝廷以安阳令吕珉为相州刺史，更以相州刺史王德仁为岩州刺史。
现代文：当初，朝廷任命安阳令吕珉为相州刺史，改任相州刺史王德仁为岩州刺史。
English: At first, the imperial court appointed Anyang Ling Lyu Hao as the governor of Xiangzhou, and changed the appointment of the governor of Xiangzhou to Wang Deren as the governor of Iwashu.

古文：德仁由是怨愤，甲申，诱山东大使宇文明达入林虑山而杀之，叛归王世充。
现代文：王德仁因为此事愤恨不平，甲申，引诱山东大使宇文明达进林虑山并杀了他，叛唐归附了王世充。
English: Wang Deren was angry and indignant about this, so he lured the Shandong ambassador, Yu Wenming, into the forest and killed him. Wang Shichong became a traitor to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：已丑，以秦王世民为元帅，击薛仁果。
现代文：己丑，任命秦王李世民为元帅，攻打薛仁果。
English: Uglily, he appointed Qin King Li Shimin as marshal to attack Xue Rengo.

古文：丁酉，临洮等四郡来降。
现代文：丁酉，临洮等四郡前来降唐。
English: Dingyao, Linyi and other four counties came to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：隋江都太守陈稜求得炀帝之柩，取宇文化及所留辇辂鼓吹，粗备天子仪卫，改葬于江都宫西吴公台下，其王公以下，皆列瘗于帝茔之侧。
现代文：隋江都太守陈棱寻找到隋炀帝的灵柩，用宇文化及留下的车驾鼓吹，大体备齐了天子所用的仪仗，将炀帝改葬在江都宫西面的吴公台下。当时遇难的王公以下大臣，都依次埋葬在炀帝坟茔的两侧。
English: Chen Ren, the governor of the Sui and Jiang dynasties, searched for the coffin of the Sui and Jiang dynasties' emperor, and with the help of the culture of the world and the propaganda of the car left behind, he basically prepared the ceremonial battle used by the heavenly son, and buried the emperor under the Wu Gong stage on the west side of the Jiangdu Palace. The ministers who died at that time, including Wang Gong, were successively buried on both sides of the emperor's tomb.

古文：宇文化及之发江都也，以杜伏威为历阳太守；伏威不受，仍上表于隋，皇泰主拜伏威为东道大总管，封楚王。
现代文：宇文化及从江都出发时，以杜伏威为历阳太守；杜伏威没有接受他的任命，仍然向隋上表称臣，皇泰主拜杜伏威为东道大总管，封楚王。
English: Du Fuwei did not accept his appointment, but still presented himself as a courtier to the Sui and Shang dynasties. Du Fuwei, the master of the imperial palace, was the host general manager and the king of the state of Chu.

古文：沈法兴亦上表于皇泰主。自称大司马、录尚书事、天门公，承制置百官，以陈杲仁为司徒，孙士汉为司空，蒋元超为左仆射，殷芊为左丞，徐令言为右丞，刘子翼为选部侍郎，李百药为府椽。
现代文：沈法兴也向皇泰主上表，自称大司马、录尚书事、天门公，承圣旨设置百官，以陈杲仁为司徒，孙士汉为司空，蒋元超为左仆射，殷芊为左丞，徐令言为右丞，刘子翼为选部侍郎，李百药为府掾。
English: Shen Faxing also presented himself to Emperor Taizong, claiming to be the chief steward, the keeper of records, and the gatekeeper of heaven, and set up hundreds of officials in accordance with the holy will, with Chen Yujin as the steward, Sun Shihang as the steward, Jiang Yuanchao as the left-hand man, Yin Yu as the left-hand man, Xu Lingyan as the right-hand man, Liu Ziying as the selector, and Li Baiyao as the prefect.

古文：百药，德林之子也。
现代文：李百药是李德林的儿子。
English: Li Baiyao is the son of Li Delin.

古文：九月，隋襄国通守陈君宾来降，拜邢州刺史。
现代文：九月，隋襄国通守陈君宾前来投降，官拜邢州刺史。
English: In September, Chen Junbin, the general-in-chief of Sui and Xiang states, came to surrender and pay homage to Bozhou.

古文：君宾，伯山之子也。
现代文：君宾是陈伯山的儿子。
English: Junbin is the son of Chen Bozhan.

古文：虞州刺史韦义节攻隋河东通守尧君素，久不下，军数不利；壬子，以工部尚书独孤怀恩代之。
现代文：唐虞州刺史韦义节攻打隋河东通守尧君素，很久未能攻下，军队好几次陷于不利形势；壬子，命工部尚书独孤怀恩替代韦义节。
English: Tangyuzhou sent Wei Yi to attack Sui He Dongtong Tongshou and failed to capture it for a long time, and the army fell into an unfavorable situation several times; Ren Zi ordered the Ministry of Industry to replace Wei Yi with Shang Shu.

古文：初，李密既杀翟让，颇自骄矜，不恤士众；仓粟虽多，无府库钱帛，战士有功，无以为赏；又厚抚初附之人，众心颇怨。
现代文：当初，李密杀了翟让后，很有点骄矜，不体恤广大士卒；虽然仓库里的粮食很多，但是没有钱币布帛，战士立了功，没有东西可以用来行赏；对新来归附的人又极其优待，广大士卒心里很不满。
English: At first, Li Mi was a bit proud after killing Zou Zhen, and had no consideration for the soldiers; although there was a lot of grain in the warehouse, there was no money cloth, the soldiers had done their duty, and there was nothing to reward them with; the newly arrived people were treated extremely favorably, and the soldiers were very dissatisfied.

古文：徐世勣尝因宴会刺讥其短；密不怿，使世勣出镇黎阳，虽名委任，实亦疏之。
现代文：徐世曾趁宴会讽刺他的短处，李密不高兴，让徐世去镇守黎阳，名义上是委以重任，实际上是疏远他。
English: Xu Shih once took advantage of a banquet to satirize his shortcomings. Li Mi was not happy, so he let Xu Shih go to guard Liyang, nominally entrusting him with an important task, but actually alienating him.

古文：密开洛口仓散米，无防守典当者，又无文券，取之者随意多少；或离仓之后，力不能致，委弃衢路，自仓城至郭门，米厚数寸，为车马所轥践；群盗来就食者并家属近百万口，无甕盎，织荆筐淘米，洛水两岸十里之间，望之皆如白沙。
现代文：李密打开洛口仓分发粮食，没有防守和主管的人，又没有凭证，取米的人随便取多少；有的人离开粮仓后，拿不动，丢散在街道上，从仓城到外城门，路上的米有几寸厚，被车马践踏；前来这儿要粮吃的各路盗贼及其家属有近百万人，没有容器，就用荆条编筐淘米，洛水两岸十里范围内，看上去象蒙上一层白沙。
English: Li Mi opened the Lokou storehouse to distribute grain. There was no guard or supervisor, and there was no certificate. The person who took the rice took as much as he wanted. Some people left the granary, did not move, and left it scattered on the streets. From Cangcheng to the outer city gate, the rice on the road was a few inches thick and was trampled by horses and carts. There were nearly one million thieves and their families from all walks of life who came here to eat grain. Without containers, they wove baskets of rice with sticks. Within ten miles on both sides of the Luoshui River, it looked like a layer of white sand.

古文：密喜，谓贾闰甫曰： 此可谓足食矣！ 
现代文：李密很高兴，对贾闰甫说： 这可以称得上是足食了！ 
English: Li Mi was very happy and said to Jia Liufu: This can be called foot food!

古文：闰甫对曰： 国以民为本，民以食为天。
现代文：贾闰甫回答： 国家的根本是老百姓，老百姓生存靠的是粮食。
English: Jia Liufu replied: The country is basically made up of the common people, and the common people rely on grain to survive.

古文：今民所以襁负如流而至者，以所天在此故也。
现代文：现在老百姓所以背着扛着像潮水一样涌来，是因为他们赖以生存的东西在这里的缘故。
English: The reason why the common people are now pouring in like a tidal wave, carrying everything on their backs, is because the things they depend on to survive are here.

古文：而有司曾无爱吝，屑越如此！窃恐一旦米尽民散，明公孰与成大业哉！ 
现代文：而有关官署却毫不爱惜，这样糟踏，我恐怕一旦没有米了百姓也就走散了，明公您又靠什么来完成大业呢？ 
English: However, the relevant government agencies did not spare any effort. Such a terrible thing. I am afraid that once there is no rice, the people will also disperse. My lord, what do you rely on to complete the great cause?

古文：密谢之，即以闰甫判司仓参军事。
现代文：李密感谢他的这番话，就任命闰甫为判司仓参军事。
English: Li Mi thanked him for his words and appointed Ye Fu as the judge of the warehouse and military.

古文：密以东都兵数败微弱，而将相自相屠灭，谓朝夕可平。王世充既专大权，厚赏将士，缮治器械，亦阴图取密。
现代文：李密因为东都的军队几次打败仗，力量微弱，而且将相之间自相残杀，认为短期内就可以平东都；王世充专擅大权之后，重赏将士，修治器械，也在暗中准备谋取李密。
English: Because the Dongdu army had been defeated several times, Li Mi was weak, and the warlords were killing each other, believing that they could level Dongdu in a short period of time. After Wang Shichong gained exclusive power, he rewarded the soldiers, repaired the equipment, and secretly prepared to seek Li Mi.

古文：时隋军乏食，而密军少衣，世充请交易，密难之；长史邴元真等各求私利，劝密许之。
现代文：当时隋朝的军队缺粮，而李密的部队少衣，王世充请求相互交换，李密感到为难，长史邴元真等人各自谋求私利，劝李密答应交换。
English: At that time, the army of the Sui Dynasty was short of grain, while Li Mi's troops were short of clothing. Wang Shichong asked for mutual exchange. Li Mi felt embarrassed. Chang Shi Xuan Yuanzhen and others each sought their own interests and persuaded Li Mi to agree to exchange.

古文：先是，东都人归密者，日以百数；既得食，降者益少，密悔而止。
现代文：原来东都每天有几百人归顺李密，得到粮食之后，投降的人越来越少，李密后悔，停止了交换。
English: Originally, several hundred people in Dongdu surrendered to Li Mi every day. After receiving the grain, fewer and fewer people surrendered. Li Mi regretted and stopped the exchange.

古文：密破宇文化及还，其劲卒良马多死，士卒疲病。
现代文：李密打败宇文化及回师，丧失了很多精兵好马，士兵也疲劳，生了病。
English: Li Mi defeated Yu Wenhua and returned to his division, losing many good soldiers and horses. The soldiers were also tired and fell ill.

古文：世充欲乘其弊击之，恐人心不壹，乃诈称左军卫士张永通三梦周公，令宣意于世充，当勒兵相助击贼。
现代文：王世充准备乘李密军队疲困进攻，又怕大家不一条心，于是谎称左军卫士张永通三次梦到周公，让他转告王世充，应该统帅军队互相协助打击敌人。
English: Wang Shichong was preparing to take advantage of Li Mi's exhausted army to attack, and was afraid that everyone would not have the same heart, so he falsely claimed that Zhang Yongtong, the guard of the Left Army, dreamed of Zhou Gong three times, and asked him to tell Wang Shichong that he should command the army to help each other fight the enemy.

古文：乃为周公立庙，每出兵，辄先祈祷。
现代文：于是建周公庙，每次出军作战，都先祈祷。
English: As a result, Zhou Gong Temple was built, and every time the army went out to fight, they prayed first.

古文：世充令巫宣言周公欲令仆射急讨李密，当有大功，不即兵皆疫死。
现代文：王世充命巫者宣称周公准备命仆射迅速讨伐李密，肯定会立大功，否则士兵都会染上疾病死去。
English: Wang Shixin, a sorcerer, declared that Zhou Gong was ready to fight Li Mi to the death, and he would certainly do a great service, otherwise the soldiers would catch the disease and die.

古文：世充兵多楚人，信妖言，皆请战。
现代文：王世充的士兵很多是楚人，相信这种妖言，都请求出战。
English: Many of Wang Shichong's soldiers were Chu people, and they all believed in this fairy tale and asked to go to war.

古文：世充简练精锐得二万馀人，马二千馀匹，壬子，出师击密，旗幡之上皆书永通字，军容甚盛。
现代文：王世充挑出二万多精锐，马二千多匹。壬子，出兵攻打李密，旗帜上都写上 永通 的字，军容很强大。
English: Wang Shichong selected more than twenty thousand elite soldiers and more than two thousand horses. Ren Zi sent troops to attack Li Mi, and the word "Yong Tong" was written on the flag. The army was very powerful.

古文：癸丑，至偃师，营于通济渠南，作三桥于渠上。
现代文：癸丑，到偃师，驻扎在通济渠南边，在渠水上搭设了三座桥梁。
English: He was stationed in the south of Tongji Canal from Gongushi to Gongshi, and built three bridges over the canal.

古文：密留王伯当守金墉，自引精兵出偃师北，阻邙山以待之。
现代文：李密留王伯当守卫金墉城，自己带领精兵去偃师，以邙山为屏障等候王世充的军队。
English: Li Miliu Wang Botang guarded Jinyuan City, and he himself led the elite soldiers to Lushan Division, using Lushan Mountain as a barrier to await the departure of Wang Shichong's army.

古文：密召诸将会议，裴仁基曰： 世充悉众而至，洛下必虚，可分兵守其要路，令不得东，简精兵三万，傍河西出以逼东都。
现代文：李密召集各位将领开会商议，裴仁基说： 王世充率领他的全部军队到这儿，洛阳必然空虚，我们可以分出兵力把守王世充军队要经过的要道，使他不能再向东前进，另挑选三万精兵，沿黄河向西进逼东都。
English: Li Mi called all the generals to a meeting for discussion, and Pei Renji said: Wang Shichong has led his entire army here, Luoyang is bound to be empty, we can allocate troops to guard the important path that Wang Shichong's army will pass through, so that he can no longer advance eastward, and select another thirty thousand elite soldiers to advance westward along the Yellow River to force Dongdu.

古文：世充还，我且按甲；世充再出，我又逼之。
现代文：王世充回军，我方就按兵不动；王世充再次出军，我方就再逼东都。
English: When Wang Shichong returned to the army, our side did not move; when Wang Shichong went to the army again, our side again forced Dongdu.

古文：如此，则我有馀力，彼劳奔命，破之必矣。 
现代文：这样，我方还有富余的力量，对方疲于奔命，肯定能打败他。 
English: In this way, we still have a surplus of strength, and the other side is exhausted and can certainly defeat him.

古文：密曰： 公言大善。
现代文：李密说： 您说得很好。
English: Li Mi said: You spoke very well.

古文：今东都兵有三不可当：兵仗精锐，一也；决计深入，二也；食尽求战，三也。
现代文：但现在东都的军队有三个不可抵挡：武器精良，这是一；决计深入我方，这是二；粮食吃完了决战，这是三。
English: However, there are three irresistible things about Dongdu's army now: first, it is well armed; second, it is determined to invade us; and third, it has finished eating grain and is ready for a decisive battle.

古文：我但乘城固守，蓄力以待之；彼欲斗不得，求走无路，不过十日，世充之头可致麾下。 
现代文：我们只要利用城池坚守，保持力量等待，对方想交战打不成，求退兵又没退路，过不了十天，王世充的头就可以到我们手中。 
English: As long as we hold on to the city, maintain our strength and wait, the other side will not be able to fight, and there is no way to retreat. Within ten days, Wang Shichong's head will be in our hands.

古文：陈智略、樊文超、单雄信皆曰： 计世充战卒甚少，屡经摧破，悉已丧胆。
现代文：陈智略、樊文超、单雄信都说： 算算王世充的士兵少得很，又好几次打了败仗，都已经吓破了胆。
English: Chen Zhiliu, Zou Wenchao and Shan Xiongxin all said: Wang Shichong's soldiers are very few, and they have been defeated several times, and they have been scared.

古文：《兵法》曰 倍则战 ，况不啻倍哉！
现代文：《兵法》说， 己方力量是对方一倍则作战 ，何况不止是一倍！
English: The "Law of War" says that if one's own strength is double that of the other side, then one should fight, and even more than double!

古文：且江、淮新附之士，望因此机展其勋效；及其锋而用之，可以得志。 
现代文：况且刚刚来归附的江淮人士，正希望乘此机会一展身手建立功勋，趁他们的锐气利用他们作战，正可以成功。 
English: Moreover, the people of Jianghuai who have just come to attach are hoping to take this opportunity to show their skills to build merits, take advantage of their spirit to use them to fight, and can succeed.

古文：于是诸将喧然，欲战者什七八，密惑于众议而从之。
现代文：于是众将领大声表示赞同，想打的占十分之七八，李密受众人的意见影响，决定照办。
English: As a result, the generals loudly expressed their approval, with 78 out of 10 wanting to fight. Li Mi, influenced by the opinions of the crowd, decided to comply.

古文：仁基苦争不得，击地叹曰： 公后必悔之！ 
现代文：裴仁基苦苦争辩却不能说服众人，敲着地叹息道： 阁下以后一定会后悔今天的决定。 
English: Pei Renki argued hard but couldn't convince everyone. He knocked on the ground and sighed, "Your Excellency will surely regret today's decision in the future."

古文：魏征言于长史郑颋曰： 魏公虽骤胜，而骁将锐卒多死，战士心怠，此二者难以应敌。且世充乏食，志在死战，难与争锋，未若深沟高垒以拒之，不过旬月，世充粮尽，必自退，追而击之，蔑不胜矣。 
现代文：魏徵对长史郑说： 魏公虽然屡次打了胜仗，但是精兵骁将伤亡很多，战士心身很疲倦，有这两点很难应敌，况且王世充缺粮，志在决一死战，很难和他争战以决胜负，不如挖深壕沟，加高壁垒以拒敌，过不了十天半个月，王世充粮食吃完了，必然自己退兵，那时再追击他，没有不胜的。 
English: Wei Zheng said to Changshi Zheng: Although Wei Gong repeatedly won the war, the elite soldiers suffered many casualties, and the soldiers were mentally and physically tired. With these two points, it was difficult to meet the enemy. Moreover, Wang Shizhong was short of grain and was determined to fight to the death. It was difficult to fight with him to decide whether to win or lose. It was better to dig a deep trench and raise the barrier to repel the enemy. Within ten days and a half months, Wang Shizhong had finished eating grain, and he would inevitably withdraw from the army. At that time, he would pursue him. There was no way to win.

古文：颋曰： 此老生之常谈耳。 
现代文：郑说： 这是老生常谈了。 
English: Zheng said: This is an old story.

古文：征曰： 此乃奇策，何谓常谈！ 
现代文：魏徵道： 这是奇策，怎么说是老生常谈！ 
English: Wei Zheng said: This is a strange policy, how can it be said to be commonplace!

古文：拂衣而起。
现代文：拂袖而去。
English: With that, she brushed off her clothes.

古文：程知节将内马军与密同营在北邙山上，单雄信将外马军营于偃师城北。
现代文：程知节带领内马军同李密一起扎营在北邙山上，单雄信带领外马军驻扎在偃师城北。
English: Cheng Zhijie led the Inner Mongolian Army and camped together with Li Mi on Beilun Mountain, while Shan Xiongxin led the Outer Mongolian Army and camped in the north of Jinshicheng.

古文：世充遣数百骑渡通济渠攻雄信营，密遣裴行俨与知节助之。
现代文：王世充派遣数百名骑兵渡过通济渠攻打单雄信的营寨，李密派遣裴行俨和程知节援助单雄信。
English: Wang Shichong sent hundreds of cavalry across the Tongji Canal to attack the camp of Shan Xiongxin, Li Mi sent Pei Xingyao and Cheng Zhisai to aid Shan Xiongxin.

古文：行俨先驰赴敌，中流矢，附于地；知节救之，杀数人，世充军披靡，乃抱行俨重骑而还；为世充骑所逐，刺槊洞过，知节回身捩折其槊，兼斩追者，与行俨俱免。
现代文：裴行俨率先奔赴战场，中流箭，倒在地下；程知节救起裴行俨，杀了几个人，王世充军队所向披靡，于是程知节抱着裴行俨骑着一匹马返回，被王世充的骑兵赶上，长枪直刺过来，程知节返身折断了刺来的长枪，又杀了追赶的人，和裴行俨一起脱身。
English: Pei Xingtao took the lead in rushing to the battlefield, and fell to the ground in the middle of the stream of arrows; Cheng Zhijie rescued Pei Xingtao and killed several people. Wang Shichong's army was overwhelming, so Cheng Zhijie carried Pei Xingtao and rode a horse back. He was caught up by Wang Shichong's cavalry, and the long gun stabbed him. Cheng Zhijie returned and broke the stabbed long gun, and killed the pursuing people, and escaped with Pei Xingtao.

古文：会日暮，各敛兵还营。
现代文：恰好天色暗了，双方各自收兵回营。
English: Just as it was getting dark, both sides withdrew to their respective camps.

古文：密骁将孙长乐等十馀人皆被重创。
现代文：李密手下的猛将孙长乐等十几人都受了重伤。
English: Li Mi's fierce general Sun Changle and more than a dozen others were seriously injured.

古文：密新破宇文化及，有轻世充之心，不设壁垒。
现代文：李密刚刚打败了宇文化及，有些轻视王世充，不设防御敌人的围墙。
English: Li Mi has just defeated Yu Cultura and, somewhat belittling Wang Shichong, has not set up a defensive wall against the enemy.

古文：世充夜遣二百馀骑潜入北山，伏溪谷中，命军士皆秣马蓐食。
现代文：王世充派二百多骑兵夜里秘密进入北邙山，埋伏在山谷中，命令士兵喂好马匹吃饱饭。
English: Wang Shichong sent more than two hundred horsemen to secretly enter Beilun Mountain at night, ambushed in the valley, and ordered the soldiers to feed the horses well.

古文：甲寅旦，将战，世充誓众曰： 今日之战，非直争胜负；死生之分，在此一举。
现代文：甲寅清晨，准备出击，王世充告诫众将士说： 今天这一仗，不仅仅是争胜负，而是生与死全在此一举。
English: In the early morning, when preparing to attack, Wang Shicheng admonished the soldiers: Today's battle is not just about winning or losing, but about life and death.

古文：若其捷也，富贵固所不论；若其不捷，必无一人获免。
现代文：如果胜了，荣华富贵自然不在话下；如果败了，一个人也逃不了。
English: If you win, the glory and wealth are naturally out of the question; if you lose, no one can escape.

古文：所争者死，非独为国，各宜勉之！ 
现代文：我们争相赴死，不单是为了国家，各位要努力作战！ 
English: We fight to the death, not just for our country. You must fight hard!

古文：迟明，引兵薄密。
现代文：天亮后，带兵逼近李密。
English: After dawn, the soldiers approached Li Mi.

古文：密出兵应之，未及成列，世充纵兵击之。
现代文：李密出兵应战，还没来得及排好队，王世充就放兵攻击。
English: Li Mi sent troops to fight, but before they could line up, Wang Shichong launched an attack.

古文：世充士卒皆江、淮剽勇，出入如飞。
现代文：王世充的士兵都是长江、淮河流域的人，剽悍勇猛，出入迅捷。
English: Wang Shichong's soldiers were all from the Yangtze River and Huaihe River basins. They were fierce and brave, and they entered and left quickly.

古文：世充先索得一人貌类密者，缚而匿之。战方酣，使牵以过陈前，噪曰： 已获李密矣！ 
现代文：王世充事先找到一个长得很象李密的人，捆起来藏好，战斗正激烈时，让人牵着通过阵前，大喊： 已经捉住李密了！ 
English: In advance, Wang Shichong found a man who looked very much like Li Mi, tied him up and hid him well. When the battle was raging, he let people lead him through the front of the battle, shouting: Li Mi has been caught!

古文：士卒皆呼万岁。
现代文：士兵们都呼万岁。
English: The soldiers all shouted "long live."

古文：其伏兵发，乘高而下，驰压密营，纵火焚其庐舍。
现代文：王世充埋伏的骑兵出击，从高处冲下来，驰向李密营地，放火焚烧房屋。
English: Wang Shichong's ambushed cavalry attacked, rushed down from a height, drove to Li Mi's camp, and set fire to houses.

古文：密众大溃，其将张童仁、陈智略皆降，密与万馀人驰向洛口。
现代文：李密部众溃散，将领张童仁、陈智略都投降了王世充，李密和一万多人逃往洛口。
English: Li Mi's troops dispersed, generals Zhang Tongren and Chen Zhiliu surrendered to Wang Shichong, and Li Mi and more than 10,000 people fled to Lokou.

古文：世充夜围偃师；郑颋守偃师，其部下翻城纳世充。
现代文：夜晚王世充包围偃师，郑守卫偃师，他的部下反而开城放王世充入城。
English: In the evening, Wang Shichong encircled Gong Division, Zheng Shouwei surrounded Gong Division, his subordinates instead opened the city and let Wang Shichong enter the city.

古文：初，世充家属在江都，随宇文化及至滑台，又随王轨入李密，密留于偃师，欲以招世充。
现代文：当初，王世充的家属在江都，随宇文化及至滑台，又随王轨到了李密部队，李密把王世充家属留在偃师，打算用他们招降王世充。
English: At the beginning, Wang Shichong's family members were in Jiangdu. They followed Yu Qun and arrived at Zhidai, and then followed Wang Lu to Li Mi's army. Li Mi kept Wang Shichong's family members in Jinshi, intending to use them to recruit Wang Shichong.

古文：及偃师破，世充得其兄世伟、子玄应、虔恕、琼等，又获密将佐裴仁基、郑颋、祖君彦等数十人。
现代文：待到偃师城破，王世充寻回哥哥王世伟，儿子王玄应、王虔怒、王琼等人，又俘虏李密的将佐裴仁基、郑、祖君彦等几十人。
English: After the fall of Jinshicheng, Wang Shifeng recovered his brother Wang Shwei, his sons Wang Xuanying, Wang Qianwu, and Wang Qiong, as well as dozens of Li Mi's captives, including generals Zuo Pei Rongji, Zheng, and Zu Junyan.

古文：世充于是整兵向洛口，得邴元真妻子、郑虔象母及密诸将子弟，皆抚慰之，令潜呼其父兄。
现代文：王世充于是整顿兵马向洛口进发，得到邴元真的妻子、郑虔象的母亲以及李密众位将领的子弟，都加以安慰，让他们暗中招呼各自的父兄。
English: Wang Shichong then set out to rectify the soldiers and horses to Lokou, and got the wife of Yu Yuanzhen, the mother of Zheng Qianxiang, and the children of Li Mi's generals to comfort them and let them secretly greet their respective fathers and brothers.

古文：初，邴元真为县吏，坐赃亡命，从翟让于瓦冈；让以其尝为吏，使掌书记。
现代文：当初，邴元真作县吏，犯了贪污罪逃跑在外，跟随翟让到瓦岗，翟让因为他曾经作过小官，让他掌文书。
English: At first, Yan Yuanzhen was a county official who had committed the crime of embezzlement and fled abroad. He followed Yan Zhan to Vagang. Yan Zhan, because he had once been a minor official, let him handle the paperwork.

古文：及密开幕府，妙选时英，让荐元真为长史；密不得已用之，行军谋画，未尝参预。
现代文：到李密开设幕府，挑选当时的出色人物时，翟让推荐邴元真为长史；李密不得已任用他为长史，但从未让他参与过军事行动的谋划。
English: When Li Mi opened the Shogunate and selected the outstanding figures of the time, he was forced to appoint him as the Long History, but he never allowed him to participate in the planning of military operations.

古文：密西拒世充，留元真守洛口仓。
现代文：李密到西边抵抗王世充，留邴元真守洛口仓。
English: Li Mi went to the west to resist Wang Shichong, and Ruyuan Yuanma guarded Lokuchangang.

古文：元真性贪鄙，宇文温谓密曰： 不杀元真，必为公患。 
现代文：邴元真性情贪婪浅薄，宇文温对李密说： 不杀了邴元真，必然成为您的祸患。 
English: Yuwenwen said to Li Mi: "If you don't kill Xuan Yuanzheng, he will inevitably become your scourge."

古文：密不应。
现代文：李密没有答应。
English: Li Mi did not agree.

古文：元真知之，阴谋叛密；杨庆闻之，以告密，密固疑焉。
现代文：邴元真知道了此事，阴谋反叛李密；杨庆听说后，把邴元真的阴谋报告了李密，李密才真的怀疑邴元真。
English: Xuan Yuan Zhen knew about the matter and plotted to rebel against Li Mi; after Yang Qing heard about it, he reported Xuan Yuan Zhen's plot to Li Mi, and only then did Li Mi really suspect Xuan Yuan Zhen.

古文：至是，密将入洛口城，元真已遣人潜引世充矣。
现代文：到此时，李密要进入洛口城，邴元真已经秘密派人招来王世充。
English: By this time, Li Mi was about to enter the city of Luokou, and Yu Yuanzhen had secretly sent someone to recruit Wang Shichong.

古文：密知而不发，因与众谋，待世充兵半济洛水，然后击之。
现代文：李密知道后没有声张，乘机和众人商量，等王世充军队一半渡过洛水，然后攻击。
English: After Li Mi found out, he did not make a fuss, he took the opportunity to consult with everyone, and waited for half of Wang Shicheng's army to cross Luoshui, and then attacked.

古文：世充军至，密候骑不时觉，比将出战，世充军悉已济矣。
现代文：王世充军到洛水，李密的骑哨兵没有及时发现，临到要出击时，王世充的军队已经全部过了河。
English: When Wang Shichong's army arrived at Luoshui, Li Mi's horse-mounted sentries did not discover it in time. When it was time to attack, Wang Shichong's army had all crossed the river.

古文：单雄信等又勒兵自据；密自度不能支，帅麾下轻骑奔虎牢，元真遂以城降。
现代文：单雄信等人又领兵自保；李密自己估计不能坚持，率领部下轻装乘马逃往虎牢，于是邴元真以洛口投降了王世充。
English: Shan Xiongxin and others also led soldiers to protect themselves; Li Mi himself estimated that he could not insist, and led his subordinates lightly dressed on horseback to flee to the tiger prison, so Xuan Yuanzhen surrendered to Wang Shichong.

古文：初，雄信骁捷，善用马槊，名冠诸军，军中号曰 飞将 。
现代文：当初，单雄信勇猛敏捷，善长骑马和使用长枪，名声为各军首位，军中称为 飞将 。
English: At the beginning, Shan Xiongxin was brave and agile, good at riding horses and using long guns, and his reputation was the first in each army. He was called "Flying General" in the army.

古文：彦藻以雄信轻于去就，劝密除之；密爱其才，不忍也。
现代文：房彦藻因为单雄信对去留很轻率，劝李密除掉他；但李密爱惜单雄信的才能，不忍心。
English: Since Shan Xiongxin was very careless about leaving, Fang Yanmo advised Li Mi to get rid of him; however, Li Mi did not have the heart to spare Shan Xiongxin's talent.

古文：及密失利，雄信遂以所部降世充。
现代文：待李密失利，单雄信便率领他的部下投降了王世充。
English: After Li Mi's defeat, Shan Xiongxin led his men to surrender to Wang Shichong.

古文：密将如黎阳，或曰： 杀翟让之际，徐世勣几死，今失利而就之，安可保乎！ 
现代文：李密将要去黎阳，有人说： 杀翟让的时候，徐世差点死了，现在失利了去投奔他，怎么能保险呢！ 
English: Li Mi is going to go to Liyang. Some people say, "When we killed and transferred him, Xu Shih almost died. Now that we have lost, how can we be safe if we go to him?"

古文：时王伯当弃金墉保河阳，密自虎牢归之，引诸将共议。
现代文：当时王伯当丢弃了金墉城保守河阳，李密从虎牢回到河阳，召诸将共同商议。
English: At that time, Wang Bodang abandoned Jinyu City to preserve Heyang. Li Mi returned to Heyang from the Tiger's Lair and called the generals together for discussion.

古文：密欲南阻河，北守太行，东连黎阳，以图进取。
现代文：李密想南面凭仗黄河，北面守住太行，东面连结黎阳，以此设法进取。
English: Li Mi wanted to take advantage of the Yellow River in the south, defend Taihang in the north, and connect Liyang in the east, in an attempt to advance.

古文：诸将皆曰： 今兵新失利，众心危惧，若更停留，恐叛亡不日而尽。
现代文：众将都说： 现在军队刚失利，大家心中胆怯，如果再停留，恐怕要不了几天人就叛逃光了。
English: The generals all said: Now the army has just been defeated, everyone is timid. If we stay any longer, I'm afraid it won't take more than a few days for everyone to defect.

古文：又人情不愿，难以成功。 
现代文：而且人情不愿，也难以成功。 
English: Moreover, people are not willing, and it is difficult to succeed.

古文：密曰： 孤所恃者众也，众既不愿，孤道穷矣。 
现代文：李密说： 孤所依靠的就是大家，大家既然不愿意，孤没路可走了。 
English: Li Mi said: What the lonely rely on is everyone, since everyone is unwilling, the lonely have no way to go.

古文：欲自刎以谢众。
现代文：打算自刎以谢众人。
English: He plans to thank everyone for their support.

古文：伯当抱密号绝，众皆悲泣，密复曰： 诸君幸不相弃，当共归关中；密身虽无功，诸君必保富贵。 
现代文：王伯当抱住李密哭得昏了过去，大家也都伤心落泪，李密又说： 有幸诸位没有抛弃我，应当一起回到关中；密自己虽然没有功劳，诸位必定保有富贵。 
English: Wang Bodang hugged Li Mi and wept until she fainted. Everyone was sad and shed tears. Li Mi also said, "Fortunately, you have not abandoned me, and you should return to Guanzhong together. Although Mi herself has no merit, you will certainly remain rich and noble."

古文：府掾柳燮曰： 明公与唐公同族，兼有畴昔之好；虽不陪起兵，然阻东都，断隋归路，使唐公不战而据长安，此亦公之功也。 
现代文：府掾柳燮说： 明公和唐公是同一宗族，又加上有过去联合的友谊；虽然没有随唐公一同起兵，但阻隔东都，切断了隋军的归路，使唐公不战而占领了长安，这也是您的功劳。 
English: Fuxi Liujuan said, "Ming Gong and Tang Gong are from the same clan, plus the friendship of the past alliance. Although you did not join Tang Gong in raising an army, you blocked the eastern capital, cut off the return route of the Sui army, and made Tang Gong occupy Chang'an without fighting. This is also your merit.

古文：众咸曰： 然。 
现代文：众人都说： 的确如此。 
English: And all the people said, So be it.

古文：密又谓王伯当曰： 将军室家重大，岂复与孤俱行哉！ 
现代文：李密又对王伯当说： 将军您的家庭重要，怎么可以又和孤一同走呢？ 
English: Li Mi also said to Wang Bodang: Your family burden is very heavy, how can you go with me again!

古文：伯当曰： 昔萧何尽帅子弟以从汉王，伯当恨不兄弟俱从，岂以公今日失利遂轻去就乎！
现代文：王伯当说： 过去萧何率领所有的子弟跟随汉王，伯当遗憾的是兄弟们不能都跟着您，怎么能因为您今天失利就不看重去留了呢？
English: Wang Bodang said: In the past, Xiao He led all his children to follow Han Wang. Bodang regretted that his brothers could not all follow you. How can you not attach importance to staying because you lost today?

古文：纵身分原野，亦所甘心！ 
现代文：纵然是粉身碎骨葬身原野，也心甘情愿跟随您！ 
English: Even if they are crushed and buried in the wilderness, they are willing to follow you!

古文：左右莫不感激，从密入关者凡二万人。
现代文：周围的人无不深受感动。跟随李密入关的有二万人。
English: All the people around him were deeply moved. Twenty thousand people followed Li Mi into the prison.

古文：于是密之将帅、州县多降于隋。
现代文：于是李密原有的将帅、州县大多归顺了隋。
English: As a result, most of Li Mi Yuan's generals and prefectures surrendered to the Sui.

古文：硃粲亦遣使降隋，皇泰主以粲为楚王。
现代文：朱粲也派使节投降了隋，皇泰主以朱粲为楚王。
English: Zhu Xi also sent envoys to surrender to the Sui Dynasty, and Emperor Taizong made Zhu Xi the King of Chu.

古文：甲寅，秦州总管窦轨击薛仁果，不利；骠骑将军刘感镇泾州，仁果围之。
现代文：甲寅，唐秦州总管窦轨进攻薛仁果，不利；骠骑将军刘感镇守泾州，薛仁果包围了泾州。
English: Jia Yin, the general of Tang and Qin states, attacked Xue Rengguo, which was unfavorable; the cavalry general Liu Xuan defended Zhangzhou, and Xue Rengguo encircled Zhangzhou.

古文：城中粮尽，感杀所乘马以分将士，感一无所啖，唯煮马骨取汁和木屑食之。
现代文：泾州城中粮食吃光了，刘感把自己骑的马杀了分给将士们，自己没有吃一点肉，只用煮马骨的汤拌了木屑吃。
English: The food in the city of Luzhou ran out, and Liu Xuan gave the soldiers a share of the horse he rode. He did not eat any meat, but only used the soup of boiled horse bones mixed with wood chips.

古文：城垂陷者数矣，会长平王叔良将士至泾州，仁果乃扬言食尽，引兵南去；乙卯，又遣高墌人伪以城降。
现代文：城池几次濒临陷落；恰好长平王李叔良带兵至泾州，薛仁果于是扬言粮食吃完了，带兵向南而去。乙卯，薛仁果又派高人假装以城池降唐。
English: Chengchi was on the verge of falling several times; it happened that the Changping King Li Shuliang led an army to Zhangzhou, and Xue Rengguo then threatened that he had finished eating the grain and led the army to the south. Second, Xue Rengguo also sent high-ranking officials to pretend to use Chengchi to fall to Tang.

古文：叔良遣感帅众赴之，己未，至城下，扣城中人曰： 贼已去，可逾城入。 
现代文：李叔良派遣刘感率部下赴高；己未，到高城下，敲城门，城里的人说： 贼已经走了，可以翻城墙进城。 
English: Li Shuliang sent Liu Xuan and his subordinates to Gao; before he left, he went to Gaocheng and knocked on the city gate. The people in the city said, "The thief has already left. You can climb over the city wall and enter the city."

古文：感命烧其门，城上下水灌之。感知其诈，遣步兵先还，自帅精兵为殿。
现代文：刘感下令烧高城门，城上人倒水浇下来，刘感知道城里人是诈降，让步兵先回师，自己带领精兵走在最后。
English: Liu Xuan ordered to burn the high city gate, the people on the top of the city poured water down, Liu Xuan knew that the people in the city were cheating, let the infantry return to the division first, and he led the elite soldiers to walk at the end.

古文：俄而城上举三烽，仁果兵自南原大下，战于百里细川，唐军大败，感为仁果所擒。
现代文：一会儿，城上点燃三座烽火，薛仁果的军队从南原大批涌下来，与刘感军在百里细川交战，唐军大败，刘感被薛仁果抓获。
English: In a moment, three bonfires were lit on the castle, and Xue Rengo's army poured down from Nanyuan in large numbers and fought with Liu Xuan's army in Bailixu River. The Tang army was defeated, and Liu Xuan was captured by Xue Rengo.

古文：仁果复围泾州，令感语城中云： 援军已败，不如早降。 
现代文：薛仁果又包围了泾州，命令刘感向城中喊话说： 援军已经被打败了，不如尽快投降。 
English: Xue Rengguo encircled Zhangzhou again and ordered Liu Xuan to shout to the city: "The reinforcements have been defeated, it is better to surrender as soon as possible."

古文：感许之，至城下，大呼曰： 逆贼饥馁，亡在朝夕，秦王帅数十万众，四面俱集，城中勿优，勉之！ 
现代文：刘感答应了，到城下却大声喊道： 反贼没粮食挨饿，很快就要灭亡了，秦王率领几十万军队从四面赶来，城里的人不要担心，努力守城！ 
English: Liu Xuan agreed, but when he got to the outskirts of the city, he shouted loudly: "The rebels have no food, are starving, and will soon perish. King Qin has led hundreds of thousands of troops to come from all directions. People in the city should not worry, and work hard to defend the city!"

古文：仁果怒，执感，于城旁埋之至膝，驰骑射之；至死，声色逾厉。
现代文：薛仁果很恼火，捉住刘感，在城旁把刘感活埋到膝盖，骑马跑着用箭射刘感；一直到死，刘感声音愈来愈高、态度愈来愈愤怒。
English: Xue Rengguo was very angry. He caught Liu Xuan, buried him alive up to his knees next to the city, and ran on horseback to shoot him with arrows. Until his death, Liu Xuan's voice became louder and louder, and his attitude became angrier and angrier.

古文：叔良婴城固守，仅能自全。
现代文：李叔良环城坚守，仅能保全自己，无力救刘感。
English: Li Shuliang adhered to the city ring, only able to protect himself, unable to save Liu Xuan.

古文：感，丰生之孙也。
现代文：刘感是刘丰生的孙子。
English: Liu Xuan is the grandson of Liu Fengsheng.

古文：庚申，陇州刺史陕人常达击薛仁果于宜禄川，斩首千余级。
现代文：庚申，唐陇州刺史陕人常达在宜禄川攻击薛仁果，杀了一千多人。
English: Gao Sheng, Tang Yanzhou assassin, and Shaanxi Changda attacked Xue Rengguo in Yilu River, killing more than a thousand people.

古文：上遣从子襄武公琛、太常卿郑元璹以女妓遗始毕可汗。
现代文：唐高祖派侄子襄武公李琛、太常卿郑元把女妓送给突厥始毕可汗。
English: Tang Gaozu sent his nephews, Xiangwu Gong Li Xi and Tai Changqing Zheng Yuan, to give the prostitute to Turku Shi Bi Khan.

古文：壬戌，始毕复遣骨咄禄特勒来。
现代文：壬戌，始毕又派遣骨咄禄特勒来唐。
English: At the beginning of the year, he also sent the bones of Lotterer to Tang.

古文：癸亥，白马道士傅仁均造《戊寅历》成，奏上，行之。
现代文：癸亥，白马县的道士傅仁均编成了《戊寅历》，上奏章进呈，唐从此实行《戊寅历》。
English: Zou Hai and Fu Ren, a Taoist priest from Baima County, both compiled the "Wu Yin Calendar." The last chapter was submitted, and Tang implemented the "Wu Yin Calendar" from then on.

古文：薛仁果屡攻常达，不能克，乃遣其将仵士政以数百人诈降，达厚抚之。
现代文：薛仁果屡次攻常达，都未能取胜，于是派他的将领仵士政带几百人诈降，常达待仵士政很优厚。
English: Xue Renggu repeatedly attacked Changda, but failed to win, so he sent his generals and officials to defraud hundreds of people. Changda was very generous to the officials.

古文：乙丑，士政伺隙以其徒劫达，拥城中二千人降于仁果。
现代文：乙丑，仵士政伺机带他的部下劫持了常达，带着城里的二千人投降了薛仁果。
English: Yixiu and Shizheng waited for an opportunity to kidnap Changda with his subordinates, and surrendered to Xue Rengo with two thousand people in the city.

古文：达见仁果，词色不屈，仁果壮而释之。
现代文：常达见了薛仁果，言辞表情毫不屈服，薛仁果因为他的豪壮放了他。
English: When Changda saw Xue Rengguo, his words and expression were unyielding, and Xue Rengguo let him go because of his bravery.

古文：奴贼帅张贵谓达曰： 汝识我乎？ 
现代文：奴仆出身的贼帅张贵对常达说： 你认识我吗？ 
English: Zhang Gui, a handsome thief who was born as a slave, said to Zhang Da: "Do you know me?

古文：达曰： 汝逃死奴贼耳！ 
现代文：常达说： 你不就是该死而逃跑的奴贼吗？ 
English: Changda said, "Aren't you just a slave thief who ran away?

古文：贵怒，欲杀之，人救之，获免。
现代文：张贵很气恼，要杀了常达；有人相救，常达才免于一死。
English: Zhang Gui was very angry and wanted to kill Changda; only when someone came to his rescue was Changda saved from certain death.

古文：辛未，追谥隋太上皇为炀帝。
现代文：辛未，唐追谥隋太上皇为炀帝。
English: On the 29th, an additional imperial title was given to the Empress Dowager of the Sui Dynasty as Empress Dowager.

古文：宇文化及至魏县，张恺等谋去之；事觉，化及杀之。
现代文：宇文化及到魏县，张恺等人商议要离开他；事情被查觉，宇文化及杀了张恺等人。
English: U Bunka went to Wei County, and Zhang Ye and others discussed leaving him; the matter was discovered, and U Bunka killed Zhang Ye and others.

古文：腹心稍尽，兵势日蹙，兄弟更无他计，但相聚酣宴，奏女乐。
现代文：心腹之人逐渐丧失殆尽，兵力日益削弱，兄弟们更没有什么计谋，只有相互聚会在一起尽情吃喝，玩歌伎。
English: The loyalists have all been killed, the number of soldiers is dwindling day by day, and there is nothing to be done for Yu Kun and his brothers. They just get together to drink and enjoy women's music.

古文：化及醉，尤智及曰： 我初不知，由汝为计，强来立我。
现代文：宇文化及喝醉了，抱怨智及道： 当初我什么也不知道，是你的主意，一定要推我为首。
English: Yu Wenhua and drunk, complained about Zhi and said: At first I didn't know anything, it was your idea, be sure to push me to be the leader.

古文：今所向无成，士马日散，负弑君之名，天下所不容。今者灭族，岂不由汝乎！ 
现代文：如今一事无成，人马日益减少，背着弑君的罪名，为天下所不容，现在遭灭族，还不是因为你！ 
English: Today, nothing has been accomplished, the number of people is decreasing day by day, and the crime of betraying the Emperor is unacceptable to the world. It is not because of you that people are being exterminated!

古文：持其两子而泣。
现代文：搂着两个儿子哭起来。
English: She hugged her two sons and began to cry.

古文：智及怒曰： 事捷之日，初不赐尤，及其将败，乃欲归罪，何不杀我以降窦建德！ 
现代文：智及生气地说： 当初事情成功的时候，你不怪我，到了要失败时，又想归罪于我，怎么不杀了我投降窦建德！ 
English: Wisely and angrily, he said, "In the beginning, when things were successful, you didn't blame me. When things were about to fail, you wanted to blame me. Why didn't you kill me? Surrender Dou Jiande!"

古文：数相斗阋，言无长幼；醒而复饮，以此为恒。
现代文：好几次相互争吵打了起来，说话也不分老小，酒醒后又饮酒，以此为常事。
English: They quarreled and fought with each other several times. They spoke to each other regardless of age, and it was common for them to drink again after they sobered up.

古文：其众多亡，化及自知必败，叹曰： 人生固当死，岂不一日为帝乎！ 
现代文：宇文化及的部下大多逃跑了，化及自己知道肯定要失败，叹息道： 人生自然是要死的，怎能不当一天皇帝呢？ 
English: U Bunka and most of his subordinates ran away, and when he realized that he was sure to fail, he sighed: Life is naturally dying, how can I not be emperor one day?

古文：于是鸩杀秦王浩，即皇帝位于魏县，国号许，改元天寿，署置百官。
现代文：于是用鸩酒毒死了秦王杨浩，在魏县即皇帝位，国号许，改年号天寿，设置百官。
English: So he poisoned the Qin king Yang Hao with poisoned wine, and set up a hundred officials in Wei County, namely the emperor, the country name Xu, and the year name Tian Shou.

古文：冬，十月，壬申朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季十月，壬申朔，出现日食。
English: In the winter of October, the Jinshen New Year, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：戊寅，宴突厥骨咄禄，引骨咄禄升御坐以宠之。
现代文：戊寅，唐高祖宴请突厥骨咄禄，领骨咄禄登上皇帝的宝座表示恩宠。
English: Wu Yin, Tang Gao's ancestor invited the Turks to the banquet, and the Turks ascended the throne of the emperor to express their grace.

古文：李密将至，上遣使迎劳，相望于道。
现代文：李密就要到长安了，高祖接连不断地派人前去迎接慰问。
English: Li Mi is about to arrive in Chang'an, Gao Zu continuously sends people to meet the condolences.

古文：密大喜，谓其徒曰： 我拥众百万，一朝解甲归唐，山东连城数百，知我在此，遣使招之，亦当尽至；比于窦融，功亦不细，岂不以一台司见处乎！ 
现代文：李密非常高兴，对他的部下说： 我拥有百万兵力，一朝脱去战袍归顺唐，崤山以东几百座城镇，知道我在这里，派人去招降，也会全部来归顺的；比起窦融，功劳也不小，还能不给我安排一个要职吗？ 
English: Li Mi was very happy and said to his subordinates: I have a million soldiers, and I will take off my battle dress and surrender to Tang one day. There are hundreds of towns east of Lushan. If they know I am here and send people to recruit, they will all surrender. Compared to Dou Rong, the merit is not small. Can they not arrange an important position for me?

古文：己卯，至长安，有司供待稍薄，所部兵累日不得食，众心颇怨。
现代文：己卯，李密到长安，负责部门对他们的供应颇差，李密部下的士兵接连几天没饭吃，众人心里颇生怨气。
English: However, when Li Mi arrived in Chang'an, the responsible department's supply to them was rather poor. The soldiers under Li Mi's command had not eaten for several days in a row, and the people were quite resentful.

古文：既而以密为光禄卿、上柱国，赐爵邢国公。
现代文：不久唐以李密为光禄卿、上柱国，赐他邢国公的爵位。
English: Soon, the Tang Dynasty made Li Mi the Guangluqing and Shangzhu Guo, and gave him the title of the Duke of Guo.

古文：密既不满望，朝臣又多轻之，执政者或来求贿，意甚不平；独上亲礼之，常呼为弟，以舅子独孤氏妻之。
现代文：李密没能满足原来的期望，大臣们大多又轻视他，有些掌权的人向李密索取贿赂，李密内心很不满意；唯有高祖对待他很好，经常称他为弟，将舅舅的女儿独孤氏嫁给他。
English: Li Mi failed to meet the original expectations, most of the ministers despised him, some people in power asked Li Mi for bribes, Li Mi was very dissatisfied; only Gaozu treated him well, often called him his brother, and married his uncle's daughter to him.

古文：庚辰，诏右翊卫大将军淮安王神通为山东道安扶大使，山东诸军并受节度；以黄门侍郎崔民幹为副。
现代文：庚辰，唐高祖下诏任命右翊卫大将军淮安王李神通为山东道安抚大使，山东各路兵马都接受他的指挥；以黄门侍郎崔民为副使。
English: Geng Chen, Tang Gao's ancestor, issued an edict appointing Huai'an Wang Li Shentong, a general of the Right Division of the National Guard, as the ambassador of peace and tranquility in Shandong Province. All the troops and horses in Shandong Province accepted his command; with Huangmen waiter Cui Min as the deputy envoy.

古文：邓州刺史吕子臧与抚慰使马元规击硃粲，破之。
现代文：邓州刺史吕子臧和抚慰使马元规攻打朱粲，打败了他。
English: Deng Zhou stabbed Shishi Lv Zi and comforted Ma Yuan Gui to attack Zhu Xi and defeat him.

古文：子臧言于元规曰： 粲新败，上下危惧，请并力击之，一举可灭。
现代文：吕子臧向马元规建议： 朱粲刚打了败仗，上上下下都胆怯，我请求和您会兵进攻他，可以一下子消灭他。
English: Lü Zixuan suggested to Ma Yuan Gui: Zhu Xi has just lost the battle, he is timid from top to bottom. I request that you and your soldiers attack him, you can eliminate him at once.

古文：若复迁延，其徒稍集，力强食尽，致死于我，为患方深。 
现代文：如果再拖延下去，朱粲的部队逐渐收拢，力量增加而粮食吃光，会跟我们拼死，那将成为大患。 
English: If we delay any longer, Zhu Xi's troops will gradually close in, their strength will increase and they will run out of food, and they will fight to the death with us. That will be a big problem.

古文：元规不从。
现代文：马元规没有听从他的意见。
English: Ma Yuanfei did not listen to his advice.

古文：子臧请独以所部兵击之，元规不许。
现代文：吕子臧又要求由他自己的部队去攻打朱粲，马元规也没有答应。
English: Lv Zixuan also demanded that his own troops attack Zhu Xi, but Ma Yuan Rong did not agree.

古文：既而粲收集余众，兵复大振，自称楚帝于冠军，改元昌达，进攻邓州。
现代文：不久，朱粲收聚他的余部，重振军势，在冠军自称楚帝，改年号昌达，进攻邓州。
English: Soon, Zhu Xi gathered the rest of his troops, reinvigorated the army, and attacked Dengzhou under the champion's self-proclaimed name of Chu Di, later renamed Chanda.

古文：子臧抚膺谓元规曰： 老夫今坐公死矣！ 
现代文：吕子臧捶着胸对马元规说： 因为您，今天要了老夫的命了！ 
English: Lyu Zi clutched his chest and said to Ma Yuan Gui, "Because of you, I'm going to kill my husband today!"

古文：粲围南阳，会霖雨城坏，所亲劝子臧降。子臧曰： 安有天子方伯降贼者乎！ 
现代文：朱粲围攻南阳，恰逢连绵大雨冲毁了城墙，亲信劝吕子臧投降，吕子臧说： 哪有天子的一方大臣向强盗投降的？ 
English: Zhu Xi besieged Nanyang, coinciding with the continuous heavy rain that washed away the city walls. His close friends advised Lü Zixuan to surrender. Lü Zixuan said: Which of the sons of Heaven's ministers surrendered to the bandits?

古文：帅麾下赴敌而死。
现代文：率领部下冲向敌人，战死。
English: He led his men against the enemy and was killed.

古文：俄而城陷，元规亦死。
现代文：一会儿城池陷落，马元规也死了。
English: A moment later, the city fell, and Ma Yuanfei also died.

古文：癸未，王世充收李密美人珍宝及将卒十余万人还东都，陈于阙下。
现代文：癸未，王世充收罗了李密的美女珍宝以及部下十几万人回到东都，排列在皇宫门前的阙楼之下。
English: Soon after, Wang Shichong gathered Li Mi's beautiful treasures and more than 100,000 of his subordinates and returned to Dongdu, where they were lined up under the mirage in front of the imperial palace.

古文：乙酉，皇泰主大赦。
现代文：乙酉，皇泰主对他们实行大赦。
English: As a result, Emperor Taizong granted them amnesty.

古文：丙戌，以世充为太尉、尚书令，内外诸军事，仍使之开太尉府，备置官属，妙选人物。
现代文：丙戌，以王世充为太尉、尚书令、内外诸军事，又让他建太尉府，设置官属，选拔优秀人物。
English: He promoted Wang Shichong to the rank of captain, and made him the commander of the military at home and abroad. He also asked him to build a captain's office, set up subordinates, and select outstanding people.

古文：世充以裴仁基父子骁勇，深礼之。
现代文：王世充因为裴仁基父子骁勇，很尊重他们。
English: Wang Shichong respects Pei Rongji and his son very much because of their bravery.

古文：徐文远复入东都，见世充，必先拜。
现代文：徐文远又回到东都，见王世充，必定先行礼。
English: When Xu Wenyuan returned to Dongdu and saw Wang Shichong, he was sure to bow first.

古文：或问曰： 君倨见李密而敬王公，何也？ 
现代文：有人问他： 您见李密很傲慢，却很敬重王公，是什么原因？ 
English: Someone asked him: You see that Li Mi is very arrogant, but he respects the prince very much. What is the reason?

古文：文远曰： 魏公，君子也，能容贤士；王公，小人也，能杀故人，吾何敢不拜！ 
现代文：徐文远说： 魏公李密是君子，能够容纳贤士；王公是小人，老熟人也能杀，我怎么敢不行礼？ 
English: Xu Wenyuan said: Wei Gong Li Mi is a gentleman, able to accommodate sages; Wang Gong is a villain, old acquaintances can also kill, how dare I not be polite?

古文：李密总管李育德以武陟来降，拜陟州刺史。
现代文：李密的总管李育德以武陟来降唐，拜陟州刺史。
English: Li Yude, the head of Li Mi, used martial arts to bring down Tang, and Baizhou to make history.

古文：育德，谔之孙也。
现代文：李育德是李谔的孙子。
English: Li Yude is the grandson of Li Yao.

古文：其余将佐刘德威、贾闰甫、高季辅等，或以城邑，或帅众，相继来降。
现代文：李密手下其他的将领刘德威、贾闰甫、高季辅等人，或者以城镇，或者率领部下，相继前来降唐。
English: Other generals under Li Mi, such as Liu Dewei, Jia Liufu and Gao Jifu, came to Tang successively, either with towns or leading their subordinates.

古文：初，北海贼帅綦公顺帅其徒三万攻郡城，已克其外郭，进攻子城；城中食尽，公顺自谓克在旦夕，不为备。
现代文：当初，北海地方的贼帅綦公顺率领他的三万人进攻郡城，已经攻陷郡城的外郭，进而攻击子城；城中粮食吃光了，綦公顺自认为很快就能攻陷，不设防备。
English: At first, the North Sea region's thieving general, Nie Gongshun, led his 30,000 men to attack the county seat. They had already captured the outskirts of the county seat, and then attacked the sub-city. The grain in the city was exhausted, and Nie Gongshun thought that he would soon be able to capture it, without setting up defenses.

古文：明经刘兰成纠合城中骁健百余人袭击之，城中见兵继之，公顺大败，弃营走，郡城获全。
现代文：中过明经科的刘兰成集合了一百多位城里的骁健袭击綦公顺，城中现有的士兵跟上他们一同进攻，公顺大败，放弃了营地逃走，郡城得以保全。
English: Liu Lancheng, a student of Chinese classics, gathered more than a hundred soldiers from the city to attack Gongshun. The soldiers in the city followed them and attacked Gongshun together. Gongshun was defeated, abandoned the camp and fled, and the county seat was preserved.

古文：于是郡官及望族分城中民为六军，各将之，兰成亦将一军。
现代文：于是，郡里的长官及大族把城里的百姓分为六个军，各自分别统领，刘兰成领一军。
English: As a result, the prefect of the county and the clan divided the people of the city into six armies, each led separately, and Liu Lan became the leader of one army.

古文：有宋书佐者，离间诸军曰： 兰成得众心，必为诸人不利，不如杀之。 
现代文：有一位宋书佐，离间各军，说道： 兰成得人心，必然不利于各位，不如杀了他。 
English: An aide to Song Shuzo, who had alienated the troops, said, "Lancheng's winning the hearts of the people is bound to be detrimental to you all. It would be better to kill him."

古文：众不忍杀，但夺其兵以授宋书佐。
现代文：大家不忍杀刘兰成，只夺了他的兵改交宋书佐统领。
English: They couldn't bear to kill Liu Lancheng, and only took his soldiers to turn them over to the general Song Shuza.

古文：兰成恐终及祸，亡奔公顺。公顺军中喜噪，欲奉以为主，固辞，乃以为长史，军事咸听焉。
现代文：刘兰成恐怕最终逃不脱祸事，逃跑投奔了綦公顺；綦公顺的部队高兴地喧哗，想拥载他为首领，刘兰成坚决推辞，于是以他为长史，军队事情都听从刘兰成的。
English: Liu Lancheng was afraid that he would not be able to escape the calamity in the end, and he ran away to Shao Gongshun; Shao Gongshun's troops shouted with joy and wanted to carry him as their leader, but Liu Lancheng firmly refused, so he took him as his long-term successor, and obeyed Liu Lancheng in military affairs.

古文：居五十余日，兰成简军中骁健者百五十人，往抄北海。
现代文：过了五十多天，刘兰成从军队中挑选了一百五十人，去北海抢掠。
English: After more than fifty days, Liu Lancheng selected one hundred and fifty people from the army to go to the North Sea to loot.

古文：距城四十里，留十人，使多芟草，分为百余积；二十里，又留二十人，各执大旗；五六里，又留三十人，伏险要；兰成自将十人，夜，距城一里许潜伏；余八十人分置便处，约闻鼓声即抄取人畜亟去，仍一时焚积草。
现代文：离城四十里，留下十人，命他们多割草，分成一百多堆；离城二十里，又留下二十人，让他们分别扛着大旗；离城五六里，又留下三十人，埋伏在险要之处；刘兰成自己带领十个人，半夜悄悄地埋伏在离城一里多的地方；其余八十人分别安置在方便的地方，约定听到鼓声立即抢夺人畜，然后马上离开，并同时点燃草堆。
English: Forty miles away from the city, he left ten people and ordered them to cut more grass and divide it into more than a hundred piles; twenty miles away from the city, he left another twenty people and let them carry the flag separately; five or six miles away from the city, he left another thirty people and ambushed them in a critical place; Liu Lancheng himself led ten people and quietly ambushed them in the middle of the night in a place more than a mile away from the city; the remaining eighty people were placed separately in a convenient place, and agreed to immediately snatch people and animals when they heard the drums, and then immediately leave, and at the same time ignite the grass pile.

古文：明晨，城中远望无烟尘，皆出樵牧。
现代文：第二天清晨，城中看远处没有显示战斗的烟火尘土，都出城砍柴放牧。
English: In the morning of the next day, there was no sign of the smoke and dust of the battle in the distance, and everyone went out of the city to chop wood and graze.

古文：日向中，兰成以十人直抵城门，城上钲鼓乱发；伏兵四出，抄掠杂畜千余头及樵牧者而去。
现代文：接近中午，刘兰成带十人一直抵达城门，城上钲鼓乱敲，刘兰成的伏兵四处出击，抢夺了各种牲畜一千多头，以及砍柴放牧的人然后撤走。
English: Close to noon, Liu Lancheng and his ten men arrived at the city gate. The gongs and drums were beating wildly on the city. Liu Lancheng's ambush soldiers attacked everywhere, robbed more than a thousand heads of various livestock, as well as people cutting firewood and grazing, and then withdrew.

古文：兰成度抄者已远，徐步而还。
现代文：刘兰成估计抄掠的人已经走远，慢慢地走了回去。
English: Liu Lancheng estimated that the looters had gone far away and slowly walked back.

古文：城中虽出兵，恐有伏兵，不敢急追；又见前有旌旗、烟火，遂不敢进而还。
现代文：城里虽然出兵，但是怕有伏兵，不敢急追；又看到前方有旌旗、烟火，于是不敢前进，退了回去。
English: Although soldiers were dispatched in the city, they were afraid of an ambush and did not dare to chase after the enemy; they also saw flags and fireworks ahead, so they did not dare to advance and retreated.

古文：既而城中知兰成前者众少，悔不穷追。
现代文：不久城里知道上次刘兰成带的人很少，后悔没有追下去。
English: Soon, few people in the city knew that Liu Lan had won the belt last time, and they regretted not following up.

古文：居月余，兰成谋取郡城，更以二十人直抵城门。
现代文：过了一个多月，刘兰成又谋划攻取北海郡城，改为带二十人直接抵达城门。
English: After more than a month, Liu Lancheng again planned to attack Beihai County, but instead he took twenty people directly to the city gate.

古文：城中人竞出逐之，行未十里，公顺将大军总至。
现代文：城中的人争相出城追逐，走了没有十里，綦公顺率领大军忽然出现。
English: The people in the city scrambled to leave the city in pursuit. After walking less than ten miles, Yu Gongshun suddenly appeared leading a large army.

古文：郡兵奔驰还城，公顺进兵围之，兰成一言招谕，城中人争出降。
现代文：郡里的军队奔驰回城，綦公顺进军包围了郡城；刘兰成晓谕城里人，说一句话，城里的人就争相出城投降。
English: The troops from the county rushed back to the city, and Zhai Gongshun marched in and encircled the county seat. Liu Lancheng told the people in the city that if they said one word, the people in the city would rush out of the city to surrender.

古文：兰成抚存老幼，礼遇郡官，见宋书佐，亦礼之如旧，仍资送出境，内外安堵。
现代文：刘兰成安抚老人儿童，对郡里的官员很尊重，见到宋书佐，还象过去一样有礼貌，于是给他钱，送他离境，城内外没有受骚扰。
English: Liu Lancheng pacified the elderly and children, respected the officials in the county, and when he saw Song Shuzo, he was polite as in the past, so he gave him money and sent him out of the country. He was not harassed in and out of the city.

古文：时海陵贼帅臧君相闻公顺据北海，帅其众五万来争之；公顺众少，闻之大惧。
现代文：当时海陵帅臧君相听说綦公顺占领了北海，率领他的五万人前来争夺郡城；綦公顺的人少，闻讯非常恐慌。
English: At that time, the commander-in-chief of the Imperial General Headquarters heard that Gongshun had occupied the North Sea, and led his 50,000 men to fight for the county seat. Gongshun's men were few, and the news was very frightening.

古文：兰成为公顺画策曰： 君相今去此尚远，必不为备，请将军倍道袭击其营。 
现代文：刘兰成为公顺出谋划策： 君相现在离这里还远，肯定不加防备，请将军您急速行军袭击他的军营。 
English: Liu Lan became Gongshun's strategist: Your Majesty is still far away from here, certainly not taking precautions, please general, you should quickly march to attack his military camp.

古文：公顺从之，自将骁勇五千人，赍熟食，倍道袭之。
现代文：綦公顺听从了他的建议，亲自带领五千骁用，携带干粮，急速行军进攻臧君相。
English: Zhai Gongshun followed his advice, personally led five thousand mu, carried dry grain, and marched rapidly to attack Zhai Junxiang.

古文：将至，兰成与敢死士二十人前行，距君相营五十里，见其抄者负担向营，兰成亦与其徒负担蔬米、烧器，诈为抄者，择空而行听察，得其号及主将姓名；至暮，与贼比肩而入，负担巡营，知其虚实，得其更号。
现代文：快要到时，刘兰成和二十名敢死兵士先行，距离臧君相营地五十里，见到君相手下出外掠夺的人肩挑背扛地向营地走去，刘兰成和他的手下也背着蔬菜粮食、炊具冒充抢夺的人，乘机进行侦察，了解了对方的军号以及主将的姓名。傍晚，与对方并肩进入营地，背着东西走遍了营地，了解到敌营的虚实以及夜里值更守卫的暗号。
English: When it was almost time, Liu Lancheng and twenty soldiers who dared to die went ahead, fifty miles away from the camp of Zou Junxiang. The people who saw the enemy go out to plunder went shoulder to shoulder to the camp. Liu Lancheng and his men also carried vegetables, grain and cooking utensils on their backs, pretending to be robbers. They took the opportunity to conduct reconnaissance and learned the other side's military number and the name of the commander. In the evening, they entered the camp side by side with the other side, walked around the camp with their things on their backs, and learned the truth of the enemy camp and the code worth guarding at night

古文：乃于空地燃火营食，至三鼓，忽于主将幕前交刀乱下，杀百余人，贼众惊扰；公顺兵亦至，急攻之，君相仅以身免，俘斩数千，收其资粮甲仗以还。由是公顺党众大盛。
现代文：于是在空地点火作饭，至三更时，忽然在主将帐幕前一起拔刀乱砍，杀一百多人，对方受惊扰，綦公顺的部队也到达，急攻敌军，臧君相只身逃脱。綦公顺等俘虏并杀死了几千人，缴获臧君相的物资粮食和武器后回师，綦公顺的人马因此大大地强盛起来。
English: So they made a fire in an empty place to cook, and when it was late, they suddenly drew their swords and slashed together in front of the main tent, killing more than a hundred people. The other side was alarmed, and Gongshun's troops also arrived and attacked the enemy army. Gongshun and others captured and killed several thousand people, seized Gongshun's supplies, grain and weapons, and then returned to the division. Gongshun's men and horses were greatly strengthened as a result.

古文：及李密据洛口，公顺以众附之，密败，亦来降。
现代文：当李密占据洛口，綦公顺带部下归附了李密；李密失败后，也来投降了唐。
English: When Li Mi occupied Lokou, Yan Gong and his subordinates attached Li Mi; after Li Mi's defeat, he also surrendered to Tang.

古文：隋末群盗起，冠军司兵李袭誉说西京留守阴世师遣兵据永丰仓，发粟以赈穷乏，出库物赏战士，移檄郡县，同心讨贼；世师不能用。
现代文：隋末，各路豪强纷纷起兵，冠军司兵李袭誉劝说西京留守阴世师派兵占据永丰仓，发放粮食救济贫穷的人，拿出库房里的物品赏给战士，通告郡县，同心讨贼。阴世师没有采用他的建议。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, all the great and powerful raised an army one after another. The champion soldier Li Xiangyong persuaded the West Beijing left-behind Yin Shishi division to send troops to occupy Yongfeng Cang, distribute grain relief to the poor, take out the goods in the warehouse to reward the soldiers, notify the counties, and solicit the thieves. The Yin Shishi did not adopt his suggestion.

古文：乃求募兵山南，世师许之。
现代文：于是李袭誉请求去山南召募士兵，阴世师答应了他。
English: As a result, Li Xi Rong requested to go to Shannan to recruit soldiers, and the underworld master agreed.

古文：上克长安，自汉中召还，为太府少卿；乙未，附袭誉籍于宗正。
现代文：唐高祖攻陷长安，从汉中召李袭誉回长安，任命他为太府少卿；乙未，在宗正寺把李袭誉编入天子宗族的名册。
English: Tang Gaozu invaded and conquered Chang'an, and summoned Li Haoyu from the Han Dynasty to return to Chang'an, and appointed him as the Taifu Shaoqing; Yi Wei compiled Li Haoyu into the roster of Tianzi clan at Sozheng Temple.

古文：袭誉，袭志之弟也。
现代文：李袭誉是李袭志的弟弟。
English: Li Xi Rong is the younger brother of Li Xi Zhi Rong.

古文：丙申，硃粲寇淅州，遣太常卿郑元璹帅步骑一万击之。
现代文：丙申，朱粲侵犯淅州，唐派太常卿郑元率领一万步兵、骑兵攻打朱粲。
English: Bishen, Zhu Xi invaded Bozhou, and the Tang faction leader Zheng Yuan led ten thousand infantry and cavalry to attack Zhu Xi.

古文：是月，纳言窦抗罢为左武候大将军。
现代文：这个月，唐纳言窦抗降为左武候大将军。
English: This month, Tang Nagon Dou was promoted to General of the Left Army.

古文：十一月，乙巳，凉王李轨即皇帝位，改元安乐。
现代文：十一月，乙巳，凉王李轨登皇帝位，改年号安乐。
English: In November, at the stroke of midnight, Li Rail, the King of Cool, ascended to the throne, and the new year was a happy one.

古文：戊申，王轨以滑州来降。
现代文：戊申，王轨以滑州前来降唐。
English: Boshin, Wang Liao came to Slanting to reduce Tang.

古文：薛仁果之为太子也，与诸将多有隙；及即位，众心猜惧。
现代文：薛仁果作太子时，和大多数的将领有矛盾；他当皇帝后，众人心里疑忌不安。
English: When Xue Rengguo was crown prince, he had conflicts with most generals; after he became emperor, everyone was suspicious and uneasy.

古文：郝瑗哭举得疾，遂不起，由是国势浸弱。
现代文：薛举去世，郝瑗伤心过度得了病，于是不治而死，王国的势力也从此逐渐衰落。
English: Xue Jiu passed away, and his grief-stricken heart was overwhelmed by illness, and he died of an incurable disease. From then on, the power of the kingdom gradually declined.

古文：秦王世民至高墌，仁果使宗罗睺将兵拒之；罗侯数挑战，世民坚壁不出。
现代文：秦王李世民到高，薛仁果派宗罗领兵抵御；宗罗几次挑战，李世民坚守营垒不出战。
English: When Qin King Li Shimin was in high school, Xue Rengo sent Zongluo to lead the army to resist; Zongluo challenged him several times, but Li Shimin held fast to the camp and did not fight.

古文：诸将咸请战，世民曰： 我军新败，士气沮丧，贼恃胜而骄，有轻我心，宜闭垒以待之。
现代文：诸位将领都请战，世民说： 我军才打了败仗，士气沮丧，对方仗着得胜而骄傲，有轻视我们的意思，我们应当紧闭营门耐心等待。
English: All the generals are asking for war, and the people of the world are saying: Our army has just lost the battle, morale is depressed, the other side is proud of its victory and wants to despise us, we should close the camp door and wait patiently.

古文：彼骄我奋，可一战而克也。 
现代文：他们骄傲我们奋勇，可以一仗打败他们。 
English: They are proud that we are brave and can defeat them in a single battle.

古文：乃令军中曰： 敢言战者斩！ 
现代文：于是命令全军： 有敢请战的，斩首！ 
English: So he ordered the whole army: If you dare to go to war, behead yourself!

古文：相持六十余日，仁果粮尽，其将梁胡郎等帅所部来降。
现代文：双方相持六十多天，薛仁果的军队粮食吃完了，将领粱胡郎等人率领各自的队伍前来投降。
English: The two sides held each other for more than sixty days. When Xue Rengguo's army ran out of food, General Gong Hulang and others led their respective teams to surrender.

古文：世民知仁果将士离心，命行军总管梁实营于浅水原以诱之。
现代文：李世民了解到薛仁果手下的将领士卒有离异之心，命令行军总管梁实在浅水原扎营引诱薛仁果部下。
English: Li Shimin learned that the generals and soldiers under Xue Rengguo had a spirit of dissent, and ordered the commander-in-chief of the march, Liang Cheng, to set up camp on the shallow water to lure Xue Rengguo's subordinates.

古文：罗侯大喜，尽锐攻之，梁实守险不出；营中无水，人马不饮者数日。
现代文：宗罗知道后非常高兴，出动全部精锐攻梁实，梁实守住险要不出战。营地中没有水源，好几天人马没有水喝。
English: Zongluo was very happy when he found out. He sent out all the elite to attack Liangshi. Liangshi had to stay in the camp and not fight. There was no water source in the camp, and people had no water to drink for several days.

古文：罗侯攻之甚急；世民度贼已疲，谓诸将曰： 可以战矣！ 
现代文：宗罗的攻击很猛烈；李世民估计对方已经疲劳，对诸位将领说： 可以打了！ 
English: Zongluo's attack was fierce; Li Shimin estimated that the other side was tired and said to the generals: "Let's fight!"

古文：迟明，使右武候大将军宠玉陈于浅水原。
现代文：快到天亮，李世民让右武候大将军庞玉在浅水原列阵。
English: It was almost dawn when Li Shimin ordered General Pang Yu to form a line in the shallow water.

古文：罗侯并兵击之，玉战，几不能支，世民引大军自原北出其不意，罗侯引兵还战。
现代文：宗罗合兵攻庞玉，庞玉作战，几乎不能坚持了，李世民带领大军出其不意从浅水原北方出现，宗罗带军迎战。
English: Zongluo joined forces to attack Pangyu, Pangyu fought, and could hardly hold out. Li Shimin led a large army to unexpectedly appear from the northern part of the shallow water plain, and Zongluo led the army to fight.

古文：世民帅骁骑数十先陷陈，唐兵表里奋击，呼声动地。罗侯士卒大溃，斩首数千级。
现代文：世民率领几十名骁骑率先冲入敌阵，唐军内外奋力搏斗，呼声动地，宗罗的部队大败，唐军杀了几千人。
English: The people of the world led by dozens of horsemen took the lead in rushing into the enemy lines. The Tang army fought hard both inside and outside, and the cries were moving. Zongluo's troops were defeated, and the Tang army killed several thousand people.

古文：世民帅二千余骑追之，窦轨叩马苦谏曰： 仁果犹据坚城，虽破罗侯，未可轻进，请且按兵以观之。 
现代文：世民率领二千多骑兵追击宗罗，窦轨拉住马苦苦地劝道： 薛仁果还占据着坚固的城池，我们虽然打败了宗罗，但不能轻易冒进，我请求暂且按兵不动，观察一下薛仁果的动静。 
English: The world's people led more than two thousand cavalrymen to pursue Zonglu, and Dou Zhe pulled the horse and painstakingly advised: Xue Rengguo still occupies a solid castle. Although we have defeated Zongluo, we cannot easily rush in. I request that you hold your position for the time being and observe Xue Rengguo's movements.

古文：世民曰 吾虑之久矣，破竹之势，不可失也，舅勿复言！ 
现代文：李世民说： 我考虑这个问题很久了，现在我军取胜势如破竹，机不可失，舅舅不要再说了！ 
English: Li Shimin said, "I have been thinking about this issue for a long time. Now our army's victory is imminent. We must not lose this opportunity. Uncle, stop talking!"

古文：遂进。
现代文：于是进军。
English: So they marched in.

古文：仁果陈于城下，世民据泾水临之，仁果骁将浑幹等数人临陈来降。
现代文：薛仁果在城下列阵，李世民依泾河面对薛仁果营地，薛仁果手下的骁将浑等人到唐军阵前投降。
English: Xue Rengguo was in the city's lower ranks, Li Shimin was facing Xue Rengguo's camp by the Li River, and Xue Rengguo's subordinates, such as Xue Zhaoguang and others, surrendered to the Tang army.

古文：仁果惧，引兵入城拒守。
现代文：薛仁果怕了，带兵进城拒守。
English: Xue Ren was afraid and led his troops into the city to defend it.

古文：日向暮，大军继至，遂围之。
现代文：天快黑时，唐大军相继到达，于是包围了城池。
English: When it was getting dark, Tang's army arrived one after another and surrounded the city.

古文：夜半，守城者争自投下。
现代文：半夜，守城的人纷纷下城投降。
English: In the middle of the night, the defenders of the city went down to the city to surrender.

古文：仁果计穷，己酉，出降；得其精兵万馀人，男女五万口。
现代文：薛仁果无计可施，己酉，出城投降；唐得薛仁果的一万多名精兵，五万名男女。
English: There was nothing Xue Renga could do, so he gave up and left the city to surrender; Tang got Xue Renga's more than ten thousand elite soldiers, fifty thousand men and women.

古文：诸将皆贺，因问曰： 大王一战而胜，遽舍步兵，又无攻具，轻骑直造城下，众皆以为不克，而卒取之，何也？ 
现代文：诸位将领都来祝贺，顺便问： 大王一仗就取得了胜利，骤然舍弃步兵，又没有攻城的用具，轻骑直到城下，众人都认为无法攻克城池，却很快就取胜，是什么原因呢？ 
English: All the generals came to congratulate him. By the way, they asked: What was the reason for the great king's victory in a single battle, his sudden abandonment of the infantry, his lack of equipment for attacking the city, and his light cavalry until he reached the foot of the city? Everyone thought that he would not be able to conquer the city, but he quickly won.

古文：世民曰： 罗侯所将皆陇外之人，将骁卒悍；吾特出其不意而破之，斩获不多。
现代文：李世民说： 宗罗的部下都是陇山之西的人，将领骁勇，士卒剽悍；我只是出其不意打败了他，杀伤不多。
English: Li Shimin said, "Zongluo's subordinates are all from the west of Lushan Mountain. The generals are brave and the soldiers are tough. I only defeated him by surprise and did not suffer many casualties.

古文：若缓之，则皆入城，仁果抚而用之，未易克也；急之，则散归陇外。折墌虚弱，仁果破胆，不暇为谋，此吾所以克也。 
现代文：如果迟迟不追击，则都会返回城内，薛仁果加以抚慰再派他们作战，就不容易战胜了；如果迅速追击，则将跑散回到陇山之西，折城就虚弱，薛仁果吓破了胆，没有时间谋划，这就是我取胜的原因。 
English: If they did not pursue, they would all return to the city. If Xue Rengo consoled them and sent them to fight, it would not be easy to defeat them. If they pursued quickly, they would scatter back to the west of Lushan Mountain, and the city would be weak. Xue Rengo was scared and had no time to plan, which is why I won.

古文：众皆悦服。
现代文：众人都心悦诚服。
English: Everyone was delighted and impressed.

古文：世民所得降卒，悉使仁果兄弟及宗罗侯、翟长孙等将之，与之射猎，无所疑间。贼畏威衔恩，皆愿效死。
现代文：李世民把投降的士兵全都交给薛仁果兄弟以及宗罗、翟长孙等人统领，和他们一起打猎，丝毫不加怀疑戒备，这些人畏惧李世民的威严，又感受李世民的恩德，都愿以死效劳。
English: Li Shimin put all the surrendered soldiers under the command of Xue Rengo's brothers, Zong Luo, Zou Changsun, and others, and hunted with them, without the slightest doubt of alertness. These people feared Li Shimin's majesty and felt Li Shimin's grace, and were willing to serve with death.

古文：世民闻褚亮名，求访，获之，礼遇甚厚，引为王府文学。
现代文：李世民听说褚亮的名气，访求并找到了褚亮，对他很尊重，很优厚，让他作秦王府的文学。
English: Li Shimin heard of the fame of Zhai Liang, visited and found Zhai Liang, respected him very much, very generous, and let him make the literature of the Qin Wangfu.

古文：上遣使谓世民曰： 薛举父子多杀我士卒，必尽诛其党以谢冤魂。 
现代文：唐高祖派遣使者对李世民说： 薛举父子杀了我们很多士卒，务必杀光他们的同党以告慰死去的冤魂。 
English: Tang Gaozhu sent an envoy to Li Shimin saying: Xue You and his sons have killed many of our soldiers, we must kill all of their fellow party members to console the souls of the dead.

古文：李密谏曰： 薛举虐杀不辜，此其所以亡也，陛下何怨焉？
现代文：李密进谏说： 薛举残暴地杀害无辜者，这正是他灭亡的原因，陛下又有什么可怨恨的呢？
English: Li Mi Jintao said, "Xue Jiu brutally killed innocent people, which is precisely the reason for his demise. What does Your Majesty have to be angry about?

古文：怀服之民，不可不抚。 
现代文：已心悦诚服的百姓，不能不加安抚！ 
English: The people, who have been sincerely convinced, cannot be appeased!

古文：乃命戮其谋首，余皆赦之。
现代文：于是下令杀掉主要谋划者，其余的人都给予赦免。
English: So he ordered the main planner to be killed, and the rest were pardoned.

古文：上使李密迎秦王世民于豳州，密自恃智略功名，见上犹有傲色；及见世民，不觉惊服，私谓殷开山曰： 真英主也！不如是，何以定祸乱乎！ 
现代文：高祖派李密到豳州迎接秦王李世民，李密自己仗着智略功名，见皇上时还有傲慢之意，待见了李世民，不由得惊服，私下对殷开山说： 这真是英主，不是这样的人，又怎么能平定祸乱呢？ 
English: Gao Zu sent Li Mi to Luzhou to meet Li Shimin, the king of Qin. Li Mi, relying on his own wisdom and achievements, was still arrogant when he saw the emperor. When he saw Li Shimin, he couldn't help but be surprised and said to Yin Kaishan in private: This is really the British lord, not such a person, and how can we quell the calamity?

古文：诏以员外散骑常侍姜謩为秦州刺史，謩抚以恩信，盗贼悉归首，士民安之。
现代文：下诏任命员外散骑常侍姜为秦州刺史，姜以施恩与信义怀柔地方，盗贼全都自首，百姓感到安定。
English: Under the edict, the appointment of non-commissioned officers to ride around and serve Jiang is the history of Qinzhou. In places where Jiang has shown grace and sincerity, the thieves have all surrendered, and the people feel stable.

古文：徐世勣据李密旧境，未有所属。
现代文：徐世占据了原属李密的地盘，没有归附任何人。
English: Xu occupied the original territory of Li Mi and did not attach it to anyone.

古文：魏征随密至长安，乃自请安集山东，上以为秘书丞，乘传至黎阳，遗徐世勣书，劝之早降。
现代文：魏徵随李密到长安，于是自己请求招抚潼关以东地区，高祖以他为秘书丞，乘驿站的传车到黎阳，致书徐世，劝他尽快投降唐。
English: Wei Zheng followed Li Mi to Chang'an, whereupon he requested to be courted in the area east of Shaoguan. Gao Zu took him as his secretary and took a train from Shaoguan Station to Liyang to write to Xu Shih, urging him to surrender to Tang as soon as possible.

古文：世勣遂决计西向，谓长史阳翟郭孝恪曰： 此众土地，皆魏公有也；吾若上表献之，是利主之败，自为功以邀富贵也，吾实耻之。
现代文：徐世于是决定向西投唐，对长史阳翟人郭孝恪说： 这里的百姓和土地，都是魏公的，我如果上表献百姓土地，是利用主人的失败，当作自己的功劳求得富贵，我深以为耻。
English: Xu Shi then decided to go west to Tang, and said to Guo Xiaoqi, a member of the Long Shi Yang faction: "The people and land here are all Wei Gong. If I offer the people's land, it is to take advantage of the owner's failure and seek wealth as my own merit. I am deeply ashamed.

古文：今宜籍郡县户口士马之数以启魏公，使自献之。 
现代文：现在应当登记郡县的户口、士兵及马匹的数目，上报魏公，由他自己献上。 
English: Now it is time to register the number of households, soldiers and horses in the county, report it to Wei Gong, and present it to him.

古文：乃遣孝恪诣长安，又运粮以饷淮安王神通。
现代文：于是派遣郭孝恪到长安，又运粮食供给淮安王李神通。
English: As a result, Guo Xiaoqi was sent to Chang'an, and grain was transported to supply Huai'an Wang Lishentong.

古文：上闻世勣使者至，无表，止有启与密，甚怪之。
现代文：高祖听说徐世的使者到长安，没有奉表，只有书信给李密，非常奇怪。
English: Gao Zu heard that Xu Shi's emissary to Chang'an did not have a form, only a letter to Li Mi, which was very strange.

古文：孝恪具言世勣意，上乃叹曰： 徐世勣不背德，不邀功，真纯臣也！ 
现代文：郭孝恪陈述了徐世的意思，高祖于是感叹道： 徐世不违背道德，不希求功劳，真是个好臣子呀！ 
English: Guo Xiaoqiu stated the meaning of Xu Shiyi, Gao Zu then sighed: Xu Shiyi does not violate morality, does not want to seek credit, what a good vassal!

古文：赐姓李。
现代文：赐他姓李。
English: He was given the surname Li.

古文：以孝恪为宋州刺史，使与世勣经营虎牢以东，所得州县，委之选补。
现代文：以郭孝恪为宋州刺史，让他和李世策划处理虎牢以东地区，得到的州县，委任他们选补官吏。
English: Guo Xiaoqiu was appointed as the chief historian of Song, and he and Li Shih planned to deal with the areas east of the Tiger's Lair, and assigned them to select the replacement officials.

古文：癸丑，独孤怀恩攻尧君素于蒲坂。
现代文：癸丑，独孤怀恩在蒲反攻打尧君素。
English: Ugly, lonely, and alone, Wynn is in the battle against the ugly.

古文：行军总管赵慈景尚帝女桂阳公主，为君素所擒，枭首城外，以示无降意。
现代文：行军总管赵慈景娶高祖的女儿桂阳公主为妻，被尧君素俘虏，尧君素杀了他，把头挂在城外，以表示没有投降的意思。
English: The head of the march, Zhao Cijing, married Gaozu's daughter, Princess Guiyang, and was captured by Su Junso. Su Junso killed him and hung his head outside the city to show that he did not intend to surrender.

古文：癸亥，秦王世民至长安，斩薛仁果于市，上赐常达帛三百段。
现代文：癸亥，秦王李世民到长安，在闹市杀了薛仁果，赐给常达三百段帛。
English: In the Year of the Rooster, Li Shimin, the king of Qin, went to Chang'an, killed Xue Renguo in the downtown, and gave Changda three hundred taels of silver.

古文：赠刘感平原郡公，谥忠壮。
现代文：追赠刘感平原郡公，谥号忠壮。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Liu Kan Pingyuan County, and his posthumous name was Zhong Zhuang.

古文：扑杀仵士政于殿庭。以张贵尤淫暴，腰斩之。
现代文：在宫殿庭院中击杀了仵士政。因为张贵太荒淫暴虐，腰斩了张贵。
English: In the courtyard of the palace, he killed Fuxizheng. Because Zhang Gui was too wild and violent, he beheaded Zhang Gui.

古文：上享劳将士，因谓群臣曰： 诸公共相翊戴以成帝业，若天下承平，可共保富贵。
现代文：高祖宴请慰劳将士，乘机对群臣说： 各位共同的辅助拥戴使我成就了帝王之业，假如天下承平，可以共同保守富贵。
English: Gao Zu feasted and consoled the laborers, and took the opportunity to say to the courtiers: Your common support has enabled me to achieve the emperor's cause. If the world is peaceful, we can jointly preserve and enrich.

古文：使王世充得志，公等岂有种乎！
现代文：让王世充得志，各位还能有性命身家吗？
English: Let Wang Shifu be filled with ambition, can you still have a life and a home?

古文：如薛仁果君臣，岂可不以为前鉴也！ 
现代文：像薛仁果君臣，怎么能不作为前车之鉴呢？ 
English: Like Xue Renga, how can we not follow his example?

古文：己巳，以刘文静为户部尚书，领陕东道行台左仆射，复殷开山爵位。
现代文：己巳，以刘文静为户部尚书，领陕东道行台左仆射；恢复殷开山的爵位。
English: Now, with Liu Wenzhing as the head of the household, Shang Shu led the Shaanxi hosts to march to the left, and restored the peerage of Yin Kaishan.

古文：李密骄贵日久，又自负归国之功，朝廷待之不副本望，郁郁不乐。
现代文：李密长期地位崇高又骄纵，自己又仗着归附国家的功劳，朝廷给他的待遇与他的愿望不符，因此郁郁不乐。
English: Li Mi's long-term status was lofty and arrogant, and he relied on the credit of the state. The treatment given to him by the court did not match his wishes, so he was depressed.

古文：尝遇大朝会，密为光禄卿，当进食，深以为耻；退，以告左武卫大将军王伯当。
现代文：曾经适逢大朝会，李密作为光禄卿应当进奉食物，他深深以此为耻，退朝后，告诉了左武卫大将军王伯当。
English: There was a time when Li Mi, as Guangluqing, was supposed to donate food to the Great Imperial Court Banquet. He was deeply ashamed of this, and after retiring from the imperial court, he told the General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards, Wang Botang.

古文：伯当心亦怏怏，因谓密曰： 天下事在公度内耳。
现代文：王伯当心里也郁郁不乐，因此对李密说： 天下的事情都在您的掌握中。
English: Wang Bodang was also depressed in his heart, so he said to Li Mi: Everything in the world is under your control.

古文：今东海公在黎阳，襄阳公在罗口，河南兵马，屈指可计，岂得久如此也！ 
现代文：现在东海公徐世在黎阳，襄阳公在罗口，黄河以南的兵马屈指可数，怎么能长期这样下去？ 
English: Now the East China Sea Lord Xu Shih is in Liyang, the Lord of Xiangyang is in Luokou, and there are only a handful of soldiers and horses south of the Yellow River. How can this go on for a long time?

古文：密大喜，乃献策于上曰： 臣虚蒙荣宠，安坐京师，曾无报效；山东之众皆臣故时麾下，请往收而抚之。凭藉国威，取王世充如拾地芥耳！ 
现代文：李密非常高兴，于是向高祖献策： 臣空受荣宠，安坐京师，不曾报效国家；山东之众都是臣过去的部下，请让臣前往山东收抚，凭借国家的威力，取王世充不过象拾地下的草介一样！ 
English: Li Mi was very happy, so he offered his advice to Gao Zu: the vassal was favored with honor, sat quietly as a Beijing teacher, and never served the country; the people of Shandong were all the vassal's former subordinates, please let the vassal go to Shandong to collect the favor, with the power of the country, it is not enough to take Wang Shijian, just like picking up the underground herbs!

古文：上闻密故将士多不附世充，亦欲遣密往收之。群臣多谏曰： 李密狡猾好反，今遣之，如投鱼于泉，放虎于山，必不返矣！ 
现代文：高祖听说李密的旧将士大多不服王世充，也准备派遣他前往收服，群臣大多劝谏说： 李密狡猾好反，现在派他去山东，犹如放鱼于泉，放虎归山，肯定不会回来了！ 
English: Gaozu heard that most of Li Mi's old soldiers were not satisfied with Wang Shicheng, and they were also ready to send him to collect the clothes. Most of the ministers persuaded him, saying: Li Mi is cunning and rebellious, and now sending him to Shandong is like releasing a fish into a spring, or releasing a tiger into the mountains. He will definitely not come back!

古文：上曰： 帝王自有天命，非小子所能取。
现代文：高祖说： 帝王自有天命，不是小子所能取得的。
English: Gaozu said, "The emperor has his own destiny, and it is not something that a child can achieve.

古文：借使叛去，如以蒿箭射蒿中耳！
现代文：假如他叛离，就象用蒿子作的箭射到蒿子里，不值得可惜！
English: If he were to defect, it would be like shooting a dart into a dice. It would be a pity!

古文：今使二贼交斗，吾可以坐收其弊。 
现代文：现在让二贼互相争斗，我们可以坐收渔利。 
English: Now let the two thieves fight each other, we can reap the benefits.

古文：辛未，遣密诣山东，收其馀众之未下者。
现代文：辛未，派李密往崤山以东，收服他尚未归附的余部。
English: Xinwei sent Li Mi to the east of Lushan Mountain to collect the rest of the land he had not yet annexed.

古文：密请与贾闰甫偕行，上许之，命密及闰甫同升御榻，赐食，传饮卮酒曰： 吾三人同饮是酒，以明同心；善建功名，以副朕意。丈夫一言许人，千金不易。
现代文：李密请求和贾闰甫一同去，皇上答应了他的请求，命李密和贾闰甫一起登上御榻，赐给他们食品，传着喝了卮中的酒说： 我们三人同饮这酒用来表明同心，二位好好建立功勋，以称朕的心意，大丈夫答应人一句话，千金也不能改变。
English: Li Mi asked to go with Jia Liufu, and the emperor agreed to his request. He ordered Li Mi and Jia Liufu to board the imperial couch together, gave them food, and passed on the wine they had drunk, saying, "The three of us drank this wine together to show that we are of the same mind. The two of us should do a good job of building up merit to praise my will. It's okay to promise someone a word. A thousand dollars can't change that."

古文：有人确执不欲弟行，朕推赤心于弟，非他人所能间也。 
现代文：有人确实坚持不愿让兄弟去，朕以真心对兄弟，不是别人能够离间的。 
English: Some people really insist that they do not want to let their brothers go. I sincerely believe that brothers cannot be separated by others.

古文：密、闰甫再拜受命。
现代文：李密、贾闰甫再三拜谢受命。
English: Li Mi and Jia Liufu were ordered to bow repeatedly.

古文：上又以王伯当为密副而遣之。
现代文：高祖又以王伯当为李密的副手派他去山东。
English: Gao Zu also sent Wang Bodang to Shandong as Li Mi's deputy.

古文：有大鸟五集于乐寿，群鸟数万从之，经日乃去。
现代文：有五只大鸟落在乐寿，数万只鸟随着大鸟，经过一天才离开。
English: Five large birds landed in Leshou. Tens of thousands of birds followed the large birds and left after one day.

古文：窦建德以为己瑞，改元五凤。
现代文：窦建德以为是自己的祥瑞之兆，改年号五凤。
English: Dou Jiande thought it was a sign of his auspiciousness, and changed his name to Wu Feng.

古文：宗城人有得玄圭献于建德者，宋正本及景城丞会稽孔德绍皆曰： 此天所以赐大禹也，请改国号曰夏。 
现代文：宗城有人得到玄圭献给窦建德，宋正本和景城丞会稽人孔德绍都说： 这是上天赐给大禹的，请将国号改为夏。 
English: Someone in Zongcheng got a copy of Geng Gui dedicated to Dou Jiande. Song Zhengben and Kong Desao, the inspector of the Jingcheng Ju Association, both said: This was given to Dayu by God. Please change the country name to Xia.

古文：建德从之，以正本为纳言，德绍为内史侍郎。
现代文：窦建德听从了他们的请求。以宋正本为纳言，孔德绍为内史侍郎。
English: Dou Jiande listened to their request, with Song Zhengben as his advisor and Kong Deshao as his secretary.

古文：初，王须拔掠幽州，中流矢死，其将魏刀儿代领其众，据深泽，掠冀、定之间，众至十万，自称魏帝。
现代文：当初王须拔夺取幽州时，中流箭而死，他的部将魏刀儿代替他率领军队，占据深泽，在冀、定之间掠夺，手下有十万人，自称魏帝。
English: At first, when Wang Suba conquered Yuzhou, he died in the middle of the stream of arrows. His subordinate Wei Jia Er led the army instead of him, occupied Fuzawa, plundered between Ji and Ding, and had 100,000 people under his command. He called himself Wei Emperor.

古文：建德伪与连和，刀儿弛备，建德袭击破之，遂围深泽；其徒执刀儿降，建德斩之，尽并其众。
现代文：窦建德假意和魏刀儿联合，魏刀儿放松了戒备，建德袭击并打败了他，于是包围了深泽；魏刀儿的部下绑了他投降，窦建德斩了魏刀儿，合并了他全部队伍。
English: Dou Jiande pretended to unite with Wei Cutter, Wei Cutter relaxed his guard, Jiande attacked and defeated him, and then surrounded Fukasawa; Wei Cutter's subordinates tied him up and surrendered, Dou Jiande beheaded Wei Cutter and merged his entire team.

古文：易、定等州皆降，唯冀州刺史麹稜不下，稜婿崔履行，暹之孙也，自言有奇术，可使攻者自败，稜信之。
现代文：易、定等州都投降了窦建德，唯有冀州刺史棱未降。棱的女婿崔履行是崔暹的孙子，自称有奇妙的法术，可以让进攻的人自己失败，棱相信了他。
English: Yi, Ding and other prefectures surrendered to Dou Jiande, but only Jizhou's Jishi Ren did not surrender. Ren's son-in-law, Cui Xing, was the grandson of Cui Siem. He claimed to have a wonderful spell that could make the attacker fail, and Ren believed him.

古文：履行命守城者皆坐，毋得妄斗，曰： 贼虽登城，汝曹勿怖，吾将使贼自缚。 
现代文：崔履行命令守城的人都坐下，不得随意作战，说： 贼人就是登上了城墙，你们也不用怕，我能让贼人自己绑起来。 
English: Cui gave the order for the defenders of the city to sit down and not fight at will, saying, "Even if the thieves have climbed onto the city wall, you don't have to be afraid. I can have the thieves tie themselves up."

古文：于是为坛，夜，设章醮，然后自衣衰绖，杖竹登北楼恸哭；又令妇女升屋四向振裙。
现代文：于是搭了土坛，晚上，设符祈祷，然后自己穿着丧服，柱竹竿登上北楼恸哭；又让妇女爬上屋子四面抖动裙子。
English: So they built a dirt mound, and in the evening, they set up a prayer, and then they dressed themselves in mourning clothes, climbed up the bamboo pole to the north tower to cry; and let the women climb up the house and shake their skirts.

古文：建德攻之急，稜将战，履行固止之。
现代文：窦建德攻城很猛，棱要迎战，崔履行坚决阻止了他。
English: Dou Jiande's attack on the city was fierce, Ren wanted to fight, and Cui Sheng resolutely stopped him.

古文：俄而城陷，履行哭犹未已。
现代文：一会儿城池陷落，履行还哭个没完。
English: After a while, the castle fell, and I couldn't stop crying.

古文：建德见稜，曰： 卿忠臣也！ 
现代文：窦建德见了棱说： 你是忠臣！ 
English: Dou Jiande saw Ren and said: You are a loyal subject!

古文：厚礼之，以为内史令。
现代文：非常尊重他，以他为内史令。
English: I have a lot of respect for him, and he's my chief of staff.

古文：十二月，壬申，诏以秦王世民为太尉、使持节、陕东道大行台，其蒲州、河北诸府兵马并受节度。
现代文：十二月，壬申，唐高祖下诏以秦王李世民为太尉、使持节、陕东道大行台，蒲州及黄河以北各府的兵马都受他指挥。
English: In December, Jinshin, Tang Gaozhu issued an edict to appoint Qin King Li Shimin as the first lieutenant, the envoy, and the host of the grand march in Shaanxi, and the soldiers and horses in Puzhou and all the provinces north of the Yellow River were under his command.

古文：癸酉，西突厥曷娑那可汗自宇文化及所来降。
现代文：癸酉，西突厥曷娑那可汗从宇文化及处前来投降。
English: At the same time, West Turkistan's Shah Narakhan came from all over the world to surrender.

古文：隋将尧君素守河东，上遣吕绍宗、韦义节、独孤怀恩相继攻之，俱不下。
现代文：隋将领尧君素守卫河东，高祖先后派吕绍宗、韦义节、独孤怀恩攻打，都没有攻克。
English: The Sui generals, led by Qijun, used to guard the east of the river, but Gao Ancestor later sent Liushaozong, Wei Yi Jie, and Duolou Huai'en to attack, but none of them were defeated.

古文：时外围严急，君素为木鹅，置表于颈，具论事势，浮之于河；河阳守者得之，达于东都。皇泰主见而叹息，拜君素金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：当时，城外包围很严，攻城很急，尧君素作一只木鹅，把表章放在鹅颈中，详细叙述了形势，放入黄河；守卫河阳的人得到木鹅，送到东都，皇泰主见了叹息不已，拜君素金紫光禄大夫。
English: At that time, the encirclement outside the city was very strict, and the siege of the city was very urgent. Zou Jun used to make a wooden goose, put the badge in the neck of the goose, described the situation in detail, and put it into the Yellow River. The guards of Heyang got the wooden goose and sent it to Dongdu. Emperor Tai sighed when he saw it, and paid homage to Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：宠玉、皇甫无逸自东都来降，上悉遣诣城下，为陈利害，君素不从。又赐金券，许以不死。
现代文：庞玉、皇甫无逸从东都前来投降，高祖都派往河东城下，向尧君素讲述利害关系，君素不听，又赐君素金券，答允他不死。
English: Pang Yu and Empress Dowager Wu Yat both came from Dongdu to surrender, and Gao Zu sent both of them to the city of Hedong to explain the interests to Su Jun Su. However, Jun Su did not listen, and gave Jun Su a golden ticket, promising that he would not die.

古文：其妻又至城下，谓之曰： 隋室已亡，君何自苦！ 
现代文：君素的妻子又到城下，对他说： 隋王室已经灭亡了，君何必自己吃苦？ 
English: Kim Su's wife went to the outskirts of the city and said to him, "The Sui royal family has perished. Why do you have to suffer?

古文：君素曰： 天下名义，非妇人所知！ 
现代文：君素说： 天下名义，不是女人能了解的！ 
English: Kim So said: In the name of heaven, not a woman can understand!

古文：引弓射之，应弦而倒。
现代文：拉弓射妻子，妻子随弦响倒下。
English: He pulled a bow and shot his wife, who fell to the ground.

古文：君素亦自知不济，然志在守死，每言及国家，未尝不歔欷。
现代文：尧君素自己也知道守不住，但是志在一死，每当说到隋朝，没有不抽泣的。
English: Sui Jun himself knew that he could not keep it, but he was determined to die, and whenever he spoke of the Sui Dynasty, he could not help but sob.

古文：谓将士曰： 吾昔事主上于籓邸，大义不得不死。
现代文：对将士们说： 我过去在晋王府就侍奉主上，依大义不能不死。
English: He said to the soldiers, "I have served the Lord in the past in the palace of the king of Jin, and according to justice, I must die.

古文：必若隋祚永终，天命有属，自当断头以付诸君，听君等持取富贵。
现代文：如果隋的国统永远终结，天命另有所属，我会自己砍了自己的头交给各位，随你们拿着去取得富贵。
English: If the Sui Dynasty's national unification ends forever, and the fate of the world belongs to someone else, I will cut off my own head and give it to you, and you can take it with you to get rich.

古文：今城池甚固，仓储丰备，大事犹未可知，不可横生心也！ 
现代文：现在城池非常坚固，仓库储备很充足，天下大事还无法预料，不能另外生二心！ 
English: Now the city is very strong, the warehouse reserves are very sufficient, the world's major events cannot be predicted, we cannot have second thoughts!

古文：君素性严明，善御众，下莫敢叛。
现代文：君素性格严厉贤明，善于管理部下，部下没有敢反叛的。
English: His character was stern and wise, and he was good at managing his subordinates, who did not dare to rebel.

古文：久之，仓粟尽，人相食；又获外人，微知江都倾覆。
现代文：时间长了，仓里的粮食吃完了，就人吃人；又抓获外面的人，略微知道江都隋室灭亡。
English: As time went on, when the grain in the storehouse was finished, people began to eat each other. People from outside were also captured, and Suishu, the capital of Jiangsu Province, was about to be destroyed.

古文：丙子，君素左右薛宗、李楚客杀君素以降，传首长安。
现代文：丙子，尧君素身边的薛宗、李楚客杀了他投降唐军，把尧居素的头颅送到长安。
English: Xue Zong and Li Chu, who were close to Xing Junsu, killed him to surrender to the Tang army and sent Xing Jiusu's head to Chang'an.

古文：君素遣朝散大夫解人王行本将精兵七百在它所，闻之，赴救，不及，因捕杀君素者党与数百人，悉诛之，复乘城拒守。独孤怀恩引兵围之。
现代文：此前尧君素派朝散大夫解县人王行本带七百精兵驻扎在别的地方，王行本闻知尧君素被杀的消息后，救援已来不及，于是捉住杀尧君素的人的同党几百人，全部杀死，重新登城拒守，独孤怀恩带兵围攻。
English: Prior to this, Wang Xingpeng, a doctor from Lixian County and a member of the Xingjun Su faction, had stationed seven hundred elite soldiers with him in another place. After Wang Xingpeng heard the news that Xingjun Su had been killed, the rescue was too late, so he caught several hundred members of the same party as the person who killed Xingjun Su, killed them all, re-entered the city and refused to defend it, leaving Wai En alone to lead the soldiers in a siege.

古文：丁酉，隋襄平太守邓暠以柳城、北平二郡来降；以暠为营州总管。
现代文：丁酉，隋襄平太守邓以柳城、北平二郡前来降唐。封邓为营州总管。
English: Ding Xi, the governor of Sui and Yangpyeong, and Deng Yiliucheng, the governor of Beiping County, came to Tang Dynasty China. Deng Yiliucheng was the governor of Yingzhou.

古文：辛巳，太常卿郑元璹击硃粲于商州，破之。
现代文：辛巳，太常卿郑元在商州攻打朱粲，打败了他。
English: Soon after, Zheng Yuan, the Tai Changqing, attacked Zhu Xi in Shangzhou and defeated him.

古文：初，宇文化及遣使招罗艺，艺曰： 我，隋臣也！ 
现代文：当初，宇文化及派使节招降罗艺，罗艺说： 我是隋臣。 
English: At the beginning, Yu Culture sent envoys to recruit Luo Yi, and Luo Yi said: I am a Sui subject.

古文：斩其使者，为炀帝发丧，临三日。
现代文：杀了宇文化及的使节，为隋炀帝发丧，哭吊了三天。
English: He killed the envoys of the Chinese and Japanese, mourned for the Sui and Qian Emperors, and wept for three days.

古文：窦建德、高开道各遣使招之，艺曰： 建德、开道，皆剧贼耳。
现代文：窦建德、高开道分别派遣使节招降罗艺，罗艺说： 建德、开道，不过是大贼罢了！
English: Dou Jiande and Gao Kaido separately sent envoys to recruit Luo Yi. Luo Yi said: Jiande and Kaido are nothing but thieves!

古文：吾闻唐公已定关中，人望归之。
现代文：我听说唐公已经平定关中，人心向往归附于他。
English: I heard that Tang Gong has already conquered Guanzhong, and people's hearts yearn to be attached to him.

古文：此真吾主也，吾将从之，敢沮议者，斩！ 
现代文：这才真是我的主人，我打算归附他，有敢阻止的，斩！ 
English: This is truly my master, I intend to join him, if anyone dares to stop me, behead him!

古文：会张道源慰抚山东，艺遂奉表，与渔阳、上谷等诸郡皆来降。
现代文：恰逢张道源抚慰山东，罗艺于是奉表，和渔阳、上谷等诸郡都来投降。
English: When Zhang Daoyuan came to comfort Shandong, Luo Yi followed suit, and counties such as Yuyang and Shanggu surrendered.

古文：癸未，诏以艺为幽州总管。
现代文：癸未，下诏以罗艺为幽州总管。
English: At the same time, the next edict named Luo Yi as the general manager of Yuzhou.

古文：薛万均，世雄之子也，与弟万彻俱以勇略为艺所亲待，诏以万均为上柱国、永安郡公，万彻为车骑将军、武安县公。
现代文：薛万均是薛世雄的儿子，和弟弟薛万彻都因为机智勇敢受罗艺厚待，诏令以薛万均为上柱国、永安郡公，薛万彻为车骑将军、武安县公。
English: Xue Wanjun was the son of Xue Shixiong, and both he and his brother Xue Wancher were treated well by Luo Yi because of their wit and bravery. According to the imperial edict, Xue Wanjun was the ruler of Shangchuan Province and Yong'an County, and Xue Wancher was the general of cavalry and the ruler of Wu'an County.

古文：窦建德既克冀州，兵威益盛，帅众十万寇幽州。
现代文：窦建德攻克冀州后，声威更加壮大，又率十万人侵犯幽州。
English: After Dou Jiande conquered Jizhou, his prestige grew even stronger, and he invaded Yuzhou with a hundred thousand people.

古文：艺将逆战，万均曰： 彼众我寡，出战必败。不若使羸兵背城阻水为陈，彼必渡水击我。
现代文：罗艺准备应战，薛万均说： 敌众我寡，出战必然失败，不如用老弱残兵背对城堡临水列阵，对方必然渡水来攻击我们。
English: Luo Yiyi prepared for the challenge, and Xue Wanjun said: We are outnumbered by the enemy, and it is inevitable that we will fail in the battle. It is better to use the old and weak remnants of soldiers to line up with their backs to the castle facing the water, and the other side will inevitably cross the water to attack us.

古文：万均请以精骑百人伏于城旁，俟其半渡击之，蔑不胜矣。 
现代文：万均我请求用百名精骑兵埋伏在城边，待他们一半过河时攻击，无不取胜。 
English: I request you to ambush the city with a hundred horsemen and attack them when they are halfway across the river.

古文：艺从之。
现代文：罗艺听从了他的建议。
English: Luo Yi followed his advice.

古文：建德果引兵渡水，万均邀击，大破之。
现代文：窦建德果然领军过河，薛万均截击，大败窦建德。
English: Dou Jiande led the army across the river, and Xue Wanjun intercepted and defeated Dou Jiande.

古文：建德竟不能至其城下，乃分兵掠霍堡及雍奴等县；艺复邀击，败之。
现代文：窦建德始终无法靠近幽州城。于是分兵抢夺霍堡及雍奴等县，罗艺又截击并打败了他。
English: Dou Jiande was never able to get close to Yuzhou City. Therefore, detachments of soldiers robbed Hoburg and Yongnu counties, and Luo Yi intercepted and defeated him.

古文：凡相拒百余日，建德不能克，乃还乐寿。
现代文：相互攻战一百多天，窦建德不能攻克幽州，于是回到乐寿。
English: After fighting each other for more than 100 days, Dou Jiande was unable to conquer Yuzhou, so he returned to Leshou.

古文：艺得隋通直谒者温彦博，以为司马。
现代文：罗艺得到隋通直谒者温彦博，用他作司马。
English: Luo Yi got hold of Wen Yanbo, a direct descendant of the Sui Dynasty, and used him as his steed.

古文：艺以幽州归国，彦博赞成之；诏以彦博为幽州总管府长史，未几，征为中书侍郎。
现代文：罗艺以幽州归附唐朝，彦博赞成此事；唐下诏以温彦博为幽州总管府长史，没多久，调他为中书侍郎。
English: Luo Yi assigned Yuzhou to the Tang Dynasty, and Yan Bo agreed to this; the Tang Dynasty issued an edict naming Wen Yan Bo as the governor of Yuzhou, and he was soon transferred to the position of the secretary of the Central Committee.

古文：兄大雅，时为黄门侍郎，与彦博对居近密，时人荣之。
现代文：温彦博的兄长温大雅，当时是黄门侍郎，与彦博同为天子的亲近之臣，两人的衙门相对而居，当时的人都认为是很荣耀的事。
English: The elder brother of Yan Yanbo, Wen Daya, was a Yellow Gate chamberlain at that time, and he and Yan Yanbo were both close vassals of the Son of Heaven. The two lived opposite each other, and people at that time thought it was a very glorious thing.

古文：以西突厥曷娑那可汗为归义王。曷娑那献大珠，上曰： 珠诚至宝；然朕宝王赤心，珠无所用。 
现代文：唐以西突厥曷娑那可汗为归义王，曷娑那献大珍珠，唐高祖说： 珠子确实是少有的宝物，但朕所宝贵的是王的赤心，珠子没有用。 
English: Tang Dynasty took the Western Turkic Jinnah Khan as the King of righteousness, Jinnah offered a great pearl, Tang Gao Zu said: The pearl is indeed a rare treasure, but what I treasure is the king's red heart, the pearl is useless.

古文：竟还之。
现代文：最后归还了珠子。
English: The beads were eventually returned.

古文：乙酉，车驾幸周氏陂，过故墅。
现代文：乙酉，唐高祖御驾临幸周氏陂，经过故墅。
English: Acetylene, Tang Gao Zu drove to Zhou's residence, passing by the old villa.

古文：初，羌豪旁企地以所部附薛举，及薛仁果败，企地来降，留长安，企地不乐，帅其众数千叛，入南山，出汉川，所过杀掠。
现代文：当初，羌族豪强旁企地率领部落归附薛举，待薛仁果败亡，旁企地前来降唐，留在长安。旁企地感到不愉快，又率领几千部下反叛，进入南山，从汉川出，经过之处烧杀抢掠。
English: At first, the powerful warrior of the Yao people, Bianqi, led the tribe to attach to Xueju, and waited for Xue Renga to be defeated. Bianqi came to Tang and stayed in Chang'an. Bianqi felt unhappy, and led several thousand of his subordinates to rebel, entered Nanshan, came out of Hanchuan, and burned, killed and looted everywhere he passed.

古文：武候大将军宠玉击之，为企地所败。
现代文：武候大将军庞玉攻打旁企地，被旁企地打败。
English: Pangyu, the grand general of Wuhu, attacked and was defeated by Bianqi.

古文：行至始州，掠女子王氏，与俱醉卧野外；王氏拔其佩刀，斩首送梁州，其众遂溃。
现代文：旁企地走到始州，抢了姓王的女子，二人一同喝醉了躺在野外；王氏拔出旁企地的佩刀，割了旁企地的头送到梁州，旁企地的部下也就溃散了。
English: Mr. Wang pulled out Mr. Wang's sword, cut off Mr. Wang's head and sent it to Liangzhou. Mr. Wang's subordinates also scattered.

古文：诏赐王氏号崇义夫人。
现代文：高祖下诏赐王氏尊号为崇义夫人。
English: Emperor Gaozong gave Wang the honorific title of Mrs. Chongyi.

古文：壬辰，王世充帅众三万围谷州，刺史任瑰拒却之。
现代文：壬辰，王世充率领三万人包围州，唐州刺史任抵御并击退了王世充。
English: In Imjin, Wang Shichong led 30,000 men to encircle the prefecture, and Tang Prefecture resisted and repulsed Wang Shichong.

古文：上使李密分其麾下之半留华州，将其半出关。
现代文：高祖让李密把他手下的人马分一半留在华州，带一半出关。
English: Gaozu told Li Mi to leave half of his men in Huazhou and take the other half out of the customs.

古文：长史张宝德预在行中，恐密亡去，罪相及；上封事，言其必叛。
现代文：长史张宝德在出行的一半中，恐怕李密逃亡，受牵连；上密封的奏章，说李密必叛。
English: Long history Zhang Baode in the half of the trip, I am afraid that Li Mi fled and was implicated; the sealed record said that Li Mi must be a traitor.

古文：上意乃中变，又恐密惊骇，乃降敕书劳来，令密留所部徐行，单骑入朝，更受节度。
现代文：高祖便中途改变想法，又怕李密受惊动，于是降下敕书慰问，命李密留下部队慢慢前进，一个人骑马入朝，另外接受安排。
English: Gaozu changed his mind halfway through, and feared that Li Mi would be alarmed, so he lowered the condolence letter and ordered Li Mi to leave the troops to advance slowly, ride into the North alone, and accept other arrangements.

古文：密至稠桑，得敕，谓贾闰甫曰： 敕遣我去，无故复召我还，天子向云， 有人确执不许 ，此谮行矣。
现代文：李密到稠桑，接到敕书，对贾闰甫说： 敕书派我去山东，又无缘无故召我回去，天子曾经有言， 有人坚持不让你东去 ，这种谮言起作用了。
English: When Li Mi arrived in Zhusang and received the imperial edict, she said to Jia Rongfu, "The imperial edict sent me to Shandong and called me back for no reason. God once said, 'Some people insist that you should not go to Shandong.' This criticism worked.

古文：吾今若还，无复生理，不若破桃林县，收其兵粮，北走渡河。
现代文：我现在如果回去，必定要被杀了，不如攻陷桃林县，取了县里的军队、粮食，向北渡过黄河。
English: If I go back now, I will surely be killed. It would be better to invade Taolin County, take the troops and grain in the county, and cross the Yellow River to the north.

古文：比信达熊州，吾已远矣。
现代文：等消息到了熊州，我们已经走远了。
English: By the time the news reached Xiongzhou, we had already gone too far.

古文：苟得至黎阳，大事必成。
现代文：假如能到黎阳，大事肯定能成功，您以为怎么样？ 
English: If you can get to Liyang, the event will definitely be a success. What do you think?

古文：公意如何？ 闰甫曰： 主上待明公甚厚；况国家姓名，著在图谶，天下终当一统。
现代文：贾闰甫说： 主上对待明公您非常好，何况国家的李姓，符合图谶，天下最终要统一。
English: Jia Liufu said: The Lord has treated you very well, and the country's surname, Li, is in accordance with the diagram. The world must eventually be unified.

古文：明公既已委质，复生异图，任瑰、史万宝据熊、穀二州，此事朝举，彼兵夕至，虽克桃林，兵岂暇集，一称叛逆，谁复容人！
现代文：明公您既然已经归顺了，却又产生了别的意图；任、史万宝在熊、二州，这事早晨发动，晚上他们的军队就会赶到，虽然攻陷桃林，哪里有时间召集士兵，一旦被称为叛逆，谁又能容纳？
English: Ming Gong, since you have already surrendered, you have another intention. Let Shi Wanbao launch this thing in Xiong and Erzhou in the morning, and their army will arrive in the evening. Although the peach grove has been captured, where is there time to gather soldiers? Once it is called a rebellion, who can accommodate it?

古文：为明公计，不若且应朝命，以明元无异心，自然浸润不行；更欲出就山东，徐思其便可也。 
现代文：我为明公您设想，不如暂且按朝廷的命令行事，以表明根本没有异心，自然那些谮言也就不起作用了。您再想出关前往山东，可以慢慢考虑怎么合适。 
English: In my opinion, it would be better for you to temporarily act in accordance with the order of the imperial court to show that there is no hostility at all, and naturally those criticisms will not work. If you want to travel to Shandong, you can slowly consider how appropriate it is.

古文：密怒曰： 唐使吾与绛、灌同列，何以堪之！
现代文：李密生气地说： 唐让我和绛侯周勃、灌婴一样不能割地封王，怎么能忍受？
English: Li Mi said angrily: "Tang has made me as incapable of cutting land and crowning a king as Zhou Bo and Huan Ying, how can I bear it?

古文：且谶文之应，彼我所共。
现代文：况且他和我都应了谶文。
English: What's more, he and I both responded to the letter.

古文：今不杀我，听使东行，足明王者不死；纵使唐遂定关中，山东终为我有。
现代文：今天不杀我，听凭我向东前进，足以证明王者不死；纵然唐平定了关中，山东最后也是我的。
English: If you don't kill me today, just let me march eastward, it is enough to prove that the king is immortal; even if Tang has leveled Guanzhong, Shandong is finally mine.

古文：天与不取，乃欲束手投人！
现代文：老天爷给的不拿，却要白送给人吗！
English: You don't take what God gives you, but you want to give it away for free!

古文：公，吾之心腹，何意如是！
现代文：您，是我的心腹，怎么这样想！
English: You, my confidant, how can you think like that!

古文：若不同心，当斩而后行！ 
现代文：如果不能一条心，就斩了你然后走！ 
English: If you can't be of one mind, I'll cut you up and go!

古文：闰甫泣曰： 明公虽云应谶，近察天人，稍已相违。
现代文：闰甫流着泪说： 明公您虽然说也应图谶，但近来观察天道与人事，已经逐渐地不合适了。
English: With tears streaming down his face, Ryoho said, "Ming Gong, although you said that you should also draw pictures, it has become increasingly inappropriate to observe the heavenly path and human affairs recently.

古文：今海内分崩，人思自擅，强者为雄；明公奔亡甫尔，谁相听受！
现代文：现在海内分崩离析，人人想自己独断专行，强者称雄；明公您又开始逃亡，又有谁能听您的调遣？
English: Now the country is falling apart, everyone wants to do things their own way, and the strong are glorified; My lord, you have begun to flee again, and who can listen to your instructions?

古文：且自翟让受戮之后，人皆谓明公弃恩忘本，今日谁肯复以所有之兵束手委公乎！
现代文：况且从杀了翟让以后，人人都说明公您弃恩忘本，今天谁还肯把自己的军队乖乖地交给您呢？
English: Moreover, after the killing of Zhang Zhen, everyone said that you had abandoned your principles. Who would willingly hand over his army to you today?

古文：彼必虑公见夺，逆相拒抗，一朝失势，岂有容足之地哉！
现代文：他们必定顾虑您夺兵权，要加以抵抗，一朝失势，哪里还有立足之地呢？
English: They must be worried about your seizure of military power and want to resist it. Once they lose power, where will they have a foothold?

古文：自非荷恩殊厚者，讵能深言不讳乎！
现代文：如果不是蒙受您的特殊恩典，怎么作如此深切坦率、毫无忌讳的言谈！
English: If it were not for Your special grace, how could I have spoken so deeply, frankly and without any inhibitions!

古文：愿明公熟思之，但恐大福不再。
现代文：但愿明公好好考虑一下，恐怕大的福份不再会有了。
English: I hope that Ming Gong will think about it carefully. I am afraid that there will no longer be a great blessing.

古文：苟明公有所措身，闰甫亦何辞就戮！ 
现代文：如果明公有安身之处，闰甫我又怎能怕死呢？ 
English: If there is a safe place for Ming Gong, how can I be afraid of death?

古文：密大怒，挥刃欲击之；王伯当等固请，乃释之。
现代文：李密十分气恼，举刀要砍贾闰甫；王伯当等人使劲劝住，于是放了闰甫。
English: Li Mi was very angry and raised his sword to cut Jia Liufu; Wang Bodang and others tried hard to dissuade him, so he let Jia Liufu go.

古文：闰甫奔熊州。
现代文：贾闰甫逃往熊州。
English: Jia Liufu fled to Xiongzhou.

古文：伯当亦止密，以为未可，密不从。
现代文：王伯当也劝阻李密，认为不可以起事，李密不听。
English: Wang Bodang also tried to dissuade Li Mi, saying that it was unacceptable to start trouble, but Li Mi would not listen.

古文：伯当乃曰： 义士之志，不以存亡易心。
现代文：王伯当于是说： 义士的志向，不因为存亡而改变。
English: Wang Bodang then said, "The aspiration of a righteous man does not change because he survives.

古文：公必不听，伯当与公同死耳，然终恐无益也。 
现代文：您一定不听，伯当和您一同死就是了，不过恐怕最终也没有用。 
English: You won't listen, and Bertrand will die with you, but I'm afraid it won't work in the end.

古文：密因执使者，斩之。
现代文：李密于是捉住使者，把他杀了。
English: Li Mi then caught the messenger and killed him.

古文：庚子旦，密绐桃林县官曰： 奉诏暂还京师，家人请寄县舍。 
现代文：庚子清晨，李密骗桃林县官说： 我奉诏暂时返回京师，家人请求寄居在县衙。 
English: In the early morning of Geng Zi, Li Mi lied to the Taolin County official and said: I was ordered to temporarily return to Beijing Division, and my family requested to live in the county seat.

古文：乃简骁勇数十人，著妇人衣，戴羃，藏刀裙下，诈为妻妾，自帅之入县舍。须臾，变服突出，因据县城。
现代文：于是挑选了几十名骁勇，穿着妇女的服装，戴着面罩，把刀藏在裙子下，冒充妻妾，李密自己带着进入县衙，一会儿，换了服装突然出现，乘机占据了县城。
English: Therefore, he selected dozens of warriors, dressed in women's clothing, wearing masks, hiding knives under their skirts, posing as wives and concubines. Li Mi took them with her into the county seat. After a while, she changed her clothes and suddenly appeared, taking the opportunity to occupy the county seat.

古文：驱掠徒众，直趣南山，乘险而东，遣人驰告故将伊州刺史襄城张善相，令以兵应接。
现代文：驱赶县里百姓，直奔南山，凭借险要向东而行，派人骑马通报旧部将领伊州刺史襄城人张善相，命令他派兵接应。
English: They drove away the people in the county, headed straight to Nanshan, and sent a man on horseback to inform Zhang Zensheng, the former general of the Yi Province, and ordered him to send troops to meet them.

古文：右翊卫将军史万宝镇熊州，谓行军总管盛彦师曰： 李密，骁贼也，又辅以王伯当，今决策而叛，殆不可当也。 
现代文：右翊卫将军史万宝镇守熊州，对行军总管盛彦师说： 李密是骁贼，又有王伯当辅助，现在决定反叛，几乎是不可抵抗的。 
English: Right Guard General Shi Wanbao, who was in charge of guarding Xiongzhou, said to the commander-in-chief of the march, Morihiko Shi: Li Mi is a bandit, assisted by Wang Bodang, and now he has decided to rebel. He is almost irresistible.

古文：彦师笑曰： 请以数千之众邀之，必枭其首。 
现代文：彦师笑着说： 请用几千兵马截击，必能砍了李密的头。 
English: Hikonshi said with a smile, "Please use several thousand soldiers and horses to intercept, and you will surely be able to cut off Li Mi's head."

古文：万宝曰： 公以何策能尔？ 
现代文：万宝说： 您用什么办法能这样？ 
English: Montblanc said: "How can you do that?

古文：彦师曰： 兵法尚诈，不可为公言之。 
现代文：彦师说： 兵法推崇使诈，不能对您讲。 
English: Master Hiko said, "I can't talk to you about promoting the art of war by using deception.

古文：即帅众逾熊耳山南，据要道，令弓弩夹路乘高，刀楯伏于溪谷，令之曰： 俟贼半渡，一时俱发。 
现代文：随即率兵翻过熊耳山，到山南占据要道，命令弓弩手埋伏在路两旁高处，持刀盾的士卒埋伏在溪谷，下令说： 等贼人过河到一半，一同攻击。 
English: He then led his soldiers over Mount Xiong Er and went to the south of the mountain to occupy the important road. He ordered the archers to lie in ambush on the high places on both sides of the road, and the soldiers with swords and shields to lie in ambush in the valley. He ordered: "Wait until the thieves have crossed the river halfway and attack together."

古文：或问曰： 闻李密欲向洛州，而公入山，何也？ 
现代文：有人问： 听说李密准备去洛州，而您却进了山，这是为什么？ 
English: Someone asked: I heard that Li Mi was preparing to go to Lozhou, but you went into the mountains. Why is that?

古文：彦师曰： 密声言向洛，实欲出人不意，走襄城，就张善相耳。
现代文：彦师说： 李密声称去洛州，实际是想出人不意，经襄城投奔张善相。
English: Hikonshi said: Li Mi claimed to go to Lozhou, but in fact, unexpectedly, he went to Zhang Sanso via Xiangcheng.

古文：若贼入谷口，我自后追之，山路险隘，无所施力，一夫殿后，必不能制。
现代文：如果贼进了谷口，我们从后面追赶，山路险要，没办法施展力量，一个人殿后，就肯定拿他们没办法。
English: If the thieves entered Taniguchi, we would have to chase them from behind. The mountain roads are dangerous, and there would be no way to exert our strength.

古文：今吾先得入谷，擒之必矣。 
现代文：现在我们抢先进谷，肯定能捉住他们。 
English: Now that we've got the upper hand, we're sure to catch them.

古文：李密既渡陕，以为馀不足虑，遂拥众徐行，果逾山南出。
现代文：李密过了陕州后，认为其他地方不足为虑，于是带着众人慢慢前进，果然翻过山从南面出山。
English: After Li Mi passed through Shaanxi, he thought that other places were not enough to worry about, so he slowly moved forward with the crowd and successfully climbed over the mountain to get out of the mountain from the south.

古文：彦师击之，密众首尾断绝，不得相救。
现代文：盛彦师发动攻击，李密的部队首尾断绝了联系，相互不能救援。
English: When Morihiko's division launched an attack, Li Mi's troops lost contact with each other and were unable to rescue each other.

古文：遂斩密及伯当，俱传首长安。
现代文：于是杀了李密和王伯当，首级都传送到长安。
English: So he killed Li Mi and Wang Bodang and sent their heads to Chang'an.

古文：彦师以功赐爵葛国公，仍领熊州。
现代文：彦师因为功劳被赐予葛国公爵位，仍然镇守熊州。
English: Hikonshi was given the title of Duke of Katsukuni for his services and still guards Kumashu.

古文：李世勣在黎阳，上遣使以密首示之，告以反状。
现代文：李世勣在黎阳，高祖派使节把李密的首级拿给他看，告诉他李密反叛的情况。
English: When Li Shijun was in Liyang, Gao Zu sent an envoy to show him Li Mi's severed head and tell him about Li Mi's rebellion.

古文：世勣北面拜伏号恸，表请收葬；诏归其尸。
现代文：李世朝北伏地行礼嚎啕恸哭，上表请求收葬李密；下诏将李密的尸体送给李世。
English: Li Shichang bowed his head to the north and wept. The upper table requested the burial of Li Mi; the lower table sent Li Mi's body to Li Shichang.

古文：世勣为之行服，备君臣之礼。大具仪卫，举军缟素，葬密于黎阳山南。
现代文：李世完全按照君臣的礼节为李密服丧，备办了仪卫，全军戴孝，将李密埋葬在黎阳山之南。
English: In full accordance with the etiquette of monarchs and ministers, Li Shiyi held a funeral for Li Mi, prepared a ceremonial guard, and the whole army paid tribute to Li Mi. Li Mi was buried in the south of Liyang Mountain.

古文：密素得士心，哭者多欧血。
现代文：李密平素很得军心，很多人哭得吐了血。
English: Lee Myung-pyo was very military-minded, and many people cried until they vomited blood.

古文：隋右武卫大将军李景守北平，高开道围之，岁余不能克。
现代文：隋右武卫大将军李景守卫北平，高开道围北平，一年多不能攻陷。
English: Sui Yu Wu Wei general Li Jing guarded Beiping, Gao Kai Dao encircled Beiping, and could not be invaded for more than a year.

古文：辽西太守邓暠将兵救之，景帅其众迁于柳城；后将还幽州，于道为盗所杀。
现代文：辽西太守邓领兵救援，李景带领部下迁到柳城；后来准备回幽州，在路上被强盗杀死。
English: Deng, the western governor of Liaoning Province, led soldiers to the rescue, and Li Jing led his subordinates to move to Liucheng. Later, he was preparing to return to Yuzhou, but was killed by robbers on the way.

古文：开道遂取北平，进陷渔阳郡，有马数千匹，众且万，自称燕王，改元始兴，都渔阳。
现代文：高开道于是攻取了北平，进一步又攻陷渔阳郡，拥有数千匹马，近一万人，自称燕王，改年号为始兴，都城设在渔阳。
English: Gao Kaidou then conquered Beiping, and further invaded Yuyang County, with thousands of horses, nearly 10,000 people, calling himself Yan Wang, changing the year name to Shixing, and the capital was located in Yuyang.

古文：怀戎沙门高昙晟因县令设斋，士民大集，昙晟与僧五千人拥斋众而反，杀县令及镇将，自称大乘皇帝，立尼静宣为邪输皇后，改元法轮。
现代文：怀戎的僧人高昙晟乘县令设斋来了很多百姓时，与五千名僧人裹胁参加斋会的人反叛，杀了县令以及镇守的将领，自称大乘皇帝，立尼姑静宣为邪输皇后，改年号为轮。
English: In Wai Rong, when many people came to have a meal at a Buddhist temple built by the prefectural order, the monk Gao Jiong rebelled with five thousand monks who had been coerced into attending the meal, killed the prefectural order and the commander of the town guard, claimed to be the Emperor of the Great Buddha, declared the nun Jing Xuan to be the evil queen, and changed the name of the year to a wheel.

古文：遣使招开道，立为齐王。
现代文：派人招降高开道，立高开道为齐王。
English: Send someone to recruit and demote Gao Kaido, and establish Gao Kaido as the king of Qi.

古文：开道帅众五千人归之，居数月，袭杀昙晟，悉并其众。
现代文：高开道率领五千人归顺了高昙晟，过了几个月，又袭击，杀了高昙晟，兼并了他的全部人马。
English: Gao Kaido led five thousand people to surrender to Gao Yao. A few months later, he attacked and killed Gao Yao and took over all of his men and horses.

古文：有犯法不至死者，上特命杀之。
现代文：有些人犯了法但不够判死罪，高祖特别下令杀了。
English: Some people had broken the law but were not guilty enough to be sentenced to death, so Gaozu gave special orders to kill them.

古文：监察御史李素立谏曰： 三尺法，王者所与天下共也；法一动摇，人无所措手足。
现代文：监察御史李素立规劝说： 法律，是王者和天下百姓共同遵守的；法一动摇，人就会无所措手足。
English: Li Su Lijian, the inspector of imperial history, said: The law is to be observed by the king and the people of the world; if the law is shaken, people will be at a loss.

古文：陛下甫创鸿业，奈何弃法！
现代文：陛下才开创了大事业，怎么可以丢掉法律？
English: Your Majesty has just created a great cause, how can you throw away the law?

古文：臣忝法司，不敢奉诏。 
现代文：臣下我愧为法律官员，不敢接受诏命。 
English: As a vassal, I am ashamed to be a legal official and dare not accept the imperial edict.

古文：上从之。
现代文：高祖听从了他的规劝。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：自是特承恩遇，命所司授以七品清要官；所司拟雍州司户，上曰： 此官要而不清。 
现代文：从此李素立受到特别的宠遇，高祖命令有关部门授予他七品清要官；负责部门打算让他作雍州司户，高祖说： 这个职位虽属枢要，但不清贵。 
English: From then on, Li Suri received special favors. Gao Zu ordered the relevant departments to award him seven prizes of Qing dignitaries; the responsible departments intended to make him the Yongzhou steward. Gao Zu said: Although this position is important, it is not noble.

古文：又拟秘书郎。上曰： 此官清而不要。 
现代文：又改为秘书郎，高祖说： 这个职位清贵，但不掌枢要。 
English: He was also changed to secretary, Gaozu said: This position is noble, but it is not the most important.

古文：遂擢授侍御史。
现代文：于是提升为侍御史。
English: As a result, he was promoted to Samurai Governor.

古文：素立，义深之曾孙也。
现代文：李素立是李义深的曾孙。
English: Li Suli is the great-grandson of Li Yishen.

古文：上以舞胡安叱奴为散骑侍郎。
现代文：高祖任命跳舞的胡人安比奴当散骑侍郎。
English: Gaozu appointed the dancing Hu man, Ambino, to be the horseback-riding attendant.

古文：礼部尚书李纲谏曰： 古者乐工不与士齿，虽贤如子野、师襄，皆终身继世不易其业。
现代文：礼部尚书李纲规劝道： 古代乐工不能与士人并列，即便是像晋乐师子野、鲁乐师襄那样有道德的人，也都是世世代代不许改变所从事的职业。
English: Li Gangjie, a member of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, advised, "Ancient musicians cannot be put on the same level as scholars. Even people with morals, such as Jinle Shi Zino and Lule Shi Xiang, are not allowed to change their occupation for generations.

古文：唯齐末封曹妙达为王，安马驹为开府，有国家者以为殷鉴。
现代文：只有北齐末年封曹妙达为王，安马驹为开府，凡是拥有国家的人，都以此作为亡国之鉴。
English: It was only in the last years of Northern Qi that Cao Miao Da was crowned king, and Anmaju became the capital. All those who have a country should take this as a lesson for those who have lost their country.

古文：今天下新定，建义功臣，行赏未遍，高才硕学，犹滞草莱；而先擢舞胡为五品，使鸣玉曳组，趋翔廊庙，非所以规模后世也。 
现代文：现在天下刚刚平定，一起起义的功臣还没有全部论功行赏，有才华的博学之士仍在民间没有得到任用，而先提选跳舞的胡人当五品官，让他作官佩印，行走于庙堂之上，这不是为后世立规矩的作为。 
English: Now that the country has just been pacified, the heroes of the uprising have not all been rewarded for their merits. Talented and learned people are still not appointed by the people. However, it is not a good deed to establish rules for future generations by first nominating and electing a dancing goose to be the fifth grade official, having him wear the official seal and walk on the temple.

古文：上不从，曰： 吾业已授之，不可追也。 
现代文：高祖不听，说： 我已经授予他官衔了，不能追回了。 
English: Gaozu didn't listen and said, "I've already given him an official title, and I can't take it back."

古文：陈岳论曰：受命之主，发号施令，为子孙法；一不中理，则为厉阶。
现代文：陈岳评论道：受天命的人主，发出号令，要作为子孙后代的法则；一旦不合常规，就会成为祸端。
English: Chen Yue commented: The man of destiny has issued an order to be the law for future generations; if it is not normal, it will become a disaster.

古文：今高祖曰： 业已授之，不可追 ，苟授之而是，则已；授之而非，胡不可追欤！
现代文：现在高祖说： 已经授予，不可追回。 如果授予的对，可以不追；授予的不对，为什么不可以追回呢？
English: Now Gao Zu said: It has been awarded, it cannot be recovered; if the award is right, it can not be pursued; if the award is wrong, why can not it be recovered?

古文：君人之道，不得不以 业已授之 为诫哉！
现代文：君主的规矩，不能不把 已经授予 作为鉴戒呀！
English: The monarch's rules cannot but take what has already been granted as a warning!

古文：李轨吏部尚书梁硕，有智略，轨常倚之以为谋主。
现代文：李轨的吏部尚书梁硕，很机智，有谋略，李轨常常依靠他，以他为出谋定计的人。
English: Li Rong's officials were well-educated, witty, and strategic. Li Rong often relied on him as a strategist.

古文：硕见诸胡浸盛，阴劝轨宜加防察，由是与户部尚书安修仁有隙。
现代文：梁硕见各胡族逐渐强盛，暗中劝李轨应当加强防备，因此与户部尚书安修仁产生了隔阂。
English: Liang Shuo saw that the various Hu tribes were becoming increasingly powerful, and secretly advised Li Rail to strengthen their defenses. As a result, there was a rift with the head of the household, Shang Shuan Shuren.

古文：轨子仲琰尝诣硕，硕不为礼，乃与修仁共谮硕于轨，诬以谋反，轨鸩硕，杀之。
现代文：李轨的儿子李仲琰曾经去见梁硕，梁硕对他不太尊重，于是仲琰和安仁一起向李轨诬陷梁硕，诬告他阴谋反叛，李轨用鸩酒杀了梁硕。
English: Li Rail's son, Li Zhongyao, once went to see Liang Shuo. Liang Shuo didn't respect him very much, so Zhongyao and Anren together framed Li Rail for Liang Shuo, falsely accusing him of conspiracy and rebellion. Li Rail killed Liang Shuo with alcohol.

古文：有胡巫谓轨曰： 上帝当遣玉女自天而降。 
现代文：有胡人巫者对李轨说： 天帝要派玉女从天而降。 
English: A Wu person sorcerer said to Li Liao: The Heavenly Emperor wants to send a lady down from the sky.

古文：轨信之，发民筑台以候玉女，劳费甚广。
现代文：李轨相信了，征百姓建高台迎接玉女，花费很多劳力费用。
English: Li Rail believed it, and enlisted the people to build a high platform to welcome the princess, spending a lot of labor costs.

古文：河右饥，人相食，轨倾家财以赈之；不足，欲发仓粟，召群臣议之。曹珍等皆曰： 国以民为本，岂可爱仓粟而坐视其死乎！ 
现代文：黄河以西饥荒，人吃人，李轨用全部家财救济饥民；仍然不够，想分发仓库中的粮食，召群臣商议，曹珍等人都说： 国家以人民为根本，怎么可以舍不得仓里的粮食而眼看着老百姓饿死呢？ 
English: There was a famine west of the Yellow River, and people were eating each other. Li Guorong used all of his family's wealth to help the starving. It still wasn't enough. He wanted to distribute the grain stored in the warehouse and called a group of ministers to discuss it. Cao Zhen and others all said, "The country is fundamentally based on the people. How can we be reluctant to store grain and watch the people starve to death?"

古文：谢统师等皆故隋官，心终不服，密与群胡为党，排轨故人，乃诟珍曰： 百姓饿者自是羸弱，勇壮之士终不至此。
现代文：谢统师等人都是隋朝的官员，心里始终不服，秘密地与诸胡结为团伙，排挤李轨的旧部下，于是骂曹珍说： 老百姓饿死的是因为他自己瘦弱，健壮的人怎么也饿不死。
English: Xie Junshi and others were all officials of the Sui Dynasty. They were always dissatisfied in their hearts and secretly formed a gang with Zhu Hu to oust Li Ke, Li Ke's old subordinates. They then scolded Cao Zhen and said, "The reason why the common people starve to death is because he himself is thin and weak. Strong people can't starve to death.

古文：国家仓粟以备不虞，岂可散之以饲羸弱！
现代文：国家仓里的粮食是用来防备意外的，怎么可以用来喂那些瘦弱的人！
English: The grain in the state storehouse is used to prevent accidents, how can it be used to feed those who are weak!

古文：仆射苟悦人情，不为国计，非忠臣也。 
现代文：仆射如果要讨好人情，不为国家打算，就不是忠臣。 
English: A flunky is not a loyal subject if he wants to please people and not the country.

古文：轨以为然，由是士民离怨。
现代文：李轨认为谢统师说得对，从此百姓官员都产生了离心怨恨。
English: Li Rail thought that Xie Junshu was right, and from then on, the people's officials all had centrifugal resentment.

