古文：太祖纪太祖道武皇帝，讳珪，昭成皇帝之嫡孙，献明皇帝之子也。
现代文：太祖道武皇帝，名托跋珪，是昭成皇帝的嫡孙，是献明皇帝的儿子。
English: Emperor Daowu, the great-great-grandfather, is the great-great-grandson of Emperor Zhaocheng and the son of Emperor Xianming.

古文：母曰献明贺皇后。
现代文：母亲是献明贺皇后。
English: His mother was Empress Kenmyoga.

古文：初因迁徙，游于云泽，既而寝息，梦日出室内，寤而见光自牖属天，欻然有感。
现代文：当初由于迁徙，在云泽游览，随后就寝歇息，梦见太阳从室内升起，醒后见到阳光从窗户上连天际，忽然有所感应。
English: At first, due to migration, he visited Yunze, then went to bed and rested, dreamed of the sun rising from the room, woke up and saw the sun shining from the window to the sky, and suddenly felt something.

古文：以建国三十四年七月七日，生太祖于参合陂北，其夜复有光明。
现代文：在建国三十四年七月七日，于垒合脏北生下基担，这天夜晚又有光亮。
English: On July 7th, the 34th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the foundation stone was laid in Yuhe dirty north, and the night was bright again.

古文：昭成大悦，群臣称庆，大赦，告于祖宗。
现代文：昭成皂查非常高兴，群臣道贺，大赦境内，禀报给祖宗。
English: Emperor Akechi was very pleased, and all his ministers came to celebrate, so he pardoned the whole world and honored his ancestors.

古文：保者以帝体重倍于常兒，窃独奇怪。
现代文：哺育的人因皇帝的体重成倍于一般儿童，暗中独自奇怪。
English: The nanny thought the child weighed twice as much as a normal child and privately felt alone and strange.

古文：明年有榆生于埋胞之坎，后遂成林。
现代文：第二年有榆树生长在埋衣胞的土坑，后来就成为树林。
English: The following year, an eucalyptus tree grew in the pit, which later became a forest.

古文：弱而能言，目有光曜，广颡大耳，众咸异之。
现代文：很小时就能说话，眼睛中有光芒，宽额头大耳朵，众人都认为他很与众不同。
English: He could talk at an early age, had a sparkle in his eyes, a wide forehead and big ears, and everyone thought he was very special.

古文：年六岁，昭成崩。
现代文：六岁时，昭成皇帝逝世。
English: At the age of six, Emperor Akechi died.

古文：苻坚遣将内侮，将迁帝于长安，既而获免。
现代文：苻坚派遣将领侵入国内，将迁皇帝到长安，不久得以免行。
English: Yu Jian sent generals to invade the country and moved the emperor to Chang'an, but he was soon released.

古文：语在《燕凤传》。
现代文：事情记载在《燕凤传》。
English: The incident is recorded in "The Tale of the Swallow and the Phoenix."

古文：坚军既还，国众离散。
现代文：苻坚军队返回后，国内民众离散。
English: After the return of Yan Jian's army, the domestic ministries were dispersed.

古文：坚使刘库仁、刘卫辰分摄国事。
现代文：蕴坚命刘尘仁、刘题分别代理国事。
English: Yu Jian let Liu Kuren and Liu Weichen take charge of the country's major events.

古文：南部大人长孙嵩及元他等，尽将故民南依库仁，帝于是转幸独孤部。
现代文：菌垫大人匡珏崖和元他等人，率领所有旧时民众向南依附刘库仁，皇帝这时转往独孤部。
English: The fungus-cushion adults, including Kuang Zhiya and Yuan He, led all the old-time people to the south to cling to Liu Curen, while the emperor moved to the isolation department.

古文：元年，葬昭成皇帝于金陵，营梓宫，木柿尽生成林。
现代文：元年，将昭成皇帝安葬在金堕，制造棺木，木屑都生长成林。
English: In the first year of the year, Emperor Zhaocheng was buried in Jinpu, coffins were made, and wood chips grew into forests.

古文：帝虽冲幼，而嶷然不群。
现代文：皇帝虽然幼小，而才智超出众人。
English: Although Emperor Daowu was young, he was outstanding and extraordinary.

古文：库仁常谓其子曰：帝有高天下之志，兴复洪业，光扬祖宗者，必此主也。
现代文：型尘仁经常对他的儿子说： 皇帝有高于天下的志向，复兴宏大的业绩，光宗耀祖的，必定是这人。 
English: Ji Duchenren often said to his son: The emperor has higher aspirations than the world, the revival of great achievements, the light of the ancestors, it must be this person.

古文：七年，冬十月，苻坚败于淮南。
现代文：七年，冬十月，苻坚在淮南失败。
English: In the winter of October in the seventh year, Zou Jian failed in Huainan.

古文：是月，慕容文等杀库仁，库会弟眷摄国部。
现代文：这个月，摹查塞等人杀死型尘仁，刘尘仁的弟弟型鲞代领国内部众。
English: This month, Zou Chasai and others killed Zou Eren, Liu Eren's younger brother, and Zou Eren's younger brother.

古文：八年，慕容暐弟冲僭立。
现代文：八年，慕容啤的弟弟墓查迚僭越即位。
English: Eight years later, Murong Beer's younger brother, Tomb Chao, ascended to the throne.

古文：姚苌自称大单于、万年秦王。
现代文：挑苌自称为大单于、万年秦王。
English: Yao Yao called himself the Great King of Qin.

古文：慕容垂僭称燕王。
现代文：墓容垂僭越称遮王。
English: Murong Du claims to be the King of Swallows.

古文：九年，库仁子显杀眷而代之，乃将谋逆。
现代文：九年，刘库仁的儿子刘显杀死刘眷而取代他，继而将图谋作乱。
English: In nine years, Liu Kuren's son, Liu Xian, killed Liu Zhen and replaced him, and then plotted to create turmoil.

古文：商人王霸知之，履帝足于众中，帝乃驰还。
现代文：商人王霸知道这件事，在众人中踩皇帝的脚，皇帝便奔驰而回。
English: When the merchant Wang Ba heard the news, he stepped on Emperor Daowu's foot in the crowd.

古文：是时故大人梁盖盆子六眷，为显谋主，尽知其计，密使部人穆崇驰告。
现代文：这时旧大人梁盖盆的儿子六眷，是刘显的主要谋士，知道刘显的全部计策，秘密派部落中人穆崇驰马报告。
English: At this time, Liu Xian's main strategist, Liuguan, the son of the old man Liang Gabon, knew all of Liu Xian's strategies and secretly sent a report to Mu Chongzima, a member of the tribe.

古文：帝乃阴结旧臣长孙犍、元他等。
现代文：皇帝于是暗中交结旧臣长孙犍、元他等人。
English: The emperor then secretly befriended his former vassals, Sun Yat-sen, Yuan He and others.

古文：秋八月，乃幸贺兰部。
现代文：秋八月，前往贺兰部。
English: In autumn and August, I went to the Horan section.

古文：其日，显果使人求帝，不及。
现代文：这天，刘显果然派人寻找皇帝，没有赶上。
English: On this day, Liu Xian did indeed send someone to look for the emperor, but he did not catch up.

古文：语在《献明太后传》。
现代文：事情记载在《献明太后传》。
English: It is described in detail in "Kenmyo Kyounen."

古文：是岁，鲜卑乞伏国仁私署大单于。
现代文：这一年，鲜卑人乞伏国仁私自任命为大单于。
English: This year, the humble begged the country for help and appointed Da Shan Yu.

古文：苻坚为姚苌所杀，子丕僭立。
现代文：苻坚被姚苌杀死，儿子苻丕僭越即位。
English: Yu Jian was killed by Yao Yu, and his son Yu Yue took the throne.

古文：登国元年春正月戊申，帝即代王位，郊天，建元，大会于牛川。
现代文：登国元年春正月戊申，皇帝登上代王位，郊祀上天，建立年号，在牛川大集会。
English: The Emperor ascended to the throne in the spring of the first month of the first year of the year, the Emperor ascended to the throne in the spring of the first year of the year, the suburb worshiped to the heavens, the year of establishment, and the great assembly in Ushikawa.

古文：复以长孙嵩为南部大人，以叔孙普洛为北部大人。
现代文：又任命长孙嵩为南部大人，任命叔孙普洛为北部大人。
English: He also appointed his eldest grandson, Song, as the Southern Grandmaster, and his great-uncle, Puro, as the Northern Grandmaster.

古文：班爵叙勋，各有差。
现代文：颁赐爵位奖励功勋，各有等级。
English: The awarding of knighthoods rewards meritorious service, each with its own rank.

古文：二月，幸定襄之盛乐。
现代文：二月，前往定襄的盛乐。
English: In February, I went to Dingxiang's grand festival.

古文：息众课农。
现代文：休养民众勉励农耕。
English: People taking time off to recuperate are encouraged to return to farming.

古文：三月，刘显自善无南走马邑，其族奴真率所部来降。
现代文：三月，刘显从善无向南逃到马邑，他的族人奴真率领部众来投降。
English: In March, Liu Xian fled south from Shanwu to Mayi. His kinsman Nuzhen led his followers to surrender.

古文：夏四月，改称魏王。
现代文：夏四月，改称为魏王。
English: In the summer of April, he was renamed Wei Wang.

古文：五月，车驾东幸陵石。
现代文：五月，皇帝向东前往陵石。
English: In May, the emperor traveled east to Neolithic.

古文：护佛侯部帅侯辰、乙弗部帅代题叛走。
现代文：护佛侯部头领侯辰、乙弗部头领代题背叛逃走。
English: Hou Chen, the head of the Buddhist Protection Division, and Yifu, the head of the Buddhist Protection Division, betrayed and fled.

古文：诸将追之，帝曰： 侯辰等世修职役，虽有小愆，宜且忍之。
现代文：众将领追击他们，皇帝说： 侯辰等人世代履行职责役事，虽然有小过失，应姑且容忍他们。
English: The generals pursued them, and the emperor said, "Hou Chen and others have performed their duties and duties for generations. Although there are minor faults, they should be tolerated.

古文：当今草创，人情未一，愚近者固应趑趄，不足追也。 
现代文：当今万事初创，人心不统一，愚蠢凡庸的人固然会徘徊不前，不值得追赶。 
English: Nowadays, everything starts from scratch, people's hearts are not unified, and stupid and mediocre people will certainly linger, and it is not worth catching up.

古文：秋七月己酉，车驾还盛乐。
现代文：秋七月己酉，皇帝回到盛乐。
English: In the autumn and July, the emperor returned to Shengle.

古文：代题复以部落来降，旬有数日，亡奔刘显。
现代文：代题又带领部落来投降，十多天后，逃奔刘显。
English: The subject also led the tribe to surrender, and more than ten days later, Liu Xian fled.

古文：帝使其孙倍斤代领部落。
现代文：皇帝命他的孙子值丘代领部落。
English: The emperor ordered his grandson to become the head of the tribe.

古文：是月，刘显弟肺泥率骑掠奴真部落，既而率以来降。
现代文：这月，型题的弟弟肿迟率领骑兵抄掠奴真的部落，不久率部落来投降。
English: This month, the younger brother of the title, Tomei, led the cavalry to plunder the slave's real tribe, and soon led the tribe to surrender.

古文：初，帝叔父窟咄为苻坚徙于长安，因随慕容永，永以为新兴太守。
现代文：当初，皇帝的叔父窟咄被苻坚迁到长安，便跟随慕容丞，摹查丞委任他为塞哩太守。
English: At first, the emperor's uncle, Gu Gu, was moved to Chang'an by Qian Jian. He followed Murong Zheng, and Qin Zha Zheng appointed him as the governor of Xili.

古文：八月，刘显遣弟亢泥迎窟咄，以兵随之，来逼南境。
现代文：八月，垫龌派遣弟弟立迟迎接窟，以军队相随，来逼近南部疆域。
English: In August, Matanagi dispatched his younger brother, Tachibai, to meet the cave, accompanied by an army, to approach the southern territory.

古文：于是诸部骚动，人心顾望。
现代文：这时各部骚扰动荡，人心犹豫。
English: At this time, the ministries harassed and disturbed, and people hesitated.

古文：帝左右于桓等，与诸部人谋为逆以应之。
现代文：皇帝身边于担等人，与各部的人谋划作乱来响应窟咄。
English: The emperor was surrounded by people such as Yu Dang, who plotted with people from various departments to create chaos in response to the chaos.

古文：事泄，诛造谋者五人，余悉不问。
现代文：事情泄露，杀死主谋的五人，其余的全不追究。
English: The affair leaked out, five of the masterminds were killed, and the rest were not prosecuted at all.

古文：帝虑内难，乃北逾阴山，幸贺兰部，阻山为固。
现代文：皇帝担忧内部祸难，于是向北越过阴山，前往贺兰塑，依山为险固。
English: Emperor Daowu was worried that there would be civil unrest, so he went to Helanbu in the northern Vietnam mountains, using the high mountains as a solid barrier.

古文：遣行人安同、长孙贺使于慕容垂以征师。垂遣使朝贡，并令其子贺驎帅步骑以随同等。
现代文：派遣使者塞回、垦逐贺出使蔓查垂以征集军队，慕容垂派遣使者入朝贡奉，并命令他的儿子贺膦率领步兵骑兵跟随安同等人。
English: He sent envoys to the court to collect tribute, and ordered his son He Zhen to lead the infantry and cavalry to follow An and his men.

古文：冬十月，贺驎军未至而寇已前逼，于是北部大人叔孙普洛等十三人及诸乌丸亡奔卫辰。
现代文：冬十月，贺铿军队未到来而敌寇已逼近，这时北部大人叔孙普洛等十三人和所有鸟丸人逃奔卫辰。
English: In the winter of October, when the Hezhen army had not yet arrived and the enemy raiders were already approaching, thirteen people including the northern adult uncle and grandson Puro and all the Torimaru people fled to Weichen.

古文：帝自弩山迁幸牛川，屯于延水南，出代谷，会贺驎于高柳，大破窟咄。
现代文：皇帝从弩山迁往牛，屯驻在于延水南面，出兵代谷，在高柳会合贺膦，大败窟咄。
English: The emperor moved from Lushan to Niu, stationed in the south of Yanshui, dispatched troops to Daitang, and met He Yao in Gaoliu, and suffered a great defeat.

古文：窟咄奔卫辰，卫辰杀之，帝悉收其众。
现代文：窟咄投奔卫辰，卫辰杀了他，皇帝全部收集窟咄的部众。
English: The groom ran to Wei Chen, Wei Chen killed him, and the emperor gathered all the groom's subordinates.

古文：十二月，慕容垂遣使朝贡，奉帝西单于印绶，封上谷王。
现代文：十二月，慕容垂派遣使者入朝贡奉，向皇帝献上西单于印绶，封为上谷王。
English: In December, Murongdali sent an envoy to pay tribute to the court, presented Xidan to the emperor, and was crowned the king of Shanggu.

古文：帝不纳。
现代文：皇帝不接受。
English: The emperor would not accept it.

古文：是岁，慕容垂僭称皇帝于中山，自号大燕。
现代文：这一年，慕容垂在中山僭越称皇帝，自号为大燕。
English: In the same year, Murong Du became emperor in Zhongshan, and called himself the Great Swallow.

古文：苻丕死，苻登自立于陇东。
现代文：苻丕死去，苻登在陇柬自立为王。
English: died,  ascended to the throne in  Cambodia.

古文：姚苌称皇帝于长安，自号大秦。
现代文：姚苌在长安称皇帝，自号为大秦。
English: In Chang'an, Yao Wei called himself the emperor and called himself the Great Qin.

古文：慕容冲为部下所杀。
现代文：慕容冲被部下杀死。
English: Murongchong was killed by his subordinates.

古文：慕容永僭立。
现代文：慕容永僭越即位。
English: Murong Yongxuan ascended the throne.

古文：二年春正月，班赐功臣长孙嵩等七十三人各有差。
现代文：二年春正月，颁赐功臣长孙嵩等七十三人多少不等。
English: In the first month of the second year of spring, 73 people, including the chief meritorious subject Sun Song, were awarded.

古文：二月，帝幸宁川。
现代文：二月，皇帝前往宁川。
English: In February, the emperor went to Ningchuan.

古文：夏五月，遣行人安同征兵于慕容垂，垂使子贺驎率众来会。
现代文：夏五月，派遣使者安同向慕容垂征调军队，慕容垂派儿子贺膦率领部众来会合。
English: In the summer of May, An Tong sent an envoy to Murongtang to recruit and transfer troops. Murongtang sent his son He Xuan to lead the troops to the meeting.

古文：六月，帝亲征刘显于马邑南，追至弥泽，大破之，显南奔慕容永，尽收其部落。
现代文：六月，皇帝亲自到马邑南部征讨刘显，追击到弥泽，大败刘显，刘显向南投奔慕容永，皇帝全部收集他的部落。
English: In June, the emperor himself went to the south of Mayi to recruit Liu Xian, pursued him to Yize, defeated Liu Xian, Liu Xian went south to Murongyong, and the emperor collected all his tribes.

古文：秋八月，帝至自伐显。
现代文：秋八月，皇帝从讨伐刘显的前线返回。
English: In the autumn and August, the emperor returned from the front line of Liu Xian's crusade.

古文：冬十月癸卯，幸濡源，遣外朝大人王建使于慕容垂。
现代文：冬十月癸卯，前往濡源，派遣外朝大人王建出使慕容垂。
English: At the end of October in winter, he went to Nureyuan and dispatched the foreign imperial envoy Murongtai.

古文：十一月，遂幸赤城。
现代文：十一月，便前往赤城。
English: In November, they went to Akagi.

古文：十有二月，巡松漠。还幸牛川。
现代文：十二月，巡视松漠，回到牛川。
English: In December, he inspected Songpan and returned to Ushikawa.

古文：三年春二月，帝东巡。
现代文：三年春二月，皇帝向东巡视。
English: In the spring and February of the third year, the emperor went on a tour to the east.

古文：夏四月，幸东赤城。
现代文：夏四月，前往东赤城。
English: In the summer of April, I went to East Akagi.

古文：五月癸亥，北征库莫奚。
现代文：五月癸亥，向北征讨尘墓圣。
English: In May, at the time of the Year of the Rooster, they marched north to pray for the repose of the dead.

古文：六月，大破之，获其四部杂畜十余万，渡弱落水。
现代文：六月，大败他们，捕获四个部落的各类牲畜十多万头，渡过弱落水。
English: In June, they defeated them and captured more than 100,000 head of livestock of various types from four tribes.

古文：班赏将士各有差。
现代文：颁赏将士多少不等。
English: The awards given to soldiers vary somewhat.

古文：秋七月庚申，库莫部帅鸠集遗散，夜犯行宫。
现代文：秋七月庚申，库莫部头领鸠合残余人马，夜晚进犯皇帝行宫。
English: In the autumn and July of the Heian period, the leader of the Cuomo faction mingled with the remaining soldiers and horses, and attacked the emperor's palace at night.

古文：纵骑扑讨，尽杀之。
现代文：皇帝指挥骑兵扑击，全部杀了他们。
English: The emperor ordered the cavalry to swoop in and kill them all.

古文：其月，帝还赤城。
现代文：这月，皇帝回到赤城。
English: This month, the emperor returned to Akagi.

古文：八月使九原公元仪使于慕容垂。
现代文：八月，派遣九原公元仪出使慕容垂。
English: In August, Mu Rongtui was dispatched as envoy to the 9th year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：冬十一月，慕容垂遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬十月，慕容垂派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the winter of October, Murongdali sent an envoy to pay tribute to the court.

古文：十有二月辛卯，车驾西征。至女水，讨解如部。大破之，获男女杂畜十数万。
现代文：十二月辛卯，皇帝西征，到达女水，讨伐解如部，大败他们，捕获男女老少和各种牲畜十几万头。
English: In December of Xinwu, the Emperor's Western Expedition arrived at the Women's Water, fought and defeated them, and captured more than 100,000 men, women, and children, as well as various livestock.

古文：是岁，乞伏国仁死，弟乾归立，私署河南王。
现代文：这一年，乞伏国仁死，弟弟蔓铲即位，自命为河南王。
English: In the same year, Begging Guo Ren died, and his younger brother Wenshao ascended to the throne, proclaiming himself the king of Henan.

古文：四年春正月甲寅，袭高车诸部落，大破之。
现代文：四年春正月甲寅，袭击套车各部落，大败他们。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Spring, Jia Yin attacked the tribes of the cart, and defeated them.

古文：二月癸巳，至女水，讨叱突邻部，大破之。
现代文：二月癸巳，到达女水，讨伐叱突邻部，大败他们。
English: At the end of February, he arrived at the city of Yeosu, where he fought against his neighbors and defeated them.

古文：戊戌，贺染干兄弟率诸部来救，与大军相遇，逆击走之。
现代文：戊戌，贺染干兄弟率领各部来救援，和大军相遇，迎击赶走了高车部落。
English: Wuzhen, He Dang brothers led all departments to come to the rescue, and met the great army, and drove away the Taka tribe.

古文：夏四月，行还赤城。
现代文：夏四月，返回赤城。
English: Summer April, back to Akagi.

古文：五月，陈留公元虔使于慕容垂。
现代文：五月，陈留公元虔出使慕容垂。
English: In May, Chen Rui sent his emissary, Mu Rongtui.

古文：冬十月，垂遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬十月，慕容垂派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the winter of October, Murong Du sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：是岁，氐吕光自称三河王，遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，氐人吕光自称三河王，派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In that year, Luguang, a native of Xing, claimed to be the king of the three rivers and sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：五年春三月甲申，帝西征。次鹿浑海，袭高车袁纥部，大破之，虏获生口、马牛羊二十余万。
现代文：五年春三月甲申，皇帝西征，驻扎在鹿浑海，袭击高车袁纥部，大败他们，俘获人口、马牛羊二十多万。
English: In March of the spring of the fifth year of Jiaxing, the emperor's expedition to the West, stationed in Luhunhai, attacked the high-speed train Yuan Xibe, defeated them, and captured more than 200,000 people, horses, cattle and sheep.

古文：慕容垂遣子贺驎率众来会。
现代文：慕容垂派遣儿子贺膦率领部众前来会合。
English: Mu Rongtai sent his son He Xuan to lead the crowd to come to the meeting.

古文：夏四月丙寅，行幸意辛山，与贺驎讨贺兰、纥突邻、纥奚诸部落，大破之。
现代文：夏四月丙寅，行进到意辛山，和贺辚讨伐贺兰、纥突邻、纥奚各部落，大败他们。
English: In the summer of April, Hsin-yin marched to Yixing Mountain, and fought against Helan, its neighbors, and its various tribes, and defeated them.

古文：六月，还幸牛川。
现代文：六月，回到牛。
English: In June, back to the cow.

古文：卫辰遣子直力鞮寇贺兰部，围之。
现代文：卫辰派遣儿子直力千侵犯贺兰部，包围了他们。
English: Wei Chen sent his son, Zhi Li Qian, to invade the Horan troops and encircle them.

古文：贺讷等请降，告困。
现代文：贺讷等人请求归降，报告困境。
English: Hoene and others requested to surrender and reported their predicament.

古文：秋七月丙子，帝引兵救之，至羊山，直力鞮退走。
现代文：秋七月丙子，皇帝率兵救援贺兰部，到达羊山，直力千退兵逃走。
English: In the autumn of July, the emperor and his soldiers arrived at Yangshan to rescue the Helan troops, but the soldiers retreated and fled.

古文：八月，还幸牛川。
现代文：八月，回到牛川。
English: In August, he returned to Ushikawa.

古文：遣秦王觚使于慕容垂。
现代文：派遣秦王元觚出使慕容垂。
English: Qin King Yuan sent the envoy Mu Rongtuo.

古文：九月壬申，讨叱奴部于囊曲河，大破之。
现代文：九月壬申，在囊曲河讨伐叱奴部，大败他们。
English: In September in Jinshin, he fought against the scold's club in Cangqu River and defeated them.

古文：冬十月，迁云中，讨高车豆陈部于狼山，破之。
现代文：冬十月，迁到云中，在狼山讨伐高车豆陈部，打败了他们。
English: Winter October, moved to the clouds, in the Wolf Mountain to fight the high-car bean stamens, defeated them.

古文：十有一月，纥奚部大人库寒举部内属。
现代文：十一月，纥奚部大入库寒率部归附。
English: In November, the cold storage department was added to the warehouse.

古文：十有二月，纥突邻大人屈地鞬举部内属。帝还次白漠。
现代文：十二月，纥突邻大人屈地鞑率部归附。皇帝返回驻扎在白漠。
English: In December, the neighboring provinces were annexed. The emperor returned to stay in the White Desert.

古文：六年春二月，幸纽垤川。
现代文：六年春二月，前往纽丝川。
English: In the spring and February of the sixth year, I went to the Neuss River.

古文：三月，遣九原公元仪、陈留公元虔等西讨黜弗部，大破之。
现代文：三月，派遣立愿公豆仪、陈留公五虔等人向西讨伐匙叠塑，大败他们。
English: In March, they sent Gongdou Yi, Chen Liu Gongwu Qian and others to the west to fight against the spoon-stacking, and defeated them.

古文：夏四月，祠天。
现代文：夏四月，祭天。
English: In summer, in April, there is a festival.

古文：六月，慕容贺驎破贺讷于赤城。
现代文：六月，慕容贺膦在壶垣打败贺讷。
English: In June, Murong Herao defeated Herao in Juegaki.

古文：帝引兵救之，驎退走。
现代文：皇帝率军救援贺讷，贺坠退兵而走。
English: The emperor led the army to rescue He Nai, but He Kuan retreated and left.

古文：秋七月壬申，讲武于牛川。
现代文：秋七月壬申，在牛川练兵，回到纽垤川。
English: On the second day of autumn in July, martial arts classes began in Ushikawa.

古文：行，还纽垤川。慕容垂止元觚而求名马，帝绝之。
现代文：慕容垂留下五觚而求取名马，皇帝拒绝了他。
English: Murongdiao left behind five horses and asked for a famous horse, but the emperor refused.

古文：乃遣使于慕容永，永使其大鸿胪慕容钧奉表劝进尊号。
现代文：于是派遣使者到慕容永那裹，蔓查丞派他的大鸿胪摹查钧上表劝说进位称帝。
English: As a result, Wei sent an envoy to see Murong Yong, and Murong Yong sent his great-great-grandson Murong Yong to send a letter to persuade Emperor Daowu to proclaim himself emperor.

古文：其月，卫辰遣子直力鞮出棝杨塞，侵及黑城。
现代文：这月，卫辰派遣儿子直越呈出兵捆圭睦，侵犯到墨球。
English: This month, Wei Chen dispatched his son Zhi Yue to send troops and invade Moqiu.

古文：九月，帝袭五原，屠之。
现代文：九月，皇帝袭击互愿，大肆杀戮。
English: In September, the emperor attacked and killed many people.

古文：收其积谷，还纽垤川。
现代文：收集互愿积累的谷粟，回到纽垩业。
English: They will collect the mutually accumulated millet and return to Nuuk.

古文：于棝杨塞北，树碑记功。
现代文：在挝挝壁北，树立石碑记载功绩。
English: North of the Laotian Wall, a stone monument was erected to record the feat.

古文：冬十月戊戌，北征蠕蠕。追之，及于大碛南床山下，大破之。班赐从臣各有差。
现代文：冬卜月戊戌，向北征讨蠕蠕，追击他们，在大沙漠南牀山下追上，把他们打得大败，颁赏随从的臣属多少不等。
English: In the winter, he went to the north to fight against the Cree, chased them, caught up with them under the great desert Nanluo Mountain, defeated them, and rewarded his subordinates.

古文：其东西二部主匹候跋及缊纥提，斩别帅屋击于。
现代文：蠕蠕东西二部首领匹候跋和组纥提，杀死别部首领屋击于。
English: The leaders of the East and West Divisions of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) were killed, and the leaders of other divisions were killed.

古文：事具《蠕蠕传》。
现代文：事情记载在《蠕蠕传》。
English: The story is recounted in "Creep."

古文：十有一月戊辰，还幸纽垤川。
现代文：十一月戊辰，回到纽垤。
English: In November, I returned to New Taipei City.

古文：戊寅，卫辰遣子直力鞮寇南部。
现代文：戊寅，卫辰派遣儿子直力千进犯南部疆域。
English: On the 9th, Wei Chen sent his son Zuo Zhili to invade the south.

古文：己卯，车驾出讨。
现代文：己卯，皇帝出兵讨伐。
English: In response, the emperor dispatched troops to fight.

古文：壬午，大破直力鞮军于铁歧山南，获其器械辎重。牛羊二十余万。
现代文：壬午，在铁歧山南部大败直力千的军队，获取他的器械车辆，牛羊二十多万头。
English: At Renwu, in the southern part of Tieguishan, he defeated a thousand-strong army, obtained his equipment and vehicles, and more than two hundred thousand heads of cattle and sheep.

古文：戊子，自五原金津南渡河。
现代文：戊子，从五原的金津向南渡过黄河。
English: Wuzi, from Wuhan's Jinjin, crossed the Yellow River to the south.

古文：辛卯，次其所居悦跋城，卫辰父子奔遁。
现代文：辛卯，驻扎在直力千所居的悦跋城，刘卫辰父子逃奔。
English: Xinwu, stationed in Yuetba City, where Zhi Li Qian lived, Liu Weichen and his son fled.

古文：壬辰，诏诸将追之，擒直力鞮。
现代文：壬辰，诏令众将追赶，擒获直力辊。
English: In the morning, he ordered the crowd to chase after him, and they caught up with him.

古文：十有二月，获卫辰尸，斩以徇，遂灭之。
现代文：十二月，获取卫辰的尸体，斩首后加以展示，于是灭了他的部落。
English: In December, they obtained the body of Wei Chen, beheaded it and displayed it, thus exterminating his tribe.

古文：语在《卫辰传》。
现代文：记载在《刘卫辰传》。
English: Recorded in "Liu Weichen Biography."

古文：卫辰少子屈丐，亡奔薛干部。
现代文：卫辰的小儿子屈丐，逃奔到薛下部。
English: The youngest son of Wei Chen, Qu Gai, fled to the lower part of Xue Rong.

古文：车驾次于盐池。
现代文：皇帝在盐池屯驻。
English: The emperor resided in Yanchi.

古文：自河已南，诸部悉平。
现代文：从黄河以南，各部全部平定。
English: From south of the Yellow River, all the provinces have been pacified.

古文：簿其珍宝畜产，名马三十馀万匹，牛羊四百余万头。
现代文：登记珍宝牲畜，获名马三十多万匹，牛羊四百多万头。
English: More than 300,000 famous horses and more than 4 million head of cattle and sheep have been registered as precious livestock.

古文：班赐大臣各有差。
现代文：颁赏大臣多少不等。
English: The awarding ministers vary somewhat.

古文：收卫辰子弟宗党无少长五千余人，尽杀之。
现代文：收捕卫辰的子弟族人不分老少五千多人，全部杀了他们。
English: They arrested Liu Weichen's sons and brothers, and killed more than 5,000 people of the same clan and the same party, regardless of age.

古文：山胡酋大幡颓、业易于等率三千余家降附，出居于马邑。
现代文：山胡头领幡颓、业易于等人率领三千多家归降依附，外出定居在马邑。
English: Shanhu led more than three thousand people to surrender and settle in Ma'e.

古文：是岁，起河南宫。
现代文：这一年，修建河南宫。
English: In this year, Henan Palace was built.

古文：七年春正月，幸木根山，遂次黑盐池。
现代文：七年春正月，前往木根山，于是停驻在黑盐池。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, he went to Kigenyama, whereupon he stopped in Kurotaniike.

古文：飨宴群臣，觐诸国贡使。
现代文：设宴招待群臣，会见各国贡奉的使者。
English: He hosted a banquet for his ministers and met with envoys from tributary states.

古文：北之美水。
现代文：向北到达美水。
English: Head north to reach the town of Mysui.

古文：三月甲子，宴群臣于水滨，还幸河南宫。
现代文：三月甲子，在水边设宴招待群臣。回到河南宫。
English: In March, Emperor Go-Shirakawa held a banquet on the water's edge to invite his ministers. He then returned to Henan Palace.

古文：西部泣黎大人茂鲜叛走，遣南部大人长孙嵩追讨，大破之。
现代文：西部泣黎大人茂鲜背叛逃跑，皇帝派遣南部大人长孙嵩追击讨伐，大败茂鲜。
English: In the west, the adult Lili Shoucheng betrayed and fled, and the emperor sent the southern adult Chosun Song to pursue the crusade. Shoucheng suffered a great defeat.

古文：夏五月，班赐诸官马牛羊各有差。
现代文：夏五月，颁赏给各官员马牛羊多少不等。
English: In summer and May, the number of horses, cattle and sheep awarded to each official varies.

古文：秋八月，行幸漠南，仍筑巡台。
现代文：秋八月，前往沙漠南部，随之修筑巡视台。
English: In autumn and August, they went to the southern part of the desert and built a patrol station.

古文：冬十有二月，慕容永遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬十二月，摹登丞派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the winter of December, Emperor Gendenjo sent an envoy to pay tribute to the court.

古文：是岁，皇子嗣生。
现代文：遣一年，皇子托腿锢出生。
English: One year later, the prince was born with a club foot.

古文：八年春正月，帝南巡。
现代文：八年春正月，皇帝向南巡视。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of the Spring, the emperor went on a tour to the south.

古文：二月，幸羖羊原，赴白楼。三月，车驾西征侯吕邻部。夏四月，至苦水，大破之。
现代文：前往投芏愿，到鱼蝗。皇帝向西征讨侯吕邻部。夏四月，到达萱，大败侯吕邻部。
English: The emperor went to the west to conquer the neighboring provinces of Hou and Lv. In the summer of April, he arrived in Lu and defeated the neighboring provinces of Hou and Lv.

古文：五月，还幸白楼。
现代文：五月，回到直搂。
English: In May, he returned to Naosuke.

古文：慕容垂讨慕容永于长子。
现代文：慕容垂在垦王讨伐基查丞。
English: Murong bowed his head at the king's attack on Qi Zha Rong.

古文：六月，车驾北巡。永来告急，遣陈留公元虔、将军庾岳率骑五万东度河救之。
现代文：六月，皇帝向北巡视慕容永前来告急，派遣陈留公五卢、将军尘至率领五万骑兵束渡差董回救援他。
English: In June, the emperor made a tour to the north to see Murong Yong, who had come to him in an emergency, and sent Chen Ruigong Wolu, General Chen Zhi and led 50,000 cavalrymen Shuo Duanzhang Dong back to rescue him.

古文：破类拔部帅刘曜等，徙其部落。
现代文：打败类送塑头领刘压等人，迁徙他们的部落。
English: Defeated the head of the group, Liu Zhen, and others, and moved their tribe.

古文：元虔等因屯秀容，慕容垂遂围长子。
现代文：五虐等人于是屯驻秀容，慕容垂于是包围长子。
English: Wuzhong and others then stationed themselves in Xiurong, and Murong subsequently encircled the eldest son.

古文：秋七月，车驾临幸新坛。
现代文：秋七月，皇帝前往新坛。
English: In autumn and July, the emperor went to the new altar.

古文：庚寅，宴群臣，仍讲武。
现代文：庚寅，设宴招待群臣，随之习武。
English: Goyang, set up a banquet to invite a group of ministers, followed by martial arts.

古文：先是，卫辰子屈丐奔薛干部，征之不送。
现代文：在这以前，卫辰的儿子屈丐投奔薛干部，征召他不遣送。
English: Prior to this, Wei Chen's son, Qu Gai, had joined the Ben Xue cadre and was conscripted but not sent away.

古文：八月，帝南征薛干部帅太悉佛于三城，会其先出击曹覆，帝乘虚屠其城，获太悉佛子珍宝，徙其民而还。
现代文：八月，皇帝向南征讨薛王塑头领太悉佛到三球，正好立悉垡先前出兵攻打直覆，皇帝乘虚屠戮他的城池，擒获太悉佛的儿子涂重，迁徙他的民众而返回。
English: In August, the emperor went to the south to invade Xue Wang Shuxing, leading the head of the Buddha of Wisdom to the three balls. It was just when the Buddha of Wisdom had previously sent troops to attack and overturn. The emperor took advantage of the virtual slaughter of his castle, captured the son of the Buddha of Wisdom, and returned to his people.

古文：太悉佛闻之，来赴不及，遂奔姚兴。
现代文：太悉佛听说后，赴救不及，于是投奔姚兴。
English: After hearing about the Buddha, he was too late to help, so he rushed to Yao Xing.

古文：九月，还幸河南宫。
现代文：九月，回到河南宣。
English: In September, he returned to Henan Palace.

古文：是岁，姚苌死。
现代文：这一年，姚苌死去。
English: This year, Yao Xuan died.

古文：九年春三月，帝北巡。
现代文：九年春三月，皇帝向北巡视。
English: In the spring and March of the ninth year, the emperor went on a tour to the north.

古文：使东平公元仪屯田于河北五原，至于棝杨塞外。
现代文：命东平公元仪在董回以北的互愿屯田，到达担圭瞳以外。
English: According to the order of Dongping era, the ceremony will be held in the Mutually Willing Tunden, north of Donghui, and will not reach Danggui Hitomi.

古文：夏五月，田于河东。
现代文：夏五月，在黄河东面狩猎。
English: In the summer and in May, I hunted trout in the fields of the eastern part of the river.

古文：秋七月，还幸河南宫。
现代文：秋七月，回到河南宫。
English: In autumn and July, he returned to Henan Palace.

古文：冬十月，蠕蠕社仑等率部落西走。
现代文：冬十月，蠕蠕社仑等人率部落向西退走。
English: In the winter of October, the tribal people headed west at the rate of half a percent.

古文：事具《蠕蠕传》。
现代文：事情记载在《蠕蠕传》。
English: The story is recounted in "Creep."

古文：是岁，姚苌子兴僭立，杀苻登。
现代文：这一年，姚苌的儿子姚兴僭越即位，杀死苻登。
English: In the same year, Yao Xing, the son of Yao Xing, proclaimed himself emperor and killed Xing Deng.

古文：慕容垂灭永。
现代文：慕容垂消灭慕容永。
English: Murong has extinguished Murong Yong.

古文：十年春正月，太悉佛自长安还岭北，上郡以西皆应之。
现代文：十年春正月，太悉佛从长安回到陉岭以北，上郡以西都响应他。
English: In the first month of the tenth year of the Spring, Taishi Buddha returned from Chang'an to the north of Fuling, and the west of Shangxian County responded to him.

古文：夏五月，幸盐池。
现代文：夏五月，前往盐迤。
English: In summer and May, I went to Yancheng.

古文：六月，还幸河南宫。
现代文：六月，回到回卢宣。
English: In June, he returned to Luzheng.

古文：秋七月，慕容垂遣其子宝来寇五原，造舟收谷。
现代文：秋七月，蔓查垂派遣他的儿子台洼宾前来进犯亘厘，造船只收谷物。
English: In the autumn and July, Manchadli sent his son, Taiwabing, to attack Wotan and build ships to collect grain.

古文：帝遣右司马许谦征兵于姚兴。
现代文：皇帝派遣右司马许谦向继兴微调军队。
English: The emperor sent his right-hand man, Ma Xuqian, to Suixing to fine-tune the army.

古文：东平公元仪徙据朔方。
现代文：东平公五堡迢徙占据望喧。
English: The five castles of Dongping Gong occupy the hustle and bustle.

古文：八月，帝亲治兵于河南。
现代文：八月，皇帝亲自在董回南训练军队。
English: In August, the emperor personally trained the troops in Donghuinan.

古文：九月，进师，临河筑台告津，连旌沿河东西千里有余。
现代文：九月，进军。临近茎回建台祷告河津，旌旗相连沿着黄河东西有一千多里。
English: In September, they marched. They approached the stem of the Jiantai River and prayed to the river god. Their banners stretched for more than a thousand miles along the east and west of the Yellow River.

古文：是时，陈留公元虔五万骑在东，以绝其左；元仪五万骑在河北，以承其后；略阳公元遵七万骑塞其中山之路。
现代文：这时，陈留公元虔率领五万骑兵在东面，来断绝基查宣的左路，五堡率领五万骑兵在董回北面，来跟随在慕容实的后面，略阳公五遵率领七万骑兵阻隔慕容宝通向中山的道路。
English: At this time, Chen Rui Diao Qian led fifty thousand cavalrymen in the east to cut off the left path of Gichasun, Wufu led fifty thousand cavalrymen in the north of Dong Hui to follow behind Mu Rong Ci, and Liao Yang Gong Wuzhun led seventy thousand cavalrymen to block the road of Mu Rong Bao to Zhongshan.

古文：冬十月辛未，宝烧船夜遁。
现代文：冬十月辛未，慕容宝烧毁船只夜晚逃跑。
English: On the 25th day of winter in October, Murong Bao burned the boat and fled at night.

古文：十一月己卯，帝进军济河。
现代文：十一月己卯，皇帝进军渡过黄河。
English: In November, the emperor marched across the Yellow River.

古文：乙酉夕，至参合陂。
现代文：乙酉晚上，到达叁金照。
English: On the night of the 9th, we arrived in Sanghejing.

古文：丙戌，大破之。
现代文：丙戌，大败慕容实。
English: He's a real loser, a real loser.

古文：语在《宝传》。
现代文：记载在《慕容宝传》。
English: Recorded in "Murong Baozhuang."

古文：生擒其陈留王绍、鲁阳王倭奴、桂林王道成、济阴公尹国、北地王世子钟葵、安定王世子羊兒以下文武将吏数千人，器甲辎重、军资杂财十余万计。
现代文：生擒他的速垦延摹查韶、叠逛堡趣、挂牡龃、济阴公塑、蜒世于鲢、塞定王世子圣且和以下文武将吏几千人，器械车辆、军用物资各种财物计有十多万。
English: There are more than 100,000 pieces of equipment, vehicles, military supplies, and various kinds of property.

古文：于俘虏之中擢其才识者贾彝、贾闺、晁崇等与参谋议，宪章故实。
现代文：在俘虏中提升有才学见识的置萎、贾闺、垦毖等人，参与谋划商议典章制度和旧曰条例。
English: He promoted the talented and insightful prisoners, such as Jia Wu, Jia Bou and Zou, to participate in the planning and discussion of the disciplinary code system and the old regulations.

古文：班赏大臣将校各有差。
现代文：颁赏大臣将吏多少不等。
English: The awarding minister will be a higher-ranking official.

古文：十有二月，还幸云中之盛乐。
现代文：十二月，回到霎生的盛銮。
English: In December, I returned to my hometown of Seongnam.

古文：皇始元年春正月，大搜于定襄之虎山，因东幸善无北陂。
现代文：皇始元年春正月，在定襄的虎山大阅兵，继而向东前往善无北陂。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the emperor, a military parade was held at the Tiger Mountain in Dingxiang, and then it went east to the North Pole.

古文：三月，慕容垂来寇桑乾川。
现代文：三月，慕容垂前来进犯桑干川。
English: In March, Murongtai came to invade Sangan River.

古文：阿留公元虔先镇平城，时征兵未集，虔率麾下邀击，失利死之。
现代文：陈留公元虔原先镇守平城，这时征调军队还没有会集，元虔率领部下阻击，失败战死。
English: Chen Liu (Chan Liu) and Yuan Qian (Yuan Qian) originally guarded Pingcheng. At that time, the conscripted and transferred troops had not yet assembled. Yuan Qian led his subordinates to resist, but failed and died in battle.

古文：垂遂至平城西北，逾山结营。闻帝将至，乃筑城自守。
现代文：慕容垂于是到达平城西北，跨山扎营，听说皇帝将要到来，便筑城守卫。
English: Murongdeli then reached the northwest of Pingcheng, camped across the mountain, heard that the emperor was about to arrive, and set up a city guard.

古文：疾甚，遂遁走，死于上谷。
现代文：病情严重，于是逃走，死在上谷。
English: He was seriously ill, so he ran away and died in Kamitani.

古文：子宝匿丧而还，至中山乃僭立。
现代文：儿子慕容宝隐秘丧事返回，到达中山才僭越即位。
English: His son, Murong Bao, secretly returned from the funeral and arrived in Zhongshan to take the throne.

古文：夏六月癸酉，遣将军王建等三军讨宝广宁太守刘亢泥，斩之，徙其部落。
现代文：夏六月癸酉，派遣将军王建等三军讨伐慕容实的广宁太守刘亢泥，杀了他，迁徙他的部落。
English: In the summer of June, General Wang Jian and other three armies were dispatched to fight against the capacious Guangning governor Liu Bingdi, kill him, and relocate his tribe.

古文：宝上谷太守慕容普邻，捐郡奔走。
现代文：慕容宝的上谷太守慕容普邻，丢下郡城逃跑。
English: Murong Bao's Kamitani Taishu, Murong Pu's neighbor, left the county seat and fled.

古文：丁亥，皇太后贺氏崩。是月，葬献明太后。
现代文：丁亥，皇太后贺氏逝世这月，安葬献明太后。
English: Dinghai, Empress Dowager He passed away this month, and her funeral was dedicated to Empress Dowager Ming.

古文：秋七月，右司马许谦上书劝进尊号，帝始建天子旌旗，出入警跸，于是改元。
现代文：秋七月，右司马许谦上奏书劝称皇帝，皇帝开始设立天子旌旗，出入有人侍卫清道，于是改年号。
English: In the autumn and July, the Right Division of Ma Xu Qian issued a report to persuade the emperor, and the emperor began to set up the flag of the Son of Heaven, and there were people guarding the road, so the year name was changed.

古文：八月庚寅，治兵于东郊。
现代文：八月庚寅，在束郊练兵。
English: In August, Geng Yin was training soldiers in Sokou.

古文：己亥，大举讨慕容宝，帝亲勒六军四十余万，南出马邑，逾于句注。旌旗骆驿二千余里，鼓行而前，民室皆震。
现代文：己亥，大举讨伐慕容宾，皇帝亲自统领六军四十多万人，向南出兵马邑，越过句注，旌旗相连二千多里，击鼓向前推进，百姓的房屋都震动了。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, the emperor personally led six armies of more than 400,000 people to fight against Murongbin, and sent soldiers and horses to the south. After the battle, the banners were connected for more than 2,000 miles, the drums were pushed forward, and the houses of the people were shaken.

古文：别诏将军封真等三军，从东道出袭幽州，围蓟。
现代文：另外韶令将军封真等三军，从东路出兵袭击幽州，包围蓟城。
English: In addition, he ordered General Feng Zhen and other three armies to attack Yuzhou from the east and encircle Fucheng.

古文：九月戊午，次阳曲，乘西山，临观晋阳，命诸将引骑围胁，已而罢还。
现代文：九月戊午，驻扎在阳曲，登上西山，观望晋阳，命令各将领率领骑兵包围威胁，不久解围退回。
English: At noon in September, he was stationed in Yangqu, climbed the West Mountain, watched Jinyang, ordered the generals to lead the cavalry to encircle the threat, and soon withdrew from the encirclement.

古文：宝并州牧辽西王农大惧，将妻子弃城夜出，东遁，并州平。
现代文：慕容宝的并州牧辽西王慕容农很害怕，带着妻子儿女放弃城池夜晚出来，向东逃跑，并州平定。
English: King Murong of Murong Bao, a farmer in the west of Liaoning Province, was very afraid. He took his wife and children, left the city at night, fled to the east, and pacified the province.

古文：初建台省，置百官，封拜公侯、将军、刺史、太守，尚书郎已下悉用文人。
现代文：开始建立台省，设置百官，分封任命公侯、将军、刺史、太守，尚书郎以下全用文人。
English: He began to establish Taiwan Province, set up hundreds of officials, and appointed princes, generals, scribes, and governors-general, with Shang Shuro and the following as full-time literati.

古文：帝初拓中原，留心慰纳。诸士大夫诣军门者，无少长，皆引入赐见。存问周悉，人得自尽。苟有微能，咸蒙叙用。
现代文：皇帝开始开拓中原，留意安抚接纳，所有前往军门的士大夫，不论老少，都引入见面，慰问十分周到详细，士人得以完全地表现自己，如果有微薄的能力，都得到任用。
English: The emperor began to explore the Central Plains, paying attention to appeasement and acceptance. All officials who went to the military gate, regardless of age, were introduced to meet, and the condolences were very thoughtful and detailed. The officials were able to fully express themselves, and if they had little ability, they were appointed.

古文：己未，诏辅国将军奚牧略地晋川，获慕容宝丹阳王买得等于平陶城。
现代文：己未，诏令辅国将军奚牧拓地到晋川，在平陶城擒获慕容宾的丹阳王买得等人。
English: In the meantime, he ordered the general of the Auxiliary State to go to Jinchuan to expand the territory, and in Pingtao City, he won the Danyang King of Murongbin and other people.

古文：冬十月乙酉，车驾出井陉，使冠军将军王建、左军将军李栗五万骑先驱启行。
现代文：冬十月乙酉，皇帝出兵井陉，命令冠军将军王建、左军将军李栗率五万骑兵充当前锋。
English: In the winter of October, the emperor sent troops to Jingyao and ordered the champion general Wang Jian and the left army general Li Li to lead fifty thousand cavalry to act as the front.

古文：十有一月庚子朔，帝至真定。
现代文：十一月庚子初一，皇帝到达真定。
English: On the first day of November, the Emperor arrived in Jinding.

古文：自常山以东，守宰或捐城奔窜，或稽颡军门，唯中山、鄴、信都三城不下。
现代文：白常山以东，郡守县令有的丢下城池逃窜，有的到军门叩头投降，衹有中山、邺、信都三座城不投降。
English: To the east of Baichang Mountain, the county magistrate ordered some to leave the city and flee, some to surrender at the military gate, and three cities including Zhongshan, Handan and Xindu not to surrender.

古文：别诏征东大将军东平公仪五万骑南攻鄴，冠军将军王建、左军将军李栗等攻信都，军之所行，不得伤民桑枣。
现代文：另外诏令征束大将军东平公元仪率五万骑兵南攻邺城，冠军将军王建、左军将军李栗等人攻打信都，军队行走的地方，不能损害民众的农作物与家园。
English: In addition, he ordered the general Dongping to lead 50,000 cavalry south to attack Handan, the champion general Wang Jian, the left army general Li Li and others to attack Xindu, and the army should not damage the people's crops and homes.

古文：戊午，进军中山；己未，引骑围之。
现代文：戊午，进军到中山；己未，带领骑兵包围中山。
English: At noon, he marched into Zhongshan; at dusk, he led the cavalry to encircle Zhongshan.

古文：帝谓诸将曰： 朕量宝不能出战，必当凭城自守，偷延日月。急攻则伤士，久守则费粮，不如先平鄴、信都，然后还取中山，于计为便。
现代文：皇帝对各将领说： 我估计慕容宝不能出城交战，必定会凭藉城池守卫、苟延残喘，急速攻打则损伤兵士，长久守备则浪费粮食，不如先平定邺城、信都，然后回来攻取中山，是适宜的计策。
English: The emperor said to the generals: I estimate that Murongbao cannot go out of the city to fight, it will certainly rely on the city guard and lingering breath, rapid attack will damage soldiers, and long-term defense will waste grain. It is better to first pacify Shicheng and Xindu, and then return to capture Zhongshan. It is a suitable strategy.

古文：若移军远去，宝必散众求食民间，如此，则人心离阻，攻之易克。 
现代文：如果转移军队远走，慕容宝必定分散部众到民间求取食物，如此，就会人心离散，攻打他容易得胜。 
English: If the army is moved far away, Murong Bao will certainly disperse his followers to the people to seek food. In this way, the people will be dispersed, and it will be easy to win against him.

古文：诸将称善。
现代文：各将领称赞计策高妙。
English: The generals all thought it was a good idea.

古文：丁卯，车驾幸鲁口城。
现代文：丁卯，皇帝前往鲁口城。
English: On the 28th, the emperor's carriage arrived at Lukou City.

古文：是岁，司马昌明死，子德宗僭立，遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，司马昌明死去，儿子司马德宗僭越即位，派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the same year, Sima Changming died, and his son Sima De Zongyi ascended the throne and sent an envoy to pay tribute to the court.

古文：吕光僭称天王，号大凉，遣使朝贡。
现代文：吕光僭越称天王，国号大凉，派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: Lü Guangxuan called himself the Heavenly King, the country's name was Dairang, and sent emissaries to pay tribute to the court.

古文：二年春正月己亥朔，大飨群臣于鲁口。
现代文：二年春正月己亥初一，在鲁口大宴群臣。
English: On the first day of the Chinese New Year in the spring of the second year, a large banquet was held in Lukou.

古文：慕容宝遣其左卫将军慕容腾寇博陵，杀中山太守及高阳诸县令长，抄掠租运。
现代文：慕容实派遣他的左卫将军慕容腾进犯博陵，杀死中山太守和高阳各县的县令县长，抄掠租谷运输。
English: Murong Shih sent his left guard general Murong Teng to invade Boling, kill the governor of Zhongshan and the county magistrate of each county in Gaoyang, and loot and transport Rent Valley.

古文：是时信都未下，庚申，乃进军。
现代文：这时信都没有攻下来，庚申，于是进军。
English: At this time, the letter was not attacked, so Goshun marched in.

古文：壬戌，引骑围之。
现代文：壬戌，率领骑兵包围信都。
English: Rinchen, led the cavalry to encircle Xindu.

古文：其夜，宝冀州刺史宜都王慕容凤逾城奔走，归于中山。
现代文：这天夜晚，慕容实的冀州刺史宜都王慕容凤越城逃跑，回到中山。
English: On this night, Mu Rongrui, the prince of Jizhou, escaped from the city of Murongfeng and returned to Zhongshan.

古文：癸亥，宝辅国将军张骧、护军将军徐超率将吏已下举城降。
现代文：癸亥，慕容宝的辅国将军张骧、护军将军徐超率领将吏以下献城投降。
English: Yan Hai, Murongbao's auxiliary general Zhang Ye, and escort general Xu Chao led the officers and men to surrender the city.

古文：宝闻帝幸信都，乃趣博陵之深泽，屯呼沱水，遣弟贺麟寇杨城，杀常山守兵三百余人。
现代文：慕容实听说皇帝到了信都，就赶往运堕的遝涅，屯驻在坠蓬丞，派遣弟弟昼困进犯杨城，杀死常山的守军三百多人。
English: When Murongshi heard that the emperor had arrived in Xindu, he hurried to Qinye, which had fallen into chaos, stationed himself in Xuanpengzheng, and sent his younger brother to invade Yangcheng in the middle of the day, killing more than three hundred defenders of Changshan.

古文：宝悉出珍宝及宫人招募郡县，群盗无赖者多应之。
现代文：慕容宝拿出全部珍宝和宫女招募郡县民众，盗贼和好诈强横之徒多响应他。
English: Murong Bao took out all the precious treasures and concubines to recruit the county and county people. Thieves and good swindlers responded to him.

古文：二月己巳，帝进幸杨城。
现代文：二月己巳，皇帝行进到杨城。
English: In February, the emperor marched to Yangcheng.

古文：丁丑，军于钜鹿之柏肆坞，临呼沱水。
现代文：丁丑。驻扎在堑尘的柏壁坦，临近呼谜。
English: Ding Yuxi. Stationed in the dusty mountains of Baoqitan, near the town of Shuhei.

古文：其夜，宝悉众犯营，燎及行宫，兵人骇散。
现代文：这天夜晚，蔓查宣以全部兵力进犯军营，火烧到行宫，兵士惊骇四散。
English: That night, Murong Bao led all the horses to steal the camp, set fire to the palace, and the soldiers were scared and ran away.

古文：帝惊起，不及衣冠，跣出击鼓。
现代文：皇帝受惊起身，来不及穿衣戴帽，打着赤脚出来击鼓。
English: The emperor was startled and got up, but before he could put on his clothes and hat, he went out barefoot to play the drums.

古文：俄而左右及中军将士，稍稍来集。
现代文：不久左右和中军的将领士兵，渐渐来会集。
English: Soon after, the generals and soldiers of the Chinese army gradually gathered.

古文：帝设奇陈，列烽营外，纵骑冲之，宝众大败，斩首万余级，擒其将军高长等四千余人。
现代文：皇帝摆设奇异的阵势，列烽火到营外，放开骑兵冲锋，慕容宝的部众大败，被斩一万多首级，擒获墓容宝的将军高长等四千多人。
English: The emperor set up a strange formation, lined up bonfires outside the camp, let the cavalry charge, defeated Murong Bao's troops, beheaded more than ten thousand heads, and captured more than four thousand generals and generals who were buried with Murong Bao.

古文：戊寅，宝走中山，获其器仗辎重数十万计。
现代文：戊寅，摹查宜逃到史山，获取的器械车辆各类物资以敷十万计。
English: Wu Yin and Zou Zhaoyi fled to Shishan, and obtained 100,000 pieces of equipment, vehicles and all kinds of materials.

古文：宝尚书闵亮、秘书监崔逞、太常孙沂、殿中侍御史孟辅等并降。
现代文：慕容宾的尚书闵亮、秘书监崔逞、太常孙沂、殿中侍御史孟辅等人一起投降。
English: Murongbin's Shang Shuxin Liang, Secretary Supervisor Cui Gang, Grand Empress Dowager Sun Yat-sen, and Palace Attendant Shi Mengwei surrendered together.

古文：降者相属，赐拜职爵各有差。
现代文：投降者接连不断，赐授职位爵位各有等级。
English: The capitulators followed one after another, and the positions and titles were awarded in different grades.

古文：平原徐超聚众反于畔城，诏将军奚辱捕斩之。
现代文：平原人徐超在畔城聚众反叛，诏令将军奚辱捕捉杀了他。
English: The plainsman Xu Chao rallied the masses to rebel in Hencheng, and the general was ordered to capture and kill him.

古文：并州守将封真率其种族与徒何为逆，将攻刺史元延，延讨平之。
现代文：并州守将封真率领他的部族和徒何作乱，准备攻打刺史元延，元延讨伐平定了他。
English: In addition, the governor of the state, Fuzhen, led his tribe and followers to create a disturbance, preparing to attack Shih Yuan Yan, who subdued him.

古文：是时，柏肆之役，远近流言，贺兰部帅附力眷、纥突邻部帅匿物尼、纥奚部帅叱奴根聚党反于阴馆，南安公元顺率军讨之，不克，死者数千。
现代文：这时，柏肆的战役，远近散布没有根据的话，贺兰部头领附力眷、纥突邻部头领匿物尼、纥奚部头领叱奴根聚集党羽在阴馆反叛，南安公顺率军讨伐他们，不能取胜，死亡的有几千人。
English: At this time, the battle of Pakzhu, far and near spread unfounded words, the head of the Helan Department joined the force, the head of the neighboring Department of the Yangtze River, the head of the Yangtze River, the leader of the Yangtze River, the leader of the Yangtze River, the leader of the Yangtze River, the leader of the Yangtze River, the leader of the Yangtze River, the leader of the Yangtze River, the leader of the Yangtze River, the leader of the Yangtze River, the leader of the Yangtze River, the leader of the Yangtze River, the leader of the Yangt

古文：诏安远将军庾岳总万骑，还讨叱奴根等，灭之。
现代文：韶令安远将军庾岳统领一万骑兵，回去讨伐叱奴根等人，消灭了他们。
English: He ordered Anyuan General Gong Yue to lead ten thousand cavalrymen and go back to fight against Yanugen and others and destroy them.

古文：三月己酉，车驾次于卢奴。
现代文：三月己酉，皇帝停驻在卢奴。
English: At the end of March, the emperor stopped in Lunu.

古文：宝遣使求和，请送元觚，割常山以西奉国，乞守中山以东。帝许之。
现代文：慕容宝派遣使者求和，愿意送回元觚，割让常山以西献给国家，乞求守卫中山以柬地区，皇帝同意了他的请求。
English: Murong Bao sent an envoy to ask for peace, willing to send back to Yuancheng, cede the west of Changshan to the country, and beg to guard the Zhongshan-Cambodia region. The emperor agreed to his request.

古文：已而宝背约。
现代文：不久慕容宝违背约定。
English: But Murongbao soon reneged on the agreement.

古文：辛亥，车驾次中山，命诸将围之。
现代文：辛亥，皇帝驻扎中山，命令各将领包围城池。
English: Xinhai, the emperor stationed in Zhongshan, ordered the generals to surround the city.

古文：是夜，宝弟贺麟将妻子出走西山。
现代文：这天夜晚，慕容宝的弟弟画逊带着妻子儿女出城逃入酉旦。
English: That night, Murong Bao's younger brother, Gu Xun, took his wife and children out of the city and fled to Handan.

古文：宝见贺麟走，恐先据和龙，壬子夜，遂将其妻子及兄弟宗族数千骑北遁。
现代文：基查宜见贺麟逃走，担心他先占据和龙，壬子夜晚，就带着他的妻子儿女和兄弟族人几千骑兵向北逃跑。
English: Guichai saw He Lin fleeing and was worried that he would occupy He Long first. In the evening, Ren Zi took his wife, children and brothers and fled north with several thousand cavalry.

古文：宝将李沈、王次多、张超、贾归等来降。
现代文：慕容实的将领李沈、王次多、张超、贾归等人前来投降。
English: Mu Rongsheng's generals Li Shen, Wang Cid, Zhang Chao, Jia Gui and others came to surrender.

古文：遣将军长孙肥追之，至范阳，不及而还。
现代文：派遣将军长孙肥追赶，追到范阳，没赶上而返回。
English: He dispatched General Sun Fei to chase after them, and they chased him to Fanyang. However, they did not catch up and returned.

古文：城内共立慕容普邻为主。
现代文：城内一起拥立慕容普邻为首领。
English: The people of the city jointly established Murong Pu neighbor as the emperor.

古文：夏四月，帝以军粮未继，乃诏征东大将军东平公元仪罢鄴围，徙屯钜鹿，积租杨城。
现代文：夏四月，皇帝因军粮不能跟上，就下韶征束大将军束平公互懂解除对面继的包围，迁到堑鹿屯驻，在杨城聚积租谷。
English: In the summer of April, because the emperor could not keep up with the military grain, he sent the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general.

古文：普邻出步卒六千余人，伺间犯诸屯兵。
现代文：普邻出动步兵六千多人，伺机进犯各军营。
English: More than six thousand infantrymen were dispatched from all over the country, waiting for an opportunity to attack the military camps.

古文：诏将军长孙肥等轻骑挑之，帝以虎队五千横截其后，斩首五千，生虏七百人，宥而遣之。
现代文：韶令将军长孙肥等人以轻装的骑兵挑战，皇帝率领勇士五千人横断普邻的后路，斩下五千首级，活捉七百人，宽宥而放回他们。
English: The emperor ordered General Sun Fei and others to challenge the lightly armed cavalry. The emperor led five thousand warriors across the back road of the neighborhood, cut off five thousand heads, captured seven hundred people alive, and pardoned and released them.

古文：夏五月庚子，大赏功臣。
现代文：夏五月庚子，大力赏赐功臣。
English: Xia May Geng Zi, vigorously rewarded meritorious vassals.

古文：帝以中山城内为普邻所胁，而大军迫之，欲降无路，乃密招喻之。
现代文：皇帝因中山城内受萱邻的胁迫，而大军逼迫他们，想投降没有门路，就秘密招抚晓谕他们。
English: The emperor was coerced by his neighbors in Zhongshan City, and the large army persecuted them. If they wanted to surrender, there was no way, so he secretly coaxed and told them.

古文：甲辰，曜兵扬威以示城内，命诸军罢围南徙以待其变。
现代文：甲辰，陈兵炫耀威风给城内看，命令各军解除包围向南迁徙以等待城内的变故。
English: At that time, Chen soldiers showed off their power to the city and ordered the troops to lift the siege and move south to wait for the change in the city.

古文：甲寅，以东平公元仪为骠骑大将军、都督中外诸军事、兗豫雍荆徐扬六州牧、左丞相，封卫王。
现代文：甲寅，任命东平公元仪为骠骑大将军、都督中外诸军事、兖豫雍荆徐扬六州牧、左丞相，封为卫王。
English: Jia Yin appointed Dongping Rongyi as the cavalry general, the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, the governor of the Six Provinces, the Minister of the Left, and the King of Wei.

古文：襄城公元题，进封为王。
现代文：襄城公元题，进封号为王。
English: Xiangcheng's era is the theme, and the imperial seal is king.

古文：秋七月，普邻遣乌丸张骧率五千余人出城求食，寇常山之灵寿，杀害吏民。
现代文：秋七月，萱锂派遣宣乞扯人昙坠率领五千多人出城求取食物，进犯常山的灵寿，杀害官吏民众。
English: In autumn and July, he sent more than 5,000 people out of the city to beg for food, and attacked Lingshou in Changshan, killing officials and citizens.

古文：贺麟自丁零国入于骧军，因其众，复入中山，杀普邻而自立。
现代文：贺麟从丁零中进入张骧的军队，利用他的部众，又进入中山，杀害普邻而自己登位。
English: He Lin entered Zhang Ye's army from Ding Zi Middle School, took advantage of his subordinates, and entered Zhongshan Middle School, killed his neighbors and ascended to the throne.

古文：帝还幸鲁口，遣将军长孙肥一千骑袭中山，入其郛而还。
现代文：皇帝回到鲁口，派遣将军长孙肥率一千骑兵袭击中山，进入外城后返回。
English: The emperor returned to Lukou, dispatched General Sun Fei to attack Zhongshan with a thousand cavalry, entered the outer city and returned.

古文：八月丙寅朔，帝自鲁口进军常山之九门。
现代文：八月丙寅初一，皇帝从鲁口进军到常山的九门。
English: On the first day of August, the emperor marched from Lukou to the Nine Gates of Changshan.

古文：时大疫，人马牛多死。
现代文：这时发生大瘟疫，人马牛死亡很多。
English: At this time, a great plague occurred, and many people, horses and cattle died.

古文：帝问疫于诸将，对曰： 在者才十四五。 
现代文：皇帝向众将领询问疫情，回答说： 活下来的仅十分之四五。 
English: The emperor asked the generals about the epidemic and replied, "Only four or five out of ten survived.

古文：是时中山犹拒守，而饥疫并臻，群下咸思还北。
现代文：这时中山还在拒守，而饥荒瘟疫一起到来，部下都想回到北方。
English: At this time, Zhongshan was still refusing to defend, and famine and plague came together, and his subordinates all wanted to return to the north.

古文：帝知其意，因谓之曰： 斯固天命，将若之何！四海之人，皆可与为国，在吾所以抚之耳，何恤乎无民！ 
现代文：皇帝知道他们的心意，就对他们说： 这本是天命，该怎么办四海的人民，都可以组成国家，就在于我如何安抚他们而已，何必忧虑没有人民呢? 
English: The emperor knew what they were thinking and said to them, "This is the will of heaven. What should I do? People from all over the world can form a country, it just depends on how I can appease them. Why worry about not having people?

古文：群臣乃不敢复言。
现代文：群臣于是不敢再进言。
English: The courtiers then did not dare to make any more suggestions.

古文：遣抚军大将军略阳公元遵袭中山，芟其禾菜，入郛而还。
现代文：派遣抚军大将军略阳公元遵袭击中山，铲除他们的庄稼，进入外城后返回。
English: He dispatched the general of the Fuzhou army, Liangyang, to attack Zhongshan, uproot their crops, enter the outer city and return.

古文：九月，贺麟饥穷，率三万余人出寇新市。
现代文：九月，贺麟饥饿困穷，率领三万多人出城劫掠新市。
English: In September, He Lin, starving and destitute, led more than thirty thousand people out of the city to plunder the new city.

古文：甲子晦，帝进军讨之。太史令晁崇奏曰： 不吉。 
现代文：甲于晦曰，皇帝进军讨伐他，太史令晁崇上奏说： 不吉利。 
English: On the eve of the first day of the year, the emperor marched out to fight against him, and Taishi ordered Yongsong to report to him, saying: "This is not auspicious.

古文：帝曰： 其义云何？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 这话怎么讲? 
English: The emperor said, "How can I say this?

古文：对曰： 昔纣以甲子亡，兵家忌之。 
现代文：晁崇回答说： 从前商纣王在甲子日灭亡，用兵的人忌讳这一天。 
English: Gong Chong replied: In the past, the Shang Dynasty was overthrown on Jiazi Day, and soldiers avoided this day.

古文：帝曰： 纣以甲子亡，周武不以甲子胜乎？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 商纣王在甲子日灭亡，周武王不是在甲子日得胜了吗? 
English: The emperor said: King Shangdi died on the day of the Horse, but did not King Zhouwu win on the day of the Horse?

古文：崇无以对。
现代文：晁崇无话回答。
English: Hao Chong had nothing to say.

古文：冬十月丙寅，帝进军新市。贺麟退阻泒水，依渐洳泽以自固。
现代文：冬十月丙寅，皇帝进军新市，贺麟退到弧水阻挡，依仗渐洳泽来固守。
English: In winter and October, Emperor Xinyin marched into Xincheng, while Emperor Helin retreated to the Arc of Water to block the advance, and relied on the gradual rise of Heze to hold fast.

古文：甲戌，帝临其营，战于义台坞，大破之，斩首九千余级。
现代文：甲戌，皇帝接近他的营垒，在义台坞交战，大败贺麟，斩下九千多首级。
English: Armor, the emperor approached his camp, fought in Yidai dock, defeated He Lin, and cut off more than nine thousand heads.

古文：贺麟单马走西山，遂奔鄴，慕容德杀之。
现代文：贺鳞单人匹马逃到酉山，继而奔往邺越，蔓容德杀了他。
English: He Qian fled to Lushan on horseback, and then rushed to Gongyue. Cang Rongde killed him.

古文：甲申，共所署公卿、尚书、将吏、士卒降者二万余人。
现代文：甲申，贺麟所委任的公卿、尚书、将领官吏、士兵投降的有二万多人。
English: According to Jiaxin, more than 20,000 nobles, officials, generals, and soldiers who were appointed by He Lin surrendered.

古文：其将张骧、李沈、慕容文等先来降，寻皆亡还，是日复获之，皆赦而不问。
现代文：他的将领张坠、奎选、摹查塞等人先来投降，不久都逃回，这天又擒获他们，都赦免而不追究。
English: His subordinates Zhang Xuan, Li Shen, Murongwen and others had all surrendered and later ran back. They were captured again on this day, but Emperor Daowu pardoned them without investigation.

古文：获其所传皇帝玺绶、图书、府库、珍宝，簿列数万。
现代文：缴获贺麟所传授的皇帝玺绶、图书、府库、珍宝，注册登记有几万件。
English: Tens of thousands of imperial regalia, books, government treasuries, and precious treasures handed down by He Lin have been seized and registered.

古文：班赐功臣及将士各有差。
现代文：颁赏功臣和将士各有等级。
English: There are different levels of awards for meritorious soldiers and officers.

古文：中山平。
现代文：中山乎定。
English: Zhongshan was leveled.

古文：乙酉，襄城王题薨。
现代文：乙酉，襄城王元题逝世。
English: On the twenty-first day, Xiangcheng Wangqi passed away.

古文：丁亥，遣三万骑赴卫王仪，将以攻鄴。
现代文：丁亥，派遣三万骑兵奔赴堑王五垡那裹，将要攻打邺城。
English: Dinghai sent thirty thousand cavalrymen to rush to the king of Shao, Wuxuan, and they were going to attack Shaocheng.

古文：是岁，鲜卑秃发乌孤私署大单于、西平王。
现代文：这一年，挞卑人秃发乌孤自命为大单于、酉垩王。
English: In that year, a low-born, bald-headed man named Wukong claimed to be the king of Xing.

古文：天兴元年春正月，慕容德走保滑台。仪克鄴，收其仓库。
现代文：型坚元年春正月，摹容擅逃到攫台据守，五仪攻下塑越，没收他们的仓库。
English: In the first month of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year.

古文：诏赏将士各有差。
现代文：下诏赏赐将士多少不等。
English: The following edict rewards soldiers in varying amounts.

古文：仪追德至于河，不及而还。
现代文：元仪追击慕容德到黄河，没赶上而返回。
English: Yuan Yi chased Murongde to the Yellow River, but did not catch up and returned.

古文：庚子，车驾自中山行幸常山之真定，次赵郡之高邑，遂幸于鄴。
现代文：庚子，皇帝从中山前往常山的真定，停留在趟郡的高邑，于是前往邺城。
English: Geng Zi, the emperor, traveled from Zhongshan to Zhending in Changshan, stayed in Gaoyu in Wai County, and then went to Lucheng.

古文：民有老不能自存者，诏郡县赈恤之。
现代文：民众有年老不能自己养活的，下诏郡县赈济抚恤他们。
English: The people have old people who can't support themselves, and the county will subsidize them.

古文：帝至鄴，巡登台榭，遍览宫城，将有定都之意，乃置行台，以龙骧将军日南公和跋为尚书，与左丞贾彝率郎吏及兵五千人镇鄴。
现代文：皇帝到达邺城，巡游层台楼榭，遍观宫城，将有在这裹定都的心意。于是设置行台，任命龙骧将军日南公和跋为尚书，同左丞贾彝率领郎吏和兵士五千人镇守邺城。
English: The emperor arrived at Lucheng, cruised through the multi-storied palace and toured Miyagi, and would have the intention of wrapping up the capital here. Therefore, he set up a platform, appointed Longjing General Nichinan Gongwaba as the official, and led the retainers and soldiers of five thousand people to defend Lucheng with Zuo Jia Wei.

古文：车驾自鄴还中山，所过存问百姓。
现代文：皇帝从邺城回到中山，所过之处都慰问百姓。
English: When the emperor returned to Zhongshan from Shicheng, he consoled the people everywhere he went.

古文：诏大军所经州郡，复赀租一年，除山东民租赋之半。
现代文：诏令大军所经过的州郡，免除一年的资租，免除太行山以束民众一半的租赋。
English: The imperial edict exempted the counties and prefectures through which the army passed from paying one year's capital rent, and exempted the Taihang Mountains from paying half of the people's rent.

古文：车驾将北还，发卒万人治直道，自望都铁关凿恆岭至代五百余里。
现代文：皇帝将回方，调发士卒一万人修理直道，从望都的铁关开凿恒岭到代郡的道路五百多里。
English: The emperor turned back, dispatched ten thousand soldiers to repair the straight road, and dug more than five hundred miles of road from Hengling to Dayi County from the iron gate of the capital.

古文：帝虑还后山东有变，乃置行台于中山，诏左丞相、守尚书令、卫王仪镇中山，抚军大将军、略阳公元遵镇勃海之合口。
现代文：皇帝担心回去后太行山东有变故，就在中山设置行台，诏令左丞相、守尚书令、卫王元仪镇守中山，抚军大将军、略阳公元遵镇守勃海的合口。
English: The emperor was worried that there would be changes in Shandong after returning, so he set up a marching platform in Zhongshan. He ordered Zuo Zheng, Shou Shang Shuling, Wei Wang Yuan Yi Zhen to guard Zhongshan, Fuzhun Da Gen, and Liangyang A.D. Zun Zhen to guard the mouth of the Bohai Sea.

古文：右军将军尹国先督租于冀州，闻帝将还，谋反，欲袭信都。安南将军长孙嵩执送，斩之。
现代文：右军将军尹国先前在冀州督运租谷，听说皇帝将要返回，图谋反叛，想要袭击信都，安南将军长孙嵩捉住送上，杀了他。
English: The right-wing army general Yin Guo was previously in Jizhou to supervise the transportation of rent. Hearing that the emperor was about to return, he plotted a rebellion and wanted to attack Xindu. Annan's general Sun Song caught him and killed him.

古文：辛酉，车驾发自中山，至于望都尧山。
现代文：辛酉，皇帝从中山出发，到达望都的尧山。
English: Xinzhuang, the emperor departed from Zhongshan and arrived at Lushan, the capital of Wangdu.

古文：徙山东六州民吏及徒何、高丽杂夷三十六万，百工伎巧十万余口，以充京师。
现代文：迁徙太行山以束六州民众官吏和徒何、高丽各类夷人三十六万，工匠艺人十多万，去充实京城。
English: Around 360,000 civil servants from six prefectures, as well as various types of barbarians from Hokkaido and Korea, and more than 100,000 craftsmen and artists, migrated to Mt. Taihang to enrich the capital city.

古文：车驾次于恆山之阳。
现代文：皇帝驻扎在恒山南面。
English: The emperor was stationed in the south of Hengshan Mountain.

古文：博陵、勃海、章武群盗并起，略阳公元遵等讨平之。
现代文：博陵、勃海、章武的盗贼同时起事，略阳公元遵等人讨伐平定了他们。
English: The thieves of Boling, Bohai and Zhangwu revolted at the same time, and they were subdued by the crusade of Liangyang and Zun.

古文：广川太守贺卢杀冀州刺史王辅，驱勒守兵，抄掠阳平、顿丘诸郡，遂南渡河，奔慕容德。
现代文：广太守贺卢杀死冀州刺史王辅，驱使守兵，抄掠阳平、顿丘各郡，继而向南渡过黄河，投奔慕容德。
English: He Lu, the governor of Guangxi, killed Wang Yu, the governor of Jizhou, and drove the guards to plunder Yangping and Dongqiu counties, and then crossed the Yellow River to the south and went to Murongde.

古文：二月，车驾自中山幸繁宫，更选屯卫。
现代文：二月，皇帝从土山前往篮旦擅，另外选择守卫。
English: In February, the emperor traveled from Tsuchiyama to Kambutan-sho, and selected another guard.

古文：诏给内徙新民耕牛，计口受田。
现代文：诏令供给内徙新民耕牛，按人授受田地。
English: The imperial edict provided the newly immigrated people with farm cattle, and the fields were allocated according to the number of people.

古文：三月，离石胡帅呼延铁、西河胡帅张崇等聚党数千人叛。诏安远将军庾岳讨平之。
现代文：三月，整互翅头领呼至蜡、酉回翅头领退塞等人聚集党羽几千人反叛，韶令安远将军座压讨伐平定了他们。
English: In March, several thousand party members, including the leaders of the rectification movement and the return movement, gathered to rebel, and the general Anyuan was ordered to suppress them.

古文：渔阳群盗库傉官韬聚众反。诏中坚将军伊谓讨之。
现代文：渔隧盗贼库僻官韬聚众反叛，诏令中坚将军困讨伐他。
English: A fish tunnel thief, a bank robber, and a renegade government official gather a group of rebels and order a strong general to fight him.

古文：征左丞相、卫王仪还京师，诏略阳公遵代镇中山。
现代文：征召左丞相、旺五仪回京城，诏令喳堡公五遵代替互堡镇守虫山。
English: Left Minister of War and Wang Wogi were summoned back to the capital, and it was decreed that Bunker King Wuzun would take the place of Mutsuhaku as the town guard of Mushizan.

古文：夏四月壬戌，进遵封常山王，南安公元顺进封毗陵王，征虏将军、历阳公穆崇为太尉，安南将军、钜鹿公长孙嵩为司徒。
现代文：夏四月壬戌，晋封丞遵为当丛，卢曲五岖进封为毗陵王，征虏将军、历腥公穆塞担任太尉，安南将军、钜鹿公垦逐盖担任司徒。
English: In the summer of April, Jinfeng Zong was appointed as Dangzong, Luqu Wogu Jinfeng was appointed as Viling Wang, Conscript General, Liguo Gong Muxi was appointed as Tai Lai, General Annan and Yinglu Gongyi were appointed as Sittu.

古文：帝祠天于西郊，麾帜有加焉。
现代文：皇帝在西郊祭天，旌旗有所增加。
English: The emperor held a festival in the western suburbs, and the number of banners increased.

古文：广平太守、辽西公元意烈谋反，于郡赐死，原其妻子。
现代文：卢垩太守、辽酉公元意烈图谋反叛，在郡中赐令自杀，宽免他的妻子儿女。
English: The governor of Lu'an and Liao'an, who plotted a rebellion, was ordered to commit suicide in the county and his wife and children were pardoned.

古文：鄜城屠各董羌、杏城卢水郝奴、河东蜀薛榆、氐帅苻兴，各率其种内附。
现代文：鄘城屠各董羌、杏城卢水郝奴、回束蜀薛榆、氐人头领苻兴，各自率他们的种族归附。
English: Gongcheng Tu Gu Dong, Gongcheng Lu Shui Xuan Niu, Huizhou Shu Xue Yao, and the leader of the Qiang people, Gongxing, each led their race to annexation.

古文：六月丙子，诏有司议定国号。
现代文：六月丙子，韶令有关官员议定国号。
English: On June 16, the relevant departments were ordered to discuss and determine the country name.

古文：群臣曰： 昔周秦以前，世居所生之土，有国有家，及王天下，即承为号。
现代文：群臣说： 古代周秦以前，世代居住在所出生的土地，有国有家，等到统一天下，就承袭所居之地为国号。
English: The group of ministers said: Before the ancient Zhou and Qin dynasties, generations lived in the land where they were born, and there were state-owned families. When unification came, they inherited the place where they lived as the country name.

古文：自汉以来，罢侯置守，时无世继，其应运而起者，皆不由尺土之资。
现代文：自从汉代以来，罢诸侯置郡守，逭时没有世代继承的土地，凡应运而兴起的，都不凭藉一尺土地的资本。
English: Since the Han Dynasty, there has been no land inherited from generation to generation since the abolition of vassals and the establishment of county governors. All those who have arisen in response to the movement do not rely on the capital of a foot of land.

古文：今国家万世相承，启基云代。
现代文：现在国家万代相承，开创基业于昼生搜塑。
English: Now the country is inheriting from generation to generation, and the founding of the foundation industry is in the middle of the day.

古文：臣等以为若取长远，应以代为号。 
现代文：臣等以为如取长远的意思，应以优为国号。 
English: The vassals thought that if they wanted to take a long-term view, they should take "excellent" as the country's name.

古文：诏曰： 昔朕远祖，总御幽都，控制遐国，虽践王位，未定九州。
现代文：诏令说： 从前我的远祖，总领幽都，控制远方的国家，虽然登上王位，但没有平定九州。
English: The imperial edict said: Once upon a time, my distant ancestor, the general leader of Yuto, controlled a distant country. Although he ascended the throne, he did not conquer Kyushu.

古文：逮于朕躬，处百代之季，天下分裂，诸华乏主。
现代文：到了我本人，处在百代之后，天下分崩离析，诸侯没有主宰。
English: As far as I am concerned, after a hundred generations, the world is falling apart, and the lords have no control.

古文：民俗虽殊，抚之在德，故躬率六军，扫平中土，凶逆荡除，遐迩率服。
现代文：民俗虽然不同，安抚在于德行，所以亲率六军，扫平中原，凶恶叛逆者被除掉，远近归服。
English: Although the folk customs are different, the pacification lies in the virtue, so the relatives led the six armies to sweep the Central Plains, the vicious rebels were eliminated, and the far and near were subdued.

古文：宜仍先号，以为魏焉。
现代文：应该沿用先前名号，称为魏。
English: The previous name, Wei, should be used.

古文：布告天下，咸知朕意。 
现代文：遍告天下，使都知道我的心意。 
English: I want to make my intentions known to the whole world.

古文：秋七月，迁都平城，始营宫室，建宗庙，立社稷。
现代文：秋七月，迁都到平城，开始修造宫室，建立宗庙，设置社稷。
English: In autumn and July, the capital was moved to Pingcheng, and the construction of the palace and the construction of the ancestral temple to establish the shrine began.

古文：渔阳乌丸库傉官韬复聚党为寇。
现代文：渔迁昼立库僻官韬又聚集党羽劫掠。
English: At the time of the fishery resettlement, secluded officials and officials gathered to loot the warehouse.

古文：诏冠军将军王建讨平之。
现代文：韶令冠军将军王建讨伐平定了他们。
English: They were defeated by the champion general Wang Jian.

古文：八月，诏有司正封畿，制郊甸，端径术，标道里，平五权，较五量，定五度。
现代文：八月，诏令有关官员核定京城地带，确立郊野地域，严密测量技术，标示道路里程，统一五种重量单位，校正五种衡器单位，固定五种长度单位。
English: In August, the relevant departments were ordered to determine the scope of Fongji, delineate the suburb and dian clothing areas, correct the measurement method, set up road and village signs, average five rights, calibrate five quantities, and verify five degrees.

古文：遣使循行郡国，举奏守宰不法者，亲览察黜陟之。
现代文：派遣使者巡视郡国，举奏不守法度的郡守县官，皇帝亲自阅览考察予以罢免提升。
English: Envoys were sent to every county and province to report local officials who had broken the law, and the emperor personally reviewed and inspected them and promoted and demoted them.

古文：九月，乌丸张骧子超，收合亡命，聚党三千余家，据勃海之南皮，自号征东大将军、乌刃王，抄掠诸郡。
现代文：九月，壹丸退堕的儿子退超，收集逃亡的人，聚集党羽三千多家，占据勃海的南皮，自称征束大将军、乌立王，抄掠各郡。
English: In September, the son of a general who had defected, retired, collected fugitives, gathered more than 3,000 followers, occupied the southern part of the Bohai Sea, claimed to be a conscript general, Uli Wang, and plundered counties.

古文：诏将军庾岳讨之。
现代文：韶令将军庾岳讨伐他们。
English: He ordered General Gongyue to fight them.

古文：冬十月，起天文殿。
现代文：冬十月，修建天文殿。
English: In the winter of October, the Tenmonden hall was built.

古文：十有一月辛亥，诏尚书吏部郎中邓渊典官制，立爵品，定律吕，协音乐；仪曹郎中董谧撰郊庙、社稷、朝觐、飨宴之仪；三公郎中王德定律令，申科禁；太史令晁崇造浑仪，考天象；吏部尚书崔玄伯总而裁之。
现代文：十一月辛亥，诏令尚书吏部郎中邓渊掌管官制，订立爵品，确定律吕，协和音乐；仪曹郎中董箠编集郊庙、社稷、朝见、飨宴的礼仪；三公郎中王德制定律令，申明科禁；太史令晁崇制造浑天仪，考察天象；吏部尚书崔玄伯总管裁定。
English: In November of Xinhai, Emperor Taizong of the Shang Dynasty issued an edict to Deng Yuanzhong, who was in charge of the official system, to conclude the peerage, determine the laws and regulations, and coordinate the music; Emperor Taizong of the Song Dynasty compiled the etiquette of suburban temples, social gatherings, court audiences, and banquets; Emperor Taizong of the Three Kingdoms issued an edict, affirming the prohibition of science; Emperor Taizong of the Taizong Dynasty issued an edict to Zhaozhong of the Song Dynasty to manufacture the celestial globe, and inspect the celestial bodies; and Emperor Cui Xuanbo,

古文：闰月，左丞相、骠骑大将军、卫王仪及诸王公卿士，诣阙上书曰： 臣等闻宸极居中，则列宿齐其晷；帝王顺天，则群后仰其度。
现代文：闰月，左丞相、骠骑大将军、堑王五仅和各王公卿士，前往宫殿上书说： 臣等听说北极星居于中央，则众星齐受它的光彩；帝王顺从天意，则白 官瞻仰他的风度。
English: In the leap month, the left minister of justice, the commander of the cavalry, the five kings, and all the princes and nobles went to the palace to write a letter saying: When the courtiers heard that the North Star was in the center, the stars all received its brilliance; when the emperor obeyed the will of heaven, the white officials admired his demeanor.

古文：伏惟陛下德协二仪，道隆三五，仁风被于四海，盛化塞于大区，泽及昆虫，恩沾行苇，讴歌所属，八表归心，军威所及，如风靡草，万姓颙颙，咸思系命。
现代文：陛下德行协和天地，道义隆于三皇五帝，仁政之风遍及四海，盛大的教化充塞大地，德泽普及于昆虫，恩惠沾濡路旁芦苇，妪歌连属，八方之外诚心归向，军威所到之处，如风吹草伏在地，百姓仰慕，都想效命。
English: His Majesty's moral conduct is in harmony with heaven and earth. Morality flourished under the three emperors and five emperors. The winds of benevolent politics spread throughout the four seas. Grand enlightenment filled the earth. Virtue spread to insects. His grace drenched the reeds along the roadside. He was accompanied by songs. His sincerity spread beyond the eight directions. Wherever his military power went, the people, like the wind blowing grass, lay prostrate on the ground in admiration. They all wanted to serve him.

古文：而躬履谦虚，退身后己，宸仪未彰，哀服未御，非所以上允皇天之意，下副乐推之心。
现代文：可是陛下行事谦虚，抑退自身，朝廷礼仪不显赫，衮服不穿，造不是上答皇天意愿，下符民众乐于推举心意的做法。
English: However, His Majesty behaves modestly, restrains himself, does not flaunt court etiquette, does not wear formal attire, and does not answer to the will of the emperor, but to the will of the people.

古文：宜光崇圣烈，示轨宪于万世。
现代文：陛下应该彰明显示圣德，给万世展现准则法式。
English: His majesty should manifest the virtue of holiness, and show to the world the standard of Frenchness.

古文：臣等谨昧死以闻。 
现代文：臣等恭谨地冒死陈闻。 
English: Our vassals have risked their lives to report the news.

古文：帝三让乃许之。
现代文：皇帝三次推让后才同意这件事。
English: The emperor yielded again and again, and the request was granted.

古文：十有二月己丑，帝临天文殿，太尉、司徒进玺绶，百官咸称万岁。
现代文：十二月己丑，皇帝到天文殿，太尉、司徒进献玺绶，百官都欢呼万岁。
English: December was ugly, the emperor went to the Astronomical Hall, the lieutenant and the scholar presented the imperial scepter, and all the officials cheered.

古文：大赦，改年。
现代文：大赦境内，改年号。
English: Within the amnesty territory, the year number was changed.

古文：追尊成帝已下及后号谥。
现代文：追尊盛壶以下各帝和皇后谧号。
English: The imperial and empress posthumous names of the emperors and empresses are shown below.

古文：乐用《皇始》之舞。
现代文：音乐采用《皇始》的舞曲。
English: The music is a dance piece from "The Beginning of the Emperor."

古文：诏百司议定行次。尚书崔玄伯等奏从土德，服色尚黄，数用五；未祖辰腊，牺牲用白。五郊立气，宣赞时令，敬授民时，行夏之正。
现代文：诏令各官署议定五德次第，尚书崔塞伯等人上奏依土德，服色崇尚黄色，数量用五，未祭路神辰曰祭百神，祭祀牲畜用白色，五次郊迎节气，大力推广时令，恭敬授予民众农时，采用夏朝历法。
English: According to the edict, the various government departments agreed on the five virtues, with Shangshu Triseb and others playing on the local virtues, clothing color advocating yellow, quantity using five, un-sacrificed road gods saying "sacrifice hundreds of gods," sacrificial animals using white, welcoming the solar terms five times in the suburbs, vigorously promoting the season, respectfully granting the people farm time, and adopting the summer calendar.

古文：徙六州二十二郡守宰、豪杰、吏民二千家于代都。
现代文：迁徙六州二十二郡的郡守县令、豪强、官吏民众二千家到代都。
English: Twenty-two counties in six prefectures were relocated, and the county governors, officials, and people from 2,000 households moved to the capital.

古文：是岁，兰汗杀慕容宝而自立，宝子盛杀汗僭立。
现代文：这一年，疆汗杀死慕容宝而自己登位，慕容宜的儿子墓容盛杀死个迁而僭越即位。
English: In that year, Jian Khan killed Murong Bao and ascended to the throne himself, while Murong Yi's son, Tomb Yong Sheng, killed a nobleman and ascended to the throne.

古文：慕容德自称燕王。
现代文：慕容德自称燕王。
English: Murongde calls himself the King of Swallows.

古文：二年春正月甲子，初祠上帝于南郊，以始祖神元皇帝配，降坛视燎，成礼而反。
现代文：二年春正月甲子，初次在南郊祭祀上天。以始祖神元皇帝配祭，走下祭坛观看焚柴祭天的地方，完成礼仪后返回。
English: In the first month of the second year of spring, in the southern suburb of Kazo, a sacrifice was offered to the heavens for the first time. Emperor Yuan, as the founder god, accompanied the offering, stepped down from the altar to watch the place where the firewood was burned to offer to the heavens, and returned after completing the ritual.

古文：乙丑，曲赦京师。
现代文：乙丑，赦免京师地区。
English: Second ugly, pardoned the Beijing division area.

古文：始制三驾之法。
现代文：开始制定三种车驾的做法。
English: He began to establish the Emperor's Three Vehicles Law.

古文：庚午，车驾北巡，分命诸将大袭高车。大将军、常山王遵等三军从东道出长川，镇北将军、高凉王乐真等七军从西道出牛川，车驾亲勒六军从中道自驳髯水西北。
现代文：庚午，皇帝向北巡视，分派各将军大举袭击直禀，大将军、常山王元遵等三军从东路出兵昼业，镇北将军、高凉王乐真等七军从西路出兵生川，皇帝亲自统率六军从中路自驳髯水向西北行进。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th month, the emperor made a tour to the north and dispatched generals to attack Zhouzhuang in a big way. The three armies including the great general and Changshan Wang Yuan Zun sent troops from the east to the daytime occupation, and the seven armies including Zhenbei general and Gaoliang Wang Lezhen sent troops from the west to the Yangchuan River. The emperor personally led the six armies to march from the middle to the northwest.

古文：二月丁亥朔，诸军同会，破高车杂种三十余部，获七万余口，马三十余万匹，牛羊百四十余万。
现代文：二月丁亥初一，各军会合，打败高车各种族三十多部，擒获七万多人，马三十多万匹，牛羊一百四十多万头。
English: In February, on the first day of the Dinghai Festival, the armies met, defeated more than 30 high-speed vehicles of various ethnic groups, captured more than 70,000 people, more than 300,000 horses, and more than 1.4 million cattle and sheep.

古文：骠骑大将军、卫王仪督三万骑别从西北绝漠千余里，破其遗迸七部，获二万余口，马五万馀匹，牛羊二十余万头，高车二十余万乘，并服玩诸物。
现代文：骠骑大将军、卫王元仪督率三万骑兵另从西北无人烟的沙漠行进一千多里，打败他们逃出的七个部落，擒获二万多人，马五万多匹，牛羊二十多万头，高大的车辆二十多万乘，还有服饰珍玩各类物品。
English: The cavalry general, Wei Wangyuan Yi, led by 30,000 cavalrymen, marched more than 1,000 miles from the northwestern desert, defeated the seven tribes they escaped from, and captured more than 20,000 people, more than 50,000 horses, more than 200,000 cattle and sheep, more than 200,000 tall vehicles, as well as clothing and various precious items.

古文：还次牛川及薄山，并刻石记功。班赐从臣各有差。
现代文：返回停驻牛川和薄山，还刻石碑记载功绩，颁赐随从的臣属多少不等。
English: Returning to stay in Ushikawa and Usan, they also carved stone monuments to record their achievements, and the number of attendant vassals awarded varied.

古文：庚戌，征虏将军庾岳破张超于勃海。
现代文：庚戌，征虏将军庾岳在勃海打败张超。
English: Geng Zheng, the conscript general Zhaoyue defeated Zhang Chao in the Bohai Sea.

古文：超走平原，为其党所杀。
现代文：张超逃到平原，被他的党羽杀死。
English: Zhang Chao fled to the plain and was killed by his henchmen.

古文：以所获高车众起鹿苑，南因台阴，北距长城，东包白登，属之西山，广轮数十里。凿渠引武川水注之苑中，疏为三沟，分流宫城内外。
现代文：以所擒获的高车人修鹿苑，南面靠近台阴，北面抵达长城，束面环抱白登，连接西山，方圆几十里，开渠道引武水注入苑中，疏通为三条沟，分别流入宫城内外。
English: The captured cart driver was used to build Deer Park. The south side is close to Taiyin, the north side reaches the Great Wall, and the bundled side embraces Baiden, connecting the West Mountain, with a radius of dozens of miles. A channel was opened to bring water into the park, and it was dredged into three ditches, which separately flowed into and out of Miyagi.

古文：又穿鸿雁池。
现代文：又穿凿鸿雁池。
English: He also excavated the Wild Goose Pond.

古文：三月己未，车驾至自北伐。
现代文：三月己未，皇帝从北伐前线返回。
English: On the third day of March, the emperor returned from the Northern Expedition.

古文：甲子，初令《五经》群书各置博士，增国子太学生员三千人。
现代文：甲子，初次令《五经》群书各自设立博士，增加国子太学生员达三千人。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he ordered for the first time that all the books of the "Five Classics" be set up as doctorates, adding three thousand students in the middle school of the State Children's Supervision.

古文：是月，氐人李辩叛慕容德，求援于鄴行台尚书和跋。
现代文：当月，氐人李辩背叛慕容德，向邺城行台尚书和跋请求援助。
English: In the same month, Li Yan, a native of Shicheng, betrayed Murongde and requested assistance from Shang Shu and Bao of Xingtai in Shicheng.

古文：跋轻骑往应之，克滑台，收德宫人府藏；又破德桂林王镇及郎吏将士千余人。
现代文：和跋率轻装骑兵前去接应他，攻克滑台，没收慕容德的宫女库藏；又打败慕容德的桂林王慕容镇和郎吏将士一千多人。
English: and led a troop of light cavalry to meet him, conquered the slide, confiscated Murongde's palace treasury; and defeated Murongde's Guilin King Murongzhen and more than a thousand retainers.

古文：丙子，遣建义将军庾真、越骑校尉奚斤讨库狄部帅叶亦干、宥连部帅窦羽泥于太浑川，破之。库狄勤支子沓亦干率其部落内附。
现代文：丙子，派遣建义将军庾真、越骑校尉奚斤到太浑川讨伐库狄部头领叶亦干、宥连部头领窦羽泥，打败了他们，库狄憋支的儿子沓亦干率领他的部落前来归附。
English: Cui Zi sent Jianyi General Cui Zhen and Yue Cavalry Lieutenant Cui Jian to Taihunchuan to fight against the leader of the Ku Di faction, Ye Yigang, and the leader of the Yulian faction, Dou Yuandi, and defeated them. Cui Yigang's son, Cui Yigang, led his tribe to annexation.

古文：真等进破侯莫陈部，获马牛羊十余万头，追殄遗迸，入大峨谷。
现代文：庾真等人进军打败侯莫陈部，获取马牛羊十多万头。追击逃跑者，进入大峨谷。
English: Yu Zhen and others marched in to defeat Hou Mo Chenbu and obtained more than one hundred thousand horses, cattle and sheep. They chased the escapees and entered the Great Aga Valley.

古文：中山太守仇儒亡匿赵郡，推群盗赵准为主，号使持节、征西大将军、冀青二州牧、钜鹿公，仇儒为准长史，聚党扇惑。
现代文：中山太守仇儒逃跑躲在赵郡，推举盗贼赵准为首领，号称使持节、征西大将军、冀青二州牧、钜鹿公，仇儒做赵准的长史，聚集党羽煽动迷惑百姓。
English: Zhongshan Taishou's enemy Zhu ran away and hid in Zhao County, and promoted the thief Zhao Jun to be the leader, claiming to be the envoy of the festival, the general of the Western Conquest, the herdsman of the two states of Jieqing and the lord of the elk, and the long history of the enemy Zhu as Zhao Jun, and gathered the party feathers to incite and confuse the people.

古文：诏中领军长孙肥讨平之。
现代文：诏令中领军长孙肥讨伐平定他们。
English: The central leader of the army, Sun Hui, issued an order to fight and subdue them.

古文：夏四月，前清河太守傅世聚党千余家，自号抚军将军。
现代文：夏四月，前清河太守傅世聚集党羽一千多家，自称为抚军将军。
English: In the summer of April, Fu Shi, the former governor of Qinghe, gathered more than a thousand party members and called himself the general of the army.

古文：五月癸亥，征虏将军庾岳讨破之。
现代文：五月癸亥，征虏将军庾岳讨伐打败了他。
English: In May of the year of the boar, the conscript general defeated him in the battle of the mountain.

古文：秋七月，起天华殿。
现代文：秋七月，修建天华殿。
English: In autumn and July, the construction of Tianhua Hall began.

古文：辛酉，大阅于鹿苑，飨赐各有差。
现代文：辛酉，在鹿苑大阅兵，赏赐多少不等。
English: Xin Yao, in the Luyuan grand military parade, how much reward varies.

古文：陈郡、河南流民万余口内徙，遣使者存劳之。
现代文：陈郡、河南流民一万多人迁徙到国内，派遣使者慰问他们。
English: More than 10,000 Chen County and Henan refugees migrated to China, and envoys were sent to console them.

古文：姚兴遣众围洛阳，司马德宗将辛恭靖请救。
现代文：姚兴派遣部众包围洛阳，司马德宗的将领辛恭靖请求救援。
English: Yao Xing dispatched his troops to encircle Luoyang, and Sima Dezong's general Xin Jiajing came to request rescue.

古文：八月，遣太尉穆崇率骑六千往赴之。
现代文：八月，派遣太尉穆崇率领六千骑兵赶赴那裹。
English: In August, Captain Mu Chong was dispatched to the area with 6,000 cavalry.

古文：增启京师十二门。
现代文：增开京城十二座门。
English: Twelve additional gates to the capital will be opened.

古文：作西武库。
现代文：建造西武库。
English: Construction of the West Arsenal.

古文：除州郡民租赋之半。
现代文：免除州郡民众一半的租赋。
English: Exempt half of the state's residents from paying rent.

古文：辛亥，诏礼官备撰众仪，著于新令。
现代文：辛亥，诏令礼官完整编集各项礼仪，着录在新令中。
English: On the 28th, the officials of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies wrote down all kinds of etiquette regulations in detail and compiled them into a new decree.

古文：范阳人卢溥，聚众海滨，称使持节、征北大将军、幽州刺史，攻掠郡县，杀幽州刺史封沓干。
现代文：范阳人卢溥，在海边聚集民众，自称使持节、征北大将军、幽州刺史，攻打抄掠郡县，杀死幽州刺史封沓干。
English: Lu Wei, a Fanyang man, gathered people at the seaside, claiming to be the envoy of the festival, the general of conquering the North, and the history of Yuzhou, attacking and plundering counties and counties, and killing the history of Yuzhou.

古文：慕容盛辽西太守李朗，举郡内属。
现代文：慕容盛的辽西太守李朗，率全郡归附。
English: Li Lang, the grand marshal of West Liaoning Province, led by Murong Sheng, annexed the whole county.

古文：西河胡帅护诺于、丁零帅翟同、蜀帅韩砻，并相率内附。
现代文：西河胡头领护诺于、丁零头领翟同、蜀人头领韩磐，都相继归附。
English: Xihe Hu head leader Guo Noyu, Ding Zi head leader Xing Tong, Shu people head leader Han Ban, have all been successively attached.

古文：冬十月，太庙成，迁神元、平文、昭成、献明皇帝神主于太庙。
现代文：冬十月，左庙建成，垩土、堕虚、献明皇帝的牌位到立廓。十甲午，摹容盛的征虏将军、趣塑太守直邀，率领三千户归附。
English: In winter and October, the Great Temple was completed, and the plaques of Emperor Jingen, Emperor Pingwen, Emperor Zhaocheng, and Emperor Xianming were moved into the Great Temple.

古文：十有二月甲午，慕容盛征虏将军、燕郡太守高湖，率户三千内属。辛亥，诏材官将军和突讨卢溥。
现代文：辛亥，诏令材官将军扭塞讨伐卢遵。
English: Xinhai issued an edict to the generals to stop fighting against Luzun.

古文：天华殿成。
现代文：玉茎压建成。
English: The stem of the egg is pressed into place.

古文：是岁，吕光立其子绍为天王，自称太上皇。
现代文：这一年，吕光立他的儿子吕绍为天王，自称太上皇。
English: In the same year, Lü Guang appointed his son Lü Shao as the Heavenly King, claiming to be the Emperor.

古文：光死，庶子纂杀绍僭立。
现代文：吕光死去，庶子吕纂杀死吕绍僭越即位。
English: Lü Guang died, and his son-in-law Lü Cao killed Lü Shaoqi to take the throne.

古文：秃发乌孤死，弟鹿孤代立，遣使朝贡。
现代文：秃发乌孤死去，弟弟鹿孤代立，派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: Bald-haired Uko died, and his younger brother Shikao succeeded him and sent an envoy to pay tribute to the court.

古文：三年春正月戊午，和突破卢溥于辽西，生获溥及其子焕，传送京师，轘之。
现代文：三年春正月戊午，和突在辽西打败卢溥，生擒卢遵和他的儿子卢堡，传送到京城，以车裂刑处死了他俩。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of spring in the third year, He suddenly defeated Lu Zong in West Liaoning Province. Lu Zong and his son Lu Bo, who were still alive, were transported to Beijing, and both of them were killed by chariot torture.

古文：癸亥，有事于北郊。
现代文：癸亥，在北郊祭祀。
English: Bonfire in the Northern Suburbs.

古文：分命诸官循行州郡，观民风俗，察举不法。
现代文：分派官员巡视州郡，观察民众风俗，检举不法行为。
English: Officials have been dispatched to inspect counties and prefectures, observe people's habits, and report illegal activities.

古文：赐群臣布帛各有差。
现代文：赐予群臣布帛多少不等。
English: The number of cloths given to the courtiers varies.

古文：二月丁亥，诏有司祀日于东郊。
现代文：二月丁亥，诏令有关官员在束郊祭。
English: In February, Dinghai, the imperial edict ordered the relevant officials to attend the Saku Suburban Festival.

古文：始耕籍田。
现代文：开始耕种籍田。
English: Began cultivating his family farm.

古文：壬寅，皇子聪薨。
现代文：壬寅，皇子元聪逝世。
English: On the 20th, Prince Satoshi passed away.

古文：三月戊午，立皇后慕容氏。
现代文：三月戊午，立皇后慕容氏。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, the Murong clan was proclaimed empress.

古文：是月，穿城南渠通于城内，作东西鱼池。
现代文：这月，穿凿城南渠水通入城内，修建东西鱼池。
English: In the same month, the southern city canal was dug to enter the city, and the fish pond was dug.

古文：夏四月，姚兴遣使朝贡。
现代文：夏四月，塑哩派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the summer of April, Yao Xing sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：五月戊辰，诏谒者仆射张济使于姚兴。
现代文：五月戊辰，诏令谒者仆射张迺出使型遝。
English: At the end of May, Zhang Xuan, who had been ordered by the emperor to dispatch soldiers, sent out an envoy.

古文：己巳，车驾东巡，遂幸涿鹿，遣使者以太牢祠帝尧、帝舜庙。
现代文：己巳，皇帝向东巡视，于是到达；鲢，派遣使者以太牢祭祀帝童、帝爱庙。
English: At this time, the emperor made a tour to the east, and then arrived;, sent an envoy to the ether prison to worship the Emperor and the Emperor's Love Temple.

古文：西幸马邑，观氵垒源。
现代文：向西到昼旦，观看漫丞源头。
English: We drove west to Ma'eup and saw the source of Surabaya's water.

古文：秋七月壬子，车驾还宫。
现代文：秋七月壬子，皇帝回宫。
English: In autumn and July, Emperor Jinshi returned to the palace.

古文：起中天殿及云母堂、金华室。
现代文：修建中天殿和云母堂、金华室。
English: Construction of the Middle Heaven Hall, the Mica Hall, and the Jinhua Room.

古文：十有一月，高车别帅敕力犍，率九百余落内属。
现代文：十一月，高车别部首领敕力犍，率领九百多家归附。
English: In November, Hao Lijuan, the leader of the high-speed railway department, led more than 900 people to join.

古文：十有二月乙未，诏曰： 世俗谓汉高起于布衣而有天下，此未达其故也。
现代文：十二月乙未，下诏说：世俗以为汉高祖出身于平民而拥有天下，这是没有通晓根由。
English: On December 18th, the next imperial edict said: "The world thinks that Han Gao Zu was born from a commoner and owns the world. There is no clear reason for this.

古文：夫刘承尧统，旷世继德，有蛇龙之征，致云彩之应，五纬上聚，天人俱协，明革命之主，大运所钟，不可以非望求也。
现代文：刘氏继承帝尧统绪，隔代接续德运，有蛇龙的征兆，导致云彩的呼应，五星聚于星空，天人都协和，表明改朝换代的君主，是大运所聚集，不可以非分之想而求取。
English: Liu's succession to the imperial throne, the successive German invasions, the signs of serpents and dragons, which led to the echo of clouds, the five stars gathered in the starry sky, and the heavenly beings were in harmony, indicating that the monarchs who changed the dynasty and generation were gathered by the Great Movement, and they could not be obtained without thinking about it.

古文：然狂狡之徒，所以颠蹶而不已者，诚惑于逐鹿之说，而迷于天命也。
现代文：然而狂妄狡诈的人，之所以失败而不罢手的，实在是受共逐野鹿的说法的诱惑，而分辨不清天命。
English: However, the reason why arrogant and cunning people fail and do not give up is that they are really tempted by the saying of chasing the wild deer, and cannot distinguish the fate of heaven.

古文：故有踵覆车之轨，蹈衅逆之踪，毒甚者倾州郡，害微者败邑里，至乃身死名颓，殃及九族，从乱随流，死而不悔，岂不痛哉！
现代文：所以有人跟随翻车的轨道，踏上叛逆的踪迹，毒害严重的倾败州郡，祸害微小的败坏乡里，以致身败名裂，殃及九族，跟著作乱随波逐流，至死而不后悔，岂不痛惜!
English: Therefore, some people follow the track of the overturned car, set foot on the trail of rebellion, poison the severely overthrown state and county, the scourge of the small township, so that they are disgraced, affect the nine ethnic groups, and drift with the chaos of writing, and die without regret, will not regret it!

古文：《春秋》之义，大一统之美，吴楚僭号，久加诛绝，君子贱其伪名，比之尘垢。
现代文：《春秋》的义理，推重统一的美好，吴楚僭越称号，长久加以诛杀灭绝，君子鄙视他们非法窃取的名声，把它同灰尘污垢相比。
English: The righteousness of "Spring and Autumn," the beauty of promoting unification, and the title of Wu Chu Xuan Yue, have long been fought to extinction. Gentlemen despise their illegally stolen reputation and compare it to dust and dirt.

古文：自非继圣载德，天人合会，帝王之业，夫岂虚应。
现代文：没有历代相继的圣明大德，天人会合，帝王的业绩，哪裹是凭空而生的呢?
English: Without successive generations of sages, great sages, meetings between gods and men, and the achievements of emperors, where would we have come from?

古文：历观古今，不义而求非望者，徒丧其保家之道，而伏刀锯之诛。
现代文：遍观古今，不讲道义而求取非分之想的，衹是丧失他保护家族的道理，而受到刀锯的诛杀。
English: Looking at the past and the present, without preaching morality and seeking to get what he did not deserve, he lost the principle of protecting his family and was killed with a knife and saw.

古文：有国有家者，诚能推废兴之有期，审天命之不易，察征应之潜授，杜竞逐之邪言，绝奸雄之僭肆，思多福于止足，则几于神智矣。
现代文：有国有家的人，真能推断废兴的期限，审知天命的不可改易，考察征兆应和的暗中传授，杜绝竞争追逐的邪僻言论，去除奸雄的僭越恣肆，思虑知足以求多福，则接近于神明智慧了。
English: Those who have a state-owned family can truly deduce the time limit for the abolition of prosperity, judge the immutability of fate, investigate the secret teaching of signs and harmony, put an end to the eccentric speech of competition pursuit, remove the arrogance of the villain, and think and know enough to seek more blessings, then they are close to the wisdom of the gods.

古文：如此，则可以保荣禄于天年，流余庆于后世。
现代文：如此，就可以在有生之年中保持荣华福禄，流传余福到后世。
English: In this way, it is possible to maintain prosperity and good fortune throughout one's lifetime and pass on remaining good fortune to future generations.

古文：夫然，故祸悖无缘而生，兵甲何因而起？凡厥来世，勖哉戒之，可不慎欤！ 
现代文：这样，所以祸难狂悖没有因由产生，战事由何而引起后世之人，努力警戒，能不谨慎吗!
English: Thus, since there is no cause for the calamity of war, and no cause for the war, the people of the future generations should be cautious.

古文：时太史屡奏天文错乱，帝亲览经占，多云改王易政，故数革官号，一欲防塞凶狡，二欲消灾应变。已而虑群下疑惑，心谤腹非，丙申复诏曰： 上古之治，尚德下名，有任而无爵，易治而事序，故邪谋息而不起，奸慝绝而不作。
现代文：当时太史屡次上奏天象错乱，皇帝亲自观察占卜，多称要改王号变政事，所以几次改换官号，一是要防止凶险狡诈的人，二是要消除灾害顺应变故不久担心群臣疑惑，心中诽谤，丙申又下诏说：上占的治理，崇尚道德而轻视名位，有职任而无爵号，容易治理而事情顺利，所以邪恶的计谋寝息而不生，奸诈的人断绝而不起。
English: At that time, Emperor Taishi repeatedly mentioned that the celestial phenomena were disordered. The emperor personally observed the divination, and said that he wanted to change the king's name and change the government, so he changed the official name several times. The first was to prevent the dangerous and cunning people, and the second was to eliminate the disasters and adapt to the changes. Therefore, he soon worried about the doubts of the ministers and slandered them in his heart. He also issued an edict saying: the governance of the upper hand, advocating morality and despising the name, having a position without a title, easy to govern and things are going well, so the evil schemes do not sleep and do not

古文：周姬之末，下凌上替，以号自定，以位制禄，卿世其官，大夫遂事，阳德不暢，议发家陪，故衅由此起，兵由此作。
现代文：周朝的末年，上下更替，名号自定，以职位制定俸禄，公卿世代任官，大夫世代理事，阳德不顺畅，议论出于家人陪臣，所以裂痕由此而起，战争由此而发生。
English: In the last years of the Zhou Dynasty, the top and bottom were replaced, the name was self-determined, the salary was determined by the position, the generation of nobles was appointed, the generation of doctors was appointed, the yangde was not smooth, and the discussion was due to family members and retainers, so the rift arose from this, and the war occurred from this.

古文：秦汉之弊，舍德崇侈，能否混杂，贤愚相乱，庶官失序，任非其人。
现代文：秦漠的弊政，舍道德而崇奢侈，能否混杂，贤士愚人淆乱，各种职官失去次序，任职者不是合适的人。
English: Qinmang's maladministration, sacrificing morality and exalting luxury, whether it can be mixed, sages and fools confused, various officials out of order, and the incumbent is not the right person.

古文：于是忠义之道寝，廉耻之节废，退让之风绝，毁誉之义兴，莫不由乎贵尚名位，而祸败及之矣。
现代文：这时忠义的道理寝息，廉耻的节操废弃，退让的风尚断绝，毁誉的议论兴起，莫不是由于崇尚名位，而祸败到了身上。
English: At this time, the principle of loyalty is dormant, the principle of shamelessness is abandoned, the tradition of concession is broken, and discrediting discussions arise. It is not because of the worship of fame, but the disaster has fallen on the body.

古文：古置三公，职大忧重，故曰 待罪宰相 ，将委任责成，非虚宠禄也。
现代文：占代设置三公，职责大忧虑重，所以说 待罪宰相 ，将委以大任责以成功，不是无端受宠得厚禄。
English: When the Three Great Kings were set up in the Zhan Dynasty, the responsibilities were very heavy. Therefore, it was not without reason that the Prime Minister, who was to be punished, was favored with great responsibilities and received a generous reward.

古文：而今世俗，佥以台辅为荣贵，企慕而求之。
现代文：而现在世间风俗，都以台辅荣耀尊贵，企盼羡慕而求取。
English: And now, the world's customs are all based on the glory and dignity of Taiwan, hoping for admiration and seeking it.

古文：夫此职司，在人主之所任耳，用之则重，舍之则轻。
现代文：这样的职掌，在君主的任用而已，任用就重要，舍弃就轻微。
English: This kind of post is only appointed by the monarch. The appointment is important, and the renunciation is minor.

古文：然则官无常名，而任有定分，是则所贵者至矣，何取于鼎司之虚称也。
现代文：既然如此，宫职没有固定名称，而责任有固定的本分，这是所尊贵的至为重要，何必看重三公的虚名呢?
English: Since this is the case, there is no fixed name for the palace duties, but there is a fixed duty for the responsibilities, which is the most important thing for the nobles. Why should we care about the false names of the three princes?

古文：夫桀纣之南面，虽高而可薄；姬旦之为下，虽卑而可尊。
现代文：夏桀商纣君临天下，虽位高而可轻视；姬旦为臣下，虽卑微而可尊崇。
English: When the king of the Xia and Shang dynasties came to the world, although he was high, he could be despised; when he was a vassal, although he was lowly, he could be respected.

古文：一官可以效智，荜门可以垂范。
现代文：一官可以报效智慧，贫民可以留存风范。
English: An official can repay wisdom, and the poor can retain their manners.

古文：苟以道德为实，贤于覆餗蔀家矣。
现代文：如果以道德为实质，强于不胜任而败事的豪贵之家。
English: If morality is the essence, it is stronger than a house of nobles that is incompetent and fails.

古文：故量己者，令终而义全；昧利者，身陷而名灭。
现代文：所以节制自己的人，善终而道义全；昧于利益的人，身陷囹圄而名声减。
English: Therefore, those who restrain themselves are ultimately good and full of morality; those who are not interested in profit are in prison and their reputation is diminished.

古文：利之与名，毁誉之疵竞；道之与德，神识之家宝。
现代文：利和名，是造成毁誉的双重瑕疵；道和德，是神智的看家之宝。
English: Profits and fame are the twin blemishes that cause dishonor; virtue and morality are the treasures of wisdom.

古文：是故道义，治之本；名爵，治之末。
现代文：所以道义，是治世的根本；名爵，是治理的末节。
English: Therefore, morality is the foundation of governance; nobility is the end of governance.

古文：名不本于道，不可以为宜；爵无补于时，不可以为用。
现代文：名不根源于道，不能称适宜；爵无补于时代，不能够采用。
English: The name is not rooted in the Tao and cannot be said to be appropriate; the title does not complement the times and cannot be adopted.

古文：用而不禁，为病深矣。
现代文：采用而不禁止，造成的病患就深了。
English: If it is adopted but not banned, the disease caused by it will become more serious.

古文：能通其变，不失其正者，其惟圣人乎？
现代文：能够通晓权变，不失去正道的，大概衹有圣人吧?
English: There are probably no saints who are able to understand power changes without losing the right path, right?

古文：来者诚思成败之理，察治乱之由，鉴殷周之失，革秦汉之弊，则几于治矣。 
现代文：后来的人真能思考成败的道理，考察治乱的根由，借鉴殷周的过失，革除秦漠的弊政，就接近于治理了。
English: Later people could really think about the reasons for success and failure, examine the root causes of the chaos, learn from the mistakes of Yin Zhou, and eliminate the maladministration of Qin Mo, which was close to governance.

古文：是岁，乞伏乾归为姚兴所破，李暠私署凉州牧、凉公。
现代文：这一年，乞伏干归被姚兴打败，李嵩自命为凉州牧、凉公。
English: In this year, Begging Guan Gui was defeated by Yao Xing, and Li Song declared himself to be the leader of Liangzhou and Lianggu.

古文：四年春正月，高车别帅率其部三千余落内附。
现代文：四年春正月，高车别部首领率他的部属三千多家归附。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year, Gao Che, the leader of another department, led more than three thousand of his subordinates to attach.

古文：二月丁亥，命乐师入学习舞，释菜于先圣、先师。
现代文：二月丁亥，命令乐师入学练习舞曲，向先圣、先师行祭祀之礼。
English: In February of Dinghai, he ordered the musicians to enter the school to practice the dance, and to perform the ritual to the first saint and the first teacher.

古文：丁酉，分命使者循行州郡，听察辞讼，纠劾不法。
现代文：丁酉，分派使者巡视州郡，听取诉讼，纠察弹劾不守法的人。
English: Ding Rong, dispatched envoys to tour the state and county, listen to lawsuits, picket and impeach those who do not abide by the law.

古文：三月，帝亲渔，荐于寝庙。
现代文：三月，皇帝亲自捕鱼，奉献到寝庙。
English: In March, Emperor Daowu himself went fishing to offer a sacrifice to the Great Temple.

古文：夏四月辛卯，罢鄴行台。
现代文：夏四月辛卯，罢除邺城行台。
English: On the 17th day of the 4th month of summer, the procession platform set up in Fucheng was removed.

古文：诏有司明扬隐逸。
现代文：诏令有关官员发现和推举隐匿的贤人。
English: The relevant departments were ordered to publicly display the recluses.

古文：五月，起紫极殿、玄武楼、凉风观、石池、鹿苑台。
现代文：五月，修建紫极殿、玄武楼、凉风观、石池、鹿苑台。
English: In May, the Shiji Hall, the Genbu Building, the Cool Breeze View, the Stone Pond, and the Deer Park were built.

古文：秋七月，诏镇远将军、兗州刺史长孙肥步骑二万南徇许昌、彭城。
现代文：秋七月，韶令镇远将军、兖州刺史长孙肥率领步兵骑兵二万人向南夺取许昌、彭城。
English: In the autumn and July, General Zhenyuan and Sun Fei, the chief historian of Zhangzhou, led 20,000 infantry and cavalry to the south to capture Xu Chang and Pengcheng.

古文：诏赐天下镇戍将士布帛各有差。
现代文：下诏赐予天下镇戍将士布帛多少不等。
English: The imperial edict rewarded the soldiers who defended the country with cloth bags, the number of which varied.

古文：冬十二月辛亥，诏征西大将军、常山王遵等率众五万讨破多兰部帅木易于，材官将军和突率骑六千袭黜弗、素古延等诸部。
现代文：冬十二月辛亥，诏令征西大将军、常山王元迈等人率部众五万人讨伐驴多兰部头领木易王，材官将军扭窒率领六千骑兵袭击曲弗、素古延等各部。
English: In the winter of December of Xinhai, the general of the Western Expeditionary Force, Changshan Wang Yuanmai, and others led 50,000 people to fight against the leader of the Doran Division, Muxi Wang, and the general of the material officer, Jian Nian, led 6,000 cavalry to attack Qufu, Sukoyan and other departments.

古文：集博士儒生，比众经文字，义类相从，凡四万余字，号曰《众文经》。
现代文：召集博士儒生，考校各经文字，按义类排列，共四万多字，称为《众文经》。
English: Confucianism doctoral students were called together, and all the scriptures were arranged according to their meanings, a total of more than forty thousand words, called "Zhongwenjing."

古文：是岁，慕容盛死，宝弟熙僭立。
现代文：这年，墓查盛死去，墓查宣的弟弟墓昼压僭越即位。
English: In this year, Tomb Chasheng died, and Tomb Chasuan's younger brother, Tomb Hunchao, ascended to the throne.

古文：吕光弟子隆杀纂自立。
现代文：旦韭弟弟的儿子旦建杀死旦墓自己登位。
English: Dang Jian, the son of Dang Yao's younger brother, killed Dang Bo and ascended to the throne himself.

古文：卢水胡沮渠蒙逊私署凉州牧、张掖公。
现代文：卢水胡沮渠蒙逊自命为遍州牧、张龇。
English: Lu Shui Hu Dequ Mengxun appointed himself as the governor of Henzhou and Zhang Ye.

古文：蒙逊及李暠并遣使朝贡。
现代文：塞逊和奎员都派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: Both Sesson and Kuijian sent emissaries to pay tribute to the court.

古文：五年春正月丁丑，慕容熙遣将寇辽西。虎威将军宿沓干等拒战不利，弃令支而还。
现代文：五年春正月丁丑，慕容熙派遣将领侵犯辽西，虎威将军宿沓干等人抵御失利，放弃令支而返回。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Spring and the month of Dingwu, Murongxi sent generals to invade the west of Liaoning, and the tiger general Succubus Gan and others resisted the defeat, abandoned the order branch and returned.

古文：帝闻姚兴将寇边，庚寅，大简舆徒，诏并州诸军积谷于平阳之乾壁。
现代文：皇帝听说姚兴将要侵犯边境，庚寅，大量挑选车辆兵士，诏令并州各军积累谷物到平阳的干壁。
English: The emperor heard that Yao Xing was going to invade the border, and he ordered the troops to accumulate grain to the dry wall of Pingyang.

古文：戊子，材官将军和突破黜弗、素古延等诸部，获马三千余匹，牛羊七万余头。
现代文：戊子，材官将军和突打败黜弗、素古延等各部，获取马三千多匹，牛羊七万多头。
English: Bo Zi, the generals of the cadre and the coup defeated the various departments such as Su Fu and Su Gu Yan, and obtained more than three thousand horses, more than seventy thousand cattle and sheep.

古文：辛卯，蠕蠕祖仑遣骑救素古延等，和突逆击破之于山南河曲，获铠马二千余匹。
现代文：辛卯，蠕蠕社仑派遣骑兵救援素古延等人，和突迎击，在山南的黄河弯曲处打败了社仑，缴获战马二千多匹。
English: Xinwu, Cwmwu, and Shulun dispatched cavalry to rescue Suguyan and others, and made a surprise attack. They defeated the Shulun at the bend of the Yellow River in Shannan and captured more than two thousand horses.

古文：班师。
现代文：凯旋。
English: A triumphant return.

古文：赏赐将士各有差。
现代文：赏赐将士多少不等。
English: The rewards given to generals vary somewhat.

古文：二月癸丑，征西大将军、常山王遵等至安定之高平，木易于率数千骑与卫辰、屈丐弃国遁走，追至陇西瓦亭，不及而还。
现代文：二月癸丑，征西大将军、常山王元遵等人到达安定的高平，木易于率领几千骑兵和卫辰、屈丐放弃封国逃跑，追赶到陇西的瓦亭，没赶上而返回。
English: At the end of February, the general of the Western Expedition, Wang Yuan Zun of Changshan, and others arrived in stable Gaoping. He easily led several thousand cavalrymen and Wei Chen and Qu Gai to abandon the siege of the country and escape, and chased them to Watei in Shaanxi. They did not catch up and returned.

古文：获其辎重库藏，马四万余匹，骆驼、牦牛三千余头，牛、羊九万余口。
现代文：缴获车辆物资和库藏，马四万多匹，骆驼、牦牛三千多头，牛、羊九万多头。
English: More than 40,000 horses, more than 3,000 camels and yaks, and more than 90,000 cattle and sheep were seized.

古文：班赐将士各有差。
现代文：颁赏将士多少不等。
English: The ancestors of the world rewarded the soldiers in varying amounts.

古文：徙其民于京师。
现代文：迁徙他们的民众到京城。
English: to move their people to the capital.

古文：沙门张翘自号无上王，与丁零鲜于次保聚党常山之行唐。
现代文：僧人张翘自称无上王，和丁零人鲜于次保在常山的行唐聚集党羽。
English: Zhang Gao, a monk, claimed to be the supreme king, and Ding Zi Ren and Xian Yu Zi Bao gathered their followers in the mountains of Changshan.

古文：夏四月，太守楼伏连讨斩之。
现代文：夏四月，太守楼伏连讨伐杀了他们。
English: In the summer of April, Tai Shou Lou Furen fought and killed them.

古文：五月，姚兴遣其弟安北将军、义阳公平率众四万来侵。平阳乾壁为平所陷。
现代文：五月，姚兴派遣他的弟弟安北将军、义阳公姚平率领部众四万人入侵，平阳的干壁被姚平攻占。
English: In May, Yao Xing sent his brother, Anbei General, and Yiyang Gong Yao Ping to invade with 40,000 people. The dry wall of Pingyang was occupied by Yao Ping.

古文：六月，治兵于东郊，部分众军，诏镇西大将军毗陵王顺、长孙肥等三将六万骑为前锋。
现代文：六月，在束郊训练兵士，调度各军队，韶令镇西大将军毗陵王元顺、长孙肥等三将领率六万骑兵做前锋。
English: In June, he trained soldiers in Sokou and dispatched various armies. He ordered the three generals, including the general of the west of the town, Viling Wang Yuanshun, and the eldest son, Fei, to lead 60,000 cavalry to be the vanguard.

古文：秋七月戊辰朔，车驾西讨。
现代文：秋七月戊辰初一，皇帝向西征讨。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Emperor Daowu began the Western Expedition.

古文：八月乙巳，至于柴壁。平固守，进军围之。姚兴悉举其众来救。
现代文：八月乙巳，到达柴壁，姚平固守，进军包围他，姚兴出动全部军队来救援。
English: At the stroke of midnight in August, Yao Ping held fast to the wall of firewood and marched in to encircle him. Yao Xing dispatched his entire army to come to the rescue.

古文：甲子，帝渡蒙坑，逆击兴军，大破之。
现代文：甲子，皇帝渡过蒙坑，迎击姚兴的军队，大败他们。
English: Jia Zi, the emperor, crossed Mengkeng to meet Yao Xing's army and defeated them.

古文：冬十月，平赴水而死，俘其余众三万余人。
现代文：冬十月，姚平投水而死，俘虏他残余的部众三万多人。
English: In the winter of October, Yao Ping threw himself into the water and died, and his remaining followers captured more than thirty thousand people.

古文：语在《兴传》。
现代文：记载在《姚兴传》。
English: Recorded in "The Biography of Yao Xing."

古文：获兴征虏将军、尚书右仆射狄伯支，越骑校尉唐小方，积弩将军姚梁国，建忠将军雷星、康官，北中郎将康猥，平从弟伯禽已下、四品将军已上四十余人。
现代文：擒获姚兴的征虏将军、尚书右仆射狄伯支，越骑校尉唐小方，积弩将军姚梁国，建忠将军雷星、康官，北中郎将康猥，姚平堂弟伯禽以下、四品将军以上四十多人。
English: Yao Xing's conscript general, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Sha Bozhong, the Yue cavalry captain Tang Xiaofeng, the general Yao Liangguo, the general Jianzhong, Lei Xing, Kang Guan, the general Beizhong Lang, Kang Nai, Yao Ping's cousin Bo Ji and more than forty people from the four generals.

古文：获先亡臣王次多、靳勤，并斩以徇。
现代文：擒获原先逃亡的臣子王次多、靳憋，都斩首示众。
English: The vassals who had previously escaped and were captured, including Wanzhida and Zou, were beheaded in public.

古文：兴频使请和，帝不许。
现代文：挑兴频繁遣使者请求和好，皇帝不允许。
English: Yao Xing repeatedly sent people to ask for peace, but Emperor Daowu did not agree.

古文：群臣劝进平蒲坂，帝虑蠕蠕为难，戊申，班师。
现代文：群臣请求进军平定渣揠，皇帝担心竖蠕作难，戊申，凯旋。
English: A group of courtiers requested to march to pacify the dregs, the emperor was worried about the difficulties, and made a triumphant return.

古文：十有一月，车驾次晋阳。
现代文：十一月，皇帝停驻晋阳。
English: In November, the emperor stopped in Jinyang.

古文：征相州刺史庾岳为司空。
现代文：征召相州刺史厦鱼担任司空。
English: He summoned Xiangzhou Shishi Xingyue as his subordinate.

古文：遣左将军莫题讨上党群盗秦颇、丁零翟都于壶关。
现代文：派遣左将军墓题到壶关讨伐上党盗贼蠢颇、卫茎人翟都。
English: It is foolish to send General Zuo's epitaph to Kuguan to fight the thieves of the Party, and it is foolish for the people of the North to fight the capital.

古文：丁丑，上党太守捕颇，斩之，都走林虑。
现代文：丁丑，上党太守捕获羞颇，杀了他，型都逃到拯卢。
English: Ding Yuxiu, the upper party leader, captured Shypo and killed him, and they all fled to Zhenglu.

古文：十有二月辛亥，至自西征。
现代文：十二月辛亥，从西征前线归来。
English: In December of Xinhai, he returned from the Western Expedition front.

古文：蠕蠕杜仑犯塞，诏常山王遵追之，不及而还。
现代文：蜢鳄挂益进犯边塞，诏令宜旦王五遵追击他，没赶上而返回。
English: When the crocodile Khangyip invaded the border fortress, the emperor ordered the Yitan king Wuzun to chase him, but he did not catch up and returned.

古文：越勤莫弗率其部万余家内属，居五原之北。
现代文：垄勤莫弗率领他的部落一万家归附，居住在互愿的北面。
English: Rongqin Mofu led his tribe of ten thousand families to join and live in the north of the mutual will.

古文：是岁，秃发鹿孤病死，弟傉檀统任，遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，秃发鹿孤病死，弟弟俦檀统领部众，派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the same year, Bald-Haired Deer Lone died of illness, and his younger brother, Xidan, sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：六年春正月辛未，朔方尉迟部别帅率万余家内属，入居云中。
现代文：六年春正月辛未，朔方尉迟部别部首领率一万多家归附，进入云中居住。
English: In the first month of the spring of the sixth year, more than ten thousand people, led by the leader of the second division, Shuo Fangfei, were annexed and moved to Yunzhong.

古文：夏五月，大简舆徒，将略江淮，平荆扬之乱。
现代文：夏五月，大量挑选车辆兵士，将要攻取江淮，平定荆州扬州的祸乱。
English: In summer and May, a large number of selected vehicle soldiers will capture the Jianghuai River and quell the calamity of Jingzhou and Yangzhou.

古文：秋七月，镇西大将军、司隶校尉、毗陵王顺有罪，以王还第。
现代文：秋七月，镇西大将军、司隶校尉、毗陵王元顺犯罪，以王的身份回宅第。
English: In autumn and July, Zhenxi General, Sili Lieutenant, and Viling Wang Shun were found guilty, but they still returned to the capital to live idly.

古文：戊子，车驾北巡，筑离宫于犲山，纵士校猎，东北逾罽岭，出参合、代谷。
现代文：戊子，皇帝向北巡视，在豺山筑造离宫，驱使士兵狩猎，东北翻过尉岭，越出参合、代谷。
English: Wuzi, the emperor inspected the north, built a detached palace in Shaoshan, drove the soldiers to hunt, crossed the Yuling Mountains in the northeast, and went beyond the Sanghe and Daiya.

古文：九月，行幸南平城，规度氵垒南，面夏屋山，背黄瓜堆，将建新邑。
现代文：九月，行进到南平城，规划在漫水南，面向夏屋山，背靠黄瓜堆，将建造新城。
English: In September, they marched to Nanping City, planning to build a new city in the flooded south, facing Xiaya Mountain, backed by cucumber piles.

古文：辛未，车驾还宫。
现代文：辛未，皇帝回宫。
English: On the 11th day, he drove back to the palace.

古文：冬十月，起西昭阳殿。
现代文：冬十月，修建西昭阳殿。
English: Winter October, Jianxi Shoyang Palace.

古文：乙卯，立皇子嗣为齐王，加车骑大将军，位相国；绍为清河王，加征南大将军；熙为阳平王；曜为河南王。
现代文：乙卯，立皇子珏堕题为变王，加授车骑大将军，职位为相国；元绍为遣延，加授征南大将军；亘压为墨王王；五坠为河南王。
English: Second, the crown prince was named "Changwang" (Changing King) and was given the title of "General of Chariot and Cavalry" (General of Cavalry and Cavalry) and the position was the same country; Yuan Shao was given the title of "Yuan Yan" (Extension of Service) and was given the title of "General of Southern Expeditionary Force" (General of Southern Expeditionary Force); Watanabe was named "King of Mo" (King of Mo); and Wokang was named "King of Henan" (King of Henan).

古文：封故秦愍王子夔为豫章王，陈留王子右将军悦为朱提王。
现代文：封已故台墨王的儿子五夔为邃童工，速垦延的儿子右将军五坦为塞墨王。
English: The son of the late King Taimo, Wuzhong, was a child laborer, and the son of the late King Taimo, the Right General Wutan, was a child laborer.

古文：丁巳，诏将军伊谓率骑二万北袭高车。
现代文：丁巳，诏令将军迩率领二万骑兵向北袭击产娄。
English: At the same time, the Emperor ordered General Zou to lead twenty thousand cavalry northward to attack Zhangye.

古文：司马德宗遣使朝贡。
现代文：区困派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: Sima Dezong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：十有一月庚午，伊谓大破高车。
现代文：十一月庚午，伊谓大败产车。
English: In the late afternoon of November, the I-Pace production car suffered a major setback.

古文：是年，岛夷桓玄废其主司马德宗而自立，僭称大楚。
现代文：这一年，岛夷桓玄废黜他的主子司马德宗而自己登位，僭越称为大楚。
English: In this year, the islander Huan Xuan dethroned his master Sima Dezong and ascended to the throne himself, becoming known as the Great Chu.

古文：天赐元年春正月，遣离石护军刘托率骑三千袭蒲子。
现代文：玉逊元年春正月，派遣趣五护军塑毖率领三千骑兵袭击渣王。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Jade Emperor Xuanzong, he dispatched the Five Guardians of Fun, led by three thousand cavalrymen, to attack Jia Wang.

古文：三月丙寅，擒姚兴宁北将军、泰平太守衡谭，获三千余口。
现代文：三月丙寅，生擒姚兴的宁北将军、蚕垩太守瞪，捕获三千多人。
English: In March, Cui Yin, the general of Ningbei, who was born Yao Xing, and Zong Yao, the general of Ningbei, captured more than three thousand people.

古文：初限县户不满百罢之。
现代文：初次限定户数不满一百的县罢除。
English: Counties with an initial limited number of households of less than 100 will be removed from the list.

古文：夏四月，诏尚书郎中公孙表使于江南，以观桓玄之衅也。
现代文：夏四月，诏令尚书郎中公孙表出使江南，以观察但直的嫌隙。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Taizong ordered Shang Shulang's grandson, Zhong Gongsun, to send an envoy to the south of the Yangtze River to observe Tianzhong's rift.

古文：值玄败而还。
现代文：遇到桓玄失败而返回。
English: Encountered Kangen's failure and returned.

古文：蠕蠕社仑从弟悦伐大那等谋杀社仑而立大那。
现代文：蠕蠕过盔的堂弟：区饯太那等人策谋杀死丝仑而立大那。
English: The cousin who crept over the helmet: The district magistrate and others plotted to murder and kill her.

古文：发觉，来奔。
现代文：被发现，前来投奔。
English: He was spotted and came running.

古文：五月，置山东诸冶，发州郡徒谪造兵甲。
现代文：五月，设置太行山以东众冶炼处，调发州郡刑徒受罚者制造兵器鉴甲。
English: In May, the People's Smelting Office was set up to the east of Taihang Mountain, and the state and county convicts were dispatched to make weapons.

古文：秋九月，帝临昭阳殿，分置众职，引朝臣文武，亲自简择，量能叙用；制爵四等，曰王、公、侯、子，除伯、男之号；追录旧臣，加以封爵，各有差。
现代文：秋九月，皇帝前往昭阳殿，分别安置各种职务，引见朝臣文武官员，亲自挑选，根据才能加以任用；制定爵位为四等，称王、公、侯、子，除去伯、男的爵号；追授旧的臣子，加以封爵，各有等级。
English: In the autumn and September, the emperor went to the Zhoyang Palace and set up various positions, introduced courtiers and military officials, hand-picked and appointed according to their talents; established four ranks of nobility, called king, duke, lord and son, and removed the titles of nobleman and gentleman; posthumously awarded old courtiers and knighted them, each with a rank.

古文：是秋，江南大乱，流民繦负而奔淮北，行道相寻。
现代文：这年秋天，江南大乱，流民背负着婴儿奔往淮北，道路上行人相连接。
English: In the autumn of this year, the south of the Yangtze River was in turmoil. Displaced people carrying babies rushed to Huaibei, and pedestrians were connected on the road.

古文：冬十月辛巳，大赦，改元。
现代文：冬十月辛巳，大赦境内，改年号。
English: In winter, on October 28th, there was a general amnesty and the name of the year was changed.

古文：筑西宫。
现代文：建筑西宫。
English: The West Palace was built.

古文：十有一月，上幸西宫，大选朝臣，令各辨宗党，保举才行，诸部子孙失业赐爵者二千余人。
现代文：十一月，皇帝前往西宫，大量选拔朝臣，命各自辨别宗族乡党，保举有才能德行的人，各部子孙失去职位而赐爵的达二千多人。
English: In November, the emperor went to the West Palace to select a large number of courtiers, ordering them to distinguish between the clan and the township party, to protect the talented and virtuous, and to give knighthoods to more than two thousand children and grandchildren of various ministries who lost their positions.

古文：十有二月戊辰，车驾幸犲山宫。
现代文：十二月戊辰，皇帝前往豺山宫。
English: In December, the emperor went to Lushan Palace.

古文：是岁，岛夷刘裕起兵诛桓玄。
现代文：这一年，岛夷刘裕起兵诛杀桓玄。
English: In this year, Liu Yu, an islander, raised an army to kill Kangen.

古文：二年春二月癸亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：二年春二月癸亥，皇帝回宫。
English: In the spring and February of the second year, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：夏四月，车驾有事于西郊，车旗尽黑。
现代文：夏四月，皇帝在西郊祭祀，车辆旗帜全为黑色。
English: In the summer of April, the emperor held a religious service in the western suburb, and the vehicle flags were all black.

古文：是岁，司马德宗复僭立。
现代文：这一年，司马德宗又僭越即位。
English: That year, Sima Dezong ascended the throne again.

古文：慕容德死，兄子超僭立。
现代文：慕容德死去，哥哥的儿子慕容超僭越即位。
English: Murong De died, and his brother's son, Murong Chaohui, ascended the throne.

古文：三年春正月甲申，车驾北巡，幸犲山宫。
现代文：三年春正月甲申。皇帝向北巡视，前往豺山宫。
English: In the spring of the third year, in the first month of the year, the emperor inspected the north and went to the Lushan Palace.

古文：校猎，至屋孤山。
现代文：狩猎，到屋孤山。
English: Hunting, arriving at a lonely mountain.

古文：二月乙亥，幸代园山，建五石亭。
现代文：二月乙亥，前往代园山，建造五石亭。
English: On February 29th, he made a tour of the garden and built a five-stone pavilion.

古文：三月庚子，车驾还宫。
现代文：三月庚子，皇帝回宫。
English: On March 15, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：夏四月庚申，复幸犲山宫。
现代文：夏四月庚申，又前往豺山宫。
English: In the summer of April, he went to Lushan Palace again.

古文：占授著作郎王宜弟造《兵法孤虚立成图》三百六十时。
现代文：口授著作郎王宜弟作《兵法孤虚立成图》三百六十个时辰。
English: The book written by Wang Yi's younger brother Wang Yi, "The Art of War: 360 Hours" was written by dictation.

古文：遂登定襄角史山，又幸马城。
现代文：于是登上定襄角史山，又前往马城。
English: So he climbed Dingxiangjiao Mountain and went to Macheng.

古文：甲午，车驾还宫。
现代文：甲午，皇帝回宫。
English: At noon, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：是月，蠕蠕寇边。夜召兵，将旦，贼走，乃罢。
现代文：这个月，蠕蠕侵犯边境，夜晚征召军队，天将亮，贼寇逃跑，才作罢。
English: This month, the creep invaded the border, the army was called up at night, the sky will be bright, the thief escaped, and only then did it stop.

古文：六月，发八部五百里内男丁筑氵垒南宫，门阙高十余丈；引沟穿池，广苑囿；规立外城，方二十里，分置市里，经涂洞达。
现代文：六月，调发八部五百里内的男丁建筑漫南宫，宫门柱高十多丈；引沟渠穿城壕，扩大苑囿；谋划建立外城，方圆二十里，分设集市民居，道路四通八达。
English: In June, eight men's buildings within 500 miles of the palace were transferred to the southern palace, with palace gateposts more than 10 meters high; ditches were dug through the trenches to expand the gardens; and plans were made to build an outer city, with a radius of 20 miles, a separate set of citizens' residences, and roads to all directions.

古文：三十日罢。
现代文：三十天完工。
English: The work was suspended on the 30th.

古文：秋七月，太尉穆崇薨。
现代文：秋七月，太尉穆崇逝世。
English: In autumn and July, Lieutenant Mu Chong passed away.

古文：八月甲辰，行幸犲山宫，遂至青牛山。
现代文：八月甲辰，前往豺山宫，乘便到青牛山。
English: August Jia Chen, go to Lushan Palace, take the bus to Qingyushan.

古文：丙辰，西登武要北原，观九十九泉，造石亭，遂之石漠。
现代文：丙辰，向西登上武要北原，观看九十九泉，建造石亭，于是到石漠。
English: B Chen, go west to the Wuya North Plain, watch the 99 Springs, build a stone pavilion, and then go to the Stone Desert.

古文：九月甲戌朔，幸漠南盐池。
现代文：九月甲戌初一，前往沙漠南的盐池。
English: On the first day of September, he went on a tour to Yanchi in the south of the country.

古文：壬午，至漠中，观天盐池；度漠，北之吐盐池。
现代文：壬午，到沙漠中，观看天盐池；越过沙漠，北到吐盐池。
English: At noon, go to the desert and see the Tianyan Pool; cross the desert and go north to the Tuyan Pool.

古文：癸巳，南还长川。
现代文：癸巳，往南返回长川。
English: On the 20th, it went as far south as Nagakawa.

古文：丙申，临观长陂。
现代文：丙申，靠近长陂观望。
English: On the 23rd, I watched the long-tailed egrets up close.

古文：冬十月庚申，车驾还宫。
现代文：冬十月庚申，皇帝回宫。
English: In the winter, on October 18th, I drove back to the palace.

古文：四年春二月，封皇子羒为河间王，处文为长乐王，连为广平王，黎为京兆王。
现代文：四年春二月，封皇子元恺为迎昼旺，虞塞为量壬旺，五连为尘平王，五垫为直韭玉。
English: In the spring and February of the fourth year, the emperor's son, Yuan Xuan, was called Ying Rongwang, Yu Ce was called Jia Rongwang, Wu Lian was called Deng Pingwang, and Wuzhong was called Zhonan Yu.

古文：夏五月，北巡。
现代文：夏五月，向北巡视。
English: In the summer and May, it patrolled to the north.

古文：自参合陂东过蟠羊山，大雨，暴水流辎重数百乘，杀百余人。
现代文：从参合陂束过蟠羊山，天降大雨，暴水冲走车辆几百乘，杀死一百多人。
English: Heavy rain fell and torrential water swept away hundreds of vehicles, killing more than a hundred people.

古文：遂东北逾石漠，至长川，幸濡源。
现代文：于是往东北翻越石漠，到达长川，前往濡源。
English: They crossed the stone desert from the northeast, reached the Nagakawa River, and headed for the wetland.

古文：常山王遵有罪赐死。
现代文：常山王元遵有罪被赐自杀。
English: King Zun of Changshan was found guilty and sentenced to death.

古文：秋七月，车驾自濡源西幸参合陂。
现代文：秋七月，皇帝从濡源西到参合陂。
English: In the autumn and July, the emperor traveled from the west of Nureyuan to Sanghaebao.

古文：筑北宫垣，三旬而罢，乃还宫。
现代文：修筑北宫垣墙，三十完工，然后回宫。
English: The construction of the north palace wall was halted for 30 days. The emperor returned to the palace.

古文：八月，幸犲山宫。
现代文：八月，前往豺山宫。
English: In August, he went to Shaoshan Palace.

古文：是月，诛司空庾岳。
现代文：这个月，诛杀司空庾岳。
English: This month, the story of the murder of Sikyong Yueyue begins.

古文：冬十有一月，车驾还宫。
现代文：冬十一月，皇帝回宫。
English: In the winter of November, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：是岁，慕容宝养子高云杀熙自立，赫连屈丐自称大单于、大夏天王。
现代文：这一年，慕容宝的养子高云杀死慕容熙自己登位。赫连屈丐自称为大单于、大夏天王。
English: In the same year, Murong Bao's adopted son Gao Yun killed Murong Xi and ascended to the throne himself. Heren Kugai called himself the Great Summer King.

古文：五年春正月，行幸犲山宫，遂如参合陂，观渔于延水，至宁川。
现代文：五年春正月，前往豺山宫，于是到参合陂，在于延水观看捕鱼，到宁。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of spring, I went to the Lushan Palace, then to the Senghaiguan, to watch the fishing in the Yangtze River, and to Ning.

古文：三月，姚兴遣使朝贡。
现代文：三月，姚兴派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In March, Yao Xing sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：是岁，皇孙焘生。
现代文：这一年，皇孙托跋焘出生。
English: In the same year, the emperor's grandson, Emperor Taobao, was born.

古文：六年夏，帝不豫。
现代文：六年夏，皇帝患病。
English: In the summer of the sixth year, the emperor fell ill.

古文：初，帝服寒食散，自太医令阴羌死后，药数动发，至此逾甚。
现代文：当初，皇帝服用寒食散，自从太医令阴羌死了之后，药力数次发作，到这时更加厉害。
English: At first, the emperor took cold medicine, but since the doctor ordered Yin Qi to die, the potency of the medicine had several attacks, and it was more severe at this time.

古文：而灾变屡见，忧懑不安，或数日不食，或不寝达旦。
现代文：而灾害变故屡次出现，忧虑烦闷心中不安，有时几天不进食，有时到天亮不能入睡。
English: But disasters repeatedly occur, worries are annoying and uneasy, sometimes they do not eat for a few days, and sometimes they cannot fall asleep until dawn.

古文：归咎群下，喜怒乖常，谓百僚左右人不可信，虑如天文之占，或有肘腋之虞。
现代文：过失归之于臣下，喜怒失常，以为百官左右的人不可相信，担心如同天象的占卜，恐怕有亲信发动的祸乱。
English: They attribute faults to their vassals, they lose their temper, they think that people around them can't be trusted, and they are afraid that there will be a calamity instigated by their close confidants.

古文：追思既往成败得失，终日竟夜独语不止，若旁有鬼物对扬者。
现代文：追忆以前的成败得失，成成夜地自言自语不止，如同旁边有鬼和他对话。
English: He recalled his past successes and failures, and talked to himself all night long, as if a ghost was talking to him.

古文：朝臣至前，追其旧恶皆见杀害，其余或以颜色变动，或以喘息不调，或以行步乖节，或以言辞失措，帝皆以为怀恶在心，变见于外，乃手自殴击，死者皆陈天安殿前。
现代文：朝臣到面前，追思他旧时的坏事都被杀害，其余的人有的因脸色变化，有的因喘息不均匀，有的因走路失去步调，有的因言辞慌乱失常，皇帝都以为他们怀恨在心，变化显现于外，就亲手殴打，死的人都陈列在天安殿前。
English: When courtiers came before him, they were all killed for thinking about the bad things that had happened to him in the past. The rest of the people, some because of changes in their complexion, some because of uneven breathing, some because they lost their pace while walking, and some because their words were out of kilter, the emperor thought they were harboring grudges, but the changes were apparent to the outside world, so he beat them with his own hands, and the dead people were displayed in front of the Tian'an Temple.

古文：于是朝野人情各怀危惧。有司懈怠，莫相督摄；百工偷劫，盗贼公行，巷里之间人为希少。
现代文：遣时朝野人心各自怀着危急恐惧之心，有关官员松懈怠慢，不加以督察控制，工匠偷盗抢劫，盗贼公然行事，街巷中间行人为之稀少。
English: At the time of dispatch, the hearts of both the government and the people of the countryside were filled with the fear of a crisis, the relevant officials were lax and negligent, without supervision and control, artisans stole and robbed, thieves acted openly, and pedestrians were rare in the middle of the streets.

古文：帝亦闻之，曰： 朕纵之使然，待过灾年，当更清治之尔。 
现代文：皇帝也听到了这种情况，说： 我放纵使他们如此，等过了灾年，会再肃清整治他们。 
English: The emperor also heard of this and said, "I have let them get away with this, and after the year of disaster, I will cleanse and rectify them."

古文：秋七月，慕容支属百余家，谋欲外奔。发觉，伏诛，死者三百余人。
现代文：秋七月，慕容氏的亲属一百多家，策谋要投奔国外，被发现，受死刑，死亡的三百多人。
English: In autumn and July, more than a hundred relatives of the Murong family plotted to flee abroad, were discovered, sentenced to death, and more than three hundred people died.

古文：八月，卫王仪谋叛，赐死。
现代文：八月，卫王元仪策谋反叛，赐他自杀。
English: In August, Wei Wangyi plotted a rebellion and was sentenced to death.

古文：冬十月戊辰，帝崩于天安殿，时年三十九。
现代文：冬十月戊辰，皇帝在天安殿逝世，时年三十九岁。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Wencheng died at the age of thirty-nine at the Tian'an Temple.

古文：永兴二年九月甲寅，上谥宣武皇帝，葬于盛乐金陵。庙号太祖。
现代文：永兴二年九月甲寅卜谧号为宣武皇帝，安葬在盛乐金陵，庙号为太祖。
English: In September of the second year of Yongxing, Emperor Xuanwu was buried in Shenle Jinling, and his temple name was Taizu.

古文：泰常五年，改谥曰道武。
现代文：泰常五年，改谧号为道武。
English: In the fifth year of his reign, he changed his family name to Douwu.

古文：史臣曰：晋氏崩离，戎羯乘衅，僭伪纷纠，犲狼竞驰。
现代文：史臣日：晋氏分崩离析，戎羯利用缝隙，僭越称王纷纷而起，豺狼争竞奔驰。
English: Shishen Day: The Jin Dynasty fell apart, the army took advantage of the gap, the nobles rose up one after another, and the wolves raced.

古文：太祖显晦安危之中，屈伸潜跃之际，驱率遗黎，奋其灵武，克剪方难，遂启中原，朝拱人神，显登皇极。
现代文：太祖在安危之中显迹隐晦，在潜伏腾跃之时弯曲伸展，率领民众，发挥他的英武，剪除艰难，于是开拓中原，朝见天入神明，登上皇位。
English: In the midst of safety and danger, the great-great-grandfather showed signs of ambiguity. When he was lurking and leaping, he bent and stretched, led the people, exerted his bravery, eliminated difficulties, and then opened up the Central Plains, saw the heavens and gods in the morning, and ascended the throne.

古文：虽冠履不暇，栖遑外土，而制作经谟，咸存长世。
现代文：虽然冠履来不及修饰，颠沛于外地，但是制定经世长策，都保存到后世。
English: Although the crown shoes are too late to be decorated and are scattered in the field, the long-term policies have been formulated and preserved for future generations.

古文：所谓大人利见，百姓与能，抑不世之神武也。
现代文：所谓有德之人利于出现，百姓协助他的才能，是多少代才产生的神明英武。
English: The so-called virtuous man is conducive to the emergence of the people to assist his talent, how many generations of talent produced by the gods.

古文：而屯厄有期，祸生非虑，将人事不足，岂天实为之。
现代文：然而艰难厄运有定期，祸乱产生于意料之外。是人事不足，还是上天导致如此！
English: However, hardships and misfortunes come at regular intervals, and calamities occur unexpectedly. Is it a lack of personnel, or is it caused by God!

古文：呜呼！
现代文：呜呼！
English: Alas!

