古文：皇甫遇，常山人也。
现代文：皇甫遇，常山人。
English: Emperor Fu En, a native of Changshan.

古文：父武，流寓太原，尝为遮塞军使。
现代文：父亲皇甫武，流离寓居太原，曾任遮虏军使。
English: His father, Emperor Fuwu, lived in Taiyuan as a wanderer, and was once an envoy of the Qarun army.

古文：遇少好勇，及壮，虬髯，善骑射。
现代文：皇甫遇小时喜好勇武，到年长时，须发卷曲，善于骑马射箭。
English: When he was a child, the emperor liked to be brave. When he was older, he had curly hair and was good at riding and archery.

古文：唐明宗在籓时，隶于麾下，累从战有功。
现代文：后唐明宗还在藩镇时，把他收留在部下，历次跟随作战，屡建功绩。
English: Later, when Mingzong of the Tang Dynasty was still in the town, he was kept under his subordinates, and he followed the war every time, and made many achievements.

古文：明宗即位，迁龙武都指挥使，遥领严州刺史，出讨东川，为行营左军都指挥使。
现代文：明宗即位后，升为龙武军都指挥使，遥任严州刺史，出征东川，担任行营左军都指挥使。
English: After Emperor Mingzong ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the commander of the Longwu army, appointed as the distant governor of Yanzhou, sent to the East River, and served as the commander of the left army.

古文：应顺、清泰中，累历团练防御使，寻迁邓州节度使。
现代文：应顺、清泰年间，历任团练防御使，不久迁任邓州节度使。
English: During the Ying Shun, Qing and Thai dynasties, successive regiments trained defense envoys, and were soon transferred to Denzhou Festival envoys.

古文：所至苛暴，以诛敛为务，其幕客多私去，以避其累。
现代文：所到之处，为官苛刻暴戾，以杀戮搜刮为要务，幕客多私下离去，以逃避他的牵累。
English: Everywhere he went, he was a harsh and violent official, with killing and robbing as his top priority. Most of the shogunate guests left privately to escape his entanglement.

古文：高祖入洛，移领中山，俄闻与镇州安重荣为婚家，乃移镇上党，又改平阳，咸以憸人执事，政事隳紊。
现代文：晋高祖进入洛阳后，皇甫遇移镇中山，不久朝廷听说他与镇州安重荣结为亲家，便调任他镇守上党，又改镇平阳，都是因为用小人主事，政事败坏混乱的原因。
English: After Emperor Gaozu entered Luoyang, the imperial court moved to Zhongshan Town. Soon after, the court heard that he was related to An Chong Rong of Zhenzhou Town, and he was transferred to his town to guard the party, and then to Pingyang Town. All of these were caused by the use of villains to take charge of affairs and the corruption of political affairs.

古文：及镇河阳，部内创别业，开畎水泉，以通溉灌，所经坟墓悉毁之，部民以朝廷方姑息郡帅，莫之敢诉。
现代文：到镇守河阳时，在所辖境内建造别墅，开掘泉水，以用来灌溉，所经过的坟墓，全部加以毁坏，境内百姓因朝廷正姑息州郡主帅，没有谁敢上诉。
English: When he arrived in the town of Heyang, he built a villa in the territory under his jurisdiction, dug a spring to be used for irrigation, and destroyed all the graves he passed. Because the imperial court was appeasing the county governor, no one dared to appeal.

古文：少帝即位，罢归阙下。
现代文：少帝即位后，他罢官回到朝廷。
English: After the young emperor ascended the throne, he resigned and returned to the imperial court.

古文：二年，契丹南寇，从至澶州，战于郓州北津，契丹众大败，溺死者数千人，以功拜滑州节度使。
现代文：开运二年，契丹南犯，皇甫遇跟随少帝到了澶州，在郓州北渡口发生战争，契丹大败，淹死的有几千人，因功被任为滑州节度使。
English: Two years after the start of the campaign, when Khitan was imprisoned in the south, Emperor Fu Rong accompanied the young emperor to Bozhou. A war broke out at the northern ferry port of Bozhou. Khitan was defeated, and several thousand people drowned. For his service, he was appointed as the festival envoy of Bozhou.

古文：三年，契丹率众屯邯郸，遇与安审琦、慕容彦超等御之。
现代文：开运三年，契丹国主率兵进驻邯郸，皇甫遇与安审琦、慕容彦超等前去抵御。
English: Three years after the start of the campaign, soldiers led by the head of the Khitan state entered the city, and the emperor met with the security court and Murong Yanchao to resist.

古文：遇将渡漳河，契丹前锋大至，遇引退，转斗二十里至鄴南榆林。
现代文：皇甫遇将要渡过漳河，契丹先头部队大军杀来，皇甫遇向后撤退，转战二十余里到达邺都南面的榆林店。
English: When the emperor was about to cross the Li River, the Qidam vanguard army came and killed him. When the emperor was about to retreat, he fought for more than twenty miles to reach the Yulin store in the south of the capital.

古文：遇谓审琦等曰： 彼众我寡，走无生路，不如血战。 
现代文：皇甫遇对安审琦等说： 敌众我寡，逃跑就没有活路，不如血战一场。 
English: The empress dowager said to the magistrates: With so few enemies, there is no way to escape. It is better to fight a bloody battle.

古文：遂自辰及未，战百余合，所伤甚众。
现代文：于是从辰时战到未时，打了一百多个回合，受伤的兵士非常多。
English: As a result, from the beginning of the war to the end, more than a hundred rounds were fought, and there were a lot of injured soldiers.

古文：遇所乘马中镝而毙，遇有纪纲杜知敏以马授遇，遇得马复战，久之稍解。
现代文：皇甫遇的坐骑也中箭死去，他的随从杜知敏把战马给他，皇甫遇得马后又投入战斗，战了很久，形势才逐渐缓解。
English: The rider of the horse that met the emperor also died from the arrow. His follower Du Zhimin gave him the horse. After the emperor met the horse, he went into battle. The battle lasted for a long time, and the situation gradually eased.

古文：杜知敏已为所获，遇谓彦超曰： 知敏苍黄之中，以马授我，义也，安可使陷于贼中！ 
现代文：杜知敏已被敌军俘获，皇甫遇对慕容彦超说： 知敏在危急之中，把战马给了我，这是义举，怎能让他落在敌人手中！ 
English: Du Zhimin had been captured by the enemy army, and the emperor said to Murong Yanchao: Zhimin was in a critical situation and gave me the war horse, this was a righteous deed, how could he fall into the hands of the enemy!

古文：遂与彦超跃马取知敏而还，敌骑壮之。
现代文：于是与慕容彦超跃马夺取杜知敏而回，敌人骑兵都钦佩他们的勇壮。
English: So he returned with Murongyan on his super-leaping horse to capture Du Zhimin, and the enemy cavalry all admired their bravery.

古文：俄而生军复合，遇不能解。
现代文：不一会儿剩下的军队又与敌人合战，皇甫遇不能解脱。
English: Soon after, the remaining troops fought against the enemy again, and the emperor was unable to escape.

古文：时审琦已至安阳河，谓首将张从恩曰： 皇甫遇等未至，必为敌骑所围，若不急救，则成擒矣。 
现代文：当时安审琦已经到了安阳河，对统帅张从恩说： 皇甫遇等没有回来，一定是被敌人骑兵包围了，如不马上援救，则要被俘虏了。 
English: At that time, An Tin had already arrived at the Anyang River, and said to the commander Zhang Cong En: If the emperor did not return, he must have been surrounded by enemy cavalry, and if he did not immediately rescue, he would be captured.

古文：从恩曰： 敌甚盛，无以枝梧，将军独往何益？ 
现代文：张从恩说： 敌军势气正盛，没有谁可以抵抗，将军独自前往有何益？ 
English: Zhang Cong'en said, "The enemy army is in full swing, no one can resist, what is the benefit of the general going alone?

古文：审琦曰： 成败命也。设若不济，则与之俱死。假令失此二将，将何面目以见天子！ 
现代文：安审琦说 ：成败是命中注定的，假若不能成功，就与他一同死去，如果失去了这二位将领，将以何面目去见天子！ 
English: An Ji said, "Success or failure is predetermined by fate. If you can't succeed, you will die with him. If you lose these two generals, what will you look like when you go to see the Son of Heaven!"

古文：遂率铁骑北渡赴之。
现代文：于是率领铁骑向北渡河奔去解围。
English: So he led the cavalry to rush to the Beidou River to relieve the siege.

古文：契丹见尘起，谓救军并至，乃引去。
现代文：契丹军队看见尘土飞扬，以为是援军大量来到，便引兵退去。
English: The Khitan army saw the dust flying, thought it was a large number of reinforcements, and withdrew.

古文：遇与彦超中数创得还，时诸军叹曰： 此三人皆猛将也！ 
现代文：皇甫遇与慕容彦超多处受伤，但得以生还，当时各军将士感叹说 ：这三人都是猛将啊！ 
English: The crown prince and Murongyan were injured in many places, but survived. At that time, the soldiers of each army lamented: These three are fierce generals!

古文：遇累官至检校太师、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：皇甫遇历官至检校太师、同中书门下平章事。
English: Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：四年，契丹复至，从杜重威营滹水，重威送款于契丹，遇不预其议，及降，心不平之。
现代文：开运四年，契丹又南侵，皇甫遇跟随杜重威经营滹水一带，杜重威与契丹讲和，皇甫遇没有参与其中，到投降契丹后，心里极为不平。
English: Four years after the start of the campaign, the Khitans invaded the south again, and Emperor Fu Rong followed Du Chongwei to manage the Surabaya area. Du Chongwei and the Khitans made peace, but Emperor Fu Rong did not participate in it. After surrendering to the Khitans, he was extremely uneasy.

古文：时契丹欲遣遇先入汴，遇辞之，因私谓人曰： 我身荷国恩，位兼将相，既不能死于军阵，何颜以见旧主！
现代文：当时契丹国主打算派皇甫遇先进入汴州，他推辞了，还私下对人说 ：我身蒙国恩，位兼将相，既然没有死在战场上，又有何面目以见旧主！
English: At that time, the Khitan sovereign planned to send the emperor to enter Zhangzhou ahead of the others. He declined, and privately said to the people: I am blessed by the country, and I am also the commander-in-chief. Since I did not die on the battlefield, how can I see the old master again!

古文：更受命图之，所不忍也。 
现代文：反而接受伪命来图谋他，我不忍心。 
English: I can't bear to accept a fake mission to plot against him.

古文：明日，行至赵郡，泊其县舍，顾从者曰： 我已信宿不食，疾甚矣，主辱臣死，无复南行。 
现代文：第二天，走到赵郡，止歇在县舍中，他看着跟随的人说 ：我已经二天没有吃饭了，病得很重，君王受辱则为臣者当死，我不再南行了。 
English: The next day, he walked to Zhao County and stopped to rest in the county seat. He looked at his followers and said, "I haven't eaten for two days. I'm very ill. When the king is insulted, the vassal must die. I'm not going south anymore."

古文：因绝吭而殒，远近闻而义之。
现代文：因此切断自己的咽喉而死，远近的人听说后都认为他有节义。
English: Therefore, he cut his own throat and died. After hearing this, people near and far thought that he was justified.

古文：汉高祖登极，诏赠中书令。
现代文：后汉高祖登上帝位，下诏追赠中书令。
English: Henkel's ancestor ascended the throne and issued a posthumous imperial edict.

古文：后汉瑭屯兵赵郡，因事奏而杀之，时人冤之。
现代文：后周广顺三年一月，皇甫遇的妻子宋国夫人霍氏上奏，请求度为尼姑，周太祖准允了，并赐紫衣尼服，赐号贞范大师，法名惠圆，又赐僧龄十年。
English: Later, in January of the third year of Zhou Guangshun's reign, Emperor Fu's wife, Song Guo's wife, Song Guo's wife, Song Guo's wife, Song Guo's wife, Song Guo's wife, Song Guo's wife, Song Guo's wife, Song Guo's wife, Song Guo's wife, Song Guo's wife, Song Guo's wife, Song Guo's wife, Song Guo's wife, Song Guo's wife, Song Guo's wife, Song Guo's wife, Song Guo's wife, Song Guo's

古文：白奉进，字德升，云州清塞军人也。
现代文：白奉进，字德升，云州清塞军人。
English: Bai Fengjin, the character De Sheng, Yunnan Qing Dynasty soldiers.

古文：父曰达子，世居朔野，以弋猎为事。
现代文：父亲白达子，世代居住在朔北，以狩猎为生。
English: His father, Baida Zi, has lived in Shuo Bei for generations and makes a living from hunting.

古文：奉进少善骑射，后唐武皇镇太原，奉进谒于军门，以求自效，武皇纳于麾下。
现代文：白奉进小时善于骑马射箭，后唐武皇镇守太原时，白奉进到军门拜见，以求效力，武皇收容在他部下。
English: When Bai Fengjin was young, he was good at riding horses and shooting arrows. Later, when Emperor Wu of the Tang Dynasty was garrisoning Taiyuan, Bai Fengjin went to the military gate to meet him in order to be effective. Emperor Wu was sheltered by his subordinates.

古文：庄宗之破夹寨也，奉进挺身首犯贼锋，庄宗睹而壮之。后从战山东河上，继以功迁龙武指挥使。
现代文：庄宗攻破夹寨时，白奉进挺身而出，首先进击敌人的前锋，庄宗看见后认为他勇猛过人，后来跟随庄宗在崤山以东黄河边上作战，接着因战功升任龙武军指挥使。
English: When Zhuangzong broke through the encirclement, Bai Fengjin stepped forward and first attacked the enemy's forward. Zhuangzong saw him and thought he was very brave. Later, he followed Zhuangzong to fight on the edge of the Yellow River east of Shaoshan. Then, he was promoted to commander of the Dragon Army for his war service.

古文：同光中，魏王继岌伐蜀，擢为亲军指挥使。
现代文：同光年间，魏王李继岌讨伐蜀地，他被提拔为亲军指挥使。
English: In the same year, the Wei king, Li Jizhi, led a desperate crusade against Shu, and he was promoted to commander of the pro-government army.

古文：天成、长兴中，统上军，加检校右散骑常侍。
现代文：天成、长兴年间，统领上军，加封检校右散骑常侍。
English: During the Tiancheng and Changxing dynasties, he led the army and became a samurai of the right cavalry.

古文：应顺中，转捧圣右厢都指挥使、检校刑部尚书，赐忠顺保义功臣，遥领封州刺史。
现代文：应顺年间，改任护圣右厢都指挥使、检校刑部尚书，赐封忠顺保义功臣名号，遥任封州刺史。
English: During the year of Gu Shun, he was reappointed as the commander of the right compartment of the guard of honor, the inspector of the inspection and punishment department of the school, the title of the loyal and loyal hero, and the distant appointment of the history of the state.

古文：清泰中，加检校右仆射、唐州刺史，治郡逾年，甚有政绩。
现代文：清泰年间，加封检校右仆射、唐州刺史，治理州郡一年多，很有政绩。
English: During the Qing and Tai Dynasties, Jiafeng Jiankuo, Tangzhou Jianshi, governed the county for more than a year, with great political achievements.

古文：高祖即位，征赴阙，超加检校司徒，充护圣左厢都指挥使，遥领歙州刺史。
现代文：晋高祖即位后，征召入朝，越级加封检校司徒，兼护圣左厢都指挥使；遥任歙州刺史。
English: After Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, he was conscripted into the imperial court. He was promoted beyond his grade and became a member of the sealing and inspection of schools, as well as the guardian of the left wing of the imperial palace. He was also appointed as the distant governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：始奉进有女嫁于皇子重信，故高祖尤所倚爱。
现代文：开始时白奉进有个女儿，嫁给了皇子石重进，所以晋高祖特别倚重珍爱他。
English: At the beginning, Bai Fengjin had a daughter who was married to the prince Shi Chongjin, so Emperor Jingu especially cherished him.

古文：二年，改护圣左右厢都指挥使。
现代文：天福二年改任护圣左右厢都指挥使。
English: In the second year of Tianfu, he was reappointed as the commander of both the left and right side of the guard.

古文：是岁，车驾幸夷门。
现代文：这一年，高祖驾临夷门。
English: This year, Gao Zu drove to Yimen.

古文：五月，领昭信军节度，充侍卫马军都指挥使。
现代文：五月，任昭信军节度使，兼侍卫马军都指挥使。
English: In May, he was appointed as the festival envoy of the Zhaoxin Army and the commanding envoy of the Horse Guards.

古文：六月，范延光据鄴为乱，诏遣率骑军三千北屯滑台。
现代文：六月，范延光凭借邺都叛乱，高祖下诏派白奉进率骑兵三千北驻滑台。
English: In June, Fan Yanguang took advantage of the rebellion in Shidu and Gaozhu sent Baifong marching cavalry with a rate of three thousand north to slide.

古文：时符彦饶为滑州节度使，一夕，有军士夜掠居人，奉进捕之，凡获五盗，三在奉进本军，二在彦饶麾下，寻命俱斩之。
现代文：当时符彦饶担任滑州节度使，一天晚上，有士兵趁夜抢劫居民，白奉进追捕，一共抓获了五个强盗，其中三个是白奉进自己的士兵，另二个是符彦饶的部下，旋即下令一并斩杀了。
English: At that time, Fuhiko Rao was serving as a festival envoy for the city of Talas. One night, some soldiers took advantage of the night to rob residents. Bai Fengjin pursued them and captured a total of five robbers, three of whom were Bai Fengjin's own soldiers, and the other two were Fuhiko Rao's subordinates. He immediately ordered them to be killed together.

古文：彦饶怒其不先告，深衔之。
现代文：符彦饶恼怒他不先告知，深深地怀恨在心。
English: Fuhiko is annoyed that Rao did not tell him first, and he harbors a deep grudge.

古文：明日，奉进左右劝奉进面谢，奉进然之，以从骑数人候彦饶于牙城，既入，且述其过。
现代文：第二天，白奉进左右劝他去当面向符彦饶致歉，白奉进答应了，带着几个骑兵在牙城等候符彦饶，进来以后，白奉进自陈过失。
English: The next day, Bai Fengjin persuaded him to go and apologize to Fuhiko Rao face to face. Bai Fengjin agreed, and waited for Fuhiko Rao with several cavalrymen in Yacheng. After coming in, Bai Fengjin confessed his fault.

古文：彦饶曰： 军中法令，各有部分，何得将滑州兵士一例处斩，殊无主客之义乎！ 
现代文：符彦饶说： 军中法令，各有所辖，怎能将滑州兵士一概处斩，太没有主客的情义了吧！ 
English: Fuhiko Rao said, "The laws and regulations in the military are all different, so how can the soldiers in Gushu be killed all at once? There's no such thing as a guest of honor!"

古文：奉进曰： 军士抵法，宁有彼我，今仆以咎自陈，而公怒不息，莫是与范延光同反耶！ 
现代文：白奉进说 ：兵士犯法，岂有你我之分，现在我以过自责，而你却怒气不息，莫是要与范延光一同谋反不成？ 
English: Bai Fengjin said, "Soldiers breaking the law is between you and me. Now that I have rebuked myself, and you are still angry, why do you want to conspire with Fan Yanguang?

古文：因拂衣而起，彦饶不留。
现代文：便拂袖而去，符彦饶不予挽留。
English: Then he whisked his sleeve and left, and Fuhiko Rao did not stay.

古文：其帐下介士大噪，擒奉进杀之。
现代文：符彦饶帐下武士大声叫嚷，抓住白奉进就杀了。
English: Fuhiko Rao's samurai shouted loudly, grabbed Bai Fengjin and killed him.

古文：是日，步军都校马万、次校卢顺密闻奉进遇害，率其步众攻滑之子城，执彦饶送于京师，戮于班荆馆北。
现代文：这天，步军都校马万、次校卢顺密听说白奉进被害，带领步兵进攻滑台的内城，抓获符彦饶送往京城，在班荆馆的北面斩杀了他。
English: On this day, the infantry of the capital school Ma Wan and the second school Lu Shunmi heard that Bai Fengjin was injured, led the infantry to attack the inner city of the slide, captured Fuhiko Rao and sent him to Beijing, and killed him on the north side of the Ban Jing Pavilion.

古文：高祖以奉进仓卒遇祸，叹惜久之，诏赠太傅。
现代文：高祖因白奉进仓猝遇祸，长久哀叹惋惜，下诏追赠太傅。
English: Gao Zu suffered a sudden accident when he was sent into a warehouse, and he lamented and regretted for a long time. He was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu.

