古文：世人惟不平则鸣，圣人以无讼为贵。
现代文：世人遇上不公平的事就会发出不满的呼声，圣明的人认为人世间没有官司打才是最宝贵的。
English: When the world encounters unfair things, it will cry out in discontent. The holy people believe that the absence of lawsuits is the most precious thing in the world.

古文：上有恤刑之主，桁杨雨润；下无冤枉之民，肺石风清。
现代文：上面有慎用刑法的君主，用刑犹如细雨滋润万物，使罪犯被感化而向善；下面也没有被冤枉的百姓，用来喊冤的肺石则冷冷清清。
English: Above, there is a monarch who carefully uses criminal law, using punishment like a drizzle to moisten all things, so that criminals are influenced and become good; below, there are no people who have been wronged, and the lung stone used to shout injustice is cold and clear.

古文：虽囹圄便是福堂，而画地亦可为狱。
现代文：只要弃恶从善，牢狱可能就是福堂；上古的民风淳朴，在地上画一个圈也能成为监狱。
English: As long as you abandon evil and do good, prison may be a blessing; the ancient folk custom is simple, and drawing a circle on the ground can also be a prison.

古文：与人构讼，曰鼠牙雀角之争；罪人诉冤，有抢地吁天之惨。
现代文：和人结怨打官司，可以说是 鼠牙雀角 的争斗；犯人诉讼冤情，则有 抢地吁天 的惨状。
English: To litigate grievances with others can be said to be a battle of wits; to litigate the grievances of prisoners is a disastrous situation of grabbing land.

古文：狴犴猛犬而能守，故狱门画狴犴之形；棘木外刺而里直，故听讼在棘木之下。
现代文：狴犴生得勇猛肥大，能看门守户，所以古时牢门上常常画有它的图像。棘木外面长着针刺但里面却是直的，所以古代的司法官大多在棘木下审理案件。
English: In ancient times, the thorn tree was often depicted on prison doors. The thorn tree has needle pricks on the outside but is straight on the inside, so most of the ancient judicial officers tried cases under the thorn tree.

古文：乡亭之系有岸，朝廷之系有狱，谁敢作奸犯科；死者不可复生，刑者不可复续，上当原情定罪。
现代文：乡亭的监牢有 岸 ，朝廷的监牢有 狱 ，谁还敢为非作歹，违法犯罪；死了的人不可能再活过来，服过刑的人也不可能再用金钱赎回，所以上面应当按照实际情况量刑定罪。
English: There is a shore in the country pavilion prison, and there is a prison in the imperial court prison. Who would dare to do evil and illegal crimes? It is impossible for a dead person to come back to life, and it is impossible for a person who has served his sentence to redeem it with money. Therefore, the above should be sentenced and convicted according to the actual situation.

古文：囹圄是周狱，羑里是商牢。
现代文： 囹圄 是周代的监狱， 羑里 是商代的牢房。
English: Shantou is the prison of Zhou Dynasty, and Baili is the cell of Shang Dynasty.

古文：桎梏之设，乃拘罪人之具；缧绁之中，岂无贤者之冤。
现代文：脚镣、手铐是用来拘捕犯人的刑具；在囚禁的犯人之中，怎么可能没有被冤枉的好人。
English: Leg irons and handcuffs are instruments of torture used to detain prisoners; how is it possible that there are no innocent good people among the prisoners?

古文：两争不放，谓之鹬蚌相持；无辜牵连，谓之池鱼受害。
现代文：双方互相争执不想让，就是 鹬蚌相持 ；无故受到牵连则是 池鱼受害 。
English: If the two sides do not want to let them quarrel with each other, they will hold a grudge; if they are involved without reason, the pond fish will suffer.

古文：请公入瓮，周兴自作其孽；下车泣罪，夏禹深痛其民。
现代文： 请公入瓮 是指唐代的酷吏周兴自作自受； 下车泣罪 则是大禹对百姓犯法的怜悯。
English: "Asking the public to enter the train" refers to the cruel official Zhou Xing of the Tang Dynasty; "getting off the train and crying" is Dayu's pity for the people breaking the law.

古文：好讼曰健讼，挂告曰株连。
现代文：好打官司称为 健讼 ，没有罪而受到牵连被称作 株连 。
English: Those who are willing to sue are called "Jian Zhe," and those who are implicated without being guilty are called "Kaburen."

古文：为人息讼，谓之释纷；被人栽冤，谓之嫁祸。
现代文：帮助别人解除诉讼，称为 释纷 ；被人栽赃冤枉称作 嫁祸 。
English: Helping others to resolve a lawsuit is called "setting things right"; being wronged is called "blaming others."

古文：徒配曰城旦，遣戍是问军。三尺乃朝廷之法，三木是罪人之刑。
现代文：判徒刑流放去做苦役的称 城旦 ；充军到边境守边的称作 问军 。 三尺 是指朝廷的法律； 三木 是铐在犯人颈、手、足上的三种刑具。
English: Sentence of imprisonment and banishment to do hard labor is called Shiro-dan-ro; sending troops to guard the border is called Shoran-gun; Sanjaku refers to the law of the imperial court; Miki is the three types of instruments of torture attached to the prisoner's neck, hands, and feet.

古文：古之五刑，墨、劓、剕、宫、大辟；今之律例，笞、杖、死罪、徒、流。
现代文：古时候的五种刑罚分别是墨、劓、剕、宫、大辟；现在的刑罚则是笞、杖、死罪、徒、流。
English: In ancient times, the five kinds of punishments were ink, whip, cane, palace, and capital punishment; the current punishments are whip, cane, capital punishment, imprisonment, and exile.

古文：上古时削木为吏，今日之淳风安在；唐太宗纵囚归狱，古人之诚信可嘉。
现代文：上古的时候削木为吏，犯人能够抱木吏自己到庭受审，今天这种古朴的淳风在哪里呢?
English: In ancient times, wood-chopping was a form of punishment, and prisoners were allowed to bring their own wood-choppers to court for trial. Where is this old-fashioned justice today?

古文：花落讼庭间，草生囹圄静，歌何易治民之间；吏从冰上立，人在镜中行，颂卢奂折狱之清。
现代文：唐太宗贞观六年将两百多名死囚释放回家，规定第二年秋天再归狱受刑，结果这些犯人如期而至，古人的诚信实在值得赞许。 花落讼庭闲，草生囹圄静 ，这是百姓对唐代益昌县令何易的廉洁及治民有方的称颂； 吏从冰上立，人在镜中行 ，则是百姓对唐代南海太守卢奂断案清正廉明的赞美。
English: In the sixth year of the Tang Dynasty, Taizong Zhenguan released more than two hundred death-row prisoners to go home, stipulating that they would return to prison in the autumn of the following year. As a result, these prisoners arrived as scheduled, and the integrity of the ancients is truly worthy of praise. Flowers fall in the courtroom, grass grows quietly, this is the people's praise for the Tang Dynasty Yichang County Governor He Yi's integrity and ability to govern the people; officials stand on ice, and people walk in mirrors, is the people's praise for the Tang Dynasty South China Sea Governor Lu Wei's clean and honest decision-making.

古文：可见治乱之药石，刑罚为重；兴平之梁肉，德教为先。
现代文：由此可见，治理乱世的良药，是要以刑罚为重；振兴太平的美味，则要以道德教化为先。
English: From this, it can be seen that the best medicine to control the chaotic world is to focus on punishment; to revitalize the taste of peace, it is necessary to start with moral enlightenment.

