古文：足太阳脉气所发者，七十八穴：两眉头各一。
现代文：足太阳膀胱经脉气所发的地方，有七十八个府穴：在眉头的陷中左右各有一穴。
English: There are seventy-eight prefectural cavities in the area of the solar plexus where the meridional qi is emitted: there is a hole in the middle of the eyebrow, one on each side.

古文：入发至项三寸半，旁五，相去三寸，其浮气在皮中者凡五行，行五，五五二十五。
现代文：入发际至头顶共三寸长，伴有头部的五行，每行间隔三寸，头部的脉气浮动相通运行在五行中，每行有五穴，共计五五二十五穴。
English: The hairline from the hairline to the top of the head is a total of three inches long, accompanied by five rows of the head, each row spaced three inches apart, and the pulse gas floating in the head runs in five rows, each row having five holes, for a total of 5525 holes.

古文：项中大筋两旁各一。
现代文：项中的大筋两旁左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole on each side of the large bar in the item.

古文：风府两旁各一。
现代文：风府穴为两旁各有一穴。
English: There is a hole on each side of the Fengfu hole.

古文：侠背以下至尻尾二十一节十五间各一，五脏之俞各五，六腑之俞各六。
现代文：脊椎骨自上而下至骶尾骨有二十一节，其中十五节脊椎骨间左右各有一穴，五脏的俞穴左右各有一穴；六腑的俞穴左右各有一穴。
English: There are 21 vertebrae from the top down to the coccyx, of which 15 vertebrae each have a hole on the left and right, the internal organs each have a hole on the right and left, and the six limbs each have a hole on the right and left.

古文：委中以下至足小指旁各六俞。
现代文：自委中穴以下至足小趾旁，左右各有六俞穴。
English: There are six calluses on each side of the foot from the middle to the little toe.

古文：足少阳脉气所发者，六十二穴：两角上各二。
现代文：足少阳胆经脉气所发的地方，有六十二府穴：头两角上左右各有二穴。
English: There are sixty-two pits in the area where the meridional qi of the lesser yang qi is emitted: there are two pits in each of the first two corners on the upper left and right.

古文：直目上发际内各五。
现代文：两目瞳孔直上发际内左右各有五穴。
English: There are five holes on each side of the pupil of the second eye, just above the hairline.

古文：耳前角上各一。
现代文：两耳前角上左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole in each of the upper and lower front corners of each ear.

古文：耳前角下各一。
现代文：两耳前角下左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole in the lower left and right front corners of each ear.

古文：锐发下各一。
现代文：头发的鬓角下左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole in each side of the hair under the sideburn.

古文：客主人各一。
现代文：客主人左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole on each side of the host.

古文：耳后陷中各一。
现代文：两耳后的陷凹中左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole in the middle of the depression behind each ear.

古文：下关各一。
现代文：下关穴左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole on each side of the lower pass.

古文：耳下牙车之后各一。
现代文：两耳下、牙床后左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole under each ear and behind the gums on each side.

古文：缺盆各一。
现代文：缺盆穴左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole on each side of the missing basin hole.

古文：腋下三寸，胁下至胠，八间各一。
现代文：腋下三寸，从胁下至腋下，八条肋骨间左右各有一穴。
English: Underarm three inches, from underarm to underarm, there is a hole between each of the eight ribs.

古文：髀枢中旁各一。膝以下至足小指次指各六俞。
现代文：髀枢中旁左右各一穴；膝以下至足第四趾侧各有六俞穴。
English: There is one hole on each side of the middle of the pastern; there are six on each side of the fourth toe below the knee.

古文：足阳明脉气所发者，六十八穴：额颅发际旁各三。
现代文：足阳明胃经脉气所发的地方，有六十八府穴：额颅发际旁左右各有三穴。
English: There are sixty-eight prefectural holes in the place where the foot yang, stomach meridian and qi are emitted: there are three holes on each side of the hairline of the forehead.

古文：面鼽骨空各一。
现代文：颧骨骨空中间左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole in each side of the tibial space.

古文：大迎之骨空各一。
现代文：大迎穴在骨空陷中，左右各有一穴。
English: The large entrance hole is in the bone cavity, with one hole on each side.

古文：人迎各一。
现代文：人迎穴左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole on each side of the welcoming hole.

古文：缺盆外骨空各一。
现代文：在肩缺盆中骨空陷处，左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole on each side of the hollow in the hollow in the hollow in the hollow in the hollow in the hollow in the hollow in the hollow in the hollow.

古文：膺中骨间各一。
现代文：胸中在肋骨间左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole in each side of the chest between the ribs.

古文：侠鸠尾之外，当乳下三寸，侠胃脘各五；侠齐广三寸各三；下齐二寸侠之各三。
现代文：在鸠尾穴与乳下三寸的中点向下拉线，在胃脘的部位，左右各有五穴；在肚脐横开三寸处上下排列，左右各有三穴；在肚脐下二寸，左右各有三穴。
English: At the midpoint of the appendix and three inches below the nipple, draw a line downwards. At the site of the stomach fistula, there are five holes on each side; at the navel three inches apart, there are three holes on each side; at two inches below the navel, there are three holes on each side.

古文：气街动脉各一。
现代文：气街在股沟的动脉跳动处，左右各一穴。
English: The qi street is in the groin at the place where the artery beats, with one hole on each side.

古文：伏菟上各一。
现代文：伏菟穴左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole on each side of the Fuso hole.

古文：三里以下至足中指各八俞，分之所在穴空。
现代文：从足三里穴至足中趾之间，左右各有八个俞穴，从足三里穴后的两条分支各自行往足趾间的穴空处。
English: From the third metatarsal to the middle toe, there are eight grooves on each side, and from the third metatarsal to the space between the toes, there are two branches.

古文：手太阳脉气所发者，三十六穴：目内眦各一。
现代文：手太阳小肠经脉气所发的地方，有三十六府穴：目内眦左右各有一穴。
English: There are thirty-six prefectural cavities in the area of the hand, the small intestine and the solar plexus from which qi emanates: one on each side of the inner eyelid.

古文：目外各一。
现代文：目外侧左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole on each side of the outer side of the eye.

古文：鼽骨下各一。
现代文：颧骨下左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole on each side under the tibia.

古文：耳郭上各一。
现代文：耳廓上左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole on each side of the auricle.

古文：耳中各一。
现代文：耳中左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole in the middle of the ear on each side.

古文：巨骨穴各一。
现代文：巨骨穴左右各一。
English: One giant bone hole each on the left and right.

古文：曲腋上骨穴各一。
现代文：曲腋上左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole on each side of the bell.

古文：柱骨上陷者各一。
现代文：柱骨上陷中左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole in the middle of the upper depression of the post bone on each side.

古文：上天窻四寸各一。
现代文：天窗穴与之上四寸左右有一穴，共四穴。
English: The skylight hole and the upper four inches or so have a hole, a total of four holes.

古文：肩解各一。
现代文：肩解部左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole on each side of the shoulder release.

古文：肩解下三寸各一。
现代文：肩解部之下三寸处左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole about three inches below the shoulder release.

古文：肘以下至手小指本各六俞。
现代文：肘部以下至手小指端的爪甲根部左右各有六俞穴。
English: From the elbow to the end of the little finger, there are six grooves around the base of the nail plate.

古文：手阳明脉气所发者，二十二穴：鼻空外廉项上各二。大迎骨空各一。
现代文：手阳明大肠经脉气所发的地方，有二十二府穴：鼻孔的外侧左右各有一穴；项部左右各有一穴。
English: There are twenty-two prefectural holes in the area from which qi emanates: one hole each on the outer side of the nostrils and on the right and left; one hole each on the left and right sides of the pharynx.

古文：柱骨之会各一。
现代文：大迎穴在下颌骨的骨空间，左右各有一穴。
English: The large entrance hole is in the bone space of the mandible, with one hole on each side.

古文：髃骨之会各一。
现代文：柱骨之会左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole on each side of the post-and-beam joint.

古文：肘以下至手大指次指本各六俞。
现代文：髃骨之会左右各有一穴。肘部以下至手食指端的爪甲根部左右各有六俞穴。
English: There is one hole on each side of the metacarpals, and six on each side of the base of the carapace from below the elbow to the tip of the index finger.

古文：手少阳脉气所发者，三十二穴：鼽骨下各一。
现代文：手少阳三焦经脉气所发的地方，有三十二府穴：颧骨下左右各有一穴。
English: There are thirty-two prefectural cavities in the place where the Shao Yang three-focal meridians are emitted: one on each side under the shinbone.

古文：眉后各一。
现代文：眉后左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole on each side behind the eyebrow.

古文：角上各一。
现代文：耳前角上左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole on each side of the upper front corner of the ear.

古文：下完骨后各一。项中足太阳之前各一。
现代文：耳后完骨穴的下面左右各有一穴；脖子中间足太阳经之前左右各有一穴。
English: Behind the ear, there is a hole on each side below the postcranial fossa; in the middle of the neck, there is a hole on each side before the meridian.

古文：侠扶突各一。肩贞各一。
现代文：在扶突穴的外侧左右各有一穴；肩贞穴左右各一。
English: On the outer side of the fulcrum hole, there is a hole on each side; on the right and left, there is a hole; on the right and left, there is a hole.

古文：肩贞下三寸分间各一。
现代文：在肩贞穴之下，每隔三寸的分肉之间左右各有一穴，合计六穴。
English: Under the epiglottis, there is a hole on each side every three inches, for a total of six holes.

古文：肘以下至手小指次指本各六俞。
现代文：肘部以下至手无名指之端爪甲根部左右各有六俞穴。
English: Below the elbow to the ring finger of the hand, there are six grooves on each side of the base of the terminal nail.

古文：督脉气所发者，二十八穴：项中央二。
现代文：督脉经气所发的地方，有二十八府穴：项中央有二穴。
English: There are twenty-eight prefectural anomalies in the area from which qi emanates through the mandibular vein: there are two anomalies in the middle of the anus.

古文：发际后中八。面中三。大椎以下至尻尾及旁十五穴。
现代文：前发际向后正中一线有八穴；面部的中央从鼻至唇有三穴；自大椎以下至骶尾骨有十五穴。
English: There are eight holes in the hairline from front to back; three holes in the middle of the face from the nose to the lips; and fifteen holes from the spine to the coccyx.

古文：至骶下凡二十一节，脊椎法也。
现代文：自大椎至骶尾骨共二十一节，这是脊椎骨节的计算方法。
English: There are a total of 21 vertebrae from the humerus to the coccyx. This is the method for calculating the number of vertebrae.

古文：任脉之气所发者，二十八穴：喉中央二。
现代文：任脉经气所发的地方，有二十八府穴：喉部正中有二穴。
English: There are twenty-eight prefectural acupoints in the place where the meridians emit qi: two in the middle of the larynx.

古文：膺中骨陷中各一。
现代文：前胸正中的肋骨凹陷中各有一穴。
English: There is a hole in each of the rib depressions in the middle of the forearm.

古文：鸠尾下三寸，胃脘五寸，胃脘以下至横骨六寸半一，腹脉法也。下阴别一。
现代文：自鸠尾穴起至上脘穴是三寸，上脘穴至脐中是五寸，脐中至横骨是六寸半，每寸一穴，这是腹部取穴的方法。下阴别一。
English: From the navel to the upper navel is three inches, from the upper navel to the middle of the navel is five inches, from the middle of the navel to the transverse bone is six and a half inches, one hole per inch, this is the method of taking a hole in the abdomen.

古文：目下各一。
现代文：两目之下左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole under each eye on the left and right.

古文：下唇一。
现代文：下嘴唇颏唇沟有一穴。
English: There is a hole in the lower lip at the base of the lip groove.

古文：龂交一。
现代文：上齿龈有一穴。
English: There's a hole in the maxillary palate.

古文：冲脉气所发者，二十二穴：侠鸠尾外各半寸，至齐寸一；侠脐下旁各五分，至横骨寸一，腹脉法也。
现代文：冲脉经气所发的地方，有二十二府穴：在鸠尾穴旁开五分向下至脐旁开五分，一寸一穴；自脐旁开五分向下至横骨穴，一寸一穴。这是腹脉取穴的方法。
English: There are 22 prefectural holes in the place where the pulse is emitted by the qi: open five points next to the appendix hole and down to five points next to the navel, one inch per hole; open five points next to the navel and down to the transverse bone hole, one inch per hole. This is the method of taking a hole in the abdominal vein.

古文：足少阴舌下。
现代文：足少阴肾经脉气所发的地方在舌下。
English: The place where the qi emanates from the foot and the kidney meridians is under the tongue.

古文：厥阴毛中急脉各一。
现代文：足厥阴肝经脉气所发的地方，在阴毛中急脉左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole on each side of the mid-acute vein in the pubic hair at the place where the qi emanates from the mid-acute vein.

古文：手少阴各一。
现代文：手少阴心经脉气所发的地方左右各有一穴。
English: There is a hole on each side of the place where the meridional qi is emitted.

古文：阴阳蹻各一。手足诸鱼际脉气所发者。
现代文：手、足的白肉隆起处，有如鱼腹，是肺经、脾经脉气所发的地方。
English: The raised areas of white flesh on the hands and feet, like the belly of a fish, are the places from which the pulmonary and splenic qi emanates.

古文：凡三百六十五穴也。
现代文：脉气所发的地方共计三百六十五府穴。
English: A total of three hundred and sixty-five prefectures were affected by the pulse gas.

