古文：儒者称圣人之生，不因人气，更禀精於天。
现代文：儒者声称圣人的出生，不依赖于从天上承受而形成人的气，却是另外承受于天的精气。
English: Confucians claim that the birth of a saint does not depend on receiving the breath of life from heaven, but on receiving the breath of life from heaven.

古文：禹母吞薏苡而生禹，故夏姓曰姒；卨母吞燕卵而生卨，故殷姓曰子。
现代文：禹的母亲吞食了薏苡就生下了禹，所以夏朝的天子姓姒；卨的母亲吞食了燕子卵就生下了卨，所以商殷天子的姓叫子。
English: Yu's mother swallowed a dragonfly and gave birth to Yu, so the god's son of the Xia Dynasty was surnamed Yu; Yu's mother swallowed a swallow's egg and gave birth to a dragonfly, so the god's son of the Shang Yin Dynasty was surnamed Yu.

古文：后稷母履大人迹而生后稷，故周姓曰姬。
现代文：后稷的母亲踩了巨人的足迹就生下后稷，所以周天子的姓叫姬。
English: Houyi's mother stepped on the giant's footprints and gave birth to Houyi, so Zhou Tianzi's surname was Ji.

古文：《诗》曰： 不坼不副 。是生后稷。
现代文：《诗经·大雅·生民》上说： 胞衣破裂，胎盘分离 ，如此顺利地生下了后稷。
English: "Shijing·Daya·Shengmin" said: the placenta ruptured, the placenta separated, and the placenta was successfully delivered.

古文：说者又曰： 禹、卨逆生，闿母背而出；后稷顺生，不坼不副。
现代文：解说者又说：禹、卨难产，是开他们母亲背才生出来的。后稷是顺利出生，胞衣破裂，胎盘分离。
English: The commentator also said, "Yu and Hao had a difficult delivery and were born on their mother's back. Hou Hao was born smoothly, the placenta ruptured and the placenta separated.

古文：不感动母体，故曰 不坼不副 。
现代文：由于没有损害母体，所以说是 不坼不副 。
English: Since there is no damage to the parent body, it is said to be healthy.

古文：逆生者子孙逆死，顺生者子孙顺亡。
现代文：难产的其子孙不得好死。顺生的其子孙就顺应天命死去。
English: The offspring of a difficult birth will die. The offspring of a normal birth will die in accordance with the will of heaven.

古文：故桀、纣诛死，赧王夺邑 。
现代文：所以夏桀、商纣被讨伐处死，而周赧王只被夺去城邑。
English: Therefore, Xia Yao and Shang Yao were killed in the battle, while King Zhou Yao only lost his towns.

古文：言之有头足，故人信其说；明事以验证，故人然其文。
现代文：说得有头有尾，所以人们相信他们的说法；又摆出事实来证明，所以人们就相信他们写的东西。
English: They tell it like it is, so people believe what they say, and they present facts to prove it, so people believe what they write.

古文：谶书又言： 尧母庆都野出，赤龙感己，遂生尧 。
现代文：谶书上又说： 尧的母亲庆都到野外去，遇上赤龙冲动与之交合，于是生下尧。 
English: It also says in the Book of Zhai: Zhai's mother, Qingdu, went out into the field, met the Red Dragon, and the two of them had sexual intercourse. As a result, Zhai was born.

古文：《高祖本纪》言：刘媪尝息大泽之陂，梦与神遇。
现代文：《史记·高祖本纪》说：刘媪曾在大泽的岸边休息，梦见与神仙交合。
English: "The History of Gaozubun" says: Liu Bei once rested on the shore of Osawa and dreamed of having intercourse with the immortals.

古文：是时，雷电晦冥，太公往视，见蛟龙於上。
现代文：这时，雷电交加天空昏暗不明，汉高祖刘邦的父亲去看，见一条蛟龙在刘媪身上。
English: At this time, there was lightning and the sky was dark and unclear. The father of Liu Bang, the ancestor of Han Gao, went to have a look and saw a dragon on Liu Bei's body.

古文：已而有身，遂生高祖。
现代文：后来她就有了身孕，终于生下汉高祖。
English: Later, she became pregnant and finally gave birth to Han Gaozu.

古文：其言神验，文又明著，世儒学者，莫谓不然。
现代文：这些话象神似的灵验，文字又明明白白地写着，世上的儒者学者，都没有说它不对的。
English: These words are as eloquent as a god, and the words are written so clearly and plainly that no Confucian scholar in the world can say that they are not correct.

古文：如实论之，虚妄言也。
现代文：如实评论这些话，其实都是没有事实根据的说法。
English: Truthfully commenting on these words, in fact, they are all claims without factual basis.

古文：彼《诗》言 不坼不副 ，言其不感动母体，可也；言其母背而出，妄也。
现代文：那首诗说 胞衣破裂胎盘分离 ，是说不损伤母体，这是可信的；但说开母背而出生，就没有根据了。
English: The poem says that the placenta is ruptured and the placenta is separated, which means that it does not damage the mother, which is credible; but there is no basis for saying that the baby is born on the mother's back.

古文：夫蝉之生复育也，闿背而出。
现代文：蝉生幼虫复育，是开背而出的。
English: The rearing of cicada larvae is initiated by the dorsal fin.

古文：天之生圣子，与复育同道乎？
现代文：天生圣子，难道跟蝉生复育同一个道理吗？
English: Natural son, is it the same reason as the cicada's rebirth?

古文：兔吮毫而怀子，及其子生，从口而出。
现代文：母兔舔公兔的毛就怀孕，等到小兔要出生，就从口中吐出。
English: The mother rabbit licks the hair of the male rabbit to become pregnant, and when the baby rabbit is about to be born, it spits it out of its mouth.

古文：案禹母吞薏苡，卨母咽燕卵，与兔吮毫同实也。
现代文：考察一下，禹的母亲吞食薏苡，卨的母亲咽食燕蛋，跟兔子舔毛是同一种情况。
English: Let's see, Yu's mother swallowed crickets, the mother of crickets swallowed swallowing eggs, and the rabbit licked wool is the same situation.

古文：禹、卨之母生，宜皆从口，不当闿背。
现代文：禹和卨的母亲生子，应该都是从口吐出，不应当开背。
English: The mother and child of Yu Hejun should be spit out from the mouth, and should not open the back.

古文：夫如是，闿背之说，竟虚妄也。
现代文：像这样，开背的说法便没有事实根据了。
English: As such, there is no factual basis for the allegation.

古文：世间血刃死者多，未必其先祖初为人者生时逆也。
现代文：社会上被刀杀死的人多得很，未必他们的先祖最初成为人出生时都难产。
English: There are many people in society who have been killed by a sword, and it is not necessarily that their ancestors had difficulty giving birth when they first became human.

古文：秦失天下，阎乐斩胡亥，项羽诛子婴。
现代文：秦朝失掉天下，阎乐迫死胡亥，项羽诛杀子婴。
English: The Qin Dynasty lost the world, Yan Le forced the death of Hu Hai, Xiang Yu killed the baby.

古文：秦之先祖伯翳，岂逆生乎？
现代文：秦的先祖伯翳，难道初生时也是难产吗？
English: Qin Dynasty's ancestor, Bo Xuan, did he also have a difficult birth when he was born?

古文：如是为顺逆之说，以验三家之祖，误矣。
现代文：像这样，作为顺生、顺亡，逆生、逆亡的说法，用夏、商、周三家先祖的事来验证，都是错误的。
English: In this way, it is wrong to use Xia, Shang, and the ancestors of the Wednesday family as proof of the saying of "successful birth," "successful death," and "reverse birth" and "reverse death."

古文：且夫薏苡，草也；燕卵，鸟也；大人迹，土也，三者皆形，非气也，安能生人？
现代文：况且薏苡是草，燕子是鸟，巨人的脚印是土。三者都是形体，并不是气，怎么能生出人来呢？
English: Moreover, the reed is grass, the swallow is a bird, and the footprint of the giant is soil. All three are forms, not qi, so how can they produce people?

古文：说圣者，以为禀天精微之气，故其为有殊绝之知。
现代文：说圣人由于禀受了上天精致的气，所以他们因此具有特殊卓越的智慧。
English: The sages are said to have been endowed with special and superior wisdom because they were endowed with the refined breath of heaven.

古文：今三家之生，以草、以鸟、以土，可谓精微乎？
现代文：现在把夏、商、周三家的生产，说成是由于草，由于鸟，由于土的缘故，这能够说是禀受了天的精致之气吗？
English: Now the production of summer, business and Wednesday homes is said to be due to grass, due to birds, due to soil, can this be said to be the refined air of the day?

古文：天地之性，唯人为贵，则物贱矣。
现代文：天地之间存在的生命，只有人是宝贵的，而其他物体都很卑贱。
English: The life that exists between heaven and earth, only human beings are precious, while other objects are lowly.

古文：今贵人之气，更禀贱物之精，安能精微乎？
现代文：现在贵重的是从天禀受而形成人之气，却要说成是另外接受了卑贱物体的精气，那又怎么能说得上精致呢？
English: What is precious now is the human breath received from heaven, but how can it be said to be exquisite if it is said to be the breath received from a base object?

古文：夫令鸠雀施气於雁鹄，终不成子者，何也？
现代文：叫斑鸠麻雀施放气给大雁天鹅，始终不会形成幼子，为什么呢？
English: Why is it that the turtledove sparrow, when it is asked to release its breath to the swan goose, never produces a youngling?

古文：鸠雀之身小，雁鹄之形大也。
现代文：因为斑鸠麻雀的身体小，大雁天鹅的形体大。
English: Because the body of the tufted sparrow is small, the body of the goose swan is large.

古文：今燕之身不过五寸，薏苡之茎不过数尺，二女吞其卵实，安能成七尺之形乎？
现代文：如今燕子的身体不过五寸，薏苡的茎不过数尺，禹母、卨母吞食薏苡、燕卵，又怎么能形成七尺长的身体呢？
English: Nowadays, the body of a swallow is only five inches long, the stem of a dragonfly is only a few feet long, but how can a seven-foot-long body be formed if the mother swallow swallows dragonflies and swallow eggs?

古文：烁一鼎之铜，以灌一钱之形，不能成一鼎，明矣。
现代文：熔化铸个鼎的铜水，把它灌入一个钱那么小的模子里，不能铸成一个鼎，是明摆着的。
English: Melting copper and pouring it into a mold as small as a penny, it cannot be cast into a ring, it is obvious.

古文：今谓大人天神，故其迹巨。
现代文：如今说是巨人天神，所以他们脚印巨大。
English: Today it is said to be the giant Tenjin, so their footprints are huge.

古文：巨迹之人，一鼎之烁铜也；姜原之身，一钱之形也。
现代文：大脚印的巨人，像可以铸一个鼎的铜水，姜原的身体，像一个钱样的小模子。
English: The giant with the big footprints looks like he can cast a copper water ring, and Jiang Yuan's body looks like a small money-like mold.

古文：使大人施气於姜原，姜原之身小，安能尽得其精？
现代文：让巨人施放气给姜原，姜原的身体小，怎么能完全接受他的精气呢？
English: Let the giant give the breath to Jiangyuan, Jiangyuan's body is small, how can he fully accept his breath?

古文：不能尽得其精，则後稷不能成人。
现代文：不能全部得到他的精气，那么后稷就不能形成人。
English: If you can't get all of his essence, then you can't form a person.

古文：尧、高祖审龙之子，子性类父，龙能乘云，尧与高祖亦宜能焉。
现代文：尧与汉高祖果真是龙的儿子，儿子的禀赋像父亲，龙能乘云，尧与高祖也应该能乘云。
English: Yu and Han Gao Zu are really the sons of dragons. The son's endowment is like the father's. The dragon can ride the clouds, and Yu and Gao Zu should also be able to ride the clouds.

古文：万物生於土，各似本种；不类土者，生不出於土，土徒养育之也。
现代文：植物从土里萌芽，各自像本来的物种。它们的本性之所以不类似土，是因为其本性不是从土里得到的，土地仅仅是养育了它们。
English: Plants sprout from the soil, each like the original species. The reason why their nature is not similar to the soil is because their nature is not obtained from the soil, the land merely nurtured them.

古文：母之怀子，犹土之育物也。
现代文：母亲身怀儿子，就像土地养育植物。
English: A mother bearing a son is like the earth nourishing a plant.

古文：尧、高祖之母，受龙之施，犹土受物之播也。
现代文：尧与高祖的母亲，承受龙施放的气，如同土地接受植物播种一样。
English: The mother of the dragonfly and the great ancestor received the breath of the dragon, just as the land received the seed of plants.

古文：物生自类本种，夫二帝宜似龙也。
现代文：植物本性各自像原来的物种，尧和高祖二帝应该像龙。
English: Each plant nature is like the original species, and the dragonfly and the high ancestor should be like the dragon.

古文：且夫含血之类，相与为牝牡；牝牡之会，皆见同类之物。
现代文：况且有血动物，相互成为配偶。雌雄交配，都只见于同类动物。
English: Moreover, blood animals mate with each other. Both male and female mating are only found in the same kind of animal.

古文：精感欲动，乃能授施。
现代文：精神感动性欲冲动，才能进行施授。
English: The spirit is moved by the sexual impulse in order to teach.

古文：若夫牡马见雌牛，雄雀见牝鸡，不相与合者，异类故也。
现代文：至于说公马见到母牛，公雀见到母鸡，不相互交配，是因为不同种类的缘故。
English: As for the male horse seeing a cow and the male finch seeing a hen, they do not mate with each other because of different species.

古文：今龙与人异类，何能感於人而施气？
现代文：现今龙与人不同种类，怎么能使人感动交配而施放气呢？
English: Now that dragons and humans are different species, how can people be moved by mating and giving off energy?

古文：或曰：夏之衰，二龙斗於庭，吐漦於地。龙亡漦在，椟而藏之。
现代文：有人说： 夏朝衰败的时候，二条龙在宫庭里争斗，吐了口水在地上龙消失之后口水仍然在地上，于是把它放入木柜藏起来。
English: Some people said: When the Xia Dynasty was in decline, two dragons fought in the palace courtyard, and spat on the ground. After the dragon disappeared, the saliva was still on the ground, so it was put into a wooden cabinet and hidden.

古文：至周幽王发出龙漦，化为玄鼋，入於後宫，与处女交，遂生褒姒。
现代文：到周厉王时打开木柜放出龙的口水，就变成了一条黑色的蜥蜴，进入到后宫，与处女交配，于是生下了褒姒。
English: When King Zhou Li opened the wooden cabinet to release the dragon's saliva, it turned into a black lizard, entered the harem, mated with a virgin, and gave birth to a dragonfly.

古文：玄鼋与人异类，何以感於处女而施气乎？
现代文：黑蜥蜴跟人不同类，怎么能使处女感动交配而施放气呢？ 
English: Black lizards are a different species from humans. How can a virgin be moved to mate and deflated?

古文：夫玄鼋所交非正，故褒姒为祸，周国以亡。
现代文：黑蜥蜴交配不符合正常情况，所以褒姒成了祸害，西周因而灭亡。
English: The mating of the black lizards did not conform to the normal situation, so the black lizards became a scourge, and the Western Zhou Dynasty perished.

古文：以非类妄交，则有非道妄乱之子。
现代文：跟不同类的动物胡乱交配，就会有不走正道胡作非为的儿子。
English: When animals of different species are promiscuously mated, they will have sons who do not follow the right path and commit crimes.

古文：今尧、高祖之母，不以道接会，何故二帝贤圣，与褒姒异乎？
现代文：如今尧和高祖的母亲不按正常情况交配，怎么尧和高祖二帝会贤良圣明，与褒姒不一样呢？ 
English: Nowadays, the mother of Gong and Gaozu does not mate according to the normal situation. How can Gong and Gaozu the Second Emperor be virtuous and holy, which is different from Baozhu?

古文：或曰： 赵简子病，五日不知人。
现代文：有人说： 赵简子病得很厉害，五天不省人事。
English: Some people said: Zhao Jianzi is very ill, he has been unconscious for five days.

古文：觉言，我之帝所，有熊来，帝命我射之，中熊，死；有罴来，我又射之，中罴，罴死。
现代文：醒来后说，我去天帝住所，看见有熊来，天帝命令我射死它，箭中熊，熊死；又有罴来，我又射它，箭中罴，罴死。
English: After waking up, he said, "I went to the emperor's residence and saw a bear coming. The emperor ordered me to shoot it, and the arrow hit the bear, and the bear died. Another arrow came, and I shot it again, and the arrow hit the bear, and it died."

古文：後问当道之鬼，鬼曰： 熊罴，晋二卿之先祖也。 
现代文：后来问挡道的鬼，鬼说 熊和罴是晋国范氏和中行氏二卿的祖先。 
English: Later, he asked the ghost that was blocking the way, and the ghost said that Xiong and Zou were the ancestors of the Fan and Zhongxing dynasties in Jin Province.

古文：熊罴物也，与人异类，何以施类於人，而为二卿祖？
现代文：熊和罴都是动物，与人不同类，怎么能施放气给人，而成为二卿的先祖呢？
English: Both the bear and the stork are animals, different from humans. How could they be the ancestors of the two nobles?

古文：夫简子所射熊罴，二卿祖当亡，简子当昌之祆也。
现代文：赵简子射死熊和罴的事，是晋二卿该当灭亡，赵简子该当昌盛的征兆。
English: The fact that Zhao Jianzi shot dead the bear and the baboon is a sign that Jin Erqing should perish and Zhao Jianzi should prosper.

古文：简子见之，若寝梦矣。
现代文：赵简子看见熊和罴，就像睡着做梦一样。
English: When Zhao Jianzi saw the bear and the baboon, it was as if he had fallen asleep and was dreaming.

古文：空虚之象，不必有实。
现代文：是一种空幻虚假的图象，未必有其事。
English: is an illusionary and false image, which is not necessarily true.

古文：假令有之，或时熊罴先化为人。乃生二卿。
现代文：即使有其事，或许是熊罴先变成人，才生出范氏和中行氏。
English: Even if there is such a thing, it may be that Xiong Yao turned into a human first, only to give birth to Fan and Zhong Xing.

古文：鲁公牛哀病化为虎。
现代文：鲁国的公牛哀生病七天后变成虎。
English: Lu's bull became a tiger after seven days of illness.

古文：人化为兽，亦如兽为人。
现代文：人变成兽，也如同兽变成人一样。
English: Man became an animal, just as an animal became a man.

古文：玄鼋入後宫，殆先化为人。
现代文：黑蜥蜴进入后宫，恐怕是先变成人。
English: When a black lizard enters a harem, it probably turns into a human first.

古文：天地之间，异类之物，相与交接，未之有也。
现代文：天地之间，不同种类的动物相互交配，是没有的。
English: There is no such thing as different species of animals mating with each other between heaven and earth.

古文：天人同道，好恶均心。
现代文：天和人遵循的是同一个道理，喜欢和厌恶也有相同的心理。
English: Heaven and man follow the same principle, and like and dislike have the same psychology.

古文：人不好异类，则天亦不与通。
现代文：人不喜欢不同类的东西，那么天也不与异类交配。
English: People don't like different types of things, so they don't mate with different types.

古文：人虽生於天，犹虮虱生於人也。
现代文：人虽然从天上承受气而降生，如同虱子在人身上产卵一样。
English: Though a man be born of a woman, he is born of a woman; though a woman be born of a man, she is born of a woman.

古文：人不好虮虱，天无故欲生於人。
现代文：人不喜欢虱子卵，天也不会有意对人产生欲望。
English: People do not like hazelnut eggs, and heaven will not intentionally desire people.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：异类殊性，情欲不相得也。
现代文：因为不同类的东西具有不同的本性，情欲也不会相互合得来。
English: Because different kinds of things have different natures, the passions will not be compatible with each other.

古文：天地，夫妇也，天施气於地以生物。人转相生，精微为圣，皆因父气，不更禀取。
现代文：天地是一对夫妻，天施放气给地因此创造出万物，人于是将气辗转代代相传而生，承受精微之气的成为圣人，都是因为承受了父气，而没有另外禀取其他异类之气。
English: Heaven and earth are a husband and wife. As a result, all things have been created by heaven and earth. Therefore, people have passed down the spirit of discouragement from generation to generation. Those who have borne the subtle spirit of discouragement have become saints, all because they have borne the fatherly spirit of discouragement, and have not otherwise captured other alien spirits.

古文：如更禀者为圣，後稷不圣。
现代文：如果另外禀取异类之气形成了圣人，像卨、后稷就不能算圣人。
English: If a saint is formed by taking on the air of an outlier, people like Xing and Houyi cannot be considered saints.

古文：如圣人皆当更禀，十二圣不皆然也。
现代文：假如圣人都该另外禀受异类之气，那么十二圣并不全都是这样。
English: If saints are supposed to have an air of otherness about them, then not all of the Twelve are like that.

古文：黄帝、帝喾、帝颛顼、帝舜之母，何所受气？
现代文：像黄帝、帝喾、帝颛顼、帝舜的母亲，是承受了什么气呢？
English: Like the Yellow Emperor, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi, and Empress Dowager Cixi's mother, what kind of anger did they bear?

古文：文王、武王、周公、孔子之母，何所感吞？
现代文：像文王、武王、周公、孔丘的母亲，又是吞食了什么才交配的呢？
English: Like the mothers of King Wen, King Wu, Zhou Gong, and Kong Qiu, what did they eat before mating?

古文：此或时见三家之姓，曰姒氏、子氏、姬氏，则因依放，空生怪说，犹见鼎湖之地，而著黄帝升天之说矣。
现代文：这或许是看见夏、商、周三家的姓叫做姒氏、子氏、姬氏，就因此依照模仿，凭空生造出奇怪的说法，像看见了鼎湖的地方，就捏造出黄帝在此升天的说法。
English: This may be because he saw that the surnames of Xia, Shang, and Shuzhong's families were called Geng, Zi, and Ji, and therefore, according to imitation, he created a strange saying out of thin air, like he saw the place of Dinghu and fabricated the saying that the Yellow Emperor ascended to heaven here.

古文：失道之意，还反其字。
现代文：这不仅丧失了道理的原意，也违反了那些字的本意。
English: This not only loses the original meaning of the principle, but also violates the original meaning of those words.

古文：苍颉作书，与事相连。
现代文：苍颉造字，最初都与具体事物相关联。
English: Heron-made characters were initially associated with specific things.

古文：姜原履大人迹。迹者基也，姓当为其下土，乃为女旁臣，非基迹之字，不合本事，疑非实也。
现代文：姜原踩巨人的足迹，足迹的意思是基础，姓应当是 其 字下加 土 字的 基 ，现在却是 女 字旁加 卨 字的 姬 。而不是基础足迹意思的那个 基 字，不符合原来的事实，所以怀疑不是真事。
English: Jiang Yuan stepped on the footprints of a giant. Footprints mean foundation. The family name should have been the base of the word with the word earth under it, but now it is the female word with the word 姬 next to it. The base word, which is not the meaning of the base footprint, does not correspond to the original facts, so the suspicion is not true.

古文：以周姬况夏殷，亦知子之与姒，非燕子、薏苡也。
现代文：用周代的姬姓去类推夏代、商代的姓，也就知道 姒 姓和 子 姓，不是源于薏苡和燕子。
English: If we compare the surnames of the Xia and Shang dynasties with the maiden name of the Zhou Dynasty, we will know that the surnames of the Zhou Dynasty and the Shang Dynasty are not derived from the names of the Zhou Dynasty and the Shang Dynasty.

古文：或时禹、契、後稽之母适欲怀妊，遭吞薏苡、燕卵，履大人迹也。
现代文：或许是禹、卨、后稷的母亲恰好要怀孕，碰巧吞食了薏苡、燕卵、踩了巨人的脚印。
English: Perhaps the mother of Yu, Yao, and Houya just happened to be pregnant, and happened to swallow dragonflies, swallow eggs, and step on the footprints of giants.

古文：世好奇怪，古今同情。
现代文：世人喜欢奇怪的东西，古今都是同样的心情。
English: The world likes strange things, and the mood is the same now as it was in the past.

古文：不见奇怪，谓德不异，故因以为姓。
现代文：没有看见奇怪的东西，认为是品德不优异，所以就用奇怪的事来作姓。
English: They didn't see anything strange and thought that his character wasn't outstanding, so they used something strange as his surname.

古文：世间诚信，因以为然。
现代文：社会上居然真诚地相信，于是认为就是如此。
English: Society actually sincerely believes, and therefore thinks, that this is the case.

古文：圣人重疑，因不复定。
现代文：圣人不轻易怀疑它，因而没有另行改定。
English: The saint did not easily doubt it, and therefore did not change it.

古文：世士浅论，因不复辨。
现代文：一般读书人学识浅薄，因而不会再去辨别真假。
English: The average reader's knowledge is shallow, so they will no longer be able to distinguish between true and false.

古文：儒生是古，因生其说。
现代文：儒生由于崇古，因而又创造出他们的说法。
English: The Confucianists, because of their reverence for antiquity, invented their own saying.

古文：《被诗》言 不坼不副 者，言後稽之生，不感动母身也。
现代文：那首诗说 胞衣破裂，胎盘分离 ，是说后稷出生没有损伤他母亲的身体。
English: The poem says that the placenta was ruptured and the placenta was separated, which means that the baby was born without injuring his mother's body.

古文：儒生穿凿，因造禹、契逆生之说。
现代文：儒生牵强附会，于是臆造出禹、卨难产的说法。
English: Confucianism is far-fetched, so they invented the saying that it is difficult to give birth.

古文：感於龙，梦与神遇，犹此率也。
现代文：尧母与赤龙交配，刘媪梦中与神仙交合，就像这类。
English: The dragonfly mates with the red dragon, and the dragonfly mates with the immortals in the dream, just like this kind.

古文：尧、高祖之母，适欲怀妊，遭逢雷龙载云雨而行，人见其形，遂谓之然。
现代文：尧和汉高祖的母亲恰好要怀孕，正巧遇上雷龙乘云雨而去，人们看见那形状，于是认识确实如此。
English: The mother of Yao and Han Gaozu just happened to be pregnant, and just happened to meet the thunder dragon riding the clouds and rain, and people saw the shape, so they knew it was true.

古文：梦与神遇，得圣子之象也。
现代文：梦见与神仙交合，是要得圣子的征兆。
English: Dreaming of mating with a god is a sign of wanting to have a son.

古文：梦见鬼合之，非梦与神遇乎，安得其实！ 野出感龙 ，及 蛟龙居上 ，或尧、高祖受富贵之命。龙为吉物，遭加其上，吉祥之瑞，受命之证也。
现代文：梦见与鬼交合，不是跟梦见与神仙交合是一样吗，怎么就成了真事！尧的母亲到野外去与龙交配，以及蛟龙附在刘媪身上，也许是尧和高祖在接受富贵之命，因为龙是吉祥物，碰巧伏在他们身上，可见是吉祥物授富贵之命的证明。
English: Dreaming of mating with a ghost, isn't it the same as dreaming of mating with a fairy? How did it become a reality? The mother of the dragonfly went out to the field to mate with the dragon, and the dragon attached to Liu Yao. Perhaps the dragonfly and Gao Zu were accepting the rich man's order, because the dragon is a mascot, and it happened to fall on them. This can be seen as proof that the mascot gave the rich man's order.

古文：光武皇帝产於济阳宫，凤皇集於地，嘉禾生於屋。
现代文：汉光武帝在济阳宫出生，凤凰在地上聚集，嘉禾在房顶上长出。
English: Emperor Han Guangwu was born in Jiyang Palace, phoenixes gathered on the ground, and jiahe sprouted on the roof.

古文：圣人之生，齐鸟吉物之为瑞应。
现代文：圣人出生，就会有稀奇的鸟和吉祥物作出吉祥的应验。
English: When a saint is born, there will be a rare bird and a mascot to make the auspicious fulfillment.

古文：必以奇吉之物见而子生，谓之物之子，是则光武皇帝嘉禾之精，凤皇之气欤？
现代文：如果一定要把稀奇物和吉祥物出现时生下的孩子认为是这些东西的后代，那么汉光武帝难道是承受了风凰、嘉禾的精气而出生的吗？
English: If we must consider the children born at the time of the appearance of rare and wonderful things and mascots as the descendants of these things, then was Han Guangwu Emperor born with the essence of Fenghuang and Jiahe?

古文：案《帝系》之篇及《三代世表》，禹，鲧之子也；卨、稷皆帝喾之子，其母皆帝喾之妃也，及尧，亦喾之子。
现代文：考察《大戴礼记·帝系》和《史记·三代世表》，禹是鲧的儿子，卨和后稷是帝喾的儿子，他们的母亲都是帝喾的妻子，至于尧，也是帝喾的儿子。
English: Examining the "Diary of the Great Dai Li Dynasty" and the "History of the Three Dynasties," Yu is the son of Yu, Yu and Houyi are the sons of Emperor Yu, their mothers are the wives of Emperor Yu, and as for Yu, he is also the son of Emperor Yu.

古文：帝王之妃，何为适草野？
现代文：帝王的妻子，为什么要到荒野去？
English: Why did the emperor's wife have to go into the wilderness?

古文：古时虽质，礼已设制，帝王之妃，何为浴於水？
现代文：古时候的人虽然朴实，但礼已经制订，帝王的妻子，为什么在河水中洗浴？
English: In ancient times, although people were simple, the etiquette had already been established. Why did the emperor's wife take a bath in river water?

古文：夫如是，言圣人更禀气於天，母有感吞者，虚妄之言也。
现代文：像这样，说圣人是另外从天接受异类之气，或因母亲吞食了异类而交配，这些都是没有根据的说法。
English: Thus, it is groundless to say that the sage received the aura of the eccentric from the heavens, or that he mated with the eccentric because his mother ate him.

古文：实者，圣人自有种族，如文、武各有类。
现代文：真实的情况，是圣人各自有种族，像周文王生周武王一样，各有自己的族类。
English: The real situation is that the saints each have their own race, just like Zhou Wensheng Zhouwu Wang, each has its own tribe.

古文：孔子吹律，自知殷後；项羽重瞳，自知虞舜苗裔也。
现代文：孔子吹律管，自己知道是殷的后代；项羽每只眼睛有两个重叠的瞳仁，所以自己知道是虞舜的后裔。
English: Confucius played the fife and knew himself to be a descendant of Yin; Xiang Yu had two overlapping pupil nuclei in each eye, so he knew himself to be a descendant of Yu Yao.

古文：五帝、三王皆祖黄帝。
现代文：五帝、三王都以黄帝为祖先。
English: The Five Emperors and the Three Kings all have the Yellow Emperor as their ancestor.

古文：黄帝圣人，本禀贵命，故其子孙皆为帝王。
现代文：黄帝是圣人，原来禀受的是富贵命，所以他的子子孙孙都做帝王。
English: The Yellow Emperor was a saint. Originally, he suffered a rich life, so his children and grandchildren all became emperors.

古文：帝王之生，必有怪奇，不见於物，则效於梦矣。
现代文：帝王出生，一定有稀奇古怪的事出现，不在事物里出现，就会在梦中表现。
English: When an emperor is born, there are bound to be strange and eccentric occurrences. If they do not appear in things, they will manifest themselves in dreams.

