古文：楼钥李大性任希夷徐应龙庄夏王阮王质陆游方信孺王柟楼钥，字大防，明州鄞县人。隆兴元年，试南宫，有司伟其辞艺，欲以冠多士，策偶犯旧讳，知贡举洪遵奏，得旨以冠末等。
现代文：楼钥字大防，明州鄞县人。隆兴元年，楼钥参加礼部考试，有关部门以为他的文章文辞奇伟瑰丽，打算列为第一名，由于他的策论中偶尔触犯旧讳，知贡举洪遵奏明皇帝，得到旨令置于末等。
English: In the first year of the Longxing, Lou Keji took part in the examination of the etiquette department. The relevant departments thought that his article was magnificent and magnificent, and intended to be ranked first. Because he occasionally broke the old taboo in his policy, he knew the tribute, raised the Hongzong, submitted to the Ming Emperor, and got the order to be placed in the last grade.

古文：投贽谢诸公，考官胡铨称之曰： 此翰林才也。 试教官，调温州教授，为敕令所删定官，修《淳熙法》。
现代文：楼钥投书感谢各位考官，考官胡铨称赞楼钥说： 真是翰林才也。 考试教官，楼钥出任温州州学教授，拜官敕令所删定官，受令编修《淳熙法》。
English: The examiner, Hu Wei, thanked the examiners, the examiner, Hu Wei, praised the examiners and said, "It's really Hanlin Cai." The exam instructor, Lou Ke, served as a professor of Wenzhou state studies, and was ordered to edit the "Jun Xi Law."

古文：议者欲降太学释奠为中祀，钥曰： 乘舆临辛，于先圣则拜，武成则肃揖，其礼异矣，可钧敌乎？ 
现代文：议者想将太学释奠礼降为中祀，楼钥以为不妥，他说 ：陛下亲自临幸，对于先圣则拜，对于武成则肃揖，礼仪不同，怎么可以同等对待呢？ 
English: The speaker thought it was inappropriate to downgrade the Taigaku memorial service to a middle-ranking ceremony, and the key to the building, he said: His Majesty himself is lucky, for the first saint is worship, for Wu Cheng is solemn, the etiquette is different, how can it be treated equally?

古文：改宗正寺主簿，历太府、宗正寺丞，出知温州。
现代文：楼钥改任宗正寺主簿，历迁太庙、宗正寺丞，离京任温州知州。
English: The key of the building was changed to the main book of Sojo-ji Temple, the history of the relocation of the Imperial Temple and Sojo-ji Temple, and the departure from Beijing to Wenzhou Chizhou.

古文：属县乐清倡言方腊之变且复起，邑令捕数人归于郡。
现代文：属县乐清县境内流传方腊变乱将再次发生，县令逮捕了几位散布谣言的人，押送至州府。
English: It was rumored that the Fangla Rebellion would occur again in Yueqing County, which belongs to the county. The county government arrested several people who spread the rumors and sent them to the state capital.

古文：钥曰： 罪之则无可坐，纵之则惑民。 编隶其为首者，而驱其徒出境，民言遂定。
现代文：楼钥说： 处治他们则没有获罪的理由，释放他们则会继续制造谣言惑众。 楼钥将为首者治罪，又将散布谣言者驱逐出境，民心这才稳定。
English: "If they are punished, there will be no reason for them to be found guilty, but if they are released, they will continue to create rumors to mislead the public," Lou said. "Lou will punish the ringleaders and expel those who spread rumors, which will stabilize the public's mind."

古文：堂帖问故，钥曰： 苏洵有言： 有乱之形，无乱之实，是谓将乱。
现代文：宰相下文书询问原因，楼钥回答说： 苏洵曾说： 有乱之形，无乱之实，这就叫将乱。
English: When the Prime Minister's secretary inquired about the reason, the key to the building replied: Su Shi once said: There is a form of disorder, but no disorder. This is called chaos.

古文：不可以有乱急，不可以无乱弛。 丞相周必大心善之。
现代文：不可因为会有乱而着急，不可因为无乱而放松警惕。  丞相周必大认为很好。
English: We should not be in a hurry because there will be turmoil, and we should not relax our vigilance because there is no turmoil.

古文：光宗嗣位，召对，奏曰： 人主初政，当先立其大者。
现代文：光宗即位，召见楼钥，楼钥奏道 ：人君为政之初，应当先树立大政。
English: When Emperor Guangzong ascended to the throne, the key to the Great Hall of the People was summoned, and the key to the Great Hall of the People was played.

古文：至大莫如恢复，然当先强主志，进君德。 又曰： 今之网密甚矣，望陛下轸念元元，以设禁为不得已，凡有创意增益者，寝而勿行，所以保养元气。 
现代文：当前最大的政治莫如恢复国土，然而应当首先坚持人君的意志，增进君德。 又说： 现在法网甚为严，请陛下深切怀念百姓，以设立禁令为不得已，凡有立意提出增加禁令的，停止而不实施，这样才能保养国家元气。 
English: At present, the most important political task is to restore the country, but we should first adhere to the will of the people and promote the dignity of the people. He also said: Now that the legal network is very strict, I ask Your Majesty to deeply remember the people, to set up a ban as a last resort, and if anyone has the intention to propose an increase in the ban, to stop and not implement it, so as to maintain the vitality of the country.

古文：除考功郎兼礼部。
现代文：楼钥官拜考功郎兼礼部。
English: The building key clerk is the exam winner and the head of the etiquette department.

古文：吏铨并缘为奸，多所壅底。
现代文：典选者在官员选拔时乘机为奸，使很多人遭到阻滞。
English: Selectors took advantage of the opportunity to act as spies during the selection of officials, causing many people to be blocked.

古文：钥曰： 简要清通，尚书郎之选。 尽革去之。
现代文：楼钥说： 简明切要清通，是尚书郎的人选。 将弊病全部革除。
English: The key to the building said: It is necessary to be clear and concise, and it is the candidate of Shang Shuro.

古文：改国子司业，擢起居郎兼中书舍人。
现代文：楼钥改任国子司业，升为起居郎兼中书舍人。
English: Rokei was reassigned to the position of Kuniko no Tsukasa, and was promoted to Kijiro and junior high school teacher.

古文：代言坦明，得制诰体，缴奏无所回避。
现代文：代言坦明，合制书体，封还不合规定章奏无所回避。
English: The endorsement is clear, the typeface is well-matched, and there is no getting around the fact that the cover is not up to standard.

古文：禁中或私请，上曰： 楼舍人朕亦惮之，不如且已。 刑部言，天下狱案多所奏裁，中书之务不清，宜痛省之。
现代文：宫中有人私自请托，光宗说： 楼舍人我亦害怕他，不如罢了。 刑部奏言，天下案例大多上奏裁定，中书职责不清，应当忍痛减少它。
English: Someone in the imperial court asked for a personal favor, and Guangzong said: I am also afraid of the man who lives in the building, so it's better. The Criminal Investigation Department reported, and most of the cases in the world were reported and adjudicated, and the responsibilities of the Central Criminal Court were unclear, and it should be painstakingly reduced.

古文：钥曰： 三宥制刑，古有明训。 力论不可。
现代文：楼钥说 ：宽恕三次处刑，古来已有明训。 极力论述不可。
English: Lou Ke said: Forgiving three punishments has been a clear teaching since ancient times, and cannot be discussed as much as possible.

古文：会庆节上寿，扈从班集，乘舆不出。
现代文：会庆节祝寿，扈从云集，皇帝拒不出来接见。
English: The Emperor couldn't resist coming out to meet them as they gathered in droves to celebrate his birthday.

古文：已而玉牒、圣政、会要书成，将进重华，又屡更日。
现代文：不久玉牒、圣政、会要等已撰成书，将要进奉重华宫，又一再改变日期。
English: Soon after, the imperial edict, the edict of sacred politics, the edict of the meeting, and so on, have been compiled into a book, and will be enshrined in the Chonghua Palace, and the date has been changed again and again.

古文：钥言： 臣累岁随班，见陛下上寿重华宫，欢动宸极。
现代文：楼钥说 ：我历年与大家一起，看见陛下至重华宫祝寿，欢声震动宇内。
English: The key to the building said: I have been with everyone over the years to see His Majesty celebrate his birthday at the Imperial Palace, and the cheers shook the world.

古文：嘉王日趋朝谒，恪勤不懈，窃料寿皇望陛下之来，亦犹此也。 又奏： 圣政之书，全载寿皇一朝之事。
现代文：嘉王每天上朝拜谒皇上，坚持不懈，我料定寿皇盼望陛下前去，也是如此。 又奏： 圣政之书，全都是记载寿皇一朝之事。
English: King Jia went to pay homage to Empress Jie every day, and he persevered, and I'm sure Emperor Shou hoped that His Majesty would go, too.

古文：玉牒、会要足成淳熙末年之书，幸速定其日，无复再展，以全圣孝。 于是上感悟，进书成礼。
现代文：玉牒、会要足以完成淳熙末年之书，请尽快定下日期，不要再往后推延，以保全皇上孝子美名。 于是光宗醒悟，进书成礼。
English: In order to complete the book of the last years of Emperor Junxi, please set a date as soon as possible, and do not postpone it any further, so as to preserve the good name of the emperor's filial son.

古文：试中书舍人，俄兼直学士院。
现代文：楼钥任中书舍人，不久兼直学士院。
English: He served as a junior high school teacher and soon became a member of the academy.

古文：光宗内禅诏书，钥所草也，有云： 虽丧纪自行于宫中，而礼文难示于天下。 荐绅传诵之。
现代文：光宗内禅诏书，就是楼钥所起草的，文中称 ：即使自己在宫服丧，仍于礼文难以向天下人交代。 
English: The Emperor's edict on Zen within the Guangzong Sect, which was drafted by the key to the palace, said in the text: Even if you are buried in the palace, it is still difficult to explain to the world what happened in the ritual.

古文：迁给事中。
现代文：缙绅互相推荐，到处传颂。楼钥升任给事中。
English: Sheng Shanshui is in the middle of something.

古文：钥言： 熹鸿儒硕学，陛下闵其耆老，当此隆寒，立讲不便，何如俾之内祠，仍令修史，少俟春和，复还讲筵。 不报。
现代文：请求纠正太祖东向位置，另外建僖祖室用来代替夹室，顺祖、翼祖、宣祖神位都可以放在里面，礻合祭即于僖祖庙中合祭。朝廷采纳了他的建议。朱熹因为论事得罪了韩胄，被任命到外地做官。楼钥上书说 ：朱熹是博学之士，皇上怜悯他年纪大，站着讲经不方便，不如让他掌管京城内宫观，仍让他修史，等到春季天气暖和，再让他返回讲经。 奏书呈上没有答复。
English: The request was to correct the eastward position of the Great Ancestor. In addition, the ancestral room of Zhu Xi was built to replace the clamping room. Shun Zi, Ying Zi, and Xuan Zi deities could all be placed inside. The enthronement ceremony is the enthronement ceremony in the ancestral temple of Zhu Xi. The court accepted his suggestion. Zhu Xi offended Han Zi because of the discussion and was appointed to work as an official in a foreign country. The key to the building said: Zhu Xi is a learned man. The emperor took pity on him because he was old and it was inconvenient for him to stand and lecture. It would be better

古文：赵汝愚谓人曰： 楼公当今人物也，直恐临事少刚决耳。 及见其持论坚正，叹曰： 吾于是大过所望矣。 
现代文：赵汝愚曾对人说 ：楼公是当今的一个人物，只是担心他临事不能刚强处置。 等到他看到楼钥坚决坚持自己的看法，赞叹说： 楼公此举，大出我的所料。 
English: Zhao Ruwu once said to people: "Lou Gong is a person of today, but I am worried that he cannot deal with things firmly." When he saw that Lou Ke firmly adhered to his own opinion, he said with admiration: "This move by Lou Gong is beyond my expectations.

古文：宁宗受禅，侂胄以知阁门事与闻传命，颇有弄权之渐，彭龟年力攻之。
现代文：宁宗受禅继承帝位，韩胄因为任知门事参与传达命令，逐渐窃弄权力，作威作福，彭龟年极力攻击他。
English: Ning Zong received the imperial succession by Zen, Han Xuan, because he was involved in conveying orders as the chancellor, gradually stole power and acted as a tyrant, and Peng Guiren vigorously attacked him.

古文：侂胄转一官，与在京宫观，龟年除待制，与郡。
现代文：结果韩胄官升一级，主管在京宫观，彭龟年官拜待制，离开京城去地方任知州。
English: As a result, Han Xuan was promoted to the first level, the supervisor was in Beijing Gongguan, and Peng Kengnian was appointed to the position, and left Beijing to be appointed to the local position in Zhizhou.

古文：钥与林大中奏，乞留龟年于讲筵，或命侂胄以外祠。
现代文：楼钥与林大中都上奏，请求留下彭龟年任经筵官，或者让韩胄出外主管宫观。
English: The key to the building and the junior high school of Lin University both appealed, requesting to keep Peng Kuei as the eunuch, or to let Han Wei go abroad to be in charge of the palace.

古文：龟年竟去，钥迁为吏部尚书，以显谟阁学士提举江州太平兴国宫。
现代文：彭龟年最后还是被贬离京，楼钥升为吏部尚书，以显谟阁学士身份提举江州太平兴国宫。
English: In the end, Peng Kuei was still banished from Beijing, and the key to the palace was promoted to the post of secretary, and the Jiangzhou Taiping Xingguo Palace was promoted to the status of Mokou Academy.

古文：寻知婺州，移宁国府，罢，仍夺职。
现代文：不久，楼钥被起用为婺州知州，改任宁国府知府，后罢免仍被削夺官职。
English: Soon after, Lou Ke was appointed as the prefect of Bozhou and the governor of Ningguofu, but was later removed from his post.

古文：告老至再，许之。
现代文：楼钥再三上书，请求告老还乡，得到了准许。
English: The key to the building was repeatedly submitted, and the request to return to his hometown was granted.

古文：侂胄尝副钥为馆伴，以钥不附己，深嗛之。
现代文：韩胄曾以楼钥为馆伴副使，因为楼钥不附会自己，深深怀恨他。
English: Han Zheng once used the key to the building as a vice envoy, because the key to the building would not attach itself, and he deeply resented him.

古文：侂胄诛，诏起钥为翰林学士，迁吏部尚书兼翰林侍讲。
现代文：韩胄被杀，宁宗下诏起用楼钥为翰林学士，升礼部尚书兼翰林侍讲。
English: After Han Xuan was killed, Ning Zong issued an edict to use the key of the building to become a scholar of Hanlin, and he was promoted to be a scholar of etiquette and a lecturer of Hanlin.

古文：时钥年过七十，精敏绝人，词头下，立进草，院吏惊诧。
现代文：当时楼钥已年过七十，精力充沛，反应灵敏，超过常人，命官任职的谕旨刚传下，楼钥立即献上文书，使院吏惊讶不已。
English: At that time, the key to the building was over seventy years old, full of energy, responsive, more than ordinary people. The order to appoint an officer had just been issued, and the key to the building immediately presented the document, which surprised the hospital staff.

古文：入朝，陛楯旧班谛视钥曰： 久不见此官矣。 时和好未定，金求韩侂胄函首，钥曰： 和好待此而决，奸凶已毙之首，又何足恤。 诏从之。
现代文：楼钥上朝，执盾于皇帝侧身的旧班侍卫仔细观看他后说： 很久不见这位大臣了。 当时宋金和议没有确定，金人索要韩胄的人头，楼钥说 ：和议等这个而议定，已死奸凶之头，又有什么怜悯的。 
English: On the morning of the key, the old guard guard holding the shield at the emperor's side looked at him carefully and said: I haven't seen this minister for a long time. At that time, Song Jin's peace proposal was not determined, and the Jin people asked for Han Xuan's head. The key said: The peace proposal and so on were agreed upon, and there is no mercy for the head of the traitor.

古文：赵汝愚之子崇宪奏雪父冤，钥乞正赵师召之罪，重蔡琏之诛，毁龚颐正《续稽古录》以白诬谤。
现代文：宁宗下诏同意。赵汝愚之子崇宪上奏为父亲雪冤，楼钥请求治理赵师召之罪，诛蔡琏，烧毁龚颐正所著《续稽古录》，消除谤言。
English: Zhao Rugu's son, Chong Xian, appealed to the emperor for his father's grievous wrongs, asking for the punishment of Zhao Shi Zhao's crime, the punishment of Cai Xuan, the burning of "Continuation of Ancient Records" written by Zhaozheng, and the elimination of slander.

古文：除端明殿学士、签书枢密院事，升同知，进参知政事。
现代文：楼钥官拜端明殿学士、签书枢密院事，升任同知，进位参知政事。
English: The keeper of the key to the palace was called a Duanming palace bachelor, the signer of the letter a privy councillor, promoted to the position of a councillor, and promoted to the position of a councillor of state.

古文：位两府者五年，累疏求去，除资政殿学士、知太平州，辞，进大学士，提举万寿观。
现代文：在两府职五年，多次上疏请求离职，宁宗任他为资政殿学士、太平州知州，楼钥拒不接受任命，进大学士、提举万寿观。
English: After five years of service in the two prefectures, he was repeatedly asked to leave the post by Shang Shou. Ning Zong appointed him as a scholar of the Palace of Capital and Politics and a scholar of Taiping and Zhizhou. Lou Ke refused to accept the appointment. He entered the university as a scholar and promoted the concept of longevity.

古文：嘉定六年薨，年七十七，赠少师，谥宣献。
现代文：嘉定三年逝世，终年七十七岁，赠官少师，谥号 宣献 。
English: Jiading died three years later, at the age of seventy-seven, and was given the title of "Junior Teacher" and the posthumous name "Xuanxian."

古文：淳熙十五年卒。
现代文：楼钥所著文章既精亦博，自号攻愧主人。
English: The article written by the key to the building is both excellent and extensive, and the owner is ashamed of himself.

古文：陆游字务观，越州山阴人。
现代文：有文集一百二十卷。陆游字务观，越州山阴人。
English: There are 120 volumes of anthologies. Lu You Zhiwu Guan, Yuezhou Shanyin Ren.

古文：年十二能诗文，荫补登仕郎。
现代文：十二岁就能做诗、写文章，荫补登上仕郎之位。
English: At the age of twelve, he could make poems, write articles, and rise to the position of a servant.

古文：锁厅荐送第一，秦桧孙埙适居其次，桧怒，至罪主司。
现代文：参加锁厅试被推举为第一名，秦桧的孙子秦埙正好位居其次，秦桧大怒，以致治罪主考官。
English: He was selected as the first to take part in the locksmith's exam. Qin Hui's grandson, Qin Hui, came in second place. Qin Hui was furious, which resulted in the chief examiner being punished.

古文：明年，试礼部，主司复置游前列，桧显黜之，由是为所嫉。
现代文：第二年，陆游参加礼部的考试，主考官又把陆游放在前面，秦桧扬言要废黜他，因为这个原因陆游被秦桧嫉妒。
English: In the second year, Lu You took part in the examination of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the examiner put Lu You in front again. Qin Hui threatened to depose him, because of this reason, Lu You was jealous of Qin Hui.

古文：桧死，始赴福州宁德簿，以荐者除敕令所删定官。
现代文：秦桧死后，开始赴任福州宁德主簿，因为有人推荐，任命为敕令所删定官。
English: After the death of Qin Hui, he began to work as the chief accountant of Ningde, Fuzhou, because someone recommended that he be appointed as the official of the imperial edict.

古文：时杨存中久掌禁旅，游力陈非便，上嘉其言，遂罢存中。
现代文：当时杨存中掌握禁军很久了，陆游极力陈说不合适，皇上认为他的意见很好，于是罢免杨存中。
English: At that time, Yang Cunzhong had been in charge of the Forbidden Army for a long time. Lu You's strenuous protest was inappropriate. The emperor thought his opinion was good, so he dismissed Yang Cunzhong.

古文：中贵人有市北方珍玩以进者，游奏： 陛下以 损 名斋，自经籍翰墨外，屏而不御。小臣不体圣意，辄私买珍玩，亏损圣德，乞严行禁绝。 
现代文：朝中贵人有买北方的珍奇玩物进贡的，陆游上奏说： 陛下以 损 作为斋名，除经典书籍笔墨外，都摒除不用，小臣不体会圣上的心意，于是私买珍玩，亏损圣德，乞求严加禁止。 
English: The dignitaries of the North and the Middle Kingdom paid tribute by buying rare toys from the North. Lu Yu said: "Your majesty uses loss as the name of the fast. Except for classic books, pens and ink, they are all eliminated and unnecessary. Minions do not understand the holy mind, so they buy rare toys, lose sanctity, and begging is strictly prohibited."

古文：应诏言： 非宗室外家，虽实有勋劳，毋得辄加王爵。
现代文：陆游应皇上的诏令而说 ：不是宗室外戚，即使实在有功劳，不得加上王爵称号。
English: In response to the Emperor's edict, Lu You said, "If you are not a relative of the emperor, even if you have done something meritorious, you are not allowed to be given the title of prince."

古文：顷者有以师傅而领殿前都指挥使，复有以太尉而领阁门事，渎乱名器，乞加订正。 迁大理寺司直兼宗正簿。
现代文：近来有以师傅之职兼任殿前都指挥使，又有以太尉之职兼任门事，渎乱了名份、礼制，乞求加以订正。 陆游被升为大理寺司直兼宗正簿。
English: Recently, there was a person who concurrently held the post of master and commander of the front of the hall, and there was also a person who concurrently held the post of ether lieutenant and concurrently served as a clerk, which disturbed the name, etiquette, and begged to be revised.

古文：孝宗即位，迁枢密院编修官兼编类圣政所检讨官。
现代文：孝宗即位，陆游被升为枢密院编修官兼编类圣政所检讨官。
English: When Emperor Xiaozong ascended to the throne, Lu You was promoted to the editor-in-chief of the Privy Council and the editor-in-chief of the Holy Office.

古文：史浩、黄祖舜荐游善词章，谙典故，召见，上曰： 游力学有闻，言论剀切。 遂赐进士出身。
现代文：史浩、黄祖舜推荐陆游善于做词、写文章，熟悉典故，皇上召见陆游，皇上说： 陆游努力学习早已有所闻，发表的言论也切合事理。 于是赐予他进士出身。
English: Shi Hao and Huang Zuqi recommended Lu You, who was good at making lyrics and writing articles, and was familiar with allusions. The emperor summoned Lu You, and the emperor said, "I have already heard that Lu You studied hard, and the remarks he made are also reasonable. Therefore, he was given the title of Jin Shi.

古文：入对，言： 陛下初即位，乃信诏令以示人之时，而官吏将帅一切玩习，宜取其尤沮格者，与众弃之。 
现代文：陆游入朝对话，说 ：陛下刚即位，正是明申诏令以示臣下之时，而官吏将帅一切玩习，应取其特别颓丧、出格的事，当众抛弃。 
English: Lu Yu entered into a dialogue with the North Koreans, saying, "Your majesty has just ascended the throne, and it is precisely the time to issue a clear edict to show your allegiance, and officials should abandon all playful habits in public, taking things that are particularly depressing and out of the ordinary.

古文：和议将成，游又以书白二府曰： 江左自吴以来，未有舍建康他都者。
现代文：宋金和议将签成，陆游又写信报告二府说 ：江左从吴国以来，没有舍弃建康到他地建都。
English: The Song-Jin peace treaty was about to be signed, and Lu You wrote a letter to report to the two prefectures, saying, "Since Jiang Zuo came from the State of Wu, he has not abandoned Jiankang to build a capital elsewhere.

古文：驻跸临安出于权宜，形势不固，馈饷不便，海道逼近，凛然意外之忧。
现代文：皇上驻扎临安是出于权宜之策，形势不稳定，运送粮饷不方便，又濒临海上通道，担心受到意外的袭击。
English: The emperor's stationing in Lin'an was a matter of expediency. The situation was unstable, it was inconvenient to transport grain and straw, and it was on the edge of a sea passage, so he was worried about being attacked by accident.

古文：一和之后，盟誓已立，动有拘碍。
现代文：一旦结盟、定下誓约以后，行动就有所拘束。
English: Once an alliance is formed and pledges are made, actions are somewhat constrained.

古文：今当与之约，建康、临安皆系驻跸之地，北使朝聘，或就建康，或就临安，如此则我得以暇时建都立国，彼不我疑。 
现代文：今天应当与金协约，建康、临安都是皇上驻扎的地方，北使来朝拜，或者到建康，或者到临安，为此，我们得以有空余时间建都立国，他们也不会怀疑我们。 
English: Today, we should make a treaty with the Jin Dynasty. Jiankang and Lin'an are both places where the emperor was stationed. The Northern envoys came to worship, or to Jiankang, or to Lin'an. For this reason, we were able to have spare time to build the capital and establish the country, and they would not suspect us.

古文：时龙大渊、曾觌用事，游为枢臣张焘言： 觌、大渊招权植党，荧惑圣听，公及今不言，异日将不可去。 焘遽以闻，上诘语所自来，焘以游对。
现代文：当时龙大渊、曾觌掌权，陆游对枢密使张焘说 ：曾觌、龙大渊集权植私党，迷惑圣上明察，你到今天不说，他日将不能去除他们了。 张焘立即转告皇上，皇上责问这些话的来历，张焘回答来自陆游。
English: At that time, Long Dayuan and Zeng Yao were in power, and Lu You said to the confidential envoy Zhang Yao: Zeng Yao and Long Dayuan concentrated power and planted their own party, and deceived the Holy See. If you don't say anything today, you won't be able to get rid of them the next day. Zhang Yao immediately told the emperor. The emperor asked the origin of these words, and Zhang Yao answered that they were from Lu You.

古文：上怒，出通判建康府，寻易隆兴府。
现代文：皇上大怒，让陆游离朝任建康府通判，不久改为隆兴府通判。
English: The emperor was furious and ordered Lu You to leave the imperial court for Jiankang Prefecture, which was soon changed to Longxing Prefecture.

古文：言者论游交结台谏，鼓唱是非，力说张浚用兵，免归。
现代文：有人说陆游勾结台谏，鼓吹是非，极力劝说张浚发兵，不得回朝。
English: Some people said that Lu You colluded with the Taiwanese, advocated right and wrong, and tried his best to persuade Zhang Jun to send troops. He was not allowed to return to the DPRK.

古文：久之，通判夔州。
现代文：过了很久，陆游任夔州通判。
English: After a long time, Lu You was appointed as the general judge of Zhangzhou.

古文：王炎宣抚川、陕，辟为干办公事。
现代文：王炎宣抚川、陕，召陆游为干办公事。
English: Wang Yan sent messengers to Fuzhou and Shaanxi, and summoned Lu You to do business.

古文：游为炎陈进取之策，以为经略中原必自长安始，取长安必自陇右始。
现代文：陆游为王炎陈述进取策略，认为经略中原必须从长安开始，夺取长安必须从陇右开始。
English: Lu Yu stated the aggressive strategy for Wang Yan, and believed that the Central Plains must start from Chang'an, and the capture of Chang'an must start from the right.

古文：当积粟练兵，有衅则攻，无则守。
现代文：应当积蓄粮食训练士兵，有力量就进攻，没力量就固守。
English: One should accumulate grain to train soldiers, attack when one has strength, and hold fast when one does not have strength.

古文：吴璘子挺代掌兵，颇骄恣，倾财结士，屡以过误杀人，炎莫谁何。
现代文：吴王子吴挺代父掌兵，非常骄傲放纵，把所有的财物用以交结士人，屡次因为小过而误杀人，王炎不敢把他怎么样。
English: Wu Prince Wu Ting, his father-in-law, was very proud and self-indulgent. He used all of his wealth to befriend nobles, and repeatedly killed people by mistake. Wang Yan did not dare to do anything to him.

古文：游请以玠子拱代挺。
现代文：陆游请求以吴之子吴拱代替吴挺。
English: Lu Yu requested that Wu Ting be replaced by Wu Gong, son of Wu.

古文：炎曰： 拱怯而寡谋，遇敌必败。 游曰： 使挺遇敌，安保其不败。
现代文：王炎说 ：吴拱胆怯而缺少智慧，遇到敌人必败。 陆游说 ：如果吴挺遇敌，怎能保证他不失败。
English: Wang Yan said, "Wu Qiang is timid and lacks wisdom, and when he encounters an enemy, he is sure to be defeated." Lu Yu said, "If Wu Ting encounters an enemy, how can he guarantee that he will not fail?"

古文：就令有功，愈不可驾驭。 及挺子曦僣叛，游言始验。
现代文：如果他立有战功，更加难以驾驭了。 等到吴挺之子吴曦叛敌，陆游的话开始得到验证。
English: When Wu Ting's son Wu Xi rebelled against the enemy, the words of the land tour began to be verified.

古文：范成大帅蜀，游为参议官，以文字交，不拘礼法，人讥其颓放，因自号放翁。
现代文：范成大统帅蜀，陆游为参议官，二人以文字结交，不拘泥于礼节，人们讥笑他们颓放，因此自号放翁。
English: Fan Chengda was the commander-in-chief of Shu, and Lu You was the councillor. The two made friends through writing and were not concerned with etiquette. People ridiculed them for being unruly, so they called themselves unruly.

古文：后累迁江西常平提举。
现代文：后来陆游历迁江西常平提举。
English: Later, he was transferred to Jiangxi Changping Province.

古文：江西水灾。奏： 拨义仓振济，檄诸郡发粟以予民。 召还，给事中赵汝愚驳之，遂与祠。
现代文：江西发生水灾，陆游上奏说 ：拨义仓粮赈济，令诸郡发粮给百姓。 皇上召他回朝，给事中赵汝愚驳斥他，于是陆游被派去管理祠观。
English: When a flood occurred in Jiangxi Province, Lu Yu was summoned by the emperor to return to the imperial court, but Zhao Rugu rebuffed him, so Lu Yu was sent to manage the ancestral hall.

古文：起知严州，过阙，陛辞，上谕曰： 严陵山水胜处，职事之暇，可以赋咏自适。 再召入见，上曰： 卿笔力回斡甚善，非他人可及。 除军器少监。
现代文：陆游被起用为严州知州，路过皇宫，与陛下告辞，皇上告诉他说： 严陵山水美处，公事之余，可以亲自前往游览赋咏。 皇上再次召见他，说： 你的文笔善于无穷回旋，不是他人可以比的。 任命为军器少监。
English: Lu You was appointed as Yanzhou Chizhou, passing through the imperial palace and bidding farewell to His Majesty, the emperor told him: Yanling is a beautiful place of landscape and water, you can personally visit Fuxi outside of business. The emperor summoned him again and said: Your writing is good at infinite circling, it is not comparable to others. Appointed as a junior inspector of military equipment.

古文：绍熙元年，迁礼部郎中兼实录院检讨官。
现代文：绍熙元年，陆游升任礼部郎中兼实录院检讨官。
English: In the first year of Shaoxi, Lu You was promoted to the vice-minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies and the inspector of the Academy of Historical Records.

古文：嘉泰二年，以孝宗、光宗两朝实录及三朝史未就，诏游权同修国史、实录院同修撰，免奉朝请，寻兼秘书监。
现代文：嘉泰二年，因为孝宗、光宗《两朝实录》及《三朝史》未完成，皇上诏令陆游暂代同修国史、实录院同修撰之职，免去上朝请安，不久陆游兼秘书监。
English: In the second year of Jia Tai, because the "Two Dynasties Record" and the "Three Dynasties History" of Xiaozong and Guangzong were not completed, the emperor ordered Lu You to temporarily perform the duties of writing the national history and the record of the institute, and to be relieved of the upper court, and soon Lu You was also the secretary supervisor.

古文：三年，书成，遂升宝章阁待制，致仕。
现代文：绍熙三年，书完成；于是提升他为宝章阁待制，以此职退休。
English: Three years later, the book was completed; he was then promoted to the position of the "Hoshangge" and retired from this position.

古文：游才气超逸，尤长于诗。
现代文：陆游才气超人，尤其擅长于诗。
English: Lu You is a super-talented person, especially good at poetry.

古文：晚年再出，为韩侂胄撰《南园阅古泉记》，见讥清议。
现代文：晚年再次出山，替韩胄撰写《南园阅古泉记》，被人们议论、讥讽。
English: In his later years, he went to the mountains again to write "Southern Garden and Ancient Spring" for Han Zheng, which was discussed and ridiculed by people.

古文：朱熹尝言： 其能太高，迹太近，恐为有力者所牵挽，不得全其晚节。 盖有先见之明焉。
现代文：朱熹曾说： 他的才能太高，经历太浅，恐怕被有权力的人所牵连，不能保全他的晚节。 这是有先见之明啊。
English: Zhu Xi once said: His talent is too high, his experience is too shallow, I am afraid that he will be entangled by people with power and will not be able to preserve his late festival.

古文：嘉定二年卒，年八十五。
现代文：嘉定二年，陆游逝世，终年八十五岁。
English: In the second year of Jiading, Lu You died at the age of eighty-five.

古文：方信孺，字孚若，兴化军人。
现代文：方信孺字孚若，兴化军人。
English: Fang Xinqian is a Fu Ruo, Xinghua soldier.

古文：有隽材，未冠能文，周必大、杨万里见而异之。
现代文：他才华出众，未成年时就能写文章，周必大、杨万里见到后都感到很惊讶，认为是个奇才。
English: Zhou Bida and Yang Wanli were very surprised to see his outstanding talent, he was able to write articles when he was underage, and they thought he was a genius.

古文：以父崧卿荫，补番禺县尉。
现代文：方信孺以父亲方崧卿恩荫进入仕途，补为番禺县尉。
English: Fang Xinyi entered his career with the blessing of his father, Fang Yingqing, and was promoted to Panyu County Lieutenant.

古文：盗劫海贾，信孺捕之，盗方沙聚分卤获，惶骇欲趋舟，信孺已使人负盗舟去矣，乃悉缚盗，不失一人。
现代文：盗贼抢劫海商，方信孺接到报案后，带领人马前往追捕。盗贼正聚在一起分赃，见有人来，惶恐万分，纷纷想登舟逃跑。方信孺已派人将盗贼使用的船只运走，于是盗贼束手被擒，无一人漏网。
English: Thieves rob a shipping company. Upon receiving a report of the case, Fang Xinlu led his men in pursuit. The thieves were gathering to divide the loot. When they saw someone coming, they panicked and wanted to board a boat to escape. Fang Xinlu had sent someone to transport the ship used by the thieves, so the thieves were handcuffed and no one escaped.

古文：韩侂胄举恢复之谋，诸将偾军，边衅不已。
现代文：韩胄倡议北伐，诸将希望开战以取得军功，边地战火不断。
English: Han Xuan initiated the Northern Expedition, generals hoped to go to war to gain military merit, and the border war continued.

古文：朝廷寻悔，金人亦厌兵，乃遣韩元靓来使，而都督府亦再遣壮士遗敌书，然皆莫能得其要领。
现代文：朝廷不久后悔对金用兵，金人同样厌战，于是派韩元靓出使宋廷，都督府也一再派壮士致书金人，然而都未能获得实质性进展。
English: The imperial court soon regretted using soldiers against Kim, and the Kim people were equally war-weary, so they sent Han Won-soo to send an envoy to Song Ting, and the governor's office repeatedly sent strong men to Shujin, but they failed to make substantial progress.

古文：近臣荐信孺可使，自萧山丞召赴都，命以使事。
现代文：朝廷近臣举荐方信孺，认为他适合出任金国，于是方信孺从萧山县丞被召至京师，命以出使之事。
English: A close vassal of the imperial court recommended Fang Xinyi, believing that he was suitable for the post of Jin Guo, so Fang Xinyi was summoned from Xiaoshan County to Beijing and ordered to do so.

古文：信孺曰： 开衅自我，金人设问首谋，当何以答之？ 侂胄矍然。
现代文：方信孺问 ：我方首开战火，金人假若追问首谋是谁，该怎样回答呢？ 韩胄听后惊惶不安。
English: Fang Xinyu asked: Our side started the war first, if the Jin people asked who the mastermind was, how should they answer? Han Zheng was alarmed and uneasy after listening.

古文：假朝奉郎、枢密院检详文字，充枢密院参谋官，持督帅张岩书通问于金国元帅府。
现代文：方信孺假以朝奉郎、枢密院检详文字，充任枢密院参谋官，携带督师张岩书信前往金军元帅府。
English: Fang Xinyan pretended to be a courier to the emperor and a scrutineer of the Privy Council, served as a staff officer of the Privy Council, and carried the inspector Zhang Yan's letter to the Gold Army Marshal's Office.

古文：至濠州，金帅纥石烈子仁之止于狱中，露刃环守之，绝其薪水，要以五事。
现代文：方信孺来到濠州，金军元帅纥石烈子仁将他投入监狱，卫兵手持刀刃将四面把住，断绝供给柴火及饮用水，并以五事相要挟。
English: When Fang Xinyi came to Ganzhou, the marshal of the Golden Army, Zou Shi Rezi Ren, threw him into prison. The guards seized him on all sides with blades in their hands, cut off the supply of firewood and drinking water, and threatened him with five things.

古文：信孺曰： 反俘、归币可也，缚送首谋，于古无之，称藩、割地，则非臣子所忍言。 子仁怒曰： 若不望生还耶？ 信孺曰： 吾将命出国门时，已置生死度外矣。 
现代文：方信孺说： 遣返战俘，归还岁币可以做，交出战争首谋者，自古无此先例，称藩、割地，则不是做臣子的所忍说的。 纥石烈子仁大怒，对方信孺说： 你难道不想活着回国吗？ 方信孺针锋相对地说： 我在受命出使离开国门时，就已将生死置之度外了。 
English: Fang Xinyu said: repatriating prisoners of war, returning old money can be done, handing over the mastermind of the war, there is no precedent for this since ancient times, calling it a clan, cutting land, is not what a courtier can bear to say. Zhai Shi Ren Ziren was furious, and the other side said to Xinyu: Don't you want to return to the country alive? Fang Xinyu said pointedly: When I was ordered to leave the country, I had already put life and death aside.

古文：至汴，见金左丞相、都元帅完颜宗浩，出就传舍。
现代文：金帅对方信孺无可奈何，只好将他放行。方信孺来到汴京，拜见金廷左丞相、都元帅完颜宗浩后，来到传舍下榻。
English: When Fang Xinyi came to Beijing, he met with the Minister of the Left, Jin Ting, and the Marshal of the Capital, Yan Zonghao, and then came to stay at the nunnery.

古文：宗浩使将命者来，坚持五说，且谓： 称藩、割地，自有故事。 信孺曰： 昔靖康仓卒割三镇，绍兴以太母故暂屈，今日顾可用为故事耶？
现代文：完颜宗浩派传令兵来到旅店，坚持议和五项条件，并且说： 称藩、割地有成例可循。 方信孺对传令兵说 ：早先靖康年间仓卒割让三镇，绍兴时因为太母去世暂且接受屈辱，今日难道可以援引为成例吗？
English: After Yan Zonghao sent a messenger to the inn, he insisted on the five conditions of the negotiation and said, "There is a precedent to follow in naming a clan and dividing land." Fang Xinyan said to the messenger, "Earlier, during the Jing and Kang Dynasties, Cang Zi ceded three towns, and when he was in Shaoxing, he temporarily accepted humiliation because of the death of his great-grandmother. Can it be invoked as a precedent today?

古文：此事不独小臣不敢言，行府亦不敢奏也。
现代文：这事不仅微臣不敢言说，就是行府也不敢上奏皇帝。
English: Not only did the Weixin not dare to speak about it, but even the Xingfu did not dare to report it to the emperor.

古文：请面见丞相决之。 将命者引而前，宗浩方坐幄中，陈兵见之，云： 五事不从，兵南下矣。 信孺辩对不少诎。
现代文：我要求面见贵朝丞相判决。 金朝传令兵将方信孺带去见完颜宗浩，完颜宗浩坐在幄帐中，四周布满卫士，接见方信孺，他威胁说 ：不接受五项条件，就将立即南下。 方信孺对金人提出的五项条件逐条辩驳，毫不屈服。
English: I asked to meet with the Minister of Justice of the Guizhong Dynasty to make a decision. The soldiers sent by the Kim dynasty brought Fang Xinyu to see Yan Zonghao. Yan Zonghao sat in the box surrounded by guards and received Fang Xinyu. He threatened that if he did not accept the five conditions, he would immediately go to the south. Fang Xinyu refuted the five conditions proposed by the Kim people one by one and did not give in.

古文：宗浩叱之曰： 前日兴兵，今日求和，何也？ 信孺曰： 前日兴兵复仇，为社稷也。
现代文：完颜宗浩大声叱骂： 前日兴兵挑起战火，今日却要求议和，这是为什么呢？ 方信孺回答说 ：前日兴兵复仇，为江山社稷；今日屈己求和，为天下生灵。 
English: After Yan Zonghao loudly scolded, "Why is it that the day before yesterday the rebels started a war, but today they are asking for peace talks?" Fang Xinyan replied, "The day before yesterday the rebels took revenge, for the country and society; today they bowed down and asked for peace, for the sake of the world."

古文：今日屈己求和，为生灵也。 宗浩不能诘，授以报书曰： 和与战，俟再至决之。 
现代文：完颜宗浩无言以对，只好将给宋廷的回信交给方信孺，并且说： 和谈还是继续作战，等下次来再决定。 
English: After Yan Zonghao was speechless, he had no choice but to give the reply letter to Song Ting to Fang Xinyan, and said: Peace talks or continue to fight, wait until the next time to decide.

古文：信孺还，诏侍从、两省、台谏官议所以复命。
现代文：方信孺返回朝廷，将金人要求向皇帝禀报。皇帝下诏让侍从、两省、台谏官讨论，如何答复金人。
English: Fang Xinyan returned to the imperial court and reported the request to the emperor. The emperor ordered his attendants, the two provinces, and the Taiwanese eunuchs to discuss how to respond to the request.

古文：众议还俘获，罪首谋，增岁币五万，遣信孺再往。
现代文：经过大臣议论，议定同意遣还战俘，惩罚首谋，增加岁币五万，决定再次派遣方信孺出使金国。
English: After the ministers' discussion, they agreed to repatriate the prisoners of war, punish the ringleaders, and increase the annual allowance by 50,000 yuan, and decided to send the envoy of Fangxin to China again.

古文：时吴曦已诛，金人气颇索，然犹执初议。
现代文：其时宋廷叛将吴曦已被忠义军士诛杀，金人失去了宋军内应，气焰快尽，然而却依然坚持初议。
English: At that time, Song Ting's traitor Wu Xi had been killed by the loyal sergeant, Jinren lost the support of the Song army, and his pride was exhausted, but he still insisted on the initial proposal.

古文：信孺曰： 本朝谓增币已为卑屈，况名分地界哉？
现代文：方信孺说 ：本朝认为增加岁币，已经是卑颜屈膝了，况且是涉及名份的称藩及割地呢？
English: Fang Xinyu said: This dynasty thinks that the increase of the annual coins is already a humiliation, and what's more, it involves the naming of domains and land allocation?

古文：且以曲直校之，本朝兴兵在去年四月，若贻书诱吴曦，则去年三月也，其曲固有在矣。
现代文：若要追究是非曲直，本朝兴兵时间在去年四月，贵国遗书引诱吴曦则是在去年三月，时间在我朝兴兵之前，贵朝理亏。
English: If you want to investigate the rights and wrongs, the time to raise troops this morning was in April last year, and your country's suicide note to lure Wu Xi was in March last year. The time was before I raised troops this morning, and your country was at a loss.

古文：如以强弱言之，若得滁、濠，我亦得泗、涟水。
现代文：如以势力强弱来讲，贵军攻占了滁州、濠州，我方也占领了贵国泗州、涟水。
English: In terms of strength and weakness, your army has occupied Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou, and we have also occupied Zhangzhou and Zhangshui in your country.

古文：若夸胥浦桥之胜，我亦有凤凰山之捷。
现代文：你们夸耀胥浦桥之胜，我方亦取得了凤凰山大捷。
English: You boast of the victory of the Niepu Bridge, and we have also won the Phoenix Mountain Victory.

古文：若谓我不能下宿、寿，若围庐、和、楚果能下乎？
现代文：你们说我们不能攻下宿州、寿州，你们围攻庐州、和州、楚州，果真能攻克吗？
English: You say that we can't take over Shuzhou and Shuzhou, but you besieged Zhangzhou, Hezhou and Chuzhou. Can you really conquer them?

古文：五事已从其三，而犹不我听，不过再交兵耳。 
现代文：你们所提五项条件我们已同意三条，你们仍不接受我方主张，大不了再度开战了。 
English: We have agreed to three of the five conditions you have proposed, but you still do not accept our proposal. Otherwise, we will go to war again.

古文：金人见信孺忠恳，乃曰： 割地之议姑寝，但称藩不从，当以叔为伯，岁币外，别犒师可也。 信孺固执不许。
现代文：金人看到方信孺忠厚诚恳，于是说： 割地之议暂且缓一缓，只是称藩不从，两国之间当以叔为伯，岁币之外另加犒师银钱。 方信孺坚决拒绝，不肯答应。
English: When the goldsmith saw that Fang Xinyi was loyal and sincere, he said, "Let's postpone the discussion of dividing the land for the time being, just say that the clan does not agree, and that between the two countries, the uncle should be the uncle, and in addition to the old year's money, there should be another year's money." Fang Xinyi resolutely refused and would not agree.

古文：宗浩计穷，遂密与定约。
现代文：完颜宗浩无计可施，于是秘密与朝廷议定和约。
English: There was nothing Yan Zong could do, so he secretly negotiated a peace treaty with the imperial court.

古文：复命，再差充通谢国信所参谋官，奉国书誓草及许通谢百万缗抵汴。
现代文：方信孺返回朝廷复命，随后又被差派充任通谢国信所参谋官，携带朝廷国书及同意给予通谢钱百万缗口信抵达汴京。
English: Fang Xinyi returned to the imperial court to resume his duties. Later, he was assigned to serve as the staff officer of the State Chancellery of the People's Republic of China, and arrived in Beijing with the imperial edict and the agreement to give the State Chancellery of the People's Republic of China millions of dollars in messages.

古文：宗浩变前说，怒信孺不曲折建白，遽以誓书来，有 诛戮禁锢 语。
现代文：完颜宗浩改变前说，对方信孺未能委婉地禀告金人的要求很恼怒，于是让人将誓书交给方信孺，内有 诛杀禁锢 之语。
English: Before the change, Yan Zonghao said that the other party's letter was not able to euphemistically complain that the request of the gold person was very angry, so let the person hand over the oath to the party's letter, which contained the words "kill and imprison."

古文：信孺不为动，将命曰： 此事非犒军钱可了。 别出事目。
现代文：方信孺见后不为所动，传令兵对方信孺说 ：这事不是犒师钱可以了结的。 另外还提出了些名目。
English: After seeing Fang Xinyan, he was not moved, and the messenger said to him, "This is not something that can be settled with money.

古文：信孺曰： 岁币不可再增，故代以通谢钱。
现代文：方信孺说： 岁币数目不能再增加，所以以通谢钱为名充代。
English: Fang Xinjun said: The number of old coins cannot be increased any more, so he used the name of Tong Xie Qian as a substitute.

古文：今得此求彼，吾有陨首而已。 将命曰： 不尔，丞相欲留公。 信孺曰： 留于此死，辱命亦死，不若死于此。 会蜀兵取散关，金人益疑。
现代文：现在你们得此求彼，得寸进尺，我只有死而已。 传令者回答说： 不会的，丞相打算留您在此。 方信孺说： 留在这是死，辱没君命回去后也是死，不如现在就死在这儿。 碰巧四川地区宋军攻取大散关，金人更加不安。
English: Now you have to beg him for this, inch by inch, I only have to die.The messenger replied: No, the prime minister intends to keep you here.Fang Xinyi said: It is death to stay, it is death to go back, it is better to die here now.As it happens, the Song Army in Sichuan has captured the Great Sankan, and the Jin people are even more uneasy.

古文：信孺还，言： 敌所欲者五事：割两淮一，增岁币二，犒军三，索归正等人四，其五不敢言。 侂胄再三问，至厉声诘之，信孺徐曰： 欲得太师头耳。 侂胄大怒，夺三秩，临江军居住。
现代文：方信孺回到朝廷，奏道： 金人所提有五件事情，割让两淮地区，此其一；增加岁币数量，此其二；犒劳金军将士，此其三；索还归正人，此其四；其五微臣不敢说。 韩胄再三追问，直至大声训斥，方信孺这才慢慢地回答说 ：他们想要太师您的头。 韩胄听后大怒，将方信孺贬官三级，临江军居住。
English: Fang Xinyuan returned to the imperial court and reported: There are five things proposed by the Jin people. One is to cede the two Huai regions; the second is to increase the number of annual coins; the third is to reward the labor of the Jin soldiers; the fourth is to ask for the return of the righteous; and the fifth is that the minor ministers dare not say. Han Xinyuan repeatedly asked until he shouted a reprimand, and then Fang Xinyuan slowly replied: They want your head. After listening to this, Han Xinyuan was furious, demoted Fang Xinyuan to the third level, and the Linjiang Army lived.

古文：信孺自春至秋，使金三往返，以口舌折强敌，金人计屈情见，然愤其不屈，议用弗就。
现代文：方信孺自春天至深秋，三次往返于宋金间，出使金国，舌战强敌，金人无计可施，然而怒其不屈，和议最终未能成立。
English: From spring to late autumn, Fang Xinyu made three round trips between Song and Jin, dispatching an envoy to Jin, a strong enemy in a war of words. The Jin people had nothing to do, but their anger was unyielding, and the peace talks ultimately failed to be established.

古文：已而王柟出使，定和议，增币、函首，皆前信孺所持不可者。
现代文：不久，朝廷改以王木冉出使金国，订立和议，增加岁币，将首谋者斩首送给金廷，都是以前方信孺坚决拒绝接受的条款。
English: Soon after, the imperial court sent Wang Mulin as an envoy to Kim, concluded a peace treaty, increased the annual allowance, and beheaded the mastermind to the Kim dynasty, all of which were terms that Nobukatsu resolutely refused to accept.

古文：柟白庙堂： 信孺辩折敌酋于强愎未易告语之时，信孺当其难，柟当其易。
现代文：王木冉上奏朝廷说： 方信孺舌战敌酋，在其刚强固执不易交谈时使之屈服，信孺面对困难，我王木冉面对的事情容易些。
English: Wang Mullan reported to the imperial court, "Fang Xinyu fought with his tongue against the enemy chiefs, and made them yield when they were stubborn and not easy to talk to. While Xinyu faced difficulties, my Wang Mullan faced things more easily.

古文：柟每见，金人必问信孺安在，公论所推，虽敌人不能掩也。 乃诏信孺自便。
现代文：我每次与金人见面，金人一定会问方信孺今在何处，公论所推崇，即使是敌人也不能掩饰。 于是皇帝下诏，放松对方信孺的管制，允许他自由活动。
English: Every time I meet a goldsmith, the goldsmith is bound to ask where Fang Xinyi is now, who is so revered by public opinion that even his enemies cannot conceal him. So the emperor issued an edict to loosen the control of the other party's Xinyi and allow him to move freely.

古文：寻知韶州，累迁淮东转运判官兼提刑。
现代文：不久，方信孺被起用为韶州知州，历任淮东转运判官兼提点刑狱。
English: Soon after, Fang Xinyan was appointed as the judge of Zhangzhou and Zhizhou, and the successive judges of Huaidong transshipment were also sentenced to prison.

古文：知真州，即北山匮水筑石堤，袤二十里，人莫知其所为。
现代文：出任真州知州时，方信孺沿北山筑石堤蓄水，延绵二十里，很多人不知道筑堤的目的。
English: When he was in charge of Zhenzhou and Chizhou, Fang Xinyan built a stone embankment along the North Mountain to store water, stretching for twenty miles. Many people did not know the purpose of building the embankment.

古文：后金人薄仪真，守将决水匮以退敌，城乃获全。
现代文：后来金人来犯，迫近仪真，守城将领打开水柜击退敌人，城镇得以保全，免遭金兵蹂躏。
English: Later, the Jin people came to invade, approaching the ceremony, the garrison commander opened the water cabinet to repel the enemy, and the town was preserved from being ravaged by the Jin soldiers.

古文：山东初内附，信孺言： 豪杰不可以虚名驾驭，武夫不可以弱势弹压，宜选威望重臣，将精兵数万，开幕山东，以主制客，以重驭轻，则可以包山东，固江北，而两河在吾目中矣。 坐责降三秩，再奉祠，稍复官。
现代文：山东刚内附朝廷，方信孺说： 豪杰不能以虚名驾驭，武夫不可以弱势镇压，应当选择有威信的重臣，率领数万强兵，在山东设立幕府，以主制客，以重驭轻，则可以包容山东，固守江北，而两河地区尽在监督之下。 方信孺因此获罪，降官三级，又一次奉祠闲居，此后又恢复了官职。
English: When Shandong had just annexed the imperial court, Fang Xinyi said: "A hero cannot rule under a false name, a warrior cannot suppress the weak, he should choose a senior vassal with prestige and lead tens of thousands of strong soldiers to set up a shogunate in Shandong. If you are the master and the guest, if you are the heavy and the light, then you can tolerate Shandong and keep the north of the river, while the two rivers region is under supervision. Fang Xinyi was therefore convicted, demoted to the third level, once again lived idly in a temple, and then resumed his official duties.

古文：信孺性豪爽，挥金如粪土，所至宾客满其后车。
现代文：方信孺生性豪爽，视金钱如粪土，花钱如流水，所到之处，高朋满座。
English: Fang Xinzhuang has a strong character, regards money as dung, spends money like running water, and is full of pride wherever he goes.

古文：使北时，年财三十。
现代文：出使金国时，年仅三十岁。
English: He was only thirty years old when he was sent to China.

古文：既龃龉归，营居室岩窦，自放于诗酒。
现代文：不久因触怒权贵被罢官返乡，营造居室在山涧，放任自在，赋诗饮酒。
English: Not long after, he was expelled from office for angering the powerful and returned to his hometown, where he built a house in the mountains, where he was free to drink and write poetry.

古文：后赀用竭，宾客益落，信孺寻亦死矣。
现代文：后来家产花完，宾客更少，方信孺不久也就逝世了。
English: Later, when the family's production of flowers was over and there were fewer guests, Fang Xinyu passed away soon after.

