古文：蔡京字元长，兴化仙游人。
现代文：蔡京字元长，兴化仙游人。
English: Cai Jing, the first emperor of the Yuan Dynasty, and Xinghua Xianyurong.

古文：登熙宁三年进士第，调钱塘尉、舒州推官，累迁起居郎。
现代文：登熙宁三年进士第，调任钱塘尉、舒州推官，累迁起居郎。
English: Deng Xining was promoted to the third grade in three years, transferred to Qiantang lieutenant, Shuzhou magistrate, and successively moved to Jiu Lang.

古文：使辽还，拜中书舍人。
现代文：出使辽国回来，被任命为中书舍人。
English: He was sent to Liao and returned, and was appointed as a scholar of Chinese classics.

古文：时弟卞已为舍人，故事，入官以先后为序，卞乞班京下。兄弟同掌书命，朝廷荣之。
现代文：此时他的弟弟蔡卞已是中书舍人，按规定，做官要以先后为序，蔡卞请求排位在蔡京之后，兄弟二人同时负责书写诏命，朝廷以此为荣。
English: At this time, his younger brother Cai Qi was already a Chinese calligrapher. According to regulations, officials should be appointed in order of precedence. Cai Qi requested to be ranked after Cai Jing, and the two brothers were responsible for writing the imperial edict at the same time. The imperial court was proud of this.

古文：改龙图阁待制、知开封府。
现代文：蔡京被改为龙图阁待制、知开封府。
English: Caijing was changed to Longtu Pavilion, and Chikaifu Prefecture was established.

古文：元丰末，大臣议所立，京附蔡确，将害王珪以贪定策之功，不克。
现代文：元丰末，群臣议立新君，蔡京附会蔡确，想害王王圭并贪定策之功，没成。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, a group of courtiers deliberated on the new prince, Cai Jing was attached to Cai Zhengyi, and tried to harm Wang Wanggui and take credit for the decision, but failed.

古文：司马光秉政，复差役法，为期五日，同列病太迫，京独如约，悉改畿县雇役，无一违者。
现代文：司马光掌权，恢复差役法，限期五天，臣僚们都担心太急迫，只有蔡京如约，使其辖区全部改雇役为差役，没一人违反。
English: When Sima Guang took power and reinstated the dispatch law with a deadline of five days, the ministers were worried that it was too urgent. Only Cai Jing kept his promise and changed all the hired workers in his jurisdiction to dispatch workers, and no one violated it.

古文：诣政事堂白光，光喜曰： 使人人奉法如君，何不可行之有！ 已而台谏言京挟邪坏法，出知成德军，改瀛州，徙成都。
现代文：他到政事堂向司马光汇报，司马光高兴地说： 若人人奉法如君，有什么行不通！ 不久，台、谏官说蔡京怀奸邪、坏法度，因此蔡京调到地方为知成德军，改知瀛州，调到成都。
English: He went to the State Council to report to Sima Guang. Sima Guang said happily: "If everyone follows the law like you, nothing will work!" Soon, Taiwan and eunuchs said that Cai Jing harbored treachery and bad laws. Therefore, Cai Jing was transferred to a place known to the German army, changed to Zhangzhou, and transferred to Chengdu.

古文：谏官范祖禹论京不可用，乃改江、淮、荆、浙发运使，又改知扬州。
现代文：谏官范祖禹论说蔡京不可用，于是改为江、淮、荆、浙发运使，又改知扬州。
English: The eunuch Fan Zuyu argued that Caijing could not be used, so it was changed to Jiang, Huai, Jing, Zhejiang, and Yangzhou.

古文：历郓、永兴军，迁龙图阁直学士，复知成都。
现代文：经过在郓州、永兴军任官后，升为龙图阁直学士，再知成都。
English: After serving in Zhangzhou and Yongxing Army, he was promoted to the direct bachelor of Longtu Ge, and then he knew Chengdu.

古文：绍圣初，入权户部尚书。
现代文：绍圣初，回到朝廷，任代理户部尚书。
English: At the beginning of the Shaosheng era, he returned to the imperial court and was appointed as the agent of the household of Shang Shu.

古文：章惇复变役法，置司讲议，久不决。
现代文：章又改变役法，设机构讨论，长时间不能决策。
English: The chapter also changed the method of appointment, set up a body for discussion, and was unable to make decisions for a long time.

古文：京谓惇曰： 取熙宁成法施行之尔，何以讲为？ 惇然之，雇役遂定。
现代文：蔡京对章说 ：按熙宁役法实行，还有什么可议论的？ 章同意，于是决定采用雇役法。
English: Cai Jing said to Zhang: "Implementation according to the Xi Ning Enlistment Law is over, what else is there to discuss?" Zhang agreed, and decided to adopt the Enlistment Law.

古文：差雇两法，光、惇不同。
现代文：差役雇役两法，司马光、章不同。
English: There are two methods of dispatched labor and hired labor, and Sima Guang and Zhang are different.

古文：十年间京再莅其事，成于反掌，两人相倚以济，识者有以见其奸。
现代文：十年间蔡京再历此事，易如反掌，蔡京与他们两人互相依仗而成就此事，有见识的人因而发现他的奸猾。
English: After ten years, Cai Jing relived the matter, it was as easy as pie. Cai Jing and the two of them depended on each other to achieve this, and people with insight thus discovered his cunning.

古文：卞拜右丞，以京为翰林学士兼侍读，修国史。
现代文：蔡卞为右丞，蔡京为翰林学士兼侍读、修国史。
English: Cai Wei is the right-hand man, Cai Jing is a scholar of Hanlin and attendant, studying national history.

古文：文及甫狱起，命京穷治，京捕内侍张士良，令述陈衍事状，即以大逆不道论诛，并刘挚、梁焘劾之。
现代文：文及甫一案出现，命蔡京追查处理，蔡京逮捕内侍张士良，命他讲出陈衍事状，就以大逆不道罪处理陈衍，刘挚、梁焘一起受到弹劾。
English: When the case of Wen Jiahu emerged, Cai Jing was ordered to investigate and deal with it, Cai Jing arrested the servant Zhang Shiliang, ordered him to tell Chen Yan's case, and dealt with Chen Yan with the crime of high treason. Liu Zhi and Liang Qi were impeached together.

古文：衍死，二人亦贬死，皆锢其子孙。
现代文：陈衍被诛杀，刘挚、梁焘也遭贬死，他们的子孙都被禁锢。
English: Chen Yan was beaten to death, Liu Zhi and Liang Qi were also killed, and their children and grandchildren were all imprisoned.

古文：王岩叟、范祖禹、刘安世复远窜。
现代文：王岩叟、范祖禹、刘安世被流放到远方。
English: Wang Yanzhang, Fan Zuyu and Liu Anshi were exiled to distant places.

古文：京觊执政，曾布知枢密院，忌之，密言卞备位承辖，京不可以同升，但进承旨。
现代文：蔡京觊觎执政的位置，曾布知枢密院，忌恨蔡京，暗地对皇帝说蔡卞已备位枢府，蔡京不能同时升入，只进宫为承旨即可。
English: Cai Jingjing's position in power was once known to the Privy Council, which hated Cai Jingjing, and secretly told the emperor that Cai Jingjing had already prepared the position of the central government, Cai Jingjing could not be promoted at the same time, only entering the palace was enough to carry out the will.

古文：徽宗即位，罢为端明、龙图两学士，知太原，皇太后命帝留京毕史事。
现代文：徽宗即位，蔡京被罢官为端明、龙图两学士，知太原，皇太后命徽宗留蔡京完成修史工作。
English: Huizong ascended to the throne, Cai Jing was dismissed from his post and became a scholar of Duanming and Longtu, and Zhi Taiyuan, the empress dowager, ordered Huizong to retain Cai Jing to complete the revision of history.

古文：逾数月，谏官陈瓘论其交通近侍，瓘坐斥，京亦出知江宁，颇怏怏，迁延不之官。
现代文：过了几个月，谏官陈馞弹劾他与内侍交结，陈馞获罪被斥退，蔡京也被贬，出知江宁，蔡京很不满，拖延着不去赴任。
English: A few months later, the eunuch Chen Xi impeached him for consorting with a concubine. Chen Xi was found guilty and dismissed. Cai Jing was also demoted. It was learned that Cai Jing was very dissatisfied with Jiangning and delayed going to work.

古文：御史陈次升、龚、陈师锡交论其恶，夺职，提举洞霄宫，居杭州。
现代文：御史陈次升、龚夫、陈师锡相继议论他的罪恶，蔡京被夺去官职，让他提举洞霄宫，居住在杭州。
English: Grand Historian Chen Jisheng, the widower, and Chen Shixi successively discussed his sins. Cai Jing was deprived of his official position, and he was allowed to live in Hangzhou.

古文：童贯以供奉官诣三吴访书画奇巧，留杭累月，京与游，不舍昼夜。凡所画屏幛、扇带之属，贯日以达禁中，且附语言论奏至帝所，由是帝属意京。
现代文：童贯以供奉官的身份到三吴访求名家书画、各种奇巧之物，在杭州住了几个月，蔡京极力巴结他，日夜陪伴他，凡是蔡京画的屏幛、扇带等物，童贯每天都送到宫中，并附上自己的评论，于是皇上开始留意蔡京。
English: Tong Quan, in his capacity as a vassal, went to Samgou to visit famous calligraphers, painters, and all kinds of wonderful things. He lived in Hangzhou for several months. Cai Jing tried his best to curry favor with him, accompanying him day and night. Every day, Tong Quan sent screens, fan belts, and other objects of Cai Jing's paintings to the palace, and attached his own comments, so the emperor began to pay attention to Cai Jing.

古文：又太学博士范致虚素与左街道录徐知常善，知常以符水出入元符后殿，致虚深结之，道其平日趣向，谓非相京不足以有为。
现代文：太学博士范致虚一向与左街道录徐知常友好，徐知常认为符水出入元符后殿，是在预示着什么，范致虚进一步交结他，讲出他平日意向，说非让蔡京为相，就不能有作为。
English: Dr. Fan Zhixu has always been friendly with Xu Zhizang of the Left Street Records. Xu Zhizang believes that the water entering and leaving the Yuan Fu Hou Temple is a sign of something. Fan Zhixu further intersected with him and spoke of his daily intention, saying that if Cai Jing is not a sign, there can be no action.

古文：已而宫妾、宦官合为一词誉京，遂擢致虚右正言，起京知定州。
现代文：不久，嫔妃、宦官也一起称赞蔡京，于是范致虚升为右正言，起用蔡京为定州知州。
English: Soon, Empress Dowager Cai and eunuchs also praised Cai Jing together, so Fan Zhihu was promoted to the Right Zhengyan, and Cai Jing was appointed as the leader of Dingzhou Zhizhou.

古文：崇宁元年，徙大名府。
现代文：崇宁元年，调蔡京知大名府。
English: In the first year of Chongning, Cai Jingchi University became a famous university.

古文：韩忠彦与曾布交恶，谋引京自助，复用为学士承旨。
现代文：韩忠彦与曾布不和，谋划荐举蔡京以自助，于是，蔡京仍为学士承旨。
English: Han Tadahiko and Zeng Bu did not get along, and planned to recommend Cai Jing for self-help. As a result, Cai Jing remained a bachelor.

古文：徽宗有意修熙、丰政事，起居舍人邓洵武党京，撰《爱莫助之图》以献，徽宗遂决意用京。
现代文：徽宗有意修饰熙、丰政事，起居舍人邓洵武偏袒蔡京，做了《爱莫助之图》献给徽宗，徽宗才决定重用蔡京。
English: Huizong intentionally embellished Hee and Feng's political affairs, and Deng Yiwu, who lived there, favored Caijing, and made "The Picture of Helplessness" dedicated to Huizong. It was only then that Huizong decided to reuse Caijing.

古文：忠彦罢，拜尚书左丞，俄代曾布为右仆射。制下之日，赐坐延和殿，命之曰： 神宗创法立制，先帝继之，两遭变更，国是未定。
现代文：韩忠彦被罢相，蔡京为尚书左丞，不久，蔡京取代曾布为右仆射，诏命传下那天，徽宗在延和殿召见他，赐坐，对他说 ：神宗创法立制，先帝继承，两遭变更，国家大计还未确定。
English: Han Tadahiko was ousted from the position of prime minister, Cai Jing became Shang Shul Zu Rong, and soon, Cai Jing replaced Zeng Bu as the right-hand man. On the day when the imperial edict was issued, Huizong called him to see him at Yanhe Hall, gave him a seat, and said to him: Shensong created the legal system, the first emperor inherited it, two changes were made, and the overall national plan has not yet been determined.

古文：朕欲上述父兄之志，卿何以教之？ 京顿首谢，愿尽死。
现代文：朕想继承父兄的遗志，卿有何指教？ 蔡京叩头谢恩，表示愿效死力。
English: I want to carry on my father's and brother's legacy. What advice do you have for me? Cai Jing bowed his head in gratitude, expressing his willingness to do his best.

古文：二年正月，进左仆射。
现代文：崇宁二年二月，升任左仆射。
English: In February of the second year of Chongning, he was promoted to the position of Zuoxia.

古文：京起于逐臣，一旦得志，天下拭目所为，而京阴托 绍述 之柄，箝制天子，用条例司故事，即都省置讲议司，自为提举，以其党吴居厚、王汉之十余人为僚属，取政事之大者，如宗室、冗官、国用、商旅、盐泽、赋调、尹牧，每一事以三人主之。
现代文：蔡京由放逐大臣被重新起用，一旦得志，天下人拭目以待，希望他能有所作为，而蔡京暗暗假托 绍述 的名义，掌握大权，钳制天子，用条例司故事，在尚书省设讲议司，自任提举，用他的党羽吴居厚、王汉之等十余人为僚属，重要的国事，如宗室、冗官、国用、商旅、盐泽、赋调、尹牧，每事由三人负责。
English: Cai Jing was reappointed by the Minister of Deportation. Once he gained the will, the world would wait and see, hoping that he could make a difference. But Cai Jing secretly assumed the name of the Minister of Deportation, seized power, tamed the son of heaven, used the story of the regulations department, set up a discussion department in Shangshu Province, appointed and promoted himself, and used more than ten of his party members, such as Wu Ju Hou and Wang Han, as colleagues. Important national affairs, such as the family room, redundant officials, national use, business travel, salting, fusing, and Yin Mu, were all handled by three people.

古文：凡所设施，皆由是出。
现代文：所有决策，都出自讲议司。
English: All decisions are made by the board of directors.

古文：用冯澥、钱遹之议，复废元祐皇后。罢科举法，令州县悉仿太学三舍考选，建辟雍外学于城南，以待四方之士。
现代文：采用冯氵解、钱谲的建议，又废元皇后，罢去科举法，令州县都仿照太学三舍法考试选官，在汴京城南建辟雍，为太学的外学，用以安置各地学者。
English: He adopted the suggestions of Feng Lijie and Qian Qian, abolished the former empress, abolished the imperial examination law, and ordered all prefectures to follow the example of the examination selection officials of the three schools of Taiyue, and built Biyong in the south of the city of Beijing as a foreign school of Taiyue to accommodate scholars from all over the country.

古文：推方田于天下。
现代文：在天下推行方田法。
English: To promote the Fonda Method throughout the world.

古文：榷江、淮七路茶，官自为市。
现代文：国家对江、淮七路茶实行专卖。
English: The state has implemented a monopoly on the sale of Jiang and Huaiqi Road tea.

古文：尽更盐钞法，凡旧钞皆弗用，富商巨贾尝赍持数十万缗，一旦化为流丐，甚者至赴水及缢死。
现代文：盐钞法被全部改变，凡是旧盐钞都不使用，富商大贾曾拥有数十万缗，一朝化为乌有，成为乞丐，更有甚者竟赴水或吊死。
English: The salt bill law was completely changed, and all the old salt bills were not used. The rich merchant Dajia once owned hundreds of thousands of baht, but he was reduced to nothing, became a beggar, and even went to the water or hanged himself.

古文：提点淮东刑狱章縡见而哀之，奏改法误民，京怒，夺其官。因铸当十大钱，尽陷縡诸弟。
现代文：淮东提点刑狱章纟宰见此情景对他们十分同情，于是上书说改盐钞法坑害百姓，蔡京大怒，免他的官；并铸当十大钱，陷害章纟宰所有的兄弟。
English: Huaidong Prisoner Zhang Ruzha was very sympathetic to them when he saw this scene, so he wrote a letter saying that changing the salt bill law would harm the people. Cai Jing was furious and pardoned him. He also minted ten-dollar coins and framed all of Zhang Ruzha's brothers.

古文：御史沈畸等用治狱失意，羁削者六人。
现代文：御史沈畸等因办案不合蔡京意，有六人被捕或削官。
English: Due to the fact that the handling of the case did not meet the wishes of Cai Jing, six people were arrested or demoted.

古文：陈瓘子正汇以上书黥置海岛。
现代文：陈馞之子陈正汇因上书触犯蔡京被处黥刑并流放到海岛。
English: Chen Zhenghui, the son of Chen Yao, was flogged and exiled to the island for writing a letter that offended Cai Jing.

古文：南开黔中，筑靖州。
现代文：宋向南开辟黔中，建靖州。
English: Song opened up the Yunnan Province to the south and built Jingzhou Province.

古文：辰溪徭叛，杀溆浦令，京重为赏，募杀一首领者赐之绢三百，官以班行，且不令质究本末。
现代文：辰溪徭反叛，杀了溆浦县令，蔡京悬重赏，招募能杀辰溪徭的人，规定杀他们的首领一人，赐绢三百匹，拜官班行，且不必追究原委。
English: Chenxi Xuan rebelled and killed the county magistrate of Zhaopu County. Caijing offered a heavy reward, recruiting people who could kill Chenxi Xuan, stipulating that one of their leaders should be killed, three hundred yakitori should be given to them, and they should act in an official capacity, and there was no need to investigate the original commission.

古文：荆南守马珹言： 有生徭，有省地徭，今未知叛者为何种族，若计级行赏，俱不能无枉滥。 蒋之奇知枢密院，恐忤京意，白言珹不体国，京罢珹，命舒亶代之，以剿无群徭为期。
现代文：荆南守马王成说： 有生徭，有省地徭，现在不知叛乱的是哪一族，如果按杀人多少行赏，恐怕会有冤死和滥赏的事。 蒋之奇知枢密院，害怕违背蔡京的意思，上言说马王成不体谅国家，蔡京免马王成的官，命舒代替，希望他能剿灭徭人的反叛。
English: Jiang Ziqi knew the Privy Council and was afraid to go against Cai Jing's wishes, so he said that Ma Wangcheng did not understand the country, Cai Jing relieved Ma Wangcheng of his post and spared his life in his place, hoping that he would be able to put an end to the rebellion of the Yan people.

古文：西收湟川、鄯、廓，取牜羊牁、夜郎地。
现代文：于是，向西收复湟川、鄯、廓，攻取糝、夜郎。
English: As a result, they went west to recover Shukawa, Shima, and Kuka, and captured Shima and Yaro.

古文：擢童贯领节度使，其后扬戩、蓝从熙、谭稹、梁师成皆踵之。
现代文：提拔童贯领节度使，以后杨晋戈、蓝从熙、谭稹、梁师成都沿袭而为节度使。
English: Tong Runlian was promoted to the post of the chief of the festival, and later Yang Jingo, Lan Congxi, Tan Xuan and Liang Shi Chengdu followed suit and became the chief of the festival.

古文：凡寄资一切转行，祖宗之法荡然无余矣。
现代文：凡是内侍升迁都依外官例归于吏部，使祖宗的法度荡然无存。
English: All promotions and transfers of inner chamberlains were attributed to the cadre department in accordance with the rules for non-officials, so that the rules of the ancestors disappeared completely.

古文：又欲兵柄士心皆归己，建澶、郑、曹、拱州为四辅，各屯兵二万，而用其姻昵宋乔年、胡师文为郡守。
现代文：蔡京又想控制兵权，建澶、郑、曹、拱州为四辅，每辅屯兵二万，用他的姻亲及亲信宋乔年、胡师文为郡守。
English: Cai Jing also wanted to control the military power. Jian Kun, Zheng, Cao, and Gongzhou were the four auxiliary commanders, with 20,000 soldiers per auxiliary commander, and he used his in-laws and close confidants Song Qiaoren and Hu Shimen as county governors.

古文：禁卒干掫月给钱五百，骤增十倍以固结之。
现代文：禁军巡夜打更每月给钱五百，蔡京立即增加十倍来收买人心。
English: Forbidden Army night patrols pay 500 yuan a month, and Caijing immediately increases it tenfold to buy people's hearts.

古文：威福在手，中外莫敢议。
现代文：他擅作威福，朝廷内外没有人敢有异议。
English: He was good at bullying, and no one inside or outside the court dared to disagree with him.

古文：累转司空，封嘉国公。
现代文：他连续升官至司空，并被封为嘉国公。
English: He was successively promoted to the post of Jiu Kong and was named the Duke of Jiaguo.

古文：京既贵而贪益甚，已受仆射奉，复创取司空寄禄钱，如粟、豆、柴薪与傔从粮赐如故，时皆折支，亦悉从真给，但入熟状奏行，帝不知也。
现代文：随着地位的升高，蔡京更加贪婪，他已领仆射的俸禄，又首创司空寄禄钱，像粟、豆、柴草及侍从口粮都照旧赏赐给他，当时都是折支，给他的都是实物，蔡京只是用熟状上奏施行，皇上并不知道。
English: With the rise of his status, Cai Jing became more greedy. He had already received the salary of a servant, and was the first to send bonus money. He was still rewarded with millet, beans, firewood and servant rations. At that time, they were all expenses, and they were all given to him in kind. Cai Jing only used the rite to perform, and the emperor did not know.

古文：时元祐群臣贬窜死徙略尽，京犹未惬意，命等其罪状，首以司马光，目曰奸党，刻石文德殿门，又自书为大碑，遍班郡国。
现代文：当时元时的朝臣被贬斥流放或死去的已剩下不多了，蔡京还不满意，下令列举他们的罪状，以司马光为首，把他们看成奸党，在文德殿门前立石碑，他亲自书写碑文，发布到各地。
English: At that time, there were only a few remaining Yuan Dynasty courtiers who had been denounced, exiled or died. Cai Jing was still not satisfied and ordered to list their crimes, with Sima Guang at the head. He regarded them as traitors and erected a stone monument in front of the Wende Hall. He personally wrote the inscription and distributed it to various regions.

古文：初，元符末以日食求言，言者多及熙宁、绍圣之政，则又籍范柔中以下为邪等凡名在两籍者三百九人，皆锢其子孙，不得官京师及近甸。
现代文：起初，元符末因出现日食，下诏求言，言者大多谈及熙宁、绍圣时的政事，就又把范柔中等人定为邪等，写上姓名。有三百零九人的名字在这两个名册中，他们的子孙也遭禁锢，不能在京城及附近做官。
English: At first, due to the solar eclipse at the end of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a request for comments. Most of the speakers talked about the political affairs of Xining and Shaosheng, and they also designated Fan Rong and others as evil and wrote down their names. The names of 309 people are in these two rosters, and their children and grandchildren have also been imprisoned and cannot work as officials in Beijing and its vicinity.

古文：五年，进司空、开府仪同三司、安远军节度使，改封魏国。
现代文：崇宁五年，升为司空、开府仪同三司、安远军节度使，改封为魏国公。
English: In the fifth year of Chongning, he was promoted to Siku, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and Anyuan Army Festival Envoy, and changed his title to Wei Guogong.

古文：时承平既久，帑庾盈溢，京倡为丰、亨、豫、大之说，视官爵财物如粪土，累朝所储扫地矣。
现代文：当时国家持续太平，府库充盈，蔡京首倡丰、亨、豫、大之说，视官爵财物如粪土，前代积累的财富被挥霍一空。
English: At that time, the country continued to be peaceful, the government treasury was full, and Cai Jing advocated abundance, abundance, abundance, and abundance, saying that the wealth accumulated by the previous generation was squandered.

古文：帝尝大宴，出玉琖、玉卮示辅臣曰： 欲用此，恐人以为太华。 京曰： 臣昔使契丹，见玉盘琖，皆石晋时物，持以夸臣，谓南朝无此。
现代文：皇上曾举办宴会，拿出玉杯、玉卮给辅臣看并说 ：我想用它们，又怕人们认为太奢侈。 蔡京说： 臣过去出使契丹，看见玉盘玉杯，都是石晋时的东西，契丹拿来在臣面前夸耀，说南朝没有。
English: The emperor once held a banquet, took out a jade cup and a jade goblet to show his aides and said, "I want to use them, but I'm afraid people will think it's too extravagant." Cai Jing said, "A vassal sent an envoy to Khitan in the past, and when he saw the jade plate and jade cup, they were both from the Stone and Jin Dynasties, and the Khitan used them to boast in front of the vassal, saying that the Southern Dynasty didn't have them.

古文：今用之上寿，于礼无嫌。 帝曰： 先帝作一小台财数尺，上封者甚众，朕甚畏其言。
现代文：现在用它们祝寿，并不过分。 皇上说： 先帝做一小台才数尺，上书的很多，朕很怕他们的话。
English: It's not too much to use them now to celebrate one's birthday. The emperor said, "The previous emperor made a small table that was only a few feet long, and he wrote many letters on it. I'm very afraid of their words.

古文：此器已就久矣，倘人言复兴，久当莫辨。 京曰： 事苟当于理，多言不足畏也。
现代文：这些玉器已放置很久了，如果人言又起，无法分辩。 蔡京说： 事情如果合乎情理，言多也不值得害怕。
English: These jade objects have been left for a long time, and if people start talking about them again, it's impossible to tell the difference.Cai Jing said: If things are reasonable, it's not worth being afraid of too much talk.

古文：陛下当享天下之奉，区区玉器，何足计哉！ 
现代文：陛下应当享受天下的供奉，区区玉器，又算得了什么！ 
English: His Majesty should enjoy the world's offerings, precious jewels and all!

古文：五年正月，彗出西方，其长竟天。
现代文：崇宁五年正月，西方出现彗星，尾巴很长。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of Chongning, a comet appeared in the west with a long tail.

古文：帝以言者毁党碑，凡其所建置，一切罢之。
现代文：皇上因言者指责党人碑，于是，凡是蔡京建置的事物都罢去。
English: The emperor criticized the party monument because of the speaker, so all the things built by Cai Jing were abandoned.

古文：京免为开府仪同三司、中太乙宫使。
现代文：蔡京免官为开府仪同三司、中太一宫使。
English: Cai Jing was dismissed as Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, Zhongtai Yigu envoy.

古文：其党阴援于上，大观元年，复拜左仆射。
现代文：蔡京的党羽暗中在皇上面前推举他，大观元年，又拜他为左仆射。
English: Cai Jing's party secretly nominated him in front of the emperor, and in the first year of the Great View, he was worshiped as a left-handed shot.

古文：以南丹纳土，躐拜太尉，受八宝，拜太师。
现代文：因南丹纳土，他一跃而为太尉；接受八宝，拜为太师。
English: Because of Nan Dan Na soil, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant at one jump; he accepted the Eight Treasures and became the Grand Master.

古文：三年，台谏交论其恶，遂致仕。
现代文：大观三年，台谏官相继弹劾他，于是辞官退休。
English: In the third year of Taikan, the Taiwan eunuchs impeached him one after another, so the resigner retired.

古文：犹提举修《哲宗实录》，改封楚国，朝朔望。
现代文：仍负责修《哲宗实录》，改封楚国公，每月一日、十五日朝拜皇上。
English: He was still in charge of revising "Tetsuzo Shitsuroku" and was given the title of Duke of Chu, and paid homage to the emperor on the first and fifteenth day of every month.

古文：太学生陈朝老追疏京恶十四事，曰渎上帝、罔君父、结奥援、轻爵禄、广费用、变法度、妄制作、喜导谀、箝台谏、炽亲党、长奔竞、崇释老、穷土木、矜远略。
现代文：太学生陈朝老上疏追究蔡京十四大罪状，即：渎上帝，罔君父，结奥援，轻爵禄，广费用，变法度，妄制作，喜导谀，钳台谏，炽亲党，长奔兢，崇释老，穷土木，矜远略。
English: The great student Chen Chaolang oversaw the investigation of the 14 major crimes of Caijing, namely: blasphemy, slandering the emperor, slandering the emperor's father, slandering the Olympic Games, slandering the emperor's family, slandering the emperor's father, slandering the emperor's father, slandering the emperor's father, slandering the emperor's father, slandering the emperor's father, slandering the emperor's father, slandering the emperor's father, slandering the emperor's father, slandering the emperor's father, slandering the emperor's father,

古文：乞投畀远方，以御魑魅。
现代文：请求把他流放到远方，以御魑魅。
English: He asked to be exiled to a faraway place, in order to seduce her.

古文：其书出，士人争相传写，以为实录。
现代文：陈朝老书一出现，士人争相抄写，作为实录。
English: As soon as Chen Chaolaoshu appeared, scholars scrambled to copy it as a record.

古文：四年五月，彗复出奎、娄间，御史张克公论京辅政八年，权震海内，轻锡予以蠹国用，托爵禄以市私恩，役将作以葺居第，用漕船以运花石。
现代文：大观四年五月，彗星又在奎宿、娄宿之间出现，御史张克公议论蔡京辅政八年，权震海内，轻易赏赐以蠹国用，凭借爵禄以市私恩，役使工匠修缮舍第，动用漕船运送花石。
English: In May of the 4th year of the Taikan era, a comet appeared again between Kweijuku and Suyejuku. The historian Zhang Ke publicly discussed the 8th year of Cai Jingyu's administration, and the power of the earthquake in the sea was easily rewarded with the use of the country, by virtue of the peerage with the city's favor, to help the craftsmen to repair the house, and to use the rowing boat to transport the flowers and stones.

古文：名为祝圣而修塔，以壮临平之山；托言灌田而决水，以符 兴化 之谶。
现代文：名为祝圣而修塔，使临平山壮美；借口灌田而决水，以符合 兴化 的预言。
English: They built a tower in the name of consecration to beautify the Linping Mountain, and they used the excuse of watering the fields to fulfill the prophecy of King Heunghwa.

古文：法名退送，门号朝京。
现代文：法名 退送 ，门号 朝京 。
English: Her legal name is "退送" and her house number is "朝京."

古文：方田扰安业之民，圜土聚徙郡之恶。
现代文：方田法骚扰安居乐业的百姓，牢狱中有很多流放的犯人。
English: Fang Tianfa has been harassing the people who live and work peacefully, and there are many exiled prisoners in the prison.

古文：不轨不忠，凡数十事。
现代文：不轨不忠，共数十事。
English: Infidelity, a total of dozens of things.

古文：先是，御史中丞石公弼、侍御史毛注数劾京，未允，至是，贬太子少保，出居杭。
现代文：先前，御史中丞石公弼、侍御史毛注多次弹劾蔡京，没允奏，这时，贬蔡京为太子少保，杭州居住。
English: Previously, Grand Historian Shi Gongjun and Grand Historian Maozhu repeatedly impeached Cai Jing, but he did not acquiesce. At that time, Cai Jing was demoted to a minor prince and lived in Hangzhou.

古文：政和二年，召还京师，复辅政，徙封鲁国，三日一至都堂治事。
现代文：政和二年，把蔡京召回京师，仍为宰相，改封鲁国公，三天去一次都堂办理政事。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, he recalled Cai Jing to the capital, still as prime minister, changed his title to Lu Guogong, and went to the capital once every three days to handle government affairs.

古文：京之去也，中外学官颇有以时政为题策士者。
现代文：蔡京离朝时，中外学官很多以时政为题考试的。
English: When Cai Jing left the imperial court, many Chinese and foreign school officials took the exam on current affairs.

古文：提举淮西学士苏棫欲自售，献议请索五年间策问，校其所询，以观向背，于是坐停替者三十余人。
现代文：提举淮西学士苏木或想向上爬，献议请搜取五年来的考试题，进行询问比较，以观向背，有三十多人因此获罪。
English: If you want to promote Su Mu, a bachelor from Huaxi, or if you want to climb up, please search the exam questions for the past five years, make inquiries and comparisons, and look back. More than 30 people have been convicted for this.

古文：初，国制，凡诏令皆中书门下议，而后命学士为之。
现代文：原来宋制规定，凡诏令都由中书门下议定，然后令学士草拟。
English: Originally, the Song Dynasty system stipulated that all imperial edicts should be agreed upon by the Chinese scholars and then drafted by the scholars.

古文：至熙宁间，有内降手诏不由中书门下共议，盖大臣有阴从中而为之者。
现代文：到熙宁间，有降手诏不由中书门下共议之事，是因为有大臣暗中所为。
English: As far as Xi Ning is concerned, the reason why there was a handshake agreement not to discuss the matter under the auspices of Zhongshu is because a minister did it in secret.

古文：至京则又患言者议己，故作御笔密进，而丐徽宗亲书以降，谓之御笔手诏，违者以违制坐之。
现代文：到蔡京时又怕言者非议自己，故而做御笔秘密进上、请徽宗亲自批示颁布，称为御笔手诏，违者以违制论罪。
English: When he arrived at Caijing, he was afraid that the speaker would criticize him, so he secretly went up and asked Huizong to personally issue an order, known as the handwritten edict, and the violator would be convicted of violating the system.

古文：事无巨细，皆托而行，至有不类帝札者，群下皆莫敢言。
现代文：事无巨细，都借以推行，甚至有不像皇帝手书的，群僚都不敢说。
English: No matter how big or small, they all use it to promote themselves. Even if something doesn't look like the emperor's handwriting, his colleagues are afraid to say.

古文：由是贵戚、近臣争相请求，至使中人杨球代书，号曰 书杨 ，京复病之而亦不能止矣。
现代文：于是贵戚、近臣争相请求，以至于让内侍杨球代书，号为 书杨 ，蔡京又担心起来但也无法禁止了。
English: As a result, close relatives and close ministers clamored for requests, so much so that Tsai Jing became worried about having the chambermaid Yang Qiu acting as his secretary, but was unable to forbid it.

古文：既又更定官名，以仆射为太、少宰，自称公相，总治三省。
现代文：不久又改定官名，以仆射为太、少宰，自称公相，总治尚书、中书、门下三省。
English: Soon after, he changed his official title to "Minister" and "Junior Minister," calling himself the "Minister of Public Affairs" and ruling the three provinces of Shangshu, Zhongshu, and Mengshu.

古文：追封王安石、蔡确皆为王，省吏不复立额，至五品阶以百数，有身兼十余奉者。
现代文：追封王安石、蔡确皆为王，三省官吏不再定额，以致五品阶官成百，有的一身兼领十多种俸禄。
English: Wang Anshi and Cai Jizhi were crowned as emperors, and there was no longer a quota for officials in the three provinces, so that there were hundreds of officials of five grades, and some of them received more than ten kinds of salaries.

古文：侍御史黄葆光论之，立窜昭州。
现代文：侍御史黄葆光议论他，立即被流放到昭州。
English: The chamberlain, Shi Huang Jiguang, spoke ill of him and was immediately exiled to Zhaozhou.

古文：拔故吏魏伯刍领榷货，造料次钱券百万缗进入，徽宗大喜，持以示左右曰： 此太师与我奉料也。 擢伯刍至徽猷阁待制。
现代文：蔡京提拔故吏魏伯刍负责榷货，造料次钱券百万缗献给皇上，徽宗大喜，拿着它们给左右的人看说 ：这是蔡太师给我的奉料啊。 魏伯刍被提拔为徽猷阁待制。
English: Cai Jing promoted Wei Boqi, a former official, to be in charge of stockpiling goods, and he made materials worth millions of baht and presented them to the emperor. Huizong was overjoyed, and showed them to the people around him, saying, "This is the fodder that Cai Taiji gave me." Wei Boqi was promoted to Huizhong Pavilion.

古文：京每为帝言，今泉币所积赢五千万，和足以广乐，富足以备礼，于是铸九鼎，建明堂，修方泽，立道观，作《大晟乐》，制定命宝。
现代文：蔡京常对皇上说，现今国家钱币多达五千万缗，和足以广乐，富足以备礼，于是铸九鼎，建明堂，修方泽，立道观，做《大晟乐》，制定命宝。
English: Cai Jing often said to the emperor that today the national money is as much as 50 million baht, and it is enough to make music, and it is rich enough to prepare for the ceremony. Therefore, he minted Jiuding, built Ming Hall, repaired Fangze, established Taoism, made "Great Music," and formulated the treasure of life.

古文：任孟昌龄为都水使者，凿大伾三山，创天成、圣功二桥，大兴工役，无虑四十万。
现代文：任用孟昌龄为都水使者，开凿大亻丕三山，建天成、圣功二桥，大兴土木徭役，服役者不下四十万。
English: Meng Changling was appointed as the water envoy of the capital, excavated three mountains, built two bridges of Tiancheng and Shengong, and served as a civil engineer, with no less than 400,000 service personnel.

古文：两河之民，愁困不聊生，而京僴然自以为稷、契、周、召也。
现代文：两河人民，愁困不聊生，而蔡京竟以稷、契、周公、召公自居。
English: The people of the two rivers are neither sad nor bored, but Cai Jing actually considers himself to be a scholar, a scholar, a scholar, and a scholar.

古文：又欲广宫室求上宠媚，召童贯辈五人，风以禁中逼侧之状。
现代文：又想扩大宫室规模以求恩宠，召童贯等五人，暗示说宫中狭窄简陋。
English: He also wanted to expand the size of the palace room in order to seek favor, summoning Tongran and five others, implying that the palace was narrow and simple.

古文：贯俱听命，各视力所致，争以侈丽高广相夸尚，而延福宫、景龙江之役起，浸淫及于艮岳矣。
现代文：童贯等都听命于他，他们各显神通，争相以堂皇奢侈为得意，而延福宫、景龙江的修建，使徽宗等更奢靡，修了更加华丽的艮岳。
English: Tongran and the others all obeyed his orders. They each displayed their magical powers and competed to be the most extravagant. The construction of Yanfu Palace and Jinglong River made Huizong and the others even more extravagant, and they built a more magnificent Mount Lushan.

古文：子攸、壝、绦，攸子行，皆至大学士，视执政。
现代文：蔡京的儿子蔡攸、蔡倏、蔡袺，蔡攸的儿子蔡行，皆官至大学士，相当执政。
English: Cai Jing's sons, Cai You, Cai Ye, Cai Ye, and Cai You's son, Cai Xing, were all high-ranking officials and even university professors, and were quite capable of governing.

古文：鞗尚茂德帝姬。
现代文：蔡鈃娶茂德帝姬。
English: Cai Zhen married Maude Teiji.

古文：帝七幸其第，赉予无算。
现代文：皇上七次到他家，赏赐不计其数。
English: The emperor visited his home seven times, bestowing countless gifts.

古文：命坐传觞，略用家人礼。
现代文：让他坐着与皇上饮酒，大致使用家人的礼仪。
English: Let him sit and drink with the emperor, roughly using the family's etiquette.

古文：厮养居大官，媵妾封夫人，然公论益不与，帝亦厌薄之。
现代文：蔡京家的仆役有做大官的，陪嫁的婢女有封为夫人的，这样公论渐渐地不赞许他了，皇上也讨厌、看不起他。
English: The servants of the Caijing family included those who were high-ranking officials, and the maidservants who accompanied the bride included those who had been given the title of mistress. Thus, the public gradually disapproved of him, and the emperor also disliked and despised him.

古文：宣和二年，令致仕。
现代文：宣和二年，令他辞官退休。
English: Two years after the declaration of peace, he was dismissed from his post and retired.

古文：六年，以朱勔为地，再起领三省。
现代文：六年，凭朱面力的势力，再度起用蔡京为相。
English: Six years later, under the influence of Zhu Mianli, Cai Jing was once again appointed as the prime minister.

古文：京至是四当国，目昏眊不能事事，悉决于季子绦。
现代文：蔡京到此四次掌权，老眼昏花不能办事，政事都由他的小儿子处理。
English: Cai Jing has been in power for four times so far. He is too lazy to do anything, and his youngest son is in charge of government affairs.

古文：凡京所判，皆绦为之，且代京入奏。
现代文：凡是蔡京所批，都是蔡眥所做，并替蔡京上奏。
English: Everything approved by Cai Jing is done by Cai Wei, and he plays the leading role for Cai Jing.

古文：每造朝，侍从以下皆迎揖，呫嗫耳语，堂吏数十人，抱案后从，由是恣为奸利，窃弄威柄，骤引其妇兄韩梠为户部侍郎，媒糵密谋，斥逐朝士，创宣和库式贡司，四方之金帛与府藏之所储，尽拘括以实之，为天子之私财。
现代文：蔡眥每次上朝，侍从以下都拱手相迎，低声耳语，堂吏数十人，怀抱案卷跟在后面，于是他恣意为奸，窃弄威权，立即用他的妻兄韩木吕为户部侍郎。他们一起密谋，挑拨是非，陷害和驱逐朝士，建宣和库式贡司，各地的金帛及库藏，都被搜刮来充实它，作为天子的私财。
English: Every time Cai Xuan went to court, the attendants below him greeted him with open arms and whispered in a low voice. Dozens of courtiers followed behind, hugging the case file. So he arbitrarily acted as a traitor, mocked authority, and immediately used his brother-in-law Han Mulu as a household attendant. They conspired together, stirred up trouble, framed and expelled the courtier, Jian Xuan and Ku-style tributary, and gold ingots and treasuries from all over the country were scraped to enrich it as the son of heaven's private wealth.

古文：宰臣白时中、李邦彦惟奉行文书而已，既不能堪。兄攸亦发其事，上怒，欲窜之，京力丐免，特勒停侍养，而安置韩梠黄州。
现代文：宰相白时中、李邦彦只奉行文书而已，不久，蔡眥不能胜任其职，他的哥哥蔡攸也揭发他们，皇上大怒，想流放他们，蔡京极力请求免他的罪，皇上只令停他的俸养，但把韩木吕贬到黄州。
English: During the reign of Emperor Baizhong, Li Bangyan, the prime minister, was only following the letter of the law. Soon, Cai Xuan was unable to perform his duties. His brother Cai You also exposed them. The emperor was furious and wanted to exile them. Cai Jing strongly pleaded for his pardon. The emperor only suspended his salary, but demoted Han Mulu to Huangzhou.

古文：未几，褫绦侍读，毁赐出身敕，而京亦致仕。
现代文：不久，革去蔡眥侍读，毁掉赐出身的诏令，蔡京也辞职。
English: Soon after, he removed Cai Jie from his position as an aide-de-camp, destroying the imperial edict that had given him his position, and Cai Jing also resigned.

古文：方时中等白罢绦以撼京，京殊无去意。
现代文：当时白时中等上书请罢蔡眥以动摇蔡京的地位，蔡京毫无退意。
English: At that time, Bai Zhizhong submitted a petition to oust Cai Wei in order to shake the status of Cai Jing. Cai Jing did not give up.

古文：帝呼童贯使诣京，令上章谢事，贯至，京泣曰： 上何不容京数年，当有相谗谮者。 贯曰： 不知也。 京不得已，以章授贯，帝命词臣代为作三表请去，乃降制从之。
现代文：皇上让童贯去蔡京那儿，令他上章辞官，童贯到后，蔡京哭着说 ：皇上为何不容京几年？
English: The emperor sent Tong Rong to Cai Jing, and made him a magistrate. After Tong Rong arrived, Cai Jing cried and said: Why did the emperor not allow Cai Jing for several years?

古文：钦宗即位，边遽日急，京尽室南下，为自全计。
现代文：一定是有人进了谗言。 童贯说 ：不知道。 
English: Someone must have said something.Todochan said: I don't know.

古文：天下罪京为六贼之首，侍御史孙觌等始极疏其奸恶，乃以秘书监分司南京，连贬崇信、庆远军节度副使，衡州安置，又徙韶、儋二州。
现代文：蔡京不得已，把辞职的章奏交给童贯，皇上命词臣代他做辞职三表，于是，皇上降诏同意。钦宗即位，边事日紧，蔡京举家南下，逃避战乱。天下士人认为蔡京是六贼之首，侍御史孙觌等开始上书极力陈述他的奸恶，于是蔡京以秘书监的身份管南京，连贬崇信、庆远军节度副使，衡州居住，又迁到韶、儋二州。
English: As a last resort, Cai Jing submitted his letter of resignation to Tong Yan. The emperor ordered his vassals to make three letters of resignation on his behalf. Therefore, the emperor agreed to the abdication. Qin Zong ascended the throne, the border was tight, Cai Jing went south with his family to escape the war. The world's scholars believed that Cai Jing was the head of the six thieves, and the attendants, such as Sun Quan, began to submit letters to vigorously state his treachery. Therefore, Cai Jing managed Nanjing as a secretary-supervisor, and lived in Hengzhou, and moved to Shandong and Fujian.

古文：行至潭州死，年八十。
现代文：走到潭州，蔡京去世，终年八十岁。
English: After arriving in Tanzhou, Cai Jing passed away at the age of 80.

古文：京天资凶谲，舞智御人，在人主前，颛狙伺为固位计，始终一说，谓当越拘挛之俗，竭四海九州之力以自奉。
现代文：蔡京天资凶狠狡诈，舞弄权术，以智慧控制别人，在皇帝面前，专门窥伺人主之意以求固位专宠，始终对皇帝说，不必拘泥流俗，应该竭尽四海九州的财力来满足自己享乐。
English: Cai Jing was gifted with ferocious cunning, danced with power tricks, and controlled others with wisdom. In front of the emperor, she was dedicated to spying on the will of the Lord in order to secure her position as a special favorite. She always said to the emperor that you don't have to stick to tradition, and you should exhaust the financial resources of the four seas and nine states to satisfy your enjoyment.

古文：帝亦知其奸，屡罢屡起，且择与京不合者执政以柅之。
现代文：皇上也知道他奸诈，故屡罢屡起，并选与蔡京不合的人为执政来牵制他。
English: The emperor also knew that he was treacherous, so he repeatedly went on strike and elected someone who did not agree with Cai Jing to govern in order to contain him.

古文：京每闻将退免，辄入见祈哀，蒲伏扣头，无复廉耻。
现代文：蔡京每当要被免职时，就去向皇帝哀求，跪地磕头，毫无廉耻。
English: Whenever Cai Jing was about to be removed from office, he would go to the emperor to plead, kneel down and bow his head, without any shame.

古文：燕山之役，京送攸以诗，阳寓不可之意，冀事不成得以自解。
现代文：宋收复燕山时，蔡京送诗给蔡攸，表明此事行不通，希望此事不成以自我解脱。
English: When Song recovered Yanshan, Cai Jing sent a poem to Cai You, indicating that the matter would not work, hoping that the matter would not lead to self-liberation.

古文：见利忘义，至于兄弟为参、商，父子如秦、越。
现代文：见利忘义，以至于兄弟不合睦，如参、商二星；父子不相关，如秦、越二国。
English: Seeing profit and forgetting righteousness, so that brothers do not get along, such as San and Shang; father and son are not related, such as Qin and Yue.

古文：暮年即家为府，营进之徒，举集其门，输货僮隶得美官，弃纪纲法度为虚器。
现代文：晚年以家为官府，谋求升官的人，聚集在他的门下，只要输钱纳货，就是仆隶也可当上美官，丢弃国家纲纪法度，使它们如同虚设。
English: In his later years, he used his family as a government office, and people who were seeking promotion gathered under his door. As long as they lost money and goods, even servants could become officials, discarding the national discipline and laws, making them as if they were nothing.

古文：患失之心无所不至，根株结盘，牢不可脱。
现代文：处处患得患失，培植个人势力，盘根错节，牢不可破。
English: There are gains and losses everywhere, cultivation of personal power, entangled roots, unbreakable.

古文：卒致宗社之祸，虽谴死道路，天下犹以不正典刑为恨。
现代文：最终导致国家祸乱，虽贬死在道路上，天下人仍以没处死他为恨。
English: In the end, it led to a national calamity. Although he died on the road, the world still hated him for not being executed.

古文：子八人，壝先死，攸、翛伏诛，绦流白州死，鞗以尚帝姬免窜，余子及诸孙皆分徙远恶郡。
现代文：蔡京有八子，蔡倏早死，蔡攸、蔡袺被诛，蔡眥被流放到白州死去，蔡鈃因娶公主没受处罚，蔡京的其他儿子及孙子都分别被流放到边远的州郡。
English: Cai Jing had eight sons, Cai Jie died early, Cai You and Cai Jie were executed, Cai Jie was exiled to Baizhou and died, Cai Jie was not punished for marrying a princess, Cai Jing's other sons and grandchildren were exiled to remote counties.

古文：卞字元度，与京同年登科，调江阴主簿。
现代文：蔡卞，字元度，兴化仙游人，与蔡京同年考中进士，调为江阴主簿。
English: Cai Qian, the character degree, Xing Huaxian Youren, and Cai Jing in the same year of the junior high school entrance examination, transferred to the Jiangyin master book.

古文：王安石妻以女，因从之学。
现代文：王安石的女儿是他妻子，因此他师从王安石。
English: Wang Anshi's daughter is his wife, so he learned from Wang Anshi.

古文：元丰中，张璪荐为国子直讲，加集贤校理、崇政殿说书，擢起居舍人，历同知谏院、侍御史。
现代文：元丰中期，张推荐他为国子直讲，加官集贤校理、崇政殿说书，升为起居舍人，历任同知谏院、侍御史。
English: In the middle of the Yuanfeng era, Zhang recommended him to be a direct disciple of the emperor, and he was promoted to the post of the chief priest, and successively held the posts of the councillor of the imperial court and the attendant of the emperor.

古文：居职不久，皆以王安石执政亲嫌辞。
现代文：任职不久，都因王安石为执政，他避亲嫌而辞官。
English: Shortly after taking office, he resigned because Wang Anshi was in power and he did not want to be close to his relatives.

古文：拜中书舍人兼侍讲，进给事中。
现代文：他被任命为中书舍人兼侍讲，升为给事中。
English: He was appointed as a lecturer and assistant lecturer in Chinese literature, and was promoted to vice-chairman.

古文：哲宗立，迁礼部侍郎。
现代文：哲宗即位后，蔡卞升任礼部侍郎。
English: After Tetsuzo's accession to the throne, Cai Jun was promoted to the post of etiquette attendant.

古文：使于辽，辽人颇闻其名。
现代文：他出使辽国，辽人很熟悉他的名字。
English: He was sent to Liao Province, and Liao people are very familiar with his name.

古文：卞适有寒疾，命载以白驰车，典客者曰： 此，君所乘，盖异礼也。 使还，以龙图阁待制知宣州，徙江宁府，历扬、广、越、润、陈五州。
现代文：恰巧蔡卞染上寒病，辽国的接待者受命用白驰车拉他，并说： 你乘坐白驰车，是特殊的礼节了。 出使辽国回来，他以龙图阁待制的身份为宣州知州，转到江宁府，历任扬、广、越、润、陈五州知州。
English: It just so happened that Cai Qi caught a cold, and his Liao host was ordered to pull him along in a white horse-drawn carriage, saying, "It is a special courtesy for you to ride in a white horse-drawn carriage." After returning from Liao, he was sent to Xuanzhou Chizhou with the status of Longtu Ge, transferred to Jiangning, and successively to Yang, Guang, Yue, Run, and Chen Wuzhou Chizhou.

古文：广州宝贝丛凑，一无所取。
现代文：广州宝物很多，他一无所取。
English: There are a lot of treasures in Guangzhou. He didn't take anything.

古文：及徙越，夷人清其去，以蔷薇露洒衣送之。
现代文：等调到越州，夷人得知他要离开，就用蔷薇露洒在衣服上送他。
English: After he was transferred to Yuezhou, when the barbarians learned that he was leaving, they sprinkled rose dew on his clothes to send him away.

古文：绍圣元年，复为中书舍人，上疏言： 先帝盛德大业，卓然出千古之上，发扬休光，正在史策。
现代文：绍圣元年，他重新为中书舍人，上疏说： 先帝的盛德大业，高于千古之上，发扬光大，全在史册。
English: In the first year of Shaosheng, he once again became a Chinese calligrapher. Shang Zuo said: The great deeds of the former emperor, higher than the ages, have been carried forward, all in the annals of history.

古文：而实录所纪，类多疑似不根，乞验索审订，重行刊定，使后世考观，无所迷惑。 诏从之。
现代文：但实录所记，多数有疑问没根据，请验证审订，重新刊定，使后世人考察，没有迷惑。 皇上下诏允许。
English: However, as recorded in the record, most of the doubts are unfounded, please verify, revise and republish, so that the world will not be confused.

古文：以卞兼国史修撰。
现代文：以蔡卞兼任国史修撰。
English: With Cai Jun, he also served as a national history editor.

古文：初，安石且死，悔其所作《日录》，命从子防焚之，防诡以他书代。
现代文：当初，王安石将去世，后悔他所做的《日录》，命令他的侄子王防烧掉它，王防用别的书代替《日录》。
English: At first, Wang Anshi died, regretted the "Diary" he had made, and ordered his nephew Wang Bo to burn it. Wang Bo replaced the "Diary" with another book.

古文：至是，卞即防家取以上，因芟落事实，文饰奸伪，尽改所修实录、正史，于是吕大防、范祖禹、赵彦若、黄庭坚皆获深谴。
现代文：这时，蔡卞到王防家搜取《日录》献给皇上，趁机除去事实，文饰奸伪，实录、正史都被修改，于是吕大防、范祖禹、赵彦若、黄庭坚都受到重责。
English: At this time, Cai Wei went to Wang Fang's house to search for the "Diary" dedicated to the emperor, and took the opportunity to remove the facts, the literary decoration was fraudulent, the actual record and the official history were all modified, so Lu Dabao, Fan Zuyu, Zhao Yanruo and Huang Tingjian all received heavy responsibilities.

古文：迁翰林学士。
现代文：蔡卞升任翰林学士。
English: Fan Zhen was transferred to the post of Hanlin Scholar.

古文：四年，拜尚书左丞，专托 绍述 之说，上欺天子，下胁同列。
现代文：绍圣四年，蔡卞被任命为尚书左丞，他专靠 绍述 之说，上欺天子，下压群臣。
English: In the fourth year of Shaosheng, Cai Xuan was appointed as Shang Shuzhouzong. He relied exclusively on Shaoshu to say that he would deceive the Son of Heaven and put pressure on the ministers.

古文：凡中伤善类，皆密疏建白，然后请帝亲札付外行之。
现代文：凡是中伤忠良的事，他都秘密禀奏皇上，然后请皇上亲下诏书，颁布施行。
English: He would secretly inform the emperor of any slander against Tadayoshi, and then ask the emperor to personally issue an imperial edict to be promulgated and enforced.

古文：章惇虽钜奸，然犹在其术中。惇轻率不思，而卞深阻寡言，论议之际，惇毅然主持，卞或噤不启齿。
现代文：章虽是大奸，但还在他的控制中，章轻率，不善思考，而蔡卞阴险寡言，朝堂议论时，章总是说出很多，蔡卞常闭口不言。
English: Although Zhang is a great traitor, he is still under his control. Zhang is thoughtless and not good at thinking, while Cai Xuan is sinister and reticent. When discussing in the court, Zhang always says a lot, and Cai Xuan often keeps his mouth shut.

古文：一时论者以为惇迹易明，卞心难见。
现代文：当时议论的人认为章的心迹容易明白，蔡卞的心难见。
English: At the time, commentators believed that Zhang's thoughts were easy to understand, while Cai Xuan's thoughts were difficult to see.

古文：徽宗即位，谏官陈瓘、任伯雨、御史龚夬疏其兄弟奸恶，瓘并数卞尊私史以厌宗庙之罪，伯雨言： 卞之恶有过于惇。
现代文：徽宗即位，谏官陈馞、任伯雨，御史龚艼弹奏蔡京、蔡卞的奸恶，陈馞列举蔡卞遵私史以压宗庙的罪状，任伯雨说： 蔡卞的罪恶超过章，去年数千人上密封的章奏请求杀章、蔡卞，公议由此可见啊。 
English: Emperor Huizong ascended to the throne, eunuchs Chen Zheng and Ren Bo Yu, imperial court officials played Cai Jing and Cai Zheng's treachery, Chen Zheng enumerated Cai Zheng's crimes of suppressing the imperial family's temple, Ren Bo Yu said: Cai Zheng's crimes exceed Zheng, last year thousands of people sealed Zheng Zheng's request to kill Zheng and Cai Zheng, public discussion can be seen from this.

古文：去年封事，数千人皆乞斩惇、卞，公议于此可见矣。 遂陈其大罪有六，曰： 诬罔宣仁圣烈保佑之功，欲行追废，一也；凡绍圣以来窜逐臣僚，皆卞启而后行，二也；宫中厌胜事作，哲宗方疑，未知所处，惇欲召礼法官通议，卞云： 既犯法矣，何用礼法官议？ 
现代文：于是列出蔡卞六大罪状，是 诬蔑宣仁圣烈后的保佑之功，想要废去她的尊号，此其一；凡是绍圣以来被贬逐的官僚，都是蔡卞先弹奏而后实行的，此其二；后宫中出现用巫术诅咒人的事，哲宗正在怀疑，不知如何处置，章想让礼法官讨论，蔡卞说： 已经犯法了，还用礼法官议论什么？ 
English: He then listed Cai Jun's six major offenses. First, he slandered Xuanren Shengru's blessing, and wanted to abolish her honorary title. Second, all the bureaucrats who had been ousted since Shao Sheng were first played and then carried out by Cai Jun. In the harem, Zhezong was suspicious of the use of witchcraft to curse people, and did not know how to deal with it. Zhang wanted to have the judge discuss it. Cai Jun said: It has already violated the law, so why use the judge to discuss it?

古文：皇后以是得罪，三也；编排元祐章牍，萋菲语言，被罪者数千人，议自卞出，四也；邹浩以言忤旨，卞激怒哲宗，致之远谪，又请治其亲故送别之罪，五也；蹇序辰建看详诉理之议，章惇迟疑未应，卞即以二心之言迫之，惇默不敢对，即日置局，士大夫得罪者八百三十家，凡此皆卞谋之而惇行之，六也。
现代文：皇后因此获罪，此其三；编排元时的章奏，谗毁其中的语言，使数千人获罪，议论出于蔡卞，此其四；邹浩因上疏忤犯圣旨，蔡卞激怒哲宗，使邹浩遭贬到远方，又请求对送别他的亲朋治罪，此其五；蹇序辰建议看详诉理，章迟疑不决，蔡卞就以他怀有二心逼迫他，章沉默不敢回答，当天就定案，士大夫有八百三十家获罪，这都是蔡卞的主意而章执行的，此其六。
English: The empress was convicted for this, the third; the orchestration of the Yuan-era chapter music, the destruction of the language in it, caused thousands of people to be convicted, the discussion was due to Cai Zheng, the fourth; Zhao Hao violated the holy will because of Shang Shao Zheng, Cai Zheng angered Zhe Zong, caused Zhao Hao to be relegated to a distant place, and requested that his relatives and friends be punished, the fifth; Zhaozhuchen suggested to see the detailed indictment, Zhang hesitated and did not decide, Cai Zheng forced him with his double-mindedness, Zhang was silent and did not dare to

古文：愿亟正典刑，以谢天下。 诏以资政殿学士知江宁府，连贬少府少监、分司池州。
现代文：希望立即明正典刑，以谢天下。 皇上下诏让蔡卞以资政殿学士的身份出任江宁知府，连续贬官为少府少监，分管池州。
English: It is hoped that the formal punishment will be carried out immediately, so as to thank the world. The emperor issued an imperial edict to let Cai Wei serve as the governor of Jiangning with the status of the academician of the Palace of Councillors, and he was successively demoted to the position of the assistant governor and assistant superintendent in charge of Chizhou.

古文：才逾岁，起知大名府，徙扬州，召为中太乙宫使，擢知枢密院。
现代文：才过一年，蔡卞被起用为大名知府，调到扬州，被召用为中太一宫使，升任知枢密院。
English: Just a year later, Cai Xuan was appointed as a daimyo chifu, transferred to Yangzhou, was called to serve as an envoy to the Central Palace, and was promoted to the Privy Council.

古文：时京居相位，卞礼辞，不许。
现代文：当时蔡京为宰相，蔡卞辞职，皇上不许。
English: At that time, Cai Jing was the prime minister, Cai Ye resigned, and the emperor did not allow it.

古文：帝谋复湟、鄯，问于卞，卞以王厚、高永年对。
现代文：皇上谋求收复湟、鄯二地，问蔡卞，蔡卞回答王厚、高永年可担当此任。
English: The emperor sought to recover the two provinces of Anhui and Fujian, and asked Cai Jian, Cai Jian replied that Wang Hou and Gao Yongnian could take on this task.

古文：与京合谋，竭府藏以事边，募商人运粮，不复问其直贵贱。
现代文：他与蔡京合谋，拿出全部府藏用于边事，召募商人运粮，不再问粮价的贵贱。
English: He conspired with Cai Jing, took out the entire government treasury for side business, recruited merchants to transport grain, and no longer asked about the price of grain.

古文：鄯、廓至斗米钱四千，束刍钱千二百，秦中骚困。
现代文：鄯、廓二处达到一斗米四千钱，一束草料一千二百钱，陕西受到骚扰。
English: In Shaanxi and Guizhou, the price of a barrel of rice reached 4,000 yuan, and a bundle of herbs was 1,200 yuan. Shaanxi was harassed.

古文：及取三州，进金紫光禄大夫，永年竟为帐下执去以降。
现代文：等到夺取三州后，蔡卞升为金紫光禄大夫，高永年竟被部下抓去投降了敌人。
English: After the capture of the Three Provinces, Cai Jinsheng became the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, but Gao Yongnian was actually captured by his subordinates and surrendered to the enemy.

古文：自是西方交兵，连年不息，追仇任伯雨所言，曲自办理。
现代文：从此西方战事连年不断，蔡卞追究仇人任伯雨所说的话，为自己辩解。
English: Since then, the war in the West has continued year after year, and Cai Wei has pursued the words said by his enemy, Ren Bo Yu, to justify himself.

古文：至欲会狱证治，诸人坐贬。
现代文：甚至想下狱惩治，从前弹劾他的人都遭贬。
English: He even wanted to punish him by sending him to prison, and those who had previously impeached him were all censured.

古文：卞居心倾邪，一意以妇公王氏所行为至当。
现代文：蔡卞心怀奸邪，一心认为岳父王安石的所作所为最完美。
English: Cai Xuan harbored treachery in her heart and believed that her father-in-law Wang Anshi's actions were the most perfect.

古文：兄晚达而位在上，致己不得相，故二府政事时有不合。
现代文：他哥哥蔡京升官晚于他，但官位在上，使他不能任宰相，故此枢密、中书二府政事常有不合。
English: His brother Cai Jing was promoted later than him, but his higher official rank prevented him from being appointed prime minister, so there was often a discrepancy between the government of the two prefectures.

古文：京以中旨用童贯为陕西制置使，卞言不宜用宦者，右丞张康国引李宪故事以对，卞曰： 用宪已非美事，宪犹稍习兵，贯略无所长，异时必误边计。 帝令中书行之。
现代文：蔡京用皇上的旨意任童贯为陕西制置使，蔡卞说不应用宦官，右丞张康国引用李宪的先例来回答，蔡卞说： 用李宪已不是好事，李宪还稍稍懂兵，童贯没有军事才能，他时定会贻误边防大事。 皇上命令中书执行。
English: Cai Jing used the emperor's will to appoint Tong Quan as the Shaanxi envoy, Cai Jie said that eunuchs should not be used, and the right-hand man Zhang Kanguo cited the precedent of Li Xian to answer, Cai Jie said: Using Li Xian is not a good thing, Li Xian still knows a little about soldiers, Tong Quan has no military talent, he will definitely delay the border defense event. The emperor's order was carried out in writing.

古文：京于帝前诋卞，卞求去，以资政殿大学士知河南。
现代文：蔡京在皇上面前诋毁蔡卞，蔡卞请求辞官，皇上就让他以资政殿大学士的身份出任河南知府。
English: Cai Jing slandered Cai Jian in front of the emperor, Cai Jian requested a resignation, and the emperor let him serve as the governor of Henan Province in the capacity of a scholar of the Imperial Palace.

古文：妖人张怀素败，卞素与之游，谓其道术通神，尝识孔子、汉高祖，至称为大士，坐降职。
现代文：妖人张怀素败露，蔡卞一向与他友好，称他的道术通神，曾结识孔子、汉高祖，甚至称他为大士，蔡卞受牵连而降职。
English: Zhang Huai was revealed to be a sorcerer, and Cai Qi had always been friendly with him, calling him a Taoist channeler, having met Confucius and Han Gao Zu, and even calling him a great scholar. Cai Qi was implicated and demoted.

古文：旋加观文殿学士，拜昭庆军节度使，入为侍读，进检校少保、开府仪同三司，易节镇东。
现代文：不久他被加官为观文殿学士，任为昭庆军节度使，入朝为侍读，进升为检校少保、开府仪同三司，调为镇东节制。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, appointed as an envoy of the Shaoqing Army for the Spring Festival, entered the Imperial Court as an attendant, and was promoted to the position of a junior school inspector, the head of the ceremony and the three departments, and transferred to the Zhendong Temperance.

古文：政和末，谒归上冢，道死，年六十。
现代文：政和末年，蔡卞请求归京，在途中去世。终年六十岁。
English: At the end of the Meiji era, Cai Jun requested to return to Kyoto, but died on the way. He was sixty years old.

古文：赠太傅，谥曰文正。
现代文：死后他被赠官为太傅，谥号 文正 。
English: After his death, he was given the title of Taifu and the posthumous name of Wenzheng.

古文：高宗即位，追责为宁国军节度副使。
现代文：高宗即位后，追责他的罪状，贬为宁国军节度副使。
English: After Gaozong ascended to the throne, he was accused of crimes and demoted to vice-envoy of the Ningguo Army.

古文：绍兴五年，又贬单州团练副使。
现代文：绍兴五年，又被贬为单州团练副使。
English: After five years in Shaoxing, he was demoted to vice-envoy of single-province group training.

古文：攸字居安，京长子也。
现代文：蔡攸，字居安，兴化仙游人，是蔡京的长子。
English: Cai You, also known as Ju An and Xing Hua Xian Yu Ren, is the eldest son of Cai Jing.

古文：元符中，监在京裁造院。
现代文：元符中，官为监在京裁造院。
English: In the Yuanfu era, the official overseer was stationed at the Beijing Cutting and Building Institute.

古文：徽宗时为端王，每退朝，攸适趋局，遇诸途，必下马拱立，王问左右，知为蔡承旨子，心善之。
现代文：徽宗当时是端王，每次退朝，蔡攸都到自己的府衙，他们在途中相遇，蔡攸必下马垂手站立恭迎端王，端王问左右，知道他是蔡承旨的儿子，心里喜欢他。
English: At that time, Huizong was the King of Dong, and every time he retired, Cai You had to go to his capital. They met on the way. Cai You would get off the horse and stand with outstretched hand to greet the King of Dong. The King of Dong asked around and knew that he was the son of Cai Chengzhi, and liked him in his heart.

古文：及即位，记其人，遂有宠。
现代文：等即位后，记着他，于是蔡攸得宠。
English: After the enthronement, he was remembered, and Cai You became a favorite.

古文：崇宁三年，自鸿胪丞赐进士出身，除秘书郎，以直秘阁、集贤殿修撰编修《国朝会要》，二年间至枢密直学士。
现代文：崇宁三年，蔡攸从鸿胪丞被赐予进士出身，授予秘书郎，以直秘阁、集贤殿修撰的身份编修《国朝会要》，二年间官至枢密直学士。
English: In the third year of Chongning, Cai You was given the title of "Junior Scholar" by Hong Xuanzheng, and was awarded the title of "Secretary," and edited the "Important Documents of the Imperial Court" with the title of "Direct Secretary" and "Writer of the Imperial Court," and was promoted to the rank of "Direct Scholar" in two years.

古文：京再入相，加龙图阁学士兼侍读，详定《九域图志》，修《六典》，提举上清宝箓宫、秘书省两街道录院、礼制局。
现代文：蔡京再次任宰相，他被加官为龙图阁学士兼侍读，详定《九域图志》，修《六典》，提举上清宝宫、秘书省两街道录院、礼制局。
English: Cai Jing was reappointed as the prime minister. He was promoted to the post of Longtu Pavilion bachelor and attendant, detailed the "Nine Regions Chart," revised the "Six Classics," and promoted the Shangqing Treasure Palace, the Secretary of the Provincial Two-Street Recording Academy, and the Bureau of Etiquette.

古文：道、史官僚合百人，多三馆隽游，而攸用大臣子领袖其间，懵不知学，士论不与。
现代文：道、史官僚计有百人，多数是三馆才智出众的人，而蔡攸以大臣的儿子的身份为他们的领袖，不知上进，士大夫都不赞成。
English: There are hundreds of bureaucrats in the ministries of education and history, most of whom are outstanding intellectuals from the three branches of government. Cai You, as the son of a minister, is their leader. He does not know how to advance, and the scholars do not approve of him.

古文：初置宣和殿，命为大学士，赐球文方团金带，改淮康军节度使。
现代文：刚设宣和殿时，蔡攸被任命为大学士，赐给他文方团金带，被改派为淮康军节度使。
English: When the Great Hall of the People was first established, Cai You was appointed as a university scholar, given the gold belt of the Literary Circle, and was reassigned as the military envoy of the Huai Kang Army.

古文：帝将去京，先逐其党刘昺、刘焕等，使御史中丞王安中劾之。
现代文：皇上要罢去蔡京，先逐走他的党羽刘籨、刘焕等人，让御史中丞王安中弹劾他们。
English: The emperor wanted to oust Cai Jing, first expelling his followers Liu Ye, Liu Huan, and others, and having them impeached by the imperial historian Wang Anzhong.

古文：攸通籍禁庭，闻其事，亟请间百拜以恳，帝意遂解。
现代文：宫门登记蔡攸的姓名，他可随时入宫，听到这件事后，立即请求拜见，恳求皇上，皇上就放弃了这个想法。
English: The palace gate registered Cai You's name, and he could enter the palace at any time. After hearing this, he immediately asked to see the emperor and pleaded with him. The emperor gave up this idea.

古文：其后与京权势日相轧，浮薄者复间之，父子各立门户，遂为仇敌。
现代文：后来他与蔡京的权势日益相倾轧，轻薄小人又离间他们，父子就各立门户，成为仇敌。
English: Later, he and Cai Jing's power increasingly clashed, and the light-skinned villain separated them. Father and son set up separate portals and became enemies.

古文：攸别居赐第，尝诣京，京正与客语，使避之，攸甫入，遽起握父手为胗视状，曰： 大人脉势舒缓，体中得无有不适乎？ 京曰： 无之。 攸曰： 禁中方有公事。 即辞去。
现代文：蔡攸住在皇上赐给的另一府第，曾去拜见蔡京，蔡京正同客人谈话，让客人避开，蔡攸刚进来，就握住父亲的手，做出诊脉的样子问： 大人脉势舒缓，身体可有不适？ 蔡京答 ：没有。 蔡攸说 ：宫中正有公事。 就告辞了。
English: Cai Yu lived in another palace given to him by the emperor, and once went to visit Cai Jing. Cai Jing was talking to a guest, and asked the guest to avoid him. As soon as Cai Yu came in, he held his father's hand and asked, as if he were making a diagnosis: "The pulse of an adult is gentle, is there any discomfort in your body?" Cai Jing replied, "No." Cai Yu said, "There is a business in the palace." Then he left.

古文：客窃窥见，以问京，京曰： 君固不解此，此儿欲以为吾疾而罢我也。 阅数日，京果致仕。
现代文：客人偷着看见这一切，问蔡京，蔡京答 ：你本来不了解这些，这是我儿子想以我有病而罢去我呀。 过几天，蔡京果然退休。
English: The guest secretly saw all of this, asked Cai Jing about it, and Cai Jing replied, "You didn't know about this, this is my son trying to get rid of me because I'm sick." A few days later, Cai Jing retired.

古文：以季弟绦钟爱于京，数请杀之，帝不许。
现代文：他因四弟蔡眥受父亲钟爱，就多次请求杀蔡眥，皇上不许。
English: Because his fourth brother Cai Qi was loved by his father, he repeatedly asked to kill Cai Qi, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：攸历开府仪同三司、镇海军节度使、少保，进见无时，益用事，与王黼得预宫中秘戏，或侍曲宴，则短衫窄裤，涂抹青红，杂倡优侏儒，多道市井淫媟谑浪语，以蛊帝心。
现代文：蔡攸历任开府仪同三司、镇海军节度使、少保，进见皇上没有时限，更加跋扈，和王黼一起能够参加宫中游戏，或被留在宫中赐宴，就穿上短衣窄裤、涂抹青红，夹杂在歌舞艺人、侏儒中，说很多市井无赖、淫夫荡妇的戏谑浮浪之语，来博取皇上的欢心。
English: Cai Yu, who was successively appointed to the Kaifu Rite, the Third Division, the Town Navy Festival Envoy, and the Minor Protector, had no time limit to see the emperor, and he was more daring. Together with Wang Yao, he could participate in the palace games, or be left in the palace to give a banquet. He put on shorts and narrow trousers, smeared blue and red, and mingled with singing and dancing artists and dwarfs. He said a lot of bantering and vagabond words of street ruffians and lascivious sluts to win the emperor's favor.

古文：妻宋氏出入禁掖，子行领殿中监，视执政，宠信倾其父。
现代文：他的妻子宋氏可出入后宫，儿子蔡行任殿中监，皇上把他视如执政，宠信超过了蔡攸。
English: His wife, the Song clan, could enter and leave the harem, and his son, Cai Xing, served as the palace's chancellor. The emperor regarded him as if he were in power, and he was more favored than Cai You.

古文：帝留意道家者说，攸独倡为异闻，谓有珠星璧月、跨凤乘龙、天书云篆之符，与方士林灵素之徒争证神变事。于是神霄、玉清之祠遍天下，咎端自攸兴矣。
现代文：皇上留心道家学说，蔡攸又独自倡导成一些奇闻，说有珠星璧月、跨凤乘龙、天书云篆的符应，同道士林灵素之徒争相证明神变的事，于是神霄、玉清宫观遍及天下，都是蔡攸的罪过。
English: The emperor paid attention to the teachings of the Taoists, and Cai You independently advocated some strange stories, saying that there was a correspondence between the pearl star and the moon, the phoenix and the dragon, and the heavenly book and the clouds, and with the Taoist and spiritualists to prove the transformation of the divine, so the view of the divine sky and the Jade Palace spread all over the world, all of which were the sins of Cai You.

古文：童贯伐燕，以攸副宣抚，攸童騃不习事，谓功业可唾手致。
现代文：童贯征伐燕云，蔡攸为副宣抚。蔡攸幼稚无知，认为功业唾手可得。
English: Tsai You is a childish ignoramus who thinks that achievements are easy to come by.

古文：入辞之日，二美嫔侍上侧，攸指而请曰： 臣成功归，乞以是赏。 帝笑而弗责。
现代文：他入宫辞行时，有两个美嫔侍奉皇上，蔡攸指着她们请求说： 臣成功归来，请把她们赏给我。 皇上笑了，但不责怪他。
English: When he entered the palace and left, there were two beautiful concubines serving the emperor. Cai Yu pointed to them and asked: "If the minister returns successfully, please give them to me." The emperor laughed, but did not blame him.

古文：涿州留守郭药师拥所部八千人举涿、易二州降，进攸少傅。
现代文：涿州留守郭药师率所部八千人献涿、易二州降宋，蔡攸升为少傅。
English: Eight thousand people from the research department of Zhangzhou left-behind Guo Pharmacist, Yi two states were relegated to the Song Dynasty, and Cai You was promoted to a junior professor.

古文：王师入燕，进少师，封英国公。
现代文：宋军进入燕京，蔡攸升为少师，封为英国公。
English: The Song army entered Yanjing, and Cai You was promoted to the rank of junior division and given the title of British general.

古文：还，领枢密院。
现代文：回朝后，蔡攸领枢密院。
English: After returning to China, Cai You led the Privy Council.

古文：王黼罢政，帝欲大用攸，既而悔之，但进太保，徙封燕。
现代文：王黼被罢，皇上想重用蔡攸，不久又后悔，只升他为太保，改封为燕国公。
English: Wang Yao was ousted, and the emperor wanted to reuse Cai You, but soon regretted it, and only promoted him to the position of Tai Bao, changing his title to Yan Guo Gong.

古文：帝欲内禅，亲书 传位东宫 字授李邦彦，邦彦却立不敢承，遂以付攸。
现代文：皇上想禅位，亲自写下 传位东宫 的字授予李邦彦，李邦彦退后不敢接受，皇上就交给蔡攸。
English: The emperor wanted to be enthroned and personally wrote down the words "Crown Prince of the East" to be conferred on Li Bangyan. Li Bangyan did not dare to accept, so the emperor gave it to Cai You.

古文：攸退，属其客给事中吴敏，议遂定。
现代文：蔡攸退朝后，交给他的门客给事中吴敏，议定了此事。
English: After Cai You retired from the imperial court, he handed the matter over to his protégé, Wu Min, and the matter was settled.

古文：靖康元年，从上皇南下。
现代文：靖康元年，蔡攸跟从徽宗南下。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, Cai You followed Huizong to the south.

古文：及还都，始责为大中大夫，继而安置永州，连徙浔、雷。
现代文：等他回到京城，才被贬责为大中大夫，接着安置到永州，连续被转到浔州、雷州。
English: It was not until he returned to Beijing that he was demoted to the rank of senior middle school doctor, and then he was transferred to Yongzhou, and then successively to Ganzhou and Leizhou.

古文：京死，御史言攸罪不减乃父，燕山之役祸及宗社，骄奢淫泆载籍所无，当窜诸海岛。
现代文：蔡京去世后，御史说蔡攸的罪过不比他父亲轻，燕山之役祸及宗社，他骄奢淫佚的程度超过了史籍的记载，应把他流放到海岛。
English: After Cai Jing's death, the imperial historian said that Cai You's crime was no less than that of his father, the Yanshan Incident and the Soshe Incident, and that his degree of arrogance and debauchery exceeded the historical records, and that he should be exiled to the island.

古文：诏置万安军，寻遣使者随所至诛之。
现代文：皇上下诏把他安置到万安军。不久又派使臣到他所去的地方杀了他。
English: The imperial edict placed him in the Wan'an army, and soon dispatched envoys to kill him wherever he went.

古文：翛初以恩泽为亲卫郎、秘书丞，至保和殿学士。
现代文：赵良嗣，本是燕人马植，世代为辽国大族，官至光禄卿。
English: Zhao Liangzi, originally a Swallow Man and Horse Breeder, was a member of the Liao Dynasty, and rose to the rank of Guangluqing.

古文：宣和中，拜礼部尚书兼侍讲。
现代文：他行为污浊且乱伦，人们极端鄙视他。
English: He behaved in a filthy and incestuous manner, and people despised him intensely.

古文：时棻弟兄亦知事势日异，其客傅墨卿、孙傅等复语之曰： 天下事必败，蔡氏必破，当亟为计。 翛心然之，密与攸议，稍持正论，故与京异。
现代文：政和初年，童贯出使辽国，走到卢沟，马植晚上见到他的侍史，自称有灭燕的办法，于是才得以拜见童贯。童贯和他交谈，认为他是奇人，就带着他一起回来，改姓名叫李良嗣。童贯把他推荐给朝廷，他就献计说： 女真人对辽人恨之入骨，而天祚帝荒淫无道。本朝若派使臣从登、莱州渡海，和女真结好，相约攻打辽国，辽国可图。 
English: In the first year of the Meiji Restoration, Tongran went to Lugou, Liaoning Province, as an envoy of Liao. Ma Zhi saw his attendant in the evening and said that he had a way to exterminate Yan, so he was able to meet Tongran. Tongran talked with him and thought that he was a strange person, so he brought him back with him and changed his name to Li Liangzi. Tongran recommended him to the imperial court, and he proposed a plan: Niang Zhen hated the Liao people to the bone, while Tian Zhengdi had no way. If this dynasty sent envoys from Deng and Laizhou to cross the sea, and

古文：然皆蓄缩不敢明言，遂引吴敏、李纲、李光、杨时等用之，以挽物情。
现代文：议论这事的人认为祖宗以来，虽然有这条路，但因它与其他少数民族相接，禁止商人船只通行，有一百多年了，一旦开通，恐怕于中国不利。
English: People who discuss this matter believe that although this road has existed since the time of the ancestors, it has been forbidden to merchant ships for more than a hundred years because it is connected to other ethnic minorities. Once it is opened, I am afraid it will be unfavorable to China.

古文：寻加大学士，提举醴泉观。钦宗立，翛上募兵陕西策，自请行，又劝西幸，帝颇采纳，俾知京兆府。
现代文：徽宗召见他，问他来的原因，他答 ：辽国必亡，陛下念及旧民遭涂炭之苦，恢复中国从前的疆域，替天行道，以治伐乱，王师一出，身陷辽境的旧民一定会以酒相迎。
English: Huizong summoned him and asked him the reason for his visit. He replied, "Liaoning is doomed. Your majesty should think about the suffering of the old people, restore China's former territory, act for heaven, and control the chaos. As soon as Wang Shi comes out, the old people trapped in Liaoning will certainly welcome him with wine."

古文：计垂就，攸忌其功成，会金破濬州，徽宗南幸，攸假徽宗旨，请翛守镇江，改资政殿大学士。
现代文：万一女真得志，先发者制人，后发者被人制，事情就不能成功了。 皇上赞同并采纳了他的话。赐他姓赵，任命他为秘书丞，攻燕之议从此开始。
English: In the unlikely event that the woman really succeeds, and the first mover is the winner, and the second mover is the loser, the matter will not succeed. The emperor agreed and accepted his words. He gave him the surname Zhao, appointed him secretary-general, and the attack on Yan began.

古文：或谓翛前计已乖，宜勿行。
现代文：赵良嗣升为直龙图阁、提点万寿观，加官为右文殿修撰。
English: Zhao Liangzi was promoted to Zhaolong Tu Ge, raised the point of longevity, and was promoted to Umenden Shuxian.

古文：翛幸得去，不复辞。
现代文：宣和二年二月，赵良嗣出使金国，见到金国皇帝阿骨打，商量攻打燕云。
English: In February of the second year of the declaration of peace, Zhao Liangzhi sent an envoy to Jin, and met with Emperor Akechi of Jin to discuss attacking Yan Yun.

古文：流言至京师，谓将复辟于镇江。
现代文：出使回来后，他升任徽猷阁待制。
English: After returning from the mission, he was promoted to the position of Huiyang Pavilion.

古文：帝趣迎上皇还，而责翛昭信军节度副使。攸之诛也，御史陈述且行，帝取诏批其尾曰： 翛亦然。 于是并诛。
现代文：从此他受命出使金国六七次，很能尽心尽力地婉言劝解，替宋朝说话，与金人争议，他被升为龙图阁直学士。
English: From then on, he was ordered to send envoys to the Jin Dynasty six or seven times, and he was able to do his best to gently persuade, speak for the Song Dynasty, and dispute with the Jin people. He was promoted to Longtuge's direct bachelor.

古文：崈者，京族子也。性矫妄，善谈鬼神事。
现代文：宋得到燕山后，又被加官为延康殿学士、提举上清宫，官至光禄大夫。
English: After Song obtained Yanshan, he was also promoted to the post of Yan Kang Dian Baccalaureate, promoted to Shangqing Palace, and promoted to the post of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：当承门荫，固推与庶兄，宗族称为贤。崇宁初，京党以学行修饬闻诸朝，与泉州布衣吕注皆著道士服。
现代文：赵良嗣说： 我从前在北国，同燕中豪杰刘范、李及族兄马柔吉三人同心结义，想占据幽蓟后归朝，在北极祠下洒酒，祭天发誓，等以后功成时，就做一个平民百姓，来表达本心，最初不是为取功名，求富贵的。
English: Zhao Liangzhi said: I used to be in the north country, with Yan Zhonghao Jie Liu Fan, Li and his elder brother Ma Rongji, the three of us were of the same mind. I wanted to occupy a secluded place after returning to the North, sprinkle wine under the North Pole Shrine, swear to the gods, and when I achieved success in the future, I would be a commoner to express my true heart. At first, it was not to gain fame, but to seek wealth.

古文：召入谒，累官拜给事中兼侍读。
现代文：仰仗陛下威灵，现今此事幸而成功，我念及从前的誓言，怎能违背呢？
English: Relying on the benevolence of His Majesty, now that the matter is fortunately successful, I remember the previous oath, how can I violate it?

古文：京去位，为言者所攻，以显谟阁待制提举崇福宫。
现代文：希望准许我辞官，让我买田归农，使有见识的人说： 这是平燕的首谋，能请求辞官闲居，真是天下的美事。 
English: I hope that I will be allowed to become a diplomat, so that I can buy land and return to farming, so that people with insight can say: This is Pingyan's mastermind. To be able to ask a diplomat to stay idle is truly a wonderful thing in the world.

古文：言者复论其不学无文，结豪民，规厚利，持道家吐纳之说以为论思，侍立集英瞑目自若为不恭，遂夺职。
现代文：不然，我连神明都敢欺骗，还有什么不能干的呢？ 
English: Otherwise, I dare to deceive even the gods, what else can I not do?

古文：陈正汇上京变事，置狱京师，具陈在杭州时，日闻崈盛言京有后福，狱上，诏削其籍。
现代文：他一共三次上表章辞官，皇上不准。不久朝廷接纳张觉，赵良嗣争辩说： 国家刚与金国结盟，这样做定会失去金国的欢心，后悔都来不及。 朝廷没听他的话。赵良嗣被罢官，削去五阶。
English: In total, he submitted his resignation three times, but the emperor did not allow him to do so. Soon, the imperial court accepted Zhang Jue, and Zhao Liangzi argued: The country had just allied with China, and doing so would certainly lose the favor of China, and it was too late to regret it. The imperial court did not listen to his words. Zhao Liangzi was dismissed from his post, and his rank was reduced by five ranks.

古文：京复相，徽宗戒毋得用崈但复集英殿修撰，旋还待制，提点洞霄宫。宣和中，卒。
现代文：靖康元年四月，御史胡舜陟弹劾他造成边患，败坏了与契丹的百年友好，致使金人侵凌，祸及中原，请求对他斩首示众。
English: In April of the first year of the Jing-Kang Dynasty, Emperor Hu Jintao impeached him for causing border troubles and spoiling the century-old friendship with Khitan, resulting in the abuse of the Jin people and the disaster of the Central Plains, and requested that he be beheaded.

古文：赵良嗣，本燕人马植，世为辽国大族，仕至光禄卿。
现代文：当时他已被流放到郴州，皇上诏命广西转运副使李升之在赵良嗣到的地方砍下他的头，把他的妻子迁移到万安军。张觉，平州义丰人。在辽国中进士，任辽兴军节度副使。
English: At that time, he had been exiled to Bozhou, and the emperor ordered Li Shengzhi, the deputy envoy of Guangxi transit, to cut off his head in the place where Zhao Liangzi arrived, and to transfer his wife to the Wan'an Army. Zhang Jue, a native of Pingzhou Yifeng, entered the Middle Kingdom of Liao and served as deputy envoy of the Liao Xing Army.

古文：行污而内乱，不齿于人。
现代文：辽兴军百姓杀死节度使萧谛里，张觉平定叛乱，州人推举他领州事。
English: The people of the Liao Xing Army killed the festival to make Xiao Dili, Zhang Jue quelled the rebellion, and the people of the state elected him to lead the state affairs.

古文：政和初，童贯出使，道卢沟，植夜见其侍史，自言有灭燕之策，因得谒。
现代文：燕王耶律淳死后，张觉知道辽国必亡，征召壮丁五万人，一千匹马，练兵备战。
English: After the death of Yan Wang Yerutun, Zhang Jue knew that Liaoning would be doomed. He conscripted fifty thousand young men and a thousand horses to train soldiers and prepare for war.

古文：童贯与语，大奇之，载与归，易姓名曰李良嗣。
现代文：萧后派时立爱来做知州，张觉拒不接受。
English: Xiao Hou sent Shi Li Ai to do Chizhou, Zhang Jue refused to accept.

古文：荐诸朝，即献策曰： 女真恨辽人切骨，而天祚荒淫失道。
现代文：金人进入燕京，向辽国旧臣康公弼询问张觉的情况，康公弼说他怎能有什么作为，应该表示对他不怀疑，让他任临海军节度使，平州知州。
English: The goldsmith entered Yanjing and inquired about Zhang Jue from Liao's former vassal Kang Gonglu. Kang Gonglu said that he could not do anything, and that he should not doubt him and let him serve as the naval envoy to Pingzhou and Zhizhou.

古文：本朝若遣使自登、莱涉海，结好女真，与之相约攻辽，其国可图也。 议者谓祖宗以来，虽有此道，以其地接诸蕃，禁商贾舟船不得行，百有余年矣。一旦启之，惧非中国之利。徽宗召见，问所来之因，对曰： 辽国必亡，陛下念旧民遭涂炭之苦，复中国往昔之疆，代天谴责，以治伐乱，王师一出，必壶浆来迎。
现代文：辽国宰相左企弓等将要回到东部，粘罕想先派兵捉拿张觉，康公弼说： 这样做是逼他反叛，请让我去他那儿观察一下。 
English: Liao's Prime Minister Zuo Qigong and others were about to return to the east, and they wanted to send soldiers to capture Zhang Jue first. Kang Gongyi said, "This is to force him to rebel. Please let me go to him and observe."

古文：万一女真得志，先发制人，后发制于人，事不侔矣。 帝嘉纳之，赐姓赵氏，以为秘书丞，图燕之议自此始。
现代文：就前去见张觉。
English: He went to see Zhang Jue.

古文：迁直龙图阁，提点万寿观，加右文殿修撰。
现代文：张觉说： 契丹八路都被攻陷，现在只有平州还在，我怎敢有异心！所以没撤去兵备，是防萧干的。 
English: Zhang Jue said, "The eight roads of Khitan have all been conquered, and now only Pingzhou is still there. How dare I have a different opinion! That's why I didn't withdraw the troops. I did it to prevent a depression.

古文：宣和二年二月，使于金国，见其主阿骨打，议取燕、云。
现代文：张觉给他重贿让他回去。康公弼把张觉的话说给粘罕，粘罕相信了，升平州为南京，张觉被加官为同中书门下平章事。
English: Zhang Jue gave him a heavy bribe to let him go back. Kang Gongyi told Zhang Jue's words to Mu Han, and Mu Han believed him. Pingzhou was promoted to Nanjing, and Zhang Jue was promoted to the position of a scholar of the same school.

古文：使还，进徽猷阁待制。
现代文：左企弓、康公弼和曹勇义、虞仲文都迁到东部。
English: Zuo Qigong, Kang Gongtao, Cao Yongyi and Yu Zhongwen all moved to the east.

古文：自是将命至六七，颇能缓颊尽心，与金争议，进龙图阁直学士。
现代文：当时燕京百姓都被迁走，他们流转、离散在路上，有的到张觉那诉苦： 康公弼、左企弓等不能守燕京，使我们如此。能免除我们痛苦的，除你还有谁？ 
English: At that time, the people of Yanjing were all moved away. They wandered and dispersed on the road. Some went to Zhang Jue to complain about their hardships: Kang Gongyun, Zuo Kegui and others could not keep Yanjing and made us like this. Who else can relieve our suffering but you?

古文：既得燕山，又加延康殿学士、提举上清宫，官至光禄大夫。
现代文：张觉召僚属商议，都说： 近来听说天祚皇帝又在松漠振兴，金人所以直奔山西，是怕契丹谋取他的后方。
English: Zhang Jue called his colleagues to discuss the matter, and they all said, "Recently, we have heard that Emperor Tianmu is revitalizing Songpan again. That's why the Jin people are heading straight to Shanxi. They are afraid of the Khitan seeking his rear.

古文：良嗣言： 顷在北国，与燕中豪士刘范、李奭及族兄柔吉三人结义同心，欲拔幽、蓟归朝，沥酒于北极祠下，祈天为约，俟他日功成，即挂冠谢事，以表本心，初非取功名而徼富贵也。
现代文：公若能仗大义，迎故主来谋求复兴，责罚左企弓等的罪过并杀了他们，放纵燕人归燕，南朝应是无所不纳；倘若金人从西面来，我们内用营、平二州的兵马，外靠南朝的支援，有什么可怕的？ 张觉又向翰林学士李石询问，李石也认为可以这样。于是张觉就杀了左企弓等四人，重用契丹年号，称保大三年，在厅堂画天祚帝像，每件事都先报告后执行。又叫来百姓说 ：女真是我们的仇敌，怎能跟从？ 指着天祚帝像说： 这不是我们的国主吗，怎能背叛？
English: If the public is able to fight for the greater good, welcome the Lord to seek revival, punish the sins of Zuo Qigong and others and kill them, and indulge Yan people to return to Yan, the Southern Dynasty should be all-inclusive; if the Jin people come from the west, we will use the camp, the soldiers and horses of Ping Erzhou, and rely on the support of the Southern Dynasty, what is terrible? Zhang Jue also asked Li Shi, a scholar of Hanlin, and Li Shi also thought that this was OK. So Zhang Jue killed four people such as Zuo Qigong, reused the Qidan year, said that he was three years old, and painted the

古文：赖陛下威灵，今日之事幸而集，顾前日之约岂可欺哉？
现代文：应该相约同生死，不得已时就投奔中原。 燕人崇尚义，都跟从他。
English: It should be a matter of life and death, and when he had no choice, he went to the Central Plains. Yanren advocated righteousness, and they all followed him.

古文：愿许臣致仕，使得买田归耕，令有识者曰： 此平燕首谋之人，得请闲退，天下美事也。不然，则臣为敢欺神明，何所不至？ 凡三上章，诏不许。
现代文：于是他就使被迁移的百姓归来。李石改名叫安弼，同辽从前的三司使高党到燕山向王安中游说说 ：平州自古是军事重镇，地方数百里，甲兵十余万，张觉是文武全才，如果为我所用，定能保卫王室。不然，他西迎天祚帝，北面与萧干沟通，将成为我们的肘腋之患啊。 王安中深以为然，把这些上奏朝廷，愿以性命担保，让安弼、高党去京城。
English: So he brought the displaced people back. Li Shih changed his name to An Xuan, and together with Liao, the former three departments sent Gao Party to Yanshan to lobby Wang Anzhong, saying: Pingzhou has been a military stronghold since ancient times, with hundreds of villages, more than one hundred thousand soldiers, and Zhang Jue is an all-round talent in literature and martial arts. If he is used for me, he will be able to defend the royal family. Otherwise, he will meet Emperor Tianyu in the west and communicate with Xiao Gan in the north, which will be a problem for us. Wang Anzhong was deeply convinced, and reported these to the court. He

古文：既而朝廷纳张觉，良嗣争之云： 国家新与金国盟，如此必失其欢，后不可悔。 不听。
现代文：徽宗给詹度手谕说： 本朝与金国通好，誓言很重要，我们怎能先违背呢？金人先前所以不立即讨伐张觉，是因为金兵在关中而张觉把守榆关的缘故。现在金兵已经向东去，以后若往西来，那么张觉那几座小城，恐怕不容易抵挡金兵。
English: Huizong said to Zhandu, "This morning, we are on good terms with Jin. The oath is very important. How can we renege on it first? The reason why the Jin people did not immediately fight against Zhang Jue before was because the Jin soldiers were in the middle of the pass and Zhang Jue was guarding the pass. Now the Jin soldiers have gone to the east, and if they go to the west in the future, then Zhang Jue's several small cities may not be able to easily resist the Jin soldiers.

古文：坐夺职，削五阶。
现代文：今日之计，应暂时秘密跟他联系就行了。 
English: As of today, you should just contact him confidentially for the time being.

古文：靖康元年四月，御史胡舜陟论其结成边患，败契丹百年之好，使金寇侵陵，祸及中国，乞戮之于市。
现代文：但詹度多次诱惑张觉，劝他归降宋朝。宣和五年六月，张觉给安抚司送来书信说： 金虏凭借着虎狼之强，驱逐燕京的富家巨室，只留空城来搪塞双方的盟誓，遥想大朝，也是不得已。
English: However, Zhan Du repeatedly tempted Zhang Jue and advised him to surrender to the Song Dynasty. In June of the 5th year of Xuan He, Zhang Jue sent a letter to the Pacifying Division, saying: The Jin Rui, by virtue of the strength of the tiger and the wolf, drove out the rich giant of Yanjing, leaving only the empty city to evade the oaths of both sides. It was also a last resort to dream of the Great Dynasty.

古文：时已窜郴州，诏广西转运副使李升之即所至枭其首，徙妻子于万安军。张觉，平州义丰人也。在辽国第进士，为辽兴军节度副使。
现代文：流落的百姓借道应当管理，他们叫冤哀痛的声音，充满了道路；州中百姓不能容忍，都认为应该抗敌，来保存生灵，恢复国家，并做大朝的守备，现在已把他们全送过国界，派掌书记张钧、参谋军事张敦固到安抚司听命。 金人听说张觉反叛，派母国王率三千骑兵来讨伐，张觉率军在营州迎敌，母因为兵少，没交锋就退去，在营门上写有 今冬再来 的大字。
English: The wandering people should be managed through the road, and their voices of grievance and sorrow filled the road; the people in the state could not tolerate it, and all believed that they should resist the enemy to save lives, restore the country, and guard the Great Dynasty. Now they have all been sent across the national border, sending Zhang Xuan, the chief secretary, and Zhang Dungu, the military staff officer, to the pacification department to obey orders. The Jin people heard that Zhang Jue rebelled and sent the mother king and three thousand cavalry to fight. Zhang Jue led the army to meet the enemy in Yingzhou. Because the mother was short of soldiers, she retreated without a battle

古文：镇民杀其节度使萧谛里，觉拊定乱者，州人推领州事。
现代文：张觉就荒谬地向朝廷报捷，朝廷以平州为泰宁军，任命张觉为节度使，安弼、高党、张钧、张敦固都被任命为徽猷阁待制，宣抚司用数万银绢犒赏张觉。
English: Zhang Jue absurdly reported the victory to the imperial court. The imperial court took Pingzhou as the Tainin army and appointed Zhang Jue as the festival envoy. Anhui, Gaotang, Zhang Ye and Zhang Donggu were all appointed as Huiyang Pavilion, and the Propaganda Department rewarded Zhang Jue with tens of thousands of silver ingots.

古文：燕王淳死，觉知辽必亡，籍丁壮五万人，马千匹，练兵为备。
现代文：皇帝诏令到，张觉很高兴，走出很远去迎接。金人侦探到后，率兵前来，张觉不能返回，和他的弟弟带着皇帝的诏书跑到燕京。
English: When the emperor's edict arrived, Zhang Jue was very happy and went far away to meet him. After the Jinren detective arrived, he led the soldiers to come. Zhang Jue could not return, and he and his brother ran to Yanjing with the emperor's edict.

古文：萧后遣时立爱来知州，拒弗纳。
现代文：他的母亲妻子住在营州，为金人俘获，他弟弟听说后，立即去投降金人，献出诏书。
English: His mother's wife, who lived in Yingzhou, was captured by the Jin people. When his younger brother heard about it, he immediately went to surrender to the Jin people and presented the imperial edict.

古文：金人入燕，访觉情状于辽故臣康公弼，公弼言彼何能为，当示以不疑，乃以为临海军节度使，任知平州。
现代文：金人包围平州，张觉的堂弟和侄子固守城池，金人以招纳反叛为借口，并索要粮饷，一共攻打几个月，城中百姓有几千人突围逃走，不肯投降。金人攻占营、平二州后，开始索要张觉，王安中回避。
English: The goldsmiths besieged Pingzhou, Zhang Jue's cousin and nephew held the city, the goldsmiths used the excuse of recruiting rebels and demanded grain. They fought for several months, and several thousand people in the city broke out of the encirclement and refused to surrender. After the goldsmiths captured the camp and Ping Erzhou, they began to demand Zhang Jue, and Wang Anzhong evaded them.

古文：辽相左企弓等将归东，粘罕欲先遣兵擒觉，公弼曰： 如此是趣之叛也，我请使焉而观之。 遂往见觉。觉曰： 契丹八路皆陷，今独平州存，敢有异志？
现代文：金人索要愈来愈急，就杀了一个长相和张觉相似的人送去。
English: The goldsmith's demands became more and more urgent, so he killed a man with a similar appearance to Zhang Jue and sent him away.

古文：所以未释甲者，防萧干耳。 厚赂公弼使还。
现代文：金人说 ：这不是张觉。张觉藏在王宣抚的甲仗库中，如果不交出来，我们自己就用兵把他取来。 
English: The goldsmith said, "This is not Zhang Jue. Zhang Jue is hidden in the armoury of Wang Xuanfu. If he is not handed over, we will use our own soldiers to get him."

古文：公弼道其语，粘罕信之，升平州为南京，加觉同中书门下平章事。
现代文：王安中不得已，拉出张觉，历数他的罪状，让人用刑，张觉的话很不恭顺。杀死张觉后，把他的头装入匣中送给金人，燕地的降将和郭药师的常胜军都流下了眼泪，郭药师说： 如果金人来索要药师，怎么办？ 
English: As a last resort, Wang Anzhong pulled out Zhang Jue, counted his crimes, and let people use punishment. Zhang Jue's words were very disrespectful. After killing Zhang Jue, he put his head in a box and sent it to Jinren. Yan Di's surrender and Guo Yakushi's ever-victorious army both shed tears. Guo Yakushi said: What if Jinren comes to ask for Yakushi?

古文：企弓、公弼与曹勇义、虞仲文皆东迁。
现代文：从此降人解体，不愿为宋朝卖命，金人终于以此为借口向宋进攻。郭药师，渤海铁州人。
English: From then on, the Jin people disintegrated, unwilling to fight for the Song Dynasty, and the Jin people finally used this as an excuse to attack the Song Dynasty. Guo Yakushi, a native of Tiezhou, Bohai.

古文：郭药师，渤海铁州人也。辽之将亡，燕王淳募辽东饥民为兵，使之报怨于女真，目曰 怨军 ，药师为之渠首。明年，其两营叛，药师杀叛者罗青。
现代文：辽国快灭亡时，燕王耶律淳招募辽东饥民为兵，让他们向女真报仇怨，称为 怨军 ，郭药师担任首领。第二年，有两营的 怨军 反叛，郭药师杀了反叛者罗青。
English: When the state of Liao was on the verge of extinction, Yan Wang Ye Lu Chun recruited the starving people of Liaodong as soldiers and let them avenge their grievances against Niang Zhen, known as the "grudge army," with Guo Yaoshi as the leader. The following year, two battalions of the "grudge army" rebelled, and Guo Yaoshi killed the rebel Luo Qing.

古文：都统萧干留二千人为四营，以药师及张令徽、刘舜仁、甄五臣为将。
现代文：都统萧干留两千人分为四营，以郭药师及张令徽、刘舜仁、甄五臣为将领。
English: The two thousand people who remained in Xiao Gan in the capital were divided into four battalions, with Guo Yakushi, Zhang Linghui, Liu Yujin, and Zhen Wuxin as generals.

古文：淳建号于燕，改 怨军 为 常胜军 ，擢药师至诸卫上将军、涿州留守。
现代文：耶律淳在燕京称帝，改 怨军 为 常胜军 ，提升郭药师为诸卫上将军、涿州留守。
English: Yeluchun proclaimed himself emperor in Yanjing, changed the army of grievance to the army of permanent victory, promoted Guo Yaoshi to the general of the guards, and stayed in Zhangzhou.

古文：淳死，萧后立，萧干专，国人贰。
现代文：耶律淳死后，萧后掌权，萧干专横，辽人怀有二心。
English: After the death of Yeluchun, Xiao Hou was in power, Xiao Gan was domineering, and the Liao people were ambivalent.

古文：宣和四年九月，药师拥所部八千人奉涿、易二州来归，诏以为恩州观察使。
现代文：宣和四年九月，郭药师率所部八千人献涿、易州投降宋朝，皇上下诏任命他为恩州观察使。
English: In September of the 4th year of Xuanhe, Guo Yakushi led 8,000 people from the headquarters to offer sacrifices, Yizhou surrendered to the Song Dynasty, and the emperor appointed him as the Enzhou observation envoy.

古文：王师北讨，刘延庆与干军于卢沟，药师曰： 干以全师抗我，燕城必虚，选劲骑袭之，可得也。 延庆遣药师与诸将帅兵六千，夜半渡河，倍道而进。
现代文：宋军北伐，刘延庆同萧干在卢沟对阵，郭药师说： 萧干倾全力对抗我们，燕京一定空虚，选精骑兵去偷袭，燕京可得。 刘延庆派郭药师和几员将领率六千人，半夜渡河，兼程而行。
English: During the Northern Expedition of the Song Army, Liu Yanqing and Xiao Gan fought against each other in Lugou. Guo Yakushi said: Xiao Gan devoted all his strength to fight against us, Yanjing must be empty, select cavalry to sneak attack, Yanjing can be obtained. Liu Yanqing sent Guo Yakushi and several generals to lead six thousand people to cross the river in the middle of the night.

古文：质明，甄五臣领五千骑夺迎春门以入，大军继至，下令纳燕人降而尽杀契丹杂虏。
现代文：天刚亮，甄五臣领五千骑兵夺取迎春门进城，大军随后赶到，郭药师下令招降燕人，把契丹等族人全杀死。
English: At first light, Zhen and his five ministers led five thousand cavalry to seize the Yingchun Gate and entered the city. The large army then arrived, and Guo Yaoshi ordered the Yan people to be recruited and demoted, and all ethnic people such as Qidan were killed.

古文：药师遣人谕萧后，使趣降，后密诏萧干还战于三市，药师失马，几为所擒，遂以败还，犹进安远军承宣使。
现代文：郭药师派人告诉萧后，让她投降。萧后秘密下诏让萧干回来在三市迎战，郭药师失去战马，差点被活捉，于是败回宋营，他还被升为安远军承宣使。
English: Guo Yakushi sent someone to tell Xiao Hou to surrender. Xiao Hou secretly ordered Xiao Gan to come back and fight in the three cities. Guo Yakushi lost his war horse and was almost captured alive, so he was defeated and returned to Songying. He was also promoted to be the envoy of the Anyuan Army.

古文：十二月，拜武泰军节度使。
现代文：十二月，郭药师被任命为武泰军节度使。
English: In December, Guo Yakushi was appointed as the military envoy of the Wu Tai Army.

古文：五年正月，加检校少保，同知燕山府。
现代文：宣和五年正月，他又被加官为检校少保，同知燕山府。
English: In the first month of the 5th year of the Xuanhe era, he was promoted to the position of inspecting school junior security guard, and he also knew Yanshan Prefecture.

古文：诏入朝，徽宗礼遇甚厚，赐以甲第姬妾。
现代文：诏命他入朝，徽宗对他十分尊敬有礼，赏给他府第和姬妾。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered him to enter the imperial court, and Emperor Huizong treated him with great respect and courtesy, awarding him the title of prefect and a concubine.

古文：张水嬉于金明池，使观之，命贵戚大臣更互设宴。
现代文：在金明池戏水，让他观看，下令贵戚大臣互相设宴。
English: He ordered the minister's relatives to hold a banquet for each other.

古文：又召对于后苑延春殿，药师拜廷下，泣言： 臣在虏，闻赵皇如在天上，不谓今日得望龙颜。 帝深褒称之，委以守燕，对曰： 愿效死。 又令取天祚以绝燕人之望，变色而言曰： 天祚，臣故主也，国破出走，臣是以降。
现代文：又召他到后苑延春殿奏对，郭药师拜伏在殿下，哭着说： 我在辽国，听说赵皇如在天上，不想今日能看到您的龙颜。 皇上非常赞赏他，委他以守燕重任，他回答说 ：愿效死力。 皇上又命令他捕取天祚帝而使燕人绝望，他脸色一变说： 天祚帝，是我的旧主，国破后逃走，我才投降。
English: He also called him to the backyard of Yanchun Palace to play the accordion, and Guo Yakushi prostrated himself before His Highness, crying, "I am in Liao Province, and I heard that Emperor Zhao is in heaven, and I don't want to see your dragon face today." The Emperor greatly appreciated him and entrusted him with the important task of guarding Yan, and he replied, "I will do my best." The Emperor also ordered him to capture Emperor Tianyao, which made Yan people despair. His face changed, and he said, "Emperor Tianyao is my old master. I only surrendered after I fled the country."

古文：陛下使臣毕命他所，不敢辞，若使反故主，非所以事陛下，愿以付他人。 因涕泣如雨。
现代文：陛下派我去干别的事，我不敢推辞。若让我反旧主，我不能侍奉陛下了，希望把这件事交给别人去办。 于是泪如雨下。
English: His Majesty sent me to do something else, and I did not dare to refuse. If I were to turn against my former master, I would not be able to serve His Majesty, and I hoped to hand this matter over to someone else to handle. As a result, tears fell like rain.

古文：帝以为忠，解所御珠袍及二金盆以赐。
现代文：皇上认为他忠诚，解下自己穿的珠袍同二个金盆一起赏给他。
English: The emperor thought he was loyal, and gave him the jeweled robe he was wearing, along with two pots of gold.

古文：药师出，谕其下曰： 此非吾功，汝辈力也。 即剪盆分给之。
现代文：郭药师出来，对他的部下说： 这不是我的功劳，全是你们的力量。 就剪开金盆分给大家。
English: Guo Yakushi came out and said to his subordinates, "This is not my achievement, it is all your strength," and cut open the pots of gold for everyone.

古文：加检校少傅，归镇。
现代文：他被加官为检校少傅，回到燕山府。
English: He was promoted to school inspector and returned to Yanshan.

古文：萧干犯塞，药师破其众于峰山，生擒阿鲁太师，获耶律德光尊号宝剑检、涂金印，干寻为部下所杀。
现代文：萧干侵犯边境，郭药师在峰山攻破他的军队，活捉阿鲁太师，得到耶律德光尊号宝剑、涂金印，不久萧干被部下杀死。
English: Xiao Gan violated the border, Guo Yaoshi broke through his army at the peak of the mountain, captured Aru Taiji alive, got the sword named Yeludekuangzong and the gold stamp, and Xiao Gan was killed by his subordinates soon after.

古文：策勋加检校太傅。
现代文：郭药师因功升为检校太傅。
English: Guo Yakushi was promoted to school inspector due to his merits.

古文：初，王安中知燕山府，詹度与药师同知，药师自以节钺，欲居度上。
现代文：起初，王安中为燕山知府，詹度和郭药师为同知，郭药师认为自己有兵权，想居于詹度之上。
English: At first, Wang Anzhong was the governor of Yanshan, and Zhando and Guo Yakushi were acquaintances. Guo Yakushi thought he had military power and wanted to live above Zhando.

古文：度称御笔所书有序，药师不从。
现代文：詹度声称诏旨所写有次序，郭药师不服从。
English: Zhandu claimed that there was an order written in the imperial edict, and Guo Yaoshi disobeyed it.

古文：加以常胜军肆横，药师右之，度不能制，告于朝廷。
现代文：加上常胜军横行，郭药师袒护他们，詹度不能控制，就报告给朝廷。
English: In addition, the ever-victorious troops were rampant, Guo Yakushi protected them, and Zhan Du could not control them, so he reported them to the imperial court.

古文：虑其交恶，命度与河间蔡靖两易。
现代文：朝廷怕他俩互相怀恨在心，就命令詹度同河间的蔡靖互换。
English: The imperial court was afraid that they would hold a grudge against each other, so they ordered Zhan Du to exchange with Cai Jing.

古文：靖至，坦怀待之，药师亦重靖，稍为抑损，安中但谄事之，朝廷亦曲徇其意，所请无不从。
现代文：蔡靖到后，对郭药师坦诚相待，郭药师也尊重蔡靖，郭药师稍有收敛，王安中只是巴结他，朝廷也一味顺从他，他所请求的事没有不允许的。
English: After Cai Jing arrived, he treated Guo Yajing with sincerity. Guo Yajing also respected Guo Yajing. Guo Yajing was a bit restrained. Wang Anzhong only flattered him, and the imperial court also blindly obeyed him. There was nothing he asked for that was not allowed.

古文：良械精甲，多遣部曲贸易他道，为奇巧之物以奉权贵宦侍，于是誉言日闻。
现代文：精良的武器铠甲，大多被他派部下到别的地方贸易掉，换回些奇巧的东西送给权贵和宦官、侍从，于是赞扬他的话每天都能听到。
English: His praises were heard every day, for he sent his men to other places to trade away most of the fine weapons and armor, and to exchange them for some wonderful things to give to the magnates and eunuchs and attendants.

古文：专制一路，增募兵号三十万，而不改左衽，朝论颇以为虑。
现代文：郭药师在一路专权，增募兵士号称三十万，并且衣着不改左衽的习俗，朝中的议论认为这值得忧虑。
English: Guo Yakushi had absolute power, and it was rumored that 300,000 additional soldiers would be recruited, and the custom of not changing the left crotch in clothing. Discussions in the court considered this to be worrisome.

古文：亟拜太尉，召入朝，辞不至。
现代文：朝廷立即任命他为太尉，召他入朝，他推辞不来。
English: The imperial court immediately appointed him as a captain and summoned him to the imperial court, but he refused to come.

古文：帝令童贯行边，阴察其去就，不然，则挟之偕来。
现代文：皇上命令童贯巡视边境，暗中观察郭药师的动向，不然，就挟持他入朝。
English: The emperor ordered Tong Rong to patrol the border and secretly observe the movement of Guo Yakushi, otherwise, he would be taken into the imperial court.

古文：贯至燕，药师迎于易州，再拜帐下，贯避之，曰： 汝今为太尉，位视二府，与我等耳，此礼何为？ 药师曰： 太师，父也。
现代文：童贯到燕山，郭药师到易州去迎接，在帐下拜了两次，童贯躲避他，问 ：你现在是太尉，相当于二府的官职，和我同等，为什么用这样的礼？ 郭药师答： 太师，是父亲。
English: Tong Rong went to Yanshan, Guo Yakushi went to Yizhou to meet him, and bowed twice under the table. Tong Rong avoided him and asked: You are now a captain, equivalent to the official position of the two prefectures, and equal to me, why do you use such a ceremony? Guo Yakushi replied: Daishi, is the father.

古文：药师唯拜我父，焉知其他？ 贯释然。
现代文：药师只拜我父亲，怎知别的？ 童贯很高兴。
English: The pharmacist only worships my father, how can he know anything else? Tongran is very happy.

古文：遂邀贯视师，至于迥野，略无人迹，药师下马，当贯前掉旗一挥，俄顷，四山铁骑耀日，莫测其数。
现代文：郭药师请童贯检阅军队，在没有人迹的远野，郭药师下马，在童贯面前把旗一挥，很快，四面山中铁骑兵同太阳相映，不知有多少。
English: Guo Yakushi asked Tongrun to review the army. In the remote field where there were no traces, Guo Yakushi dismounted and waved the flag in front of Tongrun. Soon, the iron cavalrymen in the mountains on all sides were reflected in the sun. I don't know how many.

古文：贯众皆失色。
现代文：童贯一行人大惊失色。
English: Tong Yan and his party were shocked and disgraced.

古文：归为帝言，药师必能抗虏，蔡攸亦从中力主之。
现代文：童贯回来对皇上说，郭药师定能抗敌，蔡攸也从中极力赞同这种看法。
English: When Tong Rong returned, he told the emperor that Guo Yakushi would certainly be able to resist the enemy, and Cai You also strongly agreed with this view.

古文：金使贺天宁节归，送伴使见药师兵，遇之于道，金使为之敛马引避。
现代文：金国的贺天宁节使臣归国，送伴使看见郭药师的军队，他们在路上相遇，金国使臣勒马退避。
English: On the day of Hetian Ning Festival, the envoys of Jin returned to the country. The escorting envoys saw Guo Yaxi's army. They met on the road, and the envoys of Jin withdrew.

古文：乡兵或持矛揭取其羊羜，皆不敢争，奏言药师威声远振，攸益谓其可倚，故内地不复防制。
现代文：士兵中有人持矛夺取金国使臣的羔羊，金人不敢抗争，接伴使上奏说郭药师威名远震，蔡攸更认为他可依靠，因此宋在内地不再做防备。
English: One of the soldiers seized the lamb of the Chinese envoy with a spear, and the Chinese did not dare to fight back. The accompanying envoy said that Guo Yaxi's fame was far-reaching, and Cai You even thought that he could be relied on, so Song no longer took precautions in the inland.

古文：屡有告变及得其通金国书，辄不省。
现代文：多次有人告发他将谋反并得到他与金国串通的书信，宋廷还不醒悟。
English: Song Ting has not woken up to the fact that people have repeatedly accused him of plotting a rebellion and received letters that he is colluding with Kim Guo.

古文：七年十二月，詹度言： 药师瞻视不常，趣向怀异，蜂目乌喙，怙宠恃功，逆节已萌，凶横日甚。
现代文：宣和七年十二月，詹度说： 郭药师看东西的神态不同寻常，怀有异心，长着蜂眼鸟嘴，依仗自己受宠和有功，已萌生反谋，日益凶恶蛮横；现在听说他与金人交结，背叛朝廷，不久将制造祸乱，希望早做防备。 
English: In December of the 7th year of the Xuanhe era, Zhandu said: Guo Yaozhi has an unusual way of looking at things. He harbors a different heart, has a beady-eyed beak, relies on being favored and meritorious, has already sprouted a counter-plot, and is becoming increasingly vicious and arrogant. Now I hear that he is in contact with the Jin people, betraying the imperial court, and will soon create a disaster. I hope to take precautions as early as possible.

古文：今闻与金人交结，背负朝廷，兴祸不远，愿早为之虑。 始诏遣官究实，而金兵已南下破檀、蓟，至玉田。蔡靖遣药师、张令徽、刘舜仁帅师出御，其夕，令徽遁归，靖与部使者诣药师计事，药师欲降，靖曰： 靖誓死报国，此何言邪？ 引佩刀将自刭，药师抱持之，并诸使者悉锁于家。
现代文：皇上才下诏派官追查核实，而金兵已南下攻破檀、蓟二州，到达玉田。蔡靖派郭药师、张令徽、刘舜仁率军抵御，当晚，张令徽逃回，蔡靖和部使者到郭药师那儿议事，郭药师想投降，蔡靖说 ：我蔡靖誓死报国，这是什么话？ 抽出佩刀要自刎，郭药师抱住他，并把他和使者都锁在家中。
English: The emperor only issued an imperial edict to send an officer to investigate and verify, but the gold soldiers had gone south to break through the sandalwood and the two states and reached Yutian. Cai Jing sent Guo Yakushi, Zhang Linghui, and Liu Yujin to lead the army to resist. That night, Zhang Linghui fled back, Cai Jing and the envoy went to Guo Yakushi to discuss. Guo Yakushi wanted to surrender. Cai Jing said: I Cai Jing swear to die and return to the country. What is this saying? Draw a saber to commit suicide. Guo Yakushi hugged him and locked him and the envoy in the house.

古文：斡离不及郊，药师率军官迎拜，遂从以南。
现代文：斡离不到达城郊，郭药师率军官迎接并拜见了他，就跟从斡离不南下。
English: When he could not reach the outskirts of the city, Guo Yakushi and his officers greeted and visited him, and followed him to the south.

古文：叛报至，帝犹秘其事，议封为燕王，割地与之，使世守，而已无及。
现代文：郭药师反叛的消息传来，皇上还隐瞒这事，商议封他为燕王，割地给他，让他世代守在那里，但已来不及。
English: When the news of Guo Yaoshi's rebellion came, the emperor tried to cover it up. They discussed naming him the King of the Swallows, giving him land, and letting him stay there for generations, but it was too late.

古文：斡离不至庆源，闻天子内禅，欲回军，药师曰： 南朝未必有备，不如姑行。 其后趑趄京城，诘索宫省与邀取宝器服玩，皆药师导之也。
现代文：斡离不到庆源，听说徽宗禅位，想回师，郭药师说： 南朝未必有防备，不如先往前行。 以后包围汴京，责问宋廷和索取宝器服玩都是郭药师倡导的。
English: When he could not get away from Qingyuan, heard about Huizong Zen and wanted to go back to his teacher, Guo Yakushi said: The Southern Dynasty may not have prepared, it is better to go ahead. Later, Guo Yakushi advocated the encirclement of Beijing, the interrogation of Song Ting and the request for treasure clothes.

