古文：己丑，诏侍卫马军都指挥使韩令坤权知扬州军府事。庚寅，发楚州管内丁壮，开鹳河以通运路。
现代文：显德五年正月四日，右龙武将军王汉璋上奏，攻打海州。八日，朝廷征发楚州管区内丁壮民夫，开鹳河以通运输道路。
English: On the 4th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of Xiande, Wang Hanjun, the right dragon general, marched up to attack Haizhou. On the 8th day, the imperial court sent Ding Zhuang, a civil servant in the Chuzhou region, to open the Minhe River and pass the transportation road.

古文：乙巳，帝亲攻楚州。
现代文：二十三日，世宗亲自攻打楚州州城。
English: On the 23rd, Sejong personally attacked Chuzhou.

古文：于是诸将愕眙亦泣，莫敢言降。二月甲寅，伪命天长军使易赟以城归顺。
现代文：当时今上赵匡胤在楚州城北，昼夜不卸甲胄，亲身顶着弓矢炮石，指挥战士登城。二十四日，攻克楚州城，杀死伪守将张彦卿等人，六军入城大行抢掠，城内军民死亡一万多人，房屋几乎全被烧尽。二月二日，伪天长军使易赋贝献城投降。
English: At that time, the current Zhao Kuangyin was in the north of Chuzhou, day and night without removing his armor, personally carrying a bow and arrow, commanding soldiers to climb the city. On the 24th, he attacked Chuzhou City, killed the fake guard Zhang Yanqing and others, the six armies entered the city for a large-scale looting, more than 10,000 soldiers and civilians died in the city, and almost all the houses were burned down. On February 2, the fake Tianchang Army made Yi Fubei surrender the city.

古文：戊午，车驾发楚州南巡。
现代文：六日，御驾从楚州出发往南巡视。
English: On the 6th, the car set off from Chuzhou to tour the south.

古文：丁卯，驻跸于广陵，诏发扬州部内丁夫万余人城扬州。
现代文：十五日，驻驾广陵，诏令征发扬州管区内丁夫一万多人修筑扬州城。
English: On the 15th, Guangling was stationed, and more than 10,000 people from Dingfu in Yangzhou District were ordered to build Yangzhou City.

古文：帝以扬州焚荡之后，居民南渡，遂于故城内就东南别筑新垒。
现代文：世宗因为扬州在遭受焚烧扫荡之后，居民渡江向南，于是在故城内靠东南边另修新城。
English: Because the residents of Yangzhou crossed the river to the south after the city was burned and swept away, Sejong built a new city on the southeast side of the old city.

古文：戊辰，遣使祭故淮南节度使杨行密、故升府节度使徐温等墓。
现代文：十六日，派使者祭奠已故淮南节度使杨行密、已故升府节度使徐温等人坟墓。
English: On the 16th, an envoy was sent to pay tribute to the graves of Yang Xingmi, the late Huainan Festival, and Xu Wen, the late Shengfu Festival.

古文：癸酉，幸扬子渡观大江。
现代文：二十一日，世宗到扬子渡口观赏万里长江。
English: On the twenty-first day, Shizong went to the Yangtze River to watch the Yangtze River.

古文：乙亥，黄州刺史司超奏，破淮贼三千人，擒伪舒州刺史施仁望。
现代文：二十三日，黄州刺史司超上奏，打败淮南贼军三千人，擒获伪舒州刺史施仁望。
English: On the 23rd, the Huangzhou Scythian Division played a superior game, defeated 3,000 Huainan invaders, and captured the pseudo Shuzhou Scythian Division.

古文：未旬日而并人至，方盛暑，谦溥服絺绤，挥羽扇，引二小吏登城徐步，并人望之，勒兵不敢动。三月壬午朔，幸泰州。
现代文：二十四日，隰州上奏，河东贼军逃遁。当时刘钧听到世宗南征，便出兵包围隰州，巡检使李谦溥领州兵抵拒击退他们。三月一日，驾临泰州。
English: On the 24th, the invasion of Bozhou was announced, and the East Hedonist bandits fled. At that time, Liu Bei heard of Shizong's southern expedition and sent troops to surround Bozhou. The inspector sent Li Qiankun to lead the National Guard to resist and repel them. On March 1, he arrived in Taizhou.

古文：丁亥，复幸广陵。
现代文：六日，再次驾临广陵。
English: On the sixth day, he came to Guangling again.

古文：辛卯，幸迎銮江口。
现代文：九日，驾临迎銮江口。
English: On the 9th, they arrived at the mouth of the Lijiang River.

古文：乙未，殿前都虞候慕容延钊奏，大破贼军于东氵布州。
现代文：派右武卫大将军李继勋率领水军到江中岛上视察敌情。十二日，世宗到江边望见贼船几十艘，命令今上赵匡胤率战船追击，贼军退去，今上赵匡胤直抵南岸，焚烧敌营而回。
English: On the 12th, Shizong went to the river and saw dozens of pirate ships. He ordered the current Zhao Kuangyin to lead the warships to chase them. The pirate army retreated, and the current Zhao Kuangyin went straight to the south bank and burned the enemy camp before returning.

古文：丙申，江南李景遣其臣兵部侍郎陈觉奉表陈情，兼贡罗縠绢三千匹，乳茶三千斤，及香药犀象等。觉至行在，睹楼船战棹已泊于江岸，以为自天而降，愕然大骇。
现代文：十四日，殿前都虞候慕容延钊上奏，在东浠州大败贼军。十五日，江南李景派他的臣子兵部侍郎陈觉奉表陈述心意，陈觉来到世宗所在地，看见战船已停泊在长江岸边，以为是从天而降，愕然大惊。
English: On the fifteenth day, Li Jing of the Southern Yangtze River sent his vassal Chen Jue, the attendant of the military department, to present his intention. Chen Jue came to the location of Shizong and saw that the warship had anchored on the shore of the Yangtze River. He thought it was falling from the sky and was shocked.

古文：丁酉，荆南高保融奏，本道舟师已至鄂州。
现代文：十六日，荆南高保融上奏，该道水军已到鄂州。
English: On the 16th, Jingnan High-security Reunification was played, and the navy of this province has arrived in Ezhou.

古文：戊戌，两浙钱俶奏，差发战棹四百艘，水军万七千人，已泊江岸，请师期。
现代文：十七日，两浙钱亻叔上奏，派遣战船四百艘，水军一万七千人，已停靠长江岸边，请问出师日期。
English: On the 17th, the two Zhejiang Qianyun uncles made a report, dispatched four hundred warships and seventeen thousand sailors, and have docked on the shore of the Yangtze River. Please ask for the date of the division.

古文：己亥，今上率水军破贼船百余只于瓜步。
现代文：十八日，今上赵匡胤领水军在瓜步攻破贼军船只一百多艘。
English: On the 18th, the present Zhao Kuangyin Territorial Navy attacked and broke more than one hundred ships of the Kleptocratic Army at full speed.

古文：边陲顿静于烟尘，师旅便还于京阙，永言欣慰，深切诚怀。
现代文：这天，李景派他的臣子刘承遇奉表将庐、舒、蕲、黄等四州献上，又请求以长江为界划江而治。世宗回报说： 既能这样，我又复有何求。
English: On this day, Li Jing sent his vassal Liu Chengyu to present the four states of Min, Shu, Min, and Huang to the emperor, and also requested that the Yangtze River be used as the boundary to rule the river. Shizong replied: "Since I can do this, what more can I ask for?"

古文：其常、润一路及沿江兵棹，今已指挥抽退；兼两浙、荆南、湖南水陆兵士，各令罢兵；其庐、黄、蕲三路将士，亦遣抽拔近内，候彼中起揭逐处将员及军都家口丁毕，只请差人勾唤在彼将校，交割州城 云。
现代文：边陲战尘立刻平息，我朝大军马上回京。常州、润州一带沿江部队战船，现已指挥撤退；两浙、荆南、湖北的水陆兵士，也各令他们罢兵；庐、蕲、黄三路将士，将在近期撤走，等那里各处将员及军中家属调遣上路完毕，只请派人召唤在那里的将校，交割州城就行。 
English: The fighting on the border immediately subsided, and I immediately returned to Beijing with my large army. The warships of the riverside troops around Changzhou and Runzhou have now been commanded to retreat; the soldiers and sailors of Zhejiang, Jingnan and Hubei have also ordered them to disengage; the soldiers of the three routes of Zhai, Lu and Huang will be withdrawn in the near future. When the deployment of generals and military families from various places there has been completed, please just send someone to summon the officers there and hand over the state capital.

古文：淮南平，凡得州十四、县六十、户二十二万六千五百七十四。
现代文：淮南平定，共得到十四州、六十县、二十二万六千五百七十四户。
English: Huainan was pacified, with a total of 14 prefectures, 60 counties, and 226,574 households.

古文：先是，李景以江南危蹙，谋欲传位于世子，使附庸于我，故遣陈觉上表陈叙。
现代文：此前，李景因为江南危急，想传位给太子，让他附庸于周朝，所以派陈觉上表陈述。
English: Previously, because of the critical situation in the south of the Yangtze River, Li Jing wanted to pass the throne to the prince and make him a vassal of the Zhou Dynasty, so he sent Chen Jue to make a statement.

古文：其刘坦、战贻庆、李颂、徐纬、张觐等诗赋稍优，宜放及第；王汾据其文辞，亦未精当，念以顷曾剥落，特与成名；熊若谷、陈保衡皆是远人，深可嗟念，亦放及第；郭峻、赵保雍、杨丹、安元度、张昉、董咸则、杜思道等未甚苦辛，并从退黜，更宜修进，以俟将来。知贡举、右谏议大夫刘涛选士不当，有失用心，责授右赞善大夫，俾令省过，以戒当官。 
现代文：现在世宗既然答应与他互通友好，于是写信给李景，告诉他不必传位给儿子。十九日，诏令说： 因为近年来科举选拔，很是因循守旧，多次诏令有关部门，要精心考试选拔，希望取舍不要有误，优劣分明。昨日看到贡院上奏，今年新及第的进士等，所写的文章，其中有好有坏，于是命令翰林文士，再行复试，希望泾渭分明，以免玉石相混。其中刘坦等人诗赋写得较好，当让及第；王汾若据他的文辞，也不精当，念他才遭剥落，特准及第；熊若谷、陈保衡都是自远方而来，深可感念，也可及第；郭峻等未经苦学，均予斥退，希望再加努力，以待将来。主管贡举的右谏议大夫刘涛选拔士人不当，未用心尽责，贬任为右赞善大夫，使之反省过失，以亻敬他人。 
English: Now that Shizong had agreed to be on friendly terms with him, he wrote to Li Jing, telling him that he did not have to pass the throne to his son. On the 19th, the imperial edict said: Because in recent years, the selection of the imperial examinations has been very old-fashioned, the relevant departments have been repeatedly ordered by the imperial edict to carefully select the examinations, hoping that the selection will not be wrong, and the advantages and disadvantages will be clear. Yesterday, when I saw the articles written by the prelude to the Gong Academy, this year's new and first prize winners, some of which were good and bad, I ordered Hanlin scribes to retake the

古文：谔先为王师所俘，故遣之。丙午，江南李景遣所署宰相冯延巳献犒军银十万两、绢十万匹、钱十万贯、茶五十万斤、米麦二十万石。
现代文：此前，刘涛在东京公榜后，带着新入第的进士刘坦以下十五人到世宗所在地来，世宗命翰林学士李日方复试，所以有此诏令。二十一日，再一次驾临扬州。二十三日，派盐铁监使申屠谔带着书信以及御马十匹，散马四十匹，羊一千头，赐与南唐李景。
English: Previously, Liu Tao, after the Tokyo public list, came to the seat of the Sejong with fifteen people including Liu Tan, the newly ranked Jin scholar, and the Sejong ordered the Japanese side to retake the examination of Hanlin Scholar Li, so there was this imperial decree. On the 21st, he once again visited Yangzhou. On the 23rd, he sent the salt and iron inspector Shen Tuo with a letter and ten imperial horses, forty loose horses, and a thousand sheep to give the South Tang Li Jing.

古文：庚戌，诏： 故淮南节度使杨行密、故升府节度使徐温各给守冢户，应江南臣僚有先代坟墓在江北者，委所在长吏差人检校。 
现代文：申屠谔在以前被周军所俘，所以这次派他去。二十五日，南唐李景派他的宰相冯延巳献给周朝犒劳军士的银子十万两，绢十万匹，钱十万贯，茶叶五十万斤，米麦二十万石。
English: On the 25th, Southern Tang's Li Jing sent his prime minister, Feng Yanmi, to present 100,000 taels of silver, 100,000 horses, 100,000 cords of money, 500,000 catties of tea, and 200,000 kilos of rice to Zhou's sergeant-at-arms.

古文：辛亥，李景遣所署临汝郡公徐辽进买宴钱二百万并遣伶官五十人与辽俱来献寿觞。
现代文：三十日，李景派他所任命的临汝郡公徐辽进奉买宴钱二百万，并派伶官五十人与徐辽一起来为世宗祝寿。
English: On the 30th, Li Jing sent his appointed Linwu County official, Xu Liaojin, to buy the banquet money of two million, and sent fifty eunuchs with Xu Liao to celebrate Shizong's birthday.

古文：夏四月癸丑，宴从臣及江南进奉使冯延巳等于行宫，徐辽代李景捧寿觞以献，进金酒器、御衣、犀带、金银、锦绮、鞍马等。
现代文：夏四月二日，世宗在行宫宴请随从臣子以及南唐进奉使者冯延巳等，徐辽代表李景为世宗敬酒祝寿，进上金制酒具、御衣、犀带、金银、锦绮、鞍马等。
English: On the 2nd day of the 4th month of the summer, Sejong held a banquet at the palace to invite his attendants and the envoy of the Southern Tang Dynasty, Feng Yanmi, and others. The representative of Xu Liao, Li Jing, made a toast to Sejong to celebrate his birthday. Gold wine utensils, imperial robes, rhinoceros belts, gold and silver, brocades, pommel horses, etc. were brought in.

古文：辛丑，幸怀信驿。乙巳，诏在朝文资官各再举堪为幕职令录一人。戊申，以襄州节度使向训兼西南面水陆发运招讨使。己酉，以太府卿冯延鲁充江南国信使，以卫尉少卿钟谟为副。
现代文：二十六日，两浙上奏，四月十九日杭州发生火灾，房屋官府几乎延绵烧尽。五月十一日，以今上赵匡胤为忠武军节度使，仍任殿前都指挥使。淮南之战，今上赵匡胤的功劳最大，现在的任命，虽然说是赏报功勋，也只不过移镇他处而已，赏赐太轻，舆论认为不妥。二十九日，以太府卿冯延鲁任江南南唐信使，以卫尉少卿钟谟为副使。
English: On the 26th, the two Zhe were promoted, and on the 19th of April, a fire broke out in Hangzhou, and the government buildings were almost completely burned down. On the 11th of May, with the present Zhao Kuangyin as the loyal military festival envoy, he was still appointed as the commander of the palace. In the Battle of Huainan, the greatest merit of the present Zhao Kuangyin, although the current appointment is said to be a reward for meritorious service, it is just a move to another town, the reward is too light, and public opinion is not appropriate. On the 29th, the Ether prefect Feng Yanlu was appointed as the messenger of the

古文：赐李景御衣、玉带、锦绮罗縠帛共十万匹、金器千两、银器万两、御马五匹、金玉鞍辔全、散马百匹、羊三百口。
现代文：赐给李景御衣、玉带，锦绮绫罗共十万匹，金器千两，银器万两，御马五匹，金玉鞍辔齐全，散马一百匹，羊三百匹。
English: Li Jing was given a royal robe, a jade belt, 100,000 brocade horses, 1,000 pairs of gold, 10,000 pairs of silver, five royal horses, a complete set of jade saddles, 100 loose horses, and 300 sheep.

古文：赐江南世子李宏冀器币鞍马等。
现代文：赐南唐太子李弘冀器具钱币和鞍马等。
English: Southern Tang Prince Li Hongzhi was given a number of utensils, coins and saddle horses.

古文：别赐李景书曰： 皇帝恭问江南国主。
现代文：另赐李景书信说 ：皇帝恭问江南国主。
English: He also gave Li Jing a letter saying, "The emperor respectfully asks the lord of Jiangnan Province.

古文：煮海之利，在彼海滨，属疆壤之初分，虑供食之有阙。
现代文：煮水为盐，在那海滨，正遇疆土刚定，忧虑食盐有缺。
English: Boiled water is salt. On that seashore, the country is experiencing a period of instability, and there is concern about a shortage of salt.

古文：江左诸郡素号繁饶，然于川泽之间，旧无斥卤之地，曾承素旨，常在所怀，愿均收积之余，以助军旅之用。
现代文：江东各郡，一向号称繁华富饶，然而川泽之间，以前无一尺含盐之地，曾听你谈到此事，常记在我心中，愿均出收藏的多余食盐，以助军队食用。
English: The counties in the east of the Yangtze River have always been known for their prosperity and wealth. However, there was not a single foot of land containing salt between Kawazawa and Shimonoseki. When I heard you talk about this, I always kept in mind that I would like to collect excess salt to help the army eat.

古文：已下三司，逐年支拨供军食盐三十万石。 
现代文：以后由三司每年拨出食盐三十万石供应。 
English: In the future, the three divisions will allocate 300,000 koku of salt per year for supply.

古文：戊寅，诏谏议大夫宜依旧为正五品上，仍班在给事中之下。
现代文：又赐给李景今年日历一副。六月二十一日，放出以前俘虏的江南士兵四千七百人回到南唐。二十二日，有关部门上奏皇室伙食问题，世宗批示说 ：我的日常膳食，今后减少一半，其他人依旧。 
English: He also gave Li Jing a copy of this year's calendar. On June 21, the 4,700 soldiers from the south of the Yangtze River who had been captured earlier were released and returned to southern Tang. On the 22nd, the relevant departments reported on the issue of the royal family's diet, and Shizong ordered: "My daily diet will be reduced by half in the future, and the others will remain the same."

古文：秋七月癸未，以右散骑常侍高防为户部侍郎，以左骁卫上将军李洪信为右龙武统军，以左领军上将军李继勋为右羽林统军，以工部尚书田敏为太子少保，以刑部侍郎裴巽为尚书左丞，以左武卫上将军薛怀让为太子太师，以右羽林大将军李萼为右千牛卫上将军。自敏已下皆致仕。丙戌，中书门下新进册定《大周刑统》，奉敕班行天下。
现代文：二十五日，兵部尚书张昭等人撰写《太祖实录》三十卷完成，呈上，赐给器物布帛不等。秋七月七日，中书门下进上新删定的《大周刑统》，奉诏颁行天下。
English: On the 25th, Zhang Zhao and others from the Ministry of Military Affairs completed the 30 volumes of "The True Record of the Great Ancestors" and presented it to the emperor, giving him cloth and other items. On the 7th of autumn, the newly deleted "Great Zhou Code of Criminal Law" was presented to the emperor and issued to the world.

古文：丁亥，赐诸道节度使、刺史《均田图》各一面。
现代文：八日，赐给各道节度使、刺史《均田图》各一幅。
English: On the 8th, a copy of the "District-level Field Map" was given to each of the provincial festival commissioners and chief priests.

古文：唐同州刺史元稹，在郡日奏均户民租赋，帝因览其文集而善之，乃写其辞为图，以赐籓郡。
现代文：唐朝同州刺史元稹，在州郡任职时每天上奏均户民租赋，世宗因此披览他的《长庆集》而认为写得很好，于是据其文辞描画为图，以赐给州郡。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the same prefectural governor, Yuan Shikai, was in charge of the prefectures and counties. When he was in charge of the prefectures and counties, he was in charge of reporting the average household income every day. Therefore, Shizong read his "Changqing Collection" and thought that it was well written. Therefore, according to his words, he drew a picture and gave it to the prefectures and counties.

古文：己丑，太子太师致仕宋彦筠卒。
现代文：当时世宗准备均定天下赋税，所以先将此图遍赐各州。闰七月十三日，黄河冲决河阴县堤岸，淹死四十二人。
English: At that time, Shizong was preparing to equalize taxes across the country, so he first gave this map to all the states. On July 13, the Yellow River broke through the banks of Heyin County, drowning 42 people.

古文：辛丑，江南李景上表乞降，诏书不允。
现代文：二十四日，邢州留后陈思让上奏，在西山下打败河东的北汉贼军一千多人，斩首五百级。
English: On the 24th, Chen Sijian, who stayed in Zhangzhou, defeated more than a thousand North Han rebels in the West Mountain and beheaded 500 of them.

古文：九月丁巳，以太府卿冯延鲁为刑部侍郎，以卫尉少卿钟谟为给事中，并放归江南。
现代文：九月九日，以太府卿冯延鲁为刑部侍郎，以卫尉少卿钟谟为给事中，均让他们回归江南。
English: On September 9, Feng Yanlu, the chancellor of the Tai Prefecture, was appointed as the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, and Zhong Moo, the junior secretary of the Guards, was appointed as the assistant secretary, both of which allowed them to return to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：时延鲁、钟谟自江南复命，李景复奏欲传位于其世子宏冀，帝亦以书答之。
现代文：当时冯延鲁、钟谟从江南回来报告完成使命，李景又上奏想将帝位传给太子李弘冀，世宗写信回复他。
English: At that time, Feng Yanlu and Zhong Mu returned from the south of the Yangtze River to report the completion of their mission. Li Jing also wanted to pass the imperial throne to Prince Li Hongji, and Shizong wrote back to him.

古文：今差使臣往彼检括，余从别敕。
现代文：十六日，赐给南唐羊一万头，马三百匹，骆驼三十头；赐给两浙钱亻叔羊五千口，马二百匹，骆驼二十头。
English: On the 16th, he gave 10,000 head of Nantang sheep, 300 horses, and 30 camels; he gave 5,000 sheep, 200 horses, and 20 camels to two Zhejiang Qianyans.

古文：十一月丁未朔，诏翰林学士窦俨，集文学之士，撰集《大周通礼》、《大周正乐》，从俨之奏也。
现代文：二十四日，天清节，群臣到上德殿为世宗祝寿。南唐进奉使商崇仪代表李景向世宗敬酒祝寿。
English: On the 24th, Tianqing Festival, a group of courtiers came to Shangde Hall to wish Sejong a happy birthday. Li Jing, the representative of the Southern Tang Dynasty envoy Shangzong Yi, toasted Sejong's birthday.

古文：辛亥，日南至，帝御崇元殿受朝贺，仗卫如式。
现代文：冬十月二日，以户部侍郎高防为西南面水陆转运使，因为准备向巴、邛进军。
English: On the 2nd of October in the winter, Takaho, the steward of the Household Division, was appointed as the land and water transportation envoy for the southwest, because he was preparing to march to Batam and Surabaya.

古文：己未，昭义李筠奏，破辽州长清寨，获伪命磁州刺史李再兴。
现代文：十八日，诏令淮南各州乡军，全回家务农。十一月一日，诏令翰林学士窦亻严，汇同文人学士，撰集《大周通礼》、《大周正乐》。十三日，昭义军李筠上奏，攻破辽州长清寨，俘获伪磁州刺史李再兴。
English: On the 18th, he ordered the Huainan provincial and rural troops to go back to farming. On the 1st of November, he ordered the Hanlin scholar Dou Xuanyan and the Huidong literati scholar to compile the "Big Weekly Ritual" and "Big Weekly Music." On the 13th, the Shouyi army led by Li Xuan defeated the Liao governor Qingzhai and captured the pseudo-magnetic provincial poet Li Zaixing.

古文：甲子，帝狩于近郊。十二月丁丑朔，郎州奏，醴陵县玉仙观山门中，旧有田二万顷，久为山石闭塞，今年七月十七日夜，暴雷劈开，其路复通。
现代文：十二月一日，朗州上奏，醴陵县玉仙观山门中，以前有二万顷良田，长期被山石闭塞，今年七月十七日夜晚，暴雷劈开山石，那条路又被打通。
English: On December 1st, in Langzhou Shangso, Yuxianqiang Mountain Gate of Fuling County, there were 20,000 hectares of good fields in the past, which were blocked by rocks for a long time. On the evening of July 17th this year, the thunderstorm split the rocks, and the road was opened again.

古文：己亥，诏翰林学士，今后逐日起居，当直者仍赴晚朝。
现代文：三日，楚州兵马都监武怀恩被当街处死抛尸，因犯擅杀投降士兵四人之罪。十三日，楚州防御使张顺被赐死，犯在任时贪污榷税钱五十万、官丝绵二千两之罪。
English: On the third day, the commander of the Chuzhou Army and Horse Corps, Wu Huai'en, was sentenced to death on the spot for the crime of killing four soldiers who had surrendered. On the thirteenth day, Zhang Shun, the commander of the defense of Chuzhou, was sentenced to death for the crime of embezzling 500,000 yuan of tax money and embezzling 2,000 yuan of public funds while in office.

古文：是月，江南李景杀其臣伪太傅中书令宋齐丘、伪兵部侍郎陈觉、伪镇南军节度副使李徵古等。
现代文：本月，南唐李景杀死他的臣子伪太傅中书令宋齐丘、伪兵部侍郎陈觉、伪镇南军节度副使李征古等人。
English: This month, Li Jing of the Southern Tang Dynasty killed his vassals Song Qiqiu, the pseudo-taifu, the pseudo-middle-ranking military official, Chen Jue, the pseudo-servant of the military department, and Li Zhenggu, the pseudo-deputy of the Southern Army, and others.

古文：初，帝之南征也，吴人大惧，觉与徵古皆齐丘门人，因进说于景，请委国事于齐丘，景繇是衔之。
现代文：当初，世宗南征时，南唐人大为惊惧，陈觉与李征古都是宋齐丘的门客，便向李景推荐，请将国事交付给宋齐丘，李景因此记恨他们。
English: At first, when Shizong led the Southern Expedition, the Southern Tang people were greatly alarmed. Chen Jue and Li Zhenggu were both disciples of Song Qiqiu, and they recommended to Li Jing that he should hand over the affairs of state to Song Qiqiu. Li Jing hated them for this.

古文：及吴人遣钟谟、李德明奉表至行在，帝寻遣德明复命于金陵，德明因说李景请割江南之地求和于我，而陈觉、李徵古等以德明为卖国，请戮之，景遂杀德明。
现代文：当南唐派钟谟、李德明奉表到世宗所在地时，世宗旋即派李德明到金陵回报完成使命，李德明便劝李景割让江北土地向周朝求和，而陈觉、李征古等人认为李德明是卖国，请李景杀了他们，李景便杀了李德明。
English: When the Southern Tang Dynasty sent Zhong Mu and Li Deming to the location of Shizong, Shizong immediately sent Li Deming to Jinling to return and complete his mission. Li Deming then advised Li Jing to cede the land north of the Yangtze River to the Zhou Dynasty for peace, while Chen Jue, Li Zhenggu and others believed that Li Deming was a traitor and asked Li Jing to kill them. Li Jing then killed Li Deming.

古文：及江南内附，帝放钟谟南归，谟本德明之党也，因谮齐丘等，故齐丘等得罪。
现代文：当南唐归顺周朝后，世宗放钟谟回到南唐，钟谟本是李德明的同党，便说坏话陷害宋齐丘等人，所以宋齐丘获罪。
English: When Southern Tang was returned to the Shun Zhou Dynasty, Shizong pardoned Zhong Moo to return to Southern Tang. Zhong Moo, who was a member of the same party as Li Deming, slandered and framed Song Qiqiu and others, so Song Qiqiu was convicted.

古文：放齐丘归九华山，觉等贬官，寻并害之。
现代文：放逐宋齐丘回九华山，陈觉等人被贬官，旋即全部遇难。
English: Song Qiqiu was banished back to Jiuhua Mountain, Chen Jue and others were demoted, and all of them were killed immediately.

