古文：一曰：凡人之性，爪牙不足以自守卫，肌肤不足以扞寒暑，筋骨不足以从利辟害，勇敢不足以却猛禁悍。
现代文：恃君就人的本能来说，爪平不足以保卫自己，肌肤不足以抵御寒暑。筋骨不足以使人趋利避害，勇敢不足以使人击退凶猛制止强悍之物。
English: In terms of human instinct, claws are not enough to defend oneself, skin is not enough to resist the cold and heat, muscles and bones are not enough to make people seek benefits and avoid harm, and bravery is not enough to make people repel ferocity and stop powerful things.

古文：然且犹裁万物，制禽兽，服狡虫，寒暑燥湿弗能害，不唯先有其备，而以群聚邪！
现代文：然而人还是能够主宰万物，制服毒虫猛兽，使寒暑燥湿不能为害，这不正是人们事先有准备，并且能聚集吗？
English: However, people are still able to dominate all things, subdue the poisonous insects and beasts, and make the cold, hot and humid weather harmless. Isn't this exactly what people have prepared in advance and can gather?

古文：群之可聚也，相与利之也。
现代文：人们可以聚集，是因为彼此都能使对方得利。
English: People can come together because they can benefit each other.

古文：利之出于群也，君道立也。
现代文：人们在群聚中能够相互得利，君主的原则就确立了。
English: People can benefit from each other in a crowd, and the principle of the monarch is established.

古文：故君道立则利出于群，而人备可完矣。
现代文：所以，君主的原则确立了，那利益就会从群聚中产生出来了，而人事方面的准备就可以齐全了。
English: Therefore, the principle of the monarch is established, the benefit will be generated from the gathering, and the personnel preparation can be completed.

古文：昔太古尝无君矣，其民聚生群处，知母不知父，无亲戚兄弟夫妻男女之别，无上下长幼之道，无进退揖让之礼，无衣服履带宫室畜积之便，无器械舟车城郭险阻之备。
现代文：从前，远古时期没有君主，那时的人民过着群居的生括，只知道母亲而不知道父亲，没有父母兄弟夫妻男女的区别，没有上下长幼的准则，没有进退揖让的礼节，没有衣服鞋子衣带房屋积蓄这些方便人的东西，不具备器械车船城郭险隘这些东西。
English: Once upon a time, in ancient times, there were no monarchs. At that time, the people lived in groups, only knowing their mothers but not their fathers. There was no difference between parents, brothers, husbands and wives, no rules for raising children, no etiquette for entering and leaving the country, no clothes, shoes, clothing, houses, savings, these are things that are convenient for people. There were no tools, cars, boats, castles, or narrow streets.

古文：此无君之患。
现代文：这就是没有君主的祸患。
English: This is the evil of not having a monarch.

古文：故君臣之义，不可不明也。
现代文：所以君臣之问的原则，不可不明察啊。
English: Therefore, the principle of asking questions of the monarchs and ministers should not be overlooked.

古文：自上世以来，天下亡国多矣，而君道不废者，天下利之也。
现代文：从上古敢来，天下灭亡的国家很多了，可是君主的原则却不废掉，因为这是对天下有利的。
English: From time immemorial, there have been many countries that have perished, but the principle of monarchy has not been abolished, because it is beneficial to the world.

古文：故废其非君，而立其行君道者。
现代文：所以要废掉那些不按君主原则行事的人，拥立那些按君主原则行事的人。君主的原则是什么？
English: Therefore, those who do not act according to the principle of monarchy should be abolished, and those who act according to the principle of monarchy should be supported. What is the principle of monarchy?

古文：君道何如？利而物利章。
现代文：就是把为人民谋利而自己不谋私利作为准则。
English: That is, the principle of seeking the interests of the people and not seeking one's own interests.

古文：北滨之东，夷秽之乡，大解、陵鱼、其、鹿野、摇山、扬岛、大人之居，多无君；扬、汉之南，百越之际，敝凯诸、夫风、余靡之地，缚娄、阳禺、驩兜之国，多无君；氐、羌、呼唐、离水之西，僰人、野人、篇笮之川，舟人、送龙、突人之乡，多无君；雁门之北，鹰隼、所鸷、须窥之国，饕餮、穷奇之地，叔逆之所，儋耳之居，多无君。
现代文：非滨以东，夷人居住的秽国，大解、陵鱼，其、鹿野、摇山、扬岛、大人等部族居住的地方，大都没有君主；扬州，汉水以南，百越人住的地方，敝凯诸，夫风、余靡等部族那里，缚娄、阳禺、驩兜等国家，大都没有君主，氐族、羌族，呼唐、离水以西，僰人、野人、篇笮川那里，舟人、送龙、突人等部族居住的地方，大都没有君主，雁门以北，鹰隼、所鸷、须窥等国家，饕餮、穷奇等部族那里，叔逆族那里，儋耳族居住的地方，大都没有君主。
English: To the east of Binhai, there are no monarchs in the countries where the barbarians live, such as Zhuang, Dalia, Lingyu, Su, Luye, Shaking Mountain, Yangdao, and other tribes. In Yangzhou, south of Hanshui, there are no monarchs in the countries where the Baiyue people live, such as Xingkai, Fufeng, Yimai, and other tribes. In the countries where there are no monarchs in the countries where there are no monarchs in the countries where there are no monarchs in the countries where there are no monarchs in the countries where there are no monarchs in the countries where there are no monarchs in the

古文：此四方之无君者也。
现代文：这是四方没有君主的地方。
English: This is a place where there is no ruler on four sides.

古文：其民麋鹿禽兽，少者使长，长者畏壮，有力者贤，暴傲者尊，日夜相残，无时休息，以尽其类。圣人深见此患也，故为天下长虑，莫如置天子也；为一国长虑，莫如置君也。
现代文：那里的人民象麇鹿禽兽一样，年轻人役使老年人，老年人畏惧牡年人，有力气的人就被认为贤德，残暴骄横的人就受到尊重，人们日夜互相残害，没有停息的时候，以此来灭绝自己的同类，圣人清楚地看到这样做的危害，所以为天下做长远的考虑，没有比设立天子更好的了，为一国做长远的考虑，没有比设立国君更好的了。
English: The people there are like deer and beasts, the young serve the old, the old fear the young, the powerful are considered virtuous, the cruel and arrogant are respected, people kill each other day and night, without stopping, in order to exterminate their own kind. The sage clearly saw the harm of doing this, so for the world to make long-term considerations, there is nothing better than to establish a godson, and for a country to make long-term considerations, there is nothing better than to establish a sovereign.

古文：置君非以阿君也，置天子非以阿天子也，置官长非以阿官长也。
现代文：设立国君不是为了让国君谋私利，设立天子不是为了让天子谋私利，设立官长不是为了让官长谋私利。
English: The establishment of the sovereign is not for the sovereign to seek personal gain, the establishment of the divine son is not for the divine son to seek personal gain, and the establishment of officials is not for the officials to seek personal gain.

古文：德衰世乱，然后天子利天下，国君利国，官长利官。
现代文：等到道德衰微世道混乱的时代，然后天子才凭借天下谋私利，国君才凭惜国家谋私制，官长才凭借官职谋私利。
English: Wait until the era of moral decline and chaos in the world, and then the heavenly son will seek personal gain by relying on the world, the sovereign will seek personal gain by sparing the country, and the officials will seek personal gain by virtue of their official position.

古文：此国所以递兴递废也，乱难之所以时作也。
现代文：这就是国家一个接一个兴起、一个接一个灭掉的原因，这就是混乱灾难所以时时发生的原因。
English: This is the reason why countries rise and fall one after another, and why chaos and disaster occur all the time.

古文：故忠臣廉士，内之则谏其君之过也，外之则死人臣之义也。
现代文：所以忠臣和廉正之士，对内就要敢于劝谏自己国君的过错，对外就要敢于为维护臣子的道义而献身。
English: Therefore, loyal subjects and men of integrity must dare to dissuade the faults of their sovereigns at home, and must dare to devote themselves to upholding the morals of their subjects abroad.

古文：豫让欲杀赵襄子，灭须去眉，自刑以变其容，为乞人而往乞于其妻之所。
现代文：豫让想刺杀赵襄子，就剃掉胡须眉毛，自己动手毁坏了面容，装扮成乞丐去他妻子那里乞讨。
English: Yu Zhen wanted to assassinate Zhao Xiangzi, so he shaved off his beard and eyebrows, destroyed his face with his own hands, and dressed up as a beggar to beg from his wife.

古文：其妻曰： 状貌无似吾夫者，其音何类吾夫之甚也？ 
现代文：他的妻子说： 这个人相貌没有象我丈夫的地方，他的声音怎么这样象我的丈夫呀? 
English: His wife said, "This man looks nothing like my husband, how come his voice sounds so much like my husband?"

古文：又吞炭以变其音。
现代文：他又吞炭改变了自己的声音。
English: He swallowed again and changed his voice.

古文：其友谓之曰： 子之所道甚难而无功。
现代文：他的朋友对他说； 您所选取的道路很艰难而且没有什么功效。
English: His friend said to him; The path you have chosen is difficult and of little avail.

古文：谓子有志则然矣，谓子智则不然。
现代文：要说您有决心那是对的，要说您聪明那就不对了。
English: To say that you are determined is right, to say that you are clever is wrong.

古文：以子之材而索事襄子，襄子必近子。
现代文：凭着您的才干去请求侍奉襄子，襄子必定亲近您。
English: With your talent, ask to serve the Son, and the Son will draw near to you.

古文：子得近而行所欲，此甚易而功必成。 
现代文：您受到亲近然后再做您想做的事，这样就会很容易而且必定能成功。 
English: You will be approached and encouraged to do what you want to do, and it will be easy and sure to succeed.

古文：豫让笑而应之曰： 是先知报后知也，为故君贼新君矣，大乱君臣之义者无此，失吾所为为之矣。
现代文：豫让笑着回答他说： 你说的这种做法是为了先知遇自己的人而去报复后知遇自己的人，是为了过去的主人而去杀害新的主人，使君臣之间的准则大乱的事没有比这更大的了，这就失去我所以要行刺的目的了。
English: Yu Zheng answered him with a smile, "You said that this kind of action was for the purpose of the prophet meeting his own people and taking revenge on those who later met him, and for the purpose of killing the new master for the sake of the past master, so that there would be no greater thing than this to cause chaos among the princes and ministers. This would defeat the purpose of my assassination.

古文：凡吾所为为此者，所以明君臣之义也，非从易也。 
现代文：我要行刺的目的，是为了让君臣之间的道义彰明，并不是要抛弃君臣之义选取容易的道路。 
English: The purpose of my assassination is to make the morality between monarchs and subjects clear, not to abandon the righteousness of monarchs and subjects and choose an easy path.

古文：柱厉叔事莒敖公，自以为不知，而去居于海上。
现代文：柱厉叔侍奉莒敖公，自己认为不被知遇，因而离开敖公到海边居住。
English: Uncle Zhu Li served Shao Gong, but he thought that he was not well-known, so he left Shao Gong to live by the sea.

古文：夏日则食菱芡，冬日则食橡栗。
现代文：夏天吃菱角芡实，冬天吃橡树籽。
English: In summer, eat horse chestnuts, and in winter, eat oak seeds.

古文：莒敖公有难，柱厉叔辞其友而往死之。
现代文：莒敖公遇难，柱厉叔辞别他的朋友要为敖公击死。
English: When Shigong encountered a crisis, Uncle Zhu Li told a friend that he was going to quit his job and work hard for Shigong.

古文：其友曰： 子自以为不知故去，今又往死之，是知与不知无异别也。 柱厉叔曰： 不然。
现代文：他的朋友说： 您自己认为不被知遇所以离开他，如争又要为他去死，这样看来，被知遇与不被知遇就没有什么区别了， 柱厉叔说； 不是这样。
English: His friend said: You yourself think that you will not be found out, so you leave him, and if you fight, you will die for him, so it seems that there is no difference between being found out and not being found out, Uncle Zhu Li said; this is not the case.

古文：自以为不知故去，今死而弗往死，是果知我也。
现代文：我自己认为不被知遇，所既离开了他，如今他死了我却不为他去死，这就表明他果真了解我是不忠不义之臣了。
English: I myself thought that I would not be found out, so I left him, and now that he is dead, I will not die for him, which shows that he really understands that I am a disloyal and unjust minister.

古文：吾将死之，以丑后世人主之不知其臣者也，所以激君人者之行，而厉人主之节也。
现代文：我将为他而死，以便使后世当君主却不了解自己臣子的人感到惭愧，用以激励君主的品行，磨砺君主的节操。
English: I will die for him in order to make the future monarchs who do not understand their subjects feel ashamed, to inspire the monarch's behavior, and to sharpen the monarch's self-control.

古文：行激节厉，忠臣幸于得察。忠臣察则君道固矣。 
现代文：君主的品行得到激励，节操受到磨砺，忠臣就有可能被了解，忠臣被了解，那么为君之道就牢固了。 
English: If the conduct of the monarch is encouraged, and his self-restraint is sharpened, then it is possible for loyal subjects to be understood, and if loyal subjects are understood, then the way of the monarch is strengthened.

古文：二曰：天下之士也者，虑天下之长利，而固处之以身者也。
现代文：长利天下杰出的凡士，考虑的是天下长远的利益，而自己必定要身体力行。
English: The outstanding ordinary people in the world consider the long-term interests of the world, and they must do their best.

古文：利虽倍于今，而不便于后，弗为也；安虽长久，而以私其子孙，弗行也。
现代文：即使对现在有加倍的利益，只要对后世不利，也不去做，即使能长久安定，只要这些是为自己的子孙谋利，也不去做。
English: Even if there is a double benefit for the present, as long as it is unfavorable to future generations, they will not do it. Even if it can be stable for a long time, as long as it is for the benefit of their children and grandchildren, they will not do it.

古文：自此观之，陈无宇之可丑亦重矣，其与伯成子高、周公旦、戎夷也，形虽同，取舍之殊，岂不远哉？
现代文：由此看来，陈无宇的贪婪可耻也很严重了，他与伯成子高、周公旦、式夷相比，虽然同是人，但取舍的不同，相差难道不是很远吗?
English: From this point of view, Chen Wuyu's greed is shameful and serious. Compared with Bao Cheng Zigao, Zhou Gongdan and Shiyi, although he is the same person, his choice is different. Isn't the difference very far?

古文：尧治天下，伯成子高立为诸侯。
现代文：尧管理天下时，伯成子高立为诸侯。
English: When he was in charge of the whole country, Bao Chengzi was elevated to the position of vassal.

古文：尧授舜，舜授禹，伯成子高辞诸侯而耕。
现代文：尧把帝位让给舜，舜把帝位让给禹，伯成子高就辞去诸侯去耕种。
English: Yao abdicated the imperial throne to Yao, Yao abdicated the imperial throne to Yu, and Baocheng Zigao resigned from his position as vassal to go farming.

古文：禹往见之，则耕在野。
现代文：禹去见他，他正在田里耕种。
English: Yu went to see him. He was ploughing a field.

古文：禹趋就下风而问曰: 尧理天下，吾子立为诸侯。
现代文：禹快步走到下风头问道： 尧管理天下时，您立为诸侯。
English: Yu quickly stepped into the limelight and asked: "When you were in charge of the world, did you set yourself up as a prince?

古文：今至于我而辞之，故何也？ 
现代文：现在传到我这里您却辞去诸侯，这是什么原因呢? 
English: Now it has come to me that you are resigning from the lordship. What is the reason for this?

古文：伯成子高曰： 当尧之时，未赏而民劝，未罚而民畏。民不知怨，不知说，愉愉其如赤子。
现代文：伯成子高说： 尧的时候，不奖赏可是人们却勉力向善，不惩罚可是人们却畏惧为非。
English: Hecheng Zigao said, "When there is no reward, people try their best to be good, and when there is no punishment, people are afraid to do wrong.

古文：今赏罚甚数，而民争利且不服，德自此衰，利自此作，后世之乱自此始。
现代文：人们不知道什么是怨恨，不知道什么是高兴，就象小孩子一样和悦。现在奖赏和惩罚很频繁，可是人们却争利而且不顺服，道德从此衰微了，谋私利的事从此兴起了，后世的混乱从此开始了。
English: People do not know what resentment is, do not know what happiness is, just like children, they are happy. Now rewards and punishments are frequent, but people compete for profits and disobey. Morality has since declined, self-interest has since arisen, and the chaos of the hereafter has begun.

古文：夫子盍行乎？
现代文：先生您为什么不走呢？
English: Sir, why don't you leave?

古文：无虑吾农事！ 
现代文：您不要打扰我耕种的事。 
English: Don't interfere with my farming.

古文：协而耰，遂不顾。
现代文：说罢，面带和悦之色来覆盖种子，不再回头看禹。
English: Say it, wear a happy face to cover the seed, and don't look back.

古文：夫为诸侯，名显荣，实佚乐，继嗣皆得其泽，伯成子高不待问而知之，然而辞为诸侯者，以禁后世之乱也。
现代文：当个诸侯，名声显赫荣耀，实际情况又很安逸快乐，后嗣都能得到恩惠，这些，伯成子高不须问便能知道，然而却推辞不当诸侯，这是为了以此制止后世的混乱啊!
English: To be a vassal, the fame is great and glorious, the actual situation is very comfortable and happy, and the heirs can receive favors. These are things that Boseongjigao can know without asking, but he has rejected the vassals. This is in order to stop the chaos of the future!

古文：辛宽见鲁缪公曰: 臣而今而后，知吾先君周公之不若太公望封之知也。
现代文：辛宽见到鲁穆公以后说： 我从今以后，知道了我们先君周公在受封的问题上不如太公望聪明。
English: After seeing Prince Rumu, Xin Kuan said, "From now on, I know that our predecessor, Prince Zhou, was not as clever as Taigongvang in the matter of being given the title.

古文：昔者太公望封于营丘之渚，海阻山高，险固之地也。是故地日广，子孙弥隆。
现代文：从前太公望被封到营丘一带滨海之地，那里是海阻山高，险要坚固的地方，所以地域日益广大，子孙越来越昌盛。
English: In the past, Tai Gongwang was sealed to the coastal land around Yingqiu, where the sea resistance was high and almost solid, so the area became more and more extensive, and the descendants became more and more prosperous.

古文：吾先君周公封于鲁，无山林溪谷之险，诸侯四面以达。是故地日削，子孙弥杀。 
现代文：我们先君周公被封到鲁国，这里没有山林溪谷之险，诸侯从四面都可以侵入，所以地域日益缩小，子孙越来越衰撤。 
English: Our forefather, King Zhou, was exiled to the State of Lu. There is no danger of mountains, valleys, or streams here. Princes can invade from all directions. Therefore, the region is shrinking day by day, and the descendants are fading away.

古文：辛宽出，南宫括入见。
现代文：辛宽出去以后，南官括进来见穆公。
English: After Xin Kuan went out, the Southern officials came to see Mu Gong.

古文：公曰： 今者宽也非周公，其辞若是也。 
现代文：穆公说： 刚才辛宽责备周公，他的话是如此如此说的。 
English: Mu Gong said: Just now, Xin Guang rebuked Zhou Gong, and his words were as follows.

古文：南宫括对曰： 宽少者，弗识也。君独不闻成王之定成周之说乎？
现代文：南宫括回答说： 辛宽是个年幼无知的人，不懂道理，您难道没有听说过成王建成成周时说的话吗?
English: Nan Gong Quan replied, "Xin Kuan is a young and ignorant person, he does not understand reason. Haven't you heard what Cheng Wang Jian Cheng Zhou said?

古文：其辞曰： 惟余一人，营居于成周。惟余一人，有善易得而见也，有不善易得而诛也。 
现代文：他说的是： 我营建并居住在成周，我有好地方容易被发现，不好的地方容易受责备。 
English: What he said was: I build and live in Chengzhou, I have good places that are easy to find, bad places that are easy to blame.

古文：故曰善者得之，不善者失之，古之道也。
现代文：所以说，做好事的人得天下，干坏事的人失天下，这是自古以来的规律。
English: Therefore, people who do good things gain the world, and people who do bad things lose the world. This has been the rule since ancient times.

古文：夫贤者岂欲其子孙之阻山林之险以长为无道哉？
现代文：贤德的人难道想让自己的子孙凭借山林之险来长久地干无道之事吗?
English: Do virtuous people want their children and grandchildren to rely on the perils of the mountains and forests to do useless things for a long time?

古文：小人哉宽也！ 
现代文：辛宽是个小人啊！ 
English: Xin Kuan is a villain!

古文：今使燕爵为鸿鹄凤皇虑，则必不得矣。
现代文：如果让燕雀为鸿鹄凤凰谋划，那一定不会得当。
English: If you ask a sparrow to plan for a phoenix, it won't work.

古文：其所求者，瓦之间隙，屋之翳蔚也，与一举则有千里之志，德不盛、义不大则不至其郊。
现代文：它们所谋求的，只不过是瓦缝之间、屋檐之下罢了，哪里比得上鸿鹄凤凰一飞就有飞千里的志向，如果君主品德不隆厚、道义不宏大，就不飞到他的郊野。
English: What they seek is only between the tiles and under the eaves. No matter where they are, they have the ambition to fly thousands of miles as soon as they fly. If the monarch's character is not noble and moral is not grand, they will not fly to his countryside.

古文：愚庳之民，其为贤者虑，亦犹此也。
现代文：愚昧卑下的入，他们为贤德的入谋划，也和这相同。
English: So is the way of folly and of the base: but the way of understanding they have devised.

古文：固妄诽訾，岂不悲哉？
现代文：固陋狂妄，横加诽谤，难道不是很可悲吗?
English: Isn't it sad to be so arrogant and slanderous?

古文：戎夷违齐如鲁，天大寒而后门，与弟子一人宿于郭外。
现代文：式夷离开齐国到鲁国去，天气非常冷，城门关闭后才到达，就跟一个学生露宿城外。
English: Shiyi left Qi Province to go to Lu Province. The weather was very cold. He arrived after the city gate was closed, and he and a student camped outside the city.

古文：寒愈甚，谓其弟子曰： 子与我衣，我活也；我与子衣，子活也。
现代文：冷得越来越厉害了，他就对自己的学生说； 你把衣服给我，我就能活命；我把衣服给你，你就能活命。
English: As the cold became more and more severe, he said to his pupil; Give me your clothes and I will live; give me your clothes and you will live.

古文：我，国士也，为天下惜死；子，不肖人也，不足爱也。
现代文：我是国家杰出的人，为天下着想会不得死，你是个不贤德的人，不值得爱惜生命。
English: I am an outstanding person of the country, I will not die for the sake of the world, you are an unvirtuous person, you do not deserve to cherish life.

古文：子与我子之衣。 
现代文：你把你的衣服给我吧。 
English: You can give me your clothes.

古文：弟子曰： 夫不肖人也，又恶能与国士之衣哉？ 
现代文：学生说。 不贤德的人，又怎么能给国家杰出的人衣服呢? 
English: The student said, "How can a person who is not virtuous give clothes to the outstanding people of the country?

古文：戎夷太息叹曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：式夷长叹一声说： 哎！
English: The chief priest sighed and said, "Oh!

古文：道其不济夫！ 
现代文：道义大概行不通啦! 
English: Morality probably doesn't work!

古文：解衣与弟子，夜半而死。
现代文：说罢就脱下自己的衣服给了学生，半夜里冻死了。
English: As soon as he said that, he took off his clothes and gave them to the student. He froze to death in the middle of the night.

古文：弟子遂活。
现代文：学生终于括命了。
English: The student eventually died.

古文：谓戎夷其能必定一世，则未之识。
现代文：要说式夷的才能一定能让整个社会安定，那是不能知道的。
English: It is impossible to say that the talent of Shikiichi will definitely make the whole society stable.

古文：若夫欲利人之心，不可以加矣。
现代文：至于他想对别人有利的思想，那是无以复加了。
English: As for the idea that he wanted to do good to others, that is beyond question.

古文：达乎分，仁爱之心识也，故能以必死见其义。
现代文：他通晓死和生的区别，仁爱之心是很诚恳的，所以他能用必死的行为来显示自己的道义。
English: He knows the difference between life and death, and his benevolence is very sincere, so he can show his morality with the act of dying.

古文：三曰：达士者，达乎死生之分。
现代文：知分通达事理的人士，通晓死生之义。
English: Intelligent and rational people know the meaning of life and death.

古文：达乎死生之分，则利害存亡弗能惑矣。
现代文：通晓死生之义，那么利害存亡就不能使之迷惑了。
English: Knowing the meaning of life and death, the interest of survival can not be confused.

古文：故晏子与崔杼盟而不变其义。延陵季子，吴人愿以为王而不肯。孙叔敖三为令尹而不喜，三去令尹而不忧。
现代文：所以，晏子与崔杼盟誓时，能够不改变自己遵守的道义；廷陵季子，吴国人愿意让他当王他却不肯当，孙叔敖几次当令尹并不显得高兴，几次不当令尹并不显得忧愁。
English: Therefore, when Yao Zi and Cui Gan swore an oath, they could not change the moral principles they observed; Tingling Ji Zi, the people of Wu were willing to let him be king, but he refused to be, Sun Shuxuan did not seem happy when he ordered Yin several times, and he did not seem sad when he ordered Yin several times.

古文：皆有所达也。
现代文：这是因为他们都通晓理义啊。
English: It's because they all understand reason.

古文：有所达则物弗能惑。
现代文：通晓理义，那么外物就不能使之迷惑了。
English: If you understand the truth, then you will not be confused by external things.

古文：荆有次非者，得宝剑于干遂。
现代文：楚国有个叫次非的，在干遂得到了一把宝剑。
English: In the state of Chu, there is a notorious person who got a sword for his efforts.

古文：还反涉江，至于中流，有两蛟夹绕其船。
现代文：回来的时候渡长江，到了江心，有两条蛟龙从两也缠绕住他乘坐的船。
English: When he returned, he crossed the Yangtze River, and when he reached the middle of the river, two dragons from the two sides surrounded the boat he was on.

古文：次非谓舟人曰： 子尝见两蛟绕船能两活者乎？ 
现代文：次非对船工说。 你曾见到过两条蛟龙缠绕住船、龙和船上的人都能活命的吗? 
English: He said to the boatman, "Have you ever seen two dragons coiled around a boat, and both the dragon and the people on the boat survived?"

古文：船人曰： 未之见也。 
现代文：船工蜕： 没有见到过。 
English: Shipwright: I haven't seen any.

古文：次非攘臂袪衣，拔宝剑曰： 此江中之腐肉朽骨也！弃剑以全己，余奚爱焉！ 
现代文：次非捋起袖子，伸出胳膊，撩起衣服，拔出宝剑，说， 我至多不过成为江中的腐肉朽骨罢了，如果丢掉剑能保全自己，我何必要舍不得宝剑呢？ 
English: The second time, he rolled up his sleeves, stretched out his arms, rolled up his clothes, and pulled out his sword, saying, "At best, I am nothing more than rotting flesh in the river. If I can save myself by throwing away my sword, why should I not be willing to give up my sword?"

古文：于是赴江刺蛟，杀之而复上船。
现代文：于是跳到江里去刺蛟龙，杀死蛟龙后又上了船。
English: So he jumped into the river to catch the dragon. After killing the dragon, he got on the boat.

古文：舟中之人皆得活。
现代文：船里的人全都得以活命了。
English: Everyone on board survived.

古文：荆王闻之，仕之执圭。
现代文：楚王听到这事以后，封他为执圭之爵。
English: After King Chu heard about this, he made him a peer.

古文：孔子闻之曰： 夫善哉！不以腐肉朽骨而弃剑者，其次非之谓乎！ 
现代文：孔子听到这事以后说： 好啊，不因为将成为腐内朽骨而丢掉宝剑的，大概只有次非能做到吧! 
English: After hearing this, Confucius said, "Well, if you don't throw away your sword because you will become rotten bones, you can probably only do it twice!"

古文：禹南省，方济乎江，黄龙负舟。
现代文：禹到南方巡视，当他渡江的时候，一条黄龙把他乘的船驮了起来。
English: Yu went to the south for inspection. When he crossed the river, a yellow dragon tied up the boat he was on.

古文：舟中之人五色无主。
现代文：船上的人大惊失色。
English: The people on board were stunned.

古文：禹仰视天而叹曰： 吾受命于天，竭力以养人。
现代文：禹仰脸朝天感慨地说： 我从上天接受使命，尽力养育人民。
English: Yu Yang looked up to heaven and said with emotion: I accept the mission from heaven and do my best to nurture the people.

古文：生，性也；死，命也。
现代文：生和死都是命中注定的。
English: Life and death are predetermined.

古文：余何忧于龙焉？ 
现代文：我对龙有什么害怕的呢? 
English: What do I have to fear from a dragon?

古文：龙俯耳低尾而逝。
现代文：龙伏下耳朵垂下尾巴游开了。
English: The dragon swam away with its ears down and tail hanging down.

古文：则禹达乎死生之分、利害之经也。
现代文：这样看来，禹是通晓死生之义、利害之道了。
English: From this perspective, Yu is well-versed in the meaning of life and death, and the way of interests.

古文：凡人物者，阴阳之化也。
现代文：凡是人和物，都是阴阳他育而成的。
English: All people and things are born of yin and yang.

古文：阴阳者，造乎天而成者也。
现代文：阴阳是由天创造而形成的。
English: Yin and yang are created by the heavens.

古文：天固有衰嗛废伏，有盛盈蚠息；人亦有困穷屈匮，有充实达遂。
现代文：天本来就有衰微、亏缺、毁弃、隐伏，有兴盛、盈余、聚积，生息；人也有困顿、窘迫、贫穷、匮乏，有充足、富饶、显贵、成功。
English: In nature, there is decline, deficiency, abandonment, concealment; there is prosperity, surplus, accumulation, and growth; there is also hardship, distress, poverty, and scarcity; there is sufficiency, abundance, prominence, and success.

古文：此皆天之容、物理也，而不得不然之数也。
现代文：这些都是天包容万物的原则，是命运不得不如此的规律。
English: These are the principles of heaven's tolerance of all things, and they are the laws that fate has to follow.

古文：古圣人不以感私伤神，俞然而以待耳。
现代文：古代的圣人不因自己的私念伤害神性，只是安然地对待罢了。
English: The ancient sages did not harm divinity because of their selfish thoughts, but simply treated it with equanimity.

古文：晏子与崔杼盟。
现代文：晏予与崔杼盟誓。
English: I made a vow with Choe Heon.

古文：其辞曰： 不与崔氏而与公孙氏者，受其不祥！ 
现代文：崔杼的誓词说： 不亲附崔氏而亲附齐国公室的，遭受祸殃! 
English: Cui Gan's oath says: Woe to those who are not close to the Cui clan, but are close to the Qi government!

古文：晏子俯而饮血，仰而呼天曰： 不与公孙氏而与崔氏者，受此不祥！ 
现代文：晏子低下头含了血，仰起头向上天呼告说， 不亲附齐国公室而亲附崔氏的，遭受这祸殃! 
English: The cripple bowed his head with blood on it, raised his head and shouted to the heavens, "If you don't side with the Qi government and side with the Cui family, you will suffer this calamity!"

古文：崔杼不说，直兵造胸，句兵钩颈，谓晏子曰： 子变子言，则齐国吾与子共之；子不变子言，则今是已！ 晏子曰： 崔子，子独不为夫《诗》乎！
现代文：崔杼很不高兴，用矛顶着他的胸，用戟勾住他的颈，对晏子说； 你改变你的话。那么我跟你共同享有齐国；你不改变你的话，那么现在就杀死你！ 晏子说： 崔子，你难道没有学过《诗》吗?
English: Cui Yao was very upset. He held a spear to Cui Yao's chest and hooked him around the neck with a hoe. He said to Cui Yao, "If you change your words, then I will share Qi with you; if you don't change your words, then I will kill you right now!" Cui Yao said, "Cui Yao, haven't you ever studied "Poetry"?

古文：《诗》曰: 莫莫葛藟，延于条枚。
现代文：《诗》中说： 密麻麻的葛藤，爬上树干桂头。
English: "Poetry" said: The dense struggle, climb up the tree trunk to the top.

古文：凯弟君子，求福不回。 
现代文：和悦近人的君子，不以邪道求福。 
English: A gentleman who is friendly and approachable does not seek happiness in evil ways.

古文：婴且可以回而求福乎？
现代文：我难道能够以邪道求福吗?
English: Can I seek happiness in the wrong way?

古文：子惟之矣！ 
现代文：你考虑考虑这些话吧! 
English: Think about what you're saying!

古文：崔杼曰： 此贤者，不可杀也。 
现代文：崔杼说； 这是个贤德的人，不可以杀死他。 
English: "This is a virtuous person, you can't kill him," Cui said.

古文：罢兵而去。
现代文：于是崔杼撒去兵器离开了。
English: So Choe Ceasar went to his weapons and left.

古文：晏子援绥而乘，其仆将驰，晏子抚其仆之手曰: 安之！毋失节！
现代文：晏子拉着车上的绳索上了车，他的车夫要赶马快跑，晏子抚摸着车夫的手说： 安稳点，不要失去常态!
English: The mule pulled the rope on the cart and got on the cart. His coachman wanted to run fast. The mule stroked the hand of the coachman and said, "Steady, don't lose your balance!"

古文：疾不必生，徐不必死。
现代文：快了不一定就能活，慢了不一定就会死。
English: If it's fast, you might live, if it's slow, you might die.

古文：鹿生于山，而命悬于厨。
现代文：鹿生长在山上，可是它的命却掌握在厨师手里。
English: The deer grows in the mountains, but its life is in the hands of the chef.

古文：今婴之命有所悬矣。 
现代文：如今我的命也有人掌握着了。 
English: Now my life is in someone else's hands.

古文：晏子可谓知命矣。
现代文：晏子可以说是懂得命了。
English: The mule can be said to know how to die.

古文：命也者，不知所以然而然者也。
现代文：命指的是不知为什么会这样但却终于这样了。
English: I don't know why it's happening, but it's finally happening.

古文：人事智巧以举错者，不得与焉。
现代文：靠耍聪明乖巧来做事的人，是不能领会这些的。
English: People who do things by being clever and well-behaved can't understand this.

古文：故命也者，就之未得，去之未失。
现代文：所以命这东西，靠近它未必能得到，离开它未必能失去。
English: Therefore, it is not possible to gain life by being close to it, and it is not possible to lose it by leaving it.

古文：国士知其若此也，故以义为之决而安处之。
现代文：国家杰出的人知道命是如此，所以按照义的原则决断，安然地对待它。
English: The outstanding people of the country know that life is like this, so they make a decision according to the principle of righteousness and treat it safely.

古文：白圭问于邹公子夏后启曰: 践绳之节，四上之志，三晋之事，此天下之豪英。
现代文：白圭向邹公子夏后启问道； 正直之士的节操，平民百姓的志向，三家分晋的事情，这些都是天下最杰出的。
English: Bai Gui asked Xia Houqi, the son of Zou, about the most outstanding things in the world: the integrity of honest people, the aspirations of the common people, and the separation of the three families.

古文：以处于晋，而迭闻晋事，未尝闻践绳之节、四上之志。
现代文：因为我住在晋国，所以能经常听到晋国的事情，不曾听到过正直之士的节操、平民百姓的志向。
English: Because I live in Jin Province, I can often hear things about Jin Province, but I have never heard about the integrity of honest people and the aspirations of ordinary people.

古文：愿得而闻之。 
现代文：希望能听您说一说。 
English: I hope to hear from you.

古文：夏后启曰： 鄙人也，焉足以问？ 
现代文：夏后启说； 我是鄙陋之人，哪里值得问? 
English: Xia Houkai said; I am a despicable person, what is worth asking?

古文：白圭曰： 愿公子之毋让也！ 
现代文：白圭说； 希望您不要推辞。 
English: Bai Gui said; I hope you don't refuse.

古文：夏后启曰： 以为可为，故为之，为之，天下弗能禁矣；以为不可为，故释之，释之，天下弗能使矣。 
现代文：夏后启说： 认为可以做，所以就去做，做了，天下谁都不能禁止他，认为不可以做，所以就不去做，他不去做，夭下谁都不能驱使池。 
English: Xia Guoqi said: If he thinks it can be done, he will do it; if he does it, no one in the world can forbid him; if he thinks it can't be done, he won't do it; if he doesn't do it, no one can force him to do it.

古文：白圭曰： 利弗能使乎？
现代文：白圭说； 利益也不能驱使他吗?
English: Bai Gui said; Can't profit also drive him?

古文：威弗能禁乎？ 
现代文：威严也不能禁止他吗? 
English: Can't his majesty forbid him to dance?

古文：夏后启曰： 生不足以使之，则利曷足以使之矣？
现代文：夏后启说； 就连生存都不能驱使他，那么利益又怎么足以驱使他呢?
English: Xia Houqi said; Even survival cannot drive him, so how can profit be enough to drive him?

古文：死不足以禁之，则害曷足以禁之矣？ 
现代文：连死亡都不足阻禁止他，那么祸害又怎么足以禁止他呢? 
English: If even death is not enough to banish him, how can evil be enough to banish him?

古文：白圭无以应。
现代文：白圭无话回答。
English: Bai Gui did not answer.

古文：夏后启辞而出。
现代文：夏后启告辞走了。
English: He resigned after the summer.

古文：凡使贤不肖异：使不肖以赏罚，使贤以义。
现代文：役使贤德之人和不肖之人方法不同：役使不肖之人用赏罚，役使贤德之人用道义。
English: There are different methods for making virtuous people and unsavory people happy: rewards and punishments are used for making unsavory people happy, and morality is used for making virtuous people happy.

古文：故贤主之使其下也必义，审赏罚，然后贤不肖尽为用矣。
现代文：所以贤明的君主役使自己的臣属一定要根据道义，慎重地施行赏罚，然后贤德之人和不肖之人就都能为自己所使用了。
English: Therefore, wise monarchs make their subjects must be based on morality, carefully implement rewards and punishments, and then the virtuous and the unscrupulous can be used for themselves.

古文：四曰：类同相召，气同则合，声比则应。
现代文：召类物类相同的就互相招引，气味相同的就互相投合，声音相同的就互相应和。
English: The same calls attract each other, the same smells attract each other, the same sounds attract each other.

古文：故鼓宫而宫应，鼓角而角动。
现代文：所以敲击宫则其他的宫与之共鸣，敲击角则其他的角与之共振。
English: So when you strike the palace, other palaces resonate with it, and when you strike the horn, other horns resonate with it.

古文：以龙致雨，以形逐影。
现代文：用龙就能招来雨，凭形体就能找到影子。
English: Dragons can be used to bring rain, and shapes can be used to find shadows.

古文：祸福之所自来，众人以为命，焉知其所。
现代文：祸与福的到来，一般人认为是天命，哪里知道它们到来的原因?
English: The arrival of misfortune and good fortune is generally believed to be the result of fate. How can we know the reason for their arrival?

古文：故国乱非独乱，有必召寇。
现代文：所以国家混乱不仅仅是内部混乱，又必定会招致外患。
English: Therefore, national chaos is not just internal chaos, but will inevitably lead to external problems.

古文：独乱未必亡也，召寇则无以存矣。
现代文：国家仅仅是内部混乱未必会灭亡，招致外患就无法保存了。
English: A country may not perish just because of internal turmoil, but it cannot be saved by inviting external troubles.

古文：凡兵之用也，用于利，用于义。
现代文：凡是用兵作战，应该用在有利的地方，用在符合道义的地方。
English: Whenever soldiers are used to fight, they should be used where it is advantageous, and where it is ethical.

古文：攻乱则服，服则攻者利；攻乱则义，义则攻者荣。
现代文：攻打混乱的国家就能使之屈服，敌国屈服，那幺进攻的国家就有利；攻打混乱的国家就符台道义，符台道义，都么进攻的国家就荣耀。
English: To attack a chaotic country is to bring it to its knees; to bring an enemy country to its knees is to help the attacking country; to attack a chaotic country is to uphold morality; to uphold morality is to honor the attacking country.

古文：荣且利，中主犹且为之，有况于贤主乎？
现代文：既荣耀又有利，中等才能的君主尚且会去做，更何况贤明的君主呢?
English: What prince of moderate ability, much less a wise one, will do what is both honourable and advantageous?

古文：故割地宝器戈剑，卑辞屈服，不足以止攻，唯治为足。
现代文：所以割让土地，献出宝器，奉上金戈利剑，言辞卑谦，屈服于人，这些都不足以制止别国的进攻，只有国家治理得好才足以制止别国的进攻。
English: Therefore, ceding land, sacrificing treasure, presenting the jingoli sword, being humble and yielding to others are not enough to stop the attack of other countries. Only a well-governed country is enough to stop the attack of other countries.

古文：治则为利者不攻矣，为名者不伐矣。
现代文：国家治理得好，那么图利的就不来进攻了，图名的就不来讨伐了。
English: If the country is well governed, then the tyrants will not attack and the tyrants will not fight.

古文：凡人之攻伐也，非为利则固为名也。
现代文：凡是发动攻伐的，不是图利就一定是图名。
English: Anyone who launches an attack must be a figurehead, not a figurehead.

古文：名实不得，国虽强大，则无为攻矣。
现代文：名利都得不到，国家即使强大，也不会发动进攻了。
English: Neither fame nor profit can be obtained, and even if the country is strong, it will not launch an attack.

古文：兵所自来者久矣。
现代文：战争的由来已经很久了。
English: The origins of war go back a long way.

古文：尧战于丹水之浦，以服南蛮；舜却苗民，更易其俗；禹攻曹、魏、屈骜、有扈，以行其教。
现代文：尧在丹水边作战，以便使南蛮归服，舜击退了苗民，改变了他们的习俗，禹攻打曹、魏，屈骜，有扈，以便推行自己的教化。
English: He fought on the banks of the Dan River in order to subjugate Nanban, repelled the Miao people and changed their customs, and attacked Cao, Wei, Qu and Yao in order to promote his own enlightenment.

古文：三王以上，固皆用兵也。
现代文：由三王往上，本来都用过是。
English: From the three kings upwards, everything has been used.

古文：乱则用，治则止。
现代文：对发生混乱的国家就用兵，对治理得好的国家就不用兵。
English: Troops are used against countries in chaos, but not against well-governed countries.

古文：治而攻之，不祥莫大焉；乱而弗讨，害民莫长焉。
现代文：一个国家冶理得很好却去攻打它，没有比这更不吉祥的了，一个国家发生混乱却不去讨伐它，对人民的残害没有比这更大的了。
English: There is nothing more inauspicious than attacking a well-regulated country, and there is nothing more harmful to the people than not attacking a country in chaos.

古文：此治乱之化也，文武之所由起也。
现代文：这就是根据治乱不同而采取的不同策略，用文和用武就是由此发生的。
English: This is the different strategies adopted according to the different types of chaos, and the use of literature and the use of force is the result.

古文：文者爱之征也，武者恶之表也。
现代文：用文是喜爱的表露，用武是厌恶的表现。
English: The use of words is an expression of affection, while the use of weapons is an expression of disgust.

古文：爱恶循义，文武有常，圣人之元也。
现代文：喜爱或厌恶都遵循道义的原则，用文或用武都有常规，这是圣人的根本。
English: Whether one likes or dislikes follows the principle of morality. Whether one uses words or weapons, there are rules. This is the essence of a saint.

古文：譬之若寒暑之序，时至而事生之。
现代文：这就如同寒暑的更造一样，时令到了就做相应的事情。
English: This is just like the change of cold and heat, when the time comes, do the appropriate thing.

古文：圣人不能为时，而能以事适时。
现代文：圣人不能改变时令，却能使所做的事情适应时令。
English: A sage cannot change the times, but he can adapt what he does to the times.

古文：事适于时者，其功大。
现代文：做的事情适应时令，取得的功效就大。
English: If you do things in accordance with the season, the effect will be greater.

古文：士尹池为荆使于宋，司城子罕觞之。
现代文：士尹池为楚国出使到宋国去，司城子罕宴请他。
English: Yinchi, an envoy from Chu, went to Song and was invited to a banquet by Shicheng Zihan.

古文：南家之墙犨于前而不直，西家之潦径其宫而不止。
现代文：子罕南边邻居的墙向前突出却不拆了它取直，西边邻居家的积水流过子罕的院子却不加制止。
English: The wall of the neighbor to the south of Zihan protrudes forward but does not tear it down and straightens it. The water from the neighbor's house to the west flows through Zihan's yard but is not stopped.

古文：士尹池问其故，司城子罕曰: 南家工人也，为鞔者也。
现代文：士尹池询问这是为什么，司城子罕说： 南边邻居家是工匠，是做鞋的。
English: When asked why this was, Shi Yinchi said, "Our neighbor to the south is an artisan who makes shoes.

古文：吾将徙之，其父曰： 吾恃为鞔以食三世矣，今徙之，是宋国之求鞔者不知吾处也，吾将不食。
现代文：我要让他搬家，他的父亲说： 我家靠做鞋谋生已经三代了，现在如果搬家，那么宋国那些要买鞋的，就不知道我的住处了，我将不能谋生。
English: I want him to move, his father said: My family has been making shoes for three generations. If we move now, those in Song who want to buy shoes won't know where I live, and I won't be able to make a living.

古文：愿相国之忧吾不食也。 为是故，吾弗徙也。
现代文：希望相国您怜悯我。 因为这个缘故，我没有让他搬家。
English: I hope my country will have mercy on me, because I didn't let him move because of this.

古文：西家高，吾宫庳，潦之经吾宫也利，故弗禁也。 
现代文：两边邻居家院子地势高，我家院子地势低，积水流过我家院子很便利，所以没有加以制止。 
English: Neighbors' yards on both sides are on high ground, while my yard is on low ground. It's convenient for the water to flow through my yard, so I didn't stop it.

古文：士尹池归荆，荆王适兴兵而攻宋，士尹池谏于荆王曰： 宋不可攻也。
现代文：士尹池回到楚国，楚王正要发兵攻打宋国，士尹池劝阻楚王说； 不可攻打宋国。
English: The soldier Yinchi returned to the State of Chu. The King of Chu was about to send troops to attack the State of Song. The soldier Yinchi dissuaded the King of Chu, saying, "You must not attack the State of Song."

古文：其主贤，其相仁。
现代文：它的君主贤明，它的国相仁慈。
English: Her princes are wise, and her princes are merciful.

古文：贤者能得民，仁者能用人。
现代文：贤明的凡能得民心，仁慈的人别人能为他出力。
English: A wise man wins the favor of the people, but a gracious man wins the favor of others.

古文：荆国攻之，其无功而为天下笑乎！ 
现代文：楚国去攻打它，大概不会有功，而且还要为天下所耻笑吧！
English: If the state of Chu attacks it, it will probably not succeed, and it will be laughed at by the whole world!

古文：故释宋而攻郑。
现代文：所以楚国放弃了宋国而击攻打郑国。
English: Therefore, Chu abandoned Song and attacked Zheng.

古文：孔子闻之曰： 夫修之于庙堂之上，而折冲乎千里之外者，其司城子罕之谓乎！ 
现代文：孔子听到这事以后说。 在朝廷上修养自己的品德，却能制胜敌军于千里之外，这大概说的就是司城子罕吧! 
English: After hearing this, Confucius said, "To cultivate one's virtue in the imperial court, yet be able to defeat the enemy army thousands of miles away, this is probably what Shicheng Zihan is all about!"

古文：宋在三大万乘之间，子罕之时，无所相侵，边境四益，相平公、元公、景公以终其身，其唯仁且节与？
现代文：宋国处在三个拥有万辆兵车的大国之间，子罕当相的时候，一直没有受到侵犯，四方边境都很安宁，子罕辅佐平公、元公、最公一直到身终，这大概正是因为他既仁慈又节俭吧！
English: Song was located between three great powers with tens of thousands of chariots. When Zihang was in power, it was never invaded. The borders on all four sides were very peaceful. Zihang assisted Saping, Yuan, and Shangguo until the end of his life. This was probably because he was both kind and frugal.

古文：故仁节之为功大矣。
现代文：所以仁慈和节俭的功效太大了。
English: Therefore, benevolence and frugality are too effective.

古文：故明堂茅茨蒿柱，土阶三等，以见节俭。
现代文：因此，天子理事的朝堂用茅草覆盖屋顶，用蒿杆做柱子，土台阶只有三级，用这些来表示节俭。
English: Therefore, the morning hall of the Tenshi director covered the roof with thatch, made pillars with reed rods, and the foundation steps were only three steps, and used these to express frugality.

古文：赵简子将袭卫，使史默往睹之，期以一月。
现代文：赵简子要攻打卫国，派史默去卫国观察动静，约定一个月为期。
English: Zhao Jianzi wanted to attack the defense of the country, and sent Shimo to the defense of the country to observe the situation, and agreed on a one-month period.

古文：六月而后反，赵简子曰： 何其久也？ 
现代文：过了六个月史默才回来!赵简子说； 怎么去了这么长时间呢? 
English: It took Shimei six months to come back! Zhao Jianzi said, "How did you go away for so long?

古文：史默曰： 谋利而得害，犹弗察也。
现代文：史默说： 您要攻打卫国是为了谋取利益，结果反要遭受祸害，这个情况您还不了解啊。
English: Smer said: You want to attack and defend the country in order to seek benefits, but as a result you will suffer harm. You still don't understand this situation.

古文：今蘧伯玉为相，史佐焉，孔子为客，子贡使令于君前，甚听。《易》曰: 涣其群，元吉。 
现代文：如今卫国蘧伯玉当相，史鳅辅佐卫君，孔子当宾客，子贡在卫君面前供茬邋，他们都很受卫君信任。《周易》中说： 涣其群，元吉。 
English: Today, the Minister of the Great Patriotic War, Zou Bo-yu, is in charge of the defense of the country, the Minister of the Great Patriotic War, Shi Xizhe, is in charge of the defense of the country, Confucius is a guest, and Zigong is in charge of the defense of the country. They are all trusted by the defense of the country. "Zhou Yi" said: "Do your best, Yuanji."

古文：涣者贤也，群者众也，元者吉之始也。 涣其群元吉 者，其佐多贤也。 
现代文： 涣 是贤德的意思， 群 是众多的意思， 元 是吉的开始的意思。 涣其群元吉 ，是说他的辅佐有很多贤德之人。 
English: is the meaning of virtue, 群 is the meaning of many, 元 is the meaning of the beginning of auspiciousness. 其群元吉, is to say that his assistant has many virtuous people.

古文：赵简子按兵而不动。
现代文：于是赵简子才按兵不动。
English: That's why Zhao Jianzi didn't budge.

古文：凡谋者，疑也。
现代文：凡是进行谋划，都是因为有疑惑。
English: Whenever plans are made, it is because of doubts.

古文：疑则从义断事。
现代文：有疑惑，就要按照义的原则决断事情。
English: If there is any doubt, the matter should be decided in accordance with the principle of justice.

古文：从义断事，则谋不亏。
现代文：按照义的原则决断事情，那么谋划就不会失当。
English: Decide things according to the principle of righteousness, then the plan will not be improper.

古文：谋不亏，则名实从之。
现代文：谋划不失当，那么名声和实利就会跟着到来。
English: If you plan well, fame and fortune will follow.

古文：贤主之举也，岂必旗偾将毙而乃知胜败哉？
现代文：贤明君主行事，难道一定要弄得旗倒将死然后才知道胜败吗?
English: If a wise ruler acts, does he have to make the flag fly upside down and upside down before he knows whether he has won or lost?

古文：察其理而得失荣辱定矣。
现代文：明察事理，得失荣辱就能确定了。
English: If you carefully examine the facts, you will be able to determine the gains and losses.

古文：故三代之所贵，无若贤也。
现代文：所以夏商周三代所尊崇的，没有什么比得上贤德。
English: Therefore, there is nothing comparable to virtue that Xia Shangzhong revered for three generations.

古文：五曰：凡人三百六十节，九窍、五藏、六府。
现代文：达郁凡是人都有三百六十个骨节，有九窍、五脏，六腑。
English: Every human being has three hundred and sixty bones, nine organs, five viscera, and six glands.

古文：肌肤欲其比也，血脉欲其通也，筋骨欲其固也，心志欲其和也，精气欲其行也。
现代文：肌肤应该让它细密，血脉应该让它通畅，筋骨应该让它强壮，心志应该让它平和，精气应该让它运行。
English: The skin should be fine, the blood should be smooth, the bones and muscles should be strong, the mind should be peaceful, and the spirit should be running.

古文：若此则病无所居，而恶无由生矣。
现代文：这样，病痛就无处滞留，恶疾就无法产生了。
English: In this way, there is no place for the pain to stay, and the malady cannot occur.

古文：病之留、恶之生也，精气郁也。
现代文：病痛的滞留；恶疾的产生，是因为精气闭结。
English: Sickness lingers; maladies arise because the vital air is blocked.

古文：故水郁则为污，树郁则为蠹，草郁则为菑。
现代文：所以，水闭结就会变污浊，树闭结就会生蛀虫，草闭结就会枯死。
English: Therefore, if the water is stagnant, it will become dirty, if the tree is stagnant, it will produce aphids, and if the grass is stagnant, it will die.

古文：国亦有郁。
现代文：国家也有闭结的情形。
English: There are also cases of countries shutting down.

古文：主德不通，民欲不达，此国之郁也。
现代文：君主的道德不通达，百姓的愿望不能实现，这就是国家的闭结。
English: If the monarch's moral standards are not up to the mark, and if the people's wishes cannot be fulfilled, the country is doomed.

古文：国郁处久，则百恶并起，而万灾丛至矣。
现代文：国家的闭结长期存在，那么各种邪恶都会一齐产生，所有灾难都会一起到来了。
English: If the closure of the country persists for a long time, all kinds of evils will come together, and all disasters will come together.

古文：上下之相忍也，由此出矣。
现代文：高官与下民的互相残害，就由此产生了。
English: This is how the mutual destruction of high-ranking officials and commoners came about.

古文：故圣王之贵豪士与忠臣也，为其敢直言而决郁塞也。
现代文：所以圣贤的君壬尊重豪杰和忠臣，这是因为他们敢于直言劝谏而且能排除阻塞。
English: That's why the wise respect heroes and loyalists, because they dare to speak out and can eliminate obstacles.

古文：周厉王虐民，国人皆谤。
现代文：周厉王残害百姓，国人都指责他。
English: Zhou Li Wang brutalized the people, and the Chinese people blamed him.

古文：召公以告，曰： 民不堪命矣！ 
现代文：召公把这情况告诉丁周厉王，说； 百姓们不能忍受您的政令了！ 
English: Zhao Gong told this to King Ding Zhouli, saying, "The people can no longer tolerate your decrees!"

古文：王使卫巫监谤者，得则杀之。
现代文：厉王派卫国的巫者监视敢于指责的人，抓到以后就杀掉。
English: King Li sent wizards to watch those who dared to criticize him. If they caught them, they would kill them.

古文：国莫敢言，道路以目。
现代文：都城内没有人敢再讲话，彼此在道上相遇只是用眼看看而已。
English: In the capital, no one dares to speak anymore. People meet each other on the street just to look at each other.

古文：王喜，以告召公，曰： 吾能弭谤矣！ 
现代文：厉王很高兴，把这种情况告诉了召公，说： 我能消除人们的怨言了! 
English: Li Wang was very happy and told the situation to the summoner, saying: I can eliminate people's complaints!

古文：召公曰： 是障之也，非弭之也。
现代文：召公说： 这只是阻止人们的指责，并不是消除人们的怨言啊。
English: Zhao Gong said: This is just to stop people's accusations, not to eliminate people's complaints.

古文：防民之口，甚于防川。川壅而溃，败人必多。
现代文：堵塞人们的嘴，其危害比堵寒流水还厉害。流水被堵塞，一旦决口，伤人必定很多。
English: Blocking people's mouths is even more harmful than blocking cold running water. If running water is blocked, once it bursts, it will certainly hurt a lot of people.

古文：夫民犹是也。
现代文：人民也是这样。
English: So are the people.

古文：是故治川者决之使导，治民者宣之使言。
现代文：因此，治水的人应该排除阻塞，使水畅流，治理凡民的人应该引导人民，让人民尽情讲话。
English: Therefore, the person who controls the water should remove the obstruction and make the water flow smoothly. The person who governs the common people should guide the people and let the people speak freely.

古文：是故天子听政，使公卿列士正谏，好学博闻献诗，矇箴，师诵，庶人传语，近臣尽规，亲戚补察，而后王斟酌焉。
现代文：所以，天子处理政事，让公卿列士直言劝谏，让好学博闻之人献上讽谏诗歌，让乐官进箴言，让乐师吟诵讽谏之诗，让平民把意见转达上来，让身边的臣子把规劝的话全讲出来，让同宗的大臣弥补天子的过失、监督天子的政事，然后由天子斟酌去取，加以实行。
English: Therefore, for the heavenly son to deal with political affairs, let the nobles and courtiers speak frankly and advise him, let those who are good at learning and erudite present ironic poems, let the music officials enter the proverbs, let the musicians chant the ironic poems, let the commoners convey their opinions, let the courtiers around him speak out all the words of exhortation, let the ministers of the same clan make up for the mistakes of the heavenly son and supervise the political affairs of the heavenly son, and then let the heavenly son consider it and implement it.

古文：是以下无遗善，上无过举。
现代文：因此，下边没有遗漏的善言，上边没有错误的举动。
English: Therefore, there are no missing good words at the bottom, and there are no wrong actions at the top.

古文：今王塞下之口，而遂上之过，恐为社稷忧。 
现代文：如争您堵住下边人的嘴，从而铸成君王的过错，恐怕要成为国家的忧患。 
English: If you try to shut the mouths of those below you, thereby casting the fault of the monarch, I am afraid it will become a national sorrow.

古文：王弗听也。
现代文：厉壬不听他的劝告。
English: Liren did not listen to his advice.

古文：三年，国人流王于彘。
现代文：过了三年，国人把厉王放遂到彘地。
English: After three years, the Chinese released Li Wang to Shunde.

古文：此郁之败也。
现代文：这就是闭结造成的祸害。
English: This is the scourge of closure.

古文：郁者不阳也。
现代文：闭结就是丧失阳气。
English: Closure is the loss of yang.

古文：周鼎著鼠，令马履之，为其不阳也。
现代文：周鼎上刻铸着鼠形图案，让马踩着它，就是因为它属阴。
English: Zhou Ding has a mouse-shaped pattern engraved on it, so that the horse can step on it, because it belongs to Yin.

古文：不阳者，亡国之俗也。
现代文：丧失阳气，这是亡国的特征。
English: The loss of masculinity, which is a characteristic of a ruined country.

古文：管仲觞桓公。
现代文：管仲宴请齐桓公。
English: Please invite Lord Qi Kan to preside over the banquet.

古文：日暮矣，桓公乐之而征烛。
现代文：天已经黑了，桓公喝得很高兴，让点上烛火接着喝。
English: It was already dark, and Prince Kan was very happy to drink. Let's light a candle and continue drinking.

古文：管仲曰： 臣卜其昼，未卜其夜。君可以出矣。 
现代文：管仲说： 白天招待您喝酒，我占卜过，至于晚上喝酒，我没有占卜过。您可以走了。 
English: Guanzhong said: I have divined to invite you to drink during the day, but I have not divined to invite you to drink at night. You can go.

古文：公不说，曰： 仲父年老矣，寡人与仲父为乐将几之！
现代文：桓公很不高兴，说。 仲父您年老了，我跟您一块享乐还能有多久呢!
English: Huan Gong was very unhappy, saying, "Middle father, you are getting old, how much longer can I enjoy life with you!"

古文：请夜之。 
现代文：希望夜里继续喝酒。 
English: He hopes to continue drinking into the night.

古文：管仲曰： 君过矣。
现代文：管仲说： 您错了。
English: Guanzhong said: You are mistaken.

古文：夫厚于味者薄于德，沈于乐者反于忧。
现代文：贪图美昧的人道德就微薄，沉湎于享乐的人最终要忧伤。
English: He who loves beauty has poor morals, but he who loves pleasure ends in sorrow.

古文：壮而怠则失时，老而解则无名。
现代文：壮年懈怠就会失去时机，老年懈怠就会丧失功名。
English: If you slack off in your prime, you will lose your opportunity, and if you slack off in your old age, you will lose your reputation.

古文：臣乃今将为君勉之，若何其沈于酒也！ 
现代文：我从现在开始将对您加以勉励，怎么可以沉湎在饮酒中呢! 
English: I will encourage you from now on, how can you indulge in drinking!

古文：管仲可谓能立行矣。
现代文：管仲可以说是能树立品行了。
English: Guanzhong can be said to be able to establish ethics.

古文：凡行之堕也于乐，今乐而益饬；行之坏也于贵，今主欲留而不许。
现代文：凡是品行的堕落在于过分享乐，现在虽然宴乐，态度却越发严正，品行的败坏在于过分尊贵，现在君主想留下，他却不答应。
English: All moral depravity lies in over-sharing, and now, although it is fun, the attitude is becoming more and more serious, and the moral corruption lies in excessive dignity. Now the monarch wants to stay, but he does not agree.

古文：伸志行理，贵乐弗为变，以事其主。
现代文：他申明白己的意志，按照原则行事，不因为尊贵和享乐就加以改变，用这种态度来侍奉自己的君主。
English: He declares his own will, acts according to principles, does not change them for the sake of prestige and pleasure, and serves his sovereign with this attitude.

古文：此桓公之所以霸也。
现代文：这就是桓公之所以成就霸业的原因啊。
English: This is the reason why Kan was able to dominate the industry.

古文：列精子高听行乎齐湣王，著柬布衣，白缟冠，颡推之履，特会朝而袪步堂下，谓其侍者曰： 我何若？ 侍者曰： 公姣且丽。 
现代文：齐湣王对列精子高言听计从。有一次列精子高穿着熟绢做的衣服，戴着白绢做的帽子，穿着粗劣的鞋子，天刚亮就特意在堂下撩起衣服走来走去，对自己的侍从说： 我的样子怎么样? 侍从说： 您又美好又漂亮。 
English: Once upon a time, a row of spermatozoa, wearing clothes made of rattan, a hat made of egrets, and shoddy shoes, deliberately picked up their clothes at dawn and walked around, saying to their attendant: How do I look? The attendant said: You are beautiful and beautiful.

古文：列精子高因步而窥于井，粲然恶丈夫之状也。
现代文：列精子高子是走到井边去照看，分明是个丑陋男子的形象。
English: The spermatozoon Takako goes to the well to look after is clearly the image of an ugly man.

古文：喟然叹曰: 侍者为吾听行于齐王也，夫何阿哉！
现代文：他慨叹者说： 侍从因为齐王对我言听计从，就这样的曲意迎合我啊！
English: He sighed and said, "Servant, because King Qi listened to me and followed my advice, this kind of melody appeals to me!

古文：又况于所听行乎？ 
现代文：更何况对于听信实行我的主张的齐王呢? 
English: How much more so for King Qi, who listened to and implemented my suggestions?

古文：万乘之主，人之阿之亦甚矣，而无所镜，其残亡无日矣。
现代文：对大国君主来说，人们曲意迎合他，也就更厉害了，可他自己却无法看见自己的缺点，这样，国破身亡也就没有多久了。
English: It is all the more difficult for the ruler of a great power to be pandered to by the people, but he cannot see his own shortcomings, and so it does not take long for the country to be ruined.

古文：孰当可而镜？其唯士乎！
现代文：谁能够帮他照见自己的缺点，大概只有贤士吧!
English: Who can help him see his own shortcomings, probably only the sages!

古文：人皆知说镜之明己也，而恶士之明己也。
现代文：人都知道喜欢镜子能照出自己的形象，却厌恶贤士指明自己的缺点。
English: Everyone knows that people like a mirror to reflect their image, but they hate it when a sage points out their shortcomings.

古文：镜之明己也功细，士之明己也功大。
现代文：镜子能照出自己的形象，功用很小，贤士能指明自己的缺点，功绩很大。
English: A mirror can reflect one's own image, but it is of little use. A sage can point out one's own shortcomings, but his achievements are great.

古文：得其细，失其大，不知类耳。
现代文：如果只知得到小的，而丢掉大的，这是不知道类比啊。
English: If you only know how to get the small, but lose the big, this is not an analogy.

古文：赵简子曰： 厥也爱我，铎也不爱我。
现代文：赵简子说： 赵厥热爱我，尹铎不热爱我。
English: Zhao Jianzi said: Zhao Jue loves me, but Yin Xi does not love me.

古文：厥之谏我也，必于无人之所；铎之谏我也，喜质我于人中，必使我丑。 
现代文：赵厥劝谏我的时候，一定在没有人的地方；尹铎劝谏我的时候，喜欢当着别人的面纠正我，一定让我出丑。 
English: When Zhao Jue advises me, he must be in a place where there is no one; when Yin Yu advises me, he likes to correct me in front of others, and he must make me look bad.

古文：尹铎对曰： 厥也爱君之丑也，而不爱君之过也；铎也爱君之过也，而不爱君之丑也。
现代文：尹铎回答说， 赵厥顾惜您的出丑，却不顾惜您的过错，我顾惜您的过错，却不顾惜您的出丑。
English: Yin Qi replied, "Zhao Jue is sorry for your disgrace, but not sorry for your fault. I am sorry for your fault, but not sorry for your disgrace.

古文：臣尝闻相人于师，敦颜而土色者忍丑。
现代文：我曾经从老师那里听到过如何观察人的相貌。相貌敦厚而且是黄色的能够承受住出丑。
English: I once heard from a teacher about how to observe a person's face. The face is thick and yellow and can withstand ugliness.

古文：不质君于人中，恐君之不变也。 
现代文：我如果不在别人面前纠正您，恐怕您不能改正啊。 
English: If I don't correct you in front of others, I'm afraid you can't be corrected.

古文：此简子之贤也。
现代文：这就是简子的贤明之处。
English: This is where Jenzo's wisdom comes in.

古文：人主贤则人臣之言刻。
现代文：君主贤明，那么臣子的谏言就严刻。
English: If the sovereign is wise, then the rebuke of the vassal must be severe.

古文：简子不贤，铎也卒不居赵地，有况乎在简子之侧哉！
现代文：如果简子不贤聪，那么尹铎最终连在赵地存身都不能，更何况呆在简子身边呢?
English: If Jian Zi is not virtuous, then Yin Zi will not even be able to survive in Zhao Di, let alone stay with Jian Zi.

古文：六曰：人主之行，与布衣异。
现代文：行论君主的所作所为，与平民不同。
English: The behaviour of a monarch is different from that of a commoner.

古文：势不便，时不利，事雠以求存。
现代文：形势不好，时机不利，可以恃奉仇敌以便求得生存。
English: The situation is not good, the timing is not good, you can serve the enemy in order to survive.

古文：执民之命。
现代文：君主掌握着人民的命运。
English: The monarch holds the fate of the people in his hands.

古文：执民之命，重任也，不得以快志为故。
现代文：掌握着人民的命运，是重大的责任，不能以恣心所欲为能事。
English: It is a great responsibility to hold the fate of the people in one's hands, and one should not act arbitrarily.

古文：故布衣行此指于国，不容乡曲。
现代文：平民如果在国内也这样做，那就不能在乡里容身了。
English: If civilians do the same in the country, they will not be able to live in the countryside.

古文：尧以天下让舜。
现代文：尧把帝位让给了舜。
English: He abdicated the imperial throne to Emperor Wu.

古文：为诸侯，怒于尧曰： 得天之道者为帝，得地之道者为三公。
现代文：鲧当诸侯，他对尧发怒说： 符合天道的就当帝王，符合地道的就当三公。
English: When he was a vassal, he said angrily to his vassal, "If you follow the heavenly way, you should be the emperor, and if you follow the earthly way, you should be the three princes."

古文：今我得地之道，而不以我为三公。 
现代文：如今我符合地道，却不让我当三公。 
English: Now I'm conforming to the true way, but they won't let me be one of the three princes.

古文：以尧为失论，欲得三公。
现代文：鲧认为尧这样做是丧失了原则，想得到三公的职位。
English: He thought that by doing so, he had lost his principles and wanted to get the position of the Three Princes.

古文：怒甚猛兽，欲以为乱。
现代文：他的愤怒超过了猛兽，想发动叛乱。
English: His anger overcame the beast and he wanted to start a rebellion.

古文：比兽之角，能以为城；举其尾，能以为旌。
现代文：他象猛兽把角并排起来一样固城自守，象猛兽举起尾巴一样立旗为号。
English: He fortified the city and defended himself like a beast of prey with its horns side by side, and raised a flag as a signal like a beast of prey with its tail raised.

古文：召之不来，仿佯于野以患帝。
现代文：舜召见他他不来，在野外游荡，以便给舜制造祸患。
English: When the stork calls to him, he does not come, but wanders about in the fields to make trouble for the storks.

古文：舜于是殛之于羽山，副之以吴刀。
现代文：舜于是在羽山杀死了他，用锋利的吴刀肢解丁他。
English: So he killed him in Hasan and dismembered him with a sharp Wu knife.

古文：禹不敢怨，而反事之。
现代文：禹对此不敢怨恨，反而侍奉舜。
English: Yu did not dare to hold a grudge, but instead served Zou.

古文：官为司空，以通水潦。
现代文：他担任了司空之职，疏导洪水。
English: He took up the post of air steward, diverting the flood.

古文：颜色黎黑，步不相过，窍气不通，以中帝心。
现代文：他晒得面孔黧黑，累得步履艰难，七窍不能畅通因而很得舜的欢心。
English: He was sunburned and his face was dark, he was tired and it was difficult for him to walk, and he couldn't get his bowels to flow smoothly, so he was very popular.

古文：昔者纣为无道，杀梅伯而醢之，杀鬼侯而脯之，以礼诸侯于庙。
现代文：从前纣王暴虐无遭，杀死梅伯把他做成肉酱，杀死鬼侯把他做成肉干，在宗庙里用来宴请诸侯。
English: Once upon a time, King Yao was a ruthless tyrant. He killed Mei Bo and turned him into mincemeat. He killed the ghost lord and turned him into jerky, which was used to entertain the lords in the ancestral temple.

古文：文王流涕而咨之。
现代文：文王流着眼泪为此叹息。
English: King Wen shed tears and sighed for this.

古文：纣恐其畔，欲杀文王而灭周。
现代文：纣王担心他背叛自己，想杀死文王灭掉周国。
English: King Yao feared that he would betray him and wanted to kill King Wen to destroy Zhou.

古文：文王曰： 父虽无道，子敢不事父乎？
现代文：文王说， 父亲即使无道，儿子敢不侍奉父亲吗?
English: King Wen said, "Even if the father is a scoundrel, how dare the son not serve the father?"

古文：君虽不惠，臣敢不事君乎？
现代文：君主即使无道，臣子敢不恃奉君主吗?
English: Even if the monarch is a scoundrel, would a vassal dare not serve the monarch?

古文：孰王而可畔也？ 
现代文：君主怎么可以背叛呢? 
English: How can a sovereign be betrayed?

古文：纣乃赦之。
现代文：纣王于是赦免了他。
English: So the king pardoned him.

古文：天下闻之，以文王为畏上而哀下也。
现代文：天下人听到这件事，认为文王畏惧在上位的人而哀怜在下位的人。
English: When the world heard about this, they thought that King Wen feared those at the top and pitied those at the bottom.

古文：《诗》曰: 惟此文王，小心翼翼。
现代文：所以《诗经》中说； 就是这个周文王，言与行小心翼翼。
English: Therefore, it is said in the "Book of Songs" that it is this King Zhouwen who is careful in his words and deeds.

古文：昭事上帝，聿怀多福。 
现代文：心地光明侍奉上天。因而得来大福大吉。 
English: Serve heaven with a bright heart, and you will be blessed with great fortune.

古文：齐攻宋，燕王使张魁将燕兵以从焉，齐王杀之。
现代文：齐国攻打宋国，燕王派张魁率领燕国士兵去帮助齐国，齐王却杀死丁张魁。
English: Qi attacked Song, and King Yan sent Zhang Kui to lead the soldiers of Yan to help Qi. However, King Qi killed Ding Zhang Kui.

古文：燕王闻之，泣数行而下，召有司而告之曰： 余兴事而齐杀我使，请今举兵以攻齐也。 
现代文：燕王听到送梢息，眼泪一行行落下来，召来有关官员告诉他说： 我派是参战可是齐国却杀死了我的使臣，我要立即发兵攻打齐国。 
English: Yan Wang heard the sending of last breaths, tears fell one by one, and summoned the relevant officials to tell him: I sent to participate in the war, but Qi killed my envoy, I will immediately send troops to attack Qi.

古文：使受命矣。
现代文：官员接受了命令。
English: The official accepted the order to leave.

古文：凡繇进见，争之曰： 贤主故愿为臣。
现代文：凡繇进来谒见燕王，劝谏说： 从前认为您是贤德的君主，所以我愿意当您的臣子。
English: Everyone who came to see King Yan advised him, "I used to think you were a virtuous monarch, so I am willing to be your vassal."

古文：今王非贤主也，愿辞不为臣。 
现代文：现在看来您不是贤德的君主，所以我希望辞官不再当您的臣子。 
English: Now it seems that you are not a virtuous monarch, so I hope that the Dictator will no longer be your vassal.

古文：昭王曰： 是何也？ 
现代文：燕昭王说： 这是什么原因呢？ 
English: Yan Zhao Wang said: What is the reason for this?

古文：对曰： 松下乱，先君以不安弃群臣也。
现代文：凡繇回答说： 松下之难，我们的先君不得安宁而被俘。
English: Fanning replied, "Our forefathers were not able to rest peacefully and were captured because of the hardships of the Song Dynasty.

古文：王苦痛之，而事齐者，力不足也。
现代文：您对此感到痛苦，但却侍奉齐国，是因为力量不足啊。
English: You are pained by this, but you are serving the country because you are not strong enough.

古文：今魁死而王攻齐，是视魁而贤于先君。 
现代文：如今张魁被杀死，您却要攻打齐国，这是把张魁看得比先君还重。 
English: Now that Zhang Kui has been killed, you want to attack Qi Guo. This shows that you consider Zhang Kui more important than your predecessor.

古文：王曰： 诺。 
现代文：燕王说； 好吧。 
English: After listening, Zhao Wang said, "Hmm.

古文：请王止兵，王曰： 然则若何？ 
现代文：凡繇请燕王停止出兵，燕王说： 然而应该怎么办? 
English: When he asked King Yan to stop sending troops, King Yan said, "But what should we do?

古文：凡繇对曰： 请王缟素辟舍于郊，遣使于齐，客而谢焉，曰： 此尽寡人之罪也。
现代文：几繇回答说； 请您穿上丧服离开官室住到郊外，派遣使臣到齐国，以客人的身分去谢罪，说： 这都是我的罪过。
English: "Please put on your mourning clothes, leave your official residence and live in the suburbs, and send an envoy to Qi as a guest to apologize and say, 'It's all my fault,'" Qian Ye replied.

古文：大王贤主也，岂尽杀诸侯之使者哉？
现代文：大王您是贤德的君主，哪能全部杀死诸侯们的使臣呢?
English: Great King, you are a virtuous monarch, how can you kill all the princes' envoys?

古文：然而燕之使者独死，此弊邑之择人不谨也。
现代文：然而燕国的使臣独被杀死，这是我国选择人不慎重啊。
English: However, only the envoys of Yan were killed, which is because our country did not choose people carefully.

古文：愿得变更请罪。 
现代文：希望能够让我改换使臣以表示请罪。 
English: I hope that I will be able to change my envoy in order to plead guilty.

古文：使者行至齐，齐王方大饮，左右官实御者甚众，因令使者进报。
现代文：使臣到了齐国，齐王正在举行盛大宴会，参加宴会的近臣、官员、待从很多，于是让使臣前来禀告。
English: When the envoys arrived in Qi, the King of Qi was holding a grand banquet. Many of his close ministers, officials, and courtiers were attending the banquet, so he asked the envoys to come and report.

古文：使者报，言燕王之甚恐惧而请罪也。
现代文：使臣禀告，说是燕王非常恐惧，因而来请罪。
English: The envoy reported that Yan Wang was very afraid, so he came to plead guilty.

古文：毕，又复之，以矜左右官实。
现代文：使臣说完了，齐王又让他重复一遍，以此来向近臣，官员、侍从炫耀。
English: After the envoy finished speaking, King Qi asked him to repeat it again, in order to show off to his close ministers, officials, and attendants.

古文：因乃发小使以反令燕王复舍。
现代文：于是齐王就派出地位低微的使臣去让燕王返回宫室届住。
English: As a result, King Qi sent a low-ranking envoy to ask King Yan to return to the palace to live.

古文：此济上之所以败，齐国以虚也。
现代文：这就是后来齐国之所以在济水一带被燕国打败的原困，齐国因而变得很虚弱。
English: This was the reason why Qi was later defeated by Yan in the Jishui area. As a result, Qi became very weak.

古文：七十城，微田单，固几不反。
现代文：七十余座被攻下的城邑，如果没有田单，几乎不能收复。
English: More than seventy cities and towns that have been conquered can hardly be recovered without a field list.

古文：湣王以大齐骄而残，田单以即墨城而立功。
现代文：齐湣王凭借着强大的齐国，因为骄横而使国家残破，田单凭借着即墨城，却能立下大功。
English: King Qizong relied on the powerful State of Qi, and because of his arrogance, the country was ruined. Tian Dan relied on the City of Ink, but he was able to achieve great success.

古文：诗曰: 将欲毁之，必重累之；将欲踣之，必高举之。 
现代文：古诗说： 要想毁坏它，必先把它重叠起；要想摔倒它，必先把它高举起。 
English: The ancient poem says: If you want to destroy it, you must first overlap it; if you want to fall over it, you must first lift it up.

古文：其此之谓乎！
现代文：大概说的就是这个吧！
English: This is exactly the situation.

古文：累矣而不毁，举矣而不踣，其唯有道者乎！
现代文：重叠起来却能不被毁坏，高举起来却能不被摔倒，大概只有有道之人能做到吧！
English: Can overlap but not be destroyed, can lift up but not fall down, probably only a virtuous person can do it!

古文：楚庄王使文无畏于齐，过于宋，不先假道。
现代文：楚庄王派文无畏出使齐国，途经宋国，没有事先借道。
English: The king of Chu Zhuang sent an envoy to Qi, passing through Song, without any prior detour.

古文：还反，华元言于宋昭公曰: 往不假道，来不假道，是以宋为野鄙也。
现代文：等他返回的时傧，华元对宋昭公说： 他去的时候不借道，回来的时候也不借道，这是把宋国当成楚国的边远城邑了。
English: When he returned, Hua Yuan said to Song Zhaogong: When he goes, he does not take the road, and when he comes back, he does not take the road. This is to regard Song as a remote town in Chu.

古文：楚之会田也，故鞭君之仆于孟诸。
现代文：从前楚王眼您会猎时，在孟诸故意鞭打您的车夫。请您允许杀掉文无畏。 
English: In the past, Chu Wangyan, when you were hunting, deliberately whipped your coachman in Mengzhu. Please allow me to kill Wengfai.

古文：庄王方削袂，闻之曰： 嘻！ 
现代文：于是就在扬粱的堤防上杀死了文无畏。楚庄王正悠闲地把手揣在衣袖里，听到达消息后说； 哼！ 
English: So he killed Wen Daowei on the embankment of the Yanglu River. Chu Zhuang Wang was leisurely putting his hands in his sleeves, and after hearing the news, he said; Ha!

古文：投袂而起。履及诸庭，剑及诸门，车及之蒲疏之市。
现代文：就拂袖而起，来不及穿鞋、佩剑、乘车，奉鞋的侍从追到庭院中才给他穿上鞋，奉剑的侍从追到寝门才给他佩上剑，驾车的驭者追到蒲疏街市上才让他乘上车。
English: He got up with his sleeves rolled up, and it was too late to put on his shoes, put on his sword, and get on the bus. The attendant with the shoes had to chase him into the courtyard before he could put on his shoes, the attendant with the sword had to chase him to the bedroom door before he could put on his sword, and the driver had to chase him to the market on Puzo Street before he could get on the bus.

古文：遂舍于郊。
现代文：接着住在了郊外。
English: Then I lived in the suburbs.

古文：兴师围宋九月。
现代文：发兵围困宋国九个月。
English: and besieged Song for nine months.

古文：宋人易子而食之，析骨而爨之。
现代文：宋国人彼此交换孩子杀了吃掉，劈开尸骨来烧火傲饭。
English: The people of the Song Dynasty exchanged children with each other, killed and ate them, and split the bones to make fire to cook rice.

古文：宋公肉袒执牺，委服告病，曰： 大国若宥图之，唯命是听。 
现代文：宋国君主脱去衣服，露出臂膀，牵着纯色牲，表示屈服，述说困苦状况，说： 贵国如果打算赦免我的罪过，我将唯命是从。 
English: The Song monarch stripped off his clothes, bared his arms, led the pure-colored animal, expressed his submission, described the difficult situation, and said: If your country intends to forgive my sins, I will follow your orders.

古文：庄王曰： 情矣宋公之言也！ 
现代文：庄王说： 宋国君主的话很诚恳啊! 
English: Zhuang Wang said: The words of the Song monarch are very sincere!

古文：乃为却四十里，而舍于卢门之阖，所以为成而归也。
现代文：因此就后退了四十里，驻扎在卢门那里，两国媾和以后就返回去了。
English: So he retreated forty miles, stationed himself at Lumen, and returned after the two countries had made peace.

古文：凡事之本在人主，人主之患，在先事而简人。
现代文：大凡事情的根本在于君主，君主的弊病，在于重事而轻人。
English: The foundation of all great things lies in the monarch, and the malady of the monarch lies in the fact that he makes light of the most important things.

古文：简人则事穷矣。
现代文：轻视人，那么事情就会处于困境。
English: If you belittle people, then things will be in trouble.

古文：今人臣死而不当，亲帅士民以讨其故，可谓不简人矣。
现代文：现在臣子死得不应该，楚庄王亲自率领士兵加以讨伐，可以说是不轻视人了。
English: Now the vassal died an undeserved death, and the king of Chu Zhuang personally led the soldiers to fight against him. It can be said that he does not despise people.

古文：宋公服以病告而还师，可谓不穷矣。
现代文：宋国君主表示屈服述说困苦状况之后，楚庄王就退军了，可以说是不会处于困境了。
English: After the Song monarch expressed his submission and described the difficult situation, the king of Chu Zhuang withdrew from the army, and it can be said that he will not be in a difficult situation.

古文：夫舍诸侯于汉阳而饮至者，其以义进退邪！强不足以成此也。
现代文：他在汉水之北盟会诸侯，回国之后用饮至之礼向祖先报功，所以能如此，大概是因为他一进一退都根据义的原则吧，单凭强大是不足以达到这个地步的。
English: He was a member of the Northern Alliance of Princes in Hanshui, and after returning to China, he used a toast to his ancestors, so he could do so, probably because he went in and out according to the principle of righteousness. Being strong alone is not enough to reach this level.

古文：七曰：亡国之主，必自骄，必自智，必轻物。
现代文：骄恣亡国的君主，必然骄傲自满，必然自以为聪明，必然轻视外物。
English: A monarch who arrogantly destroys his country is bound to be proud and self-satisfied, bound to think he is clever, and bound to despise external things.

古文：自骄则简士，自智则专独，轻物则无备。
现代文：骄傲自满就会傲视贤士，自以为聪明就会独断专行，看轻外物就会没有准备。
English: If you are proud and complacent, you will look down on the sages. If you think you are clever, you will act arbitrarily. If you look down on others, you will be unprepared.

古文：无备召祸，专独位危，简士壅塞。
现代文：没有准备就会召致祸患，独断专行君位就会危险，傲视贤士听闻就会闭塞。
English: If there is no preparation, it will bring disaster, if there is arbitrariness, there will be danger, if there is arrogance, there will be obstruction.

古文：欲无壅塞，必礼士；欲位无危，必得众；欲无召祸，必完备。
现代文：要想不闭塞，必须礼贤下士；要想君位不危险，必须得到众人辅佐，要想不召致祸患，必须准备齐全。
English: If you don't want to be blocked, you must be a virtuous corporal; if you don't want to be dangerous, you must be assisted by everyone; if you don't want to cause trouble, you must be fully prepared.

古文：三者，人君之大经也。
现代文：这三条，是君主治理国家的最大原则。
English: These three are the most important principles for the monarch to govern the country.

古文：晋厉公侈淫，好听谗人，欲尽去其大臣而立其左右。
现代文：晋厉公奢侈放纵，喜欢听信谗人之言，他想把他的大臣们都除掉，提拔他身迎的人为官。
English: Jin Liguo was extravagant and indulgent, and liked to listen to what others had to say. He wanted to get rid of his ministers and promote people he liked as officials.

古文：胥童谓厉公曰: 必先杀三郄。
现代文：胥童对厉公说。 一定要先杀掉三个姓郄的。
English: Xing Tong said to Liguo, "You must first kill three people with the surname of Xing.

古文：族大多怨，去大族不逼。 公曰： 诺。 
现代文：他们家族大，对公室有很多怨恨，除掉大家族，就不会威逼公室了。 
English: They have a large family and have a lot of resentment towards the office. If they got rid of their large family, they wouldn't be able to bully the office.

古文：乃使长鱼矫杀郄犨、郄锜、郄至于朝，而陈其尸。
现代文：厉公说； 好吧。 于是就派长鱼矫在朝廷上杀死了郄犨、郄锜、郄至，陈列他们的尸体示众。
English: Li Gong said, "All right." He then sent Changyu Jiao to the imperial court to kill Zou, Zou and Zi Zi and display their bodies for the public to see.

古文：于是厉公游于匠丽氏，栾书、中行偃劫而幽之。
现代文：接着厉公到匠丽氏那里游乐，栾书，中行偃劫持并囚禁了他。
English: Next, Liguang went to the residence of the Li family to have fun and read books, but Zhongxing kidnapped and imprisoned him.

古文：诸侯莫之救，百姓莫之哀。
现代文：诸侯们没有人援救他，百姓们没有几哀怜他。
English: The lords had no one to rescue him, and the people had little pity for him.

古文：三月而杀之。
现代文：过了三个月，就把他杀死了。
English: After three months, they killed him.

古文：人主之患，患在知能害人，而不知害人之不当而反自及也。
现代文：君主的弊病，在于只知道自己能危害别人，却不知道如果所害的人是不该害的反而会自己遭殃。
English: The evil of a monarch is that he only knows that he can harm others, but does not know that if he harms someone who should not be harmed, he will suffer himself.

古文：是何也？
现代文：这是为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：智短也。
现代文：这是因为智谋短浅啊。
English: That's because your strategy is short-sighted.

古文：智短则不知化，不知化者举自危。
现代文：智谋短浅就不知道事物的变化，不知道事物变化的人一举一动都会危害自己。
English: Those who are short-sighted do not know the change of things, and those who do not know the change of things will harm themselves with every move.

古文：魏武侯谋事而当，攘臂疾言于庭曰: 大夫之虑，莫如寡人矣！ 
现代文：魏武侯谋划事情总是很得当，有一次他在朝廷中捋袖伸臂大声说： 大夫们的谋虑，没有人赶得上我了。 
English: Wei Wuhou always planned things very well. Once he stretched out his arms in the court and said loudly: "The doctors' plans, no one can catch up with me."

古文：立有间，再三言。
现代文：只站了一会儿，这句话就说了好几遍。
English: He only stood there for a moment, but he said this several times.

古文：李悝趋进曰: 昔者楚庄王谋事而当，有大功，退朝而有忧色。
现代文：李悝快步走上前说： 从前楚庄王谋划事情很得当，成就了很大功业，退朝以后却面有忧色。
English: Li Qian quickly stepped forward and said: Once upon a time, King Chu Zhuang planned things very well and accomplished great feats, but after he retired from the throne, he was sad.

古文：左右曰： 王有大功，退朝而有忧色，敢问其说？ 
现代文：身军官的人说： 大王您成就了很大的功业，退朝以后却面有忧色，请问这是什幺原因? 
English: An officer said, "Your Majesty, you have accomplished a great deal of work, but you have a gloomy face after retiring from the throne. What is the reason for this?"

古文：王曰： 仲虺有言，不穀说之。
现代文：庄王说： 仲虺有话，我很喜欢。
English: Zhuo Wang said, "Zhongyao has a way with words, I like it very much.

古文：曰： 诸侯之德，能自为取师者王，能自取友者存，其所择而莫如己者亡。 
现代文：他税： 诸侯的品德，能为自己选取老师的，就会称王天下，能为自己选取朋友的，就会保存自身，所选取的人不如自己的，就会遭到灭亡。 
English: He said: Princes are virtuous. If they can choose their own teachers, they will become kings. If they can choose their own friends, they will be saved. If they choose people who are not as good as themselves, they will be destroyed.

古文：今以不穀之不肖也，群臣之谋又莫吾及也，我其亡乎！  
现代文：如今凭着我这样不贤德，臣子们的谋划，又都赶不上我，我大概要灭亡了吧！  
English: Now, with my lack of virtue, the plans of the courtiers can't keep up with me, and I'll probably perish!

古文：曰: 此霸王之所忧也，而君独伐之，其可乎！ 武侯曰： 善。 
现代文：李悝接着又说道： 这就是成就霸王之业的人所忧虑的，可是您却偏偏自夸，那怎么可以呢？ 武侯说： 你说的好。 
English: Li Yan continued to say, "This is what people who have achieved the cause of overlord are worried about, but you are just boasting, how can that be?" Wuhou said, "You said it well.

古文：人主之患也，不在于自少，而在于自多。
现代文：君主的弊病，不在于自己看轻自己，而在于自己看重自己。
English: The malady of the sovereign is not that he thinks less of himself, but that he thinks more of himself.

古文：自多则辞受，辞受则原竭。
现代文：自己看重自己，那么该接受的意见就会加以拒绝。
English: If you value yourself, then you will reject the opinion you should accept.

古文：李悝可谓能谏其君矣，壹称而令武侯益知君人之道。
现代文：该接受的意见加以拒绝，那么进谏之路就堵塞了。李悝可以说是善于劝谏自己的君主了，他一劝谏，就让武侯更加懂得了当君主的原则。
English: If he refused to accept the proposal, his path to the throne would be blocked. It can be said that Li Yu was good at persuading his monarch. Once he persuaded him, he made the Wuhou understand the principle of being a monarch.

古文：齐宣王为大室，大益百亩，堂上三百户。
现代文：齐宣王修建大宫室，规模之大超过了一百亩，堂上设置三百座门。
English: King Qi Xuan built a large palace, the size of which exceeded one hundred mu, and three hundred doors were set up in the hall.

古文：以齐之大，具之三年而未能成。
现代文：凭着齐国选样的大国，修建了三年还没有能修建成。
English: With the help of the large country selected by Qi, it has been built for three years and has not yet been built.

古文：群臣莫敢谏王。
现代文：臣子们没有人敢劝阻齐王。
English: None of the courtiers dared to dissuade King Qi.

古文：春居问于宣王曰: 荆王释先王之礼乐，而乐为轻，敢问荆国为有主乎？ 
现代文：春居向宣王说： 楚王抛弃了先王的礼乐，音乐因此变得轻浮了，请问楚国算是有贤明君主吗? 
English: Chunju said to King Xuan: King Chu abandoned the ceremonial music of the previous king, and the music became frivolous as a result. Is the State of Chu a wise monarch?

古文：王曰： 为无主。 
现代文：宣王说； 没有贤明君主。 
English: There is no wise ruler, said King Xuan.

古文： 贤臣以千数而莫敢谏，敢问荆国为有臣乎？ 
现代文：春居说： 所谓的贤臣数以千计，却没有人敢劝谏，请问楚国算有贤臣吗? 
English: "There are thousands of so-called wise men, but no one dares to advise them. Are there any wise men in Chu?

古文：王曰： 为无臣。 
现代文：宣壬说： 没有贤臣。 
English: There is no such thing as a wise minister, proclaimed the king.

古文： 今王为大室，其大益百亩，堂上三百户。
现代文：春居说： 如争您修建大富室，富室之大超过了一百亩，堂上设置三百座门。
English: Spring House said: If you want to build a large rich room, the rich room is more than one hundred mu, and there are three hundred doors on the hall.

古文：以齐国之大，具之三年而弗能成。
现代文：凭着齐国这样的大国，修建了三年仍不能够修建成。
English: With the help of a big country like Qi, it took three years to build, but it still can't be built.

古文：群臣莫敢谏，敢问王为有臣乎？ 
现代文：臣子们没有人敢劝阻，请问您算是有贤臣吗? 
English: No one dares to dissuade the courtiers. Are you a wise man?

古文：王曰： 为无臣。 
现代文：宣王说； 没有贤臣。 
English: There is no such thing as a wise minister, proclaimed the king.

古文：春居曰： 臣请辟矣！ 
现代文：春居说： 我请您允许我离开吧！ 
English: Harui said, "I beg you to allow me to leave!"

古文：趋而出。
现代文：说完就快步走出去。
English: After saying that, he left at a brisk pace.

古文：王曰： 春子！
现代文：宣壬说； 春子！
English: Xuanren said; Haruko!

古文：春子！
现代文：春子!
English: Haruko!

古文：寡人请今止之。 
现代文：回来，为什么这么晚才劝阻我呢? 
English: Why did you come back so late to dissuade me?

古文：遽召掌书曰: 书之！寡人不肖，而好为大室。
现代文：赶紧召来记事的官员说， 写上，我不贤德，喜欢修建大官室。
English: The official who was quickly summoned to take notes said, "Write down, I am not virtuous, I like to build large offices."

古文：春子止寡人。 
现代文：春子阻止了我。 
English: Haruko stopped me.

古文：箴谏不可不熟。
现代文：对于劝谏，不可不认真考虑。
English: For persuasion, we must seriously consider it.

古文：莫敢谏者，非弗欲也。
现代文：不敢劝谏的人，并不是不想劝谏。
English: Those who do not dare to persuade others do not mean that they do not want to persuade others.

古文：春居之所以欲之与人同，其所以入之与人异。
现代文：春居想要做的跟别人相同，而他采用的劝谏的方法跟别人不一样。
English: What he wants to do is the same as others, but the method of persuasion he uses is different from others.

古文：宣王微春居，几为天下笑矣。
现代文：宣王如果没有春居，几乎要被天下人耻笑了。
English: If Emperor Xuanwu did not have a spring residence, he would almost be laughed at by the world.

古文：由是论之，失国之主，多如宣王，然患在乎无春居。
现代文：由此说来，亡国的君主，大都象宣王一样，然而他们的祸患在于没有春居那样的臣子。
English: From this, it can be said that most of the dead monarchs were like King Xuan, but their misfortune was that they did not have a vassal like Shunju.

古文：故忠臣之谏者，亦从入之，不可不慎。
现代文：所以那些敢于劝谏的忠臣，也应顺势加以劝谏，这是不可不慎重对待的。
English: Therefore, those loyalists who dare to persuade others should also be persuaded, which must be treated with caution.

古文：此得失之本也。
现代文：这是成败的根本啊。
English: This is the root of success or failure.

古文：赵简子沈鸾徼于河，曰： 吾尝好声色矣，而鸾徼致之；吾尝好宫室台榭矣，而鸾徼为之；吾尝好良马善御矣，而鸾徼来之。
现代文：赵简子把鸾徼沉没到黄河里，说； 我曾经爱好音乐女色，鸾徼就给我弄来，我曾经爱好宫室台榭，鸾徼就给我修建，我曾经爱好良马好驭手，鸾徼就培我找来。
English: Zhao Jianzi sank the anchor into the Yellow River and said: I used to love music and women, so I got the anchor, I used to love the palace, so I built the anchor, I used to love good horses and good drivers, so I got the anchor.

古文：今吾好士六年矣，而鸾徼未尝进一人也。
现代文：如今我爱好贤士六年了，可鸾徼不曾举荐过一个人。
English: I've been a fan for six years now, but I've never recommended anyone.

古文：是长吾过而绌吾善也。 
现代文：这是助长我的过错、磨灭我的长处啊。 
English: It's fuelling my faults and eroding my strengths.

古文：故若简子者，能厚以理督责于其臣矣。
现代文：所以象简子这样的人，是能严格地依照原则审察责求自己的臣子了。
English: Therefore, a person like Janzi is able to strictly examine and rebuke his vassals in accordance with the principle.

古文：以理督责于其臣，则人主可与为善，而不可与为非；可与为直，而不可与为枉。
现代文：对自己的臣子依照原则审察责求，那么就可以跟他一起为善，而不可以跟他一起为非，可跟他一起做正直的事，而不可以跟他一起做邪曲的事。
English: If you examine and reprimand your vassal according to principle, then you can do good with him, but you cannot do evil with him. You can do honest things with him, but you cannot do evil things with him.

古文：此三代之盛教。
现代文：这是夏商周三代的美好教化
English: This is the beautiful enlightenment of the third generation of summer merchants.

古文：八曰：凡论人心，观事传，不可不熟，不可不深。
现代文：观表凡是衡量人心，观察事物，不可不精审，不可不深人。
English: To watch the clock is to measure the human heart, to observe things, to scrutinize, to delve.

古文：天为高矣，而日月星辰云气雨露未尝休也；地为大矣，而水泉草木毛羽裸鳞未尝息也。
现代文：天算是很高了，而日月星辰云气雨露却不曾休止过，地算是很大了，而水泉草木飞禽走兽却不曾灭绝过。
English: The sky is very high, but the sun, moon, stars, clouds, gas, rain and dew have never stopped. The land is very large, but the water springs, plants, birds and beasts have never been extinct.

古文：凡居于天地之间、六合之内者，其务为相安利也，夫为相害危者，不可胜数。
现代文：凡是处于天地之问四方之内的，本来都应该尽力做到互安互利，可是它们之间互相危害的，却数不胜数。
English: All things in the four quarters of heaven and earth should try their best to achieve mutual benefit, but there are countless things that harm each other.

古文：人事皆然。
现代文：人和事情也都是如此。
English: The same is true of people and things.

古文：事随心，心随欲。
现代文：事情取决于人心，人心取决于欲望。
English: Things depend on the human heart, and the human heart depends on desire.

古文：欲无度者，其心无度。
现代文：欲望投有限度的，人心也役有限度。
English: Desire has a limit, but the human heart also has a limit.

古文：心无度者，则其所为不可知矣。
现代文：人心没有限度的，那么他的新作所为就不可以被了解了。
English: There is no limit to the human heart, so what his new work does cannot be understood.

古文：人之心隐匿难见，渊深难测。
现代文：人的心思隐藏着，难以窥见，就象深渊难以测量一样。
English: The thoughts of a man's heart are hidden from him; they are as unsearchable as the great deep.

古文：故圣人于事志焉。
现代文：所以圣人考察事情必先观察行事之人的志向。
English: That is why sages, when examining matters, must first observe the aspirations of those who act.

古文：圣人之所以过人以先知，先知必审征表。
现代文：圣人之所以超过一般人，是因为能先知先置，要先知先觉必须审察征兆和表象。
English: The reason why sages are superior to ordinary people is that they can predict the future. In order to predict the future, it is necessary to examine the signs and appearances.

古文：无征表而欲先知，尧、舜与众人同等。
现代文：没有征兆表象却想先知先觉，就是尧、舜也和一般人一样不可能做到。
English: It is just as impossible for ordinary people to be prescient without signs and symptoms, even if they are deaf and dumb.

古文：征虽易，表虽难，圣人则不可以飘矣。
现代文：虽然真象易于观察，假象难于考查，圣人不论对哪种情况都不可以匆忙下结论。
English: Although truth is easy to observe and falsehood is difficult to test, a sage should not jump to conclusions in either case.

古文：众人则无道至焉。
现代文：一般人不能审察征兆和表象，所以就无法达到先知先觉了。
English: The average man cannot scrutinize signs and appearances, so he cannot achieve precognition.

古文：无道至则以为神，以为幸。
现代文：无法达到先知先觉，就认为先知者是靠神力，是靠侥幸。
English: Unable to achieve precognition, they think that prophets rely on divine power and chance.

古文：非神非幸，其数不得不然。
现代文：其实先知并不是靠神力，并不是靠侥幸，而是圣人根据征兆表象看到事理不得不如此。
English: In fact, a prophet does not rely on divine power or chance, but a sage sees things as they must be according to signs and symptoms.

古文：郈成子、吴起近之矣。
现代文：郈成子、吴起就接近于先知先觉了。
English: Zou Chengzi and Wu Qi are close to prophesy.

古文：郈成子为鲁聘于晋，过卫，右宰谷臣止而觞之。陈乐而不乐，酒酣而送之以璧。
现代文：郈成子为鲁国聘问晋国，路过卫国，卫国的右宰谷臣留下并宴请他，右宰谷臣陈列上乐器奏乐，乐曲却不欢快，喝酒喝到畅快之际，把璧玉送给了郈成手。
English: Zou Cheng Zi enquired about Jin for the State of Lu and passed by the State of Wei. The State of Wei's right-hand man, Zui Gu Chen, stayed behind and invited him to a banquet. The right-hand man, Zui Gu Chen, displayed musical instruments and played music, but the music was not happy. While drinking until he was happy, he gave the gem to Zou Cheng Zi.

古文：顾反，过而弗辞。
现代文：郈成子从晋国回来，经过卫国，却不向右宰谷臣告别。
English: On his return from Jin, Shigeko passed through Heiguo, but did not say goodbye to Uzaigayatomi.

古文：其仆曰： 向者右宰谷臣之觞吾子也甚欢，今侯渫过而弗辞？ 
现代文：他的车夫说； 先前右宰谷臣宴请您，感情很欢洽，如今为什么重新经过这里却不向他告别? 
English: His driver said, "Previously, Uzaigayatomi had invited you to a banquet, and our feelings were very congenial. Now, why do you pass by here again, but do not say goodbye to him?"

古文：郈成子曰： 夫止而觞我，与我欢也。
现代文：郈成子说： 他留下我并宴请我，是要跟我欢乐一番。
English: Hao Cheng Zi said: He left me behind and invited me to a banquet to have some fun with me.

古文：陈乐而不乐，告我忧也。
现代文：可陈列上乐器奏乐，乐曲却不欢快，这是向我表示他的忧愁啊。
English: But the fact that the instruments are on display and the music is not happy is a sign of his sadness to me.

古文：酒酣而送我以璧，寄之我也。
现代文：喝洒喝的正畅快之际，他把璧玉送给了我，这是把璧玉托付给我啊。
English: He gave me the gemstone when I was having a good time drinking sake. This is entrusting the gemstone to me.

古文：若由是观之，卫其有乱乎！ 
现代文：如果从这些迹象来看，卫国大概有祸乱吧! 
English: If we look at these signs, there is probably a disaster in the homeland!

古文：倍卫三十里，闻甯喜之难作，右宰谷臣死之，还车而临，三举而归。
现代文：郈成子离开卫国三十里，听到宁喜作乱杀死卫君，右宰谷臣为卫君殉难，就掉转车子回去哭悼谷臣，哭了三次然后才回国。
English: Thirty miles away from the Emperor's territory, Shoseishi heard that Ning Xizangran killed the Emperor and Uzaigatomi was martyred for the Emperor, so he turned around and went back to mourn for Uzaigatomi. He cried three times before returning to the country.

古文：至，使人迎其妻子，隔宅而异之，分禄而食之。
现代文：到了鲁国，派人去接右宰谷臣的妻子孩子，把住宅隔开让他们与自己分开居住，分出自己的俸禄来养活他们。
English: When he arrived in Lu Province, he sent someone to pick up the wife and children of Uzaigatomi, separated the house so that they could live separately from him, and allocated his salary to feed them.

古文：其子长而反其璧。
现代文：右宰谷臣的族子长大了，郈成子把鐾玉还给了他。
English: When Uzaigayatomi's son grew up, Shigeko gave him back the Orb.

古文：孔子闻之，曰： 夫智可以微谋、仁可以托财者，其郈成子之谓乎！ 
现代文：孔子听到这件事，说； 论智慧可以通过隐微的方式跟他进行谋划，论仁德可以托付给他财物的，大概就是郈成子吧！ 
English: When Confucius heard of this, he said, "If wisdom can plot with him in subtle ways, and if benevolence can entrust him with wealth, then he must be the son of Confucius!"

古文：郈成子之观右宰谷臣也，深矣妙矣。
现代文：郈成子观察右宰谷臣，真是深人精妙了。
English: Shigeko Shizuku's observation of Uzaigayatomi is truly profound and exquisite.

古文：不观其事而观其志，可谓能观人矣。
现代文：不观察他做的事情，而观察他的思想，可以说是能观察人了。
English: Not to observe what he does, but to observe his thoughts, can be said to observe a person.

古文：吴起治西河之外，王错谮之于魏武侯，武侯使人召之。
现代文：吴起冶理西河郡，王错向魏武侯诬陷他，武侯派人召他回来。
English: Wu Qi governed the West River. Wang Er slandered him in front of Wei Wuhou. Wuhou sent someone to recall Wu Qi.

古文：吴起至于岸门，止车而休，望西河，泣数行而下。
现代文：吴起到了岸门，停下车子休息，望着西河，眼泪一行行流了下来。
English: Wu got up at the dock gate, stopped the car to rest, looked at the West River, and tears streamed down.

古文：其仆谓之曰： 窃观公之志，视舍天下若舍屣。
现代文：他的车夫对他说： 我私下观察您的志向，您把抛弃天下看得象抛弃鞋子一样。
English: His coachman said to him: I have observed your ambition in private, and you treat the abandonment of the world as you would the abandonment of a shoe.

古文：今去西河而泣，何也？ 
现代文：如今离开西河却哭泣，这是为什么昵? 
English: Now, when I leave the West River, I cry. Why is that?

古文：吴起雪泣而应之曰: 子弗识也。
现代文：吴起擦掉眼泪回答他说： 你不知道啊。
English: Wu Qi wiped away his tears and replied, "You don't know.

古文：君诚知我，而使我毕能，秦必可亡，而西河可以王。
现代文：国君如果真的了解我，让我把自己的才能都发挥出来，一定可以灭掉秦国，凭着西河就可以成就王业。
English: If the sovereign really understands me and allows me to bring my talents into full play, I will surely be able to destroy Qin, and with the help of the West River, I will be able to achieve great things.

古文：今君听谗人之议，而不知我，西河之为秦也不久矣，魏国从此削矣。 
现代文：现在国君听信谗人之言，不了解我，西河不久就会成为秦国的了，魏国从此就要削弱了。 
English: Now the sovereign listens to the words of the eunuchs and does not understand me. The West River will soon become the Qin State, and the Wei State will be weakened from now on.

古文：吴起果去魏入荆，而西河毕入秦。
现代文：结果吴起离开魏国到了楚国，西河全部归人秦国。
English: As a result, Wu Qi left Wei and went to Chu, and the West River all went to Qin.

古文：魏日以削，秦日益大。
现代文：魏国一天天削弱，秦国一天比一天强大。
English: Wei weakened day by day, while Qin became stronger day by day.

古文：此吴起之所以先见而泣也。
现代文：这就是吴起事先预见到这种情况固而哭泣的原因啊。
English: This is the reason why Wu Qi foresaw this situation in advance and wept.

古文：古之善相马者，寒风是相口齿，麻朝相颊，子女厉相目，卫忌相髭，许鄙相，投伐褐相胸胁，管青相唇肳，陈悲相股脚，秦牙相前，赞君相后。
现代文：古代善子相马的人，寒风是观察品评马的口齿，麻朝观察品评马的面颊，子女厉现察品评马的眼睛，卫忌观察品评马的须髭，许鄙观察品评马的臀部，投伐褐观察晶评马的胸肋管青观察品评马的嘴唇，陈悲观察品评马腿，秦牙观察品评马的前部，赞君现察品评马的后部。
English: In ancient times, people who had a good relationship with horses, cold wind was to observe the horse's mouth, Ma Dynasty observed the horse's cheeks, children observed the horse's eyes, Wei Wei observed the horse's whiskers, Xu Wei observed the horse's buttocks, Tuan Luang observed the horse's chest ribs, Qing Qing observed the horse's lips, Chen Pei observed the horse's legs, Qin Fang observed the horse's front, and Zang Jun observed the horse's rear.

古文：凡此十人者，皆天下之良工也。
现代文：所有这十个人，都是天下的良工巧匠。
English: All of these ten people are the best craftsmen in the world.

古文：其所以相者不同，见马之一征也，而知节之高卑，足之滑易，材之坚脆，能之长短。
现代文：也们用来相马的方法不同，但他们看到马的一处征象，就能知道马骨节的高低，腿脚的快慢，体质的强弱，才能的高下。
English: They also use different methods to find a horse, but when they see a sign of a horse, they can know the height of the sinews, the speed of the legs and feet, the strength of the body, and the level of talent.

古文：非独相马然也，人亦有征，事与国皆有征。
现代文：不仅相马是这样，凡也有征兆，事情和国家都有征兆。
English: Not only Soma is like this, there are signs everywhere, things and countries have signs.

古文：圣人上知千岁，下知千岁，非意之也，盖有自云也。
现代文：圣人往上知道千年以前的事，往下知道千年以后的事，并不是靠猜想，而是有根据的。
English: The sages knew the events of a thousand years ago from above, and the events of a thousand years from below, not by conjecture, but with evidence.

古文：绿图幡薄，从此生矣。
现代文：绿图幡薄这些吉祥征兆，就从此产生了。
English: These auspicious signs have been produced ever since.

