古文：张柔张柔，字德刚，易州定兴人，世力农。
现代文：张柔，字德刚，易州定兴人，家世代务农。
English: Zhang Rong, Zi Degang, Yizhou Ding Xingren, the family has been engaged in agriculture for generations.

古文：柔少慷慨，尚气节，善骑射，以豪侠称。
现代文：柔年幼时就胸襟开阔，讲气节，善于骑射，以豪侠为人称赞。
English: When he was young, he was open-minded, talkative, good at riding and shooting, and praised as a hero.

古文：金贞祐间，河北盗起，柔聚族党保西山东流寨，选壮士，结队伍以自卫，盗不敢犯。郡人张信假柔声势，纳流人女为妻，柔鞭信百而还其女。
现代文：金朝贞年间，河北人民反金，柔聚集同族人固守西山东流埚，起义军不敢进犯。同郡人张信，借张柔的声势，强娶一流亡妇女为妻，柔狠狠鞭打张信，归还其女。
English: During the reign of Kim Jong-il, the people of Hebei revolted against Kim Jong-il and gathered their compatriots to hold fast to West Shandong and East Luhansk, and the rebel army did not dare to attack. Zhang Xin, a resident of the same county, took advantage of Zhang Xin's influence to forcefully marry a first-class dead woman as his wife. Zhuo severely whipped Zhang Xin and returned his daughter.

古文：信憾之，谋结党害柔。
现代文：张信心怀不满，企图谋害张柔。
English: Disgruntled with Zhang Xinyu, he attempted to murder Zhang Rong.

古文：未几，信有罪当诛，柔救之得免，于是骁勇之士，多慕义从之。
现代文：不久，张信犯罪，判处死刑，而张柔又救他。所以一些骁勇义士多慕名而投向张柔。
English: Not long after, Zhang Xin committed a crime and was sentenced to death, but Zhang Rong saved him. Therefore, some of the brave and righteous warriors came to Zhang Rong's aid.

古文：遂移檄道润部曲，会易州军市川，誓众为之复仇，众皆感泣。适道润麾下何伯祥得道润所佩金虎符以献，因推柔行经略使事。
现代文：金中都经略使苗道润授张柔为定兴县令，后升为清州防御使。道润上表朝廷，称张柔有才，朝廷加柔为昭毅大将军，管领永定军节度使，兼雄州管内观察使，暂为元帅左都监，行元帅府事。苗道润为其副经略使贾王禹所杀，张柔传令道润部下起兵复仇，众推柔行经略使事。
English: Miao Daorun was given the title of Dingxing County Commander and later promoted to Chingzhou Defense Commander. Daorun presented Zhang Zhuo to the imperial court, saying that Zhang Zhuo was talented. The imperial court promoted Zhang Zhuo to General Zhao Yi, the commander of the Yongding Army, and the observer of the Xiongzhou area, temporarily serving as the marshal of the Left Capital, and conducting the affairs of the marshal's office. Miao Daorun was killed by his deputy, Jia Wang Yu. Zhang Zhuo ordered the subordinates of Daorun to take revenge, and the people pushed Zhuo to carry out the diplomatic affairs.

古文：事闻，加骠骑将军、中都留守，兼大兴府尹、本路经略使，行元帅事。
现代文：金朝廷闻知，加张柔为骠骑将军、中都留守兼大兴府尹、本路经略使，行元帅事。
English: The Kim dynasty court heard that Zhang Rong was promoted to the general of cavalry, the central government left-behind and Daxingfu Yin, and the main road was dispatched to do the marshal's work.

古文：戊寅，国兵出紫荆口，柔率所部逆战于狼牙岭，马蹶被执，遂以众降，太祖还其旧职，得以便宜行事。
现代文：太祖十三年，蒙古军出紫荆口，张柔率所部迎战于狼牙岭，战败被俘，于是率众降蒙古，太祖仍令他官居原职。
English: In the thirteenth year of Taizu's reign, the Mongolian army marched out of Bauhinia, and Zhang Rong led his troops into battle at the Wolf's Teeth Ridge. He was defeated and taken prisoner, and then led his troops to Mongolia. Taizu still kept him in his original post.

古文：柔招集部曲，下雄、易、安、保诸州，攻破贾瑀于孔山，诛瑀，剖其心祭道润。
现代文：柔招集其部属，随蒙军伐金，攻下雄、易、安、保诸州，在孔山击败贾王禹军，擒获贾王禹，剖其心以祭苗道润。
English: Jo summoned his subordinates, followed the Mongolian army to mine gold, conquered Xiong, Yi, An and Baozhou, defeated Jia Wangyu's army in Kongshan, captured Jia Wangyu, and cut out his heart with the sacrifice of seedlings.

古文：瑀党郭收亦降，尽有其众，徙治满城。金真定帅武仙会兵数万来攻，柔以兵数百出奇迎战，大破之。乘胜攻完州，下之，获州佐甄全。
现代文：王禹部将郭收亦降。金真定帅武仙，以数万兵力进攻，张柔只以数百兵力迎战，出奇制胜，大破金兵，乘胜攻克完州，俘州佐甄全。
English: Wang Yube took Guo and also fell. Jin Zhending, a brave warrior, attacked with tens of thousands of troops, Zhang Rong only fought with hundreds of troops, won a surprise victory, defeated the gold soldiers, conquered Ganzhou with victory, and captured Zazhenquan.

古文：全慷慨就戮，柔义而释之，且升为守，使将部曲以从。
现代文：张柔不仅释放了甄全，而且升他为完州太守，令他率其所部归附蒙古。
English: Zhang Rong not only released Yan Quan, but also promoted him to the governor of Ganzhou and ordered him to lead his troops to annex Mongolia.

古文：己卯，仙复来攻，败走之，进拔郎山、祁州、曲阳，诸城寨闻之，皆降。
现代文：十四年，武仙又来进攻，被击走，张柔进克郎山、祁阳、曲阳，其他城寨亦闻风而降。
English: In the 14th year, Wuxian attacked again and was repulsed. Zhang Rong marched into Ke Lang Mountain, Fenyang, Quyang, and other walled cities.

古文：既而中山叛，柔引兵围之，与仙将葛铁仓战于新乐。
现代文：不久，中山反叛，柔引兵围攻，与武仙部将葛铁枪战于新乐。
English: Not long after, Zhongshan rebelled, Jiuhui soldiers besieged, and the Wuxian Department took Ge Tie to a gunfight in Xinle.

古文：一月之间，与仙遇者凡十有七，每战辄胜。
现代文：柔面中二箭，打落二齿，拔出箭仍继续战斗，斩敌数千，擒藁城县令刘成，攻克中山。
English: Two arrows in the soft face, knock down two teeth, pull out the arrow and continue to fight, kill thousands of enemies, Liu Cheng, the governor of Lucheng County, conquered Zhongshan.

古文：方献捷于行在所，行次宣德，而易州军叛，逐其守卢应妻子，据西山马头寨。
现代文：武仙围攻满城，为张柔所败。张柔乘胜招降鼓城，再败武仙于祁阳，攻克深泽、宁晋、安平，遣将分别夺取平棘、藁城、无极、栾城诸县，辟地千余里。深州、冀州以北，真定以东三十余城相继归降。
English: Wuxian besieged and besieged the whole city, but was defeated by Zhang Rong. Zhang Rong took advantage of the victory and besieged and defeated Gucheng, and defeated Wuxian again in Poyang, and conquered Shanzawa, Ningjin, and Anping. He sent commanders to seize the counties of Pingxian, Lucheng, Wuji, and Lucheng respectively, covering more than a thousand miles. More than thirty cities in the north of Shenzhou and Jizhou and in the east of Zhending surrendered one after another.

古文：柔闻之，即弃辎重还，出奇计破其寨，而诛叛者，归其妻子。加荣禄大夫、河北东西等路都元帅，号拔都鲁，置官属，将士迁授有差。燕帅孱赤台数凌柔，柔不为下，乃谮柔于中都行台曰： 张柔骁勇无敌，向被执而降，今委以兵柄，战胜攻取，威震河朔，失今不图，后必难制。
现代文：一月之间，张柔与武仙会战十七次，每战必胜，因功加荣禄大夫、河北东西等路都元帅，赐号 拔都鲁 ，蒙语为勇士之美称。燕帅孱赤台多次欺侮张柔，对中都行台说 ：张柔骁勇无敌，是被迫投降，今授他兵权，战胜攻取，威震河朔，现在不图，以后就难制服。
English: Between January and March, Zhang Ronglu fought seventeen times with the Wuxian, and won every battle. He was awarded the title of "Batullu," the Mongolian word for "warrior," and given the title of "Marshal of the East and West of Hebei Province." Yan Shuai (赤台) bullied Zhang Ronglu many times, and said to Zhongdu Xingtai: "Zhang Ronglu is invincible, he was forced to surrender, now he has been given the right to fight, he has won, he has conquered, he has shaken the river, now he is not, later he will be difficult to subdue."

古文：常欲杀我，我不敢南也。 
现代文：他总想杀我，故我不敢南下。 
English: He always wanted to kill me, so I didn't dare go south.

古文：行台召柔，幽之土室，孱赤台施帐寝其上，环以甲骑，明日将杀之，孱赤台一夕暴死，柔乃得免。金经略使固安王子昌，善战知名，与信安张进连兵，阻水为固，远近惮之。
现代文：行台把张柔幽禁于土室，准备杀他，因孱赤台一夕暴死，柔才幸免。金经略使固安王子昌善战，并与信安张进连兵，远近都怕他。
English: Gangtai imprisoned Zhang Rong in the earthen room and prepared to kill him, but he died suddenly in the middle of the night, and Rongtai was spared. Jin Jingliao made Prince Guan Chang fight well, and joined forces with Xin'an Zhang, and people were afraid of him both near and far.

古文：柔出其不意，率兵径渡，生擒以还。
现代文：柔出其不意，生擒而还。
English: He was taken by surprise by the gentleness of the response, but returned it with a smile.

古文：乙酉，真定武仙杀其帅史天倪，其弟天泽使来求援。
现代文：太祖二十年，真定守将武仙杀其统帅史天倪，其弟史天泽向张柔求援。
English: In the 20th year of Taizu's reign, he decided to kill his general Shi Tianni, and his younger brother Shi Tianze went to Zhang Rou for help.

古文：柔遣骁将乔惟忠等率千余骑赴之，与仙战，败之。
现代文：柔遣骁将乔惟忠等率千余骑兵赴援，击败武仙。
English: Zhuoyuan sent more than a thousand cavalrymen, including Qiao Weizhong, to help and defeated Wuxian.

古文：遂分遣惟忠、宋演略彰德，徇齐鲁；聂福坚略青、魏、山东。
现代文：接着派乔惟忠、宋演等夺取彰德及齐鲁之地；派聂福坚夺占青、魏、山东。
English: Next, he sent Qiao Wei Zhong and Song Yuan to seize the territories of Zhangde and Qilu; he sent Yan Fu Jian to seize the territories of Jianqing, Wei and Shandong.

古文：玺书授柔行军千户、保州等处都元帅。
现代文：朝廷授柔行军千户、保州等处都元帅。
English: He was awarded the title of marshal by the Imperial Court of Japan.

古文：丙戌，遣将以兵从国王孛鲁，攻李全于益都，降之。
现代文：二十一年，遣将率兵随国王孛鲁攻益都，金守将李全降。
English: In the twenty-first year, the general and his soldiers were sent to attack the capital of Yiwu with King Jielu, and Jin Shou defeated Li Quan.

古文：迁庙学于城东南，增其旧制。
现代文：二十二年，镇守保州。保州城经战乱之后，荒废十五年，盗贼出没。
English: In 1922, he was the town guard of Bozhou. After the war, Bozhou was abandoned for 15 years, and was infested with thieves.

古文：壬辰，从睿宗伐金，语其众曰： 吾用兵，杀人多矣，宁无冤者？
现代文：柔精心治理，工商得到发展，市民日渐富裕。太宗四年，张柔率军随睿宗伐金时对部将宣称： 我用兵以来，杀了许多人，其中有冤死的。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, when Zhang Jiu led the army to mine gold with Ruizong, he declared to his opposite number: "Since I have been a soldier, I have killed many people, some of whom died unjustly.

古文：自今以往，非与敌战，誓不杀也。 
现代文：自今以后，非与敌战，誓不滥杀无辜。 
English: From now on, instead of fighting with the enemy, we pledge not to kill innocents indiscriminately.

古文：围汴京，柔军于城西北，金兵屡出拒战。
现代文：蒙军围攻汴京，柔率军攻城西北，单骑杀入敌阵中，四进四出，金军不能抵挡。
English: The Mongolian army besieged Suijing, and the Chinese army besieged the northwest of the city, riding alone into the enemy lines, four in and four out, and the Chinese army could not resist.

古文：柔单骑陷阵，出入数四，金人莫能支。金主自黄陵冈渡河，次沤麻冈，欲取卫州，柔以兵合击，金主败走睢阳。
现代文：金朝哀宗弃汴京自黄陵冈渡黄河，至沤麻冈，欲夺取卫州，张柔领兵合击，哀宗败走睢阳。金汴京守臣崔立开城投降。
English: The Kim dynasty abandoned Yeongjong, abandoned Yeongjeong from Hwangneunggang to the Yellow River, to Yeongmaeung, wanted to seize Weizhou, Zhang Rong led the army to fight, Yeongjong was defeated and fled Yeongyang. Kim Yeongjong's keeper of Yeongjong, Choe Ryikhae, surrendered.

古文：汝南恃柴潭为阻，会宋孟珙以兵粮来会，珙决其南，潭水涸。金人惧，启南门求死战，柔以步卒二十余突其阵，促聂福坚先登，擒二校以归。
现代文：张柔入汴京不取金帛，只取史馆中之《金实录》及秘府图书；访求德高望重的金朝遗老和赵燕世族十余家，将他们卫送北归。张柔进围睢阳，金哀宗逃往汝南。
English: Zhang Rong did not take the gold ingot when she entered Beijing, but only took the "Gold Record" and the secret book from the history museum; she visited more than ten families of the highly respected Kim dynasty and Zhao Yan family, and sent them back to the north. Zhang Rong entered the siege of Shenyang, and Jin Aizong fled to the south of Ryu.

古文：又遣张信据其内隍，诸军齐进，金主自杀。
现代文：汝南在张柔与宋将孟珙的夹攻下城破，哀宗自杀。
English: Runan was defeated by Zhang Rong and Song Mengqi, and Aizong committed suicide.

古文：汝南既破，下令屠城，一小校缚十人以待，一人貌独异，柔问之，状元王鹗也，解其缚，宾礼之。
现代文：汝南攻下后，蒙军下令屠杀城中居民，有一小校缚十人准备诛杀，其中一人相貌与众不同，张柔问知是状元王鹗，立即待之以礼。
English: After the capture of Runan, the Mongolian army ordered the massacre of the inhabitants of the city. There was a small school that tied up ten people and prepared to kill them. One of them was different in appearance. Zhang Rong asked if it was the former king, and immediately received a salute.

古文：入朝，太宗历数其战功，班诸帅上，赐金虎符，升军民万户。
现代文：班师回朝，太宗历数张柔的战功在诸帅之上，赐他金虎符，升为军民万户。
English: When his classmates returned to the imperial court, Emperor Taizong gave him the Golden Tiger Badge and promoted him to the rank of general.

古文：乙未，从皇子阔出拔枣阳，继从大帅太赤攻徐、邳。
现代文：太宗七年，随皇子阔出攻取枣阳。接着随大帅太赤攻克徐州、邳州。
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Taizong's reign, Emperor Taizong went out to conquer Zaoyang with Emperor Gaozong. Then, Emperor Taizong went out to conquer Xuzhou and Zhangzhou with Emperor Taizong.

古文：丁酉，诏屯兵曹武以逼宋。
现代文：九年，奉诏屯兵曹武以威胁宋军。
English: In the ninth year of the Heian period, Cao Wu, a soldier of the imperial army, threatened the Song army.

古文：柔率众出略地他处，宋兵乘虚来袭，柔还，与之遇，自旦至暮，凡十余战，大败宋师，斩其将校十有三人。
现代文：途经九里关时遭宋军伏击，幸大军赶到，这才达到曹武，攻破洪山寨。当张柔出兵攻占其他地方时，宋兵乘虚袭击，两军相遇，大败宋军，斩其将校军官十三人。
English: They were ambushed by the Song army while passing through the nine-mile pass. Fortunately, the large army arrived at Cao Wu and broke through the Hong village. When Zhang Rong sent troops to conquer other places, the Song soldiers took advantage of the false attack, the two armies met, defeated the Song army, and killed thirteen of its officers.

古文：遂会诸军取光州，又进趣黄州。破三山寨，至大湖中，得战舰，沿江接战，壁于黄州西北隅。
现代文：与诸军会师夺取光州，进取黄州，破三山寨，在大湖中缴获战舰，乘舰沿江而下，直抵黄州城西北角。
English: With the army division to seize Gwangju, enterprising Huangzhou, breaking three cottage, captured warships in the great lake, down the river by ship, straight to the northwest corner of Huangzhou city.

古文：柔率死士十余，奋戈大呼，所向仆踣，执俘而还。
现代文：二更时分，宋军袭营，张柔早有防备，中途伏击，俘宋军数百人，江中溺死无数。蒙军攻黄州东门，城上箭如雨下，张柔率敢死队冲击，挥戈大呼，所向披靡。
English: At two o'clock, the Song Army attacked the camp, Zhang Rong had prepared early, ambushed halfway, captured hundreds of Song Army, and drowned countless people in the river. The Mongolian Army attacked the East Gate of Huangzhou, the city was rained with arrows, Zhang Rong led the death squads to attack, waved and shouted, and was invincible.

古文：宋师惧，请和，乃还军。
现代文：宋军大恐，请和，张柔退军。
English: The Song army is terrified. Please make peace. Zhang Rong withdraws from the army.

古文：大帅察罕攻滁州，柔以二百骑往。
现代文：大帅察罕攻滁州，张柔率二百骑增援。
English: The grand marshal Chakhan attacked Bozhou, and Zhang Rong sent 200 cavalry reinforcements.

古文：时卢、泗、盱眙、安丰间，宋屯戍相望，斥候甚严，或劝柔勿行，不听，且战且前，凡二十余战。
现代文：当时在庐州、泗州、盱眙、安丰一带宋军密布，防御甚严，有人劝他不要去，不听，边战边前进，经过二十余战才到达滁州。
English: At that time, the Song army was densely spread in the areas of Ganzhou, Ganzhou, Handan and Anfeng, and the defense was very strict. Some people advised him not to go, but he did not listen and advanced side by side. It took more than 20 battles to reach Ganzhou.

古文：比至滁，察罕以滁久不拔，欲解去，柔请决战，从之。
现代文：至滁州后，察罕因滁州久攻不下，准备撤兵，张柔请求与宋兵决战。
English: After arriving in Bozhou, because Bozhou could not be conquered for a long time, Cahan prepared to withdraw, and Zhang Rong requested a decisive battle with the Song soldiers.

古文：既阵，宋骁将出挑战，柔佯却，宋将骄，柔驰及之，楇击坠地，宋将执柔辔曳入其阵，飞石中柔鼻，两军哄，柔得还，裹疮复战。
现代文：战争进行得非常激烈，张柔险被俘虏。
English: The war was very fierce, and Zhang Rongyan was taken prisoner.

古文：夜遣巩彦晖劫其营，焚城东南隅，柔率锐卒五十七人先登，拔之。
现代文：夜间遣巩彦晖劫宋营，张柔率精兵五十七人自城东南角攻入，终于攻克滁州。
English: During the night, Emperor Gonglian sacked the Song camp, and 57 soldiers led by Zhang Jiu entered from the southeast corner of the city, finally conquering Zhangzhou.

古文：己亥，以本官节制河南诸翼兵马征行事，河南三十余城皆属焉。
现代文：太宗十一年，张柔以军民万户统领河南诸军，河南三十余城都属他管辖。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Zhang Rong led the armies of Henan with an army of ten thousand soldiers and ten thousand households. More than thirty cities in Henan were under his jurisdiction.

古文：庚子，诏柔等八万户伐宋。
现代文：太宗十二年，诏令张柔等八万户伐宋。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor Taizong, the Emperor issued an edict to Zhang Rong and other 80,000 households to set out for Song.

古文：会诸军攻破寿州，柔欲留兵守之，察罕不从。又败宋师于泗州，还杞上。
现代文：十三年，升保州为顺天府。张柔率军自五河口渡过淮河，攻占和州诸城。回师后，张柔遣部将率兵千人屯田于襄城，察罕则奏请令张柔统领诸军镇守杞县。
English: In the thirteenth year, Shengbozhou became Shuntianfu. Zhang Rong and his army crossed the Huai River from the mouth of the Five Rivers to capture the cities of Hezhou. After returning, Zhang Rong's dispatching department led a thousand soldiers to set up camp in Xiangcheng, and Chahan then requested Zhang Rong to lead the troops to defend the county.

古文：帐下吏夹谷显祖得罪亡走，上变诬柔，执柔以北。
现代文：张柔在杞县东西中三山夹河设防，宋军不敢侵犯。蒙军攻破寿州，张柔请求留兵镇守，察罕不同意。
English: Zhang Rong set up fortifications in the middle of the three mountains and rivers in the east and west of Yunnan County, and the Song Army did not dare to invade. The Mongolian Army broke through Shoushou, Zhang Rong requested to stay in the town, and Chahan did not agree.

古文：大臣多以阖门保柔者，卒辨其诬，显祖伏诛。辛亥，宪宗即位，换授金虎符，仍军民万户。
现代文：张柔于泗州击败宋军后还镇杞县。宪宗元年，宪宗即位，授张柔金虎符，仍为军民万户。
English: After Zhang Rong defeated the Song army in Bozhou, he returned to Bozhou County. In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Emperor Xianzong ascended to the throne and awarded Zhang Rong the Golden Tiger Badge.

古文：甲寅，移镇亳州。
现代文：四年，张柔镇守亳州。
English: For four years, Zhang Rouzhen guarded Luzhou.

古文：环亳皆水，非舟楫不达，柔甃城壁为桥梁属汴堤，以通商贾之利；复建孔子庙，设校官弟子员。
现代文：亳州城四周皆水，非舟船不得通行。张柔在水上架起桥梁以便商贾进行贸易；建立孔庙，设立学校，使官员子弟能上学读书。
English: Zhang Rong built bridges on the water so that merchants could trade; he built a Confucius Temple and a school so that the children of officials could go to school.

古文：世祖自阳罗渡江，促柔会兵攻鄂，百余日不能下。
现代文：宪宗九年，张柔令副将张果、王仲仁率军随宪宗征蜀；令王安国、胡进、田伯荣、宋演率军随宗王塔察儿攻荆山，自己则随世祖攻鄂州。世祖由大胜关，张柔由虎头关分头并进。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Xianzong, Zhang Rong ordered Vice Generals Zhang Guo and Wang Zhongren to lead the army to conquer Shu with Emperor Xianzong; ordered Wang Anguo, Hu Jin, Tian Bo Rong and Song Rong to lead the army to conquer Mount Jing with Emperor Xianzong, and himself to conquer Ezhou with Emperor Xianzong. Emperor Xianzong marched from Dasheng Pass and Emperor Zhang Rong from Houtou Pass.

古文：世祖谕之曰： 吾犹猎者，不能擒圈中豕，野猎以供汝食，汝可破圈而取之。 柔乃令何伯祥作鹅车，洞掘其城，别遣勇士先登，攻其西南陬，屡破之。会宪宗凶问至，宋亦行成，世祖北还，命柔统领蒙古、汉军，以俟后命，城白鹿矶，为久驻计。
现代文：张柔军于沙窝遇宋军，为柔子张弘彦击败。世祖自阳罗渡江，催促张柔会师共同攻鄂。攻鄂州百余日未下，张柔令何伯祥制作鹅车，掘穿城墙，另派勇士从西南攻城。这时闻宪宗驾崩，世祖北还，令张柔统领蒙古、汉军修白鹿矶城，驻守待命。
English: Zhang Rong's army met the Song army in the sand pit and was defeated by Rong's son Zhang Hongyan. The founder of the dynasty crossed the river from Yangluo and urged Zhang Rong's followers to jointly attack Hubei. More than 100 days before the attack on Hubei, Zhang Rong ordered He Boxiang to make a goose cart, dig through the city wall, and sent other warriors to attack the city from the southwest. At this time, Wen Xianzong passed away. The founder of the dynasty was still in the north, and ordered Zhang Rong to rule Mongolia, and the Han army to repair Bailuqiao City and stay on standby.

古文：中统元年，世祖即位，诏班师。
现代文：中统元年，世祖即位，诏令张柔班师回朝。
English: In the first year of the unified China, the founder of the dynasty ascended to the throne and ordered Zhang Rongbanshi to return to the imperial court.

古文：阿里不哥反，世祖北征，诏柔入卫，至庐朐河，有诏止之。分其兵三千五百卫京师，以子弘庆为质。
现代文：阿里不哥反叛，世祖北征，诏令张柔入大都保卫京城，行军至庐朐河又奉诏停止前进，只以三千五百人入卫京师，并以其子张弘庆为人质。
English: Ali's younger brother rebelled, the founder of the Northern Expedition, and ordered Zhang Rong to march into the capital to defend the capital, marching to the Li River and stopping the advance, with only three thousand five hundred people entering the Beijing Division, and with his son Zhang Hongqing as a hostage.

古文：二年，以《金实录》献诸朝，且请致仕，封安肃公，命第八子弘略袭职。
现代文：中统二年，张柔将《金实录》献给朝廷，并请求辞去官职。获准，封安肃公，命柔之第八子张弘略袭承父职。
English: In the second year of unified China, Zhang Rou dedicated the "Golden Record" to the imperial court, and requested to resign from his official post. He was allowed to be appointed to An Sui, and Zhang Hongli, the eighth son of Mu Rong, succeeded to his father's post.

古文：至元三年，加荣禄大夫，判行工部事，城大都。
现代文：至元三年，加荣禄大夫、判行工部事，负责修建大都城垣。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, Dr. Garonglu was assigned to the Ministry of Works and was responsible for the construction of most of the city walls.

古文：四年，进封蔡国公。
现代文：四年，进封蔡国公。
English: Four years later, Cai Guogong was enthroned.

古文：五年六月卒，年七十九。
现代文：五年六月卒，年七十九岁。
English: He died in June 2005, aged 79.

古文：赠推忠宣力翊运功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，谥武康。
现代文：赠推忠宣力翊运功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，谥武康。
English: Prizes were given to the following meritorious vassals: Taishi, Kaifu Yi, Tong San Shi, Shangzhu Guo, and Zou Wu Kang.

古文：延祐五年，加封汝南王，谥忠武。
现代文：延五年，加封汝南王，谥忠武。
English: It was extended for five years, with the addition of King Runan and King Taotong.

古文：子十有一人，弘略、弘范最显，弘范自有传。
现代文：子十一人，以弘略、弘范最有名，各有传。
English: He had eleven children, the most famous of whom were Hong Liak, and Hong Fan, both of whom have been passed down.

古文：弘略字仲杰，柔第八子也。
现代文：张弘略，字仲杰，张柔之第八子。
English: Zhang Hongli, alias Zhongjie, is the eighth son of Zhang Rong.

古文：有谋略，通经史，善骑射。
现代文：弘略有谋略，精通经史，善骑射。
English: Hong has a keen sense of strategy, is well versed in history, and is good at riding and shooting.

古文：尝从柔镇杞徙亳。
现代文：曾随其父镇守杞县，后来迁居亳州。
English: He once followed his father to the town of Shixian, and later moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：岁乙卯，入朝宪宗，授金符，权顺天万户。
现代文：宪宗五年，入朝拜见宪宗，授金符，暂为顺天万户。
English: In the fifth year of Kenzong, he entered the imperial court and saw Kenzong, and received a gold medal. For the time being, he was Shuntian million households.

古文：从征蜀，以其幼，赐锦衣，令还镇。
现代文：后随宪宗征蜀，因年幼，赐他锦衣，令他回亳州。
English: Later, he followed Emperor Xianzong to conquer Shu, and because he was young, he was given a brocade robe and ordered to return to Zhangzhou.

古文：柔既致仕，授弘略金虎符、顺天路管民总管、行军万户，仍总宣德、河南、怀孟等路诸军屯亳者。
现代文：张柔辞官后，授弘略金虎符、顺天路管民总管、行军万户，仍总领在亳州屯田的宣德、河南、怀孟等路军队。
English: After Zhang Rong's resignation, he was awarded the title of General of the Golden Tiger, General of the People of Shuntian Road, General of the March of Ten Thousand Households, and still led the army of Xuande, Henan, Huai Meng and other roads in Tongtian, Zhangzhou.

古文：中统三年，李璮反，求救于宋将夏贵。
现代文：中统三年，李王反叛，求救于宋将夏贵。
English: Three years after the unification of China, King Li rebelled and turned to Song general Xia Gui for help.

古文：贵自蕲乘虚北夺亳、滕、徐、宿、邳、沧、滨七州，新蔡、符离、蕲、利津四县，杀守将。
现代文：贵自蕲州乘虚向北进军，攻占亳、滕、徐、宿、邳、沧、滨七州及新蔡、符离、蕲、利津四县，杀守将。
English: Guizhou marched northward from Bozhou, taking advantage of the situation, and captured seven prefectures including Handan, Teng, Xu, Shuku, Handan, Cang and Binzhou, as well as four counties including Xincai, Fuyong, Handan and Lijin.

古文：弘略率战船遏之于涡口，贵退保蕲，弘略发亳军攻之，水陆并进。
现代文：弘略率战船截堵宋军于涡口，夏贵退保蕲县。弘略自亳州出兵攻击，水陆并进。
English: Hong Liang led warships to block the Song army in Workou, and Xia Gui retreated to Baoshan County. Hong Liang sent troops from Zhangzhou to attack, marching on land and sea.

古文：宋兵素惮亳军，焚城宵遁，追杀殆尽，获军资不可计，尽复所失地。
现代文：宋军素来害怕亳州张弘略的军队，焚其城夜遁。弘略追杀几尽，缴获军械物资不可胜计，收复所有失地。
English: The Song Army had always been afraid of Zhang Hongli's army in Ganzhou, and had set fire to the city's watchtower. They had chased and killed many of Zhang Hongli's troops, and had seized an incalculable amount of military supplies. They had recovered all the lost territory.

古文：李璮既诛，追问当时与璮通书者，独弘略书皆劝以忠义，事得释。
现代文：李王失败伏诛，追究当时与王有书信往来的人中，惟独弘略给王的信中都是劝他忠义。
English: King Li failed to surrender, and among the people who had written letters with King Li at that time, only Hong Li's letters to King Li were to persuade him to be loyal.

古文：朝廷惩璮叛逆，务裁诸侯权以保全之，因解弘略兵职，宿卫京师，赐只孙冠服，以从宴享。至元三年，城大都，佐其父为筑宫城总管。
现代文：在惩办李王之后，朝廷裁削诸侯权力，弘略因此而被解除兵职，只充京师宿卫。至元三年，修建大都城，弘略帮助其父为筑宫城总管。
English: After punishing King Li, the imperial court curtailed the power of the princes. As a result, Hong Liao was relieved of his military duties and only served as a palace guard. In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, Hong Liao helped his father to build Dadu City as the general manager of Tsukiji City.

古文：八年，授朝列大夫、同行工部事，兼领宿卫亲军、仪鸾等局。
现代文：八年，授朝列大夫、同行工部事，兼领宿卫亲军、仪鸾等局。
English: In the eighth year, he was awarded the title of doctor of the Imperial Household Agency, the same as the Ministry of Works, and the concurrent leader of the Imperial Guards and the Ceremonial Office.

古文：十三年，城成，赐内帑金扣、玳瑁卮，授中奉大夫、淮东道宣慰使。
现代文：十三年，大都城垣竣工，赐内帑金扣、玳瑁酒器，授中奉大夫、淮东道宣慰使。
English: In the thirteenth year, the construction of the Great Wall of Chenghuai was completed, and the gold buckles and wine glasses were given to the inner wall, and the middle school was awarded the title of doctor, and the Huai host was awarded the title of consoler.

古文：十四年，宋广王昺据闽、广，时东海县储粟数万，行省檄弘略将兵二千戍之，仍命造舟运粟入淮安。
现代文：十四年，宋广王赵籨占据闽、广，当时东海县储有粮食数万石，行省令弘略领兵二千人去戍守，并令他造舟运粟到淮安。
English: In the 14th year of the Song Dynasty, the king of Song and Guangxi, Zhao Wei, occupied Shu and Guang. At that time, Donghai County stored tens of thousands of kilos of grain, and the provincial government ordered Hongliu to lead two thousand soldiers to Shu, and ordered him to build a boat to transport corn to Huai'an.

古文：弘略顾民舟，有能载粟十石者与一石，人争趋之，一月而毕。
现代文：弘略雇民船，凡能载粟十石者，给运资一石，有船者争相运输，只一月便运完。
English: Hong Liak hired a people's ship, and anyone who could carry ten stone of millet was given one stone of freight, and those who had ships competed for transportation, and the transportation was completed in only one month.

古文：十六年，迁江西宣慰使。
现代文：至元十六年，调任江西宣慰使。
English: In the 16th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred to the post of Jiangxi Propaganda and Consolation Envoy.

古文：二十九年，见世祖于龙虎台，请曰： 臣之子玠长矣，愿备宿卫。 
现代文：饶州盗进犯都昌。弘略认为，饶州虽属江东，然与南康只一湖相隔，此寇不灭，则江西必有起来响应的。于是派人去直捣贼巢，生擒贼首，斩首于市，其余的溃散。不久，弘略因病回到亳州。
English: Raozhou intruded into Ducheng. Hongliu thought that although Raozhou belonged to the east of the Yangtze River, it was only separated from Nankang by a lake. If this intrusion did not end, then Jiangxi would have to respond. So he sent someone to directly attack the thief's nest, cut off the thief's head, beheaded in the city, and dispersed the rest. Soon, Hongliu returned to Zhangzhou due to illness.

古文：从之，且赐以酒曰： 卿年未老，谢事何为。 特命为河南行省参知政事。
现代文：至元二十九年，在龙虎台朝见世祖，请求将其子张入宿卫服役。世祖允准，并特任命弘略为河南行省参知政事。
English: In the 29th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he met his ancestor in the Longhu-Tai Dynasty and requested his son Zhang to serve as a night watchman. The ancestor agreed, and specially appointed Hongliu as a political advisor to Henan Province.

古文：元贞二年卒。赠推忠佐理功臣、银青荣禄大夫、平章政事、上柱国、蔡国公，谥忠毅。
现代文：元贞二年卒，赠推忠佐理功臣、银青荣禄大夫、平章政事、上柱国、蔡国公，谥忠毅。
English: Two years after the death of Yuan Zhen, he was presented with the titles of Zhuozhong Zali Meritorious Servant, Yinqing Ronglu Doctor, Pingzhang Political Affairs, Shangzhu Guo, Cai Guo Gong, and Zou Zhongyi.

古文：史天倪，字和甫，燕之永清人。
现代文：史天倪，字和甫，燕之永清人。
English: Shi Tian Ni, Zi He Fu, Yan Zi Yong Qing Ren.

古文：曾祖伦，少好侠，因筑室发土得金，始饶于财。
现代文：曾祖史伦，年少时就好扶弱抑强，见义勇为，在建房时从地下发掘出大量金银，因而成为富豪之家。
English: Zengzu Shulun, when he was young, was good at supporting the weak and suppressing the strong, and he was brave in doing good deeds. When building a house, he excavated a large amount of gold and silver from the ground, thus becoming a rich man's home.

古文：金末，中原涂炭，乃建家塾，招徕学者，所藏活豪士甚众，以侠称于河朔。士族陷为奴虏者，辄出金赎之。
现代文：金朝末年，中原战争连年，人民极其困苦，史伦在家中设立私塾，请学者为师，许多豪士依他为生，士族中有沦为奴隶者，伦出钱赎身为民，河北地区称他为侠义之士。
English: At the end of the Jin Dynasty, the Central Plains War continued year after year, and the people were extremely poor. Shulun set up a private school in his home and invited scholars as teachers. Many heroes lived by him. Among the warrior class, there were those who were reduced to slavery. Shulun paid money to redeem himself for the people, and the Hebei region called him a man of chivalry.

古文：甲子，岁大侵，发粟八万石赈饥者，士皆争附之。
现代文：金章宗泰和四年为饥荒年，史家以粟八万石赈济饥民，所以许多人都争相归附于史家。
English: Jinzhang Zongtai and the four years were famine years, and the historian raised eighty thousand mica to feed the hungry, so many people are competing to join the historian.

古文：父秉直，读书尚气义。癸酉，太师、国王木华黎统兵南伐，所向残破，秉直聚族谋曰： 方今国家丧乱，吾家百口，何以自保！ 既而知降者皆得免，乃率里中老稚数千人，诣涿州军门降。
现代文：祖父史成皀也很豪爽，有其父风度，战乱年月，盗贼四起，成皀把家财散与平民，自己只留下一些粮食度日。史天倪父亲叫史秉直，好读书，重义气。太祖八年，国王木华黎统兵南伐，大军所到地方，残破不堪。秉直知道只有投降蒙古军才能保存全家百口之众，于是率领同乡老幼数千人到涿州向蒙军投诚。
English: His grandfather, Shi Chengran, was also very heroic. He had his father's demeanor. During the years of war, there were four robberies. Chengran scattered his family's wealth with the commoners, leaving only some grain for himself to live on. Shi Tianni's father was named Shi Bingzhi, who was good at reading and had a strong sense of loyalty. In the eighth year of King Taizu's reign, King Mu Huali led an army southward, and the large army reached the countryside, which was in ruins. Bingzhi knew that only by surrendering to the Mongol army could he save his entire family of 100 people, so he led thousands of

古文：木华黎欲用秉直，秉直辞而荐其子，乃以天倪为万户，而命秉直管领降人家属，屯霸州。
现代文：木华黎想任用史秉直，秉直辞谢，而推荐其子天倪。于是木华黎以史天倪为万户，而命秉直管领降人家属，聚居于霸州。
English: Mu Huali wanted to appoint Shi Bingzhi, but Bingzhi declined and recommended his son Tianni. Therefore, Mu Huali appointed Shi Bingzhi as the head of the family, and ordered Bingzhi to lead the descendant's family members to live in Bazhou.

古文：秉直拊循有方，远近闻而附者十余万家。
现代文：秉直将他们安置得很好，远近闻知前来归附者十余万家。
English: He placed them well, and more than a hundred thousand families came from near and far to join him.

古文：寻迁之漠北，降人道饥，秉直得所赐牛羊，悉分食之，多所全活。
现代文：不久，把他们迁往漠北，路途上这些归顺降民饥寒交迫，秉直将赏赐他的牛羊全给他们分食。
English: Soon, he moved them to the north of the desert. On the way, these surrendered people were hungry and cold, and he dutifully gave them all the cattle and sheep he had been given.

古文：甲戌，从木华黎攻北京。乙亥，北京降，木华黎承制以乌野儿为北京路都元帅，秉直行尚书六部事，主馈饷，军中未尝乏绝。
现代文：太祖九年，秉直随木华黎攻北京，十年，北京降，木华黎任乌野儿为北京路都元帅，秉直行尚书六部事，主管军饷供给。
English: In the ninth year of the great-grandfather, Bingzhi followed Mu Huali to attack Beijing, and in the tenth year, Beijing fell. Mu Huali was appointed as the marshal of Beijing, and Bingzhi was in charge of six departments and the supply of military supplies.

古文：有道士见而异之曰： 封侯相也。 
现代文：他在任期间，军饷从未缺乏。太宗二年，秉直告老回乡，终年七十一岁。
English: During his tenure, there was never a shortage of military pay. In the second year of Taizong, he returned to his hometown, at the age of seventy-one.

古文：及长，好学，日诵千言。
现代文：史天倪为史秉直长子，童年就体貌魁梧。长大好学，能日诵千言。
English: Shi Tianni is the eldest son of Shi Bingnao. He was a heavy-set man in his childhood. He grew up eager to learn and could recite a thousand words a day.

古文：大安末，举进士不第，乃叹曰： 大丈夫立身，独以文乎哉！
现代文：金卫绍王大安末年，应试考进士落榜，叹息道： 大丈夫处世岂能单靠文章求功名！
English: In the last years of King Taian's reign, Kim Weishao lost his place on the list of candidates for the entrance examination. He sighed and said, "If you want to do well in life, you can't rely on your articles alone!

古文：使吾遇荒鸡夜鸣，拥百万之众，功名可唾手取也。 
现代文：如果我闻鸡起舞，发奋进取，统百万大军，功名是容易得到的。 
English: If I dance to the beat of the drum, work hard, and unite a million-strong army, it will be easy to gain fame.

古文：木华黎见而奇之。
现代文：木华黎深为器重他。
English: He is respected by all.

古文：既以万户统诸降卒，从木华黎略地三关已南，至于东海，所过城邑皆下。
现代文：天倪以万户之职统领诸归附降卒，随木华黎攻城夺地，自三关以南至于东海的各地城池，攻无不克。
English: Tian Ni, as the leader of ten thousand households, led the subordinate subordinate subordinates to attack the city and seize the land, from the south of the Three Passes to the East China Sea, and attacked all the cities.

古文：因进言于木华黎曰： 金弃幽燕，迁都于汴，已失策矣。
现代文：他向木华黎建议道 ：金人弃幽燕，迁都于汴梁，这是失策。
English: He suggested to Mu Huali that it was a mistake for the Jin people to abandon Yuyan and move the capital to Qilian.

古文：辽水东西诸郡，金之腹心也。我若得大宁以挖其喉襟，则金虽有辽阳，终不能保矣。 
现代文：辽水东西诸郡是金国的腹心，我若得大宁就是卡住他们的脖子，金人只有辽阳，但最终还是保不住的。 
English: The counties in the eastern and western parts of Liaoshui are the vassals of Jin Guo. If I were to get hold of Daining, I would grab them by the scruff of the neck. The only Jin people are Liaoyang, but in the end, I can't keep them.

古文：木华黎善之。
现代文：木华黎认为此话很对。
English: Mu Huali thinks this is quite right.

古文：先，伦卒时，河朔诸郡结清乐社四十余，社近千人，岁时像伦而祠之。
现代文：原先，其曾祖史伦去世时，河北诸郡组织 清乐社 四十余个，拥有群众近千人，每年在祠中对史伦的像祭祀。
English: Originally, when his great-grandfather Shulun died, Hebei counties organized more than 40 Qingleisha, with a population of nearly a thousand people, to sacrifice Shulun's image in the ancestral hall every year.

古文：至是，天倪选其壮勇万人为义兵，号清乐军，以从兄天祥为先锋，所向无敌。分兵略三河、蓟州，诸寨望风款服。
现代文：这时，史天倪从 清乐社 中挑选壮勇万人组成义军，号 清乐军 ，任堂兄史天祥为先锋，所向无敌，分兵攻占三河、蓟州，诸寨望风而降。
English: At this time, Shi Tian Ni selected a group of brave men from the Qingle Society to form a rebel army, called the Qingle Army, and appointed his cousin Shi Tian Xiang as the vanguard. He was invincible, and his detachment captured Sanhe, Zhangzhou, and Zhuzhai.

古文：甲戌，朝太祖于燕之幄殿，所陈皆奇谋至计，大称旨，赐金符，授马步军都统，管领二十四万户。
现代文：太祖九年，史天倪在燕地帐篷里朝见太祖，献奇谋良计，皆得太祖赏识，赐金符，授马步军都统，管领二十四万户。
English: In the ninth year of Taizu's reign, Shi Tianni met with Taizu in a tent in Yanchi, and offered him a miracle and a good plan. All of them appreciated Taizu, gave him gold charms, awarded him with horse cavalry and foot soldiers, and governed 240,000 households.

古文：从木华黎攻高州，又从攻北京，皆不战而克。
现代文：这年，随木华黎攻高州、北京，皆不战而克。
English: In the same year, Huari attacked Gaozhou and Beijing without a fight.

古文：乙亥，授右副都元帅，改赐金虎符。
现代文：十年，授右副都元帅，改赐金虎符。
English: Ten years later, he was awarded the title of Vice-Marshal of the Capital and the Golden Tiger Badge.

古文：奉诏南征，围平州，金经略使乞住降。
现代文：奉诏南征，围攻平州，金经略使乞住降。
English: He ordered the Southern Expedition, besieged Pingzhou, and forced the Jin Emperor to abdicate.

古文：而真定帅武仙，固守不下，遂移军围大名。
现代文：进军真定，真定帅武仙固守，天倪围攻不下，转而围攻大名。
English: The army marched into Shingon. Shingon's brave warriors held firm. They could not besiege Tianni, so they turned to besieging Daimyo.

古文：众谓城坚不可击，天倪使攻其西南角，劲卒屡上屡却，天倪先登，守者辟易，遂破其城。丙子，会木华黎兵于燕南，清州监军王守约、平州推官合达，俱以城叛，连谋越海归金，天倪追袭至乐安，合达以益都行省忙古兵来拒，败之，杀守约，擒忙古，斩首万级。
现代文：从西南角进攻，天倪身先登城，守军惊退，攻克大名。十一年，与木华黎会师燕南，清州监军王守约、平州推官合达相继反叛，策划共同沿海道投向金朝。天倪追击至乐安，合达派益都行省忙古率军来抵抗，被击败。天倪杀守约，擒忙古，斩首万余。
English: Attacking from the southwest corner, Tian Ni went to the city first, the defenders retreated in a panic, and conquered the daimyo. In the eleventh year, he rebelled successively with Yan Nan, a member of the Mu Huali Association, Wang Shouyu, the overseer of the Qingzhou army, and Heda, the governor of Pingzhou, and planned to jointly attack the Kim dynasty along the highway. Tian Ni pursued to Le'an, and Heda sent benefits to the province to lead the army to resist, and was defeated. Tian Ni killed Shouyu, killed Shouyu, and beheaded more than 10,000 people.

古文：天倪命穴其旁，地虚，楼陷，遂拔之。
现代文：十二年，史天倪率军攻占山东诸郡，其部卒有杀民家牲猪者，立即斩首示众，故军纪严厉，远近响应。
English: In the 12th year, Shi Tian Ni led the army to occupy the counties of Shandong Province. Some of his subordinates killed people's livestock and pigs, and immediately beheaded them. Therefore, the military discipline was strict, and the response was far and near.

古文：木华黎喜，赏以绣衣、金鞍、名马。
现代文：中山李明、赵州李王禹、邢州武贵、磁州李平、氵名州张立皆相继投诚。十四年，随木华黎攻取河东，克绛州。
English: Li Ming of Zhongshan, Li Wang Yu of Zhao, Wu Gui of Quzhou, Li Ping of Magnet, and Zhang Li of Shengmeizhou all successively surrendered. In 1914, they followed Huari of Mu to conquer Hedong and Keji of Quzhou.

古文：庚辰，还军真定，武仙降。
现代文：十五年，回军攻真定，武仙降。
English: Fifteen years later, the returning army attacked Zhending, and Wuxian fell.

古文：木华黎承制以天倪为金紫光禄大夫、河北西路兵马都元帅，行府事；仙副之。
现代文：木华黎承制授天倪为金紫光禄大夫、河北西路兵马都元帅、行府事；以武仙为副都元帅。
English: According to the Muhua-Li succession system, Tian Ni was awarded the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, Hebei West Road Terracotta Warriors and Horses Marshal, and Administration of the Capital; with Wu Xian as Vice-Marshal of the Capital.

古文：天倪乃言于木华黎曰： 今中原粗定，而所过犹纵钞掠，非王者吊民伐罪意也。
现代文：天倪对木华黎说道 ：今中原已大略平定，而大军所过还掠夺百姓，这不是皇上为民除害的本意。
English: Tian Ni said to Mu Huali, "Now that the Central Plains have been more or less pacified, and large armies still pass through and plunder the people, this is not the Emperor's intention to eliminate harm to the people.

古文：且王奉天子命，为天下除暴，岂复效其所为乎！ 
现代文：王奉天子之命为天下除暴安民，岂能反而像那些暴君所作所为吗？ 
English: The king, by the order of the Son of God, came to rid the world of violence and peace, but can he act like those tyrants?

古文：王曰： 善。 下令：敢有剽虏者，以军法从事。
现代文：木华黎认为他说得对，下令：敢有掠夺百姓者，以军法从事。
English: Mu Huali thought he was right and ordered that anyone who dared to plunder the people should be dealt with according to military law.

古文：辛巳，金怀州元帅王荣、潞州元帅裴守谦、泽州太守王珍皆以城降。
现代文：十六年，金怀州元帅王荣、路州元帅裴守谦、泽州太守王珍都相继开门投降。
English: In the 16th year, Wang Rong, the marshal of Jinhuaizhou, Pei Shouqian, the marshal of Luzhou, and Wang Zhen, the grand marshal of Zhejiang, all surrendered one after another.

古文：壬午，攻济南水寨，破之。癸未，徇山西，遂克三关，不浃旬，定四十余寨。
现代文：十七年，攻克济南水寨。十八年，攻夺山西，克三关，不到十二天连下四十余寨。
English: In the seventeenth year, Jinan Water Village was conquered. In the eighteenth year, Shanxi was conquered, Sangan was conquered, and more than forty villages were conquered in less than twelve days.

古文：天倪曰： 合达以实归汴，必以今夕。 
现代文：大兵至河卫，与严实会师。严实请求自己去攻河卫。天倪说 ：合达、蒲瓦都是劲敌。 严实说 ：那也容易对付，保险为公攻破此城。 
English: The soldiers went to the river Wei and joined forces with Yan Shih. Yan Shih begged him to attack the river Wei. Tian Ni said, "Heda and Powa are both strong opponents." Yan Shih said, "That is also easy to deal with, it is safe to attack the city."

古文：急命冯存、杜必贵率壮士一千三百，伏延津柳渡。
现代文：第二天，严实出兵，受蒲瓦与合达夹击，兵败，严实被俘。
English: The next day, Yan solidly sent out troops and was attacked by Puwa and Heda. The troops were defeated and Yan solidly captured.

古文：果夜缚实过延津，遇存等，与战，败之，实得脱归，必贵战死。
现代文：天倪说 ：合达今晚必定会把严实送去汴京。 急命冯存、杜必贵率壮士一千三百人于延津柳渡伏击，大败合达军，救出严实，而杜必贵战死。
English: Tian Ni said, "Heda will definitely send Yan Si to Yanjing tonight." Feng Cun and Du Bigui led 1,300 strong men to ambush Yanjing in Yanjin Liudu, defeated the Heda army, rescued Yan Si, and Du Bigui died in the battle.

古文：未几，帝命天倪回军真定。
现代文：不久，太祖命天倪回军真定。
English: Soon after, the great-grandfather was ordered by Heaven to return to the army.

古文：甲申夏，大名总管彭义斌以宋兵犯河朔，天倪逆战于恩州，义斌败，入保大名。
现代文：十九年夏，宋大名总管彭义斌进军河朔，史天倪迎战于恩州，义斌退守大名。
English: In the summer of the 19th year, Peng Yibin, the head of the Song Dynasty, marched into Hexuo, Shi Tianni fought in Enzhou, and Yibin retired from the daimyo.

古文：乙酉，师还，闻武仙之党据西山腰水、铁壁二寨以叛，天倪直捣其巢穴，尽掩杀之。
现代文：二十年，天倪还军于真定，闻武仙旧部占据西山腰水、铁壁二寨反叛，天倪直捣其巢穴，杀尽叛军。
English: Twenty years ago, Tian Ni returned his army to Zhending. It was rumored that Wu Xian's old faction had occupied Xishan Xiangshui and Tiebi Erzhai and rebelled. Tian Ni went straight to their lair and killed all the rebels.

古文：仙怒，谋作乱，乃设宴邀天倪。
现代文：武仙怒，也图谋反叛，设宴邀请天倪。
English: Wuxian was furious and also plotted a rebellion, setting up a banquet and inviting Tianni.

古文：有知其谋者，止天倪毋往，天倪不从，遂为仙所杀。
现代文：有人知是阴谋，劝天倪不去。天倪不听，果为武仙所杀。
English: Some people knew it was a conspiracy, and advised Tian Ni not to go. Tian Ni did not listen, and was killed by martial artists.

古文：天倪之赴真定也，秉直密戒之曰： 观武仙之辞气，终不为我用，宜备之。 
现代文：天倪赴真定时，其父秉直曾暗自告诫天倪： 看武仙的言辞表现，终会反叛，防备为好。 
English: When Tian Ni went to Zhending, his father Bing Zhi warned Tian Ni secretly: Look at the speech performance of the warrior, it will eventually rebel, and it is better to be prepared.

古文：天倪曰： 我以赤心待人，人或相负，天必不容，愿无虑。 
现代文：天倪说： 我以赤诚之心待人，别人负心，天必不容，不要有什么顾虑。 
English: Tian Ni said, "I treat people with sincerity, but others treat me with negativity. Heaven will not tolerate it. Don't worry about it."

古文：秉直乃携其孙楫、权还北京。至是，人服其先识。
现代文：天倪死后，秉直带着孙子史楫、史权回北京去了，人们认为秉直有先见之明。
English: After Tian Ni's death, Bing Zhi took his grandsons Shi Yan and Shi Quan back to Beijing. People thought that Bing Zhi was prescient.

古文：天倪死时，年三十九。
现代文：天倪死时年仅三十九岁。
English: Tian Ni was only 39 years old when he died.

古文：徙东平，又徙河间。
现代文：其子五人，三人年幼俱死于武仙之叛，惟史楫、史权幸免于祸。
English: His five sons, three of them young, all died in the rebellion of Wuxian, but Shi Yan and Shi Quan were spared from the disaster.

古文：卒。枢字子明。
现代文：史枢，字子明。
English: The historical pivot, the character Zi Ming.

古文：父天安，字全甫，秉直仲子也。
现代文：父史天安，字全甫，史秉直之次子。
English: His father was Shi Tian'an, also known as Quan Fu, the second son of Shi Bingzhi.

古文：岁癸酉，从秉直降。
现代文：枢年二十余岁时，因为是勋臣之后，任中山府知府。
English: When he was in his twenties, he was appointed as the governor of Zhongshan because he was a distinguished retainer.

古文：己未，从天泽击败宋将吕文德于嘉陵江，追至重庆而还，赐黄金五十两、白金二百两、锦一匹。
现代文：九年，随史天泽在嘉陵江击败宋将吕文德，追至重庆而还。诏赐黄金五十两、白金二百两、锦一匹。
English: In the ninth year, with Shi Tianze defeating the Song general Lü Wende in the Jialing River, he chased him to Chongqing and defeated him. He was awarded fifty-two gold, two hundred and two platinum, and one brocade.

古文：世祖即位，改赐金虎符。
现代文：世祖即位，赐史枢金虎符。
English: The founder ascended the throne and bestowed the Golden Tiger, the key to history.

古文：中统二年，从天泽扈驾北征。
现代文：中统二年，随天泽扈驾北征。
English: In the second year of unification, he went on the Northern Expedition with Tian Ze.

古文：三年，李璮叛据济南，复从天泽往讨之。城西南有大涧，亘历山，枢一军独当其险，夹涧而城，竖木栅于涧中。
现代文：三年，随天泽讨伐济南叛将李王。济南城西南有大涧，横贯历山，枢领一军扼守这险要之地，屯军于涧两边，涧中竖立木栅。涧水暴涨，冲坏涧中木栅。
English: Three years later, King Li, the rebel of Jinan, was defeated by Emperor Tianze. In the southwest of Jinan City, there was a large moat that extended across the Leshan Mountains. An army led by the emperor guarded this crucial place. The troops were stationed on both sides of the moat, and wooden grates were erected in the middle of the moat. The water of the moat was so high that it broke the wooden grates in the middle of the moat.

古文：淫雨暴涨，木栅尽坏，枢曰： 贼乘吾隙，俟夜必出。 命作苇炬数百置城上。逮三鼓，贼果至，飞炬掷之，风怒火烈，弓弩齐发，贼众大溃，自相蹂躏，死者不可胜计。
现代文：枢估计贼兵必乘机于夜间突出，命做芦苇火把数百置于涧两岸的城寨之上。夜三更，贼果出，城寨上火炬飞掷，风大火烈，万箭齐发，贼军大溃，自相践踏，死者不可胜计。
English: The core estimated that the thief soldiers would take the opportunity to protrude at night, and hundreds of reed torches would be placed on the walled city on both sides of the river. On the third day of the night, the thieves came out, the torches were thrown on the walled city, the wind was fierce, thousands of arrows were fired, the thief army was defeated, trampled on each other, and the dead were incalculable.

古文：未几，璮就擒。
现代文：不久，李王就擒。
English: Soon, Li Wang fell asleep.

古文：宜分军为三，多张旗帜以疑之。吾与诸君潜师捣其巢穴，破之必矣。 与战，大破之，其地悉平。十二年，复以万户从丞相伯颜伐宋，赐锦衣一、宝鞍一、弓一、矢百、甲十注、马十二匹，仍给天泽帐下士十人以从。
现代文：十二年，随丞相伯颜伐宋。
English: In the twelfth year, he followed the prime minister, Bo Yan, to the Song Dynasty.

古文：宋平，署安吉州安抚使。
现代文：宋平，授安吉州安抚使。
English: Song Ping was awarded the title of Anji State Pacifying Envoy.

古文：时新附之初，民所在依险阻自保，枢以威信招怀之，复业为民者以千万计。
现代文：安吉州归附元朝，百姓未服，常据险要之地以自卫，不愿接受元朝的统治。史枢极力招抚，复业为民者以千万计。
English: Anji Province was annexed to the Yuan Dynasty, but the people were not satisfied, and often defended themselves in dangerous places, unwilling to accept the Yuan Dynasty's rule. Shi Zu tried his best to appease the people, and tens of thousands of people were reinstated.

古文：十四年，移疾还。
现代文：至元十四年，因病还乡。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he returned to his hometown due to illness.

古文：十九年，起为东京路总管，辞不赴。
现代文：十九年，又起任为东京路总管，但不肯就职。
English: In 1919, he was appointed as the head of Tokyo Road, but he refused to take up the post.

古文：二十三年，拜中奉大夫、山东东西道宣慰使，治济南，后又治益都。
现代文：二十三年，拜中奉大夫、山东东西道宣慰使，先在济南，后迁至益都。
English: In the 23rd year, Dr. Baizhong Bong, Shandong East-West Consolation Envoy, was first in Jinan, and later moved to Yidu.

古文：木华黎命怀德就领其黑军隶帐下，署天祥都镇抚，选降卒长身武勇者二百人，使领之。
现代文：二十四年卒，享年六十七岁。史天祥，父怀德，为尚书史秉直之弟。太祖八年，太师、国王木华黎随太祖伐金时，史天祥随伯父秉直在涿州投顺太祖，木华黎命史怀德在其帐下统领黑军，任天祥为都镇抚。先选降卒身长武勇者二百人交他统领，后又招收壮丁万余。
English: Twenty-four years old, died at the age of sixty-seven. Shi Tianxiang, father of Bai De, was the younger brother of Shang Shushi and King Mu Huali. In the eighth year of the great-grandfather, when the great-grandfather and king Mu Huali followed the great-grandfather to mine gold, Shi Tianxiang followed his uncle Bing Zhi in Zhangzhou to vote for the great-grandfather, and Mu Huali ordered Shi De to lead the Black Army under his account, and appointed Tianxiang as the governor of the capital. First, he selected two hundred soldiers who were brave enough to surrender to him, and then recruited more than ten thousand strong

古文：招徕丁壮，得众万余，从取霸州、文安、大城、沧滨、长山等二十余城，东下淄、沂、密三州，所至皆先登，诏赐以银符。
现代文：随大军攻取霸州、文安、大城、沧滨、长山等二十余城，后又向东夺得淄、沂、密三州。所到之处，天祥都是身先登城，因功赐银符。
English: Accompanied by a large army, he conquered more than 20 cities, including Bazhou, Wen'an, Dacheng, Cangbin, and Changshan, and later conquered the three eastern provinces of Handan, Gansu, and Miyang. Wherever he went, Tianxiang was the first to enter the city, and was awarded silver medals for his achievements.

古文：从大军攻燕，不克。
现代文：又随大军攻燕，未克。
English: Again, we followed the large army to attack Yan, but failed.

古文：甲戌，略地高州，拔惠和、金源、和众、龙山、利、建、富庶等十五城，惟大宁固守不下。
现代文：太祖九年，攻取高州，连克惠和、金源、和众、龙山、利州、建州、富庶等十五城，只有大宁未下。
English: In the ninth year of Taizu, 15 cities, including Gaozhou, Lian Kehuihe, Jinyuan, Hezong, Longshan, Lizhou, Jianzhou, and Fushiao, were conquered, with only Daning remaining.

古文：天祥获金将完颜胡速，木华黎欲杀之，天祥曰： 杀一人无损于敌，适驱天下之人为吾敌也。
现代文：史天祥俘获金将完颜胡速，木华黎要把他杀掉，天祥劝道： 杀一人于敌无损，却正好使天下人与我们为敌。
English: Shi Tianxiang's capture of Jin will be over quickly, Mu Huali wants to kill him, Tianxiang advised: Killing one person in the enemy is harmless, but it just makes the whole world our enemy.

古文：且其降时尝许以不死，今杀之，无以取信于后，不若从而用之。 
现代文：他投降时曾答应不杀，今若杀他，如何取信于后来之人，不如任用他为我们效力。 
English: When he surrendered, he promised not to kill. If we kill him now, how will we gain the trust of those who come after us? It would be better to appoint him to serve us.

古文：乃以为千户。
现代文：于是授完颜胡速为千户。
English: As a result, the number of households receiving Yan Hu soon reached 1,000.

古文：进攻北京傍近诸寨，磨云山王都统首诣军门降，天祥命入列崖，擒都统不剌，释其缚，仍晓以大义，不剌感泣，愿效死。
现代文：太祖十年，与大帅乌野儿招降金北京留守银答忽、同知乌古伦，进攻北京附近诸寨。磨云山王都统首先来投诚，史天祥命他入列崖，擒金都统不剌。天祥亲自给他松绑，向他讲明大义。不剌感激不杀之恩，愿为蒙军效力。
English: In the tenth year of Taizu's reign, he and his general, Unno'er, invited Jin to stay in Beijing to answer questions about the situation, and together with his friend, Ugulun, they attacked the villages near Beijing. Ma Yunshan Wang Du Du Du first came to cast sincerity, Shi Tianxiang ordered him to enter the cliff, and Jin Du Du did not hesitate. Tianxiang personally untied him and explained the great justice to him. He was grateful for the grace of not killing, and was willing to work for the Mongolian army.

古文：天祥察其诚，许与王都统往说降城子崖王家奴，乃命三人各将旧卒，付空名告身，使谕楼子崖等二十余寨，悉降，得老幼数万、胜兵八千。西乾河答鲁、五指山杨赵奴独固守不下，天祥击之，大小百余战，赵奴死，答鲁败走，得户二万。
现代文：天祥看出他是真心降顺，准他与王都统去说降城子崖的王家奴。又命此三人去招降楼子崖等二十余寨，得老幼数万人，精兵八千。金西乾河之答鲁、五指山之杨赵奴独坚守不降，史天祥多次攻击，大小百余战，最后是赵奴战死，答鲁败逃，得其户二万。
English: Tianxiang saw that he was sincere in his surrender, and allowed him and Wang Du to go to talk about the royal slaves of the castle cliff. He also ordered the three of them to recruit more than twenty villages such as the castle cliff, gaining tens of thousands of old and young people, and eight thousand elite soldiers. Jinxi Qianhe's Talu and Wuzhishan's Yang Zhao Nu were the only ones who did not surrender. Shi Tianxiang attacked many times, and there were more than a hundred battles. Finally, Zhao Nu died in battle, Talu was defeated and fled, and his household gained twenty thousand.

古文：授西山总帅兵马。
现代文：因功授天祥西山总帅兵马。
English: He was awarded the title of Tianxiang Xishan Commander-in-Chief for meritorious service.

古文：兴州节度使赵守玉反，天祥与乌野儿分道讨平之。
现代文：兴州节度使赵守玉反叛，史天祥与乌野儿分兵讨平。
English: The Xingzhou Festival made Zhao Shouyu rebel, and Shi Tianxiang fought with Unno's detachment.

古文：答鲁复聚众攻龙山，以槊刺乌野儿中胸，随堕马，天祥驰救得免，复整阵出战，大败之，斩首八千级，答鲁战死。
现代文：答鲁后复聚众攻龙山，将乌野儿刺中落马，幸天祥救回。天祥等再整军出战，大败敌军，斩首八千级，答鲁战死。
English: After answering Lu, they gathered to attack Longshan, stabbed Uno into a fall, and were fortunately rescued by Tianxiang. Tianxiang then went to war to reorganize the army, defeated the enemy army, beheaded eight thousand, and answered Lu died in battle.

古文：进克中兴府。
现代文：蒙军进克中兴府。
English: The Mongolian army entered Zhongxing Prefecture.

古文：张致盗据锦州，从木华黎讨平之。
现代文：张致盘踞锦州以抗拒蒙古势力，天祥随木华黎讨平。
English: Zhang Zhipan subdued Jinzhou to resist the Mongolian forces, and Tianxiang followed suit.

古文：会契丹汉军擒关肃，复利州，杀刘禄于银治，斩首五十级，尖山、香炉、红螺、塔山、大虫、骆驼、团崖诸寨悉平，虏生口万余，得锦州旧将杜节，并黑军五百人，即命统之。
现代文：与契丹汉军会师，生擒关肃，收复利州，杀刘禄于银治，斩首五十级，平定了尖山、香炉、红螺、塔山、大虫、骆驼、团崖诸寨，俘虏百姓万余人，收降锦州旧将杜节及黑军五百人，黑军命杜节统领。
English: With the Khitan-Han army, he joined the division, captured Gansu, recovered Lishu, killed Liu Lu in Yinzhi, beheaded fifty, leveled Jianshan, Incense Burner, Red Snail, Tower Hill, Big Worm, Camel, and Tuanjia villages, captured more than 10,000 people, defeated Jinzhou's former general Du Jie and 500 Black Army soldiers, and led the Black Army to kill Du Jie.

古文：丙子春，觐太祖于鱼儿泺，赐金符，授提控元帅。
现代文：太祖十一年，史天祥在鱼儿泺朝见太祖，赐他金符，授提控元帅。
English: In the eleventh year of his grandfather's life, Shi Tianxiang met his grandfather in Yu'erqiao, gave him a gold medallion and promoted him to the rank of marshal.

古文：拔盖、金、苏、复等州，获金完颜奴、耶律神都马，迁镇国上将军、利州节度使、所部降民都总官、监军兵马元帅。
现代文：是年，他率师攻克盖、金、苏、复等州，俘金将完颜奴、耶律神都马。因功升为镇国上将军、利州节度使、所部降民都总管、监军兵马元帅等职。
English: In the same year, he led his division to conquer Gai, Jin, Su, Fuzhou and other states, and captured the gold to complete the Yan Niu and Yerut Shen Du Ma. Because of his achievements, he was promoted to the position of Zhen Guo Shang General, Lishu Festival Envoy, General Manager of the Headquarters of the People's Liberation Army, and Supervisor of the Army and Marshal of the Horse.

古文：丁丑夏，山贼祁和尚据武平，讨平之。缚金将巢元帅。
现代文：十二年，祁和尚率领一支人马占据武平，天祥率军讨平，俘金将巢元帅。
English: In the twelfth year, Zou Monk led a team to occupy Wuping, Tianxiang led an army to settle the dispute, and captured the marshal.

古文：又灭重儿盗众万人于兴州之车河。己卯，权兵马都元帅，蒙古、汉军、黑军并听节制。
现代文：又在兴州之车河歼灭重儿反蒙军万人。十四年，暂任兵马都元帅，蒙古军、汉军及黑军均受他统领调遣。
English: He also annihilated tens of thousands of anti-Mongolian soldiers in Chehe, Xingzhou. In 1914, he was temporarily appointed as the marshal of soldiers and horses. The Mongolian army, the Han Chinese army and the Black Army were all dispatched by him.

古文：下河东、平阳、河中、岢岚、绛、石、隰、吉、廓等八十余城。
现代文：这年，天祥攻克河东、平阳、河中、岢岚、绛州、石州、隰州、吉州、廓州等八十余城。
English: In this year, Tianxiang conquered more than 80 cities including Hedong, Pingyang, Hechu, Handan, Handan, Shizhou, Shizhou, Handan, Jizhou and Guozhou.

古文：庚辰，至真定，木华黎使天祥攻城，天祥因请曰： 攻之恐戮及无辜，不如先往谕之。苟其不从，加兵未晚。 
现代文：十五年，蒙军至真定，木华黎令天祥攻城。天祥请示说 ：攻城恐会戮杀无辜平民，不如先派人去说服他们投降，如果不听，再攻城不晚。 
English: Fifteen years later, when the Mongolian army reached Zhending, Mu Huali ordered Tianxiang to attack the city. Tianxiang requested: "Attacking the city may kill innocent civilians. It is better to send someone to persuade them to surrender first. If they do not listen, it is not too late to attack the city again."

古文：木华黎许之。天祥往见守将武仙，谕以祸福，仙悟，乃降。
现代文：木华黎同意，天祥去见守将武仙，说明祸福利害，武仙愿降。
English: Mu Huali agreed, Tian Xiang went to see the guard general Wu Xian, explained the harm and welfare, and Wu Xian was willing to surrender.

古文：吾也而请留天祥守真定，木华黎曰： 天下未定，智勇士可离左右乎？
现代文：吾也而建议留天祥镇守真定，木华黎道： 天下未定，智勇之士岂可离开我。
English: I also suggested that he should stay in Tianxiang Town to guard Zhending. Mu Huali said: The world is undecided. How can a man of wisdom and courage leave me?

古文：吾将别处之。 
现代文：我将另派人镇守。 
English: I will send another person to guard the town.

古文：乃以秉直之子天倪为河北西路兵马都元帅，镇真定；以天祥为左副都元帅，余如故，引兵南屯邢西遥水山下。
现代文：决定以秉直之子史天倪为河北西路兵马都元帅，守真定，以史天祥为左副都元帅，领兵屯驻于邢州西之遥水山下。
English: It was decided that Shi Tian Ni, the son of Bing Zhi, would be the marshal of the Western Hebei Military Command, and Shou Zhending, the son of Bing Zhi, would be the deputy marshal of the Western Hebei Military Command, and Shi Tian Xiang would be the deputy marshal of the Western Hebei Military Command, and the leader of the troops would be stationed at the foot of Yanshui Mountain in the west of Zhangzhou.

古文：仙兄贵以万人壁于山上，负固不下，天祥携完颜胡速及黑军百人，由鸟道扳援而上，尽掩捕之。
现代文：当时是武仙的哥哥武贵率万人在山上建立营垒，顽强抵抗。史天祥与完颜胡速率黑军百人由险峻而狭窄的山路攀援而上，全俘金军。
English: At that time, Wu Xian's brother, Wu Gui, led thousands of people to build a camp on the mountain and stubbornly resisted. Shi Tianxiang and Guan Yanhu led hundreds of black soldiers to climb up from the steep and narrow mountain road, and captured the gold army.

古文：从战黄龙冈，破单、胜、兖三州。
现代文：武仙不禁惊异说 ：公好像是长了翅膀，不然何以能上此高山。 接着蒙军攻下邢州、磁州、相州、单州、胜州、兖州。
English: Wu Xian couldn't help but say in surprise: "It seems that the king has grown wings, otherwise how could he climb this high mountain." Next, the Mongolian army captured Bozhou, Magangzhou, Sangzhou, Shanzhou, Shengzhou, and Ganzhou.

古文：木华黎围东平，久不下，怒吾也而不尽力，将手斩之，天祥请代攻。木华黎喜，付皮甲一，又与己铁铠并被之。
现代文：木华黎围攻东平，久攻不下，斥责吾也而不尽力，要杀他。天祥请求代吾也而攻城，木华黎大喜，给他皮甲一付，又将自己的铁铠甲披天祥身上。
English: Mu Huali besieged Dongping and could not attack for a long time. He rebuked me for not doing my best and wanted to kill him. Tianxiang asked Mu Huali to attack the city on my behalf. Mu Huali was very happy and gave him a pair of leather armor and put his iron armor on Tianxiang's body.

古文：鏖战不已，木华黎使人止之曰： 尔力竭矣，宜少休。 
现代文：天祥与金军鏖战不分胜负，木华黎令他收兵回营，对他说 ：你已竭尽自己力量，应当休息一会儿再战！ 
English: Tian Xiang and the Golden Army were engaged in a pitched battle, with no distinction of victory or defeat. Mu Huali ordered him to gather his troops and return to camp, saying to him: You have exhausted your strength, you should rest for a while and then fight!

古文：复以金鞍名马与之。
现代文：又以金鞍名马给他，其爱护天祥备至。
English: He also gave him a famous horse with a golden saddle, and his love for Tianxiang was overwhelming.

古文：辛巳，从取绥德、鄜、坊等五十余城。
现代文：太祖十六年，随大军攻取绥德？坊等五十余城。
English: In the 16th year of Taizu's reign, he led a large army to conquer more than 50 cities, including Shunde?fang.

古文：壬午，木华黎攻青龙、金胜诸堡，花帽军坚守不下，既破，欲屠之，天祥力谏而止，获壮士五千人。
现代文：十七年，木华黎攻青龙、金胜诸堡，花帽军顽强抵抗。攻破后木华黎要大肆屠杀，天祥极力谏止，获壮士五千人。
English: In the seventeenth year, Mu Huali attacked Qinglong and Jin Sheng's fortresses, and the Flower Hat Army stubbornly resisted. After defeating Mu Huali, there was a large-scale massacre, and Tian Xiang tried his best to stop it, gaining five thousand strong men.

古文：癸未春，还军河中，木华黎上其功，赐金虎符，授蒙古汉军兵马都元帅，总十二万户，镇河中，冬，徇西夏，破贺兰山，还，遇贼，射伤额，出血，目为之昏。
现代文：十八年春，蒙军回到河中，木华黎上报天祥战功，因而赐金虎符，授蒙古汉军兵马都元帅，总领十二万户，镇守河中。这年冬季，史天祥攻占西夏，破贺兰山，回来时途中遇贼，头被射伤，眼睛失明。
English: In the spring of the 18th year, the Mongolian army returned to the middle of the river. Mu Huarai reported Tianxiang's war exploits to the emperor, and was thus given the Golden Tiger Badge. He was awarded the title of Marshal of the Mongolian and Han armies, the leader of 120,000 households, and the town guard of the middle of the river. In the winter of this year, Shi Tianxiang conquered Western Xia, broke through Helan Mountain, and on his way back, he was shot in the head and lost his eyes.

古文：甲申，归北京，授右副北京等七路兵马都元帅。
现代文：十九年归北京，授右副北京等七路兵马都元帅。
English: In 1919, he returned to Beijing and was awarded the title of Vice-Marshal of Beijing and seven other military commands.

古文：庚寅，朝太宗于卢朐河，乞致仕，不允。
现代文：太宗二年，于卢朐河朝拜太宗，请辞官，不允。
English: In the second year of Taizong's reign, he paid homage to Taizong at the Luye River. He was asked to resign, but he refused.

古文：辛卯，太宗用兵河南，强之从行，转漕河上，给饷诸军。
现代文：三年，太宗进军河南，天祥勉强随行，负责漕运军饷。
English: Three years later, when Taizong marched into Henan, Tianxiang reluctantly accompanied him and was responsible for transporting the troops.

古文：壬辰，命天祥领汴京百工数千，屯霸州之益津，行元帅府事，赐锦衣一袭。
现代文：四年，朝廷命天祥领汴京百工数千屯霸州之益津，行元帅府事。
English: In the fourth year, the imperial court ordered Tian Xiang to lead the hundreds of thousands of workers in Beijing to Yijin in Bozhou, and to act as marshal of the prefecture.

古文：初，天祥夜中流矢，镞入颊骨，不能出，至是，金疮再发，镞自口出。睿宗闻而闵之，授海滨和众利州等处总管，兼领霸州御衣局人匠都达鲁花赤，行北京七路兵马都元帅府事。
现代文：天祥自中箭之后，箭镞一直在面颊中未拔出来，现在创口溃烂，镞自口出，睿宗怜悯，授他海滨之和众、利州等处总管，兼领霸州御衣局人匠都达鲁花赤，行北京七路兵马都元帅府事。
English: After Tianxiang from the middle arrow, the arrowhead has not been pulled out in the cheek, now the wound is festering, the wart is coming out of the mouth, Ruizong pity, awarded him the general manager of the seaside, the people, the Lizhou and other departments, and the leader of the Bozhou Imperial Garment Bureau.

古文：宪宗即位，俾仍旧职。
现代文：宪宗八年九月病逝，年六十八岁。
English: Gensong died of illness in September of the eighth year, at the age of sixty-eight.

古文：戊午秋九月，以疾卒，年六十八。天祥幼有大志，长身骈胁，力绝人，性不嗜酒，喜稼穑，好施予。
现代文：天祥幼有大志，身长力大、不嗜酒、喜种田、好施舍。
English: Tianxiang was ambitious as a child. He was tall and strong, did not drink alcohol, liked farming and was good at giving alms.

古文：乙未括户，纵其奴千余口，俾为民。
现代文：太宗七年清查户口，他释放其奴婢千余口为良民。
English: In the seventh year of Taizong's reign, his household was investigated, and he released more than a thousand of his slaves as good citizens.

古文：晚虽丧明，忧国爱民之心，未尝忘也。
现代文：晚年虽失明，但其忧国忧民之心一直未减。
English: Although he lost his sight in his later years, his concern for the country and the people has never diminished.

