古文：释道安鸠摩罗什法郎李恒沙门
现代文：释道安鸠摩罗什法郎李恒沙门
English: Amity Morosh Francs Li Heng Shamen

古文：释道安
现代文：释道安
English: Shaku Doan

古文：释道安姓魏氏，常山扶柳人也。家世为儒，早失覆荫，为外兄孔氏所养。年七岁，读书再览能诵，乡邻嗟异。
现代文：释道安本姓魏，常山扶柳人，家里世代都是读书人，早年父母双亡，自小由外兄孔氏抚养，七岁开始读书，能够过目不忘，立即背诵，为邻人赞叹称奇。
English: Anben surnamed Wei, a resident of Fuliu, Changshan, explained that his family had been readers for generations. His parents died early, and he was raised by his older brother, Kong. He began to read at the age of seven. He could read without forgetting, recite immediately, and was admired by his neighbors.

古文：至年十二出家，神性聪敏，而形貌甚陋，不为师之所重。数岁之后，方启师求经，与辩意经一卷，可五千言。
现代文：十二岁剃度出家，虽然神性聪敏，但因形貌又黑又丑，不为师父所看重，几年之后才开始要经书学习，师父给一卷《辩意经》，约五千余字。
English: He entered the Buddhist priesthood at the age of twelve. Although he was spiritually astute, he was not valued by his master due to his dark and ugly appearance. It was only a few years later that he began to study the scriptures. Master gave him a volume of "Dialogue with the Divine," about five thousand words.

古文：安赍经入田，因休息就览。
现代文：道安带上经书下地干活，休息的时候就看经书。
English: Dao An took the scriptures with him to work, and read the scriptures when he rested.

古文：暮归，以经还师，更求余者。
现代文：晚上收工回来，把经书退还师父，再借别的经书看。
English: At the end of the day, he would come back, return the scriptures to his master, and then borrow other scriptures to read.

古文：师曰： 昨经未读，今复求耶？ 
现代文：师父说： 昨天给你的那本经书还没读完。怎么又要别的呢？ 
English: Master said, "I haven't finished reading the scripture you gave me yesterday. Why would I want anything else?

古文：答曰： 即以暗诵。 
现代文：道安答道： 昨天那书已能默诵了。 
English: Dao An replied, "I was able to recite the book yesterday."

古文：师虽异之，而未言也，复与成具光明经一卷，不减一万言。
现代文：师父对此虽然感到惊异，但也没说什么，又给他一卷《成具光明经》不少于一万字。
English: Although Master was surprised by this, he did not say anything. He also gave him a volume of "Forming the Sutra of Enlightenment" with no less than ten thousand words.

古文：赍之如初，暮复还师。
现代文：他拿到手后，还像读上一本一样。第二天晚上收工回来又还给师父。
English: After he got his hands on it, he read it as if it were his last book. The next evening, he came back from work and gave it back to his master.

古文：师执覆之。不差一字。
现代文：师父拿着经书让他背诵，结果一字不差。
English: Master took the scripture and asked him to recite it, and the result was word for word.

古文：师大惊嗟，敬而异之。
现代文：师父甚为惊讶，敬重他的才华，改变了原来对他的态度。
English: Master was very surprised, respected his talent, and changed his original attitude towards him.

古文：后为受具戒，恣其游学。
现代文：后来为他受具足戒，还特意允许他可以任意出外游学。
English: Later, he was given strict discipline and was allowed to travel abroad to study at will.

古文：至邺，遇佛图澄，因事澄为师。
现代文：道安到了邺都，遇见佛图澄，便师事佛图澄。
English: When Dao An arrived in Shidu, he met Buddha Tuzhen and became his disciple.

古文：及石氏将乱，与弟子惠远等四百余人渡河南游，夜行值雷雨，乘电光而进。
现代文：后来石氏政权要发生内乱，道安与弟子惠远等四百余人，渡过黄河南下，一天晚上赶路时遇上了雷雨，他们借着闪电的光亮行进。
English: Later, when the Shi regime was on the verge of civil unrest, more than 400 people, including Dao An and his disciple Huiyuan, crossed the Yellow River to the south. One night, when they were on their way, they encountered a thunderstorm. They traveled by the light of lightning.

古文：前行得人家，见门里有一马桩，桩之间悬一马兜，可容一斛。
现代文：走着走着，面前出现了一户人家，只见大门里面有个栓马桩，两桩之间挂着个马兜，能盛一斛东西。
English: As I walked along, a family appeared in front of me. Inside the gate, I saw a bolted horse post, and between the two posts, there was a horse's hood, which could hold a bunch of things.

古文：安使呼林百升，百升谓是神人，厚相赏接。
现代文：道安让别人呼唤林百升，林百升说道安是个神人，所以厚礼接待了他们。
English: Dao An asked others to call Lin Baisheng, and Lin Baisheng said that An was a godman, so Houli received them.

古文：既而弟子问何以知其姓字，安曰： 两木为林，兜容百升也。 
现代文：后来弟子问他怎么能知道那个人的姓名，道安说： 因为那两根桩二木为 林 字，那个马兜可以盛下 百升 。 
English: Later, a disciple asked him how he could know the man's name. Dao An said, "Because the two piles and the two trees are the characters of forest, the horse's helmet can hold a hundred liters.

古文：既达襄阳，复宣佛法。
现代文：到达襄阳后，道安就在那里宣讲佛法。
English: After arriving in Yangyang, Dao An began to preach Buddhism there.

古文：时襄阳习凿齿锋辩天逸，笼罩当时。
现代文：当时襄阳有个习凿齿，能言善辩，名噪一时。
English: At that time, Xiangyang had a chiseled tooth, could speak well, and was famous for a while.

古文：其先藉安高名，及闻安至，即往修造。
现代文：原先他是因道安而使自己出了名，听说道安到了襄阳，便去拜访他。
English: Originally, he had made a name for himself thanks to Dao An. When he heard that An had arrived in Yangyang, he went to visit him.

古文：既坐，称言： 四海习凿齿， 安曰： 弥天释道安。 时人以为名答。
现代文：叙座之后，习凿齿自己炫耀说： 四海习凿齿 ，意思是说，自己的名声摇扬四海之间；道安则说： 弥天释道安 意思是说，普天之下无人不知道释道安的名字。
English: After the enthronement ceremony, Xi Jiaozuo showed off his teeth and said: "Shihai Xi Jiaozuo," meaning that his reputation would spread across the four seas; Dao An said: "Yatian Xie Dao An," meaning that no one in the world knows the name of Xie Dao An.

古文：时苻坚素闻安名，每云： 襄阳有释道安，是神器，方欲致之，以辅朕躬。 
现代文：这次对话在当时很有名气，尤其是道安的对答，成为一时的名对。符坚素闻释道安的名气，常跟人说道： 襄阳有个释道安，是神才，正想把他召致来，让他辅佐我。 
English: This dialogue was very famous at the time, especially Daoan's reply, which became a momentary famous pair. Fu Jianshu heard the fame of Daoan, and often said to people: Xiangyang has a Daoan, who is a genius, and is trying to summon him to help me.

古文：后遣苻平南攻襄阳，安与朱序，俱获于坚。
现代文：后来他派符平南下攻打襄阳，道安与朱序都被抓获送给了符坚。
English: Later, he sent Fu Ping south to attack Xiangyang, and both Dao An and Zhu Sequence were captured and sent to Fu Jian.

古文：坚谓仆射权翼曰： 朕以十万之师取襄阳，唯得一人半。 
现代文：符坚对仆射权翼说： 朕以十万大军攻取襄阳，只为得到一个半人。 
English: Fu Jian said to his servant Zhao Quanying: I conquered Xiangyang with a hundred thousand troops, only to get one and a half men.

古文：翼曰： 谁耶？ 
现代文：权翼问道： 这一个半人是谁？ 
English: Power Wing asked: Who is this half-human?

古文：坚曰： 安公一人，习凿齿半人也。 
现代文：符坚说： 道安是一个人，习凿齿是半个人。 
English: Fu Jian said: Dao An is one person, and Xi Jizhen is half a person.

古文：既至，住长安五重寺。
现代文：道安到了长后，住在长安五重寺。
English: After arriving in Chang'an, Doan lived in Chang'an Wujie Temple.

古文：初坚承石氏之乱，至是户民殷富，四方略定。
现代文：符坚当初接受了石氏的混乱江山。到现在已经人口兴旺生活富裕。周围邦国基本被平定。
English: Fu Jian initially accepted the chaos of the Shi clan. By now, the population is prosperous and the life is rich. The surrounding states have basically been pacified.

古文：唯建业一隅，未能克伏。
现代文：唯独建业一方面，未能克服。
English: On the other hand, the construction industry alone has not been able to overcome this.

古文：每与侍臣谈语，未尝不欲平一江左。
现代文：他常与大臣们谈论，时时刻刻都想平息江东一带。
English: He often talks with his ministers and always wants to pacify the eastern Jiangsu region.

古文：坚弟平阳公融及朝臣石越、原绍等，并切谏，终不能回。
现代文：符坚的弟弟平阳公符融与朝廷大臣石越、原绍等，一起恳切地劝阻他，但他一直不能改变自己的主意。
English: Fu Jian's younger brother, Pingyang Gong Fu Rong, together with the imperial ministers Shi Yue and Yuan Shao, earnestly tried to dissuade him, but he could not change his mind.

古文：众以安为坚所信敬，乃共请曰： 主上将有事东南，公何能不为苍生致一言耶？ 
现代文：他们以为道安是符坚最为信服敬重的人，便共同请求他道： 我主要向东南出兵，您怎么能不为了苍生而劝他一句呢！ 
English: They thought that Dao An was Fu Jian, the most convinced and respected person, and they jointly asked him: I mainly send troops to the southeast, how can you not advise him for the sake of life!

古文：会坚出东苑，命安外辇同载。
现代文：正赶上符坚从东苑里出来，命道安坐在自己车的一边。
English: Fu Jian came out of the East Garden just in time and sat on the side of his car.

古文：仆射权翼谏曰： 臣闻天子法驾，侍中陪乘。
现代文：仆射权翼劝谏道： 臣闻天子的车驾，只能由侍中陪坐。
English: A servant of the Emperor urged him, "If you are driving a car, you can only be accompanied by an attendant.

古文：道安毁形，宁可参厕？ 
现代文：道安剃度毁形，哪能坐在您旁边。 
English: Dao An is so disfigured that he can't even sit next to you.

古文：坚勃然作色曰： 安公道德可尊，朕以天下不易，舆辇之荣，未称其德。 
现代文：符坚厉声斥道： 道安公的道德令人尊重，朕以天下都换不过他，让他与我同车的荣誉，也不能与他的道德相称。 
English: Fu Jian sternly rebuked: Dao Angong's morals are worthy of respect, I can't replace him with anything in the world, and the honor of having him ride with me is not commensurate with his morals.

古文：即勑仆射扶安登辇。
现代文：当即敕令仆射扶着道安上车。
English: He immediately ordered the attendant to help Doan get on the bus.

古文：俄尔顾谓安曰： 朕将与公南游吴越，整六师而巡狩，陟会稽以观沧海，不亦乐乎？ 
现代文：不一会儿，符坚看着道安对他说： 朕将要与你南游吴越，统领六军南下巡视，登上会稽以观沧海，不也是件很惬意的事吗？ 
English: After a while, Fu Jian looked at Dao An and said to him: "I am going to travel with you to the south of Wu Yue, lead the six armies to inspect the south, and board the ship to watch the sea of vicissitudes. Isn't it a very pleasant thing?

古文：安对曰： 陛下应天御世，有八州之富，居中土而制四海，宜栖神无为，与尧舜比隆。
现代文：道安说： 陛下顺应天命而管领天下，今有八州之多的疆土，居于中原而统治四方，应当息神无元为而休养生息，与尧舜二世比赛昌盛。
English: Daoan said, "Your Majesty, who rules the world in accordance with the mandate of Heaven, now has a territory of as many as eight states, lives in the Central Plains and rules the four directions. You should rest and recuperate without any reason, and prosper in the competition with Emperor Xizong II.

古文：今欲以百万之师，求厥田下之土，且东南一隅，地卑气厉，禹游而止，舜狩而殂，秦王适而不归。
现代文：现在想以百万之师，要争夺的不过是那块不毛之地，况且这东南一带地处偏僻气候恶劣，大军行动极为不利，当年禹帝巡游到那里就不能前进，舜帝巡狩死在那里，秦王到了那里也没有回来。
English: Now, if you want to have a million-man army, all you have to fight for is that barren land. Moreover, this southeastern region is located in a remote area with bad weather, and the actions of large armies are extremely unfavorable. In the past, when Emperor Yu made a tour there, he could not advance. Emperor Xian made a tour and died there. When King Qin went there, he did not return.

古文：以贫道观之，非愚心所同也。
现代文：以贫道之见，不同意出兵吴越。
English: From the perspective of poverty alleviation, Wu Yue did not agree to send troops.

古文：平阳公懿戚，石越重臣，谓并不可，犹尚见距。贫道轻浅，言必不允。既荷厚遇，故尽丹诚耳。 
现代文：平阳公是至亲，吴越是重臣，他们一致说不可以，尚且被拒绝，贫道如此轻浅，我的话肯定不能应允；但因既蒙陛下厚遇，所以理当竭尽赤诚而已。 
English: Prince Pingyang is a close relative, and Wu Yue is a senior minister. They unanimously said that it was not possible, and yet they were rejected. Poverty is so shallow, my words certainly cannot be accepted. However, since His Majesty has been treated well, it is only right to be sincere.

古文：坚曰： 非为地不广，民不足治也。
现代文：符坚说： 不是因为地盘不大，人口不多，不足以治理。
English: Fu Jian said: It is not because the territory is small, the population is small, and it is not enough to govern.

古文：将简天心，明大运所在耳。
现代文：为的是要扩大天意的影响，彰明天运无处不在罢了。
English: In order to expand the influence of providence, the promotion of tomorrow's fortune is ubiquitous.

古文：顺时巡狩，亦著前典。
现代文：朕应天时而巡狩四方，也符合前人的法则。
English: I will patrol the four directions according to the weather, which is also in line with the laws of the predecessors.

古文：若如师言，则先帝王无省方之文乎？ 
现代文：如果像大师所说的那样。那么先前的帝王岂不没有视察四方的举动和文字记载了吗？ 
English: If it is as the master said, then wouldn't previous emperors have observed the movements of the four directions and recorded them in writing?

古文：安曰： 若銮驾必动，可先幸洛阳，抗威蓄锐，传檄江南，如其不伏，伐之未晚。 
现代文：道安说： 如果銮驾一定要出巡，可以先到洛阳，在那里抗御强敌的威胁，积蓄自己的力量，向江南下一道征讨的文书，如果他们不顺服，然后兴兵讨伐也不算晚。 
English: Dao An said: If you must go on patrol, you can first go to Luoyang, where you can resist the threat of a strong enemy, accumulate your strength, and send a document to the south of the river. If they do not obey, then it is not too late to raise an army to fight.

古文：坚不从，遣平阳公融等精锐二十五万为前锋，坚躬率步骑六十万，至须城。
现代文：符坚没有听从。派遣平阳公符融等精锐部队二十五万为前锋，符坚亲率步骑六十万，挥师南下，到了须城。
English: He did not listen to Fu Jian. He dispatched elite troops such as Pingyang Gong Fu Rong with 250,000 soldiers as the vanguard, and Fu Jian and his relatives led 600,000 soldiers on foot and rode south to Sucheng.

古文：晋遣征虏将军谢石、徐州刺史谢玄距之。
现代文：东晋派遣征虏将军谢石、徐州刺史谢玄统兵迎战。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty dispatched the conscript general Xie Shi and the Xuzhou assassin Xie Xuan to lead the troops into battle.

古文：坚前军大溃于八公山，晋军遂北三十余里，坚单骑而遁，如所谏焉。
现代文：符坚的前锋部队大败于八公山，晋军便向北推进了三十余里，符坚单人独骑落荒而逃，正像道安所劝谏他说的那样。
English: Fu Jian's vanguard troops were heavily defeated at Bagooshan, and the Jin army pushed northward for more than 30 miles. Fu Jian fled alone, just as Dao An advised him to do.

古文：安註诸经，恐不合理，乃誓曰： 若所说不甚远理，愿见瑞相。 
现代文：道安注释了许多佛经，唯恐自己的注解不合于教义，便发誓说： 如果所说的与佛理相差不大，祈愿佛祖显示吉祥之象。 
English: Dao An has annotated many Buddhist scriptures. Fearing that his annotation may not be in line with the teachings, he swore: If what is said is not far from the Buddhist teachings, pray for the Buddha to show auspicious signs.

古文：乃梦见道人，头白眉长，语安云： 君所註经，殊合道理。
现代文：于是梦见一位道人，满头白发，长长的眉毛，告诉道安： 你所注释的经书，非常符合佛理。
English: Then I dreamed of a Taoist, with a full head of white hair and long eyebrows, telling Dao An: The scripture you have commented on is very consistent with the Buddha's teachings.

古文：我不得入泥洹，住在西域，当相助通，可时时设食。 
现代文：我不能入泥淖世俗，住在西域会帮助你通达的，你可时时摆设供食。 
English: I can't go into the muddy mundane, living in the West will help you reach, you can always set up for food.

古文：后十诵律至，远公乃知和尚所梦宾头卢也。
现代文：后十诵律至，远公乃知和尚所梦宾的头颅了。
English: After ten chanting rites, the head of Dangong Nochi Monk's Dream Bin was found.

古文：后至秦建元二十一年正月二十七日，忽有异僧，形甚庸陋，来寺寄宿。
现代文：到了前秦建元二十一年，正月二十七日，忽然有个异僧，形貌很脏很丑，来到寺庙寄宿。
English: In the twenty-first year of the former Qin Dynasty, on the 27th day of the first month, a strange monk, very dirty and ugly, suddenly came to the temple for lodging.

古文：寺房既窄，处之讲堂。
现代文：因为寺房狭窄，便把他安置在讲经堂上。
English: Because the temple building is narrow, he was placed in the lecture hall.

古文：时维那值殿，夜见此僧，从窗而出入，遽以白安。
现代文：当时维那值班守殿，夜里看见此僧从窗口出入，立即报告了道安。
English: At that time, Vina was on duty guarding the palace. At night, she saw the monk coming and going from the window and immediately reported his safe passage.

古文：安惊起礼讯，问其来意？答云： 特相为来。 
现代文：道安慌忙起床，按照礼节去询问他，问及他的来意时，答道： 特意为你而来。 
English: Dao An got up in a hurry and went to inquire about him according to etiquette. When asked about his intentions, he replied: I came especially for you.

古文：安曰： 自惟罪深，讵可度脱。 
现代文：道安说： 自觉罪孽深重，怎么可以度脱。 
English: Dao An said, "If you are so guilty, how can you get rid of it?"

古文：答云： 甚可以度耳。 
现代文：答道： 完全可以超度了。 
English: Answer: It's totally okay to overdo it.

古文：安请问来生所生之处，彼乃以手虚拨天之西北，即见云开，备睹兜率妙胜之极。
现代文：道安请问来生生在什么地方，他便用手在空中拨了拨西北方向的天，顿见那边云雾散开，清清楚楚地看见兜率妙胜之极。
English: When Dao An asked where the afterlife was, he used his hand to dial the northwest sky in the air. Suddenly, he saw the clouds and fog dispersing over there, and clearly saw the ultimate victory.

古文：安至其年二月八日忽告众曰： 吾当去矣。 
现代文：道安于这年二月八日突然告诉大家说： 我要离去了！ 
English: On February 8 of this year, Dao An suddenly told everyone: I'm leaving!

古文：是日斋毕，无疾而卒，葬城内五级寺中。
现代文：这一天斋戒完毕后，他没有任何疾病就去世了，安葬在城内五极寺中。
English: After he finished fasting on this day, he died without any illness and was buried in Wuji Temple in the city.

古文：是岁晋太元元年也。
现代文：这一年是晋太元元年。
English: It was the first year of the reign of Emperor Jintao.

古文：鸠摩罗什
现代文：鸠摩罗什
English: Comoros

古文：鸠摩罗什，此云童寿，天竺人也。善经律论，化行于西域。及东游龟兹，龟兹王为造金狮子座一处之。
现代文：鸠摩罗什，意译为童寿，天竺人，通晓经、律、论三藏佛典，游化于西域，东游龟兹时，龟兹王为他建造金狮子一座安置他。
English: Kumarosh, which can be loosely translated as "childhood longevity," was a celestial being who was well versed in the sutras, the laws, and the three Tibetan Buddhist scriptures. He was born in the west, and when he traveled to the east, the king of Kuez built a golden lion for him and placed him there.

古文：时苻坚僭号关中，有外国前部王及龟兹王弟并来朝坚。
现代文：当时符坚统治关中。有外国前部王与龟兹王弟一起朝见符坚。
English: At that time, Fu Jian was the ruler of Guanzhong. A foreign forefather of the king and a younger brother of the king of the turtle came to see Fu Jian at court.

古文：坚引见，二王说坚云： 西域多产珍奇，请兵往定。以求内附。 
现代文：符坚召见他们，二王说符坚道： 西域多有珍奇特产，请出兵征伐，让其归附。 
English: Fu Jian summoned them, and the two kings said to Fu Jian: There are many rare and special products in the western region, please send troops to conquer and annex them.

古文：至坚建元十三年正月，太史奏云： 有星见外国分野，当有大德智人入辅中国。 
现代文：符坚建元十三年，正月，太史奏道： 有一个星座在外国边界出现，要有大德贤能的人物前来辅助中国。 
English: In the first month of the 13th year of Jianyuan, Fu Jian, Taishi said, "There is a constellation appearing on the border of a foreign country. It is necessary to have a person of great virtue and ability come to assist China."

古文：坚曰 朕闻西戎有鸠摩罗什，襄阳有沙门道安，将非此耶？ 即遣使求之。
现代文：符坚说： 朕听说西域有个鸠摩罗什，襄阳有个沙门道安，莫不就是他么，立即派使去求他。 
English: Fu Jian said, "I heard that there is a Jian Morosh in the western region and a Shaman Dao An in Xiangyang. Could it be him? I immediately sent an envoy to ask for him."

古文：至十七年二月。鄯善上前部王等又说坚请兵西伐。
现代文：到了建元十七年二月，鄯善国原先那个前部王等人又来游说符坚，请他出兵西伐。
English: In February of the seventeenth year of the Jian Yuan, the former front king of Shenshan Province and others came to lobby Fu Jian, asking him to send troops to the West.

古文：十八年九月，坚遣骁将吕光、凌江将军姜飞将前部王及车师王等率兵七万西伐龟兹。
现代文：十八年九月，符坚派遣骁将吕光、凌江将军姜飞，由前部王与车师王等陪同，领兵七万西征龟兹。
English: In September 18th, Fu Jian dispatched the general Liguang and the general Jiang Fei of the Lingjiang River, accompanied by the former king and the coachman Wang, to lead 70,000 soldiers to the West.

古文：临发，坚饯光于建章，谓光曰： 夫帝王应天而治，以子爱苍生为本，岂贪其地而伐之，正以怀远之人故也。
现代文：出发前，符坚于建章为吕光饯行，他对吕光说： 帝王顺应天命而治天下，要以慈爱苍生为根本，岂能为了贪占其土地而攻伐他们；正是因为怀念远方山人的缘故。
English: Before setting out, Fu Jian was walking with Luguang. He said to Luguang, "If the emperor is to rule the world in accordance with Heaven's will, and if he is to have love for all sentient beings as his fundamental principle, how can he invade them in order to seize their land? It is precisely because he is nostalgic for the mountain people far away.

古文：朕闻西域有鸠摩罗什，深解法相，善闲阴阳，为后学之宗。
现代文：朕听说西域有个人叫鸠摩罗什，精通佛家教义，善长阴阳之学，成为后学者的楷模。
English: I have heard that there is a person in the western region called Kumaros, who is proficient in Buddhist teachings and good at the study of yin and yang, and has become a model for later scholars.

古文：朕甚思之。
现代文：肤非常思念他。
English: I miss him so much.

古文：贤哲者，国之大宝，若克龟兹，即驰驿送什。 
现代文：贤哲之人是国家的珍宝，如果攻克龟兹，要立即把鸠摩罗什送回来。 
English: A wise man is a national treasure, and if we defeat the Turtles, we must immediately send back the Tamerlane.

古文：光军未至，什谓龟兹王白纯曰： 国运衰矣，尚有劲敌从东方来，宜恭承之，勿抗其锋。 
现代文：吕光的军队还没到达龟兹时，鸠摩罗什就对龟兹国王白纯说： 国家的气运已经衰微了，又有强敌从东方打来，应当恭顺地服从他们，不要与其交锋。 
English: When Luguang's army had not yet arrived in Kuez, Tamerosh said to the king of Kuez, Bai Chun: The fortunes of the country have declined, and there are strong enemies coming from the east. You should obediently obey them and not fight them.

古文：纯不从而战，光遂破龟兹，杀纯，立纯弟震为主。
现代文：白纯不听他的劝告，出兵与吕光交战，吕光攻破龟兹，杀死了白纯，他的弟弟白震为龟兹国王。
English: Bai Chun did not listen to his advice and sent troops to fight Luguang. Luguang defeated Kuez and killed Bai Chun. His brother, Bai Zhen, became the king of Kuez.

古文：光既获什，未测其智量，见年齿尚少，及以凡人戏之，强妻以龟兹王女。
现代文：吕光得到鸠摩罗什后，不知道他有多大的才学，见他年纪尚轻，便以常人对待，并且戏弄他，强迫他与龟兹王女儿结婚。
English: After Lu Guang got hold of Yimorosh, he did not know how much talent he had. Seeing that he was still young, he treated him like an ordinary person, and teased him and forced him to marry the daughter of the King of Turtle.

古文：什拒而不受，辞甚苦至。光曰。道士之操。不逾先父。
现代文：鸠摩罗什极力拒绝，向吕光苦苦哀求，吕光却说： 道士的操行，不过像你父亲而已，为什么要拒绝。 
English: Kumarosh strenuously refused and pleaded with Liguang, but Liguang said, "The Taoist's conduct is just like your father's, why should you refuse?"

古文：何所因辞。
现代文：吕光让他喝了美酒，与妻子关到一间房子里。
English: Luguang made him drink fine wine and locked him in a room with his wife.

古文：乃饮以醇酒。同闭密室。
现代文：什被逼着与妻子同房之后，便损失了自己的操守。
English: After he was forced to have sex with his wife, he lost his self-discipline.

古文：什被逼既至，遂亏其节。
现代文：吕光还让他骑牛或骑没有驯服的马，想要他摔下来出丑。
English: Luguang also made him ride a bull or an untamed horse, wanting him to fall off and make a fool of himself.

古文：或令骑牛及乘恶马，欲使堕落。
现代文：什忍受这些屈辱，毫无怨怒之色，吕光感到惭愧。
English: Lu Guang felt ashamed that he had put up with these humiliations without any sense of resentment.

古文：什常怀忍辱，曾无异色，光惭愧而已。光还中路，置军于山下，将士已休。什曰： 不可在此，必见狼狈，宜徙军陇上。 
现代文：吕光在返回关中的途中，把军队安置在山下，将士们已经休息了，什说： 不应住在这个地方，住在这里会有危险的，应该把军队转移到平坦的地方去。 
English: On the way back to Guanzhong, Lü Guang placed the army at the foot of the mountain. The soldiers had already rested, and Sh said: "You shouldn't live in this place. It would be dangerous to live here. You should move the army to a flat place."

古文：光不纳。
现代文：吕光没有采纳他的意见。
English: Lü Guang did not accept his opinion.

古文：至夜，果有大雨，洪潦暴起，水深数丈，死者数千。
现代文：到了夜间，果然下起了大雨，山洪暴发，水涨数丈，淹死了几千人。
English: In the night, it rained heavily, causing flash floods, and the water rose several meters, drowning several thousand people.

古文：光始密而异之。
现代文：由此，吕光才暗暗佩服他，认为他是个不寻常的人。
English: As a result, Lu Guang secretly admired him and thought that he was an unusual person.

古文：什谓光曰： 此凶亡之地，不宜淹留，推迁揆数，应速言归，中路必有福土可居。 
现代文：什对光说： 这个凶险的地方，不易于久留，推究起来，应该赶紧往回走，去关中的路上肯定有好地方可以住下。 
English: Sh said to the light: This dangerous place is not easy to stay for a long time, in fact, we should hurry to go back, there must be a good place to stay on the way to Guanzhong.

古文：光从之。
现代文：吕光听从了他的话。
English: Luguang obeyed his words.

古文：至凉州，闻苻坚已为姚苌所害，光三军缟素，大临城南。
现代文：部队行进到凉州，听说符坚已被姚苌杀害，吕光三军都穿上了孝服，兵临城南。
English: The troops marched to Liangzhou. It was heard that Fu Jian had been killed by Yao Qi, and the three armies of Luguang all put on filial piety uniforms. The soldiers marched to the south of the city.

古文：于是窃号关外，年称太安。
现代文：吕光于是占领凉州，自立为凉主，年号称为太安。
English: Luguang then occupied Liangzhou and established himself as the ruler of Liangzhou. The year was called Taian.

古文：太安二年正月，姑臧大风。什曰： 不祥之风，当有奸叛，然不劳自定也。 
现代文：太安二年正月，姑臧刮起了狂风，什说： 这是不祥之风，会有奸贼叛乱，然而不用出兵叛敌就会自动平息的。 
English: In the first month of the second year of the Taian era, a fierce wind blew in Guzheng. Shi said, "This is an ominous wind. There will be a treacherous rebellion, but the enemy will automatically subside without the need to send troops."

古文：俄尔梁谦、彭晃相系而反，寻亦殄灭。
现代文：不久，梁谦与彭晃接连谋反，很快就被扑灭了。
English: Soon after, Liang Qian and Peng Jiao plotted a series of rebellions, which were quickly put down.

古文：至光龙飞二年，张掖临松卢水胡沮渠男成及从弟蒙逊反，推建康太守段业为主。
现代文：到了吕凉龙飞二年，张掖临松卢水的胡人渠男成及其从弟沮渠蒙逊反叛，推举建康太守段业为国主。
English: Two years after arriving in Lulianglongfei, Zhang Xuan and his younger brother Dechengqiu Mengxun rebelled at Hu Rengqiu in Songlu Water and promoted Jiankang Taishou Danye as the sovereign.

古文：遣庶子秦州刺史太原公纂，率众五万讨之。
现代文：吕光派遣庶子秦州刺史太原公吕纂，率兵五万前去讨伐。
English: Lü Guang dispatched his illegitimate son, Qin Zhou Zishi Taiyuan Gong Lü Zuo, to lead 50,000 soldiers to the crusade.

古文：时论谓业等乌合，纂有威声，势必全克。
现代文：当时人们都评论说，段业的人马乃是乌合之众，吕纂又素有声威，此次征讨，必获全胜。
English: At that time, people all commented that Duan Ye's men and horses were a rabble, and Lu Zuo was well-known. This time, they would win a complete victory.

古文：光以访什，什曰： 观察此行，未见其利。 
现代文：吕光为此事去问鸠摩罗什，什说： 我看这次行动，不会胜利。 
English: Lü Guang went to ask more Rosh about this matter, and Sh said: I think this operation will not be successful.

古文：既而纂败绩于合黎。
现代文：后来吕纂败于合黎。
English: Later, Lu Xuan was defeated by Haili.

古文：俄有郭黁作乱，纂委大军轻还，为黁听败，仅以身免。
现代文：不久又有郭黁作乱，吕纂轻率地让大军往回行进，果被郭黁打败，只有他一人逃了回来。
English: Not long after, Guo Gan started another riot, and Lu Cao rashly let the large army march back. As a result, he was defeated by Guo Gan, and he was the only one to escape back.

古文：光中书监张资，文翰温雅。
现代文：吕光的中书监张资，很有文才，为人温文尔雅。
English: Zhang Zi, Luguang's Chinese librarian, was a man of great literary talent and gentle manners.

古文：光甚器之。
现代文：很受吕光器重。
English: He's a big fan of Ryuko.

古文：资病，光博营救疗。
现代文：张资病了，吕光不惜代价多方营救治疗。
English: Zhang Zi fell ill, and Luguang tried his best to rescue and treat him.

古文：有外国道人罗叉，云能差资疾，光喜，给赐甚重。
现代文：有个外国人叫罗叉，说能治好张资的病，吕光非常高兴，送给他很多东西。
English: A foreigner named Luo Zhen said that he could cure Zhang Cai's illness. Lu Guang was very happy and gave him a lot of things.

古文：什知叉诳诈，告资曰： 叉不能为，徒烦费耳。
现代文：鸠摩罗什知道罗叉在撒谎骗人，告诉张资说： 罗叉根本不能治你的病，白白浪费而已。
English: Knowing that Luo Fork was lying and deceiving people, Yan Morosh told Zhang Zi: Luo Fork cannot cure your illness at all, it is just a waste.

古文：冥运虽隐，可以事试也。 
现代文：寿命长短虽然看不出来，但可用一件事来试验你的病能不能治好。 
English: Although the length of life cannot be seen, one thing can be used to test whether your illness can be cured.

古文：乃以五色丝作绳，结之，烧为灰末投水中，灰若出水还成绳者，病不可愈。
现代文：他以五色丝线搓成绳，打成结，烧成灰末扔在水里，说如果灰末从水里浮出来还原绳，病不能治愈。
English: He twisted five-colored silk thread into a rope, tied it into a knot, burned it into ash and threw it into the water, saying that if the ash floated out of the water and restored the rope, the disease could not be cured.

古文：须臾，灰聚浮出，复绳本形。
现代文：不一会儿，只见灰末聚拢在一起浮出水面，又变成了绳的原形。
English: A moment later, the ash floated to the surface, gathered together, and turned back into the original rope shape.

古文：既叉治无效，少日资亡。
现代文：既然罗叉治疗无效，没过几天张资就死了。
English: Since Luo Fork's treatment was ineffective, Zhang Zuo died within a few days.

古文：顷之，光又卒，子绍袭位。
现代文：不久，吕光又死了，他的儿子吕绍承袭其位。
English: Soon after, Lü Guang died again, and his son Lü Shao succeeded him.

古文：数日，光庶子纂杀绍自立，称元咸宁。
现代文：过了几天，吕光的庶子吕纂杀死吕绍，自立为王，年号称为咸宁。
English: A few days later, Lü Guang's son-in-law, Lü Cao, killed Lü Shao and declared himself king, taking the name Xianning.

古文：咸宁二年，猪生子，一身三头，龙出东箱井中，到殿前蟠卧，比旦失之。纂以为美瑞，号大殿为龙翔殿。
现代文：咸宁二年，有口猪生的崽一只身子上长着三个脑袋，一只龙从东箱井中飞出，飞到宫殿前面蟠卧起来，第二天早上又不见的，吕纂以为这是吉祥之兆，命名大殿为龙翔殿。
English: In the second year of Xianning, a stork born from a pig with three heads grew on one body. A dragon flew out of the East Hakone well, flew to the front of the palace, lay down, and disappeared the next morning. Lu Zuo thought this was an auspicious sign and named the main hall Longxiang Hall.

古文：俄而有黑龙升于当阳九宫门，纂改为龙兴门。
现代文：没过多久，又有一条黑龙飞到当阳九宫门上，吕纂改名为龙兴门。
English: Not long after, another black dragon flew to the Dangyang Jiu Palace Gate, which was renamed the Longxing Gate.

古文：什奏曰： 此日潜龙出游，豕妖来异。
现代文：鸠摩罗什奏道： 这几天潜藏着的龙飞了出来，猪妖也生下来奇异之物。
English: "In the past few days, the hidden dragon has flown out, and the boar demon has given birth to a strange creature.

古文：龙者阴类，出入有时，而今屡见，则为灾眚。
现代文：龙属于阴类，并不轻易出动。如今连续出现，说明要有灾祸降临，肯定有人犯上作乱。
English: Dragons belong to the female category and are not easily dispatched. Their continuous appearance today indicates that if there is to be a calamity, someone must have committed a disturbance.

古文：必有下人谋上之变，宜克己修德，以答天戒。 
现代文：应当克制自己，广施仁德，借以报答上天的惊戒。 
English: You should restrain yourself, and cultivate benevolence to repay Heaven's admonition.

古文：纂不纳，与什博戏，杀棋曰： 斫胡奴头。 
现代文：吕纂没有采纳他的建议。他与鸠摩罗什打赌，赌注是：我要砍掉胡奴的头。
English: Lyu Tsang did not accept his suggestion. He made a bet with Kumarosh, the bet was: I will cut off the head of Hu Nu.

古文：什曰： 不能斫胡奴头，胡奴将砟人头。 
现代文：鸠摩罗什说： 不能砍掉胡奴的头，胡奴反要砍掉别人的头。 
English: "You can't cut off a goon's head, but a goon wants to cut off someone else's head," Kumarosh said.

古文：此言有旨，而纂终不悟也。
现代文：这句话是有所指的，而吕纂始终不明白。
English: This sentence refers to something, but Lu Xuan still doesn't understand.

古文：光弟保，有子名超，超小字胡奴。
现代文：吕光的弟弟吕保，有个儿子叫吕超，小名叫胡奴。
English: Luguang's younger brother, Lubao, has a son named Luchao, whose nickname is Hu Nu.

古文：后果杀纂斩首，立其兄隆为主，时人方验什之言也。
现代文：胡奴后来果然杀死吕纂砍下了他头，立他的哥哥吕隆为凉王，这时人们才验证了鸠摩罗什打赌时所说的那句话。
English: Hu Nu later killed Lyu Tsang and chopped off his head, setting up his brother Lulong as the king of coolness. It was only then that people verified the words said by Kumarosh during the bet.

古文：什住凉积年，吕光父子既不弘道教，故蕴其深解，无所宣化。
现代文：鸠摩罗什在凉地住了多年，因为吕光父子从不弘扬佛教，他只蕴藏起自己对佛理的深刻见解，没有机会进行宣化。
English: Kumarosh lived in the cold for many years, because Liguang and his son never promoted Buddhism. He only had his own profound views on Buddhism, and had no opportunity to propagate it.

古文：苻坚已亡，竟不相见。
现代文：符坚虽然深慕其名。但他死了，一直没有见到他。
English: Although Fu Jian deeply admired his name, he died without ever seeing him.

古文：及姚苌僭有关中，亦挹其高名，虚心要请。吕以什智计多解，恐为姚谋，不许东入。
现代文：姚苌在长安称帝之后，也仰慕鸠摩罗什的高名，曾经虚心邀请；而吕光父子因为罗什足智多能，怕他为姚苌出谋旬策，不放他东行。
English: After Yao Yao was crowned emperor in Chang'an, he also admired the high reputation of Xiamurosh, and humbly invited him. However, Lu Guang and his son did not allow him to go to the East because of the wisdom of Roche, fearing that he would come up with a strategy for Yao Yao.

古文：及苌卒，子兴袭位，复遣敦请。
现代文：到了姚苌逝世，其子姚兴继位之后，又曾派人敦请。
English: After the death of Yao Xing and the succession of his son Yao Xing, he sent someone to invite him.

古文：兴弘始三年三月，有树连理，生于庙庭逍遥园，葱变为菃，以为美瑞，谓智人应入。
现代文：姚兴弘始三年三月，皇宫院内的逍遥园长了一棵连理树，葱变为菃，人们都说这是吉祥之兆，要有才智之人应召入关。
English: In March of the third year of Yao Xinghong's reign, a lianli tree grew in the pleasure garden of the imperial palace, and the green onion turned into a thistle. People said that this was an auspicious sign, and anyone with talent should be called in.

古文：至五月，兴遣陇西公硕德西伐吕隆，隆军大破。
现代文：五月，姚兴派遣陇西公硕德西征讨伐吕隆，吕隆的军队被打败。
English: In May, Yao Xing dispatched Gongsuo Desi to fight against Lulong. Lulong's army was completely defeated.

古文：至九月，隆上表归降，方得迎什入关，以其年十二月二十日至于长安。
现代文：到了九月，吕降上表归降，罗什才被迎接入关，于十二月二十日来到长安。
English: It was not until September that Lü Qian stepped down and Roche was welcomed to Chang'an, where he arrived on December 20.

古文：兴待以国师之礼，甚见优宠。
现代文：姚兴以国师之礼待他，罗什备受尊宠。
English: Yao Xing treated him as a national teacher, and Roche was highly respected.

古文：自大法东被，始于汉明，涉历魏晋，经论渐多，而支竺所出，多滞文格义。
现代文：自从佛教东传以来，从汉明帝开始，历经魏晋，流传在中国的经书日渐增多，但这些经书是用印度梵文写成的，艰涩难懂。
English: Since the introduction of Buddhism to the East, beginning with Han Mingdi and continuing through the Wei and Jin dynasties, the number of scriptures circulating in China has been increasing day by day. However, these scriptures are written in Indian Sanskrit, which is difficult to understand.

古文：兴少崇三宝，锐志讲集，什既至止，仍请入西明阁及逍遥园译出众经。
现代文：姚兴年轻时就推崇佛教经典，有志于收罗通晓经典的进行讲解，罗什既已来到长安住下，便请他在西明阁与逍遥园开始翻译各种经书。
English: When he was young, Yao Xing revered Buddhist classics and was interested in collecting and explaining the classics of Luo Tongxiao. When Roche came to live in Chang'an, he asked him to start translating various scriptures at Siming Pavilion and Happy Garden.

古文：什既率多谙诵，无不究尽，转能汉言，音译流便。
现代文：这些经书罗什过去大都熟读过，深刻而全面地研究过其中的含义，后又熟练地掌握了汉语，翻译起来流畅轻便。
English: In the past, most of these sutras were familiar to him, and he deeply and comprehensively studied their meanings. Later, he mastered the Chinese language skillfully, making the translation smooth and easy.

古文：既览旧经，义多纰僻，皆由先度失旨，不与梵本相应。
现代文：他发现原来的译本文义有许多乖讹之处，都出自当时译者在理解上存在的偏差，与梵文原著不相符合。
English: He found that the original translation contained many ambiguities, all of which stemmed from the translator's understanding at the time, and did not correspond to the original Sanskrit text.

古文：于是兴使沙门僧栔、僧迁、法钦、道流、道恒、道标、僧睿、僧肇等八百余人，谘受什旨。
现代文：姚兴于是让沙门学者僧契、僧迁、法钦、道流、道恒、道标、僧睿、僧肇等八百余人，都来请教，接受罗什的见解，共同从事翻译工作。
English: Yao Xing then asked more than eight hundred scholars of Shamanism, including Sangchi, Sangqian, Faqin, Daolong, Daoheng, Daoban, Sangrui, and Sangzhao, to come to consult, accept Rosh's opinions, and jointly engage in translation work.

古文：更令出大品。
现代文：又让他们重新译出《大品》经。
English: He also asked them to re-translate the "Great Text" of the Song Dynasty.

古文：什持梵本，兴执旧经，以相雠校。
现代文：罗什手持梵文原著，姚兴拿着旧译的经书，互相对照校订。
English: Roche is holding the original Sanskrit text, Yao Xing is holding the old translation of the scripture, and they are proofreading each other.

古文：其新文异旧者，义皆圆通，众心惬伏，莫不欣赞。
现代文：新的译文与旧译不同的地方，都比原译文意义圆满通达，众人读了无不称心佩服、大为欣赏。
English: Where the new translation is different from the old translation, the meaning is more complete than the original translation, and everyone read it with admiration and great appreciation.

古文：什为人神情鉴彻，傲岸出群，应机领会，鲜有其匹。
现代文：鸠摩罗什为人神情开朗，秉性坦率。对于佛理能够应机领会，卓有见地，很少有人比得上他，他对人坦诚热情，忠厚仁慈，心存博爱情怀。
English: Kumarosh is a cheerful person with a straightforward nature. Few people can match him in his ability to understand the Buddha's teachings in a timely and insightful manner. He is sincere and passionate about people, loyal and kind, and has much love in his heart.

古文：且笃性仁厚，泛爱为心，虚己善诱，终日无倦。姚兴常谓什曰： 大师聪明超悟，天下莫二。若一旦后世，何可使法种无嗣？ 
现代文：他虚怀若谷，循循善诱，终日不倦。姚兴常跟罗什说： 大师聪明超悟，天下第一。一旦百年之后，怎能使法种没有后代？ 
English: Yao Xing often said to Rosh: Master is clever and super-enlightened, the best in the world. Once a hundred years have passed, how can there be no descendants of the Dharma lineage?

古文：遂以妓女十人，逼令受之。
现代文：便给他舞女十人，强令他接受。
English: They gave him ten dancing girls and forced him to accept.

古文：自尔已来，不住僧坊，别立廨舍，供给丰盈。
现代文：从那之后，罗什不再住在僧舍，另外有了住宅，日常供给十分丰盈。
English: Since then, Rosh no longer lives in a monastery, but has a house, and the daily supply is very plentiful.

古文：每至讲说。
现代文：每到讲说教义的时候。
English: Every time there is a sermon.

古文：常先自说譬，譬如臭泥中生莲华，但采莲花，勿取臭泥也。
现代文：常常以自身作譬喻，譬如臭泥中生莲花，但采莲花之高洁，勿取臭泥之污浊。
English: He often used himself as a metaphor, for example, a lotus flower growing in stinking mud, but the lotus flower should be picked clean, and the filth of the stinking mud should not be picked.

古文：什初在龟兹，从卑摩罗叉律师受律。卑摩后入关中，什闻至欣然，师敬尽礼。
现代文：罗什当初在龟兹的时候，跟从卑摩罗叉律师学习音律，卑摩后来也来到长安，罗什听说后非常高兴，对他极尽师敬之礼。
English: When Roche was in Kezi, he studied music with the lawyer Bimo Rofor. Bimo later came to Chang'an. Roche was very happy when he heard about this, and he was extremely grateful to his teacher.

古文：卑摩未知被逼之事，因问什曰： 汝于汉地，大有重缘，受法弟子，可有几人。 
现代文：卑摩不知道被逼接受舞女的事，就问罗什道： 你在汉地，极有缘分，跟你受法的弟子，能有多少人？ 
English: Bima did not know that he was forced to accept the dancing girl, so he asked Rosh, "You are in Han, you have a great destiny, and with your disciples who have received the Fa, how many people can there be?

古文：什答云： 汉境经律未备，新经及诸论等，多是什所传出。
现代文：罗什答道： 汉地经律尚未完备，新译的经书与许多论著，多是我所出的。
English: Roche replied: The Han Chinese sutras are not yet complete, and the newly translated scriptures and many treatises are mostly from me.

古文：三千徒众，皆从什受法。
现代文：三千徒弟，都跟我学习佛法。
English: Three thousand disciples, all learning Buddhism with me.

古文：但什累业障深，故不受师敬耳。 
现代文：但我守戒奉佛的功业经常受到深重的障碍，所以得不到他们对师父的敬重。 
English: But my work of observing the precepts and following the Buddha was often severely hindered, so I did not get their respect for Master.

古文：又杯渡比丘在彭城，闻什在长安，乃叹曰： 吾与此子戏，别三百余年，杳然未期。迟有遇于来生耳。 
现代文：还有，僧人杯度住在彭城，听说罗什在长安，便叹道： 要跟这小子开开玩笑，纵使三百多年见不着他，来生总有遇见他的时候。 
English: Moreover, the monk, who had lived in Pengcheng all his life, heard that Rosh was in Chang'an, and lamented, "I have to joke with this boy, even though I haven't seen him for more than three hundred years, there will always be a time to meet him in the next life."

古文：什未终少日，觉四大不愈，乃口出三番神咒，令外国弟子诵之以自救，未及致力，转觉危殆，于是力疾。
现代文：罗什在临终的前几天，感到身体不舒服，便口出三番神咒，让外国弟子念诵，借此救治自己，没等咒语生效，又觉生命危殆，于是来了重病。
English: A few days before his death, feeling unwell, Roche uttered the three divine spells and asked a foreign disciple to recite them in order to cure himself. He did not wait for the spells to take effect, but felt that his life was in danger, and he became seriously ill.

古文：与众僧告别曰： 因法相遇，殊未尽心。
现代文：他与众僧告别道： 因缘佛法与诸位相遇，深感情念未尽，现在又要离去，悲痛伤感之怀难以表达。
English: He bade farewell to the monks, saying, "I met you all because of Buddhism, and I have not exhausted my deep feelings. Now I am leaving again, and it is difficult to express my sorrow and sadness.

古文：方复后世，恻怆何言。
现代文：以我之愚昧不明，谬充传译之任。
English: With my stupidity unclear, absurdly charged with the task of interpretation.

古文：自以暗昧，谬充传谭。凡所出经论三百余卷，唯十诵一部，未及删繁。
现代文：所出经论三百余卷，只有《十诵》一部，未及删订，薄耵其本来旨意，必定没有差失。
English: Of the more than three hundred volumes of sutras, only a part of the "Ten Recitations" has not been abridged, which is a poor reflection of its original intention, and there must be no mistake.

古文：存其本旨，必无差失。愿凡所宣谭，传流后世，咸共弘通。
现代文：愿我平生所宣讲的教义，能够流传于世，与大家共同弘扬、研讨佛法。
English: May the teachings that I have been preaching all my life be passed on to the world, and may we all work together to promote and study Buddhism.

古文：今于众前，发诚实誓： 若所传无谬者，当使焚身之后，舌不焦烂。 
现代文：今于众位面前，我发诚实之誓：如果所传经义无谬误者，当使焚身之后舌不焦烂。 
English: And now, in the presence of all, I solemnly swear that if there is no error in the teaching of this sutra, the tongue will not be scorched in the fire.

古文：以伪秦弘始十一年八月二十日卒于长安，是岁晋义熙五年也。
现代文：弘始十一年八月二十日，鸠摩罗什逝世于长安，这年是东晋义熙五年。
English: On August 20th of the 11th year of the Hongshi era, Gong Morosh died in Chang'an, which was the fifth year of the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：即于逍遥园依外国法以火焚尸，薪灭形碎，唯舌不灰耳。
现代文：逝世后就在逍遥园依照西域习俗予以火化，柴火熄灭后形体粉碎，唯独舌头没有变成灰烬。
English: After his death, he was cremated in accordance with Western customs in the Pleasure Garden. After the fire was extinguished, his body was crushed, but his tongue did not turn into ashes.

古文：法朗
现代文：法朗
English: Farang

古文：晋沙门康法朗学于中山。
现代文：晋代有个佛教僧侣康法朗，修学佛道于中山。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, there was a Buddhist monk, Kangfarang, who studied Buddhism in Zhongshan.

古文：永嘉中，与一比丘西入天竺。行过流沙千有余里，见道边败坏佛图，无复堂殿，蓬蒿没人。
现代文：永嘉年间，与一个出家的僧人一起西游去印度，通过大沙漠后又走了一千余里，见道旁有一座破败的寺庙，殿堂已经没有了，杂草有一人高。
English: During the Yongjia years, he traveled west to India with a monk who had become a monk. After passing through the great desert, he walked more than a thousand miles. Next to the path, there was a dilapidated temple, the hall of fame was no longer there, and the weeds were as tall as a man.

古文：法朗等下拜瞻礼，见有二僧，各居其旁。一人读经，一人患痢，秽污盈房。其读经者，了不营视。
现代文：法朗等人走下路来前去拜谒，见有两个僧人分别坐在一旁，一人正在读经书，一人患了痢疾，满屋子都是粪便，那个读经书的人都不闻不问。
English: Farang and the others walked down the road to pay homage, and saw two monks sitting separately. One was reading a scripture, one had dysentery, and the room was full of excrement. The person reading the scripture did not pay any attention.

古文：朗等恻然兴念，留为煮粥，扫除浣濯。
现代文：法朗等人出于怜悯之心，留下来为那个病人煮粥吃，并为他打扫洗涮。
English: Out of compassion, Farran and the others stayed behind to cook porridge for the sick man and clean his bed.

古文：至六日，病者稍困，注痢如泉。朗等共料理之。
现代文：到第六天，病人有些困乏，痢泻不止，法朗等人一块儿收拾料理。
English: By the sixth day, the patient was a little tired, and the diarrhea had not stopped. Farang and the others gathered the food together.

古文：其夜，朗等并谓病者必不起，至明晨往视之，容色光悦，病状顿除。然屋中秽物，皆是华馨。
现代文：这天晚上，法朗等人都说病人恐怕好不了了，第二天早上去看他，只见他容光焕发，病状全没了，但是屋里的粪便全变成了香花。
English: That evening, Farran and the others said that the patient was probably not going to get better, and the next morning they went to see him and saw that he was radiant and his condition was completely gone, but the feces in the house had all turned into fragrant flowers.

古文：朗等乃悟是得道之士以试人也。
现代文：法朗等人这才省悟，此人明明是个得道之士，原来那副样子是用来试验他们。
English: It was only then that Farang and the others realized that this man was clearly a learned man, and that his appearance had been used to test them.

古文：病者曰： 隔房比丘，是我和尚，久得道惠，可往礼觐。 
现代文：病人说： 隔壁房里那个僧人，是我师傅。他已久得道惠，你们可去见礼。 
English: The patient said, "The monk in the next room is my master. He has been blessed for a long time. You can go and pay your respects."

古文：法朗等先嫌读经沙门无慈爱心，闻已，乃作礼悔过。
现代文：法朗等人原先嫌恶那人读经的僧人毫无慈爱之心，听了这番话后，便向他赔礼道歉。
English: After hearing this, Farang and the others apologized to the monk who had previously disliked the person reading the scripture and had no love for him.

古文：读经者曰： 诸君诚契并至，同当入道。
现代文：读经和尚说： 诸位信守契约同时来到这里，都应当得道。
English: The sutra-reading monk said, "All of you who have come here while abiding by the contract should attain the way.

古文：朗公宿学业浅，此世未得愿也。 
现代文：但法朗平日学业尚成，今生不能如愿了。 
English: However, Farang was still able to complete his studies on a daily basis, but he was not able to fulfill his wish in this life.

古文：谓朗伴云： 惠若植根深，当现世得愿。 
现代文：对法朗的那个同伴说： 你的佛心植根很深，现世即可如愿。 
English: To Farang's companion, he said, "Your buddha-heart is deeply rooted, and you can fulfill your wish in this life.

古文：因而留之。
现代文：于是将他留了下来。
English: So they kept him.

古文：法朗后还山中，为大法师，道俗宗之。
现代文：法朗后来返回山中，是一位大法师，许多佛教徒，无论是出家的还是从俗的，都尊他为宗师。
English: Farang later returned to the mountains as a great sage, revered by many Buddhists, both lay and ordained, as a guru.

古文：李恒沙门
现代文：李恒沙门
English: Li Hengsam Gate

古文：晋李恒字元文，谯国人。
现代文：晋代有个李恒，字元文，谯国人。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, there was a Li Heng, who was a native of Shandong Province.

古文：少时，有一沙门造恒谓曰： 君福报对至，而复对来随之。
现代文：年轻时，有一个出家和尚到他家里去跟他说： 你有祥福与喜报双双到来，接受还会在祥福与喜报双双跟着到来。
English: When he was young, a monk came to his home and said to him, "You have received both good fortune and good tidings. If you accept, good fortune and good tidings will follow you."

古文：君能守贫修道，不仕宦者，福增对灭。
现代文：你若能甘心贫寒而专心修学佛道，不走仕宦之路，祥福就会增加而喜极则双双消灭。
English: If you can be willing to be poor and cold and concentrate on learning Buddhism, and do not take the path of self-sacrifice, good fortune will increase and extreme happiness will be eliminated.

古文：君其勉之。 
现代文：你可要好自为之呀！ 
English: You've got to pace yourself!

古文：恒性躁，又寒门，但问仕宦当何所至，了不寻究修道意也。
现代文：李恒生性急躁，又加出身贫寒之家，只关心仁宦之途会官至什么级别，毫无研究修学佛道的兴趣。
English: Li Hengsheng is impetuous and comes from a poor family. He is only interested in the path of benevolence and how high he can rise in the hierarchy. He has no interest in studying Buddhism.

古文：沙门与一卷经，恒不肯取，固问荣途贵贱何如。
现代文：和尚送给他一卷经书，李恒不愿意接受，非要询问荣禄之途能不能当上显贵的官职。
English: The monk gave him a volume of scriptures, which Li Heng did not want to accept. He had no choice but to ask if the path to glory was to become a high-ranking official.

古文：沙门曰： 当带金紫，极于三郡。
现代文：和尚说： 能当上五品以上的大官，最高可到三郡之守。
English: The monk said, "If you can become a high-ranking official of the Fifth Rank or higher, you can become the governor of up to three counties.

古文：若能于一郡止者，亦为善道。 
现代文：如能当了一郡之守就停止，也可以很好地修学于佛道。 
English: If you can stop when you have become the guardian of a county, you can also learn Buddhism well.

古文：恒曰： 且当富贵，何顾后患。 
现代文：李恒说： 只要眼前能够富贵，谁还顾虑以后的福祸。 
English: Li Heng said: As long as you can be rich and noble in the present, who will worry about the future blessings and disasters.

古文：因留宿。
现代文：这天晚上，便留和尚住在家里。
English: That evening, the monk stayed at home.

古文：恒夜起。见沙门身满一床，入呼家人窥视。复变为大鸟跱屋梁上，天晓而形如旧。
现代文：李恒夜问起来时，看见和尚一个人躺了满满的一床，进屋招呼家人来看时，又见变成一只大鸟蹲大房梁上，天亮时他又恢复了原来的样子。
English: When Li Hengya asked, he saw a monk lying on a full bed. When he entered the house to invite his family to come and see, he saw a big bird squatting on the beam of the big room. At dawn, he returned to his original appearance.

古文：恒送出门，忽不复见。
现代文：李恒刚送他出门，眨眼之间他就再也看不到了，可知这是个神人。
English: Li Henggang sent him out of the door, and in the blink of an eye he could no longer see, but he was a man of God.

古文：知是神人，因此事佛，而亦不能精至。
现代文：此后，李恒即使仍然供佛，也不能专心致志。
English: After that, even though Li Heng still made offerings to Buddha, he could not concentrate.

古文：后为西阳、江夏、庐江太守，加龙骧将军。
现代文：后来他曾为西阳、江夏、庐江三郡的太守。又加封为龙骧将军。
English: Later, he served as the governor of Xiyang, Jiangxia and Minjiang counties, and was also awarded the title of Longjing general.

古文：太兴中，预钱凤之乱，被诛。
现代文：太兴年间，因为参与钱凤之乱，被杀掉了。
English: During the Taeking Dynasty, he was killed for participating in the Qianfeng Rebellion.

