古文：崔邓魏卫李韩卢高崔光远，系出博陵，后徙灵昌。
现代文：崔光远是博陵大姓的后代，后来迁到滑州灵昌县。
English: Cui Guangyuan is a descendant of the Boling family, and later moved to Lingshang County, Luzhou.

古文：祖敬嗣，嗜酒摴博。
现代文：他祖父崔敬嗣，好喝酒赌博。
English: His grandfather, Cui Jingzi, was fond of drinking and gambling.

古文：中宗在房州，吏多肆慢不为礼，敬嗣为刺史，独尽诚推奉，储给丰衍，帝德之。
现代文：唐中宗在房州时，官吏多有放肆、怠慢、不讲礼节的，崔敬嗣任刺史，单单全心拥戴、供奉，储蓄、供应丰足，唐中宗感激他。
English: When Tang Zhongzong was in Fangzhou, the officials were often presumptuous, negligent, and did not speak of etiquette. Cui Jingzong was a history-maker, and he simply wholeheartedly supported, offered, saved, and supplied abundantly. Tang Zhongzong was grateful to him.

古文：及反正，有与敬嗣同姓名者，每拟官，帝辄超拜，后召见，悟非是。
现代文：到复位后，有个和崔敬嗣同姓名的，每次任命官职，皇帝就破格提拔，后召见他，才知道弄错了。
English: After the restoration, there was a person with the same name as Cui Jingzhi, and every time he was appointed to an official post, the emperor promoted him in an unprecedented way. Only after he was summoned to see him did he realize that he had made a mistake.

古文：访真敬嗣，已死，即授其子汪五品官。
现代文：再寻找旧日的崔敬嗣，他已经去世了，于是提拔他儿子崔汪为五品官。
English: He then looked for the old Cui Jingzhi, who had passed away, and promoted his son Cui Wang to the rank of Fifth Grade Officer.

古文：汪生光远，勇决任气，长六尺，瞳子白黑分明。
现代文：崔汪生了崔光远。他勇猛、果断、任性，身长六尺，眼睛黑白分明。
English: Cui Wang gave birth to Cui Guangyuan. He was brave, decisive and headstrong. He was six feet tall and his eyes were black and white.

古文：开元末，为唐安令，与杨国忠善，累迁京兆少尹，为吐蕃吊祭使，还，会玄宗西狩，诏留光远为京兆尹、西京留守、采访使。
现代文：开元末年，任蜀州唐安县县令，和杨国忠要好，多次升官后任京兆府少尹，又担任吐蕃吊祭使。归来后，遇到唐玄宗西逃，有诏命崔光远留下任京兆尹、西京留守、采访使。
English: At the end of the first century, he served as the county magistrate of Tang'an County, Shuzhou, and was better than Yang Guozhong. After being promoted several times, he was appointed as a minor official of Beijing Zhaofu, and also served as an envoy to the hanging ceremony in Tubo. After returning, he encountered Tang Xuan Zong fleeing to the west, and was ordered by the emperor to leave Cui Guangyuan to serve as an envoy to Beijing Zhaofu, stay in West Beijing, and interview him.

古文：乘舆已出，都人乱，火左藏大盈库，争辇财珍，至乘驴入宫殿者。
现代文：皇帝车驾已出京，京城人乱了，放火烧左藏大盈库，抢着去运财宝，以至于有骑着驴子进宫殿的。
English: The emperor's chariot has left the capital, and the people of the capital are in turmoil. They have set fire to the Great Treasury of Zuozang and are rushing to transport the treasure, so much so that some are riding donkeys into the palace.

古文：光远乃募官摄府、县，谁何宫阙，斩十数人，乃定。
现代文：崔光远就招募官员代理府、县职务，守卫宫殿，杀死了十多人，才平定了。
English: Cui Guangyuan recruited officials to act as government and county officials and guard the palace, and killed more than ten people before he was subdued.

古文：因伪使其子东见禄山，而禄山先署张休为京兆尹，由是追休，授光远故官。
现代文：他又假装投降，派他的儿子到东边去拜见安禄山，安禄山此前已任命张休为京兆尹，因此又追回张休，任命崔光远为此职。
English: He also pretended to surrender and sent his son to the east to pay homage to Anlu Mountain, which had previously appointed Zhang Xiu as Jing Zhaoyun, and thus recaptured Zhang Xiu and appointed Cui Guangyuan to this position.

古文：俄而同罗背贼，以厩马二千出奔，贼将孙孝哲、安神威招之不得，神威忧死，官吏惊走，狱囚皆逸。
现代文：不久同罗背叛安禄山，带着皇宫的两千多匹马离去，叛军将领孙孝哲、安神威召唤他们，但他们不听，安神威忧虑而死，官吏受惊逃走，狱中犯人也都逃跑了。
English: Soon he and Luo betrayed Anlu Mountain and left with more than two thousand horses from the imperial palace. The rebel generals, Sun Xiaozhe and An Shenwei, summoned them, but they did not listen. An Shenwei died of worry. The officials were frightened and fled, and the prisoners also fled.

古文：光远以为贼且走，命人守神威、孝哲等第，斩曳落河二人。
现代文：崔光远认为叛贼将要逃走了，令人守住安神威、孙孝哲的府第，杀死了两名叛军。
English: Cui Guangyuan thought that the rebels were about to escape, so he had them guard the residence of An Shenwei and Sun Xiao Zhe, and killed two rebels.

古文：孝哲驰白禄山，光远惧，与长安令苏震出开远门，使人奔呼曰： 尹巡门！ 
现代文：孙孝哲跑去报告了安禄山，崔光远害怕了，和长安县县令苏震一起逃向开远门，先派人跑去喊道： 京兆尹来巡视城门了！ 
English: Sun Xiaozhe ran to report the Anlu Mountain, Cui Guangyuan was afraid, and he and Su Zhen, the county magistrate of Chang'an County, fled to the open gate. They first sent someone to run and shouted: Jing Zhaoyun has come to inspect the city gate!

古文：门兵具器仗迎谒，至，皆斩之，募得百馀人，遂趋灵武。
现代文：守门叛军举着仪仗来迎接参拜，他去后，把他们都杀了，招募到一百多人，就逃往灵武。
English: After he left, he killed them all, recruited more than a hundred people, and fled to Lingwu.

古文：肃宗嘉之，擢拜御史大夫，复为京兆尹，遣到渭北募侨民。
现代文：唐肃宗赞赏他，提升他为御史大夫，仍任京兆尹，派他到渭水北边去招募从沦陷区逃出的人。
English: Tang Su Zong praised him, promoted him to goshi daifu, and sent him to the north of Surabaya to recruit people who had escaped from the occupied area.

古文：会贼党剽泾阳，休祠房，椎牛呼饮。
现代文：遇上叛军一支部队掳掠泾阳，在祠庙中休息，杀牛喝酒。
English: Encountering the rebels, a troop captured and plundered Fenyang, resting in the ancestral temple, killing cattle and drinking.

古文：光远刺知之，率兵夜趋其所，使百骑彀满狙其前，命骁士合噪。
现代文：崔光远探听到这情况，带兵夜里到了那里，派一百名骑兵持弓箭在前边狙击，命骁勇的士兵齐声呐喊杀敌。
English: Upon hearing this, Cui Guangyuan scouted the area and arrived there in the middle of the night with his troops. He sent a hundred horsemen with bows and arrows to snipe in front. The brave soldiers shouted in unison to kill the enemy.

古文：贼醉，不能师，斩其徒二千，得马千噭，俘一酋长以献。
现代文：叛军喝醉了，不能抵抗，共杀死叛军两千名，缴获马一千匹，抓住一名敌军首领献上。
English: The rebels, drunk and unable to resist, killed a total of two thousand rebels, captured a thousand horses, and captured an enemy leader for sacrifice.

古文：自是，贼常避其锋。
现代文：从此，叛军常避开他。
English: Since then, the rebels have largely shunned him.

古文：扈帝还，改礼部尚书、鄴国公，封实户三百。
现代文：他跟随皇帝回长安后，被封为礼部尚书、邺国公，食实封三百户。
English: After he followed the emperor back to Chang'an, he was given the titles of the Minister of Ceremonies, the Minister of Literature, and the Governor of Shandong Province.

古文：乾元元年，繇汴州刺史代萧华为魏州节度使。
现代文：乾元元年，从汴州刺史职取代萧华任魏州节度使。
English: In the first year of the Qianyuan era, he replaced Xiao Hua as the Weizhou festival envoy from the Zhangzhou stabbing history post.

古文：初，郭子仪与贼战汲郡，光远裁率汴师千人援之，不甚力。
现代文：此前，郭子仪和叛军在汲郡作战，崔光远只带汴州一千名军队增援他，作战不卖力。
English: Previously, Guo Ziyi and the rebels were fighting in Kyu County. Cui Guangyuan only brought a thousand troops from Zhangzhou to reinforce him, and did not fight hard.

古文：及守魏，使将军李处崟拒贼，子仪不救，战不胜，奔还，贼因傅城下诡呼曰： 处崟召我而不出，何也？ 
现代文：到他任魏州节度使，派将军李处肶抵抗叛军，郭子仪不去救援，唐军战败，逃回城中，叛军追到城下假装喊道 ：李处肶喊我们来又不出来迎接我们，是为什么？ 
English: When he served as the Wei State Festival envoy, he sent General Li Shanzhang to resist the rebels, Guo Ziyi did not go to the rescue, the Tang army was defeated and fled back to the city, the rebels chased down the city and pretended to shout: Li Shanzhang shouted for us to come and did not come out to meet us, why?

古文：光远信之，斩处崟。
现代文：崔光远听信了这话，杀死了李处肶。
English: Cui Guangyuan listened to this and killed Li Shunlu.

古文：处崟善战，众倚以为重，及死，人益危。
现代文：李处肶善于作战，众人都依靠他，他死了，人们更害怕了。
English: Li Shanzhang was good at fighting, and everyone relied on him. Now that he is dead, people are even more afraid.

古文：魏城经袁知泰、能元皓等完筑，牢甚，光远不能守，夜溃围出，奔京师。
现代文：魏州城经过袁知泰、能元皓等人修筑，非常坚固，崔光远不会守城，夜晚突围出城，逃到了京城。
English: Weizhou City was built by Yuan Zhitai, Nengyuan Yao and others. It was very strong, and Cui Guangyuan could not defend the city. He broke out of the city at night and fled to Beijing.

古文：帝赦其罪，拜太子少保。
现代文：皇帝赦免了他的罪，任命为太子少保。
English: The emperor pardoned his crime and appointed him as Crown Prince Junior Protector.

古文：会襄州将康楚元、张嘉延反，陷荆、襄诸州，因拜持节荆、襄招讨，充山南东道兵马都使。
现代文：襄州将领康楚元、张嘉延反叛了，攻占了荆、襄等州，因此任命他为持节荆、襄招讨，任山南东道兵马都使。
English: The generals of Xiangzhou, Kang Chu Yuan and Zhang Jiayang, rebelled and conquered Jing and Xiang Provinces. Therefore, he was appointed as the commander of Jing and Xiang Provinces and the commander of the troops and horses of Shannan Province.

古文：又徙凤翔尹。
现代文：后又调任凤翔府尹。
English: Later, he was transferred to Fengxiangfu Yin.

古文：先是，岐、陇贼郭愔等掠州县，峙五堡，光远至，遣官喻降之。
现代文：此前，岐、陇反贼郭忄音等人掳掠州县，修筑五座城堡，崔光远去了，派官员招降了他们。
English: Previously, Guo Xuanying and other anti-Thief Guo Xuanying had captured and plundered counties and built five castles, but Cui Guang had gone far away and sent officials to recruit them.

古文：既而沉饮不亲事，愔等阴约党项及奴剌、突厥，败韦伦于秦、陇，杀监军使。
现代文：之后他成天喝酒不管事，郭忄音等人偷偷勾结党项和奴刺、突厥，在秦、陇州一带打败了韦伦，杀死了监军使。
English: After that, he drank all day and did not care about anything, Guo Yuyin and others secretly colluded with the party and the slave stabbers and Turks, defeated Weiren in the Qin and Zhangzhou areas, and killed the supervising envoy.

古文：帝怒光远无状，召还。
现代文：皇帝因崔光远治理不当发怒了，把他召回京城。
English: The emperor was angered by Cui Guangyuan's improper governance and recalled him to Beijing.

古文：复使节度剑南。
现代文：后又派他任剑南节度使。
English: Later, he was appointed as the Jian'nan Festival envoy.

古文：会段子璋反东川，李奂败走成都，光远进讨平之。
现代文：遇到段子璋在东川反叛，李奂战败后逃到成都，崔光远进兵讨平了他。
English: When Duan Zixuan rebelled in the East River, Li Qian fled to Chengdu after the defeat, and Cui Guangyuan entered the army to level him.

古文：然不能禁士卒剽掠士女，至断腕取金者，夷杀数千人。
现代文：但不能禁止兵将抢劫人民，以至于有砍断手腕抢金臂钏的，共杀死了几千百姓。
English: However, the soldiers could not be stopped from robbing the people, so much so that some cut off their wrists to snatch gold bracelets, killing thousands of people in total.

古文：帝诏监军按其罪，以忧卒。
现代文：皇帝下诏派监军调查他的罪状，他因忧虑去世了。
English: The emperor sent an army of inspectors to investigate his crimes, and he died of worry.

古文：邓景山，曹州人。
现代文：邓景山是曹州人。
English: Deng Jingshan is from Caozhou.

古文：本以文吏进，累至监察御史。
现代文：本来由文职官吏提升，累官到监察御史。
English: Originally a civil servant, he was promoted to inspector general of history.

古文：至德初，擢拜青齐节度使，徙淮南。
现代文：至德初年，升任青齐节度使，后调任淮南节度使。
English: In the first year of Zhi De, he was promoted to the Qingqi Festival Delegate, and later transferred to the Huainan Festival Delegate.

古文：为政简肃。
现代文：他管理政务简朴严格。
English: He managed the affairs of state simply and strictly.

古文：有鼍集城门，邓班语景山曰： 介物也。失所次，金不从革之象。其有兵乎？ 
现代文：有次鳄鱼集中爬到城门口，邓王廷对邓景山说： 鳄鱼是有鳞甲的动物，离开他们的住处，这是金不随从革的象征，大概有兵灾吧？ 
English: Once all the crocodiles gathered at the gate of the city. Deng Wangting said to Deng Jingshan, "Crocodiles are scaled animals. If they leave their home, this is a symbol of gold not following leather. There will probably be a military disaster, right?"

古文：未几，宋州刺史刘殿反。
现代文：不久，宋州刺史刘展反叛了。
English: Soon after, the Songzhou chief Liu Zhen rebelled.

古文：初，展有异志，淮西节度使王仲昇表其状，诏迁扬州长史兼江淮都统，密诏景山执送京师。
现代文：起初，刘展有野心，淮西节度使王仲升上奏报告他反叛的表现，有诏提升他任扬州长史兼任江淮都统。秘密下诏命邓景山把他抓到京城去。
English: At first, Liu Zhen had ambitions, the Huaxi Festival made Wang Zhongsheng report his rebellious performance, and promoted him to the post of Yang governor and the post of Jianghuai Duodu. The secret decree ordered Deng Jingshan to arrest him to Beijing.

古文：展知之，拥兵二万度淮。
现代文：刘展知道了这计划，就率兵两万渡过了淮河。
English: When Liu Zhan learned of this plan, he led 20,000 soldiers across the Huai River.

古文：景山逆击不胜，奔寿州，因引平卢节度副使田神功讨展。
现代文：邓景山迎击战败，逃到了寿州，因此派平卢节度副使田神功来讨伐刘展。
English: Deng Jingshan was defeated and fled to Shoushou, so he sent Tian Shengong, the deputy of Pinglu Jiedu, to fight Liu Zhan.

古文：神功兵至扬州，大掠居人，发冢墓，大食、波斯贾胡死者数千人。
现代文：田神功的军队到了扬州，大肆抢劫居民、挖坟墓，大食、波斯的异族商人被杀死了几千人。
English: Tian Sheng Gong's army arrived in Yangzhou, robbed the residents, dug graves, ate lavishly, and killed thousands of Persian foreign merchants.

古文：展叛凡三月平，追景山入朝，拜尚书左丞，以崔圆代之。
现代文：刘展共三个月才被平定了，后把邓景山调回朝廷，任尚书左丞，命崔圆接替他。
English: Liu Zhan was only subdued for a total of three months, after which Deng Jingshan was transferred back to the imperial court, with Shang Shuxu as the second-in-command and Cui Yuan as his successor.

古文：王思礼在太原，储廥赢衍，请输半以实京师。
现代文：王思礼在太原时，储备充足，请求送一半到京城。
English: When Wang Sili was in Taiyuan, he had sufficient reserves and asked for half to be sent to Beijing.

古文：会卒，管崇嗣代之，政弛不治，数月，为下盗费略尽。
现代文：赶上他去世了，就派管崇嗣接替他，法纪松弛混乱，几个月后，被部下偷盗花费得差不多了。
English: When he died, he sent his subordinate, Chong Zi, to replace him. The legal system was in disarray. A few months later, he was robbed by his subordinates and almost lost everything.

古文：帝闻，即以景山为太原尹，封南阳郡公。
现代文：皇帝听说了，就任命邓景山为太原尹，封爵为南阳郡公。
English: When the emperor heard about it, he appointed Deng Jingshan as Taiyuan Yin and knighted him as Nanyang County Duke.

古文：至则振核纪纲，检覆干隐，众大惧。
现代文：他去后整顿法纪，检查并复核犯法和隐瞒的，军人很害怕。
English: After he went to rectify the legal discipline, check and review the violation of the law and concealment, the soldiers are very afraid.

古文：而景山清约，子弟馔不过草具，用器止乌漆，待上宾惟豚、鱼而已，取仓粟红腐者食之，兼给麾下，麾下怨讪。
现代文：邓景山清廉俭朴，儿子和弟弟吃的也是粗劣的食物，用具上只有黑漆，接待贵客也只有猪肉和鱼，他把仓库里腐烂了的粮食煮了吃，也用这粮食供应部下，部下有怨言。
English: Deng Jingshan was frugal and thrifty. His son and younger brother also ate poor quality food. There was only black lacquer on the utensils, and only pork and fish were used to receive distinguished guests. He cooked and ate the rotten grain in the warehouse, and also used this grain to supply his subordinates. His subordinates complained.

古文：左右白景山，景山曰： 此不食，留将安用邪？ 
现代文：侍从告诉了邓景山，邓景山说： 这不吃掉，留着有什么用呢？ 
English: The servant told Deng Jingshan, and Deng Jingshan said, "If you don't eat it, what's the use of keeping it?

古文：因慢骂，士皆羞忿。
现代文：因此辱骂部下，部下都羞惭恼怒。
English: So he abused his subordinates, and his subordinates were ashamed and angry.

古文：有裨校抵死，诸将请赎，不许；其弟请代，不许；请纳一马赎，景山乃许减死。
现代文：有位偏将被判死罪，众将请求用钱赎罪，邓景山不答应；他的弟弟请求代他受刑，邓景山也不答应；他弟弟请求献一匹马来赎罪，邓景山才允许减免了死罪。
English: One of them was sentenced to death, and the crowd asked for money to atone for the crime, but Deng Jingshan did not agree; his younger brother asked to take the punishment on his behalf, but Deng Jingshan did not agree; his younger brother asked to donate a horse to atone for the crime, but Deng Jingshan allowed the commutation of the death penalty.

古文：众怒曰： 吾属命才一马直乎？ 
现代文：众人发怒说 ：我们的性命才值买一匹马的钱吗？ 
English: People were angry and said: Are our lives worth the price of a horse?

古文：景山护失，叱遣之。
现代文：邓景山掩饰自己的失误，呵斥并驱赶他们。
English: Deng Jingshan covered up his mistakes, rebuked and drove them away.

古文：少将黄抱节因众怒作乱，景山遇害，时宝应元年也。
现代文：小将黄抱节利用大家的愤怒发难，邓景山被杀死了，当时是宝应元年。
English: Young general Huang Bao Jie took advantage of everyone's anger to launch an attack, and Deng Jingshan was killed. It was the first year of Baoying.

古文：肃宗以其统驭失方，不复究验，遣使喻抚其军，军中请辛云京为节度，诏可。
现代文：唐肃宗因为他管理军队不当，不再追查，派使者安抚他的军队，军队请求任命辛云京为节度使，皇帝下诏同意了。
English: Tang Su Zong, because of his improper management of the army, no longer pursued, sent an envoy to appease his army. The army requested the appointment of Xin Yunjing as the festival envoy, and the emperor agreed.

古文：景山与刘晏善，其后家寒窭，晏屡经纪之，嫁其孤女。
现代文：邓景山和刘晏交情好，他的后代家境贫穷，刘晏多次帮他们经营，把他的女儿嫁了出去。
English: Deng Jingshan and Liu Hui are good friends. His descendants are poor. Liu Hui has helped them run the business many times and married off his daughter.

古文：谥曰敬。
现代文：皇帝赐给他谥号叫敬。
English: His nickname is Zeng.

