古文：高帝下建元元年夏，四月，甲午，上即皇帝位于南郊，设坛柴燎告天曰： 皇帝臣道成敢用玄牡，昭告皇皇后帝。
现代文：建元元年夏四月甲午，高帝在南郊即皇帝位，设祭坛柴堆举行燎祭，奉告上天说： 皇帝臣道成，大胆用黑公畜，昭告皇天后帝。
English: In the summer of Jianyuan in the first year of Jianyuan, on the afternoon of April, Emperor Gao ascended the throne in the southern suburbs, set up an altar pyre to hold a burnt offering, and announced to the heavens: "Emperor subject Daocheng, boldly use black cattle to announce the emperor to the emperor.

古文：宋帝陟鉴乾序，钦若明命，以命于道成。
现代文：宋帝明识上天授命之序，颁布旨命，让我萧道成受上天之命。
English: Emperor Song clearly understood the order of God's mandate, promulgated the order of God's mandate, and let me receive God's mandate.

古文：夫肇自生民，树以司牧，所以阐极则天，开元创物，肆兹大道。
现代文：自人类起源，设立管理者，目的是阐明至理效法上天，开启新元创造万物，扩展这一大道。
English: Since the origin of mankind, managers have been set up with the purpose of clarifying the principle of imitation of heaven, opening up a new era of creation of all things, and expanding this avenue.

古文：天下惟公，命不于常。
现代文：天下是众人的，上天不会长期授命于一人。
English: The world is made up of many people, and God does not give long-term orders to one person.

古文：昔在虞、夏，受终上代，粤自汉、魏，揖让中叶，咸炳诸典谟，载在方册。
现代文：从前在虞、夏时代，都是从上代承受帝位，及至连、魏，中世就相互揖让，这些都明白地见诸典籍，载于史册。
English: In the past, Emperor Wu and Emperor Xia inherited the throne from the previous generation, and Emperor Ziliang, Emperor Wei, and the Middle Ages conceded to each other. These are all clearly seen in the classics and recorded in the history books.

古文：水德既微，仍世多故，实赖道成匡拯之功，以弘济于厥艰。
现代文：宋秉承的气敷既已衰微，累代多有变故，实际是依赖道成匡扶拯救的功绩，才度过了那些艰难。
English: Song Bing Rong's influence has already waned, and there have been many changes over the generations. In fact, it was only through relying on Tao Cheng Kuang's rescue efforts that he was able to overcome those difficulties.

古文：大造颠坠，再构区宇，宣礼明刑，缔仁缉义。
现代文：再造颠覆坠亡的王朝，重新构建疆域，宣布礼仪明确刑罚，结集仁义。
English: Rebuild the fallen dynasty, rebuild the territory, announce the etiquette and clear punishment, and gather the benevolence and righteousness.

古文：晷纬凝象，川岳表灵，诞惟天人，罔弗和会。
现代文：曰晷星纬凝聚天象，河岳显灵，大至天人之际，无不表示感应。
English: It is said that when the stars and planets condense the heavenly bodies, and the rivers and mountains manifest their spirits, when they are as large as the heavens and the earth, they all indicate inspiration.

古文：乃仰协归运，景属与能，用集大命于兹。
现代文：于是才敬依天运，委任贤能，把天命赋予我身。
English: So I obeyed God's providence, appointed a virtuous person, and entrusted my body to God's will.

古文：辞德匪嗣，至于累仍，而群公卿士，庶尹御事，爰及黎献，至于百戎，佥曰 皇天眷命，不可以固违，人神无托，不可以旷主 。
现代文：我推辞德业不足以继承帝位，达到数次，然而诸位公卿士大夫，长官执事，以及众多贤人，包括各地戎狄，全都说： 皇天眷爱并赋予重任，不可以坚持推辞，入神无所寄托，不可以空缺帝位。 
English: I have renounced my virtue several times, which is not enough to succeed to the imperial throne. However, all of you nobles, magistrates, officials, and many sages, including military officers from all over the country, have all said: The emperor is loved by heaven and given a heavy responsibility. It is not possible to persist in renouncing. There is nothing to entrust to God. It is not possible to vacate the imperial throne.

古文：畏天之威，敢不祗顺鸿历？
现代文：我害怕上天的威严，怎敢不恭敬地顺从天命。
English: I am afraid of the majesty of heaven, how dare I not respectfully obey the fate.

古文：敬简元辰，虔奉皇符，升坛受禅，告类上帝，以永答民衷，式敷万国。
现代文：敬选吉曰，恭奉皇符，登坛接受禅让，类祭上天，以永报百姓的衷心，传布万国。
English: Respectfully select the auspicious day, respectfully worship the imperial emblem, ascend the altar to accept the zen concession, and go up to heaven with the heart of the people, and spread it to all countries.

古文：惟明灵是飨！ 
现代文：希望圣明神灵享用! 
English: Pay homage to the revered gods!

古文：礼毕，大驾还宫，临太极前殿。
现代文：典礼结束，车驾回到宫中，登临太极前殿。
English: After the ceremony, the car drove back to the palace and arrived at the Taiji front hall.

古文：诏曰： 五德更绍，帝迹所以代昌；三正迭隆，王度所以改耀。
现代文：下诏书说： 五德更替，所以王朝的业绩代代昌盛；夏正、殷正、周正转换，所以帝王法度再度光耀。
English: The following edict said: The Five Dynasties have been replaced, so the performance of the dynasty has been prosperous for generations; Xia Zheng, Yin Zheng, Zhou Zheng have been converted, so the Emperor's Law once again shines.

古文：世有质文，时或因革，其资元膺历，经道振民，固以异术同揆，殊流共贯者矣。
现代文：世间有质朴有文饰，时有沿革，其奉天承运，经治道统，整顿百姓，本来就是用不同的方法达到同样的管理目的，通过不同的渠道流到一起。
English: In the world, there are simplicity and decoration, and there are times and times of history. It is natural to use different methods to achieve the same management purpose, and to flow together through different channels.

古文：朕以寡昧，属值艰季，推肆勤之诚，藉乐治之数，贤能悉心，士民致力，用获拯溺龛暴，一匡天下。
现代文：朕寡陋愚昧，值此艰难之季，以勤恳尽力的诚心，凭藉期望安定的运数，贤能者尽心，士人百姓尽力，因此得以拯救危亡平定暴乱，匡扶一统天下。
English: In this season of hardship, I, with the sincerity of diligence and exertion, by virtue of the expectation of stable operation, the wise and able have done their best, and the scholars and the people have done their best, so I was able to save the perilous and quell the riot, and support the unification of the world.

古文：业未参古，功殆侔昔。
现代文：事业没有高遇古代，功绩大致可与从前相比。
English: In ancient times, the cause was not high, and the achievements could be roughly compared with those in the past.

古文：宋氏以陵夷有徵，历数攸及，思弘乐推，永鉴崇替，爰集天禄于朕躬。
现代文：宋代因为有衰亡征兆，气数已尽，想光大德业，乐于禅让，这是明了朝代更替的长远之见，于是上天赐予的禄位就集中到了我身上。
English: In the Song Dynasty, because there were signs of decline and death, the number of qi was exhausted, and people wanted to achieve great virtue and were willing to meditate. This was a long-term view of the replacement of dynasties, so the position given by God was concentrated on me.

古文：惟志菲薄，辞弗获昭，遂钦从天人，式繇景命，祗月正于文祖，升禋鬯于上帝。
现代文：衹是我志向浅薄，推辞又不被理解，所以就敬从天人之意，遵照上天授予王位之命，正月敬奉祖先，升烟祭祀上帝。
English: Because my aspiration is shallow and my refusal is not understood, so I respectfully follow the will of heaven and man, follow the order of heaven to grant the throne, honor my ancestors in the first month, and offer sacrifices to God.

古文：猥以寡德，光宅四海，纂革代之踪，托王公之上，若涉渊水，罔知所济。
现代文：我缺少德业有辱使命，如今居有四海，承续帝统，寄位王公之上，好像涉入深水，不知如何渡过。
English: I lack virtue and have dishonored my mission. Now I live on the four seas, succeed to the throne, and sit on the throne. It's like wading into deep water and not knowing how to get through.

古文：宝祚初启，洪庆惟新，思俾利泽，宣被亿兆，可大赦天下。
现代文：初登帝位，大庆新象，要把恩惠施予广大的百姓，可以大赦天下。
English: As the new emperor ascending the throne for the first time, it is time to bestow favors on the broad masses of the people, and grant amnesty to the whole world.

古文：改升明三年为建元元年。
现代文：改升明三年为建元元年。
English: The promotion was changed from the third year of the Ming Dynasty to the first year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：赐民爵二级，文武进位二等，鳏寡孤独不能自存者谷人五斛。
现代文：赐予国民爵位二级，文武官员晋升二等官位，鳏寡孤独不能自我谋生者，每人给五斛谷。
English: Awarded the second-class national title, the second-class civil and military officials were promoted to the second-class official rank, and the widows and widowers who could not make a living on their own were each given a five-tiered valley.

古文：逋租宿债勿复收。
现代文：拖欠的田租旧债不要再收。
English: Old rents and debts will no longer be collected.

古文：有犯乡论清议，赃污淫盗，一皆荡涤，洗除先注，与之更始。
现代文：有触犯乡里考核评议的律条，贪污奸淫盗窃的，一律都予以清理，洗刷原先的罪名，让他们重新开始。
English: Those who have violated the rules of the township assessment and evaluation, and those who have committed corruption, adultery and theft, will all be cleaned up, and the original charges will be washed away, so that they can start anew.

古文：长徒敕系之囚，特皆原遣。
现代文：长期服劳役者和钦定关押的囚犯，都特赦遣散。
English: Long-serving forced laborers and prisoners sentenced to imprisonment will be amnestied and discharged.

古文：亡官失爵，禁锢夺劳，一依旧典。 
现代文：丢失官爵，受禁锢被夺去的功劳，一律依照从前的规定予以恢复。 
English: The officials who lost their posts, lost their titles, and were imprisoned or deprived of their posts and forced labor were all released in accordance with the old law.

古文：封宋帝为汝阴王，筑宫丹阳县故治，行宋正朔，车旗服色，一如故事，上书不为表，答表不称诏。
现代文：封宋帝为汝阴王，在丹阳县从前的治所为其建造宫殿，采用宋代的历法，车驾、仪仗、服饰的颜色，完全与过去相同，上书朝廷不用称表，皇上对其上书的回答不称韶。
English: Emperor Song was named King Ruyin, and a palace was built for him in the former capital of Danyang County. The calendar of the Song Dynasty was adopted, and the colors of the chariot, ceremonial battle, and clothing were completely the same as in the past. The imperial court did not need to weigh the watch when sending the letter, and the emperor's answer to the letter was not good.

古文：降宋晋熙王燮为阴安公，江夏王跻为沙阳公，随王棨为舞阴公，新兴王嵩为定襄公，建安王禧为荔浦公，郡公主为县君，县公主为乡君。
现代文：宋晋熙王刘燮降为阴安公，江夏王刘跻降为沙阳公，随王刘翻降为舞阴公，新兴王刘嵩降为定襄公，建安工刘禧降为荔浦公，郡公主降为县君，县公主降为乡君。
English: Song Jinxi's King Liu Ye was demoted to Yin An Gong, Jiangxia's King Liu Rong was demoted to Shayang Gong, Wang Liu Dou was demoted to Wu Yin Gong, the emerging King Liu Song was demoted to Ding Xiang Gong, the construction safety engineer Liu Xie was demoted to Li Pu Gong, the county princess was demoted to county prince, and the county princess was demoted to township prince.

古文：诏曰： 继世象贤，列代盛典，畴庸嗣美，前载令图。
现代文：下韶书说： 承继事业效仿先贤，是历代盛典，酬报劳绩使立功者的后代生活美满，是从前的善意举措。
English: He said: "Succession to the cause of emulating the sages is a grand ceremony for all generations. Rewarding the achievements and making the descendants of the meritorious people live a happy life is a goodwill measure.

古文：宋氏通侯，乃宜随运省替。
现代文：宋代封的通侯，就应当随着朝运变换降低或免去爵位。
English: Tong Hou of Song Dynasty should be reduced or exempted from a peerage with the change of the dynasty.

古文：但钦德怀义，尚表坟闾，况功济区夏，道光民俗者哉？
现代文：衹要有值得钦敬的道德受人怀念的仁义，就可以记载于典籍传播于民间，何况功在中原，道德光照民俗的人呢?
English: If you want to have admirable morality and be remembered for benevolence, you can record it in the classics and spread it to the people. How much more so is it in the Central Plains, where morality shines on the people?

古文：降差之典，宜遵往制。
现代文：爵位降低等次的规定，应当遵照从前的制度。
English: The provisions on the downgrading of titles of nobility should follow the previous system.

古文：南康县公华容县公可为侯，萍乡县侯可为伯，减户有差，以继刘穆之、王弘、何无忌后。 
现代文：南康县公、华容县公可以降为侯，萍乡县侯可以降为伯，食邑的户数依次减少，以此沿续刘穆之、王弘、何无忌的后人。 
English: Nankang County and Huarong County may be downgraded to Hou, Pingxiang County may be downgraded to Bo, and the number of households in food villages will be reduced in turn, so that the descendants of Liu Muzhi, Wang Hong and He Muxi can follow suit.

古文：以司空褚渊为司徒，吴郡太守柳世隆为南豫州刺史。
现代文：任命司空褚渊为司徒，吴郡太守柳世隆为南豫州刺史。
English: He appointed the governor of the Southern Henan Province, Liu Shilong, as the chief historian, and the governor of the Southern Henan Province, Gaoyuan, as the chief historian.

古文：诏曰： 宸运肇创，实命惟新，宜弘庆宥，广敷蠲汰。
现代文：下诏书说： 帝王时运初创，天命惟新，应当弘扬奖赏宽恕之心，广施减免消除罪过。
English: The following edict said: Since the emperor's time is new, and his destiny is new, he should promote the spirit of rewarding and forgiving, and make extensive efforts to reduce and eliminate sins.

古文：劫贼余口没在台府者，悉原放。诸负衅流徙，普听还本土。 
现代文：强盗剩余家口被没入宫府的，全部赦免释放那些举家流浪迁徙的，一律听任返回本土。 
English: The rest of the robbers whose families were confiscated by the imperial court were all pardoned, and those whose entire families had wandered and migrated were released and allowed to return to the mainland.

古文：以齐国左卫将军陈显达为中护军，中领军王敬则为南兖州刺史，左卫将军李安民为中领军。
现代文：任命齐国左卫将军陈显达为中护军，中领军王敬则为南兖史，左卫将军李安民为中领军。
English: Chen Xianda, the left guard general of Qi, was appointed as the middle guard, Wang Jing, the middle leader, was appointed as the south guard general, and Li Anmin, the left guard general, was appointed as the middle leader.

古文：戊戌，以荆州刺史嶷为尚书令、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史，冠军将军映为荆州刺史，西中郎将晃为南徐州刺史，冠军将军垣崇祖为豫州刺史，骠骑司马崔文仲为徐州刺史。
现代文：戊戌，任命荆州刺史萧嶷为尚书令、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、扬史，冠军将军萧映为荆州刺史，西中郎将萧晃为南徐州刺史，冠军将军垣崇祖为豫州刺史，骠骑司马崔文仲为徐州刺史。
English: Wu Wei appointed the Jingzhou champion general Xiao Wei as the Shang Shuling, the Zhang riding general, the Kaifu ceremony with three divisions, and the Yang history, the champion general Xiao Ying as the Jingzhou champion, the West middle-aged general Xiao Xing as the South Xuzhou champion, the champion general Gui Chongzu as the Yuanzhou champion, and the champion horse rider Ma Cui Wenzhong as the Xuzhou champion.

古文：断四方上庆礼。
现代文：禁止各地进贡庆贺礼物。
English: Stop the four-way dedication ceremony.

古文：己亥，诏曰： 自庐井毁制，农桑易业，盐铁妨民，货鬻伤治，历代成俗，流蠹岁滋。
现代文：己亥，下诏令说： 自从井田制度毁弃，农桑业者改行，晒盐冶铁妨碍百姓生计，商业凋零混乱，历代成为习俗，流弊越来越严重。
English: Ji Hai, the next imperial edict said: Since the rice field system was abandoned, farmers and mulberry growers changed their line of work, salt and iron smelting hindered the livelihood of the people, commerce withered and became chaotic, and became a custom throughout the ages, the abuses have become more and more serious.

古文：援拯遗弊，革末反本，使公不专利，氓无失业。
现代文：拯救流弊，改革商业重视农业，使官方不独占货利，百姓不失业。
English: Rescuing the corrupt, reforming business and attaching importance to agriculture, so that the government does not monopolize goods and profits, and the people do not lose their jobs.

古文：二宫诸王，悉不得营立屯邸，封略山湖。
现代文：二宫各王，都不得营造屯田府邸，封占山湖。
English: All the kings of the Second Palace were not allowed to build a tonden residence and occupy the mountains and lakes.

古文：太官池嵒，宫停税入，优量省置。 
现代文：太官掌管的皇家园林，停止征纳赋税，酌情省建。 
English: The royal gardens under the control of the eunuchs will stop levying taxes, and will be built sparingly as appropriate.

古文：庚子，诏 宋帝后蕃王诸陵，宜有守卫。 
现代文：庚子，诏令 宋朝皇帝、皇后、各王的陵墓，应当有守卫 。
English: Emperor Geng Zi decreed that the mausoleums of the emperors, empresses and kings of the Song Dynasty should be guarded.

古文：有司奏帝陵各置长一人，兵有差，王陵五人，妃嫔三人。
现代文：有关部门奏请皇帝陵墓各设置长官一人，兵士不等，王的陵墓五人，妃嫔的陵墓三人。
English: The relevant departments requested that the imperial mausoleum be set up with one officer and soldiers, five for the king's mausoleum and three for the concubine's mausoleum.

古文：五月，丙午，进河南王吐谷浑拾寅号骠骑大将军。
现代文：五月丙午，晋封河南王吐谷浑拾寅为骠骑大将军。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the fifth month, the king of Henan Province, Tuya Hunshuying, was promoted to the general of the cavalry.

古文：诏曰： 宸运革命，引爵改封，宋氏第秩，虽宜省替，其有预效屯夷、宣力齐业者，一仍本封，无所减降。
现代文：下诏令说： 帝运更替，除去爵位改变封号，宋朝的等第禄秩，虽然应当减省更替，但是其中原来已经守边效力，致力宣扬齐代功业的，一律沿用本来的封号。不要有什么降低。 
English: The next imperial edict said: "In the replacement of the emperor, the title of nobility should be removed and the title of seal changed, and the rank of the Song Dynasty should be reduced and replaced, but among them, the original title of seal should be used. Do not reduce anything.

古文：有司奏留襄阳郡公张敬儿等六十二人，除广兴郡公沈昙亮等百二十二人。
现代文：主管部门奏请留用襄阳郡公张敬儿等六十二人，去旧官而任新官的有广兴郡公沈昙亮等一百二十二人。
English: The competent department requested that 62 people, including Zhang Jing'er, the public official of Yangyang County, be retained, and 122 people, including Guangxing County's public official, Shen Yuliang, were appointed as new officials instead of the old ones.

古文：改《元嘉历》为《建元历》，木德盛卯终未，以正月卯祖，十二月未腊。
现代文：历法改《元嘉历》为《建元历》，木德盛于卯终于未，用正月卯曰祭祖，十二月末日祭腊。
English: The calendar was changed from the "Yuanjia Calendar" to the "Jianyuan Calendar," and the wood was in full bloom at the end of the year, with the first month of the year being the "Sai Zu" and the last day of December being the "Sai Ra."

古文：丁未，诏曰： 设募取将，悬赏购士，盖出权宜，非曰恒制。
现代文：丁未，下诏令说： 招募选取将领，悬赏征求士人，出于权宜之计，不是永久的制度。
English: Ding Wei, the next imperial edict said: Recruiting and selecting generals, offering rewards to solicit scholars, is a stopgap measure, not a permanent system.

古文：顷世艰险，浸以成俗，且长逋逸，开罪山湖。
现代文：但近年世事艰难，逐渐成为习俗，而且许多人长期逃逸，藏匿在山野湖泊开脱罪责。
English: However, in recent years, as the world has become more difficult, it has gradually become a custom, and many people have escaped for a long time, hiding in the mountains and lakes to absolve their guilt.

古文：是为黥刑不辱，亡窜无咎。
现代文：这样就会造成犯罪者不感到耻辱，逃亡者受不到指责。
English: This will result in the offender not being stigmatised and the absconder not being blamed.

古文：自今以后，可断众募。 
现代文：从今以后，可以禁止在民众中招募。 
English: From now on, recruitment among the population can be prohibited.

古文：壬子，诏封佐命文武功臣新除司徒褚渊等三十一人，进爵增户各有差。
现代文：壬子，韶令加封辅佐登基的文武功臣，包括新任司徒褚渊等三十一人，晋封爵位增加食邑户数各有不等。
English: There are thirty-one great scholars and military heroes who ascended to the throne, including the newly-appointed scholar Shanyuan, and the number of households that were ennobled and promoted to peerage varies.

古文：乙卯，河南王吐谷浑拾寅奉表贡献。
现代文：乙卯，河南王吐谷浑拾寅上表进献贡品。
English: Second, the king of Henan Province, Tugu Hunqin, came to the table to offer tribute.

古文：丙辰，诏遣大使分行四方，遣兼散骑常侍十二人巡行。
现代文：丙辰，诏令派大臣分别到各地去，派遣兼散骑常侍十二人巡视。
English: At the same time, the imperial edict sent ministers to various regions, and dispatched twelve horsemen to patrol.

古文：以交宁道远，不遣使。
现代文：交宁因为路途遥远，不派遣大使。
English: China prefers not to send an ambassador because of the distance.

古文：己未，汝阴王薨，追谥为宋顺帝，终礼依魏元、晋恭帝故事。
现代文：己未，汝阴王去世，追封谧号为宋顺帝，葬礼依照魏元帝、晋恭帝旧例。
English: Before long, King Ruyin passed away, and his posthumous name was Emperor Song Shun. The funeral followed the old custom of Emperor Wei Yuan and Emperor Jinguang.

古文：辛酉，阴安公刘燮等伏诛。
现代文：辛酉，阴安公刘燮等人被处死。
English: Xin Zheng, Yin An Gong Liu Zheng and others were executed.

古文：追封谥上兄道度为衡阳元王，道生为始安贞王。
现代文：追封谧号，哥哥萧道度为衡阳元王，萧道生为始安贞王。
English: His brother Xiao Daodu was named Hengyang Yuan Wang, and Xiao Daoweng was named Shi'an Zhen Wang.

古文：丙寅，追尊皇考曰宣皇帝，皇妣为孝皇后，妃为昭皇后。
现代文：丙寅，追尊皇父为宣皇帝，皇母为孝皇后，妃为昭皇后。
English: Hsin-Yin followed his father as Emperor Xuan, his mother as Empress Xiao, and his wife as Empress Zhao.

古文：六月，辛未，诏 相国骠骑中军三府职，可依资劳度二官，若职限已盈，所余可赐满。 
现代文：六月辛未，韶令 相国、骠骑将军、中军将军三府的官吏，可以依照资历功劳增加二员，假如职位已经满了，剩下的人可以全部赐给官位 。
English: At the end of June, the Emperor issued an order that the officials of the three prefectures of the Qing Dynasty, the Zhou Dynasty, and the Chinese Dynasty could be increased by two in accordance with their seniority and merits. If the position was already full, the remaining people could all be given official positions.

古文：壬申，以游击将军周山图为兖州刺史。
现代文：壬申，任命游击将军周山图为兖州刺史。
English: Jinshin, appointed the guerrilla general Zhou Shantu as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：乙亥，诏曰： 宋末频年戎寇，兼灾疾凋损，或枯骸不收，毁榇莫掩，宜速宣下埋藏营恤。
现代文：乙亥，下诏说： 宋末连年战乱，加上灾害疾病的破坏，致使有些枯骨无人收拾，毁掘的棺材未能掩埋，应当尽快通知下边埋葬体恤。
English: Yi Hai, the next edict said: The end of the Song Dynasty was accompanied by years of war, coupled with the destruction of disasters and diseases, resulting in some dead bones left uncollected, and the destroyed coffins could not be buried. It is necessary to inform the lower side of the burial shirt as soon as possible.

古文：若标题犹存，姓字可识，可即运载，致还本乡。 
现代文：如果还存有标志文字。姓名字号能够识别，可以立即装运，运到本乡。 
English: If you still have the logo text. Surname and name number can be identified, you can immediately ship it to your hometown.

古文：有司奏遣外监典事四人，周行离门外三十五里为限。
现代文：主管部门奏请派遣外监典事四人，巡行城门外三卜五里以内的地区。
English: The competent department requested the dispatch of four foreign supervisors to patrol the area within three and a half miles outside the city gate.

古文：其余班下州郡。
现代文：其余地区把命令下达给州郡。
English: The rest of the region sent the order to prefectures and counties.

古文：无棺器标题者，属所以台钱供市。
现代文：没有棺材和标志文字的，当地用官方的钱购置有关物品予以下葬。
English: If there is no coffin and sign language, the local government will use official money to purchase the relevant items for burial.

古文：庚辰，七庙主备法驾即于太庙。
现代文：庚辰，七座宗庙神主乘坐皇帝车驾到太庙就位。
English: Geng Chen, the god of the seven temples, drove to the Great Temple in the emperor's car and took his place.

古文：诏 诸将及客，戮力艰难，尽勤直卫，其从还宫者，普赐位一阶。 
现代文：诏令说： 诸位将领及门客，合力共度艰难，尽心尽力值班守卫，那些随从归还宫廷的，全部赐给一级官位。 
English: The imperial edict said: Generals and courtiers, work together to overcome difficulties, do your best to guard on duty, and those who return to the palace are all given a first-class official position.

古文：辛巳，罢荆州刺史。
现代文：辛巳，罢免荆州刺史。
English: Xin Si, remove Jing Zhou from office.

古文：甲申，立皇太子赜。
现代文：甲申，立萧赎为皇太子。
English: Jia Sheng and Li Xiaoyu became crown princes.

古文：断诸州郡礼庆。
现代文：禁止各州郡送礼庆贺。
English: States and counties are prohibited from sending gifts to celebrate.

古文：见刑入重者，降一等，并申前赦恩百日。
现代文：现在量刑加重的，减轻一等，并且申明赦免一百天。
English: Now the sentence is aggravated, reduced to the first degree, and an amnesty of one hundred days is declared.

古文：立皇子嶷为豫章王，映为临川王，晃为长沙王，晔为武陵王，暠为安成王，锵为鄱阳王，铄为桂阳王，鉴为广陵王，皇孙长懋为南郡王。
现代文：立皇子萧嶷为豫章王，萧映为临川王，萧晃为长沙王，萧毕为武陵王，萧嵩为安成王，萧锵为鄱阳王，萧铄为桂阳王，萧鉴为广陵王，皇孙萧长懋为南郡王。
English: The prince's son, Xiao Wei, became the king of Yuzhang, Xiao Ying became the king of Linchuan, Xiao Xing became the king of Changsha, Xiao Bi became the king of Wuling, Xiao Song became the king of Ancheng, Xiao Wei became the king of Shenyang, Xiao Wei became the king of Guiyang, Xiao Jian became the king of Guangling, and the grandson, Xiao Changwei, became the king of Nan County.

古文：乙酉，葬宋顺帝于遂宁陵。
现代文：乙酉，把宋顺帝安葬在遂宁陵。
English: On the 20th, Emperor Song Shun was buried in Suining Mausoleum.

古文：秋，七月，丁未，诏曰： 交止北景，独隔书朔，斯乃前运方季，负海不朝，因迷遂往，归款莫由。
现代文：秋七月丁未，下诏说： 交吐、比景，独不上书奉齐为正统，这是因为前朝刚刚终结，他们依仗隔海的有利地势不服从朝廷，因而迷失了方向，不知如何归顺。
English: In the autumn of July, the following edict was issued: "Conversation, comparison, and non-conformity alone do not make writing equal to orthodoxy. This is because the previous government had just ended. They relied on the advantageous situation across the sea to disobey the imperial court. As a result, they lost their way and did not know how to submit.

古文：曲赦交州部内李叔献一人即抚南士，文武详才选用。
现代文：宽赦交州部属李叔献一人即可安抚南部国土，文武官员量才选用。
English: Pardoning a subordinate of the Jiaozhou Provincial Government, Uncle Li, can pacify the southern part of the country with the donation of one person. Only the number of civil and military officials can be used.

古文：并遣大使宣扬朝恩。 
现代文：并派遣大使宣扬朝廷恩德。 
English: and dispatched ambassadors to proclaim the benevolence of the imperial court.

古文：以试守武平太守行交州府事李叔献为交州刺史。
现代文：任命试守武平太守行交州府事奎扭赵为交丛刺史。
English: The appointment of the probationary governor Wu Ping Taishou as the governor of Jiaozhou Prefecture, Kui Quan Zhao, was a turning point in the history of Jiaozhou.

古文：丙辰，以虏伪茄芦镇主阴平公杨广香为沙州刺史。
现代文：丙辰，任命胡人伪茄芦镇主阴平公杨广香为逆业刺史。
English: Bing Chen, appointed Hu Ren pseudo-cucumber town master Yin Ping Gong Yang Guang Xiang as a reverse industry stabbing history.

古文：丁巳，诏 南兰陵桑梓本乡，长蠲租布；武进王业所基，复十年。 
现代文：丁巳，下韶说： 南兰陵是家乡故土，长期减免田租布帛；武进是奠基帝王大业的所在，免除十年赋税徭役。 
English: Ding, the lower jaw said: Nanlianling is the hometown of the hometown, long-term reduction and exemption of land rent; Wujin is the foundation of the emperor's great cause, exempt from ten years of tax and service.

古文：九月，辛丑，诏 二吴、义兴三郡遭水，减今年田租。 
现代文：九月辛丑，诏令 二吴、义兴三郡遭水灾，减去今年的田租 。
English: September was gloomy, and floods hit two counties in Wu and three counties in Yixing. This year's field rent was deducted.

古文：乙巳，以新除尚书令、骠骑将军豫章王嶷为荆、湘二州刺史，平西将军临川王映为扬州刺史。
现代文：乙巳，让新任尚书令、骠骑将军豫章王萧嶷为荆、湘二州刺史，平西将军临川王萧映任扬州刺史。
English: At this time, let the newly appointed Shang Shuling and General of Horse and Cavalry Yuzhang Wang Xiaoying serve as Jing, Hunan Erzhou Shishi, and Pingxi General Linchuan Wang Xiaoying serve as Yangzhou Shishi.

古文：丙午，司空褚渊领尚书令。
现代文：丙午，司空褚渊领尚书令。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Sikyu Shanyuan received Shang Shuling.

古文：戊申，车驾幸宣武堂宴会，诏诸王公以下赋诗。
现代文：戊申，皇上亲临宣武堂举行宴会，诏令诸位王公以下大臣赋诗。
English: According to legend, the emperor himself came to hold a banquet at the Xuanwu Hall and ordered all ministers below the prince to compose poems.

古文：冬，十月，丙子，立彭城刘胤为汝阴王，奉宋帝后。
现代文：冬十月丙子，立彭城刘胤为汝阴王，作为宋帝后代奉祀。
English: In winter and October, Liu Yin, the king of Ruyin, was enshrined as a descendant of Emperor Song.

古文：己卯，车驾殷祠太庙。
现代文：己卯，皇上大祭太庙。
English: The Emperor's Grand Festival at the Imperial Temple.

古文：辛巳，诏曰： 朕婴缀世务，三十馀岁，险阻艰难，备尝之矣。
现代文：辛巳，下诏书说： 朕很小就为世俗事务所羁绊，三十多年来，各种艰难险阻，都已尝遍。
English: Sincerely, the next imperial edict said: I have been entangled in worldly affairs since I was very young. For more than thirty years, I have experienced all kinds of difficulties and obstacles.

古文：末路屯夷，戎车岁驾，诚藉时来之运，实资士民之力。
现代文：最后艰难消失，乘兵车登临帝位，诚然是凭藉时来运转，实际也是依靠了士人百姓。
English: In the end, it was difficult for him to disappear, and he ascended to the throne in a chariot. It is true that he relied on time to operate, but in reality, he also relied on the people.

古文：宋元徽二年以来，诸从军得官者，未悉蒙禄，可催速下访，随正即给。
现代文：宋元徽二年以来，各位从军得到官职的人，没有全部领受俸禄，可以催促尽快下去查访，随时纠正立刻补给。
English: Since the second year of Song Yuanhui, all of you who have received official positions from the military have not received all of their salaries. You can urge them to go and visit as soon as possible, and correct them at any time for immediate supply.

古文：才堪余任者，访洗量序。
现代文：才能可以担任其他职务的，访查甄别，评定等级次序。
English: If the talents can be used for other positions, the inspection and screening will be carried out and the grading order will be determined.

古文：若四州士庶，本乡沦陷，簿籍不存，寻校无所，可听州郡保押，从实除奏。
现代文：如果四州的士民百姓，本乡沦陷，户籍簿没有留下来，无处考查审核，可以听任州郡画押作保，照实上奏。
English: If the citizens of Shizhou, whose hometowns have fallen, do not have their household registration books, and there is no place to check and review them, they can listen to the county painting of the county as a guarantee, and play it as it is.

古文：荒远阙中正者，特许据军簿奏除。
现代文：偏远地区没有中正官的，特许根据军簿上奏。
English: In remote areas where there is no middle-ranking officer, the special permit shall be issued according to the military record.

古文：或戍扞边役，末由旋反，听于同军各立五保，所隶有司，时为言列。 
现代文：有人在边境防守作战，短期内无法返回，可以听任他们在同部队中各由五人作保。他们所隶属的官府，要按时列入上奏。 
English: If there are persons engaged in border defense operations who are unable to return within a short period of time, they may be allowed to be escorted by five members of the same unit. The government office to which they belong shall be included in the report in a timely manner.

古文：汝阴太妃王氏薨，追赠为宋恭皇后。
现代文：汝阴太妃王氏去世，追赠为宋恭皇后。
English: Ruyin Taifei Wang died and was posthumously given the title of Empress Song Gong.

古文：十一月，庚子，以太子左卫率萧景先为司州刺史。
现代文：十一月庚子，任命太子左卫率萧景先为司州刺史。
English: In November, Geng Zi appointed Prince Zawaidi Xiao Jingsen as the governor of Shizhou.

古文：辛亥，立皇太子妃裴氏。
现代文：辛亥，立皇太子妃裴氏。
English: Xinhai, the Crown Princess Pei.

古文：甲申，封功臣骠骑长史江谧等十人爵户各有差。
现代文：甲申，封给功臣骠骑长史赵等十人爵位、食邑户敷各有不等。
English: Jiashen, ten knighthoods were given to the meritorious vassal, including the cavalry commander Shi Zhao, and the households of the food villages varied.

古文：二年春，正月，戊戌朔，大赦天下。
现代文：建五二年春正月戊戌初一，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of the second month of the second year of the third year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the third year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the third year

古文：以司空、尚书令褚渊为司徒，中军将军张敬儿为车骑将军，中领军李安民为领军将军，中护军陈显达为护军将军。
现代文：任命司空、尚书令遗揽为司徒，中军将军张敬儿为车骑将军，中领军奎堂吕为领军将军，中护军陈显蚂护军将军。
English: Siku and Shang Shuling were appointed as guards, the Chinese general Zhang Jing'er was appointed as the cavalry general, the leader of the central army, Kuidong Lyu, was appointed as the leader of the central army, and the middle guard, Chen Xian'i, was appointed as the general of the central guard.

古文：辛丑，车驾亲祠南郊。
现代文：辛丑，皇上亲临南郊祭天。
English: On the fifteenth day, they arrived in the southern suburbs for a religious service.

古文：癸卯，诏索虏寇淮、泗，遣众军北伐，内外纂严。
现代文：癸卯，下诏因索虏进犯淮、泗，派遣各部队北伐，内外戒严。
English: At the same time, the imperial edict was issued to dispatch all troops to the Northern Expedition, and martial law was imposed both at home and abroad.

古文：二月，丁卯，虏寇寿阳，豫州刺史垣崇祖破走之。
现代文：二月丁卯，敌人进犯昼区，豫州刺史垣崇祖击退了他们。
English: In February of Dingwu, the enemy invaded the daytime area, and Yu Zhou stabbed Shigeki Chongzu to repel them.

古文：置巴州。
现代文：设置巴州。
English: Set up the bar state.

古文：壬申，以三巴校尉明慧昭为巴州刺史。
现代文：壬申，任命三巴校尉明慧昭为巴州刺史。
English: In Jinshin, Ming Hui Zhao, the captain of Sanba, was appointed as the governor of Bazhou.

古文：戊子，以宁蛮校尉萧赤斧为雍州刺史，南蛮长史崔惠景为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：戊子，任命宁蛮校尉萧赤斧为雍州刺史，南蛮长史崔惠景为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: Wuzi, appointed Ningban Lieutenant Xiao Chiaxue as Yongzhou chief historian, Nanban Chief Historian Cui Huijing as Liang, and Southern Qin as Erzhou chief historian.

古文：辛卯，诏西境献捷，解严。
现代文：辛卯，下诏西部边境进献战利品，解除戒严。
English: Xinwu decreed that the western border should be presented with trophies and martial law should be lifted.

古文：癸巳，遣大使巡慰淮、肥。徐、豫边民尤贫遘难者，刺史二千石量加赈恤。
现代文：癸巳，派遣大使巡行慰问淮、肥，徐、豫特别贫困和遭逢灾难的边民，刺史及俸禄二千石的官员酌量进行救济。
English: At the same time, it dispatched an ambassadorial procession to offer condolences to the extremely poor and disaster-stricken border residents of Huai, Hui, Xu, and Yu, and to provide relief to the officials with a salary of 2,000 koku.

古文：甲午，诏 江西北民避难流徙者，制遣还本，蠲今年租税。
现代文：甲午，下诏 长江西北百姓避难流亡的，命令遣返本乡，免除今年的租税。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, the people in the northwest of the Yangtze River were ordered to repatriate to their hometowns and exempted from this year's tax.

古文：单贫及孤老不能自存者，即听番籍，郡县押领。 
现代文：孤单贫困以及年老不能自我生存者，就在当地落户，郡县签押认领 。
English: Those who are lonely, poor, and old and unable to survive on their own can settle in the local area, and the county will sign and claim them.

古文：三月，丁酉，以侍中西昌侯鸾为郢州刺史。戊戌，以护军将军陈显达为南兖州刺史，吴郡太守张岱为中护军。
现代文：三月丁酉，任命侍中西吕侯萧鸾为郢州刺史戊戌，任命护军将军陈显达为南兖州刺史，吴郡太守张岱为中护军。
English: In March, Ding Jun, appointed the attendant of the West Luhou, Xiao Jun, as the leader of the Luzhou escort, appointed the escort general Chen Xianda as the leader of the South Luzhou escort, and appointed the Wuxi County Governor Zhang Jun as the central escort.

古文：己亥，车驾幸乐游苑宴，王公以下赋诗。
现代文：己亥，御驾亲临乐游苑参加宴会，王公以下赋诗。
English: Ji Hai and his family attended a banquet at the Pleasure Garden, and Wang Gong and his entourage recited poems.

古文：辛丑，以征虏将军崔祖思为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：辛丑，任命征虏将军崔祖思为青、冀二州刺史。
English: Xinxiu, appointed the conscript general Cui Zusi as the general of the Qing Dynasty, and the two states of Hebei as the general of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：夏，四月，丙寅，进高丽王乐浪公高琏号骠骑大将军。
现代文：夏四月丙寅，晋封高丽王乐浪公高琏为骠骑大将军。
English: In the summer of April, Goryeo King Le Lang Gong Gao Jun was promoted to the rank of General of the Horse.

古文：五月，立六门都墙。
现代文：五月，建造国都六门城墙。
English: In May, the six-gate city wall of the capital was built.

古文：六月，癸未，诏 昔岁水旱，曲赦丹阳、二吴、义兴四郡遭水尤剧之县，元年以前，三调未充，虚列已毕，官长局吏应共偿备外，详所除宥。 
现代文：六月癸未，诏令 前岁水旱灾害，宽免丹隧、二呈、盏垒四郡遭受水灾特别厉害的县，建五元年以前征收的粮、绢、劳役没有完成，虚报已经完成，除有关官吏应共同补收外，慎重地予以免除 。
English: On the eve of June, four counties that suffered particularly severe floods, including Danzhong, Erzhen and Zhanbei, were exempted from the previous year's flood and drought disaster. The grain, alms and labor service levied before the year of Jianwen were not completed, but the false report was completed. In addition to the relevant officials should jointly make up the collection, they should be carefully exempted.

古文：秋，七月，甲寅，以辅国将军卢绍之为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：秋七月甲寅，任命辅国将军卢绍之为青、冀二州刺史。
English: In the autumn and July of the year of Jia Yin, Lu Shao, the general of the Auxiliary State, was appointed as the leader of the two states of Qing and Hebei.

古文：戊午，皇太子妃裴氏薨。
现代文：戊午，皇太子妃裴氏去世。
English: In the afternoon, Crown Princess Bae passed away.

古文：闰月辛巳，遣领军将军李安民行淮、泗。
现代文：闰月辛巳，派遣领军将军李安民巡视淮、泗地区。
English: At the time of the intercalary month of Xin, Li Anmin, the leading general of the army, was sent to inspect the Huai and Lu regions.

古文：庚寅，索虏攻朐山，青、冀二州刺史卢绍之等破走之。
现代文：庚寅，索虏进攻朐山，青、冀二州刺史卢绍之等人击退了他们。
English: Gyeongin and Sorhuk attacked Lushan, but were repulsed by the Qing and Hebei states.

古文：冬，十一月，戊子，以氐杨后起为秦州刺史。
现代文：冬十一月戊子，任命氐人杨后起为秦州刺史。
English: In the winter of November, Wu Zi appointed Yang Houqi as the chief historian of Qin.

古文：十二月，戊戌，以司空褚渊为司徒。
现代文：十二月戊戌，任命司空褚渊为司徒。
English: In December, Emperor Gao of the Southern Qi Dynasty appointed Siku Shanyuan as his disciple.

古文：乙巳，车驾幸中堂听讼。
现代文：乙巳，皇上亲临史堂听取诉讼。
English: Suddenly, the Emperor himself came to the History Hall to listen to the proceedings.

古文：壬子，以骠骑大将军豫章王嶷为司空，扬州刺史、前将军临川王映为荆州刺史。
现代文：壬子，任命骠骑大将军豫章王蕴盛为司空，扰业刺史、前将军堕上坦萧映为荆州刺史。
English: Ren Zi appointed Yu Zhang Wang Yun Sheng, the general of the cavalry, as the secretary of the sky, the history of the disruption of the industry, and the former general, Tang Xiao Ying, as the history of Jingzhou.

古文：三年春，正月，壬戌朔，诏王公卿士荐谠言。
现代文：建元三年春正月壬戌初一，诏令王公卿士直言进谏。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Wang Gongningshi was ordered to go to the capital.

古文：丙子，以平北将军陈显达为益州刺史，贞阳公柳世隆为南兖州刺史，皇子锋为江夏王。
现代文：丙子，任命平北将军速题达为益业刺史，贞阳公柳世隆为南兖州刺史，皇子芦缝为江夏王。
English: Cun Zi appointed the Pingbei General Xu Zi Da Rong to be the historian of Yiyang, the Zhengyang Prince Liu Shilong to be the historian of South Luzhou, and the Prince Liushe to be the king of Jiangxia.

古文：领军将军李安民等破虏于淮阳。
现代文：领军将军李安民等在淮阳击败敌寇。
English: The leading general Li Anmin and others defeated the enemy corsairs in Huaiyang.

古文：夏，四月，以宁朔将军沈景德为广州刺史。
现代文：夏四月，任命宁朔将军沈景德为广州刺史。
English: In the summer of April, Ningshuo General Shen Jingde was appointed as the chief historian of Guangzhou.

古文：六月，壬子，大赦。
现代文：六月壬子，实行大赦。
English: In June, there was a general amnesty in Nanzi and Nanzi.

古文：逋租宿债，除减有差。
现代文：拖欠的田租旧债，免除削减不等。
English: The amount of old debts in arrears of land rent will be exempted from reduction.

古文：秋七月，以冠军将军垣荣祖为徐州刺史。
现代文：秋七月，任命冠军将军垣荣祖为徐州刺史。
English: In autumn and July, he appointed the champion general, Qi Rongzu, as the history of Xuzhou.

古文：冬，十月，戊子，以河南王世子吐谷浑易度侯为西秦、河二州刺史，河南王。
现代文：冬十月戊子，任命河南王世子世子吐谷浑易度侯为西秦、河二州刺史，河南王。
English: In the winter of October, Wu Zi, the heir of the king of Henan, appointed the heir of the king of Tugu, Hun Yidu, as the prince of West Qin, the prince of He Erzhou, and the king of Henan.

古文：四年，春，正月，壬戌，诏曰： 夫胶庠之典，彝伦攸先，所以招振才端，启发性绪，弘字黎氓，纳之轨义，是故五礼之迹可传，六乐之容不泯。
现代文：建元四年春正月壬戌，下诏书说： 学校的规章，最首要的是天地人伦，目的是振作才能，启发性情，教化黎民百姓，纳入礼义的轨道，因此五礼的事迹流传，六乐的内容不灭。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the following edict was issued: The rules of the school, the most important thing is the relationship between heaven and earth, the purpose is to invigorate talent, inspire temperament, enlighten the people, and integrate into the track of etiquette. Therefore, the deeds of the Five Rites have been passed down, and the content of the Six Music has not been extinguished.

古文：朕自膺历受图，志阐经训，且有司群僚，奏议咸集，盖以戎车时警，文教未宣，思乐泮宫，永言多慨。
现代文：我自秉受天命以来。有志于阐发经义，而且各有关部门官吏，都提出了建议，祇是因为战事不断，文教事业未能开展，想起学宫乐事，感慨良多。
English: I have been interested in expounding the meaning of the sutras since I received my heavenly calling, and officials from all relevant departments have made suggestions. It is only because of the continuous war that the cultural and educational undertakings could not be carried out. When I think of the music of the palace, I feel a lot of emotion.

古文：今关燧无虞，时和岁稔，远迩同风，华夷慕义。
现代文：如今边境没有什么战事，岁时祥和，谷物丰收，远近风俗划一，华夏夷狄都钦慕礼义。
English: Nowadays, there is no war on the border, the year is peaceful, the grain harvest is plentiful, and the customs are the same far and near.

古文：便可式遵前准，修建敩学，精选儒官，广延国胄。 
现代文：马上就可以遵照从前的规定，修建学校，精选儒学教官，广泛延纳王公贵族子弟。 
English: It will soon be possible, in accordance with the previous regulations, to build schools, select Confucianism instructors, and widely recruit the sons of princes and aristocrats.

古文：以江州刺史王延之为右光禄大夫。
现代文：任命江州刺史王延之为右光禄大夫。
English: Wang Yan, the governor of Jiangsu Province, was appointed the first doctor of Uguanglu.

古文：癸亥，诏曰： 比岁申威西北，义勇争先，殒气寇场，命尽王事。
现代文：癸亥，下诏说： 连年扬威西北边境，官兵义勇争先，战死疆场，用生命完成君王的事业。
English: Zou Hai, the next emperor said: For years, the northwest border has been rising, officers and soldiers have bravely competed for the first place, died on the battlefield, and used their lives to complete the cause of the king.

古文：战亡蠲复，虽有恒典，主者遵用，每伤简薄。
现代文：阵亡者免除赋税徭役，虽然有固定的制度，但是主事的人在遵照执行时，往往过于简单微薄。
English: Although there is a fixed system, the person in charge is often too simple and meager when following the implementation.

古文：建元以来战亡，赏蠲租布二十年，杂役十年。
现代文：建元以来阵亡的士兵，奖赏免除田租布帛二十年，免除杂役十年。
English: Since the founding of the People's Republic of China, soldiers who died in battle have been rewarded with 20 years of land rent exemption and 10 years of miscellaneous service exemption.

古文：其不得收尸，主军保押，亦同此例。 
现代文：那些没有找到尸体的，由部队长官作保画押，也遵照这一条例。 
English: Those whose bodies have not been found are also subject to this regulation, with a certificate issued by the commanding officer.

古文：以后将军长沙王晃为护军将军，中军将军南郡王长懋为南徐州刺史，冠军将军安成王暠为江州刺史。
现代文：任命后将军长沙王萧晃为护军将军，中军将军南郡王萧长懋为南徐州刺史，冠军将军安成王萧嵩为江州刺史。
English: After the appointment, the general Changsha Wang Xiao Huan was appointed as the escort general, the Chinese army general South County Wang Xiao Changyu was appointed as the history of South Xuzhou, and the champion general Ancheng Wang Xiaosong was appointed as the history of Jiangzhou.

古文：二月，乙未，以冠军将军桓康为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：二月乙未，任命冠军将军桓康为青、冀二州刺史皇上病重。
English: In February of the following year, the champion general Huan Kang was appointed as the new emperor, and Emperor Jishi of the two states of Hebei fell seriously ill.

古文：上不豫，庚戌，诏原京师囚系有差，元年以前逋责皆原除。
现代文：庚戌，韶令不同地减免京城囚犯罪行，建元元年以前拖欠的债务都免除。
English: According to Geng Zi, the imperial edict reduced and exempted the criminal acts of Beijing prisoners in different ways, and the debts that were in arrears before the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China were exempted.

古文：三月，庚申，召司徒褚渊、左仆射王俭诏曰： 吾本布衣素族，念不到此，因藉时来，遂隆大业。
现代文：三月庚申，召集司徒遣渊、左仆射王俭下诏说： 我本是平民庶族，没有想到能有今天，凭藉时来运转，成就了大业。
English: In March of the year of the Go-shin, he called together his magistrates, Yan Yuan, and his left-hand man, Sha Wang Jian, and issued an edict saying, "I am originally a commoner from a commoner family, and I never imagined that I would be able to use my time to operate and accomplish great things today.

古文：风道沾被，升平可期。
现代文：风化道德施及天下，太平盛世可以预期。
English: When morality is spread throughout the world, peace and prosperity can be expected.

古文：遘疾弥留，至于大渐。
现代文：谁知得病久不见好，至于病危。
English: Who knows, it is not good to be ill for a long time, and it is dangerous to be ill.

古文：公等奉太子如事吾，柔远能迩，缉和内外，当令太子敦穆亲戚，委任贤才，崇尚节俭，弘宣简惠，则天下之理尽矣。
现代文：你们要像事奉我一样事奉太子，怀柔远近，团结内外，应当让太子亲厚和睦亲戚，委任贤才，崇尚节俭，弘扬宽大仁惠的政治，治理天下之道就在于此。
English: You should serve the crown prince just as you serve me, be tender-hearted to those far and near, and unite both at home and abroad. The crown prince should be close to his relatives, appoint wise people, advocate frugality, and promote a policy of generosity and benevolence. This is the way to govern the world.

古文：死生有命，夫复何言！ 
现代文：死生有命，还有什么话说! 
English: Life or death, there is nothing else to say!

古文：壬戌，上崩于临光殿，年五十六。
现代文：壬戌，皇上在临光殿逝世，终年五十六岁。
English: The Emperor passed away at the Imperial Palace at the age of fifty-six.

古文：四月，庚寅，上谥曰太祖高皇帝。
现代文：四月庚寅，尊上谧号太祖高皇帝。
English: In April, Emperor Go-In was given the honorary title of Emperor Taizu-Gao.

古文：奉梓宫于东府前渚升龙舟。
现代文：将梓木棺材在东府前岸边抬上龙舟。
English: The Azusa wooden coffin was lifted onto a dragon boat on the shore in front of Higashi-fu.

古文：丙午，窆武进泰安陵。
现代文：丙午，安葬在武进泰安陵。
English: He was buried at Wujin Tai'an Mausoleum at 3:00 p.m.

古文：上少沈深有大量，宽严清俭，喜怒无色。
现代文：皇卜从小深沉有大量，宽严适度，清正节俭，喜怒不形于色。
English: From a young age, Wang Bo had a large amount of depth, moderate breadth and strictness, uprightness and frugality, and was indifferent to emotions.

古文：博涉经史，善属文，工草隶书，弈棋第二品。
现代文：博览经书史籍，擅长撰写文章，工于草书隶书，下棋达到第二品。
English: He has an extensive knowledge of books on history, is good at writing articles, is proficient in cursive handwriting, and is a second-rate chess player.

古文：虽经纶夷险，不废素业。
现代文：虽然致力治理国家消除危难，也没有放弃平日的爱好。
English: Although running a big business is very arduous, it doesn't invalidate normal schoolwork.

古文：从谏察谋，以威重得众。
现代文：听从劝谏，明察阴谋，凭藉威严庄重获得众人的拥护。
English: Heed the advice, see through the plots, and win the support of the people with dignity.

古文：即位后，身不御精细之物，敕中书舍人桓景真曰： 主衣中似有玉介导，此制始自大明末，后泰始尤增其丽。
现代文：登上帝位之后，自身不用精细物品，敕令中书舍人桓景真说： 君主的衣服上似乎装饰玉介导，这一服制始自宋大明末年，后来到泰始年间更增加其华丽。
English: After ascending to the throne, he did not need to use fine items himself, and Huan Jingzhen, a scholar in the imperial court, said: The monarch's clothes seem to be decorated with jade. This clothing system began at the end of the Song Dynasty, and later increased its splendor during the reign of Emperor Taizong.

古文：留此置主衣，政是兴长疾源，可即时打碎。
现代文：把它留在君主的衣服上，就是发生祸害的根源，可以立刻打碎。
English: Leaving it on the monarch's clothes is a recipe for disaster and can be broken immediately.

古文：凡复有可异物，皆宜随例也。 
现代文：凡是再有招致灾异的物品，都应依照此例。 
English: This example should be followed for any other items that may cause disasters.

古文：后宫器物栏槛以铜为饰者，皆改用铁，内殿施黄纱帐，宫人著紫皮履，华盖除金花瓜，用铁回钉。
现代文：后宫的器物栏槛用铜作为装饰的，都改用铁，内殿用黄纱帐，宫人穿紫皮履，车辆的华盖除去金花爪，都用铁回钉。
English: In the harem, the thresholds of the goods rails, which were decorated with copper, were replaced with iron, the inner hall with yellow curtains, the courtiers wore purple leather shoes, and the flower covers of the vehicles were removed with gold claws, and they were all nailed back with iron.

古文：每曰： 使我治天下十年，当使黄金与土同价。 
现代文：常说： 让我治理天下十年，当会使黄金与土同价。 
English: He often said: If I had ten years to rule the world, I would make gold equal in value to dirt.

古文：欲以身率天下，移变风俗。
现代文：想要亲身表率天下，改变风俗。
English: I want to personally set an example for the world and change customs.

古文：上姓名骨体及期运历数，并远应图谶数十百条，历代所未有，臣下撰录，上抑而不宣，盛矣。
现代文：皇上的姓名、骨相以及气运历数，都对应上数十百条预言图符，是历代帝王所没有的，臣下记录，而皇上压下没有公开，美德啊。
English: The emperor's name, skeleton, and the number of years of good fortune all correspond to tens of hundreds of prophetic symbols. This is a virtue that the emperors of all ages did not have, the vassals recorded, and the emperor did not make it public.

古文：史臣曰：孙卿有言： 圣人之有天下，受之也，非取之也。 
现代文：史臣曰：孙卿有句话： 圣人之所以拥有天下，是受予的，不是夺取来的。 
English: Shichen said: Sun Qian has a saying: The reason why saints own the world is that they are given, not taken.

古文：汉高神武骏圣，观秦氏东游，盖是雅多大言，非始自知天命；光武闻少公之论谶，亦特一时之笑语；魏武初起义兵，所期 征西 之墓；晋宣不内迫曹爽，岂有定霸浮桥？宋氏崛起匹夫，兵由义立：咸皆一世推雄，卒开鼎祚。
现代文：汉高祖神勇、杰出、圣明，观秦始皇束游时，也衹是喜欢说大话，并非自己知晓天命；光武帝听少公谈论谶语，也衹是一时的说笑；魏武帝最初起兵举义，所期望的是 征西 的墓地；晋宣帝没有内逼曹爽，岂能确立霸位于浮桥；宋代刘氏出身于匹夫，仗义起兵，都是称雄一世，最终开启国运。
English: The ancestors of the Han Gao Dynasty were courageous, outstanding, and saintly. When they watched the Qin Dynasty's first emperor, they also liked to talk big, but they did not know the fate of heaven; Emperor Guangwu listened to the Shao Gong talk about slang, but he also laughed at the time; Emperor Weiwu was the first to raise an army for righteousness, and what they expected was the cemetery of the Western Conquest; Emperor Jinxuan could not establish hegemony in the pontoon bridge without forcing Cao Shuang; the Liu clan in the Song Dynasty was born in Pifu, and the soldiers who fought for righteousness were the first generation of heroes, and finally

古文：宋氏正位八君，卜年五纪，四绝长嫡，三称中兴，内难边虞，兵革世动。
现代文：宋代在位八个国君，根据占卜传位六十年，四次嫡长子断绝，三次号称中兴，内忧外患，年年有战争。
English: During the Song Dynasty, eight sovereigns reigned. According to divination, the throne was passed down for sixty years. Four times, the eldest son was cut off. Three times, he was called Zhongxing. There were internal and external troubles, and there were wars every year.

古文：太祖基命之初，武功潜用，泰始开运，大拯时艰，龙德在田，见猜云雨之迹。
现代文：太祖受命奠定国基之初，武装深藏不用，叁盘年间国运开启，拯救了当时的危难，龙在田野上显示德行，呈现兴云作雨的迹象。
English: At the beginning of the founding of the country, when the great-grandfather was ordered to lay the foundation of the country, there was no need to hide the armed forces. During the Year of the Rooster, the National Movement was launched, which saved the danger at that time. The dragon showed virtue in the field and showed signs of making rain.

古文：及苍梧暴虐，衅结朝野，百姓懔懔，命悬朝夕。
现代文：等到苍梧王暴虐，与朝野结怨，百姓惶恐不已，性命朝不保夕。
English: Wait until the Cangwu King is tyrannical and quarrels with the court and the field, the people are terrified, and their lives are not safe.

古文：权道既行，兼济天下。
现代文：既然当权，就要兼而救助天下。
English: Now that he is in power, he must also save the world.

古文：元功振主，利器难以假人，群才戮力，实怀尺寸之望。
现代文：大的功绩会威胁君主地位，国家权力不应假藉给别人，众位人才合力，实际是怀有建功立业的愿望。
English: Great achievements will threaten the status of the monarch, the power of the state should not be given to others under false pretenses, and many talented people should work together. In fact, it is the desire to build a career.

古文：岂其天厌水行，固已人希木德。
现代文：岂衹是上天厌弃五德中之水德，人们希求木德的愿望也很强烈。
English: Heaven abhors the water virtue among the five virtues, and people's desire for the virtue of mud is also very strong.

古文：归功与能，事极乎此。
现代文：把功绩归还贤能，事情至此达到极点。
English: To give credit where credit is due, things have come to a head.

古文：虽至公于四海，而运实时来；无心于黄屋，而道随物变。
现代文：虽然极为公正于天下，可确实时来运转，上大无意于皇帝，天道随着事物变易。
English: Although it is extremely fair to the world, it can actually work from time to time. The emperor does not care about the emperor, and the heavenly way changes with things.

古文：应而不为，此皇齐所以集大命也。
现代文：应验而不是去争取，这就是皇齐会集天命的原因。
English: Fulfillment, rather than striving for it, is the reason why the Emperor Qi will collect the Mandate of Heaven.

古文：赞曰：於皇太祖，有命自天，同度宇宙，合量山渊。
现代文：赞曰：呜呼太祖，承受天命。共同测度宇宙，一起计量山渊。
English: Zang Zhai said: "Hail the great ancestor, bear the destiny. Measure the universe together, and measure the mountains together."

古文：宋德不绍，神器虚传。
现代文：宋代的德业不能继续，国家祭器空白流传。
English: The virtuous deeds of the Song Dynasty could not be continued, and the national sacrificial instruments were passed down in a vacuum.

古文：宁乱以武，黜暴资贤。
现代文：功在开发西疆，兴盛北部国土。
English: Great efforts have been made to develop western Xinjiang, and the northern part of the country is flourishing.

古文：庸发西疆，功兴北翰，偏师独克，孤旅霆断。
现代文：偏师独自攻克，孤旅猛烈击断。举旗束夏，掌管平定作乱。
English: The single-minded teacher conquers alone, the lonely journey violently breaks off. The banner is raised, the summer is bundled, and the leader is pacified to make a riot.

古文：援旆东夏，职司静乱；指斧徐方，时惟伐叛；抗威京辇，坐清江汉。
现代文：刀斧指向徐方，当时衹是讨伐叛乱。扬威京城，安坐乎定江漠地区。
English: The sword and axe were pointed at Xu Fang, at that time he was fighting against the rebellion. Yangwei Capital, An sits near the Dingjiang desert area.

古文：文艺在躬，芳尘渊塞。
现代文：亲自赋诗作文，到处都是好名声。
English: He has a good reputation everywhere for composing his own poems.

古文：用下以才，镇民以德。
现代文：依据才能任用下属，凭藉德业统治百姓。
English: He appoints subordinates according to ability, and rules the people by virtue of virtue.

古文：端己雄睟，君临尊默。
现代文：端正自己，雄武而温和，治理天下，保持尊严沉静。
English: Correct yourself, be strong and gentle, govern the world, maintain dignity and tranquility.

古文：苞括四海，大造家国。
现代文：囊括四海，大造家国。
English: Covering the four seas and building a great country.

