古文：昔赵文王喜剑，剑士夹门而客三千余人，日夜相击于前，死伤者岁百余人，好之不厌。
现代文：当年赵文王喜好剑术，三千多名剑客蜂拥而至门下，他们在赵文王面前日夜相互比试剑术，每年死伤百余人，但赵文王喜爱剑术从不觉得厌倦。
English: At that time, Zhao Wenwang was fond of swordsmanship, and more than three thousand swordsmen flocked to his door. They tested swordsmanship against each other day and night in front of Zhao Wenwang. More than a hundred people were killed and injured every year, but Zhao Wenwang loved swordsmanship and never felt bored.

古文：如是三年，国衰。诸侯谋之。
现代文：就这样过了三年，国力日益衰退，各国诸侯都在谋算怎样攻打赵国。
English: Just like that, three years have passed, the national strength has been declining day by day, and the princes of all countries are plotting how to attack Zhao.

古文：太子悝患之，募左右曰： 孰能说王之意止剑士者，赐之千金。 
现代文：太子悝十分担忧，征求左右近侍说： 谁能够说服赵王停止比试剑术，赠予他千金。 
English: Prince Zhao was very worried and asked his right and left aides to say: Who can persuade King Zhao to stop the fencing match and give him a thousand gold.

古文：左右曰： 庄子当能。 
现代文：左右近侍说： 只有庄子能够担当此任。 
English: The aides to the left and right said, "Only Zhuangzi can take on this position."

古文：太子乃使人以千金奉庄子。
现代文：太子于是派使者带着一千两金子奉送给庄子。
English: The prince then sent an envoy with a thousand taels of gold to present to Zhuangzi.

古文：庄子弗受，与使者俱往，见太子曰： 太子何以教周，赐周千金？ 
现代文：庄子没有接受，就和使者一同来见太子。说： 太子有什么事情请教我，要送给我一千两金子？ 
English: Zhuangzi did not accept, so he came to see the prince together with an emissary. He said, "What does the prince want to ask me for, to give me a thousand taels of gold?

古文：太子曰： 闻夫子明圣，谨奉千金以币从者夫子弗受，悝尚何敢言。 
现代文：太子说： 我听说先生通达圣智，恭恭敬敬地奉送一千两金子，作为随从的费用。可是先生不肯接受，我还敢说什么呢？ 
English: The prince said, "I have heard that my master is a man of great wisdom, and he has respectfully offered me a thousand taels of gold as an escort fee. However, my master refused to accept it. What else can I say?

古文：庄子曰： 闻太子所欲用周者，欲绝王之喜好也。
现代文：庄子说： 我听说太子想要任用我，是想断绝赵王对剑术的嗜好。
English: Zhuo Zi said: I heard that the prince wanted to appoint me in order to break Zhao Wang's penchant for swordsmanship.

古文：使臣上说大王而逆王意，下不当太子，则身刑而死，周尚安所事金乎？
现代文：往上，我劝说赵王，违反了赵王的意旨；往下，也不合太子的心愿；我的身体将要受刑而死，我还用得着什么金子呢？
English: Above, I persuaded King Zhao, which was against King Zhao's will; below, it was not in accordance with the prince's wishes; my body was about to be tortured to death, so what use did I have for gold?

古文：使臣上说大王，下当太子，赵国何求而不得也！ 
现代文：假使，在上我说服了国王，在下也合乎太子的心愿，我想在赵国要求什么不行呢？ 
English: Assuming that on the one hand I have convinced the king, and on the other hand I am in accordance with the wishes of the crown prince, what can I not ask for in Zhao?

古文：太子曰： 然，吾王所见，唯剑士也。 庄子曰： 诺。
现代文：太子说： 是这样。父王的心目中，只有那些剑客。 
English: The prince said, "That's right. In my father's eyes, there are only those swordsmen.

古文：周善为剑。 
现代文：庄子说： 好的，我也善于运用剑术。 
English: Zhuo Zi said: OK, I am also good at using swordsmanship.

古文：太子曰： 然吾王所见剑士，皆蓬头突鬓，垂冠，曼胡之缨，短后之衣，瞋目而语难，王乃说之。
现代文：太子说： 不过父王所见到的击剑人，全都头发蓬乱、髻毛突出、帽子低垂，帽缨粗实，衣服紧身，瞪大眼睛而且气喘语塞，大王竟喜欢见到这样打扮的人。
English: The prince said, "However, all the fencers my father saw had unkempt hair, prominent armpit hair, low-hanging hats, thick brims, tight clothes, wide eyes, and stifled speech. The great king actually liked to see people dressed like this.

古文：今夫子必儒服而见王，事必大逆。 
现代文：如今先生假如穿儒服去会见赵王，事情一定会弄糟。 
English: Now, if my husband were to wear a Confucian robe to meet Zhao Wang, things would definitely get messy.

古文：庄子曰： 请治剑服。 
现代文：庄子说： 请让我准备剑士的服装。 
English: Zhuo Zi said: Please let me prepare a swordsman's costume.

古文：治剑服三日，乃见太子。
现代文：三天以后剑士的服装裁制完毕，于是面见太子。
English: Three days later, the dressmaking of the swordsmen was completed, and they met the crown prince.

古文：太子乃与见王，王脱白刃持之。
现代文：太子就跟庄子一道拜见赵王，赵王解下利剑等待着庄子。
English: Prince Zhao went with Zhuangzi to see King Zhao, who unsheathed his sword and waited for Zhuangzi.

古文：庄子入殿门不趋，见王不拜。
现代文：庄子不急不忙地进入殿内，见到赵王也不行跪拜之礼。
English: Zhuangzi entered the hall unhurriedly, and when he saw King Zhao, he could not kneel down.

古文：王曰： 子欲何以教寡人，使太子先？ 
现代文：赵王问庄子： 你想用什么话来开导我，使得太子做了您的向导呢？ 
English: Zhao Wang asked Zhuang Zi: What words do you want to use to enlighten me, so that the prince can be your guide?

古文：曰： 臣闻大王喜剑，故以剑见王。 
现代文：庄子说： 臣听说大王喜好剑术，所以就凭着我的剑术来参见大王。 
English: Chuang Tzu said, "I have heard that the great king likes swordsmanship, so I will use my swordsmanship to see the great king."

古文：王曰： 子之剑何能禁制？ 
现代文：赵王说： 你的剑术能够怎样遏阻剑手、战胜对方呢？ 
English: Zhao Wang said, "How can your swordsmanship restrain the swordsman and defeat the opponent?"

古文：曰： 臣之剑，十步一人，千里不留行。 
现代文：庄子说： 我的剑术，十步之内可杀一人，行走千里也无人阻挡。 
English: Zhuo Zi said, "In my swordsmanship, I can kill a person within ten steps, and no one can stop me from walking a thousand miles."

古文：王大悦之，曰： 天下无敌矣。 
现代文：赵王听了后非常高兴，说： 那天下就没有人是你的对手了！ 
English: After listening, Zhao Wang was very happy and said, "In that world, no one will be your rival!"

古文：庄子曰： 夫为剑者，示之以虚，开之以利，后之以发，先之以至。
现代文：庄子说： 那善于使剑的人，要用空虚无备暗示对方，要用有利可乘引诱对方，后发制人。
English: Zhuangzi said: Those who are good at wielding swords should suggest the other side with emptiness and unpreparedness, use advantages to lure the other side, and strike back.

古文：愿得试之。 
现代文：我愿意找机会和大王试剑。 
English: I'm willing to take a chance and take on the big boys.

古文：王曰： 夫子休，就舍待命，令设戏请夫子。 
现代文：赵王说： 先生且先回馆舍休息休息，我将安排好击剑比武的盛会再请先生出面比武。 
English: Zhao Wang said: Sir, please go back to the library for a rest first. I will arrange a grand fencing tournament and then invite you to compete.

古文：王乃校剑士七日，死者六十余人，得五六人，使奉剑于殿下，乃召庄子。
现代文：赵王于是用七天时间让剑士们比武较量，死伤了六十多人，从中挑选出五六人，让他们拿着剑在殿下等候，这才去召唤庄子。
English: King Zhao then used seven days to have the swordsmen compete in a martial arts contest. More than sixty people were killed or injured. He selected five or six of them and had them wait with their swords in his palace before summoning Zhuangzi.

古文：王曰： 今日试使士敦剑。 
现代文：赵王对庄子说： 可让剑士们跟先生比试剑术了。 
English: Zhao Wang said to Zhuang Zi: Let the swordsmen try swordsmanship with their master.

古文：庄子曰： 望之久矣！ 
现代文：庄子说： 我已经盼望很久了。 
English: Zhuo Zi said: I have been looking forward to this for a long time.

古文：王曰： 夫子所御杖，长短何如？ 
现代文：赵王说： 先生所习惯使用的宝剑，长短怎么样？ 
English: Zhao Wang said: What is the length of the sword you are used to using?

古文：曰： 臣之所奉皆可。
现代文：庄子说： 我的剑术长短都适应。
English: Zhuo Zi said: My swordsmanship is suitable for both long and short.

古文：然臣有三剑，唯王所用，请先言而后试。 
现代文：不过我有三种剑，任凭大王选用，请让我先作些说明然后再行比试。 
English: However, I have three swords, and I'll let the king choose which one to use. Please let me explain first and then we'll have a contest.

古文：王曰： 愿闻三剑。 
现代文：赵文王说： 我愿意听听这三种剑。 
English: Zhao Wenwang said: I am willing to listen to these three swords.

古文：曰： 有天子剑，有诸侯剑，有庶人剑。 
现代文：庄子说： 有天子剑，有诸侯剑，有平民剑。 
English: Zhuangzi said, "There are heavenly swords, princes' swords, and common people's swords.

古文：王曰： 天子之剑何如？ 
现代文：赵文王问： 天子剑是什么样的呢？ 
English: Zhao Wenwang asked: What is the Heavenly Sword like?

古文：曰： 天子之剑，以燕谿石城为锋，齐岱为锷；晋卫为脊，周宋为镡，韩魏为夹；包以四夷，裹以四时；绕以渤海，带以常山；制以五行，论以刑德；开以阴阳，持以春夏，行以秋冬。
现代文：庄子说： 天子之剑，以燕谿、石城作为剑锋，以齐国的泰山作为剑刃，以晋国、卫国作为剑背，以周国、宋国作为剑环，以韩国、魏国作为剑把，用四夷包围着，用四时裹着，用渤海环绕着，用恒山缠束着，用五常制衡着，用刑罚和道德缠裹着，用阴阳开导着，用春夏持守着，用秋冬运行着。
English: Zhuo Zi said: The sword of the Son of Heaven, with Yan Zang and Shicheng as the sword front, with Mount Tai in Qi as the sword blade, with Jin and Wei as the sword back, with Zhou and Song as the sword ring, with Korea and Wei as the sword handle, is surrounded by the Four Emperors, wrapped in the Four Seasons, surrounded by the Bohai Sea, wrapped in the Hengshan Mountains, weighed down by the Five Ancients, wrapped in punishment and morality, guided by the Yin and Yang, held by the Spring and Summer, and run by the Autumn and Winter.

古文：此剑直之无前，举之无上，案之无下，运之无旁。上决浮云，下绝地纪。
现代文：这种剑，竖起来，没有比它靠前的；举起来，没有比它更高的；按下去，没有比它更低的；运用起来，没有比它广阔的；在上说，它可以拔开浮云；在下说，可以穿过地基。
English: This sword, when held upright, is never closer than it is forward; when raised, it is never higher than it is; when pressed down, it is never lower than it is; when wielded, it is never wider than it is; above, it can pluck floating clouds; below, it can pierce the foundations of the earth.

古文：此剑一用，匡诸侯，天下服矣。此天子之剑也。 
现代文：这种剑一旦使用，就可以匡正诸侯、威仪天下。这便是天子之剑。 
English: Once this kind of sword is used, it can rectify the princes and dominate the world. This is the sword of the Son of Heaven.

古文：文王芒然自失，曰： 诸侯之剑何如？ 
现代文：赵文王迷茫一片感到手足无措，就问： 那诸侯之剑是什么样的呢？ 
English: Zhao Wenwang felt confused and helpless, so he asked: What is the sword of the princes like?

古文：曰： 诸侯之剑，以知勇士为锋，以清廉士为锷，以贤良士为脊，以忠圣士为镡，以豪桀士为夹。
现代文：庄子说： 那诸侯之剑，用智勇之士作为剑锋，用清廉之士作为剑刃，用贤良之士作为剑背，用忠圣之士作为剑环，用豪杰之士作为剑把。
English: Zhuo Zi said: The swords of the princes, use the wisdom of the brave as the blade, the cleanliness of the corrupt as the blade, the virtuous as the back of the sword, the loyalty of the saints as the sword ring, and the hero as the sword handle.

古文：此剑直之亦无前，举之亦无上，案之亦无下，运之亦无旁。上法圆天以顺三光，下法方地以顺四时，中和民意以安四乡。
现代文：这口剑，竖起来，也是没有比它低的；运用起来，也是没有比它广阔的；在上说它效法圆运的天道，顺从三光；在下说，它效法方静的人道，安抚四方。
English: This sword, when it is raised, is no lower than it; when it is used, it is no wider than it; on the top, it is said to imitate the heavenly way of the round, and obey the three lights; on the bottom, it is said to imitate the human way of the square, and pacify the four directions.

古文：此剑一用，如雷霆之震也，四封之内，无不宾服而听从君命者矣。
现代文：这种剑一旦使用，就如同雷霆的震动，四境之内，没有不宾服的，都听从君王的命令了。
English: Once this sword is used, it shakes like thunder, and no one in the four realms disobeys the king's order.

古文：此诸侯之剑也。 
现代文：这便是诸侯之剑。 
English: This is the sword of lords.

古文：王曰： 庶人之剑何如？ 
现代文：赵文王又问： 那平民之剑是什么样的呢？ 
English: Zhao Wenwang also asked: What does the sword of the common people look like?

古文：曰： 庶人之剑，蓬头突鬓，垂冠，曼胡之缨，短后之衣，瞋目而语难。相击于前，上斩颈领，下决肝肺。
现代文：庄子说： 那平民之剑，剑士者蓬散着头发，倒梳着鬓毛，戴着瓶式的帽子，帽缨盘结在下巴下面，穿着后身短小的衣服，急瞪着眼睛，不爱和别人说话；在人前互相砍杀，上面斩断了脖颈，下面流出了肝肺。
English: Zhuang Zi said: That sword of the common people, the swordsmen have unkempt hair, comb their mane backwards, wear a bottle-shaped hat, the brim is twisted under the chin, wear clothes with a short back, stare with their eyes, and do not like to talk to others; they cut each other in front of others, the top of the neck is cut off, and the bottom of the liver and lungs flow out.

古文：此庶人之剑，无异于斗鸡，一旦命已绝矣，无所用于国事。
现代文：这种平民之剑，和斗鸡没有什么差别，一旦使用就断送生命。这对于国家大事并没有好处。
English: This sword of the common people is no different from the one used in cockfights. Once it is used, it will kill. This is not good for national affairs.

古文：今大王有天子之位而好庶人之剑，臣窃为大王薄之。 
现代文：现在大王享有天子之位，可是喜好平民之剑。臣仆私自替大王感到微不足道了。 
English: Now the great king enjoys the throne of the son of heaven, but prefers the sword of the common people. The vassals feel insignificant for the great king.

古文：王乃牵而上殿，宰人上食，王三环之。
现代文：赵文王于是牵着庄子来到殿上。厨师献上食物，赵王绕着坐席惭愧地绕了三圈。
English: Zhao Wenwang then led Zhuangzi to the palace. The chef presented the food, and Zhao Wang walked around the table three times in shame.

古文：庄子曰： 大王安坐定气，剑事已毕奏矣！ 
现代文：庄子说： 大王安坐下来定定心气，有关剑术之事我已启奏完毕。 
English: Chuang Tzu said, "Great King An, sit down and set your mind at rest. I have finished the opening ceremony of the swordplay.

古文：于是文王不出宫三月，剑士皆服毙其处也。
现代文：于是赵文王三月不出宫门，剑士们都在自己的住处自刎而死。
English: As a result, Zhao Wenwang did not leave the palace gate in March, and the swordsmen all committed suicide in their homes.

