古文：世祖世祖文皇帝，讳蒨，字子华，始兴昭烈王长子也。
现代文：世祖文皇帝名蒨，字子华，是始兴昭烈王的长子。
English: Emperor Zezuwen's great-great-grandson, Zihua, was the eldest son of King Shi Xingxiao.

古文：少沈敏有识量，美容仪，留意经史，举动方雅，造次必遵礼法。
现代文：青年时期就沉稳机敏有胆识气度，仪容秀美，研读经史，举止大方高雅，行为符合礼教法度。
English: In his youth, he was calm, quick-witted, daring and knowledgeable, had a beautiful appearance, studied history, had a generous and elegant demeanor, and his behavior conformed to the rules of etiquette.

古文：高祖甚爱之，常称 此儿吾宗之英秀也 。
现代文：高祖很宠爱他，常说 这孩子是我家门的优秀人物 。
English: Gao Zu was very fond of him and often said that this child was an outstanding person in my family.

古文：梁太清初，梦两日斗，一大一小，大者光灭坠地，色正黄，其大如斗，世祖因三分取一而怀之。
现代文：梁太清初年，世祖梦见两个太阳斗焰，一大一小，结果大太阳光焰泯减坠地，呈正黄颜色，有斗一样大，于是世祖取下三分之一揣于怀中。
English: In the first year of the reign of Liang Taiqing, Shizu dreamed of two suns, one large and one small. As a result, the great sun's flame dwindled and fell to the ground. It was a pure yellow color and as big as a bucket, so Shizu took a third of it and carried it in his arms.

古文：侯景之乱，乡人多依山湖寇抄，世祖独保家无所犯。
现代文：侯景作乱时，乡人多凭山据湖为盗，进行劫掠，独有世祖保护家族不受侵扰。
English: When Houjing made a disturbance, the villagers mostly used the mountains and lakes to steal and loot. The unique ancestor protected the family from intrusion.

古文：时乱日甚，乃避地临安。
现代文：当时一天比一天混乱，就到临安避乱。
English: At that time, it was getting more and more chaotic day by day, so I went to Lin'an to escape the chaos.

古文：及高祖举义兵，侯景遣使收世祖及衡阳献王，世祖乃密袖小刀，冀因入见而害景。至便属吏，故其事不行。
现代文：到高祖举义军时，侯景派人收捕世祖和衡阳献王，世祖就暗中袖藏小刀，准备进见时杀了侯景，到了那裹因为接见的是属员，所以没有采取行动。
English: When Gao Zu raised a rebel army, Hou Jing sent people to capture his ancestor and Hengyang to offer the king. The ancestor secretly hid a knife in his sleeve and killed Hou Jing when he was preparing to go to see him. When he got there, he did not take action because he was a subordinate.

古文：高祖大军围石头，景欲加害者数矣。
现代文：高祖的大军围攻石头城时，侯景多次想加害世祖。
English: When Gaozu's army besieged Stone Town, Houjing repeatedly tried to harm Gaozu.

古文：会景败，世祖乃得出赴高祖营。
现代文：逢侯景失败，世祖才得以逃奔高祖军营中。
English: When Feng Houjing failed, Shizu was able to escape to Gaozu's camp.

古文：起家为吴兴太守。
现代文：起始任吴兴太守。
English: Wu Xing became the first governor-general.

古文：时宣城劫帅纪机、郝仲等各聚众千馀人，侵暴郡境，世祖讨平之。
现代文：那时宣城的乱军头子纪机、郝仲等各聚集千余人，到郡境内侵扰，世祖讨平了他们。
English: At that time, the leaders of the rebel army of Xuancheng, Ji Ji and Xuan Zhong, gathered more than a thousand people each, invaded the county, and the patriarch leveled them.

古文：承圣二年，授信武将军，监南徐州。
现代文：承圣二年，授为信武将军，监管南徐州。
English: In the second year after his ordination, he was awarded the title of General of the Xinwu, overseeing southern Xuzhou.

古文：三年，高祖北征广陵，使世祖为前军，每战克捷。
现代文：三年，高祖北征广陵，派世祖为前军，每战必胜。
English: In the third year, Gao Zu led the Northern Expedition to Guangling, and sent his ancestors to be the vanguard, winning every battle.

古文：高祖之将讨王僧辩也，先召世祖与谋。
现代文：高祖将要讨伐王僧辩时，先召世祖一起商议。
English: When Gaozhu is going to fight against Wang Sofen, he will first call his ancestors to discuss together.

古文：及高祖遣周文育率兵讨龛，世祖与并军往吴兴。
现代文：当时僧辩的女婿杜宠占据吴兴，兵势很强盛，高祖密令世祖返回长城县，立起寨栅来防备杜宠。
English: At that time, Du Cun, the son-in-law of the monk Duan, occupied Wu Xing, and the army was very strong. Gao Zu Mi ordered Shizuo to return to the Great Wall County and set up a fence to protect Du Cun.

古文：时龛兵尚众，断据冲要，水步连阵相结，世祖命将军刘澄、蒋元举率众攻龛，龛军大败，窘急，因请降。
现代文：世祖招的兵仅几百人，军械装备又少，杜盒派他的部将杜泰领五千精兵，乘虚杀来，将士们见了相顾失色，但是世祖谈笑自如，部署更加精明，于是众人心裹才安定下来。杜泰了解到寨内兵少，日夜猛攻，世祖激励将士，亲自上阵。
English: The ancestor recruited only a few hundred soldiers, and there was little armament and equipment. Du Xuan sent his general Du Tai to lead five thousand elite soldiers to take advantage of the fake killing. The soldiers lost their color when they saw each other, but the ancestor talked and laughed freely, and the deployment was more astute, so everyone's hearts settled down. Du Tai learned that there were few soldiers in the stockade, and the attack was fierce day and night. The ancestor encouraged the soldiers and personally went into battle.

古文：东扬州刺史张彪起兵围临海太守王怀振，怀振遣使求救，世祖与周文育轻兵往会稽以掩彪。
现代文：相持了几十天，灶台兵才退走。等到直担派且塞直带兵讨伐拄台，世担和他一起进军昱兴。当时丝粗兵众还多，占据要路，水军和步兵阵连着阵，世担命将军刘逗、墨互举领兵进攻丝矗，丝鑫军大败，走投无路，只好请求投降。刺史游彪起兵围攻临海太守王怀振，怀面派人来求救，世担与且塞直领轻兵奔袭巫彪的盒稽。
English: It took tens of days for the soldiers of Zhaotai to retreat. It was not until Zhichang faction and Xizhi faction led the soldiers to fight against Xingtai that Shidang marched with him to Pu Xing. At that time, there were still a large number of soldiers, occupying the important road, the navy and the infantry lined up in a row, and the generals responsible for the fate of the world, Liu Zhi and Mo, led the soldiers to attack Xizhi. The Xixin army was defeated and had no choice but to surrender. Zhi Yu Biao raised an army to besiege the Linhai Taizhou Wang Huai Zhen, and

古文：后彪将沈泰开门纳世祖，世祖尽收其部曲家累，彪至，又破走，若邪村民斩彪，传其首。
现代文：后来鱼遥的部将选台开门迎入世担，世担把亟彪和家财全部收缴，张彪来救，又被击败逃走，羞邪挝的百姓杀了张彪，送来他的首级。
English: Later, Yuyao's ministry opened the door of the election platform to the world, the world confiscated all of Yao Biao and his family's wealth, Zhang Biao came to the rescue, was defeated and fled, and the people of Laos killed Zhang Biao and sent his head.

古文：以功授持节、都督会稽等十郡诸军事、宣毅将军、会稽太守。
现代文：世担因功被授于持节、都督会稽等十郡诸军事、宣毅将军、会稽太守。
English: For his meritorious service, Shetan was awarded to the military of ten counties, including Jisetsu, the inspector general of the capital, General Xuan Yi, and the inspector general of the capital.

古文：山越深险，皆不宾附，世祖分命讨击，悉平之，威惠大振。
现代文：山越一带深势险，都不来归附，世趄命人分头讨伐，全部平定，威名和德声大振。
English: Mountains and rivers in the area were in danger of falling into the hands of the enemy, but they did not surrender. The world ordered people to fight separately, and all of them were pacified. Their prestige and moral authority were greatly enhanced.

古文：高祖受禅，立为临川郡王，邑二千户，拜侍中、安东将军。
现代文：产担受惮让时，立世祖为临川郡王，食邑二千户，拜为侍中、安束将军。
English: When the head of the family was forced to abdicate, the founding father was the king of Linchuan County, which had 2,000 households, and he was revered as a courtier and the general of Anzoku.

古文：及周文育、侯安都败于沌口，高祖诏世祖入卫，军储戎备，皆以委焉。寻命率兵城南皖。
现代文：当周文育、侯安都在迤旦战败时，直担诏命世担入都护驾，军队的储备和警戒的事，都交给他管不久命令他领兵到卢喧筑城坚守。
English: When Zhou Wenyu and Hou An were both defeated in the Battle of Shantang, he was directly assigned to the capital escort, and he was put in charge of the army's reserves and vigilance. Soon he was ordered to lead the army to Lu Yunzhu and hold the city.

古文：永定三年六月丙午，高祖崩，遗诏征世祖入纂。
现代文：丛：三年六月丙午曰，壶祖驾崩，遣韶召世担入京继位。
English: Cong: On the afternoon of June 3rd, Jiu Zu passed away. He was summoned to succeed to the throne in Beijing.

古文：甲寅，至自南皖，入居中书省。
现代文：甲寅口，从南皖回京，入居中书省。
English: A Tingkou, from Nanshan back to Beijing, moved to Zhongshuo.

古文：皇后令曰： 昊天不吊，上玄降祸。
现代文：大行皇帝突然抛下万民。全国悲哀。
English: Emperor Da Xing suddenly abandons the people. The whole country is in mourning.

古文：大行皇帝奄捐万国，率土哀号，普天如丧，穷酷烦冤，无所迨及。
现代文：天下如失父母。
English: It's like losing a parent.

古文：诸孤藐尔，反国无期，须立长主，以宁宇县。
现代文：悲痛至极，无法抑制。
English: The grief is overwhelming and uncontrollable.

古文：侍中、安东将军、临川王蒨，体自景皇，属惟犹子。建殊功于牧野，敷盛业于戡黎，纳麓时叙之辰，负扆乘机之日，并佐时雍，是同草创，祧祏所系，遐迩宅心，宜奉大宗，嗣膺宝录，使七庙有奉，兆民宁晏。
现代文：众龙子消息杳渺，不知归期，须立国主，使国家安宁，侍中、安束将军、临川王速蓝，是基皇后裔，犹如儿广一般，在牧墅建立大功，平定垫地光大伟业，在大行皇帝掌重权之时，以及受惮即位之曰，并力辅佐使国家和顺，实是一同草创大业的人；又是亲族一脉，远近归心，应该继承祖业，登上大位，使得祖庙香火有继，万民安乐。
English: The news of the dragons is vague, I do not know the return date, it is necessary to establish a sovereign, to make the country peaceful, the attendant, the Anzac general, the Linchuan king, Sui Lan, is a descendant of the Queen Ji, just like a child, to establish a great achievement in the pasture, to pacify the great cause, when the Emperor Da Xing is in power, and to be crowned, and to help the country and Shun, is actually a great cause of the same people; it is also a relative, far and near to the heart, should inherit the ancestral cause, ascend to the throne, so that the ancestral temple

古文：未亡人假延馀息，婴此百罹，寻绎缠绵，兴言感绝。 
现代文：未亡人苟延残喘，遇到这样的大祸，心裹悲伤凄楚，出言哀绝。 
English: Widow lingering breath, encountered such a calamity, heart-wracked grief, uttered his last words.

古文：世祖固让，至于再三，群公卿士固请，其日即皇帝位于太极前殿。
现代文：世祖坚决辞让，一而再再而三众公卿大臣坚决请求，那一天在左捶前殿即皇帝位。
English: On that day, the emperor abdicated his throne in front of the left antechamber, after the three nobles and ministers had repeatedly and firmly requested him to abdicate.

古文：诏曰： 上天降祸，奄集邦家，大行皇帝背离万国，率土崩心，若丧考妣。
现代文：下诏道： 上天突然降祸到国家，大行皇帝离开万民，全国痛心，如丧父母。
English: The following imperial edict was issued: Heaven has suddenly brought disaster to the country, Emperor Da Xing has left the people, and the whole country is heartbroken, like the loss of a parent.

古文：龙图宝历，眇属朕躬，运钟扰攘，事切机务，南面须主，西让礼轻，令便式膺景命，光宅四海。
现代文：国家大位，交我继承，国事纷扰，处事要抓住关键，朝廷需要主持朝政的君主，辞让是轻微的礼节，现在就继承大命，光耀四海。
English: The great throne of the country is to be handed over to me for succession. The affairs of the country are in turmoil. It is necessary to grasp the key to handling affairs. The imperial court needs to preside over the monarch of the imperial government. It is a minor etiquette to resign. Now I will inherit the great destiny and shine all over the world.

古文：可大赦天下，罪无轻重，悉皆荡涤。
现代文：可大赦天下，不论轻罪重罪，一律赦免。
English: There can be a general amnesty for the whole country, regardless of misdemeanors and felonies, all will be pardoned.

古文：逋租宿债，吏民愆负，可勿复收。文武内外，量加爵叙。
现代文：拖欠的旧租债，官民负担过重，可不要再收朝内外文武百官，按等级加封爵禄。
English: The delinquent old rent debt is too heavy a burden on the public and private sectors. It is necessary to stop collecting money from hundreds of civil and military officials inside and outside the DPRK, and award them with peerages according to their ranks.

古文：孝悌力田为父后者，赐爵一级。
现代文：孝悌力田继承父职的赐爵级。
English: Filial piety forces Tian to inherit his father's knighthood.

古文：庶祗畏在心，公卿毕力，胜残去杀，无待百年。
现代文：望敬畏上天，公卿尽力，劝恶为善，不用极刑之曰为期不道。
English: Looking up to and fearing the heavens, court nobles do their best to persuade evil to do good, and do not use capital punishment for a period of time.

古文：兴言号哽，深增恸绝。 
现代文：出言哽泣，深增悲恸。 
English: To utter a word of lamentation is to increase one's sorrow.

古文：又诏州郡悉停奔赴。
现代文：又诏令州郡停止赴京奔丧。
English: He also ordered the prefectural government to stop rushing to Beijing for the funeral.

古文：秋七月丙辰，尊皇后为皇太后，己未，以镇南将军、开府仪同三司、广州刺史欧阳頠进号征南将军，平南将军、开府仪同三司周迪进号镇南将军，平南将军、开府仪同三司、高州刺史黄法抃进号安南将军。
现代文：秋月丙辰曰，尊封皇后为皇太后。己未，给镇南将军、开府仪同三司、广州刺史欧阳塑进号为征南将军，给平南将军、开府仪同三司旦迤进号为镇南将军，给平南将军、开府仪同三司、高州刺史董迭毡进号为安南将军。
English: Akizuki Bitchin said, "The Empress is the empress dowager. Previously, General Zhenan, Kaifu Yi and the Three Departments, Guangzhou Zhishi Ouyang Shuxin were given the title of General Zhenan, General Pingnan, Kaifu Yi and the Three Departments were given the title of General Zhenan, General Pingnan, Kaifu Yi and the Three Departments, and Gaozhou Zhishi Dong Diyu Jin was given the title of General Annan.

古文：庚申，以镇南大将军、开府仪同三司、桂州刺史淳于量进号征南大将军。
现代文：庚申，给镇南大将军、开府仪同三司、桂州刺史淳于量进号为征南大将军。
English: Geng Shen, Zhen Nandai General, Kaifu Yi Tong San Sisi, Guizhou Shishi Junyurong were given the title of General of the Southern Expedition.

古文：辛酉，以侍中、车骑将军、司空侯瑱为太尉，镇西将军、开府仪同三司、南豫州刺史侯安都为司空，侍中、中权将军、开府仪同三司王冲为特进、左光禄大夫，镇北将军、南徐州刺史徐度为侍中、中抚军将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：辛酉曰，任侍中、车骑将军、司空堡垄为太尉，任镇西将军、开府仪同三司、南豫州刺史堡玄都为司空，任侍中、中权将军、开府仪同三司王冲为特进、左光禄大夫，任镇北将军、直俭业刺史涂座为侍中、中抚军将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Xin Wei said that he was appointed as a chamberlain, a chariot and cavalry general, and a commander of the empty fort as a captain; he was appointed as a general of Zhenxi, a commander of Kaifu, and a commander of the three divisions; he was appointed as a commander of the southern Yuzhou garrison as a commander of the empty fort; he was appointed as a chamberlain, a general of the central government, a commander of Kaifu, and a commander of the three divisions as a special envoy, a doctor of the left Guanglu, a general of Zhenbei, and a general of the straight thrift industry as a commander of the general staff, a

古文：壬戌，以侍中、护军将军徐世谱为特进、安右将军；侍中、忠武将军杜棱为领军将军。
现代文：壬戌日，任侍中、护军将军徐世道为特进、安右将军；任侍中、忠武将军杜蓬为领军将军。
English: On the Ninth Day of the Ninth Month, Xu Shidao, who served as an aide-de-camp and escort general, became a special envoy and general An Yu; Du Pont, who served as an aide-de-camp and general Zhongwu, became the leading general.

古文：乙丑，重云殿灾。
现代文：乙丑日，重云殿发生火灾。
English: On the 1st day of the 2nd lunar month, a fire broke out in the Chongyun Palace.

古文：八月癸巳，以平北将军、南徐州刺史留异为安南将军、缙州刺史，平南将军、北江州刺史鲁悉达进号安左将军。
现代文：八月癸巳日，任平北将军、直篮业刺史旦垦为安南将军、蟹州刺史，给平南将军、韭江业刺史鲁悉达进号为安左将军。
English: On the third day of August, the generals of Pingbei and Zhonhan were named as General Annan and Cangzhou, respectively, and the generals of Pingbei and Minjiang were named as General Anzo.

古文：庚戌，封皇子伯茂为始兴王，奉昭烈王后。
现代文：庚戌日，封皇子值蓬为盘兴王，继承压烈王。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th month of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 19th year of the 19th year of the 19th year of the 19th year of the 20th year of the 20th year of the 20

古文：徙封始兴嗣王顼为安成王。
现代文：改封始兴嗣王肿更为塞卢王。
English: He changed his title from Prince Heungseong to King Seol.

古文：九月辛酉，立皇子伯宗为皇太子，王公以下赐帛各有差。
现代文：九月辛酉，立皇子值塞为皇太子，王公以下赐赏钱帛不等。
English: In September, the emperor decreed that princes should be crowned as crown princes, and rewards ranged from the rank of vassal to crown prince.

古文：乙亥，立妃沈氏为皇后。
现代文：乙亥日，立王妃沈氏为皇后。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st lunar month, Princess Shen became the empress.

古文：冬十一月乙卯，王琳寇大雷，诏遣太尉侯瑱、司空侯安都、仪同徐度率众以御之。
现代文：冬十一月乙卯，王壁侵犯大重，韶令太尉堡垄、司空堡室都、仪同途度领兵抵御。
English: In the winter of November, the king's wall was seriously violated, and the king ordered Taifeng Fort Ridge, Sikuang Fort Muroto, and Yi to lead the troops to resist.

古文：天嘉元年春正月癸丑，诏曰： 朕以寡昧，嗣纂洪业，哀茕在疚，治道弗昭，仰惟前德，幽显遐畅，恭己不言，庶几无改。
现代文：玉台元年春正月癸丑日，下韶道： 我以浅薄的德识，嗣承大业，内心愧疚，治国不能显德，衹是仰仗先王遣德，显达幽昧而畅达远方，自己端肃不敢自作主张，大致未改变先王政教。
English: On the fateful day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Jade Emperor, he said, "I have inherited a great cause with a shallow sense of virtue, and I feel guilty. I cannot show virtue in governing the country, but I rely on the former king to show virtue, and I can show it in a vague and distant way. I dare not make my own assertions, and I have not changed the former king's politics and religion.

古文：虽宏图懋轨，日月方弘，而清庙廓然，圣灵浸远，感寻永往，瞻言罔极。
现代文：虽然宏图远大，日月正明，但都因庙堂清朗、圣灵护佑深远，永久感怀不尽。
English: Although the grand plan is far-reaching and the sun and moon are bright, but because the temple is clear and the Holy Spirit's protection is far-reaching, the eternal feeling is inexhaustible.

古文：今四象运周，三元告献，华夷胥洎，玉帛骏奔，思覃遗泽，播之亿兆。
现代文：现在四象正常运转，三元得位，中外来朝，玉帛来贡，先王遣泽，广布万民。
English: Now the four elephants are in normal operation, the three yuan has been put in place, the middle and foreign dynasties, the Jade Emperor came to pay tribute, the former king sent to Zhejiang, and the broad masses of the people.

古文：其大赦天下。
现代文：该大赦天下。
English: It is time for a general amnesty.

古文：改永定四年为天嘉元年。
现代文：改永定四年为天嘉元年。
English: The four-year period was changed to the first year of Tianjia.

古文：鳏寡孤独不能自存立者，赐谷人五斛。
现代文：鳏寡孤独不能自养的，每人赐五斛谷。
English: Widows and widowers who are alone and unable to support themselves will each receive five rupees.

古文：孝悌力田殊行异等，加爵一级。 
现代文：孝悌力田品行突出的，加爵一级。 
English: His filial piety and outstanding performance earned him a knighthood.

古文：甲寅，分遣使者宣劳四方。
现代文：甲寅日，分派使者到四方慰劳。
English: On July 1, envoys were dispatched to the four regions to offer condolences.

古文：辛酉，舆驾亲祠南郊，诏曰： 朕式飨上玄，虔奉牲玉，高禋礼毕，诚敬兼弘。
现代文：辛酉日？驾车亲到南郊祭天，下诏道： 我享受上天恩赐，虔诚地奉献牲礼玉帛，升里礼毕，更加诚敬。
English: On that fateful day, he drove to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to the heavens, saying, "I enjoy God's grace, devoutly offer the sacrificial offering of the yamahoko, and am raised to a higher level of reverence.

古文：且阴霾浃辰，褰霁在日，云物韶朗，风景清和，庆动人祇，忭流庶俗，思俾黎元，同此多祐。
现代文：连阴多时，开朗有日，天朗物明，风清景和，欢庆感动人神，喜悦遍布民间，想使黎民百姓同享逭护佑。
English: Even when it is cloudy, there is a bright day, the sky is clear, the wind is clear, the scenery is peaceful, the celebration moves people and gods, the joy is all over the people, and I want to make the people of Lai enjoy the blessing of protection.

古文：可赐民爵一级。 
现代文：可赐给民爵一级。 
English: He can be given a first-class title.

古文：辛未，舆驾亲祠北郊。
现代文：辛未日，驾车到北郊亲祭。
English: On the eve of Xin Wei Day, I drove to the north suburb of Zeng.

古文：日有冠。
现代文：日有冠形光晕。
English: The sun has a crown-shaped halo.

古文：二月辛卯，老人星见。
现代文：二月辛卯日，老人星出现。
English: On a gloomy day in February, the elderly star appeared.

古文：乙未，高州刺史纪机自军叛还宣城，据郡以应王琳，泾令贺当迁讨平之。
现代文：乙末日，高州刺史塑携从军中反叛回宣塑，占据郡城响应王进，泾逊县令贺当迁讨平了他。
English: On the last day of the second month, Gaozhou Zhishi Plastic took the lead in rebelling against Xuanplastic from the military, occupied the county seat in response to Wang Jin, and He Dangqian, the county magistrate of Jiaoxun County, leveled him.

古文：丙申，太尉侯瑱败王琳于梁山，攻齐兵于博望，生擒齐将刘伯球，尽收其资储船舰，俘馘以万计，王琳及其主萧庄奔于齐。
现代文：丙申日，太尉侯填在凿业打败旦坠，在坛望打败蛮军，活捉壹将塑堕珪，全部缴获他的军资储备和战船，俘虏敌军以万计，王琳和他的主子萧庄出逃到齐国。
English: On the day of Yin Shen's death, Taifeng Hou Zhi defeated Dan Sheng in the chiseling industry, defeated the barbarian army in the battle of the altar, captured alive the one who would cast down the dragon, captured all of his military reserves and warships, and captured the enemy army by the tens of thousands. Wang Lin and his master Xiao Zhuang fled to Qi.

古文：戊戌，诏曰： 夫五运递来，三灵眷命，皇王因之改创，殷、周所以乐推。
现代文：戊戌日，下韶道： 五行运转，三灵眷顾，皇王因而改易，殷、周因而更替，我统继大位。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, in the Lower Yunnan Province: The five elements are operating, the three spirits are attending, the emperor is thus relieved of his duties, Yin and Zhou are thus replaced, and I succeed to the throne.

古文：朕统历承基，丕隆鼎运，期理攸属，数祚斯在，岂侥幸所至，宁卜祝可求。
现代文：大业兴隆国运昌盛，属于正理，符合定敷，岂是侥幸能达到的，岂是卜祝可以求得的。
English: The great cause of prosperity, the prosperity of the national movement, belongs to the truth and conforms to the requirements. Is it a fluke that can be achieved, is it a wish that can be obtained.

古文：故知神器之重，必在符命。
现代文：由此可知国家重任，必因气敷而定。
English: From this, it can be seen that the heavy responsibilities of the state must be determined by the atmosphere.

古文：是以逐鹿贻讥，断蛇定业，乱臣贼子，异世同尤。
现代文：因而争天下而贻留给后世讥嘲，斩白蛇能定伟业，乱臣贼子，即使时代不同也都一样遭斥责。
English: Therefore, contending for the world and leaving it to posterity is ridiculed, cutting the white snake can determine the great cause, and the ruffian thief, even if the times are different, are all equally rebuked.

古文：王琳识暗挈瓶，智惭卫足，干纪乱常，自贻颠沛，而缙绅君子，多被絷维，虽泾渭合流，兰鲍同肆，求之厥理，或有胁从。
现代文：王琳识见浅薄，智力低下，违犯纲常，自招颠沛苦果，大臣君子，很多被他所累，虽然泾、渭流于一起，兰草舆鲍鱼同放一室，但寻思其中原因，有的是被迫胁从。
English: Wang Lin saw the superficiality, low intelligence, violation of rules and regulations, self-promotion and bitter fruit, the minister gentleman, many were tired of him, although they flowed together, the bluegrass abalone was placed in the same room, but some of them were forced to obey.

古文：今九罭既设，八纮斯掩，天网恢恢，吞舟是漏。
现代文：现在法纲早架，纲绳已设，天网恢恢，能放过吞舟大鱼。
English: Now the syllabus has been set up, the syllabus rope has been set up, the sky net has been restored, and the big fish that swallowed the boat can be released.

古文：至如伏波游说，永作汉蕃，延寿脱归，终为魏守，器改秦、虞，材通晋、楚，行藏用舍，亦岂有恒，宜加宽仁，以彰雷作。
现代文：至于像丛波一样游说外邦，永作汉的藩国，或如五缰脱身回归，最终成为魏的守宰，才能可改变台、虞之急，本领能通好晋、楚的关系，做与不做用舆不用，哪还有一成不变的，应对这些人加以宽恕，以示皇恩浩荡。
English: As for the foreign states that lobbied like a swarm of waves, and the Han states that were always Han, or the Five Dynasties that escaped and returned, and eventually became Wei's defenders, in order to change the table, the urgency of the situation, the ability to improve the relationship between Jin and Chu, and whether to do or not to do, there is no need, and there is no invariable, these people should be forgiven to show the vastness of the imperial grace.

古文：其衣冠士族，预在凶党，悉皆原宥；将帅战兵，亦同肆眚，并随才铨引，庶收力用。 
现代文：凡官绅士族，参与逆党，一概赦免；将帅兵卒，也一同宽恕，一并量才录用，希望能起到作用。 
English: Ordinary officials and gentry who participated in the anti-party were all pardoned; handsome soldiers and soldiers were also pardoned, and they were only hired together, hoping to play a role.

古文：又诏师旅以来，将士死王事者，并加赠谥。
现代文：又诏令对从发生战事以来为国而死的人，都加赠谧号。
English: It also decreed that all those who had died for the country since the outbreak of the war would be given a posthumous name.

古文：己亥，诏曰： 日者凶渠肆虐，众军进讨，舟舰输积，权倩民丁，师出经时，役劳日久。
现代文：己亥日，下诏道： 近日凶徒肆虐，众军前往征讨，船舰运送军资，动用人丁，出师多时，长久劳苦。
English: On Ji Hai Day, he issued the following edict: Recently, the villains have been raging, the troops have gone to collect, the ships have transported military supplies, the men have been used, the teachers have been out for a long time, and they have been working hard for a long time.

古文：今气昆廓清，宜有甄被。
现代文：现在国家太平，应该奖赏。
English: Now that the country is peaceful, it should be rewarded.

古文：可蠲复丁身。
现代文：当过兵的男丁可免除赋税劳役。
English: Men who have served in the military are exempt from tax and labor service.

古文：夫妻三年，于役不幸者，复其妻子。 
现代文：夫妻三年以上的，男丁在这次战事中遭到不幸的，就免除他妻儿的赋税劳役。 
English: If the husband and wife have been married for more than three years, and the man has suffered misfortune in this war, he will exempt his wife and children from tax and labor service.

古文：庚子，分遣使者赍玺书宣劳四方。
现代文：庚子日，分派使者带着玺书到四方慰劳。
English: On the day of Geng Zi, an envoy was dispatched to the four corners of the country with a letter of condolence.

古文：乙巳，遣太尉侯瑱镇湓城。
现代文：乙巳日，派太尉侯琐镇守湓城。
English: On the 21st day of the second lunar month, he sent the second lieutenant Hou Zuozhen to guard the city.

古文：庚戌，以高祖第六子昌为骠骑将军、湘州牧，立为衡阳王。
现代文：庚戌日，封高祖的第六子速旦为骠骑将军、翅蛆牧，立他为堑垦旺。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month, the 6th son of Emperor Gaozu, Fudan, was appointed as the general of the cavalry and the leader of the army.

古文：三月丙辰，诏曰： 自丧乱以来，十有馀载，编户凋亡，万不遗一，中原氓庶，盖云无几。
现代文：三月丙辰日，下韶道： 自从梁末丧乱以来，有十多年了，在编的户日凋零，万户中未存一户，中原的百姓，可以说没有多少了。
English: On the third day of the third month of the year, in the lower Yunnan Province: It has been more than ten years since the Liangmai Rebellion, and the number of households has decreased. There is not a single household left among the ten thousand households. It can be said that there are not many people left in the Central Plains.

古文：顷者寇难仍接，算敛繁多，且兴师已来，千金日费，府藏虚竭，杼轴岁空。
现代文：不久前寇祸相连，征敛繁多，况且兴兵以来，每日费用千金，府库空虚，布帛用尽。
English: Not long ago, there was a series of robberies, and there was a lot of tax collection. Moreover, since the rise of the army, the daily expenses were thousands of dollars, the treasury was empty, and the cloth was exhausted.

古文：近所置军资，本充戎备，今元恶克殄，八表已康，兵戈静戢，息肩方在，思俾馀黎，陶此宽赋，今岁军粮通减三分之一。
现代文：近来所备办的军资，全用于战事，如今首恶被减除，八方太平，兵戈收藏，战事刚停，想让幸存的百姓，因宽减赋税而喜悦，今年的军粮都减去三分之一。
English: The recently prepared military funds were all used for the war, and now the first evil has been reduced, the war has just stopped, and the surviving people want to rejoice because of the tax reduction. This year's military rations have been reduced by one third.

古文：尚书申下四方，称朕哀矜之意。
现代文：由尚书省传达四方，说明我怜民的意思。
English: Conveyed in four directions by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, it shows the meaning of "pitying the people."

古文：守宰明加劝课，务急农桑，庶鼓腹含哺，复在兹日。 
现代文：各地州郡长官多加鼓励务必用力农事，希望鼓腹而游含哺而笑的盛况，又在今日实现。 
English: The governors of counties and prefectures around the country have been encouraging farmers to work harder, hoping that the grand occasion of laughing while eating and laughing will be realized again today.

古文：萧庄所署郢州刺史孙瑒举州内附。
现代文：萧庄所辖的郢州刺史孙墨领全州归附。
English: The whole of Zhangzhou Jishi Sunmo County, which was under the jurisdiction of Xiaozhuang, was annexed.

古文：丁巳，江州刺史周迪平南中，斩贼率熊昙朗，传首京师。
现代文：丁巳日，江州刺史周迪平定南史，杀了贼首熊昙朗，把首级送到京城。
English: On the tenth day of the third month, Zhou Di, the governor of Jiangsu Province, pacified Nanshi, killed the head of the thief Xiong Yulang, and sent the head to Beijing.

古文：先是，齐军守鲁山城，戊午，齐军弃城走，诏南豫州刺史程灵洗守之。
现代文：原先，变军守鲁山城，戊午，变军弃城逃跑，韶令南塑出刺史但玺选守这座城。
English: Originally, the mutinous army guarded Lushan City, but in the afternoon, the mutinous army abandoned the city and fled, and Yan ordered Nan to make a stab at history, but Yan chose to guard this city.

古文：甲子，分荆州之天门、义阳、南平，郢州之武陵四郡，置武州。
现代文：甲子日，分设荆州的越、赵、龃，以及剀的龌四郡，设武丛。
English: On Jiazi Day, the four counties of Yue, Zhao, Handan, and Handan in Jingzhou were separated, and Wuzhong was set up.

古文：其刺史督沅州，领武陵太守，治武陵郡。其都尉所部六县为沅州。
现代文：州刺史督，领亘递太守，管理逮堕叠。那个都尉所辖的六县为沅州。
English: The six counties under the jurisdiction of that lieutenant are the six counties of Zhangzhou.

古文：别置通宁郡，以刺史领太守，治都尉城，省旧都尉。
现代文：另设通宁郡，用刺史领太守职，管理都尉城，减了旧时的都尉。
English: In addition, Tongning County was set up, and the post of captain was reduced from the old post of captain.

古文：以安南将军、南兗州刺史、新除右卫将军吴明彻为安西将军、武州刺史，伪郢州刺史孙瑒为安南将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：任安南将军、直兖业刺史、新授右卫将军吴明彻为安西将军、逮业刺史，任伪竖业刺史茎疆为安南将军、翅刺史。
English: General Annan was appointed as the chief historian, General Wu Mingche, newly promoted to the post of right guard, was appointed as the chief historian of Anxi, General Fang was appointed as the chief historian of Fang, General Annan was appointed as the chief historian of Shijiazhuang, and General Ye was appointed as the chief historian of Fengtai.

古文：丙子，衡阳王昌薨。
现代文：丙子日，衡阳王陈昌死。
English: On the third day of the third month, King Chen Chang of Hengyang died.

古文：丁丑，诏曰： 萧庄伪署文武官属还朝者，量加录序。 
现代文：丁丑日，下诏道： 蔻蓝伪政权所任文武官员回到朝廷的，量才录用。 
English: On the day of Ding Jiu, the following edict was issued: Only those military and civilian officials appointed by the Indochinese puppet regime who returned to the imperial court would be recruited.

古文：夏四月丁亥，立皇子伯信为衡阳王，奉献王后。
现代文：夏四月丁亥，立皇子值值为堕逛，继承墼王的后嗣。
English: In the summer and April of Dinghai, the crown prince was set up as the heir to the king.

古文：乙未，以安南将军荀朗为安北将军、合州刺史。
现代文：乙末日，任安南将军苞幽为安北将军、盒州刺史。
English: On the last day of the second month, General Annan became General Anbei, and Koju became history.

古文：五月乙卯，改桂阳之汝城县为庐阳郡。分衡州之始兴、安远二郡，置东衡州。
现代文：五月，把挂屋的汝城县改为卢腿盛。分设衔妙的蛆兴、塞远二郡，设塞堑业。
English: In May, Rucheng County, a county with a large number of boarding houses, was changed to Lujinsheng County. It was divided into two counties, namely, Shuxing County and Saiyuan County. Saiyuan County was established.

古文：六月辛巳，改谥皇祖妣景安皇后曰景文皇后。
现代文：六月辛巳日，改谧先皇祖母景安皇后为景文皇后。
English: On June 30, the former emperor's grandmother, Empress Jingan, was enthroned as Empress Jingwen.

古文：壬辰，诏曰： 梁孝元遭离多难，灵榇播越，朕昔经北面，有异常伦，遣使迎接，以次近路。
现代文：壬辰日，下诏道： 梁孝元时期遭逢多难，灵棺远离，我往日曾经为臣，这样有违人伦常情，派使者迎来，停在近处。
English: On the day of Imjin, he issued the following edict: During the time of Liang Xiaoyuan, there were many hardships, the coffin was far away, I used to be a vassal in the past, so it was against human ethics and common sense to send an envoy to usher in and stop nearby.

古文：江宁既有旧茔，宜即安卜，车旗礼章，悉用梁典，依魏葬汉献帝故事。 
现代文：江宁既然有旧墓地，应即时安葬，车骑礼仪，全用梁时旧典，按魏国葬汉献帝的事办理。 
English: Since there is an old cemetery in Jiangning, it should be buried immediately, and the car and horse riding etiquette should be carried out according to the ancient book of Liang Shi, and the matter of dedicating the Han emperor should be handled according to the Wei state funeral.

古文：甲午，追策故始兴昭烈王妃曰孝妃。
现代文：甲午，追封已故的始兴昭烈王妃为孝妃。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, the late Princess Shi Xingxiao was posthumously named Princess Xiaofei.

古文：丁酉，以开府仪同三司徐度为侍中、中军将军。
现代文：丁酉日，任开府仪同三司徐度为侍中、中军将军。
English: On the day of Ding Xi's death, Kaifu Yi and his three subordinates were promoted to the ranks of attendants and generals of the Chinese army.

古文：辛丑，国哀周忌，上临于太极前殿，百僚陪哭。
现代文：辛丑日，足国哀周年忌日，皇上驾临太极前殿，百官陪哭。
English: On Sin Ugly Day, the anniversary of the death of the foot country, the emperor arrived at the Taiji front hall, accompanied by hundreds of officials.

古文：赦京师殊死已下。
现代文：赦免京城中死罪以下的罪犯。
English: Pardoning the capital's criminals convicted of crimes punishable by death or less.

古文：是月，葬梁元帝于江宁。
现代文：当月，把梁元帝葬在江宁。
English: That month, Emperor Liang Yuan was buried in Jiangning.

古文：秋七月甲寅，诏曰： 朕以眇身，属当大宝，负荷至重，忧责实深，而庶绩未康，胥怨犹结，伫咨贤良，发于梦想，每有一言入听，片善可求，何尝不褒奖抽扬，缄书绅带。
现代文：秋七月甲寅日，下诏道： 我凭无能的资质登上宝座，担子极重，忧虑实是深切，然而事业未成，积怨还在，久待贤士咨询，梦寐以求，每当有一句可采纳的话，有一点善事可做，我何尝不嘉奖褒扬，记录下来挂在腰带上随身带着。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, he issued the following edict: I ascended to the throne by virtue of my incompetent qualifications. The burden is extremely heavy, the worries are really deep. However, the cause is not accomplished, the resentment is still there, I have been waiting for the advice of the sages for a long time, and I have been dreaming of it. Whenever there is a sentence that can be accepted, there is a little good deed that can be done. I would not hesitate to praise and commend, record it, hang it on my belt and carry it with me.

古文：而傅岩虚往，穹谷尚淹，蒲币空陈，旌弓不至。
现代文：但是锤已逝，穹谷已淹灭。蒲币空设，旌弓不来。
English: But the hammer is gone, the valley is drowned, the shovel is empty, and the bow is no more.

古文：岂当有乖则哲，使草泽遗才？将时运浇流，今不逮古？
现代文：难道是我违背准则，使得民间有贤士未用，还是时代流于浇薄，现在不如古代?
English: Was it I who violated the code, causing the folk to have sages unused, or did the times flow in a thin stream, and now is not as good as ancient times?

古文：侧食长怀，寝兴增叹。
现代文：我吃饭睡觉都想，衹是空增叹息。
English: I want to eat and sleep, but it's all empty.

古文：新安太守陆山才有启，荐梁前征西从事中郎萧策，梁前尚书中兵郎王暹，并世胄清华，羽仪著族，或文史足用，或孝德可称，并宜登之朝序，擢以不次。
现代文：新安太守陆山才有奏章，推荐銮时的征西从事中郎芦箠，銮的尚书中兵郎王运，都是世家后裔，羽仪望族，或者文才足可任用，或者孝德可称道，都应列于朝廷，以不同等级任用。
English: The new governor of An Taizhou, Lushan, only has the calligraphy, and it is recommended that Lushan, who was engaged in the Western Conquest at the time of the imperial edict, should be engaged as the middle-ranking official, and Lushan, who was engaged in the Western Conquest at the time of the imperial edict, should be engaged as the highest-ranking official, both of whom are descendants of the same family, and both of whom are respected by the imperial family, or both of whom can be appointed for their literary ability, or both of whom can be praised for their filial piety, and both of whom should be listed in the imperial court and appointed

古文：王公已下，其各进举贤良，申荐沦屈，庶众才必萃，大厦可成，使《棫朴》载歌，《由庚》在咏。 
现代文：王公爵位以下的，该各自举荐贤士，起用被埋没的人才，才能众才汇集，大厦可成，使得《械朴》可唱，《由庚》可歌。 
English: For those below the rank of prince, they should each recommend a wise man, use the talents that have been buried, and bring together the talents of all talents, so that the building can be completed, so that "Mechanical Park" can be sung, and "Yu Geng" can be sung.

古文：乙卯，诏曰： 自顷丧乱，编户播迁，言念馀黎，良可哀惕。
现代文：乙卯曰，下韶道： 自前不久国家丧乱，在籍的户口远迁，幸存的百姓，很是悲伤惊恐。
English: Yi Wu said, from the Lower Yunnan Province: Since the country was in turmoil not long ago, the registered residence was moved far away, and the surviving people were very sad and frightened.

古文：其亡乡失土，逐食流移者，今年内随其适乐，来岁不问侨旧，悉令著籍，同土断之例。 
现代文：他们离乡背井，流浪求食，今年任随他们到他们能安居的地方，来年无论是新迁的还是原籍的，全都登记入籍，与侨民并入当地户籍管理的政策一样实行。 
English: They have left their hometowns and wandered in search of food. This year, they will be allowed to go to a place where they can live safely. Next year, all of them, regardless of whether they are newly moved or their original nationality, will be registered for naturalization, and the policy of integrating them into the local household registration management will be implemented in the same way as that of overseas Chinese.

古文：丙辰，立皇子伯山为鄱阳王。
现代文：丙辰曰，立皇子伯山为鄱阳王。
English: Xing Chen said that he would make Prince Heshan the King of Shenyang.

古文：八月庚辰，老人星见。
现代文：八月庚辰日，老人星出现。
English: In August, Geng Chen Day, the old man star appeared.

古文：壬午，诏曰： 菽粟之贵，重于珠玉。
现代文：壬午日，下诏道： 菽粟比珠玉还要贵重。
English: On the morning of the third day of the third lunar month, he issued the following edict: "The poppy is more precious than jewels.

古文：自顷寇戎，游手者众，民失分地之业，士有佩犊之讥。
现代文：自从不久前发生战事以来，游手好闲的人增多，百姓失去了耕作的本业，士族中有对务农的讥嘲。
English: Since the war broke out not long ago, the number of idlers has increased, the people have lost their main occupation of farming, and there is mockery of farming among the warrior class.

古文：朕哀矜黔庶，念康弊俗，思俾阻饥，方存富教。
现代文：我同情百姓，想改变陋俗，使他们免除饥荒，正想让他们富裕起来再受到教化。
English: I sympathize with the people, I want to change the vulgar customs, I want to save them from famine, I want to make them rich and then be educated.

古文：麦之为用，要切斯甚，今九秋在节，万实可收，其班宣远近，并令播种。
现代文：种麦对于口粮来说，占有重要地位，现在正是九秋时节，万物可以收获，该宣告远近，让百姓都去播种。
English: For grain rations, seed wheat plays an important role. Now is the ninth autumn season, everything can be harvested. This announcement is far and near, let the people go to sow.

古文：守宰亲临劝课，务使及时。
现代文：守宰亲自鼓励农事，务必使百姓及时收种。
English: The governor personally encourages farming, and it is imperative that the people harvest the seeds in a timely manner.

古文：其有尤贫，量给种子。 
现代文：有特别穷困的，酌情给予种粮。 
English: Those who are particularly impoverished shall be given seed grain as appropriate.

古文：癸未，世祖临景阳殿听讼。
现代文：癸末日，世祖驾临景阳殿视察审案。
English: At the end of the day, the patriarch drove to Jingyang Palace to inspect the trial.

古文：戊子，诏曰： 汙罇土鼓，诚则难追，画卵雕薪，或可易革。
现代文：戊子日，下韶道： 掘地为樽以地为鼓的俭朴风气或许难以做到，蛋上画彩柴薪上雕刻的奢侈风气或许容易改革。
English: On the day of the Empress Dowager Cixi, the Lower Yunnan Road: The frugal style of digging the earth for the barrel and using the earth as the drum may be difficult to achieve, and the luxury style of painting on the egg, painting on the wood and carving on the wood may be easy to reform.

古文：梁氏末运，奢丽已甚，刍豢厌于胥史，歌钟列于管库，土木被硃丹之采，车马饰金玉之珍，逐欲浇流，迁讹遂远。
现代文：梁代末年，奢侈华丽的风气很厉害，官府中的低级小官都厌吃牛羊肉，管库小吏家裹都陈设歌钟乐器，土木上用朱丹作彩饰，车马用金玉珍宝来装饰，追求欲望系随流俗，坏的影响很深远。
English: At the end of the Liang Dynasty, the extravagant and gorgeous culture was very strong. The low-level petty officials in the government were all sick of eating beef and mutton. The minor officials in charge of the treasury were all equipped with musical instruments, the civil engineering was decorated with red diamonds, and the chariots and horses were decorated with gold and jade treasures. The pursuit of desire was following the fashion, and the bad influence was far-reaching.

古文：朕自诸生，颇为内足，而家敦朴素，室靡浮华，观览时俗，常所扼腕。
现代文：我生长于儒学家庭，懂得应内心充实，家裹也朴素，室内没有浮华装饰，看到当时的习俗，常常扼腕叹息。
English: I grew up in a Confucian family, I know how to be full of heart, the house wrap is also simple, there is no flashy decoration in the room, I often sigh when I see the customs of the time.

古文：今妄假时乘，临驭区极，属当沦季，思闻治道，菲食卑宫，自安俭陋，俾兹薄俗，获反淳风。
现代文：今天我掌大权，治理国家，在造沦落的时候，想到治国的正道，食粗粮居简朴的宫室，自安俭朴简陋，要使逭浇薄的时俗改变成淳厚的风气。
English: Today, I am in power, governing the country. At the time of decline, I thought of the right way to govern the country, eating coarse grains, living in a simple palace, being frugal and simple, and changing the time-honored customs into a virtuous culture.

古文：维雕镂淫饰，非兵器及国容所须，金银珠玉，衣服杂玩，悉皆禁断。 
现代文：那些雕镂都属过分的装饰，不是兵器或国家形象所必须的，金银珠玉、鲜亮的衣服及杂巧玩物，全都禁止使用。 
English: Those carvings are excessive decoration, not necessary for weapons or national image. Gold, silver, jewels, bright clothes and knickknacks are all prohibited.

古文：甲午，周将贺若敦率马步一万，奄至武陵，武州刺史吴明彻不能拒，引军还巴陵。
现代文：甲午日，周将贺若敦领马步军一万，突然杀到武陵，武州刺史吴明彻不能抵抗，带兵回到巴陵。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Zhou general He Ruodong led ten thousand horse infantry and suddenly arrived in Wuling. Wu Mingcher, the governor of Wuzhou, could not resist and led the soldiers back to Baling.

古文：丁酉，上幸正阳堂阅武。
现代文：丁酉日，皇上驾幸正阳堂检阅军队。
English: On the day of Ding Xi, the emperor drove to Zhengyang Hall to inspect the troops.

古文：九月癸丑，彗星见。
现代文：九月癸丑日，彗星出现。
English: In September, on the day of the Ugly Goat, a comet appeared.

古文：乙卯，周将独孤盛领水军将趣巴、湘，与贺若敦水陆俱进，太尉侯瑱自寻阳往御之。
现代文：乙卯，周将独孤盛领水军将要奔往巴、湘一带，舆贺若敦联军水陆并进，太尉侯琐从寻阳出发前往抵御。
English: Second, Zhou will be alone and the Sheng territorial navy will rush to the Ba and Hunan areas, and if the allied forces of Dun advance simultaneously on land and water, Taifeng Huzo will set off from Huanyang to resist.

古文：辛酉，遣仪同徐度率众会瑱于巴丘。
现代文：辛酉，派仪同徐度领兵在巴丘舆侯填会合。
English: Xin Yao sent Yi to meet with Xu Du, the leader of the army, in Bachu County.

古文：丙子，太白昼见。
现代文：丙子日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the third day of the new year, a white star appeared during the day.

古文：丁丑，诏侯瑱众军进讨巴、湘。
现代文：丁丑，韶令侯填等众军前往巴、湘讨伐。
English: Dingwu, Xilinghou and other troops went to Ba and Hunan to fight.

古文：十月癸巳，侯瑱袭破独孤盛于杨叶洲，尽获其船舰，盛收兵登岸，筑城以保之。
现代文：十月癸巳日，侯填突袭杨叶洲打败独孤盛，缴获他的全部战船，独孤盛收兵上岸，筑城自保。
English: On the third day of October, Hou Ji raided Yangyezhou to defeat Duolongsheng and captured all his warships. Duolongsheng gathered his troops ashore and defended the city.

古文：丁酉，诏司空侯安都率众会侯瑱南讨。
现代文：丁酉日，诏令司空侯安都领兵舆侯填会师向南征讨。
English: On the day of Ding Xi's death, the emperor ordered the Secretary of the Ku Klux Klan, Hou Andu, to lead the troops of the Ku Klux Klan to the south for a campaign.

古文：十二月乙未，诏曰： 古者春夏二气，不决重罪。
现代文：十二月乙未，下韶道： 古代春夏二季不斩决重罪犯。
English: December 18th, Xiamen Road: The ancient spring and summer two seasons do not make a felon.

古文：盖以阳和布泽，天秩是弘，宽网省刑，义符含育，前王所以则天象地，立法垂训者也。
现代文：大概是因为阳和润泽，恢弘天道，宽和刑法，有养育万物的意思，前代君王之所以取法天地，是为了建立法度留下训诫。
English: Probably because of the yang and the moistness, the magnificence of the heavenly way, the breadth and the criminal law, with the intention of nurturing all things, the reason why the previous monarchs took the law heaven and earth was to establish the law and leave teachings.

古文：朕属当浇季，思求民瘼，哀矜恻隐，念甚纳隍，常欲式遵旧轨，用长风化。
现代文：我处在末世，想到百姓疾苦，同情怜悯，有拯救百姓出水火之心，常想遵循旧法施行教化。
English: I am in the last days, think of the people's suffering, sympathize and pity, have the heart to save the people from the water and fire, and often want to follow the old law to carry out enlightenment.

古文：自今孟春讫于夏首，罪人大辟事已款者，宜且申停。 
现代文：自今年初春到初夏，已判定大辟重刑的罪犯，应暂停止用刑。 
English: From early spring to early summer of this year, offenders who have been sentenced to heavy sentences should temporarily suspend their sentences.

古文：己亥，周巴陵城主尉迟宪降，遣巴州刺史侯安鼎守之。
现代文：己亥日，周巴陵城主尉迟宪来降，派巴州刺史侯安鼎去守巴陵。
English: On Ji Hai Day, the captain of Zhoubaling Castle, Chi Xian, came down and sent Ba Zhou's aide-de-camp, Hou Anding, to guard Baling.

古文：庚子，独孤盛将馀众自杨叶州潜遁。
现代文：庚子日，独孤盛领残兵从杨叶洲悄悄逃走。
English: On the day of Geng Zi's death, only one man, Sheng Sheng, led the remaining soldiers to quietly flee from Yangyezhou.

古文：二年春正月庚戌，大赦天下。
现代文：二年春正月庚戌日，大赦天下。
English: On the second day of the first month of the second year of the Spring, the general amnesty came into effect.

古文：以云麾将军、晋陵太守杜棱为侍中、领军将军。
现代文：任云麾将军、晋陵太守杜棱为侍中、领军将军。
English: He was appointed as General Yun Xi, and the Grand Steward of the Imperial mausoleum, Du Ren, was appointed as an aide-de-camp and leading general.

古文：辛亥，以始兴王伯茂为宣惠将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：辛亥日，任始兴王伯茂为宣惠将军、扬州刺史。
English: On the day of Xinhai, Ren Shi Xing Wang Bomao became the general of Xuan Hui and the history of Yangzhou.

古文：乙卯，合州刺史裴景徽奔于齐。
现代文：乙卯日，合州刺史裴景徽逃奔齐国。
English: On the second day of the second month, Bae Jinghui fled to the State of Qi.

古文：辛未，周湘州城主殷亮降，湘州平。
现代文：辛未，周湘州城主殷亮来降，湘州平定了。
English: Soon after, Zhou Xiangzhou castellan Yin Liang came down, and Xiangzhou was pacified.

古文：二月丙戌，以太尉侯瑱为车骑将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：二月丙戌日，任太尉侯琐为车骑将军、湘州刺史。
English: On February 6th, he was appointed as the cavalry general of Hunan Province.

古文：庚寅，曲赦、湘州诸郡。
现代文：庚寅日，特赦湘州等郡。
English: Gyeongin Day, amnesty for Hwangju and other counties.

古文：三月乙卯，太尉、车骑将军、湘州刺史侯瑱薨。
现代文：三月乙卯日，太尉、车骑将军、挝刺史堡垄死。
English: On the second day of March, the lieutenant, the cavalry general, and Lao Zhi Shibao died.

古文：丁丑，以镇东将军、会稽太守徐度为镇南将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：丁丑，任镇束将军、盒檀太守涂仅为镇南将军、翅丛刺史。
English: Ding Ugly, Ren Zhenzhu General, Box Dandan Taishu Tu only for Zhenan General, Wing Cong stabbed history.

古文：夏四月，分荆州之南平、宜都、罗、河东四郡，置南荆州，镇河东郡。
现代文：夏四月，划分型州的蓖垩、宣部、罗、眯四郡，设置直趔妙，镇辖河东郡。
English: In the summer of April, the four counties of Min, Xuanbu, Luo, and Min in the divided state were set up, and the town was placed under the jurisdiction of Hedong County.

古文：以安西将军、武州刺史吴明彻为南荆州刺史。
现代文：任安西将军、武蛆刺史吴明彻为南荆州刺史。
English: General Anxi and Wu Mingche, the military governor of the Southern Jingzhou region, were appointed to the post.

古文：庚寅，以安左将军鲁悉达为安南将军、吴州刺史。
现代文：庚寅，任安左将军叠墨达为安南将军、昱刺史。
English: Geng Ying, General Ren Anza, and General Annan are the history.

古文：辛卯，老人星见。
现代文：辛卯日，老人星出现。
English: On a gloomy day, an old man appears.

古文：秋七月丙午，周将贺若敦自拔遁归，人畜死者十七八。
现代文：秋七月丙午日，周将贺若敦撤军悄悄逃回去了，人畜死了十分之七八。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the seventh month of the autumn, Zhou General He Ruodong withdrew his troops and quietly fled back. Seventy-eight out of ten people and animals died.

古文：武陵、天门、南平、义阳、河东、宜都郡悉平。
现代文：武陵、天门、南平、义阳、河东、宜都郡都平定了。
English: Wuling, Tianmen, Nanping, Yiyang, Hedong and Yidu counties have all been pacified.

古文：九月甲寅，诏曰： 姬业方阐，望载渭滨，汉历既融，道通圮上。
现代文：九月甲寅日。下韶道： 姬姓基业始创时，从渭滨迎来姜尚，汉代建国，是从圮上老人的事开始。
English: September Jia Yin Day. Xiamen Road: When Ji Ye, surnamed Ji Ye, was founded, Jiang Shang was ushered in from Binhai, and the founding of the Han Dynasty began with the matter of the old man on the raft.

古文：若乃摛精辰宿，降灵惟岳，风云有感，梦寐是求，斯固舟楫盐梅，递相表里，长世建国，罔或不然。
现代文：像这样星宿显现，五岳降灵，风云感动，真是梦寐以求的，逭就像渡海凭舟楫调味靠盐梅一样，君臣互为表裹，建立永久的政权，没有不是这样的。
English: The appearance of the stars like this, the descent of the five mountains, the movement of the wind and clouds, is truly a dream come true. It is like crossing the sea by boat and seasoning with salt and plums, and the monarchs and ministers are wrapped around each other to establish a permanent regime. This is not the case.

古文：至于铭德太常，从祀清庙，以贻厥后来，垂诸不朽者也。
现代文：直到铭刻大臣功德，立庙祭祀，遗传后世，永垂不朽。
English: Until the minister's merits and virtues are inscribed, the temple is built, the rituals are passed down to future generations, and they are immortalized.

古文：前皇经济区宇，裁成品物，灵贶式甄，光膺宝命，虽谟明浚发，幽显协从，亦文武贤能，翼宣王业。
现代文：前皇治理天下，裁就体制，神灵甄选恩赐，我荣承大宝，即使深谋明智，也得依靠文武贤臣，裹外相助，光大伟业。
English: The former emperor governed the world, established a system of justice, and received the gift of divine selection. I inherited a great treasure. Even if I were to seek wisdom, I would have to rely on literati and military sages, enlist foreign assistance, and achieve great things.

古文：故大司马、骠骑大将军瑱，故司空文育，故平北将军、开府仪同三司僧明，故中护军颖，故领军将军拟，或缔构艰难，经纶夷险；或摧锋冒刃，殉义遗生；或宣哲协规，绸缪帷幄；或披荆汗马，终始勤劬；莫不罄诚悉力，屯泰以之。
现代文：已故的大司马、骠骑大将军侯琐，已故的司空文育，已故的平北将军、开府仪同三司僧明，已故的中护军颖，已故的领军将军拟等人，有的在艰难中一起创业，历经危险；有的冲锋陷阵，为正义而牺牲；有的协助谋划，运筹帷幄；有的劳苦披荆，始终勤勉；无不竭诚尽力，不论艰难还是安泰都如此。
English: The late Grand Sima, Grand General Hou Zuo, the late Siku Wenyu, the late General Ping Beigu, the late Kaifu Yi and the three monks Ming, the late Zhongguo Junying, the late leading general Qiu and others, some of them started a business together in the midst of difficulties and experienced danger; some stormed into the battlefield and sacrificed for justice; some assisted in planning and operation planning; some worked hard and were always diligent; all made every effort, no matter how difficult or safe it was.

古文：朕以寡昧，嗣膺丕绪，永言勋烈，思弘典训，便可式遵故实，载扬盛轨，可并配食高祖庙庭，俾兹大猷，永传宗祏。 
现代文：我仅凭粗浅的见识嗣承大位，永远怀念这些忠烈，想弘扬他们作为训典，就照以往的例子盛赞宣扬，可一起供在高祖庙堂配享，使这些大功臣永垂后世。 
English: I was able to succeed to the throne with only a superficial insight, and I will always remember these loyal soldiers. If I want to promote them as a training manual, I will praise them as in the past, and offer them together at the Gaozhu Temple, so that these great heroes will live forever.

古文：丙辰，以侍中、中权将军、特进、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司王冲为丹阳尹；丹阳尹沈君理为左民尚书，领步兵校尉。
现代文：丙辰日，任侍中、中权将军、特进、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司王冲为丹阳尹；任原丹阳尹沈君理为左民尚书，领步兵校尉。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month, Danyang Yin was appointed as the attendant, the general of the central power, the special envoy, the doctor of the left light, the doctor of the opening ceremony and the three kings; the former Danyang Yin, Shenjun Li, was appointed as the left people's disciple and the leader of the infantry captain.

古文：冬十月乙巳，霍州西山蛮率部落内属。
现代文：冬十月乙巳，霍姐酉山崖领部落归附。
English: In the winter of October, the Huo Sister Lushan Cliff Neck Tribe was annexed.

古文：十一月乙卯，高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：十一月乙卯，高骊国派使者进贡。
English: In November, Gaocheng sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：甲子，以武昌、国川为竟陵郡，以安流民。
现代文：甲子日，设武昌、国川为竟陵郡，来安顿流亡的百姓。
English: On Ji Zi Day, Wuchang and Guochuan were set up as Jingling County to settle the exiled people.

古文：十二月辛巳，以安东将军、吴郡太守孙瑒为中护军。
现代文：十二月辛巳，任安束将军、吴郡太守孙场为中护军。
English: In December, General Anzac and the Governor of Wu County, Sun Yat-sen, were appointed as middle guards.

古文：甲申，立始兴国庙于京师，用王者之礼。
现代文：甲申日，在京城建始兴国瑚，用祭王的礼仪来祭祀。
English: On the day of the Jiaxing Revolution, the Jiaxing Guohui Temple was built in Beijing. It was dedicated with the etiquette of the festival king.

古文：太子中庶子虞荔、御史中丞孔奂以国用不足，奏立煮海盐赋及榷酤之科，诏并施行。
现代文：太子中庶子虞荔、御史中丞孔奂因国家资金不足，奏请设立海盐赋和官府专卖酒的制度，诏令一并实行。
English: Due to insufficient state funds, the Prince's middle illegitimate son, Yu Li, and the Imperial Historian's middle son, Kong Xi, petitioned for the establishment of the sea salt supply system and the government's exclusive liquor sales system, which were implemented together with the imperial edict.

古文：先是，缙州刺史留异应于王琳等反，丙戌，诏司空侯安都率众讨之。
现代文：起初，缙州刺史留异响应王琳等叛逆，丙戌日，韶令司空侯安都领兵征讨。
English: At first, in response to the rebellion of Wang Lin and others, Zhangzhou's Zhang Shiliuyi, on the same day, ordered the commander-in-chief, Kuang Hou Andu, to lead the conscription.

古文：三年春正月庚戌，设帷宫于南郊，币告胡公以配天。
现代文：三年春正月庚戌，在南郊临时设帷宫，用缯帛祭礼告胡公配祭上天。
English: In the spring of the third year, the first month of the year, Geng Zi temporarily set up a curtain palace in the southern suburbs, and used the sacrificial rite to tell Hu Gongbai to go to heaven.

古文：辛亥，舆驾亲祠南郊。
现代文：辛亥日，车驾到南郊亲祭。
English: At the turn of the year, the emperor went to the southern suburbs to personally worship the heavens.

古文：诏曰： 朕负荷宝图，亟回星琯，兢兢业业，庶几治定，而德化不孚，俗弊滋甚，永言念之，无忘日夜。
现代文：韶书写道： 我承当国位，弹精竭力，兢兢业业，差不多治理得国家安定了，但道德教化不行，风气鄙陋得很。总在思虑，日夜不忘。
English: The imperial edict wrote: I have assumed the position of the head of state, I have worked hard and devotedly, and I have almost managed to stabilize the country, but moral education is not possible, and the culture is very despicable. I am always thinking, and I do not forget day and night.

古文：阳和布气，昭事上玄，躬奉牺玉，诚兼飨敬，思与黎元，被斯宽惠，可普赐民爵一级，其孝悌力田，别加一等。 
现代文：上天播撒阳和之气，光明普照，我亲自献上牲礼玉帛，倍加虔诚敬祭，想舆百姓一起蒙享恩惠。可给百姓赐民爵一级。那些任职孝悌力田的，另外再加一等。 
English: I will personally offer the sacrificial offering of the Jade Urn and redouble the piety of the sacrifice, so that the people can enjoy the grace together. I can give the people a first-class people's peerage. Those who serve as filial piety, another first-class.

古文：辛酉，舆驾亲祠北郊。
现代文：辛酉日，车驾到北郊去亲祭。
English: On that fateful day, I drove to the northern suburbs to attend a parent-child festival.

古文：闰二月己酉，以百济王馀明为抚东大将军，高句骊王高汤为宁东将军。
现代文：闰二月己酉日，任百济王余明为抚束大将军，任直句骊王高汤为宁束将军。
English: On the day of leap February, King Yu Ming of Baekje was appointed as the general of Fuzhou, and King Gaotang of Zhouzhuang was appointed as the general of Ningzhu.

古文：江州刺史周迪举兵应留异，袭湓城，攻豫章郡，并不克。
现代文：江州刺史周迪起兵响应留异，袭击湓城，进攻豫章郡，都未成功。
English: Zhou Di, the governor of Jiangsu Province, raised an army in response to the dissent, attacked Lucheng, and attacked Yuzhang County, all of which were unsuccessful.

古文：辛亥，以南荆州刺史吴明彻为安右将军。
现代文：辛亥日，任南荆州刺史吴明彻为安右将军。
English: On the day of Xinhai, Wu Mingche, the governor of South Jingzhou, was appointed as the Anyu general.

古文：甲子，改铸五铢钱。
现代文：甲子日，改铸五稣钱。
English: Jia Zi Day, changed to the casting of the Pentecostal money.

古文：三月丙子，安成王顼至自周，诏授侍中、中书监中卫将军，置佐史。
现代文：丙子日，塞旦迗速玺从周回来，韶令授予侍中、中书监、中卫将军的职务，可设佐史。
English: On the third day of the third month of the year, when Sedan returned from Zhou, the imperial edict awarded him the posts of chamberlain, librarian, and general of the middle guard, and he could be appointed as assistant historian.

古文：丁丑，以安右将军吴明彻为安南将军、江州刺史，督众军南讨。
现代文：丁丑日，任安右将军昱旦困为安南将军、辽州刺史，督令众军到南方征讨。
English: On the day of Dingwu, General Ren Anyu, who was trapped between General Annan and Liao Zhou, ordered his troops to go to the south to fight.

古文：甲申，大赦天下。
现代文：甲申日，大赦天下。
English: On the Day of Atonement, there will be universal amnesty.

古文：庚寅，司空侯安都破留异于桃支岭，异脱身奔晋安，东阳郡平。
现代文：庚寅日，司空堡岂都在挑直岭打败里异，贸垦脱身逃到置昼，塞瞪平定了。
English: On the day of Geng Yin, the officials of the Empty Fort were all in Zhiling to defeat Li Yi, and the traffickers escaped to the afternoon, and the situation was stabilized.

古文：夏四月癸卯，曲赦东阳郡。
现代文：夏四月癸卯日，特赦塞遇盛。
English: In the summer of April, the amnesty was in full swing.

古文：乙巳，齐遣使来聘。
现代文：乙巳日，蛮派使者来通问修好。
English: On the 21st, they sent an envoy to ask for a truce.

古文：六月丙辰，以侍中、中卫将军安成王顼为骠骑将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：六月丙辰，任侍中、中卫将军安成王陈顼为骠骑将军、握业刺史。
English: In June, Ancheng Wang Chen Rong, who served as the general of the middle and middle guards, became the general of the cavalry and made history.

古文：以会稽、东阳、临海、永嘉、新安、新宁、晋安、建安八郡置东扬州。以扬州刺史始兴王伯茂为镇东将军、东扬州刺史，征北将军、司空、南徐州刺史侯安都为侍中、征北大将军。秋七月己丑，皇太子纳妃王氏。
现代文：把盒擅、塞荡、堕塑、墟、龌、经、逛、盘等八郡并属趋蚶。任握州刺史蛆胆迫茎为镇束将军、塞扰真刺史，任征北将军、司空、南徐州刺史侯安都为侍中、征北大将军。秋七月己丑日，皇太子娶王氏为妃。
English: There are eight counties in the province, including Zhisheng, Zhaozhuang, Jiaozhuang, Huizhou, Shijiazhuang, Zhaozhuang and Pan, all of which belong to the province of Chengdu. The provincial governor of Zhisheng was named Zhenzhuang General, the provincial governor of Zhaozhuang was named Zhenzhuang General, the provincial governor of Zhezhou was named Zhezhou General, the provincial governor of Zhezhou was named Zhezhou General, the provincial governor of Zhezhou was named Zhezhou General, the provincial governor of Zhezhou was named Zhezhou General, the provincial governor of

古文：在位文武赐帛各有差，孝悌力田为父后者赐爵二级。
现代文：在职的文武官员各有等级不同的赏赐，孝悌力田为父后的人赐爵二级。
English: The civil and military officials on duty each have a different level of reward, and the filial piety force field bestows a second-level knighthood for those who follow in their father's footsteps.

古文：九月戊辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月戊辰初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：以侍中、都官尚书到仲举为尚书右仆射、丹阳尹。
现代文：任侍中、都官尚书到仲举为尚书右仆射、丹阳尹。
English: In the middle of the appointment of attendants, the official of the capital, Shangshu, was promoted to the middle, and his right-hand man, Danyang Yin, was promoted.

古文：丁亥，周迪请降，诏安成王顼督众军以招纳之。
现代文：丁亥，周迪请求投降，诏令塞旦逗速玺督领众军去受降。
English: Dinghai and Zhou Di requested to surrender, and ordered Sedan to lead the troops to accept the surrender.

古文：是岁，周所立梁王萧詧死，子岿代立。
现代文：这年，且厘所支持的阻芦莹死了，他的儿子芦崖继嗣为王。
English: In the same year, Jiao Lu Ying, who was supported by Kili, died, and his son Lu Yap became the king.

古文：四年春正月丙子，干陀利国遣使献方物。
现代文：四年春正月丙子，干陁利国派使者来进贡。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Spring, the Qianlong Kingdom sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：甲申，周迪弃城走，闽州刺史陈宝应纳之，临川郡平。
现代文：甲申日，旦迤弃城逃跑，凰业刺史堕童尘收留了他，临川郡平定了。
English: On the day of Jia Sheng, once he abandoned the city and ran away, the phoenix industry stabbed the fallen child dust and took him in, and Linchuan County was leveled.

古文：壬辰，以平西将军、郢州刺史章昭达为护军将军，仁武将军、新州刺史华皎进号平南将军，镇南将军、开府仪同三司、高州刺史黄法抃为镇北大将军、南徐州刺史，安西将军、领临川太守周敷为南豫州刺史，中护军孙瑒为镇右将军。
现代文：壬辰日，任平西将军、郢州刺史章昭达为护军将军，给仁武将军、新州刺史垄蝰进号平南将军，任镇南将军、开府仪同三司、产州刺史黄法毡为镇北大将军、南徐州刺史，任安西将军、领垩则太守且堑为亩盘出刺史，任中护军逊曼为镇右将军。
English: On the Ninth Day of the Ninth Month, General Pingxi and Zhang Zhaoda of Zhangzhou Province were appointed as escort generals, General Renwu and General Pingnan of Xinzhou Province were appointed as escort generals, General Zhennan and Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji of Zhenzhou Province were appointed as escort generals, General Huang Fahui of Zhengzhou Province was appointed as escort general of Zhenbei Province, General Nan Xuzhou Province was appointed as escort general of Xuzhou Province, General Anxi and Lianhu were appointed as escort general of Anhui Province, and General Sunman was appointed as escort general of Zhenzhou Province.

古文：罢高州隶入江州。
现代文：撤除高州隶属于江州。
English: The removal of Gaozhou is subordinate to Jiangzhou.

古文：二月戊戌，征南将军、开府仪同三司、广州刺史欧阳頠进号征南大将军。
现代文：二月戊戌日，征南将军、开府仪同三司、庐塑刺史鞑旦匿题进号为征南大将军。
English: In February, General of the Southern Expedition, Kaifu Yi Tong San Sisi, and Zou Shuxi Xizhi Xidan Anzai were promoted to General of the Southern Expedition.

古文：庚戌，以侍中、司空、征北大将军侯安都为征南大将军、江州刺史。
现代文：庚戌日，任侍中、司空、征北大将军堡宝都为征南大将军、丝丛刺史。
English: On the day of the Geng Zi, he was appointed as the Vice-Commander, the Secretary of the Air Force, and the General of the Northern Expedition. The treasure of the castle was the General of the Southern Expedition, and the silk bunch was engraved in history.

古文：庚申，以平南将军华皎为南湘州刺史。
现代文：庚申日，任平南将军茎堕为拇刺史。
English: On the day of the Genghis Khan's death, Ren Pingnan was relegated to a footnote in history.

古文：三月辛未，以镇南将军、开府仪同三司徐度为侍中、中军大将军。
现代文：三月辛未日，任镇南将军、开府仪同三司徐度为侍中、中军大将军。
English: On the last day of March, General Zhenan, Kaifu Yi and the three generals were promoted to the ranks of attendants and generals of the Chinese army.

古文：辛巳，诏赠讨周迪将士死王事者。
现代文：辛巳日，诏令追赠在讨伐周迪的战斗中死亡的将士。
English: On the day of Xin Si, the imperial edict posthumously awarded the soldiers who died in the battle against Zhou Di.

古文：夏四月辛丑，设无珝大会于太极前殿。
现代文：夏四月辛丑日，在太极前殿设无遮大会。
English: In the summer, on April Fool's Day, an open-to-the-public convention was held in front of the Taiji Hall.

古文：乙卯，以侍中、中书监、中卫将军、骠骑将军、扬州刺史安成王顼为开府仪同三司。
现代文：乙卯日，授予侍中、中书监、中卫将军、骠骑将军、扬州刺史安成王陈顼为开府仪同三司。
English: On the second day of the month, it was awarded to the chamberlain, the Chinese librarian, the general of the middle guard, the general of the cavalry, and the Yangzhou scribe Ancheng Wang Chen Qi for the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments.

古文：五月丁卯，安前将军、右光禄大夫徐世谱卒。
现代文：五月丁卯日，安前将军、右光禄大夫徐世谱逝世。
English: In May, on the day of Dingwu, General Anzen and Doctor Uguanglu Xu Shifu passed away.

古文：六月癸巳，太白昼见。
现代文：六月癸巳曰，太白星白天出现。
English: On the eighth day of the sixth month, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：司空侯安都赐死。
现代文：司空侯安都被赐死。
English: Siku and Hou An were both sentenced to death.

古文：七月丁丑，以镇北大将军、开府仪同三司、南徐州刺史黄法甗为镇南大将军、江州刺史。
现代文：七月丁丑日，授镇北大将军、开府仪同三司、南徐州刺史黄法毡为镇南大将军、江州刺史。
English: In July on Dingushi Day, he was awarded the title of General of Zhenbei University, the title of General of Kaifu University and the title of Third Division, the title of General of South Xuzhou University, and the title of General of South Zhenbei University and the title of General of Jiangzhou University.

古文：九月壬戌，开府仪同三司、广州刺史欧阳頠薨。
现代文：九月壬戌日，开府仪同三司、广州刺史欧阳愿逝世。
English: Kaifu Yi Tong San Si and Guangzhou Zhishi Ouyang Wang passed away on September 30.

古文：癸亥，曲赦京师。
现代文：癸亥日，特赦京城。
English: On April Fool's Day, amnesty for the capital city.

古文：辛未，周迪复寇临川，诏护军章昭达率众讨之。
现代文：辛末日，周迪又侵犯临川，韶令护军章昭达领兵讨伐。
English: At the end of the Xin Dynasty, Zhou Di invaded Linchuan again, and ordered the military escort Zhang Zhaoda to lead the troops in the crusade.

古文：十一月辛酉，章昭达大破周迪，悉擒其党与，迪脱身潜窜。
现代文：十一月辛酉日，章昭达大败周迪，擒获他的所有部属，周迪独身逃脱。
English: On November 30, Zhang Zhaoda defeated Zhou Di, captured all his subordinates, and Zhou Di escaped single-handedly.

古文：十二月丙申，大赦天下。
现代文：十二月丙申曰，大赦天下。
English: In December, he said, "All is forgiven."

古文：诏护军将军章昭达进军建安，以讨陈宝应。
现代文：诏令护军将军章昭达向建安进军，去讨伐陈宝应。
English: He ordered the escort general Zhang Zhaoda to march to Jian'an to fight Chen Baoying.

古文：信威将军、益州刺史余孝顷督会稽、东阳、临海、永嘉诸军自东道会之。
现代文：信威将军、益州刺史余孝顷统领会稽、束阳、临海、永嘉众军从东路会师。
English: General Xinwei, Yizhou general Zishi Yu Xiao, and the armies of Sokyang, Linhai and Yongjia marched from the east to join the division.

古文：癸丑，以前安南将军、江州刺史吴明彻为镇前将军。
现代文：癸丑日，任原来的安南将军、江州刺史吴明彻为镇前将军。
English: On April Fool's Day, the former General Annan and the Governor of Jiangsu Province Wu Mingche were appointed as the town's former generals.

古文：五年春正月庚辰，以吏部尚书、领右军将军袁枢为丹阳尹。
现代文：五年春正月庚辰日，任吏部尚书、领右军将军重担为旦盐尹。
English: On the day of Geng Chen in the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, Tang Yan Yin was appointed as the leader of the right army.

古文：辛巳，舆驾亲祠北郊。
现代文：辛巳日，车驾前往北郊祭天。
English: On the day of Xin Si, the emperor personally drove to the northern suburbs to offer sacrifices.

古文：乙酉，江州湓城火，烧死者二百馀人。
现代文：乙酉日，辽真的继失火，烧死二百多人。
English: On the day of the earthquake, Liao Zhengyi died in a fire that killed more than 200 people.

古文：三月丁丑，以征南大将军、开府仪同三司、桂州刺史淳于量为中抚军大将军。
现代文：三月丁丑日，任征南大将军、开府仪同三司、桂州刺史淳于量为中抚军大将军。
English: On the day of the Ides of March, he was appointed the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji, and Guizhou Sashishi Junyuryo as the general of the Central Expeditionary Army.

古文：壬午，诏以故护军将军周铁虎配食高祖庙庭。
现代文：壬午日，韶令把已故的护军将军周铁虎供奉在高祖庙中配享。
English: On the morning of the third day of the third lunar month, the imperial command dedicated the late general Zhou Tiehu to the Gaozu Temple.

古文：夏四月庚子，周遣使来聘。
现代文：夏四月庚子日，周派使者来修好。
English: In the summer of April, Geng Zi Day, Zhou sent an envoy to repair it.

古文：五月庚午，罢南丹阳郡。
现代文：五月庚午日，撤除南丹阳郡。
English: On the afternoon of May 6th, the southern Danyang County was removed.

古文：是月，周、齐并遣使来聘。
现代文：同月，周、齐都派使者来修好。
English: In the same month, Zhou and Qi both sent envoys to repair it.

古文：六月丁未，夜，有白气两道，出于北斗东南，属地。
现代文：六月丁末日夜裹，有两道白气从北斗东南方向的属地冲出。
English: On the night of the last day of June, there were two streams of white gas rushing out of the territory belonging to the southeast direction of Beidou.

古文：秋七月丁丑，诏曰： 朕以寡昧，属当负重，星籥亟改，冕旒弗旷，不能仰协璇衡，用调玉烛，傍慰苍生，以安黔首。
现代文：秋七月丁丑，下韶道： 我识浅昏惑，担此大任，时局多变，国君又不可缺，却不能上应天象，调和国政，抚慰苍生，安定百姓。
English: In the autumn and July, Ding Chou, the lower eunuch, said: I have a shallow and confused understanding, I am responsible for this great responsibility, the situation is changeable, and the sovereign is indispensable, but I can't answer to the celestial body, reconcile national politics, soothe sentient beings, and stabilize the people.

古文：兵无宁岁，民乏有年，移风之道未弘，习俗之患犹在，致令氓多触网，吏繁笔削，狱犴滋章，虽由物犯，囹圄淹滞，亦或有冤。
现代文：战事没有一年安宁，丰年裹百姓依然贫乏，改易新风也没有推行，鄙陋的习俗还存在，使得百姓多触犯法网，官吏忙于治罪，监狱人满，虽说是因客观环境引起犯罪，长留牢狱，也有的是含有冤屈。
English: The war has not been peaceful for a year, the people are still poor in a good year, the reform and opening up has not been carried out, the despicable customs still exist, making the people more likely to violate the law, officials are busy with crime, prisons are full of people, although it is due to the objective environment caused by crime, long stay in prison, some also contain grievances.

古文：念俾纳隍，载劳负扆，加以肤凑不适，摄卫有亏，比获微痊，思覃宽惠，可曲赦京师。 
现代文：我想救民出水火，在位多劳，加上身体不适，养生不善，近来稍愈，很想广行德政，可特赦京城的罪犯。 
English: I want to save the people from the fire and the water. I have been overworked during my reign, coupled with physical discomfort and poor health. Recently, I have been a little better. I would like to practice good governance, but I can pardon the criminals in Beijing.

古文：九月，城西城。
现代文：九月，建西城。
English: September, Jianxi Town.

古文：冬十一月丁亥，以左卫将军程灵洗为中护军。
现代文：冬十一月丁亥日，任左卫将军程灵洗为中护军。
English: In the winter of November, Dinghai Day, Ren Zuwei General Cheng Lingwu became the middle protector.

古文：己丑，章昭达破陈宝应于建安，擒宝应、留异，送京师，晋安郡平。
现代文：己丑日，章昭达在建安打败了陈宝应，擒获宝应、留异，送到京都，平定了晋安郡。
English: On April Fool's Day, Zhang Zhaoda defeated Chen Baoying in Jian'an, captured Baoying and Remai, sent them to Kyoto, and conquered Jin'an County.

古文：甲辰，以护军将军章昭达为镇前将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：甲辰日，封护军将军章昭达为镇前将军、开府仪同三司。
English: On the day of Jia Chen, Zhang Zhaoda, the general of the protection army, became the former general of the town, and Kaifu Yi and the three divisions.

古文：十二月甲子，曲赦建安、晋安二郡。
现代文：十二月甲子，特赦建安、晋安二郡。
English: Jian'an and Jin'an counties were granted amnesty in December.

古文：讨陈宝应将士死王事者，并给棺槥，送还本乡，并复其家。
现代文：在征讨陈实应战斗中阵亡的将士，都赐给棺木，送回本乡，并且免除他们家裹的赋税和劳役。
English: The soldiers who died in battle during the collection of money were given coffins, sent back to their hometowns, and exempted from taxes and labor service.

古文：疮痍未瘳者，给其医药。
现代文：受创未愈的将士，给他们医治。
English: The wounded soldiers who have not yet recovered, give them medical treatment.

古文：癸未，齐遣使来聘。
现代文：癸未，齐国派使者来通好。
English: The day before yesterday, the State of Qi sent an envoy to communicate.

古文：六年春正月甲午，皇太子加元服，王公以下赐帛各有差，孝悌力田为父后者赐爵一级，鳏寡孤独不能自存者谷人五斛。
现代文：六年春正月甲午，皇太子行加冕礼，王公以下分等受到赏赐，孝悌力田继承父业的人赐爵一级，鳏寡孤独不能自养的人赐五斛谷。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the first month of the sixth year of the Spring, the crown prince performed the coronation ceremony, and those below the rank of prince were rewarded, those who inherited their father's inheritance from filial piety were given a first-class knighthood, and those who were widowed and lonely and could not support themselves were given a five-branched valley.

古文：庚戌，以领军将军杜棱为翊左将军、丹阳尹，丹阳尹袁枢为吏部尚书，卫尉卿沈钦为中领军。
现代文：庚戌曰，任领军将军杜棱为翊左将军、丹阳尹，原丹阳尹袁枢授为吏部尚书，任卫尉卿沈钦为中领军。
English: Geng Yao said that Du Ren was appointed as the leading general of the army, Danyang Yin was appointed as the leading general of the army, the former Danyang Yin Yuan was appointed as the leading general of the army, and Shen Qin, who was appointed as the leading general of the army, was appointed as the leading general of the army.

古文：三月乙未，诏侯景以来遭乱移在建安、晋安、义安郡者，并许还本土，其被略为奴婢者，释为良民。
现代文：三月乙未日，韶令侯景之乱以来移居建安、晋安、义安等郡的人，都允许回到本乡，那些被抓去做奴婢的，开释为良民。
English: On the second day of March, people who had moved to Jian'an, Jin'an, Yian and other counties since the War of the Three Kingdoms were allowed to return to their hometowns. Those who had been arrested to work as slaves were released as good citizens.

古文：夏四月甲寅，以侍中、中书监、中卫将军、骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史安成王顼为司空。
现代文：夏四月甲寅日，任侍中、中书监、中卫将军、骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史安成王陈顼为司空。
English: In the summer of April, he was appointed as the chamberlain, the chief librarian, the general of the middle guard, the general of the cavalry, the secretary of the Kaifu ceremony, and the secretary of Yangzhou Shishi Ancheng Wang Chen Wei.

古文：辛酉，有彗星见。
现代文：六月辛酉日，有彗星出现。
English: On the hottest day of June, a comet appeared.

古文：周遣使来聘。
现代文：周派使者通好。
English: Zhou sent an envoy to ask questions.

古文：秋七月癸未，大风至自西南，广百馀步，激坏灵台候楼。
现代文：秋七月癸未，从西南方刮起大风，有百余步宽度，毁坏了灵台的候楼。
English: In late autumn and July, a gale blew up from the southwest, with a width of more than a hundred paces, destroying the waiting building of the spiritual platform.

古文：甲申，仪贤堂无故自坏。
现代文：甲申日，仪置堂无故塌坏。
English: On the first day of the year, the ceremonial hall collapsed for no reason.

古文：丙戌，临川太守骆文牙斩周迪，传首京师，枭于硃雀航。
现代文：丙戌日，堕皿太守坚塞亘斩了凰迪，把首级送到京城，挂在塞雀魃上示众。
English: On the day of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation.

古文：丁酉，太白昼见。
现代文：丁酉日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the day of Ding Xi, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：八月丁丑，诏曰： 梁室多故，祸乱相寻，兵甲纷纭，十年不解，不逞之徒虐流生气，无赖之属暴及徂魂。
现代文：八月丁丑日，下诏道： 梁朝多事，祸乱相连，战事纷纷，十年未停，不法之徒肆虐横行，无赖之辈残暴施及往日的幽魂。
English: In August, on Dingwuxi Day, the following edict was issued: The Liang Dynasty is full of events, disasters are interlinked, wars are rampant, and have not stopped for ten years. Outlaws are rampant, and the ghosts of the past have been inflicted by the brutality of scoundrels.

古文：江左肇基，王者攸宅，金行水位之主，木运火德之君，时更四代，岁逾二百。
现代文：江左自从开创帝王基业以来，君王所居，金德水德的人主，木德火德的国君，变更了四代，有二百多年。
English: Since Jiang Zuo founded the Imperial Foundation, there have been four generations, more than 200 years, of emperors, kings, kings, kings and queens.

古文：若其经纶王业，缙绅民望，忠臣孝子，何世无才，而零落山丘，变移陵谷，或皆剪伐，莫不侵残。
现代文：如果他们能经营帝王事业，德高望重的重臣，忠臣孝子，哪一世没有呢，却落得山丘零落，陵墓失了面目，有的树木都被砍伐了，没有不遭受侵犯残破的。
English: If they can manage the emperor's business, there is no such thing as a virtuous and respected senior vassal, loyal subject and filial son, but the hills have fallen apart, the mausoleum has lost its face, some trees have been cut down, and there is no one who has not been violated and broken.

古文：玉杯得于民间，漆简传于世载，无复五株之树，罕见千年之表。
现代文：墓中的玉杯竟流到民间，漆器简册也流到世上，陵上不再见到五棵以上的树，很少有千年石表保存。
English: The jade cup in the tomb actually flowed to the people, the lacquerware brochure also flowed to the world, more than five trees were no longer seen on the tomb, and few thousand-year stone tables were preserved.

古文：自大祚光启，恭惟揖让，爰暨朕躬，聿修祖武，虽复旂旗服色，犹行杞、宋之邦，每车驾巡游，眇瞻河、雒之路，故乔山之祀，蘋藻弗亏，骊山之坟，松柏恒守。
现代文：自我朝开基，谦恭揖让，传到我手中，发扬祖上的威武，虽然旗帜服色，仍是和杞、宋那样无名国家一样，每次车驾出巡，远望河、雒一带，原来的乔山的陵祠，草木未动，骊山的坟陵，松柏还在。
English: Although the flag has changed color, it is still the same as that of unknown countries such as the Song Dynasty and the Song Dynasty. Every time I drive out, I look at the rivers and riverside areas, the original Qiaoshan's mausoleum, the plants have not moved, the tombs of Lushan, and the pine trees are still there.

古文：唯戚籓旧垄，士子故茔，掩殣未周，樵牧犹众。
现代文：衹有外戚藩臣的旧墓，以及士族老坟，保存得不好，砍伐放牧的多。
English: There are old tombs of maternal relatives of the feudal lords, as well as old tombs of the warrior class, which are not well preserved, and there is a lot of cutting and grazing.

古文：或亲属流隶，负土无期，子孙冥灭，手植何寄。
现代文：或许是亲人流散，没有及时来添土，或是子孙绝减，谁来植树呢。
English: Perhaps it is because relatives have dispersed and have not been able to add soil in time, or because their descendants have dwindled. Who will plant the trees?

古文：汉高留连于无忌，宋祖惆怅于子房，丘墓生哀，性灵共恻者也。
现代文：漠高祖在无忌墓前徘徊，宋祖在子房坟前伤怀，望坟丘而生悲哀，是因为心裹有相似的忧伤。
English: Mogao Zu wandered in front of the tomb of Mu Mu, Song Zu grieved in front of the tomb of Zibo, and looked at the grave mound and was sad, because his heart was wrapped in similar sadness.

古文：朕所以兴言永日，思慰幽泉。
现代文：我之所以说了许多这样的话，是想安抚九泉下的幽魂。
English: I say a lot of things like that because I want to appease the ghosts of the past.

古文：维前代王侯，自古忠烈，坟冢被发绝无后者，可检行修治，墓中树木，勿得樵采，庶幽显咸畅，称朕意焉。 
现代文：凡是前代王侯，古来忠烈，坟墓被毁而没有后代的，可检视修理，墓地的树木，不能砍伐，这样才使幽魂安适，使我满意了。 
English: All the former princes, ancient and faithful, whose tombs were destroyed and have no descendants, can be inspected and repaired, and the trees in the cemetery cannot be cut down. This is the only way to make the ghosts comfortable and satisfy me.

古文：己卯，立皇子伯固为新安郡王，伯恭为晋安王，伯仁为庐陵王，伯义为江夏王。
现代文：己卯日，立皇子伯固为新安郡王，伯恭为晋安王，伯仁为庐陵王，伯义为江夏王。
English: On the same day, the emperor made Prince Baogu the king of Xin'an County, Baogong the king of Jin'an, Bo Ren the king of Fuling, and Bo Yi the king of Jiangxia.

古文：九月癸未，罢豫章郡。
现代文：九月癸未日，撤除豫章郡。
English: On the last day of September, Yuanzhang County was abolished.

古文：是月，新作大航。
现代文：同月，新造大航船。
English: In the same month, a newly built tall ship was launched.

古文：冬十月辛亥，齐遣使来聘。
现代文：冬十月辛亥日，齐派使者来通好。
English: In winter, October, Xinhai Day, Qi sent an emissary to Chongqing.

古文：十二月乙卯，立皇子伯礼为武陵王。
现代文：十二月乙卯日，立皇子伯礼为武陵王。
English: On the second day of December, Prince Bolei was proclaimed King of Wuling.

古文：丁巳，以镇前将军、开府仪同三司章昭达为镇南将军、江州刺史，镇南大将军、江州刺史黄法抃为中卫大将军，中护军程灵洗为宣毅将军、郢州刺史，军师将军、郢州刺史沈恪为中护军，镇东将军、吴兴太守吴明彻为中领军。
现代文：丁巳日，任镇前将军、开府仪同三司章昭达为镇南将军、江州刺史，任镇南大将军、江州刺史黄法毡为中卫大将军，任中护军程灵洗为宣毅将军、郢州刺史，任军师将军、郢州刺史沈恪为中护军，任镇束将军、吴兴太守吴明彻为中领军。
English: On the day of Ding Si, Zhenan general, Kaifu Yi and three divisional commanders Zhaoda were appointed as Zhenan general, Jiangzhou stabbing history, Zhenan general, Jiangzhou stabbing history Huang Fahui was appointed as Zhongwei general, Cheng Lingqi was appointed as Xuan Yi general, Zhangzhou stabbing history, military division general, Zhangzhou stabbing history Shen Ju as Zhongguo army, Zhenzhu general, Wu Xingtao Wu Mingche as Zhongguo army.

古文：戊午，以东中郎将、吴郡太守鄱阳王伯山为平北将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：戊午日，任束中郎将、吴郡太守鄱阳王伯山为平北将军、南徐州刺史。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the third month of the lunar calendar, Wang Bozhan, the general of North Pyongan Province and the governor of South Xuzhou Province, was appointed as the second-in-command of Zhaoyang and the governor of Wu County.

古文：癸亥，诏曰： 朕自居民牧之重，托在王公之上，顾其寡昧，郁于治道。
现代文：癸亥日，下韶道： 我自居国君重位，尊在王公之上，但是见识浅陋，不善治理。
English: On the Day of the Boar, the Lower Yangtze River: I consider myself to be the king of the country, and I am respected above the prince, but I have a shallow understanding and I am not good at governing.

古文：加以屡亏听览，事多壅积，冤滞靡申，幽枉弗鉴。念兹罪隶，有甚纳隍。
现代文：加上屡屡顾不上听政板奏章，事情堆积，冤情久久不能申明，枉屈不能明察，想到这些罪人，应拯救他们如救水火。
English: In addition, they often do not pay attention to listening to the play of the political board, things pile up, grievances can not be affirmed for a long time, and wrongs can not be seen. Thinking of these sinners, they should be saved like saving water and fire.

古文：而惠泽未流，愆阳累月，今岁序云暮，元正向肇，欲使幽圄之内，同被时和，可曲赦京师。 
现代文：但德泽未能润及，拖延了时日，现在年岁将尽，元旦将临，正想让监狱裹的人，都享受和阳时节，可特赦京城的罪犯。 
English: However, Deze failed to do so and delayed the time. Now the year is coming to an end and New Year's Day is approaching, he is trying to let those who are in prison enjoy the sunny season, and can pardon the criminals in Beijing.

古文：天康元年春二月丙子，诏曰： 朕以寡德，纂承洪绪，日昃劬劳，思弘景业，而政道多昧，黎庶未康，兼疹患淹时，亢阳累月，百姓何咎，实由朕躬，念兹在兹，痛如疾首。
现代文：玉尘元年春二月丙子曰，下诏道： 我凭薄德，继承大业，日夜操劳，想恢弘大业，但政治多不清明，百姓不安，加上长时间祸乱，连年累月，百姓何辜，实是我的过错，一想到这些，痛心疾首。
English: In the spring and February of the first year of the Jade and Dust era, Cixi said, "I rely on thin virtue, inherit a great cause, work day and night, and want to expand a great cause, but the politics are unclear, the people are uneasy, coupled with a long time of calamity, for years and years, the people are innocent, it's really my fault. When I think about these, my heart aches.

古文：可大赦天下，改天嘉七年为天康元年。
现代文：可大赦天下，改丢台七年为丢尘元年。 
English: However, the emperor pardoned the whole country and changed the seven years of losing Taiwan to the first year of losing dust.

古文：三月己卯，以骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史、司空安成王顼为尚书令。
现代文：三月己卯日，任骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史、司空安成王陈顼为尚书令。
English: On the first day of March, Chen Xi, who was appointed as the general of the cavalry, the third secretary of the Kaifu Rites and Decrees, the governor of Yangzhou, and the secretary of the Kuo Ancheng Wang, was appointed as the secretary.

古文：夏四月乙卯，皇孙至泽生，在位文武赐绢帛各有差，为父后者赐爵一级。
现代文：夏四月乙卯日，皇孙至泽诞生，在职的文武官员各有不等的赐赠，继承父业的赐爵一级。
English: On the 1st day of the 4th month of the summer, the emperor's grandson Zizawa was born, and the civil and military officials on duty each had different gifts, inheriting his father's first-class knighthood.

古文：癸酉，世祖疾甚。
现代文：癸酉日，世祖病重。
English: On the last day of the year, Sezu fell seriously ill.

古文：是日，崩于有觉殿。
现代文：同日，在有觉殿驾崩。
English: On the same day, he passed away at the Imperial Palace.

古文：遗诏曰： 朕疾苦弥留，遂至不救，修短有命，夫复何言。
现代文：遣韶写道： 我病情沉重，到了无救的程度，长短有命，有何话说。
English: He wrote: I am gravely ill, to the point of helplessness. I have a life expectancy, what can I say?

古文：但王业艰难，频岁军旅，生民多弊，无忘愧惕。
现代文：衹是王业艰难，连年战争，百姓多难，不忘谨慎。
English: It is a difficult king's career, a long-term war, and many difficulties for the people, so be careful.

古文：今方隅乃定，俗教未弘，便及大渐，以为遗恨。
现代文：现在国家安定，教化未行，就到了大限，很是遣憾。
English: Now that the country is stable, it is regrettable that enlightenment has not been carried out, and the country has reached its limit.

古文：社稷任重，太子可即君临，王侯将相，善相辅翊，内外协和，勿违朕意！
现代文：社稷重任，太子可立即登位，王侯将相，善加辅佐，内外协调，不要违背我的意思!
English: Social responsibility, the crown prince can immediately ascend the throne, the prince will be the prime minister, the prince will be the deputy prime minister, the prince will be the deputy prime minister, the prince will be the deputy prime minister, the prince will be the deputy prime minister, the prince will be the deputy prime minister, the prince will be the deputy prime minister, and the prince will be the deputy prime minister.

古文：山陵务存俭速。
现代文：坟陵务必要俭朴。
English: Cemetery affairs must be frugal.

古文：大敛竟，群臣三日一临，公除之制，率依旧典。 
现代文：大殓完毕，群臣三日一次临哭，公除制度，都依照旧的典例。 
English: After the grand banquet, the courtiers cried once every three days, and the public expulsion system was in accordance with the old example.

古文：六月甲子，群臣上谥曰文皇帝，庙号世祖。
现代文：六月甲子日，群臣上书请谧为文皇帝，庙号世祖。
English: On June 1st, a group of courtiers petitioned Emperor Wenwen, the founder of the temple.

古文：丙寅，葬永宁陵。
现代文：丙寅日，葬在永宁陵。
English: He was buried in Yongning Mausoleum.

古文：世祖起自艰难，知百姓疾苦。
现代文：世祖从艰难中发迹，了解百姓的疾苦。
English: The ancestors of the world made a fortune from the hardships and understood the sufferings of the people.

古文：国家资用，务从俭约。
现代文：国家的用费，定依俭约的原则。
English: The expenses of the state shall be determined in accordance with the principle of frugality.

古文：常所调敛，事不获已者，必咨嗟改色，若在诸身。
现代文：平常征调赋役这些事，事情如果没能办好的，他定会嗟叹失色，好像自身的事一样。
English: If things don't work out, he's bound to lose his temper, as if it were his own business.

古文：主者奏决，妙识真伪，下不容奸，人知自励矣。
现代文：主持奏表的裁决，善辨真假，不容臣下奸巧，使得人人知道自励。
English: He presided over the ruling of the report card, was good at distinguishing between truth and falsehood, and did not tolerate the treachery of his subordinates, so that everyone knew how to encourage themselves.

古文：一夜内刺闺取外事分判者，前后相续。
现代文：每一夜投报内宫有政务要处理的，前后相接。
English: Every night, there are government affairs to be dealt with in the Inner Court.

古文：每鸡人伺漏，传更签于殿中，乃敕送者必投签于阶石之上，令枪然有声，云 吾虽眠，亦令惊觉也 。
现代文：每当伺时的人送更签到殿内，就吩咐送签人把签扔到石阶上，让签发出声响，说： 我即使睡着了，也要让我惊醒。 
English: Whenever the watchman brought the signature to the hall, he ordered the bearer to throw the signature on the stone steps, so that the signature would make a noise, saying: "Even if I fall asleep, I want to be woken up."

古文：始终梗概，若此者多焉。
现代文：始终是这样。类似的事很多。
English: It's always like that. There are a lot of things like that.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：世称继体守文，宗枝承统，得失之间，盖亦祥矣。
现代文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：世上流传的继承守业，宗族枝脉承位，得失的事，也算详细的了。
English: Chen Li Bu Shangshu Yao said: The world's popular inheritance and career, family lineage and succession, gain and loss, are also detailed.

古文：大抵以奉而勿坠为贤能，挠而易之为不肖；其有光扬前轨，克荷曾构，固以少焉。
现代文：大多以承接而不坠声名的视为贤能，承位而改政的视为不肖；那些能使前王事业发扬光大的，能扩大基业的，原本就少。
English: For the most part, those who succeed to the throne without losing their reputation are considered to be virtuous, while those who succeed to the throne and change the government are considered to be shady; those who can carry forward the cause of the former king and expand the foundation are originally few.

古文：世祖自初发迹，功庸显著，宁乱静寇，首佐大业。
现代文：世祖自从当初发迹，功劳显赫，平定寇乱，辅佐大业。
English: From the very beginning, the founder of the world has made great achievements, made outstanding contributions, quelled the rebellion, and assisted the great cause.

古文：及国祸奄臻，入承宝祚，兢兢业业，其若驭朽，加以崇尚儒术，爱悦文义，见善如弗及，用人如由己，恭俭以御身，勤劳以济物，自昔允文允武之君，东征西怨之后，宾实之迹，可为联类。
现代文：等到国家突生祸患，入承实位，兢兢业业，就像用朽绳驭马一样小心。加上崇尚儒术，重视文治，见善行就怕做不到，任用人就像用自己，以恭俭要求自己，以勤劳对待外物。自古又文又武的君王，柬征西讨的入主，他们的声名与事功，可算是一类的人。
English: When a national calamity suddenly occurs, he will assume a real position and work diligently, just as careful as riding a horse with a rotten rope. In addition to advocating Confucianism and attaching importance to literature and politics, he is afraid that he will not be able to do good deeds, and the appointees are like using themselves, demanding themselves with frugality, and treating foreign objects with diligence. The kings who were literate and martial since ancient times, and those who conquered the West by conquering Cambodia, their reputation and achievements can be considered to be the same kind of people.

古文：至于杖聪明，用鉴识，斯则永平之政，前史其论诸。
现代文：至于说到依靠聪明，运用鉴识，这是永平的政治，前史中自有论述。
English: As for relying on wisdom and using discernment, this is the politics of Yongping, which has its own discussion in prehistory.

