古文：《左传》书晋惠公背秦穆公事曰： 晋侯之入也，秦穆姬属贾君焉，且曰，尽纳群公子。晋侯烝于贾君，又不纳群公子，是以穆姬怨之；晋侯许赂中大夫，既而皆背之；赂秦伯以河外列城五，东尽虢略，南及华山，内及解梁城，既而不与：晋饥，秦输之粟，秦饥，晋闭之籴。
现代文：《左传》在写到晋惠公背弃秦穆公一事的时候说： 晋惠公要回晋国的时候，秦穆公把帮助惠公归国的事托附于贾君，并且说：要让各位公子都回晋国，可是晋惠公后来对贾君也不好，又不让群公子归国，因此，秦穆公已有怨恨；晋惠公曾许诺中大夫里克，事成后，把汾阳一带给他为封地，后来也背弃了诺言；回国前他曾答应秦穆公，一旦在秦的帮助下得到王位。
English: "Zo Zhuan" wrote about the betrayal of Qin Mu Gong by Jin Huigong: "When Jin Huigong wanted to return to Jin, Qin Mu Gong entrusted the matter of helping Huigong return to the country to Jia Jun. He also said that he wanted all the princes to return to Jin. However, Jin Huigong later treated Jia Jun badly and did not allow a group of princes to return to the country. Therefore, Qin Mu Gong already had a grudge. Jin Huigong had promised Dr. Li Ke, and after the matter was settled, he gave him the area around Shenyang as a fiefdom. Later, he also reneged on his promise

古文：故秦伯伐晋。 观此一节，正如狱吏治囚，蔽罪议法，而皋陶听之，何所伏窜，不待韩原之战，其曲直胜负之形见矣。
现代文：要把黄河以南的王城割给秦国，东面包括国的大部分，南边到了华山，黄河以北包括了解梁城，可是后来又不给；晋国遭到了饥荒，秦国给送去了粮食，可秦国遇到饥荒的时候，晋国则把买进来的粮食也封存起来由于这些原因、秦国的国王才去讨伐晋国。 看了这段叙述，真如法官审判犯人，以罪绳之以法，想逃遁是办不到的，就是古代最贤明的执法官皋陶听了，也会服气的。
English: It was necessary to cede Wangcheng south of the Yellow River to Qin, Cangzhou to the east included most of the country, the south reached Huashan, and the north of the Yellow River included Liangcheng, but later it was not given; Jin suffered a famine, Qin sent grain, but when Qin encountered a famine, Jin also sealed the grain it had bought. For these reasons, the king of Qin went to fight against Jin. After reading this account, it is true that if a judge judges a prisoner and brings him to justice for a crime, it is impossible to escape, even if the wisest law enforcement officer in ancient times, Xiang Tao, listened,

古文：晋历公绝秦，数其五罪，书词铿訇，极文章鼓吹之妙，然其实皆诬秦。
现代文：不必等到秦晋两国的韩原大战，其间的是非曲直也就一目了然了。晋厉公与秦断交时，曾罗列秦的五条罪状，言词铿锵有方，极尽其夸张美饰之能卒，但其中的事实却全是编造的。
English: You don't have to wait until the Han and Yuan War between the two countries of Qin and Jin for the rights and wrongs to be clear at a glance. When Jin Liguo broke off diplomatic relations with Qin, he had listed Qin's five crimes. His words were eloquent and he did his best to exaggerate and embellish, but the facts were all fabricated.

古文：故《传》又书云： 秦桓公既与晋厉公为令狐之盟，而又召狄与楚，欲道以伐晋。 
现代文：于是《左传》写道： 秦桓公已经与晋厉公订立了令级之盟，仍然要与北方，的狄人和南方的楚国商议讨伐晋国的事。 
English: As a result, "Zo Zhuan" wrote: Qin Huan Gong had already concluded an order-level alliance with Jin Li Gong, but he still had to discuss the matter of fighting Jin Guo with the northern Di people and the southern Chu people.

古文：杜元凯注云： 据此三事，以正秦罪。 
现代文：对于上面这些记载，杜元凯加的注是 根据上述的三桩事实，就可以认定秦国伐晋并无罪过。 
English: Regarding the above records, Du Yuankaiga's note is that based on the above three facts, it can be determined that Qin Guowajin was not guilty.

古文：左氏于文，反复低昂，无所不究其至。
现代文：左丘明在《左传》中的文章真是有起有伏，但没有一件事不是追根求源，以事实证其是非的。
English: Zuo Qiuming's articles in "Zo Zhuan" really have their ups and downs, but there is not a single thing that is not rooted in the source and proven by facts.

古文：观秦、晋争战二事，可窥一斑矣。
现代文：这只要看看上面叙述的关于秦、晋之间的这两次战事，也就可以见其一斑了。
English: One only has to look at the two wars between Qin and Jin, described above, to see this.

