古文：太宗威容俨肃，百僚进见者，皆失其举措。
现代文：唐太宗容貌威武严肃，百官中觐见的人，见到他都会紧张得举止失常不知所措。
English: Tang Taizong's appearance was dignified and stern. Among the hundreds of officials who met him, those who saw him would be so nervous that they would lose their composure.

古文：太宗知其若此，每见人奏事，必假颜色，冀闻谏诤，知政教得失。
现代文：太宗知道情况后，每当见到有人奏事时，总是做出和颜悦色的样子，希望能够听到谏诤，知道政治教化的得失。
English: Taizong knew the situation, whenever he saw someone playing an instrument, he always made a pleasant appearance, hoping to hear the gong and know the pros and cons of political education.

古文：贞观初，尝谓公卿曰： 人欲自照，必须明镜；主欲知过，必藉忠臣。
现代文：贞观初年，太宗曾对公卿们说： 人要照见自己，一定要有明镜；一国之主要想知道自己的过失，一定要借助于忠臣。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong once said to the nobles: "If you want to see yourself, you must have a clear mirror; if you want to know your own faults, you must rely on loyal subjects."

古文：主若自贤，臣不匡正，欲不危败，岂可得乎？
现代文：君主假如自以为圣明，臣下又不去纠正，要想国家不倾危败亡，能办得到吗？
English: If the monarch thinks he is a saint, but his subjects do not correct him, can the country survive?

古文：故君失其国，臣亦不能独全其家。
现代文：于是君主失掉他的国，臣下也不能独自保全他的家。
English: As a result, the sovereign lost his country, and his vassals could not protect his house on their own.

古文：至于隋炀帝暴虐，臣下钳口，卒令不闻其过，遂至灭亡，虞世基等，寻亦诛死。
现代文：至于像隋炀帝残暴淫虐，臣下都把嘴闭起来不讲话，最后终于因为听不到自己的过失而导致灭亡，虞世基等人不久也被诛杀。
English: As for the brutality and cruelty of the Sui and Qian dynasties, their subjects shut their mouths and did not speak, and finally, because they could not hear their own mistakes, they were destroyed, and Yu Shiji and others were soon killed.

古文：前事不远，公等每看事有不利于人，必须极言规谏。 
现代文：前事不远，你们今后每当看到事情有不利于百姓的，必须直言规劝谏诤。 
English: The past is not far away. In the future, whenever you see things that are unfavorable to the people, you must speak out and persuade them.

古文：贞观元年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 正主任邪臣，不能致理；正臣事邪主，亦不能致理。
现代文：贞观元年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 正直的君主任用了奸臣，就不可能治理好国家；忠直的臣子侍奉昏庸的君主，也不可能治理好国家。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to the ministers who served him: "An honest monarch cannot govern a country well if he uses treacherous vassals; a loyal vassal cannot govern a country well if he serves a dull monarch."

古文：惟君臣相遇，有同鱼水，则海内可安。
现代文：只有正直的君主和忠直的大臣相处共事，如鱼得水，那么天下才可以平安无事。
English: Only if an honest monarch and a loyal minister get along and work together, like a fish gets water, then the world can be safe.

古文：朕虽不明，幸诸公数相匡救，冀凭直言鲠议，致天下太平。 
现代文：我虽然不算明君，幸亏你们多次匡正补救过失，希望凭借你们直言鲠议，以实现天下太平。 
English: Although I am not a Mingjun, thanks to your many times rectifying and remedying faults, I hope to rely on your forthright discussion to achieve world peace.

古文：谏议大夫王珪对曰： 臣闻，木从绳则正，后从谏则圣。
现代文：谏议大夫王珪回答说： 我听说木材弹上墨线就能锯得笔直，君主听从规谏就能成为圣明。
English: Wang Yao, the doctor of deliberation, replied, "I have heard that wood can be sawn straight with an ink line, and that a monarch can become a saint if he obeys the rules.

古文：是故古者圣主必有争臣七人，言而不用，则相继以死。
现代文：所以古代圣明的君主必须设诤臣七人，说的话如不被接受，就一个接一个地以死相谏。
English: Therefore, the ancient sacred ruler must have seven vassals, and if his words are not accepted, they will die one by one.

古文：陛下开圣虑，纳刍荛，愚臣处不讳之朝，实愿罄其狂瞽。 
现代文：陛下开拓思路，采纳臣民忠言，我等处在不避忌讳的圣朝，实在愿意把愚昧之见都讲出来。 
English: Your Majesty, open up your thoughts and accept the loyal advice of your subjects. We, who are in the holy land where there is no taboo, are truly willing to speak out about our foolish opinions.

古文：太宗称善，诏令自是宰相入内平章国计，必使谏官随入，预闻政事。有所开说，必虚己纳之。
现代文：太宗称赞他说得好，下诏规定今后宰相入宫商量处理国家大事，必须让谏官跟着进来，听一听如何处理，有话敞开说，皇上一定虚心采纳。
English: Emperor Taizong praised him for speaking well. The following edict stipulated that in the future, the prime minister would enter the palace to discuss the handling of national affairs, and eunuchs must be allowed to follow, listen to how to deal with them, and speak openly if they have something to say. The emperor must humbly accept it.

古文：贞观二年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 明主思短而益善，暗主护短而永愚。
现代文：贞观二年，唐太宗对侍臣说： 明智的君主能时时反省自己的过失，并且不断加以改进，然而昏庸的君主总是力图掩饰自己的短处，蒙蔽视听。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his attendant: A wise monarch can always reflect on his mistakes and constantly improve them, but a dull monarch always tries to cover up his shortcomings and deceive the public.

古文：隋炀帝好自矜夸，护短拒谏，诚亦实难犯忤。
现代文：像隋炀帝，他自以为是，对自己的缺点视而不见，又拒绝别人的意见，这样就再也没有人敢于直言不讳了。
English: Like Emperor Sui, he is self-righteous, blind to his own shortcomings, and rejects the opinions of others, so that no one dares to speak out.

古文：虞世基不敢直言，或恐未为深罪。
现代文：大臣虞世基不敢直言，或许这算不上什么大罪过。
English: Minister Yu Shiji does not dare to speak out, perhaps this is not a great sin.

古文：昔箕子佯狂自全，孔子亦称其仁。
现代文：商代的时候，箕子假装发疯来保全自己，孔子还评价他仁义。
English: During the Shang Dynasty, Zangzi pretended to be mad to save himself, and Confucius also praised him for his benevolence.

古文：及炀帝被杀，世基合同死否？ 
现代文：后来隋炀帝被杀，虞世基难道就该一同去死吗？ 
English: Later, when Emperor Sui and Qian were killed, should Yu Shiji have died with them?

古文：杜如晦对曰： 天子有诤臣，虽无道，不失其天下。
现代文：杜如晦说： 君主身边有敢于直言的大臣辅佐，虽然自己治国无道，也不会失去天下。
English: Du Rugao said: The monarch is surrounded by ministers and assistants who dare to speak out, and although they have no way to govern the country, they will not lose the world.

古文：仲尼称： 直哉史鱼，邦有道如矢，邦无道如矢。 
现代文：孔子曾经赞扬过忠臣史鱼，说： 卫国的大夫史鱼真耿直啊，国家有道义的时候他直言进谏，国家失去道义了，他还以死相谏。 
English: Confucius once praised the loyal retainer Shi Yu, saying, "The doctor of national defense, Shi Yu, is truly honest. When the country had moral principles, he spoke frankly. When the country lost its moral principles, he was ready to die."

古文：世基岂得以炀帝无道，不纳谏诤，遂杜口无言？
现代文：虞世基怎么能因为隋炀帝无道，不接受忠言，就闭口不提意见呢。
English: How could Yu Shiji keep his mouth shut and not offer any advice because Emperor Sui and Qian had no way out and did not accept loyal advice?

古文：偷安重位，又不能辞职请退，则与箕子佯狂而去，事理不同。
现代文：他身居要职，却苟且偷生，不肯辞官隐退，这和箕子装疯离去，是不能相提并论的。
English: He holds an important position, but he is determined to steal a living. He does not want to resign from his post and go into seclusion. This cannot be compared to the lame man who pretends to be mad and leaves.

古文：昔晋惠帝贾后将废愍怀太子，司空张华竟不能苦争，阿意苟免。
现代文：过去晋惠帝的皇后贾后要废掉愍怀太子，司空张华非但不据理力争，反而阿谀顺应贾后，苟全性命。
English: In the past, Empress Jia Hou, the Empress of Emperor Jinhui, wanted to depose Empress Dowager Jia Huai, but Empress Dowager Zhang Hua, the Empress Dowager of the State of Jia Hui, not only fought against it, but also obeyed Empress Jia Hou and spared her life.

古文：及赵王伦举兵废后，遣使收华，华曰： 将废太子日，非是无言，当时不被纳用。 
现代文：直到赵王伦起兵废掉贾后，派使者捉拿张华时，张华说： 贾后废太子的时候，我不是不想阻止，只是怕贾后不会采纳我的意见。 
English: Until Zhao Wanglun raised an army to depose Jia Hou and sent an envoy to capture Zhang Hua, Zhang Hua said: When Jia Hou deposed the crown prince, I did not want to stop him, but I was afraid that Jia Hou would not accept my opinion.

古文：其使曰： 公为三公，太子无罪被废，言既不从，何不引身而退？ 
现代文：使者说： 太子没有罪却被废掉，你贵为三公，怎么不站出来说话？
English: The messenger said, "The crown prince has not committed any crime, but he has been dethroned. You are one of the three princes, why don't you speak up?

古文：华无辞以答，遂斩之，夷其三族。
现代文：即使你的意见不被接受，你又为什么不辞退归隐呢？ 张华无言以对，于是他被斩杀，株连三族。
English: Even if your opinion is not accepted, why don't you resign and go into seclusion? Zhang Hua was speechless, so he was beheaded, along with the three clans.

古文：古人有云： 危而不持，颠而不扶，则将焉用彼相？ 
现代文：古人说得好： 危难却不扶持，倾倒却不支撑，用这样的宰相有什么用呢？ 
English: The ancients said it well: What is the use of such a prime minister if he does not support you when you are in danger, and does not support you when you are down and out?

古文：故 君子临大节而不可夺也。 
现代文：所以君子虽然面临危难却依然能坚守节操。
English: Therefore, although the gentleman is facing danger, he can still adhere to the discipline.

古文：张华既抗直不能成节，逊言不足全身，王臣之节固已坠矣。
现代文：身居高位的张华既然不能成全自己的节操，而保全自己的性命，君臣之间的正常关系已经不复存在。
English: Since Zhang Hua, who held a high position, was unable to fulfill his duty and save his own life, the normal relationship between monarch and vassal ceased to exist.

古文：虞世基位居宰辅，在得言之地，竟无一言谏诤，诚亦合死。 
现代文：同样虞世基身为宰相，在该进言的时候却保持沉默，他的确该死啊！ 
English: Similarly, Yu Shiji, as prime minister, remained silent when he should have spoken. He really deserved to die!

古文：太宗曰： 公言是也。
现代文：唐太宗听后很赞同杜如晦的观点，说： 你说得对。
English: After listening, Tang Taizong agreed with Du Ruzhuang's view and said: You are right.

古文：人君必须忠良辅弼，乃得身安国宁。
现代文：君主必须有忠臣辅佐，才能够自身平安，国家太平。
English: The monarch must be assisted by loyal subjects in order to keep himself and the country in peace.

古文：炀帝岂不以下无忠臣，身不闻过，恶积祸盈，灭亡斯及！
现代文：隋炀帝难道不是因为身边没有忠臣，看不到自己的过失，才使得罪恶和灾祸越来越大而导致灭亡的吗？
English: Wasn't it because there were no loyal subjects around him and he couldn't see his own faults that Emperor Sui and Qian became more and more evil and disastrous, leading to his downfall?

古文：若人主所行不当，臣下又无匡谏，苟在阿顺，事皆称美，则君为暗主，臣为谀臣，君暗臣谀，危亡不远。
现代文：如果国君行为不当，臣下又不尽职，只知道阿谀奉承，苟全性命，凡事只知道说好，那么这样的君主就是昏庸的君主，臣子就是阿谀的臣子。君主昏庸，臣子阿谀，那么距离国家的灭亡就为期不远了。
English: If the sovereign behaves inappropriately, if his subjects do not perform their duties, if they only know how to flatter, if they only know how to live a virtuous life, and if they only know how to say yes to everything, then such a monarch is a dull monarch, and his vassals are dull vassals. If the monarch is dull, and his vassals are dull vassals, then the country's demise is not far off.

古文：朕今志在君臣上下，各尽至公，共相切磋，以成治道。
现代文：现在我要使朝廷君臣上下，恪尽职守，戮力同心，共同成就一番功业。
English: Now, I would like to encourage all the courtiers and officials of the imperial court to fulfill their duties, work together with one heart, and jointly accomplish the most meritorious deeds.

古文：公等各宜务尽忠谠，匡救朕恶，终不以直言忤意，辄相责怒。 
现代文：你们一定要尽到自己的责任，及时地指出并纠正我的过失，我们君臣之间切不可因为开诚布公，指出彼此的过错而相互误会和怨恨。 
English: You must do your duty to point out and correct my mistakes in a timely manner. There must be no misunderstanding or resentment between us princes and ministers because we are open and honest and point out each other's mistakes.

古文：贞观三年，太宗谓司空裴寂曰： 比有上书奏事，条数甚多，朕总粘之屋壁，出入观省。
现代文：贞观三年，唐太宗对司空裴寂说： 近来有人上书奏事，条数很多，我都贴到卧室的墙壁上，出入时看看想想。
English: In the third year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Siku Peijia: Recently, there have been a lot of people who have written reports, and I have posted them on the walls of my bedroom. Think about it when you go out.

古文：所以孜孜不倦者，欲尽臣下之情。
现代文：之所以要这么孜孜不倦，是想把臣下的想法都弄清楚。
English: The reason why I have to be so tireless is that I want to clarify the thoughts of my subjects.

古文：每一思政理，或三更方寝。
现代文：我每当一想到治国大事，有时要到三更以后才睡觉。
English: Whenever I think about the important matters of governing the country, I sometimes can't sleep until after 3 a.m.

古文：亦望公辈用心不倦，以副朕怀也。 
现代文：我也希望你们用心不倦，以符合我的心意。 
English: And I hope that you will not grow weary in your zeal to do what is right in my sight.

古文：贞观五年，太宗谓房玄龄等曰： 自古帝王多任情喜怒，喜则滥赏无功，怒则滥杀无罪。
现代文：贞观五年，唐太宗对房玄龄等人说： 自古以来，帝王大都由着自己的性子高兴或发怒。
English: In the fifth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Fang Xuanling and others: Since ancient times, emperors have mostly been pleased or angered by their own disposition.

古文：是以天下丧乱，莫不由此。
现代文：高兴的时候就胡乱赏赐，功过不分；发怒时就任意杀戮，是非不明。
English: When they are happy, they reward people indiscriminately, regardless of merit; when they are angry, they kill arbitrarily, and the rights and wrongs are unknown.

古文：朕今夙夜未尝不以此为心，恒欲公等尽情极谏。
现代文：天下大乱，一般都是因为肆意妄为造成的。因此我非常警觉，无论白天黑夜，无不铭刻在心，希望各位大臣永远都能够对我的缺点大胆地提出批评。
English: The world's turmoil is generally caused by wanton acts. Therefore, I am very alert, and no matter day or night, I will always keep it in my heart. I hope that ministers will always be able to boldly criticize my shortcomings.

古文：公等亦须受人谏语，岂得以人言不同己意，便即护短不纳？
现代文：同时，你们也应当接受别人的批评意见。切不可因为别人的意见和自己不一致就不承认、不采纳。
English: At the same time, you should also accept the criticisms of others. You must not deny or reject the opinions of others because they are not in line with your own.

古文：若不能受谏，安能谏人？ 
现代文：如果一个人不接受别人的批评，那他又怎么能去批评别人呢？ 
English: If a person does not accept criticism from others, then how can he criticize others?

古文：贞观六年，太宗以御史大夫韦挺、中书侍郎杜正伦、秘书少监虞世南、著作郎姚思廉等上封事称旨，召而谓曰： 朕历观自古人臣立忠之事，若值明主，便宜尽诚规谏，至如龙逄、比干，不免孥戮。
现代文：贞观六年，唐太宗因为御史大夫韦挺、中书侍郎杜正伦、秘书少监虞世南、著作郎姚思廉等人所奏的事很合心意，召见时对他们说： 我曾把从古以来臣子尽忠的事迹一一看过，如果遇到圣明的君主，自然就能够诚心规谏，但如像关龙逢、比干那样的处境，就不免身遭杀戮株连家人。
English: In the sixth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to them when he summoned them, "I have seen the deeds of loyal retainers from ancient times one by one. If I meet a saintly monarch, I will naturally be able to rule with sincerity, but if I am in a situation like Guanlong and Bi Gan, I will inevitably be killed by Zhu Lian's family.

古文：为君不易，为臣极难。
现代文：做君主不容易，做臣子也难。
English: It is not easy to be a monarch, and it is not easy to be a vassal.

古文：朕又闻龙可扰而驯，然喉下有逆鳞。
现代文：我又听说龙可以驯养得听话，但喉下有逆鳞。
English: I've also heard that dragons can be tamed to be obedient, but they have inverse scales under their throats.

古文：卿等遂不避犯触，各进封事。
现代文：你们就敢于犯逆鳞，各自进上奏书。
English: You have dared to go against the grain, and each of you has advanced to the recital.

古文：常能如此，朕岂虑宗社之倾败！
现代文：常能这样，我难道还怕宗庙社稷会倾覆！
English: How often can I do this, am I still afraid that the patriarchal society will be overthrown!

古文：每思卿等此意，不能暂忘，故设宴为乐。 
现代文：每想到你们一片忠心，一刻也不能忘怀，所以设宴共享欢乐。 
English: Every time I think of your loyalty, I can't forget it for a moment, so I'm throwing a party to share the joy.

古文：仍赐绢有差。
现代文：还给每人赏赐了数量不等的绢。
English: Each person was also rewarded with varying amounts of money.

古文：太常卿韦挺尝上疏陈得失，太宗赐书曰： 所上意见，极是谠言，辞理可观，甚以为慰。
现代文：太常卿韦挺曾经上书唐太宗，指出他治理国家的功劳与过失。太宗写了一道诏书送给他说： 你所呈上的意见极其珍贵，里面的言辞和道理都值得称道，我对此感到十分欣慰。
English: Taizong wrote a message to Tang Taizong, pointing out the merits and demerits of his governance of the country. Taizong wrote an edict and sent it to him: Your opinion is extremely precious. The words and reason in it are praiseworthy. I am very pleased about this.

古文：昔齐境之难，夷吾有射钩之罪，蒲城之役，勃鞮为斩袂之仇，而小白不以为疑，重耳待之若旧。
现代文：春秋时齐国发生内乱，管仲的箭曾射中齐桓公；晋国蒲城的争斗，勃鞮曾用剑斩断晋文公的衣袖。但齐桓公重用管仲，没有猜疑；晋文公对待勃鞮仍一视同仁，没有什么差别。
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, there was a civil war in the State of Qi, and the arrow shot by Guanzhong hit King Qi Huan; in the battle of Putian in the State of Jin, Burgundy once cut off the sleeve of King Jinwen with a sword. However, King Qi Huan used Guanzhong again and again, and there was no suspicion; King Jinwen still treated Burgundy as an equal, and there was no difference.

古文：岂非各吠非主，志在无二。
现代文：这是臣子心怀坦诚，为他们的君主效劳。你的忠诚，从行文中就可以看出来。
English: This is the heart of a courtier, serving their sovereign with sincerity. Your loyalty can be seen in your writing.

古文：卿之深诚，见于斯矣。若能克全此节，则永保令名。
现代文：如果你能一直像这样实事求是，刚正不阿，那么你的好名声就可以永远保全了。
English: If you can always be as matter-of-fact and forthright as that, then your good name can be preserved forever.

古文：如其怠之，可不惜也。
现代文：如果你在这方面懈怠了，那是多么可惜呀。
English: It would be a shame if you slacked off in this area.

古文：勉励终始，垂范将来，当使后之视今，亦犹今之视古，不亦美乎？
现代文：我希望你能自始至终地做后人的表率。这可以使后来的人看今天所发生的事情，就像今天的人看古代所发生的事一样，这难道不是很好吗？
English: I hope you can be a role model for future generations from beginning to end. This can make future generations look at what is happening today, just as today's people look at what happened in ancient times. Isn't that great?

古文：朕比不闻其过，未睹其阙，赖竭忠恳，数进嘉言，用沃朕怀，一何可道！ 
现代文：我过去没有听说过我所犯下了哪些过错，也没看见我所做过的一切事中存在哪些缺陷，这些功绩都是依靠你们这些忠信、诚实的人的结果。你们不断地提出一些很好的建议，用来告诫提醒我，丰富我治国的思想，如果仅仅依靠我个人的能力，哪里值得一提呢！ 
English: In the past, I have not heard about the mistakes I have made, nor have I seen the shortcomings in everything I have done. These achievements are the result of relying on you, loyal and honest people. You have constantly put forward some good suggestions to caution me, remind me, enrich my thought of governing the country. If I only rely on my personal ability, what is worth mentioning?

古文：贞观八年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 朕每闲居静坐，则自内省，恒恐上不称天心，下为百姓所怨。
现代文：贞观八年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 我每当无事静坐，就自我反省。常常害怕对上不能使上天称心如意，对下被百姓所怨恨。
English: In the eighth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his attendant ministers: Whenever I meditate on nothing, I self-reflect. I am often afraid of not being able to make Heaven pleased, and of being resented by the people.

古文：但思正人匡谏，欲令耳目外通，下无怨滞。
现代文：只想得到正直忠诚的人匡救劝谏，好让我的视听能和外边相通，使下面没有积怨。
English: I just want to get honest and loyal people to help and advise me, so that my audio-visual can communicate with the outside world, so that there is no resentment below.

古文：又比见人来奏事者，多有怖慑，言语致失次第。
现代文：此外近来见到来奏事的人，常显得心怀恐惧，连讲话也变得语无伦次。
English: In addition, people who have recently come to report incidents often appear fearful, and even their speech has become incoherent.

古文：寻常奏事，情犹如此，况欲谏诤，必当畏犯逆鳞。
现代文：平时奏事，情况尚且如此，何况要折面谏诤，必然害怕触犯逆鳞。
English: In normal times, the situation is still the same, not to mention that it is necessary to fold the face, inevitably afraid of offending the inverse scale.

古文：所以每有谏者，纵不合朕心，朕亦不以为忤。
现代文：所以每当有人谏诤时，纵然不合我的心意，我也不见怪。
English: So I'm not surprised when someone criticizes me, even if it's not what I want.

古文：若即嗔责，深恐人怀战惧，岂肯更言！ 
现代文：假如立刻发怒斥责，恐怕人人心怀恐惧，岂敢再说话！ 
English: If the angry reprimand came at once, I'm afraid everyone would recoil in horror and not dare to speak again!

古文：贞观十五年，太宗问魏征曰： 比来朝臣都不论事，何也？ 
现代文：贞观十五年，唐太宗问魏徵： 近来朝臣都不议论政事，这是为什么？ 
English: In the 15th year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong asked Wei Zheng: Recently, courtiers do not talk about politics, why is that?

古文：征对曰： 陛下虚心采纳，诚宜有言者。
现代文：魏徵回答说： 陛下虚心纳谏，本来应当有话说。
English: Wei Zheng replied, "Your Majesty humbly accepted the invitation. You should have said something."

古文：然古人云： 未信而谏，则以为谤己；信而不谏，则谓之尸禄。 
现代文：然而古人说过： 不被信任的人劝谏，会被认为是毁谤自己；已被信任而不劝谏，就叫做尸禄。 
English: However, the ancients said: Those who are not trusted to persuade others will be considered to have slandered themselves; those who are trusted but do not persuade others are called corpse.

古文：但人之才器各有不同，懦弱之人，怀忠直而不能言；疏远之人，恐不信而不得言；怀禄之人，虑不便身而不敢言。
现代文：但是人的才能气度，各有不同：胆小怕事的人，心存忠直而不能进谏；被疏远的人，怕不信任而无法进谏；贪恋禄位的人，怕不利于自身而不敢进谏。
English: However, people's talents and demeanors are different: timid and fearful people, loyal and upright, cannot enter the kingdom; alienated people, afraid of distrust, cannot enter the kingdom; greedy people, afraid of being unfavorable to themselves, do not dare to enter the kingdom.

古文：所以相与缄默，俯仰过日。 
现代文：所以大家沉默不言，应付着混日子。 
English: So everyone is silent, coping with a chaotic life.

古文：太宗曰： 诚如卿言。
现代文：太宗说： 这些现象确实像你所说。
English: Tang Taizong said: Just as you said.

古文：朕每思之，人臣欲谏，辄惧死亡之祸，与夫赴鼎镬、冒白刃，亦何异哉？
现代文：我常想，人臣要劝谏，动辄害怕有死亡之祸，这和赴鼎镬被烹杀、冒刀剑被斩杀又有什么两样？
English: I've often thought, what's the difference between being advised by a minister and being afraid of death, and being boiled to death and beheaded with a fake sword?

古文：故忠贞之臣，非不欲竭诚。竭诚者，乃是极难。
现代文：因此忠贞的臣子，并非不想竭尽忠诚，竭尽忠诚实在太难了。
English: Therefore, a loyal vassal does not want to be loyal to the end. It is too difficult to be loyal to the end.

古文：所以禹拜昌言，岂不为此也！
现代文：所以夏禹听了好的意见要拜谢，岂不就是因为这个缘故。
English: So Xia Yu listened to the good advice and wanted to say thanks, isn't it because of this.

古文：朕今开怀抱，纳谏诤。卿等无劳怖惧，遂不极言。 
现代文：我如今敞开胸怀，接受谏诤，你们无须因为害怕而不敢把想说的话说出口。 
English: I open my heart to you now, and you don't have to be afraid to say what you want to say.

古文：贞观十六年，太宗谓房玄龄等曰： 自知者明，信为难矣。
现代文：贞观十六年，唐太宗对房玄龄等人说： 能正确对待自己的人是明智的，但要做到实在困难。
English: In the 16th year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Fang Xuanling and others: People who can treat themselves correctly are wise, but it is really difficult to do so.

古文：如属文之士，伎巧之徒，皆自谓己长，他人不及。
现代文：这像会写作的文士、有技巧的工匠，都自夸自己有本领，别人比不上。
English: It's like scribes and skilled craftsmen who can write, boasting of their skills that no one else can match.

古文：若名工文匠，商略诋诃，芜词拙迹，于是乃见。
现代文：如果遇上著名的文士、工匠来评量指责，杂乱无章的文辞和拙劣的技艺就会显现出来。
English: If famous scribes and craftsmen are brought in to weigh in on the criticism, the disorganized language and poor craftsmanship will be exposed.

古文：由是言之，人君须得匡谏之臣，举其愆过。
现代文：这样说来，君主须有匡救谏诤的臣子，来指出过错。
English: Thus, it is necessary for the sovereign to have courtiers who can point out faults.

古文：一日万机，一人听断，虽复忧劳，安能尽善？
现代文：每天有成千上万的事情，若单靠一个人来了解判断，即使再辛苦劳累，怎能把每件事都处理得尽善尽美呢？
English: There are thousands of things every day. If only one person understands the judgment, even if he is overworked, how can he handle everything perfectly?

古文：常念魏征随事谏正，多中朕失，如明镜鉴形，美恶必见。 
现代文：我常想念魏徵遇到问题时随事谏诤匡正，多次切中我的过失，这好像用明镜来照形体，美与丑都会显现出来。 
English: I often think of Wei Zheng when I encounter problems, I will correct myself and correct my mistakes many times. It is like using a mirror to reflect the body, beauty and ugliness will be revealed.

古文：因举觞赐玄龄等数人勖之。
现代文：因而举起杯子给房玄龄等几位敬酒，勉励他们也应这样做。
English: Therefore, he raised his glass to toast several people such as Fang Xuanling and encouraged them to do the same.

古文：贞观十七年，太宗问谏议大夫褚遂良曰： 昔舜造漆器，禹雕其俎，当时谏者十有余人。
现代文：贞观十七年，唐太宗问谏议大夫褚遂良说： 从前虞舜制作漆器，夏禹雕饰祭器，当时劝谏的有十多人。
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong asked the doctor Yu Suiliang for advice and said: In the past, Yu Yu made lacquerware, and Xia Yu carved and decorated sacrificial vessels. At that time, there were more than ten people who advised Yu Yu.

古文：食器之间，何须苦谏？ 
现代文：饮食器皿一类的小事，何必苦谏？ 
English: Why worry about trifles like eating utensils?

古文：遂良对曰： 雕琢害农事，纂组伤女工。
现代文：褚遂良回答说： 从事精雕细琢会妨害农耕，编织五颜六色的彩带会妨碍妇女的正常事务。
English: Zou Suiliang replied: Engaging in fine carving will interfere with farming, and weaving colorful ribbons will interfere with women's normal affairs.

古文：首创奢淫，危亡之渐。
现代文：首创奢侈淫逸，就是危亡的开端。
English: The first creation of luxurious lasciviousness is the beginning of peril.

古文：漆器不已，必金为之；金器不已，必玉为之。
现代文：有了漆器不满足，必然要用黄金来做。有了金器还不满足，必然要用玉石来做。
English: If you are not satisfied with lacquerware, you must use gold. If you are not satisfied with goldware, you must use jade.

古文：所以诤臣必谏其渐，及其满盈，无所复谏。 
现代文：所以谏诤之臣必须在事情的开端就进谏，等到已做完再劝谏也不起作用了。 
English: Therefore, the vassal of the vassal must enter the vassal at the beginning of the matter, and when it is done, it will not work to persuade the vassal.

古文：太宗曰： 卿言是矣。朕所为事，若有不当，或在其渐，或已将终，皆宜进谏。
现代文：太宗说： 你讲得很对，我所做的事情，如有不当，不论是在刚开始，或者是将做完，都应当及时进谏。
English: Taizong said: You are quite right. If there is anything improper about what I have done, whether at the beginning or in the future, it should be promptly investigated.

古文：比见前史，或有人臣谏事，遂答云 业已为之 ，或道 业已许之 ，竟不为停改。
现代文：近来我翻阅前朝史书的记载，有时臣下进谏，君主就回答说 已经做了 ，或者说 已经同意做了 ，终究不肯停止改正。
English: Recently, I have been looking through the records of the history books of the previous dynasty. Sometimes, when a vassal made a correction, the monarch replied that he had already done it, or that he had agreed to do it, and finally refused to stop the correction.

古文：此则危亡之祸，可反手而待也。 
现代文：这样下去危亡的灾祸在一反手之间就会到来。 
English: If this continues, the disaster of imminent death will come during a backhand.

