古文：◎成宗一成宗钦明广孝皇帝，讳铁穆耳，世祖之孙，裕宗真金第三子也。
现代文：元成宗，钦明广孝皇帝，名铁穆耳，世祖之孙，裕宗真金的第三个儿子。
English: Yuancheng Zong, the third son of Emperor Qinming Guangxiao, the famous iron mule, the grandson of the founder, Yu Zong Zhenjin.

古文：母曰徽仁裕圣皇后，弘吉烈氏。
现代文：母亲徽仁裕圣皇后，姓弘吉烈氏。
English: His mother was Empress Huiren Yu Sheng, surnamed Hongjile.

古文：至元二年九月庚子生。
现代文：铁穆耳至元二年九月初五生。
English: Timur became the fifth-born in early September of the year 1000.

古文：二十四年，诸王乃颜反，世祖自将讨平之。
现代文：至元二十四年，诸侯王乃颜反叛，世祖亲自率军将其讨平。
English: In the 24th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the princes of Wang Naiyan rebelled, and the ancestor personally led the army to defeat them.

古文：其后合丹复叛，命帝往征之，合丹败亡。
现代文：后来合丹又造反，命铁穆耳前往征伐，合丹兵败身亡。
English: Later, Hatan rebelled again and ordered Tie Mu'er to go to the conquest, but the soldiers of Hatan were defeated and killed.

古文：三十年六月乙巳，受皇太子宝，抚军于北边。
现代文：至元三十年六月二十一日，铁穆耳接受皇太子的宝印，率军驻守在北方边境。
English: On June 21, 1830, Ti Mu'er accepted the crown prince's seal of approval and stationed his army along the northern border.

古文：三十一年春正月，世祖崩，亲王、诸大臣遣使告哀军中。
现代文：至元三十一年春，正月，世祖去世，亲王、诸大臣派遣使臣到军中来向铁穆耳报告凶信。
English: In the spring of the first month of the 31st year of the Yuan, when the ancestor died, the prince and the ministers sent envoys to the army to report the bad news to Tie Mule.

古文：夏四月壬午，帝至上都，左右部诸王毕会。
现代文：夏季，四月初二，铁穆耳抵达上都，左右部的诸侯王全都前来聚会。
English: In the summer, on the second day of April, Tie Mule arrived in Shangdu, and all the princes and queens from the left and right came to the gathering.

古文：先是，御史中丞崔彧得玉玺于故臣之家，其文曰 受命天于，既寿永昌 ，上之徽仁裕圣皇后。
现代文：在此之前，御史中丞在旧臣的家中得到一方玉玺，上面的文字是 受命于天，既寿永昌 ，玉玺献给徽仁裕圣皇后。
English: Prior to this, Mishi Chujo received a piece of jade bracelet from the home of a former minister. The inscription on the bracelet read, "Commanded by heaven, I live forever," and the bracelet was dedicated to Empress Huiren Yu Sheng.

古文：至是手授于帝。
现代文：就在这时亲自授予铁穆耳皇太孙。
English: It was at this time that he personally awarded the great-grandson of Emperor Timur.

古文：甲午，既皇帝位，受诸王宗亲、文武百官朝于大安阁，诏曰：
现代文：十四日，铁穆耳即皇帝位，在大安阁接受诸侯王、皇族宗亲、文武百官的朝拜，皇帝下诏说：
English: On the 14th day, Ti Mu'er, that is, the emperor's throne, received the worship of the princes and kings, the imperial family, and the military and civilian officials in the Da'an Pavilion. The emperor said:

古文：朕惟太祖圣武皇帝受天明命，肇造区夏，圣圣相承，光熙前绪。
现代文： 我太祖圣武皇帝接受上天的明命，开创了国家的疆土，圣主一代一代地相承，光芒照耀着前人的功业。
English: My great-great-grandfather, Emperor Shenwu, accepted the clear mandate of heaven and created the national territory. The Holy Lord has been passed down from generation to generation, and the light shines on the work of the predecessors.

古文：迨我先皇帝体元居正以来，然后典章文物大备。
现代文：待到我那先皇帝登上帝位，然后典章礼乐制度就完全具备了。
English: Wait until my emperor ascends to the throne, and then the ceremonial music system will be fully in place.

古文：临御三十五年，薄海内外，罔不臣属，宏规远略，厚泽深仁，有以衍皇元万世无疆之祚。
现代文：先皇帝治理国家三十五年，海内外的地域没有不向我朝称臣的。宏大的规模，长远的谋略，敦厚的恩泽，深沉的仁爱，能够延续我大元的福祚万代无疆。
English: In the thirty-five years that the former emperor governed the country, there was no region at home and abroad that did not pay tribute to my dynasty. The grand scale, long-term strategy, generous grace, and deep benevolence can continue my great fortune for generations without borders.

古文：我昭考早正储位，德盛功隆，天不假年，四海缺望。
现代文： 我的父王早年就居于王储的地位，德行高超，功业深厚。然而皇天没有给他长寿，四海之内失去了所望。
English: In his early years, my father Wang occupied the position of crown prince. He was a man of great virtue and accomplished great feats. However, the emperor did not give him a long life, and he lost all hope.

古文：顾惟眇质，仰荷先皇帝殊眷，往岁之夏，亲授皇太子宝，付以抚军之任。
现代文：而渺小且弱质的我，承蒙先皇特别的眷爱，去年夏天，亲自授予我皇太子的印信，把统率军队的重任交付给我。
English: But I, being small and weak, was specially favored by the late Emperor. Last summer, he personally granted me a seal letter from the Crown Prince, entrusting me with the important task of leading the army.

古文：今春宫车远驭，奄弃臣民，乃有宗藩昆弟之贤，戚畹官僚之旧，谓祖训不可以违，神器不可以旷，体承先皇帝夙昔付托之意，合辞推戴，诚切意坚。
现代文：今年春天皇帝去世，离弃了他的臣民，却又有贤德的宗亲昆弟，旧日的外戚官员，认为祖训不可以违背，国家不可以无主，体察并接受先皇帝往昔托付的心意，众口一辞地推戴我登上大宝，心诚志坚。
English: This spring, the emperor passed away, abandoning his subjects, but there was also a virtuous ancestral relative, Kun Di, an old relative official, who believed that the ancestral precept should not be violated, and the country should not be ownerless. He perceived and accepted the intention entrusted by the former emperor in the past. I was unanimously recommended to board the treasure, and my heart was sincere.

古文：朕勉徇所请，于四月十四日既皇帝位，可大赦天下。
现代文：我勉力曲从大家的请求，于四月十四日即皇帝位，可以大赦天下。
English: I have done my best to comply with everyone's request. I will ascend to the throne as emperor on April 14th, and I can grant amnesty to the world.

古文：尚念先朝庶政，悉有成规，惟慎奉行，罔敢失坠。
现代文： 由此还想到先朝的政务，都有现成的制度，只能谨慎地奉行，不敢有所闪失。
English: From this, I also thought that the government affairs of the previous government had a ready-made system, which could only be pursued cautiously and did not dare to slip up.

古文：更赖祖亲勋戚，左右忠良，各尽乃诚，以辅台德。
现代文：更须仰赖祖母、母亲、元勋、外戚，以及我身边的忠臣良将，各尽自己的忠诚，以辅佐朝廷。
English: Furthermore, I must rely on my grandmother, my mother, my father-in-law, my maternal relatives, and the loyal generals around me, each of whom will do their best to assist the Imperial Court.

古文：布告远迩，咸使闻知。
现代文：特向远近的臣民们宣告，使他们全都知道。 
English: Especially proclaim it to your subjects near and far, so that they may all know.

古文：诏除大都、上都两路差税一年，其余减丁地税粮十分之三。
现代文：下诏免征大都、上都两个路一年的差役赋税，其余的地方减免丁口税、田税粮的十分之三。
English: The following edict exempted the two provinces of Dadu and Shangdu from a year's labor tax, and the rest of the provinces were exempted from three-tenths of the dingkou tax and rice tax.

古文：系官逋欠，一切蠲免。
现代文：只要是拖欠官府未交的钱粮，全部免征。
English: As long as they are in arrears with the government for unpaid rations, they are all exempt from taxation.

古文：民户逃亡者，差税皆除之。
现代文：逃亡在外的民户，差役和赋税全部免除。
English: Private households that have fled abroad are exempt from all taxes and taxes.

古文：追尊皇考曰皇帝，尊太母元妃曰皇太后。
现代文：追加皇父为 皇帝 尊号，尊奉祖母和皇太妃为皇太后。
English: In addition, the Emperor's father was given the title of Emperor, and his grandmother and the Empress Dowager were given the title of Empress Dowager.

古文：庚子，遣摄太尉兀都带等请谥于南郊。
现代文：二十日，派遣署理太尉兀都带等在南郊请求向先皇追加谥号。
English: On the 20th, they dispatched the acting lieutenant general, Yu Du, and others to Nanjiao to request the emperor to issue an additional imperial edict.

古文：遣礼部侍郎李衎、兵部郎中萧泰登赍诏使安南。
现代文：派遣礼部侍郎李珩、兵部郎中萧泰登携带诏书出使安南。
English: He dispatched the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Li Xi, and the attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Xiao Teden, to carry the imperial rescript to Annan.

古文：中书省臣言： 陛下新即大位，诸王、驸马赐与，宜依往年大会之例，赐金一者加四为五，银一者加二为三。
现代文：中书省大臣上奏说： 陛下新即皇帝位，对于诸侯王、驸马的赏赐，应当依从往年大朝会的先例，赐金子一两的，加四为五；赐银子一两的，加二为三。
English: The Minister of the Ministry of the People's Republic of China said in his report: Your new majesty is the emperor, and for the reward of the princes and princes, it should follow the precedent of the previous year's Grand Council of the People's Republic of China. If you give one or two gold, add four to five; if you give one or two silver, add two to three.

古文：又江南分土之赋，初止验其版籍，令户出钞五百文，今亦当有所加，然不宜增赋于民，请因五百文加至二贯，从今岁官给之。 
现代文：另外，江南所分封的土地的赋税，最初只查验其户籍，令每户出五百文钱钞，现在也应当有所增加，但是不应当向百姓增加赋税，请把五百文增加到两贯，从今年起由官府支出。 
English: In addition, the tax levied on the land allocated in the south of the Yangtze River, which initially only checked the household registration and required each household to pay 500 yuan, should now also be increased, but the tax should not be increased on the people. Please increase the 500 yuan to two yuan, and from this year, the government should pay the tax.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：乙巳，赐驸马蛮子带银七万六千五百两，阔里吉思一万五千四百五十两，高丽王王昛三万两。
现代文：二十五日，赐给驸马蛮子带七万六千五百两银子，阔里吉思一万五千四百五十两，赐给高丽国王三万两。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, seventy-six thousand five hundred taels of silver were given to the king of Goryeo, thirty-two thousand taels to the king of Goryeo, and fifteen thousand four hundred and fifty taels to the king of Goryeo.

古文：丁未，湖广行省所属寇盗窃发，复令刘国杰讨之。
现代文：二十七日，湖广行省所属的地区，寇盗暗中兴起，再次令刘国杰讨伐。
English: On the 27th, in the area belonging to Hukanggang Province, the bandits surreptitiously arose, and Liu Guojie was once again ordered to fight them.

古文：戊申，太白昼见，又犯鬼。
现代文：二十八日，太白金星白昼出现，又干犯鬼宿天区。
English: On the 28th, Taibai Jinxing appeared in broad daylight, and again committed a crime.

古文：诏存恤征黎蛮、瓜哇等军。
现代文：下诏慰问、抚恤征伐黎蛮、爪哇等国的军队。
English: He sent the following message of condolence and condolences to the armies of the conquered countries such as the Levant and Java.

古文：己酉，云南行省以所定路、府、州、县来上：上路二，下路十一，下州四十九，中县一，下县五十。
现代文：二十九日，云南行省把所确定的路、府、州、县前来奏上：上路两个，下路十一个，下州四十九个，中县一个，下县五十个。
English: On the 29th, Yunnan Province reported the confirmed roads, prefectures, states and counties: two upstream roads, eleven downstream roads, forty-nine downstream states, one mid-county and fifty downstream counties.

古文：以金齿归附官阿鲁为孟定路总管，佩虎符。
现代文：任命金齿国归附的官员阿鲁为孟定路总管，佩戴虎符。
English: An official named Aru, who belonged to the Golden Tooth Kingdom, was appointed as the general manager of Mengding Road, wearing a tiger emblem.

古文：是月，即墨县雹。
现代文：当月，即墨县发生雹灾。
English: In the same month, there was a hailstorm in Mok County.

古文：五月庚戌朔，太白犯舆鬼。
现代文：五月初一，太白金星干犯鬼宿天区。
English: On the first day of May, the all-too-white Venus is in the ascendant.

古文：壬子，始开醮祠于寿宁宫，祭太阳、太岁、火、土等星于司天台。
现代文：五月初三，开始在寿宁宫举行醮祭。在司天台祭祀太阳、太岁、火星、土星等星官。
English: On the 3rd day of the 5th month of the lunar calendar, the New Year's Eve Festival was held at Shuning Palace, with the Sun, the Earth, Mars, Saturn and other celestial bodies being worshipped at the main altar.

古文：戊午，遣摄太尉兀都带奉玉册玉宝，上大行皇帝尊谥曰圣德神功文武皇帝，庙号世祖；皇后尊谥曰昭睿顺圣皇后；皇考尊谥曰文惠明孝皇帝，庙号裕宗。
现代文：五月初九，派遣署理太尉兀都带捧着玉册玉宝，献上已故皇帝的尊谥为 圣德神功文武皇帝 ，庙号 世祖 ；皇后的尊谥为 昭睿顺圣皇后 ；父王的尊谥为 文惠明孝皇帝 ，庙号 裕宗 。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month of the lunar calendar, the deputy Taifeng Yu was dispatched with a jade scroll and a jade treasure to present the deceased emperor's honorary title as the Emperor of the Holy German God of Literature and Martial Arts, the temple name of the founder; the queen's honorary title as the Holy Empress Zhaorui Shun; the father's honorary title as the Emperor Wenhui Mingxiao, the temple name of Yu Zong.

古文：赐国王和童金二百五十两，月儿鲁百五十两，伯颜、月赤察而各五十两，银、钞、锦各有差。
现代文：赐给国王和童黄金二百五十两，月儿鲁黄金一百五十两，伯颜、月赤察而黄金各五十两，又赐给数额不同的白银、钱钞、锦缎。
English: The king and the boy were given 250 taels of gold, the girl 150 taels of gold, the boy 50 taels of gold, the girl 50 taels of gold, and the boy 50 taels of gold. Different amounts of silver, banknotes, and brocade were also given.

古文：庚申，祭紫微星于云仙台。
现代文：五月十一日，在云仙台祭祀紫微星。
English: On May 11th, a memorial service was held for Zi Wei Xing in Sendai.

古文：云南部长适习、四川散毛洞主覃顺等来贡方物，升其洞为府。
现代文：云南蛮部酋长适习、四川散毛洞主覃顺等前来贡献地方特产，把他们的溪洞升格为府。
English: Yunnan barbarian chieftain Shixi, Sichuan loose-hair cave master Shushun and others came to contribute local specialties and upgrade their cave to the capital.

古文：丁卯，八番宣慰使斡罗思犯法，为人所讼，惧罪逃还京师。
现代文：五月十八日，八番宣慰使斡罗思犯法，被人控告，畏罪逃回京师。
English: On May 18th, the eighth consoling messenger, Luo Si, was accused of breaking the law and fled back to Beijing.

古文：赐安西王阿难答钞万锭。
现代文：赐给安西王难答钱钞一万锭。
English: He gave Anxi Wang 10,000 baht of hard-to-return money.

古文：己巳，改皇太后所居旧太子府为隆福宫，詹事院为徽政院，司议曰中议，府正曰宫正，家令曰内宰，典医署曰掌医，典宝曰掌谒，典设曰掌仪，典膳曰掌膳，仍增控鹤至三百人。
现代文：五月二十日，把皇太后所住的旧太子府改为隆福宫，把詹事院改为徽政院，司议称为中议，府正称为宫正，家令称为内宰，典医署称为掌医，典宝称为掌谒，典设称为掌仪，典膳称为掌膳，并将宿卫的近侍增加到三百人。
English: On May 20, the old Prince's residence, where the empress dowager lived, was changed to Longfu Palace, Zhanji Court was changed to Huizheng Court, the councilor was called the middle councilor, the prefect was called the palace prefect, the family secretary was called the secretary, the medical examiner was called the doctor, the treasure was called the palanquin, the decoration was called the palanquin, and the banquet was called the banquet, and the attendants of the guards were increased to three hundred.

古文：诏各处转运司官，欺隐奸诈为人所讼者，听廉访司即时追问，其案牍仍旧例于岁终检之。
现代文：诏令各处转运司的官员，因为欺骗奸诈而被人控告的，由肃政廉访司立即进行追讯，其案卷文牍仍按照旧例年终时进行查核。
English: It was ordered that the officials of the Forwarding Department in various places, who were accused of deception and treachery, would be immediately investigated by the Anti-Corruption and Corruption Investigation Department, and their case files would still be examined at the end of the year in accordance with the old practice.

古文：升福建盐提举司为盐转运司，增捕私盐人赏格。
现代文：把福建盐提举司升格为盐转运司，增加捕捉犯私盐者的赏金。
English: The Fujian Salt Raising Department will be upgraded to the Salt Transportation Department, and the bounty for catching salt smugglers will be increased.

古文：庚午，诸王亦里不花来朝，以瘠马输官，官酬其直，为钞十有一万五千锭。
现代文：五月二十一日，诸侯王亦里不花前来朝见，把瘠瘦的马匹交纳给官府，官府付给了马的价钱，共有钱钞十一万五千锭。
English: On the 21st of May, Wang Yili, the prince of the princes, came to the court without any expense, and handed over the emaciated horses to the government. The government paid the price of the horse, a total of 115,000 baht.

古文：赐也速带而、汪惟正两军将士粮五万石，饷北征军。
现代文：赐给也速带儿、汪惟正两军的将士粮食五万石。发给北征军粮饷。
English: He gave 50,000 koku of grain to the soldiers of the two armies led by Yao Zhaocheng and Wang Weizheng, and sent grain baskets to the Northern Expeditionary Force.

古文：壬申，御史台臣言： 内外官府增置愈多，在京食禄者万人，在外尤众，理宜减并。 
现代文：五月二十三日，御史台大臣上奏说： 朝内外增设的官府变得越来越多，在京师领取俸禄的就有一万人，在地方上的更多，按理应当减少、合并。 
English: On May 23rd, the Minister of State for History reported as follows: The number of government offices established both inside and outside the country is increasing. There are 10,000 people receiving salaries in Beijing, and many more in the provinces. Logically, these should be reduced and merged.

古文：命与中书议之。
现代文：皇帝命中书省讨论这件事。
English: The emperor ordered the cabinet to discuss the matter.

古文：用崔彧言，肃政廉访司案牍，勿令总管府检劾。
现代文：采纳崔的意见，肃政廉访司的案卷文牍，不要让总管府查核、审决。
English: Adopt Cui's opinion, submit the case file to the Anti-Corruption Investigation Division, and do not let the General Administration of Justice check and adjudicate.

古文：诏议增官吏禄。
现代文：下诏讨论增加官吏俸禄之事。
English: The matter of increasing the salary of government officials will be discussed at a later date.

古文：以也速带而所统将士贫乏，给钞万锭。
现代文：因为也速带儿所统辖的将士贫困匮乏，赐给钱钞一万锭。
English: Because of the poverty and scarcity of soldiers under the jurisdiction of the nursery, he quickly gave ten thousand baht in money and bills.

古文：乙亥，以紥珊知枢密院事。
现代文：五月二十六日，派扎珊掌管枢密院事务。
English: On May 26th, Pai Zassan took charge of the Privy Council affairs.

古文：戊寅，封皇姑高丽王王昛妃忽都鲁揭里迷失为安平公主。
现代文：五月二十九日，晋封皇姑、高丽国王王日巨的妃子忽都鲁揭里迷失为安平公主。
English: On May 29th, the consort of Emperor Jinfeng and the consort of King of Goryeo, King Nichijo, was revealed to be Princess Anping.

古文：赐亦都护金五百五十两、银七千五百两，合迷里的斤帖林金五十两、银四百五十两。
现代文：赐给新疆拔悉蜜部首领黄金五百五十两、白银七千五百两，赐给合迷里的斤帖林黄金五十两、白银四百五十两。
English: He gave Xinjiang's Puxi honey chiefs gold five hundred fifty-two and silver seven thousand five hundred two, and gave Hamuli's Jintailin gold fifty-two and silver four hundred fifty-two.

古文：西平王奥鲁赤言： 汪总帅之军，多庇其富实，而令贫弱者应役。 
现代文：西平王奥鲁赤上奏说： 汪总帅的军队，大都庇护那些富裕殷实的人，而让贫弱的人服役。 
English: Xiping King Olu Akagamitsu said: General Wang's army mostly protects those who are rich and affluent, and lets the poor and weak serve.

古文：命更易之。
现代文：命他更换他的士兵。
English: order him to replace his soldiers.

古文：以月儿鲁为太师，伯颜为太傅，月赤察而为太保。
现代文：任命月儿鲁为太师，伯颜为太傅，月赤察而为太保。
English: He appointed Yue Erlu as the Grand Master, Bo Yan as the Grand Master, and Yue Chakcha as the Grand Master.

古文：禁诸司豪夺盐船递运官物，僧道权势之家私匿盗贩。
现代文：禁止各司署巧取豪夺盐船运送的官府物资，禁止僧侣、道士、权豪势要之家私自隐藏盗运的商贩。
English: It is forbidden for the various departments to take advantage of the government's materials transported by the salt ships, and it is forbidden for monks, Taoists, and merchants who secretly hide the smuggling from the powerful families.

古文：是月，密州路诸城县、大都路武清县雹，峡州路大水。
现代文：当月，密州的诸城县、大都路的武清县发生雹灾，峡州路发生水灾。
English: In the same month, floods occurred in Zhucheng County and Wuching County of Datu Road in Mizhou, and floods occurred in Xiuzhou Road.

古文：六月庚辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of June, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：辛巳，御史台臣言： 名分之重，无逾宰相，惟事业显著者可以当之，不可轻授。
现代文：初二，御史台大臣上奏说： 名声职份的重要，再没有超过宰相的了，只有在事业上取得了显著成就的人才能担当，不能够轻易授给。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, the Minister of State for History made a report saying, "There is no more important prestigious post than that of prime minister. Only those who have made significant achievements in their careers can take on the post, and it cannot be easily conferred.

古文：廉访司官岁以五月分按所属，次年正月还司。
现代文：廉访司的官员每年五月分别检查所属的地方司署，第二年正月返回本司。
English: Every May, officials from the Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC) separately inspect the local departments to which they belong, and then return to the ICAC in the first month of the following year.

古文：职官犯赃，敕授者听总司议，宣授者上闻。
现代文：职官犯了贪赃的罪，敕令其听任御史台总司处置，并将其罪状具文上奏。
English: If a functionary commits the crime of corruption, he shall be ordered to be dealt with by the Director-General of the State Administration of Radio, Film and Television, and his crime shall be recorded in writing.

古文：其本司声迹不佳者代之，受赂者依旧例比诸人加重。 
现代文：那些在本司名声、表现不佳的，派人取而代之，接受贿赂的按照旧例较一般人加重处罚。 
English: Those who have a bad reputation and poor performance in the division will be replaced, and those who accept bribes will be punished more severely than ordinary people according to the old practice.

古文：帝曰： 其与中书同议。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：希望和中书省共同商议决定。 
English: The emperor said: Hope and the People's Republic of China will jointly discuss and make a decision.

古文：乙酉，云南金齿路进驯象三。
现代文：初六，云南金齿路进献驯象三头。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, Jinzu Road, Yunnan Province, presented three elephants for training.

古文：丙戌，以云南岁贡马二千五百匹给梁王，数太多，命量减之。
现代文：初七，把云南今年进贡的二千五百匹马赐给梁王，数量太多，命令酌量减少。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the king of Liang was given 2,500 horses from Yunnan's tribute this year. The amount was too much, and the amount was ordered to be reduced.

古文：庚寅，必察不里城敢木丁遣使来贡。
现代文：十一日，必察不里城的敢木丁派遣使臣前来进贡。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Can Mu Ding of Bitchaburi City sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：诏罢功德使司及泉府司官冗员。
现代文：下诏裁撤功德使司及泉府司的冗员。
English: The following decree abolishes the redundant personnel of the Meritorious Envoy Division and the Izumi Prefecture Division.

古文：壬辰，立晋王内史府，复以光禄寺隶宣徽院。
现代文：十三日，设立晋王内史府。重新把光禄寺隶属于宣徽院。
English: On the 13th, the Jin Wang Nei History Office was established, and Guanglu Temple was once again subordinated to Xuanhui Temple.

古文：中书省臣言： 朝会赐与之外，余钞止有二十七万锭。
现代文：中书省大臣上奏说 ：朝会赏赐的之外，剩余的钱钞只有二十七万锭了。
English: The Minister of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy reported, "In addition to the reward from the Imperial Court, there are only 270,000 baht of banknotes left.

古文：凡请钱粮者，乞量给之。 
现代文：以后凡是请求赐给钱粮的，请酌量数目赐给他们。 
English: And whosoever shall ask of you a penny, give it him for a penny.

古文：定西平王奥鲁赤、宁远王阔阔出、镇南王脱欢及也先帖木而大会赏赐例，金各五百两、银五千两、钞二千锭、币帛各二百匹；诸王帖木而不花、也只里不花等，金各四百两、银四千两、钞一千六百锭、币帛各一百六十匹。
现代文：确定西平王奥鲁赤、宁远王阔阔出、镇南王脱欢，以及也先帖木儿在大朝会上赏赐的定例：黄金各五百两、白银五千两、钱钞二千锭、绢帛各二百匹；诸侯王帖木而不花、也只里不花等：黄金各四百两、白银四千两、钱钞一千六百锭、绢帛各一百六十匹。
English: Determine the regular rules for the awards given at the Grand Imperial Conference by King Orochi of Xiping, King Kokang of Ningyuan, King Deguan of Zhenan, and also first Timur: gold five hundred and two each, silver five thousand two, banknotes two thousand tenge, and two hundred horseshoes each; the princes of Timur do not spend and do not spend: gold four hundred and two each, silver four thousand two, banknotes sixteen hundred tenge, and one hundred and sixty horseshoes each.

古文：以帖木而复为平章政事。
现代文：任命帖木而重新担任平章政事。
English: Appointed Tetsuki and re-assumed the post of Taira no Shosho.

古文：诸王阿只吉部玉速福屡叛，伏诛。
现代文：诸侯王阿只吉部下的玉速福屡次谋叛，被处死。
English: Tamasafuku, a vassal of the vassal king Ajukichi, repeatedly plotted to rebel and was executed.

古文：以甘肃等处米价踊贵，诏禁酿酒。
现代文：因为甘肃等地的米价腾贵，下诏禁止酿酒。
English: Because of the soaring price of rice in Gansu and other places, it is forbidden to brew alcohol.

古文：命月赤察而提调群牧事。
现代文：命令月赤察儿掌管群牧监的事务。
English: He ordered Yue Chia-er to take charge of the affairs of the group's overseer.

古文：乙未，以世祖、皇后、裕宗谥号播告天下。
现代文：十六日，把世祖、皇后、裕宗的谥号传告于全国。
English: On the 16th, the names of the founder, empress, and emperor were announced throughout the country.

古文：免所在本年包银、俸钞，及内郡地税、江淮以南夏税之半。
现代文：免征各地今年的包税银、职俸钞，以及内地的地租和江淮以南地区夏税的一半。
English: This year's tax-covered silver and salary banknotes, as well as land rent in the mainland and half of the summer tax in areas south of the Yangtze River and Huai River, will be exempted in various regions.

古文：乙亥，以乳保劳，封完颜伯颜为冀国公，妻何氏为冀国夫人。
现代文：二十日，因为用乳汁养育皇帝的功劳，封完颜伯颜为冀国公，妻子何氏为冀国夫人。
English: On the 20th, because of the merit of raising the emperor with milk, Yan Boyan was awarded the title of Prince of Hebei Province, and his wife, He, was awarded the title of Lady of Hebei Province.

古文：完泽贷民钱，多取其息，命依世祖定制。
现代文：完泽把钱贷给百姓，多取他们的利息，命令他按照世祖时定下的制度取息。
English: Kanazawa loaned money to the people, took more of their interest, and ordered him to collect interest in accordance with the system established by the ancestors.

古文：辛丑，浙西道提刑按察使弘吉烈带阿鲁灰受赂，遇赦免，复以为河西陇北道肃政廉访使。
现代文：二十二日，浙西道提刑按察使弘吉烈带阿鲁灰受贿，遇大赦而免罪，又被任为河西陇北道肃政廉访使。
English: On the 22nd, the inspector of the western Zhejiang Province, Hongjile, was sentenced to take bribes with Aru ash, but was pardoned in the case of amnesty. He was also appointed as the political corruption envoy of the northern Hebei Province.

古文：御史台臣言： 先朝决狱，随罪轻重，笞杖异施，今止用杖，乞如旧制。 
现代文：御史台大臣上奏说： 先朝判决刑狱，根据罪行的轻重，鞭刑和杖刑的施行有所不同。现在一律只用杖刑，请按旧制实行。 
English: The Minister of State for History said in his report: In the past, prison sentences were handed down, and whipping and caning were carried out differently depending on the severity of the crime. Now, only caning is used, so please implement it according to the old system.

古文：不允。
现代文：皇帝不允。
English: He did not agree to the request of the Guru.

古文：宋使家铉翁安置河间，年逾八十，赐衣服，遣还其家。
现代文：把宋朝的使臣家铉翁安置在河间府。他年过八十，赐给他衣服，遣送他返回自己家中。
English: He placed the Song Dynasty envoy Gao Weng in Moru, He was over 80 years old, gave him clothes, and sent him back to his home.

古文：癸卯，封驸马阔里吉思为唐王，给金印。
现代文：二十四日，封驸马阔里吉思为高唐王，赐给金印。
English: On the 24th, Ma Kuo Li Jisi was crowned King of Gaotang and given the golden seal.

古文：甲辰，诏翰林国史院修《世祖实录》，以完泽监修国史。
现代文：二十五日，诏令翰林国史院修撰《世祖实录》，命完泽监修国史。
English: On the 25th, he ordered the Hanlin Academy of National History to compile the "Ancestor Record" and supervised the national history.

古文：乙巳，给困赤秃出征军士钞各千户千锭。
现代文：二十六日，赐给困赤秃部出征的士卒钱钞，各千户每人一千锭。
English: On the 26th, money and banknotes were given to the impoverished soldiers of the Red-and-Bald Army, one thousand baht for each thousand households.

古文：丙午，太阴犯井。
现代文：二十七日，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the 27th, the star of the Great Yin moved to the area of Guanzhongjing.

古文：以昔宝赤从征诸军自备马一千一百九十余匹，命给还其直。
现代文：命令昔宝赤从征的各军自备战马一千一百九十余匹，命付给他们马价钱。
English: He ordered the armies once led by Baocheng to prepare more than 1,190 horses, and ordered them to pay the price of the horses.

古文：戊申，诏宗藩内外官吏人等，咸听丞相完泽约束。
现代文：二十九日，下诏给宗室外藩和朝内外的官吏人等，均听由丞相完泽约束。
English: On the 29th, the following edict was issued to the Zongyou County and the officials inside and outside the court, all of whom were to be bound by the chancellor Kanazawa.

古文：以合剌思八斡节而为帝师，赐玉印。
现代文：任命合剌思八斡节而为帝师，赐给他玉印。
English: He was appointed as the emperor's teacher and given the imperial seal.

古文：赐雪雪的斤公主钞千锭，诸王伯答罕、末察合而部贫乏者三千锭，伯牙兀真、赤里、由柔伯牙伯剌麻、阔怯伦、忙哥真各金五十两，银、钞、币有差。
现代文：赐给雪雪的斤公主钱钞一千锭，赐给诸侯王伯答罕、末察合而部属的贫穷者钱钞三千锭，赐给伯牙兀真、赤里、由柔伯牙伯剌麻、阔怯伦、忙哥真黄金各五十两，以及数额不等的白银、钱钞、绢帛。
English: He gave a thousand rupees in banknotes to Snow Snow's princess Jin, three thousand rupees in banknotes to the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the

古文：是月，东安州蝗。
现代文：当月，东安州发生蝗灾。
English: In the same month, a locust plague occurred in Dong'an.

古文：秋七月壬子，诏御史大夫月儿鲁振台纲，禁内外诸司减官吏俸为宴饮费。
现代文：秋季，七月初四，诏令御史大夫月儿鲁整顿御史台的纪纲。禁止朝内外各司署减免官吏的俸钱作为宴饮的费用。
English: In the autumn, on the 4th day of the 7th month, the Emperor ordered the Grand Historian, Gessler, to reorganize the syllabus of the Grand Historian's Office, prohibiting all departments inside and outside the court from deducting or exempting officials' salaries as banquet expenses.

古文：置隆福宫卫候司。
现代文：设置隆福宫卫候司。
English: The Longfu Palace Sanitation Department was set up.

古文：癸丑，诏军民各隶所司，无相侵越。
现代文：初五，诏令军兵和百姓各属所司管辖，不得互相侵犯。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the emperor ordered that the soldiers and the people should be under the jurisdiction of their respective departments and should not encroach on each other.

古文：乙卯，以诸王出伯所部四百余户乏食，徙其家属就食内郡，仍赐以奥鲁军年例钞三千锭。
现代文：初七，因为诸侯王出伯部属四百余户缺粮乏食，把他们的家属迁徙到内地州郡就食，并赐给辎重老营当年的常例钱三千锭。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, because more than 400 households belonging to the princes and lords were short of grain and food, they moved their families to the inland counties to eat, and gave the usual money of three thousand baht to Zou Chonglaoying that year.

古文：给瓜、沙之民徙甘州屯田者牛价钞二千六百锭。
现代文：赐给瓜州、沙州迁移到甘州去屯田的百姓耕牛价钱二千六百锭钱钞。
English: The people who migrated from Guazhou and Shazhou to Ganzhou to work in the fields were given 2,600 baht banknotes for the price of a cow.

古文：以也的迷失为东昌路达鲁花赤，中书省臣言其尝官是郡，犯法五百余款，今不宜复官，帝曰： 姑试之。 
现代文：任命也的迷失为东昌路镇守官，中书省大臣说他在这里担任过官职，违犯法令的事有五百多条，如今不宜再担任这项官职，皇帝说 ：姑且试一试他。 
English: The appointment was also lost for the Dongchang Road Town Warden. The Minister of the Ministry of Literature said that he had served as an official here. There were more than five hundred violations of the law. Now it is not appropriate to hold this official position. The emperor said: Let's try him.

古文：己未，复立平阳路之蒲、武乡，保定路之博野，泰安州之新泰等县。
现代文：十一日，重新设立平阳路的蒲县、武乡县，保定路的博野县，泰安州的新泰县等县。
English: On the 11th, Pu County and Wuxiang County of Pingyang Road, Bono County of Baoding Road, Xintai County of Tai'an Province and other counties were re-established.

古文：赐诸王出伯奥鲁军、也速带而红袄军，币帛各六万匹。
现代文：赐给诸侯王出伯的辎重老营、也速带儿的红袄军绢帛各六万匹。
English: Sixty thousand red yakitori and sixty thousand red yakitori army yakitori were given to the lords and lords.

古文：庚申，改侍卫都指挥使司为隆福宫左都威卫使司、右都威卫使司；以陕西道廉访司没入赃罚钱旧给安西王者，令行省别贮之。
现代文：十二日，把侍卫都指挥使司改为隆福宫左都威卫使司、右都威卫使司。把原先赐给安西王的陕西道廉访司没收的贪赃罚款，令行中书省另行贮藏。
English: On the 12th, he changed the commanding officers of the palace guards to Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei

古文：壬戌，诏中外崇奉孔子。
现代文：十四日，下诏令朝内外尊崇祭奉孔子。
English: On the 14th, the Emperor issued an imperial edict ordering that Confucius be venerated both at home and abroad.

古文：癸亥，罢肇州宣慰司，并入辽东道。
现代文：十五日，撤销肇州宣慰司，并入辽东道。
English: On the 15th, Zhaozhou Xuanliao Division was abolished and merged into Liaodong Division.

古文：戊辰，减八番等处所设官二百一十六员。
现代文：二十日，裁减八番等地所设置的官员二百一十六人。
English: On the 20th, the 216 officials set up in the eighth district and other places were reduced.

古文：八番称新附九十万户，设官四百二十四员，及遣官核实，止十六万五千余户，故减之。
现代文：八番奏称新归附的百姓九十万户，设置官员四百二十四名，待到派遣官员前去核实，只有十六万五千多户，因此裁减一部分官员。
English: The eighth report said that the newly annexed people numbered 900,000 households, and 424 officials were set up. Wait until the dispatched officials come to verify. There are only more than 165,000 households, so some officials were reduced.

古文：行枢密院月的迷失、程鹏飞各加平章政事，中书省臣言： 枢密之臣不宜重与相衔。 
现代文：行枢密院月的迷失、程鹏飞各加授平章政事，中书省大臣上奏说 ：枢密院的大臣不宜与宰相职衔相重叠。 
English: After the loss of the Privy Council and the promotion of Cheng Pengfei to Pingzhang, the Minister of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature made a report saying that it was not appropriate for the Minister of the Privy Council to overlap with the Prime Minister's title.

古文：帝命以军职尊崇者授之。
现代文：皇帝便命令以尊贵的军职授予他们。
English: The emperor then ordered that they be given the highest military ranks.

古文：辛未，中书省臣言： 向御史台劾右丞阿里尝与阿合马同恶，论罪抵死，幸得原免，不当任以执政。
现代文：二十三日，中书省大臣上奏说 ：原先御史台弹劾右丞阿里曾经与阿合马一起共同作恶，按其罪行应当处死，幸而得到赦免，不应当任命他担任执政大臣。
English: On the 23rd, the Minister of the Ministry of the People's Commissariat of Literature made a report, saying, "Previously, the Ministry of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People'

古文：臣谓阿里得罪之后，能自警省，乞令执政如故。 
现代文：臣等认为，阿里获罪之后，能够自己警觉、反省，请让他和原来一样地执政。 
English: The courtiers and others believed that after Ali was convicted, he would be able to be alert and reflect on himself. Please let him continue to govern as before.

古文：从之。以军户所弃田产岁入及管军官吏赎罪等钞，复输枢密院。
现代文：皇帝依从，把军户所弃置的田产每年的收入，以及管军官吏赎罪的钱钞等重新交纳给枢密院。
English: The emperor complied, returning to the Privy Council the annual income from the farmland abandoned by the military households, as well as the money to pay for the sins of the officers and officials.

古文：癸酉，以陕西行省平章不忽木为中书平章政事。
现代文：二十五日，任命陕西行省平章不忽木为中书省平章政事。
English: On the 25th, Pingzhang Nongmu, the governor of Shaanxi Province, was appointed as the governor of Pingzhang, China's Shandong Province.

古文：甲戌，立随路民匠、打捕、鹰房、纳绵等户总管府，秩正三品。
现代文：二十六日，设立随路民匠、打捕、鹰房、纳绵等匠户的总管府，秩禄为正三品。
English: On the 26th, the head office of the craftsmen, such as the roadside craftsmen, the trappers, the falconers, and the potters, was established, and the rank was raised to the third grade.

古文：诏招谕暹国王敢木丁来朝，或有故，则令其子弟及陪臣入质。
现代文：下诏召令暹国国王敢木丁前来朝见，如果因故不能前来，则令他的子弟和陪臣入朝做人质。
English: He issued a proclamation ordering the King of Siam to dare Mu Ding to come to the court, and if he could not come for some reason, he would order his son and his attendants to come to the court as hostages.

古文：紥鲁花赤言： 诸王之下有罪者，不闻于朝，辄自决遣。 
现代文：大断事官上奏说 ：诸侯王属下有了犯罪的，他们不向朝廷奏闻，就自行判决、流放。 
English: The grand adjudicator reported: If there is a crime among the vassals of the princes and kings, they will not report it to the court, but will make their own judgment and exile.

古文：诏禁治之。
现代文：下诏禁止他们这样做。
English: The following edict prohibited them from doing so.

古文：诏月儿鲁守北边，赐其所统军士币帛各万匹，及西征军士币三万匹、钞三万六千六百锭。
现代文：诏令月儿鲁戍守北部边境，赐给他所统辖的军士绢和帛各一万匹。赐给西征军士兵绢三万匹，钱钞三万六千六百锭。
English: He ordered Yue'er Lu to guard the northern border, and gave the soldiers under his command ten thousand yakitori and ten thousand yakitori, the soldiers of the Western Expeditionary Force thirty thousand yakitori, and 36,600 yakitori in money.

古文：赐不鲁花真公主及诸王阿只吉女弟伯秃银、钞有差。
现代文：赐给不鲁花真公主及诸侯王阿只吉的妹妹伯秃不同数额的银两、钱钞。
English: Different amounts of silver and banknotes were given to Princess Furuhana and the sister of the vassal king Abdukhi.

古文：是月，棣州阳信县雹，大风拔木发屋，真定路之南宫、新河，易州之涞水等县雹。
现代文：当月，棣州阳信县发生雹灾，大风拔起树木，刮倒房屋，真定路的南宫、新河，易州的涞水等县发生雹灾。
English: In the same month, hailstorms occurred in Yangxin County, Luzhou. High winds uprooted trees and knocked down houses, and hailstorms occurred in Nangu, Xinhe, and Surabaya counties in Yizhou.

古文：八月庚辰，太白昼见。
现代文：八月初二，太白金星白昼出现。
English: On the second day of August, the white Venus appeared in broad daylight.

古文：癸未，平滦路迁安等县水，蠲其田租。
现代文：初五，平滦路迁安等县发生水灾，免去他们的田租。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, floods occurred in counties such as Pingluo Road and Qian'an, and their land rent was exempted.

古文：戊子，初祀社稷，用堂上乐，岁以为常。
现代文：初十，皇帝首次祭祀社稷神，用堂上的音乐，以后每年成为常例。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the emperor offered a sacrifice to the shrine gods for the first time, using the music from the hall, which became a regular occurrence every year thereafter.

古文：己丑，以大都留守段贞、平章政事范文虎监浚通惠河，给二品银印。
现代文：十一日，派遣大都留守段真、平章政事范文虎监督疏浚通惠河，赐给二品银印。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Danzhen and Fan Wenhu, who were mostly left behind, were sent to supervise the dredging of the Tonghui River and were awarded the second silver seal.

古文：令军士复浚浙西太湖，淀山湖沟港，立新河运粮千户所。
现代文：令军士再次疏浚浙西太湖、淀山湖的沟渠、港湾，设立新河运粮千户所。
English: He ordered the sergeant-at-arms to dredge the ditches and harbors of West Lake Taihu and Lake Dianshan in Zhejiang again, and set up the New River Grain Transportation Center.

古文：诏诸路平准交钞库所贮银九十三万六千九百五十两，除留十九万二千四百五十两为钞母，余悉运至京师。
现代文：诏令各路平淮交钞库所贮存的银子九十三万六千九百五十两，除留下十九万二千四百五十两作为钞币的本金之外，其余的全部运到京师。
English: The emperor ordered that all the silver stored in the Pinghuai Banknote Depository be reduced to 936,950,000 taels, leaving only 192,450,000 taels as the principal of the banknotes, and the rest to be transported to Beijing.

古文：复立平阳之芮城、陵川等县。
现代文：重新设立平阳的芮城、陵川等县。
English: Pingyang's Lucheng, Lingchuan and other counties were re-established.

古文：辛卯，以忙哥撒而妻子为敌所掠，赐钞八千锭。
现代文：十三日，因为忙哥撒而的妻儿被敌军抢去，赐给他钱钞八千锭。
English: On the 13th day, his wife and child were snatched by the enemy army because he was so busy, and he was given eight thousand baht in banknotes.

古文：戊戌，太阴犯毕，太白犯轩辕。
现代文：二十日，太阴星干犯毕宿天区。太白金星干犯轩辕星座。
English: On the 20th day of the month, the super-dark star of the yin constellations will enter the heaven. The super-white star of the yang constellations will enter the heaven.

古文：是月，德州之安德县大风雨雹。
现代文：当月，德州的安德县刮大风、降冰雹。
English: That month, Texas' Ender County was hit by high winds and hail.

古文：九月壬子，圣诞节，帝驻跸三部落，受诸王、百官贺。
现代文：九月初五，皇帝的寿诞佳节，皇帝驻跸在三部落，接受诸侯王、百官的朝贺。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of September, the Emperor's birthday festival, the Emperor stayed in the Three Tribes to receive the morning greetings from the princes and officials.

古文：癸丑，诏有司存恤征瓜哇军士死事之家。
现代文：初六，诏令官府慰问、优恤征伐爪哇而战死的士兵家属。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the government issued a decree to offer condolences to the families of soldiers who died in the Java campaign.

古文：甲寅，口授诸王傅阿黑不花为丞相。
现代文：初七，口头授任诸侯王太傅阿黑不花为丞相。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, he was verbally appointed as the Prince of Princes, the Grand Duke Ah-Hei-Fu, and the Prime Minister.

古文：丁巳，太白经天。
现代文：初十，太白金星行经天宇。
English: On the 23rd, a white star streaked across the sky.

古文：庚申，以合鲁剌及乃颜之党七百余人隶同知枢密院事不怜吉带，习水战。
现代文：十三日，把合鲁剌和乃颜的余党七百余人隶属于枢密院同知不怜吉带，练习水战。
English: On the thirteenth day, more than seven hundred members of the other parties affiliated to the Privy Council, including Hailu and Naoyan, practiced water battles.

古文：丙寅，太阴掩填星。
现代文：十九日，太阴星掩蔽土星。
English: On the 19th, the eclipsing planet occulted Saturn.

古文：辛未，太阴犯轩辕。
现代文：二十四日，太阴星干犯轩辕星座。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the great yin star committed the sin of the great yang constellation.

古文：乙亥，太白犯右执法，太阴犯平道。
现代文：二十八日，太白金星干犯右执法星。太阴星干犯平道星。
English: On the 28th, the star of the right law enforcement, the star of the right criminal, the star of the right criminal, the star of the right criminal, and the star of the right criminal.

古文：遣秃古铁木儿等使阁蓝。
现代文：派遣秃古铁木而等出使阁蓝。
English: Dispatch the bald old iron and wood and wait for the dispatch of the cabinet blue.

古文：是月，赵州之宁晋等县水。
现代文：当月，赵州的宁晋等县发生水灾。
English: In the same month, flooding occurred in Ningjin and other counties in Zhao Prefecture.

古文：冬十月戊寅，车驾还大都。
现代文：冬季，十月初二，皇帝的车驾返回大都。
English: In the winter, on the second day of October, the emperor's chauffeur drove back to the capital.

古文：辛巳，江浙行省臣言： 陛下即位之初，诏蠲今岁田租十分之三。
现代文：初五，江浙行省大臣上奏说： 陛下即位之初，下诏免除今年田租的十分之三。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the minister of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province made a report saying: At the beginning of His Majesty's reign, the following edict exempted three-tenths of this year's field rent.

古文：然江南与江北异，贫者佃富人之田，岁输其租，今所蠲特及田主，其佃民输租如故，则是恩及富室而不被于贫民也。
现代文：然而江南与江北不同，穷人租种富人的田，每年交纳田租给他们，现在所免除的只不过免到田主身上，那些佃户仍然和原来一样交租，那么，这项恩泽只达到有钱人家，而不能达到贫民身上。
English: However, the south of the Yangtze River is different from the north of the Yangtze River. The poor people rent the rich people's fields to grow crops, and pay the land rent to them every year. What is exempted now is only exempted to the owners of the fields. Those tenants still pay the rent as before. So, this benefit only reaches the rich people, but not the poor people.

古文：宜令佃民当输田主者，亦如所蠲之数。 
现代文：应当令佃户应当交给田主的田租，也像朝廷免除的数字一样地减免。 
English: Tenants should be required to hand over the rent to the landlord, and it should be reduced and exempted in the same way as the figures exempted by the imperial court.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：辽阳行省所属九处大水，民饥，或起为盗贼，命赈恤之。
现代文：辽阳行省所属地区九处发生水灾，百姓饥馑，有的人起而为盗贼。下令赈济、抚恤饥民。
English: Floods occurred in nine places in the province of Liaoyang, the people were starving, and some people became thieves. It was ordered to provide relief and support for the hungry.

古文：江西行省臣言： 银场岁办万一千两，而未尝及数，民不能堪。 
现代文：江西行省的大臣上奏说 ：冶银场每年炼出一万一千两银子，却没有达到规定的数字，百姓们无法忍受了。 
English: The minister of Jiangxi Province said in his report: the metallurgical silver field refined 11,000 taels of silver every year, but it did not reach the required number, and the people could not bear it.

古文：命自今从实办之，不为额。
现代文：下令从今以后据实备办，不规定数额。
English: From now on, the order will be prepared according to the facts, and the amount will not be specified.

古文：壬午，太白犯左执法。
现代文：初六，太白金星干犯左执法星。
English: Junior high school sixth, too white Venus criminal left law enforcement star.

古文：有事于太庙。癸巳，太阴掩填星。
现代文：在太庙举行祭祀。十七日，太阴星掩蔽土星。
English: On the 17th, the eclipsed star occulted Saturn.

古文：乙未，太阴犯井。
现代文：十九日，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the 19th day of the lunar month, the star of the Great Yin appeared in the area of the criminal well.

古文：金齿新附孟爱甸酋长遣其子来朝，即其地立军民总管府。
现代文：金齿国新归附的孟爱甸酋长派遣他的儿子前来朝见，就在当地设立军民总管府。
English: Chief Meng Aidian of the newly annexed Jinzu Province sent his son to meet the emperor and set up a military and civil administration in the area.

古文：朱清、张瑄从海道岁运粮百万石，以京畿所储充足，诏止运三十万石。
现代文：朱清、张王宣从海道每年运送一百万石粮食进京，因为京畿地区所储备的粮食很充足，诏令每年只运三十万石。
English: Zhu Qing and Zhang Wangxuan transported one million koku of grain from the sea route to Beijing every year, but because the grain reserves in the Gyeonggi region were sufficient, they were only allowed to transport 300,000 koku each year.

古文：辛丑，帝谕右丞阿里、参政梁德珪曰： 中书职务，卿等皆怀怠心。
现代文：二十五日，皇帝谕令右丞阿里、参知政事梁德王圭说： 中书省的职务，你们都怀着怠惰之心。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the emperor ordered the right-hand man, Ali, and the co-governor and political officer, Liang Dewang Gui, to leave, saying: "You all have a lazy heart when it comes to the post of China's book ministry.

古文：朕在上都，令还也的迷沙已没财产，任明里不花，皆至今未行。
现代文：我在上都，命令发还也的迷沙已被没收的财产，任命明里不花官职，都是至今没有执行。
English: In Shangdu, I ordered the confiscation of property to be returned to Misha, who had also been confiscated, and the appointment clearly did not cost an official post, all of which have not yet been implemented.

古文：又不约束吏曹，使选人留滞。
现代文：又不管束下吏，使候选的官员滞留不决。
English: In addition, regardless of the subordinate officials, the candidate officials remained undecided.

古文：桑哥虽奸邪，然僚属惮其威，政事无不立决。
现代文：桑哥虽然奸邪，然而属官都害怕他的威严，每件政务没有不立即处理的。
English: Although Sango was a traitor, his subordinate officials were afraid of his authority, and every government matter had to be dealt with immediately.

古文：卿等其约束曹属，有不事事者笞之。仍以朕意谕右丞相完泽。 
现代文：希望你们管束下属的官员，有不勤于办事的立即用鞭子抽打，并把我的意思告诉右丞相完泽。 
English: I hope that some officials under your supervision who are not diligent in their duties will be whipped immediately, and that you will tell my intention to the Chancellor Kanazawa.

古文：壬寅，缅国遣使贡驯象十。
现代文：二十六日，缅国派遣使臣进贡驯象十头。
English: On the 26th, Myanmar dispatched an envoy to bring ten elephants to be tamed.

古文：乙巳，遣南巫里、速木答剌、继没剌矛、毯阳使者各还其国，赐以二珠虎符及金银符，金、币、衣服有差。
现代文：二十九日，遣发南巫里、速木答剌、没剌予、毯阳等国的使者各回他们本国，赐给三珠虎符和金银符，金子、绢帛、衣服，数目各不相同。
English: On the 29th, the envoys from Nanwuli, Hayakimadera, Muzhiguo, Baoyang and other countries were sent back to their home countries. They were given the three pearl and tiger charms, gold and silver charms, gold, brooches and clothes in different amounts.

古文：初，也黑迷失征瓜哇时，尝招其濒海诸国，于是南巫里等遣人来附，以禁商泛海留京师，至是弛商禁，故皆遣之。
现代文：起初，也黑迷失征伐爪哇时，曾经招降那些濒临海边的各国，于是南巫里等国派人前来归附，因为禁止商贾漂洋过海而把他们留在京师，至此放宽商禁，因此把他们都遣送回去。
English: At first, when Yahei lost the conquest of Java, he had invited those countries bordering the sea to surrender, so Nan Wuli and other countries sent people to come to annex, because the ban on merchants drifting across the sea left them in Beijing Division, thus easing the ban on commerce, so they were all sent back.

古文：十一月丁未朔，帝朝皇太后于隆福宫，上玉册、玉宝。
现代文：十一月初一，皇帝在隆福宫朝见皇太后，献上玉册、玉宝。
English: On the first day of November, the emperor met with the empress dowager at Longfu Palace and presented her with the jade scroll and the jade treasure.

古文：庚戌，行枢密院臣刘国杰讨辰州贼，诏选州民刀弩手助其军，他不为例。
现代文：初二，行枢密院大臣刘国杰讨伐辰州贼寇，诏令在州民中挑选刀弩手协助他的军队，但不作为其他地方的先例。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the Minister of the Privy Council, Liu Guojie, to fight the bandits in Lucheng, issued an order to select swordsmen from the people of the state to assist his army, but not as a precedent for other places.

古文：京师犯赃罪者三百人，帝命事无疑者，准世祖所定十三等例决之。
现代文：京师有三百人犯有贪赃罪，皇帝命令，事实已经确凿无疑的，按照世祖皇帝定下的十三等旧例进行判决。
English: There were three hundred people in Beijing who had committed the crime of corruption. The emperor ordered that, since the facts were beyond doubt, they should be judged according to the thirteen old cases set down by the ancestor emperor.

古文：己酉，太阴犯亢。
现代文：初三，太阴星干犯亢宿天区。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the yin and yang constellations are at their peak.

古文：庚戌，广西盐先给引于民，而征其直，私盐日横，及官自鬻盐，民复不售。
现代文：初四，广西的官盐是先把盐引发给百姓，再征收其价钱，私盐便日益横行，等到官府自行贩盐，百姓便不再买盐引了。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the year, the government salt in Guangxi first brought the salt to the people, and then levied its price. Private salt became increasingly rampant. When the government sold salt on its own, the people would no longer buy salt.

古文：诏先以盐与民，而后征之。
现代文：诏令先把盐给予百姓，然后再征收盐款。
English: The imperial edict first gave salt to the people, and then levied salt money.

古文：辛亥，中书省臣言： 国赋岁有常数，先帝尝曰： 凡赐与，虽有朕命，中书其斟酌之。 
现代文：初五，中书省大臣上奏说 ：国家的赋税是有固定数目的，先皇帝曾经说过： 凡是进行赏赐，即使有了我的命令，也要由中书省斟酌后确定。 
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Minister of the Ministry of the People's Republic of China said in his report: There is a fixed number of state taxes. The former emperor once said: Any reward, even if there is my order, must be determined by the Ministry of the People's Republic of China after consideration.

古文：由是岁务节约，常有赢余。
现代文：从此以后每年务求节约开支，常常有所结余。
English: Since then, we have been trying to save money every year, and often there is a surplus.

古文：今诸王藩戚费耗繁重，余钞止一百十六万二千余锭。
现代文：现在诸侯王、宗藩、外戚耗费繁重，余下的钱钞只有一百一十六万二千余锭。
English: Now the princes, the clan, and the maternal relatives are spending heavily, and the remaining banknotes are only more than 1,162,000 baht.

古文：上都、隆兴、西京、应昌、甘肃等处籴粮钞计用二十余万锭，诸王五户丝造作颜料钞计用十余万锭，而来会诸王尚多，恐无以给。
现代文：上都、隆兴、西京、应昌、甘肃等地购买粮食的钱钞，总共用去二十余万锭，五户诸侯王的丝，制作颜料所用的钱钞共计十多万锭，而前来参加朝会的诸侯王还多，恐怕没有钱赏给他们了。
English: The Shang capital, Longxing, West Beijing, Yingchang, Gansu and other places used a total of more than 200,000 baht of banknotes to buy grain, and more than 100,000 baht of banknotes were used to make silk and paint for the five princes. There were also many princes who came to attend the imperial meeting. I am afraid there is no money to reward them.

古文：乞俟其还部，臣等酌量定拟以闻。 
现代文：请等他们返回本部，臣等再酌量拟定赏赐的数目奏闻皇上。 
English: Please wait for them to return to the headquarters, and then let the emperor know the number of rewards to be awarded.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：壬子，诏以军民不相统壹，罢湖广、江西行枢密院，并入行省。
现代文：初六，下诏：因为军民之间不相统一，撤销湖广、江西行枢密院，并入行中书省。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued: Because of the lack of unity between the military and the people, the Privy Councils of Hubei, Guangxi and Jiangxi Provinces were abolished, and the Ministry of Education and Culture was established.

古文：乙卯，令河西僧人依旧助役。
现代文：初九，令河西的僧人依旧交纳助役钱。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the monks in Hexi still had to pay service money.

古文：丁巳，以伯颜察而参议中书省事，其兄伯颜言曰： 臣叨平章政事，兄弟宜相嫌避。 
现代文：十一日，命伯颜察而参议中书省事务。他的兄长伯颜上奏说 ：我已经担任中书省平章政事，兄弟之间应当互相避嫌。 
English: On the 11th day of the month, it was decreed that Bo Yancha should take part in the deliberation of the affairs of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Education. His elder brother, Bo Yan, said: "I have already taken part in the political affairs of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Education. Brothers should avoid each other."

古文：帝曰： 卿勿复言。
现代文：皇帝说 ：你不要再说了。
English: The emperor said, "Don't say anything more."

古文：兄平章于上，弟参议于下，何所嫌也。 
现代文：哥哥担任平章于上，弟弟参议于下，有什么嫌疑呢？ 
English: What is the suspicion that the elder brother is the second-in-command and the younger brother is the second-in-command?

古文：罢贵赤屯田总管府；罢宣政院所刻河西《藏经》板。
现代文：撤销贵赤屯田总管府。停止宣政院刻印河西的《藏经》版本。
English: Revoke the Guizhou Tunden General Administration Office. Stop the Xuan Zheng Academy from engraving the "Zangjing" version from Hexi.

古文：庚申，太阴犯毕。
现代文：十四日，太阴星干犯毕宿天区。
English: On the 14th, the Great Yin Star committed a crime and was banished to the Heaven Realm.

古文：甲子，诏禁作奸犯科者。
现代文：十八日，下诏禁止作奸犯法。
English: On the 18th, the Anti-Trafficking Law was promulgated.

古文：以湖南道宣慰使何伟为中书参知政事。
现代文：任命湖南道宣慰使何玮担任中书省参知政事。
English: The appointment of Hunan Province Xuancheng made He Jun to serve as the governor of the People's Republic of China.

古文：罢海北海南市舶提举司。
现代文：撤销海北海南市舶提举司。
English: Revocation of Hainan City, Hainan Province, ship lifting division.

古文：壬申，立覆实司。
现代文：二十六日，设立覆实司。
English: On the 26th, the Department of Revision of Facts was established.

古文：济宁路立诸色户计诸总管府，秩四品。
现代文：济宁路设立诸色户计诸总管府，秩禄为四品。
English: Jining Road was established as the head office of the General Administration of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs.

古文：癸酉，太白犯房。
现代文：二十七日，太白金星干犯房宿天区。
English: On the 27th, the too-white Venus committed the crime of lodging in the heavenly quarter.

古文：诏改明年为元贞元年。
现代文：下诏把明年改为元贞元年。
English: The following edict changed the next year to the first year of Yuan Zhen.

古文：十二月辛巳，赐诸王亦思麻殷金五十两。
现代文：十二月初六，赐给诸侯王亦思麻殷黄金五十两。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month of the year, fifty taels of gold were given to the princes.

古文：癸未，岁星犯房。
现代文：初八，木星干犯房宿天区。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Jupiter entered the house of heaven.

古文：丙戌，罢辽河等处人匠正副达鲁花赤。
现代文：十一日，撤销辽河等地工匠的正副监印官。
English: On the 11th, the official and deputy inspectors of craftsmen in Liaohe and other places were revoked.

古文：丁亥，岁星犯钩钤。
现代文：十二日，木星干犯钩钤星。
English: On the 12th, Jupiter was the culprit.

古文：甲午，以诸王晃兀而、驸马阿失等皆在军，加赐金银、鞍勒、弓矢、衣服各有差。
现代文：十九日，因为诸侯王晃兀而、驸马阿失等都在军中，加赐他们金银、鞍勒、弓箭、衣服，数额各不相同。
English: On the 19th day of the month, because the lords and princes were on the move, the horses and chariots were all in the army, and they were given gold and silver, saddles, bows and arrows, and clothes, in varying amounts.

古文：乙未，以伯遥带忽剌出所隶一千户饥，赐钞万锭。
现代文：二十日，因为伯遥带忽剌出所隶属的一千户百姓饥饿乏食，赐给他一万锭钱钞。
English: On the 20th day of the month, because Bo Yao had suddenly taken away 1,000 people from his household, who were starving and had nothing to eat, he was given 10,000 baht in money.

古文：壬辰，太阴犯鬼。
现代文：十七日，太阴星干犯鬼宿天区，又干犯木星。
English: On the seventeenth day, the great Yin star committed the crime of haunting the sky, and also committed the crime of Jupiter.

古文：戊戌，禁侵扰农桑者。庚子，太阴犯房，又犯岁星。选各卫精兵千人，命孛罗曷答儿等将之，戍和林，听太师月儿鲁节度，三年而更。
现代文：挑选各卫的精兵一千名，命令孛罗曷答而等率他们戍守和林，由太师月儿鲁节制、调遣，三年再更换。
English: He selected one thousand elite soldiers from each of the guards, and ordered Luo Jia and others to lead them to guard Wafang. They were restrained and dispatched by Grand Master Yueru, and then replaced three years later.

古文：用帝师奏，释京师大辟三十人，杖以下百人；赐诸鳏寡贫民钞二百锭。
现代文：采纳帝师的建议，释放京师判死刑的罪囚三十人、判处杖刑以下的一百人；赐给各鳏寡贫苦百姓三百锭钱钞。
English: He accepted the suggestion of the imperial master and released 30 prisoners sentenced to death by the imperial master, and 100 people sentenced to the cane or less; he gave 300 baht banknotes to each widow and poor people.

古文：曲静、澂江、普安等路夷官各以方物来贡。
现代文：曲靖、贗江、普安等路的夷官，各以地方特产前来进贡。
English: Yi officials from Qujing, Minjiang, Pu'an and other places came to pay tribute with local special products.

古文：以东胜等处牛递户贫乏，赐钞三千余锭。
现代文：因为东胜等地牛驿的站户贫穷，赐给钱钞三千余锭。
English: Because the station owners of the cattle stations in Dongsheng and other places are poor, they are given more than three thousand money banknotes.

古文：卜阿里使麻八儿还都。
现代文：卜阿里出使麻八而返回京师。
English: Bu Ali sent an envoy to Mahachi and returned to Beijing.

古文：阿思民为海都所虏，赐钞三万九千九百锭。
现代文：阿思的百姓被海都所掳掠，赐给他们钱钞三万九千九百锭。
English: The people of Assi were plundered by the sea capital, which gave them 39,900 baht in banknotes.

古文：是月，常德、岳、鄂、汉阳四州水，免其田租。
现代文：当月，常德、岳州、鄂州、汉阳四州发生水灾，免除其田租。
English: In the same month, floods occurred in the four prefectures of Changde, Yuezhou, Ezhou and Hanyang, and they were exempted from paying field rent.

古文：是岁，断大辟三十一人。
现代文：这一年，判处死刑的罪囚三十一人。
English: In the same year, 31 prisoners were sentenced to death.

古文：元贞元年春正月戊申，诸王阿失罕来朝，赐金五十两、银四百五十两。
现代文：元贞元年春，正月初三，诸侯王阿失罕前来朝见，赐给他黄金五十两、白银四百五十两。
English: On the third day of the first month in the spring of the first year of the Zhen, the prince Ah Quhan came to see the emperor and gave him fifty taels of gold and four hundred fifty taels of silver.

古文：癸丑，以太仆卿只而合朗为御史大夫。
现代文：正月初八，任命太仆寺御只而合郎为御史大夫。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the chief priest of Taipo-ji Temple was appointed to the position of chief historian.

古文：甲寅，以从世祖狩杭海功，赐诸王忽剌出金五十两、珠一串。
现代文：正月初九，因为随从世祖巡守杭海的功劳，赐给诸侯王忽剌出黄金五十两、珍珠一串。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, because of the merit of following the ancestors to patrol the Hangzhou Sea, he gave the princes and kings 50 taels of gold and a string of pearls.

古文：乙卯，太阴犯填星，又犯毕。
现代文：正月初十，太阴星干犯土星，又干犯毕宿天区。
English: On the 10th day of the first lunar month, the planet of the Great Yin interfered with Saturn, and also interfered with the celestial sphere.

古文：壬戌，以国忌，即大圣寿万安寺饭僧七万。
现代文：正月十七日，因为是国家的忌日，在大圣寿万安寺向七万名僧众供斋饭。
English: On the seventeenth day of the first month, because it was the anniversary of the country's death, a meal was served to seventy thousand monks at the Dai Shoshu Ban'an Temple.

古文：癸亥，安西王阿难答、宁远王阔阔出皆言所部贫乏，赐安西王钞二十万锭、宁远王六万锭。
现代文：正月十八日，安西王阿难答、宁远王阔阔出都说他们的部属贫困，赐给安西王钱钞二十万锭、宁远王六万锭。
English: On the 18th day of the first month, Anxi King Ananda and Ningyuan King Kuo Kuo both replied that their subordinates were poor, and gave Anxi King 200,000 baht in banknotes and Ningyuan King 60,000 baht.

古文：又以陨霜杀禾，复赈安西王山后民米一万石。
现代文：又因为降下严霜冻死禾苗，再赈济安西王的山后百姓粮米一万石。
English: In addition, because of the frost that fell, the seedlings froze to death, and the people in the mountains behind Anxi King were given 10,000 kilos of grain and rice.

古文：诏道家复行《金箓》、《科范》。
现代文：诏令道家重新通行《金》、《科范》。
English: The emperor ordered the Taoists to re-adopt the "Gold" and "Scientific Standards."

古文：以云南行省左丞杨炎龙为中书左丞。
现代文：任命云南行省左丞杨炎龙为中书左丞。
English: Yang Yanlong, Yunnan Provincial Secretary of the Communist Party of China, was appointed as the new Secretary of the Communist Party of China.

古文：乙丑，以亦奚不薛复隶云南行省；以行枢密院既罢，赐行中书省长官虎符，领其军。
现代文：正月二十日，把亦奚不薛重新隶属于云南行省。因为行枢密院既然已经撤销，就赐给行中书省长官虎符，掌管其军队。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the year, he re-subordinated Yizhongbuxue to Yunnan Xing Province. Since the Xing Privy Council had been revoked, he gave the governor of Xingzhongbu Province the official tiger emblem to control his army.

古文：庚午，以江浙行省平章阿老瓦丁为参知政事。
现代文：正月二十五日，任命江浙行省平章政事阿老瓦丁为参知政事。
English: On the 25th day of the first month of the year, the governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, Pingzhang, appointed the governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, Alaowading, as the governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province.

古文：壬申，立北庭都元帅府，以平章政事合伯为都元帅，江浙行省右丞撒里蛮为副都元帅，皆佩虎符。
现代文：正月二十七日，设立北庭都元帅府，任命平章政事合伯为都元帅，江浙行省右丞撒里蛮为副都元帅，均佩戴虎符。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the year, the North Court Marshal's Office was established, and Ping Zhang Zhengji He Bo was appointed as the Marshal of the Capital, and Jiangsu and Zhejiang Governor Yu Zheng Sariman was appointed as the Deputy Marshal of the Capital. They both wore the tiger emblem.

古文：立曲先塔林都元帅府，以衅都察为都元帅，佩虎符。
现代文：设立曲先塔林都元帅府，任命衅都察为都元帅，佩戴虎符。
English: The Quqian-Tallinn Marshal's Office was established, and the Marshal of the Capital was appointed as the Marshal of the Capital, wearing a tiger emblem.

古文：饶州路达鲁花赤阿剌红、治中赵良不法，佥江东廉访司事昔班、季让受金纵之，事觉，昔班自杀，杖季让，除名，仍没其财产奴婢之半。
现代文：饶州路镇守官阿剌红、治中赵良不守法，江东廉访司佥事昔班、季让接受贿金放走他们，事情被觉察后，昔班自杀，季让处杖刑，除名，并没收其财产、奴婢的一半。
English: Raozhou Road Town Warden Ah Yanhong and Deputy Warden Zhao Liang did not abide by the law, and Jiangdong Liang visited the magistrate to accept bribes and let them go. After the matter was discovered, the former class committed suicide, and the former class was punished with a cane, expelled, and confiscated half of their property and slaves.

古文：罢瓜、沙等州屯田。
现代文：罢除瓜州、沙州等州的屯田。
English: Remove the military cantonments in Guazhou, Shazhou and other provinces.

古文：癸酉，岁星犯东咸。
现代文：正月二十八日，木星干犯东咸星。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of the year, Jupiter interfered with the East Ham star.

古文：甲戌，有飞书妄言朱清、张瑄有异图者，诏中外慰勉之。
现代文：正月二十九日，有匿名信胡说朱清、张王宣别有意图，诏令朝内外劝慰勉励他们。
English: On the 29th day of the first month of the year, there was an anonymous letter saying that Zhu Qing and Zhang Wang had announced their intention to break up, and the imperial edict was issued to encourage and encourage them both at home and abroad.

古文：乙亥，追封皇国舅按只那演为济宁王，谥忠武，封皇姑囊家真公主为鲁国大长公主，驸马蛮子台为济宁王，仍赐金印。
现代文：正月三十日，追封皇国舅按只那演为济宁王，追谥 忠武 ，封皇姑囊家真公主为鲁国大长公主，封驸马蛮子台为济宁王，并赐给金印。
English: On the 30th day of the first month of the year, the imperial uncle of the emperor was enthroned as the king of Jining, the imperial uncle of the emperor was enthroned as the king of Jining, the imperial aunt of the emperor was enthroned as the princess of Lu, and the imperial uncle of the emperor was enthroned as the king of Jining, and the golden seal was given.

古文：诏饬诸道盐运司。
现代文：下诏整饬诸道盐运司。
English: The following edict is issued to rectify the various salt transportation departments.

古文：二月丙子朔，安西王相铁赤等请复立王相府，不许。
现代文：二月初一，安西王的丞相铁赤等人请求重新设立安西王丞相府，皇帝不许。
English: On the first day of February, Anxi King's chancellor Tiehak and others requested the re-establishment of the Anxi King's chancellor's office, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：令陕西省臣给其所需，仍以廉访司没入赃罚钞与之。
现代文：敕令陕西行省大臣供给其所需物资，并把廉访司没收的赃款给予王府。
English: He ordered the provincial minister of Shaanxi to supply him with the necessary materials, and to give Wangfujing the stolen money confiscated by the Independent Investigation Department.

古文：丁丑，翰林学士承旨留梦炎告老，帝以其在先朝言无所隐，厚赐遣之。
现代文：初二，翰林学士承旨留梦炎告老辞官，皇帝因为他在先朝直言无所隐瞒，给予厚赏送他还乡。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi Lumen Yan sued the old judge, and the emperor gave him a rich reward to send him back to his hometown because he had nothing to hide in the previous day.

古文：命曷伯、撒里蛮、孛来将探马赤军万人出征，听诸王出伯节度。
现代文：命令曷伯、撒里蛮、孛来率领探马赤军一万人出征，听任诸侯王出伯节制、调遣。
English: He ordered Zibo, Sariman, and Xing to come and lead the 10,000-strong Red Army of Tanma to go to war, and allowed the princes to control and dispatch Zibo.

古文：壬午，罢江南茶税，以其数三千锭添入江西榷茶都转运司岁额。
现代文：初七，免除江南的茶税，将其原数三千锭钱钞添入江西榷茶都转运司每年茶税的定额中。
English: On the seventh day of the month, the tea tax in the south of the Yangtze River was exempted, and the original 3,000 baht banknote was added to the annual tea tax quota of the Yangtze River Tea Transportation Division.

古文：诏贷斡脱钱而逃隐者罪之，仍以其钱赏首告者。
现代文：下诏对借出高利贷钱而逃跑隐匿的人追究罪责，并把那些钱赏给告发的人。
English: He issued an edict to prosecute those who lend money to loan sharks and then run away and hide, and to reward those who denounce them.

古文：癸未，荧惑犯太阴。
现代文：初八，荧惑星干犯太阴星。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, the planet of light is the offender of the planet of darkness.

古文：丁亥，云南行省平章也先不花言： 敢麻鲁有两夷未附，金齿亦叛服不常，乞调兵六千镇抚金齿，置驿入缅。 
现代文：十二日，云南行省平章政事也先不花上奏说 ：敢麻鲁有两处夷民尚未归附，金齿国也是时而叛离时而臣服，没有一定，请调遣六千名军队镇抚金齿国，设置驿站通入缅国。 
English: On the 12th, the political affairs of Yunnan Province, Pingzhang Province, also did not spend a lot of time on the report, saying: there are two IDPs in Dangmaru that have not yet been annexed, and Jinzu Province is also sometimes rebellious and sometimes submissive, there is no certainty, please dispatch six thousand troops to pacify Jinzu Province and set up a post to enter Myanmar.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：复以拱卫司为正三品。
现代文：重新把拱卫国的秩禄改为正三品。
English: Change the rank of the arch-defender of the country to the third rank.

古文：以济宁王蛮子台所部弘吉烈人贫乏，赐钞一十八万锭。
现代文：因为济宁王蛮子台所部弘吉烈人贫困，赐给钱钞一十八万锭。
English: Because of the poverty of the Hongji martyrs of the Jining Wangbanzi Taisho Department, he gave them 180,000 baht in banknotes.

古文：戊子，思州田曷剌不花、云南夷卜木、四川洞主查闾王、金齿带梅混冬等来见。
现代文：十三日，思州的田曷剌不花、云南夷族的卜木、四川的洞主查闾王、金齿国的带梅混冬等前来朝见。
English: On the 13th day of the month, Tian Xuan of Shizhou, Bu Mu of Yunnan's Yi people, Zha Yao Wang of Sichuan's Dongshu, and Zhou Mei of Jintao came to see the emperor.

古文：缅国阿剌紥高微班的来献舍利、宝玩。
现代文：缅国的阿剌扎高微班的前来进献舍利、宝玩。
English: Students from Myanmar's Azadza High School came forward to offer gifts and play treasure games.

古文：甲午，以探马赤军出征，马不足，诏除军民官吏所乘，凡有马者尽括之。
现代文：十九日，因为探马赤军出征，马匹不足，诏令除了军民官吏所骑乘的之外，凡是有马的全部登记征集。
English: On the 19th, because there were not enough horses for the Red Army's expedition to search for horses, the emperor ordered that all horses, except those ridden by military and civilian officials, be registered and collected.

古文：壬辰，太阴犯平道。
现代文：十七日，太阴星干犯平道星。
English: On the 17th, Taiyin Star committed a crime against Pingdao Star.

古文：丁酉，车驾幸上都。
现代文：二十二日，皇帝的车驾临幸上都。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor's carriage drove to Shangdu.

古文：癸卯，太阴犯岁星。
现代文：二十八日，太阴星干犯木星。
English: On the 28th, the planet of the shadow of the sun interfered with Jupiter.

古文：以诸王亦怜真部马牛驿人贫乏，赐钞千锭。
现代文：因为诸侯王亦怜真部马牛驿站的人贫困，赐予钱钞一千锭。
English: Because the princes and princes also pitied the poverty of the people at the Zhenbu Horse and Cattle Station, they gave a thousand baht in banknotes.

古文：以工部尚书兼诸路金玉人匠总管府达鲁花赤吕天麟为中书参知政事。
现代文：任命工部尚书兼诸路金玉人匠总管府监印官吕天麟为中书省参知政事。
English: Appointed Lv Tianlin, the inspector of the General Administration of Press and Publication of the People's Republic of China, as the political advisor of the People's Republic of China.

古文：立云州银场都提举司，秩四品。
现代文：设立云州银场都提举司，秩禄为四品。
English: The establishment of the Yunnan Silver Mine raised the rank of the division, and the rank of the four products.

古文：中书省臣言： 近者阿合马、桑哥怙势卖官，不别能否，止凭解由选调，由是选法大坏。
现代文：中书省大臣上奏说 ：近人阿合马、桑哥依仗权势卖官，不区别是否有才能，只凭着偶然邂逅的因缘而升迁提拔，于是选拔官员的制度遭到极大破坏。
English: The Minister of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy said in his report, "Close relatives such as Ahama and Sango were promoted to official positions by virtue of their power and influence. It did not matter whether they had talent or not. They were only promoted due to chance encounters. As a result, the system of selecting officials was greatly damaged."

古文：宜令廉访司体覆以闻，省台选官核实，定其殿最，以明黜陟。
现代文：应当令廉访司考核审查之后奏闻朝廷，中书省御史台负责铨选的官员核实，确定其优劣，以明确贬黜和提升的办法原则。
English: It should be reported to the imperial court after the examination and review of the Independent Investigation Department, and the officials responsible for the selection of the History Department of the People's Republic of China should be verified to determine their strengths and weaknesses, and to clarify the principles of the method of demotion and promotion.

古文：其廉访司官，亦令省台同选为宜。 
现代文：那些廉访司的官员，也令中书省和御史台进行选拔为妥。 
English: Those officials of the Independent Investigation Department also made it appropriate for the Ministry of Education and Culture and the History Channel to conduct the selection.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：罢河西军，听各还其所属。
现代文：撤除河西的军队，听任他们各自返回所属地区。
English: Withdraw the troops from Hexi and let them return to their respective regions.

古文：赐驸马那怀钞万五千锭。
现代文：赐给驸马那怀钱钞一万五千锭。
English: He gave her 15,000 baht in cash.

古文：以醮延春阁，赐天师张与棣、宗师张留孙、真人张志仙等十三人玉圭各一。
现代文：因为在延春阁设坛打醮，赐给天帅张与棣、宗师张留孙、真人张志仙等十三人玉圭各一块。
English: Because the altar was set up at Yanchun Pavilion, thirteen people, including the heavenly commander Zhang He, the patriarch Zhang Rusun, and the real person Zhang Zhisen, were each given a piece of jade.

古文：制宝玉五方佛冠赐帝师。
现代文：制作宝玉五方佛冠赐给帝师。
English: The production of the precious jade five-sided Buddha crown was given to the emperor.

古文：三月乙巳朔，安南世子陈日燇遣使上表慰国哀，又上书谢宽贳恩，并献方物。
现代文：三月初一，安南国的世子陈日火尊派遣使臣奉上表章慰问国丧，又上书感谢朝廷宽赦的恩典，并进献地方特产。
English: On the first day of March, Chen Riguotong, the son of Annan, sent an envoy to offer condolences on the occasion of the national mourning, and also sent a letter to thank the court for the grace of clemency, and presented local special products.

古文：丙午，遣密剌章以钞五万锭授征西元帅，令市马万匹，分赐二十四城贫乏军校。
现代文：初二，派遣密剌章把五万锭钱钞赐给征西元帅，令他买一万匹马，分赐给二十四城贫穷的军校。
English: On the second day of the first year of the school year, he sent Mishan Zhang to give a 50,000 baht banknote to Marshal Zheng Xi, and ordered him to buy 10,000 horses and distribute them to poor military schools in 24 cities.

古文：庚戌，太阴犯填星。
现代文：初六，太阴星干犯土星。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the lunar calendar, the planet Saturn was eclipsed by the planet Venus.

古文：壬子，禁来朝官敛所属俸。
现代文：初八，禁止前来朝廷的官员收聚部属的职俸。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, officials who came to the imperial court were prohibited from collecting the salaries of their subordinates.

古文：丙辰，给月儿鲁、秃秃军炒米万石。
现代文：十二日，给予月儿鲁、秃秃的军队炒米一万石。
English: On the 12th, the army of Yue Erlu and Gao Gao was given 10,000 kilos of fried rice.

古文：金齿夷洞蛮来见，赐衣遣之。
现代文：金齿夷的洞蛮前来朝见，赐给衣服遣发他们返回。
English: The cave dwellers of Jinzui came to see the emperor, who gave them clothes and sent them back.

古文：戊午，罢福建银场提举司，其岁额银以有司领之。
现代文：十四日，撤销福建银场提举司，其每年出银的定额由地方官府掌管。
English: On the 14th, the Fujian Banking Industry Promotion Department was abolished, and the annual quota of its silver output was controlled by the local government.

古文：中书省臣言： 枢密院、御史台例应奏举官属，其余诸司不宜奏请，今皆请之，非便。 
现代文：中书省大臣上奏说 ：枢密院、御史台照例应当上奏荐举属下的官吏，其余各司不宜上表保举，如今都进行保奏，不妥。 
English: The Minister of the Ministry of the People's Republic of China said in his report: the Privy Council and the Imperial History Museum should, as usual, report the recommendation to nominate the officials under their jurisdiction, and the other departments should not report the nomination, but now they are all doing the nomination, which is not appropriate.

古文：诏自今已后，专令中书拟奏。
现代文：诏令从今以后，专令中书省拟具举荐的名单上奏。
English: From now on, the decree ordered the Ministry of Education to prepare a list of recommended candidates.

古文：以东作方殷，罢诸不急营造，惟帝师塔及张法师宫不罢。
现代文：因为农事很繁重，停止各项不急迫的营建工程，只有帝师塔和张法师宫不停建。
English: Because farming is very heavy, all non-urgent construction projects have been stopped. Only the Emperor's Tower and Zhang Mage's Palace are still under construction.

古文：壬戌，地震。
现代文：十八日，发生地震。
English: On the 18th, an earthquake occurred.

古文：太阴犯房。
现代文：太阴星干犯房宿天区。
English: Too much yin and yang will cause the room to be in the heaven zone.

古文：丙寅，国王和童隐所赐本部贫民钞三百五十锭，命台臣遣人按问以愧之。
现代文：二十二日，国王和童隐瞒朝廷赐给本部贫民的钱钞三百五十锭，命御史台大臣派人查问以令他羞愧。
English: On the 22nd, the king and his son concealed 350 monies that the court had given to the poor in the capital, and the minister of history sent someone to investigate to shame him.

古文：诏免医工门徭。
现代文：下诏免除医户、匠户的徭役。
English: The following edict exempts medical practitioners and artisans from their duties.

古文：增置蒙古学正，以各道肃政廉访司领之。
现代文：增设蒙古学正，由各道肃政廉访司管领。
English: An additional Mongolian Vice-Minister of Education will be set up, headed by the Vice-Minister of Education and Culture of each province.

古文：夏四月辛巳，妖人蒙虫僣拟，及其党十三人伏诛。
现代文：夏季，四月初七，妖人蒙虫拟建伪号，和他的同党十三人一起被处死。
English: In the summer, on the seventh day of the fourth month of the year, the sorcerer Mengwu planned to create a fake name, and he was executed together with thirteen of his fellow party members.

古文：赐章河至苦盐贫乏驿户，钞一万二千九百余锭。
现代文：赐予章河至苦盐贫困的驿户钱钞一万二千九百余锭。
English: Zhang He gave more than 12,900 baht in banknotes to the poverty-stricken tenants.

古文：丙戌，诸王也只里以兵五千人戍兀鲁思界，遣使来求马，帝不允。
现代文：十二日，诸侯王也只里率领五千名士卒戍守兀鲁思边界，派使者前来求马，皇帝不准。
English: On the twelfth day, the princes led five thousand soldiers to guard the border of Lu Si and sent an envoy to ask for a horse, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：庚寅，太阴犯东咸。
现代文：十六日，太阴星干犯东咸星。
English: On the 16th, Ta Yin Xing committed a crime against Dong Xian Xing.

古文：封乳母杨氏为赵国安翼夫人。
现代文：封乳母杨氏为赵国安翼夫人。
English: The nanny, Ms. Yang, is the wife of Zhao Guoan Ying.

古文：癸巳，以同知乌撒乌蒙等处宣慰使司事牙那木假兵部尚书，佩虎符，使马答儿的阴。
现代文：十九日，任命乌撒、乌蛮等地宣慰使司同知牙那木为代理兵部尚书，佩戴虎符，出使马答儿的阴。
English: On the 19th, Usa, Uban, and others were appointed to comfort the envoys with Zhiga Naki as the acting military commander, wearing tiger badges and sending out Matador's Yin.

古文：戊戌，给扈从探马赤军市马钞十二万锭。
现代文：二十四日，赐给侍从皇帝的探马赤军购买马匹的钱钞十二万锭。
English: On the 24th, the Red Army sent 120,000 baht to the emperor's equerry to buy horses.

古文：庚子，立掌谒司，掌皇太后宝，秩四品，以宦者为之。
现代文：二十六日，设立掌谒司，掌管皇太后的宝印，秩禄为四品，任命宦官担任。
English: On the 26th, the post of the chief usher was established, in charge of the treasure seal of the empress dowager, with four ranks and the appointment of eunuchs.

古文：赐贵赤亲军贫乏户钞四万一千五百余锭。
现代文：赐给贵赤亲军的贫困户钱钞四万一千五百余锭。
English: The amount of money given to the poor households of the Guizhou Red Army was more than 41,500 baht.

古文：癸卯，以诸王出伯所统探马赤、红袄军各千人，隶西平王奥鲁赤。
现代文：二十九日，把诸侯王出伯所统辖的探马赤军、红袄军各一千人隶属于西平王奥鲁赤。
English: On the 29th, he subordinated one thousand people each from the Tanma Red Army and the Red Kite Army, which were under the control of the vassal king, to the king of Xiping, Olukang.

古文：设各路阴阳教授，仍禁阴阳人不得游于诸王、驸马之门。
现代文：设置各路的阴阳教授，仍旧禁止阴阳先生与诸侯王、驸马的府内交游。
English: The Yin and Yang Professor, who set up all roads, still prohibits Mr. Yin and Yang from traveling with princes and horses in the capital.

古文：以贵赤万户忽秃不花等所部为敌所掠，赐钞有差。
现代文：因为贵赤万户忽秃不花等人的部属被敌军所劫掠，赐给他们数额同等的钱钞。
English: Because the subordinates of Guizhong Wanzhong, Xuchang Nianbo and others were plundered by the enemy army, they were given the same amount of banknotes.

古文：是月，真定路之平山、灵寿等县有虫食桑。
现代文：当月，真定路的平山、灵寿等县有虫吃桑叶。
English: In the same month, there were insects eating mulberry leaves in Hirayama, Lingshou and other counties along Jinding Road.

古文：闰四月丙午，为皇太后建佛寺于五台山，以前工部尚书涅只为将作院使，领工部事；燕南河北道肃政廉访使宋德柔为工部尚书，董其役；以大都、保定、真定、平阳、太原、大同、河间、大名、顺德、广平十路，应其所需。
现代文：闰初二，在五台山为皇太后建造佛寺，任命前工部尚书涅只为将作院使，执掌工部的事务；燕南河北道肃政廉访使宋德柔任工部尚书，监督其工程；以大都、保定、真定、平阳、太原、大同、河间、大名、顺德、广平十个路供应其所需要的物资。
English: On the second day of the leap year, the construction of a Buddhist temple for the empress dowager in Mount Wutai began, and the former engineering department, Shang Shunie, was appointed only as an envoy of the academy to take charge of the affairs of the engineering department; the envoy of Yan'an and Hebei Province, Song De Rong, was appointed as the engineering department of Shang Shun to supervise the project; and the necessary materials were supplied by ten routes: Datu, Baoding, Zhending, Pingyang, Taiyuan, Datong, Hema, Daming, Shunde and Guangping.

古文：癸丑，岁星犯房。
现代文：初九，木星干犯房宿天区。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Jupiter entered the house of heaven.

古文：甲寅，太阴犯平道。
现代文：初十，太阴星干犯平道星。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Taiyin Star committed a crime against Pingdao Star.

古文：立梭厘招讨使司，以答而忽带为使，佩虎符。
现代文：设立梭厘招讨使司，任命答而忽带为招讨使，佩戴虎符。
English: Set up the Soli Recruitment Envoy, appoint the answer and suddenly wear the Recruitment Envoy, wear the tiger emblem.

古文：乙卯，太阴犯亢。
现代文：十一日，太阴星干犯亢宿天区。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the great Yin star committed the crime of entering the heaven zone.

古文：丁巳，太阴掩房。
现代文：十三日，太阴星掩蔽房宿。
English: On the thirteenth day, a very cloudy star covered the house.

古文：己未，罢打捕鹰房总管府，及司籍、周用、薄敛等库，及徽州路银场。
现代文：十五日，撤销打捕鹰房总管府，以及司籍库、周用库、薄敛库等府库，以及徽州路冶银场。
English: On the 15th, the General Administration Office of Yingfang was revoked, as well as the prefectural archives such as the Registrar's Office, the Zhou Library, and the Hubei Library, as well as the Huizhou Luye Silver Mine.

古文：各处盐使司盐场，改设司令、司丞。
现代文：各地盐使司的盐场改设司令、司丞。
English: He was the commander and secretary of the salt farms of the salt commissioners in various regions.

古文：仍免大都今岁田租。
现代文：仍旧免除大都今年的田租。
English: Most of them are still exempt from paying rice field rent this year.

古文：弛甘州酒禁。
现代文：放宽甘州的酒禁。
English: Relaxation of alcohol ban in Ganzhou.

古文：庚申，河南行省亏两淮岁办盐十万引、钞五千锭，遣紥剌而带等往鞫实，命随其罪之轻重治之。
现代文：十六日，河南行省亏损两淮备办的盐十万引、钱钞五千锭，派遣扎剌而带等前往审讯确实，命令根据其罪行的轻重处治。
English: On the 16th, it was confirmed that the Henan-bound loss-making two Huai prepared 100,000 yuan of salt and 5,000 yuan of banknotes, and sent them to the trial, and ordered them to be punished according to the severity of their crimes.

古文：陕西行省增羡盐钞一万二千五百余锭，山东都转运使司别思葛等增羡盐钞四千余锭，各赐衣以旌其能。
现代文：陕西行省增加结余的盐钞钱一万二千五百余锭，山东都转运使司别思葛等增加结余的盐钞钱四千余锭，各赐给衣服以表彰他们的才能。
English: Shaanxi Province received 12,500 salt banknotes and Shandong Province received 4,000 salt banknotes in recognition of their talents.

古文：南人洪幼学上封事，妄言五运，笞而遣之。
现代文：南方人洪幼学献上封奏之事，胡说五种运会，将他处以笞刑而遣出。
English: The southerner, Hong Ju Xue, presented a fanzone and talked nonsense about the Five Sports Games. He was punished with whipping and sent away.

古文：壬戌，塔即古阿散从不法伏诛。
现代文：十八日，塔即古阿散因犯法被处死。
English: On the 18th, Tajogu Ahsan was executed for breaking the law.

古文：诏禁行省、行泉府司抽分市舶船货，而固匿其珍细者。
现代文：下诏禁止行省、行泉府司抽取市舶商的货物，并共同隐匿那些珍贵精细的。
English: The following edict forbids the provincial government and the Quan prefectural government to take the goods of the city's shipping merchants and jointly conceal those precious and delicate goods.

古文：戊辰，遣爱牙赤核实高丽国储粮。
现代文：二十四日，派遣爱牙赤核实高丽国的储备粮。
English: On the 24th, Aiga Red was dispatched to verify the grain reserves of the Republic of Korea.

古文：平阳民诉诸王小薛、曲列失伯部曲恣横，遣官鞫之。
现代文：平阳的百姓控告诸侯王小薛、曲列失伯的部下恣意横行，派遣官员前去审讯。
English: The people of Pingyang accused the princes Wang Xiao Xue and Qu Lai Shubo's subordinates of arbitrarily rampant behavior, and sent officials to the trial.

古文：赐安南国王陈益稷钞千锭。
现代文：赐予安南国王陈益稷钱钞一千锭。
English: Chen Yixuan was given 1,000 baht in banknotes by King Annan.

古文：是月，兰州上下三百余里河清三日。
现代文：当月，兰州黄河上下三百余里清了三日。
English: That month, more than 300 miles up and down the Yellow River in Lanzhou were cleared in three days.

古文：五月戊寅，以鲁国大长公主建佛寺于应昌，给钞千锭、金五十两。
现代文：五月初五，因为鲁国大长公主在应昌建造佛寺，赐给钱钞一千锭、黄金五十两。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, because the Grand Princess of the State of Lu was building a Buddhist temple in Yingchang, she gave a thousand baht in banknotes and fifty taels of gold.

古文：命麦术丁、何荣祖等厘正选法。
现代文：命令麦术丁、何荣祖等订正铨选制度。
English: He ordered Mai Zhuting, He Rongzu and others to revise the election system.

古文：己卯，窜忙兀部别阇于江西，俾从月底迷失讨贼。
现代文：五月初六，把忙兀部的别流放到江西，命他跟随月底迷失讨伐贼寇。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month, he exiled Busy Be to Jiangxi Province and ordered him to follow the Lost at the end of the month to fight the bandits.

古文：庚辰，诏各省止存儒学提举司一，余悉罢之。
现代文：五月初七，诏令各行省只保留儒学提举司一处，其余的全部撤销。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth lunar month, the imperial edict ordered all provinces to retain only one Confucianism Promotion Division, and the rest were all revoked.

古文：升江南平阳等县为州。
现代文：把江南的平阳等县升格为州。
English: Pingyang and other counties in the south of the Yangtze River were upgraded to prefectures.

古文：以户为差，户至四万五万者为下州，五万至十万者为中州，下州官五员，中州六员。
现代文：以户数作为区别，户数达到四万五万的为下州，达到五万至十万的为中州。下州设官五员，中州设官六员。
English: Based on the number of households, those with up to 450,000 households will be assigned to Shimotsu, and those with between 50,000 and 100,000 households will be assigned to Chushu. Shimotsu will have five officials, and Chushu will have six.

古文：凡为中州者二十八，下州者十五。
现代文：一共有中州二十八个，下州十五个。
English: There are a total of 28 middle prefectures and 15 lower prefectures.

古文：又以户不及额，降连州路为连州。
现代文：又因为户数不足定额，把连州路降格为连州。
English: Also, because the number of households was less than the quota, Lianzhou Road was downgraded to Lianzhou.

古文：增重挑补钞人罪，告捕者仍优其赏，令犯人给之。
现代文：加重对挑唆造假钞人的罪罚，告发的人仍旧优给赏赐，令狱中犯人供给赏钱。
English: Increase the punishment for those who instigate the counterfeiting of banknotes. Those who denounce will still be rewarded, and prisoners will be made to provide reward money.

古文：辛巳，罢行大司农司。
现代文：五月初八，撤销行大司农司。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth month of the year, the Department of Agriculture was abolished.

古文：加平章政事麦术丁为平章军国重事，中书左丞、议中书省事何荣祖为昭文馆大学士，与中书省事。
现代文：加授平章政事麦术丁为平章军国重事，中书右丞、参议中书省事何荣祖为昭文馆大学士，参与中书省事务。
English: In addition, he was awarded the title of "Pingzhang" for his contribution to politics and military affairs, and the title of "Makizhuting" for his contribution to military affairs. He was also awarded the title of "Chuanshu" for his contribution to politics and military affairs, and the title of "Chuanshu" for his contribution to politics and military affairs, and the title "Chuanshu" for his contribution to politics and military affairs.

古文：甲申，诏自元贞元年五月以前逋欠钱粮者，皆罢征。
现代文：五月十一日，下诏从元贞元年五月以前拖欠未交的钱粮，一律停止征收。
English: On May 11th, the following edict was issued to stop the collection of all arrears of money grain from the Yuan Zhen before May of the first year.

古文：丁亥，太阴犯南斗。
现代文：五月十四日，太阴星干犯斗宿天区。
English: On May 14th, the Great Yin and the Great Yin collided in the sky.

古文：甲午，以诸王阿只吉部贫乏，赐钞二十万锭。
现代文：五月二十一日，因为诸侯王阿只吉部贫穷，赐给钱钞二十万锭。
English: On the 21st of May, because the vassal king, Ajukichi, was poor, he gave him 200,000 monies.

古文：江浙行省臣铁木而不听诏，遣官责之。
现代文：江浙行省大臣铁木而不服从诏令，派遣官员斥责他。
English: Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province Minister Tiemu did not obey the edict and sent officials to reprimand him.

古文：丙申，以伯颜之子买的为佥书枢密院事。
现代文：五月二十三日，任命伯颜之子买的为枢密院佥事。
English: On May 23rd, Bo Yan's son was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：太后言其父尽心王室，欲令代其父官，帝以其年尚小，故有是命。
现代文：太后说买的之父为王室尽心，想让他代替其父的官职，皇帝认为他的年龄还小，因而才有这项任命。
English: The Empress Dowager said that Buy's father was devoted to the royal family and wanted him to replace his father's official position, and the emperor thought he was too young, which led to this appointment.

古文：诏以农桑水利谕中外。
现代文：诏令把农桑生产以水为利晓谕朝内外。
English: The edict made it clear to both inside and outside the court that water should be used for the production of agricultural mulberry.

古文：巩昌府金州、西和州、会州雨雹，无麦禾。
现代文：巩昌府的金州、西和州、会州降下冰雹，麦禾无收。
English: Hail fell on Jinzhou, Xihezhou and Huizhou in Gongchang Prefecture, and no wheat was harvested.

古文：饶州、镇江、常州、湖州、平江、建康、太平、常德、澧州皆水。
现代文：饶州、镇江、常州、湖州、平江、建康、太平、常德、澧州均发生水灾。
English: Floods occurred in Raozhou, Zhenjiang, Changzhou, Huzhou, Pingjiang, Jiankang, Taiping, Changde and Zhangzhou.

古文：六月戊申，济南路之历城县大清河水溢，坏民居。
现代文：六月初五，济南路的历城县大清河泛滥，冲毁了民房。
English: On June 5, the Daqing River in Licheng County in Jinan Road flooded, destroying houses.

古文：壬子，高丽王王昛乞为太师中书令，不允。
现代文：初九，高丽国王王日巨请求担任太师中书令，皇帝不允。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the King of Goryeo, King Nichijo, requested to serve as Taishi Chusho Rei, but the Emperor did not agree.

古文：以近边役烦及水灾，免咸平府民八百户今年赋税。
现代文：因为靠近边境的差役繁重，以及水灾的缘故，免除咸平府百姓八百户今年的赋税。
English: Because of the heavy traffic near the border, as well as the floods, 800 households of the people of Xianping Prefecture are exempt from this year's tax.

古文：诏辽阳省进海东青鹘二十四驿，每驿给牛六头，使者食米五石，鹰食羊五口；又狗递十二驿，每户给钞十锭。
现代文：诏令辽阳行省进献海东青鹘快传驿站二十四处，每处驿站供给牛六头，驿使食米五石，鹰食羊五头。又加狗传驿站十二处，每个驿户供给钱钞十锭。
English: The imperial edict ordered Liaoyang Province to donate 24 stations of the East China Sea Qinghai-Tibet Express Relay, with each station providing six heads of cattle, five kilos of rice and five sheep. In addition, there were 12 stations of the dog relay, with each station providing ten rupees of money.

古文：甲寅，翰林承旨董文用等进《世祖实录》。
现代文：十一日，翰林学士承旨董文用等进奉《世祖实录》。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi Dong Wenyi and others presented the "Ancestor Record."

古文：乙卯，江西行省所辖郡大水无禾，民乏食，令有司与廉访司官赈之，仍弛江河湖泊之禁，听民采取。
现代文：十二日，江西行省所辖的州郡因为大水，庄稼无收，百姓缺粮，令地方官署和廉访司官员赈济饥民，并放宽江河湖泊的禁令，听任百姓渔猎。
English: On the 12th, the counties under the jurisdiction of Jiangxi Province were flooded, crops were not harvested, and the people were short of food. The local government offices and the officials of the Bureau of Investigation and Inspection were ordered to feed the hungry, and the ban on rivers and lakes was relaxed, allowing the people to fish and hunt.

古文：升沅州为路，以靖州隶之。
现代文：把沅州升格为路，把靖州隶属于该路。
English: upgrade Luzhou to a province and subordinate Jingzhou to it.

古文：遣使与各省官就迁调边远六品以下官，并左右两江宣慰司都元帅府、宣抚司，为广西两江道宣慰司都元帅府，以静江为治所，仍分司邕州。
现代文：派遣使臣与各行省的官员就地升迁提拔边远地区六品以下的官员。合并左右两江宣慰司都元帅府、宣抚司为广西两江道宣慰司都元帅府，以静江作为治所，并分管邕州。
English: Send envoys and officials from all provinces to promote and promote officials below the sixth grade in outlying areas. The merger of the left and right Two Rivers Relief Division to the Marshal's Office, and the Relief Division to the Marshal's Office of the Guangxi Two Rivers Relief Division, with Jingjiang as the administrative center, and in charge of Zhangzhou.

古文：敕： 凡上封事者，命中书省发缄视之，然后以闻。 
现代文：敕令： 凡是上奏封事的，命中书省打开封口审察，然后上奏皇帝。 
English: Imperial edict: Whenever a matter is sealed, the Ministry of Education is ordered to open the seal and examine it, and then the emperor is to be sealed.

古文：诏河西僧纳租税。
现代文：诏令河西的僧侣交纳租税。
English: The edict ordered the monks in Hexi to pay taxes.

古文：癸亥，立蒙古军都元帅府于西川，径隶枢密院，以阿剌铁木而、岳乐罕并为都元帅，佩虎符。
现代文：二十日，在西川设立蒙古军都元帅府，直接隶属于枢密院，任命阿剌铁木而、岳乐罕共同担任都元帅，佩戴虎符。
English: On the 20th, the Mongolian Army's Capital Marshal's Office was established in Xichuan, directly subordinated to the Privy Council, appointing Aba Tiemu and Yue Lehan to jointly serve as the capital marshal, wearing the tiger emblem.

古文：河西陇北道廉访司鞫张万户不法，西平王奥鲁赤沮挠其事，帝命谕之。
现代文：河西陇北道廉访司审讯张万户犯法之事，西平王奥鲁赤阻挠这件事。皇帝命令劝谕他。
English: Xiping King Oluka obstructed the investigation of Zhang Wanzhong's illegal activities by the Criminal Investigation Department of North Shandong Province. The emperor ordered to advise him.

古文：甲子，以安西王所部出征军妻孥乏食，给粮二千石。
现代文：二十一日，因为安西王部下出征士兵的妻儿缺粮，赐给粮食二千石。
English: On the twenty-first day, because the wives and children of soldiers dispatched by Anxi's subordinates were short of grain, he gave them two thousand koku of grain.

古文：昭、贺、藤、邕、澧、全、衡、柳、吉、赣、南安等处蛮寇窃发，以军民官备御不严，抚字不至，皆责而降之。
现代文：昭州、贺州、藤州、邕州、澧州、全州、衡州、柳州、吉州、赣州、南安等地的蛮寇作乱，因为掌管军民事务的官员防御不严，安抚的文书不到，均责成他们令蛮寇投降。
English: Since the officials in charge of civil and military affairs were not able to secure a pacifying document, they ordered them to force the barbarians to surrender, as the barbarians in Shoshu, Hezhou, Fujishu, Bozhou, Bozhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Hengzhou, Liuzhou, Jizhou, Bozhou, Nan'an and other places were rioting.

古文：驸马济宁王蛮子台私杀罪人，御史台臣言其专擅，有旨谕蛮子台令知之。
现代文：驸马济宁王蛮子台私自杀死罪囚，御史台大臣认为他专权随意，皇帝有旨谕示蛮子台，令他懂得。
English: King Barbarossa committed suicide and became a death row inmate. The Minister of History thought that he had the power to do as he pleased. The Emperor gave Barbarossa an edict so that he would understand.

古文：庚午，立西域卫亲军都指挥使司，以迷而的斤为都指挥使。
现代文：二十七日，设立西域卫亲军都指挥使司，任命迷而的斤为都指挥使。
English: On the 27th, the Western Region Garrison Commander-in-Chief Division was established, and the confused Jin was appointed as the Commander-in-Chief.

古文：是月，汴梁路蝗，利州、盖州螟，泰安、曹州、济宁路水，巩昌、环州、庆阳、延安、安西旱。
现代文：当月，汴梁路发生蝗灾，利州、盖州发生螟害，泰安、曹州、济宁路发生水灾，巩昌、环州、庆阳、延安、安西发生旱灾。
English: In the same month, locust plagues occurred in Qilian Road, hail damage occurred in Lizhou and Gaizhou, floods occurred in Tai'an, Caozhou and Jining Road, and droughts occurred in Gongchang, Huanzhou, Qingyang, Yan'an and Anxi.

古文：秋七月乙亥，徙甘、凉御匠五百余户于襄阳。
现代文：秋季，七月初三，迁移甘州、凉州的御匠五百余户到襄阳。
English: In the autumn, on the third day of the seventh month, more than 500 masters from Ganzhou and Liangzhou migrated to Yangyang.

古文：诏江南地税输钞。
现代文：诏令江南的地租用钱钞交纳。
English: The edict ordered land rent in the south of the Yangtze River to be paid in banknotes.

古文：丁丑，太阴犯亢。
现代文：初五，太阴星干犯亢宿天区。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the yin and yang stars are in the sky.

古文：罢追问已原逋欠。
现代文：停止追究原先拖欠未交的租税。
English: Stop pursuing the original tax arrears.

古文：普颜怯里迷失公主等，俱以其部贫乏来告，赐钞计四十九万余锭。
现代文：普颜怯里迷失公主等都把他们部下贫困的情况前来陈告，赐给钱钞总计为四十九万余锭。
English: Pu Yan, the timidly lost princess, and others all came forward to report the poverty of their subordinates, and gave them money and banknotes totaling more than four hundred and ninety thousand baht.

古文：御史台臣言： 内地盗贼窃发者众，皆由国家赦宥所致，乞命中书立为条格，督责所属，期至尽灭。 
现代文：御史台大臣上奏说 ：内地盗贼作乱的很多，都是由于国家赦免宽容他们造成的。请命令中书省制定条令规格，督促责成部属，在限定的日期内灭尽盗贼。 
English: The Minister of State for History said in his report: Many of the disturbances caused by the mainland thieves were caused by the state's pardon and tolerance of them. Please order the Ministry of Education to formulate regulations and specifications, urge and instruct subordinates to exterminate the thieves within a limited period of time.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：皇帝批示说： 可行。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：乙卯，诏申饬中外： 有儒吏兼通者，各路举之，廉访司每道岁贡二人，省台委官立法考试，中程者用之，所贡不公，罪其举者。
现代文：初七，下诏申令朝内外说： 有兼通儒书和吏治的人，各路举荐上来，各道廉访司每年举荐二人，行省御史台委派官员立法考试，考中课程的即录用；所举荐不公正，将举荐者治罪。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued an edict to the imperial court and the outside world, saying, "Those who have both knowledge of Confucianism and administration should be recommended from all directions, and the departments for investigation of corruption in each province should recommend two persons each year. The provincial government should appoint officials to take the legislative examination, and those who pass the middle school examination should be immediately hired. The recommendation is not fair, and those who make the recommendation should be punished."

古文：职官坐赃论断，再犯者加二等。
现代文：在职的官员按照贪赃罪论处，再次犯法的罪加二等。
English: Officials in office will be punished according to the crime of corruption, and the crime of re-offending the law will be increased by two.

古文：仓库官吏盗所守钱粮，一贯以下笞之，至十贯杖之，二十贯加十等，一百二十贯徒一年，每三十贯加半年，二百四十贯徒三年，满三百贯者死。
现代文：仓库官吏盗窃其所监守的钱粮，价值一贯以下的处以笞刑，达到一贯的处以杖刑，二十贯以上罪加一等，达到一百二十贯的判徒刑一年，每三十贯加刑半年，二百四十贯判徒刑三年，满三百贯的判处死刑。
English: If a warehouse official steals the money and grain he is guarding, he will be punished with whipping if the value is below the standard, with cane if the value is above the standard, with one-year imprisonment if the value is above 20 yuan, with half-year imprisonment if the value is above 120 yuan, with three-year imprisonment if the value is above 240 yuan, and with death penalty if the value is above 300 yuan.

古文：计赃以至元钞为则。 
现代文：计算赃款以至元的交钞为标准。 
English: The standard for calculating stolen money is a banknote with a denomination of up to one yuan.

古文：给江南行御史台守护军百人。
现代文：派给江南行御史台守护军一百名。
English: One hundred men were sent to the south of the Yangtze River to guard the historical platform.

古文：减海南屯田军之半，还其元翼。
现代文：减少海南屯田军的一半，让他们返回本营。
English: Halve the number of troops stationed in Hainan and let them return to their home base.

古文：诏增给诸军药饵价直。
现代文：诏令增加给予诸军药物的价钱。
English: The decree increases the price of medicines given to the armed forces.

古文：壬午，立肇州屯田万户府，以辽阳行省左丞阿散领其事。
现代文：初十，设立肇州屯田万户府，任命辽阳行省左丞阿散掌管万户府事务。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Zhaozhou Tunden Wanyu Prefecture was established, and Liaoyang Xingxing Zuo Zhe A San was appointed to be in charge of the affairs of Wanyu Prefecture.

古文：甲申，岁星犯房。
现代文：十二日，木星干犯房宿天区。
English: On the twelfth day, Jupiter trespassed into the quarter of the heavens.

古文：给塞下贫民钞二万四千锭。
现代文：赐给塞外的贫民钱钞二万四千锭。
English: Twenty-four thousand baht in banknotes and coins were given to the poor outside of the country.

古文：己丑，赐刘国杰玉带锦衣，旌其战功。
现代文：十七日，赐给刘国杰玉带锦衣，以表彰他的战功。
English: On the 17th, Liu Guojie was given a jade belt brocade dress in recognition of his war service.

古文：辛卯，以秃秃合所部贫乏，赐钞十万锭。
现代文：十九日，因为秃秃合的部属贫穷，赐给他钱钞十万锭。
English: On the 19th, because of the poverty of Baldo's subordinates, he was given 100,000 baht in banknotes.

古文：戊戌，朱永福、边珍裕以妖言伏诛。
现代文：二十六日，朱永福、边珍裕因为散布妖言被处死。
English: On the 26th, Zhu Yongfu and Bian Zhenyu were executed for spreading evil rumors.

古文：紥鲁忽赤文移旧用国语，敕改从汉字。
现代文：大断事官的公文原来用蒙古文，敕命改用汉字。
English: The official document of the grand adjudicator was originally written in Mongolian, but was changed to Chinese characters.

古文：壬寅，诏易江南诸路天庆观为玄妙观，毁所奉宋太祖神主。
现代文：三十日，诏令把江南诸路的天庆观改为玄妙观，砸毁其所供奉的宋太祖神主。
English: On the 30th, the imperial edict changed the Tianqing view of the south of the Yangtze River to the mysterious view, destroying the Song Taizu deity it worshipped.

古文：大都、辽东、东平、常德、湖州武卫屯田大水，隆兴路雹，太原、平阳、安丰、河间等路旱。
现代文：大都、辽东、东平、常德、湖州武卫的屯田发生水灾，隆兴路发生雹灾，太原、平阳、安丰、河间等路发生旱灾。
English: Floods occurred in the townships of Datu, Liaodong, Dongping, Changde, and Huzhou Wuwei, floods occurred in Longxing Road, and droughts occurred in Taiyuan, Pingyang, Anfeng, and Hema.

古文：八月乙酉，太阴犯牛。
现代文：八月初七，太阴星干犯牛宿天区。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month of the lunar month, the yin and yang star is in the celestial quarter.

古文：壬子，太阴犯垒壁阵。
现代文：初十，太阴星干犯垒壁阵星。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the sun was too dark to be seen.

古文：辛酉，缅国进驯象三。
现代文：十九日，缅国进贡驯象三头。
English: On the 19th, Myanmar paid tribute to train three elephants.

古文：癸亥，赈辽阳民被水者粮两月。
现代文：二十一日，赈济辽阳遭受水灾的百姓两个月粮食。
English: On the 21st, the people of Liaoyang who suffered from floods were given food for two months.

古文：己巳，以驸马那怀知枢密院事。
现代文：二十七日，任命驸马那怀执掌枢密院事务。
English: On the 27th, he appointed Mana Narasimha to take charge of the Privy Council.

古文：金、复州屯田有虫食禾，汴梁、安西、真定等路旱，平江、安丰等路大水。
现代文：金州、复州的屯田有虫吃庄稼，汴梁、安西、真定等路发生旱灾，平江、安丰等路发生大水。
English: In Jinzhou and Fuzhou, there were insects eating crops in the tundra, droughts occurred in Qiliang, Anxi, and Zhending, and floods occurred in Pingjiang and Anfeng.

古文：九月甲戌，帝至自上都。
现代文：九月初三，皇帝从上都抵达京师。
English: On the third day of September, the emperor arrived in Beijing from Shangdu.

古文：乙亥，用帝师奏，释大辟三人、杖以下四十七人。
现代文：初四，采纳帝师的建议，释放处以死刑的囚徒三人，处以杖刑以下罪罚的四十七人。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the emperor's suggestion was adopted to release three prisoners sentenced to death and forty-seven people sentenced to the cane or less.

古文：戊寅，以八撒而治私第，给盐万引。
现代文：初七，因为八撒而建造私宅，赐给他盐一万引。
English: On the 7th day of the month, he built a house for himself because of the 8th son, and gave him ten thousand talents of salt.

古文：诏输米十万石于榷场故廪，以备北塞。
现代文：下诏运米十万石到榷场原来的仓库里，以备北部边塞之用。
English: The next order was to transport 100,000 koku of rice to the original warehouse in Ganchang, in preparation for the northern border fortification.

古文：以探马赤军士所至扰民，令合伯镇之，犯者罪其主将。
现代文：因为探马赤军的士兵所到之处骚扰百姓，令合伯前去镇抚，有犯法的士兵则将其主将治罪。
English: Because the soldiers of the Red Army harassed the people wherever they went, He Bo was ordered to appease them, and soldiers who violated the law were punished by their commanders.

古文：乙卯，罢四川淘金户四千，还其元籍，罪初献言者。
现代文：初八，撤除四川的淘金户四千人，让他们返回原籍，将最初献策淘金者治罪。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, 4,000 gold panning households in Sichuan were removed, so that they could return to their place of origin, and the gold panners who initially proposed the policy were criminalized.

古文：庚辰，罢宁夏路行中书省，以其事并入甘肃行省。
现代文：初九，撤销宁夏路行中书省，把它的事务合并到甘肃行省。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the Ministry of Education and Culture of Ningxia was abolished, and its affairs were merged into the Ministry of Education and Culture of Gansu Province.

古文：丁亥，瓜哇遣使来献方物。
现代文：十六日，爪哇国派遣使臣前来贡献地方特产。
English: On the 16th, the state of Java sent an envoy to Cebu to contribute local special products.

古文：己丑，给桓州甲匠粮千石。
现代文：十八日，赐给桓州的甲匠粮米一千石。
English: On the 18th, a thousand koku of grain and rice was given to Kousho in Kanshu.

古文：壬辰，湖州司狱郭玘诉浙西廉访司佥事张孝思多取廪饩，孝思系玘于狱。
现代文：二十一日，湖州司狱郭王巳控告浙西廉访司佥事张孝思多取官粮补贴，张孝思把郭王巳关进监狱。
English: On the twenty-first day, Guo Wangsi, the Huzhou prison chief, accused Zhang Xiaosi of taking more government grain subsidies than the Zhejiang West Liancheng visiting chief, and Zhang Xiaosi put Guo Wangsi in prison.

古文：行台令监察御史杨仁往鞫，而江浙行省平章铁木而逮孝思至省讯问，又令其属官与仁同鞫玘事，仁不从，行台以闻。
现代文：行御史台命监察御史杨仁前去审讯，而江浙行省平章政事铁木而却把张孝思逮捕到行省讯问，又命他的属官和杨仁共同审讯郭王巳的事情，杨仁不同意，行御史台将此事奏闻朝廷。
English: At the behest of the Imperial Historian's Office, the Imperial Historian's Office supervised the imperial historian Yang Ren to go to the trial, but the Jiangsu and Zhejiang provincial governor Pingzhang Tiemu arrested Zhang Xiaosi to the provincial interrogation, and ordered his subordinate officers and Yang Ren to jointly interrogate Guo Wang Si. Yang Ren did not agree, and the Imperial Historian's Office reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：诏省台遣官鞫问，既引服，皆杖之。
现代文：皇帝诏令中书省御史台派官员前去审讯，张孝思、郭王己自承诬陷之罪以后，均处以杖刑。
English: The emperor issued a decree to send officials from the Ministry of History to the trial, and Zhang Xiaosi and Guo Wang were both sentenced to caning after they confessed to the crime of framing.

古文：诸王小薛部众扰民，遣官按问，杖其所犯重者，余听小薛责之。
现代文：诸侯王小薛的部众扰害百姓，派遣官员前去讯问，将其中犯法较重的处以杖刑，其余的听凭小薛责罚他们。
English: Prince Xiao Xue's subordinates harassed the people, sent officials to interrogate them, and punished those who committed more serious offenses with the cane. The rest were punished by Xiao Xue.

古文：甲午，太阴犯轩辕。
现代文：二十三日，太阴星干犯轩辕星座。
English: On the 23rd, the supercluster Taiyin violated the Constellation of Xuanxuan.

古文：戊戌，太阴犯平道。
现代文：二十七日，太阴星干犯平道星。
English: On the 27th, Taiyin Star committed a crime against Pingdao Star.

古文：宣德府大水，军民乏食，给粮两月。
现代文：宣德府发生水灾，军民缺粮，赐给两个月口粮。
English: A flood occurred in Xuandefu, the military and civilians were short of food, and they were given two months of rations.

古文：武卫万盈屯及延安路陨霜杀禾，高邮府、泗州、贺州旱，平江、庐州等路大水。
现代文：武卫的万盈屯以及延安路降下严霜冻死庄稼，高邮府、泗州、贺州发生旱灾，平江、庐州等路发生水灾。
English: The frost killed crops in Wan Ying Tun and Yan'an Road in Wuwei, droughts occurred in Gaoyou Post Office, Zhangzhou and Hezhou, and floods occurred in Pingjiang River and Zhangzhou.

古文：冬十月癸卯，有事于太庙。
现代文：冬季，十月初三，在太庙进行祭祀。
English: In winter, on the third day of October, a ritual is held at Taimiao.

古文：中书省臣言： 去岁世祖、皇后、裕宗祔庙，以绫代玉册。
现代文：中书省大臣上奏说 ：去年世祖、皇后、裕宗的神主附祭于太庙，以绢绫书写代替玉册。
English: The Minister of the Chinese Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy reported: Last year, the deities of the ancestor, the empress, and Yuzong were enshrined in the Great Temple, and the scroll was written in ink instead of the jade scroll.

古文：今玉册、玉宝成，请纳诸各室。 
现代文：如今玉册、玉宝制成，请送进各个祭室。 
English: Now that the jade book and the jade treasure have been made, please take them to the various ritual rooms.

古文：帝曰： 亲享之礼，祖宗未尝行之，其奉册以来，朕躬祝之。 
现代文：皇帝说： 祭享宗亲的典礼，祖宗没有实行过。希望奉献玉册的时候，我亲自进行祝祷。 
English: The emperor said, "The ceremony of dedicating and enjoying ancestral relatives has never been carried out by our ancestors. When I wish to dedicate the jade scroll, I personally offer a blessing.

古文：命献官迎导入庙。
现代文：命祭献的官员引导皇帝进入太庙。
English: The officials who sacrificed their lives led the emperor into the imperial temple.

古文：给江浙、河南巡逻私盐南军兵仗。
现代文：给予江浙、河南巡逻私盐的南军武器甲仗。
English: Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Henan have been given the southern army's weapons to patrol and steal salt.

古文：癸丑，以西北叛王将入自土蕃，命平章军国重事答失蛮往征之，仍敕便宜总帅发兵千人从行，听其节度。
现代文：十三日，因为西北的叛王将从吐蕃侵入，命令平章军国重事答失蛮前往征讨，并敕令便宜行事总帅发兵一千人随行，听由答失蛮节制、调遣。
English: On the 13th, because the northwestern rebel king would invade from Tubo, he ordered Pingzhang to go to collect the important things of the military state, and ordered the commander-in-chief to send a thousand soldiers to accompany and control and dispatch them.

古文：甲寅，中书省、御史台臣言： 江浙行省平章明里不花陈台宪非便事，臣等议，乞自今监察御史廉访司有所按核，州县官与本路同鞫，路官与宣慰司同鞫，宣慰司官与行省同鞫。 
现代文：十四日，中书省、御史台大臣上奏说 ：江浙行省平章政事明里不花陈奏行御史台官员执行公务不便的事情，臣等商议，请求从今以后监察御史有所检察审核的案子，由州县官和本路长官共同讯问，路长官和宣慰司共同讯问，宣慰司官员与行中书省共同讯问。 
English: On the 14th, the Minister of the Central Historiography Department and the Minister of the Central Historiography Department made a report saying that the political affairs of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, Pingzhang, were clearly not inconvenient for the officials of the Central Historiography Department to perform their official duties. The ministers and others discussed and requested that from now on, the cases of the supervision and examination of the Central Historiography Department should be jointly interrogated by the state and county officials and the chief of the road, the chief of the road and the consolation secretary jointly interrogated, and the consolation secretary officials and the Central Historiography Department jointly interrogated.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：皇帝批示说 ：可以。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：诏诸王、驸马部民既隶军籍者，毋夺回本部。
现代文：诏令：诸侯王、驸马部属的百姓已经隶属于军籍的，不得强迫他们返回本部。
English: Imperial edict: Princes, princes, and people belonging to the Ministry of the Horse, who have already been subordinated to the military, must not be forced to return to the headquarters.

古文：己未，赐各卫士贫乏者钞二万九千三百余锭。
现代文：十九日，赐给各卫贫穷的士兵钱钞，共二万九千三百余锭。
English: On the 19th, a total of more than 29,300 baht in banknotes and coins were given to the impoverished soldiers of the two armies.

古文：辛酉，辰星犯房。
现代文：二十一日，水星干犯房宿天区。
English: On the twenty-first day, Mercury enters the house.

古文：壬戌，辰星犯键闭。
现代文：二十二日，水星干犯键闭星。
English: On the 22nd, Mercury will be retrograde.

古文：癸亥，赐诸王巴撒而、火而忽答孙、秃剌三部钞四万八千五百余锭。
现代文：二十三日，赐给诸侯王巴撒而、火而忽答孙、秃剌三部钱钞共四万八千五百余锭。
English: On the 23rd, three sets of banknotes, totaling more than 48,500 baht, were given to the princes Basakure, Heguru, and Vulture.

古文：丁卯，以博而赤、答剌赤等贫乏，赐钞二万九千余锭。
现代文：二十七日，因为博而赤、答剌赤一类人贫穷，赐给他们钱钞二万九千余锭。
English: On the 27th, he gave more than 29,000 baht in banknotes and coins to poor people such as Bo Erhak and Dato Erhak.

古文：戊辰，太白昼见，太阴犯房。
现代文：二十八日，太白金星白昼出现。太阴星干犯房宿天区。
English: On the 28th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime, and the too-dark Venus stayed in the sky.

古文：遣安南朝贡使陈利用等还其国，降诏谕陈日燇。
现代文：遣送安南朝贡使陈利用等返回他们本国，下诏晓谕陈日火尊。
English: Send Annan's tributary envoys to Chen Rong and others back to their home countries, and issue the following edict to Chen Ronghu.

古文：十一月甲戌，太白经天及犯垒壁阵。
现代文：十一月初四，太白金星行经天宇并干犯垒壁阵星。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month, the great white planet Venus will pass through the sky and collide with the Bastion Star.

古文：辛巳，置江浙行省检校官二员，立江浙金银洞冶转运使司。
现代文：十一日，设置江浙行省检校官二名。设立江浙金银洞冶转运使司。
English: On the 11th day of the month, two Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial Inspection Officers were set up, and the Jiangsu and Zhejiang Jinyintong Metallurgy Transportation Envoy Office was established.

古文：乙酉，太阴犯井。
现代文：十五日，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the fifteenth day, Taiyin star dry criminal wells Yutian District.

古文：丙戌，毯阳酋长之兄脱杭捧于、法而剌酋长之弟密剌八都、阿鲁酋长之弟脱杭忽先等，各奉金表来觐。
现代文：十六日，毯阳酋长的哥哥脱杭捧于、法而剌酋长的弟弟密剌八都、阿鲁酋长的弟弟脱杭忽先等，各自奉上金粉书写的表章前来觐见。
English: On the 16th, the elder brother of the chief of Baoyang, Dehang Hupu, the younger brother of the chief of Fawang, Mishu Badu, the younger brother of the chief of Aru, Dehang Hwuxian, and so on, each presented a gold-painted badge to the audience.

古文：丁亥，太阴犯鬼。
现代文：十七日，太阴星干犯鬼宿天区。
English: On the seventeenth day, the Great Yin star committed the crime of haunting the sky.

古文：戊子，赐阿鲁酋长虎符。
现代文：十八日，赐给阿鲁酋长虎符。
English: On the 18th, Aru was given the Chieftain Tiger Badge.

古文：癸巳，赐安西王甲胄、枪挝、弓矢、橐鞬等十五万八千二百余事。
现代文：二十三日，赐给安西王甲胄、枪挝、弓箭、箭囊弓袋等，总共十五万八千二百多件。
English: On the 23rd, a total of more than 158,200 pieces of armor, guns, bows and arrows, arrow cases, and bow bags were given to King Anxi.

古文：戊戌，升赣州路之宁都、会昌二县为州，以石城县隶宁都，瑞金县隶会昌。
现代文：二十八日，把赣州路的宁都、会昌二县升格为州，把石城县隶属于宁都，瑞金县隶属于会昌。
English: On the 28th, Ningdu and Huichang two counties on Luzhou Road were upgraded to prefectures, Shicheng County was subordinated to Ningdu, and Ruijin County was subordinated to Huichang.

古文：诏江浙行省括隐漏官田及检劾富强避役之户。
现代文：诏令江浙行省登记隐瞒遗漏的官田，并审核查处有钱有势而逃避徭役的民户。
English: The edict ordered Jiangsu and Zhejiang to register the omitted and concealed government-owned fields, and to examine the private households with money and influence that evaded the forced labor.

古文：十二月庚子朔，遣集贤院使阿里浑撒里等祭星于司天台。
现代文：十二月初一，派遣集贤院使阿里浑撒里等在司天台祭星。
English: On the first day of December, Jixianyuan sent Ali Hunsari to wait for the star of the Tiantai Festival.

古文：癸卯，以驸马阿不花所部民贫，赐钞万锭。
现代文：初四，因为驸马阿不花所部百姓贫穷，赐给钱钞一万锭。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, he gave 10,000 baht in money and notes to the poor people in the area because he did not want to spend it.

古文：赐诸王押忽秃、忽剌出、阿失罕等金各二百五十两、钞五百锭。
现代文：赐给诸侯王押忽秃、忽剌出、阿失罕等黄金各二百五十两、钱钞五百锭。
English: He gave the lords and princes, such as Abi-Khubal, Khubad-Daula, and Abi-Khan, 250 taels of gold each, and 500 taels of banknotes.

古文：丙辰，太阴犯轩辕。
现代文：十七日，太阴星干犯轩辕星座。
English: On the seventeenth day, the very dark star committed the crime of being a constellation.

古文：荆南僧普昭等伪撰佛书，有不道语，伏诛。
现代文：荆南的僧人晋昭等伪造佛书，有大逆不道的话，被处死。
English: Jin Zhao, a monk from Jingnan, and others who forged Buddhist scriptures, including those who committed high treason, were executed.

古文：己未，诏大都路，凡和顾和买及一切差役，以诸色户与民均当。
现代文：二十日，诏令大都路，凡属官府雇佣工匠，征收税钱等，命各类民户与一般百姓平均承担。
English: On the 20th, the edict of Datou Road was issued, and all craftsmen employed by the government were ordered to collect taxes, which were to be borne equally by all types of households and the general public.

古文：赐诸王不颜铁木而、阿八也不干金各五百两、银五千两、钞二千锭、币帛各二百匹，其幼王减五分之一。
现代文：赐给诸侯王不颜铁木儿、阿八也不干黄金各五百两、白银五千两、钱钞二千锭、绢帛各二百匹，其未成年的幼王减少五分之一。
English: He gave five hundred taels of gold, five thousand taels of silver, two thousand taels of banknotes, and two hundred yakitori to each of the princes, the king and the queen, and reduced the number of their minor children by one-fifth.

古文：以各道廉访司官八员，员一印，命收其三。
现代文：因为各道的八名廉访司官员每人都有一枚印信，命收回其中的三枚。
English: Because each of the eight ICAC officers from each province had a stamped letter, three of them were ordered to be withdrawn.

古文：甲子，太阴犯天江。
现代文：二十五日，太阴星干犯天江星。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the star Taiyin offended the star Tianjiang.

古文：赐帝师双龙纽玉印。
现代文：赐给帝师饰有双龙钮键的玉印。
English: The emperor was given a jade seal decorated with double dragon buttons.

古文：也速带而之军因李璮乱去山东，其元驻之地为人所垦，岁久成业，争讼不已；命别以境内荒田给之，正军五顷，余丁二顷，已满数者不给。
现代文：也速带而的军队因为李王之乱而去了山东，其原来的驻地被人开垦，年岁久了成为他人的产业，双方争吵诉讼不停。命令另以境内的荒田给予也速带而，在籍的正军每人五顷，余下的士卒每人二顷，已经够数不再给。
English: Due to the Rebellion of King Li, the hastily brought troops went to Shandong. Their original station was reclaimed by people, and over the years it became the property of others. The two sides quarreled and sued incessantly. The order was also given to hastily bring in other wasteland in the territory. The active soldiers were given five hectares each, and the remaining soldiers were given two hectares each, which was enough to no longer give.

古文：减海运脚价钞一贯，计每石六贯五百文，著为令。
现代文：降低海运粮食的运费钱一贯，计每石的运费为六贯零五百文，著明为法令。
English: To reduce the cost of shipping grain by sea, the cost of shipping grain by sea shall be increased to six thousand and five hundred yuan per stone, which is clearly stipulated in the decree.

古文：徙缙山所居乞里乞思等民于山东，以田与牛、种给之。
现代文：把住在缙山的乞里乞思等部的百姓迁移到山东，把农田、耕牛和种子给他们。
English: They moved the people living in Lushan's Qili, Qisi and other parts to Shandong, and gave them farmland, cattle and seeds.

古文：丁卯，禁诸王辄召有司官吏。
现代文：二十八日，禁止诸侯王随意征召官府的官吏。
English: On the 28th, the princes were forbidden to conscript government officials at will.

古文：己巳，诏免军器匠门徭。
现代文：三十日，下诏免除军器匠户的徭役。
English: On the 30th, the emperor issued an edict exempting military artisans from the tax.

古文：是岁，断大辟三十人。
现代文：这一年，判处死刑的罪犯三十人。
English: In that year, there were thirty criminals sentenced to death.

