古文：刘邺叶京李蔼房珝汪遵刘允章王凝卢尚卿李尧高湜公乘亿孙龙光王璘蒋凝吴融卢光启王彦昌杜升郑昌图程贺陈峤秦韬玉陆扆张曙崔昭矩贾泳
现代文：刘邺叶京李蔼房珝汪遵刘允章王凝卢尚卿李尧高湜公乘亿孙龙光王璘蒋凝吴融卢光启王彦昌杜升郑昌图程贺陈峤秦韬玉陆扆张曙崔昭矩贾泳
English: Liu Bei, Ye Jing, Li Yan Fang, Wei Wang Zun, Liu Yun Zhang, Wang Jing, Lu Shangqing, Li Yan, Gao Wei, Gong Jizhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong

古文：刘邺
现代文：刘邺
English: Liu Xuan

古文：刘邺字汉藩。咸通中，自长春宫判官召入内庭。特赐及第。
现代文：刘邺字汉藩，唐懿宗中期，由长春宫判官任上召入京城，特别赐给他进士及第。
English: In the middle of the Tang Dynasty, Liu Xizhi from the Han Dynasty was appointed by the magistrate of the Changchun Palace to enter the capital city, and he was specially awarded the title of Jin Shi and the first rank.

古文：韦保义以兄在相位，应举不得，特赐及第，擢入内庭。
现代文：韦保义的哥哥做宰相，不能应举，也赐给进士，提拔做京官。
English: Wei Baoyi's elder brother was made prime minister, but could not be promoted. He was also given a promotion to be a Beijing official.

古文：叶京
现代文：叶京
English: Yejing

古文：叶京，建州人也，极有赋名。
现代文：叶京是建州人，他的赋很有名。
English: Ye Jing is a native of Jiangzhou, and his Fu is very famous.

古文：向游大梁，常预公宴，因与监军使面熟。
现代文：曾经游太梁，经常参加官家的宴会，因之同监军使相识。
English: He used to travel to Tailiang and often attended official banquets, which is how he became acquainted with the inspector general.

古文：及至京师时已遂登科，与同年连镳而行。逢其人于通衢，马上相揖。
现代文：京试时中进士，与同年们骑马同行，在大街上遇到那位监军使，没有下马，仅仅一揖。
English: When he was a junior high school student at the Beijing exam, he rode with his classmates and met the inspector on the street. He didn't get off the horse, he just hitchhiked.

古文：因之谤议喧然，后颇至沈弃。终于太学博士。
现代文：这是一种不礼貌的行为，因此被人非议导致他官运也不好，只做到太学博士。
English: This was an impolite act, and as a result, he was criticized, which led to a bad career, and he only became a doctor of science.

古文：李蔼
现代文：李蔼
English: Li Aini

古文：李蔼应举功勤，敏妙绝伦，人谓之束翅鹞子。
现代文：李蔼为了应举，读书勤奋。才思敏捷，妙笔文章。被人称为束翅鹞子，意思展翅便可腾飞。
English: In order to be promoted, Li Yan is diligent in reading. He is quick-witted and writes excellent articles. He is known as a "bunch-winged louse," meaning that he can fly if he spreads his wings.

古文：咸通二年及第。
现代文：咸通二年考中进士。
English: Hamdong passed the second-year middle school entrance examination.

古文：房珝
现代文：房珝
English: Chestnut

古文：房珝，河南人，太尉之孙，咸通四年垂成而败。
现代文：河南人房珝，祖父做过太尉。咸通四年功败垂成。
English: A native of Henan Province, his grandfather was a captain. Hamdong's achievements in the past four years have been outstanding.

古文：先是名第定矣，无何写试之际，仰泥土落，击翻砚瓦，污试纸。
现代文：本来他能够考中，但是正在考试时房上的泥落下来，打翻了砚台，污损了卷纸。
English: Originally, he was able to take the middle school exam, but during the exam, the mud on the room fell down, knocked over the turntable, and stained the rolling paper.

古文：珝以中表重地，只荐珝一人，主事不获已，须应之。珝既临曙，更请印副试。
现代文：河南是一个重要的地方，只举荐了他一个人。他认为主持考试的官员肯定会照顾他，更换一张卷纸。
English: Henan is an important place, only one person recommended him. He thought that the official who presided over the examination would certainly take care of him and replace a roll of paper.

古文：主司不诺，遂罢。
现代文：但是天亮时他向监场的试官请求更换卷纸时，遭到拒绝。因之落第。
English: But at dawn, when he asked the inspector at the inspection station to replace the roll of paper, he was refused and failed.

古文：汪遵
现代文：汪遵
English: by Wang Zun

古文：许棠，宣州泾县人，早修举业。
现代文：许棠是宣州泾县人，读了很多年书。
English: Xu Tang is a native of Xuanzhou Yixian County and has read many almanacs.

古文：乡人汪遵者幼为小吏。
现代文：同乡人汪遵从小做吏员。
English: Fellow villager Wang Zunong worked as a small clerk.

古文：洎棠应二十余举，遵犹在胥徒。
现代文：许棠考了二十多次，汪遵还是小吏。
English: Xu Tang has taken the exam more than 20 times, but Wang Zun is still a minor official.

古文：然善为绝句诗，而深晦密。
现代文：汪遵的绝句诗作得极好，功底深厚。
English: Wang Zun's poem is very good and profound.

古文：一旦辞役就贡，会棠送客至灞浐，忽遇遵于途中。棠讯之曰：汪都，何事至京？
现代文：他辞去了吏职去参加考试，遇到送客的许棠。许棠问他到京城来做什么？汪遵说来参加京试。
English: He resigned from his post as an official to take the exam, and met Xu Tang, who was seeing him off. Xu Tang asked him what he had come to Beijing to do. Wang Zun said that he had come to take the Beijing exam.

古文：遵对曰：此来就贡。棠怒曰：小吏无礼。
现代文：许棠发怒，说小吏无礼。
English: Xu Tong got angry and said that the minor official was rude.

古文：而果与棠同砚席，棠甚侮之。
现代文：结果考试时两人同堂，许棠竭尽侮辱。
English: As a result, the two of them were in the same classroom during the exam, and Xu Tang went to great lengths to humiliate them.

古文：后遵成名五年，棠始及第。
现代文：但是，汪遵考中进士五年后，许棠才考中。
English: However, five years after Wang Zun was admitted to the junior high school entrance examination, Xu Tang was admitted to the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：刘允章
现代文：刘允章
English: Liu Yunzhang

古文：刘允章题目天下为家赋，给事中杜裔体进疏论。
现代文：刘允章出的题目是《天下为家赋》，给事中杜裔体上表示异议。
English: Liu Yunzhang's topic was "The whole world is a family gift," to which the Du descendants physically objected.

古文：事虽不行，时以为当。
现代文：疏虽然没有采纳，但时人认为得当。
English: Although it was not adopted, it was considered appropriate at the time.

古文：崔澹至仁伐不仁赋，亦颇招时议。
现代文：而崔澹的《至仁伐不仁赋》不被人们认可。
English: However, Cui Yao's "Supreme Compassion" is not recognized by the people.

古文：薛耽盛德日新赋，韵脚云：循乃无已。
现代文：薛耽的盛德日新赋》，用循乃无已的切音作韵脚比较别扭。
English: Xue Tan's Sheng De Ri Xin Fu, it is more awkward to make rhymes with the unfinished rhyme.

古文：刘子震通状，请改为修字，当时改正。
现代文：刘子震请他直接用循和无来切音，得出修字做韵脚，比较恰当，薛耽采纳。
English: Liu Zi Zhen asked him to directly use the chord and voiceless tritone to make the correction to make the rhyme, which was more appropriate, and Xue Tan adopted it.

古文：王凝
现代文：王凝
English: Wang Rong

古文：王凝清族重德，冠绝当时。
现代文：王凝家族人都注重德行，天下闻名，即使睡觉也有一定的姿势，叉手仰卧。
English: Wang Rong's family members are all famous for their virtues. Even when they sleep, they have a certain posture, lying on their backs.

古文：每就寝息，必叉手而卧，或虑梦中见其先祖。
现代文：有人担心这种睡法会作恶梦，梦见先辈的鬼魂。
English: Some people are worried that this way of sleeping will lead to nightmares and dreams about the ghosts of their ancestors.

古文：曾牧绛州。于时司空图方应进士举，自别墅到郡。
现代文：王凝作绛州刺史，司空图参加京试路过绛州，谒见后不复再来。
English: Wang Geng wrote the history of Bozhou, and Sihongtu passed through Bozhou when he took part in the Beijing Experiment. After meeting, they never saw each other again.

古文：或入郭访亲知，即不造郡齐。
现代文：部属告诉，司空图出城了。有时入城拜访某某，但不到刺史衙门来。
English: His subordinates told him that Siu To had left the city. Sometimes, he would come to the city to visit so-and-so, but he would not come to Zhishimen.

古文：王知之，谓其专敬，愈重之。
现代文：王凝认为这是司空图对自己的尊重，愈加看重司空图。
English: Wang Jian believes that this is the respect that Skytree has for itself, and that it values Skytree more and more.

古文：及知举，司空一捷，列第四人登科。
现代文：王凝作了主考官，司空图一举考中进士第四名。
English: Wang Geng became the chief examiner, and Siku Tu won the fourth place in the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：同年讶其名姓甚暗，成事太速。
现代文：同年们惊讶司空图并无名声而高中。
English: In the same year, they were surprised that Siku did not become famous in high school.

古文：有浮薄者号之为司徒空。
现代文：没品行的人就称他为司徒空。
English: People with no morals call him Satoru.

古文：王知有此说。
现代文：王凝知道这件事，宴集所有新科进士。
English: Wang Rong knew about this and gathered all the new science students.

古文：因召一榜门生开筵，宣言于众曰：某切忝文柄，今年榜贴，全为司空先辈一人而已。由是图声彩益振。卢尚卿
现代文：对他们说： 我虽然有愧于主考官的位置，但今年这一榜，就是为了司空图一个人，我才肯担任这个职务。 因此，司空图名声雀起。卢尚卿
English: He said to them, "Although I am not worthy of the position of chief examiner, I am willing to take up this position this year for the sake of Skytu, who is at the top of the list. Therefore, Skytu's reputation has risen.

古文：咸通十一年，以庞勋盗据徐州，久屯戎卒，连年飞輓，物力方虚，因诏权停贡举一年。
现代文：懿宗咸通十一年，因为庞勋占据徐州，对抗朝廷，连年战争，国库空虚，皇帝下诏，停一年贡举。
English: In the eleventh year of Emperor Xizong's reign, because of Pang Xun's occupation of Xuzhou and his opposition to the imperial court, the war lasted for years, the treasury was empty, the emperor issued an edict, and the tribute was suspended for one year.

古文：桂树放教遮月长，杏园终待隔年开。
现代文：那年，卢尚卿由远处应举到陕州，听到诏命返回故乡，作《东归诗》。
English: That year, Lu Shangxing traveled from afar to Shaanxi, heard the imperial command to return to his hometown, and wrote "The Return to the East Poem."

古文：自从玉帐论兵后，不许金门谏猎来。
现代文：大意是：皇上的诏命下来，今年停止科考了，没有机会折桂，只好等待来年。
English: The implication is: the emperor's edict came down, this year's scientific research was stopped, there was no chance to fold the laurel, we had to wait for next year.

古文：今日霸陵桥上过，关人应笑腊前回。
现代文：从打兵连祸结，京城的路被切断了。现在我从霸陵桥上走过，人家都笑我冒着风寒回家。
English: The road to Beijing was cut off from the battlefields. Now, when I walk across the Baring Bridge, people laugh at me for braving the wind and cold to get home.

古文：李尧
现代文：李尧
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：李尧及第，在偏侍下，俯逼起居宴。
现代文：李尧中进士，原住在城郊，去参加宴会，大雨不止。
English: Li Junzhongjin, who used to live on the outskirts of the city, went to a banquet, and it rained heavily.

古文：霖雨不止，因遣赁油幕以张之。尧先人旧庐升平里，凡用钱七百缗。
现代文：所以派人买油布遮盖。李尧祖上的老房子在升平里，他花了七百缗钱油布。
English: Therefore, he sent someone to buy oilcloth to cover it. The old house of Li Yanzhu's grandfather was in Shengping, and he spent seven hundred baht to buy oilcloth.

古文：自所居连亘通衢迨之一里余，参御辈不啻千余人，鞯马车舆，阗咽门巷，往来无有沾湿者。
现代文：从住所到大街差不多有一里地长上千的车辆，骑马乘轿者往来熙熙攘攘，没有被雨浇的。
English: From the house to the main street, there is almost a mile of thousands of vehicles, horse riders and sedanists come and go, bustling, not watered by the rain.

古文：而金壁照耀，别有嘉致。
现代文：所建金壁辉煌，极为别巧。
English: The splendor of the Golden Wall is extremely unique.

古文：尧时为丞相韦保衡所委，干预政事，号为李八郎。
现代文：李尧被宰相韦保衡所重用，参与大政，被称为李八郎。
English: Li Yao was heavily used by Wei Baoheng, the prime minister, to participate in the grand politics, and was called Li Hachiro.

古文：其妻又南海韦宙女，恒资之金帛，不可胜纪。
现代文：他的妻子是南海韦宙的女儿，家里很有钱。资助李尧的钱财，不可以数计。
English: His wife is the daughter of Nanhai Weizhou, and the family is very rich. The amount of money that has been used to support Li Yao cannot be counted.

古文：高湜
现代文：高湜
English: Takatsuki

古文：咸通十二年，礼部侍郎高湜知举。
现代文：懿宗咸通十二年，礼部侍郎高湜做主考官，取中一些贫苦举子。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor Xizong of Hamdang, Gaozong, the attendant of the etiquette department, was the chief examiner, and some poor children were selected.

古文：榜内孤贫者，公乘亿有赋三百首，人多书于壁。
现代文：公乘亿有赋三百首，许多人把他的赋写出来挂在墙上。
English: There are three hundred poems attributed to him, and many people have written his poems and hung them on the wall.

古文：许棠有洞庭诗尤工，时人谓之许洞庭。
现代文：许棠的《洞庭诗》非常工整，被时人称为许洞庭。
English: Xu Tang's "Dongting Poem" is very well-crafted, and was known as Xu Dongting at the time.

古文：最者有聂夷中，少贫苦，精于古体。
现代文：最杰出的是聂夷中，少时家贫，精于古体诗。
English: The most outstanding of them was Zou Yizhong, who was poor at home when he was young, and was good at ancient poetry.

古文：有公子家诗云：种花满西园，花发青楼道。花下一禾生，去之为恶草。
现代文：他的《公子家诗》大意是，有人种了一些西园的花，花开得佼好，花下生出一棵庄稼，被当作杂草拔去。
English: His "Kung Zi Family Poem" is to the effect that someone planted some flowers of the West Garden, the flowers bloomed excellently, and a crop was born under the flower and was plucked as a weed.

古文：又詠田家诗云：父耕原上田，子斫山下荒。
现代文：《田家诗》大意是：父亲在塬上耕田，儿子在塬下开荒。
English: The meaning of "Tajia Shi" is: the father cultivates the fields on the plow, and the son clears the wasteland under the plow.

古文：六月禾未秀，官家已修仓。
现代文：六月庄稼还没有成熟，官府已把粮仓修好了。
English: In June, the crops were not yet ripe, and the government had already repaired the granary.

古文：又云：锄田当日午，汗滴禾下土。谁念盘中餐，粒粒皆辛苦。
现代文：又一首《锄禾诗》说：锄地到日中了，汗水湿了泥土，有谁知道碗里的饭，每一粒都是汗水浇灌的啊。
English: Another poem, "The Grasshopper's Poem," says: "The ploughing has gone on until the middle of the day, the sweat has dampened the earth. Does anyone know the rice in the bowl? Every grain is drenched in sweat."

古文：又云：二月卖新丝，五月粜新谷。
现代文：还有一首诗说：二月里把新丝卖了，五月又把新粮卖了。
English: There is also a poem that says: In February, the new silk was sold, and in May, the new grain was sold.

古文：医得眼前疮，剜却心头肉。
现代文：眼前的窟窿堵上了，心里的肉却被剜掉了。
English: The hole in front of my eyes has been plugged, but the flesh in my heart has been chewed off.

古文：我愿君王心，化为光明烛。不照绮逻筵，只照逃亡屋。
现代文：希望君王的心，能象光明的蜡烛一样，不要只照在有钱人的好吃好穿上，照一照穷人的屋子吧。
English: Let the king's heart, like a bright candle, not only light the rich man's table, but also the poor man's house.

古文：所谓言近意远，合三百篇之旨也。
现代文：他的诗意浅近而寓义深，被称为唐诗中的精品。
English: His poetry is shallow and allegorical, and is known as a masterpiece of Tang poetry.

古文：公乘亿
现代文：公乘亿
English: Public transport billion

古文：公乘亿，魏人也，以词赋著名。咸通十三年，垂三十举矣。
现代文：魏州人公乘亿以词赋著称。咸通十三年，已经考了三十次。
English: In the 13th year of Hamdang, he has passed the exam for the first time 30 times.

古文：尝大病，乡人误传已死。
现代文：曾经生了大病家乡误传他已死去。
English: He was once seriously ill, and his hometown falsely reported that he had died.

古文：其妻自河北来迎丧，会亿送客至坡下，遇其妻。
现代文：他的妻子从河北到京城去迎丧，正碰到他送客人到山坡下。夫妻分别十多年。
English: His wife had come from Hebei Province to the capital to mourn, and she was meeting him as he was escorting guests down the hillside. The couple had been separated for more than ten years.

古文：妻亦如是。乃令人诘之，果亿。内子与之相持而泣。
现代文：当时公乘亿骑在马上，见一女子穿着粗布衣服骑着驴子，好象妻子，注目而望。
English: At that time, he was riding on a horse and saw a woman dressed in coarse cloth riding a donkey, like a wife, looking for attention.

古文：路人叹异之。后旬日，亿登第矣。
现代文：他妻子也一样，在驴上望着他，请人打听，果然是公乘亿。夫妻把臂流泪，路人叹息。十几天后，公乘亿中了进士。
English: His wife did the same. She looked at him on the donkey and asked someone to inquire, and sure enough, it was the billionth ride. The couple's arms shed tears, and passers-by sighed. Ten days later, the billionth ride won a prize.

古文：孙龙光，崔殷梦下状元及第。
现代文：孙龙光崔殷梦主考，孙龙光中状元。
English: Sun Longguang Cui Yin Meng is the main examiner, Sun Longguang is the middle rank.

古文：前一年，尝梦积木数百，龙光践履往复。既而请一李处士圆之，处士曰：贺郎君，喜来年必是状元。
现代文：孙龙光曾经梦见自己在许多大木上走来走去。次后，请李处士圆梦，李处士说： 祝贺你，来年准中状元。
English: Sun Longguang once dreamed that he was walking around on many large trees. Next, he asked Li Guanzhong to make his dream come true. Li Guanzhong said: "Congratulations, next year you will be middle-aged."

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢，木者，材也。
English: Why is that?

古文：已居众材之上。
现代文：众材之上，寓意状元。 
English: You've risen above the crowd.

古文：王璘
现代文：王璘
English: Wang Yao

古文：长沙日试万言，王璘词学寓赡，非积学所致。
现代文：长沙人王璘日书万言，文词好，文章有胆识，学识精深。
English: Wang Xi, a native of Changsha, is fluent in Japanese. His writing is good, his articles are courageous, and his knowledge is profound.

古文：璘絺扪扪腹，往来口授，十吏笔不停辍。
现代文：詹事崔廉问奏章举荐他，先召他考问。王璘请十名书吏备好砚笔纸张，袖着手踱步口授，十个人没有一人停过笔。
English: Zhan asked Cui Lian to recommend him and summoned him for an examination. Wang Yao asked ten librarians to prepare a sheet of paper and take dictation. None of the ten people stopped writing.

古文：首题黄河赋，三十字数刻而成。
现代文：首题《黄河赋》三十字，一蹴而成。
English: The first theme, "Yellow River Fu" with three crosses, was created overnight.

古文：又鸟散余花落诗三十首，援毫而就。
现代文：《鸟散余花落》诗三十首，一吟而成。
English: "Birds scatter the remaining flowers" is a collection of thirty poems.

古文：时忽风雨暴至，数幅为回飚所卷，泥滓沾渍，不胜舒卷。
现代文：当时忽然刮风下雨，好几首写成的诗卷被狂风吹落，被泥污。舒展不开。
English: At that time, it was suddenly windy and rainy, and several poems that had been written were blown down by the strong wind and muddied. I couldn't stretch out.

古文：璘曰：勿取，但将纸来。复纵笔一挥，斯须复十余篇矣。
现代文：王璘说不用拾了，拿纸来，提笔而书，很快就写了十余篇。
English: Wang Yao said that there was no need to pick it up. He took out a piece of paper, picked up a pen and began to write. He soon wrote more than ten articles.

古文：时未停午，已积七千余言。
现代文：没到中午，写了七千余言。
English: Before noon, I had written more than seven thousand words.

古文：崔公语试官曰：万言不在试限，但请召来饮酒。
现代文：崔廉问对试官说，不必以万言为限，请他来喝酒。
English: Cui Lianqian said to the examiner that he did not have to limit himself to a million words, and invited him to drink.

古文：黄河赋复有僻字百余，请璘对众朗宣，旁若无人。
现代文：《黄河赋》有不常用字一百多个，崔廉问请王璘当众朗读，王璘旁若无人。
English: "Yellow River Fu" has more than a hundred uncommon words. Cui Lian asked Wang Yao to read it aloud in front of everyone. Wang Yao was speechless.

古文：至京，时路岩方当轴，遣一介召之。璘意在沽激，曰：请俟见帝。
现代文：到了京城，路岩主考，差仆人召见他，本意让王璘中第后感激他。
English: When he arrived in Beijing, Lu Yan, the examiner, sent his servant to summon him, intending to make Wang Qizhong thank him.

古文：岩闻之。大怒，亟命奏废万言科。
现代文：王璘却说，等我见到皇帝后再去见他。路岩听了，非常恼怒，立即奏请取消《万言科》，王璘受到这样的打击，拄着杖回去。
English: Wang Yao, however, said that he would wait until he saw the emperor before going to see him. Luyan listened, was very angry, and immediately asked for the cancellation of "Wangyan Science." Wang Yao received such a blow and walked back with a cane.

古文：璘杖策而归，放旷于杯酒间，虽屠沽无间然矣。
现代文：之后，放浪形骸，借酒浇愁。同屠夫卖酒的人差不多。
English: Afterward, the wandering corpse, borrowing alcohol to drown his sorrows, is similar to a butcher selling alcohol.

古文：蒋凝
现代文：蒋凝
English: Jiang Zeng

古文：乾符中，蒋凝应宏词。
现代文：僖宗乾符中期，蒋凝考博学宏词科。
English: In the middle of the middle period of Jianzong Qianfu, Jiang Jie examined the erudite macro-diction.

古文：为赋止及四韵，遂白而去。
现代文：作赋仅写四韵，请示试官要走。
English: If you only write four rhymes, please tell the examiner to go away.

古文：试官不之信，逼请所谓。
现代文：试官不相信，逼问他为什么？
English: The examiner doesn't believe him and forces him to ask why?

古文：凝以实告。
现代文：蒋凝以实话相告。
English: Jiang Zhen told the truth.

古文：顷刻之间，播于人口。
现代文：说写完了。试官拿他的卷子同别人的比较，蒋凝感到自足，试官长时间叹息。
English: After he finished writing, the examiner compared his paper with others. Jiang Rong felt self-sufficient. The examiner sighed for a long time.

古文：或称之曰，白头花钿满面，不若徐妃半妆。
现代文：蒋凝的赋很快被传诵。有人说，满头白花花的头发，不如淡妆的女子。
English: Jiang Rong's Fu was soon recited. Some people said that a woman with a full head of white hair is not as good as a woman with light makeup.

古文：吴融
现代文：吴融
English: Wu Rong

古文：吴融字子华，广明中和间久负屈声。
现代文：吴融字子华。僖宗广明、中和年间，长时间人们为他称屈。
English: Wu Rong Zihua. During the reigns of Emperor Xuanzong, Emperor Guangming and Emperor Zhonghe, people praised him for a long time.

古文：虽未擢第，同人率多执贽谒之，如先达。
现代文：虽然没有考中，许多同代人执学生礼见他，待为师长。
English: Although he didn't take the middle school entrance examination, many of his contemporaries who were supervising students admired him and wanted to be his teacher.

古文：有王图者工词赋，投卷凡旬月。
现代文：有一个叫王图的人，词赋写得工整，把自己的文章拿给吴融评阅。
English: There was a man named Wang Tu, who had written a well-structured text, and he showed his article to Wu Rong for review.

古文：融既见之，殊不言图之臧否。
现代文：过了一段时间，王图去见吴融。
English: After some time, Wang Tu went to see Wu Rong.

古文：但问图曰：吏曾得卢休信否？
现代文：吴融不谈文章好坏。直接问他： 你听到过关于卢休的消息吗？
English: Wu Rong did not talk about whether the article was good or bad. He asked him directly: Have you heard the news about Lu Xiu?

古文：休，图之中表，长于八韵，向与融同砚席，晚年抛废，归镜中别墅。
现代文：他为什么不求取功名，很可惜的。我的学问，其实不如卢休。 卢休和王图是表亲，擅长八韵诗，跟吴融是同窗。直至晚年仍不得志，住在镜中别墅。
English: It's a pity why he didn't seek fame. In fact, my knowledge is not as good as Lu Xiu's. Lu Xiu and Wang Tu are cousins, good at eight-rhyme poetry, and Wu Rong is a classmate. Until his old age, he still had no ambition and lived in the mirror villa.

古文：卢光启
现代文：卢光启
English: Lu Guangqi

古文：卢光启先人伏法，光启兄弟修饰赴举，谓亲知曰：此乃开荒也。
现代文：卢光启的父亲被处死。光启同他的弟弟隐姓埋名去应科举，跟亲近要好的人说，我们兄弟比如是去开荒。
English: Lu Guangqi's father was executed. Guangqi and his younger brother went incognito to take the entrance exam, and told those close to them that our brothers were going to open up the wasteland.

古文：然其立性周谨。
现代文：卢光启性格谨慎，做事周祥。
English: Lu Guangqi has a cautious personality and does things well.

古文：著初举子一卷，即进取诸事，皆此类也。
现代文：著有《初举子》一卷。做什么事，文如其人。
English: He is the author of "初举子" one volume. When it comes to what to do, Wen is his own man.

古文：策名后，扬历台省，受知于租庸张浚。
现代文：中第后，在省台做官，知遇于租庸使张浚。
English: After graduating from middle school, he worked as an official in Taiwan Province, where he met Zhang Jun, a mercenary.

古文：浚出征并汾，卢每致书疏，凡一事别为一幅。
现代文：张浚出征并州、汾州。卢光启每次写信，一件事写一张纸，被后来官员效仿。
English: Zhang Jun marched out to annex Zhuzhou and Zhangzhou. Every time Lu Guangqi wrote a letter, he wrote one thing on a piece of paper, which was later imitated by officials.

古文：朝士至今斆之，盖重叠别纸，自光启始也。唐末举人，不问事行文艺，但勤于请谒，号曰精切，亦皆法于光启尔。
现代文：一张纸写一件事，始于卢光启。唐末举荐人才，先不问才学，而看他们对官长的态度，称为精切，也是跟卢光启学来的。
English: To write one thing on a piece of paper began with Lu Guangqi. At the end of the Tang Dynasty, when recommending talents, they did not ask about talent and learning first, but looked at their attitude towards the officials. This is called refinement, and it also came from Lu Guangqi.

古文：其族弟汝弼尝为张浚出征判官，传檄四方，其略云：致赤子之流离，自朱耶之版荡。
现代文：他的堂弟卢汝弼，曾经做过张浚的出征判官。传檄四方，大略意思是：导致赤子流离失所，都是因为朱温这个奸逆所造成的。
English: His cousin, Lu Rucheng, once served as Zhang Jun's judge for the expedition. "Zhu Rucheng Sifang" roughly means: the displacement of the baby was caused by Zhu Wen's treachery.

古文：自谓人曰：天生朱耶赤子，供我之笔也。
现代文：对人说过，老天生下朱温这个野种，是供我们作文章来骂的。
English: I have said to people that Zhu Wen, a wild species born by nature, is for us to make an article to scold.

古文：王彦昌
现代文：王彦昌
English: Wang Yanchang

古文：王彦昌太原人，家世簪冕，推于鼎甲。
现代文：太原人王彦昌，大族世家，官宦之孙。王氏世家以太原为首。
English: Wang Yanchang, a member of the Taiyuan people, is from a large family and the grandson of a government official. The Wang family is headed by Wang.

古文：广明岁驾幸西蜀，敕赐及第。
现代文：僖宗广明年间，逃亡成都，赐给他进士学位。
English: When Gong Zongguang fled to Chengdu in the following year, he was awarded the degree of "Junior Scholar."

古文：后为嗣薛王知柔判官。
现代文：后来做薛知柔的判官。
English: Later he became the judge of Xue Zhirong.

古文：昭宗幸石门时，宰臣学士不及随驾，知柔以京兆尹权中书，事属近辅。
现代文：昭宗逃到石门时，大臣、学士们来不及跟随。薛知柔以京兆尹署理中书省。
English: When Zhaozong fled to Shimen, the ministers and academicians were too late to follow. Xue Zhirou took the post of deputy director of the Central Literature Department with Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：表章继至，勤于批答。
现代文：职权近乎宰辅，来往文件特别多，批阅繁荣。
English: His powers are close to those of a vice-premier, the number of documents exchanged is particularly high, and approvals are flourishing.

古文：知柔以彦昌名闻，遂命权知学士。
现代文：薛知柔推荐王彦昌有名望，僖宗让他署理学士，协助薛知柔。
English: Xue Zhirou recommended Wang Yanchang, who was well-known, and Zou Zong asked him to act as an assistant to the bachelor of science to assist Xue Zhirou.

古文：居半岁，出拜京兆尹，加左常侍大理卿。
现代文：半年后，升王彦昌为京北尹，又加衔左常侍、大理寺卿。
English: Half a year later, Shouwang Yanchang became the Beijing and North Yin, and was also promoted to the rank of Zuo Changzhuang and Daliji Kei.

古文：为寺胥所累，南迁。
现代文：后来受到大理寺的吏员牵连，贬官。
English: Later, he was implicated by the clerk of Dali Temple and demoted.

古文：杜升
现代文：杜升
English: Du Sheng

古文：杜升父宣猷终宛陵。
现代文：杜升的父亲杜宣猷死于宛陵。
English: Du Sheng's father, Du Xuanqian, died in Wanling.

古文：升有词藻。
现代文：杜升善言词。
English: Du Sheng's kind words.

古文：升时已拜小谏，抗表乞就试，从之。登第数日，有敕复前官并服色。议者荣之。
现代文：上表请求参加科试，皇帝准许。中第几天后，皇帝命他复职，并仍赐给官服。人议以为光彩。
English: He requested to take the examination, and the emperor granted his request. A few days after the first day of the middle school, the emperor ordered him to resume his duties, and still gave him an official uniform. People thought it was glorious.

古文：升自拾遗赐绯，却应举及第，又拾遗，时号著绯进士。
现代文：杜升由拾遗赐绯，又去应考，又做拾遗。被称为着绯进士。
English: Du Sheng was given a gong for collecting relics, went to take the exam, and collected relics. He was known as a gong collector.

古文：郑昌图
现代文：郑昌图
English: Zheng Changtu

古文：广明年中，凤翔副使郑侍郎昌图未及第前，尝自任以广度弘襟，不拘小节，出入游处，悉恣情焉。
现代文：广明年间，凤翔节度副使、侍郎郑昌图没有及第之前，自以为襟怀博大，不拘小节。游山玩水，纵情豪放。
English: During the Guangyuan era, Fengxiang's vice-envoy and attendant Zheng Changtu did not have the same degree of discipline as before. He thought that he was broad-minded and did not care about the details. He went to the mountains and played with water, indulging in passion.

古文：洎至舆论喧然，且欲罢举。
现代文：因之舆论大哗，自己也不准备参加科举。
English: Due to the public uproar, he is not prepared to participate in the science fair.

古文：其时同里有亲表家仆，自宋亳庄上至，告其主人云：昨过洛京，于谷水店边，逢见二黄衣使人西来，某遂与同行。
现代文：当时他表亲家的仆人从宋亳的庄上回来对主人说： 昨天经过洛阳，在谷水店边遇到两位黄衣使者从西来，跟我一起走。
English: At that time, the servant of his cousin's family came back from Song Tao's village and said to his master: "Yesterday, I passed through Luoyang and met two yellow-clad messengers from the west at the Gusui store. Come with me."

古文：至华岳庙前，二黄衣使与某告别，相揖于店后面，谓某曰：君家郎君应进士举无？仆曰：我郎主官已高，诸郎君见修学次。
现代文：到了华岳庙前，他们俩同我告别，互相作揖，告诉我说你们主人家有没有应试的？ 我说： 我的主人官位已经很高，他的孩子正在读书。 黄衣使者又问。
English: Before arriving at Huayu Temple, the two of them said goodbye to me, exchanged greetings, and told me, "Does your master's family have any candidates for the examination?" I said, "My master's official position is already high, and his children are studying." The messenger in yellow asked again.

古文：又问曰：莫亲戚家儿郎应无？曰：有。
现代文：那么你主人亲属中有没有应举的？ 我说有。
English: So, are there any of your master's relatives who should be raised? I say yes.

古文：使人曰：吾二人乃是今年送榜之使也，自泰山来到金天处，押署其榜，子幸相遇。
现代文：那两人便告诉我，他们是今年送榜的，从泰山来，到金天去送榜，咱们有幸相遇。
English: The two people told me that they were this year's presenters, coming from Mount Taishan and going to Jintian to present the list. We were lucky to meet.

古文：仆遂请窃窥其榜，使者曰：不可，汝但记之。遂画其地曰：此年状头姓，偏傍有阝，名两字，下一字在口中。
现代文：我就想私下看看榜，人家说不行。但是在地上划字，让我记住，今年状元姓的偏傍有个耳刀，名字是两字的，未一字在口里边。
English: I wanted to look at the list in private, but they said I couldn't. But I wrote it on the ground, so that I would remember that there was an ear cutter on the side of this year's first name, a two-word name, and not a single word in the mouth.

古文：榜尾之人姓，偏傍亦有此阝，名两字，下一字亦在口中。
现代文：最后的一位进士，姓氏旁也是耳刀，也是两字的名，尾字也在口里。
English: The last one, next to the surname, is also an ear knife, also a two-word name, and the last word is also in the mouth.

古文：记之记之？
现代文：你好好记住，他们就走了。
English: Just remember, they're gone.

古文：时场中不减千人，谁势可热手，亦皆骑驴。
现代文：郑昌图的表亲很惊异，便把这件事告诉他，并鼓励他去应考。郑昌图果然中了状元，榜尾进士名叫邹希回，一点不差。
English: Zheng Changtu's cousin was very surprised, so he told him about this and encouraged him to take the exam. Zheng Changtu won the first prize, and the winner of the second prize, named Fan Xihai, was not bad at all.

古文：或嘲之曰：今年敕下尽骑驴，短袖长鞦满九衢。
现代文：另外，咸通中期，认为进士们骑乘和衣服太过份，禁止骑马，参试的不下千人，怎样有势力，也只能骑驴。
English: In addition, in the mid-Hamtong period, it was considered that the Jin soldiers were riding horses and wearing clothes that were too excessive. Riding horses was prohibited, and no less than a thousand people participated in the test. No matter how powerful they were, they could only ride donkeys.

古文：清瘦儿郎犹自可，就中愁杀郑昌图。
现代文：有人嘲笑说，今年皇上点的进士都是骑驴的，满大街都是，瘦小的还可以，郑昌图那样魁伟的可要愁死了。
English: Some people scoffed that this year's Emperor's point winners were all donkey riders, and the streets were full of them. The skinny ones were okay, but the great ones like Zheng Changtu would be worried to death.

古文：程贺
现代文：程贺
English: Cheng He

古文：唐崔亚郎中典眉州，程贺以乡役充厅仆，共弟在州曹为小书吏。
现代文：唐朝崔亚以郎中官出典眉州。程贺出徭役充当官厅仆人。他的弟弟在眉州府里作小书吏。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Cui Ya sent his son as a middle-ranking official to Meizhou. Cheng He sent his son to serve as a servant in the government office. His brother went to work as a junior clerk in the Meizhou government.

古文：崔公见贺风味有似儒生，因诘之曰：尔读书乎？
现代文：崔亚认为程贺言谈象读书人，便问他，你读过书吗？
English: Treya thought that Cheng Heyan spoke like a reader, so she asked him, "Have you ever read a book?"

古文：贺降阶对曰：薄涉艺文。
现代文：程贺到厅阶下说，读过一些书。
English: Cheng He came down the steps of the hall and said that he had read some books.

古文：崔公指一物，俾其赋詠。
现代文：崔亚就指物为题，让他赋诗。
English: Treya asked him to write a poem on the topic of fingering.

古文：雅有意思，因令归。
现代文：程贺的诗文雅而意境颇好。
English: Cheng He's poem is elegant and the artistic conception is quite good.

古文：选日，装写所业执贽，甚称奖之，俾称进士，依崔之门，更不他岐。
现代文：崔亚就让他回家读书。选了一个日子，程贺带着自己的文章，以学生礼去见崔亚。崔亚很褒奖他。中了进士之后，始终依靠崔亚，不去投靠别人。
English: Treya let him go home to study. He chose a day, and Cheng He took his essay and went to see Treya as a student gift. Treya praised him very much. After winning the scholarship, he always relied on Treya, not to rely on others.

古文：凡二十五举及第。
现代文：程贺考了二十五次才考中。
English: Cheng He took the exam twenty-five times before passing it.

古文：每入京，馆于博陵之第，常感提拔之恩。
现代文：每次到京，都住在崔亚的府第，经常表示感激之情。
English: Every time he comes to Beijing, he stays in Choya's residence, and he often expresses his gratitude.

古文：亚卒之日，贺为崔公衰服三年。人皆美之。
现代文：崔亚逝世，程贺为其戴孝三年，人们都赞美他的操守。
English: After the death of Cui Ya, Cheng He has been the leader of his filial piety for three years, and people have praised his integrity.

古文：陈峤
现代文：陈峤
English: Chen Yao

古文：陈峤谒安陆郑諴，三年，方一相面。
现代文：陈峤去见安陆郑諴，三年才见到面。
English: Chen Yao went to see Anlu Zheng Yao, but they didn't meet for three years.

古文：从容諴谓峤曰：识闵廷言否？
现代文：郑諴从容地对陈峤说，认识闵廷言吗？
English: Zheng Rong calmly said to Chen Rong, do you know Gong Tingyan?

古文：峤曰：偶未知闻。
现代文：陈峤说，没听说过这个人。
English: Chen Yao said that he had never heard of this person.

古文：諴曰：不妨与之往还，其人文似西汉。
现代文：郑諴便说，那么你不妨同他交往，这个人的文章可比西汉的大家。
English: Zheng Yao said, then you might as well get in touch with him, this person's article is comparable to everyone in Western Han.

古文：秦韬玉
现代文：秦韬玉
English: Qin Yuanyuan

古文：秦韬玉出入田令孜之门。
现代文：秦韬玉经常出入宦官显贵田令孜家。
English: Qin Zhengyu often went to and from the house of the eunuch Xian Gui Tianling.

古文：车驾幸蜀，韬玉已拜丞郎，判鹾。
现代文：僖宗逃亡成都，秦韬玉做丞郎，主管盐务琐事。
English: Shizong fled to Chengdu, and Qin Shiyu served as his second-in-command, in charge of minor matters related to salt.

古文：及小归公主文，韬玉准敕放第，仍编入其年榜中。
现代文：归崇敬的儿子做主考，僖宗亲下诏命，让秦韬玉中第。并把他编进同年榜。
English: The son of Gui Chongyi was the chief examiner, and Zou Zong personally gave the order to make Qin Zhaoyu the first in the junior high school. And he was included in the same year's list.

古文：韬玉致书谢新人，皆呼同年。
现代文：秦韬玉给新进士的信中，都一律称同年。
English: In Qin Zhengyu's letter to Xin Jinshi, they all said the same year.

古文：略曰：三条烛下，虽阻文闱，数仞墙边，幸同恩地。陆扆
现代文：大略说，一样的烛光下，我没有参加科试，但彼此相差不多，有幸大家同年。陆扆
English: Roughly speaking, under the same candlelight, I did not participate in the science exam, but we are similar to each other, and we are fortunate to be in the same year.

古文：陆扆举进士，属僖宗幸梁洋，随驾至行在，与中书舍人郑损同止逆旅。
现代文：陆扆进京科举，赶上唐僖宗逃亡梁洋，陆扆便追到僖宗的驻地。同中书舍人郑损住在一起。
English: Lu Wei entered the Beijing Science and Technology High School and caught up with Tang Yizong's fugitive Liang Yang. Lu Wei chased Liang Yang to Yizong's residence. He lived with Zheng Ji, a junior high school student.

古文：扆为宰相韦昭度所知，欲身事之速了，屡告昭度，昭度曰：奈已深夏，复使何人为主司？扆以郑损对。
现代文：宰相韦昭度很了解陆扆，陆扆希望自己快一些成为进士，好几次恳求韦昭度。韦昭度说： 现在是夏天，不是试期，并且请谁做主考呢？ 陆扆就说，请郑损就合适。
English: Prime Minister Wei Zhaodu knew Lu Xuan very well. Lu Xuan hoped that he could become a graduate faster, and pleaded with Wei Zhaodu several times. Wei Zhaodu said: It is summer, not a trial period, and who would you ask to be the main examiner? Lu Xuan said that it would be appropriate to ask Zheng Zu.

古文：昭度从之。
现代文：韦昭度答应了，让他自己去说。
English: Wei Zhaodu agreed, and let him speak for himself.

古文：因令扆致意。榜贴皆扆自定。
现代文：书贴、榜文，都由陆扆自己制定。
English: Both the bookmark and the list were designed by Lu Wei himself.

古文：其年六月，状头及第。
现代文：那年六月，以状元及第。
English: In June of that year, it was ranked first and second.

古文：后在翰林署，时苦热，同列戏之曰：今日好造榜矣。
现代文：后来在翰林院任职，正赶上大热天。同僚跟他开玩笑，说这样的日子，很适合造榜。
English: Later, he worked at the Hanlin Academy, just in time for the hot weather. Colleagues joked with him that such a day was very suitable for making a list.

古文：然扆名冠一时，兄弟三人，时谓三陆，希声及威也。张曙
现代文：陆扆很有名望，三兄弟并称三陆，另外三陆是陆希声和陆威。张曙
English: Lu Xuan is very famous. The three brothers are also called the Three Lands, and the other Three Lands are Lu Xisheng and Lu Wei.

古文：张曙、崔昭纬，中和初西川同举，相与诣日者问命。
现代文：中和初年，张曙和崔昭纬同被四川举荐赴试。两人一起请人给占卜前程。
English: In the first year of middle school, Zhang Shuguang and Cui Zhaowei were both recommended by Sichuan to go to the trial. The two of them together invited people to divination.

古文：时曙自恃才名籍甚，人皆目为将来状元。
现代文：当时张曙自恃才名赫赫，人们都认为他会中状元。
English: At that time, Zhang Akebono was famous for his talent, and people thought he would be a star.

古文：崔亦分居其下。
现代文：崔昭纬对他也很尊崇，自认不如。
English: Cui Zhaowei also respected him and felt inferior to him.

古文：无何，日者殊不顾曙，第目崔曰：将来万全高第。曙有愠色。
现代文：只一会儿，卜者根本不理会张曙，而对崔昭纬说： 你肯定高中。 张曙很不满。
English: For just a moment, the fortuneteller did not pay any attention to Zhang Shugu, but said to Cui Zhaoyi: You must be in high school. Zhang Shugu was very dissatisfied.

古文：日者曰：郎君亦及第，然须待崔家郎君拜相，当此时过堂。既而曙果以惨恤不终场，昭纬其年首冠。
现代文：卜者说： 你也能考中，但是需要等崔相公做了宰相，由他给你过堂。 不久，张曙因病，考试不能终场，而崔昭纬中了状元。
English: The fortuneteller said, "You can also take the middle school exam, but you need to wait until Cui Xiangkun becomes the prime minister, and he will give you a hall pass." Soon, Zhang Shuchu was unable to finish the exam due to illness, and Cui Zhaowei was in the first place.

古文：崔甚不平。会夜饮，崔以巨觥饮张，张推辞再三。
现代文：张曙赠诗讽刺崔昭纬，诗意是：千里迢迢马前马后一起赴试，只因为偶然的原因我失去了机会；所以皇恩浩荡，你才春风得意。
English: Zhang Shuchu gave a poem to satirize Cui Zhaowei, the poetic meaning of which is: I have traveled thousands of miles to go to the trial together, and I lost the opportunity only because of accidental reasons; therefore, the imperial grace is vast, and you are only proud of the spring breeze.

古文：崔曰：但喫却，待我作宰相，与郎君取状头。张拂衣而去，因之大不叶。
现代文：崔昭纬很不高兴。两人夜里一起饮酒，崔昭纬用大杯灌酒，张曙推却不肯喝。崔昭纬说： 你喝下去，等我做了宰相，一定让你做状元。 张曙拂袖而去，继绝交往。
English: Cui Zhaowei was very unhappy. The two of them drank together at night. Cui Zhaowei used a large glass to pour the wine, but Zhang Shugu refused to drink it. Cui Zhaowei said: You drink it, and when I become prime minister, I will definitely let you be the prime minister. Zhang Shugu walked away, breaking off the relationship.

古文：后七年，崔自内廷大拜。
现代文：七年后，崔昭纬真的做了宰相。
English: Seven years later, Cui Zhaowei actually became prime minister.

古文：张后于裴贽下及第。果于崔下过堂。
现代文：裴贽做主考官，张曙才考中，果然由崔昭纬过堂。
English: Pei Hao was the chief examiner, Zhang Shuchu was only in the middle of the exam, and indeed, Cui Zhaowei passed the exam.

古文：崔昭矩
现代文：崔昭矩
English: Choe Sona

古文：崔昭矩，大顺中裴贽下状元及第。
现代文：昭宗大顺年间，裴贽主考，取崔昭矩为状元。
English: During the reign of Zhaozong Dashun, Pei Yao was the chief examiner, with Cui Zhaocheng as the examiner.

古文：翌日，兄昭纬登庸。
现代文：第二天，他的哥哥崔昭纬拜宰相。
English: The next day, his brother, Cui Zhaowei, called on the prime minister.

古文：王倜，丞相鲁公损之子。倜及第。翌日，损登庸。
现代文：王倜是王损的儿子，王倜考中的第二天，王损拜相。
English: Wang Yao is the son of Wang Zai. On the second day of Wang Zai's middle school, Wang Zai paid homage to his father.

古文：倜过堂别见。
现代文：因为宰相是他的父亲，过堂的时候，王倜个别拜见。
English: Because the prime minister is his father, Wang Yao went to see him individually when he was passing by.

古文：归点亲迎拜席曰：状元及第，榜下版巡。
现代文：归点时，王损以宰相的身份，按照礼法祝贺王倜中了状元。几个月后，王倜无病死去。
English: At the return point, Wang Zai, in his capacity as prime minister, congratulated Wang Xuan on his victory in accordance with the etiquette. A few months later, Wang Xuan died without any illness.

古文：贾泳
现代文：贾泳
English: Jia Yong

古文：贾泳父修有义声。泳落拓，不拘细碎。
现代文：贾修是一个义声远播的人，他的儿子贾泳性格豪放，不拘小节。
English: Jia Xiu is a man whose voice can be heard far and wide. His son, Jia Yong, has a boisterous personality, no matter what.

古文：尝佐武臣倅晋州，时昭宗幸蜀。
现代文：曾经协助武将守晋州。当时昭宗逃亡成都，裴贽三次被任命为主考官。
English: He once assisted the military commander in the defense of Jinzhou. At that time, Zhaozong fled to Chengdu, and Pei Jun was appointed chief examiner three times.

古文：三榜裴相贽，时为前主客员外，客游至郡。泳接之傲睨。
现代文：此前，裴贽做主客员外时，曾经到晋州，贾泳接待不周，视如不见。
English: Previously, when Pei Hao was the guest of honor, he once went to Jinzhou. Jia Yong was not well received and was not seen.

古文：裴尝簪笏造泳，泳戎装一揖曰：主公尚书邀放鹞子，勿怪。
现代文：后来裴贽也曾经很有礼貌地去拜访他，贾泳穿着军服，仅一揖，说： 尚书邀请我们主将一起去放风筝，请别见怪。 不理裴贽而退。
English: Later, Pei Xuan also visited him very politely. Jia Yong, wearing a military uniform, said, "Shang Shu invited our master to go kite flying together. Please don't be surprised. Ignore Pei Xuan and leave."

古文：如此偬偬而退，裴贽颇衔之。
现代文：裴贽有些怀恨。裴贽三次做主考，前两次排除贾泳。
English: Pei Yao held some grudge. Pei Yao was the chief examiner three times, and excluded Jia Yong from the first two times.

古文：既而谓门人曰：贾泳老倒可哀，吾当报之以德。
现代文：最后一次对门客们说贾泳老而值得同情，我应该以德报怨。
English: For the last time, I told the guests that Jia Yonglu was old and worthy of sympathy, and I should repay the grudge with virtue.

古文：遂放及第。
现代文：于是，取他中了进士。
English: As a result, he won a prize.

