古文：凡与敌战，或岸边为阵，或水上泊舟，皆谓之水战。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，无论是在河岸列阵对敌，还是在水上驾船击敌，这都叫做水战。
English: All fighting against the enemy, whether it is arrayed against the enemy on the riverbank, or driving a boat on the water to hit the enemy, this is called water war.

古文：若近水为阵者，须去水稍远，一则诱敌使渡，一则示敌无疑。
现代文：如在近水岸边作战时，必须要离水远一些，一方面可以引诱敌人渡河，一方面可以使敌军消除疑虑。
English: For example, when fighting near the water's edge, it is necessary to be farther away from the water. On the one hand, it can lure the enemy to cross the river, and on the other hand, it can make the enemy army dispel doubts.

古文：我欲必战，勿近水迎敌，恐其不得渡；我欲不战，则拒水阻之，使敌不得济。
现代文：如果我军一定要与敌人决战时，就不要在靠近河水的岸边迎击敌人，怕的是敌人不敢渡河而来；如果我方不想同敌人决战时，就凭据河岸有利地势阻截敌人，使其无法渡过河来。
English: If our army must fight with the enemy, we should not meet the enemy on the bank close to the river, for fear that the enemy will not dare to cross the river; if we do not want to fight with the enemy, we should block the enemy according to the favorable situation of the river bank, so that it can not cross the river.

古文：若敌率兵渡水来战，可于水边伺其半济而击之，则利。法曰： 涉水半渡可击。 
现代文：如果敌人渡河进攻我方，我方可以等到敌军还未全部渡河的时候进攻。这样作战就利于取胜。诚如兵法所说： 待敌人渡河一半时，就可以出兵袭击它。 
English: If the enemy crosses the river to attack us, we can wait until the enemy has not completely crossed the river to attack. In this way, the battle is conducive to victory. As the military law says: When the enemy is halfway across the river, you can send troops to attack it.

古文：汉郦生说齐下之，齐王日与生纵酒为乐，而罢守备。
现代文：西汉初年，刘邦派郦食其游说齐国，劝齐王田广与汉约和，齐王整天设宴款待郦食其，而且撤除了防卫部队。
English: In the first year of the Western Han Dynasty, Liu Bang sent his concubines to lobby Qi and persuade Qi Wang Tianguang to make peace with the Han Dynasty. Qi Wang held a banquet all day to entertain the concubines, and removed the defense forces.

古文：蒯通说信，遂渡河，袭破齐。齐王以郦生卖己，烹之，而走高密，请救于楚。
现代文：谋士蒯通建议韩信乘齐国守备废弛之隙而出兵进攻它；韩信采纳了他的意见，于是率军渡过黄河，出敌不意地一举袭破了齐国。齐王田广认为是郦食其出卖了自己，便把他煮死了，然后逃往高密，向楚国求救。
English: Han Xin took his advice and led his army across the Yellow River, defeating Qi in one fell swoop. Qi Wang Tian Guang thought that he had been betrayed by Xing, so he boiled him to death, and then fled to Gaomi to ask for help from Chu.

古文：楚遣龙且将兵救齐。
现代文：楚王于是派遣龙且为将率兵号称二十万前往援救齐国。
English: King Chu then dispatched dragons and claimed that he would lead 200,000 soldiers to rescue Qi.

古文：或曰： 汉兵远来，其锋难当，齐、楚自居其地，兵易败散。
现代文：有人劝龙且说： 汉军远离本土而来拚死作战，其锋芒锐盛不可阻挡，齐、楚军队是在自己地域内作战，士卒容易逃散。
English: Some people advised Long and said: The Han army came from far away from the mainland to fight to the death, and its sharp edge was unstoppable. The Qi and Chu armies fought in their own region, and the soldiers could easily escape.

古文：不如深壁，令齐王使其信臣招所亡城，闻其王在，楚来救，必反汉。
现代文：因此，不如采取深沟高垒固守不战之策，叫齐王派遣其心腹大臣去招抚失陷的城邑。这些失陷的城邑知道自己的国王还在，且有楚军前来救援，就一定会反叛汉军。
English: Therefore, it would be better to adopt the strategy of standing firm in a deep ditch and fortress and not fighting, and ask King Qi to send his trusted ministers to appease the lost cities. These lost cities know that their king is still there, and that the Chu army has come to the rescue, they will certainly rebel against the Han army.

古文：汉兵客居，其势无所食，可不战而擒也。 
现代文：汉军因客居在别国土地上，必定会造成缺少粮食的不利态势，这样，就可以不经交战而擒获他们了。 
English: Since the Han troops were living in a foreign land, they would inevitably create an unfavorable situation of a lack of food, so that they could be captured without fighting.

古文：龙且曰： 吾知韩信为人，易与耳。
现代文：但龙且不以为然地说： 我一向了解韩信的为人，他是容易对付的。
English: But Long said disapprovingly: I have always known Han Xin as a person, he is easy to deal with.

古文：今若救齐不战而降之，有何功？
现代文：如今若是援救齐国不经交战而迫降了韩信，我还有什么战功可言？
English: Now, if I rescue Qi and force Han Xin to surrender without a fight, what war merit can I claim?

古文：若战而胜，齐半可得。 
现代文：如果同他交战而又能战胜他，齐国的一半土地可就成为我的封地了。 
English: If I fight him and defeat him, half of Qi will become my fiefdom.

古文：遂进兵与汉军夹潍水而阵。
现代文：于是，率军前进，与汉军相隔潍水而摆开了阵势。
English: As a result, he led the army forward, separated from the Chinese army by a narrow strip of water, and set up a position.

古文：信夜使人囊沙壅水上流，旦渡击且，佯败走。
现代文：韩信连夜派人制作了大批袋囊装满沙子，堵住了潍水上游，清晨又亲率部分兵力渡河袭击龙且而伪装成战败逃回。
English: Overnight, Han Xin sent people to make a large number of bags filled with sand, blocking the upper reaches of the Surabaya River. In the morning, he led some troops to cross the river to attack the dragon and escaped back disguised as a defeat.

古文：龙且喜曰： 吾固知信怯。 
现代文：龙且见此高兴地说： 我本来就知道韩信是个胆小怕战的懦夫。 
English: Seeing this, Long Jie happily said, "I already knew that Han Xin was a coward who was afraid of war.

古文：遂追之。
现代文：于是挥军渡河追击汉军。
English: As a result, the waved army crossed the river to chase the Chinese army.

古文：信使人决壅囊，水大至，且军大半不得渡，即击，杀且。
现代文：韩信立即派人掘开潍水上游的沙袋，河水顿时倾泻而至。
English: Han Xin immediately sent someone to dig up the sandbags in the upper reaches of the river, and the water suddenly poured in.

古文：水东军散走，亡去，遂平齐。
现代文：这时，韩信命手下扒开上游的沙袋，大水直冲下来。楚军刚过来一半，其余部队无法渡河。
English: At this time, Han Xin ordered his men to open the sandbags upstream, and the water rushed straight down. Half of the Chu army had just come over, and the rest of the troops could not cross the river.

