古文：凡与敌相攻，若敌无故退归，必须审察，果力疲粮竭，可选轻锐蹑之。
现代文：凡是与敌人作战，如果敌人无缘无故地突然退走，就一定要查明其原因。敌人因为力气衰竭粮尽而败走，就可以派遣轻装精锐部队跟踪追击它。
English: In any battle with the enemy, if the enemy suddenly withdraws without any reason, it is necessary to find out the reason. If the enemy loses because of exhaustion and exhaustion, it is possible to send light elite troops to chase it.

古文：若是归师，则不可遏也。
现代文：如果敌人是为了保存实力而撤退，那么，就不要轻率地拦截它。
English: If the enemy is retreating in order to conserve strength, then do not intercept it lightly.

古文：法曰： 归师勿遏。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 对于退归本国的敌人，不要轻率阻击拦截。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: For the enemy who has retreated to his own country, do not frivolously obstruct interception.

古文：汉献帝建安三年，曹操围张绣于穰。
现代文：东汉献帝建安三年，曹操率军围攻据守穰城的张绣。
English: In the third year of the Eastern Han Dynasty's dedication to Emperor Jianan, Cao Cao and his army besieged Zhang Xiu, who was defending Lucheng.

古文：刘表遣兵救之，绣欲安众守险，以绝军后。
现代文：荆州牧刘表派兵增援。张绣企图扼守安众险要地势，以截断曹操军的后路。
English: Jingzhou Mu Liu table sent reinforcements. Zhang Xiu attempted to hold the key position of Anzhuan to cut off the back way of Cao Cao's army.

古文：操军不得进，前后受敌，夜乃凿险伪遁，伏兵以待。
现代文：致使曹操部队不得前进，腹背受敌；于是曹操下令停止前进，趁夜凿险开道假装成逃跑的样子，而暗设伏兵以等待敌人。
English: As a result, Cao Cao's troops were not allowed to advance and suffered from the enemy. Therefore, Cao Cao ordered them to stop advancing, take advantage of the night to cut a dangerous path and pretend to escape, and set up an ambush to wait for the enemy.

古文：绣悉兵来追，操纵奇兵夹攻，大败之。
现代文：张绣认为曹操想突围逃跑，于是率领全部兵力追到这里，曹操马上挥纵伏兵与步骑主力实施夹击，大败张绣军。
English: Zhang Shuxiu thought that Cao Cao wanted to break through the encirclement and escape, so he led all the troops to chase him here. Cao Cao immediately waved the ambush soldiers and the main force of the cavalry to carry out a pincer attack, and defeated Zhang Shuxiu's army.

古文：谓荀彧曰： 虏遏我归师，而与吾死地战，吾是以知胜矣。 
现代文：事后，当谋士荀彧问到此战取胜原因时，曹操对他说： 敌人企图截断我军退归之路，而我军则是处于死地而战，我因此知道是能够取得胜利的。 
English: Afterwards, when the counselor asked the reason for the victory in this battle, Cao Cao said to him: The enemy tried to cut off our army's retreat, but our army was fighting to the death, so I knew that I could win.

