古文：古者周天子之官，有庶子官。
现代文：古代周天子设立的官职，有一种叫庶子。
English: In ancient times, Zhou Tianzi established an official post, one of which was called bastard.

古文：庶子官职诸侯、卿、大夫、士之庶子之卒，掌其戒令，与其教治，别其等，正其位。
现代文：庶子官负责管理由诸侯、卿、大夫、士的儿子组成的部队，掌管对他们的戒令和教治，辨别他们的等级，确定他们的朝位的位次。
English: The bastard officials were responsible for managing the troops composed of the sons of lords, nobles, doctors, and soldiers, controlling their orders and teachings, distinguishing their ranks, and determining their imperial rank.

古文：国有大事，则率国子而致于大子，唯所用之。
现代文：国家有大事，就率领他们到太子哪里去，听凭太子任用。
English: When there is a major event in the country, he leads them to wherever the crown prince is, and they are appointed by the crown prince.

古文：若有甲兵之事，则授之以车甲，合其卒伍，置其有司，以军法治之，司马弗正。
现代文：如有战事发生，就发给他们兵车和盔甲，编成队伍，设立各级军官，按照军法进行管理。因为他们直属于太子，所以就不再接受司马的征调。
English: If there is a war, they will be issued with chariots and armor, organized into teams, set up officers at all levels, and managed in accordance with military law. Because they directly belong to the prince, they will no longer accept Sima's conscription.

古文：凡国之政事，国子存游卒，使之修德学道，春合诸学，秋合诸射，以考其艺而进退之。
现代文：国家有谣役等事，就把这些贵族子弟单独编队，使他们修养品德，力学道艺。春天把他们聚集在太学，秋天把他们聚集在射宫，考核他们的学业，根据成绩的优劣，决定他们的进退。
English: When the state has a ballad and other events, these aristocrats' children are formed separately to cultivate their moral character and mechanical skills. In the spring, they are gathered at Taishu, and in the autumn, they are gathered at Shaogu. Their studies are evaluated, and their advancement and retreat are decided according to the merits of their grades.

古文：诸侯燕礼之义：君立阼阶之东南，南乡尔卿，大夫皆少进，定位也；君席阼阶之上，居主位也；君独升立席上，西面特立，莫敢适之义也。
现代文：诸侯宴饮群臣的礼仪是这样的：国君站在阼阶的东南方，面朝南向卿作揖，使卿近前，卿稍北进，然后面朝西而立；国君又揖请大夫近前，大夫也都稍向北进，面朝北而立。这是要确定群臣的位置。
English: The etiquette for lords entertaining their retinue of courtiers is as follows: The sovereign stands at the southeast corner of the dais, facing south, and makes a sign to the lord, asking the lord to move closer, the lord to move slightly north, and then to stand facing west; the sovereign also invites the doctor to move closer, and the doctor also moves slightly north, and stands facing north. This is to determine the position of the courtiers.

古文：设宾主，饮酒之礼也；使宰夫为献主，臣莫敢与君亢礼也；不以公卿为宾，而以大夫为宾，为疑也，明嫌之义也；宾入中庭，君降一等而揖之，礼之也。君举旅于宾，及君所赐爵，皆降再拜稽首，升成拜，明臣礼也；君答拜之，礼无不答，明君上之礼也。
现代文：作为臣下的宾客进入庭中，国君就走下一级台阶，这是表示对宾客以礼相待。旅酬时，国君首先举杯向宾客劝酒，一接着饮国君特赐的酒客在饮酒之前都要下堂向国君行再拜稽首的大礼。国一君谦让，小臣前去阻止，于是宾客和臣下又升堂再拜稽首，完成拜礼。是表明臣下应有的礼数。国君以再拜作为答礼，礼无不氛这是表明君上应有的礼数。
English: When entering the court as a guest of a vassal, the sovereign steps down one step, which indicates that the guests are treated with courtesy. When traveling, the sovereign first raises a glass to persuade the guests to drink, and then the guests who drink the wine specially given by the sovereign must go down to the court and bow to the sovereign before drinking. Once the sovereign concedes, the vassal goes to stop it, so the guests and the vassal go up to the court again to bow to the sovereign and complete the bow. It is to show the number of courtesies that the vassal should have. The sovereign responds with a bow, and there is no lack of courtesies. This

古文：臣下竭力尽能以立功于国，君必报之以爵禄，故臣下皆务竭力尽能以立功，是以国安而君宁。
现代文：臣下竭尽自己的能力为国立功，君上一定要以爵位和傣禄作为回报，这样臣下就会都乐于竭尽其能去立功，因此就国家安宁、国君安宁。
English: Subordinates do their best to perform national services, and the sovereign must reward them with a peerage and a stipend. In this way, subordinates will be willing to do their best to perform national services, and the country and the sovereign will be at peace.

古文：礼无不答，言上之不虚取于下也。
现代文：礼无不答，意思是说，作君上的不会让臣下白白地效力。
English: You should be polite, which means that you will not let your subordinates work in vain.

古文：上必明正道以道民，民道之而有功，然后取其什一，故上用足而下不匮也；是以上下和亲而不相怨也。
现代文：君上必须说明了正道以引导百姓，百姓跟随引导而取得收获，然后国家抽取十分之一作为赋税，其结果是君上用度充足，百姓生活也不匮乏。所以上下和睦亲密，没有互相怨恨。
English: The ruler must show the right path to guide the people, the people follow the guidance and get the harvest, and then the state takes one-tenth as a tax. The result is that the ruler's consumption is sufficient and the people's life is not lacking. Therefore, the upper and lower levels are harmonious and intimate, and there is no mutual resentment.

古文：和宁，礼之用也；此君臣上下之大义也。
现代文：上下和睦亲密，互相没有怨恨，这正体现了礼的作用。这就是君臣上下的大义。
English: There is harmony and closeness between the upper and lower ranks, and there is no grudge against each other, which reflects the role of etiquette. This is the great righteousness of the ruler and the subordinate.

古文：故曰：燕礼者，所以明君臣之义也。
现代文：所以说，燕礼是用以表明君臣大义的。
English: Therefore, the Yan Rite is used to show the great righteousness of the monarch and his subjects.

古文：席：小卿次上卿，大夫次小卿，士、庶子以次就位于下。
现代文：宴饮时坐席的设置是这样的：宾席在户墉之间，上卿的席位在宾席之东，小卿的席位在宾席之西，次于上卿；大夫的席位在小卿之西，又次于小卿；士与庶子，堂上没有席位，在昨阶下依次站立。
English: The seating arrangement at a banquet is as follows: the guests' seats are between the eaves, the lord's seat is to the east of the guests' seats, the junior lord's seat is to the west of the guests' seats, next to the senior lord; the doctor's seat is to the west of the junior lord's seat, next to the junior lord's seat; there are no seats in the hall for nobles and commoners, and they stand in order of precedence.

古文：献君，君举旅行酬；而后献卿，卿举旅行酬；而后献大夫，大夫举旅行酬；而后献士，士举旅行酬；而后献庶子。
现代文：饮酒时，宰夫代国君为主人，先给国君敬酒，国君饮过之后，举杯向在座的人劝酒；然后宰夫又献酒给卿，卿饮过之后，也举杯向大家劝饮；然后宰夫又献酒给大夫，大夫饮过之后，又举杯向大家劝饮；然后宰夫又献酒给士，士饮过之后，又举杯向在座的人劝酒；最后才是给庶子敬酒。
English: When drinking, the steward serves as the host of the sovereign, first giving a toast to the sovereign, after which the sovereign drinks and raises a glass to the people present; then the steward gives a toast to the lord, after which the lord drinks and raises a glass to the people present; then the steward gives a toast to the doctor, after which the doctor drinks and raises a glass to the people present; then the steward gives a toast to the priest, after which the priest drinks and raises a glass to the people present; and finally to the bastard.

古文：俎豆、牲体、荐羞，皆有等差，所以明贵贱也。
现代文：席前所陈之撰：国君和宾席前，俎肉、脯酿、庶羞皆有；卿大夫席前，有脯酿、庶羞而无姐肉；士以下，唯有脯酸而已。
English: Compiled before the banquet: before the banquet of the sovereign and the guests, there are stewed meat, stewed wine, and stewed pork; before the banquet of the noble doctor, there is stewed meat, stewed wine, and stewed pork, but no stewed meat; after the banquet of the nobles, there is only stewed pork.

