古文：孝景皇帝者，孝文之中子也。
现代文：孝景皇帝是孝文皇帝的中子。
English: Emperor Xiaojing was the son of Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：母窦太后。
现代文：他的母亲是窦太后。
English: His mother was Empress Dowager Dou.

古文：孝文在代时，前有三男，及窦太后得幸，前后死，及三子更死，故孝景得立。
现代文：孝文皇帝在代国的时候，前任王后生有三个男孩，等到窦太后得宠的时候，前任王后去世，她的三个儿子也相继死亡，因此孝景皇帝能够嗣位。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen was in charge of the country, his predecessor Empress Dowager Dou gave birth to three boys. When Empress Dowager Dou fell in love with Emperor Xiaowen, her predecessor Empress Dowager Dou died, and her three sons also died one after another, so Emperor Xiaojing was able to succeed to the throne.

古文：元年四月乙卯，赦天下。
现代文：景帝元年四月二十二日，大赦天下。
English: Emperor Jing was pardoned on April 22nd, the first day of the year.

古文：乙巳，赐民爵一级。
现代文：乙巳日，赐予百姓爵一级。
English: On the 19th day of the month, he was awarded the first level of people's peerage.

古文：五月，除田半租，为孝文立太宗庙。
现代文：五月，减免农户一半的田租。为孝文皇帝修建了太宗庙。
English: In May, half of the farm rents of farmers were exempted. The Taizong Temple was built for Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：令群臣无朝贺。
现代文：命令大臣们不要为自己即位一事上朝拜贺。
English: Ordered his ministers not to go to the Imperial Palace to congratulate him on his accession.

古文：匈奴入代，与约和亲。
现代文：允许匈奴进入代地，与匈奴签约和亲。
English: He allowed the Xiongnu to enter the vicarage and signed a peace treaty with them.

古文：二年春，封故相国萧何孙系为武陵侯。男子二十而得傅。
现代文：二年春天，册封原来的相国萧何的孙子萧系为武陵侯，规定男子二十岁时要登记在簿。
English: In the spring of the second year, Xiao He's grandson Xiao, who was originally from the same country as Xiao He, was registered as the Prince of Wuling, and it was stipulated that men should be registered in the book at the age of twenty.

古文：四月壬午，孝文太后崩。
现代文：四月二十五日，孝文太后去世。
English: On April 25, Empress Dowager Xiaowen passed away.

古文：广川、长沙王皆之国。
现代文：广川王、长沙王都前往自己的封国。
English: The kings of Guangchuan and Changsha went to their own fiefdoms.

古文：丞相申屠嘉卒。
现代文：丞相申屠嘉去世。
English: Minister of War Shin Tooja passed away.

古文：八月，以御史大夫开封侯陶青为丞相。
现代文：八月，任命御史大夫开封侯陶青为丞相。
English: In August, he appointed Mishi no daibu Kaifeng marquis Tao Qing as chancellor.

古文：彗星出东北。
现代文：彗星出现在东北方。
English: The comet appeared in the northeast.

古文：秋，衡山雨雹，大者五寸，深者二尺。
现代文：秋天，衡山冰雹如雨，最大的冰雹有五寸，最深的地方有二尺。
English: In autumn, Hengshan's hailstones are like rain. The largest hailstone is five inches, and the deepest is two feet.

古文：荧惑逆行，守北辰。月出北辰间。
现代文：荧惑倒着运行，逼近北辰的位置，月亮出现在北辰的中间。
English: The fluorescence illusion runs backwards, approaching the position of the North Star, and the moon appears in the middle of the North Star.

古文：岁星逆行天廷中。
现代文：岁星在天庭中逆向运行。
English: The year star runs backwards in the heavens.

古文：置南陵及内史、祋ì祤ǔ为县。
现代文：皇帝将南陵和内史、祋祤设置为县。
English: The emperor designated Nanling, Inner Shih, and Jiu as counties.

古文：三年正月乙巳，赦天下。
现代文：三年正月二十二日，大赦天下。
English: On the 22nd day of the first month of the third year, the general amnesty began.

古文：长星出西方。
现代文：一颗光芒很长的彗星出现在西方。
English: A long-beamed comet appears in the west.

古文：天火燔雒阳东宫大殿城室。
现代文：天火烧毁了雒阳东宫大殿和城楼。
English: The fire destroyed the main hall and the castle tower of the East Palace in Shenyang.

古文：吴王濞、楚王戊、赵王遂、胶西王卬、济南王辟光、菑川王贤、胶东王雄渠反，发兵西乡。
现代文：吴王刘濞、楚王刘戊、赵王刘遂、胶西王刘卬、济南王刘辟光、淄川王刘贤、胶东王刘雄渠发动叛乱，出兵向西进发。
English: Wu King Liu Bei, Chu King Liu Er, Zhao King Liu Sui, Jiaoxi King Liu Bei, Jinan King Liu Biguang, Hechuan King Liu Xian, and Jiaodong King Liu Xiongqiu launched a rebellion and sent troops to the west.

古文：天子为诛晁错，遣袁盎谕告，不止，遂西围梁。
现代文：天子因为这件事处死了晁错，派袁盎谕告七国，但七国仍不停止进军，继续向西围攻梁国。
English: As a result of this incident, the Son of Heaven punished the error and sent Yuan Angzhu to the Seven Kingdoms, but the Seven Kingdoms still did not stop marching and continued to encircle Liang to the west.

古文：上乃遣大将军窦婴、太尉周亚夫将兵诛之。
现代文：于是，皇帝派遣大将军窦婴、太尉周亚夫率兵讨伐他们，最后将其消灭。
English: As a result, the emperor sent the general Dou Ying and the lieutenant Zhou Yafu to fight them and finally eliminate them.

古文：六月乙亥。赦亡军及楚元王子蓺等与谋反者。
现代文：六月二十五日，皇帝赦免败亡的士卒和楚元王的儿子刘蓺等参加叛乱的人。
English: On June 25, the emperor pardoned the defeated soldiers and the son of King Chu Yuan, Liu Ye, and others who participated in the rebellion.

古文：封大将军窦婴为魏其侯。
现代文：封大将军窦婴为魏其侯。
English: General Dou Yu, who was given the title of grand marshal, became Wei's vassal.

古文：立楚元王子平陆侯礼为楚王。
现代文：立楚元王的儿子平陆侯刘礼为楚王。
English: The son of the founding king of Chu, Pinglu Hou Liu Li, became the king of Chu.

古文：立皇子端为胶西王，子胜为中山王。
现代文：立皇子刘端为胶西王，皇子刘胜为中山王。
English: Prince Liu Duan was appointed King of Jiaoxi, and Prince Liu Sheng was appointed King of Zhongshan.

古文：徙济北王志为菑川王，淮阳王余为鲁王，汝南王非为江都王。
现代文：改封济北王刘志为淄川王，淮阳王刘余为鲁王，汝南王刘非为江都王。
English: Liu Zhi, the king of Jibei, was renamed as the king of Hechuan, Liu Yu, the king of Huaiyang, as the king of Lu, and Liu Fei, the king of Yunnan, as the king of Jiangdu.

古文：齐王将庐、燕王嘉皆薨ō。
现代文：齐王刘将庐、燕王刘嘉全都去世了。
English: The king of Qi, Liu Zhaojun, and the king of Yan, Liu Jia, have all passed away.

古文：四年夏，立太子。
现代文：四年夏天，立皇太子。
English: In the summer of 1904, the crown prince was appointed.

古文：立皇子彻为胶东王。
现代文：封皇子刘彻为胶东王。
English: The crown prince Liu Che was crowned King of Jiaodong.

古文：六月甲戌，赦天下。
现代文：六月二十九日，大赦天下。
English: On June 29, the amnesty came into effect.

古文：后九月，更以易阳为阳陵。
现代文：闰九月，把戈阳改为阳陵。
English: In leap September, Goyang was changed to Yangling.

古文：复置津关，用传出入。
现代文：又在渡口和关口设置哨卡，凭符信出入。
English: In addition, checkpoints have been set up at ferry ports and checkpoints, and entry and exit is by letter.

古文：冬，以赵国为邯郸郡。
现代文：冬天，把赵国改置为邯郸郡。
English: In the winter, Zhao County will be replaced by Handan County.

古文：五年三月，作阳陵、渭桥。
现代文：五年三月，修建陽陵和渭桥。
English: In March of the fifth year, Yangling and Fen Bridge were built.

古文：五月，募徙阳陵，予钱二十万。
现代文：五月，拨下钱币二十万，招募全国百姓迁往阳陵。
English: In May, 200,000 coins were allocated to recruit people from all over the country to move to Yangling.

古文：江都大暴风从西方来，坏城十二丈。
现代文：江都地区遭遇从西方刮来的大风暴，毁坏了城墙十二丈。
English: The Jiangdu region was hit by a big storm that blew in from the west, destroying the twelve-height city wall.

古文：丁卯，封长公主子蟜为隆虑侯。
现代文：二十八日，皇帝封长公主的儿子为隆虑侯。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Fuchang's daughter's son, Zou, was born.

古文：徙广川王为赵王。
现代文：改封广川王为赵王。
English: King Hirokawa was renamed King Zhao.

古文：六年春，封中尉绾为建陵侯，江都丞相嘉为建平侯，陇西太守浑邪为平曲侯，赵丞相嘉为江陵侯，故将军布为鄃ū侯。
现代文：六年春天，封中尉卫绾为建陵侯，江都的丞相程嘉为建平侯，陇西郡的太守公孙浑邪为平曲侯，赵国的丞相苏嘉为江陵侯，原来的将军栾布为鄃侯。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, Lieutenant Wei Wei was Jianling Hou, Jiangdu's chancellor Cheng Jia was Jianping Hou, the governor of Shaanxi County, Gongsun Hunya, was Pingqu Hou, the chancellor of Zhao Province, Su Jia, was Jiangling Hou, and the former general Zibo was Zou Hou.

古文：梁楚二王皆薨。
现代文：梁王、楚王都去世了。
English: King Liang and King Chu have both passed away.

古文：后九月，伐驰道树，殖兰池。
现代文：闰九月，砍伐驰道旁的树木，填平了兰池。
English: In September, the trees next to the track were cut down, filling the orchid pond.

古文：七年冬，废栗太子为临江王。
现代文：七年冬天，废掉栗太子刘荣，改封为临江王。
English: In the winter of the seventh year, Liu Rong, the Prince of Chestnut, was abolished and his title was changed to the King of Linjiang.

古文：十一月晦，日有食之。
现代文：十一月的最后一天，出现了日食。
English: On the last day of November, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：春，免徒隶作阳陵者。
现代文：春天，赦免修筑陽陵的囚犯奴隶。
English: In the spring, prisoners and slaves who built Yangling were pardoned.

古文：丞相青免。
现代文：丞相陶青被免除职务。
English: The chancellor, Tao Qing, was relieved of his duties.

古文：二月乙巳，以太尉条侯周亚夫为丞相。
现代文：二月十六日，任命太尉条侯周亚夫为丞相。
English: On February 16th, Lieutenant General Zhou Yafu was appointed as chancellor.

古文：四月乙巳，立胶东王太后为皇后。
现代文：四月十七日，立胶东王的母亲为皇后。
English: On April 17th, the mother of King Jiaodong became the empress.

古文：丁巳，立胶东王为太子。
现代文：二十九日，立胶东王为皇太子。
English: On the 29th, King Jiaodong became the crown prince.

古文：名彻。
现代文：皇太子的名叫彻。
English: The crown prince's name is Cho.

古文：中元年，封故御史大夫周苛孙平为绳侯，故御史大夫周昌孙左车为安阳侯。
现代文：中元元年，封原来的御史大夫周苛的孙子周平为绳侯，原来的御史大夫周昌的孙子周左车为安阳侯。
English: In the first year of the Middle Ages, Zhou Ping, the grandson of the former imperial historian Zhou Cao, was named Zhenhou, and Zhou Zuohe, the grandson of the former imperial historian Zhou Chang, was named Anyang.

古文：四月乙巳，赦天下，赐爵一级。
现代文：四月二十三日，大赦天下，赐予百姓爵位一级。
English: On April 23rd, the emperor pardoned the whole country and gave the people a first-class title.

古文：除禁锢。地动。衡山、原都雨雹，大者尺八寸。
现代文：废除不准商人、入赘女婿做官和不准犯过罪的官吏重新做官的禁令。发生了地震。衡山、原都下了冰雹，最大的直径有一尺八寸。
English: The ban prohibiting merchants, sons-in-law of the emperor, and officials who had committed crimes from serving as officials was abolished. An earthquake occurred. Hengshan and Hara were covered with hailstones, the largest of which had a diameter of one and a half feet.

古文：中二年二月，匈奴入燕，遂不和亲。
现代文：中元二年二月，匈奴侵入燕地，于是不再同匈奴和亲。
English: In February of the second year of the Middle Ages, the Xiongnu invaded Yan, so they no longer made peace with the Xiongnu.

古文：三月，召临江王来。即死中尉府中。
现代文：三月，下令召临江王到都城问罪，不久临江王就死在中尉府中。
English: In March, it was ordered that King Linjiang be summoned to the capital to answer for his crimes. Soon after, King Linjiang died in the lieutenant's residence.

古文：夏，立皇子越为广川王，子寄为胶东王。
现代文：夏天，立皇子刘越为广川王，皇子刘寄为胶东王。
English: In the summer, Prince Liu Yue was crowned King of Guangchuan, and Prince Liu Ying was crowned King of Jiaodong.

古文：封四侯。
现代文：分封了四个列侯。
English: Four of them were appointed as mayors.

古文：九月甲戌，日食。
现代文：九月三十日，出现了日食。
English: On September 30th, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：中三年冬，罢诸侯御史中丞。
现代文：中元三年冬天，废除诸侯王国中御史中丞这一官职。
English: In the winter of the 3rd year of the Middle Ages, the official post of Chugoshi Chujo, the head of the vassal state, was abolished.

古文：春，匈奴王二人率其徒来降，皆封为列侯。
现代文：春天，匈奴的两个王率领自己的部众前来归降，都被封为列侯。
English: In the spring, the two kings of the Xiongnu led their troops to surrender, and were both made vassals.

古文：立皇子方乘为清河王。
现代文：立皇子刘方乘为清河王。
English: The crown prince Liu Fangxian became the king of Qinghe.

古文：三月，彗星出西北。
现代文：三月，彗星出现在西北方。
English: In March, the comet appeared in the northwest.

古文：丞相周亚夫免，以御史大夫桃侯刘舍为丞相。
现代文：丞相周亚夫被免除职务，任命御史大夫桃侯刘舍为丞相。
English: The chancellor, Zhou Yafu, was relieved of his duties, and the imperial historian, Taohou Liu She, was appointed chancellor.

古文：四月，地动。
现代文：四月，发生地震。
English: In April, there was an earthquake.

古文：九月戊戌晦，日食。
现代文：九月的最后一天，出现了日食。
English: On the last day of September, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：军东都门外。
现代文：派遣军队驻扎在都城的东都门外。
English: Troops were dispatched and stationed outside the eastern gate of the capital.

古文：中四年三月，置德阳宫。
现代文：中元四年三月，建造德阳宫。
English: In March of the 4th century, the Deyang Palace was built.

古文：大蝗。
现代文：发生严重的蝗灾。
English: A serious locust plague occurred.

古文：秋，赦徒作阳陵者。
现代文：秋天，赦免修建阳陵的囚犯。
English: In the autumn, the prisoners who built the mausoleum were pardoned.

古文：中五年夏，立皇子舜为常山王。
现代文：中元五年夏天，立皇子刘舜为常山王。
English: In the summer of the 5th year of the Middle Ages, Prince Liu Bei was appointed King of Changshan.

古文：封十侯。
现代文：分封了十人为侯。
English: Ten people were appointed as governors.

古文：六月丁巳，赦天下，赐爵一级。
现代文：六月二十九日，大赦天下，赐予百姓爵位一级。
English: On June 29th, the emperor pardoned the whole country and gave the people the first-level title.

古文：天下大潦。
现代文：全国发生了严重的涝灾。
English: Severe hailstorms occurred across the country.

古文：更命诸侯丞相曰相。
现代文：把诸侯王国的丞相改名为相。
English: Renaming the chancellor of the princely kingdom to the prime minister.

古文：秋，地动。
现代文：秋天，发生了地震。
English: In the autumn, there was an earthquake.

古文：中六年二月己卯，行幸雍，郊见五帝。
现代文：中元六年二月二十五日，皇帝来到雍县，郊祭五帝。
English: On February 25, the sixth year of the Middle Ages, the emperor came to Yong County to attend the suburb festival of the Five Emperors.

古文：三月，雨雹。
现代文：三月，下了冰雹。
English: In March, there was hail.

古文：四月，梁孝王、城阳共王、汝南王皆薨。
现代文：四月，梁孝王、城阳共王、汝南王都去世了。
English: In April, Liang Xiao Wang, Chengyang Gong Wang and Runan Wang all passed away.

古文：立梁孝王子明为济川王，子彭离为济东王，子定为山阳王，子不识为济阴王。
现代文：立梁孝王的儿子刘明为济川王，刘彭离为济东王，刘定为山阳王，刘不识为济阴王。
English: Liu Ming, the son of Li Liang Xiao Wang, was the king of Jichuan, Liu Peng Li was the king of Jidong, Liu was the king of Shanyang, and Liu Biao was the king of Jilin.

古文：梁分为五。
现代文：将原来的梁国分割为五国。
English: The original Liang Province was divided into five provinces.

古文：封四侯。
现代文：封四人为侯。
English: Four of them were appointed as mayors.

古文：更命廷尉为大理，将作少府为将作大匠，主爵中尉为都尉，长信詹事为长信少府，将行为大长秋，大行为行人，奉常为太常，典客为大行，治粟内史为大农。
现代文：将廷尉这个官职该名为大理，将作少府改名为将作大匠，主爵中尉改名为都尉，长信詹事改名为长信少府，将行改名为大长秋，大行改名为行人，奉常改名为太常，典客改名为大行，治粟内史改名为大农。
English: The official title of the court lieutenant was changed to Dali, the title of the minor prefect was changed to the grand master, the lord lieutenant was changed to the captain, the long letter Zhanji was changed to the long letter Shofu, the line was changed to the big long autumn, the big line was changed to the pedestrian, the official name was changed to the official name, the official name was changed to the official name, the official name was changed to the official name, the official name was changed to the official name.

古文：以大内为二千石，置左右内官，属大内。
现代文：把大内的官秩确定为二千石，设置左内官和右内官，使其隶属于大内。
English: The official rank of Dainai was determined to be 2,000 koku, and the left and right inner officers were set up to be subordinate to Dainai.

古文：七月辛亥，日食。
现代文：七月二十九日，出现了日食。
English: On July 29th, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：八月，匈奴入上郡。
现代文：八月，匈奴入侵上郡。
English: In August, the Xiongnu invaded Shang County.

古文：后元年冬，更命中大夫令为卫尉。
现代文：后元元年冬天，改名中大夫令为卫尉。
English: After the winter of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he changed his name from junior doctor to lieutenant.

古文：三月丁酉，赦天下，赐爵一级，中二千石、诸侯相爵右庶长。
现代文：三月十九日，大赦天下，赐予百姓爵位一级，中二千石的官员和诸侯国的相都赐爵为右庶长。
English: On March 19th, the emperor pardoned the whole country and gave the people a first-class knighthood, and the officials of 2,000 koku and the princes of the provinces were given a knighthood for the right subordinate leader.

古文：四月，大酺。
现代文：四月，允许百姓欢聚宴饮。
English: In April, the people were allowed to gather for feasting.

古文：五月丙戌，地动，其蚤食时复动。
现代文：五月九日，发生了地震，早饭时又有地震。
English: On the 9th of May, there was an earthquake, and again at breakfast.

古文：上庸地动二十二日，坏城垣。
现代文：上庸地震持续了二十二天，毁坏了城墙。
English: The Shangyong earthquake lasted 22 days and destroyed the city wall.

古文：七月乙巳，日食。
现代文：七月二十九日，出现了日食。
English: On July 29th, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：丞相刘舍免。
现代文：丞相刘舍被免除职务。
English: The chancellor, Liu She, was relieved of his duties.

古文：八月壬辰，以御史大夫绾为丞相，封建陵侯。
现代文：八月，任命御史大夫卫绾为丞相，封为建陵侯。
English: In August, he appointed Goshi no daifu (Minister of History) Morosuke Moro as chancellor, and gave him the title of Kenryo no marquis.

古文：后二年正月，地一日三动。
现代文：后二年正月，一天发生三次地震。
English: In the first month of the latter two years, three earthquakes occurred in one day.

古文：郅将军击匈奴。
现代文：郅将军率兵出击匈奴。
English: General Zou led the troops to attack the Xiongnu.

古文：酺五日。
现代文：允许百姓欢聚宴饮五天。
English: People are allowed to gather, feast and drink for five days.

古文：令内史郡不得食马粟，没入县官。
现代文：命令内史郡不得用粮食喂马，要把马匹收归官府。
English: ordered Neishi County not to feed the horses with grain and to bring the horses back to the government.

古文：令徒隶衣七緵ò布。止马舂。
现代文：规定罪犯和奴隶只能穿极粗劣的衣服。禁止用马舂米。
English: Criminals and slaves were only allowed to wear very poor quality clothing. The use of sticky rice was forbidden.

古文：为岁不登，禁天下食不造岁。
现代文：由于当年收成不好，禁止天下百姓不到一年就把当年收获的粮食提前吃完。
English: Due to the poor harvest that year, it is forbidden for the people of the world to eat the grain harvested that year less than a year in advance.

古文：省列侯遣之国。
现代文：减少在京城的列侯数量，派遣他们前往自己的封地。
English: Reduce the number of vassals in the capital and send them to their fiefdoms.

古文：三月，匈奴入雁门。
现代文：三月，匈奴入侵雁门。
English: In March, the Xiongnu invaded the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：十月，租长陵田。
现代文：十月，将高祖陵墓长陵周围的耕地租给农民。
English: In October, the cultivated land around the Mausoleum of Gao Zu was leased to farmers.

古文：大旱。
现代文：发生了严重的旱灾。
English: There was a severe drought.

古文：衡山国、河东、云中郡民疫。
现代文：衡山国、河东郡、云中郡的百姓流行瘟疫。
English: People in Hengshan Province, Hedong County and Yunnan County are affected by the epidemic.

古文：后三年十月，日月皆食赤五日。
现代文：后元三年十月，发生日食和月食，太阳和月亮连续五天都是红色。
English: In October of the 3rd year of the last century, a solar eclipse and a lunar eclipse occurred, and the sun and the moon were red for five consecutive days.

古文：十二月晦，䨓é。
现代文：十二月的最后一天，出现了雷震。
English: On the last day of December, there was a thunderstorm.

古文：日如紫。
现代文：太阳呈现紫色。
English: The sun is turning purple.

古文：五星逆行守太微。
现代文：五星逆行，侵入太微垣。
English: Five stars retrograde, intrusion too slight.

古文：月贯天廷中。
现代文：月亮横穿天庭。
English: The moon crosses the sky.

古文：正月甲寅，皇太子冠。
现代文：正月十七日，皇太子刘彻举行冠礼。
English: On the 17th day of the first month of the year, Crown Prince Liu Che held a coronation ceremony.

古文：甲子，孝景皇帝崩。
现代文：二十七日，孝景皇帝去世。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Xiaojing passed away.

古文：遗诏赐诸侯王以下至民为父后爵一级，天下户百钱。
现代文：遗诏赐予诸侯王以下至百姓中作为父亲后嗣的每人爵位一级，天下百姓每户一百钱。
English: The edict granted a first-class peerage to everyone from the princes down to the common people who were the heirs of their fathers. The common people of the world received one hundred coins per household.

古文：出宫人归其家，复无所与。
现代文：放出宫女，让他们回到自己家里，免除他们终身的赋税和徭役。
English: Let them go, let them return to their homes, let them be freed from lifelong taxes and servitude.

古文：太子即位，是为孝武皇帝。
现代文：太子即位，这就是孝武皇帝。
English: The crown prince's accession to the throne, this is the beginning of Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：三月，封皇太后弟鼢é为武安侯，弟胜为周阳侯。
现代文：三月，封皇太后的弟弟田蚡为武安侯，田胜为周阳侯。
English: In March, the younger brother of the empress dowager, Tian Yao, became the prince of Wu'an, and Tian Sheng became the prince of Zhouyang.

古文：置阳陵。
现代文：设置阳陵作为景帝的陵园。
English: The Yangling Mausoleum was established as the imperial mausoleum of Emperor Jing.

古文：太史公曰：汉兴，孝文施大德，天下怀安，至孝景，不复忧异姓。
现代文：太史公说：汉兴之后，孝文皇帝广施恩德，天下百姓怀恩而安。到了孝景皇帝的时候，已经不需要再忧虑异姓诸侯王的反叛了。
English: Taishikong said, "After Han Xing, Emperor Xiaowen was very generous, and the people of the world were very happy. By the time of Emperor Xiaojing, there was no need to worry about the rebellion of princes with different surnames.

古文：而晁错刻削诸侯，遂使七国俱起，合从而西乡，以诸侯太盛，而错为之不以渐也。
现代文：然而晁错削夺同姓诸侯王的封地，导致七国共同起兵反叛，联合西向攻打朝廷。这是由于诸侯王的势力太强大，而晁错在行动的时候不是采取渐渐削弱的方法。
English: However, he mistakenly seized the fiefdoms of princes with the same surname, which led to the seven countries jointly rising in rebellion and jointly attacking the imperial court in the west. This was because the power of the princes was too strong, and he did not take the method of gradually weakening when acting.

古文：及主父偃言之，而诸侯以弱，卒以安。
现代文：等到主父偃提出建议，诸侯王的势力才衰弱下来，终于国家得到了安定。
English: It was not until the Lord Father Zou made a suggestion that the power of the princes and kings weakened, and the country finally became stable.

古文：安危之机，岂不以谋哉？
现代文：国家安危的关键，难道不是靠谋略吗？
English: Isn't strategy the key to national security?

