古文：夫凡国博君尊者，未尝非法重而可以至乎令行禁止于天下者也。
现代文：凡是国土广大、君主独尊的，自来都是因为法制严厉而可以在天下达到令行禁止的。因此作为君主在划分爵位、制定俸禄时。
English: Wherever there is a vast territory and the monarch is held in high esteem, it is because of the strictness of the legal system that it is possible to achieve the prohibition of orders and actions in the world. Therefore, as a monarch, when allocating titles and setting salaries.

古文：夫国治则民安，事乱则邦危。
现代文：就必须严格执行重法原则。国家太平，民众就安定；政事混乱，国家就危险。
English: The principle of the rule of law must be strictly implemented. If the country is peaceful, the people will be stable; if the government is chaotic, the country will be dangerous.

古文：法重者得人情，禁轻者失事实。
现代文：法制严厉符合人之常情。法禁松弛不符合社会实际。
English: The strictness of the legal system is in line with people's common sense. The relaxation of the legal prohibition is not in line with social reality.

古文：且夫死力者，民之所有者也，情莫不出其死力以致其所欲；而好恶者，上之所制也，民者好利禄而恶刑罚。上掌好恶以御民力，事实不宜失矣，然而禁轻事失者，刑赏失也。
现代文：况且拼命出力是民众固有的，他们的心理无非是想拼命出力去获得渴望的东西。而民众喜欢什么，厌恶什么，是由君主一手控制着的。民众喜欢的是利禄，厌恶的是刑罚；君主掌握民众好此恶彼的心理来使用民力，政事的实际功效就不应该丧失了。既然如此，那么法禁松弛，政事有失，正是由于刑赏不当。
English: Moreover, it is inherent in the people to work hard, and their mentality is nothing more than to work hard to get what they desire. And what the people like and dislike is controlled by the monarch. The people like the reward, and dislike the punishment; the monarch should grasp the people's psychology to use the people's power, and the actual effectiveness of the government should not be lost. In this case, then the law is loose and the government is at fault, precisely because of the improper reward.

古文：其治民不秉法为善也，如是，则是无法也。
现代文：君主治理民众不能掌握法度除恶务善。这样情形一旦出观。也就等于没有法制了。
English: Monarchs governing the people cannot grasp the law, eliminate evil, and do good. Once such a situation emerges, it is tantamount to no legal system.

古文：故治乱之理，宜务分刑赏为急。
现代文：所以根据国家治乱的原理，应把致力于区分刑赏作为当务之急。
English: Therefore, according to the principle of national anti-riot, it is urgent to devote ourselves to the distinction of punishment and reward.

古文：治国者莫不有法，然而有存有亡；亡者，其制刑赏不分也。
现代文：要治理一个国家。没有哪位君主不实行一定的法令。然而结果却是存亡各异；君国灭亡，在于法令之中刑赏不分。
English: To govern a country, there is no prince who does not carry out certain decrees. However, the result is different; the death of the monarchy is that there is no distinction between punishment and reward in the decrees.

古文：治国者，其刑赏莫不有分：有持以异为分，不可谓分；至于察君之分，独分也。
现代文：进一层说，要治理一个国家。没有哪位君主实行刑赏时是不加区分的。然而有的所谓 区分 ，是拿了不同标准进行区分。
English: "To govern a country, no monarch is indiscriminate in the imposition of punishment and reward. However, some so-called "differentiation" is based on different criteria.

古文：是以其民重法而畏禁，愿毋抵罪而不敢胥赏。
现代文：因此明君统治下的民众都重视法制畏惧禁令，既希望不要犯罪，又不敢妄自取赏。
English: Therefore, the people under the rule of the Ming Dynasty valued the rule of law and feared prohibitions. They both hoped not to commit crimes and dared not to take the reward themselves.

古文：故曰：不待刑赏而民从事矣。
现代文：所以说：不等到用刑用赏。民众就都服服贴贴地做事了。
English: Therefore, he said, people will not wait until punishment is used as a reward, and they will do things obediently.

古文：是故夫至治之国，善以止奸为务。
现代文：因此，那种治理得最好的国家。善于把禁止奸邪作为急务。
English: The best-governed state, therefore, is the one that is best at making the prohibition of adultery a top priority.

古文：是何也？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：其法通乎人情，关乎治理也。
现代文：因为禁止奸邪的法律是和人情息息相通。和政理紧密相关的。
English: Because the law prohibiting adultery is closely related to human feelings, and is closely related to politics.

古文：然则去微奸之道奈何？
现代文：既然如此，那么去掉那些不易觉察的奸邪行为要用什么方法呢？
English: That being the case, what method should be used to get rid of those treacherous acts that are difficult to detect?

古文：其务令之相规其情者也。则使相窥奈何？
现代文：关键在于一定要使民众窥探彼此的隐情。那么又怎样使民众互相窥探呢？
English: The key is to get people to spy on each other, but how do you get people to spy on each other?

古文：曰：盖里相坐而已。
现代文：大致说来。也就是同里有罪连坐受罚罢了。
English: Roughly speaking, that is to say, the guilty are punished together.

古文：禁尚有连于己者，理不得相窥，唯恐不得免。
现代文：假定禁令有牵连到自己的、从情理上看他们不得不相互监视，唯恐牵连到自己头上。
English: Assuming that they are affected by the ban, they will have to keep an eye on each other for fear of being affected themselves.

古文：有奸心者不令得忘，窥者多也。如此，则慎己而窥彼，发奸之密。
现代文：不允许有奸心的人得到隐匿的机会，靠的是四下里有眼睛盯着。
English: Don't allow the conniving to get a chance to hide by having eyes on all sides.

古文：告过者免罪受赏，失奸者必诛连刑。
现代文：告奸的人免罪受常，有奸不报的人一定要连带受刑。
English: Those who denounce treason are exempted from punishment, while those who do not denounce treason must be punished.

古文：如此，则奸类发矣。
现代文：如能这样，各种各样的奸人就被揭发出来了。
English: If this were possible, all kinds of traitors would be exposed.

古文：奸不容细，私告任坐使然也。
现代文：连细小的奸邪行为都不容发生，是靠暗中告密和实行连坐所起的作用。
English: Even small acts of treachery are not allowed to take place, relying on the role played by undercover informants and the practice of liaison.

古文：夫治法之至明者，任数不任人。
现代文：对法律整饬得极其严明的君主，依靠的是法律条文而不是一二人才。
English: Monarchs, who are extremely strict with the law, rely on legal provisions rather than one or two people.

古文：是以有术之国，不用誉则毋适，境内必治，任数也。
现代文：因此有办法的国家，毋需名扬四海。就能无敌于天下，国家得到治理，这都是是依靠法度的缘故。
English: Therefore, a country that has the means does not need to be famous all over the world. It can be invincible in the world, and the country can be governed. This is all due to relying on the rule of law.

古文：亡国使兵公行乎其地，而弗能圉禁者，任人而无数也。自攻者人也，攻人者数也。
现代文：丧失主权的国家，让敌兵公开地在境内活动而不能予以防御机制止的原因，在于只凭一二人才而没有法术，自取灭亡，是人为的因素在起作用；进攻别国，是法术的力量在起作用。
English: The reason why a country that has lost its sovereignty allows enemy soldiers to operate openly in its territory and cannot provide a defense mechanism is that only one or two talents are needed, and there is no magic. If a country self-destructs, it is the human factor that is at work; if a country attacks another country, it is the power of magic that is at work.

古文：故有术之国，去言而任法。
现代文：所以在有办法的国家里。总是排斥空谈而仟用法术。
English: So in countries that have the means, always reject the rhetoric and use the magic.

古文：凡畸功之循约者虽知，过刑之于言者难见也，是以刑赏惑乎贰。
现代文：凡属和有关条例存关奈例曲相附会的虚功是难以识破的，凡属经花言巧语掩饰的错误是难以发现的；因此。刑赏易为表里不一的情况所惑乱。
English: It is difficult to detect false achievements that are in accordance with the relevant regulations, and it is difficult to detect errors that are disguised by rhetoric; therefore, it is easy for the reward to be confused by the discrepancy between appearances.

古文：所谓循约难知者，奸功也。
现代文：所谓依据条例而难以识别的功勋。
English: So-called merits that are difficult to identify according to regulations.

古文：臣过之难见者，失根也。
现代文：就是奸功；臣下那些难以发现的过失，就是失根。
English: is to betray one's merits; those faults of one's vassals that are difficult to discover are to lose one's roots.

古文：循理不见虚功，度情诡乎奸根，则二者安得无两失也？
现代文：依据条例则不能发现虚功仪依常情判断就发现不了奸情。这样一来。
English: According to the regulations, it is not possible to detect false gong instruments, and judging by common sense, it is not possible to detect adultery. In this way.

古文：是以虚士立名于内，而谈者为略于外，故愚、怯、勇、慧相连而以虚道属俗而容乎世。
现代文：刑罚和赏赐怎能不双双产生差错呢？因此，徒有虚名的功臣在闰内捞得声誉，夸夸其谈的说客在国外巧取私利，结果愚妄、怯懦、暴庆、巧诈的种种人物串通一气，用虚无的道理迎合世俗、取悦社会。
English: How can punishment and reward not both produce errors? Therefore, vain and fictitious heroes gain a reputation within the country, and boastful lobbyists seek personal gain abroad. As a result, all kinds of foolish, cowardly, violent, and cunning people collude to use the principle of nothingness to cater to the world and please society.

古文：故其法不用，而刑罚不加乎僇人。
现代文：所以那些国法得不到执行，而罪不容诛的犯人得以逃脱刑罚的制裁。
English: As a result, those national laws are not enforced, and the worst offenders escape punishment.

古文：如此，则刑赏安得不容其二？
现代文：这样的话，刑罚和奖赏怎么会不发牛歧异？
English: So how can punishment and reward be the same?

古文：实故有所至，而理失其量，量之失，非法使然也，法定而任慧也。
现代文：事实本来摆在面前，但按常理推断却失去了正确度量。度量发生差错，并不是法度造成的；尽管法制业已明定，但依靠的却是私智。
English: The facts were originally in front of us, but according to common sense, we lost the correct measurement. The error of measurement is not caused by the law; although the legal system has been clearly defined, it relies on personal wisdom.

古文：释法而任慧者，则受事者安得其务？
现代文：放弃法制而依靠智慧，那么接受任务的官员怎能把握要领？
English: If we give up the rule of law and rely on wisdom, how can the officials who accept the task grasp the essentials?

古文：务不与事相得，则法安得无失，而刑安得无烦？
现代文：事务要领与事务本身统一不起来。那么法令哪能不出差错，而刑罚又哪能不趋烦乱？
English: The essentials of the matter cannot be unified with the matter itself. So how can the law not make mistakes, and how can the punishment not be disturbed?

古文：是以赏罚扰乱，邦道差误，刑赏之不分白也。
现代文：因此，赏罚混乱不堪，国法错误百出，是由于刑赏区分不明。
English: As a result, there is a lot of confusion about rewards and punishments, and the national law is riddled with errors, due to the fact that the distinction between punishments and rewards is unclear.

