古文：孔纬
现代文：孔纬
English: orifice

古文：鲁国公孔纬入相后，言于甥侄曰： 吾顷任兵部侍郎，与王晋公铎，充弘文馆学士，判馆事。
现代文：鲁国公孔纬做丞相后，对他的外甥侄子说： 我不久前任兵部侍郎时，和晋公王铎，充当弘文馆学士，审理馆中事务。
English: After Lu Guo Gong Kong Wei became the prime minister, he said to his nephew Rong: When I was the attendant of the military department, I served as a scholar of the Korean Literature Museum and handled the affairs of the museum.

古文：上任后，巡厅，晋公乃言曰： 余昔任兵部侍郎，与相国杜邠公悰，充弘文馆直学士，判馆事。
现代文：上任后，巡视办公厅。晋公说他从前任兵部侍郎时，和宰相邠公杜悰充当了弘文馆直学士，审理馆中事务。
English: After taking office, he inspected the general office. Jin Gong said that when he was a former attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, he and Prime Minister Xing Gong Dujuan acted as direct scholars of the Hongwu Museum to deal with matters in the museum.

古文：又语余曰： 明公将来亦据此座，犹或庶几。
现代文：他又告诉我说， 明公将来也会占据这个位置。或许还可以。
English: He also told me that Ming Gong will also occupy this position in the future.

古文：由公而下者，罹其事矣。 
现代文：从你以后的人，就会遭遇那种事 。
English: That's what's going to happen to everyone after you.

古文：以吾今日观之则邠公之言。得其大概矣。 
现代文：从我今天的情况来看，邠公的话，已说中了现在的大致情况。 
English: From my point of view today, the general situation has already been described.

古文：是时昭宗纂承，孔纬入相，朝庭事体，扫地无余，故纬感昔言而伤时也。
现代文：这时昭宗继承帝位，孔纬任宰相，朝廷各种体统，破坏无余，所以孔纬感于从前邠公的话而伤感时势。
English: At this time, Emperor Zhaozong succeeded to the imperial throne, Kong Yu was appointed as prime minister, and the various systems of the imperial court were destroyed. Therefore, Kong Yu was saddened by the words of the former Duke and the current situation.

古文：李克助
现代文：李克助
English: Li Kezhu

古文：李克助为大理卿。昭宗在华州。
现代文：李克助是大理寺正卿，昭宗帝在华州。
English: Li Keshu is the chancellor of Dali Temple, and Emperor Zhaozong is in Huazhou.

古文：郑县令崔銮，有民告举放絁绢价。
现代文：郑州县令崔銮，有百姓告发他提高丝绸价格。
English: Zhengzhou County Governor Cui Wei has been accused of raising the price of silk.

古文：刺史韩建令计以为赃，奏下三司定罪。
现代文：刺史韩建命令登记按贪赃处理，上奏朝廷请让三司给他定罪。
English: Han Jian ordered to register as a corrupt official, and appealed to the Imperial Court, asking the three departments to convict him.

古文：御史台刑部奏，罪当绞。
现代文：御史台刑部上奏：按罪应当绞死。
English: The Criminal Investigation Department of the State History Channel issued the following report: The culprit should be hanged.

古文：大理寺数月不奏，建问李尚书： 崔令乃亲情耶？
现代文：大理寺几个月没有上奏，韩建问李尚书： 崔銮是你的亲戚吗？
English: Dali Temple has not had a performance for several months. Han Jian asked Li Shangshu: Is Cui Wei your relative?

古文：何不奏？ 
现代文：为什么不上奏？ 
English: Why not sing?

古文：克助云： 裨公之政也。 
现代文：李克助说： 是帮助您的办法呀。 
English: Li Kezhu said, "It is a way to help you."

古文：韩云： 崔令犯赃，奈何言我之过也？ 
现代文：韩建说： 崔县令贪赃，为什么说是我的过错呢？ 
English: Han Jian said: Cui Xianling was greedy, why is it my fault?

古文：李云： 闻公举放，数将及万矣。 
现代文：李克助说： 听说你提高价格，数量将要达到上万了。 
English: Li Kezhu said: I heard that you raised the price, and the quantity will reach tens of thousands.

古文：韩曰： 我华州节度，华民我民也。 
现代文：韩建说： 我是华州节度使，华州百姓是我的百姓。 
English: Han Jian said: I am the ambassador of the Huazhou Festival, and the people of Huazhou are my people.

古文：李曰： 华民乃天子之民，非公之民。
现代文：李克助说： 华州百姓是天子的，不是你的。
English: Li Keshu said: "The people of Huazhou are God's children, not yours.

古文：若尔，即郑县民，乃崔令民也。 
现代文：像你所说，那么郑县百姓就是崔县令的百姓了。 
English: As you said, then the people of Zheng County are the people of Cui County.

古文：建伏其论，乃舍崔令之罪，谪颍阳尉。
现代文：韩建佩服李克助的看法。于是免了崔銮的死罪，把他贬为颍阳尉。
English: Han Jian admired Li Keshu's opinion. Therefore, he pardoned Cui Yao's capital crime and demoted him to the rank of Shenyang lieutenant.

古文：京都儒士
现代文：京都儒士
English: Kyoto Confucianism

古文：近者京都有数生会宴，因说人有勇怯，必由胆气。
现代文：近来京城里有几个读书人聚在一起饮酒，便说起来人有勇敢和怯懦的，都来自内心的胆气。
English: Recently, a few readers in Beijing got together to drink, and they said that people are brave and cowardly, and it all comes from their inner courage.

古文：胆气若盛，自无所惧，可谓丈夫。
现代文：胆气如果强盛，自己就无所恐惧，这样的人可谓是男子汉。
English: If you have strong courage, you have nothing to fear. Such a person can be described as a man.

古文：座中有一儒士自媒曰： 若言胆气，余实有之。 
现代文：在座的有一个儒士自我介绍说： 若说胆气啊，我是真有哇。 
English: One of the Confucianists present introduced himself, saying, "If you say I have guts, I really do.

古文：众人笑曰： 必须试，然可信之。 
现代文：众人笑着说： 必须先试试，然后才可信你。 
English: The crowd laughed and said, "You have to try it before you can believe it."

古文：或曰： 某亲故有宅，昔大凶，而今已空锁。
现代文：有个人说： 我的亲戚有座宅院，过去非常不吉祥，而今已经无人居住锁上门了。
English: One person said: 'My relative has a house that used to be very inauspicious, but now it's empty and locked.

古文：君能独宿于此宅，一宵不惧者，我等酧君一局。 
现代文：如果您能独自住宿在这个宅子里，一夜不害怕，我们几个人酬谢你一桌酒席。 
English: If you can stay alone in this house and not be afraid for one night, a few of us will reward you with a table.

古文：此人曰： 唯命。 
现代文：这个人说： 就按你们说的办。 
English: And he said, Let it be according to your words.

古文：明日便往，实非凶宅，但暂空耳。
现代文：第二天便去了。其实并不是不吉祥的宅子，只是没人住罢了。
English: They left the next day. Actually, it wasn't an inauspicious house, but there was no one living there.

古文：遂为置酒果灯烛，送于此宅中。
现代文：就备置酒肉瓜果灯烛，送到宅院里。
English: He prepared wine, meat, melon and fruit candlesticks and sent them to the courtyard.

古文：众曰： 公更要何物？ 
现代文：大家说： 你还要什么东西？ 
English: Everyone said: What else do you want?

古文：曰： 仆有一剑，可以自卫，请无忧也。 
现代文：他说： 我有一把剑，可以自卫。请你们不要担忧。 
English: He said: "I have a sword, I can defend myself. Please do not worry.

古文：众乃出宅，锁门却归。
现代文：于是大家都出了宅子，锁上门回去了。
English: So everyone left the house, locked the door and went back.

古文：此人实怯懦者，时已向夜，系所乘驴别屋，奴客并不得随。
现代文：这个人实际是个怯懦的人。到了晚上，这人把驴拴到另一间屋子里，仆人也不许跟随。
English: The man was actually a coward. In the evening, the man led the donkey into another room, and the servant was not allowed to follow.

古文：遂向阁宿，了不敢睡。唯灭灯抱剑而坐，惊怖不已。
现代文：他就在卧室里住宿，一点也不敢睡，只是熄灭了灯，抱着剑坐着，惊恐不止。
English: He went to sleep in his bedroom, not daring to sleep at all, but turned off the light and sat with his sword in his arms, terrified.

古文：至三更，有月上，斜照窗隙。
现代文：到了半夜，月亮升起来了，从窗缝中斜照进来。
English: In the middle of the night, the moon rose, slanting in through the window.

古文：见衣架头有物如鸟鼓翼，翻翻而动。
现代文：这人看见衣架上面有个东西像鸟在展翅，飘飘地动。
English: The man saw something like a bird on top of the hanger, spreading its wings and fluttering.

古文：此人凛然强起，把剑一挥，应手落壁，磕然有声，后寂无音响。
现代文：他鼓起勇气勉强站了起来，把剑一挥，那东西随手落在墙根，发出了声音，后来就一点动静也没有了。
English: He mustered his courage and managed to get to his feet. He swung his sword, and the thing fell against the wall, making a noise, and then nothing.

古文：恐惧既甚，亦不敢寻究，但把剑坐。
现代文：因为特别害怕，所以也不敢找寻，只握着剑坐在那里。
English: Because he was so scared, he didn't dare to look for it and just sat there holding his sword.

古文：及五更，忽有一物，上阶推门，门不开，于狗窦中出头，气休休然。
现代文：到了五更，突然有个东西，上台阶来推门，门没有推开，却从狗洞里伸进个头来，咻咻地喘气。
English: At five o'clock, something suddenly came up the steps to push the door open. The door didn't open, but a head poked out of the dog's hole, gasping for breath.

古文：此人大怕，把剑前斫，不觉自倒，剑失手抛落，又不敢觅剑，恐此物入来，床下跧伏，更不敢动。
现代文：这人害怕极了，握着剑向前砍去，不由自主自己却倒在了地上。
English: Terrified, the man lunged forward, sword in hand, and fell to the ground.

古文：忽然困睡，不觉天明。
现代文：剑也失手落在地上。此人又不敢去找剑，怕那东西进来。
English: The sword also fell to the ground by mistake. The man did not dare to go looking for the sword, for fear of the thing coming in.

古文：诸奴客已开关，至阁子间，但见狗窦中，血淋漓狼藉。
现代文：他钻到床下蜷伏着，一点也不敢动。突然困倦起来，睡着了，在不知不觉中天亮了。人们已来开门，到了内室，但见狗洞里鲜血淋漓杂乱。
English: He got under the bed and curled up, not daring to move at all. He suddenly felt drowsy, fell asleep, and before he knew it, it was dawn. People had come to open the door and go into the inner room, but they saw blood and debris in the dog cave.

古文：众大惊呼，儒士方悟。开门尚自战栗。
现代文：大家吃惊地大声呼喊，儒士才醒过来，开门时还在战栗。
English: Everyone shouted loudly in surprise, and it was only when the Confucianist woke up that he was still shivering when he opened the door.

古文：具说昨宵与物战争之状，众大骇异。
现代文：于是他详细地说了昨晚与怪物搏斗的情形，大家也异常害怕，就到墙壁下去找。
English: So he recounted the details of last night's fight with the monster, and everyone was so scared that they went down to the walls to look for it.

古文：遂于此壁下寻，唯见席帽，半破在地，即夜所斫之鸟也。
现代文：只见到帽子破成两半散在地上，就是昨夜所砍的那个 鸟 。
English: I only saw the hat broken in two and scattered on the ground. It was the bird that was cut down last night.

古文：乃故帽破弊，为风所吹，如鸟动翼耳。
现代文：原来是那个旧帽子，已经破烂，被风一吹，像鸟在扇动翅膀。
English: It turned out to be that old hat, already tattered, blown by the wind, like a bird flapping its wings.

古文：剑在狗窦侧，众又绕堂寻血踪，乃是所乘驴，已斫口喙，唇齿缺破。
现代文：剑在狗洞旁边，大家又绕屋寻找血迹，原来是他骑的那驴，已被砍破了嘴，唇齿破损。
English: The sword was next to the dog's hole, and everyone went around the house looking for bloodstains. It turned out that the donkey he was riding had been hacked in the mouth, and its lip and teeth were damaged.

古文：乃是向晓因解，头入狗门，遂遭一剑。
现代文：原来是天快亮时挣脱了缰绳，头伸入狗洞里才遭了这么一剑。
English: It turned out that it was only when he broke free of the bridle at dawn and stuck his head into the dog's hole that he suffered such a blow.

古文：众大笑绝倒，扶持而归，士人惊悸，旬日方愈。
现代文：众人大笑，笑得前仰后合。大家搀着儒士回去，儒士惊恐心跳，十天才好。
English: Everyone laughed loudly, laughing their heads off. Everyone went back with the Confucianist in their arms. The Confucianist's heart was pounding with fear. It would be a good ten days.

古文：孟乙
现代文：孟乙
English: Meng B.

古文：徐之萧县，有田民孟乙者善网狐狢。百无一失。
现代文：徐州萧县，有个打猎的百姓孟乙擅长用网网狐狸、貉子，网一百次也没有一次失误。
English: In Xiao County, Xuzhou, there is a hunting folk, Meng Yi, who is good at using the net to catch foxes and pigeons. He has not made a single mistake a hundred times.

古文：偶乘暇，持槊行旷野。
现代文：偶而有一天趁着空闲，手持长矛走在旷野中。
English: Once in a while, he would take advantage of his free time to walk through the wilderness with a spear in his hand.

古文：会日将夕，见道左数百步，荒冢岿然，草间细迳，若有人迹。
现代文：当太阳偏西时，看见道边数百步处，有高大的野坟；在草地中的小道上像是有人的脚印。
English: When the sun goes west, you can see the roadside hundreds of paces away, there are tall field graves; on the path in the meadow there seem to be human footprints.

古文：遂入之，以槊于黑暗之处搅之。若有人捉拽之，不得动。问 尔鬼耶人耶？
现代文：于是他走了进去。孟乙用长矛在黑暗处乱搅，忽然觉得好像有人把长矛拽住，搅不动了，就问： 你是人是鬼？
English: So he went in. Meng Yi stirred the dark place with a spear, suddenly felt as if someone had pulled the spear and stirred it, and asked: Are you a ghost?

古文：怪耶魅耶？
现代文：是妖怪还是鬼魅？
English: Are they yokai or ghosts?

古文：何故执吾槊而不置？ 
现代文：为什么抓住我的长矛不放？ 
English: Why do you hold on to my spear?

古文：暗中应曰： 吾人也。 
现代文：黑暗中回答说： 我是人哪。 
English: He answered in the darkness, "I am a man.

古文：乃命出之。
现代文：就让孟乙把他救出来。
English: Let Meng Yi rescue him.

古文：具以诚告云： 我姓李，昨为盗，被系兖州军候狱。五木备体，捶楚之处，疮痏遍身。
现代文：他把实情如实地告诉了孟乙，说： 我姓李，从前是个小偷，被关押在兖州军候的监狱中，受到各种体罚，被棍子和荆条打的地方伤痕累累，便找了个机会越狱逃了出来。
English: He told Meng Yi the truth, saying: My surname is Li, I used to be a thief, I was detained in the Zhangzhou Military Waiting Prison, I was subjected to various physical punishments, and the place where I was beaten with sticks and thorns was scarred, so I found an opportunity to escape from prison.

古文：因伺隙逾狱垣，亡命之此，死生唯命焉。孟哀而将归，置于复壁中，后经赦乃出。
现代文：逃到这个地方，生死听天由命吧。 孟乙可怜他，把他带回了家，藏在夹壁中，后来遇大赦才从壁中出来。
English: Meng Yi took pity on him, brought him back home, hid him in the wall, and only came out of the wall when he was granted amnesty.

古文：孟氏以善猎知名，飞走之属，无得脱者，一旦荒冢之中，而得叛狱囚以归。
现代文：孟乙因为擅长打猎出了名，飞禽走兽之类没有能够逃脱的，却忽然在荒坟之中，把一个从狱中逃跑的囚犯带回家。
English: Meng Yi was famous for being good at hunting, and there was no such thing as a bird or animal that could escape, but suddenly, in the middle of a deserted grave, he brought home a prisoner who had escaped from prison.

古文：闻者皆大笑之。
现代文：听到这事的人都大笑起来。
English: Everyone burst out laughing when they heard about it.

古文：振武角抵人
现代文：振武角抵人
English: Arriving at Zhenwu Cape

古文：光启年中，左神策军四军军使王卞出镇振武。
现代文：光启年间，左神策军四军军使王卞出朝镇守振武。
English: In the year of Guangqi, the four armies of Zuoshenchao sent Wang Xuan out to defend Zhenwu.

古文：置宴，乐戏既毕，乃命角抵。
现代文：举行宴会，奏乐舞蹈之后，就下令摔跤比赛。
English: After holding a banquet, playing music and dancing, he ordered a wrestling match.

古文：有一夫甚魁岸，自邻州来此较力，军中十数辈躯貌膂力，悉不能敌。
现代文：有一个男人特别魁梧高大，是从邻州来此地比力气的，军中十几个人在体形外貌、体力方面，都比不过他。
English: There was a man who was particularly large and tall. He had come from a neighboring state and was more powerful than he was. More than a dozen men in the army were no match for him in terms of physical appearance and strength.

古文：主帅亦壮之。遂选三人，相次而敌之，魁岸者俱胜。
现代文：主帅也觉得他很健壮，就选了三个人，相继和他比试，魁梧的人都胜了。
English: The manager also thought he was very strong, so he chose three people to compete with him one after another, and the strong ones all won.

古文：帅及座客，称善久之。
现代文：主帅和座上客人都称赞了他好久。
English: The manager and the crowd have been praising him for a long time.

古文：时有一秀才坐于席上，忽起告主帅曰： 某扑得此人。 
现代文：当时有一个秀才坐在席上，突然站起来告诉主帅说： 我可以打倒这个人。 
English: There was a talent who was sitting on the bench and suddenly stood up and told the manager: "I can beat this guy."

古文：主帅颇骇其言，所请既坚，遂许之。
现代文：主帅对他说的话很吃惊，因为他坚决请求，于是就答应了他。
English: The manager was surprised by what he said because he asked for it and he got it.

古文：秀才降阶，先入厨，少顷而出，遂掩绾衣服，握左拳而前。魁梧者微笑曰： 此一指必倒矣。 
现代文：秀才下了台阶，先进了厨房，不一会儿就出来了。把衣服系紧一些，握着左拳走上前去，魁梧的人微笑着说： 这人我一指就得倒下。 
English: The scholar descended the steps, went into the kitchen, and soon came out, fastened his clothes a little tighter, and walked forward with his left fist clenched. The burly man smiled and said: "I'd have to fall over with one finger."

古文：及渐相逼，急展左手示之，魁岸者懵然而倒，合座大笑。
现代文：等到二人渐渐靠近时，秀才迅速展开左手让他看，魁梧的人不知不觉地倒在了地上。满座大笑。
English: When the two got closer, Xiucai quickly extended his left hand to show him, and the burly man unconsciously fell to the ground. The whole audience laughed.

古文：秀才徐步而出，盥手而登席焉。
现代文：秀才慢慢走出圈外，洗洗手又登上了坐席。
English: Scholar slowly walked out of the circle, washed his hands and boarded the seat.

古文：主帅诘之： 何术也？ 
现代文：主帅问他： 是什么招术？ 
English: The manager asked him: What's the trick?

古文：对曰： 顷年客游，曾于道店逢此人，才近食桉，踉跄而倒。
现代文：他回答说： 近年旅游，曾在途中遇到过这个人。当时此人刚近饭桌，就踉踉跄跄倒在地上。
English: He replied: "During a recent trip, I met this man on the road. He was just about to sit down at the table when he fell to the ground.

古文：有同伴曰： 怕酱，见之辄倒。
现代文：有个同伴说： 他怕大酱，见到就晕倒。
English: One of his companions said: "He's afraid of soy sauce, he faints at the sight of it."

古文：某闻而志之。
现代文：我听到后就记在心上。
English: As soon as I heard it, it stuck in my mind.

古文：适诣设厨，求得少酱，握在手中。
现代文：刚才去厨房，要了点大酱，握在手中，这个人见到后，果然倒了。
English: Just now, I went to the kitchen, asked for some large sauce, held it in my hands, and when this person saw it, he fell down.

古文：此人见之，果自倒，聊助宴设之欢笑耳。有边岫判官，目睹其事。
现代文：姑且为宴会助兴取乐罢了。 有个叫边岫的判官，亲眼看到了这件事。
English: A judge named Bentham saw this with his own eyes.

古文：赵崇
现代文：赵崇
English: Zhao Chong

古文：赵崇凝重清介，门无杂宾，慕王濛、刘真长之风也。
现代文：赵崇这个人庄重、清高、耿直，家中没闲杂的客人，羡慕王濛、刘真长的风度。
English: Zhao Chong, a dignified, clear and upright person, with no idle guests in his home, envied Wang Qian and Liu Zhenlong's demeanor.

古文：标格清峻，不为文章，号曰无字碑。
现代文：格调高洁，不写文章，号称 无字碑 。
English: The style is high and clean, it does not write articles, and it is known as a wordless monument.

古文：每遇转官，旧例各举一人自代，而崇未尝举人。
现代文：每次遇到调任他职，按惯例需推荐一人代替自己，可赵崇从未推荐过任何人。
English: Every time he is transferred to another position, according to the usual practice, he needs to recommend a person to replace himself, but Zhao Chong has never recommended anyone.

古文：云： 朝中无可代己者。 
现代文：他说： 朝廷里没有能够代替我的。 
English: He said: "There is no one in the court who can replace me.

古文：世以此少之。
现代文：世人因此看不起他。
English: The world despised him for it.

古文：韩偓
现代文：韩偓
English: Han Zheng

古文：韩偓，天复初入翰林。
现代文：韩偓，天复初年进入翰林院。
English: Han Zheng and Tian Fu entered the Hanlin Academy in the first year.

古文：其年冬，车驾幸凤翔，偓有卮从之功。返正初，帝面许用偓为相。
现代文：那年冬天，皇帝巡幸凤翔，韩偓有随从护驾的功劳，国家由乱而治之初，皇帝当面答应让韩偓做宰相。
English: That winter, the emperor went on a tour of Fengxiang, and Han Zheng had the merit of accompanying the escort. At the beginning of the country's transition from chaos to rule, the emperor personally promised to make Han Zheng the prime minister.

古文：偓奏云： 陛下运契中兴，当须用重德，镇风俗。
现代文：韩偓启奏道： 您运气符合中兴，用人当用有大德的人，以安定风俗。
English: Han Wei Qisong said: Your luck is in line with ZTE. You should employ people with great virtues to stabilize customs.

古文：臣座主右仆射赵崇，可以副陛下是选。
现代文：我当年的主考官右仆射赵崇，可以符合陛下这个选择。
English: My chief examiner at the time, my right-hand man, Sho Zhao Chong, can match His Majesty's choice.

古文：乞回臣之命授崇，天下幸甚。 
现代文：请收回成命改授赵崇，天下的百姓一定很幸运。 
English: Please withdraw the order to change Zhao Chong, the people of the world must be very lucky.

古文：帝甚嘉叹。
现代文：皇帝很赞叹。
English: The emperor was very impressed.

古文：翼日，制用崇，暨兵部侍郎王赞为相。
现代文：第二天，皇帝下令用赵崇和兵部侍郎王赞为宰相。
English: The next day, the emperor ordered that Zhao Chong and Wang Zan, the attendant of the military department, be appointed as the prime minister.

古文：时梁太祖在京，素闻崇轻佻，赞又有嫌衅，乃驰入请见，于帝前，具言二公长短。
现代文：当时梁太祖在京城，一向听说赵崇很轻佻，他又与王赞有隔膜，就迅速骑马入宫请见皇帝。在皇帝面前，全面陈述了二人的优缺点。
English: At that time, Liang Taizu was in Beijing. He had always heard that Zhao Chong was very frivolous, and he and Wang Zhan had a barrier, so he quickly rode into the palace to see the emperor. In front of the emperor, he comprehensively stated the advantages and disadvantages of the two.

古文：帝曰： 赵崇乃韩偓荐。 
现代文：皇帝说： 赵崇是韩偓推荐的。 
English: The emperor said: Zhao Chong was recommended by Han Yu.

古文：时偓在侧，梁王叱之。
现代文：当时韩偓在场，梁太祖叱责他。
English: Han Zheng was present at the time, and Liang Taizu reprimanded him.

古文：偓奏： 臣不敢与大臣争。 
现代文：韩偓启奏： 我不敢同大臣争辩。 
English: Han Wei: I don't dare to argue with the minister.

古文：帝曰： 韩偓出。 
现代文：皇帝说： 韩偓，你出去吧！ 
English: The emperor said: Han Xuan, get out!

古文：寻谪官入闽。
现代文：不久他被贬到福建做官。
English: Soon he was demoted to Fujian to work as an official.

古文：故偓诗曰： 手风慵展八行书，眼病休看九局基。
现代文：所以韩偓的诗中写道： 手风慵展八行书，眼病休看九局基。
English: Therefore, Han Xuan wrote in his poem: The hand style is the basis of the eight-line book, and the eye disease is the basis of the nine-line book.

古文：窗里日光飞野马，案前筠管长蒲卢。
现代文：窗里日光飞野马，案前筠管长蒲卢。
English: Sunlight in the window flying wild horses, in front of the case is a long pipe.

古文：谋身拙为安蛇足，报国危曾捋虎须。
现代文：谋身拙为安蛇足，报国危曾捋虎须。
English: Seeking to be a safe pair of hands, he reported that the country was in danger.

古文：满世可能无默识，未知谁拟试齐竽。 
现代文：满世可能无默识，未知谁拟试齐竽。 
English: There may be no tacit knowledge in the whole world, and it is unknown who intends to try to catch up.

古文：薛昌绪
现代文：薛昌绪
English: Xue Changxu

古文：岐王李茂贞霸秦陇也。
现代文：岐王李茂贞称霸秦陇一带。
English: The king of Qi, Li Maozhen, claimed to dominate the area around Qinbei.

古文：泾州书记薛昌绪为人迂僻，禀自天性。
现代文：泾州书记官薛昌绪为人迂腐怪僻，天性如此。
English: Xue Changxu, the secretary of Zhangzhou, is a pedantic and eccentric person by nature.

古文：飞文染翰，即不可得之矣。
现代文：在快速写作方面，就谁也不能赶上了。
English: When it comes to writing fast, no one can keep up.

古文：与妻相见亦有时，必有礼容，先命女仆通转，往来数四，可之，然后秉烛造室。至于高谈虚论，茶果而退。
现代文：与妻子见面也有时有刻，必有礼节法度：先命使女去通告一声，往来多次，允许了，然后才拿着蜡烛到室内，高谈阔论一番，喝杯茶，吃些水果就回去了。
English: There are also times when meeting with one's wife requires a certain amount of etiquette: the maidservant has to go first to announce, and after several visits, permission is given, and only then can one take a candle into the room, have a long talk, drink a cup of tea, eat some fruit, and then go back.

古文：或欲诣帏房，其礼亦然。
现代文：有时想到卧室去，那礼节也是这样。
English: Sometimes I think of going to the bedroom, and the etiquette is the same.

古文：尝曰： 某以继嗣事重，辄欲卜其嘉会。 
现代文：他曾经说： 我把传宗接代的事看得很重要，总想事先算好那恰当的聚会日子。 
English: He once said: I regard the issue of succession as very important, and I always want to calculate the appropriate day for the gathering in advance.

古文：必候请而可之。
现代文：必须等候邀请才可以。
English: You have to wait for an invitation.

古文：及从泾帅统众于天水，与蜀人相拒于青泥岭。岐众迫于辇运，又闻梁人入境，遂潜师宵遁，颇惧蜀人之掩袭。
现代文：等到跟着泾州大帅统领大兵到天水与蜀人对峙在青泥岭时，岐王将士因被用人拉车运东西所限制，又听说梁人也入了境，于是就偷偷地在夜里逃跑了。
English: When he followed the commander-in-chief of Zhangzhou and led his soldiers to Tianshui to confront the Shu people in Qingdeiling, Qi Wang was restricted by the fact that he had to use a cart to transport things, and he also heard that Liang people had entered the territory, so he secretly fled in the night.

古文：泾帅临行，攀鞍忽记曰： 传语书记，速请上马。 
现代文：泾州大帅很害怕蜀人偷袭。泾州大帅临走时，刚要上马，忽然想到了薛昌绪，说： 传话给书记官，快请他上马。 
English: When he was about to leave, just as he was about to mount his horse, he suddenly thought of Xue Changxu and said, "Send word to the registrar, quickly ask him to mount his horse."

古文：连促之，薛在草庵下藏身。曰： 传语太师，但请先行，今晨是某不乐日。 
现代文：连催几回，薛昌绪仍在草庵中藏身，说： 告诉太师，请他们先走，今天是我不高兴的日子。 
English: After being urged several times, Xue Changxu was still hiding in the thatched hut, saying: "Tell the Grandmaster, ask them to leave first, today is my day of displeasure."

古文：戎帅怒，使人提上鞍轿，捶其马而逐之，尚以物蒙其面。云： 忌日礼不见客。 
现代文：军帅很生气，派人把薛昌绪提上马鞍，然后用棍子打那马赶它走。在这时薛昌绪仍用东西蒙住自己的脸说： 忌日按礼应当不见人。 
English: The military commander was very angry and sent someone to put Xue Changxu on the saddle, and then beat the horse with a stick to drive it away. At this time, Xue Changxu still covered his face with something and said: "On the day of death, according to etiquette, you should not see anyone."

古文：此盖人妖也。
现代文：这大概是人妖吧。
English: It's probably a shapeshifter.

古文：秦陇人皆知之。
现代文：秦陇人都知道这件事。
English: Everyone in Qinhuangdao knew about it.

古文：姜太师
现代文：姜太师
English: Jiang Taishi

古文：蜀有姜太师者，失其名，许田人也，幼年为黄巾所掠，亡失父母。
现代文：蜀地有个姓姜的太师，弄不清叫什么名，是许田人，小的时候遭到黄巾军抢掠，失去了双亲。
English: In Shunde, there is a teacher surnamed Jiang, whose name is not clear. He is from Xu Tian. When he was a child, he was robbed by the Yellow Turban Army and lost his parents.

古文：从先主征伐，屡立功勋。
现代文：跟随先主刘备南征北战，屡立战功。
English: He followed his predecessor Liu Bei to the south to fight in the northern war, and repeatedly made war achievements.

古文：后继领数镇节钺，官至极品。
现代文：后来接受了几个镇的军权，官至正一品。
English: Later, he accepted the military authority of several towns, and he was promoted to the highest rank.

古文：有掌厩夫姜老者，事刍秣数十年。
现代文：他手下有个管马圈的姜老头，从事喂牲口的活儿有数十年了。
English: One of his subordinates, Jiang Lao Tou, who is in charge of the stables, has been engaged in the work of feeding livestock for decades.

古文：姜每入厩，见其小过，必笞之。
现代文：姜太师每次进牲口圈，看到姜老头有点儿过失，就一定用鞭子抽他。
English: Every time Jiang Taishi entered the cattle pen and saw that Jiang Laotong was a little negligent, he would definitely whip him.

古文：如是积年，计其数，将及数百。
现代文：就这样好多年，计算一下，姜老被打将近几百次。
English: Over the years, Jiang Lao has been beaten nearly hundreds of times.

古文：后老不任鞭棰，因泣告夫人，乞放归乡里。夫人曰： 汝何许人？ 
现代文：后来姜老头实在受不了鞭打，便哭着告诉姜太师的夫人，乞求姜太师能让他回故乡。夫人说： 你是哪里人？ 
English: Later, Old Jiang really couldn't stand the whipping, so he cried and told Jiang Taishi's wife, begging Jiang Taishi to let him return to his hometown. The wife said: Where are you from?

古文：对曰： 许田人。 
现代文：姜老头回答说： 是许田人。 
English: Old Jiang replied, "It is Xu Tianren.

古文： 复有何骨肉？ 
现代文：又问： 你还有什么亲人？ 
English: He also asked: What other relatives do you have?

古文：对曰： 当被掠之时，一妻一男，迄今不知去处。 
现代文：回答说： 当初被抢掠的时候，有一个妻子和一个儿子，至今不知道下落。 
English: He replied: At the time of the initial robbery, there was a wife and a son whose whereabouts are still unknown.

古文：又问其儿小字，及妻姓氏行第，并房眷近亲，皆言之。
现代文：又问他儿子的小名及妻子的姓氏，排行次第、家族分支、亲属和比较近的亲戚，姜老头都说了。
English: He also asked his son's nickname and his wife's surname, ranking, family branches, relatives and relatively close relatives, Jiang Lao Tou said.

古文：及姜归宅，夫人具言，姜老欲乞假归乡，因问得所失男女亲属姓名。
现代文：等到姜太师回府，夫人告诉说： 姜老头要请假回乡，我问出了姜老头所失去的男女亲属姓名。 
English: When Jiang Taishi returned to the capital, his wife told him: "Old Jiang wants to take a leave of absence to return to his hometown. I asked for the names of the male and female relatives that Old Jiang had lost.

古文：姜大惊，疑其父也，使人细问之： 其男身有何记验？ 
现代文：姜太师听后非常惊讶，疑心姜老头是他的父亲。便派人前去细问他儿子身上有什么记号。
English: After hearing this, Jiang Taishi was very surprised and suspected that Jiang Lao Tou was his father. He sent someone to find out what mark was on his son's body.

古文：曰： 我儿脚心上有一黑子，余不记之。 
现代文：回答说： 我儿子脚心上有一个黑痣。剩下的都不记得了。 
English: She replied: "My son had a black mark on the centre of his foot. I don't remember the rest of it.

古文：姜大哭，密遣人送出剑门之外。
现代文：姜太师大哭起来，于是暗地里派人把姜老头送出剑门关外。
English: Jiang Taishi burst into tears, so he secretly sent someone to escort Jiang Lao Tou out of the gate.

古文：奏先主曰： 臣父近自关东来。 
现代文：然后奏明先主，说： 为臣的父亲最近从关东来。 
English: Then he sent a message to his predecessor, saying: My father recently came from the Kanto region.

古文：遂将金帛车马迎入宅，父子如初。
现代文：于是用金帛、车马把姜老头迎入府中，恢复了当初的父子关系。
English: As a result, he welcomed Jiang Lao Tou into the palace with gold brooches and carriages, restoring the original father-son relationship.

古文：姜报挞父之过，斋僧数万，终身不挞从者。
现代文：姜太师为了弥补鞭打父亲的过错，把数万钱的斋食施舍僧人，并且一生中再也不打随从了。
English: In order to make up for the mistake of whipping his father, Jiang Taishi gave away tens of thousands of money for fasting to monks, and never followed him again in his life.

古文：康义诚
现代文：康义诚
English: Kang Yicheng

古文：后唐长兴中，侍卫使康义诚，常军中差人于私宅充院子，亦曾小有笞责。
现代文：后唐长兴年间，侍卫使康义诚，曾经从军队中派人到他自己家中充当仆人，也曾经轻微地用板子荆条打过他。
English: During the post-Tang Changxing period, the bodyguard of Kang Yicheng once sent someone from the army to serve as a servant in his own home, and also once lightly beat him with a board and a stick.

古文：忽一日，怜其老而询其姓氏，则曰姓康。
现代文：忽有一天，康义诚可怜这个仆人衰老了，就询问他的姓氏，说姓康。
English: Suddenly, one day, Kang Yicheng took pity on the old servant and asked his surname, saying that his surname was Kang.

古文：别诘其乡土亲族息胤，方知是父，遂相持而泣。
现代文：又问了他的故乡、亲属、家族、子女、后代，才知道这仆人是他父亲，于是两人拥抱痛哭。
English: Then he asked about his hometown, his relatives, his family, his children, and his descendants. Only then did he know that the servant was his father, and the two of them embraced and wept bitterly.

古文：闻者莫不惊异。
现代文：听到的人无不感到惊奇。
English: Everyone who heard it was astonished.

古文：高季昌
现代文：高季昌
English: Gao Jichang

古文：后唐庄宗过河，荆渚高季昌谓其门客梁震曰： 某事梁祖，仅获自免。
现代文：后唐庄宗过了黄河。荆渚人高季昌对他的门客梁震说： 我在后梁太祖手下做事，得到的仅仅是自己没有被处罚。
English: Gao Jichang, who lived in Hou Tangzhuang, crossed the Yellow River. Gao Jichang, a native of Jingzhuang, said to his guest, Liang Zhen: I worked under Hou Liang Taizu, and all I got was that I wasn't punished.

古文：龙德已来，止求安活。
现代文：龙德初年以来，只求安稳地活着。
English: Since the first year of Longde, I have only sought to live safely.

古文：我今入觐，亦要尝之。
现代文：我现在去朝见庄宗，试探试探。
English: I'm going to see Zhuang Zong in the morning now, to try and find out.

古文：彼若经营四方，必不縻我。
现代文：他若是想得天下，一定不会囚系我。
English: If he wants to rule the world, he won't imprison me.

古文：若移入他镇，可为子孙之福。
现代文：要是进军别的地方，那可是子孙的福分。
English: If we go somewhere else, it will be a blessing for our children and grandchildren.

古文：此行决矣。 
现代文：这次行动决定了。 
English: This operation is decided.

古文：既自阙回。谓震曰： 新主百战，方得河南。
现代文：从皇宫回来以后，他告诉梁震说： 新国主经历百战，才得到河南。
English: After returning from the imperial palace, he told Liang Zhen: The new sovereign experienced a hundred battles before gaining Henan.

古文：对勋臣夸手抄《春秋》。
现代文：对功臣自夸他亲手抄录《春秋》。
English: He boasted to his benefactor that he had copied "Spring and Autumn" by hand.

古文：又竖指云： 我于指头上得天下。
现代文：又竖起指头说： 我从指头上得到天下。
English: And he lifted up his finger again, and said, From my finger shall the whole earth be blessed.

古文：则功在一人，臣佐何有。
现代文：这意思就是功劳在一个人身上。哪还有辅佐的大臣！
English: This means that the credit is in one person. Where is the assistant minister!

古文：且游猎旬日不回，中外情何以堪？
现代文：而且去游玩打猎十天不回来，朝廷内外人们的心情怎么受得了？
English: And to go hunting for ten days and not come back, how could people inside and outside the court stand it?

古文：吾高枕无忧。 
现代文：我现在高枕无忧了。 
English: I can rest easy now.

古文：乃筑西面罗城，拒敌之具。
现代文：于是在西南加筑了罗城，又修造了用来阻挡敌人的用具。
English: Therefore, Luocheng was built in the southwest, and equipment was built to block the enemy.

古文：不三年，庄宗不守。
现代文：不到三年，庄宗果然没有守住。
English: Less than three years later, Zhuozong did not hold on to his position.

古文：英雄之料，顷刻不差，宜乎贻厥子孙。
现代文：英雄预料的，一点没错，难怪要说留给子孙了。
English: What the hero anticipated, to a certain extent, came to pass, and it is no wonder that he left it to his children and grandchildren.

古文：沈尚书妻
现代文：沈尚书妻
English: Shen Shang Shuzhuan

古文：有沈尚书失其名，常为秦帅亲吏。
现代文：有个沈尚书已弄不清叫什么名，曾经做过秦地主帅的亲近小吏。
English: There was a man named Shen Shangshu, whose name I can't remember, who had once been a minor official close to the coach of Qin.

古文：其妻狼戾而不谨，又妒忌，沈常如在狴牢之中。
现代文：他的妻子性格贪暴凶残而且不谨慎，又生性嫉妒。沈尚书常常像生活在监牢里一样。
English: His wife's character is greedy, cruel and imprudent, and she is jealous by nature. Shen Shangshu often feels like living in a prison.

古文：后因闲退，挈其妻孥，寄于凤州，自往东川游索，意是与怨偶永绝矣。
现代文：后来因为闲散而辞了官，带着妻儿，寄住在凤州。自己却到东川游玩散心，想和自己的这位怨偶永不来往了。
English: Later, because of idleness, he resigned from his post and took his wife and children to live in Fengzhou. However, he went to Dongchuan to have a good time and wanted to never have any contact with his evil twin.

古文：华洪镇东蜀，与沈有布衣之旧，呼为兄。
现代文：华洪镇守东蜀，和沈尚书在未当官时就有交情，称沈为兄。
English: Hua Hong, the town guard of Dongshu, had a friendship with Shen Shangshu when he was not an official, and called Shen his brother.

古文：既至郊迎，执手叙其契阔，待之如亲兄。
现代文：沈到达后，华到郊外迎接，拉着手叙述久别之情，待他像自己的亲哥哥。
English: After Shen's arrival, Hua went to the suburbs to meet him, holding his hand and recounting his feelings of farewell, treating him like his own brother.

古文：遂特创一第，仆马金帛器玩，无有缺者，送姬仆十余辈，断不令归北。
现代文：于是特地为他建了一所住宅，仆人、马匹、金银、绸缎、器具、玩物，没有什么缺的；送他小妾仆人十多个，坚决不让沈尚书回北方去。
English: Therefore, he specially built a house for him, with servants, horses, gold and silver, silks and satins, utensils, and playthings, nothing was lacking; he sent more than ten concubines and servants to him, and resolutely refused to let Shen Shangshu go back to the north.

古文：沈亦微诉其事，无心还家。
现代文：沈尚书也约略地告诉了他有关妻子的一些事情，表示没有心思再回家了。
English: Shen Shangshu also roughly told him some things about his wife, saying that he had no intention of returning home.

古文：及经年，家信至，其妻已离凤州，自至东蜀。
现代文：一年后，家信到了，说他的妻子己离开凤州，自己奔东川来了。
English: A year later, a letter arrived from home saying that his wife had left Fengzhou and had come to Dongchuan on her own.

古文：沈闻之大惧，遂白于主人，及遣人却之。
现代文：沈尚书听了非常害怕，就告诉了华洪，并且派人去让她回去。
English: Shen Shangshu was very scared when he heard this, so he told Hua Hong and sent someone to tell her to go back.

古文：其妻致书，重设盟誓，云： 自此必改从前之性，愿以偕老。 
现代文：他的妻子又送信来，重新立下誓言，说： 从此一定改掉以前的性格，愿意和你白头到老。 
English: His wife sent another letter, renewing their vows, saying: "From now on, I will definitely change my previous personality, and I am willing to grow old with you."

古文：不日而至。
现代文：不几天他妻子就到了。
English: His wife arrived a few days later.

古文：其初至，颇亦柔和；涉旬之后，前行复作。诸姬婢仆悉鞭棰星散，良人头面，皆拿擘破损。
现代文：她刚来到时，也很温柔和平，经过十天后，又旧病复发，小妾侍女仆人们被她鞭打得四散奔逃，丈夫的头和脸都被揪抓得伤痕累累。
English: When she first arrived, she was very gentle and peaceful. Ten days later, her old illness returned, and she whipped her concubines and maidservants into a stampede. Her husband's head and face were covered with bruises from the beating.

古文：华洪闻之，召沈谓之曰： 欲为兄杀之，如何？ 
现代文：华洪听到这种情况，叫来沈尚书对他说： 我想替哥哥杀了她，怎么样？ 
English: When Hua Hong heard this, he summoned Shen Shangshu and said to him: I want to kill her for my brother, how about it?

古文：沈不可。
现代文：沈尚书不让。
English: Shen Shangshu would not allow it.

古文：如是旬日后又作，沈因入衙，精神沮丧。
现代文：就这样十天后沈妻又发作一次。沈尚书于是来到衙门，精神沮丧，华洪一看就明白了。
English: Just like that, ten days later, Shen Zhe's wife had another seizure. Shen Shangshu then came to the imperial court, depressed. Hua Hong understood at a glance.

古文：洪知之，密遣二人提剑，牵出帷房，刃于阶下，弃尸于潼江，然后报沈。
现代文：于是偷偷地派两个人拿着剑，把沈妻拉出屋，在台阶下杀了，并把尸体扔进了潼江，然后告诉了沈尚书。
English: So he secretly sent two men with swords to drag Shen Shangshu's wife out of the house, killed her under the steps, and threw her body into the Li River, and then told Shen Shangshu.

古文：沈闻之，不胜惊悸，遂至失神。
现代文：沈尚书听了后，异常惊恐，以至于失去了正常的神态。
English: After hearing this, Shen Shangshu was so terrified that he lost his normal demeanor.

古文：其尸住急流中不去，遂使人以竹竿拨之，便随流。
现代文：沈妻的尸首在急流中停住了不走，就派人用竹竿拨动，随水漂走了。
English: Shenzhuan's corpse stopped in the rapids and would not move, so they sent someone to move it with a bamboo pole, and it floated away with the water.

古文：来日，复在旧湍之上，如是者三。
现代文：可是第二天，又停在原来的急流上了，这样反复了多次。
English: But the next day, I stopped again on the same rapids, and this happened several times.

古文：洪使系石缒之，沈亦不逾旬，失魂而逝。
现代文：华洪派人把石头捆在尸体上，才使尸体沉下去。沈尚书不到十天，就像掉了魂似的死去了。
English: Hua Hong sent someone to tie stones to the corpse to make it sink. Shen Shangshu died less than ten days later, as if he had lost his soul.

古文：得非怨偶为仇也！
现代文：大概是那个不和睦的配偶报仇吧？
English: Revenge from the estranged spouse, perhaps?

古文：悲哉！沈之宿有仇乎？
现代文：可悲呀，沈尚书早先与她有仇吗？
English: What a pity. Did Shen Shangshu have a grudge against her earlier?

古文：杨蘧
现代文：杨蘧
English: by Yang Hui

古文：王赞，中朝名士。
现代文：王赞，是朝中有名的人士。
English: Wang Zan is a famous person in the dynasty.

古文：有弘农杨蘧者，曾至岭外，见杨朔荔浦山水，心常爱之，谈不容口。
现代文：有个弘农地方的杨蘧，曾经到过五岭山脉以南，看到阳朔荔浦的山山水水，心里非常喜欢，赞不绝口。
English: A farmer from Hongnong, Yang Jiu, once went to the south of the Wuling Mountains and saw the mountains and rivers of Yangshuo-Lipu. He liked it very much and was full of praise.

古文：蘧尝出入赞门下，稍接从容，不觉形于言曰： 侍郎曾见杨朔荔浦山水乎？ 
现代文：杨蘧曾出入王赞门下，渐渐有些放松，就不自觉地问道： 您曾见过阳朔荔浦的山水吗？ 
English: Yang Hui used to go in and out of Wang Zan's door, gradually relaxed a little, and unconsciously asked: Have you ever seen the landscape of Yangshuo Lipu?

古文：赞曰： 未曾打人唇绽齿落，安得见耶？ 
现代文：王赞说： 不曾把人打得唇裂齿落，怎么能见到那里的山水呢？ 
English: Wang Zan said, "How can you see the mountains and rivers there if you have never beaten someone so badly that their lips and teeth fall off?"

古文：因大笑。
现代文：于是大笑起来。
English: Then he burst out laughing.

古文：此言岭外之地，非贬不去。
现代文：这是说，五岭以南的地方，不是被贬的人是不去的。
English: This means that people who have not been demoted will not go to places south of Wuling.

古文：袁继谦
现代文：袁继谦
English: Yuan Jichian

古文：晋将少作监袁继谦常说： 顷居青社，假一第而处之，闻多凶怪，昏瞑即不敢出户庭，合门惊惧，莫能安寝。
现代文：晋将少作监袁继谦曾说过： 刚到东方土神庙，借了一间房住下，就听说这里多出现凶神恶怪，天一黑人们就不敢出门，一家人都很害怕，没有能睡安稳的。
English: Yuan Jikian, a junior official of the Jin Dynasty, once said: "I had just arrived at the Dongfangdu Temple and borrowed a room to live in, when I heard that there were many evil spirits and monsters here. People would not dare to go out as soon as it was dark, and my family was very scared. No one could sleep peacefully.

古文：忽一夕，闻吼声，若有呼于瓮中者，其声重浊，举家师惧，必谓其怪之尤者。
现代文：忽然有一晚，听到吼叫声，好像有什么在大瓮中呼叫，声音浑浊，全家人恐怖极了，认为一定是个大妖怪。
English: Suddenly, one night, they heard a roaring sound, as if something was calling in the bushes. The sound was muffled, and the whole family was terrified, thinking it must be a big monster.

古文：遂于窗隙窥之，见一物苍黑色，来往庭中。
现代文：就趴在窗缝窥视，看见一个苍黑色的东西，在庭院中来回走。
English: I peered through the crack in the window and saw a pale black thing walking back and forth in the courtyard.

古文：是夕月色晦，睹之既久，似若狗身，而首不能举。
现代文：这一夜月色阴暗，看了很长时间，觉得身子像狗，可是头不能抬起来。
English: It was a dark and gloomy night, I looked at it for a long time, I felt like a dog, but I couldn't lift my head.

古文：遂以挝击其脑，忽轰然一声，家犬惊叫而去。
现代文：就用挝打它的头，突然 轰 的一声，家犬惊叫着跑了。
English: He hit it on the head with a broom and suddenly there was a bang and the family dog ran away screaming.

古文：盖其日庄上人输税至此，就于其地而糜，釜尚有余者，故犬以首入空器中，而不能出也。
现代文：原来那天村里人到这纳税，就在那地上做粥，锅里还有剩余，狗就把头伸到中空的器具里，却不能脱出来。
English: It turned out that on the day the villagers came to pay their taxes, they were making porridge on the ground, and there was leftover in the pot. The dog stuck its head into the hollow utensil, but couldn't get out.

古文：因举家大笑，遂安寝。 
现代文：全家人大笑后，安安稳稳睡下了。 
English: After the whole family laughed loudly, they fell asleep safely.

古文：帝羓
现代文：帝羓
English: The Imperial Palace

