古文：辛丑，孛星见东北方。冬十月甲子，扩廓帖木儿遣其弟脱因帖木儿及貊高、完哲等驻兵济南，以控制山东。十一月甲申，大明兵取湖州路。
现代文：顺帝至正二十六年夏四月，大明的军队占领淮安路、徐州、宿州、濠州、泗州、颍州、安丰路。十一月初六，大明的军队占领湖州路。
English: In the summer and April of the 26th year of Emperor Shun's reign, Daming's army occupied Huai'an Road, Xuzhou, Suizhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou and Anfeng Road. On the 6th day of the 11th month, Daming's army occupied Huzhou Road.

古文：丙申，大明兵取杭州路及绍兴路。
现代文：十一月十八日，大明军队占领杭州及绍兴路。
English: On November 18th, the Ming army occupied Hangzhou and Shaoxing Road.

古文：辛丑，大明兵取嘉兴路。
现代文：十一月二十三日，大明军队占领嘉兴路。
English: On November 23, Daming troops occupied Jiaxing Road.

古文：时湖州、杭州、绍兴、嘉兴、松江、平江诸路及无锡州皆张士诚所据。
现代文：顺帝至正二十七年春，正月二十三日，大明的军队攻取松江府。正月二十六日，大明的军队攻取沅州路。九月初八，大明的军队攻占平江路，捕获张士诚。九月十三日，大明的军队攻占通州。
English: In the spring of the 27th year of Emperor Shun and the 23rd day of the first month of the year, Daming's army captured Songjiang Prefecture. On the 26th day of the first month, Daming's army captured Zhangzhou Road. On the 8th day of the 9th month, Daming's army captured Pingjiang Road and captured Zhang Shicheng. On the 13th day of the 9th month, Daming's army captured Tongzhou.

古文：十二月庚午，蒲城洛水和顺崖崩。
现代文：九月十四日，大明的军队攻占无锡州。
English: On September 14, Daming's army captured Wuxi.

古文：二十七年春正月乙未，绛州夜闻天鼓鸣，将旦复鸣，其声如空中战斗者。庚子，大明兵取松江府。
现代文：九月二十八日，大明的军队攻占台州路。十一月初十，大明军队占据沂州。十一月十一日，大明军队占领庆元路。
English: On September 28th, Daming's army occupied Taizhou Road. At the beginning of November 10th, Daming's army occupied Zhangzhou. On November 11th, Daming's army occupied Qingyuan Road.

古文：癸卯，大明兵取沅州路。
现代文：十二月初六，大明军队占领济宁路。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, Daming troops occupied Jining Road.

古文：丙辰，扩廓帖木儿自泽州退守晋宁，关保守泽、潞二州，与貊高军合。己未，大明兵取宝庆路。
现代文：十二月初七，大明军队占领莱州，进而占据济南及东平路。十二月十五日，大明军队进入杉关，占领邵武路。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month, the Daming army occupied Laizhou, and then occupied Jinan and Dongping Road. On the 15th day of the 12th month, the Daming army entered Sugiguan and occupied Shaowu Road.

古文：甲子，汀州路总管陈谷珍以城降于大明。
现代文：当月，方国珍归顺大明。顺帝至正二十八年春，正月初一，皇太子命令关保固守晋宁，总领各军。二月十二日，大明军队攻取东昌路。
English: That month, Fang Guozhen returned to Shun Daming. Shun Emperor ruled until the spring of the 28th year, and on the first day of the first month, the crown prince ordered Guan Baogu to defend Jinning and lead the army. On February 12, Daming's army captured Dongchang Road.

古文：壬辰，翰林学士承旨王时、太常院使陈祖仁上章，乞抚谕扩廓帖木儿，以兵勤王赴难。
现代文：二月十八日，大明军队攻占宝庆路。二月二十五日，大明军队攻取棣州。当月，大明的军队到达河南。
English: On February 18th, the Daming army captured Baoqing Road. On February 25th, the Daming army captured Zhangzhou. That month, the Daming army arrived in Henan.

古文：是月，有星流于东北，众小星随之，其声大震。
现代文：李思齐、张良弼等撤军返回西边。三月大明军队占据河南。
English: Li Siqi, Zhang Liangyao and other retreating troops returned to the west. In March, the Daming army occupied Henan.

古文：大明兵取河南。李思齐、张良弼会兵驻潼关，火焚良弼营，思齐移军葫芦滩，调其所部张德敛、穆薛飞守潼关。
现代文：李思齐、张良弼会师，进驻潼关，张良弼的军营被焚烧，李思齐把军队转移到葫芦滩，调他的部下张德敛、穆薛飞防守潼关。
English: Li Siqi and Zhang Liangqi's division, stationed in Shaoguan, Zhang Liangqi's camp was burned, Li Siqi transferred the army to Huludao, and sent his subordinates Zhang Deqian and Mu Xuefei to defend Shaoguan.

古文：大明兵入潼关，攻李思齐营，思齐弃辎重，奔于凤翔。
现代文：大明军队进入潼关，进攻李思齐的营垒，李思齐丢弃辎重，奔逃到凤翔。
English: Daming's army entered Shaoguan and attacked Li Sizi's camp. Li Sizi abandoned his baggage and fled to Fengxiang.

古文：是月，大明兵取永州路，又取惠州路。
现代文：当月，大明军队占领永州路，又占领惠州路。
English: That month, Daming troops occupied Yongzhou Road and Huizhou Road.

古文：夏四月辛丑朔，大明兵取英德州。
现代文：夏，四月初一，大明军队占领英德州。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, the Ming army occupied Yingdezhou.

古文：闰月己亥朔，扩廓帖木儿与貊高、关保战，败之，擒关保、貊高，遣其断事官以闻。
现代文：四月初八，大明军队占领广州路，又占领嵩州、陕州、汝州等地。五月初一，大明军队占领道州。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth lunar month, the Ming army occupied Guangzhou Road, Songzhou, Shaanxi and Ruzhou, and on the first day of the fifth lunar month, the Ming army occupied Daozhou.

古文：诏： 关保、貊高，间谍构兵，可依军法处治。 关保、貊高皆被杀。辛丑，大明兵取卫辉路。
现代文：六月十四日大明军队占领全州、郴州、梧州、藤州、浔州、贵县、象县、郁林等州郡。当月，广西各郡县都归顺了大明。闰七月初三，大明军队占领卫辉路。
English: On June 14, Daming's army occupied Zhengzhou, Zhangzhou, Wuzhou, Fujian, Zhangzhou, Guizhou, Xiangshan, Yulin and other counties. That month, all counties in Guangxi surrendered to Daming. On the third day of the seventh month, Daming's army occupied Weihui Road.

古文：癸卯，大明兵取彰德路。
现代文：七月初五，大明军队占领彰德路。
English: On the fifth day of the seventh month, Daming troops occupied Zhangde Road.

古文：皇太子爱猷识理达腊悉总天下兵马，裁决庶务，具如前诏。壬戌，白虹贯日。
现代文：七月初七，左江、右江各路都投降大明。七月初九，大明军队占领广平路。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th lunar month, the left and right rivers surrendered to Daming. On the 9th day of the 7th month of the 7th lunar month, the Daming army occupied Guangping Road.

古文：癸亥，罢内府河役。甲子，扩廓帖木儿自晋宁退守冀宁。
现代文：七月二十六日，扩廓帖木儿从晋宁退守冀宁。
English: On July 26, Timur retreated from Jining to Jining.

古文：诏淮王帖木儿不花监国，庆童为中书左丞相，同守京城。丙寅，帝御清宁殿，集三宫后妃、皇太子、皇太子妃，同议避兵北行。
现代文：大明军队抵达通州，左丞相失列门传皇上旨意，令太常寺礼仪院使阿鲁浑等尊奉太庙中各室所供奉的神位，与皇太子一起到北方去。阿鲁浑等即到太庙和主管官员王嗣宗、太祝哈剌不华共同护送神主，完毕之后仍留在太庙室内。七月二十八日，皇上驾临清宁殿，招集三宫的后妃、皇太子、皇太子妃共同商议躲避兵乱，前往北方的事。
English: When Daming's army arrived in Tongzhou, Zuo Jiao lost his place in the line of succession to transmit the emperor's will, and ordered the ceremonial hall of Taizhong Temple to send Arughun and other dignitaries to worship the gods enshrined in the various rooms of the temple, and to go to the north with the crown prince. Arughun and other dignitaries immediately went to the temple and escorted the god together with the responsible officials Wang Shizong and Taizhong Hao Buhua, and remained in the temple after the ceremony. On July 28, the emperor arrived at the Qingning Hall, and summoned the queens of the three palaces, the

古文：失列门及知枢密院事黑厮、宦者赵伯颜不花等谏，以为不可行，不听。
现代文：失列门及掌管枢密院事务的黑厮、宦官赵伯颜不花等进谏，认为不能离去。
English: Zhao Boyan, the eunuch and eunuch in charge of the Privy Council affairs, did not want to spend so much time in the palace, and thought that he could not leave.

古文：伯颜不花恸哭谏曰： 天下者，世祖之天下，陛下当以死守，奈何弃之！
现代文：皇上未予听从。伯颜不花痛哭着劝谏说： 天下是世祖的天下，陛下应当以死相守，为什么要放弃呢？
English: The emperor did not listen. Bo Yan did not spend much time crying and persuaded him, saying: The world is the world of the ancestors. Your Majesty should protect each other with death. Why should you give up?

古文：臣等愿率军民及诸怯薛歹出城拒战，愿陛下固守京城。 
现代文：臣等愿意率领军民及护卫军出城拒敌作战，希望陛下能够固守京城。 
English: The ministers are willing to lead the military, civilians and escort troops out of the city to resist the enemy, and hope that His Majesty will be able to hold on to the capital.

古文：卒不听。
现代文：皇上终究没有听从。
English: In the end, the Emperor did not listen.

古文：至夜半，开健德门北奔。
现代文：半夜打开健德门向北逃跑。
English: In the middle of the night, he opened the Jiande Gate and fled north.

古文：八月庚午，大明兵入京城，国亡。
现代文：八月初二，大明的军队开进京城，国家灭亡。
English: On the second day of August, Daming's army marched into the capital, and the country was destroyed.

古文：五月癸卯，大明兵袭应昌府，皇孙买的里八剌及后妃并宝玉皆被获，皇太子爱猷识礼达腊从十数骑遁。
现代文：五月二十六日，大明军队袭击应昌府，皇孙买的里八剌及皇上的后妃以及珍宝玉器都被大明军队所得。皇太子爱猷识礼达腊带着几十个骑手逃走了。
English: On May 26th, the Ming army attacked Yingchangfu. The imperial grandson's eight-leaf clover, the emperor's concubine, and precious jade objects were all taken by the Ming army. Crown Prince Aizhong Xilingdara fled with dozens of horsemen.

