古文：顺宗宪宗上顺宗至德大圣大安孝丘帝讳诵，德宗长子，母昭德皇后王氏。
现代文：顺宗至德大圣大安孝皇帝名李诵，是德宗皇帝李适的长子。母亲是昭德皇后王氏。
English: Emperor Shunzong of the Zhou Dynasty to Emperor Dezong of the Zhou Dynasty was named Li Zheng, the eldest son of Emperor Dezong of the Zhou Dynasty. His mother was Empress Wang of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：上元二年正月生于长安之东内。
现代文：他于肃宗上元二年正月出生在长安皇宫东边的宫中。
English: He was born in the first month of the second year of Su Zong's reign in the palace on the east side of the Chang'an Palace.

古文：大历十四年六月，封宣王。
现代文：代宗大历十四年六月，被封为宣王。
English: In June of the 14th year of the Daijong era, he was named King Seonjo.

古文：建中元年正月丁卯，立为皇太子。
现代文：德宗建中元年正月初一，被立为皇太子。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the first century, Dezong Jianzhong was appointed crown prince.

古文：上元二十一年正月癸巳，德宗崩，丙申，即位于太极殿。
现代文：贞元二十一年正月二十三日，德宗逝世。二十六日，顺宗在太极殿登皇帝位。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the 21st year of the Zhengyuan era, Dezong died. On the 26th day, Shunzong ascended the throne in the Taiji Palace.

古文：上自二十年九月风病，不能言，暨德宗不豫，诸王亲戚皆侍医药，独上卧病不能侍。
现代文：他从贞元二十年九月中风瘫痪以来，不能讲话，在德宗病重期间，各皇子亲戚都侍候德宗看病吃药，惟独顺宗躺在病床上不能去侍候。
English: He had not been able to speak since he was paralysed by a stroke in September of the 20th year of the Jōgen era. During the period of Dezong's serious illness, all the prince's relatives attended Dezong to see a doctor and take medicine, but Shunzong was lying in his sickbed and could not attend.

古文：德宗弥留，思见太子，涕咽久之。
现代文：德宗皇帝在弥留之际，希望见见皇太子，满面泪痕地哭泣了很长时间。
English: When Emperor Dezong was dying, he wished to meet the crown prince, and wept for a long time with tears on his face.

古文：大行发丧，人情震惧。
现代文：德宗皇帝逝世的噩耗公布以后，人们的情绪震动惊惧。
English: After the bad news of Emperor Dezong's death was announced, people's emotions were shocked and frightened.

古文：上力疾衰服，见百僚于九仙门。
现代文：顺宗勉强支撑着病体穿上孝服，在九仙门召见全体朝臣。
English: Shunzong reluctantly supported the sick body, put on filial piety, and summoned all the courtiers at the Nine Immortals' Gate.

古文：既即位，知社稷有奉，中外始安。
现代文：在他登上帝位以后，人们知道国家又有了君主，国内国外才安定下来。
English: After he ascended to the throne, people knew that the country had a monarch again, and it only settled down at home and abroad.

古文：庚子，群臣上书请听政。
现代文：三十日，朝臣们联名呈递奏章请求他亲自处理朝廷政务。
English: On the 30th, the courtiers jointly submitted a petition to the emperor, requesting him to personally handle the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：二月辛丑朔。
现代文：二月初一是辛丑。
English: The first day of February is always a tough one.

古文：甲申，以河阳三城行军司马元韶为怀州刺史、河阳怀州节度使。
现代文：初四日，任命河阳三城行军司马元韶为怀州刺史、河阳怀州节度使。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, he appointed Ma Yuanqi, the commander of the march of the three cities of Heyang, as the secretary of the history of Heyang and the secretary of the festival of Heyang.

古文：丙午，罢翰林医工、相工、占星、射覆、冗食者四十二人。
现代文：初六日，免去翰林院用法术看病的医生、看面相的算命先生、观测星相预测吉凶的人、从事占卜的人、杂务人员等四十二人的职务。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, forty-two people, including doctors who used spells to see patients, fortune-tellers who read facial expressions, people who observed the stars to predict good and bad luck, people engaged in divination, and miscellaneous staff at Hanlin Hospital, were relieved of their duties.

古文：己酉，以易定张茂昭兼同平章事，以来朝，故宠之。
现代文：初九日，任命易定的张茂昭兼同平章事，因为他主动进京拜谒顺宗，所以顺宗宠信他。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Zhang Maozhao and Tongping Zhang, both of whom were appointed by Yi Ding, because he took the initiative to go to Beijing to visit Shunzong, so Shunzong favored him.

古文：是夜，太白犯昴。
现代文：当天夜晚，东方的太白星冲犯西方七宿正中的昴星星座。
English: It's night, and the white star is colliding with the Pleiades.

古文：辛卯，以吏部郎中韦执谊为尚书左丞、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十一日，任命吏部郎中韦执谊为尚书左丞、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he appointed the head of the Ministry of Personnel, Longzhong Wei Xieyi, as the left assistant secretary of the Ministry of Personnel, and the left assistant secretary of the Ministry of Personnel, Longzhong Wei Xieyi.

古文：辛酉，贬京兆尹李实通州长史，寻卒。
现代文：二十一日，把京兆尹李实贬为通州长史，李实不久就去世了。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he demoted the governor of Beijing Zhaoyun, Li Si, to the rank of general governor. Li Si died soon after.

古文：壬子，淄青李师古以兵寇滑之东鄙，闻国丧也。
现代文：十二日，淄青的李师古带领人马侵犯滑州的东部边镇，是因为知道朝廷正在为德宗办理丧事。
English: On the 12th, the indestructible Li Shigu led men and horses to invade the eastern border town of Nanzhou, because he knew that the imperial court was handling the funeral for Dezong.

古文：甲寅，释仗内囚严怀志、吕温等一十六人。
现代文：十四日，释放软禁在宫庭拘留所的严怀志、吕温等十六名囚犯。
English: On the 14th, 16 prisoners, including Yan Huai Zhi and Lü Wen, who were under house arrest at the Gongting Detention Center, were released.

古文：平凉之盟陷蕃。久之得还，以习蕃中事，不欲令出外，故囚之仗内，至是方释之。
现代文：他们因参加平凉县的盟会而滞留在吐蕃，过了很长时间才回国，因为熟悉吐蕃的情况，朝廷不愿让他们到外边去，所以把他们软禁在宫庭拘留所，直到这时才释放他们。
English: They stayed in Tubo due to their participation in the alliance meeting in Pingliang County. It took a long time for them to return home. Because they were familiar with the situation in Tubo, the court did not want them to go outside, so they were placed under house arrest in the palace detention center. Only then were they released.

古文：日本国王并妻还蕃，赐物遣之。
现代文：日本国的国王和妻子要回日本去，赏赐给财物让他们回去了。
English: The king of Japan and his wife wanted to go back to Japan, and they were rewarded with goods to let them go back.

古文：壬寅，以太子侍书、翰林待诏王伾为左散骑常侍，充翰林学士。
现代文：二十二日，任命太子侍书、翰林待诏王亻丕为左散骑常侍，充当翰林学士。
English: On the 22nd, the prince's attendant, Hanlin Zhizhao Wang Xi, was appointed as the left rider's attendant, acting as Hanlin's scholar.

古文：以前司功参军、翰林待诏王叔文为起居舍人，充翰林学士。
现代文：任命前司功参军、翰林待诏王叔文为起居舍人，充任翰林学士。
English: Appointed Wang Shouwen, a former military officer and scholar of Hanlin, as a resident scholar and appointed him as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：以鸿胪卿王权为京兆尹。
现代文：任命鸿胪寺卿王权为京兆尹。
English: He appointed Wang Quan, the head of Hongyu Temple, as the successor of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：甲子，御丹凤楼，大赦天下。
现代文：二十四日，顺宗亲临丹凤楼，对全国宣布大赦囚犯的诏令。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Shunzong personally visited the Danfeng Building and issued a decree to declare a nationwide amnesty for prisoners.

古文：诸道除正敕率税外，诸色榷税并宜禁断；除上供外，不得别有进奉。
现代文：全国十五道，除按朝廷正式法令交纳租税之外，各种专卖税收都要完全禁止；除了按规定供给朝廷外，不准增加额外的进献。
English: In the 15 provinces across the country, in addition to paying taxes according to the formal decree of the imperial court, all kinds of monopoly taxes should be completely prohibited; in addition to supplying the imperial court according to regulations, it is not allowed to increase additional contributions.

古文：百姓九十已上，赐米二石，绢两匹，版授上佐、县君，仍令本部长吏就家存问；百岁已上，赐米五石，绢二匹，绵一屯，羊酒，版授下州刺史、郡君。
现代文：年龄九十岁以上的百姓，赏赐两石稻米，两匹绢帛，授予上佐、县君头衔，还命令本地长官到他们家里看望问候；年龄一百岁以上的百姓，赏赐五石稻米，两匹绢帛，一屯丝绵，羊肉和酒，授予末等的州刺史、郡君头衔。
English: People over the age of ninety were awarded two stone of rice, two horseshoe cucumbers, awarded the title of captain and county leader, and ordered the local governor to visit their home for greetings; people over the age of one hundred were awarded five stone of rice, two horseshoe cucumbers, a ton of silk, mutton and wine, and awarded the title of the last state senator and county leader.

古文：戊辰，以开府仪同三司、检校太尉、使持节、大都督鸡林州诸军事、鸡林州刺史、上柱国、新罗王金重熙兼宁海军使，以重熙母和氏为太妃，妻朴氏为妃。
现代文：二十八日，命令开府仪同三司、检校太尉、使持节、大都督鸡林州诸军事、鸡林州刺史、上柱国、新罗国王金重熙兼任宁海军使，给金重熙的母亲和氏授予太妃头衔，给他的妻子朴氏授予王妃头衔。
English: On the 28th, Kim Chung Hee, the King of Silla, who also served as the naval envoy of Ning, ordered the Kaifu Yi, the Third Division, the Inspector of Schools, the Envoy to the Military, the Grand Governor of Jilin Province, the Jilin Provincial Historian, and the Shangzhuo Province, to award the title of Tofei to Kim Chung Hee's mother, Wo, and the title of Wangfei to his wife, Pak.

古文：三月庚午，出宫女三百人于安国寺，又出掖庭教坊女乐六百人于九仙门，召其亲族归之。
现代文：三月初一，遣散宫庭侍女三百人到安国寺，还遣散后宫和教坊的音乐歌舞女艺人六百人到九仙门，招呼她们的亲属领回家去。
English: On the first day of March, 300 court ladies were sent to Anguo Temple, and 600 music and dance entertainers from the harem and the teaching hall were sent to Jiu Xianmen, and their relatives were invited to take them home.

古文：戊寅，以韦皋兼检校太尉，李师古、刘济兼检校司空。张茂昭司徒。
现代文：初九日，命令韦皋兼任检校太尉，李师古、刘济兼任检校司空，张茂昭任司徒。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Wei Wei was also ordered to serve as a school inspector, Li Shigu and Liu Ji also served as school inspectors, and Zhang Maozhao as a teacher.

古文：丙戌，检校司空、同平章事杜祐为度支盐铁使。
现代文：十七日，检校司空、同平章事杜佑任度支盐铁使。
English: On the 17th, the inspector of the school, Ku, and Tongping Zhangji Duyou were appointed to support the salt iron envoy.

古文：戊子，徐州节度赐名武宁军。
现代文：十九日，徐州节度赐予武宁军称号。
English: On the 19th, the Xuzhou Festival awarded the title of Wu Ning Army.

古文：蔡州吴少诚兼同平章事。
现代文：蔡州的吴少诚兼任同平章事。
English: Wu Shaocheng of Caizhou concurrently served as Tongping Zhangji.

古文：以翰林学士王叔文为度支盐铁转运副使。杜祐虽领使名，其实叔文专总。
现代文：任命翰林学士王叔文为度支盐铁转运使的副使，杜佑虽然兼有度支盐铁使的头衔，实际上由王叔文一人统管。
English: Hanlin Scholar Wang Shouwen was appointed as the deputy envoy of Dujiangyan Salt and Iron Transportation Envoy. Although Duyou also has the title of Dujiangyan Salt and Iron Envoy, in fact, Wang Shouwen is in charge.

古文：宰相贾耽兼检校司空，郑瑜吏部尚书，高郢刑部尚书，韦执谊中书侍郎，镇冀王士真、淮南王锷、魏博田季安皆检校司空。
现代文：宰相贾耽兼任检校司空，郑瑜任吏部尚书，高郢任刑部尚书，韦执谊任中书侍郎，镇冀的王士真、淮南的王锷、魏博的田季安都任检校司空。
English: Prime Minister Jia Tan also served as a school inspector, Zheng Yu as a secretary of the personnel department, Gao Wei as a secretary of the criminal department, Wei Xiyi as a secretary of the middle school, Wang Shizhen of Zhenji, Wang Wei of Huainan, and Tian Ji'an of Weibo all served as school inspectors.

古文：癸巳，诏册广陵郡王淳为皇太子，改名纯。
现代文：二十四日，顺宗颁发诏书立广陵郡王李淳为皇太子，改名叫纯。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Shunzong issued an edict to establish the Guangling County King Li Jun as the crown prince, and changed his name to Jun.

古文：夏四月壬寅，制第十弟谔封钦王，第十一弟諴封珍王。
现代文：四月初三日，顺宗颁布诏令把第十弟李谔封为钦王，第十一弟李讠咸封为珍王。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month, Emperor Shunzong issued a decree to appoint the 10th brother, Li Yu, as the King of Qin, and the 11th brother, Li Yu Xian, as the King of Zhen.

古文：男建康郡王涣封郯王，改名经；洋川郡王沔封均王，改名纬；临淮郡王洵封溆王，改名纵；弘农王浼封莒王，改名纾；汉东郡王泳封密王，改名绸；晋陵郡王堤封郇王，改名总；高平郡王溆封邵王，改名约；云安郡王滋封宋王，改名结；宣城郡王淮封集王，改名缃；德阳郡王湑封冀王，改名絿；河东郡王浥封和王，改名绮。
现代文：把儿子建康郡王李涣封为郯王，改名叫经；洋川郡王李沔封为均王，改名叫纬；临淮郡王李洵封为溆王，改名叫纵；弘农王李浼封为莒王，改名叫纾；汉东郡王李泳封为密王，改名叫绸；晋陵郡王李氵是封为郇王，改名叫纟总；高平郡王李溆封为邵王，改名叫约；云安郡王李滋封为宋王，改名叫结；宣城郡王李淮封为集王，改名叫缃；德阳郡王李氵胥封为冀王，改名叫纟求；河东郡王李氵邑封为和王，改名叫绮。
English: He named his son Jiankang County King Li Shufeng as King of Jiankang and changed his name to Jing; Yangchuan County King Li Shufeng as King of Jun and changed his name to Wei; Linhuai County King Li Shufeng as King of Jiankang and changed his name to Zheng; Hongnong County King Li Shufeng as King of Jiankang and changed his name to Zheng; Hantong County King Li Yongfeng as King of Mi and changed his name to Silk; Jinling County King Li Shufeng as King of Jiankang and changed his name to Zheng; Gaoping County King Li Shufeng as King

古文：十七男绚封衡王，十九男纁封会王，二十男绾封福王，二十一纮男封抚王，二十三男绲封岳王，二十四男绅封袁王，二十五男纶封桂王，二十七男繟封翼王，弥臣国嗣王道勿礼封弥臣国王。
现代文：把第十七子李绚封为衡王，第十九子李纟熏封为会王，第二十子李绾封为福王，第二十一子李封为抚王，第二十三子李绲封为岳王，第二十四子李绅封为袁王，第二十五子李纶封为桂王，第二十七子李纟单封为冀王。把弥臣国的王子道勿礼封为弥臣国王。
English: The seventeenth son, Li Hua Feng, was named Heng Wang, the nineteenth son, Li Jianmen Feng, was named Hui Wang, the twentieth son, Li Jianmen Feng, was named Fu Wang, the twenty-first son, Li Jianmen Feng, was named Fu Wang, the twenty-third son, Li Jianmen Feng, was named Yue Wang, the twenty-fourth son, Li Jianmen Feng, was named Yuan Wang, the twenty-fifth son, Li Jianmen Feng, was named Gui Wang, and the twenty-seventh son, Li Jianmen Feng, was named Ji Wang. Do not crown the prince of a subject country as a subject king

古文：西平郡王晟男左羽林大将军愿袭封岐公，食邑三千户。
现代文：让西平郡王李晟的儿子左羽林大将军李愿继承他父亲的岐公爵号，收纳三千户租税。
English: Let the king of Xiping County, Li Yan's son, General Zuo Yulin, Li Yan, inherit his father's title of Duke of Qi and collect taxes from three thousand households.

古文：戊申，诏以册太子礼毕，赦京城系囚，大辟降从流，流以下减一等。
现代文：初九日，颁发诏书册立太子的礼仪结束，赦免京城的在押囚犯，死刑减为流放，流放以下的徒刑各减去一级刑罚。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the ceremony of issuing the imperial edict to establish the crown prince came to an end, the prisoners in custody in Beijing were pardoned, the death penalty was reduced to banishment, and the prison sentences below banishment were each reduced by one level of punishment.

古文：以给事中陆质、中书舍人崔枢并为太子侍读。
现代文：命令给事中陆质、中书舍人崔枢一起担任太子侍读。
English: The order was given to the middle-class Lu Quan and the middle-class scholar Cui Zu to serve as the prince's attendants.

古文：庚戌，封太子男宁、宽、宥、察、寰、寮等六人为郡王，并食邑三千户。
现代文：十一日，把皇太子李纯的儿子李宁、李宽、李宥、李察、李寰、李寮等六人封为郡王，共同收纳三千户租税。
English: On the 11th, six people, including Li Ning, Li Quan, Li Yu, Li Zha, Li Yan and Li Liao, the sons of Crown Prince Li Chun, were appointed as county chiefs to collect taxes from 3,000 households.

古文：癸丑，赠吐蕃使、工部侍郎、兼御史大夫张荐礼部尚书。
现代文：十四日，追认已故的入吐蕃使、工部侍郎、兼御史大夫张荐为礼部尚书。
English: On the 14th, it was confirmed that Zhang, the late envoy to Tibet, chamberlain of the engineering department, and doctor of history, was recommended as a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：丙寅，罢万安监牧。
现代文：二十七日，罢免万安监牧的官职。
English: On the 27th, he was removed from the post of the Supervisor of Public Security.

古文：戊辰，以杭州刺史韩皋为尚书右丞。
现代文：二十九日，任命杭州刺史韩皋为尚书右丞。
English: On the 29th, Han Zheng, the mayor of Hangzhou, was appointed as Shang Shuyuan.

古文：五月己巳，以右金吾卫大将军范希朝为右神策统军，充左右神策、京西诸城镇行营兵马节度使。
现代文：五月初一，任命右金吾卫大将军范希朝为右神策统军，担任左右神策、京西各城镇行营兵马节度使。
English: On the first day of May, he appointed Fan Xichang, the general of the Right King Wuwei, as the leader of the Right Divine Policy, and served as the envoy of the Left and Right Divine Policy, and the soldiers and horses of the festival in the cities and towns in the west of Beijing.

古文：丁丑，以邕管经略使韦丹为河南少尹，以万年县令房启为容管经略招讨使。
现代文：初九日，任命邕管经略使韦丹为河南少尹，任命万年县令房启为容管经略招讨使。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Wei Dan was appointed as Henan Shao Yin, and Wan Nian County Rong Fang Kai was appointed as Yangguan Rongguan Recruiting Envoy.

古文：癸未，以郴州司马郑余庆为尚书左丞。
现代文：十五日，任命郴州司马郑余庆为尚书左丞。
English: On the 15th, Zheng Yuqing, the secretary of Zhangzhou Sima, was appointed as the secretary.

古文：甲辰，以检校司空、忽汗州都督、渤海国王大嵩璘检校司徒。
现代文：十六日，任命检校司空、忽汗州都督、渤海国王大嵩瞞为检校司徒。
English: On the 16th, the inspector of the school was appointed as the inspector of the school.

古文：承徽王氏、赵氏可昭仪，崔氏、杨氏可充仪，王氏可昭媛，王氏可昭容，牛氏可修仪，张氏可美人。
现代文：原任承徽官职的王氏、赵氏批准为昭仪，崔氏、杨氏批准为充仪，王氏批准为昭媛，王氏批准为昭容，牛氏批准为修仪，张氏批准为美人。
English: Mr. Wang and Mr. Zhao, who were originally appointed to assume official positions in Hui, were approved as Zhao Yi, Mr. Cui and Mr. Yang were approved as Zheng Yi, Mr. Wang was approved as Zhao Yuan, Mr. Wang was approved as Zhao Rong, Mr. Niu was approved as Xiu Yi, and Mr. Zhang was approved as Bijin.

古文：以右丞韩皋为鄂岳沔蕲都团练观察使。
现代文：命令右丞韩皋任番号为鄂岳沔蕲都团练观察使。
English: He ordered Han Zheng, the right-hand man, to be appointed as the number of the observation envoy for the training of the Hubei-Hengdu group.

古文：丁亥，升襄州为大都督府。
现代文：十九日，把襄州升格为大都督府。
English: On the 19th, he upgraded Xiangzhou to the status of a big governor's office.

古文：临汉县仍徙于邓城。
现代文：临汉县衙于是搬迁到邓城。
English: Linhan County then moved to Dengcheng.

古文：辛卯，以盐铁转运使副王叔文为户部侍郎。
现代文：二十三日，任命盐铁转运使副使王叔文为户部侍郎。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Shouwen, the deputy envoy of the Envoy of Salt and Iron Transportation, was appointed as the house steward.

古文：六月丙申，诏二十一年十月已前百姓所欠诸色课利、租赋、钱帛，共五十二万六千八百四十一贯、石、匹、束，并宜除免。
现代文：六月十九日，顺宗颁布诏书将贞元二十一年也就是本年十月以前百姓所欠的各种利钱、租税、财物，共计五十二万六千八百四十一贯、石、匹、束，全部予以免去。
English: On June 19th, the emperor issued an imperial edict to cancel all kinds of interest, taxes, and property owed by the people from the twenty-first year of the Zhengyuan, that is, before October of this year, totaling 526 thousand 841 kun, stones, horses, and bundles.

古文：七月戊辰朔，吐蕃使论悉诺来朝贡。
现代文：七月初一，吐蕃的使者论悉诺进京朝拜进贡。
English: On the first day of July, the envoys from Tubo arrived in Beijing to pay tribute.

古文：丙子，郓州李师古加检校侍中。
现代文：初九日，郓州的李师古被任命为检校侍中。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Li Shigu of Ganzhou was appointed as a middle school inspector.

古文：赠故忠州别驾陆贽兵部尚书，谥曰宣；赠故道州刺史阳城为左散骑常侍。
现代文：追认已故的忠州别驾陆贽为兵部尚书，授予谥号为宣；追认已故道州刺史阳城为左散骑常侍。
English: It was confirmed that the late Chungju Biejie Lu Jie was a member of the military and was awarded the honorary title of Xuan; the late Daozhou Jie Shiyangcheng was a member of the left horseback cavalry.

古文：戊寅，以户部侍郎潘孟阳为度支盐铁转运使副。
现代文：十一日，任命户部侍郎潘孟阳为度支盐铁转运副使。
English: On the 11th, he appointed Pan Mengyang, the head of the Household Division, as the deputy envoy for the transportation of salt and iron.

古文：丙戌，关东蝗食田稼。
现代文：十九日，函谷关以东的农田出现蝗虫灾害。
English: On the 19th, locusts appeared in farmland east of Hakodate.

古文：癸已，横海军节度伎、沧州刺史程怀信卒，以其子副使执恭起复沧州刺史、横海军节度使。
现代文：二十六日，横海军节度使、沧州刺史程怀信去世，朝廷把他的儿子横海军节度副使程执恭提升为沧州刺史、横海军节度使。
English: On the 26th day of the month, Cangzhou deputy naval envoy Cheng Ruigong passed away. The imperial court promoted his son, Cangzhou deputy naval envoy Cheng Ruigong, to Cangzhou deputy naval envoy.

古文：甲午，度支使杜祐奏： 太仓见米八十万石，贮来十五年，东渭桥米四十五万石，支诸军皆不悦。
现代文：二十七日，度支使杜佑禀奏 ：京城粮仓现有稻米八十万石，已经储存十五年，东渭桥粮仓的稻米四十五万石，调拨给各个部队，将士们都不高兴。
English: On the 27th, Du Youxuan, the imperial envoy, announced that 800,000 koku of rice had been stored in the Beijing granary for 15 years, and 450,000 koku of rice had been allocated to various troops from the Dongluqiao granary. The soldiers were not happy.

古文：今岁丰阜，请权停北河转运，于滨河州府和籴二十万石，以救农伤之弊。 
现代文：今年又获丰收，请暂且停止北河的军粮的调拨运输，让河流两岸的州府出钱购买百姓的粮食两百万石作为军粮，以便补救粮贱伤农的损失。 
English: This year has also been a bumper harvest, please temporarily stop the allocation and transportation of military grain from the North River, and let the state capitals on both sides of the river pay for the purchase of two million stone of people's grain as military grain, in order to compensate for the losses of farmers who were injured by cheap grain.

古文：乃下百僚议，议者同异，不决而止。
现代文：于是交给朝臣们讨论，朝臣们的意见不一致就搁下来了。
English: It was then handed over to the courtiers for discussion, and the disagreements between the courtiers were put aside.

古文：乙未，诏： 朕承九圣之烈，荷万邦之重。
现代文：二十八日，顺宗颁下的诏书写道： 我继承九代先皇的伟业，肩负治理天下的重任。
English: On the 28th, the Imperial Rescript issued by the Emperor Shunzong read: I inherit the great cause of the nine-generation Emperor Shunzong and shoulder the important task of governing the world.

古文：顾以寡德，涉道未明，虔恭寅畏，惧不克荷。
现代文：但是因为我德行不高，对治理国家的大政方针还研究得不透，所以虔诚恭敬小心谨慎，害怕完成不了历史使命。
English: However, because my virtue is not high, and I have not thoroughly studied the major policies for governing the country, I am pious, respectful, cautious, and afraid that I will not be able to complete my historical mission.

古文：恐上坠祖宗之训，下贻卿士之忧，夙夜祗勤，如临渊谷。
现代文：担心对上丢失了列祖列宗的训诫，对下给臣民造成了忧患，从早到晚恭敬勤勉，如同站立在万丈深渊旁边一样谨慎小心。
English: Fearing that they have lost the teachings of their forefathers on the one hand, and have caused sorrow to their subjects on the other, they are respectful and diligent from morning to night, as cautious and careful as if they were standing next to the abyss.

古文：而积疾未复，至于经时，怡神保和，常所不暇。
现代文：但是长时间的疾病还没有康复，到了最近一个时期，愉悦心神调养身体，也往往没有时间顾及。
English: But the long-term illness has not yet recovered, and in the recent period, there is often no time to take care of the joyful mind and body.

古文：永惟四方之大，万务之殷，不躬不亲，虑有旷废。
现代文：总是考虑着国家这么庞大，政务这么繁多，不能亲自处理，担心造成拖延失误。
English: They always consider that the country is so huge and the government affairs are so numerous that they cannot deal with them personally, and they are worried about causing delays and mistakes.

古文：加以山陵有日，霖潦逾旬，是用儆于朕心，以答天戒。
现代文：加上自从我的陵墓竣工那天起，滂沱大雨一连下了十多天不见停止，我用这异常的征兆克制自己的欲望，来报答上天的警告。
English: In addition, since the day my mausoleum was completed, torrential rain has fallen for more than ten days in a row without stopping. I used this unusual sign to restrain my desires, to repay the warning of heaven.

古文：其军国政事，宜令皇太子勾当。 
现代文：全部军政国事，应当让皇太子管理。 
English: All military, political and state affairs should be managed by the crown prince.

古文：时上久疾，不复延纳宰臣共论大政。
现代文：当时顺宗长时间生病，不能再请朝廷大臣们一起研究处理国家政务。
English: At that time, Shunzong had been ill for a long time, and it was no longer possible to invite the imperial ministers to study and handle state affairs together.

古文：事无巨细皆决于李忠言、王亻丕、王叔文。
现代文：不论是大事小事，都由李忠言、王亻丕、王叔文决断。
English: No matter whether it is a big or small matter, Li Zhongyan, Wang Qi, and Wang Shouwen make the final decision.

古文：物论喧杂，以为不可。
现代文：人们议论纷纷，认为不能这样。
English: There's been a lot of talk about how it can't be done.

古文：籓镇屡上笺于皇太子，指三竖之挠政，故有是诏。
现代文：各个藩镇的地方长官多次向皇太子上书，批评李忠言、王亻丕、王叔文扰乱朝政，所以才颁发了这道诏书。
English: The local governors of various provinces and towns repeatedly wrote to the crown prince, criticizing Li Zhongyan, Wang Qi, and Wang Shouwen for disrupting the imperial government, which is why this edict was issued.

古文：以太常卿杜黄裳为门下侍郎，左金吾卫大军袁滋为中书侍郎，并同中书门下平章事；郑珣瑜为吏部尚书，高郢刑部尚书，并罢知政事。
现代文：任命太常卿杜黄裳为门下侍郎，左金吾卫大将军袁滋为中书侍郎，两人一起为同中书门下平章事；将郑王旬瑜降职为吏部尚书，高郢降职为刑部尚书，两人一样不再参与研究朝政大事。
English: He appointed the Grand Councilor Du Huangxiao as a subordinate attendant, the Left King Wuwei's General Yuan Zhi as a subordinate attendant, and both of them as subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate

古文：皇太子见百僚于朝堂。
现代文：皇太子李纯到朝堂召见百官。
English: Crown Prince Li Chun summoned hundreds of officials to the imperial court.

古文：丙申，皇太子于麟德殿西亭见奏事官。
现代文：二十九日，皇太子在麟德殿的西亭召见奏事的官员。
English: On the 29th, the Crown Prince summoned officials to a meeting in the West Pavilion of the Lindo Wing.

古文：八月丁酉朔。
现代文：八月初一是丁丑。
English: The first day of August is Dingxia Day.

古文：庚子，诏： 惟皇天佑命烈祖，诞受方国，九圣储祉，万邦咸休。
现代文：初四日，朝廷以顺宗的名义颁发诏书 ：皇天佑助我功业显赫的先祖，秉承天命得到了华夏大地，九代先帝积下福德，全国上下喜乐安宁。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the imperial court issued an imperial decree in the name of Shunzong: "God help my illustrious ancestors. Adhering to the heavenly destiny, they obtained the land of China. The nine generations of emperors have accumulated merits. The whole country is joyful and peaceful."

古文：肆予一人，获绩丕业，严恭守位，不遑暇逸。
现代文：皇位传到我的手里，得以继承伟大的基业，严肃恭谨地坚守职责，没有空闲悠游安逸。
English: The imperial throne has passed into my hands, and I have been able to inherit the great heritage, seriously and respectfully adhere to my duties, and do not have any leisure time.

古文：而天佑不降，疾恙无瘳，将何以奉宗庙之灵，展郊、禋之礼！
现代文：但上天没能降临对我的佑助，疾病没有好转，我还怎么能够供奉祖宗的灵位，举行祭祀天地的礼仪？
English: However, heaven has not been able to come down to help me, and my illness has not improved. How can I still offer the ancestor's spiritual position and hold a ritual to worship heaven and earth?

古文：畴咨庶尹，对越上玄，内愧于朕心，上畏于天命。
现代文：无法做到访问朝廷大臣，无法做到德行高如上天，在内心我感到惭愧，对天意我感到惧怕。
English: Not being able to visit the imperial court, not being able to be as virtuous as heaven, I felt ashamed in my heart, and I was afraid of God's will.

古文：夙夜祗忄栗，深惟永图。
现代文：从早到晚恭敬惶恐，深深思考一个长久的方略。
English: From dawn to dusk, with reverence and trepidation, thinking deeply about a long-term strategy.

古文：一日万机，不可以久旷；天工人代，不可以久违。
现代文：每天的政务千头万绪，不能长时间地耽搁；上天的职能由人代理，不能长时间地违背天意。
English: The day-to-day affairs of government are so complicated that they cannot be delayed for a long time; the functions of heaven are represented by man, and it is not possible to go against the will of heaven for a long time.

古文：皇太子纯睿哲温文，宽和仁惠，孝友之德，爱敬之诚，通乎神明，格于上下。
现代文：皇太子李纯英明智慧、彬彬有礼，宽厚温和仁爱善良，他对父母孝顺对兄弟友好的品德，对后辈慈爱对长辈尊敬的真诚，感动神明，充满天地。
English: Crown Prince Li Chun is wise, courteous, generous, gentle, benevolent and kind. His filial piety to his parents, his friendly character to his brothers, his sincere love for the younger generation and his respect for the elders have moved the gods and filled the world.

古文：是用法皇王至公之道，遵父子传归之制，付之重器，以抚兆人。
现代文：因此效法先皇极为公正的法则，遵循帝位父子传承的制度，我把政权交给皇太子，以便安抚天下臣民。
English: Therefore, following the emperors' extremely just rule, and following the system of imperial succession from father to son, I will hand over the power to the crown prince in order to appease the subjects of the world.

古文：必能宣祖宗之重光，荷天地之休命，奉若成宪，永绥四方。
现代文：他一定会发扬祖宗的光辉功德，担当起天高地阔般的神圣使命，遵循祖宗既定的法规，使得天下永远安宁。
English: He will surely carry forward the glorious merits of the ancestors, take on the sacred mission of the heavens and the earth, follow the rules established by the ancestors, and make the world forever peaceful.

古文：宜令皇太子即皇帝位，朕称太上皇，居兴庆宫，制称诰。 
现代文：应当让皇太子登上帝位，我本人称为太上皇帝，安排在兴庆宫居住，我的诏书称为诰命。 
English: The crown prince should be allowed to ascend to the throne. I myself called myself the supreme emperor, arranged to live in the Xingqing Palace, and my edict was called the death sentence.

古文：辛丑，诰： 有天下传归于子，前王之制也。
现代文：初五日，太上皇帝发出诰命： 皇帝把天下传给皇太子，这是先辈帝王的制度。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the empress dowager issued an edict: The emperor would hand over the country to the crown prince. This was the system of the previous emperors.

古文：钦若大典，斯为至公，式扬耿光，用体文德。
现代文：尊崇这一重要的法律典章，是极为公正的事情，继承发扬列祖列宗的光辉，以此体现礼乐教化的功德。
English: It is an extremely just thing to respect this important legal code, to inherit and carry forward the glory of the ancestors, and to reflect the merit of the teaching of ritual music.

古文：朕获奉宗庙，临御万方，降疾不瘳，庶政多阙。
现代文：我主持祭祀宗庙，当天下的君主，而得下的疾病没有好转，繁杂的政务多有延误。
English: I presided over the sacrificial worship of the ancestral temple, the monarch of the day, but the illness I got did not improve, and the complicated government affairs were mostly delayed.

古文：乃命元子，代予守邦，爰以令辰，光膺册礼，宜以今月九日册皇帝于宣政殿。
现代文：于是命令我的长子，接替我主持朝政，选定吉日良辰，隆重举行禅让的礼仪，应当定于本月初九在宣政殿册立皇帝。
English: Therefore, I ordered my eldest son, who will succeed me in presiding over the imperial government, to select a auspicious day and solemnly hold a ceremony of abdication, which should be scheduled for the ninth day of this month at the Imperial Palace.

古文：国有大命，恩俾惟新，宜因纪元之庆，用覃在宥之泽。
现代文：国家有了这一重大举措，就希望出现一个新的气象，应当趁着新皇帝登位的喜庆日子，对凡是可以宽恕的人们广施恩德。
English: With this major measure, the country hopes that a new climate will emerge, and should take advantage of the festive day of the new emperor's enthronement to extend grace to all those who can be forgiven.

古文：宜改贞元二十一年为永贞元年。
现代文：应当把贞元二十一年改为永贞元年。
English: The 21st year of Zhengyuan should be changed to the 1st year of Yongzheng.

古文：自贞元二十一年八月五日已前，天下死罪降从流，流以下递减一等。 
现代文：从贞元二十一年八月初五算起，这之前的全国死刑囚犯减刑为流放，流放以下的囚犯依次减刑一等。 
English: Starting from the 5th day of the 8th month of the 21st year of the Jōgen era, the sentence of all death-row prisoners nationwide was reduced to banishment, and the sentence of prisoners below banishment was reduced in turn.

古文：诰立良娣王氏为太上皇后，良媛董氏为太上皇德妃。
现代文：诰命立良娣王氏为太上皇后，良媛董氏为太上皇德妃。
English: It was decreed that the Prince Ryosuke clan would become the empress dowager, and the Princess Ryohime clan would become the empress dowager.

古文：壬寅，贬右散骑常侍王伾为开州司马，前户部侍郎、度支盐铁转运使王叔文为渝州司户。
现代文：初六日，将右散骑常侍王亻丕降职为开州司马，将前户部侍郎、度支盐铁转运使王叔文降职为渝州司户。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, he demoted Wang Xi, a right-hand rider and a regular attendant, to the position of Kaizhou Sima, and demoted Wang Shouwen, a former household attendant, to the position of Yuzhou Sifu.

古文：元和元年正月丙寅朔，皇帝率百僚上太上皇尊号曰应乾圣寿。
现代文：元和元年正月初一，宪宗皇帝李纯率领全体朝臣为太上皇帝进奉尊号为 应乾圣寿 。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the Yuan and the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of

古文：甲申，太上皇崩于兴庆宫之咸宁殿，享年四十六岁。
现代文：十九日，太上皇帝在兴庆宫的咸宁殿逝世，享年四十六岁。
English: On the 19th, the empress dowager passed away at the age of 46 in Xianning Hall of the Xingqing Palace.

古文：惜乎寝疾践祚，近习弄权；而能传政元良，克昌运祚，贤哉！宪宗圣神章武孝皇帝讳纯，顺宗长子也，母曰庄宪王太后。
现代文：六月二十三日，宪宗率领全体朝臣给已故的太上皇帝进奉谥号为至德大圣大安孝皇帝，进奉给他宗庙的称号为 顺宗 。七月初一，安葬在丰陵。宪宗本纪宪宗圣神章武孝皇帝名李纯，是顺宗皇帝的长子，母亲是庄宪太后王氏。
English: On June 23rd, Emperor Xianzong led all the courtiers to present the posthumous name of the late Emperor Shun to the late Empress Dowager, and the title of the ancestral temple to him was Shunzong. On the first day of July, he was buried in Fengling. Emperor Xianzong, the eldest son of Emperor Shun, was named Li Chun, and his mother was Empress Dowager Wang.

古文：大历十三年二月生于长安之东内。
现代文：他于代宗大历十三年二月出生在长安皇宫东边的宫中。
English: He was born in February of the thirteenth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong in the palace on the east side of the Chang'an Palace.

古文：六七岁时，德宗抱置膝上，问曰： 汝谁子，在吾怀？ 
现代文：六七岁的时候，他祖父德宗皇帝把他抱在膝头上，问他： 你是谁的儿子，坐在我的怀里？ 
English: When he was six or seven years old, his grandfather Emperor Dezong held him on his lap and asked him, "Whose son are you, sitting in my arms?"

古文：对曰： 是第三天子。 
现代文：他回答说 ：我是第三个天子。 
English: He answered, "I am the third son of God."

古文：德宗异而怜之。
现代文：德宗对他的聪慧感到惊异而喜爱他。
English: Emperor Dezong was amazed by his intelligence and loved him.

古文：贞元四年六月，封广陵王。
现代文：德宗贞元四年六月，他被封为广陵王。
English: In June of the 4th year of Dezong Zhengyuan, he was named Guangling Wang.

古文：顺宗即位之年四月，册为皇太子。
现代文：顺宗皇帝登上帝位的那年四月，他被册立为皇太子。
English: In April of the same year that Emperor Shunzong ascended to the throne, he was registered as crown prince.

古文：七月乙未，权勾当军国政事。
现代文：同年七月二十八日，代理顺宗主持朝廷军政事务。
English: On July 28 of the same year, acting Shunzong presided over the military and political affairs of the imperial court.

古文：八月丁酉朔，受内禅。乙巳，即皇帝位于宣政殿。
现代文：同年八月初一，顺宗颁发诏令把帝位交给了他。
English: On the first day of August of the same year, Emperor Junzong issued a decree to hand over the throne to him.

古文：先是，连月霖雨，上即位之日晴霁，人情欣悦。
现代文：初九日，他在宣政殿正式登皇帝位。在这之前，滂沱大雨连续下了一个多月，宪宗登位那天雨住天晴，人们心里欢欣喜悦。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, he officially ascended to the throne at Xuancheng Palace. Prior to this, it had rained heavily for more than a month in a row. On the day of the enthronement of Emperor Xianzong, the rain stopped and the sky was clear. People were overjoyed.

古文：丙午，升平公主进女口十五人，上曰： 太上皇不受献，朕何敢违！
现代文：初十日，升平公主进献美女十五人，宪宗说： 太上皇不接受进献，我哪敢违背他老人家的意愿！
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Princess Shouhei presented fifteen beautiful women, and Emperor Kenzo said, "If the Empress Dowager does not accept the offering, how can I go against the wishes of her elders!"

古文：其还郭氏。 
现代文：还是退回郭府去吧。 
English: Let's go back to Guofu.

古文：丁未，始御紫宸对百僚。
现代文：十一日，开始亲临紫宸殿召见百官处理政务。
English: On the eleventh day, he began to personally summon hundreds of officials to Shishinden to deal with government affairs.

古文：己酉，以道州刺史路怒为邕管经略使。
现代文：十三日，任命道州刺史路恕为邕管经略使。
English: On the 13th, he appointed Daozhou Zhishi Lu Xun as the Deputy Minister of the Ministry of Economic Affairs.

古文：庚戌，荆南献龟二，诏曰： 朕以寡昧，纂承丕业，永思理本，所宝惟贤。
现代文：十四日，荆南进献两只珍奇的乌龟，宪宗发出诏书说 ：我这孤陋寡闻的人，继承大业，老是考虑着治理根本，珍视的只是贤能的人才。
English: On the 14th, Jingnan presented two rare tortoises, and the Emperor issued an edict saying, "I, who have never heard of such a thing, inheriting a great cause, always consider the fundamentals of governance, and only value talented people.

古文：至如嘉禾神芝，奇禽异兽，盖王化之虚美也。
现代文：至于神异的禾稻芝草，珍奇的飞禽走兽，大抵是对王道教化的虚假粉饰。
English: As for the miraculous grain, rice and turf grass, and the rare birds and beasts, it is mostly a false whitewash of the royal path.

古文：所以光武形于诏令，《春秋》不书祥瑞，朕诚薄德，思及前人。
现代文：所以东汉光武皇帝在诏书中明文禁止，《春秋》这本书里没有关于吉祥符瑞的记载，我的德行实在不高，但还是希望赶上先辈圣贤。
English: Therefore, Emperor Guangwu of the Eastern Han Dynasty expressly forbade it in his edict. "Spring and Autumn" does not have any records of auspicious signs. My virtue is really not high, but I still hope to catch up with the ancestors of sages.

古文：自今已后，所有祥瑞，但令准式申报有司，不得上闻；其奇禽异兽，亦宜停进。 
现代文：从今以后，凡是发现吉祥符瑞，只让按照规定向有关主管官吏报告说明，不准告诉朝廷；有关奇异的飞禽走兽，也应当停止进献。 
English: From now on, if any auspicious animals are found, they should only be reported to the relevant competent officials in accordance with regulations, and are not allowed to tell the imperial court; the introduction of strange birds and beasts should also be stopped.

古文：癸丑，剑南西川节度使、检校太尉、中书令、南康郡王韦皋薨。
现代文：十七日，剑南西川节度使、检校太尉、中书令、南康郡王韦皋逝世。
English: On the 17th, Wang Weiqi of Nankang County, Jian'nan Nishikawa Setsudouji, Kengyo Taifu, Chushirei, passed away.

古文：甲寅，以常州刺史穆赞为宣歙池观察使，以前宣歙观察使崔衍为工部尚书。
现代文：十八日，任命常州刺史穆赞为宣、歙、池三州观察使，任命前宣、歙二州观察使崔衍为工部尚书。
English: On the 18th, the Changzhou magistrate Shumuzan was appointed as the three-state observation envoy of Xuan, Zang and Chi, and the former Xuan and Zang two-state observation envoy Cui Yan was appointed as the official of the Ministry of Industry and Trade.

古文：己未，以中书侍郎、平章事袁滋为剑南东西两川、山南西道安抚大使，时昌韦皋卒，刘辟据蜀邀节钺故也。
现代文：二十三日，任命中书侍郎、平章事袁滋为剑南东西两川、山南西道安抚大使，是因为这时韦皋去世，而刘辟凭借蜀州伸手向朝廷强要军权的缘故。
English: On the 23rd, the appointment of Zhongshushijiro and Pingzhangji Yuan Zhi as the Ambassador of Tranquility for the East and West of Jian'an and the West of Shannan was due to the fact that Wei Wei died at this time, and Liu Bi extended his hand to the imperial court to force military power with the help of Shuzhou.

古文：辛酉，太上皇诰册良娣王氏为太上皇后。
现代文：二十五日，太上皇帝发出诰命册立良娣王氏为太上皇后。
English: On the 25th, the Emperor issued an imperial edict appointing the Liangwu Wang clan as the Empress Dowager.

古文：癸亥，以朝请大夫、守尚书左丞、轻车都尉、赐紫金鱼袋郑余庆同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十七日，给朝请大夫、署理尚书左丞、轻车都尉、赐紫金鱼袋郑余庆授予同中书门下平章事头衔。
English: On the 27th, Zheng Yuqing, the doctor who invited the morning, the deputy Shang Shuzhong, the light vehicle captain, and the purple gold fish bag, was awarded the title of Tongzhong Shumen Shimo Pingzhang.

古文：丙寅，以饶州刺史李吉甫为考功郎中，夔州刺史唐次为吏部郎中。并知制诰。
现代文：三十日，任命饶州刺史李吉甫为考功郎中，夔州刺史唐次为吏部郎中，一同参与朝廷诏书诰命的研究起草工作。
English: On the 30th, Li Jifu, the Raozhou scholar, was appointed as a meritorious scholar, and Tang Zi, the Zhangzhou scholar, was appointed as an official scholar, and they both participated in the research and drafting of the imperial edict.

古文：九月丁卯朔。
现代文：九月初一是丁卯。
English: September 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：己巳，罢教坊乐人授正员官之制。
现代文：初三日，废除给教坊的音乐歌舞艺人授予编制内的官职的制度。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the system of awarding official positions within the establishment to music and dance artists of teaching schools was abolished.

古文：辛未，河阳三城节度使元韶卒。
现代文：初五日，河阳三城节度使元韶去世。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the three-city festival in Hebei and Hebei caused the death of Yuan Shao.

古文：癸酉，以陈州刺史孟元阳为怀州刺史、河阳三城孟怀节度使。
现代文：初七日，任命陈州刺史孟元阳为怀州刺史和河阳三城、孟州、怀州节度使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Meng Yuanyang, Chenzhou's chief historian, was appointed as the chief historian of Waizhou and the chief envoy of the three cities of Heyang, Mengzhou and Waizhou.

古文：丙子，敕申光蔡、陈许两道比遭亢旱，宜加赈恤，申、光、蔡赈米十万石，陈、许五万石。
现代文：初十日，诏令指出申州、光州、蔡州和陈州、许州所在的两个道接连遭受旱灾，应当散发粮食给予救济，申州、光州、蔡州散发救济粮食十万石，陈州、许州散发救济粮食五万石。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the imperial decree pointed out that the two provinces of Shenzhou, Gwangju, Caizhou and Chenzhou and Huzhou suffered from consecutive droughts and should distribute grain to provide relief. Shenzhou, Gwangju and Caizhou distributed relief grain of 100,000 koku, and Chenzhou and Huzhou distributed relief grain of 50,000 koku.

古文：丁丑，前户部侍郎蔡弁卒。
现代文：十一日，前户部侍郎蔡弁去世。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Tsai Ben, the former chief steward of the household, died.

古文：襄州于頔进鹰，诏还之。
现代文：襄州的于由页进献猎鹰，宪宗诏令退了回去。
English: In Yangzhou, Yu Yufei presented a falcon, and the Emperor's edict was withdrawn.

古文：己卯，京西神策行营节度行军司马韩泰贬抚州刺史，司封郎中韩晔贬池州刺史，礼部员外郎柳宗元贬邵州刺史，屯田员外郎刘禹锡贬连州刺史，坐交王叔文也。
现代文：十三日，京西神策行营节度行军司马韩泰贬谪为抚州刺史，司封郎中韩晔被贬谪为池州刺史，礼部员外郎柳宗元贬谪为邵州刺史，屯田员外郎刘禹锡贬谪为连州刺史，都是由于和王叔文交往密切而获罪受到处分。
English: On the 13th day of the month, Ma Han-tai, the secretary of the Beijing and Xi'an Shenshe Xingdu Campaign, was demoted to Fuzhou, Han Zheng, the secretary of the seal, was demoted to Chizhou, Liu Zongyuan, the member of the etiquette department, was demoted to Shaozhou, and Liu Yuxi, the member of the Tonden Camp, was demoted to Lianzhou. All of them were punished for being in close contact with Wang Shouwen.

古文：辛巳，给事中陆质卒。
现代文：十五日，给事中陆质去世。
English: On the fifteenth day, in the middle of things, Lu Qiao passed away.

古文：冬十月丙申朔。
现代文：十月初一是丙申。
English: The first day of October is xinshen.

古文：丁酉，集百僚发曾太皇太后沈氏哀于肃章门外。
现代文：初二日，召集百官在肃章门外公布曾太皇太后也就是代宗的皇后沈氏逝世的噩耗。
English: On the second day of the first month, hundreds of officials were summoned to announce the bad news of the death of the empress dowager, the empress dowager, the empress dowager, the empress dowager, the empress dowager.

古文：检校司空兼右仆射、同中书门下平章事、魏国公贾耽卒。
现代文：检校司空兼右仆射、同中书门下平章事、魏国公贾耽去世。
English: The inspecting officer of the school, Kuken Umenosuke, and the schoolmaster of the same school, Shimohei Shoshoji, and the Wei Guogong Jia Tan passed away.

古文：戊戌，以宰臣剑南安抚使袁滋检校吏部尚书、同中书门下平章事、成都尹、剑南西川节度观察等使，以西川行军司马齐辟为给事中。
现代文：初三日，任命宰臣剑南安抚使袁滋为检校吏部尚书、同中书门下平章事、成都府尹、剑南西川节度观察等使，任命西川行军司马刘辟为给事中。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Yuan Zhi, the vice-minister of Jian'nan, was appointed to be the inspector of the school, Shang Shu, the vice-minister of the same school, Chengdu Fu Yin, the vice-minister of Jian'nan to observe the West River Festival, and the secretary of the West River Marching Army, Ma Liu Bei, was appointed to be the secretary.

古文：舒王谊薨。
现代文：舒王李谊逝世。
English: Shu Wang Liyi passed away.

古文：庚子，南诏使赵迦宽来赴山陵。
现代文：初五日，南诏的使者赵迦宽进京为曾太皇太后吊丧。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the emissary of Nanzhao, Zhao Jiahuan, came to Beijing to pay his respects to the former empress dowager.

古文：浙东观察使贾全卒。
现代文：浙东观察使贾全去世。
English: The East Zhejiang Observer reports that Jia Quan passed away.

古文：辛丑，吐蕃使论乞缕贡助山陵金银衣服。
现代文：初六日，吐蕃的使者论乞缕进献金银衣服作为吊祭曾太皇太后的礼物。
English: On the sixth day of the first month, the emissaries of Tubo begged for gold and silver clothes as a gift from the Empress Dowager Zeng.

古文：太常上大行曾太皇太后沈氏谥曰睿真皇后。
现代文：太常寺为已故曾太皇太后沈氏进奉谥号为睿真皇后。
English: The late Empress Dowager Zeng of Taizhong Temple was given the posthumous title of Empress Ruizhen.

古文：丙午，以华州刺史杨于陵为越州刺史、浙东观察使。
现代文：十一日，任命华州刺史杨於陵为越州刺史、浙东观察使。
English: On the 11th, Yang Yuling, the chief historian of Huazhou, was appointed as the chief historian of Yuezhou and the observer of East Zhejiang.

古文：丁未，改桂州纯化县为慕化县，蒙州纯义县为正义县。
现代文：十二日，把桂州的纯化县改名为慕化县，蒙州的纯义县改名为正义县。
English: On the 12th, Chunhua County in Guizhou was renamed as Muhua County, and Chunyi County in Mengzhou was renamed as Zhengyi County.

古文：乙酉，葬德宗皇帝于崇陵。
现代文：十四日，将德宗皇帝安葬在崇陵。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Dezong was buried in Chongling.

古文：甲寅，以刑部尚书高郢为华州刺史、潼关防御、镇国军使，御史中丞李鄘为京兆尹。
现代文：十九日，任命刑部尚书高郢为华州刺史、潼关防御使、镇国军使，任命御史中丞李庸阝为京兆尹。
English: On the 19th, Gao Jian of the Criminal Investigation Department was appointed as the State Historian of Huazhou, the Defense Envoy of Shaoguan, and the Military Envoy of Zhenguo, and the Vice-Minister of History Li Yongjun was appointed as the Vice-Minister of History of Beijing.

古文：贬京兆尹王权为雅王傅。
现代文：把京兆尹王权降职为雅王傅。
English: He demoted Jingzhao Yin Wangquan to Ya Wangfu.

古文：久雨，京师盐贵，出库盐二万石，粜以惠民。
现代文：由于长时间下雨，京城食盐价格飞涨，朝廷拿出库存的食盐两万石，低价卖给百姓。
English: Due to a long period of rain, the price of salt in the capital skyrocketed. The imperial court took out 20,000 kilos of salt in stock and sold it to the people at a low price.

古文：乙巳，祔睿真皇后神主、德宗皇帝神主于太庙。
现代文：十一月初四日，将睿真皇后的灵位、德宗皇帝的灵位设置在太庙举行与祖宗合祭的仪式。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month of the year, a ceremony was held in the Great Temple to hold a memorial service for Empress Ruizhen and Emperor Dezong.

古文：壬申，贬正议大夫、中书侍郎、平章事韦执谊为崖州司马，以交王叔文也。
现代文：初七日，把正议大夫、中书侍郎、平章事韦执谊贬谪为崖州司马，他是由于跟王叔文交往密切而获罪受到处分。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, he relegated Zheng Rong Daofu, Zhongshu Jiro and Ping Zhang to the position of Jiaozhou Sima. He was punished for being in close contact with Wang Shouwen.

古文：润、池、扬、楚、湖、杭、睦、江等州旱。
现代文：润州、池州、扬州、楚州、湖州、杭州、睦州、江州等地发生旱灾。
English: Droughts occurred in Renzhou, Chizhou, Yangzhou, Chuzhou, Huzhou, Hangzhou, Mianzhou, Jiangzhou and other places.

古文：贬剑南西川节度使袁滋为吉州刺史，以其慰抚三川逗留不进故也。
现代文：把剑南西川节度使袁滋贬谪为吉州刺史，是因为他率领军队安抚三川却迟疑犹豫不愿前进的缘故。
English: The reason why Jiannan Xichuan Jiedu reduced Yuan Zhi to a footnote in the history of Jizhou was that he led an army to pacify Mikawa, but hesitated to advance.

古文：以左骁卫将军李演为夏州刺史、夏绥银等州节度使，以右庶子武元衡为御史中丞。
现代文：任命左骁卫将军李演为夏州刺史和夏、绥、银等州节度使，任命右庶子武元衡为御史中丞。
English: He appointed General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards Li Yuan as the Secretary of State for Xia, Shandong, and Yin Provinces, and appointed his son-in-law, General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards Wu Yuanheng, as the Vice-Minister of State for History.

古文：己卯，再贬抚州刺史韩泰为虔州司马，河中少尹陈谏台州司马，邵州刺史柳宗元为永州司马，连州刺史刘禹锡朗州司马，池州刺史韩晔饶州司马，和州刺史凌准连州司马，岳州刺史程异郴州司马，皆坐交王叔文。
现代文：十四日，再次把抚州刺史韩泰贬谪为虔州司马，河中少尹陈谏贬谪为台州司马，邵州刺史柳宗元被贬谪为永州司马，连州刺史刘禹锡被贬谪为朗州司马，池州刺史韩晔贬谪为饶州司马，和州刺史凌准贬谪为连州司马，岳州刺史程异贬谪为郴州司马，都由于他们同王叔文交往密切而获罪。
English: On the 14th, Fuzhou's Han Tai was once again demoted to Kenzhou's Sima, Hezhong's Shao Yin Chen Di was demoted to Taizhou's Sima, Shao's Liu Zongyuan was demoted to Yongzhou's Sima, Lianzhou's Liu Yuxi was demoted to Langzhou's Sima, Chizhou's Han Di was demoted to Raozhou's Sima, Hezhou's Lingjun was demoted to Lianzhou's Sima, and Yuezhou's Chengyi was demoted to Zhangzhou's Sima. All of them were

古文：初贬刺史，物议罪之，故再加贬窜。
现代文：开始把他们贬谪为刺史，人们舆论认为他们的罪过太重，所以再次给予贬谪流放的处罚。
English: They began to denigrate them as traitors, and the public opinion thought that their crimes were too serious, so the punishment of denigration and exile was given again.

古文：辛巳，宣、抚、和、郴、郢、袁、衢七州旱。
现代文：十六日，宣州、抚州、和州、郴州、郢州、袁州、衢州遭受旱灾。
English: On the 16th, Xuanzhou, Fuzhou, Hezhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, Yuanzhou and Zhangzhou suffered from drought.

古文：壬午，吏部尚书郑珣瑜卒。
现代文：十七日，吏部尚书郑王旬瑜去世。
English: On the 17th, Zheng Wang Junyu, the secretary of the Ministry of Personnel, passed away.

古文：甲申，以湖南观察使杨凭为洪州刺史、江西观察使，以虢州刺史薛苹为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
现代文：十九日，任命湖南观察使杨凭为洪州刺史、江西观察使，任命虢州刺史薛苹为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
English: On the 19th, Yang Biao, the observer of Hunan, was appointed as the observer of Hongzhou and the observer of Jiangxi, and Xue Ping, the observer of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the observer of Tanzhou and the observer of Hunan.

古文：鄂、岳、婺、衡等州旱。
现代文：鄂州、岳州、婺州、衡州等地遭受旱灾。
English: Ezhou, Yuezhou, Zhangzhou, Hengzhou and other places suffered from drought.

古文：癸巳，宣歙观察使穆赞卒。
现代文：二十八日，宣、歙二州观察使穆赞去世。
English: On the 28th, the announcement of the two-state observation caused the death of Muzan.

古文：十二月丙申朔。
现代文：十二月初一是丙申。
English: The first day of December is xinshen.

古文：庚子，以东都留守韦夏卿为太子少保，以兵部尚书王绍为东都留守。
现代文：初五日，任命东都洛阳留守韦夏卿为太子少保，任命兵部尚书王绍为东都洛阳留守。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Wei Xiaqing, who stayed in Luoyang, the eastern capital, was appointed as the prince's minor protector, and Wang Shao, who stayed in Luoyang, the eastern capital, was appointed as the commander of the military.

古文：壬寅，改淳县为清溪县，姓淳于者改姓于。
现代文：初七日，把淳州改名为峦州，把还淳县改名为清溪县，淳风县改名为从化县，把姓淳于的人改为姓于。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the name of Junzhou was changed to Bozhou, the name of Hounxian County was changed to Qingxi County, the name of Junfeng County was changed to Conghua County, and the surname of Junyu was changed to Yu.

古文：甲辰，襄阳于頔加平章事。
现代文：初九日，襄阳的于由页被授予平章事头衔。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Yangyang's Yu Yufei was awarded the title of Pingzhangji.

古文：丙申，月犯毕。
现代文：十一日，月亮冲犯西方毕星星宿。
English: On the 19th, the moon encroached upon the star.

古文：己酉，以新除给事中、西川行军司马刘辟为成都尹、剑南西川节度使。
现代文：十四日，任命新任的给事中、西川行军司马刘辟为成都尹、剑南西川节度使。
English: On the 14th, Ma Liu Bei, the newly appointed secretary of the Nishikawa march, was appointed as the Chengdu Yin and Jianan Nishikawa festival envoy.

古文：岁星犯太微西垣。
现代文：岁星冲犯太微星宿西边的星位。
English: The year star collides with the position of the star to the west of the faint star.

古文：庚戌，金州复析汉阴县置石泉县。
现代文：十五日，又把金州的汉阳县划分出来一部分设置石泉县。
English: On the 15th, a part of Hanyang County in Jinzhou was divided and set up as Shiquan County.

古文：壬子，以右谏议大夫韦丹为梓州刺史，充剑南东川节度使，以常州刺史路应为宣州刺史、宣歙池观察使。
现代文：十七日，任命右谏议大夫韦丹为梓州刺史，充任剑南东川节度使，任命常州刺史路应为宣州刺史和宣、歙、池三州观察使。
English: On the 17th, the Right Rev. Wei Dan was appointed as the secretary of Zizhou, acting as the secretary of the Jian Nan Dongchuan Festival, and the secretary of Changzhou was appointed as the secretary of Xuanzhou and the observer of Xuan, Zou and Chi.

古文：壬戌，以朝请大夫、守中书舍人、翰林学士、上柱国郑絪为中书侍郎、同平章事、集贤殿学士。
现代文：二十七日，任命朝请大夫、署理中书舍人、翰林学士、上柱国郑纟因为中书侍郎、同平章事、集贤殿学士。
English: On the 27th, appointed as the invited doctor, acting junior high school librarian, Hanlin bachelor, Shangzhu Guo Zheng, the junior high school librarian, Tongping Zhangji, and Jixianden bachelor.

古文：以考功郎中、知制诰李吉甫为中书舍人，以考功员外郎裴为考功郎中、知制诰，并充翰林学士。
现代文：任命考功郎中、知制诰李吉甫为中书舍人，任命考功员外郎裴土自为考功郎中、知制诰，以上二人一起充任翰林学士。
English: He appointed Li Jifu, a meritorious student in the examination and a scholar, as the teacher of Chinese literature, and appointed Wei Lang Pei Du, a meritorious student in the examination and a scholar, as the teacher of Chinese literature, and the two of them together served as scholars of Hanlin.

古文：元和元年春正月丙寅朔，皇帝率群臣于兴庆宫奉上太上皇号曰应乾圣寿太上皇。
现代文：元和元年正月初一，宪宗皇帝率领朝臣们到兴庆宫向太上皇帝顺宗李诵进献尊号叫 应乾圣寿太上皇 。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first year of the Yuan and the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of

古文：丁卯，御含元殿受朝贺。
现代文：初二日，宪宗亲临含元殿接受朝臣们的朝拜祝贺。
English: On the second day of the first month, Kenzong personally came to Gan Yuan Hall to receive the congratulations of the courtiers.

古文：礼毕，御丹凤楼，大赦天下，改元曰元和。
现代文：礼仪完毕后，宪宗亲临丹凤楼，向天下宣告大赦诏令，把年号改为元和。
English: After the ceremony was over, Emperor Gensong visited Danfeng Tower in person to announce to the world the amnesty edict and change the era name to Yuan and He.

古文：自正月二日昧爽已前，大辟罪已下，常赦不原者，咸赦除之。
现代文：从正月初二拂晓算起，这以前被判死刑以下的囚犯，包括在一般性赦免时没有得到宽恕的，全部免除刑罚。
English: Starting at dawn on the second day of the first month of the year, all prisoners who had previously been sentenced to death or less, including those who were not pardoned during the general amnesty, were exempted from punishment.

古文：辛未，以鄂岳沔观察使韩皋为鄂、岳、蕲、安、黄等州节度使。
现代文：初六日，任命鄂、岳、沔三州观察使韩皋为鄂、岳、蕲、安、黄等州节度使。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the three states of Hubei, Yue and Shandong were appointed as observers, and Han Wei was appointed as the festival envoy of Hubei, Yue, Shandong, An and Huangshan.

古文：丁丑，太子少保韦夏卿卒。
现代文：十一日，太子少保韦夏卿去世。
English: On the 11th day, Prince Shobo Weixia passed away.

古文：辛巳，以兴元元从功臣、右神策护军使副薛盈珍为右神策护军中尉。
现代文：十六日，任命德宗兴元元年的功臣、右神策护军使副使薛盈珍为神策护军中尉。
English: On the 16th, Xue Yingzhen, a meritorious subject of Dezongxing in the first year of the first century and deputy envoy of the Right Divine Providence Protection Force, was appointed as a lieutenant of the Divine Providence Protection Force.

古文：壬午，成德军节度使、检校司空王士真同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十七日，给成德军节度使、检校司空王士真授予同中书门下平章事头衔。
English: On the seventeenth day, the title of the second-highest award of the same school was awarded to Kong Wang Shizhen, the festival envoy of the Chengde Army and the inspector of the school.

古文：癸未，诏以太上皇旧恙愆和，亲侍药膳，起今月十六日已后，权不听政。
现代文：十八日，宪宗颁发诏书，说明太上皇帝旧病失调，要亲自侍奉汤药，从本月十六日以后开始，暂不临朝处理政务。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Xianzong issued an imperial edict, stating that the empress dowager was suffering from an old disease and was out of balance, that she should personally serve Tangye, and that from the 16th of this month onwards, she would temporarily not attend the imperial court to deal with government affairs.

古文：以左神策长武城防秋都知兵马使高崇文检校工部尚书，充神策行营节度使。
现代文：任命左神策军番号叫做 长武城防秋都 的知兵马使高崇文为检校工部尚书，充任神策行营节度使。
English: Appointed Gao Chongwen, the number of Zuo Sheng's army, known as the Changwu City Autumn Prevention Capital, as the inspector of the school inspection department, and served as the inspector of Sheng Sheng's camp.

古文：甲申，太上皇崩于兴庆宫，迁殡于太极殿，发丧。
现代文：十九日，太上皇帝在兴庆宫逝世。棺柩转移到太极殿停放，向天下宣布噩耗。
English: On the 19th, the emperor died in the Xingqing Palace. The coffin was transferred to the Taiji Hall and parked, announcing the bad news to the world.

古文：乙酉，宰相杜祐摄冢宰，杜黄裳为礼仪使，右仆射伊慎大明宫留守，视事于尚书省。
现代文：二十日，命令宰相杜佑代理冢宰，杜黄裳任礼仪使，右仆射伊慎任大明宫留守，在尚书省主持政务。
English: On the 20th, he ordered the prime minister, Du You, to act as the vice-premier, Du Huang, to serve as the ceremonial envoy, and his right-hand man, Sha Yishen, to stay at the Daming Palace and preside over government affairs in Shangshu Province.

古文：壬辰，复置斜谷路馆驿。
现代文：二十七日，重新设置斜谷路旅馆驿站。
English: On the 27th, the Xizhou Valley Road Hotel Railway Station was re-established.

古文：戊子，制： 剑南西川，疆界素定，籓镇守备，各有区分。
现代文：二十三日，宪宗发出诏书： 剑南西川，边界早已划定，藩镇守卫，各有各的防区。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Xianzong issued an edict: Jian Nan Xichuan, the border has already been delineated, the towns of the domain are on guard, and each has its own defense zone.

古文：顷因元臣薨谢，邻籓不睦，刘辟乃因虚构隙，以忿结仇，遂劳王军，兼害百姓。
现代文：近来因为大臣逝世，藩镇之间不大和睦，刘辟才乘空挑起矛盾，由于愤怒结成怨仇，于是给朝廷军队造成劳苦，同时给百姓造成危害。
English: Recently, due to the death of the minister and the lack of harmony between the provinces and towns, Liu Bei took advantage of the situation to provoke conflicts. Because of anger and hatred, he caused hardship to the imperial army and harm to the people.

古文：朕志存含垢，务欲安人，遣使谕宣，委之旄钺。
现代文：我有心以宽容为怀，努力让百姓安宁，派遣使者作了宣告，把军权交给了他们。
English: I had the spirit of forbearance in my heart, and tried to keep the people calm, and sent an envoy to make an announcement, and handed over the military power to them.

古文：如闻道路拥塞，未息干戈，轻肆攻围，拟图吞并。
现代文：然而听说道路仍旧阻塞，战斗还没有停止，轻狂放肆地进攻包围，企图吞并对方。
English: However, I heard that the roads are still blocked, the fighting has not stopped, and they are frivolously attacking, encircling, and attempting to annex the other side.

古文：为君之体，义在胜残，命将兴师，盖非获已。
现代文：作为国君的根本，按照义理是在于制止凶残的人作恶，任命将帅兴师动众，完全是出于万不得已。
English: As the foundation of the sovereign, according to the principle of justice, it is to stop the wicked people from doing evil, and the appointment of a handsome leader to motivate the masses is entirely out of necessity.

古文：宜令兴元严砺、东川李康掎角应接，神策行营节度使高崇文、神策兵马使李元奕率步骑之师，与东川、兴元之师类会进讨。
现代文：应当让兴元的严砺、东川的李康牵制敌人接应我军，神策行营节度使高崇文、神策兵马使李元奕率领步兵骑兵队伍，和东川、兴元的部队会合进军讨伐。
English: We should let Xingyuan's Yan Xuan and Dongchuan's Li Kang lead the enemy to meet our army, and let Gao Chongwen and Li Yuan Yi lead the infantry and cavalry, and Dongchuan and Xingyuan's troops march into the crusade.

古文：其粮料供饷，委度支使差官以闻。 
现代文：有关军粮马料的供给，委托度支使派遣官员通报。 
English: Regarding the supply of military rations and supplies, the dispatching officer will be notified by the delegate.

古文：甲午，高崇文之师由斜谷路，李元奕之师由骆谷路，俱会于梓潼。
现代文：二十九日，高崇文的部队经由斜谷路，李元奕的部队经由骆谷路，一起到梓潼会合。
English: On the 29th, Gao Chongwen's troops passed through Xizhou Valley Road, and Li Yuanyi's troops passed through Luokou Valley Road, and came together to Zizhou Junction.

古文：辛卯，群臣请听政。
现代文：二十六日，朝臣们请求宪宗临朝处理政务。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the courtiers requested that Kenzong come to the imperial court to handle government affairs.

古文：二月乙未朔，以度支郎中敬宽为山剑行营粮料使。
现代文：二月初一日，任命度支郎中敬宽为山南、剑南行营粮料使。
English: On the first day of February, Du Zhirong Zhong Jinghong was appointed as the envoy of grain for the campaign in Shannan and Jianan.

古文：严砺奏收剑州。
现代文：严砺禀奏收复了剑州。
English: Jianzhou has been recovered with great success.

古文：乙丑，入朝奚王梅落可银青光录大夫、检校司空，封饶乐郡王，放还蕃。
现代文：初七日，进京朝拜的奚国国王梅落被批准为银青光禄大夫、检校司空，封为饶乐郡王，让他回国去了。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, King Mei Lok of Shan State, who went to Beijing to pay homage, was approved as a silver Qingguanglu doctor, a school inspector, and crowned as the king of Raole County, and he was allowed to return home.

古文：癸卯，赠宣武军节度使陆长源为右仆射，赠故吉州刺史姜公辅礼部尚书。
现代文：初九日，追认宣武军节度使陆长源为右仆射，追认已故吉州刺史姜公辅为礼部尚书。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Lu Changyuan, the commander of the Xuanwu Army, was recognized as the right-hand man, and Jiang Gongfu, the late governor of Jizhou, was recognized as the ceremonial secretary.

古文：甲辰，以钱少，禁用铜器。
现代文：初十日，因为钱币太少，宫庭禁止使用铜器。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, because there were too few coins, the palace forbade the use of copper utensils.

古文：癸丑，以魏博田季安同平章事。
现代文：十九日，魏博的田季安授予同平章事头衔。
English: On the 19th, Tian Ji'an of Weibo awarded Tongping Zhangji to the title.

古文：戊戌，谓宰臣曰： 前代帝王，或怠于听政，或躬决繁务，其道如何。 
现代文：初四日，宪宗对宰相们说： 前代的君主们，有的在主持朝政方面松懈懒散，有的亲自处理各种繁杂的事务，他们的做法怎么样？ 
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Kenzong said to the prime ministers, "The previous monarchs, some of whom were lax and lazy in presiding over the government, and some of whom personally handled all kinds of complicated affairs, how did they do?

古文：杜黄裳对曰： 帝王之务，在于修己简易，择贤委任，宵旰以求民瘼，舍己从人以厚下，固不宜怠肆安逸。
现代文：杜黄裳回答说 ：国君必须做好的主要事情，在于抓紧自我修养，精简杂务，选拔人才交给职责，起早睡晚地了解民间疾苦，舍弃自己的私利，服从民众的心愿，对待下级宽厚仁爱，本来就不应当松懈懒散贪图安逸。
English: Du Huangxiang replied: The main things that the sovereign must do well are to pay close attention to self-cultivation, streamline miscellaneous duties, select talents to be assigned to duties, go to bed early and stay up late to understand the hardships of the people, abandon their own selfish interests, obey the wishes of the people, and treat the lower ranks with generosity and benevolence. Originally, they should not be lazy and greedy for comfort.

古文：然事有纲领小大，当务知其远者大者；至如簿书讼狱，百吏能否，本非人主所自任也。
现代文：但是事情有纲和目、大和小的区别，应该全力处理好那些关系国家长远利益和全局利益的重大政务，至于簿记文书，诉讼案件，属吏们有没有才干，本来不是国君亲自处理的事情。
English: However, there is a difference between matters of principle and purpose, large and small, and we should make every effort to properly handle those important government affairs that are related to the long-term interests of the country and the overall interests. As for bookkeeping documents, litigation cases, and whether officials are competent, these are not things that the sovereign should personally handle.

古文：昔秦始皇自程决事。见嗤前代；诸葛亮王霸之佐，二十罚以上皆自省之，亦为敌国所诮，知不久堪；魏明帝欲省尚书拟事，陈矫言其不可；隋文帝日旰听政，令卫士传餐，文皇帝亦笑其烦察。
现代文：从前秦始皇规定自己每天要审阅一百二十斤重的简牒文书，遭到前代人的讥笑；诸葛亮是辅佐帝王成就王业霸业的人才，凡是要判二十年徒刑以上的案子，他都要亲自审理，也受到敌对国家的责备，知道他无法长期坚持下去；魏明帝想察看尚书们所处理的公务，陈矫说是不能这样做；隋文帝天已很晚了还要处理政务，让卫士传送饭菜，连文皇帝也笑话他繁琐。
English: Former Emperor Qin Shi Huang stipulated that he had to review the 120-pound summary document every day, which was ridiculed by the previous generation; Zhuge Liang was a talented person who assisted the emperor in achieving the king's tyranny, and he had to personally examine any case that was to be sentenced to more than 20 years in prison. He was also reproached by the hostile country and knew that he could not continue for a long time; Wei Mingdi wanted to inspect the official duties handled by Shang Shuxu, but Chen Jiao said that he could not do so; Sui Wendi was very late in the day and had to deal with government affairs, let the guards deliver meals, and

古文：为人主之体固不可代下司职，但择人委任，责其成效，赏罚必信，谁不尽心。
现代文：做国君的本来不能替代下级主管官吏的工作，只要选择人才布置任务，督促他们把事办好，奖赏惩罚坚守诚信，谁不尽心竭力。
English: Being the ruler of the country cannot replace the work of lower-level competent officials, as long as they choose talents to assign tasks, urge them to do things well, reward and punish those who adhere to integrity, and who do not try their best.

古文：《传》称帝舜之德曰： 夫何为哉？
现代文：《春秋左氏传》称颂虞舜大帝的德行说 ：还需要干什么呢？
English: "Chunqiu Zuo's Biography" praises the virtues of Emperor Yu Xi and says: What else is needed?

古文：恭己南面而已！ 
现代文：严肃地约束自己无为而治罢了！ 
English: Let's seriously restrain ourselves from doing nothing!

古文：诚以能举十六相，去四凶也。
现代文：实在是因为他能提拔十六位辅佐大臣，流放了不服从控制的四个部族的首领浑敦、穷奇、木寿杌、饕餮。
English: It was really because he was able to promote sixteen assistant ministers and banish the leaders of the four tribes who did not submit to control, including Hun-tun, Kin-chi, Mu-soo-soo and Soo.

古文：岂与劳神疲体自任耳目之主同年而语哉！
现代文：哪里是那些劳神费力只相信自己的国君能相提并论的呀！
English: Where are those who laboriously believe only in their own country's ruler can compare!

古文：但人主常势。患在不能推诚，人臣之弊，患在不能自竭。
现代文：但是国君的通常状况，毛病就在不能真诚待人，臣子的普遍弱点，毛病就在不能自觉地竭尽忠心。
English: However, in the usual situation of the sovereign, the defect lies in the inability to treat people sincerely, and the general weakness of the vassal, the defect lies in the inability to consciously exert loyalty.

古文：由是上疑下诈，礼貌或亏，欲求致理，自然难致。
现代文：因此上边猜疑下边欺骗，在礼貌方面有时就会欠缺，希望达到天下大治，自然难得办到。
English: Therefore, the upper side suspects the lower side of deception, and sometimes lacks politeness, hoping to achieve world domination, which is naturally difficult to achieve.

古文：苟无此弊，何患不至于理。 
现代文：如果没有这些毛病，担心什么不能做到天下大治。 
English: If there were no such problems, it would be impossible to rule the world.

古文：上称善久之。
现代文：宪宗对杜黄裳的分析称赞了很长时间。
English: Kenzong praised Du Huangxiao's analysis for a long time.

古文：以京兆尹李鄘为尚书右丞，以金吾大将军郑云逵为京兆尹。
现代文：任命京兆尹李庸阝为尚书右丞，任命金吾大将军郑云逵为京兆尹。
English: He appointed Jing Zhaoyun Li Yongtao as Shang Shu Rongcheng, and appointed King Wu's general Zheng Yuntao as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：三月乙丑朔。
现代文：三月初一是乙丑。
English: The first day of March is the first day of the second month.

古文：戊辰，诏常参官寒食拜墓，在畿内听假日往还，他州府奏取进止。
现代文：初四日，诏令于皇帝正衙日到宣政殿参拜的高级文官即常参官在寒食节祭扫祖先的陵墓，到京城郊县的，按照往返所需的时间给予假期，到外州府的报请朝廷批准去还是不去。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict ordered that the high-ranking civil servants, that is, the senior officials, who visited the Xuan Zheng Palace on the Emperor's birthday, should clean the ancestor's mausoleum on the cold food festival, and those who went to the suburbs of Beijing should be given a vacation according to the time required for the round trip, and those who went to the provincial capital should report to the imperial court for approval whether to go or not.

古文：辛未，御史中丞武元衡奏： 中书门下御史台五品已上官、尚书省四品已上、诸司正三品已上、从三品职事官、东都留守、转运盐铁节度观察使、团练防御招讨经略等使、河南尹、同华州刺史、诸卫将军三品已上官除授，皆入合谢，其余官许于宣政南班拜讫便退。 
现代文：初七日，御史中丞武元衡禀奏： 中书门下御史台五品以上的官员、尚书省四品以上的官员、各司正三品以上的官员、从三品的职事官员、东都留守、转运盐铁节度观察使、团练防御招讨经略等使、河南府尹、同州、华州刺史、各个卫将军三品以上的官员已任命完毕，都到紫宸殿谢恩，其他的官员约定在宣政殿的南班礼拜完毕之后就退出去。 
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Takemoto Heng, the vice-commander-in-chief of the history department, announced that the following officials had been appointed: the officials of the five-grade or higher of the history department under the leadership of the Chinese history department, the officials of the four-grade or higher of the Shangshu province, the officials of the three-grade or higher of each department, the officials of the three-grade or higher of the civil service, the envoys who stayed in Dongdu, the envoys of the observation of the transfer of the salt and iron festival, the envoys of the group defense training and the envoys of the

古文：诏曰： 如此例中有加使及职掌并准此。 
现代文：宪宗批示说 ：如果在这类官员中有授予了这个级别的头衔而不主管实际政务的和实际主管这个级别的政务而官衔没有达到这个级别的，一并照此办理。 
English: The directive of the Constitutional Court said: If there are officials of this kind who have been awarded the title of this level without being in charge of actual government affairs, or who are actually in charge of government affairs at this level but the official title has not reached this level, it will be handled accordingly.

古文：又 兵部、吏部、礼部贡院官员，每举选限内，有十月至二月不奉朝参。
现代文：武元衡还禀奏说 ：兵部、吏部、礼部贡院官员，每当举荐选拔人才的限期之内，原有从头年十月到第二年二月不遵守上朝参拜的规定。
English: Wu Yuanheng also said that the officials of the Military Department, the Personnel Department, and the Ceremonial Department of the Tribute Academy did not comply with the rules of visiting the Shang Dynasty from October of the first year to February of the second year within the time limit for recommending and selecting talents.

古文：若称事繁，则中书门下、御史台、度支、京兆府公事至重，朝谒如常。
现代文：如果说是事务繁忙，那么中书门下、御史台、度支、京兆尹的公务最为繁重，还是按照常规上朝参拜。
English: If it is said that affairs are busy, then the official duties of Zhongshumen, Goshidai, Doushi, and Jingzhao Yin are the most onerous, but they still visit the emperor in accordance with the routine.

古文：况旬节已赐归休，又许分日，一月之内，才奉十日朝参，甚暑甚寒，又蒙矜放。
现代文：何况每十天之中就有一天或者碰上节日，都已规定赐假休息，还允许只参拜半日时间，一个月内，仅仅十天上朝参拜，酷暑严寒季节，还受到怜惜免去朝拜。
English: In addition, it has been stipulated that one day out of every ten days or when there is a festival, there will be a holiday break. It is also allowed to visit the temple for only half a day. In a month, only ten days visit the temple in the morning. In the hot and cold seasons, they are also spared from going to the temple.

古文：臣求故实，以为王颜任中丞日尝论其事，举对甚详。
现代文：我研究可供效法的历史事例，认为王颜任中丞的时候曾经议论这事，列举先例回答得非常周详。
English: I have studied historical examples that can be emulated, and I believe that Wang Yanren discussed this matter when he was vice-president, and he gave a very detailed answer by listing the precedents.

古文：伏请准贞元十二年四月二十七日敕，永为常式。 
现代文：请求准许把贞元十二年四月二十七日德宗皇帝的诏书，作为永远固定的法制。 
English: Request permission to take Emperor Dezong's edict of April 27th, 12th year of the Zhen, as a legal system fixed forever.

古文：从之。
现代文：宪宗听从了这个意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：丙子，严砺收梓州。
现代文：十二日，严砺收复了梓州。
English: On the 12th, Yan Xuan recovered Zizhou.

古文：丁丑，制削夺刘辟在身官爵。
现代文：十三日，宪宗发出诏令剥夺刘辟的全部官职爵号。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor issued a decree to deprive Liu Bei of all official titles.

古文：先是韩全义入朝，令其甥杨惠琳知留后，俄有诏除李演为节度，代全义。
现代文：在这之前，韩全义进京朝拜，让他的外甥杨惠琳主持留后事务，朝廷很快发出诏书任命李演为节度，接替韩全义。
English: Prior to this, Han Chuan-yi went to Beijing to pay homage and let his nephew Yang Huilin preside over the affairs of his stay. The imperial court soon issued an edict appointing Li Yuan as the regent to succeed Han Chuan-yi.

古文：演赴任，惠琳据城叛，诏发河东、天德兵诛之。
现代文：李演去上任，杨惠琳凭借州城叛变，诏令派遣河东、天德的部队前去讨伐杨惠琳。
English: Li Yuen left to take office, Yang Huilin took advantage of the rebellion in Zhucheng to send troops from Hedong and Tiande to fight Yang Huilin.

古文：辛巳，夏州兵马使张承金斩惠琳，传首以献。
现代文：十七日，夏州兵马使张承金斩杀了杨惠琳，把他的首级传送到京城献给朝廷。
English: On the 17th, Zhang Chengjin killed Yang Huilin and sent his head to Beijing to be presented to the imperial court.

古文：壬辰，大行太上皇德妃董氏卒。
现代文：二十八日，已故太上皇顺宗的德妃董氏去世。
English: On the 28th, the late Empress Dowager Shunzong's consort, Empress Dowager Dong, passed away.

古文：以右神策行营节度高崇文检校兵部尚书、梓州刺史、剑南东川节度。
现代文：任命右神策行营节度高崇文为检校兵部尚书、梓州刺史、剑南东川节度。
English: He appointed Gao Chongwen, a member of the Right Divine Scheming and Operating Camp, as the inspector of the school's military department, the inspector of Zizhou, and the inspector of Jian'nan Dongchuan.

古文：戊戌，以安南经略副使张舟为安南都护、本管经略使。
现代文：四月初五，任命安南经略副使张舟为安南都护、本管经略使。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth month, Zhang Zhou, Deputy Envoy of Annan for Economic Affairs, was appointed as the guardian of the capital of Annan and the Deputy Envoy of Annan for Economic Affairs.

古文：己亥，以前剑南东川节度使韦丹为晋绛观察使。
现代文：初六日，任命前剑南东川节度使韦丹为晋绛观察使。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the former Jiannan Dongchuan Festival appointed Wei Dan as the observation envoy of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：壬寅，以前安南经略使赵昌为广州刺史、岭南节度使。
现代文：初九日，任命前安南经略使赵昌为广州刺史、岭南节度使。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Zhao Chang, the former Annan delegate, was appointed as the Guangzhou delegate and the Lingnan delegate.

古文：癸卯，前岭南节度使徐申卒。
现代文：初十日，前岭南节度使徐申去世。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the former Lingnan Festival caused Xu Shen to die.

古文：丙午，命宰臣监试制举人于尚书省，以制举人先朝所征，不欲亲试也。
现代文：十三日，宪宗命令宰臣在尚书省监督考试本该皇帝亲自考试的制举人，因为制举人是前朝征召的，所以不想亲自考试。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Xianzong ordered the Vice-Minister to supervise the examination in Shangshu Province. This was the examiner of the emperor's personal examination, because the examiner was conscripted by the previous government, so he did not want to take the examination in person.

古文：丁未，以检校司空、平章事杜祐为司徒，所司备礼册拜，平章事如故；罢领度支、盐铁、转运等使，从其让也，仍以兵部侍即李巽代领其任。
现代文：十四日，任命检校司空、平章事杜佑为司徒，主管官吏全部按照礼仪行文授职，平章事依旧不变；免去他兼任的比较低级的度支、盐铁、转运等使职务，是同意他的辞职申请免去的，接着任命兵部侍郎李巽接替兼任度支、盐铁、转运等使职务。
English: On the 14th, Du You, the inspector of the school, and Ping Zhang, were appointed as the inspectors, and the officials in charge all performed their duties in accordance with the etiquette, and the rank and file remained unchanged. He was relieved of the relatively low-level posts of the provincial governor, salt iron, and transportation, which he concurrently held. It was agreed that his resignation application was exempted, and then Li Yan, the attendant of the military department, was appointed to take over the posts of the provincial governor, salt iron, and transportation.

古文：戊申，以陇右经略使、秦州经略使、秦州刺史刘澭为保义军节度使。赈浙东米十万石。
现代文：十五日，任命陇右经略使、秦州刺史刘氵雍为保义军节度使。给浙东发放救灾稻米十万石。
English: On the 15th, appointed Zou Yu Jing's special envoy and Qin State's chief historian Liu Qinyong as the envoy to the festival of the Guoying Army, and distributed 100,000 koku of rice for disaster relief to East Zhejiang.

古文：己未，武元衡奏，常参官兼御史大夫、中丞者，准检校省官例，立在本品同类之上。
现代文：二十六日，武元衡禀奏，常参官兼任御史大夫、御史中丞的，比照检校台省官员的规则，名次列在原来品级相同官员的前头。
English: On the 26th, Takemoto Hensho, a permanent staff officer who also serves as a goshi taifu and goshi chujo, was ranked ahead of officials of the same grade, in accordance with the rules for inspecting officials of the Ministry of Education.

古文：壬戌，邵王约薨。
现代文：二十九日，邵王李约逝世。
English: On the 29th, Shao Wang Li passed away.

古文：武元衡奏： 正衙待制官，本置此官以备问。
现代文：武元衡禀奏： 在正衙轮流值班的五品以上京官，本来是为准备皇上访问咨询而安排的。
English: Takemoto Hengyo: The five or more Beijing officials on duty in rotation at Zhengqi were originally arranged to prepare for the emperor's visit.

古文：比来正衙多不奏事。
现代文：近来正衙官员大多不上书陈事。
English: In recent times, most officials of the Central Military Commission do not go on record.

古文：自今后请以尚书省六品以上职事官、东宫师傅宾詹、王傅等，每坐日令两人待制，退朝，诏于延英候对。 
现代文：从今以后请让尚书省六品以上的职事官员，东宫的太子师、傅、宾客、詹事，各位王的傅等官员，每当皇上临朝理事时，安排两个人值班准备皇上访问咨询，朝拜礼仪结束后，命令到延英殿等候回答咨询。 
English: From now on, please let the officials of more than six grades in Shangshu Province, the officials of the East Palace such as the prince's teacher, Fu, guests, Zhanji, and the Fu of each king, arrange two people on duty to prepare for the emperor's visit consultation whenever the emperor is the director of the imperial court, and after the end of the worship ceremony, order them to wait at Yan Ying Hall to answer the consultation.

古文：从之。
现代文：宪宗听取了这个建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：五月甲子朔。
现代文：五月初一是甲子。
English: May 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：丁卯，京兆尹郑云逵卒。
现代文：初四日，京兆尹郑云逵去世。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Jingzha Yin Zheng Yunzhu passed away.

古文：辛未，以兵部侍郎韦武为京兆尹兼御史大夫。
现代文：初八日，任命兵部侍郎韦武为京兆尹兼御史大夫。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Wei Wu, the attendant of the military department, was appointed as the Keizhoin and the chief historian.

古文：壬申，贬剑南东川节度使李康为雷州司马。
现代文：初九日，把剑南东川节度使李康贬谪为雷州司马。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the Jiannan Dongchuan Festival caused Li Kang to be relegated to Leizhou Sima.

古文：陈、许、蔡等州旱。
现代文：陈州、许州、蔡州等地遭受旱灾。
English: Chenzhou, Huzhou, Caizhou and other places suffered from drought.

古文：以横海军留后程执恭横海军节度使。
现代文：任命横海军留后程执恭任横海军节度使。
English: Appointed the Vice-Admiral to serve as the Vice-Admiral of the Navy.

古文：庚辰，左丞、同平章事郑余庆为太子宾客，罢知政事。
现代文：十七日，左丞、同平章事郑余庆任太子宾客，免去知政事职务。
English: On the 17th, Zheng Yuqing, the left-hand man, and Tongping Zhangji were appointed as guests of the crown prince and removed from the position of chancellor.

古文：辛卯，册太上皇后王氏为皇太后。
现代文：二十八日，册立太子皇后王氏为皇太后。
English: On the 28th, the crown prince and empress Wang was enthroned as empress dowager.

古文：六月癸己朔，以册太后礼毕，赦天下系囚，死罪降从流，流以下递减一等。
现代文：六月初一日，因为册立皇太后的礼仪完毕，赦免全国在押的囚犯，死罪减刑为流放，流放以下的依次减去一等徒刑。
English: On the first day of early June, because the ceremony of enthroning the Empress Dowager was completed, the prisoners in custody nationwide were pardoned, the death penalty was commuted to banishment, and the first-class prison sentence was sequentially reduced for those below banishment.

古文：文武内外官加母邑号，太后诸亲，量与优给。
现代文：给朝廷内外文武官员的母亲授予封号，皇太后王氏的各家亲戚，酌情予以优待。
English: The mothers of civil and military officials inside and outside the imperial court were granted the title, and the various relatives of the Empress Dowager Wang were given preferential treatment as appropriate.

古文：丙申，册德宗充容武氏为崇陵德妃。
现代文：初四日，册立德宗的充容武氏为崇陵德妃。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the founder of the German sect, Zeng Rongwu, was enthroned as Chongling Defei.

古文：大风折树。
现代文：暴风刮断了树木。
English: The storm uprooted trees.

古文：丁酉，高崇文破贼万人于鹿头关。
现代文：初五日，高崇文在鹿头关打败了上万名敌军。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Gao Chongwen defeated tens of thousands of enemy troops in Shantou Pass.

古文：加幽州刘济侍中，淄青李师古检校司徒。
现代文：任命幽州的刘济为侍中，淄青的李师古为检校司徒。
English: Liu Ji from Yuzhou was appointed as a chamberlain, and Li Shigu from Jiaqing was appointed as a school inspector.

古文：癸卯，高崇文收汉州。
现代文：十一日，高崇文收复了汉州。
English: On the 11th day, Gao Chongwen recovered Hanzhou.

古文：闰六月壬子朔，淄青李师古卒。
现代文：闰六月初一，淄青的李师古去世。
English: On the first day of the sixth lunar month, the blue-eyed Li Shigu passed away.

古文：戊辰，以秘书监董叔经为京兆尹。
现代文：初七日，任命秘书监董叔经为京兆尹。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the secretary of the supervisory board was appointed as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：壬午，谏议大夫去左、右字，只置四员。
现代文：二十一日，谏议大夫去掉 左 、 右 字样，只设置四名。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the doctor removed the words "left" and "right" and set only four.

古文：以前司封员外郎韦况为谏议大夫。
现代文：任命前司封员外郎韦况为谏议大夫。
English: Appointed the former secretary and member of the board of governors, Wei Quan, as the doctor of deliberation.

古文：甲申，吐蕃论勃藏来朝贡。
现代文：二十三日，吐蕃的论勃藏进京朝拜进贡。
English: On the 23rd, the collection of Tu Bao went to Beijing to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月壬辰朔。
现代文：七月初一是壬辰。
English: The first day of July is Imjin.

古文：壬寅，葬顺宗于丰陵。
现代文：十一日，把顺宗的棺柩安葬在丰陵。
English: On the 11th day, Shunzong's coffin was buried in Fengling.

古文：己酉，太子少保致仕韩全义卒。
现代文：十八日，辞官家居的太子少保韩全义去世。
English: On the 18th, the prince of the dictionary family, Shobo Han Chuanyi, passed away.

古文：八月辛酉朔。
现代文：八月初一是辛酉。
English: The first day of August is the start of the new year.

古文：癸亥，以左卫大将军李愿检校礼部尚书、夏州刺史，充夏、绥、银节度使。
现代文：初三日，任命左卫大将军李愿为检校礼部尚书、夏州刺史，充任夏、绥、银三州节度使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the General of the Left Division of the Guards Li Yan was appointed as the inspector of the ceremonial department of the school, the inspector of the ceremonial department of the school, the inspector of the ceremonial department of the school, and the inspector of the ceremonial department of the school.

古文：甲子，郇王母王昭仪、宋王母赵昭仪、郯王母张昭训、衡王母阎昭训等，各以其王并为太妃。
现代文：初四日，郇王的母亲王昭仪、宋王的母亲赵昭仪、郯王的母亲张昭训、衡王的母亲阎昭训等人，各人都因儿子是王而被封为太妃。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Wang Zhaoyi, the mother of King Zhaozong, Zhao Zhaoyi, the mother of King Song, Zhang Zhaoxun, the mother of King Zhaozong, Yan Zhaoxun, the mother of King Heng, and so on, each of them was named Taifei because their son was a king.

古文：以许氏为美人，尹氏、段氏为才人。
现代文：封许氏为美人，尹氏、段氏为才人。
English: Fu Xu is a beauty, while Yin and Duan are talented.

古文：浔阳公主母崔昭训为太妃。
现代文：浔阳公主的母亲崔昭训被封为太妃。
English: Princess Suyang's mother, Cui Zhaoxun, was crowned Empress Dowager.

古文：韩全义子进女乐八人，诏还之。
现代文：韩全义的儿子进献八名音乐歌舞女艺人，宪宗命令退回去了。
English: Han Chuan-yi's son offered eight female musical singers and dancers, but the order was turned down.

古文：丁卯，封王子平原郡王宁为邓王，同安郡王宽为澧王，建安郡王宥为遂王，彭城郡王察为深王，高密郡王寰为洋王，文安郡王寮为绛王，第十男审为建王。
现代文：初七日，封王子平原郡王李宁为邓王，同安郡王李宽为沣王，建安郡王李宥为遂王，彭城郡王李察为深王，高密郡王李寰为洋王，文安郡王李寮为绛王，第十三子李审为建王。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Li Ning, the king of Prince Plains County, was named the king of Deng, Li Guang, the king of Tong'an County, was named the king of Shun, Li Yu, the king of Jian'an County, was named the king of Sui, Li Zha, the king of Pengcheng County, was named the king of Sheng, Li Xi, the king of Gaomi County, was named the king of Yang, Li Liu, the king of Wen'an County, was named the king of Shun, and Li Jian, the thirteenth son, was named the king of Jian.

古文：己巳，以建王审为郓州大都督、平卢淄青节度使；以节度副使李师道权知郓州事，充节度留后。
现代文：初九日，任命建王李审为郓州大都督和平卢、淄青两镇节度使；任命节度副使李师道代理主管郓州事务，充任节度留后。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Jian Wang Lixin was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and the delegate of the two towns of Pinglu and Jiaqing; the deputy delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate of the delegate.

古文：乙亥，册妃郭氏为贵妃。
现代文：十五日，册立郭妃为贵妃。
English: On the fifteenth day, Guofei was registered as a noble.

古文：灵武李栾奏，黄河岸塌处得古钱三千三百，其形小，方孔，三足。
现代文：灵武县的李栾禀奏，黄河堤岸坍塌的地方发现了三千三百枚古代钱币，它的形制很小，有方形的孔，有三只脚。
English: Li Yuxiao of Lingwu County, where 3,300 ancient coins were found in the place where the Yellow River embankment collapsed, its shape is small, with square holes and three feet.

古文：壬午，左降官韦执谊，韩泰、陈谏、柳宗元、刘禹锡、韩晔、凌准、程异等八人，纵逢恩赦，不在量移之限癸未，京兆尹董叔经卒。
现代文：二十二日，韦执谊、韩泰、陈谏、柳宗元、刘禹锡、韩晔、凌准、程异等八名被贬谪的官吏，虽然见到了朝廷大赦天下罪犯的文书，但他们却不在酌情移近安置的范围之内。二十三日，京兆尹董叔经去世。
English: On the 22nd, Wei Xiyu, Han Tai, Chen Qi, Liu Zongyuan, Liu Yuxi, Han Qi, Ling Jun, Cheng Yi and other eight officials who were demoted, although they saw the document of the imperial court's general amnesty for criminals, they were not within the scope of relocation as appropriate. On the 23rd, Jing Zhaon Dongxue passed away.

古文：甲申，御史台奏，常参官在城未上及在外未到、假故等，在外未到，计水陆程外，满百日，并停解，从之。
现代文：二十四日，御史台禀奏，朝廷的高级文官之中发生了有的人在京城却不进宫朝拜、有的人滞留在外没有回京、有的人借故既不回京又不进宫朝拜等等情况。滞留在外没有回京的，除开他在水路陆路行走所需要的时间以外，延期满了一百天的，应当一并停职免职，宪宗采纳了这个意见。
English: On the 24th, the Imperial History Channel reported that among the high-ranking civil servants of the imperial court, there were some people who were in Beijing but did not enter the palace to worship, some people who stayed outside and did not return to Beijing, some people who did not return to Beijing and did not enter the palace to worship, and so on. Those who stayed outside and did not return to Beijing, in addition to the time he needed to travel by land and water, after a delay of one hundred days, should be suspended and dismissed at the same time, and the Constitutional Court accepted this opinion.

古文：丙戌，以尚书右丞李鄘为京兆尹。
现代文：二十六日，任命尚书右丞李庸阝为京兆尹。
English: On the 26th, he appointed Shangshu Rongcheng Li Yongqian as Beijing Zhaoyun.

古文：九月辛卯朔。
现代文：九月初一是辛卯。
English: The first day of September is a bad day.

古文：癸卯，诏自今后两省官每坐日一人对。
现代文：十三日，诏令从今以后中书、门下两省官员每当皇上临朝理事的日子，安排一个人值班准备回答皇上的访问咨询。
English: On the 13th, it was decreed that from now on, whenever an official of the two provinces under the two provinces of Zhongshu served as a director of the Emperor, he would arrange a person on duty to prepare to answer the Emperor's visit inquiry.

古文：丙午，以太子宾客郑余庆为国子祭酒。
现代文：十六日，任命太子宾客郑余庆为国子祭酒。
English: On the 16th, Zheng Yuqing, a guest of the crown prince, was appointed as the national son festival wine.

古文：辛亥，高崇文奏收成都，擒刘辟以献。
现代文：二十一日，高崇文禀奏收复了成都，抓获了刘辟进献给朝廷。
English: On the twenty-first day, Gao Chongwensong recovered Chengdu and captured Liu Bijin to present to the imperial court.

古文：癸丑，以山人李渤为左拾遗，征不至。
现代文：二十三日，任命隐士李渤为左拾遗，征召他，他没有来。
English: On the 23rd, the hermit Li Yan was appointed as the left relic collector, and he was conscripted, but he did not come.

古文：甲子，易定张茂昭来朝。
现代文：十月初五，易定县的张茂昭进京朝拜。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of October, Zhang Maozhao from Yiding County went to Beijing to worship.

古文：丙寅，以剑南东川节度使、检校兵部尚书、梓州刺史、封渤海郡王高崇文检校司空，兼成都尹、御史大夫，充剑南西川节度副大使、知节度事、管内度支营田观察使、处置统押近界诸蛮及西山八国云南安抚等使，仍改封南平郡王，食邑三千户。
现代文：初七日，命令剑南东川节度使、检校兵部尚书、梓州刺史、封渤海郡王高崇文任检校司空，兼任成都尹、御史大夫，充任剑南西川节度副大使、知节度事、管内度支营田观察使、处置统押近界诸蛮及西山八国兼云南安抚等使，接着改封为南平郡王，收纳三千户租税。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of the year, he ordered Wang Gao Chongwen, the envoy of Jianan Dongchuan Festival, the inspector of the inspection of the military department of Shangshu, the inspector of Zizhou, and the governor of Bohai County, to serve as the inspector of the inspection of the school. He also served as the deputy ambassador of Chengdu Yin and the inspector of the history, the deputy ambassador of Jianan Xichuan Festival, the inspector of the inspection of the festival, the inspector of the internal affairs of the province, and the inspector of the treatment and control of the envoys of the eight countries of

古文：戊戌，以山南西道节度使严砺为梓州刺史、剑南东川节度使；以将作监柳晟检校工部尚书，兼兴元尹，充山南西道节度使。
现代文：初九日，任命山南西道节度使严砺为梓州刺史、剑南东川节度使；命令将作监柳晟任检校工部尚书，兼任兴元府尹，充任山南西道节度使。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Yan Qi, the chief of the festival of Shannan West Road, was appointed as the chief of the festival of Zizhou and the chief of the festival of Dongchuan, Jianan; the order was to be the supervisor of the inspection of the school inspection department, and the chief of the festival of Shannan West Road, and the chief of the festival of Xingyuanfu.

古文：庚辰，以吉州刺史袁滋为御史大夫，充义成军节度使。
现代文：二十一日，命令吉州刺史袁滋任御史大夫，充任义成军节度使。
English: On the twenty-first day, he ordered Yuan Zhi, the chief historian of Jizhou, to serve as the chief historian and delegate to the Yicheng Army Festival.

古文：壬午，以淄青节度使留后李师道检校工部尚书，兼郓卅大都督府长史，充平卢淄青节度副大使、知节度事。
现代文：二十三日，命令淄青节度使留后李师道任检校工部尚书，兼任郓州大都督府长史，充任平卢和淄青节度副大使、知节度事。
English: On the 23rd, he ordered Li Shidao, who had been assigned to the inspection department of the school, to remain as the deputy ambassador of Pinglu and Jiaqing Jiedu. He also served as the governor of Zhangzhou and the deputy ambassador of Pinglu and Jiaqing Jiedu.

古文：丙戌，以渤海国王大嵩璘检校太尉。
现代文：二十七日，任命渤海国国王大嵩瞞为检校太尉。
English: On the 27th, the king of the Bohai Kingdom, Dasong Xie, was appointed as the inspecting officer.

古文：戊子，斩刘辟并子超郎等九人于独柳树下。
现代文：二十九日，在独柳镇的树下对刘辟和他的儿子刘超郎等九人处以斩刑。
English: On the 29th, nine people, including Liu Bi and his son Liu Chaorang, were executed by beheading under a tree in Duolu Town.

古文：十一月庚寅朔。
现代文：十一月初一是庚寅。
English: The first day of the first month of November is Geng Yin Day.

古文：己巳，以简王傅王权为河南尹。
现代文：十六日，任命简王的傅王权为河南府尹。
English: On the 16th, Fu Wangquan was appointed as the governor of Henan Province.

古文：丁未，以司农卿李上公为陕州大都督府长史，充陕虢观察使。
现代文：十八日，命令司农卿李上公任陕州大都督府长史，充任陕、虢两州观察使。
English: On the 18th, he ordered the Secretary of Agriculture Li Shangguo to serve as the governor of Shaanxi Province and the observation envoy of Shaanxi and Fujian Provinces.

古文：甲申，以武宁军节度张愔为工部尚书，以东都留守王绍检校右仆射，兼徐州刺史、武宁军节度使、徐泗濠等州观察等使。
现代文：十九日，命令武宁军节度张忄音任工部尚书，命令东都洛阳留守王绍任检校右仆射，兼任徐州刺史、武宁军节度使和徐、泗、濠等州观察等使。
English: On the 19th, he ordered Zhang Xuanyin, the military governor of the Wu Ning Army, to be appointed as Shang Shu of the Engineering Department, and ordered Wang Shao, who stayed in Luoyang, the eastern capital, to be appointed as the right-hand man of the inspection of the school, and also served as the Xuzhou chief historian, the military governor of the Wu Ning Army, and the state observation envoys such as Xu, Zou, and Zou.

古文：庚戌，以吏部侍郎赵宗儒为东都留守、东畿汝防御使，以国子祭酒郑馀庆为河南尹。
现代文：二十一日，任命吏部侍郎赵宗儒为东都留守和东畿、汝州防御使，任命国子祭酒郑余庆为河南府尹。
English: On the 21st, Zhao Zongru, the attendant of the cadre department, was appointed as the defense minister of Dongdu, Donggi and Ruzhou, and Zheng Yuqing was appointed as the Yin of Henan.

古文：甲寅，以给事中刘宗经为华州刺史、潼关防御、镇国军等使。
现代文：二十五日，任命给事中刘宗经为华州刺史、潼关防御使、镇国军等使。
English: On the 25th, Liu Zongjing was appointed as the envoy of Huazhou History, Shaoguan Defense, and Zhenguo Army.

古文：丙辰，以内常侍吐突承璀为神策护军中尉。
现代文：二十七日，任命内常侍吐突承璀为神策护军中尉。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, he appointed the Lord Chamberlain, Tutu Chengyu, as a lieutenant of the Divine Protection Force.

古文：十二月丙申朔，太常奏隐太子、章怀、懿德、节愍、惠庄、惠文、惠宣、请恭、昭靖以下九太子陵，代数已远，官额空存，今请陵户外并停。
现代文：十二月初一，太常寺禀奏隐太子李建成、章怀太子李贤、懿德太子李重润、节愍太子李重俊、惠庄太子李扌为、惠文太子李范、惠宣太子李业、靖恭太子李琬、昭靖太子李邈以上九位太子的陵墓，年代已很久远，白白地保留着留守署官的职数，现在请求除了守陵人员之外的官吏全都撤除。
English: On the first day of December, the tombs of nine princes, including Prince Li Jiancheng of Taizhong Temple, Prince Li Xian of Zhanghuai, Prince Li Chongrun of Shunde, Prince Li Chungjun of Jiejing, Prince Li Jianwei of Huizhong, Prince Li Fan of Huiwen, Prince Li Ye of Huixuan, Prince Li Jian of Jinggong, and Prince Li Jian of Zhaojing, have been around for a long time, and the remaining officials have been retained in vain. It is now requested that all officials, except for those guarding the tombs, be removed.

古文：乙亥，工部尚书张愔卒。
现代文：十六日，工部尚书张忄音去世。
English: On the 16th, Zhang Xuanying, a member of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, passed away.

古文：丙戌，新罗、渤海、牂柯、回纥各遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十七日，新罗、渤海、柯、回鹘四国各派使者朝拜进贡。
English: On the 27th, envoys from the four countries of Silla, Bohai, Ke and Huizhou came to pay tribute.

古文：二年春正月己丑朔，上亲献太清宫、太庙。
现代文：元和二年正月初一，宪宗亲临太清宫、太庙举行献祭。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of the Yuan and the first day of the first month of the second year of the Yuan, Gensong personally visited the Taiching Palace and the Taimiao to hold a sacrifice.

古文：辛卯，祀昊天上帝于郊丘，是日还宫，御丹凤楼，大赦天下。
现代文：初三日，宪宗到长安城郊的山丘上祭祀昊天上帝，当天返回皇宫，亲临丹凤楼，向天下宣布大赦令。
English: On the third day of the first lunar month, Emperor Gensong went to the hills on the outskirts of Chang'an City to offer sacrifices to the God of Heaven. On the same day, he returned to the Imperial Palace, visited the Danfeng Tower, and announced the amnesty decree to the world.

古文：先是，将及大礼，阴晦浃辰，宰臣请改日，上曰： 郊庙事重，斋戒有日，不可遽更。 
现代文：在这之前，快到举行祭祀大礼的前夕，天气一连阴暗了十二天，宰臣请求改日举行，宪宗说： 到郊外祭祀，事情重大，斋戒准备的时间是有礼仪规定的，不能突然更改。 
English: Prior to this, on the eve of the grand ritual, the weather had been gloomy for twelve days in a row, and the vice-minister requested that it be held on another day. Gensong said, "It is a serious matter to hold a ritual in the suburbs. The time to prepare for fasting is prescribed by etiquette and cannot be suddenly changed.

古文：享献之辰，景物晴霁，人情欣悦。
现代文：祭祀天帝的时候，云开日出，天气晴朗，人们一派欢乐喜悦的心情。
English: At the time of the sacrifice to the Heavenly Emperor, the sun was shining, the weather was fine, and people were in a joyful mood.

古文：丁酉，司徒杜祐辞知政事。诏令每月三度入朝，便于中书商量政事。
现代文：初九日，司徒杜佑辞去了知政事职务，宪宗诏令他每个月入朝三次，乘便到中书省商议朝政事务。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Szeto Duyou resigned from his position as chancellor, and Emperor Gensong ordered him to visit the court three times a month, taking the opportunity to go to Zhongshuo to discuss court affairs.

古文：庚子，回纥请于河南府、太原府置摩尼寺，许之。
现代文：十二日，回纥要求在河南府、太原府设立摩尼寺，朝廷答应了回纥的要求。
English: On the 12th, Hui Xuan requested the establishment of Mani Temple in Henan and Taiyuan, and the imperial court agreed to Hui Xuan's request.

古文：乙巳，以门下侍郎、同平章事、南阳郡开国公杜黄裳检校司空、同平章事，兼河中尹、河中晋绛等州节度使。
现代文：十七日，命令门下侍郎、同平章事、南阳郡开国公杜黄裳任检校司空、同平章事，兼任河中府尹和河中、晋、绛等州节度使。
English: On the 17th, he ordered his subordinate attendants, Tongping Zhangji, and Nanyang County founding father Du Huangxiang to serve as school inspection officers, Tongping Zhangji, and concurrently served as Yin of Central Hebei Province and provincial festival envoys of Central Hebei Province, Jin, and Handan.

古文：停诸陵留守。
现代文：中止了隐太子李建成等九位太子陵墓留守署官。
English: Nine officials of the Prince's Mausoleum, including the late Prince Lee Jong Il, have been suspended.

古文：己卯，以户部侍郎、赐绯鱼袋武元衡为门下侍郎、同平章事、赐紫金鱼袋，以中书舍人、翰林学士李吉甫为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：二十七日，任命户部侍郎、赐绯鱼袋武元衡为门下侍郎、同平章事、赐紫金鱼袋，任命中书舍人、翰林学士李吉甫为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: On the 27th, he appointed Household Attendant Takemoto Motohira, who had been given the gourd bag, as a subordinate attendant, and Tonghei Shoshoji, who had been given the purple and gold gourd bag. He also appointed Li Jifu, who had been a high school teacher and a scholar of Hanlin, as a high school teacher and Tonghei Shoshoji.

古文：丁巳，停中和、重阳二节赐宴；其上巳宴，仍旧赐之。
现代文：二十九日，停止执行中和、重阳两个节日宫庭给朝臣赐宴的制度，其中上巳节的宴会，仍按旧例赐给朝臣。
English: On the 29th, the system of giving banquets to courtiers in the palace for the two festivals of Zhonghe and Chongyang was suspended. Among them, the banquet for the Spring Festival was still given to courtiers according to the old custom.

古文：二月辛酉，诏僧尼道士全隶左右街功德使，自是祠部司封不复关奏。
现代文：二月初三日，诏令和尚、尼姑、道人全部由长安城内的左右六街功德使管理，从此礼部的祠部曹司封郎中不再禀奏他们的事。
English: On the 3rd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the year, the emperor ordered that all the monks, nuns, and Taoists in Chang'an City be managed by the left and right six streets of the city, and from now on, the ancestral hall of the ceremonial department, Cao Si Feng Lang, would no longer play their affairs.

古文：丙寅，左右羽林军应管月飜骑总五千六百一十三人，并停。
现代文：初八日，左右羽林军中接受雇佣每月轮流侍卫皇帝、名叫 飞骑 的军士共五千六百一十三人，一齐停止。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the 5,613 sergeants named Fei Jie, who were hired to guard the emperor on a monthly rotating basis, stopped all together.

古文：己巳，起居舍人郑随次对，面受进止；令宣与两省供奉官，自今已后，有事即进状，次对官宜停。
现代文：十一日，起居舍人郑随值班回答宪宗的答询，请求宪宗当面表态决定问题。宪宗命令对中书、门下两省的供奉官员宣布，从今以后，有什么事情就呈递奏文，官员轮流值班回答咨询的做法应当停止。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zheng, the chief resident, came on duty to answer the enquiries of Xianzong, and requested Xianzong to make a statement in person to decide the issue. Xianzong ordered to announce to the officials of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the two provinces under him that from now on, if there is any matter, they should submit a report, and the practice of officials taking turns on duty to answer inquiries should be stopped.

古文：庚午，司天造新历成，诏题为《元和观象历》。
现代文：十二日，主管天文历法的官员司天制定成新的历书，诏令题名为《元和观象历》。
English: On the 12th, the official in charge of the astronomical calendar, Su Tian, formulated a new calendar, titled the "Yuanhe Observational Calendar."

古文：壬申夜，月掩岁星。
现代文：十四日夜晚，月亮遮蔽了岁星。
English: On the night of the 14th, the moon covered the lucky star.

古文：丁丑，寒食节，宴群臣于麟德殿，赐物有差。
现代文：十九日，是寒食节，宪宗在麟德殿设宴款待朝臣们，各按等级赏赐了财物。
English: On the 19th, which was the cold food festival, Emperor Gensong held a banquet in the Lin De Hall to entertain the courtiers, each of whom was rewarded with property according to their rank.

古文：壬午，以第五国轸为右神策军中尉。
现代文：二十四日，任命第五国珍为右神策军中尉。
English: On the 24th, the Fifth Guo Zhen was appointed as a lieutenant of the Ushenshao Army.

古文：三月辛卯，赐群臣宴于曲江亭。
现代文：三月初三日，宪宗在曲江亭赏赐众朝臣宴饮。
English: On the 3rd day of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3

古文：癸卯，判度支李巽为兵部尚书，依前判度支盐铁转运使。
现代文：十五日，判度支李巽任兵部尚书，依旧兼任度支、盐铁、转运等使。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Han Du Zhi Li Jie was appointed as the secretary of the military department, and still concurrently served as the envoy of Du Zhi, Salt and Iron, and Transportation.

古文：夏四月甲子，禁铅锡钱。
现代文：四月初七，禁止使用铅、锡铸造的钱币。
English: On April 7, the use of coins made of lead and tin was prohibited.

古文：以右金吾卫大将军范希朝为检校司空、灵州长史、朔方灵盐节度使。
现代文：任命右金吾卫大将军范希朝为检校司空、灵州长史和朔方的灵、盐两州节度使。
English: He appointed Fan Xichang, the general of the Right King Wuwei, as the inspector of the school, the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the governor of the

古文：戊寅，近置英武军额，宜停。
现代文：二十一日，新近设置的英武军的编制，应当停止。
English: On the 21st, the newly established British armed forces should cease to exist.

古文：庚辰，岭南节度使赵昌进琼、管、儋、振、万安六州《六十二洞归降图》。
现代文：二十三日，岭南节度使赵昌进献琼管的儋、振、万安等六州的《六十二洞归降图》。
English: On the 23rd, the Lingnan Festival invited Zhao Chang to present the "Return Map of the Sixty-two Caves" of the Qiong, Zhen and Wan'an of the Qiong.

古文：六月丁巳朔，始置百官待漏院于建福门外。
现代文：六月初一日，在建福门外开始设置朝廷百官等候早朝的待漏院。
English: On the first day of June, a waiting room was set up outside the Jianfu Gate for hundreds of imperial officials to wait for the early morning.

古文：故事，建福、望仙等门，昏而闭，五更而启，与诸坊门同时。
现代文：历史上的规矩，建福、望仙等门，天刚黑的时候关闭，五更的时候打开，跟各街巷的关门、开门时间一致。
English: According to historical rules, Jianfu, Wangxian and other gates are closed when it is dark, and opened when it is dark, which is the same as the closing and opening time of each street and alley.

古文：至德中有吐蕃囚自金吾仗亡命，因敕晚开门，宰相待漏于太仆寺车坊。
现代文：肃宗至德年间有一个吐蕃的囚犯从金吾仪仗逃跑，所以诏令推迟时间开城门，宰相们就在太仆寺的车坊等候早朝。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Sozong and Emperor Dezong, a Tibetan prisoner escaped from King Wu's honor guard, so the imperial edict delayed the opening of the city gate. The chancellors waited in the garage of Taipo Temple in the early morning.

古文：至是始令有司据班品置院。
现代文：到了这时才让有关主管官吏根据官员的品级设置待漏院。
English: It was only at this time that the officials in charge were allowed to leave the hospital according to the official's rank.

古文：戊午，凤翔节度使张敬则卒。
现代文：初二日，凤翔节度使张敬则去世。
English: On the second day of the first lunar month, Fengxiang died.

古文：乙丑，五坊色役户及中书门下两省纳课陪厨户及捉钱人，并归府县色役。
现代文：初九日，皇帝饲养猎鹰猎犬的官署五坊各种名目的劳役户和中书、门下两省收纳赋税帮忙的炊事户以及为官府放高利贷的人，一起退回府县从事各种劳役。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the emperor's falcon-hunting dog-breeding government office, the five-ward laborer households of various names and Chinese calligraphy, the kitchen households of tax collection assistance in two provinces under the emperor, and the loan sharks for the government returned to the prefecture to engage in various labor services.

古文：己巳，停舒、庐、滁、和四州团练使额。
现代文：十三日，停止舒、庐、滁、和四个州团练使的名额。
English: On the 13th, the quotas of Shu, Yao, Yao, and four state group training envoys were suspended.

古文：癸酉，东都庄宅使织造户，并委府县收管，乙亥，停润州丹阳军额。
现代文：十七日，东都洛阳的庄宅使、织造户，一起交给府县收管。十九日，停止润州丹阳军的名额。
English: On the 17th, the manor servants and weavers of Luoyang, the eastern capital, were handed over to the prefectures for collection. On the 19th, the quota of the Danyang Army of Rongzhou was stopped.

古文：丙子，左神策军新筑夹城，置玄化门晨耀楼。
现代文：二十日，左神策军新近筑起了夹城，设立玄化门晨耀楼。
English: On the 20th, Zuo Shengchao's army recently built a new city and established the Xuanhua Gate Chenyao Building.

古文：辛巳，以京兆尹李鄘为凤翔尹、凤翔陇右节度使。
现代文：二十五日，任命京兆尹李庸阝为凤翔府尹和凤翔陇右节度使。
English: On the 25th, he appointed Jing Zhaoying as Feng Xiangfu's Yin and Feng Xiangfu's Right Sectional Envoy.

古文：蔡州水，平地深七八尺。
现代文：蔡州遭受洪水灾害，平地积水七八尺深。
English: Caizhou suffered from floods, with the water level reaching seven to eight feet deep.

古文：秋七月丙戌朔，敕刑部侍郎许孟容等删定《开元格后敕》。
现代文：七月初一日，敕令刑部侍郎许孟容等人删改订正《开元格后敕》。
English: On the first day of July, the Emperor ordered Xu Meng Rong, the attendant of the Department of Criminal Law, and others to amend and revise the "Imperial edict after the founding."

古文：丁亥，敕外命妇朝谒皇太后，多有前却，今后诸亲委宗正寺，百官母妻委台司，如有违越者，夫子在一月俸，频不到，有司具状奏闻。
现代文：初二日，敕令宫外受有封号的妇人进宫拜见皇太后王氏，大多数提前退出去了，从此以后各位亲戚交给宗正寺管理，百官的母亲妻子交给台司管理，如有违背规定的，丈夫、儿子扣除一个月的薪俸，多次不按时进宫拜见的人，有关主管官吏写出报告禀奏朝廷。
English: On the second day of the first month, the emperor ordered women with sealed numbers from outside the palace to enter the palace to visit the empress dowager Wang, and most of them left ahead of schedule. Since then, relatives have been handed over to the management of Sozheng Temple, and the mothers and wives of officials have been handed over to the management of the director. If there is any violation of the regulations, the husband and son will be deducted one month's salary, and those who repeatedly fail to enter the palace on time will be visited, and the relevant competent officials will write a report and report to the imperial court.

古文：戊子，录配享功臣之后，得苏瑰孙系，用为京兆府司录；崔玄暐孙元方、张说孙騑，并为监察御史；狄仁杰后玄范，为右拾遗；敬晖孙元亮、袁恕己孙德师，相次叙用。
现代文：初三日，录用灵位安置在皇家祖庙陪享祭祀的功臣后代，寻访到了苏瑰的孙子苏系，任命为京兆府司录；崔玄日韦的孙子崔元方，张说的孙子张，一同任监察御史职务；狄仁杰的后代狄玄范，任右拾遗；敬晖的孙子敬元亮、袁恕己的孙子袁德师，先后分级录用。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the descendants of the heroes who were placed in the spiritual position in the royal ancestral temple to accompany the sacrificial rites, visited the grandson of Su Gui and was appointed as the secretary of the Beijing Zhao Prefecture; the grandson of Cui Xuan Rong Wei, Cui Yuan Fang, the grandson of Zhang Said, also served as the supervisor of the history; the descendant of Di Renjie, Di Xuan Fan, was appointed as the right to collect the relics; the grandson of Jing Yao, Jing Yuan Liang, and the grandson of Yuan Shuxi, Yuan De Shi, were successively graded and hired.

古文：癸巳，太仆寺丞令狐丕进亡父亘所撰《代宗实录》四十卷，诏赠峘工部尚书。
现代文：初八日，太仆寺丞令狐丕进献已故的父亲令狐山亘撰写的《代宗实录》四十卷，诏令追认令狐山亘为工部尚书。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Grand Chamberlain Terauchi ordered the fox to present the forty volumes of "Daizong Shihaku" written by his late father, Ling Fooshan Wai, and the imperial edict recognized Ling Fooshan Wai as the official book of the Ministry.

古文：八月丙辰朔。
现代文：八月初一是丙辰。
English: The first day of August is Hsinchu.

古文：辛酉，宰相武元衡兼判户部事。
现代文：初六日，宰相武元衡兼管户部事务。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, Prime Minister Take Motohira also took charge of household affairs.

古文：壬戌，刑部奏改《律》卷第八普《斗竞律》。
现代文：初七日，刑部禀奏朝廷更改《律》书的第八卷为《斗竞律》。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Criminal Investigation Department sent a message to the imperial court to change the eighth volume of the "Law" book to "Competition Law."

古文：甲子，以职方员外郎王洁为岭南选补使，监察御史崔元方监之。
现代文：初九日，任命职方员外郎王洁为岭南选补使，监察御史崔元方为岭南监察使。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Wang Jie, a member of the Workers' Party, was appointed as the Lingnan Election Sub-envoy, and Cui Yuanfang, the Supervisor, was appointed as the Lingnan Supervisor.

古文：甲戌，中书奏： 先停诸道奏祥瑞。
现代文：十九日，中书省禀奏： 以前禁止各道向朝廷禀奏吉祥符瑞。
English: On the 19th day of the month, the provincial anthem was played: Previously, it was forbidden for each province to play the auspicious fury to the imperial court.

古文：伏以所献祥瑞，皆缘腊飨、告庙、元会奏闻，今后诸大瑞随表闻奏，中瑞、下瑞申有司，其元日奏祥瑞，请依令式。 
现代文：我们认为进献吉祥符瑞的事，都应乘着腊祭、告庙、元会禀奏朝廷，今后各种重大的吉祥符瑞随同奏表呈递到朝廷，中型、小型的吉祥符瑞报告有关主管官吏，在正月初一向朝廷禀奏，请求按照朝廷的规定执行。 
English: We believe that all matters related to the presentation of auspicious charms should be presented to the imperial court at the time of the wax festival, temple announcement, and the founding ceremony. In the future, all kinds of important auspicious charms will be submitted to the imperial court along with the accompaniment sheet. Medium-sized and small auspicious charms will be reported to the relevant competent officials, and they will be presented to the imperial court at the beginning of the first month of the year, and the request will be implemented in accordance with the provisions of the imperial court.

古文：从之。
现代文：宪宗同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：辛巳，封杜黄裳为邠国公，于頔为燕国公。
现代文：二十六日，封杜黄裳为国公，于由页为燕国公。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Huang Zang, the feudal duke, became the sovereign, and Yu Zhe became the sovereign of Yan.

古文：没蕃僧惟良阐等四百五十人自蕃中还。
现代文：流落到吐蕃的和尚只有良阐等四百五十人从吐蕃回国。
English: Of the monks who were exiled to Tubo, only Ryosei and 450 others returned from Tubo.

古文：九月乙酉，密王绸薨。
现代文：九月初一，密王李绸去世。
English: On the first day of September, Mi Wang Li Silk passed away.

古文：十月己酉，以浙西节度使李锜为左仆射；以御史大夫李元素为润州刺史，镇海军、浙西节度使。
现代文：十月初五日，任命浙西节度使李钅奇为左仆射；任命御史大夫李元素为润州刺史、镇海军、浙西节度使。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of the year, the West Zhejiang Festival Committee was appointed, and Li Rongqi was appointed as the Left Footman; the Chief Historian, Li Yinglian, was appointed as the Renzhou Historian, the Town Navy and the West Zhejiang Festival Committee.

古文：庚申，李锜据润州反，杀判官王澹、大将赵琦。
现代文：初六日，李钅奇凭借润州反叛朝廷，杀死了判官王澹、大将赵琦。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Li Rongqi rebelled against the imperial court with the help of Runzhou and killed the judge Wang Qian and the general Zhao Qian.

古文：时锜诈请入朝，署澹为留后，因讽诏： 李锜属列宗枝，任居方伯，赫奕之跺，饱绸缪之恩。
现代文：当时李钅奇诈称要求进京朝拜，安排王澹代理留后，乘机教唆兵士叛乱，杀掉了王澹、赵琦，接着命令苏州、常州、杭州、湖州、睦州的守将杀掉各州刺史，修整石头故城，图谋造反称帝。初八日，宪宗颁发诏书： 李钅奇是皇家的同族子孙，身居一方长官的高位，享尽了显赫尊贵的荣华，饱受了情意殷勤的恩惠。
English: At that time, Li Rongqi fraudulently claimed that he had requested to go to Beijing to pay homage, arranged for Wang Rong's agent to stay behind, took the opportunity to instigate soldiers to rebel, killed Wang Rong and Zhao Rong, and then ordered the guards of Suzhou, Changzhou, Hangzhou, Huzhou, and Mengzhou to kill the history of each state, repair the stone old city, and attempt to create a counter-emperor. On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the Emperor issued a decree: Li Rongqi is a descendant of the same family as the royal family, holds a high position as a prefect,

古文：待以亲贤，报之以逆节；授其师旅，用元以乱常。
现代文：我用亲属和贤才看待他，他用叛逆朝廷来回报我；我把军队交给他，他用军队来扰乱法纪。
English: I looked up to him for kinship and wisdom, and he rewarded me by rebelling against the court; I gave him the army, and he used the army to break the law.

古文：屡献表章，亟请朝会，初则诈疾，后万纵兵。
现代文：他接二连三地呈递奏表奏章，急切地请求回京朝见，开始时诈称生病，后来却怂恿军队叛乱。
English: One after another, he presented his music sheets and urgently requested to return to Beijing to see the emperor. At first, he falsely claimed to be ill, but later he incited the army to rebel.

古文：僚佐以献规受屠，王臣以传命见胁。
现代文：他的同事和下属因为规劝而遭受屠杀，朝廷大臣因为给他传达命令而受到威胁。
English: Colleagues and subordinates were slaughtered for their advice, and courtiers were threatened for relaying orders to him.

古文：朕切于含垢，未忍发明，累降中人，令遵前旨。
现代文：我极力地宽大为怀，还不忍心向天下公开他的罪过，接连不断地派出朝廷官员，命令他遵从以前的旨意。
English: I tried my best to be lenient, but I couldn't bear to reveal his crime to the world, so I sent court officials one after another to order him to comply with his previous will.

古文：无轺车之戒路，有沴气之滔天。加以日逞淫刑，月兴暴赋。
现代文：没有朝见的轻便车子登程，倒有叛乱的妖雾漫天，加上天天随意地滥用刑罚，月月发动不义的战争。
English: There are no flashy cars on the road, but there is a haze of rebellion in the sky, coupled with the daily abuse of punishment and the launching of unjust wars every month.

古文：朕为人父母，闻甚恻然，顾惟纪纲，焉敢废坠！
现代文：我是百姓的父母，知道这些情况后心里非常伤痛，思虑着朝廷的法纪，哪敢损害丢弃！
English: I am the parent of a commoner. My heart is very sad after knowing these circumstances. I am thinking about the imperial court's legal discipline. How dare I damage and discard it!

古文：李锜在身官爵，并宜削夺。 
现代文：李钅奇的全部官职爵号，都应当剥夺。 
English: He should be stripped of all his official titles.

古文：以淮南节度使王锷充诸道行营招讨使，内官薛尚衍为监军，率汴、徐、鄂、淮南、宣歙之师，取宣州路进讨。
现代文：命令淮南节度使王锷担任诸道行营招讨使，内官薛尚衍任监军，统率汴州、徐州、鄂州、淮南、宣歙的军队，取道宣州进军讨伐。
English: He ordered the Huainan Provincial Party Committee to appoint Wang Qian as the envoy to call for troops from all directions, and the inner officer Xue Shangyan as the supervisor of the army, to lead the armies of Bozhou, Xuzhou, Ezhou, Huainan, and Xuanqian, and to march into the crusade of Xuanzhou.

古文：丁卯，以门下侍郎、平章事武元衡检校吏部尚书、兼门下侍郎、平章事、成都尹、充剑南西川节度使，仍封临淮郡公。
现代文：十三日，命令门下侍郎、平章事武元衡任检校吏部尚书，兼任门下侍郎、平章事、成都府尹，担任剑南西川节度使，仍旧封为临淮郡公。
English: On the 13th, he ordered his subordinate attendant, Ping Zhangji Wu Yuanheng, to be appointed as the school inspector Shang Shu, concurrently serving as his subordinate attendant, Ping Zhangji, Chengdu Fu Yin, and serving as the Jianan West River Festival Envoy, still named Linhuai County.

古文：将行，上御安福门慰劳之。
现代文：武元衡准备动身赴任，宪宗亲临安福门慰劳他。
English: As Takemoto-Hirai prepared to leave for his new post, Kenso came to comfort him in person at the Anpu Gate.

古文：癸酉，润州大将张子阆、李奉独等执李锜以献。
现代文：十九日，润州大将张子良、李奉仙等人拘捕李钅奇献给朝廷。
English: On the 19th, Rongzhou General Zhang Ziliang, Li Fengxian and others arrested Li Xuanqi and presented him to the imperial court.

古文：辛巳，锜从父弟宋州刺史銛、通事舍人铣坐贬岭外。
现代文：二十七日，李钅奇的堂弟宋州刺史李钅舌、通事舍人李铣因此获罪被贬谪到岭南。
English: On the 27th, Li Rongqi's cousin, Song Zhou's secretary, Li Rongji, and secretary, Li Rong, were convicted and banished to Lingnan.

古文：十一月甲申，斩李锜于独柳树下，削锜属籍。
现代文：十月初一日，在独柳对李钅奇处以斩刑，在皇族的名册上勾销了李钅奇的名字。
English: On the first day of October, Li Xuanqi was sentenced to beheading in Duoliu, and Li Xuanqi's name was deleted from the roster of the imperial family.

古文：丙戌，以擒李锜润州牙将张子良为左金吾卫将军，封南阳郡王；田少卿、李奉仙等为羽林将军，并封公。
现代文：初三日，把捉拿李钅奇的润州牙将张子良任命为左金吾卫将军，封为南阳郡王；田少卿、李奉仙等人任命为羽林将军，一起封为郡公。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Zhang Ziliang, the leader of Rongzhou Fang, who captured Li Xuanqi, was named General Zuo Jinwu, and was named the king of Nanyang County; Tian Shaoqing, Li Fengxian and others were named General Ulin, and were also named county officials.

古文：甲辰，诏司徒杜祐筋力未衰，起今后每日入中书视事。
现代文：二十一日，诏令说司徒杜佑精力并没有衰弱，从今以后每天到中书省主持政务。
English: On the twenty-first day, the imperial edict said that the energy of Stu Duyou had not weakened, and from now on, he would go to the People's Republic of China to preside over government affairs every day.

古文：十二月甲寅，宰相李吉甫封赞皇侯。
现代文：十二月初一日，宰相李吉甫被封为赞皇侯。
English: On the first day of December, Prime Minister Li Jifu was awarded the title of Prince of Praise.

古文：丙辰，上谓宰臣曰： 朕览国书，见文皇帝行事，少有过差，谏臣论诤，往复数四。
现代文：初三日，宪宗对宰臣们说： 我阅读本朝历史书籍资料，看到文皇帝办事，很少发生差错，谏臣们直言争辩，反反复复三番五次不厌其烦。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Kenzong said to his vassals: I read the historical books and materials of this dynasty, and I saw Emperor Wen's work, and I rarely made mistakes. The vassals argued with each other, and repeated the same thing three times and five times without getting tired of it.

古文：况朕之寡昧，涉道未明，今后事或未当，卿等每事十论，不可一二而止。 
现代文：何况我孤陋寡闻，对治国的艺术还没有研究透彻，今后有的事情处理得不恰当，您等诸位可要充分地争辩，不要稍微说说就了事。 
English: What's more, I am not well-informed, and I have not thoroughly studied the art of governing the country. In the future, some things will be handled inappropriately. You and others should fully argue, not just talk about things.

古文：丁巳，东都国子监增置学生一百人。
现代文：初四日，东都的国家最高学府国子监增收了一百名学生。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the State Commissioner of Education, the country's highest educational institution in Dongdu, admitted an additional one hundred students.

古文：癸亥，御史台奏： 文武常参官准乾元元年三月十四日敕，如有朝堂相吊慰及跪拜、待漏行立失序，语笑喧哗；入衙入阁，执笏不端，行立迟慢；立班不正，趋拜失仪，言语微喧哗穿班穿仗，出入阁门，无故离位；廊下饮食，行坐失仪喧闹；入朝及退朝不从正衙出入；非公事入中书等：每犯夺一月俸。
现代文：初十日，御史台禀奏： 常参官按照肃宗乾元元年三月十四日敕令的规定，如果出现一一一在朝堂互相问候和跪拜；等候早朝时行走站立打乱了官阶次序，笑语喧哗；进宣政殿或紫宸殿参拜，手板捧得不端正，行走站立动作迟缓；站班站得不整齐，跪拜不符合礼仪规范，禀奏的声音过低或太高，在朝班仪仗中穿行，出入阁门，无故离开规定的位置；朝拜完毕后在廊下享用皇上赐给的廊餐时，行走坐席失去仪态喧哗吵闹；进殿参拜和拜毕出殿不从正衙进出；没有公事擅自进入中书省一一一等等情况：每当违犯一项规定就扣除一个月的薪俸。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the Imperial Historian's Table played: In accordance with the provisions of the imperial edict of Su Zong Qianyuan on March 14, 2019, if there are one-on-one greetings and genuflections in the morning hall, the standing officers will greet each other; waiting for the early morning, standing up and walking will disrupt the official order, and laughter will be noisy; entering the Xuan Zheng Hall or the Zijie Hall to worship, the hand board is not properly held, and the walking and standing movements are slow; standing order is not neat, kneeling does not meet the etiquette standards, the sound

古文：班列不肃，所由指摘，犹或饰非，即具闻奏贬责。
现代文：在朝堂按照位次站列时不整肃，经过批评，还要掩饰错误，就写出报告禀奏朝廷进行降职处分。
English: In the imperial court, when they lined up according to rank, they did not clean up. After being criticized, they had to cover up their mistakes, so they wrote a report and reported it to the imperial court for demotion.

古文：臣等商量，于旧条每罚各减一半，所贵有犯必举。 
现代文：我们商议斟酌，对于原有规章的每项处罚各减轻一半，重要的是如有违犯必须检举。 
English: We deliberated and decided to reduce the penalties for each of the original regulations by half. It is important to report any violations.

古文：从之。
现代文：宪宗同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：丙寅，以剑南西川节度使高崇文检校司空、同平章事，兼邠州刺史、邠宁庆节度使，充京西诸军都统。
现代文：十三日，命令剑南西川节度使高崇文任检校司空、同平章事，兼任州刺史和州、宁州、庆州节度使，担任京西各军都统。
English: On the 13th, he ordered the Jian'nan West River Festival Committee to appoint Gao Chongwen as the school inspection secretary of the sky and Tongping chapter, and also served as the state secretary of the state, Ningzhou, and Gyeongju festivals, and served as the Beijing and West armies.

古文：壬申，礼部举人，罢试口义，试墨义十条，五经通五，明经通六，即放进士。
现代文：十九日，礼部选用人才，免去口试，笔试对答儒家的十条经义，在五经科考试中答对了五条，在明经科考试中答对了六条，就可以录取为进士。
English: On the 19th, the etiquette department selected talents, waived the oral examination, and the written examination answered the ten Confucian scriptures, answered five of the five subjects in the five subjects examination, and answered six of the five subjects in the five subjects examination, and could be admitted as a scholar.

古文：举人曾为官司科罚，曾任州县小吏，虽有辞艺，长吏不得举送，违者举送官停任，考试官贬黜。
现代文：举荐的人员曾经受到官府的处罚，曾经在州县当过小吏，即使富有文采、才干，州府的长史不准举荐，违犯的举荐官员停止职务，主考官员降职撤职。
English: The person who made the recommendation had been punished by the government, and had been a minor official in the prefecture or county. Even if they are talented and talented, the prefecture is not allowed to recommend them. The offending recommending official will be suspended, and the examiner will be demoted and dismissed.

古文：丙子，令宰臣宣敕：百僚游宴过从饯别，此后所由不得奏报，务从欢泰。
现代文：二十三日，命令宰臣宣布诏令：百官游乐宴饮交往饯行，从此以后听凭自便，不须报告朝廷，务必遵循欢快平安的原则。
English: On the 23rd, he ordered the aide-de-camp to announce the imperial edict: From now on, the entertainment, banqueting, and socializing of a hundred officials will be allowed to proceed at their own discretion, without having to report to the imperial court, and it is imperative to follow the principle of joy and peace.

古文：保义军节度使刘澭卒。
现代文：保义军节度使刘氵雍去世。
English: Liu Qianyong was killed by the rebel army.

古文：己卯，史官李吉甫撰《元和国计簿》，总计天下方镇凡四十八，管州府二百九十五，县一千四百五十三，户二百四十四万二百五十四，其凤翔、鄜坊、邠宁、振武、泾原、银夏、灵盐、河东、易定、魏博、镇冀、范阳、沧景、淮西、淄青十五道，凡七十一州，不申户口。
现代文：二十六日，史官李吉甫撰写《元和国计簿》，统计出全国共有四十八个方镇，二百九十五个州、府，一千四百五十三个县，二百四十四万零二百五十四户，在凤翔、坊、宁、振武、泾原、银夏、灵盐、河东、易定、魏博、镇冀、范阳、沧景、淮西、淄青十五道中，共有七十一州没有上报户数人口。
English: On the 26th, historian Li Jifu wrote the "Yuan and National Accounts Book" and counted a total of 48 towns, 295 prefectures and counties, 1,453 counties, and 2,440,254 households across the country. In Fengxiang, Fang, Ning, Zhenwu, Yuyuan, Yinxia, Lingyan, Hedong, Yiding, Weibo, Zhenji, Fanyang, Cangjing, Huaxi, and Jiaqing 15 provinces, a total of 71 provinces did not report the number of households.

古文：每岁赋入倚办，止于浙江东西、宣歙、淮南、江西、鄂岳、福建、湖南等八道，合四十九州，一百四十四万户。
现代文：每年照章交纳赋税的只限于浙东、浙西、宣歙、淮南、江西、鄂岳、福建、湖南等八道，约四十九州，一百四十四万户。
English: The annual tax paid according to the regulations is limited to eight provinces, including East Zhejiang, West Zhejiang, Xuancheng, Huainan, Jiangxi, Yueyang, Fujian and Hunan, about 49 states, and 1.44 million households.

古文：比量天宝供税之户，则四分有一。
现代文：和玄宗天宝年间交纳赋税的户口比，目前只有那时的四分之一。
English: The ratio of households that paid taxes during the reign of Emperor Xuanzong is currently only a quarter of what it was at that time.

古文：天下兵戎仰给县官者八十三万余人，比量天宝士马，则三分加一，率以两户资一兵。
现代文：全国依靠朝廷供给的兵卒八十三万多人，和天宝年间的兵卒比，目前却超过了那时的三分之一，大约靠两户农家供养一名兵卒。
English: Nationwide, more than eight hundred and thirty thousand soldiers depend on the imperial court for supplies. This is up from the ratio of soldiers to soldiers in the Tenpo era, but currently exceeds one-third of that time, with approximately two farming households supporting one soldier.

古文：其他水旱所损，征科发敛，又在常役之外。
现代文：碰上一些地方因水旱灾害造成赋税损失等情况，其他一些地方征收赋税突破限额，还在固定的任务之外。
English: Some localities have encountered situations such as tax losses caused by floods and droughts, and some other localities have levied tax in excess of the limit, which is still outside the fixed task.

古文：吉甫都纂其事，成书十卷。
现代文：李吉甫总结那些情况，编写成《元和国计簿》十卷。
English: Li Jifu summed up the situation and compiled a ten-volume "Yuan and National Accounts Book."

古文：是岁，吐蕃、回纥、奚、契丹、渤海、牂柯、南诏并朝贡。
现代文：这一年，吐蕃、回纥、奚国、契丹、渤海、柯、南诏等国进京朝拜进贡。
English: In this year, the countries of Tubo, Hui, Shan, Qidan, Bohai, Ke and Nanzhao came to Beijing to pay tribute.

古文：三年春正月癸未朔。
现代文：元和三年正月初一是癸未。
English: The first day of the first month of the third year of the Yuan Dynasty and the first day of the third year of the third year of the Yuan Dynasty are the same day.

古文：癸巳，群臣上尊号曰睿圣文武皇帝。
现代文：十一日，朝臣们向宪宗进尊号为 睿圣文武皇帝 。
English: On the 11th day, the courtiers gave the title of Emperor Rui Shengwenwu to Emperor Xianzong.

古文：御宣政殿受册，礼毕，移仗御丹凤楼，大赦天下。
现代文：宪宗亲临宣政殿接受尊号，礼仪完毕，仪仗跟随宪宗亲临丹凤楼，向天下宣告大赦令。
English: Kenzong personally came to the Xuan Zheng Hall to accept the honorary title. After the ceremony, he personally followed Kenzong to the Danfeng Tower to announce the amnesty decree to the world.

古文：庚子，泾原段祐请修临泾城，在泾州北九十里，扼犬戎之冲要，诏从之。
现代文：十八日，泾原的段请求修筑临泾城，在泾州以北九十里，控制犬戎的军事交通要道，宪宗下诏同意。
English: On the 18th day of the month, Xuan Yuan's section requested the construction of Linyi City, ninety miles north of Yanzhou, to control the military traffic route of Yunnan, which was approved by Emperor Xizong.

古文：戊申，罢左右神威军，合为一，号天威军。
现代文：二十六日，撤销左右神威军番号，合为一支军队，番号叫做天威军。
English: On the 26th, the numbers of the left and right Shenwei armies were revoked, and they were merged into one army. The number is called the Tianwei Army.

古文：二月丙申，宰相李吉甫进封赵国公。
现代文：二月初四日，宰相李吉甫被晋封为赵国公。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month, Prime Minister Li Jifu was promoted to Zhao Guogong.

古文：己丑，以武昌军节度使韩皋为润州刺史、镇海军节度、浙西观察使。
现代文：十三日，任命武昌军节度使韩皋为润州刺史、镇海军节度使、浙西观察使。
English: On the 13th, the Wuchang Military Commander appointed Han Zheng as the Runshu Historian, the Town Navy Commander, and the West Zhejiang Observer.

古文：辛未，赠故布衣崔善真睦州司马，忠谏而死于李锜也。
现代文：十九日，追认已故的平民崔善真为睦州司马，他是由于忠于朝廷劝阻李钅奇而被李钅奇杀死的。
English: On the 19th, the deceased civilian Cui Shanzhen was identified as the Sima of Mutsu Province. He was killed by Li Rongqi because he was loyal to the court and tried to dissuade Li Rongqi.

古文：癸丑，以鄜坊节度使裴玢为兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
现代文：二十一日，任命坊节度使裴玢为兴元府尹、山南西道节度使。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Festival Delegate of Xingyuan and West Shannan Provinces was appointed.

古文：丙子，以右金吾卫大将军路恕为鄜州刺史、鄜坊节度使。
现代文：二十四日，任命右金吾卫大将军路恕为州刺史、坊节度使。
English: On the 24th, he appointed General Lu Xun of the U.S. 5th Army to be the provincial secretary of history and the provincial secretary of education.

古文：戊寅，咸安大长公主卒于回纥。
现代文：二十六日，咸安大长公主在回纥去世。
English: On the 26th, the eldest princess of Haman died in Uluwatu.

古文：三月癸巳，郇王总薨。
现代文：三月十一日，郇王李纟总去世。
English: On March 11th, the eunuch king, Li Yongzong, passed away.

古文：庚子，以定平镇兵马使硃士明为四镇、北庭、泾原等州节度使。
现代文：十八日，任命定平镇兵马使朱士明为龟兹、于阗、疏勒、碎叶四镇和北庭、泾州、原州等州节度使。
English: On the 18th, Zhu Shiming, the military and horse envoy of Dingping Town, was appointed as the state festival envoy for the four towns of Guizi, Yuqi, Shule and Chibi, as well as Beiting, Zhangzhou and Wonju.

古文：乙巳，御宣政殿试制科举人。
现代文：二十三日，宪宗亲临宣政殿考试被推荐来参加制科考试的人员。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Kenzong personally visited the Xuancheng Hall for the examination of those who were recommended to participate in the examination.

古文：夏四月癸丑，中使郭里旻酒醉犯夜，杖杀之，金吾薛伾、巡使韦纁皆贬逐。
现代文：四月初一日，宦官郭里因为醉酒而违犯宫庭宵禁，被用刑杖打死，金吾薛亻丕、巡使韦纟熏都受到贬谪流放的处罚。
English: On the first day of April, the eunuch Guo Li was beaten to death with a cane for violating the curfew of the palace due to drunkenness, and Kingu Xueyuan and the inspector Wei Yuxuan were both punished by banishment.

古文：赐硃士明名曰忠亮。
现代文：宪宗给朱士明赐名叫忠亮。
English: Kenzong gave Zhu Shiming the name Zhongliang.

古文：乙丑，贬翰林学士王涯虢州司马，时涯甥皇甫湜与牛僧孺、李宗闵并登贤良方正科第三等，策语太切，权幸恶之，故涯坐亲累贬之。
现代文：十三日，翰林学士王涯被贬谪为虢州司马，当时王涯的外甥皇甫氵是和牛僧孺、李宗闵一同考取贤良方正科第三等，对答时事政治的语言过分严厉，当权受宠的人憎恶他，所以王涯受到亲戚关系的连累获罪遭到贬谪。
English: On the 13th, Wang Lai, a scholar of Hanlin, was relegated to the position of Zhangzhou Sima. At that time, Wang Lai's nephew, Wang Fuxi, who was a member of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class

古文：壬申，大风毁含元殿栏槛二十七间。
现代文：二十日，暴风刮倒含元殿二十七间房的栏杆。
English: On the 20th, a storm blew down the railings of 27 rooms, including the original hall.

古文：乙亥，以岭南节度使赵昌为江陵尹、荆南节度使，以户部侍郎杨于陵为广州刺史、岭南节度使。
现代文：二十三日，任命岭南节度使赵昌为江陵府尹、荆南节度使，任命户部侍郎杨於陵为广州刺史、岭南节度使。
English: On the 23rd, the Lingnan Festival was appointed, and Zhao Chang was appointed as the Yin of Jiangling Prefecture and the Jingnan Festival, and the Household Attendant Yang Yuling was appointed as the Guangzhou Historian and the Lingnan Festival.

古文：丁丑，以荆南节度使裴均为左仆射、判度支。
现代文：二十五日，任命荆南节度使裴均为右仆射、判度支。
English: On the 25th, Jingnan Jiedu was appointed to make Pei both the right-hand shooting and judging branch.

古文：敕五月一日御殿受朝贺礼宜停。
现代文：宪宗诏令五月初一日亲临宣政殿接受朝臣参拜祝贺的礼仪应当停止。
English: On the first day of May, Emperor Genso decreed that the custom of courtiers coming to the Imperial Throne Hall in person to receive congratulations should be discontinued.

古文：己卯，裴均于尚书省都堂上仆射。
现代文：二十七日，裴均在尚书省尚书令的大厅 都堂 举行升任仆射的交接仪式。
English: On the 27th, Pei Jun held a handover ceremony for his promotion to the position of assistant director in the Great Hall of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the People's Republic of China.

古文：其送印及呈孔目唱案授案，皆尚书郎为之，文武三品已上升阶列坐，四品五品及郎官、御史拜于下，然后召御史中丞、左右丞、侍郎升阶答拜。
现代文：传送印信和呈送条目，宣读、传递案卷文书，都由尚书郎担任，三品以上的文武官员登上阶台依次坐下，四品五品以及郎官、御史在厅下礼拜，然后叫御史中丞、左右丞、侍郎登上阶台举行答谢礼拜。
English: Shang Shuro was in charge of sending the stamped letter and the item to be sent, as well as reading out and passing on the documents of the case file. The civil and military officials of three or more grades ascended the steps and sat down in turn, and the four grades and five grades, as well as the vassals and the officials, worshiped under the hall, and then called the officials of the middle, left and right grades, and the attendants to ascend the steps to hold a thanksgiving service.

古文：虽修故事行之，议者论其太过。
现代文：这些虽然是按历史先例举行的，舆论认为太过分。
English: Although these were held in accordance with historical precedent, public opinion considered them to be excessive.

古文：五月壬辰，兵部请复武举，从之。
现代文：五月十一日，兵部请求恢复举行武科考试录用武官的制度，宪宗同意。
English: On May 11, the Ministry of Military Affairs requested the reinstatement of the system of holding a military science examination to recruit military officers, which was agreed to by the Constitutional Court.

古文：甲午，敕东都畿、汝州都防御使及副使宜停，所管将士三千七百三十人，随畿、汝界分留守及汝州防御使分掌之。
现代文：十三日，诏令东都畿、汝州都的防御使和副使应当停止，它主管的三千七百三十名将士，按照东都畿、汝州都的界线划分给东都留守和汝州防御使分别主管。
English: On the 13th, the imperial edict ordered that the defense envoy and deputy envoy of Dongdu and Ruzhou should be stopped, and the 3,730 soldiers in charge of it should be divided according to the boundaries of Dongdu and Ruzhou, and the defense envoys of Dongdu and Ruzhou should be in charge respectively.

古文：辛丑，右仆射裴均请取荆南杂钱万贯修尚书省，从之。
现代文：二十日，右仆射裴均请求拿来荆南的杂项收入一万贯维修尚书省房舍，宪宗同意。
English: On the 20th, his right-hand man, Sha Pei Jun, requested that 10,000 yuan of Jingnan's miscellaneous income be used to repair the buildings in Shangshu Province, and Xianzong agreed.

古文：丙午，正衙册九姓回纥可汗为登啰里汨蜜施合毗伽保义可汗。
现代文：二十五日，宪宗在宣政殿册立九姓回纥的可汗为登罗里汨密施合毗伽保义可汗。
English: On the 25th, the Khans of the nine surnames of the Uighurs were recorded by the Emperor in the Hall of Proclamation as the Khans of Denlori.

古文：六月戊辰，诏以钱少，欲设畜钱之令，先告谕天下商贡畜钱者，并令逐便市易，不得畜钱。
现代文：六月初七日，宪宗发出诏令说由于钱币太少，准备制定国家储蓄钱币的法令，事先告知全国囤积着钱币的商人，都要积极采用以物易物的简便方式买卖交易，不准囤积钱币。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the year, the Emperor issued a decree saying that since there were too few coins, he was going to issue a decree on the national savings of coins. Merchants across the country who were hoarding coins were to be informed in advance that they should actively use the simple method of barter to buy and sell, and were not allowed to hoard coins.

古文：天下银坑，不得私扌采。
现代文：全国的银矿，不准私人开采。
English: No private mining is allowed in the country's silver mines.

古文：癸亥，以邕管将黄少卿为归顺州刺史，弟少高、少温并授官，西原蛮酋也，贞元中屡寇邕管，至是归款。
现代文：十二日，任命邕管的将领黄少卿为归顺州刺史，他的弟弟黄少高、黄少温一同授予官职，他们是西原蛮的头领，德宗贞元年间多次侵犯邕管，到这时归顺了朝廷。
English: On the 12th, Huang Shaoqing, the general of the Shiguan, was appointed as the subordinate of the Shizhi of Shunzhou, and his younger brothers Huang Shogao and Huang Showen were awarded official posts together. They were the leaders of the Xihara barbarians. Dezong Zhenyuan violated the Shiguan many times during the year, and then submitted to the imperial court.

古文：乙丑，罢江淮私堰埭二十二，从转运使奏也。
现代文：十四日，取缔了长江、淮河之间私人筑起的堵水土坝二十二处，是采纳转运使禀奏的建议决定的。
English: On the 14th, the 22 privately built earth dams between the Yangtze River and the Huai River were banned. The decision was made by adopting the suggestion of the transporter.

古文：甲戌，以河南尹关除庆为东都留守。
现代文：二十三日，任命河南尹郑余庆为东都留守。
English: On the 23rd, Yin Zheng Yuqing of Henan Province was appointed as the acting governor of Dongdu.

古文：丁丑，沙陀、突厥七百人携其亲属归振武节度伎范希朝，乃授其大首领曷勒河波阴山府都督。
现代文：二十六日，沙陀、突厥的七百人带着亲属归附振武节度使范希朝，于是给他们的大首领曷勒河波授予阴山府都督官衔。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, seven hundred people from the Sado and Turkic tribes, together with their relatives, returned to the Zhenwu festival to make the Fanxi dynasty, and then awarded their great leader, Zhelehebo, the title of governor of Yinshan Prefecture.

古文：秋七月辛巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：七月初一日，发生了日偏食。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the sun was eclipsed.

古文：己亥，复以度支安邑、解县两池留后为榷盐使。
现代文：十九日，又任命度支安邑、解县两个盐池的留后为榷盐使。
English: On the 19th, he also appointed the retainers of two salt ponds in Dujiangyan and Jie County to be the salt envoys.

古文：丁未，涪州复隶黔中道。
现代文：二十七日，涪州恢复隶属于黔中道。
English: On the 27th, Zhangzhou resumed its affiliation with Zhangzhong Road.

古文：八月庚申，复置东都防御兵七百人。
现代文：八月初十日，又在东都建立七百人的城防部队。
English: On the 10th day of the 8th month, another 700-man city defense force was established in Dongdu.

古文：九月己丑，淮南节度使王锷来朝。
现代文：九月初十日，淮南节度使王锷进京朝拜。
English: On the 10th day of early September, the Huainan Festival brought Wang Hui to Beijing to pay homage.

古文：庚寅，以山南东道节度使于頔守司空、同平章事；以右仆射裴均检校左仆射、同平章事、襄州长史，充山南东道节度使；加宣武韩弘同平章事。
现代文：十一日，命令山南东道节度使于由页代任比本人官阶更高的司空、同平章事；命令右仆射裴均任检校左仆射、同平章事、襄州长史，担任山南东道节度使；给宣武的韩弘授予同平章事头衔。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he ordered the host of the Shannan Festival to appoint Yu Zhigu as the representative of Jiguang and Tongping Zhangji, who were higher than his own official rank; ordered his right-hand man, Sha Pei, to appoint his left-hand man, Tongping Zhangji, and Yang Guo Shi, as the representative of Shannan Host Festival; and awarded the title of Tongping Zhangji to Han Hong, who was a military propagandist.

古文：丙申，以户部侍郎裴洎为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：十七日，任命户部侍郎裴土自为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: On the 17th, he appointed the Household Attendant Pei Tu as the Chusho Attendant and Tonghei as the Shogun.

古文：戊戌，以中书侍郎、平章事李吉甫检校兵部尚书、兼中书侍郎、平章事、扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度使。
现代文：十九日，命令中书侍郎、平章事李吉甫任检校兵部尚书，兼任中书侍郎、平章事、扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度使。
English: On the 19th, Li Jifu was ordered to serve as the chief secretary of the military inspection department of the school. He also served as the chief secretary of the military inspection department of the school, the chief secretary of the military inspection department of the school, the chief secretary of the governor of Yangzhou, and the festival envoy of Huainan.

古文：以淮南节度使王锷检校司徒、河中尹、河中晋绛慈隰节度使。
现代文：任命淮南节度使王锷为检校司徒、河中府尹和河中的晋州、绛州、慈州、隰州节度使。
English: Appointed the Huainan Festival Delegate Wang Qian as the inspector of the school, and the Jinzhou, Zhangzhou, Cizhou and Zhangzhou Festival Delegates from Yin and Hezhong in Hechu.

古文：河中节度使、检校司空、同平章事邠国公杜黄裳卒。
现代文：河中节度使、检校司空、同平章事国公杜黄裳去世。
English: Kawakami Setsudoshi, Kengyo no Tsukasa, Tonghei Shosho, Jikokuko Duhansho passed away.

古文：是秋，京师大雨。
现代文：这年秋天，京城连续暴雨。
English: In the autumn of that year, there were continuous heavy rains in Kyoto.

古文：十月己酉朔。
现代文：十月初一是己酉。
English: The first day of October is the beginning of spring.

古文：癸亥，以太常卿高郢为御史大夫。
现代文：十五日，任命太常卿高郢为御史大夫。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Gao Jun, Tai Changqing, was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：甲子，以御史中丞窦群为湖南观察使，既行，改为黔中观察使。
现代文：十六日，任命御史中丞窦群为湖南观察使，启程以后，改任黔中观察使。
English: On the 16th, the Minister of History, Zhongzheng Douqun, was appointed as the Hunan Observation Envoy, and after his departure, he was reappointed as the Xizhong Observation Envoy.

古文：群初为李吉甫所擢用，及持宪，反倾吉甫，吉甫谧其阴事，故贬之。
现代文：窦群开始受到李吉甫提拔，到他当了御史中丞后，反而排挤李吉甫，李吉甫揭发他的隐私进行弹劾，所以贬谪了他。
English: Dou Qun was initially promoted by Li Jifu, but after he became the Vice-Minister of History, he ousted Li Jifu. Li Jifu denigrated him by exposing his private life for impeachment.

古文：丁卯，度支使下判案官，以四员为定。
现代文：十九日，度支使以下的判案官，以四名为定额。
English: On the 19th, the governor sent the following adjudicators, with a quota of four.

古文：十一月甲午，横海军节度使程执恭来朝。
现代文：十一月十六日，横海军节度使程执恭进京朝拜。
English: On November 16th, the Navy Day holiday brought Cheng Xigong to Beijing to pay homage.

古文：十二月庚戌，以临泾县为行原州，命镇将郝玼为刺史。
现代文：十二月初三日，把临泾县改为行原州，命令镇守的将领郝王此任刺史。
English: On the third day of early December, Linyi County was changed to Xingyuan County, and the town's commander, Shao Wang, was ordered to resign.

古文：自玼镇临泾，西戎不敢犯塞。
现代文：自从郝王此镇守临泾县，西部的外族属国就不敢侵犯边境。
English: Ever since the king of the Xiongnu held this town in Linyi County, the foreign vassal states in the west did not dare to encroach on the border.

古文：甲子，南诏异牟寻卒。
现代文：十七日，南诏国王异牟寻去世。
English: On the 17th, Nanzhao King Yimuhang passed away.

古文：辛未，以谏议大夫段平仲使南诏吊祭，仍立其子骠信苴蒙阁劝为南诏王。
现代文：二十四日，派遣谏议大夫段平仲出使南诏慰问祭奠，接着立他的儿子骁勇忠诚的苴蒙阁劝为南诏王。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he sent the envoy Nanzhao to offer condolences and pay tribute to Duan Pingzhong, then appointed his son, the brave and loyal Yu Mengge, as the king of Nanzhao.

古文：是岁，淮南、江南、江西、湖南、山南东道旱。
现代文：这年，淮南、江南、江西、湖南、山南东道遭受旱灾。
English: This year, Huainan, Jiangnan, Jiangxi, Hunan and Shannan suffered from drought.

古文：夏四月丙子朔。
现代文：元和四年四月初一是丙子。
English: In summer, the first day of April is Cixi Day.

古文：戊寅，国子祭酒冯伉卒。
现代文：初三日，国子祭酒冯伉去世。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the son of the country, Feng Yao, passed away.

古文：壬午，裴均进银器一千五百两，以违敕，付左藏库。
现代文：初七日，裴均进献银质器物重一千五百两，因为违背宪宗诏令，交给左藏库。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Pei Jun donated silverware weighing fifteen hundred taels, which was handed over to the Zuo Collection because it violated the Emperor's edict.

古文：甲申，令皇太子居少阳院。
现代文：初九日，命令皇太子住进少阳院。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the crown prince was ordered to live in Shao Yang Yuan.

古文：武功人张英奴撰《回波辞》惑众，杖杀之。
现代文：武功县百姓张英奴编写《回波辞》迷惑民众，被用刑杖打死。
English: Zhang Yingnu, a citizen of Wugong County, was beaten to death with a cane for writing "Echo Speech" to confuse the public.

古文：丙申，抚州山人张洪骑牛冠履，献书于光顺门，书不足采，遣之。
现代文：二十一日，抚州的隐士张洪骑着牛戴着帽子穿着鞋，到光顺门进献书籍，这书没有可取之处，打发他走了。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhang Hong, a hermit from Fuzhou, rode a cow, wore a hat and shoes, and went to the Guangshun Gate to present a book. The book had nothing to recommend it, so he was sent away.

古文：庚子，制故太尉、西平郡王李晟宜编附属籍。
现代文：二十五日，诏令该把已故太尉、西平郡王李晟编进皇室家族的名册。
English: On the 25th, it was decreed that the late Tai Lai and Xiping County King Li Xi should be included in the roster of the royal family.

古文：以太常卿李元素为户部尚书、判度支，以商州刺史元义方为福建观察使。
现代文：任命太常卿李元素为户部尚书、判度支，任命商州刺史元义方为福建观察使。
English: He appointed Tai Changqing Li Ermen as the head of the Household Department of Shangshu and the Judiciary Branch, and appointed Shangzhou Jishi Yuan Yifang as the Fujian Observer.

古文：甲辰，以兵部侍郎权德舆为太常卿，仍赐金紫。
现代文：二十九日，任命兵部侍郎权德舆为太常卿，接着赐予紫金鱼袋。
English: On the 29th, the Minister of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Guan Deyu, was appointed as the First Secretary of the Central Military Commission, and then he was given a purple gold fish bag.

古文：以御史大夫高郢为兵部尚书，以刑部郎中、侍御史知杂李夷简为御史中丞。
现代文：任命御史大夫高郢为兵部尚书，任命刑部郎中、侍御史知杂李夷简为御史中丞。
English: He appointed Mishi no daibu Takatsuki as Hyobusho Shosho, and appointed Gyobusho Roju and Samurai Mishi Chizho Riichan as Mishi chujo.

古文：五月丙午朔。
现代文：五月初一是丙午。
English: The first day of May falls on the afternoon of the third day.

古文：辛酉，刑部尚书郑元卒。
现代文：十六日，刑部尚书郑元去世。
English: On the 16th, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Zheng Yuan, passed away.

古文：丁卯，盐铁使、吏部尚书李巽卒。
现代文：二十二日，盐铁使、吏部尚书李巽去世。
English: On the 22nd, the envoy of salt and iron and the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Li, passed away.

古文：六月乙亥朔。
现代文：六月初一是乙亥。
English: The first day of June is the first day of the second Chinese lunar month.

古文：丁丑，以河东节度使李鄘为刑部尚书以充诸道盐铁转运使；以灵盐节度使范希朝为太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使；以右卫上将军王佖为灵州大都督府长史、灵盐节度使。
现代文：初三日，命令河东节度使李庸阝任刑部尚书，担任诸道盐铁转运使；任命灵盐节度使范希朝为太原府尹、北都太原留守、河东节度使；任命右卫上将军王亻必为灵州大都督府长史、灵盐节度使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he ordered the Hedong Festival to appoint Li Yongbai as the secretary of the Penal Department and as the envoy for the transfer of salt and iron to all provinces; appointed the Spirit Salt Festival to appoint Fan Xichang as the governor of Taiyuan, the governor of the Northern Capital of Taiyuan and the envoy for the Hedong Festival; appointed the Right Guard General Wang Bingbai as the governor of the Lingzhou Capital and the envoy for the Spirit Salt Festival.

古文：辛丑，五岭已北银坑任人开采，禁钱不过岭南。
现代文：二十七日，五岭山脉以北的银矿听任人们开采，禁止囤积钱币的命令贯彻不到岭南。
English: On the 27th, the silver mines north of the Wuling Mountains were allowed to be mined, and the order to ban the hoarding of coins could not be implemented in Lingnan.

古文：秋七月乙巳朔，御制《前代君臣事迹》十四篇，书于六扇屏风。
现代文：七月初一日，宪宗亲自撰写《前代君臣事迹》十四篇，书写在六扇屏风上。
English: On the first day of July, Emperor Kenzong personally wrote fourteen chapters of "The Deeds of Former Emperors and Ministers," which were written on six screens.

古文：是月，出书屏以示宰臣，李籓等表谢之。
现代文：这个月，摆出书写着《前代君臣事迹》的屏风让宰臣们观看，李藩等朝臣呈递奏表谢恩。
English: This month, a screen was set up for the aides-de-camp to view, with the words "the deeds of the former monarchs and ministers" written on it, and the Li clan and other courtiers presented thank-you cards.

古文：丁未，渭南暴水，坏庐舍二百余户，溺死六百人，命府司赈给。
现代文：初三日，渭南县洪水暴发，冲垮了两百多户人家的房屋，淹死了六百人，朝廷命令州府官吏散粮救灾。
English: On the third day of the first month, floods broke out in Yinan County, destroying the houses of more than two hundred families and drowning six hundred people. The imperial court ordered the state government officials to distribute grain for disaster relief.

古文：乙卯，右羽林统军高固卒。
现代文：十一日，右羽林统军高固去世。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Gao Gu, leader of the Right Uebayashi Unification Army, passed away.

古文：壬戌，御史中丞李夷简弹京兆尹杨凭前为江西观察使时赃罪，贬凭临贺尉。
现代文：十八日，御史中丞李夷简弹劾京兆尹杨凭以前任江西观察使期间的贪污罪，杨凭被贬谪为临贺县尉。
English: On the 18th, Grand Historian Li Yijian impeached Jing Zhao Yin Yang Biao for corruption during his previous term as Jiangxi Observer, and Yang Biao was demoted to Linhe County Lieutenant.

古文：戊辰，以尚书右丞许孟容为京兆尹，赐金紫。
现代文：二十四日，任命尚书右丞许孟容为京兆尹，赐给紫金鱼袋。
English: On the 24th, he appointed Shangshu Yuanzheng Xu Meng Rong as Beijing Zhaoyun and gave him a purple gold fish bag.

古文：八月甲戌朔。
现代文：八月初一是甲戌。
English: The first day of August is Armor Day.

古文：癸未，兗州鱼台县移置于黄台市。
现代文：初十日，兖州的鱼台县衙搬迁设置到黄台市。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the relocation of Yutai County in Luzhou to Huangdao City was set up.

古文：丙申，安南都护张舟奏破环王国三万余人，获战象、兵械，并王子五十九人。
现代文：二十三日，安南都护张舟禀奏打败环王国三万多人马，缴获了战象、武器装备，连同王子共俘获五十九人。
English: On the 23rd, Annan's tutelary Zhang Zhouqiao defeated more than 30,000 horses in the Ring Kingdom, captured war elephants, weapons and equipment, and captured 59 people together with the prince.

古文：癸卯，赠太师裴冕宜配享代宗庙庭，赠太师李晟、赠太尉段秀实宜配享德宗庙庭。
现代文：三十日，追认已故太师裴冕在代宗祠庙里设置灵位陪同享受祭祀，追认已故太师李晟、追认已故太尉段秀实在德宗祠庙里设置灵位陪同享受祭祀。
English: On the 30th, the recognition of the late Grand Master Fei Guan was set up in the ancestral ancestral temple to enjoy the sacrifice, and the recognition of the late Grand Master Li Xi and the recognition of the late Grand Officer Duan Xiuzhen were set up in the ancestral temple to enjoy the sacrifice.

古文：九月甲辰朔。
现代文：九月初一是甲辰。
English: The first day of September is Jia Chen.

古文：庚戌，以成德军都知兵马使、镇府右司马王承宗起复检校工部尚书，充成德军节度使；以德州刺史薛昌朝检校左常侍，充保信军节度、德棣等州观察等使。
现代文：初七日，将成德军都知兵马使、镇府右司马王承宗重新起用为检校工部尚书，担任成德军节度使；命令德州刺史薛昌朝任检校左常侍，担任保信军节度使和德、棣等州观察等使。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of the year, Wang Chengzong, the military envoy of the Chengdu German Army and the right secretary of the town government, was re-appointed as the inspector of the school inspection department and served as the inspector of the Chengdu German Army; he ordered Xue Chang, the inspector of the school inspection, to serve as the inspector of the school inspection, and served as the inspector of the festival of the Baoxin Army and the observation of the states such as Germany and Shandong.

古文：昌朝，薛嵩之子，婚于王氏，时为德州刺史。
现代文：薛昌朝是薛嵩的儿子，娶王承宗家的女儿为妻，当时任德州刺史。
English: Xue Changchao, the son of Xue Song, married the daughter of Wang Chengzong, who was the governor of Texas at the time.

古文：朝廷以承宗难制，乃割二州为节度，以授昌朝。
现代文：朝廷认为王承宗难得控制，就划分出德、棣两个州来设置节度，交给薛昌朝主管。
English: The imperial court thought that Wang Chengzong was difficult to control, so it divided the German and Han states to set up the festival, and handed it over to the head of the Xue Chang Dynasty.

古文：制才下，承宗以兵虏昌朝归镇州。
现代文：诏书刚刚发出，王承宗就派出军队俘虏薛昌朝返回镇州。
English: As soon as the edict was issued, Wang Chengzong sent troops to capture Xue Chang and return to Zhenzhou.

古文：丁卯，邠宁节度使、检校司空、同平章事高崇文卒。
现代文：二十四日，宁节度使、检校司空、同平章事高崇文逝世。
English: On the 24th, Ning Jiedu, the inspector of the school, Tongping Zhang, and Gao Chongwen passed away.

古文：冬十月癸酉朔，以右羽林统军阎巨源为邠州刺史、邠宁庆节度使，以少府监崔颋为同州刺史、本州防御、长春宫等使、癸未，诏： 成德军节度使王承宗顷在苫庐，潜窥戎镇。
现代文：十月初一日，任命右羽林统军阎巨源为州刺史和州、宁州、庆州节度使，任命少府监崔廷页为同州刺史、本州防御、长春宫等使。十一日，宪宗发出诏书 ：成德军节度使王承宗近段时间藏在密室里，暗中窥测京都。
English: On the first day of October, Yan Jiuyuan, the right-wing Lin Rongjun, was appointed as the envoy to record the history of the state and the festivals of the state, Ningzhou and Gyeongju, and Cui Tingzhe, the minor governor, was appointed as the envoy to record the history of the state, the defense of the state, and the Changchun Palace. On the 11th day, Emperor Xizong issued an edict: During the German military festival, Wang Chengzong had been hiding in a secret room for some time, secretly spying on Kyoto.

古文：而内外以事君之礼，叛而必诛；分土之仪，专则有辟。
现代文：京官外官按照事奉国君的理义，背叛朝廷就得惩处；按照分封土地的法规，独断专行就是犯罪。
English: According to the principle of serving the sovereign, if a foreign official in Beijing betrays the imperial court, he must be punished; according to the laws of land allocation, it is a crime to act arbitrarily.

古文：朕念其先祖尝有茂勋，贷以私恩，抑于公议。
现代文：我看在他先祖曾经立有卓越功勋的分上，用个人恩情来宽恕他，对公众舆论进行了压制。
English: In my opinion, he suppressed public opinion by using personal favors to pardon his ancestors for their outstanding merits.

古文：使臣旁午以告谕，孽童俯伏以陈诚，愿献两州，期无二事。
现代文：反复派遣朝臣指明他的罪错，这个忤逆的小子匍匐在地表明自己的诚意，愿意献出德、棣两个州，保证不再发生同类事件。
English: Repeatedly sending courtiers to point out his faults, this rebellious young man boldly declared his sincerity and was willing to give up two states, Germany and Japan, to ensure that similar incidents would not happen again.

古文：朕亦收其后效，用以曲全，授节制于旧疆，齿勋贤于列位。
现代文：我也决定观察他的后效，用变通方法保全他，授予他原来辖区的节度使职务，赐给他先辈功臣的相应爵号。
English: I also decided to observe his after-effects, to preserve him with workarounds, to grant him the post of governor of his original jurisdiction, and to give him the corresponding title of his predecessors.

古文：况德、棣本非成德所管，昌朝又是承宗懿亲，俾抚近邻，斯诚厚泽，外虽两镇，内是一家。
现代文：况且德、棣两州本来不受成德军管辖，薛昌朝又是王承宗的至亲，安排他们作互相抚慰的亲近邻居，这实在是巨大的恩德，表面上是两个方镇，实质上是一家子。
English: Moreover, the German and Han states were not under the jurisdiction of the German army, and the Xue Chang Dynasty was also a close relative of Wang Chengzong, arranging them to be close neighbors to comfort each other. This is really a huge boon. On the surface, they are two towns, but in essence they are one family.

古文：而承宗象恭怀奸，肖貌稔恶，欺裴武于得位之后，囚昌朝于授命之中。
现代文：但王承宗外表恭谨内心奸诈，装着恭谨的样子打着罪恶的主意，在获得官职以后欺侮裴武，在接受朝廷命令之时囚禁了薛昌朝。
English: However, Wang Chengzong was outwardly courteous, but inwardly treacherous. He wore a courteous appearance with evil intentions. After obtaining the official post, he bullied Pei Wu. When he received the order from the imperial court, he imprisoned Xue Changdai.

古文：加以表疏之章，悖慢斯甚，义士之所兴叹，天地之所不容。
现代文：加上在呈递给朝廷的奏表奏疏之中，狂悖傲慢得很，正义的人为此而发出感叹，天地也认为这不可容忍。
English: In addition, in the absence of the report form submitted to the imperial court, he was very arrogant, and the righteous people sighed for this, and heaven and earth also thought that this was intolerable.

古文：恭行天诛，盖示朝典，承宗在身官爵，并宜削夺。 
现代文：严正地对他实行上天的惩罚，来表明国法的威力，王承宗的所有官职爵号，应当全部剥夺。 
English: To show the power of the law of the land, Wang Chengzong should be stripped of all his titles.

古文：以神策左军中尉吐突承璀为镇州行营招讨处置等使，以龙武将军赵万敌为神策先锋将，内官宋惟澄、曹进玉、马朝江等为行营馆驿粮料等使。
现代文：任命神策左军中尉吐突承璀为镇州行营招讨处置等使，任命龙武将军赵万敌为神策先锋将，内官宋惟登、曹进玉、马朝江等人担任负责部队行军住宿军粮马料的行营馆驿粮料等使。
English: He appointed Lieutenant of the Left Division of the Divine Strategy Army, Tu Tu Chengyu, as the envoy of the Zhenzhou Campaign to solicit and deal with the matter, and appointed Long Wu general Zhao Wanchun as the vanguard commander of the Divine Strategy Army, and the officers Song Weiden, Cao Jinyu, Ma Chaojiang and others as the envoys responsible for the troops' marching, lodging, grain and horse feed.

古文：京兆尹许孟容与谏官面论，征伐大事，不可以内官为将帅，补阙独孤郁其言激切。
现代文：京兆尹许孟容和谏议官员们当面议论，征讨叛逆是件大事，不能够把内官任命为将帅，补阙独孤郁的言辞最为激烈率直。
English: Jing Zhao, Yin Xu, Meng Rong and the officials in charge of the discussion discussed face-to-face that it was a big deal to solicit rebellion, and it was not possible to appoint the inner officer as the commander-in-chief. The rhetoric of making up for one's loneliness was the most intense and frank.

古文：诏旨只改处置为宣慰，犹存招讨之名。
现代文：宪宗诏令只把 镇州行营招讨处置等使 中的 处置 一词改为 宣慰 ，还是保留 招讨 的名义。
English: The Emperor Gensong's edict only changed the word "disposition" in the "Disposition of Invitation to Camps in Zhenzhou" to "consolation," but still retained the name of "invitation."

古文：己丑，诏军进讨，其王武俊、士真坟墓，军士不得樵采，其士平、士则各守本官，仍令士则各袭武俊之封。
现代文：十七日，诏令军队出征讨伐，对王武俊、王士真的坟墓，部队的士卒们不准上去打柴，对王士平、王士则的要求是各人办好官职份内的事，仍旧让王士则各兄弟继承王武俊的封号。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor ordered the army to go on a crusade against Wang Wujun and Wang Shizhen's grave, and the soldiers were not allowed to go up to collect firewood. The requirement for Wang Shiping and Wang Shizhen was that everyone should do well in their official positions, and still let Wang Shizhen's brothers inherit Wang Wujun's title.

古文：庚寅，册邓王宁为皇太子。
现代文：十八日，册立邓王李宁为皇太子。
English: On the 18th, Deng Wang Lining was enthroned as crown prince.

古文：癸巳，以册储，肆赦系囚，死罪降从流，流以下递降一等。
现代文：二十一日，由于册立了皇太子，大赦在押囚犯，死刑减为流放，流放以下依次减刑一等。
English: On the 21st, due to the enthronement of the crown prince, prisoners in custody were amnestied, the death penalty was reduced to banishment, and the sentence was reduced one level below banishment.

古文：文武常参官、外州府长官子为父后者，赐勋两转。
现代文：朝内文武常参官员、外州府头号官员的儿子，官职爵位比父亲低的，赐给勋官两等。
English: The son of the most senior civil and military official of the Joseon Dynasty and the highest-ranking official of Gwangju, he was given a lower official title and rank than his father, and was given the second-class medal.

古文：工部侍郎归登、给事中吕元膺为皇太子诸王侍读。
现代文：工部侍郎归登、给事中吕元膺担任皇太子和各位皇子的侍读。
English: The attendant of the engineering department returned to the throne, and in the middle of the event, Lü Yuanzhang served as the attendant of the crown prince and the princes.

古文：己亥，吐突承璀军发京师，上御通化门劳遣之。
现代文：二十七日，吐突承璀的军队从京城出发，宪宗亲临通化门慰问送行。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, the army of Tutu Chengyu set out from the capital, and Kenzong personally visited Tonghua Gate to offer condolences and see them off.

古文：十一月癸卯朔，浙西苏、润、常州旱俭，赈米二万石。
现代文：十一月初一日，浙西道的苏州、润州、常州遭受旱灾而歉收，朝廷发放了两万石稻米救济灾民。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, Suzhou, Runzhou and Changzhou in West Zhejiang Province suffered a poor harvest due to drought, and the imperial court distributed 20,000 kilos of rice to help the victims.

古文：甲子，河南尹杜兼卒。
现代文：二十二日，河南府尹杜兼去世。
English: On the 22nd, Yin Duqian of Henan Province passed away.

古文：己巳，彰义军节度使、检校司空、同平章事吴少诚卒。
现代文：二十七日，彰义军节度使、检校司空、同平章事吴少诚去世。
English: On the 27th day of the month, Wu Shaocheng, the commander of the festival of the Zhangyi Army, the inspector of the inspection of schools, and the head of the Tongping chapter, passed away.

古文：十二月壬申朔，以户部侍郎张弘靖为陕府长史、陕虢观察陆运等使，赐金紫。
现代文：十二月初一日，任命户部侍郎张弘靖为陕府长史、陕虢观察陆运等使，赐给紫金鱼袋。
English: On the first day of December, Zhang Hongjing, the head of the Household Division, was appointed as the chief historian of Shaanxi Province and the envoy of Shaanxi and Fujian to observe land transportation, and was given a purple gold fish bag.

古文：以陕虢观察使房式为河南尹。
现代文：任命陕虢观察使房式为河南府尹。
English: The appointment of Shaanxi and Fujian observation makes the room type as Yin of Henan Province.

古文：中丞李夷简奏： 诸州府于两税外违格科率，请诸道盐铁、转运、度支、巡院察访报台司，以凭举奏。 
现代文：中丞李夷简禀奏 ：各个州府在国家规定的夏秋两次纳税款项之外违反规定分派赋税数额，请各道的盐铁、转运、度支、巡院调查清楚后报告给台司，以便据实向皇上禀奏。 
English: Vice-Commander Li Yijian reported: Each prefectural government allocated the tax amount in violation of the regulations in addition to the two tax payments in the summer and autumn stipulated by the state, please report to the director after the investigation of the salt railway, transshipment, subsidy, and inspection stations in each province is clear, so that it can be reported to the emperor.

古文：从之。
现代文：宪宗同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：五年春正月壬寅朔，己巳，浙西观察使韩皋以杖决安吉令孙澥致死，有乖典法，罚一月俸料。
现代文：元和五年正月初一是壬寅。二十八日，浙西观察使韩皋因判处安吉县令孙氵解的杖刑以致打死了他，背离了法律规章，罚扣他一个月的薪俸赏赐。
English: The first day of the first month of the Yuan and the first month of the fifth year is Renin. On the 28th, the West Zhejiang Observation Center made Han Wei punish him by deducting one month's salary and reward for sentencing Anji County's Sun Xuanlu to cane punishment and beating him to death, deviating from laws and regulations.

古文：二月辛未朔。
现代文：二月初一是辛未。
English: The first day of February is the beginning of winter.

古文：戊子，礼院奏东宫殿阁名及宫臣姓名，与太子名同者改之，其上台官列、王官爵土无例辄改，从之。
现代文：十八日，礼院禀奏东宫殿阁的名称和宫中臣子的姓名，跟皇太子李宁的名字相同的应当改换，那些登上了尚书、御史等台官级别的官员、各位亲王的官阶爵号封地不符合规定的要立即更改，宪宗同意。
English: On the 18th, the name of the east palace pavilion and the names of the courtiers in the palace, which were the same as the name of the crown prince Li Ning, should be changed. Those officials who had ascended to the level of officials such as Shangshu and Goshi, and the official ranks and titles of the princes who did not meet the requirements should be changed immediately. The Constitutional Court agreed.

古文：东台监察御史元稹摄河南尹房式于台，擅令停务，贬江陵府士曹参军。
现代文：东台监察御史元稹把河南尹房式拘捕到东台，擅自让他停职，被贬谪为江陵府士曹参军。
English: The Dongtai Supervisor, Historian Yuan Xuan, arrested Henan Yin Fangxiao to Dongtai, suspended him without authorization, and he was demoted to the rank of Gangneung Prefecture Sgt. Cao.

古文：三月辛丑朔，宰相杜祐与同列宴于樊川别墅，上遣中使赐酒馔。
现代文：三月初一日，宰相杜佑和同事们在樊川别墅宴饮，宪宗派中使给他赏赐酒菜。
English: On the first day of March, Prime Minister Du You and his colleagues had a banquet at the Luchuan Villa. He was presented with food and drink by the leaders of the Constitutionalist faction.

古文：乙巳，以御史中丞李夷简为户部侍郎、判度支，以兵部侍郎王播为御史中丞。
现代文：初五日，任命御史中丞李夷简为户部侍郎、判度支，任命兵部侍郎王播为御史中丞。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Li Yijian, the Vice-Minister of History, was appointed as the Household Attendant, and Wang Bo, the Vice-Minister of War, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of History.

古文：癸巳，以太子宾客郑絪检校礼部尚书、广州刺史、岭南节度使。
现代文：十三日，任命太子宾客郑纟因为检校礼部尚书、广州刺史、岭南节度使。
English: On the 13th, the prince's guest, Zheng Jun, was appointed as the inspector of the school inspection department, the Guangzhou chief historian, and the Lingnan festival envoy.

古文：己未，制以遂王宥为彰义军节度使，以申州刺史吴少阳为申光蔡节度留后。
现代文：十九日，诏令遂王李宥任彰义军节度使，任命申州刺史吴少阳为申州、光州、蔡州节度留后。
English: On the 19th, Wang Liyu was appointed as the festival envoy of the Zhangyi Army by imperial decree, and Wu Shaoyang, a scholar from Shenzhou, was appointed as the festival ambassador of Shenzhou, Gwangju and Caizhou.

古文：甲子，大风折木。
现代文：二十四日，暴风刮断了树木。
English: On the 24th, a storm blew down trees.

古文：丁卯，宰相于頔请依杜祐例一月三朝，从之。
现代文：二十七日，宰相于由页请求按照对杜佑的规定一个月内进宫朝拜三次，宪宗同意。
English: On the 27th, the Prime Minister, at the request of Yu Yueh, went to the palace to pay homage three times within one month in accordance with the provisions for Du You, and the Emperor agreed.

古文：夏四月庚午朔。
现代文：四月初一是庚午。
English: The first day of April is Geng'ao.

古文：癸酉，户部尚书李元素卒。
现代文：初四日，户部尚书李元素去世。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the head of the household, Shangshu Li, passed away.

古文：甲申，镇州行营招讨使吐突承璀执昭义节度使卢从史，载从史送京师。
现代文：十五日，镇州行营招讨使吐突承璀拘捕了昭义节度使卢从史，用囚车把他押送到京城。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Zhenzhou marching camp recruiting officer Tutu Chengyi arrested Shao Yi Jiedu recruiting officer Lu Zengshi, and sent him to Beijing in a prison van.

古文：丁亥，河东范希朝奏破贼于木刀沟。
现代文：十八日，河东道的范希朝禀奏说在木刀沟打败了敌人。
English: On the 18th, Fan Xizhong of Hedong Road said that he had defeated the enemy in Xutanggou.

古文：福州复置侯官、长乐二县，建州置将乐县。
现代文：在福州恢复设立侯官、长乐两县，在建州设立将乐县。
English: In Fuzhou, the establishment of the two counties of Houkan and Changle was resumed, and in Jianzhou, the establishment of Jianle County was resumed.

古文：壬申，以昭义都知兵马使、潞州左司马乌重胤为怀州刺史、河阳三城怀州节度使，以河阳节度使孟元阳为潞州长史、昭义军节度、泽潞磁邢洺观察使。
现代文：二十三日，任命昭义都知兵马使、潞州左司马乌重胤为怀州刺史、河阳三城怀州节度使，任命河阳节度使孟元阳为潞州长史、昭义军节度使和泽州、潞州、磁州、邢州、氵名州观察使。
English: On the 23rd, the Shouyi Tochi Terracotta Warriors and Horses Envoy, the Zhangzhou Zuosima Wu Shigetian was appointed as the Waizhou Historian, the Heyang Three Cities Waizhou Festival Envoy, the Heyang Festival Envoy Meng Wenyang was appointed as the Zhangzhou Governor's Historian, and the Shouyi Army Festival Envoy was appointed as the Heze, Zhangzhou, Zengzhou, Zhangzhou, and Anming Observing Envoy.

古文：戊戌，贬前昭义节度使卢从史为驩州司马。
现代文：二十九日，把前昭义节度使卢从史贬谪为州司马。
English: On the 29th, Lu Congshi was demoted to the position of prefectural governor by the former Shao Yi Sect.

古文：五月庚子朔。
现代文：五月初一是庚子。
English: The first day of May is Geng Zi.

古文：乙巳，昭义军三千人夜溃奔魏州。
现代文：初六日，昭义军的三千人马乘夜晚溃散逃跑到魏州。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, three thousand horses of the Shouyi Army broke up and fled to Weizhou at night.

古文：右神策军使段祐卒。
现代文：右神策军使段去世。
English: The envoy of the Right Divine Providence Army passed away.

古文：庚申，吐蕃使论思即热朝贡，并归郑叔矩、路泌之柩。
现代文：二十一日，吐蕃的使者论思即热进京朝拜进贡，同时送回了郑叔矩、路泌的灵柩。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emissaries from Tubo went to Beijing to worship and pay tribute, and at the same time sent back the coffins of Zheng Shucheng and Lu Xuan.

古文：六月庚午朔。
现代文：六月初一是庚午。
English: The first day of June is Geng'ao.

古文：戊寅，以太府卿李少和为洪州刺史、江西观察使。
现代文：初九日，任命太府卿李少和为洪州刺史、江西观察使。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Li Shaohe, Taifuqing, was appointed as the Hongzhou chief historian and the Jiangxi observation envoy.

古文：奚、回纥、室韦寇振武。
现代文：奚国、回纥、室韦侵犯振武军。
English: Shan State, Yunnan, and Muroto invaded the Zhenwu Army.

古文：癸巳，应给食实封例，节度使兼宰相，每食实封百户，岁给八百端匹，若是绢，加给绵六百两；节度使不兼宰相，每百户给四百端匹；军使诸卫大将军，每百户给三百五十端匹。
现代文：二十四日，收纳实际封户赋税的折算条例规定，兼任宰相的节度使，每收纳实际封户一百户的赋税，一年供给布帛八百匹，如果是绢，另外供给六百两绵；不兼宰相的节度使，每收纳实际封户一百户的赋税，一年供给布帛四百端匹；各个卫大将军军使，每收纳实际封户一百户的赋税，一年供给布帛三百五十端匹。
English: On the 24th, the regulations on the conversion of the collection of the actual tax for the fencing of households stipulated that for each year of the collection of the tax for the actual fencing of 100 households, the designated official, who was also the prime minister, would provide 800 pieces of cloth, and if it was a donkey, an additional 600 two-ton pieces; for the collection of the tax for the actual fencing of 100 households, the designated official, who was not the prime minister, would provide 400 pieces of cloth a year; and for each year of the collection of the tax for the actual fencing of 100 households, the designated official of the General of the Great Palace Guards would provide 350 pieces of cloth

古文：秋七月己亥朔。
现代文：七月初一是己亥。
English: The first day of July is Ji Hai.

古文：庚子，承宗遣判官崔遂上表自首，请输常赋，朝廷除授官吏。
现代文：初二日，王承宗派遣判官崔遂进京呈递奏表自行投案认罪，请求按照朝廷法律缴纳赋税，由朝廷罢免任命他的官员属吏。
English: On the second day of the first month, Wang Chengzong sent the judge Cui Sui to Beijing to submit a report form to plead guilty, request to pay taxes in accordance with the laws of the imperial court, and to remove the officials appointed by the imperial court.

古文：丁未，诏昭洗王承宗，复其官爵，待之如初。
现代文：初九日，宪宗颁发诏书替王承宗平反昭雪，恢复他的官职爵号，像从前一样对待他。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Emperor Xianzong issued an edict on behalf of Wang Chengzong to rehabilitate Zhao Xue, restore his official title and treat him as before.

古文：诸道行营将士，共赐物二十八万四百三十端匹。
现代文：给各道的行营将士，总共赏赐布帛二十八万零四百三十匹。
English: A total of 2,804,030 pieces of cloth were given to the campers from each province.

古文：时招讨非其人，诸军解体，而籓邻观望养寇，空为逗挠，以弊国赋。
现代文：当时因统率招讨的人选不当，各道军队关系涣散。邻近的藩镇又迟疑不决放纵敌人养成寇患，只在那里躲躲闪闪回避敌人，使得朝廷的军队疲惫不堪。
English: At that time, due to the improper selection of the person to lead and recruit, the relationship between the armies of each province was scattered. The neighboring towns hesitantly allowed the enemy to develop into a bandit, only there to dodge and avoid the enemy, making the imperial army exhausted.

古文：而李师道、刘济亟请昭雪，乃归罪卢从史而宥承宗。不得已而行之也。
现代文：而李师道、刘济又多次请求为王承宗平反昭雪，就把罪过归结到卢从史头上而宽恕了王承宗，是不得已才这样处理的。
English: However, Li Shidao and Liu Ji repeatedly requested that Wang Chengzong be vindicated, and they attributed the crime to Lu from the beginning of history and forgave Wang Chengzong. They had no choice but to do so.

古文：幽州刘济加中书令，魏博田季安加司徒，淄青李师道加仆射，并以罢兵加赏也。
现代文：幽州的刘济被任命为中书令，魏博的田季安被任命为司徒，淄青的李师道被任命为仆射，都是由于停止战争而得到封赏的。
English: Liu Jie of Yuzhou was appointed as the Clerk of the Chinese Academy of Letters, Tian Ji'an of Weibo was appointed as the Secretary of State, and Li Shidao of Jiaqing was appointed as the Secretary of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs. All of them were rewarded for stopping the war.

古文：乙卯，幽州节度使刘济为其子总鸩死。
现代文：十七日，幽州节度使刘济被他的儿子刘总用鸩酒毒死。
English: On the 17th day of the Yuzhou Festival, Liu Ji was poisoned to death by his son Liu Zang with poisoned wine.

古文：庚申，以虔州刺史马总为安南都护、本管经略使。
现代文：二十二日，任命虔州刺史马总为安南都护、本管经略使。
English: On the 22nd, the governor of Gyeongju, Jishima, was appointed as the guardian of the capital of South Korea, and the special envoy of the governor.

古文：八月乙巳朔。
现代文：八月初一是己巳。
English: The first day of August has come and gone.

古文：乙亥，上顾谓宰臣曰： 神仙之事信乎？
现代文：初七日，宪宗环视着众宰臣说 ：神仙的事情可信吗？ 
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Kenzong looked around at all his vassals and said, "Is the story of the immortals credible?"

古文：李籓对曰： 神仙之说，出于道家；所宗《老子》五千文为本。
现代文：李藩回答说： 神仙的学说，是从道教产生的；它以老子的《道德经》作为根据。
English: Li Han replied: The doctrine of the immortals is derived from Taoism; it is based on Laozi's "Tao Te Ching."

古文：《老子》指归，与经无异。
现代文：《道德经》的主旨，跟儒家的《诗经》、《尚书》、《易经》、《礼记》、《春秋》没有什么不同。
English: The main theme of the Tao Te Ching is no different from that of the Confucian "Book of Songs," "Book of Songs," "Book of Changes," "Book of Rites" and "Spring and Autumn."

古文：后代好怪之流，假托老子神仙之说。
现代文：后代喜爱稀奇荒诞的人们，假托老子的名义来制造散布神仙的学说。
English: Subsequent generations of people who loved the strange and the absurd, fabricated and spread the doctrine of the immortals in the name of Lao Zi.

古文：故秦始皇遣方士载男女入海求仙，汉武帝嫁女与方士求不死药，二主受惑，卒无所得。
现代文：所以秦始皇派遣方士用船带上少男少女到海上去求仙，汉武帝把女儿嫁给方士求取吃了永远不死的药物，两位皇帝受了蒙蔽，终究没有得到长生。
English: Therefore, Qin Shihuang Emperor sent an envoy with a boat to take young boys and girls to the sea to ask for immortality. Emperor Hanwu married his daughter to the envoy and ate the medicine that would never die. The two emperors were deceived and ultimately did not receive eternal life.

古文：文皇帝服胡僧长生药，遂致暴疾不救。
现代文：文皇帝服用了外国和尚的长生不老药，导致暴病逝世无法补救。
English: Emperor Wen took the elixir of life from a foreign monk, which led to his death from a violent illness that could not be cured.

古文：古诗云： 服食求神仙，多为药所误。 
现代文：古诗说： 服食求神仙，多为药所误。 
English: An ancient poem says: If you eat and drink to please the gods, you will mostly be mistaken for medicine.

古文：诚哉是言也。
现代文：这句话是何等中肯啊！
English: How pertinent this statement is!

古文：君人者，但务求理，四海乐推，社稷延永，自然长年也。 
现代文：作为国君，只有努力追求天下大治，黎民百姓拥护爱戴，江山千秋万代永无止境，自然是万寿无疆了。 
English: As the sovereign of the country, only by diligently pursuing the great rule of the country can the people of the country support and love him. There is no end to the vicissitudes of the country for thousands of generations. Naturally, there is no limit to longevity.

古文：上深然之。
现代文：宪宗深深感到这话的正确。
English: Gensong deeply felt that this was the right thing to say.

古文：以浙东观察使薛苹为润州刺史、浙西观察使，以常州刺史李逊为越州刺史、浙东观察使。
现代文：任命浙东观察使薛苹为润州刺史、浙西观察使，任命常州刺史李逊为越州刺史、浙东观察使。
English: He appointed Xue Ping, the observer of East Zhejiang, as the observer of Runzhou and the observer of West Zhejiang, and appointed Li Xun, the observer of Changzhou, as the observer of Yuezhou and the observer of East Zhejiang.

古文：以都官郎中韦贯之为中书舍人，起居舍人裴度为司封员外郎、知制诰。
现代文：任命都官郎中韦贯之为中书舍人，起居舍人裴度为司封员外郎、知制诰。
English: He appointed the vassal of the governor of the capital, Zhongwei Guanzhong, as the vassal of the central government, and the vassal of the provincial government, Pei Du, as the vassal of the provincial government and the vassal of the provincial government.

古文：癸巳，以邓州刺史崔咏为邕州刺史、本管经略使。
现代文：二十五日，任命邓州刺史崔咏为邕州刺史、本管经略使。
English: On the 25th, Deng Zhou's aide, Cui Wei, was appointed as Zhang Zhou's aide and deputy chief of the bureau.

古文：九月戊戌朔。
现代文：九月初一是戊戌。
English: The first day of September is Pentecost.

古文：辛亥，以吐突承璀复为左军中尉。
现代文：十四日，恢复吐突承璀的左军中尉职务。
English: On the 14th, the post of lieutenant of the Left Army was restored to Tutu Chengyu.

古文：谏官以承璀建谋讨伐无功，请行朝典。
现代文：谏官认为吐突承璀建议讨伐王承宗但没有功劳，请求按照国法予以制裁。
English: The eunuch thought that Tutu Chengjun's suggestion to fight Wang Chengzong was not meritorious, and requested that sanctions be imposed in accordance with national law.

古文：上宥之，降承璀为军器使。
现代文：宪宗宽恕了他，只是把他贬职为军器使。
English: Kenzong forgave him, but demoted him to a military attaché.

古文：乃以内官程文干为左军中尉。
现代文：于是任命内官程文干为左军中尉。
English: As a result, he appointed his secretary, Cheng Wenkan, as a lieutenant of the Left Army.

古文：壬戌，以瀛州刺史刘总起复受幽州长史，充幽州卢龙军节度使。
现代文：二十五日，恢复起用瀛州刺史刘总任幽州长史，担任幽州卢龙军节度使。
English: On the 25th, the appointment of Yuzhou Governor Liu as the head of Yuzhou Lulong Army was restored.

古文：癸亥，以兵部尚书高郢为右仆射致仕。
现代文：二十六日，任命兵部尚书高郢为右仆射退休回家。
English: On the 26th, Gao Yao, the head of the military department, was appointed as his right-hand man and retired to his home.

古文：丙寅，制以正议大夫、守太常卿、上柱国、襄武县开国侯、赐紫金鱼袋权德舆可守礼部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十九日，诏令正议大夫、守太常卿、上柱国、襄武县开国侯、赐紫金鱼袋权德舆批准兼任比本身职务高的礼部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 29th, the imperial edict was issued to confer the title of Doctor of Ceremonies, the title of Grand Marshal, the title of Shangzhu Guo, the title of Founding Marquis of Xiangwu County, and the title of Shangshu of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, which was higher than his own position, and the title of Shangping of the Ministry of Letters, which was lower than his position.

古文：丁卯，翰林学士独孤郁守本官起居，以妻父权德舆在中书，避嫌也。
现代文：三十日，翰林学士独孤郁兼任比本身职务高的起居官，是因为他的岳父权德舆在中书省，需要回避。
English: On the 30th, Hanlin, a bachelor, was lonely and depressed, and also served as a higher-ranking living official than his own position, because his father-in-law, Dezhou, was in the Central Book Ministry and needed to be avoided.

古文：冬十月戊辰朔，以京兆尹许孟容为兵部侍郎，以中丞王播代容，又以吕元膺代播。
现代文：十月初一日，任命京兆尹许孟容为兵部侍郎，任命中丞王播接替许孟容为京兆尹，又任命吕元膺接替王播为中丞。
English: On the first day of October, he appointed Jing Zhaoyun Xu Meng Rong as the attendant of the military department, appointed Vice-Commander Wang Bo to replace Xu Meng Rong as Vice-Commander, and appointed Lü Yuanqi to replace Wang Bo as Vice-Commander.

古文：升平大长公主薨。
现代文：升平大长公主逝世。
English: Princess Shohei no Okimi passed away.

古文：庚辰，宰相裴垍进所撰《德宗实录》五十卷，赐垍锦彩三百匹、银器等，史官蒋武、韦处厚等颁赐有差。
现代文：十三日，宰相裴土自进献自己撰写的《德宗实录》五十卷，宪宗赐给他三百匹彩色绢帛、银质器物等等，史官蒋武、韦处厚等人也按等级给予了赏赐。
English: On the 13th, Prime Minister Pei Tu presented 50 volumes of the "True Record of the German Sect" written by himself. The Emperor gave him 300 colored horses, silverware, etc. Historians Jiang Wu and Wei Shuanhou also gave rewards according to their ranks.

古文：辛巳，定州将杨伯玉诱三军为乱，拘行军司马任迪简。
现代文：十四日，定州将领杨伯玉引诱三军叛乱，拘捕了行军司马任迪简。
English: On the 14th, Yang Bo-yu, the general of Dingzhou, lured the three armies into a rebellion and arrested the marshal Ma Ren Di-jian.

古文：别将张佐元杀伯玉，迪简谋归朝，三军惧，乃杀佐元。
现代文：别将张佐元杀掉了杨伯玉，任迪简谋划回到朝廷，三军将士恐惧，就杀死了张佐元。
English: Don't kill Zhang Sanyuan, kill Yang Boyu, let Diyan plot to return to the imperial court, the three soldiers are afraid, so they killed Zhang Sanyuan.

古文：壬辰，制以迪简检校工部尚书、定州长史，充义武军节度观察、北平军等使。
现代文：二十五日，诏令任迪简任检校工部尚书、定州长史，担任义武军节度观察、北平军等使。
English: On the 25th, Ren Diqian was appointed as the inspector of the school inspection department and the governor of the history department, and served as the observer of the festival of the volunteer army and the envoy of the Peiping Army.

古文：甲午，以前义武军节度、检校太尉、兼太子太傅、同平章事张茂昭检校太尉、兼中书令、河中尹，充河中晋绛慈隰节度使。
现代文：二十七日，命令前义武军节度、检校太尉、兼太子太傅、同平章事张茂昭任检校太尉、兼任中书令、河中府尹，担任河中府的晋州、绛州、慈州、隰州节度使。
English: On the 27th, he ordered Zhang Maozhao, the former commander of the Yiwu Army, the inspector of the school, the prince of the prince, and the peer of the peer, to serve as the inspector of the school, the secretary of the Central Government, the governor of the Central Government, and the festival envoy of the Central Government in Jinzhou, Zhangzhou, Cizhou, and Zhangzhou.

古文：十一月戊戌朔，浙西奏当镇旧有丹阳军，今请并为镇海军，从之。
现代文：十一月初一日，浙西禀奏本镇原有的丹阳军，现在请求合并为镇海军，宪宗同意。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the former Danyang Army in the town of Xishuanzo, Zhejiang Province, requested to be merged into the town's navy, and Xizong agreed.

古文：庚子，右金吾卫大将军伊慎降为右卫将军，以行赂三十万与中尉第五从直，求为河东节度故也。
现代文：初三日，右金吾卫大将军伊慎降职为右卫将军，是因为他送给中尉第五从直三十万钱进行贿赂，要求担任河东节度使的缘故。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Isen, the commander of the Right Division of the 5th Division of the 5th Division of the 5th Division, was demoted to the position of the commander of the Right Division, because he gave 300,000 yuan to the 5th Lieutenant of the 5th Division of the 5th Division of the 5th Division of the 5th Division of the 5th Division of the 5th Division of the 5th Division of the 5th Division of the 5th Division of the 5th Division of the 5th Division of the 5th Division of the 5th Division.

古文：甲辰，会王纁薨。
现代文：初七日，会王李纟熏逝世。
English: On the seventh day of the first lunar month, the king of the association, Li Yuxuan, passed away.

古文：庚戌，以前河中节度使王锷检校司空、兼太子太傅、太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
现代文：十三日，命令前河中节度使王锷任检校司空、兼任太子太傅、太原府尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
English: On the 13th, the former Mid-Hebei Festival was ordered to appoint Wang Xuan as the inspector of schools, concurrently serving as the prince of Taifu, the prince of Taiyuan, the governor of Beidou, and the East Hedong Festival envoy.

古文：以代州刺史阿跌光进为单于大都护、振武麟胜节度度支营田观察押蕃落等使。
现代文：任命代州刺史阿跌光进为单于大都护和振武、麟胜的节度、度支、营田、观察、押蕃落等使。
English: He appointed Daishu Shishi Adokwangjin as the envoy for the protection of the capital, the defense of the capital, the victory of the victory of the victory of the victory of the victory of the victory of the victory of the victory of the victory of the victory of the victory.

古文：庚申，以中书侍郎、平章事裴垍为兵部尚书。
现代文：二十三日，任命中书侍郎、平章事裴土自为兵部尚书。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed Zhongshu Zhi Rong and Ping Zhangji Pei Tu himself as the secretary of the military department.

古文：以前保信军节度使、德州刺史薛昌朝为右武卫将军。前为王承宗虏之，囚于镇州，至是归朝故也。
现代文：任命前保信军节度使、德州刺史薛昌朝为右武卫将军，是因以前被王承宗抓去，囚禁在镇州，到现在才回到朝廷的缘故。
English: The reason for appointing the former festival envoy of the Hoxin Army, the Texian commander Xue Chang, as the General of the Right Division was that he had been arrested by Wang Chengzong, imprisoned in Zhenzhou, and had only now returned to the imperial court.

古文：丙寅，吏部郎中柳公绰献《太医箴》，上深喜纳，遣中使劳之。
现代文：二十九日，吏部郎中柳公绰进献《太医箴》，宪宗十分高兴地接受了，派遣中使慰劳他。
English: On the 29th, the chief secretary's son, Liu Gongzhao, presented the "Great Physician's Precept," which was gladly accepted by the Emperor, who sent an envoy to console him.

古文：十二月丁卯朔。
现代文：十二月初一是丁卯。
English: The first day of December is Dingwu.

古文：癸酉，诸道盐铁转运使、刑部尚书李鄘检校吏部尚书，兼扬府长史，充淮南节度使。
现代文：初七日，诸道盐铁转运使、刑部尚书李庸阝任检校吏部尚书，兼任扬府长史，担任淮南节度使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Li Yongyao, the envoy for the transfer of salt and iron from various provinces and the inspector of the criminal justice department, was appointed as the inspector of the school inspection department, and also served as the governor of Yangfu and the festival envoy of Huainan.

古文：以河南尹房式为宣州刺史、宣歙池观察、采石军等使。
现代文：任命河南府尹房式为宣州刺史和宣、歙、池三州观察、采石军等使。
English: Yin Fang of Henan Province was appointed as the envoy of Xuanzhou to record the history of Xuanzhou, and the envoy of Xuanzhou, Yunnan, and Chi to observe the three states and the quarrying army.

古文：以前宣歙观察使卢坦为刑部侍郎，充诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：命令前宣歙观察使卢坦任刑部侍郎，担任诸道盐铁转运使。
English: Before the order was issued, Lu Tan was appointed as the attendant of the criminal department, and served as the envoy of salt and iron transportation.

古文：壬午，以吏部郎中柳公绰为御史中丞。
现代文：十六日，任命吏部郎中柳公绰为御史中丞。
English: On the 16th, he appointed Rikibu-ro Chuchu Yanagikimi as Goshi Chujo.

古文：以前御史中丞吕元膺为鄂州刺史、鄂黄岳沔蕲安黄等州观察使。
现代文：任命前御史中丞吕元膺为鄂州刺史和鄂、黄、岳、沔、蕲、安、黄等州观察使。
English: Appointed the former Vice-Minister of History, Ryu Won-soo, as the Observer of Huzhou, Hubei, Hwanghae, Yue, Gansu, Fujian, An and Hwanghae.

古文：以鄂岳察使郗士美为河南尹。
现代文：任命鄂岳观察使郗士美为河南府尹。
English: Appointment of Hougue observation makes Wuxi Mei the Yin of Henan.

古文：新授谏议大夫蒋武请改名乂。
现代文：新任谏议大夫蒋武请求改名叫。
English: Jiang Wu, the newly-appointed chief medical officer, asked to change his name.

古文：以吏部侍郎崔邠为太常卿。
现代文：任命吏部侍郎崔为太常卿。
English: He appointed Choi, the chamberlain of the cadre department, as the Grand Steward.

古文：六年春正月丙寅朔。丙申，以彰义军留后吴少阳检校工部尚书，充彰义军节度、申光蔡等州观察使。
现代文：元和六年正月初一日，命令彰义军留后吴少阳任检校工部尚书，担任彰义军节度和申、光、蔡等州观察使。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year of the Yuan and the first month of the sixth year of the year, Wu Shaoyang was appointed as the inspector of the inspection department of the school, and served as the observation envoy of the Zhangyi Army and the states of Shen, Guang and Cai.

古文：敕谏议大夫孟简、给事中刘伯刍、工部侍郎归登、右补阙萧俯等于丰泉寺翻译《大乘本生心地观音经》。
现代文：诏令谏议大夫孟简、给事中刘伯刍、工部侍郎归登、右补阙萧俯等人在丰泉寺翻译《大乘本生心地观音经》。
English: Dr. Meng Jian, Liu Boqin, Guideng, and Xiaopi translated the "Mahayana Sutra of the Heart of Life" at the Fengquan Temple.

古文：庚申，以淮南节度使、中书侍郎、同平章事、赵国公李吉甫复知政事、集贤殿大学士、监修国史。
现代文：二十五日，命令淮南节度使、中书侍郎、同平章事、赵国公李吉甫恢复担任知政事、集贤殿大学士，主持编写本朝历史。
English: On the 25th, he ordered Li Jifu, the envoy of Huainan Festival, the attendant of the Chinese book, Tongping Zhangji, and Zhao Guogong, to resume his duties as the governor and the scholar of Jixian Palace, and presided over the compilation of the history of this dynasty.

古文：二月丙寅朔。
现代文：二月初一是丙寅。
English: The first day of February is Cui Yin.

古文：壬申，门下侍郎、同平章事李籓为太子詹事。
现代文：初七日，门下侍郎、同平章事李藩任太子詹事。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, his disciple, Tongping Zhangji of the Li clan, was appointed as Prince Zhanji.

古文：籓与吉甫不叶，吉甫既用事，故罢籓相位。
现代文：李藩和李吉甫不和，李吉甫又主持朝政，所以免去了李藩的宰相职务。
English: The Li clan and Li Jifu did not get along, and Li Jifu presided over the imperial government, so he dismissed the prime minister of the Li clan.

古文：丙子，河中节度使、检校太尉、中书令张茂昭卒。
现代文：十一日，河中节度使、检校太尉、中书令张茂昭去世。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhang Maozhao, the deputy of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, died.

古文：以太府卿裴次元为福建观察使。
现代文：任命太府卿裴次元为福建观察使。
English: He appointed Grand Mufu Emperor Pei Jian as Fujian Observer.

古文：己丑，诉王造薨。
现代文：二十四日，忻王李造逝世。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, King Li Zuo passed away.

古文：癸巳，以陕虢观察使绛弘靖检校礼部尚书、河中尹、晋绛慈等州节度使，以右丞卫次公为陕府长史、陕虢观察使。
现代文：二十八日，任命陕虢观察使张弘靖为检校礼部尚书、河中府尹和晋、绛、慈等州节度使，任命右丞卫次公为陕府长史、陕虢观察使。
English: On the 28th, Zhang Hongjing, the Shaanxi and Fujian Observation Envoy, was appointed as the inspector of the ceremonial department of the school, and Yin Hejin, Zou, Ci and other state festival envoys were appointed from the central government, and Ujo Weizikong was appointed as the governor of Shaanxi Province and Shaanxi and Fujian Observation Envoy.

古文：以中书舍人、翰林学士李张为户部侍郎。
现代文：任命中书舍人、翰林学士李绛为户部侍郎。
English: Appointed the middle school librarian and scholar of Hanlin, Li Xuan, as the head of the household.

古文：以京畿民贫，贷常平义仓粟二十四万石，诸道州府依此赈贷。
现代文：因为京城郊区州县百姓贫困，拿出普通义仓的粟米二十四万石借给贫民，各道的州府按照这个办法救济贫困农民。
English: Because of the poverty of the people in the counties and prefectures in the suburbs of Beijing, 240,000 koku of millet from the ordinary granary was lent to the poor. The prefectures of each province used this method to help poor farmers.

古文：三月乙未朔，以河南尹郗士美检校工部尚书，兼潞府长史、昭义军节度使。
现代文：三月初一日，命令河南府尹郗士美任检校工部尚书，兼任潞府长史、昭义军节度使。
English: On the first day of March, he ordered Yin Yuxi Mei of Henan Province to be appointed as the inspector of the school inspection department, and also served as the governor of Yunnan Province and the festival envoy of the Shao Yi Army.

古文：丁未，以检校右仆射严绶为江陵尹荆南节度使。
现代文：十三日，任命检校右仆射严绶为江陵府尹、荆南节度使。
English: On the 13th, the school inspector's right-hand man, She Yanqian, was appointed as the chief envoy of Yin and Jingnan Festivals of Jiangling Prefecture.

古文：河东旧使锡钱，民颇为弊，宜于蔚州置五炉铸钱。
现代文：河东道原来使用锡质钱币，百姓深受危害，应当在蔚州设置五堂铸造炉铸钱。
English: The people of Hetao used to use tin coins, which caused great harm to the people. Five foundry furnaces should be set up in Ulsan to mint money.

古文：乙卯，畿内军镇牧放，驸马贵族略获，并不得带兵仗，恐杂盗也。
现代文：二十一日，京城郊区由部队防守的区域开放，皇亲贵戚前去狩猎，都不准携带武器，是怕坏人乘机闹事。
English: On the twenty-first day, the suburbs of the capital were opened up from the area guarded by the troops. The imperial relatives and relatives went hunting, but they were not allowed to carry weapons, for fear of bad people taking the opportunity to cause trouble.

古文：夏四月乙丑朔。
现代文：四月初一是乙丑。
English: The first day of April is the first day of spring.

古文：戊辰，兵部尚书裴垍为太子宾客，以谏议大夫裴堪为同州防御从事使。
现代文：初四日，兵部尚书裴土自任太子宾客。任命谏议大夫裴堪为同州防御使。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Minister of Military Affairs, Shangshu Pei Tu, appointed himself as a guest of the crown prince. He appointed Dr. Pei Kan as the first defense envoy of the state.

古文：庚午，以户部侍郎、判度支李夷简检校礼部尚书、襄州大都督府长史、山南东道节度使；以刑部侍郎、盐铁转运使卢坦为户部侍郎、判度支；京兆尹王播为刑部侍郎，充诸道盐铁转运使；以福建观察使元义方为京兆尹。
现代文：初六日，任命户部侍郎、判度支李夷简为检校礼部尚书、襄州大都督府长史、山南东道节度使；任命刑部侍郎、盐铁转运使卢坦为户部侍郎、判度支；京兆尹王播任刑部侍郎，担任诸道盐铁转运使；任命福建观察使元义方为京兆府尹。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, appointed the head of the Household Division and the head of the Judgement Division, Li Yijian, as the head of the School Inspection Department, Shang Shu, the governor of the Yangzhou Grand Duchy, and the head of the Shannan Host Festival; appointed the head of the Criminal Division and the head of the Salt and Iron Transportation Department, Lu Tan, as the head of the Household Division and the head of the Judgement Division; appointed the head of the Criminal Division and the head of the Salt and Iron Transportation Department, Jing Zhao Yin Wang as the head of the Criminal Division and the head of the Salt and Iron Transportation Department; appointed the Fujian

古文：癸酉，以张茂昭家妓四十七人归定州。
现代文：初九日，把张茂昭的四十七名家庭女歌舞艺人遣散回定州老家。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Zhang Maozhao's forty-seven female folk singers and dancers were sent back to their hometown in Dingzhou.

古文：己卯，月近房。
现代文：十五日，月亮靠近东方的房宿星座。
English: On the 15th, the moon will be close to the eastern house constellation.

古文：以前荆南节度使赵宗儒为刑部尚书。
现代文：任命前荆南节度使赵宗儒为刑部尚书。
English: Prior to Jingnan's appointment, Zhao Zongru was promoted to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：东都留守郑余庆为兵部尚书，依前留守。
现代文：东都留守郑余庆任兵部尚书，仍旧任东都留守。
English: Zheng Yuqing remained in Dongdu as the commander of the military department, and still remained in Dongdu.

古文：王播奏：江淮河岭已南、兗郓等盐院，元和五年都收卖盐价钱六百九十八万五千五百贯。
现代文：王播禀奏：江南、淮南、河南、岭南各道和兖州、郓州等地的盐院，元和五年总共收入卖盐的实际款项是六百九十八万五千五百贯。
English: Wang Huanqiao: The total income of the salt houses in Jiangnan, Huainan, Henan and Lingnan Provinces and Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou and other places in the first five years is 6.9855 million yuan.

古文：校量未改法已前四倍抬估，虚钱一千七百四十六万三千七百贯。
现代文：比没有改变法规以前的预计提高了将近四倍，少收入一千七百四十六万三千七百贯。
English: This is nearly four times more than what was expected before the regulations were changed, with a loss of 17,463,700 won.

古文：除盐本外，付度支收管。
现代文：除掉盐的本钱外，付给度支收管。
English: Except for the cost of salt, it is paid to the revenue and expenditure department.

古文：从之。
现代文：宪宗同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：辛卯，户部奏置巡官。
现代文：二十七日，户部禀奏设置巡官。
English: On the 27th, the head of the Household Division issued an order to set up inspectors.

古文：五月甲午朔，取受王承宗钱物人品官王伯恭杖死。
现代文：五月初一日，拘捕接受王承宗财物的品官王伯恭，用刑杖打死。
English: On the first day of May, Wang Boqiong, the official who received Wang Chengzong's property, was arrested and beaten to death with a cane.

古文：庚子，以左金吾卫将军李惟简检校户部尚书、凤翔尹、陇右节度使。
现代文：初七日，任命左金吾卫将军李惟简为检校户部尚书、凤翔府尹、陇右节度使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Li Wei Jian, the general of the Left King Wu Wei, was appointed as the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, the inspector of the inspection department, and the inspector of the inspection department.

古文：丙午，前山南东道节度使、检校左仆射、平章事裴均卒。
现代文：十三日，前山南东道节度使、检校左仆射、平章事裴均去世。
English: On the 13th, the former Shannan host festival envoy, school inspector Zuofu shot, and Ping Zhangji Pei all died.

古文：壬子，以振武节度阿跌光进夙彰诚节，久立茂勋，宜赐姓李氏。
现代文：十九日，因为振武节度阿跌光进一贯表现出忠诚的节操，长久地建立了巨大功勋，应当赐给他姓李。
English: On the 19th, because Zhenwu Jiedu A Dingguangjin has always shown loyalty and self-restraint, and has long established great merits, he should be given the surname Li.

古文：弟洺州刺史光颜，已从别敕处分。
现代文：他弟弟氵名州刺史阿跌光颜，已由另一敕令处理。
English: His younger brother, Yan Mingzhou, has been dealt with by another order.

古文：六月甲子朔，减教坊乐人衣粮。
现代文：六月初一日，降低了教坊的音乐歌舞艺人衣服粮食供给的标准。
English: On the first day of June, the standard of clothing and food supply for music and dance artists in the classroom was lowered.

古文：丁卯，中书门下奏：
现代文：初四日，中书、门下两省禀奏：
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Zhongshu and his two subordinate provinces played:

古文：官省则事省，事省则人清；官烦则事烦，事烦则人浊。
现代文： 官员精简事务就精简，事务精简人员就廉洁；官员繁杂事务就繁杂，事务繁杂人员就污浊。
English: When officials streamline affairs, the affairs will be streamlined and the people who streamline affairs will be clean; when officials complicate affairs, the affairs will be complicated and the people who complicate affairs will be dirty.

古文：清浊之由，在官之烦省。
现代文：廉洁污浊的根源，就在官员的繁杂精简。
English: The root cause of corruption lies in the streamlining of officials.

古文：国家自天宝已后，中原宿兵，见在军士可使者八十余万。
现代文：国家自从玄宗天宝年间以后，中原一直驻守着军队，现在可供调遣的士卒有八十多万人。
English: Since the reign of Emperor Xuanzong in the Tenpo era, the Central Plains has been garrisoned by the military, and now there are more than 800,000 soldiers available for deployment.

古文：其余浮为商贩，度为僧道，杂入色役，不归农桑者，又十有五六。
现代文：其余四方游荡成为商人贩子，离俗出家当了和尚道士，被征集去充当各种名目的劳役，而不回家从事农业生产的人，又占十分之五六。
English: The rest, who wandered in all directions to become merchants and traders, left the secular world to become monks and Taoists, and were conscripted to serve as laborers for various purposes, but did not return home to engage in agricultural production, accounted for another five-sixths of ten.

古文：则是天下常以三分劳筋苦骨之人，奉七分坐衣待食之辈。
现代文：这就是说国家一直是靠十分之三劳累筋骨的种田人，供养十分之七不劳而食的寄生虫。
English: This means that the state has always relied on three-tenths of hard-working farmers to feed seven-tenths of parasites.

古文：今内外官给俸料者不下一万余员，其间有职出异名，奉离本局，府寺旷废，簪组因循者甚众。
现代文：如今依靠朝廷供给俸禄的内外官员不少于一万多人，其中别出心裁地设立官职，没有什么本职工作可干，官署政务荒废，依旧占据官位的为数众多。
English: Today, there are no less than ten thousand officials at home and abroad who rely on the Imperial Court to provide their salaries. Among them, there are a large number of officials who still occupy their official positions, despite the fact that their official positions were created in a creative way, they have little to do with their official duties, and the government affairs of their official offices have been abandoned.

古文：况敛财日寡而授禄至我，设官有限而入色无数，九流安得不杂，万物安得不烦。
现代文：况且国库的收入一天天减少但发放的俸禄一天天增多，官署人员的数额有个限制但额外招进的却没个定数，各品官吏哪能不繁杂，各种政务哪能不繁琐。
English: Moreover, the income of the state treasury is decreasing day by day, but the salaries issued are increasing day by day. The number of government officials is limited, but there is no fixed number of additional recruits. Officials of all ranks cannot be complicated, and various government affairs cannot be complicated.

古文：汉初置郡不过六十，文景醲化，百官莫先，则官少不必政紊，郡多不必事理。
现代文：汉朝初年设置的郡没有超过六十，文帝、景帝教化隆盛，此前的君王没有谁超过他们，那么官员少就不一定会政务紊乱，官署多就不一定会政务和顺。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, there were no more than sixty counties set up. Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing had a flourishing culture of enlightenment, and no previous monarch had surpassed them. Therefore, fewer officials would not necessarily lead to disorderly government affairs, and more government offices would not necessarily lead to harmonious government affairs.

古文：今天下三百郡，一千四百县。
现代文：如今全国有三百个郡，一千四百个县。
English: At present, there are three hundred counties and fourteen hundred counties in the country.

古文：故有一邑之地，虚设群司，一乡之甿，徒分县职，所费至广，所制全轻。
现代文：像这样有了一个邑的封地，就不切实际地设置各种各样的机构官员，有了一个乡的百姓，就白白地分派出去当差，所耗费的财物数额巨大，所管理的事情却无关紧要。
English: With a county fiefdom like this, it is unrealistic to set up all kinds of agency officials. With a township people, they are sent out to work for free. The amount of property consumed is huge, but the things managed are not important.

古文：伏请敕吏兵部侍郎、郎中、给事中、中书舍人各一人，错综利病，详定废置，吏员可并省者并省之，州县可并合者并合之，每年入仕者可停减者停减之。
现代文：请诏令吏部和兵部的侍郎、郎中、给事中、中书舍人各一人，交错综合地比较怎么样好，怎么样不好，审慎周密地决定哪些该撤销，哪些该设置，可以精简的官员就精简，可以合并的州县就合并，每年里可以停止或减少录用新官吏就停止或减少录用。
English: Ask each of the attendants, junior attendants, junior attendants, junior attendants, junior attendants, junior attendants, and junior attendants of the General Staff and the Military Department to make a staggered and comprehensive comparison of what is good and what is not good, and carefully and thoroughly decide which should be revoked and which should be set up. Officials that can be streamlined should be streamlined, counties and prefectures that can be merged should be merged, and new officials that can be stopped or reduced each year should be stopped or reduced.

古文：此则利广而易求，官少而易理，稍减冗食，足宽疲甿。
现代文：这样就会财源广阔而容易征收，官员少却容易办好事情，逐渐减少宫庭官府中打杂混饭吃的人，足以缓解百姓的困顿。
English: In this way, the financial resources will be broad and easy to collect, the number of officials will be small but it will be easy to do things well, and the number of people in the palace and government who eat mixed meals will be gradually reduced, which is enough to alleviate the hardships of the people.

古文：又国家旧章，依品制俸，官一品月俸三十千，其余职田禄米，大约不过千石，自一品以下，多少可知。
现代文：再说国家的原有章程，按照官的品级规定了薪俸标准，一品官员每月薪俸三十贯，另外从禄米田收纳的俸禄粮食，大约不超过一千石，从一品以下官员每月薪俸的标准都是规定得清清楚楚的。
English: Moreover, the original constitution of the country stipulated the salary standard according to the rank of the official. The monthly salary of an official of the first grade was 30 yuan, in addition, the salary grain received from the rice fields was not more than 1,000 koku, and the monthly salary standard of an official below the first grade was clearly stipulated.

古文：艰难已来，禁纲渐弛，于是增置使额，厚请俸钱。
现代文：自从安史之乱以来，法令逐渐松弛，于是增设各种 使 官的名额，要求提高薪俸标准。
English: Since the Anshi Rebellion, the decrees have been gradually relaxed, so the number of various envoys has been increased and the salary standard has been required to be raised.

古文：故大历中权臣月俸有至九千贯者，列郡刺史无大小给皆千贯。
现代文：所以代宗大历年间竟然有每月薪俸高达九千贯的有权势的朝臣，各郡刺史不分大小月薪都是足足一千贯。
English: Therefore, during the reign of Emperor Daizong, there were powerful courtiers with a monthly salary of up to nine thousand kun, and the monthly salary of all counties, regardless of size, was fully one thousand kun.

古文：常衮为相，始立限约，至李泌又量其闲剧，随事增加，时谓通济，理难减削。
现代文：常兖任宰相时，开始制定了一个限额标准，到李泌任宰相时又衡量公事的闲散繁忙，按照公务的繁忙程度增加俸禄，当时称为 通济 ，而增加上去之后就不便削减下来。
English: When Tsuneyoshi was appointed prime minister, he began to set a quota standard. When Li Xiu was appointed prime minister, he also measured the idle busyness of public affairs and increased the salary according to the degree of busyness of public affairs. At that time, it was called Tongji, and it was not possible to reduce it after it was increased.

古文：然犹有名存职废，额去俸存，闲剧之间，厚薄顿异。
现代文：同时还有官衔存在而公务废止，官员职数取消而薪俸保留的情况，按照公务闲散繁忙比较起来，薪俸的多少顿时变得极不合理。
English: At the same time, there are cases where official titles exist but official duties are abolished, and the number of official positions is canceled but salaries are retained. Compared with the idleness and busyness of official duties, the number of hours of salary becomes extremely unreasonable.

古文：将为永式，须立常规。
现代文：请制定长期管用的薪俸标准，作为固定的规章。 
English: Please establish a long-term salary standard as a fixed regulation.

古文：从之。
现代文：宪宗同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：乃命给事中段平仲、中书舍人韦贯之、兵部侍郎许孟容、户部侍郎李绛等详定减省。
现代文：于是命令给事中段平仲、中书舍人韦贯之、兵部侍郎许孟容、户部侍郎李绛等人审定精简机构、官员、薪俸。
English: Therefore, the order was given to the middle section of Heizhong, the middle school teacher Wei Gangzhi, the secretary of the military department Xu Mengrong, the secretary of the household department Li Yan and others to streamline the organization, officials and salaries.

古文：甲申，以御史中丞柳公绰为湖南观察使。
现代文：二十一日，任命御史中丞柳公绰为湖南观察使。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Imperial Historian Chujo Liu Gongqiao was appointed as the Hunan Observation Envoy.

古文：丁亥，太白近右执法。
现代文：二十四日，太白星逼近右执法星。
English: On the 24th, the Taibai Star approached the right law enforcement star.

古文：戊子，赐御史中丞窦易直绯鱼袋。
现代文：二十五日，给御史中丞窦易直赏赐绯鱼袋。
English: On the 25th, the Grand Historian Chuanzheng Dou Yizhi was awarded a carp bag.

古文：秋七月癸巳朔，尚书右仆射致仕高郢卒。
现代文：七月初一日，已退休的尚书右仆射高郢去世。
English: On the first day of July, Shang Shuxu's retired right-hand man Gao Ya passed away.

古文：庚申，赠银青光禄大夫、太子宾客裴垍太子少傅。
现代文：二十八日，追认银青光禄大夫、太子宾客裴土自为太子少傅。
English: On the 28th, the silver Qing Guanglu doctor and the prince's guest Pei Tu identified himself as the prince's young master.

古文：八月癸亥朔，户部侍郎李绛奏： 诸州阙官职田禄米，及见任官抽一分职田，请所在收贮，以备水旱赈贷。 
现代文：八月初一日，户部侍郎李绛禀奏： 各州空额官员禄米田的禄米，以及现任官吏提取的一分禄米田的禄米，请当地主管官署收存，以便准备发生水旱灾害时借贷救济老百姓。 
English: On the first day of August, Li Xinsao, the head of the Household Department, said, "The loan rice of the vacant officials' loan rice fields in each state, as well as the loan rice of the one-point loan rice fields extracted by the current officials, should be stored by the local competent authority in order to prepare for the loan relief of the people in the event of a flood and drought disaster."

古文：从之。
现代文：宪宗同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：乙丑，以天德军防御使张煦为夏州刺史、夏绥银等州节度使。
现代文：初三日，任命天德军防御使张煦为夏州刺史和夏、绥、银等州节度使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Zhang Ye, the defense envoy of the German Empire, was appointed as the secretary of the history of Xia Prefecture and the secretary of state of Xia, Handan and Yin Provinces.

古文：丁卯，荆南先置永安军，宜停。
现代文：初五日，荆南原先设置的永安军，应当停止。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Yongan Army, originally set up in Jingnan, should be stopped.

古文：辛巳，以常州刺史崔芃为洪州刺史、江西观察使。
现代文：十九日，任命常州刺史崔艹凡为洪州刺史、江西观察使。
English: On the 19th, the Changzhou chief historian Cui Yufan was appointed as the Hongzhou chief historian and the Jiangxi observation envoy.

古文：九月癸巳朔，以蜀州刺史崔能为黔中观察使。
现代文：九月初一日，任命蜀州刺史崔能为黔中观察使。
English: On the first day of September, Shu Zhi Shi Cui Rong was appointed as the observation envoy of the Shandong Province.

古文：戊戌，富平县人梁悦为父复仇，杀秦杲，投狱请罪。
现代文：初六日，富平县平民梁悦为父亲报仇，杀死仇人秦杲后，投案自首。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Liang Yue, a civilian from Fuping County, took revenge for his father, killed his enemy Qin Yu, and then turned himself in.

古文：特敕免死，决杖一百，配流循州。
现代文：朝廷特地赦免死罪，判处杖刑一百，流放到循州。
English: The imperial court specifically pardoned the death penalty, sentenced him to a hundred strokes of the cane, and exiled him to Chuzhou.

古文：职方员外郎韩愈献议执奏之。
现代文：职方员外郎韩愈建议对他拘捕查办。
English: Han Yu, a member of the staff, suggested that he be arrested and investigated.

古文：减诸司流外总一千七百六十九人。
现代文：精简各个官署品级以外的人员总共一千七百六十九人。
English: A total of 1,769 people outside the ranks of various government departments were streamlined.

古文：贬黔中观察使窦群为开州刺史，以为政烦苛，辰、锦二州蛮叛故也。
现代文：将黔中观察使窦群贬谪为开州刺史，是由于他处理政务法令繁琐严酷，酿成辰、锦两州少数民族叛乱的缘故。
English: The reason why Dou Qun was relegated to the status of Kaizhou's chief historian was that he dealt with government affairs and decrees in a cumbersome and harsh manner, which led to the rebellion of ethnic minorities in Chengcheng and Jin.

古文：冬十月，以前夏州节度使李愿检校兵部尚书、徐州刺史，充武宁军节度使。
现代文：十月初，命令前夏州节度使李愿任检校兵部尚书、徐州刺史，担任武宁军节度使。
English: At the beginning of October, he ordered the former Xiazhou military governor to appoint Li Yan as the military governor of Xuzhou and the military governor of Xuzhou to serve as the military governor of Wu Ning Army.

古文：戊辰，以户部尚书韩皋为东都留守，判东都尚书省事。
现代文：初七日，任命户部尚书韩皋为东都留守，兼管东都尚书省的政务。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of the year, Han Zheng of the Household Department of Shangshu was appointed to stay in Dongdu and take charge of the government affairs of Dongdu and Shangshu.

古文：以太子詹事李籓为华州刺史、潼关防御、镇国军使。
现代文：任命太子詹事李藩为华州刺史、潼关防御使、镇国军使。
English: Prince Zhan Zhi Li Han was appointed as the governor of Huazhou, the defense envoy of Shaoguan, and the military envoy of Zhenguo.

古文：以东都留守郑余庆为吏部尚书。
现代文：任命东都留守郑余庆为吏部尚书。
English: Zheng Yuqing, who stayed behind in Dongdu, was appointed as the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：己巳，诏： 朕于百执事、群有司，方澄源流，以责实效。
现代文：初八日，宪宗发出诏书： 我对各部门的专职人员、各官署的主管官吏，正在正本清源，要求产生实际成效。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the Emperor issued an edict: I am asking the full-time employees of all departments and the responsible officials of all government departments to clear the source and produce practical results.

古文：转运重务，专委使臣，每道有院，分督其任；今陕路漕引悉归中都，而尹守职名尚仍旧贯。
现代文：运输的重要事务，专门委托给使臣，每个道设有院，分别监理自己的职责；现将陕州一路的水上运输全部合并到中都主管，但是府尹州守的职责官衔还是照旧。
English: The important business of transportation was specially entrusted to the envoys, and each province had its own court to supervise its own duties. Now, all water transportation along the Shaanxi-Zhuhai Road has been consolidated under the authority of the central government, but the official title of the governor of Yinzhou is still the same.

古文：又诸道都团练使，足修武备以靖一方；而别置军额，因加吏禄，亦既虚设，颇为浮费。
现代文：还有各道的都团练使，足够建立守卫的武装力量来使辖区安宁，却另外设置了军队编制，因此增加官吏俸禄，这种设置是多余的，很要增加一些不必要的开支。
English: There is also the practice of sending regiments to the capital of each province, which is enough to establish the armed forces of the guards to make the jurisdiction peaceful, but it has set up a separate military establishment, thus increasing the salaries of officials. This arrangement is superfluous, and it is necessary to increase some unnecessary expenses.

古文：思去烦以循本，期省事以使人。
现代文：我考虑着删繁就简，期望精简政务有利于百姓。
English: I am considering cutting red tape and expecting that the streamlining of government affairs will benefit the people.

古文：其河水陆运、陕府陆运、润州镇海军、宣州采石军、越州义胜军、洪州南昌军、福州靖海军等使额，并宜停。
现代文：河南府的水路陆路转运使、陕州府的陆路转运使、润州的镇海军使、宣州的采石军使、越州的义胜军使、洪州的南昌军使、福州的靖海军使等等使官的名额，都应当停止。
English: The posts of envoys such as Henan Province's Waterway and Land Transportation Envoy, Shaanxi Province's Land Transportation Envoy, Runzhou's Town and Navy Envoy, Xuanzhou's Quarrymen's Envoy, Yuezhou's Yixing Army Envoy, Hongzhou's Nanchang Army Envoy, and Fuzhou's Jing Navy Envoy should all be terminated.

古文：所收使已下俸料一事已来，委本道充代百姓阙额两税，仍具数奏闻。 
现代文：自从实行抽取使以下官员一分禄米田禄米的规定以来，所收禄米委托给本道替代补交百姓没有交齐的夏秋两季赋税，照旧如数报告朝廷。 
English: Since the implementation of the provision of withdrawing the following officials from the rice fields, the rice entrusted to this province to make up for the taxes paid by the people in the summer and autumn, which have not been paid, has been reported to the imperial court as before.

古文：戊寅，诏： 王者之牧黎元也，爱之如子，视之如伤。
现代文：十七日，宪宗颁发诏书： 国君统治百姓，要把他们当作儿子一样爱护，当作伤残一样痛惜。
English: On the seventeenth day, Emperor Kenzong issued an edict: The sovereign governs the people, and must love them as sons, and pity them as cripples.

古文：苟或风雨不时，稼穑不稔，则必除烦就简，惜力重劳，以图便安，以阜生业。
现代文：如果有时雨水错失季节，五谷没有收成，就一定要免除杂务做到节俭，爱惜财物珍重劳力，来求得天下安宁，来使得产业兴旺。
English: If sometimes the rain misses the season and the grain fails to yield, we must do without chores and be frugal, cherish wealth and value labor, in order to achieve world peace and make the industry flourish.

古文：况邦畿之内，百役所业，虽勤恤之令亟行，而供亿之制犹广。
现代文：何况国都郊区州县之内，是各种劳役集中的区域，虽然多次颁发忧心怜惜的命令，但是征调赋税劳役的名目还是繁多。
English: What's more, in the suburbs of the national capital, within prefectures and counties, there is a concentration of all kinds of forced laborers. Although orders of concern and pity have been issued many times, there are still many names of tax and tax-paying forced laborers.

古文：重以经夏炎又，自秋霖泽，南亩亏播植之功，西成失丰登之望。
现代文：加上整个夏天干旱炎热，立秋之后大雨不停，田地来不及耕耘播种，秋季没有丰收的希望。
English: In addition, the whole summer was dry and hot, and heavy rain did not stop after the beginning of autumn. The fields could not be ploughed and sown in time, and there was no hope of a good harvest in autumn.

古文：内管口食，外牵王徭，岂惟转输之虞，虑有馁殍之患。
现代文：家里缺乏口粮，外边还受官府徭役的拖累，哪里只是担心运输困难，忧虑的是出现饿死百姓的灾难。
English: There is a lack of food rations at home, and the outside world is still being dragged down by the bureaucracy. Some are only worried about transportation difficulties, while others are worried about the disaster of people starving to death.

古文：斯盖理道犹郁，和气未通，永言于兹，良所咎叹。
现代文：这大概是治国的途径还没有理顺，和顺的气运还没有通畅，长期这样下去，实在是令人内疚叹息。
English: This is probably because the way of governing the country has not yet been rationalized, and the harmonious atmosphere has not yet been smooth. It is really a guilty sigh to go on like this for a long time.

古文：京兆府每年所配折粜粟二十五万石宜放。
现代文：京兆府每年分派降价收纳抵交租银的粟米二十五万石应当发放出去。
English: The 250,000 koku of millet distributed annually by the prefectural government of Kyosho at the reduced price to collect the rent should be distributed.

古文：于百姓有粟情愿折纳者，时估外特加优饶。
现代文：对于那些存有粟米愿意降价抵交租银的百姓，在现价之外要特别增加优厚的条件。
English: For those people who have stored millet and are willing to reduce the price to pay the rent, it is necessary to specially increase the favorable conditions in addition to the current price.

古文：今春所贷义仓粟，方属岁饥，容至丰熟岁送纳。
现代文：今年春天义仓所借出去的粟米，刚刚碰上连续饥荒，延缓到丰收年景再交还。
English: The corn lent out by the granary this spring has just been hit by continuous famine, delaying the return until a bumper harvest.

古文：元和五年已前诸色逋租并放。
现代文：元和五年以前的欠租一概免去。
English: All rent arrears from five years ago will be waived.

古文：百官职田，其数甚广，今缘水潦，诸处道路不通，宜令所在贮纳，度支支用，令百官据数于太仓请受。
现代文：百官禄米田所收的禄米，数量很大，现在由于洪水泛滥，各地道路不能通行，应当让所在官署收存，统筹安排交付使用，让百官按照存粮数额申请从京城的太仓中领取。
English: The amount of rice received from the rice fields of the hundred officials is very large. Now, due to the flooding, roads in various regions are impassable. It is necessary to have the local government office collect and store the rice, make overall arrangements for delivery and use, and let the hundred officials apply to receive it from Taicang in Beijing according to the amount of grain stored.

古文：遭水旱处，通计所损，便与除破，不得检覆。
现代文：遭受水旱灾害的地方，统计农民受到的损失，就予免除租税，不准考查核实。
English: In areas affected by floods and droughts, if the losses of farmers are counted, they will be exempted from taxes and inspection and verification will not be allowed.

古文：为理之本，在乎安人。
现代文：天下大治的根本，在于使得百姓安定。唉！
English: The foundation of world governance lies in making the people stable. Alas!

古文：咨尔尹京宰邑之臣，实为亲人阜俗之寄，必当询其疾苦，奉我诏条，恤隐为心，无怠于事，罔或徇利以剥下，吐刚而茹柔，使闾井咸安，惸嫠获济。
现代文：你们这些府尹县令啊，实在是我亲近人民推行教化的依靠，一定要访问民间疾苦，执行朝廷诏令。心里只有顾惜怜悯，办事不要懈怠，一刻也别谋求私利而搜刮百姓，不要怕硬欺软，使得村村都安宁，孤苦伶仃的人都得到救助。
English: You, the prefectural and county governors, are truly the ones I rely on to be close to the people and carry out the indoctrination. You must visit the people's sufferings and implement the imperial edict. You should only have compassion in your heart, do not slack off in your work, do not seek personal gain and rob the people for a moment, do not be afraid of hard and soft, so that the villages will be peaceful and the lonely people will be rescued.

古文：各勉忠孝，宜悉朕怀。 
现代文：各人努力尽忠尽孝，应当明白我的心情。 
English: Everyone should try to be loyal and understand my feelings.

古文：丙戌，以谏议大夫孔戣为皇太子诸王侍读。
现代文：二十五日，任命谏议大夫孔癸戈为皇太子和皇子们的侍读。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, he appointed Dr. Kong Rengo as the attendant of the crown prince and princes.

古文：十一月壬辰朔。
现代文：十一月初一是壬辰。
English: The first day of November is Imjin.

古文：癸巳，新授华州刺史李籓卒。
现代文：初二日，新任华州刺史李藩去世。
English: On the second day of the first month, the newly appointed governor of Huazhou, Li Han, passed away.

古文：乙巳，以工部尚书赵昌检校兵部尚书，兼华州刺史，充潼关防御、镇国军等使。
现代文：十四日，命令工部尚书赵昌任检校兵部尚书，兼任华州刺史，担任潼关防御、镇国军等使。
English: On the 14th, he ordered Zhao Chang, the inspector of the Ministry of Engineering, to be the inspector of the Ministry of Armaments, and he also served as the historian of Huazhou, and served as the defense of Shaoguan, the town of the national army and other envoys.

古文：十二月癸亥朔。
现代文：十二月初一是壬戌。
English: The first day of December is 壬.

古文：壬申，诏委宗正卿选人门嫁十六宅诸王女，仍封为县主。
现代文：十一日，下诏委托宗正卿选择有才干品德门阀地位的人把十六宅各位亲王的女儿嫁出去，亲王的女儿们按照惯例封为县主。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the emperor issued an imperial edict, instructing Zong Zhengqing to choose a person with talent, character, and virtue to marry off the daughters of the princes of the 16 households. The daughters of the princes were, according to the usual practice, made the heads of the counties.

古文：甲申，京兆尹元义方、户部侍郎判度支卢坦以违令立戟，罚一月俸，收夺所请门戟。
现代文：二十三日，京兆府尹元义方、户部侍郎判度支卢坦因违反朝廷制度在府第门前树立戟枪表示显贵，受到扣除一个月薪俸的处罚，强行收回他们请求朝廷赐给的门前树立的戟枪。
English: On the 23rd, Yin Yuan Yifang and Hubei Chamberlain of Beijing Zhao Prefecture sentenced Lutan to deduct one month's salary for violating the imperial court system by setting up a gun in front of the gate of the prefecture, and forcibly took back the gun they had asked the court to give them.

古文：己丑，制以朝义郎、守尚书户部侍郎、骁骑尉、赐紫金鱼袋李绛为朝议大夫、守中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十八日，诏令朝义郎、守尚书户部侍郎、骁骑尉、赐紫金鱼袋李绛任朝议大夫、守中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 28th, the imperial edict was issued appointing Asayirô, Shôshô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô, Shôhô,

古文：闰十二月辛卯朔，右卫上将军伊慎卒。
现代文：闰十二月初一日，右卫上将军伊慎去世。
English: On the first day of the second month of December, Ishin, the Admiral of the Right Division, passed away.

古文：辛亥，皇太子宁薨，谥曰惠昭，废朝三日。
现代文：二十一日，皇太子李宁逝世，谥号为惠昭，宪宗停止临朝理事三天。
English: On the twenty-first day, Crown Prince Li Ning passed away, his posthumous name was Hui Zhao, and Emperor Gensong suspended the Councilor for three days.

古文：国典无太子薨礼，国子司业裴苣精礼学，特赐于西内定仪。
现代文：在本朝的典章中没有为皇太子举行丧礼的现成礼仪制度，国子司业裴羅精通礼学，特地诏赐他到西内制定皇太子的丧礼制度。
English: There was no ready-made etiquette system for holding a funeral for the crown prince in the regulations of this dynasty. The Secretary of State, Ye Pei Lo, was well versed in etiquette, and he was specially sent to the West to establish a funeral system for the crown prince.

