古文：崔鉴，字神具，博陵安平人也。
现代文：崔鉴，字神具，博陵安平人。
English: Cui Jian, Zha Sheng, Boling Anping.

古文：六世祖赞，魏尚书仆射。
现代文：六世祖崔赞，为魏尚书仆射。
English: Zu Cui Zan, the sixth, was a disciple of Wei Shang.

古文：五世祖洪，晋吏部尚书。
现代文：五世祖崔洪，为晋吏部尚书。
English: The fifth-generation ancestor, Cui Hong, was a member of the Jin cadre.

古文：曾祖懿，字世茂，仕燕，位秘书监。
现代文：曾祖父崔懿，字世茂，在燕为官，官至秘书监。
English: Cui Yao's great-grandfather, surnamed Shimao, was an official in Yan, rising to the position of secretary-supervisor.

古文：祖遭，字景遇，位钜鹿令。
现代文：祖父崔遭，字景遇，官至巨鹿令。
English: His grandfather, Cui Xuan, was a well-known poet who rose to the rank of grand deacon.

古文：父绰，少孤，学行修明，有名于世。
现代文：父亲崔绰，幼年丧父，学业和德行都很杰出，驰名于当世。
English: His father, Cui Zhaozhu, died when he was young. He was an outstanding scholar and a virtuous person, well-known in the contemporary world.

古文：与范阳卢玄、勃海高允、赵郡李灵等俱被征，寻以母老固辞。
现代文：他和范阳人卢玄、渤海人高允、赵郡人李灵等一起被朝廷征召，不久因为母亲需要养老而坚持辞职。
English: He was called up by the imperial court together with Lu Xuan from Fanyang, Gao Yun from Bohai, and Li Ling from Zhao County, and soon he insisted on resigning because his mother needed to retire.

古文：后为郡功曹，卒。
现代文：后来他任郡功曹，不久去世。
English: He later served as a county meritorious officer and died soon after.

古文：鉴颇有文学，自中书博士转侍郎，赐爵桐庐县子。
现代文：崔鉴很有文才和学识，从中书博士转任为侍郎，赐爵为桐庐县子。
English: Cui Jian was a man of great literary talent and knowledge. He was promoted from the position of Doctor of Chinese Calligraphy to the position of chamberlain, and was awarded a knighthood as the best son of Tonglu County.

古文：出为东徐州刺史。
现代文：又出任为东徐州刺史。
English: He also served as a historian of East Xuzhou.

古文：鉴兄，字洛祖，行博陵太守。
现代文：崔鉴为了安抚新归附的百姓，有些年老的，崔鉴上表请求封他们为非正式的守、令，皇帝下诏批准。
English: In order to appease the newly annexed people, some of whom were elderly, Cui Jian made a request to seal them as unofficial guards, and the emperor approved it.

古文：子文业，中书郎、钜鹿太守。
现代文：他又下令将州里的铜制品冶炼为农具，使军民都得到了好处。他去世后，追赠为青州刺史、安平侯，谥号 康 。
English: He also ordered the smelting of copper products in Qingzhou into agricultural tools, so that both the military and the people benefited. After his death, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Tashi of Qingzhou, Anping Hou, and Kang.

古文：文业子伯谦。伯谦字士逊，贫居养母。
现代文：崔伯谦，字士逊，贫困在家侍养母亲。
English: Cui Boqian, a poet, grew up in poverty, supporting his mother at home.

古文：齐神武召补相府兼功曹，称之曰： 崔伯谦清直奉公，真良佐也。 
现代文：齐神武帝任命他为相府兼功曹，称赞他道 ：崔伯谦清廉正直，为公尽责，真是个好助手。 
English: Emperor Qizhenwu appointed him as a prefect and meritorious person, praising him as follows: Cui Boqian is clean and honest, and does his duty for the public. He is really a good assistant.

古文：转七兵、殿中、左户三曹郎中。
现代文：他又转任为七兵、殿中、左户三曹郎中。
English: He was also reassigned to the seven soldiers, the middle of the hall, and the middle of the third sergeant of the left house.

古文：弟仲让为北豫州司马，与高慎同叛。
现代文：他的弟弟崔仲让为北豫州司马，和高慎一起反叛。
English: His younger brother, Cui Zhongyan, became the Sima of North Henan Province and rebelled with Gao Sheng.

古文：坐免官。
现代文：他因此被牵连而免官。
English: He was relieved of his duties.

古文：后历瀛州别驾、京畿司马。
现代文：后来他历任瀛州别驾、京畿司马。
English: Later, he successively served as the governor of Ganzhou and the governor of Gyeonggi Province.

古文：文襄将之晋阳，劳之曰： 卿聘足瀛部，已著康歌。
现代文：文襄帝将要去晋阳，慰劳他道： 卿帮助治理的瀛州已呈现一片太平景象。
English: Emperor Wenxiang will go to Jinyang to console him. He said, "Changzhou, which Your Excellency has helped to govern, has shown a peaceful scene.

古文：督府务总，是用相授。 
现代文：今后军府的繁杂事务，都要靠您处理了。 
English: In the future, the complicated affairs of the military government will be handled by you.

古文：临别，又马上执手曰： 执子之手，与子偕老，卿宜深体此情。 
现代文：临别时，又在马上握住他的手道： 握住您的手，要与您共同生活到老，卿应该深刻体会我的用意。 
English: At the time of parting, he immediately grasped his hand: Hold your hand, I want to live with you until I am old. Sir should deeply understand my intention.

古文：族弟暹当时宠要，伯谦与之旧寮同门，非吉凶未尝造请，以雅道自居。
现代文：他同族的弟弟崔暹当时很得宠，崔伯谦和他既是同事又是同宗，但若没有喜事和丧事从不去拜访他，一直以高雅自居。
English: His brother of the same clan, Cui Siam, was very popular at the time. Cui Boqian and he were both colleagues and members of the same family, but he never visited him unless there was a happy event or a sad event. He always considered himself to be elegant.

古文：天保初，除济北太守，恩信大行，富者禁其奢侈，贫者劝课周给。
现代文：天保初年，崔伯谦出任济北太守，用恩德和诚信治理当地，禁止有钱人奢侈浪费，周济穷人并鼓励他们致力农桑。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, Cui Boqian became the governor of North Jeju, governing the region with benevolence and integrity, prohibiting the rich from extravagant waste, giving alms to the poor and encouraging them to devote themselves to agriculture.

古文：县公田多沃壤，伯谦咸易之以给人。
现代文：县里的公田土壤肥沃，崔伯谦都将它们调换给百姓。
English: The public fields in the county have fertile soil, and Cui Boqian has transferred all of them to the people.

古文：又改鞭，用熟皮为之，不忍见血，示耻而已。朝贵行过郡境，问人太守政何似？
现代文：他又改革鞭刑，用熟皮做鞭，不忍心在施刑时让罪人出血，只是以示耻辱而已，朝中掌权的重臣路过该郡境内，问当地百姓太守为政的情况如何。
English: He also reformed the whipping punishment, using ripe leather to make whips. He did not have the heart to make the criminal bleed during the punishment, just to show shame. The chief minister of the central government passed through the county and asked the local people what the situation was like.

古文：对曰： 府君恩化，古者所无。 
现代文：回答道 ：太守的恩德教化，自古以来无人可比。 
English: He replied, "Since ancient times, no one has been able to match the Emperor's benevolence and enlightenment."

古文：诵人为歌曰： 崔府君，能临政。退田易鞭布威德，人无争。 
现代文：并给他背诵当地人做的歌道： 崔府君，能临政，退田易鞭布威德，人无争。 
English: And recited to him a song made by local people: Cui Fookun, able to be a politician, easy to be a leader, no conflict.

古文：客曰： 既称恩化，何因复威？ 
现代文：来人问道 ：既然说他以恩惠教化为政，怎么又施威严呢？ 
English: A visitor asked: Since he said that he came to power through benevolence and education, how can he be so dignified?

古文：对曰： 长吏惮其威严，人庶蒙其恩惠，故兼言之。 
现代文：回答道： 官吏都害怕他的威严，老百姓都得到他的恩惠，所以说威德兼备。 
English: He replied, "Officials are afraid of his majesty, and the common people have all received his grace, so he is both powerful and benevolent.

古文：以相府旧寮，例有加授，征赴鄴。
现代文：由于他是相府的旧官员，按例要加官，被征召至邺赴任。
English: Since he was a former official of the prefectural government, he had to be promoted as usual, and was called up to take office.

古文：百姓号泣遮道，数日不得前。
现代文：临走时百姓痛哭流涕，拦在路上，数天不能前行。
English: When they were about to leave, the people wept bitterly and stopped on the road, unable to move forward for several days.

古文：以弟仲让在关中，不复居内任，除南钜鹿太守。下车导以礼让，豪族皆改心整肃。
现代文：因为他弟弟崔仲让在西魏，他不能在朝为官，出任南巨鹿太守，一到任就用礼让之道治理当地，豪绅们都改过自新。
English: Because his brother, Cui Zhongzheng, was in the West Wei Dynasty, he could not serve as an official in the North and became the governor of Nanju Luga. As soon as he took office, he used the way of courtesy to govern the local area. The wealthy gentry were reformed.

古文：事无巨细，必自亲览。
现代文：他不论大小事务，都要亲自过问。
English: He takes matters, large and small, into his own hands.

古文：在县有贫弱未理者，皆曰 我自告白须公，不虑不决 。
现代文：县里有些贫困孱弱的人有事得不到公正处理，都说： 我直接告到白须太守面前，不愁得不到解决。 
English: There are some poor and weak people in the county who are unable to get justice for their problems. They all say, "I reported directly to the governor of Baishu, but I still can't get a solution."

古文：在郡七年，狱无停囚。
现代文：他任郡守七年，监狱里没有长期在押的囚犯。
English: He has been county governor for seven years, and there are no long-term prisoners in the prison.

古文：每有大使巡察，恆处上第。征拜银青光禄大夫。
现代文：每次有大使前来巡察，崔伯谦的政绩都被评为上等，后来被拜为银青光禄大夫。
English: Every time an ambassador came to inspect, Cui Boqian's political achievements were rated as superior, and later he was worshiped as the silver Qingguanglu doctor.

古文：仲方字不齐。
现代文：崔仲方字不齐。
English: Cui Zhongfang's handwriting is uneven.

古文：少好读书，有文武才略。
现代文：从小喜爱读书，有文才武略。
English: He has loved reading since he was a child, and has a talent for writing.

古文：年十五，周文帝见而异之，令与诸子同就学。隋文帝亦在其中。
现代文：十五岁时，周文帝见到他以后很惊讶，就让他和皇家子弟一起读书，隋文帝也在其中。
English: At the age of fifteen, Zhou Wendi was surprised to see him, and let him study with the royal children, including Sui Wendi.

古文：由是与帝少相款密。
现代文：仲方因此和隋文帝从小就交情深厚。
English: As a result, Nakafata had a deep friendship with the Sui Emperor from an early age.

古文：后以明经为晋公宇文护参军，转记室，迁司正大夫，与斛斯征、柳敏等同修礼律。
现代文：后来，仲方以明经当了晋公宇文护的参军，转为记室，升司玉大夫，和斛斯征、柳敏等一起撰修有关礼仪和音律的书籍。
English: Later, Nakafata joined the army with Ming Jing as Jin Gongwu Wenju, and was transferred to the record room, promoted to the position of Yu Daifu, and wrote books on etiquette and music together with Gongsheng and Liu Min.

古文：后以军功授平东将军、银青光禄大夫，赐爵石城县男。
现代文：后来又以军功被任为平东将军、银青光禄大夫，封爵为石城县男。
English: Later, he was appointed as the general of Pingdong and the doctor of Yinqingguanglu for his military merits, and he was knighted as the man of Shicheng County.

古文：时武帝阴有灭齐志，仲方献二十策，帝大奇之。
现代文：当时周武帝已暗暗准备灭齐，崔仲方向他进献了二十条计策，武帝大为惊奇。
English: At that time, Emperor Zhou Wudi was already secretly preparing to annihilate Qi. Cui Zhong presented him with twenty strategies, which greatly surprised Emperor Wudi.

古文：复与少内史赴芬删定格式。
现代文：他又和少内史赵芬确定标准。
English: He and Shonaishi Zhaofen also set the standard.

古文：寻从帝攻下晋州，又令仲方说下翼城等四城，授仪同，进爵范阳县侯。
现代文：不久又跟从武帝攻下了晋州，武帝又让仲方说降了翼城等四座城池，被任命为仪同，晋爵范阳县侯。
English: Not long after, he conquered Jinzhou from Emperor Wu, and Emperor Wu also made Zhongfang say that he had reduced four cities such as Yingcheng, and was appointed as the Prince of Fanyang County.

古文：后以行军长史从郯国公王轨禽陈将吴明彻于吕梁，仲方策居多。
现代文：后又任行军长史，跟随郯国公王轨在吕梁俘虏了陈将吴明彻，采用仲方计策最多。
English: Later, he was also appointed as the commander of the marching army, and captured Chen general Wu Mingcher in Luliang following the prince's route. He adopted most of the stratagems of Zhongfang.

古文：宣帝嗣位，为少内史。
现代文：周宣帝即位，被任为少内史。
English: Emperor Zhou Xuan ascended to the throne, and he was appointed as Shao Naishi.

古文：会帝崩，隋文帝为丞相，与仲方相见，握手极欢，仲方亦归心焉。
现代文：宣帝死，隋文帝任丞相，他和崔仲方见面后，高兴地紧紧握手，崔仲方也忠心相随。
English: After the death of Emperor Xuan and the appointment of Emperor Sui Wen as chancellor, he and Cui Zhongfang happily shook hands tightly. Cui Zhongfang also faithfully followed suit.

古文：其夜上便宜十八事，帝并嘉纳之。
现代文：当晚他便向隋文帝进献适宜采用的十八条计策，隋文帝十分赞许并采纳。
English: That evening, he presented 18 suitable measures to Emperor Sui, which Emperor Sui highly approved and adopted.

古文：又劝帝应天受命，从之。
现代文：他又劝隋文帝顺应天意受命为帝，隋文帝也听从了。
English: He also advised the Sui Emperor to obey the will of heaven and accept the order to become emperor, and the Sui Emperor also obeyed.

古文：及受禅，上召仲方与高颎议正朔服色事。
现代文：到受禅时，隋文帝召崔仲方和高赹一起商议改朝时间及所用的车马祭牲的颜色。
English: At the time of receiving Zen, the Sui Emperor summoned Cui Zhongfang and Gao Qi to discuss the change of time and the color of the chariots and horses used for sacrifice.

古文：仲方曰： 晋为金行，后魏为水，周为木，皇家以火承木德之统。又圣躬载诞之初，有赤光之瑞。
现代文：仲方说： 在五行里，晋朝为金，后魏为水，周为木，皇帝应以火来继承木德，况且圣上诞生时，有红光的吉兆。
English: Zhongfang said, "In the Five Elements, the Jin Dynasty is gold, the Later Wei Dynasty is water, and the Zhou Dynasty is wood. The emperor should inherit the wood virtue with fire. Moreover, when the saint was born, there was the auspicious sign of red light.

古文：车服旗牲，并宜用赤。 
现代文：因此所用的车辆、马匹、旗帜，祭祀用的牲畜，都应采用红色。 
English: Therefore, the vehicles, horses, flags, and sacrificial animals used should all be red.

古文：又劝上除六官，依汉魏之旧。
现代文：他又劝隋文帝设置六部官制，依照汉、魏的旧制。
English: He also advised the Sui Emperor to set up a six-branch government system, in accordance with the old Han and Wei systems.

古文：并从之。
现代文：隋文帝都采纳了。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：进位上开府，授司农少卿，进爵固安县公。
现代文：他被晋位为上开府，任司农少卿，晋爵为固安郡公。
English: He was promoted to Shangkaifu, served as Sino-Minor Secretary of Agriculture, and was promoted to Gu'an County.

古文：令发丁三万于朔方、灵武筑长城，东至黄河，西拒绥州，南至勃出岭，绵历七百里。
现代文：令他带三万民工到朔方、灵武修筑长城，东至黄河，西到绥州，南到勃出岭，绵延七百里。
English: He ordered him to take 30,000 migrant workers to Shuofang and Lingwu to build the Great Wall, stretching 700 miles from east to the Yellow River, west to Bozhou, and south to Bijieling.

古文：明年，复令仲方发丁十万，于朔方已东，缘边险要，筑数十城，以遏胡寇。
现代文：第二年，又命令仲方领民工十万，在朔方郡的东部，沿边境一带的险要地方，修筑几十座城堡，以制止胡人入侵。
English: The next year, he also ordered 100,000 migrant workers from Zhongfang County to build dozens of castles in the eastern part of Shuofang County, along the border, in order to stop the Hu invasion.

古文：丁父艰，去职。
现代文：不久，遭父丧而离职。
English: He left the company shortly after his father's death.

古文：未期，起为虢州刺史。
现代文：守丧期未满，起用为虢州刺史。
English: Before the mourning period was over, he was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：上书论取陈之策曰：
现代文：他上书朝廷提出取陈朝的策略：
English: He submitted a letter to the imperial court proposing a strategy to take over the Chen dynasty:

古文：臣谨案：晋太康元年，岁在庚子，晋武帝平吴。
现代文： 臣详加考查，晋朝太康元年，正是庚子年，晋武帝平定吴国。
English: After detailed examination, it was in the first year of the Taikang Dynasty of the Jin Dynasty, precisely the year of Geng Zi, that Emperor Wu of the Jin Dynasty conquered the State of Wu.

古文：至今开皇六年，岁次丙午，合三百七载。
现代文：至今是开皇六年，丙午年，合计过了三百零七年。
English: So far, it has been six years since the founding of the People's Republic of China, and three hundred and seven years since the founding of the People's Republic of China.

古文：《春秋宝乾图》云： 王者三百年一蠲法。 
现代文：《春秋宝乾图》上说 ：帝王有三百年一免之法。 
English: "Spring and Autumn Treasures" says: The emperor has a three-hundred-year exemption.

古文：今三百之期，可谓至矣。
现代文：如今三百年的期限可说已到了。
English: Now the three-hundred-year deadline has, so to speak, arrived.

古文：陈氏草窃，起于丙子，至今丙午，又子午为冲，阴阳之忌。
现代文：陈氏窃据帝位，起于丙子年，今年是丙午年，子午相冲，正是阴阳学中的大忌之年。
English: Chen's usurpation of the imperial throne began in the year of C, and this year is the year of C, the year of the meridian, which is exactly the year of the great taboo in Yin and Yang studies.

古文：昔史赵有言曰： 陈，颛顼之族，为水，故岁在鹑火以灭。 
现代文：过去史赵曾说过： 陈姓，出于颛顼帝族，水德，所以当岁星在鹑火位时就要灭亡了。 
English: In the past, Shi Zhao once said: Chen surname, from the Qin dynasty, water virtue, so when the year star is in the campfire, it will perish.

古文：又云： 周武王克商，封胡公满于陈。 
现代文：又说 ：周武王灭商，封胡公满于陈。 
English: He also said: King Zhou Wu exterminated the merchants, and Hu Gong was filled with Chen.

古文：至鲁昭九年，陈灾，裨灶曰： 岁五及鹑火而后陈亡，楚克之。 
现代文：到鲁昭公九年，陈国有灾祸，裨灶说： 再过五年岁星到了鹑火，然后陈国就灭亡了，楚国将灭了它。 
English: In the ninth year of King Lu Zhaogu, a calamity befell the State of Chen. He said, "In another five years, the star will reach the bonfire, and then the State of Chen will perish, and the State of Chu will extinguish it."

古文：楚，祝融后也，为火正，故复灭陈。
现代文：楚人是祝融的后代，当过火正，所以又灭了陈。
English: The Chu people are the descendants of Zhu Rong, when the fire was too hot, so they extinguished Chen.

古文：陈承舜后，舜承颛顼。太岁左行，岁星右转；鹑火之岁，陈族再亡，戊午之年，妫虞运尽。
现代文：陈是舜的后裔，而舜又是颛顼的传人，太岁左行时，岁星向右转，到达鹑火的那一年，陈族将又灭亡。戊午这一年，也就是陈氏国运终结的时候了。
English: Chen is a descendant of Zou, and Zou is a descendant of Zou. When the sun goes to the left, the year star turns to the right. In the year of reaching the bonfire, the Chen clan will perish again. In the year of Wu, it is time for the Chen clan's national fortune to end.

古文：语迹虽殊，考事无别。
现代文：古语和古事虽然和现在不同，但考察其中的规律，却又没有差别。
English: Although ancient languages and ancient events are different from the present, there is no difference when examining the laws in them.

古文：皇朝五运相承感火德。而国号为隋，隋与楚同分，楚是火正。
现代文：今我皇朝以五运相承应感为火德，国号又称隋，古代隋国和楚国是同分野，楚是火正。
English: At present, our imperial dynasty takes the Five Elements of the Chinese Zodiac as the fire virtue, and the country name is also called Sui. The ancient Sui and Chu countries are in the same field, and Chu is the fire virtue.

古文：午为鹑火，未为鹑首，申为实沈，酉为大梁。既当周、秦、晋、赵之分，若当此分发兵，将得岁之助。
现代文：午配鹑火，未是鹑首，申配实沈，酉配大梁，正当周、秦、晋、赵的分野，如果在这个时候发兵，将是得到好年头的条件。
English: If you send troops at this time, it will be a condition for a good year. If you send troops at this time, it will be a condition for a good year.

古文：以今量古，陈灭不疑。
现代文：以古代的故事来比照今天，陈朝的灭亡是无疑的。
English: Comparing ancient stories with today, the demise of the Chen Dynasty is beyond doubt.

古文：臣谓午、未、申、酉并其数极。
现代文：我以为午、未、申、酉同是术数中的极点。
English: I thought that AM, PM, DEC, and DEC were the same as the extreme points in the operation number.

古文：盖闻天时不如地利，地利不如人和。
现代文：向来人们说，天时不如地利，地利不如人和。
English: People have always said that time is not as important as place, and place is not as important as people.

古文：况主圣臣良，兵强国富，陈既主昏于上，人讟于下，险无百二之固，众非九国之师，独此岛夷，而稽天讨！
现代文：况且皇上圣明，臣下贤良，兵强国富。陈朝在上的国君昏庸，在下的民众怨恨，论险没有百二河山的坚固，论兵众又比不上当年的九国之师，独处一隅的蛮夷之众，怎能挡得住奉天命进行的讨伐！
English: Moreover, the emperor was a saint, his vassals were virtuous, his army was powerful and the country was rich. During the reign of Chen, the sovereign at the top was dull and mediocre, the people at the bottom were resentful, the danger was not as strong as that of a hundred and two rivers and mountains, and the army was not as strong as that of the Nine Kingdoms, the barbarians who were alone in a corner, how could they stop the crusade ordered by heaven!

古文：伏度朝廷，自有宏谟，皞荛所见，冀申萤爝。
现代文： 我知道朝廷自有宏伟的谋略，而我不过是草野村民的见解，但还是想像萤火虫那样发一点微光。
English: I know that the imperial court has its own grand strategy, and I am just a grassland villager's opinion, but I still want to emit a little light like a firefly.

古文：今唯须武昌以下，蕲、和、徐、方、吴、海等州，更帖精兵，密营渡计；益、信、襄、荆、基、郢等州，速造舟楫，多张形势，为水战之具。
现代文：现在必须在武昌以下的蕲、和、滁、方、吴、海等各州，安排精兵，秘密准备渡河，益州、信州、襄阳、荆州、基州、郢州等地，加速建造船只，大造声势，制作水战的各种用具。
English: Now it is necessary to arrange elite soldiers and secretly prepare to cross the river in the provinces of Min, He, Min, Fang, Wu and Hai below Wuchang, and accelerate the construction of ships, make a big noise, and make various equipment for water wars in the provinces of Yizhou, Xinshou, Xiangyang, Jingzhou, Kizhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：蜀、汉二江，是其上流，水路冲要，必争之所。
现代文：蜀、汉两条江，是长江上游，水路要塞，历来是兵家必争之地。
English: The two rivers of Shu and Han are the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, waterway fortresses, and have always been a place for soldiers to compete.

古文：贼虽于流头、荆门、延洲、公安、巴陵、隐矶、夏口、盆城置船，然终聚汉口、峡口，以水战火决。
现代文：贼人虽然在流头、荆门、延洲、公安、巴陵、隐矶、夏首、蕲口、盆城设置船队，但最终要聚集到汉口和峡口，以水上作战一决胜负。
English: Although the bandits set up convoys in Nagato, Jingmen, Yanzhou, Shimin, Baling, Yingye, Xiasou, Hukou, and Boncheng, they would eventually gather in Hankou and Xiaokou to fight on the water and decide the outcome.

古文：若贼必以上流有军，令精兵赴援者，下流诸将，即须择便横度。
现代文：如果贼人考虑上游有军队，命令精兵前去支援的话，我们在下游的所有将领，立即应选择合适的地点横渡南下。
English: If the thieves consider that there is an army upstream and order the elite soldiers to go to support, all our generals downstream should immediately choose a suitable place to cross to the south.

古文：如拥众自卫，上江水军，鼓行以前。
现代文：如果敌人聚集大兵自卫，上游的水军就应一鼓作气向前进攻。
English: If the enemy gathers soldiers for self-defense, the upstream navy should advance to attack.

古文：虽恃九江五湖之险，非德无以为固；徒有三吴百越之兵，无恩不能自立。
现代文：这样，敌方虽自恃有九江五湖的天险，但没有德行便缺乏稳固的基础；徒有三吴和百越之地的兵马，但没有恩义便难以自立。 
English: In this way, although the enemy claims to have the natural dangers of the nine rivers and five lakes, but without virtue, it lacks a solid foundation; without gratitude, it is difficult to stand on its own.

古文：上览，大悦。
现代文：隋文帝看后，非常高兴。
English: Emperor Sui Wen was very happy after watching it.

古文：转基州刺史，征入朝。
现代文：他改任崔仲方为基州刺史，征召入朝。
English: He was reassigned to Cui Zhongfang as the Keizhou magistrate and conscripted into the imperial court.

古文：仲方因陈经略，上善之，赐以御袍裤并罗杂彩五百段，进位开府。
现代文：由于崔仲方奏上平陈的方略，深得皇帝嘉许，赐给他皇袍裤和绫罗绸缎五百段，晋位为开府。
English: As Cui Zhongfang played the strategy of Ping Chen, he was deeply appreciated by the emperor, who gave him the imperial robes and trousers and 500 pieces of silk brocade, and promoted him to the position of Kaifu.

古文：及大举伐陈，以仲方为行军总管，与秦王会。
现代文：当隋朝大举出兵攻陈时，任命崔仲方为行军总管，和秦王相会合。
English: When the Sui Dynasty sent a large number of troops to attack Chen, he appointed Cui Zhongfang as the general manager of the march and met with Qin Wang.

古文：及陈平，坐事免。
现代文：平陈后，他因事而被免职。
English: He was later relieved of his duties over the incident.

古文：未几，复位。
现代文：不久，又恢复职位。
English: He was soon reinstated.

古文：后数载，授会州总管。
现代文：几年以后，被任命为会州总管。
English: A few years later, he was named the state's superintendent.

古文：时诸羌犹未宾附，诏仲方击之，与贼三十余战，紫祖、四邻、望方、涉题、干碉、小铁围山、白男、弱水等赭都诸贼悉平。
现代文：当时，北方各部羌人还没有归顺朝廷，皇帝传旨命令崔仲方出征，他和敌人打了三十多仗，紫祖、四邻、望方、涉题、干碉、小铁围山、白男、弱水等赭都的各部敌人均被征服。
English: At that time, people in the northern provinces of Shandong had not yet surrendered to the imperial court. The emperor sent a message to Cui Zhongfang, ordering him to go to war. He fought more than 30 battles with the enemy. All the enemies of Shandong, such as Zizu, Sidi, Mokpo, Wuzhi, Ganlu, Xiaotie Wai Mountain, Baimeng and Weak Water, were conquered.

古文：赐奴婢一百二十口、黄金三十斤。
现代文：他被赏赐给奴婢一百二十人，黄金三十斤。
English: He was given one hundred and twenty male and female slaves, and thirty talents of gold.

古文：迁代州总管。总被征入朝。
现代文：晋升为代州总管，后来又被征召入朝。
English: He was promoted to daishu chokan, and later was conscripted into the imperial army.

古文：会文帝崩，汉王余党据吕州不下。
现代文：正值隋文帝去世，汉王的余党占据吕州，朝廷屡攻不下。
English: At the time of the death of Emperor Sui Wen, the remnants of the Han Dynasty occupied Luzhou, and the imperial court was repeatedly unable to conquer it.

古文：炀帝遣周罗攻之，中流矢卒。
现代文：隋炀帝派周罗目侯去攻打，却被流箭射中身亡。
English: Emperor Sui sent Zhou Lome to attack, but he was shot dead by a stray arrow.

古文：及令仲方代总其众，拔之，进位大将军。
现代文：当派崔仲方带领这支军队时，攻克了吕州，晋封他为大将军。
English: When Pai Cui Zhongfang led this army, he conquered Luzhou and promoted him to the rank of general.

古文：历户部、礼部尚书，坐事免。
现代文：又历官户部、礼部尚书，因事而获罪，免职。
English: In addition, all officials of the Household Department and the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies were found guilty and removed from office.

古文：寻为国子祭酒，转太常卿。
现代文：不久又被任命为国子祭酒，改为太常卿。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the son of the state, and changed his title to Taizongqing.

古文：朝廷以其衰老，出拜上郡太守。
现代文：朝廷因他已年老力衰，让他出任上郡太守。
English: Due to his old age and frail health, the imperial court made him the governor of Shang County.

古文：以母忧去职，岁余起为信都太守。
现代文：因母亲去世而离职服丧。一年多后又起用为信都太守。
English: Due to the death of his mother, he resigned from his post and went into mourning. More than a year later, he was appointed as the new Shintō Taishō.

古文：后乞骸骨，优诏许之，卒于家。
现代文：后来他年老请求退休，朝廷予以优待，准许他的请求，后死在家里。
English: Later, he asked to retire in his old age, the court gave him preferential treatment, granted his request, and then died at home.

古文：子焘，位定陶令。
现代文：他儿子名焘，官定陶令。
English: His son was a famous general, named Guan Ding Tao Ling.

古文：宣猷弟宣度，位齐王开府司马、恆农太守。
现代文：他的叔叔宣度，任齐王府司马、恒农太守。
English: His uncle, Xuan Du, was appointed the secretary of the Qi royal government and the governor of Hengnong.

古文：宣度弟宣轨，颇有才学，位尚书考功郎中，与弟宣质、宣静、宣略并早卒。
现代文：宣度的弟弟宣轨，颇有才学，任尚书考功郎中，宣轨和弟弟宣质、宣静、宣略都很早就去世。
English: Xuan Du's younger brother, Xuan Rong, was quite talented in learning, and was one of Ren Shang's students. Xuan Rong and his younger brothers, Xuan Chia, Xuan Jing, and Xuan Liang, all died early.

