古文：黄帝问曰：余闻缪刺，未得其意。何谓缪刺？
现代文：黄帝问道：我听说有一种 缪刺 ，但不知道它的意义，究竟什么叫缪刺？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "I have heard that there is a kind of thorn, but I don't know what it means. What exactly is a thorn?"

古文：岐伯对曰：夫邪之客于形也，必先舍于皮毛；留而不去，入舍于孙脉；留而不去，入舍于络脉；留而不去，入舍于经脉；内连五脏，散于肠胃，阴阳俱感，五脏乃伤。
现代文：岐伯回答说：大凡病邪侵袭人体，必须首先侵入皮毛；如果逗留不去，就进入孙脉；再逗留不去，就进入络脉；如还是逗留不去，就进入经脉；就向内延及五脏，流散到肠胃，这时表里都受到邪气侵袭，五脏就要受伤。
English: Qibo replied, "When a great evil invades the human body, it must first invade the fur; if it can't stay, it will enter the grandchild vein; if it can't stay any longer, it will enter the vas deferens; if it still can't stay, it will enter the meridians; it will extend inward to the internal organs and spread to the stomach and intestines. At this time, the external organs will be attacked by the evil, and the internal organs will be injured.

古文：此邪之从皮毛而入，极于五脏之次也，如此则治其经焉。
现代文：这是邪气从皮毛而入，最终影响到五脏的次序。如此就要治疗其经穴了。
English: This is because the evil gas enters through the fur and eventually affects the order of the five internal organs, so it is necessary to treat its acupuncture points.

古文：今邪客于皮毛，入舍于孙络，留而不去，闭塞不通，不得入于经，流溢于大络，而生奇病也。
现代文：现在邪气从皮毛侵入，进入到孙、络后，就逗留不去，如果此时络脉闭塞不通，邪气不得入于经脉，于是就要流溢于大络中，从而生成一些异常疾病。
English: Now the evil spirit invades from the fur, enters the sun and the network, and then lingers. If the choroid is blocked at this time, the evil spirit cannot enter the meridians, so it must flow over the large network, thus generating some abnormal diseases.

古文：夫邪客大络者，左注右，右注左，上下左右与经相干，而布于四末，其病无常处，不入于经俞，命曰缪刺。
现代文：邪气侵入大络后，在左边的就流窜到右边，在右边的就流窜到左边，或上或下，或左或右，但只影响到络脉而不能进入经脉之中，从而随大络流布到四肢，邪气流窜无一定的地方，也不能进入经脉俞穴，这种刺法就叫做 缪刺 。
English: After the evil spirit invades the great network, it flows from the left to the right, and from the right to the left, or up or down, or left or right, but it only affects the vas deferens and cannot enter the meridians, and thus spreads to the limbs with the great network. The evil spirit does not flow to a certain place, nor can it enter the acupoints of the meridians. This method of pricking is called "musing."

古文：帝曰：愿闻缪刺，以左取右，以右取左，奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：我想听听缪刺法左病右取、右病左取的道理是怎样的？
English: Huang Di said: I would like to hear what is the reason for taking the left side of the disease and the right side of the disease and the left side of the disease?

古文：其与巨刺，何以别之？
现代文：缪刺法与巨刺法怎么区别？
English: What is the difference between the pincer method and the giant pincer method?

古文：岐伯曰：邪客于经，左盛则右病，右盛则左病；亦有移易者，左病未已，而右脉先病，如此者必巨刺之，必中其经，非络脉也。
现代文：岐伯说：邪气侵袭到经脉，如果左边经气较盛则影响到右边经脉，或右边经气较盛则影响到左边经脉；但也有左右相互转移的，如左边疼痛尚未好，而右边经脉已开始有病，如此这样的，就必须用巨刺法。但是运用巨刺法，必定要邪气中于经脉，如果邪气留滞于络脉则决不能运用。
English: Qi Bo said: Evil qi invades the meridians. If the left meridians are more abundant, it will affect the right meridians, or if the right meridians are more abundant, it will affect the left meridians. But there are also left-right mutual transfers. If the pain on the left is not good yet, but the right meridians have begun to be sick, then the giant thorn method must be used. However, when using the giant thorn method, the evil qi must be in the meridians, and if the evil qi remains in the vas deferens, it must not be used.

古文：故络病者，其痛与经脉缪处，故命曰缪刺。
现代文：因为络脉病变的病痛部位与经脉相缪，因此称为 缪刺 。
English: Because the diseased part of the choroid lesion is adjacent to the meridians, it is called a myiasis.

古文：帝曰：愿闻缪刺奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：我想知道缪刺法怎样进行，怎样用于治疗病人？
English: Huang Di said, "I want to know how to perform the Miao Stinging Method and how to use it to treat patients."

古文：取之何如？岐伯曰：邪客于足少阴之络，令人卒心痛、暴胀、胷胁支满，无积者，刺然骨之前出血，如食顷而已。不已，左取右，右取左。
现代文：岐伯说：邪气侵入足少阴肾经的络脉，使人突然发生心痛、腹胀大、胸胁部胀满，但并无积聚，针刺然谷穴出些血，大约过一顿饭的工夫，病情就可以缓解；如尚未好，左病则刺右边，右病则刺左边。
English: Qi Bo said: The evil spirit invades the veins of the Shaoyin Kidney Meridian, causing sudden heartache, bloating, and swelling of the chest wall, but there is no accumulation. The needle pricks the valley and some blood comes out. After about one meal, the condition can be alleviated. If it is still not good, the left disease pricks the right side, and the right disease pricks the left side.

古文：病新发者，取五日已。
现代文：新近发生的病，针刺五天就可痊愈。
English: A recent illness can be cured in five days with acupuncture.

古文：邪客于手少阳之络，令人喉痹、舌卷、口干心烦、臂外廉痛、手不及头，刺手中指次指爪甲上，去端如韭叶，各一痏，壮者立已，老者有顷已。
现代文：邪气侵入手少阳三焦经的络脉，使人发生咽喉麻痹、舌卷、口干、心中烦闷、手臂外侧疼痛使抬手不能至头，针刺手小指内侧无名指指甲上方，距离指甲如韭菜叶宽，左右各有一穴，壮年人马上就见缓解，老年人稍待一会儿也就好了。
English: The evil spirit invades the veins of the Shao Yang Sanjiao Jing in the hands, causing throat paralysis, tongue curl, dry mouth, boredom in the heart, pain on the outside of the arm so that the hand cannot reach the head, needle prick on the inside of the little finger above the ring finger nail, the distance from the nail is as wide as a leek leaf, and there is a hole on each side, the adults will see relief immediately, and the elderly will be fine if they wait a while.

古文：左取右，右取左。
现代文：左病刺右边，右病则刺左边。
English: The left disease affects the right acupoint, Shangyang hole; the right disease affects the left acupoint, Shangyang hole.

古文：此新病，数日已。
现代文：如果是新近发生的病，几天就可痊愈。
English: If it is a recent illness, it can be cured in a few days.

古文：邪客于足厥阴之络，令人卒疝暴痛，刺足大指爪甲上与肉交者各一痏，男子立已，女子有顷已。
现代文：邪气侵袭足厥阴肝经的络脉，使人突然发生疝气剧烈疼痛，针刺足大趾爪甲上与皮肉交接处，左右各有一穴，男子立刻缓解，女子稍待一会儿也就好了。
English: The evil gas attacks the veins of the jujube, yin and yang of the liver, causing a person to suddenly have a severe pain of hernia. The big toe nail is pricked at the junction with the skin, and there is a hole on the right and left. The man is immediately relieved, and the woman will be fine if she waits for a while.

古文：左取右，右取左。
现代文：左病则刺右边，右病则刺左边。
English: The left disease affects the right acupoint, Shangyang hole; the right disease affects the left acupoint, Shangyang hole.

古文：邪客于足太阳之络，令人头项肩痛，刺足小指爪甲上与肉交者各一痏，立已。
现代文：邪气侵袭足太阳膀胱经的络脉，使人发生头、项、肩部疼痛，针刺足小趾爪甲上与皮肉交接处，左右各有一穴，立刻就缓解。
English: The evil spirit attacks the vas deferens of the solar plexus of the foot, causing pain in the head, neck, and shoulder, and needling the junction between the toenail and the skin. There is a hole on each side, which is immediately relieved.

古文：不已，刺外踝下三痏。
现代文：如若不缓解，再刺足外踝下三针，大约一顿饭的工夫也就好了。
English: If there is no relief, then three stitches under the outer ankle, about a meal's worth of work.

古文：左取右，右取左，如食顷已。
现代文：左则刺右边，右病则刺左边。
English: Left-sided disease affects the right side, while right-sided disease affects the left side.

古文：邪客于手阳明之络，令人气满胷中、喘息而支胠、胷中热，刺手大指次指爪甲上，去端如韭叶，各一痏。
现代文：邪气侵袭手阳明大肠经的络脉，使人发生胸中气满，喘息而胁肋部撑胀，胸中发热，针刺手大指侧的次指指甲上方，距离指甲如韭菜叶宽，左右各有一穴。
English: The evil air invades the vas deferens of the large intestine, causing the person to have fullness of breath in the chest, swelling of the ribs due to wheezing, fever in the chest, needling above the second fingernail on the side of the thumb, the distance from the fingernail is as wide as a leek leaf, and there is a hole on each side.

古文：左取右，右取左，如食顷已。
现代文：左病则刺右边，右病则刺左边。
English: Left-sided disease affects the right side, while right-sided disease affects the left side.

古文：邪客于臂掌之间，不可得屈，刺其踝后，先以指按之痛，乃刺之，以月死生为数，月生一日一痏，二日二痏，十五日十五痏，十六日十四痏。
现代文：大约一顿饭的工夫也就好了。邪气侵入，使人发生臂掌之间疼痛，不能弯曲，针刺手腕踝骨后方，先以手指按压，找到痛处，再针刺。根据月亮的圆缺确定针刺的次数，例如月亮开始生光，初一刺一针，初二刺二针，以后逐日加一针，直到十五日加到十五针，十六日又减为十四针，以后逐日减一针。
English: About a meal's worth of time is enough. Evil spirits invade, causing pain between the palms of the hands, which cannot be bent, and needling behind the bones of the wrists and ankles. First, press with fingers to find the painful area, and then needling. The number of needling is determined according to the roundness of the moon. For example, when the moon begins to shine, the first prick is one prick, the first two pricks are two pricks, and then one prick is added day by day, until the fifteenth day is added to fifteen pricks, the sixteenth day is reduced to fourteen pricks, and then one prick is

古文：邪客于足阳蹻之脉，令人目痛从内眦始，刺外踝之下半寸所各二痏。
现代文：邪气侵入足部的阳蹻脉，使人发生眼睛疼痛从内眦开始，针刺足外踝下面约半寸后，左右各有二穴。
English: The evil spirit invades the vas deferens in the foot, causing pain in the eyes starting from the medial condyle. After about half an inch of needling under the ankle, there are two holes on each side.

古文：左刺右，右刺左，如行十里顷而已。
现代文：左病则刺右边，右病则刺左边。大约如人步行十里路的工夫就可以好了。
English: Left-sided disease affects the right side, while right-sided disease affects the left side. If you walk for about ten miles, you will be fine.

古文：人有所堕坠，恶血留内、腹中满胀、不得前后，先饮利药。
现代文：人由于堕坠跌伤，淤血停留体内，使人发生腹部胀满、大小便不通，要先服通便导淤的药物。
English: If a person is injured in a fall due to a fall, and the congealed blood stays in the body, causing the person to have a swollen abdomen and loose stools, it is necessary to first take a laxative medicine.

古文：此上伤厥阴之脉，下伤少阴之络。
现代文：这是由于坠跌，上面伤了足厥阴肝经的经脉，下面伤了足少阴肾经的络脉。
English: This was due to a fall, which injured the meridians of the jujube-yin-hepatic meridians above and the meridians of the jujube-yin-kidney meridians below.

古文：刺足内踝之下，然骨之前血脉，出血，刺足跗上动脉。
现代文：针刺取其足内踝之下、然骨穴之前的淤血处，刺出其血，再刺足背上动脉处。
English: Needle puncture to take the blood clot under the ankle in the foot, but before the bone hole, prick out the blood, and then prick the upper dorsal artery.

古文：不已，刺三毛上各一痏，见血立已。
现代文：如果病不缓解，再刺足大趾聚毛处，左右各有一穴，针刺出血，立即就缓解。
English: If the disease is not alleviated, then prick the big toe where the hairs are gathered, there is a hole on each side, prick the bleeding, and it will be relieved immediately.

古文：左刺右，右刺左。
现代文：左病则刺右边，右病则刺左边。
English: Left-sided disease affects the right side, while right-sided disease affects the left side.

古文：善悲惊不乐，刺如右方。
现代文：假如有好悲伤或惊恐不乐的现象，刺法同上。
English: If there is a good sadness or a phenomenon of fright or displeasure, the stabbing method is the same as above.

古文：邪客于手阳明之络，令人耳聋、时不闻音，刺手大指次指爪甲上，去端如韭叶，各一痏，立闻。
现代文：邪气侵入手阳明经的络脉，使人耳聋，间断性失去听觉，针刺手大姆指侧的食指指甲上方，距离指甲如韭菜叶宽，左右各有一穴，立刻就可以恢复听觉。
English: The evil spirit invades the vein of the yangming sutra in the hand, causing deafness, intermittent loss of hearing, the index finger of the thumb side of the finger is pricked above the nail, the distance from the nail is as wide as a leek leaf, and there is a hole on each side, and the hearing can be restored immediately.

古文：不已，刺中指爪甲上与肉交者，立闻。
现代文：如果无效，再刺中指爪甲上与皮肉交接处，马上就可听到声音。
English: If that doesn't work, then prick the middle of the nail where it meets the flesh and you'll hear the sound right away.

古文：其不时闻者，不可刺也。
现代文：如果是间断性失去听力的，就不可用针刺治疗了。
English: If you have intermittent hearing loss, you can't be treated with acupuncture.

古文：耳中生风者，亦刺之如此数。左刺右，右刺左。
现代文：假如耳中鸣响如有风声，也采取上述方法进行针刺治疗。左病则刺右边，右病则刺左边。
English: If there is a ringing in the ear, such as wind, the above method is also used for acupuncture treatment. The left disease is on the right side, and the right disease is on the left side.

古文：凡痹往来，行无常处者，在分肉间痛而刺之，以月死生为数。
现代文：凡是痹证疼痛走窜，无固定地方的，就随疼痛所在而刺其分肉之间，根据月亮盈亏变化确定针刺的次数。
English: If there is no fixed place where the pain is felt, the needles should be inserted between the joints according to the location of the pain, and the number of needles should be determined according to the change of the moon.

古文：用针者，随气盛衰，以为痏数，针过其日数则脱气，不及日数则气不泻。
现代文：凡有用针刺治疗的，都要随着人体在月行周期中气血的盛衰情况来确定用针的次数，如果用针次数超过其相应的日数，就会损耗人的正气；如果达不到相应的日数，邪气又不得泻除。
English: For all effective acupuncture treatments, the number of times to use needles should be determined according to the rise and fall of qi and blood in the menstrual cycle of the human body. If the number of times to use needles exceeds the corresponding number of days, it will deplete the person's righteous qi; if the corresponding number of days is not reached, the evil qi will not be eliminated.

古文：左刺右，右刺左，病已止。
现代文：左病则刺右边，右病则刺左边。
English: Left-sided disease affects the right side, while right-sided disease affects the left side.

古文：不已，复刺之如法。
现代文：病好了，就不要再刺；若还没有痊愈，按上述方法再刺。
English: If you are cured, do not prick again; if you are not cured, prick again according to the above method.

古文：月生一日一痏，二日二痏，渐多之；十五日十五痏，十六日十四痏，渐少之。
现代文：月亮新生的初一刺一针，初二刺二针，以后逐日加一针，直到十五日加到十五针，十六日又减为十四针，以后逐日减一针。
English: When the moon is newly born, the first stitch is one stitch, the first two stitches are two stitches, and then one stitch is added day by day, until the fifteenth day is added to fifteen stitches, and the sixteenth day is reduced to fourteen stitches, and then one stitch is reduced day by day.

古文：邪客于足阳明之经，令人鼽衄、上齿寒，刺足中指次指爪甲上与肉交者各一痏。
现代文：邪气侵入足阳明胃经的络脉，使人发生鼻出血、上齿寒冷，针刺足中趾侧的次趾爪甲上方与皮肉交接处，左右各有一穴。
English: The evil spirit invades the veins of the foot and stomach meridians, causing people to have nosebleeds, cold upper teeth, and pinpricks at the junction of the toenail and the skin on the middle toe, with one hole on each side.

古文：左刺右，右刺左。
现代文：左病则刺右边，右病则刺左边。
English: Left-sided disease affects the right side, while right-sided disease affects the left side.

古文：邪客于足少阳之络，令人胁痛不得息、欬而汗出，刺足小指次指爪甲上与肉交者各一痏，不得息立已，汗出立止。
现代文：邪气侵入足少阳胆经的络脉，使人胁痛而呼吸不畅、咳嗽而汗出，针刺足小趾侧的次趾爪甲上方与皮肉交接处，左右各有一穴，呼吸不畅马上就缓解，出汗也就很快停止了。
English: The evil gas invades the vein of the lesser yang and gall of the foot, causing pain and poor breathing, coughing and sweating. The needle pierces the junction between the toenail and the flesh on the side of the little toe, and there is a hole on each side. Poor breathing is immediately relieved, and sweating soon stops.

古文：欬者温衣饮食，一日已。
现代文：如果有咳嗽症状的，要嘱其注意穿衣、饮食的温暖，这样一天就可好了。
English: If you have coughing symptoms, you should instruct them to pay attention to the warmth of clothing and diet. This will be a good day.

古文：左刺右，右刺左，病立已。
现代文：左病则刺右边，右病则刺左边，疾病很快就可痊愈。
English: The left disease affects the right side, and the right disease affects the left side, and the disease can be cured quickly.

古文：不已，复刺如法。
现代文：如果仍未痊愈，按上述方法再刺。
English: If it still hasn't healed, follow the above method for a second prick.

古文：邪客于足少阴之络，令人嗌痛不可内食、无故善怒、气上走贲上，刺足下中央之脉各三痏，凡六刺立已。
现代文：邪气侵入足少阴肾经的络脉，使人咽喉肿而疼痛不能进饮食、无故发怒、气上逆至贲门之上，针刺足底中心的络脉，左右各三针，共六针，可立刻缓解。
English: The evil spirit invades the vas deferens in the meridians of the feet, legs, and kidneys, causing sore throats and pain that makes it impossible to eat and drink, anger for no reason, the spirit rises to the top of the anus, and the vein in the center of the sole of the foot is pricked with three needles on the left and right, for a total of six needles, which can be relieved immediately.

古文：左刺右，右刺左。
现代文：左病则刺右边，右病则刺左边。
English: Left-sided disease affects the right side, while right-sided disease affects the left side.

古文：嗌中肿不能内，唾时不能出唾者，刺然骨之前，出血立已。
现代文：如果咽喉肿而疼痛不能进饮食，想咯吐痰涎又不能咯出来，针刺然骨穴的前面使之出血，很快就好。
English: If you have a sore throat and can't eat because of the pain, if you want to spit and can't, and if the needle punctures the front of the bone hole and makes it bleed, you'll soon be fine.

古文：左刺右，右刺左。
现代文：左病则刺右边，右病则刺左边。
English: Left-sided disease affects the right side, while right-sided disease affects the left side.

古文：邪客于足太阴之络，令人腰痛、引少腹控䏚、不可以仰息，刺腰尻之解，两胂之上，是腰俞。以月死生为痏数，发针立已。
现代文：邪气侵入足太阴脾经的络脉，使人腰痛，连及小腹，牵引至胁下，不能挺胸呼吸，针刺椎骨与尾骨的接缝处当中，椎骨两旁肌肉之上，是腰部的俞穴，根据月亮圆缺确定用针次数，出针后马上就好了。
English: Evil spirits invade the veins of the meridians of the feet, legs, and spleen, causing people to have lower back pain, pain in the groin and lower abdomen, pulling them under duress, unable to breathe, needling the joints of the vertebrae and coccyx, above the muscles on both sides of the vertebrae, is the hernia of the waist, according to the lack of the moon, determine the number of needles, and it will be fine immediately after the needle is released.

古文：左刺右，右刺左。
现代文：左病则刺右边，右病则刺左边。
English: Left-sided disease affects the right side, while right-sided disease affects the left side.

古文：邪客于足太阳之络，令人拘挛、背急、引胁而痛，刺之从项始，数脊椎侠脊，疾按之应手如痛，刺之旁三痏，立已。
现代文：邪气侵入足太阳膀胱经的络脉，使人背部拘急、牵引胁肋部疼痛，针刺应从项部开始沿着脊椎骨两旁向下按压，在病人感到疼痛处周围针刺三针，病立刻就好。
English: The evil spirit invades the vas deferens of the solar plexus of the foot, causing pain in the back, and pain in the traction-stressed ribs. Acupuncture should be applied from the neck down along both sides of the vertebrae, and three needles should be inserted around the place where the patient feels pain, and the disease will be cured immediately.

古文：邪客于足少阳之络，令人留于枢中痛、髀不可举，刺枢中以毫针，寒则久留针，以月死生为数，立已。
现代文：邪气侵入足少阳胆经的络脉，使人胯关节疼痛、大腿不能抬举，针刺胯关节中间，用毫针，有寒的可留针久一些，根据月亮盈亏的情况确定针刺的次数，很快就好。
English: The evil spirit invades the vein of the lesser yang and gall of the foot, causing pain in the hip joint, the thigh can not be lifted, and the middle of the hip joint is needled with a millimeter needle. If it is cold, the needle can be left for a long time, and the number of needling is determined according to the situation of the moon's profit and loss, and it will be better soon.

古文：治诸经刺之，所过者不病，则缪刺之。
现代文：治疗各经疾病用针刺的方法，如果经脉所经过的部位未见病变，就用缪刺法。
English: The method of acupuncture is used for the treatment of various menstrual diseases. If there is no lesion in the part where the menstrual pulse passes, the method of acupuncture is used.

古文：耳聋，刺手阳明。
现代文：耳聋，针刺手阳明大肠经。
English: Deafness, pinprick hand yangming large bowel meridian.

古文：不已，刺其通脉出耳前者。
现代文：如果不好，再刺手阳明大肠经的络脉出于耳前的部位。
English: If it is not good, then prick the area in front of the ear with the vein of the Yang Ming large bowel meridian.

古文：齿龋，刺手阳明。
现代文：牙痛，刺手阳明大肠经。
English: Toothache, stabbing hand yangming large intestine meridian.

古文：不已，刺其脉入齿中者，立已。
现代文：如果不好，再刺手阳明大肠经的络脉入齿中的痛点，很快就见效。
English: If it is not good, then stab the pain point in the tooth with the lumen of the Yangming large intestine, and it will be effective soon.

古文：邪客于五脏之间，其病也，脉引而痛、时来时止。视其病，缪刺之于手足爪甲上，视其脉，出其血，间日一刺；一刺不已，五刺已。
现代文：邪气侵入到五脏之间，其病变表现为经脉牵引作痛、时痛时止，根据其病的情况，在其手、足的爪甲上进行缪刺法，选择有血液郁滞的络脉，刺出其血，隔日刺一次，一次不见好，连刺五次就可好了。
English: The evil spirit invades between the five viscera, and the lesion manifests itself as pain caused by the pulling of the meridians, and pain when it stops. According to the condition of the disease, the nail plate of the hands and feet is pricked, the vein with stagnant blood is selected, and the blood is pricked out. The next day, it is pricked once, once is not good, and it is good to be pricked five times.

古文：缪传引上齿，齿唇寒痛，视其手背脉血者，去之，足阳明中指爪甲上一痏，手大指次指爪甲上各一痏，立已。
现代文：缪传于而牵引上齿，出现唇齿寒冷疼痛的症状，可视其手背上经脉有瘀血的地方针刺出血，再在足阳明中趾爪甲上刺一针，在手大拇指侧的食指爪甲上刺一针，很快就好了。
English: It is said that if a person pulls the upper teeth, the symptoms of cold pain in the upper lip and teeth will appear. It can be seen that the place where the meridians on the back of the hand have pus and blood will be pricked with a needle, and then a needle will be pricked on the toenail in the middle of the foot, and a needle will be pricked on the index nail on the thumb side of the hand. It will be better soon.

古文：左取右，右取左。
现代文：左病则刺右边的厉兑、商阳穴；右病则刺左边的厉兑、商阳穴。
English: The left disease affects the right acupoint, Shangyang hole; the right disease affects the left acupoint, Shangyang hole.

古文：邪客于手足少阴、太阴；足阳明之络，此五络皆会于耳中，上络左角，五络俱竭，令人身脉皆动，而形无知也，其状若尸，或曰尸厥。
现代文：邪气侵入到手少阴、手太阴、足少阴、足太阴、足阳明的络脉，这五经的络脉都聚会于耳中，并上绕左耳上面的额角，假如由于邪气侵袭而至这五络的真气全部衰竭，就会使经脉都振动，而形体失去知觉，就像死尸一样，有人把它叫做 尸厥 。
English: The evil spirits invade the meridians of Shaoyin of the hand, Taiyin of the hand, Shaoyin of the foot, Taiyin of the foot, and Yangming of the foot. These five meridians are gathered in the ear and wind around the upper corner of the forehead above the left ear. If the five meridians are all exhausted due to the invasion of the evil spirits, the meridians will vibrate and the body will lose consciousness, just like a dead body. Some people call it a corpse.

古文：刺其足大指内侧爪甲上，去端如韭叶；后刺足心；后刺足中指爪甲上各一痏；后刺手大指内侧，去端如韭叶；后刺手心主少阴锐骨之端，各一痏，立已。
现代文：这时应当针刺其足大趾内侧爪甲，距离爪甲有韭菜叶宽；然后再刺足心；再刺足中趾爪甲上，左右各刺一针；然后再刺手拇指内侧，距离爪甲有韭菜叶宽；再刺手少阴心经在掌后桡骨茎突处，左右各刺一针，当立刻清醒。
English: At this time, you should prick the medial nail of the big toe of the foot, and the distance from the nail is the width of a leek leaf; then prick the center of the foot; then prick the nail of the middle toe of the foot, and prick one needle on each side; then prick the inner side of the thumb of the hand, and the distance from the nail is the width of a leek leaf; then prick the heart of the hand through the pharyngeal protrusion at the back of the palm, and prick one needle on each side, and immediately wake up.

古文：不已，以竹管吹其两耳，鬄其左角之发方一寸，燔治，饮以美酒一杯；不能饮者灌之，立已。
现代文：如仍不好，就用竹管吹气入病人两耳之中，并把病人左边头角上的头发剃下来，取一平方寸左右，烧制为末，用好酒一杯冲服，如因失去知觉而不能饮服，就把药酒灌下去，很快就可恢复过来。
English: If it is still not good, use a bamboo tube to blow air into the patient's two ears, and shave off the hair on the left corner of the patient's head, take about one square inch, burn it to the end, and wash it down with a glass of good wine. If you can't drink because you are unconscious, pour the medicinal wine down and you can recover quickly.

古文：凡刺之数：先视其经脉，切而从之，审其虚实而调之；不调者，经刺之；有痛而经不病者，缪刺之；因视其皮部有血络者，尽取之。
现代文：凡是针刺治疗的方法：先要根据所病的经脉，切按推寻，详审虚实而进行调治；如果经脉不调，先采用针刺经脉的方法；如果有病痛而经脉没有病变，再采用缪刺的方法；发现皮肤有瘀血的地方，应立即把瘀血刺出。
English: All methods of acupuncture treatment: first of all, according to the diseased meridians, cut according to the search, carefully examine the truth and adjust the treatment; if the meridians are not adjusted, first use the method of acupuncture meridians; if there is pain and there is no lesion in the meridians, then use the method of acupuncture; if there is blood in the skin, it should be immediately pricked out.

古文：此缪刺之数也。
现代文：以上就是缪刺的方法。
English: So that's the way to do it.

