古文：◎食货一
现代文：食货一
English: Groceries 1

古文：《记》曰： 取财於地，而取法於天。
现代文：《礼记》上说： 从大地上获取财物，向上天取得法式。 
English: "The Book of Rites" says: Acquire wealth from the earth, and acquire virtue for heaven.

古文：富国之本，在於农桑。 
现代文：使国家富强的根本，在于农业生产和种桑养蚕。
English: The foundation of the country's prosperity and strength lies in agricultural production and the cultivation of mulberry and silkworm.

古文：明初，沿元之旧，钱法不通而用钞，又禁民间以银交易，宜若不便於民。
现代文：明朝初年，沿袭元朝旧制，钱法不流通而使用钞法，又禁止民间用银进行交易，似乎对人民不便利。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the old system of the Yuan Dynasty was followed, the money law was not circulated but the banknote law was used, and private transactions with silver were prohibited, which seemed to be inconvenient for the people.

古文：而洪、永、熙、宣之际，百姓充实，府藏衍溢。
现代文：而洪武、永乐、洪熙、宣德年问，百姓财物充实，府库储藏盈余。
English: But in the years of Hongwu, Yongle, Hongxi and Xuande, the people's wealth was enriched, and the prefectural treasury stored surplus.

古文：盖是时，劭农务垦辟，土无莱芜，人敦本业，又开屯田、中盐以给边军，餫饷不仰藉於县官，故上下交足，军民胥裕。
现代文：这时候，鼓励农业生产开垦土地，耕地没有荒芜，人民勤勉于本业。又开发屯田、中盐以供给边防军队，粮饷不依赖于政府，所以上下都富足，军队人民都很富裕。
English: At this time, agricultural production was encouraged to reclaim land, cultivated land did not become barren, and the people were diligent in this industry. Also, the development of tundra and mid-salt was carried out to supply the border defense army. The grain supply did not depend on the government, so both upstream and downstream were rich, and the army people were very rich.

古文：其后，屯田坏於豪强之兼并，计臣变盐法。
现代文：此后，由于豪强兼并而屯田毁坏，财赋大臣改变盐法。
English: After that, due to the annexation of Gaoqiang and the destruction of Tonden, the Minister of Finance changed the salt law.

古文：於是边兵悉仰食太仓，转输住往不给。
现代文：于是边防军队都依赖国库，输送军粮往往不能供足。
English: As a result, the border troops are dependent on the state treasury, and the delivery of military food is often insufficient.

古文：世宗以后，耗财之道广，府库匮竭。
现代文：世宗以后，耗费财物的地方太多，国家府库匮乏竭尽。
English: After the reign of King Sejong, there were too many places to spend money, and the national treasury was exhausted.

古文：神宗乃加赋重征，矿税四出，移正供以实左藏。
现代文：神宗便增加赋税征收，矿税太多，移法定赋税以充实国库。
English: Shenzong increased tax collection, too much mineral tax, and transferred legal tax to enrich the national treasury.

古文：中涓群小，横敛侵渔。
现代文：内宫群小人，横征暴敛掠夺民财。
English: Inner palace group villain, embezzlement rampant plunder of people's wealth.

古文：民多逐末，田卒污莱。
现代文：人民多追逐末业，田地终于荒废。
English: Many people are chasing the last job, and the fields are finally abandoned.

古文：吏不能拊循，而覆侵刻之。
现代文：官吏不能安抚，反而侵害剥削。
English: Officials can't be appeased, but they can be abused and exploited.

古文：海内困敝，而储积益以空乏。
现代文：天下困顿疲敝，而国家储积的财物更加空虚。
English: The world is weary, and the national treasury is emptier.

古文：昧者多言复通钞法可以富国，不知国初之充裕在勤农桑，而不在行钞法也。
现代文：蒙昧的人多称恢复流通钞法可以使国家富足，不知道开国之初的富裕在于勤事农业生产种桑养蚕，而不在于施行钞法。
English: Many ignorant people say that the restoration of the circulation of banknotes can make the country rich. They do not know that the wealth at the beginning of the founding of the country lies in the diligent agricultural production of mulberry and silkworm breeding, and not in the implementation of the banknote law.

古文：夫缰本节用，为理财之要。
现代文：加强农业，节省开支，是管理财政的关键。
English: Strengthening agriculture and saving expenses is the key to financial management.

古文：明一代理财之道，始所以得，终所以失，条其本末，著於篇。
现代文：现将明朝一代管理财政的措施，开始成功，最终失败的原因，条陈其本末，记录于此篇。
English: The reasons for the initial success and ultimate failure of the Ming Dynasty's financial management measures are recorded in this article.

古文：户口田制
现代文：户口田制
English: Hukou rice field system

古文：太祖籍天下户口，置户帖、户籍，具书名、岁、居地。
现代文：太祖登记天下户口，设置户帖、户籍，详细登载姓名、年龄、居住地。
English: The great-grandfather registered the world account, set up the household book, household register, and published the name, age, and place of residence in detail.

古文：籍上户部，帖给之民。
现代文：户籍上交户部，户帖、下发人民。
English: The household registration shall be submitted to the household department, and the household register shall be issued to the people.

古文：有司岁计其登耗以闻。
现代文：主管部门每年计算人口增加减少的情况上报。
English: The competent departments shall calculate and report the population increase and decrease every year.

古文：及郊祀，中书省以户籍陈坛下，荐之天，祭毕而藏之。
现代文：到举行郊祀时，中书省把户籍陈列在祭坛下，进献给上天，祭祀完毕而收藏。
English: When the suburb worship is held, the Ministry of Chinese Literature displays the family register under the altar, dedicates it to the heavens, and collects it after the worship is over.

古文：洪武十四年诏天下编赋役黄册，以一百十户为一里，推丁粮多者十户为长，馀百户为十甲，甲凡十人。
现代文：洪武十四年，诏令天下编制赋役的黄册，以一百一十户为一里，推举按人口交纳粮食多的十户为长，其余的一百户为十甲，甲一共十人。
English: In the 14th year of Hongwu, the emperor issued an edict to compile the Yellow Book of Fuyu, with one hundred and ten households as one li, and the ten households that paid more grain according to their population as the longest, and the remaining one hundred households as ten jia, with ten people in total.

古文：岁役里长一人，甲首一人，董一里一甲之事。
现代文：每年出役里长一人，甲首一人，管理一里一甲的事务。
English: Every year, one village chief and one head of village A are sent to manage the affairs of one village and one county.

古文：先后以丁粮多寡为序，凡十年一周，曰排年。
现代文：先后以按人口交纳粮食的多少作为顺序，十年为一周，叫做排年。
English: In order of how much grain is paid by the population, ten years is one week, which is called the year of ranking.

古文：在城曰坊，近城曰厢，乡都曰里。
现代文：在城中称坊，在城的近郊称厢，在乡都称里。
English: In the city, it is called a ward, in the suburbs of the city, it is called a compartment, and in the countryside, it is called a village.

古文：里编为册，册首总为一图。
现代文：里编制成册，册的开头总领为一图。
English: compiled into a book, the beginning of the book is a picture of the leader.

古文：鳏寡孤独不任役者，附十甲后为畸零。
现代文：鳏寡孤独不承担赋役的，附在十甲之后作马零余之数。
English: For widows and widowers alone who do not bear the tax, the number of horse-drawn carriages is added after the ten-horse carriage.

古文：僧道给度牒，有田者编册如民科，无田者亦为畸零。
现代文：僧侣道士给予度牒公文，有田的如平民的方式编成册，无田的也作为零余之敷。
English: Monks and Taoists were given official documents, those with fields were compiled in the same way as the commoners, and those without fields were also used as extra bedding.

古文：每十年有司更定其册，以丁粮增减而升降之。
现代文：每十年主管部门改定一次簿册，以按人口交粮的增减情况来提升和降职。
English: Every ten years, the competent department will revise the register to promote and demote according to the increase and decrease of the population's grain payment.

古文：册凡四：一上户部，其三则布政司、府、县各存一焉。
现代文：簿册一共四份：一份上交户部，其余三份则布政司、府、县各存一份。
English: There are a total of four copies of the book: one is submitted to the Household Department, and the remaining three copies are kept by the Department of Political Affairs, the prefecture, and the county.

古文：上户部者，册面黄纸，故谓之黄册。
现代文：上交户部的，簿册封面用黄纸，所以叫做黄册。
English: The book cover is made of yellow paper, which is why it is called a yellow book.

古文：年终进呈，送后湖东西二库庋藏之。
现代文：年终进呈，送后湖东西二库保存。
English: Submitted at the end of the year, sent to the East and West Lake for preservation.

古文：岁命户科给事中一人、御史二人、户部主事四人厘校讹舛。
现代文：每年命令户科给事中一人、御史二人、户部主事四人校正错误。
English: Every year, the head of the Household Science Department orders one of the clerks, two of the historians, and four of the heads of the Household Department to correct errors.

古文：其后黄册只具文，有司征税、编徭，则自为一册，曰白册云。
现代文：以后黄册只是记载文字，主管部门征收赋税，编制徭役，便自己编写一册，称为白册。
English: Since then, the Yellow Book has only recorded words. The competent departments collect taxes and compile reports, and then compile a book themselves, called the White Book.

古文：凡户三等：曰民，曰军，曰匠。
现代文：户籍共分三等：一是平民，一是军人，一是工匠。
English: There are three classes of household registration: one for civilians, one for military personnel, and one for craftsmen.

古文：民有儒，有医，有阴阳。
现代文：平民有儒生，有医生，有阴阳。
English: Civilians have Confucianism, doctors, and yin and yang.

古文：军有校尉，有力士，弓、铺兵。
现代文：军人有校尉，有力士，有弓、铺兵。
English: A soldier has a captain, a strong man, a bow and a staff.

古文：匠有厨役、裁缝、马船之类。
现代文：匠有厨役、裁缝、马船之类。
English: Craftsmen have roles as cooks, tailors, horse-drawn carriages and the like.

古文：濒海有盐灶。
现代文：临海有盐灶。
English: There is a salt oven by the sea.

古文：寺有僧，观有道士。
现代文：寺庙有僧人，道观有道士。
English: Temples have monks, Taoism has Taoists.

古文：毕以其业著籍。
现代文：都按各自的职业记载于簿册。
English: according to their offices, are written in the book.

古文：人户以籍为断，禁数姓合户附籍。
现代文：户口按簿籍作为决断依据，禁止多个姓合成一户附于簿籍。
English: Household registration is based on the book as the basis for decision-making, and it is prohibited to combine multiple surnames into one household and attach it to the book.

古文：漏口、脱户，许自实。
现代文：遗漏人口、脱落人户，允许自己核实。
English: Allow yourself to verify the omission of the population and the loss of households.

古文：里设老人，选年高为众所服者，导民善，平乡里争讼。
现代文：里设置老人，选举年龄大被众人信服的人，引导人民行善，平息乡里的争执狱讼。
English: Set up an old man in the village, elect an older person who is convinced by the crowd, guide the people to do good, and quell the disputes and lawsuits in the village.

古文：其人户避徭役者曰逃户。
现代文：那些躲避徭役的人户称逃户。
English: Those who evade the bailiff are called fugitives.

古文：年饥或避兵他徙者曰流民。
现代文：遇到荒年或逃避兵祸迁移他处的称流民。
English: The so-called "displaced persons" are those who migrate to other places in the event of a bad year or to escape military disaster.

古文：有故而出侨於外者曰附籍。
现代文：有事而外出寄居在外的称附籍。
English: A person who goes out of the country to live in a foreign country is called a "secondary citizen."

古文：朝廷所移民曰移徙。
现代文：朝廷组织的移民称移徙。
English: Immigration organized by the imperial court is called migration.

古文：凡逃户，明初督令还本籍复业，赐复一年。
现代文：凡是逃户，明代初年督责命令返回原籍恢复自己的职业，赐免除赋税一年。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, anyone who ran away from home was ordered to return to his place of origin and resume his profession, and was granted a one-year tax exemption.

古文：老弱不能归及不愿归者，令在所著籍，授田输赋。
现代文：老弱之人不能返回和不愿意返回的，命令在居住地编入户籍，给予田地，交纳赋税。
English: Elderly and weak people who cannot return or do not want to return are ordered to be registered in the place of residence, given fields, and pay taxes.

古文：正统时，造逃户周知册，核其丁粮。
现代文：正统时期，制造逃户周知册，核实逃户按人口所交纳的粮食。
English: During the orthodox period, a weekly register of fugitive households was made to verify the grain paid by fugitive households according to their population.

古文：凡流民，英宗令勘籍，编甲互保，属在所里长管辖之。
现代文：凡是流民，英宗命令勘察户籍，编成甲互相担保，归属居住地里长管辖。
English: For all displaced people, Yingzong ordered to investigate the household registration, compile a mutual guarantee, and belong to the jurisdiction of the mayor of the place of residence.

古文：设抚民佐贰官。
现代文：设置安抚人民的副职官。
English: Set up a deputy official to appease the people.

古文：归本者，劳徕安辑，给牛、种、口粮。
现代文：返归本业的，给予慰劳安抚，供应牛、种籽、口粮。
English: If they return to their jobs, they will be comforted and provided with cattle, seeds, and rations.

古文：又从河南、山西巡抚於谦言，免流民复业者税。
现代文：又听从河南、山西巡抚于谦的建议，免除复业流民的赋税。
English: He also listened to the suggestion of Yu Qian, the governor of Henan and Shanxi, to exempt the tax of the displaced persons who resumed their jobs.

古文：成化初，荆、襄寇乱，流民百万。
现代文：成化初年，荆、襄敌寇叛乱，流民达百万。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, Jing and Xiang rebelled against the invaders, and the number of displaced people reached one million.

古文：项忠、杨璇为湖广巡抚，下令逐之，弗率者戍边，死者无算。
现代文：项忠、杨璇作湖广巡抚，下令驱逐，不遵守命令的戍守边地，死去的人不计其数。
English: Xiang Zhong and Yang Jie, as the inspectors of Hukang, ordered the expulsion, and those who did not comply with the order guarded the borderlands, and the number of people who died was countless.

古文：祭酒周洪谟著《流民说》，引东晋时侨置郡县之法，使近者附籍，远者设州县以抚之。
现代文：祭酒周洪谟着成《流民说》一书，引用东晋时期异地设置郡县的办法，使就近的人归附于户籍，离得速的，设置州县来安抚。
English: Zhou Hongmu, the sacrificial wine, wrote a book called "The Story of the Exiles," quoting the method of setting up counties and counties in different places during the Eastern Jin Dynasty, so that people in the vicinity would be attached to the household registration, and those who left quickly would be pacified by setting up prefectures and counties.

古文：都御史李宾上其说。
现代文：都御史李宾呈上他的意见。
English: Metropolitan Historian Li Bin presented his opinion.

古文：宪宗命原杰出抚，招流民十二万户，给闲田，置郧阳府，立上津等县统治之。
现代文：宪宗命令原杰出京安抚，招集流民十二万户，供给闲田，设置鄙阳府，设立上津等县来统一管理。
English: Emperor Gensong ordered the former emperor to pacify Beijing, gather 120,000 households of exiles, provide idle land, set up Mianyang Prefecture, and establish Shangjin and other counties for unified administration.

古文：河南巡抚张瑄亦请辑西北流民。
现代文：河南巡抚张逭也请安抚西北流民。
English: Zhang Ye, the Henan governor, also asked to appease the northwest refugees.

古文：帝从其请。
现代文：皇帝听从他的请求。
English: The emperor acceded to his request.

古文：凡附籍者，正统时，老疾致仕事故官家属，离本籍千里者许收附，不及千里者发还。
现代文：凡是附籍，是正统年问，年老疾病退休事奉原官的家属，距离原籍达一千里的允许收留附籍，不到一千里的遣发返回。
English: In all cases, it is an orthodox custom that the family members of former officials who have retired from the service due to old age or illness are allowed to take up the status of vassalage if they are a thousand miles away from their place of origin, but if they are less than a thousand miles away, they are sent back.

古文：景泰中，令民籍者收附，军、匠、灶役冒民籍者发还。
现代文：景泰年问，命令民籍者收录附载，军队、工匠、盐灶劳役冒充民籍的，遣回原籍。
English: Jing Tai Nian asked, ordering that people with civil status be recorded and attached, and that soldiers, craftsmen, and salt cooker laborers who were posing as people with civil status should be sent back to their original countries.

古文：其移徙者，明初，当徙苏、松、嘉、湖、杭民之无田者四千馀户，往耕临濠，给牛、种、车、粮，以资遣之，三年不征其税。
现代文：那些迁移的，明朝初年，曾经迁徙苏、松、嘉、湖、杭等地人民中无田的人四千多户，前往临濠，供给耕牛、种籽、车辆、粮食，以资助遣送，三年不征收他们的赋税。
English: Those who migrated, in the first year of the Ming Dynasty, more than four thousand households of people who had no fields among the people who had migrated from Su, Song, Jia, Hubei, Hangu and other places, went to Linyi to supply farm cattle, seeds, vehicles, and grain to finance the deportation, and their taxes would not be levied for three years.

古文：徐达平沙漠，徙北平山后民三万五千八百馀户，散处诸府卫，籍为军者给衣粮，民给田。
现代文：徐达平定沙漠，迁徙北平山后人民三万五千八百多户，散居各府卫，编籍在军队的供给衣服粮食，编籍在平民的供给田地。
English: Xu Dada pacified the desert, more than 35,800 households of the people migrated to Beiping Mountain, dispersed to various provinces and cities, registered in the supply of clothes and grain for the army, and registered in the supply of fields for the civilians.

古文：又以沙漠遗民三万二千八百馀户屯田北平，置屯二百五十四，开地千三百四十三顷。
现代文：又以沙漠遗民三万二千八百多户在北平屯田，设置屯所二百五十四处，开垦土地一千三百四十三顷。
English: In addition, more than 32,800 households of desert survivors were settled in Beiping, 254 settlements were set up, and 1,343 hectares of land were reclaimed.

古文：复徙江南民十四万於凤阳。
现代文：又迁徙江南人民十四万到凤阳。
English: In addition, 140,000 people from the south of the Yangtze River migrated to Fengyang.

古文：户部郎中刘九皋言： 古狭乡之民，听迁之宽乡，欲地无遗利，人无失业也。 
现代文：户部郎中刘九皋说： 古代人多地少之乡的人民听凭他们迁移到人少地多的乡，是想使土地没有遗失其利益，人没有失业的。 
English: Liu Jiuyong, the head of the household department, said: The people of the ancient people with more land and less land allowed them to migrate to the township with fewer people and more land, in order to ensure that the land did not lose its benefits and people did not lose their jobs.

古文：太祖采其议，迁山西泽、潞民於河北。
现代文：太祖采纳他的提议，迁徙山西泽、潞的人民到河北。
English: The great-great-grandfather accepted his proposal and moved the people of Zhe and Min in Shanxi to Hebei.

古文：众屡徙浙西及山西民於滁、和、北平、山东、河南。
现代文：后来屡次迁徙浙西和山西人民到滁、和、北平、山东、河南。
English: Later, the people of western Zhejiang and Shanxi repeatedly migrated to Quzhou, He, Beiping, Shandong and Henan.

古文：又徙登、莱、青民於东昌、兖州。
现代文：又迁徙登、莱、青人民到柬昌、兖州。
English: In addition, the people of Deng, Lai and Qing migrated to Kamchang and Bozhou.

古文：又徙直隶、浙江民二万户於京师，充仓脚夫。
现代文：又迁徙直隶、浙江人民二万户到京城，充任仓库搬运工。
English: In addition, 20,000 people from Zhili and Zhejiang migrated to Beijing to work as warehouse porters.

古文：太祖时徙民最多，其间有以罪徙者。
现代文：太祖时代迁徙人民最多，其问有因犯罪被迁徙的。
English: The greatest number of people migrated during the time of the great-grandfathers, some of whom were displaced due to crime.

古文：建文帝命武康伯徐理往北平度地处之。
现代文：建文帝命令武康伯徐理前往北平测量规划土地安置。
English: Emperor Jianwen ordered Wu Kangbo Xuli to go to Peiping to survey, plan and resettle the land.

古文：成祖核太原、平阳、泽、潞、辽、沁、汾丁多田少及无田之家，分其丁口以实北平。
现代文：成祖考察到太原、平阳、泽、潞、辽、沁、汾人多田少以及无田之家，分出人口来充实北平。
English: Cheng Zu inspected Taiyuan, Pingyang, Ze, Handan, Liao, Handan and Handan, and found that there were few fields and no fields, and allocated the population to enrich Beiping.

古文：自是以后，移徙者鲜矣。
现代文：从此之后，迁徙的人就少了。
English: Since then, fewer people have been migrating.

古文：初，太祖设养济院收无告者，月给粮。
现代文：当初，太祖设置养济院收留没有生活出路的人，按月供给粮食。
English: At first, Taizu set up a nursing home to take in people who had no way out of life, and provided grain on a monthly basis.

古文：设漏泽园葬贫民。
现代文：设置漏泽园安葬贫民。
English: A leaky garden was set up for the poor to be buried.

古文：天下府州县立义冢。
现代文：全国各府州县建立义冢。
English: All prefectures, states and counties across the country have set up donation stations.

古文：又行养老之政，民年八十以上赐爵。
现代文：又施行养老政策，人民年满八十以上的赐给爵禄。
English: In addition, the old-age pension policy was implemented, and people over the age of eighty were given a peerage.

古文：复下诏优恤遭难兵民。
现代文：又下诏抚恤遭逢灾难的士兵和平民。
English: He also issued an edict to pay tribute to soldiers and civilians who suffered disasters.

古文：然惩元末豪强侮贫弱，立法多右贫抑富。
现代文：然而有戒于元朝末年豪强欺侮贫弱之民，设立法律多保护贫弱抑制富豪。
English: However, at the end of the Yuan Dynasty, the powerful were warned against bullying the poor and weak, and laws were established to protect the poor and weak and restrain the rich and powerful.

古文：尝命户部籍浙江等九布政司、应天十八府州富民万四千三百馀户，以次召见，徙其家以实京师，谓之富户。
现代文：曾经命令户部登记浙江等九个布政司、应天十八个府州富豪之民一万四千三百余户，依次召见，迁徙其家来充实京城，称为富户。
English: He once ordered the Household Department to register more than 14,300 households of rich people from nine provinces including Zhejiang and 18 prefectures, who were summoned in turn to move their homes to enrich Beijing, known as rich households.

古文：成祖时，复选应天、浙江富民三千户，充北京宛、大二县厢长，附籍京师，仍应本籍徭役。
现代文：成祖时，又选择应天、浙江富豪之民三千户，充任北京宛、大二县厢长，户籍附在京城，仍供本籍的徭役。
English: When he became the ancestor, he also chose three thousand households of rich people in Yingtian and Zhejiang to serve as the mayor of Beijing and the second county. His household registration was attached to Beijing, and he still served as the steward of his hometown.

古文：供给日久，贫乏逃窜，辄选其本籍殷实户佥补。
现代文：供给时间长久了，贫困逃走，便选择其本籍中富裕户一一补足。
English: If the supply time is long and the poor are fleeing, they will choose rich households among their own to supplement one by one.

古文：宣德间定制，逃者发边充军，官司邻里隐匿者俱坐罪。
现代文：宣德年问交下制度，逃跑的发配边地充军，官府主管部门和邻居隐藏的都连坐治罪。
English: In the Xuande Year of the Dog, questions were asked about the surrender system, fugitive dispatchers were rounded up, and the competent government departments and neighbors were punished for hiding.

古文：弘治五年始免解在逃富户，每户徵银三两，与厢民助役。
现代文：弘治五年纔免去解送在逃富户，每户征收银三两，给厢民助役。
English: In the fifth year of the Hongzhi Five-Year Plan, fugitive rich households were exempted from deportation, and each household was levied silver thirty-two to help the citizens.

古文：嘉靖中减为二两，以充边饷。
现代文：嘉靖年问减少成二两，以充实边地军饷。
English: In the year of Jiajing, the number of questions was reduced to two, in order to enrich the military pay of the border areas.

古文：太祖立法之意，本仿汉徙富民实关中之制，其后事久弊生，遂为厉阶。
现代文：太祖制定法律的本意，原是仿效汉朝迁徙富裕之民充实关中的制度，此后施行久了弊端便产生出来，于是成为祸端。
English: The original intention of the law formulated by the great-grandfather was to imitate the system of enriching the people who migrated from the Han Dynasty to the Middle Kingdom, but after a long time of implementation, drawbacks arose and became a disaster.

古文：户口之数，增减不一，其可考者，洪武二十六年，天下户一千六十五万二千八百七十，口六千五十四万五千八百十二。
现代文：户口的数目，增加减少不一致，其可以考察的，洪武二十六年，全国有一千零六十五万二千八百七十户，六千零五十四万五千八百一十二人。
English: The number of hukou, the increase and decrease of which is inconsistent, which can be investigated, increased in the 26th year of Hongwu, with a total of 10,652,870 households and 60,545,812 people.

古文：弘治四年，户九百十一万三千四百四十六，口五千三百二十八万一千一百五十八。
现代文：弘治四年，九百一十一万三千四百四十六户，五千三百二十八万一千一百五十八人。
English: In the fourth year of the Konji era, the number of households increased to 9,113,446 and the number of people to 53,281,158.

古文：万历六年，户一千六十二万一千四百三十六，口六千六十九万二千八百五十六。
现代文：万历六年，一千零六十二万一千四百三十六户，六千零六十九万二千八百五十六人。
English: Six years have passed, and the number of households has increased to 10,062,114,336 and the number of people to 60,692,856.

古文：太祖当兵燹之后，户口顾极盛。
现代文：太祖在战争灾难之后，户口却很兴盛。
English: After the tragedy of the war, my great-grandfather's hukou prospered.

古文：其后承平日久，反不及焉。
现代文：其后天下太平时间长久，反而赶不上。
English: After that, the world was at peace for a long time, but it could not catch up.

古文：靖难兵起，淮以北鞠为茂草，其时民数反增於前。
现代文：燕王平定祸难之兵发起，淮河以北地区长满茂草，那时候人民数量反而比以前增加。
English: The area north of the Huai River was overgrown with grass when Yan Wang launched the campaign to quell the soldiers of misfortune. At that time, the number of people increased more than before.

古文：后乃递减，至天顺间为最衰。
现代文：后来纔递减，到天顺年问最少。
English: Later, the number of inquiries decreased, and by the end of the year, the number of inquiries was at its lowest.

古文：成、弘继盛，正德以后又减。
现代文：成、弘继起开始兴盛，正德以后又减少。
English: Cheng and Hong successively began to flourish, and then declined after Zhengde.

古文：户口所以减者，周忱谓： 投倚於豪门，或冒匠窜两京，或冒引贾四方，举家舟居，莫可踪迹也。 
现代文：户口减少的原因，周忱说： 投靠于富豪之家，有的冒充工匠逃到两京，有的冒领官引到各地作买卖，全家住在船上，不能查到其踪迹。 
English: The reasons for the decrease in the number of hukou, Zhou Zhen said, are as follows: Some of them have taken refuge in the homes of wealthy people, some have escaped to the two capitals posing as artisans, some have been lured to various regions by impostor officials to do business, and the whole family lives on a boat and cannot be traced.

古文：而要之，户口增减，由於政令张弛。
现代文：而主要的，户口的增加减少，在于政令的宽严。
English: However, the main reason for the decrease in the increase in hukou is due to the leniency of the government decree.

古文：故宣宗尝与群臣论历代户口，以为 其盛也，本於休养生息，其衰也，由土木兵戎 ，殆笃论云。
现代文：所以宣宗曾经与群臣讨论历代户口，认为 户口兴盛，根本在于休养生息；户口衰减，在于大兴土木和战争 ，大概是确实的议论。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xuanzong once discussed the Hukou of past generations with his retainers, and believed that the prosperity of Hukou basically lies in rest and recuperation; the decline of Hukou lies in the expansion of civil engineering and war, which is probably a true argument.

古文：明土田之制，凡二等：曰官田，曰民田。
现代文：明朝土田制度，共分二等：一为官田，一为民田。
English: In the Tsuchida system of the Ming Dynasty, land was divided into two classes: one for government-owned land and one for private land.

古文：初，官田皆宋、元时入官田地。
现代文：最初，官田都是宋、元时代没入官府的田地。
English: At first, all government-owned fields were fields that had been absorbed into the government during the Song and Yuan dynasties.

古文：厥后有还官田，没官田，断入官田，学田，皇庄，牧马草场，城壖苜蓿地，牲地，园陵坟地，公占隙地，诸王、公主、勋戚、大臣、内监、寺观赐乞庄田，百官职田，边臣养廉田，军、民、商屯田，通谓之官田。
现代文：其后有还官田，役官田，断入官田，学田，皇庄，牧马草场，城蠕苜蓿地，牲地，园陵坟地，公占隙地，诸王、公主、勋戚、大臣、内监、寺观赐予或请求给予的庄田，百官职田，边防大臣的养廉田，军、民、商人屯田，通称官田。
English: After that, there were also government-owned fields, government-appointed fields, government-owned fields broken into government-owned fields, school fields, imperial estates, horse pastures, farmlands, livestock lands, gardens, cemeteries, government-occupied spaces, villages granted or requested by kings, princesses, relatives, ministers, supervisors, and temples, fields for hundreds of officials, fields for the border defense minister, and fields for the military, the people, and merchants, known as government-owned fields.

古文：其馀为民田。
现代文：其余为民田。
English: The rest is private land.

古文：元季丧乱，版籍多亡，田赋无准。
现代文：元朝末年，国家丧乱，图籍记载多亡失，田赋没有准绳。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, the country was in turmoil, many deaths and losses were recorded in the maps, and there was no standard for the rice fields.

古文：明太祖即帝位，遣周铸等百六十四人，核浙西田亩，定其赋税。
现代文：明太祖登上帝位，派遣周铸等一百六十四人，考核浙西的田亩，制定赋税。
English: Emperor Taizu of the Ming Dynasty ascended to the throne, dispatched one hundred and sixty-four people, including Zhou Jiao, to assess the fields and acres in western Zhejiang, and set the tax rate.

古文：复命户部核实天下土田。
现代文：又命令户部核实天下田地。
English: He also ordered the household department to verify the fields under the country.

古文：而两浙富民畏避徭役，大率以田产寄他户，谓之铁脚诡寄。
现代文：而两浙富豪之民逃避徭役，大都以田产寄托别户，叫做铁脚诡寄。
English: However, the people of the two Zhejiang millionaires evaded the forced labor, and most of them used their farm produce to send money to other households, which is called the iron foot trick.

古文：洪武二十年命国子生武淳等分行州县，随粮定区。
现代文：洪武二十年，命令国子生武淳等分别巡行州县，随粮划定区域。
English: In the 20th year of Hongwu's reign, he ordered Kuniko Shosho and Wuchun to march through the prefectures and counties separately, and to delineate the regions according to the grain.

古文：区设粮长四人，量度田亩方圆，次以字号，悉书主名及田之丈尺，编类为册，状如鱼鳞，号曰鱼鳞图册。
现代文：区设粮长四人，测量田亩方圆，以字号编次，全部记载主名和田地的面积，按类编制成册，形状如鱼鳞，称为鱼鳞图册。
English: The district set up four grain chiefs, measured the fields by the square of the mu, and ranked them by the word number, all recorded the main name and the area of the field, compiled into a book by category, shaped like fish scales, called the fish scale atlas.

古文：先是，诏天下编黄册，以户为主，详具旧管、新收、开除、实在之数为四柱式。
现代文：在此之前，诏令天下编制黄册，以户为主，详细记载旧管、新收、开除、实在的数目成为四柱式。
English: Prior to this, the imperial edict ordered the country to compile a yellow book, mainly based on households, detailing the number of old pipes, new receipts, expulsions, and actuals into a four-column form.

古文：而鱼鳞图册以土田为主，诸原坂、坟衍、下隰、沃瘠、沙卤之别毕具。
现代文：而鱼鳞图册以田地为主，各原扳、坟衍、下隰、沃瘠、沙卤的区别全都具备。
English: And the fish scale atlas is mainly based on fields, and all the differences between the original wrenches, graves, lower jaws, worms, and sand and brine are all available.

古文：鱼鳞册为经，土田之讼质焉。
现代文：鱼鳞册作为经，田地的好壤有了评判标准。
English: The Fish Scale Book has been used as a guide, and the quality of the soil in the fields has become the criterion for judging.

古文：黄册为纬，赋役之法定焉。
现代文：黄册作为纬，赋税徭役之法便确定了。
English: The Yellow Book was used as a standard, and the method of tax collection was established.

古文：凡质卖田土，备书税粮科则，官为籍记之，毋令产去税存以为民害。
现代文：凡是典卖田地，便详细记载赋税纳粮的标准，官府造簿册记载，不要让田产已去而赋税犹存以作为人民的祸害。
English: Whenever land is sold by auction, the standard of tax and grain payment is recorded in detail, and the government book is recorded. Don't let the farm produce be gone and the tax still exist as a scourge to the people.

古文：又以中原田多芜，命省臣议，计民授田。
现代文：又因中原田地多荒芜，命令省臣讨论，统计人民授予田地。
English: Also, because Nakahara fields were mostly barren, he ordered provincial officials to discuss and count the number of people awarded fields.

古文：设司农司，开治河南，掌其事。
现代文：设置司农司，开治河南，掌管其事。
English: Set up the Department of Agriculture to govern Henan Province and take charge of its affairs.

古文：临濠之田，验其丁力，计亩给之，毋许兼并。
现代文：临濠的田地，察验其人力，计算田亩供给，不允许兼并。
English: Linfen's fields, inspect its manpower, calculate the supply of fields and mu, and do not allow mergers.

古文：北方近城地多不治，召民耕，人给十五亩，蔬地二亩，免租三年。
现代文：北方靠近城区的土地多没有整治，召集人民耕种，每人供给十五亩，蔬菜地二亩，免征租税三年。
English: In the north, the land close to the urban area is mostly unimproved. The people are called to cultivate, each person is provided with fifteen mu, two mu of vegetable land, and they are exempt from tax for three years.

古文：每岁中书省奏天下垦田数，少者亩以千计，多者至二十馀万。
现代文：每年中书省上报天下开垦田地的数目，少的田亩以千计，多的达到二十余万。
English: Every year, the Ministry of Education and Culture reports the number of cultivated fields in the world. The smallest number is a thousand mu, while the largest is more than two hundred thousand.

古文：官给牛及农具者，乃收其税，额外垦荒者永不起科。
现代文：官府供给耕牛和农具的，纔收其税，额外开垦的荒地永远不计亩收税。
English: If the government supplies oxen and farm tools, it will collect the tax. If the government reclaims additional wasteland, it will never collect the tax per mu.

古文：二十六年核天下土田，总八百五十万七千六百二十三顷，盖骎骎无弃土矣。
现代文：二十六年，核实天下的田地，总共八百五十万七干六百二十三顷，到处一片茂盛而没有抛弃的土地。
English: In twenty-six years, the fields of the world have been verified, a total of 8.5 million and 7 hundred and 623 hectares, everywhere a lush and not abandoned land.

古文：凡田以近郭为上地，迤远为中地、下地。
现代文：凡是田地以靠近城郭为上等，渐渐速离为中等、下等。
English: All fields are ranked as superior if they are close to the city walls, and as intermediate or inferior if they are further away.

古文：五尺为步，步二百四十为亩，亩百为顷。
现代文：五尺为步，二百四十步为一亩，一百亩为一顷。
English: Five feet is one step, two hundred and forty steps is one mu, one hundred mu is one hectare.

古文：太祖仍元里社制，河北诸州县土著者以社分里甲，迁民分屯之地以屯分里甲。
现代文：太祖依照元代里社制度，河北众州县土著居民以社分里甲，迁徙的居民分别屯居之地以屯来分里甲。
English: According to the Yuan Dynasty's commune system, the aboriginal residents of Zhouzhou County in Hebei Province were divided into commune and county, and the migratory residents were divided into township and county.

古文：社民先占亩广，屯民新占亩狭，故屯地谓之小亩，社地谓之广亩。
现代文：社民先占田亩广阔，屯民新占田亩狭窄，所以屯地叫作小亩，社地叫作广亩。
English: The socialists first occupied a broad mu of land, and the new residents occupied a narrow mu of land. Therefore, the settlement is called a small mu, and the community is called a wide mu.

古文：至宣德间，垦荒田永不起科及洿下斥卤无粮者，皆核入赋额，数溢于旧。
现代文：到宣德年问，原垦荒的田地永远不计亩收税以及低洼、盐碱不产粮食的田地，都核实纳入交纳赋税的数额中，田亩之数比过去更多。
English: By the Xuande New Year, it was verified that the fields that were previously barren and barren would never be included in the amount of tax collected, as well as the low-lying, saline and non-grain-producing fields, and the number of acres was more than in the past.

古文：有司乃以大亩当小亩以符旧额，有数亩当一亩者。
现代文：主管部门以大亩当小亩来与旧有数额相符，有几亩当一亩的。
English: The competent department will match the old amount with large mu and small mu, and a few mu will be treated as one mu.

古文：步尺参差不一，人得以意赢缩，土地不均，未有如北方者。
现代文：步尺计量参差不一，人们能够按心意扩大或缩小，土地不均匀，没有像北方那样乱的。
English: The steps are unevenly measured, people can expand or contract as they wish, the land is uneven, and it is not as chaotic as the north.

古文：贵州田无顷亩尺籍，悉徵之土官。
现代文：贵州的田地没有记载田亩的簿册，全部征之龄土官。
English: The fields in Guizhou do not have a book of records of the fields and mu, and all the land officials are of conscription age.

古文：而诸处土田，日久颇淆乱，与黄册不符。
现代文：而各处田地，时间久远颇为混淆杂乱，与黄册不相符。
English: However, the fields everywhere have long been quite confusing and chaotic, and do not match the Yellow Book.

古文：弘治十五年，天下土田止四百二十二万八千五十八顷，官田视民田得七之一。
现代文：弘治十五年，天下的田地只有四百二十二万八千零五十八顷，官田与民田相比较得七分之一。
English: In the 15th year of the Hongzhi era, there were only 4,228,058 hectares of farmland in the world, one-seventh the amount of government-owned farmland compared to private farmland.

古文：嘉靖八年，霍韫奉命修会典，言： 自洪武迄弘治百四十年，天下额田已减强半，而湖广、河南、广东失额尤多。
现代文：嘉靖八年，霍韬奉命修撰《会典》，说： 从洪武到弘治一百四十年，天下的田地额敷已减了一半多，而湖广、河南、广东失去的数额特别多。
English: In the eighth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Huo Zhen was ordered to write the "Code of the Association" and said: "In the 140 years from Hongwu to Hongzhi, the amount of fields in the world has been reduced by more than half, and the amount lost by Hukang, Henan and Guangdong is particularly large.

古文：非拨给於王府，则欺隐於猾民。
现代文：不是划拨赐给王府，就是被奸猾的百姓所隐瞒。
English: Either it was allotted to the royal palace, or it was concealed by the treacherous people.

古文：广东无藩府，非欺隐即委弃於寇贼矣。
现代文：广东没有藩王府，不是被隐瞒就是丢弃给了贼寇。
English: Guangdong did not have a royal palace, which was either concealed or abandoned to the bandits.

古文：司国计者，可不究心？ 
现代文：掌握国家生计的人，可以不专心研究吗？ 
English: Can those who control the country's livelihood not concentrate on research?

古文：是时，桂萼、郭弘化、唐能、简霄先后疏请核实田亩，而顾鼎臣请履亩丈量，丈量之议由此起。
现代文：适时，桂萼、郭弘化、唐龙、简霄先后上疏请求核实田亩，而顾鼎臣请求丈量土地，丈量的提议由此产生。
English: At the right time, Gui Calyx, Guo Honghua, Tang Long, and Jian Xiao successively requested Shang Shou to verify the acres of land, and Gu Dingcheng requested to measure the land, and the proposal of measurement resulted from this.

古文：江西安福、河南裕州首行之，而法未详具，人多疑惮。
现代文：江西安福、河南裕州首先施行，而办法没有详细具备，人们多怀疑害怕。
English: Jiangxi's Anfu and Henan's Yuzhou were the first to implement it, but the measures are not detailed, and people are more suspicious and afraid.

古文：其后福建诸州县，为经、纬二册，其法颇详。
现代文：此后，福建各州县，造经、纬二册，其办法相当详细。
English: Since then, Fujian's prefectures and counties have made two volumes of sutras and precepts, and their methods are quite detailed.

古文：然率以地为主，田多者犹得上下其手。
现代文：然而大都以地为主，田多的还是得以玩弄手段作弊。
English: However, most of them were land-based, and Tado was still able to cheat by means of cheating.

古文：神宗初，建昌知府许孚远为归户册，则以田从人，法简而密矣。
现代文：神宗初年，建昌知府许孚速造归户册，便以田从人，办法简单而细密。
English: In the first year of the Shinshu Sect, the governor of Jianchang, Xu Fu, quickly made an account book, and then used the fields to recruit people. The method was simple and meticulous.

古文：万历六年，帝用大学士张居正议，天下田亩通行丈量，限三载竣事。
现代文：万历六年，皇帝用大学士张居正的建议，天下的田地全部丈量，限定三年完成。
English: After six long years, the emperor used the suggestion of the university scholar Zhang Juzheng to measure all the fields in the world, limited to three years.

古文：用开方法，以径围乘除，畸零截补。
现代文：采用开方法，以直径圆围乘除，畸形零星的裁截添补。
English: The open method is used to multiply and divide by the diameter circumference, and the deformed sporadic truncation is added.

古文：於是豪猾不得欺隐，里甲免赔累，而小民无虚粮。
现代文：于是豪强狡猾之徒不能欺骗隐瞒，里甲免于赔偿之累，而小民不再交纳虚粮。
English: As a result, the brave and cunning cannot deceive and conceal, the rich and powerful are free from the burden of compensation, and the little people no longer have to pay for bread.

古文：总计田数七百一万三千九百七十六顷，视弘治时赢三百万顷。
现代文：总计田地数目七百零一万三千九百七十六顷，比弘治时多三百万顷。
English: The total number of fields was 7,013,976 hectares, 3 million hectares more than in the Hongzhi era.

古文：然居正尚综核，颇以溢额为功。
现代文：然而张居正重视聚总考核，多以增加田亩数额为功。
English: However, Zhang Ju is paying attention to the total assessment of agglomeration, and is mostly credited with increasing the amount of acres.

古文：有司争改小弓以求田多，或掊克见田以充虚额。
现代文：主管官吏量地争着改用小步弓，以追求田地多，或搜刮现有之田以充虚额。
English: The officials in charge are competing with each other to switch to the small step bow, in order to pursue more fields, or to scrape the existing fields in order to increase the amount.

古文：北直隶、湖广、大同、宣府，遂先后按溢额田增赋云。
现代文：北直隶、湖广、大同、宣府，便先后按增加的田亩数增收赋税。
English: North Zhili, Hukang, Datong and Xuanfu will successively increase the tax according to the increased number of acres.

古文：屯田之制：曰军屯，曰民屯。太祖初，立民兵万户府，寓兵於农，其法最善。
现代文：屯田的制度：一是军屯，一是民屯太祖初年，设立民兵万户府，寄寓士兵于农业，其方法最好。
English: The system of military cantonment: one is military cantonment, the other is civilian cantonment. In the first year of Taizu's reign, the militia Wanhufu was established, and soldiers were quartered in agriculture. This method is the best.

古文：又令诸将屯兵龙江诸处，惟康茂才绩最，乃下令褒之，因以申饬将士。
现代文：又命令诸将屯兵于龙江等处，惟独康茂才的政绩最显著，于是下令褒奖，顺势申令整饬将士。
English: He also ordered the generals to garrison the troops in the Longjiang River and other places, but only Kang Maocai's political achievements were the most significant, so he ordered a reward and ordered the rectification of the soldiers.

古文：洪武三年，中书省请税太原、朔州屯卒，命勿徵。
现代文：洪武三年，中书省请求对太原、朔州的屯田士卒收税，朝廷命令不要征收。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy requested to collect taxes from the soldiers of Taiyuan and Shuozhou, but the imperial court ordered not to collect.

古文：明年，中书省言： 河南、山东、北平、陕西、山西及直隶淮安诸府屯田，凡官给牛种者十税五，自备者十税三。 
现代文：第二年，中书省上奏说： 河南、山东、北平、陕西、山西以及直隶淮安等府屯田，凡是官府供给耕牛种子的收税十分之五，自备的收税十分之三。 
English: In the second year, the report of the General Office of the People's Republic of China said: In the built-up areas of Henan, Shandong, Beiping, Shaanxi, Shanxi and Zhili Huai'an prefectures, five-tenths of the tax will be collected for the seeds supplied by the government, and three-tenths of the tax will be collected for the self-supplied seeds.

古文：诏且勿徵，三年后亩收租一斗。
现代文：皇帝下诏暂时不收税，三年后，每亩收租一斗。
English: The emperor decreed that taxes would not be collected for the time being, and three years later, one dou of rent per mu was collected.

古文：六年，太仆丞梁埜仙帖木尔言： 宁夏境内及四川西南至船城，东北至塔滩，相去八百里，土膏沃，宜招集流亡屯田。 
现代文：六年，太仆丞梁堃倦帖木尔说： 宁夏境内和四川西南至船城，东北至塔滩，相距八百里，土地肥沃，应该招集流亡之人屯田。 
English: In the sixth year, Tamerlane Tamerlane said: In Ningxia and Sichuan, from the southwest to Ship Town, and from the northeast to Tatan, there is a distance of eight hundred miles, the land is fertile, and the exiles should be called up to occupy the land.

古文：从之。
现代文：朝廷听从其连议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：是时，遣邓愈、汤和诸将屯陕西、彰德、汝宁、北平、永平，徙山西真定民屯凤阳。
现代文：这时，派邓愈、汤和诸将屯田于陕西、彰德、汝宁、北平、永平，迁徙山西真定人民屯田于凤阳。
English: At this time, Deng Yu, Tang He and other generals set up military camps in Shaanxi, Changde, Runing, Peiping, and Yongping, and the Shanxi Zhending people moved their military camps to Fengyang.

古文：又因海运饷辽有溺死者，遂益讲屯政，天下卫所州县军民皆事垦辟矣。
现代文：又因海运粮饷到辽有淹死的，便更多研究屯政，天下的卫所州县军民都从事土地开垦。
English: In addition, due to the fact that grain was transported by sea to Liao You and drowned, more research was done on tuen zheng, and the military and civilians of Weizhou County in the world were engaged in land reclamation.

古文：其制，移民就宽乡，或召募或罪徙者为民屯，皆领之有司，而军屯则领之卫所。
现代文：其办法是，迁移人民到宽阔的地方，或者招募，或者因罪迁徙的人为屯民，都由主管官吏统领。而军屯则由卫所统领。
English: The method was to relocate the people to a wider area, or to recruit them, or to make the people who had migrated because of crime into residents, all of which were led by the officials in charge, while the military camps were led by the garrison.

古文：边地，三分守城，七分屯种。
现代文：边防之地，三分守城，七分屯田耕种。
English: Border defense land, three points for castle defense, seven points for farmland cultivation.

古文：内地，二分守城，八分屯种。
现代文：内地，二分守城，八分屯田耕种。
English: Mainland, two points for castle defense, eight points for farmland cultivation.

古文：每军受田五十亩为一分，给耕牛、农具，教树植，复租赋，遣官劝输，诛侵暴之吏。
现代文：每个士兵接受田五十亩为一分，供给耕牛、农具，教他种植庄稼，免除租赋，派官吏鼓励输粮，诛罚侵吞凶暴的官吏。
English: Each soldier received 50 mu of land for one point, provided with oxen and farm tools, taught him to grow crops, exempted from rent, sent officials to encourage grain transportation, and punished officials who were violent.

古文：初亩税一斗。
现代文：起初每亩交税一斗。
English: At the beginning, each mu was taxed one dou.

古文：三十五年定科则：军田一分，正粮十二石，贮屯仓，听本军自支，馀粮为本卫所官军俸粮。
现代文：三十五年按田亩制定赋税：军田一分，正粮十二石，贮藏于屯仓，听凭本部军队自己支配，余粮为本卫所官军俸禄粮。
English: In 35 years, the tax was set according to the mu of the field: one point for the military field, 12 koku for the grain, stored in the camp, subject to the control of the headquarters army, and the remaining grain was the official army salary grain of the headquarters.

古文：永乐初，定屯田官军赏罚例：岁食米十二石外馀六石为率，多者赏钞，缺者罚俸。
现代文：永乐初年，规定屯田官军赏罚条例：每年食用米十二石外，剩余六石为标准，多的赏给钱钞，缺少的处罚俸金。
English: In the first year of Yongle, the regulations for the rewards and punishments of the government troops in the field were stipulated: in addition to 12 kilos of rice per year, the remaining 6 kilos were the standard, more rewards were given to banknotes, and the missing punishment salary.

古文：又以田肥瘠不同，法宜有别，命官军各种样田，以其岁收之数相考较。
现代文：又按田地的肥沃和瘦瘠的不同，办法应该有区别，命令官军各自种样田，以其每年收成的数目相考核。
English: Also, according to the difference between the fertility and thinness of the fields, the methods should be different, and the government troops should be ordered to plant their own sample fields and evaluate them according to the number of harvests each year.

古文：太原左卫千户陈淮所种样田，每军馀粮二十三石，帝命重赏之。
现代文：太原左卫千户陈淮所种的样田，每军余粮二十三石，皇帝命令重赏。
English: The emperor ordered a heavy reward for the 23 koku of surplus grain per army from the sample fields planted by Chen Huai of the Thousand Households of Taiyuan Zuwei.

古文：宁夏总兵何福积谷尤多，赐敕褒美。
现代文：宁夏总兵何福聚积的谷物特别多，赐给敕书褒奖。
English: Ningxia general He Fu amassed a particularly large amount of grain and was awarded the prize for his book.

古文：户部尚书郁新言： 湖广诸卫收粮不一种，请以米为准。
现代文：户部尚书郁新说： 湖广诸卫收粮不仅一种，请求以米为标准。
English: The head of the household department, Shangshu Yuxin, said: "There is more than one way to collect grain in Hukang and Zhuwei. We request that rice be used as the standard.

古文：凡粟谷穈黍大麦荞穄二石，稻谷薥秫二石五斗，穇稗三石，皆准米一石。
现代文：凡是粟谷糜黍大麦薷棕二石，稻谷萄秫二石五斗，穆稗三石，都合准米一石。
English: All millet, barley and palm are 2 kilos, rice and grapes are 2 kilos and 5 doos, mulberry is 3 kilos, and rice is 1 kilo.

古文：小麦芝麻豆与米等。 
现代文：小麦芝麻豆类与米相当。 
English: Wheat, sesame and beans are comparable to rice.

古文：从之，著为令。
现代文：朝廷听从其议，著录为法令。
English: The imperial court followed his advice, and the record became a decree.

古文：又更定屯守之数。
现代文：又重新确定屯守之数。
English: The number of garrisons was also re-determined.

古文：临边险要，守多於屯。
现代文：临近边防地势险要，守多于屯。
English: The situation of nearby border defense areas is critical, with more garrisons than towns.

古文：地僻处及输粮艰者，屯多於守，屯兵百名委百户，三百名委千户，五百名以上指挥提督之。
现代文：地区偏僻和输送粮食困难的地方，屯多于守。屯田兵一百名委任百户，三百名委任千户，五百名以上由指挥提督。
English: In remote areas and places where it is difficult to transport grain, there are more townships than garrisons. One hundred garrison soldiers are assigned to one hundred households, three hundred are assigned to one thousand households, and more than five hundred are commanded by an admiral.

古文：屯设红牌，列则例於上。
现代文：屯设红牌，陈列规则条例在上面。
English: A red card is displayed with the display rules and regulations on it.

古文：年六十与残疾及幼者，耕以自食，不限於例。
现代文：年龄六十岁和残疾以及年幼的，耕种自食其力，不受条例限制。
English: Sixty-year-olds and the disabled, as well as the young, can farm on their own without any restrictions.

古文：屯军以公事妨农务者，免徵子粒，且禁卫所差拨。
现代文：屯军因公事妨害了农务的，免征粮食，并且禁止卫所摊派。
English: If the garrison troops obstructed the agricultural work due to their official duties, they were exempted from the grain tax, and it was forbidden to allocate it to the sanitary station.

古文：於时，东自辽左，北抵宣、大，西至甘肃，南尽滇、蜀，极於交阯，中原则大河南北，在在兴屯矣。
现代文：在那时，东面从辽左，北面抵宣、大，西面到苴壶，南面到滇、蜀，一直到交趾，中原则大河南北，到处都兴起屯田。
English: At that time, from Liao Zuo in the east, to Xuan Xuan and Dadong in the north, to Jiu Jiu in the west, to Yao and Shu in the south, all the way to Jiaozuo, and from the middle of the country to the north and south of the Yangtze River, there were built-up areas everywhere.

古文：宣宗之世，屡核各屯，以征戍罢耕及官豪势要占匿者，减馀粮之半。
现代文：宣宗时代，多次核实各屯，以征伐戍寺罢除耕种和官府豪强权势要入侵占隐匿的，减去余粮的一半。
English: During the era of Emperor Xuanzong, each township was inspected many times, and the surplus grain was reduced by half, with the conquest and felling of monasteries as the first step, the suppression of farming, and the strong power of the government to invade and occupy the hidden areas.

古文：迤北来归就屯之人，给车牛农器。
现代文：从北方前来归顺从事屯田的人，供给车辆耕牛农具。
English: Those who came from the north to subjugate the people engaged in tunden supplied vehicles, oxen, and farm tools.

古文：分辽东各卫屯军为三等，丁牛兼者为上，丁牛有一为中，俱无者为下。
现代文：划分辽东各卫屯军为三等，人力和耕牛兼有的为上等，人力和耕牛有其中之一者为中等，人力耕牛都没有的为下等。
English: Liaodong's various watchtower armies were divided into three classes: those with both manpower and oxen were ranked higher, those with either manpower and oxen were ranked middle, and those without manpower and oxen were ranked lower.

古文：英宗免军田正粮归仓，止徵馀粮六石。
现代文：英宗免除军田正粮归仓，祇征收余粮六石。
English: Yingzong exempted the military field grain from returning to the warehouse, only the surplus grain of six stones was levied.

古文：后又免沿边开田官军子粒，减各边屯田子粒有差。
现代文：后来又免征沿边开田官军的粮食，减征各边屯田粮食不一。
English: Later, the grain of the government troops along the border was exempted from the tax, and the reduced tax did not apply to the grain of the occupied fields on all sides.

古文：景帝时，边方多事，令兵分为两番，六日操守，六日耕种。
现代文：景帝时期，边境多战事，命令士兵分成两番，六天操练防守，六天耕种土地。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jing, when there were many battles on the border, he ordered the soldiers to be divided into two groups, six days to practice defense, and six days to cultivate the land.

古文：成化初，宣府巡抚叶盛买官牛千八百，并置农具，遣军屯田，收粮易银，以补官马耗损，边入称便。
现代文：成化初年，宣府巡抚叶盛买官府耕牛一千八百头，并置办农具，派军队屯田，收粮食交换银子，以弥补官马损耗，边地之人称焉有利。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, Ye Sheng, the procurator of the Xuanwu government, bought 1,800 heads of cattle from the government, and also purchased agricultural tools, sent troops to occupy fields, collected grain and exchanged silver to make up for the loss of officials and horses. People in outlying areas said it was beneficial.

古文：自正统后，屯政稍弛，而屯粮犹存三之二。
现代文：从正统以后，屯田的政务渐渐废弛，而屯粮还存有三分之二。
English: After the establishment of orthodoxy, the government affairs of Tongtian gradually deteriorated, but two-thirds of Tongren still existed.

古文：其后屯田多为内监、军官占夺，法尽坏。
现代文：此后屯田多被内监、军官侵占掠夺，屯法全坏。
English: After that, most of the cantonments were occupied and plundered by supervisors and officers, and the cantonment laws were completely destroyed.

古文：宪宗之世颇议厘复，而视旧所入，不能什一矣。
现代文：宪宗之世多提议端正恢复，而与旧时收入相比，不能达到十分之一。
English: The majority of Kenzong's generation proposed a proper restoration, but compared to the old income, it could not reach one-tenth.

古文：弘治间，屯粮愈轻，有亩止三升者。
现代文：弘治年问，屯粮更轻，有一亩祗交三升的。
English: In the year of Hongzhi, the grain was lighter, with one mu of rice yielding three liters.

古文：沿及正德，辽东屯田较永乐间田赢万八千馀顷，而粮乃缩四万六千馀石。
现代文：延及正德，辽东屯田比永乐年问的田亩多一万八千多顷，而粮食却减少四万六千多石。
English: As far as Zhengde is concerned, Liaodong Tun Tian has more than 18,000 mu more than Yongle Nian, but the grain has decreased by more than 46,000 koku.

古文：初，永乐时，屯田米常溢三之一，常操军十九万，以屯军四万供之。
现代文：当初，永乐时期，屯田米常常超过三分之一，常操军十九万，以屯军四万供应。
English: At first, during the Yongle period, more than one-third of the rice was supplied from the tundra, and the standing army of 190,000 was supplied from the tundra army of 40,000.

古文：而受供者又得自耕。边外军无月粮，以是边饷恒足。
现代文：而接受供应的又能自己耕种，边外军没有月粮，因此边防军饷常很充足。
English: Those receiving supplies, on the other hand, are able to grow their own crops. The border troops do not have monthly rations, so the rations of the border troops are often sufficient.

古文：及是，屯军多逃死，常操军止八万，皆仰给於仓。
现代文：到这时，屯军多逃跑死亡，常操军只有八万，都依赖于官仓。
English: By this time, most of the garrison had fled and died, and the standing army was only eighty thousand, all dependent on the government warehouse.

古文：而边外数扰，弃不耕。
现代文：而边外多次扰乱，弃置不耕种。
English: However, it has been disturbed many times and abandoned without being cultivated.

古文：刘瑾擅政，遣官分出丈田责逋。
现代文：刘瑾独揽大权，派官吏分头出发丈量田地追收欠税。
English: Liu Bei monopolized power and sent officials to go out separately to measure fields and collect tax arrears.

古文：希瑾意者，伪增田数，搜括惨毒，户部侍郎韩福尤急刻。
现代文：迎合刘瑾心意的人，虚假地增加田亩敷，残酷搜刮，户部侍郎韩福尤其急切刻薄。
English: Those who pandered to Liu Wei's wishes falsely increased the number of mu of farmland and cruelly scrounged. The head waiter, Han Fu, was particularly eager to be mean.

古文：辽卒不堪，胁众为乱，抚之乃定。
现代文：辽地士兵不能忍受，胁迫众人作乱，经招抚纔平定下来。
English: The Liao soldiers could not bear it, so they coerced everyone to make a riot, and settled down after being coaxed.

古文：明初，募盐商於各边开中，谓之商屯。
现代文：明朝初年，招募盐商在各边地输送粮食并给予食盐运销权，称为商屯。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, salt merchants were recruited to transport grain across the country and were given the right to transport and sell salt, known as Shangtun.

古文：迨弘治中，叶淇变法，而开中始坏。
现代文：到弘治年问，叶淇变法，这种开中商屯开始毁坏。
English: By the time of the Hongzhi era, this kind of Kaizhong mercantile town began to be destroyed.

古文：诸淮商悉撤业归，西北商亦多徙家於淮，边地为墟，米石直银五两，而边储枵然矣。
现代文：众淮商全部撤除业务返回，西北的商人也多迁徙到淮，边地变成废墟，米价一石值银五两，而边疆的储备变得空虚。
English: All the Huai merchants returned after withdrawing their businesses, and many merchants from the northwest also migrated to Huai. The borderlands became ruins, the price of rice was five times the price of silver, and the reserves of the borderlands became empty.

古文：世宗时，杨一清复请召商开中，又请仿古募民实塞下之意，招徕陇右、关西民以屯边。
现代文：世宗时期，杨一清又请求召集商人输粮入边，准其逼销食盐，又请求仿效古代招募人民充实边塞的作法，招徕陇右、关西人民屯田于边地。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, Yang Iqing also requested to convene merchants to transport grain to the border and allow them to force the sale of salt. He also requested to follow the ancient practice of recruiting people to enrich the border fortifications, and to recruit people from the right and Kansai to occupy the border areas.

古文：其后周泽、王崇古、林富、陈世辅、王畿、王朝用、唐顺之、吴桂芳等争言屯政。
现代文：此后，周泽、王崇古、林富、陈世辅、王畿、王朝用、唐顺之、昊桂芳等争着讨论屯政。
English: Since then, Zhou Ze, Wang Chonggu, Lin Fu, Chen Shifu, Wang Gui, Dynasty Ying, Tang Shunzhi, Hao Guifang and others have been competing to discuss the Tunzheng.

古文：而庞尚鹏总理江北盐屯，寻移九边，与总督王崇古，先后区画屯政甚详。
现代文：而庞尚鹏总管江北盐屯，不久移置九边，与总督王崇古，先后规划屯政十分详密。
English: However, Pang Shangpeng, the general manager of Jiangbei Yantun, soon moved to Jiubei, and Governor Wang Chonggu successively planned the township government in great detail.

古文：然是时因循日久，卒鲜实效。
现代文：然而这时，因循守旧已很久，终究很少右实际效果。
English: However, at this time, the old rules have been followed for a long time, and in the end, they have little practical effect.

古文：给事中管怀理言： 屯田不兴，其弊有四：疆埸戒严，一也；牛种不给，二也；丁壮亡徙，三也；田在敌外，四也。
现代文：给事中管怀理说： 屯田不兴，其弊端有四个：边疆戒严，此其一。耕牛种子供应不上，此其二。丁壮之人逃亡迁徙，此其三。田地在敌人之外，此其四。
English: Guan Huairi said: "There are four drawbacks to keeping a garrison in the field: martial law on the border, the first one; not being able to raise cattle and children, the second one; strong people fleeing and migrating, the third one; and the field being outside the enemy, the fourth one.

古文：如是而管屯者犹欲按籍增赋，非扣月粮，即按丁赔补耳。 
现代文：像这样而管理屯田的人还想按簿册增加赋税，不是扣除月粮，就是按丁赔补而已。 
English: As such, the people in charge of the military garrisons still want to increase taxes according to the book, either by deducting monthly rations, or by compensating.

古文：屯粮之轻，至弘、正而极，嘉靖中渐增，隆庆间复亩收一斗。
现代文：屯粮变轻，到弘治、正德而达到极点，嘉靖年问渐渐增加，隆庆年问又每亩收税一斗。
English: The amount of grain in the canton became lighter, reaching its peak in Hongzhi and Zhengde. In the year of Jiajing, the grain tax gradually increased, and in the year of Longqing, a tax of one dou was levied per mu.

古文：然屯丁逃亡者益多。
现代文：然而屯丁逃亡的人更多。
English: However, more people fled from Tun Ding.

古文：管粮郎中不问屯田有无，月粮止半给。
现代文：管粮郎中不管屯田有无，月粮只给一半。
English: Regardless of whether or not there is a tonden, only half of the monthly grain is given.

古文：沿边屯地，或变为斥卤、沙碛，粮额不得减。
现代文：沿边防的屯地，有的变成盐碱地、沙碛，收粮的额数不能减。
English: Some of the settlements along the border have become saline and sandy, and the amount of grain to be collected cannot be reduced.

古文：屯田御史又於额外增本折，屯军益不堪命。
现代文：屯田御史又在额敷之外增加本折，屯田军更加不能忍受。
English: The Tonden Imperial History also increased the burden beyond the frontage, and the Tonden army was even more unbearable.

古文：万历时，计屯田之数六十四万四千馀顷，视洪武时亏二十四万九千馀顷，田日减而粮日增，其弊如此。
现代文：万历年问，总计屯田之数为六十四万四千多顷，比洪武时期少二十四万九千多顷，田地一天天减少而纳粮一天天增加，其弊端就像这样。
English: Over the course of thousands of years, the total number of occupied farmlands has increased to more than 644,000 hectares, which is more than 249,000 hectares less than that of the Hongwu period. The farmland is decreasing day by day, but the grain allowance is increasing day by day. The drawbacks are as follows.

古文：时则山东巡抚郑汝璧请开登州海北长山诸岛田。
现代文：当时山东巡抚郑汝璧请求开垦登州海北长山诸岛的田地。
English: At that time, Zheng Rubei, the governor of Shandong Province, requested that the fields of the Changshan Islands in the northern part of the Danzhou Sea be reclaimed.

古文：福建巡抚许孚远垦闽海坛山田成，复请开南日山、澎湖；又言浙江滨海诸山，若陈钱、金塘、补陀、玉环、南麂，皆可经理。
现代文：福建巡抚许孚远开垦闽海坛山田地成功，又请求开垦南日山、澎湖；又说浙江临海各山，如陈钱、金塘、补陀、玉环、南麂，都可以经营。
English: The governor of Fujian, Xu Fu, successfully reclaimed the mountains and fields far away from the sea, and also requested the reclaiming of Nanyishan and Penghu; he also said that all the mountains along the coast of Zhejiang, such as Chenqian, Jintang, Fuda, Yuhuan and Nanlu, can be operated.

古文：天津巡抚汪应蛟则请於天津兴屯。
现代文：天津巡抚汪应蛟则请求在天津开展屯田。
English: At the request of Tianjin's governor, Wang Yingtao, military garrisons were established in Tianjin.

古文：或留中不下，或不久辄废。
现代文：其提议或留在内宫不下发，或不久就废弃。
English: His proposal was either left in the inner palace without being issued, or was soon scrapped.

古文：熹宗之世，巡按张慎言复议天津屯田。
现代文：熹宗之世，巡按张慎言又提议天津屯田事。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xizong, Zhang Shengyan, the procurator of the imperial court, also proposed Tianjin Tonden.

古文：而御史左光斗命管河通判卢观象大兴水田之利，太常少卿董应举踵而行之。
现代文：而御史左光斗命令管河通判卢观象大兴水田之利，太常少卿董应举跟着实行。
English: However, Gu Shi Zuo Guangdou ordered Gu Kehong to award Lu Guanzhong the profits of Daxing paddy fields, and Shaoqing Dong should be promoted accordingly.

古文：光斗更於河间、天津设屯学，试骑射，为武生给田百亩。
现代文：左光斗又在河间、天津设置屯学，考试骑马射箭，为武生供给田地一百亩。
English: Zuo Guangdou also set up camp schools in Hebei and Tianjin, riding horses and shooting arrows for examinations, and provided Takefu with 100 mu of farmland.

古文：李继贞巡抚天津，亦力於屯务，然仍岁旱蝗，弗克底成效也。
现代文：李继贞巡抚天津，也致力于屯田事务，然而遭遇旱灾和蝗灾，不能见到成效。
English: Li Jizhen, the procurator of Tianjin, also devoted himself to the affairs of the military cantonment, but suffered from droughts and locust plagues and could not see any results.

古文：明时，草场颇多，占夺民业。
现代文：明朝时，草场颇多，侵占夺去人民的生业。
English: During the Ming Dynasty, there were a lot of pastures, and the occupation took away people's livelihood.

古文：而为民厉者，莫如皇庄及诸王、勋戚、中官庄田为甚。
现代文：而成为人民的最大祸害的，没有什么比得上皇庄和诸王、勋戚、宦官庄田更厉害。
English: However, there is nothing that has become the greatest scourge of the people more than the imperial manor and the kings, relatives and eunuchs of Shoda.

古文：太祖赐勋臣公侯丞相以下庄田，多者百顷，亲王庄田千顷。
现代文：太祖赏赐勋臣公侯丞相以下的庄田，多的一百顷，亲王庄田一千顷。
English: The great-great-grandfather rewarded the great-great-grandson, the prince and the prime minister with an additional one hundred hectares of farmland and the prince with one thousand hectares of farmland.

古文：又赐公侯暨武臣公田，又赐百官公田，以其租入充禄。
现代文：又赐给公侯和武臣公田，又赏赐百官公田，以其租税缴入充当俸禄。
English: In addition, public lands were granted to princes and samurai retainers, and public lands were also awarded to officials, with their taxes paid in as a salary.

古文：指挥没於阵者皆赐公田。
现代文：指挥战死的都赏赐公田。
English: Commanders who died in battle were awarded public land.

古文：勋臣庄佃，多倚威捍禁，帝召诸臣戒谕之。
现代文：勋臣庄田的佃户，多倚仗权威违犯禁令，皇帝召诸臣告诫。
English: The retainer of the honored vassal, Shoda, relied more on authority to violate the ban, and the emperor summoned his vassals to admonish him.

古文：其后公侯复岁禄，归赐田於官。
现代文：其后公侯恢复岁禄，归还赐予的田地给官府。
English: Later, the prince restored the land grant and returned the land to the government.

古文：仁、宣之世，乞请渐广，大臣亦得请没官庄舍。
现代文：仁、宣之世，请求赐田渐渐多起来，大臣也可以请求没收入官府的庄舍。
English: In the era of Jin and Xuan, the number of requests for land grants gradually increased, and ministers could also request a mansion without income from the government.

古文：然宁王权请灌城为庶子耕牧地，帝赐书，援祖制拒之。
现代文：然而宁王朱权请求灌城作庶子的耕种放牧之地，皇帝赐书，援引祖宗制度加以拒绝。
English: However, King Zhu Quan of Ning requested that Gancheng be used as a place of cultivation and grazing for his illegitimate son, and the emperor gave him a letter, citing the ancestral system to reject it.

古文：至英宗时，诸王、外戚、中官所在占官私田，或反诬民占，请案治。
现代文：到英宗时，诸王、外戚、宦官到处侵占官田和私田，有时反而诬告人民占其田地，请求审察治罪。
English: At the time of Emperor Yingzong, kings, maternal relatives and eunuchs occupied official and private fields everywhere, and sometimes falsely accused the people of occupying their fields, requesting that they be investigated and punished.

古文：比案问得实，帝命还之民者非一。
现代文：等到审察得到真实情况，皇帝仑令还给人民田地的情况不止一次。
English: By the time the investigation got to the real situation, the emperor had ordered the return of the people's fields more than once.

古文：乃下诏禁夺民田及奏请畿内地。
现代文：于是下诏禁止侵夺人民的田地，禁止上奏请求京畿内的田地。
English: As a result, the imperial edict prohibited usurping people's fields and forbade petitioning for the return of fields in Gyeonggi Province.

古文：然权贵宗室庄田坟茔，或赐或请，不可胜计。
现代文：然而权臣贵戚宗室的庄田、坟茔，或赐予或请求，不可胜计。
English: However, it is difficult to predict whether the shodati or grave mound of the family of a high-ranking vassal or noble relative will be given or requested.

古文：御马太监刘顺家人进蓟州草场，进献由此始。
现代文：御马太监刘顺家人进献蓟州草场，进献田地从此时开始。
English: The family of Liu Shun, the imperial equestrian eunuch, donated the grassland in Luzhou, and the donation of fields began at this time.

古文：宦官之田，则自尹奉、喜宁始。
现代文：宦官的田地，则从尹奉、喜宁开始。
English: The fields of eunuchs began with Yin Bong and Xining.

古文：初，洪熙时，有仁寿宫庄，其后又有清宁、未央宫庄。
现代文：当初，洪熙时期，有仁寿宫庄，其后又有清宁、未央宫庄。
English: At first, during the Hongxi period, there was the Renshou Imperial Villa, and later there were the Qingning and Weiyang Imperial Villa.

古文：天顺三年，以诸王未出阁，供用浩繁，立东宫、德王、秀王庄田。
现代文：天顺三年，因诸王没有出京去藩国，供给用度浩繁，便设立束宫、德王、秀王庄田。
English: In the third year of Tenshun, because the kings did not leave Beijing to go to the feudal state, and the supply needs were extensive, they set up Sokunomiya, Dewang, and Shuangwang villages.

古文：二王之藩，地仍归官。
现代文：二王到藩国后，土地仍然归属官府。
English: After the two kings came to the domain, the land still belonged to the government.

古文：宪宗即位，以没入曹吉祥地为宫中庄田，皇庄之名由此始。
现代文：宪宗即位，把没收入官的曹吉祥的田地作为宫中的庄田，皇庄之名从此时开始。
English: When Emperor Gensong ascended to the throne, he used the fields of Cao Jixiang, who was not a revenue official, as a shoden in the palace. The name of the imperial shoen began at this time.

古文：其后庄田遍郡县。
现代文：此后庄田遍布郡县。
English: Since then, Shoda has spread throughout the county.

古文：给事中齐庄言： 天子以四海为家，何必置立庄田，与贫民较利。 
现代文：给事中齐庄说： 天子以四海为家，何必置立庄田，与贫困的人民争利呢？ 
English: In the matter, Qizhuang said: The Son of Heaven takes the four seas as his home, why should he set up farmlands to compete with the poor people?

古文：弗听。
现代文：不听。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：弘治二年，户部尚书李敏等以灾异上言： 畿内皇庄有五，共地万二千八百馀顷；勋戚、中官庄田三百三十有二，共地三万三千馀顷。
现代文：弘治二年，户部尚书李敏等因灾异上奏说： 京畿内皇庄有五座，共有土地一万二干八百多顷；勋戚、宦官庄田三百三十二座，共有土地三万三千多顷。
English: In the 2nd year of Hongzhi, the head of the household, Shangshu Li Min, and others reported the following due to the disaster: There are five imperial estates in Gyeonggi Province, with a total land area of more than 12,800 hectares; there are 333 eunuch and eunuch estates, with a total land area of more than 33,000 hectares.

古文：管庄官校招集群小，称庄头、伴当，占地土，敛财物，污妇女。
现代文：管理田庄的官校招集群小人，称庄头、伴当，侵占土地，收敛财物，污辱妇女。
English: The government school that manages the grange recruits a group of villains, calling them the head of the grange and the attendant, seizing land, confiscating property, and insulting women.

古文：稍与分辩，辄被诬奏。
现代文：稍微与之辩理，便被诬告。
English: Argue with them a little and you'll be falsely accused.

古文：官校执缚，举家惊惶。
现代文：官校拘捕捆缚，全家惊惶。
English: Arrested and tied up at the government school, the whole family panicked.

古文：民心伤痛入骨，灾异所由生。
现代文：民心伤痛入骨，灾异由此而生。
English: The people are heartbroken to the bone, and disasters arise from this.

古文：乞革去管庄之人，付小民耕种，亩徵银三分，充各宫用度。 
现代文：请求革除管庄之人，交付小民耕种，每亩征收银三分，充为各宫用度。 
English: Those who requested the removal of the manor were required to give the land to the peasants to cultivate, and three silver coins were levied for each mu, which was used for the expenses of each palace.

古文：帝命戒饬庄户。
现代文：皇帝命令告诫整饬庄户。
English: The emperor ordered to admonish and rectify the farmers.

古文：又因御史言，罢仁寿宫庄，还之草场，且命凡侵牧地者，悉还其旧。
现代文：又因御史建议，罢除仁寿宫之庄，还给草场，并且命令凡是侵占牧地者，全部返还其旧。
English: Also, due to the suggestion of the Imperial Historian, the village of Renshugu was abolished and given back to the pasture, and all those who had occupied the pastureland were ordered to return all of their old lands.

古文：又定制，献地王府者戍边。
现代文：又定立制度，献地于王府的人则罚戍守边地。
English: In addition, a system was established whereby those who donated land to the royal palace were fined and forced to keep the land.

古文：奉御赵瑄献雄县地为皇庄，户部尚书周经劾其违制，下瑄诏狱。
现代文：奉御赵管献雄县之地作为皇庄，户部尚书周经弹劾他违犯制度，把趟管关进钦犯监狱。
English: Emperor Zhao Guan designated the land of Xianxiong County as the imperial manor. After impeaching him for violating the system, the head of the household, Shang Shu Zhou, put Watan Guan in the Qin Criminal Prison.

古文：敕诸王辅导官，导王奏请者罪之。
现代文：敕命诸王辅导官，引导王奏请田地的则判罪。
English: Instructing the king's counsellors, leading the king to the fields, is a crime.

古文：然当日奏献不绝，气请亦愈繁。
现代文：然而当时奏请献纳的不绝，乞请也越来越纷繁。
English: However, at that time, the requests for donations were incessant, and the begging was becoming more and more diverse.

古文：徽、兴、岐、衡四王，田多至七千馀顷。
现代文：徽、兴、岐、衡四王，田地多达七干多顷。
English: The four kings, Hui, Xing, Qi and Heng, have more than seven hectares of farmland.

古文：会昌、建昌、庆云三侯争田，帝辄赐之。
现代文：会昌、建昌、庆云三侯争夺田地，皇帝便赐给他们田地。
English: The three lords of Huichang, Jianchang and Qingyun fought for the fields, and the emperor gave them the fields.

古文：武宗即位，逾月即建皇庄七，其后增至三百馀处。
现代文：武宗即位，过了一个月，便建皇庄七座，此后增至三百多处。
English: A month after Emperor Wuzong ascended the throne, he built seven imperial villas, which later increased to more than three hundred.

古文：诸王、外戚求请及夺民田者无算。
现代文：诸王、外戚请求赐田和侵夺民田的无数。
English: Countless kings and their relatives asked for land and invaded and seized people's land.

古文：世宗初，命给事中夏言等清核皇庄田。
现代文：世宗初年，仑令给事中夏言等清查核对皇庄田。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, the Emperor ordered a thorough inspection of the Emperor's manor.

古文：言极言皇庄为厉於民。
现代文：夏言竭力陈说皇庄为害于民。
English: Natsugen tried his best to say that the Imperial Villa was harmful to the people.

古文：自是正德以来投献侵牟之地，颇有给还民者，而宦戚辈复中挠之。
现代文：从此正德以来投献侵吞的田地，多有归还人民的，而宦戚之辈又从中阻挠。
English: Since then, many of the fields that Zhengde had appropriated were returned to the people, but their relatives obstructed them from doing so.

古文：户部尚书孙交造皇庄新册，额减於旧。
现代文：户部尚书孙交造皇庄新簿册，额数比旧时减少。
English: The head of the household, Shang Shusun, handed over the new book of the imperial villa, and the amount was reduced from the old time.

古文：帝命核先年顷亩数以闻，改称官地，不复名皇庄，诏所司徵银解部。
现代文：皇帝命令核实过去顷亩之数上报，改称官地，不再称皇庄，下诏主管部门征收银两解送到部。
English: The emperor ordered to verify the number of hectares of mu reported in the past, renamed the official site, no longer called the imperial villa, and ordered the competent department to collect the silver and send it to the ministry.

古文：然多为宦寺中饱，积逋至数十万以为常。
现代文：然而多被宦官中饱私囊，积欠赋税到数十万以为常。
English: However, most of them were eunuchs who filled their own pockets and considered it normal to accumulate tax arrears in the hundreds of thousands.

古文：是时，禁勋戚奏讨、奸民投献者，又革王府所请山场湖陂。
现代文：这时，禁止勋戚上奏求讨、奸民投献之事，又革除王府所请的山场湖陂。
English: At this time, it was forbidden for the relatives of the deceased to appeal to the emperor, and the treacherous people to make offerings, and the mountain and lake festivals invited by the royal court were also banned.

古文：德王请齐、汉二庶人所遗东昌、兖州闲田，又请白云等湖，山东巡抚邵锡按新令却之，语甚切。
现代文：德王请齐、汉二庶人所遣留的柬昌、充州闲置的田地，又请求白云等湖，山东巡抚邵锡根据新制定的法令予以拒绝，话语很直切。
English: King De invited the commoners of Qi and Han to take over the idle fields of Camchang and Chenzhou, and also requested Baiyun and other lakes. Shandong Governor Shao Xi refused according to the newly formulated laws and regulations, and his words were very direct.

古文：德王争之数四，帝仍从部议，但存藩封初请庄田。
现代文：德王多次争辩皇帝仍然依从户部之议，只保存藩封时初次请求的庄田。
English: King Toku argued many times that the emperor still followed the advice of the household department and only kept Shoda, which was requested for the first time when the domain was fenced.

古文：其后有奏请者不听。
现代文：此后有上奏请求的一律不同意。
English: After that, all requests for rehearing were denied.

古文：又定，凡公主、国公庄田，世远者存什三。
现代文：又规定，凡是公主、国公的庄田，世代远的保存十分之三。
English: It also stipulates that three-tenths of all shodati belonging to princesses and sovereigns must be preserved for generations to come.

古文：嘉靖三十九年遣御史沈阳清夺隐冒庄田万六千馀顷。
现代文：嘉靖三十九年派遣御史沈阳清理侵夺隐瞒冒领的庄田一万六千多顷。
English: In the thirty-ninth year of Jiajing, the imperial historian Shenyang was dispatched to clean up more than 16,000 hectares of Zhuoda, which had been invaded, seized, concealed and usurped.

古文：穆宗从御史王廷瞻言，复定世次递减之限：勋臣五世限田二百顷，戚畹七百顷至七十顷有差。
现代文：穆宗听从御史王廷瞻的建议，又制定世代递减的限额：勋臣五代限定田地二百顷，外戚七百顷至七十顷不等。
English: Mu Zong listened to the suggestion of Wang Tingzhang, the Grand Historian, and set a limit that would decrease with each generation: the five generations of honored vassals were limited to 200 hectares of farmland, and the relatives of the deceased ranged from 700 hectares to 70 hectares.

古文：初，世宗时，承天六庄二湖地八千三百馀顷，领以中官，又听校舍兼并，增八百八十顷，分为十二庄。
现代文：当初，世宗时，承天六庄二湖土地八干三百多顷，以宦官统领，又听凭校舍兼并，增加八百八十顷，分为十二庄。
English: At the beginning, Shizong initially inherited more than eight hundred and three hundred hectares of land in six villages and two lakes, ruled by eunuchs, and increased by eight hundred and eighty hectares due to the annexation of school buildings, divided into twelve villages.

古文：至是始领之有司，兼并者还民。
现代文：至此始以主管官吏统领，兼并的归还给人民。
English: At this point, the competent officials took the lead, and the annexation was returned to the people.

古文：又著令宗室买田不输役者没官，皇亲田俱令有司徵之，如勋臣例。
现代文：又定着命令，宗室买田不输送赋役的没收入官，皇亲之田都命令主管部门徽收，如同勋臣之例。
English: In addition, there was an order that the imperial family's land would not be sent to the revenue officer, and the imperial family's land would be ordered by the competent department to receive the emblem, as in the case of honored subjects.

古文：虽请乞不乏，而赐额有定，徵收有制，民害少衰止。
现代文：虽然请求赐田不断，而赐予的数额有定数，征收有制度，人民的危害稍微减少。
English: Although requests for land grants continue, the amount granted is fixed, the collection is systematic, and the harm to the people is slightly reduced.

古文：神宗赉予过侈，求无不获。
现代文：神宗赐予过于奢侈，只要请求无不获取。
English: Shenzong gives too much luxury, as long as you ask for everything and get it.

古文：潞王、寿阳公主恩最渥。
现代文：潞王、寿阳公主施恩最丰厚。
English: King Gong and Princess Shouyang were the most generous.

古文：而福王分封，括河南、山东、湖广田为王庄，至四万顷。
现代文：而福王分封，包括河南、山东、湖广之田为王庄，达到四万顷。
English: And Fuwang Fenfeng, including Henan, Shandong and Hukang fields, is the king's manor, reaching 40,000 hectares.

古文：群臣力争，乃减其半。
现代文：群臣竭力争辩，纔减少一半。
English: The ministers argued strenuously, and the fine was reduced by half.

古文：王府官及诸阉丈地徵税，旁午於道，扈养厮役廪食以万计，渔敛惨毒不忍闻。
现代文：王府官吏和众宦官丈量土地征收赋税，纷杂于道路，供养杂役的粮食数以万计，侵吞搜刮惨不忍闻。
English: The officials of the royal court and the eunuchs measured the land to collect taxes, cluttered the roads, and provided tens of thousands of grains for miscellaneous services. It was appalling to see the embezzlement and robbery.

古文：驾帖捕民，格杀庄佃，所在骚然。
现代文：以刑科签发公文逮捕人民，擎杀庄田的佃户，到处一片骚乱。
English: With the criminal investigation department issuing official documents to arrest people and instigating the killing of Shoda's tenant, there was a riot everywhere.

古文：给事中官应震、姚宗文等屡疏谏，皆不报。
现代文：给事中官应震、姚宗文等屡次上书劝谏，都不回复。
English: The liaison officers, including Ying Zhen and Yao Zongwen, repeatedly sent letters to persuade him, but he did not reply.

古文：时复更定勋戚庄田世次递减法，视旧制稍宽。
现代文：当时又重新制定勋臣外戚庄田世代递减法，比旧有的制度稍微宽缓。
English: At that time, the honourable minister's maternal relative Shoda generation reduction method was newly formulated, which was slightly more lenient than the old system.

古文：其后应议减者，辄奉诏姑留，不能革也。
现代文：此后应议削减的，便奉诏姑且保留，不能革除。
English: After that, if it is reduced in response to a motion, it will be retained and cannot be removed.

古文：熹宗时，桂、惠、瑞三王及遂平、宁德二公主庄田，动以万计，而魏忠贤一门，横赐尤甚。
现代文：熹宗之时，桂、惠、瑞三王和遂平、宁德二公主的庄田动不动以万来计算，而魏忠贤一族，横加赏赐特别多。
English: At the time of Emperor Xizong, the three kings of Guizhou, Huizhou, and Ruizhou, and the two princesses of Suiping and Ningde, were rewarded with tens of thousands of dollars, while the Wei Zhongxian family received a particularly large number of rewards.

古文：盖中叶以后，庄田侵夺民业，与国相终云。
现代文：大致明朝中期以后，庄田侵吞掠夺人民的产业，与国家灭亡一起结束。
English: After the middle of the Ming Dynasty, Shoda invaded and plundered the people's industry, ending with the demise of the country.

