古文：世俗起土兴功，岁月有所食，所食之地，必有死者。
现代文：社会上相信破土建房，岁神月神就会对人有所侵害，受侵害的地方，一定会死人。
English: It is believed in society that if you break ground and build a house, the god of the year and the god of the moon will infringe on people, and people will surely die where they are infringed upon.

古文：假令太岁在子，岁食於酉，正月建寅，月食於巳，子、寅地兴功，则酉、巳之家见食矣。
现代文：假如太岁运行到子位，岁神就会侵害西面的人家，以建寅之月为正月，月神就会侵害南面的人家。北面、东面破土建房，那么西方、南方的人家就会被侵害了。
English: If Tairei runs to the child position, the god of the year will infringe on the people's homes in the west, and the moon god will infringe on the people's homes in the south. If the north and east break ground and build houses, then the people's homes in the west and south will be infringed.

古文：见食之家，作起厌胜，以五行之物，悬金木水火。
现代文：被侵害的人家，就要搞 厌胜 巫术，用五行之物悬挂金木水火以避祸害。
English: The families of those who have been violated must engage in "victim-shaming" and sorcery, and use the five elements to hang gold, wood, water and fire to ward off evil.

古文：假令岁月食西家，西家悬金；岁月食东家，东家悬炭。
现代文：假如岁神月神侵害西家，西家就悬挂金以避祸害。岁神月神侵害东家，东家就悬挂木炭以避祸害。
English: If the god of the year and the god of the moon encroach on the west house, the west house will hang gold to avoid disaster. If the god of the year and the god of the moon encroach on the east house, the east house will hang charcoal to avoid disaster.

古文：设祭祀以除其凶，或空亡徙以辟其殃。
现代文：或举行祭祀以消除那些凶祸，或者全家出走搬迁以躲避那些祸殃。
English: Or hold a ritual to eliminate those evils, or the whole family fled and moved to avoid those evils.

古文：连相仿效，皆谓之然。
现代文：一家仿效一家，都认为这样做是对的。
English: One by one, they all thought it was the right thing to do.

古文：如考实之，虚妄迷也。
现代文：如果考订核实一下这种看法，这是一种虚妄的主张。
English: That's a false claim, if fact-checked.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：夫天地之神，用心等也。
现代文：天上地上的神，用心是相同的。
English: The God of heaven and earth has the same intention.

古文：人民无状，加罪行罚，非有二心两意，前後相反也。
现代文：百姓无礼，就加以罪名实行惩罚，天地之神不会有二心两意，前后相反的情况。
English: If the people are impolite, they will be charged with a crime and punished. The God of heaven and earth will not be ambivalent, but the opposite.

古文：移徙不避岁月，岁月恶其不避己之冲位，怒之也。
现代文：搬家不避开岁神和月神，岁神和月神憎恨他们不避开自己相对的位置，就会谴责他们。
English: Moving house does not avoid the god of the year and the god of the moon, and the god of the year and the god of the moon hate them if they do not avoid their relative position, and will condemn them.

古文：今起功之家，亦动地体，无状之过，与移徙等。
现代文：现在修建房屋的人家，也触动了地体，无礼的过错，和搬迁之家是同样的。
English: The family of the person who is now building the house has also touched the earth, and the fault of rudeness is the same as that of moving the house.

古文：起功之家，当为岁所食，何故反令巳、酉之地受其咎乎？
现代文：建房的人家，应当被岁神和月神所侵害，为什么反而让南方、西方之地受到他们的祸害呢？
English: The homes of those who build houses should be invaded by the god of the year and the god of the moon, but why should the south and the west be plagued by them?

古文：岂岁月之神怪移徙而咎起功哉！
现代文：难道岁月之神责怪搬迁而不祸害建房的人家吗？
English: Is it possible that the god of time blames the relocation without harming the people who built the house?

古文：用心措意，何其不平也。
现代文：岁月之神所用的心意，多么不公平啊！
English: How unfair is the mind of the god of time!

古文：鬼神罪过人，犹县官谪罚民也。
现代文：鬼神惩罚人，如同天子谴责惩罚老百姓一样。
English: Ghosts and gods punish people, just as the Son of Heaven condemns and punishes the common people.

古文：民犯刑罚多非一，小过宥罪，大恶犯辟，未有以无过受罪。
现代文：老百姓触犯刑法而受惩罚的很多不只一个，小过错可以宽赦，大罪恶就受刑法处治，没有因无过错而被判刑的人。
English: There are many people who are punished for violating the criminal law, not just one. Minor faults can be pardoned, while major crimes are punished by the criminal law. There is no one who has been sentenced for no fault.

古文：无过而受罪，世谓之冤。
现代文：无过错而被判刑，世人就称为受冤枉。
English: When a man is condemned for no fault of his own, the world says, "He is unjustly condemned."

古文：今巳、酉之家，无过於月岁，子、起宅，空为见食，此则岁冤无罪也。
现代文：现在巳、酉之地的人家，对岁神月神毫无过错、子、寅之地的人家建房，他们平白无故地被侵害，这就是岁神月神冤枉无罪的人家了。
English: Now, the people in the land of the rooster have no fault with the god of the year and the god of the moon, and the people in the land of the son and the god of the tiger have built houses, and they have been violated for no reason. These are the people who have been wronged by the god of the year and the god of the moon.

古文：且夫太岁在子，子宅直符，午宅为破，不须兴功起事，空居无为，犹被其害。
现代文：而且太岁运行到子位，子位的房屋 直符 ，午位的房屋正相对，不须建房办事，空坐家中什么也不干，仍然被岁月之神所侵害。
English: Moreover, the old man runs to the child's place, the child's house is a direct match, the house of the noon is opposite, there is no need to build a house to do business, sitting at home doing nothing, still being violated by the god of years.

古文：今岁月所食，待子宅有为，巳、酉乃凶。
现代文：现在岁月之神所侵害的地方，一定要等到子、寅之地破土动工，巳、酉之地才有凶祸。
English: Where the god of time is currently encroaching, it must wait until the ground is broken in the land of the son and the tiger, and the land of the snake and the grasshopper, before the evil comes.

古文：太岁，岁月之神，用罚为害，动静殊致，非天从岁月神意之道也。
现代文：岁月之神，给予惩罚造成灾害，对 兴功起事 和 空居无为 的人家造成的祸害不一样，这不符合上天采纳岁月之神的意见进行惩罚的道理。
English: It is not in accordance with the principle of heaven adopting the opinion of the god of the ages to punish the disasters caused by the punishment of the god of the ages.

古文：审论岁月之神，岁则太岁也，在天边际，立於子位。
现代文：仔细论述岁月之神，岁就是太岁，它在天的边缘，立于子位。
English: Carefully discuss the god of years, years are too old, it is on the edge of heaven, standing at the zenith.

古文：起室者在中国一州之内，假令扬州在东南，使如邹衍之言，天下为一州，又在东南，岁食於酉，食西羌之地，东南之地安得凶祸？
现代文：盖房的人在中国的某一个州之内，假设这个州是扬州的话，它处在东南方。假如像邹衍所说的，全中国是一个州，又处在东南方，岁神侵害酉地，那么受害的该是西羌那些地方，位于东南的地方怎么会遭受凶祸呢？
English: The person who built the house is in a certain state in China. Assuming that this state is Yangzhou, it is located in the southeast. If, as Zou Yan said, all of China is a state, and it is located in the southeast, and the god of the year infringes upon the land, then the victims should be those places in Xidi. How can a place located in the southeast suffer from evil?

古文：假令岁在人民之间，西宅为酉地，则起功之家，宅中亦有酉地，何以不近食其宅中之酉地，而反食佗家乎！
现代文：如果岁神就在民间，西边的房屋都是酉地，那么修建房屋的人家，房子中也有酉地，为什么不就近侵害他家房中的酉地，反而去侵害别家呢？
English: If the god of the year is in the folk, and the houses on the west side are all ploughed fields, then the people who built the houses also have ploughed fields in their houses. Why not encroach on the ploughed fields in his house nearby, but instead encroach on other houses?

古文：且食之者审谁也？
现代文：况且侵害人的究竟是谁呢？
English: Moreover, who is the aggressor?

古文：如审岁月，岁月，天之从神，饮食与天同。
现代文：如果确实是岁神和月神，岁神和月神是天的从属之神，它们的饮食与天相同。
English: If they are indeed the god of the year and the god of the moon, the god of the year and the god of the moon are subordinate gods of heaven, and their diet is the same as that of heaven.

古文：天食不食人，故郊祭不以为牲。
现代文：天饮食时不吃人，所以帝王郊祭时不用人作牺牲。
English: They don't eat people when they eat in heaven, so they don't need people to make sacrifices during the Imperial Suburbs Festival.

古文：如非天神，亦不食人。
现代文：如果岁神和月神不是天神，那也不会吃人的。
English: If the god of the year and the god of the moon were not gods, they would not eat people.

古文：天地之间，百神所食，圣人谓当与人等。
现代文：天地之间，各种神所吃的东西，圣人认为应当和人吃的一样。
English: Between heaven and earth, what various gods eat, sages believe should be eaten in the same way as humans.

古文：推生事死，推人事鬼，故百神之祀皆用众物，无用人者。
现代文：根据侍奉活人的道理去侍奉死人，根据侍奉人的道理去侍奉鬼神，所以对各种神的祭祀都用各种东西，没有用人来作祭品的。
English: According to the principle of serving the living, we should serve the dead, and according to the principle of serving the living, we should serve the ghosts and gods. Therefore, all kinds of things are used for the worship of all kinds of gods, but no human beings are used as sacrifices.

古文：物食人者，虎与狼也。
现代文：动物中会吃人的，是虎狼。
English: Tigers and wolves are the only animals that eat humans.

古文：岁月之神，岂虎狼之精哉？
现代文：岁月之神，难道是虎狼的精气吗？
English: Is the god of time the spirit of the tiger and the wolf?

古文：仓卒之世，谷食乏匮，人民饥饿，自相啖食。
现代文：战乱灾荒的年头，谷物食品缺乏，人民吃不饱常受饿，自相残食。
English: In the war-torn and disaster-stricken years, there was a shortage of grain and food, and the people were not satisfied with what they had and often went hungry, leaving food for each other.

古文：岂其啖食死者，其精为岁月之神哉？
现代文：难道那些吃饿死者的尸体的人，他们的精气变成了岁月之神吗？
English: Do those who eat the corpses of the starving become the gods of time?

古文：岁月有神，日亦有神，岁食月食，日何不食？
现代文：岁月有神，日也有神，岁神侵害人，月神侵害人，为什么日神不侵害人呢？
English: Years have gods, days have gods, the god of the year encroaches on people, the god of the moon encroaches on people, why does the god of the day not encroach on people?

古文：积日为月，积月为时，积时为岁，千五百三十九岁为一统，四千六百一十七岁为一元，增积相倍之数，分余终竟之名耳，安得鬼神之怪、祸福之验乎？
现代文：一天天聚集就成月，一月月聚集就成季，一季季聚集就成年，年为一统，年为一元，月、时、岁、统、元是不断增加聚积的相互的倍数、分余完毕而取的名称而已，怎么有鬼神之怪、祸福的征兆呢？
English: One day gathers to become a month, one month gathers to become a season, one season gathers to become an adult, a year is a unit, and a year is a yuan. The month, hour, year, unit, and yuan are the multiples of each other that are constantly increasing in accumulation, and the names that are taken after the completion of the division. How can there be ghosts and gods, and signs of misfortune and blessing?

古文：如岁月终竟者宜有神，则四时有神，统元有神。
现代文：如果岁月完毕应当有神，那么一年四季就有神，统、元就有神。
English: If there should be a god at the end of time, then there should be a god in all four seasons of the year, and there should have been a god in the beginning.

古文：月三日魄，八日弦，十五日望，与岁月终竟何异？
现代文：月亮初三日露微光，初八日成弦月，十五日成望月，这与岁月完毕有什么不同呢？
English: The moon shines faintly on the third day of the first lunar month, becomes the crescent moon on the eighth day of the first lunar month, and the crescent moon on the fifteenth day of the first lunar month. What is the difference between this and the end of time?

古文：岁月有神，魄与弦复有神也？
现代文：岁月有神，新月、弦月、满月时也有神吗？
English: Does time have a god, and does the new moon, the crescent moon and the full moon also have a god?

古文：一日之中，分为十二时，平旦寅，日出卯也。
现代文：一天之中，分为十二个时辰，寅时天刚刚发亮，卯时太阳出来了。
English: A day is divided into twelve hours. In the morning, the sky is just beginning to brighten, and in the evening, the sun comes out.

古文：十二月建寅卯，则十二月时所加寅卯也。
现代文：十二个月建月所用的寅、卯等十二辰，也就是十二时所用的寅、卯等十二辰。
English: The "C" and "U" used in the 12-month calendar refer to the 12 hours, that is, the "C" and "U" used at 12 o'clock refer to the 12 hours.

古文：日加十二辰不食，月建十二辰独食，岂日加无神，月建独有哉？
现代文：每天用十二辰不侵害人，唯独每月用十二辰会侵害人，难道每天用十二辰没有神，唯独每月用十二辰就有神了吗？
English: Using twelve hours every day does not infringe on people, but using twelve hours every month will infringe on people. Is there no God using twelve hours every day, but there is a God using twelve hours every month?

古文：何故月建独食，日加不食乎！
现代文：为什么每月用偏偏侵害人，每天用就不侵害人呢？
English: Why is it that every month it is used to violate people, but every day it is not used to violate people?

古文：如日加无神，用时决事非也。如加时有神，独不食，非也。
现代文：如果每天用十二时辰没有神，那么用时辰来判断事情就不对了；如果每天用十二时辰有神，那么，唯独日神不侵害人就不对了。
English: If there is no God at 12 o'clock every day, then it is not right to use the time to judge things; if there is a God at 12 o'clock every day, then it is not right that only God does not infringe on people.

古文：神之口腹，与人等也。
现代文：神的嘴巴肚子，和人的是同样的。
English: The mouth of God is the same as the stomach of man.

古文：人饥则食，饱则止，不为起功乃一食也。
现代文：人饥饿了就要吃东西，吃饱了就停止了，不是因为有人盖房子才吃一次东西。
English: People need to eat when they are hungry and stop when they are full. It is not because someone is building a house that they only need to eat once.

古文：岁月之神，起功乃食，一岁之中，兴功者希，岁月之神饥乎？
现代文：岁月之神，有人盖房子才吃，一年之中，盖房子的很少，岁月之神吃不饱吧？
English: God of the ages, some people build a house before they eat, in the course of a year, very few houses are built, God of the ages can't get enough to eat, right?

古文：仓卒之世，人民亡，室宅荒废，兴功者绝，岁月之神饿乎？
现代文：战乱灾荒年代，百姓逃亡，室宅没有人住，根本没有盖房子的人，岁月之神会饿死吧？
English: In times of war, disaster and famine, when people fled, when no one lived in houses, when no one built houses at all, would the god of time starve to death?

古文：且田与宅俱人所治，兴功用力，劳佚钧等。
现代文：况且田地和住宅都是人整修的，修田造屋所花的气力，劳逸是相等的。
English: Moreover, both fields and houses are renovated by people, and the effort spent on repairing fields and building houses is equal.

古文：宅掘土而立木，田凿沟而起堤，堤与木俱立，掘与凿俱为。
现代文：盖房子要挖土树立屋架，修田地要挖沟筑起堤坎，堤坎与屋架都是人建立的，掘土和挖沟都是人干的。
English: To build a house, you need to dig up soil and erect a roof frame. To repair a field, you need to dig a ditch and build a dike. Both the dike and the roof frame are built by people. The digging of soil and the digging of ditches are done by people.

古文：起宅，岁月食；治田，独不食。岂起宅时岁月饥，治田时饱乎？
现代文：盖房子岁神月神侵害人，修田地，岁神月神偏不侵害人，难道盖房子时岁月之神饥饿，修田地时它们是饱的吗？
English: When building a house, the god of the year and the god of the month encroach on people, and when building a field, the god of the year and the god of the month do not encroach on people. Is the god of the year and the god of the month hungry when building a house, and are they full when building a field?

古文：何事钧作同，饮食不等也？
现代文：为什么事情相等，劳动相同，而岁神、月神的侵害却不相同呢？
English: Why are things equal, labor the same, but the infringement of the god of the year and the god of the moon are not the same?

古文：说岁月食之家，必铨功之小大，立远近之步数。
现代文：说岁神月神侵害人的人，必定要根据工程的大小来确定岁月之神祸害人的远近范围。
English: Those who say that the god of the year and the god of the month harm people must determine the far and near range of the god of the year and the god of the month harming people according to the size of the project.

古文：假令起三尺之功，食一步之内；起十丈之役，食一里之外。
现代文：假设建三尺的工程，就祸害一步以内的人家；建十丈的工程，就祸害一里以上的人家。
English: Assuming that a project of three feet is built, it will harm people's homes within one step; a project of ten feet is built, it will harm people's homes more than one mile.

古文：功有小大，祸有近远。
现代文：如果工程有大小，祸害就有远近。
English: If the project is large or small, the scourge is far and near.

古文：蒙恬为秦筑长城，极天下之半，则其为祸宜以万数。
现代文：蒙恬为秦朝修筑长城，工程达到全中国的一半，那么岁月之神为害的范围就该有几万里了。
English: Mengniu built the Great Wall for the Qin Dynasty, and the project reached half of all of China, so the scope of harm caused by the god of time should be tens of thousands of miles.

古文：案长城之造，秦民不多死。
现代文：考察长城的建造，秦朝的百姓并没有多死人。
English: When examining the construction of the Great Wall, the people of the Qin Dynasty did not suffer many deaths.

古文：周公作雒，兴功至大，当时岁月宜多食。
现代文：周公兴建洛邑，建造工程极大，当时岁月之神应当多侵害人。
English: Zhou Gong built Luoyang, and the construction project was enormous. At that time, the god of the ages should have attacked more people.

古文：圣人知其审食，宜徙所食地，置於吉祥之位。
现代文：圣人周公如果知道岁月之神确实会侵害人，就应该把岁月之神所侵害之地的老百姓迁走，安置在吉祥的地方。
English: If the sage Zhou Gong knew that the god of time would indeed encroach on people, he should have moved the people of the land encroached upon by the god of time and placed them in an auspicious place.

古文：如不知避，人民多凶，经传之文，贤圣宜有刺讥。
现代文：如果不知道避开，人民就多有凶祸，经传上的文章，贤人圣人就应该有所刺讥。
English: If you don't know how to avoid it, the people will have more evil, and the scriptures, sages and saints should be ridiculed.

古文：今闻筑雒之民，四方和会，功成事毕，不闻多死。
现代文：现今听说建造洛邑的百姓，四方和睦相聚，建造工程完毕之后，没有听说多死人。
English: Nowadays, I have heard that the people who built Luoyang have gathered harmoniously from all four sides. After the construction project was completed, I have not heard of many deaths.

古文：说岁月之家，殆虚非实也。
现代文：说岁神月神侵害人的人，说的恐怕都是虚假不实的话。
English: Those who say that the god of the year, the god of the month, the god of the year, the god of the month, the god of the year, the god of the month, the god of the year, the god of the month, the god of the year, the god of the month, the god of the year, the god of the month, the god of the year, the god of the month, the god of the year, the god of the month, the god of the year, the god of the month, the god of the year, the god of the month, the god of the year, the god of the month, the god of the year, the god of the month,

古文：且岁月审食，犹人口腹之饥必食也；且为巳、酉地有厌胜之故，畏一金刃，惧一死炭，同闭口不敢食哉！
现代文：岁月之神真能吃东西，好比人的口腹饿了一定要吃东西一样，因为巳、酉地搞厌胜术的缘故，岁月之神由于害怕刀剑，畏惧没有燃烧的炭，难道就闭口不敢吃了吗！
English: The god of the ages can really eat, just as the human mouth is hungry and must eat, because of the snake and the snake's obsession with the art of winning, the god of the ages, afraid of the sword, afraid of the unburned charcoal, will not dare to eat!

古文：如实畏惧，宜如其数。五行相胜，物气钧适。
现代文：如果真要使岁月之神畏惧，就该用与建筑工程数量相当的五行之物来压制它们。
English: If you really want to frighten the god of time, you should suppress them with five elements equivalent to the number of construction projects.

古文：如山失火，沃以一杯之水；河决千里，塞以一掊之土，能胜之乎？
现代文：五行相克，物和物、气和气之间的数量多少要相当。假如泰山失火，用一杯水去浇，黄河决口千里，用一捧土去堵塞，能够灭火堵决吗？
English: If Mount Tai catches fire, can it be put out with a glass of water? If the Yellow River is blocked with a handful of soil, can it be put out with a cup of water?

古文：非失五行之道，小大多少不能相当也。
现代文：这并不是没有把握五行相克的道理，而是小与大多与少太不相称了。
English: This is not a failure to grasp the relationship between the five elements, but a mismatch between the small and the many and the few.

古文：天地之性，人物之力，少不胜多，小不厌大。
现代文：天地万物的特性，是人和物的力量，少不能胜多，小不能胜大。
English: The characteristics of all things in heaven and earth are the power of people and things. Less cannot beat more, and small cannot beat big.

古文：使三军持木杖，匹夫持一刃，伸力角气，匹夫必死。
现代文：让众多的军队拿着木杖，让一个人拿着一把刀，施展力气，互相争斗，这个人必然被打死。
English: Let many armies with sticks and one man with a sword fight it out, and the man must be killed.

古文：金性胜木，然而木胜金负者，木多而金寡也。
现代文：金的本性能胜木，然而木胜金败，是因为木多金少的缘故。
English: The natural ability of gold is superior to wood, but wood is inferior to gold because there is less of it.

古文：积金如山，燃一炭火以燔烁之，金必不消。非失五行之道，金多火少，少多小大不钧也。
现代文：堆积如山一般的金属，燃烧一盆炭火去烧熔它，这堆金属必然不会熔化，并不是没有把握五行相克的道理，而是金属多炭火少，少与多、小与大太不相称了。
English: If you pile up a mountain of metal and burn a pot of charcoal to melt it, this pile of metal will not melt. This is not because you have not grasped the principle of the five elements, but because the metal has more charcoal and less fire. Less is not commensurate with more, and small is not commensurate with large.

古文：五尺童子与孟贲争，童子不胜。非童子怯，力少之故也。
现代文：身材矮小的儿童与孟贲争斗，儿童不能取胜，并不是儿童胆小，是力气太小的缘故。
English: If a small child cannot win in a fight with a giant, it is not because the child is timid, but because the child has too little strength.

古文：狼众食人，人众食狼。
现代文：狼多就吃人，人多就打死狼。
English: If there are more wolves, they will eat more people. If there are more people, they will kill more wolves.

古文：敌力角气，能以小胜大者希；争强量功，能以寡胜众者鲜。
现代文：施展力气，相互争斗，能够以小胜大的很少；争比强弱，较量威力，能够以少胜多的极少。
English: When exerting strength and fighting with each other, only a few can win big with a small victory; when competing against the strong and the weak, and testing their strength, only a few can win with a small victory.

古文：天道人物，不能以小胜大者，少不能服多。
现代文：天道人事，不能以小胜大，是由于少数不能压过多数。
English: In the kingdom of heaven, the small cannot overcome the great, because the few cannot overpower the many.

古文：以一刃之金，一炭之火，厌除凶咎，却岁之殃，如何也！
现代文：用一把刀剑，一盆炭火，压过解除凶祸，消掉岁月之神带来的灾殃，怎么可能呢？
English: How is it possible to use a sword and a pot of charcoal to overcome the evil and eliminate the calamity brought by the god of time?

