古文：夫帝王者，配德天地，叶契阴阳，发号施令，动关幽显，休咎之征，随感而作，故《书》曰： 惠迪吉，从逆凶，惟影响。 
现代文：帝王，是要德性与天地相配，舆阴阳相协和，发号施令，行动关乎入神，灾祥的征兆，会感应而显现，因此《尚书》说： 仁爱之道吉祥，放纵邪恶不吉，就像影子随形回响应声。 
English: The emperor is to match virtue with heaven and earth, to harmonize public opinion with yin and yang, to issue orders, actions are related to God, and the signs of calamity will appear by induction. Therefore, "Shang Shu" said: The path of benevolence is auspicious, and indulging evil is not auspicious, just like the shadow echoes the echo.

古文：昔伏羲氏继天而王，受《河图》，则而画之，八卦是也。
现代文：从前伏义氏承天命为王，接受《河图》，依据其画成圆，造就是八卦。
English: Once upon a time, the Fushi clan, following the will of heaven, accepted the "river map" and drew a circle according to it, which was the Eight Trigrams.

古文：禹治洪水，赐《洛书》，法而陈之，《洪范》是也。
现代文：禹治理洪水，受赐《洛书》，遵照其陈述，这就是《洪范》。
English: When Yu controlled the flood, he was given the Book of Luo, and according to his statement, this is the Book of Hong Fan.

古文：圣人行其道，宝其真，自天祐之，吉无不利。
现代文：圣人依其道而行，以其真为宝，上天保佑，吉祥而无不利。
English: The saint walks according to his path, treasures his truth, is blessed by heaven, and is auspicious without disadvantage.

古文：三五已降，各有司存。
现代文：三皇五帝以来，各有官吏掌管。
English: Since the time of the three emperors and five emperors, each has had officials in charge.

古文：爰及殷之箕子，在父师之位，典斯大范。
现代文：直到殷代的箕子，居父师之位，遵循遣大的典范。
English: Until the time of the Yin Dynasty, the sons of the imperial family followed the example of sending their sons to university.

古文：周既克殷，以箕子归，武王虚己而问焉。
现代文：周朝替代殷朝后，将箕子带回，武王谦虚地向他请教。
English: After replacing Yin Dynasty with Zhou Dynasty, Wu Wang humbly asked him for advice.

古文：箕子对以禹所得《雒书》，授之以垂训。
现代文：箕子以禹所得的《雒书》应对，教授他以留下训诫。
English: Xun Zi responded to Yu's copy of the Book of the Law, teaching him to leave behind admonitions.

古文：然则《河图》、《雒书》相为经纬，八卦、九章更为表里。
现代文：如此，则《河圆》、《雒书》相互为经纬，八卦、九章相为表裹。
English: In this way, "River Circle" and "Book of Changes" are each other's latitude and longitude, and the "Eight Trigrams" and "Nine Chapters" are the same.

古文：殷道绝，文王演《周易》；周道弊，孔子述《春秋》。
现代文：殷朝道行断绝，文王推演《周易》；周朝道行衰败，孔子作《春秋》。
English: The Taoism of the Yin Dynasty was broken, and King Wen deduced "Zhou Yi"; the Taoism of the Zhou Dynasty decayed, and Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn."

古文：奉乾坤之阴阳，郊洪范之休咎，天人之道粲然著矣。
现代文：尊奉乾坤之阴阳，效法洪范》之灾祥，天人相应之道就明白了。
English: Honoring the yin and yang of Qian Kun, emulating the calamity and auspiciousness of Hong Fan, the corresponding way of heaven and man will be understood.

古文：汉兴，承秦灭学之后，文帝时，虙生创纪《大传》，其言五行庶征备矣。
现代文：汉朝兴起，承续在秦朝灭绝学术之后，文帝时，虑生创有《大传》，其中论说五行的种种征兆已很完备。
English: After the rise of the Han Dynasty, which followed the extinction of learning in the Qin Dynasty, Emperor Wen thoughtfully created the "Great Biography," in which the various signs of the Five Elements were fully discussed.

古文：后景武之际，董仲舒治《公羊春秋》，始推阴阳，为儒者之宗。
现代文：后来景帝、武帝期间，董仲舒研究《公羊春秋》，开始推论阴阳，是儒者的宗师。
English: Later, during the reigns of Emperor Jing and Emperor Wu, Dong Zhongshu studied "Ram Spring and Autumn" and began to deduce yin and yang. He was the founder of Confucianism.

古文：宣元之间，刘向治《谷梁春秋》，数其祸福，传以《洪范》，与仲舒多所不同。
现代文：宣帝、元壶时，刘血研究《谷梁春秋》，论算其祸福，为《洪范》作传注，与董仲舒有很多不同。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Xuanxi and Yuan Jue, Liu Xue studied "The Spring and Autumn of Gu Liang" and discussed its misfortunes and blessings. He also wrote a preface for "Hong Fan," which is very different from that of Dong Zhongshu.

古文：至向子歆治《左氏传》，其言《春秋》及五行，又甚乖异。
现代文：到型宜的儿子塑挞研究《左氏传》，他论说《春秋》和五行，又有很多不同和错误之处。
English: His son, Shuxuan, studied "The Biography of Zuo," and he discussed "Spring and Autumn" and the Five Elements, and there were many differences and mistakes.

古文：班固据《大传》，采仲舒、刘向、刘歆著《五行志》，而传载眭孟、夏侯胜、京房、谷永、李寻之徒所陈行事，讫于王莽，博通祥变，以传《春秋》。
现代文：班固依据《大传》，采纳董仲舒、刘向、刘歆的论说着《五行志》，而记载眭孟、夏侯胜、京房、谷永、奎曼等人的论述和事迹，止于王莽，博通祥瑞变异，来为《春秋》作佐证。
English: According to the "Great Biography," Ban Gu adopted the theories of Dong Zhongshu, Liu Xiang and Liu Yao to write the "Five Elements," and recorded the discourses and deeds of Zou Meng, Xia Hou Sheng, Jing Fang, Gu Yong, Quiman and others, stopping at Wang Mang, Bo Tong Xiang Rui variation, to support the "Spring and Autumn."

古文：综而为言，凡有三术。
现代文：综合地说，共有三种方法。
English: Broadly speaking, there are three methods.

古文：其一曰，君治以道，臣辅克忠，万物咸遂其性，则和气应，休征效，国以安。
现代文：其一，君王以道治理，臣子辅佐尽忠，万物都顺其本性，就会和气相应，吉祥的征兆显现，国家安宁。
English: On the one hand, if the king governs with virtue, and his vassals and subordinates are loyal, everything will follow its nature and will be in harmony, auspicious signs will appear, and the country will be peaceful.

古文：二曰，君违其道，小人在位，众庶失常，则乖气应，咎征效，国以亡。
现代文：其二，君王违背其道，小人在位，万众失去常道，就会有不祥之兆应验，灾凶的征兆显现，国家灭亡。
English: Secondly, if the monarch goes against his way, if a villain takes the throne, and if all the people lose their normal way, then the ominous signs will come to pass, the ominous signs will appear, and the country will perish.

古文：三曰，人君大臣见灾异，退而自省，责躬修德，共御补过，则消祸而福至。
现代文：其三，帝王大臣见到灾异，退而自省，检讨自身修养德行，同心协力弥补过失，那么灾祸就会消除，福运就会降临。
English: Thirdly, when the imperial minister sees the calamity, he will step back and introspect, review his self-cultivation and moral conduct, and make concerted efforts to make up for his mistakes. Then the calamity will be eliminated and good fortune will come.

古文：此其大略也。
现代文：这是其大概。
English: That's about it.

古文：辄举斯例，错综时变，婉而成章，有足观者。
现代文：就举出这方面的例子，交错综述当时的变异，错杂组成篇章，有值得参阅之处。
English: Just to give an example in this regard, the staggered review of the variation at that time, the intricate composition of the chapter, is worth reading.

古文：及司马彪纂光武之后以究汉事，灾眚之说不越前规。
现代文：到司马彪编纂光武帝之后的事来推究汉朝的事情，灾祸之说不超越前规。
English: When Sima Biao compiled the events after Emperor Guangwu to investigate the events of the Han Dynasty, the disaster did not exceed the previous regulations.

古文：今采黄初以降言祥异者，著于此篇。
现代文：现选取黄初以后谈及吉祥灾异的事，写在逭卷中。
English: It is now selected to talk about auspicious and calamitous things after the beginning of the Yellow Emperor, and is written in a scroll.

古文：《经》曰： 五行：一曰水，二曰火，三曰木，四曰金，五曰土。
现代文：《经》说： 五行：一谓水，二谓火，三谓木，四谓金，五谓土。
English: "Scripture" says: Five elements: one is water, two is fire, three is wood, four is gold, and five is earth.

古文：水曰润下，火曰炎上，木曰曲直，金曰从革，土爰稼穑。 
现代文：水谓润下，火谓炎上，木谓曲直，金谓从革，土谓稼穑。 
English: Water is referred to as urinating, fire is referred to as burning, wood is referred to as warping, gold is referred to as tanning, and soil is referred to as tilling.

古文：《传》曰： 田猎不宿，饮食不享，出入不节，夺农时及有奸谋，则木不曲直。 
现代文：《传》说： 田猎不按时归返歇息，饮食不依享献之礼，出入不依规定，违误农时以及有邪恶的谋划，木就不曲直。 
English: "Legend" says: If you don't return from hunting and resting on time, if you don't eat and drink according to the offering, if you don't go in and out according to regulations, if you violate the agricultural time and have evil plans, the tree will not be straight.

古文：说曰：木，东方也。
现代文：解说：木，是东方。
English: Commentary: Wood is the source of the East.

古文：于《易》，地上之木为《观》。
现代文：在《易》，地上之木为《观》。
English: In Yi, the tree on the ground is Guan.

古文：于王事，威仪容貌亦可观者也。
现代文：在王事，是威仪容貌也有可观者。
English: In the royal event, there are some people who have a dignified appearance.

古文：故行步有佩玉之度，登车有和鸾之节，三驱之制，饮食有享献之礼；出入有名，使人以时，务在劝农桑，谋在安百姓，如此，则木得其性矣。
现代文：因而行走有佩玉的制度，登车有挂和鸾铃铛的节度，田猎有三驱的规定，饮食有享献的礼仪；出入有制度，按照时令劝导民众，鼓励农耕桑植，谋划安定百姓，像这样做，木就会得其本性。
English: Therefore, there is a system of wearing beads when walking, a system of hanging bells when boarding a car, a three-wheel drive system for hunting, and a etiquette for eating and drinking; there is a system for entering and exiting, advising the people according to the season, encouraging agricultural mulberry planting, and planning to stabilize the people. If you do this, the tree will get its nature.

古文：若乃田猎驰骋，不反宫室；饮食沈湎，不顾法度；妄兴徭役，以夺农时；作为奸诈，以伤人财，则木失其性矣。
现代文：如果田猎驰骋，不回宫室；沉湎饮食，不顾法度；随意大兴徭役，而违背农时；虚伪邪恶欺诈，伤害民众财物，木就失去本性。
English: If the fields and hunting gallop, do not return to the palace room; heavy diet, regardless of the law; arbitrary large-scale hunting, but contrary to the agricultural time; hypocrisy, evil and fraud, harm the people's property, the tree will lose its nature.

古文：盖工匠之为轮矢者多伤败，及木为变怪，是为不曲直。
现代文：做车轮弓箭的工匠多有伤害，木马精变怪异，造就是不曲直。
English: Craftsmen who make wheeled bows and arrows are more likely to do harm, the Trojan horse essence becomes strange, and the creation is not straight.

古文：魏文帝黄初六年正月，雨，木冰。
现代文：魏文帝黄初六年正月，降雨，木结冰。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of Emperor Weiwenhuang's reign, it rained and the trees froze.

古文：案刘歆说，上阳施不下通，下阴施不上达，故雨，而木为之冰，氛气寒，木不曲直也。
现代文：刘歆说，上有阳而不舆下通，下有阴而没有上达，所以降雨，而木为此结冰，是凶气寒，木不曲直。
English: Liu Yao said that the sun shines on the top, but does not reach the bottom, and the rain falls on the bottom, but does not reach the top, so the rain falls, and the wood freezes for this reason. It is fierce and cold, and the wood is not straight.

古文：刘向曰，冰者阴之盛，木者少阳，贵臣卿大夫象也。
现代文：刘向说，冰是阴之盛，木是少阳，是贵臣卿大夫的象征。
English: Liu Xiang said that ice is the height of yin and wood is the height of yang, which is the symbol of the noble doctor.

古文：此人将有害，则阴气胁木，木先寒，故得雨而冰也。
现代文：此人将受伤害，阴气就会侵木，木先寒，所以有雨就会结冰。
English: This person will be harmed, the gloomy weather will invade the wood, the wood will be cold, so if it rains, it will freeze.

古文：是年六月，利成郡兵蔡方等杀太守徐质，据郡反。
现代文：这年六月，利成郡兵士蔡方等人杀死太守徐质，占据郡地谋反。
English: In June of that year, the soldiers of Licheng County, Cai Fang and others, killed the governor Xu Jian and occupied the county to plot a rebellion.

古文：太守，古之诸侯，贵臣有害之应也。
现代文：太守，如古代的诸侯，这是贵臣有伤害的应验。
English: Tai Shou, like the ancient princes, is the fulfillment of the noblemen's woes.

古文：一说以木冰为木介，介者甲兵之象。
现代文：一说认为木结冰就是木介，介是甲兵的象征。
English: According to one theory, the wood icing is the wood accessory, and the accessory is the symbol of the armored soldier.

古文：是岁，既讨蔡方，又八月天子自将以舟师征吴，戍卒十余万，连旌数百里，临江观兵，又属常雨也。
现代文：当年，讨伐蔡方后，又在八月，天子亲率水军征讨吴国，兵卒十多万人，旌旗连绵敷百里，到长江视察军队，又属于常雨。
English: In that year, after the campaign against Cai Fang, in August, Tianzi Zicheng led the navy to conquer the State of Wu, with more than one hundred thousand soldiers and banners stretching for hundreds of miles, and went to the Yangtze River to inspect the army. It was also raining.

古文：元帝太兴三年二月辛未，雨，木冰。
现代文：元帝太兴三年二月辛未，降雨，木结冰。
English: In February of the third year of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, the weather was cold, it rained, and the trees froze.

古文：后二年，周顗等遇害，是阳施不下通也。
现代文：后二年，周顗等遇害，这是阳气行不与下相通。
English: In the last two years, Zhou Xuan and others were killed, which was the result of the yang qi not communicating with the lower qi.

古文：穆帝永和八年正月乙巳，雨，木冰。
现代文：穆帝永和八年正月乙巳，降雨，木结冰。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of Mu Di Yonghe, it rained, and the trees froze.

古文：是年殷浩北伐，明年军败，十年废黜。
现代文：遣年殷浩北伐，第二年兵败，永和十年被废黜。
English: In the following year, Yin Hao led the Northern Expedition. He was defeated in the second year and deposed in the tenth year of Yonghe.

古文：又曰，荀羡、殷浩北伐，桓温入关之象也。
现代文：又说，荀羡、殷浩北伐，是桓温入盟的征兆。
English: He also said that the Northern Expedition of Yan Zhen and Yin Hao is a sign of the accession of Huanwen to the alliance.

古文：孝武帝太元十四年十二月乙巳，雨，木冰。
现代文：孝武帝左五十四年十二月乙巳，降雨，木结冰。
English: In December of the 54th year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, it rained and the trees froze.

古文：明年二月王恭为北籓，八月庾楷为西籓，九月王国宝为中书令，寻加领军将军，十七年殷仲堪为荆州，虽邪正异规，而终同夷灭，是其应也。
现代文：第二年二月王恭做北部边境统帅，八月庾楷做西部边境统帅，九月王凰查任中书令，不久加领军将军，十七年殷仲堪统领荆州，虽然邪正各有不同，但最终都被消灭，这是他们的应兆。
English: In February of the following year, Wang Qiong became the commander of the northern border, in August, Zou Kai became the commander of the western border, in September, Wang Huancha was appointed as the secretary of the Central Military Commission, and soon became the leader of the army, and in 17th year, Yan Zhongkang became the leader of Jingzhou. Although the evil and the righteous were different, they were all eliminated in the end. This was their response.

古文：吴孙亮建兴二年，诸葛恪征淮南，后所坐听事栋中折。
现代文：吴孙亮建兴二年，诸葛恪征讨淮南，后官府厅堂的屋梁从中折断。
English: In the second year of the construction of Wusunliang, Zhuge was conscripted to fight against Huainan, after which the roof beam of the government hall was broken.

古文：恪妄兴征役，夺农时，作邪谋，伤国财力，故木失其性致毁折也。
现代文：诸葛恪随意增加赋税徭役，违背农时，策划邪恶计谋，损害国家资财物力，所以木失去其性而造成毁坏折断。
English: Zhuge Ke arbitrarily increased the tax collection, violated the agricultural time, planned evil schemes, and damaged the national assets and resources, so the tree lost its nature and caused destruction and fracture.

古文：及旋师而诛灭，于《周易》又为 栋挠之凶 也。
现代文：等到他撤军返回就被诛杀灭族，在《周易》上又叫 栋挠之凶 。
English: When he returned from the retreat, he was beaten to death, and in "Zhou Yi" he was called "the villain of Dongzhe."

古文：武帝太康五年五月，宣帝庙地陷，梁折。
现代文：武帝太康五年五月，宣帝庙地基塌陷，梁折断。
English: In May of the fifth year of Emperor Wu Taikang, the foundation of the Emperor Xuan Temple collapsed and the beams broke.

古文：八年正月，太庙殿又陷，改作庙，筑基及泉。
现代文：八年正月，太庙殿又塌陷，改建太庙，修筑地基及地下室。
English: In the first month of the eighth year, the Great Temple collapsed again. The Great Temple was rebuilt, and the foundation and basement were built.

古文：其年九月，遂更营新庙，远致名材，杂以铜柱，陈勰为匠，作者六万人。
现代文：这年九月，就重新修建新庙，从远方找来名贵木材，杂用铜柱，陈勰任匠官，修造者有六万人。
English: In September of that year, the new temple was rebuilt, with precious wood and miscellaneous copper columns brought from far away, with Chen Yu as the master craftsman, and 60,000 people involved in the construction.

古文：至十年四月乃成，十一月庚寅梁又折。
现代文：到十年四月才建成，十一月庚寅梁又折断。
English: It was not completed until April of the tenth year, and in November, the Geng Yin Liang was broken again.

古文：天戒若曰，地陷者分离之象，梁折者木不曲直也。
现代文：天戒这样说，地塌陷是分离的征兆，梁柱折断是木不曲直。
English: According to the heavenly commandment, the earth's collapse is a sign of separation, and the broken beam and column are not straight.

古文：明年帝崩，而王室遂乱。
现代文：第二年武帝去世，王室于是战乱。
English: The following year, Emperor Wu died, and the royal family was thrown into turmoil.

古文：惠帝太安二年，成都王颖使陆机率众向京都，击长沙王乂，及军始引而牙竿折，俄而战败，机被诛，颖遂奔溃，卒赐死。
现代文：惠帝太安二年，成都王司马颖派陆机率领部众去京都，攻打长沙王司马义，军队刚刚出发牙旗旗杆就折断，不久后战败，陆机被杀，司马颖溃散逃跑，最终被赐死。
English: In the second year of Hui Di Tai'an, Chengdu Wang Sima Ying sent a land plane and led his troops to Kyoto to attack Changsha Wang Sima Yi. As soon as the army set out, the flagpole was broken, and soon after the defeat, the land plane was killed, Sima Ying scattered and fled, and was eventually killed.

古文：此奸谋之罚，木不曲直也。
现代文：这是对邪恶谋划的惩罚，木不曲直。
English: It's a punishment for evil planning.

古文：元帝太兴四年，王敦在武昌，铃下仪仗生华如莲华，五六日而萎落。
现代文：元帝太兴四年，王敦在武昌，铃下仪仗生出像莲花一样的花，五六日后才枯萎败落。
English: In the four years of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, Wang Dun was in Wuchang, and under the bell, a lotus-like flower bloomed, which withered and fell five or six days later.

古文：此木失其性。
现代文：遣是木失去本性。
English: A sentient tree loses its nature.

古文：干宝以为狂华生枯木，又在铃阁之间，言威仪之富，荣华之盛，皆如狂华之发，不可久也。
现代文：干宝认为乱花生在枯木，又在铃合间，是说威仪的富丽，荣华极多，都像乱花的生发，不能够长久。
English: The dry treasure thinks that the wild peanuts in the dead wood and between the bells, is to say that the splendor of the dignity, the glory is very much, are like the hair of the wild flowers, can not be long.

古文：其后王敦终以逆命加戮其尸。
现代文：此后王敦终因叛逆遭到诛杀。
English: After that, Wang Dun was finally killed for his rebellion.

古文：一说亦华孽也，于《周易》为 枯杨生华 。
现代文：一说也是花孽，在《周易》中是 枯杨生花 。
English: It is also a flower iniquity, in "Zhou Yi" it is withered poplars.

古文：桓玄始篡，龙旂竿折。
现代文：桓玄篡位，龙旗旗杆就折断。
English: When Kuan Xuan usurped the throne, the dragon flagpole broke.

古文：时玄田猎无度，饮食奢恣，土木妨农，又多奸谋，故木失其性。
现代文：当时担室田猎无度，饮食奢侈，大兴土木妨碍农时，又多有邪恶的图谋，所以木失去本性。
English: At that time, there was a lot of hunting in the backyard, extravagant food, large-scale construction hindered farming, and there were many evil plots, so the tree lost its nature.

古文：天戒若曰，旂所以挂三辰，章著明也，旂竿之折，高明去矣。
现代文：天戒这样说，旌旗是用来悬挂日月星三辰，显扬光明的，旗竿折断，高处的光明离去了。
English: According to the celestial ring, the banner is used to hang the sun, the moon and the three stars, showing the bright, the flagpole is broken, and the light at the top is gone.

古文：玄果败。
现代文：担玄终于败亡。
English: Tang Xuan was finally defeated.

古文：《传》： 弃法津，逐功臣，杀太子，以妾为妻，则火不炎上。 
现代文：《传》说： 背弃法律，驱逐功臣，杀死太子，以妾作妻，火就不炎上。 
English: "Legend" says: If you disobey the law, expel a meritorious subject, kill a crown prince, and take a concubine as a wife, the fire will not catch fire.

古文：说曰：火，南方，扬光辉为明者也。
现代文：解说：火，南方，是扬光辉为光明之物。
English: Explanation: Fire, the South, is a thing that radiates light.

古文：其于王者，南面向明而治。
现代文：它对于君王来说，是面向南方光明而统治。
English: It is for kings to rule towards the southern light.

古文：《书》云： 知人则哲，能官人。 
现代文：《书》中说： 知人就是贤明，能任官。 
English: In the "Book" it says: Acquaintances are wise and can hold office.

古文：故尧舜举群贤而命之朝，远四佞而放诸野。
现代文：所以尧、舜提拔众贤才任用他们在朝为官，远离四个奸邪之人将他们流放到野外。
English: Therefore, Zou and Zou promoted all the sages and appointed them as officials in the government, and banished them to the wilderness far away from the four evil-doers.

古文：孔子曰： 浸润之谮，肤受之诉，不行焉，可谓明矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 逐渐加深的谗言，不实之辞的诽谤，都不起作用，可以称之为明。 
English: Confucius said, "Gradually deepening criticism and slander of untruthful words do not work. It can be called enlightenment."

古文：贤佞分别，官人有序，帅由旧章，敬重功勋，殊别嫡庶，如此则火得其性矣。
现代文：贤明之人和好邪之人分开，任命官员有法，统帅遵循旧法，敬爱重用有功之人，区分嫡出和庶出的子孙，这样做火就会得其本性。
English: Separating the wise from the wicked, appointing officials who have the law, commanding officers who follow the old law, honoring and reusing meritorious people, and distinguishing between legitimate and illegitimate children. In this way, fire will gain its nature.

古文：若乃信道不笃，或耀虚伪，谗夫昌，邪胜正，则火失其性矣。
现代文：如果信奉道而不诚，或虚妄奸诈盛行，谗佞之人得势，邪恶胜过正直，火就失去其本性。
English: If the followers of the Way are dishonest, or if falsehood and treachery prevail, or if the scoundrels gain power, or if evil prevails over righteousness, then fire loses its nature.

古文：自上而降，及滥炎妄起，焚宗庙，烧宫馆，虽兴师众，不能救也，是为火不炎上。
现代文：从上而降，及至肆虐的烈火乱起，焚烧宗庙，烧毁宫馆，虽然兴师动众，也不能救，造就是火不炎上。
English: From the top down, and to the raging fire, burning the ancestral temple, burning the palace, although the teacher is moving, it can not be saved, because the fire is not on fire.

古文：魏明帝太和五年五月，清商殿灾。
现代文：魏明帝太和五年五月，清商殿遭火灾。
English: In May of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Ming of Wei and Taihe, the Qing Commercial Palace was destroyed by fire.

古文：初，帝为平原王，纳河南虞氏为妃。
现代文：当初，魏明帝为平原王，纳河南虞氏为妃。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wei Ming was the king of the plains, and Nan Yu of the Na River was his wife.

古文：及即位，不以为后，更立典虞车工卒毛嘉女为后。
现代文：等到即皇帝位，却不将她立为皇后，另外立典虞车工卒垩台的女儿为皇后。
English: However, he did not appoint her as empress until he became emperor. In addition, he appointed the daughter of the cartwright Zou Xingtai as empress.

古文：后本仄微，非所宜升，以妾为妻之罚也。
现代文：皇后本来地位低微，不应当升为皇后，这是以妾为妻的惩罚。
English: The position of the empress was originally low, and she should not have been promoted to empress. This was the punishment for taking a concubine as a wife.

古文：青龙元年六月，洛阳宫鞠室灾。
现代文：青龙元年六月，洛阳宫鞠室火灾。
English: In June of the first year of the Qing Dynasty, a fire broke out in the bowing room of Luoyang Palace.

古文：二年四月，崇华殿灾，延于南阁，缮复之。
现代文：二年四月，崇华殿火灾，蔓延到南合，修缮复原。
English: In April of the second year, the fire of the Chonghua Hall spread to Nanhe, and it was repaired and restored.

古文：至三年七月，此殿又灾。
现代文：到三年七月，此殿又失火。
English: In July of the following year, the hall caught fire again.

古文：帝问高堂隆： 此何咎也？
现代文：魏明帝问高堂隆： 遣是什么遇错?
English: Wei Mingdi asked Gaodanglong: What's wrong with sending him?

古文：于礼宁有祈禳之义乎？ 
现代文：礼仪上有祈福禳灾的说法吗? 
English: Is there a saying in the etiquette about praying for good fortune and for calamity?

古文：对曰： 夫灾变之发，皆所以明教诫也，惟率礼修德可以胜之。
现代文：回答说： 灾变的发生，都是来显示教诲惩戒的。衹有遵循礼法修明德行才可以克服。
English: He replied, "Disasters happen to show the teachings and punishments, and they can only be overcome by following the etiquette and cultivating virtue.

古文：《易传》曰： 上不俭，下不节，孽火烧其室。 又曰： 君高其台，天火为灾。 此人君苟饰宫室，不知百姓空竭，故天应之以旱，火从高殿起也。
现代文：《易传》说： 上不勤俭，下不节约，罪火就会烧其室，又说： 君王高筑其台，天火就会成灾，这是君主一味修饰宫室，不知道百姓财空力竭，所以上天以干旱应验，火从高殿烧起。
English: "I Chuan" said: If the upper is not diligent and frugal, and the lower is not economical, the sin and fire will burn its room. It also said: If the king builds his table high, the heavenly fire will become a disaster. This is the monarch's obsession with beautifying the palace, not knowing that the people's wealth and strength are exhausted. Therefore, the heavens fulfilled the test with drought, and the fire burned from the high temple.

古文：案《旧占》曰： 灾火之发，皆以台榭宫室为诫。 
现代文：依《旧占》说： 火灾的发生，都是以台榭宫室作为惩诚。 
English: According to "Old Occupation," it is said that the occurrence of fire is always punished by the Taiyu Palace Room.

古文：今宜罢散作役，务从节约，清扫所灾之处，不敢于此有所营造，萐莆嘉禾必生此地，以报陛下虔恭之德。 
现代文：现在应当停止劳役，励行节约，清扫受灾的地方，不敢在逭裹再进行营建，象征吉瑞的草和禾稻一定会在这裹长出，回报陛下虔诚恭敬的德行。 
English: Now is the time to stop forced labor, practice thrift, clean up the affected areas, and no longer dare to build in bundles. The grass and rice that symbolize Jiri will surely grow in these bundles, repaying His Majesty's pious and respectful virtue.

古文：帝不从。
现代文：明帝不听。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：遂复崇华殿，改曰九龙。
现代文：于是修复崇华殿，改名九龙。
English: As a result, Chonghua Hall was restored and renamed Kowloon Hall.

古文：以郡国前后言龙见者九，故以为名。
现代文：因各郡国先后九次称有龙出现，所以以此为名。
English: It was named after the nine times a dragon was said to have appeared in each county.

古文：多弃法度，疲众逞欲，以妾为妻之应也。
现代文：这是背弃法度，使民众疲惫满足自己私欲，以妾作为妻的应兆。
English: This is a betrayal of the law, making the people tired to satisfy their own desires, with a concubine as a wife's token.

古文：吴孙亮建兴元年十二月，武昌端门灾，改作，端门又灾。
现代文：吴孙亮建兴元年十二月，武昌端门失火，改建，端门又失火。
English: In December of the first year of Wu Sun Liang's reign of construction, the Wuchang terminal gate was destroyed by fire, rebuilt, and the terminal gate was destroyed by fire again.

古文：内殿门者，号令所出；殿者，听政之所。
现代文：内殿门，是号令所出之处；殿，是听政之地。
English: The gate of the inner hall is the place where the call goes out; the hall is the place to listen to the government.

古文：是时诸葛恪执政，而矜慢放肆，孙峻总禁旅，而险害终著。
现代文：逭时诸葛恪执政， 傲慢放肆，逊些总管禁卫军，而凶险危害终于显现。
English: At that time, Zhuge was in power, arrogant and presumptuous, and inferior to the commander-in-chief of the Praetorian Guard, and the dangerous danger finally emerged.

古文：武昌，孙氏尊号所始。
现代文：亘媪，是珏压建国称帝的地方。
English: Wuhan is the place where the founding of the country and the proclamation of the emperor took place.

古文：天戒若曰，宜除其贵要之首者，恪果丧众殄人，峻授政于綝，綝废亮也。
现代文：夭戒这样说，应除去达官贵人的首领，诸葛恪果然失去部众残害人民，茎堕将政权交给逊进，逐餸废黜彊台。
English: Xiao Cao thus said that the leaders of high-ranking officials and nobles should be removed, Zhuge Ke lost his subordinates who were brutalizing the people, and handed over the power to the subordinates, and abolished the throne one by one.

古文：或曰，孙权毁撤武昌以增太初宫，诸葛恪有迁都意，更起门殿，事非时宜，故见灾也。
现代文：另有一说，孙权放弃武昌来增建太初宫，诸葛恪有迁都的想法，另建门殿，事情不合时宜，所以出现火灾。
English: Another theory is that Sun Quan abandoned Wuchang to build an addition to the Imperial Palace. Zhuge had the idea of moving the capital and building another gate, but the timing was not right, which is why the fire occurred.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 君不思道，厥妖火烧宫。 
现代文：塞廛《易传》说： 君王不思道义，妖火就烧宫殿。 
English: "I Chuan" said: The monarch does not think about morality, and the demon fire burns the palace.

古文：太平元年二月朔，建鄴火，人之火也。
现代文：太平元年二月初一，建邺起火，是人为的火灾。
English: On the first day of February in the first year of the Taiping era, Jianye caught fire. It was a man-made fire.

古文：是秋，孙綝始执政，矫以亮诏杀吕据、滕胤。
现代文：遣年秋天，孙琳开始执政，假托孙亮的诏书杀死旦墟、坠凰。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Sun Lin began to govern. The imperial edict issued under the guise of Sun Liang killed off the Han Ruins and brought about the fall of the Xiao Dynasty.

古文：明年，又辄杀硃异。
现代文：第二年，又擅杀塞墨。
English: The following year, he again killed off the ink.

古文：弃法律逐功臣之罚也。
现代文：这是对违背法律驱逐功臣的惩罚。
English: This is the punishment for expelling a meritorious person in violation of the law.

古文：孙休永安五年二月，城西门北楼灾。
现代文：孙休永安五年二月，城西门北楼遭火灾。
English: In February of the fifth year of Sun Xiu Yong'an, the north tower of the west gate of the city suffered a fire.

古文：六年十月，石头小城火，烧西南百八十丈。
现代文：六年十月，石头小城着火，烧西南一百八十丈。
English: In October of the sixth year, the stone town caught fire and burned 180 meters to the southwest.

古文：是时嬖人张布专擅国势，多行无礼，而韦昭、盛冲终斥不用，兼遣察战等为内史，惊扰州郡，致使交止反乱，是其咎也。
现代文：逭时受宠爱的张布专断国政，多做无礼之事，而童堕、盛迹终被贬斥不用，又派遣塞盐等作内史，骚扰各州郡，造成交耻叛乱，这是其灾祸。
English: Zhang Bo, who was favored in his youth, dictated national politics and did many impolite things. However, he was eventually scorned and dismissed. He also sent salt to be used for internal history, harassed various states and counties, and caused a disgraceful rebellion. This was his disaster.

古文：孙皓建衡二年三月，大火，烧万余家，死者七百人。
现代文：孙皓建衡二年三月，大火，烧一万多人家，死七百人。
English: In March of the second year of Sun Yat-sen's reign, a fire destroyed more than ten thousand homes and killed seven hundred people.

古文：案《春秋》齐大灾，刘向以为桓公好内，听女口，妻妾数更之罚也。
现代文：《春秋》说齐大火灾，刘向认为是桓公喜爱内室，听从女人的话，妻妾多次更换的惩罚。
English: "Spring and Autumn" said that there was a big fire, and Liu Xiang thought that Huan Gong liked the inner room, listened to the woman's words, and changed his wife and concubine many times.

古文：时皓制令诡暴，荡弃法度，劳臣名士，诛斥甚众，后宫万余，女谒数行，其中隆宠佩皇后玺绶者又多矣，故有大火。
现代文：当时忧壁法令阴险残暴，完全背弃了法度，有功大臣和贤名人士，遭诛杀贬斥的很多，后宫有万余人，听命的女官有很多队列，其中特别宠爱佩带皇后玺印绶带的又很多，所以有大火。
English: At that time, the Sorrowful Wall Decree was insidious and cruel, completely abandoning the rule of law. There were many meritorious ministers and famous people who were killed, there were more than ten thousand people in the harem, and there were many queues of obedient female officials. Among them, there were many who were particularly fond of wearing the Queen's seal and ribbon, so there was a big fire.

古文：武帝太康八年三月乙丑，震灾西阁楚王所止坊及临商观窗。
现代文：武帝太康八年三月乙丑，地震失火烧西合楚王居留的坊和临商观窗。
English: In March of the eighth year of Emperor Wu Taikang's reign, an earthquake and fire burned down the residence of King Xihechu and the window of a nearby shop.

古文：十年四月癸丑，崇贤殿灾。
现代文：十年四月癸丑，崇贤殿火灾。
English: In April of the 10th year, a fire broke out in the Soken-den.

古文：十一月庚辰，含章鞠室、修成堂前庑、景坊东屋、晖章殿南阁火。
现代文：十一月庚辰，含章鞠室、脩成堂前廉、景坊东屋、晖章殿南合失火。
English: In November, Gengchen, including Zhangjiajie Room, Shicheng Hall, Jingfang East Hall, and Shizhang Hall South Hall caught fire.

古文：时有上书曰： 汉王氏五侯，兄弟迭任，今杨氏三公，并在大位，故天变屡见，窃为陛下忧之。 
现代文：当时有上奏说： 汉王氏五侯，兄弟相继任职，现在杨氏三公，同在高位，所以上天多次出现灾变，私下裹为陛下担忧此事。 
English: At that time, there was a report that said: The five princes of the Han Dynasty, brothers successively served, and now the three princes of the Yang Dynasty, are also in high positions. Therefore, there have been many disasters in heaven. Privately, His Majesty is worried about this.

古文：由是杨珧求退。
现代文：因此杨珧请求退职。
English: Therefore, Yang Hui requested to retire.

古文：是时帝纳冯紞之间，废张华之功，听杨骏之谗，离卫瓘之宠，此逐功臣之罚也。
现代文：逭时武帝听从了冯鱿的挑拨离间，废除张华的功勋，听信了杨骏的谗言，不再宠爱卫璀，这是对贬斥功臣的惩罚。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu listened to Feng Qi's incitement to sow discord, abolished Zhang Hua's meritorious service, listened to Yang Qi's admonition, and no longer favored Wei Wei, which was a punishment for disparaging meritorious service.

古文：明年，宫车宴驾。
现代文：第二年，皇帝死去。
English: The following year, the emperor died.

古文：其后楚王承窃发之旨，戮害二公，身亦不免。
现代文：此后楚王禀承暗中传达的旨意，杀害二公，他自己也没有幸免。
English: After that, King Chu carried out the secretly conveyed intention to kill the two princes, and he himself was not spared.

古文：震灾其坊，又天意乎。
现代文：地震毁坏他的坊，也是天意吧。
English: It must have been God's will that the earthquake destroyed his village.

古文：惠帝元康五年闰月庚寅，武库火。
现代文：惠帝元康五年闰月庚寅，军需仓库失火。
English: In the leap year of the fifth year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, the munitions warehouse caught fire.

古文：张华疑有乱，先命固守，然后救火。
现代文：张华疑心有变乱，先命令固守。然后救火。
English: Zhang Hua suspected that there was a disturbance. First, he ordered to hold fast. Then, he put out the fire.

古文：是以累代异宝，王莽头，孔子屐，汉高祖断白蛇剑及二百八万器械，一时荡尽。
现代文：因此历代的珍奇宝物，王莽头、孔子屐、漠高祖斩白蛇剑及二百万人的器械，一时荡然无存。
English: As a result, the precious treasures of all ages, Wang Mangtuo, Confucius's hammer, the white snake sword of the founder of the Great Wall of China, and the equipment of two million people, all disappeared at once.

古文：是后愍怀太子见杀之罚也。
现代文：这是后来愍怀太子被杀的惩罚。
English: This was the punishment for the later murder of Prince Gong Huai.

古文：天戒若曰，夫设险击柝，所以固其国，储积戒器，所以戒不虞。
现代文：天戒这样说，设险要之地的守卫警备，是为了保卫国家，储备积存兵器，是为了防备意想不到的情况。
English: According to Heaven's Commandments, the purpose of setting up guards in critical areas is to protect the country, and the purpose of stockpiling weapons is to prepare for unexpected situations.

古文：今冢嗣将倾，社稷将泯，禁兵无所复施，皇旅又将谁卫。
现代文：现在国家将要倾覆，社稷将要灭亡，禁卫部队无处可用，皇室军队又将保卫谁。
English: Now the country is about to fall, society is about to die, the imperial guard is nowhere to be found, and who will the imperial army defend?

古文：帝后不悟，终丧四海，是其应也。
现代文：帝后没有醒悟，终于失去天下，这是其应兆。
English: Empress Dowager did not wake up, finally lost the world, this is its response.

古文：张华、阎纂皆曰，武库火而氐羌反，太子见废，则四海可知。 
现代文：张华、间纂都说， 军需仓库失火而氐羌叛乱，太子被废黜，那么天下形势可以料知了。 
English: Zhang Hua and the mediator both said that if the munitions warehouse caught fire and led to a rebellion, and the prince was deposed, then the situation in the world could be predicted.

古文：八年十一月，高原陵火。
现代文：八年十一月，高原陵失火。
English: In November 1988, the Kogen Mausoleum caught fire.

古文：是时贾后凶恣，贾谧擅朝，恶积罪稔，宜见诛绝。
现代文：遣时买后凶恶恣意，贾谧专断朝政，罪恶深重，应当被诛灭。
English: The cruel and arbitrary way in which Jia Zhang arbitrarily decided on the policies of the dynasty was a serious crime that should be eradicated.

古文：天戒若曰，臣妾之不可者，虽亲贵莫比，犹宜忍而诛之，如吾燔高原陵也。
现代文：天戒这样说，臣妾中的不良者，即使无比亲密尊贵，仍应抑制感情而诛减他们，就像天焚烧高原陵一样。
English: Thus says the heavenly precept, the bad ones among the vassals and concubines, even if they are extremely intimate and honorable, should still restrain their feelings and reduce them, just as the sky burns the highland mausoleum.

古文：帝既眊弱，而张华又不纳裴頠、刘卞之谋，故后遂与谧杀太子也。
现代文：惠帝昏聩懦弱，张华又不采纳裴颢、刘卞的计谋，所以贾后就同贾谧杀死了太子。
English: Hui Di was dizzy and weak, and Zhang Hua did not adopt the stratagems of Pei Jun and Liu Jun, so Jia Hou and Jia Jun killed the prince.

古文：干宝以为 高原陵火，太子废之应。
现代文：干宝认为 高原陵着火，是太子废黜的应兆。
English: Ganbao believes that the fire at the plateau mausoleum is a sign of the dethronement of the crown prince.

古文：汉武帝世，高园便殿火，董仲舒对与此占同 。
现代文：漠武帝时代，高园的便殿失火，董仲舒的应对和此占相同 。
English: In the era of Emperor Mengwu, the toilet of Gaoyuan was on fire, and Dong Zhongshu's response was the same.

古文：永康元年，帝纳皇后羊氏，后将入宫，衣中忽有火，众咸怪之。
现代文：永康元年，惠帝娶皇后羊氏，皇后将要入宫，衣中忽然有火，众人都奇怪此事。
English: In the first year of Yongkang, Emperor Hui married Empress Yang. When the Empress was about to enter the palace, there was suddenly a fire in her robe. Everyone was surprised by this.

古文：永兴元年，成都王遂废后，处之金墉城。
现代文：永兴元年，成都王废黜王后，让她住到金墉城。
English: In the first year of Yongxing, the King of Chengdu dethroned the Empress Dowager and sent her to live in Jinyuan City.

古文：是后还立，立而复废者四。
现代文：此后复立，立后又废黜，共反复了四次。
English: Since then, he has been reinstated and then deposed four times.

古文：又诏赐死，荀籓表全之。
现代文：又下韶赐她死，荀藩上奏表保全了她。
English: She was sentenced to death by the court, but she was spared by the court.

古文：虽来还在位，然忧逼折辱，终古未闻。
现代文：虽然回来恢复皇后位，但是这样逼迫羞辱，自古以来没有听说过。
English: Although she returned to resume her position as empress, she was persecuted and humiliated in a way that had not been heard of since ancient times.

古文：此孽火之应也。
现代文：这是孽火的应兆。
English: It's a sure sign of iniquity.

古文：永兴二年七月甲午，尚书诸曹火起，延崇礼闼及阁道。
现代文：永兴二年七月甲午，尚书省各处起火，蔓延到崇礼闺和阁道。
English: On the afternoon of July 1st, Yongxing Year 2, fires broke out all over Shangshu Province, spreading to Chongleibu and Jiaodou.

古文：夫百揆王化之本，王者弃法津之应也。
现代文：百官是教化的根本，是君王背弃法律的应兆。
English: A hundred officials are the root of indoctrination, and a sign of the monarch's betrayal of the law.

古文：后清河王覃入嗣，不终于位，又杀太子之罚也。
现代文：后来清河王司马覃入宫继位，没有在位上善终，也是杀死太子的惩罚。
English: Later, the Qing River King Sima Qian entered the palace to succeed to the throne. If he did not die well on the throne, it was also a punishment to kill the prince.

古文：孝怀帝永嘉四年十一月，襄阳火，烧死者三千余人。
现代文：孝怀帝永嘉四年十一月，襄盐火灾，烧死三千多人。
English: In November of the 4th year of Xiao Huai Di Yongjia, there was a fire in Xiangyan, which killed more than 3,000 people.

古文：是时王如自号大将军、司雍二州牧，众四五万，攻略郡县。
现代文：逭时王垫自称大将军、司雍二州牧，部众四五万人，攻占郡县。
English: At that time, Wang Mat claimed to be a great general and the leader of two states, with a total of 450,000 people, and conquered counties.

古文：此下陵上，阳失其节之应也。
现代文：这是下凌上，阳气失去节制的应兆。
English: This is a sign that the yang has lost its restraint.

古文：元帝太兴中，王敦镇武昌，武昌灾，火起，兴众救之，救于此而发于彼，东西南北数十处俱应，数日不绝。
现代文：元帝太兴年间，王敦镇守武昌，武昌遭火灾，火起，叫民众救火，救了此处别处又起，东西南北数十处都相应起火，数日不停。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taheung of the Yuan Dynasty, Wang Dun Town guarded Wuchang. Wuchang was on fire, the fire broke out, the people were called to save the fire, the fire was saved here and elsewhere, dozens of places in the east, west, north and south were on fire, and it lasted for several days.

古文：旧说所谓 滥炎妄起，虽兴师众，不能救之 之谓也。
现代文：旧说所称 肆虐之火妄起，即使兴师动众也不能救灭 就是指此。
English: This is what was meant by the old saying, "A raging fire cannot be put out even by arousing teachers and rousing the masses."

古文：干宝以为 此臣而君行，亢阳失节，是为王敦陵上，有无君之心，故灾也。 
现代文：王宣认为 这是臣子有君王的行为，阳气失去节制，是因为王敦欺上，有漠视君王的心，所以有火灾 。
English: Wang Xuan thought that this was the behavior of a vassal with a king, the yang lost control, because Wang Dun cheated and had a heart of ignoring the king, so there was a fire.

古文：永昌二年正月癸巳，京师大火。
现代文：永昌二年正月癸巳，京都出现大火灾。
English: In the first month of the second year of Yongchang, a big fire broke out in Kyoto.

古文：三月，饶安、东光、安陵三县火，烧七千余家，死者万五千人。
现代文：三月，饶安、东光、安陵三县火灾，烧七千余家，死者一万五千人。
English: In March, fires in three counties of Raoan, Dongguang and Anling burned more than 7,000 homes and killed 15,000 people.

古文：明帝太宁元年正月，京都火。
现代文：明帝太宁元年正月，京都起火。
English: In the first month of the first year of the reign of Emperor Tanin, Kyoto caught fire.

古文：是时王敦威侮朝廷，多行无礼，内外臣下咸怀怨毒，极阴生阳也。
现代文：这时王敦侵侮朝廷，行为大多很无礼，朝廷内外臣下都心怀怨恨愤怒，是极阴生阳。
English: At this time, Wang Dun insulted the imperial court, and most of his actions were very rude. Both inside and outside the imperial court, his vassals harbored resentment and anger. It was the yin to his yang.

古文：成帝咸和二年五月，京师火。
现代文：成帝咸和二年五月，京师失火。
English: In May of the second year of Emperor Chengdi's reign of peace, the imperial capital was destroyed by fire.

古文：康帝建元元年七月庚申，吴郡灾。
现代文：康帝建元元年七月庚申，吴郡火灾。
English: In July of the first year of Kangdi Jianyuan, there was a fire in Goshun, Wuxi County.

古文：穆帝永和五年六月，震灾石季龙太武殿及两庙端门。
现代文：穆帝永和五年六月，地震火灾烧互至董主盏殿及两庙端门。
English: In June of the fifth year of Mu Di Yonghe, the earthquake and fire burned all the way to the Dongzhulian Hall and the two temple gates.

古文：震灾月余乃灭，金石皆尽。
现代文：地震火灾一个多月才止灭，金石全部烧毁。
English: It took more than a month for the earthquake and fire to be extinguished, and all the precious stones were burned.

古文：其后季龙死，大乱，遂灭亡。
现代文：这一年石季龙死，大乱，不久灭亡。
English: This year, Shijilong died, there was a great turmoil, and he soon perished.

古文：海西公太和中，郗愔为会稽太守。
现代文：海西公太和年间，郗愔任会稽太守。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Haixi, he was appointed as the auditor of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：六月大旱灾，火烧数千家。延及山阴仓米数百万斛，炎烟蔽天，不可扑灭。
现代文：六月大旱火灾，火烧敷千家，蔓延烧毁山阴仓的数百万斛稻米，烈焰浓烟遮蔽天空，不能扑灭。
English: In June, there was a big fire caused by drought. The fire burned thousands of homes and spread to destroy millions of bags of paddy rice stored in mountain silos. The flames and thick smoke covered the sky and could not be extinguished.

古文：此亦桓温强盛，将废海西，极阴生阳之应也。
现代文：逭也是但逞强盛，将要废除遵酉盆，极阴生阳的应兆。
English: The dragonfly is also strong and vigorous, but it will be abolished, and it will be a good omen for the extreme yin and yang.

古文：孝武帝宁康元年三月，京师风火大起。
现代文：孝武帝宁康元年三月，京师发生大风大火灾。
English: In March of the first year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, a great fire broke out in Beijing.

古文：是时桓温入朝，志在陵上，少主践位，人怀忧恐，此与太宁火事同。
现代文：这时桓温入朝，志在篡位，年幼的君主登基，人们心怀忧虑恐惧，遣与太宁年间失火的事相同。
English: At this time, Kuan-Wen entered the imperial court, aspiring to usurp the throne, a young monarch ascended to the throne, and people were worried and fearful. It was the same with the fire during the reign of Taining.

古文：太元十年正月，国子学生因风放火，焚房百余间。
现代文：太元十年正月，国子监学生乘风放火，焚烧一百多间房屋。
English: In the first month of the 10th year of the Taiyuan era, the students of the National Children's Supervision Center set fire to the wind and burned more than a hundred houses.

古文：是后考课不厉，赏黜无章。
现代文：此后考试核查不严，赏罚没有章法。
English: Since then, examination verification has been lax, and there are no rules for rewards and punishments.

古文：盖有育才之名，而无收贤之实，此不哲之罚先兆也。
现代文：有育才的名，而没有招收贤才之实，这是对不贤明惩罚的先兆。
English: Having the name of nurturing talent, but not the reality of recruiting talent, is a harbinger of punishment for the unwise.

古文：十三年十二月乙未，延贤堂灾。
现代文：十三年十二月乙未，延贤堂发生火灾。
English: On December 13th, a fire broke out in Yan Xian Hall.

古文：是月丙申，螽斯则百堂及客馆、骠骑府库皆灾。
现代文：当月丙申，螽斯则百堂和客馆、骠骑府库都起大火。
English: In the same month, the fire broke out in hundreds of churches, guesthouses, and the cavalry prefectural treasury in Gansu.

古文：于时朝多弊政，衰陵日兆，不哲之罚，皆有象类。主相不悟，终至乱亡。
现代文：当时朝政有很多弊端，衰败益显现，不贤明的惩罚，都有征兆，君主臣子没有醒悟，终于败亡。
English: At that time, the government of the dynasty had many drawbacks, with signs of decay and inefficiency, and unwise punishments. The princes and courtiers did not wake up, and finally fell.

古文：会稽王道子宠幸尼及姏母，各树用其亲戚，乃至出入宫掖，礼见人主。
现代文：会稽王道子宠幸尼姑和老年妇女，各任用其亲戚，竟至出入皇宫，拜见君主。
English: Daozi Wang, the Grand Inquisitor, favored nuns and old women, and each of them appointed their relatives to go in and out of the palace to visit the monarch.

古文：天戒若曰，登延贤堂及客馆者多非其人，故灾之也。
现代文：天戒这样说，登上延贤堂和客馆的多是不应该进入遣裹的人，所以遭受火灾。
English: According to the heavenly decree, most of the people who boarded the Yan Xian Hall and the guest house were not supposed to enter the enclosure, so they suffered from the fire.

古文：又，孝武帝更不立皇后，宠幸微贱张夫人，夫人骄妒，皇子不繁，乖 螽斯则百 之道，故灾其殿焉。
现代文：又，孝武帝又不立皇后，宠幸地位低微卑贱的张夫人，夫人骄横嫉妒，皇子不多，达背了《诗经》所说的 螽斯则百 的道理，所以其殿遭受火灾。
English: In addition, Emperor Xiaowu did not appoint a queen, but favored the lowly and humble Lady Zhang. The lady was arrogant and jealous, and there were not many princes, which was contrary to the principle of the "hundreds of virtues" mentioned in the "Book of Songs." Therefore, his palace suffered a fire.

古文：道子复赏赐不节，故府库被灾，斯亦其罚也。
现代文：道子又赏赐无度，所以府库遭火灾，遣也是对他的惩罚。
English: Taoism also rewards excessively, so the prefectural treasury was set on fire, and the expulsion was also a punishment for him.

古文：安帝隆安二年三月，龙舟二乘灾，是水沴火也。
现代文：安帝隆安二年三月，两艘龙舟着火，这是水克火。
English: In March of the second year of An Di Long'an, two dragon boats caught fire.

古文：其后桓玄篡位，帝乃播越。
现代文：此后桓玄篡位，安帝流亡。
English: After that, Kangen usurped the throne, and Emperor Andi went into exile.

古文：天戒若曰，王者流迁，不复御龙舟，故灾之耳。
现代文：天戒这样说，君王流亡，不能再乘龙舟，所以遭火灾。
English: According to the celestial oracle, the king was exiled and could no longer take the dragon boat, so it was set on fire.

古文：元兴元年八月庚子，尚书下舍曹火。
现代文：元兴元年八月庚子，尚书省下舍官署失火。
English: In August of the first year of the Yuanxing Dynasty, the official residence of Geng Zi of the Ministry of Education and Culture was destroyed by fire.

古文：时桓玄遥录尚书，故天火，示不复居也。
现代文：此时桓玄遥领录尚书，所以上天降下火，示意不能再留。
English: At this time, Kuan Xuan Yao received a letter, so he sent fire down from heaven, indicating that he could no longer stay.

古文：三年，卢循攻略广州，刺史吴隐之闭城固守。
现代文：三年，卢循攻打广州，刺史吴隐之关闭城门坚守。
English: In the third year, Lu Xun attacked Guangzhou and stabbed Wu Yingzhi to close the city gate.

古文：其十月壬戌夜，火起。
现代文：十月壬戌夜，火起。
English: In the evening of October, the fire broke out.

古文：时百姓避寇盈满城内，隐之惧有应贼者，但务严兵，不先救火。
现代文：当时百姓躲避贼寇挤满城内，碴之害怕有接应贼寇的人，衹是极力整肃军队，不先救火。
English: At that time, the people were crowded in the city to avoid the bandits. They were afraid that there would be someone who would meet the bandits. They tried their best to clean up the army without first putting out the fire.

古文：由是府舍焚荡，烧死者万余人，因遂散溃，悉为贼擒。
现代文：因此宫府馆舍焚烧一空，烧死的有一万多人，于是民众四散溃逃，尽敷被贼寇擒获。
English: As a result, the palace was burned to the ground, and more than 10,000 people died in the fire. As a result, the people scattered and fled, only to be captured by the bandits.

古文：义熙四年七月丁酉，尚书殿中吏部曹火。
现代文：义熙四年七月丁酉，尚书省殿中吏部官署失火。
English: In July of the 4th year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, the Office of the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy caught fire.

古文：九年，京都大火，烧数千家。
现代文：九年，京都大火，烧敷千家。
English: Nine years ago, the Great Fire of Kyoto burned down thousands of homes.

古文：十一年，京都所在大行火灾，吴界尤甚。
现代文：十一年，京都一带火灾肆虐，吴地界内尤眉严重。
English: In the eleventh year, fires raged around Kyoto, and the situation was particularly serious in the Kure region.

古文：火防甚峻，犹自不绝。
现代文：火灾防范非常严厉，仍然不能杜绝。
English: Fire prevention is very strict and still cannot be eliminated.

古文：王弘时为吴郡，昼在听事，见天上有一赤物下，状如信幡，遥集路南人家屋上，火即大发。
现代文：王弘当时任职吴郡，白天在官署处理政事，见天上有一红色物下来，形状像旗帜，速速地落在路南人家屋顶上，即起大火。
English: Wang Hong was in charge of Wu County at the time. During the day, he was dealing with government affairs at the government office. When he saw a red object falling from the sky, shaped like a flag, it quickly landed on the roof of a person's house on the south side of the road, causing a fire.

古文：弘知天为之灾，故不罪火主。
现代文：王弘知道是上天降下的火灾，所以不责罚失火事主。
English: Wang Hong knew that it was a fire sent down from heaven, so he did not punish the person who caused the fire.

古文：此帝室衰微之应也。
现代文：这是帝室衰亡败落的应兆。
English: This was a response to the decline and fall of the imperial family.

古文：《传》曰： 修宫室，饰台榭，内淫乱，犯亲戚，侮兄弟，则稼穑不成。 
现代文：《传》说： 修建宫室，装饰台榭，在内淫乱，欺凌亲戚，侮慢父兄，作物就没有收成。 
English: "Biography" says: Build a palace, decorate the table, commit adultery, bully relatives, insult parents, and crops will not be harvested.

古文：说曰：土，中央，生万物者也。
现代文：解说：土，居中央，是生育万物的。
English: Explanation: Earth, in the center, is the birthplace of all things.

古文：其于王者，为内事，宫室、夫妇、亲属，亦相生者也。
现代文：对于君王，是内事，宫室、夫妇、亲属，也是有相生关系的。
English: For the monarch, it is an internal matter, and the palace, the couple, and the relatives are also related to each other.

古文：古者天子诸侯，宫庙大小高卑有制，后夫人媵妾多少有度，九族亲疏长幼有序。
现代文：古代天子诸侯，宫庙的大小高低有规定，王后夫人媵妾的多少有一定限度，九族远近亲属长幼有礼秩。
English: In ancient times, princes were the sons of the gods. There were rules about the size and height of palaces and temples. There was a certain limit to the number of concubines a queen's husband could have. Far and near relatives of the nine ethnic groups were given a courtesy rank.

古文：孔子曰： 礼，与其奢也，宁俭。 
现代文：孔子说： 礼，与其奢华，宁可俭朴。 
English: Confucius said: It is better to be frugal than to be extravagant.

古文：故禹卑宫室，文王刑于寡妻，此圣人之所以昭教化也。
现代文：所以禹修建低矮的宫室，文王示范于后代，这是圣人以此来宣明教化。
English: Therefore, Yu built a low palace, and King Wen demonstrated it to future generations. This was the sage's way of enlightening and enlightening.

古文：如此，则土得其性矣。
现代文：像这样做，土就会得其本性。
English: Like this, the soil will take on its true nature.

古文：若乃奢淫骄慢，则土失其性。
现代文：假如奢华淫佚骄纵傲慢，土就失去其本性。
English: If luxury, lasciviousness, pride and arrogance prevail, the soil loses its nature.

古文：亡水旱之灾而草木百谷不熟，是为稼穑不成。
现代文：没有水旱灾害但是草木百谷都不成熟，逭就是作物无收成。
English: There are no floods or droughts, but all the plants and trees are immature, and there is no harvest.

古文：吴孙皓时，常岁无水旱，苗稼丰美而实不成，百姓以饥，阖境皆然，连岁不已。
现代文：吴孙皓时，平常年份没有水旱灾害，禾苗庄稼长得好但不长粮食，百姓因而挨饿，整个境内都如此，连年不断。
English: During the reign of King Sun Yat-sen, there were no floods or droughts in ordinary years. The crops grew well, but there was not enough grain. As a result, the people were starving. This was the case throughout the entire territory, year after year.

古文：吴人以为伤露，非也。
现代文：吴人认为是受露水危害，不是。
English: Wu people think that it is harmed by dew, but it is not.

古文：案刘向《春秋说》曰 水旱当书，不书水旱而曰大无麦禾者，土气不养，稼穑不成 ，此其义也。
现代文：刘向《春秋说》说 水旱灾害应当记载，不记载水旱灾害而说大无麦禾，是土气不养，稼穑不成 ，就是这个道理。
English: Liu Xiang "Spring and Autumn" said that drought and flood disasters should be recorded, and if drought and flood disasters are not recorded, it is said that there is no wheat and barley, the soil is not cultivated, and the harvest is not achieved. This is the reason.

古文：皓初迁都武昌，寻还建鄴，又起新馆，缀饰珠玉，壮丽过甚，破坏诸营，增广苑囿，犯暑妨农，官私疲怠。
现代文：孙皓当初迁都武昌，不久返回建邺，又建起新的馆舍，点缀装饰珠宝玉石，壮丽非同寻常，破坏各营寨，扩建宫苑园林，妨碍农时，侵害农民，官府民间疲惫懈怠。
English: Sun Yat-sen initially moved the capital to Wuchang, but soon returned to Jianye. He also built new buildings, decorated with jade, magnificent and extraordinary, destroyed the camps, expanded the palace gardens, hindered the agricultural time, infringed on the farmers, and the government and the people were tired and slack.

古文：《月令》，季夏不可以兴土功，皓皆冒之。
现代文：按《月令》，夏末不可以大兴土建劳作，孙皓全都冒犯了。
English: According to the "Monthly Regulation," it is not allowed to carry out large-scale civil construction work at the end of summer, and Sun Yat-sen offended everyone.

古文：此修宫室饰台榭之罚也。
现代文：这是对修建宫室装饰台榭的惩罚。
English: This is the punishment for building a palace decoration table.

古文：元帝太兴二年，吴郡、吴兴、东阳无麦禾，大饥。
现代文：元帝太兴二年，吴郡、吴兴、束阳没有麦禾，大饥荒。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Taixing of the Yuan Dynasty, there was no wheat and barley in Wu County, Wuxing and Sokyang, and there was a great famine.

古文：成帝咸和五年，无麦禾，天下大饥。
现代文：成帝咸和五年，没有麦苗，天下大饥荒。
English: In the five years of Emperor Chengxian's reign, there were no wheat seedlings, and the world suffered from a great famine.

古文：穆帝永和十年，三麦不登。
现代文：穆帝永和十年，三季麦不熟。
English: Mudiyong and ten years, three seasons of wheat are not ripe.

古文：十二年，大无麦。
现代文：十二年，大面积没有麦。
English: For 12 years, there has been no wheat in a large area.

古文：孝武太元六年，无麦禾，天下大饥。
现代文：孝武太元六年，没有麦禾，天下大饥荒。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, there was no wheat and barley, and the world suffered from a great famine.

古文：安帝元兴元年，无麦禾，天下大饥。
现代文：安帝元兴元年，没有麦禾，天下大饥荒。
English: In the first year of Emperor Andei's reign, there was no wheat and barley, and the world suffered from a great famine.

古文：《传》曰： 好战攻，轻百姓，饰城郭，侵边境，则金不从革。 
现代文：《传》说： 喜欢战争攻伐，轻视百姓，修整城郭，侵犯边境，金就不从革。 
English: "Legend" says: If you like to wage war, despise the people, repair the city walls, and violate the border, you will not make money.

古文：说曰：金，西方，万物既成，杀气之始也。
现代文：解说：金，西方，万物已长成，是杀气的开始。
English: Commentary: Gold, the West, all things have grown up, it is the beginning of killing.

古文：故立秋而鹰隼击，秋分而微霜降。
现代文：所以立秋后鹰隼就追捕，秋分后就降下微霜。
English: Therefore, the eagle chases the dragonfly after the beginning of autumn, and the frost falls after the autumnal equinox.

古文：其于王事，出军行师，把旄杖钺，誓士众，抗威武，所以征叛逆，止暴乱也。
现代文：对于君王之事，是发动军队，握持旗帜兵仗斧铁，誓师兵众，振奋威武，来征讨叛逆贼人，制止暴乱。
English: For the king's business, it is to mobilize the army, hold the flag, march the soldiers, wield the axe and iron, swear the division and the soldiers, invigorate the martial arts, to recruit the traitors and stop the riot.

古文：《诗》云： 有虔执钺，如火烈烈。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 威武地持着那斧娥，火一般地兴旺。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Hold the axe with authority, and the fire will flourish."

古文：又曰： 载戢干戈，载橐弓矢。 
现代文：又说： 收藏起干戈，将弓箭收入囊中。 
English: He also said, "Starting from the collection of sticks and arrows, put the bow and arrows in your bag."

古文：动静应宜，说以犯难，人忘其死，金得其性矣。
现代文：动静相应适宜，愉快地迎接危难，人们忘记了死亡，金得其性。
English: The movement is appropriate, the danger is met with joy, people forget about death, and money has its own nature.

古文：若乃贪欲恣睢，务立威胜，不重人命，则金失其性。
现代文：假如贪婪放纵，一味树立威望胜利，不重视生命，金就失去其本性。
English: If greed is indulged, if prestige and victory are pursued, if life is not valued, gold will lose its nature.

古文：盖工冶铸金铁，冰滞涸坚，不成者众，乃为变怪，是为金不从革。
现代文：因工匠冶炼铸造金铁，冰冷凝滞干涸坚硬，不成的很多，就成为变异精怪，造就是金不从革。
English: Due to the craftsmen smelting the cast iron and gold, the ice solidified and dried hard, resulting in a lot of imperfections, it became a strange mutation, and the creation was gold and not leather.

古文：魏时张掖石瑞，虽是晋之符命，而于魏为妖。
现代文：魏时张掖石有祥瑞，虽然是晋的符命，但对于魏是妖孽。
English: During the Wei Dynasty, Zhang Yanshi had Xiang Rui, although it was Jin's life, but for Wei it was witchcraft.

古文：好攻战，轻百姓，饰城郭，侵边境，魏氏三祖皆有其事。
现代文：喜欢攻伐战争，忽视百姓，修造城郭，侵犯边境，魏氏三祖都有这样的事。
English: The three forefathers of the Wei Dynasty were fond of attacking and waging war, neglecting the people, building fortresses, and encroaching on borders.

古文：石图发于非常之文，此不从革之异也。
现代文：石图显现不同寻常的图文，这是金不从革的怪异。
English: The stone map shows unusual images and text, which is very strange.

古文：晋定大业，多毙曹氏，石瑞文 大讨曹 之应也。
现代文：晋定大业，多杀曹氏，是石瑞图文 大讨曹 的应兆。
English: It is a good omen for Shi Ruituwen to fight against Cao for the great cause of promotion to emperor.

古文：案刘歆以《春秋》石言于晋，为金石同类也，是为金不从革，失其性也，刘向以为石白色为主，属白祥。
现代文：刘歆认为《春秋》石说到晋，是金石同类，这是金不从革，失去其性。刘向认为石白色为主，属于白祥。
English: Liu Xuan believes that the "Spring and Autumn" stone said to Jin, is the same kind of gold stone, this is gold not from leather, lost its nature. Liu Xiang believes that the stone is mainly white, belongs to Bai Xiang.

古文：魏明帝青龙中，盛修宫室，西取长安金狄，承露槃折，声闻数十里，金狄泣，于是因留霸城。
现代文：魏明帝青龙年间，大规模装修宫室，向西去取长安的铜铸人像，承露盘折断，声音传出敷十里，铜像流泪，便留在霸城。
English: During the reign of Emperor Ming of the Wei Dynasty, a large-scale decoration of the palace room was carried out, and the bronze cast statue of Chang'an was taken to the west, the tray was broken, the sound was heard ten miles away, and the bronze statue shed tears, and then it remained in the city.

古文：此金失其性而为异也。
现代文：这是金失去其性而成为怪异。
English: This is gold losing its character and becoming weird.

古文：吴时，历阳县有岩穿，似印，咸云 石印封发，天下太平 。
现代文：吴时，历阳县有岩石穿，像印，都说 石印启封，天下太平 。
English: At the time of Wu, Liyang County had a rock pierced, like a seal, and they all said that the stone seal was opened, and the world was peaceful.

古文：孙皓天玺元年，印发。
现代文：孙皓天玺元年，印启封。
English: In the first year of Sun Yat-sen's reign, the seal was opened.

古文：又，阳羡山有石穴，长十余丈。
现代文：又，阳羡山上有石洞，长有十多丈。
English: In addition, there is a stone cave on Yangsen Mountain, which is more than ten meters long.

古文：皓初修武昌宫，有迁都之意。
现代文：孙皓起初修武昌宫，有迁都的想法。
English: At first, Sun Yat-sen planned to rebuild Wuchang Palace, with the idea of moving the capital.

古文：是时武昌为离宫。
现代文：逭时武昌是离宫。
English: At that time, Wuchang was separated from the palace.

古文：班固云 离宫与城郭同占 ，饰城郭之谓也。
现代文：班固称 离宫与城郭的占卜相同 ，指的是修造城郭。
English: The name "Banggu" is the same as the divination of the palace and the castle, and refers to the construction of the castle.

古文：其宝鼎三年后，皓出东关，遣丁奉至合肥，建衡三年皓又大举出华里，侵边境之谓也。
现代文：宣蛊三年后，彊壁出塞盟，派工萎到金肥，建蛮三年孙皓又大规模出华里，可称为侵犯边境。
English: Three years after the proclamation of the People's Republic of China, Yan Wei left Serbia and sent workers to Jinfei, and three years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, Sun Yat-sen went to China on a large scale, which can be called a violation of the border.

古文：故令金失其性，卒面缚而吴亡。
现代文：所以让金失去其性，最终反缚双臂投降而吴国灭亡。
English: Therefore, Kim was allowed to lose his character, and eventually he tied his arms and surrendered, and the State of Wu was destroyed.

古文：惠帝元康三年闰二月，殿前六钟皆出涕，五刻止。
现代文：惠帝元康三年闰二月，宫殿前的六个钟都流泪，历时五刻后停止。
English: In February of Hui Di Yuan Kang's third year, the six clocks in front of the palace shed tears and stopped after five hours.

古文：前年贾后杀杨太后于金墉城，而贾后为恶不止，故钟出涕，犹伤之也。
现代文：前一年买厘将扰塞后杀死在金擅球，而买后作恶不止，所以钟流泪，似为此而忧伤。
English: The previous year, he had killed Jin Shaoqin after interfering with the ball, and he had done more and more evil, so Zhong shed tears, as if he was sad because of this.

古文：永兴元年，成都伐长沙，每夜戈戟锋有火光如悬烛。
现代文：永兴元年，盛都王攻打垦业工，每天夜间戈戟的锋刃有火光就像悬挂的蜡烛。
English: In the first year of Yongxing, the king of Shengdu attacked the mineworkers. Every night, the sharp blades of the mineworkers glowed like hanging candles.

古文：此轻人命，好攻战，金失其性而为光变也。
现代文：这是忽视人命，喜欢攻战，金失去其性而出现光变。
English: This is a disregard for human life, likes to attack, money loses its nature and there is a light change.

古文：天戒若曰，兵犹火也，不戢将自焚。
现代文：天戒这样说，兵如火，不收敛将会自焚。
English: Heaven's precepts say that soldiers are like fire, and if they do not restrain themselves, they will burn themselves.

古文：成都不悟，终以败亡。
现代文：成都王没有醒悟，终于因此失败灭亡。
English: The king of Chengdu did not wake up, and finally died as a result.

古文：怀帝永嘉元年，项县有魏豫州刺史贾逵石碑，生金可采，此金不从革而为变也。
现代文：怀帝永嘉元年，项县有魏豫州刺史贾逵石碑，生出金可以采取，这是金不从革而有变异。
English: In the first year of Huai Di Yongjia, Xiang County had the Wei, Yuzhou, Zhishi, Jiajing stone monument. The output gold can be taken. This is because the gold is not from the leather, but has a variation.

古文：五月，汲桑作乱，群寇飙起。
现代文：五月，汲桑作乱，众多贼寇暴起。
English: In May, Kuisang caused a riot, and many thieves and robbers went on a rampage.

古文：清河王覃为世子时，所佩金铃忽生起如粟者，康王母疑不祥，毁弃之。
现代文：清河王司马覃做世子时，所佩带的金铃忽然生出像粟一样的东西，康王母亲疑心不吉祥，毁坏扔掉。
English: When Sima Ye, the king of Qinghe, became the heir to the throne, the golden bell he was wearing suddenly sprouted something that looked like a poppy seed. King Kang's mother was suspicious and thought it was not auspicious, so she destroyed it and threw it away.

古文：及后为惠帝太子，不终于位，卒为司马越所杀。
现代文：到后来成为惠帝的太子，没有在位上善终，最终被司马越所杀。
English: He later became the prince of Hui Di, but did not have a happy ending on the throne, and was eventually killed by Sima Yue.

古文：愍帝建兴五年，石言于平阳。
现代文：愍帝建兴五年，在平阳有石头说话。
English: In the five years of Emperor Jianxing, there is a stone in Pingyang.

古文：是时帝蒙尘亦在平阳，故有非言之物而言，妖之大者。
现代文：逭时愍帝也在平阳蒙难，所以有不会说话的东西说了话，是大的妖孽。
English: At that time, Emperor Xizong was also martyred in Pingyang, so if something that could not speak spoke, it was a great evil.

古文：俄而帝为逆胡所弑。
现代文：不久愍帝被叛乱的胡人杀死。
English: Soon after, Emperor Gong was killed by the rebellious Hu people.

古文：元帝永昌元年，甘卓将袭王敦，既而中止。
现代文：元帝永昌元年，甘卓准备袭击王敦，后来半途停止。
English: In the first year of Emperor Yongchang of the Yuan Dynasty, Gan Zhuo prepared to attack Wang Dun, but later stopped halfway.

古文：及还，家多变怪，照镜不见其头。
现代文：等到返回，家中有很多变异怪事，照镜看不到脑袋。
English: When he returns, there are so many strange things going on at home that he can't see his head in the mirror.

古文：此金失其性而为妖也。
现代文：这是金失去其性而为妖。
English: This is money losing its nature and becoming a demon.

古文：寻为敦所袭，遂夷灭。
现代文：不久被王敦袭击，于是被诛灭。
English: It was soon attacked by Wang Dun and destroyed.

古文：石季龙时，鄴城凤阳门上金凤皇二头飞入漳河。
现代文：石季龙时，邺城凤阳门上有二只金凤凰飞入违回。
English: At the time of the stone dragon, there were two golden phoenixes flying into the illegal return on the Fengyang Gate of Fucheng.

古文：海西太和中，会稽山阴县起仓，凿地得两大船，满中钱，钱皆轮文大形。
现代文：海西公太和年间，会稽山阴县建仓库，掘地得到两只大船，其中装满钱，钱都是轮纹大形。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Haixi, a warehouse was built in Shanyin County, and two large ships were obtained from the excavation site. They were filled with money, and the money was all in the shape of a large wheel.

古文：时日向暮，凿者驰以告官，官夜遣防守甚严。
现代文：当时近日暮时分，挖掘的人急速去报告官府，官府连夜派人严加守卫。
English: At that time, it was late in the evening, and the excavators quickly went to report to the government, which sent people to keep a close watch overnight.

古文：至明旦，失钱所在，惟有船存。
现代文：到天明，找不到钱所在的地方，衹有船还在。
English: By dawn, they couldn't find the place where the money was, but the boat was still there.

古文：视其状，悉有钱处。
现代文：审视形状，都是有钱的地方。
English: Examining the shape is where the money is.

古文：安帝义熙初，东阳太守殷仲文照镜不见其头，寻亦诛翦，占与甘卓同也。
现代文：安帝义熙初年，东阳太守殷仲文照镜子看不到脑袋，不久也被诛杀，占与甘卓相同。
English: In the first year of Emperor Andei Yixi, the Dongyang Emperor Yin Zhongwen could not see his head when he looked in the mirror, and was soon killed, the same as Gan Zhuo.

古文：《传》曰： 简宗庙，不祷祠，废祭祀，逆天时，则水不润下。 
现代文：《传》曰： 慢待宗庙，不在祠中祭祀，荒废祭祀，违背天时，水就不顺下。 
English: "Biography" says: wait for the ancestral temple, do not sacrifice in the ancestral hall, waste the sacrifice, violate the time of day, the water will not go down.

古文：说曰：水，北方，终藏万物者也。
现代文：解说：水，北方，是收藏万物之处。
English: Commentary: Water, the north, is the place where all things are collected.

古文：其于人道，命终而形藏，精神放越。
现代文：对于人道，生命终结而形体收藏，精神放任自由。
English: For humanity, the end of life is the collection of the body, and the spirit is left free.

古文：圣人为之宗庙，以收魂气，春秋祭祀，以终孝道。
现代文：圣人立宗庙，收留魂气，春秋祭祀，来尽孝道。
English: The saint established the ancestral temple, received the spirit, held the spring and autumn sacrifices, and fulfilled his filial duty.

古文：王者即位，必郊祀天地，祷祈神祇，望秩山川，怀柔百神，亡不宗事。
现代文：君王即位，一定要在郊野祭祀天地，祷祈神祇，望祭山川，安顺百神，无不尊崇其事。
English: When a king ascends the throne, he must offer sacrifices to heaven and earth in the countryside, pray to the gods, worship the mountains and rivers, and worship the hundreds of gods.

古文：慎其斋戒，致其严敬，是故鬼神歆飨，多获福助。
现代文：谨慎地斋戒，表达崇敬之情，因此鬼神受享其祭，就能获得福佑。
English: Fasting with caution, expressing reverence, so that ghosts and spirits can enjoy their sacrifices, will be able to obtain blessings.

古文：此圣王所以顺事阴气，和神人也。
现代文：造就是圣明君王要顺奉阴气，和睦神人。
English: The creation is that the Holy Emperor should obey the yin and yang, and reconcile the people of God.

古文：及至发号施令，亦奉天时。
现代文：至于发号施令，也要敬奉天时。
English: When it comes to giving orders, you should also respect the times.

古文：十二月咸得其气，则阴阳调而终始成。
现代文：十二个月都各得其气，阴阳就谐调而善始善终。
English: Each of the twelve months has its own spirit, and the yin and yang are in harmony and have a good beginning and a good end.

古文：如此，则水得其性矣。
现代文：像这样，水就得其性。
English: In this way, water acquires its properties.

古文：若乃不敬鬼神，政令逆时，水失其性。
现代文：假如不敬鬼神，政令违背时势，水失去其性。
English: If there is no respect for ghosts and gods, government decrees go against the trend of the times, and water loses its nature.

古文：雾水暴出，百川逆溢，坏乡邑，溺人民，及淫雨伤稼穑，是为水不润下。
现代文：茫茫大水暴涨，百川倒溢，毁坏乡村，淹死人民，还有绵绵雨水伤害稼穑，这就是水不顺下。
English: The vast water surges, the rivers overflow, destroy the countryside, drown the people, and the continuous rainwater damages the crops. This is the water does not go down.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 颛事者加，诛罚绝理，厥灾水。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 专制者侵凌，诛杀责罚无理，就遭水灾。
English: Jingfang's "I Chuan" said: The tyrant encroaches, kills and punishes unreasonably, and is flooded.

古文：其水也，雨，杀人，以陨霜，大风天黄。
现代文：其水，是降雨，杀人，降霜，大风天黄。
English: Its water is rain, murder, frost, and wind.

古文：饥而不损，兹谓泰，厥大水，水杀人。
现代文：饥荒却没有损害，逭叫做泰，有大水，水杀人。
English: Famine does no harm, the grasshopper is called Tai, there is water, water kills.

古文：避遏有德，兹谓狂，厥水，水流杀人也。
现代文：远避阻遏有德的，这叫做狂，其有水，水流杀人。
English: To shun, to avoid, to restrain, to have virtue, this is called madness. It has water, and the flow of water kills.

古文：已水则地生虫。
现代文：水后则地就会生虫。
English: After the water, there will be worms.

古文：归狱不解，兹谓追非，厥水寒，杀人。
现代文：归罪于人不止，遣叫做追非，其水寒，杀人。
English: There is more than blaming someone, it is called persecuting the wrongdoers, it is cold-blooded, it is murder.

古文：追诛不解，兹谓不理，厥水五谷不收。
现代文：逼迫诛杀不止，遣叫做不理，其水让五谷不收。
English: Persecuted and killed more and more, dismissed and ignored, its water is not collected.

古文：大败不解，兹谓皆阴，厥水流入国邑，陨霜杀谷。 
现代文：大败不止，这叫做阴，其水流入国境，降霜损害谷物。 
English: This is called yin, the water of which flows into the border, and frost damages the grain.

古文：董仲舒曰： 交兵结仇，伏尸流血，百姓愁怨，阴气盛，故大水也。 
现代文：董仲舒说： 交战结仇，伏尸流血，百姓愁怨，阴气盛，所以有大水。 
English: Dong Zhongshu said: There is a lot of fighting, bloodshed, dead bodies, people's grievances and gloomy moods, so there is a lot of water.

古文：魏文帝黄初四年六月，大雨霖，伊洛溢，至津阳城门，漂数千家，杀人。
现代文：魏文帝黄初四年六月，大雨连绵，伊水、洛水涨溢，到了津阳城门，冲毁几千户人家，淹死人。
English: In June of the fourth year of Emperor Wen of Wei and Huang, continuous heavy rain, Yishui and Luo water overflowed and reached the city gate of Tsuyang, destroying thousands of homes and drowning people.

古文：初，帝即位，自鄴迁洛，营造宫室，而不起宗庙。
现代文：当初，文帝即位，从邺迁到洛，建造宫室，却不建宗庙。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wen ascended the throne, moved from Sui to Luo, built a palace, but did not build a family temple.

古文：太祖神主犹在鄴，尝于建始殿飨祭如家人礼，终黄初不复还鄴。
现代文：太祖神主仍然在邺，曾经在建始殿举行飨祭就像家人礼，到黄初年号结束没有再返回邺。
English: The great-grandfather deity is still in Jie, once held a Jie festival in Jianzhi Hall like a family ritual, and did not return to Jie until the end of the first year of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：又郊社神祇，未有定位。
现代文：又郊祭神祇，也没有定位。
English: There is also no positioning for the deities of the suburb festival.

古文：此简宗庙废祭祀之罚也。
现代文：这是对慢待宗庙荒废祭祀的惩罚。
English: This is the punishment for the abolition of sacrificial rites in the Jianrong Family Temple.

古文：吴孙权赤乌八年夏，茶陵县鸿水溢出，漂二百余家。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌八年夏，茶陵县洪水涨溢，冲毁二百多家。
English: In the summer of the eighth year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, floods in Chaling County overflowed and washed away more than 200 people.

古文：十三年秋，丹阳、故鄣等县又鸿水溢出。
现代文：十三年秋，丹杨、故鄣等县又有洪水暴涨。
English: In the autumn of the 13th year, there was a sudden increase in floods in Danyang, Goyang and other counties.

古文：案权称帝三十年，竟不于建鄴创七庙。
现代文：孙权称帝三十年，竟然不在建邺建七庙。
English: Sun Quan has been emperor for 30 years, yet he has not built seven temples.

古文：惟父坚一庙远在长沙，而郊祀礼阙。
现代文：衹有父亲孙坚的一座庙远在长沙，而且郊祭的礼也缺乏。
English: The temple of his father, Sun Jian, is far away in Changsha, and the ceremony of the suburb festival is also lacking.

古文：嘉禾初，群臣奏宜郊祀，又不许。
现代文：嘉禾初年，群臣奏请应举行郊祭，又不答允。
English: In the first year of Jiahe, a group of ministers requested to hold a suburb festival, but it was not approved.

古文：末年虽一南郊，而北郊遂无闻焉。
现代文：末年虽然举行了一次南郊，但北郊始终没有听说。
English: At the end of the year, although a rally was held in the southern suburbs, the northern suburbs never heard about it.

古文：吴楚之望亦不见秩，反祀罗阳妖神，以求福助。
现代文：吴、楚之地的望祭也没有见到依次序祭祀，反而祭祀罗阳妖神，以求福佑。
English: Wangsai in the lands of Wu and Chu did not see a sequence of sacrifices, but instead offered sacrifices to Luoyang demon gods in order to seek blessings.

古文：天戒若曰，权简宗庙，不祷祠，废祭祀，故示此罚，欲其感悟也。
现代文：天戒这样说，孙权简慢宗庙，不祈福神祠，荒废祭祀，所以显现这样的惩罚，是要让他感悟。
English: According to the heavenly precepts, Sun Quan neglected the ancestral temple, did not pray for the blessing of the shrine, and abandoned the sacrificial rites. Therefore, the appearance of such a punishment is to make him understand.

古文：太元元年，吴又有大风涌水之异。
现代文：太元元年，又有大风涌水的变异。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, there was also a big wind and water variation.

古文：是冬，权南郊，宜是鉴咎征乎！
现代文：当年冬，孙权举行南郊祭天，应是看到了罪罚的征兆吧!
English: In the winter of that year, Sun Quan held the Southern Suburbs Festival. He must have seen the signs of punishment!

古文：还而寝疾，明年四月薨。
现代文：返回后卧病在床，第二年四月去世。
English: After returning, he was bedridden and died in April of the following year.

古文：一曰，权时信纳谮诉，虽陆逊勋重，子和储贰，犹不得其终，与汉安帝听谗免杨震、废太子同事也。
现代文：一说，孙权常听信谗言，虽然陆逊功勋卓著，儿子孙和是太子，仍然没有得到善终，舆汉安帝听谗言罢免杨震、废太子的事相同。
English: One said that Sun Quan often listened to criticism, and although Lu Xun was outstanding in his achievements and his son Sun He was the prince, he still did not receive a good death. It was the same for Han Emperor An Di to listen to criticism and remove Yang Zhen and abolish the prince.

古文：且赤乌中无年不用兵，百姓愁怨。
现代文：而且赤乌年间没有一年不用兵，百姓忧愁怨愤。
English: Moreover, there was not a single year during the Red-and-White Uprising when there were no soldiers. The people were sad and angry.

古文：八年秋，将军马茂等又图逆。
现代文：八年秋，将军马茂等人又图谋叛乱。
English: In the autumn of the eighth year, General Ma Mao and others again plotted a rebellion.

古文：魏明帝景初元年九月，淫雨，冀、兗、徐、豫四州水出，没溺杀人，漂失财产。
现代文：魏明帝景初元年九月，降雨连绵不断，冀、兖、徐、豫四州水涨出，淹没溺死人，冲走财物。
English: In September of the first year of Emperor Jing of the Wei and Ming dynasties, continuous rainfall occurred, and water rose in the four prefectures of Hebei, Shandong, Hebei, and Henan, drowning people and washing away property.

古文：帝自初即位，便淫奢极欲，多占幼女，或夺士妻，崇饰宫室，妨害农战，触情恣欲，至是弥甚，号令逆时，饥不损役。
现代文：明帝刚即位，就荒淫奢侈纵欲，多占幼女，或抢夺士人妻子，增修装饰宫室，妨害农时，触情纵欲，至此更加严重，发号施令乖背时节，饥荒时也不减少劳役。
English: As soon as Emperor Ming ascended the throne, he began to indulge in extravagant sexual indulgence, mostly taking young daughters, or robbing the wives of scholars, adding decoration to the palace, interfering with farmers, and indulging in sexual indulgence. This was even more serious. He issued orders to be good behind the times, and did not reduce labor service in times of famine.

古文：此水不润下之应也。
现代文：造就是水不顺下的应兆。
English: It is a sign that the water is not going down.

古文：吴孙亮五凤元年夏，大水。
现代文：吴孙亮五凤元年夏，发大水。
English: Wu Sunliang Wufeng was born in the summer of the first year of the year.

古文：亮即位四年，乃立权庙。
现代文：孙亮即位四年，才建孙权庙。
English: It took Sun Liang four years to build the Sun Quan Temple.

古文：又终吴世不上祖宗之号，不修严父之礼，昭穆之数有阙。
现代文：又整个吴世没有加封祖宗的号，不修严父的礼仪，宗庙中父子之数也有阙失。
English: In addition, the entire Wu Dynasty did not add the name of the ancestor, did not practice the etiquette of the strict father, and the number of fathers and sons in the ancestral temple also decreased.

古文：亮及休、皓又并废二郊，不秩群神。
现代文：孙亮和孙休、孙皓又都废除了南北二郊祭，不依等级祭众神。
English: Sun Liang, Sun Xiu and Sun Yat-sen also abolished the festivals of the two suburbs in the north and south, and the gods were no longer worshipped according to their ranks.

古文：此简宗庙不祭祀之罚也。
现代文：这是对筒慢宗庙不举行祭祀的惩罚。
English: This is the punishment for not holding a religious service at the Jangjongsa Temple.

古文：又，是时孙峻专政，阴胜阳之应乎！
现代文：又，此时孙峻专断朝政，是阴胜阳的应兆!
English: In addition, at this time, Sun Jun's arbitrary rule of the dynasty is a sign of yin winning over yang!

古文：孙休永安四年五月，大雨，水泉涌溢。
现代文：孙休永安四年五月，大雨，水泉喷涌涨溢。
English: In May of the fourth year of Sun Xiu Yong'an, there was heavy rain, and water springs gushed and overflowed.

古文：昔岁作浦里塘，功费无数，而田不可成，士卒死叛，或自贼杀，百姓愁怨，阴气盛也。
现代文：往年修建逋里塘，劳力费用无数，但田不能成，士兵死亡叛乱，或自相残杀，百姓忧愁怨愤，是阴气盛。
English: In previous years, the construction of Bailitang, labor costs countless, but the field can not be completed, soldiers died in rebellion, or fratricide, the people are sad and angry, it is gloomy.

古文：休又专任张布，退盛冲等，吴人贼之应也。
现代文：还休又专用张垄，贬退盛冲等，是吴人为贼寇的应兆。
English: It is a signal for the Wu people to fight against the bandits.

古文：五年八月壬午，大雨震电，水泉涌溢。
现代文：五年八月壬午，大雨雷电，水泉喷涌涨溢。
English: At noon on August 5, heavy rain, thunder and lightning, water springs gushing and overflowing.

古文：武帝泰始四年九月，青、徐、兗、豫四州大水。
现代文：武帝泰始四年九月，责、途、兖、辽四州发大水。
English: In September of the fourth year of Emperor Wu, the four prefectures of Liaoning, Guizhou, Shandong and Liaoning were hit by floods.

古文：七年六月，大雨霖，河、洛、伊、沁皆溢，杀二百余人。
现代文：七年六月，大雨连绵不断，黄河、洛水、伊水、沁水都漫溢，淹死二百多人。
English: In June of the seventh year, continuous heavy rain caused the Yellow River, Luoshui River, Yishui River and Lushui River to overflow, drowning more than 200 people.

古文：自帝即尊位，不加三后祖宗之号。
现代文：武帝即帝位，不加封三王祖宗的庙号。
English: Emperor Wu is the imperial throne, and the temple name of the Three Ancestors is not added.

古文：泰始二年又除明堂南郊五帝座，同称昊天上帝，一位而已。
现代文：泰始二年又撤除南郊五帝座，同称为昊天上帝，仅一位而已。
English: In the second year of Taizhi, the Southern Suburbs Five Emperor Constellation, also known as Haotian God, was removed, leaving only one.

古文：又省先后配地之祀。
现代文：又减省先王配地的祭祀。
English: In addition, the sacrificial rites of the previous king were reduced.

古文：此简宗庙废祭祀之罚也。
现代文：这是对简慢宗庙废除祭祀的惩罚。
English: This is the punishment for the abolition of sacrificial rites in the Jianrong Family Temple.

古文：咸宁元年九月，徐州大水。
现代文：咸宁元年九月，徐州发大水。
English: In September of the first year of Xianning, Xuzhou was flooded.

古文：二年七月癸亥，河南、魏郡暴水，杀百余人。
现代文：二年七月癸亥，河南、魏郡发大水，死一百多人。
English: In July of the following year, more than a hundred people died in floods in Wei County, Henan Province.

古文：闰月，荆州郡国五大水，流四千余家。
现代文：闰月，荆蛆五郡国发大水，冲走四千多家。
English: During the leap month, five counties in Jingye County were flooded, and more than 4,000 people were swept away.

古文：去年采择良家子女，露面入殿，帝亲简阅，务在姿色，不访德行，有蔽匿者以不敬论，搢绅愁怨，天下非之，阴盛之应也。
现代文：前一年选取良家子女，不戴面饰入殿，武帝亲自观看挑选，衹注重姿色，不过问德行，有藏匿的以大不敬论罪，士大夫忧愁怨愤，天下责难此事，这是阴盛的应兆。
English: The previous year, the children of good families were selected, they entered the temple without wearing face decorations, Emperor Wu personally watched the selection, he paid attention to the appearance, but asked about the virtue, the hidden ones were condemned with great disrespect, the scholars were sad and angry, and the whole world condemned the matter, which was a sign of gloom.

古文：三年六月，益、梁二州郡国八暴水，杀三百余人。
现代文：三年六月，益、梁二州八郡国发大水，死三百多人。
English: In June of the third year, eight counties in two prefectures of Yizhou and Liang were flooded, and more than three hundred people died.

古文：七月，荆州大水。
现代文：七月，荆州发大水。
English: In July, Jingzhou was hit by floods.

古文：九月，始平郡大水。
现代文：九月，始平郡发大水。
English: In September, large amounts of water were released in Shihei County.

古文：十月，青、徐、兗、豫、荆、益、梁七州又大水。
现代文：十月，直、涂、蛮、逸、型、益、垩七州又发大水。
English: In October, seven prefectures, including Zhi, Tu, Mansu, Yiyi, Kata, Yixi and Qian, were hit by major floods.

古文：是时贾充等用事专恣，而正人疏外者多，阴气盛也。
现代文：逭时贾充等人专断政事肆意妄为，而正直的人疏远到外地的很多，是阴气盛。
English: At that time, Jia Chong and others were acting arbitrarily and wantonly in political affairs, while many honest people were alienated to the outside world, and they were full of gloom.

古文：四年七月，司、冀、兗、豫、荆、扬郡国二十大水，伤秋稼，坏屋室，有死者。
现代文：四年七月，司、冀、兖、豫、荆、扬等二十个郡国发大水，损害秋庄稼，毁坏房舍，有人死亡。
English: In July of the fourth year, twenty counties and provinces, including Ji, Jie, Kun, Yu, Jing, and Yang, were flooded, damaging autumn crops, destroying houses, and causing deaths.

古文：太康二年六月，泰山、江夏大水，泰山流三百家，杀六十余人，江夏亦杀人。
现代文：太康二年六月，泰山、江夏发大水，泰山被冲毁三百户人家，死六十多人，江夏也死了人。
English: In June of the second year of Taikang, floods hit Mount Taishan and Jiangxia. Three hundred households in Mount Taishan were washed away, more than sixty people died, and people also died in Jiangxia.

古文：时平吴后，王浚为元功而诋劾妄加，荀、贾为无谋而并蒙重赏，收吴姬五千，纳之后宫，此其应也。
现代文：这时平定吴国后，王浚有首功但遭到无故诋毁弹劾，苞、买没有谋划却蒙受重赏，收星姬五千人，纳在后宫，这是其应兆。
English: At this time, after the pacification of the State of Wu, Wang Jun, who had made the first contribution, was slandered and impeached without any reason. He did not have a plan, but he received a great reward. He received five thousand stars and was accommodated in the harem. This was his response.

古文：四年七月，兗州大水。
现代文：四年七月，銮州发大水。
English: In July of the fourth year, there was a big flood in Zhangzhou.

古文：十二月，河南及荆、扬六州大水。
现代文：十二月，适宜和型、荡六州发大水。
English: In December, it is appropriate for six states to have floods.

古文：五年九月，郡国四大水，又陨霜。
现代文：五年九月，四郡国发大水，又降霜。
English: In September 2005, four counties in the country were hit by heavy rain and frost.

古文：是月，南安等五郡大水。
现代文：当月，卖岂等五郡发大水。
English: In the same month, five counties, including Xiling, were flooded.

古文：六年四月，郡国十大水，坏庐舍。
现代文：六年四月，十郡国发大水，毁坏庐舍。
English: In April of the sixth year, ten counties of the country were flooded, destroying the outhouse.

古文：七年九月，郡国八大水。
现代文：七年九月，八郡国发大水。
English: In September of the seventh year, eight counties of the country were flooded.

古文：八月六月，郡国八大水。
现代文：八年六月，八郡国发大水。
English: In June of the same year, eight counties in the country were flooded.

古文：惠帝元康二年，有水灾。
现代文：惠帝元康二年，有水灾。
English: In the second year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, there was a flood.

古文：五年五月，颍川、淮南大水。
现代文：五年五月，颖川、淮南发大水。
English: In May, Yingchuan and Huainan were hit by floods.

古文：六月，城阳、东莞大水，杀人，荆、扬、徐、兗、豫五州又水。
现代文：六月，城阳、东莞发大水，死了人，荆、扬、徐、兖、豫五州又发水。
English: In June, Chengyang and Dongguan were flooded, and people died. The five provinces of Jing, Yang, Xu, Handan and Henan were also flooded.

古文：是时帝即位已五载，犹未郊祀，其蒸尝亦多不亲行事。
现代文：这时惠帝即位已经五年，仍然没有举行郊祭，冬祭秋祭也多不亲自去办。
English: At this time, it had been five years since Emperor Hui ascended the throne, but there was still no suburb festival, and the winter festival and autumn festival were mostly not held in person.

古文：此简宗庙废祭祀之罚。
现代文：这是对简慢宗庙荒废祭祀的惩罚。
English: This is the punishment for abandoning the sacrificial rites of the Jianrong Temple.

古文：六年五月，刑、扬二州大水。
现代文：六年五月，荆、扬二州发大水。
English: In May of the sixth year, two states, Jing and Yang, were flooded.

古文：是时贾后乱朝，宠树贾、郭，女主专政，阴气盛之应也。
现代文：遣时贾后扰乱朝政，宠信任用买、郭，女主专断朝政，是阴气盛的应兆。
English: When Jia Hou was sent to disturb the imperial government, the favorite was trusted to buy, Guo, the mistress arbitrarily ruled the imperial government, it was a sign of a gloomy mood.

古文：八年五月，金墉城井溢。
现代文：八年五月，金墉城水井涨溢。
English: In May of the eighth year, the water wells of Jincheng overflowed.

古文：《汉志》，成帝时有此妖，后王莽僭逆。
现代文：《汉志》，成帝时有这样的变异，后来王莽篡位。
English: "Han Zhi," there was such a variation when he became emperor, and later Wang Mang usurped the throne.

古文：今有此妖，赵王伦篡位，伦废帝于此城，井溢所在，其天意也。
现代文：现在有此变异，赵王司马伦篡位，司马伦在此城废掉惠帝，所在之地的井涨溢，是天意。
English: Now there is this variation, Zhao Wang Sima Lun usurped the throne, Sima Lun abolished Hui Emperor in this city, and the well of the place where it is located is overflowing, it is the will of heaven.

古文：九月，荆、扬、徐、冀、豫五州大水。
现代文：九月，荆、扬、徐、冀、豫五州发大水。
English: In September, the five prefectures of Jing, Yang, Xu, Hebei, and Henan all experienced major floods.

古文：是时贾后暴戾滋甚，韩谧骄猜弥扇，卒害太子，旋以祸灭。
现代文：这时买后残暴乖戾更加严重，韩谧骄横猜忌更加张狂，终于害死太子，很快因祸害被灭。
English: At this time, Bui's cruel grudge became more serious, and Han Xuan's arrogance and suspicion became more blatant. Finally, he killed the prince, and was quickly eliminated due to the scourge.

古文：九年四月，宫中井水沸溢。
现代文：九年四月，皇宫中井水沸腾涨溢。
English: In April of the ninth year, the water in the well of the Imperial Palace boiled and overflowed.

古文：永宁元年七月，南阳、东海大水。
现代文：永宁元年七月，南阳、束海发大水。
English: In July of the first year of the Yongning era, Nanyang and Sokhai were flooded.

古文：是时齐王冏专政，阴盛之应也。
现代文：这时齐王司马同专断朝政，这是阴气盛的应兆。
English: At this time, Qi Wang Sima began to arbitrarily rule the dynasty, which was a sign of a gloomy mood.

古文：太安元年七月，兗、豫、徐、冀四州水。
现代文：太安元年七月，兖、豫、徐、冀四州发水。
English: In July of the first year of the Taian era, the four prefectures of Min, Yu, Xu, and Hebei issued water.

古文：时将相力政，无尊主心，阴盛故也。
现代文：逭时将相抢掌朝政，没有尊主之心，这是阴气盛的缘故。
English: At the time of death, they will grab the power of the government, and have no respect for the Lord. This is due to the abundance of yin and yang.

古文：孝怀帝永嘉四年四月，江东大水。
现代文：孝怀帝永嘉四年四月，江束发大水。
English: In April of the fourth year of Emperor Xiaohui Yongjia, Jiangzhu unleashed a great flood.

古文：时王导等潜怀翼戴之计，阴气盛也。
现代文：当时王导等人暗中有拥戴新帝的计谋，这是阴气盛。
English: At that time, Wang Du and others secretly had a plan to support the new emperor, which was sinister.

古文：元帝太兴三年六月，大水。
现代文：元帝太兴三年六月，发大水。
English: In June of the third year of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, a great flood occurred.

古文：是时王敦内怀不臣，傲很陵上，此阴气盛也。
现代文：这时王敦心怀叛君之心，傲慢欺凌君主，这是阴气盛。
English: At this time, Wang Dun harbored a traitor's heart and arrogantly bullied the monarch. This was a gloomy mood.

古文：四年七月，又大水。
现代文：四年七月，又发大水。
English: In July of the same year, another flood occurred.

古文：永昌二年五月，荆州及丹阳、宣城、吴兴、寿春大水。
现代文：永昌二年五月，荆州和丹杨、宣城、吴兴、寿春发大水。
English: In May of the second year of Yongchang, Jingzhou, Danyang, Xuancheng, Wuxing and Shuchun were hit by floods.

古文：明帝太宁元年五月，丹阳、宣城、吴兴、寿春大水。
现代文：明帝太宁元年五月，丹杨、宣城、吴兴、寿春发大水。
English: In May of the first year of Emperor Taining of the Ming Dynasty, Danyang, Xuancheng, Wu Xing, and Shouchun all suffered floods.

古文：是时王敦威权震主，阴气盛故也。
现代文：逭时王敦权力大威胁君主，这是阴气盛的缘故。
English: At that time, Wang Dun's power greatly threatened the monarch, which was the reason for the gloomy mood.

古文：成帝咸和元年五月，大水。
现代文：成帝咸和元年五月，发大水。
English: In May of the first year of Emperor Chengdi's reign, a great flood occurred.

古文：是时嗣主幼冲，母后称制，庾亮以元舅决事禁中，阴胜阳故也。
现代文：这时继位的君王年幼，母后代行职权，庾亮以长舅身份在皇宫中掌握政权，这是阴气胜阳气的缘故。
English: At this time, the monarch who succeeded to the throne was young, the mother's offspring carried out their duties, and Yao Liang, as the eldest brother, seized power in the imperial palace. This was due to the fact that yin prevailed over yang.

古文：二年五月戊子，京都大水。
现代文：二年五月戊子，京都发大水。
English: In May of the following year, a large flood occurred in Kyoto.

古文：是冬，以苏峻称兵，都邑涂地。
现代文：当年冬，因苏峻举兵，都邑毁坏。
English: In the winter of that year, Su Jun raised an army, and the whole town was destroyed.

古文：四年七月，丹阳、宣城、吴兴、会稽大水。
现代文：四年七月，丹杨、宣城、吴兴、会稽发大水。
English: In July of the fourth year, Danyang, Xuancheng, Wu Xing, and Huizhong issued a large amount of water.

古文：是冬，郭默作乱，荆豫共讨之，半岁乃定，兵役之应也。
现代文：当年冬，郭默作乱，荆、豫共同讨伐他，半年才平定，这是有军事战争的应兆。
English: In the winter of that year, Guo Mei started a riot, Jing and Yu jointly fought him, and it took half a year to pacify him. This was a sign of a military war.

古文：七年五月，大水。
现代文：七年五月，发大水。
English: In May of the seventh year, there was a big flood.

古文：是时帝未亲机务，政在大臣，阴胜阳也。
现代文：这时皇帝不能亲自处理政务，政权由大臣掌握，这是阴胜阳。
English: At this time, the emperor cannot personally handle government affairs, and the government is controlled by the minister. This is yin and yang.

古文：咸康元年八月，长沙、武陵大水。
现代文：咸康元年八月，长沙、武陵发大水。
English: In August of the first year of Xiankang, Changsha and Wuling were flooded.

古文：穆帝永和四年五月，大水。
现代文：穆帝永和四年五月，发大水。
English: In May of the fourth year of Mu Di Yonghe's reign, a great calamity occurred.

古文：五年五月，大水。
现代文：五年五月，发大水。
English: In May of the fifth year, there was a big flood.

古文：六年五月，又大水。
现代文：六年五月，又发大水。
English: In May of the sixth year, there was another flood.

古文：时幼主冲弱，母后临朝，又将相大臣各执权政，与咸和初同事也。
现代文：当时年幼的君主幼稚，母后代理朝政，又将相大臣各自掌握权力，与咸和初年情况相同。
English: At that time, the young monarch was naïve, his mother acted as regent, and the ministers of state each held power, which was the same situation as in the first year of the Haman and Heian periods.

古文：七年七月甲辰夜，涛水入石头，死者数百人。
现代文：七年七月甲辰夜，汹涌的大水冲入石头，死数百人。
English: On the night of the first hour of July in the seventh year, the raging water rushed into the stone, killing hundreds of people.

古文：是时殷浩以私忿废蔡谟，遐迩非之。
现代文：这时殷浩以私愤罢免蔡谟，远近的人都指责他。
English: At this time, Yin Hao dismissed Zhaimou in a fit of pique, and people near and far blamed him.

古文：又幼主在上而殷桓交恶，选徒聚甲，各崇私权，阴胜阳之应也。
现代文：又年幼的君主在上而殷浩、桓温发生冲突，挑选部众集合军士，各人都要提高自己的权力威望，这是阴胜阳的应兆。
English: In addition, the conflict between the young monarchs, Yinhao and Huanwen, occurred at the top, and soldiers were gathered from all over the country. Each of them wanted to increase their power and prestige. This was a sign of yin defeating yang.

古文：一说，涛水入石头，以为兵占。
现代文：一说，汹涌的大水冲入互头，被认为是起兵事的预兆。
English: For one thing, the rush of water into each other is considered to be a harbinger of war.

古文：是后殷浩、桓温、谢尚、荀羡连年征伐，百姓愁怨也。
现代文：后来殷浩、但温、邀适、茎羞连年征伐攻战，百姓忧愁怨愤。
English: Later, Yinhao, Danwen, Zhishu, and Zhuxun fought in successive years, and the people were sad and angry.

古文：升平二年五月，大水。
现代文：升平二年五月，发大水。
English: In May of the second year of Shangping, there was a big flood.

古文：五年四月，又大水。
现代文：五年四月，又发大水。
English: In April 2005, another flood occurred.

古文：是时桓温权制朝廷，专征伐，阴胜阳也。
现代文：这时桓温控制朝政，专事征战讨伐，阴胜阳。
English: At this time, Kuan-Wen controlled the imperial government and specialized in war campaigns. Yin won over yang.

古文：海西太和六年六月，京师大水，平地数尺，浸及太庙。
现代文：海西太和六年六月，京师发大水，平地敷尺深，淹到太庙。
English: In June of the 6th year of the Taihe era in the western part of the Sea of Japan, a large amount of water was unleashed in Beijing, covering the flat ground to a depth of a yard and flooding the Imperial Temple.

古文：硃雀大航缆断，三艘流入大江。
现代文：朱雀大船的缆绳断裂，三艘流入大江。
English: The cable of the Suzaku big ship broke, and three ships flowed into the big river.

古文：丹阳、晋陵、吴郡、吴兴、临海五郡又大水，稻稼荡没，黎庶饥馑。
现代文：丹杨、晋陵、吴郡、吴兴、临海五郡又发大水，冲走庄稼，黎民百姓遭受饥荒。
English: The five counties of Danyang, Jinling, Wu County, Wu Xing and Linhai also experienced heavy water, washing away crops, and the people of Lai suffered from famine.

古文：初，四年桓温北伐败绩，十丧其九，五年又征淮南，逾岁乃克，百姓愁怨之应也。
现代文：当初，四年桓温北伐失败，损失十分之九，五年又征讨淮南，一年多才平定，这是百姓忧愁怨愤的应兆。
English: At first, the northward campaign of Huanwen failed in four years, with a loss of nine-tenths, and the southward campaign in five years, and it took more than a year to pacify, which was a sign of the people's sorrow and resentment.

古文：简文帝咸安元年十二月壬午，涛水入石头。
现代文：简文帝咸安元年十二月壬午，汹涌的大水冲入石头。
English: On the morning of December in the first year of Emperor Jianwen's reign, a raging torrent of water rushed into the stone.

古文：明年，妖贼卢竦率其属数百人入殿，略取武库三库甲仗，游击将军毛安之讨灭之，兵兴、阴盛之应也。
现代文：第二年，贼寇卢竦率领部众几百人进入宫殿，掠夺武库三库的兵器仪仗，游击将军毛安之讨伐消灭了他，这是军队兴起阴盛的应兆。
English: In the second year, the bandit Kole Loo, led by several hundred people, entered the palace, plundered the arsenal and three warehouses of weapons, and the guerrilla general Mao An's crusade eliminated him. This was a sign of the rise of the army.

古文：孝武帝太元三年六月，大水。
现代文：孝武帝太元三年六月，发大水。
English: In June of the third year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, a great flood occurred.

古文：是时帝幼弱，政在将相。
现代文：这时孝武帝幼小，朝政由将相掌握。
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaowu was still a child, and the imperial government was controlled by the generals.

古文：五年五月，大水。
现代文：五年五月，发大水。
English: In May of the fifth year, there was a big flood.

古文：六年六月，扬、荆、江三州大水。
现代文：六年六月，扬、荆、江三州发大水。
English: In June of the sixth year, Yang, Jing and Jiang provinces were hit by floods.

古文：八年三月，始兴、南康、庐陵大水，平地五丈。
现代文：八年三月，始兴、南康、庐陵发大水，平地有五丈深。
English: In March of the eighth year, large amounts of water were released in Shixing, Nankang, and Fuling, with the depth of the flat land reaching five meters.

古文：十年五月，大水。
现代文：十年五月，发大水。
English: In May of the tenth year, there was a big flood.

古文：自八年破苻坚后，有事中州，役无宁岁，愁怨之应也。
现代文：从八年打败苻坚后，出兵中州，没有一年安宁而没有劳役，这是忧愁怨愤的应兆。
English: From eight years after the defeat of Yan Jian to the dispatch of troops to Zhongzhou, there has not been a year of peace without labor service, which is a sign of sorrow and resentment.

古文：十三年十二月，涛水入石头，毁大航，杀人。
现代文：十三年十与，汹涌大水冲入石头，毁坏大船，淹死人。
English: On the thirteenth day of the thirteenth month, the raging waters rushed into the stone, destroying the big ship and drowning people.

古文：明年，慕容氏寇扰司兗，镇戍西北，疲于奔命，愁怨之应也。
现代文：第二年，慕容氏侵扰司州、兖州，镇守防卫西北，疲于奔命，这是忧愁怨愤的应兆。
English: In the second year, the Murong clan invaded Shizhou and Zhangzhou, and the town guards defended the northwest, exhausted from running for their lives. This was a sign of sorrow and resentment.

古文：十五年七月，沔中诸郡及兗州大水。
现代文：十五年七月，沔中各郡及兖州发大水。
English: In July of the fifteenth year, all counties in Central Yunnan and Yunnan Province were flooded.

古文：是时缘河纷争，征戍勤瘁之应也。
现代文：逭时沿黄河有纷争，这是征伐戍边频繁劳累兵民的应兆。
English: At that time, there were disputes along the Yellow River, which was a response to the frequent exhaustion of soldiers and civilians during the campaign.

古文：十七年六月甲寅，涛水入石头，毁大航，漂船舫，有死者。
现代文：十七年六月甲寅，汹涌大水冲入石头，冲毁大船，冲走船舫，有死亡的人。
English: In June 17th, Jia Yin, the turbulent water rushed into the stone, destroying the big ship, washing away the anchor, and there were deaths.

古文：京口西浦亦涛入杀人。
现代文：京口西浦也有大水冲入淹死人。
English: In Kyoguchi Nishiura, large amounts of water also rushed in, drowning people.

古文：永嘉郡潮水涌起，近海四县人多死。
现代文：永嘉郡潮水汹涌而起，近海的四个县有很多人死亡。
English: In Yongjia County, the tide surged, and many people died in four counties along the coast.

古文：后四年帝崩，而王恭再攻京师，京师亦发众以御之，兵彼频兴，百姓愁怨之应也。
现代文：后四年孝武帝去世，而王恭两次攻打京师，京师也发动民众抵御，兵役频繁，这是百姓忧愁怨愤的应兆。
English: In the last four years, Emperor Xiaowu died, and Wang Gong twice attacked the Beijing Division, and the Beijing Division also mobilized the people to resist. Military service was frequent, which was a sign of the people's sorrow and resentment.

古文：十八年六月己亥，始兴、南康、庐陵大水，深五丈。
现代文：十八年六月己亥，始兴、南康、庐陵发大水，水深五丈。
English: In June of the 18th year of Ji Hai, Shixing, Nankang and Fuling were flooded, with water depth of five meters.

古文：十九年七月，荆徐大水，伤秋稼。
现代文：十九年七月，荆、徐发大水，损伤秋庄稼。
English: In July of the 19th year, Jing and Xu had heavy water, which damaged the autumn crops.

古文：二十年六月，荆徐又大水。
现代文：二十年六月，荆、徐又发大水。
English: In June of the 20th year, Jing and Xu were flooded again.

古文：二十一年五月癸卯，大水。
现代文：二十一年五月癸卯，发大水。
English: In May 21st, there was a big flood.

古文：是时政事多弊，兆庶非之。
现代文：这时政事有很多弊病，百姓反对。
English: At this time, there were many ills in the government, and the people opposed it.

古文：安帝隆安三年五月，荆州大水，平地三丈。
现代文：安帝隆安三年五月，荆州发大水，平地有三丈深。
English: In May of the third year of An Di Long'an, Jingzhou was flooded, and the flat land was three meters deep.

古文：去年殷仲堪举兵向京师，是年春又杀郗恢，阴盛作威之应也。
现代文：前一年殷仲堪起兵进攻京师，这年春又杀郗恢，这是阴盛作威的应兆。
English: The previous year, Yin Zhongkang raised an army to attack the Beijing Division, and this spring, he killed many soldiers, which is a sign of Yin Sheng's arrogance.

古文：仲堪寻亦败亡。
现代文：殷仲堪不久也败亡。
English: Yin Zhongkan was soon defeated as well.

古文：五年五月，大水。
现代文：五年五月，发大水。
English: In May of the fifth year, there was a big flood.

古文：是时会稽王世子元显作威陵上，又桓玄擅西夏，孙恩乱东国，阴胜阳之应也。
现代文：遣时会稽王世子元颢作威作福侵凌君王，又桓玄专权西夏，孙恩在东部地区作乱，这是阴胜阳的应兆。
English: It is a sign of yin conquering yang that the king's descendant, Yuan Xuan, will make a threat to the king, invade the king, and Sun En will make a disturbance in the eastern region, while Huan Xuan has exclusive power in the western region.

古文：元兴二年十二月，桓玄篡位。
现代文：元兴二年十二月，桓玄篡位。
English: In December of the second year of the Genko era, Kangen usurped the throne.

古文：其明年二月庚寅夜，涛水入石头。
现代文：第二年二月庚寅夜，汹涌大水冲入石头。
English: On the night of February 2nd, the raging water rushed into the stone.

古文：商旅方舟万计，漂败流断，骸胔相望。
现代文：商旅舟船数以万计漂流断毁，尸骸处处可见。
English: Tens of thousands of merchant ships are adrift and wrecked, and bodies can be seen everywhere.

古文：江左虽频有涛变，未有若斯之甚。
现代文：江左虽然常常有汹涌大水的变故，但没有像这样严重的。
English: Although there are often turbulent and large water changes in the Yangtze River, there is nothing as serious as this.

古文：三月，义军克京都，玄败走，遂夷灭之。
现代文：三月，义军攻克京都，桓玄败逃，遂即诛杀除灭了他。
English: In March, the rebel army conquered Kyoto, Kanzen was defeated and fled, and he was killed immediately.

古文：三年二月己丑朔夜，涛水入石头，漂没杀人，大航流败。
现代文：三年二月己丑初一夜，汹涌大水冲入石头，冲毁淹死人，桥梁被毁。
English: On the first night of February in the third year, the raging water rushed into the stone, washed away and drowned people, and the bridge was destroyed.

古文：义熙元年十二月己未，涛水入石头。
现代文：义熙元年十二月己未，汹涌大水冲入石头。
English: In December of the first year of Yixi, the raging water rushed into the stone.

古文：二年十二月己未夜，涛水入石头。
现代文：二年十二月己未夜，汹涌大水冲入石头。
English: It was late in December of the second year, and a torrent of water was rushing into the stone.

古文：明年，骆球父环潜结桓胤、殷仲文等谋作乱，刘稚亦谋反，凡所诛灭数十家。
现代文：第二年，骆球的父亲骆环暗中勾结桓胤、殷仲文等人谋划作乱，刘稚等人也谋划反叛，总共被诛杀灭族的有几十家。
English: In the second year, Luo Guan's father Luo Huan secretly colluded with Huan Tan and Yin Zhongwen and others to plan a riot, and Liu Zhi and others also planned a rebellion. In total, dozens of families were killed.

古文：三年五月丙午，大水。
现代文：三年五月丙午，发大水。
English: On the afternoon of May 3rd, there was a big flood.

古文：四年十二月戊寅，涛水入石头。
现代文：四年十二月戊寅，汹涌大水冲入石头。
English: In December of the fourth year of Wu Yin, the turbulent water rushed into the stone.

古文：明年，王旅北讨。
现代文：第二年，皇帝的军队北伐。
English: The following year, the emperor's army began the Northern Expedition.

古文：六年五月丁巳，大水。
现代文：六年五月丁巳，发大水。
English: In May of the sixth year, Ding Si was born.

古文：乙丑，卢循至蔡洲。
现代文：乙丑，卢循到达蔡洲。
English: Second Ugly, Lu Xun arrived in Caizhou.

古文：八年六月，大水。
现代文：八年六月，发大水。
English: In June of the same year, a large flood occurred.

古文：九年五月辛巳，大水。
现代文：九年五月辛巳，发大水。
English: In May of the ninth year, it was very hot, and there was a lot of rain.

古文：十年五月丁丑，大水。
现代文：十年五月丁丑，发大水。
English: In May of the tenth year, Ding ugly, hair big water.

古文：戊寅，西明门地穿，涌水出，毁门扇及限，亦水沴土也。
现代文：戊寅，西明门地裂出水，毁坏门板和门槛，也是水克土。
English: In Wuyin and Ximing, water burst out of the door, destroying the door panel and the threshold.

古文：七月乙丑，淮北风灾，大水杀人。
现代文：七月乙丑，淮北受风灾，大水淹死人。
English: In the second month of July, Huaibei was hit by a typhoon, and people were drowned in the flood.

古文：十一年七月丙戌，大水，淹渍太庙，百官赴救。
现代文：十一年七月丙戌，发大水，淹浸太庙，百官赶去抢救。
English: In July of the eleventh year of the Heian period, a large amount of water flooded the Imperial Temple, and hundreds of officials rushed to the rescue.

古文：明年，王旅北讨关河。
现代文：第二年，皇帝的军队北上征讨关、河地区。
English: The following year, the emperor's army went north to conquer the Guan and He regions.

古文：《经》曰： 敬用五事：一曰貌，二曰言，三曰视，四曰听，五曰思。
现代文：《经》曰： 民有五事：一为貌，二为言，三为视，四为听，五为思。
English: "Scripture" says: People have five things: one is appearance, two is speech, three is sight, four is hearing, and five is thought.

古文：貌曰恭，言曰从，视曰明，听曰聪，思曰睿。
现代文：貌称作恭，言称作从，枧称作明，听称作聪，思称作睿。
English: Appearance is called qing, speech is called zhu, speech is called ming, hearing is called zhu, and thinking is called rui.

古文：恭作肃，从作乂，明作哲，聪作谋，睿作圣。
现代文：恭生肃，从生义，明生哲，聪生谋，睿生圣。
English: Respectful and sober, from life and righteousness, bright and wise, clever and wise, wise and holy.

古文：休徵：曰肃，时雨若；乂，时晹若；哲，时燠若；谋，时寒若；圣，时风若。
现代文：吉兆：肃，时或降雨；义，时或晴朗；哲，时或温暖；谋，时或寒冷；圣，时或风吹。
English: Auspicious signs: Shu, when it rains; Righteousness, when it is sunny; Zhe, when it is warm; Mu, when it is cold; Shen, when the wind blows.

古文：咎徵：曰狂，恆雨若；僭，恆晹若；豫，恆燠若；急，恆寒若；恆风若。 
现代文：凶兆：狂，连续降雨；僭，连续晴天；豫，连续温热；急，连续寒冷；霜，连续大风。 
English: Bad omen: Crazy, continuous rainfall; Hail, continuous sunny weather; Yu, continuous warm weather; Rapid, continuous cold weather; Frost, continuous strong wind.

古文：《传》曰： 貌之不恭，是谓不肃，厥咎狂，厥罚恆雨，厥极恶。
现代文：《传》曰： 外貌不恭，称之为不肃，其凶为狂，其惩罚是连续不停降雨，非常凶险。
English: "Biography" says: The appearance is disrespectful, it is called shameless, its ferocity is crazy, its punishment is continuous non-stop rainfall, very dangerous.

古文：时则有服妖，时则有龟孽，时则有鸡祸，时则有下体生上之痾，时则有青眚青祥。
现代文：时则有服饰奇异，时则有龟孽，时则有鶸祸，时则有下肢长在上身的怪病，时则有青色的灾异或青色的祥兆。
English: Sometimes there are strange costumes, sometimes there are curses, sometimes there are misfortunes, sometimes there are strange diseases of the lower limbs growing on the upper body, sometimes there are blue disasters or blue auspicious signs.

古文：惟金沴木。 
现代文：金克木。 
English: It is made of gold birch.

古文：说曰：凡草木之类谓之妖。
现代文：解说：凡草木之类称之为妖。
English: Explanation: All plants and trees are called demons.

古文：妖犹夭胎，言尚微也。
现代文：妖就像是说夭胎，是说还比较小。
English: Demon is like saying stillborn, meaning still relatively small.

古文：虫豸之类谓之孽。
现代文：虫豸之类称之为孽。
English: Insect larvae and the like are called maggots.

古文：孽则芽孽矣。
现代文：孽就是芽孽。
English: Iniquity is the bud of iniquity.

古文：及六畜，谓之祸，言其著也。
现代文：至于六畜，称之为祸，是说已经很明显了。
English: As for the six beasts, to call it a calamity is to say that it is already obvious.

古文：及人，谓之痾。
现代文：至于人，称之为疴。
English: As for man, he is called a maggot.

古文：痾，病貌也，言浸深也。
现代文：病，是病的形象，是说病很深了。
English: Illness, is the image of illness, is to say that the disease is very deep.

古文：甚则有异物生，谓之眚；自外来，谓之祥。
现代文：更进一步就是有怪异之物生出，称之为眚；从外而来，称之为祥。
English: To take it a step further, if something strange arises, it is called a swan; if it comes from outside, it is called a dragonfly.

古文：祥，犹祯也。
现代文：祥，如同祯。
English: Xiang, like a cormorant.

古文：气相伤，谓之沴。
现代文：气相伤害，称之为诊。
English: For gas injuries, it's called a clinic.

古文：沴犹临莅，不和意也。
现代文：诊就像凌其上，是不和之意。
English: "Diagnostic" is like "superior," which means "incompatible."

古文：每一事云 时则 以绝之，言非必俱至，或有或亡，或在前或在后。
现代文：每一种事称 时则 断言，说的是不一定都出现，可能出现也可能不出现，可能在前也可能在后。
English: Each event is asserted to have not necessarily occurred, may or may not have occurred, may or may not have occurred, may or may not have occurred.

古文：孝武时，夏侯始昌通《五经》，善推《五行传》，以传族子夏侯胜，下及许商，皆以教所贤弟子。
现代文：孝武帝时，夏侯始昌通晓《五经》，善于推算《五行传》，传授给了同族子侄夏侯胜，后传到许商，都以此教授他们认为贤明的弟子。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, Xia Hou Shichang was familiar with the "Five Classics" and was good at calculating the "Five Elements." He passed it on to his cousin Xia Hou Sheng, and later to Xu Shang, both of whom used it to teach their wise disciples.

古文：其传与刘向同，惟刘歆传独异。
现代文：其传授的和刘向相同，衹有刘歆传授的与人不同。
English: His teachings are the same as Liu Xiang's, but those taught by Liu Yao are different from others.

古文：貌之不恭，是谓不肃。
现代文：外貌的不恭，这叫做不肃。
English: Disrespectful appearance, this is called shamelessness.

古文：肃，敬也。
现代文：肃是敬的意思。
English: "Shu" means respect.

古文：内曰恭，外曰敬。
现代文：内称恭，外称敬。
English: Inwardly respectful, outwardly respectful.

古文：人君行己，体貌不恭，怠慢骄蹇，则不能敬万事，失则狂易，故其咎狂也。
现代文：帝王行事，体貌不敬，懈怠傲慢骄横迟滞，就不能敬万事，有阙失就会狂乱迷失，所以他的错谬是狂。
English: If an emperor behaves in a disrespectful manner, if he is lazy, arrogant, arrogant and tardy, he cannot respect everything. If he makes a mistake, he will be lost in a frenzy. Therefore, his error is madness.

古文：上慢下暴，则阴气胜，故其罚常雨也。
现代文：上简慢下暴戾，就会阴气胜，所以其惩罚是连续有雨。
English: If it rains too much, it will be bad luck, so the punishment is continuous rain.

古文：水伤百谷，衣食不足，则奸宄并作，故其极恶也。
现代文：水伤害百谷，衣食不足，奸邪罪恶就都会发生，所以是最壤的。
English: Water can damage a hundred grains, lack of food and clothing, and the evil of treachery will all occur, so it is the most loathsome.

古文：一曰，人多被刑，或形貌丑恶，亦是也。
现代文：一说，人多有形体，有的形体外貌丑恶，也是对的。
English: It is right to say that most people have bodies, but some of them are ugly.

古文：风俗狂慢，变节易度，则为剽轻奇怪之服，故有服妖。
现代文：风气习俗狂乱傲慢，改变了礼节法度，就会出现奇异怪诞的服饰，所以有奇装异服。
English: The culture and customs are insanely arrogant and have changed the rules of etiquette. Strange and bizarre clothing will appear, so there are strange clothes.

古文：水类动，故有龟孽。
现代文：水类动，所以有龟孽。
English: Water moves, therefore there is evil.

古文：于《易》，《巽》为鸡。
现代文：在《易》中，《巽》是鶸。
English: In Yi, "" is.

古文：鸡有冠、距，文武之貌。
现代文：鶸有冠、距，是文武之貌。
English: 有冠、距,是文武之貌.

古文：而不为威，貌气毁，故有鸡祸。
现代文：若没有威，外貌的气损毁，所以有鸡祸。
English: If there is no dignity, the appearance of gas damage will be destroyed, so there is a chicken accident.

古文：一曰，水岁多鸡死及为怪，亦是也。
现代文：一说，水年多有鸡死而成为精怪，也是鸡祸。
English: First, it was said that in the water year, many chickens died and became eccentrics, which was also a chicken disaster.

古文：上失威仪，则有强臣害君上者，故有下体生于上之痾。
现代文：上失去威仪，就会有强臣侵害君主，所以有下肢长在上体的怪病。
English: If the upper body loses its dignity, there will be powerful vassals to infringe on the monarch, so there is a strange disease of the lower limbs growing on the upper body.

古文：木色青，故有青眚青祥。
现代文：木色青，所以有青色的怪异青色的祥瑞。
English: Wood is blue, so there is a strange blue Xiang Rui with a blue ring.

古文：凡貌伤者病木气，木气病则金沴之，冲气相通也。
现代文：凡是外貌损伤的就是木气有病，木气病金就会克木，这是冲气相通。
English: Any damage to the appearance is wood gas disease, wood gas disease, the gold will crack the wood, this is the impact of gas.

古文：于《易》，《震》在东方，为春为木；《兑》在西方，为秋为金；《离》在南方，为夏为火；《坎》在北方，为冬为水。
现代文：在《易》中，《震》在东方，是春是木；《兑》在西方，是秋是金；《离》在南方，是夏是火；《坎》在北方，是冬是水。
English: In Yi, Zhen in the east is spring and wood; Du in the west is autumn and gold; Li in the south is summer and fire; Kan in the north is winter and water.

古文：春与秋日夜分，寒暑平，是以金木之气易以相变，故貌伤则致秋阴常雨，言伤则致春阳常旱也。
现代文：春和秋日夜平分，寒暑均等，因此金木之气容易相变，所以外貌损伤就会导致秋阴常雨，言语损伤就会导致春阳常旱。
English: Spring and autumn are equally divided into day and night, cold and heat are equal, so the qi of gold and wood is easy to phase change, so the appearance damage will lead to the autumn shade and rain, and the speech damage will lead to the spring sun and drought.

古文：至于冬夏，日夜相反，寒暑殊绝，水火之气不得相并，故视伤常燠、听伤常寒者，其气然也。
现代文：至于冬夏，日夜相反，寒暑差别极远，水火之气不能相克，所以视有损害会常温热，听有损害会常寒冷，是其气如此。
English: As for winter and summer, contrary to day and night, the difference between hot and cold is extremely far, and the gas of water and fire cannot compete, so if there is damage, it will be hot at room temperature, and if there is damage, it will be cold, which is its gas.

古文：逆之，其极曰恶；顺之，其福曰攸好德。
现代文：背逆，其极叫做恶；顺应，其福叫做攸好德。
English: Rebellion, its extreme, is called evil; compliance, its blessing, is called virtue.

古文：刘歆《貌传》曰有鳞虫之孽，羊祸，鼻痾。
现代文：刘歆《貌传》说有鳞虫的妖孽，羊祸，鼻病。
English: Liu Wei's "Mao Zhuan" says that there are scale-worm sorcery, sheep plague, and rhinitis.

古文：说以为于天文东方辰为龙星，故为鳞虫。
现代文：解说认为在天文上东方的星辰是龙星，所以是鳞虫。
English: The commentary believes that the star in the east is a dragon star, so it is a scale insect.

古文：于《易》，《兑》为羊，木为金所病，故致羊祸，与常雨同应。
现代文：在《易》中，《兑》是羊，木被金所伤，所以导致羊祸，和常雨应兆相同。
English: In Yi, Dui is a sheep, and wood is injured by gold, so it leads to sheep disaster, which is the same as the sign of frequent rain.

古文：此说非是。
现代文：这种说法不对。
English: This is not true.

古文：春与秋气阴阳相敌，木病金盛，故能相并，惟此一事耳。
现代文：春和秋之气阴阳相等，木有病金强盛，所以能相克，祇是遣一种情况罢了。
English: The qi of spring and autumn is equal to the yin and yang, and the wood is sick and strong, so it can be controlled, but it is only one situation.

古文：祸与妖痾祥眚同类，不得独异。
现代文：祸与妖疴祥眚同类，不能单独有异常。
English: Woe is of the same kind as evil, and cannot be abnormal alone.

古文：魏尚书邓飏扬行步驰纵，筋不束体，坐起倾倚，若无手足，此貌之不恭也。
现代文：魏尚书邓飏行走步伐急速随意，筋骨不约束肢体，坐起倾身倚靠，就像没有手脚，这是形貌的不恭。
English: Wei Shangshu Deng Qi's walking pace is rapid and casual, the bones and sinews do not constrain the limbs, sitting up, leaning and leaning, as if there are no hands and feet, this is the appearance of disrespect.

古文：管辂谓之鬼躁。
现代文：管辖称之为鬼躁。
English: The authorities call it "ghost mania."

古文：鬼躁者，凶终之征，后卒诛也。
现代文：鬼躁，凶险命终的征兆，邓飏后来终于被杀。
English: In a fit of rage, a sign that his life was in danger, Deng Yao was finally killed.

古文：惠帝元康中，贵游子弟相与为散发倮身之饮，对弄婢妾，逆之者伤好，非之者负讥，希世之士耻不与焉。
现代文：惠帝元康年间，显贵的王公子弟相互结伴披散头发裸露身体宴会，公然戏弄婢女侍妾，背逆他们的人受伤害，非难他们的人遭受呵责，世俗之人耻于同他们为伍。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hui Yuankang, the sons of eminent princes accompanied each other, wore their hair loose and bared their bodies at banquets, openly teased their maids and concubines, those who rebelled against them were hurt, those who criticized them suffered reproach, and secular people were ashamed to be in their company.

古文：盖貌之不恭，胡狄侵中国之萌也。
现代文：形貌的不恭，是胡狄侵犯中原的先兆。
English: The appearance of disrespect is a harbinger of Hu Di's invasion of the Central Plains.

古文：其后遂有五胡之乱，此又失在狂也。
现代文：此后就有二胡之乱，这又是失在狂。
English: After that, there was the Erhu Disturbance, which was another case of losing one's way.

古文：元康中，贾谧亲贵，数入二宫，与储君游戏，无降下心。
现代文：元康年间，贾谧受宠显贵，多次进入束宫，和太子游玩嬉戏，没有卑谦尊敬的态度。
English: During the Yuan and Kang dynasties, Jia Zhang was favored by the nobility. He entered the Sokong Palace many times, and played with the prince. He did not have a humble and respectful attitude.

古文：又尝因弈棋争道，成都王颖厉色曰： 皇太子国之储贰，贾谧何敢无礼！ 
现代文：又曾经因为下棋争执，成都王司马颖声色俱厉地说： 皇太子是国家未来的国君，贾谧怎么敢无礼! 
English: Once again, because of a dispute over playing chess, Chengdu Wang Sima Ying said in a strained voice: The crown prince is the future ruler of the country, how dare Jia Wei be rude!

古文：谧犹不悛，故及于祸，貌不恭之罚也。
现代文：买谧仍然不悔改，所以遭到灾祸，是形貌不恭的惩罚。
English: He still did not repent, so he suffered a disaster, which was a cruel punishment.

古文：齐王冏既诛赵王伦，因留辅政，坐拜百官，符敕台府，淫专骄，不一朝觐，此狂恣不肃之咎也。
现代文：齐王司马冈诛杀赵王司马伦后，就留下来辅佐朝政，坐着授百官，领敕符命给官署，酗酒淫乱专断骄横，不再进见君主，这是狂妄恣意不敬的罪责。
English: After King Sima Gang of Qi killed King Sima Lun of Zhao, he stayed to assist in the government of the dynasty. He sat to confer hundreds of officials, took orders to the government office, drank alcohol, committed adultery, was arbitrary and arrogant, and no longer visited the monarch. This was a crime of arrogance and disrespect.

古文：天下莫不高其功而虑其亡也，冏终弗改，遂致夷灭。
现代文：天下人无不认为他功劳很大却担心他的败亡，司马冈始终不改，终于被诛杀灭族。
English: People all over the world thought that he had done a great deal of merit, but they were worried about his downfall. Sima Gang never changed, and he was finally killed.

古文：司马道子于府园内列肆，使姬人酤鬻，身自贸易。
现代文：司马道子在府第园中开店铺，让嫔妃卖粥，亲自去买卖。
English: Sima Daozi opened a shop in the middle of the prefectural garden, let Gongfei sell congee, and personally went to buy and sell.

古文：干宝以为贵者失位，降在皁隶之象也。
现代文：干宝认为是尊贵者丧失其位，降低至仆役的征兆。
English: The dry treasure is considered to be a sign that the dignitary has lost his position and has been reduced to a servant.

古文：俄而道子见废，以庶人终，此貌不恭之应也。
现代文：不久道子被废，以平民身份结束余生，这是形貌不恭的应兆。
English: Not long after, the title was abolished, and he ended the rest of his life as a commoner, which was a sign of disrespect.

古文：安帝义熙七年，将拜授刘毅世子，毅以王命之重，当设飨宴，亲请吏佐临视。
现代文：安帝义熙七年，准备拜授刘毅为太子。刘毅认为王命重大，应设享宴，亲自请官员属下前去。
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Andei Yixi, Liu Yi was preparing to crown Liu Yi as the crown prince. Liu Yi believed that the king's life was important, so he should set up a banquet and personally invite officials to come.

古文：至拜日，国僚不重白，默拜于厩中。
现代文：到了拜授之日，朝廷官员没有再告说，就在马舍中默拜。
English: On the day of the conferment, the court officials did not say anything more, but worshipped silently in the stable.

古文：王人将反命，毅方知之，大以为恨，免郎中令刘敬叔官。
现代文：君王使者将要返回覆命，刘毅才知晓，感到非常愤恨，免除了郎中令刘敬叔的官职。
English: When Liu Yi learned that the king's emissary was about to return, he was so angry that he dismissed his brother-in-law, Liu Jingshu, from his post.

古文：天戒若曰，此惰略嘉礼不肃之妖也。
现代文：天戒这样说，这是懒惰忽略嘉礼不敬的妖异。
English: Heaven's ring says so. This is the strange phenomenon of laziness, disregard for courtesy, and disrespect.

古文：其后毅遂被杀焉。
现代文：此后刘毅遭诛杀。
English: After that, Liu Yi was beaten to death.

古文：庶征恆雨，刘歆以为《春秋》大雨，刘向以为大水。
现代文：征兆持续降雨，刘歆认为《春秋》中是大雨，刘向认为是大水。
English: Signs of continuous rainfall, Liu Wei thought that it was heavy rain in "Spring and Autumn," and Liu Xiang thought it was heavy water.

古文：魏明帝太和元年秋，数大雨，多暴卒，雷电非常，至杀鸟雀。
现代文：魏明帝太和元年秋，数次大雨，多有暴死，雷电异于平常，甚至击杀鸟雀。
English: In the autumn of the first year of the Wei and Ming dynasties, there were several heavy rains, mostly violent deaths, thunder and lightning were different from usual, and even birds and sparrows were killed.

古文：案杨阜上疏，此恆雨之罚也。
现代文：杨阜上奏疏，说是持续降雨的惩罚。
English: Yangfu reported a lack of rain, saying it was the result of continuous rainfall.

古文：时天子居丧不哀，出入弋猎无度，奢侈繁兴，夺农时，故水失其性而恆雨为罚。
现代文：这时天子在丧期不哀伤，外出狩猎没有节制，奢靡豪华大肆铺张，违背农时，所以水失其性而以持续降雨作为惩罚。
English: At this time, the son of heaven did not mourn during the mourning period, went out hunting without restraint, extravagant luxury, and violated the agricultural time, so the water lost its nature and continued rainfall as a punishment.

古文：太和四年八月，大雨霖三十余日，伊、洛、河、汉皆溢，岁以凶饥。
现代文：太和四年八月，大雨绵绵三十多天，伊、洛、河、汉都涨溢，当年因此凶灾饥荒。
English: In August of the same year, it rained heavily for more than 30 days, and the rivers I, Lo, He and Han all overflowed. As a result, there was a terrible famine.

古文：吴孙亮太平二年二月甲寅，大雨，震电。
现代文：吴孙亮太平二年二月甲寅，大雨，雷电。
English: Wu Sunliang was born in the year of Taiping in February of the year of Jia Yin.

古文：乙卯，雪，大寒。
现代文：乙卯，降雪，非常寒冷。
English: Snowing, very cold.

古文：案刘歆说，此时当雨而不当大，大雨，恆雨之罚也。
现代文：刘歆说，逭时候应下雨但不应是大雨，大雨，就是持续降雨的惩罚。
English: Liu Wei said that it should rain at the time of hail, but it should not be heavy rain. Heavy rain is the punishment for continuous rainfall.

古文：于始震电之，明日而雪，大寒，又常寒之罚也。
现代文：在雷电的第二天降雪，非常寒冷，又是持续寒冷的惩罚。
English: On the second day after the thunder and lightning, it snowed, it was very cold, and it was a punishment of continuous cold.

古文：刘向以为既已雷电，则雪不当复降，皆失时之异也。
现代文：刘向认为既然已经有雷电，就不应当再降雪，都是悖失时节的怪异。
English: Liu Xiang believes that since there is already thunder and lightning, there should be no more snowfall, which is a strange phenomenon of the lost season.

古文：天戒若曰，为君失时，贼臣将起。
现代文：天戒这样说，作君王的悖逆时节，叛臣就将出现。
English: Thus saith the Lord, In the time of the king's wrath the traitor shall come.

古文：先震电而后雪者，阴见间隙，起而胜阳，逆弑之祸将成也。
现代文：先雷电然后降雪。是阴气见到有空隙，兴起而胜过阳气，叛逆杀君的祸患就要形成。
English: First lightning and then snowfall. If the yin qi sees a gap, it will rise and prevail over the yang qi, and the calamity of rebellion and murder will be formed.

古文：亮不悟，寻见废。
现代文：孙亮没有醒悟，不久被废。
English: Sun Liang did not wake up and was soon eliminated.

古文：此与《春秋》鲁隐同。
现代文：这与《春秋》鲁隐公年间的情况相同。
English: This is the same as the situation during the "Spring and Autumn" Lu Yingguo period.

古文：武帝泰始六年六月，大雨霖。
现代文：武壶泰始六年六月，大雨连绵不断。
English: In June of the sixth year of Wuchuan Taishi, continuous heavy rain fell.

古文：甲辰，河、洛、伊、沁水同时并溢，流四千九百余家，杀二百余人，没秋稼千三百六十余顷。
现代文：甲辰，河、洛、伊、沁四水同时都涨溢，冲毁四千九百多家，淹死二百多人，淹没秋庄稼一千三百六十多顷。
English: At the same time, the four rivers of Jia Chen, He, Luo, Yi, and Handan all overflowed, destroying more than 4,900 people, drowning more than 200 people, and flooding more than 1,360 hectares of autumn crops.

古文：太康五年七月，任城、梁国暴雨，害豆麦。
现代文：太康五年七月，任越、梁国下暴雨，伤害了豆子麦子。
English: In July of the fifth year of Taikang, heavy rain fell in Ren Yue and Liang Guo, hurting beans and wheat.

古文：九月，南安郡霖雨暴雪，树木摧折，害秋稼。
现代文：九月，南安郡降雨连绵不断又降大雪，树木折断，伤害了秋庄稼。
English: In September, Nan'an County experienced continuous rainfall and heavy snowfall. Trees were broken and autumn crops were damaged.

古文：是秋，魏郡西平郡九县、淮南、平原霖雨暴水，霜伤秋稼。
现代文：当年秋，魏郡和西平郡九县、淮南、平原连续降雨发大水，降霜伤害了秋庄稼。
English: In the autumn of that year, continuous rainfall in nine counties of Wei County and Xiping County, Huainan and the plain caused heavy water, and frost damage to autumn crops.

古文：惠帝永宁元年十月、义阳、南阳、东海霖雨，淹害秋麦。
现代文：惠帝永宁元年十月，义阳、南阳、东海连续降雨，淹毁秋麦。
English: In October of the first year of Huidi Yongning, continuous rainfall in Yiyang, Nanyang and the East China Sea flooded the autumn barley.

古文：元帝太兴三年，春雨至于夏。
现代文：元帝太兴三年，春雨一直下到夏天。
English: In the three years of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, the spring rain continued to fall until summer.

古文：是时王敦执权，不恭之罚也。
现代文：遣时王敦执掌朝政，是对不敬的惩罚。
English: The appointment of Wang Dun to head the imperial government was a punishment for disrespect.

古文：永昌元年，春雨四十余日，昼夜雷电震五十余日。
现代文：永昌元年，春雨下了四十多天，昼夜有雷电五十多天。
English: In the first year of Yongchang, there were more than forty days of spring rain and more than fifty days of thunder and lightning.

古文：是时王敦兴兵，王师败绩之应也。
现代文：这时王敦起兵，这是朝廷军队失败的应兆。
English: At this time, Wang Dun raised an army, which was a sign of the defeat of the imperial army.

古文：成帝咸和四年，春雨五十余日，恆雷电。
现代文：成帝咸和四年，春雨下丁五十多天，持续有雷电。
English: Emperor Chengxian and four years, more than fifty days of spring rain, continuous thunder and lightning.

古文：是时虽斩苏峻，其余党犹据守石头，至其灭后，淫雨乃霁。
现代文：这时虽然斩杀了苏峻，他的余党仍然据守着石头，直到他们灭亡后，连绵不断的降雨才停而天晴。
English: At this time, although Su Jun was killed, his remaining party still held on to the stone, until after their demise, the continuous rain stopped and the sky cleared.

古文：咸康元年八月乙丑，荆州之长沙攸、醴陵、武陵之龙阳，三县雨水，浮漂屋室，杀人，损秋稼。
现代文：咸康元年八月乙丑，荆州的长沙攸县、醴陵，武陵的龙阳，三个县降雨发大水，冲毁房舍，淹死人，损毁秋庄稼。
English: In August of the first year of Xiankang, the second ugly, Jingzhou's Changshayou County, Fuling, Longyang of Wuling, three counties of rainfall caused heavy water, washed away houses, drowned people, and damaged autumn crops.

古文：是时帝幼，权在于下。
现代文：逭时咸帝年幼，政权由下臣掌握。
English: At the time of his death, Emperor Hamdi was young, and the power was in the hands of his subordinates.

古文：服妖魏武帝以天下凶荒，资财乏匮，始拟古皮弁，裁缣帛为白帢，以易旧服。
现代文：魏武帝因天下凶灾饥荒，资金财物严重缺乏，开始仿照古代朝服，裁剪缣帛做成白拾，来改替旧式服装。
English: Emperor Wei Wudi, due to the world-wide famine and severe lack of funds and property, began to imitate the ancient imperial robes, cut cocoons into white, to replace the old-style clothing.

古文：傅玄曰； 白乃军容，非国容也。 
现代文：傅玄说： 白是军队的仪容，不是国家的仪容。 
English: Fu Xuan said: White is the appearance of the army, not the appearance of the country.

古文：干宝以为 缟素，凶丧之象也 。
现代文：干贲认为 白色服装，是凶丧的征兆 。
English: According to the dryads, white clothing is a sign of death.

古文：名之为帢，毁辱之言也，盖革代之后，劫杀之妖也。
现代文：称之为恰，是毁灭受辱的说法，是改换朝代之后，劫杀的妖异。
English: To call it cha is to destroy and humiliate, and it is a strange phenomenon of robbing and killing after changing dynasties.

古文：魏明帝著绣帽，披缥纨半袖，常以见直臣杨阜，谏曰： 此礼何法服邪！ 帝默然。
现代文：魏明帝戴织绣的帽子，披青白色薄绸半袖衣服，常以这样的着装见耿直的大臣杨阜，杨阜劝纤： 这是依照什么礼法的服装呀： 明帝默然无语。
English: Emperor Ming of Wei wore a woven and embroidered cap and a blue and white silk short-sleeved garment. Yang Fu, the minister of Geng Jiu, often saw him in this kind of attire. Yang Fu advised: What kind of etiquette is this? Emperor Ming was speechless.

古文：近服妖也。
现代文：近于奇装异服。
English: Close to fancy dress.

古文：夫缥，非礼之色。
现代文：青白，不是合于礼的颜色。
English: Blue and white is not a proper color.

古文：亵服尚不以红紫，况接臣下乎？
现代文：家居时所穿便服还不用红紫色，何况接见臣下时呢?
English: You don't have to wear red and purple when you're at home, let alone when you're meeting your subjects.

古文：人主亲御非法之章，所谓自作孽不可禳也。
现代文：君主自己穿着不合礼法，逭就是所说的自己作孽不能够除祸。
English: The monarch himself is dressed inappropriately, which means that he cannot remove the evil by his own actions.

古文：帝既不享永年，身没而禄去王室，后嗣不终，遂亡天下。
现代文：明帝没有享年长久，死后福运也离开了王室，后裔没有延续，终于失去了天下。
English: Emperor Ming did not live for long, after his death, the good fortune also left the royal family, the descendants did not continue, and finally lost the world.

古文：景初元年，发铜铸为巨人二，号曰翁仲，置之司马门外。
现代文：景初元年，用铜铸成两个巨人，名为翁仲，立在划马门外。
English: In the first year of Jinghu, two giants, named Wengzhong, were cast in copper and stood outside the horse-drawn carriage gate.

古文：案古长人见，为国亡。
现代文：古代长人出现，国家灭亡。
English: The emergence of ancient elders, the country's demise.

古文：长狄见临洮，为秦亡之祸。
现代文：长狄在堕逃出现，是秦朝灭亡的灾祸。
English: The appearance of Changdi in the downfall and escape was the disaster of the Qin Dynasty's downfall.

古文：始皇不悟，反以为嘉祥，铸铜人以象之。
现代文：始皇没有醒悟，反而认为是吉瑞祥兆，铸造铜人来象征。
English: The first emperor did not wake up, but thought it was a good omen, casting a bronze man to symbolize it.

古文：魏法亡国之器，而于义竟无取焉。
现代文：魏玺遵循制造亡国的器物，而在义礼上终究没有可取的。
English: Wei and Qian followed the rule of making objects for the dead, but in the end, it was not a good idea to do so in a religious ceremony.

古文：盖服妖也。
现代文：这是服饰的妖异。
English: It's the strangeness of clothing.

古文：尚书何晏好服妇人之服，傅玄曰： 此妖服也。
现代文：尚书何晏喜欢穿妇人的衣服，傅玄说： 这是妖服。
English: Shangshu He Rong likes to wear women's clothes, Fu Xuan said: This is a witch costume.

古文：夫衣裳之制，所以定上下殊内外也。
现代文：衣裳之规制，是来确定上下区别内外的。
English: The regulation of clothing is to determine the difference between inside and outside.

古文：《大雅》云 玄衮赤舄，钩膺镂锡 ，歌其文也。
现代文：《大雅》说 绣着卷龙的黑色礼服，红色的鞋子，马头马身装备闪金光，歌唱的是衣裳文的一面。
English: "Daya" said that the black dress embroidered with a curly dragon, red shoes, horse head and horse body equipped with glittering gold, singing is one side of the dress.

古文：《小雅》云 有严有翼，共武之服 ，咏其武也。
现代文：《小雅》说 有严有翼，是共武之服 ，吟咏的是衣裳武的一面。
English: "Xiao Ya" said: "Strict and winged is the uniform of the martial arts, while elegant is the martial side of the clothing."

古文：若内外不殊，王制失叙，服妖既作，身随之亡。
现代文：如果内外没有区别，王制就失去秩序，服饰的妖异出现后，其身就会随之灭亡。
English: If there is no difference between inside and outside, the monarchy will lose order, and after the appearance of the apparel, its body will perish.

古文：妹嬉冠男子之冠，桀亡天下；何晏服妇人之服，亦亡其家，其咎均也。 
现代文：末嬉头戴男子的冠帽，桀失去天下；何晏穿妇人的衣服，也灭了他的家，他们的罪责是相等的。 
English: And if a man put on a woman's garment, and it is destroyed, and he put it on again, and it is destroyed, they are both equally guilty.

古文：吴妇人修容者，急束其发而劘角过于耳，盖其俗自操束太急，而廉隅失中之谓也。
现代文：吴地的妇女修饰容貌，紧束头发而修整鬓角高过耳朵，这种风俗大概来自操束很急，而行为品性有失中庸。
English: The women of Wu decorate their faces, tightly tie their hair and trim their sideburns higher than their ears. This custom probably comes from the fact that they are in a hurry to tie their hair, and their behavior is out of the ordinary.

古文：故吴之风俗，相驱以急，言论弹射，以刻薄相尚。
现代文：所以吴地的风气习俗，相互间行为急迫，言谈诘难，以刻薄相待。
English: Therefore, the customs of Wuxi are to act urgently, speak harshly, and treat each other harshly.

古文：居三年之丧者，往往有致毁以死。
现代文：守三年丧期的，往往有损毁身体而死的。
English: Those who observe the three-year mourning period often die with their bodies destroyed.

古文：诸葛患之，著《正交论》，虽不可以经训整乱，盖亦救时之作也。
现代文：诸葛恪对此感到忧虑，撰写《正交论》，虽然不能够以经典教育整顿混乱，也是拯救时弊的作品。
English: Zhuge Ke was worried about this, and wrote "Orthodoxy," although it could not rectify the chaos with classical education, it was also a work to save the times.

古文：孙休后，衣服之制上长下短，又积领五六而裳居一二。
现代文：孙休之后，衣服的形制上长下短，又叠领占十之五六而下身占十之一二。
English: After Sun Xiu, the shape of the clothes is long and short, and the overlapping collar accounts for five-sixths of ten, while the lower body accounts for one-two-tenths.

古文：干宝曰： 上饶奢，下俭逼，上有余下不足之妖也。 
现代文：干宝说： 上身多而繁奢，下身节俭紧短，是上有余下不足的妖异。 
English: Gan Bao said: The upper body is abundant and luxurious, while the lower body is frugal and short. It is a strange phenomenon that there are some deficiencies on the upper body.

古文：至孙皓，果奢暴恣情于上，而百姓雕困于下，卒以亡国，是其应也。
现代文：到孙皓时，果然在上奢侈暴虐放纵情欲，而百姓在下穷苦困顿，终于亡国，是其应兆。
English: By the time of Sun Yat-sen, it was indeed extravagant tyranny and indulgence of lust on the top, while the people were poor and destitute on the bottom, and finally the country was destroyed, which was its response.

古文：武帝泰始初，衣服上俭下丰，著衣者皆厌衤要，此君衰弱，臣放纵，下掩上之象也。
现代文：武帝泰始初年，衣服上身俭朴下身繁复，穿衣的都束紧腰身，这是君王衰弱，臣下放纵，下蒙蔽上的征兆。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wu's reign, the clothing of the upper body was frugal and simple, while the lower body was complicated, and those who wore clothes were tightly bound at the waist. This was a sign that the emperor was weak, his vassals were indulgent, and he was blinded.

古文：至元康末，妇人出两裆，加乎交领之上，此内出外也。
现代文：到元康末年，妇女服装出现坎肩，加在交叠衣领之上，这是内出到外。
English: By the end of the Yuan and Kang dynasties, women's clothing appeared shoulder pads, added on top of overlapping collars, which was inside-out.

古文：为车乘者苟贵轻细，又数变易其形，皆以白篾为纯，盖古丧车之遗象也。
现代文：制作车乘的人重视轻巧细腻，又多次改变其形状，都以白竹篾镶边，是古代丧车的遣留的迹象。
English: The people who made the carriage attached importance to lightness and delicacy, and changed its shape many times, all with white bamboo rims, which is a sign of the transfer of the ancient funeral carriage.

古文：夫乘者，君子之器。
现代文：车乘，是君子之物。
English: A carriage ride is a gentleman's thing.

古文：盖君子立心无恆，事不崇实也。
现代文：君子立心没有恒定，是事不崇实。
English: If a gentleman's determination is not constant, it is not noble.

古文：干宝以为晋之祸征也。
现代文：干宜认为是晋朝祸难的征兆。
English: It was considered to be a sign of disaster for the Jin Dynasty.

古文：及惠帝践阼，权制在于宠臣，下掩上之应也。
现代文：等到惠帝登基，权力掌握在宠爱的臣子手裹，是下蒙蔽上的应兆。
English: Wait until Hui Di ascends to the throne, the power is in the hands of the favorite vassal, which is a sign of being blinded.

古文：至永嘉末，六宫才人流冗没于戎狄，内出外之应也。
现代文：到永嘉末年，六宫才人流散沦落到戎狄中，是内出到外的应兆。
English: By the end of Yongjia, it was only in the sixth palace that people were scattered and fell into the middle of the army, which was a response to the outside world.

古文：及天下挠乱，宰辅方伯多负其任，又数改易不崇实之应也。
现代文：等到天下混乱动荡，宰辅大臣各地诸侯多仗恃自己的权势，又是多次改变不崇实的应兆。
English: By the time the world was in chaos and turmoil, the vice-ministers and lords of various regions were more concerned with their own power, which was a sign of many changes.

古文：泰始之后，中国相尚用胡床貊槃，及为羌煮貊炙，贵人富室，必畜其器，吉享嘉会，皆以为先。
现代文：泰始之后，中原崇尚使用胡人的轻便坐具胡床、貊族装食物的盛器貊盘，以及羌族貊族的烹煮方式，尊贵富足人家，必定有这样的器物，吉曰供祭举行宴会，都以此为先。
English: After the beginning of the Tai Dynasty, the Central Plains advocated the use of the Hu people's light seat and the Hu bed, the Yi people's food containers and plates, and the Yi people's cooking methods. Noble and wealthy people must have such utensils, and it is auspicious to hold a banquet for the festival.

古文：太康中，又以氈为絈头及络带袴口。
现代文：太康年间，又用毡作为纳头、络带、裤口。
English: During the Taikang period, the yakitori was also used as a headdress, braid, and trouser opening.

古文：百姓相戏曰，中国必为胡所破。
现代文：百姓相互戏志说，中原必定被胡人打败。
English: People joked with each other that the Central Plains would definitely be defeated by the Hu people.

古文：夫氈毳产于胡，而天下以为絈头、带身、袴口，胡既三制之矣，能无败乎！
现代文：毡毳产于胡地，而天下用来作绌头、带身、裤口，胡人已经控制了这三处，能不失败吗!
English: Cormorants are produced in the Hu region, and the world uses them to make cormorants' heads, bodies, and trouser mouths. The Hu people have controlled these three places. Can they not fail?

古文：至元康中，氐羌互反，永嘉后，刘、石遂篡中都，自后四夷迭据华土，是服妖之应也。
现代文：到元康年问，氐族羌族相反叛，永嘉后，刘渊、石勒终于夺取中都，从此后四夷交替占据中原之地，这是服饰妖异的应兆。
English: In the Yuan and Kang years, the Yi people rebelled against the Yi people, and after Yongjia, Liu Yuan and Shi Le finally captured the Central Capital, from then on, the four Yi alternately occupied the Central Plains, which is a sign of the dress of the strange.

古文：初作屐者，妇人头圆，男子头方。
现代文：起初制做的木屐，妇女的屐头圆，男子的屐头方。
English: Originally made wooden rafts, women's steamed buns round, men's steamed buns square.

古文：圆者顺之义，所以别男女也。
现代文：圆是顺的义，是来区别男女的。
English: A circle is a straight line and is used to differentiate between men and women.

古文：至太康初，妇人屐乃头方，与男无别。
现代文：到太康初年，妇女木屐的头竟成了方形，与男子的没有区别。
English: By the first year of Taikang, the heads of the women's rafts had actually become square, no different from the men's.

古文：此贾后专妒之征也。
现代文：这是贾后专权的征兆。
English: This was a sign of Jia's absolute power.

古文：太康中，天下为《晋世宁》之舞，手接杯盘而反覆之，歌曰 晋世宁，舞杯盘 。
现代文：太康年间，天下跳《晋世宁》的舞蹈，手接杯盘而上下反复，唱着 晋世宁，舞杯盘 。
English: During the Taikang years, the whole world danced the dance of "Jin Shining," holding cups and plates and repeating up and down, singing "Jin Shining, dance cups and plates."

古文：识者曰： 夫乐生人心，所以观事也。
现代文：有识之士说： 舞乐发自人心，是来表现事情的。
English: People of insight say: Dance music comes from the heart and is meant to express things.

古文：今接杯盘于手上而反覆之，至危之事也。
现代文：现在接杯盘在手上而上下反复，是非常危险的事。
English: Now it's very dangerous to pick up a cup and saucer and go up and down repeatedly.

古文：杯盘者，酒食之器，而名曰《晋世宁》，言晋世之士苟偷于酒食之间，而知不及远，晋世之宁犹杯盘之在手也。 
现代文：杯盘，是饮酒进食的器物，名叫《晋世宁》，是说晋世的人在酒食闾苟且偷安，而不能考虑到长远，晋世的安宁就像杯盘在手中。 
English: Cups and plates are drinking and eating utensils. They are called "Jin Shining," which means that people in the Jin Dynasty are fond of drinking and eating and stealing peace, but cannot take the long-term into account. The peace of the Jin Dynasty is like a cup and plate in their hands.

古文：惠帝元康中，妇人之饰有五兵佩，又以金银玳瑁之属，为斧钺戈戟，以当笄。
现代文：惠帝元康年间，妇女的装饰有五种兵器形佩饰，又用金银玳瑁之类，做成斧铁戈戟，来当头笄。
English: During the reign of Hui Di Yuan Kang, women were adorned with five kinds of weapon-shaped ornaments, and used gold and silver brooches and the like to make axe-shaped brooches to serve as head brooches.

古文：干宝以为 男女之别，国之大节，故服物异等，贽币不同。
现代文：干宝认为 男女的区别，是国家的大礼仪，所以服饰物品等级不同，礼品不同。
English: Ganbao believes that the distinction between men and women is the country's great etiquette, so the clothing items are of different grades, and the gifts are different.

古文：今妇人而以兵器为饰，此妇人妖之甚者。
现代文：现今妇女却以兵器作为饰物，这是妇女的妖异很严重的。
English: Nowadays, women use weapons as ornaments, which is a very serious problem for women.

古文：于是遂有贾后之事 。
现代文：不久便有贾后专权的事 。
English: Soon, the matter of Jia's exclusive right to succeed to the throne arose.

古文：终亡天下。
现代文：最终失去天下。
English: Eventually losing the world.

古文：是时妇人结发者既成，以缯急束其环，名曰撷子紒。
现代文：这时妇女结起头发后，用丝织带子紧扎发环，叫作撷子髻。
English: At this time, after the woman knits her hair, she uses a silk ribbon to tightly tie the hair ring, which is called a braid.

古文：始自中宫，天下化之。
现代文：开始于宫中，天下仿照。
English: It started in the palace, and the whole world followed suit.

古文：其后贾后废害太子之应也。
现代文：是此后买后废黜并加害太子的应兆。
English: It is a sign that the crown prince will be dethroned and harmed after the purchase.

古文：元康中，天下始相傚为乌杖以柱掖，其后稍施其镦，住则植之。夫木，东方之行，金之臣也。
现代文：元康年间，天下开始相互以乌杖来做拐杖，后来逐渐加上平底金属套头，停下时就立着它。木，是东方之行，是金之臣。
English: During the Yuan and Kang dynasties, the world began to use black cane as a crutch for each other. Later, flat-bottomed metal heads were gradually added, and it stood up when it stopped. Wood is the journey to the East, and it is the vassal of gold.

古文：杖者扶体之器，乌其头者，尤便用也。
现代文：杖是扶持身体的物体，做成乌形杖头，特别便于使用。
English: A cane is an object that supports the body, made into a black cane head, which is particularly easy to use.

古文：必旁柱掖者，旁救之象也。
现代文：一定要有人用，是要救的征兆。
English: It must be used by someone, it is a sign of rescue.

古文：施其金，柱则植之，言木因于金，能孤立也。
现代文：加上金属，直立时就能立在地上，是说木依靠着金，能够自己立着。
English: With the addition of metal, it can stand on the ground when it is upright, which means that wood relies on gold and can stand on its own.

古文：及怀愍之世，王室多故，而此中都丧败，元帝以籓臣树德东方，维持天下，柱掖之应也。
现代文：等到怀童、壁童时代，王室变故很多，而京都陷落，五帝以藩臣地位在东方树立威德，维持天下，是扶持的应兆。
English: By the time of Kaido and Kikidou, the royal family had changed a lot, and Kyoto had fallen. The Five Emperors used their position as vassals to establish virtue in the East and maintain the world, which was a sign of support.

古文：至社稷无主，海内归之，遂承天命，建都江外，独立之应也。
现代文：到国家没有了君主，海内归顺他，他就承受天命，在长江之南建都，这是独立的应兆。
English: When the country no longer had a monarch, and the country surrendered to him, he received a heavenly mandate to build a capital south of the Yangtze River, which was a sign of independence.

古文：元康、太安之间，江淮之域有败屩自聚于道，多者至四五十量，人或散投坑谷，明日视之复如故。
现代文：元康、太安年间，江、淮地区有破草鞋自己聚在道路上，多的达四五十双，有人将其分散扔到坑穴山谷，第二天见草鞋又回到原位。
English: During the Yuan-Kang and Taian dynasties, there were as many as forty or fifty pairs of broken straw sandals on the roads in the Jiang and Huai regions. Some people scattered them and threw them into the valley. The next day, the sandals returned to their original positions.

古文：或云，见狸衔聚之。
现代文：有人说，看见是狐狸衔来聚在一起的。
English: Some people say that it was the foxes that brought them together.

古文：干宝以为 夫屩者，人之贱服，处于劳辱，黔庶之象也。
现代文：干宝认为 草鞋，是人身上低贱的着装，处于劳作屈辱的地位，是贫民的象征。
English: According to Gan Bao, straw sandals are low-class clothing for the human body, in a humiliating position of labor, and a symbol of the poor.

古文：败者，疲弊之象；道者，四方往来，所以交通王命也。
现代文：破败，是疲惫困顿的象征；道路，四面往来，是用来传达王命的。
English: The ruin is a symbol of weariness and hardship; the road, the four-way traffic, is used to convey the king's order.

古文：今败屩聚于道者，象黔庶罢病，将相聚为乱，以绝王命也 。
现代文：如今破败的草鞋聚在道路，象征贫民疲劳穷困，武将文臣相聚作乱，绝断王命 。
English: Nowadays, dilapidated straw sandals gather on the road, symbolizing the fatigue and poverty of the poor. Generals and courtiers gather to make trouble and cut off the king's life.

古文：太安中，发壬午兵，百姓怨叛。
现代文：太安年间，征发壬午兵，百姓怨愤反叛。
English: During the Taian era, the Jin soldiers were conscripted, and the people revolted.

古文：江夏张昌唱乱，荆楚从之如流。
现代文：江夏张昌发动叛乱，荆、楚地区追随他的人源源不断。
English: Jiangxia Zhangchang launched a rebellion, and people in the Jing and Chu regions followed him.

古文：于是兵革岁起，服妖也。
现代文：于是战乱年年出现，这是服妖。
English: As a result, war appears year after year, and this is the work of demons.

古文：初，魏造白帢，横缝其前以别后，名之曰颜帢，传行之。
现代文：当初，魏做白恰，在前面横缝以区别于后面，叫作颜恰，流传开来。
English: At first, Wei made Bai Cha, with a horizontal slit in the front to distinguish it from the back, called Yan Cha, and it spread.

古文：至永嘉之间，稍去其缝，名无颜帢，而妇人束发，其缓弥甚，紒之坚不能自立，发被于额，目出而已。
现代文：到永嘉年问，逐渐去掉横缝，叫作无颜蛤，而妇女束发更加松散，结成的发髻不能直立，头发披在前额，衹露出眼睛。
English: By the time of the Yongjia New Year, the horizontal slit is gradually removed, and it is called a no-face bun. On the other hand, women's hair is more loosely bundled, and the formed bun cannot stand upright. The hair is draped over the forehead, revealing the eyes.

古文：无颜者，愧之言也。
现代文：无颜，就是说羞愧。
English: Faceless, that is to say ashamed.

古文：覆额者，惭之貌也。
现代文：盖着额头，是惭愧的样子。
English: Covering his forehead, he looked ashamed.

古文：其缓弥甚者，言天下亡礼与义，放纵情性，及其终极，至于大耻也。
现代文：更加松散，是说天下没有礼义，放纵性情，达到极点，至于大耻辱。
English: More loosely, it means that there is no sense of propriety in the world, the indulgence of nature has reached the extreme, and as for the great shame.

古文：永嘉之后，二帝不反，天下愧焉。
现代文：永嘉之后，二位皇帝被掳不回，正是天下的耻辱。
English: After Yongjia, the two emperors were abducted and never returned, which was a disgrace to the world.

古文：孝怀帝永嘉中，士大夫竞服生笺单衣。
现代文：孝怀帝永嘉年间，士大夫竞相穿起生笺单衣。
English: During the Yongjia era of Emperor Xiaohui, scholar-officials competed to wear the single-breasted robe.

古文：识者指之曰： 此则古者繐衰，诸侯所以服天子也。
现代文：有见识的人指着说： 造就是古代稀疏细布的丧服，是诸侯的大夫为天子服孝穿的。
English: People with insight pointed and said: "It is made of ancient thin and thin mourning clothes, which were worn by the doctors of the princes for the sons of heaven.

古文：今无故服之，殆有应乎！ 
现代文：现在无故穿这样的衣服，必有应兆! 
English: Wearing something like that now, for no reason, is bound to backfire!

古文：其后遂有胡贼之乱，帝遇害焉。
现代文：此后就有胡入之乱，孝怀帝遇害。
English: After that, there was a riot, and Emperor Xiaohui was killed.

古文：元帝太兴中，兵士以绛囊缚紒。
现代文：元帝太兴年间，士兵用紫色囊袋扎发髻。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taheung of the Yuan Dynasty, soldiers used purple bags to tie their hair.

古文：识者曰： 紒者在首，为乾，君道也。
现代文：有见识的人说： 发髻在头，是干，代表君王之道。
English: Those with insight say: "Hair stands on end, is dry, and represents the way of kings."

古文：囊者坤，臣道也。
现代文：囊是坤，代表臣子之道。
English: 囊是坤, representing the way of the vassal.

古文：今以硃囊缚紒，臣道上侵君之象也。 
现代文：现在用红色囊袋绑缚发髻，是臣子上侵君王的象征。 
English: Now the hair is tied in a red pouch, a symbol of the emperor's invasion by courtiers.

古文：于是王敦陵上焉。
现代文：这时王敦侵凌君王。
English: At this time, Wang Dun encroached on the king.

古文：旧为羽扇柄者，刻木象其骨形，列羽用十，取全数也。
现代文：旧时做羽扇柄，刻木作为骨架，排列羽毛十根，取全数之义。
English: In the old days, feather fan handles were made, carved wood was used as a skeleton, and ten feathers were arranged, taking the meaning of the whole number.

古文：自中兴初，王敦南征，始改为长柄，下出可捉，而减其羽用八。
现代文：自从中兴初年，王敦南征，开始改成长柄，下部长出可以手握，减羽毛敷为八根。
English: Since the first year of ZHONGXING, Wang Dun Nan Zheng, began to change the growth handle, the lower extension can be hand-held, and the feathers are reduced to eight.

古文：识者尤之曰： 夫羽扇，翼之名也。
现代文：有见识的人指责说： 羽扇，是羽翼的名。
English: People with insight criticized: "Feather fan is the name of a feather.

古文：创为长柄者，将执其柄以制羽翼也。
现代文：用长柄，是将要握持其柄来控制羽翼。
English: With a long handle, it is going to grip its handle to control the wings.

古文：改十为八者，将未备夺已备也。
现代文：改十根为八根，是将要以不完备的取代已完备的。
English: To change ten roots into eight roots is to replace what is complete with what is incomplete.

古文：此殆敦之擅权以制朝廷之柄，又将以无德之材欲窃非据也。 
现代文：这是指王敦专擅朝政来控制朝廷的权柄，又将要用无德之才想窃取不该拥有的。 
English: This means that Wang Dun is trying to control the power of the imperial court by taking advantage of the political power of the imperial court, and he will use the power to steal what he should not have.

古文：是时，为衣者又上短，带才至于掖，著帽者又以带缚项。
现代文：这时，做衣服又是上衣短，衣带仅到腋下，戴帽子又用带子扎系在脖子上。
English: At this time, when making clothes, the jacket is short, the belt only reaches the armpits, and when wearing a hat, it is tied around the neck with a belt.

古文：下逼上，上无地也。
现代文：是下逼迫上，上没有地方。
English: There's no room to go up.

古文：为袴者直幅为口，无杀，下大之象。
现代文：做裤以直幅作口，不束紧，是下大之象。
English: Do pants with a straight width as the mouth, not tight, is the next big thing.

古文：寻而王敦谋逆，再攻京师。
现代文：不久王敦谋划叛乱，两次攻打京都。
English: Soon after, Wang Dun plotted a rebellion and attacked Kyoto twice.

古文：海西嗣位，忘设豹尾。
现代文：海西公继位，忘记装饰豹尾。
English: Haixi Gong's succession, forget to decorate the leopard's tail.

古文：天戒若曰，夫豹尾，仪服之主，大人所以豹变也。
现代文：天戒这样说，豹尾，是礼仪服饰之主，是地位变尊贵的人用作豹变的。
English: According to the heavenly ring, the leopard's tail is the main part of the ceremonial dress, and it is used as a leopard's tail by dignitaries.

古文：而海西豹变之日，非所宜忘而忘之。
现代文：海西公豹变的日子，不应当忘记而忘记了。
English: The day when the male leopard changed into a leopard should not be forgotten, but it was.

古文：非主社稷之人，故忘其豹尾，示不终也。
现代文：不是执掌社稷的人，所以忘记了豹尾，说明不会善终。
English: He is not the person in charge of the company, so he forgot the leopard's tail, indicating that it would not end well.

古文：寻而被废焉。
现代文：不久就被废黜。
English: He was soon deposed.

古文：孝武太元中，人不复著帩头。
现代文：孝武太元年间，人们不再戴悄头。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, people no longer wore the shaved heads.

古文：天戒若曰，头者元首，帩者助元首为仪饰者也。
现代文：天戒这样说，头是元首，峭是辅助元首作为礼仪装饰的。
English: According to the heavenly ring, the head is the head, and the tail is the auxiliary head as a ceremonial decoration.

古文：今忽废之，若人君独立无辅佐，以至危亡也。
现代文：现在忽然废弃，就像人君孤独没有辅佐，将至于危亡。
English: Now suddenly abandoned, like a man alone without a helper, it is in danger of dying.

古文：至安帝，桓玄乃篡位焉。
现代文：到安帝，桓玄便篡位。
English: When Emperor An came to power, Kangen usurped the throne.

古文：旧为屐者，齿皆达楄上，名曰露卯。
现代文：旧时做屐，底下木齿都排到底板上，叫作露卯。
English: In the old days, it was made of straw, and the lower wooden teeth were all lined up on the bottom board, called dew.

古文：太元中忽不彻，名日阴卯。
现代文：太元年间忽然不再排满，叫作阴卯。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, it was suddenly no longer full, and was called Yinwu.

古文：识者以为卯，谋也，必有阴谋之事。
现代文：有见识的人认为卯，是谋，一定有阴谋的事。
English: People with insight believe that if there is a conspiracy, there must be a conspiracy.

古文：至烈宗末，骠骑参军袁悦之始揽构内外，隆安中遂谋诈相倾，以致大乱。
现代文：到烈宗末年，骠骑参军袁悦之开始把持内外政权，隆安年间有阴谋而互相倾轧，造成大乱。
English: Towards the end of the reign of Emperor Reizei, Yuan Yuezhi, who had joined the army as a cavalryman, began to hold power both at home and abroad. During the Longan era, there were conspiracies and mutual rivalries, which caused great turmoil.

古文：太元中，公主妇女必缓鬓倾髻，以为盛饰。
现代文：五年间，公主妇女必定松散鬓发斜结发髻，装饰很多头饰。
English: For the next five years, the princesses wore their hair in loose, braided buns and accessorized with many tiaras.

古文：用髲既多，不可恆戴，乃先于木及笼上装之，名曰假髻，或名假头。
现代文：用的假发很多，不能始终戴着，就先在木头和笼子上装好，叫作假髻，也有叫作假头。
English: There are many wigs used, and if they cannot be worn all the time, they are first mounted on wood and cages, and are called false beaks or false heads.

古文：至于贫家，不能自办，自号无头，就人借头。
现代文：至于贫穷人家，不能自己备办，自称无头，去向人家借头。
English: As for poor people, they can't do it themselves, so they say they have no money and borrow money from others.

古文：遂布天下，亦服妖也。
现代文：于是流行天下，也是服妖。
English: As a result, it became popular all over the world.

古文：无几时，孝武晏驾而天下骚动，刑戮无数，多丧其元。
现代文：没有多久，孝武帝去世天下动荡，杀戮的人不计其敷，大多没有了头。
English: Not long after the death of Emperor Xiaowu, the whole country was in turmoil, and most of those who killed without regard for the consequences were beheaded.

古文：至于大殓，皆刻木及蜡或缚菰草为头，是假头之应云。
现代文：到大殓时，都刻木和蜡或者捆扎菰草做成头，遣是假头的应兆。
English: By the time they reach the Great Hall, they have all carved wood and wax or tied reeds to make a head, which is a sign of a fake head.

古文：桓玄篡立，殿上施绛帐，镂黄金为颜，四角金龙衔五色羽葆流苏。
现代文：桓玄篡位自立，殿上设置红色幔帐，雕刻黄金做成脸面，四个角有金龙衔着五色的羽葆流苏。
English: Huan Xuan usurped the throne, set up a red curtain in the hall, carved gold into the face, four corners with gold dragons and five-colored feathered tassels.

古文：群下相谓曰： 颇类轜车。 
现代文：众大臣相互说： 很像丧车。 
English: The ministers said to each other: It's very much like a hearse.

古文：寻而玄败，此服之妖也。
现代文：不久桓玄覆灭，这是服妖。
English: Soon after, Kangen was overthrown and destroyed, and this was the end of Fuyu.

古文：晋末皆冠小而衣裳博大，风流相放，舆台成俗。
现代文：置伐末年都是帽子小而衣裳宽大，风气教化相互仿效，在平民中间成为习俗。
English: At the end of the year of the siege, the hats were small and the clothes were large, and the customs and education imitated each other, becoming a custom among the commoners.

古文：识者曰： 上小而下大，此禅代之象也。 
现代文：有见识的人说： 上小而下大，这是禅让替代的象征。 
English: People with insight say, "Up is small and down is big," which is a symbol of the substitution of Zen.

古文：寻而宋受终焉。
现代文：不久后刘宋取代末代皇帝。
English: Soon after, Liu Song replaced the last emperor.

古文：鸡祸魏明帝景初二年，廷尉府中雌鸡化为雄，不鸣不将。
现代文：魏明帝景初二年，廷尉府中母鶸变为雄鶸，不鸣叫不争斗。
English: In the first two years of the reign of Emperor Jing of the Wei and Ming Dynasties, the imperial egret became a male egret, and did not sing or fight.

古文：干宝曰： 是岁宣帝平辽东，百姓始有与能之义，此其象也。
现代文：王宜说： 逭年童童平定迄塞，百姓开始有推举贤才的议论，这是其象征。
English: Wang Yi said: In the year of the dragon, the people began to have discussions about the election of talents. This is its symbol.

古文：然晋三后并以人臣终，不鸣不将，又天意也。 
现代文：但是置翘三位帝王都是以人臣身份终其生，不呜叫不争斗，又是天意吧。 
English: However, all three emperors lived their entire lives as vassals. It was God's will that they did not complain or fight.

古文：惠帝元康六年，陈国有鸡生雄鸡无翅，既大，坠坑而死。
现代文：惠帝元康六年，陈国有鸡生下公鶸没有翅膀，长大后，坠落坑中死去。
English: In the sixth year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, Chen Guozhou chicken gave birth to a male chicken without wings, after growing up, he died in a fall pit.

古文：王隐以为： 雄者，胤嗣子之象。
现代文：王隐认为： 雄，是传承子孙的象征。
English: Wang Yin believes: Male is the symbol of inheriting the descendants.

古文：坑者，母象。
现代文：坑，是母亲的象征。
English: The pit is a symbol of the mother.

古文：今鸡生无翅，坠坑而死，此子无羽翼，为母所陷害乎？ 
现代文：现在鸡出生没有翅膀，坠落坑中死亡，这是儿子没有羽翼，被母亲所陷害的征兆? 
English: Now a chicken is born without wings, falls into a pit and dies. Is this a sign of a son without wings, framed by his mother?

古文：于后贾后诬杀愍怀，此其应也。
现代文：后来买后陷害杀死愍怀太子，这是其应兆。
English: Later, after buying and framing, he killed Prince Gong Huai, which was his response.

古文：太安中，周家雌鸡逃承溜中，六七日而下，奋翼鸣将，独毛羽不变。
现代文：太安年间，周圮家母鶸逃入屋檐水漕中，六七天才下来，鼓动羽翼啼呜争斗，衹有羽毛没有改变。
English: During the Taian era, the mother quail of the Zhou family escaped into the water tank of the house, and it took her 67 days to come down. She encouraged the quail to fight, and the quail's feathers did not change.

古文：其后有陈敏之事。
现代文：此后有陈敏事件。
English: After that, there was the Chen Min incident.

古文：敏虽控制江表，终无纪纲文章，殆其象也。
现代文：陈敏虽然控制江南地区，终于没有礼乐法度，大概是他的象征吧。
English: Although Chen Min controls the southern region of the Yangtze River, he finally has no etiquette, which is probably a symbol of him.

古文：卒为所灭。
现代文：最终被周圮消灭。
English: It was eventually eliminated by Zhou Enlai.

古文：鸡祸见家，又天意也。
现代文：鶸祸出现在周圮家，又是天意。
English: The misfortune occurred in Zhou Ye's family, and it was also the will of heaven.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 牝鸡雄鸣，主不荣。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 母鸡作公鸡呜叫，主人不荣。 
English: Jing Fang's "Easy Biography" said: "If a hen crows like a rooster, the owner is not proud."

古文：元帝太兴中，王敦镇武昌，有雌鸡化为雄。
现代文：元帝太兴年间，王敦镇守武昌，有母鸡变为公鶸。
English: During the reign of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, Wang Dunzhen guarded Wuchang, and a hen was turned into a male rooster.

古文：天戒若曰，雌化为雄，臣陵其上。
现代文：天戒这样说，雌变为雄，臣下侵凌君主。
English: Thus says the heavenly decree, the female becomes male, and the vassals encroach upon the sovereign.

古文：其后王敦再攻京师。
现代文：此后王敦两次进攻京都。
English: After that, Wang Dun attacked Kyoto twice.

古文：孝武太元十三年四月，广陵高平阎嵩家雌鸡生无右翅，彭城人刘象之家鸡有三足。
现代文：孝武帝太元十三年四月，广陵高平闽嵩家母鸡出生没有右翅膀，彭城人刘象之家鸡有三只脚。
English: In April of the 13th year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowu of Taiyuan, the hen of the Gaoping Yongsong family in Guangling was born without right wings, and the chicken of the Liu Xiang family in Pengcheng had three feet.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 君用妇人言，则鸡生妖。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 君主听信妇人的话，鶸就会出现妖异。 
English: According to the "Easy Biography" of the Imperial Household Agency: If the monarch listens to the woman's words, the dragonfly will appear.

古文：是时，主相并用尼媪之言，宠赐过厚，故妖象见焉。
现代文：这时，君王辅臣都听取女尼老妇人的话，宠幸赏赐特别丰厚，所以妖异的征兆出现。
English: At this time, the king's aides and ministers all listened to the words of the nun and the old woman, and the favors and rewards were particularly rich, so the signs of the devil appeared.

古文：安帝隆安元年八月，琅邪王道子家青雌鸡化为赤雄鸡，不鸣不将。
现代文：安帝隆安元年八月，琅邪王司马道子家青色母鶸变为赤色雄鸡，不呜叫不争斗。
English: In August of the first year of the Andean Long'an, the blue mother hen of the evil king Sima Daozi's family turned into a red rooster, no crowing, no fighting.

古文：桓玄将篡，不能成业之象。
现代文：是桓玄将篡权，却不能成就功业的象征。
English: It is a symbol of Kuan Xuan's usurpation of power, but his failure to accomplish his mission.

古文：四年，荆州有鸡生角，角寻堕落。
现代文：四年，荆州有鶸生出角，角不久脱落。
English: In four years, Jingzhou had two horns grow out, and the horns soon fell off.

古文：是时桓玄始擅西夏，狂慢不肃，故有鸡祸。
现代文：造时桓玄开始专权西夏地区，狂妄傲慢不敬，所以有鶸祸。
English: When Emperor Kuan Xuan began to exercise absolute power in the Western Xia region, he was arrogant and disrespectful, which led to his downfall.

古文：天戒若曰，角，兵象，寻堕落者，暂起不终之妖也。
现代文：天戒这样说，角，兵器的象征，不久脱落，是一时兴起却不能终久的妖异。
English: Thus says the Lord of the Rings: Horns, symbols of weapons, soon to fall, are whimsical but impermanent oddities.

古文：后皆应也。
现代文：后来都应验了。
English: Later it all came true.

古文：元兴二年，衡阳有雌鸡化为雄，八十日而冠萎。
现代文：元兴二年，衡阳有母鸡变为公鸡，八十天后鸡冠萎缩。
English: In the second year of the Yuanxing Dynasty, a hen in Hengyang changed into a rooster, and after 80 days, the rooster's crown shrank.

古文：天戒若曰，衡阳，桓玄楚国之邦略也。
现代文：天戒这样说，衡阳，是桓玄楚国的邦国。
English: According to Heaven's Commandments, Hengyang is a state of Huan Xuan Chu.

古文：及桓玄篡位，果八十日而败，此其应也。
现代文：等到桓玄篡位，果然八十天就败亡，这是他的应验。
English: When Kuan Xuan usurped the throne, he was defeated after eighty days, which was his fulfillment.

古文：青祥武帝咸宁元年八月丁酉，大风折大社树，有青气出焉，此青祥也。
现代文：武帝咸宁元年八月丁酉，大风折断社庙大树，有青气冒出来，这是青祥。
English: In August of the first year of Emperor Wu's reign, Emperor Xianning, the wind broke the big trees of the shrine and temple, and there was a burst of youthful energy, which was auspicious.

古文：占曰： 东莞当有帝者。 
现代文：占卜说： 塞差应有帝王。 
English: Divination says: There should be an emperor in Szecha.

古文：明年，元帝生。
现代文：第二年，五童出生。
English: The next year, five children were born.

古文：是时，帝大父武王封东莞，由是徙封琅邪。
现代文：遣时，五童祖父重皇王受封在墓差，从逭裹改封为遮夏臣王。
English: At the time of the envoys, the grandfather of the five children, Shigeo Wang, was sealed in the tomb, and changed his seal from Shibu to Shaka.

古文：孙盛以为中兴之表。
现代文：瑟盛认为是中兴的象征。
English: Su Sheng believes that it is a symbol of ZTE.

古文：晋室之乱，武帝子孙无孑遗，社树折之应，又常风之罚。
现代文：晋室战乱，武帝的子孙无一遗留，这是社庙之树折断的应兆，又是持续大风的惩罚。
English: The Jin Dynasty was at war, and none of Emperor Wu's descendants were left behind. This was a response to the breaking of the tree of the community temple, as well as a punishment for the continuous strong winds.

古文：惠帝元康中，洛阳南山有虻作声，曰 韩尸尸 。
现代文：惠帝元康年间，洛阳南山有虻虫发出叫声，叫 韩尸尸 。
English: During the reign of Hui Di Yuan Kang, there was a tapeworm in the Nanshan Mountains of Luoyang that emitted a cry called "Han corpse corpse."

古文：识者曰： 韩氏将尸也，言尸尸者，尽死意也。 
现代文：有见识的人说： 韩氏将有死尸，说尸尸，是全部死亡的意思。 
English: People with insight said: Han will have a corpse, saying corpse means all dead.

古文：其后韩谧诛而韩族歼焉，此青祥也。
现代文：此后韩谧被诛杀而韩氏家族灭亡，这是青祥。
English: After that, Han Xuan was killed and the Han family perished. This was the beginning of the Qingxiang Dynasty.

古文：金沴木魏文帝黄初七年正月，幸许昌。
现代文：魏文帝黄初七年正月，巡幸许昌。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of Emperor Wen of the Wei Dynasty, Xu Chang went on a tour.

古文：许昌城南门无故自崩，帝心恶之，遂不入，还洛阳。
现代文：许昌城南门无缘无故自行崩塌，文帝心中厌恶此事，就没有进城，返回洛阳。
English: The south gate of Xuchang City collapsed on its own without any reason. Emperor Wen was so disgusted by this that he did not enter the city and returned to Luoyang.

古文：此金沴木，木动之也。
现代文：这是金克木，木震动。五月，文帝去世。
English: This is Jinque wood, wood vibration. In May, Emperor Wen passed away.

古文：五月，宫车晏驾。京房《易传》曰： 上下咸悖，厥妖也城门坏。 元帝太兴二年六月，吴郡米庑无故自坏。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 上下都悖逆，其妖异就是城门毁坏。 元帝太兴二年六月，吴郡米廉无故自行毁坏。
English: According to the "I Chuan" of the Imperial Household Agency, "Both above and below are rebellious, and the strange thing is the destruction of the city gate." In June of the second year of the reign of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, Milen of Wu County destroyed himself without reason.

古文：天戒若曰，夫米庑，货籴之屋，无故自坏，此五谷踊贵，所以无籴卖也。
现代文：天戒这样说，米廉，是买入卖出的房屋，无故自行毁坏，这是五谷暴贵，因而没有买入卖出。
English: Heaven's ring says this, Milam, is to buy and sell houses, and destroy them without reason. This is a case of extravagance, so they did not buy and sell.

古文：是岁遂大饥，死者千数焉。
现代文：当年就有大饥荒，饿死千余人。
English: In that year, there was a great famine, and more than a thousand people died of starvation.

古文：明帝太宁元年，周莚自归王敦，既立其宅宇，所起五间六梁，一时跃出坠地，余桁犹亘柱头。
现代文：明帝太宁元年，周莛自己归附王敦，建他的宅屋，建起的五间六梁，一时间跳脱坠落地上，其余的檩子仍交错在柱头上。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taining of the Ming Dynasty, Zhou Qi attached himself to Wang Dun and built his mansion. The five and six beams that were built suddenly jumped off and fell to the ground. The remaining beams were still staggered on the column head.

古文：此金沴木也。
现代文：这是金克木。
English: It's the golden birch.

古文：明年五月，钱凤谋乱，遂族灭莚，而湖熟寻亦为墟矣。
现代文：第二年五月，钱凤阴谋叛乱，灭了周莛家族，湖熟地区不久也成为废墟。
English: In May of the following year, Qian Feng plotted a rebellion and wiped out the Zhou family. The Hukou region soon became a ruin.

古文：安帝元兴元年正月丙子，会稽王世子元显将讨桓玄，建牙竿于扬州南门，其东者难立，良久乃正。
现代文：安帝元兴元年正月丙子，会稽王太子元显准备讨伐桓玄，在扬州南门树立牙旗旗竿，东边的旗竿很难立住，很久才立直。
English: In the first month of the first year of the reign of Emperor Andei, Prince Yuanxing, the king's inspector, Prince Yuanxian, prepared to fight against Huanxuan, and set up a banner flagpole at the south gate of Yangzhou. The flagpole on the east side was difficult to stand on, and it took a long time to stand upright.

古文：近沴妖也。
现代文：近于克木的妖异。
English: Closer to the weirdness of the cedar tree.

古文：而元显寻为玄所擒。
现代文：元显不久被桓玄擒获。
English: Yuan Xian was soon captured by Kuan Xuan.

古文：三年五月，乐贤堂坏。
现代文：三年五月，乐贤堂毁坏。
English: In May of the third year, Le Xian Hall was destroyed.

古文：时帝嚚眊，无乐贤之心，故此堂是沴。
现代文：当时安帝暴虐昏庸，没有喜爱贤才之心，所以这座堂遭受毁坏。
English: At that time, Emperor An was a tyrannical tyrant and had no love for the sages, so this hall was destroyed.

古文：义熙九年五月，国子圣堂坏。
现代文：义熙九年五月，国子圣堂毁坏。
English: In May of the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, the Guozi Church was destroyed.

古文：天戒若曰，圣堂，礼乐之本，无故自坏，业祚将坠之象。
现代文：天戒这样说，圣堂，是礼乐的根本，无故白行毁坏，是帝业将要失去的征兆。
English: Thus says the heavenly decree, the church is the foundation of the liturgy, and its destruction without cause is a sign that the empire is about to be lost.

古文：未及十年而禅位焉。
现代文：不到十年就禅让了帝位。
English: Less than ten years later, Zen abdicated the throne.

