古文：二十年春，新作南门。
现代文：二十年春季，重新建造南门。
English: In the spring of 1920, the south gate was rebuilt.

古文：夏，郜子来朝。
现代文：夏季，郜子来鲁国朝见。
English: In the summer, the pheasants come to Lu to see the emperor.

古文：五月乙巳，西宫灾。
现代文：五月乙巳日，西宫发生火灾。
English: On May 21st, a fire broke out in Nishinomiya.

古文：郑人入滑。
现代文：郑国攻入滑国。
English: Zheng Guo invaded Sui Guo.

古文：秋，齐人、狄人盟于邢。
现代文：秋季，齐人、狄人在邢国订立盟约。
English: In the autumn, the Qi people and the Di people signed a treaty in the state of Min.

古文：冬，楚人伐随。
现代文：冬季，楚国攻打随国。
English: In winter, Chu attacked Sui.

古文：二十年春，新作南门，书不时也。凡启塞从时。
现代文：二十年的春季，重新建造南门。《春秋》记载这件事，是由于妨碍农时。
English: In the spring of the 20th year, the south gate was rebuilt. "Spring and Autumn" recorded this event, because it interfered with farming time.

古文：滑人叛郑而服于卫。
现代文：凡是修筑城门和制作门闩，不应该妨碍农时。滑国人背叛郑国而顺服于卫国。
English: The construction of the city gate and the making of the lintel should not interfere with the farming time. The people of Nian betrayed Zheng and obeyed the defense of the country.

古文：夏，郑公子士、洩堵寇帅师入滑。
现代文：夏季，郑国的公子士、泄堵寇率领军队攻入滑国。
English: In the summer, Zheng's nobles, led the army to invade the land of Nian.

古文：秋，齐、狄盟于邢，为邢谋卫难也。
现代文：秋季，齐国和狄人在邢国相会并订立盟约，为邢国策划对付卫国的侵袭。
English: In the autumn, the Qi and Di people met in Yunnan and signed a treaty, planning for Yunnan to deal with the invasion of the motherland.

古文：于是卫方病邢。
现代文：这时候卫国才担心邢国。
English: At this time, the defender of the country was worried about the country.

古文：随以汉东诸侯叛楚。
现代文：随国依靠汉水东边各诸侯的力量背叛楚国。
English: Suigoku relied on the power of the lords east of the Han River to betray Chu.

古文：冬，楚鬥穀於菟帅师伐随，取成而还。
现代文：冬季，楚国的鬬穀於菟率领军队进攻随国，讲和以后回国。
English: In the winter, Ying Guo of Chu led an army to attack Sui Guo, and returned to the country after making peace.

古文：君子曰： 随之见伐，不量力也。
现代文：君子说： 随国被攻打，是由于不估量自己的国力。
English: The gentleman said, "Whenever a country is attacked, it is because it does not appreciate its own national strength."

古文：量力而动，其过鲜矣。
现代文：估量自己的力量然后动作，祸害就少了。
English: Measure your strength and act, and the scourge is lessened.

古文：善败由己，而由人乎哉？《诗》曰： 岂不夙夜，谓行多露。  
现代文：成败在于自己，难道在于别人？《诗》说： 难道不想早晚奔波，无奈路上露水太多。  
English: Success or failure is up to oneself, is it up to others? "Poetry" says: Don't you want to run around sooner or later, but there is too much dew on the road.

古文：宋襄公欲合诸侯，臧文仲闻之，曰： 以欲从人则可，以人从欲鲜济。 
现代文：宋襄公想要会合诸侯。臧文仲听到了，说： 用别人的欲望操纵别人是，这是可以实现的，人想要操纵别人的欲望，这是很少能成功的。 
English: Song Xiangong wanted to meet with the princes. Gong Wenzhong heard this and said, "It is possible to manipulate others with their desires. It is rare for a person to succeed in manipulating others' desires."

