古文：十有一年春，晋杀其大夫丕郑父。
现代文：十一年春季，晋国杀掉自己的大夫丕郑父。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, Jin killed his own doctor, Zou Zhengfu.

古文：夏，公及夫人姜氏会齐侯于阳穀。
现代文：夏季，僖公和夫人姜氏在阳穀与齐侯会见。
English: In the summer, Zhai Gong and his wife Jiang met with Qi Hou in Yanggu.

古文：秋八月，大雩。
现代文：秋季八月，有大型祭祀。
English: In August, the festival of praying for rain is held.

古文：冬，楚人伐黄。
现代文：冬季，楚国人进攻黄国。
English: In winter, the people of Chu attacked Huangguo.

古文：十一年春，晋侯使以丕郑之乱来告。
现代文：十一年春季，晋惠公派遣使者报告邳郑发动的叛乱。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, Jin Huigong sent an envoy to report the rebellion launched by Zou Zheng.

古文：天王使召武公、内史过赐晋侯命。
现代文：周襄王派遣召武公、内史过以荣宠赐给晋惠公。
English: King Zhou Xiang dispatched a summons to arms to the duke, and the Imperial Household Agency bestowed honor and favor on Prince Jin Hui.

古文：受玉惰。
现代文：晋惠公接受瑞玉的时候精神不振作。
English: Jin Huigong was not in the best of spirits when he received Rui Yu.

古文：过归，告王曰： 晋侯其无后乎。
现代文：内史过回去，向周襄王报告说： 晋侯的后代恐怕不能享有禄位了吧！
English: After reviewing the internal history, he reported to King Zhou Xiang: I'm afraid the descendants of the Jin princes can't enjoy the throne!

古文：王赐之命而惰于受瑞，先自弃也已，其何继之有？
现代文：天子以荣宠赐给他，他反而懒散地接受瑞玉，这就是先自暴自弃了，他还会有什么继承人？
English: The Son of Heaven bestowed honor and favor on him, but instead he lazily accepted the auspicious gems. That is to say, he first abandoned himself. What other heirs will he have?

古文：礼，国之干也。敬，礼之舆也。
现代文：礼，是国家的躯干；敬，是载礼的车箱。
English: The salute is the trunk of the country; the salute is the box that carries the salute.

古文：不敬则礼不行，礼不行则上下昏，何以长世？ 
现代文：不恭敬，礼就不能实施；礼不能实施，上下就昏乱，如何能长久？ 
English: If there is no reverence, the ritual cannot be performed; if the ritual cannot be performed, the upper and lower levels will be in a daze. How can this last?

古文：夏，扬、拒、泉、皋、伊、雒之戎同伐京师，入王城，焚东门。王子带召之也。
现代文：夏季，扬、拒、泉、皋、伊、雒的戎人一起进攻京城，进了王城，烧了东门，这是王子带召引来的。
English: In the summer, Yang, Zhao, Quan, Yao, Yi, and Zhou's soldiers attacked the capital together, entered the royal city, and burned the east gate, which was brought by the prince.

古文：秦、晋伐戎以救周。
现代文：秦军、晋军攻打戎军来救援周朝。
English: The Qin and Jin armies attacked the imperial army and came to the rescue of the Zhou dynasty.

古文：秋，晋侯平戎于王。
现代文：秋季，晋惠公让戎人和周襄王讲和。
English: In the autumn, Jin Huigong asked the Emperor and King Zhou Xiang to make peace.

古文：黄人不归楚贡。
现代文：黄国人不向楚国进贡品。
English: The people of Huangguo did not pay tribute to Chu.

