古文：汉和熹邓皇后，尝梦登梯以扪天，体荡荡正清滑，有若钟乳状。乃仰嗡饮之。以讯诸占梦。言： 尧梦攀天而上，汤梦及天砥之，斯皆圣王之前占也。
现代文：汉和熹邓皇后曾经梦见自己登着梯子去摸天，那天体平坦宽广，非常清凉滑爽，有点象钟乳石的样子，她就仰头吸进那清新的空气，她向占梦的人讯问梦的吉凶，占梦的说： 尧曾经梦见自己抓着天向上爬，汤曾经梦见自己碰到了天而舔它，这都是当圣王的预兆。
English: Emperor Han and Empress Dowager Zi Deng once dreamed that she was climbing a ladder to touch the sky. Her body was flat and wide, very cool and smooth, a bit like a stalactite. She looked up and breathed in the fresh air. She asked the dreamer about the fortunes of the dream. The dreamer said: "Empress Dowager Zi once dreamed that she was climbing up the sky, and Tang once dreamed that he had touched the sky and licked it. These are all omens of being a holy king."

古文：吉不可言。 
现代文：你的梦吉利得没话说了。 
English: Your dream of happiness is out of the question.

古文：孙坚夫人吴氏，孕而梦月入怀。已而生策。
现代文：孙坚的夫人吴氏，怀孕时梦见月亮进入她的怀里，后来就生了孙策。
English: Sun Jian's wife, Ms. Wu, dreamed of the moon falling into her arms when she was pregnant, and later gave birth to Sun Ce.

古文：及权在孕，又梦日入怀。
现代文：到孙权怀在肚皮里的时候，她又梦见太阳进入她的怀里。
English: When Sun Quan Hui was still in her stomach, she dreamt of the sun entering her arms.

古文：以告坚曰： 妾昔怀策，梦月入怀；今又梦日，何也： 坚曰： 日月者，阴阳之精，极贵之象，吾子孙其兴乎。 
现代文：她把这件事告诉给孙坚说： 我过去怀孙策，梦见月亮进入我的怀里；今天又梦见太阳进入我的怀里，这是为什么呢？ 孙坚说， 太阳和月亮，是阴阳的精气，是极其显贵的象征。我们的子孙大概要兴旺了吧！ 
English: She told this to Sun Jian, saying: I used to miss Sun Ce, and dreamed that the moon entered my arms; today I dreamed that the sun entered my arms, why is this? Sun Jian said that the sun and the moon are the essence of yin and yang, and are extremely prominent symbols. Our grandchildren will probably prosper!

古文：汉蔡茂字子礼，河内怀人也。
现代文：汉代的蔡茂，字子礼，河内郡怀县人。
English: Cai Mao of the Han Dynasty, a native of Huai County, Hanoi County.

古文：初在广汉，梦坐大殿，极上有禾三穗。茂取之，得其中穗，辄复失之。
现代文：当初他在广汉郡，梦见自己坐在大殿上，那大殿的正脊梁上有三穗谷子，蔡茂便去取它，拿到了那中间的一穗，却马上又失掉了。
English: At that time, he was in Guanghan County and dreamed that he was sitting on the main hall. There were three ears of corn on the main backbone of the hall. Cai Mao went to get it, got the middle ear, but immediately lost it again.

古文：以问主簿郭贺。贺曰： 大殿者，官府之形象也。极而有禾，人臣之上禄也。取中穗，是中台之象也。
现代文：他把这梦告诉了主簿郭贺，询问这梦的吉凶，郭贺说： 大殿，是官府的形象；正脊梁上有谷子，是臣子中最高的俸禄，你拿到了中间的一穗，这是中台司徒或司空的象征。
English: He told this dream to the chief bookkeeper, Guo He, and inquired about the fortunes of this dream. Guo He said: The main hall is the image of the government office; there is corn on the backbone, which is the highest salary among the courtiers. You got the middle ear, which is the symbol of Zhongtai Sito or Sikuo.

古文：于字， 禾  失 为 秩 ，虽曰失之，乃所以禄也。
现代文：从文字字形来看， 禾  失 合起来是 秩 ，因此，虽说是 失 掉了 禾 穗，但实际上是你有了 秩 ，这可是赖以取得俸禄的品级等第啊。
English: From the point of view of the word glyph, 禾 失合 is 秩, therefore, although it is said that 禾 穗 has been lost, but in fact you have 秩, which is based on the grade of the salary.

古文：兖职中阙，君其补之。 
现代文：皇上的政务如果有失误，您一定要补救它啊。 
English: If there is a mistake in the emperor's government affairs, you must remedy it.

古文：旬月，而茂征焉。
现代文：一个月后，蔡茂就被征用了。
English: A month later, Cai Mao was expropriated.

古文：周揽啧者，贫而好道，失妇夜耕，困，息卧。梦天公过而哀之，敕外有以给与。
现代文：周揽啧这个人，安贫乐道。有一次，他夫妻而人夜间耕种，疲倦了便歇下来睡着了，梦见天帝来看望他们并很怜悯他们，天帝命令外边的小吏给他们一些给养。
English: Once, when he and his wife were working at night, they got tired and fell asleep. They dreamed that the Heavenly Emperor came to visit them and felt very sorry for them. The Heavenly Emperor ordered the petty officials outside to give them some supplies.

古文：司命按录籍，云： 此人相贫，限不过此。
现代文：司命神查阅了一下簿籍，说 这人的面相贫穷，按规定不能再超过现在这境况了。
English: The god of fate checked the register and said that the man's face was poor, and according to the rules, he could not exceed his current situation.

古文：惟有张车子，应赐录千万。车子未生，请以借之。 天公曰： 善。 
现代文：只有张车子应该受赐成千上万的钱，现在张车子还没有生下来，请把这钱先借给周揽啧吧。 天帝说： 好。 
English: Only Zhang Chezi should be given thousands of money, and now Zhang Chezi has not yet been born, please lend this money to Zhou Yuanzhang first. The Heavenly Emperor said: Good.

古文：曙觉，言之。
现代文：天亮时周揽啧醒来，便把这梦说了出来。
English: When Zhou Yuanzhang woke up at dawn, he told the dream.

古文：于是夫妇戮力，昼夜治生，所为辄得，赀至千万。
现代文：于是夫妻两人齐心合力，日夜经营家业，做什么事总有收益，财产积累到成千上万。
English: As a result, the husband and wife worked together to run the family business day and night, always making a profit in everything they did, and accumulating tens of thousands of dollars in assets.

古文：先时。有张妪者，尝往周家佣赁，野合，有身，月满，当孕，便遣出外，驻车屋下，产得儿。
现代文：前些时候有个张妪，曾经到周家做佣人，因为和别人私通而怀了孕，孕期已满该分娩了，就被打发出了周家，她住在车棚底下，生了个儿子。
English: Some time ago, there was a woman named Zhang Qian, who used to work as a maid in the Zhou family. Because she had an affair with another man, she became pregnant. When her pregnancy was over and she was due to give birth, she was sent away from the Zhou family. She lived under a carport and gave birth to a son.

古文：主人往视，哀其孤寒，作粥糜食之。问： 当名汝儿作何？ 
现代文：主人去看望她，哀怜她孤苦寒酸，就烧了粥给她吃，问她： 该给你的儿子起个名字，叫什么来着？ 
English: Her master went to visit her and felt sorry for her, for she was lonely and poor, so he cooked porridge for her to eat and asked her: "What should you name your son?

古文：妪曰： 今在车屋下而生，梦天告之，名为车子。 
现代文：张妪说： 今天在车棚底下生了他，我梦见天帝告诉我，这孩子的名字叫车子。 
English: Zhang Ye said, "Today, I gave birth to him under the car shed. I dreamt that the Heavenly Emperor told me that this child's name is Chezu.

古文：周乃悟曰： 吾昔梦从天换钱，外白以张车子钱贷我，必是子也。
现代文：周揽啧便恍然大悟，说： 我过去梦见自己从天帝那里借钱，司命神说拿张车子的钱借给我，这张车子一定是这个孩子了。
English: Zhou Yuanzhang suddenly came to his senses and said, "I used to dream that I borrowed money from the Heavenly Emperor. The God of Death said to lend me the money for a car. This car must be this child's."

古文：财当归之矣。 
现代文：这笔资产要归还给他了。 
English: That asset is going to be returned to him.

古文：自是居日衰减，车子长大，富于周家。
现代文：从此周家的收入每天都减少。张车子长大后，比周家更富裕。
English: From then on, the Zhou family's income decreased every day. When Zhang Chezi grew up, he was richer than the Zhou family.

古文：夏阳卢汾，字士济，梦入蚁穴，见堂宇三间，势甚危豁，题其额，曰：审雨堂。
现代文：夏阳县的卢汾，字士济，梦见自己进入蚂蚁洞中，看见厅堂三间，形状十分高大开阔，他就在它的匾额上题写了 审雨堂 三个字。
English: Lu Wei of Xiayang County, the character Shi Jie, dreamed that he entered the ant cave, saw three halls, the shape was very tall and wide, he inscribed three words "Ji Yu Tang" on its plaque.

古文：吴选曹令史刘卓，病笃，梦见一人，以白越单衫与之，言曰： 汝着衫，污，火烧，便洁也。 
现代文：六吴国选曹令史刘卓，病得很重，梦见一个人，拿了件白越布做的单衣送给他，对他说道： 你穿这件单衣穿脏了，只要用火烧一下就干净了。 
English: Sixth, Liu Zhuo, the Great Elector of the State of Wu, who was very ill, dreamed of a man and gave him a singlet made of Bai Yue cloth. He said to him, "This singlet you are wearing is dirty. Just burn it with fire and it will be clean."

古文：卓觉，果有衫在侧。
现代文：刘卓醒来，果然有件单衣放在身边。
English: When Liu Zhuo woke up, he found a singlet lying next to him.

古文：污，辄火浣之。
现代文：他穿脏了总是用火来洗它。
English: When he gets dirty, he always washes it with fire.

古文：进南书佐刘雅。梦见青刺蜴从屋落其腹内。因苦腹痛病。
现代文：淮南国书佐刘雅，梦见一只青色的蜥蜴从屋上掉进了他的腹中，他因而被腹痛病缠苦了。
English: Liu Ya, a scholar from Huainan Province, dreamed that a blue lizard fell from the roof into his stomach, and he suffered from abdominal pain.

古文：后汉张奂为武威太守，其妻梦帝与印绶，登楼而歌。
现代文：东汉的张奂任武威太守。他的妻子梦见自己佩带着张奂的印绶，登楼悲歌。
English: Zhang Xuan of the Eastern Han Dynasty was the military governor of Wuwei. His wife dreamed that she was wearing Zhang Xuan's seal and climbed to the top of the building to sing a tragic song.

古文：觉，以告奂。奂令占之，曰： 夫人方生男，后临此郡命终此楼。 
现代文：醒来后她把梦告诉了张奂，张奂让人占卜，占卜的人说： 您的夫人将要生个儿子，他后来会统治这个郡，生命也会在这楼上了结。 
English: After she woke up, she told her dream to Zhang Yao. Zhang Yao had a fortune-teller tell her. The fortune-teller said, "Your wife is going to have a son. He will later rule this county, and his life will end on this floor."

古文：后生子猛，建安中，果为武威太守杀刺史，邯郸商州兵围急，猛耻见擒，乃登楼自焚而死。
现代文：后来，张奂的妻子生了个儿子张猛。建安年间，张猛果然任武威太守，他杀了刺史邯郸商，被州里的军队紧紧围困，他觉得被活捉太耻辱了，就登上这座楼自焚而死。
English: Later, Zhang Meng's wife gave birth to a son, Zhang Meng. During the Jianan era, Zhang Meng was indeed appointed as the military governor. He killed the merchants of Zhushi and was closely besieged by the troops in the state. He felt that it was too shameful to be captured alive, so he climbed up this building and burned himself to death.

古文：汉灵帝梦见桓帝，怒曰： 宋皇后有何罪过，而听用邪孽，使绝其命。
现代文：汉灵帝梦见汉桓帝忿怒地对他说： 宋皇后有什么罪过，你却听信奸臣，使她丧了生？
English: Han Ling Di dreamed that Han Huan Di said to him angrily: What is the sin of Empress Song, but you listened to the treacherous vassal and caused her death?

古文：渤海王悝，既已自贬，又受诛毙。
现代文：渤海王悝既然已经抑损自己了，却又被杀死。
English: Since he had already restrained himself, he was killed again.

古文：今宋氏及悝，自诉于天，上帝震怒，罪在难救。 
现代文：现在宋皇后和渤海王悝，亲自向上天申诉，上天发怒了，你的罪恶已经难以救治了。 
English: Now the Queen of Song and the King of Bohai have personally appealed to heaven, and heaven is angry. Your sins have become difficult to cure.

古文：梦殊明察。
现代文：这梦特别清楚。
English: The dream was very clear.

古文：帝既觉而恐，寻亦崩。
现代文：汉灵帝醒来后十分恐惧，过了不久就死了。
English: When Han Lingdi woke up, he was very frightened and died soon after.

古文：吴时嘉兴徐伯始病，使道士吕石安神座，石有弟子戴本、王思，三人居住海盐，伯始迎之以助石。
现代文：吴国的时候，嘉兴县徐伯始生了病，就让道士吕石来安放神座。吕石有徒弟戴本、王思二人，住在海盐县，徐伯始把他们接了来帮助吕石。
English: In the time of the State of Wu, when Xu Bozhi of Jiaxing County fell ill, he asked the Taoist priest Lv Shi to install the shrine. Lv Shi had two disciples, Dai Ben and Wang Si, who lived in Haiyan County. Xu Bozhi took them to help Lv Shi.

古文：昼卧，梦上天北斗门下见外鞍马三匹。云： 明日当以一迎石，一迎本，一迎思。 
现代文：吕石白天睡觉，梦见自己上天来到北斗门下，看见小吏给三匹马配好鞍座，并说： 明天要用一匹来迎接吕石，用一匹来迎接戴本，用一匹来迎接王思。 
English: Lv Shi slept during the day. He dreamed that he went to heaven and came under the Big Dipper Gate. He saw the officials saddling three horses and said, "Tomorrow, I will use one horse to meet Lv Shi, one horse to meet Dai Ben, and one horse to meet Wang Si."

古文：石梦觉，语本、思云： 如此死期，可急还，与家别。 
现代文：吕石从梦中醒来，对戴本、王思说： 如果真象我梦中所见到的这样，那么我们的死日到了。你们可以赶快国家，和家里的人告别。 
English: Lv Shi woke up from his dream and said to Daibeng and Wang Si, "If it's really like what I saw in my dream, then the day of our death has come. You can hurry to the country and say goodbye to your family."

古文：不卒事而去。
现代文：于是他们没把事干完就走了。
English: So they left without finishing the job.

古文：伯始怪而留之。
现代文：徐伯始觉得奇怪而挽留他们。
English: Xu Bo felt strange at first and held them back.

古文：曰： 惧不得见家也。 
现代文：他们说： 再不走，怕见不到自己的家了。 
English: They said: "I won't go again, I'm afraid I won't see my home again."

古文：间一日，三人同时死。
现代文：过了一天，三个人在同一个时刻逝世了。
English: A day later, three people died at the same time.

古文：会稽谢奉与永嘉太守郭伯猷善，谢忽梦郭与人于浙江上争樗蒲钱。因为水神所责，堕水而死。已营理郭凶事。
现代文：会稽郡的谢奉与永嘉郡太守郭伯猷很有交情。有一次，谢奉忽然梦见郭伯猷和别人在浙江上争夺赌傅的钱，因而遭到水神的责罚，落水死了，郭奉就亲自去操办郭伯猷的丧事。
English: Xie Feng of Huijian County was very friendly with Guo Bo Rong, the governor of Yongjia County. Once, Xie Feng suddenly dreamed that Guo Bo Rong and others were competing for gambling money in Zhejiang, so he was punished by the water god, fell into the water and died. Guo Feng personally went to arrange Guo Bo Rong's funeral.

古文：及觉，即往郭许，共围棋，良久，谢云： 卿知吾来意否： 因说所梦。
现代文：等醒来后，谢奉就马上到郭伯猷那里，和他一起下围棋。过了很久，谢奉说： 您知道我的来意吗？ 接着便把他梦见的事告诉了郭伯猷。
English: After waking up, Xie Feng immediately went to Guo Boxiong and played Go with him. After a long time, Xie Feng said: Do you know what I mean? Then he told Guo Boxiong about his dream.

古文：郭闻之，怅然云： 吾作夜亦梦与人争钱，如卿所梦，何期太的的也？ 
现代文：郭伯猷听见了这事十分惆怅说： 我昨天夜里也梦见和别人争钱，就象您所梦见的那样，为什么会这样明明白白！ 
English: Hearing this, Guo Boqin was very puzzled and said, "I also dreamed last night that I was competing with others for money, just like you dreamed. Why is this so clear and obvious?"

古文：须臾，如厕，便倒，气绝。
现代文：一会儿郭伯猷上厕所，就倒在地上断了气。
English: After a while, Guo Boqi went to the toilet and collapsed on the ground and passed out.

古文：谢为凶具。嘉兴徐泰，幼丧父母，叔父隗养之，甚于所生。
现代文：谢奉给他操办丧事，完全就象自己所梦见的那样。嘉兴县的徐泰，幼年就失去了父母，叔父徐隗抚养他，比抚养亲生的儿子还周到。
English: Xie Feng gave him a funeral, just as he had dreamed of. Xu Tai from Jiaxing County lost his parents at a young age, and his uncle Xu Wei raised him more carefully than he had raised his own son.

古文：隗病，泰营侍甚勤。
现代文：徐隗病了，徐泰照料服侍也很殷勤。
English: Xu Rong is ill, and Xu Tai is also very diligent in his care and service.

古文：是夜三更中，梦二人乘船持箱，上泰床头，发箱，出簿书示曰： 汝叔应死。 
现代文：那一夜三更时分，徐泰梦见两个人乘了船拿着箱子来到自己床头，他们打开箱子，拿出簿籍给他看，并对他说： 你的叔父应该死了。 
English: At 3 a.m. that night, Xu Tai dreamed that two people came to his bedside on a boat with a box. They opened the box, took out a book and showed it to him, saying, "Your uncle should be dead."

古文：泰即于梦中叩头祈请。
现代文：徐泰就在梦中向他们磕头求情。
English: In his dream, Xu Tai begged for their forgiveness.

古文：良久，二人曰： 汝县有同姓名人否？ 
现代文：过了很久，那两个人说： 你县里有没有与你叔父姓名相同的人？ 
English: After a long time, the two men said: Is there anyone in your county with the same name as your uncle?

古文：泰思得，语二人云： 张隗，不姓徐。 
现代文：徐泰想到了，便告诉这两个人说： 只有一个张隗，不姓徐。 
English: Xu Tai thought about it and told the two men: There is only one Zhang Ye, not surnamed Xu.

古文：二人云： 亦可强逼。
现代文：那两个人说： 姓不同也可以勉强逼他死。
English: The two men said, "You can force him to die even if his last name is different."

古文：念汝能事叔父，当为汝活之。 
现代文：我们顾怜你能服侍叔父，应当替你救活他。 
English: We pity you for being able to serve your uncle, and we should save his life for you.

古文：遂不复见。
现代文：于是徐泰就再也看不见他们了。
English: So Xu Tai couldn't see them anymore.

古文：泰觉，叔病乃差。
现代文：徐泰醒来，叔父的病就痊愈了。
English: When Xu Tai woke up, his uncle's illness was cured.

