古文：◎乐二
现代文：乐二
English: 2nd movement

古文：○乐章一
现代文：乐章一
English: Movement 1

古文：洪武元年圜丘乐章。
现代文：洪武元年圜丘乐章：
English: Hongwu 1st year of the Year of the Rooster Music:

古文：迎神，《中和之曲》：昊天苍兮穹窿，广覆焘兮庞洪。
现代文：迎神，奏《中和之曲》：昊天苍苍啊无比高大，广泛覆被啊庞大恢宏。
English: Ying Sheng, playing the "Song of Neutrality": "How tall, how tall, how tall, how tall, how tall, how tall, how tall, how tall.

古文：建圜丘兮国之阳，合众神兮来临之同。
现代文：建造圜丘啊在国都之南，聚集聚神啊来和同。
English: Build a sacred mound in the south of the capital, and gather the gods to make peace.

古文：念蝼蚁兮微衷，莫自期兮感通。
现代文：想到世间的凡人啊微表诚意，自己没有料到啊与神灵感通。
English: When I think of the world's ordinary people, they show sincerity, but I didn't expect to be inspired by God.

古文：思神来兮金玉其容，驭龙鸾兮乘云驾风。
现代文：想到众神降临啊仪容如金似玉，驾着飞龙乘着鸾凤啊腾云御风。
English: When I think of the gods descending, their appearance is like gold and jewels. They ride dragons, ride phoenixes, and soar above the clouds.

古文：顾南郊兮昭格，望至尊兮崇崇。
现代文：顾念南郊啊昭显到来，盼望最尊贵的神啊无比盛隆。
English: In consideration of the obvious arrival of the southern suburbs, I hope that the most honorable god will be extremely prosperous.

古文：奠玉帛，《肃和之曲》：圣灵皇皇，敬瞻威光。
现代文：祭献玉帛，奏《肃和之曲》：圣哲的神灵严肃庄重，崇敬瞻仰威严的光芒。
English: Sacrificing the Jade Scepter and playing the "Song of Sorrow and Peace": The deities of the saints are serious and solemn, revering and admiring the majesty of the light.

古文：玉帛以登，承筐是将。穆穆崇严，神妙难量。
现代文：进献玉帛供奉承筐。肃穆恭谨崇高莅严，神秘美妙难以估量。
English: Presenting the jade bowl for flattery basket. Serious, respectful, sublime and rigorous, mysterious and wonderful are difficult to estimate.

古文：谨兹礼祭，功徵是皇。
现代文：恭敬陈列隆礼祭祀，功勋征验无比辉煌。
English: With respect to the display of long ceremony and worship, the performance of meritorious service was extremely brilliant.

古文：进俎，《凝和之曲》：祀仪祗陈，物不于大。
现代文：进俎，奏《凝和之曲》：祭祀礼仪陈列在前，祭祀的牲品取于自然。
English: Entering the hall, playing the "Condensation Song": the sacrificial rites are displayed in front, and the sacrificial animals are taken from nature.

古文：敢用纯犊，告于覆载。
现代文：冒昧献上纯色的牛犊，恭敬告祭大地苍天。
English: Dare to offer a pure-colored bull calf, respectfully sacrifice the earth to the heavens.

古文：惟兹菲荐，恐未周完。
现代文：以此菲薄的进献，惟恐不能完备周全。
English: With this slim offering, I am afraid that it cannot be complete.

古文：神其容之，以享以观。
现代文：神灵宽宏包容，敬请飨食敬请观瞻。
English: God's spirit is magnanimous and tolerant, please eat and drink, please watch.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：眇眇微躬，何敢请于九重，以烦帝聪。
现代文：首次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：渺小卑微的身份，哪里敢告请于九重，以此烦劳明帝圣聪。
English: The first offering, playing the "Song of Lifelong Peace": small and humble, how dare you complain to Jiujie, thus bothering Ming Di Shengcong.

古文：帝心矜兮，有感而通。
现代文：圣帝内心哀怜，受到感动而沟通。
English: The Holy Father was moved by his heartfelt sorrow and was able to communicate.

古文：既俯临于几筵，神缤纷而景从。
现代文：既俯临于筵席，神灵缤纷簇拥跟从。
English: As soon as they bowed down to the table, the deities flocked to follow.

古文：臣虽愚蒙，鼓舞欢容，乃子孙之亲祖宗。
现代文：臣虽然愚昧无知，却能鼓吹起舞一片欢容，子孙后代亲近祖宗。
English: Although the vassal is ignorant and stupid, he is able to preach and dance with a happy countenance, and future generations are close to their ancestors.

古文：酌清酒兮在钟，仰至德兮玄功。
现代文：清净的美酒啊斟在酒锺，崇敬最高的美德啊歌唱玄妙的奇功。
English: The pure wine is poured into the goblet, the highest virtue is revered, and the mystic wonders are sung.

古文：亚献，《豫和之曲》：荷天之宠，眷驻紫坛。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《豫和之曲》：承蒙上天的恩宠，眷颅这紫色的祭坛。
English: For the second offering, the "Song of Peace" was played. By the grace of heaven, the purple altar was spared.

古文：中情弥喜，臣庶均懽。
现代文：内心特别地喜悦，臣民都共同欣欢。
English: Their hearts were filled with joy, and all their subjects rejoiced with them.

古文：趋跄奉承，我心则宽。
现代文：急急忙忙躬身奉承，我的内心欣然放宽。
English: I hurried to bow down and flatter him, and my heart was glad to relax.

古文：再献御前，式燕且安。
现代文：再献于御前，既快乐啊又平安。
English: Re-dedicate to the Lord, both happy and safe.

古文：终献，《熙和之曲》：小子于兹，惟父天之思，惟恃天之慈，内外殷勤。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《熙和之曲》：小子身处在此，蒙受着父老的大思。依靠着上天的慈爱，内外之人殷切忠勤。
English: At the end of the dedication, the "Song of Peace" was played: The boy is here, suffering from his father's great thoughts. Relying on the mercy of heaven, people inside and outside are eagerly loyal.

古文：何以将之？
现代文：拿出什么来供奉呢？
English: What do you bring out to offer?

古文：奠有芳齐，设有明粢。
现代文：进献牲醴纯洁芳芬，陈设洁净的粢盛。
English: Offer pure and fragrant animal stew, and display a clean bowl of rice.

古文：喜极而抃，奉神燕娭。
现代文：喜悦到了极点以致拍掌欢欣，供奉神灵嬉乐宴饮。
English: The joy was so great that they clapped their hands for joy, and offered to the gods and feasted.

古文：礼虽止于三献，情悠长兮远而。
现代文：礼仪虽然三次奠献而停止，情谊悠长啊远传子孙。
English: Although the etiquette stops after the third offering, the friendship lasts a long time and is passed down from generation to generation.

古文：彻馔，《雍和之曲》：烹饪既陈，荐献斯就。
现代文：撤除僎食，奏《雍和之曲》：烹饪的祭品已经陈列，祭献的牲醴已经摆就。
English: Remove the food and play "Yonghe No Qu" (Song of Harmony): The cooking offerings have been displayed, and the sacrificial animals have been set up.

古文：神之在位，既歆既右。
现代文：神灵来到祭位，既歆飨又保佑。
English: When the deities come to the altar, they both bless and protect.

古文：群臣骏奔，彻兹俎豆。
现代文：群公大臣急速奔走，撤除这陈设的俎豆。
English: A group of ministers rushed to remove the display of peas.

古文：物倘未充，尚幸神宥。
现代文：祭品如果不大充足，还诚请神灵原宥。
English: If the offering is not sufficient, sincerely pray to the gods for forgiveness.

古文：送神，《安和之曲》：神之去兮难延，想遐袂兮翩翩。
现代文：送神，奏《安和之曲》：神灵一去啊难以挽留，举袂远离啊飘摇翩翩。
English: Send the gods, play "Anwa no Kyoku": Once the gods are gone, it's hard to retain them, lift the shovel away, float and sway.

古文：万灵从兮后先，卫神驾兮回旋。
现代文：众多神灵相从啊后后先先，保卫神驾啊匆匆回还。
English: Many deities follow one after the other, rushing back to protect the deity.

古文：稽首兮瞻天，云之衢兮眇然。
现代文：叩头再拜啊瞻仰上天，云中大路啊飘渺深远。
English: Bow down again and look up to the sky, the road in the clouds is so far away.

古文：望燎，《时和之曲》：焚燎于坛，灿烂晶荧。
现代文：望祀燎祭，奏《时和之曲》：坛场之上燃起柴燎，火光灿烂闪亮晶莹。
English: On the occasion of the sacrificial burnt offering, the "Song of Time and Harmony" is played: On the altar, a pyre is lit, and the fire shines brightly and sparkles.

古文：币帛牲黍，冀彻帝京。
现代文：币帛牺牲与黍稷，希望撤去回帝京。
English: With the sacrifice of coins and money, it is hoped to withdraw back to the imperial capital.

古文：奉神于阳，昭祀有成。
现代文：奉祀神灵于南郊，昭显的祭祀已完成。
English: Deities were worshipped in the southern suburbs, and it was clear that the sacrifices had been completed.

古文：肃然望之，玉宇光明。
现代文：肃穆宁静望上天，普天环宇一片光明。
English: Looking solemnly and quietly up at the sky, the whole universe is bright.

古文：洪武八年御制圜丘乐章。
现代文：洪武八年皇帝亲制圜丘乐章：
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Hongwu's reign, the Emperor personally composed the music for "Fangqiu":

古文：迎神：仰惟兮昊穹，臣率百职兮迓迎。
现代文：迎神：仰望思慕啊昊天苍穹，臣率领百官啊迎神虔恭。
English: Ying Sheng: Looking up at the sky, the minister led hundreds of officials to worship God.

古文：幸来临兮坛中，上下护卫兮景从。
现代文：希望来临啊祭坛中，上下护卫啊紧跟从。
English: Hope arrives at the altar, escorted by guards up and down.

古文：旌幢缭绕兮四维，重悦圣心兮民获年丰。
现代文：旌旗缭绕啊布四方，圣心喜悦啊民乐年鲎。
English: Flags flutter in all directions, the Sacred Heart rejoices, and folk music rings in the New Year.

古文：奠玉帛：民依时兮用工，感帝德兮大化成功。
现代文：奠献玉帛：人民按时节啊作工，感谢圣帝恩啊化育成功。
English: Dedication of the Jade Urn: The people worked in accordance with the season, thanking the Holy Spirit for the success of the transformation.

古文：臣将兮以奠，望纳兮微衷。
现代文：臣恭奉玉帛啊奠献，诚望收纳啊略表微衷。
English: The vassals respectfully presented the Jade Urn to the emperor, and sincerely hoped that the emperor would accept it.

古文：进俎：庖人兮列鼎，肴羞兮以成。
现代文：进献俎：庖人啊陈列大鼎，肴僎珍馑啊已完成。
English: The presentation of gifts: the display of gifts has been completed, and the display of dishes has been completed.

古文：方俎兮再献，愿享兮以歆。
现代文：方俎盛物啊再次进献，诚望享祀啊祭歆。
English: Once again, offerings were made to the deities, and it was hoped that they would be honored at the festival.

古文：初献：灵兮皇皇，穆严兮金床。
现代文：首次奠献：圣哲的神灵啊美盛皇皇，肃穆庄严啊尊者的坐床。
English: The first offering: The deities of the sages, the beauty of the emperor, the solemnity of the dignitary's bed.

古文：臣令乐舞兮景张，酒行初献兮捧觞。
现代文：臣令乐舞啊大张，酒醴首次奠献啊捧起酒觞。
English: The minister ordered the music and dance to be performed, and the first offering of wine was made. He held up the wine.

古文：亚献：载斟兮再将，百辟陪祀兮具张。
现代文：第二次奠献：斟满酒啊第二次进献，百王陪祀啊都已设张。
English: The second offering: The second offering, accompanied by a hundred kings, has been set up.

古文：感圣情兮无已，拜手稽首兮愿享。
现代文：感激圣心啊无尽，拜手叩头啊诚望歆享。
English: Gratitude to the Sacred Heart is inexhaustible, bowing to the hand is worship, and sincere hope is shared.

古文：终献：三献兮乐舞扬，肴羞具纳兮气蔼而芳。
现代文：最后奠献：三次进献啊乐舞飞扬，看馁珍肴都进献啊气芬和美而芬芳。
English: The final offering: three offerings, the music and dance are flying, and all the precious dishes are presented, the atmosphere and beauty are fragrant.

古文：光朗朗兮上方，况日吉兮时良。
现代文：光辉明朗啊照上方，吉瑞祭日啊时辰和祥。
English: Shining brightly above, the Jiri Festival is in full swing and the time is auspicious.

古文：彻馔：粗陈菲荐兮神喜将，感圣心兮何以忘。
现代文：撤去僎食：粗陋陈设菲薄进献啊神灵喜洋洋，感激圣心啊如何能忘。
English: Take away the baubles: how can the coarse display, the thin offering, the gods rejoice, and the grateful heart forget?

古文：民福留兮佳气昂，臣拜手兮谢恩光。
现代文：人民的福禄存留啊美好气象昂扬，臣跪拜啊感谢恩赐光芒。
English: The blessings of the people remain, the beautiful weather is uplifting, and the vassals kneel down and give thanks for the gift of light.

古文：送神：旌幢烨烨兮云衢长，龙车凤辇兮驾飞扬。
现代文：送神：旌旗鲜明啊云路长，龙车凤辇啊驾驭飞扬。
English: Sending God: The banner is bright, the road is long, the dragon and chariot, the phoenix and dragon are flying.

古文：遥瞻冉冉兮去上方，可见烝民兮永康。
现代文：迁望冉冉啊升入上方，可以预见人民啊永远乐康。
English: Looking ahead and rising into the sky, we can foresee that the people will always be happy and healthy.

古文：望燎：进罗列兮诣燎方，炬焰发兮煌煌。
现代文：望祀燎祭：进献祭品排列啊到燎祭的地方，火焰腾起啊光照辉煌。
English: Looking forward to the sacrificial burnt offering: the sacrificial offerings are lined up to the place of the burnt offering, the flame rises and the light shines brilliantly.

古文：神变化兮物全于上，感至恩兮无量。
现代文：神灵变化啊物品全放在上，感激深恩啊无穷无量。
English: God's spirit changes, all the goods are placed on it, and the gratitude is boundless.

古文：洪武二年方丘乐章。
现代文：洪武二年方丘乐章：
English: Hongwu Year Two Fangqiu Music:

古文：迎神，《中和之曲》：坤德博厚，物资以生。
现代文：迎神，奏《中和之曲》：大地的美德广博深厚，万物赖此得以产生。
English: Ying Sheng, playing the "Song of Neutrality": The virtues of the earth are vast and profound, and all things can be created by it.

古文：承天时行，光大且宁。
现代文：承奉上天以时而行，光明远大而且安宁。
English: In the service of Heaven, time marches on, the light is vast and tranquil.

古文：穆穆皇祇，功化顺成。
现代文：庄严肃穆的大神，功绩化育顺时而成。
English: A dignified and solemn great god, he has been nurtured through his merits.

古文：来御方丘，严恭奉迎。
现代文：来到方丘，恭敬地奉迎。
English: When you come to Fangqiu, you will be greeted respectfully.

古文：奠玉帛，《肃和之曲》：地有四维，大琮以方；土有正色，制币以黄。
现代文：奠献玉帛，奏《肃和之曲》：大地有四隅，大琮形为方；土地有正色，制币色呈黄。
English: Dedication of the Jade Urn, playing of "Shuhe no Kyoku": The earth has four corners, and the shape of the large Urn is square; the land has a positive color, and the color of the coin is yellow.

古文：敬存于中，是荐是将。
现代文：恭敬存其中，纷纷供奉上。
English: Respectfully stored in them, they were offered up one after another.

古文：奠之几筵，临鉴洋洋。
现代文：奠献于几筵，临鉴乐洋洋。
English: It is dedicated to several deities, and is accompanied by music.

古文：进俎，《凝和之曲》：奉将纯牡，其牡童犊。
现代文：进献俎，奏《凝和之曲》：供献上纯色牡畜，这牡畜是一条小犊。
English: For the offering of the burnt offering, and for the playing of the "Song of Condensation": for the offering of the pure-coloured ox, which is a young bull.

古文：烹饪既严，登俎惟肃。
现代文：烹饪既谨严，放在俎中更严肃。
English: Cooking is both rigorous and serious, but it is more serious when it is done in a pot.

古文：升坛昭荐，神光下烛。
现代文：登上坛台昭然进献，神灵的光辉烛照下属。
English: After ascending the altar, the offering is made, and the subordinates are illuminated by the shining candle of the gods.

古文：眷佑邦家，报效惟笃。
现代文：眷顾保佑国家，报效神灵特别淳笃。
English: To care for and bless the country, and to repay the gods is especially auspicious.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：午为盛阳，阴德初萌。
现代文：首次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：午时阳气盛旺，阴柔之德刚刚发萌。
English: The first offering, playing the "Song of the Summer Solstice": At noon, the yang spirit is in full bloom, and the feminine virtue has just begun to sprout.

古文：天地相遇，品物光荣。
现代文：天地相极其广大无边无际。
English: The heavens and the earth are extremely vast and boundless.

古文：吉日令辰，明祀攸行。
现代文：大道全修全部装载。山岳藉此有依凭，海滨全都有依赖。
English: The highway is fully repaired and fully loaded. The mountains rely on it, and the seashore is fully dependent on it.

古文：进以醇醴，展其洁清。
现代文：人民藉助于水土，既平安又康泰。
English: With the help of water and soil, the people are both safe and healthy.

古文：亚献，《豫和之曲》：至广无边，道全持载。
现代文：斟酌美酒表虔诚，功绩美德无限大。第二次奠献：奏《豫和之曲》，山岳藉此有依凭，海滨全都有依赖。
English: The second offering: to play the "Song of Peace" so that the mountains can rely on it and the coast can rely on it.

古文：山岳所凭，海渎咸赖。
现代文：人民藉助于水土，既平安又康泰。
English: With the help of water and soil, the people are both safe and healthy.

古文：民次水土，既安且泰。
现代文：斟酌美酒表虔诚，功绩美德无限大
English: Piety, merit, and virtue are infinite

古文：酌酒揭虔，功德惟大。终献，《熙和之曲》：庸眇之资，有此疆宇。
现代文：最后进献，奏《熙和之曲》：浩渺神灵的资助，有这样广阔的疆宇。
English: The final offering, a rendition of "Heiwa no Kyoku" (Song of Peace and Prosperity): With the support of the vast gods, there is such a vast realm.

古文：匪臣攸能，仰承佑助。
现代文：不是愚臣有才能，而是仰承上天的保佑资助。
English: It is not that fools have talent, but that they are supported by God's blessing.

古文：恩崇父母，臣欢鼓舞。
现代文：父母的恩情崇高无比，臣为此而欢欣鼓舞。
English: The gratitude of the parents is incomparably lofty, and the vassal rejoices for this.

古文：八音宣扬，叠侑明醑。
现代文：八音传宣播扬，频频侑劝洁净的甘露。
English: The eight-tone chanting propagates, and the clean nectar is frequently exhorted.

古文：彻馔，《雍和之曲》：牲牷在俎，笾豆有实。
现代文：撤除僎食，奏《雍和之曲》：祭祀的牺牲放在俎，篷豆祭品也充实。
English: Remove the food offering and play the "Song of Yonghe": the sacrificial offering is placed on the gong, and the taro bean offering is also enriched.

古文：临之蕣蚃，匪惟饮食。
现代文：亲临其前散芬芳，原来不仅是饮食。
English: In front of the fragrance, it turns out to be more than just food.

古文：登歌乃彻，荐献爰毕。
现代文：升登歌舞撤僎食，进献祭奠已完毕。
English: The ascension ceremony, song and dance, meal and offering ceremony have been completed.

古文：执事奉承，一其严粟。
现代文：主持之人承奉事，大家同感严战栗。
English: The person presiding takes over the service, and everyone shudders with the same feeling.

古文：送神，《安和之曲》：神化无方，妙用难量。
现代文：送神，奏《安和之曲》：神灵造化无边无方，精巧用途难估量。
English: Send gods, play "Anwa no Kyoku": The creation of gods is boundless, and the exquisite uses are incalculable.

古文：其功显融，其礼攸长。
现代文：其功显耀和融融，祭祀神灵历久长。
English: Their achievements are brilliant and harmonious, and the worship of deities has a long history.

古文：飚轮云旋，龙探鸾翔。
现代文：飞轮运转云周旋，神龙控驭鸾翱翔。
English: The flywheel moves around the clouds, and the divine dragon soars with control.

古文：拜送稽首，瞻礼余光。
现代文：虔跪送神稽首拜，瞻望祭礼留余光。
English: Gently kneel down to worship God, and leave some time for the memorial service.

古文：望瘗，《时和之曲》：牲醴制币，馂馔惟馨。
现代文：望祀痉祭，奏《时和之曲》：牺牲酒醴伴制币，肴僎供食惟香馨。
English: A sacrificial feast is held, and the "Song of Time and Harmony" is played: the sacrificial wine is accompanied by the minting of coins, and the dishes are served with food, all of which are fragrant.

古文：瘗之于坎，以达坤灵。
现代文：一同痉埋在坎中，以此传达到地神。
English: They were buried together in a ditch, and this is how they reached the earth god.

古文：奉神于阴，典礼是程。
现代文：供奉神灵于地阴，祭祀典礼有规程。
English: Deities are worshipped in the shade of the earth, and there are rules for the ritual.

古文：企而望之，厚壤宽平。
现代文：企足伸颈远处望，广大土地宽且平。
English: Gaze into the distance, the vast land is wide and flat.

古文：洪武八年御制方丘乐章。
现代文：洪武八年皇帝亲制方丘乐章：
English: In the eighth year of Hongwu, the emperor personally made the Fangqiu movement:

古文：迎神：仰皇祇兮驾来，川岳从迎兮威灵备开，香烟缭绕兮神临御街。
现代文：迎神：仰望大神啊大驾来，山川迎候啊威武神灵一同开，香烟缭绕啊神到御街。
English: Ying Shen: Look up to the great god, oh, come on, welcome the mountains and rivers, oh, mighty deities, drive together, smoke around, oh, god to the main street.

古文：渐升坛兮穆穆，霭瑞气兮应结楼台。
现代文：渐渐升坛啊肃穆，霭霭瑞气啊应结楼台。
English: Gradually ascending the altar ah solemn, 瑞氣 ah应结楼台.

古文：以微衷兮率职，幸望圣悦兮心谐。
现代文：以卑微的内心啊循顺职责，侥幸希望圣哲喜悦啊内心和谐。
English: With a humble heart, follow the duties, and hope for the happiness of the Holy Spirit and inner harmony.

古文：但允臣兮固请，愿嘉烝民兮永怀。
现代文：只愿允许臣啊坚持请求，希望嘉赏百姓啊永存胸怀。
English: I would only like to allow the minister to insist on the request, and hope to reward the people and keep my heart forever.

古文：奠玉帛：臣奉兮以筐，玉帛是进兮岁奠以常。
现代文：奠献玉帛：臣手捧着啊礼笸，进献玉帛啊每年进奠如常。
English: The presentation of the imperial regalia: The courtiers held the ceremonial regalia in their hands, and the presentation of the imperial regalia began as usual every year.

古文：百辟陪祀兮珮声琅琅。
现代文：百王陪祭啊环佩琅琅。
English: The festival of a hundred kings is in full swing.

古文：惟南薰兮解愠，映燎炎兮煌煌。
现代文：南风歌啊解结愠，映照燎焰啊明煌煌。
English: Nanfeng Song ah untangling knots, reflection blaze ah sparkling.

古文：进俎：庖人兮净汤，大烹牲兮气霭而芳。
现代文：庖人啊洁净其汤，大量烹牲啊气霭芬芳。
English: A good cook purifies the broth, but a great cook disturbs the fragrance.

古文：以微衷兮献上，曰享兮曰康。
现代文：以卑微的内心啊进献上，歆享啊安康。
English: Offer with a humble heart and enjoy good health.

古文：初献：初献行兮捧觞，圣灵穆穆兮洋洋。
现代文：首次奠献：首次奠献施行啊手捧酒觞，圣哲神灵肃穆啊浩浩洋洋。
English: The first offering: The first offering was made with a cup in hand, and the holy spirit was solemn and vast.

古文：为烝民兮永康，鉴丰年兮耿光。
现代文：为了百姓呵永安康，明照丰年啊映辉光。
English: For the sake of the people's long-term health and well-being, the bright sunshine of the year will shine brightly.

古文：亚献：杂肴羞兮已张，法前王兮典章。
现代文：第二次奠献：错杂肴镤啊已设张，效法前王啊循典章。
English: The second offering: miscellaneous dishes have been set up, following the example of the former king.

古文：臣固展兮情悃，用斟醴兮载觞。
现代文：臣已展布啊内心真诚，以此斟酒啊进酒觞。
English: The minister has been sincere in his heart, so he poured the wine and drank it.

古文：终献：爵三献兮礼将终，臣心眷恋兮无穷。
现代文：最后奠献：酒爵三献啊祭礼将终，臣的肉心眷恋啊无尽无穷。
English: The final offering: the third offering of the lord of the wine will end the ceremony, the minister's carnal attachment is endless.

古文：恐肴羞兮未具，将何报兮神功。
现代文：深恐肴僎啊没有具备，将如何报答啊神灵德功。
English: I am deeply afraid that if I do not have it, how will I repay the divine virtue?

古文：彻馔：俎豆彻兮神熙，鸾舆驾兮旋归。
现代文：撤僎：俎豆撤去啊神熙明，鸾舆凤驾啊凯旋归。
English: Withdrawal of the pea: the pea is withdrawn, and the god is resplendent; the pea and the phoenix return in triumph.

古文：百神翼翼兮云衣。
现代文：百神翩翩啊披云衣。
English: A hundred deities are dancing in the clouds.

古文：敬奉行兮弗敢违。
现代文：恭敬奉行啊弗敢违。
English: Respectfully follow and dare not disobey.

古文：送神：祥风兴兮悠悠，云衢开兮民福留。
现代文：送神：祥瑞风起啊慢悠悠，云路打开啊人民福禄留。
English: Sending God: Xiang Rui, the wind rises slowly, the cloud road opens, and the people stay happy.

古文：岁乐烝民兮大有，想洋洋兮举觞载酒。
现代文：百姓欢乐啊大丰收，思想无边啊举酒相酬。
English: The people are happy about the bumper harvest, their thoughts are boundless, and they reward each other with wine.

古文：望瘗：肴羞玉帛兮瘗坎中，遥瞻隐隐兮龙旗从。
现代文：望祀痉祭：肴僎玉帛啊埋坎中，远望隐隐啊龙旗跟从。
English: Wishing to worship the Dragon Festival: the dishes, the gems, the buried treasure, the far-sighted, the hidden, and the dragon flag follow.

古文：祀事成兮尽微衷，感厚德兮民福雍雍。
现代文：祭祀事成啊尽表微衷，感激厚恩啊人民福禄兴隆。
English: Sacrifices and achievements fully express the feelings of the people, and gratitude and benevolence bring prosperity to the people.

古文：洪武十二年合祀天地乐章。
现代文：洪武十二年，合祭天地乐曲词章：
English: In the 12th year of Hongwu, the hymn of the Heaven and Earth Music:

古文：迎神，《中和之曲》：荷蒙天地兮君主华夷，钦承踊跃兮备筵而祭，诚惶无已兮寸衷微，仰瞻俯首兮惟愿来期。
现代文：迎神，奏《中和之曲》：承蒙天地啊统治华夷，敬承欢欣啊备办筵席而祭祀。惶恐不已啊内心卑微，仰望俯首啊只望来约会。
English: Welcoming the gods, playing the "Song of Neutrality": inherit heaven and earth, ah, rule Huai, respect, rejoice, ah, prepare a banquet and sacrifice. Fearlessly, ah, humble in heart, look up and down, ah, just want to date.

古文：想龙翔凤舞兮庆云飞，必昭昭穆穆兮降坛壝。
现代文：向往龙翔凤舞啊吉庆云飞，必定昭昭穆穆啊降临祭坛内。
English: Longing for the dragon soaring, the phoenix dancing, and the auspicious clouds flying, it is certain that Zhao Zhao Mu Mu will come to the altar.

古文：奠玉帛，《肃和之曲》：天垂风露兮雨泽沾，黄壤氤氲兮气化全。
现代文：奠献玉帛，奏《肃和之曲》：天垂轻风微露啊雨泽润沾，黄土弥漫啊祥气化育完全。
English: Dedicating the Jade Urn and playing the "Song of Solemnity": The sky is overcast, the wind is light, the dew is slight, the rain is moist, the loess is thick, and the auspicious atmosphere is fully developed.

古文：民勤〈亩犬〉亩兮束帛鲜，臣当设宴兮奉来前。
现代文：百姓勤于耕种啊束帛鲜艳，臣应当设宴啊奉呈上前。
English: The common people are diligent in farming, and the bunches are bright, and the vassals should set up a banquet and present it to the emperor.

古文：进俎以后，咸同八年圜丘词。
现代文：进献俎豆以后，全同于八年的圜丘词。
English: After donating the peas, all of them sprouted in eight years.

古文：嘉靖九年复定分祀圜丘乐章。
现代文：嘉靖九年，重新制定分别祭祀圜丘的乐章：
English: In the 9th year of the Jiajing era, the music for the separate rites of Fongqiu was reformulated:

古文：迎神，《中和之曲》：仰惟玄造兮于皇昊穹，时当肇阳兮大礼钦崇。
现代文：迎神，奏《中和之曲》：仰思恩德啊昊天崇高，时值肇阳啊祭礼恭敬。
English: Welcoming the gods, playing the "Song of the Middle Way": Think of the benevolence, the loftiness of the day, the time of the sunrise, and the ritual respect.

古文：臣惟蒲柳兮蝼蚁之衷，伏承春命兮职统群工。
现代文：臣如蒲柳啊微贱内心，恭承眷顾啊职司统率群臣。
English: A vassal is like a bulrush, a humble heart, a courteous patron, a steward leading a group of vassals.

古文：深怀愚昧兮恐负洪德，爰遵彝典兮勉竭微衷。
现代文：深怀愚昧啊恐负大德，遵守常典啊勉力竭尽微心。
English: Filled with ignorance, afraid of failing to live up to one's great virtue, adhering to the classics, and trying one's best.

古文：遥瞻天阙兮宝辇临坛，臣当稽首兮祗迓恩隆。
现代文：迁望天门啊车驾到祭坛，臣当叩头啊迎候隆恩。
English: Looking at the heavenly gate, the car drove to the altar, and the vassals bowed their heads to welcome Long En.

古文：百辟陪列兮舞拜于前，万神翊卫兮以西以东。
现代文：众臣陪列啊舞拜于前，万神护卫啊南北东西。
English: All the courtiers line up and bow before him, and all the gods escort him from north to south and east to west.

古文：臣俯伏迎兮敬瞻帝御，愿垂歆鉴兮拜德曷穷。
现代文：臣俯伏迎候啊敬观帝驾，希望垂顾察鉴啊拜谢恩德无尽。
English: The courtiers prostrate themselves to welcome and respect the emperor, hoping to observe and learn from him, and thanking him endlessly.

古文：奠玉帛，《肃和之曲》龙舆既降兮奉礼先，爰有束帛兮暨瑶瑄。
现代文：奠献玉帛，奏《肃和之曲》：龙车已降啊奉礼在先，因有束帛啊及瑶璧佩逭。
English: Dedication of the Jade Urn, playing of the "Song of Sorrow and Peace": The dragon chariot has been lowered, and the homage is first, because there is a bunch of cormorants and cormorants.

古文：臣谨上献兮进帝前，仰祈听纳兮荷苍乾。
现代文：臣恭敬祭献啊进呈帝前，敬求听候收纳啊承恩上天。
English: The vassal respectfully presents the offering to the emperor, respectfully waits for the acceptance, and receives God's grace.

古文：进俎，《凝和之曲》：肴羞珍馔兮荐上玄，庖人列鼎兮致精虔。
现代文：进献俎豆，奏《凝和之曲》：美味肴僎啊进献上天，庖人列鼎啊致上精诚。
English: Presenting peas, playing the "Song of Condensation": Delicious dishes are presented to the heavens, and people are lined up to be sincere.

古文：臣盍祗献兮馨醴牷，愿垂歆享兮民福渊。
现代文：臣恭敬祭献啊馨香的牲醴，希望垂顾歆享啊民福渊深。
English: The vassals respectfully offer the sweet-scented cattle, and hope to enjoy the people's profound happiness.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：礼严初献兮奉觞，臣将上进兮圣皇。
现代文：首次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：恭敬地首次奠献祭礼啊捧持酒觞，臣将进呈啊圣哲的上皇。
English: The first offering, playing the "Song of Peace": Respectfully, the first offering, holding the wine goblet, the vassal will present the holy emperor.

古文：圣皇垂享兮穆穆，臣拜手兮何以忘。
现代文：圣皇垂顾歆享啊盛大美好，臣礼拜啊怎能忘。
English: The Holy Emperor's patronage is grand and wonderful, how can we forget the vassal worship?

古文：亚献，《豫和之曲》：礼觞再举兮荐玉浆，帝颜歆悦兮民福昂。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《豫和之曲》：礼杯再举啊进献玉浆，帝颜喜悦啊民福高昂。
English: The second offering, playing the "Song of Yuhe": Raise the ceremonial cup again and present the jade pulp, the emperor's joy and the people's happiness are high.

古文：民生有赖兮感上苍，臣惟鞠拜兮荷恩长。
现代文：人民依赖啊感激上苍，臣恭拜啊受恩长。
English: The people rely on and are grateful to God, the ministers pay homage to and are grateful to their superiors.

古文：终献，《熙和之曲》：三献兮礼告成，一念微衷兮露悃情。
现代文：最后一次奠献，奏《熙和之曲》：三次进献啊礼告成，一念微衷啊露至诚。
English: The last offering, playing "Heiwa no Kyoku" (Song of Heiwa): the third offering was a success, and the sincerity of the dedication was revealed.

古文：景张乐舞兮响锽鋐，仰瞻圣容兮俯锡恩泓。
现代文：大张乐舞啊声镂鍟，仰瞻圣容啊俯赐恩泓。
English: Great music and dance, singing, looking up to the sacred countenance, and bestowing grace.

古文：彻馔，《雍和之曲》：祀礼竣兮精意禋，三献备兮诚已申。
现代文：撤除肴喂，奏《雍和之曲》：祭礼高啊祭天精心，三次进献具备啊意虔诚。
English: Remove the dishes and play "Yonghe's Song": The ritual is high, the sacrifice is meticulous, and the three offerings are pious.

古文：敬彻弗迟兮肃恭寅，恐多弗备兮惟赖洪仁。
现代文：敬撤不迟延啊严肃恭谨，恐多不备啊依赖大仁。
English: Respect and withdraw without delay, be serious and respectful, be afraid of many things, be prepared, and rely on great people.

古文：送神，《清和之曲》：禋事讫终兮百辟维张，帝垂歆鉴兮沐泽汪洋。
现代文：送神，奏《清和之曲》：祭祀事终啊百王伸张，帝垂顾鉴察啊沐浴恩泽如汪洋。
English: Send God, play the "Song of Peace": the end of the ritual, hundreds of kings stretch out, the emperor looks down and observes, and the bath of grace is like a vast ocean.

古文：龙车冉冉兮宝驾旋云，灵风鼓舞兮瑞露清瀼。
现代文：龙车再冉上升啊车驾还云，神风鼓动飘舞啊祥露浓滚。
English: The dragon chariot is rising again, the chariot is returning to the clouds, the divine wind is stirring and dancing, and the dewdrops are thick.

古文：洪恩浩荡兮无以为酬，粗陈菲荐兮已感歆尝。
现代文：大恩浩荡啊无法酬谢，粗略陈列菲薄祭品啊感谢歆享。
English: There is no way to repay a great favor, and a crude display of thin offerings is no way to express gratitude.

古文：香气腾芳兮上彻帝座，仰瞻圣造兮赐福群方。
现代文：飘扬香气啊上达帝座，仰望圣功啊赐福四方。
English: Let the fragrance waft and ascend to the throne, look up to the sacred merits, and bestow blessings in all directions.

古文：臣同率土兮载欢载感，祗回宝辇兮凤啸龙翔。
现代文：臣同全国啊欢欣感激，敬回宝车啊龙啸凤翔。
English: The courtiers and the whole country are joyful and grateful, and respectfully return the treasure car to the dragon and the phoenix.

古文：诚惶诚恐兮仰恋弥切，愿福生民兮永锡亨昌。
现代文：诚惶诚恐啊留恋更切，希望福佑人民啊永赐盛昌。
English: Sincerely fear and cherish, hope to bless the people and prosper forever.

古文：望燎，《时和之曲》：龙驾宝辇兮升帝乡，御羞菲帛兮奉燎方。
现代文：望燎，《时和之曲》：龙驾宝车啊升帝乡，进献菲帛啊燎祭一方。
English: Wang Yao, "The Song of Time and Harmony": The dragon drives the treasure car to ascend to the emperor's hometown, and the offering of feathers to the emperor is a part of the festival.

古文：环珮铿锵兮罗坛壝，炬焰特举兮气辉煌。
现代文：佩戴玉环铿锵啊罗列坛场，火焰持举啊气势辉煌。
English: Wearing a jade ring and setting up an altar, holding a flame and being magnificent.

古文：生民蒙福兮圣泽沾，臣荷眷佑兮拜谢恩光。
现代文：人民受福啊沾圣恩，臣蒙受眷顾保佑啊拜谢恩光。
English: The people are blessed with divine grace, and the ministers are blessed with benevolence and blessing.

古文：嘉靖九年复定方丘乐章。
现代文：嘉靖九年，复位方丘乐章：
English: In the ninth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the square hill movement was reinstated:

古文：迎神，《中和之曲》：俯瞻兮凤辇来，灵风兮拂九垓。
现代文：迎神，奏《中和之曲》：俯身观看啊凤车来，神灵清风啊吹拂九州岛四海。
English: Welcoming the gods and playing the "Song of Neutrality": bend over and watch the phoenix chariots come and the divine wind blow across the four seas of Kyushu Island.

古文：川岳从兮后先，百辟列兮襄陪。
现代文：山川河岳跟着啊先先后后，百王陈列啊依次安排。
English: Mountains, rivers, and mountains follow one after another, and the hundred kings are arranged in order.

古文：臣拜首兮迓迎，愿临享兮幸哉。
现代文：臣叩头啊迎接，希望亲临享祀啊幸甚至哉。
English: The vassals bowed their heads to welcome him, hoping that he would come and worship them in person.

古文：奠玉帛，《广和之曲》：祀礼有严兮奉虔，玉帛在笥兮来前。
现代文：奠献玉帛，奏《广和之曲》：祭礼严谨啊供奉诚虔，玉帛在竹笥啊至前。
English: Dedication of the Jade Urn and playing of the "Song of Guanghe": The ritual is strict and the offering is devout, and the Jade Urn is placed in front of the bamboo basket.

古文：皇灵垂享兮以纳，烝民率土兮乐丰年。
现代文：威灵垂临享祀啊以收纳，全国百姓啊欢庆丰年。
English: Willing to come and enjoy the worship ah to receive, the people of the whole country ah to celebrate the prosperous year.

古文：进俎，《咸和之曲》：肴羞馨兮气芳，庖人奉役兮和汤。
现代文：进献俎豆，奏《咸和之曲》：肴僎馨香啊气味芬芳，庖人供奉其事啊和汤。
English: Presenting peas, playing the "Song of Salt and Peace": the dishes are fragrant, the smells are fragrant, and the people are offering their things and the soup.

古文：奉进兮皇祗歆慰，臣稽首兮敬将。
现代文：奉献进来啊大神歆享慰劳，臣叩头啊恭敬呈上。
English: Dedication comes in ah great god  enjoy consolation, minister kowtow ah respectfully present.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：酒行初献兮乐舞张，齐醴明洁兮氙香。
现代文：首次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：举行初次献酒啊乐舞施张，斋醴洁净啊气味馨香。
English: The first offering of libations and the playing of the "Lullaby of Peace": the first offering of wine was held, music and dance were performed, the table was clean and the smell was sweet.

古文：愿垂享兮以歆，生民安兮永康。
现代文：希望垂顾享祀啊以歆，百姓安宁啊永远乐康。
English: It is hoped that the people will enjoy the religious rites and festivities, and the people will enjoy peace and happiness forever.

古文：亚献，《安和之曲》：载献兮奉觞，神颜和懿兮以尝。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《安和之曲》：进献啊捧觞，神灵和美啊以尝。
English: For the second offering, "Anwa no Kyoku" was played. The offering was to hold the bowl, and the deities and beauty were to taste it.

古文：功隆厚载兮配天，民感德兮无量。
现代文：功高德厚啊配上天，人民感激恩德啊无限量。
English: Meritorious and virtuous deeds are matched by the heavens, and the people's gratitude is boundless.

古文：终献，《时和之曲》：三进兮玉露清，百职奔绕兮佩环鸣。
现代文：最后一次奠献，奏《时和之曲》：三次进献啊玉露清，百官奔走围绕啊佩环岛。
English: The last offering, playing the "Song of Time and Harmony": the three-time offering, ah, jade dew, hundreds of officials running around, ah, Peihuan Island.

古文：凫钟鹭鼓兮韵铮鍧，愿留福兮群生。
现代文：鬼钟鹭鼓啊声韵铮铮响亮，希望留赐福禄啊给予众苍生。
English: The bells and drums are ringing loudly. I hope to bestow blessings on all living beings.

古文：彻馔，《贞和之曲》：礼告终兮彻敢违，深惟一念兮诚意微。
现代文：撤除僎食，奏《贞和之曲》：祭礼结束啊撤僎不违背，深思一念啊诚意微薄。
English: Take away the food and play the "Song of Chastity": The festival is over, take away the food and play the "Song of Chastity": Take away the food and play the "Song of Chastity": The festival is over, take away the food and play the "Song of Chastity."

古文：神垂博容兮听纳，恐未备兮惟慈依。
现代文：神垂临宽容啊听凭采纳，恐怕没有具备啊惟求慈荷。
English: God's tolerance and tolerance, I'm afraid I don't have it, but I ask for mercy.

古文：送神，《宁和之曲》：礼成兮诚已伸，驾还兮法从陈。
现代文：送神，奏《宁和之曲》：礼已完成啊诚意已伸，车驾返还啊法度随陈。
English: Send God, play the "Song of Peace": The ceremony has been completed, the sincerity has been extended, the car has been returned, and the law will follow.

古文：灵祇列兮以随，百辟拜兮恭寅。
现代文：神灵列啊相随，百王拜啊恭敬。
English: The spirits of the gods line up and follow, the kings bow down and pay homage.

古文：望坤宫兮奉辞，愿普福兮烝民。
现代文：希望坤宫啊奉辞。希望遍赐枢啊给人民。
English: I hope the palace will be flattered. I hope the palace will be given to the people.

古文：望燎，曲同《宁和》。
现代文：望燎，曲同《宁和》。
English: "Ninghe" is sung by Wang Yao.

古文：洪武三年朝日乐章。
现代文：洪武三年朝日乐章。
English: Hongwu three years of the morning sun movement.

古文：二十一年罢。
现代文：二十一年罢。
English: Twenty-one years removed:

古文：迎神，《熙和之曲》：吉日良辰，祀典式陈。
现代文：迎神，奏《熙和之曲》：吉日良辰，祭祀典礼设陈。
English: Welcoming the gods, the "Song of Peace" was played: "Good day, good hour," and the sacrificial ceremony was held.

古文：纯阳之精，惟是大明。
现代文：纯阳的精英，只有这犬明。
English: The elite of the pure sun, only this dog is bright.

古文：濯濯厥灵，昭鉴我心。
现代文：神灵光明，照出我内心。
English: The spirit of the gods shines brightly, inspecting my heart.

古文：以候以迎，来格来歆。
现代文：等候相迎，神来享歆。
English: Welcome when you arrive, leave when you leave.

古文：奠币，《保和之曲》：灵旗莅止，有赫其威。
现代文：奠献币帛，奏《保和之曲》：神旗萑临，赫赫声威。
English: Laying a coin urn, playing the "Song of Peace": The divine banner arrives, and resounds.

古文：一念潜通，幽明弗违。
现代文：思念暗通，人神不违。
English: Thoughts pass through the mind, and man does not go against God.

古文：有币在篚，物薄而微。
现代文：币帛装筐篚，祭物薄而微。
English: The coffers are full of coins, and the offerings are thin.

古文：神兮安留，尚其享之。
现代文：神啊留下，尚享莫推。
English: God, stay, there's no other way.

古文：初献，《安和之曲》：神兮我留，有荐必受。
现代文：首次奠献，奏《安和之曲》：神啊我诚心请留，有所进献敬请纳受。
English: The first offering, playing "Anwa no Kyoku": "God, I sincerely ask you to stay, and if you have any further offerings, please accept them."

古文：享祀之初，奠兹醴酒。
现代文：首次享祀，献上醴酒。
English: Enjoying worship for the first time, presenting sake.

古文：晨光初升，祥徵应候。
现代文：早晨的太阳刚刚升起，吉祥的征兆应合占候。
English: The sun has just risen in the morning, so the auspicious signs should coincide.

古文：何以侑觞，乐陈雅奏。
现代文：用什么来佐助饮兴，陈设音乐雅乐奏。
English: What should be used to assist drinking, and how should music be played?

古文：亚献，《中和之曲》：我祀维何？
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《中和之曲》：我祭祀时用什么？
English: The second offering, playing the "Song of Neutrality": What do I use for my sacrifice?

古文：奉兹牺牲，爰酌醴齐，贰觞载升。
现代文：供奉这牺牲，斟上醴酒，第二杯再次献呈。
English: Offer the sacrifice, pour the wine, and offer the second cup again.

古文：洋洋如在，式燕以宁。
现代文：喜乐自得如在眼前，既快乐啊又安宁。
English: Joy is right in front of you, both happy and peaceful.

古文：庶表微衷，交于神明。
现代文：聊且表达微薄的心意，呈交给圣明的众神。
English: With this watch subtlety, feel traffic gods.

古文：终献，《肃和之曲》：执事有严，品物斯祭，稷非馨，式将其意。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《肃和之曲》：主持人庄重严肃，祭祀的物品纷呈，馨香不在黍稷，关键在表示真心。
English: At the end of the dedication, "Shuwa no Kyoku" was played: the host was solemn and serious, the sacrificial objects were numerous, the incense was absent, and the key was to express sincerity.

古文：荐兹酒醴，成我常祀。神其顾歆，永言乐只。
现代文：进献上这杯酒醴，完成我经常的祭祀仪程，神灵前来歆享，永远幸福欢欣。
English: Present this cup of wine, complete my regular ritual, and the gods will come to enjoy it, forever happy and joyful.

古文：彻馔，《凝和之曲》：春祈秋报，率为我民。
现代文：撤除僎食，奏《凝和之曲》：春天行祈礼秋天行报仪，祭祀的都是我的子民。
English: Remove the yakitori, play the "Song of Condensation": in the spring, perform the prayer, in the fall, perform the ceremony, all the sacrifices are made by my people.

古文：我民之生，赖于尔神。
现代文：我的子民的生存，仰赖您仁慈的众神。
English: The survival of my people depends on your benevolent gods.

古文：维神佑之，康宁是臻。
现代文：惟有众神的护佑，纔能达到康宁。
English: Only by the protection of the gods can you reach Kangning.

古文：祭祀云毕，神其乐忻。
现代文：祭祀已完毕，神灵快乐欢欣。
English: The ritual is over, and the deities are happy.

古文：送神，《寿和之曲》：三献礼终，九成乐作。
现代文：送神，奏《寿和之曲》：三次进献礼仪结束，奏起九成音乐。
English: Sending forth the gods, playing the "Song of Peace": At the end of the third offering ceremony, ninety percent of the music is played.

古文：神人以和，既燕且乐。
现代文：神人和顺，既安然又快乐。
English: God's people and Shun are both safe and happy.

古文：云车风驭，灵光昭灼。
现代文：云载着车风驾着马，神光昭显鲜明灼灼。
English: The clouds carry the chariot, the wind drives the horse, and the divine light shines brightly.

古文：瞻望以思，邈彼寥廓。
现代文：虔敬仰望思绪起，遥远的空际无限寥廓。
English: From the reverent contemplation of thoughts, the distant space becomes infinitely small.

古文：望燎，《豫和之曲》：俎豆既彻，礼乐已终。
现代文：望祀燎祭，奏《豫和之曲》：俎豆已撤除，礼乐已告终。
English: On the occasion of the wreath-laying ceremony, "Yuwa no Kyoku" was played: the pea has been removed, and the ritual music has ended.

古文：神之云旋，倏将焉从。
现代文：神灵返回，倏然跟从。
English: The spirit returns and follows.

古文：以望以燎，庶几感通。
现代文：望杞燎祭，希望感念沟通。
English: At the memorial service, hope and emotion are communicated.

古文：时和岁丰，维神之功。
现代文：时令和顺年岁丰，一切都是神灵功。
English: Seasonal and year-round prosperity, everything is the work of the gods.

古文：嘉靖九年复定朝日乐章。
现代文：嘉靖九年，重新制定朝日乐章：
English: In the ninth year of Jiajing, the Asahi movement was reformulated:

古文：迎神，《熙和之曲》：仰瞻兮大明，位奠兮王宫。
现代文：迎神，奏《熙和之曲》：仰瞻啊大明，位尊啊王官。
English: Ying Sheng, playing the "Song of Prosperity and Peace": Looking up, Daming, Dignity, Royal.

古文：时当仲春兮气融，爰遵祀礼兮报功。
现代文：时值仲春啊氟融融，遵照祀礼啊上报功。
English: The time of the Mid-Autumn Festival has come and gone, and according to the ritual, the merit has been awarded.

古文：微诚兮祈神昭鉴，愿来享兮迓神聪。
现代文：微薄的内心啊请神鉴察，希望来歆享啊迎神聪。
English: Humble heart, ask God to inspect, hope to enjoy, welcome God.

古文：奠玉帛，《凝和之曲》：神灵坛兮肃其恭，有帛在篚兮赤琮。
现代文：奠献玉帛，奏《凝和之曲》：神灵祭坛啊肃穆敬恭，有帛在筐篚啊还有赤色玉琮。
English: The laying of the Jade Urn and the playing of the "Song of Condensation": the altar of the gods is solemn and respectful, there is an urn in the basket, and there is also a red jade Urn.

古文：奉神兮祈享以纳，予躬奠兮忻以颙。
现代文：供奉神灵啊请求收纳享用，我亲自进献啊快乐敬颐。
English: Offer to the gods, ask for acceptance and enjoyment, I will personally make a donation, happy and respectful.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：玉帛方奠兮神歆，酒行初献兮舞呈。
现代文：首次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：玉帛正奠献啊神已歆，首次奠献酒醴啊舞蹈纷呈。
English: The first offering of libations and the playing of the "Shuwa no Kyoku" (Song for the New Year's Eve): Tamakazura is offering the libations and the god is already dead, the first offering of libations and the dance is in full swing.

古文：齐芳馨兮牺色骍，神容悦兮鉴予情。
现代文：祭品馨香啊牺色焉辟，神灵喜悦啊鉴察我心。
English: Sacrifices are fragrant, sacrifices are radiant, and the gods are pleased to inspect my heart.

古文：亚献，《时和之曲》：二齐升兮气芬芳，神颜怡和兮喜将。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《时和之曲》：二次祭献啊气味芬芳，神灵和悦啊喜洋洋。
English: The second offering, playing "The Song of Time and Harmony": the second offering, the smell, the fragrance, the gods, the joy, the jubilation.

古文：予令乐舞兮具张，愿垂普照兮民康。
现代文：我命令乐舞啊都设张，希望垂临遍照大地啊人民安康。
English: I order the music and dance to be staged, and hope for the well-being of the people.

古文：终献，《保和之曲》：殷勤三献兮告成，群职在列兮周盈。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《保和之曲》：殷勤三次进献啊已完成，众官在列啊满盈。
English: At the end of the dedication, the "Song of Peace" was played: the three times of dedication had been completed, and the officials were lined up.

古文：神锡休兮福民生，万世永赖兮神功明。
现代文：神赐福啊保佑人民，万代永赖啊神功显明。
English: May God bless and protect the people, and may He be glorified forever and ever.

古文：彻馔，《安和之曲》：一诚尽兮予心怿，五福降兮民获禧。
现代文：撤除僎食，奏《安和之曲》：真诚尽献啊我心乐，五福降临啊人民得福禄。
English: Remove the food restrictions, play the "Song of Peace": sincere dedication ah my heart music, the five blessings come down ah the people are blessed.

古文：仰九光兮诚已申，终三献兮彻敢迟。
现代文：仰望九光啊诚心展布，结束三献啊肴僎快撤除。
English: Look up at the nine lights, spread sincerity, end the three offerings, and quickly remove the dishes.

古文：送神，《昭和之曲》：祀礼既周兮乐舞扬，神享以纳兮还青乡。
现代文：送神，奏《昭和之曲》：祭礼周全啊乐舞飞扬，神灵享食收纳啊返回青乡。
English: Send off the gods, play "Showa no Kyoku": the festival is complete, the music and dance are flying, the gods enjoy the food, receive it, and return to their hometown.

古文：予当拜首兮奉送，愿恩光兮普万方。
现代文：我应当礼拜啊奉送，希望恩惠的光芒遍照四方。
English: I should worship and serve, hoping that the light of grace would shine everywhere.

古文：永耀熹明兮攸赖，烝民咸仰兮恩光。
现代文：光明永照啊人依赖，百姓都仰承啊恩惠福光。
English: The light shines forever, people rely on it, the people obey it, and the grace and blessing of the blessed light prevail.

古文：望燎之曲：睹六龙兮御驾，神变化兮凤翥鸾翔。
现代文：望祀燎祭之曲：看到六龙啊驾着车，神灵变化啊鸾凤飞翔。
English: Song of the Woshu Gong Festival: Seeing the six dragons driving a car, the gods changing, and the phoenixes flying.

古文：束帛肴羞兮诣燎方，佑我皇明兮基绪隆长。
现代文：束帛肴仆啊送到燎祭之处，保佑我皇明啊帝业兴隆久长。
English: Send a bunch of food and drink to the place of the wreath-laying ceremony, and bless my Emperor Ming for a long and prosperous reign.

古文：洪武三年夕月乐章。
现代文：洪武三年夕月乐章，周天星辰附后。
English: Hongwu three years sunset and moon music, Zhou Tianxing later.

古文：二十一年罢。
现代文：二十一年罢除：
English: Twenty-one years removed:

古文：迎神，《凝和之曲》：吉日良辰，祀典式陈。
现代文：迎神，奏《凝和之曲》：吉祥的日子美好的时辰，祭祀典礼献陈。
English: Welcoming the gods, playing the "Condensation Song": auspicious days, beautiful hours, sacrificial ceremonies.

古文：太阴夜明，以及星辰。
现代文：太阴夜空明，施及众星辰。
English: The night was too cloudy, but the sky was bright and full of stars.

古文：濯濯厥灵，昭鉴我心以候以迎，来格来歆。
现代文：光明神灵，明察我必。等候欢迎，神来享歆。
English: I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills from whence cometh my help.

古文：奠帛以下，咸同朝日。
现代文：四年，星辰另外祭祀，改 以及星辰 句为 惟德孔神 。
English: In the fourth year, the star was sacrificed separately, and the star phrase was changed to "Wei Dekong God."

古文：嘉靖九年复定夕月乐章。
现代文：奠献币帛以下，都与朝日乐章相同。嘉靖九年，重新制定夕月乐章：
English: The following are the same as the Asahi movement. In the ninth year of Jiajing, the setting moon movement was reformulated:

古文：迎神，《凝和之曲》：阴曰配合兮承阳宗，式循古典兮斋以恭。
现代文：迎神，奏《凝和之曲》：太阴配合啊承续阳宗，遵循古代典制啊斋戒敬恭。
English: Welcoming the gods, playing the "Song of Condensation": the Great Yin cooperated with and followed the Yang Sect, followed the ancient ceremony system, and fasted and fasted.

古文：睹太阴来格兮星辰罗从，予拜首兮迓神容。
现代文：观看太阴前来啊星辰纷纷跟从，我礼拜啊迎接神容。
English: Watching the moon come and the stars follow, I pray to welcome the divine appearance.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：神其来止，有严其诚。
现代文：首次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：神灵到来啊，严肃真诚。
English: The first offering and playing of the "Lullaby of Peace": The gods have arrived, serious and sincere.

古文：玉帛在篚，清酤方盈。
现代文：玉帛放在篚筐，清酒已酌满盈。
English: Tamakazura is placed in a basket and sake is drunk to the full.

古文：奉而奠之，愿鉴微情。
现代文：奉上奠献，希望鉴察微薄心情。
English: I would like to offer my condolences and hope that you can appreciate my humble feelings.

古文：夫祀兮云何？
现代文：祭祀为了什么？
English: What is the ritual for?

古文：祈佑兮群氓。
现代文：求福保佑万民。
English: Pray for the well-being and blessing of all people.

古文：亚献，《豫和之曲》：二觞载斟，乐舞雍雍。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《豫和之曲》：二杯已满斟，乐舞更和雍。
English: The second offering, playing "Yuwa no Kyoku": the two cups are full, and the music and dance are even more harmonious.

古文：神歆且乐，百职惟供。
现代文：神灵歆享又欢乐，百官万事已备供。
English: The divine spirits enjoy and rejoice, and all things have been prepared for them.

古文：愿顺轨兮五行，祈民福兮惟神必从。
现代文：希望顺轨范啊随五行，为民求福啊神必依从。
English: Hope to be on track, follow the five elements, seek blessings for the people, and God will obey.

古文：终献，《康和之曲》：一诚以申，三举金觥。钟鼓鍧鍧，环珮琤琤。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《康和之曲》：内心已申明，三献已完成，钟鼓钢钢响，环佩垮垮呜。
English: At the end of the dedication, "Kangwa no Kyoku" was played: the heart has been affirmed, the three dedications have been completed, the bell and drum are ringing, and the ringing is deafening.

古文：鉴予之情，愿永保我民生。
现代文：鉴察我内心，但愿永保我人民。
English: Look into my heart, and may you preserve my people forever.

古文：彻馔，《安和之曲》：礼乐肃具，精意用申。
现代文：撤除僎食，奏《安和之曲》：礼乐恭肃备，精诚已申明。
English: Removing the yakitori and playing "Anwa no Kyoku": the music is solemn and solemn, and sincerity has been affirmed.

古文：位坎居歆，纳兹藻蘋。
现代文：立在坎位居处享歆，收纳这藻苹。
English: Stand in the square where the cormorants live and collect the algae.

古文：彻之弗迟，仪典肃陈。
现代文：撤除肴撰不延迟，仪节典礼恭敬陈。
English: The removal of the dishes will not be delayed, and the ceremony will respect Chen.

古文：神其鉴之，佑我生民。
现代文：万望神灵鉴察，保佑我的人民。
English: May the gods watch over and bless my people.

古文：送神，《保和之曲》：礼备告终兮神喜旋，穹碧澄辉兮素华鲜。
现代文：送神，奏《保和之曲》：礼备结束啊神灵高兴返回，天空碧蓝光辉澄澈啊白花鲜。
English: Send the gods, play "Song of Peace": The ceremony is over, ah, the gods are happy to return, the sky is blue, bright and clear, ah, white flowers.

古文：星辰从兮返神乡，露气清兮霓裳蹁跹。
现代文：星辰跟随啊返回神乡，露气清新啊霓裳起舞蹁跶。
English: Follow the stars and return to God's hometown, the dew is fresh and the costumes are dancing.

古文：望瘗之曲：肴羞兮束帛，荐之于瘗兮罔敢愆。
现代文：望祀痉埋之曲：肴侯啊束帛，进献祭品痉埋地下啊不敢违反。
English: Wishing for the buried song: Dishes, bundles, offerings, buried in the ground, dare not violate.

古文：予拜首兮奉送，愿永贶兮民乐丰年。
现代文：我礼拜啊奉送，希望永远赐予啊人民欢乐喜获丰年。
English: I pray for the bestowal and hope for the eternal bestowal of a happy and prosperous year for the people.

古文：嘉靖十年，定祈谷乐章。
现代文：嘉靖十年，制定祈谷乐章：
English: In the tenth year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, the following prayer melody was formulated:

古文：迎神，《中和之曲》：臣惟穹昊兮民物之初，为民请命兮祀礼昭诸。
现代文：迎神，奏《中和之曲》：臣思昊天啊是人民获得万物的来源，为人民请求啊祭祀典礼昭然。
English: Welcoming the gods and playing the "Song of Neutrality": The emperor thought that heaven was the source of all things for the people, and it was obvious that the sacrificial ceremony was a request for the people.

古文：备筵率职兮祈洪庥，臣衷微眇兮悃恳诚摅。
现代文：备办筵席率领百官啊祈求福禄，臣内心微渺啊真诚坦现。
English: To prepare a banquet, to lead a hundred officials, to pray for good fortune, and to be sincere and candid in the smallness of one's heart.

古文：遥瞻驾降兮霁色辉，欢迎鼓舞兮迓龙舆。
现代文：远望车驾降临啊霁色光辉，欢欣鼓舞啊迎龙车。
English: Looking forward to the arrival of the car, bright and radiant, rejoicing and cheering, welcoming the dragon car.

古文：臣愧菲才兮后斯民，愿福斯民兮圣恩渠。
现代文：臣惭愧才薄啊为民君，希塱圣恩啊赐福人民。
English: For the people's prince, the vassal should be ashamed of himself, but for the people's prince, may the holy grace bless the people.

古文：奠玉帛，《肃和之曲》：烝民勤职兮农事颛，蚕工亦慎兮固桑阡。
现代文：奠献玉帛，奏《肃和之曲》：人民勤于职守啊农业之事谨颛，养蚕之人也谨慎啊巩固种桑陌阡。
English: The dedication of the Jade Urn and the playing of the "Song of Solemnity": the people are diligent in their duties and careful in agriculture, and the people who raise silkworms are also cautious and strengthen the cultivation of mulberry.

古文：玉帛祗奉兮暨豆笾，仰祈大化兮锡以丰年。
现代文：玉帛敬奉啊以及豆篷，景仰祈求大化啊赐给丰年。
English: The Jade Skull reveres and worships the Rooster and the Bean Canopy, and prays for the Year of Abundance.

古文：进俎，《咸和之曲》：鼎烹兮气馨，香羞兮旨醽。
现代文：进献俎豆，奏《咸和之曲》：鼎中烹饪啊气芳馨，浓香的肴僎啊美酒醇。
English: Presenting peas, playing the "Song of the Salt and Peace": Dingzhong cooking ah qi fragrance, fragrant dishes  ah fine wine alcohol.

古文：帝垂享兮以歆，烝民蒙福兮以宁。
现代文：神帝垂临享祀啊闻歆，众民蒙受福禄啊安宁。
English: The divine emperor descends to enjoy worship, and the people are blessed with peace.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：礼严兮初献行，百职趋跄兮佩琤鸣。
现代文：首次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：祭礼严肃啊首次奠献举行，百官奔走啊佩环鸣。
English: The first laying of wreaths and the playing of the "Song of Peace": The solemn ceremony was held for the first time, and hundreds of dignitaries marched to the sound of ringing bells.

古文：臣谨进兮玉觥，帝心歆鉴兮岁丰亨。
现代文：臣恭谨进献啊玉杯，神帝心中鉴察啊年岁丰登。
English: The ministers respectfully present the jade cup, and the divine emperor looks into the hearts of the aged.

古文：亚献，《景和之曲》：二觞举兮致虔，清醴载斟兮奉前。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《景和之曲》：第二杯酒举起啊致上诚虔，清醇美酒斟满啊奉献在前。
English: The second offering, playing "Songs of Jinghe": the second cup of wine is raised to the godly, and the wine is poured before the offering.

古文：仰音容兮忻穆，臣感圣恩兮实拳拳。
现代文：仰承音容啊祥和喜乐，臣感激圣恩啊忠心倦倦。
English: Obedient to the melody, peaceful and joyful, grateful to the grace, faithful and weary.

古文：终献，《永和之曲》：三献兮一诚微，禋礼告成兮帝鉴是依。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《永和之曲》：三次奠献啊内心微诚，祭礼完成啊神帝鉴察有依凭。
English: At the end of the dedication, the "Song of Eternal Peace" was played: three dedications ah, the heart is weak, the ritual is complete ah, the god emperor has evidence of inspection.

古文：烝民沐德兮岁丰禨，臣拜首兮竭诚祈。
现代文：众民沐浴恩德啊年岁丰登，臣礼拜祈求啊竭尽忠心。
English: All the people are showered with kindness, the years are abundant, the vassals pray and pray, and they are loyal.

古文：彻馔，《凝和之曲》：三献周兮肃乃仪，俎豆敬彻兮弗敢迟。
现代文：撤除僎食，奏《凝和之曲》：三次进献啊严肃仪节，俎豆恭敬撤除啊不敢延迟。
English: Remove the peas and play the "Song of Condensation": the three-time offering is a serious ceremony, the peas are respectfully removed and do not dare to delay.

古文：愿留福兮丕而，曰雨曰旸兮若时。
现代文：希望留下福禄啊洪大，下雨天晴啊顺时。
English: I hope to leave behind a great fortune, a great fortune, and a good time, rain or shine.

古文：送神，《清和之曲》：祀礼告备兮帝鉴彰，臣情上达兮感昊苍。
现代文：送神，奏《清和之曲》：祭祀典礼完成啊神帝鉴察显彰，臣的内心上达啊感谢上苍。
English: Sending forth the gods, playing the "Song of Peace": The ritual ceremony is complete, the god-emperor's inspection is revealed, the minister's heart is uplifted, and thanks be to God.

古文：云程肃驾兮返帝乡，臣荷恩眷兮何以忘。
现代文：云路肃驾啊返回帝乡，臣蒙受恩惠啊不能忘。
English: Take the high road and return to the imperial hometown. You must not forget the favors you have received.

古文：祥风瑞霭兮弥坛壝，烝民率土兮悉获丰康。
现代文：祥风瑞雾霭啊弥漫坛场，众民在各地啊尽获丰收安康。
English: The auspicious wind and mist pervaded the fields, and the people everywhere enjoyed a good harvest and good health.

古文：望燎，《太和之曲》：遥睹兮天衢长，邈彼寥廓兮去上方。
现代文：望祀燎祭，奏《太和之曲》：迁望啊苍天大路长，遥远寥廓啊离开上方。
English: On the occasion of the wreath-laying ceremony, the "Song of Taihe" was played: "Move away from the sky, the road is long, the distance is short, move away from the sky."

古文：束帛荐火兮升闻，悃愊通兮沛泽长。
现代文：束帛进献火啊听到上升，诚朴沟通啊沛泽长。
English: Bundled into a bonfire ah heard rising, honest communication ah long.

古文：乐终九奏兮神人以和，臣同率土兮咸荷恩光。
现代文：音乐九奏结束啊神人顺和，臣同天下呵都承蒙恩惠光。
English: At the end of the ninth movement of the music, the gods and mortals are in harmony, and the vassals and the whole world are blessed with grace and light.

古文：嘉靖十七年，定大飨乐章。
现代文：嘉靖十七年，制定大飨的乐章：
English: In the seventeenth year of Jiajing, he formulated the movement of the great gong:

古文：迎神，《中和之曲》：于皇穆清兮弘覆惟仁，既成万宝兮惠此烝民。
现代文：迎神，奏《中和之曲》：上皇肃穆清静啊广被其仁，已生成万宝啊惠赐此众民。
English: Welcoming the gods, playing the "Song of Neutrality": The Emperor's solemnity and serenity are widely known for their benevolence, and have become a treasure for the people.

古文：祗受厥明兮欲报无因，爰稽古昔兮式展明禋。
现代文：敬受其明啊想要报答无门，考察古代啊展陈祭祀分明。
English: It is clear that there is no way to repay the respect, and it is clear that the ancient sacrificial rites should be investigated.

古文：肃肃广庭兮遥遥紫旻，笙镛始奏兮祥风导云。
现代文：肃穆的广庭啊遥速的紫色天曼，笙锈开始演奏啊祥风引导云。
English: The solemn courtyard, the distant speed of the purple sky, the rust begins to play, the auspicious wind guides the clouds.

古文：臣拜稽首兮中心孔勤，爰瞻宝辇兮森罗万神。
现代文：臣恭敬礼拜啊心中非常勤恳，瞻望宝车啊满布万神。
English: The vassal reverently worships, and is very diligent in his heart; he looks around for the chariot, and is clothed with all the gods.

古文：庶几昭格兮眷命其申，徘徊顾歆兮鉴我恭寅。
现代文：差不多昭明到来啊眷命展伸，徘徊垂顾歆享啊察我恭顺的内心。
English: It's almost dawning on me that I've come so far, that I've survived so long, that I'm wandering around, enjoying myself, and looking into my obedient heart.

古文：奠玉帛，《肃和之曲》：捧珪币兮瑶堂，穆将愉兮圣皇。
现代文：奠献玉帛，奏《肃和之曲》：捧着珪币啊在瑶堂，气氛肃穆啊将愉乐圣皇。
English: The presentation of the Jade Urn and the playing of the "Shuwa no Kyoku" (Song of Repose): holding the sacred coins in the hall, the solemn atmosphere will bring joy to the Holy Emperor.

古文：秉予心兮纯一，荷帝德兮溥将。
现代文：秉持我的心啊纯净专一，蒙受圣帝的恩德啊那样宽广。
English: Uphold my heart, pure and single-minded, and receive the grace of the Holy Emperor, so broad.

古文：进俎，《凝和之曲》：岁功阜兮庶类成，黍稷飶兮濡鼎馨。
现代文：进献俎豆，奏《凝和之曲》：农事收获丰厚啊万物生成，黍稷香啊煮在鼎中芬馨。
English: Peas are presented, and the "Song of Condensation" is played: the agricultural harvest is bountiful, all things are produced, and the fennel is boiled in the middle of the soup.

古文：敬荐之兮惭菲轻，大礼不烦兮惟一诚。
现代文：敬献神灵啊惭愧菲薄礼轻，大礼不用烦费啊只有专诚。
English: It's a shame to pay homage to the gods, but it's easy to pay a little homage, and there's no need to go to the trouble of paying a lot of homage, all you need is dedication.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：金风动兮玉宇澄，初献觞兮交圣灵。
现代文：首次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：秋风吹动啊宇宙清澄，首次献酒啊交通圣灵。
English: The first offering of libations and the playing of the "Lullaby of Peace": the autumn wind is blowing and the universe is clear, the first offering of wine and communion with the Holy Spirit.

古文：瞻玄造兮怀鸿祯，曷以酬之心怦怦。
现代文：瞻望皇恩啊怀洪福，如何酬谢啊不安心。
English: Looking forward to the king's favor, I am anxious about how to reward and thank him.

古文：亚献，《豫和之曲》：帝眷我兮居歆，纷繁会兮五音。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《豫和之曲》：帝眷顾我啊来受祭享，纷繁交会啊奏五音。
English: For the second offering, the "Song of Yuhe" was played: "The emperor has favored me, and I have come to enjoy the sacrifice.

古文：再捧觞兮莫殚臣心，惟帝欣怿兮生民是任。
现代文：再捧酒杯啊不尽臣心，祇有神帝快乐啊保佑人民。
English: Holding a glass of wine is not enough to be a subject, only God and the emperor can be happy and bless the people.

古文：终献，《熙和之曲》：绥万邦兮屡丰年，眇眇予躬兮实荷昊天。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《熙和之曲》：安定天下啊屡获丰年，渺小的我身啊实蒙恩上天。
English: At the end of the memorial service, the "Song of Prosperity" was played: "The world is stable, and there have been many years of prosperity. My small body has truly been blessed by heaven.

古文：酒三献兮心益虔，帝命参舆兮勿遽旋。
现代文：酒三献啊心更诚虔，帝命令驾车啊请不要匆匆返还。
English: Three servings of wine makes the heart more pious. The emperor commands you to drive a car. Please don't return it in a hurry.

古文：彻馔，《雍和之曲》：祀礼既洽兮神人肃雍，享帝享亲兮勉歆臣衷。
现代文：撤除僎食，奏《雍和之曲》：祭礼和谐啊神人庄严从容，祭享上天祭享亲人啊勉力竭尽臣心胸。
English: Remove the yakitori and play "Yonghe no Kyoku": the festival will be harmonious, the gods and mortals will be solemn and calm, and the gods and mortals will enjoy the heavenly festival and enjoy their relatives.

古文：惟洪恩兮罔极，俨连蜷兮圣容。
现代文：只是大恩啊无边际，俨然舒卷啊圣灵颜容。
English: Just a great grace, boundless, resplendent, the countenance of the Holy Spirit.

古文：送神，《清和之曲》：《九韶》既成兮金玉铿锵，百辟森立兮戚羽期藏。
现代文：送神，奏《清和之曲》：《九韶》已成啊金玉铿锵，百王森然排列啊戚羽暗藏。
English: Send God, play "Song of Peace": "The Nine Melodies" has become a golden eagle, hundreds of kings are lined up and hidden.

古文：皇天在上兮昭考在旁，严父配天兮祗修厥常。
现代文：皇天在上啊昭考在旁，父亲配祀上天啊敬修典常。
English: The emperor is on the throne, the exam is next to him, and the father is with him, worshipping the emperor and attending the ceremony.

古文：殷荐既终兮神去无方，玄云上升兮鸾鹄参翔。
现代文：众多祭献结束啊神去无方，黑云上升啊鸾鹄纷纷翱翔。
English: At the end of many offerings, there is no way for the gods to go, black clouds rise, and kites soar in succession.

古文：灵光回照兮郁乎芬芳，载慕载瞻兮愿锡亨昌。
现代文：灵光回照啊郁都芬芳，仰慕瞻望啊希望赐予通达繁昌。
English: The reflection of the light of the spirit, the fragrance of the city, the admiration of the gaze, and the hope of prosperity.

古文：子孙庶民兮惟帝是将，于昭明德兮永怀不忘。
现代文：子孙万民啊天帝佑助，昭显明德啊永怀不忘。
English: Descendants of all people, oh Heavenly Father, help us, show us our virtue, and never forget us.

古文：望燎，《时和之曲》：龙舆杳杳兮归上方，金风应律兮燎斯扬，达精诚兮合灵光。
现代文：望祀燎祭，奏《时和之曲》：龙车杳杏啊返回上方，金风应合律吕啊燎祭飞扬，通达精诚啊聚合灵光。
English: Wishing to worship the Dragon Boat Festival, playing the "Song of Time and Harmony": Dragon Chariot, return to the top, the golden wind should be in accordance with the law, the Dragon Boat Festival is flying, and the wisdom and sincerity are converging.

古文：帝廷纳兮玉帛将，顾下土兮春不忘，愿锡吾民兮长阜康。
现代文：天帝廷纳呵带玉帛，反顾下土啊眷念不忘，希望赐给我人民长久丰厚安康。
English: The Heavenly Emperor Tingna, with the Jade Emperor, and the lower earth, will not be forgotten, and I hope to give my people long-term prosperity and health.

古文：嘉靖十八年，兴都大飨乐章。
现代文：嘉靖十八年，兴都大规模飨祀乐曲词章：
English: In the 18th year of Jiajing, Xingdu held a large-scale religious music performance.

古文：迎神，《中和之曲》：仰高高之在上兮皇穹，冒九围之遍覆兮罔止西东。
现代文：迎神，奏《中和之曲》：仰望高高在上的苍穹，普遍覆盖天下啊不分西束。
English: Welcoming the gods, playing the "Song of Neutrality": looking up at the lofty sky, covering the whole world, regardless of the Western Zodiac.

古文：王者出王游衍兮必奉天顾，愚臣之此行兮亶荷帡幪。
现代文：王者出外从容自如啊必奉承天帝眷顾，愚臣这次出行啊蒙受庇护。
English: The king who goes out at ease will flatter the heavenly emperor, and the fool will be protected on this trip.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：于昭帝庥兮臣感恩渊渊，巡省旧藩之地兮实止承天。
现代文：首次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：昭显的天帝之恩啊臣感激深深，巡察旧藩府地啊停止在承天。
English: For the first time, a memorial service was held, and the "Lullaby of Peace" was played. The emperor's kindness was so obvious, and the minister was so grateful, that he stopped to inspect the old domain's capital city, Chengdu.

古文：下情思报兮此心拳拳，琼卮苍币兮捧扣坛前。
现代文：下情思报啊此心忠诚拳拳，琼玉酒杯苍色币帛啊捧承祭坛前。
English: In front of the altar, the loyal fist, the jade wine cup, and the pale coin stand for the loyalty of this heart.

古文：亚献，《敷和之曲》：乐奏兮三成，觞举兮再呈。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《敷和之曲》：音乐演奏啊三成，举起酒杯啊二次献呈。
English: The second offering, playing "Shikiwa no Kyoku": music performance ah thirty percent, raising a glass ah second offering.

古文：帝鉴几微兮曰尔诚，小臣顿首兮敢不严于此精。
现代文：天帝察鉴细微啊称你心诚，小臣叩头啊岂敢不严肃于此精纯。
English: The heavenly emperor inspects the subtleties and calls you sincere, the vassal kowtows, how dare you not be serious about this purity.

古文：终献，《承和之曲》：臣来兹土，本之思亲。
现代文：最后一次奠献，奏《承和之曲》：臣来此地，本是思亲。
English: The last offering, playing "Song of Conquest": The vassal came here, thinking of his relatives.

古文：思亲伊何？
现代文：思亲为何？
English: Why do you miss your family?

古文：昌厥嗣人。
现代文：昌盛我后继之人。
English: Chang Sheng is my successor.

古文：嗣人克昌，菲戴帝之临汝夫何因。
现代文：后继之人得以昌盛，不是感戴天帝降临于你又是何原因。
English: Successors can prosper, not because they feel that the emperor has come to you.

古文：彻馔，《永和之曲》：肃其具兮祀礼行，备彼仪兮乐舞张。
现代文：撤除僎食，奏《永和之曲》：整肃具备啊祀礼举行，备办礼仪啊乐舞设张。
English: The removal of the yakitori and the playing of the "Song of Eternal Peace": the purification ceremony was held, the ritual was prepared, and the music and dance were set up.

古文：退省进止兮臣疏且狂，沐含仁兮何以量。
现代文：退后省察进退啊臣粗疏而且狂放，沐浴含仁啊如何能估量。
English: Backward and forward, backward and forward, the minister is coarse and wild, and how can he be measured?

古文：送神，《感和之曲》：王之狩兮典有禋望，于维柴祀兮首重上苍。
现代文：送神，奏《感和之曲》：君王巡狩啊典章有望祀，祇是柴祀啊首先推重上苍。
English: Send God, play "Song of Sympathy": The king is on a hunting tour, the medal is expected to be enshrined, but it is the firewood that is enshrined, and first of all, the emphasis is on the heavens.

古文：臣情罔殚兮夙夜惶惶，祗伸愚悃兮允赖恩光。
现代文：臣心不怕啊夙夜匆忙，敬伸愚内心啊诚赖恩光。
English: The vassal heart is not afraid ah, the day and night are in a hurry, respect and extend the foolish heart ah, sincerity and light.

古文：遥瞻兮六龙腾翔，帝垂祉兮万世永昌。
现代文：迁望啊六龙腾翔，帝垂留福禄啊万世永昌。
English: The six dragons soar high in the sky, and the emperor is blessed forever and ever.

古文：嘉靖十一年，定雩祀乐章，十七年罢。
现代文：嘉靖十一年，制定求雨之祭的乐章，十七年罢除：
English: In the eleventh year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the music of the rain-worshipping festival was formulated, and in the seventeenth year it was abolished:

古文：迎神，《中和之曲》：于穆上帝，爰处瑶宫。
现代文：迎神，奏《中和之曲》：敬穆的上帝啊，居处在瑶官。
English: To welcome the gods, play the "Song of Neutrality": O God of reverence, dwell in the eunuchs.

古文：咨尔黎庶，覆悯曷穷。
现代文：询问你黎民百姓啊，保护怜悯无穷。
English: Ask thee, O people of Lî, for protection and pity.

古文：旗幢戾止，委蛇云龙。
现代文：旗幢来到，逶迤霎龙。
English: Here comes the banner, here comes the dragon.

古文：霖泽斯溥，万宝有终。
现代文：甘雨普降人间，万宝为有终。
English: The sweet rain falls on all mankind, and the treasure of all nations comes to an end.

古文：奠币，《肃和之曲》：神之格思，奠兹文纁。
现代文：奠献币帛，奏《肃和之曲》：神灵到来，奠献这文熏。
English: To lay a wreath and play "Shuwa no Kyoku": When the gods arrive, lay this wreath.

古文：盛乐斯举，香气氤氲。
现代文：盛乐奏起，香气氤氲。
English: The music begins to play and the air is fragrant.

古文：精禋孔，彻于紫冥。
现代文：精里太干燥，通达至空冥。
English: Jiri is too dry, leading to nothingness.

古文：恳祈膏泽，渥我嘉生。
现代文：恳请降膏雨，沾润我美好的生灵。
English: Please send the rain to drench my beautiful soul.

古文：进俎，《咸和之曲》：百川委润，名山出云。
现代文：进献俎豆，奏《咸和之曲》：百川委滋润，名山出祥云。
English: Presenting peas and playing the "Song of Harmony": the Hundred River Committee is moisturizing, and the famous mountain is out of the clouds.

古文：愆旸孔炽，膏泽斯屯。
现代文：阳气过盛天太炽热，滋润这艰难的处境。
English: The yang qi is too strong and the sky is too hot, nourishing this difficult situation.

古文：祈年于天，载牲于俎。
现代文：向天帝祈求丰年，置牲于俎祭神灵。
English: Pray to the heavenly emperor for a good year, and sacrifice to the god of sacrifice.

古文：神之格思，报以甘雨。
现代文：神灵到来，甘雨降临。
English: When the gods arrive, the rain falls.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：有严崇祀，日吉辰良。
现代文：首次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：肃穆崇敬行祭祀，日期吉祥时辰良。
English: For the first time, a memorial service was held, and the "Song of Peace" was played: a solemn act of reverence and sacrifice, the date was auspicious.

古文：酌彼罍洗，椒馨飶香。
现代文：酌酒在洗净的酒杯，馨香芬芳。
English: Drinking wine in a clean glass, the fragrance of cinnamon.

古文：元功溥济，时雨时旸。
现代文：大功普遍救济，时而降雨时而亢阳。
English: Great efforts have been made to provide universal relief, and sometimes it rains and sometimes it rains.

古文：惟神是听，绥以多穰。
现代文：听从神的安排，人民多得食粮。
English: In obedience to God's arrangement, the people had plenty of grain.

古文：亚献，《景和之曲》：皇皇禋祀，孔惠孔明。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《景和之曲》：盛大的祭祀，非常惠爱鲜明。
English: The second offering, the playing of "Kagewa no Kyoku": a grand ritual, very beautiful and vivid.

古文：瞻仰来歆，拜首钦承。
现代文：瞻望神灵来享祀，向神叩头敬奉承。
English: Looking up to the gods to enjoy worship, bowing to the gods and flattering them.

古文：有醴维醽，有酒维清，去韶侑献，肃雍和鸣。
现代文：有醴馨香，有酒清醇，云韶之乐佐酒，庄严雍容和岛。
English: There is a sweet fragrance of ginger, a clear and mellow wine, the music of clouds, and the solemnity and beauty of the island.

古文：圣灵有赫，鉴享精诚。
现代文：圣灵显赫，鉴察享祀精诚。
English: The Holy Spirit is prominent, inspecting and enjoying the sincerity of worship.

古文：终献，《永和之曲》：灵承无斁，骏奔有容。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《永和之曲》：神灵承续不厌倦，飞快奔走而从容。
English: At the end of the dedication, the "Song of Eternity" was played: the gods do not get tired of succeeding, they run fast and calmly.

古文：嘉玉以陈，酌鬯以供。
现代文：美好的玉石已陈设，酌上香酒来供奉。
English: Beautiful jade stones have been set up, and fragrant wine has been served.

古文：礼三再称，诚一以从。
现代文：祭礼举酒已三遍，精诚专一以相从。
English: The wine has been raised three times at the festival, and everyone has followed it with sincerity and dedication.

古文：备物致志，申荐弥恭。
现代文：备办祭物表心志，继续进献更顺恭。
English: The preparation of the sacrificial offering shows the heart's desire, and it is more auspicious to continue the offering.

古文：神昭景贶，佑我耕农。
现代文：神灵昭显大恩赐，保佑我耕农。
English: God has shown me a great gift and blessed me to be a farmer.

古文：彻馔，《凝和之曲》：有赫旱，民劳瘁斯。
现代文：撤除仆食，奏《凝和之曲》：赫赫天旱，人民劳苦疲困多。
English: The removal of food and drink and the playing of the "Song of Condensation": the drought was severe and the people were exhausted.

古文：于牲于醴，载舞载诗。
现代文：摆上牲呈上酒，一边起舞一边唱歌。
English: They put the animal on the table, serve it with wine, and sing while dancing.

古文：礼成三献，敬彻不迟。
现代文：三献祭礼已完成，恭敬撤除不延拖。
English: Three sacrificial rites have been completed, and they will be respectfully removed without delay.

古文：神之听之，雨我公私。
现代文：神灵听告啊，雨润我公田私田人民乐。
English: The gods have spoken, and the rain has fallen on my field and my field of folk music.

古文：送神，《清和之曲》：爰迪寅清，昭事昊穹。
现代文：送神，奏《清和之曲》：言行敬慎持心清正，昭颢祭祀苍穹。
English: Send the god, play "Song of Peace": words and deeds are respectful and prudent, keep the heart clean and righteous, and make a sacrifice to the sky.

古文：仰祈甘雨，惠我三农。
现代文：仰求苍天降甘雨，赐给恩惠予我三农。
English: Pray to the heavens for rain and give grace to my three farmers.

古文：既歆既格，言归太空。
现代文：歆享上升，将返太空。
English: The spacecraft is ascending and will return to space.

古文：式沾下土，万方其同。
现代文：沾润大地，万方并同。
English: If you touch the moist earth, all things will grow.

古文：望燎，《太和之曲》：赤龙旋驭，礼洽乐成。
现代文：望祀燎祭，奏《太和之曲》：赤龙回旋驾驭，礼仪协洽音乐成。
English: On the occasion of a religious festival, the "Song of Taihe" is played: the red dragon is wheeled around, and the etiquette is set to music.

古文：燔燎既举，昭格精禋。
现代文：燔燎已举行，昭明感通精纯祭祀。
English: The rites have been held, and it is clear that this is a pure ritual.

古文：维帝降康，雨施云行。
现代文：希望上帝降下康乐，雨市施云流行。
English: I hope that God will bring down recreation, and rain clouds will be popular.

古文：登我黍稌，溥受厥明。
现代文：使我粮食得丰收，普受其明恩。
English: To cause my grain to come forth abundantly, and for the fruit of my ground to abound.

古文：祭毕，乐舞童群歌《云门之曲》：景龙精兮时见，测鹑纬兮宵悬。
现代文：祭祀完毕，乐舞众儿童高歌奏《云门之曲》：大龙精啊时而出现，测量鹑纬啊宵悬。
English: After the ritual, the children sang and danced to "The Cloud Gate Song": the great dragon spirit appeared from time to time, and the measurement of the latitude and longitude was suspended.

古文：肆广乐兮铿鍧，列皇舞兮蹁跹。
现代文：肆陈广乐啊声铿铜，列大舞啊蹁跃。
English: The music is boisterous, the voices are brassy, and the dancers are exuberant.

古文：祈方社兮不莫，荐圭璧兮孔虔。
现代文：祈求方社啊不莫，进献圭璧啊甚诚虔。
English: Praying to the Fang Society is not a bad thing, and making offerings to Gui Bi is very pious.

古文：需密云兮六漠，霈甘澍兮九玄。
现代文：待密云啊六漠，甘雨大降啊于九天。
English: It's going to be cloudy and gloomy, and it's going to rain heavily for nine days.

古文：慰我农兮既渥，锡明昭兮有年。
现代文：安慰我农人啊已沾润，赏赐分明啊得丰年。
English: Comfort me, farmers, for the harvest is plentiful and the reward is great.

古文：洪武元年，太社稷异坛同壝乐章。
现代文：洪武元年，太社稷异坛同趟乐章：
English: In the first year of Hongwu, Taisha and Hetan performed the same movement:

古文：迎神，《广和之曲》：五土之灵，百谷之英。
现代文：迎神，奏《广和之曲》：五土的精灵，百谷的精英。
English: Greet God, and play the "Song of the Great Harmony": the elves of the five lands, the elite of the hundred valleys.

古文：国依土而宁，民以食而生。
现代文：国家依赖土地而安宁，人民依赖食物而生存。
English: Countries depend on land for peace, and people depend on food for survival.

古文：基图肇建，祀礼修明。
现代文：基业开始建立，祭祀典礼修明。
English: The foundation began to be built, and the sacrificial ceremony was completed.

古文：神其来临，肃恭而迎。
现代文：神灵来临，恭敬相迎。
English: When the gods arrive, they are greeted with respect.

古文：奠币，《肃和之曲》：有国有人，社稷为重。
现代文：奠献币帛，奏《肃和之曲》：有国家有人民，社稷为重。
English: The laying of the coin urn and the playing of "Shuhe no Kyoku": There are countries and there are people, and social harmony is important.

古文：昭事云初，玉帛虔奉。
现代文：开始祭祀，玉帛虔诚进奉。
English: The ritual begins, and Tamakazura reverently worships.

古文：维物匪奇，敬实将之。
现代文：此物并不珍奇，恭敬地奉行。
English: It's not rare, and it's treated with respect.

古文：以斯为礼，冀达明祗。
现代文：以此成礼，希望上达神明。
English: With this rite, I hope to reach the gods.

古文：进俎，《凝和之曲》：崇坛北向，明禋方阐。
现代文：进献俎豆，奏《凝和之曲》：高坛面向北，明祀正光阐。
English: Offering peas and playing the "Song of Condensation": the high altar faces north and is illuminated by the bright moonlight.

古文：有洁牺牲，礼因物显。
现代文：牺牲洁净，礼因物显。
English: The sacrifice is pure, and the reward is manifest.

古文：大房载设，中情以展。
现代文：大房已设，内心已展。
English: The big house has been set up, the heart has been expanded.

古文：景运既承，神贶斯衍。
现代文：大运已承继，神灵赐广远。
English: The great fortune has been inherited, and the gods have given it far and wide.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：太社云，高为山林，深为川泽。
现代文：首次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：太社词说，高为山林，深为川泽。
English: For the first time, he dedicated and played the "Song of Lifelong Peace": According to the Taisha, high is the mountain forest, deep is Kawazawa.

古文：崇丘广衍，亦有原隰。
现代文：高丘广远，也有平原。
English: The hills are vast and there are plains.

古文：惟神所司，百灵效职。
现代文：社神有所掌，供职有百神。
English: There are hundreds of deities in the service of the social gods.

古文：清醴初陈，颙然昭格。
现代文：清醇美酒已陈列，肃敬祈祷告神灵。
English: The clear and mellow wine has been displayed, and prayers have been offered to the gods.

古文：句龙配云，平治水土，万世神功。
现代文：句龙配祀词说，平整治理水土，万世传神功。
English: A long sentence with a religious text says that the smooth management of water and soil is the transmission of God's work.

古文：民安物遂，造化攸同。
现代文：人民安宁百物顺遂，天地造化尽相同。
English: The people are peaceful, and all things go smoothly. The heavens and the earth are made of the same stuff.

古文：嘉惠无穷，报祀宜丰。
现代文：嘉赏恩惠本无穷，回报祭祀礼应丰。
English: The bounty of rewards and benefits is boundless, and the rewards of sacrificial rites are abundant.

古文：配食尊严，国家所崇。
现代文：配食尊严，国家推崇。
English: Dignity in food distribution, respected by the state.

古文：太稷云，黍稷稻粱，来牟降祥，为民之天。
现代文：太稷词说，黍稷稻粱，嘉麦降祥，为民之天。
English: It is said in the Tao Te Ching that "the rice is good, the barley is good, and the people are blessed."

古文：丰年穰穰，其功甚大，其恩正长。
现代文：丰年谷熟有余粮，其功广大，其恩正长。
English: There is surplus grain in the rich harvest, which is a great achievement and a great blessing.

古文：乃登芳齐，以享以将。
现代文：于是登芳斋，歆享祭祀而送行。
English: So they went to Fangzhai to enjoy the sacrificial rites and see them off.

古文：后稷配云，皇皇后稷，克配于天。
现代文：后稷配说，美盛的后稷，配享于天。
English: As the saying goes, the afterglow of beauty belongs to the heavens.

古文：诞降嘉种，树艺大田。
现代文：降下好粮种，种植大田。
English: Plant good grain seeds and cultivate large fields.

古文：生民粒食，功垂万年。
现代文：人民获粮食，功绩传万年。
English: The people received grain, and the achievement was passed down for thousands of years.

古文：建坛于京，歆兹吉蠲。
现代文：建坛于京城，歆享这洁净的奉献。
English: The altar was built in the capital city, so enjoy this pure offering.

古文：亚献，《豫和之曲》：太社云，广厚无偏，其体弘兮。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《豫和之曲》：太社词说，广大深犀无偏颇，其体宏钩。
English: The second offering, playing the "Song of Yuhe": Tai Shezhi said that the vast depth is unbiased, and its body is hooked.

古文：德侔坤顺，万物生兮。
现代文：恩德同坤顺，万物以生。
English: Ende with Kunshun, all things with life.

古文：锡民地利，神化行兮。
现代文：赐给人民地利，神灵造化以行。
English: Give the people a place where the gods can walk.

古文：恭祀告虔，国之祯兮。
现代文：恭敬祭祀禀告虔诚，国得福祯。
English: Reverence for religious rites denotes piety, and the country will be blessed.

古文：句龙配云，周览四方，伟烈昭彰。
现代文：句龙配祀词说，遍览四方，伟绩昭彰。
English: Gu Long said in his eulogy, "Seeing all over the four directions, great achievements are outstanding."

古文：九州既平，五行有常。
现代文：九州岛已平，五行恒常。
English: Kyushu Island has been flattened, and the five elements are constant.

古文：坛位以妥，牲醴之将。
现代文：坛位已安，牲醴摆放。
English: The altar has been set up and the sacrificial animals have been placed.

古文：是崇是严，焕然典章。
现代文：崇高庄严，焕然典章。
English: Sublime and solemn, the ceremony is resplendent.

古文：太稷云，亿兆林林，所资者谷。
现代文：太稷词说，亿万人民，赖生惟谷。
English: Taiko lyrics say that hundreds of millions of people live in Lai Sheng Weh Valley.

古文：雨昜应时，家给人足。
现代文：下雨天晴顺应时节，人民丰足。
English: Rainy days and fine weather conform to the season, and the people are plentiful.

古文：仓庾坻京，神介多福。
现代文：粮食堆积如山，神赐多福。
English: The grain is piled up like a mountain, and God has given us many blessings.

古文：祗荐其仪，昭事维肃。
现代文：敬献礼仪，昭示神灵庄重严肃。
English: The offering ceremony shows that the gods are solemn and serious.

古文：后稷配云，躬勤稼穑，有相之道。
现代文：后稷配祀词说，勤劳耕种，有相度有治道。
English: The epitaph at the end of the eulogy said that hard work in farming has its own rhythm and its own path.

古文：不稂不莠，实坚实好。
现代文：不稂不莠，子粒饱满而美好。
English: Not salty, not sweet, the bean is full and beautiful.

古文：农事开国，王基永保。
现代文：以农事治国，帝王基业永保。
English: The emperor Motie Nagayasu ruled the country with an agricultural policy.

古文：有年自今，常奉苹藻。
现代文：自今粮食丰收，祭祀常献苹藻。
English: From now on, when there is a bumper grain harvest, apples are often offered as a religious offering.

古文：终献，《豫和之曲》，词同亚献。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《豫和之曲》，歌词与第二次奠献相同。
English: At the end of the memorial service, the "Song of Yuhe" was played, with the same lyrics as the second memorial service.

古文：庶品苾芬，神明是达。
现代文：撤除俎豆，奏《雍和之曲》：祭礼展陈殷勒，演奏音乐有节奏。
English: Remove the peas, play "Yonghe's Song": Chen Yinle's festival exhibition, playing music with rhythm.

古文：有严执事，俎豆乃彻。
现代文：各样祭品芬芳，直达神灵获护佑。主持人庄重严肃，撤除俎豆。
English: All kinds of offerings are fragrant, and even the gods are blessed. The host solemnly removes the peas.

古文：穆穆雍雍，均其欣悦。
现代文：庄严从容，皆大欢欣万事就。
English: Solemn and calm, everyone was overjoyed with everything.

古文：送神，《安和之曲》：维坛洁清，维主坚贞。
现代文：送神，奏《安和之曲》：祭坛洁净又清新，维主坚贞。
English: Send God, play "Anwa no Kyoku": the altar is clean and fresh, uphold the Lord's chastity.

古文：神之所归，依兹以宁。
现代文：神灵归往，赖此安宁。
English: The return of the gods depends on this tranquility.

古文：土宇靖安，年谷顺成。
现代文：疆土清静，粮谷丰登。
English: The territory is clear and quiet, and the grain is plentiful.

古文：祀事昭明，永致升平。
现代文：祭祀光明，永远升平。
English: Sacrifice to the light, forever rise to the same level.

古文：望瘗，《时和之曲》：晨光将发，既侑既歆。
现代文：望祀痉祭，奏《时和之曲》：天将发亮，侑助享歆。
English: On the occasion of the rite of sacrifice, the "Song of Time and Harmony" was played: "The heavens will shine brightly, and I will help you enjoy it."

古文：瘗兹牲币，达于幽阴。
现代文：埋此牺牲币帛，达到幽暗阴深。
English: Bury this sacrificial coin, reach the dark and gloomy depths.

古文：神人和悦，实获我心。
现代文：神与人和乐喜悦，实得我的真心。
English: God is well pleased with man, and my heart is glad.

古文：永久禋祀，其始于今。
现代文：永久祭祀，从始至今。
English: A perpetual sacrifice, from the beginning to the present.

古文：洪武十一年，合祭太社稷乐章。
现代文：洪武十一年，合祭太社稷乐章：
English: In the eleventh year of Hongwu, the music for the closing ceremony of Taisha is played:

古文：迎神，《广和之曲》：予惟土谷兮造化工，为民立命兮当报崇。
现代文：迎神，奏《广和之曲》：我想土地谷物啊自然之功，为民立命啊祭祀隆。
English: Greeting the gods, he played the "Song of Guanghe": "I think the land and grain are the work of nature, and sacrificing for the people is the work of life."

古文：民歌且舞兮朝雍雍，备筵率职兮候迓迎。
现代文：人民唱歌跳舞啊庄严雍容，备办筵席奉行职事啊候迎。
English: The people sing and dance solemnly, prepare banquets, perform duties, and wait for welcome.

古文：想圣来兮祥风生，钦当稽首兮告年丰。
现代文：想到圣灵到来啊吉祥风生，敬顺叩头啊报告年丰。
English: Thinking of the arrival of the Holy Spirit, it is auspicious and auspicious, and it is respectful and obedient to report the abundance of the year.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：氤氲气合兮物遂蒙，民之立命兮荷阴功。
现代文：初献，奏《寿和之曲》：氤氲气合啊物覆蒙，民立命啊受阴功。
English: The first offering, playing "Song of the Summer Solstice": "The people are united, the things are covered with clouds, the people's lives are determined, and the evil deeds are done."

古文：予将玉帛兮献微衷，初斟醴荐兮民福洪。
现代文：我供玉帛啊献微心，初次斟酒进献啊民福洪。
English: I offer my heart and soul to the jade bowl, and pour wine for the first time and present it to the people of Fu Hong.

古文：亚献，《豫和之曲》：予令乐舞兮再捧觞，愿神昭格兮军民康。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《豫和之曲》：我令乐舞啊第二次捧献美酒，希望神灵明示啊军民乐康。
English: The second offering, playing the "Song of Peace": I will make music and dance ah second offering of wine, I hope the gods will make it clear ah army and people happy.

古文：思必穆穆兮灵洋洋，感恩厚兮拜祥光。
现代文：思念恭谨啊神灵美，感激厚恩啊礼拜吉祥之光。
English: Thoughts of respect and reverence, divine beauty, gratitude and grace, and prayers for auspicious light.

古文：终献，《熙和之曲》：干羽飞旋兮酒三行，香烟缭绕兮云旌幢。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《熙和之曲》：干羽飞扬盘旋啊酒行三巡，香烟缭绕啊云旗幢幢。
English: At the end of the ceremony, the "Song of Peace" was played: the dry feathers flew and circled, the wine was drunk three times, the cigarettes swirled, and the flags flew.

古文：予今稽首兮忻且惶，神颜悦兮霞彩彰。
现代文：我现在叩头啊既欣喜又畏惧惶惶，神灵喜悦啊彩霞昭彰。
English: I now bow my head in both joy and fear and trepidation, and the gods rejoice in the radiance of the autumn leaves.

古文：彻馔，《雍和之曲》：粗陈微礼兮神喜将，琅然丝竹兮乐舞扬。
现代文：撤除僎食，奏《雍和之曲》：粗陋陈设微礼啊神喜乐，琅琅丝竹啊乐舞飞扬。
English: Take away the yakitori and play "Yonghe no Kyoku" (Song of Yonghe): crude decorations, small ceremonies, divine joy, silk and bamboo, music and dance.

古文：愿祥普降兮遐迩方，烝民率土兮尽安康。
现代文：希望福禄普降啊远近四方，天下人民啊尽安康。
English: I hope that the prosperity will spread far and wide, and the people all over the world will enjoy good health.

古文：送神，《安和之曲》：氤氲氤氲兮祥光张，龙车凤辇兮驾飞扬。
现代文：送神，奏《安和之曲》；香气浓郁啊闪耀样光，龙凤车驾啊驰骋飞扬。
English: Send God, play "Anhe's Song"; the fragrance is rich and shines, the dragon and phoenix are driving and flying.

古文：遥瞻稽首兮去何方，民福留兮时雨旸。
现代文：迁望叩头啊前往何方，留给人民福禄啊按时下雨出太阳。
English: Where to go, where to go, where to go, where to go, where to go, where to go, where to go, where to go, where to go.

古文：望瘗，《时和之曲》：捧肴羞兮诣瘗方，鸣銮率舞兮声铿锵。
现代文：望祀痉祭，奏《时和之曲》：捧掎肴僎啊到痉埋地方，鸣銮起舞啊乐声铿锵。
English: On the occasion of the religious festival, the "Song of Time and Harmony" was played: holding the dishes, going to the burial place, singing, dancing, and music.

古文：思神纳兮民福昂，予今稽首兮谢恩光。
现代文：想到神灵歆享啊人民幸福，我现在叩头啊感谢恩光。
English: Thinking of the gods enjoying the happiness of the people, I now bow my head and thank Enkō.

古文：嘉靖十年，初立帝社稷乐章。
现代文：嘉靖十年，初次制定帝社稷乐章：
English: In the 10th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the Imperial Marching Band movement was first formulated:

古文：迎神，《时和之曲》：东风兮地脉以融，首务兮稼穑之工。
现代文：迎神，奏《时和之曲》：束风吹啊地脉融融，首先从事啊农事耕种。
English: Greet God, play the "Tune of Time and Harmony": The wind blows and the earth's veins melt, and first of all engage in farming and cultivation.

古文：祀神于此兮苑中，愿来格兮慰予衷。
现代文：秋天祭祀便说： 秋风吹啊万物丰登，欣喜庄稼啊好收成。 在这苑中啊祭神灵，希望前来啊慰我心胸。
English: The autumn ritual then says: The autumn wind is blowing, everything is bountiful, enjoy the crops, a good harvest. In this garden, there is a deity, I hope you will come and comfort my heart.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：神兮临止，礼荐清醇。菲币在笥，初献式遵。
现代文：首次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：神灵啊降临，献礼啊清醇，菲薄币帛在笥筐，首次奠献有法可遵。
English: The first offering was made, and the "Song of the New Year's Eve" was played: The gods have come, the offering is pure, the coins are in the basket, and the first offering has a law to follow.

古文：神其鉴兹，享斯藻苹。
现代文：神灵鉴察在此，歆享这浮藻水苹。
English: The spirit of the gods can be found here, enjoying the floating algae.

古文：我祀伊何？
现代文：我今祭祀为什么？
English: What am I worshipping now?

古文：祈报是因。
现代文：祈祷祭祀有依凭。
English: Prayers and sacrifices depend on it.

古文：神兮锡祉，则阜吾民。
现代文：神灵啊赐福，财物丰盛保佑我人民。
English: Bless us, O Spirit, and bless our people with wealth.

古文：亚献。《雍和之曲》：二觞载举，中此殷勤。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《雍和之曲》：第二杯酒已举献，进一步表达我殷勤。
English: The second offering, playing "Yonghe Zong": The second glass of wine has been offered, further expressing my attentiveness.

古文：神悦兮以纳，祥霭兮氤氲。
现代文：神灵喜悦啊已收纳，祥云蒸腾啊飘逸纷纷。
English: The joy of the gods has been received, and the clouds are steaming and flowing.

古文：终献，《宁和之曲》：礼终兮酒三行，喜茂实兮黍稷粱。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《宁和之曲》：祭礼结束啊酒三巡，欣喜庄稼长势良。
English: At the end of the ceremony, the "Song of Peace" was played. The ceremony ended with three rounds of wine, rejoicing that the crops were growing well.

古文：农事待兮丰康，予稽首兮以望。
现代文：农事期待啊丰盛乐康，我叩头啊朝远望。
English: I look forward to a prosperous and healthy agricultural life. I bow my head and gaze into the morning.

古文：彻馔，《保和之曲》：祀事告终，三献既周。
现代文：撤除僎食，奏《保和之曲》：祭祀已告终，三次奠献很周详。
English: The food is removed and the "Song of Peace" is played: the ritual has ended, and the three dedications are very elaborate.

古文：彻之罔迟，惠注田畴。
现代文：撤除喂食不迟延，恩赐田地长稻粱。
English: Remove the feeding without delay, and grant the fields with long rice stalks.

古文：迓以休贶，庇兹有秋。
现代文：迎接神灵赐嘉美，保佑人民秋满仓。
English: Greet the gods with blessings and bless the people with the autumn fullness.

古文：送神，《广和之曲》：耕耨伊首，力事豆笾。
现代文：送神，奏《广和之曲》：耕种已开始，秋天祭祀便说： 耕种已完成。 
English: Send God, play the "Song of Guanghe": Farming has begun, the autumn ritual will say: Farming has been completed.

古文：粢盛赖之，于此大田。
现代文：努力祭奠。粮食赖神赐，收成在大田。
English: Efforts are made to pay tribute. Grain is given by God, and the harvest begins in Daejeon.

古文：予将以祀，神其少延。
现代文：我将奉祭祀，神灵请稍缓。
English: I'm going to make a sacrifice, so please slow down for the gods.

古文：愿留嘉祉，副我洁虔。
现代文：希望留嘉福，洁净称诚虔。
English: Hope to remain virtuous, clean and pious.

古文：肃驾兮云旋，普予兮有年。
现代文：整齐腾驾啊彩云旋，遍赐恩惠啊获丰年。
English: Steady as she goes, bright as a cloud, bountiful in bounty, bountiful in harvest.

古文：望瘗，曲同。
现代文：望祀痉祭，乐曲相同。
English: The music is the same as that of the Bon Festival.

古文：洪武二年，分祀天神地祇乐章。迎天神，奏《中和之曲》：吉目良辰，祀典式陈。
现代文：洪武二年，分别祭祀天神地只乐章：迎接夭神，演奏《中和之曲》：吉祥的日子美好时辰，祭祀典礼已列陈。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, there were only two pieces of music for the worship of the heavenly deities: welcoming the young god, and playing the "Song of Neutrality": auspicious day, beautiful hour, the worship ceremony has been listed.

古文：太岁尊神，雷雨风云。濯濯厥灵，昭鉴我心。
现代文：岳镇与海滨，山川与城隍，在内有中国，在外及四方。光明的神灵，明察我内心。
English: Yue Zhen and the seashore, mountains and rivers and cities, including China, abroad and in all directions. The god of light, look into my heart.

古文：以候以迎，来格来歆。
现代文：恭候又拜迎，神来请享歆。
English: Welcome when you arrive, leave when you leave.

古文：奠帛以后，咸同朝日。
现代文：奠献币帛以后，全同朝日祭祀。
English: After the laying of the wreaths, the Asahi Festival was held.

古文：迎地祇，奏《中和之曲》：吉日良辰，祀典式陈。
现代文：迎地祇，奏《中和之曲》：吉日良辰，祀典式陈。
English: Ying Ji Ji, playing "Song of the Middle Way": auspicious day, auspicious hour, ceremonial ceremony.

古文：惟地之祇，百灵缤纷。
现代文：惟地之祇，百灵缤纷。
English: Except for the gods of the earth, all things are beautiful.

古文：岳镇海渎，山川城隍，内而中国，外及四方。
现代文：岳镇海渎，山川城隍，内而中国，外及四方。
English: Yue Zhen, Hai Zheng, Shanchuancheng, inside and outside of China, and in all directions.

古文：濯濯厥灵，昭鉴我心。
现代文：濯濯厥灵，昭鉴我心。
English: The spirit of the gods shines brightly, inspecting my heart.

古文：以候以迎，来格来歆。
现代文：以候以迎，来格来歆。
English: Welcome when you arrive, leave when you leave.

古文：洪武六年，合祀天神地祗乐章。
现代文：洪武六年，会合祭祀天神地祇乐章：
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu's reign, a meeting was held to celebrate the gods and goddesses.

古文：迎神，《保和之曲》：吉日良辰，祀典式陈。
现代文：迎神，奏《保和之曲》：吉祥日子好时辰，祭祀典礼已列陈。
English: Welcoming God, playing the "Song of Peace": the auspicious day is a good time, the ritual ceremony has been listed.

古文：太岁尊神，雷雨风云，岳镇海渎，山川城隍。
现代文：太岁是尊神，雷雨与风云。岳镇与海渎，山川与城隍。
English: Taisei is the worship of gods, thunderstorms and wind and clouds, mountain towns and sea erosion, mountains and rivers and castle mounds.

古文：内而中国，外及四方。
现代文：在内有中国，在外及四方。
English: Inside, there is China, and outside, there is Mongolia and Sifang.

古文：濯濯厥灵，昭鉴我心。
现代文：神灵显光明，明察我内心。
English: The spirit of the gods shines brightly, inspecting my heart.

古文：以候以迎。来格来歆。
现代文：恭候又欢迎，敬来享歆。
English: Greetings and welcome, please come and enjoy.

古文：嘉靖九年，复分祀天神地祇乐章。
现代文：嘉靖九年，又分成祭祀天神与地祇的乐章：
English: In the ninth year of the Jiajing era, it was divided into movements for the worship of gods and goddesses:

古文：迎天神，《保和之曲》：吉日良辰，祀典式陈。
现代文：迎接天神，奏《保和之曲》：吉祥日子好时辰，祭祀典礼已列陈。
English: Welcoming the Tenjin, playing the "Song of Peace": the auspicious day is a good time, the ritual ceremony has been listed.

古文：景灵甘雨，风雷之神。
现代文：祥云纷纷甘雨降，和风吹拂奔雷岛。
English: The clouds are parting, the rain is falling, and the wind is blowing in the direction of Thunder Island.

古文：赫赫其灵，功著生民。
现代文：赫赫显威灵，功绩在人民。
English: The spirit of grandeur shines brightly, and the credit goes to the people.

古文：参赞玄化，宣布苍仁。
现代文：协助神妙的变化，宣布上苍的慈仁。
English: Assisting in miraculous changes, proclaiming God's mercy.

古文：爰兹报祀，鉴斯藻苹。
现代文：于此献祭祀，神灵鉴藻苹。
English: Sacrifices are made here, and deities come to inspect the offerings.

古文：奠帛以后，俱如旧。
现代文：奠献币帛以后，都如同旧有乐词。
English: After the laying of the wreaths, it was like the old music.

古文：迎地祇，《保和之曲》：吉日良辰，祀典式陈。
现代文：迎接地神，奏《保和之曲》：吉祥日子好时辰，祭祀典礼已列陈。
English: Greet the earth god, play the "Song of Peace": auspicious day, auspicious hour, the ritual ceremony has been listed.

古文：灵岳方镇，海渎之神，京畿四方，山泽群真。
现代文：山岳与方镇，海滨众神灵，京郊四方地，山泽各真神。
English: Mountains and square towns, the gods of the seashore, the suburbs of Kyoto, and the true gods of the mountains and lakes.

古文：毓灵分隅，福我生民。
现代文：养育生灵分各地，福禄赏赐我人民。
English: The blessing of nurturing sentient beings will be bestowed upon our people everywhere.

古文：荐斯享报，鉴我恭寅。
现代文：进献祭品请歆享，鉴察我恭敬奉真情。
English: Please enjoy the sacrificial offerings, and respectfully observe my true feelings.

古文：奠帛以后，亦如旧。
现代文：奠献币帛以后，也如同旧有乐词。
English: After the laying of the wreaths, there was also a performance of traditional music.

古文：洪武四年，祀周天星辰乐章。
现代文：洪武四年，祭祀周天星辰乐章：
English: In the 4th year of Hongwu, the Zhou Tianxingchen music is performed:

古文：迎神，《凝和之曲》：星辰垂象，布列玄穹，择兹吉日，祀礼是崇。
现代文：迎神，奏《凝和之曲》：星辰垂显象，布列在苍穹，选择这吉日，祀礼最尊崇。
English: Greet the gods, play the "Condensation Song": the stars appear, spread out in the sky, choose this auspicious day, worship the most revered.

古文：濯濯厥灵，昭鉴我心。
现代文：神灵放光明，鉴察我内心。
English: The spirit of the gods shines brightly, inspecting my heart.

古文：谨候以迎，庶几来歆。
现代文：恭敬立迎候，希望来享歆。
English: Stand respectfully to greet, hope to come to enjoy.

古文：奠帛，《保和之曲》，词同朝日。
现代文：奠献币帛，奏《保和之曲》，乐词与朝日祭相同。
English: Coin urns are presented, and the "Song of Peace" is played. The words are the same as those of the Asahi Festival.

古文：初献，《保和之曲》：神兮既留，品物斯荐。
现代文：初次奠献，奏《保和之曲》：神灵已留下，祭品正献呈。
English: The first offering, the playing of the "Song of Peace": the gods have remained, and the sacrifice is being offered.

古文：奉礼之初，醴酒斯奠。
现代文：初次奉察祀，醴酒应先行。
English: If it's your first time to hold a memorial service, you should drink sake first.

古文：仰惟灵耀，以享以歆。
现代文：仰思神灵到，敬请自享歆。
English: If you think you're good enough, you're good enough.

古文：何以侑觞？
现代文：什么可助兴？
English: What could be more fun?

古文：乐奏八音。
现代文：乐奏有八音。
English: The music has eight tones.

古文：亚献，《中和之曲》：神既初享，亚献再升。以酌醴齐，仰荐于神。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《中和之曲》：神灵己初享，次献再进升，斟酌酒醴满，敬献于众神。
English: For the second offering, the "Song of Neutrality" is played: the gods enjoy the first offering, and the second offering is then advanced, the wine is poured, and the offering is made to the gods.

古文：洋洋在上，式燕以宁。
现代文：上神最美善，快乐又安宁。
English: God is the most beautiful and good, happy and peaceful.

古文：庶表微衷，交于神明。
现代文：藉此表微意，感交通神明。
English: With this watch subtlety, feel traffic gods.

古文：终献，《肃和之曲》：神既再享，终献斯备。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《肃和之曲》：神灵已再享，终献又备呈。
English: At the end of the offering, "Shuwa no Kyoku" was played. The gods had regained their rights, and the final offering was prepared.

古文：不腆菲仪，式将其意。
现代文：礼仪实菲薄，谨以表寸心。
English: The etiquette is very thin, and it's best to watch your step.

古文：荐兹酒醴，成我常祀。
现代文：献上这酒醴，恒常祭祀已完成。
English: With the presentation of this wine goblet, the regular ritual is complete.

古文：神其顾歆，永言乐只。
现代文：望神临歆享，永远快乐又安宁。
English: Longing for God, enjoying life, forever happy and peaceful.

古文：彻豆，《豫和之曲》：祀事将毕，神既歆只。
现代文：撤除俎豆，奏《豫和之曲》：祭祀典礼将完毕，神灵光临已享歆。
English: Remove the peas and play "Yuwa no Kyoku": The sacrificial ceremony will be over, and the presence of the gods will have ended.

古文：彻兹俎豆，以成其礼。
现代文：撤除这俎豆，典礼告完成。
English: Remove this pea and the ceremony is complete.

古文：惟神乐欣，无间始终。
现代文：惟望神快乐，始终来不停。
English: But the hope of the Lord endures forever.

古文：乐音再作，庶在微悰。
现代文：音乐再奏起，希望表微心。
English: The music starts again, and hope is in the air.

古文：送神，《雍和之曲》，词同朝日。
现代文：送神，奏《雍和之曲》，乐词与朝日祭相同。
English: Send God, play "Yonghe no Kyoku," the music lyrics are the same as the Asahi Festival.

古文：望燎，《雍和之曲》：神既享祀，灵驭今旋。
现代文：望祀燎祭，奏《雍和之曲》：神灵已享祀，灵驾已回还。
English: Attending the wreath-laying ceremony and playing "Yonghe no Kyoku": the deities have been enshrined, and the spirit has returned.

古文：燎烟既升，神帛斯焚。
现代文：燎祭畑已升，神帛也已焚。
English: The sacrificial field has been raised, and the shrine has been burned.

古文：巍巍霄汉，倏焉以适。
现代文：巍巍霄汉远，转眼已在天。
English: The mountains are far away, but in a blink of an eye, they are already in the sky.

古文：拳拳余衷，瞻望弗及。
现代文：我心正眷恋，迁望不能前。
English: My heart is yearning, I can't look back.

古文：嘉靖八年，祀太岁月将乐章。
现代文：嘉靖八年祭祀太岁月供的乐章：
English: The music for the eight-year celebration of the Jiajing Festival:

古文：迎神：吉日良辰，祀典式陈。
现代文：迎神：吉祥日子好时辰，祭祀典礼已列陈。
English: Welcoming God: The auspicious day is a good time, the ritual ceremony has been listed.

古文：辅国佑民，太岁尊神。四时月将，功曹司辰。
现代文：辅助国家保人民，太岁尊神，四季月献，功曹司辰。
English: Assist the national security of the people, respect the gods of the year, the four seasons and the moon, and the merits of Cao Shichen.

古文：濯濯厥灵，昭鉴我心。以候以迎，来格来歆。
现代文：光明的神灵，察鉴我内心，等候恭迎接，神来受享歆。
English: God of light, look into my heart, wait to greet me, God comes to enjoy me.

古文：奠帛以后，俱同神祇。
现代文：奠献币帛以后，都与祭祀神只乐词相同。
English: After the dedication of the money basket, the words of the music are the same as those of the sacrificial god.

古文：洪武元年宗庙乐章。
现代文：洪武元年，宗庙乐章：
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the music of the ancestral temple went:

古文：迎神，《太和之曲》：庆源发祥，世德惟崇。
现代文：迎神，奏《太和之曲》：吉祥的源头生长我，世代仁德大旦崇。
English: Greet the gods and play the "Song of the Great Harmony": The auspicious source grows me, the generation of benevolence and magnanimity.

古文：致我眇躬，开基建功。
现代文：传致我微渺的躯体，开创帝业建大功。
English: He has given me a tiny body and created a great empire.

古文：京都之中，亲庙在东。
现代文：宗庙建在京城中，亲庙处在柬。
English: The ancestral temple was built in the capital, and the family temple is in Cambodia.

古文：惟我子孙，永怀祖风。
现代文：希望我子孙后代，永远怀念祖德风。
English: I hope that my children and grandchildren will always remember my grandfather's style.

古文：气体则同，呼吸相通。
现代文：气体本相同，呼吸也相通。
English: The gases are the same, the breathing is the same.

古文：来格来崇，皇灵显融。
现代文：尊敬的神灵请降临，皇家大福显融融。
English: Revered deities, please come down. Royal blessings abound.

古文：奉册宝，《熙和之曲》：维水有源，维木有根。
现代文：奉上册宝，奏《熙和之曲》：时节的享祭不施用。水有源头，树木有根。
English: Presented with the treasure of the anthology, the "Song of Peace" is played: the festival of the season is not applied. Water has a source, trees have roots.

古文：先世积善，福垂后昆。
现代文：前世积善，福留子孙。
English: If you were good in your previous life, you will be blessed with children and grandchildren.

古文：册宝镂玉，德显名尊。
现代文：册实用玉雕镂成，美德昭显名位尊。
English: The practical jade carving in the book has been completed, and the virtue has been revealed.

古文：祗奉礼文，仰答洪恩。
现代文：恭谨呈礼文，敬仰答洪恩。
English: I would like to present a letter of commendation and express my respect and gratitude to Hong En.

古文：进俎，《凝和之曲》：明明祖考，妥神清庙。
现代文：进献俎豆，奏《凝和之曲》：时节的享祭不施用。
English: Presenting peas and playing the "Song of Condensation": the seasonal offering is not used.

古文：荐以牲牷，匪云尽孝。
现代文：尊贵的祖先，安神在清庙。进献此祭牲，并非仅尽孝。
English: The venerable ancestor, An Shen, is enshrined in the Qing Temple. The offering of this sacrifice is not just for the sake of filial piety.

古文：愿通神明，愿成治效。
现代文：诚愿通神明，治国成功效。
English: Sincerity is the key to success in governing the country.

古文：此帝王之道，亦祖考之教。
现代文：这是帝王的正道，也是祖宗的诲教。
English: This is the emperor's righteous path, and it is also the teaching of our ancestors.

古文：其远历年，其神在天。
现代文：初次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：圣明的高祖，肃穆深渊。时间已久远，神灵处在天。
English: The first offering, playing the "Lullaby of Peace": Sacred ancestors, solemn abyss. The time is long gone, the gods are in heaven.

古文：尊临太室，余庆绵绵。
现代文：敬请临太室，余福长绵绵。
English: Please pay your respects at the throne room. You will be blessed with long life.

古文：歆于几筵，有永其传。
现代文：歆享在灵殿，圣德永流传。
English: It is enjoyed in the spiritual hall, and the sacred virtue is passed down forever.

古文：懿祖庙初献云：思皇曾祖，清勤纯古。
现代文：懿祖庙，初次奠献说：圣明的曾祖，清明勤劳而纯古。
English: In the ancestral temple, the first dedication said: Shenming's great-grandfather, Qingming was diligent and pure.

古文：田里韬光，天笃其祜。
现代文：隐藏才能处乡间，天然笃厚存大福。
English: The hidden talent is in the countryside, and the great fortune is naturally abundant.

古文：佑我曾孙，弘开土宇。
现代文：保佑我曾孙，开基扩疆土。
English: Bless my great-grandson, who laid the foundation and expanded the territory.

古文：追远竭虔，勉遵前矩。
现代文：追念远祖竭尽虔诚，勉励后代效法先祖。
English: They are devout in their remembrance of their ancestors and encourage future generations to follow in their footsteps.

古文：熙祖庙初献云：维我皇祖，淑后贻谋。
现代文：熙祖庙，初次奠献：圣明的熙祖，留给后代好谋略。
English: Xi Zu Temple, dedicated for the first time: the sacred Xi Zu, a good strategy for future generations.

古文：盛德灵长，与泗同流。
现代文：德行美盛福悠远，可与泗水永长流。
English: Virtue, beauty, prosperity and good fortune are far away, and can flow with water forever.

古文：发于孙枝，明禋载修。嘉润如海，恩何以酬。
现代文：传到孙辈便发迹，明洁美好德润如大海，洪恩广博如何酬。
English: Passed down to the grandchildren, they will make a fortune. The clear and beautiful virtue is like the sea, and the bountiful grace is how to reward.

古文：仁祖庙初献云：惟我皇考，既淳且仁。
现代文：仁祖庙，初次奠献说：圣明的父亲，既淳厚又贤仁。
English: Ren Zu Temple, for the first time, said: Shen Ming's father, both honest and virtuous.

古文：弗耀其身，克开嗣人。
现代文：自身未荣耀，开启于后人。
English: He did not glorify himself, but opened it up to future generations.

古文：子有天下，尊归于亲。
现代文：儿子有天下，尊归于父亲。
English: The son hath the kingdom, but the father hath the glory.

古文：景运维新，则有其因。
现代文：大运正崭新，推原有起因。
English: The Great March of Return is brand new, and there are reasons for pushing back.

古文：亚献，《豫和之曲》：对越至亲，俨然如生。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《豫和之曲》：答谢颂扬至亲人，仿佛真的还在生。
English: The second offering, playing "Yuwa no Kyoku": thanking and praising relatives as if they were still alive.

古文：其气昭明，感格在庭。
现代文：气概昭显正分明，感动神灵来前庭。
English: The spirit is clearly evident, and the gods are moved to come to the front yard.

古文：如见其形，如闻其声。
现代文：如同见到真身影，如同听到说话声。
English: It was like seeing a real person, like hearing a voice.

古文：爱而敬之，发乎中情。
现代文：爱戴而尊敬，情发于内心。
English: Love and respect come from the heart.

古文：终献，《熙和之曲》：承先人之德，化家为国。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《熙和之曲》：禀承祖先德，化家建成国。
English: At the end of the memorial service, the "Song of Peace" was played: Inheriting the ancestral virtue, transforming the family into a country.

古文：毋曰予小子，基命成绩。
现代文：勿说我小子，创立建基业。
English: Don't say I'm a kid, I started a foundation business.

古文：欲报其德，昊天罔极。
现代文：要想报恩德，苍天广无极。
English: If you want to repay kindness, the sky is limitless.

古文：殷勤三献，我心悦怿。
现代文：殷勤成三献，我心正喜悦。
English: I am overjoyed to be able to offer my services to you.

古文：彻豆，《雍和之曲》：乐奏具肃，神其燕嬉。
现代文：撤除俎豆，奏《雍和之曲》：乐奏具肃穆，神灵也喜乐。
English: Remove the peas and play "Yonghe no Kyoku": the music is solemn, and the gods are happy.

古文：告成于祖，亦右皇妣。
现代文：祭祖报功成，也右及皇母。
English: The founder of the shrine reports on his achievements, and the queen mother is also on the right.

古文：敬彻不迟，以终祀礼。
现代文：敬撤俎豆不迟延，祀礼告结束。
English: There was no delay in withdrawing the peas, and the ritual ended.

古文：祥光焕扬，锡以嘉祉。
现代文：祥光正焕发，赏赐以嘉福。
English: Xiangguang is radiant and is rewarded with Jiafu.

古文：送神，《安和之曲》：显兮幽兮，神运无迹。
现代文：送神，奏《安和之曲》：光显啊幽晦啊，神运无踪迹。
English: Send gods, play "Anwa no Kyoku": bright or dim, there is no trace of divine fortune.

古文：鸾驭逍遥，安其所适。
现代文：鸾凤驾车逍逼游，神灵何处去。
English: Zou Feng drives car and roams freely. Where will the gods go?

古文：其灵在天，其主在室。
现代文：灵魂在苍天，神主在内室。
English: The soul is in heaven, but God is in the inner room.

古文：子子孙孙，孝思无斁。
现代文：子子孙孙代代传，孝思无终极。
English: Passed down from generation to generation, filial piety has no end.

古文：二十一年，更定其初献合奏，余并同。
现代文：二十一年，重新制定初次奠献的合奏，其余全部相同：
English: Twenty-one years later, the ensemble for the first offering has been reformulated, with the rest remaining the same:

古文：思皇先祖，耀灵于天。
现代文：圣明广大的先祖，光耀灵福在苔天。
English: The holy and vast ancestors, shining with spiritual blessings in the mossy sky.

古文：源衍庆流，由高逮玄。
现代文：本源繁衍福长流，起由高祖到玄孙。
English: The origin and propagation of the long stream of fortune, from the ancestors to the great-great-grandchildren.

古文：玄孙受命，追远其先。
现代文：玄孙承受上天命，追踪速溯到祖先。
English: The great-great-grandson bears the heavenly destiny to trace back to the ancestor.

古文：明禋世崇，亿万斯年。
现代文：明洁敬献世世崇，承传亿亿万万年。
English: It has been passed down for hundreds of millions of years.

古文：永乐以后，改迎神章 致我眇躬 句为 助我祖宗 。
现代文：永乐以后，改换迎神章中的 致我眇躬 句为 助我祖宗 。
English: After the Yongle, the 致我躬 rhyme in the Ying Shen chapter was changed to 助我祖祖.

古文：又改终献章首四句为 惟前人之功，肇膺天历。
现代文：又改最俊奠献章的开头四句为 前人建功劳，开始受天命。
English: He also changed the opening four sentences of the dedication chapter of the most handsome to build merit for the predecessors, and began to receive the mandate of heaven.

古文：延及于小子，爰受方国 。
现代文：延续到小子，天下我继承 。
English: If it continues to the boy, I will inherit the world.

古文：余并同。
现代文：其余都相同。
English: The rest is the same.

古文：嘉靖十五年，孟春九庙特享乐章。
现代文：嘉靖十五年，初春九庙举行特享礼的乐章：
English: In the fifteenth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, in early spring, nine temples held a special ceremony:

古文：太祖庙。迎神，《太和之曲》：于皇于皇兮仰我圣祖，乃武乃文，攘夷正华，为天下大君。
现代文：太祖庙：迎神，奏《太和之曲》：真是伟大啊敬仰我圣祖，既勇武又能文，抵抗夷狄匡正中华，成为天下的大君。
English: Taizu Temple: Welcoming the gods, playing "Taiwa no Kyoku": It is truly great to revere my holy ancestor, who was both brave and able to write, resisted the barbarians to establish the Chinese nation, and became the emperor of the world.

古文：比隆于古，越彼放勋。
现代文：与古帝王一样高大，超过那帝尧放勋。
English: As tall as the ancient emperors, surpassing the emperors.

古文：肇造王业，佑启予子孙。
现代文：开创帝王的基业，保佑开导我子孙。
English: Create the foundation of the emperor, bless and guide my children and grandchildren.

古文：功德超迈，大室攸尊。
现代文：功德超卓又广大，大室人所尊。
English: His merits are outstanding and wide-ranging, and he is revered by the people of Omuro.

古文：首称春祀，诚敬用申。
现代文：开春首次行祭祀，虔诚恭敬再重申。
English: At the beginning of spring, the first ritual was held, and the piety and respect were reaffirmed.

古文：维神格思，万世如存。
现代文：想望神灵定来享，千秋万代名永存。
English: It is hoped that the deities will come to enjoy it, and the name will last forever.

古文：初献。《寿和之曲》：荐帛于篚，洁牲于俎，嘉我黍稷，酌我清酤。
现代文：初次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：进献布帛在筐篚，洁净牺牲放在俎，献上香黍稷，斟酌清醇酤。
English: For the first offering, the "Song of Peace" is played: the offering cloth is placed in the basket, the clean offering is placed in the basket, the wreath is offered, and the wine is poured.

古文：愚孙毖祀，奠献初举。
现代文：愚下子孙谨慎祭祀，进献初次举。
English: Foolish children and grandchildren should be careful when making sacrifices, and should not make offerings for the first time.

古文：翼翼精诚，对越我皇祖。
现代文：小心表精诚，颂扬我皇祖。
English: Be careful to show sincerity, and glorify my ancestors.

古文：居然顾歆，永锡纯祜。
现代文：居然来歆享，永远赐给大福禄。
English: Come and enjoy it, and you will be forever blessed with great fortune.

古文：亚献，《豫和之曲》：籥舞既荐，八音洋洋，工歌喤喤。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《豫和之曲》：钥舞已进献，八音浩洋洋，乐工歌响亮。
English: The second offering, playing "Yuwa no Kyoku": the key dance has been presented, the eight notes are vast, and the music song is loud.

古文：醇醴载羞，齐明其将之。
现代文：醇厚酒醴加珍炉，谨肃严明奉献上。
English: Mellow sake lees with a precious furnace, solemn and strict dedication.

古文：永佑于子孙，岁事其承之。
现代文：永远保佑众子孙，大小节日祭不忘。
English: Always bless your children and grandchildren, and never forget the festivals and festivals.

古文：俾嗣续克承，百世其保之。
现代文：让后代代代继承，保守江山百代长。
English: Let future generations inherit from generation to generation, and preserve the country for hundreds of generations.

古文：终献，《宁和之曲》：三爵既崇，礼秩有终。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《宁和之曲》：进献三遍已隆重，礼仪次第应有终。
English: At the end of the dedication ceremony, the "Tune of Peace" was played. The ceremony had been held three times, and it was time for the ceremony to end.

古文：盈溢孚颙，显相肃雍。
现代文：充满精诚与仰慕，助祭庄严又雍容。
English: Full of devotion and admiration, the assistant priest is solemn and graceful.

古文：惟皇祖格哉，以绎以融，申锡无穷。
现代文：诚望皇祖来享祀，欢快和谐乐融融，申明赏赐福无穷。
English: It is sincerely hoped that the emperor's ancestors will come to enjoy the worship, rejoice in harmony and harmony, and affirm that the rewards and blessings are endless.

古文：暨于臣民，万福攸同。
现代文：延及大臣与百姓，接受万福人人同。
English: This extends to ministers and the people, and everyone receives the same blessing.

古文：彻馔，《豫和之曲》：礼毕乐成，神悦人宜。
现代文：撤除镁食，奏《豫和之曲》：祭礼完毕众乐成，神灵欢悦世人宜。
English: Remove the magnesia food, play "Yuwa no Kyoku": After the festival is over, everyone is satisfied, and the gods should be pleased with the world.

古文：笾豆静嘉，敬彻不迟。
现代文：篷豆祭品洁净美好，恭敬撤除不延迟。
English: The taro bean offering is clean and beautiful, and will be respectfully removed without delay.

古文：穆穆有容，秩秩有仪。
现代文：肃穆又雍容，整齐有威仪。
English: Dignified and graceful, neat and dignified.

古文：益祗以严，矧敢斁于斯。
现代文：更加诚敬而殿肃，岂敢懈怠而不为。
English: If you want to be more honorable and dignified, don't slack off.

古文：还宫，《安和之曲》：于皇我祖，陟降在天。
现代文：返回宫禁，奏《安和之曲》；伟大啊我皇祖，上下在苍天。
English: Returning to the palace, he played "Anwa no Kyoku" (Song of Peace); "Great, my ancestor, up and down in the sky.

古文：清庙翼翼，禋祀首虔。
现代文：肃穆的宗庙整齐庄严，祭祀首要在诚虔。
English: The solemn ancestral temple is neat and solemn, and the first ritual is to be pious.

古文：祀事孔明，亿万斯年。
现代文：专诚祭奠致享祀，一切礼仪循古经。
English: Dedication is dedicated to worship, and all etiquette follows the ancient scriptures.

古文：初献、亚献、终献、彻馔、还宫，俱与太祖庙同。
现代文：春天祭祀甚庄严，恭敬迎圣灵。上下往来在殿庭，赏赐我思所欲成。初献、亚献、终献、彻馔、还宫，俱与太祖庙同。
English: The spring sacrifice is very solemn, respectfully welcoming the Holy Spirit. It goes up and down in the courtyard, rewarding me with whatever I want. The first offering, the second offering, the final offering, the last offering, and the return offering are all the same as the ancestral temple.

古文：仁宗庙。
现代文：仁宗庙。
English: Ninshong Temple.

古文：迎神，《太和之曲》：明明我祖，盛德天成。
现代文：迎神，《太和之曲》：明明我祖，盛德天成。
English: Ying Sheng, "Song of the Great Harmony": It is clear that my ancestors, Shengde Tiancheng.

古文：至治訏谟，遹骏有声。
现代文：至治訏谟，遹骏有声。
English: As the saying goes, the more the merrier.

古文：专奠致享，惟古经是程。
现代文：专奠致享，惟古经是程。
English: Dedicate to enjoy, but the ancient sutra is the course.

古文：春祀有严，以迓圣灵。
现代文：春祀有严，以迓圣灵。
English: Spring worship has strictness, with the Holy Spirit.

古文：惟陟降在庭，以赉我思成。
现代文：惟陟降在庭，以赉我思成。
English: However, I thought it would be better if I bowed down before the court.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：币牲在陈，金石在悬。
现代文：初次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：币帛牺牲已陈列，金石音乐已挂悬。
English: The first offering, the playing of the "Song of the Summer Solstice": The coins and offerings have been displayed, and the gold and stone music has been hung.

古文：清酒方献，百执事有虔。
现代文：清醇美酒正奠献，执事官员心诚虔。
English: Fine wine is being offered, and the officiating officials are devout.

古文：明神洋洋，降歆自天。
现代文：圣明神灵太美善，下降歆享来自天。
English: The Holy Light and the Holy Spirit are too beautiful and good, and their descent and enjoyment come from heaven.

古文：俾我孝孙，德音孔宣。
现代文：使我孝顺孙辈在，美好声誉传无边。
English: Make me filial to my grandchildren, and my good reputation will spread far and wide.

古文：亚献，《豫和之曲》：中诚方殷，明神如存。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《豫和之曲》：内心真诚正殷盛，圣明神灵如现存。
English: The second offering, the "Song of Peace" was played. The sincerity of the heart was in full bloom, and the Holy Spirit was as present as ever.

古文：醴齐孔醇，再举罍尊。
现代文：酒醴呈献太醇厚，再次举起大酒樽。
English: The wine is too mellow, so he lifts the large wine barrel again.

古文：福禄穰穰，攸介攸臻。
现代文：福禄隆盛，既宏大又臻臻。
English: The prosperity flourished, both grand and sublime.

古文：追远报酬，罔极之恩。
现代文：追怀速祖献酬报，无边无尽恩情深。
English: He is deeply grateful for the bountiful reward for his dedication to his ancestors.

古文：终献，《宁和之曲》：乐比声歌，佾舞婆娑。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《宁和之曲》：音乐奏响同声歌，八佾乐舞起婆娑。
English: At the end of the memorial service, the "Song of Peace" was played: the music played a homophonic song, and the eight-stringed music dance began.

古文：称彼玉爵，酒旨且多。
现代文：举起玉杯再奠献，醇酒甘甜而且多。
English: Raising the jade cup and offering it again, the wine is sweet and has a lot of cinnamon.

古文：献享维终，神听以和。
现代文：献享仪式已终结，神灵听乐又雍和。
English: The consecration ceremony has ended, and the gods are listening to music.

古文：彻馔，《雍和之曲》：牷牲在俎，稷黍在簠。
现代文：孝顺子孙今在位，幸运蒙受大寿福。撤除僎食，奏《雍和之曲》：全体牺牲盛在俎，稷黍嘉谷盛在篮。
English: The sons and grandsons of the filial piety are now on the throne, and they are fortunate to receive the great longevity blessing. Remove the yakitori and play "Yonghe no Kyoku": the entire sacrifice is in the bowl, and the bowl is in the basket.

古文：孝享多仪，格我皇祖。
现代文：诚孝享祀多仪节，虔诚请求我皇祖。
English: Honest filial piety, enjoy the multi-ceremonial festival, and earnestly request my imperial ancestor.

古文：称歌进彻，髦士膴々。
现代文：歌唱进献锲食撤，英俊之士正繁多。
English: Singing, making offerings, eating, and retiring, there are many handsome men in the crowd.

古文：孝孙受福，以敷锡于下土。
现代文：孝顺子孙受福禄，遍赐天万民乐。
English: Filial children and grandchildren will receive blessings and be blessed with heavenly and universal happiness.

古文：还宫，《安和之曲》：犆享孔明，物备礼成。
现代文：返回内官，奏《安和之曲》：单独祭享太光明，祭品齐备祀礼成。
English: Returning to Naikan, playing "Anwa no Kyoku": it is too bright to celebrate alone, and it is a great honor to have all the offerings ready.

古文：于昭在天，以莫不听。神明即安，维华寝是凭。
现代文：昭显啊上天，万事能察明，神灵已安逋，华贵寝殿可依凭。
English: It is clear, O heaven, that all things can be seen, that the gods have been pacified, and that the magnificent bedchamber can be relied upon.

古文：肇祀迄今，百世祗承。
现代文：开始祭祀到如今，世世代代谨继承。
English: It has been handed down from generation to generation since the beginning of the festival.

古文：宣庙、英庙、宪庙俱与仁庙同。
现代文：宣宗庙、英宗庙、宪宗庙都与仁宗庙相同。
English: Xuan Zong Temple, Ying Zong Temple, and Xian Zong Temple are all the same as Ren Zong Temple.

古文：孝庙。迎神，《太和之曲》：列祖垂统，景运重熙。
现代文：孝宗庙：迎神，奏《太和之曲》：列祖垂留大统绪，宏大福运又重兴。
English: Xiaozong Temple: Welcoming the gods, playing the "Song of the Great Harmony": the ancestors remain united, and the great fortune is revived.

古文：于惟孝皇，敬德允持。
现代文：伟大的孝皇啊，恭谨美德公允持平。
English: Great filial piety, respect, virtue, fairness and equanimity.

古文：用光于大烈，化被烝黎。
现代文：光辉显大业，德化被人民。
English: The great cause is brilliant, and the people are virtuous.

古文：专庙以享，经礼攸宜。
现代文：专设庙庭供祭享，大法大礼巫适应。
English: Dedicated ancestral temple to enjoy the gods, in line with the etiquette and the scriptures.

古文：俎豆式陈，庶几来思。
现代文：俎豆已陈列，敬请神驾临。
English: The pea offerings have been displayed, and we sincerely hope that the gods will enjoy them.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：粢盛孔蠲，腯肥牲牷。
现代文：初次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：粮食祭品太洁净，牺牲祭品又肥脂。
English: The first offering, playing the "Song of Lifelong Peace": The grain offering was too pure, and the sacrificial offering was too greasy.

古文：考鼓雰雰，万舞跹跹。清醑初酌，对越在天。
现代文：敲击乐鼓咚咚响，武舞文舞起翩腿，清醇醴酒初酌献，祭祀神灵在苍天。
English: Drums are beating, martial arts are being performed, people are dancing, alcohol is being drunk, and sacrifices are being made to the gods.

古文：明神居歆，式昭厥虔。
现代文：神灵安然来歆享，昭显其诚虔。
English: God's spirit is safe to enjoy, revealing his piety.

古文：亚献，《豫和之曲》：祀事孔勤，精意未分。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《豫和之曲》：祭祀大事太殷勤，专心一意不分心。
English: For the second offering, the "Song of Yuhe" was played: the sacrificial event was too diligent, concentrating on one thing without distraction.

古文：乐感凤仪，礼虔骏奔。
现代文：音乐感召凤来仪，礼数虔诚骏马奔。
English: The music inspires the phoenix to fly, and the reverent horse-drawn carriage to gallop.

古文：醖齐挹清，载奠瑶尊。
现代文：酝酿醇酒酌取清，奠献瑶玉酒一樽。
English: Brewing alcoholic liquor, drinking sake, and presenting a cask of ouzo.

古文：神其格思，福禄来臻。
现代文：神灵下降请歆享，赐给福禄已来临。
English: The gods have descended, please enjoy it. The blessing has arrived.

古文：终献，《宁和之曲》：乐舞既成，献享维终。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《宁和之曲》：音乐舞蹈已完成，奠献歆享已告终。
English: At the end of the dedication, the "Song of Peace" was played: the music and dance were completed, and the dedication ceremony was over.

古文：明明对越，弥笃其恭。
现代文：勤勉祭神灵，更加诚笃更敬恭。
English: The more diligently one worships the gods, the more sincere and respectful one will be.

古文：笃恭维何？
现代文：诚笃恭敬焉什么？
English: Sincerity and respect for what?

古文：明德是崇。
现代文：彰明美德受推崇。
English: The promotion of virtue is highly respected.

古文：神之听之，万福来同。
现代文：神灵请审察，万福享受同。
English: Ask the gods to judge, and enjoy all the blessings.

古文：彻馔，《雍和之曲》：牲牢醴陈，我享我将，黍稷苹藻，洁白馨香。
现代文：撤除僎食，奏《雍和之曲》：牺牲酒醴已陈列，我奉献啊我祭享。黍稷与苹藻，洁白又馨香。
English: Remove the food and drink and play the "Song of Yonghe": The sacrificial wine goblets have been displayed, I offer and I enjoy. The gourds and apples are white and fragrant.

古文：彻以告成，降禧穰穰。
现代文：撤除僎食报告祭祀已完成，降下福禄正兴旺。
English: It was reported that the sacrificial rites for the removal of the yakitori had been completed, and the descendant of Fukuroku was thriving.

古文：神锡无疆，祐我万方。
现代文：神灵赐予福无疆，保佑我万方。
English: God's spirit bestows blessings without borders, and blesses us in every direction.

古文：还宫，《安和之曲》：礼享既洽，神御聿兴。
现代文：返回内宫，奏《安和之曲》：祭礼歆享已周遍，神灵车驾已起程。
English: Returning to the inner palace, playing "Anwa no Kyoku": the festival bells have been rung, and the hearse has set off.

古文：庙寝煌煌，以凭以宁。
现代文：宗庙寝殿明煌煌，可以凭倚可安宁。
English: The main hall of the ancestral temple is resplendent, so you can rest in peace.

古文：维神匪遐，上下在庭。
现代文：神灵不远，上下在庭。
English: The gods are not far away, up and down in the yard.

古文：于寝孔安，永底我烝民之生。
现代文：寝殿很安宁，永保百姓的生存。
English: The dormitory is very peaceful, ensuring the survival of the people.

古文：武庙。迎神，《太和之曲》：列祖垂统，景运重熙。
现代文：武宗庙：迎神，奏《太和之曲》：列代祖先留传基业，洪大气运又重兴。
English: Wuzong Temple: Welcoming the gods, playing "Taiwa no Kyoku": Ancestors have passed down the heritage for generations, and it was revived after the Great Flood.

古文：于惟武皇，昭德敕威。
现代文：圣明的武皇，昭颢仁德慎武威。
English: Emperor Wu of the Holy Ming Dynasty was a benevolent, prudent and powerful ruler.

古文：用剪除奸凶，大业弗隳。
现代文：剪除奸恶与凶顽，伟大帝业不毁坠。
English: Cut out the treacherous and the vicious, and the great empire will not fall.

古文：专庙以享，经礼攸宜。
现代文：专设宗庙享神灵，符合礼法与常经。
English: Dedicated ancestral temple to enjoy the gods, in line with the etiquette and the scriptures.

古文：俎豆式陈，庶几来思。
现代文：俎豆祭品已陈列，诚望神灵来享歆。
English: The pea offerings have been displayed, and we sincerely hope that the gods will enjoy them.

古文：初献、亚献、终献及彻馔、还宫，俱与孝庙同。
现代文：初次奠献、第二次奠献、最后奠献以及撤除僎食、退回内宫都与孝庙相同。
English: The initial offering, the second offering, and the final offering, as well as the removal of the sacrificial food and the return to the inner palace, are all the same as the filial piety temple.

古文：睿庙。迎神，《太和之曲》：于穆神皇，秉德凝道。
现代文：睿宗庙：迎神，奏《太和之曲》：肃穆神皇，秉凝道德帝业隆。
English: Ruizong Temple: Welcoming the gods, playing the "Song of the Great Harmony": the solemn god emperor, upholding the moral imperium.

古文：仁厚积累，配于穹昊。
现代文：仁慈积累，配祀天神于苍穹。
English: Benevolence accumulates, and is enshrined with the gods in the firmament.

古文：流庆显休，萃于眇躬。
现代文：流布善德显休美，聚集微末身。
English: The spread of good morals shows the beauty of beauty, and gathers the small and the small.

古文：施于无穷，以似以续，以光绍我皇宗。
现代文：施及于无穷，继承又延续，发扬光大我皇宗。
English: My imperial lineage extends to infinity, inherits and continues, and carries forward the glory.

古文：惟兹气始，俎豆是供。
现代文：在此气节之始，俎豆祭品已上供。
English: At the beginning of the festival, the pea offering was offered.

古文：循厥典礼，式敬式崇。
现代文：遵循其典礼，敬仰又尊崇。
English: Follow its rites, admire and venerate it.

古文：神其至止，以鉴愚衷。
现代文：神灵到来啊，察鉴我愚下的内衷。
English: The spirit of the gods has arrived, and is probing my innermost thoughts.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：制帛牲牢，庶羞芬〈月尞〉。
现代文：初次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：币帛牺牲，多种美味烤肉芬芳。
English: The first offering, playing the "Song of the Summer Solstice": Coin sacrifice, a variety of delicious grilled meat fragrance.

古文：玉戚朱干，协于韶箫。
现代文：玉制大斧红盾牌，协调箫韶乐铿锵。
English: A red shield with a large axe made of jade, coordinating the music.

古文：清醑在筵，中情缠绵。
现代文：清澄美酒在筵席，内心缠绵情意长。
English: The clear and beautiful wine is at the banquet, and the feelings are lingering in the heart.

古文：神之格思，仪形僾然。
现代文：神灵到来啊，仪容隐约正悠扬。
English: A divine spirit has arrived. His appearance is vaguely serene.

古文：亚献，《豫和之曲》：瑶爵再陈，侑以工歌。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《豫和之曲》：瑶玉酒杯再次陈，乐工奏响侑酒歌。
English: For the second offering, the "Song of Yuhe" was played: the jade wine cup was reopened, and the musicians played the wine song.

古文：籥舞跄跄，八音谐和。
现代文：执钥舞蹈跆跆起，八音演奏乐谐和。
English: The clavichord dance begins, and the eight-tone music plays in harmony.

古文：孝思肫肫，感格圣灵。
现代文：孝顺心思最诚恳，感动神灵来同乐。
English: Filial piety is the sincerest of thoughts, and moves the gods to rejoice with us.

古文：致悫则存，如闻其声。
现代文：致上忠心神共处，如闻其声太幸福。
English: To live with a faithful God is such a happy sound.

古文：终献，《宁和之曲》：仪式弗逾，奠爵维三。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《宁和之曲》：祭祀仪式不越制，奠献美酒只三遍。
English: At the end of the offering, the "Song of Peace" is played: the sacrificial ceremony does not exceed the system, and the wine is offered only three times.

古文：乐舞雍容，以雅以南。
现代文：音乐舞蹈甚舒缓，合符雅乐与二南。
English: The music and dance are very soothing, in line with classical music and Ernan.

古文：仰仁源德泽，岳崇海渊。
现代文：仰思仁惠溯德泽，如山崇高海深渊。
English: Looking up, thinking of benevolence and benefiting the future, De Ze is like a mountain of sublime sea abyss.

古文：愿启我子孙，缉熙光明，维两仪是参。
现代文：诚望开导子孙辈，永远放光明，参拜大地与苍天。
English: I sincerely hope to enlighten my children and grandchildren, to always shine brightly, and to worship the earth and the heavens.

古文：彻馔，《雍和之曲》：嘉馔甘只，亦既歆只。
现代文：撤除僎食，奏《雍和之曲》：美酒佳肴甚甘甜，神灵欢快已享歆。
English: Take away the food and drink, and play "Yonghe no Kyoku": The food and wine are very sweet, and the gods are happy.

古文：登歌迅彻，敬终惟始。
现代文：升堂奏歌撤撰食，从始至终都恭敬。
English: The choir sang and danced, and the food was prepared with respect from start to finish.

古文：维神孔昭，赉永成于孝矣。
现代文：神灵明察甚昭显，赐予后代永孝顺。
English: God's spirit is very clear and gives eternal filial piety to future generations.

古文：还宫，《安和之曲》：幽显莫测，神之无方。
现代文：返回内宫，奏《安和之曲》：神人不可测，神去无方向。
English: Returning to the inner court, he played the "Anwa no Kyoku" (Song of Peace): The god-man is unfathomable, the god has no direction.

古文：祀事既成，神返诸帝乡。
现代文：祭祀已完成，神返回帝乡。
English: The sacrifice has been completed, and the god has returned to the imperial village.

古文：申发休祥，俾胤嗣蕃昌。
现代文：扩大延展万事吉祥，使我后代繁衍盛昌。
English: It is auspicious to expand and extend everything, so that my descendants can prosper.

古文：宜君兮宜王，历世无疆。
现代文：合宜君主也宜王，世世代代永无疆。
English: The right monarch is also the right king. From generation to generation, there will be no borders.

古文：九庙时祫乐章
现代文：九庙按时节举行的合祭乐章：
English: The ritual music of the nine temples held according to the time of the festival:

古文：孟夏。迎神，《太和之曲》：序届夏首兮风气薰，礼严时祫兮拏击钟鼖。
现代文：初夏：迎神，奏《太和之曲》：时序到了夏天的开头啊风气温熏，按时合祭礼仪严整啊击鼓敲钟。
English: Early summer: Welcoming God, playing "Taiwa no Kyoku": The time sequence has come to the beginning of summer, the wind is hot, the ritual of the festival is strict, and the drums are beating and the bells are ringing.

古文：迎群主来合享交欣，于皇列圣正南面，以申崇报皇勋。
现代文：迎候众神主来合享大家都欢欣，历代的君王南画亲临，申明崇敬祭祀皇勋。
English: Expecting the gods to come and share everyone's joy, the kings of all ages came to Nanpo, affirming their reverence for the sacrifice of the emperor.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：瞻曙色方昕，仰列圣在上，奠金觥而捧币纹。小孙执盈兮敢不惧。
现代文：初次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：瞻望曙光正放亮，仰拜历代圣君都在上，奠献杯酒捧上币帛，小孙秉持杯酒啊岂敢不戒惧悲伤。
English: The first offering, playing the "Lullaby of Peace": Looking ahead, the dawn is shining, the saints of all ages are worshiped, the offering cup of wine is holding a coin, and the grandson is holding a cup of wine, how dare he not be afraid of sadness.

古文：亚献，《豫和之曲》：思皇祖，仰圣神。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《豫和之曲》：思念皇祖，敬仰圣神。
English: For the second offering, the "Song of Peace" was played: thinking of the emperor and revering the Holy Spirit.

古文：来列主，会太宸。
现代文：陈列主位，会于太宸。
English: The main display will be in Taichung.

古文：时祫修，循古伦。
现代文：按时合祭正实行，古礼宜遵循。
English: The closing ceremony is being carried out on time, and ancient etiquette should be followed.

古文：惟圣鉴歆，愚孙忱恂。
现代文：惟望圣皇临歆享，愚孙诚信表内心。
English: I only hope that the Holy Emperor will come and enjoy it, and that the grandson of a fool will be sincere in his heart.

古文：终献，《宁和之曲》：齐醴清兮麦熟新，笾豆洁兮孝念申。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《宁和之曲》：酒醴清澄啊麦成熟可尝新，篷豆祭晶洁净啊孝心申。
English: At the end of the dedication, the "Song of Peace" was played: the wine is clear, the wheat is ripe and can taste new, the taro festival is crystal clear and filial.

古文：仰祖功兮宗德，愿降祐兮后人。
现代文：景仰祖宗功绩啊祖宗德，诚望降福啊保佑后人。
English: Admire the merits of the ancestors, the ancestral virtue, sincerely hope for the blessing, and bless the descendants.

古文：彻馔，《雍和之曲》：乐终兮礼成，告玉振兮讫金声。
现代文：撤除僎食，奏《雍和之曲》：音乐终结啊祭礼完成，报告结束金玉声。
English: Remove the food, play "Yonghe's Song": the music ends, the festival is complete, and the report ends with the sound of gold.

古文：彻之弗违，以肃精诚。
现代文：撤除撰食不连礼，肃穆庄严致精诚。
English: Eliminate the preparation of food without ceremony, solemn solemnity and sincerity.

古文：还宫，《安和之曲》：三献就兮祖宗鉴享，一诚露兮念维长。
现代文：返回内宫，奏《安和之曲》：三次奠献完成啊祖宗鉴临歆享，精诚专一啊思绪长。
English: Returning to the Inner Court, he played "Anhe no Kyoku" (Song of Peace): the three dedications were completed, the ancestral genealogy was copied and enjoyed, and his thoughts were long and single-minded.

古文：思弗尽兮思弗忘，深荷德泽之启佑，小孙惟赖以馀光。
现代文：思念不尽啊思念不忘，深蒙德泽开导保佑，小孙依赖余恩光。
English: The yearning is never exhausted, the yearning is never forgotten, the profound blessings of Mondo Ze Kaido, and the grandson's reliance on Yu Enguang.

古文：神返宫永安，保家国益昌。
现代文：神灵返回宫永安，保佑国家更盛昌。
English: God's spirit returned to the Imperial Palace in Yongan, blessing the country with even greater prosperity.

古文：孟秋。迎神：时兮孟秋火西流，感时毖祀兮爽气回。
现代文：初秋：迎神：时序啊到初秋大火星向西流，感念时节谨慎祭祀啊凉爽气息回。
English: Early autumn: welcoming God: the time sequence ah to early autumn, the great Mars flows westward, the sentimental season, careful sacrifice ah, cool breath back.

古文：喜金风兮飘来，仰祖宗兮永慕哉。
现代文：喜秋风啊飘飘而来，敬仰祖宗啊永远慕怀。
English: Enjoy the autumn breeze as it drifts in, revere your ancestors and cherish them forever.

古文：秋祫是举兮希鉴歆，小孙恭迓兮捧素裁。
现代文：举行秋季合祭啊诚望鉴临歆享，小孙恭敬迎接啊手捧素裁。
English: The autumn closing ceremony was held, and the children eagerly awaited the opportunity to enjoy the tea ceremony, while the grandchildren respectfully welcomed the guests, holding tea leaves in their hands.

古文：初献：皇祖降筵，列圣灵联。
现代文：初次奠献：皇祖降临筵席，历代圣祖神灵联。
English: The first offering: the imperial ancestors descend to the banquet, and the ancestors of all generations are united.

古文：执事恐蹎，乐舞蹁跹。
现代文：主持大臣慎戒惧，伴乐舞蹈起翩昵。
English: The presiding minister cautions against fear, and the accompanying dance begins.

古文：小孙捧盈兮敢弗虔。
现代文：小孙捧献杯酒啊岂敢不诚虔。
English: Grandson holding an offering cup of wine, how dare he not be pious.

古文：亚献：再酌兮玉浆，洁净兮馨香。
现代文：第二次奠献：再酌起啊酒浆，洁净啊又馨香。
English: The second offering: the wine is poured again, clean and fragrant.

古文：祖宗垂享兮锡胤昌，万岁兮此礼行。
现代文：祖宗垂临歆享啊赐予后代繁昌，千秋万岁啊此礼长。
English: Ancestors have passed down their wealth to their descendants, and they have given prosperity to their descendants. Long live this leader.

古文：终献：进酒三觥，歌舞雍韺，钟鼓轰铮。
现代文：最后奠献：进献酒三杯，歌舞雍和端庄，钟鼓轰轰齐鸣响。
English: The final offering: three glasses of wine, song and dance, solemnity, and the peal of bells and drums.

古文：皇祖列圣，永享愚诚。
现代文：皇祖啊历代圣君，永远享受我愚下的真诚。
English: Emperor, ancestors, and all the saints throughout the ages, always enjoy the sincerity of my foolishness.

古文：彻馔：秋尝是举，稌黍丰农。
现代文：撤除僎食：秋季尝新礼举行，农耕顺利粮食丰。
English: Removal of grazing: New Year's celebrations were held in the autumn, and farming was successful and grain was abundant.

古文：三献既周，圣灵显容。
现代文：三次奠献已周全，圣祖神灵显仪容。
English: The three dedications have been completed, and the Holy Emperor's spirit is on display.

古文：小孙时思恩德兮惟忡。
现代文：小孙时时思念恩德啊忧心忡忡。
English: Xiao Sun is always thinking about the benevolence and is worried.

古文：还宫：仰皇祖兮圣神功，祀典陈兮报莫穷。
现代文：返回内宫：敬仰皇祖啊神圣功，祭祀典礼陈列啊祭神无穷。
English: Return to the Inner Court: Admire the imperial ancestors and sacred deeds, and watch the endless display of sacrificial rites and deities.

古文：尝祫告竣，鸾驭旋宫。
现代文：尝新合祭已完成，皇帝车驾返回官。
English: After the new year's festival was over, the emperor drove back to his office.

古文：皇灵在天主在室，万祀陟降何有终。
现代文：皇祖神卷六十二志第三十八乐乐章主在室，万祀陟降何有终。
English: The Emperor's Ancestors Volume 62 Chapter 38 Music Music Master is in the room, there is no end to the decline of worship.

古文：孟冬。迎神：时兮孟冬凛以凄，感时毖祀兮气潜回。
现代文：初冬：迎神：时序啊初冬凛冽而凄凄，感念时节祭祀啊地气暗暗返回。
English: Early winter: welcoming God: the time sequence ah, early winter is poignant and amazing, the emotion of the season of sacrifice ah, the spirit of the land is returning.

古文：溯朔风兮北来，仰祖宗兮永慕哉。
现代文：寒凉的北风啊从北来，敬仰祖宗啊永远慕怀。
English: The cold north wind comes from the north. Respect your ancestors and cherish them forever.

古文：冬祫是举兮希鉴歆，小孙恭迓兮捧素裁。
现代文：举行冬季合祭啊诚望鉴临歆享，小孙恭敬迎接啊手捧素裁。
English: A winter festival was held to celebrate the passing of the torch, and the young grandson respectfully received the torch and held it in his hand.

古文：初、亚、终献，俱同孟秋。
现代文：初次奠献、第二次奠献、最后奠献，都与初秋相同。
English: The first offering, the second offering, and the final offering are all the same as in early autumn.

古文：撤馔：冬烝是举，俎豆维丰。
现代文：撤除僎食：举行冬季熏条，俎豆祭品丰。
English: Removal of gnawing: held in winter smoked strips, pea offerings plentiful.

古文：三献既周，圣灵显容。
现代文：三次奠献已周全，圣皇神灵显仪容。
English: The three dedications have been completed, and the Holy Emperor's spirit is on display.

古文：小孙时思，恩德兮惟忡。
现代文：小孙时时思念恩德啊忧心忡忡。
English: Xiao Sun is always thinking about the benevolence and is worried.

古文：还宫。
现代文：返回内宫。
English: Return to the Inner Court.

古文：大祫乐章。
现代文：与盂秋相同，只是改 尝袷 为 熏袷 。
English: It's the same as the autumn sardine, but the taste has been changed to smoked sardine.

古文：迎神：仰庆源兮大发祥，惟世德兮深长。
现代文：大合祭乐章：迎神：敬仰福源啊大发祥，世祖德泽啊太久长。
English: Grand festival music: Welcoming God: Admire Fuyuan ah great birth, Shizuo Dezawa ah too long.

古文：时惟岁残，大祫洪张。
现代文：时逢岁末，大合祭礼大伸张。
English: At the end of every year, the great festival is held.

古文：祖宗圣神，明明皇皇。
现代文：祖宗圣明神灵，极尊颢又大皇。
English: Ancestors of the Holy Light God, highly revered and revered as the great emperor.

古文：遥瞻兮顿首，世德兮何以忘。
现代文：遥望啊叩头，世代恩德怎能忘。
English: Looking into the distance and kowtowing, how can the generations of grace forget?

古文：初献：神之格兮慰我思，慰我思兮捧玉卮。捧来前兮栗栗，仰歆纳兮是幸已而。
现代文：初次奠献：神灵来啊安慰我心思，安慰我心思啊捧起玉杯，捧上前啊心戒惧，诚愿收纳歆享啊太幸运。
English: The first offering: The gods have come to comfort my mind, comfort my mind, hold up the jade cup, hold it forward, my heart is afraid, I sincerely hope to receive and enjoy it, I am so lucky.

古文：亚献：再举瑶浆，乐舞群张。
现代文：第二次奠献：再次举献美酒浆，音乐舞蹈齐供张。
English: Second offering: Once again, the best wine is offered, and music and dance are performed.

古文：小孙在位，陪助贤良。
现代文：小孙在祭位，陪祭群臣都贤良。
English: The grandchild is at the altar, and the attendants are all virtuous.

古文：百工罗从，大礼肃将。
现代文：百官跟随，大礼整肃助献享。
English: Hundreds of officials followed, and a grand ceremony of purification was held to help with the offering.

古文：惟我祖宗，显锡恩光。
现代文：诚愿我祖宗，明显赐恩光。
English: I sincerely hope that my ancestors will be clearly blessed with the light of grace.

古文：终献：思祖功兮深长，景宗德兮馨香。
现代文：最后奠献：思念祖宗功啊深又长，景仰祖宗恩德啊馨香。
English: The final offering: Thinking of the ancestors' merits is deep and long, and admiring the ancestors' kindness is sweet.

古文：报岁事之既成兮典则先王，惟功德之莫报兮何以量。
现代文：岁时祭祀已完成啊效法先王，只有功德没有报啊如何能估量。
English: At that age, the sacrifice has already been completed, following the example of the previous king, only the merit has not been reported, how can it be estimated.

古文：彻馔：三酌既终，一诚感通。
现代文：撤除僎食：三次酌酒进献已告终，真诚专一感念通。
English: Withdrawal of eating and drinking: the three-time wine-drinking offering has ended, and the sincere dedication has passed.

古文：仰圣灵兮居歆，万礻异是举兮庶乎酬报之衷。
现代文：敬仰圣灵啊来歆享，万年都举行啊希望酬报在心中。
English: Reverence the Holy Spirit, come and enjoy, hold for all eternity, hope to be rewarded in the heart.

古文：还宫：显兮幽兮，神运无迹。
现代文：返回内宫：显现啊幽隐啊，神灵来去无踪。
English: Returning to the inner court: appearing and disappearing, the gods come and go without a trace.

古文：神运无迹兮化无方，灵返天兮主返室。
现代文：神灵无踪啊变化无穷，神灵返天啊神主返室。
English: There is no trace of the gods, the changes are endless, the gods return to heaven, the god returns to the room.

古文：愿神功圣德兮启佑无终，玄孙拜送兮以谢以祈。
现代文：希望神功圣德啊开导保佑无尽终，玄孙拜送啊感谢祈求与神通。
English: I hope that the divine power, holiness, enlightenment, and blessing will last forever, and that the great-grandson will be born, and I thank you for your prayers and supernatural powers.

古文：嘉靖十年大禘乐章。
现代文：嘉靖十年大祭祀乐章：
English: Jiajing Ten-Year Grand Festival Music:

古文：迎神，《元和之曲》：于维皇祖，肇创丕基。
现代文：迎神，奏《元和之曲》：啊伟大的皇祖，开创帝王大事业。
English: Greeting the gods, he played the "Song of the Yuan Dynasty": Ah, great emperor, you have begun a great imperial career.

古文：钟祥有自，曰本先之。
现代文：获得福禄有所出，原来先人已奠基。
English: Some of them have received awards, but the foundation was already laid by our predecessors.

古文：奄有万方，作之君师。
现代文：拥有天下，建立君师。
English: Own the world, establish a master.

古文：追报宜隆，以申孝思。
现代文：追怀祭祀应隆礼，用以申展孝顺思。
English: The memorial service should be followed by a grand ceremony to show filial piety.

古文：瞻望稽首，介我休禧。
现代文：瞻望神灵又叩头，赐给我福祉。
English: Look to the gods and bow down, grant me well-being.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：木有本兮水有源，人本祖兮物本天。
现代文：初次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：树有根本啊水有源，人本自祖宗啊物本白天。
English: The first offering, playing the "Song of the Summer Solstice": Trees have roots, water has a source, people are from the ancestors, and things are from the daytime.

古文：思报德兮礼莫先，仰希鉴兮敢弗虔。
现代文：想报恩德啊没有什么比礼先，景仰希望鉴临啊岂敢不诚虔！
English: If you want to repay kindness, there is nothing better than being polite, and if you want to be admired, there is nothing better than being pious!

古文：亚献，《仁和之曲》：中觞载升，于此瑶觥。小孙奉前，愿歆其诚。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《仁和之曲》：第二杯酒已斟升，在这瑶玉酒杯存，小孙捧献到灵前，希望歆享虔诚心。
English: The second offering, playing the "Song of Compassion": The second cup of wine has been poured, stored in this enameled jade wine cup, and the grandson holds it before the soul, hoping to enjoy the piety.

古文：乐舞在列，庶职在庭。
现代文：音乐舞蹈已排列，众官陪祭在殿庭。
English: The music and dance have been arranged, and the officials are celebrating in the courtyard.

古文：祖鉴孔昭，锡祐攸亨。
现代文：祖宗鉴察甚昭颢，赐给福佑事道亨。
English: The forefathers were keen observers and bestowed blessings on Daoheng.

古文：终献，《德和之曲》：于维兮先祖，延庆兮深高。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《德和之曲》：想念啊我先祖，延福啊深又高。
English: At the end of the dedication, the "Song of Virtue and Harmony" was played: "I miss my ancestors, and the blessings are deep and high."

古文：追报兮曷能，三进兮香醪。
现代文：追念报答啊怎么能，香酒三进啊表寸心。
English: How can I repay the thought, three shots of spiced wine is too much.

古文：彻馔，《太和之曲》：芬兮豆笾，洁兮黍粢。
现代文：撤除仆食，奏《太和之曲》：芬芳啊豆篷，洁净啊黍粢。
English: Remove the serving utensils, play "Taiwa no Kyoku": fragrant ah bean canopy, clean ah cocoon.

古文：祖垂歆享，彻乎敢迟。
现代文：祖宗垂临任歆享，撤除仆食不敢迟。
English: The forefathers enjoyed the position of vicar, and they did not hesitate to remove the servants.

古文：礼云告备，以讫陈辞。
现代文：报告祭礼已完备，结束陈述祈祷辞。
English: The report ceremony has been completed, and the closing prayer is over.

古文：永裕后人，亿世丕而。
现代文：永远赐福给后人，千秋万代永不衰。
English: Forever bestow blessings on future generations, and never fade away.

古文：送神，《永和之曲》：禘祀兮具张，佳气兮郁昂。
现代文：送神，奏《永和之曲》：大型祭祀啊已陈设，美好云气啊郁郁昂扬。
English: God-sending, playing "Song of Eternal Peace": Large-scale sacrificial rites have been set up, and the beautiful clouds are full of vigor.

古文：皇灵锡纳兮喜将，一诚通兮万载昌。
现代文：皇大神灵赏光收纳啊喜送神，专诚感通啊万年昌。
English: The Emperor's Great Spirit appreciates the light, receives it, sends it to the gods with joy, and is dedicated to it.

古文：祈鉴祐兮天下康，仰源仁浩德兮曷以量。
现代文：祈求明鉴保佑啊天下安康，敬仰悠远浩荡的仁德啊如何能估量。
English: Praying for the blessing of clear judgment, the world's well-being, and respecting the vast benevolence, how can we measure it?

古文：小孙顿首兮以望，遥瞻冉冉兮圣灵皇皇。
现代文：小孙叩头啊向远望，逼望冉冉升腾啊神灵盛大皇皇。
English: Little grandson kowtowing, looking into the distance, looking up at the rising sun, the spirit of the great emperor.

古文：洪武七年，御制祀历代帝王乐章。
现代文：洪武七年皇帝亲自作祭祀历代帝王的乐章：
English: In the seventh year of the Hongwu Emperor, he personally composed a piece of music to worship the emperors of past generations:

古文：迎神，《雍和之曲》：仰瞻兮圣容，想銮舆兮景从。
现代文：迎神，奏《雍和之曲》：瞻仰啊圣帝仪容，迁想车驾啊陆盛趋从。
English: Greet God, play "Yonghe's Song": Admire the holy emperor's appearance, imagine driving a car, and follow the prosperous trend of the country.

古文：降云衢兮后先，来俯鉴兮微衷。
现代文：沿云路下降啊后后先先，来俯察啊我心中。
English: Descending along the cloud road, let's look down into my heart.

古文：荷圣临兮苍生有崇，眷诸帝兮是临，予顿首兮幸蒙。
现代文：承蒙圣帝降临啊苍生崇敬，眷顾诸帝啊来临，我叩头啊幸运得恩蒙。
English: Thanks to the holy emperors' advent, I am revered by all living beings. Thanks to the emperors' patronage, I come. I bow my head, and I am blessed with grace.

古文：奠帛，《保和之曲》：秉微诚兮动圣躬，来列坐兮殿庭。
现代文：奠献币帛，奏《保和之曲》：秉持微小诚心啊劳动圣帝身，前来列坐啊在殿庭。
English: Laying a coin urn, playing the "Song of Peace": uphold a little sincerity, labor for the Holy Emperor, come and sit in the courtyard.

古文：予今愿兮效勤，奉礼帛兮列酒尊。
现代文：我现夜愿意啊献上殷勤，捧上礼帛啊排列酒樽。
English: Tonight, I'd like to offer my hospitality, raise my gong and line up the wine barrels.

古文：鉴予情兮忻享，方旋驾兮云程。
现代文：察我内心啊请歆享，然后回驾啊到云程。
English: Look into my heart, please enjoy it, and then drive back to Yuncheng.

古文：初献，《保和之曲》：酒行兮爵盈，喜气兮雍雍。
现代文：初次奠献，奏《保和之曲》：酒巡行啊酒杯满，喜气洋洋啊和谐欢悦。
English: The first offering of votive offerings, the playing of the "Song of Peace": the wine procession, the full wine glasses, the jubilant mood, the harmony and joy.

古文：重荷蒙兮载瞻载崇，群臣忻兮跃从，愿睹穆穆兮圣容。
现代文：垂蒙恩惠啊瞻仰尊崇，群臣喜乐啊踊跃跟从，希望目睹肃穆啊圣帝仪容。
English: We are blessed with grace, we look up to and respect him, the courtiers joyfully follow him, and we hope to see the solemn appearance of the holy emperor.

古文：亚献，《中和之曲》：酒斟兮礼明，诸帝熙和兮悦情。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《中和之曲》：酒已斟上啊礼已明，众帝王和乐啊愉悦心情。
English: The second offering, playing the "Song of Neutrality": The wine has been poured, the ceremony has been made clear, and the emperors are in a happy mood.

古文：百职奔走兮满庭，陈笾豆兮数重，亚献兮愿成。
现代文：百官奔忙啊满殿庭，陈列祭品啊一层又一层，第二次奠献啊愿告成。
English: Hundreds of officials are busy filling the palace courtyard, displaying the sacrificial offerings layer after layer, and the second offering is ready to be made.

古文：终献，《肃和之曲》：献酒兮至终，早整云鸾兮将旋宫。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《肃和之曲》：献酒啊到最终，早早整顿车驾啊将回帝宫。
English: At the end of the ceremony, "Shuwa no Kyoku" will be played: the offering of wine will come to an end, and the early rectification of the car will return to the Imperial Palace.

古文：予心眷恋兮神圣，欲攀留兮无从。
现代文：我心中眷恋啊神灵，想要挽留啊无理由。
English: My heart is attached to the gods, there is no reason to hold back.

古文：蹑云衢兮缓行，得遥瞻兮达九重。
现代文：踏上云路啊缓缓行，得以迁望啊到达天九重。
English: Tread the path of the clouds, walk slowly, be able to look around, and reach the nine heavens.

古文：彻馔，《凝和之曲》：纳肴羞兮领陈，烝民乐兮幸生。
现代文：撤除锲食，奏《凝和之曲》：接纳祭品啊领受列陈，众民乐啊幸运生。
English: Remove the feasting, play the "Song of Condensation": accept the offerings and receive the list, the folk music and the lucky students.

古文：将何以兮崇报，惟岁时兮载瞻载迎。
现代文：将用什么啊重报，只有按时节啊瞻拜奉行。
English: What will be used to re-report, only according to the time of the season to observe.

古文：送神，《寿和之曲》：幡幢缭绕兮导来踪，銮舆冉冉兮归天宫。
现代文：送神，奏《寿和之曲》：旗施缭绕啊引导来踪，车驾冉冉啊返回天宫。
English: Send God, play the "Song of the Summer Solstice": Surround the banner, guide the trail, drive the car, and return to the Heavenly Palace.

古文：五云拥兮祥风从，民歌圣佑兮乐年丰。
现代文：五云簇拥啊祥风跟从，人民歌唱神灵保佑啊欢乐年丰。
English: The five clouds gather, the auspicious wind follows, and the people sing, "God bless you," and "Happy New Year."

古文：望燎，《豫和之曲》：神机不测兮造化功，珍羞礼帛兮荐火中。
现代文：望祀燎祭，奏《豫和之曲》：神机不可测啊天地神化功，珍美磋喂祭礼币帛啊送入火中。
English: Wishing to worship the sacrificial bowl, playing the "Song of Yuhe": God's power is immeasurable, heaven and earth are deified, and precious coins are sent into the fire.

古文：望瘗庭兮稽首，愿神鉴兮寸衷。
现代文：望祀痉埋于庭啊叩头，希望神灵察鉴啊寸心中。
English: Wishing for the dead to be buried in the garden, bowing down, and hoping for the gods to examine their hearts.

古文：洪武六年定祀先师孔子乐章。
现代文：洪武六年，制定祭祀先师孔子的乐章：
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu's reign, he formulated the music for the rites of his mentor, Confucius:

古文：迎神，《咸和之曲》：大哉宣圣，道德尊崇。
现代文：迎神，奏《咸和之曲》：伟大啊宣圣孔子，道德尊崇。
English: Greet God and play the "Song of Harmony": Great, proclaim Confucius, respect morality.

古文：维持王化，斯民是宗。
现代文：维持王者教化，人民宗奉。
English: Keep the king enlightened, and the people will follow.

古文：典祀有常，精纯益隆。
现代文：典礼祭祀，精粹纯洁更加盛隆。
English: ceremonies and rites, the essence of purity is more prosperous.

古文：神其来格，于昭圣容。
现代文：神灵到来，昭显圣容。
English: When the spirit of the gods arrives, it reveals its holy face.

古文：奠帛，《宁和之曲》：自生民来，谁底其盛？
现代文：奠献币帛，奏《宁和之曲》：自从人类产生以来，谁入最昌盛？
English: The laying of the coin urn, the playing of the "Song of Tranquility": Who has been the most prosperous since the birth of mankind?

古文：惟王神明，度越前圣。
现代文：只有文宣王神灵圣明，超越前代圣人。
English: Only the holy spirit of King Wenxuan surpasses the saints of the previous generation.

古文：粢帛具成，礼容斯称。
现代文：粢盛币帛等祭品准备已完成，典礼仪容正相称。
English: Preparations for the offerings, including the auspicious coins and gongs, have been completed, and the ceremonial appearance is becoming more appropriate.

古文：黍稷非馨，惟神之听。
现代文：并不是黍稷馨香，只是等候宣圣神。 准王 ，后来改为 睢师 。
English: It's not a sweet fragrance, just waiting for the Holy Spirit to be announced.

古文：初献，《安和之曲》：太哉圣王，实天生德。
现代文：初次奠献，奏《安和之曲》：伟大啊圣王，上天生美德。
English: The first offering, the "Tune of Peace" was played: "Great, holy king, born of heavenly virtues.

古文：作乐以崇，时祀无斁。
现代文：演奏音乐以尊崇，按时祭祀不怠惰。
English: To play music with reverence, to perform the ritual on time is not lazy.

古文：清酤惟馨，嘉牲孔硕。
现代文：清澄美酒很馨香，美好牺牲很肥硕。
English: The clear and beautiful wine is very sweet, and the beautiful sacrifice is very fat.

古文：荐羞神明，庶几昭格。
现代文：进献珍鳝给神明，希望向神祷告，昭示表诚笃。
English: Offering precious things to the gods, hoping to pray to the gods, shows sincerity.

古文：亚、终献，《景和之曲》：百王宗师，生民物轨。
现代文：第二次奠献、最后奠献，奏《景和之曲》：百王的宗师，人民典范。
English: For the second and final offering, he played "Kagewa no Kyoku": the guru of a hundred kings, the people's role model.

古文：瞻之洋洋，神其宁止。
现代文：瞻望庄严，神灵宁安。
English: The outlook is solemn, and the deities are at peace.

古文：酌彼金罍，惟清且旨。
现代文：酌酒在金杯，清澄又甘甜。
English: The wine is served in golden goblets, clear and sweet.

古文：登献惟三，于戏成礼。
现代文：进献祇三遍，呜呼礼成典。
English: Shinkeng three times, wu hu rei is a classic.

古文：彻馔，《咸和之曲》：牺象在前，豆笾在列，以享以荐，既芬既洁。
现代文：撤除锲食，奏《咸和之曲》：牺象杯在前，祭品陈在列，祭享进奠献，芬芳又净洁。
English: Remove the food and play the "Song of Salt and Peace": The offering is like a cup in front, the offerings are displayed, the offering is enjoyed, and the fragrance is clean.

古文：礼成乐备，人和神悦。
现代文：典礼完成音乐备，人民和顺神喜悦。
English: After the ceremony, the music was prepared and the people sang for joy.

古文：祭则受福，率遵无越。
现代文：祭祀神灵受福禄，永远遵循不僭越。
English: It is a blessing to worship the deities, and one should always follow the precepts.

古文：送神，《咸和之曲》：有严学宫，四方来宗。
现代文：送神，奏《咸和之曲》：庄严的学宫，四方来朝宗。
English: Send God, play the "Song of Harmony": the solemn school palace, the four directions come to the imperial family.

古文：恪恭祀事，威仪雍雍。
现代文：敬恭祭祀事，威仪庄重又雍容。
English: It is a ceremony of homage and sacrifice, with a solemn and graceful appearance.

古文：歆格惟馨，神驭旋复。
现代文：前来歆享惟馨香，神驾返神宫。
English: Come and enjoy the sweet fragrance, and the gods will return to the divine palace.

古文：明禋斯毕，咸膺百福。
现代文：明洁诚敬献享毕，领受神赐百福同。
English: After making a clear, sincere and respectful offering, you will receive God's bestowal of a hundred blessings.

古文：洪武二年享先农乐章。
现代文：洪武二年，祭享先农的乐章：
English: In the second year of Hongwu, the following music was performed to celebrate the farmers' ancestors:

古文：迎神，《永和之曲》：东风启蛰，地脉奋然。
现代文：迎神，奏《永和之曲》：束风启伏虫，地脉动奋然。
English: Welcoming the gods, playing "Song of Eternal Peace": the wind whips up the insects, and the earth pulsates vigorously.

古文：苍龙挂角，烨烨天田。
现代文：苍龙挂在角，灿烂有天田。
English: The celestial dragon hangs in the corner, and the celestial field is resplendent.

古文：民命惟食，创物有先。
现代文：人民生存在于食，创造万物有先贤。
English: People's lives exist in food, and there are sages to create all things.

古文：圜钟既奏，有降斯筵。
现代文：圜钟已敲响，降临到此筵。
English: The cuckoo has rung, and it's come to roost.

古文：奠帛，《永和之曲》：帝出乎震，天发农祥。
现代文：奠献币帛，奏《永和之曲》：帝出于东方，天发于农祥。
English: Laying a coin urn and playing the "Song of Eternal Peace": The emperor came from the East, and heaven was born in Nongxiang.

古文：神降于筵，蔼蔼洋洋。
现代文：农神降临于此筵，香气四溢尽芬芳。
English: The god of agriculture descends on this cocoon, and the fragrance is overflowing.

古文：礼神有帛，其色惟苍。
现代文：礼献神灵有币帛，颜色选择为青苍。
English: The offerings to the deities are made with coins, and the color of the offering is blue.

古文：岂伊具物，诚敬之将。
现代文：哪里祇为备祭物，奉献诚敬显贤良。
English: Where there is only a sacrificial offering, devotion, sincerity, and respect are the signs of a virtuous person.

古文：进俎，《雍和之曲》：制帛既陈，礼严奉牲。
现代文：进献俎豆，奏《雍和之曲》：币帛已陈列，典礼整肃供牺牲。
English: Offering peas, playing "Yonghe no Kyoku": The coins have been displayed, and the ceremony has been cleaned up for the sacrifice.

古文：载之于俎，祀事孔明。
现代文：放置在俎上，祭祀很严明。
English: Placed on the urn, the ritual is very strict.

古文：簠簋攸列，黍稷惟馨。
现代文：篮簋都排列，黍稷惟香馨。
English: The baskets are all lined up, except for the cucumbers.

古文：民力普存，先穑之灵。
现代文：民力普遍存，先农有验灵。
English: Civilian power generally exists, and the forefathers of agriculture had spiritual discernment.

古文：初献，《寿和之曲》：九谷未分，庶草攸同。
现代文：初次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：九谷未分时，众草都相同。
English: The first offering, playing "Juwa no Kyoku": When the nine valleys are not divided, all the grasses are the same.

古文：表为嘉种，实在先农。
现代文：指出是嘉谷，功劳在先农。
English: It was pointed out that it was Jiayu, and the credit goes to the pioneer farmers.

古文：黍稌斯丰，酒醴是供。献奠之初，以祈感通。
现代文：粮食进献丰，酒醴已上供，初次奠献酒，求与神戚通。
English: The grain offering is plentiful, the wine has been offered, and the first libation of wine has been offered, asking for kinship with the gods.

古文：配位云：厥初生民，粒食其天。
现代文：配祀位说：当初的人民，吃粮靠上天。
English: The deity said, "In the beginning, the people relied on the heavens for food.

古文：开物惟智，邃古奚传。
现代文：开发万物凭智慧，远古何人传？
English: To develop all things with wisdom, how many people in ancient times passed it down?

古文：思文后稷，农官之先。
现代文：思文为后稷，最早作农官。
English: Siwen was the second son, and the first to become an agronomist.

古文：侑神作主，初献惟蠲。
现代文：作主侑神酒，初次奠献求洁鲜。
English: The chief brewer of this divine sake, the first to make a dedication to cleanliness.

古文：亚献，《寿和之曲》：倬彼甫田，其隰其原。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：宽广无边那甫田，拥有湿地与平原。
English: The second offering, playing "Juwa no Kyoku": the vast and boundless Nafuda, with its wetlands and plains.

古文：耒耜云载，骖驭之间。
现代文：耒耜勤耕作，胶驭在其问。
English: Cultivate diligently, and you will succeed.

古文：报本思享，亚献惟虔。
现代文：报答根本思祭享，二次奠献惟诚虔。
English: The reward is to think about and enjoy the sacrifice, and the second offering is to be pious.

古文：神其歆之，自古有年。
现代文：神灵来歆享，自古有丰年。
English: Since ancient times, there have been good years when gods came to enjoy the harvest.

古文：配位云：后稷配天，兴于有邰。
现代文：配祀位说：后稷配祭天，兴起在有邰。
English: It is said in the place of worship: "After the yakitori, there is the yakitori."

古文：诞降嘉种，有栽有培。
现代文：降下嘉谷种，栽种又培育。
English: The seed of Jiayu was sown, and it was planted and nurtured.

古文：俶载南亩，祗事三推。
现代文：开始到田间，耒耜推三推。
English: Start in the field, push the plough three times.

古文：佑神再献，歆我尊罍。
现代文：佑柙且再献，歆享我酒杯。
English: Thank you and again, enjoy my glass.

古文：终献，《寿和之曲》：帝耤之典，享祀是资，洁丰嘉栗，咸仰于斯。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《寿和之曲》：皇帝耕藉行典礼，藉以享祀先农神，美好谷物洁且丰，全都仰此祭物陈。
English: At the end of the dedication, the "Song of Peace" was played: the emperor cultivated the ceremony to enjoy the worship of the former farmer's god, the beautiful grain was clean and plentiful, and all said that this sacrifice was old.

古文：时维亲耕，享我农师。
现代文：按时举行亲耕礼，祭享农师富人民。
English: The family farming ceremony was held on time to celebrate the success of the farmers, teachers and rich people.

古文：礼成于三，以讫陈词。
现代文：典礼告成由三献，以此结束祷神灵。
English: The ceremony ended with three offerings, concluding with a prayer to the gods.

古文：配位云：嘉德之荐，民和岁丰。帝命率育，报本之功。
现代文：配祀位说：嘉政布施，百姓和美，五谷丰登，帝王奉天命育万民是本职之功。
English: The inscription reads: "Jia Zheng gave alms, the people were at peace, the grain was plentiful, and the emperor nurtured the people according to God's command. This was his duty."

古文：陈常时夏，其德其功。齐明有格，惟献之终。
现代文：四时平常，是神明的其德其功，礼献神明有规格，从始至终。
English: At four o'clock in the afternoon, it is the god's virtue and his work, and the offering to the god has specifications, from beginning to end.

古文：彻馔，《永和之曲》：于赫先农，歆此洁修。
现代文：撤除撰食，奏《永和之曲》：显赫的先农，歆享祭品甚洁修。
English: Remove the preparation of food, play the "Song of Eternal Peace": prominent forefathers, enjoy the offerings and clean up.

古文：于篚于爵，于馔于羞。
现代文：粮食与美酒，肴锲与珍磋。
English: Grain and fine wine, delicacies and rarities.

古文：礼成告彻，神惠敢留。
现代文：典礼完成告撤除，神灵恩惠不敢留。
English: After the completion of the ceremony, it was canceled, and the grace of the gods did not dare to stay.

古文：馂及终亩，丰年是求。
现代文：绫及终亩耕，丰年敬祈求。
English: Pray for good harvests in the years to come.

古文：送神，《永和之曲》：神无不在，于昭于天。
现代文：送神，奏《永和之曲》：神灵无处不存在，昭显于上天。
English: Send gods, play "Song of Eternity": gods do not exist anywhere, but are manifested in the heavens.

古文：曰迎曰送，于享之筵。
现代文：迎神又送神，歆享在此筵。
English: Welcome the gods and send the gods, enjoy it here.

古文：冕衣在列，金石在悬。
现代文：官吏在行列，乐器仍挂悬。
English: The officials are in line, the musical instruments are still hanging.

古文：往无不之，其佩翩翩。
现代文：前往到各处，佩饰舞翩翩。
English: Go everywhere, dress up and dance.

古文：望瘗，《太和之曲》：祝帛牲醴，先农既歆。不留不亵，瘗之厚深。
现代文：望祀痉祭，奏《太和之曲》：币帛与牲醴，先农已享歆，不留不亵渎，痉埋厚又深。
English: On the occasion of the sacrificial offering, the "Song of Taihe" was played: Money and livestock were buried together, the first farmers had already enjoyed the money, there was nothing left to desecrate, the money was buried thick and deep.

古文：有幽其瘗，有赫其临。
现代文：幽深痉埋，赫赫面临。
English: Deeply buried, deeply confronted.

古文：曰礼之常，匪今斯今。
现代文：礼之常制，并不在今。
English: There is no standing order of courtesy now.

古文：嘉靖九年定享先蚕乐章。
现代文：嘉靖九年，制定祭享先蚕的乐章：
English: In the ninth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the music for the celebration of the first silkworm was formulated:

古文：迎神，《贞和之曲》：于穆惟神，肇启蚕桑。
现代文：迎神，奏《贞和之曲》：肃穆的神灵，开始养蚕桑。
English: Greeting the gods and playing the "Song of Chastity": the solemn deities began to raise silkworms.

古文：衣我万民，保我家邦。
现代文：供我万民衣，保卫我家邦。
English: To provide me with clothes for all my people, and to defend my country.

古文：兹举旷仪，春日载阳。
现代文：此举仪节远，春天暖洋洋。
English: The ceremony is far away, and the spring is warm.

古文：恭迎霞驭，灵气洋洋。
现代文：恭敬迎候彩霞车，神灵和气无比宽广。
English: Respectfully waiting for the Caixia car, the gods and spirits are incomparably broad.

古文：奠帛，《寿和之曲》：神其临只，有苾有芬。
现代文：奠献币帛，奏《寿和之曲》：神明降临，无比芳芬。
English: Laying a coin urn, playing the "Song of the Long Life": the gods descend, the incomparable fragrance.

古文：乃献玉歊，乃奠文纁。
现代文：献上玉洁似黍稷，奠献文饰的帛缥。
English: Presenting a jade jelly-like bowl, and laying a bowl decorated with ornaments.

古文：仰祈昭鉴，淑气氤氲。
现代文：敬祷神灵昭明鉴，神灵之气盛氤氲。
English: Worshipping and praying to the gods is a good example, and the spirits of the gods are strong.

古文：顾兹蚕妇，祁祁如云。
现代文：瞻顾此蚕妇，盛多如浮云。
English: Looking at this silkworm, it is as numerous as floating clouds.

古文：初献，曲同奠帛。
现代文：初次奠献，乐曲与奠献币帛相同。
English: For the first offering, the music is the same as for the offering of the coin.

古文：亚献，《顺和之曲》：载举清觞，蚕祀孔明。
现代文：第二次奠献，奏《顺和之曲》：举起清澄的酒浆，亲蚕祭祀很鲜明。
English: The second offering, playing "Shunwa no Kyoku" (Song of Harmony): Raising the clear wine pulp, the sibling sacrifice is very clear.

古文：以格以享，鼓瑟吹笙。
现代文：恭请降临来歆享，弹起琴瑟吹奏笙。
English: Please come and enjoy, play the lute and play the gong.

古文：阴教用彰，坤仪允贞。
现代文：女子教化被彰显，皇后母仪贤且贞。
English: Female enlightenment is emphasized, and the empress dowager is depicted as virtuous and chaste.

古文：神之听之，鉴此禋诚。
现代文：神灵明察，鉴察祭祀最真诚。
English: The gods are watching, and the sacrificial rites are the most sincere.

古文：终献，《宁和之曲》：神之格思，桑土是宜。
现代文：最后奠献，奏《宁和之曲》：神灵到来，桑土适宜。
English: At the end of the dedication, the "Song of Peace" was played: When the gods arrive, the mulberry soil is suitable.

古文：三缫七就，惟此茧丝。
现代文：三条彩绳丝七匝，正是这蚕丝。
English: Three colored ropes of silk seven folds, it is this silk.

古文：献礼有终，神不我遗。
现代文：献礼有终结，神灵对我不赠遣。
English: The offering has come to an end, and the gods are not pleased with me.

古文：锡我纯服，藻绘皇仪。
现代文：赐我黑祭服，彩色绣纹皇家容仪。
English: Give me a black ceremonial robe, a colorful embroidered royal robe.

古文：彻馔，《安和之曲》：俎豆具彻，式礼莫愆。
现代文：撤除僎食，奏《安和之曲》：俎豆祭品都已撤，礼仪不违愆。
English: Remove the feasting and play "Anwa no Kyoku": The pea offerings have all been removed, and the etiquette does not violate the imperial edict.

古文：既匡既敕，我祀孔虔。
现代文：既端正又整饬，我的祭祀很诚虔。
English: My sacrifices are very sincere. They are both upright and proper.

古文：我思古人，葛覃惟贤。
现代文：我思念古人，《葛覃》颂后妃之贤。
English: I think of the ancients, and "Dragonfly" is a tribute to the wisdom of the Empress Dowager.

古文：明灵歆只，永顾桑阡。
现代文：明察神灵已歆享，永远顾念治桑蚕。
English: Mindful of the fact that the deities have already enjoyed it, they will forever be mindful of the mulberry silkworm.

古文：送神，《恒和之曲》：神之升矣，日霁霞蒸。
现代文：送神，奏《恒和之曲》：神灵已飞升，太阳晴好云霞蒸腾。
English: Send the gods, play the "Song of Everlasting Peace": The gods have soared, the sun is fine and the clouds are steaming.

古文：相此女红，杼轴其兴。
现代文：看此女工，纺织繁兴。
English: Look at this female worker. Textiles are flourishing.

古文：兹返玄宫，鸾凤翔腾。
现代文：今日返玄宫，鸾凤翱翔而飞升。
English: Today, returning to the Palace of the Ancients, the Phoenix soars and soars.

古文：瞻望弗及，永锡嘉徵。
现代文：瞻望看不尽，永赐吉祥征。
English: You can't see it all, but it's always a good omen.

古文：望燎，曲同送神。
现代文：望祀燎祭，乐曲与送神相同。
English: It is a religious festival, and the music is the same as that for sending a god.

