古文：贾谊，雒阳人也，年十八，以能诵诗书属文称于郡中。
现代文：贾谊，洛阳人，十八岁时，就因能够背诵诗书和会写文章闻名当地。
English: Jia Yi, a resident of Luoyang, became famous locally for being able to recite poetry and write articles at the age of 18.

古文：河南守吴公闻其秀材，召置门下，甚幸爱。
现代文：河南郡守吴公听到他才学优异，把他召到门下，非常器重他。
English: When Wu Gong, the governor of Henan County, heard that he was an excellent student, he summoned him to his court and treated him very seriously.

古文：文帝初立，闻河南守吴公治平为天下第一，故与李斯同邑，而尝学事焉，征以为廷尉。
现代文：汉文帝即位不久，听说河南郡守吴公政绩为全国第一，过去与李斯同乡，曾经向李斯学习过，于是征召他做廷尉。
English: Not long after Emperor Hanwen ascended the throne, he heard that Wu Gongzheng, the governor of Henan County, was the first in the country in terms of political achievements. He had been a fellow villager of Li Si in the past and had once studied under Li Si, so he conscripted him to be a court lieutenant.

古文：廷尉乃言谊年少，颇通诸家之书。
现代文：廷尉就推荐说贾谊年纪虽小，但很能通晓诸子百家之书。
English: The courtier recommended that although Jia Yi is young, he is very familiar with the books of hundreds of children.

古文：文帝召以为博士。
现代文：汉文帝就召贾谊做了博士。
English: In this way, Emperor Hanwen conscripted Jia Yi and let him serve as a doctor.

古文：是时，谊年二十余，最为少。
现代文：这时，贾谊二十多岁，在博士中是最年轻的。
English: At this time, Jia Yi was in his twenties, the youngest among the doctors.

古文：每诏令议下，诸老先生未能言，谊尽为之对，人人各如其意所出。诸生于是以为能。
现代文：汉文帝每次下令讨论的问题布置下来，年长的博士们不能说上什么，而贾谊能够一一回答，并且人人都觉得说出了他们的意思。博士们于是认为贾谊才能出众。
English: Every time Emperor Hanwen ordered the discussion questions to be arranged, the older doctors could not say anything, but Jia Yi could answer one by one, and everyone felt that they had said what they meant. The doctors then thought that Jia Yi could be outstanding.

古文：文帝说之，超迁，岁中至太中大夫。
现代文：汉文帝喜欢他，破格提拔，一年之内提升到太中大夫。
English: Emperor Hanwen liked him and gave him an unprecedented promotion. Within a year, he was promoted to the position of Grand Vice Admiral.

古文：谊以为汉兴二十余年，天下和洽，宜当改正朔，易服色制度，定官名，兴礼乐。
现代文：贾谊认为汉朝建立二十多年了，国家太平和洽，应当改订历法，改变车马服饰的颜色，订立法令制度，确定官职名称，振兴礼乐。
English: Jia Yiyi believes that the Han Dynasty has been established for more than 20 years, and the country is too peaceful. It should change the calendar, change the color of the chariot and horse costumes, establish a legal order system, determine the names of official positions, and revitalize the ceremonial music.

古文：乃草具其仪法，色上黄，数用五，为官名悉更，奏之。
现代文：于是起草各项仪式的法度，以黄色为尊贵之色，官印用五字印，确定官职名称，全部改变旧制，贾谊上奏皇上。
English: As a result, regulations for various ceremonies were drafted, with yellow as the color of honor, official stamps using five-character stamps, official titles determined, all of which changed from the old system.

古文：文帝廉让未皇也。
现代文：汉文帝谨慎从事，来不及实行。
English: Emperor Hanwen acted cautiously, but it was too late to implement.

古文：然诸法令所更定，及列侯就国，其说皆谊发之。
现代文：然而各项法令的更改确定，以及各个诸侯都住到自己的封国裹去，这些主张都是贾谊提出的。
English: However, the amendment of various laws and decrees, as well as the fact that various lords lived in their own fiefdoms, these claims were made by Jia Yixing.

古文：于是天子议以谊任公卿之位。
现代文：于是汉文帝与大臣商议，让贾谊担任公卿的职位。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwen discussed with the minister to let Jia Yi take the post of court noble.

古文：绛、灌、东阳侯、冯敬之属尽害之，乃毁谊曰： 雒阳之人年少初学，专欲擅权，纷乱诸事。 
现代文：绛侯、灌侯、东阳侯、冯敬这些人嫉妒他，就诋毁说： 洛阳这个少年，年纪轻轻，学识浅薄，一心想独揽大权，给许多事情造成混乱。 
English: Yan Hou, Gan Hou, Dongyang Hou and Feng Jing were all jealous of him and slandered him, saying: "Luoyang is a young boy, young in age, shallow in knowledge, bent on seizing power and causing chaos in many things.

古文：于是天子后亦疏之，不用其议，以谊为长沙王太傅。
现代文：由于这样，汉文帝后来也疏远了他，不采纳他的意见，让他做长沙王太傅。
English: As a result of this, Emperor Hanwen later alienated him, did not accept his opinion, and made him the Changsha King Taifu.

古文：谊既以適去，意不自得，及渡湘水，为赋以吊屈原。
现代文：贾谊因为贬官离开了，意志没有得到施展，在渡湘水时，写了一篇赋吊念屈原。
English: Jia Yi left because of the demotion, his will was not exerted, and when he crossed the Xiangshui River, he wrote a poem about Qu Yuan.

古文：屈原，楚贤臣也，被谗放逐，作《离骚赋》，其终篇曰： 已矣！
现代文：屈原是楚国一位贤明的臣子，遭受谗言而被放逐，写作《离骚赋》，在篇末写道： 算了吧!
English: Qu Yuan was a wise courtier of the State of Chu. He was ostracized and exiled. He wrote "Leaving the Country" and at the end of the story he wrote: Forget it!

古文：国亡人，莫我知也。 
现代文：国家无人，没有了解我的。 
English: No one in the country knows me.

古文：遂自投江而死。
现代文：于是投江而死。
English: As a result, he fell into the river and died.

古文：谊追伤之，因以自谕。
现代文：贾谊追念哀伤他，因此以屈原自喻。
English: He was saddened by the memory of Jia Yi, so he took Qu Yuan as his role model.

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：他的赋写道：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：恭承嘉惠兮，竢罪长沙。
现代文：我禀承皇帝恩旨，到长沙去上任。
English: Following the emperor's behest, I went to Changsha to take office.

古文：仄闻屈原兮，自湛汨罗。
现代文：曾以谦恭的心情听别人说屈原投汨罗江自尽的事。
English: I was humbled to hear others say that Qu Yuan committed suicide by throwing himself into the Qiluo River.

古文：造托湘流兮，敬吊先生。
现代文：如今我来到湘江岸边用湘江水来寄托我对屈原的哀思与祭吊。
English: Now I have come to the shore of the Hunan River to use the water of the Hunan River to express my sorrow for Qu Yuan and to make offerings.

古文：遭世罔极兮，乃陨厥身。
现代文：大量的世俗谗言秽语泼向先生，您衹能投江自尽毁灭自己的身体。
English: It took a tumultuous society to drive you to take your own life. How sad!

古文：乌呼哀哉兮，逢时不祥！
现代文：大呼悲哀呀!您生不逢时，没有遇到一个好的年代。
English: How sad! You were born at the wrong time, you didn't have a good time.

古文：鸾凤伏窜兮，鸱鸮翱翔。
现代文：神奇的大鸟隐藏或者飞离，而鹞鹰却在天空中飞翔。
English: The magical bird hides or flies away, while the bald eagle soars through the sky.

古文：阘茸尊显兮，谗谀得志；贤圣逆曳兮，方正倒植。谓随、夷混兮，谓跖、蹻廉；莫邪为钝兮，铅刀为銛。
现代文：世上竟有人说不贪天下而投水身亡的卞随和不食周粟而饿死的伯夷贪婪，反而说大盗跖、矫是廉洁的；他们竞说古代十分锋利的名剑莫邪钝缓，而普通铅铁刀都十分锋利。唉!
English: There are people in the world who say that it is not greedy to follow the world and drown oneself in water, or greedy to starve to death by not eating corn. On the contrary, they say that the great robber and swindler are incorruptible. They contend that the famous sword, which was very sharp in ancient times, must be blunt, while ordinary lead and iron knives are very sharp. Alas!

古文：于嗟默默，生之亡故兮！
现代文：您如此默默不得志无缘无故遭遇迫害。
English: You can't remain silent when you're being persecuted for no reason.

古文：斡弃周鼎，宝康瓠兮。
现代文：放弃传国的周鼎宝物而不要，却把破烂的瓦罐当宝贝。
English: They don't want to give up the national treasure of Zhou Dynasty, but they treat the broken crock pot as a treasure.

古文：腾驾罢牛，骖蹇驴兮；骥垂两耳，服盐车兮。
现代文：驾车用疲惫不堪的牛来驾辕，用跛腿的驴来拉车边套；骏马垂着双耳，拉着超重的盐车。
English: Drivers use exhausted oxen to drive ploughs and lame donkeys to pull the saddles; horses with their ears hanging down pull the overweight salt wagons.

古文：章父荐屦，渐不可久兮；嗟苦先生，独离此咎兮！
现代文：用殷人的礼帽来垫鞋，这种混乱的局面还能维持很久吗?嘻!受苦受难的屈原先生啊!惟独您遭受到这些灾难。宣示说：得了吧！
English: Can this chaotic situation be maintained for a long time with a pompous top hat to cushion the shoes? Haha! Suffering Mr. Qu Yuan! Only you suffer from these disasters. Declare: Come on!

古文：谇曰：已矣！国其莫吾知兮，子独壹郁其谁语？
现代文：在国内能有谁了解您，先生您一个人在这生闷气，心裹的话又能向谁讲呢?
English: Who in the country can understand you, sir, and who can you talk to if you are sulking and heartbroken all alone?

古文：凤缥缥其高逝兮，夫固自引而远去。
现代文：没有人理解，就应当像凤凰鸟一样飘缈高飞消逝在远方，自我引退。
English: No one understands, it should be like a phoenix bird, soaring high and disappearing in the distance, self-retiring.

古文：袭九渊之神龙兮，沕渊潜以自珍；偭蟂獭以隐处兮，夫岂从虾与蛭螾？
现代文：效法隐藏在深渊裹的蛟龙，要深藏在水中珍爱自己，神龙怎能和水虫、鱼、虾、蛤蟆、蚂蟥、蚯蚓之类为伍?
English: Following the example of the dragon hidden in the abyss, we should cherish ourselves deep in the water. How can the divine dragon be in the company of aquatic insects, fish, shrimps, earthworms, grasshoppers, and earthworms?

古文：所贵圣之神德兮，远浊世而自臧。
现代文：要远离污浊的境界而自我珍藏，就要珍贵圣人流传下来的美德啊!
English: If you want to keep yourself away from the realm of filth, you must cherish the virtues passed down by precious saints!

古文：使骐骥可系而羁兮，岂云异夫犬羊？
现代文：假如骏马能叫人拴住，任人驾驭使唤，那它又与狗羊有什么不同呢?
English: If a horse can be harnessed and ridden, how is it different from a dog or a sheep?

古文：般纷纷其离此邮兮，亦夫子之故也！
现代文：您遭遇到各种各样的迫害与不幸，也是您没有洁身自好，远离这污浊的尘世的缘故啊!
English: You have encountered all kinds of persecution and misfortune, and it is also because you have not kept yourself clean and away from this filthy world!

古文：历九州而相其君兮，何必怀此都也？
现代文：您完全可以云游中国大地，选择一个明君去辅佐他，何必一定要怀念楚国呢?
English: You can travel all over China and choose a Ming ruler to assist him. Why do you have to miss Chu?

古文：凤皇翔于千仞兮，览德煇而下之；见细德之险征兮，遥增击而去之。
现代文：像凤凰一样的君子能飞上万里长空，当看到有光辉德性的明君时才肯下来。当看到德行短浅卑劣有危险的征兆，便马上拍打着双翅远走高飞而去。
English: Like a phoenix, a gentleman can fly thousands of miles into the sky. He is only willing to come down when he sees a bright and virtuous Mingjun. When he sees the signs of danger in the short-sightedness and meanness of virtue, he immediately flaps his wings and flies away.

古文：彼寻常之污渎佤，岂容吞舟之鱼！
现代文：在长宽衹有十几尺的死水坑裹，怎能容下可以吞掉船的大鱼。
English: How can a large fish that can swallow a boat be contained in a long and wide reed with a dead puddle of more than ten feet?

古文：横江湖之鳣鲸兮，固将制于蝼蚁。
现代文：在江湖中来回游的鲈鲸大鱼，一旦游入死水坑中必然要受到蝼蛄和蚂蚁的侵袭。
English: The beaked whale, a large fish that swims back and forth in rivers and lakes, is bound to be attacked by earthworms and ants once it swims into a stagnant puddle.

古文：谊为长沙傅三年，有服飞入谊舍，止于坐隅。
现代文：贾谊做长沙太傅的第三年，有一只猫头鹰飞入贾谊的房间裹，停在座位的旁边。
English: In Jia Yi's third year as Changsha Taifu, an owl flew into Jia Yi's room, wrapped itself around him, and stopped next to his seat.

古文：服似鸮，不祥鸟也。
现代文：猫头鹰像鹃，是一种不吉祥的鸟。
English: The owl, like the stork, is an unlucky bird.

古文：谊既以適居长沙，长沙卑湿，谊自伤悼，以为寿不得长，乃为赋以自广。
现代文：贾谊已因被贬来居长沙，长沙低洼潮湿，贾谊常常哀伤，以为寿命不可能长，就作赋来安慰自己。
English: Jia Yi has been relegated to live in Changsha, Changsha is low-lying and humid, Jia Yi is often sad, thinking that life can not be long, he made a gift to comfort himself.

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：赋写道：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：单阏之岁，四月孟夏，庚子日斜，服集余舍，止于坐隅，貌甚闲暇。
现代文：丁卯年夏季的第一个月二十三日这天傍晚太阳就要西下时，一只猫头鹰停栖在我的居室裹，停留在座位的一角，神态十分悠闲从容不迫。
English: On the evening of the 23rd day of the first month of summer in the year of Dingwu, when the sun was about to set, an owl perched in my living room, staying in a corner of the seat, looking very relaxed and unhurried.

古文：异物来崒，私怪其故，发书占之，谶言其度。
现代文：这只奇怪的鸟停栖在我的家中，看到猫头鹰飞进我的居室，便暗自猜测它飞来是什么原因。我打开占卜吉凶的书，以书中预言吉凶的话核对吉凶的定数。
English: When I saw the owl flying into my room, I guessed the reason for its arrival. I opened my fortune-telling book and checked the number of the lucky number with the words of the book.

古文：曰 野鸟入室，主人将去。 
现代文：书上说： 野生的飞鸟飞入屋内，屋主人将要离开此地。 
English: The book said: Wild birds fly into the house, the owner is leaving.

古文：问于子服： 余去何之？
现代文：我向猫头鹰发问： 我将要到什么地方去?
English: I asked the owl: Where am I going?

古文：吉乎告我，凶言其灾。
现代文：如果有吉利的事，你就告诉我，即使将有凶事，也请把灾祸是什么对我说明。
English: If there is good news, tell me; if there is evil, tell me what the evil is.

古文：淹速之度，语余其期。 
现代文：我的寿命是长是短，请告诉我一个定期。 
English: My lifespan is long or short, please tell me a regular schedule.

古文：服乃太息，举首奋翼，口不能言，请对以意。
现代文：猫头鹰于是叹息了一声，然后抬起头，奋力拍打翅膀，它虽然嘴裹不能说人语，却能用示意的方式来作答，根据它的表情来猜测它的心情。
English: The owl then sighed, then raised its head and flapped its wings vigorously. Although it was unable to speak human language, it was able to answer in a gestural way, guessing its mood based on its expression.

古文：万物变化，固亡休息。斡流而迁，或推而还。
现代文：它的意思说：世间万种物种循环变化万千，原本就没有止境停息，旋转流动，推移变化，有时运转而消失，有时推移而回还。
English: It means that all kinds of species in the world go through thousands of cycles of change. Originally, there was no stopping, no rotation, no flow, no change. Sometimes they move and disappear, sometimes they move and return.

古文：形气转续，变化而嬗。
现代文：形和气的转化连续而不断，变化无穷无尽，有如蝉之蜕化。
English: The transformation of form and qi is continuous and unceasing, the changes are endless, like the transmutation of cicadas.

古文：沕穆亡间，胡可胜言！
现代文：精大深奥微妙之处说也说不完，简直就是无法用语言表达。
English: There is no end to the exquisite subtleties of it, it's almost impossible to put into words.

古文：祸兮福所倚，福兮祸所伏；忧喜聚门，吉凶同域。
现代文：祸中含有福因，福中隐藏着祸根，祸福彼此相因相随，往往会因祸生福，福中藏祸。忧喜同聚在同一家之门，吉凶共在同一个地域。
English: Misfortune contains blessing, blessing hides the root of misfortune. Misfortune and blessing go hand in hand. Misfortune often leads to blessing, and blessing hides misfortune. Sorrow and joy gather at the door of the same family, and good luck and bad luck are in the same region.

古文：彼吴强大，夫差以败；粤栖会稽，句践伯世。
现代文：李斯成功地游说秦国，做了秦国丞相，后被赵高所害，竟然身受五刑而死。
English: Li Si successfully lobbied the State of Qin, became the Prime Minister of Qin, and was later victimized by Zhao Gao, to the extent that he was sentenced to five years in prison and died.

古文：斯游遂成，卒被五刑；傅说胥靡，乃相武丁。
现代文：傅说原是一名一个接一个捆在一起服劳役的囚徒，而最后却位居殷高宗武丁的丞相。
English: Fu said that he used to be a prisoner who was tied up one after another for forced labor, but eventually he became a chancellor of the Yin Gao Sect.

古文：夫祸之与福，何异纠纆！
现代文：所以福与祸之间的关系与两三股绳子绞合拧在一起有什么不同呢?
English: So what is the difference between the relationship between fortune and misfortune and two or three strands of rope twisted together?

古文：命不可说，孰知其极？
现代文：天命是无法解说清楚的，谁知道它的终极止境在哪裹!
English: Destiny cannot be explained clearly, and who knows where it will end!

古文：水激则旱，矢激则远。
现代文：水受到激发便迅猛奔流，箭受到激发便能射得很远。
English: Water, when excited, rushes swiftly; arrows, when excited, can be shot very far.

古文：万物回薄，震荡相转。
现代文：万物往返回荡相激，不断变化转化。
English: Everything swings back and forth violently, constantly changing and transforming.

古文：云烝雨降，纠错相纷。
现代文：水受热上蒸为云，云受冷又从天而降为雨，事物的变化自然现象错综复杂无法分清。
English: When water is heated, it evaporates into clouds, and when clouds are cooled, they fall from the sky as rain. The changes in things and natural phenomena are so intricate and complex that they cannot be distinguished.

古文：大钧播物，坱圠无垠。
现代文：自然界形成万物好像用制陶转轮运转造物，变化多端，范围广大无边无际。
English: The natural world forms all things as if using a pottery wheel to run the creation, with many changes, and the scope is vast and endless.

古文：天不可与虑，道不可与谋。
现代文：天和道，其理深远，不可人为思虑谋度。
English: Heaven and earth are far-reaching principles, which cannot be thought out by man.

古文：迟速有命，乌识其时？
现代文：人的寿命长短，生死迟速自有天命，哪能预知它的期限呢!
English: The length of a person's life, and the speed of life and death, are predetermined by fate. How can we predict its duration?

古文：且夫天地为炉，造化为工；阴阳为炭，万物为铜，合散消息，安有常则？
现代文：况且上天与大地就好像是一个冶炼金属的炉子，造化万物的造物主就像是冶金工匠。以阴阳当做冶炼炉中的炭火，自然界中的万物当做被冶炼的铜矿石料。聚灭生息，毁灭生存，这一切怎么会有一定的规律呢?
English: Moreover, heaven and earth are like a furnace for smelting metals, and the Creator of all things is like a metallurgist. Yin and yang are used as the coals in the smelting furnace, and all things in nature are used as the copper ore to be smelted. How can there be a certain pattern to all of this?

古文：千变万化，未始有极。
现代文：自然界万物的千变万化，没有开始也没有终止极限。
English: The ever-changing nature of all things in nature has no beginning and no end limit.

古文：忽然为人，何足控揣；化为异物，又何足患！
现代文：偶然生而成人，也不值得过分地珍爱；死后变为鬼神又何必过分地忧伤!
English: It is not worth treasuring too much to be born by chance and become an adult; nor is it worth grieving too much when you die and turn into a ghost!

古文：小智自私，贱彼贵我；达人大观，物亡不可。
现代文：眼光短浅耍小聪明的人总是自私自利，以他物为贱，以自己为贵。通达的人目光心胸远大，对万物一视同仁没有不适宜的地方。
English: Shallow-sighted and small-minded people are always selfish and self-serving, treating others as inferior and themselves as precious. Clever people are far-sighted, and there is nothing inappropriate about treating all things equally.

古文：贪夫徇财，列士徇名；夸者死权，品庶每生。
现代文：贪婪无厌的人以身殉财，重义轻生之士为名节而死；谋求虚名重视权势的人为争权夺利而死。
English: Those who are greedy and insatiable will sacrifice their lives for wealth, and those who cherish righteousness and despise life will die for fame; those who seek false fame and attach importance to power will die for competition for power and profit.

古文：怵迫之徒，或趋西东；大人不曲，意变齐同。
现代文：平民百姓大多都是贪生怕死。为名利所引诱，为贪财所逼迫的人整天东奔西跑到处钻营。道德修养高深的人不为物欲所屈服，万物再怎么变化都等量齐观一视同仁。
English: Most of the ordinary people are greedy for life and afraid of death. Those who are lured by fame and fortune, and those who are persecuted by greed for money, run around all day long. People with high moral cultivation do not succumb to material desires. No matter how things change, they are all equal.

古文：愚士系俗，僒若囚拘；至人遗物，独与道俱。
现代文：愚笨的人为世俗所累所牵系，其窘迫的形态如同被囚禁的犯人一样。有至高的道德的人，抛弃了身外之物的拖累，惟独与大道共存。
English: Foolish people are burdened and entangled by the mundane, and their form of distress is like that of an imprisoned prisoner. People with the highest morals, abandoning the drag of external things, only coexist with the main road.

古文：众人惑惑，好恶积意；真人恬漠，独与道息。
现代文：人们慌恐疑惑不可终，头脑中聚集了很多可爱和可憎的事物。而得天地之道的真人却十分恬静淡漠，独与大道共存同处。
English: People are panicked and confused, and a lot of lovely and hateful things are gathered in their minds. But the real person who has obtained the way of heaven and earth is very quiet and indifferent, and coexists with the road.

古文：释智遗形，超然自丧；寥廓忽荒，与道翱翔。
现代文：放弃智慧思虑，遗弃形体，做到心如死灰，形如稿木达到人生修养的最高境界。在寥阔恍惚深远的世界中，得天地之道的真人无所依附，惟与大道共翱翔。
English: To abandon wisdom and thought, to abandon the body, to make the heart like ashes and the body like a manuscript, to reach the highest level of cultivation in life. In the vast and far-reaching world, the real man who has gained the way of heaven and earth has nothing to cling to, but soars together with the road.

古文：乘流则逝，得坎则止；纵躯委命，不私与已。
现代文：人生像浮在水上的木头顺水而流漂向远方，衹是在碰到水中小洲才停止。把自己的身躯任凭命运来支配，不把身躯看成是自己私有之物。
English: Life is like a piece of wood floating on the water. It flows along the water and drifts far away. The ripples only stop when they hit a small island in the water. They let their bodies be controlled by fate, and do not regard their bodies as their own private property.

古文：其生兮若浮，其死兮若休。
现代文：活着的时候就好像将自己的生命托附人间，死后就如同永久地安息。
English: When one is alive, it is as if one has entrusted one's life to the world, and when one dies, it is as if one has entered into eternal rest.

古文：澹虖若深渊之靓，泛虖若不系之舟。
现代文：淡泊的人生就像死一般宁静的深渊，而推波助澜的思想波涛就如同没有拴住的航船。
English: A life of indifference is like death, a calm abyss, while the waves of thought that push the waves are like untethered ships.

古文：不以生故自保，养空而浮。
现代文：不应因为生在人世间而过于珍惜自己的生命，最好是养其空虚之性，以浮游于人世之间。
English: One should not cherish one's life too much because one was born in the human world. It is best to nurture one's emptiness so as to float between the worlds.

古文：德人无累，知命不忧。细故蒂芥，何足以疑！
现代文：有修养有德性的人无所牵累，居无思行无虑，不藏是非美恶，因为他们知天命而不会自寻忧愁。像猫头鹰飞入室内这样琐细之事有什么值得疑虑的呢!
English: Cultivated and virtuous people are not affected by anything, they do not think, act, or worry, they do not hide what is right or wrong, because they know the fate of the world and do not seek sorrow. What is there to worry about in such a trivial matter as an owl flying into the room!

古文：后岁余，文帝思谊，征之。
现代文：一年多以后，汉文帝想念贾谊，征召他回京城长安。
English: More than a year later, Emperor Han Wen missed Jia Yi and summoned him back to the capital Chang'an.

古文：至，入见，上方受厘，坐宣室。
现代文：贾谊到了，进入朝廷求见，汉文帝正在承受神灵的降福，坐在宣室裹接见贾谊。
English: When Jia You arrived, he went to the imperial court to ask for an audience. Emperor Hanwen was receiving the blessing of the gods, and he was sitting in the Xuanwu Room to receive Jia You.

古文：上因感鬼神事，而问鬼神之本。
现代文：汉文帝因对鬼神之事有所感触，就向贾谊询问鬼神的原本。
English: Because Emperor Wen was impressed by the ghosts and gods, he asked Jia Yi about the origin of ghosts and gods.

古文：谊具道所以然之故。
现代文：贾谊详细讲述其中的道理。
English: Jia Yi elaborates on the reason for this.

古文：至夜半，文帝前席。
现代文：一直谈到深夜，汉文帝听得不觉移坐到席的前端。
English: All the time talking about late at night, Han Wenti moved imperceptibly to the front of the table.

古文：既罢，曰： 吾久不见贾生，自以为过之，今不及也。 
现代文：谈论完了，汉文帝说： 我很久没看到贾生了，自以为超过他了，今天看来，还比不上他啊。 
English: After the discussion, Han Wenti said, "I haven't seen Jia Sheng for a long time. I thought I was better than him, but now I can't even compare to him."

古文：乃拜谊为梁怀王太傅。
现代文：于是任命贾谊作梁怀王的太傅。
English: So he appointed Jia Yi to be Liang Huai Wang's grand tutor.

古文：怀王，上少子，爱，而好书，故令谊傅之，数问以得失。
现代文：梁怀王，是汉文帝的小儿子，很受宠爱，又喜欢读书，所以叫贾谊作他的老师，他多次向贾谊请教成败得失。
English: Liang Huai Wang, the youngest son of Emperor Hanwen, was very beloved and liked to read, so he called Jia Yi to be his teacher. He repeatedly asked Jia Yi for advice on success and failure.

古文：是时，匈奴强，侵边。
现代文：这一时期，匈奴强盛，常常侵犯汉朝边疆。
English: During this period, the Xiongnu were strong and often encroached on the Han Dynasty border.

古文：天下初定，制度疏阔。
现代文：汉朝刚刚建立，法规制度粗疏而不严明。
English: The Han Dynasty had just been established, and the legal system was crude and unclear.

古文：诸侯王僣拟，地过古制，淮南、济北王皆为逆诛。
现代文：诸侯王超越本身的权力范围，占据的土地超过古代制度的规定，淮南王、济北王都因为谋反而被诛灭。
English: Princely kings overstepped the scope of their authority and occupied land beyond the provisions of the ancient system. King Huainan and King Jibei were both annihilated for plotting rebellion.

古文：谊数上疏陈政事，多所欲匡建，其大略曰：
现代文：贾谊多次上疏陈述政事，他的意见大多是想改变和建立新制度，其大意是：
English: Jia Yiyi has repeatedly made public statements on political affairs, and most of his opinions are to change and establish a new system, to the effect of:

古文：臣窃惟事势，可为痛哭者一，可为流涕者二，可为长太息者六，若其它背理而伤道者，难遍以疏举。
现代文：我私下考虑了当前的国家形势，认为可以为之痛哭的有一件，可以为之流涕的有二件，可以为之长叹的有六件，至于其他违背事理而伤害正道的，难以分条列举。
English: I have privately considered the current national situation, and I think that there is one thing that can be cried for, two things that can be shed for, and six things that can be sighed for. As for other things that violate reason and harm the righteous path, it is difficult to list them in detail.

古文：进言者皆曰天下已安已治矣，臣独以为未也。
现代文：向陛下进言的人都说国家已经安宁已经治理好了，我独自认为国家远未治理好。
English: Those who advise His Majesty say that the country is peaceful and well-governed. I alone think that the country is far from well-governed.

古文：曰安且治者，非愚则谀，皆非事实知治乱之体者也。
现代文：说国家安定并治理好的人，不是愚蠢就是阿谀奉承，都不是从事实出发知道治乱的根本的人。
English: Those who say that the country is stable and well-governed are either stupid or flatterers. They are not people who know the fundamentals of managing turmoil from the facts.

古文：夫抱火厝之积薪之下而寝其上，火未及燃，因谓之安，方今之势，何以异此！
现代文：这如同把火种放在柴堆下而自己睡到上面，柴堆没有被点燃，就说很平安，当前国家的形势，跟这种情况有什么两样呢!
English: This is like putting kindling under a pile of firewood and sleeping on top of it. If the pile is not lit, it is said to be very safe. What is the difference between the current situation of the country and this situation?

古文：本末舛逆，首尾衡决，国制抢攘，非甚有纪，胡可谓治！
现代文：本与末被颠倒了，前后的堤防被破坏了，国家制度混乱，并不是很有纲纪，怎么可以说治理好了呢。
English: The beginning and the end have been reversed, the front and back dikes have been destroyed, the national system is chaotic, and there is not much discipline. How can it be said that governance is good?

古文：陛下何不壹令臣得孰数之于前，因陈治安之策，试详择焉！
现代文：陛下为何不让我在您面前获得机会，来深入细致地陈述国家政治修明、社会安定的策略，试让您来仔细选择。
English: Your Majesty, why don't you give me the opportunity to present to you a strategy for national political reform and social stability, and let you make a careful choice.

古文：夫射猎之娱，与安危之机孰急 使为治，劳智虑，苦身体，乏钟鼓之乐，勿为可也。
现代文：打猎这种娱乐，与掌握国家安危的关键哪一个紧要?如果认为去治理国家就要伤脑筋，苦身体，缺少钟鼓的娱乐，这是不对的。
English: Which is more important, hunting as a form of entertainment, or grasping the key to national security? It would be wrong to think that governing a country requires a lot of mental and physical effort, and lacks the entertainment of bells and drums.

古文：乐与今同，而加之诸侯轨道，兵革不动，民保首领，匈奴宾服，四荒乡风，百姓素朴，狱讼衰息，大数既得，则天下顺治，海内之气清和咸理，生为明帝，没为明神，名誉之美，垂于无穷《礼》祖有功而宗有德，使顾成之庙称为太宗，上配太祖，与汉亡极。
现代文：娱乐与现在一样，再加上诸侯遵守法纪，国家没有战乱，民众得到安定，匈奴表示臣服，边远地区的人归顺朝廷，百姓简朴无华，纠纷诉讼逐步消失。治国的大计掌握了，就能使天下顺治，社会气象清平和谐，都很合理，活在世上就做贤明的帝王，去世了则做明神，美好的名誉，流传千古。《周礼》上说，作为开国的君主要有功，做为继业的君主要有德，使陛下您的帝业功德，上与高祖刘邦相配，并和汉朝统治一起流芳百世。
English: Entertainment is the same as now, plus the princes abide by the law and discipline, the country is not in war, the people are stable, the Xiongnu are submissive, the people in remote areas are obedient to the court, the people are simple and unadorned, and the disputes and lawsuits are gradually disappearing. If the overall plan for governing the country is mastered, it will make the world go smoothly. The social weather is clear and harmonious, it is very reasonable. If you live in the world, you will be a wise emperor, and if you die, you will be a bright god. A wonderful reputation has been passed down for thousands of years. "Zhou Li" said

古文：建久安之势，成长治之业，以承祖庙，以奉六亲，至孝也；以幸天下，以育群生，至仁也；立经陈纪，轻重同得，后可以为万世法程，虽有愚幼不肖之嗣，犹得蒙业而安，至明也。
现代文：建立永久安定的局势，成就长久统治的基业，以此继承祖业，奉养六亲，这是最孝的了；以此造福天下，养育万物，这是最仁的了；确立准则，颁布纲纪，轻重缓急处理得宜，而后可以成为万世的法式，即使有愚笨不成器的后代，还能承受祖业得到安定，这是最英明的了。
English: It is the most filial to establish a permanent and stable situation and achieve a long-term ruling heritage, so as to inherit the ancestral heritage and nurture the six relatives; it is the most benevolent to benefit the world and nurture all things in this way; it is the wisest to establish standards, promulgate rules and regulations, and deal with priorities appropriately, and then it can become the French style for all ages. Even if there are stupid and incompetent descendants, it can withstand the ancestral heritage to be stable.

古文：以陛下之明达，因使少知治体者得佐下风，致此非难也。
现代文：靠陛下这样的英明通达，衹要让稍许懂得治国道理的人在下面辅佐，做到这样不是什么难事。
English: Relying on the wisdom and insight of His Majesty, it is not difficult to have someone who knows a little about the principles of statecraft assist him.

古文：其具可素陈于前，愿幸无忽。
现代文：这些办法可以原原本本摆在您的前面，希望不要忽视。
English: These methods can be put in front of you in their original form, and I hope you will not ignore them.

古文：臣谨稽之天地，验之往古，按之当今之务，日夜念此至孰也，虽使禹、舜复生，为陛下计，亡以易此。
现代文：我谨慎地考察自然和社会，用历史加以验证，研究当前必须解决的事情，日夜思念这套治国安邦的办法已经很成熟了。即使禹、舜再生，为陛下计谋，也不会改变这个办法。
English: I carefully examine nature and society, verify them with history, and study the things that must be solved at present. This method of governing the country and the country has matured. Even if Yu and Zou are reborn and strategize for His Majesty, it will not change this method.

古文：夫树国固必相疑之势，下数被其殃，上数爽其忧，甚非所以安上而全下也。
现代文：诸侯王国的力量强大丫，必然会造成与朝廷互相猜疑对立的局势，民众因此屡次遭受灾祸，朝廷也常为此而忧虑，这实在不是安定朝廷、保全民众的办法。
English: The great power of the princely kingdoms inevitably created a situation of mutual suspicion and opposition with the imperial court. As a result, the people repeatedly suffered disasters, and the imperial court often worried about this. This was really not a way to stabilize the imperial court and protect the people.

古文：今或亲弟谋为东帝，亲兄之子西乡而击，今吴又见告矣。
现代文：如今有你的亲弟图谋在束部地区称帝，亲兄的儿子也向西面进攻朝廷，同时，吴王谋反的事又报上来了。
English: Now your own brother is plotting to become emperor in the Sokube region, your own brother's son is also attacking the imperial court to the west, and at the same time, the matter of King Wu plotting a rebellion has come to light.

古文：天子春秋鼎盛，行义未过，德泽有加焉，犹尚如是，况莫大诸侯，权力且十此者乎！
现代文：陛下正当壮年，行事合乎道义，没有过错，对诸侯王的恩泽又不断增加，他们尚且如此，更何况那些最大的诸侯，权力比他们还要强大十倍呢!
English: Your majesty is of full age, you have behaved honourably and without fault, and your favours to the princes have continued to increase. They are still doing so, not to mention that the greatest princes are ten times more powerful than they are!

古文：然而天下少安，何也？
现代文：然而，天下还稍微安定，这是什么原因呢?
English: However, the world is still somewhat stable. What is the reason for this?

古文：大国之王幼弱未壮，汉之所置傅、相方握其事。
现代文：因为那些大诸侯国的国王还未成年，朝廷派去的太傅、丞相正掌握着王国的大权。
English: Because the kings of those great principalities were still minors, the taifu and chancellor sent by the imperial court were holding the power of the kingdom.

古文：数年之后，诸侯之王大抵皆冠，血气方刚，汉之傅、相称病而赐罢，彼自丞、尉以上偏置私人，如此，有异淮南、济北之为邪！
现代文：几年以后，诸侯王大都加冠成人，精力旺盛，朝廷委派的太傅、丞相则不得不称病免官，那些诸侯王就会把丞尉以上的官员，都安插上自己的亲信，像这样，他们的所作所为与淮南王、济北王有什么不同呢!
English: A few years later, most of the princes were crowned as adults and were full of energy. The taifu and chancellor appointed by the imperial court had to resign due to illness. Those princes would install their cronies as officials above the rank of chancellor. In this way, what is the difference between their behavior and that of the kings of Huainan and Jibei?

古文：此时而欲为治安，虽尧、舜不治。
现代文：到了那时，要想使国家长治久安，即使唐尧虞舜也是办不到的。
English: At that time, even the Tang Dynasty could not keep the country stable for a long time.

古文：黄帝曰： 日中必，操刀必割。 
现代文：黄帝说： 太阳正中时一定要晒东西，拿着刀子就要赶快去切割东西。 
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "When the sun is in the middle of the day, you must expose something to the sun. If you hold a knife, you must quickly cut something."

古文：今令此道顺而全安，甚易，不肯早为，已乃堕骨肉之属而抗刭之，岂有异秦之季世乎！
现代文：现在按照这个道理去做，使国家巩固，民众安全，是很容易的。假如不趁早采取措施，就会伤害骨肉之情，以致要杀他们的头，这难道和秦朝末年还有什么不同吗?
English: It is easy to act in accordance with this principle now to consolidate the country and keep the people safe. If we do not take measures as soon as possible, we will hurt the feelings of the flesh and blood, so that we will kill their heads. Is this any different from the end of the Qin Dynasty?

古文：夫以天子之位，乘今之时，因天之助，尚惮以危为安，以乱为治，假设陛下居齐桓之处，将不合诸侯而匡天下乎？
现代文：现在您凭着天子的权位，趁着当今的有利时机，靠着上天的保佑，还对转危为安、改乱为治的措施有顾虑；假如陛下处于当年齐恒公的地位，还能联合诸侯恢复天下的秩序吗?
English: Now, by virtue of your position as the son of heaven, taking advantage of today's favorable opportunity, relying on the blessing of heaven, you still have concerns about the measures to turn crisis into peace and chaos into order. If your majesty were in the position of Qi Hengguo in those days, could you still unite with the princes to restore order in the world?

古文：臣又知陛下有所必不能矣。
现代文：我知道陛下一定不能这样做。
English: I know that Your Majesty must not do this.

古文：假设天下如曩时，淮阴侯尚王楚，黥布王淮南，彭越王梁，韩信王韩，张敖王赵，贯高为相，卢绾王燕，陈豨在代，令此六七公者皆亡恙，当是时而陛下即天子位，能自安乎？
现代文：假如国家的形势还像从前那样，淮阴侯韩信还统治楚国，黥布统治淮南，彭越统治梁国，韩王信统治韩国，张敖统治赵国，贯高做赵国的相，卢绾统治燕国，陈稀还在代国，假如这六七人都还活着，而这时陛下即天子位，自己能觉得安全吗?
English: If the situation of the country is still the same as before, Huaiyin Hou Hanxin still rules Chu, Zibo rules Huainan, Peng Yue rules Liang, Han Wangxin rules South Korea, Zhang Qian rules Zhao, runs high as Zhao, Lu Qian rules Yan, Chen Xie is still in the country, if these sixty-seven people are still alive, and at this time His Majesty is the Son of Heaven, can you feel safe?

古文：臣有以知陛下之不能也。
现代文：我有理由认为是不能的。
English: I have reason to think not.

古文：天下淆乱，高皇帝与诸公并起，非有仄室之势以豫席之也。
现代文：那时，天下混乱，高皇帝和这些人一同起兵，起初并没有亲族的势力可以依靠。
English: At that time, the world was in chaos, and Emperor Gao and these people raised an army together. At first, there was no relative power to rely on.

古文：诸公幸者，乃为中涓，其次廑得舍人，材之不逮至远也。
现代文：这些人中的幸运者才做了中涓，差一点的衹当舍人，他们的才能比高皇帝差得很远。
English: Only the lucky ones among these people made it to the middle echelon, and those who were close to the top were left behind. Their talents were far from those of Emperor Gao.

古文：高皇帝以明圣威武即天子位，割膏腴之地以王诸公，多者百余城，少者乃三四十县，德至渥也，然其后十年之间，反者九起。
现代文：高皇帝凭着他的圣明威武登上了天子之位，把肥沃的土地分封给这些人做诸侯王，多的有一百多座城池，少的也有三、四十个县，恩德是极深厚的了。可是在以后的十年当中，反叛的事件发生了九起。
English: Emperor Gao ascended to the throne of the Son of Heaven by virtue of his holy wisdom and might, and assigned fertile land to these people as princes. There are more than a hundred cities, and at least thirty or forty counties. The boon is very profound. However, in the next ten years, nine rebellions occurred.

古文：陛下之与诸公，非亲角材而臣之也，又非身封王之也，自高皇帝不能以是一岁为安，故臣知陛下之不能也。
现代文：陛下与这些人的关系，并不是亲自同他们较量过才使他们甘心臣服的，也不是亲自封他们当诸侯王的。在这种情况下，高皇帝也不能得到一年的安宁，所以我知道陛下也是不能得到安宁的。
English: His Majesty's relationship with these people is not one in which he has personally measured himself against them in order to make them submit willingly, nor is it one in which he has personally crowned them as princes and kings. Under these circumstances, Emperor Gao cannot obtain a year's peace, so I know that His Majesty cannot obtain peace either.

古文：然尚有可诿者，曰疏，臣请试言其亲者。
现代文：然而，还有一个可以推托的藉口，说与他们的关系疏远，那就让我说说那些关系亲近的同姓王吧。
English: However, there is another excuse that can be put forward, saying that the relationship with them is distant, so let me talk about those close relationships with the same surname Wang.

古文：假令悼惠王王齐，元王王楚，中子王赵，幽王王淮阳，共王王梁，灵王王燕，厉王王淮南，六七贵人皆亡恙，当是时陛下即位，能为治乎？
现代文：假如悼惠王还在齐国称王，元王还在楚国称王，中子在趟国称王，幽王在淮阳称王，共王在梁国称王，灵王在燕国称王，厉王在淮南称王，假如这六七位贵人都还健在，这时陛下即位为天子，能把国家治理好吗?
English: If King Miao Hui still reigns in the State of Qi, King Yuan still reigns in the State of Chu, King Zhongzi still reigns in the State of Tong, King You still reigns in the State of Huaiyang, King Gong still reigns in the State of Liang, King Ling still reigns in the State of Yan, and King Li still reigns in the State of Huainan, if these sixty-seven noblemen are still alive, when His Majesty ascends the throne as the Son of Heaven, can He govern the country well?

古文：臣又知陛下之不能也。
现代文：我又知道陛下是不能的。
English: I also know that Your Majesty can't.

古文：若此诸王，虽名为臣，实皆有布衣昆弟之心，虑亡不帝制而天子自为者。
现代文：这些同姓诸侯王，虽然名义上是臣子，实际上都认为自己和皇帝是一般的兄弟关系，他们没有一个不想采用皇帝的礼仪制度让自己做皇帝的。
English: These princes and princes with the same surname, although nominally they were courtiers, in fact they all considered themselves to have a normal brotherly relationship with the emperor. There was not one of them who did not want to adopt the emperor's etiquette system to make himself emperor.

古文：擅爵人，赦死罪，甚者或戴黄屋，汉法令非行也。
现代文：他们擅自封爵，赦免死罪的人，甚至有人乘坐皇帝专用的黄绸车盖的车，汉朝的法令在那裹不能推行。
English: They arbitrarily knighted people, pardoned those sentenced to death, and even allowed some people to ride in the emperor's special yellow silk covered car. The Han Dynasty's decrees could not be enforced there.

古文：虽行不轨如厉王者，令之不肯听，召之安可致乎！
现代文：即使能推行，对于图谋不轨如厉王那样的人，命令他都不肯听从，召见他又怎么会来呢?
English: Even if it were possible, how could he come when he was summoned, when he would not listen to the orders of someone who was plotting evil, such as King Li?

古文：幸而来至，法安可得加！
现代文：侥幸来了，法律又怎么能施加到他的身上去呢?
English: How could the law be imposed on him when it was a fluke?

古文：动一亲戚，天下圜视而起，陛下之臣虽有悍如冯敬者，适启其口，匕首已陷其匈矣。
现代文：如果制裁了一个亲戚，天下的诸侯王就会瞪着眼起来反抗。陛下的臣子当中虽然有冯敬那样勇敢的人，但刚要开口告发诸侯王，刺客的匕首就已经刺进他的胸膛了。
English: If you sanction a relative, the princes of the world will stare and resist. Although there is a brave man like Feng Jing among the courtiers of His Majesty, the assassin's dagger has already pierced his chest just as he was about to open his mouth to denounce the princes.

古文：陛下虽贤，谁与领此？
现代文：陛下虽然英明，但谁能辅佐您来一起治理这些诸侯王呢?
English: Your Majesty, although you are wise, who can help you to govern these princes?

古文：故疏者必危，亲者必乱，已然之效也。
现代文：所以说关系疏远的异姓王必然危害国家，关系亲近的同姓王也一定会反叛，这已经被事实证明了。
English: Therefore, it has been proved by facts that a king with a different surname who is distantly related will inevitably harm the country, and a king with the same surname who is closely related will certainly rebel.

古文：其异姓负强而动者，汉已幸胜之矣，又不易其所以然。
现代文：那些自恃实力强大而反叛的异姓诸侯王，汉朝已经幸运地战胜他们了，可是并没有改变造成混乱的原因。
English: The Han Dynasty has fortunately defeated those who claimed to be powerful and rebelled, but it did not change the cause of the chaos.

古文：同姓袭是迹而动，既有征矣，其势尽又复然。
现代文：同姓诸侯王又沿着这条老路发动叛乱，已经有征兆了，这种局势又完全和过去一样。
English: There are already signs that the princes of the same name are again launching a rebellion along this old road, and this situation is exactly the same as in the past.

古文：殃祸之变，未知后移，明帝处之尚不能以安，后世将如之何！
现代文：灾祸的变化，还不知要演变到什么地方。像您这样英明的皇帝处在这种情况下，尚且不能使国家安宁，后世的人又将怎么办呢!
English: What will future generations do when a wise emperor like you is in such a situation and is unable to pacify the country?

古文：屠牛坦一朝解十二牛，而芒刃不顿者，所排击剥割，皆众理解也。
现代文：屠牛坦一个早晨宰十二头牛，可是锋利的刀刃没有变钝，这是因为他拍击剥割的地方都在肌肉和骨头的缝隙之间。
English: A butcher slaughters a dozen cows in one morning, but his razor-sharp blade does not blunt, because he hits the cut between the muscle and the bone.

古文：至于髋髀之所，非斤则斧。
现代文：至于对付大腿骨的地方，不是用砍刀就是用斧头。
English: As for the thigh bone, it can be treated with either a machete or an axe.

古文：夫仁义恩厚，人主之芒刃也；权势法制，人主之斤斧也。
现代文：仁义恩厚好比皂上的利刃，权势和法制好比皇卜的砍刀和斧子。
English: Righteousness and benevolence are like sharp blades on a bar of soap, while power and the rule of law are like the king's machete and axe.

古文：今诸侯王皆众髋髀也，释斤斧之用，而欲婴以芒刃，臣以为不缺则折。
现代文：如今诸侯王都像一些大腿骨，对他们不用砍刀斧子，而想用利刃去切割，我认为不是碰出缺口就是被折断。
English: Now princes are like thigh-bones, for which you do not need a chopping-knife or an axe, but if you try to cut them with a sharp blade, I think you will either make a hole or break them.

古文：胡不用之淮南、济北？
现代文：为什么不用仁义厚恩去对待淮南王、济北王呢?
English: Why not treat King Huainan and King Jibei with benevolence and kindness?

古文：势不可也。
现代文：因为形势不允许了。
English: Because the situation does not allow it.

古文：臣窃迹前事，大抵强者先反。
现代文：我私下考察以前发生的事情，大都是势力强大的诸侯王先反叛。
English: I privately examined what had happened before, most of which were rebellions of powerful princes.

古文：淮阴王楚最强，则最先反；韩信倚胡，则又反；贯高因赵资，则又反；陈豨兵精，则又反；彭越用梁，则又反；黥布用淮南，则又反；卢绾最弱，最后反。
现代文：淮阴侯韩信称王于楚，势力最强，就最先反叛；韩王信依靠匈奴的势力，继续反叛；贯高依靠趟国的优越条件，又反叛；陈稀军队精悍，又反叛；彭越利用梁国的力量，又反叛；黥布依靠淮南的力量，又反叛；卢绾势力最弱，最后一个反叛。
English: Huaiyin Prince Han Xin said that Wang Yu Chu had the strongest power and was the first to rebel; Han Wang Xin relied on the power of the Xiongnu and continued to rebel; Guan Gao relied on the superior conditions of Tang and rebelled again; Chen Xi's army was powerful and rebelled again; Peng Yue used the power of Liang and rebelled again; Zibo relied on the power of Huainan and rebelled again; Lu Wei had the weakest power and was the last to rebel.

古文：长沙乃在二万五千户耳，功少而最完，势疏而最忠，非独性异人也，亦形势然也。
现代文：长沙王的封地内人口才二万五千户，功劳小但保存得最完善，势力弱而对朝廷最忠诚，这不是由于性格独特与其他诸侯王不同，而是形势使他这样的。
English: Changsha King's fiefdom had a population of only twenty-five thousand households. He had little merit but was the best preserved. He was weak and most loyal to the imperial court. This was not due to his unique character, which was different from that of other princes, but the situation made him like this.

古文：曩令樊、郦、绛、灌据数十城而王，今虽以残亡可也；令信、越之伦列为彻侯而居，虽至今存可也。
现代文：如果从前把樊啥、郦商、周勃、灌婴等人封为占据几十个城池的诸侯王，即使现在他们的势力已经削弱了，也是不可以的。如果让韩信、彭越这些人衹居于彻侯地位，即使现在还存在，也是可以的。
English: If, in the past, people such as Zou Wei, Zou Shang, Zhou Bo, and Gan Ying Rong were appointed as princes who occupied dozens of cities, even if their power has been weakened, it is not allowed. If these people, Han Xin and Peng Yue, are allowed to live in the position of princes, even if they still exist, it is also possible.

古文：然则天下之大计可知已。
现代文：既然这样，治理国家的大计就可以知道了。
English: This being the case, the overall plan for governing the country can be known.

古文：欲诸王之皆忠附，则莫若令如长沙王；欲臣子之勿菹醢，则莫若令如樊、郦等；欲天下之治安，莫若众建诸侯而少其力。
现代文：要想使诸侯王都忠心归附朝廷，那么最好让他们像长沙王那样地小力弱；要想使臣子不至于被剁成肉酱，那么最好让他们像樊啥、郦商等人那样衹封侯不封王；要想使国家长治久安，最好多多建立诸侯小国，缩小他们的势力。
English: If you want the princes to be loyal to the imperial court, then it is best to make them as weak as the king of Changsha; if you want the courtiers not to be turned into meat sauce, then it is best to make them like the merchants; if you want the country to enjoy long-term peace, it is best to establish more and more small states and reduce their power.

古文：力少则易使以义，国小则亡邪心。
现代文：势力小了，就容易用法令来调遣他们；封国小了，就不会有谋反的邪心。
English: When their power is small, it is easy to use laws and regulations to manipulate them; when their power is small, they will not have the evil intention to rebel.

古文：令海内之势如身之使臂，臂之使指，莫不制从，诸侯之君不敢有异心，辐凑并进而归命天子，虽在细民，且知其安，故天下咸知陛下之明。
现代文：倘使全国的形势如同身体指挥胳膊，胳膊指挥手指一样，没有不服从的。诸侯王不敢抱有二心，就像车轮的辐条聚集向车轴那样，都听命于皇帝。即使平民百姓也会感到国家安定，因此天下人都知道陛下的英明。
English: If the situation of the whole country is like that of the body commanding the arm, and the arm commanding the fingers, there will be no disobedience. Princes and kings dare not be double-minded, just as the spokes of the wheel are gathered to the axle, they all obey the emperor. Even the common people will feel that the country is stable, so everyone in the world knows His Majesty's wisdom.

古文：割地定制，令齐、赵、楚各为若干国，使悼惠王、幽王、元王之子孙毕以次各受祖之分地，地尽而止，及燕、梁它国皆然。
现代文：分割土地，定下制度，使齐、趟、楚等几个大诸侯国分成若干小国，使悼惠王、幽王、元王的子孙，都按长幼次序承受祖先的一份封地，一直到分完为止。至于燕、梁等其他诸侯国也都这样做。
English: The land was divided, and a system was set up to divide several large vassal states, such as Qi, Wati, and Chu, into several small states, so that the descendants of King Hui, King Yu, and King Yuan would all inherit one ancestor's fief in the order of eldest to youngest until the division was complete. As for other vassal states such as Yan and Liang, they also did the same.

古文：其分地众而子孙少者，建以为国，空而置之，须其子孙生者，举使君之。
现代文：那些封地多子孙少的诸侯国也划分成若干小国，可以暂时空着王位，等他们有了子孙，全部让他们去做诸侯国君。
English: Those vassal states with many fiefs and few descendants were also divided into a number of small states. They could temporarily vacate the throne until they had descendants, and let them all become vassal kings.

古文：诸侯之地其削颇入汉者，为徙其侯国及封其子孙也，所以数偿之；一寸之地，一人之众，天子亡所利焉，诚以定治而已，故天下咸知陛下之廉。
现代文：对于诸侯王的土地被大量削减而收归朝廷的，就迁移他的封地和封他的子孙到其他地方去，按原来的土地数还给他。一寸土地，一个百姓，皇帝都不想占有他们的，实在是为了国家的安定罢了。因此，天下之人都知道陛下的廉洁了。
English: As for the land of the princes, which was greatly reduced and returned to the imperial court, he transferred his fiefs and fenced his descendants to other places and returned them to him according to the original number of lands. One inch of land, one people, the emperor does not want to occupy them, it is really just for the stability of the country. Therefore, people all over the world know His Majesty's integrity.

古文：地制壹定，宗室子孙莫虑不王，下无倍畔之心，上无诛伐之志，故天下咸知陛下之仁。
现代文：分割土地的制度一确定，宗室子孙没有谁会担心做不到王，诸侯王没有背叛之心，皇上也就没有讨伐的念头，因此，天下人都知道陛下的仁爱了。
English: As soon as the system of dividing land was established, none of the descendants of the imperial family would be worried about not being able to become king, the princes and kings did not have the heart of betrayal, and the emperor did not have the idea of fighting. Therefore, everyone in the world knew His Majesty's benevolence.

古文：法立而不犯，令和而不逆，贯高、利几之谋不生，柴奇、开章之计不萌，细民乡善，大臣致顺，故天下咸知陛下之义。
现代文：法制建立而没有人触犯，政令推行而没有人违抗。像贯高、利几之类的阴谋不会发生，柴奇、开章那样的诡计也不会出现，百姓都趋向善良，大臣都表示顺从，因此，天下人都知道皇上的正义了。
English: The legal system was established without anyone violating it, and the government decrees were implemented without anyone defying them. Schemes such as Guan Gao and Lijia would not occur, and tricks such as Zaichi and Kaizhang would not appear. The people all tended to be kind, and the ministers all showed obedience. As a result, everyone in the world knew the emperor's justice.

古文：卧赤子天下之上而安，植遗腹，朝委裘，而天下不乱，当时大治，后世诵圣。
现代文：这样，即使让幼儿当皇帝，国家也是安宁的；即使立遣腹子为皇帝，让臣下朝拜先帝遣留下来的衣物，天下也不会混乱。这样，当代能大治，后代也会称颂陛下的圣明。
English: In this way, even if a toddler were made emperor, the country would be at peace; even if a pauper were made emperor and his subjects bowed down before the clothes left behind by the previous emperor, there would be no chaos in the world. In this way, the present generation would be able to govern well, and future generations would praise His Majesty's holiness.

古文：壹动而五业附，陛下谁惮而久不为此？
现代文：实行这一措施，就能建树这样五项功业，陛下还顾虑什么而迟迟不这样做呢？
English: By taking this measure, you will be able to accomplish these five tasks. What is your majesty's reason for delaying this?

古文：天下之势方病大瘇。
现代文：目前，天下的形势好像一个人正患着脚肿病一样。
English: At present, the situation in the world is as if a person is suffering from swollen feet.

古文：一胫之大几如要，一指之大几如股，平居不可屈信，一二指搐，身虑亡聊。
现代文：一条小腿肿得差不多跟腰一样粗，一个脚趾头肿得差不多像大腿一样粗。平时不能屈伸，一两个脚趾抽动，全身都感到疼痛难忍。
English: A calf swelled up to be almost as thick as my waist, and a toe swelled up to be almost as thick as my thigh. Normally, I can't bend over, one or two toes twitch, and my whole body feels unbearable pain.

古文：失今不治，必为锢疾，后虽有扁鹊，不能为已。
现代文：如果现在不及时治疗，必然成为难治之症，以后即使有扁鹊也无能为力了。
English: If it is not treated in time, it will inevitably become an intractable disease. In the future, there will be nothing that can be done even if there are tonsils.

古文：病非徒瘇也，又苦炙盭。
现代文：况且患的不仅仅是脚肿病，而且还苦于脚掌扭折。
English: What's more, it's not just swollen feet that he suffers from, but he also suffers from a sprained foot.

古文：元王之子，帝之从弟也；今之王者，从弟之子也。
现代文：元王的儿子是陛下的堂弟；现在当楚王的是陛下堂弟的儿子。
English: The son of the former king was the cousin of His Majesty; the son of His Majesty's cousin is now the king of Chu.

古文：惠王，亲兄子也；今之王者，兄子之子也。
现代文：惠王的儿子是陛下亲哥哥的儿子，现在做齐王的是陛下哥哥的孙子。
English: King Hui's son was the son of His Majesty's own brother, and King Qi is now the grandson of His Majesty's brother.

古文：亲者或亡分地以安天下，疏者或制大权以逼天子，臣故曰非徒病瘇也，又苦炙盭。
现代文：现在，陛下近亲当中有的还没有封地来保持天下的安定局面，而疏远的人有的执掌着大权来威胁皇上。所以，我说不但患脚肿病，同时还苦于脚掌扭折。
English: Now, some of His Majesty's close relatives do not have fiefdoms to maintain the stability of the world, and some estranged people hold great power to threaten the Emperor. Therefore, I say that I not only suffer from swollen feet, but also suffer from foot sprains.

古文：可痛哭者，此病是也。
现代文：可以为之痛哭的，就是这种病啊。
English: It's the kind of illness that makes you cry.

古文：天下之势方倒县。
现代文：现在，天下的形势正好上下颠倒。
English: Right now, the world is upside down.

古文：凡天子者，天下之首，何也？
现代文：天子是天下的头，为什么呢?
English: The Son of God is the head of the world. Why?

古文：上也。
现代文：因为在上面。
English: Because it's up there.

古文：蛮夷者，天下之足，何也？
现代文：蛮夷是天下的脚，为什么呢?
English: Barbarians are the scum of the earth. Why?

古文：下也。
现代文：因为在下面。
English: Because it's down there.

古文：今匈奴嫚侮侵掠，至不敬也，为天下患，至亡已也，而汉岁致金絮采缯以奉之。
现代文：现在匈奴对汉朝肆意侮辱，侵扰掠夺，不敬到了极点，成为天下的祸害，没有止境，而汉王朝每年却还向它赠送大量的金钱、丝绵和各种彩色的丝织品。
English: Nowadays, the Huns have been insulting, harassing, plundering and disrespecting the Han Dynasty to the extreme, becoming the scourge of the world without end, while the Han Dynasty still presents it with a large amount of money, silk and various colored silk products every year.

古文：夷狄征令，是主上之操也；天子共贡，是臣下之礼也。
现代文：匈奴对汉朝发号施令，掌的是皇上的权柄；皇上向匈奴纳贡，行的是臣下的礼节。
English: The Hun issued orders to the Han Dynasty, and the emperor's authority was in his hands; the emperor paid tribute to the Hun, and the courtesies of his subjects were performed.

古文：足反居上，首顾居下，倒县如此，莫之能解，犹为国有人乎？
现代文：现在脚反而到上面，头反而在下面，如此颠倒，不能解救，还能说有治国的人才吗?
English: Now, instead, the feet are above and the head is below, so upside down that there is no escape. Can it still be said that there are people capable of governing the country?

古文：非亶倒县而已，又类辟，且病痱。
现代文：不但上下颠倒而已，又像得了足病，还患了风病。
English: Not only was it upside down, it looked like he had a foot disease, and he also suffered from rheumatism.

古文：夫辟者一面病，痱者一方痛。
现代文：足病衹是局部性的病，风病则是一大片地方疼痛。
English: Athlete's foot is a localized disease, and rheumatism is a large area of local pain.

古文：今西边北边之郡，虽有长爵不轻得复，五尺以上不轻得息，斥候望烽燧不得卧，将吏被介胄而睡，臣故曰一方病矣。
现代文：现在在西部边境上，即使爵位很高的人也不能轻易免除兵役，儿童以上的人都因为战备而得不到休息，哨兵日夜了望烽火不得安睡，将官都披戴着铛甲睡觉。所以我说这是一方得了病。
English: Now, on the western border, even those with high ranks cannot easily be exempted from military service, people older than children cannot rest because of combat readiness, sentries cannot sleep peacefully day and night watching the bonfires, and generals are sleeping wearing armor. So I say that this is a party that has fallen ill.

古文：医能治之，而上不使，可为流涕者此也。
现代文：这种病，医生能够治疗，但皇上没有让他治。可以为之流泪的，就是这件事啊。
English: This is a disease that doctors can treat, but the emperor did not allow him to be cured. It is this matter that can shed tears for it.

古文：陛下何忍以帝皇之号为戎人诸侯，势既卑辱，而祸不息，长此安穷！
现代文：陛下怎能忍受以堂堂的皇帝的称号去作匈奴的诸侯，地位既卑下屈辱，又祸患无穷，长此下去，哪有穷尽?
English: How can His Majesty bear to be the prince of the Huns with the grand title of emperor, a position that is both lowly and humiliating, and the disasters are endless. If this continues, how can there be an end?

古文：进谋者率以为是，固不可解也，亡具甚矣。
现代文：出谋献策的人都认为这样做是对的，这实在让人不可理解，这些人简直无能到了极点。
English: It is incomprehensible that the people who came up with the idea thought it was the right thing to do, they are incompetent to the core.

古文：臣窃料匈奴之众不过汉一大县，以天下之大困于一县之众，甚为执事者羞之。
现代文：我私下估计匈奴的人口衹不过是汉朝的一个大县，以这么大的天下，而受困于衹相当于一县人口的匈奴，我真为执政的大臣们羞愧。
English: Privately, I estimate that the population of Xiongnu is no more than a large county in the Han Dynasty. With such a large world, and trapped in Xiongnu, which is equivalent to the population of a county, I am really ashamed of the ruling ministers.

古文：陛下何不试以臣为属国之官以主匈奴？
现代文：陛下为什么不任命我为属国之官去掌管匈奴呢?
English: Why doesn't your majesty appoint me as a vassal to rule the Huns?

古文：行臣之计，请必系单于之颈而制其命，伏中行说而笞其背，举匈奴之众唯上之令。
现代文：实行我的计策，必定可以捉住单于，掌握他的生死命运，制服中行说而鞭打他的脊背，使整个匈奴都听从陛下的命令。
English: If I carry out my plan, I will surely be able to capture Xiang Yu, grasp his fate of life and death, speak to him in uniform and whip his back, and make the entire Xiongnu obey His Majesty's orders.

古文：今不猎猛敌而猎田彘，不搏反寇而搏畜菟，玩细娱而不图大患，非所以为安也。
现代文：现在不去打击凶猛的敌人而去打野猪，不捕捉叛臣而去捕捉兔子，贪图娱乐而不考虑解除国家的大祸患，这不是使天下安定的做法啊。
English: It is not the way to make the world stable to fight wild boars instead of fighting ferocious enemies, to catch rabbits instead of traitors, and to indulge in entertainment without considering how to solve the country's big problems.

古文：德可远施，威可远加，而直数百里外威令不信，可为流涕者此也。
现代文：皇上的恩德本来可以施行到很远的地方，而现在仅仅在数百里以内就行不通了。可以为之流泪的，就是这件事啊。
English: The emperor's benevolence could have been carried out far away, but now it can't be done within just a few hundred miles. This is the thing that we can shed tears for.

古文：今民卖僮者，为之绣衣丝履偏诸缘，内之闲中，是古天子后服，所以庙而不宴者也，而庶人得以衣婢妾。
现代文：现在民间贩卖奴婢的人，给奴婢穿上镶了花边的绣花衣和丝鞋，圈在木栅栏内，这些奴婢穿的都是古代皇后的服饰，而且皇后平时不穿，也衹是在祭祀时穿，而现在一般人却用来给婢妾穿了。
English: Nowadays, people who sell slaves and maids dress them in laced embroidered clothes and silk shoes, and put them inside the wooden fence. These slaves and maids are dressed in the ancient queen's clothing, and the queen does not wear it at ordinary times, but also wears it during sacrifices, but now ordinary people use it to dress their maids and concubines.

古文：白縠之表，薄纫之里，緁以偏诸，美者黼绣，是古天子之服，今富人大贾嘉会召客者以被墙。
现代文：用白色绉纱做面子，细薄熟绢做衬裹，又镶上花边，更漂亮的还绣上花纹，这是古代帝王的服饰，现在富商大买在宴会上招待客人时，却用来挂在墙壁上。
English: With white satin for the face, thin ruffles for the lining, and lace, and even more beautiful embroidered patterns, these are the costumes of ancient emperors, but now they are used to hang on the walls when rich businessmen invite guests to banquets.

古文：古者以奉一帝一后而节适，今庶人屋壁得为帝服，倡优下贱得为后饰，然而天下不屈者，殆未有也。
现代文：古代这些服饰衹用来侍奉一帝一后，是节制、适宜的。现在一般人的屋壁挂上了皇帝的服饰，下贱的倡优也用皇后的服饰，这样天下财力不枯竭，恐怕是不会有的吧。
English: In ancient times, these costumes were used to serve one emperor and one empress, which was restrained and appropriate. Now, ordinary people's roofs are hung with the emperor's clothing, and the lowly and privileged also use the queen's clothing, so that the world's financial resources are not exhausted, I'm afraid it will not exist.

古文：且帝之身自衣皂绨，而富民墙屋被文绣；天子之后以缘其领，庶人孽妾缘其履：此臣所谓舛也。
现代文：况且皇帝自己穿的是黑色粗厚的丝织品，而富民的墙壁上披挂着华丽的刺绣；皇后用来镶衣领的花边，一般人的婢妾却用来镶在鞋口上，造就是我所讲的错乱的事。
English: Moreover, the emperor himself wore thick black silk, while the rich people's walls were covered with ornate embroidery; the empress used lace to make collars, but the common people's maidservants and concubines used it to make shoe laces. This is the disorder I am talking about.

古文：夫百人作之不能衣一人，欲天下亡寒，胡可得也？
现代文：一百个人做衣，不能满足一人穿，要想使天下之人不受冻，怎么可能做到呢?
English: One hundred people can make clothes, but one person can't wear them. If you want to keep everyone in the world from freezing, how can you do it?

古文：一人耕之，十人聚而食之，欲天下亡饥，不可得也。
现代文：一个人种地收获的粮食，十个人聚集起来吃它，要想使天下之人不挨饿，是不可能做到的。
English: If ten people gather to eat the grain harvested by one person, it is impossible to prevent people around the world from starving.

古文：饥寒切于民之肌肤，欲其亡为奸邪，不可得也。
现代文：饥饿寒冷关系到人的身体，要想使他们不做奸邪的事，也是不可能的。
English: Hunger and cold affect the human body, and it is impossible to keep them from committing evil.

古文：国已屈矣，盗贼直须时耳，然而献计者曰 毋动为大 耳。
现代文：国家的财力已经枯竭了，盗贼兴起衹是需要时间罢了。然而献计的人却说： 不变动为上策。 
English: The financial resources of the state have been exhausted, and it will only take time for thieves to rise up. However, the contributors say: No change is the best policy.

古文：夫俗至大不敬也，至亡等也，至冒上也，进计者犹曰 毋为 ，可为长太息者此也。
现代文：社会风气已经到了对长上极不尊敬的地步，简直是没有尊卑等级，简直是冒犯皇上，而献计的人却说：不要去改变这种状况。 可以为之深深叹息的，就是这样的事啊。
English: The social climate has reached a point of extreme disrespect for superiors and superiors, there is simply no hierarchy of superiority and inferiority, it is simply an offense to the emperor, and those who offer solutions say: do not change this situation.

古文：商君遗礼义，弃仁恩，并心于进取，行之二岁，秦俗日败。
现代文：商君抛弃礼义，舍弃仁恩，一心一意变法圆强，他的变法主张推行了两年，秦朝的风俗渐渐衰败。
English: The merchant abandoned propriety, renounced benevolence, and single-mindedly changed the law to make it more perfect. His change of law was carried out for two years, and the customs of the Qin Dynasty gradually declined.

古文：故秦人家富子壮则出分，家贫子壮则出赘。
现代文：所以秦朝人家庭富裕儿子成年了就分家，家庭贫寒儿子成年了就到女方家去成婚。
English: Therefore, during the Qin Dynasty, when the rich son of a family became an adult, the family split up, and when the poor son of a family became an adult, he went to the woman's house to get married.

古文：借父耰锄，虑有德色；毋取箕帚，立而谇语。
现代文：借给父亲农具，就流露出恩赐的脸色；母亲取用一下畚箕和扫帚，立即遭到责骂。
English: Lending farm tools to his father, he showed a face of blessing; his mother was scolded as soon as she took a plough and broom.

古文：抱哺其子，与公并倨；妇姑不相说，则反唇而相稽。其慈子耆利，不同禽兽者亡几耳。
现代文：儿媳抱着孩子喂奶，与公公一同伸开腿坐着；婆媳之间一不高兴，就顶嘴吵架：他们宠爱儿子贪图利益，不同禽兽的地方没有多少了。
English: The daughter-in-law cradles the baby and breastfeeds, sitting with the father-in-law with her legs stretched out; when the mother-in-law and daughter-in-law are not happy, they quarrel: they love their son and are greedy for profit, and there are not many places for different animals.

古文：然并心而赴时，犹曰蹶六国，兼天下。
现代文：然而商君顺应时势一心进取，还可以说是为了挫败六国，统一天下。
English: However, the merchant followed the trend of the times and forge ahead single-mindedly, which can also be said to defeat the six countries and unify them.

古文：功成求得矣，终不知反廉愧之节，仁义之厚。
现代文：功成名就了，最终不知道违背了廉耻羞愧的节操，违背了仁义的厚德。
English: Achievement and fame are enough. In the end, they do not know that they have violated the integrity of shamelessness and shame, and the virtue of benevolence and righteousness.

古文：信并兼之法，遂进取之业，天下大败；众掩寡，智欺愚，勇威怯，壮陵衰，其乱至矣。
现代文：推行兼并的办法，成就了进取的事业，却败坏了天下。势力大的压倒势力小的，聪明的欺侮愚笨的，勇猛的威吓胆怯的，强壮的欺凌衰弱的，真是乱到了极点。
English: The method of promoting mergers has achieved an enterprising cause, but it has corrupted the whole world. The powerful overwhelm the less powerful, the clever bully the stupid, the brave intimidate the timid, the strong bully the weak, it is really chaotic to the extreme.

古文：是以大贤起之，威震海内，德从天下。
现代文：因此大贤汉高祖刘邦出来扶持天下的危乱，声威震荡四海，恩德遍布天下。
English: Therefore, the great sage and ancestor Liu Bang came out to support the world's crisis, the sound of his voice shook the four seas, and benevolence spread all over the world.

古文：曩之为秦者，今转而为汉矣。
现代文：过去是秦朝的天下，如今转为汉朝的天下了。
English: In the past, it was the world of the Qin Dynasty, but now it is the world of the Han Dynasty.

古文：然其遗风余俗，犹尚未改。
现代文：但是秦朝遗留下来的风俗习惯，还没有改变。
English: However, the customs and habits left over from the Qin Dynasty have not changed.

古文：今世以侈靡相竞，而上亡制度，弃礼谊，捐廉耻，日甚，可谓月异而岁不同矣。
现代文：当今社会上人们都竞相追求奢侈豪华，而上面又没有建立制度，这种抛弃礼义，槟弃廉耻的风气一天比一天厉害，可以说足每年每月都不一样了。
English: In today's society, people are competing to pursue luxury and luxury, and there is no established system above. This abandonment of courtesy and decency is becoming more and more severe every day, and it can be said that it is different every month.

古文：逐利不耳，虑非顾行也，今其甚者杀父兄矣。
现代文：衹注重追逐名利，而不顾行为的好坏，到了今天，严重的发展到杀害自己的父亲兄弟了。
English: Focusing on the pursuit of fame and fortune, regardless of good or bad behavior, to this day, serious development to the killing of his father and brother.

古文：盗者剟寝户之帘，搴两庙之器，白昼大都之中剽吏而夺之金。
现代文：盗贼割取皇帝宗庙后室的门帘，拿起汉高祖、汉惠帝两庙的祭器，白天在大都城中抢夺官吏的钱财。
English: Thieves cut the door curtain of the back room of the emperor's ancestral temple, picked up the sacrificial vessels of the two temples of Han Gaozu and Han Hui, and robbed officials of money and wealth in the daytime in the capital city.

古文：矫伪者出几十万石粟，赋六百余万钱，乘传而行郡国，此其亡行义之尤至者也。
现代文：作伪的人骗出近十万石粮食，征收六百多万钱财，乘坐官车周游郡国，这真是没有道义到了极点。
English: The fraudsters swindled nearly 100,000 koku of grain, collected more than six million money, and traveled around the county by official car. This is really immoral to the extreme.

古文：而大臣特以簿书不报，期会之间，以为大故。
现代文：而大臣衹把不上报公文和期会的中断当作大事。
English: However, the minister regarded the failure to report the official document and the interruption of the regular meeting as a major event.

古文：至于俗流失，世坏败，因恬而不知怪，虑不动于耳目，以为是适然耳。
现代文：至于社会风俗的败坏，却安然处之不以为怪，无动于衷，以为是理所当然的事。
English: As for the corruption of social customs, they do not find it strange, are indifferent, and take it for granted.

古文：夫移风易俗，使天下回心而乡道，类非俗吏之所能为也。
现代文：移风易俗，使天下人心归向正道，这些不是平庸的官吏所能做到的。
English: It can be seen that it is probably not possible for a vulgar official to change the culture and customs and make the people of the world change their minds and turn to the right path.

古文：俗吏之所务，在于刀笔筐箧，而不知大体。
现代文：平庸的官吏所能干的，衹在于写写公文，收收钱财，不懂得治国的根本。
English: What mediocre officials can do is to write official documents, collect money, and do not understand the fundamentals of governing the country.

古文：陛下又不自忧，窃为陛下惜之。
现代文：陛下您又不为此忧虑，我私下为陛下惋惜。
English: Your Majesty, you don't worry about it. I feel sorry for your Majesty in private.

古文：夫立君臣，等上下，使父子有礼，六亲有纪，此非天之所为，人之所设也。
现代文：确立君臣上下之间的等级关系，使父子之间有礼可遵，六亲之间有法度可循，这不是上天所为，而是人们设立的。
English: It was not God who established the hierarchical relationship between the monarch and his subjects, so that there are rules to be followed between father and son, and laws to be followed between six relatives. It was established by people.

古文：夫人之所设，不为不立，不植则僵，不修则坏。
现代文：人们设立的制度，不做的事不设立，不建立制度就维护不了人际关系，不维护制度就会破坏人际关系。
English: People set up the system, do not do not set up, do not establish the system can not maintain interpersonal relationships, do not maintain the system will destroy interpersonal relationships.

古文：《管子》曰： 礼义廉耻，是谓四维；四维不张，国乃灭亡。 
现代文：《管子》说： 礼义廉耻是治国的四个纲，这四个纲不张，国家就要灭亡。 
English: "Pipe" said: Courtesy, righteousness and integrity are the four principles of governing the country. If these four principles are not upheld, the country will perish.

古文：使管子愚人也则可，管子而少知治体，则是岂可不为寒心哉！
现代文：假使管子是个愚蠢的人那就罢了，假使管子是稍微知道治国的根本道理的，那么，怎能不为此寒心呢?
English: If the tube is a stupid person, that's all. If the tube knows a little about the fundamental principles of governing the country, then how can you not feel cold about it?

古文：秦灭四维而不张，故君臣乖乱，六亲殃戮，奸人并起，万民离叛，凡十三岁，而社稷为虚。
现代文：秦朝舍弃四个纲而不张，所以君臣的等级关系错乱，六亲遭殃被杀，奸邪的人一同起来，万民叛离朝廷，一共十三年，而整个国家成为一片废墟。
English: The Qin Dynasty abandoned the Four Noble Truths and did not proclaim them. As a result, the hierarchical relationship between the emperor and his ministers became disordered, six relatives were killed, traitors rose up together, and all the people rebelled against the imperial court. It took a total of thirteen years, and the entire country became a ruin.

古文：今四维犹未备也，故奸人几幸，而众心疑惑。
现代文：现今四个纲还没有齐备，所以奸人有机可乘，而人心疑惑不定。
English: At present, the four programs are not yet complete, so deceivers can take advantage of them, and people's minds are uncertain.

古文：岂如今定经制，令君君臣臣，上下有差，父子六亲各得其宜，奸人亡所几幸，而群臣众信，上不疑惑！
现代文：哪如在现在确定等级制度的原则，让君是君臣是臣，上下有差别，父子与六亲各得其所，奸人没有机会可乘，而群臣都讲忠信，皇上不疑惑!
English: What if the principle of the hierarchy system is determined now, so that the prince is the prince and the vassal is the vassal, there is a difference between the upper and lower, the father and the son and the six relatives each have their own place, the traitor has no opportunity to take advantage of, and the ministers all speak of loyalty, the emperor does not doubt!

古文：此业壹定，世世常安，而后有所持循矣。
现代文：这样的法度一建立，世世代代得到安宁，而后代就有法可遵循了。
English: Once such a law is established, generations will enjoy peace, and future generations will have a law to follow.

古文：若夫经制不定，是犹度江河亡维楫，中流而遇风波，船必覆矣。
现代文：假如等级制度的原则没有确定，就像渡江时没有缆绳和船桨一样，到中流遇到风波，必定要翻船。
English: If the principle of the hierarchical system is not determined, it is like crossing a river without ropes and oars. If there is a storm in the middle of the river, the boat will certainly capsize.

古文：可为长叹息者此也。
现代文：我认为可为之叹息的就是这样的事啊。
English: I think that's what's so sad about it.

古文：夏为天子，十有余世，而殷受之。
现代文：夏朝统治天下，有十多代，而殷商承接它。
English: The Xia Dynasty ruled the world for more than ten generations, while the Shang Dynasty succeeded it.

古文：殷为天子，二十余世，而周受之。
现代文：殷商统治天下，有二十多代，而周朝承接它。
English: Yin merchants ruled the world for more than 20 generations, and the Zhou Dynasty succeeded them.

古文：周为天子，三十余世，而秦受之。
现代文：周朝统治天下，有三十多代，而秦朝承接它。
English: The Zhou Dynasty ruled the world for more than 30 generations, and the Qin Dynasty succeeded it.

古文：秦为天子，二世而亡。
现代文：秦朝统治天下，两代就灭亡了。
English: The Qin Dynasty ruled the world, and two generations perished.

古文：人性不甚相远也，何三代之君有道之长，而秦无道之暴也？
现代文：人的性情相差不是很远，为什么夏商周三代的君主政治清明统治长久，而秦朝没有德政暴虐残酷呢?
English: People's dispositions are not very far apart. Why did the monarchy of the third generation of the Xia and Shang dynasties rule with clarity for a long time, while the Qin Dynasty did not have the tyranny and cruelty of the German regime?

古文：其故可知也。
现代文：这当中的原因可以知道。
English: The reasons for this are well known.

古文：古之王者，太子乃生，固举以礼，使士负之，有司齐肃端冕，见之南郊，见于天也。
现代文：古代的帝王，太子刚生下来，就用礼来教养，让士人背着他，有关的官员整洁身心显示庄重，端正衣冠，到南郊祭天。
English: The emperors of ancient times, when the prince was just born, he was brought up with etiquette, let the scholars carry him, the relevant officials were neat and dignified, the crown was neat, and they went to the southern suburbs to worship the heavens.

古文：过阙则下，过庙则趋，孝子之道也。
现代文：过宫阙就下车马步行，过宗庙就俯着身小步快走，这是孝子之道。
English: It is the way of filial piety to get off the car and walk across the palace moat, and to walk across the ancestral temple by bending down and walking quickly.

古文：故自为赤子而教固已行矣。
现代文：所以在婴孩时教育就已经进行了。
English: Therefore, education has already been carried out in infancy.

古文：昔者成王幼在襁抱之中，召公为太保，周公为太傅，太公为太师。
现代文：过去，周成王还在襁褓之中，召公做太保，周公做太傅，太公做太师教育他。
English: In the past, Zhou Cheng Wang was still in his infancy. He was educated by Zhaogong as Taibo, Zhou Gong as Taifu, and Taigong as Taishi.

古文：保，保其身体；傅，傅之德义；师，道之教训：此三公之职也。
现代文：保，保护他的身体；傅，传授给他道德、行为的道理；师，教育训导：造就是三公的职责。
English: Bao, to protect his body; Fu, to teach him the principles of morality and conduct; Shi, to educate and instruct: to create is the duty of the Three Princes.

古文：于是为置三少，皆上大夫也，曰少保、少傅、少师，是与太子宴者也。
现代文：于是又设三少，都是上大夫级别，叫少保、少傅、少师，这是同太子生活在一起的人。
English: As a result, three Shosho were established, all at the level of senior doctor, called Shobo, Shofu, Shoshi, these are the people who live with the prince.

古文：故乃孩提有识，三公、三少固明孝仁礼义以道习之，逐去邪人，不使见恶行。
现代文：所以当太子刚懂事，三公、三少就给他讲明孝、仁、礼、义，并引导他去做，驱逐奸邪之人，不让太子见到不好的行为。
English: Therefore, when the prince is just beginning to understand things, the three great lords and three lesser lords will teach him filial piety, benevolence, courtesy, and righteousness, and guide him to do so, expel evil-doers, and prevent the prince from seeing bad behavior.

古文：于是皆选天下之端士孝悌博闻有道术者以卫翼之，使与太子居处出入。
现代文：由于这样，都选拔天下行为端正，讲求孝悌，见识广博，有道德学术的人护卫辅助他，让这些人跟太子居住一处，同出同入。
English: As a result of this, all the world's well-behaved, filial, knowledgeable, moral and academic people were selected to escort and assist him, and let these people live in the same place as the prince, and go in and out together.

古文：故太子乃生而见正事，闻正言，行正道，左右前后皆正人也。
现代文：所以太子刚生下来见到的是正事，听到的是正言，推行的是正道，左右前后都是品行端正的人。
English: Therefore, when the prince was just born, what he saw was the right thing to do, what he heard was the right thing to say, what he implemented was the right thing to do, and he was surrounded by people of good moral character.

古文：夫习与正人居之，不能毋正，犹生长于齐不能不齐言也；习与不正人居之，不能毋不正，犹生长于楚之地不能不楚言也。
现代文：习惯于同品行端正的人相处，品行就不会不端正，如同生长在齐国不能不讲齐国话；习惯于同品行不端正的人相处，品行就不会端正，如同生长在楚国不能不讲楚国话。
English: If you are used to getting along with people of good character, your behavior will not be improper, just as if you grew up in Qi, you cannot help but speak the Qi language; if you are used to getting along with people of bad character, your behavior will not be proper, just as if you grew up in Chu, you cannot help but speak the Chu language.

古文：故择其所耆，必先受业，乃得尝之；择其所乐，必先有习，乃得为之。
现代文：所以选择天子的嗜好，必须先使他接受教育，然后才能去试行。选择天子的爱好，必须先使他有了习惯，然后才能去做。
English: Therefore, to choose the hobby of the son of heaven, he must first receive education before he can try it. To choose the hobby of the son of heaven, he must first get used to it before he can do it.

古文：孔子曰： 少成若天性，习惯如自然。 
现代文：孔子说： 小时养成的习惯好像是自然的天性。 
English: Confucius said, "Habit formed in a short time seems to be the law of nature."

古文：及太子少长，知妃色，则入于学。
现代文：等到太子稍稍长大，知道女色，就让他进入学校学习。
English: When the prince grows up a bit and knows about women, he will be allowed to go to school.

古文：学者，所学之官也。
现代文：学，就是朝廷裹的学馆。
English: Learning is a schoolhouse wrapped in the imperial court.

古文：《学礼》曰： 帝入东学，上亲而贵仁，则亲疏有序而恩相及矣；帝入南学，上齿而贵信，则长幼有差而民不诬矣；帝入西学，上贤而贵德，则圣智在位而功不遗矣；帝入北学，上贵而尊爵，则贵贱有等而下不逾矣；帝入太学，承师问道，退习而考于太傅，太傅罚其不则而匡其不及，则德智长而治道得矣。
现代文：《学礼》说： 帝入东学，懂得尊敬亲属，重视仁爱，于是亲、疏有了序别而恩德都能施加到了；帝入南学，懂得尊敬老年人，注重信义，于是长幼有了区别而民众互相不欺骗；帝入西学，懂得尊敬贤良，注重道德，于是圣贤聪明的人得到任用而有功之人不被遗漏；帝入北学，懂得尊敬有地位的人，崇尚爵禄，于是贵贱之分有了等级而卑下的人不超越自己的身份；帝入太学，从师请教治国的道理，回来练习并接受太傅的考核，太傅惩罚他不合标准的地方，而改正不足之处，于是，德行和智慧增长了，治国的办法也学到了。
English: "Gakurei" said: When the emperor entered the East School, he knew how to respect relatives and attach importance to benevolence, so that affection and estrangement had precedence and benevolence could be exerted; when the emperor entered the South School, he knew how to respect the elderly and pay attention to faith and righteousness, so that there was a difference between the eldest and the youngest, and the people did not deceive each other; when the emperor entered the West School, he knew how to respect the virtuous and pay attention to morality, so that the wise and clever people were appointed and the meritorious people were not omitted; when the emperor entered the North School, he knew how to respect

古文：此五学者既成于上，则百姓黎民化辑于下矣。 
现代文：这五学在上面学成了，那么百官和平民在下面就会受感化而和睦相处了。 
English: If these five lessons are learned at the top, then the officials and the people at the bottom will be inspired to live in harmony.

古文：及太子既冠成人，免于保傅之严，则有记过之史，彻膳之宰，进善之旌，诽谤之木，敢谏之鼓。
现代文：等到太子加冠成年，免去太保、太傅的管束，就有记载过失的官员，用减膳食的办法进行规劝的官员，还竖起旌旗招引人们进善言，在路旁竖起木牌记载过失，在官府门口设进谏时敲的鼓。
English: By the time the crown prince is crowned and comes of age, and is freed from the shackles of the Tai Po and Tai Fu, there will be officials who record faults, officials who use the method of reducing meals to persuade, officials who also put up banners to attract people into good words, put up wooden signs on the side of the road to record faults, and set up drums at the entrance of government offices to be beaten when entering.

古文：瞽史诵诗，工诵箴谏，大夫进谋，士传民语。
现代文：瞽史用诗来规劝，乐工朗诵进谏的文章来规劝，大夫进献计谋，士传诵民间警语。
English: Zou Shi used poetry to persuade, Musicians recited articles to persuade, Doctors presented strategies, and Judges recited folk policing language.

古文：习与智长，故切而不愧；化与心成，故中道若性。
现代文：智慧和学习一起增长，所以做事就能切合准则；教化和思想一起形成，所以行为合乎道理就像出自本性一样。
English: Wisdom and learning grow together, so that things can be done according to the standard; education and thought are formed together, so that behavior is reasonable as if from nature.

古文：三代之礼：春朝朝日，秋暮夕月，所以明有敬也；春秋入学，坐国老，执酱而亲馈之，所以明有孝也；行以鸾和，步中《采齐》，趣中《肆夏》，所以明有度也；其于禽兽，见其生不食其死，闻其声不食其肉，故远庖厨，所以长恩，且明有仁也。
现代文：夏商周三代之礼：春天的早上去祭曰，秋天的傍晚去祭月，以此表示敬重天地；春秋入学的时候，请国老上座，太子捧着肉酱亲自送给他，以此表示孝敬长老；乘车出行，速度快慢要适合车上的铃声，走路时，慢步要合乎《采齐》的节奏，快步要合乎《肆夏》的节拍，以此表明懂得礼节；对于禽兽，活的时候见过它，听见过它的叫声，死了以后就不吃它的肉，所以要远庖厨，以此加深恩惠，而且表明有仁爱之心。
English: The rites of the Summer Merchant Wednesday: in the morning of spring, go to the festival, and in the evening of autumn, go to the festival of the moon, in order to show respect for heaven and earth; in the spring and autumn, when entering the school, invite the elder to the seat, and the prince holding the meat sauce will personally give it to him, in order to show respect for the elders; when traveling by car, the speed should be suitable for the bell on the car, when walking, the slow pace should be in line with the rhythm of "Zhe Qi," and the fast pace should be in line with the rhythm of "Boiling Summer," in order to show that they understand the

古文：夫三代之所以长久者，以其辅翼太子有此具也。
现代文：夏商周三代之所以统治长久，是因为他们辅助太子有这些办法。
English: The reason why the third generation of Xia merchants ruled for a long time was because they had these methods to assist the prince.

古文：及秦而不然。
现代文：到了秦朝就不是这样。
English: This was not the case in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：其俗固非贵辞让也，所上者告讦也；固非贵礼义也，所上者刑罚也。
现代文：他们的社会风气本来就不是讲究谦让，他们崇尚的是揭发人家阴私；他们本来就不是讲究礼义，他们崇尚的是刑罚。
English: Their social ethos does not emphasize modesty, they advocate exposing people's secrets; they do not emphasize propriety, they advocate punishment.

古文：使赵高傅胡亥而教之狱，所习者非斩劓人，则夷人之三族也。
现代文：使趟高辅助秦二世，教他的是刑戮之法，所练习的不是杀人割鼻子，就是减门三族。
English: Qin II was assisted by Zhiwigao, who taught him the method of torture. He practiced either killing people or cutting off their noses.

古文：故胡亥今日即位而明日射人，忠谏者谓之诽谤，深计者谓之妖言，其视杀人若艾草菅然。
现代文：所以秦二世今天登上皇帝位而明天就杀人，把忠心进谏的话说成是诽谤，深远的计谋当成妖言，把杀人看作是割草一样。
English: Therefore, Qin II ascended the throne of the emperor today and killed people tomorrow, describing the words of loyalty as slander, far-reaching stratagems as gossips, and murder as mowing grass.

古文：岂惟胡亥之性恶哉？
现代文：难道衹是秦二世的性恶吗?
English: Was it really the sexual vice of Qin II?

古文：彼其所以道之者非其理故也。鄙谚曰： 不习为吏，视已成事。 
现代文：那是由于教育他的东西不合理的缘故。俗语说： 不熟悉做官的事，看看以前官吏做过的事。 
English: That is because his education was not reasonable. As the saying goes: If you are not familiar with the work of a government official, look at what government officials have done in the past.

古文：又曰： 前车覆，后车诚。 
现代文：又说： 前面的车颠覆了，后面的车作好戒备。 
English: He also said: "The car in front overturned, the car behind is on the alert.

古文：夫三代之所以长久者，其已事可知也；然而不能从者，是不法圣智也。
现代文：夏商周三代的统治之所以长久，看过去的事就可知道了；然而不能依从的，是不效法圣贤的聪明。
English: The reason why the reign of Xia Shangzhu's generation was long can be seen from the past; however, what cannot be followed is the wisdom of not following the sages.

古文：秦世之所以亟绝者，其辙迹可见也；然而不避，是后车又将覆也。
现代文：秦朝之所以迅速灭亡，有痕迹留下可以看出；然而如果不避免，后面的车又将倾覆了。
English: The reason for the Qin Dynasty's rapid demise can be seen in the traces left behind; however, if not avoided, the car behind will topple over again.

古文：夫存亡之变，治乱之机，其要在是矣。
现代文：存与亡的变化，治与乱的关键，其要旨就在造裹了。
English: The essence of the changes in existence and death, the key to governance and chaos, is in the making.

古文：天下之命，县于太子；太子之善，在于早谕教与选左右。
现代文：天下的命运，决定于太子；太子治国能力的强弱，在于早期开导教育，与选拔辅助护卫太子的左右人。
English: The fate of the world is determined by the prince; the strength of the prince's ability to govern the country lies in the early enlightenment education and the selection of the right and left people to assist and guard the prince.

古文：夫心未滥而先谕教，则化易成也；开于道术智谊之指，则教之力也。
现代文：在思想还没有放开时就先开始教育，那么教化就容易成功；领悟治国道理和知识道义的要旨，则是教育的力量了。
English: If education is started before the mind is liberated, then it is easy to succeed in indoctrination; if the essence of the principles of governing the country and the principles of knowledge and morality are understood, then it is the power of education.

古文：若其服习积贯，则左右而已。
现代文：至于习惯的养成，则是左右的任务了。
English: As for the development of habits, it is the task of the left and right.

古文：夫胡、粤之人，生而同声，耆欲不异，及其长而成俗，累数译而不能相通，行者有虽死而不相为者，则教习然也。
现代文：北方人和南方人，生下时声音相同，嗜好欲望也没有什么差异，等长大养成习惯了，他们之间的语言经过多次翻译也不能相通，行为习惯有到死也不能互相改变的，那是教育和习惯造成的结果。
English: Northerners and Southerners have the same voice at birth, and there is no difference in their hobbies and desires. When they grow up, they develop habits. After many translations, the languages between them cannot communicate with each other, and there are behavioral habits that cannot be changed until death. That is the result of education and habits.

古文：臣故曰选左右早谕教最急。
现代文：所以我说选好左右辅佐的人和进行早期教育是最重要的。
English: That's why I say it's most important to choose the right and left assistants and carry out early education.

古文：夫教得而左右正，则太子正矣，太子正而天下定矣。
现代文：教育得当而且左右的人品行端正，那么太子就正派丁，太子正派了，天下也就安定了。
English: If the education is proper and the people around him are decent, then the prince will be a decent person. If the prince is decent, the world will be stable.

古文：《曰书》： 一人有庆，兆民赖之。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 天子一人有庆幸的事，亿万民众依赖他得好处。 
English: "Shangshu" said: Only the Son of Heaven has good fortune, and hundreds of millions of people rely on him for benefits.

古文：此时务也。
现代文：这是当前急于办的事。
English: This is an urgent matter at the moment.

古文：凡人之智，能见已然，不能见将然。
现代文：大凡人的智慧，能见到的已经是这样，不能见到的也想这样。
English: The great wisdom of mortals is that what can be seen is already so, and what cannot be seen wants to be so.

古文：夫礼者禁于将然之前，而法者禁于已然之后，是故法之所用易见，而礼之所为生难知也。
现代文：礼是用在禁止人们的行为将要发生之前，而法律是用在行为已经发生之后，所以法律的功能容易看到，而礼的功效却难知晓。
English: Etiquette is used before prohibiting people's behavior is about to occur, and the law is used after the behavior has occurred, so the function of the law is easy to see, but the effect of etiquette is difficult to know.

古文：若夫庆赏以劝善，刑罚以惩恶，先王执此之政，坚如金石，行此之令，信如四时，据此之公，无私如天地耳，岂顾不用哉？
现代文：假如庆赏用来劝善，刑罚用来惩恶，先工执掌这样的政权，会坚硬如同金石，推行这样的命令，会得到长久信从，掌握这种方法的人，像天地一样无私，难道还不使用吗?
English: If celebration is used to encourage the good, and punishment to punish the evil, and if the forerunner of such a regime can be as hard as a rock, and if the implementation of such an order can gain long-term adherence, and if the person who masters this method is as selfless as heaven and earth, will they still not use it?

古文：然而曰礼云礼云者，贵绝恶于未萌，而起教于微眇，使民日迁善远罪而不自知也。
现代文：然而说礼之于礼，重要的是杜绝坏事在没有发生以前，而教育放在细微的地方，使老百姓一天天接近善良远离罪恶而自己不知道。
English: However, to be polite, it is important to prevent bad things from happening before they happen, and education is placed in a subtle place, so that people can get closer to goodness and away from evil every day without knowing it.

古文：孔子曰： 听讼，吾犹人也，必也使毋讼乎！ 
现代文：孔子说： 审理诉讼，我同别人一样，一定要使诉讼事件消灭才好! 
English: Confucius said: When hearing a lawsuit, I, like others, must first eliminate the lawsuit.

古文：为人主计者，莫如先审取舍；取舍之极定于内，而安危之萌应于外矣。
现代文：为国君谋划的人，不如先审定要选择和弃置的东西；取舍的标准定于朝廷，而安危的开始应验在社会上。
English: It is better for those who plan for the sovereign to first determine what to choose and what to discard; the criteria for choosing and discarding are determined by the imperial court, and the beginning of danger is fulfilled in society.

古文：安首非一日而安也，危者非一日而危也，皆以积渐然，不可不察也。
现代文：平安不是一天能够平安的，危险也不是一天就危险了的，都是积蓄以后才逐渐发生的，不可不仔细考察。
English: Peace is not a one-day peace, and danger is not a one-day danger. Both occur gradually after accumulation, and must be carefully examined.

古文：人主之所积，在其取舍。
现代文：国君所积蓄的，在取舍方面。
English: What the sovereign has saved is the most valuable in terms of trade-offs.

古文：以礼义治之者，积礼义；以刑罚治之者，积刑罚。
现代文：用礼义来治理国家的人，积蓄的是礼义；用刑罚来治理国家的，积蓄的是刑罚。
English: Those who govern the country with courtesy accumulate courtesy; those who govern the country with punishment accumulate punishment.

古文：刑罚积而民怨背，礼义积而民和亲。
现代文：刑罚多而老百姓就要埋怨反抗，礼义多而老百姓就会和睦相亲。
English: If there are many punishments, the common people will complain and rebel; if there are many proprieties, the common people will live in harmony.

古文：故世主欲民之善同，而所以使民善者或异。
现代文：所以国君希望老百姓从善的想法相同，而使老百姓行善的方法是不同的。
English: Therefore, the ruler hopes that the common people will have the same idea of doing good, but the way to make the common people do good is different.

古文：或道之以德教，或驱之以法令。
现代文：有人教导他们德行，有人用法令来逼迫他们。
English: Some teach them virtue, others use the law to persecute them.

古文：道之以德教者，德教洽而民气乐；驱之以法令者，法令极而民风哀。
现代文：用德行教导他们的，德行被推广而民众和气快乐；用法令来威逼他们的，法令到了极点而民众的风气哀怨。
English: Teach them with virtue, virtue is spread and the people are happy; force them with laws, laws are extreme and the people are sad.

古文：哀乐之感，祸福之应也。
现代文：哀乐之感，便是祸福的应证。
English: The feeling of joy and sorrow is the evidence of good and bad luck.

古文：秦王之欲尊宗庙而安子孙，与汤、武同，然而汤、武广大其德行，六七百岁而弗失，秦王治天下，十余岁则大败。
现代文：秦王想尊崇宗庙而安定子孙的想法，与商汤、周武王相同，然而商汤、周武王扩大了他们的德行，六七百年而不失败，秦王治理天下，十多年就大败了。
English: The idea that the Qin king wanted to honor the ancestral temple and stabilize his descendants was the same as that of Shang Tang and Zhou Wu Wang. However, Shang Tang and Zhou Wu Wang expanded their virtue, and they did not fail for six or seven hundred years. The Qin king ruled the world for more than ten years, but he was defeated.

古文：此亡它故矣，汤、武之定取舍审而秦五之定取舍不审矣。
现代文：这没有别的缘故，商汤、周武王确定取舍审慎而秦王确定取舍不审慎。
English: There is no other reason for this. Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu decided to be prudent in their choice, while King Qin decided to be imprudent in his choice.

古文：夫天下，大器也。
现代文：天下，是重要的工具。
English: It's an important tool.

古文：今人之置器，置诸安处则安，置诸危处则危。
现代文：现在人们把器物放在安稳的地方就安稳，放在危险的地方就危险。
English: Nowadays, when people put things in a safe place, they are safe, and when they put things in a dangerous place, they are dangerous.

古文：天下之情与器亡以异，在天子之所置之。
现代文：天下的情况与器物没有什么不同，在于天子怎么放置它。
English: The situation in the world is no different from the utensils, it is up to God how to place it.

古文：汤、武置天下于仁义礼乐，而德泽洽，禽兽草木广裕，德被蛮貊四夷，累子孙数十世，此天下所共闻也。
现代文：商汤周武王把天下放于仁、义、礼、乐的位置，而恩德广被四方，禽兽、草木茂盛，恩德加于蛮貊四夷，接连子孙几十代，这是天下人都知道的。
English: Shangtang Zhouwu put the world in the position of benevolence, righteousness, courtesy, and joy, and Ende Guang was surrounded by the four directions, animals and plants flourished, and Ende was added to the barbarians in the four directions, and his descendants continued for dozens of generations. This is known to everyone in the world.

古文：秦王置天下于法令刑罚，德泽亡一有，而怨毒盈于世，下憎恶之如仇雠，祸几及身，子孙诛绝，此天下之所共见也。
现代文：秦王把天下放在法令刑罚的位置，恩德一点没有，而埋怨仇恨遍布社会，平民百姓憎恨他如仇敌，祸害差一点临身，后来子孙诛死断绝，这是天下人都看到的。
English: King Qin put the world in the position of decrees and punishments. There was no benevolence at all, but hatred spread throughout society. The common people hated him like an enemy. The scourge was almost upon him, and later his children and grandchildren died. This was seen by everyone in the world.

古文：是非其明效大验邪！
现代文：这不是很明显的效验吗!
English: Isn't that an obvious test of efficacy!

古文：人之言曰： 听言之道，必以其事观之，则言者莫敢妄言。 
现代文：有人说： 听人说话，一定要看他的行动，这样他就不敢胡说八道了。 
English: Some people say, "When you listen to someone, you must watch his actions, so that he does not dare to talk nonsense."

古文：今或言礼谊之不如法令，教化之不如刑罚，人主胡不引殷、周、秦事以观之也？
现代文：今天有人说礼义不如法令，教化不如刑罚，国君为何不援引商、周、秦朝的事来让他们看呢?
English: Today, some people say that etiquette is not as good as laws and regulations, and that education is not as good as punishment. Why doesn't the sovereign invoke Shang, Zhou, and Qin dynasties to show them?

古文：人主之尊譬如堂，群臣如陛，众庶如地。
现代文：国君的高贵譬如殿堂，群臣譬如台阶，百姓譬如地。
English: The nobility of the sovereign is like a palace, the courtiers are like steps, and the people are like the ground.

古文：故陛九级上，廉远地，则堂高；陛亡级，廉近地，则堂卑。
现代文：所以台阶在九级以上，地基离地面远，那么殿堂就高；台阶没有级，离地面近，殿堂就低下。
English: Therefore, if the steps are more than nine steps and the foundation is far from the ground, then the hall is high; if there are no steps and the foundation is close to the ground, then the hall is low.

古文：高者难攀，卑者易陵，理势然也。
现代文：高的难以攀登，低的易于跨上，这是理所当然的。
English: It is a matter of course that the high is difficult to climb and the low is easy to climb.

古文：故古者圣王制为等列，内有公卿、大夫、士，外有公、侯、伯、子、男，然后有官师小吏，延及庶人，等级分明，而天子加焉，故其尊不可及也。
现代文：所以古代圣王制定等级，朝廷有公、卿、大夫、士，地方封国有公、侯、伯、子、男，然后有大小官吏，一直排到平民，等级分明，而天子的地位在最上面，所以他的尊贵是至高无上的。
English: Therefore, the ancient holy kings established a hierarchy. The imperial court had princes, nobles, doctors, and judges, the local fiefdoms had princes, lords, great lords, sons, and men, and then there were small and large officials, all the way down to the commoners. The hierarchy was clear, and the position of the heavenly son was at the top, so his dignity was supreme.

古文：里谚曰： 欲投鼠而忌器。 
现代文：里巷流行的谚语说： 要投掷东西打老鼠却又顾忌损坏器物。 
English: There is a popular saying in the streets: If you want to throw something to hit a mouse, be careful not to damage the equipment.

古文：此善谕也。
现代文：这是很好的比喻。
English: It's a good metaphor.

古文：鼠近于器，尚惮不投，恐伤其器，况于贵臣之近主乎！
现代文：因为老鼠距离器物近，人们尚且害怕损坏器物而不敢打，何况显贵之臣距主上太近了呢!
English: Because the mouse is close to the utensils, people are still afraid of damaging the utensils and do not dare to fight, not to mention that the dignitaries are too close to the Lord!

古文：廉耻节礼以治君子，故有赐死而亡戮辱。
现代文：用廉耻节礼治理君子，所以有赐死而没有杀戮侮辱。
English: To govern a gentleman with modesty, therefore, is to give death, not to kill and insult.

古文：是以黥、劓之罪不及大夫，以其离主上不远也。
现代文：因此，脸上刺字割掉鼻子的罪行不加到大夫头上，因为他们离主上不远啊。
English: Therefore, the crime of cutting off one's nose to spite one's face does not apply to doctors, because they are not far from the Lord.

古文：礼不敢齿君之路马，蹴其刍者有罚；见君之几杖则起，遭君之乘车则下，入正门则趋；君之宠臣虽或有过，刑戮之罪不加其身者，尊君之故也。
现代文：礼规定不能计算拉国君坐的车的马的年龄，踢踩马的草料要受惩罚；看到国君的案桌拐杖就肃立，遇到国君的车马就去到低处，进入正门就小步快走；国君的宠臣即使有人有了过错，杀戮的罪行不加在他身上，这样做是为了尊敬国君。
English: According to the rules of etiquette, it is not possible to calculate the age of the horse pulling the carriage in which the sovereign is sitting, and it is punishable to kick or step on the horse's grass; if you see the sovereign's desk, you should stand up with crutches, and if you meet the sovereign's carriage, you should go to a low place, and if you enter the main gate, you should walk quickly; the sovereign's favorite, even if someone is at fault, the crime of killing is not imposed on him, this is done in order to respect the sovereign.

古文：此所以为主上豫远不敬也，所以体貌大臣而厉其节也。
现代文：这是为了使皇上预先避开对他不尊敬的事情，而用礼貌来鼓励大臣保持节操。
English: This was done in order that the Emperor might be forewarned of anything disrespectful to him, and that the Minister might be politely encouraged to keep his temper.

古文：今自王侯三公之贵，皆天子之所改容而礼之也，古天子之所谓伯父、伯舅也，而令与众庶同黥、劓、髡、刖、笞傌、弃市之法，然则堂不亡陛乎？被戮辱者不泰迫乎？
现代文：今天自王侯三公这些贵人起，都是天子所要敬重以礼相待的人，就是古代的天子称作伯父、伯舅的人，而对他们与民众同样施用各种刑罚，那么殿堂不是失去台阶了吗?被杀戮侮辱的人不是太迫近天子吗?
English: Today, starting with the princes and nobles, these are the people whom the Son of Heaven must respect and treat with courtesy. They are the people whom the ancient Son of Heaven called uncles and great-uncles, and imposed various punishments on them in the same way as the common people. So, hasn't the hall of fame lost its steps? Aren't the people who were killed and insulted too close to the Son of Heaven?

古文：廉耻不行，大臣无乃握重权，大官而有徒隶亡耻之心乎？
现代文：廉耻不被推行，大臣岂不就会掌握过重的权力，大官不就会有囚徒的无耻之心了吗?
English: If integrity is not enforced, won't ministers end up holding too much power, and won't high-ranking officials have the shamelessness of prisoners?

古文：夫望夷之事，二世见当以重法者，投鼠而不忌器之习也。
现代文：望夷宫这件事，秦二世被判处重刑，这是投鼠而不忌器造成的。
English: In the matter of Wangyi Palace, Qin II was sentenced to a heavy sentence, which was caused by a rat and not a guillotine.

古文：臣闻之，履虽鲜不加于枕，冠虽敝不以苴履。
现代文：我听说，鞋子即使很新也不能放到枕头上，帽子即使破旧也不能用来垫鞋。
English: I have heard that shoes, even if they are very new, cannot be placed on pillows, and hats, even if they are old, cannot be used to cushion shoes.

古文：夫尝已在贵宠之位，天子改容而体貌之矣，吏民尝俯伏以敬畏之矣，今而有过，帝令废之可也，退之可也，赐之死可也，灭之可也；若夫束缚之，系緤之，输之司寇，编之徒官，司寇小吏詈骂而榜笞之，殆非所以令众庶见也。
现代文：曾经处在被尊宠地位的人，天子对他以礼相待，官吏民众曾对他表示过敬畏。今天有了过错，皇帝下令废黜爵位可以，罢除官职可以，赐他死可以，灭了他的家族可以；至于把他捆绑起来，牵着押送给司寇，编在徒官的管辖之下，让司寇小吏咒骂和鞭打他，这恐怕是不能让一般民众看到的吧!
English: A person who was once in a respected and favored position, the Son of Heaven treated him with courtesy, and the officials and the people once showed him reverence. Today, if there is a mistake, the emperor may order the dethronement of the title, the removal of the official post, the death of the person, and the destruction of his family; as for tying him up, leading and escorting him to the scout, placing him under the jurisdiction of the scouts, and letting the scouts curse and whip him, I am afraid that this cannot be seen by the general public.

古文：夫卑贱者习知尊贵者之一旦吾亦乃可以加此也，非所以习天下也，非尊尊贵贵之化也。
现代文：卑贱的人熟知被尊宠的人一旦有了过错，我也可以同样对待他，遣不是教习天下的办法，也不符合尊尊贵贵的教化。
English: A lowly person knows that if a respected and favored person makes a mistake, I can treat him the same way. Sending him away is not the way to teach the world, nor is it in line with the enlightenment of respectable people.

古文：夫天子之所尝敬，众庶之所尝庞，死而死耳，贱人安宜得如此而顿辱之哉！
现代文：天子曾经敬重过，民众曾经尊崇过，让他死了就死了，卑贱人怎么可以这样折磨侮辱他呢!
English: The Son of Heaven was once respected, the people once revered, let him die when he dies, how can a lowly person torture and insult him like this!

古文：豫让事中行之君，智伯伐而灭之，移事智伯。
现代文：豫让事奉中行氏之君，在智伯攻灭中行氏之后，转而事奉智伯。
English: Yu Zhen served the prince of the Zhong Xing clan, and after Zhi Bo defeated the Zhong Xing clan, he turned to serve Zhi Bo.

古文：及赵灭智伯，豫让衅面吞炭，必报襄子，五起而不中。
现代文：等到趟襄子灭掉智伯，豫让就毁坏容貌，吞炭使声音嘶哑，一定要报复赵襄子，为智伯报仇，但多次没有成功。
English: Waiting for Zhao Xiangzi to eliminate Zhi Bo, Yu Zhan Ruined his appearance, swallowed charcoal and made his voice hoarse, he must take revenge on Zhao Xiangzi and avenge Zhi Bo, but he failed many times.

古文：人问豫子，豫子曰： 中行众人畜我，我故众人事之；智伯国士遇我，我故国士报之。 
现代文：有人问豫子，豫子回答说： 中行氏像对一般人那样对待我，我也像一般人那样事奉他；智伯像国士一样待我，我就像国士一样报答他。 
English: Someone asked Yu Zi, Yu Zi replied: Zhong Xing treated me like an ordinary person, and I served him like an ordinary person; Zhi Bo treated me like a statesman, and I repaid him like a statesman.

古文：故此一豫让也，反君事仇，行若狗彘，已而抗节致忠，行出乎列士，人主使然也。
现代文：所以同一个豫让，起初背叛自己的主人去事奉他的仇敌，行为像猪狗，后来又持节尽忠，行为像烈士，这是主上使他这样的。
English: Therefore, the same Yuzhen, at first betraying his master to serve his enemy, behaved like a pig dog, and later remained loyal and acted like a martyr, which is what the Lord made him do.

古文：故主上遇其大臣如遇犬马，彼将犬马自为也；如遇官徒，彼将官徒自为也。
现代文：所以国君对待他的大臣如同对待犬马，他们就甘愿做犬马。如果对待他们如同对待犯人，他们就甘愿做犯人。
English: Therefore, if the sovereign treats his ministers like dogs and horses, they are willing to be dogs and horses. If he treats them like prisoners, they are willing to be prisoners.

古文：顽顿亡耻，奊诟亡节，廉耻不立，且不自好，苟若而可，故见利则逝，见便则夺。
现代文：顽固愚笨无耻，胸无大志没有节操，没有廉耻之心，并且不自爱，马马虎虎就可以了，所以他们见利便向往，见利便争夺。
English: Stubborn, stupid, and shameless, they have no great ambition, no integrity, no sense of shame, and no self-love. They can only do things in a half-hearted manner, so when they see profit, they yearn for it and when they see profit, they compete for it.

古文：主上有败，则因而挻之矣；主上有患，则吾苟免而已，立而观之耳；有便吾身者，则欺卖而利之耳。
现代文：遇到主上失利，就乘机篡权；遇到主上有了患难，就衹顾自己苟且偷生，袖手旁观；有利于自己的，就欺诈出卖主人而从中谋利。
English: When his master fails, he takes advantage of the opportunity to usurp power; when his master is in trouble, he ignores himself, steals a living, and stands idly by; when it is to his advantage, he deceives and betrays his master and makes a profit from it.

古文：人主将何便于此？
现代文：这样对主上有什么好处呢?
English: And what advantage is that to the Lord?

古文：群下至众，而主上至少也，所托财器职业者粹于群下也。
现代文：群臣众多，而主上衹有一人，主上委托的财器职业等权力都集中在群臣之手。
English: There are many vassals, but there is only one master, and the power entrusted by the master, such as the financial profession, is concentrated in the hands of the vassals.

古文：俱亡耻，俱苟妄，则主上最病。
现代文：全都无耻，全都胡作非为，主上就最担心了。
English: All of them are shameless, all of them are acting out of character, and that's what worries the Lord the most.

古文：故古者礼不及庶人，刑不至大夫，所以厉宠臣之节也。
现代文：所以古人说： 礼不及庶人，刑不至大夫 ，这样做是为了勉励宠臣守节。
English: Therefore, the ancients said: "Courtesy is not enough for a commoner, punishment is not enough for a doctor," this was done in order to encourage the favorite to keep the festival.

古文：古者大臣有坐不廉而废者，不谓不廉，曰 簠簋不饰 ；坐污秽淫乱男女亡别者，不曰污秽，曰 帷薄不修 ；坐罢软不胜任者，不谓罢软，曰 下官不职 。
现代文：古代有大臣因为不廉洁之罪要被废黜的，不说不廉洁，说 篮簋不整洁 ；因为淫乱肮脏男女无别的，不说肮脏，说 帷薄不修 ；因为软弱无能不能胜任官职的，不说软弱无能，说 下官不职 。
English: In ancient times, when a minister was to be deposed for the crime of dishonesty, instead of saying that he was dishonest, he would say that the basket was not clean; when there was no difference between men and women because of immorality and filth, instead of saying that he was dirty, he would say that the drapery was not neat; when he was incompetent because of weakness, instead of saying that he was weak, he would say that his subordinate was incompetent.

古文：故贵大臣定有其罪矣，犹未斥然正以呼之也，尚迁就而为之讳也。
现代文：所以对有地位的大臣定罪时，不仅不以斥责的口吻正面宣布他的罪行，还迁就地为他隐讳。
English: Therefore, when convicting a high-ranking minister, not only did they not announce his crime in a scolding tone, but they also concealed it for him.

古文：故其在大谴大何之域者，闻谴何则白冠氂缨，盘水加剑，造请室而请罪耳，上不执缚系引而行也。
现代文：所以那些处于应被大声谴责呵斥的地位的人，听到谴责呵斥就穿上丧服，盘水加剑，到请罪的房间去请罪，皇上不叫人捆绑起来牵着走。
English: Therefore, those who are in a position to be loudly condemned and rebuked, when they hear the condemnation and rebukes, they put on mourning clothes, add water and a sword, and go to the room to plead guilty. The emperor does not let anyone tie them up and take them away.

古文：其有中罪者，闻命而自弛，上不使人颈盭而加也。
现代文：犯有中等罪行的人，听到命令便白毁容仪认罪，皇上不使人把刀架到他的脖子上。
English: A person who had committed a medium crime was ordered to confess to the crime, and the emperor did not allow anyone to put a knife to his neck.

古文：其有大罪者，闻命则北面再拜，跪而自裁，上不使捽抑而刑之也，曰： 子大夫自有过耳！
现代文：犯有大罪的人，听到命令便朝北跪拜认罪，跪下自杀，皇上不派人揪住他的头发往下按把他处死，说： 你大夫是自己有罪啊!
English: When a person who had committed a serious crime heard the order, he knelt to the north and confessed his guilt, kneeling down to commit suicide. The emperor did not send someone to hold his hair down and press him to death, saying: Your doctor is guilty himself!

古文：吾遇子有礼矣。 
现代文：我待你是有礼的。 
English: I'm being polite.

古文：遇之有礼，故群臣自憙；婴以廉耻，故人矜节行。
现代文：对待他有礼，所以群臣自爱；以廉耻待人，所以人们就注重节操和德行。
English: Treat him with courtesy, so the ministers love themselves; treat people with modesty, so people pay attention to self-discipline and virtue.

古文：上设廉耻礼义以遇其臣，而臣不以节行报其上者，则非人类也。
现代文：皇上设立廉耻礼义来对待他的臣子，而臣子不以节操和德行报答他的主上，那他就不是人啊。
English: If the emperor treats his vassals with decency and propriety, but the vassal does not repay his lord with integrity and virtue, then he is not a man.

古文：故化成俗定，则为人臣者主耳忘身，国耳忘家，公耳忘私，利不苟就，害不苟去，唯义所在。
现代文：所以教化成、风俗定，那么作为臣子的人，就会想到主上便忘了自己，想到国家便忘了自己的家庭，想到公事便忘了私事，见利不随便谋取，见害不苟且逃避，衹按照道义办事。
English: Therefore, when the culture and customs are established, then, as a vassal, one will think of the Lord and forget oneself, think of the country and forget one's family, think of business and forget one's private affairs, do not arbitrarily seek profit, be scrupulous and evade harm, and act in accordance with morality.

古文：上之化也，故父兄之臣诚死宗庙，法度之臣诚死社稷，辅翼之臣诚死君上，守圄扞敌之臣诚死城郭封疆。
现代文：皇上施行教化，所以父兄之臣忠诚于祖业而死，制定和推行法度的大臣忠诚于国家而死，辅助保护君主的大臣忠诚于君主而死，守边御敌的大臣忠诚于城郭疆界而死。
English: When the emperor carried out his edification, his father's and brother's vassals died because they were loyal to their ancestors, the ministers who enacted and enforced laws died because they were loyal to the country, the ministers who assisted and protected the monarch died because they were loyal to the monarch, and the ministers who guarded the borders against enemies died because they were loyal to the borders of the castle.

古文：故曰圣人有金诚者，比物此志也。
现代文：所以说圣人拥有金城，就是用金城这样的物来比喻众臣的这种意志的。
English: Therefore, to say that a sage possesses a golden city is to use such a thing as a golden city as a metaphor for the will of his subjects.

古文：彼且为我死，故吾得与之俱生；彼且为我亡，故吾得与之俱存；夫将为我危，故吾得与之皆安。
现代文：他尚且为我而死，所以我必须与他共生死；他尚且为我而亡，所以我必须与他共存亡；他将为我去冒危险，所以我必须与他一起平安。
English: He died for me, so I must live and die with him; he died for me, so I must live and die with him; he risked his life for me, so I must be at peace with him.

古文：顾行而忘利，守节而仗义，故可以托不御之权，可以寄六尺之孤。
现代文：顾全德行而忘记利益，守住节操而主持正义，所以可以托付给他不加约束的大权，可以寄养未成年而父已死的皇帝。
English: He can be entrusted with unlimited power, he can foster an emperor who is a minor and whose father is dead.

古文：此厉廉耻行礼谊之所致也，主上何丧焉！
现代文：这是勉励廉耻推行礼义所应该达到的，主上何必要失去这些呢!
English: This is what should be achieved by encouraging shamelessness and promoting propriety. Lord, why do we have to lose these things!

古文：此之不为，而顾彼之久行，故曰可为长叹息者此也。
现代文：这些事不做，反而长久地顾及不该做的事，所以我说可以为之叹息的就是这些事啊。
English: Instead of doing these things, I've been thinking about what I shouldn't do for a long time, so I can say that these are the things I can sigh for.

古文：是时，丞相绛侯周勃免就国，人有告勃谋反，逮系长安狱治，卒亡事，复爵邑，故贾谊以此讥上。上深纳其言，养臣下有节。
现代文：这时丞相绛侯周勃免职回到封国，有人告发周勃谋反，把周勃捆绑押解到长安下狱治罪，结果没有反事，又恢复了他的爵位，所以贾谊用周勃的事来规劝汉文帝处罚大臣要慎重。
English: At this time, Zhou Bo, the minister of the imperial court, was dismissed from his post and returned to the feudal state. Some people accused Zhou Bo of plotting a rebellion and sent Zhou Bo to Chang'an to be tied up and sent to prison for punishment. As a result, there was no objection and his peerage was restored. Therefore, Jia Yi used the matter of Zhou Bo to persuade the Han Emperor to be cautious in punishing the minister.

古文：是后大臣有罪，皆自杀，不受刑。
现代文：汉文帝深深地接受了他的意见，对待臣下有了分寸。这以后大臣犯了罪，都自杀，没有处以死刑的。
English: Emperor Hanwen deeply accepted his opinion and treated his vassals with discretion. After this, the ministers committed crimes and committed suicide, but were not sentenced to death.

古文：至武帝时，稍复入狱，自甯成始。
现代文：到了漠武帝时，从宁成开始，才逐渐有大臣犯罪入狱的。
English: By the time of Emperor Mu, it was only from the time of Emperor Ningcheng that ministers were gradually sent to prison for committing crimes.

古文：初，文帝以代王入即位，后分代为两国，立皇子武为代王，参为太原王，小子胜则梁王矣。
现代文：起初，汉文帝以代王的身份即皇帝位。后来把代国分为两国，立皇子刘武为代王，刘参为太原王，小儿子刘胜为梁王。
English: At first, Emperor Hanwen ascended to the throne as the acting king. Later, he divided the acting country into two countries, establishing the prince Liu Wu as the acting king, Liu San as the king of Taiyuan, and the youngest son Liu Sheng as the king of Liang.

古文：后又徙代王武为淮阳王，而太愿王参为代王，尽得故地。
现代文：后来又调代王刘武为淮阳王，而太原王刘参做代王，得到原先代王的全部封地。
English: Later, the acting king, Liu Wu, was transferred to be the king of Huaiyang, while the king of Taiyuan, Liu San, became the acting king and obtained all the fiefs of the original acting king.

古文：居数年，梁王胜死，亡子。
现代文：过了几年，梁王刘胜死了，没有儿子。
English: A few years later, Liang Wang Liu Sheng died without a son.

古文：谊复上疏曰：
现代文：贾谊又上疏说：
English: Jia Yi went on to say:

古文：陛下即不定制，如今之势，不过一传再传，诸侯犹且人恣而不制，豪植而大强，汉法不得行矣。
现代文：陛下如果不订立制度，如今的形势，祇不过是一二世罢了，诸侯王国尚且没有管束，势力建起并逐步强大，汉王朝的法令就得不到推行了。
English: Your Majesty, if you do not establish a system, the current situation will only last for one or two generations. The kingdoms of the princes have not yet been controlled, and the forces have been built up and gradually strengthened. The decrees of the Han Dynasty will not be implemented.

古文：陛下所以为蕃扞及皇太子之所恃者，唯唯阳、代二国耳。
现代文：陛下用来保持自己和皇太子所依赖的，衹不过是淮阳和代两国罢了。
English: What His Majesty relies on to sustain himself and the crown prince is nothing more than Huaiyang and the success of the two countries.

古文：代北边匈奴，与强敌为邻，能自完则足矣。
现代文：代国北面靠近匈奴，与强敌为邻，能够保全自己就差不多了。
English: On behalf of the country, the north is close to the Xiongnu, with a strong enemy as a neighbor, it is almost enough to be able to protect yourself.

古文：而淮阳之比大诸侯，廑如黑子之著面，适足以饵大国耳，不足以有所禁御。
现代文：而淮阳同大诸侯相比，仅仅如同小小的黑痣长在脸上，衹适合被大国所吞食，而不足以抵御大国。
English: But compared with the great princes, Huaiyang is just like a small black mole on the face. The mole is suitable for being devoured by the great power, but not enough to resist the great power.

古文：方今制在陛下，制国而令子适足以为饵，岂可谓工哉！
现代文：现在制度在于陛下制定，编制诸侯国而让自己的儿子适合作大国的食饵，难道可以说是工于心计吗!
English: Now the system is for His Majesty to establish, to compile the vassal states and to make his son fit for the table of a great power, can it be said to be a trick?

古文：人主之行异布衣。
现代文：主上行为与平民百姓不同。
English: The Lord behaves differently from the common people.

古文：布衣者，饰小行，竞小廉，以自托于乡党，人主唯天下安社稷固不耳。
现代文：平民百姓，注重小德行，讲究小廉洁，以此托付于乡里，主上注重的是统一天下，安定社会。
English: Ordinary people, pay attention to small virtue, pay attention to small integrity, and entrust it to the countryside. The main focus is to unify the country and stabilize the society.

古文：高皇帝瓜分天下以王功臣，反者如蝟毛而起，以为不可，故蔪去不义诸侯而虚其国。
现代文：高皇帝瓜分天下给有功之臣做诸侯王，反对的人如同猬毛一样起来，认为不可以，所以除去不义的诸侯而空着他的国家。
English: Emperor Gao divided the world into meritorious vassals and made them princes. Opponents stood up like bristles and thought it was unacceptable, so he removed the unjust princes and left his country empty.

古文：择良日，立诸子雒阳上东门之外，毕以为王，而天下安。
现代文：选择良辰吉曰，在洛阳上束门外立他的几个儿子，全都做了诸侯王，这样天下安定了。
English: He chose Liang Chenji and set up several of his sons outside the gates of Luoyang, and they all became princes and kings, thus stabilizing the country.

古文：故大人者，不牵小行，以成大功。
现代文：所以干大事的人，不被小的行动所牵累，最后成就大功业。
English: Therefore, those who do big things are not affected by small actions, and finally achieve great achievements.

古文：今淮南地远者或数千里，越两诸侯，而县属于汉。
现代文：现在淮南这个诸侯国跨越的土地，远的有达到几千里的，超过梁和淮阳两个诸侯，而作为县属汉王朝统辖。
English: At present, Huainan, the vassal state, spans thousands of miles of land, exceeding the two vassals of Liang and Huaiyang, and is under the jurisdiction of the Han Dynasty as a county.

古文：其吏民徭役往来长安者，自悉而补，中道衣敝，钱用诸费称此，其苦属汉而欲得王至甚，逋逃而归诸侯者已不少矣。
现代文：淮南的官吏和老百姓因为徭役往来长安的人，拿出全部家财添补衣服，但半路上衣服就破了，钱大多用在这项费用的开支上，他们苦于隶属于汉而非常想得一个诸侯王，逃跑而归附于诸侯的已经不少了。
English: The officials and common people of Huainan took out all of their family wealth to supplement their clothing because they had to serve the people traveling to and from Chang'an. However, their clothing broke in the middle of the journey, and most of the money was spent on this expense. They were struggling to be subordinate to the Han Dynasty and really wanted to become a vassal king. There were already quite a few people who had run away and become vassals of vassals.

古文：其势不可久。
现代文：这种形势不能让它长久。
English: This situation cannot be allowed to continue.

古文：臣之愚计，愿举淮南地以益淮阳，而为梁王立后，割淮阳北边二三列城与东郡以益梁；不可者，可徙代王而都睢阳。
现代文：我有一个愚笨的计谋，希望拿出淮南之地加给淮阳，而在立了梁王以后，割淮阳北边二三县和束郡加给梁国；不行的话，可调代王建都睢阳。
English: I have a stupid stratagem. I hope to take out the land of Huainan and add it to Huaiyang, and after the establishment of Liang Wang, I will cut off 23 counties and Sok County in the north of Huaiyang and add them to Liang Guo; if not, I can transfer the capital of Wang Jian to Fenyang.

古文：梁起于新郪以北著之河，淮阳包陈以南揵之江，则大诸侯之有异心者，破胆而不敢谋。
现代文：梁国的土地从新郭起向北靠近黄河，淮阳取陈国以南土地接着长江，这样，大诸侯国有野心的，也会吓破胆而不敢图谋。
English: Liang's land from Xinguo to the north is close to the Yellow River, and Huaiyang takes the land south of Chen's country and follows the Yangtze River. In this way, if the great princes have ambitions, they will be scared and not dare to plot.

古文：梁足以扞齐、赵，淮阳足以禁吴、楚，陛下高枕，终亡山东之忧矣，此二世之利也。
现代文：梁国足以防御齐国、趟国，淮阳足以抵挡吴国、楚国。陛下可高枕而卧，没有崤山以东的忧患了，这是两代人的利益啊。
English: Liang Province is strong enough to defend against Qi Province and Wa Province, and Huaiyang Province is strong enough to defend against Wu Province and Chu Province. Your Majesty can lie down with your head held high, free from the troubles to the east of Mount Lushan. This is the benefit of two generations.

古文：当今恬然，适遇诸侯之皆少，数岁之后，陛下且见之矣。
现代文：当今国家安定，正好遇上诸侯都年少，几年以后，陛下将看到危机了。
English: Today, the country is stable, just as the princes are young. In a few years, His Majesty will see a crisis.

古文：夫秦日夜苦心劳力以除六国之祸，今陛下力制天下，颐指如意，高拱以成六国之祸，难以言智。
现代文：秦朝夜苦心积虑消除六国的祸患，现在陛下以权力控制天下，衹用面颊表情示意人，想要达到的就能如意，如果陛下高拱两手酿成六国的祸患，就难以说聪明不聪明。
English: The Qin Dynasty painstakingly and deliberately eliminated the scourge of the Six Kingdoms. Now, His Majesty controls the world with power. He shows people with his cheek expression that what he wants to achieve can be achieved. If His Majesty's high-arched hands create the scourge of the Six Kingdoms, it is difficult to say whether he is smart or not.

古文：苟身亡事，畜乱宿祸，孰视而不定，万年之后，传之老母弱子，将使不宁，不可谓仁。
现代文：苟全自身没有滋事，蓄留祸乱，仔细看看而不决定，万年之后，传给老母弱子，将使他们不得安宁，不可以说是仁爱。
English: If you are careful not to get into trouble, if you store up misfortune, if you look carefully but do not decide, and if you pass it on to your children ten thousand years later, you will bring them no peace. This cannot be called benevolence.

古文：臣闻圣主言问其臣而不自造事，故使人臣得毕其愚忠。
现代文：我听说圣主要说话时，先问臣子而不自己先说。因此使臣子们能够尽表愚忠。
English: I have heard that when the Lord spoke, He asked the attendants before He spoke, so that the attendants would be able to show their loyalty.

古文：唯陛下财幸！
现代文：希望陛下裁纳我的话。
English: I hope Your Majesty will accept my words.

古文：文帝于是从谊计，乃徙淮阳王武为梁王，北界泰山，西至高阳，得大县四十余城；徙城阳王喜为淮南王，抚其民。
现代文：汉文帝于是采纳了贾谊的计策，就调淮阳王刘武为梁王，梁国北面以泰山为界，西面到达高阳，得大县四十多个；调城阳王刘喜为淮南王，安抚他的老百姓。
English: Emperor Hanwen then adopted Jia Yi's strategy, and changed the king of Huaiyang, Liu Wu, to the king of Liang; the north of Liang was bounded by Mount Tai, and the west reached Gaoyang, with more than forty large counties; the king of Chengyang, Liu Xi, was changed to the king of Huainan, to appease his people.

古文：时又封淮南厉王四子皆为列侯。
现代文：当时，又封淮南厉王刘长的四个儿子都当列侯。
English: At that time, the four sons of Liu Chang, the king of Huainan Li, were also made princes.

古文：谊知上必将复王之也，上疏谏曰： 窃恐陛下接王淮南诸子，曾不与如臣者孰计之也。
现代文：贾谊知道皇上一定要恢复诸侯王的爵位，上疏进谏说： 我私下担心陛下将要封淮南厉王的几个儿子为王，这是没有同臣下仔细计议过啊。
English: Jia Yi knew that the emperor must restore the titles of princes and princes, Shangxo Jinjun said: I am privately worried that His Majesty will crown several sons of King Huainanli as kings. This has not been carefully considered by his subordinates.

古文：淮南王之悖逆亡道，天下孰不知其罪？
现代文：淮南王反叛作乱，天下谁不知道他的罪行?
English: King Huainan rebelled and caused turmoil. Who in the world does not know his crimes?

古文：陛下幸而赦迁之，自疾而死，天下孰以王死之不当？
现代文：陛下幸而宽大放逐他，他自杀而死，天下谁认为他死得不应该呢?
English: His majesty had the good fortune to banish him with clemency. He committed suicide and died. Who in the world thinks that he did not deserve to die?

古文：今奉尊罪人之子，适足以负谤于天下耳。
现代文：今天重用罪人的儿子，恰好辜负了天下人对厉王的谴责!
English: Today's repeated use of the son of a sinner just lives up to the world's condemnation of King Li!

古文：此人少壮，岂能忘其父哉 白公胜所为父报仇者，大父与伯父、叔父也。
现代文：厉王的儿子稍稍长大，难道能忘了他父亲的仇恨吗?白公胜为父报仇，就是针对祖父和伯父、叔父的。
English: Can the son of King Li grow up a little and forget the hatred of his father? Bai Gongsheng avenged his father against his grandfather and uncle.

古文：白公为乱，非欲取国代主也，发愤快志，剡手以冲仇人之匈，固为俱靡而已。
现代文：白公胜发动政变，不是夺权篡位，而是发泄心中的愤恨之气，手持尖刀刺向仇人胸膛，本来要和仇人同归于尽。
English: Bai Gongsheng launched a coup, not to seize power and usurp the throne, but to vent the resentment in his heart, stabbing the enemy's chest with a sharp knife. Originally, he wanted to die with the enemy.

古文：淮南虽小，黥布尝用之矣，汉存特幸耳。
现代文：淮南地方虽小，黥布曾经利用它反汉，汉朝能够存在真是太幸运了。
English: Although Huainan is a small place, Zibo once used it as an anti-Han stronghold. It is so fortunate that the Han Dynasty could exist.

古文：夫擅仇人足以危汉之资，于策不便。
现代文：让仇人据有足以危及汉朝的资本，是失策的。
English: It is a mistake to let the enemy have enough capital to endanger the Han Dynasty.

古文：虽割而为四，四子一心也。
现代文：虽然把厉王的四个儿子分割开来，但他们为父报仇的想法是一个。
English: Although Li Wang's four sons were separated, they all had the same idea of avenging their father.

古文：予之众，积之财，此非有子胥、白公报于广都之中，即疑有剸诸、荆轲起于两柱之间，所谓假贼兵为虎翼者也。
现代文：给他们很多民众，使他们积累很多财产，这样做，如果不是像伍子胥、白公那样在都城公开起兵报仇，就会有专诸、荆轲这样的暗杀行刺，造就是所谓的把武器借给盗贼，给老虎添了翅膀啊。
English: Give them a lot of people and let them accumulate a lot of property. In this way, if they don't openly raise an army in the capital to take revenge like Wu Zichuan and Bai Gong, there will be assassinations like Zong Zhu and Jing Zichuan. This is what is called lending weapons to thieves and giving wings to tigers.

古文：愿陛下少留计！ 
现代文：希望陛下稍微考虑一下! 
English: I hope His Majesty will give it some thought!

古文：梁王胜坠马死，谊自伤为傅无状，常哭泣，后岁余，亦死。
现代文：梁王刘胜坠马而死，贾谊感伤自己作为太傅失了职，常常哭泣。过了一年多，也死了。
English: Liang Wang Liu Sheng fell from his horse and died. Jia Yi felt sad that he had lost his position as Taifu and often cried. More than a year later, he also died.

古文：贾生之死，年三十三矣。
现代文：贾谊死时，年三十三岁。
English: Jia Yi was 33 years old when he died.

古文：后四岁，齐文王薨，亡子。
现代文：后来的四年，齐文王死了，没有儿子。
English: Four years later, King Qiwen died without a son.

古文：文帝思贾生之言，乃分齐为六国，尽立悼惠王子六人为王；又迁淮南王喜于城阳，而分淮南为三国，尽立厉王三子以王之。
现代文：汉文帝想起贾谊的话，于是把齐国分成六个小国，分别立悼惠王的六个儿子为王；又调淮南王刘喜到城阳，把淮南分成三个小国，分别立厉王的个儿子为王。
English: Emperor Hanwen remembered Jia's words, and divided Qi into six small states, and separately appointed the six sons of King Miao Hui as kings; he also transferred the King of Huainan, Liu Xi, to Chengyang, and divided Huainan into three small states, and separately appointed the first son of King Li as king.

古文：后十年，文帝崩，景帝立；三年而吴、楚、赵与四齐王合从举兵，西乡京师，梁王扞之，卒破七国。
现代文：以后十年，汉文帝驾崩，汉景帝继位，景帝三年，吴、楚、赵与四个齐王联合起兵反叛，向西直逼漠京城长安，梁孝王刘武保卫长安，最后打败七国。
English: In the next ten years, Emperor Hanwen passed away, Emperor Hanjing succeeded to the throne, Emperor Jing was three years old, Wu, Chu, Zhao and the four Qi kings jointly raised an army to rebel, drove the capital Chang'an westward, Liang Xiao Wang Liu Wu defended Chang'an, and finally defeated the seven countries.

古文：至武帝时，淮南厉王子为王者两国亦反诛。
现代文：到汉武帝时，淮南厉王的儿子做了王的也有两国谋反而被诛灭。
English: By the time of Emperor Hanwu, the son of King Huainanli became king, but the two countries also plotted a rebellion and were annihilated.

古文：孝武初立，举贾生之孙二人至郡守。
现代文：汉武帝即位，任贾谊的孙子二人为郡太守。
English: Emperor Hanwu ascended to the throne, and Ren Jia's two grandsons became county governors.

古文：贾嘉最好学，世其家。
现代文：其中买嘉最好学，继承书香门第。
English: Among them, Buy Jia is the best to learn, inheriting Shuxiang.

古文：赞曰：刘向称 贾谊言三代与秦治乱之意，其论甚美，通达国体，虽古之伊、管未能远过也。
现代文：赞曰：刘向称 贾谊谈论夏商周三代和秦朝治乱的意义，他的论述十分优美，他通晓国家典章制度，即使是古代的伊尹、管仲也不能超过他。
English: Praise: Liu Xiang said that Jia Yi talked about the significance of the third generation of Xia merchants and the Qin Dynasty. His discussion was very beautiful. He was familiar with the national award system. Even the ancient Yi Yin and Guanzhong could not surpass him.

古文：使时见用，功化必盛。
现代文：假如当时他的主张得以实行，功业教化必定显著。
English: If his ideas had been put into practice at that time, it is certain that there would have been a significant improvement in the quality of education.

古文：为庸臣所害，甚可悼痛。 
现代文：但他被庸臣陷害，实在让人痛心 。
English: But it's heartbreaking that he was set up by a vassal.

古文：追观孝文玄默躬行以移风俗，谊之所陈略施行矣。
现代文：回过头去看看汉文帝沉静无为，身体力行来移风易俗，贾谊所陈述的主张被略微施行了。
English: Looking back, we can see that Emperor Hanwen was quiet and inactive, but he did his best to change customs and customs, and the proposition stated by Jia Yi was slightly implemented.

古文：及欲改定制度，以汉为土德，色上黄，数用五，及欲试属国，施五饵三表以系单于，其术固以疏矣。
现代文：等到想改定制度，因为汉是土德，就崇尚黄色，官印的数字使用 五 ，等到想试着拥有属国，就施用贾谊的 五饵 、 三表 来紧紧拴住单于，他的办法因此取得了效果。
English: When he wanted to change the system, because Han was a native of Germany, he advocated yellow, and the official seal used the number five. When he wanted to try to have a vassal state, he applied Jia Yi's five folds and three tables to tightly hold on to the single, and his method thus achieved results.

古文：谊亦天年早终，虽不至公卿，未为不遇也。
现代文：贾谊英年早逝，他做官虽然没到公卿，但不是没有机遇。
English: Jia Yiying died at an early age. Although he did not become a noble, he was not without opportunities.

古文：凡所著述五十八篇，掇其切于世事者著于传云。
现代文：他的著述共五十八篇，摘取其中切于时事的内容写在他的传中。
English: He wrote a total of fifty-eight books, excerpts of which are relevant to current events and are written in his biography.

