古文：胡颖，字方秀，吴兴东迁人也。
现代文：胡颖字方秀，吴兴东迁人。
English: Hu Ying, Fang Xiu, Wu Xing moved to the East.

古文：其先寓居吴兴，土断为民。
现代文：他的祖先寄居吴兴，经官府土断而成为当地人。
English: His ancestors lived in Wu Xing as sojourners and became local people after the local government made a decision to expel them.

古文：颖伟姿容，性宽厚。
现代文：胡颖姿容壮美，性情宽厚。
English: Hu Ying has a magnificent appearance and a generous disposition.

古文：梁世仕至武陵国侍郎，东宫直前。
现代文：在梁朝官至武陵国侍郎，束宫直前。
English: In the Liang Dynasty, he was a courtier of Wuling, just before the establishment of the Sokong Palace.

古文：出番禺，征讨俚洞，广州西江督护。高祖在广州，颖仍自结高祖，高祖与其同郡，接遇甚隆。
现代文：调出京城到番禺，征讨俚洞时，广州西江督护高祖在广州，胡颖于是主动攀附高祖，高祖与他是同郡人，很隆重地接待他。
English: When he was transferred from Beijing to Panyu to investigate Shandong, Guangzhou Xijiang Governor Gao Zu was in Guangzhou, so Hu Ying took the initiative to attach Gao Zu. Gao Zu and he were from the same county, and received him very ceremoniously.

古文：及南征交趾，颖从行役，馀诸将帅皆出其下。
现代文：到南征交趾时，胡颖随军服务，其他将领僚属的才干都比不上他。
English: When he went to the Southern Expedition, Hu Ying served with the army, and the talents of other generals' subordinates were no match for him.

古文：及平李贲，高祖旋师，颖隶在西江，出兵多以颖留守。
现代文：到平定了李贲，高祖凯旋回师后，胡颖隶属于西江，高祖率兵外出时多次派胡颖留守后方。
English: After Li Qiye was pacified and Gaozu triumphantly returned to his division, Hu Ying was subordinated to the Xijiang River. Gaozu sent Hu Ying to stay behind several times when he went out with his soldiers.

古文：侯景之乱，高祖克元景仲，仍渡岭援台，平蔡路养、李迁仕，颖皆有功。
现代文：侯景作乱时，高祖打败了元景仲后，随即越过五岭打算北上援救朝廷，途中平定了蔡路养、李迁仕，胡颖都有功劳。
English: When Hou Jing made a disturbance, Gaozu defeated Yuan Jingshong, and then crossed the Wuling Mountains to rescue the imperial court. On the way, he pacified Cai Luyang, Li Qianshi, and Hu Ying.

古文：历平固、遂兴二县令。
现代文：历任平固、遂兴二县县令。
English: He has served as the county magistrate of two counties, Pinggu and Suixing.

古文：高祖进军顿西昌，以颖为巴丘县令，镇大皋，督粮运。
现代文：高祖进军驻扎在西昌，派胡颖担任巴丘县县令，镇守大皋，统管军粮运输。
English: Gao Zu marched into the army and stationed in Xichang, and sent Hu Ying to serve as the county magistrate of Bachu County, the town guard, and the general manager of military grain transportation.

古文：下至豫章，以颖监豫章郡。
现代文：高祖束下到豫章，即派胡颖监理豫章郡。
English: Gao Zu cascaded down to Yuzhang and sent Hu Ying to supervise Yuzhang County.

古文：高祖率众与王僧辩会于白茅湾，同讨侯景，以颖知留府事。
现代文：高祖率部属舆王僧辩在白茅湾会合，共同讨伐侯景，派胡颖主持留守府内的事务。
English: Gao Zu and his subordinate, Miao Wang, met in Baimaowan to jointly fight against Houjing, and sent Hu Ying to preside over the affairs of the remaining government.

古文：梁承圣初，元帝授颖假节、铁骑将军、罗州刺史，封汉阳县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：梁朝承圣初年，元帝任命胡颖为假节、铁骑将军、罗州刺史，封汉阳县侯，食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of the Liang Dynasty, Emperor Yuan appointed Hu Ying as the False Festival, the Iron Cavalry General, the History of Luozhou, the Marquess of Hanyang County, and 500 households in the food village.

古文：寻除豫章内史，随高祖镇京口。
现代文：不久又任命为豫章内史，随从高祖镇守京口。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a historian of Yuzhang, and followed Gao Zuzhen as the keeper of the capital.

古文：齐遣郭元建出关，都督侯瑱率师御之。
现代文：齐派遣郭元建出关来犯，都督侯填领兵抵御。
English: Qi sent Guo Yuanjian out of the pass to defend against the invaders, and the prefectural governors led the troops to defend against them.

古文：高祖选府内骁勇三千人配颖，令随瑱，于东关大破之。
现代文：高祖挑选府内的三千勇士调配给胡颖，派他随从侯填，在东关大破郭元建。
English: Gaozu selected three thousand warriors in the capital and assigned them to Hu Ying. He sent him to follow Hou Jian and to break the block of Yuan Jian in Dongguan.

古文：三年，高祖围广陵，齐人东方光据宿预请降，以颖为五原太守，随杜僧明援光，不克，退还，除曲阿令。
现代文：三年，高祖围攻广陵，齐人东方光据守宿预请求降顺，高祖派胡颖为五原太守，随从杜僧明援助东方光，没能成功，退还，被任命为曲阿县令。
English: In the third year, Gao Zu besieged Guangling, the Qi people of Dongfangguang surrendered according to the advance request of the guard, Gao Zu sent Hu Ying as the governor of Wuhuan, followed by Du Sangming to assist Dongfangguang, but failed, returned, and was appointed as the governor of Qua County.

古文：寻领马军，从高祖袭王僧辩。
现代文：不久，率领马军，随从产担袭击王僧辩。
English: Not long after, he led the horse army, and his attendants attacked Wang Sangwei.

古文：又随周文育于吴兴讨杜龛。
现代文：又随且塞直在昱璺讨伐拄矗。
English: He also went on a rampage to fight the logging.

古文：绍泰元年，除假节、都督南豫州诸军事、轻车将军、南豫州刺史。
现代文：纽台元年，被任命为假节、都督南豫州诸军事、轻车将军、直邃业刺史。
English: In the first year of the New Tai Dynasty, he was appointed as the False Festival, the military governor of South Yuzhou, the general of light vehicles, and the historian of the industry.

古文：太平元年，除持节、散骑常侍、仁威将军。
现代文：立垩元年，被任命为持节、散骑常侍、仁威将军。
English: In the first year after the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was appointed as the general of Jinwei.

古文：寻兼丹阳尹。
现代文：不久又兼任壁堡尹。
English: Soon after, he also assumed the post of Walled Fort Yin.

古文：高祖受禅，兼左卫将军，馀如故。
现代文：产担受挥为帝后，塑题又兼左卫将军，其他官职仍旧。
English: The imperial empress is in charge of production and administration, and the General of the Left Division is also in charge of military affairs. Other official positions remain unchanged.

古文：永定三年，随侯安都征王琳，于宫亭破贼帅常众爱等。
现代文：永定三年，随从侯安都征讨王琳，在宣台大破贼帅堂塞爱等。
English: Yongding for three years, followed by Hou Andu to recruit Wang Lin, in Xuan Tai to smash the thief, Shuai Tang, Sai Ai and so on.

古文：世祖嗣位，除侍中、都督吴州诸军事、宣惠将军、吴州刺史。
现代文：世担继承帝位，任命他为侍中、都督吴州诸军事、宣惠将军、吴州刺史。
English: The emperor was concerned about the succession to the throne, and appointed him as a chamberlain, the military governor of Wuzhou, General Xuan Hui, and the chief historian of Wuzhou.

古文：不行，寻为义兴太守，将军如故。
现代文：他没有赴任，随即改任为义兴太守，将军称号仍旧。
English: He did not take up the post, but was immediately reappointed as Yixing Dazhu, while retaining his title of general.

古文：天嘉元年，除散骑常侍、吴兴太守。
现代文：玉墓元年，任命他为散骑常侍、吴兴太守。
English: In the first year of the Tomb of Jade, he appointed him as a strolling equerry, Wu Xing Taishu.

古文：其年六月卒，时年五十四。
现代文：逭年六月去世，时年五十四岁。
English: He died in June of the same year at the age of fifty-four.

古文：赠侍中、中护军，谥曰壮。
现代文：追赠为侍中、中护军，谧号是壮。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Middle Captain and Middle Guardian, and his posthumous name was Zhuang.

古文：二年，配享高祖庙庭。
现代文：二年，配享在高祖祭庙。
English: Two years later, it was distributed at the Gaozhu Temple.

古文：子六同嗣。
现代文：儿子胡六同继承。
English: He was succeeded by his son Hu Liuping.

古文：颖弟铄，亦随颖将军。
现代文：翅题弟弟塑铿，也随着支噬带兵。
English: The younger brother of the winged subject, Shuxuan, also led the troops with the phagocytosis.

古文：颖卒，铄统其众。
现代文：查岖去世后，塑镗统率他的部属。
English: After the death of Chagugu, Shuxuan led his subordinates.

古文：历东海、豫章二郡守，迁员外散骑常侍。
现代文：历任束海、豫章二郡太守，升任员外散骑常侍。
English: Successive governors of Sokha and Yuzhang counties were promoted to the rank of non-commissioned officer.

古文：随章昭达南平欧阳纥，为广州东江督护。
现代文：随从章昭达南征平定欧疆丝时，担任卢业塞红督护。
English: When he followed Zhang Zhao on the Southern Expedition to subdue the Western Regions, he served as Lu Yessai's Red Supervisor.

古文：还预北伐，除雄信将军、历阳太守。
现代文：回军后参与北伐，被任命为雄信将军、历阳太守。
English: After returning to the army, he participated in the Northern Expedition and was appointed as the general of Xiongxin and the governor of Liyang.

古文：太建六年卒，赠桂州刺史。
现代文：太建六年去世，追赠为桂州刺史。
English: Tai Jian died six years later and was posthumously awarded the title of Guizhou stabbing history.

古文：徐度，字孝节，安陆人也。世居京师。
现代文：锤字垄个，室堕入。世世代代住在京师。
English: A hammer-and-sickle ridge, a room to fall into. Generations of people have lived in Kyoto.

古文：少倜傥，不拘小节。
现代文：青年时期就卓越不俗，不拘小节。
English: In his youth, he was outstanding, no matter how small.

古文：及长，姿貌瑰伟，嗜酒好博。恒使僮仆屠酤为事。
现代文：到长大成人后，姿容相貌奇伟，喜欢饮酒爱好博戏，经常派僮仆专门从事屠宰和卖酒。
English: When he became an adult, his appearance was marvelous, he liked drinking and gambling, and he often sent his servants to specialise in slaughtering and selling alcohol.

古文：梁始兴内史萧介之郡，度从之，将领士卒，征诸山洞，以骁勇闻。
现代文：梁朝始兴内史萧介到了郡裹，涂仅跟着他，带领士卒，征讨各个山洞，以骁勇而闻名。
English: When Liang Zhaozhi Xing Nai Shi Xiao entered the county, Tu followed him and led his soldiers to conquer various caves. He was famous for his bravery.

古文：高祖征交趾，厚礼招之，度乃委质。
现代文：高祖征讨交趾，用隆重的礼节招揽他，徐度才表示归顺。
English: Gao Zuzheng discussed with his kinsman and invited him with grand etiquette, but he was slow to surrender.

古文：侯景之乱，高祖克定广州，平蔡路养，破李迁仕，计划多出于度。
现代文：龌作乱之时，龃平定龇，削平了龃养，打垮了李迁仕，这些计策谋划大多出于徐度。
English: At the time of the riots, the government pacified and stabilized the peasants, leveled the peasants' upbringing, and defeated Li Qianshi. Most of these strategies and plans were slow.

古文：兼统兵甲，每战有功。
现代文：篮仅兼带统领士兵，每次战斗都有功劳。
English: The basket is only accompanied by the commanding soldier, and every battle has merit.

古文：归至白茅湾，梁元帝授宁朔将军、合州刺史。
现代文：回到白茅湾，梁元帝任命他为宁朔将军、合州刺史。
English: Back in Baimao Bay, Emperor Liang Yuan appointed him as the general of Ningshuo and the leader of Hezhou.

古文：侯景平后，追录前后战功，加通直散骑常侍，封广德县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：堡量之乱平息以后，对他前前后后的战功计写入册，加任通直散骑常侍，封广德县侯，食邑五百户。
English: After the chaos of the castle volume subsided, his war exploits were recorded, and he was appointed as a regular attendant, the lord of Guangde County, and 500 households in food villages.

古文：迁散骑常侍。
现代文：又升任为散骑常侍。
English: Promoted to Sangetsu-no-Zenshi.

古文：高祖镇硃方，除信武将军、兰陵太守。
现代文：直担镇守塞立时，任命他为信武将军、兰陵太守。
English: When he was directly in charge of Selit, the town guard, he appointed him as the general of Shinbu and the governor of Lanling.

古文：高祖遣衡阳献王往荆州，度率所领从焉。
现代文：产担派衡阳献王去趔，过率领所部随同。
English: The production supervisor sent Hengyang Xianwang to the capital, and he led the directorate to accompany him.

古文：江陵陷，间行东归。
现代文：堰失陷后，涂廛从小路向东潜回。
English: After the collapse of the weir, Tu Youyou dived back from the path to the east.

古文：高祖平王僧辩，度与侯安都为水军。
现代文：高祖平定王僧辩时，徐度与侯安都率领水军。
English: When Gaozhu Pingding Wang argued with the monk, Xu Du and Hou An both led the navy.

古文：绍泰元年，高祖东讨杜龛，奉敬帝幸京口，以度领宿卫，并知留府事。
现代文：绍泰元年，高祖东征讨伐杜宠，拥奉敬帝到京时，派徐度统率宿卫部队，并且主持留守府事务。
English: In the first year of the Shao Tai Dynasty, Gao Zu went on an eastward expedition to fight Du Ji, and when he arrived in Beijing to worship Emperor Jing, he sent Xu Du to command the home guard troops and preside over the affairs of the palace.

古文：徐嗣徽、任约等来寇，高祖与敬帝还都。
现代文：徐嗣徽、任约等来犯，高祖与敬帝回到都城。
English: Xu Shihui, Ren You and others came to commit crimes, Gao Zu and Jing Di returned to the capital.

古文：时贼已据石头城，市廛阝居民，并在南路，去台遥远，恐为贼所乘，乃使度将兵镇于冶城寺，筑垒以断之。
现代文：这时贼寇已经占据石头城，市集上的平民百姓，都集中在南路，距离朝廷禁省很远，都害怕被贼寇骚扰，高祖就派徐度率兵在冶城寺镇守，构筑城垒将百姓隔离开来。
English: At this time, the bandits had already occupied Stone Town, and the common people at the market were all concentrated on South Road, far away from the Imperial Forbidden Province. They were all afraid of being harassed by the bandits. Gaozu sent Xu Du and his soldiers to guard the town of Yecheng Temple, building a fortress to isolate the people.

古文：贼悉众来攻，不能克。
现代文：贼寇倾尽全力进攻，没能攻下来。
English: The bandits tried their best to attack, but failed.

古文：高祖寻亦救之，大败约等。
现代文：紧接着高祖也前来救援，打败了任约等人。
English: Immediately after, Gaozu also came to the rescue, defeating Ren Yotong and others.

古文：明年，嗣徽等又引齐寇济江，度随众军破之于北郊坛。
现代文：第二年，徐嗣徽等又勾引齐寇渡江南侵，徐度随从各路军兵在北郊坛打败了他们。
English: In the second year, Xu Shihui and others lured the Qigong to cross the Yangtze River to invade the south, and soldiers from all directions defeated them in the northern suburb of Tan.

古文：以功除信威将军、郢州刺史，兼领吴兴太守。
现代文：因有战功被任命为信威将军、郢州刺史，兼领吴兴太守。
English: Due to his war service, he was appointed as the general of Xinwei, the governor of Zhangzhou, and the governor of Wu Xing.

古文：寻迁镇右将军、领军将军、徐州缘江诸军事、镇北将军、南徐州刺史，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：不久升任镇右将军、领军将军、徐州缘江诸军事、镇北将军、南徐州刺史，赏给鼓吹乐一部。
English: He was soon promoted to Zhenyu General, Leading General, Xuzhou Yangtze River Military, Zhenbei General, South Xuzhou Sashih, and awarded a part of the propaganda music.

古文：周文育、侯安都等西讨王琳，败绩，为琳所拘，乃以度为前军都督，镇于南陵。
现代文：周文育、侯安都等向西进军征讨王琳，结果全军大败，他们也被王琳拘囚不还，高祖就任命徐度为前军都督，镇守在南陵。
English: Zhou Wenyu, Hou Andu and others marched west to fight Wang Lin. As a result, the whole army was defeated. They were also detained by Wang Lin and did not return. Gaozu appointed Xu Du as the former military governor, and the town guard was in Nanling.

古文：世祖嗣位，迁侍中、中抚军将军、开府仪同三司，进爵为公。
现代文：世祖继承帝位后，调他入朝升任侍中、中抚军将军、开府仪同三司，提升爵级为公。
English: After the founder of the dynasty succeeded to the throne, he was transferred to the imperial court and promoted to the posts of chamberlain, general of the Middle Palace Guards, and secretary of the Imperial Household Agency. He was also promoted to the peerage.

古文：未拜，出为使持节、散骑常侍、镇东将军、吴郡太守。
现代文：徐度还没有赴任，又调出京城担任使持节、散骑常侍、镇东将军、吴郡太守。
English: Xu Du had not yet taken office, and he was transferred out of Beijing to serve as the envoy of the festival, the horseback riding attendant, the general of Zhendong, and the governor of Wu County.

古文：天嘉元年，增邑千户。
现代文：天嘉元年，增赐食邑一千户。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, an additional one thousand households were given food villages.

古文：以平王琳功，改封湘东郡公，邑四千户。
现代文：因为平定王琳有功，改封为湘束郡公，食邑四千户。
English: Because of Wang Lin's contribution to pacification, he was given the title of Hunan County Governor, with 4,000 households in the county.

古文：秩满，为侍中、中军将军。
现代文：任期满后，调入朝廷担任侍中、中军将军。
English: After his term of office expired, he was transferred to the imperial court to serve as an aide-de-camp and general of the Chinese army.

古文：出为使持节、都督会稽、东阳、临海、永嘉、新安、新宁、信安、晋安、建安九郡诸军事、镇东将军、会稽太守。
现代文：又调出京城担任使持节、都督会稽束阳临海水嘉新安新宁信安晋安建安九郡诸军事、镇束将军、会稽太守。
English: In addition, the capital city was transferred to serve as the festival of envoys, and the military, township generals, and chief auditors of the capital city were transferred to Yanglin, Haihua, Jiaxin, Anning, Xin'an, Jin'an, Jian'an and Jiujiang counties.

古文：未行而太尉侯瑱薨于湘州，乃以度代瑱为都督湘、沅、武、巴、郢、桂六州诸军事、镇南将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：还没有启程赴任而太尉侯填在湘州去世，于是就以徐度代替侯琐担任都督湘沅武巴郢桂六州诸军事、镇南将军、湘州刺史。
English: Before he left for the post, Taiyi Houfu died in Hunan Province, so Xu Du replaced Hou Zuo as the governor of Hunan Province, the military commander of the Six Provinces, the general of Zhenan Province, and the historian of Hunan Province.

古文：秩满，为侍中、中军大将军，仪同、鼓吹并如故。
现代文：任期满后调入朝廷担任侍中、中军大将军，仪同、鼓吹乐的封赏一起仍旧。
English: After the expiration of his term of office, he was transferred to the Imperial Court to serve as an aide-de-camp and general of the Chinese army, and the ceremony, along with the reward of preaching music, remained the same.

古文：世祖崩，度预顾命，以甲仗五十人入殿省。
现代文：世祖驾崩，徐度参与听受辅佐太子的遣诏而为顾命大臣，带五十名甲士进入殿省。
English: After the death of his ancestor, he gradually participated in listening to the dispatch of the crown prince and became the minister of life, bringing fifty soldiers into the palace.

古文：废帝即位，进位司空。
现代文：废帝即位后，提升他的官职为司空。
English: After the deposed emperor ascended the throne, he was promoted to the official position of Siku.

古文：华皎据湘州反，引周兵下至沌口，与王师相持，乃加度使持节、车骑将军，总督步军，自安成郡由岭路出于湘东，以袭湘州，尽获其所留军人家口以归。
现代文：华皎占据湘州反叛，勾引周兵束下到沌口，与王师相抗，废帝就加任徐度为使持节、车骑将军，总领陆军，从安成郡通过五岭的山路出兵到湘束，以袭击湘州，俘获了华皎留在后方的全部军人家属然后回师。
English: Hua Tuo occupied rebellious Hunan, lured Zhou soldiers down to Chaozhou to fight against Wang Shifu, and the deposed emperor appointed Xu Du as envoy, cavalry general, and commander-in-chief of the army. He sent troops from Ancheng County through the Wuling Mountains to Hunan to attack Hunan, captured all the military families left behind by Hua Tuo, and then returned to the division.

古文：光大二年薨，时年六十。
现代文：光大二年去世，这年六十岁。
English: He died in his second year of college, at the age of sixty.

古文：赠太尉，给班剑二十人，谥曰忠肃。
现代文：追赠为太尉，赏赐班剑仪仗二十人，谧号是忠肃。
English: He was posthumously promoted to the rank of second lieutenant, and was awarded a ceremonial sword for twenty people. His posthumous name was Chunsu.

古文：太建四年，配享高祖庙庭。
现代文：太建四年，配享在高祖祭庙。
English: It has been under construction for four years and is located in the Gaozhu Temple.

古文：子敬成嗣。
现代文：儿子徐敬成继承。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Xu Jingcheng.

古文：敬成幼聪慧，好读书，少机警，善占对，结交文义之士，以识鉴知名。
现代文：徐敬成幼年时期聪明有智慧，喜爱读书，少年时期机敏警觉，善于应口答对，结交那些言之有物的文义之士，以能赏识人才辨别是非而闻名。
English: As a child, Xu Jingcheng was smart and intelligent and loved reading. As a teenager, he was alert and alert, good at answering questions, and made friends with those literati who had something to say. He was famous for being able to appreciate talent and distinguish right from wrong.

古文：起家著作郎。
现代文：在家中以平民身份直接出任为著作郎。
English: At home, as a commoner, he worked directly as a scribe.

古文：永定元年，领度所部士卒，随周文育、侯安都征王琳，于沌口败绩，为琳所絷。
现代文：永定元年，徐敬成统率徐度部下的士卒，随从周文育、侯安都征讨王琳，在沌大败，被王琳拘囚。
English: In the first year of Yongding, Xu Jingcheng led the soldiers of Xu Du's subordinates, followed by Zhou Wenyu and Hou An, to recruit Wang Lin. They were defeated in the chaos, and Wang Lin was taken prisoner.

古文：二年，随文育、安都得归，除太子舍人，迁洗马。
现代文：二年，随周文育、侯安都逃回，被任命为太子舍人，升任洗马。
English: In the second year, with Zhou Benyu and Hou An both fleeing back, he was appointed as the prince's concubine and promoted to the post of washing horses.

古文：度为吴郡太守，以敬成监郡。
现代文：徐度担任吴郡太守时，派徐敬成监理郡中事务。
English: When Xu Du served as the governor of Wu County, he sent Xu Jingcheng to supervise the affairs of the county middle school.

古文：天嘉二年，迁太子中舍人，拜湘东郡公世子。
现代文：天嘉二年。升任为太子中舍人，被确立为湘东郡公世子。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, he was promoted to the position of the prince's middle son and was established as the heir to the throne of Shandong County.

古文：四年，度自湘州还朝，士马精锐，敬成尽领其众。
现代文：四年。徐度从湘州回到朝廷时，兵马精锐，徐敬成即统率这支军队。
English: Four years later, when Xu Du returned to the imperial court from Hunan Province, the army was led by Xu Jingcheng, an elite soldier.

古文：随章昭达征陈宝应，晋安平，除贞威将军、豫章太守。
现代文：随从童昭达征讨陈实应，晋安平定后，被任命为贞威将军、豫章太守。
English: He followed Tong Zhaoda to recruit Chen Shiru, and after the subjugation of Jinan, he was appointed as General Zhenwei and Governor of Yuzhang.

古文：光大元年，华皎谋反，以敬成为假节、都督巴州诸军事、云旗将军、巴州刺史。寻诏为水军，随吴明彻征华皎，皎平还州。
现代文：光大元年，华皎谋反，庐童任命徐敬成为假节、都督旦业诸军事、云旗将军、巴州刺史不久天子又命令他组建水军，随从吴明彻征讨华皎，在平定华皎后回到巴州。
English: In the first year of the Guangda era, Hua Tuo plotted a rebellion, and Xing Tong appointed Xu Jing to be the false festival, the military governor of Dangye, the general of Yunqi, and the governor of Bazhou. Soon after, Tianzi ordered him to form a navy, followed by Wu Mingcher to recruit Hua Tuo, and returned to Bazhou after pacifying Hua Tuo.

古文：二年，以父忧去职。
现代文：二年，因父亲去世服丧而离职。
English: Two years later, he left the position due to the death of his father.

古文：寻起为持节、都督南豫州诸军事、壮武将军、南豫州刺史。
现代文：不久即起任为持节、都督南豫州诸军事、壮武将军、南豫州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the military commander of the Southern Yu Prefecture, the military commander of the Southern Yu Province, the military commander of the Southern Yu Province, and the military commander of the Southern Yu Province.

古文：四年，袭爵湘东郡公，授太子右卫率。
现代文：四年，继承湘束郡公的爵位，被任命为太子右卫率。
English: Four years later, he succeeded to the title of Xiangzhu County's prince and was appointed as the crown prince's right guard.

古文：五年，除贞威将军、吴兴太守。
现代文：五年，被任命为贞威将军、吴兴太守。
English: Five years later, he was appointed as General Zhenwei and Wu Xing as the de facto ruler.

古文：其年随都督吴明彻北讨，出秦郡，别遣敬成为都督，乘金翅自欧阳引埭上溯江由广陵。
现代文：逭年随从都督呈明彻北伐，从秦郡出兵，吴明彻另派一军以途董噬为都督，乘金翅大舰从压坠到埭溯辽而上到达赵。
English: In the year of the Rooster, Wu Mingche sent an army from Qin County to join the Northern Expedition, and Wu Mingche sent another army to take Dong Zha as the governor, and used the Golden Wing Ship to sail up to Zhao from Pudong to Liao.

古文：齐人皆城守，弗敢出。
现代文：蛮兵都缩守城内，不敢出战。
English: The barbarian soldiers have all retreated inside the city, afraid to go out to fight.

古文：自繁梁湖下淮，围淮阴城。
现代文：徐敬成从箠凿翅顺进丞而下，包围进压城。
English: Xu Jingcheng marched down from Zouqi Wing to Jinzheng, and encircled and pressed the city.

古文：仍监北兗州。
现代文：随即监理北兖州。
English: He was immediately put in charge of North Luzhou.

古文：淮、泗义兵相率响应，一二日间，众至数万，遂克淮阴、山阳、盐城三郡，并连口、朐山二戍。
现代文：进丞、回丞一带的义兵相继响应，一两天内，多达几万人，于是攻占了淮阴、山鳗、盐球三座郡城，以及轴、跑山两座城垒。
English: The volunteers around Jinzheng and Huizhong successively responded, and within a day or two, as many as tens of thousands of people, and then captured Huaiyin, Shanshui, and Yanqiu three county towns, as well as the axis and running mountain two fortresses.

古文：仍进攻郁州，克之。
现代文：接着进攻郁，打下来了。
English: Then the offense stuttered and was shut down.

古文：以功加通直散骑常侍、云旗将军，增邑五百户。
现代文：因有战功加任通直散骑常侍、云旗将军，增赐食邑五百户。
English: Due to his war exploits, he was appointed to the post of Tsuchizuchikizanki no Tsuneishi, General of the Clouded Banner, and was awarded an additional 500 households of Shokui.

古文：又进号壮武将军，镇朐山。
现代文：又提升官号为壮武将军，镇守朐山。
English: He was also promoted to the official title of Zhuangwu General and became the town guard of Shaoshan.

古文：坐于军中辄科订，并诛新附，免官。
现代文：因为在军中擅自论罪判处和诛杀新降顺的人而获罪，被罢官免职。
English: Because he was convicted of arbitrarily discussing crimes in the army and fighting and killing people who had newly surrendered, he was dismissed from his post.

古文：寻复为持节、都督安、元、潼三州诸军事、安州刺史，将军如故，镇宿预。
现代文：不久又恢复官职担任持节、都督安元潼三州诸军事、昼业刺史，将军称号仍旧，镇守在宿预。
English: Soon after, he resumed his official duties as the military governor of the three prefectures, the military governor of the three prefectures, the military governor of the three prefectures, and the military governor of the three prefectures. The title of general is still used, and the town guard is in Shukuhaku.

古文：七年卒，时年三十六。
现代文：七年去世，这年三十六岁。
English: He died seven years later, at the age of 36.

古文：赠散骑常侍，谥曰思。
现代文：追赠为散骑常侍，谧号是思。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of strolling equerry, and his posthumous name was Shima.

古文：子敞嗣。
现代文：儿子徐敞继承。
English: He was succeeded by his son Xu Chang.

古文：杜棱，字雄盛，吴郡钱塘人也。
现代文：杜棱字雄盛，吴郡钱塘人。
English: Du Ren Zi Xiong Sheng, from Qiantang, Wuxi County.

古文：世为县大姓。
现代文：世世代代都是县裹的大姓人家。
English: For generations, it's been the big families that have been wrapped up in the county.

古文：棱颇涉书传，少落泊，不为当世所知。
现代文：杜棱读过很多书籍经传，年轻时不得志，不被当时人所了解赏识。
English: Du Ren had read a lot of books on scriptures. When he was young, he had no ambition and was not appreciated by the people at that time.

古文：遂游岭南，事梁广州刺史新渝侯萧映。
现代文：于是到岭南一带游观仕途，为梁朝广州刺史新渝侯萧映效力。
English: As a result, he went to the Lingnan area for sightseeing, and worked for Liang Chaozhou in Guangzhou and Xinwu Hou Xiaoying.

古文：映卒，从高祖，恒典书记。
现代文：萧映死后，他跟随高祖，经常主管文书记录工作。
English: After Xiao Ying's death, he followed Gao Zu and was often in charge of paperwork.

古文：侯景之乱，命棱将领，平蔡路养、李迁仕皆有功。
现代文：侯景作乱，高祖派杜棱为将领，参与平定蔡路养、李迁仕都有功。
English: Hou Jing made a disturbance, Gao Zu sent Du Ren as a general, and participated in the pacification of Cai Luyang and Li Qian.

古文：军至豫章，梁元帝承制授棱仁威将军、石州刺史，上陌县侯，邑八百户。
现代文：带兵到豫章，梁元帝秉承皇帝的旨意任命杜棱为仁威将军、石州刺史，封为上陌县侯，食邑八百户。
English: After leading the troops to Yuanzhang, Emperor Liang Yuan, adhering to the emperor's will, appointed Du Ren as General Ren Wei, Shizhou Shishi, as the lord of Shangmou County, and 800 households in Shiyou.

古文：侯景平，高祖镇硃方，棱监义兴、琅邪二郡。
现代文：侯景之乱平定后，高祖镇守在朱方，杜棱监理义兴、琅邪二郡。
English: After the suppression of the Houjing Rebellion, Gaozu Town was in Zhu Fang, Du Ren supervised Yixing, and Shiyan two counties.

古文：高祖诛王僧辩，引棱与侯安都等共议，棱难之。
现代文：高祖定计诛杀王僧辩时，召引杜棱和侯安都等前来商议，杜棱反驳了这种意图。
English: When Gao Zu was plotting to kill Wang Sofen, he summoned Du Ren and Hou Andu to come and discuss, and Du Ren refuted this intention.

古文：高祖惧其泄己，乃以手巾绞棱，棱闷绝于地，因闭于别室。
现代文：高祖怕他泄露自己的秘密，就用手巾绞杀杜棱，杜棱呼吸阻塞倒在地上，于是把他关闭在另外的房间裹。
English: Gao Zu was afraid that he would reveal his secret, so he strangled Du Ren with a hand towel. Du Ren stopped breathing and fell to the ground, so he locked him in another room.

古文：军发，召与同行。
现代文：军队出发了，才叫他随军同行。
English: When the army set out, he was asked to go with them.

古文：及僧辩平后，高祖东征杜龛等，留棱与安都居守。
现代文：到王僧辩诛死后，高祖东征杜宠等人，留杜棱与侯安都守住后方。
English: After the death of Wang Zengyuan, Gao Zu marched east with Du Ji and others, leaving Du Ren and Hou An to hold the rear.

古文：徐嗣徽、任约引齐寇济江，攻台城，安都与棱随方抗拒，棱昼夜巡警，绥抚士卒，未常解带。
现代文：徐嗣徽、任约勾引齐寇渡江，进攻台城，侯安都与杜棱紧随齐军的攻击方位处处抵御，杜棱昼夜巡视警戒，抚慰士卒，始终没有脱下军衣。
English: Xu Shihui and Ren You seduced Qi Ke to cross the Yangtze River and attack Taicheng. Hou Andu and Du Ren followed the attack direction of the Qi Army and resisted everywhere. Du Ren patrolled and guarded day and night, comforted the soldiers, and never took off his military uniform.

古文：贼平，以功除通直散骑常侍、右卫将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：平定贼兵后，因有战功被任命为通直散骑常侍、右卫将军、丹阳尹。
English: After subduing the bandits, he was appointed as a regular attendant of the cavalry, a general of the right guard, and Danyang Yin for his war service.

古文：永定元年，加侍中、忠武将军。
现代文：永定元年，加任侍中、忠武将军。
English: In the first year of the Yongding era, he was appointed to the posts of Samurai Middle Rank and General Tadatake.

古文：寻迁中领军，侍中，将军如故。
现代文：不久升任中领军，侍中、将军二职仍旧。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of middle leader, but the two positions of chamberlain and general remained the same.

古文：三年，高祖崩，世祖在南皖。
现代文：三年，高祖崩，世祖远在南皖。
English: In three years, Gao Zu passed away, and his ancestors were far away in Nanlu.

古文：时内无嫡嗣，外有强敌，侯瑱、侯安都、徐度等并在军中，朝廷宿将，唯棱在都，独典禁兵，乃与蔡景历等秘不发丧，奉迎世祖，事见景历传。
现代文：这时宫内没有高祖正妻所生之子继位，外有强敌压境，侯填、侯安都、徐度等一起都在外地带兵，朝廷老将衹有杜棱在京都，并且独自掌握了宫廷禁兵，杜棱就与蔡景历等暂不向天下发讣告，先迎接世祖即位，这一历史情节参见蔡景历传。
English: At this time, there was no son of Gao Zu's legal wife in the imperial court to succeed to the throne, and there were strong enemies outside. Hou Jian, Hou Andu, Xu Du and others were all leading soldiers in the field together. The veteran of the imperial court, Zou You Du Ren, was in Kyoto, and he alone controlled the ban on soldiers in the imperial court. Du Ren and Cai Jingli did not issue an obituary to the world for the time being, and first greeted the enthronement of the ancestor. For the historical plot, see Cai Jingli Biography.

古文：世祖即位，迁领军将军。
现代文：世祖即位后，杜棱升任领军将军。
English: After the Emperor ascended to the throne, Du Ren was promoted to the leading general.

古文：天嘉元年，以预建立之功，改封永城县侯，增邑五百户。
现代文：天嘉元年，因为参与扶立新君主有功，改封为永城县侯，增赐食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, because of his contribution to the establishment of the new monarch, he was changed to the lord of Yongcheng County, and five hundred households of food villages were added.

古文：出为云麾将军，晋陵太守，加秩中二千石。
现代文：调出京城担任云麾将军、晋陵太守，增加俸禄至中二千石。
English: He was transferred out of the capital to serve as the general of Yunnan and the governor of Jinling, and his salary was increased to 2,000 koku.

古文：二年，征为侍中、领军将军。
现代文：二年，天子征召为侍中、领军将军。
English: In the second year, Tenshi was called up to be a chamberlain and a leading general.

古文：寻迁翊左将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：不久升任翊左将军、丹阳尹。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of Shiza Gen. and Danyang Yin.

古文：废帝即位，迁镇右将军、特进，侍中、尹如故。
现代文：尘帝即位，升任杜棱为镇右将军、特进，侍中、丹阳尹二职仍旧。
English: Emperor Jian ascended to the throne, and Du Ren was promoted to Zhenyu Shogun and Special Envoy, while Danyang Yin remained in the position of Chamberlain.

古文：光大元年，解尹，量置佐史，给扶，重授领军将军。
现代文：光大元年，天子解除他丹堡尹的职务，授予他依据实情自行安排僚吏的权力、给予扶护人员，重又任命为领军将军。
English: In the first year of the Guangda era, Tianzi relieved him of the duties of Dangbao Yin, granted him the power to arrange colleagues according to the actual situation, gave him support personnel, and re-appointed him as the leading general.

古文：太建元年，出为散骑常侍、镇东将军、吴兴太守，秩中二千石。
现代文：太建元年，调出京城担任散骑常侍、镇束将军、吴兴太守，俸禄中二千石。
English: In the first year of the Tai Jian era, he was transferred out of Beijing to serve as a straggler's equerry, Zenzoku general, and Wu Xing governor, with a salary of 2,000 koku.

古文：二年，征为侍中、镇右将军。
现代文：二年。天子征召担任侍中、镇右将军。
English: Two years later, Tenshi was called up to serve as Samurai Middle Captain and General Zhenyu.

古文：寻加特进、护军将军。
现代文：不久加任特进、护军将军。
English: He was soon appointed as a special envoy and escort general.

古文：三年，以公事免侍中、护军。
现代文：三年，因公事免去侍中、护军二职。
English: Three years later, he was relieved of his duties as an aide-de-camp and bodyguard.

古文：四年，复为侍中、右光禄大夫，并给鼓吹一部，将军、佐史、扶并如故。
现代文：四年，恢复官职担任侍中、右光禄大夫，并且赏赐鼓吹乐一部，将军职务、安排僚吏的权力、给予扶护人员等待遇仍同从前一样。
English: In four years, he resumed his official position as a chamberlain and doctor of the right light, and was awarded a part of the propaganda music. The general's position, the power to arrange officials, and the treatment of support personnel were still the same as before.

古文：棱历事三帝，并见恩宠。
现代文：杜棱先后为三位皇帝服务，都得到了优待宠幸。
English: Du Ren served three emperors successively and was favored with preferential treatment.

古文：末年不预征役，优游京师，赏赐优洽。
现代文：晚年不参预征伐之役，在京都悠闲自得，赏赐丰厚。
English: In his later years, he did not take part in the pre-conquest campaign and enjoyed his leisure time in Kyoto, which was richly rewarded.

古文：顷之卒于官，时年七十。
现代文：没多久在任所去世，这年七十岁。
English: He died not long after in office, at the age of seventy.

古文：赠开府仪同三司，丧事所须，并令资给，谥曰成。
现代文：追赠为开府仪同三司，丧事所需财物，天子下令全部由国库资助供给，谧号是成。
English: The posthumous gifts were the Kaifu ceremony and the three divisions, and the property needed for the funeral, all of which were provided by the state treasury by order of the emperor, and the posthumous name was Cheng.

古文：其年配享高祖庙庭。
现代文：当年配享在高祖祭庙。
English: That year, it was held at the Koso Festival Temple.

古文：子安世嗣。
现代文：儿子杜安世继承。
English: His son Duan Shih succeeded him.

古文：沈恪，字子恭，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：沈恪字子恭，吴兴武康人。
English: Shen Kezhi Zi Gong, Wu Xing Wu Kangren.

古文：深沈有干局。
现代文：生性深刻沉着而富有办事的才能气度。
English: Deeply self-possessed by nature and with a talent for getting things done.

古文：梁新渝侯萧映为郡将，召为主簿。
现代文：梁朝新渝侯萧映担任郡守时，征召他为主簿。
English: When Liang Chaoxin Yuhou Xiao Ying served as the county governor, he was called up as the main book.

古文：映迁北徐州，恪随映之镇。
现代文：萧映调北徐州，沈恪跟随萧映到镇所。
English: Xiao Ying moved to the north of Xuzhou, Shen Ke followed Xiao Ying to the town.

古文：映迁广州，以恪兼府中兵参军，常领兵讨伐俚洞。
现代文：萧映调任广州，用沈恪兼府中兵参军，常常领兵讨伐俚洞。
English: Xiao Ying was transferred to Guangzhou, and he used Shen Ke and soldiers from the prefectural government to join the army, and often led soldiers to fight in Shandong.

古文：卢子略之反也。恪拒战有功，除中兵参军。
现代文：卢子略反叛，沈恪抗御有功，被任命为中兵参军。
English: Lu Zi slightly rebelled, Shen Jia successfully resisted, and was appointed to join the army.

古文：高祖与恪同郡，情好甚昵，萧映卒后，高祖南讨李贲，仍遣妻子附恪还乡。
现代文：高祖与沈恪是同郡人，感情好很亲近，萧映去世后，高祖向南征讨李贲，于是让妻子儿女随附沈恪还乡。
English: Gao Zu and Shen Ke were from the same county and were very close. After Xiao Ying Lun's death, Gao Zu went to the south to fight against Li Xi, so he sent his wife and children to accompany Shen Ke to return to his hometown.

古文：寻补东宫直后，以岭南勋除员外散骑侍郎，仍令招集宗从子弟。
现代文：不久委任他为东宫直后，以岭南的功劳任命为员外散骑侍郎，随后派他招集同姓叔伯兄弟的子弟。
English: Soon after he was appointed as the Eastern Palace, he was appointed as a non-commissioned cavalry officer with the merit of Lingnan, and then he was sent to recruit the children of his uncle's brothers with the same surname.

古文：侯景围台城，恪率所领入台，随例加右军将军。
现代文：侯景围困台城，沈恪率领所部人员进入朝廷禁省守御，依随条文惯例加任右军将军。
English: Hou Jing besieged Taicheng, and Shen Ke led the staff of the headquarters to enter the imperial court to defend the province, and was appointed as the general of the right army in accordance with the provisions of the regulations.

古文：贼起东西二土山以逼城，城内亦作土山以应之，恪为东土山主，昼夜拒战。
现代文：贼兵在东西方向垒起两座土山攻城，城内也堆土成山相应对峙，沈恪为东面土山的主将，昼夜抗击。
English: The robber soldiers attacked the city from the east and west by erecting two earthen mounds, and they also piled up earthen mounds inside the city to confront each other. Shen Ke was the leader of the earthen mounds in the east, resisting day and night.

古文：以功封东兴县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：因有战功被封为束兴县侯，食邑五百户。
English: Due to his war exploits, he was made the lord of Shuxing County, with more than 500 households in the county.

古文：迁员外散骑常侍。
现代文：升任员外散骑常侍。
English: Non-commissioned officers were transferred to the rank of samurai.

古文：京城陷，恪间行归乡里。
现代文：京城陷落后，沈恪从小路悄悄地回到故乡。
English: After the fall of the capital, Shen Ke quietly returned to his hometown from a side road.

古文：高祖之讨侯景，遣使报恪，乃于东起兵相应。
现代文：高祖讨伐侯景时，派人告知沈恪，沈恪就在东方起兵响应。
English: When Gaozu was fighting against Houjing, he sent someone to inform Shen Ke, and Shen Ke responded by raising an army in the east.

古文：贼平，恪谒高祖于京口，即日授都军副。
现代文：平定侯景后，沈恪到京口拜见高祖，当天被任命为都军副。
English: After subduing Houjing, Shen Ke went to Beijing to meet Gao Zu, and was appointed deputy commander of the capital on the same day.

古文：寻为府司马。
现代文：随即又担任帅府中的司马。
English: He then served as Sima in the General Headquarters.

古文：及高祖谋讨王僧辩，恪预其谋。
现代文：当高祖定计诛讨王僧辩时，沈恪参与了策划。
English: When Gao Zu made up his mind to slander Wang Sofen, Shen Ke took part in the planning.

古文：时僧辩女婿杜龛镇吴兴，高祖乃使世祖还长城，立栅备龛，又使恪还武康，招集兵众。
现代文：造时王僧辩的女婿杜宠镇守吴兴，高祖就派世祖回到长城，设立栅栏防备杜宠，又派沈恪回到武康，招集兵员。
English: At that time, the son-in-law of Wang Sangyan, Du Ji, was the town guard of Wu Xing. Gao Zu sent his ancestor back to the Great Wall to set up a fence to protect Du Ji, and sent Shen Gu back to Wu Kang to recruit soldiers.

古文：及僧辩诛，龛果遣副将杜泰率众袭世祖于长城。
现代文：到王僧辩受诛后，杜宠果然派副将杜泰领兵到长城袭击世祖。
English: After Wang Sangye was arrested, Du Ji sent Vice Admiral Du Tai to lead troops to the Great Wall to attack Shizu.

古文：恪时已率兵士出县诛龛党与，高祖寻遣周文育来援长城，文育至，泰乃遁走。
现代文：沈恪这时已经带兵到县城之外捕杀杜宠党羽，高祖也迅速派周文育援救长城，周文言到了，杜泰才逃走。
English: At that time, Shen Ke had already led soldiers to the outskirts of the county to hunt down and kill Du Ji's followers. Gao Zu also quickly sent Zhou Wenyu to rescue the Great Wall. When Zhou Wenyu arrived, Du Tai fled.

古文：世祖仍与文育进军出郡，恪军亦至，屯于郡南。
现代文：世祖于是与周文言一道杀出郡城，沈恪的军队也到了，驻扎在郡南。
English: So Shizu, together with Zhou Wenyan, drove out of the county seat. Shen Ke's army also arrived and was stationed in the south of the county.

古文：及龛平，世祖袭东扬州刺史张彪，以恪监吴兴郡。
现代文：到平定杜宠后，世祖袭击束扬州刺史张彪，派沈恪监理吴兴郡。
English: After pacifying Duzhi, Shizu attacked Zhang Biao, the governor of Yangzhou, and sent Shen Gu to supervise Wu Xing County.

古文：太平元年，除宣猛将军、交州刺史。
现代文：太平元年，沈恪被任命为宣猛将军、交州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Taiping era, Shen Ke was appointed as the general of Xuanmeng and the historian of Jiaozhou.

古文：其年迁永嘉太守。
现代文：这年又调任永塞太守。
English: In the same year, he was transferred to the position of Yongsa governor-general.

古文：不拜，复令监吴兴郡。
现代文：选坚还没有接受这一任命，又被派去监理呈星璺。
English: Zeng Jian has not yet accepted the appointment, and has been sent to supervise the performance of the opera.

古文：自吴兴入朝。
现代文：后来从昱璺入朝任职。
English: Later, he served in the Joseon Dynasty.

古文：高祖受禅，使中书舍人刘师知引恪，令勒兵入，因卫敬帝如别宫。
现代文：直担受禅时，派中书舍人刘师知召调沈恪，命令他带兵进入宫中，保护梁敬帝离开正宫去别宫。
English: When he was directly in charge of receiving Zen, he sent Liu Shizhi, a Chinese scholar, to summon Shen Ke, and ordered him to lead soldiers into the palace to protect Emperor Liang Jing from leaving the main palace to go to another palace.

古文：恪乃排闼入见高祖，叩头谢曰： 恪身经事萧家来，今日不忍见许事，分受死耳，决不奉命。 
现代文：沈恪就推门进去见高祖，叩头请罪说： 我沈恪曾经为萧家王朝服务过，今天不忍心目睹它的灭亡，我甘愿受死，也不接受这道命令。 
English: Shen Gua pushed open the door and went in to see Gao Zu. He prostrated himself and pleaded guilty, saying, "I, Shen Gua, once served the Xiao Dynasty. Today, I cannot bear to witness its demise. I am willing to die, and I will not accept this order."

古文：高祖嘉其意，乃不复逼，更以荡主王僧志代之。
现代文：高祖嘉许他的心志，就不再强迫他，另外调跳荡军的主帅王僧志代替他。
English: Gao Zu appreciated his aspiration, so he no longer forced him, and transferred Wang Sangzhi, the commander of the swinging army, to replace him.

古文：高祖践祚，除吴兴太守。
现代文：产担登上帝位后，任命他为吴兴太守。
English: After the procurator ascended to the throne, he appointed Wu Xing as the de facto ruler.

古文：永定二年，徙监会稽郡。
现代文：永定二年，调他监理会稽郡。
English: In the second year of Yongding, he was transferred to the Board of Supervisors of the county.

古文：会余孝顷谋应王琳，出兵临川攻周迪，以恪为壮武将军，率兵逾岭以救迪。
现代文：适逢余孝顷阴谋接应王继，从堡叫出兵攻打且迪，于是直担任命选监为壮武将军，率兵越过东兴岭救援周迪。
English: At the right time, Yu Xiaohua plotted to meet Wang Jie and called out troops from the fortress to attack Zhou Di. Therefore, he directly served as the overseer of the election of life as Zhuangwu general and led the troops across Dongxingling to rescue Zhou Di.

古文：余孝顷闻恪至，退走。
现代文：余孝顷听知挝到了，就退走了。
English: As soon as Yu Xiaoxiao heard that Lao had arrived, he left.

古文：三年，迁使持节、通直散骑常侍、智武将军、吴州刺史，便道之鄱阳。
现代文：三年，升任为使持节、通直散骑常侍、智武将军、吴州刺史，从近便的小路去壁匮。
English: In the third year, he was promoted to the position of Jizhi Festival, Tongzhi loose riding attendant, General Zhiwu, Wuzhou stabbing history, and went to the wall from the convenient path.

古文：寻有诏追还，行会稽郡事。
现代文：不久有圣旨把他追回，调他代理会擅飨政务。
English: Soon after, he was recalled by an imperial edict, and his agents were allowed to take part in government affairs.

古文：其年，除散骑常侍、忠武将军、会稽太守。
现代文：这年，被任命为散骑常侍、忠武将军、会稽太守。
English: In the same year, he was appointed as a samurai, a general, and an inspector general.

古文：世祖嗣位，进督会稽、东阳、新安、临海、永嘉、建安、晋安、新宁、信安九郡诸军事，将军、太守如故。
现代文：世担继承了帝位，提升选恪担任都督会稽、塞坠、塞瞳、堕遥、丞台、建塞、置圭、塞腔、值窒九郡诸军事，将军、太守二职仍旧。
English: Shitan inherited the imperial throne, and promoted and selected military officers to serve as the governor of the capital, and promoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted, demoted,

古文：天嘉元年，增邑五百户。
现代文：天嘉元年，增赐食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, an additional 500 households were given food villages.

古文：二年，征为左卫将军。
现代文：二年，天子征召他入朝为左卫将军。
English: Two years later, the emperor called him to join the imperial court as General of the Left Division.

古文：俄出为都督郢、武、巴定四州诸军事、军师将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：不久又调出京城担任都督郢武巴定四州诸军事、军师将军、郢州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was transferred out of Kyoto to serve as the military governor of the four prefectures of Bushu and Bading, the general of the military division, and the governor of Bozhou.

古文：六年，征为中护军。
现代文：六年，天子征召他入朝担任中护军。
English: Six years later, the Emperor called him to join the imperial court to serve as a middle-ranking bodyguard.

古文：寻迁护军将军。
现代文：随后升任护军将军。
English: He was subsequently promoted to General of the Guard.

古文：光大二年，迁使持节、都督荆武右三州诸军事、平西将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：光大二年，调任使持节、都督荆武佑三州诸军事、平西将军、翅业刺史。
English: In the second year of Guangda University, he was transferred to be the envoy of Jichijie, the governor of Jingwuyou, the military of the three states, the general of Pingxi, and the wing industry.

古文：未之镇，改为护军将军。
现代文：还没有赴任，改任护军将军。
English: He had not yet taken up his post when he was reassigned to the position of General of the Guard.

古文：高宗即位，加散骑常侍、都督广、衡、东衡、交、越、成、定、新、合、罗、爱、德、宜、黄、利、安、石、双等十八州诸军事、镇南将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
现代文：产塞即位，这坦加任散骑常侍、都督广衡塞堕交越盛定面金墨爱擅宣董到室互双总共十八州诸军事、镇南将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
English: When Emperor Zengze ascended the throne, Tangga was appointed as a knight-errant, a knight-errant, a vassal of the governor Guang Hengze, a vassal of the emperor Yue Sheng, a member of the imperial court, a member of the imperial court, a member of the imperial court, a member of the imperial court, a member of the imperial court, a member of the imperial court, and a member of the imperial court.

古文：恪未至岭，前刺史欧阳纥举兵拒险，恪不得进，朝廷遣司空章昭达督众军讨纥，纥平，乃得入州。
现代文：这坚赴任还没有到互岭，前刺史压昼鼬发兵在险要之地拒守，抛受阻前进不了，朝廷派遣司空章昭达统率各军讨伐欧阳纥。欧阳纥被平定之后，沈恪才得以进入广州。
English: Shen Jia had not yet arrived at Huairing when he was appointed to the post. However, he refused to defend the precarious position, and could not advance without hindrance. The imperial court sent Zhang Zhaoda to lead the army to fight the Ouyang Uprising. Shen Jia was able to enter Guangzhou only after the Ouyang Uprising was suppressed.

古文：州罹兵荒，所在残毁，恪绥怀安缉，被以恩惠，岭表赖之。
现代文：州内遭遇战火和灾荒，处处都残缺破损，沈恪收集安置流民并加以安抚关切，广施恩惠，岭表地区依靠他才得以平安稳定。
English: The state suffered from war and disaster, and everywhere was damaged and damaged. Shen Gu collected and resettled the displaced people and pacified their concerns. He also provided a wide range of favors, and the Lingtai area relied on him to be safe and stable.

古文：太建四年，征为领军将军。
现代文：太建四年，天子征召他入朝担任领军将军。
English: When Tai Jian was four years old, the Emperor summoned him to the imperial court to serve as the leading general.

古文：及代还，以途还不时至，为有司所奏免。
现代文：等到新老刺史交接完毕后他才返回朝廷，却因为路程太远没能按时到达，被有关官员奏劾而免任。
English: He did not return to the imperial court until after the handover of the new and old crown prince, but because he was too far away to arrive on time, he was impeached and removed from office by the relevant officials.

古文：十一年，起为散骑常侍、卫尉卿。
现代文：十一年，复职担任散骑常侍、卫尉卿。
English: Eleven years later, he was reinstated as a horseback riding attendant and a lieutenant.

古文：其年授平北将军、假节，监南兗州。
现代文：这年被任命为平北将军、假节，监理南兖州。
English: This year, he was appointed as the general of North Pyongan Province, the supervisor of South Pyongan Province, and the supervisor of South Pyongan Province.

古文：十二年，改授散骑常侍、翊右将军，监南徐州。
现代文：十二年，调任散骑常侍、翊右将军，监理南徐州。
English: In the 12th year, he was transferred to the position of straggler, general Zou Yu, the supervisor of South Xuzhou.

古文：又遣电威将军裴子烈领马五百匹，助恪缘江防戍。
现代文：朝廷又派遣电威将军裴子烈率领五百匹马，帮助沈恪沿着江岸防守。
English: The imperial court also dispatched the telegraph general Pei Zili led five hundred horses to help Shen Kuo defend along the riverbank.

古文：明年，入为卫尉卿，常侍、将军如故。
现代文：第二年，沈恪被调入朝廷担任卫尉卿，常侍、将军二职仍旧担任。
English: The following year, Shen Ke was transferred to the Imperial Court to serve as the Lord of the Guards, and he still held the two positions of regular attendant and general.

古文：寻加侍中，迁护军将军。
现代文：不久加任侍中，升任护军将军。
English: He was soon appointed to the position of chamberlain and promoted to general of the escort.

古文：后主即位，以疾改授散骑常侍、特进、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：后主即位，沈恪因患疾病调任散骑常侍、特进、金紫光禄大夫。
English: After the enthronement of the Lord, due to illness, Shen Ke was transferred to the position of straggling equerry, special envoy, and Jin Zi Guanglu doctor.

古文：其年卒，时年七十四。
现代文：逭年去世，时年七十四岁。
English: He died at the age of seventy-four.

古文：赠翊左将军，诏给东园秘器，仍出举哀，丧事所须，并令资给，谥曰元。
现代文：追赠为翊左将军，天子下旨赏给皇家棺木，接着又出宫前往举哀，丧事所需财物，全部由国库资助供应。谧号是元。
English: The posthumous gift was given to General Yu Zuo, and the imperial coffin was given by order of the emperor, and then he went out of the palace to mourn, and the property needed for the funeral was all funded and supplied by the national treasury. His posthumous name was Yuan.

古文：子法兴嗣。
现代文：儿子沈法兴继承。
English: He was succeeded by his son Shen Faxing.

古文：史臣曰：胡颖、徐度、杜棱、沈恪并附骐骥而腾跃，依日月之光辉，始觏王佐之才，方悟公辅之量，生则肉食，终以配飨。
现代文：史臣曰：胡颖、徐度、杜棱、沈恪都像蚊虫依附骐骥而腾跃千里那样跟随高祖才名垂青史，但也有赖帝王的圣明，才发现他们辅佐帝王创业治国的才干，才鉴知他们可以位居三公宰辅的器量，因而他们生而高官厚禄，死而配享王庙。
English: The historian said: Hu Ying, Xu Du, Du Ren, and Shen Ke all followed Gao Zu like mosquitoes attached to cocoons and leapt thousands of miles to become famous in history. However, they also relied on the emperor's holy light to discover their ability to assist the emperor in starting a business and governing the country. Only then did they know that they could rank among the three princes and assistants. As a result, they were born with high ranks and high salaries, and deserved to enjoy the royal temple after death.

古文：盛矣哉！
现代文：这是人生的盛事啊!
English: This is a great event in life!

