古文：则阳游于楚，夷节言之于王，王未之见。夷节归。
现代文：则阳到楚国游玩，夷节告诉楚王，楚王没有接见则阳，夷节只好回家。
English: Zheyang went to Chu to play, and Yijie told King Chu. King Chu did not receive Zheyang, and Yijie had to go home.

古文：彭阳见王果曰： 夫子何不谭我于王？ 王果曰： 我不若公阅休。 
现代文：则阳拜见王果时说： 先生为什么不在楚王面前推荐我呢？ 王果说： 我不如公阅休。 
English: When Wang Guo was visited by the sun, he said, "Why didn't my teacher recommend me to King Chu?" Wang Guo said, "I'd better take a break from public reading."

古文：彭阳曰： 公阅休奚为者邪？ 
现代文：则阳问： 公阅休是何人？ 
English: Then Yang asked: How many people are on the public reading holiday?

古文：曰： 冬则戳鳖于江，夏则休乎山樊。有过而问者，曰： 此予宅也。 
现代文：王果说： 他冬天到江河里刺鳖，夏天到山傍休息，有过往的人询问，他就说： 这就是我的住宅。 
English: Wang Guo said, "In the winter, he would go to the rivers to catch hedgehogs, and in the summer, he would go to the mountains to rest. When people asked him about his past, he said, 'This is my home.'

古文：夫夷节已不能，而况我乎！
现代文：夷节都不能做到，何况是我呢？
English: I can't even make it to the festival, and what about me?

古文：吾又不若夷节。
现代文：我又不如夷节。
English: I'm not even as good as Emishi.

古文：夫夷节之为人也，无德而有知，不自许，以之神其交，固颠冥乎富贵之地。
现代文：夷节缺少德行却有智巧，不甘于清虚恬淡的生活，用他自己的智巧跟人交游与结识，在富有和尊显的圈子里迷乱，不仅无助于增长德行，反而使德行有所毁损，挨冻的人盼望温暖的春天，中暑的人渴望冷风带来凉爽。
English: He who lacks virtue but has cleverness is not willing to live a simple and dull life. He uses his own cleverness to travel and get to know people. He gets lost in the rich and prestigious circles. This not only does not help to increase virtue, but also damages it. People suffering from cold are looking forward to a warm spring, and people suffering from heatstroke are longing for the cold wind to bring coolness.

古文：非相助以德，相助消也。夫冻者假衣于春，暍者反冬乎冷风。夫楚王之为人也，形尊而严。
现代文：楚王外表高贵而又威严，他对有过错的人，不会给予一点宽恕，像老虎一样，要不是小人和正德之士，谁能够让他折服？  所以，圣人穷苦的时候，他们能使家人忘却生活的清苦；当他们通达的时候，也能使王公贵族忘却爵禄而变得谦卑起来。
English: King Chu is outwardly noble and majestic. He will not give a bit of forgiveness to those who are at fault. Like a tiger, if it is not a villain and a person of virtue, who can make him submit? Therefore, when saints are poor, they can make their family members forget the hardships of life; when they are enlightened, they can also make princes and aristocrats forget their peerage and become humble.

古文：其于罪也，无赦如虎。非夫佞人正德，其孰能桡焉。
现代文：他们对于外物，共处为快；对于别人，乐于相处而又能保持自己的真性。
English: For others, they are happy to get along while maintaining their own authenticity.

古文：故圣人其穷也，使家人忘其贫；其达也，使王公忘爵禄而化卑；其于物也，与之为娱矣；其于人也，乐物之通而保己焉。
现代文：所以，常施不言之教而使人心灵和谐，相处不久的人都能受到感化。父亲和儿子相处，各得其宜，各自相宜，而圣人却完全是清虚无为地对待周围所有的人。圣人的心态跟一般人的心态相差甚远。
English: Therefore, those who have not been together for a long time can be influenced by the constant practice of silent teaching, which harmonizes the soul. Fathers and sons can get along with each other as they see fit, but a saint treats all the people around him in a completely passive manner. The mentality of a saint is very different from that of an ordinary person.

古文：故或不言而饮人以和，与人并立而使人化，父子之宜。
现代文：所以，要使楚王信服还得请公阅休出马。 圣人通达于人际间的各种纠纷，透彻地了解万物混同一体的状态，却并不知道为什么会是这样，这是出于自然的本性。
English: Therefore, in order to convince King Chu, it was necessary to ask for a public reading. The sage was familiar with all kinds of disputes between people, and thoroughly understood the state of all things being mixed into one, but did not know why this was so. This was due to the nature of nature.

古文：彼其乎归居，而一闲其所施。其于人心者，若是其远也。
现代文：为回返真性而又有所动作，但总是效法自然，人们随后才称呼他为圣人。
English: It was only later that people began to call him a saint, because he did something to return to the true nature, but he always followed nature.

古文：故曰 待公阅休 。 圣人达绸缪，周尽一体矣，而不知其然，性也。
现代文：忧心于智巧与谋虑因而行动常常不宜持久，时而有所中止又将能怎样样呢！生来就漂亮的人，是因为别人给他作了一面镜子，如果不通过比较他也不会知道自己比别人漂亮。
English: What will become of a man who is born beautiful because someone else has made a mirror for him, and who does not know that he is more beautiful than others except by comparison?

古文：复命摇作而以天为师，人则从而命之也。忧乎知，而所行恒无几时，其有止也，若之何！
现代文：好像知道，又好像不知道，好像听见了，又好像没有听见，他内心的喜悦就不会有所终止，人们对他的好感也不会有所中止，这就是出于自然的本性。
English: Whether he seems to know or not to know, whether he seems to hear or not to hear, there will be no end to his inner joy, nor will there be an end to people's affection for him. This is due to the nature of nature.

古文：生而美者，人与之鉴，不告则不知其美于人也。
现代文：圣人抚爱众人，是因为人们给予了他相应的名字，如果人们不这样称誉他圣人也不知道自己怜爱他人。
English: The saint caresses people because people have given him the appropriate name, and if people do not praise him in this way, they do not know that they are compassionate to others.

古文：若知之，若不知之，若闻之，若不闻之，其可喜也终无已，人之好之亦无已，性也。
现代文：好像知道，又好像不知道，好像听见了，又好像没有听见，他给予人们的爱就不会有所终止，人们安于这样的抚爱也不会有所终止，这就是出于自然的本性。
English: As if he knew, as if he did not know, as if he heard, as if he did not hear, there would be no end to the love he gave to people, and people would not be satisfied with such caresses, and there would be no end to it. This is due to the nature of nature.

古文：圣人之爱人也，人与之名，不告则不知其爱人也。
现代文：祖国与家乡，一看到她就分外喜悦；即使是丘陵草木使她显得面目不清，甚至掩没了十之八九，心里还是十分欣喜。
English: When she saw her motherland and hometown, she was overjoyed; even if the hilly vegetation made her look unrecognizable, and even covered up nine times out of ten, she was still very happy.

古文：若知之，若不知之，若闻之，若不闻之，其爱人也终无已，人之安之亦无已，性也。旧国旧都，望之畅然。
现代文：更何况亲身见闻到她的真面目、真情况，就像是数丈高台高悬于众人的面前让人崇敬、仰慕啊！冉相氏领悟到道的精髓，能听任外物自然发展，所以跟外物接触相处没有终始，没有时间限制。
English: What's more, having seen and smelled her true face and true condition in person, it's as if she's suspended several stories high in front of everyone to be revered and admired! Ran Xiang understands the essence of the Tao and can let things develop naturally, so there's no beginning or end to getting along with things, and no time limit.

古文：虽使丘陵草木之缗入之者十九，犹之畅然，况见见闻闻者也，以十仞之台县众间者也。冉相氏得其环中以随成，与物无终无始，无几无时。日与物化者，一不化者也。
现代文：他虽然天天随外物而变化，但是他内心的境界却一点儿也不曾改变。曾尝试过舍弃大道的精髓，有心去效法自然却没有得到预期的结果，跟外物一道相追逐，对于所修的事业有什么可担忧的呢？在圣人的心目中不曾有过天，不曾有过人，不曾有过开始，不曾有过外物，随着世道一起发展变化而无所偏废，所行完备而不知忧虑，他与外物的契合与融洽达到了这样的程度，别人又能怎么样呢？
English: Although he changes day by day according to external things, his inner realm has not changed at all. He has tried to give up the essence of the Great Way, he has tried to imitate nature but did not get the expected result, he has pursued it with external things. What is there to worry about the cause he is cultivating? In the saint's mind, there has never been a heaven, there has never been a man, there has never been a beginning, there has never been an external thing. With the development and change of the world, nothing has been wasted, and what he has done is complete without worry. His fit and harmony with external things has reached such a level. What can others do?

古文：阖尝舍之！夫师天而不得师天，与物皆殉。其以为事也，若之何！
现代文：商汤拜司御门尹登恒做他的老师，而他随从师傅学习却从不拘泥于所学；能够随顺而成，为此而察其名迹；对待这样的名迹又无心寻其常法，因而君臣、师徒能各得其所、各安其分。仲尼最后弃绝了谋虑，因此对自然才有所辅助。
English: Shang Tong looked up to Yin Dengheng as his teacher, but he never stuck to what he learned when he studied with his master. He was able to follow what he learned, and for this reason he examined his reputation. He did not have the intention to find his own way of dealing with such a reputation, so that the prince and the minister, the teacher and the student could each get their own place and their own peace. Zhong Ni finally abandoned his concerns, so he was able to help nature.

古文：容成氏曰： 除日无岁，无内无外。 
现代文：容成氏说： 摒除了日就不会累积成年，忘掉了自己就能忘掉周围的事物。 
English: Mr. Rongcheng said, "Apart from the sun, there is no accumulation of adulthood. If you forget yourself, you can forget the things around you."

古文：魏莹与田侯牟约，田侯牟背之，魏莹怒，将使人剌之。犀首公孙衍闻而耻之，曰： 君为万乘之君也，而以匹夫从仇。
现代文：魏惠王与齐威王订立盟约，而齐威王违背了盟约。魏王大怒，打算派人去刺杀他，将军公孙衍知道后认为可耻，说： 您是大国的国君，却用匹夫的手段去报仇！
English: The Wei king was furious and planned to send someone to assassinate him. When the general Gongsunyan found out, he thought it was shameful and said, "You are the sovereign of a great country, but you are taking revenge by unscrupulous means!"

古文：衍请受甲二十万，为君攻之，虏其人民，系其牛马，使其君内热发于背，然后拔其国。
现代文：我愿统带二十万部队，替你攻打齐国，俘获他的人民，掠夺他的牛马，使齐国的国君心急如焚热毒发于背心。然后我就攻占齐国的土地。
English: I am willing to lead two hundred thousand troops to attack Qi for you, capture its people, plunder its cattle and horses, and make the ruler of Qi's heart burn like fire in his waistcoat. Then I will seize the land of Qi.

古文：忌也出走，然后抶其背，折其脊。 
现代文：使齐国大将田忌望风逃跑，于是我再鞭打他的背，折断他的脊梁骨。 
English: So I whipped his back again and broke his backbone.

古文：季子闻而耻之，曰： 筑十仞之城，城者既十仞矣，则又坏之，此胥靡之所苦也。
现代文：季子知道后又认为公孙衍的做法可耻，说： 建筑七八丈高的城墙，筑城已经七八丈高了，接着又把它毁掉，这是役使之人所苦的事。
English: After learning this, Ji Zi thought Gong Sun Yan's actions were shameful, saying, "Building a wall seven or eight stories high, building a city that is already seven or eight stories high, and then destroying it, is a matter of making others suffer.

古文：今兵不起七年矣，此王之基也。
现代文：如今不打仗已经七年了，这是王业的基础。
English: Now it has been seven years without war, which is the foundation of the king's career.

古文：衍，乱人也，不可听也。 
现代文：公孙衍实在是挑起祸乱的人，不可听从他的主张。 
English: Gongsunyan is indeed a troublemaker, and his opinion should not be listened to.

古文：华子闻而丑之，曰： 善言伐齐者，乱人也；善言勿伐者，亦乱人也；谓 伐之与不伐乱人也 者，又乱人也。 君曰： 然则若何？ 
现代文：华子知道以后又鄙夷公孙衍和季子的做法，说： 极力主张讨伐齐国的人，是拨弄祸乱的人；极力劝说不要讨伐齐国的人，也是拨弄祸乱的人；评说讨伐齐国还是不讨伐齐国为拨弄祸乱之人的人，他本身就是拨弄祸乱的人。 魏王说： 既然如此，那将怎么办呢？ 
English: Knowing this, Hua Zi despised the actions of Gongsun Yan and Ji Zi in the future, saying: Those who strongly advocate the crusade against Qi are those who stir up evil; those who strongly advise against the crusade against Qi are also those who stir up evil; those who comment on whether the crusade against Qi or not are those who stir up evil are themselves those who stir up evil. Wei Wang said: In this case, what will happen?

古文：曰： 君求其道而已矣。 惠之闻之，而见戴晋人。
现代文：华子说： 你还是求助于清虚淡漠、物我兼忘的大道罢！ 惠子知道了，引见戴晋人。
English: Hua Zi said, "You should still seek help from the clear, light and desolate, forget-me-not avenue." Hui Zi knew this and introduced Dai Jinren.

古文：戴晋人曰： 有所谓蜗者，君知之乎？ 
现代文：戴晋人对魏王说： 有叫蜗牛的小动物，国君知道吗？ 
English: Dai Jin said to Wei Wang: Does the sovereign know that there is a small animal called a snail?

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文：魏王说： 知道。 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文： 有国于蜗之左角者，曰触氏；有国于蜗之右角者，曰蛮氏。时相与争地而战，伏尸数万，逐北旬有五日而后反。 
现代文：戴晋人说： 有个国家在蜗牛的左角，名字叫触氏，有个国家在蜗牛的右角，名字叫蛮氏，正相互为争夺土地而打仗，倒下的尸体数也数不清，追赶打败的一方花去整整十五天方才撤兵而回。 
English: Dai Jin said: There is a country in the left corner of the snail, named Tou, and a country in the right corner of the snail, named Man, who are fighting each other for land. The number of fallen bodies is also countless. It takes a full fifteen days to catch up with the defeated side before they withdraw.

古文：君曰： 噫！其虚言与？ 
现代文：魏王说： 咦，那都是虚妄的言论吧？ 
English: Wei Wang said, "Well, that's all false talk, isn't it?

古文：曰： 臣请为君实之。
现代文：戴晋人说： 让我为你证实这些话。
English: Dai Jin said, "Let me confirm these words for you."

古文：君以意在四方上下有穷乎？ 
现代文：你认为四方与上下有尽头吗？ 
English: Do you think there is an end to the four sides and the top and bottom?

古文：君曰： 无穷。 
现代文：魏王说 没有止境。 
English: Wei Wang said that there is no limit.

古文：曰： 知游心于无穷，而反在通达之国，若存若亡乎？ 
现代文：戴晋人说： 知道使自己的思想在无穷的境域里遨游，却又返身于人迹所至的狭小的生活范围，这狭小的生活范围处在无穷的境域里恐怕就像是若存若失一样吧？ 魏王说： 是的。 
English: Dai Jin said, "Knowing that one's thoughts are wandering in the boundless territory, but one returns to the narrow scope of life to which one's footsteps lead, this narrow scope of life is in the boundless territory, I'm afraid it's just like surviving and losing, isn't it?" Wei Wang said, "Yes."

古文：君曰： 然。 曰： 通达之中有魏，于魏中有梁，于梁中有王，王与蛮氏有辩乎？ 
现代文：戴晋人又说： 在这人迹所至的狭小范围内有一个魏国，在魏国中有一个大梁城，在大梁城里有你魏王。大王与那蛮氏相比，有区别吗？ 
English: Dai Jinren also said, "Within the narrow range of this man's footsteps, there is a state of Wei, and in the state of Wei, there is a great beam city, and in the great beam city, there is your Wei king. Is there a difference between the great king and the barbarian clan?

古文：君曰： 无辩。 
现代文：魏王回答说： 没有。 
English: The Wei king replied, "No."

古文：客出而君惝然若有亡也。
现代文：戴晋人辞别而去，魏王心中不畅怅然若有所失。
English: Dai Jin left without saying goodbye, and Wei Wang's heart was not at ease, as if he lost something.

古文：客出，惠子见。君曰： 客，大人也，圣人不足以当之。 
现代文：戴晋人离开后惠子见魏惠王，魏王说： 戴晋人，真是个了不起的人，圣人不足以和他相提并论。 
English: After Dai Jinren left, Hui Zi met with Wei Hui Wang, and Wei Wang said: Dai Jinren is really a great man, a saint is not enough to compare with him.

古文：惠子曰： 夫吹管也，犹有嗃也；吹剑首者，吷而已矣。
现代文：惠子说： 吹起竹管，就会有嘟嘟的响声；吹着剑首的环孔，只会有丝丝的声音罢了。
English: Keiko said, "If you blow up a bamboo pipe, there will be the sound of a gong; if you blow through the ring hole of a sword, there will only be a faint sound.

古文：尧、舜，人之所誉也。道尧、舜于戴晋人之前，譬犹一吷也。 孔子之楚，舍于蚁丘之浆。
现代文：尧与舜，都是人们所赞誉的圣人；在戴晋人面前称赞尧与舜，就好比那微弱的丝丝之声罢了。 孔子到楚国去，住在蚁丘卖浆的人家里。
English: Confucius went to the State of Chu and lived in the home of a man who sold syrup in an anthill.

古文：其邻有夫妻臣妾登极者，子路曰： 是稯稯何为者邪？ 
现代文：他的的邻居夫妻奴仆全都登上了屋顶观看孔子的车骑，子路说： 这么多人聚集在一起做什么呢？ 
English: His neighbors, husbands and wives, and servants all climbed onto the roof to watch Confucius's carriage ride. Zilu said, "What are so many people doing together?"

古文：仲尼曰： 是圣人仆也。
现代文：孔子说： 这些人都是圣人的仆从。
English: Confucius said, "These people are the servants of a sage.

古文：是自埋于民，自藏于畔。
现代文：他是甘愿隐于民间，隐居于田园的人。
English: He is a person who is willing to hide from the people and live in seclusion in the countryside.

古文：其声销，其志无穷，其口虽言，其心未尝言。
现代文：他的声名沉寂，他的志向无穷，他虽然说话，内心却凝寂无言。
English: His fame is silent, his aspirations are boundless, though he speaks, his heart is speechless.

古文：方且与世违，而心不屑与之俱。
现代文：他的行为和世俗相反，而内心不屑与世俗同流。
English: His actions are contrary to the world, but his heart disdains to go along with the world.

古文：是陆沉者也，是其市南宜僚邪？ 
现代文：这是自隐之人，岂不是市南宜僚吗？ 
English: This is a self-effacing person, isn't it, Ichinan Yorozu?

古文：子路请往召之。
现代文：子路请求前去召见他。
English: Zi Lu asked him to come and see him.

古文：孔子曰： 已矣！
现代文：孔子说： 算了吧！
English: Confucius said: Forget it!

古文：彼知丘之著于己也，知丘之适楚也，以丘为必使楚王之召己也。
现代文：他知道我对他十分了解，又知道我到了楚国，认为我必定会让楚王来召见他，他将把我看成是巧言献媚的人。
English: He knew that I knew him very well and that I had come to the State of Chu. He thought that I would definitely ask King Chu to summon him, and that he would see me as a flatterer.

古文：彼且以丘为佞人也。夫若然者，其于佞人也，羞闻其言，而况亲见其身乎！
现代文：如果真是这样，他对于巧言献媚的人一定会羞于听其言谈，更何况是亲自见到其人呢！
English: If so, he would be ashamed to listen to a flatterer, let alone meet one!

古文：而何以为存！ 
现代文：你凭什么认为他还会留在那里呢？ 
English: What makes you think he'll stay there?

古文：子路往视之，其室虚矣。
现代文：子路前往探视，市南宜僚的居室已经空无一人了。
English: Zi Lu went to visit, but Ichinan Yili's room was already empty.

古文：长梧封人问子牢曰： 君为政焉勿卤莽，治民焉勿灭裂。
现代文：长梧地方守护封疆的人对子牢说： 你处理政事不要太粗疏，治理百姓不要太草率。
English: Changwu, the local guardian of the blockaded territory, said to Zi Du: You should not be too rough in dealing with political affairs, and you should not be too hasty in governing the people.

古文：昔予为禾，耕而卤莽之，则其实亦卤莽而报予；芸而灭裂之，其实亦灭裂而报予。
现代文：从前我种庄稼，耕地粗疏马虎，而庄稼收获时也就用粗疏马虎的态度来报复我；锄草也轻率马虎，而庄稼收获时也用轻率马虎的态度来报复我。
English: In the past, I planted crops, the cultivated land was rough and sloppy, and the crops were harvested with a rough and sloppy attitude to take revenge on me; the rushes were careless and sloppy, and the crops were harvested with a careless and sloppy attitude to take revenge on me.

古文：予来年变齐，深其耕而熟耰之，其禾蘩以滋，予终年厌飧。 
现代文：我来年改变了原有的方式，深深地耕地细细地平整，禾苗繁茂果实累累，我一年到头不愁食品不足。 
English: Next year, I will change my old way of farming. I will cultivate the land deeply and finely, the seedlings will flourish and the fruits will be plentiful. I will not worry about food shortages all year round.

古文：庄子闻之曰： 今人之治其形，理其心，多有似封人之所谓：遁其天，离其性，灭其情，亡其神，以众为。
现代文：庄子听了后说： 如今人们治理自己的身形，调理自己的心思，许多都像这守护封疆的人所说的情况，逃避自然，背离天性，泯灭真情，丧失精神，这都因为粗疏卤莽所致。
English: After listening, Zhuangzi said, "Nowadays, people govern their bodies and regulate their minds. Many of them are like the situation described by this guardian of the closed country, evading nature, deviating from nature, annihilating true feelings, and losing spirit. All of this is due to coarseness and arrogance.

古文：故卤莽其性者，欲恶之孽为性，萑苇蒹葭始萌，以扶吾形，寻擢吾性。并溃漏发，不择所出，漂疽疥癕，内热溲膏是也。 
现代文：所以对待本性和真情粗疏卤莽的人，欲念与邪恶的祸根，就像萑苇、蒹葭蔽遮禾黍那样危害人的本性，开始时似乎还可以用来扶助人的形体，逐渐地就拔除了自己的本性，就像遍体毒疮一齐溃发，不知选择什么地方泄出，毒疮流浓，内热遗精就是这样。 
English: Therefore, for those who treat their nature and true feelings as coarse and reckless, the evil root of desire and evil is like a cocoon, covering and obscuring, which harms people's nature. At the beginning, it seems that it can also be used to support people's body. Gradually, it has eliminated its own nature. It is like a venomous sore erupting all over the body, and I don't know where to choose to leak out. The venomous sore is thick, and so is the hot semen.

古文：柏矩学于老聃，曰： 请之天下游。 
现代文：柏矩就学于老聃，说： 请求老师同意我到天下去游历。 
English: He said, "Ask my teacher to allow me to travel to the other side of the world."

古文：老聃曰： 已矣！天下犹是也。 
现代文：老聃说： 算了，天下就像这里一样。 
English: Laozi said: Forget it, the world is just like here.

古文：又请之，老聃曰： 汝将何始？ 
现代文：柏矩再次请求，老聃说： 你打算先去哪里？ 
English: "Where do you want to go first? " the old woman asked.

古文：曰： 始于齐。 
现代文：柏矩说： 先从齐国开始。 
English: He said, "Let's start with Qi."

古文：至齐，见辜人焉，推而强之，解朝服而幕之，号天而哭之，曰： 子乎！
现代文：柏矩到了齐国，见到一个处以死刑而抛尸示众的人，推推尸体把他摆正，再解下朝服覆盖在尸体上，仰天号陶大哭地诉说： 你呀你呀！
English: When he arrived in Qi Province, he saw a man who had been sentenced to death and whose corpse had been thrown to the public. He pushed the corpse to set him upright, and then he took off his royal robe and covered the corpse with it. He cried loudly and said, "You, you!"

古文：子乎！天下有大灾，子独先离之。
现代文：天下出现如此大的灾祸，偏偏你先碰上了。
English: You are the first to encounter such a great disaster in the world.

古文：曰 莫为盗，莫为杀人 。
现代文：人们常说不要做强盗，不要杀人！
English: People often say, don't be a robber, don't kill!

古文：荣辱立然后睹所病，货财聚然后睹所争。
现代文：世间一旦有了荣辱的区别，然后各种弊端就显示出来；财货日渐聚积，然后各种争斗也就表露出来。
English: Once there is a distinction between honor and disgrace in the world, then all kinds of drawbacks will be revealed; wealth and goods will gradually accumulate, and then all kinds of struggles will also be revealed.

古文：今立人之所病，聚人之所争，穷困人之身，使无休时。
现代文：如今树立人们所厌恶的弊端，聚积人们所争夺的财物，贫穷困厄的人疲于奔命便没有休止之时，想要不出现这样的遭遇，怎么可能呢？ 古时候统治百姓的人，把社会清平归于百姓，把管理不善归于自己；把正确的做法归于百姓，把各种过错归于自己；所以只要有一个人其身形受到损害，便私下总是责备自己。
English: How is it possible to avoid such an encounter today, when the evils that people detest are on the rise, the wealth that people fight for is accumulating, and the poor and needy are running around tirelessly? In ancient times, those who ruled the people attributed the social smoothness to the people, the mismanagement to themselves; the correct practices to the people, and all kinds of mistakes to themselves; so as long as one person's body was damaged, they would always blame themselves in private.

古文：今则不然，匿为物而愚不识，大为难而罪不敢，重为任而罚不胜，远其涂而诛不至。
现代文：如今却不是这样。隐匿事物的真情却责备人们不能了解，扩大办事的困难却归罪于不敢克服困难，加重承受的负担却处罚别人不能胜任，把路途安排得十分遥远却谴责人们不能达到。
English: But this is not the case today. The truth of things is concealed, but people are blamed for not being able to understand, the difficulties of expanding the work are blamed for not daring to overcome the difficulties, the burden is increased, but others are not competent, and the road is arranged very far away, but people are condemned to be unable to reach.

古文：民知力竭，则以伪继之。日出多伪，士民安取不伪。
现代文：人民耗尽了智慧和力量，就用虚假来继续应付，天天出现那么多虚假的事情，百姓怎么会不弄虚作假！
English: The people have exhausted their wisdom and strength, so they continue to cope with falsehood. So many false things appear every day, how can the people not be deceived!

古文：夫力不足则伪，知不足则欺，财不足则盗。
现代文：力量不够便作假，智巧不足就欺诈，财力不济便行盗。
English: Lack of strength leads to deception, lack of skill leads to fraud, and lack of money leads to theft.

古文：盗窃之行，于谁责而可乎？ 
现代文：盗窃的行径，对谁加以责备才合理呢？ 
English: Who is it reasonable to blame for the theft?

古文：蘧伯玉行年六十而六十化，未尝不始于是之，而卒诎之以非也。未知今之所谓是之非五十九非也。
现代文：遽伯玉在经历六十年中而六十年与时俱进，开始肯定的，后来又否定它，很难说今天所认为是对的就不是五十九年来所认为是错误的。
English: It is difficult to say that what is considered right today is not what was considered wrong fifty-nine years ago.

古文：万物有乎生而莫见其根，有乎出而莫见其门。
现代文：万物有它的生而看不见生它的根源，有它的出处却看不见它的门径。
English: All things have their birth, but do not see the source of their birth. They have their origin, but do not see the doorway.

古文：人皆尊其知之所知，而莫知恃其知之所不知而后知，可不谓大疑乎！
现代文：人们都重视他的智慧所能知道的，而不能凭他的智慧所不知道而后知道的道理，可不是所谓大疑惑吗？
English: Isn't it a big question that people value what his wisdom can know, but not what his wisdom can't know?

古文：已乎！
现代文：算了吧！
English: Forget it!

古文：已乎！
现代文：算了吧！
English: Forget it!

古文：且无所逃。此所谓然与然乎！
现代文：况且没有能逃避得了的，这就是你说这样他说那样吗？
English: Besides, there's no getting away from it, is that what you're saying?

古文：仲尼问于大史大弢、伯常骞、狶韦曰： 夫卫灵公饮酒湛乐，不听国家之政；田猎毕弋，不应诸侯之际：其所以为灵公者何邪？ 
现代文：孔子向太史大弢、伯常骞、狶韦请教： 卫灵公饮酒耽乐，不处理国家政务，狩猎网捕弋射兽鸟，不应承诸侯会盟，他却得到灵公的谥号，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Confucius asked Tai Shih-taek, Bo Chang-taek, and Wei Wei-taek for advice: Wei Ling-gong drank alcohol and indulged in pleasure, did not deal with state affairs, hunted and shot beasts and birds, and was not supposed to inherit the princes' alliance, but he got the nickname of Ling-gong. Why was this?

古文：大弢曰： 是因是也。 
现代文：大韬说： 就是因为这样才得到这样的谥号。 
English: Otsuka said, "That's how I got my nickname.

古文：伯常骞曰： 夫灵公有妻三人，同滥而浴。
现代文：伯常春说： 灵公有三个妻子，他和三个妻子在一个大浴盆中洗澡。
English: Uncle Changchun said, "Ling Gong has three wives. He and his three wives take a bath in a big tub.

古文：史鳅奉御而进所，搏币而扶翼。
现代文：史鱼奉召来到灵公住所，灵公叫人接取他献的币帛而使人扶着他的臂膀。
English: Shi Yu was summoned to Ling Gong's residence. Ling Gong called for someone to receive the coins he had offered and asked the person to hold his arm.

古文：其慢若彼之甚也，见贤人若此其肃也，是其所以为灵公也。 
现代文：灵公放纵像与三妻同盆沐浴那样严重，然而他接见贤人又如此肃然起敬，这就是他所以称为灵公的道理。 
English: Although Rinpoche's indulgence is as serious as bathing with his three wives, he is still so reverent when he meets a sage, which is why he is called Rinpoche.

古文：狶韦曰： 夫灵公也，死，卜葬于故墓，不吉；卜葬于沙丘而吉。
现代文：狶韦说： 灵公死了，卜葬在寿穴，不吉利；卜葬在沙丘就吉利。
English: Wei Wei said: Lingong died, Bu buried in the mortuary pit, unlucky; Bu buried in the sand dunes is lucky.

古文：掘之数仞，得石槨焉，洗而视之，有铭焉，曰： 不冯其子，灵公夺而里之。 
现代文：掘墓穴之深达到数时，得到一个石造的棺椁，洗去泥土后看它，上面有铭文说： 不必依赖子孙，灵公可以取去而居在这里。 
English: After digging the grave to a depth of several meters, they found a stone coffin, washed off the dirt and looked at it. There was an inscription on it that said: "You don't have to rely on your children and grandchildren. Your spirit can take it and live here."

古文：夫灵公之为灵也久矣！之二人何足以识之。 
现代文：灵公的谥号称为 灵 ，已经很久了，大韬、伯常骞这两个人怎么能知道呢！ 
English: It has been a long time since the nickname of the spiritual master was called "Ling." How could the two people, Dazhao and Bo Changyao, know this?

古文：少知问于大公调曰： 何谓丘里之言？ 
现代文：少知向大公调求教： 什么叫做 丘里 之言？ 
English: Shochi asked the Grand Duke for advice: What is the word of the hill?

古文：大公调曰： 丘里者，合十姓百名而为风俗也，合异以为同，散同以为异。
现代文：大公调说： 所谓的 丘里 ，就是聚合十家姓，上百个人而形成共同的风气与习俗；组合各各不同的个体就形成混同的整体，离散混同的整体又成为各各不同的个体。
English: Dagong Tune said: The so-called Quli is the aggregation of ten families and hundreds of individuals to form a common ethos and customs; the combination of different individuals forms a mixed whole, and the discrete mixed whole becomes different individuals.

古文：今指马之百体而不得马，而马系于前者，立其百体而谓之马也。
现代文：如今指称马的上百个部位都不能获得马的整体，而马就拴缚在眼前，只有确立了马的每一个部位并组合成一整体才能称之为马。
English: Nowadays, it is said that the hundreds of parts of a horse cannot obtain the whole of the horse, and the horse is shackled in front of the eyes. Only when each part of the horse is established and combined into a whole can it be called a horse.

古文：是故丘山积卑而为高，江河合水而为大，大人合并而为公。
现代文：所以说山丘积聚卑小的土石才成就其高，江河汇聚细小的流水才成就其大，伟大的人物并合了众多的意见才成就其公。
English: Therefore, it is said that the hills accumulate small dirt and stones to achieve their height, the rivers accumulate small flowing water to achieve their greatness, and great people and the combination of many opinions to achieve their public.

古文：是以自外入者，有主而不执；由中出者，有正而不距。
现代文：所以，从外界反映到内心里的东西，自己虽有定见却并不执着己见，由内心里向外表达的东西，即使是正确的也不愿跟他人相违逆。
English: Therefore, what is reflected from the outside to the inside, although he has a fixed opinion, he does not cling to his own opinion, and what is expressed from the inside to the outside, even if it is correct, he does not want to contradict others.

古文：四时殊气，天不赐，故岁成；五官殊职，君不私，故国治；文武殊材，大人不赐，故德备；万物殊理，道不私，故无名。
现代文：四季具有不同的气候，大自然并没有对某一节令给予特别的恩赐，因此年岁的序列得以形成；各种官吏具有不同的职能，国君没有偏私，因此国家得以治理；文臣武将具有各不相同的本事，国君不作偏爱，因此各自德行完备；万物具有各别的规律，大道对它们也都没有偏爱，因此不去授予名称以示区别。
English: The four seasons have different climates, and nature does not give special gifts to a certain season, so the sequence of years can be formed; various officials have different functions, the sovereign has no favoritism, so the country can be governed; civil servants and generals have different abilities, the sovereign does not make preferences, so their respective virtues are complete; all things have different laws, and the highways have no preference for them, so they do not award names to show the difference.

古文：无名故无为，无为而无不为。
现代文：没有称谓因而也就没有作为，没有作为因而也就无所不为。
English: Without the appellation, there is no action; without action, there is no omnipotence.

古文：时有终始，世有变化，祸福淳淳，至有所拂者而有所宜，自殉殊面；有所正者有所差，比于大泽，百材皆度；观于大山，木石同坛。
现代文：时序有终始，世代有变化。祸福在不停地流转，出现违逆的一面同时也就存在相宜的一面；各自追逐其不同的侧面，有所端正的同时也就有所差误。就拿山泽来比方，生长的各种材质全都有自己的用处；再看看大山，树木与石块处在同一块地方。
English: The chronology has a beginning and an end, generations have changes. Misfortune and good fortune are constantly circulating, there is a rebellious side and at the same time there is a suitable side; each pursues its different side, there are corrections and there are also errors. Take the mountains and lakes as an example, all kinds of growing materials have their own uses; then look at the mountains, trees and stones are in the same place.

古文：此之谓丘里之言。 
现代文：这就叫做 丘里 的言论。 
English: This is known as the "Chury" speech.

古文：少知曰： 然则谓之道足乎？ 
现代文：少知问： 既然如此，那么称之为道，可以吗？ 
English: Shochi asked: Since this is the case, is it okay to call it a path?

古文：大公调曰： 不然，今计物之数，不止于万，而期曰万物者，以数之多者号而读之也。
现代文：大公调说： 不可以。现在计算一下物的种数，不止于一万，而只限于称作万物，是用数目字最多的来称述它。
English: He said, "No. Now, let's count the number of things. There are more than ten thousand, and we can only call them all things, and use the largest number of characters to describe them."

古文：是故天地者，形之大者也；阴阳者，气之大者也；道者为之公。
现代文：所以，天和地，是形体中最大的；阴与阳，是元气中最大的；而大道却把天地、阴阳相贯通。
English: Therefore, heaven and earth are the largest in shape; yin and yang are the largest in vitality; and the avenue connects heaven and earth, yin and yang.

古文：因其大以号而读之则可也，已有之矣，乃将得比哉！
现代文：因为它大就用 道 来称述它是可以的，已经有了 道 的名称，还能够用什么来与它相提并论呢？
English: Because it is great, it can be described as Tao. It already has the name of Tao. What else can be used to compare it with?

古文：则若以斯辩，譬犹狗马，其不及远矣。 
现代文：假如用这样的观点来寻求区别，就好像狗与马，其间的差别也就太大了！ 
English: If we look for the difference from this point of view, it will be like a dog and a horse, and the difference between them will be too big!

古文：少知曰： 四方之内，六合之里，万物之所生恶起？ 
现代文：少知问： 四境之内，宇宙之间，万物的产生从哪里开始？ 
English: Shou Zhi asked: Within the four realms, between the universes, where does the creation of all things begin?

古文：大公调曰： 阴阳相照相盖相治，四时相代相生相杀。
现代文：大公调说： 阴阳互相辉映、互相伤害又互相调治，四季互相更替、互相产生又互相衰减。
English: "Yin and yang reflect each other, harm each other, and regulate each other. The four seasons replace each other, produce each other, and decay each other.

古文：欲恶去就，于是桥起。雌雄片合，于是庸有。
现代文：欲念、憎恶、离弃、靠拢，于是像桥梁一样相互连接相互兴起，雌性、雄性的分开、交合，于是相互为常相互具有。
English: Desire, aversion, abandonment, and closeness are connected like a bridge, giving rise to each other. Masculine and feminine are separated and intermingled, giving rise to mutual possessiveness.

古文：安危相易，祸福相生，缓急相摩，聚散以成。
现代文：安全与危难相互变易，灾祸与幸福相互生存，寿延与夭折相互交接，生还与死亡因此而形成。
English: Safety and danger change with each other, disaster and happiness coexist with each other, longevity and premature death intersect with each other, and survival and death are formed as a result.

古文：此名实之可纪，精之可志也。
现代文：这些现象的名称与实际都能理出端绪，精细微妙之处都能记载下来。
English: Both the name and the reality of these phenomena can be sorted out, and the finer nuances can be recorded.

古文：随序之相理，桥运之相使，穷则反，终则始，此物之所有。
现代文：随物变化的次序相互更替总是遵循着一定的轨迹，又像桥梁连接彼此两方那样地运动而又彼此相互制约，到了尽头就会折回，有了终结就有开始；这都是万物所共有的规律。
English: The order of change of things always follows a certain trajectory, and moves like a bridge connecting the two sides and restricting each other. At the end, it will turn back, and when there is an end, there will be a beginning; these are the common laws of all things.

古文：言之所尽，知之所至，极物而已。
现代文：言语所能致意的，智巧所能达到的，只限于人们所熟悉的少数事物罢了。
English: What words can say, what wit can achieve, is limited to a few familiar things.

古文：睹道之人，不随其所废，不原其所起，此议之所止。 
现代文：体察大道的人，不追逐事物的消亡，不探究事物的源起，这就是言语评说所限止的境界。 
English: The person who observes the road, does not pursue the extinction of things, does not explore the origin of things, this is the realm limited by verbal evaluation.

古文：少知曰： 季真之莫为，接子之或使。二家之议，孰正于其情，孰偏于其理？ 
现代文：少知又问： 季真的 莫为 观点，接子的 或使 主张，两家的议论，谁最合乎事物的真情，谁又偏离了客观的规律？ 
English: Shao Zhi also asked: If there is a difference of opinion between the two parties, who is most in line with the truth of things, and who has deviated from the objective law?

古文：大公调曰： 鸡鸣狗吠，是人之所知。虽有大知，不能以言读其所自化，又不能以意其所将为。
现代文：大公调说： 鸡鸣狗叫，这是人人都能了解的现象；可是，即使是具有超人的才智，也不能用言语来称述其自我变化的原因，同样也不能臆断它们将会怎么样。
English: "Chickens and dogs crowing is a phenomenon that everyone can understand; however, even if they have superhuman intelligence, they cannot use words to describe the reasons for their self-change, nor can they predict what will happen to them.

古文：斯而析之，精至于无伦，大至于不可围。或之使，莫之为，未免于物而终以为过。或使则实，莫为则虚。
现代文：用这样的道理来加以推论和分析，精妙达到了无以伦比，浩大达到了不可围量，事物的产生有所支持，还是事物的产生全出于虚无，两种看法各持一端均不能免于为物所拘滞，因而最终只能是过而不当。 或使 的主张过于执滞， 莫为 的观点过于虚空。
English: To deduce and analyze with this kind of reasoning, the subtlety has reached unparalleled, the vastness has reached immeasurable, the production of things has support, or the production of things is entirely out of nothing, both views can not be free from the detention of things, so in the end it can only be inappropriate.

古文：有名有实，是物之居；无名无实，在物之虚。
现代文：有名有实，这就构成物的具体形象。无名无实，事物的存在也就显得十分虚无。
English: Having a name and reality, this constitutes the concrete image of a thing. Without a name and reality, the existence of a thing also appears to be very empty.

古文：可言可意，言而愈疏。
现代文：可以言谈也可以测度，可是越是言谈距离事物的真情也就越疏远。
English: You can talk and measure, but the more you talk, the further away you are from the truth of things.

古文：未生不可忌，已死不可阻。
现代文：没有产生的不能禁止其产生，已经死亡的不能阻挡其死亡。
English: What has not yet come into being cannot be prevented from coming into being, and what is already dead cannot be prevented from dying.

古文：死生非远也，理不可睹。
现代文：死与生并不相距很远，其中的规律却是不易察见。
English: Death and life are not very far apart, but the rules are not easy to see.

古文：或之使，莫之为，疑之所假。
现代文：事物的产生有所支使，还是事物的产生全都出于虚无，两者都是因为疑惑而借此生出的偏执之见。
English: Whether things are caused to come into being, or whether things come into being entirely out of nothing, both are paranoid views arising from doubt.

古文：吾观之本，其往无穷；吾求之末，其来无止。
现代文：我观察事物的原本，事物的过去没有穷尽；我寻找事物的末绪，事物的将来不可限止。
English: I observe the origin of things, the past of things is inexhaustible; I look for the end of things, the future of things is limitless.

古文：无穷无止，言之无也，与物同理。或使莫为，言之本也。与物终始。
现代文：没有穷尽又没有限止，言语的表达不能做到，这就跟事物具有同一的规律；而 或使 、 莫为 的主张，用言谈各持一端，又跟事物一样有了外在的终始。
English: There is no exhaustion and no limit, the expression of words can not be done, which has the same law as things; and the idea of "make do and mend," using words to hold one end, has the same external beginning and end as things.

古文：道不可有，有不可无。
现代文：道不可以用 有 来表达， 有 也不可以用无来描述。
English: Tao cannot be expressed by having, and having cannot be described by not having.

古文：道之为名，所假而行。或使莫为，在物一曲，夫胡为于大方！
现代文：大道之所以称为 道 ，只不过是借用了 道 的名称。 或使 和 莫为 的主张，各自偏执于事物的一隅，怎么能称述于大道呢？
English: The reason why the boulevard is called a boulevard is simply that the name of the boulevard is borrowed. How can the idea of making do and mend, each of which is obsessed with one corner of things, be described as a boulevard?

古文：言而足，则终日言而尽道；言而不足，则终日言而尽物。
现代文：言语圆满周全，那么整天说话也能符合于道；言语不能圆满周全，那么整天说话也都滞碍于物。
English: If one's speech is complete and well-rounded, one can talk all day long and still be in line with the Way; if one's speech is not complete and well-rounded, one can talk all day long and still not be in line with the Way.

古文：道，物之极，言默不足以载。非言非默，议有所极。 
现代文：道是阐释万物的最高原理，言语和缄默都不足以称述；既不说话也不缄默，评议有极限而大道却是没有极限的。 
English: The Tao is the highest principle that explains all things. Words and silence are not enough to describe it. Neither speech nor silence. Discussion has a limit, but the road has no limit.

