古文：说者，说之也；说之者，资之也，饰言者，假之也；假之者，益损也。
现代文：所谓 说 ，就是游说对方。对人进行游说的目的，就是说服人啊。
English: The so-called saying is to lobby the other party. The purpose of lobbying people is to persuade people.

古文：应对者，利辞也；利辞者，轻论也。
现代文：回答他人的问话，要会用外交辞令。所谓机变的外交辞令是一种轻俏的言辞。
English: When answering someone else's question, you should use diplomatic language. So-called diplomatic language is a kind of light rhetoric.

古文：成义者，明之也；明之者，符验也。
现代文：具有正义与真理价值的言论，必须要阐明真伪；而阐明真伪，就是要验证是否正确。
English: A statement that has the value of justice and truth must clarify the authenticity; and to clarify the authenticity is to verify whether it is correct.

古文：难言者，却论也；却论者，钓几也。
现代文：责难对方的言辞，是反对对方的论调，持这种论调时，是要诱出对方心中的机密。
English: Blaming the other side's words is an argument against the other side, and when holding such an argument, it is to induce secrets in the other side's heart.

古文：佞言者，谄而于忠：谀言者，博而于智；平言者，决而于勇；戚言者，权而于信；静言者，反而于胜。
现代文：说着一些奸佞之话的人，是为了取悦于对方以求忠诚。说着奉承话的人，会因吹捧对方显示自己聪慧多智。说着一些平实之话的人，由于果决而显得勇敢。说忧戚话的人，由于握着权，而显得有信用，而说稳重话的人，却由于能反抗而胜利。
English: He who says treacherous things seeks to please the other party in order to gain their allegiance. He who says flattering things shows that he is clever and wise by praising the other party. He who says plain things is brave because he is decisive. He who says anxious things is trustworthy because he holds power, and he who says steady things is victorious because he can resist.

古文：先意承欲者，谄也；繁种文辞者，博也；策选进谋者，权也。
现代文：用华美的词藻来鼓吹欲望者，就是谄媚。用夸大与吹嘘来进献谋略，博取上司欢心的人，就是揽权者。
English: The one who uses flowery words to promote desires is a flatterer. The one who uses exaggeration and boasting to devise strategies and win the boss's favor is a power-grabber.

古文：纵舍不疑者，决也；先分不足而窒非者，反也。
现代文：前后进退而不犹疑者，就是果决的人。自已不对而又指责他人过错的就是反抗者。
English: He who advances and retreats without hesitation is a resolute man. He who is not right in himself and accuses others of being wrong is a rebel.

古文：故口者机关也，所以关闭情意也。
现代文：一般说来， 口 是人体的机关。用它来封锁、宣传信息。
English: Generally speaking, the mouth is an organ of the human body. It is used to block and propagate information.

古文：耳目者，心之佐助也，所以窥间见奸邪。
现代文：耳目，就是心的辅助，可以用来窥察间隙发现奸邪。
English: The eyes and ears, which are the auxiliary of the heart, can be used to spy out the gaps and discover the evil.

古文：故曰： 参调而应，利道而动。 
现代文：所以说，只要口、耳、目三者相互呼应，就会走向成功。
English: Therefore, as long as the mouth, ears, and eyes are in harmony with each other, it will lead to success.

古文：故繁言而不乱，翱翔而不迷，变易而不危者，观要得理。
现代文：一般说来，虽有繁琐的语言却并不纷乱，纵横驰骋却不迷惑，虽有局势的变化并不危险，就是要抓住事物要领，看清事物本质。
English: Generally speaking, although there is cumbersome language, it is not chaotic, although there are ups and downs, it is not confusing, although there are changes in the situation, it is not dangerous. It is necessary to grasp the essentials of things and see the essence of things.

古文：故无目者，不可示以五色，无耳者，不可告以五音。故不可以往者，无所开之也；不可以来者，无所受之也。
现代文：由此可知，对于失明的人，没有必要拿五色给他们看；同理，对于失聪的人，没必要让他们听五音；所以不可以去的地方，不必让他们去，不可以来的人，也没有必要接受他们。
English: From this it can be seen that, for the blind, it is not necessary to show them the five colors; similarly, for the deaf, it is not necessary for them to listen to the five tones; therefore, it is not necessary for them to go where they cannot go, and it is not necessary for those who cannot come to accept them.

古文：物有不通者，故不事也。
现代文：有些行不通的事，就不要办。
English: If something doesn't work, don't do it.

古文：古人有言曰： 口可以食，不可以言。 
现代文：古人有言，说： 嘴可以用来吃饭，却不能胡乱说话。 
English: The ancients had a saying: "The mouth can be used for eating, but not for talking nonsense."

古文：言有讳忌也。
现代文：说的是讲话是有忌讳的。
English: What he is saying is that speech is taboo.

古文：众口烁金，言有曲故也。
现代文：警惕人言可畏，那是可以把事实歪曲的。
English: Be wary of fear mongering, which can distort the facts.

古文：人之情，出言则欲听，举事则欲成。
现代文：人之常情，只要自己说出话，就希望有人听，只要做事就希望能够成功。
English: It is human nature to want to be heard as long as you are speaking, and to want to be successful as long as you are doing.

古文：是故智者不用其所短，而用愚人之所长；不用其所拙，而用愚人之所工，故不困也。
现代文：所以，智者总是不用自己的短处，而是采用愚者的长处。不用自己的愚拙而用愚人的工巧，这样就使自己永远不会陷于窘迫。
English: Therefore the wise man does not need his own strength, but the strength of the fool; he does not need his own folly, but the craftsmanship of the fool, so that he will never be put to shame.

古文：言其有利者，从其所长也；言其有害者，避其所短也。
现代文：说到事物有利的一面，就要发挥其长处；说到事物有害的一面，就要回避它的短处。
English: When it comes to the beneficial side of things, it is necessary to give play to its strengths; when it comes to the harmful side of things, it is necessary to avoid its shortcomings.

古文：故介虫之捍也，必以坚厚；螫虫之动也，必以毒螫。
现代文：因而，甲虫防御天敌，是用其坚硬的甲壳。而毒虫攻击对方，一定用那有毒的尖刺。
English: Thus, a beetle defends itself against its natural enemies with its hard carapace, while a poisonous insect attacks its opponent with its poisonous spikes.

古文：故禽兽知用其所长，而谈者知用其所用也。
现代文：连动物禽兽都知道发扬自己的长处，游说之士更应该懂得发挥自己的长处。
English: Even animals know how to play to their strengths, and lobbyists should know how to play to their strengths.

古文：故曰： 辞言五、曰病、曰怨、曰忧、曰怒、曰喜。 
现代文：所以说，在外交辞令中有五种情况：一是病态之言；二是幽怨之言；三是忧郁之言；四是愤怒之言；五是喜悦之言。
English: Therefore, there are five situations in diplomatic speech: one is the speech of illness; the second is the speech of bitterness; the third is the speech of melancholy; the fourth is the speech of anger; the fifth is the speech of joy.

古文：故曰： 病者，感衰气而不神也；怨者，肠绝而无主也；忧者，闭塞而不泄也；怒者，妄动而不治也；喜者，宣散而无要也。 
现代文：一般地说来，病态之言是中气衰弱，说话没精神。幽怨之言是伤心痛苦，心神无主。忧郁之言是心情郁结，不能畅言，愤怒之言是轻举妄动，不能控制自己的话。所谓喜悦之言是说话自由散漫，没有重点。
English: Generally speaking, the words of illness are weak in the middle, and there is no spirit in speech. The words of bitterness are sad and painful, and the mind is helpless. The words of melancholy are depressed, and can not speak freely, and the words of anger are reckless, and can not control themselves. The so-called words of joy are free-flowing speech, and there is no focus.

古文：此五者，精则用之，利则行之。
现代文：以上这五种外交辞令，精要者可以使用，有利者可以付之实行。
English: The above five kinds of diplomatic rhetoric can be used by those who are essential and can be implemented by those who are advantageous.

古文：故与智者言，依于博；与拙者言，依于辩；与辩者言，依于要；与贵者言，依于势；与富者言，依于高；与贫者言，依于利；与贱者言，依于谦；与勇者言，依于敢；与过者言，依于锐，此其术也，而人常反之。
现代文：所以与智者谈话，就要以渊博为原则，与拙者说话，要以强辩为原则；与善辩的人谈话，要以简要为原则；与高贵的人谈话，要以鼓吹气势为原则；与富人谈话，要以高雅潇洒为原则；与穷人谈话，要以利害为原则；与卑贱者谈话，要以谦恭为原则；与勇敢的人谈话，要以果敢为原则；与上进者谈话，要以锐意进取为原则，这些都是与人谈话的原则。
English: Therefore, when talking with the wise, the principle is to be profound; when talking with the ignorant, the principle is to be forceful; when talking with the eloquent, the principle is to be concise; when talking with the noble, the principle is to be energetic; when talking with the rich, the principle is to be elegant; when talking with the poor, the principle is to be interested; when talking with the lowly, the principle is to be humble; when talking with the brave, the principle is to be bold; when talking with the advanced, the principle is to be aggressive. These are the principles of talking with people.

古文：是故与智者言，将此以明之；与不智者言，将此以教之，而甚难为也。
现代文：然而不少人却常常背道而驰。所以，与聪明人谈话时，就要让他明了这些方法，与笨人谈话时，就要把这些方法教给他。然而事实上很难作到。
English: However, many people often go in the opposite direction. Therefore, when talking to a smart person, it is necessary to let him know these methods, and when talking to a stupid person, it is necessary to teach him these methods. However, it is actually difficult to do.

古文：故言多类，事多变。
现代文：所以说谈话有各种方法，所论事情会不断变化。
English: So there are many ways to have a conversation, and the things we talk about are constantly changing.

古文：故终日言，不失其类，故事不乱。
现代文：终日谈论，也不会把事情搞乱。事情不断变化，也不会失其原则。
English: Talking all day long will not mess things up. Things are constantly changing, and they will not lose their principles.

古文：终日变，而不失其主，故智贵不妄，听贵聪，智贵明，辞贵奇。
现代文：故就智者而言重要的是要不乱不虚，听话善辨真伪，聪颖则善断是非，出言要变化莫测。
English: Therefore, as far as the wise are concerned, it is important not to be chaotic and not to be false, to be obedient and good at distinguishing truth from falsehood, to be clever and good at deciding right and wrong, and to be unpredictable.

