古文：皇甫恂卫庭训韦秀庄华岳神女王僴
现代文：皇甫恂卫庭训韦秀庄华岳神女王僴
English: Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：皇甫恂
现代文：皇甫恂
English: Emperor Fu Xi

古文：皇甫恂，字君和。
现代文：皇甫恂，字君和。
English: "Kohfu" means emperor and "kunwa" means ruler.

古文：开元中，授华州参军。
现代文：唐开元年间，授官为华州参军时，突然死去。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, when he was commissioned to join the army for Huazhou, he died suddenly.

古文：暴亡，其魂神若在长衢路中，夹道多槐树。
现代文：死后觉得自己的魂魄走在一条漫长的街道上，路两旁都是槐树。
English: After his death, he felt that his soul was walking down a long street lined with eucalyptus trees.

古文：见数吏拥篲，恂问之，答曰：五道将军常于此息马。
现代文：看见几个人用扫帚清扫，就问清道做什么。回答说，五道将军常在这里歇马。
English: When he saw several people sweeping with brooms, he asked them what they were doing. They replied that the five generals often rested their horses here.

古文：恂方悟死耳，嗟叹而行。
现代文：这时皇甫恂才知道自己也死了。
English: It was only then that Empress Dowager Cixi realized that she was also dead.

古文：忽有黄衣吏数人，执符，言天曹追，遂驱迫至一处。门阙甚崇，似上东门，又有一门，似尚书省门。
现代文：正在感叹，忽然有几个手执符的穿黄衣的官员催他快走，说天曹在追他。皇甫恂被仓惶地赶到一个高大的殿堂门外，看那大门非常庄严，好象是世间皇城的上东门。又有一个门，好象是尚书省的门，门口警卫森严。
English: While he was lamenting, he was suddenly urged to leave by several yellow-clad officials holding signs, who said that Heavenly Father was chasing him. The emperor was hurried to a tall gate outside the palace, which was very solemn, as if it were the eastern gate of the world's imperial city. There was another gate, which looked like the provincial gate, and the guards at the gate were strict.

古文：门卫极众，方引入。一吏曰：公有官，须别通，且伺务隙耳。
现代文：刚要带他进去，一个官员说，里面大人正在办紧要公事，得等一会他有了空才能通报。皇甫恂只好老实地等着。
English: Just as they were about to take him inside, an official said that the adults inside were busy with important business and would have to wait until he was free to make an announcement. The empress dowager had to honestly wait.

古文：恂拱立候之。须臾，见街中人惊矍辟易。俄见东来数百骑，戈矛前驱。恂匿身墙门以窥。
现代文：这时，街上的人突然惊慌地到处躲避，原来从东来了几百个骑马的执枪的人，皇甫恂也躲在墙角偷看。
English: At this time, the people on the street suddenly panicked and fled everywhere. It turned out that several hundred gunmen on horseback had come from the east, and the Empress Dowager was also hiding in a corner to peek.

古文：渐近，见一老姥，拥大盖，策四马，从骑甚众。
现代文：不一会看见一个有伞盖的四马车上坐着一个老妇人在很多随从簇拥下过来了。
English: An old woman in an umbrella-covered four-horse carriage, surrounded by a large entourage, soon arrived.

古文：恂细视之，乃其亲叔母薛氏也。
现代文：他细细一看，那老妇人竟是已经去世的婶娘薛氏。
English: When he took a closer look, the old woman turned out to be Mr. Xue's deceased aunt.

古文：恂遂趋出拜伏，自言姓名。
现代文：皇甫恂立刻跑出来跪伏在地，并报出自己的姓名。
English: The Empress Dowager immediately ran out, knelt on the ground, and announced her name.

古文：姥驻马问恂：是何人？
现代文：老妇人停下来问：你是什么人？
English: The old woman stopped and asked, "Who are you?"

古文：都不省记。
现代文：我怎么想不起来了？
English: Why can't I remember?

古文：恂即称小名，姥乃喜曰：汝安得来此？
现代文：皇甫恂就说出自己的小名。老妇人一听才笑了起来，又问：你怎么会到这儿来了？
English: The old woman laughed and asked: "How did you come here?"

古文：恂以实对。
现代文：皇甫恂就照实说自己死了。
English: The Empress Dowager Empress Dowager actually said that she was dead.

古文：姥曰：子侄中唯尔福最隆，来当误尔。
现代文：老妇人说：我的子侄中，你的福气是最大的，你来肯定是他们弄错了。
English: The old woman said, "You are the luckiest of all my nephews. You must have made a mistake.

古文：且吾近充职务，苦驱驰，汝就府相见也。
现代文：可是我最近公务非常繁忙，现在还有急事，你以后到我府上来再谈吧。
English: However, I have been very busy with my official duties recently, and there are pressing matters right now, so please come to my office later to discuss them further.

古文：言毕遂过。
现代文：说完就匆匆走了。
English: After saying this, he hurried away.

古文：逡巡，判官务隙命入。
现代文：过了一会儿，判官办公务有了时间，就传皇甫恂上殿。
English: After a while, when there was time for the magistrate's office work, he sent the imperial edict to the palace.

古文：见一衣冠，昂然与之承迎，恂哀祈之。谓恂曰：足下阳中有功德否？恂对曰：有之。
现代文：皇甫恂一看殿上走下来一个穿官服很傲气的人，就苦苦向他求告还阳。判官问：你想还阳，那你在阳世积有什么功德吗？皇甫恂说：有功德。
English: When the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：俛而笑曰：此非妄语之所。
现代文：判官俯耳笑道：这里可不是容你胡说八道的地方。
English: The judge smiled and said, "This is not a place for you to talk nonsense."

古文：顾左右曰：唤阉，割家来。
现代文：说着就命令左右：把他的阳物割下来！
English: As he spoke, he gave the order: Cut off his penis!

古文：恂甚惶惧。
现代文：皇甫恂一听就吓坏了。
English: Hearing this, Empress Dowager Cixi was terrified.

古文：忽闻疾报声，王有使者来，判官遽趋出，拜受命。
现代文：忽然听见外面有人报道：阎王的使者到！判官赶快下殿去接，并跪拜听命。
English: Suddenly, someone outside reported: "The emissary of the king of hell has arrived! Judge, hurry down to the hall to meet him, and kneel to obey his orders."

古文：恂窥之，见一阉人传命毕，方去。
现代文：皇甫恂偷眼看，见一个太监模样的人向判官传达了命令就走了。
English: The Empress Dowager looked furtively and saw a man who looked like a eunuch. He conveyed the order to the judge and left.

古文：判官拜送门外，却入，谓恂：向来大使有命，言足下未合来，所司误耳。
现代文：送走了使者，判官回来对皇甫恂刚才使者传来大王的命令，说你不该到这里来，是主管你方的司官弄错了。
English: Having sent the envoy away, the magistrate returned to tell the emperor that the emissary had just received an order from the great king, saying that you should not have come here, that the magistrate in charge of your side had made a mistake.

古文：足下自见大使，便可归也。
现代文：你自己去见见那使者，就可以还阳了。
English: If you go to see the messenger yourself, you can return the sun.

古文：数吏引去，西行三四里，至一府郡，旌旗拥门，恂被命入。
现代文：于是有几个官员领着皇甫恂走出判官大殿，向西走了三四里，来到一个府邸前，只见门外旗织飘扬，很是森严。
English: So a few officials led the empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：仰视，乃见叔母据大殿，命上令坐，恂俯伏而坐，羽卫森然。
现代文：官吏让他进去后，抬头一看，大殿上正端坐着他的婶子。婶子命他上殿坐下，他就战战兢兢地坐下了。
English: After the official let him in, he looked up and saw that his aunt was sitting at the end of the hall. His aunt ordered him to go to the hall and sit down, and he sat down fearfully.

古文：旁有一僧趺宝座，二童子侍侧，恂亦理揖。
现代文：婶子的旁边还有一个宝座，一个和尚正在打坐，两旁各有一个童子。皇甫恂也向和尚拜了一下。
English: There was also a throne next to her, a monk was meditating, and there was a boy on either side. The Empress Dowager also bowed to the monk.

古文：叔母方叙平生委曲亲族，诲恂以仁义之道，陈报应之事。乃曰：儿岂不闻地狱乎？
现代文：婶子对皇甫恂说自己过去有很多对不住乡亲族人的事，教导他一些重仁义信报应的道理，并说：孩子，你不是听说过地狱吗？
English: His aunt told him that in the past he had a lot of hard feelings towards his relatives in his hometown. She taught him some principles about the importance of benevolence, righteousness, and retribution, and said, "My child, haven't you heard of hell?

古文：此则其所也，须一观之。
现代文：这里就是地狱啊。你来了就看一看吧。
English: This is hell. Come and have a look.

古文：叔母顾白僧：愿导引此儿。
现代文：说着看了看那个和尚说：你就带他去吧。
English: He looked at the monk and said, "Take him with you."

古文：僧遂整衣，而命恂：从我。
现代文：和尚整了整衣裳，让皇甫恂跟他走。
English: The monk straightened his clothes and let the Empress Dowager go with him.

古文：恂随后行。比一二里，遥望黑风，自上属下，烟涨不见其际。中有黑城，飞焰赫然。
现代文：走出去一二里地时，就看见远处黑烟滚滚，自上而下无边际地翻卷着，黑烟里有一座黑城，城里烈火冲天。
English: When I walked out a mile or two, I saw black smoke billowing in the distance, billowing from top to bottom without limit. There was a black city in the black smoke, and the city was on fire.

古文：渐近其城，其黑气即自去和尚丈余而开。至城，门即自启，其始入也。
现代文：来到城外一丈远的地方，那黑烟就在和尚的面前分开了，城门也自动打开。
English: When he came to a place far away from the city, the black smoke parted in front of the monk, and the gate opened automatically.

古文：见左右罪人，初剥皮吮血，砍刺糜碎，其叫呼怨痛。
现代文：进城后，只见到处都是受刑的罪犯，有的被剥皮吸血，有的被斧剁磨辗，到处是拷打声和罪犯的号叫声，惨不忍闻。
English: After entering the city, I only saw criminals being punished everywhere. Some were skinned and drained of blood, others were sharpened with an axe. Everywhere I heard the sounds of torture and the cries of criminals. It was unbearable.

古文：宛转其间，莫究其数，楚毒之声动地。
现代文：皇甫恂吓破了胆，请求快点离开。他们又来到一个门前，只见门内烈焰万丈。
English: Frightened, the Empress Dowager implored them to hurry up and leave. They came to another door, only to find it in flames.

古文：恂震怖不安，求还。
现代文：和尚说这儿叫无间门，说罢了就打算回去。
English: The monk said that this place was called the Door to Nowhere, and he planned to go back as soon as he had said that.

古文：又北望一门，炽然炎火，和尚指曰：此无间门也。
现代文：这时突然听见烈火中有人喊皇甫恂的名字，一看是一个和尚坐在烧红的铁床上，脑袋上钉着个大铁钉，血流如注。
English: At this time, someone suddenly shouted the name of Emperor Fuxiong from the flames. At first glance, it was a monk sitting on a red-hot iron bed, with a large iron nail nailed to his head, and blood streaming down his face.

古文：言讫欲归，忽闻火中一人呼恂。
现代文：皇甫恂仔细辨认，原来是自己的一个门徒叫胡辨的和尚，就惊问他怎么到了这地步。
English: After carefully identifying the monk, who turned out to be one of his own disciples named Hu Gan, the Empress Dowager asked him how he had reached this point.

古文：恂视之，见一僧坐铁床，头上有铁钉钉其脑，流血至地。
现代文：胡辨说：是因为我平时爱和别人也和你喝酒吃肉，犯了佛门大戒，现在后悔极了，请救救我吧！
English: Hu Ben said: Because I usually love to drink with others and eat meat with you, I broke the Buddhist precepts, and now I regret it very much, please save me!

古文：细视之，是恂门徒僧胡辨也。
现代文：皇甫恂问：我怎么能救得了你呢？
English: Emperor Fuxi asked, "How could I save you?"

古文：惊问之，僧曰：生平与人及公饮酒食肉，今日之事，自悔何阶。
现代文：胡辨说：你为我抄一部《金光明经》，再为我在城里造一个刻着经文的石柱，那我就可以投胎做一个畜牲了。
English: Huben said, "Copy a copy of the Golden Light Sutra for me, and then build a stone pillar engraved with scriptures for me in the city. Then I can be reborn as an animal."

古文：君今随和尚，必当多福，幸垂救。
现代文：皇甫恂很难过地答应下来。然后他回到大殿，把刚才所见所闻说给婶子听。婶子说：只要你多做好事，是不会到那个地步的。
English: The Empress Dowager reluctantly agreed. Then he returned to the main hall and told his aunt what he had just seen and heard. She said, "As long as you do more good deeds, you won't get to that point."

古文：曰：何以奉救？
现代文：又问皇甫恂想不想知道自己的阳间官运，皇甫恂说想知道。
English: He also asked the Empress Dowager if she would like to know about her career as a courtesan. The Empress Dowager said that she would like to know.

古文：见京官至多。又一节，言太府卿贬绵州刺史，其后掩之。
现代文：不一会，就有一个穿黄衣的官员抱着一堆大簿子来，让他在殿下看。皇甫恂见簿子里京官非常多，又翻到一页，终于看到了自己，写的是先当大府卿，然后又贬到四川绵州当刺史。
English: Soon, a yellow-clad official came with a pile of large books and asked him to show them to His Imperial Highness. The Emperor's father-in-law saw that there were a lot of Beijing officials in the book, turned to the next page, and finally saw himself, writing about first being the prefect of the prefecture, and then being relegated to Mianzhou, Sichuan.

古文：吏曰：不合知矣。遂令二人送恂归，再拜而出。
现代文：他还想往后看，黄衣官员忙合上簿子说：以后的事就不该让你知道了。婶子就派了两个官员送皇甫恂回阳世。
English: He still wanted to look back. The yellow-clad official busily closed the book and said, "You should not know what will happen next." The aunt sent two officials to send the emperor back to the world.

古文：出门后，问二吏姓氏，一姓焦，一姓王。
现代文：皇甫恂拜别出门，问二位官员的姓氏，他们说一个姓焦一个姓王。
English: The crown prince asked the two officials their surnames, and they said that one was surnamed Jiao and the other was surnamed Wang.

古文：相与西行十余里。有一羊三足，截路吼噉，骂恂曰：我待尔久矣！
现代文：三人往西走了十多里时，突然有只三条腿的羊堵住去路不断狂叫道：皇甫恂，我等你多时了！
English: When the three of them had walked more than ten miles to the west, a three-legged sheep suddenly blocked their path and kept barking madly: "Empress Dowager, I've been waiting for you for a long time!

古文：何为割我一脚？
现代文：你为什么割了我一只蹄子？说！
English: Why did you cut off one of my hooves? Tell me!

古文：恂实不省，且问之，羊曰：君某年日，向某县县尉厅上，誇能割羊脚。
现代文：皇甫恂实在不明白，就问羊是怎么回事。那羊说：你某年某日在某县的县尉大厅上夸口说你能活剁羊蹄。
English: The Empress Dowager really didn't understand, so she asked the goat what was going on. The goat said, "One year, on a certain day, you boasted at the county magistrate's hall in a certain county that you could shear a goat alive.

古文：其时无羊，少府打屠伯，屠伯活割我一脚将去，我自此而毙。
现代文：当时没有羊，你们就打屠户，屠户只好剁了我一只蹄子送给你，我因此就死掉了。
English: At that time there were no sheep, so you fought with the butcher, and the butcher had no choice but to give you one of my hooves, and that's how I died.

古文：吾由尔而夭。
现代文：这不是你的罪果吗？
English: Isn't this the result of your sin?

古文：恂方省之，乃卑词以谢，讬以屠者自明。
现代文：皇甫恂这才想起来，忙不迭的向羊陪罪，并说我还要向那个屠户转告，也让他知道他的罪果。
English: It was only then that the Empress Dowager came to mind. She hurriedly apologized to the sheep and said that I would also tell the butcher and let him know the consequences of his sin.

古文：焦王二吏。亦同解纷。羊当路立，恂不得去。
现代文：这时焦、王两个官员也上来劝解，可是那只羊仍然堵着路不放行。
English: At this time, two officials, Jiao and Wang, also came up to persuade him, but the sheep still blocked the road and would not let go.

古文：乃谢曰：与尔造功德可乎？
现代文：皇甫恂说：那我为你造些功德行不行？
English: Empress Dowager Cixi said, "Then can I create some merits for you?"

古文：羊曰：速为我写金刚经。
现代文：羊说：当然行。你快为我写一部《金刚经》吧。
English: The sheep said, "Of course. Write me a copy of the Diamond Sutra."

古文：许之，羊遂喜而去。
现代文：皇甫恂答应后，羊才高兴地走开了。
English: After the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager agreed, the sheep walked away happily.

古文：二吏又曰：幸得奉送，亦须得同幸惠，各乞一卷。
现代文：两个官员又说，我俩有幸送你一路，你能不能也给我们各写一卷经？
English: The two officials also said, "We both have the honor of escorting you all the way, can you also write us each a book of scripture?"

古文：并许之。
现代文：皇甫恂也答应了。
English: Empress Dowager Cixi also agreed.

古文：更行里余，二吏曰：某只合送至此，郎君自寻此迳。
现代文：又走了一里多路，两个官员说：我们只能送到这里，你自己继续走吧。
English: After walking for more than a mile, the two officials said, "We can only send you here, you can go on your own."

古文：更一二里，有一卖浆店，店旁斜路，百步已下，则到家矣。
现代文：再走一二里地，有一个卖水的小店，店旁有条斜路，走百步就是你家了。
English: Walk another mile or two and you'll find a small shop selling water. There's a slope next to the shop, and after a hundred paces you'll be at home.

古文：遂别去。恂独行，苦困渴。果至一店。
现代文：两个官吏走后，皇甫恂就自己往前走，正觉得又累又渴时，果然看见一个小店。
English: After the two officials left, the Empress Dowager moved forward on her own. Feeling tired and thirsty, she happened to see a small shop.

古文：店有水瓮，不见人。
现代文：店里没有人，有一个大瓮，里面是水，他就偷偷取来喝。
English: There was no one in the shop, but there was a large urn with water inside, which he stole to drink.

古文：恂窃取浆饮，忽有一老翁大叫怒，持刀以趂，骂云：盗饮我浆。
现代文：正喝着突然一个老头拿着刀逼过来，大喊：你怎么偷喝我的水？
English: While he was crying, an old man with a knife suddenly forced his way in, shouting: "How can you steal my water?

古文：恂大惧却走，翁甚疾来。
现代文：皇甫恂夺路就逃，老头在后面紧追。
English: The old man chased after him.

古文：恂反顾，忽陷坑中，怳然遂活。
现代文：皇甫恂边跑边回头看，一脚陷进一个坑里，突然一惊就复活了。
English: Looking back as he ran, the crown prince fell into a pit and was suddenly revived.

古文：而殓棺中，死已五六日。
现代文：这时他已死了五六天，已经盛殓在棺材里。
English: By this time he had been dead for five or six days and was already in his coffin.

古文：既而妻觉有变，发视之，绵绵有气。
现代文：他的妻子觉得不对劲儿，揭开棺材看，发现皇甫恂有微弱的气息。
English: His wife felt something was wrong and opened the coffin to see that there was a faint smell of the imperial pallium.

古文：久而能言，令急写三卷金刚经。
现代文：过了好久终于会说话了，急忙说：快写三卷《金刚经》！
English: After a long time, he was finally able to speak. He hurriedly said, "Write three volumes of the Diamond Sutra!"

古文：其夜忽闻敲门声，时有风歘歘然。空中朗言曰：焦某王某，蒙君功德，今得生天矣。
现代文：这天夜里忽然有人敲门，还有阵阵风吹进屋来，接着听得空中有人大声说：焦某王某由于你的功德，今天要转生了！
English: That night, someone suddenly knocked on the door, and a gust of wind blew into the house, and then I heard someone in the air say in a loud voice: "Jiao Xing Wang, because of your merits, you will be reborn today!"

古文：举家闻之。
现代文：这话全家都听到了。
English: The whole family heard it.

古文：更月余，胡辨师自京来，恂异之，而不复与饮。
现代文：一个多月后，那个在地狱里见过的受火刑的和尚胡辨从京城来了，皇甫恂很奇怪，就不再同他喝酒。
English: More than a month later, the monk Hu Ben, who had been burned in hell, came from the capital. The Empress Dowager was very surprised and stopped drinking with him.

古文：其僧甚恨，恂于静处，略为说冥中见师如此，师辄不为之信。
现代文：和尚很生气，皇甫恂就把他拉到一旁，简单说了在阴间看见他受刑的事。和尚根本不信。
English: The monk was very angry, so the Empress Dowager took him aside and simply told him that she had seen him suffer in the underworld. The monk did not believe it at all.

古文：既而去至信州，忽患顶疮。宿昔溃烂，困笃。僧曰：恂言其神乎？
现代文：几天后，和尚去了信州后，突然头上生了疮，而且一夜之间就烂透了，痛苦不堪，心想皇甫恂说的真就这么神吗？
English: A few days later, after the monk went to Shinshu, he suddenly developed sores on his head, and overnight he was rotten to the core, in excruciating pain. He thought to himself, "Is what the Empress Dowager said really so divine?"

古文：数日而卒。
现代文：不几日，和尚就死了。
English: Xue Shaoyin recounted the story.

古文：恂因为石中造石幢。
现代文：捕甫恂遵守在地狱中对和尚的许诺，为他在城里造了一个刻着经文的石柱子。
English: He kept his promise to the monk in hell and built a stone pillar with scriptures for him in the city.

古文：幢工始毕，其日市中豕生六子，一白色。
现代文：石柱造起来那天，城里有个猪生了六个猪羔，其中一只是白色的。
English: On the day the column was built, a pig in the city gave birth to six piglets, one of which was white.

古文：自诣幢，环绕数日，疲困而卒。
现代文：这个白猪竟独自跑到那根石柱前，围着石柱转了好几天，终于累死在石柱下了。
English: This white pig actually ran alone to the pillar, circled around the pillar for several days, and finally died of exhaustion under the pillar.

古文：今幢见存焉。
现代文：这个石柱现在还立在城中。
English: This pillar still stands in the city.

古文：恂后果为太府卿，贬绵州刺史而卒。
现代文：皇甫恂后来果然作了太府卿，贬为绵州刺史后，死在了任上。
English: Later, Emperor Fuxi was indeed made Taifuqing, and after being demoted to Mianzhou Zushi, he died in office.

古文：卫庭训
现代文：卫庭训
English: Guarding the courtyard

古文：卫庭训，河南人，累举不第。
现代文：卫庭训是河南人，几次求功名都没考取。
English: Wei Tingxun is from Henan Province, and he failed to win the title several times.

古文：天宝初，乃以琴酒为事，凡饮皆敬酬之。
现代文：天宝初年，就日日弹琴饮酒，而且一喝酒就要请朋友同饮。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, he played the piano and drank alcohol every day, and when he drank, he had to invite friends to drink with him.

古文：恒游东市，遇友人饮于酒肆。一日，偶值一举人，相得甚欢，乃邀与之饮。
现代文：经常请朋友到东市酒店去喝酒。有一天，偶然遇到一位举人，谈得很投机，举人就约他一同喝酒。
English: He often invited friends to the Dongshi Hotel for a drink. One day, he happened to meet a friend, and the conversation was very opportunistic. The friend invited him for a drink.

古文：庭训酧，此人昏然而醉。
现代文：庭训又回请举人时，举人却已经醉了。
English: When the court called for a referee, the referee was already drunk.

古文：庭训曰：君未饮，何醉也？
现代文：庭训说：我还没请你喝，你怎么就醉了？
English: I haven't asked you to drink yet, so how did you get drunk?

古文：曰：吾非人，乃华原梓桐神也。
现代文：举人说：我不是凡人，是华原县的梓桐神。
English: The person said, "I am not an ordinary person, I am the wax god of Hua Yuan County."

古文：昨日从洒肆过，已醉君之酒。
现代文：昨天已同你喝醉了酒，今天是感念你特来看望你。
English: Yesterday I got drunk with you, today I came to visit you because I miss you so much.

古文：故今日访君，适醉者亦感君之志。
现代文：现在我该回庙去了。以后你有什么办不了的事，尽管找我。
English: Now it's time for me to go back to the temple. In the future, if there's anything you can't do, feel free to ask me.

古文：今当归庙，他日有所不及，宜相访也。
现代文：过了十几天，庭训就到庙里去看他。刚到庙前，梓桐神已派了两个人迎接。
English: After a dozen days, Niitsune went to the temple to see him. Just before arriving at the temple, the god Azusa had sent two people to greet him.

古文：言讫而去。后旬日，乃访之。
现代文：进庙后，庭训想行礼，梓桐神说：我比你小，算是你的弟弟好吗？
English: After entering the temple, Tingxun wanted to make a bow, and Zi Tong Shen said: I am younger than you, can I be your younger brother?

古文：至庙，神已令二使迎庭训入庙。
现代文：于是神就行了礼。然后摆下宴席和歌舞，欢饮到晚上庭训才回去。
English: So the deity performed the ceremony. Then the banquet and song and dance were laid out, and they drank until the evening garden ceremony before returning.

古文：庭训欲拜，神曰：某年少，请为弟。
现代文：第二天庭训又来看梓铜神，述说自己很穷困。
English: On the second day of the court hearing, Zi Tongjin came to see him again and said that he was very poor.

古文：神顾谓左右：看华原县下有富人命衰者，可收生魂来。
现代文：梓桐神对旁边的人说：看看华原县里有没有身体不佳的富人，可以把他的魂拘来。
English: Zi Tong Shen said to the people next to him, "See if there are any rich people in Hua Yuan County who are not in good health. You can capture his soul."

古文：鬼遍索之，其县令妻韦氏衰，乃收其魂。
现代文：神派人在县里到处找，发现县令的妻子韦氏身体衰弱，就把她的魂收了来，并把她的心堵住。
English: God sent people to search everywhere in the county, and when they found that the wife of the county magistrate, Wei, was weak, they took her soul and blocked her heart.

古文：掩其心，韦氏忽心痛殆绝。神谓庭训曰：可往，得二百千与疗。
现代文：韦氏立刻心痛得要死。神对庭训说：你去吧，给她治心病，向她要二百千钱。
English: Mr. Wei's heart immediately ached to death. God said to the eunuch: Go ahead, cure her of her heart disease, and ask her for two hundred thousand yuan.

古文：庭训乃归主人，自署云：解医心痛。
现代文：庭训就到县衙对主管说：我能治心痛病。
English: So he went to the county magistrate and said to the superintendent: I can cure heart disease.

古文：令召之。
现代文：县令就请他给妻子看病。
English: The county magistrate asked him to see his wife.

古文：庭训入神教，求二百千，令许之。
现代文：庭训要二百千钱才给看，县令同意。
English: The prefectural government agreed to the court's demand for two hundred thousand yuan.

古文：庭训投药，即愈如故。
现代文：韦氏吃了庭训的药，果然立刻就好了。
English: Mr. Wei took the medicine of the courtroom training, and as expected, he felt better immediately.

古文：儿女忻忭，令亦喜，奉钱为宴饮。
现代文：县令和全家人十分高兴，送了钱后又留庭训喝了一顿。庭训有了钱，就天天狂饮无度。
English: The county magistrate and the whole family were very happy. After giving the money, they stayed and had a drink with the court eunuch. Once the court eunuch had the money, he went on a drinking spree every day.

古文：自尔无日不醉，主人谕之曰：君当隐贫窘，何苦使用不节乎？庭训曰：但有梓桐神在，何苦贫也！
现代文：主人告诫他说：你应该还伪装穷困，何苦这样挥霍呢？庭训说：有梓桐神帮助，我怕什么穷啊！
English: The master admonished him: "You should still pretend to be poor, why do you squander so much? The court eulogy said: With the help of the Zizotong God, I am afraid of being poor!

古文：主人以告令，令召问之，具以实告。
现代文：主人把这话告诉了县令，县令把庭训叫来问，庭训把实情全说了。
English: The master told this to the county magistrate, the county magistrate called the court eulogy to ask, and the court eulogy told the whole truth.

古文：令怒，逐庭训而焚梓桐神庙。
现代文：县令大怒，赶走了庭训，放火烧了梓桐神庙。
English: The county magistrate flew into a rage, drove away the courtiers, and set fire to the Azusa Shrine.

古文：庭训夜宿村店，忽见梓桐神来曰：非兄之过，乃弟合衰。
现代文：庭训夜里投宿在一个乡村小店里，梓桐神忽然来了。神说：这事不怪你，是我命中该遭此祸。
English: In the middle of the night, after spending the night in a small shop in the countryside, the god Azusa suddenly appeared. The god said, "You are not to blame for this, it is my fate to suffer this calamity."

古文：弟今往濯锦江立庙，极盛于此，可诣彼也。
现代文：现在我要去濯锦江立庙，在那里会比在这里更兴盛。
English: Now I want to go to the Ruijin River Temple, where it will be more prosperous than here.

古文：言讫不见。
现代文：你可以去那里找我。说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：庭训又往濯锦江，果见新庙。
现代文：于是庭训就赶到濯锦江，果然看见了一座新庙。
English: As a result, Tingxun rushed to Maojin River and saw a new temple.

古文：神见梦于乡人，可请卫秀才为庙祝。
现代文：梓桐神又给人们托梦，说可以请卫秀才来当庙里的管事。
English: Zi Tong also gave people a dream, saying that they could ask Wei Xiu Cai to be the steward of the temple.

古文：明日，乡人请留之。
现代文：第二天，人们就都来请他当了庙祝。
English: The next day, people came to invite him to be a temple priest.

古文：岁暮，神谓庭训曰：吾将至天曹，为兄问禄寿。
现代文：年末时，神对庭训说：我要去一次天庭，去查看一下你的官运和寿数。
English: At the end of the year, God said to the courtiers: "I want to go to the heavenly court once, to check your career and longevity.

古文：去数日归，谓庭训曰：兄来岁合成名，官至泾阳主簿。
现代文：几天后神就回来了，说：你明年能考中，能做泾阳县的主簿。
English: A few days later, God came back and said, "You will be able to take the middle school entrance examination next year, and you will be able to be the chief accountant of Poyang County."

古文：秩不满，有人迎充判官。
现代文：不到十年，会有人迎你做判官。
English: In less than ten years, someone will welcome you as a judge.

古文：于是神置酒饯之。
现代文：于是梓桐神备酒为庭训赶考饯行。
English: As a result, Azusatogami prepares wine for the garden ceremony and rushes to the exam.

古文：至京，明年果成名，释褐授泾阳县主簿。
现代文：第二年，庭训到京，果然考中，被委派为泾阳县主簿。
English: In the second year, Tingxun went to Beijing and successfully passed the middle school entrance examination. He was appointed as the chief librarian of Shenyang County.

古文：在任二载，分务闲暇，独立厅事，有一黄衫吏，持书而入，拜曰：天曹奉命为判官。
现代文：在任上干了两年的时候，有一天公务不忙，他站在大厅里，突然有一个黄衣官员拿着文书进来说：天曹派你去当判官。
English: When he had been in office for two years, one day, when he was not busy with his official duties, he was standing in the hall, when suddenly a yellow-clad official came in with a document and said, "God has sent you to be a judge."

古文：遂卒于是夕。
现代文：就在这天晚上，卫庭训就去世了。
English: On this very night, Wei Tingxun passed away.

古文：韦秀庄
现代文：韦秀庄
English: Wei Xiu Zhuang

古文：开元中，滑州刺史韦秀庄，暇日来城楼望黄河。
现代文：唐朝开元年间，滑州刺史韦秀庄公余时到城楼上看黄河。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, when he was a spare time, he went to the castle tower to see the Yellow River.

古文：楼中忽见一人，长三尺许，紫衣朱冠。
现代文：在楼中忽然看见一个人，身穿紫衣头戴红帽，只有三尺高。
English: In the middle of the building, I suddenly saw a man, dressed in purple and wearing a red cap, only three feet tall.

古文：通名参谒，秀庄知非人类，问是何神。
现代文：这个人自报姓名向他参拜。韦秀庄知道他不是凡人，就问他是什么神祗？
English: Wei Xiu Zhuang knew that he was not an ordinary person, so he asked him what kind of god he was.

古文：答曰：即城隍之主。
现代文：回答说是本城的城隍。
English: They answered that it was the castle moat of the city.

古文：又问何来。答曰：黄河之神，欲毁我城，以端河路，我固不许。
现代文：又问他来有什么事，城隍说：黄河神打算摧毁这座城池，为了使黄河的河道畅通。
English: When asked why he had come, the city magistrate said, "The god of the Yellow River intends to destroy this city in order to keep the Yellow River flowing smoothly."

古文：克后五日，大战于河湄，恐力不禁，故来求救于使君尔。
现代文：我坚决拒绝。五天之后，我与他将在河岸有一场大战。我担心打不过黄河神特来向你求援。
English: Five days later, I will have a big fight with him on the riverbank. I'm afraid I won't be able to beat him, so the Yellow River God has come to ask for your help.

古文：若得二千人，持弓弩，物色相助，必当克捷。
现代文：如果你能支援我两千名弓箭手，到时候帮助我，我就一定能打胜。
English: If you can support me with two thousand archers and help me at the right time, I will surely win.

古文：君之城也，唯君图之。
现代文：这个城是你所管，就看你的了。
English: You're in charge of this city, so it's up to you.

古文：秀庄许诺，神乃不见。
现代文：韦秀庄答应了他的要求后，这人就消失了。
English: After Wei Xiu Zhuang agreed to his request, the man disappeared.

古文：至其日，秀庆帅劲卒二千人登城。河中忽尔晦冥，须臾，有白气直上十余丈，楼上有青气出，相萦绕。
现代文：过了五天，韦秀庄率领着两千名精壮的士兵登上城楼，看见河面上变得一团漆黑，然后冒出一股十多丈高的白气，同时城楼上也冒出一股青气，和河上的白气缠绕在一起。
English: Five days later, Wei Xiu Zhuang led two thousand strong soldiers up to the city tower, and saw the river surface become pitch black, and then a white gas more than ten meters high emerged. At the same time, a blue gas also emerged from the city tower, and was entangled with the white gas on the river.

古文：气渐小，至灭，唯青气独存，逶迤如云峰之状，还入楼中。
现代文：这时韦秀庄命令弓箭手们向白气发箭，白气渐渐变小最后终于消失，只剩下青气了。青气蒸腾而上，化入云端，又飘到望河楼里。
English: At this time, Wei Xiu Zhuang ordered the archers to shoot arrows at the white gas. The white gas gradually became smaller and finally disappeared, leaving only the blue gas. The blue gas evaporated upwards, dissolved into the clouds, and floated into the Wanghe Tower.

古文：初时，黄河俯近城之下，此后渐退，至今五六里也。
现代文：起初，黄河的流水已逼近城下，后来才逐渐退回去。一直退到现在离城五六里的地方。
English: At first, the Yellow River flowed close to the city, but then it gradually retreated, all the way to where it is now five or six miles from the city.

古文：华岳神女
现代文：华岳神女
English: Hua Yue Shen Niu

古文：近代有士人应举之京，途次关西，宿于逆旅舍小房中。
现代文：从前有位书生赴京赶考，走到关西，住进一个旅店里。
English: Once upon a time, a student went to Beijing to catch up on exams, walked to Kansai, and stayed in a hotel.

古文：俄有贵人奴仆数人，云：公主来宿。以幕围店及他店四五所。
现代文：忽然有几个贵人的仆从进店说公主要来这里住，并用幛幕把周围几家店房都围了起来。
English: Suddenly, a few of the nobleman's servants entered the shop and said that the princess was coming to live here, and they surrounded the surrounding shops with a screen.

古文：人初惶遽，未得移徙。须臾，公主车声大至，悉下。
现代文：店里的人们很惊慌，还没来得及搬走就听见外面公主的车声隆隆，只好关上房门不敢出来。
English: The people in the store panicked. Before they could move, they heard the princess's car rumbling outside and had to shut the door and not dare to come out.

古文：店中人便拒户寝，不敢出。
现代文：公主住下后要洗澡，叫使女查查不许有人在屋里。
English: The princess had to take a shower after her stay, and she asked the maid to check that no one was in the house.

古文：公主于户前澡浴，令索房内。婢云：不宜有人。
现代文：使女发现躲在门后的书生，就大骂起来。公主把书生叫出来仔细看了看说：这个人挺不错的，不要难为他。
English: When the maid found Shousho hiding behind the door, she shouted at him. The princess called Shousho out, looked at him carefully, and said, "This man is quite good. Don't be hard on him."

古文：既而见某，群婢大骂。
现代文：公主去洗浴，就让书生在屋里呆着。
English: When the princess went to bathe, she let Shousei stay in the house.

古文：公主令呼出，熟视之曰：此书生颇开人意，不宜挫辱。
现代文：洗浴以后，又和书生谈起来，话很投机，就让使女领书生去洗浴，并给他换上华贵的衣服。
English: After bathing, she began to talk with Shousheng again. The conversation was very speculative, so she asked the maid to take Shousheng to bathe and change him into luxurious clothes.

古文：第令入房，浴毕召之，言甚会意。
现代文：然后在屋里挂上华丽的红帐子，床上铺了锦锻被褥，和书生一同就寝了。第二天，公主和书生一起来到京城。
English: Then she hung a magnificent red curtain in the room, spread a brocade quilt on the bed, and went to bed with the scholar. The next day, the princess and the scholar came to the capital together.

古文：公主宅在怀远里，内外奴婢数百人，荣华盛贵，当时莫比。
现代文：公主家在怀远里住，家里有好几百名仆从婢女，其富贵的程度当时谁也比不上。
English: The princess's family lived in Huaiyuan. There were several hundred servants and maids in the family, and no one could match their wealth at that time.

古文：家人呼某为驸马，出入器服车马，不殊王公。
现代文：公主家的人都管书生叫驸马。书生的用度也象王公贵族一样排场。
English: The people of the princess's family all called the scholar "Horse." The scholar's service was also as ostentatious as that of the princes and nobles.

古文：某有父母，在其故宅。公主令婢诣宅起居，送钱亿贯，他物称是。某家因资，郁为荣贵。
现代文：公主还派人到书生自己的家里去问候，并给了很多钱和贵重的物品，书生家里也过起了豪华的生活。
English: The princess also sent someone to Shousei's own home to say hello, and gave a lot of money and valuable items. Shousei's family also lived a luxurious life.

古文：如是七岁，生二子一女，公主忽言，欲为之娶妇，某甚愕，怪有此语。
现代文：这样过了七年，公主生了两男一女。有天公主忽然对书生说：我打算为你娶个妻子。书生很惊讶。
English: After seven years of this, the princess gave birth to two sons and a daughter. One day, the princess suddenly said to Shosei, "I am planning to marry a wife for you." Shosei was very surprised.

古文：主云：我本非人，不合久为君妇，君亦当业有婚媾。
现代文：公主说：我不是凡人，不可能永远陪伴你，你应该有自己的妻室。
English: The princess said, "I am not a mortal, I cannot accompany you forever, you should have your own wife."

古文：知非恩爱之替也，其后亦更别婚，而往来不绝。
现代文：书生这才知道不是公主对他没有恩爱了。后来书生就娶了一房妻子，但仍和公主经常来往。
English: It was only then that Shousei knew that it was not the princess who had no love for him. Later, Shousei married a wife, but he still often visited the princess.

古文：婚家以其一往辄数日不还，使人候之。见某恒入废宅，恐为鬼神所魅。
现代文：妻子家发现书生常常一出去好几天不回家，就派人跟着，见书生常去一个破败的宅第，于是怀疑书生是被鬼怪所迷。
English: When his wife's family discovered that Shousei often went out for several days without returning home, they sent someone to follow him. Seeing that Shousei often went to a dilapidated house, they suspected that Shousei was possessed by a ghost.

古文：他日，饮之致醉，乃命术士书符，施衣服中，及其形体皆遍。某后复适公主家，令家人出止之，不令入。
现代文：有一天，家里人把书生灌醉，叫道士写了符咒装进他的衣服里。书生又到公主那里去，在门外就让公主的仆人挡住不让进去。
English: One day, his family members got him drunk and asked a Taoist to write a spell and put it in his clothes. Shousei went to the princess and asked the princess's servant to block the entrance.

古文：某初不了其故，倚门惆怅。
现代文：书生不知原因，很难过的靠在门上不走。
English: For some unknown reason, the student leaned against the door and refused to leave.

古文：公主寻出门下，大相责让云：君素贫士，我相抬举，今为贵人，此亦与君不薄，何故使妇家书符相间，以我不能为杀君也。
现代文：公主出门来，狠狠责备书生说：你不过是一个贫困的书生，由于我你才过上了好日子。我待你这么好，你为什么让你妻子家画符咒来害我？你以为我还斗不过你吗？
English: When the princess came out, she severely rebuked the scholar and said, "You are nothing but a poor scholar, you have only lived a good life because of me. I have treated you so well, why did you let your wife's family spell harm me? Do you think I can't fight you?"

古文：某视其身，方知有符，求谢甚至。
现代文：书生翻检自己的衣服，才知道身上藏着符，急忙向公主陪罪。
English: The student rummaged through his clothes, only to find out that he had a hidden mark on his body, and hurried to apologize to the princess.

古文：公主云：吾亦谅君此情，然符命已行，势不得住。
现代文：公主说：我原谅你，但是符咒已起了作用，我们不能再来往了。
English: The princess said, "I forgive you, but the spell has taken effect, and we cannot go any further.

古文：悉呼儿女，令与父诀，某涕泣哽咽。
现代文：说罢就把儿女们叫来，让他们和书生诀别。书生痛哭失声。
English: As soon as she said that, she called her children to come and bid farewell to Shousheng. Shousheng cried bitterly and lost his voice.

古文：公主命左右促装，即日出城。
现代文：公主叫仆人快收拾收行李，当天就要出城。
English: The princess told her servants to quickly pack their bags and leave the city the same day.

古文：某问其居，兼求名氏，公主云：我华岳第三女也。
现代文：书生忙问公主家住哪里，求公主把姓名告知。公主说；我是华山君的三女儿。
English: The scholar hurriedly asked the princess where she lived and asked her to tell him her name. The princess said, "I am Huashan's third daughter."

古文：言毕诀去，出门不见。
现代文：说完就和书生诀别，一出门就不见了。
English: After saying this, he said goodbye to the student and disappeared as soon as he left the house.

古文：王僴
现代文：王僴
English: Wang Yao

古文：王僴者，少应通事舍人举。
现代文：唐朝开元末年，有个叫王僴的人去考通事舍人。
English: At the end of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Wang Qian who went to the examination and gave up everything.

古文：开元末，入京。
现代文：进京城后，在皇宫西门外一棵槐树下歇息。
English: After entering the capital, he rested under a banyan tree outside the west gate of the Imperial Palace.

古文：至阙西，息槐树下，闻传诏声。忽见数骑，状如中使，谓僴曰：为所宣传，真通事舍人矣。
现代文：忽然听见宣读诏书的声音，接着来了几个骑马的人，看样像是宫中的使者，他们对王僴说：王舍人，奉命传你！
English: Suddenly, the sound of the imperial edict being read was heard, followed by the arrival of several men on horseback, who looked like emissaries from the palace. They said to Wang Yao: "O king, I have been ordered to report to you!

古文：因以后骑载僴。僴亦不知何人，仓卒随去。
现代文：王僴弄不清他们是谁，只好仓促的骑上马随他们而去。
English: Wang Yao couldn't figure out who they were, so he had to hastily mount his horse and follow them.

古文：久之，至华岳神庙中。
现代文：跑了半天，进了华岳庙。
English: After running for half a day, I entered Huayue Temple.

古文：使置僴别院，诫云：慎无私视。
现代文：使者让王僴呆在另一个院里，并警告他说：不许偷看。
English: The messenger told Wang Zhen to stay in another courtyard and warned him not to peek.

古文：便尔入内。
现代文：然后就进去了。
English: And then he went in.

古文：僴独坐，闻棒杖楚痛之声，因前行窃窥。见其妇为所由系颈于树，以棒拷击。
现代文：王僴正呆坐着，忽然传来阵阵拷打和哭叫声，就跑去偷偷看，一看竟是自己的妻子被吊在树上拷打。
English: Wang Yao was sitting still when he suddenly heard the sounds of torture and crying. He ran to take a peek and saw that it was his wife who was being hanged from a tree and tortured.

古文：僴悲愁伫立，中使出，见惨怛而问其故。
现代文：王僴没有办法，只能痛苦地站在那里看着。
English: Wang Yao had no choice but to stand there in pain and watch.

古文：僴涕泗，具言其事。使云：本欲留君，妻既死，理不可住。
现代文：不一会儿那使者转来，见王僴满面悲然，问是为什么，王僴忍不住哭了起来，说出刚才看见的事。使者说：本来打算把你留在这里，现在你妻子已死，就不能留你了。
English: After a while, the messenger returned, saw Wang Yao with a sad face, and asked why. Wang Yao couldn't help but cry and tell what he had just seen. The messenger said, "I had planned to leave you here, but now that your wife is dead, I can't keep you."

古文：若更迟延，待归之后，即不能救。
现代文：若再延误时间，你妻子就没救了。
English: If you delay any longer, your wife will not be saved.

古文：君宜速还开棺，此即放妻活。
现代文：你快回去开棺材，这里马上放她回去。
English: Hurry back and open the coffin. She needs to be put back here immediately.

古文：乃命左右取驿马，送王舍人。
现代文：说罢让左右赶快牵马送王僴回去。
English: Say, "Let's go," and quickly lead the horse to take Wang Yao back.

古文：俄见一狐来，僴不得已，骑狐而骋。
现代文：不一会，牵来一只狐狸。王僴顾不上许多，只好骑上狐狸。
English: After a while, a fox was brought in. Wang Yao couldn't pay much attention, so he had to ride the fox.

古文：其疾如风，两日至舍。
现代文：那狐狸跑起来竟象风一样快，两天就到了家。
English: The fox ran as fast as the wind and reached home in two days.

古文：骑狐乃其魂也，僴本身自魂出之后，失音不言。
现代文：原来是王僴的魂骑着狐狸回来了，而王僴本人则不能说话了。魂到家后，立刻打开棺材，看见妻子已经复活。
English: It turned out that Wang Yao's spirit had returned riding a fox, while Wang Yao himself was unable to speak. After the spirit arrived home, it immediately opened the coffin and saw that his wife had been resurrected.

古文：魂既至家，家人悲泣。
现代文：妻子问王僴：你怎么回来了？全家分外高兴。
English: His wife asked Wang Yao: How did you come back? The whole family is extremely happy.

古文：僴命开棺，其妻已活，谓僴曰：何以至耶？
现代文：过了十几天，王僴本身才回到家。据说王僴回来后十几天不会说话，直到他的魂说了一句：王僴回来了。
English: It took a dozen days before Wang Yao himself returned home. It is said that Wang Yao would not speak for a dozen days after his return, until his soul said one sentence: Wang Yao is back.

古文：举家欢悦。
现代文：魂和肉身才合到了一起。
English: It's the soul and the body coming together.

