古文：起上章执徐，尽强圉大渊献，凡八年。
现代文：起上章执徐，尽强圉大渊献，一共八年。
English: It has been a total of eight years since the last chapter was written.

古文：懿宗昭圣恭惠孝皇帝上咸通元年
现代文：唐懿宗咸通元年
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty

古文：春，正月，乙卯，浙东军与裘甫战于桐柏观前，范居植死，刘勍仅以身免。
现代文：春季，正月，乙卯，唐浙东官军与裘甫军在桐柏观前交战，唐讨击副将范居植战死，讨击副使刘只身逃出，仅得免死。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the Eastern Zhejiang government army of the Tang Dynasty and the Qufu army fought in front of Tongbaiyuan. The deputy general of the Tang Dynasty, Fan Ju Zhi, was killed in the battle, and the deputy general of the Tang Dynasty, Liu Zhidong, escaped only to avoid death.

古文：乙丑，甫帅其徒千馀人陷剡县，开府库，募壮士，众至数千人。越州大恐。
现代文：乙丑，裘甫率领部下徒众一千余人攻陷剡县，打开县府仓库，召募壮丁，部众发展到好几千人，使越州上下一片慌恐。
English: Yixiu and Qiu Fu led more than a thousand of their followers to invade Handan County, open the county warehouse, and recruit young men. The number of followers grew to several thousand, causing panic all over Yuezhou.

古文：时二浙久安，人不习战，甲兵朽钝，见卒不满三百，郑祗德更募新卒以益之。军吏受赂，率皆得孱弱者。
现代文：当时两浙地区由于长期平安无事，人民不习战阵，武器甲杖也都腐朽锈钝，现役士卒不满三百人；浙东观察使郑德增募新兵来补充军队，但军吏接受贿赂，所召新兵几乎全是软弱无能者。
English: At that time, due to the long-term peace and tranquility of the two Zhejiang regions, the people were not accustomed to the war front, the weapons and weapons were also rotten and rusty, and there were less than 300 active duty officers; the East Zhejiang Observer asked Zheng De to recruit new soldiers to supplement the army, but the military officials accepted bribes, and the recruits were almost all weak and incompetent.

古文：祗德遣子将沈君纵、副将张公署、望海镇将李珪将新卒五百击裘甫。
现代文：郑德派遣部将沈君纵、副将张公署、望海镇将李率领新兵五百人去袭击裘甫。
English: Zheng De dispatched five hundred new soldiers led by Shen Junzong, vice-commander of Zhang Gongde, and Li, commander of Wanghai Town, to attack Qufu.

古文：二月，辛卯，与甫战于剡西，贼设伏于三溪之南，而陈于三溪之北，壅溪上流，使可涉。
现代文：二月，辛卯，官军与裘甫军战天剡县以西，裘甫军在三溪之南设下埋伏，而在三溪之北虚摆阵势，堵溪水上流，使人可在溪水下游涉渡。
English: In February, Xinwu, the government army and the Qufu army fought to the west of Tianyao County. The Qufu army set up an ambush in the south of Sanxi, and set up a false position in the north of Sanxi, blocking the upper stream of the stream, allowing people to swim under the stream.

古文：既战，阳败走，官军追之，半涉，决壅，水大至，官军大败，三将皆死，官军几尽。
现代文：既开始交战，裘甫军假装败走，官军随后追击，至溪水下游，当官军一半人涉过溪水时，贼军将上流堵水闸决开，大水袭来，官军大败，三位领兵将领都战死，部下官军几乎全部丧命。
English: As soon as the battle began, Qiu Fu's army pretended to be defeated and fled. The government army then pursued them to the lower reaches of the stream. When half of the government army had waded through the stream, the thief army broke open the sluice blocking the upper stream. The flood came, the government army was defeated, the three leading generals were killed in battle, and almost all of the subordinate government army were killed.

古文：于是山海诸盗及它道无赖亡命之徒，四面云集，众至三万，分为三十二队。
现代文：由于裘甫打败浙东官军，山林海岛中的盗贼以及其他地方的无赖亡命之徒，四面云集于裘甫的旗帜之下，部从发展到三万余人，分为三十二个队。
English: As Qiu Fu defeated the Eastern Zhejiang government army, the thieves in the mountains, forests and islands, and the ruffians and outlaws in other places, gathered on all sides under the banner of Qiu Fu. The division grew to more than thirty thousand people and was divided into thirty-two teams.

古文：其小帅有谋略者推刘暀，勇力推刘庆、刘从简。
现代文：各队小帅中较有谋略者首推刘，有武勇力气者推刘庆、刘从简。
English: The strategist in each team's squad leader pushed Liu first, and those with military courage pushed Liu Qing and Liu Congjian.

古文：群盗皆遥通书币，求属麾下。
现代文：群盗都由远外地方向裘甫通信送款，要求归属于裘甫麾下。
English: The bandits all sent money to Qufu Communications from far away places, demanding to be under Qufu's command.

古文：甫自称天下都知兵马使，改元曰罗平，铸印曰天平。
现代文：裘甫自称天下都知兵马使，改称罗平，铸造的大印上刻着天平。
English: Qiu Fu claimed to be the world's best-known warrior and horseman, and was renamed Luo Ping. The casting's large seal was engraved with the balance.

古文：大聚资粮，购良工，治器械，声震中原。
现代文：于是大量聚积资财粮草，雇请优良的工匠，制造军用器械，其浩大的声势震动了中原。
English: As a result, they amassed a large amount of wealth, hired excellent craftsmen, and manufactured military equipment, whose tremendous impact shook the Central Plains.

古文：丙申，葬圣武献文孝皇帝于贞陵，庙号宣宗。
现代文：丙申，唐懿宗率群臣将圣武献文孝皇帝李忱安葬于贞陵，并给他定庙号称宣宗。
English: According to the legend, Emperor Tang Xizong led a group of courtiers to bury Emperor Li Zhen in the Tomb of the Immaculate Conception, and gave him the name Xuan Zong.

古文：丙午，白敏中入朝，坠陛，伤腰，肩舆以归。
现代文：丙午，白敏中来到朝廷朝见唐懿宗，从马上不慎坠落于地，将腰摔伤，唐懿宗让他坐上轿子回去。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Bai Minzhong came to the imperial court to see Tang Xizong. He accidentally fell to the ground from the horse, injuring his waist. Tang Xizong let him sit on the palanquin and go back.

古文：郑祗德累表告急，且求救于邻道。浙西遣牙将凌茂贞将四百人、宣歙遣牙将白琮将三百人赴之。
现代文：浙东观察使郑德一再向朝廷上表告急，并且向附近相邻的道求救；浙西道派遣牙将凌茂贞率领四百人、宣歙镇派遣牙将白琮率领三百人赶往援救。
English: East Zhejiang's observation made Zheng De repeatedly express his urgency to the imperial court and seek help from nearby adjacent provinces; West Zhejiang dispatched Ling Maozhen and 400 people, and Xuanwu Town dispatched Bai Yao and 300 people to rush to the rescue.

古文：祗德始令屯郭门及东小江，寻复召还府中以自卫。
现代文：郑德开始命令援军屯驻于城郭大门外及东小江边，不久又将他们如还帅府，用以守卫。
English: Zheng De began to order reinforcements to be stationed outside the gate of the castle and on the east side of the Xiao Jiang River, and soon they were used to guard the palace.

古文：祗德馈之，比度支常馈多十三倍，而宣、润将士犹以为不足。
现代文：郑德大肆犒赏援军，所赏钱物比朝廷度支一般发给的要多十三倍，而宣州、润州的将士仍然不满足。
English: Zheng De lavishly rewarded the reinforcements, and the rewards were thirteen times more than what the imperial court normally gave, but the soldiers in Xuanzhou and Runzhou were still not satisfied.

古文：宣、润将士请土军为导，以与贼战。诸将或称病，或阳坠马，其肯行者必先邀职级，竟不果遣。
现代文：宣州、润州将士要求当地土军为先导，以便与裘甫贼军交战；浙东军诸将领有的假称患病，有的假装从马上跌于地上，而肯出征的人又必先要求提升官职级别，以致军队竟派不出去。
English: The generals of Xuanzhou and Runzhou asked the local Turkish army to lead the way in order to fight the Qufu bandits; the generals of the East Zhejiang Army pretended to be ill, and some pretended to fall to the ground from the horse, and those who were willing to go to war must first ask to be promoted to a higher rank, so that the army could not be sent out.

古文：贼游骑至平水东小江，城中士民储舟裹粮，夜坐待旦，各谋逃溃。
现代文：裘甫贼军的游骑来到平水以东的小江，浙东城中士民准备好船只，带不粮食，从夜晚一直坐到天亮，各自谋求逃散。
English: The cavalry of Qiu Fu's bandits came to Xiao Jiang to the east of Pingshui. The sergeants and citizens of East Zhejiang City prepared boats, brought no grain, and sat from night until dawn, each seeking to escape.

古文：朝廷知祗德懦怯，议选武将代之。
现代文：朝廷知道郑德懦弱胆怯，议论要选择武将去替代他。
English: The imperial court knew that Zheng De was weak and timid, and discussed the choice of a military commander to replace him.

古文：夏侯孜曰： 浙东山海幽阻，可以计取，难以力攻。
现代文：夏侯孜说： 浙东地方山海幽深，阻拦通路，只可以用计谋攻取，难以用强力夺得。
English: Xia Houzeh said: The mountains and seas in eastern Zhejiang are very deep, blocking the passage, and can only be captured by strategy, and it is difficult to win by force.

古文：西班中无可语者。
现代文：朝中武将没有谁可以说是有智谋。
English: None of the generals in the Korean War could be said to have had a clever plan.

古文：前安南都护王式，虽儒家子，在安南威服华夷，名闻远近，可任也。 
现代文：前安南都护王式，虽然是儒家文士的儿子，却在安南使当地华人夷人都归服于他，他的威武之名远近都知道，可以任用他往浙东征讨裘甫贼。 
English: Although he was the son of a Confucian scribe, he subjugated the local Chinese and barbarians in Annan. His mighty name is known far and wide, and he can be appointed to go to East Zhejiang to fight Qufu's bandits.

古文：诸相皆以为然。
现代文：诸位宰相都认为夏侯孜说得有理。
English: All the prime ministers agreed that what Xia Houzhe said was reasonable.

古文：遂以式为浙东观察使，征祗德为宾客。
现代文：于是唐懿宗任命王式为浙东观察使，将郑德徵归朝廷，任为太子宾客。
English: As a result, Emperor Taizong appointed Wang Shih as the eastern Zhejiang observation envoy, and recruited Zheng De to the imperial court as a guest of the prince.

古文：三月，辛亥朔，式入对，上问以讨贼方略。
现代文：三月，辛亥朔，王式入朝问对，唐懿宗问王式有关讨伐裘甫贼军的方略。
English: In March, Xinhai Shuo, Wang Shih entered the court to ask questions, and Tang Xizong asked Wang Shih about the strategy of fighting the Qufu bandits.

古文：对曰： 但得兵，贼必可破。 
现代文：王式回答说： 只要给我军队，贼军必然可以攻破。 
English: The king replied, "Just give me an army, and the bandits will surely be defeated."

古文：有宦官侍侧，曰： 发兵，所费甚大。 
现代文：有宦官侍立在唐懿宗近侧，说： 调发军队，所花费的军费太大。 
English: A eunuch stood beside Tang Xizong and said, "The military expenses of dispatching an army are too high.

古文：式曰： 臣为国家惜费则不然。
现代文：王式说： 我为国家珍惜费用就不是这样。
English: Wang Shi said: I cherish expenses for the country, but this is not the case.

古文：兵多贼速破，其费省矣。
现代文：调发的军队多，贼军可迅速消灭，所用军费反而可以节省。
English: There are more troops dispatched, the bandit army can be quickly eliminated, and the military expenditure can be saved.

古文：若兵少不能胜贼，延引岁月，贼势益张，则江、淮群盗将蜂起应之。
现代文：若调发军队少，不能战胜贼军，或者是将战事拖延几年几月，贼军的势力日益壮大，江、淮之间的群盗就将蜂起响应。
English: If too few troops are dispatched and cannot defeat the bandits, or if the war is delayed for several years and months, and the bandits become increasingly powerful, the bandits between the Yangtze River and Huai River will rise up in response.

古文：国家用度尽仰江、淮，若阻绝不通，则上自九庙，下及十军，皆无以供给，其费岂可胜计哉！ 
现代文：现在国家的败政用度几乎全部仰仗于江、淮地区，如果这一地区被叛乱的贼众阻绝，使财赋输送之路不通，就会使上自九庙，下及北门十军，都没有办法保证供给，那样耗费的费用岂可胜计！ 
English: If this region is blocked by the rebellious band of thieves, so that the road of conveying wealth is impassable, it will make the upper from the Nine Temples, the lower and the North Gate of the Ten Armies have no way to ensure supply. The cost of such expenditure is incalculable!

古文：上顾宦官曰： 当与之兵。 
现代文：唐懿宗望着宦官说： 应当给王式调兵。 
English: Tang Yanzong looked at the eunuch and said: It is necessary to transfer troops to the royal style.

古文：乃诏发忠武、义成、淮南等诸道兵授之。
现代文：于是颁下诏书，调发忠武、义成、淮南等诸道军队交给王式指挥。
English: As a result, an imperial edict was issued, and the armies of various provinces such as Zhongwu, Yicheng, and Huainan were transferred to the royal command.

古文：裘甫分兵掠衢、婺州。
现代文：裘甫派兵分别攻掠衢州、婺州。
English: Qiu Fu sent soldiers to attack and plunder Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou respectively.

古文：婺州押牙房郅、散将楼曾、衢州十将方景深将兵拒险，贼不得入。
现代文：婺州军府押牙房郅、散将楼曾、衢州十将之一的方景深等人率领军队拒守险要，贼军无法进入。
English: The Chenzhou Military Government, led by the commander of the Chenzhou Military Government, Oshifa, the commander of the Chenzhou Military Region, Fang Jingshen, who was one of the ten generals of the Chenzhou Military Region, and others, refused to defend the dangerous point, and the thief army could not enter.

古文：又分兵掠明州，明州之民相与谋曰： 贼若入城，妻子皆为菹醢，况货财，能保之乎！ 
现代文：裘甫又分兵攻掠明州，明州的民众相聚在一起谋划说： 贼军如果进入城中，我们的妻子儿子都要被剁成肉酱，何况家中的财产货物，就更加难以保存了！ 
English: Qiu Fu also sent troops to attack and plunder Mingzhou. The people of Mingzhou gathered together to plan and said: If the thief army enters the city, our wives and sons will all be turned into meat sauce, not to mention the family's property and goods, which will be even more difficult to preserve!

古文：乃自相帅出财募勇士，治器械，树栅，浚沟，断桥，为固守之备。
现代文：于是相率捐出自己的财产来招募勇士，制造兵器枪械，树立栅栏，疏浚壕沟，截断桥梁，为固守城池作好准备。
English: So he donated his property to recruit warriors, manufacture weapons and firearms, erect fences, dredge trenches, cut off bridges, and prepare to defend the castle.

古文：贼又遣兵掠台州，破唐兴。
现代文：贼寇又派兵攻掠台州攻破唐兴县。
English: The bandits also sent troops to attack and plunder Taizhou and Tangxing County.

古文：己巳，甫自将万馀人掠上虞，焚之。
现代文：已巳，裘甫亲自率领军队一万余人攻掠上虞县，并焚烧县城。
English: Already, Qiu Fu personally led an army of more than ten thousand people to attack and plunder Shangyu County, and burned the county seat.

古文：癸酉，入余姚，杀丞、尉。东破慈溪，入奉化，抵宁海，杀其令而据之，分兵围象山。
现代文：癸酉，裘甫率军攻入余姚县，杀县丞、县尉；又向东攻破慈溪县，进入奉化县，又抵达宁海县，杀宁海县令，并将宁海县城占据；分一部分军队进围象山县。
English: At that time, Qiu Fu led the army into Yuyao County, killing the county secretary and the county lieutenant; he also broke through Cixi County to the east, entered Fenghua County, and arrived in Ninghai County, killed the Ninghai County magistrate, and occupied the Ninghai County town; a part of the army entered Xiangshan County.

古文：所过俘其少壮，馀老弱者蹂践杀之。
现代文：裘甫军在所过的地方俘虏少壮居民，所余老弱居民在遭受蹂躏摧残后，全部被杀死。
English: The Qufu army captured all the young and strong residents in the places they passed, and the remaining old and weak residents were all killed after being ravaged and devastated.

古文：及王式除书下，浙东人心稍安。
现代文：当王式任浙东观察使的委任文书颁发下后，浙东地区的人心才稍微安定。
English: When the appointment document of Wang Shih as the East Zhejiang Observation Envoy was issued, the people's hearts in East Zhejiang were only slightly stable.

古文：裘甫方与其徒饮酒，闻之不乐。
现代文：裘甫正与部下徒从饮酒，得知王式到来，很不高兴。
English: Qiu Fu was drinking with his subordinates when he learned that the king had arrived. He was very unhappy.

古文：刘暀叹曰： 有如此之众，而策画未定，良可惜也！
现代文：刘唉叹说： 我们有如此众多的军队，而战略计划还没有制定，实在是可惜！
English: Liu lamented, "It's a shame that we have so many troops, but no strategic plan!"

古文：今朝廷遣王中丞将兵来，闻其人智勇无敌，不四十日必至。
现代文：今天朝廷派遣王中丞率军队来镇压，听说这个人智勇双全，所向无敌，不过四十天时间必然会赶到。
English: Today, the imperial court has sent Wang Zhongzheng and his army to suppress them. It is said that this man is both wise and courageous, and he is invincible. However, forty days will inevitably come.

古文：兵马使宜急引兵取越州，凭城郭，据府库，遣兵五千守西陵，循浙江筑垒以拒之。
现代文：裘将军您应该赶快率领军队攻取越州，凭藉州高大的城郭，占据官府的仓库，再派遣五千军队驻守西陵，沿浙江修筑堡垒，以抗拒王式所率官军，同时要大量地收集各种船舰。
English: General Qiu, you should quickly lead the army to conquer Yuezhou, take advantage of the state's tall castle, occupy the government's warehouse, send another five thousand troops to guard Xiling, build a fortress along Zhejiang to resist the official army led by the king, and collect a large number of ships.

古文：大集舟舰，得间，则长驱进取浙西，过大江，掠扬州货财以自实。还，修石头城而守之，宣歙、江西必有响应者。
现代文：如果获得机会，就率大军长驱进取浙西，渡过长江，掠取扬州的货物财宝来充实自己的军资费用，回军后，修缮石头城坚守，这时宣歙、江西地区必定会有人起而响应。
English: If he gets the chance, he will lead a large army to advance into western Zhejiang, cross the Yangtze River, plunder the goods and treasures of Yangzhou to enrich his military expenses, and repair the stone city after returning to the army. At this time, Xuan Zang and Jiangxi region will certainly respond.

古文：遣刘从简以万人循海而南，袭取福建。
现代文：您再派遣刘从简率领军队一万人沿海南征，袭取福建。
English: You then sent Liu Congjian to lead an army of ten thousand along the southern coast to invade Fujian.

古文：如此，则国家贡赋之地尽入于我矣。但恐子孙不能守耳，终吾身保无忧也。 
现代文：这样，就使唐朝的东南贡赋之地全部归于我们手中；虽然说我们的子孙恐怕不能守住东南半壁山河，但我们这辈子可以保证无忧虑了。 
English: In this way, all the southeastern tributary lands of the Tang Dynasty will fall into our hands. Although our children and grandchildren may not be able to keep the southeastern half of the mountains and rivers, we can guarantee that we will have no worries in our lifetime.

古文：甫曰： 醉矣，明日议之！ 
现代文：裘甫说： 你喝醉了，明天再商议吧！ 
English: Qiu Fu said: You are drunk, let's discuss it again tomorrow!

古文：暀以甫不用其言，怒，阳醉而出。
现代文：刘因为裘甫不用他的战略谋划，十分愤怒，假装喝醉走出。
English: Liu, furious that Qiu Fu had not used his strategic planning, pretended to be drunk and walked out.

古文：有进士王辂在贼中，贼客之，辂说甫曰： 如刘副使之谋，乃孙权所为也。
现代文：有一位名叫王辂的唐朝进士在裘甫军中，被当作宾客受到优礼。王辂对裘甫说： 如果按兵马副从使刘的谋划行事，正是当年孙权所做的割据江东的事业。
English: In Qiu Fu's army, there was a Tang Dynasty soldier named Wang Qi, who was treated as a guest and received a courtesy call. Wang Qi said to Qiu Fu: If you act according to Liu's plan, it is exactly what Sun Quan did in the east of the Yangtze River.

古文：彼乘天下大乱，故能据有江东；今中国无事，此功未易成也。
现代文：但孙权是乘天下大乱的机会，因而能保据江东；如今中原无事，划江称帝诉功业不容易办成。
English: However, Sun Quan took the opportunity of the world's turmoil and thus was able to secure a foothold in the east of the Yangtze River. Today, there is nothing in the Central Plains, and it is not easy to accomplish the task of crossing the Yangtze River to appeal to the emperor.

古文：不如拥众据险自守，陆耕海渔，急则逃入海岛，此万全策也。 
现代文：不如率领部众去占据险要地方，自守天涯一角，在陆地上耕种，在大海中捕鱼，事危急时就逃入海岛，这才是万全的计策。 
English: It is better to lead the people to occupy the dangerous place, protect the corner of the world, cultivate on the land, fish in the sea, and escape to the island in case of emergency. This is the perfect strategy.

古文：甫畏式，犹豫未决。
现代文：裘甫畏惧王式，犹豫而不能决。
English: Qiu Fu was afraid of the king, hesitated and could not make up his mind.

古文：夏，四月，式行至柿口，义成军不整，式欲斩其将，久乃释之，自是军所过若无人。
现代文：夏季，四月，王式率大军束到柿口，义成军的军容不整，王式想把领兵将领斩首，过了一段又把他释放，于是军队号令齐一，队形整齐，所过这处如入无人之境。
English: In the summer, in April, Wang Shih led a large army to Kakiguchi. The army of the Yixing Army was not well-formed. Wang Shih wanted to behead the leader of the army. After a while, he released him. As a result, the army's orders were uniform and the formation was neat. It was like passing through a no man's land.

古文：至西陵，裘甫遣使请降。式曰： 是必无降心，直欲窥吾所为，且欲使吾骄怠耳。 
现代文：行至西陵，裘甫派遣使者来请求投降，王式说： 裘甫必定没有投降之心，实际上是想来刺探我的动静，并想用投诚的姿态使我军骄傲，放松警惕。 
English: After going to Xiling, Qufu sent an envoy to request surrender, and the king said: Qufu must not have the heart of surrender, in fact, he wanted to spy on my movements, and wanted to use the gesture of surrender to make our army proud and relax its vigilance.

古文：乃谓使者曰： 甫面缚以来，当免而死。 
现代文：于是对使者说： 如果裘甫把自己捆绑起来，亲自来投降，当免他一死。 
English: So he said to the messenger: "If Khufu unties himself and surrenders himself, let him not die."

古文：乙未，式入越州，既交政，为郑祗德置酒，曰： 式主军政，不可以饮，监军但与众宾尽醉。 
现代文：乙未，王式进入越州，与郑德交接政务后，即为郑德设置酒宴，王式说： 我因为要主管军政大事，不能饮酒，监军以下的将校可以与众宾客痛饮尽醉。 
English: After Wang Xi entered Yuezhou and took over the government affairs from Zheng De, he set up a wine banquet for Zheng De. Wang Xi said, "Since I am in charge of military and political affairs, I can't drink alcohol. Officers below the rank of supervisors can get drunk with all the guests."

古文：迨夜，继以烛，曰： 式在此，贼安能妨人乐饮！ 
现代文：至夜晚，点上蜡烛继续宴饮，王式说： 有我在这里叛贼怎么能妨碍我们饮酒作乐。 
English: In the evening, after lighting the candles and continuing the feast, the king said: "With me here, how can the traitor prevent us from drinking and making music?"

古文：丙申，饯祗德于远郊，复乐饮而归。
现代文：丙申，王式到远郊为郑德饯行，再次欢快痛饮而归。
English: Bishin, the king went to the suburbs for Zheng Deyu, and returned happily drunk again.

古文：于是始修军令，告馈饷不足者息矣，称疾卧家者起矣，先求迁职者默矣。
现代文：于是开始重新修订军令，先前宣告军饷用度不足的人不再吭声了，声称患病卧床的人也起来干事了，要求先升官再出战的人也不再说话了。
English: As a result, the military orders began to be revised anew. Those who had previously announced that the military pay was insufficient were no longer silenced, those who claimed to be sick in bed were also promoted, and those who demanded to be promoted first and then go to war were no longer speaking.

古文：贼别帅洪师简、许会能帅所部降。式曰： 汝降是也，当立效以自异。 
现代文：裘甫手下的小头目洪师简、许会能率所部投降官军，王式说： 你们归降是好事，应当立功自效，以区别于贼寇。 
English: Hong Shijian, a minor leader under Qiu Fu, and Xu Hui were able to lead their subordinates to surrender to the official army, and the king said: Your surrender is a good thing, and you should do your best to distinguish yourselves from the bandits.

古文：使帅其徒为前锋，与贼战有功，乃奏以官。
现代文：于是让他们率领原先的部众充当先锋，与裘甫军作战，作战有功的，上奏朝廷授以官爵。
English: Therefore, they let them lead their former subordinates to act as vanguards and fight against the Qufu army. Those who had distinguished themselves in battle were awarded official ranks by the imperial court.

古文：先是，贼谍入越州，军吏匿而饮食之。
现代文：先前，裘甫派间谍潜入越州，越州军府官吏竟把他们藏起来，给他们供应饮食。
English: Previously, Qiu Fu sent spies to sneak into Yuezhou, but the Yuezhou military officials hid them and provided them with food.

古文：文武将吏往往潜与贼通，求城破之日免死及全妻子。或诈引贼将来降，实窥虚实。城中密谋屏语，贼皆知之。
现代文：州府文武将吏也往往暗中与裘甫军通款，以求城被贼军攻破的日子，能免死并存全妻子儿女；有的人假装引裘甫手下的将领来投降，实际上是来窥探军情虚实；城中官府的密谋和暗语，裘甫军全都知道。
English: The generals and generals of the prefectural government also often secretly exchanged money with Qiu Fu's army, in order to save their wives and children from death when the city was invaded by the thief army; some people pretended to bring Qiu Fu's generals to surrender, but actually came to spy on the military situation; Qiu Fu's army knew all the conspiracies and secret words of the government in the city.

古文：式阴察知，悉捕索，斩之。刑将吏尤横猾者，严门禁，无验者不得出入，警夜周密，贼始不知我所为矣。
现代文：王式暗中将这一切查明，把通敌将吏全部逮捕，并处斩；又对州府中特别专横狡猾的将吏用刑，严格门禁法规，没有经过检查的人不得出入，夜里安排周密的警戒，裘甫贼军于是不再能探知官军的虚实了。
English: The king secretly ascertained all this, arrested all the officials who collaborated with the enemy, and executed them; he also punished the particularly arrogant and cunning officials in the state capital, strict access control regulations, people who had not been inspected were not allowed to enter and exit, and careful vigilance was arranged at night. The Qufu thief army was no longer able to detect the truth and falsehood of the official army.

古文：式命诸县开仓廪以赈贫乏，或曰： 贼未灭，军食方急，不可散也。 
现代文：王式命令越州所属诸县打开仓库的储粮，用以赈救贫若乏食的百姓，有人说： 裘甫贼寇还未消灭，军粮正急于要用，不可散发。 
English: The king ordered the counties belonging to Yuezhou to open the grain storage warehouses to help the poor and food-starved people. Some people said: Qufu bandits have not yet been eliminated, military grain is in urgent need of use and should not be distributed.

古文：式曰： 非汝所知。 
现代文：王式说： 这就不是你所能知道的了。 
English: "That's not for you to know," the royal said.

古文：官军少骑卒，式曰： 吐蕃、回鹘比配江、淮者，其人习险阻，便鞍马，可用也。 
现代文：唐官军缺少骑兵，王式说： 吐蕃、回鹘的降俘发配到江、淮的人不少，这些人在艰难险阻的环境中生活惯了，熟悉鞍马骑射，可以起用他们。 
English: The Tang government army was short of cavalry, Wang Shih said: quite a few of the surrendered prisoners from Tuyun and Huiwen were sent to Jiang and Huai. These people were accustomed to living in a difficult and dangerous environment, and were familiar with riding and shooting on pommel horses, so they could be used.

古文：举籍府中，得骁健者百馀人。
现代文：于是到官府查名籍，得到骁勇强健的吐蕃族、回鹘族人一百余。
English: So I went to the government office to check the names and get more than a hundred brave and strong Tujia and Hui Yao people.

古文：虏久羁旅，所部遇之无状，困馁甚。式既犒饮，又赒其父母妻子，皆泣拜欢呼，愿效死，悉以为骑卒，使骑将石宗本将之。
现代文：这些胡虏远离家乡，被流放看管的年月已久，看管他们的军吏对他们凶恶狠毒，又接济他们的父母妻儿，于是都感恩欢呼哭拜，愿为王式效劳出死力，王式将他们配为骑兵，让骑兵将领石宗本统率他们。
English: These Huns were far away from home and had been exiled and guarded for a long time. The military officers who guarded them were vicious and cruel to them, and they also helped their parents, wives and children. So they were all grateful and cried and prayed, and were willing to do their best to serve the king. The king assigned them as cavalry and let cavalry commander Shi Zongben lead them.

古文：凡在管内者，皆视此籍之，又奏得龙陂监马二百匹，于是骑兵足矣。
现代文：凡是流放在越州管辖境内的吐蕃、回鹘族人，均按照这种办法征集来，又上奏求得汝州龙破监好马二百匹，于是骑兵充足了。
English: All the Tujue and Hui people who were exiled in the territory under the jurisdiction of Yuezhou were recruited according to this method, and 200 horses were obtained from the Ruzhou Dragon, so the cavalry was sufficient.

古文：或请为烽燧以诇贼远近众寡，式笑而不应。选懦卒，使乘健马，少与之兵，以为候骑。众怪之，不敢问。
现代文：有人请求建设烽火台，用来警报来犯贼寇的远近、众寡，王式只是笑一笑，而不予答应；王式又选懦弱的士兵，让他们骑强健的战马，配以很少的武器作为侦察骑兵，部下众人感到奇怪，但也不敢多问。
English: The king only smiled, but did not grant the request to build a bonfire, which would be used as an alarm to warn of approaching bandits. The king also chose cowardly soldiers, and made them ride strong horses, equipped with few weapons, as scout cavalry. His subordinates were surprised, but did not dare to ask more.

古文：于是阅诸营见卒及土团子弟，得四千人，使导军分路讨贼。府下无守兵，更籍土团千人以补之。
现代文：王式察看越州城内诸军营，当时有州府士兵以及土团私家子弟四千人，王式让他们引导入援官军分路讨伐贼寇；越州府下没有守兵，王式又再征土团民兵一千人来补充。
English: Wang Xi inspected the military camps in the city of Yuezhou. At that time, there were 4,000 soldiers from the provincial capital and the private children of the local troops. Wang Xi asked them to guide the reinforcement army to fight the bandits. There was no guard under the provincial capital, and Wang Xi recruited another 1,000 local militia to supplement.

古文：乃命宣歙将白琮、浙西将凌茂贞帅本军，北来将韩宗政等帅土团，合千人；石宗本帅骑兵为前锋，自上虞趋奉化，解象山之围，号东路军。
现代文：然后王式命令宣歙将领白琮、浙西将领凌茂贞率领本部军队，北来将领韩宗政等人率领土团，合起来有一千人，由石宗本率领骑兵为前锋，从上虞县开往奉化县，去解象山之围，这支军队号称东路军。
English: Then the king ordered the headquarters army to be led by Xuan Zang general Bai Zang, the western Zhejiang general Ling Maozhen, and the northern general Han Zong Zheng and others to lead the territorial regiment, with a total of one thousand people, led by Shi Zong Ben as the vanguard, from Shangyu County to Fenghua County, to break the siege of Xiangshan, this army is known as the East Road Army.

古文：又以义成将白宗建、忠武将游君楚、淮南将万璘帅本军与台州唐兴军合，号南路军。
现代文：王式又命令义成镇将领白宗建、忠武镇将领游君楚、淮南将领万率令本部军队，与台州军会合，号称南路军。
English: Wang Shi also ordered Bai Zongjian, the general of Yicheng Town, You Junchu, the general of Zhongwu Town, and Wan, the general of Huainan Town, to lead the headquarters army to meet with the Taizhou Army, known as the South Road Army.

古文：令之曰： 毋争险易，毋焚庐舍，毋杀平民以增首级！平民胁从者，募降之。
现代文：王式下令说： 不管是艰险还是容易，各军不要对所布置的任务进行争夺，不准焚烧老百姓的房屋茅舍，不准杀平民来增加首级冒功，平民被迫参加贼寇的，应招募他们归降。
English: The royal order said: No matter whether it is difficult or easy, the armies should not compete for the assigned tasks, they are not allowed to burn the houses and huts of the common people, they are not allowed to kill civilians to increase their prestige, and if civilians are forced to participate in banditry, they should be recruited to surrender.

古文：得贼金帛，官无所问。俘获者，皆越人也，释之。 
现代文：缴获贼寇的金帛财产，官府不加过问，擒获的俘虏，都是越州本地人，放他们回家。 
English: The government did not question the seizure of the robber's gold and property. The captured prisoners were all local people from Yuezhou, and they were allowed to go home.

古文：癸卯，南路军拔贼沃州寨，甲辰，拔新昌寨，破贼将毛应天，进抵唐兴。
现代文：癸卯，南路军攻拔裘甫贼军的沃州寨，甲辰，又攻拔新昌寨，击破贼将毛应天，进而又攻拔唐兴县。
English: At the same time, the Southern Route Army attacked the Qufu Thief Army's Wozhouzhai, Jiachen, and Xinchangzhai, defeated the Thief General Mao Yingtian, and then attacked Tangxing County.

古文：白敏中三表辞位，上不许。
现代文：白敏中三次向唐懿宗上表辞宰相位，唐懿宗不批准。
English: Bai Min Middle School offered the title of chancellor to Tang Xizong three times, but Tang Xizong did not approve.

古文：右补阙王谱上疏，以为： 陛下致理之初，乃宰相尽心之日，不可暂阙。
现代文：右补阙王谱上疏，认为： 陛下即皇帝位不久，治理天下大事，尚缺乏经验，这正是宰相辅臣尽心出力的时刻，因此宰相不可暂缺。
English: Right complementing Wang Shu on the spectrum, he said: His Majesty, the emperor, has not been on the throne for long, and he lacks experience in governing the world's major events. This is precisely the time for the prime minister and his aides to make their best efforts, so the prime minister must not be absent.

古文：敏中自正月卧疾，今四月矣，陛下虽与他相坐语，未尝三刻，天下之事，陛下尝暇与之讲论乎！
现代文：白敏中自从今年正月以来就患病卧床，至今已经四个月了，陛下虽然与他坐着谈论政事，也从不超过三刻，天下大事多如乱麻，您哪有时间与他计论呢！
English: Since the first month of this year, Bai Minzhong has been ill in bed, and it has been four months so far. Although His Majesty sits with him to discuss political affairs, it never lasts more than three minutes. There are so many important events in the world, how do you have time to argue with him!

古文：愿听敏中罢去，延访硕德，以资聪明。 
现代文：希望批准白敏中辞职的请求，另外寻访有才能德望的人，来帮助您更加圣明。 
English: I hope that you will approve Bai Minzhong's request to resign, and that you will also search for talented and respected people to help you become more holy.

古文：己酉，贬谱为阳翟令。
现代文：已酉，唐懿宗将王谱贬官为阳翟县令。
English: After his death, Emperor Jianzong of Tang Dynasty demoted Wang Fu to the position of Yangshuo County Governor.

古文：谱，珪之六世孙也。
现代文：王谱是王的六世孙。
English: Wang Fu is Wang's sixth-generation grandson.

古文：五月，庚戌朔，给事中郑公舆封还贬谱敕书。
现代文：五月，庚戌朔，给事中郑公舆将的诏书封还。
English: In May, Geng Bingshuo returned the imperial edict issued by Zheng Gongming in the matter.

古文：上令宰相议之，宰相以为谱侵敏中，竟贬之。
现代文：唐懿宗命令宰相议论这件事，宰相们认为王谱官的诏书封还。
English: Tang Yanzong ordered the chancellors to discuss the matter, and the chancellors believed that the edict of Wang Fu Guan was returned.

古文：辛亥，浙东东路军破贼将孙马骑于宁海。
现代文：唐懿宗命令宰相议论这件事，宰相们认为王谱侵犯了白敏中，最后还是将王谱贬了官。辛亥，浙东东路军于宁海击败裘甫部将孙马骑率领的军队。
English: Tang Yanzong ordered the chancellors to discuss the matter. The chancellors believed that Wang Furen had violated Bai Minzhong, and finally demoted Wang Furen. In Xinhai, the East Zhejiang Road Army defeated the army led by Qiu Fu's general Sun Ma Jie in Ninghai.

古文：戊午，南路军大破贼将刘暀、毛应天于唐兴南谷，斩应天。
现代文：戊午，南路军在唐兴县南谷大破裘甫部将刘、毛应天率领的军队，并在战阵上斩毛应天。
English: At noon, the Southern Route Army defeated the army led by Liu and Mao Yingtian in Nangu, Tangxing County, and cut off Mao Yingtian's head in the battle.

古文：先是，王式以兵少，奏更发忠武、义成军及请昭义军，诏从之。
现代文：起先，王式因为军队少，向唐懿宗奏请再调发忠武军、义成军，并要求调昭义军，唐懿宗表示同意。
English: At first, Wang Xi, because of the small number of troops, asked Tang Xizong to redeploy the loyalist army and the volunteer army, and requested that the volunteer army be redeployed. Tang Xizong agreed.

古文：三道兵至越州，式命忠武将张茵将三百人屯唐兴，断贼南出之道；义成将高罗锐将三百人，益以台州土军，径趋宁海，攻贼巢穴；昭义将夹跌戣将四百人，益东路军，断贼入明州之道。
现代文：忠武、义成、昭义三道兵来到越州，王式命令忠武军将领张茵率领三百人屯驻于唐兴县，切断裘甫军逃往南方的道路；命令义成军将高罗锐率领三百人，加上台州地方军队，径直奔赴宁海县，进攻裘甫贼军的巢穴；命令昭义军将领跌率领四百人，去加强东路军，切断裘甫军进入明州的道路。
English: When the three armies of Zhongwu, Yicheng and Shouyi came to Yuezhou, Wang Xi ordered the general of the Zhongwu army, Zhang Yin, to station 300 people in Tangxing County to cut off the road for Qiu Fu's army to escape to the south; ordered the Yicheng army, led by Gao Luo Rui, to go straight to Ninghai County to attack the lair of Qiu Fu's thief army; ordered the general of the Shouyi army, led by Dangdang, to strengthen the East Road Army and cut off the road for Qiu Fu's army to enter Mingshou.

古文：庚申，南路军大破贼于海游镇，贼入甬溪洞。
现代文：庚申，南路在海游镇大破裘甫贼军，裘甫军队逃入甬溪洞。
English: Goshun, South Road in Haiyou Town defeated Qiu Fu's bandits, Qiu Fu's army fled into the Lixi Cave.

古文：戊辰，官军屯于洞口，贼出洞战，又破之。
现代文：戊辰，唐官军于洞口屯驻，裘甫出洞交战，又被打败。
English: In the Boshin War, Tang government troops were stationed in Dongkou. Qiu Fu came out of the cave to fight and was defeated again.

古文：己巳，高罗锐袭贼别帅刘平天寨，破之。
现代文：已巳，高罗锐袭击裘甫部将刘平天的营寨，将营寨攻破。
English: Already, Gao Luo Rui attacked Qufu's camp of Liu Ping Tian and broke through the camp.

古文：自是诸军与贼十九战，贼连败。
现代文：到此为止唐诸路军队与裘甫贼军作战十九次，裘甫军边续失败。
English: Up to this point, the Tang Zulu army has fought the Qufu army nineteen times, and the Qufu army has continuously failed.

古文：刘暀谓裘甫曰： 向从吾谋入赵州，宁有此困邪！ 
现代文：刘对裘甫说： 如果您能听从我的谋划，进入越州，那会有今天这样的困境呢！ 
English: Liu said to Qiu Fu, "If you could follow my plan and enter Yuezhou, you would not be in the predicament you are in today!"

古文：王辂等进士数人在贼中，皆衣绿，暀悉斩之，曰： 乱我谋者，此青虫也！ 
现代文：王辂等几个唐朝科举入第的进士在裘甫军中，都穿绿衣做小官，刘将他们全部斩首，说： 破坏我的计谋的，正是你们这些青虫！ 
English: Wang Yao and several other young men who had been promoted to the first rank of the Tang Dynasty Academy of Sciences were in the Qufu army, all wearing green uniforms as minor officials. Liu decapitated them all, saying: "It is you young worms who have destroyed my plan!

古文：高罗锐克宁海，收其逃散之民，得七千馀人。
现代文：高罗锐攻克宁海县，收集光散在外的平民百姓，得七千余人。
English: Gao Luo Rui conquered Ninghai County and gathered the civilians scattered outside, gaining more than seven thousand people.

古文：王式曰： 贼窘且饥，必逃入海，入海则岁月间未可擒也。 
现代文：王式说： 贼军窘迫，加上饥饿，必然要逃入大海，如果贼寇逃入海岛，那么今年几个月间是不能擒获他们的。 
English: Wang Shi said, "The predicament of the bandits, coupled with hunger, will inevitably escape into the sea. If the bandits escape to the island, then they cannot be captured within a few months this year.

古文：命罗锐军海口以拒之。又命望海镇将云思益、浙西将王克容将水军巡海澨。
现代文：于是命令高罗锐驻军海口拒守，又命令望海镇将领云思益、浙西将领王克容率领水军于海岸水际巡逻。
English: Therefore, he ordered Gao Luo Rui's garrison to refuse to defend Haikou, and ordered the general of Wanghai Town, Yun Siyi, and the general of West Zhejiang, Wang Ke Rong, to lead the navy to patrol the coastal waters.

古文：思益等遇贼将刘从简于宁海东，贼不虞水军遽至，皆弃船走山谷，得其船十七，尽焚之。
现代文：云思益等率水军在宁海以东海面与裘甫军将领刘从简所率船队遭遇，裘甫军船队没有料到官军水师这么快就赶到，都将船抛弃，上岸窜入山谷，云思益的水军缴获裘甫军十七条船，全部烧毁。
English: Yun Siyi and other sailors encountered the fleet led by Liu Congjian, the general of the Qufu army, on the sea east of Ninghai. The Qufu army fleet did not expect the sailors of the government army to arrive so soon, they abandoned the ship and went ashore into the valley. Yun Siyi's sailors captured seventeen ships of the Qufu army and burned them all.

古文：式曰： 贼无所逃矣，惟黄罕岭可入剡，恨无兵以守之。
现代文：王式说： 贼军已没有什么地方可逃了，只有黄罕岭可以进入剡县，可恨没有兵守黄罕岭。
English: Wang Shi said: The thief army has no place to escape, only Huanghanling can enter Handan County, but unfortunately there are no soldiers to guard Huanghanling.

古文：虽然，亦成擒矣！ 
现代文：虽然这样，裘甫贼也可擒获！ 
English: Even so, thieves can be caught!

古文：裘甫既失宁海，乃帅其徒屯南陈馆下，众尚万馀人。
现代文：裘甫既失去宁海，于是率领部下徒众屯驻宁海县西南六十余里处的南陈馆下，部众仍然有一万余人。
English: Since Qiu Fu had lost Ninghai, he led his followers to settle at Nan Chen Pavilion, more than sixty miles southwest of Ninghai County. The followers still numbered more than ten thousand.

古文：辛未，东路军破贼将孙马骑于上疁村，贼将王皋惧，请降。
现代文：辛未，东路军在宁海西北四十里的上村击败裘甫军将领孙马骑的部队，王畏惧官军，请求投降。
English: In Xinwei, the East Road Army defeated the troops of Qufu Army General Sun Ma Jie in Shangcun, 40 miles northwest of Ninghai. Wang feared the official army and asked for surrender.

古文：壬申，右拾遗内供奉薛调上言，以为： 兵兴以来，赋敛无度，所在群盗，半是逃户，固须翦灭，亦可闵伤。
现代文：壬申，右拾遗内供奉薛调向唐懿宗上言，认为： 自从兴兵征讨以来，赋敛税科无度，地方上的群盗，多半都是逃亡的农户，固然应该消灭他们，但他们处境也很可怜，令人伤心。
English: Jinshin, a right-wing disciple of Xue Zhe, appealed to Tang Xizong, saying: Since the army was raised and levied, the tax collection department has been boundless, and the local bandits are mostly fugitive farmers. Of course, they should be eliminated, but their situation is also pitiful and sad.

古文：望敕州县税外毋得科率，仍敕长吏严加纠察。 
现代文：希望陛下向州县颁布诏敕，凡朝廷所定的正税以外，不得再有课税门目，并且敕令有关官吏，对税目加以严格的纠察监督。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will issue an edict to the prefectures and counties that there shall be no taxation items other than the official taxes set by the imperial court, and order the relevant officials to carry out strict picketing and supervision of tax items.

古文：从之。
现代文：唐懿宗表示同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：袁王绅薨。
现代文：袁王李绅去世。
English: Yuan Wang Lishen passed away.

古文：戊寅，浙东东路军大破裘甫于南陈馆，斩首数千级，贼委弃缯帛盈路，以缓追者，夹跌戣令士卒： 敢顾者斩！ 
现代文：戊寅，唐浙东东路军在南陈馆大破裘甫军，斩首数千人，贼军抛弃大量丝绸缯帛，布满道路，企图延缓官军的追击。跌对士兵下命令： 谁敢顾盼不前，留恋财物，立即斩道！ 
English: According to Wu Yin, the East-East Road Army of Tang and Zhejiang defeated Qiu Fu's army at Nan Chen Pavilion, beheading thousands of people. The thief army abandoned a large number of silk cocoons, covering the roads, in an attempt to delay the pursuit of the government army. He ordered the soldiers: Who dares not look forward, hold on to property, and immediately cut off the road!

古文：毋敢犯者。
现代文：于是官军士兵没有人敢违犯。
English: As a result, none of the soldiers of the government army dared to violate it.

古文：贼果自黄罕岭遁去，六月，甲申，复入剡。
现代文：贼军果然从黄罕岭逃去，交月，甲申，再入剡县。
English: The bandit army did indeed escape from Huanghanling, passing through Jiuyue, Jiaoshen, and re-entering Yuxian.

古文：诸军失甫，不知所在，义成将张茵在唐兴获俘，将苦之，俘曰： 贼入剡矣。
现代文：贼军诸将不见裘甫，不知道他在何处，唐义成镇将张茵在唐兴县曾获俘虏，将要对他用刑，俘虏说： 贼军已进入剡县。
English: The rebel generals did not see Qiu Fu and did not know where he was. Zhang Yin, the commander of Tang Yicheng Town, had been captured in Tangxing County and was about to be tortured. The prisoner said, "The rebel army has entered Handan County."

古文：苟舍我，我请为军导。 
现代文：你如果释放我，我愿意作官军的向导。 
English: If you release me, I would like to be a guide for the government army.

古文：从之，茵后甫一日至剡，壁其东南，府中闻甫入剡，复大恐，王式曰： 贼来就擒耳！ 
现代文：张茵信以为真，听从了建议。张茵跟在俘虏后面，比裘甫晚一天到达剡县，于是义成军在剡县城东南筑垒驻扎。裘甫进入剡县城，官军府探知情报，感到恐慌，王式说： 裘甫贼不过是来束手就擒而已！ 
English: Zhang Yinsin believed it to be true and heeded the suggestion. Zhang Yinsin followed the captives and arrived in Handan County one day later than Qiu Fu, so the Yicheng Army built a fort in the southeast of Handan County. When Qiu Fu entered Handan County, the government and army detected the intelligence and panicked. Wang Shi said: "The Qiu Fu bandits just came to tie our hands!"

古文：命趣东、南两路军会于剡，辛卯，围之，贼城守甚坚，攻之，不能拔，诸将议绝溪水以渴之，贼知之，乃出战。
现代文：于是命令东、南两路军到剡县来会合，辛卯，将剡县城团团围住。裘甫军的城防守卫十分坚固，官军攻城，无法攻拔；王式部下诸将议论断绝溪水，渴死城内人，裘甫贼军知道官军要断绝其水源，于是出城交战。
English: Therefore, he ordered the eastern and southern armies to meet in Jixian and encircle the city of Jixian. The city defenses of the Qufu army were very strong, and the official army attacked the city and could not attack it; the royal subordinates discussed cutting off the stream water, and the people in the city died of thirst. The Qufu thief army knew that the official army wanted to cut off its water source, so they went out of the city to fight.

古文：三日，凡八十三战，贼虽败，官军亦疲。
现代文：三天内共交战八十三次，贼军虽被战败，官军也很疲倦。
English: A total of eighty-three battles were fought in three days. Although the rebel army was defeated, the government army was also very tired.

古文：贼请降，诸将出以白式，式曰： 贼欲少休耳，益谨备之，功垂成矣。 贼果复出，又三战。
现代文：裘甫贼军请求投降，王式部下诸将向王式报告，王式说： 裘甫贼企图获得稍许休整时间，我们应更加谨慎守备，大功就要告成了。 裘甫贼军果然出城，又与官军交战了三次。
English: The Qufu bandits requested to surrender, and Wang Shih's subordinates would report to Wang Shih, who said: "The Qufu bandits are trying to get a little rest and recuperation time, we should be more cautious in our defense, the great work is about to be completed." The Qufu bandits did indeed leave the city and fought with the government army three more times.

古文：庚子夜，裘甫、刘往、刘庆从百馀人出降，遥与诸将语，离城数十步，官军疾趋，断其后，遂擒之，壬寅，甫等至越州，式腰斩暀、庆等二十馀人，械甫送京师。
现代文：庚子夜，裘甫、刘、刘庆率百余人出城投降，并远远地对官军诸将喊话，请求收纳，官军迅速赶往城下，切断裘甫等人的后路，于是被押送到越州，王式下令将刘、刘庆等二十余人拦腰处斩，将裘甫锁于车上，押送到京师长安去报功。
English: On the night of Geng Zi, Qiu Fu, Liu, and Liu Qing led more than 100 people out of the city to surrender, and shouted to the generals of the government army from a distance, requesting to be received. The government army quickly rushed to the city, cutting off the back of Qiu Fu and others, so they were escorted to Yuezhou. Wang Xi ordered that more than 20 people such as Liu and Liu Qing be beheaded at the waist, and Qiu Fu was locked in the car and escorted to Beijing Shichang'an to report his achievement.

古文：剡城犹未下，诸将已擒甫，不复设备。
现代文：剡城仍未攻下，唐官军诸将因为已把裘甫擒获，不再布置防备。
English: Lucheng has not yet been conquered, and the Tang government troops will no longer set up defenses because they have captured Qufu.

古文：刘从简帅壮士五百突围走，诸将追至大兰山，从简据险自守。秋，七月，丁巳，诸将共攻克之。
现代文：刘从简率领壮士五百人突围逃走；官军诸将追到奉化县西北的大兰山，刘从简在山上据险自守，秋季，七月，丁已，唐官军诸军将领率领所部士兵一同攻山，将大兰山攻克。
English: Liu Congjian led five hundred strong men to break out of the encirclement and escape; the government army chased them to Dalan Mountain in the northwest of Fenghua County. Liu Congjian defended himself on the mountain. In the autumn, in July, Dingya, the Tang government army generals led the soldiers of the headquarters together to attack the mountain and conquered Dalan Mountain.

古文：台州刺史李师望募贼相捕斩之以自赎，所降数百人，得从简首，献之。
现代文：台州刺史李师望招募贼军士兵，让他们去捕杀还没有投降的同伙，以赎免自己的罪，又迫使贼军数百人投降，并获得刘从简的首级，献给上司。
English: Taizhou poet Li Shiguang recruited soldiers of the Kleptocracy to hunt down and kill their comrades who had not yet surrendered, in order to atone for their sins, and forced hundreds of Kleptocrats to surrender, and obtained Liu Congjian's head, dedicated to his boss.

古文：诸将还越，式大置酒。
现代文：官军诸将回到越州，王式大摆酒宴庆功。
English: The government troops will return to Yuezhou and celebrate their victory with a grand royal wine banquet.

古文：诸将乃请曰： 谋等生长军中，久更行陈，今年得从公破贼，然私有所不谕者，敢问：公之始至，军食方急，而遽散以赈贫乏，何也？ 
现代文：诸镇将领于向王式请教说： 我们这些人生长在军队行伍之中，久经战阵，今年能够随从您攻破裘甫贼党，实在是荣幸，但我们有些事仍没有明白过来，请问：您刚到越州上任时，军粮正紧张，而您立即将官府仓库的屯粮散给老百姓，赈救贫困乏粮者，其中用意是什么？ 
English: The town generals asked Wang Shih for advice, saying: "Those of us who grew up in the army and have been in battle for a long time, it is a real honor to be able to follow you in defeating the Qufu bandits this year, but we still do not understand some things. Please ask: When you first came to Yuezhou to take office, military food was in short supply, and you immediately distributed the government warehouse's grain to the common people to help the poor and food-deprived. What was your intention?

古文：式曰： 此易知耳，贼聚谷以诱饥人，吾给之食，则彼不为盗矣；且诸县无守兵，贼至，则仓谷适足资之耳 又问： 不置烽燧，何也？ 
现代文：王式回答说： 这个道理容易理解，裘甫贼众屯聚谷米来引诱饥饿的人民，我分发粮食，饥民就不会被裘甫引诱入伙为盗贼。况且诸县没有守兵，裘甫贼军赶到，官府仓库的谷米正好成为贼寇的资粮，为资贼所用。 诸将又问道： 您不设置烽火台，这又是为什么？ 
English: Wang Shi replied, "This principle is easy to understand. Qiu Fu's bandits gathered grain to lure the hungry people. I distributed grain so that the hungry people would not be lured by Qiu Fu into becoming bandits. Moreover, there were no guards in the counties. Qiu Fu's bandits arrived, and the grain in the government warehouse just became the loot of the bandits and was used by them. The generals also asked, "You do not set up a campfire, why is that?"

古文：式曰： 烽燧所以趣救兵也，兵尽行，城中无兵以继之，徒惊士民，使自溃乱耳。 
现代文：王式说： 设烽火台是为了求取救兵，我手下的军队都已安排了任务，越州城中没有军队可用作援兵，设烽火台不过是徒费功夫，惊扰士民，使我军自乱溃散而已。 
English: Wang Shi said, "I set up the campfire in order to call for reinforcements. The troops under my command have already arranged their tasks. There is no army in Yuezhou City that can be used as reinforcements. Setting up the campfire is just a waste of time and effort. It only disturbs the soldiers and people and causes our army to scatter.

古文：又问： 使懦卒为候骑而少给兵，何也？ 
现代文：诸部将领又问： 您派懦弱的士兵充当侦察骑兵，而且给他们配以很少的武器，这是什么道理呢？ 
English: The generals also asked: Why did you send your cowardly soldiers to serve as scouts and cavalry, and equip them with few weapons?

古文：式曰： 彼勇卒操利兵，遇敌且不量力而斗；斗死，则贼至不知矣。 
现代文：王式回答说： 如果侦察骑兵选派勇武敢斗的士兵，并配给锋利的兵器，遇到敌军就可能会不自量力上前搏斗，搏斗战死，就没有人回来报告，我们就不知道贼军来了，这样的侦察兵有什么用呢。 
English: Wang Shi replied, "If the scout cavalry selects and dispatches soldiers who are brave and brave, and is equipped with sharp weapons, when encountering the enemy army, it may not go forward to fight on its own, fight and die, and no one will come back to report, we do not know that the thief army is coming, what is the use of such scouts?

古文：皆拜曰： 非所及也！ 
现代文：众部将听完后，都十分佩服，说： 这都不是我们的智力所能达到的啊！ 
English: After listening to him, all the ministers were very impressed and said, "This is not what our intelligence can achieve!"

古文：封宪宗子忄丐为信王。
现代文：唐懿宗封唐宪宗的儿子李为信王。
English: Emperor Wenzong of Tang Dynasty named Emperor Li, the son of Emperor Xianzong of Tang Dynasty, as the Prince of Letters.

古文：八月，裘甫至京师，斩于东市。
现代文：八月，裘甫被监车押送至京师，在长安东市处斩。
English: In August, Qiu Fu was escorted by a patrol car to Beijing Division and beheaded in Chang'an East City.

古文：加王式检校右散骑常侍，诸将官赏各有差。
现代文：唐懿宗给王式加检校右散骑常侍的衔名，王式部下诸将也分别给予赏赐。
English: Tang Yanzong gave the title of right rider to the attendants of the royal inspection school, and the subordinates of the royal officers were also rewarded separately.

古文：先是，上每以越盗为忧，夏侯孜曰： 王式才有馀，不日告捷矣。 
现代文：起先，唐懿宗经常为越的贼乱忧虑，夏侯孜说： 王式的才干有余，过不了几天就会告捷的。 
English: At first, Tang Xizong was often worried about the growing banditry. Xia Houzhe said: I have more than enough royal talent, and I will succeed in a few days.

古文：孜与式书曰： 公专以执裘甫为事，军须细大，此期悉力。 
现代文：夏侯孜给王式写信说： 您专心以擒获裘甫为事，行军所需的粮仗衣物，不管多少，我们一定按期尽力协办。 
English: Xia Houzé wrote to Wang Shihong, saying: You have concentrated on capturing Qufu, and no matter how much grain and clothing you need for the march, we will do our best to help you on schedule.

古文：故式所奏求无不从，由是能成其功。
现代文：因此王式上奏有所要求，朝廷无不应从，所以能大功告成。
English: Therefore, there is a requirement for the royal performance, and the imperial court should follow it, so it can be a great success.

古文：卫王灌薨。
现代文：卫王李灌去世。
English: Wei Wang Li Guan passed away.

古文：九月，白敏中五上表辞位，辛亥，以敏中为司徒、中书令。
现代文：九月，白敏中第五次向唐懿宗上表，请求恩准辞职；辛亥，唐懿宗任白敏中为司徒、中书令。
English: In September, Bai Min Middle School sent a letter to Tang Xizong for the fifth time, requesting permission to resign; in October, Tang Xizong appointed Bai Min Middle School as a scholar and a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：癸酉，右拾遗句容刘鄴上言： 李德裕父子为相，有声迹功效，窜逐以来，血属将尽，生涯已空，宜赐哀闵，赠以一官。 
现代文：癸酉，右拾遗句容刘邺向唐懿宗上言： 李吉甫、李德裕父子为宰相时，有政绩功劳，但自从李德裕被流放以来，他的亲属几乎全部流放远外，李德裕已死，陛下应该对他发慈悲，赠给一个官爵。 
English: Li Jifu and Li Deyu, when father and son, were prime ministers, had political achievements and merits, but since Li Deyu was exiled, almost all of his relatives have been exiled far away. Li Deyu is dead, and His Majesty should have mercy on him and give him a peerage.

古文：冬，十月，丁亥，敕复李德裕太子少保、卫国公，赠左仆射。
现代文：冬季，十月丁亥，唐懿宗颁布敕令，恢复李德裕太子少保、卫国公官爵，赠左仆射。
English: In the winter, in October of Dinghai, Tang Xizong issued an imperial edict to restore Li Deyu to the position of minor prince and grand marshal of the imperial guard, and presented him with a left-handed arrow.

古文：乙亥，以门下侍郎、同平章事夏侯孜同平章事，充西川节度使。
现代文：已亥，唐懿宗任命门下侍郎、同平章事夏侯孜挂同平章事衔，也朝充当西川节度使。
English: At that time, Tang Xizong appointed Tongping Zheng, a servant of his disciple, to the title of Tongping Zheng, and he also served as a delegate to the Nishikawa Festival.

古文：以户部尚书、判度支毕諴为礼部尚书、同平章事。
现代文：又任命户部尚书、判度支毕为礼部尚书、同平章事。
English: He also appointed the head of the Household Division to be Shang Shu, and the head of the Judiciary Division to be Shang Shu of the Ceremonial Division and Tong Ping Zhangji.

古文：安南都护李鄠复取播州。
现代文：安南都护李收复播州。
English: Annan's protection of the capital has been repeated.

古文：十一月，丁丑，上祀圆丘；赦，改元。
现代文：十一月，丁丑，唐懿宗举行祀圆丘大典；宣告赦令，改年号为咸通。
English: In November, Dingwuxi, Tang Shizong held a grand ceremony to worship the round mound; announced a pardon, and changed the year name to Hamdang.

古文：十二月，戊申，安南土蛮引南诏兵合三万馀人乘虚攻交趾，陷之。
现代文：十二月，戊申，安南本地人勾结南诏王国军队共合三万人乘虚进攻交趾，将交趾城攻陷。
English: In December, a total of 30,000 local people from Annan in collaboration with the army of the Kingdom of Nanzhao launched a fictitious attack on Kotei, capturing Kotei Castle.

古文：都护李鄠与监军奔武州。
现代文：安南都护李与监军逃奔到武州。
English: Annan escapes to Wuzhou with his bodyguards.

古文：懿宗昭圣恭惠孝皇帝上咸通二年春，正月，诏发邕管及邻道兵救安南，击南蛮。
现代文：咸通二年春季，正月，唐懿宗颁下诏书，调发邕管以及相邻诸道的军队援救安南，讨击南蛮。
English: In the spring and the first month of the second year of Hamdang, Tang Xizong issued an imperial edict, dispatching Xiangguan and the armies of neighboring provinces to rescue Annan and fight Nanban.

古文：二月，以中书令白敏中兼中书令，充凤翔节度使；以左仆射、判度支杜悰兼门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：二月，唐懿宗任命中书令白敏中仍兼中书令，充当凤翔节度使；又任命左仆射、判度支杜兼任门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: In February, Emperor Taizong of Tang appointed Bai Minzhong, who was also the middle secretary, to serve as Fengxiang's delegate to the festival; he also appointed Zuo Shuai and Jandu Shidu to serve as his subordinate attendants and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：一日，两枢密使诣中书，宣徽使杨公庆继至，独揖悰受宣，三相起，避之西轩。公庆出斜封文书以授悰，发之，乃宣宗大渐时宦官请郓王监国奏也，且曰： 当时宰相无名者，当以反法处之。 
现代文：有一天，两位宦官枢密使来到中书门下政事堂，宣徽使杨公庆接着也来了，只向杜作揖，让杜接受宣命，另外毕、杜审权、蒋伸三位宰相当即起身出门，于西面客厅暂避，杨公庆拿出一札斜封的文书交给杜，启封一看，原来是唐宣宗病重时，请求郓王李温监国的奏折。几个宦官说： 请查看这些奏折，凡当时在位的宰相没有题名的，应当以谋反罪处分。 
English: One day, two eunuch emissaries came to the hall of state affairs under the gate of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and Yang Gongqing also came. He only bowed to Du and asked him to accept the proclamation. In addition, Bi, Du Xianquan, and Jiang Shen, the three viziers, immediately got up and left the door, temporarily avoiding the west-facing living room. Yang Gongqing took out a piece of oblique-sealed document and handed it to Du. When the seal was opened, it turned out to be the transcript of Tang Xuan Zong when he was seriously ill, requesting Li Wen, the guardian of the state. Several eunuchs said

古文：悰反复读良久，曰： 圣主登极，万方欣戴。
现代文：杜反复阅读这些奏折，读了很久，说： 圣明的皇上登极以来，天下万方欢欣鼓舞，衷心拥戴。
English: Du repeatedly read these excerpts, read them for a long time, and said: Since the Holy Emperor ascended to the throne, the whole world is rejoicing and heartily embracing.

古文：今日此文书，非臣下所宜窥。 
现代文：今天这些文书，并不是我所应该窥视的。 
English: Today, these documents are not something I should pry into.

古文：复封以授公庆，曰： 主上欲罪宰相，当于延英面示圣旨，明行诛谴。 
现代文：于是将奏折再封好，还给宣徽使杨公庆，说： 皇上如果想给宰相加罪，应当在延英殿当面向宰相出示圣旨，公天地进行诛讨谴责。 
English: Therefore, the record was resealed and returned to Yang Gongqing, the imperial herald, who said, "If the emperor wants to punish the prime minister, he should present the imperial edict to the prime minister in the presence of Yan Ying Dian, and the world should discuss and condemn it.

古文：公庆去，悰复与两枢密坐，谓曰： 内外之臣，事犹一体，宰相、枢密共参国政。
现代文：杨公庆走后，杜与两位枢密使坐下交谈，杜说： 禁宫内外的臣子，同样是服侍辅佐皇上，宰相和枢密使更是共同参议国家大政。
English: After Yang Gongqing left, Du sat down to talk with the two envoys. Du said: The courtiers inside and outside the Forbidden City also serve the emperor as assistants, and the prime minister and the envoys also jointly participate in the national politics.

古文：今主上新践祚，未熟万机，资内外裨补，固当以仁爱为先，刑杀为后，岂得遽赞成杀宰相事！
现代文：今天皇上登基不久，对万般机务还不熟悉，需要宫内宫外的大臣同心协力，给予辅助，我们处理政事当然应该以仁爱为先，以刑杀为后，岂能在刚登基不久就赞成皇上干诛杀宰相的事！
English: Today, not long after the Emperor ascended the throne, he is not yet familiar with all kinds of mechanisms. He needs the concerted efforts and assistance of the ministers inside and outside the Imperial Palace. Of course, we should deal with political affairs with benevolence first, and then with capital punishment. How can we approve of the Emperor's assassination of the Prime Minister so soon after he ascended the throne!

古文：若主上习以性成，则中尉、枢密权重禁闱，岂得不自忧乎！
现代文：如果皇上滥杀重臣习以成性，那么宦官两军中尉、枢密使在宫廷禁闱中权柄更重，岂不是更加要忧虑自己的身家性命吗？
English: If the emperor's indiscriminate killing of his senior vassals became a habit, then the eunuchs, the lieutenants of the two armies, and the confidential envoys had more power in the palace confinement. Shouldn't they be more worried about their own property and life?

古文：悰受恩六朝，所望致君尧、舜，不欲朝廷以爱憎行法。 
现代文：杜我自宪宗以来受恩于六朝皇帝，我所希望的是让皇上都成为尧、舜那样的圣主，不希望朝廷以个人的爱憎来执行法律。 
English: I have been beholden to the emperors of six dynasties since the time of Emperor Xianzong. What I hope for is that the emperors will all become holy lords like Emperor Xizong and Emperor Xizong. I don't want the imperial court to enforce laws based on personal likes and dislikes.

古文：两枢密相顾默然，徐曰： 当具以公言白至尊，非公重德，无人及此。 
现代文：两位枢密使听后互相观望，默默无言，过了一会儿，才慢慢地说： 我们会把您所说的话全部面告皇上，如果不是您德高望重，哪有人能够想得这么深远。 
English: The two emissaries looked at each other, speechless. They paused for a moment and then said slowly: "We should tell your words to the emperor. No one can match your attention to the overall situation."

古文：惭悚而退。
现代文：说完后惭愧地退了出去。
English: After saying this, he shamefully walked out.

古文：三相复来见悰，微请宣意，悰无言，三相惶怖，乞存家族，悰曰： 勿为他虑。 
现代文：当时士大夫们对官深为疾恶，谁如果与宦官稍有接触，就会遭到士人们的唾弃。
English: At that time, the judges and magistrates were deeply hostile to officials. Anyone who had even the slightest contact with a eunuch would be spurned by the judges and magistrates.

古文：既而寂然，无复宣命。及延英开，上色甚悦。
现代文：建州的进士叶京过去曾参加宣武军的宴会，在宴度上认识一个宦官监军。
English: Ye Jing, an envoy from Jianzhou, once attended a banquet of the Xuanwu army and met a eunuch overseer at the banquet.

古文：是时士大夫深疾宦官，事有小相涉，则众共弃之，建州进士叶京尝预宣武军宴，识监军之面；既而及第，在长安与同年出游，遇之于涂，马上相揖；因之谤议喧然，遂沉废终身，其不相悦如此。
现代文：后来进士及第，在长安与同年登第的进士出游，路上遇到那位宦官监军，于是在马上互相作揖行礼；为此，对叶京进行毁谤的各种议论至沓而来，一片喧嚣，以致叶京终身抬不起头，沉默在家，未再出来做官。
English: Later, Jin Shi and Dai, in Chang'an, went on a trip with Jin Shi, who ascended to Dai in the same year. On the way, they met the eunuch overseer, so they immediately bowed and saluted each other. For this reason, all kinds of discussions that slandered Ye Jing came to Shao, and there was a lot of noise, so that Ye Jing could not lift his head for life, was silent at home, and did not come out to be an official again.

古文：福王绾薨。
现代文：士大夫讨厌宦官竟达到了这种程度。
English: King of Fortune Li Xi passed away.

古文：夏，六月，癸丑，以盐州防御使王宽为安南经略使，时李鄠自武州收集土军，攻群蛮，复取安南，朝廷责其失守，贬儋州司户。
现代文：福王李绾去世。夏季，六月，癸丑，唐懿宗任命盐州防御史王宽为安南经略使。当时李自武州收集当地土军，攻讨群蛮，收复安南；朝廷责备李将安南失守，贬官为赡州司户。
English: In the summer, in June, Tang Yongsong appointed Shi Wangguan, who was in charge of the defense of Yanzhou, as the special envoy of Annan. At that time, Li gathered the local Turkish army from Wuzhou, fought against the barbarians, and recovered Annan; the imperial court reproached Li for losing Annan and demoted him to the position of assistant to the provincial governor.

古文：鄠初至安南，杀蛮酋杜守澄，其宗党遂诱道群蛮陷交趾，朝廷以杜氏强盛，务在姑息，冀收其力用，乃赠守澄父存诚金吾将军，再举鄠杀守澄之罪，长流崖州。
现代文：李初到安南时，杀蛮族酋领杜守澄，杜守澄的宗党于是诱导群蛮攻陷交趾，朝廷因为杜氏澄的宗党于是诱导群蛮攻陷交趾，朝廷因为杜氏宗族强盛，对他们采取尽量姑息的政策，希望使杜氏的巨大影响力能为朝廷所用，于是赠给杜守澄的父亲杜存诚金吾将军的名号，再次举发李杀杜守澄的罪过，将李长年流放于崔州。
English: When Li first arrived in Annan, he killed the barbarian chieftain Du Shoucheng. Du Shoucheng's father's party then induced the barbarian group to attack and capture the enemy. The imperial court, because of Du Shoucheng's father's party, then induced the barbarian group to attack and capture the enemy. The imperial court, because of the strong Du clan, adopted a policy of appeasing them as much as possible, hoping that the huge influence of the Du clan could be used by the imperial court. Therefore, he gave Du Shoucheng's father the name of General Du Cuncheng, again accused Li of killing Du Shouchen

古文：秋，七月，南蛮攻邕州，陷之。
现代文：秋季，七月，南诏出兵进攻唐朝的邕州，将邕州攻陷。
English: In the autumn, in July, Nanzhao sent troops to attack Bozhou of the Tang Dynasty, and conquered Bozhou.

古文：先是，广、桂、容三道共发兵三千人戍邕州，三年一代。
现代文：先前，广州、桂州、容州三道总共调发了军队三千人，去戍守邕州，三年一轮换。
English: Previously, the three provinces of Guangzhou, Guizhou and Yongzhou sent a total of 3,000 troops to defend Ganzhou, with a three-year rotation.

古文：经略使段文楚请以三道衣粮自募土军以代之，朝廷许之，所募才得五百许人。
现代文：邕管经略使须文楚向朝廷请求用三道的衣粮，自己招募当地土军来替代三州戍卒，朝廷批准了段文楚的请求，但段文楚在邕州才招募了五百多本地人当兵。
English: The imperial court approved Duan Wencu's request, but Duan Wencu only recruited more than five hundred local people as soldiers in Ganzhou.

古文：文楚入为金吾将军，经略使李蒙利其阙额衣粮以自入，悉罢遣三道戍卒，止以所募兵守左、右江，比旧什减七八，故蛮人乘虚入寇。
现代文：段文楚调回朝廷任金吾将军，新任经略使李蒙贪图兵员缺额所余的衣粮，归入自己的腰包，于是将三道戍守左江、右江地区，这比原有军队减少了十分之七八，所以南诏蛮人乘虚入寇进犯。
English: Duan Wenchu was transferred back to the imperial court as General Kingu, and the newly appointed general made Li Meng covet the clothing and grain left over from the shortage of soldiers and put it into his own pocket. As a result, he guarded the Zuo River and the Zuo River areas in three directions, which was a reduction of seven-eighths compared to the original army. Therefore, the Nanzhao barbarians took advantage of the opportunity to invade.

古文：时蒙已卒，经略使李弘源至镇才十日，无兵以御之，城陷，弘源与监军脱身奔蛮州，二十馀日，蛮去，乃还。弘源坐贬建州司户。
现代文：这时李蒙已去世，经略使李弘源到镇上任才十天，手上没有军队抵御南诏蛮人的进犯，城被攻陷，李弘源与监军从邕州城脱身投到峦州，二十多天后，南诏蛮军退走，李弘源等人才回到邕州。
English: At this time, Li Meng had already passed away. It took only ten days for the magistrate to send Li Hongyuan to the town to take office. He did not have an army to resist the attack of the Southern Zhao barbarians. The city was captured. Li Hongyuan and the supervising army escaped from Zhangzhou City and went to Zhangzhou. More than twenty days later, the Southern Zhao barbarians retreated, and Li Hongyuan and other talents returned to Zhangzhou.

古文：文楚时为殿中监，复以为邕管经略使，至镇，城邑居人什不存一。
现代文：为此李弘源被贬官任建州司户。段文楚当时在朝廷任殿中监，唐懿宗再任他为邕管经略使，段文楚来到邕州，城邑内居民已十不存一。
English: For this reason, Li Hongyuan was demoted to the post of Jianzhou steward. At that time, Duan Wenchu was appointed as the palace middle inspector in the imperial court, and Tang Yizong reappointed him as the deputy governor of Jianzhou. When Duan Wenchu came to Jianzhou, there were no more than ten residents in the city.

古文：文楚，秀实之孙也。
现代文：段文楚是段秀实的孙子。
English: Duan Wenchu is the grandson of Duan Husi.

古文：杜悰上言： 南诏向化七十年，蜀中寝兵无事，群蛮率服。
现代文：杜向唐懿宗上言： 南诏臣服向化于唐朝已七十年，蜀中地区因此罢兵无战事，群蛮大都服从州郡官府。
English: Du Xiang Tang Xizong said: Nanzhao has been subordinate to Tang Dynasty for 70 years. Therefore, Shuzhong region has no war, and most of the troops are subordinate to the state and county government.

古文：今西川兵食单寡，未可轻与之绝，且应遣使吊祭，晓谕清平官等以新王名犯庙讳，故未行册命，待其更名谢恩，然后遣使删命，庶全大体。 
现代文：今天西川的军队和粮草都很单薄，不可轻易与南诏王国断绝关系，而且我们应该派遣使者去吊祭，向南诏清平官等晓谕大义，告知南诏新国王的名字触犯了我玄宗皇帝的庙讳，因此才没有给他颁行册命，等到新国王改名并向大唐皇帝谢恩后，我们会派遣使者去册命大礼，似乎这样更能顾全大体。 
English: Today, the West River's army and grain and grass are very thin, and it is not easy to break off relations with the Nanzhao Kingdom. Moreover, we should send an envoy to the hanging ceremony to explain to the Nanzhao Qing peace officials and other dignitaries, and to inform the Nanzhao that the new king's name violated the temple taboo of my Emperor Xuanzong, so we did not issue him a written mandate. When the new king changes his name and thanks the Emperor Datang, we will send an envoy to the written mandate ceremony. It seems that this is more able to take care of everything.

古文：上从之。
现代文：唐懿宗表示同意。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：命左司郎中孟穆为吊祭使。未发，会南诏寇巂州，攻邛崃关，穆遂不行。
现代文：于是任命左司郎中孟穆为吊祭使；还没有出发，恰值南诏军队侵寇州，攻邛崃关，孟穆于是不再成行。
English: As a result, the left-hand sergeant, Meng Mu, was appointed as the envoy for the hanging ceremony; before the departure, the Nanzhao army invaded Cangzhou and attacked Shiguan, so Meng Mu no longer made the trip.

古文：冬，十月，以御史大夫郑涯为山南东道节度使。十一月，加同平章事。
现代文：冬季，十月，唐懿宗任命御史大夫郑涯为山南东道节度使；十一月，又加郑涯同平章事衔，为使相。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Taizong of Tang appointed the imperial historian Zheng Yao as the envoy to Shannan to host the festival; in November, he also added Zheng Yao with the title of Tongping, as the envoy.

古文：懿宗昭圣恭惠孝皇帝上咸通三年春，正月，庚寅朔，群臣上尊号曰睿文明圣孝德皇帝。赦天下。
现代文：咸通三年春季，正月，庚寅朔，朝廷大臣给唐懿宗上尊号，称睿文明圣孝德皇帝；唐懿宗为此大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the third year of Hamdang, in the first month of the year, Geng Yinshuo, a minister of the imperial court, gave Tang Xizong the title of honor, praising him as a wise, civilized and filial emperor; Tang Xizong was pardoned by the whole world for this.

古文：以中书侍郎、同平章事蒋伸同平章事，充河中节度使。
现代文：唐懿宗任命中书侍郎、同平章事蒋伸以同平章事衔，出任河中节度使。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang appointed Jiang Sheng, the secretary of Zhongshu, the secretary of Tongping, as the secretary of the Mid-Autumn Festival, with the title of Tongping.

古文：二月，棣王惴薨。
现代文：二月，棣王李惴去世。
English: In February, the King of Gong, Li Xi, passed away.

古文：南诏复寇安南，经略使王宽数来告急，朝廷以前湖南观察使蔡袭代之，仍发许、滑、徐、汴、荆、襄、潭、鄂等道兵各三万人授袭以御之。
现代文：南诏王国再派遣军队侵寇安南，唐安南经略使王宽几次上表向朝廷告急，朝廷派前湖南观察使蔡袭取代王宽任安南经略使，并且调发许州、滑州、徐州、汴州、荆州、襄州、潭州、鄂州等诸道军队共三万人，交蔡袭指挥，以抵御南诏蛮军。
English: The Nanzhao Kingdom again sent troops to invade Annan, the Tang's Annan Commission sent Wang Guang several times to the imperial court to express urgency, the imperial court sent the former Hunan Observer to replace Wang Guang as the Annan Commission, and dispatched a total of 30,000 troops from Huzhou, Leshou, Xuzhou, Zhangzhou, Jingzhou, Xiangzhou, Tanzhou, and Huzhou to resist the Nanzhao barbarian army.

古文：兵势既盛，蛮遂引去。
现代文：唐军兵势既很强盛，南诏蛮军也就引兵退还。
English: The Tang army was very strong, and the Nanzhao barbarian army withdrew.

古文：邕管经略使段文楚坐变更旧制，左迁威卫将军、分司。
现代文：邕管经略使段文楚由于改换旧制度，招募土军代戍卒，降职迁任威卫将军、分司东都为闲官。
English: As a result of the change of the old system, Duan Wenchu, who was in charge of economic affairs, recruited Turkish army deputies, demoted and transferred to the position of General Wei Wei, and the branch chief Dong was an idle official.

古文：左庶子蔡京，性贪虐多诈，时相以为有吏才，奏遣制置岭南事。
现代文：左庶子蔡京，性情贪鄙暴虐，善于欺诈，当时宰相认为他有做官的才能，奏请唐懿宗，派遣他去处置岭南军政事务。
English: At that time, the chancellor thought that he had the ability to be an official, so he invited Tang Xizong and sent him to deal with Lingnan's military and political affairs.

古文：三月，京还，奏事称旨，复以京权知太仆卿，充荆襄以南宣慰安抚使。
现代文：三月，蔡京回到长安，向唐懿宗奏事时迎合懿宗的旨意，唐懿宗再提拔蔡京为权知太仆卿，充任荆襄以南宣慰安抚使。
English: In March, Cai Jing returned to Chang'an and appealed to Tang Xizong to meet the will of Tang Xizong. Tang Xizong then promoted Cai Jing to the position of Guanzhidaibuqing and appointed him as Jingxiangnan's envoy of consolation and appeasement.

古文：夏，四月，己亥朔，敕于两街四寺各置戒坛，度人三七日。
现代文：夏季，四月，已亥朔，唐懿宗颁下诏敕，命令在长安左、右两街的四座佛寺，各设置一座戒坛，在二十一天时间里可剃度人当和尚、尼姑。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict, ordering the four Buddhist temples in the left and right streets of Chang'an to each set up a sacrificial altar, in which a person could become a monk or a nun within 21 days.

古文：上奉佛太过，怠于政事，尝于咸泰殿筑坛为内寺尼受戒，两街僧、尼皆入预；又于禁中设讲席，自唱经，手录梵夹；又数幸诸寺，施与无度。
现代文：唐懿宗信奉佛教太过分，处理朝政事务却懒惰怠慢，曾在禁官内咸泰殿建筑戒坛，为弃俗出家当尼姑的宫女受戒，长安两街的僧侣、尼姑都参预了此事；唐懿宗又在禁中设置佛经讲席，自己唱佛经文，并手抄梵文贝叶经；唐懿宗还多次来到各大寺庙，施舍财物没有限制。
English: Tang Xizong believed in Buddhism too excessively, but was lazy and negligent in dealing with the affairs of the imperial court. He had built a sacrificial altar in the Han Tai Hall of the Forbidden City, and monks and nuns in the two streets of Chang'an participated in the ordination of the concubines of the nuns who had abandoned their customs. Tang Xizong also set up a Buddhist scripture lecture table in the Forbidden City, sang Buddhist scriptures himself, and hand-copied Sanskrit Baye's Sutra. Tang Xizong also visited major temples many times, and there was no restriction on giving alms.

古文：吏部侍郎萧亻放上疏，以为： 玄祖之道，慈俭为先；素王之风，仁义为首，垂范百代，必不可加。
现代文：吏部侍郎萧为此向唐懿宗上疏，认为： 玄祖老子的大道，以慈爱节俭为先事，素王孔子的作风，以仁义道德为首要，他们已经成为百代的楷模，没有人能超越他们。
English: For this reason, Xiao, the steward of the cadre department, became a disciple of Tang Xizong. He believed that: the path of the ancestor Lao Zi, with mercy and frugality as a prerequisite, and the style of King Confucius, with benevolence, righteousness and morality as the first priority, they have become a model for hundreds of generations, and no one can surpass them.

古文：佛者，弃位出家，割爱中之至难，取灭后之殊胜，非帝王所宜慕也。
现代文：佛陀舍弃王位和父母出家，割舍弃了人情至爱中最难割舍的东西，同时，佛徒出家后不婚嫁，断子绝孙没有后代，这也是人情最难以接受的，这些都不是帝王所应该羡慕的事。
English: Buddha renounced the throne and his parents became a monk, renouncing what is most difficult to renounce in human love. At the same time, Buddhists do not marry after becoming a monk, and their children and grandchildren have no descendants, which is also the most difficult for human feelings to accept. These are not things that emperors should envy.

古文：愿陛下时开延英，接对四辅，力求人瘼，虔奉宗祧。思缪赏与滥刑，其殃必至；知胜残而去杀，得福甚多。
现代文：希望陛下能经常开延英殿召对宰相，与四辅官商讨大政，力求除去人民的疾苦，虔诚地侍奉宗庙；如果老是想着给寺不该给的赏赐，而又对民众滥施刑狱，必然会降来灾祸，如果知道施仁政减少刑杀的道理，比崇信佛都有用得多，必能得到更多的幸福。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will often call on the Prime Minister, discuss major policies with the four auxiliary officials, strive to eliminate the people's suffering, and faithfully serve the ancestral temple. If you always think about giving the temple a reward that should not be given, but indiscriminately impose imprisonment on the people, it will inevitably bring disaster. If you know the principle of reducing the number of executions through benevolent policies, it is much more useful than worshiping Buddha, and you will surely get more happiness.

古文：罢去讲筵，躬勤政事。 
现代文：请求陛下罢去与僧、尼讲经用的宫廷讲席，多费些精力过问军国政事。 
English: I would like to ask His Majesty to give up the palace lectern, which is used by monks and nuns, and spend more energy on military, national and political affairs.

古文：上虽嘉奖，竟不能从。
现代文：唐懿宗虽然对萧的上言给予喜奖，但却不能按萧所说的去做。
English: Although Tang Yanzong gave Xiao's exhortation a commendation, he could not do as Xiao said.

古文：岭南旧分五管，广、桂、邕、容、安南，皆隶岭南节度使；蔡京奏请分岭南为两道节度，从之。
现代文：岭南地区过去分为五管，即广、桂、邕、容、安南，全部隶属于岭南节度使，蔡京奏请唐懿宗，请将岭南分成两道来节度管理；唐懿批准了这一请求。
English: In the past, the Lingnan region was divided into five provinces, namely Guang, Guizhou, Guizhou, Yong and Annan, all of which were subordinate to the Lingnan Festival Commissioner. Cai Jingso asked Tang Yanzong to divide Lingnan into two provinces for festival management; Tang Yanzong approved this request.

古文：五月，敕以广州为东道，邕州为西道，又割桂管龚、象二州，容管藤、岩二州隶邕管。
现代文：五月，唐懿宗下敕以广州岭南东道，邕州为岭南西道，又割桂管所辖的龚州、象州二州，容管的辖的藤州、岩州二州隶属于邕管。
English: In May, Tang Yanzong's lower court was hosted by Guangzhou Lingnan, and Bozhou became Lingnan West Road. In addition, Bozhou and Xiangzhou, which were under the jurisdiction of Guizhou, were separated, and the two states of Fujian and Iwate, which were under the jurisdiction of Yanzhou, were subordinated to Bozhou.

古文：寻以岭南节度使韦宙为东道节度使，以蔡京为西道节度使。
现代文：不久唐懿宗又任命岭南节度使韦宙为岭南东道节度使，任命蔡京为岭南西道节度使。
English: Soon after, Emperor Taizong also appointed Wei Xiu as the host of the Lingnan Festival and Cai Jing as the head of the West Lingnan Festival.

古文：蔡袭将诸道兵在安南，蔡京忌之，恐其立功，奏称： 南蛮远遁，边徼无虞，武夫邀功，妄占戍兵，虚费馈运。
现代文：蔡袭率领诸道兵在安南，蔡京对他极为猜忌，恐怕他立功，于是向唐懿宗奏称： 南诏蛮军已经遁逃远去，边境地区已没有危险，一些武夫悍将为了邀取战功，硬是虚报敌情以扩充自己部下的戍兵，使朝廷耗费大量军需补给品，也虚耗了大量运费。
English: Cai Gui led the Taoist soldiers in Annan. Cai Jing was extremely suspicious of him, fearing that he would make a contribution, so he reported to Tang Xizong that: the Nanzhao barbarian army had fled far away, the border areas were no longer in danger. In order to win the war, some warriors and generals falsely reported the enemy situation in order to expand the troops of their subordinates, so that the imperial court consumed a large amount of military supplies, and also wasted a large amount of freight.

古文：盖以荒陬路远，难于覆验，故得肆其奸诈。
现代文：大概由于地处荒山，路途遥远，朝廷对武将报的情况难以查对，所以邀功武夫的奸诈能得逞。
English: Probably due to the fact that it is located in the barren mountains, the road is far away, and it is difficult for the court to check the situation of the military commander's report, so the treachery of the military commander can succeed.

古文：请罢戍兵，各还本道。 
现代文：请求陛下罢去安南的戍兵，让各阵军队归还本道。 
English: I ask Your Majesty to dismiss Annan's henchmen and let the armies of all sides return to their original path.

古文：朝廷从之。
现代文：朝廷对蔡京的建议予以批准。
English: The court followed his advice.

古文：袭累奏称群蛮伺隙日久，不可无备，乞留戍兵五千人。不听。
现代文：蔡袭连续向朝廷上奏，称群蛮对安南窥伺已久，企图乘隙侵寇，不可没有防备，乞求留下戍兵五千人；朝廷不听蔡袭的奏请。
English: Cai Wei continuously appealed to the imperial court, saying that the barbarians had been spying on Annan for a long time, attempting to take advantage of the gap to invade, must not be unprepared, begging to leave five thousand soldiers; the imperial court did not listen to Cai Wei's appeal.

古文：袭以蛮寇必至，交趾兵食皆阙，谋力两穷，作十必死状申中书。时相信京之言，终不之省。
现代文：蔡袭认为南诏蛮军必定要入侵，交趾的军队和粮食都缺乏，既无计谋又无军力，于是写了十道必死的状子向朝廷中书门下申诉；当时宰相苟求节省输送军需的费用，只相信蔡京，对蔡袭所阐述的安南险情始终不理。
English: Cai Qi believed that the barbarian army of Nanzhao was bound to invade, that the army and food were lacking, that there was no strategy and no military strength, so he wrote ten death-defying appeals to the imperial court. At that time, the prime minister, in order to save the cost of transporting military supplies, only believed Cai Jing, and always ignored the dangerous situation in Annan described by Cai Qi.

古文：秋，七月，徐州军乱，逐节度使温璋。
现代文：秋季，七月，徐州发生军乱，乱军将徐州节度使温璋驱逐出境。
English: In the autumn, in July, there was a military riot in Xuzhou, and the rebels drove Wen Qi out of the country.

古文：初，王智兴既得徐州，募勇悍之士二千人，号银刀、雕旗、门枪、挟马等七军，常以三百馀人自卫，露刃坐于两庑夹幕之下，每月一更。
现代文：起初，王智兴既取得徐州，召募勇敢强悍之士二千人，号称银刀、雕旗、门枪、挟马等七军，经常带着三百余人自卫，他们全副武装地坐在州府使院两侧的夹幕之下，每月轮换一批。
English: At the beginning, Wang Zhixing, having obtained Xuzhou, recruited two thousand brave and strong men, known as the seven armies of silver swords, carved flags, door guns, pinched horses, etc. He often defended himself with more than three hundred people. They sat in full armor under the curtain on both sides of the state capital's diplomatic mission, rotating one batch every month.

古文：其后节度使多儒臣，其兵浸骄，小不如意，一夫大呼，其众皆和之，节度使辄自后门逃去。
现代文：此后的节度使大多是儒臣文士，银刀等七军士兵逐渐骄横，稍有不如意处，只要一人振臂一呼，其他士兵就一齐响应，节度使只得从后门逃走躲避。
English: After that, most of the soldiers of the Seven Armies, such as Confucian scribes, silver swords and so on, gradually became arrogant, which was a little disappointing. As long as one person raised his arm, the other soldiers responded together, and the soldiers had to escape from the back door.

古文：前节度使田牟至与之杂坐饮酒，把臂拊背，或为之执板唱歌。犒赐之费，日以万计，风雨寒暑，复加劳来，犹时喧哗，邀求不已。
现代文：前徐州节度使田牟为了安抚这些骄兵悍将，甚至与他们不分上下地杂坐，在一起饮酒，士兵与节度使手把手，背靠背，有时田牟还为士兵们边敲竹板边唱歌；节度使府用于犒赏士兵的费用，每天以一万计，遇到风雨或寒暑之日，还要加倍慰劳，即使是这样，银刀等七军士兵仍然时常喧哗闹事，要求赏赐，贪图不已。
English: Before the Xuzhou Festival, Tian Mou, in order to appease these proud soldiers and brave generals, even sat with them, drinking together. The soldiers and the festival go hand in hand, back to back. Sometimes, Tian Mou also sings for the soldiers while beating bamboo boards. The festival is used by the government to reward the soldiers' expenses, with ten thousand every day, and on the day of wind and rain or cold and heat, it will be doubled. Even so, the soldiers of the seven armies, such as silver swords, still often make noise, demand rewards, and are greedy.

古文：牟薨，璋代之，骄兵素闻璋性严，惮之。
现代文：田牟去世后，温璋代任徐州节度使，骄兵早就听说温璋性情严厉，心怀畏惧。
English: After the death of Tian Mu, Wen Hui was appointed as the representative of the Xuzhou Festival. The soldiers had long heard that Wen Hui was stern and fearful.

古文：璋开怀慰抚，而骄兵终怀猜忌，赐酒食皆不历口，一旦，竟聚噪而逐之。
现代文：温璋虽然畅开心扉慰问存抚七军士兵，但骄兵们始终对温璋心怀猜忌，凡温璋赐予的酒食，没有人敢喝一口，一天早上，骄兵们竟聚集在一起，大喊大叫将温璋驱逐。
English: Although Wen Xuan was happy to offer condolences to the soldiers of the Seven Armies, the proud soldiers were always suspicious of Wen Xuan. No one dared to drink a sip of the wine and food that Wen Xuan gave. One morning, the proud soldiers actually gathered together and shouted to expel Wen Xuan.

古文：朝廷知璋无辜，乙亥，以璋为邠宁节度使，以浙东观察使王式为武宁节度使。
现代文：朝廷知道温璋被逐事出无辜，乙亥，任命温璋为宁节度使，改任浙东观察使王林为武宁节度使。
English: The imperial court knew that Wen Rong was innocent in each case, and appointed Wen Rong as the Ning Festival envoy, and Wang Lin, the East Zhejiang observation envoy, as the Wu Ning Festival envoy.

古文：以前西川节度使、同平章事夏侯孜为左仆射、同平章事。
现代文：唐懿宗任命前西川节度使、同平章事夏侯孜入朝为左仆射、同平章事。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang appointed the former Saikawa Setsudoshi and Tongping Zhangji, and Xia Houzhi entered the imperial court as Zuoying and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：忠武、义成两军从王式讨裘甫者犹在浙东，诏式帅以赴徐州，骄兵闻之，甚惧。
现代文：忠武、义成两镇随王式征讨裘甫的军队仍然留在浙东，唐懿宗下令王式率领两镇军队赶赴徐州，徐州骄兵得知消息，极为恐惧。
English: The two towns of Zhongwu and Yicheng still remained in eastern Zhejiang with Wang Xi's army to recruit Qiu Fu. Tang Yizong ordered Wang Xi to lead the two towns' army to rush to Xuzhou. When the proud soldiers of Xuzhou learned the news, they were extremely afraid.

古文：八月，式至大彭馆，始出迎谒。
现代文：八月，王式来到徐州城外的大彭馆，银刀等七军兵将出来迎接拜见。
English: In August, Wang Xi came to Dapeng Pavilion outside the city of Xuzhou. Seven soldiers, including the Silver Sword, will come out to meet him.

古文：式视事三日，飨两镇将士，遣还。既擐甲执兵，命围骄兵，尽杀之，银刀都将邵泽等数千人皆死。
现代文：王式在徐州使处理了三天军务，然后为忠武、义成两镇军队设宴，声称将遣送他们回本镇，两镇士兵披甲执锐，全副武装，王式突然命令他们将徐州银刀等七军骄兵团团围住，全部诛斩，一进银刀都将邵泽等数千人全被杀死。
English: Wang Xi dealt with military affairs for three days in Xuzhou, and then held a banquet for the troops of Zhongwu and Yicheng, claiming that he would send them back to the town. The soldiers of the two towns wore armor and were fully armed. Wang Xi suddenly ordered them to encircle the proud troops of the seven armies such as Xuzhou Silver Sword, and all of them were killed. Thousands of people such as Shao Ze were killed as soon as the Silver Sword entered.

古文：甲子，敕以徐州先隶淄青道，李洧自归，始置徐海使额。及张建封以威名宠任，特帖濠、泗二州。
现代文：甲子，唐懿宗颁下敕令，徐州原先录属于淄青道，自李洧归附朝廷以来，开始置徐海节度使名义，到张建封镇徐州时，因他有威名，并受到宠信重用，特将濠州时，因他有威名，并受到宠信重用，特将濠州、泗州两州拨归徐州令辖。
English: In the first century, Tang Yanzong issued an imperial edict, and Xuzhou was originally recorded as belonging to Jiaqing Road. Since Li Gan was annexed to the imperial court, it began to be named the Xuhai Festival. When Zhang Jianfeng went to Xuzhou, because of his prestige, he was favored and reused. When Zhang Jianfeng went to Xuzhou, because of his prestige and favor, he was favored and reused. When Zhang Jianfeng went to Xuzhou, because of his prestige and favored and reused, he was favored and reused.

古文：当时本以控扼淄青、光蔡。
现代文：当时的用意本来是以徐州来控扼淄青、光蔡两大镇。
English: The intention at the time was to use Xuzhou to control the two major towns of Jiaqing and Guangcai.

古文：自寇孽消弭，而武宁一道职为乱阶。
现代文：自后贼寇余孽全被消灭，而设在徐州的武宁使职衔名已相当混乱。
English: Since then, the remaining bandits have all been wiped out, and the title of the military envoy stationed in Xuzhou has become quite confusing.

古文：今改为徐州团练使，隶兗海节度。复以濠州归淮南道，更于宿州置宿泗都团练观察使。留将士二千人守徐州，馀皆分隶兗、宿。
现代文：现将徐、泗、濠节度使改为徐州团练使，录属兖海节度使管辖；将濠州归还淮南道，再于宿州设置宿泗都团练观察使；留下将士三千人驻守徐州，其余军队都分别录属于兖海和宿泗两镇。
English: Now, the Xuzhou regimental training mission will be changed to the Xuzhou regimental training mission, and it will be under the jurisdiction of the Bohai Sea regimental training mission; the Bozhou will be returned to Huainan Province, and then the Suquan City regimental training observation mission will be set up in Suquan; 3,000 soldiers will be stationed in Xuzhou, and the rest of the troops will belong to the Bohai Sea and Suquan Towns respectively.

古文：且以王式为武宁节度使，兼徐、泗、濠、宿制置使。
现代文：另外仍以王式为武宁节度使，兼任徐州、泗州、濠州、宿州制置使。
English: In addition, the king's style is still used as the ambassador to the Wu Ning Festival, and he also serves as the ambassador to Xuzhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou and Suzhou.

古文：委式与监军杨玄质分配将士赴诸道讫，然后将忠武、义成两道兵至汴滑，各遣归本道，身诣京师。
现代文：并委王式与宦官监军杨玄质来分配徐州将士奔赴诸道，分派完毕后，再将忠武、义成两藩镇军队调至汴州、滑州，然后分别回归本镇，王式完成这些任务后，再到京师汇报。
English: Wang Xi and Yang Xuanzheng, the eunuch inspector of the army, were also appointed to allocate the soldiers from Xuzhou to the provinces. After the assignment was completed, the troops from the two towns of Zhongwu and Yicheng were transferred to Zhangzhou and Slanting, and then returned to the town respectively. After Wang Xi completed these tasks, he reported to the Beijing division.

古文：其银刀等军逃匿将士，听一月内自首，一切勿问。
现代文：徐州银刀等七军士兵逃亡躲藏在外者，可以在一个月之内自首，过去的一切不再追究。
English: Xuzhou Silver Sword and other soldiers of the Seven Armies who have fled and are hiding outside can surrender within one month, and everything in the past will no longer be investigated.

古文：岭南西道节度使蔡京为政苛惨，设砲烙之刑，阖境怨之，遂为邕州军士所逐，奔藤州，诈为敕书及攻讨使印，募乡丁及旁侧土军以入邕州。
现代文：岭南西道节度使蔡京为政苛刻残暴，设用烧红的铁烙犯人肉身的惨烈刑法，辖境内人民对酷政怨恨万分，于是邕州军士将蔡京驱逐出境，蔡京投奔藤州，假造皇帝的敕书以及攻讨使的印信，招募乡村壮丁及附近州县土军，以进攻邕州。
English: The Lingnan West Road Festival made Cai Jing harsh and cruel for politics, set up a fierce criminal law using red-hot iron to brand the prisoner's body, and ruled that the people in the territory were extremely resentful of the cruel politics. So the Zhangzhou sergeant expelled Cai Jing from the country, Cai Jing went to Fujian, forged the emperor's imperial edict and the envoy's seal letter, and recruited the village youths and the Turkish troops from the nearby counties to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：众既乌合，会辄溃败，往依桂州，桂州人怨其分裂，不纳。
现代文：蔡京召来的军队既是乌合之众，一接触敌军就溃散败退，根本不能打仗，蔡京只好投依桂州，桂州人对分割桂管巡属归岭南西道领辖的举动怨恨极深，不肯接纳他。
English: The army called in by Cai Jing was a rabble, and as soon as it came into contact with the enemy army, it was routed, dispersed, and retreated, and could not fight at all. Cai Jing had no choice but to rely on Guizhou. The people of Guizhou were deeply resentful of the move to divide the Guizhou patrol into the jurisdiction of Lingnan West Road, and refused to accept him.

古文：京无所自容。敕贬崖州司户，不肯之官，还，至零陵，敕赐自尽。
现代文：蔡京无地容身，唐懿宗颁下诏敕，将蔡京贬为崖州司户，蔡京不肯往崖州任官；于是擅自回朝，来到零陵，唐懿宗赐他自杀。
English: Cai Jing had no place to live. Emperor Taizong of Tang issued an edict to demote Cai Jing to the position of the governor of Yazhou. Cai Jing refused to go to Yazhou to take up the post. Therefore, he returned to China without permission and came to Jiling. Emperor Taizong ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：以桂管观察使郑愚为岭南西道节度使。
现代文：唐懿宗改以桂管观察使郑愚任岭南西道节度使。
English: Tang Xizong changed his name to Gui Guan Observation Envoy, and Zheng Yu was appointed as Lingnan West Road Festival Envoy.

古文：冬，十月，丙申朔，立皇子佾为魏王，侹为凉王，佶为蜀王。
现代文：冬季，十月，丙申朔，唐懿宗立皇子李佾为魏王，李为凉王，李佶为蜀王。
English: In winter, in October, Jian Shenshuo, Tang Xizong's son, established the princes Li Yu as the king of Wei, Li Yu as the king of Liang, and Li Yu as the king of Shu.

古文：十一月，立顺宗子缉为蕲王，宪宗子愤为荣王。
现代文：十一月，唐懿宗立唐顺宗的儿子李缉为蕲王，立唐宪宗的儿子李愤为荣王。
English: In November, the Tang Shizong set up the Tang Shunzong's son, Li Ji, as the Shao Wang, and the Tang Xianzong's son, Li Yan, as the Rong Wang.

古文：南诏帅群蛮五万寇安南，都护蔡袭告急，敕发荆南、湖南两道兵二千，桂管义征子弟三千，诣邕州受郑愚节度。
现代文：南诏派遣将领率群蛮族军队五万人入寇安南，唐安南都护蔡袭向朝廷告急，唐懿宗下诏敕调发荆南、湖南两道军队二千人，又调发桂管应募从军的子弟三千人，到邕州接受郑愚的指挥。
English: Nanzhao sent a group of 50,000 barbarian troops led by generals to enter Ko Annan, Tang Annan's tutelary general Cai Qi sent an urgent message to the imperial court, and under Tang Xizong, Zhaozhang sent 2,000 troops from Jingnan and Hunan provinces, and sent 3,000 soldiers recruited by Guigang to Zhangzhou to accept Zhengwu's command.

古文：岭南东道节度使韦宙奏： 蛮寇必向邕州，若不先保护，遽欲远征，恐蛮于后乘虚扼绝饷道。 
现代文：岭南东道节度使韦宙上奏朝廷： 南诏蛮寇必定要入侵邕州，如果急于派军队远征，而不事先派军保护入邕州的通路。 
English: Lingnan's hosting of the festival caused Wei Xiu to report to the imperial court: Nanzhao barbarian invaders must invade Zhangzhou, if they are in a hurry to send troops on an expedition, without first sending troops to protect the passage into Zhangzhou.

古文：乃敕蔡袭屯海门，郑愚分兵备御。
现代文：于是唐懿宗颁下诏敕，让蔡袭率军屯驻于海门，放弃交趾，命令郑愚分别调派军队作防御准备。
English: As a result, Tang Xizong issued an imperial edict to have Cai Qi lead the army stationed at Haimen, to give up contact, and to order Zheng Yu to separately dispatch troops to prepare for defense.

古文：十二月，袭又求益兵，敕山南东道发弩手千人赴之。
现代文：十二月，蔡袭又向朝廷请求增调军队，唐懿宗下敕令山南东道调弓弩手一千人前往救援。
English: In December, Cai Wei again requested the imperial court to increase the number of troops, and Tang Xizong ordered Shannan to send a thousand archers to the rescue.

古文：时南诏已围交趾，袭婴城固守，救兵不得至。
现代文：这时南诏军队已围住交趾城，蔡袭关闭城门，固守，唐朝救兵不能立即赶到。
English: At this time, the Nanzhao army had surrounded Jiaozuo City, Cai Wei closed the city gate and held fast, and Tang Dynasty rescuers could not immediately arrive.

古文：翼王弹薨。
现代文：翼王李去世。
English: Wing King Lee passed away.

古文：是岁，嗢末始入贡。
现代文：这一年，末开始向唐朝进贡。
English: At the end of this year, the Qing Dynasty began to pay tribute to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：嗢末者，吐蕃之奴号也。
现代文：末是吐蕃奴隶的称号。
English: The last one is the title of the slave of Tubo.

古文：吐蕃每发兵，其富室多以奴从，往往一家至十数人，由是吐蕃之众多。
现代文：吐蕃王国每次调发军队，富室人家多有奴隶随从，往往一家有奴隶十几人，所以吐蕃军队的人数众多。
English: Each time the Kingdom of Tubo dispatched an army, most of the rich families had slaves to accompany them, and often a family had more than a dozen slaves, so the number of Tubo's army was large.

古文：及论恐热作乱，奴多无主，遂相纠合为部落，散在甘、肃、瓜、沙、河、渭、岷、廓、叠、宕之间。吐蕃微弱者反依附之。
现代文：到论恐热作乱时，奴隶大多无主人，于是自相纠集在一起，合成部落，散布在甘州、肃州、瓜州、沙州、河州、渭州、岷州、廓州、叠州、宕州之间，一些微弱的吐蕃奴隶主反而依附于他们。
English: As for the fear of making trouble, most of the slaves had no master, so they gathered themselves together and formed tribes, spreading between Ganzhou, Suzhou, Guazhou, Shazhou, Hezhou, Luzhou, Ganzhou, Guanzhou, Yamenzhou, and Gaozhou. Some weak slave owners in Tubo, on the other hand, clung to them.

古文：懿宗昭圣恭惠孝皇帝上咸通四年
现代文：咸通四年春季，正月，庚午，唐懿宗举行祀圆丘大典礼；宣告大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Hamdang, on the first day of the month, at noon, Tang Yizong held a grand ceremony to worship the round mound; proclaiming a general amnesty.

古文：春，正月。庚午，上祀圆丘；赦天下。是日，南诏陷交趾。蔡袭左右皆尽，徒步力战，身集十矢，欲趣监军船，船已离岸，遂溺海死。幕僚樊绰携其印浮度江。
现代文：这一天，南诏的军队攻陷交趾，唐安南都护蔡袭的左右侍卫全被杀死，他仍然徒步奋力拼杀，身上中了十箭，仍企图爬上监军的船，船已离岸，于是赴海而死；蔡袭的幕僚樊绰携带都护的大印游泳渡过马门江。
English: On this day, Nanzhao's army was caught in the crosshairs, and all the guards on the left and right of Tang's Southern Capital Protector Cai Qi were killed. He still fought hard on foot, was hit by ten arrows, and still tried to climb onto the supervisor's ship. The ship had already left the shore, so he went to sea and died; Cai Qi's staff members carried the capital protector's seal and swam across the Malen River.

古文：荆南、江西、鄂岳、襄州将士四百馀人，走至城东水际，荆南虞候元惟德等谓众曰： 吾辈无船，入水则死，不若还向城与蛮斗，人以一身易二蛮，亦为有利。 
现代文：荆南、江西、鄂岳、襄州戍边将士四百余人，走到交趾城东边临海的地方，荆南虞侯元惟德等对大家说： 我们没有船，入海只有死路一条，不如回到城里去与南诏蛮人搏斗，如果每人能以一条命换蛮人两条命，也死得合算。 
English: More than four hundred soldiers from Jingnan, Jiangxi, Etuake, and Xiangzhou Lianbian marched to the eastern coastal area of Jiaozi City. Jingnan warlord Yuan Weide and others said to everyone: We have no ship, there is only one way to the sea, it is better to go back to the city to fight the Nanzhao barbarians. If each person can exchange one life for two lives of the barbarians, it is also worthwhile to die.

古文：遂还向城，入东罗门。蛮不为备；惟德等纵兵杀蛮二千馀人。
现代文：于是返回交趾城，从东罗门进入，南诏蛮军没用作防备，元惟德等人纵兵厮杀，杀死南诏蛮军两千余人。
English: So he returned to Koji City and entered from East Lomon. The Nanzhao barbarian army did not use it as a defense, and Yuan Weide and others fought against it, killing more than two thousand Nanzhao barbarians.

古文：逮夜，蛮将杨思缙始自子城出救之，惟德等皆死。
现代文：到夜晚晚，南诏蛮将杨思缙才从城内的小城出来救援，元惟德等四百余人全部战死。
English: Late in the evening, Nan Zhao brutally dragged Yang Sijian from a small town within the city to come to the rescue. Yuan Weide and more than 400 others all died in the battle.

古文：南诏两陷交趾，所杀虏且十五万人。
现代文：南诏蛮军两次攻陷交趾，被杀和被俘的唐人达十五万。
English: The barbarian army of Nanzhao invaded and occupied Jiaozuo twice, and the number of killed and captured Chinese reached 150,000.

古文：留兵二万，使思缙据交趾城。谿洞夷獠无远近皆降之。
现代文：南诏留下二万人的军队，让杨思缙据守交趾城，周围山洞里的夷人獠人不管是远是近都归降于杨思缙。
English: Nanzhao left an army of twenty thousand men to let Yang Siyu defend Jiaozuo City, and the barbarians in the surrounding caves, whether far or near, all surrendered to Yang Siyu.

古文：诏诸道兵赴安南者悉召还，分保岭南东、西道。
现代文：唐懿宗于是颁下诏书，召调赴安南的诸道军队全部归还，分别派驻岭南西道进行守卫。
English: Tang Xizong then issued an edict, calling for the return of all the troops from various provinces that had been sent to Annan, and stationed them separately in the western province of Lingnan to guard it.

古文：上游宴无节，左拾遗刘蜕上疏曰： 今西凉筑城，应接未决于与夺。南蛮侵轶，干戈悉在于道涂。
现代文：唐懿宗的游玩宴饮毫无节制，左拾遣刘蜕上疏谏说： 目前西面有凉州请求建筑城堡，您因游宴应接不暇，对筑城的奏议未予裁决，南面有蛮人的侵寇，大批军队在道途上奔走调动。
English: Tang Xizong's entertainment and feasting were unrestrained. Liu Xiang Shang Shaoqi, who was sent to collect Liu Xizong, said: At present, there is a request from Liangzhou in the west to build a castle. You are too busy to respond to the request because of your entertainment. The proposal to build a city has not been decided. In the south, there are barbarians invading, and a large number of troops are moving along the way.

古文：旬月以来，不为无事。
现代文：十天以来，不是没有事情。
English: Since ten days ago, there have been a lot of things going on.

古文：陛下不形忧闵以示远近，则何以责其死力！
现代文：陛下不在表面上做出忧虑哀悯的样子，给远近臣民看，又怎能让将士们去疆场拼死出力！
English: If His Majesty does not make an appearance of concern and pity on the surface, for his subjects near and far to see, how can he let his soldiers go to the battlefield to fight to the death!

古文：望节娱游，以待远人乂安，未晚。 
现代文：希望陛下能节制娱乐游戏，等到远地区太平无事之后，再行游乐，尚不为晚。 
English: I hope that His Majesty can control his amusement and games. It is not too late to wait until there is peace and tranquility in the distant regions before going on an outing.

古文：弗听。
现代文：唐懿宗不听。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：二月，甲午朔，上历拜十六陵。
现代文：二月，甲午朔，唐懿宗一个接一个地拜谒十六座先帝陵墓。
English: In February, at the turn of the year, Tang Yizong visited the 16 imperial tombs one by one.

古文：置天雄军天秦州，以成、河、渭三州隶焉。以前左金吾将军王晏实为天雄观察使。
现代文：唐朝廷在秦州设置天雄军，以成州、河州、渭州三州之地隶属于它；任命前左金吾将军王晏实为天雄军观察使。
English: The Tang court set up the Tianxiong Army in Qinzhou and subordinated the three provinces of Chengzhou, Hezhou and Zhangzhou to it; appointed the former Zuo Kingu general Wang Jinshi as the observation envoy of the Tianxiong Army.

古文：三月，归义节度使张义潮奏自将蕃、汉兵七千克复凉州。
现代文：三月，归义军节度使张义潮奏告朝廷，称他自己率领由蕃族、汉族七千人组成的军队，收复了凉州。
English: In March, Zhang Yichao reported to the imperial court that he had led an army of seven thousand Yi and Han people to recapture Liangzhou.

古文：南蛮寇左、右江，浸逼邕州。
现代文：南诏蛮军侵寇左江、右江地区，逐渐进逼邕州。
English: The Nanzhao barbarian army invaded Zuojiang and Yujiang regions, and gradually pushed into Luzhou.

古文：郑愚惧，自言儒臣无将略，请任武臣。
现代文：唐岭南西道节度使郑愚心情恐惧，自称儒臣没有将才战略，请求朝廷任命武臣充任节度使。
English: The festival in the southwest of Tangling Province made Zheng Yu feel fearful. He claimed that Confucius did not have a strategy of generalship, and requested the imperial court to appoint a military officer to serve as the festival's envoy.

古文：朝廷召义武节度使康承训诣阙，欲使之代愚，仍诏选军校数人、士卒数百人自随。
现代文：朝迁将义武军节度使康承训召到长安，想让他往邕州替代郑愚，唐懿宗还颁下诏书，让康承训在义武军中选将领数人、士兵几百人，随同前往赴任。
English: Emperor Qianqian summoned Kang Chengxun to Chang'an on the occasion of the festival of the Yiwu army, and wanted him to go to Zhangzhou to replace Zheng Yu. Tang Yizong also issued an edict, asking Kang Chengxun to select several generals and hundreds of soldiers from the Yiwu army and accompany him to the post.

古文：中书侍郎、同平章事毕諴以同列多徇私不法，称疾辞位。夏，四月，罢为兵部尚书。
现代文：中书侍郎、同平章事毕因为同列宰相中多徇么舞弊，目无法纪，声称患有疾病，辞去宰相职位；夏季，四月，唐懿宗罢去毕的相位，任为兵部尚书。
English: In the summer, in April, after Tang Xizong had been ousted, he was appointed as the secretary of the military department.

古文：庚戌，群盗入徐州，杀官吏。刺史曹庆讨平之。
现代文：庚戌，一群盗贼攻入黎州，杀死官府官吏；徐州刺史曹庆将盗贼镇压平定。
English: Geng Xuan, a group of thieves invaded Lizhou and killed government officials; Xuzhou assassin Cao Qing suppressed and subdued the thieves.

古文：康承训至京师，以为岭南西道节度使，发荆、襄、洪、鄂四道兵万人与之俱。
现代文：康承训来到京师长安，唐懿宗任命他为岭南西道节度使，调发荆州？襄州、洪州、鄂州等四道军队一万人，由康承训率领赴邕州。
English: Kang Chengxun came to Beijing Division Chang'an, Tang Yingzong appointed him as Lingnan West Road Festival envoy, dispatched ten thousand troops from four provinces including Jingzhou, Xiangzhou, Hongzhou and Ezhou, led by Kang Chengxun to Zhangzhou.

古文：五月，戊辰，以翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎杨收同平章事。
现代文：五月，戊辰，唐懿宗任命翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎杨收为同平章事。
English: In May, Emperor Taizong of Tang appointed Hanlin Scholar Zheng Zi and Yang Hui, a military officer, to the same rank.

古文：收，发之弟也，与左军中尉杨玄价叙同宗相结，故得为相。
现代文：杨收是杨发的弟弟。杨收与宦官首领左神策军护军中尉杨玄价攀结同祖宗亲，得杨玄价的内助，所以升迁为宰相。
English: Yang Hui was the younger brother of Yang Fa. Yang Hui and the eunuch leader Zuo Shengchao and the military escort lieutenant Yang Xuanquan were related to the same ancestor, and Yang Xuanquan helped Yang Xuanquan, so he was promoted to the prime minister.

古文：乙亥，废容管，隶岭南西道，以供军食，复以龚、象二州隶桂管。
现代文：乙亥，唐朝廷废除容管，将其隶属于岭南西道，再将龚州、象州二州隶属于桂管。
English: At the end of the 19th century, the Tang Dynasty abolished Yangguan and subordinated it to Lingnan West Road, and then subordinated Zhangzhou and Xiangzhou to Guizhou.

古文：戊子，以门下侍郎、同平章事杜审权同平章事，充镇海节度使。
现代文：戊子，唐懿宗任命门下侍郎、同平章事杜权仍领同平章事衔，充任镇海节度使。
English: Wuzi, Tang Xizong appointed a subordinate attendant, Tongping Zhang Jidu, still held the title of Tongping Zhang Jidu, and served as Zhenhai Festival Envoy.

古文：六月，废安南都护府，置行交州于海门镇；以右监门将军宋戎为行交州刺史，以康承训兼领安南及诸军行营。
现代文：六月，朝廷下令废除安南都护府，设置行交州于海门镇；任命右监门将军宋戎为行交州刺史，又以康承训兼领安南以及诸军行营。
English: In June, the imperial court ordered the abolition of the Annan Capital Protectorate and the establishment of the Jiaozhou District in Haimen Town; appointed the Right Jiaozhou General Song Rong as the Jiaozhou District Historian, and also appointed Kang Chengxun as the leader of Annan and the military camp.

古文：闰月，以门下侍郎、同平章事杜悰同平章事，充凤翔节度使；以兵部侍郎、判度支河南曹确同平章事。
现代文：闰六月，唐懿宗任命门下侍郎同平章事杜仍领同平章事衔，充任凤翔节度使；又任命兵部侍郎、判度支河南人曹确为同平章事。
English: In the intercalary month of June, Tang Xizong appointed Tongping Zhi Du, the attendant of his disciple, to still hold the title of Tongping Zhi Du and serve as Fengxiang's festival envoy; he also appointed Cao Ji, the attendant of the military department and a person from the southern part of Shandong Province, as Tongping Zhi Du.

古文：秋，七月，辛卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，七月，辛卯朔，出现日食。
English: In autumn, in July, at the beginning of spring, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：复置安南都护府于行交州，以宋戎为经略使；发山东兵万人镇之。
现代文：朝廷于行交州重新设置安南都护府，任命宋戎为安南经略使，调发崤山以东诸道连队一万人镇戍安南。
English: The imperial court re-established the Annan Capital Protectorate in Jiaozhou, appointed Song Rong as Annan's special envoy, and dispatched a company of ten thousand people from the provinces east of Shaoshan to the town of Anan.

古文：时诸道兵援安南者屯聚岭南，江西、湖南馈运者皆溯湘江入澪渠、漓水，劳费艰涩，诸军乏食。
现代文：当时诸道救援安南的军队都屯集在岭南，江西、湖南为大军运输军需粮饷的人都溯湘江而上，经渠进入漓江，役夫劳累艰苦，运费极高，在岭南的诸道军因而缺乏粮食。
English: At that time, the armies of all the provinces to rescue Annan were concentrated in Lingnan. The people from Jiangxi and Hunan who transported grain for the large army went up the Xiangjiang River and entered the Minjiang River through the canal. The laborers were overworked and the freight was extremely high. As a result, the armies of all the provinces in Lingnan lacked grain.

古文：润州人陈磻石上言，请造千斛大舟，自福建运米泛海，不一月至广州，从之，军食以足。
现代文：润州人陈石上言朝廷，请求建造能载千粮食的大船，从福建运米渡海，不要一个月就能到达广州，得到朝廷的批准，于是岭南的军粮很充足。
English: Chen Shih, a native of Runchu, petitioned the imperial court to build a large ship that could carry thousands of grain, transport rice across the sea from Fujian, and arrive in Guangzhou in less than a month. With the approval of the imperial court, the military grain in Lingnan was abundant.

古文：然有司以和雇为名，夺商人舟，委其货于岸侧，舟入海或遇风涛没溺，有司囚系纲吏、舟人，使偿其米，人颇苦之。
现代文：但有关官司以和雇的名义，抢夺商人的海船，将商人的商品货物堆积在海岸边，商船运米入海若遇上风暴海涛沉没，有关官司就逮捕押船运粮的官吏和船夫，逼他们偿还米价，使沿海一带船主船夫怨声载道。
English: However, the relevant lawsuits, in the name of conciliation, robbed the merchant's ship, piled up the merchant's goods on the coast, and if the merchant ship carrying rice into the sea sank in a storm, the relevant lawsuits arrested the officials and boatmen who escorted the ship carrying grain, forced them to repay the price of rice, and made the ship owners and boatmen along the coast complain.

古文：八月，岭南东道节度使韦宙奏，蛮必向邕州，请分兵屯容、藤州。
现代文：八月，岭南东道节度使韦宙奏告朝廷，声称南诏蛮军必定要向邕州入寇，请求分兵屯驻于容州、藤州。
English: In August, Wei Cao, the host of the Lingnan Festival, appealed to the imperial court, claiming that the Nanzhao barbarian army would definitely invade Zhangzhou, and requested that the detachment be stationed in Yongzhou and Fujian.

古文：夔王滋薨。
现代文：夔王李滋去世。
English: Gong Wang Lizhi passed away.

古文：敕以阁门使吴德应等为馆驿使。台谏上言：故事，御史巡驿，不应忽以内臣代之。
现代文：唐懿宗颁下诏，任命阁门使宦官吴德应等人为馆驿使，御史台和谏官向唐懿宗上言劝谏：按照惯例，两京以御史一人掌管馆驿事务，号馆驿使，不应该突然以内廷宦官来取代御史台朝臣。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang issued an edict, appointing the eunuch Wu Deyong and other eunuchs as imperial envoys, and the imperial historian and eunuchs appealed to Emperor Taizong of Tang for advice: According to the usual practice, the two capitals should have one imperial historian in charge of imperial affairs and the imperial envoy, and the imperial eunuch should not suddenly replace the imperial historian and courtier.

古文：上谕以敕命已行，不可复改。
现代文：唐懿宗声言敕令已经颁布，不可更改。
English: The edict of the Tang Dynasty Jurchen Sect has been promulgated and cannot be changed.

古文：左拾遗刘蜕上言： 昔楚子县陈，得申叔一言而复封之；太宗发卒修乾元殿，闻张玄素谏，即日罢之。
现代文：左拾遗刘蜕上言： 春秋时期楚国灭亡陈国，将陈国置为楚国的一个县，由于申叔的一言劝谏，楚王就恢复了陈国。当年唐太宗征发役卒修筑乾元殿，听到张玄素的劝谏，当天就停止了这项工程。
English: Left: Liu Ye's last words: During the Spring and Autumn Period, the State of Chu was overthrown by the State of Chen, and Chen was made a county of the State of Chu. As a result of Uncle Shen's words of advice, the King of Chu restored the State of Chen. In that year, Emperor Taizong of Tang sent an envoy to build the Qianyuan Palace, and upon hearing Zhang Xuansu's advice, the project was stopped on the same day.

古文：自古明君所尚者，从谏如流，岂有已行而不改！
现代文：自古以来圣明的君主所崇尚的，是善于纳谏，从谏如流，哪有借口已经行文就不改正的！
English: What has been revered by enlightened monarchs since ancient times is that they are good at reading and writing, and they do not correct what has already been written under any pretext.

古文：且敕自陛下出之，自陛下改之，何为不可！ 
现代文：而且诏敕是由陛下颁布发出，再由陛下改正，有什么不可以的呢！ 
English: Moreover, the edict was promulgated and issued by His Majesty, and then corrected by His Majesty, so what's not to like!

古文：弗听。
现代文：唐懿宗还是不听。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：黠戛斯遣其臣合伊难支表求经籍及每年遣使走马请历，又欲讨回鹘，使安西以来悉归唐，不许。
现代文：黠戛斯派遣使臣伊难支向唐懿宗上表，请求唐朝的经籍文书，并要求每年派遗使者往来请颁唐历，又希望征讨回鹘，使安西广大地区全部归附唐朝，唐懿宗不予批准。
English: Kangxi dispatched the envoy Yinanzhi to Tang Xizong's table, requesting the Tang Dynasty's scripture documents, and asked to send emissaries every year to request the issuance of the Tang calendar, and also hoped to solicit the return of the imperial rescript, so that the vast area of Anxi would all be attached to the Tang Dynasty. Tang Xizong did not approve.

古文：冬，十月，甲戌，以长安尉、集贤校理令狐滈为左拾遗。
现代文：冬季，十月，甲戌，唐懿宗任命长安县尉、集贤书院校理令狐为左拾遗。
English: In winter, in October, Emperor Jiajing of the Tang Dynasty appointed the Chang'an County Lieutenant and the Jixian School and College Li Linghu as the left relic.

古文：乙亥，左拾遗刘蜕上言： 滈专家无子弟之法，布衣行公相之权。 
现代文：乙亥，左拾遗刘蜕向唐懿宗上言： 令狐治家没有官家子弟的家法，任命他犹如让平民百行使肥卿宰相的权力。 
English: Yi Hai, the left-handed Liu Bei appealed to Tang Xizong: Let the fox rule the family without the family law of the official's son, appointing him is like letting a hundred civilians exercise the power of the prime minister of Hijing.

古文：起居郎张云言： 滈，父綯用李涿为安南，致南蛮至今为梗，由滈纳贿，陷父于恶。 
现代文：起居郎张云说： 令狐的父亲令狐用李涿为安南都护，致使南诏蛮军至今仍狂妄侵寇，当时正因为令狐收陬李涿的贿赂，使他父亲背上恶名。 
English: Zhang Yun, the son-in-law of Linghu, said: Linghu's father, Linghu, used Li Yao as the protector of the capital of Annam, causing the barbarian army of Nan Yao to still aggress aggress aggressively invade. At that time, it was precisely because Linghu accepted Li Yao's bribe that his father gained a bad reputation.

古文：十一月，丁酉，云复上言： 滈，父綯执政之时，人号 白衣宰相 。 
现代文：十一月，丁酉，张云再次向唐懿宗上言： 令狐在父令狐当宰相执掌朝政时，人们称他为 白衣宰相 。
English: In November, Dingyao, Zhang Yun once again appealed to Tang Xizong: Ling Foo, when his father, Ling Foo, was the prime minister in charge of the imperial government, people called him the prime minister in white.

古文：滈亦上表引避，乃改詹事府司直。
现代文：令狐由于舆论的攻击，也向唐懿宗上表要求引退躲避，于是唐懿宗将令狐改任为太子詹事府司府司直。
English: Due to the attack of public opinion, Ling Foo also asked Tang Xizong to retire to avoid it, so Tang Xizong appointed Ling Foo as Prince Zhan's prefectural governor.

古文：辛巳，废宿泗观察使，复以徐州为观察府，以濠、泗隶焉。
现代文：辛巳，朝廷废除宿泗观察使，再将徐州升格为观察使府，将濠州、泗州隶属于徐州观察使府管辖。
English: Soon after, the imperial court abolished the Suqian Observation Mission, upgraded Xuzhou to an Observation Mission, and placed Zhangzhou and Ganzhou under the jurisdiction of the Xuzhou Observation Mission.

古文：十二月，南诏寇西川。
现代文：十二月，南诏军队入寇唐朝西川地区。
English: In December, the Nanzhao army invaded the Tang Dynasty in the Xichuan area.

古文：昭义节度使沈询奴归秦，与询侍婢通，询欲杀之，未果。乙酉，归秦结牙将作乱，攻府第，杀询。
现代文：昭义节度使沈询的奴隶名叫归秦，与沈询的女婢通奸，沈询想杀死归秦，还没有动手；乙酉，归秦勾结昭义牙将作乱，进攻节度使府内沈询的住宅，将沈询杀死。
English: The slave named Gui Qin, who was made by Zhao Yi Jie, committed adultery with the maidservant of Shen Yi Jie. Shen Yi Jie wanted to kill Gui Qin, but had not yet done so. Acetylene, which was made by Gui Qin in collusion with Zhao Yi Jie, caused a disturbance, attacked the residence of Shen Yi Jie in the palace, and killed Shen Yi Jie.

古文：懿宗昭圣恭惠孝皇帝上咸通五年春，正月，以京兆尹李蠙为昭义节度使，取归秦心肝以祭沈询。
现代文：咸通五年春季，正月，唐懿宗任使京兆尹李为昭义节度使，李到任后将归秦的心肝挖出来，用以祭奠沈询的亡灵。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Hamdang, in the first month of the year, Tang Xizong appointed the envoy Jing Zhaoyun Li as the envoy of the Zhao Yi Festival. After Li took office, he dug out the heart and liver that belonged to Qin and used it to pay tribute to the dead souls of Shen Ying.

古文：淮南节度使令狐綯为其子滈讼冤。
现代文：淮南节度使令狐为他的儿子令狐诉冤。
English: Huainan Festival made Lingfuxu sue for his son Lingfuxu.

古文：贬张云兴元少尹，刘蜕华阴令，赦曰： 虽嘉蹇谔之忠，难逃疏易之责。 
现代文：唐懿宗将张云贬为兴元府少尹，将刘蜕为华阴县令并颁布诏敕说： 虽然嘉奖直言之士的忠诚，也不能不追究出言草率的责任。 
English: Tang Xizong demoted Zhang Yun to Xingyuanfu Shao Yin, and Liu Wei to Huayin County, and issued an edict saying: Although the loyalty of the outspoken person is commended, it is necessary to investigate the responsibility of hasty speech.

古文：丙午，西川奏，南诏寇巂州，刺史喻士珍破之，获千馀人。
现代文：丙午，西川节度使奏告朝廷，南诏蛮军侵寇州，州刺史珍将蛮军击败，俘获一千余人。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, the envoy of the Saikawa Festival reported to the imperial court that the Nanzhao barbarian army invaded Kozu, and Shizhen defeated the barbarian army and captured more than a thousand people.

古文：诏发右神策兵五千及诸道兵戍之。
现代文：唐懿宗颁布诏令，调发右神策军五千人以及诸道军队往西川戍守。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang issued an imperial edict, dispatching five thousand soldiers of the Right Divine Protection Army and the armies of various provinces to defend the West River.

古文：忠武大将颜庆复请筑新安、遏戎二城，从之。
现代文：忠武镇大将颜复请求修筑新安、遏戎二座城堡，唐懿宗予以批准。
English: The general of Zhongwu Town, Yan Fu, requested the construction of two castles in Xin'an and Huanwu, which was approved by Tang Yanzong.

古文：以容管经略使张茵兼句当交州事。益海门镇兵满二万五千人，令茵进取安南。
现代文：唐懿宗任命管经略使张茵兼管交州事；又向海门镇增补军队，使驻军达二万五千人，于是命令张茵进兵收复安南。
English: Tang Xizong appointed Zhang Yin to be in charge of economic affairs and also in charge of state affairs; he also added troops to Haimen Town, bringing the garrison to twenty-five thousand, and then ordered Zhang Yin to enter the army to recover Annan.

古文：二月，己巳，以刑部尚书、盐铁转运使李福同平章事、充西川节度使。
现代文：二月，已巳，唐懿宗任命弄部尚书、盐铁转运使李福挂同平章事衔，出任西川节度使。
English: In February, Tang Xizong had already appointed Li Fu, the chief of the Department of Printing and Writing and the Department of Salt and Iron Transportation, to hold the same title as that of Pingzhang and to serve as the chief of the Nishikawa Festival.

古文：甲申，前西川节度使萧鄴左迁山南西道观察使。
现代文：甲申，前西川节度使萧邺降职调任山南西道观察使。
English: Gao Shin, the former West Sichuan governor, demoted Xiao Yao and transferred him to the position of Shannan West Road observation envoy.

古文：三月，丁酉，彗星出于娄，长三尺。
现代文：三月，丁酉，有彗星出自娄宿，长三尺。
English: In March, Dingyao, there was a comet that came from Poyang, which was three feet long.

古文：己亥，司天监奏： 按《星经》，是名含誉，瑞星也。 
现代文：己亥，司天监奏告， 按照《星经》的记载，这颗彗星的名字含有荣誉，是一颗象征祥瑞的彗星。 
English: According to the records of "The Book of Stars," the name of this comet contains honor, and it is a comet symbolizing auspiciousness.

古文：上主大喜。
现代文：唐懿宗听后极为欢喜。
English: Tang Yanzong was very happy after listening to the performance.

古文：请宣示中外，编诸史策。 
现代文：司天监又奏： 请皇上将彗星告吉祥之事宣告中外，并在史策上作记载。 
English: The chief overseer of heaven also played: Ask the emperor to announce the comet as a auspicious event in China and abroad, and make a record of it in history.

古文：从之。
现代文：唐懿宗表示同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：康承训至邕州，蛮寇益炽，诏发许、滑、青、汴、兗、郓、宣、润八道兵以授之。
现代文：唐岭南西道节度使康承训来到邕州，南诏蛮军的侵寇更加凶猛，唐懿宗于是颁发诏书调集许州、滑州、青州、汴州、兖州、郓州、宣州、润州八道军队交他指挥。
English: The festival in the southwestern province of Tangling made Kang Chengxun come to Ganzhou, and the invasion of the barbarian army of Nanzhao became more ferocious. Tang Xizong then issued an edict to mobilize the troops of eight provinces: Huzhou, Nanzhou, Qingzhou, Ganzhou, Ganzhou, Ganzhou, Xuanzhou, and Runzhou, and put them under his command.

古文：承训不设斥候，南诏帅群蛮近六万寇邕州，将入境，承训乃遣六道兵凡万人拒之，以獠为导，绐之。
现代文：康承训不设哨兵，南诏军率群蛮近站万人侵寇邕州，即将入边境，康承训才派六道兵总计一万人去抵抗，以獠人为向导，被獠人哄骗。
English: Kangchenjunga training did not set up sentries. The Nanzhao army led a group of nearly 10,000 people to invade Luzhou and was about to enter the border. Kangchenjunga training only sent a total of 10,000 soldiers from six provinces to resist. They were deceived by the eunuchs as guides.

古文：敌至，不设备，五道兵八千人皆没，惟天平军后一日至，得免。
现代文：蛮军开到，唐军不设戒备，五道军队八千人全被消灭，只有天平军晚一天赶到，得以幸免。
English: When the barbarian army arrived, the Tang army did not set up a guard, and all eight thousand troops from the five provinces were wiped out. Only the Tianping Army arrived one day later and was spared.

古文：承训闻之，惶怖不知所为。
现代文：康承训得知消息，惶恐不安，不知道怎么办才好。
English: When Kang Chengxun learned the news, he panicked and did not know what to do.

古文：节度副使李行素帅众治壕栅，甫毕，蛮军已合围。
现代文：岭南西道节度副使李行素率领部众开挖壕沟，修筑栅栏，正好修治完毕，南诏蛮军已将邕州城团团围住。
English: Li Xingsu, deputy commander of the Lingnan West Road, led the troops to dig trenches and build fences. Just as the repairs were completed, the Nanzhao barbarian army had surrounded Zhangzhou City.

古文：留四日，治攻具，将就，诸将请夜分道斫蛮营，承训不许，有天平小校再三力争，乃许之。
现代文：蛮军留在城下四天，制造攻城器械，行将完工，城内唐军诸将请求康承训乘夜分几路袭击蛮军营帐，康承训不予批准。有一位天平军小校再三力争，康承训才同意。
English: The barbarian army remained under the city for four days, making siege equipment, and was about to be completed. The generals of the Tang army in the city requested Kangchenjunga to attack the barbarian army camp several times at night. Kangchenjunga's training was not approved. A small school of the Tianping Army repeatedly tried, but Kangchenjunga agreed.

古文：小校将勇士三百，夜，缒而出，散烧蛮营，斩首五百馀级。
现代文：天平小校率领勇士三百人，乘夜用绳索由城上吊出，到处放火烧南诏蛮军的营帐，斩蛮军首级五百余级。
English: Tianping Junior High School, led by 300 warriors, took the night to use ropes to hang out of the city, set fire to the camp of the Nanzhao barbarian army everywhere, and cut off more than 500 first-level barbarians.

古文：蛮大惊，间一日，解围去。
现代文：南诏蛮军大为惊恐，只停留了一天，即解围而去。
English: The barbarian army of Nanzhao was greatly alarmed and only stayed for one day, after which they left.

古文：承训乃遣诸军数千追之，所杀虏不满三百级，皆溪獠胁从者。
现代文：康承训于是派遣诸道军队数千人追击，所杀和俘获蛮军不过三百人，且都是被南诏胁从入伍的诸溪獠人。
English: Kang Chengxun then dispatched thousands of troops from various provinces to pursue the barbarians, killing and capturing no more than three hundred barbarians, all of whom were Zhuxi soldiers who had been coerced by Nanzhao into joining the army.

古文：承训腾奏告捷，云大破蛮贼，中外皆贺。
现代文：康承训立即向朝廷上表奏告胜利，声称大破南诏蛮寇，朝廷内外都表示祝贺。
English: Kang Chengxun immediately reported his victory to the imperial court, claiming that he had defeated the Southern Zhao barbarian invaders. Both inside and outside the imperial court expressed their congratulations.

古文：夏，四月，以兵部侍郎、判户部萧置同平章事。
现代文：夏季，四月，懿宗任鸽命兵部侍郎、判户部萧为同平章事。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Taizong appointed Dove to be the attendant of the military department, and Xiao to be the judge of the household department.

古文：置，复之孙也。
现代文：萧是萧复的孙子。
English: Xiao is the grandson of Xiao Fu.

古文：加康承训检校右仆射，赏破蛮之功也。
现代文：唐懿宗加给康承训检校右仆射的官衔，奖赏他大破南诏蛮军的功劳。
English: Tang Xizong gave Kang Chenggong the official title of "training inspection school right-handed archer" and rewarded him for his great achievement in defeating the barbarian army of Nanzhao.

古文：自馀奏功受赏者，皆承训子弟亲昵，烧营将校不迁一级，由是军中怨怒，声流道路。
现代文：其余上报给朝廷而受到奖赏的人，都是康承训的子弟或亲信左右；而烧南诏蛮军营帐的天平军小校却没升迁一级，于是军中怨恨愤怒，流言蜚语传布于道路。
English: The rest of those who reported to the imperial court and were rewarded were all the sons or relatives of Kang Chengxun; however, the Tianping Military Elementary School, which burned the camp of Nan Zhaobar, was not promoted to the first level. As a result, there was resentment and anger in the army, and rumors spread on the road.

古文：五月，敕： 徐州土风雄劲，甲士精强，比因罢节，颇多逃匿，宜令徐泗团练使选募军士三千人赴邕州防戍，待岭外事宁，即与代归。 
现代文：五月，懿宗颁布诏敕： 徐州地方风俗雄健刚劲，军队精锐强悍，近因罢废节度使府，不少人逃亡藏匿于山林草泽，所以命令罢废节度使府，不少人逃亡藏匿于山林草泽，所以命令徐泗团练使选拔召募军士三千人赶赴邕州戍守边境，等到岭外战事宁息下来，给予替代，让他们归还。 
English: In May, Emperor Taizong promulgated the following edict: Xuzhou local customs are strong and vigorous, the army is elite and powerful. Recently, many people fled and hid in the mountains and forests due to the cancellation of the festival envoy, so he ordered the cancellation of the festival envoy, many people fled and hid in the mountains and forests, so he ordered the Xuyi Regiment to train, select, recruit and recruit three thousand soldiers to rush to Bozhou to guard the border, and wait until the fighting outside Lingyin subsided, give them a replacement, and let them return.

古文：秋，七月，西川奏两林鬼主邀南诏蛮，败之，杀获甚众。保塞城使杜守连不从南诏，帅众诣黎州降。
现代文：秋季，七月，西川节度使奏告朝廷，称两林部落酋长邀击南诏蛮军，将蛮军击败，杀死和俘获很多南诏军；南诏所署的保塞城使杜守连不服从南诏蛮军的命令，率领部众到黎州归降唐朝。
English: In the autumn, in July, Xichuan Jiedu envoy sent a report to the imperial court, saying that the two Lin tribal chiefs invited the Nanzhao barbarian army to attack, defeated the barbarian army, killed and captured many Nanzhao army; the Bosei city envoy of the Nanzhao government did not obey the order of the Nanzhao barbarian army, and led the people to Li Prefecture to return to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：岭南东道节度使韦宙具知康承训所为，以书白宰相。承训亦自疑惧，累表辞疾，乃以承训为右武卫大将军、分司，以容管经略使张茵为岭南西道节度使，复以容管四州别为经略使。
现代文：岭南东道节度使韦宙对康承训的所作所为一清二楚，写信告诉当朝宰相；康承训也自己感到疑虑恐惧，多次向朝廷上表请求辞官养病，于是唐懿宗调康承训为右武卫大将军、分司东都，任命容管经略使张茵为岭南西道节度使，又将容管所辖四州另外设置经略使。
English: The host of the Lingnan Festival made Wei Zhou know exactly what Kang Chengxun had done, and he wrote a letter to the prime minister of the time; Kang Chengxun also felt doubts and fears, and repeatedly asked the imperial court for a resignation to recover from illness. Therefore, Tang Xizong transferred Kang Chengxun to be the general of the Right Division of Wuwei and the deputy governor of Dongdu, appointed Zhang Yin, the deputy governor of Lingnan, to be the deputy governor of the West Division of Lingnan, and also set up deputy governors of the four states under the jurisdiction of the deputy governor.

古文：时南诏知邕州空竭，不复入寇，茵久之不敢进军取安南。
现代文：这时南诏知道邕州经过几次侵寇，财物已经空竭，于是不再入寇，张茵坐镇邕州很久，不进军收复安南。
English: At this time, Nanzhao knew that Bozhou had been invaded several times and the property had been depleted, so he did not invade again. Zhang Yin stayed in Bozhou for a long time and did not march to recover Annan.

古文：夏侯孜荐骁卫将军高骈代之，乃以骈为安南都护、本管经略招讨使，茵所将兵悉以授之。
现代文：夏侯孜于是推荐骁卫将军高骈代张茵为岭南西道节度使，唐懿宗也就任命高骈为安南都护、本管经略招讨使，将张茵统领的军队全部交给高骈指挥。
English: Therefore, Xia Houzhe recommended Gao Kun, the general of the Wei Dynasty, to replace Zhang Yin as the chief envoy of the Lingnan West Road Festival. Tang Shizong also appointed Gao Kun as the guardian of the capital of Annan and the chief envoy of the economic strategy, and put all the troops led by Zhang Yin under the command of Gao Kun.

古文：骈，崇文之孙也，世在禁军。
现代文：高骈是高崇文的孙子，世代在禁军中服役。
English: Gao Jun is the grandson of Gao Chongwen, who served in the imperial army for generations.

古文：骈颇读书，好谈今古，两军宦官多誉之，累廷右神策都虞候；党项叛，将禁兵万人戍长武，屡有功，迁秦州防御使，复有功，故委以安南。
现代文：高骈读了不少书，喜欢谈论今古时事，左右两神策军的宦官统帅对他多有称誉，经过多次升迁任右神策军都虞侯；常项族叛乱，高骈率领禁军一万人戊守长武，屡有战功，因此升任秦州防御使，又有战功，所以委以经略安南的重任。
English: Gao Wei read a lot of books and liked to talk about contemporary and ancient current affairs. The eunuch commander-in-chief of the left and right divine forces had a lot of praise for him. After many promotions, he was appointed as the governor of the right divine forces; the Changxiang rebellion, Gao Wei led the forbidden army of ten thousand people and guarded Changwu, and had many war exploits. Therefore, he was promoted to the Qinzhou defense envoy, and also had war exploits, so he was entrusted with the important task of guiding Annan.

古文：冬，十一月，以门下侍郎、同平章事夏侯孜同平章事，充河东节度使。
现代文：冬季，十一月，唐懿宗命门下侍郎、同平章事夏侯孜仍领同平章事衔，出任东节度使。
English: In winter, in November, Tongping Zhangjiakou, Tongping's servant, still held the title of Tongping Zhangjiakou and served as the East Festival envoy.

古文：壬寅，以翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎路岩同平章事，时年三十六。
现代文：壬寅，唐懿宗任命翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎路岩为同平章事；当时路岩才三十六岁。
English: In Ren Yin, Tang Xizong appointed Hanlin Baccalaureate Zong Ji, and Heibun Chamberlain Lu Yan as Tongping Zhangji; at that time, Lu Yan was only thirty-six years old.

古文：懿宗昭圣恭惠孝皇帝上咸通六年春，正月，丁已，始以懿安皇后配飨宪宗室。
现代文：咸通六年春季，正月，丁巳，唐懿宗同意将懿安皇后的神位配置于唐宪宗神主像的庙室。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Hamdang, in the first month of Ding Si, Tang Xizong agreed to place the throne of the Queen of An in the temple room of the main statue of Tang Xizong.

古文：时王皞复为礼院检讨官，更申前议，朝廷竟从之。
现代文：当时王再任礼院检讨官，重申先前的议论，朝廷最后批准了他的奏议。
English: At that time, Wang was re-appointed as the procurator of the People's Court of the People's Republic of China, reiterated the previous discussion, and the court finally approved his proposal.

古文：诸道进私白者，闽中为多，故宦官多闽人。
现代文：地方诸道向朝廷进献阉割小儿，以闽中为最多，所以官大多是闽人。
English: Local sects presented castrated children to the imperial court, with the highest number of castrated children, so most officials were eunuchs.

古文：福建观察使杜宣猷每寒食遣吏分祭其先垅，宦官德之，庚申，以宣猷为宣歙观察使，时人谓之 敕使墓户 。
现代文：福建观察使杜宣猷每当寒食之时，都要派遣官员分别去祭祀宦官祖先的坟墓，宦官们感恩戴德，在唐懿宗面前为杜宣猷说好话，庚申，唐懿宗任命杜宣猷为宣歙观察使，当时人戏称杜宣猷为 宦官敕使的守墓户 。
English: Fujian observation made Du Xuanqian send officials to the tomb of the eunuch's ancestor every time there was a cold meal. The eunuchs were so grateful that they spoke well of Du Xuanqian in front of Tang Xizong. In other words, Tang Xizong appointed Du Xuanqian as the eunuch's observation envoy. At that time, people jokingly called Du Xuanqian the eunuch's guardian of the tomb.

古文：三月，中书侍郎、同平章事萧置薨。
现代文：三月，中书侍郎、同平章事、萧去世。
English: In March, Zhongshu's attendant, Tongping Zhangji, and Xiao passed away.

古文：夏，四月，以前东川节度使高璩为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：夏季，四月，唐懿宗任使前东川节度使高琚为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
English: In the summer, in April, the former Dongchuan Sect of the Tang Dynasty appointed Gao Jun to be the attendant of the military department and the same rank.

古文：璩，元裕之子也。
现代文：高琚是高元裕的儿子。
English: Gao Jun is the son of Gao Yuan Yu.

古文：杨收建议，以 蛮寇积年未平，两河兵戍岭南冒瘴雾物故者什六七，请于江西积粟，募强弩三万人，以应接岭南，道近便，仍建节以重其权。 
现代文：杨收向唐懿宗建议，以 南诏蛮寇的侵扰多年不能平定，两河军队远戍岭南由于瘴气和水土不服而死掉的人有十分之六七，请求在江西屯积军粮，召募强健的弓弩手三万人，用以应接岭南的军事需要，距离岭南也较近，军队调动也更方便，并且在江西建节设军镇，以加重江西镇帅的权力。 
English: Yang Hui suggested to Tang Xizong that the intrusion of the barbarian invaders from the south could not be quelled for many years, and that the two rivers' armies were far away from Lingnan, and that 67 out of 10 people died due to bad air, water and soil. He requested that military grain be stockpiled in Jiangxi, and that 30,000 strong archers be recruited to meet the military needs of Lingnan. The distance to Lingnan was also relatively close, and it was more convenient to mobilize the army. In addition, a military town was built in Jiangxi to increase the power of the commander of the Jiangxi town.

古文：从之。
现代文：唐懿宗表示同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：五月，辛丑，置镇南军于洪州。
现代文：五月，辛丑，唐懿宗下令于洪州设置镇南军。
English: In May, Xinwu, Tang Yizong ordered to set up the Zhennan Army in Hongzhou.

古文：巂州刺史喻士珍贪狯，掠两林蛮以易金。南诏复寇巂州，两林蛮开门纳之，南诏尽杀戍卒，士珍降之。
现代文：州刺史喻士珍贪鄙狡猾，掠夺两林蛮人部落，强迫两林蛮人用黄金赎身；南诏蛮军再次侵寇州，两林蛮族人于是开城门接纳南诏军，南诏蛮军入州城杀尽唐军戍卒，喻士珍向南诏蛮军投降。
English: Zhou Shishi Yu Shizhen was greedy and cunning. He plundered the barbarian tribes of the Two Forests and forced the barbarians of the Two Forests to redeem themselves with gold. The Nanzhao barbarian army invaded Cangzhou again. The barbarians of the Two Forests then opened the city gate to accept the Nanzhao barbarian army. The Nanzhao barbarian army entered the city of Cangzhou and killed all the foot soldiers of the Tang army. Yu Shizhen surrendered to the Nanzhao barbarian army.

古文：壬寅，以桂管观察使严譔为镇南节度使。
现代文：壬寅，唐懿宗任命桂管观察使来为镇南军节度使。
English: Jinyin, Tang Xizong appointed the Gui Guan observation envoy to be the festival envoy of the Zhenan Army.

古文：譔，震之从孙也
现代文：严是是来震的从孙。
English: Yan is the son-in-law of Zhen.

古文：六月，高璩薨。
现代文：六月，高琚去世。
English: In June, Gao Yao passed away.

古文：以御史大夫徐商为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：唐懿宗任命御史大夫徐商为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang appointed Grand Historian Xu Shang as the attendant of the military department and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：秋，七月，立皇子侃为郢王，俨为普王。
现代文：秋季，七月，唐懿宗立皇子李侃为郢王，立李俨为普王。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Emperor of Tang Dynasty established the prince Li Kan as the king of Qi, and established the king of Pu as the king of Pu.

古文：高骈治兵于海门，未进。监军李维周恶骈，欲去之，屡趣骈使进军。
现代文：高骈在海门整治军队，尚未进兵；宦官监军李维周讨厌高骈，想将高骈挤走，多次催促高骈，要他赶快向安南进军。
English: Gao Gan was tidying up the army at Haimen and had not yet sent in the troops; the eunuch military overseer Li Wei Zhou hated Gao Gan and wanted to push Gao Gan away. He urged Gao Gan many times to march to Annan as soon as possible.

古文：骈以五千人先济，约维周发兵应援。骈既行，维周拥馀众，不发一卒以继之。
现代文：高骈派五千人先渡海进发，与李维周约好，让他发兵前去支援；高骈既已出发，李维周接管其余留在海门的军队，却不调一兵一卒继后跟进。
English: Gao Gan sent five thousand men to cross the sea first, and made an appointment with Li Wei Zhou, asking him to send troops to support; Gao Gan had already set out, and Li Wei Zhou took over the remaining troops left at the sea gate, but did not transfer a single soldier to follow.

古文：九月，骈至南定，峰州蛮众近五万，方获田，骈掩击，大破之，收其所获以食军。
现代文：九月，高骈率军来到南定县，峰州的蛮军五万人正在田里收割水稻，高骈突然袭击，大破蛮军，得蛮人所收获的稻米，用来供应军粮。
English: In September, Gao Rong led his army to Nanding County. The barbarian army of 50,000 people from Fengzhou was harvesting rice in the fields. Gao Rong suddenly attacked and defeated the barbarian army. The rice harvested by the barbarians was used to supply military grain.

古文：冬，十二月，壬子，太皇太后郑氏崩。
现代文：冬季，十二月，壬子，太皇太后郑氏驾崩。
English: In winter, in December, the Empress Dowager Zheng passed away.

古文：懿宗昭圣恭惠孝皇帝上咸通七年
现代文：咸通七年
English: Hamdang seven years old

古文：春，二月，归义节度使张义潮奏北庭回鹘固俊克西州、北庭、轮台、清镇等城。
现代文：春季，二月，归义军节度使张义潮奏告朝廷，称北庭回鹘酋领仆固俊从吐蕃手中攻克西州、北庭、轮台、清镇等城。
English: In the spring, in February, the festival of returning to the rebels caused Zhang Yichao to report to the imperial court that Gu Jun, the leader of the Northern Court Hui chiefs, conquered Xizhou, Beiting, Luntai, Qingzhen and other cities from the hands of Tubo.

古文：论恐热寓居廓州，纠合旁侧诸部，欲为边患，皆不从。所向尽为仇敌，无所容。
现代文：论恐热居留于廓州，纠集附近诸吐蕃部落，企图侵犯唐边境，诸部落都不听从；四周部落都是论恐热的仇敌，使论恐热无处容身。
English: On the subject of fear and heat, he stayed in Guozhou, gathered the nearby tribes of Tubo, and attempted to invade the Tang border, but the tribes did not listen; the surrounding tribes were the enemies of On the subject of fear and heat, so that On the subject of fear and heat had nowhere to hide.

古文：仇人认告拓跋怀光于鄯州，怀光引兵击破之。
现代文：仇人将论热的处境报告鄯州的拓跋怀光，拓跋怀光率领军队将论恐热部击败。
English: Enemies will report the situation of the heat to Guizhou's Tuoba Huaguang, and Tuoba Huaguang will lead the army to defeat the heat-fearing department.

古文：三月，戊寅，以河东节度使刘潼为西川节度使。
现代文：三月，戊寅，唐懿宗任命河东节度使刘潼为西川节度使。
English: In March, Wu Yin, Tang Xizong appointed the Hedong Festival envoy Liu Ye as the West River Festival envoy.

古文：初，南诏围巂州，东蛮浪稽部竭力助之，遂屠其城，卑笼部怨南诏杀其父兄，导忠武戍兵袭浪稽，灭之。
现代文：起初，南诏蛮军围困州，东蛮浪稽部竭力协助南诏军，于是攻陷并屠杀州城，卑龙部族对南诏蛮军杀害他们的父史怨恨无比，因此引导唐忠武镇戍军袭击浪稽部落，将浪稽部消灭。
English: At first, the Nanzhao barbarian army besieged the state, and the Eastern barbarian surveying department tried its best to assist the Nanzhao army, and then attacked and slaughtered the state capital. The Bailong tribe was extremely resentful of the Nanzhao barbarian army killing their father, so they led the Tang Zhongwuzhen barbarian army to attack the surveying tribe and eliminate the surveying department.

古文：南诏由是怨唐。
现代文：南诏为此怨恨唐朝。
English: Nanzhao resented the Tang Dynasty for this.

古文：南诏遣清平官董成等诣成都，节度使李福盛仪卫以见之。
现代文：南诏派遣清平官董成等人到成都，唐西川节度使李福排列盛大的仪仗对来迎接董成。
English: Nanzhao dispatched the Qing peace officer Dong Cheng and others to Chengdu, and the Tang Xichuan Festival made Li Fu arrange a grand ceremonial match to welcome Dong Cheng.

古文：故事，南诏使见节度使，拜伏于庭，成等曰： 骠信已应天顺人，我见节度使当抗礼。 
现代文：按以前的惯例，南诏的使者见唐朝的节度使，要在院庭伏拜行礼，董成等人声称： 南诏骠信已应天顺人，自为君主，我见贵国节度使应当分庭抗礼。 
English: According to the previous practice, the emissaries of the Nanzhao should prostrate themselves in the courtyard when they saw the festival envoys of the Tang Dynasty. Dong Cheng and others claimed: The Nanzhao's message has been accepted by heaven and earth, and he is the monarch. I think the festival envoys of your country should bow in front of the court.

古文：传言往返，自旦至日中不决。将士皆愤怒，福乃命捽而殴之，因械系于狱。
现代文：传话的人往返多次，从早晨直到中午无法决定；西川将士对南诏使者的傲慢都极为愤怒，李福于是命令将士揪往董成等人殴打，将他们用链子锁进监狱。
English: The messenger went back and forth several times, and it was impossible to decide from the morning until noon; the Saikawa officers were extremely angry at the arrogance of the Nanzhao envoy, and Li Fu then ordered the officers to beat Dong Cheng and others and lock them in prison with chains.

古文：刘潼到镇，释之，奏遣还国。
现代文：刘潼来到西川镇治成都，将董成等人释放，并奏请唐懿宗遣董成等人回南诏国。
English: Liu Bei came to Xichuan Town to settle Chengdu, released Dong Cheng and others, and requested Tang Yanzong to send Dong Cheng and others back to Nan Zhaoguo.

古文：诏召成等至京师，见于别殿，厚赐，劳而遣之。
现代文：唐懿宗颁下诏书令召董成等人至京师长安，接见于别殿，厚给赏赐，慰劳赏赐，慰劳备至，并遂他们回南诏。
English: Tang Xizong issued an imperial edict to summon Dong Cheng and others to Beijing Shi Chang'an, to be received at the villa, to be rewarded, to be rewarded, to be rewarded, and to be prepared, and then they returned to Nanzhao.

古文：成德节度使王绍懿，在镇十年，为政宽简，军民便之。
现代文：成德节度使王绍懿，在镇主掌军政十年，为政宽厚简便，受到部下军民的称赞。
English: Wang Shaoqi, who was in charge of the military government for ten years during the Chengde Festival, was praised by his subordinates for his lenient and simple politics.

古文：疾病，召兄绍鼎之子都知兵马使景崇而告之曰： 吾兄以汝之幼，以军政授我。
现代文：王绍懿病重，将兄长王绍鼎的儿子成德都知兵马使王景崇召来，告谕他说： 我兄王绍鼎因为当时你还年幼，将成德的军政大权授予我掌握。
English: Wang Shaoqi was seriously ill, so he summoned his elder brother Wang Shao Ding's son Chengde Duzhi Terracotta Warriors and Horses to Wang Jingzong and told him: My brother Wang Shao Ding, because you were still young at the time, entrusted Chengde's military and political power to me.

古文：汝今长矣，我复以军政归汝。
现代文：你今天已长成人，我再将军政权转归于你。
English: Today, you have become an adult, and I will transfer the general's power to you.

古文：努力为之，上忠朝廷，下和邻籓，勿坠吾兄之业，汝之功也。 
现代文：希望你努力效劳，上要忠诚于朝廷，下要结好于相邻的藩镇，不要败坏我史王绍鼎开创的基业，这就是你的功业啊。 
English: I hope you will work hard. Above all, you should be loyal to the imperial court, and below, you should be good to the neighboring towns. Don't destroy the foundation that I, Shi Wang Shao Ding, have created. This is your achievement.

古文：言竟而薨。
现代文：说完就去世了。
English: After saying this, he died.

古文：闰月，吐蕃寇邠宁，节度使薛弘宗拒却之。
现代文：闰三月，吐蕃的军队侵寇唐宁镇，宁节度使薛弘宗率军拒战，将吐蕃军赶走。
English: In the intercalary month of March, the army of Tubo invaded the town of Tangning. At the Ning Festival, Xue Hongzong and his army refused to fight and drove the Tubo army away.

古文：夏，四月，辛巳，贬前西川节度使李福为蕲王傅。
现代文：夏季四月，唐懿宗将前西川节度使李福贬官，任他为蕲王李缉的师傅。
English: In the summer of April, Tang Xizong demoted Li Fu from the former Xichuan Festival and appointed him as the master of the Dragon King Li Ji.

古文：五月，葬孝明皇后于景陵之侧，主祔别庙。
现代文：五月，将孝明皇后安葬于唐宪宗的景陵旁侧，将她的神主象配于另外一个庙室。
English: In May, Empress Xiaoming was buried next to the mausoleum of Tang Xianzong, and her statue was placed in another room of the temple.

古文：六月，魏博节度使何弘敬薨，军中立其子左司马全皞为留后。
现代文：六月，魏博节度使何弘敬去世，魏博军中立何弘敬的儿子左司马何全为留后。
English: In June, the Wei Bo Festival caused He Hongjing's death, and He Hongjing's son, Zuo Sima Hequan, who was a neutral in the Wei Bo Army, stayed behind.

古文：以王景崇为成德留后。
现代文：朝廷任命王景崇为成德留后。
English: The imperial court appointed Wang Jingsong as Chengde's successor.

古文：南诏酋龙遣善阐节度使杨缉思助安南节度使段酋迁守交趾，以范昵些为安南都统，赵诺眉为扶邪都统。
现代文：南诏国王尊龙遣阐节度使杨缉、安南节度使段酋迁驻守交趾，任命范昵些为安南都统，赵诺眉为扶邪都统。
English: King Nanzhao of the Southern Song Dynasty sent Yang Zhi to the Expo Festival and Duan Hui to the Annam Festival, and they were stationed at the same place. They appointed Fan Ni for Annam and Zhao Nuo for Fuzha.

古文：监陈敕使韦仲宰将七千人至峰州，高骈得以益其军，进击南诏，屡破之。
现代文：唐朝为宦官监阵敕使韦仲宰率领七千人赶到峰州，高骈的军队得到补充，于是进攻南诏蛮军，屡次南败南诏军队。
English: The Tang Dynasty ordered Wei Zhongzai to lead seven thousand people to rush to Fengzhou for the eunuch overseer array, and Gao Yao's army was replenished, so he attacked the Nanzhao barbarian army and repeatedly defeated the Nanzhao army.

古文：捷奏至海门，李维周皆匿之，数月无声问。
现代文：高骈告捷的奏表送至海门，李维周全部收藏起来，使朝廷好几个月得不到高骈的音信。
English: Gao Jie's report was sent to Haimen, and Li Weizhou collected it all, so that the imperial court did not receive Gao Jie's message for several months.

古文：上怪之，以问维周，维周奏骈驻军峰州，玩寇不进。
现代文：唐懿宗咸到奇怪，遣使问李维周，李维周上奏唐懿宗称高骈驻军于峰州，与南诏蛮军周旋，不敢进兵。
English: Tang Xizong was so salty that it was strange. The envoy asked Li Wei Zhou. Li Wei Zhou reported that Tang Xizong said that Gao Gan stationed troops in Fengzhou and negotiated with the barbarian army of Nanzhao, but did not dare to enter the army.

古文：上怒，以右武卫将军王晏权代骈镇安南，召骈诣阙，欲重贬之。
现代文：唐懿宗勃然大怒，任命右武卫将军王晏权替代高骈镇安南，并召高骈还朝，企图对高骈重贬降官。
English: Tang Xizong flew into a rage, and appointed Wang Bingquan, the right guard general, to replace Gao Bingzhen Annan, and summoned Gao Bingzong to return to the court, in an attempt to demote Gao Bingzong.

古文：晏权，智兴之从子也。
现代文：王晏权是王智兴的侄子。
English: Wang Bingquan is the nephew of Wang Zhixing.

古文：是月，骈大破南诏蛮于交趾，杀获甚众，遂围交趾城。
现代文：这个月，高骈在交趾大破南诏蛮军，杀死和俘获大量蛮军士兵，于是进围交趾城。
English: This month, Gao Gan defeated the Nanzhao barbarian army in Jiaozuo, killed and captured a large number of barbarian soldiers, and then entered Jiaozuo City.

古文：秋，七月，以何全皞为魏博留后。
现代文：秋季，七月，朝廷任命何全为魏镇留后。
English: In the autumn, in July, the imperial court appointed He Quan as Wei Zhen's successor.

古文：冬，十月，甲申，以门下侍郎、同平章事杨收为宣歙观察使。
现代文：冬季，十月，甲申，唐懿宗命门下侍郎、同平中杨收出朝任宣歙观察使。
English: In the winter, in October, Jia Shen, a servant of Tang Xizong's disciple, Tongping Zhongyang, was appointed by the emperor as an observation envoy.

古文：收性侈靡，门吏僮奴多倚为奸利。
现代文：杨收性好奢侈，其门下小吏奴仆也都依恃杨收的权势作奸求利。
English: Yang Jie had a penchant for extravagance, and his servants, who were petty officials, also took advantage of Yang Jie's power to commit treason and seek profits.

古文：杨玄价兄弟受方镇之赂，屡有请托，收不能尽从。玄价怒，以为叛己，故出之。
现代文：杨玄价的兄弟接受藩镇的贿赂，对杨收屡有请托，杨收不能全部听从；杨玄价感到愤怒，认为杨收是背判自己，所以在唐懿宗面前说杨收的坏话，将杨收赶出朝廷。
English: Yang Xuanzang's brother accepted bribes from the town and repeatedly asked Yang Jie for help, but Yang Jie could not listen to everything; Yang Xuanzang was angry and thought that Yang Jie was betraying him, so he spoke ill of Yang Jie in front of Tang Xizong and drove Yang Jie out of the imperial court.

古文：拓跋怀光以五百骑入廓州，生擒论恐热，先刖其足，数而斩之，传首京师。
现代文：吐蕃将领拓跋怀光率领五百骑进入廓州，活捉吐蕃酋领论恐热，先砍断他的肢，然后历数他的罪恶，将他处死，并将论恐热的头送交唐朝长安。
English: Tuoba Huiguang, the general of Tuwei, led five hundred horsemen into Guozhou. He captured Tuwei chieftain Tongfang Hefei alive, first cut off his limbs, then counted his sins, put him to death, and sent Tongfang Hefei's head to Chang'an of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：其部众东奔秦州，尚延心邀击，破之，悉奏迁于岭南。
现代文：论恐热的部众向东投秦州，遭到吐蕃部族酋领尚延心的邀击，被击败，尚延心奏告唐朝廷，请将论恐热余众全部迁于岭南地区。
English: The members who were afraid of the heat went east to Qinzhou, and were invited by the chiefs of the Tubo tribe. They were defeated, but they continued to appeal to the Tang Dynasty, and asked that all the remaining members who were afraid of the heat be moved to the Lingnan region.

古文：吐蕃由是衰绝，乞离胡君臣不知所终。
现代文：吐蕃从此以后衰亡灭绝，吐蕃的乞离胡君王和臣子也都不知下落，更不知他们的结局。
English: From then on, the Tubo Dynasty declined and died out, and the begging of the Tubo Dynasty to leave King Hu and his courtiers did not know their whereabouts, much less their fate.

古文：高骈围交趾十馀日，蛮困蹙甚，城且下，会得王晏权牒，已与李维周将大军发海门。骈即以军事授韦仲宰，与麾下百馀人北归。
现代文：高骈围困交趾城十多天，南诏蛮军困乏至极，城差不多要被攻克，恰好得到新任安南主帅王晏权的牒文，宣称已经与李维周率领大军从海门出发，高骈得到牒文后立即将军事大权交给监军韦仲宰，与麾下士兵一百余人北归。
English: Gao Gan besieged the city of Jiaozi for more than ten days. The Nanzhao barbarian army was extremely exhausted. The city was almost ready to be conquered. It just so happened that he received an ultimatum from Wang Bingquan, the new Annan commander, declaring that he and Li Weizhou had led a large army from Haimen. After Gao Bing received the ultimatum, he immediately handed over military power to Wei Zhongzai, the supervisor of the army, and returned north with more than one hundred soldiers under his command.

古文：先是，仲宰遣小使王惠赞，骈遣小校曾衮入告交趾之捷。至海中，望见旌旗东来，问游船，云新经略使与监军也。
现代文：在此之前，韦仲宰派遣小使王惠赞，高骈派遣小校官曾衮入朝廷报告交趾大捷，行至海中，望见有挂着大旗的船队东来，于是问在海上游弋的船夫，船夫说是新任经略使与监军的船队。
English: Prior to this, Wei Zhongzai dispatched a minor envoy Wang Huizan, and Gao Jiao dispatched a minor school official who broke into the imperial court to report a great victory. He went to the sea and saw a fleet of ships with large flags coming east, so he asked the boatman who was sailing on the sea. The boatman said that it was the fleet of the new deputy envoy and supervisors.

古文：二人谋曰： 维周必夺表留我。 
现代文：王惠赞与曾衮互相商量，说： 李维周必定要收夺我们告捷的表文，并扣留我们。 
English: Wang Huizan and Zeng Yao consulted with each other and said, "Li Weizhou is bound to confiscate our victorious petition and detain us.

古文：乃匿于岛间，维周过，即驰诣京师。上得奏，大喜，即加骈检校工部尚书，复镇安南。
现代文：于是于海岛间躲藏，待李维周的船队过去，即赶往京师长安，唐懿宗得到高骈和韦仲宰的告捷奏表，大喜过望，立即加给高骈检校工部尚书的衔名，恢复高骈镇讨安南的军职。
English: Therefore, he hid between the islands and waited for Li Weizhou's fleet to pass before rushing to the capital Chang'an. Tang Xizong was overjoyed when he received the report card from Gao Jun and Wei Zhongzai. He immediately gave Gao Jun the title of inspector and restored Gao Jun's military position.

古文：骈至海门而还。
现代文：高骈行至海门，收到唐懿宗的新任命，又归还交趾。
English: Gao Wei went to Haimen, received a new appointment from Tang Xizong, and returned to Koji.

古文：王晏权暗懦，动禀李维周之命；维周凶贪，诸将不为之用，遂解重围，蛮遁去者太半。
现代文：王晏权昏庸胆小，一切军务都听命于监军李维周；李维周凶狠贪鄙，诸道将领不听他的调遣，于是交趾城的重围得以解开，南诏蛮军得以逃出一大半。
English: Wang Xuanquan was dim-witted and timid, and all military affairs were ordered by Li Weizhou, the supervisor of the army; Li Weizhou was fierce and greedy, and the generals of all directions did not listen to his dispatch, so the heavy siege of Jiaozuo was lifted, and the barbarian army of Nanzhao was able to escape for the most part.

古文：骈至，复督励将士攻城，遂克之，杀段酋迁及土蛮为南诏乡导者硃道古，斩首三万馀级，南诏遁去。
现代文：高骈赶到交趾城下，重新部署并督促唐军将士攻城，最后将交趾城攻下，重新部署并督促唐军将土攻城，最后将交趾城攻克，杀南诏所署安南节度使段酋迁以及为南诏军队作向导的当地蛮人朱道古，斩蛮军首级三成余颗。
English: Gao Qi rushed to the foot of the Jiaozi Castle, redeployed and urged the Tang soldiers to attack the Jiaozi Castle, finally captured the Jiaozi Castle, redeployed and urged the Tang army to attack the Jiaozi Castle, and finally conquered the Jiaozi Castle. He killed the Nanzhao Army's Annan Jiedu to relocate the chieftain Duan and the local barbarian Zhu Daogu, who was a guide for the Nanzhao Army, and cut off more than 30% of the barbarian army's first level.

古文：骈又破土蛮附南诏者二洞，诛其酋长，土蛮帅众归附者万七千人。
现代文：残余的南诏蛮军逃走后，高骈又击败依附于南诏聚居于两个洞中的当地蛮族人，处死这两个蛮族的酋长，当地土蛮率部众归附唐朝的有一万七千人。
English: After the remnants of Nanzhao's barbarian army had fled, Gaozhu defeated the local barbarians who were clinging to Nanzhao and living in two caves, executed the chiefs of the two barbarians, and 17,000 local barbarians who had joined the Tang Dynasty.

古文：十一月，壬子，赦天下。
现代文：十一月，壬子，唐懿宗宣告大赦天下。
English: In November, Jinsi, Tang Xizong declared a general amnesty.

古文：诏安南、邕州、西川诸军各保疆域，勿复进攻南诏。委刘潼晓谕，如能更修旧好，一切不问。
现代文：又向安南、邕州、西川诸军颁发诏书，要求他们各保自己的疆域，不要再进攻南诏蛮军，唐懿宗还委任西川节度使刘潼告谕南诏王国，如果南诏王国能再与大唐修复旧好，唐朝将对南诏以往的侵略罪行一概不加追究。
English: He also issued an edict to the armies of Annan, Zhangzhou, and Xichuan, demanding that they each protect their own territory and not attack the Nanzhao barbarian army again. Tang Xizong also appointed Xichuan Jiedu to tell the Nanzhao Kingdom that if the Nanzhao Kingdom could once again restore the old friendship with the Great Tang, the Tang Dynasty would not investigate Nanzhao's past crimes of aggression.

古文：置静海军于安南，以高骈为节度使。
现代文：唐朝廷于安南设置静海军，任命高骈为节度使。
English: The Tang Dynasty set up a static navy in Annan and appointed Gao Jun as the commander of the static navy.

古文：自李涿侵扰群蛮，为安南患殆将十年，至是始平。
现代文：自从李涿为安南都护，误杀蛮酋杜存诚而激起变乱以来，南诏蛮军乘机侵扰，成为安南边患差不多有十年，至这时才得以平定。
English: Ever since Ri Sui, the protector of the Annamese capital, provoked turmoil by mistakenly killing the barbarian chieftain Du Cuncheng, the barbarian army of Nanzhao took advantage of the opportunity to invade and became a threat to the Annamese capital for almost ten years. It was only then that it was able to be pacified.

古文：骈筑安南城，周三千步，造屋四十馀万间。
现代文：高骈建筑安南城，城周长三千步，又建造屋四十余万间。
English: Gao Gan built Annan City, with a perimeter of three thousand paces and more than four hundred thousand houses.

古文：十二月，黠戛斯遣将军乙支连几入贡，奏遣鞍马迎册立使及请亥年历日。
现代文：十二月，黠戛斯派遗将军乙支连几入朝进贡，向唐懿宗奏称已派鞍马迎接唐朝的册立使，并请求颁发明年的年历。
English: In December, the Qajar dynasty sent its last general, Yi Zhi Lian, to pay tribute to the Tang Dynasty. He reported to the Tang Dynasty Emperor that he had sent a pommel horse to welcome the Tang Dynasty's envoy, and requested the issuance of an annual calendar for the new year.

古文：以成德留后王景崇为节度使。
现代文：唐懿宗任命成德留后王景崇为成德节度使。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang appointed Wang Jingsong as the envoy of the Chengde Festival after he stayed in Chengde.

古文：上好音乐宴游，殿前供奉乐工常近五百人，每月宴设不减十馀，水陆皆备，听乐观优，不知厌倦，赐与动及千缗。
现代文：唐懿宗喜好音乐，经常设宴游玩，在内廷殿前为他演奏的乐工经常有五百人，每个月设宴不下十余次，山珍海味一概具备，听音东看优戏，不知疲倦，赏赐给东工优伎的钱动不动就下千缗。
English: Tang Xizong was fond of music and often held banquets. There were often 500 musicians playing for him in front of the Inner Court. He held banquets more than ten times a month. He was a connoisseur of mountain and sea food. He listened to music and watched operas tirelessly. The money given to talented workers in the East was worth thousands of baht.

古文：曲江，昆明、灞浐、南宫、北苑、昭应、咸阳，所欲游幸即行，不待供置，有司常具音乐、饮食、幄帟，诸王立马以备陪从。
现代文：曲江、昆明、灞、南宫、北苑、昭应、咸阳等处禁苑离宫，唐懿宗想要去游玩立即成行，不等派人先行布置，有关部门经常准备着乐器、钦食用具和小账蓬，以备随时调用，诸亲王也都备好马随时准备着陪同皇帝去游玩。
English: Qujiang, Kunming, Handan, Nangu, Beiyuan, Zhaoying, Xianyang and other places were forbidden to leave the palace. If Tang Yizong wanted to go to play, he would go immediately, without waiting for someone to arrange it in advance. Relevant departments often prepared musical instruments, Qin eating utensils and small bookshelves to be ready to call at any time. Princes also prepared horses to accompany the emperor to play at any time.

古文：每行幸，内外诸司扈从者十馀万人，所费不可胜纪。
现代文：每次出宫游玩，宦宫内诸使司和朝官部门随从人员达十余万人，花费不可胜计。
English: Every time they leave the palace for a tour, more than 100,000 envoys and courtiers from the imperial court and government departments accompany them. The cost is incalculable.

古文：懿宗昭圣恭惠孝皇帝上咸通八年
现代文：咸通八年春季正月，唐懿宗任命魏博留后何全为魏博节度使。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of Hamdang's reign, Tang Xizong appointed He Quan as Wei Bo's regent.

古文：春，正月，以魏博留后何全皞为节度使。二月，归义节度使张义潮入朝，以为右神武统军，命其族子惟深守归义。
现代文：二月，归义军节度使张义潮入长安朝见唐懿宗，唐懿宗任命张义潮为右神武统军，又命令张义潮的侄子张淮深留守归义军使府。
English: In February, the festival of the Guiyi Army made Zhang Yichao enter the Chang'an Dynasty to see Tang Xizong. Tang Xizong appointed Zhang Yichao as the Right Divine Martial United Army, and ordered Zhang Yichao's nephew Zhang Huaixin to stay at the Guiyi Army's legation.

古文：自安南至邕、广，海路多潜石覆舟，静海节度使高骈募工凿之，漕运无滞。
现代文：由安南到邕州、广州，海路有很多暗礁，使船触礁沉没，静海节度使高骈召募工匠凿开暗礁，使海上漕运不受阻挡。
English: From Annan to Luzhou and Guangzhou, there are many reefs on the sea route, causing the ship to hit the reef and sink. The calmness of the sea made Gao Jun call for craftsmen to drill the reef, so that the sea transport would not be blocked.

古文：四川近边六姓蛮，常持两端，无寇则称效顺，有寇必为前锋。卑笼部独尽心于唐，与群蛮为仇，朝廷赐姓李，除为刺史。
现代文：西川近边有蒙蛮、夷蛮、讹蛮、狼蛮、勿邓蛮、白蛮等六姓蛮，常在唐朝与南诏之间左右摇摆，首鼠两端，南诏蛮军不来侵寇时则对唐朝宣称效忠恭顺，南诏蛮军来侵寇时则常充当南诏的前锋；只有蛮族卑笼部尽心效忠于唐朝，与群蛮各族姓世代为仇，朝廷赐卑笼部姓李，任命为刺史。
English: In the vicinity of the West River, there were six barbarian clans, including the Mong barbarians, the barbarian barbarians, the barbarian barbarians, the wolf barbarians, the non-Dun barbarians, and the white barbarians. They often swung from side to side between the Tang Dynasty and the Southern Dynasties, with the Southern Dynasties declaring their loyalty and obedience to the Tang Dynasty when they did not invade, and the Southern Dynasties barbarians often acting as the front of the Southern Dynasties when they did invade. Only the barbarians of the low cages were loyal to the Tang Dynasty, and they were enemies with the barbarians of all ethnic groups.

古文：节度使刘潼遣将将兵助之，讨六姓蛮，焚其部落，斩首五千馀级。
现代文：西川节度使刘潼派遗将领率军帮助卑笼部，讨伐六姓蛮，焚烧六姓蛮族的部落帐蓬，斩蛮人首级五千余。
English: The Xichuan Festival made Liu Bei send his general to lead the army to help the Hebei cages, fight the barbarians of the six surnames, burn the tribal tents of the barbarians of the six surnames, and behead more than five thousand barbarians.

古文：乐工李可及善为新声，三月，上以可及为左威卫将军。
现代文：乐工李可及善于谱新曲，三月，唐懿宗任命李可及为左威卫将军。
English: Li Keji, a musician, was good at composing new pieces. In March, Tang Yanzong appointed Li Keji as General Zuo Weiwei.

古文：曹确谏曰： 太宗定文武官六百馀员，谓房玄龄曰 朕以待天下贤士，工商杂流，不可处也。 
现代文：曹确劝谏唐懿宗说： 唐太宗当年确定朝廷文武官六百余名额，对房玄龄说： 朕以官爵委任给天下贤能之士，工匠商人伎巧等杂流人物不可委以官爵。 
English: Cao Jizhen advised Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty to say: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty determined more than six hundred positions of the Imperial Court's civil and military officers. He said to Fang Xuanling: I will appoint the world's most capable people with the title of nobility. Craftsmen, merchants and other miscellaneous people should not be appointed as nobility.

古文：大和中，文宗欲以乐工尉迟璋为王府率，拾遗窦洵直谏，即改光州长史。
现代文：大和年间，唐文宗想任命伎乐尉迟璋为王府率，拾遗窦洵当面真谏，唐文宗当场就将尉迟璋改派到地方上去，任光州长史。
English: During the Yamato era, Tang Wenzong wanted to appoint Gu Lefei Chi Xuan as the governor of the royal palace, but Gu Ye Dou did not want to do so, so Tang Wenzong immediately reassigned him to a provincial post and appointed him governor of the province.

古文：乞以两朝故事，别除可及官。 
现代文：希望陛下依照太宗、文宗两朝的旧例，不要委任会优为中央朝官，可以任李可及别的官。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will follow the old example of the Taizong and Wenzong dynasties and not appoint Kueyou as the central imperial official. He can appoint Li Ke and other officials.

古文：不从。
现代文：唐懿宗不加理会。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：夏，四月，上不豫，群臣希进见。
现代文：夏季四月，唐懿宗身体不舒服，朝廷群臣很少进宫觐见皇上。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Tang Xizong was not feeling well, and the courtiers of the imperial court rarely entered the palace to see the emperor.

古文：五月，丙辰，疏理天下系囚，非臣蠹不可赦者，皆递降一等。
现代文：五月，丙辰，朝廷对天下在押的囚徒普遍进行审理，如果不是十恶不赦的重大案犯，都依次减免刑一等。
English: In May, the imperial court held a general review of prisoners in custody around the world. If they were not heinous criminals, they were all commuted to the first class.

古文：秋，七月，壬寅，蕲王缉薨。
现代文：秋季七月，壬寅，蕲王李缉去世。
English: In the autumn of July, Ren Yin, the King of Gong Li Jiang passed away.

古文：怀州民诉旱，刺史刘仁规揭榜禁之，民怒，相与作乱，逐仁规，仁规逃匿村舍。
现代文：怀州百姓向官府申诉旱灾情形，刺史刘仁规四处张榜禁止百姓诉灾，激起民愤，民众相互串联，发动暴动，驱逐刘仁规，刘仁规逃到乡村房舍中躲避。
English: The people of Huizhou complained to the government about the drought situation, and the governor Liu Rengui issued a ban on the people complaining about the disaster in four places, arousing public indignation. The people colluded with each other, launched a riot, expelled Liu Rengui, and Liu Rengui fled to a rural house to hide.

古文：民入州宅，掠其家赀，登楼击鼓，久之乃定。
现代文：民众攻入州府宅院，抢劫刘二规的家财私产，登上城楼击鼓，很久才安定下来。
English: The people broke into the State House, robbed Liu Ergui's family wealth and private property, and climbed the tower to play the drums. It took a long time to settle down.

古文：甲子，以兵部侍郎、充诸道盐铁转运等使、附马都尉于琮同平章事。
现代文：甲子，唐懿宗任命兵部侍郎、充诸道铁转运等使、驸马都尉于琮为同平章事。
English: At the same time, Emperor Taizong of Tang appointed the attendant of the military department, the envoy of railway transportation and so on, and the captain of the cavalry to be the same rank.

古文：宣歙察使杨收过华岳庙，施衣物，使巫祈祷，县令诬以为收罪。右拾罪韦保衡复言，收前为相，除严譔江西节度使，受钱百万，又置造船务，人讼其侵隐。
现代文：宣歙观察使杨收路过华岳庙，施舍衣物，让巫士为自己祈祷；华阴县令将杨收的行为认作为犯罪，上告朝廷，右拾遗韦保稀又在朝堂说，杨收先前为宰相时，利用职权任严撰为江西节度使，受贿纳钱一百万，在置办造船事备时，有人告他侵吞隐瞒公费。
English: Xuanzang's observation made Yang Jie pass by Huayue Temple, give out clothes, and let the sorcerer pray for himself; Huayin County recognized Yang Jie's behavior as a crime and appealed to the imperial court. Wei Baoqi also said in the imperial court that when Yang Jie was previously the prime minister, he used his powers to appoint Yan Zhan as the Jiangxi Festival envoy, and received a bribe of one million yuan. When he was engaged in shipbuilding, he was accused of embezzling and concealing public expenses.

古文：八月，庚寅，贬收端州司马。
现代文：八月，庚寅，杨收被贬为端州司马。
English: In August, Goyin and Yang Jie were demoted to Danzhou Sima.

古文：九月，上疾瘳。
现代文：九月，唐懿宗的疾病痊愈。
English: In September, Tang Xizong recovered from his illness.

古文：冬，十二月，信王忄丐薨。
现代文：冬季，十二月，信王李去世。
English: In the winter, in December, Xin Wang Li passed away.

古文：加岭南东道节度使韦宙同平章事。
现代文：唐懿宗加给岭南东道节度使韦宙领同平章事头衔。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty added the title of Tongping chapter to the Lingnan host festival, making Wei Zhaoling the leader.

