古文：世信祭祀，谓祭祀必有福。又然解除，谓解除必去凶。解除初礼，先设祭祀。
现代文：社会上迷信祭祀，认为祭祀必定有福；又相信解除，认为解除一定能消除灾祸。 解除 的第一项仪式是先举行祭祀。
English: The society is superstitious about the ritual, believing that the ritual must be blessed; they also believe that the cancellation, believing that the cancellation must be able to eliminate the disaster.The first ceremony of cancellation is to hold the ritual first.

古文：比夫祭祀，若生人相宾客矣。
现代文：比照祭祀，就如活人招待宾客一样。
English: According to the ritual, it is just like a living person inviting guests.

古文：先为宾客设膳，食已，驱以刃杖。
现代文：首先为宾客安排饭食，吃完后，用刃杖驱赶鬼神。
English: First of all, the meal is arranged for the guests, and after eating, the ghost is driven away with a blade.

古文：鬼神如有知，必恚与战，不肯径去，若怀恨，反而为祸；如无所知，不能为凶，解之无益，不解无损。
现代文：鬼神如果有知，一定会发怒而与祭主搏斗，不肯就这样离开，或者心里怀恨，反而因此造成灾祸。如果鬼神无知，不能造成灾祸，人们解除它无益，不解除它也无损。
English: If the ghosts and gods have knowledge, they will certainly get angry and fight with the sacrificial master, refuse to leave like this, or hold grudges in their hearts, and instead cause disasters. If the ghosts and gods are ignorant and cannot cause disasters, it is useless for people to remove it, and it will not be damaged if it is not removed.

古文：且人谓鬼神何如状哉？
现代文：而且人们认为鬼神是什么样子呢？
English: And what do people think ghosts and gods look like?

古文：如谓鬼有形象，形象生人，生人怀恨，必将害人。
现代文：如果认为鬼有形状，形状像活人一样，那么活人怀恨在心，是一定要害人的。
English: If you think that ghosts have a shape, and the shape is like a living person, then the living person will hold a grudge and will definitely want to harm you.

古文：如无形象，与烟云同，驱逐云烟，亦不能除。
现代文：如果鬼没有形状，如烟云一样，要驱逐去烟云，也是不能除去的。
English: If the ghost has no shape, like a cloud of smoke, it is necessary to expel the cloud of smoke, and it cannot be removed.

古文：形既不可知，心亦不可图，鬼神集止人宅，欲何求乎？
现代文：既然鬼神的形状不能知晓，鬼神的想法也就不可推测。鬼神停留在人的住宅中，是想干什么呢？
English: Since the shape of ghosts and gods cannot be known, the thoughts of ghosts and gods cannot be guessed. What do ghosts and gods want to do when they stay in people's homes?

古文：如势欲杀人，当驱逐之时，避人隐匿；驱逐之止，则复还立故处。
现代文：如果鬼神势必要杀人，遇上驱逐鬼神的时候，它就会避开人而躲藏起来，驱逐鬼神一停止，那么鬼神又会返回原处。
English: If a ghost or deity is determined to kill, it will avoid people and hide when it is time to expel the ghost or deity. As soon as the expulsion of the ghost or deity stops, the ghost or deity will return to its original place.

古文：如不欲杀人，寄托人家，虽不驱逐，亦不为害。
现代文：如果鬼神不想杀人，只是寄居在人的家里，即使人们不驱逐它，也不会造成什么灾害。
English: If the ghosts and gods do not want to kill people, but just live in people's homes, even if people do not expel it, it will not cause any disasters.

古文：贵人之出也，万民并观，填街满巷，争进在前。
现代文：贵人出来，老百姓都来围观，挤满了大街小巷，都争着挤到前面去。
English: When the dignitaries came out, the common people all came to watch, crowding the streets and alleys, all vying to get to the front.

古文：士卒驱之，则走而却，士卒还去，即复其处；士卒立守，终日不离，仅能禁止。
现代文：士卒驱赶围观的人，他们就跑开退避；土卒一离开，他们立马又回到原处；士卒站立守卫，整天不离开，才能制止他们。
English: When the soldiers drive away the onlookers, they run away; when the peasants leave, they immediately return to their original place; the soldiers stand guard and do not leave all day to stop them.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：欲在於观，不为壹躯还也。
现代文：老百姓的目的只是在于观看贵人，不会因为一驱赶就退去了。
English: The purpose of the common people is only to watch the nobles, and they will not leave because they are driven away.

古文：使鬼神与生人同，有欲於宅中，犹万民有欲於观也，士卒驱逐，不久立守，则观者不却也。
现代文：假如鬼神同活人一样，对人的住宅有什么目的的话，就如同老百姓目的在于观看贵人一样，士卒驱逐，如果不是长久地站在那里看守，那么围观者是不会退走的。
English: If ghosts and gods, like living people, have any purpose for people's homes, just as the purpose of the common people is to watch the nobles, the nobles are expelled, and if they do not stand there for a long time, then the onlookers will not leave.

古文：然则驱逐鬼者，不极一岁，鬼神不去。
现代文：这样看来，那么驱逐鬼神的人，如果不是一年到头地赶鬼神，鬼神是不离开的。
English: From this perspective, if the person who drives out ghosts and gods does not drive them out all year round, the ghosts and gods will not leave.

古文：今驱逐之，终食之间，则舍之矣。
现代文：现在驱逐鬼神，仅仅在吃完一顿饭的时间，就抛开鬼神不过问了。
English: Now, when it comes to banishing ghosts and spirits, it's all right to leave them behind just after finishing a meal.

古文：舍之鬼，复还来，何以禁之？
现代文：不过问鬼神，鬼神又会回来，怎么能禁止它们呢？
English: But ask ghosts and gods, ghosts and gods will come back again, how can they be banned?

古文：暴谷於庭，鸡雀啄之，主人驱弹则走，纵之则来，不终日立守，鸡雀不禁。
现代文：在庭院中晒谷子，鸡雀来啄食，主人用弹弓射击驱赶，鸡雀就跑开，一放松鸡雀就回来，不整天站着防守，就不能禁止鸡雀啄食谷子。
English: In the courtyard, the sun is shining on the grain, the chickadees come to nibble, the owner shoots them with a slingshot to drive them away, the chickadees run away, and as soon as the chickadees relax, they come back. If you don't stand guard all day, you can't prohibit the chickadees from nibbling the grain.

古文：使鬼神乎，不为驱逐去止；使鬼不神乎，与鸡雀等，不常驱逐，不能禁也。
现代文：要说鬼很神灵，那么它就不会因为人的驱赶而去留。要说鬼并不神灵，那就同鸡雀一样，不经常驱逐，就不能禁止他们。
English: To say that the ghost is very divine, then it will not stay because of people's expulsion. To say that the ghost is not divine, then it is the same as the cockerel. If you do not expel them often, you cannot ban them.

古文：虎狼入都，弓弩巡之，虽杀虎狼，不能除虎狼所为来之患。
现代文：虎狼进入城里，弓弩手往来察看它，即使杀了虎狼，并不能铲除引起虎狼到来的祸根。
English: Tigers and wolves enter the city, archers come and go to inspect it. Even if they kill the tigers and wolves, they cannot eradicate the root cause of the tigers and wolves.

古文：盗贼攻城，官军击之，虽却盗贼，不能灭盗贼所为至之祸。
现代文：盗贼攻打城，官军反击他们，即使打退了盗贼，并不能消除引起盗贼到来的祸根。
English: Thieves attack the city, government troops counterattack them. Even if the thieves are repelled, it will not eliminate the root cause of the thieves' arrival.

古文：虎狼之来，应政失也；盗贼之至，起世乱也。
现代文：虎狼的到来，是应和政治上的过失；盗贼的到来，预示要引起社会的动乱。
English: The arrival of the tiger and the wolf is a political mistake; the arrival of the thief indicates that it will cause social turmoil.

古文：然则鬼神之集，为命绝也。
现代文：这样说来，那么鬼神的停留，是人的寿命当终绝了。
English: In this way, the stay of ghosts and gods is the end of human life.

古文：杀虎狼，却盗贼，不能使政得世治。
现代文：杀掉虎狼，击退盗贼，并不能使国家政治清明社会安定。
English: Killing tigers and wolves and repelling thieves cannot make the national politics clear and the society stable.

古文：然则盛解除，驱鬼神，不能使凶去而命延。
现代文：这样说来，那么盛行解除活动，驱逐鬼神，并不能使凶祸离去而寿命延长。
English: In this way, the prevalence of disabling activities and the expulsion of ghosts and gods cannot make the evil go away and prolong life.

古文：病人困笃，见鬼之至，性猛刚者，挺剑操杖，与鬼战斗。战斗壹再，错指受服，知不服，必不终也。
现代文：病人病情严重，就会看到鬼来，性格勇猛刚强的病人，就会举剑拿杖，与鬼进行战斗，战斗一两次，病人就停下手表示屈服，因为他知道如果不屈服战斗就不会有终结。
English: If the patient is seriously ill, he will see the ghost. If the patient is brave and strong, he will raise his sword and stick to fight with the ghost. Once or twice, the patient will stop his hand to surrender, because he knows that if he does not surrender, the battle will not end.

古文：夫解除所驱逐鬼，与病人所见鬼无以殊也；其驱逐之，与战斗无以异也。
现代文：用解除法所驱逐的鬼，与病人所看到的鬼没有什么不同。他们驱逐鬼的办法，与病人和鬼战斗没有什么不同。
English: The way they exorcise the ghosts is no different from the way the patients fight the ghosts.

古文：病人战斗，鬼犹不去，宅主解除，鬼神必不离。
现代文：病人与鬼战斗，鬼尚且不离去，宅主用解除法驱鬼，鬼神必然不会离去。
English: The patient fights with the ghost, but the ghost still does not leave. The owner of the house drives the ghost away with the release method, and the ghost will certainly not leave.

古文：由此言之，解除宅者，何益於事，信其凶去，不可用也。
现代文：据此说来，驱逐宅中鬼神的活动，对于驱鬼有什么好处呢？
English: According to this, what are the benefits of expelling the activities of ghosts and gods in the house?

古文：且夫所除，宅中客鬼也。
现代文：认为这样做能去掉宅中的凶祸，这种说法是不可信的。况且所要驱除的，是住宅中的客鬼。
English: It is not credible to think that this will get rid of the evil in the house. Moreover, it is the guest ghost in the house that needs to be exorcised.

古文：宅中主神有十二焉，青龙白虎列十二位。
现代文：住宅中的主神有十二位，青龙和白虎也在十二神之中。
English: There are twelve main gods in the house, and the blue dragon and the white tiger are also among the twelve gods.

古文：龙虎猛神，天之正鬼也，飞尸流凶，安敢妄集，犹主人猛勇，奸客不敢窥也。
现代文：青龙白虎是勇猛的神，是天上的正鬼，飞尸流凶怎么敢随便聚集到住宅中来，这就好比宅主人猛勇，奸邪之人不敢来侵扰一样。
English: The blue dragon and the white tiger are fierce gods, they are the righteous ghosts in the sky. How dare the flying corpses and the evil spirits gather in the house? It is just like the owner of the house is fierce and the evil doers dare not to intrude.

古文：有十二神舍之，宅主驱逐，名为去十二神之客，恨十二神之意，安能得吉？
现代文：有十二神留宿客鬼，宅主驱逐它们，这就叫驱逐十二神的客人，违反十二神的意志，宅主怎么会得吉利呢？
English: There are twelve gods who have guests, and the owner of the house expels them. This is called expelling the guests of the twelve gods, and it is against the will of the twelve gods. How can the owner of the house be lucky?

古文：如无十二神，则亦无飞尸流凶。
现代文：如果住宅中没有十二神，那么也就没有什么飞尸流凶。
English: If there are no twelve gods in the house, then there are no flying corpses.

古文：罻奚裎扌祝獬纻尾梗壳篸鸷稳嘒繝
现代文：没有十二神没有飞尸流凶，搞解除活动有什么好处呢？
English: If there are no twelve gods and no flying corpses, what good is it to engage in activities to abolish them?

古文：解逐之法，缘古逐疫之礼也。
现代文：所谓驱逐又去除什么呢？解除驱逐鬼神的方法，是因袭古代驱逐疫鬼的仪式。
English: What is the so-called expulsion and removal? The method of lifting the expulsion of ghosts and gods is to follow the ancient ritual of expelling pestilent ghosts.

古文：昔颛顼氏有子三人，生而皆亡，一居江水为虐鬼，一居若水为魍魉，一居欧隅之间主疫病人。
现代文：过去颛顼氏有三个儿子，一生下来就变化成鬼了，一个居住在长江成为虐鬼，一个居住在若水成为魍魉，一个居住在小屋角落之间专门用疫病害人。
English: In the past, the Yu family had three sons who turned into ghosts when they were born, one who lived in the Yangtze River became a sadistic ghost, one who lived in the young water became a baboon, and one who lived between the corners of the hut was a pest.

古文：故岁终事毕，驱逐疫鬼，因以送陈、迎新、内吉也。
现代文：所以每当年终事情都干完了，人们就驱逐疫鬼，借以送旧、迎新、纳吉。
English: So at the end of every year, when everything is done, people cast out the evil spirits to send off the old, welcome the new, and send off Najib.

古文：世相仿效，故有解除。
现代文：社会上相互仿效，所以就有了解除之法。
English: In society, people imitate each other, so there is a way to get rid of it.

古文：夫逐疫之法，亦礼之失也。
现代文：驱逐疫鬼的方法出现，出是由于礼仪败坏的结果。
English: The method of expelling the pestilence appeared as a result of the corruption of etiquette.

古文：行尧、舜之德，天下太平，百灾消灭，虽不逐疫，疫鬼不往。
现代文：推行尧、舜的德政，天下太平，各种灾祸都会消灭，即使不驱逐疫鬼，疫鬼也不会去害人。
English: If we carry out the virtuous and righteous policies, the world will be peaceful, and all kinds of disasters will be eliminated. Even if we do not expel the pestilence, the pestilence will not harm people.

古文：行桀、纣之行，海内扰乱，百祸并起，虽日逐疫，疫鬼犹来。
现代文：仿效桀、纣的恶行，海内纷扰混乱，各种灾祸一齐出现，即使每天驱逐疫鬼，疫鬼仍然会来害人。
English: Imitating the evil deeds of the dragonfly and the cormorant, the sea is disturbed and chaotic, and all kinds of disasters appear at the same time. Even if you expel the pestilence every day, the pestilence will still harm people.

古文：衰世好信鬼，愚人好求福。
现代文：没落的社会喜好迷信鬼神，无知的人喜好祈求福佑。
English: A society in decline likes to believe in superstitious ghosts and gods, and ignorant people like to pray for blessings.

古文：周之季世，信鬼修祀。以求福助。
现代文：周朝末期，迷信鬼神讲究祭祀，借以祈求福助。
English: At the end of the Zhou Dynasty, the superstitious paid attention to rituals to pray for blessings.

古文：愚主心惑，不顾自行，功犹之立，治犹不定。故在人不在鬼，在德不在祀。
现代文：昏庸的君王心思迷乱，不顾礼仪自行祭祀，功业仍然不能成就，统治还是不稳定，所以国家的兴衰在于人而不在于鬼，在于德政而不在于祭祀。
English: Dim-witted emperors are confused in their minds. They perform self-sacrifices regardless of the etiquette. They are still unable to accomplish their work, and their rule is still unstable. Therefore, the rise and fall of a country depends on people and not on ghosts. It depends on virtue and not on sacrifice.

古文：国期有远近，人命有长短，如祭祀可以得福，解除可以去凶，则王者可竭天下之财，以兴延期之祀；富家翁妪可求解除之福，以取逾世之寿。
现代文：国家存在的时期有长短，人的寿命也有寿夭。如果祭祀可以求得福佑，举行解除可以消掉凶祸，那么君王可以耗尽天下的财富，用来举行延长 国期 的祭祀，有钱的老头老妇可以祈求解除之福，以取得超过一般人的寿命。
English: The period of a country's existence has a length and a person's lifespan has a longevity. If a sacrifice can obtain blessings, and performing a blessing can eliminate evil, then a king can exhaust the wealth of the world and use it to hold a sacrifice to extend his reign, and a rich old man and old woman can pray for the blessing of a blessing in order to obtain a longer lifespan than the average person.

古文：案天下人民，夭寿贵贱，皆有禄命；操行吉凶，皆有衰盛。
现代文：考察天下的老百姓，寿命长短地位贵贱，都有注定的禄命寿命，行为的吉凶，都有盛衰的时候。
English: When examining the common people around the world, the length of life, the status of nobility and lowliness, all have a predestined life expectancy, the fortunes and misfortunes of behavior, all have their ups and downs.

古文：祭祀不为福，福不由祭祀。
现代文：祭祀不会得福，福不由祭祀得来。
English: Sacrifices do not bring blessings, and blessings do not come from sacrifices.

古文：世信鬼神，故好祭祀。
现代文：社会上迷信鬼神，所以喜好祭祀。
English: The society is superstitious about ghosts and gods, so they like to make sacrifices.

古文：祭祀无鬼神，故通人不务焉。
现代文：祭祀并没有什么鬼神，所以通达事理的人是不会干这种事的。
English: There is no such thing as ghosts and gods in the ritual, so sensible people would not do such a thing.

古文：祭祀，厚事鬼神之道也，犹无吉福之验，况盛力用威，驱逐鬼神，其何利哉！
现代文：祭祀，是优厚侍奉鬼神的办法，仍就没有吉福的效果，何况拚命使用武力，驱逐鬼神，这会有什么好处呢！
English: Sacrifice is an excellent way to serve ghosts and gods, but it still does not have the effect of blessing, let alone the use of deadly force to expel ghosts and gods, what good will it do!

古文：祭祀之礼，解除之法，众多非一，且以一事效其非也。
现代文：祭祀之礼，解除之法，千奇百怪不只一种，姑且用一个事例来证明它是错误的。
English: There is more than one strange way to perform the rite of sacrifice, and there is more than one way to undo it. Let me use an example to prove that it is wrong.

古文：夫小祀足以况大祭，一鬼足以卜百神。
现代文：小型的祭祀足以比喻大型的祭祀，以一个鬼的情况为例就足以推知众神的情况。
English: Small sacrifices are enough to compare with large ones, and the case of a ghost is enough to deduce the situation of the gods.

古文：世间缮治宅舍，凿地掘土，功成作毕，解谢土神，名曰： 解土 。
现代文：世间修建住宅房舍，挖掘土地，事情做成兴建完毕，就解谢土神，这称为 解土 。
English: In the world, people build houses and dig up land, and when the work is completed, they thank the earth god. This is called "de-soiling."

古文：为土偶人，以像鬼形，令巫祝延，以解土神。
现代文：做一个土偶人，以象征鬼神，让巫师祷告，用来禳解土神。
English: To be a clay figurine, to symbolize ghosts and gods, to let the sorcerer pray, to be used to appease the earth god.

古文：已祭之後，心快意喜，谓鬼神解谢，殃祸除去。
现代文：停止祭祀以后，心快意喜，就认为鬼神接受了解谢，殃祸就会除去。
English: After the end of the sacrificial rites, with a happy heart, they thought that the ghosts and gods would accept their thanks, and the calamity would be eliminated.

古文：如讨论之，乃虚妄也。
现代文：如讨论这种情况，实在是虚妄不实的。
English: It's really disingenuous to talk about that.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：夫土地犹人之体也，普天之下皆为一体，头足相去，以万里数。
现代文：土地好比是人的身体，整个天下，都是一体，头与足相距，要以万里来计算。
English: The land is like the human body. The whole world is one. The distance between the head and the feet should be calculated in thousands of miles.

古文：人民居土上，犹蚤虱着人身也。
现代文：老百姓居住在土地上，好比蚤虱附着在人的身上一样。
English: Ordinary people live on the land like fleas on a human body.

古文：蚤虱食人，贼人肌肤，犹人凿地，贼地之体也。
现代文：蚤虱吃人的血，伤害人的肌肤，如同人挖地，伤害地的形体一样。
English: Fleas and ticks eat people's blood and hurt people's skin, just as people dig the ground and hurt the earth's form.

古文：蚤虱内知，有欲解人之心，相与聚会，解谢於所食之肉旁，人能知之乎？
现代文：如果蚤虱内心有知，抱着想要解谢被咬人的心思，就相互聚会在一起，在它们所咬的肌肤旁进行解谢，人能够知道这些吗？
English: If fleas and ticks have knowledge in their hearts and want to express their gratitude to the bitten person, they will gather together and express their gratitude next to the skin they have bitten. Can people know this?

古文：夫人不能知蚤虱之音，犹地不能晓人民之言也。
现代文：人不能了解蚤虱的声音，如同地不能明白老百姓的语言一样。
English: One cannot understand the voice of a flea, just as one cannot understand the language of the common people.

古文：胡、越之人，耳口相类，心意相似，对口交耳而谈，尚不相解；况人之与地相似，地之耳口与人相远乎！
现代文：胡地、越地的人，口耳相类同，心意也相似，对口交耳进行交谈，尚且不能相互了解，何况人与地并不相似，地的口耳与人相隔甚远啊！
English: The people of Hudi and Vietdi have similar mouths and ears, and similar minds. They can't understand each other when they talk about oral sex. What's more, people and the earth are not similar, and the mouth and ears of the earth are far away from people!

古文：今所解者地乎？
现代文：现在所要解谢的是地神吗？
English: Is it the earth god who is to be thanked now?

古文：则地之耳远，不能闻也。
现代文：而地的耳朵遥远，不能听到。
English: But the ears of the earth are too far away to hear.

古文：所解一宅之土，则一宅之土犹人一分之肉也，安能晓之！
现代文：所要解谢的是一宅之土吗？而一宅之土好比人身上的一部分肉，怎么能明白这一点呢？
English: Is it the land of one's house that needs to be thanked? And how can one understand that the land of one's house is like a part of the flesh of a human body?

古文：如所解宅神乎，则此名曰 解宅 ，不名曰 解土 。
现代文：如果所解谢的是宅神吗？那么这名称就该叫 解宅 ，不该叫 解土 。
English: If it is the god of the house that you are thanking, then the name should be "解宅" and not "解土."

古文：礼入宗庙，无所主意，斩尺二寸之木，名之曰主，主心事之，不为人像。
现代文：根据礼的规定，人们到宗庙里去祭祀，由于没有一个集中表达心意的地方，就砍一根一尺二寸长的木棒，称之为神主，倾心侍奉它，但并不设人的形象。
English: According to the rules of the rite, people go to the ancestral temple to offer sacrifices, and since there is no place to express their thoughts, they cut a wooden stick one foot two inches long, call it the god, and serve it wholeheartedly, but it does not have a human image.

古文：今解土之祭，为土偶人，像鬼之形，何能解乎？
现代文：现在解土的祭祀，设置土偶人，像鬼神的形象，怎么解释谢呢？
English: Now the soil-dissolving ritual, the setting up of clay figures, like the image of ghosts and gods, how to explain Xie?

古文：神荒忽无形，出入无门，故谓之神。
现代文：神，恍恍惚惚没有固定的形体，出入不通过门，所以称为神。
English: God, in a trance, has no fixed form, and cannot enter or leave through a door, which is why he is called God.

古文：今作形象，与礼相违，失神之实，故知其非。
现代文：现在制作了形象，与礼的规定相违背，违反了神 荒忽无形 的事实，所以知道它是错的。
English: Now that an image has been made, contrary to the rules of etiquette, contrary to the fact that God is vague and intangible, we know that it is wrong.

古文：象似布藉，不设鬼形。
现代文：应该安设一个象征性的坐位，不设立鬼的形象，而解土的礼节，却设立了土偶人。
English: A symbolic seat should be set up. The image of a ghost should not be set up, but a clay figurine should be set up in accordance with the etiquette of excavation.

古文：解土之礼，立土偶人，如祭山可为石形，祭门户可作木人乎？
现代文：如果祭山神可以做一个石人，那么祭门神户神可以制作一个木人吗？
English: If the enshrined mountain god can be made into a stone man, then can the enshrined gate god be made into a wooden man?

