古文：裴叔业夏侯道迁李元护席法友王世弼江悦之淳于诞沈文秀张谠李苗刘藻傅永傅竖眼张烈李叔彪路恃庆房亮曹世表潘永基硃元旭裴叔业，河东闻喜人。魏冀州刺史徽之后也。
现代文：裴叔业，河东闻喜人，三国时魏国冀州刺史裴徽的后代。
English: Pei Shuhei, Hedong Wenshi Ren, was a descendant of Pei Hui, who was a statesman of Wei, Jizhou and Jiajing during the Three Kingdoms.

古文：五世祖苞，晋秦州刺史。
现代文：五世祖裴苞，晋时任秦州刺史。
English: The fifth generation ancestor Pei Xuan was appointed as the Qin State Historian at the time of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：祖邕，自河东居于襄阳。
现代文：祖父裴邕，从河东迁居襄阳。
English: Grandfather Pei Jun, moved from Hedong to Xiangyang.

古文：父顺宗，兄叔宝，仕宋、齐，并有名位。
现代文：父亲裴顺宗，兄裴叔宝，在南朝的宋与齐做官，都很有名位。
English: His father, Pei Shunzong, and his brother, Pei Shubao, were both well-known officials in the Southern Song Dynasty.

古文：叔业少有气干，颇以将略自许。
现代文：叔业年少时就很有抱负和才干，以有谋略自诩。
English: When my uncle was young, he was very ambitious and talented. He prided himself on being resourceful.

古文：宋元徽末，历官为羽林监、齐高帝骠骑行参军。
现代文：宋元徽末年，历官为羽林监，和齐高帝萧道成的骠骑行参军。
English: In the last years of the Song and Yuan dynasties, the officials were the forest inspectors, and they rode to join the army with Emperor Qigong and Emperor Xiao Dousheng.

古文：齐受命，累迁为宁蛮长史、广平太守。
现代文：萧道成建齐，叔业累次升迁，为宁蛮长史、广平太守。
English: Xiao Dao became a peer, and his uncle was promoted successively. He was a long-standing member of the Ning Dynasty and the governor of Guangping.

古文：叔业早与齐明帝同事。明帝辅政，以为心腹，使领军奄袭诸蕃镇，尽心用命。
现代文：叔业早年与齐明帝萧鸾共事，萧鸾辅政，把叔业作为心腹，让他带领军队袭击各蕃镇，叔业无不尽心效命。
English: In his early years, Uncle Ye worked with Qiming Emperor Xiao Ye, and Xiao Ye assisted the government. He treated Uncle Ye as a confidant, and let him lead the army to attack various towns. Uncle Ye did his best.

古文：及即位，以为给事黄门侍郎，封武昌县伯。
现代文：萧鸾即位，任他为给事黄门侍郎，封为武昌县伯。
English: When Xiao Tong ascended the throne, he was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate and was named the Count of Wuchang County.

古文：孝文南次钟离，拜叔业为徐州刺史，以水军入淮。
现代文：魏孝文帝派军队南攻钟离，齐明帝命叔业为徐州刺史，率水军入淮。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowen sent an army south to attack Zhongli, and Emperor Qiming ordered his uncle to make history in Xuzhou and led the navy into Huai.

古文：帝令郎中裴聿往与之语，叔业盛饰左右服玩以夸之。聿曰： 伯父仪服诚为美丽，但恨不昼游耳。 
现代文：明帝派郎中裴聿前去慰问，叔业穿上礼服，佩上服饰珍玩以夸耀，裴聿说： 伯父您的服饰实在漂亮，但只恨不能穿上公开游玩吧。 
English: Emperor Ming sent his son-in-law Pei Yao to offer condolences. Uncle Ye put on a ceremonial robe and wore a rare costume to show off. Pei Yao said, "Uncle, your costume is really beautiful, but I wish I could wear it in public."

古文：齐帝崩，废帝即位。
现代文：齐明帝驾崩，其子萧宝卷即位。
English: Emperor Qiming died, and his son Xiao Baozhuang ascended to the throne.

古文：诛大臣，都下屡有变发。
现代文：由于大肆诛杀大臣，都城不断有事变发生。
English: Due to the large-scale killing of the minister, there have been constant incidents in the capital.

古文：叔业登寿春城，北望肥水，谓部下曰： 卿等欲富贵乎？
现代文：叔业登临寿春城头，向北眺望淝水，对部下说 ：你们想得到富贵吗？
English: Uncle Ye went to the top of Shuchun Castle, looked north to Surabaya, and said to his subordinates, "Do you want to be rich and famous?

古文：我言富贵亦可办耳。 
现代文：我看富贵也可以得到呀。 
English: I guess rich people can get it too.

古文：未几，见徙南衮州刺史。
现代文：不久，他被调为南兖州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the Southern Luzhou Province.

古文：会陈显达围建鄴，叔业遣司马李元护应之，及显达败而还。
现代文：恰逢征南大将军陈显达进攻都城建邺，叔业派司马李元护带军救应，等陈显达兵败而还。
English: At the same time, Chen Xianda, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, attacked the capital Jianye, and his uncle sent Sima Li Yuan to escort the army to help, and Chen Xianda was defeated and returned.

古文：叔业虑内难未已，不愿为南兗州。
现代文：叔业虑及内乱不断，不愿再任南兖州刺史。
English: Uncle Ye is reluctant to be appointed as the governor of South Luzhou again because of the continuous civil unrest.

古文：齐废主嬖臣茹法珍、王咺之等疑其有异，去来者并云叔业北入。
现代文：东昏侯的幸臣茹法珍、王口亘之等怀疑他有异心，从他那里回来的人也说他要投靠北朝。
English: Zhu Fazhen, Wang Quanzhong, and other fortunate vassals of Dongdimou, suspected him of having an ulterior motive, and people who came back from him also said that he wanted to support the Northern Dynasty.

古文：叔业兄子植？瑜、粲等弃母奔寿阳。
现代文：叔业兄长的儿子裴植、裴瑜、裴粲等也都离开母亲到寿阳投奔叔父。
English: Uncle Ye's elder sons, Pei Zhi, Pei Yu and Pei Yao, also left their mother to join their uncle in Shouyang.

古文：法珍等以其既在疆场，且欲羁縻之，白齐主，遣中书舍人裴穆慰诱之，许不须回换。
现代文：法珍等因叔业正在前方带兵，想暂时宠络他，便告诉东昏侯，派遣中书舍人裴穆慰劳利诱他，答应不调换他。
English: Fa Zhen and others wanted to temporarily pamper him because his uncle was leading the troops in the front, so they told Dong Dou Hou to send the Chinese scholar Pei Mu to comfort and entice him, and promised not to replace him.

古文：叔业虽得停，而忧惧不已。
现代文：叔业虽得暂时安稳，却忧惧不已。
English: Although my uncle's business is temporarily stable, he is worried.

古文：时梁武帝为雍州刺史，叔业遣亲人马文范以自安之计访之梁武帝，曰： 雍州若能坚据襄阳，辄当戮力自保。
现代文：这时，梁武帝萧衍正任南齐的雍州刺史。叔业派心腹马文范以如何自保向萧衍求教，说： 您如能牢固地据有襄阳，我应当合力自保。
English: At this time, Liangwu Emperor Xiao Yan was in charge of the history of Yongzhou in South Qi. Ma Wenfan, a confidant of the Shuye faction, asked Xiao Yan for advice on how to protect himself, saying: If you can firmly hold onto Xiangyang, I should work together to protect myself.

古文：若不尔，回面向北，不失河南公。 
现代文：如果不如此，便回首北向，也不失做河南公。 
English: If not, he will turn his head to the north and become a Henan official.

古文：梁武报曰： 唯应送家还都以安慰之，自然无患。
现代文：萧衍回信说 ：您惟有送家眷还都，以安慰齐帝，自然可以免除祸患。
English: Xiao Yan replied to the letter, saying, "Only if you send your family back to the capital to comfort Qi Di, can you naturally be exempted from the disaster."

古文：若意外相逼，当勒马二万人，直出横江，以断其后，则天下事一举可定。
现代文：如果他意外相逼，当统率二万人马，直逼长江，以断绝建业的后路，那么天下的大事可一举而定。
English: If he is unexpectedly forced, when the leader leads twenty thousand people, straight to the Yangtze River, to cut off the construction industry, then the world's major events can be determined in one fell swoop.

古文：若欲北向，彼必遣人相代，以河北一地相处，河南公宁复可得？
现代文：如若回首北向，他必派人代替你，你孤守河北一地，想做河南公怎么可以得到？
English: If you turn your head to the north, he will send someone to replace you. You are alone in Hebei. If you want to be a Henan prince, how can you get it?

古文：如此，则南归望绝矣。 
现代文：这样，南归的希望就断绝了。 
English: In this way, the hope of returning to the south was cut off.

古文：叔业沉疑未决，遣信诣豫州刺史薛真度，访入北之宜。
现代文：叔业犹豫未决，又送信给北魏豫州刺史薛真度，访求北归之计。
English: Uncle Ye hesitated, and then sent a letter to the Northern Wei Emperor Xue Zhendu, the governor of Yuzhou, asking him to return to the north.

古文：真度答书，盛陈朝廷风化。叔业乃遣子芬之及兄女夫韦伯昕奉表内附。
现代文：真度在回信中盛陈北魏朝廷的风俗教化，叔业便派遣儿子裴芬之和自己哥哥的女婿韦伯昕奉表向北魏归附。
English: In his reply, Zhen Du praised the Northern Wei imperial court's custom of enlightenment, and his uncle sent his son Pei Fenzhi and his brother's son-in-law, Wei Bo Xifeng, to join the Northern Wei.

古文：景明元年正月，宣武诏授叔业持节、散骑常侍、都督、豫州刺史、征南将军，封兰陵郡公。
现代文：景明元年正月，北魏宣武帝元恪下诏授叔业为使持节、散骑常侍、都督、豫州刺史、征南将军，封为兰陵郡公。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Wu of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued an edict awarding him the titles of Envoy, Cavalryman, Governor, Governor of Yuzhou, and General of the Southern Expedition, and he was awarded the title of Lanling County Governor.

古文：又赐叔业玺书，遣彭城王勰、尚书令王肃赴接。
现代文：又赐给他玺书，派遣彭城王元勰、尚书令王肃去迎接他。
English: He also gave him an imperial edict to send Pengcheng Wang Yuanxuan and Shangshu Wang Su to meet him.

古文：谓崇还北，遂与别驾郑祖起等送子十四人于梁。
现代文：军队没有渡过淮河，裴叔业病卒。李元护、席法友等人推举叔业哥哥的儿子裴植监管州事。
English: The army did not cross the Huai River, and Pei Xiuye died of illness. Li Yuanguo, Xi Fa You and others elected Pei Zhi, the son of Xiuye's brother, to supervise state affairs.

古文：崇勒水军讨之，众溃见获，投水而死。植字文远，叔业兄叔宝子也。
现代文：宣武帝下诏赠叔业为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，并赠给棺木一口。裴植，字文远，叔业的兄长叔宝的儿子。
English: Emperor Xuanwu issued an imperial edict to bestow upon Shuhei the title of General of the Horse Cavalry, Kefu Yi and the Three Departments, and also presented him with a piece of coffin.

古文：少而好学，览综经史，尤长释典，善谈理义。
现代文：少小酷好读书，博览经史，尤长于佛教经典，善于谈论佛家义理。
English: Xiao Xiao is good at reading, well-versed in history, especially in Buddhist classics, and good at talking about Buddhist principles.

古文：随叔业在寿春。
现代文：跟随裴叔业在寿春任上。
English: He will follow Pei Shuhei in the Shouchun post.

古文：叔业卒，席法友、柳玄达等共举植监州。
现代文：叔业病卒，席法友、柳玄达等共同推举裴植监理州事。
English: Shude's sick pupil, the chair of Falun Gong, Liu Xenda and others jointly nominated Pei Zhi for the supervision of state affairs.

古文：秘叔业丧问，教命处分，皆出于植。
现代文：封锁叔业丧事的消息，下达命令，处理政事，都出于裴植的主张。
English: Blocking the news of his uncle's funeral, issuing orders, and handling political affairs were all based on Pei Zhi's opinion.

古文：于是开门纳魏军。
现代文：然后打开城门迎纳前来接管的魏军。
English: Then the city gates were opened to welcome the Wei army that came to take over.

古文：诏以植为衮州刺史、崇义县侯，入为大鸿胪卿。
现代文：宣武帝下诏命裴植为兖州刺史、崇义县侯，又入朝为大鸿胪卿。
English: Emperor Xuanwu issued an imperial edict to appoint Pei Zhi as the governor of Zhangzhou and the governor of Chongyi County, and he also entered the imperial court as the Great Honored One.

古文：后以长子昕南叛，有司处之大辟，诏特恕其罪，以表勋诚。
现代文：后来，因为他的长子裴昕叛投南朝，有司给他大辟的处置。昭武帝特意下诏免去他的罪过，以表示不忘他过去的功勋。
English: Later, because his eldest son, Pei Jun, had defected to the Southern Dynasty, he was dealt with harshly. Emperor Shōmu specifically issued an edict to absolve him of his sins, to show that he would not forget his past merits.

古文：寻除授扬州大中正，出为瀛州刺史，再迁度支尚书，加金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：不久，授他为扬州大中正，又命他为瀛州刺史。再升任为度支尚书，加金紫光禄大夫衔。
English: Not long after, he was awarded the title of Yangzhou Senior Middle School Principal, and he was also appointed as Zhangzhou Senior Historian. He was then promoted to Duozhi Senior Scholar, and was awarded the title of Jin Ziguanglu Doctor.

古文：植性非柱石，所为无恆。
现代文：裴植的性情品格并非是柱石人物，所作所为很不稳定。
English: Pei Zhi's temperamental character is not a pillar figure, and his behavior is very unstable.

古文：衮州之还也，表请解官，隐于嵩山，宣武不许，深以为怪。
现代文：从兖州刺史任上回来后，上表请求解除官职，到嵩山隐居。宣武帝不允许，对他的做法很是奇怪。
English: After returning from his post as the governor of Zhangzhou, he asked the emperor to relieve him of his official duties and live in seclusion in Songshan. Emperor Xuanwu did not allow this, which was very strange for him.

古文：然公私集论，自言人门不后王肃，怪朝廷处之不高。
现代文：然而，在各种场合他与人们议论，却说自己并不比先前由南齐归顺的王肃差，从而埋怨朝廷对待他不优厚。
English: However, on various occasions, he argued with people, but said that he was no worse than Wang Su, who had previously surrendered from Nanqi, and complained that the imperial court treated him less favorably.

古文：及为尚书，志意颇满，欲以政事为己任，谓人曰： 非我须尚书，尚书亦须我。 
现代文：等到当上尚书，志得意满，想把政事当作自己的神圣职责，对别人说： 不是我一定要当尚书，尚书也必须由我来当。 
English: When he becomes a Shangshu, he is full of pride and wants to treat political affairs as his sacred duty, saying to others: I don't have to be a Shangshu, I have to be a Shangshu.

古文：辞气激扬，见于言色。
现代文：言词激扬慷慨，见形于色。
English: Words inspire generosity, and it shows.

古文：及入参议论，时对众官，面有讥毁。
现代文：等到入朝参与政事的讨论，不断对众官讥讽诋毁。
English: He waited until he entered the imperial court to participate in the discussion of political affairs, and he constantly ridiculed and slandered the officials.

古文：又表毁征南将军田益宗，言华夷异类，不应在百世衣冠之上。
现代文：又上表攻击征南将军田益宗，说：华夏人和蛮人不是同类，他的地位不应该在累世为官的人上面。
English: He also publicly attacked Tian Yizong, general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, saying: "Hua Xia people and barbarians are not the same, and his position should not be above those who have been officials for generations."

古文：率多侵侮，皆此类也。
现代文：对人的轻慢污辱，都与此相同。
English: Petty insults to people are all the same.

古文：侍中于忠、黄门元昭览之切齿，寝而不奏。
现代文：侍中于忠、黄门元昭看了他的奏疏十分反感，压下来没有送给宣武帝。
English: The attendants Yu Zhong and Huang Men Yuan Zhao were very disgusted by his recitation and did not give it to Emperor Xuanwu.

古文：韦伯昕告植欲谋废黜。尚书又奏，羊祉告植姑子皇甫仲达，云受植旨，遂诈称被诏，率合部曲，欲图领军于忠。
现代文：韦伯昕告发裴植阴谋废黜明帝，尚书又奏报羊祉告裴植姑母的儿子皇甫仲达，说仲达受裴植的指使，诈称有皇帝诏书，率领部队，想图谋领军于忠。
English: Webber denounced Pei Zhi's plot to depose the Ming Emperor, and Shangshu also reported to Wang Zhi that the son of Pei Zhi's aunt, Emperor Fu Zhongda, had been instructed by Pei Zhi to falsely claim to have the Emperor's edict and to lead the troops, and to try to lead the troops to Zhong.

古文：时忠专权，既构成其祸，又矫诏杀之，朝野称冤。
现代文：当时于忠擅权，便构成罪状，又假借诏命，将裴植杀害，朝野上下为之称冤。
English: At that time, Yu Zhong's usurpation of power constituted a crime, and he killed Pei Zhi under the pretext of the imperial edict, and the court and the country praised him.

古文：临终，神志自若，遗令子弟，命尽之后，剪落须发，被以法服，以沙门礼葬于嵩高之阴。
现代文：临终时，他神色自若，嘱告子弟：被害之后，剪掉他的头发胡须，给他穿上和尚的衣服，用佛门礼仪将他埋葬在嵩山之阴。
English: At the end of his life, he looked confident and told his son: After the accident, cut off his hair and beard, dress him in a monk's robe, and bury him in the shade of Mount Song with Buddhist etiquette.

古文：初，植与仆射郭祚、都水使者韦俊等同时见害。后祚、俊事雪加赠，而植追复封爵而已。
现代文：最初，裴植与仆射郭祚、都水使者韦俊等人同时遇害，后来，郭祚、韦俊的事情得以昭雪，并加赠职衔，而裴植只是追封原来的封爵而已。
English: At first, Pei Zhi was killed at the same time as his henchmen Guo Zhi and Wei Jun, the messenger of the capital's water, and so on. Later, Guo Zhi and Wei Jun's cases were cleared up, and they were given official titles, while Pei Zhi was only posthumously knighted.

古文：植故吏勃海刁冲上疏讼之，于是赠尚书仆射、扬州刺史，乃改葬。
现代文：他的部下渤海人刁冲上疏辩争，于是，朝廷赠封为尚书仆射、扬州刺史，又重新改葬。
English: His subordinates rushed to argue, so the court granted him the title of Shangshu, Yangzhou, and re-buried.

古文：植母，夏侯道迁姊也。性甚刚峻，于诸子皆如严君。
现代文：裴植的母亲是夏侯道迁的姐姐，性情刚毅，对待孩子尤如严父。
English: Pei Zhi's mother was the sister of Xia Hou Dao Qian. She was a strong-willed person and treated her children just like her strict father.

古文：长成后，非衣幍不见，小有罪过，必束带伏门，经五三日乃引见之，督以严训。
现代文：孩子长大后，如不穿戴整齐，就不见他们。他们如小有过失，也必须穿戴整齐，跪伏在门外，经三五日后才让人引见，用严词督责。
English: When children grow up, if they are not neatly dressed, they will not be seen. If they are small and make a mistake, they must also be neatly dressed, kneel outside the door, and after three or five days, they will be introduced, and they will be severely reprimanded.

古文：唯少子衍得以常服见之，旦夕温凊。
现代文：惟有小儿子裴衍可以穿寻常衣服见她，早晚侍奉左右。
English: Only her youngest son, Pei Yan, can see her in ordinary clothes, and he serves her in the morning and evening.

古文：植在瀛州也，其母年逾七十，以身为婢，自施三宝，布衣麻菲，手执箕帚于沙门寺扫洒。
现代文：裴植在瀛州时，他的母亲年逾七十，到寺院舍身为婢，每天布衣麻裙，拿着扫帚簸箕到沙门寺洒扫庭院。
English: When Pei Zhi was in Zhangzhou, his mother, who was over seventy years old, went to the temple to live as a maid, wore a linen skirt every day, and took a broom to the Shamen Temple to sweep the courtyard.

古文：植弟瑜、粲、衍并亦奴仆之服，泣涕而从，有感道俗。
现代文：裴植的弟弟裴瑜、裴粲、裴衍也穿着奴仆的衣服，流着眼泪跟从，僧道凡俗都很受感动。
English: Pei Zhi's younger brothers, Pei Yu, Pei Xuan, and Pei Yan, also wore the clothes of slaves and followed him with tears streaming down their faces. They were deeply moved by his monastic life.

古文：诸子各以布帛数百赎免其母，于是出家为比丘。入嵩高积岁，乃还家。
现代文：她的儿子们各以布帛数百匹赎回母亲，后来她出家为尼，入嵩山好几年才回来。
English: Her sons each ransomed hundreds of horses for their mother, and later she became a nun and went into the mountains for several years before returning.

古文：飏弟瑜，字文琬，封下密县子，试守荥阳郡，坐虐暴杀人免官。
现代文：裴植既为长子，母亲又年纪高迈，他在数处任职，只让妻子跟自己生活。
English: As the eldest son of an elderly mother, Pei Zhi worked in several places and only allowed his wife to live with him.

古文：后徙封灌津子，卒于勃海太守，赠豫州刺史，谥曰定。
现代文：虽然也送禄米奉养母亲及各个兄弟，却家产有别，同居而分炊。
English: Although they also send rice to support their mother and various brothers, they have different family assets, live together and cook separately.

古文：瑜弟粲，字文亮，封舒县子。
现代文：一家数灶，也是江南的习俗，但论者多借此讥笑他。
English: It is also a custom in the south of the Yangtze River for a family to have several stoves, but the critics mostly use this to ridicule him.

古文：沉重善风仪，颇以骄豪为失。
现代文：裴粲，字文亮，被封为舒县子，性情沉稳，注重风度仪表，颇以骄横豪纵为做人的失误。
English: Pei Xuan, his words are bright, he was awarded the title of Shuxianzi, his temperament is stable, he pays attention to his demeanor and appearance, and he is quite arrogant and arrogant.

古文：历正平、恆农二郡太守。
现代文：先后任正平、恒农两郡的太守。
English: He was successively appointed as the governor of the two counties of Zhengping and Hengnong.

古文：高阳王雍曾以事属粲，粲不从，雍甚为恨。
现代文：高阳王元雍曾有事嘱托他办理，他不同意，元雍十分恼恨。
English: Goyang King Yuan Yong once asked him to handle something. He did not agree, and Yuan Yong was very angry.

古文：后因九日马射，敕畿内太守皆赴京师，雍时为州牧，粲修谒，雍含怒待之。
现代文：过后不久，适逢九月九日举行马射，皇帝命令京畿内的太守都到京师观看。元雍当时为州牧，裴粲去拜谒，元雍怒气冲冲地接待他。
English: Not long after that, when the horse shooting was held on September 9, the emperor ordered the governors of Gyeonggi Province to come to the capital to watch. At that time, Yuan Yong was the provincial governor, Pei Jun went to pay homage, and Yuan Yong received him angrily.

古文：粲神情闲迈，举止抑扬，雍目而不觉解颜。
现代文：裴粲神情闲适俊迈，举止抑扬有礼，元雍见了不觉怒气稍解。
English: Pei Yao's face was relaxed and handsome, his demeanor was restrained and polite, and Yuan Yong's anger was slightly relieved when he saw him.

古文：及坐定，谓粲曰： 可更为一行。 
现代文：等到坐定后，对裴粲说 ：可出去再走一趟。 
English: After he was seated, he said to Baizhang, "You can go out and take another walk."

古文：粲便下席为行，从容而出。
现代文：裴粲便离席又走了一趟，然后从容离去。
English: Pei Yao then left the table and walked one more time, and then calmly left.

古文：坐事免。
现代文：因获罪被免官。
English: He was removed from office as a result of his conviction.

古文：后宣武闻粲善自标置，欲观其风度，令传诏就家急召之，须臾间，使者相属，合家恇惧，不测所以，粲更恬然，神色不变。帝叹异之。
现代文：后来，宣武帝听说裴粲喜欢自我标榜名分地位，想看看他的风度，令人传旨到家里召见他。短短的时间内使者一个接着一个，全家都很恐惧，不知道发生了什么事。裴粲更加恬静，神色不变，宣武帝对他十分惊叹和奇异。
English: Later, Emperor Xuanwu heard that Pei Yao liked to flaunt his fame and status, and wanted to see his demeanor, so he sent messengers to his home to summon him. In a short time, the messengers followed one after another, and the whole family was afraid and did not know what had happened. Pei Yao was more quiet and his appearance remained unchanged. Emperor Xuanwu was very surprised and strange about him.

古文：时仆射高肇以外戚之贵，势倾一时，朝士见者，咸望尘拜谒。
现代文：当时，仆射高肇凭借外戚的地位权倾一时，朝廷官员遇见他，都远远地下拜。
English: At that time, because of his status as a maternal relative, the imperial court officials bowed down to him when they met him.

古文：粲候肇，唯长揖而已。
现代文：裴粲遇见他，惟双手一揖而已。
English: Pei Xuan met him, but only managed to escape with his hands tied.

古文：及还，家人尤责之，粲曰： 何可自同凡俗也。 
现代文：回到家，家人都埋怨他，他说： 我怎么能同那些凡夫俗子一样呢？ 
English: Back home, his family complained about him, and he said: "How can I be like those ordinary people?

古文：又曾诣清河王怿，下车始进，便属暴雨，粲容步舒雅，不以霑、濡改节。
现代文：又曾经去拜谒清河王元怿，下车刚要进门，便下起暴雨。裴粲步态从容娴雅，不因淋湿衣服而改变应有的礼节。
English: He once went to pay homage to the King of the Qing River, Wang Yuanxuan. As soon as he got off the bus and was about to enter the door, a heavy rain began to fall. Pei Xuan's gait was relaxed and elegant, and he did not change the proper etiquette because his clothes were wet.

古文：怿乃令人持盖覆之，叹谓左右曰： 何代无奇人！ 
现代文：元怿便令人给他撑伞，感叹地对左右说： 哪一个朝代没有奇人啊！ 
English: Yuan Xuan had people hold up umbrellas for him, and exclaimed to the left and right, "Which dynasty doesn't have a miracle worker?"

古文：性好释学，亲升讲座，虽持义未精，而风韵可重。但不涉经史，终为知音所轻。
现代文：裴粲喜好佛学，亲自讲佛说法，虽然持义不精，而精神弥足珍重，但却疏于儒家经典，始终为熟悉他的人所轻视。
English: Pei Jiong liked Buddhism and personally spoke Buddhist terms. Although he held the principles and spirit of Buddhism very dear, he was not familiar with the Confucian classics and was always despised by those who knew him well.

古文：后为扬州大中正、中书令。
现代文：后来，他相继任扬州大中正、中书令。
English: Later, he successively served as Yangzhou University's vice-president and secretary.

古文：明帝释奠，以为侍讲，转金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：孝明帝举行释奠礼，让他充任侍讲，又转为金紫光禄大夫。
English: Emperor Xiaoming held a memorial service, allowing him to serve as an attendant speaker, and he was also transferred to the position of the golden purple light doctor.

古文：元颢入洛，以粲为西衮州刺史，寻为濮阳太守崔巨伦所逐，弃州入嵩高山。
现代文：北海王元颢入洛后，命裴粲为西兖州刺史。不久，他被濮阳太守崔巨伦驱逐，便丢弃州城，逃入嵩山。
English: After the North Sea King Yuan Xuan entered Luo, his life, Pei Xuan, went down in history as the founder of Xishuanzhou. Soon after, he was expelled by the governor of Shenyang, Cui Julun, and he abandoned the state capital and fled to Songshan.

古文：节闵帝初，复为中书令。
现代文：节闵帝元恭初登帝位，任他为中书令。
English: Emperor Yuan Rong ascended to the throne for the first time, and he was appointed to the position of Censer.

古文：后正月晦，帝出临洛滨，粲起御前，再拜上寿酒。帝曰： 昔北海入朝，暂窃神器，尔日卿戒之以酒；今欲我饮，何异于往情？ 
现代文：正月晦日，节闵帝出游至洛水之滨，裴粲恭恭敬敬地献上寿酒，节闵帝说： 过去北海王占据京城暂时窃取了国柄，你却告诫他不要饮酒，今天却要让我饮，为什么和从前不一样了呢？ 
English: On the New Year's Eve, Emperor Jiechi went to Luoshui's waterfront, and Pei Jiechi respectfully presented the anniversary wine. Emperor Jiechi said: In the past, the North Sea King occupied Beijing and temporarily stole the national pride, but you warned him not to drink, but today you want me to drink, why is it different from before?

古文：粲曰： 北海志在沈湎，故谏其所失，陛下齐圣温克，臣敢献微诚。 
现代文：裴粲说 ：北海王沉湎酒色，所以劝谏他的过失；陛下智虑敏达，蕴藉自持，所以，臣我敢献上一片微薄的忠诚。 
English: Pei Yao said, "The king of the North Sea was drunk, so I advised him of his faults; Your Majesty is wise and has self-control, so I dare to offer a meager piece of loyalty."

古文：帝曰： 甚愧来誉。 
现代文：节闵帝说 ：十分惭愧你的赞誉。 
English: Emperor Jiechi said, "I am quite ashamed of your praise."

古文：仍为命酌。
现代文：便命饮酒。
English: He drank himself to death.

古文：孝武初，出为骠骑大将军、胶州刺史。
现代文：孝武帝即位之初，任裴粲为骠骑大将军、胶州刺史。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Xiaowu's accession to the throne, Pei Jun was appointed as the cavalry general and Jiaozhou stabbed history.

古文：属时亢旱，土人劝令祷于海神。
现代文：当时大旱，当地人劝他向海神祈祷。
English: At that time, there was a severe drought, and the locals advised him to pray to the sea god.

古文：粲惮违众人，乃为祈请，直据胡床，举杯曰： 仆白君。 
现代文：裴粲怕违拗众人的意愿，便为之祈祷。他径直坐在椅子上，举起杯子说 ：我如何与海神对话？ 
English: Afraid of going against the will of the people, Pei Jun prayed for them. He sat upright in his chair, raised his cup and said, "How can I talk to the sea god?"

古文：左右云： 前后例皆拜谒。 
现代文：周围人对他说 ：过去都照例要向海神拜谒。 
English: People around him said to him: In the past, it was customary to worship the sea god.

古文：粲曰： 五岳视三公，四渎视诸侯，安有方伯致礼海神。 
现代文：裴粲说 ：三公犹如五岳，四渎好比诸侯，地方大吏怎么能向海神下拜致礼？ 
English: Pei Yao said, "The three kings are like the five mountains, and the four villains are like the lords. How can local officials bow to the sea god?"

古文：卒不肯拜。
现代文：终于不肯向海神下拜。
English: He finally refused to bow down to the sea god.

古文：时青州叛贼耿翔寇乱三齐，粲唯高谭虚论，不事防御之术。
现代文：其时，青州一带有叛贼耿翔在山东一带纵横，裴粲只会高谈阔论，不进行防御。
English: At that time, Geng Xiang, a traitor from Qingzhou, was rampant in the Shandong area. Pei Xuan would only talk and not defend himself.

古文：翔乘其无备，掩袭州城。左右白言贼至，粲云： 岂有此理！ 
现代文：耿翔乘他没有准备，进攻州城，僚属对他说贼兵已经攻城，他说： 真是岂有此理！ 
English: Taking advantage of his lack of preparation, Geng Xiang attacked the provincial capital. His colleagues and subordinates told him that the bandits had already attacked the city, and he said: "Really, there is no reason for this!

古文：左右又言 已入州门！ 
现代文：手下人又告诉他 ：贼兵已攻入州城城门。 
English: His subordinates also told him that the robber soldiers had broken into the gate of the state capital.

古文：粲乃徐云： 耿王可引上听事，自余部众，且付城人。 
现代文：他才慢吞吞地说 ：可将耿大王引上官厅，其余部众暂且交给城内百姓料理。 
English: He only said slowly and hesitantly, "We can bring King Geng to the government office, and leave the rest of the group to the people in the city to cook for the time being."

古文：年十七，父母为结婚韦氏，道迁云： 欲怀四方之志，不愿取妇。 
现代文：不通达事变到了如此荒唐的程度。不久被耿翔所害，将他的首级送给了南梁。夏侯道迁，谯国人。从小就有志气节操，十七岁时，父母为他娶妻韦氏，道迁说： 我怀有四方之志，不愿意娶妻。 
English: Soon, he was victimized by Geng Xiang and sent his severed head to Nan Liang. Xia Hou Dao Qian, a native of Shandong Province, had a strong will from a young age. At the age of seventeen, his parents married him to Wei Shi. Dao Qian said, "I have a four-way ambition, and I don't want to marry a wife."

古文：家人咸谓戏言。及婚，求觅不知所在。
现代文：家人都认为这是戏言，等到办婚事时，竟然找不到他的下落！
English: His family thought it was a joke, but when it came time for the wedding, they couldn't find out where he was!

古文：访问，乃云逃入益州。
现代文：到处打听，有人说他逃到了益州。
English: I asked around, and someone said that he had fled to Yizhou.

古文：后随裴叔业于寿春，为南谯太守。
现代文：后来，追随裴叔业到了寿春，任南谯太守，他们俩家虽有姻亲，关系却不融洽。
English: Later, he followed Pei Shuhei to Shuchun and was appointed as the governor of Nanlu. Although the two families were related by marriage, their relationship was not harmonious.

古文：二家虽为姻好，亲情不协，遂单骑归魏，拜骁骑将军，随王肃至寿春。
现代文：后来夏侯道迁单人独骑，归顺北魏，被任命为骁骑将军，随王肃到寿春。
English: Later, Xia Hou Dao Qian rode alone and surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty. He was appointed as a cavalry general and rode with Wang Su to Shuchun.

古文：肃薨，道迁弃戍南叛。
现代文：王肃死后，道迁放弃他戍守的地方投降南朝。
English: After the death of Wang Su, Dao Qian surrendered to the Southern Dynasty.

古文：会梁以庄丘黑为征虏将军、梁秦二州刺史，镇南郑。
现代文：适逢南梁庄丘黑任征虏将军、梁州与秦州刺史，镇守南郑。
English: At the same time, Nan Liangzhuang Qiuhe Rong was conscripted as a general, Liangzhou and Qinzhou were attacked, and Nan Zheng became the town guard.

古文：黑请道迁为长史，带汉中郡。
现代文：庄丘黑请道迁任长史，兼管汉中郡。
English: Zhuangqiu Hei was transferred to Changshi, also in charge of Hanzhong County.

古文：会黑死，而道迁阴图归顺。
现代文：庄丘黑去世，夏侯道迁暗中打算重新归顺北魏。
English: After the death of Zhuang Qiuhe, Xia Hou Dao Qian secretly planned to return to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：先是，仇池镇将杨灵珍反叛南奔，梁以灵珍为征虏将军，假武都王，助戍汉中。
现代文：先是北魏仇池镇将杨灵珍叛降南朝，南梁任命他为征虏将军，并授予武都王，让他帮助戍守汉中。
English: First, the Northern Wei Qiu Chi Town rebelled Yang Lingzhen to the Southern Dynasty, Nan Liang appointed him as a conscript general, and awarded him to King Wu Du to help him defend the Han Dynasty.

古文：道迁乃击灵珍，斩其父子，送首于京师。
现代文：道迁便率军进攻杨灵珍，杀死杨家父子，将他们的人头送到北魏首都。
English: Daoxin then led his army to attack Yang Lingzhen, killed Yang's father and son, and sent their heads to the capital of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：江悦之等推道迁为梁、秦二州刺史。
现代文：江悦之等人推举道迁为梁、秦二州的刺史。
English: Jiang Yuezhi and others proposed the relocation of the road to Liang, and the history of Qin Erzhou.

古文：道迁遣表归阙，诏玺书慰勉，授持节、散骑常侍、平南将军、豫州刺史，封丰县侯，遣尚书邢峦指授节度。
现代文：道迁派人上表向北魏表示归顺，魏帝下诏书对他慰勉，授给他持节、散骑常侍、平南将军、豫州刺史等职务，又封为丰县侯，派尚书刑峦去他的驻地接洽调度。
English: Dao Qian sent a person to the table to express his submission to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and the Emperor of Wei issued an edict to console him, awarded him with the positions of holding the festival, horseback riding attendant, Pingnan general, and Yuzhou historian, and was also named the lord of Feng County, and sent Shang Shuxi to his residence to contact the dispatch.

古文：道迁表受平南、常侍，而辞豫州、丰县侯，引裴叔业公爵为例。宣武不许。
现代文：夏侯道迁上表接受平南将军、常侍的职务，而辞去豫州刺史、丰县侯，并援引裴叔业归顺封为公爵的例子要求加封，宣武帝不同意。
English: Xia Hou Dao moved up the table to accept the post of Pingnan general and attendant, and resigned from the post of Yuzhou governor and Feng County governor, and cited the example of Pei Shiye's transfer to Shunfeng as a duke to request an additional seal. Emperor Xuanwu did not agree.

古文：道迁自南郑来朝京师，引见于太极东堂，免冠徒跣谢曰： 比在寿春，遭韦缵之酷，申控无所，致此猖狂。
现代文：夏侯道迁从南郑到京师朝见宣武帝，宣武帝在太极殿东堂接见了他。他免冠赤足，谢罪说： 过去在寿春，因遭受韦缵的挟制，又没有地方申辩，所以背叛南投。
English: Xia Hou Dao Qian traveled from Nanzheng to Beijing to meet Emperor Xuanwu. Emperor Xuanwu received him in the East Hall of the Taiji Temple. He was barefoot and barefooted. Xie Sin said: In the past, in Shouchun, because he was under pressure from Wei Wei, and there was no place to defend himself, he betrayed Nantou.

古文：是段之来，希酬昔遇。 
现代文：这次归顺，是想报答您过去对我的恩遇。 
English: This surrender is to repay your kindness to me in the past.

古文：宣武曰： 卿建为山之功，一篑之玷，何足谢也。 
现代文：宣武帝说 ：你建立山岳般的功劳，一点小小的过失，何足谢罪呢？ 
English: Emperor Xuanwu said: You have built up a mountain of merits, a little small fault, how much do you thank sin?

古文：道迁以赏报为微，逡巡不拜，寻改封濮阳县侯。
现代文：道迁以自己对朝廷的贡献太小为借口，犹豫着不拜受皇帝给他的各种封赏。不久，又改封他为濮阳侯。
English: On the pretext that his contribution to the imperial court was too small, Dao Qian hesitated to accept the various rewards given to him by the emperor. Soon, he changed his title to the Prince of Shenyang.

古文：岁余，频表解州，宣武许之。除南衮州大中正，不拜。
现代文：过了一年多，不断上表要求解除刺史职务，宣武帝同意他的要求，又授他为南兖州大中正，他没有接受。
English: After more than a year, he repeatedly petitioned to be relieved of the post of chief historian. Emperor Xuanwu agreed to his request, and also awarded him the title of vice-president of the South Luzhou University, which he did not accept.

古文：道迁虽学不深洽，而历览书史，闲习尺牍。
现代文：夏侯道迁虽然学问不深邃博洽，却广览经典史书，熟于尺牍文书。
English: Although Xia Hou Dao Qian did not have a profound knowledge of learning, he read a wide range of classic history books and was proficient in shakuhachi instruments.

古文：好言宴，务口实，京师珍羞，罔不毕有。
现代文：喜好宴饮以饱口福，京城中的美食佳肴，没有不吃过的。
English: If you like feasting, you'll be spoilt for choice. There's no gourmet delicacy in the capital that you haven't tried.

古文：于京城西水次市地，大起园池，殖列蔬果，延致秀彦，时往游适。
现代文：他在京城西的水面旁买下一片地，开挖池塘，修建园田，养殖水产，种植果木菜蔬，经常延纳俊秀才学之士前来游玩。
English: He bought a piece of land next to the water in the west of the capital, dug a pond, built gardens, farmed aquatic products, planted fruits and vegetables, and often invited talented scholars to visit.

古文：妓妾十余，常自娱乐，国秩岁入三千余匹，专供酒馔，不营家产。
现代文：蓄养十余名歌妓，经常歌舞娱乐。朝廷每年发给他的三千余匹俸禄，都用于饮酒吃饭，却不去经营家产。
English: He kept more than ten courtesans and often entertained with song and dance. The imperial court gave him a stipend of more than three thousand rupees every year, which was used for drinking and eating, but not for managing the family property.

古文：每诵孔融语曰： 坐上客恆满，樽中酒不空，余非吾事也。 
现代文：他常常吟诵孔融的诗句说 ： 坐上客恒满，樽中酒不空 ，其他都不是我的事呀。 
English: He often recited a poem by Kong Rong, saying: "The guests are always full, the wine in the barrel is never empty, everything else is none of my business."

古文：识者多之。
现代文：和他结交的人很多。
English: He's got a lot of friends.

古文：历华、瀛二州刺史，为政清严，善禁盗贼。
现代文：任华州、瀛州刺史时，为政清廉严谨，善于禁止盗贼。
English: When he was in charge of making history in Huazhou and Zhangzhou, he was a clean and rigorous politician, and was good at prohibiting thieves.

古文：卒，赠雍州刺史，谥明侯。
现代文：死后，赠封雍州刺史，谥爵号明侯。
English: After his death, he was given the title of Yongzhou Jishi and the title of Ming Marquis.

古文：初，道迁以拔汉中归诚本由王颍兴之计，求分邑户五百封之，宣武不许。
现代文：最初，道迁率汉中军民归顺，实在是听从了王颖兴的劝告，因而，请求朝廷分封五百户的采邑给王颖兴，宣武帝不同意。
English: At first, Emperor Xuanwu did not agree with Wang Yingxing's suggestion that the imperial court should give Wang Yingxing the fief of five hundred households.

古文：灵太后临朝，道迁重求分封，太后大奇之，议欲更以三百户封颍兴，会卒，遂寝。
现代文：灵太后临朝摄政，道迁重新要求分封，灵太后十分惊奇，准备将三百户采邑封给王颖兴。
English: After the Lingdai became the regent of the imperial court, the Daoqian once again demanded the division of the territory. The Lingdai was very surprised and prepared to give Wang Yingxing the territory of 300 households.

古文：道迁不聘正室，唯有庶子数人。长子夬？
现代文：不久，颖兴去世事情才停下来。道迁没娶正室，只有侧室生的几个儿子。夏侯夬，字元廷。
English: Soon after Ying Xing's death, things came to a halt. Dao Qian did not marry his legal wife, but had several sons by his concubines. Xia Houyao, Zi Yuanting.

古文：字元廷，历镇远将军、南衮州大中正。
现代文：夏侯道迁的长子。历任镇远将军、南兖州大中正。
English: The eldest son of Xia Hou Dao Qian. Successive Zhenyuan generals, South Luzhou University junior high school.

古文：夬性好酒，居丧不戚，醇醪肥鲜，不离于口，沽买饮啖，多所费用。
现代文：夏侯夬喜好饮酒，居丧时并不忧伤，醇酒美味不离于口。沽酒买菜，耗资颇多。
English: Xia Houyao likes to drink alcohol, he is not sad when he is in mourning, and the taste of alcohol is never far from his mouth. He spends a lot of money to buy food.

古文：父时田园，货卖略尽，人间债犹数千余匹，谷食至常不足，弟妹不免饥寒。
现代文：父亲置买的田园，售卖殆尽，而欠下的债务却还有数千匹，粗茶淡饭常常不能满足，弟妹们不免常受饥寒的煎熬。
English: The sale of the farmland bought by his father has been exhausted, but the debts owed still amount to thousands of horses. The coarse tea and light meals are often not enough, and his brothers and sisters are often suffering from hunger and cold.

古文：初，道迁知夬好酒，不欲传授国封。
现代文：开初，道迁知道他贪酒，不想把朝廷的封号传授给他。
English: At the beginning, the Dao Qian knew that he was a heavy drinker and did not want to pass on the imperial seal to him.

古文：夬未亡前，忽梦见征虏将军房世宝至其家听事，与其父坐，屏人密言。
现代文：他没死前，忽然梦见征虏将军房世宝到他家大厅，与他父亲坐定，便摒去左右密语。
English: Before he died, he suddenly had a dream in which he saw a conquering general from the House of World Treasures come to the hall of his house, sit down with his father, and then go off to have a secret talk with him.

古文：夬心惊惧，谓人曰： 世宝为官，少间必击我也。 
现代文：他心里惊惧，对人说 ：房世宝来，官府过不了多久必定来打我。 
English: He was frightened in his heart and said to the people: "Come, you treasures of the world, the government will surely come to beat me before long."

古文：寻有人至，云： 官呼郎 ，随召即去，遣左右杖之二百，不胜楚痛，大叫。
现代文：不大一会儿，有人来喊： 官府召你去！ 他随来人去了，官长命左右打他二百杖，十分痛楚，大声喊叫。
English: Not long after, someone came and shouted, "The government has summoned you!" He went with them, and the officials beat him with two hundred canes until he died. He was in great pain and cried out loudly.

古文：良久乃悟，流汗彻于寝具。
现代文：过了很久才知道是一场惊梦，汗水浸透了睡衣被褥。
English: It took me a long time to realize it was a bad dream. My pajamas and bedding were soaked with sweat.

古文：至明，前京城太守赵卓诣之，见其衣湿，谓夬曰： 卿昨夜当大饮，溺衣如此。 
现代文：天明后，前京城太守赵卓来看他，见他衣服湿透，对他说： 你昨晚一定又喝了许多酒，将衣服弄湿成这个样子。 
English: After daybreak, Zhao Zhuo, the former governor of Beijing, came to see him. He saw that his clothes were soaking wet and said to him: You must have drunk a lot of wine last night to get your clothes wet like this.

古文：夬乃具陈所梦。
现代文：他便详细把梦中的情况述说了一遍。
English: He then described the dream in detail.

古文：先是旬余，秘书监郑道昭暴病卒，夬闻，谓卓曰： 人生何常，唯当纵饮。 
现代文：先是十多天前，秘书监郑道昭暴病死亡，他听说后对赵卓说： 人生无常，惟当纵情饮酒。 
English: First, more than ten days ago, Secretary Supervisor Zheng Dao Zhao died of violent illness. After hearing the news, he said to Zhao Zhuo: Life is impermanent, but you should indulge in drinking.

古文：于是昏酣遂甚。
现代文：于是酒醉后昏睡得更加厉害。
English: As a result, he fell into a worse coma after getting drunk.

古文：梦后，二日不能言，针之，乃得语，而犹虚劣。俄而心闷而死。
现代文：这次梦后，两天不能说话，经过针刺才能开口，而身体却很虚弱，没几天胸闷死去。
English: After this dream, I couldn't speak for two days. I had to undergo acupuncture to open my mouth, but my body was very weak, and I died of chest tightness within a few days.

古文：洗浴者视其尸体，大有杖处，青赤隐起，二百下许。
现代文：为他洗浴的人看他的尸体，有许多杖痕，隐隐呈青紫色，约有二百多处。
English: Those who bathed him looked at his corpse, which had many cane marks, faintly bluish-purple, in more than two hundred places.

古文：赠钜鹿太守。
现代文：死后，赠巨鹿太守。
English: After his death, he was given the title of Koka Taishu.

古文：初，夬与南人辛谌、庾遵、江文遥等终日游聚。酣饮之际，恆相谓曰： 人生局促，何殊朝露，坐上相看，先后间耳。
现代文：初时，他与南朝人辛谌、庚遵、江文遥等人终日游乐聚会，酒酣之际，常互相戏谑说 ：人生短暂，与晨露有什么两样？
English: In the early days, he and the Southern Dynasty people such as Xin Qi, Geng Zun and Jiang Wenyao spent the whole day having fun gatherings. While drinking wine, they often joked with each other, saying: "Life is short, what's the difference with morning dew?

古文：脱有先亡者，于良辰美景，灵前饮宴，傥或有知，庶共歆飨。 
现代文：我们在座的这些人，只不过先后都要离开人世啊。如有谁先死，活着的人选择良辰美景，在他的灵前摆宴设饮，他倘若有知，还可共同畅饮。 
English: If someone dies first, the living can choose a good time and a beautiful place to have a feast and drink in front of his soul, and if he knows, he can also drink together.

古文：及夬亡后，三月上巳，诸人相率至夬灵前，仍共酌饮。
现代文：等到夏侯夬死后，三月上已节这天，他们几个来到他的灵柩前，一起饮酒。
English: After Xia Houyi's death, on the day of the Spring Festival in March, several of them came to his coffin and drank together.

古文：时日晚天阴，室中微暗，咸见夬在坐，衣服形容，不异平昔，时执杯酒，似若献酬，但无语耳。
现代文：当时暮色已降，天气阴沉，屋子中有些昏暗，他们都看见夏侯夬坐在席上，衣服面容和平常没什么两样。不断端起酒杯，好像为大家劝饮，但却不说一句话。
English: At that time, dusk had fallen, the weather was gloomy, and the room was somewhat dim. They all saw Xia Houya sitting at the table, dressed and looking no different from usual. He kept holding up his wine glass, as if to persuade everyone to drink, but did not say a word.

古文：夬家客雍僧明心有畏恐，披帘欲出，便即僵仆，状若被殴。
现代文：他家的客人雍僧明心里害怕，掀起帘子想要出去，立即仆倒在地，样子好像被人殴打一样。
English: The guest of his family, the Yong Monk, was clearly scared. He lifted the curtain to go out and immediately fell to the ground, looking as if he had been beaten.

古文：夬从兄欣宗云： 今是节日，诸人忆弟畴昔之言，故来共饮。
现代文：他的堂兄弟欣宗说 ：今天是节日，诸位记着兄弟过去说过的话，所以来一起饮酒。
English: His cousin, Shinzong, said, "Today is a holiday. You remember what your brothers said in the past, so let's drink together."

古文：僧明何罪，而被嗔责？ 
现代文：僧明有什么罪，却被你嗔怪责罚？ 
English: What is the sin of the monk, but you blame and punish him?

古文：及至洛阳，环堵弊庐，多与俊秀交旧，积二十余岁，殊无宦情。后为饶安县令，罢，卒。李元护，辽东襄平人，晋司徒胤之八世孙也。
现代文：僧明便慢慢醒来。而欣宗这时说的鬼话和夏侯夬活着时一样，并怒斥家人，都符合他们的情况；又揭发隐私和盗窃行为，也很有头绪。李元护，辽东襄平人，是晋朝司徒李胤的八世孙。
English: Sengming slowly woke up. And the ghost stories told by Xinzong at this time were the same as when Xia Houjun was alive, and he scolded his family, all of which were in line with their situation; he also revealed privacy and theft, which was also a good clue. Li Yuan Rong, a person from Xiangping, Liaodong, is the eighth generation grandson of Li Yan, a scholar of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：胤子顺、璠及孙沉、志皆有名宦。
现代文：李胤的儿子李顺、李，及孙子李沉、李志都是有名的官员。
English: Li Yin's sons, Li Shun and Li, and his grandsons, Li Sheng and Li Zhi, are all famous officials.

古文：沉孙根，仕慕容宝，为中书监。
现代文：李沉的孙子李根，曾在慕容宝那里任中书监。
English: Li Shen's grandson, Li Gen, once worked as a middle school librarian at Murongbao.

古文：根子后智等随慕容德南渡河，居青州，数世无名，三齐豪门多轻之。
现代文：李根的儿子李后智等随慕容德南渡黄河，在青州定居。因为李氏三代中没有出一个有名望的人，所以，山东一带的豪门大姓多看不起他们。
English: Ligen's son, Li Houzhi, and others followed Murong De Nan to cross the Yellow River and settled in Qingzhou. Because there was no one famous in the three generations of the Li clan, many wealthy families in Shandong looked down on them.

古文：元护以魏平齐后，随父怀庆南奔。
现代文：元护因北魏进攻南齐，随父亲李怀庆向南迁移。
English: Due to the Northern Wei Dynasty's attack on Nanqi, Yuan Guo migrated south with his father, Li Huaiqing.

古文：身长八尺，美须髯，少有武力。
现代文：他身高八尺，胡须飘逸俊美，从小武力过人。
English: He is eight feet tall, has a beautiful flowing beard, and has been a formidable fighter since he was a child.

古文：仕齐，位马头太守，虽以将用自达，然亦颇览文史，习于简牍。
现代文：在南齐做官，位至马头太守。虽然因军功得以升迁，然而却很读过一些文史书籍，并习练简册公文。
English: He worked as an official in Nanqi and rose to the position of Ma Tou Taishou. Although he was promoted due to his military service, he read a lot of literature and history books and practiced writing official documents.

古文：后为裴叔业司马，带汝阴太守。
现代文：后来在裴叔业部下任司马，兼汝阴太守。
English: Later, he served as Sima under Pei Shuhei, and also as Ruyin's governor.

古文：叔业归顺，元护赞同其谋。
现代文：叔业归顺北魏，元护赞同他的打算。
English: Uncle Ye surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and Yuan Rong agreed to his plan.

古文：叔业疾病，元护督率上下以俟援军。
现代文：叔业患病，元护督率叔业所有的部属以等待北魏的援军。
English: Uncle Ye fell ill, and the former curator led all of Uncle Ye's subordinates to wait for reinforcements from the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：寿春克定，元护颇有力焉。
现代文：寿春被收复，元护出了很大的力气。
English: Shuchun was recaptured, and Yuan Rong showed great strength.

古文：景明初，以元护为齐州刺史、广饶县伯。
现代文：景明初年，朝廷命元护为齐州刺史、广饶县伯。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingming, the imperial court appointed him as the guardian of the history of Qi Province and the governor of Guangrao County.

古文：寻以州人柳世明图为不轨，元护诛戮所加，微为滥酷。
现代文：不久，州人柳世明图谋不轨，元护弹压杀戮多而残酷。
English: Soon, the people of the state, Liu Shiming, plotted to derail the plan, and Yuan Baoqin crushed and killed many people cruelly.

古文：州内饥俭，表请赈贷，蠲其赋役。
现代文：州内发生饥荒，上表请求赈贷，蠲免百姓的赋税。
English: When famine struck the state, the petition called for loans and tax relief for the people.

古文：但多有部曲，时为侵扰，城邑苦之，故不得为良刺史也。三年卒。
现代文：但是，因为他的部队和家丁不断骚扰地方，人民深受其害，所以，不认为他是一个好刺史。景明三年，元护病逝。
English: However, because his troops and his family constantly harassed the region and the people suffered from it, they did not think he was a good historian. In the third year of Jingming, Yuan Gao died of illness.

古文：病前月余，京师无故传其凶问。
现代文：生病前一个多月，京城中无故传出关于他的凶讯。
English: More than a month before he fell ill, there were unwarranted rumours about him in the capital.

古文：又城外送客亭柱有人书曰 李齐州死 ，纲佐饯别者见而拭之，后复如此。
现代文：另外，在城外送客亭的柱子上有人写道 ：李齐州死。 有来送别客人的官员看见后将它擦掉，以后又出现了。
English: In addition, someone wrote "Li Qizhou died" on a pillar outside the city's guest house, and an official who came to see off the guests saw it, erased it, and later reappeared.

古文：元护妾妓十余，声色自纵。情欲既甚，支骨稍消，须长二尺，一时落尽。
现代文：元护有妻妾十多人，沉溺声色，纵欲过度，身体渐消，须长二尺，一下子脱尽。
English: Yuan Guo had more than ten wives and concubines, indulged in sex, excessively indulged in sex, his body gradually disappeared, his mustache grew two feet long, and he lost it all at once.

古文：赠青州刺史。
现代文：死后朝廷赠封他为青州刺史。
English: After his death, the imperial court granted him the title of "Qingzhou Shishi."

古文：元护为齐州，经拜旧墓，巡省故宅，飨赐村老，莫不欣暢。
现代文：元护任齐州刺史时，去拜祭自己家的祖坟，巡看旧宅，赏赐酒食给村老，众人莫不欢欣畅跃。
English: When the former guardian of the history of Qizhou died, he went to worship the ancestral tomb of his family, inspected the old house, and rewarded the village elders with wine and food. Everyone was overjoyed.

古文：及将亡，谓左右曰： 吾尝以方伯簿伍至青州，士女属目。
现代文：临终前对左右的人说 ：我曾以地方长官的身份带军队到青州，引起男女老幼们的侧目。
English: Before his death, he said to the people around him, "I once brought an army to Qingzhou as a local governor, which attracted the attention of men, women and children.

古文：若丧过东阳，不可不好设仪卫，哭泣尽哀，令观者改容也。 
现代文：如果我的灵车路过东阳，不能不好好地设置仪仗护卫，哭泣得越悲哀越好，让围观的人也为之动容呀。 
English: If my hearse passes through Dongyang, I can't help but set up a guard of honor. The sadder I cry, the better, so that the onlookers will also be moved.

古文：文遥少有大度，轻财好士，士多归之。
现代文：家里人遵照他的遗嘱去办。江文遥从小就气度恢宏，轻钱财，好结交，有才能的人都去投奔他。
English: The family members followed his will to do it. Jiang Wenyao grew up with a magnificent temperament, easy money, good friends, and talented people went to him.

古文：道迁之图杨灵珍，文遥奋剑请行，遂手斩灵珍。
现代文：夏侯道迁带军队攻打南梁将军杨灵珍，文遥挺剑请求参战，亲手斩杀杨灵珍。
English: Xia Hou Dao Qian led the army to attack Yang Ling Zhen, the general of Nan Liang. Wen Yao raised his sword to request to join the war, and personally killed Yang Ling Zhen.

古文：袭父封，拜咸阳太守。
现代文：他承袭了父亲江悦之的封号，被任命为咸阳太守。
English: He inherited the title of his father, Jiang Yuezhi, and was appointed the governor of Xianyang.

古文：勤于礼接，终日坐听事。
现代文：勤于礼仪交接，每天坐公堂办公，来者求见他，都和颜悦色接待，并退去侍从，亲密交谈。
English: He is diligent in the handover of etiquette, sitting in the courtroom every day, and those who come to see him are warmly received, and retire to wait and talk intimately.

古文：至者见之，假以恩颜，屏人密问，于是人所疾苦，大盗姓名，奸猾吏长，无不知悉。郡中震肃，奸劫息止，政为雍州诸郡之最。
现代文：于是百姓的疾苦，巨盗的姓名，奸猾的官吏，没有不了解的。在郡中严肃治理，奸吏盗贼的活动全被制止，政绩在雍州各郡中最为突出。
English: As a result, there is no mistaking the sufferings of the people, the names of the great thieves, and the tricks of the treacherous officials. Serious governance was carried out in the county, the activities of the traitors and thieves were all stopped, and the political achievements were the most outstanding in the counties of Yongzhou.

古文：后为安州刺史，善于绥纳，甚得物情。
现代文：不久升为安州刺史，善于抚绥接纳，十分体察事情的情理。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of Anzhou magistrate. He was good at petting and receiving, and was very sensitive to the circumstances.

古文：时杜洛周、葛荣等相继叛逆，幽、燕已南悉没，唯文遥介在群贼之外，孤城独守，鸠集荒余，且耕且战，百姓皆乐为用。
现代文：当时，杜洛周、葛荣等相继反叛，幽燕以南的土地都已失陷，惟有文遥处在群贼包围之中，独自坚守孤城，收集灾荒中剩下的东西，一边耕种，一边打仗，老百姓都愿意听他指挥。
English: At that time, Du Luo Zhou, Ge Rong and others successively rebelled, and the land south of Yuyan had all fallen, but Wenya was surrounded by a group of thieves. He alone held on to the lonely city, collected what was left in the disaster and famine, cultivated and fought at the same time, and the people were willing to listen to his command.

古文：卒官，长史许思祖等以文遥有遗爱，复推其子果行州事。既摄州事，乃遣使奉表。
现代文：文遥死于任上，长史许恩祖等因为他在百姓中有遗爱厚德，又推举他的儿子江果代管州事，等到接替州事后，才派遣使者奉表给朝廷。
English: Wen Yao died in office, Changshi Xu Enzu and others, because he had a legacy of love and virtue among the people, also elected his son Jiang Guo to be in charge of state affairs. It was only after he took over the state affairs that he sent an envoy to the imperial court.

古文：庄帝嘉之，除果通直散骑侍郎，行安州事。
现代文：庄帝赞许这件事，授江果为通直散骑侍郎，管理安州的政事。
English: Emperor Zhuang approved of this, and bestowed upon Jiang Guo the title of Zongzhizhanzhijilang (通直散騎侍郎) to manage the political affairs of Anzhou.

古文：既而贼势转盛，救援不接，果乃携诸弟并率城人东奔高丽。
现代文：未久，贼兵势力变强，由于援军接应不上，江果便携兄弟并率领城里的老百姓向东入高丽避难。
English: Not long after, the forces of the bandits became stronger. As reinforcements could not be received, Jiang Guo took his brother and led the people of the city eastward into Korea to take refuge.

古文：天平中，诏高丽送果等。元象中，乃得还朝。
现代文：直到东魏孝静帝天平年间，朝廷才命高丽国将江果送回，孝帝元象年间，得以还朝。
English: It was not until the Eastern Wei Dynasty, during the reign of Emperor Tianping of the Xiao Jing Dynasty, that the imperial court ordered the Koryo Kingdom to send Jiang Guo back, and during the reign of Emperor Yuan Zhao, he was able to return to the imperial court.

古文：兄忠，字处顺，在南为合乡令。
现代文：张谠，字处言，清河东武城人。早先在南朝刘宋那里做官，位至东徐州刺史。
English: Zhang Qian, a native of Wucheng in the east of the Qing River, had earlier served as an official under the Southern Dynasty's Liu Song, and went on to become a historian in East Xuzhou.

古文：归降，赐爵新昌侯。卒于新兴太守，赠冀州刺史。
现代文：北魏军队平定徐州和兖州，张谠向北魏将领尉元归顺，并上表接受朝廷任命的东徐州刺史的官职。
English: The Northern Wei army subdued Xuzhou and Ganzhou, and Zhang Jun submitted to the Northern Wei general Lieutenant Yuan, and accepted the official post of East Xuzhou chief historian appointed by the imperial court.

古文：谠妻皇甫氏被掠，赐中官为婢，皇甫遂诈痴，不能梳沐。
现代文：原先，张谠的妻子皇甫氏被北魏军队抢走，朝廷把她赠给太监做奴婢。皇甫氏假装痴呆，才免于替太监梳洗沐浴。
English: Originally, Zhang Ye's wife, Empress Fu, was snatched away by the Northern Wei army, and the court gave her to the eunuch as a slave. Empress Fu pretended to be demented in order to be spared from combing and bathing the eunuch.

古文：后谠为宋冀州长史，因货千余匹，购求皇甫。
现代文：后来，张谠任刘宋的冀州长史，卖了许多东西，向北魏要求赎回皇甫氏。
English: Later, Zhang Ye, who was the governor of Hebei Province during the reign of Liu Song, sold many things and asked the Northern Wei Dynasty to redeem the imperial family.

古文：文成怪其纳财之多，引见之，时皇甫年垂六十矣。文成曰： 南人奇好，能重室家之义。
现代文：魏文成帝很奇怪他为此交纳这么多的金钱。等到引见之后，看到皇甫氏已年近六十，文成帝说： 南朝的人有特殊的爱好，能珍重夫妻间的情义。
English: Emperor Wencheng was very surprised that he had paid so much money for this. After the introduction, when he saw that Emperor Fu was nearly sixty years old, Emperor Wencheng said: People in the Southern Dynasty have special hobbies and can value the feelings between husband and wife.

古文：此老母复何所任，乃能如此致费也。 
现代文：这个老太婆还有什么用，能值得如此破费？ 
English: What is the use of this old woman, and is it worth all this trouble?

古文：皇甫氏归，谠令诸妾境上奉迎。
现代文：皇甫氏回到南朝，张谠命他所有的小妾到边境上迎接。
English: When Emperor Fu returned to the Southern Dynasty, Zhang Xuan ordered all his concubines to meet him at the border.

古文：数年卒。
现代文：过了数年，皇甫氏才去世。
English: It took several years before he passed away.

古文：后十年而谠入魏。
现代文：又过了十年，张谠归顺北魏。
English: After another ten years, Zhang Ye returned to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：谠兄子安世，正始中，自梁汉同夏侯道迁归款，为客积年，出为东河间太守。
现代文：傅永，字修期，清河人。幼时跟随叔父傅洪仲和张幸从青州进入北魏，不久，又回到南朝。
English: Fu Yong (Chinese: 傅永; pinyin: Shouqi) was a native of Qinghe. As a child, he followed his uncles Fu Hongzhong and Zhang Xing from Qingzhou to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and soon returned to the Southern Dynasty.

古文：卒。李苗，字子宣，梓潼涪人也。
现代文：有力气才干，勇猛过人，能用手抓着马鞍，倒立起身子驰骋。
English: He has strength and talent, is extremely brave, can hold a saddle with his hands, stand up and gallop.

古文：父膺，梁太仆卿。苗出后叔父畎。
现代文：二十多岁时，有位友人给他寄一封书信，他却不会写回信，请求叔父洪仲帮忙。
English: When he was in his twenties, a friend sent him a letter, but he did not write back, asking Uncle Hongzhong for help.

古文：畎为梁州刺史，大著威名。
现代文：洪仲责怪他不读书，也不替他写信。
English: Hong Zhong accused him of not reading and not writing letters for him.

古文：王足之伐蜀，梁武命畎拒足于涪，许其益州。
现代文：傅永便发奋读书，广泛涉猎经史著作，因而又兼有文采。
English: Fu Yong began to study hard, extensively dabbled in historical works, and thus also had literary talent.

古文：及足退，梁武遂改授。
现代文：任崔道固的城局参军，与道固一起投降北魏，在平齐当平民百姓。
English: The city government of Cui Daogu joined the army, surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty together with Daogu, and became a commoner in Pingqi.

古文：畎怒，将有异图，事发被害。
现代文：父母都年纪高迈，十多年忍受饥寒，全赖傅永精于处事，尽力帮工和借贷，全家才得以生存下来。
English: Both of his parents are very old, and they have endured the cold and hunger for more than ten years. It is all thanks to Fu Yong's diligence in doing things, his efforts to help others and borrow money, that the whole family has been able to survive.

古文：苗年十五，有报雪志。延昌中归魏，仍陈图蜀计。
现代文：晚年任奉礼郎，到长安拜谒文明太后的父亲燕宣王的祠庙，被朝廷赐爵为贝丘男，任中书博士。
English: In his later years, he served as a hongreiro, visiting the ancestral temple of Yan Xuan Wang, the father of the empress dowager of Chang'an, and was given a knighthood by the imperial court as a Beichu man and a doctor of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：大将军高肇西伐，诏假苗龙骧将军乡导。
现代文：王肃任豫州刺史，朝廷又命傅永任王肃的平南长史。
English: Wang Su was appointed to write the history of Yuzhou, and the imperial court also ordered Fu Yong to write the long history of Pingnan.

古文：次晋寿，宣武宴驾，班师。后以客例，除员外散骑侍郎。苗有文武才干，以大功不就，家耻未雪，常怀慷慨。乃上书陈平定江南之计，其文理甚切于时。
现代文：咸阳王元禧担心王肃难以相信他，把想法告诉了孝文帝，孝文帝说 ：已选派傅修期任他的长史，虽然他缺少庄严的容貌举止，但他所具有的文韬武略已足够用了。 
English: Xianyang King Yuanxi was worried that Wang Su would find it hard to believe him, so he told Emperor Xiaowen his thoughts. Emperor Xiaowen said, "I have chosen Fu Xiu to be in charge of his long history. Although he lacks a dignified appearance and demeanor, his literary and military skills are enough.

古文：明帝幼冲，无远略之意，竟不能纳。
现代文：王肃把傅永看成资历很深的名士，对他十分尊重；傅永认为王肃很为孝文帝器重，尽全力替他办事，两人感情十分深厚。
English: Wang Su regards Fu Yong as a very senior celebrity and respects him very much; Fu Yong believes that Wang Su is very important to Emperor Xiaowen and does his best to work for him. The two have very deep feelings.

古文：正光末，三秦反叛，侵及三辅。
现代文：南齐将领鲁康祖、赵公政侵犯豫州的太仓口，王肃命傅永率军迎击。
English: The Nanqi generals Lu Kangzu and Zhao Gongzheng invaded Taicangkou in Yuzhou, and Wang Su ordered Fu Yong to lead the army to counterattack.

古文：时承平既久，人不习战。
现代文：傅永估计吴、楚一带的军队好用偷袭这种战术。
English: Fu Yong estimated that the army around Wu and Chu could easily use this tactic of sneak attack.

古文：苗以陇兵强悍，且群聚无资，乃上书以为： 食少兵精，利于速战；粮多卒众，事宜持久。
现代文：再则，敌兵如果夜晚来攻，必定在渡过淮河的地方用火作标志，记下哪里水浅。傅永将士兵埋伏好，又秘密派人用瓢盛上燃火的东西，悄悄渡到南岸，在水深的地方放置好，对他们说： 如果别处有火光亮起，你们也将火点着。 
English: Furthermore, if the enemy attacked at night, they would certainly use fire to mark the place where they crossed the Huai River, and note where the water was shallow. Fu Yong ambushed the soldiers, and secretly sent someone to the south bank with a bowl of fire, and placed it in the deep water, and said to them: If there is a fire somewhere else, you will also light a fire.

古文：今陇贼猖狂，非有素蓄，虽据两城，本无德义，其势在于疾攻，日有降纳，迟则人情离阻，坐受崩溃。
现代文：这天夜里，鲁康祖、赵公政等人果然亲率军队前来偷营。东西两面埋伏的魏军一起夹击敌兵，鲁康祖等人率败兵赶快奔向淮河。河岸上火光四起，他们无法记起原来渡河的地方，便朝傅永派人点燃的火光处争着渡河，南军很多人被深水淹死，被斩杀的有数千人。赵公政被活捉，鲁康祖连人带马掉进淮河中，天亮才找到他的尸体。
English: On this night, Lu Kangzu, Zhao Gongzheng and others led their armies to steal the camp. The Wei army, which was lying in ambush on both sides of the east and west, attacked the enemy soldiers together. Lu Kangzu and others led the defeated soldiers to quickly run to the Huai River. There were flames on the riverbank. They could not remember the original crossing place, so they fought to cross the river to the place where Fu Yong sent people to light the fire. Many people of the Southern Army were drowned by deep water, and there were thousands of people who were killed. Zhao Gongzheng was caught alive, Lu Kangzu and his horse fell into the Huai River, and

古文：夫飙至风起，逆者求万一之功；高壁深垒，王师有全制之策。今且宜勒大将，深沟高垒，坚守勿战。
现代文：将他的头颅砍下，和赵公政一起送到京城。这时，南将裴叔业率部将王茂先、李定等侵犯楚王戍，王肃又派傅永领军埋伏在敌后，先将南军的后军打乱，而后打败了南军。
English: He cut off his head and sent it to Beijing together with Zhao Gongzheng. At this time, the Southern General Pei Shuhei led the troops of Wang Shuxian, Li Ding, and others to invade Chu Wangye. Wang Su also sent Fu Yong to lead the army to ambush behind the enemy. He first disrupted the rear army of the Southern Army, and then defeated the Southern Army.

古文：别命偏师，精卒数千，出麦积崖以袭其后，则氵幵、岐之下，群妖自散。 于是诏苗为统军，与别将淳于诞出梁、益，隶行台魏子建。
现代文：缴获裴叔业军队的仪仗伞盖、幕帐盔甲等一万多件。两月之间，两次报捷，孝文帝嘉奖他，派使者在豫州封傅永为永安将军、镇南府长史、汝南太守、贝丘县男。孝文帝常赞叹说： 上马能够进攻敌人，下马可以起草文告，惟有傅修期才是这样的文武全才啊！ 裴叔业又围攻涡阳，当时，孝文帝正在豫州，派傅永为统军，与高聪、刘藻、成道益、任莫问等率兵救援。傅永说： 我军先深沟固垒，然后再向敌人进攻。 
English: More than 10,000 pieces of ceremonial umbrella covers, curtain armor, etc. of Pei Shuhei's army were captured. Between two months, he twice reported victory. Emperor Xiaowen commended him and sent an envoy to Huizhou to appoint Fu Yong as Yongan General, Zhenan Prefectural Governor, Runan Governor, and Becciu County Man. Emperor Xiaowen often praised and said, "He who mounts a horse can attack the enemy, and he who dismounts a horse can draft a proclamation. Only Fu Shuhei is such a literary and military genius!" Emperor Pei Shuhei also besieged Wuyang. At that time, Emperor Xiaow

古文：子建以苗为郎中，仍领统军，深见知待。
现代文：高聪不听从他的意见，与敌兵一战就遭受失败。
English: Gao Cong did not listen to his advice and was defeated in the first battle with the enemy soldiers.

古文：孝昌中，兼尚书左丞，为西北道行台，与大都督宗正珍孙讨汾、绛蜀贼，平之。
现代文：高聪等人丢弃武器盔甲，逃向悬瓠。
English: Gao Cong and the others threw away their weapons and armor and fled to the overhang.

古文：及杀硃荣，荣从弟世隆拥部曲还逼都邑。
现代文：傅永收集逃散的兵卒，慢慢回军。南军追来，傅永设下伏兵袭击，挫败了他们的锐气。
English: Fu Yong gathered the scattered soldiers and slowly returned to the army. When the Southern Army chased them, Fu Yong set up an ambush attack and defeated their spirit.

古文：孝庄幸大夏门，集群臣博议，百僚计无所出。
现代文：刘藻受到流放边境的处分，傅永只被免除了官职。
English: Liu Samo was punished by being banished to the border, while Fu Yong was only relieved of his official duties.

古文：苗独奋衣起曰： 今朝廷有不测之危，正是忠臣烈士效节之时，请以一旅之众，为陛下径断河梁。 庄帝壮而许焉。
现代文：不到一旬，朝廷又命他任汝阴的镇将，兼任汝阴太守。景明初年，裴叔业拟献寿春归附北魏，秘密地报告给傅永。
English: Less than a year later, the imperial court also ordered him to serve as the town marshal of Ruyin and the governor of Ruyin. In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Pei Shuhei secretly reported to Fu Yong that he intended to annex Shuchun to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：苗乃募人于马渚上流，以师夜下。
现代文：为了迎接叔业，朝廷命傅永为统军，与杨大眼、奚康生等人率领的军队一起进入寿春。
English: In order to welcome Shuhei, the imperial court ordered Fu Yong to be the unified army, and he entered Shuchun together with the army led by Yang Dajian, Nie Kangsheng and others.

古文：去桥数里，放火烧船，俄然桥绝，贼没水死者甚众。
现代文：同日出发，而傅永入城较晚，所以，奚康生、杨大眼二人都被赏赐有土地，傅永只赐爵为清河男。
English: They set out on the same day, but Fu Yong entered the city later. Therefore, Yan Kangsheng and Yang Dajian were both awarded land, while Fu Yong was only awarded a knighthood for being a man from Qinghe.

古文：官军不至，贼乃涉水与苗死斗，众寡不敌，苗浮河而没。
现代文：齐将陈伯之领兵逼进寿春沿淮河而来。当时，司徒彭城王元勰、广陵侯元衍一同镇守寿春。因九江刚刚归附，人心尚不稳定，再加上援军没有来到，所以二人深为忧虑。
English: Qi forced Chen Bo's leading troops into Shouchun along the Huai River. At that time, Wang Yuanjun of Stubbs Pengcheng and Guangling Hou Yuanyan together guarded Shouchun. Because Jiujiang had just been annexed, people's minds were still unstable, and reinforcements had not arrived, so the two were deeply worried.

古文：帝闻，哀伤久之。
现代文：朝廷又命傅永为统军，率领汝阴的三千兵马先去救援。
English: The imperial court also ordered Fu Yong to form a united army and lead Ru Yin's three thousand soldiers to the rescue.

古文：赠都督、梁州刺史、车骑大将军、仪同三司、河阳县侯，谥忠烈。
现代文：到寿春城下，元勰让他率军入城驻守，他说 ：如若遵照您的意见，我便同殿下您一起被围困，难道是来救援的意思？ 
English: When he arrived at the foot of Shuchun Castle, Yuan Shao asked him to lead his army into the city and garrison it. He said, "If I follow your advice, I will be besieged together with Your Highness. Is this what you mean by coming to the rescue?

古文：苗少有节操，志尚功名。
现代文：便孤军驻扎在城外，与元勰合力进击南军，不断取得胜仗。
English: He then stationed a lone army outside the city and joined forces with Yuan Shao to attack the Southern Army, constantly winning battles.

古文：每读《蜀书》，见魏延请出长安，诸葛不许，叹息谓亮无奇计。
现代文：中山王元英征讨义阳，傅永被任命为宁朔将军、统军，设置围攻的防线，阻挡义阳的南门。
English: Zhongshan King Yuan Ying conquered Yiyang, Fu Yong was appointed as the general of Ningshuo, unified the army, set up a siege defense line, and blocked the south gate of Yiyang.

古文：及览《周瑜传》，未曾不嗟咨绝倒。
现代文：齐将马仙王卑连营扎寨，向前推进，准备解除魏军对义阳的包围。
English: Qi encamped Ma Xian Wang Bailian and pushed forward, preparing to lift the Wei army's encirclement of Yiyang.

古文：太保城阳王徽、司徒临淮王彧并重之。二王颇或不穆，苗每谏责。
现代文：傅永便分一部分军队给长史贾思祖，命他守卫营垒，自己率领马步两军一千人，向南迎击马仙王卑的军队，敌兵从高处射击傅永，箭头射进他的大腿，他拔出箭又领兵攻入敌营，将南军打败，马仙王卑烧掉营寨带上军械衣甲逃跑。
English: Fu Yong then assigned a part of the army to Chang Shi Jia Szu and ordered him to guard the camp. He himself led a thousand soldiers of the two armies to the south to meet the army of Ma Xian Wang Bi. The enemy soldiers shot Fu Yong from a height, and the arrow shot into his thigh. He pulled out the arrow and led the soldiers to break into the enemy camp to defeat the southern army. Ma Xian Wang Bi burned the camp and took the armor to escape.

古文：徽宠势隆极，猜忌弥甚，苗谓人曰： 城阳蜂目豺声，今转彰矣！ 
现代文：元英对傅永说： 你受伤了，请回营中休息。 他说： 汉高祖脚部受伤，包起来不让别人知道。
English: Yuan Ying said to Fu Yong: You are injured, please go back to the camp to rest. He said: Henkel injured his foot, wrapped it up and did not let others know.

古文：解鼓琴，善属文咏，工尺牍之敏，当世罕及。
现代文：我虽然地位微贱，也是国家的一员将领，怎么能让敌人有射伤我军将领的名声！ 
English: Although my position is lowly, I am also a member of the country's generals, how can I let the enemy have the reputation of shooting and wounding our generals!

古文：死之日，朝野悲壮之。及帝幽崩，世隆入洛，主者追苗赠封，以白世隆。
现代文：便与各路军队追击敌人，到深夜才回来，时年已七十多岁，三军听说后，没有不佩服他的。
English: He then chased the enemy with various armies and did not return until late at night. He was more than 70 years old at the time. When the three armies heard about this, they couldn't help but admire him.

古文：世隆曰： 吾尔时群议，更三日便欲大纵兵士，烧燔都邑，任其采掠。
现代文：义阳既被平定，元英让司马陆希道起草文告，认为内容不好，又让傅永修改。傅永也不增饰文采，直接修改，陈述魏军的威仪，对战机形势的处置，文英看了，十分欣赏。
English: After Yiyang was pacified, Yuan Ying asked Sima Lu Xidao to draft a proclamation, believing that the content was not good, and asked Fu Yong to revise it. Fu Yong did not add decoration to the proclamation, but directly revised it, stating the dignity of the Wei army, and the disposition of the fighter situation. Wen Ying read it and appreciated it very much.

古文：赖苗，京师获全。
现代文：回到京城，他被授予太中大夫。
English: Back in Kyoto, he was awarded the title of Taichung doctor.

古文：天下之善一也，不宜追之。 
现代文：后来，他任恒农太守，他对这个职务心里很不满意。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Hengnong, and he was very dissatisfied with this position.

古文：子昙袭爵。刘藻，字彦先，广平易阳人也。
现代文：这时，元英东征钟离，上表请求让傅永任他的大将，朝廷不答应。
English: At this time, Yuan Ying left the Eastern Expedition and requested that Fu Yong be appointed as his general, but the court did not agree.

古文：六世祖遐，从晋元帝南渡。
现代文：傅永常叹息说 ：马援、赵充国，是如何的老当益壮啊！
English: Fu Yongchang often sighed and said: Ma Yuan and Zhao Chongguo, how old and strong they are!

古文：父宗之，宋庐江太守。
现代文：而惟独我白首皓发，被困在这个郡吗？ 
English: And I'm the only one with a broken neck, stuck in this county?

古文：藻涉猎群籍，美谈笑，善与人交，饮酒至一石不乱。
现代文：他在管理民事行政上并不擅长，所以，在任上没有多大政绩。后来，任南兖州刺史，年过八十，还能骑马射箭，盘马挺槊，意气风发，常忌讳别人说他年纪老，自称六十九岁。
English: He was not good at managing civil administration, so he did not have much political achievements in office. Later, Ren Nanxizhou, who was over 80 years old, could also ride a horse, shoot arrows, ride a horse, and was full of energy. He often said that others said he was old, and claimed to be 69 years old.

古文：太安中，与姊夫李嶷俱来归魏，赐爵易阳子。
现代文：回到京城，拜受光禄大夫。去世后，赠封为齐州刺史。
English: He returned to Beijing and paid homage to Dr. Guanglu. After his death, he was awarded the title of "Chizhou Historian."

古文：擢拜南部主书，号为称职。时北地诸羌，恃险作乱，前后宰守不能制。
现代文：傅永曾登上北邙山，在平坦的地方奋枪跃马，扬鞭盘旋，四处瞻望，有把这里作为终身寄托的意思。
English: Fu Yong once ascended Beilun Mountain, galloped in a flat place, circled the whip, and looked around, with the intention of using this place as a lifelong trust.

古文：朝廷患之，以藻为北地太守。藻推诚布信，诸羌咸来归款，朝廷嘉之。
现代文：他远慕晋代的杜预，近重当代的季冲、王肃，想和他们埋葬在一起。便在他们墓地附近买下数顷土地，对儿子傅叔伟说： 这是我死后的葬身之地啊！ 
English: He admired Du Yuan of the Jin Dynasty, and was close to the contemporary Ji Chong and Wang Su, and wanted to be buried with them. He bought several hectares of land near their cemetery and said to his son Fu Shuwei: This is where I will be buried after my death!

古文：雍州人王叔保等三百人表乞藻为騃奴戍主，诏曰： 选曹已用人，藻有惠政，自宜他叙。 
现代文：傅永的原配妻子贾氏留在家乡，到代都后，他又娶妾冯氏，生下叔伟和几个女儿。贾氏后来也来到平城，没有生儿子，只生了个女儿。
English: Fu Yong's original wife, Jia, remained in their hometown. After moving to the capital, he married his concubine, Feng, and gave birth to Shu Wei and several daughters. Jia later came to Pingcheng and had no son, only a daughter.

古文：在任八年，迁离城镇将。
现代文：冯氏依仗自己生了儿子，对贾氏傲慢无礼，叔伟对贾氏也不恭顺，贾氏常常很气愤。
English: Ms. Feng gave birth to a son by relying on herself, and was arrogant and rude to Mr. Jia. Mr. Jia was often very angry.

古文：太和中改镇为岐州，以藻为岐州刺史。
现代文：冯氏死在傅永的前面，叔伟遵照遗命要把父亲葬在北邙，贾氏怀疑叔伟要求将傅永埋葬在他的封地贝丘县。
English: Mr. Feng died before Fu Yong, Shu Wei followed his last order to bury his father in Beilun, Mr. Jia suspected that Shu Wei requested to bury Fu Yong in his fief of Beichu County.

古文：转秦州刺史。秦人恃险，率多粗暴，或拒课输，或害吏长，自前守宰，皆遥领，不入郡县。
现代文：事情经过司徒裁决，司徒胡国珍很仰慕傅永，同意叔伟将父亲葬在北邙。贾氏又告到灵太后那里。太后听从了她的意见，便葬在东清河。
English: After the matter was adjudicated by the magistrate, the magistrate Hu Guozhen admired Fu Yong very much and agreed with Shu Wei to bury his father in Beilun. Jia also reported to the Empress Dowager. The Empress Dowager listened to her opinion and was buried in the East Qing River.

古文：藻开示恩信，诛戮豪横，羌、氐惮之，守宰于是始得居其旧所。
现代文：傅永过去曾在家乡买下墓地，将父母葬在那里。贾氏又坚持把他们都迁葬在这里，与傅永埋在一个墓地。
English: In the past, Fu Yong had bought a cemetery in his hometown and buried his parents there. Mr. Jia insisted on moving them all here and burying them together with Fu Yong.

古文：遇车驾南伐，以藻为东道都督。
现代文：傅永的亲属无法制止。傅永的父母已埋葬数十年，棺木被桑树根所缠绕，离地有一尺多，十分牢固。
English: Fu Yong's relatives could not stop him. Fu Yong's parents had been buried for decades. The coffin was wrapped in mulberry roots and was more than a foot off the ground. It was very strong.

古文：秦人纷扰，诏藻还州，人情乃定。
现代文：用斧子砍断树根，才从墓坑中把棺材取出，人们都感到很奇怪。
English: People found it strange that the coffin was removed from the grave only after the roots of the tree were cut with an axe.

古文：仍与安南元英征汉中，破贼军，长驱至南郑，垂平梁州，奉诏还军，乃不果克。后车驾南伐，以藻为征虏将军，督统军高聪等四军为东道别将，辞于洛水之南。
现代文：傅永臂力过人，能拉开三百斤的大弓，能骑在马上向左右两旁射箭，还能站在马背上与人奔驰角逐，熟悉的人都认为只见到了他的武功，而没有看到他的文采。傅竖眼，原本是清河县人。祖父傅融，渡过黄河向南迁徙，在磐阳定居下来，被乡人们所尊重。他性情豪爽，生有三个儿子：灵庆、灵根、灵越，都很有才干。
English: Fu Yong's arm strength is superior to others, he can pull a three-hundred-pound large bow, he can ride a horse and shoot arrows to the left and right, and he can stand on horseback and compete with people. People who are familiar with him think that they only saw his martial arts, but did not see his literary skills. Fu Zhixian, originally from Qinghe County. Grandfather Fu Rong, crossed the Yellow River to migrate south, settled in Banyang, and was respected by the villagers. He has a strong character and has three sons: Lingqing, Linggen, and Lingyue. They are all very talented.

古文：孝文曰： 与卿石头相见。 
现代文：傅融十分自负，说自己可以称雄当世。
English: Fu Rong is very conceited, saying that he can be a hero in the world.

古文：藻对曰： 臣虽才非古人，庶亦不留贼虏而遗陛下。
现代文：他曾对人说： 我昨天做了一个梦：有一匹骏马，没有人能配得上骑的，一人问 ：谁能骑它呢？ 
English: And he said unto them, I dreamed a dream last night, and there was a great horse; and no man could sit upon it: and one said, Who shall sit upon it?

古文：辄当酾曲阿之酒以待百官。 
现代文：另一人答道 ：惟有傅灵庆能骑这匹马！ 
English: Another replied, "Only Fu Lingqing can ride this horse!"

古文：帝大笑曰： 今未至曲阿，且以河东数石赐卿。 后与高聪等战败，俱徙平州。
现代文：还有一张弓，也没有人能拉得开，有人说： 惟有傅灵根可以拉开这张弓。 
English: There is also a bow, which no one can draw. Some people say, "Only Fulinggen can draw this bow."

古文：景明初，宣武追录旧功，拜藻为太尉司马。
现代文：又有几纸文稿，人们都读不懂，有人说： 惟有傅灵越能解释这篇文章，  傅融认为三个儿子的文武才干足可以驾驭当今的社会，常常从容地对乡人们说： 你们听说了吗？
English: There are also several paper manuscripts that people can't read. Some people say: "Only Fu Rong can explain this article." Fu Rong believes that the literary and military talents of his three sons are enough to control today's society. He often calmly says to the villagers: "Have you heard?

古文：卒。子绍珍，无他才用，善附会，好饮酒。
现代文：鬲虫之子有灵，这是图谶书上显示的呀。 
English: The son of a ladybug has a spirit, which is shown in the picture book.

古文：结托刘腾，启为其国郎中令，袭子爵。
现代文：喜欢多事的人相信了他的话，所以，豪爽勇武之士多来归附。
English: People who like a lot of things believed his words, so many brave warriors came to join him.

古文：永安中，历河北、黎阳二郡太守，所在无政绩。天平中，坐子洪业入于关中，率众侵扰，伏法。
现代文：宋将萧斌、王玄谟侵犯郂。这时傅融刚刚去世，王玄谟逼迫傅灵庆任军中的首领，去攻打城池。
English: At this time, Fu Rong had just died, and Wang Xuan Mu forced Fu Lingqing, the leader of the army, to attack the city.

古文：傅永，字脩期，清河人也。幼随叔父洪仲与张幸自青州入魏，寻复南奔。
现代文：攻城的战车被城内守军烧毁，灵庆怕受到军法的处置，诈说自己受伤很重，令军士驾车将他送回军营，便与勇壮士兵数十人骑马逃跑。
English: The siege chariot was burned by the defenders inside the city, and Lingqing, afraid of being punished by military law, falsely said that he was seriously injured, so the sergeant drove him back to the military camp, and then fled on horseback with dozens of brave soldiers.

古文：有气干，拳勇过人，能手执鞍桥，倒立驰骋。年二十余，有友人与之书而不能答，请洪仲，洪仲深让之而不为报。
现代文：萧斌、王玄谟下令追赶，左右的人劝阻说 ：灵庆兄弟三人都有雄才大略，加上他们的家丁大多是勇健男儿，像彭超、尸生一类，一人可抵挡数十人，弓不虚发，不可以逼迫他们呀。 王玄谟才停止。
English: Xiao Bin and Wang Xuan Mu gave the order to chase after them, but the people around them dissuaded them, saying, "The three Lingqing brothers all have great talents, and most of their family members are brave and strong men, like Peng Chao and the corpse, one person can resist dozens of people, the bow is not fake, you can't force them." Wang Xuan Mu finally stopped.

古文：永乃发愤读书，涉猎经史，兼有才干。
现代文：灵庆回到家里，便同两个兄弟躲藏在山林草泽间。
English: When Lingqing returned home, he and his two brothers hid in the mountains and forests.

古文：为崔道固城局参军，与道固俱降，入为平齐百姓。
现代文：灵庆的从叔傅乾爱任萧斌的法曹参军，萧斌派乾爱去将他诱出，并用自己的腰刀作为信物，又派勇健士兵暗中尾随乾爱。
English: Lingqing's uncle, Qian Ai, was recruited by Xiao Bin to join the army. Xiao Bin sent Qian Ai to lure him out, and used his waist knife as a token. He also sent brave soldiers to secretly follow Qian Ai.

古文：父母并老，饥寒十数年，赖其强于人事，戮力佣丐，得以存立。
现代文：乾爱不知道萧斌想谋害灵庆，见到灵庆后，萧斌派遣的壮士拿获灵庆，并将他杀死。灵庆将要死时，对母亲崔氏说： 从叔将我害死了，不要忘记啊。 
English: Qian Ai did not know that Xiao Bin wanted to kill Ling Qing. After seeing Ling Qing, the strong man sent by Xiao Bin captured Ling Qing and killed him. When Ling Qing was about to die, he said to his mother Cui: My uncle killed me, don't forget it.

古文：晚为奉礼郎，诣长安拜文明太后父燕宣王庙，赐爵贝丘男，除中书博士。
现代文：灵根、灵越逃向河北，来到京城，向北魏朝廷诉说齐人都向往魏国的德化，青州可以平定。文成帝十分高兴，封灵越为青州刺史、贝丘子，镇守羊兰城；灵根为临齐副将，镇守明潜垒。
English: Linggen and Lingyue fled to Hebei, came to Beijing, and told the Northern Wei court that they all yearned for the Germanization of Wei, and that Qingzhou could be pacified. Emperor Wencheng was very happy. Feng Lingyue was the town guard of Yanglan City, and Linggen was the vice-commander of Linqi, and the town guard of Mingyue Fort.

古文：王肃之为豫州，又以永为王肃平南长史。
现代文：灵越北入以后，母亲崔氏被宋赦免。宋国怕灵越在边境骚扰三齐之地，便任灵越的叔父傅琰为冀州中从事，乾爱为乐陵太守。
English: After Ling Yue's entry into the north, his mother Cui was pardoned by Song. Song feared that Ling Yue would harass San Qi at the border, so he appointed Ling Yue's uncle Fu Yao to be in charge of Jizhou and Qian Ai to be the keeper of Le Ling.

古文：咸阳王禧虑肃难信，言于孝文。
现代文：乐陵与羊兰隔河相对，朝廷命傅琰派他的学生与灵越过去的婢子假扮成夫妇投靠灵越，并招引他归顺南朝。
English: With Le Ling across the river from Yang Lan, the imperial court ordered Fu Xi to send his student and Ling Yue's former maid to pose as a married couple to win over Ling Yue and lure him to the Southern Dynasty.

古文：曰： 已选傅脩期为其长史，虽威仪不足，而文武有余矣。 
现代文：灵越与母亲分离，思念益重，便与灵根南趋。灵越与羊兰城的魏军厮杀，乾爱派出战船迎接他，才冲了出去。灵根来得晚了，没有一起渡河，被临齐宋将知道，将他杀死。
English: Ling Yue was separated from his mother, and his thoughts became more and more heavy, so he headed south with Ling Gen. Ling Yue fought with the Wei army in Yanglan City, and Qian Ai sent a warship to meet him before rushing out. Ling Gen came late and did not cross the river together, but Lin Qi and Song Zeng knew about it and killed him.

古文：肃以永宿士，礼之甚厚；永亦以肃为帝眷遇，尽心事之，情义至穆。
现代文：乾爱出城迎接灵越，询问灵根延误行期的情况，灵越却不理睬他。
English: Qian Ai went out of the city to meet Ling Yue and inquire about Ling Ge's delay, but Ling Yue ignored him.

古文：齐将鲁康祖、赵公政侵豫州之太仓口，肃令永击之。
现代文：乾爱并不计较，命左右随从取出匣中的乌皮做的衣裤，让灵越换下身上穿的北魏的服装。灵越说 ：不必。 乾爱说 ：你能穿着现在身上的衣服去见垣公吗？ 当时，垣护之任刺史。
English: Qian'ai didn't care. He just took out the cowhide trousers from the box and let Ling Yue change into the Northern Wei clothing. Ling Yue said, "No, you don't have to." Qian'ai said, "Can you wear the clothes you're wearing now to see King Kakigori?" At that time, the role of protecting Kakigori was history.

古文：永量吴、楚兵好以斫营为事，又贼若夜来，必于渡淮之所，以火记其浅处。永既设伏，仍密令人以瓠盛火，渡南岸，当深处置之，教云： 若有火起，即亦燃之。 
现代文：灵越却大声说： 垣公！
English: However, Ling Yue said loudly: "Kaki-ko!

古文：其夜，康祖、公政等果亲率领来斫营。
现代文：垣公！穿着这身衣服可以见南朝的国君，岂只是见垣公呢？ 
English: Lord Kaki! You can see the sovereign of the Southern Dynasty wearing this dress. Is it just Lord Kaki?

古文：东西二伏夹击之，康祖等奔趋淮水。
现代文：竟不肯更换衣服。命他为兖州司马，而乾爱也升任为青州和冀州的司马，兼管魏郡。后来，两人都回到建邺。
English: However, he refused to change his clothes. He was appointed as the chief magistrate of Bozhou, and Qian'ai was also promoted to the chief magistrate of Qingzhou and Jizhou, and also in charge of Wei County. Later, both of them returned to Jianye.

古文：火既竞起，不能记其本济，遂望永所置火争渡。
现代文：灵越一直想替兄长灵庆报仇，而乾爱却不提防。
English: Ling Yue always wanted to avenge his brother Chang Ling Qing, but Qian Ai did not care.

古文：水深溺死，斩首者数千级，生禽公政。
现代文：他知道乾爱喜欢吃鸡肉和葵菜，便做了这两样菜放上毒药请乾爱吃，乾爱吃后回到家就死了。以后数年，灵越任太原太守，戍守升城。
English: He knew that Qian'ai liked to eat chicken and sunflower greens, so he made these two dishes, put poison on them and asked Qian'ai to eat them. After Qian'ai ate them, he died at home. In the following years, Ling Yue served as the governor of Taiyuan and the governor of Shencheng.

古文：康祖人马坠淮，晓而获其尸，斩首并公政送京师。
现代文：后来，举兵响应宋孝武帝的三儿子刘子勋，子勋任灵越为前军将军。
English: Later, troops were raised in response to Emperor Song Xiaowu's third son, Liu Zixun, whose son, Ren Lingyue, was a former army general.

古文：时裴叔业率王茂先、李定等东侵楚王戍，肃复令永将伏兵，击其后军，破之，获叔业伞扇鼓幕甲仗万余。
现代文：子勋兵败，灵越的军队四散逃亡，灵越被宋明帝的将领王广之的部下擒获，他高声说道 ：我就是傅灵越，你抓到了贼兵将领为何不立即杀死！ 王广之将他送到宋辅国司马刘面力那里，刘面力亲自慰劳他，他却说 ：人生总归一死，我实在没有面目活着。 
English: His sons were defeated, and Ling Yue's army fled in all directions. Ling Yue was captured by Song Emperor Ming's general Wang Guangzhi's subordinates. He said in a loud voice: I am Fu Ling Yue, why don't you kill the thief general immediately when you catch him! Wang Guangzhi sent him to Liu Mianli, the Secretary of Song and Sui States, Liu Mianli personally consoled him, but he said: Life is always a death, I really have no face to live.

古文：两月之中，遂献再捷。
现代文：刘面力认为他的想法十分壮烈，又将他送到建康。
English: Liu Mianli thought his idea was very powerful and sent him to Jiankang.

古文：帝嘉之，遣谒者就豫州，策拜永安远将军、镇南府长史、汝南太守、贝丘县男。
现代文：宋明帝原谅并赦免他的罪过，但他的对答和前面的一样，便将他杀死。博竖眼就是傅灵越的儿子。他沉稳刚毅壮烈，从小就有父亲的风范。进入北魏，镇南将军王肃看见他十分惊异，加上尊重他父亲的节操，所以，对他十分礼貌敬重，上表请求朝廷任命他为参军。
English: Emperor Song Ming forgave and pardoned his sins, but his answer was the same as the previous one, so he killed him. Bo Xieyan was the son of Fu Lingyue. He was calm, strong and vigorous, and had his father's demeanor since childhood. When he entered the Northern Wei Dynasty, Zhenan General Wang Su was very surprised to see him, and respected his father's discipline, so he was very polite and respectful to him, and asked the court to appoint him to join the army.

古文：帝每叹曰： 上马能击贼，下马作露布，唯傅脩期耳。 
现代文：因立有军功，升任益州刺史。高肇讨伐蜀地，命竖眼为征虏将军、持节，领兵三万，先进攻巴北，所向克捷。
English: Because of his military exploits, Gaozhao was promoted to the position of the chief historian of Yizhou. Gaozhao fought against Shu, and his mission was to capture the general, hold the festival, lead 30,000 soldiers, and advance to attack the north of Pakistan, with the aim of conquering Tibet.

古文：裴叔业又围涡阳，时帝在豫州，遣永为统军，与高聪、刘藻、成道益、任莫问等救之。
现代文：竖眼性情清素怡静，不经营家产。除了自己的衣食之外，他的俸禄和粟帛都用来赏赠给少数民族的首领，抚恤生活困难的士卒。治理蜀地，以恩惠和信誉为根本；保境安民，不侵害百姓的任何利益。有境外的人来抢掠蜀地人，抓住后都将他们送回本乡。
English: In addition to his own food and clothing, his salary and millet allowance are used to reward the leaders of ethnic minorities and to support those who have difficulties in life. The governance of Shu is based on grace and credibility; the protection of the border and the safety of the people do not infringe on any interests of the people. People from abroad come to rob the people of Shu, and after they are caught, they will be sent back to their hometown.

古文：永曰： 深沟固垒，然后图之。 聪等不从，一战而败。
现代文：他严格要求部下奉公守法，地方长官对他都肃然起敬。
English: He strictly requires his subordinates to obey the law, and local governors hold him in high esteem.

古文：聪等弃甲奔悬瓠，永独收散卒徐还。
现代文：远近的少数民族相继来求见拜谒，仰望他的德化，都想做魏的臣民。
English: Ethnic minorities from near and far came one after another to pay homage to Wei, to look up to his virtue, and all wanted to be Wei's subjects.

古文：贼追至，又设伏击之，挫其锐。
现代文：宣武帝对他十分嘉奖称许。
English: Emperor Xuanwu highly commended him.

古文：藻徙边，永免官爵而已。不经旬，诏永为汝阴镇将，带汝阴太守。
现代文：明帝初年，傅竖眼屡次请求解除益州刺史的职务，朝廷便让元法僧接替他，益州人哭着为他送行，随着他走了数百里。南梁将领赵祖悦进逼寿春，镇南将军崔亮奉命讨伐，朝廷命竖眼为持节、镇南军司。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Fu Zhizhen repeatedly requested the dismissal of Yizhou Zhizhong, and the court asked the former monk to replace him. Yizhou people cried to see him off, and walked hundreds of miles with him. Nanliang General Zhao Zuyue went to force Shuchun, Zhenan General Cui Liang was ordered to fight, and the court ordered Zhizhong to be the military commander of Zhenan.

古文：景明初，裴叔业将以寿春归魏，密通于永。及将迎纳，诏永为统军，与杨大眼、奚康生等诸军俱入寿春。
现代文：元法僧任益州刺史后，很失民心，南梁派衡州刺史张齐借益州人的怨恨心情发动进攻，包围了益州城。
English: After the former monk Ren Yizhou stabbed history, he lost the people's hearts. Nan Liang sent Heng Zhou stabbed history Zhang Qi to launch an attack by borrowing the resentment of Yizhou people and surrounded Yizhou City.

古文：同日而永在后，故康生、大眼二人并赏列士，永唯清河男。
现代文：朝廷对西南战局十分忧虑，便火速将竖眼从淮南调来，仍任益州刺史。
English: The imperial court was very worried about the war situation in the southwest, so it quickly transferred the eyes from Huainan to Yizhou, leaving Yizhou to make history.

古文：齐将陈伯之逼寿春，沿淮为寇。
现代文：不久，加封为散骑常侍、西征都督，率步兵和骑兵三千讨伐张齐的南军。
English: Soon, Jafeng became a knight-errant, the governor of the Western Expedition, and led 3,000 infantry and cavalry to fight against Zhang Qi's Southern Army.

古文：时司徒彭城王勰、广陵侯元衍同镇寿春，以九江初附，人情未洽，兼台援不至，深以为忧。
现代文：朝廷给他一千多颗铜印，需要有委任官职的，六品以下都由他决定。竖眼率军从梁州出发，梁军到处设防抗拒，他三日之内转战二百多里，不脱盔甲，连胜九仗。
English: The imperial court gave him more than a thousand copper seals. If he needed to have an appointed official post, it was up to him to decide below six grades. He led the army from Liangzhou, Liang's army set up defenses everywhere, he fought more than two hundred miles within three days, did not take off his armor, and won nine consecutive battles.

古文：诏遣永为统军，领汝阴三千人先援之。
现代文：蜀人听说竖眼又任益州刺史，人人高兴不已，到路上迎接他的每天都有数百人。竖眼来到益州，白水以东，人们都已安居乐业。
English: The people of Shu heard that Zhizhen had been allowed to make history in Yizhou again, and everyone was overjoyed. Hundreds of people came to meet him on the road every day. When Zhizhen came to Yizhou, east of Baishui, people were already living and working in peace.

古文：永至，勰令永引军入城。
现代文：南将张齐便以白水为防线屯扎军队，进犯葭萌。
English: Zhang Qi, the commander of the Southern Expeditionary Army, then used Baishui as a defensive line to encamp troops and attack Qimeng.

古文：永曰： 若如教旨，便共殿下同被围守，岂是救援之意？ 
现代文：竖眼分派诸将从水陆两路讨伐他，将梁军打得大败。张齐身负重伤，奔逃而去。
English: Zhucheng dispatched Zhu to fight him by land and sea and defeated Liang's army. Zhang Qi was seriously injured and ran away.

古文：遂孤军城外，与勰并势以击伯之，频有克捷。
现代文：小剑、大剑一带的梁军也弃城向西逃走，益州平定。灵太后亲自写玺书向竖眼表示慰劳，赐给他骅骝马一匹，宝剑一口。后来，他转任岐州刺史，又转任梁州刺史。
English: Liang's army around Xiaojian and Dajian also abandoned the city and fled to the west, and Yizhou was pacified. The Empress Dowager herself wrote a letter of condolence to Jianye, giving him a horse and a sword. Later, he was transferred to Qizhou Jishi, and then to Liangzhou Jishi.

古文：中山王英之征义阳，永为宁朔将军、统军，当长围遏其南门。
现代文：梁州百姓得到竖眼这个好刺史，人人心里都暗自庆贺。而竖眼到任后，遇到祸患，不能很好地排除和治理。他的儿子傅敬绍阴险残暴，很不仁慈，聚敛财货，沉缅酒色，成为百姓的祸害，遭到全州的怨恨。
English: When the people of Liangzhou were given the good luck story of Xie Ye, everyone secretly celebrated in their hearts. However, after Xie Ye took office, he encountered calamities that could not be eliminated and managed well. His son Fu Jing Shao was sinister and cruel, very uncharitable, he amassed wealth and indulged in drinking, and became the scourge of the people, and was resented by the whole state.

古文：齐将马仙琕连营稍进，规解城围。
现代文：不久，朝廷命竖眼为镇南将军，统领梁州、西益州、巴州三州的各军。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed Zhenan general to command the armies of Liangzhou, Xiyi and Bazhou.

古文：永乃分兵付长史贾思祖，令守营垒，自将马步千人，南逆仙琕。
现代文：南梁派遣北梁州长史锡休儒等率十支共三万多人马进犯直城。
English: Nanliang dispatched the governor of Beiliang, Shi Xixiu Ru, and other leaders of ten branches, a total of more than 30,000 people, to attack Dazhong.

古文：贼俯射永，洞其左股，永出箭复入，遂大破之。仙琕烧营卷甲而遁。
现代文：竖眼派长子敬绍率众迎击，大败南军。敬绍观览书史经传，多少有些胆力，而却奢侈淫逸，倜傥风流，对地方多有骚扰。
English: The eldest son of the Jianye faction, Jing Shao, led the crowd to meet the attack and defeated the Southern Army. According to the history of Jing Shao's observation book, he had some courage, but he was extravagant and lascivious, indulged in debauchery, and harassed many places.

古文：英曰： 公伤矣！
现代文：他见天下多事，因而暗怀异志，想断绝同四方的联系，占据南郑。
English: He saw a lot of things going on in the world, so he harbored a secret ambition to break off ties with the Quartet and occupy South Zheng.

古文：且还营。 永曰： 昔汉祖扪足，不欲人知。下官虽微，国家一帅，奈何使虏有伤将之名！ 
现代文：他派自己小妾的哥哥唐昆仑在外面煽动，聚众包围梁州城，敬绍阴谋内应。贼兵包围合拢，事情泄露，守城的军士抓住了敬绍，告诉竖眼后将他处死。竖眼十分气愤，旧病发作死去。张烈，字徽之，清河东武城人，孝文帝赐名为烈，仍以本名为字。
English: He sent his concubine's brother, Tang Kunlun, to instigate outside, gathering a crowd to surround Liangzhou City, Jing Shao conspiracy inside. The robber soldiers surrounded and closed, the matter leaked out, the sergeant guarding the city caught Jing Shao, told the cross-eyed man and put him to death. The cross-eyed man was very angry and died of an old disease. Zhang Li, one of the characters, a native of East Wucheng in the Qing River, was given the name Li by Emperor Xiaowen, and still uses his real name.

古文：遂与诸军追之，极夜而返。
现代文：张烈从小就失去父亲，生活贫困，却广泛涉猎经史，很有气慨。
English: Zhang Lie lost his father at a young age and lives in poverty, but he is very passionate about his extensive study of history.

古文：时年七十余矣，三军莫不壮之。
现代文：当时，青州有崔徽伯、房徽叔二人，与张烈一样有很高的声誉。时人称他们为 三徽 。
English: At that time, there were two people in Qingzhou, Cui Huibao and Fang Huizhu, who had the same high reputation as Zhang Li. At that time, they were called the Three Huis.

古文：义阳既平，英使司马陆希道为露布，意谓不可，令永改之。
现代文：孝文帝时，张烈到代都做官，历任侍御、主文中散。迁都洛阳后，任太子步兵校尉。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, Zhang Lie worked as an official in the capital, successively serving as an attendant and the chief official. After the capital was moved to Luoyang, he served as the prince's infantry lieutenant.

古文：永亦不增文采，直与之改，陈列军仪，处置形要，而英深赏之。
现代文：齐将陈显达阴谋入寇北魏。顺阳太守王青石世代在南朝做官。
English: Qi conspired with Chen Xianda to invade the Northern Wei Dynasty. The Shunyang Emperor Wang Qingshi's generation served as officials in the Southern Dynasty.

古文：还京，除太中大夫。后除恆农太守，非心所乐。
现代文：荆州刺史、广阳王元嘉怕他有异心，上表请求将他换掉。
English: Jingzhou Zhishi and Guangyang Wang Yuanjia were afraid that he had a different intention, and they requested that he be replaced.

古文：时英东征钟离，表请永，求以为将，朝廷不听。永每言曰： 马援、充国，竟何人哉？
现代文：朝廷下诏，让近臣们都举荐自己所了解的人，大家各有举荐，孝文帝说： 太子步兵校尉张烈，每谈论国家大事，常常有适合人意的地方，我想用他去代替王青石怎么样？ 
English: The imperial court issued an edict, asking the courtiers to recommend people they knew, and everyone had a recommendation. Emperor Xiaowen said: Prince Zhang Lie, the captain of the infantry, always talks about national affairs, and there is often a place that is suitable for people. How about using him to replace Wang Qingshi?

古文：吾独白首见拘此郡！ 
现代文：彭城王元勰称赞孝文帝的意见，张烈便任顺阳太守。
English: Pengcheng Wang Yuanxuan praised Emperor Xiaowen's opinion, and Zhang Lie was appointed the governor of Shunyang.

古文：然于御人非其所长，故在任无多声称。
现代文：他到顺阳的第二天，便遭到齐将崔慧景的进攻，南军将顺阳包围七十多天，张烈抚慰鼓励全城将士，甚得军心。
English: On the second day after he arrived in Shunyang, he was attacked by the Qi general Cui Huijing. The Southern Army encircled Shunyang for more than seventy days. Zhang Li comforted and encouraged the soldiers of the whole city, which greatly won the hearts of the soldiers.

古文：后为南衮州刺史。
现代文：适逢孝文帝亲率大军南征，崔慧景领齐军逃走。
English: At the right time, Emperor Xiaowen led a large army southward, and Cui Huiqing led the Qi army to flee.

古文：年逾八十，犹能驰射，盘马奋槊，常讳言老，每自称六十九。
现代文：孝文帝亲自慰劳张烈说 ：你果然不辜负我的希望。 张烈答谢说 ：如果不是您亲自征讨，我不免仍被齐军围困。
English: Emperor Xiaowen personally consoled Zhang Rong and said, "You have indeed lived up to my expectations." Zhang Rong replied, "If it were not for your conscription, I would still be besieged by the Qi army."

古文：还京，拜光禄大夫。
现代文：是陛下您对得起为臣我，不是我不辜负陛下。 
English: It is Your Majesty who deserves me as a vassal, not I who deserve Your Majesty.

古文：卒，赠齐州刺史。
现代文：孝文帝称赞他回答得好。
English: Emperor Xiaowen praised him for his good answer.

古文：永尝登北芒，于平坦处奋矛跃马，盘旋瞻望，有终焉之志。
现代文：宣武帝即位，追录他过去的功勋，封爵为清河县子。不久，因母亲年迈，辞官回家。
English: Emperor Xuanwu ascended the throne, his past achievements were recorded, and he was knighted as the son of Qinghe County. Soon, due to his mother's old age, he returned home.

古文：远慕杜预，近好李冲、王肃，欲葬附墓。
现代文：前后十多年，经常遇到灾荒年景，张烈设粥厂向穷人施舍。
English: For more than ten years, Zhang Lie set up a porridge factory to give alms to the poor.

古文：遂买左右地数顷，遗敕子叔伟： 此吾之永宅也。 
现代文：受他接济的人很多，乡亲们因此称颂他。明帝继位，任张烈为司空长史。
English: There were many people who received money from him, and the villagers praised him for this. After the Ming Dynasty succeeded, Zhang Li was appointed as the Chief Historian.

古文：永妻贾氏留本乡，永至代都，娶妾冯氏，生叔伟及数女。贾后归平城，无男，唯一女。
现代文：先是元叉的父亲江阳王元维曾任青州刺史，元叉当权后，张烈请托故交，攀附元叉，历任给事黄门侍郎、光禄大夫。灵太后执政，因张烈属元叉一党，所以调出京城，任青州刺史。
English: At first, Jiangyang Wang Yuanwei, the father of Yuan Zha, was appointed as the historian of Qingzhou. After Yuan Zha came to power, Zhang Liang asked his old friends to support him. He was attached to Yuan Zha, and successively served as the Yellow Gate Attendant and the Guanglu Doctor. After Lingda came to power, because Zhang Liang was a member of Yuan Zha's party, he was transferred out of Beijing and appointed as the historian of Qingzhou.

古文：冯恃子，事贾无礼，叔伟亦奉贾不顺，贾常忿之。
现代文：当时，人们认为他家财产丰足，家僮众多，担心会有异谋，不适宜出任本州刺史，于是改任瀛州刺史。
English: At that time, people thought that his family was rich in property and had a large number of family members, and they were worried that there would be conspiracies, and that he was not suitable to serve as the Honshu sashimi, so he was changed to the Zhangzhou sashimi.

古文：冯先永卒，叔伟称父命欲葬北芒，贾疑叔伟将以冯合葬，遂求归葬永于所封贝丘县。
现代文：他为政清廉怡静，官吏百姓都安然无事。后来，因年老辞官还乡，兄弟们住在一起，和睦欢乐，为亲戚邻居所仰慕。张普惠，字洪账，常山九门人。身高八尺，相貌魁伟，对《周礼》、《仪礼》、《礼记》十分精通，还擅长于《春秋》和诸子百家的学说。
English: He was politically clean, honest and quiet, and the officials and people were all safe and sound. Later, due to the old dictionary officer returning to his hometown, the brothers lived together in harmony and joy, and were admired by relatives and neighbors. Zhang Puhui, Zi Hongjie, a native of Changshan Jiu Men. Eight feet tall, handsome, very proficient in "Weekly Rites," "Rites" and "Rites," and also good at "Spring and Autumn" and the teachings of all sons and daughters.

古文：事经司徒，司徒胡国珍感其所慕，许叔伟葬焉。
现代文：太和十九年，任主书，兼管局监，很被孝文帝所赏识。
English: In the 19th year of the Taihe era, he was appointed chief scribe and concurrently superintendent of the Administration Bureau, and was highly appreciated by Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：贾乃邀诉灵太后，太后从贾意，乃葬于东清河。
现代文：转任尚书都令史，任城王元澄敬重他的学问，为他吹嘘以提高他的身价。
English: He was appointed to the post of Shang Shudu and made history. The king of the city, Yuancheng, respected his learning and bragged about him to increase his status.

古文：又永昔营宅兆，葬父母于旧乡，贾于此强徙之，与永同处，永宗亲不能抑。
现代文：元澄任雍州刺史，聘请他为府录事参军。不久，担任管理冯翊郡的职务。
English: Yuancheng appointed as Yongzhou chief historian, hired him to join the army for the prefectural record. Soon, he assumed the position of managing Fengye County.

古文：葬已数十年矣，棺为桑枣根所绕束，去地尺余，甚为周固。以斧斫，出之于坎，时人咸怪。
现代文：元澄有丧服在身，而却想在七月七日召集文武大臣到北园骑马射箭，普惠奏劝元澄说： 孔子说： 脱掉丧服，停止祭奠，是不合乎礼的要求的。 后人注解这句话说： 这样做，就会忘掉哀痛。 我认为，除掉丧服以后，不再参与祭奠，在丧期为五个月的小功之内，难道可以看别人骑马射箭吗？ 
English: Although he was wearing mourning clothes, he wanted to summon the Minister of Culture and Martial Arts to the North Park on July 7 to ride horses and shoot arrows. Pu Huisong advised him to say, "Confucius said, 'It is not proper to take off the mourning clothes and stop the memorial service.' Later generations have commented on this saying, 'If you do so, you will forget the sorrow.' I think that after removing the mourning clothes, you will no longer participate in the memorial service. Is it possible to watch others ride horses and shoot arrows during the five-month period of mourning?

古文：叔伟膂力过人，弯弓三百斤，左右驰射，能立马上与人角骋，见者以为得永武而不得永文。
现代文：元澄接受了他的建议，寻找借口，停止了七月七日召集文武大臣射猎的计划。元澄转任扬州刺史，奏请朝廷任张普惠为羽林监领镇大将军开府主簿。
English: Motosumi accepted his suggestion, looked for an excuse, and stopped the plan to convene the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology on July 7th. Motosumi was transferred to the post of Yangzhou chief historian, and requested the court to appoint Zhang Puhui as the leader of the town of Ulin.

古文：傅竖眼，本清河人也。
现代文：普惠被元澄知遇，在元澄的两处藩地帮助他，享有很高的声誉。
English: Pu Hui was befriended by Yuan Chengzhi and helped him in two of Yuan Chengzhi's domains, enjoying a high reputation.

古文：七世祖伷。
现代文：回到京城后，仍任羽林监。
English: After returning to the capital, he continued to work as a ranger.

古文：伷子遘，石季龙太常。祖父融，南徙度河，家于磐阳，为乡闾所重。性豪侠，有三子，灵庆、灵根、灵越，并有才力。
现代文：元澄又遭遇太妃去世的忧患，大臣们为太妃立碑歌功颂德，碑上准备题写 康王元妃之碑 。元澄征询普惠的意见，普惠回答说： 查寻朝典，只有王妃，而没有元妃。
English: Motosumi also encountered the sorrow of the death of Princess Toa. The ministers set up a monument to praise the merits of Princess Toa, and prepared to inscribe the monument of Princess Kang on the monument. Motosumi asked Pu Hui for advice, and Pu Hui replied: To search the imperial records, there is only the princess, but no princess.

古文：融以自负，谓足为一时之雄。
现代文：孟子称鲁夫人为元，是想与下面的继室声子相区别。
English: Mencius referred to Lady Lu as the original, in order to distinguish her from the following successors.

古文：尝谓人曰： 吾昨梦夜，有一骏马，无堪乘者，人曰 何由得人乘 ，有一人曰 唯傅灵庆堪乘此马 ；又有弓一张，亦无人堪引，人曰 唯有傅灵根可弯此弓 ；又有数纸文书，人皆读不能解，人曰 唯有傅灵越能解此文。  融谓其三子文武才干足以驾驭当世，常从容谓乡人曰： 汝闻之不？
现代文：烈懿太妃嫁给先王，没有声子、仲子的嫌疑，我认为不用元字也可以区别名位。况且用氏配上姓，我认为这是对活人的称呼，所以，《春秋》上说：夫人姜氏从齐国来；埋葬后，用谥号配上姓，所以经书上说：埋葬我们诸侯的妻子文姜。又说：送来赠给夫人成风的衣被。都是以谥号配上姓。
English: I think that there is no suspicion of a son-in-law or a son-in-law, and I think that it is possible to distinguish the names without using the original characters. Moreover, the surname is used with the surname, which I think is the name of a living person. Therefore, "Spring and Autumn" said: Mrs. Jiang came from Qi; after burial, she was given a surname with a nickname, so the scripture said: Bury the wife of our princes, Wen Jiang. It also said: The quilt that was given to Mrs. Cheng Feng. They were all given a surname with a nickname.

古文：鬲虫之子有三灵，此图谶文也。 
现代文：古代的妇人都是随着丈夫的谥号。
English: In ancient times, women followed their husband's family name.

古文：好事者然之，故豪勇士多相归附。
现代文：现在，烈懿太妃品德冠盖当世，所以，特蒙褒奖和封赐，这是万代的盛事，怎么能强调定名的重要，而不称 烈懿妃 呢？ 
English: Now, the title of "Princess of Martyrs" is the most prestigious title in the world, so how can we emphasize the importance of naming, and not call her "Princess of Martyrs"?

古文：宋将萧斌、王玄谟寇磝碻。
现代文：元澄听从了他的意见。后来，任步兵校尉，以本官的职务兼河南尹丞。
English: Motosumi listened to his advice. Later, he was appointed as an infantry lieutenant, and concurrently served as Henan Yinzheng in his official capacity.

古文：时融始死，玄谟强引灵庆为军主。
现代文：宣武帝去世，他因在服丧期间与甄楷等人饮酒游乐获罪，被免去官职。按照旧例，被免官的，三年后降一级重新起用。
English: When Emperor Xuanwu died, he was found guilty of drinking and carousing with Zhenkai and others during the period of mourning, and was removed from his official post. According to the old practice, those who were removed from office were demoted one level and reinstated three years later.

古文：将攻城，攻车为城内所烧，灵庆惧军法，诈云伤重，令左右舆还营，遂与壮士数十骑遁还。斌、玄谟命追之。
现代文：如果才能优长，破格拔用的不受这种限制。熙平年间，吏部尚书李韶奏报张普惠有文学才能，按才能优秀的旧例，任他为宁远将军、司空仓曹参军。
English: If the talent is superior, it is not subject to this restriction. During the Heiping era, the cadres of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology and Zhang Puhui had literary talent. According to the old example of excellent talent, he was appointed as Ningyuan General and Sikuang Cao to join the army.

古文：左右谏曰： 灵庆兄弟并有雄才，兼其部曲多是壮勇，如彭超、尸生之徒，皆一当数十人，援不虚发，不可逼也。 
现代文：朝中议论以不降级为光荣。
English: The discussion between the two Koreas is that it is an honor not to be relegated.

古文：玄谟乃止。灵庆至家，遂与二弟匿山泽间。
现代文：当时，任城王元澄任大司空，他的奏章、文告、书信，大多出于普惠之手。
English: At that time, the king of the city, Yuancheng, was appointed as Daishi Ku. Most of his songs, proclamations, and letters were written by Pu Hui.

古文：时灵庆从叔乾爱为斌法曹参军，斌遣乾爱诱呼之，以腰刀为信，密令壮健者随之。
现代文：转任谏议大夫，元澄对他说： 我并不为你担任谏议大夫一职感到高兴，却高兴地看到谏议一职得到了你这个合适的人选。 
English: When he was transferred to the post of the chief medical officer, Yuancheng said to him, "I am not happy that you are the chief medical officer, but I am happy to see that you are the right person for the post of the chief medical officer."

古文：而乾爱不知斌之欲图灵庆。
现代文：这时，灵太后的父亲胡国珍去世，朝廷赠爵为相国、太上秦公。
English: At this time, Empress Dowager Ling's father, Hu Guozhen, passed away, and the imperial court bestowed a peerage on her father-in-law, Emperor Qin.

古文：既至，斌所遣壮士执灵庆杀之。灵庆将死，与母崔氏诀，言： 法曹杀人，不可忘也。 
现代文：普惠认为前代皇后的父亲没有太上的封号，所以，向朝廷上疏，陈说这样做是不可以的。
English: Pu Hui thought that the father of the former empress did not have the title of the emperor, so he complained to the court and said that it was not allowed to do so.

古文：灵根、灵越奔河北。
现代文：左右两边的大臣都很害怕，不敢附和他的话。
English: Ministers on both sides are too scared to echo his words.

古文：灵越至京师，因说齐人慕化，青州可平。
现代文：这时，听说胡家挖掘墓坑，发现地下有一块大石头。
English: At this time, I heard that the Hu family was digging a grave and found a large stone under the ground.

古文：文成大悦，拜灵越青州刺史、贝丘子，镇羊兰城；灵根为临齐副将，镇明潜垒。
现代文：普惠便秘密呈上奏表，说 ：已故侍中、司徒胡公，胸怀大道，内含灵气，所以生下圣明的太后，位近国家枢机，完全胜任朝廷的重托；身居槐里，能体察道德礼仪的真谛。
English: Pu Hui then secretly submitted a report, saying: "The late attendant, Prince Szeto Hu, had a broad mind and contained a spiritual aura, so the empress dowager who gave birth to Saint Ming, who was close to the national cardinal, was fully competent for the heavy entrustment of the imperial court; she lived in a cocoon and was able to experience the true meaning of moral etiquette.

古文：灵越北入之后，母崔氏遇赦免。
现代文：所以，因功高盖世，被朝廷赏赐九种最贵重的礼物，甚至用天子车上用的旗去褒奖他。
English: Therefore, for his great contribution to the world, the imperial court rewarded him with the nine most valuable gifts, and even praised him with the flag used on the celestial chariot.

古文：宋恐灵越在边扰三齐，乃以灵越叔父琰为冀州中从事，乾爱为乐陵太守。
现代文：圣上对他的深恩厚德更加隆重，太后对他的孝心更加慈爱，写在宪章里昭示天下，不也就可以了吗？而赐给太上的封号，我认为不妥。为什么呢？《礼记》上说 ，天上没有两个太阳，地上没有两位君主，到郊庙里祭祀，不能尊崇两位神主。 
English: The Emperor's deep benevolence towards him is even more grand, and the Empress Dowager's filial piety towards him is even more loving, and it is written in the charter to be shown to the world. Isn't that enough? But I don't think it is right to give the Emperor a title. Why? According to the "Rituals," there are not two suns in the sky, and there are not two sovereigns on the earth, and it is not possible to venerate two deities by offering sacrifices in a suburban temple.

古文：乐陵与羊兰隔河相对，命琰遣其门生与灵越婢诈为夫妇，投化以招之。
现代文：《易经》上说： 上边困惑，一定要反映在下边。 希望能听从我的建议，停止司徒威迫天子的封号。 
English: In the I Ching, it says, "Confusion on the upper side must be reflected on the lower side." I hope you can follow my advice and stop the scribes from forcing the Son of Heaven to seal His name.

古文：灵越与母分离思积，遂与灵根南走。
现代文：太后看到奏表，亲自到胡国珍家中，召集五品以上官员讨论这件事。
English: When the Empress Dowager saw the report, she personally went to Hu Guozhen's home and gathered more than five officials to discuss the matter.

古文：灵越与羊兰奋兵相击，乾爱出，遣船迎之，得免。
现代文：任城王元澄，太傅、清河王元怿，侍中崔光、御史中尉元匡、尚书崔亮都面有难色，普惠仍按理纠正，无所屈服。
English: The king of the city, Yuancheng, the taifu, the king of Qinghe, Yuanluo, the chamberlain, Cui Guang, the lieutenant of the imperial secretary, Yuan Kuang, and the secretary, Cui Liang, all had a hard face. Pu Hui still corrected according to reason, and did not give in.

古文：灵根差期，不得俱渡，临齐人知，剉斩杀之。
现代文：廷尉少卿袁翻说： 《周官》篇说： 上公被封九级，上大夫被封为四级。 
English: Yuan Fu, a courtier, said: "The Zhou Guan" article said: Shangguan was awarded the ninth grade, and Shangdaifu was awarded the fourth grade.

古文：乾爱出郡迎灵越，问灵根愆期状，灵越殊不应答。
现代文：级数虽然不一样，但都同名为上，怎么说称上的都是最尊贵的？ 
English: Although the ranks are not the same, they all have the same name. How can it be said that the highest ranks are the most honorable?

古文：乾爱不以为恶，敕左右出匣中乌皮袴褶，令灵越代所常服。
现代文：普惠厉声呵斥袁翻说 ：天子封为官职的有下卿、上士，何止只有大夫与公？
English: Pu Hui vehemently rebuked Yuan Fu, saying, "Heavenly sons and daughters are appointed to official posts, such as lower lords and staff sergeants, but how many are only doctors and court officials?

古文：灵越言 不须 。乾爱云： 汝可着体上衣服见垣公也？ 时垣护之为刺史。
现代文：但今天所封赐的号是太字下又加上字，两个名号同时赐予，不能不说达到极端。
English: However, the name given today is a combination of a boldface and a subscript, and the two names are given at the same time, which can only be said to be extreme.

古文：灵越奋声言： 垣公！
现代文：那些雕虫小技，你或许略知一二，至于事关礼仪制度的大事，哪里是你能知道的？ 
English: You may know a thing or two about the little tricks of carving insects, but what do you know about the big things when it comes to etiquette?

古文：垣公！着此当见南方国主，岂垣公也！ 竟不肯着。
现代文：袁翻脸上很有些惭愧的颜色，沉默在一旁不再说话。
English: Yuan Fu's face was a little ashamed, and he fell silent and stopped talking.

古文：及至丹阳，宋孝武见而礼之，拜衮州司马，而乾爱亦迁青、冀司马，带魏郡。
现代文：参加讨论的大臣认为灵太后正当朝理政，都顺从她的志向，便奏报说 ：张普惠言词虽然不屈不挠，但不是我们所同意的。朝廷的使命已经作出，请按前面的诏命执行。 太后又派元叉、贾灿宣读命令说： 我这样作，是孝子的心愿；你坚持陈奏，是忠臣的职责。
English: The ministers who took part in the discussion believed that the Empress Dowager Ling was the rightful ruler of the government and that they all obeyed her wishes, and they sent a report saying, "Although Zhang Puhui's words are unyielding, they are not what we agreed to. The mission of the imperial court has been accomplished, please carry it out in accordance with the previous edict." The Empress Dowager also sent Yuan Zha and Jia Can to read out the order, saying, "It is my filial son's wish that I do this; it is the duty of a loyal subject for you to persist in playing Chen Zha."

古文：后二人俱还建鄴。
现代文：群臣们已有定论，你不要苦苦夺去我孝敬父亲的情怀。
English: The courtiers have already made up their minds. Don't try to take away my feelings of reverence for my father.

古文：灵越意恆欲为兄复仇，而乾爱初不疑防。
现代文：以后有什么看法，不要因此就不再说话。 
English: If you have any opinions in the future, don't stop talking just because of that.

古文：知乾爱嗜鸡肉葵菜食，乃为作之，下以毒药，乾爱饭还而卒。
现代文：开初，普惠被太后召见，传达诏书的人骑着快马驰来，十分迅速，站着立即催促他快去。
English: At the beginning of the year, Pu Hui was summoned by the Empress Dowager. The person who delivered the edict came riding a fast horse, very quickly, and immediately stood up and urged him to hurry.

古文：后数年，灵越为太原太守，戍升城。后举兵同孝武子子勋，子勋以灵越为前军将军。
现代文：他的儿子们都吓得涕泪交流，他对他们说： 我处在圣明的朝代，身负进谏的职责，如果不陈说别人难以陈说的话，进谏别人难以进谏的事，便是惟惟诺诺，丧失职责，空食俸禄。
English: His sons were all scared to tears, and he said to them: I am in the dynasty of the Holy Light, and I have the duty of entering the palace. If I don't say things that others can't say, and enter things that others can't enter the palace, it is only a promise, loss of duty, empty salary.

古文：子勋败，灵越军众散亡，为明帝将王广之军人所擒，厉声曰： 我傅灵越也，汝得贼何不即杀！ 
现代文：人生总有一死，但要死得其所，又有什么可怨恨的呢？然而，朝廷论理讲法，你们不要担忧。 
English: There is always a death in life, but if you die in the right place, what is there to hate? However, don't worry about the reasoning of the court.

古文：广之生送诣宋辅国司马刘勔，勔躬自慰劳。
现代文：等到群臣们议论完毕，朝廷下旨慰劳，并命他回家，亲友故交都庆贺他的幸运。
English: When the ministers had finished their discussion, the imperial court issued a decree of consolation and ordered him to return home. His relatives and friends congratulated him on his good fortune.

古文：灵越曰： 人生归于死，实无面求活。 
现代文：这时，中山人杜弼写信给他说： 您深谙儒学，博学多闻，身怀奇伟之才，身居朝廷，担任谏议的职务，是那样忠诚，那样正直。
English: At this time, Du Juan, a native of Zhongshan, wrote to him, "You are deeply versed in Confucianism, erudite and well-informed, you are endowed with great talent, you are in the imperial court, you hold the post of deliberation, you are so loyal, so honest.

古文：勔壮其意，送诣建康。宋明帝欲加原宥，灵越辞对如一，乃杀之。
现代文：昨天在胡司徒的府第，当庭与胡太后谏诤，虽然诘问的话锋接连出现，而您从容应对，声音洪亮。宋城的带子才开始系上，鲁门的木柝可作警戒。
English: Yesterday, at the residence of the Hussites, in the presence of the court and the Empress Dowager Hu, although the interrogators appeared one after another, and you calmly responded, your voice was loud. Songcheng's ribbon has just begun to be tied, and Rumen's raft can be used as a warning.

古文：竖眼即灵越子也，沉毅壮烈，少有父风。
现代文：终于使后妃们逡巡顾忌，群僚们拱手沉默，虽然意见一时不被采用，但名声可传扬百代。
English: Finally, the empress dowager was made wary, and the colleagues were silent. Although the opinions were not adopted for a while, the reputation could be passed down for hundreds of generations.

古文：入魏，镇南王肃见而异之，且奇其父节，倾身礼敬，表为参军。
现代文：听说您廷诤的消息后十分畅快，所以写了这些话。 张普惠十分欣赏这封书信，常常口头向别人提起。
English: I am writing these words because I was very happy to hear the news about your daughter.Zhang Puhui appreciated this letter very much and often mentioned it to others verbally.

古文：以军功累迁益州刺史。高肇伐蜀，假竖眼征虏将军、持节，领步兵三万，先讨巴北，所至克捷。
现代文：普惠认为向天下百姓征收的布帛丝绢，幅度又长又宽，而尚书还要计议上奏，再向全国征收绵和麻，恐怕民不堪命。便上疏说： 听说尚书奏请，又要征收绵麻一类的户税，是遵照先皇定下的规矩。我日夜思忖，情感交集。
English: Pu Hui thought that the range of cloth, silk and flax levied on the people of the world was long and wide, while Shang Shu still needed to be considered and raised, and then cotton and hemp were levied on the whole country. I was afraid that the people would not be able to bear it. Then Shang Shu said: I heard that Shang Shu requested to raise and collect household taxes such as cotton and hemp, which was in accordance with the rules set by the First Emperor. I thought about it day and night, and my emotions were intertwined.

古文：竖眼性既清素，不营产业，衣食之外，俸禄粟帛皆以飨赐夷首，振恤士卒。
现代文：高祖昭成帝废除大斗，丢掉长尺，改去重秤，是因为怜爱天下百姓，减轻赋税。
English: Emperor Gaozhu Zhaocheng abolished the great battle, threw away the long ruler, and replaced it with a heavy scale, because he pitied the people of the world and reduced taxes.

古文：抚蜀人以恩信为本，保境安人，不以小利侵窃。
现代文：知道军队和国家需要绵和麻，因而，既征收户调，又让黎民百姓都享有养蚕和种麻的利益。所以，绢上税交绵八两，布上税交麻十五斤。
English: He knew that the army and the country needed cotton and hemp, so he not only levied a per capita tax, but also allowed the people of Li to enjoy the benefits of raising silkworms and growing hemp. Therefore, the tax on cocoons was 8 taels of cotton, and the tax on cloth was 15 jin of hemp.

古文：有掠蜀人入境者，皆移送还本。
现代文：百姓们能够废除大斗，去掉长尺，改变重秤，享受到减轻赋税的好处，不应该再交绵麻了。
English: The people should be able to abolish the great battle, get rid of the long ruler, change the heavy scale, and enjoy the benefits of reducing taxes. There should be no more hand-to-hand combat.

古文：检勒部下，守宰肃然。
现代文：所以，他们高兴得载歌载舞，交纳租税；欢呼雀跃，去服劳役。
English: Therefore, they are happy to sing and dance, pay taxes, and cheerfully go to labor service.

古文：远近杂夷相率款谒，仰其德化，思为魏人矣。
现代文：朝廷坚守信用，百姓就高兴输纳。但从此以后，征收调绢的尺幅却渐渐变长变宽，百姓们的怨恨声到处都可以听到。
English: The imperial court held fast to its trust, and the people were happy to accept the loss. However, from then on, the size of the levy gradually became longer and wider, and the resentment of the people could be heard everywhere.

古文：宣武甚嘉之。明帝初，屡请解州，乃以元法僧代之，益州人追随恋泣者数百里。
现代文：目前，皇太后还没有临朝执政，陛下您正在守丧，宰辅大臣不探根求源，只知道百姓们怨恨加征绵麻，不了解加宽了尺幅，增长了尺寸，加重了秤上的斤两，加大了斗的容量。
English: At present, the Empress Dowager has not yet been in power, and Your Majesty is in mourning. The Vice-Minister does not seek the root cause, but only knows that the people resent the tax increase, do not understand that the width has been widened, the size has increased, the weight on the scale has increased, and the capacity of the bucket has increased.

古文：梁将赵祖悦逼寿春，镇南将军崔亮讨之，以竖眼为持节、镇南军司。
现代文：应该革去户税中的弊端，保留所应该保留的，却专门又提出用绵麻代替调绢，以取悦天下的人心，我认为用不恰当的方法取悦人心，还不如不取悦呢。 
English: The drawbacks in the household tax should be eliminated, and what should be reserved should be reserved, but it was specifically proposed to use linen instead of the yakitori to please the hearts of the world. I think that it is better not to please the hearts of the people by using inappropriate methods.

古文：法僧既至，大失人和。
现代文：普惠又上表请求在皇帝临朝议事的日子，要当面听取朝臣的意见。
English: Pu Hui also made a request to listen to the courtier's opinion in person on the day of the emperor's visit to the court.

古文：梁遣其衡州刺史张齐因人心怨入寇，进围州城。朝廷以西南为忧，乃驿征竖眼于淮南，以为益州刺史。
现代文：从此以后，朝臣们一个月见一次皇帝。又由于孝明帝不亲自临朝听政，过分地崇尚佛法，甚至到家庙祭祀祖先的事，也让有司代替，普惠也上表规劝。当时，史官因日蚀相克，建议朝廷停止议事。
English: From then on, the courtiers met with the emperor once a month. Moreover, since Emperor Xiaoming did not personally come to the court to listen to the government, he excessively advocated Buddhism, and even went to the family temple to offer sacrifices to the ancestors, he also had a secretary replace him, and Pu Hui also went to the table to persuade him. At that time, the historian suggested that the court stop the proceedings because of the eclipse.

古文：寻加散骑常侍、西征都督，率步骑三千以讨齐。
现代文：普惠认为废除朝政是非礼的行为，上疏表示反对。
English: Pu Hui thought that abolishing the imperial government was an act of discourtesy, and Shang Suo expressed his opposition.

古文：给铜印千余，须有假职者，听六品已下板之。竖眼既出梁州，梁军所在拒塞，竖眼三日中转战二百余里，甲不去身，频致九捷。蜀人闻竖眼复为刺史，人人喜悦，迎于路者日有百数。
现代文：又上表议论时政的得失，一是要审定法度，使斗和尺标准化，减轻田租和户税的征收量，减少百姓的服役时间；二是听取朝野的意见，明察冤狱错案，先皇时的制度有不便于实行的，请全部改正；三是拔擢忠诚正派的人才，黜退卑鄙奸妄的小人。任用贤能不要三心二意，摒弃邪恶不要犹豫不决；四是复兴衰败的贵族世家，对于勋臣旧戚的后代，应该续用。
English: Also on the table was a discussion of the gains and losses of the current government. The first was to review the laws and regulations, standardize the do and shaku, reduce the amount of land rent and household tax levied, and reduce the service time of the people; the second was to listen to the opinions of the court and the field, clearly inspect the wrongful imprisonment cases, and the system of the former emperor was inconvenient to implement, and please correct them all; the third was to promote loyal and decent talents, and repel despicable and treacherous villains. Do not hesitate to appoint a virtuous person, and do not hesitate to abandon evil; the fourth was to revive the decaying aristocratic

古文：竖眼至州，白水已东，人皆宁业。
现代文：奏章送上，孝明帝和灵太后在宣光殿接见普惠，不断向他诘问质疑。
English: Emperor Xiaoming and Empress Dowager Ling met Pu Hui at the Xuan Guang Temple and questioned him constantly.

古文：张齐仍阻白水屯，寇葭萌。
现代文：君臣对答多时，太后不高兴地说： 这些烦琐小事，都一一翻腾出来，实在惹人烦恼。 
English: When the courtier took a long time to answer, the empress dowager said unhappily, "All these troublesome little things have come tumbling out one after another, which is really troublesome.

古文：竖眼分遣诸将水陆讨之，大破其军。
现代文：普惠答道： 圣上您养育天下百姓，就像慈母养育婴儿。
English: Pu Hui replied: Your Holiness, you nurture the people of the world, just like a mother nurtures a baby.

古文：齐被重创，奔而退，小剑大剑贼亦捐城西走，益州平。灵太后玺书慰劳，赐骅骝马一匹，宝剑一口。
现代文：现在，婴儿就要被弃置在山壑中，将被丢放在水火中，而却因为怕麻烦不去拯救他们，难道是婴儿们对慈母所期望的吗？ 太后说 ：天下的黎民百姓，难道有这样艰难困苦吗？ 
English: Now that the babies are about to be abandoned in the mountains, to be thrown into the water and fire, but because they are afraid of trouble, they do not save them, is that what the babies expect from their loving mother? The Queen Mother said: Is there such a hardship for the people of the world?

古文：后转岐州刺史，仍转梁州刺史。梁州人既得竖眼为牧，人咸自贺。而竖眼至州遇患，不堪综理。
现代文：普惠回答说 ：天下的皇亲贵戚，地位没有超过太师彭城王的，然而，他还不免受冤枉死去，那些平民百姓受的冤屈痛苦，还能有什么不会出现呢？ 
English: Pu Hui replied, "Imperial relatives and dignitaries around the world do not have a higher status than Grand Master Pengcheng Wang. However, he is not immune from unjustified death. What else could there be but the unjustified suffering of those common people?

古文：其子敬绍嶮暴不仁，聚货耽色，甚为人害，远近怨望。
现代文：太后解释说 ：彭城王受的冤屈，我用加封他的三个儿子的办法加以弥补，你为什么还要提起？ 
English: The empress dowager explained, "I made up for the wrongs that King Pengcheng suffered by adding three of his sons to the throne. Why did you even bring it up?

古文：寻假镇南将军，都督梁、西益、巴三州诸军事。
现代文：普惠说 ：太后您加封彭城王的三个儿子，天下人没有不对您的德行感到高兴的，知道您像慈母一样君临天下。
English: Pu Hui said, "Mother Empress, you have added the three sons of the King of Pengcheng, and no one in the world is not pleased with your virtue, knowing that you rule the world like a loving mother.

古文：梁遣其北梁州长史锡休儒等十军率众三万人寇直城，竖眼遣敬绍总众赴击，大破之。
现代文：我所以重新陈奏这件事的原因，是请求朝廷对这类冤案都要进行甄别复议。 太后又问 ：你说的复兴衰败的贵族旧戚，究竟是指的谁？ 
English: The reason why I am bringing up this matter again is to request the Imperial Court to conduct a review of all such cases of injustice.The Empress Dowager also asked: Who exactly do you mean by reviving the old aristocratic relatives who have fallen into decay?

古文：敬绍颇览书传，微有胆力，而奢淫倜傥，轻为残害，又见天下多事，阴怀异图，欲杜绝四方，擅据南郑。令其妾兄唐昆仑扇搅于外，聚众围城，敬绍谋为内应。
现代文：普惠答道 ：过去淮南王刘安因为叛逆被处死，汉文帝还封赏他的四个儿子，这是骨肉之情不可离弃、关系亲密的缘故。我见咸阳王、京兆王都是皇子皇孙，仅因一时犯罪，就自己种下祸根，永远沉沦下僚，再也不被起用，难道不应复兴衰败的贵族旧戚吗？ 太后说 ：你说的很有道理，应当让公卿大臣们广泛议论一下。 
English: Pu Hui replied, "In the past, Liu An, King of Huainan, was executed for treason, and the Han Emperor also rewarded his four sons. This is because of the close relationship between the flesh and blood. I see that King Xianyang and King Jingzhao are both princes and grandsons of emperors. Just because of a momentary crime, they have sown their own evil roots, and will forever sink into the ranks of subordinates, never to be used again. Shouldn't we revive the old relatives of the decadent aristocracy? The Empress Dowager said, "What you said is very reasonable, and we should let the noblemen and ministers discuss it

古文：贼围既合，事泄，在城兵执敬绍；白竖眼而杀之。
现代文：任城王元澄去世，普惠因受他的恩惠，初一和十五一定去祭奠。
English: When the king of the city, Yuancheng, passed away, because Pu Hui was favored by him, he went to pay his respects on the first day of the first month and the fifteenth day of the fifteenth month.

古文：竖眼恚，发疾卒。
现代文：到了除服的祭礼，不管是寒冬盛暑，刮风下雨，也必定赶去参加。
English: When it comes to the festival of removing clothes, whether it is cold winter, hot summer, wind and rain, they will certainly rush to participate.

古文：永安中，赠吏部尚书、齐州刺史。
现代文：因为，元澄曾嘉奖过普惠，临终前又奏请朝廷任命普惠为尚书右丞。
English: Because, Motosumi had commended Puhye, and before his death he asked the Imperial Court to appoint Puhye as Shojo-jo.

古文：孝武帝初，赠司空公、相州刺史。
现代文：灵太后深深悼念元澄，看到他生前写的奏书，便采纳了他的建议。
English: The Reverend Mother deeply mourned for and remembered Motosumi, and when she saw the report he had written before his death, she accepted his suggestion.

古文：长子敬和，次敬仲，并好酒薄行，倾侧势家。
现代文：诏命颁行之后，尚书省的官员们认为普惠出身寒微，不应管辖尚书省的事，他们互相联络，想一起抵制他上任，事情闹了多日才停息。
English: After the edict was issued, the officials of Shangshu Province believed that Pu Hui was from a humble background and should not govern the affairs of Shangshu Province. They contacted each other and wanted to resist his taking office together. The situation lasted for many days before it calmed down.

古文：敬和，孝庄时以其父有遗惠于益州，复为益州刺史。
现代文：正光二年，朝廷命杨钧护送蠕蠕族首领阿那王襄回国，普惠认为送回去将留下后患，上疏极力陈说不应该这样做，朝廷没有采纳他的意见。魏子建任益州刺史，被安上贪贼的罪名。
English: In the second year of the Zhengguang era, the imperial court ordered Yang Zhi to escort the leader of the Demu-Hrum tribe, Anawang Xiang, back to China. Pu Hui thought that sending him back would leave a legacy. Shang Soo tried his best to say that this should not be done, but the imperial court did not accept his opinion. Wei Zijian was appointed to write the history of Yizhou and was accused of embezzlement.

古文：至州，聚敛无已，好酒嗜色，远近失望。
现代文：普惠被派往益州调查，弄明情况，解除了魏子建的罪名。
English: Pu Hui was sent to Yizhou to investigate, clarify the situation, and cleared Wei Zijian of the charges.

古文：仍为梁将樊文炽攻围，城降，送于江南。
现代文：所以，魏子建父子十分感激他。这时，南梁西丰侯萧正德诈称投降，朝廷很认真地准备迎接他。
English: Therefore, Wei Zijian and his son were very grateful to him. At this time, Xiao Zhengde, the Southern Liang, Western Feng, pretended to surrender, and the imperial court was very seriously preparing to welcome him.

古文：后以齐神武威德日广，令敬和还北，以申和通之意。
现代文：普惠却请求朝廷将萧正德送到扬州，送还给南梁，朝廷不同意。
English: Pu Hui, however, asked the court to send Xiao Zhengde to Yangzhou and return him to Nan Liang, but the court disagreed.

古文：除北徐州刺史，复以耽酒为土贼掩袭，弃城走。
现代文：不久，萧正德果然又叛魏回到南梁。后来，朝廷任普惠为光禄大夫，右丞的职务仍然不变。
English: Not long after, Xiao Zhengde returned to Nanliang in defiance of Wei. Later, the imperial court appointed Pu Hui as the Guanglu doctor, and Ujo's position remained unchanged.

古文：遂废弃，卒于家。张烈，字徽之，清河东武城人也，孝文帝赐名曰烈，仍以本名为字焉。
现代文：仇池武兴郡的氐族多次反叛，西部边境各郡防守部队的军需物资很久就断绝运输。朝廷下诏命普惠以本官的职务再担任持节、西道行台，划拨秦、岐、泾、华、雍、豳、东秦七州的兵士健儿三万人，听凭他的调遣，让他负责将南秦、东益州二州交纳的军粮，分别送给各戍边部队。
English: The Qiang people in Wuxing County of Quchi rebelled many times, and the transportation of military supplies from the defense forces of the western border counties was cut off for a long time. The imperial court ordered Pu Hui to take the post of his own official and then serve as the holding festival and the west road platform, allocating 30,000 soldiers from Qin, Qi, Yao, Hua, Yong, Yao and East Qin seven states. With his deployment, he was responsible for sending the military grain paid by South Qin and East Yizhou two states to each border troops.

古文：高祖悕，为慕容俊尚书右仆射。
现代文：他需要的将领，也由他在关西的守将中随意挑选，军队中所需的各种物资和文书，都由他自行决定。
English: The generals he needs are also randomly selected by him from the Kansai garrison, and all kinds of materials and documents needed in the army are at his own discretion.

古文：曾祖恂，散骑常侍，随慕容德南度，因居齐郡之临淄县。
现代文：事情办完后回到京城，朝廷赐给他丝绢和布帛一百匹。
English: After the matter was over, he returned to the capital, and the court gave him a hundred silk and cloth horses.

古文：烈少孤贫，涉猎经史，有气概，时青州有崔徽伯、房徽叔、与烈并有令誉，时人号 三徽 。孝文时，入官代都，历侍御、主文中散。
现代文：这时，朝廷又下诏命群臣访察冤案，普惠不断上疏陈述种种不合理的事情。出任东徐州刺史。淮南九个边防区域十三个郡，因南梁过去遗留下的积弊，不同郡县的人错杂混居。普惠逐一清查登记，精减郡县数量，上表奏报，朝廷下诏批准。地方官根据他的意见，治理有方，盗贼消失，百姓都安居乐业。普惠不喜欢经营家产，好举荐人才，对故交旧友忠诚淳厚。
English: At this time, the imperial court also issued an edict ordering a group of courtiers to visit Nanliang to investigate the unjust case, and Pu Hui continued to go up and down to report various unreasonable things. He served as a historian of East Xuzhou. Thirteen counties in the nine border regions of Huainan, due to the accumulated shortcomings left by Nanliang in the past, people from different counties lived together. Pu Hui checked the registration one by one, reduced the number of counties, reported the above table, and approved the imperial edict. According to his opinion, the local officials were well managed, the thieves disappeared, and the people lived and worked peacefully. Pu Hui did not

古文：复除东徐州刺史，前后在州，为吏人所爱。卒，赠尚书右仆射、司徒公、冀州刺史。
现代文：冀州人侯坚少年时与他一同求学，很早就去世了，撇下儿子侯长瑜，普惠一年四季都拿出俸禄接济他，从不间断，还送给他吃的穿的。他任豫州刺史后，又推荐侯长瑜出来做官，并携带长瑜的全家到豫州，在生活上不断帮助他们。
English: Hou Jian, a resident of Jizhou, went to school with him when he was a boy. He died a long time ago, leaving behind his son Hou Changyu. Puhui has provided him with a salary all year round, without interruption, and has also given him food and clothing. After he was appointed as the governor of Yuzhou, he also recommended Hou Changyu to become an official, and brought Changyu's whole family to Yuzhou to continuously help them in life.

古文：子子义、子智。
现代文：他在豫州去世。
English: He died in Yuzhou.

