古文：则天皇后中宗
现代文：则天皇后姓武名珝，并州文水人。
English: The Empress Dowager's family name was Bu Mingsheng, and she was a member of the Shouwen Shui Ren.

古文：则天顺圣皇后武氏讳曌，并州文水人也。父士皞，官至工部尚书、荆州都督，封应国公。
现代文：其父武士皞，官至工部尚书、荆州都督，封为应国公。
English: His father was a samurai, an official of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, and the governor of Jing Province. He was given the title of Yingguo.

古文：后年十四，太宗闻其有色，选为才人。
现代文：武后十四岁时，太宗李世民听说她有姿色，选她进宫做才人。
English: When Empress Wu was fourteen years old, Emperor Taizong Li Shimin heard that she was good-looking and chose her to enter the palace as a talented person.

古文：太宗崩，后削发为比丘尼，居于感业寺。
现代文：太宗逝世后，武后削发出家为尼，住在感业寺。
English: After the death of Emperor Taizong, Empress Wu sent her family to live as nuns at Sankei-ji Temple.

古文：高宗幸感业寺，见而悦之，复召入宫。
现代文：高宗李治游感业寺，相见后非常喜欢她，再召她入宫。
English: Gao Zong Li Zhi You liked her very much after meeting her at the Zengye Temple, and then invited her to the palace.

古文：久之，立为昭仪，进号宸妃。
现代文：日久之后，将她立为昭仪，晋升封号宸妃。
English: After a long time, she was appointed as Zhaoyi and promoted to the title of Gongfei.

古文：永徽六年，高宗废皇后王氏，立宸妃为皇后。
现代文：永徽六年，高宗废黜皇后王氏，立武氏为皇后。
English: In the sixth year of Yonghui, Gaozong dethroned the Queen Wang clan and established the Queen Wu clan.

古文：高宗自显庆后，多苦风疾，百司奏事，时时令后决之，常称旨，由是参豫国政。
现代文：高宗自显庆年后，常常苦于风疾缠身，百官奏议政事，每每让武氏裁处，武后所为总使高宗称心，由此参预国政。
English: After Gao Zong's birthday, he often suffered from wind disease and had to consult with hundreds of officials to discuss political affairs. This always pleased Gao Zong, the general envoy of the Wu court and the Wu empress, and he participated in the pre-election national politics.

古文：后既专宠与政，乃数上书言天下利害，务收人心，而高宗春秋高，苦疾，后益用事，遂不能制。
现代文：武后独占宠爱参政后，便频频上疏议论治理天下的利弊，致力收揽人心，而高宗年岁渐高，又受疾病苦累，武后益发专权，竟至无法控制。
English: After Emperor Wu's exclusive participation in politics, he frequently discussed the advantages and disadvantages of governing the world, and strived to win the hearts and minds of the people. However, Emperor Gao Zong was getting older and suffering from illness, and Emperor Wu's increasing exclusive power became uncontrollable.

古文：高宗悔，阴欲废之，而谋泄不果。
现代文：高宗后悔，暗自打算废她，但计谋泄露未成。
English: Gao Zong regretted and secretly planned to depose her, but the plot was not revealed.

古文：上元元年，高宗号天皇，皇后亦号天后，天下之人谓之 二圣 。
现代文：上元元年，高宗加号 天皇 ，武后也加号 天后 ，天下人称他们为 二圣 。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Gaozong and Empress Wu also received the title of Tianhou, and people around the world called them the Two Holy Emperors.

古文：弘道元年十二月，高宗崩，遗诏皇太子即皇帝位，军国大务不决者，兼取天后进止。
现代文：弘道元年十二月，高宗逝世，遗诏皇太子李哲继位，难以裁决的军国大事，同时由天后决定取舍进退。
English: In December of the first year of the Hongdao era, Gaozong died, leaving the throne to Crown Prince Li Zhe, a military event that was difficult to adjudicate. At the same time, it was up to the Empress Dowager to decide what to do.

古文：甲子，皇太子即皇帝位，尊后为皇太后，临朝称制。
现代文：十一日，皇太子李哲登皇位，尊奉武后为皇太后，当朝理政，行使皇权。
English: On the 11th day, the crown prince Li Zhe ascended the throne, honored the empress dowager as the empress dowager, and administered the government and exercised imperial power.

古文：大赦，赐九品以下勋官一级。
现代文：朝廷施行大赦，赐予九品以下官员勋官一级。
English: The Imperial Court issued an amnesty, awarding officials with nine or fewer pins the first class of the Order of Merit.

古文：庚午，韩王元嘉为太尉，霍王元轨为司徒，舒王元名为司空。
现代文：十七日，韩王李元嘉任太尉，霍王李元轨任司徒，舒王李元名任司空。
English: On the 17th, Han Wang Li Yuanjia was appointed as a captain, Huo Wang Li Yuanlu as a steward, and Shu Wang Li Yuanming as a steward.

古文：甲戌，刘仁轨为尚书左仆射，裴炎为中书令，刘齐贤为侍中：同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十一日，刘仁轨任尚书左仆射，裴炎任中书令，刘齐贤任侍中，皆加同中书门下三品职权。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Liu Renglu was appointed as Shangshu's left-hand man, Pei Yan as Zhongshu's secretary, and Liu Qixian as attendant, all of whom were appointed to the three positions under Zhongshu.

古文：戊寅，郭待举、魏玄同、岑长倩同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十五日，郭待举、魏玄同、岑长倩加同中书门下三品。
English: On the 25th, Guo Zhifu, Wei Xuan Tong, and Zou Changqi were promoted to the third grade.

古文：癸未，郭正一罢。
现代文：三十日，郭正一被免职。
English: On the 30th, Guo Zhengyi was removed from office.

古文：光宅元年正月癸未，改元嗣圣。
现代文：武后光宅元年正月癸未，改年号为嗣圣。
English: In January of the first year of the first month of the first year of the year, the year name was changed to Shisho.

古文：癸巳，左散骑常侍韦弘敏为太府卿、同中书门下三品。
现代文：初十，左散骑常侍韦弘敏任太府卿、同中书门下三品。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Wei Hongmin, a left-hand rider and a regular attendant, was appointed Dafu-kyo, and he was promoted to Sanbon, the third grade of junior high school.

古文：二月戊午，废皇帝为庐陵王，幽之。
现代文：二月初六，武后将皇帝李哲废黜为庐陵王，并囚禁他。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, Empress Wu deposed Emperor Li Zhe as the King of Fuling and imprisoned him.

古文：己未，立豫王旦为皇帝，妃刘氏为皇后，立永平郡王成器为皇太子。
现代文：初七，立豫王李旦为皇帝、李旦妃子刘氏为皇后，立永平郡王李成器为皇太子。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Li Dan, the king of Yu, was made emperor, Li Dan's daughter-in-law Liu was made empress, and Li Chengqi, the king of Yongping County was made crown prince.

古文：大赦，改元为文明。
现代文：施行大赦，改年号为文明。
English: An amnesty was implemented, and the year was renamed "Civilization."

古文：赐文武官五品以上爵一等、九品以上勋两转。
现代文：赐予五品以上文武官员爵位一级、九品以上官员勋衔二级。
English: Civil and military officials with five or more pins were awarded the first class of knighthood, and officials with nine or more pins were awarded the second class of decoration.

古文：老人版授官，赐粟帛。
现代文：授与老人荣誉官衔，赐给粮食布帛。
English: The old man was awarded an honorary title and given a grain basket.

古文：职官五品以上举所知一人。
现代文：五品以上的主事官向朝廷举荐一名所了解的人才。
English: The leading officials of the Fifth Rank and above recommend a talent they know to the Imperial Court.

古文：皇太后仍临朝称制。
现代文：皇太后武氏仍行使皇权当朝理政。
English: The Empress Dowager Takeshi still exercised imperial power and governed the country.

古文：庚申，废皇太孙重照为庶人，杀庶人贤于巴州。
现代文：初八，武后将皇太孙李重照废为平民，在巴州杀了被废为平民的李贤。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Empress Wu abolished the imperial grandson Li Chong as a commoner, and killed Li Xian, who was abolished as a commoner, in Bazhou.

古文：甲子，皇帝率群臣上尊号于武成殿。
现代文：十二日，皇帝李旦率群臣在武成殿向武后加尊号。
English: On the 12th, Emperor Li Dan led a group of courtiers to confer the title of nobility on Empress Wu at Wucheng Hall.

古文：丁卯，册皇帝。
现代文：十五日，武后册封皇帝。
English: On the 15th, Wu Hou was proclaimed emperor.

古文：丁丑，太常卿王德真为侍中，中书侍郎刘祎之同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十五日，太常卿王德真任侍中，中书侍郎刘之加同中书门下三品。
English: On the 25th, Wang Dezhen, the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, was appointed as an attendant, and Liu Zhi, the attendant of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, was promoted to the Third Rank of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party.

古文：庚辰，赠玉清观道士太中大夫王远知金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：二十八日，赠封玉清观道士太中大夫王远知为金紫光禄大夫。
English: On the 28th, Dr. Wang Yuanchi, a disciple of the Jade and Pure Land Sect of Taoism, was awarded the title of Golden Purple and Gold Doctor.

古文：三月丁亥，徙封上金为毕王，素节葛王。
现代文：三月初五，改封李上金为毕王，李素节为葛王。
English: On March 5th, Li Shangjin was renamed as Bi Wang, and Li Su Jie as Ge Wang.

古文：四月丁巳，滕王元婴薨。
现代文：四月初六，滕王李元婴去世。
English: On the sixth day of the fourth lunar month, Teng Wang Li Yuanfang passed away.

古文：辛酉，徙封上金为泽王，素节许王。
现代文：初十，改封李上金为泽王，李素节为许王。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Li Shangjin was changed to Ze Wang, and Li Su Jie to Xu Wang.

古文：癸酉，迁庐陵王于房州；丁丑，又迁于均州。
现代文：二十二日，将庐陵王李哲迁禁至房州；二十六日，将其再迁至均州。
English: On the 22nd, Li Zhe, the king of Fuling, was banished to Fangzhou; on the 26th, he was banished to Junzhou.

古文：五月癸巳，以大丧禁射猎。
现代文：五月十二日，因帝王丧礼禁止射猎。
English: On May 12th, due to the emperor's funeral, shooting was banned.

古文：闰月甲子，礼部尚书武承嗣为太常卿、同中书门下三品。
现代文：闰五月十三日，礼部尚书武承嗣任太常卿、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 13th day of leap May, the heir of the etiquette department, Shang Shumu, was appointed as Tai Changqing, and he was promoted to the third grade of the middle school.

古文：七月戊午，广州昆仑杀其都督路元睿。
现代文：七月初九，广州的昆仑杀了本州都督路元睿。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month, Kunlun of Guangzhou killed Lu Yuanrui, the governor of Honshu.

古文：乙丑，突厥寇朔州，左武卫大将军程务挺败之。
现代文：十六日，突厥侵犯朔州，左武卫大将军程务挺将其击败。
English: On the 16th, the Turks invaded Shuozhou and were defeated by the Zuo Wei general Cheng Mu Ting.

古文：辛未，有彗星出于西方。
现代文：二十二日，在西方出现彗星。
English: On the 22nd, a comet appeared in the west.

古文：八月庚寅，葬天皇大帝于乾陵。
现代文：八月十一日，在乾陵安葬高宗。
English: On August 11, Gao Zong was buried in the Qianling Mausoleum.

古文：丙午，武承嗣罢。
现代文：二十七日，武承嗣被免职。
English: On the 27th, Wu Chengzi was removed from his post.

古文：九月甲寅，大赦，改元。旗帜尚白，易内外官服青者以碧，大易官名，改东都为神都，追尊老子母为先天太后。
现代文：九月初六，施行大赦，更改年号，旗帜崇尚白色，将宫内外的青色官服改为碧绿色，大改官名，将东都洛阳改名为神都。追尊老子李耳冉的母亲为 先天太后 。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, an amnesty was implemented, the year was changed, the flag was changed to white, the blue official uniforms inside and outside the palace were changed to turquoise green, the official name was changed, and the eastern capital Luoyang was renamed Shendu. The mother of the revered Lao Zi Li Er Ran was revered as the Empress Dowager.

古文：丙辰，左威卫大将军程务挺为单于道安抚大使，以备突厥。
现代文：初八，左威卫大将军程务挺任单于道安抚大使，以防备突厥来犯。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, General Cheng Mu Ting of the Western Wei Dynasty was appointed as an ambassador to pacify the Southern Wei Dynasty in order to prevent the invasion of the Turks.

古文：己巳，追尊武氏五代祖克己为鲁国公，妣裴氏为鲁国夫人；高祖居常为太尉、北平郡王，妣刘氏为王妃；曾祖俭为太尉、金城郡王，妣宋氏为王妃；祖华为太尉、太原郡王，妣赵氏为王妃；考士皞为太师、魏王，妣杨氏为王妃。
现代文：二十一日，追尊武后前五代先祖武克己为鲁国公，前五代先祖母裴氏为鲁国夫人；先高祖父武居常为太尉、北平郡王，先高祖母刘氏为王妃；曾祖父武俭为太尉、金城郡王，高祖母宋氏为王妃；祖父武华为太尉、太原郡王，祖母赵氏为王妃；父亲武士为太师、魏王，母亲杨氏为王妃。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, the ancestors of the first five generations of the revered Empress Wu were the Prince of Lu, and the first five generations of the great-grandmother Pei were the Lady of Lu; the great-great-grandfather Wu Ju Chang was the First Lieutenant and the King of Beiping County, and the great-great-grandmother Liu was the Queen; the great-grandfather Wu Jian was the First Lieutenant and the King of Jincheng County, and the great-grandmother Song was the Queen; the grandfather Wu Hua was the First Lieutenant and the King of Taiyuan County, and the grandmother Zhao was the Queen; the father was the Grand

古文：丁丑，柳州司马李敬业举兵于扬州以讨乱。
现代文：二十九日，柳州司马李敬业在扬州起兵讨伐武氏之乱。
English: On the 29th, Liuzhou Sima Li Jingye raised an army in Yangzhou to fight against the Wu Rebellion.

古文：贬韦弘敏为汾州刺史。
现代文：将韦弘敏贬为汾州刺史。
English: Wei Hongmin will be relegated to a footnote in Zhangzhou history.

古文：十月癸未，楚州司马李崇福以山阳、安宜、盐城三县归于敬业。
现代文：十月初五，楚州司马李崇福将山阴、安宜、盐城三县归于李敬业。
English: On October 5th, Li Chongfu, Sima of Chuzhou, attributed the three counties of Shanyin, Anyi and Yancheng to Li Jingye.

古文：甲申，左玉钤卫大将军梁郡公孝逸为扬州道行军大总管，左金吾卫大将军李知十为副，率兵三十万以拒李敬业。
现代文：初六，左玉钤卫大将军梁郡公李孝逸任扬州道行军大总管，左金吾卫大将军李知十为副总管，率兵三十万抗拒李敬业。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Li Xiaoyi, the left jade guardian general of Liang County, served as the general manager of the Yangzhou Road March, and Li Zhizhu, the left jade guardian general, was the deputy general manager. He led 300,000 soldiers to resist Li Jingye.

古文：丁亥，左肃政台御史大夫骞味道检校内史、同凤阁鸾台三品，凤阁舍人李景谌同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：初九，左肃政台御史大夫蹇味道加检校内史、同凤阁鸾台三品，凤阁舍人李景谌加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the new year, Zu Zu Zongdai, the chief historian, inspected the internal history of the school, Tong Fenggak, the three products of Tong Fenggak, and Li Jingyao, the housekeeper of Tong Fenggak, and Ping Zhang, the secretary of Tong Fenggak.

古文：壬辰，李敬业克润州。
现代文：十四日，李敬业攻克润州。
English: On the 14th, Li Jingye invaded Runzhou.

古文：丙申，杀裴炎。
现代文：十八日，武后杀裴炎。
English: On the 18th, Wu Hou killed Pei Yan.

古文：追谥五代祖鲁国公曰靖，高祖北平郡王曰恭肃，曾祖金城郡王曰义康，祖太原郡王曰安成，考魏王曰忠孝。
现代文：追赠其前五代先祖鲁国公谥号为 靖 ，高祖父北平郡王谥号为 恭肃 ，曾祖父金城郡王谥号为 义康 ，祖父太原郡王谥号为 安成 ，其父魏王谥号为 忠孝 。
English: The posthumous names of his ancestors of the first five generations of Lu Guogong were Jing, his great-great-grandfather Beiping County Wang Yi was Gansu, his great-grandfather Jincheng County Wang Yi was Yikang, his grandfather Taiyuan County Wang Yi was Ancheng, and his father Wei Wang Yi was Zhongxiao.

古文：丁酉，曲赦扬、楚二州。
现代文：十九日，对扬、楚二州施行部分赦免。
English: On the 19th, a partial amnesty was implemented for Yang and Chu two states.

古文：复敬业姓徐氏。
现代文：恢复敬业姓徐。
English: His surname is Xu.

古文：贬刘齐贤为辰州刺史。
现代文：将刘齐贤贬为辰州刺史。
English: Liu Qixian will be relegated to the dustbin of history in Chenzhou.

古文：李景谌罢。
现代文：李景谌被免职。
English: Li Jingyao was removed from his post.

古文：右史沈君谅、著作郎崔察为正谏大夫、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：右史沈君谅、著作郎崔鮞任正谏大夫、同凤鸾台平章事。
English: The right-wing historian Shen Junzhen, the author's brother Cui Junren, the doctor Zheng Junren, and the same phoenix, Tai Ping Zhang.

古文：十一月辛亥，左鹰扬卫大将军黑齿常之为江南道行军大总管。
现代文：十一月初四，左鹰扬卫大将军黑齿常之任江南道行军大总管。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of November, General Zuoying Yangwei appointed Black Tooth Chang as the commander-in-chief of marching troops in South Jiangsu Province.

古文：庚申，右监门卫将军苏孝祥及徐敬业战于阿谿，死之。
现代文：十三日，右监门卫将军苏孝祥在阿奚谷与徐敬业交战，阵亡。
English: On the 13th, the Right Supervisor and Gatekeeper General Su Xiaoxiang fought with Xu Jingye in Ahok Valley and was killed.

古文：乙丑，徐敬业将王那相杀敬业降。
现代文：十八日，徐敬业的部将王那相杀了敬业归降朝廷。
English: On the 18th, Xu Jingye's subordinate Wang Naxiang killed Jingye and surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：丁卯，郭待举罢。
现代文：二十日，郭待举被免职。
English: On the 20th, Guo Zhidong was removed from office.

古文：鸾台侍郎韦方质为凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：鸾台侍郎韦方质任凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: Wei Fangzheng, the attendant of Xingtai, was appointed as the attendant of Fengge, and Tongfeng, the attendant of Xingtai, was promoted.

古文：十二月戊子，遣御史察风俗。
现代文：十二月十一日，派御史考察民间风俗。
English: On December 11th, the Imperial Historians were sent to investigate folk customs.

古文：癸卯，杀程务挺。
现代文：二十六日，杀了程务挺。
English: On the 26th, he killed Cheng Mu Ting.

古文：垂拱元年正月丁未，大赦，改元。
现代文：垂拱元年正月初一，施行大赦，更改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, an amnesty was implemented and the year name was changed.

古文：庚戌，骞味道守内史。
现代文：初四，蹇味道代理内史。
English: The fourth year of junior high school.

古文：戊辰，刘仁轨薨。
现代文：二十三日，刘仁轨逝世。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Renzhao passed away.

古文：二月乙巳，春官尚书武承嗣、秋官尚书裴居道、右肃政台御史大夫韦思谦同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：二月二十九日，春官尚书武承嗣、秋官尚书裴居道、右肃政台御史大夫韦思谦加同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: On the 29th of February, the spring official, Shangshu Wu Chengzhi, the autumn official, Shangshu Pei Ju Dao, and the right Su Zhengdai goshi daifu, Wei Shichenga and Tong Fengge were awarded the three prizes.

古文：突厥寇边，左玉钤卫中郎将淳于处平为阳曲道行军总管以击之。
现代文：突厥侵犯边境，左玉钤卫中郎将淳于处平任阳曲道行军总管率军攻打突厥军。
English: When the Turks invaded the border, Sadamasa Weizhongro led the army to attack the Turkish army with Jun in his place as the commander-in-chief of the Yang Curve March.

古文：沈君谅罢。
现代文：沈君谅被免职。
English: Shen Junpeng was removed from his post.

古文：三月，崔察罢。
现代文：三月，崔鮞被免职。
English: In March, Choe Son was removed from office.

古文：丙辰，迁庐陵王于房州。
现代文：十一日，将庐陵王李哲迁禁房州。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Zhe, the king of Fuling, was moved to the Forbidden City.

古文：辛酉，武承嗣罢。
现代文：十六日，武承嗣被免职。
English: On the 16th, Wu Chengzhi was removed from his post.

古文：辛未，颁《垂拱格》。
现代文：二十六日，颁行《垂拱格》。
English: On the 26th, the "Dangling Arch" was issued.

古文：四月丙子，贬骞味道为青州刺史。
现代文：四月初一，将蹇味道贬为青州刺史。
English: On the first day of April, the taste of crickets was relegated to the history of Qingzhou.

古文：癸未，淳于处平及突厥战于忻州，败绩。
现代文：初八，淳于处平在忻州与突厥军交战，大败。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Jun Yu fought against the Turkic army in Bozhou and was soundly defeated.

古文：五月丙午，裴居道为纳言。
现代文：五月初一，裴居道任纳言。
English: On the first day of May, Pei Ju Dao was appointed as Nagon.

古文：丁未，流王德真于象州。
现代文：初二，将王德真流放至象州。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Wang Dezhen was exiled to Xiangzhou.

古文：己酉，冬官尚书苏良嗣守纳言。
现代文：初四，冬官尚书苏良嗣代理纳言。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the winter official, Shangshu Su Liangzhi, became the acting Nagan.

古文：封皇帝子成义为恒王。
现代文：封皇帝李旦之子李在义为恒王。
English: Emperor Li Dan's son, Li Zaiyi, became King Heng.

古文：壬戌，以旱虑囚。
现代文：十七日，武后因旱灾讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 17th, Wu Hougou inspected and recorded the crimes of the prisoners due to the drought.

古文：壬申，韦方质同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：二十七日，韦方质加同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: On the 27th, the three dishes of Wei square and Fengge bowl were served.

古文：六月，天官尚书韦待价同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：六月，天官尚书韦待价加同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: In June, Tianguan Shangshuwei's waiting price was raised, and three dishes from Tongfeng Pavilion were added.

古文：九月丁卯，扬州地生毛。
现代文：九月二十四日，扬州地面生出毛状物。
English: On September 24, a hair-like object appeared on the ground in Yangzhou.

古文：十一月癸卯，韦待价为燕然道行军大总管，以击突厥。
现代文：十一月初一，韦待价任燕然道行军大总管，率军攻打突厥。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, Wei Beiwa was appointed as the general manager of the march of Yanran Road and led the army to attack Turku.

古文：二年正月辛酉，大赦，赐酺三日，内外官勋一转。
现代文：垂拱二年正月二十日，施行大赦，赐臣民聚饮三日，赏给宫内外官员勋官一级。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the second year of the Hanging Arch, an amnesty was implemented, giving subjects three days to gather and drink, and officials inside and outside the palace were awarded first-class honors.

古文：二月辛未朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：二月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of February, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：三月戊申，作铜匦。
现代文：三月初八，制作宗庙礼器铜簋。
English: On the 8th day of the 3rd month, the ceremonial utensils of the ancestral temple, the bronze gongs, were made.

古文：四月庚辰，岑长倩为内史。
现代文：四月十一日，岑长倩任内史。
English: On April 11, Chiang Ching-kuo left office.

古文：五月丙午，裴居道为内史。
现代文：五月初七，裴居道任内史。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth month of the year, the internal history of Pei Ju Dao's tenure.

古文：六月辛未，苏良嗣同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：六月初三，苏良嗣加同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: On the third day of the sixth lunar month, Su Liangzhi and Tong Fengge prepared three dishes.

古文：己卯，韦思谦守纳言。
现代文：十一日，韦思谦代理纳言。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wei Siqian became the acting prime minister.

古文：十月己巳，有山出于新丰县，改新丰为庆山，赦囚，给复一年，赐酺三日。
现代文：十月初二，在新丰县冒出一山，将新丰改名为庆山，赦免囚犯，免除该县劳役一年，赐予聚饮三日。
English: At the beginning of October 2nd, a mountain rose up in Xinfeng County, renaming Xinfeng as Qingshan, pardoning prisoners, exempting the county from labor service for one year, and granting a drinking party for three days.

古文：十二月，免并州百姓庸、调，终其身。
现代文：十二月，免除并州百姓终生的徭役及应缴的绢绫物品。
English: In December, the people of Nianzhou were exempted from life-long corvee service and payable corvee goods.

古文：是冬，无雪。
现代文：本年冬季，无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：三年闰正月丁卯，封皇帝子隆基为楚王，隆范卫王，隆业赵王。
现代文：垂拱三年闰正月初二，封皇帝李旦之子李隆基为楚王，李隆范为卫王，李隆业为赵王。
English: On the second day of the first month of the leap year, Li Longji, the son of Emperor Li Dan, was named King of Chu, Li Long Fan was named King of Wei, and Li Longye was named King of Zhao.

古文：二月己亥，以旱避正殿，减膳。
现代文：二月初五，武后因旱灾避离正殿，减少膳食。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, Empress Wu avoided the main hall due to the drought, and cut down on meals.

古文：丙辰，突厥寇昌平，黑齿常之击之。
现代文：二十二日，突厥进犯昌平，黑齿常之迎击。
English: On the 22nd, the Turks attacked Changping, and Black Fang Changzhi counterattacked.

古文：三月乙丑，韦思谦罢。
现代文：三月初一，韦思谦被免职。
English: On the first day of March, Wei Sichen was dismissed.

古文：四月辛丑，追号孝敬皇帝妃裴氏曰哀皇后，葬于恭陵。
现代文：四月初八，武后追赠孝敬皇帝李弘的妃子裴氏号哀皇后，葬其于恭陵。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth lunar month, Empress Wu posthumously presented Emperor Li Hong's consort, Princess Pei, with the title of Empress of Sorrow, and buried her in the Imperial Mausoleum.

古文：癸丑，以旱虑囚，命京官九品以上言事。
现代文：二十日，武后因旱灾讯察记录囚犯的罪状，下令九品以上的京官议政。
English: On the 20th, because of the drought, Empress Wu investigated and recorded the crimes of the prisoners, and ordered more than nine officials in Beijing to discuss politics.

古文：壬戌，裴居道为纳言。
现代文：二十九日，裴居道任纳言。
English: On the 29th, Pei Ju Dao was appointed as Nagon.

古文：五月丙寅，夏官侍郎张光辅为凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：五月初三，夏官侍郎张光辅任凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the third day of the fifth month, Zhang Guangfu, the summer official's attendant, was appointed as Fengge's attendant and Tongfengge's attendant.

古文：庚午，杀刘祎之。
现代文：初七，杀刘之。
English: Junior seven, kill Liu Zhi.

古文：七月丁卯，冀州雌鸡化为雄。
现代文：七月初五，冀州有雌鸡变为雄鸡。
English: On the fifth day of the seventh lunar month, a hen in Jizhou became a rooster.

古文：乙亥，京师地震，雨金于广州。
现代文：十三日，京城地震，广州降落金雨。
English: On the 13th, there was an earthquake in Beijing, and it rained gold in Guangzhou.

古文：八月壬子，魏玄同兼检校纳言，交趾人李嗣仙杀安南都护刘延祐，据交州，桂州司马曹玄静败之。
现代文：八月二十一日，魏玄同兼任检校纳言。交趾人李嗣仙杀了安南都护刘延，占据交州，桂州司马曹玄静将其击败。
English: On August 21st, Wei Xuan Tong also served as the procurator of the school. Li Shixian, the interlocutor, killed Liu Yan, the guardian of the capital of Annan, occupied Jiaozhou, and Cao Xuan Jing, the secretary of Guizhou, defeated him.

古文：是月，突厥寇朔州，燕然道行军大总管黑齿常之败之。
现代文：本月，突厥进犯朔州，燕然道行军大总管黑齿常之打败突厥军。
English: This month, the Turks invaded Shuozhou, and Yanran Dao's marching general, Black Tooth Changzhi, defeated the Turkish army.

古文：九月巳卯，虢州人杨初成自称郎将，募州人迎庐陵王于房州，不果，见杀。
现代文：九月十八日，虢州人杨初成自称郎将，征召本州人士拟从房州迎接庐陵王，未成，被杀。
English: On September 18th, Yang Hucheng, a native of Zhangzhou, claimed to be the general's son-in-law, and summoned local people to come from Fangzhou to welcome the King of Fuling. However, he did not succeed, and was killed.

古文：十月庚子，右监门卫中郎将爨宝璧及突厥战，败绩。
现代文：十月初九，右监门卫中郎将爨宝璧与突厥军交战，大败。
English: At the beginning of October 9th, the Right Supervisor of the Gate Guards, Zhong Lang, fought with the Turkic army and suffered a great defeat.

古文：十二月壬辰，韦待价为安息道行军大总管，安西大都护阎温古副之，以击吐蕃。
现代文：十二月初二，韦待价任安息道行军大总管，安西大都护阎温古任副总管，率军进攻吐蕃。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, Wei Zhiguo was appointed as the general manager of the march of Shandong Province, and Anxi Daduo Yanwengu was appointed as the deputy general manager, and led the army to attack Tubo.

古文：是岁，大饥。
现代文：本年，大饥荒。
English: This year, famine.

古文：四年正月甲子，增七庙，立高祖、太宗、高宗庙于神都。
现代文：垂拱四年正月初五，武后增设奉祀七代先祖的宗庙，在神都建立高祖、太宗、高宗的祠庙。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of the Hanging Arch, Empress Wu additionally set up the ancestral temple to worship the seven generations of ancestors, and established the ancestral temples of Gaozu, Taizong and Gaozong in the capital.

古文：庚午，毁乾元殿，作明堂。
现代文：十一日，废弃乾元殿，另建宣明政教、举行大典的明堂。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Qianyuan Hall was abandoned, and a separate Ming Hall was built to promote enlightenment, politics and religion, and to hold grand ceremonies.

古文：三月壬戌，杀麟台少监周思茂。
现代文：三月初四，武后杀了麟台少监周思茂。
English: On the fourth day of March, Wu Hou killed Lintai Junior Supervisor Zhou Simao.

古文：四月戊戌，杀太子通事舍人郝象贤。
现代文：四月十一日，杀太子通事舍人郝象贤。
English: On April 11th, the murder of the crown prince was committed by Zou Xiangxian.

古文：五月庚申，得 宝图 于洛水。
现代文：五月初三，在洛水得到 宝图 。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, he obtained a treasure map from Luoshui.

古文：乙亥，加尊号为圣母神皇。
现代文：十八日，武后加尊号为 圣母神皇 。
English: On the 18th, the Empress Wu was given the title of "Holy Mother of God."

古文：六月丁亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of June, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：得瑞石于汜水。
现代文：在汜水获得瑞石。
English: In Surabaya, the gemstone was obtained.

古文：七月丁巳，大赦，改 宝图 为 天授圣图 ，洛水为永昌洛水，封其神为显圣侯，加特进，禁渔钓。
现代文：七月初一，施行大赦，将 宝图 改名 天授圣图 ，洛水改名永昌洛水，封其神为显圣侯，加 特进 封号，禁止在此打鱼垂钓。
English: On the first day of July, an amnesty was carried out, changing the name of Baotou to Tianyu Shengtu, and the name of Luoshui to Yongchang Luoshui. Its god was named Xian Shenghou, and it was forbidden to fish and fish here.

古文：改嵩山为神岳，封其神为天中王、太师、使持节、大都督。赐酺五日。
现代文：将嵩山改名神岳，封其神为天中王、太师、持使节、大都督，赐臣民聚饮五日。
English: He changed the name of Mt. Song to Mt. Shingaku, named its deities as the King of Heaven, the Grand Master, the Envoy, and the Grand Governor, and gave his subjects five days to gather and drink.

古文：戊午，京师地震。
现代文：初二，京城地震。
English: On the second day of the first month, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：八月戊戌，神都地震。
现代文：八月十三日，神都地震。
English: On August 13th, the Shintō earthquake occurred.

古文：丙午，博州刺史琅邪郡王冲举兵以讨乱，遣左金吾卫大将军丘神勣拒之。
现代文：二十一日，博州刺史琅笽郡王李冲起兵讨伐武氏之乱，武后派左金吾卫大将军丘神责力抵御。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wang Li of Bozhou Sashih County raised an army to fight against the Wuxi Rebellion, and the Empress Wu sent the Left King Wuwei General Qiu Shenwei to resist.

古文：戊申，冲死之。
现代文：二十三日，李冲死去。
English: On the 23rd, Li Chong died.

古文：庚戌，越王贞举兵于豫州以讨乱。
现代文：二十五日，越王李贞从豫州起兵讨伐武氏之乱。
English: On the 25th, the king of Yue, Li Zhen, raised an army from Yuzhou to fight against the Wu clan's rebellion.

古文：辛亥，曲赦博州。
现代文：二十六日，武后对博州施行部分赦免。
English: On the 26th, Empress Wu granted a partial pardon to Bozhou.

古文：九月丙辰，左豹韬卫大将军曲崇裕为中军大总管，岑长倩为后军大总管，以拒越王贞；张光辅为诸军节度。
现代文：九月初一，左豹韬卫大将军麴崇裕任中军大总管，岑长倩任后军大总管，率军抵御越王李贞；张光辅任诸军节度。
English: On the first day of September, General Gao Chongyu of the Left Leopard Guards was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the Chinese army, and Gao Changyu was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the rear army, leading the army to resist the king of Yue Li Zhen; Zhang Guangyu was appointed as the commander of the army.

古文：削越王贞及琅邪郡王冲属籍，改其姓为虺氏。
现代文：武后削除越王李贞及琅笽郡王李冲的宗族属籍，将他们改姓为虺氏。
English: Empress Wu deleted the family names of Yue Wang Lizhen and Zou County King Lichong, and changed their surnames to Zou.

古文：贞死之。丙寅，赦豫州。杀韩王元嘉、鲁王灵夔、范阳郡王霭、黄国公诜、东莞郡公融及常乐公主，皆改其姓为虺氏。丁卯，左肃政台御史大夫骞味道、夏官侍郎王本立同凤阁鸾台平章事。十月辛亥，大风拔木。十一月辛酉，杀济州刺名薛顗及其弟驸马都尉绍。
现代文：武后杀了韩王李元嘉、鲁王李灵夔、范阳郡王李霭、黄国公李讠巽、东莞郡公李融及常乐公主，将他们都改姓为虺氏。十二日，左肃政台御史大夫蹇味道、夏官侍郎王本立加同凤阁鸾台平章事。十月二十六日，大风拔起树木。十一月初六，武后杀了济州刺史薛岂页及其弟驸马都尉薛绍。
English: Empress Wu killed Han Wang Li Yuanjia, Lu King Li Lingjia, Fanyang County King Li Jia, Huang Guo Gong Li Jia, Dongguan County Gong Li Rong, and Changle Princess, and changed their surnames to the Jia clan. On the 12th, there was a dispute between Zuo Su and the governor of Zhengdu, the governor of Zhengdu, the governor of Zhengdu, the governor of Zhengdu, the governor of Zhengdu, the governor of Zhengdu, the governor of Zhengdu, the governor of Zhengdu, the governor of Zhengdu, the governor of Zhengdu, the governor of Zheng

古文：十二月乙酉，杀霍王元轨、江都郡王绪及殿中监裴承光。
现代文：十二月初一，杀了霍王李元轨、江都郡王李绪及殿中监裴承光。
English: On the first day of December, he killed Huo Wang Li Yuanlu, Jiangdu County King Li Xu and the palace supervisor Pei Chengguang.

古文：大杀唐宗室，流其幼者于岭南。
现代文：大肆杀戮李唐宗室成员，将其年幼者流放到岭南。
English: Members of Li Tang's family were killed, and his young children were exiled to Lingnan.

古文：己亥，杀骞味道。
现代文：十五日，杀了骞味道。
English: On the fifteenth day, I killed the taste of crickets.

古文：己酉，拜洛受图。
现代文：二十五日，武后祭拜洛水接受 圣图 。
English: On the 25th, Bai Luo Shui, the Empress Dowager, received the holy picture.

古文：辛亥，改明堂为万象神宫，大赦。
现代文：二十七日，将明堂改为万象神宫，施行大赦。
English: On the 27th, Myeongdong was changed to Bansho Shrine, and an amnesty was implemented.

古文：永昌元年正月乙卯，享于万象神宫，大赦，改元，赐酺七日。
现代文：永昌元年正月初一，武后到万象神宫祭祀，施行大赦，更改年号，赐准聚饮七日。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first year of Yongchang, Wu Hou went to the Bansho Shrine to offer sacrifices, implement an amnesty, change the year, and grant permission to gather and drink for seven days.

古文：丁巳，舒王元名为司徒。
现代文：初三，舒王李元名任司徒。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Shu Wang Li Yuan was appointed as an apprentice.

古文：戊午，布政于万象神宫，颁九条以训百官。
现代文：初四，武后在万象神宫发布政教，颁布九条训戒百官。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, Empress Wu issued a political and religious edict at the Bansho Shrine, issuing the Nine Precepts to all officials.

古文：己未，朗州雌鸡化为雄。
现代文：初五，朗州有雌鸡变为雄鸡。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, a hen in Lanzhou turned into a rooster.

古文：二月丁酉，尊考太师魏忠孝王曰周忠孝太皇。
现代文：二月十四日，武后尊奉其父太师魏忠孝王为周忠孝太皇。
English: On February 14th, Empress Wu honored her father, Grand Master Wei Zhongxiao, as Grand Emperor Zhou Zhongxiao.

古文：置崇先府官。
现代文：设置崇先府官员。
English: Establishment of officials from Chongxianfu.

古文：戊戌，追谥妣杨氏曰周忠孝太后；太原郡王曰周安成王，妃赵氏为王妃；金城郡王曰魏义康王，妣宋氏为王妃；北平郡王曰赵肃恭王，妃刘氏为王妃；五代祖鲁国公曰太原靖王，夫人裴氏为王妃。
现代文：十五日，武后追赠其母杨氏谥号为周忠孝太后；太原郡王为周安成王，其妃赵氏为王妃；金城郡王为魏义康王，其妃宋氏为王妃；北平郡王为赵肃恭王，其妃刘氏为王妃；其前五代先祖鲁国公为太原靖王，其夫人裴氏为王妃。
English: On the 15th, Empress Wu posthumously bestowed upon her mother the Yang family name of Zhou Zhongxiao as empress dowager; the king of Taiyuan County was Zhou Ancheng, and his wife, Zhao, was empress dowager; the king of Jincheng County was Wei Yikang, and his wife, Song, was empress dowager; the king of Beiping County was Zhao Suzhong, and his wife, Liu, was empress dowager; the first five generations of ancestors of Lu Guogong were Taiyuan Jing Wang, and his wife, Pei, was empress dowager.

古文：三月甲子，张光辅守纳言。
现代文：三月十一日，张光辅代理纳言。
English: On March 11, Zhang Guangyu became the acting prime minister.

古文：癸酉，天官尚书武承嗣为纳言，张光辅守内史。
现代文：二十日，天官尚书武承嗣任纳言，张光辅代理内史。
English: On the 20th, the heavenly official Shang Shumu's heir was appointed as Nagon, and Zhang Guangyu was acting as Naishi.

古文：四月甲辰，杀汝南郡王玮、鄱阳郡公諲、广汉郡公谧、汶山郡公蓁、零陵郡王俊、广都郡公，徙其家于巂州。
现代文：四月二十二日，武后杀汝南郡王李玮、鄱阳郡公李蓁、广汉郡公李谧、汶山郡公李蓁、零陵郡王李俊、广都郡公李王寿，将他们的家迁往州。
English: On April 22, Wu Hou killed Wang Lijun of Runan County, Gong Lijun of Fenyang County, Gong Lijun of Guanghan County, Gong Lijun of Wenshan County, Gong Lijun of Luling County, and Gong Lijun of Guangdu County, and moved their homes to Zhou.

古文：己酉，杀天官侍郎邓玄挺。
现代文：二十七日，杀天官侍郎邓玄挺。
English: On the 27th, Deng Xuntian, the steward of the Assassins, left.

古文：五月丙辰，韦待价及吐蕃战于寅识迦河，败绩。
现代文：五月初五，韦待价在寅识迦河与吐蕃军交战，大败。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month.

古文：己巳，白马寺僧薛怀义为新平道行军大总管，以击突厥。
现代文：十八日，白马寺僧人薛怀义任新平道行军大总管，率军攻打突厥。
English: On the 18th, Xue Huaiyi, a monk of Baima Temple, was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the march to Xinping Road and led the army to attack the Turks.

古文：七月丁巳，流纪王慎于巴州，改其姓为虺氏。
现代文：七月初七，流放纪王李慎到巴州，改其姓为虺氏。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7

古文：丙子，流韦待价于绣州，杀阎温古。
现代文：二十六日，流放韦待价至绣州，杀了阎温古。
English: On the 26th, he exiled Wei Bei to Shizhou and killed Yan Wengu.

古文：戊寅，王本立同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：二十八日，王本立加同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: On the 28th, Wang Benli added three dishes from Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：八月癸未，薛怀义为新平道中军大总管，以击突厥。
现代文：八月初三，薛怀义任新平道中军大总管，率军攻打突厥。
English: On the third day of August, Xue Huaiyi was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the Chinese army in Xinping Road, and led the army to attack the Turks.

古文：甲申，杀张光辅、洛州司马弓嗣业、洛阳令弓嗣明、陕州参军弓嗣古、流人徐敬真。
现代文：初四，武后杀张光辅、洛州司马弓嗣业、洛阳令弓嗣明、陕州参军弓嗣古、被流放的徐敬真。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Wu Hou killed Zhang Guangyu, Luozhou Sima Yushi Jie, Luoyang ordered Yushi Ming, Shaanxi Yushi Gu joined the army, and Xu Jingzhen was exiled.

古文：乙未，松州雌鸡化为雄。
现代文：十五日，松州有雌鸡变成雄鸡。
English: On the 15th, a hen turned into a rooster in Songzhou.

古文：辛丑，杀陕州刺史郭正一。
现代文：二十一日，杀陕州刺史郭正一。
English: On the 21st, Guo Zhengyi was assassinated in Shaanxi Province.

古文：丁未，杀相州刺史弓志元、蒲州刺史弓彭祖、尚方监王令基。
现代文：二十七日，杀相州刺史弓志元、蒲州刺史弓彭祖、尚方监王令基。
English: On the 27th, the assassinations of the governor of Xiangzhou, Yu Zhiming, the governor of Bozhou, Yu Pengzu, and the governor of Shangfang, Wang Lingji, were carried out.

古文：九月庚戌，杀恒山郡王承乾之子厥。
现代文：九月初一，杀恒山郡王李承乾之子李厥。
English: On the first day of September, Li Jue, the son of Li Chengxian, the king of Hengshan County, was killed.

古文：闰月甲午，杀魏玄同、夏官侍郎崔察。
现代文：闰九月十五日，杀魏玄同、夏官侍郎崔鮞。
English: On the fifteenth day of the ninth month, Wei Xendong and the summer official's servant, Cui Yao, were killed.

古文：戊申，杀彭州长史刘易从。
现代文：二十九日，杀彭州长史刘易从。
English: On the 29th, Liu Yicong, the governor of Penghu, was killed.

古文：十月癸丑，杀凉州都督李光谊。
现代文：十月初四，杀凉州都督李光谊。
English: On the fourth day of October, Li Guangyi, the governor of Liangzhou, was assassinated.

古文：丁巳，杀陕州刺史刘延景。
现代文：初八，杀陕州刺史刘延景。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Liu Yanjing, the Shaanxi assassin, was killed.

古文：戊午，杀右武威卫大将军黑齿常之、右鹰扬卫将军赵怀节。
现代文：初九，杀右武威卫大将军黑齿常之、右鹰扬卫将军赵怀节。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the right eagle Yang Wei general Zhao Huai Jie and the right eagle Wu Wei general He Zuojing were killed.

古文：己未，杀嗣郑王璥。
现代文：初十，杀嗣郑王李。
English: At the age of ten, he killed his heir, Zheng Wang Li.

古文：丁卯，春官尚书范履冰、凤阁侍郎邢文伟同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：十八日，春官尚书范履冰、凤阁侍郎邢文伟加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the 18th, the spring official, Shang Shufan, and Fengge's chamberlain, Zou Wenwei, and Fengge's chamberlain, Taihei, held a formal meeting.

古文：天授元年正月庚辰，大赦，改元曰载初，以十一月为正月，十二月为腊月，来岁正月为一月。
现代文：天授元年正月初一，施行大赦，改年号为 载初 ，以十一月为 正月 ，十二月为 腊月 ，来年正月为 一月 。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Tianju, an amnesty was implemented, and the year name was changed to the first month of the year, with November as the first month, December as the second month, and the first month of the next year as January.

古文：以周、汉之后为二王后，封爵、禹、汤之裔为三恪，周、隋同列国，封其嗣。
现代文：将周朝、汉朝的后裔作为诸侯国君的后代，封舜帝、禹王、商汤王的后裔为王侯的后代，北周、隋朝视同诸侯国，封其后嗣。
English: The descendants of the Zhou and Han dynasties were regarded as the descendants of princes, the descendants of Emperor Feng, King Yu and King Shangtan were regarded as the descendants of princes, and the Northern Zhou and Sui dynasties were regarded as princes and their heirs.

古文：乙未，除唐宗室属籍。
现代文：十六日，除去李唐宗室成员的皇族属籍。
English: On the 16th, the members of Li Tang's family were removed from the royal family.

古文：腊月丙寅，杀刘齐贤。
现代文：腊月十八日，杀刘齐贤。
English: On the 18th day of the lunar month, Liu Qixian was killed.

古文：一月戊子，王本立罢。
现代文：一月初十，王本立被免职。
English: On January 10, Wang Benli was removed from his post.

古文：邢文伟为内史，岑长倩、武承嗣同凤阁鸾台三品，凤阁侍郎武攸宁为纳言。
现代文：邢文伟任内史，岑长倩、武承嗣加同凤阁鸾台三品，凤阁侍郎武攸宁任纳言。
English: In the history of the appointment of Zou Wenwei, Zou Changjun, Wu Chengzhu and Tong Fengge's three dishes, Fengge's waiter, Wu Youning, was appointed as Nagan.

古文：甲午，流韦方质于儋州。
现代文：十六日，流放韦方质到儋州。
English: On the 16th, Wei Fangxia was exiled to Ganzhou.

古文：二月丁卯，杀地官尚书王本立。
现代文：二月二十日，杀地官尚书王本立。
English: On February 20th, the murdering magistrate, Shangshu Wang Benli, resigned.

古文：三月乙酉，以旱减膳。
现代文：三月初八，武后因旱灾减少膳食。
English: On the 8th day of the 3rd month of the year, Wuhou reduced meals due to drought.

古文：丁亥，苏良嗣薨。
现代文：初十，苏良嗣去世。
English: At the age of ten, Su Liangzi passed away.

古文：五月戊子，杀范履冰。
现代文：五月十三日，杀范履冰。
English: On May 13th, he killed Fan Lubei.

古文：己亥，杀梁郡公孝逸。
现代文：二十四日，杀梁郡公李孝逸。
English: On the 24th, Liang County official Li Xiaoyu was killed.

古文：六月戊申，杀汴州刺史柳明肃。
现代文：六月初三，杀汴州刺史柳明肃。
English: On the third day of the sixth month of the lunar calendar, Liu Mingxu, the governor of Zhangzhou, was assassinated.

古文：七月辛巳，流舒王元名于和州。
现代文：七月初七，将舒王李元名流放至和州。
English: On the seventh day of the seventh month of July, Shu Wang Li Yuanming was exiled to Hezhou.

古文：颁《大云经》于天下。
现代文：向全国颁行有 女王下世、威伏天下 之语的佛典《大云经》。
English: The Great Cloud Sutra, a Buddhist scripture containing the words of the Queen of Heaven and Earth, was issued to the whole country.

古文：壬午，杀豫章郡王鳷。
现代文：初八，杀豫章郡王李。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he killed King Li of Yuanzhang County.

古文：丁亥，杀泽王上金、许王素节。
现代文：十三日，杀泽王李上金、许王李素节。
English: On the 13th, it was the day of the murder of King Zhe Li Shangjin and King Xu Li Su.

古文：甲午，赦永昌县。
现代文：二十日，免除永昌县赋税。
English: On the 20th, it was exempted from Yongchang County tax.

古文：癸卯，杀太常丞苏践言。
现代文：二十九日，杀太常丞苏践言。
English: On the 29th, Emperor Taizong killed Su Shanzhan.

古文：八月辛亥，杀许王素节之子璟、曾江县令白令言。
现代文：八月初八，杀许王李素节之子李瞡、曾江县令白令言。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8

古文：甲寅，杀裴居道。
现代文：十一日，杀裴居道。
English: On the 11th day, he killed Pei Ju.

古文：壬戌，杀将军阿史那惠、右司郎中乔知之。
现代文：十九日，杀将军阿史那惠、右司郎中乔知之。
English: On the 19th, General Ashina Hui and his right-hand man Nakacho Chochi were killed.

古文：癸亥，杀尚书右丞张行廉、太州刺史杜儒童。
现代文：二十日，杀尚书右丞张行廉、太州刺史杜儒童。
English: On the 20th, Zhang Xinglian of Shangshu Rongcheng and Du Rude of Taizhou Zhishi were killed.

古文：甲子，杀流人张楚金。
现代文：二十一日，杀被流放的张楚金。
English: On the 21st, the exiled Zhang Chukin was killed.

古文：戊辰，杀流人元万顷、苗神客。
现代文：二十五日，杀被流放的元万顷、苗神客。
English: On the 25th, Yuan Wanhao and Miao Shengu, who had been exiled, were killed.

古文：辛未，杀南安郡王颖、鄅国公昭及诸宗室李直、李敞、李然、李勋、李策、李越、李黯、李玄、李英、李志业、李知言、李玄贞。
现代文：二十八日，杀南安郡王李颍、禹阝国公李昭及诸宗室成员李直、李敞、李然、李勋、李策、李越、李黯、李玄、李英、李志业、李知言、李玄贞。
English: On the 28th, he killed Wang Lijuan of Nan'an County, Li Zhao, the Prince of Yunnan Province, and members of his family including Li Zhi, Li Zhan, Li Ran, Li Xun, Li Ce, Li Yue, Li Qian, Li Xuan, Li Ying, Li Zhiye, Li Zhiyan, and Li Xuanzhen.

古文：九月乙亥，杀钜鹿郡公晃、麟台郎裴望及其弟司膳丞琏。
现代文：九月初二，杀钜鹿郡公李晃、麟台郎裴望及其弟司膳丞裴琏。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, Menglu County officials Li Ak, Lin Tai Lang, Pei Wang, and his younger brother, Zenzho Pei Yao, were killed.

古文：壬午，改国号周。
现代文：初九，将国号改为 周 。
English: At the beginning of the 9th month, the country name was changed to Zhou.

古文：大赦，改元，赐酺七日。
现代文：施行大赦，改年号为 天授 ，赐准聚饮七日。
English: An amnesty was implemented, and the year was changed to "Wang Rong Tong Tian," and permission was granted to gather and drink for seven days.

古文：乙酉，加尊号曰圣神皇帝，降皇帝为皇嗣，赐姓武氏，皇太子为皇孙。
现代文：十二日，武后加尊号为 圣神皇帝 ，将皇帝李显降为皇位继承人，赐其姓武；皇太子李旦降为皇孙。
English: On the 12th, Emperor Wu conferred the title of Emperor of the Holy Spirit on Empress Wu, demoted Emperor Li Xian to heir to the throne, and gave him the surname of Wu; Crown Prince Li Dan was demoted to grandson of the emperor.

古文：丙戌，立武氏七庙于神都。
现代文：十三日，武后在神都洛阳建立武氏七庙。
English: On the 13th, Empress Wu established the Seven Temples of the Wu Dynasty in Luoyang, the capital of the gods.

古文：追尊周文王曰始祖文皇帝，妣姒氏曰文定皇后；四十代祖平王少子武曰睿祖康皇帝，妣姜氏曰康惠皇后；太原靖王曰严祖成皇帝，妣曰成庄皇后；赵肃恭王曰肃祖章敬皇帝，妣曰章敬皇后；魏义康王曰烈祖昭安皇帝，妣曰昭安皇后；周安成王曰显祖文穆皇帝，妣曰文穆皇后；忠孝太皇曰太祖孝明高皇帝，妣曰孝明高皇后。
现代文：追尊周文王为始祖文皇帝，其妻姒氏为文定皇后；武后前第四十代的周平王幼子姬武为睿祖康皇帝，其妻姜氏为康惠皇后；武后上五代先祖太原靖王为严祖成皇帝，其妻为成庄皇后；其高祖父赵肃恭王为肃祖章敬皇帝，高祖母为章敬皇后；曾祖父魏义康王为烈祖昭安皇帝，曾祖母为昭安皇后；祖父周安成王为显祖文穆皇帝，祖母为文穆皇后；其父孝忠太皇为太祖孝明高皇帝，其母为孝明高皇后。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Zhao Suzong, was the great-great-grandfather of Emperor Zhang Jian, and his great-great-grandmother was the great-grandmother of Empress Zhang Jian; his great-grandfather, Wei Yi Kang, was the great-great-grandfather of Emperor Zhao'an, and his great-grandmother was the great-grandmother of Empress Zhao'an; his grandfather, Zhou An Cheng, was the great-great-grandfather of Emperor Wenmu, and his grandmother was Empress Wenmu; his father, Emperor Xiaozhong, was the great-great-grandfather of Emperor Zhang Jian, and his

古文：追封伯父及兄弟之子为王，堂兄为郡王，诸姑姊为长公主，堂姊妹为郡主。
现代文：追封其伯父及兄弟之子为王，堂兄为郡主，各姑姊为长公主，堂姊妹为郡主。
English: He crowned his uncle and his brother's son as king, his cousin as princess, his sisters as princesses, and his cousins as princesses.

古文：司宾卿史务滋守纳言，凤阁侍郎宗秦客检校内史，给事中傅游艺为鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：司宾卿史务滋代理纳言，凤阁侍郎宗秦客任检校内史，给事中傅游艺任鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: The chief secretary Shibu Shigeru acted as the representative of Nagan, the Fengge waiter Zong Qinqiao served as the inspector of the school's internal history, and the middle school teacher Yu Yi served as the attendant of Xingtai and the Fengge waiter Taihei.

古文：十月丁巳，给复并州武兴县百姓，子孙相承如汉丰、沛。
现代文：十月十四日，免除并州武兴县百姓的徭役，子孙承继如同汉朝给予丰、沛二县的待遇。
English: On October 14th, he exempted the people of Wuxing County, Anhui Province, from the corvee duty, and his descendants inherited the same treatment as that given to Feng and Pei in the Han Dynasty.

古文：甲子，贬宗秦客为遵化尉。
现代文：二十一日，将宗秦客贬为遵化尉。
English: On the twenty-first day, he demoted Zong Qin to Zun Huai.

古文：丁卯，杀流人韦方质。
现代文：二十四日，杀被流放的韦方质。
English: On the 24th, the exiled Wei Fangxia was killed.

古文：己巳，杀许王素节之子瑛、琪、琬、瓚、瑒、瑗、琛、唐臣。
现代文：二十六日，杀许王李素节之子李瑛、李琪、李琬、李瓒、李蠩、李瑗、李琛、李唐臣。
English: On the 26th, the sons of Xu Wang Li Su Jie, Li Ying, Li Qi, Li Yao, Li Yao, Li Yao Yong, Li Yao, Li Tang Chen, were killed.

古文：辛未，贬邢文伟为珍州刺史。
现代文：二十八日，贬邢文伟为珍州刺史。
English: On the 28th, Zou Wenwei was relegated to the annals of history in Zhenzhou.

古文：置大云寺。
现代文：设置大云寺。
English: Daewon-ji Temple is established.

古文：封周公为褒德王，孔子为隆道公。改唐太庙为享德庙，以武氏七庙为太庙。
现代文：封周公为褒德王，孔子为隆道公，改李唐太庙为享德庙，以武氏七庙为太庙。
English: Fong Zhou Gong was the King of Baode, Confucius was the King of Longdao, Li Tang Taimiao was changed to the Taimiao of Hengde, and the seven temples of the Wu Dynasty were changed to Taimiao.

古文：二年正月甲戌，改置社稷，旗帜尚赤。
现代文：天授二年正月初二，改置土神、谷神的祭祀场坛，旗帜崇尚赤色。
English: On the second day of the first month of the second year of Tianju, the sacrificial platforms of the soil god and the valley god were replaced, and the flag was changed to red.

古文：戊寅，杀雅州刺史刘行实及其弟渠州刺史行瑜、尚衣奉御行感、兄子左鹰扬卫将军虔通。
现代文：初六，杀雅州刺史刘行实及其弟渠州刺史刘行王俞、尚衣奉御刘行感、其兄之子右鹰扬卫将军刘虔通。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Liu Xingshi, the son of the governor of Yazhou, and his younger brother, Liu Xingwang, the governor of Quzhou, were killed; Shangyi followed Liu Xingshan, and his brother's son, the right eagle Yangwei general Liu Qiantong.

古文：戊子，武承嗣为文昌左相。
现代文：十六日，武承嗣任文昌左相。
English: On the 16th, Wu Cheng Rong was appointed as Wenchang's successor as Minister of the Left.

古文：庚寅，赐酺。
现代文：十八日，赐准聚饮。
English: On the 18th, permission was granted to gather and drink together.

古文：乙未，杀丘神勣、左豹韬卫将军卫蒲山。
现代文：二十三日，杀丘神责力、左豹韬卫将军卫蒲山。
English: On the twenty-third day, the deity of the killing hill, the left leopard, and the general of the defending army came to defend the hill.

古文：庚子，杀史务滋。
现代文：二十八日，杀史务滋。
English: On the 28th, the killing of Shi Muxizhi began.

古文：腊月己未，始用周腊。
现代文：腊月十七日，开始用周历腊祭为腊月。
English: On the 17th day of the waxing gibbous moon, the waxing gibbous moon festival began.

古文：四月壬寅朔，日有蚀之。丙午，大赦。
现代文：天授二年四月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。初五，施行大赦。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the second year of Tianju, the sun and the moon are new, there is a solar eclipse. On the fifth day of the first month, an amnesty is implemented.

古文：五月丁亥，大风折木。
现代文：五月十七日，大风摧断树木。
English: On May 17th, high winds tore down trees.

古文：岑长倩为武威道行军大总管，以击吐蕃。
现代文：岑长倩任武威道行军大总管，攻打吐蕃。
English: He served as the general manager of marching troops in Wuwei Province, and led the attack on Tujia.

古文：六月庚戌，左肃政台御史大夫格辅元为地官尚书，鸾台侍郎乐思晦，凤阁侍郎任知古：同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：六月十一日，左肃政台御史大夫格辅元任地官尚书，鸾台侍郎乐思晦，凤阁侍郎任知古，并加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On June 11th, from left to right, Shang Shu, the first-appointed magistrate of the State Council, Gu Shu, the first-appointed magistrate of the State Council, the first-appointed magistrate of the State Council, the first-appointed magistrate of the State Council, the first-appointed magistrate of the State Council, the first-appointed magistrate of the State Council, the first-appointed magistrate of the State Council, the first-appointed magistrate of the State Council, the first-appointed magistrate of the State Council, the first-appointed magistrate of the State Council, the first

古文：七月庚午，徙关内七州户以实神都。
现代文：七月初一，迁移关内七州的民户充实神都。
English: On the first day of July, the resettlement of households in seven prefectures in the Kansai region was completed.

古文：八月戊申，武攸宁罢。
现代文：八月初十，武攸宁被免职。
English: At the beginning of August, Wu Yoning was removed from his post.

古文：夏官尚书欧阳通为司礼卿兼判纳言事。
现代文：夏官尚书欧阳通任司礼卿兼纳言职务。
English: The summer official, Shangshu Ouyang Tong, assumed the post of Secretary for Ceremonies and Counselor.

古文：庚申，杀右玉钤卫大将军张虔勖。
现代文：二十二日，杀右玉铃卫大将军张虔勖。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Qianqian, the general of the Right Jade Ring Guard, was killed.

古文：九月乙亥，杀岐州刺史云弘嗣。
现代文：九月初八，杀岐州刺史云弘嗣。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of September, Yun Hirotsugu, the governor of Gifu, was assassinated.

古文：壬辰，杀傅游艺。
现代文：二十五日，杀傅游艺。
English: On the 25th, the killing of Fu Youyi began.

古文：癸巳，左羽林卫大将军武攸宁守纳言，冬官侍郎裴行本，洛州司马狄仁杰为地官侍郎：同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：二十六日，左羽林卫将军武攸宁代理纳言，冬官侍郎裴行本，洛州司马狄仁杰任地官侍郎，并加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the 26th, General Wu Youning of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards was appointed acting Nagan, Bae Xingpeng, the attendant of the winter official, and Sima Di Renjie of the Loshou official, and Fengge Xingtai Pingzhang.

古文：十月己酉，杀岑长倩、欧阳通、格辅元。
现代文：十月十二日，杀岑长倩、欧阳通、格辅元。
English: On October 12th, the killings in Changchun, Ouyang, and Gejuyuan began.

古文：壬戌，杀乐思晦、左卫将军李安静。
现代文：二十五日，杀乐思晦、左卫将军李安静。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the left guard general Li Qiye was killed.

古文：长寿元年正月戊辰，夏官尚书杨执柔同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：长寿元年一月初二，夏官尚书杨执柔加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year of longevity, Xia Guan Shangshu Yang Cui Rong and Tongfeng Guo Tai Ping signed the contract.

古文：庚午，贬任知古为江夏令，狄仁杰彭泽令。
现代文：初四，将任知古贬为江夏县令、狄仁杰贬为彭泽县令。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Ren Zhi Gu was demoted to Jiangxia County magistrate, and Di Ringer was demoted to Pengze County magistrate.

古文：流裴行本于岭南。
现代文：流放裴行本至岭南。
English: Exile Bae Gangbon to Lingnan.

古文：乙亥，杀右卫大将军泉献诚。
现代文：初九，杀右卫大将军泉献诚。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, General Izumi Kensei was killed.

古文：庚辰，司刑卿李游道为冬官尚书、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：十四日，司刑卿李游道任冬官尚书、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the 14th, the chief magistrate Li Youdao appointed Dongguan Shangshu and Tongfeng Pavilion Taihei Zhang.

古文：二月戊午，秋官尚书袁智弘同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：二月二十二日，秋官尚书袁智弘加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On February 22nd, Yuan Zhihong, the autumn official Shangshu, and Tongfengge, the governor of Taiping, signed the document.

古文：四月丙申朔，日有食之。
现代文：四月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of April, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：大赦，改元如意。
现代文：施行大赦，改年号为 如意 。
English: An amnesty will be implemented, and the new year's name will be Ruyi.

古文：五月，洛水溢。七月，又溢。
现代文：五月，洛水泛滥；七月，再次泛滥。
English: In May, Luo Shui was flooded; in July, it was flooded again.

古文：八月甲戌，河溢，坏河阳县。
现代文：八月十二日，黄河泛滥，毁坏河阳县。
English: On August 12, the Yellow River overflowed and devastated Heyang County.

古文：戊寅，武承嗣、武攸宁、杨执柔罢；秋官侍郎崔元综为鸾台侍郎，夏官侍郎李昭德为凤阁侍郎，权检校天官侍郎姚为文昌左丞，检校地官侍郎李元素为文昌右丞，营缮大匠王璿为夏官尚书，司宾卿崔神基：同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：十六日，武承嗣、武攸宁、杨执柔被免职；秋官侍郎崔元综任鸾台侍郎，夏官侍郎李昭德任凤阁侍郎，代理检校天官侍郎姚王寿任文昌左丞，检校地官侍郎李元素任文昌右丞，营缮大匠王任夏官尚书，司宾卿崔神基，并加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the 16th, Wu Chengzhi, Wu Youning, and Yang Cui Rong were dismissed from their posts; Choi Won-sumi, the attendant of the autumn official, was appointed as the attendant of Xingtai, Li Zhaode, the attendant of the summer official, was appointed as the attendant of Fengge, Yao Wang Shou, the attendant of the acting inspector, was appointed as the attendant of Wenchang Zu-jo, the attendant of the inspector was appointed as the attendant of Wenchang Yu-jo, Li Ye-neng, the attendant of the inspector, was appointed as the attendant of the inspector,

古文：九月戊戌，大雾。
现代文：九月初七，京城大雾。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, the capital was shrouded in fog.

古文：庚子，大赦，改元。
现代文：初九，施行大赦，改年号为 长寿 。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, an amnesty was implemented, and the year name was changed to Jinglong.

古文：改用九月社，赐酺七月。
现代文：改用九月秋祭社神，赐准聚饮七日。
English: In September, the autumn festival was changed to the shrine god, and permission was given to gather and drink for seven days.

古文：癸卯，以并州为北都。
现代文：十二日，以并州为北都。
English: On the 12th, with the merger of the state as the northern capital.

古文：癸丑，流李游道、袁智弘、王璿、崔神基、李元素于岭南。
现代文：二十二日，将李游道、袁智弘、王、崔神基、李元素流放岭南。
English: On the 22nd, Li Youdao, Yuan Zhihong, Wang, Cui Shenji, and Li Yimin were exiled to Lingnan.

古文：十月丙戌，武威道行军总管王孝杰败吐蕃，克四镇。
现代文：十月二十五日，武威道行军总管王孝杰打败吐蕃军，攻克龟兹、于阗、疏勒、碎叶四镇。
English: On October 25th, Wang Xiaojie, the general manager of the march of Wuwei Road, defeated the Tubo army and conquered the four towns of Kuez, Yuyu, Shule and Chibi.

古文：二年腊月癸亥，杀皇嗣妃刘氏、德妃窦氏。
现代文：长寿二年 腊月 初三，杀皇位继承人李旦的妃子刘氏、德妃窦氏。
English: He lived for two years, and at the age of three, he killed Emperor Li Dan's concubines Liu and Defei Dou.

古文：丁卯，降封皇孙成器为寿春郡王，恒王成义衡阳郡王，楚王隆基临淄郡王，卫王隆范巴陵郡王，越王隆业彭城郡王。
现代文：初七，将皇孙李成器降等封为寿春郡王，恒王李成义降为衡阳郡王，楚王李隆基降为临淄郡王，卫王李隆范降为巴陵郡王，赵王李隆业降为彭城郡王。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the imperial grandson Li Chengji was downgraded to King of Shuchun County, Heng Wang Li Chengyi was downgraded to King of Hengyang County, King of Chu Li Longji was downgraded to King of Linyi County, King of Wei Li Long Fan was downgraded to King of Baling County, and King of Zhao Li Longye was downgraded to King of Pengcheng County.

古文：一月庚子，夏官侍郎娄师德同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文： 一月 初十，夏官侍郎娄师德加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: In January, the tenth month of the year, Deka, the summer official's attendant and eunuch, and Fengge, the eunuch's attendant and eunuch's apprentice, had an affair.

古文：甲寅，杀尚方监裴匪躬、内常侍范云仙。
现代文：二十四日，杀尚方监裴匪躬、内常侍范云仙。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he killed Shang Fang's supervisor, Pei Gangwu, and his inner aide, Fan Yunxian.

古文：三月己卯，杀左卫员外大将军阿史那元庆、白润府果毅薛大信。
现代文：三月己卯日，杀左卫员外大将军阿史那元庆、白润府果毅薛大信。
English: On the same day in March, the left guards, General Ashina Yuanqing and Bai Runfu Guo Yi Xue Dashin, were killed.

古文：五月乙未，杀冬官尚书苏乾、相州刺史来同敏。
现代文：五月初七，杀冬官尚书苏干、相州刺史来同敏。
English: On the 7th day of the 5th month of the year, the winter killing officials Shangshu, Su Gan, and Xiangzhou, Shishi came to Tongmin.

古文：癸丑，河溢棣州。
现代文：二十五日，黄河水漫棣州。
English: On the 25th, the Yellow River flooded Luzhou.

古文：九月丁亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of September, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：乙未，加号金轮圣神皇帝，大赦，赐酺七日，作七宝。
现代文：初九，武后加号 金轮圣神皇帝 ，施行大赦，赐准聚饮七日，制作金轮、白象等 七宝 。
English: On the ninth day of the first lunar month, the Empress Dowager Wu plus the Golden Wheel Holy Spirit Emperor, implemented an amnesty, granted permission to gather and drink for seven days, and made seven treasures such as the Golden Wheel and the White Elephant.

古文：庚子，追尊烈祖昭安皇帝曰浑元昭安皇帝，显祖文穆皇帝曰立极文穆皇帝，太祖孝明高皇帝曰无上孝明高皇帝。
现代文：十四日，武后追尊曾祖父烈祖昭安皇帝为浑元昭安皇帝，祖父显祖文穆皇帝为立极文穆皇帝，其父太祖孝明高皇帝为无上孝明高皇帝。
English: On the 14th, Empress Wu posthumously honored her great-grandfather, Emperor Zhao'an, as Emperor Hun Yuan Zhao'an, her grandfather, Emperor Xianzu Wenmu, as Emperor Lijiao Wenmu, and her father, Emperor Xiaominggao, as Emperor Supreme Xiaominggao.

古文：辛丑，姚罢。文昌右丞韦巨源同凤阁鸾台平章事，秋官侍郎陆元方为鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事，司宾卿豆卢钦望守内史。
现代文：十五日，姚王寿被免职，文昌右丞韦巨源加同凤阁鸾台平章事，秋官侍郎陆元方任鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事，司宾卿豆卢钦望代理内史。
English: On the fifteenth day, Yao Wang Shou was dismissed from his post, Wenchang Yu Rong Wei Jiuyuan and Tong Fengge were promoted to the post of Tai Ping, Lu Yuanfang, the attendant of the autumn official, was appointed as the attendant of the Tai Ping, Tong Fengge was promoted to the post of Tai Ping, and Zhu Luqinwang, the chief secretary, was appointed as the acting secretary of the internal history.

古文：延载元年腊月甲戌，突厥默啜寇灵州。
现代文：延载元年 腊月 二十五日，突厥的默啜侵犯灵州。
English: On the 25th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the Chinese lunar calendar, the Turks invaded Lingzhou.

古文：右鹰扬卫大将军李多祚败之。
现代文：右鹰扬卫大将军李多祚将其击败。
English: The right-hander Yang Wei's general Li Duoxuan defeated him.

古文：一月甲午，娄师德为河源、积石、怀远等军营田大使。
现代文： 一月 初十，娄师德任河源、积石、怀远等军的营田大使。
English: January On the tenth day of the first month, Zou Shide was appointed as the Yingtian ambassador of Heyuan, Jishi, Huaiyuan and other armies.

古文：二月庚午，薛怀义为伐逆道行军大总管，领十八将军以击默啜。
现代文：二月十六日，薛怀义任伐逆道行军大总管，率领十八个将军兵力攻打默啜。
English: On February 16th, Xue Huaiyi was appointed as the general manager of the counter-march, and led eighteen generals to attack the silence.

古文：乙亥，以旱虑囚。
现代文：二十一日，武后因旱灾讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wu Guo inquired and recorded the crimes of the prisoners due to the drought.

古文：己卯，武威道大总管王孝杰及吐蕃战于冷泉，败之。
现代文：二十五日，武威道大总管王孝杰在冷泉打败吐蕃军。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Wang Xiaojie, the general manager of Wuwei Road, defeated the Tubo army in Lengquan.

古文：三月甲申，凤阁舍人苏味道为凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事，李昭德检校内史。
现代文：三月初一，凤阁舍人苏味道任凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事，李昭德为检校内史。
English: On the first day of March, Li Zhaode was sent to inspect the school's internal history.

古文：薛怀义为朔方道行军大总管，击默啜。
现代文：薛怀义任朔方道行军大总管，攻打默啜军。
English: Xue Huaiyi was appointed as the general manager of the march of Shuo Fang Road, and attacked the silent army.

古文：昭德为朔方道行军长史，味道为司马。
现代文：李昭德任朔方道行军长史，苏味道任司马。
English: Li Zhaode served as the commander of the Shuo and Fang road marches, and Su Qi served as the commander of the Sima.

古文：四月壬戌，常州地震。
现代文：四月初九，常州地震。
English: On the 9th of April, the Changzhou earthquake occurred.

古文：五月甲午，加号越古金轮圣神皇帝，大赦，改元，赐酺七日。
现代文：五月十一日，武后加号 越古金轮圣神皇帝 ，施行大赦，更改年号，赐准聚饮七日。
English: On May 11th, Empress Wu and the Emperor of the Holy Spirit of the Golden Wheel of Yue Gu were granted amnesty, the year was changed, and permission was granted to gather and drink for seven days.

古文：七月癸未，嵩岳山人武什方为正谏大夫、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：七月初一，嵩岳隐士武什方任正谏大夫、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the first day of July, the Songyue hermit Wushi Fang was appointed as the doctor of Zhengqi and Tongfeng Pavilion Taihei.

古文：八月，什方罢。
现代文：八月，武什方被免职。
English: In August, Bush was removed from office.

古文：戊辰，王孝杰为瀚海道行军总管。
现代文：十七日，王孝杰任瀚海道行军总管。
English: On the 17th, Wang Xiaojie was appointed as the general manager of the march of the Hanhai Highway.

古文：己巳，司宾少卿姚守纳言；左肃政台御史大夫杨再思为鸾台侍郎，洛州司马杜景佺检校凤阁侍郎：同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：十八日，司宾少卿姚王寿代理纳言，左肃政台御史大夫杨再思任鸾台侍郎，洛州司马杜景亻全任检校凤阁侍郎，并加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the 18th, Yao Wangshou, the Vice-Minister of the State Council, acted as the representative of Nagan, Yang Zhaisi, the doctor of history of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, was appointed as the attendant of Xingtai, and Lozhou Sima Du Jingyao was appointed as the attendant of Fengge, and was added to Fengge Xingtai Ping.

古文：戊寅，流崔元综于振州。
现代文：二十七日，将崔元综流放至振州。
English: On the 27th, he exiled Cui Yuanmei to Zhenzhou.

古文：九月壬午朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of September, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：壬寅，贬李昭德为南宾尉。
现代文：二十一日，将李昭德贬为南宾尉。
English: On the 21st, Li Zhaode was demoted to the rank of second lieutenant.

古文：十月壬申，文昌右丞李元素为凤阁侍郎，右肃政台御史中丞周允元检校凤阁侍郎：同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：十月二十二日，文昌右丞李元素任凤阁侍郎，右肃政台御史中丞周允元任检校凤阁侍郎，并加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On October 22nd, Wenchang U.C.R. Li Xianren was appointed as Fengge's chamberlain, and Zhou Yunyuan, U.C.R. Zongdai's secretary, was appointed as Fengge's chamberlain, and he was also appointed as Fengge's secretary.

古文：岭南獠寇边，容州都督张玄遇为桂、永等州经略大使。
现代文：岭南僚人侵扰边境，容州都督张玄遇任桂、永等州经略大使。
English: Colleagues from Lingnan invaded the border, and Zhang Xuan, the governor of Yongzhou, met with Ren Gui, Yong and other state economic ambassadors.

古文：癸酉，雨木冰。
现代文：二十三日，雨水着树成冰。
English: November 27th.

古文：天册万岁元年正月辛巳，加号慈氏越古金轮圣神皇帝，改元证圣。
现代文：天册万岁元年 正月 初二，武后加号为 慈氏越古金轮圣神皇帝 ，改年号为 证圣 。
English: In the first two days of the first month of the first year of the Chinese calendar, the empress dowager was given the additional title of Empress Dowager Cixi, the ancient Holy Spirit Emperor of the Golden Wheel, and the year name was changed to Holy Witness.

古文：大赦，赐酺三日。
现代文：施行大赦，赐准聚饮三日。
English: An amnesty was implemented, granting permission to gather and drink for three days.

古文：戊子，贬豆卢钦望为赵州刺史，韦巨源鄜州刺史，杜景佺溱州刺史，苏味道集州刺史，陆元方绥州刺史。
现代文：初九，将豆卢钦望贬为赵州刺史，韦巨源贬为州刺史，杜景亻全贬为溱州刺史，苏味道贬为集州刺史，陆元方贬为绥州刺史。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Zhu Lu Qinwang was downgraded to Zhao Zhou, Wei Jiuyuan was downgraded to Zhou, Du Jing Quan was downgraded to Quzhou, Su Tang was downgraded to Juzhou, and Lu Yuanfang was downgraded to Quzhou.

古文：丙申，万象神宫火。
现代文：十七日，万象神宫失火。
English: On the 17th, the Bansho Shrine caught fire.

古文：丙午，王孝杰为朔方行军总管，以击突厥。
现代文：二十七日，王孝杰任朔方行军总管，攻打突厥。
English: On the 27th, Wang Xiaojie was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the march of the Shuo side to attack the Turks.

古文：二月己酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of February, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：壬子，杀薛怀义。
现代文：初四，杀薛怀义。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, kill Xue Huaiyi.

古文：甲子，罢 慈氏越古 号。
现代文：十六日，武后自己免去 慈氏越古 的衔号。
English: On the 16th, Empress Wu herself removed Cixi Yuegu's title.

古文：三月丙辰，周允元薨。
现代文：三月初九，周允元去世。
English: On March 9, Zhou Yunyuan passed away.

古文：四月戊寅，建大周万国颂德天枢。
现代文：四月初一，建立大周万国颂德天枢。
English: On the first day of April, the Great Week of the Nation's Homage to Virtue was established.

古文：七月辛酉，吐蕃寇临洮，王孝杰为肃边道行军大总管以击之。
现代文：七月十五日，吐蕃军侵犯临洮，王孝杰任肃边道行军大总管迎击。
English: On July 15th, the Tubo army invaded Linyi, and Wang Xiaojie was appointed as the general manager of the march on Subei Road to meet the attack.

古文：九月甲寅，祀南郊。
现代文：九月初九，武后到京城南郊祭祀。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the 9th month, Empress Wu went to the southern suburbs of Beijing for a religious service.

古文：加号天册金轮大圣皇帝。
现代文：加号为 天册金轮大圣皇帝 。
English: The plus sign is the heavenly book, the golden wheel, the great saint emperor.

古文：大赦，改元，赐酺九日。
现代文：施行大赦，更改年号，赐准臣民聚饮九日。
English: An amnesty was implemented, the year was changed, and permission was granted for subjects to gather and drink on the 9th.

古文：以崇先庙为崇尊庙。
现代文：改崇先庙为崇尊庙。
English: The temple was renamed the Temple of Reverence.

古文：万岁通天元年腊月甲戌，如神岳。
现代文：万岁通天元年 腊月 初一，武后去神岳。
English: In the first year of the Chinese lunar calendar, the first day of the lunar month, Empress Wu went to Mt.

古文：甲申，封于神岳。
现代文：十一日，在神岳筑坛祭天。
English: On the 11th day of the month, a shrine was built at Mt. Shindake.

古文：改元曰万岁登封。
现代文：改年号为 万岁登封 。
English: The new year's name is "Banzai Dengfeng."

古文：大赦，免今岁租税，赐酺十日。
现代文：施行大赦，免除本年租税，赐准臣民聚饮十日。
English: An amnesty was implemented, this year's taxes were exempted, and permission was granted for subjects to gather and drink for ten days.

古文：丁亥，禅于少室山。
现代文：十四日，武后到少室山祭祀。
English: On the 14th, Empress Wu went to Mt. Shomuro for a religious service.

古文：己丑，给复洛州二年，登封、告成县三年。
现代文：十六日，免除洛州徭役二年，登封、告成县免除三年。
English: On the 16th, he was exempted from Luozhou labor camp for two years, and Dengfeng and Guicheng counties were exempted for three years.

古文：癸巳，复于神都。
现代文：二十日，返回神都。
English: On the 20th, he returned to the capital.

古文：一月甲寅，娄师德为肃边道行军副总管，以击吐蕃。
现代文：万岁通天元年 一月 十一日，娄师德任肃边道行军副总管，攻打吐蕃。
English: On January 11th of the first year of the millennium, Zou Shide was appointed deputy commander of the march of Subei Road and attacked Tujing.

古文：己巳，改崇尊庙为太庙。
现代文：二十六日，将崇尊庙改为武氏太庙。
English: On the 26th, the temple was renamed the Wu Dynasty Temple.

古文：二月辛巳，尊神岳天中王为神岳天中黄帝，天灵妃为天中黄后。
现代文：二月初九，尊奉神岳天中王为神岳天中黄帝，天灵妃为天中黄后。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the year, the worship of the King of Heaven is the Yellow Emperor of Heaven, and the Queen of Heaven is the Yellow Empress of Heaven.

古文：三月壬寅，王孝杰、娄师德及吐蕃战于素罗汗山，败绩。
现代文：三月初一，王孝杰、娄师德在素罗汗山与吐蕃军交战，大败。
English: On the first day of March, Wang Xiaojie and Zou Shide fought against the Tubo army in Surokhan Mountain and were soundly defeated.

古文：丁巳，复作明堂，改曰通天宫。
现代文：十六日，再建布政、典礼的明堂，改称为 通天宫 。
English: On the 16th, the Ming Hall for political and ceremonial affairs was rebuilt and renamed the Tongtian Palace.

古文：大赦，改元，赐酺七日。
现代文：施行大赦，更改年号为 万岁通天 ，赐准聚饮七日。
English: An amnesty was implemented, and the year was changed to "Wang Rong Tong Tian," and permission was granted to gather and drink for seven days.

古文：四月癸酉，检校夏官侍郎孙元亨同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：四月初二，检校夏官侍郎孙元亨加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the second day of the month of April, Sun Yuanheng, the summer official's son-in-law of the school, and Tong Fengge, the son-in-law of Tai Ping, were arrested.

古文：庚子，贬娄师德为原州都督府司马。
现代文：二十九日，将娄师德贬为原州都督府司马。
English: On the 29th, Gong Shide was demoted to the post of the provincial governor.

古文：五月壬子，契丹首领松漠都督李尽忠、归诚州刺史孙万荣陷营州，杀都督赵文翙。
现代文：五月十二日，契丹首领松漠都督李尽忠、归诚州刺史孙万荣攻破营州，杀了都督赵文岁羽。
English: On May 12th, the Khitan chieftain Li Jianzhong, the governor of Songpan, and Sun Wanyong, the governor of Guicheng, invaded Yingzhou and killed the governor, Zhao Wenyi.

古文：乙丑，左鹰扬卫将军曹仁师、右金吾卫大将军张玄遇、左威卫大将军李多祚、司农少卿麻仁节等击之。
现代文：二十五日，左鹰扬卫将军曹仁师、右金吾卫大将军张玄遇、左威卫大将军李多祚、司农少卿麻仁节等前往攻打。
English: On the 25th, General Cao Ren of the Left Eagle Yangwei Division, General Zhang Xuanyuan of the Right Eagle Yangwei Division, General Li Duojun of the Left Eagle Yangwei Division, and Shaoqing Ma Ren of the Sino-Japanese Peasants' and Peasants' Alliance went to attack.

古文：七月辛亥，春官尚书武三思为榆关道安抚大使，纳言姚为副，以备契丹。
现代文：七月十一日，春官尚书武三思任榆关道安抚大使，纳言姚王寿为副大使，以防备契丹来犯。
English: On July 11, the Spring official, Shang Shuwu, thought twice before appointing Yao Wang Shou as the ambassador of pacification in Shigatse, and Nagan Yao Wang Shou as the deputy ambassador, in order to prevent the coming of the Khitan.

古文：八月丁酉，张玄遇、曹仁师、麻仁节等及契丹战于黄麞，败绩，执玄遇、仁节。
现代文：八月二十八日，张玄遇、曹仁师、麻仁节等在獐黄谷与契丹军交战，大败，张玄遇、麻仁节被俘。
English: On August 28th, Zhang Xuanqian, Cao Ren's division, and Ma Renjie fought against the Khitan army in the Huanggu Valley, and were soundly defeated. Zhang Xuanqian and Ma Renjie were captured.

古文：九月庚子，同州刺史武攸宜为清边道行军大总管，以击契丹。
现代文：九月初一，同州刺史武攸宜任清边道行军大总管，攻打契丹。
English: On the first day of September, the governor of the same prefecture, Shi Wuyue, was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the march of Qingbian Road to attack Khitan.

古文：丁巳，吐蕃寇凉州，都督许钦明死之。
现代文：十八日，吐蕃军进犯凉州，都督许钦明死难。
English: On the 18th, the Tubo army invaded Liangzhou, and the governor Xu Qinming was killed.

古文：庚申，并州长史王方庆为鸾台侍郎，殿中监李道广：同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：二十一日，并州长史王方庆任鸾台侍郎，殿中监李道广，并加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the 21st, the governor Shi Wang Fangqing was appointed as the attendant of Xingtai, the palace middle supervisor Li Daoguang, and the Fengge Xingtai Ping chapter was added.

古文：十月辛卯，契丹寇冀州，刺史陆宝积死之。
现代文：十月二十三日，契丹军进犯冀州，刺史陆宝积死难。
English: On October 23rd, the Khitan army invaded Jizhou, stabbing Shi Lu Bao to death.

古文：甲午，虑囚。
现代文：二十五日，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 25th, the investigation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：神功元年正月壬戌，杀李元素、孙元亨、洛州录事参军綦连耀、箕州刺史刘思礼、知天官侍郎事石抱忠刘奇、给事中周譒、凤阁舍人王抃、前泾州刺史王勔、太子司议郎路敬淳、司门员外郎刘顺之、右司员外郎宇文全志、来庭县主簿柳璆。
现代文：神功元年 正月 二十四日，武后杀李元素、孙元亨、洛州录事参军綦连耀、箕州刺史刘思礼、知天官侍郎事石抱忠、刘奇、给事中周讠番、凤阁舍人王耭、前泾州刺史王面力、太子司议郎路敬淳、司门员外郎刘顺之、右司员外郎宇文全忠、来庭县主簿柳趚。
English: On the 24th day of the first month of the 1st year of Shengong, Wu Hou killed Li Xuan, Sun Yuanheng, Luo Zhou recorded the record and joined the army, Zou Lianyao, Zhengzhou scribe Liu Sili, Zhengtian official Zhi Shi Baozhong, Liu Qi, Zhou Shuban in the middle, Fengge scribe Wang Yao, former Zhengzhou scribe Wang Mianli, Prince Zhi Lang Lu Jing Chun, gatekeeper Wei Lang Liu Shun Zhi, right secretary Wei Lang Wu Wen Quanzhong, and the main book of Laiyi County, Liu Yao.

古文：癸亥，突厥默啜寇胜州，平狄军副使安道买败之。
现代文：二十五日，突厥的默啜进犯胜州，平狄军副使安道买将其击败。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the Turkic army entered Fusheng County, and the deputy commander of the Pingdi Army, Andohai, defeated it.

古文：甲子，娄师德守凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：二十六日，娄师德代理凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the 26th, Gong Shide acted as Fengge's chamberlain and Tongfengge's steward Taihei Zhang.

古文：二月乙巳，虑囚。
现代文：神功元年 一月 初八，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: In January of the first year of Shengong, the eighth day of the first month, the investigation recorded the prisoner's crime.

古文：三月庚子，王孝杰及孙万斩战于东硖石谷，败绩，孝杰死之。
现代文：三月初四，王孝杰在东硖石谷与孙万斩交战，大败，王孝杰牺牲。
English: On the fourth day of the third month of the year, Wang Xiaojie fought with Sun Wan in Shizhigu, Donglu, and was soundly defeated. Wang Xiaojie was killed.

古文：戊申，赦河南、北。
现代文：十二月，对河南、河北二道施行赦免。
English: In December, the two provinces of Henan and Hebei were pardoned.

古文：四月戊辰，置九鼎于通天宫。
现代文：四月初三，在通天宫设置九鼎。
English: On the third day of the fourth lunar month, Jiuding was set up in Tongtian Temple.

古文：癸酉，前益州大都督府长史王及善为内史。
现代文：初八，前益州大都督府长史王及善任内史。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Shi Wang, the former governor of Yishu Prefecture, and Zennin Naishi passed away.

古文：癸未，右金吾卫大将军武懿宗为神兵道行军大总管，及右豹韬卫将军何迦密以击契丹。
现代文：十八日，右金吾卫大将军武懿宗任神兵道行军大总管，与右豹韬卫将军何迦密攻打契丹。
English: On the 18th, the Right King's Guard General, Wu Xizong, was appointed as the general in charge of the march of the Shenbei Road, and fought against Khitan with the Right Leopard's Guard General, He Jiamei.

古文：五月癸卯，娄师德为清边道行军副大总管，右武卫将军沙吒忠义为清边中道前军总管，以击契丹。
现代文：五月初八，娄师德任清边道行军副大总管，右武卫将军沙吒忠义任清边中道前军总管，攻打契丹。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of May, Gong Shide was appointed deputy commander-in-chief of the army marching in Qingbian Road, and the right guard general Shaju Zhongyi was appointed commander-in-chief of the former army in Qingbian Middle Road, attacking Qidan.

古文：六月丁卯，杀监察御史李昭德、司仆少卿来俊臣。
现代文：六月初三，杀监察御史李昭德、司仆少卿来俊臣。
English: On the third day of the sixth month, Li Zhaode, the inspector-general of history, and Sibei Shaoqing, a junior minister, were killed.

古文：己卯，尚方少监宗楚客同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：十五日，尚方少监察宗楚客加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the fifteenth day, Shangfang Shao inspected the Zongchu guest and Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：戊子，特进武承嗣、春官尚书武三思同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：二十四日，特进武承嗣、春官尚书武三思并加同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the special officers, Take Shigeji and Shunkan Shang Shumu, thought about it and added three dishes from the Fengge Restaurant.

古文：辛卯，娄师德安抚河北。
现代文：二十七日，娄师德安抚河北道。
English: On the 27th, Zou Shide set out to pacify Hebei Province.

古文：七月丁酉，武承嗣、武三思罢。
现代文：七月初三，武承嗣、武三思被免职。
English: On the third day of the seventh month, Wu Chengzhi and Wu Sansi were dismissed from their posts.

古文：八月丙戌，姚罢。
现代文：八月二十三日，姚王寿被免职。
English: On August 23, Yao Wangshou was removed from his post.

古文：九月壬寅，大赦，改元，赐酺七日。
现代文：九月初九，施行大赦，更改年号，赐准聚饮七日。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, an amnesty was implemented, the year was changed, and permission was granted to gather and drink for seven days.

古文：庚戌，娄师德守纳言。
现代文：十七日，娄师德代理纳言。
English: On the seventeenth day, Gong Shide acting as Nagan.

古文：十月甲子，给复徇忠、立节二县一年。
现代文：十月初一，免除徇忠、立节二县徭役一年。
English: On the first day of October, he was exempted from serving as the county magistrate of Zhizhong and Lixi for one year.

古文：闰月甲寅，检校司刑卿、幽州都督狄仁杰为鸾台侍郎，司刑卿杜景佺为凤阁侍郎：同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：闰十月二十一日，检校司刑卿、幽州都督狄仁杰任鸾台侍郎，司刑卿杜景亻全任凤阁侍郎，并加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On October 21, Di Renjie, the chief inspector of schools and the governor of Yuzhou, was appointed as the attendant of Fengtai, Du Jingyao, the chief inspector of schools and the governor of Yuzhou, was appointed as the attendant of Fengtai, and Du Jingyao, the chief inspector of schools and the governor of Yuzhou, was appointed as the attendant of Fengtai, and Du Jingyao, the chief inspector of schools and the governor of Yuzhou, was appointed as the attendant of Fengtai.

古文：圣历元年正月甲子，大赦，改元，赐酺九日。
现代文：圣历元年 正月 初一，施行大赦，改年号为 圣历 ，赐准聚饮九日。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the Gregorian calendar, an amnesty was implemented, the year name was changed to the Gregorian calendar, and permission was granted to gather and drink for nine days.

古文：丙寅，宗楚客罢。
现代文：初三，宗楚客被免职。
English: On the third day of the new year, Zong Chuk was removed from his post.

古文：丁亥，李道广罢。
现代文：二十四日，李道广被免职。
English: On the 24th, Li Daoguang was removed from office.

古文：三月己巳，召庐陵王于房州。
现代文：圣历元年三月初九，武后从房州召回庐陵王李显。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month of the 1st year of the Chinese lunar calendar, Wu Hou recalled Li Xian, the King of Fuling, from Fangzhou.

古文：戊子，庐陵王至自房州。
现代文：二十八日，庐陵王自房州返抵京城。
English: On the 28th, Gongling Wang returned to Beijing from Fuzhou.

古文：四月庚寅，赦神都及河北。
现代文：四月初一，对神都及河北道施行赦免。
English: On the first day of April, an amnesty was implemented for Shintou and Hebei Province.

古文：辛丑，娄师德为陇右诸军大使，检校河西营田事。
现代文：十二日，娄师德任陇右诸军大使，检校河西营田事。
English: On the 12th, Zou Shide was appointed as the ambassador of Zou Yu's army, and inspected the school in Hexi Yingtian.

古文：五月庚午，禁屠。
现代文：五月十一日，禁止屠宰。
English: On May 11th, the slaughter was banned.

古文：六月乙卯，大风拔木。
现代文：六月二十七日，大风拔起树木。
English: On June 27, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：七月辛未，杜景佺罢。
现代文：七月十三日，杜景亻全被免职。
English: On July 13, Du Jingyuan was removed from his post.

古文：八月，突厥寇边。
现代文：八月，突厥军侵犯边境。
English: In August, the Turkish army invaded the border.

古文：戊子，左豹韬卫将军阎知微降于突厥，寇边。
现代文：初一，左豹韬卫将军阎知微投降突厥，侵犯边境。
English: On the first day of the new year, General Yan Zhiwei of the Left Leopard Guards surrendered to the Turks and violated the border.

古文：甲午，王方庆罢。
现代文：初七，王方庆被免职。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Wang Fangqing was dismissed.

古文：庚子，春官尚书武三思检校内史，狄仁杰兼纳言。
现代文：十三日，春官尚书武三思任检校内史，狄仁杰兼纳言。
English: On the 13th, the spring official, Shang Shuwu, thought twice about taking on the role of inspecting the school's internal history, and Di Renjie concurred.

古文：司属卿武重规为天兵中道大总管，沙吒忠义为天兵西道前军总管，幽州都督张仁亶为天兵东道总管，左羽林卫大将军李多祚、右羽林卫大将军阎敬容为天兵道西后军总管，以击突厥。
现代文：司属卿武重规任天兵中道大总管，沙吒忠义任天兵西道前军总管，幽州都督张仁任天兵东道总管，左羽林卫大将军李多祚、右羽林卫大将军阎敬容任天兵西道后军总管，攻打突厥。
English: The subordinate general Wu Chung-pyo served as the commander-in-chief of the Middle and West Divisions of Heaven's Army, Shajian Zhongyi served as the commander-in-chief of the Western Division of Heaven's Army, Zhang Ren, the governor of Yuzhou, served as the commander-in-chief of the Host of Heaven's Army, and the left-feathered Guards General Li Duojun and the right-feathered Guards General Yan Jingrong served as the commander-in-chief of the Western Division of Heaven's Army and attacked Turkey.

古文：癸丑，突厥寇蔚州。乙卯，寇定州，刺史孙彦高死之。
现代文：二十六日，突厥军进犯蔚州；二十八日，进犯定州，刺史孙彦高死难。
English: On the 26th, the Turkish army invaded Ulshu; on the 28th, they invaded Dingzhou, and assassinated Sun Yigao.

古文：九月甲子，夏官尚书武攸宁同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：九月初七，夏官尚书武攸宁加同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, Xia Guan Shang Shouwu Youning plus Tong Fengge Xingtai three dishes.

古文：戊辰，突厥寇赵州，长史唐波若降于突厥，刺史高睿死之。
现代文：十一日，突厥军进犯赵州，长史唐波若投降突厥，刺史高睿死难。
English: On the 11th day, the Turkish army invaded Zhaozhou. If Changshi Tangbo surrendered to the Turks, Gao Rui would die.

古文：突厥寇相州，沙吒忠义为河北道前军总管，将军阳基副之，李多祚为后军总管，大将军富福信为奇兵总管，以御之。
现代文：突军进犯相州，沙吒忠义任河北道前军总管，将军杨基任副总管，李多祚任后军总管，大将军富福信任骑兵总管，抵御突厥军。
English: When the Turkic army invaded Xiangzhou, Shaju Zhongyi was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the former army of Hebei Province, General Yang Ji was appointed as the deputy commander-in-chief, Li Dorao was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the latter army, and General Fufu was trusted as the commander-in-chief of the cavalry to resist the Turkic army.

古文：壬申，立庐陵王显为皇太子，大赦，赐酺五日。
现代文：十五日，武后立庐陵王李显为皇太子，施行大赦，赐准聚饮五日。
English: On the fifteenth day, Emperor Wu posthumously made Li Xian, the king of Fuling, the crown prince, and granted him amnesty and permission to gather for drinking on the fifth day.

古文：甲戌，皇太子为河北道行军元帅，以击突厥。
现代文：十七日，皇太子李显任河北道行军元帅，攻打突厥军。
English: On the 17th, the crown prince, Li Xian, was appointed as the marshal of Hebei Province to attack the Turkish army.

古文：戊寅，狄仁杰为河北道行军副元帅、检校纳言。
现代文：二十一日，狄仁杰任河北道行军副元帅、检校纳言。
English: On the 21st, Di Renjie was appointed deputy marshal of the march of Hebei Province and inspector of schools.

古文：辛巳，试天官侍郎苏味道为凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：二十四日，试天官侍郎苏味道任凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the probation officer's attendant, Su Ji, was appointed as Fengge's attendant and Tongfengge's attendant, Taihei.

古文：十月癸卯，狄仁杰为河北道安抚大使。
现代文：十月十七日，狄仁杰任河北道安抚大使。
English: On October 17th, Di Renjie was appointed as the ambassador of pacification of Hebei Province.

古文：夏官侍郎姚元崇、麟台少监李峤同凤阁鸾台平章事。族阎知微。
现代文：夏官侍郎姚元崇、麟台少监李峤加同凤阁鸾台平章事，诛灭阎知微全家。
English: Xia Guan's servant Yao Yuan Chong, Lintai Juvenile Supervisor Li Yan, and Tong Feng Ge's subordinate Tai Ping initiated the incident, leading to the death of Yan Zhiyu's entire family.

古文：二年正月壬戌，封皇嗣旦为相王。
现代文：圣历二年 正月 初六，武后封皇位继承人李旦为相王。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 2nd year of the 2nd lunar month, Li Dan, the heir to the imperial throne of Wu Hou, became the king.

古文：腊月戊子，左肃政台御史中丞吉顼为天官侍郎，检校右肃政台御史中丞魏元忠为凤阁侍郎：同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文： 腊月 初二，左肃政台御史中丞吉顼任天官侍郎，检校右肃政台御史中丞魏元忠任凤阁侍郎，并加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the second day of the lunar month, the left Su Zheng Dao's chief historian, Chihiro Yoshitaka, was appointed as the attendant of the heavenly officer, and the right Su Zheng Dao's chief historian, Wei Yuan Zhong, was appointed as the attendant of Fengge, and was added to Fengge's chief historian, Taihei Shoji.

古文：辛亥，赐皇太子姓武氏，大赦。
现代文：二十五日，赐皇太子姓武，施行大赦。
English: On the 25th, the crown prince was given the surname Wu, and a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：一月庚申，武攸宁罢。
现代文：圣历二年 一月 初四，武攸宁被免职。
English: Wu Yoning was dismissed from his post on the fourth day of the first month of the second year of the lunar calendar.

古文：二月己丑，如缑氏。
现代文：二月初四，武后去缑氏。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, Wu Hou went to the Zou clan.

古文：辛卯，如嵩阳。
现代文：初六，去嵩阳。
English: Sixth-year students, go to Songyang.

古文：丁酉，复于神都。
现代文：十二日，回到神都。
English: On the twelfth day, he returned to the capital.

古文：三月甲戌，以隋、唐为二王后。
现代文：三月十九日，武后将隋朝、李唐作为诸侯国君后裔。
English: On March 19th, Empress Wu presented the Sui Dynasty and Li Tang Dynasty as the descendants of princes and sovereigns.

古文：娄师德为纳言。
现代文：娄师德任纳言。
English: His teacher was De Ren Nagon.

古文：四月壬辰，魏元忠检校并州大都督府长史、天兵军大总管，娄师德副之，以备突厥。
现代文：四月初八，魏元忠任检校并州大都督府长史、天兵军大总管，娄师德任其副职，以防备突厥来犯。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month of the year, Wei Yuanzhong was appointed as the inspector of the school and the governor of the prefectural capital, the general manager of the Heavenly Army, and Zou Shide was appointed as his deputy, in order to prevent the Turks from coming.

古文：辛丑，类师德为陇右诸军大使。
现代文：十七日，娄师德任陇右诸军大使。
English: On the 17th, Zou Shide was appointed as the ambassador of Zou Yu to the armies.

古文：甲辰，虑囚。
现代文：二十日，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 20th, the investigation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：七月丙辰，神都大雨，洛水溢。
现代文：七月初四，神都大雨，洛水泛滥。
English: On the fourth day of the seventh month, heavy rain fell in Shentou, flooding Luo.

古文：八月庚子，王及善为文昌左相、同凤阁鸾台平章事，太子宫尹豆卢钦望为文昌右相、同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：八月十九日，王及善任文昌左相、同凤阁鸾台平章事，太子宫尹豆卢钦望任文昌右相、同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: On August 19, Wang and Shan were appointed as the left ministers of Wenchang and Tongfeng Pavilion, respectively, while the prince's wife, Yin Douluqin, was appointed as the right minister of Wenchang and Tongfeng Pavilion, respectively.

古文：杨再思罢。
现代文：杨再思被免职。
English: Yang Jiasi was removed from office.

古文：丁未，试天官侍郎陆元方为鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：二十六日，试天官侍郎陆元方任鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the 26th, Lu Yuanfang, the attendant of the probation officer, was appointed as the attendant of Xingtai and Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：娄师德薨。
现代文：娄师德逝世。
English: Gong Shide passed away.

古文：戊申，武三思为内史。
现代文：二十七日，武三思任内史。
English: On the 27th, Wu Sansi was appointed to the position of internal historian.

古文：九月乙亥，如福昌县，曲赦。
现代文：九月二十四日，武后去福昌县，对该县施行部分赦免。
English: On September 24, Wu Hou went to Fuchang County to grant a partial pardon to the county.

古文：戊寅，复于神都。
现代文：二十七日，返回神都。
English: On the 27th, he returned to the capital.

古文：庚辰，王及善薨。
现代文：二十九日，王及善去世。
English: On the 29th, Wang Yizhen passed away.

古文：是秋，黄河溢。
现代文：本年秋季，黄河泛滥。
English: In the autumn of this year, the Yellow River flooded.

古文：十月丁亥，吐蕃首领赞婆来。
现代文：十月初六，吐蕃首领赞婆到来。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of October, the leader of the Tibetan people, Zhanba, arrived.

古文：久视元年正月戊午，贬吉顼为琰川尉。
现代文：久视元年 正月 初八，将吉顼贬为琰川尉。
English: On the first day of the eighth month of the first year of the Heian period, Yoshitaka was demoted to Shikawa no jo.

古文：壬申，武三思罢。
现代文：二十二日，武三思被免职。
English: On the 22nd, Wu Sansi was dismissed.

古文：腊月辛巳，封皇太子之子重润为邵王。
现代文： 腊月 初一，武后封皇太子之子重润为邵王。
English: On the first day of the lunar month, Chongrun, the son of Empress Dowager Wu and Crown Prince Fong, became King Shao.

古文：庚寅，陆元方罢司礼卿。
现代文：初十，陆元方被免去司礼卿职务。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Lu Yuanfang was removed from the post of Secretary.

古文：阿史那斛瑟罗为平西军大总管。
现代文：阿史那斛瑟罗任平西军大总管。
English: Ashina Zenshuro was appointed the commander-in-chief of the Western Pacific Army.

古文：丁酉，狄仁杰为内史。
现代文：十七日，狄仁杰任内史。
English: On the 17th, Di Renjie was appointed to the position of internal historian.

古文：庚子，文昌左相韦巨源为纳言。
现代文：二十日，文昌左相韦巨源任纳言。
English: On the 20th, Wenchang Zuo Wei Jiuyuan was appointed as prime minister.

古文：乙巳，如嵩山。
现代文：二十五日，武后去嵩山。
English: On the 25th, Wu Hou went to Mount Song.

古文：一月丁卯，如汝州温汤。
现代文：久视元年 一月 十七日，武后去汝州温汤。
English: On the 17th day of January in the first year of the Jiu period, Wu Hou went to Ruzhou Wen Tang.

古文：戊寅，复于神都。作三阳宫。
现代文：二十八日，返回神都，建造三阳宫。
English: On the 28th, he returned to Shendu to build the Sanyang Palace.

古文：二月乙未，豆卢钦望罢。
现代文：二月十五日，豆卢钦望被免职。
English: On February 15, Doulu Qinwang was removed from his post.

古文：三月癸丑，夏官尚书唐奉一为天兵中军大总管，以备突厥。
现代文：三月初四，夏官尚书唐奉一任天兵中军大总管，以防备突厥来犯。
English: On the 4th day of the 3rd month, the summer official Shangshu Tang was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the Chinese army to prevent the Turks from coming.

古文：四月戊申，如三阳宫。
现代文：四月二十九日，武后去三阳宫。
English: On April 29, Empress Wu went to Sanyang Palace.

古文：五月己酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of May, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：癸丑，大赦，改元，罢 天册金轮大圣 号，赐酺五日，给复告成县一年。
现代文：初五，施行大赦，更改年号，武后免去 天册金轮大圣 的封号，赐准聚饮五日，免除告成县徭役一年。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, an amnesty was carried out, the year was changed, and Wu Hou was exempted from the sealing number of the Golden Wheel of Heaven, granted permission to gather and drink for five days, and exempted from serving as a county magistrate for one year.

古文：闰七月戊寅，复于神都。
现代文：闰七月初二，武后返回神都。
English: On the second day of the seventh lunar month, Wu Hou returned to the capital.

古文：己丑，天官侍郎张锡为凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：十三日，天官侍郎张锡任凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the 13th, Zhang Xi, the attendant of the heavenly official, was appointed as the attendant of Fengge, and Tongfengge and Taihei were appointed.

古文：李峤罢。
现代文：李峤被免职。
English: Li Wei was removed from office.

古文：丁酉，吐蕃寇凉州，陇右诸军州大使唐休璟败之于洪源谷。
现代文：二十一日，吐蕃侵犯凉州，陇右诸军州大使唐休瞡在洪源谷将其击败。
English: On the twenty-first day, Tubo invaded Liangzhou, and Tang Xiuqi, the ambassador of the right-wing military states, defeated it in Hongyuan Valley.

古文：八月庚戌，魏元忠为陇右诸军州大总管，以击吐蕃。
现代文：八月初五，魏元忠任陇右诸军州军大总管，以攻打吐蕃。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, Wei Yuanzhong was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the right-wing troops of the state army to attack Tuwei.

古文：庚申，敛天下僧钱作大像。
现代文：十五日，收敛全国僧钱造大佛像。
English: On the 15th, the national monk Qian made a large Buddha statue.

古文：九月辛丑，狄仁杰薨。
现代文：九月二十六日，狄仁杰逝世。
English: On September 26, Di Renjie passed away.

古文：十月辛亥，魏元忠为萧关道行军大总管，以备突厥。
现代文：十月初七，魏元忠任萧关道行军大总管，以防备突厥来犯。
English: At the beginning of October 7th, Wei Yuanzhong was appointed as the general manager of the march on Xiaoguan Road to prevent the Turks from coming.

古文：甲寅，复唐正月，大赦。
现代文：初十，恢复唐朝的正月，施行大赦。
English: On the tenth day of the first lunar month, the first month of the restoration of the Tang Dynasty, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：丁巳，韦巨源罢。
现代文：十三日，韦巨源被免职。
English: On the 13th, Wei Jiuyuan was removed from office.

古文：文昌右丞韦安石为鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：文昌右丞韦安石任鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: Wenchang Yuanzheng Wei Anshi was appointed as the attendant of Xingtai, and Tongfeng Pavilion Xingtai Ping chapter.

古文：丁卯，如新安陇涧山，曲赦。
现代文：二十三日，武后去新安陇涧山，对该地施行部分赦免。
English: On the 23rd, Empress Wu went to Xin'an Lushan Mountain to grant partial amnesty to the area.

古文：壬申，复于神都。
现代文：二十八日，返回神都。
English: On the 28th, he returned to the capital.

古文：十二月甲寅，突厥寇陇右。
现代文：十二月初十，突厥军进犯陇右。
English: On the 10th day of the 12th month, the Turkish army invaded the right bank of the Yangtze.

古文：长安元年正月丁丑，改元大足。
现代文：长安元年正月初三，改年号为 大足 。
English: On the third day of the first month of the first month of the first year of Chang'an, the year name was changed to Dashi.

古文：二月己酉，鸾台侍郎李怀远同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：二月初六，鸾台侍郎李怀远加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the year, Li Huaiyuan, the attendant of Xingtai, and Tongfeng Ge, the attendant of Xingtai Pingzhang, entered into a contract.

古文：三月丙申，流张锡于循州。
现代文：三月二十三日，将张锡流放至循州。
English: On March 23, Zhang Xi was exiled to Xuzhou.

古文：四月丙午，大赦癸丑，姚元崇检校并州以北诸军州兵马。
现代文：四月初二，施行大赦。初十，姚元崇查核并州以北各军州的兵马。
English: On the second day of the first month of April, an amnesty was implemented. On the tenth day of the first month, Yao Yuan Chong inspected the soldiers and horses of the military states north of the annexed states.

古文：五月乙亥，如三阳宫。
现代文：五月初三，武后去三阳宫。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, Empress Wu went to Sanyang Palace.

古文：丁丑，魏元忠为灵武道行军大总管，以备突厥。
现代文：初五，魏元忠任灵武道行军大总管，以防备突厥军来犯。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Wei Yuanzhong was appointed as the general manager of the martial arts march to prevent the Turkish army from coming.

古文：丙申，天官侍郎顾琮同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：二月十四日，天官侍郎顾琮加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On February 14th, Heaven's official attendant, Gu Yingjia and Tong Fengge marched into Taihei chapter.

古文：六月庚申，夏官侍郎李迥秀同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：六月十九日，夏官侍郎李迥秀加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On June 19th, Li Lanxiu, the summer official's valet, and Tong Feng Ge, the governor of Taiping, signed the document.

古文：辛未，赦告成县。
现代文：三十日，免除告成县赋税。
English: On the 30th, Goseong County was exempted from paying taxes.

古文：七月甲戌，复于神都。
现代文：七月初三，武后返回神都。
English: On the third day of the seventh month, Wu Hou returned to the capital.

古文：乙亥，扬、楚、常、润、苏五州地震。
现代文：初四，扬、楚、常、润、苏五州地震。
English: First four, Yang, Chu, Chang, Run, Su five states earthquake.

古文：壬午，苏味道按察幽、平等州兵马。
现代文：十一日，苏味道巡察考核幽、平等州的兵马状况。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Soviet inspection team inspected and assessed the state of the soldiers and horses in Yu County and Tongli County.

古文：甲申，李怀远罢。
现代文：十三日，李怀远被免职。
English: On the 13th, Li Huaiyuan was removed from office.

古文：九月壬申，杀邵王重润及永泰郡主、主婿武延基。
现代文：九月初三，杀邵王李重润及永泰郡主与其夫武延基。
English: On the 3rd day of the 9th month, they killed Shao Wang Li Chungrun and Yongtai Countess and her husband Wu Yanji.

古文：十月壬寅，如京师。
现代文：十月初三，武后去京城。
English: On the third day of October, Wu Hou went to Beijing.

古文：辛酉，大赦，改元。
现代文：二十二日，施行大赦，改年号为 长安 。
English: On the 22nd, an amnesty was implemented, and the name of the year was changed to Chang'an.

古文：给复关内三年，赐酺三日。
现代文：免除关内徭役三年，赐准聚饮三日。
English: He was exempted from guard duty for three years and allowed to drink for three days.

古文：丙寅，魏元忠同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：二十七日，魏元忠加同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: On the 27th, Wei Yuanzhong added three dishes from Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：十一月壬申，武三思罢。
现代文：十一月初四，武三思被免职。
English: On early November 4th, Wu Sansi was removed from his post.

古文：戊寅，改含元宫为大明宫。
现代文：初十，将含元宫改名大明宫。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the name of Hongyuan Palace was changed to Daming Palace.

古文：二年正月，突厥寇盐州。
现代文：长安二年正月，突厥进犯盐州。
English: In the first month of the second year of Chang'an, the Turks invaded Yanzhou.

古文：三月丙戌，李迥秀安置山东军马，检校武骑兵。
现代文：三月十九日，李迥秀安顿山东军马，考察武骑兵。
English: On March 19, Li Yuxiu settled the Shandong cavalry and inspected the cavalry.

古文：庚寅，突厥寇并州，雍州长史薛季昶持节山东防御大使以备之。
现代文：二十三日，突厥军进犯并州，雍州长史薛季昶任持节山东防御大使以防备突厥军。
English: On the 23rd, the Turkish army invaded and annexed the prefecture, and the governor of Yong, Shi Xuejian, was appointed as the defense ambassador of Shandong to prevent the Turkish army from leaving.

古文：七月甲午，突厥寇代州。
现代文：七月二十九日，突厥军进犯代州。
English: On July 29, the Turkish army invaded Daizhou.

古文：八月辛亥，剑南六州地震。
现代文：八月十六日，剑南道六个州地震。
English: On August 16, six prefectures in South Jian Province were hit by earthquakes.

古文：九月乙丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of September, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：壬申，突厥寇忻州。
现代文：初八，突厥等军进犯忻州。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month, the Turkic and other armies invaded Zhangzhou.

古文：己卯，吐蕃请和。
现代文：十五日，吐蕃求和。
English: On the 15th, Tubo sued for peace.

古文：十月甲辰，顾琮薨。
现代文：十月初十，顾琮去世。
English: At the beginning of October, Gu Xi passed away.

古文：戊申，吐蕃寇悉州，茂州都督陈大慈败之。
现代文：十四日，吐蕃军进犯悉州，茂州都督陈大慈击败吐蕃军。
English: On the 14th, the Tubo army invaded Shizhou, and the governor of Maozhou, Chen Daci, defeated the Tubo army.

古文：甲寅，姚元崇同凤阁鸾台平章事，苏味道、韦安石、李迥秀同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：二十日，姚元崇加同凤阁鸾台平章事，苏味道、韦安石、李迥秀加同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: On the 20th, Yao Yuan Chong and Tongfeng Pavilion won the first prize, while Su Tang, Wei Anshi, Li Yuxiu and Tongfeng Pavilion won the third prize.

古文：十一月甲子，相王旦为司徒。
现代文：十一月初一，相王李旦任司徒。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the king of sorcerers, Li Dan, became a disciple.

古文：戊子，祀南郊，大赦，赐酺三日。
现代文：二十五日，武后到京城南郊祭祀，施行大赦，赐准聚饮三日。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Empress Wu went to the southern suburbs of Beijing to offer sacrifices, implement an amnesty, and grant permission to gather for three days.

古文：十二月甲午，魏元忠为安东道安抚使。
现代文：十二月初二，魏元忠任安东道安抚使。
English: On the second day of December, Wei Yuanzhong was appointed as the pacification envoy of Antao.

古文：三年三月壬戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：长安三年三月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of March in the third year of Chang'an, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：四月庚子，相王旦罢。
现代文：四月初九，相王李旦被免职。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the year, King Litan was dismissed from his post.

古文：吐蕃来求婚。
现代文：吐蕃派使臣来求婚。
English: Tubo sent an envoy to propose marriage.

古文：乙巳，以旱避正殿。
现代文：十四日，武后因旱灾避离正殿。
English: On the 14th, the empress Dowager Wu left the main hall due to drought.

古文：闰月庚午，成均祭酒李峤同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：闰四月初十，成均祭酒李峤加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the 10th day of the 4th month of the lunar calendar, the Chengyun sacrificial wine Li Yijia and Tongfeng Pavilion were launched.

古文：己卯，李峤知纳言事。
现代文：十九日，李峤执掌纳言职务。
English: On the 19th, Li Rong assumed the post of prime minister.

古文：七月壬寅，正谏大夫硃敬则同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：七月十三日，正谏大夫朱敬则加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On July 13th, Zhu Jing, Zhengqi's doctor, was promoted to Tongfeng Pavilion Taihei.

古文：庚戌，检校凉州都督唐休璟为夏官尚书、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：二十一日，检校凉州都督唐休瞡任夏官尚书、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the twenty-first day of the inspection, Tang Xiuyuan, the governor of Liangzhou, appointed Xia Guan Shangshu and Tongfeng Guan Taiping as inspectors.

古文：八月乙酉，京师大雨雹。
现代文：八月二十六日，京城降大冰雹。
English: On August 26, large hailstones fell in the capital.

古文：九月庚寅朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：九月初二，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：丁酉，贬魏元忠为高要尉。
现代文：初九，将魏元忠贬为高要县尉。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Wei Yuanzhong was demoted to the rank of high-ranking county official.

古文：十月丙寅，如神都。
现代文：十月初八，武后去神都。
English: On the eighth day of October, Wu Hou went to the capital.

古文：十二月丙戌，天下置关三十。
现代文：十二月二十九日，全国设置关塞三十处。
English: On December 29, 30 checkpoints were set up across the country.

古文：四年正月丁未，作兴泰宫。
现代文：长安四年正月二十一日，建造兴泰宫。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of the fourth year of Chang'an, Xingtai Palace was built.

古文：壬子，天官侍郎韦嗣立为凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：二十六日，天官侍郎韦嗣立任凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: On the 26th day of the month, Wei Zi, the celestial officer's attendant, was appointed as Fengge's attendant and Tongfengge's steward.

古文：二月癸亥，贬李迥秀为庐州刺史。
现代文：二月初八，将李迥秀贬为庐州刺史。
English: On the eighth day of the second month of the year, Li Yuxiu was relegated to the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：壬申，硃敬则罢。
现代文：十七日，朱敬则被免职。
English: On the 17th, Zhu Jing was dismissed.

古文：三月丁亥，进封皇孙平恩郡王重福为谯王。
现代文：三月初二，晋封皇孙平恩郡王李重福为谯王。
English: On the second day of March, the crown prince of Ping'an County, King Li Chungfu, was promoted to the throne.

古文：己亥，夏官侍郎宗楚客同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：十四日，夏官侍郎宗楚客加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the 14th, the summer official's attendant, Zong Chuk, and Tong Feng Ge's attendant, Tai Ping Zhang, left.

古文：贬苏味道为坊州刺史。
现代文：将苏味道贬为坊州刺史。
English: It degraded the taste of sous to that of wangzhou.

古文：四月壬戌，韦安石知纳言事，李峤知内史事。
现代文：四月初七，韦安石执掌纳言职务，李峤执掌内史职务。
English: On the seventh day of the fourth lunar month, Wei Anshi assumed the post of Nagan, and Li Xi assumed the post of Inner History.

古文：丙子，如兴泰宫，赦寿安县，给复一年。
现代文：二十一日，武后去兴泰宫，对寿安县施行赦免，免除该县徭役一年。
English: On the 21st, Empress Wu went to Xingtai Palace to grant an amnesty to Shou'an County, exempting the county from one year of forced labor.

古文：五月丁亥，大风拔木。
现代文：五月初三，大风拔起树木。
English: On the third day of May, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：六月辛酉，姚元之罢。
现代文：六月初七，姚元之被免职。
English: On June 7, Yao Yuanzhi was removed from office.

古文：乙丑，天官侍郎崔玄为鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：十一日，天官侍郎崔玄日韦任鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Choi Hyun Il Vai, the attendant of the heavenly dignitary, was appointed as the attendant of Xingtai and Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：丁丑，李峤同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：二十三日，李峤加同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: On the 23rd, Li Yingjia and Tongfengge prepared three dishes.

古文：壬午，相王府长史姚元之兼知夏官尚书、同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：二十八日，相王府长史姚元之兼掌夏官尚书、加同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: On the 28th, the governor of the Wang Prefecture, Shi Yao Yuanzhi, and the summer official, Shang Shu, plus the phoenix pavilion and the three dishes.

古文：七月丙戌，左肃政台御史大夫杨再思守内史。
现代文：七月初三，左肃政台御史大夫杨再思代理内史。
English: On the third day of the seventh month, Dr. Yang Jiesi, the chief historian of the Zuoshu Political Bureau, took over as acting chief historian.

古文：甲午，复于神都。
现代文：十一日，武后返回神都。
English: On the 11th day, Wu Hou returned to the capital.

古文：贬宗楚客为原州都督。
现代文：将宗楚客贬为原州都督。
English: He demoted Zong Chuk to the status of provincial governor.

古文：八月庚申，唐休璟兼幽营二州都督、安东都护。
现代文：八月初七，唐休瞡兼任幽、营二州都督、安东都护。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, Tang Xiuqi also served as the governor of Yu, Ying and two prefectures, and the protector of Andong.

古文：九月壬子，姚元之为灵武道行军大总管。
现代文：九月三十日，姚元之任灵武道行军大总管。
English: On September 30th, Yao Yuanzhi was appointed as the general manager of the Lingwu martial arts march.

古文：十月辛酉，元之为灵武道安抚大使。
现代文：十月初九，姚元之任灵武道安抚大使。
English: On the 9th of October, Yao Yuanzhi was appointed as the ambassador of Lingwu appeasement.

古文：甲戌，判秋官侍郎张柬之同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：二十二日，兼任秋官侍郎的张柬之加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Khamzhi, who also served as the attendant of the autumn official, and Tong Fengge, accompanied by Taihei Zhang.

古文：壬午，怀州长史房融为正谏大夫、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：三十日，怀州长史房融任正谏大夫、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the 30th, the governor of Huai Province, Shifang Rong, appointed Zheng Yao as doctor, and Tong Feng Ge as Tai Ping.

古文：十一月丁亥，天官侍郎韦承庆行凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：十一月初五，天官侍郎韦承庆兼管凤阁侍郎职事、加同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, Wei Chengqing, the attendant of the heavenly dignitaries, also took charge of the duties of the attendant of Fengge, and added the duties of Fengge and Taihei.

古文：李峤罢。
现代文：李峤被免职。
English: Li Wei was removed from office.

古文：十二月丙辰，韦嗣立罢。
现代文：十二月初五，韦嗣立被免职。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, Wei Shili was dismissed.

古文：五年正月壬午，大赦。
现代文：长安五年正月初一，施行大赦。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of Chang'an, an amnesty was implemented.

古文：庚寅，禁屠。
现代文：初九，禁止屠宰。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, slaughter is prohibited.

古文：癸卯，张柬之、崔玄及左羽林卫将军敬晖、检校左羽林卫将军桓彦范、司刑少卿袁恕己、左羽林卫将军李湛薛思行赵承恩、右羽林卫将军杨元琰、左羽林卫大将军李多祚、职方郎中崔泰之、庙部员外郎硃敬则、司刑评事冀仲甫、检校司农少卿兼知总监翟世言、内直郎王同皎率左右羽林兵以讨乱；麟台监张易之、春官侍郎张昌宗、汴州刺史张昌期、司礼少卿张同休、通事舍人张景雄伏诛。
现代文：二十二日，张柬之、崔玄日韦及左羽林卫将军敬晖、检校左羽林卫将军桓彦范，司徒少卿袁恕己，左羽林卫将军李湛、薛思行、赵承思，右羽林卫将军杨元琰，左羽林卫大将军李多祚，职方郎中崔泰之，库部员外郎朱敬则，司刑评事冀仲甫，检校司农少卿兼知总监翟世言，内直郎王同皎率领左右羽林兵讨平武氏之乱；麟台监张易之、春官侍郎张昌宗、汴州刺史张昌期、司礼少卿张同休、通事舍人张景雄被处死。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Han Zhi, Cui Xuan Rong Wei, and the left wing of Linwei General Jing Yi, the left wing of Linwei General Kuan Yan Fan, the left wing of the school inspection, the junior secretary of Sidu Yuan Shou Ji, the left wing of Linwei General Li Zhan, Xue Si Xing, Zhao Cheng Si, the right wing of Linwei General Yang Yuan Qi, the left wing of Linwei General Li Duan, the official of the party, the official of the party, the official of the party, the official of the party, the official of the party, the official of the party, the official of the party, the official

古文：丙午，皇帝复于位。
现代文：二十五日，皇帝李显恢复皇位。
English: On the 25th, Emperor Li Xian resumed the throne.

古文：丁未，徙后于上阳宫。
现代文：二十六日，将武后迁至上阳宫。
English: On the 26th, Empress Wu was moved to Shangyang Palace.

古文：戊申，上后号曰则天大圣皇帝。
现代文：二十七日，给武后进号为则天大圣皇帝。
English: On the 27th, he gave Empress Wu the title of Emperor Zetian.

古文：十一月，崩，谥曰大圣则天皇后。
现代文：十一月，武后逝世，谥号为大圣则天皇后。
English: In November, Empress Wu passed away, and her posthumous name became Emperor Daisho's Empress.

古文：唐隆元年，改为天后；景云元年，改为大圣天后；延和元年，改为天后圣帝，未几，改为圣后；开元四年，改为则天皇后；天宝八载，加谥则天顺圣皇后。
现代文：少帝唐隆元年，改其谥号为天后；睿宗景云元年，改为大圣天后；延和元年，改为天后圣帝，不久，改为圣后；玄宗开元四年，改为则天皇后；天宝八载，加谥号为则天顺圣皇后。
English: In the first year of the Young Emperor Tanglong, his posthumous name was changed to the Queen of Heaven; in the first year of Ruizong Jingyun, it was changed to the Great Holy Queen of Heaven; in the first year of Yanhe, it was changed to the Holy Queen of Heaven, and soon after, to the Holy Queen; in the fourth year of Xuanzong Kaiyuan, it was changed to the Empress of Heaven; in the eighth year of Tianbao, the posthumous name was changed to the Holy Queen of Heaven.

古文：中宗大和大圣大昭孝皇帝讳显，高宗第七子也。母曰则天顺圣皇后武氏。
现代文：中宗，名显，高宗之第七子。母亲是则天顺圣后武氏。
English: He was the seventh son of Chuzo, Meixian, and Gaozong, and his mother was Zetian Shun of the Holy Empress Wu clan.

古文：高宗崩，以皇太子即皇帝位，而皇太后临朝称制。
现代文：高宗逝世，李显以皇太子身份登基，但皇太后武氏当朝理政、行使皇权。
English: After Gao Zong died, Li Xian ascended to the throne as crown prince, but Empress Dowager Wu ruled the country and exercised imperial power.

古文：嗣圣元年正月，废居于均州，又选于房州。
现代文：嗣圣元年正月，他被废黜幽禁均州，后又迁至房州。
English: In the first month of the following year, he was deposed and confined to Junzhou, and later moved to Fangzhou.

古文：圣历二年，复为皇太子。
现代文：圣历二年正月，恢复为皇太子。
English: He was reinstated as crown prince in the first month of the second year of the lunar calendar.

古文：太后老且病。
现代文：太后武氏年迈病重。
English: Empress Dowager Takeuji is old and seriously ill.

古文：神龙元年正月，张柬之等以羽林兵讨乱。
现代文：神龙元年正月，张柬之等率羽林兵讨伐逆乱。
English: In the first month of the first year of the year of the Dragon, Zhang Kamto and others led the Ulin soldiers to fight against the rebellion.

古文：甲辰，皇太子监国，大赦，改元。
现代文：二十三日，李显代理国政，施行大赦，改年号为神龙。
English: On the 23rd, Li Xian took over the state affairs, implemented the amnesty, and changed the year name to Shenlong.

古文：丙午，复于位，大赦，赐文武官阶、爵，民酺五日，免今岁租赋，给复房州三年，放宫女三千人。
现代文：二十五日，恢复皇位，施行大赦，赐给文武官员官阶、爵位，赐许百姓聚饮五日，免除本年租税，免除房州徭役三年，放还宫女三千人。
English: On the 25th, the imperial throne was restored, an amnesty was carried out, civil and military officials were given official ranks and peerages, the people were allowed to gather and drink for five days, this year's taxes were exempted, the Fangzhou corvee service was exempted for three years, and three thousand palace maids were released.

古文：相王旦为安国相王、太尉、同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：相王李旦任安国相王、太尉、同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: So Wang Li Dan was appointed the Minister of An Province, the Second Lieutenant, and the Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：庚戌，张柬之、袁恕己同凤阁鸾台三品，崔玄守内史，敬晖为纳言，相彦范守纳言。
现代文：二十九日，张柬之、袁恕己加同凤阁鸾台三品，崔玄日韦代理内史，敬晖任纳言，桓彦范代理纳言。
English: On the 29th, Zhang Kammanzhi, Yuan Shuji and Tong Fengge were promoted to the third grade, Cui Xuan and Sun Wei were promoted to the third grade, Jing Yao was promoted to the third grade, and Kuan Yan Fan was promoted to the third grade.

古文：二月甲寅，复国号唐。
现代文：二月初四，恢复国号为唐。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, the country's name was restored to Tang.

古文：贬韦承庆为高要尉，流房融于高州。
现代文：将韦承庆贬为高要县尉，流放房融至高州。
English: He reduced Wei Chengqing to a high-ranking county official, and the banishment house was merged into Gaozhou.

古文：杨再思同中书门下三品。
现代文：杨再思加同中书门下三品。
English: Yang Zai Si and Tong Zhong Shumen won the next three prizes.

古文：姚元之罢。
现代文：姚远之被免职。
English: Yao Yuanzhi was removed from office.

古文：甲子，皇后韦氏复于位，大赦，赐酺三日，复宗室死于周者官爵。
现代文：十四日，皇后韦氏复位，施行大赦，赐许聚饮三日，恢复死于武氏周朝的李唐皇族成员的官职爵位。
English: On the 14th, the Empress Wei restored the throne, implemented amnesty, granted permission to gather and drink for three days, and restored the official titles and ranks of the members of the Li Tang royal family who died in the Wu Zhou Dynasty.

古文：丙寅，太子宾客武三思为司空、同中书门下三品。
现代文：十六日，太子宾客武三思任司空、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 16th, the prince's guest, Wu Sansi, was appointed as the first secretary and the second secretary, and the second secretary and the third secretary.

古文：贬谯王重福为濮州刺史。
现代文：将谯王李重福贬为濮州刺史。
English: Li Chongfu, the king of Zhang, was relegated to a footnote in the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：丁卯，右散骑常侍、附马都尉武攸暨为司徒。
现代文：十七日，右散骑常侍、驸马都尉武攸暨任司徒。
English: On the seventeenth day, the right rider, the attendant, and the steed captain, Takeyaku, were appointed as the stewards.

古文：辛未，安国相王旦罢。
现代文：二十一日，安国相王李旦被免职。
English: On the 21st, Wang Lidan, Minister of Public Security, was removed from office.

古文：甲戌，太子少詹事祝钦明同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十四日，太子少詹事祝钦明加同中书门下三品。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the young prince Zhan Zhi congratulated Qin Ming and added the next three prizes to the school.

古文：韦安石罢。
现代文：韦安石被免职。
English: Wei Anshi was removed from office.

古文：进封子义兴郡王重俊为卫王，北海郡王重茂温王。
现代文：中宗将其子义兴郡王李重俊晋封为卫王，北海郡王李重茂晋封为温王。
English: Zhongzong promoted his son, the king of Yixing County, Li Chongjun, to the title of Wei Wang, and the king of Beihai County, Li Chongmao, to the title of Wen Wang.

古文：丁丑，武三思、武攸暨罢。
现代文：二十七日，武三思、武攸暨被免职。
English: On the 27th, Wu Sansi and Wu Youcai were dismissed.

古文：三月甲申，诏文明后破家者昭洗之，还其子孙廕。
现代文：三月初五，下诏为睿宗文明年后家门遭毁败者昭雪洗冤，恢复其子孙因先代的功勋获得的封赏。
English: On the 5th day of the 3rd month of the year, the emperor issued an edict to expiate the wrongs of Zhao Xue, whose family was destroyed after the Ruizong civilization, and to restore the rewards that his children and grandchildren had received for their predecessors' merits.

古文：己丑，袁恕己守中书令。
现代文：初十，袁恕己代理中书令。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, Yuan Shuji acted as the agent of the Chinese letter order.

古文：四月辛亥，桓彦范为侍中，袁恕己为中书令。
现代文：四月初二，桓彦范任侍中，袁恕己任中书令。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the year, Kanehiko Fan was appointed as an attendant, and Yuan Shuji was appointed as a secretary.

古文：丁卯，高要尉魏元忠为卫尉卿、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十八日，高要尉魏元忠任卫尉卿、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 18th, Wei Yuanzhong, a high-ranking lieutenant, was appointed as a lieutenant of the guard, and Ping Zhang, a student of the same school, was promoted.

古文：辛未，敬晖为侍中。
现代文：二十二日，敬晖任侍中。
English: On the 22nd, Jingyao was appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：甲戌，魏元忠、崔玄，刑部尚书韦安石为吏部尚书，太子右庶子李怀远为左散骑常侍，凉州都督唐休璟为辅国大将军：同中书门下三品。乙亥，张柬之为中书令。
现代文：二十五日，刑部尚书韦安石任吏部尚书，太子右庶子李怀远任左散骑常侍，凉州都督唐休瞡任辅国大将军，并加同中书门下三品。二十六日，张柬之任中书令。
English: On the 25th, Wei Anshi of the Criminal Investigation Department was appointed as the official of the Criminal Investigation Department, Li Huaiyuan, the prince's son-in-law, was appointed as the left cavalryman, and Tang Xiuyuan, the governor of Liangzhou, was appointed as the assistant general of the country, and was awarded the three prizes of the Chinese Academy of Letters. On the 26th, Zhang Xia was appointed as the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：五月壬午，迁武氏神主于崇恩庙。
现代文：五月初四，将武氏的列祖神位从太庙迁入崇恩庙。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, the ancestral deities of the Takeshi clan were moved from the Imperial Temple to the Chong'en Temple.

古文：乙酉，立太庙、社稷于东都。
现代文：初七，中宗在东都建立太庙、土神谷神祭坛。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, the Chinese sect built the Great Temple and the Altar of the Valley of Earthly Gods in Dongdu.

古文：戊子，复周、隋二王后。
现代文：初十，对北周、隋朝皇室后代按诸侯国君后裔优待。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the descendants of the Northern Zhou and Sui dynasties were given preferential treatment according to the descendants of princes.

古文：壬辰，进封兄成纪郡王千里为成王。
现代文：十四日，中宗将其兄成纪郡王李千里晋封为成王。
English: On the 14th, Zhongzong promoted his brother, Chengji County King Li Qianli, to King.

古文：甲午，敬晖、桓彦范、张柬之、袁恕己、崔韦玄罢。
现代文：十六日，敬晖、桓彦范、张柬之、袁恕己、崔玄日韦被免职。
English: On the 16th, Jingyao, Kuan Yan Fan, Zhang Xizhi, Yuan Shouji, and Cui Xuan Rihwei were removed from their posts.

古文：韦安石兼检校中书令，魏元忠兼侍中。
现代文：韦安石兼任检校中书令，魏元忠兼侍中。
English: Wei Anshi concurrently served as a junior high school inspector, and Wei Yuanzhong concurrently served as a junior high school attendant.

古文：甲辰，唐休璟为尚书左仆射，特进豆卢钦望为尚书右仆射：同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十六日，唐休瞡任尚书左仆射，特进豆卢钦望任尚书右仆射，并加同中书门下三品。
English: On the 26th day of the month, Tang Xiuyong was appointed as Shangshu's left-hand servant, and the special envoy, Zhuo Luqin, was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand servant, and he was also awarded the Third Class of the Middle School.

古文：六月壬子，左骁卫大将军裴思谅为灵武道行军大总管，以备突厥。
现代文：六月初四，左骁卫大将军裴思谅任灵武道行军大总管，以防备突厥来犯。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, General Zuoying Pei Siping was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the martial arts march to prevent the Turks from coming.

古文：癸亥，韦安石为中书令，魏元忠为侍中，杨再思检校中书令，豆卢钦望平章军国重事。
现代文：十五日，韦安石任中书令，魏元忠任侍中，杨再思任检校中书令，豆卢钦望参预裁处军国要政。
English: On the 15th, Wei Anshi was appointed as the vice-president, Wei Yuanzhong was appointed as the vice-chancellor, Yang Zhaisi was appointed as the vice-president of the inspection of schools, and Zhu Luqin Wang was appointed as the vice-president of the pre-trial department of military affairs.

古文：七月辛巳，太子宾客韦巨源同中书门下三品。
现代文：七月初四，太子宾客韦巨源加同中书门下三品。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month, Wei Jiuyuan, the prince's guest, and Zhongshumen's next three dishes were served.

古文：甲辰，洛水溢。
现代文：二十七日，洛水泛滥。
English: On the 27th, Luo Shui began to flood.

古文：八月戊申，给复河南、洛阳二县一年。
现代文：八月初一，免除河南、洛阳二县的徭役一年。
English: On the first day of August, Henan and Luoyang counties were exempted from corvee service for one year.

古文：壬戌，追册妃赵氏为皇后。
现代文：十五日，追封妃子赵氏为皇后。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zhao, the prince's daughter, was enthroned as empress.

古文：乙亥，祔孝敬皇帝于东都太庙。
现代文：二十八日，将孝敬皇帝李弘附祭于东都太庙。
English: On the 28th, the Emperor Li Hongzhi Memorial Ceremony was held at the Dongdu Temple.

古文：皇后见于庙。
现代文：皇后韦氏参谒太庙。
English: The Empress Wei visits the Grand Temple.

古文：丁丑，幸洛城南门，观斗象。
现代文：三十日，中宗游览洛城南门，观看斗象。
English: On the 30th, the Chinese delegation visited the South Gate of Los Angeles to watch the elephant fight.

古文：九月壬午，祀天地于明堂。
现代文：九月初五，中宗在明堂祭祀天地。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, the Chinese sect held a ritual for heaven and earth at Myeongdong.

古文：大赦，赐文武官勋、爵，民为父后者古爵一级，酺三日。
现代文：施行大赦，赐给文武官员勋官、爵位，平民爵级在其父以下者赐给古爵位一级，赐许聚饮三日。
English: An amnesty was carried out, and civil and military officials were given orders and peerages, and those with a peerage below their father's were given the first level of ancient peerage, and were given permission to gather for three days.

古文：癸巳，韦巨源罢。
现代文：十六日，韦巨源被免职。
English: On the 16th, Wei Jiuyuan was removed from office.

古文：十月癸亥，幸龙门。
现代文：十月十七日，中宗游历龙门。
English: On October 17th, Zhong Zong toured Longmen.

古文：乙丑，猎于新安。
现代文：十九日，在新安打猎。
English: On the 19th, I went hunting in Xin'an.

古文：辛未，魏元忠为中书令，杨再思为侍中。
现代文：二十五日，魏元忠任中书令，杨再思任侍中。
English: On the 25th, Wei Yuanzhong was appointed as the middle secretary, and Yang Jiasi was appointed as the assistant secretary.

古文：十一月戊寅，上尊号曰应天皇帝，皇后曰顺天皇后。
现代文：十一月初三，中宗加尊号为应天皇帝，皇后韦氏为顺天皇后。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Emperor Yingtian and Empress Wei became Empress Shun.

古文：壬午，及皇后享于太庙，大赦，赐文武官阶、勋、爵，民酺三日。
现代文：初六，中宗与韦后到太庙祭祀，施行大赦，赐给文武官员官阶、勋官、爵位，赐许百姓聚饮三日。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the new year, Zhongzong and Wei Hou went to the Imperial Temple to offer sacrifices, implement an amnesty, grant civil and military officials official ranks, orders, and peerages, and allow the people to gather for three days.

古文：己丑，幸洛城南门，观泼寒胡戏。
现代文：十三日，中宗游览洛城南门，观看西域传入的乐舞 泼寒胡戏 。
English: On the 13th, the Chinese delegation toured the South Gate of Los Angeles to watch the music and dance "Cold Play" introduced from the West.

古文：壬寅，皇太后崩，废崇恩庙。
现代文：二十六日，皇太后武则天逝世，废除崇恩庙。
English: On the 26th, Empress Dowager Wu Zetian passed away, abolishing the Chong En Temple.

古文：二年正月戊戌，吏部尚书李峤同中书门下三品，中书侍郎于惟谦同中书门下平章事。
现代文：神龙二年正月二十三日，吏部尚书李峤加同中书门下三品，中书侍郎于惟谦加同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 23rd day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Dragon God, the head clerk, Shangshu Li Ying, was promoted to the third grade, and the secretary, Shangshu Yu Wei Qian, was promoted to the second grade.

古文：闰月丙午，公主开府置官属。
现代文：闰正月初一，公主开建府署、设置僚属。
English: On the first day of the leap month, the princess began to build a government office and set up subordinates.

古文：二月乙未，礼部尚书韦巨源为刑部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：二月二十一日，礼部尚书韦巨源任刑部尚书、同中书门下三品。
English: On February 21st, Wei Jiuyuan of the Ministry of Ceremonies was appointed to the Ministry of Justice, and Wei Jiuyuan of the Ministry of Education was appointed to the Ministry of Education.

古文：丙申，遣十道巡察使。
现代文：二十二日，派遣十道巡察使。
English: On the 22nd, a ten-district inspection envoy was dispatched.

古文：三月甲辰，韦安石罢。
现代文：三月初一，韦安石被免职。
English: On March 1, Wei Anshi was removed from his post.

古文：户部尚书苏环守侍中。
现代文：户部尚书苏瑰代理侍中。
English: The head of the household, Shosho Suzuki, is the acting chambermaid.

古文：戊申，唐休璟罢。
现代文：初五，唐休瞡被免职。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Tang Xiuyong was removed from office.

古文：庚戌，杀光禄卿、附马都尉王同皎。
现代文：初七，杀光禄卿、驸马都尉王同皎。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, Shiguangluqing and Baima Duifeng Wang Tonglu marched out.

古文：是月，置员外官。
现代文：本月，设置员外官。
English: This month, the post of foreign minister was created.

古文：四月己丑，李怀远罢。
现代文：四月十六日，李怀远被免职。
English: On April 16, Li Huaiyuan was removed from his post.

古文：己亥，雨毛于鄮县。
现代文：二十六日，在贸阝县降落毛发状物。
English: On the 26th, a hair-like object landed in Mogao County.

古文：辛丑，洛水溢。
现代文：二十八日，洛水泛滥。
English: On the 28th, the Luo River was flooded.

古文：五月庚申，葬则天大圣皇后。
现代文：五月十八日，安葬则天大圣皇后。
English: On May 18th, the funeral of Empress Zetian was held.

古文：六月戊寅，贬敬晖为崖州司马，桓彦范泷州司马，袁恕己窦州司马，崔玄韦白州司马，张柬之新州司马。
现代文：六月初六，将敬晖贬为崖州司马，桓彦范贬为泷州司马，袁恕己贬为窦州司马，崔玄日韦贬为白州司马，张柬之贬为新州司马。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：七月戊申，立卫王重俊为皇太子。
现代文：七月初七，立卫王李重俊为皇太子。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7

古文：丙寅，魏元忠为尚书右仆射、兼中书令，李峤守中书令。
现代文：二十五日，魏元忠任尚书右仆射、兼中书令，李峤代理中书令。
English: On the 25th, Wei Yuanzhong was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man, and Li Xi as his deputy.

古文：辛未，左散骑常侍致仕李怀远同中书门下三品。
现代文：三十日，已辞官归居的左散骑常侍李怀远加同中书门下三品。
English: On the 30th, Li Huaiyuan, a left-handed riding attendant who had resigned and returned to his home, was promoted to the third grade under Zhongshumen.

古文：流敬晖于嘉州，桓彦范于瀼州，袁恕己于环州，崔玄韦于古州，张柬之于泷州。
现代文：将敬晖流放至嘉州，桓彦范流放至氵襄州，袁恕己流放至环州，崔玄日韦流放至古州，张柬之流放至泷州。
English: Jing Rong was exiled to Jiazhou, Kuan Yan Fan was exiled to Quan Xiangzhou, Yuan Shuji was exiled to Huanzhou, Cui Xuanrivi was exiled to Guzhou, Zhang Xiangzhi was exiled to Ganzhou.

古文：八月丙子，贬祝钦明为申州刺史。
现代文：八月初五，将祝钦明贬为申州刺史。
English: On the fifth day of August, Zhu Qinming was relegated to the history of Shenzhou.

古文：九月戊午，李怀远薨。
现代文：九月十七日，李怀远去世。
English: On September 17, Li Huaiyuan passed away.

古文：十月癸巳，苏环为侍中。
现代文：十月二十三日，苏瑰任侍中。
English: On October 23rd, Su Gui was appointed as an attendant.

古文：戊戌，至自东都。
现代文：二十八日，中宗自东都返回京城。
English: On the 28th, Zhong Zong returned to Beijing from Dongdu.

古文：十一月乙巳，大赦，赐行从官勋一转。
现代文：十一月初五，施行大赦，赐予随行侍从官员勋官一级。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, an amnesty was implemented, and the accompanying attendant officials were awarded the first level of the order.

古文：十二月己卯，灵武军大总管沙吒忠义及突厥战于鸣沙，败绩。
现代文：十二月初九，灵武军大总管沙吒忠义在鸣沙与突厥军交战，大败。
English: On the 9th day of the 12th month of the lunar calendar, the general manager of the Lingwu army, Shaju Zhongyi, fought with the Turkish army in Mingsha and suffered a great defeat.

古文：丙戌，以突厥寇边、京师旱、河北水，减膳，罢土木工。
现代文：十六日，因突厥侵犯边境，京城干旱，河北水灾，中宗减少膳食，停止土木工程。
English: On the 16th, due to the Turkish invasion of the border, the drought in Beijing and the floods in Hebei, the Chinese government reduced meals and stopped civil engineering projects.

古文：苏环存抚河北。
现代文：苏瑰慰问河北。
English: Su Jiu sends condolences to Hebei Province.

古文：丙申，魏元忠为尚书左仆射。
现代文：二十六日，魏元忠任尚书左仆射。
English: On the 26th, Wei Yuanzhong was appointed as Shangshu's second-in-command.

古文：景龙元年正月丙辰，以旱虑囚。
现代文：景龙元年正月十七日，因旱灾讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 17th day of the first month of the first year of Jinglong, due to drought, the crimes of prisoners were investigated and recorded.

古文：二月丙戌，复武氏庙、陵，置令、丞、守户如昭陵。
现代文：二月十七日，恢复武氏的庙室、陵墓，其看管庙、陵的令、丞、守户的设置，与昭陵相同。
English: On February 17th, the temple room and mausoleum of the Takeshi clan were restored, and the temple and mausoleum were placed under the same guardianship as the Shoryo mausoleum.

古文：甲午，褒德庙、荣先陵置令、丞。
现代文：二十五日，褒德庙、荣先陵设置令、丞。
English: On the 25th, the order for the establishment of the Baode Temple and the Rongshan Mausoleum was issued.

古文：四月庚寅，赦雍州。
现代文：四月二十三日，免除雍州的租赋。
English: On April 23rd, Yangzhou was exempted from the rent.

古文：五月戊戌，右屯卫大将军张仁亶为朔方道行军大总管，以备突厥。
现代文：五月初一，右屯卫大将军张仁任朔方道行军大总管，以防备突厥来犯。
English: On the first day of May, Zhang Ren, the general of the Right Tunwei, was appointed the general manager of the march of the Shuo Fang Road to prevent the Turks from coming.

古文：丙午，假鸿胪卿臧思言使于突厥，死之。
现代文：初九，代鸿胪卿臧思言出使突厥，死难。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15

古文：以旱避正殿，减膳。
现代文：中宗因旱灾避离正殿，减少膳食。
English: Due to the drought, the Chinese community avoided the main hall and cut down on meals.

古文：六月丁卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of June, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：庚午，雨土于陕州。
现代文：初四，陕州天空降落土雨。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the sky over Shaanxi Province was filled with rain.

古文：戊子，吐蕃及姚州蛮寇边，姚隽道讨击使唐九徵败之。
现代文：二十二日，吐蕃与姚州蛮族侵犯边境，姚道讨击使唐九征将其击败。
English: On the 22nd, the Tu Wei and Yaozhou barbarians invaded the border, and Yao Dao fought with Tang Jiu Zheng and defeated him.

古文：七月辛丑，皇太子以羽林千骑兵诛武三思，不克，死之。
现代文：七月初六，皇太子李重俊率羽林千骑兵诛除武三思，未成，死去。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the year, the crown prince Li Chung-chun led the thousand horsemen of Hulin to remove the troops from the battlefield, but he did not succeed and died.

古文：癸卯，大赦。
现代文：初八，施行大赦。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：壬戌，李峤为中书令。
现代文：二十七日，李峤任中书令。
English: On the 27th, Li Yimin was appointed as the middle secretary.

古文：八月丙戌，上尊号曰应天神龙皇帝，皇后曰顺天翊圣皇后。
现代文：八月二十一日，中宗加尊号为应天神龙皇帝，韦后为顺天翊圣皇后。
English: On August 21st, Zhongzong added the honorifics of Emperor Ying of the Heavenly Dragon and Empress Wei of the Heavenly Dragon.

古文：魏元忠罢。
现代文：魏元忠被免职。
English: Wei Yuanzhong was dismissed.

古文：九月丁酉，吏部侍郎萧至忠为黄门侍郎，兵部尚书宗楚客，左卫将军兼太府卿纪处讷：同中书门下三品。
现代文：九月初二，吏部侍郎萧至忠任黄门侍郎，兵部尚书宗楚客、左卫将军兼太府卿纪处讷，并加同中书门下三品。
English: On the second day of September, Xiao Zhizhong, the attendant of the cadre department, was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and Shang Shuzong Chu, the general of the military department, the general of the left guard and the prefectural governor were disciplined, and the three prizes of the middle school were added.

古文：于惟谦罢。
现代文：于惟谦被免职。
English: Yu Weiqian was removed from his post.

古文：庚子，大赦，改元。
现代文：初五，施行大赦，改年号为景龙。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, an amnesty was implemented, and the year name was changed to Jinglong.

古文：赐文武官阶、勋、爵。
现代文：赐给文武官员官阶、勋官、爵位。
English: The civil and military officials were given official ranks, honorary titles, and peerages.

古文：辛亥，杨再思为中书令，韦巨源、纪处讷为侍中。
现代文：十六日，杨再思任中书令，韦巨源、纪处讷任侍中。
English: On the 16th, Yang Zaisi was appointed as the middle secretary, and Wei Jiuyuan and Guizhongna were appointed as the assistant secretary.

古文：苏环罢。
现代文：苏瑰被免职。
English: Su Gui was removed from office.

古文：十月戊寅，杀习艺馆内教苏安恒。
现代文：十月十四日，杀习艺馆内教苏安恒。
English: On October 14th, Su Anheng, a teacher at the Art Museum, was killed.

古文：壬午，有彗星出于西方。
现代文：十八日，在西方天区出现彗星。
English: On the 18th, a comet appeared in the western sky.

古文：十二月乙丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of December, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：丁丑，雨土。
现代文：十三日，天空降土如雨。
English: On the 13th, the sky rained down.

古文：二年二月癸未，有星陨于西南。
现代文：景龙二年二月二十日，有星陨落在西南方。
English: On February 20th, Jinglong 2, a meteorite fell in the southwest.

古文：庚寅，大赦，进五品以上母、妻封号二等，无妻者授其女，妇人八十以上版授郡、县、乡君。
现代文：二十七日，施行大赦，给五品以上封诰的母亲、妻子加封号一等，无妻者所加封号授予其女，八十岁以上的平民妇女授予郡君、县君、乡君荣衔。
English: On the 27th, an amnesty was implemented, awarding the first-class seal number to the mothers and wives of those who were awarded more than five prizes, the seal number of those without wives was awarded to their daughters, and the civilian women over the age of eighty were awarded the title of county official, county official, and township official.

古文：七月癸巳，朔方道行军大总管张仁亶同中书门下三品。
现代文：七月初三，朔方道行军大总管张仁加同中书门下三品。
English: On the third day of the seventh month, Zhang Renga, the general manager of the march of the Shuo Fang Road, and the three products under the door of the same school.

古文：丁酉，有星孛于胃、昴。
现代文：初七，在西方白虎七星的昴、胃二宿之间出现彗星。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, a comet appeared between the constellation of the White Tiger and the Seven Stars in the west.

古文：十一月庚申，西突厥寇边，御史中丞冯嘉宾使于突厥，死之。
现代文：十一月初二，西突厥侵犯边境，御史中丞冯嘉宾出使突厥，死去。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, the Western Turks invaded the border, and Grand Historian Feng Jiabin, an envoy of the Turks, died.

古文：己卯，大赦，赐酺三日。
现代文：二十一日，施行大赦，赐许聚饮三日。
English: On the twenty-first day, an amnesty was implemented, granting permission to gather and drink for three days.

古文：癸未，安西都护牛师奖及西突厥战于火烧城，死之。
现代文：二十五日，安西都护牛师奖在火烧城与西突厥交战，阵亡。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, An Xidu Jiu Shi Award fought with the Western Turks in the burning city and died in battle.

古文：是岁，皇后、妃、主、昭容卖官，行墨敕斜封。
现代文：本年，皇后、妃子、公主、昭容卖官，不合法定规程的手书墨敕斜封盛行。
English: This year, the empress, concubines, princesses, and Zhaorong vending officials, illegal handwritten ink stamp oblique seal prevailed.

古文：三年二月己丑，及皇后幸玄武门，观宫女拔河，为宫市以嬉。
现代文：景龙三年二月初二，中宗与皇后韦氏游览玄武门，观看宫女拔河，设宫市嬉戏。
English: On the second day of the second month of the second month of the third year of Jinglong, Zhongzong and Empress Wei visited the Xuanwu Gate, watched the palace maiden tug-of-war, and set up the palace city to play.

古文：壬寅，韦巨源为尚书左仆射，杨再思为右仆射：同中书门下三品。
现代文：十五日，韦巨源任尚书左仆射，杨再思任右仆射，并加同中书门下三品。
English: On the fifteenth day, Wei Jiuyuan appointed Shang Shuxu as the left footman, Yang Zaixi as the right footman, and added the three prizes under the middle book.

古文：壬子，及皇后幸太常寺。
现代文：二十五日，中宗与韦后游览太常寺。
English: On the 25th, Zhong Zong and Wei Hou toured the Taiji Temple.

古文：三月戊午，宗楚客为中书令，萧至忠守侍中，太府卿韦嗣立守兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：三月初一，宗楚客任中书令，萧至忠代理侍中，太府卿韦嗣立暂行代理兵部尚书、加同中书门下三品。
English: On the first day of March, Zong Chu was appointed as the middle secretary, Xiao Zhizhong was appointed as the acting chamberlain, and Taifuqing Wei was appointed as the interim acting secretary of the military department of Shangshu, plus the three products under the middle secretary.

古文：中书侍郎兼检校吏部侍郎崔湜，守兵部侍郎赵彦昭为中书侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：中书侍郎兼检校吏部侍郎崔，代理兵部侍郎赵彦昭任中书侍郎，并加同中书门下平章事。
English: Choi, the secretary of the middle school and the secretary of the inspection department, and Zhao Yan Zhao, the acting secretary of the military department, were appointed as the secretary of the middle school, and together with the secretary of the middle school, Shitahira Shoji.

古文：戊寅，礼部尚书韦温为太子少保、同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十一日，礼部尚书韦温任太子少保、同中书门下三品。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Wei Wen Shangshu of the Ministry of Ceremonies was appointed as the Prince's Junior Bodyguard, and he was promoted to Third Rank in the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：太常少卿郑愔守吏部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：太常卿郑忄音代理吏部侍郎、加同中书门下平章事。
English: Zheng Jiong, the acting secretary of Taizhongqing, was appointed as the attendant of the cadre department, and Jia Tong, the disciple of Zhongshu, was appointed as the subordinate of He Ping.

古文：五月丙戌，贬崔湜为瀼州刺史，郑愔江州司马。
现代文：五月三十一日，将崔贬为襄州刺史，郑忄音贬为江州司马。
English: On May 31st, Cui was demoted to Xiangzhou Sima, and Zheng Yuyin was demoted to Jiangzhou Sima.

古文：六月癸巳，太白昼见。
现代文：六月初八，白天出现太白星。
English: On the eighth day of the sixth month, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：庚子，以旱避正殿，减膳，撤乐。
现代文：十五日，中宗因旱灾避离正殿，减少膳食，暂停演奏音乐。
English: On the 15th, because of the drought, Chuseong evacuated the main hall, reduced meals, and suspended the performance of music.

古文：诏括天下图籍。
现代文：下诏搜求全国的地图、户籍。
English: Search the map and household registration of the whole country below.

古文：壬寅，虑囚。
现代文：十七日，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 17th, the investigation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：癸卯，杨再思薨。
现代文：十八日，杨再思去世。
English: On the 18th, Yang Zhaisi passed away.

古文：七月丙辰，西突厥娑葛降。
现代文：七月初二，西突厥的娑葛投降。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month, Western Turkistan's Zhangge surrendered.

古文：辛酉，许妇人非缘夫、子封者廕其子孙。
现代文：初七，准许妇女不是因为丈夫、儿子的关系而受封者，其所受封赏可传及子孙。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, it is allowed for a woman to be awarded a title not because of her husband or son, and the award can be passed down to her descendants.

古文：癸亥，虑囚。
现代文：初九，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the investigation records the prisoner's charges.

古文：庚辰，澧水溢。
现代文：二十六日，澧水泛滥。
English: On the 26th, floodwaters began to rise.

古文：八月乙酉，李峤同中书门下三品，特进韦安石为侍中。
现代文：八月初一，李峤加同中书门下三品，特进韦安石任侍中。
English: On the first day of August, Li Yijia was promoted to the third grade of the middle school, and Wei Anshi was promoted to the middle school.

古文：壬辰，有星孛于紫宫。
现代文：初八，在紫宫诸星间出现彗星。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, a comet appeared between the stars of the Purple Palace.

古文：九月戊辰，吏部尚书苏环为尚书左仆射、同中书门下三品。
现代文：九月十五日，吏部尚书苏瑰任尚书左仆射、同中书门下三品。
English: On September 15th, Shangshu Su, the head of the Personnel Department, appointed Shangshu Zuoying as the left-hand man, and the three subordinates of Shangshu Zhongmen were promoted.

古文：十一月乙丑，有事于南郊，以皇后为亚献，大赦，赐文武官阶、爵，入品者减考，免关内今岁赋，赐酺三日。
现代文：十一月十三日，中宗在京城南郊祭天，以韦皇后为第二次奉献祀礼者，施行大赦，赐予文武官员官阶、爵位，已入九品的官员减免考核，免除关内本年赋税，赐许聚饮三日。
English: On November 13th, in the southern suburb of Beijing, the Zhongzong held the Tian Festival, with the Empress Wei as the second dedicator of the ritual. An amnesty was carried out, granting civil and military officials official ranks and titles, officials who had entered the nine grades were exempted from examination, the Guanai was exempted from paying taxes this year, and permission was granted to gather and drink for three days.

古文：甲戌，豆卢钦望薨。
现代文：二十二日，豆卢钦望去世。
English: On the 22nd, Doulu Qinwang passed away.

古文：十二月壬辰，前宋国公致仕唐休璟为太子少师、同中书门下三品。
现代文：十二月初十，已辞官归居的前宋国公唐休瞡任太子少师、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 10th day of the 12th month of the year, the former Song governor Tang Xuyun, who had resigned and returned to his residence, was appointed as the young teacher of the prince and the third grade of the middle school.

古文：甲午，如新丰温汤。
现代文：十二日，中宗去新丰县温泉。
English: On the 12th, Zhongzong went to the hot springs in Xinfeng County.

古文：甲辰，赦新丰，给复一年，赐从官勋一转。
现代文：二十二日，免除新丰县赋税、徭役一年，赐给侍从官员勋官一级。
English: On the 22nd, Xinfeng County was exempted from tax and corvee service for one year, and the attendant officials were given the first-class honors.

古文：乙巳，至自新丰。
现代文：二十三日，中宗自新丰返回京城。
English: On the 23rd, Zhong Zong returned to Beijing from Xinfeng.

古文：四年正月丙寅，及皇后微行以观灯，遂幸萧至忠第。
现代文：景龙四年正月十四日，中宗与韦皇后平民装束出宫观灯，顺道至萧至忠府宅。
English: On the 14th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of Jinglong, Zhongzong and Empress Wei's commoners dressed up to go to the palace to see the lanterns, and went all the way to Xiao and Zhongfu's house.

古文：丁卯，微行以观灯，幸韦安石、长宁公主第。
现代文：十五日，中宗平民装束出宫观灯，去到韦安石、长宁公主府宅。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the middle-class commoners dressed up and went to the palace to watch the lanterns. They went to the Wei'an Stone and the Changning Princess's residence.

古文：己卯，如始平。
现代文：二十七日，去始平。
English: On the 27th, I went to Shihping.

古文：二月壬午，赦咸阳、始平，给复一年。
现代文：二月初一，减免咸阳、始平赋税，免除徭役一年。
English: On the first day of February, Xianyang and Xiping were exempted from taxes, and they were exempted from labor service for one year.

古文：癸未，至自始平。
现代文：初二，自始平返回京城。
English: On the second day of the school year, the group returned to the capital.

古文：庚戌，及后、妃、公主观三品以上拔河。
现代文：二十九日，中宗与皇后、妃子、公主观看三品以上官员拔河。
English: On the 29th, Zhongzong and the empress, concubines, and princesses watched the tug-of-war between three or more officials.

古文：三月，以河源九曲予吐蕃。
现代文：三月，将河源、九曲划给吐蕃。
English: In March, Heyuan and Jiuqu were assigned to Tubo.

古文：庚申，雨木冰，井溢。
现代文：初九，雨水着树成冰，井水漫溢。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, rainwater froze trees, and wells overflowed.

古文：五月辛酉，封嗣虢王邕为汴王。
现代文：五月十一日，封嗣虢王李邕为汴王。
English: On May 11th, the heir to the throne, King Li Xi, became the king.

古文：丁卯，杀许州司兵参军燕钦融。
现代文：十七日，杀许州司兵参军燕钦融。
English: On the 17th, Yan Qin Rong joined the army after killing the Xuzhou sergeant.

古文：丁丑，剡县地震。
现代文：二十七日，剡县地震。
English: On the 27th, there was an earthquake in Jixian.

古文：六月，皇后及安乐公主、散骑常侍马秦客反。
现代文：六月，皇后韦氏与安乐公主、散骑常侍马秦宫反叛。
English: In June, Empress Wei rebelled against Princess Anle and the equestrian Ma Qin.

古文：壬午，皇帝崩，年五十五，谥曰孝和皇帝天宝十三年，加谥大和大圣大昭孝皇帝。
现代文：初二，中宗逝世，终年五十五岁，谥号孝和皇帝。天宝十三载，加谥号为大和大圣大昭孝皇帝。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, Zhongzong passed away, he was 55 years old, and his posthumous name was Xiaohe Emperor. Tianbao was 13 years old, and his posthumous name was Da and Dasheng Dazhao Xiao Emperor.

古文：赞曰：昔都孔子作《春秋》而乱臣贼子惧，其于杀君篡国之主，皆不黜绝之，岂以其盗而有之者，莫大之罪也，不没其实，所以著其大恶而不隐欤？
现代文：评说：古时孔子著《春秋》而使乱臣贼子恐惧，他对弑君篡国的魁首，概不摈弃，这是否由于篡位夺国，为最大罪恶，不掩盖史实，以使其大恶昭著而不被隐瞒的缘故呢？
English: Comment: In ancient times, Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn" to instill fear in unruly vassals and thieves. He did not abandon the usurper, the leader of the usurping country. Is this because usurping the throne and seizing the country is the greatest evil and does not cover up historical facts, so that its great evil is known and not concealed?

古文：自司马迁、班固皆作《高后纪》，吕氏虽非篡汉，而盗执其国政，遂不敢没其实，岂其得圣人之意欤？
现代文：司马迁、班固都写了《高后纪》，吕后虽非篡汉改朝，但她窃掌国柄，因而不敢掩盖这一史实，这是否因为他们懂得圣人的深意呢？
English: Sima Qian and Banggu both wrote "Gao Gui" (History of the Later Han Dynasty). Although Luguo did not change the Han Dynasty, she took control of the country, so she did not dare to cover up this historical fact. Is this because they understand the deep meaning of the saint?

古文：抑亦偶合于《春秋》之法也。
现代文：或者只是偶合于《春秋》的笔法？
English: Or is it just a coincidence of the brushstrokes in Spring and Autumn?

古文：唐之旧史因之，列武后于本纪，盖其所从来远矣。
现代文：旧唐史沿袭这一做法，将武后列于帝王本纪，这是由来已久的了。
English: The old Tang history followed this practice, listing Wu Hou in the Emperor's Biography, which has a long history.

古文：夫吉凶之于人，犹影响也，而为善者得吉常多，其不幸而罹于凶者有矣；为恶者未始不及于凶，其幸而免者亦时有焉。
现代文：吉凶祸福对于人，就像影之随形、回响应声，因而行善事者常多吉利，但不幸而遭凶祸的人也有不少；作恶者未尝不遭凶祸，而幸免于祸者也不时有之。
English: For human beings, good luck, bad luck, and good fortune are like shadows that follow each other and echo each other. As a result, those who do good deeds are often lucky, but there are also many people who are unlucky and suffer from misfortune; evil-doers do not experience misfortune, and those who are spared from misfortune also have it from time to time.

古文：而小人之虑，遂以为天道难知，为善未必福，而为恶未必祸也。
现代文：因而无德小人想事，便以为天道难知，行善者未必得福，而作恶也未必遭祸。
English: For this reason, the immoral think that the way of heaven is unknowable, that those who do good will not necessarily be blessed, and that those who do evil will not necessarily suffer misfortune.

古文：武后之恶，不及于大戮，所谓幸免者也。
现代文：武后的作恶，未遭大刑诛戮，即所谓 幸免者 。
English: The wicked acts of Empress Wu were not punished severely, that is, the so-called survivors.

古文：至中宗韦氏，则祸不旋踵矣。
现代文：到了中宗、韦氏，就凶祸转眼临头了。
English: When it came to the Zhongzong and Wei clans, disaster was just around the corner.

古文：然其亲遭母后之难，而躬自蹈之，所谓下愚之不移者欤！
现代文：然而他亲历母后的劫难，却又自蹈旧辙，真是所谓愚极不改者啊！
English: However, he personally experienced the calamity after his mother, but he went back to his old ways. What a so-called fool!

