古文：五礼之别，三曰宾，盖朝宗、觐遇、会同之制是也。
现代文：五礼的分别，第三种指的是宾客方面的礼，包括朝见帝王、诸侯聚会。从周朝以后，遣方面的礼制越来越繁复。
English: As opposed to the five kinds of etiquette, the third kind refers to the etiquette of guests, including the imperial court and the gatherings of lords. Since the Zhou Dynasty, the etiquette of sending guests has become more and more complicated.

古文：自周以下，其礼弥繁。
现代文：自从秦朝焚书坑儒之后，先代的典章残缺。
English: Since the Qin Dynasty burned the books of Confucius, the previous generation's regulations have been incomplete.

古文：自秦灭学之后，旧典残缺。汉兴，始使叔孙通制礼，参用先代之仪，然亦往往改异焉。汉仪有正会礼，正旦，夜漏未尽七刻，钟鸣受贺，公侯以下执贽夹庭，二千石以上升殿称万岁，然后作乐宴飨。
现代文：汉朝兴起，开始派叔孙通制定礼，参考先代的礼仪，然而也往往有所改变。漠代礼仪中有正会礼，正月初一，夜间的时刻不到七刻，钟声响起，接受贺礼，公侯以下拿着礼物立于朝廷两侧，俸禄在二千石以上的官员上殿呼万岁，然后奏乐宴饮。
English: With the rise of the Han Dynasty, great-uncles and great-grandchildren began to be sent to formulate the etiquette, referring to the etiquette of the previous generation, but it also often changed. In the etiquette of the desert, there is a formal ceremony. On the first day of the first month, the time is less than seven o'clock in the evening, the bell rings, the greeting is accepted, the prince and his subordinates stand on both sides of the imperial court holding gifts, and the officials with a salary of more than two thousand koku go to the hall and shout long life, and then play music and have a banquet.

古文：魏武帝都鄴，正会文昌殿，用汉仪，又设百华灯。
现代文：魏武帝在邺定都，在文昌殿行正会礼，用汉代的礼仪，又设置百盏华灯。
English: Emperor Wu of Wei held the formal court ceremony in Wenchang Hall, the capital of Luoding, using Han Dynasty etiquette and setting up a hundred lanterns.

古文：晋氏受命，武帝更定元会仪，《咸宁注》是也。
现代文：晋朝接受天命，武帝修订正月初一朝会的礼仪，《咸宁注》说的就是这件事。
English: After the Jin Dynasty accepted the Mandate of Heaven, Emperor Wu revised the etiquette of the morning assembly on the first day of the first month. This is what "Xianning Note" said.

古文：傅玄《元会赋》曰： 考夏后之遗训，综殷周之典艺，采秦汉之旧仪，定元正之嘉会。 
现代文：傅玄的《元会励说： 考查夏后的遣训，综合殷商、周朝的典章，采用秦、汉的旧有仪式，制定正月初一朝会的礼仪。 
English: Fu Xuan's "Guanhui Li said: Examine the summer after the summer training, integrate the Yin Shang and Zhou Dynasty ceremonies, adopt the old rituals of Qin and Han, and formulate the etiquette of the morning meeting on the first day of the first month.

古文：此则兼采众代可知矣。
现代文：其兼收并蓄由此可知。
English: Its eclecticism can be seen from this.

古文：《咸宁注》： 先正一日，有司各宿设。
现代文：《咸宁注》：在正月初一前一天，有关官吏各守其职。
English: "Xianning Note": On the day before the first day of the first month, the relevant officials all kept their duties.

古文：夜漏未尽十刻，群臣集到，庭燎起火。
现代文：夜间时刻不到十刻，群臣都集合到来，庭院中的火把被点燃。
English: Before ten o'clock at night, the courtiers all gathered and arrived, and the torches in the courtyard were lit.

古文：上贺，起，谒报，又贺皇后。
现代文：上朝祝贺，起立，禀报，又向皇后祝贺。
English: He congratulated the previous emperor, stood up, read the newspaper, and congratulated the empress.

古文：还，从云龙东中华门入，诣东阁下，便坐。
现代文：退下来，从云龙束中华门进去，到柬小门前的厢房就坐。
English: Step back, enter from Yunlongzhuanzhongmen, and sit in the compartment in front of the small door.

古文：漏未尽七刻，百官及受贽郎官以下至计吏皆入立其次，其陛卫者如临轩仪。
现代文：夜间时刻不到七刻，百官及接收礼物的郎官以下包括掌管文书的官吏都按位次站好，台阶上的卫士如同皇帝到殿前的仪式。
English: Less than seven o'clock in the evening, all the officials, including those in charge of documents, including the officials who receive gifts, stand in order. The guards on the steps are like the ceremony before the emperor arrives at the hall.

古文：漏未尽五刻，谒者、仆射、大鸿胪各各奏群臣就位定。
现代文：计时器不到五刻，谒者、仆射、大鸿胪等官员分别奏报群臣已各就各位。
English: The timer is less than five o'clock, and officials such as the eavesdropper, the gunner, and the great hunter report separately that the ministers have all taken their seats.

古文：漏尽，侍中奏外办。
现代文：计时器漏光了，侍中奏报外面已准备妥当。
English: The timer has run out, and the outside of the chambermaid's report is ready.

古文：皇帝出，钟鼓作，百官皆拜伏。
现代文：皇帝出来，钟鼓奏乐，各级官吏都跪拜。
English: The emperor came out, the bells and drums played, and officials at all levels bowed down.

古文：太常导皇帝升御坐，钟鼓止，百官起。
现代文：太常引导皇帝登上御座，钟鼓停止，各级官吏起立。
English: Too often, the emperor ascends to the throne, the bells and drums stop, and officials at all levels stand up.

古文：大鸿胪跪奏 请朝贺 。
现代文：大鸿胪跪着奏报 请朝贺 。
English: Dai Hongtao kneels to deliver the report. Please give him morning greetings.

古文：掌礼郎赞 皇帝延王登 。
现代文：掌礼郎唱赞 皇帝请王登殿 。
English: The emperor invited Wang to come to the palace.

古文：大鸿胪跪赞 籓王臣某等奉白璧各一，再拜贺 。
现代文：大鸿胪跪着唱赞 藩王臣下某某奉上白璧各一件，两拜恭贺 。
English: Dahongtao knelt down and sang praises. The vassal of the lord of the domain, So-so, presented the white gems one by one, and congratulated him twice.

古文：太常报 王悉登 。
现代文：太常通报 王都上殿 。
English: It is often said that kings come to the palace.

古文：谒者引上殿，当御坐。
现代文：谒者引导他们上殿对着皇帝坐下。
English: The eunuch led them into the hall and sat down opposite the emperor.

古文：皇帝兴，王再拜。
现代文：皇帝站立，王拜两拜。
English: The emperor stood up, and the king bowed twice.

古文：皇帝坐，复再拜。
现代文：皇帝坐下，又一次拜两拜。
English: The emperor sat down and bowed twice again.

古文：跪置璧御坐前，复再拜。
现代文：跪着把璧放在御座前，又一次拜两拜。
English: Kneel and place the gem in front of the throne, bow twice again.

古文：成礼讫，谒者引下殿，还故位。
现代文：礼仪完毕，谒者引导他们下殿，回到原座位。
English: When the ceremony is complete, the mourners are led down the hall and return to their original seats.

古文：掌礼郎赞 皇帝延太尉等 。
现代文：掌礼郎唱赞 皇帝请太尉等人 。
English: The emperor asked the eunuch and others to sing praises.

古文：于是公、特进、匈奴南单于、金紫将军当大鸿胪西，中二千石、二千石、千石、六百石当大行令西，皆北面伏。
现代文：于是公、特进、匈奴南单于、金紫将军对着大鸿胪的西面，中二千石、二千石、千石、六百石的官员对着大行令的西面，都面向北跪倒。
English: As a result, the public officials, the special envoys, the Xiongnu Nandan, and the General Jin Zi all knelt down facing north, facing the west side of the Great Horned Owl, while the middle-ranking officials of 2,000 koku, 2,000 koku, 1,000 koku, and 600 koku faced the west side of the Great Procession.

古文：鸿胪跪赞 太尉、中二千石等奉璧、皮、帛、羔、雁、雉，再拜贺 。
现代文：鸿胪唱赞 太尉、中二千石等人奉上璧玉、皮毛、丝帛、羔羊、大雁、野鶸，拜两拜敬贺 。
English: The captain, middle school students, and others of 2,000 koku offered gems, furs, silk cocoons, lambs, geese, and wild pheasants, and bowed twice in congratulation.

古文：太常赞 皇帝延公等登 。
现代文：太常唱赞 皇帝请公等人上殿 。
English: Too often singing praises, the emperor invited nobles and others to come to the palace.

古文：掌礼引公至金紫将军上殿。
现代文：掌礼郎引导公至金紫将军上殿。
English: The master of ceremonies led the prince to General Jin Zi's palace.

古文：皇帝兴，皆再拜。
现代文：皇帝站立，群臣都跪拜两次。
English: The emperor stood up, and all the courtiers bowed twice.

古文：皇帝坐，又再拜。
现代文：皇帝坐下，众臣又拜两次。
English: The emperor sat down, and the courtiers bowed twice more.

古文：跪置璧皮帛御坐前，复再拜。
现代文：跪着把璧玉皮毛丝帛放在皇帝的座前，又一次拜两拜。
English: Kneeling, he placed the jade-leather silk cocoon in front of the emperor's throne, and again bowed twice.

古文：成礼讫，谒者引下殿，还故位。
现代文：礼仪完成，谒者引导下殿，回到原座位。
English: When the ceremony is complete, the mourners are led down the hall and return to their original seats.

古文：公置璧成礼时，大行令并赞殿下，中二千石以下同。
现代文：公奉上璧玉完成礼仪时，大行令同时唱赞殿下，中二千石以下礼仪相同。
English: When publicly presenting the crown jewels to complete the etiquette, it is customary to sing praises to His Royal Highness at the same time. The etiquette is the same for those with less than 2,000 koku.

古文：成礼讫，以贽授贽郎，郎以璧帛付谒者，羔、雁、雉付太官。
现代文：完成礼仪后，把礼物送给贽郎，贽郎把璧玉丝帛交给谒者，羔羊、大雁、野鶸交给太官。
English: After completing the etiquette, the gift is given to the eunuch. The eunuch gives the jade silk brocade to the eunuch, and the lamb, goose and wild goose to the eunuch.

古文：太乐令跪请奏雅乐，乐以次作。
现代文：太乐令跪着请求奏雅乐，音乐按顺序演奏。
English: Tai Lok Ling kneeled down and asked for the classical music to be played, and the music was played in order.

古文：乘黄令乃出车，皇帝罢入，百官皆坐。
现代文：乘黄令于是派出车辆，皇帝疲困上车，群臣都坐着。
English: Huang Rong then dispatched a vehicle, the emperor got on the car exhausted, and the ministers were all seated.

古文：昼漏上水六刻，诸蛮夷胡客以次入，皆再拜讫，坐。
现代文：白天时间六刻，各少数民族宾客按顺序进入，都拜两遍后，坐下。
English: At six o'clock in the afternoon, all the ethnic minority guests entered in order, bowed twice, and sat down.

古文：御入后三刻又出，钟鼓作。
现代文：车驾进去后三刻钟又出来，钟鼓奏乐。
English: The car drove in and came out again three-quarters of an hour later, accompanied by bells and drums.

古文：谒者、仆射跪奏 请群臣上 。
现代文：谒者、仆射跪着上奏 请群臣上殿 。
English: Drummers and minstrels kneel to play, and invite the courtiers to come to the hall.

古文：谒者引王公二千石上殿，千石、六百石停本位。
现代文：谒者引导王公二千石上殿，千石、六百石停留在原位。
English: The eunuch led the prince of two thousand stones to the palace, and the thousand stones and six hundred stones remained in the same place.

古文：谒者引王诣樽酌寿酒，跪授侍中，侍中跪置御坐前。王还。
现代文：谒者引导王到酒器前斟上寿酒，跪着交给侍中。侍中跪着把酒放在皇帝座前，王退下。
English: The eunuch leads the king to the wine container, pours the anniversary wine, kneels and hands it to the attendant. The attendant kneels and places the wine in front of the emperor's throne, and the king steps down.

古文：王自酌置位前。谒者跪奏 籓王臣某等奉觞，再拜上千万岁寿 。
现代文：王自己斟酒放在位前，谒者跪着奏报 藩王臣下某人举杯，祝皇帝千万岁 。
English: The king himself poured the wine and placed it in front of the throne, and the eunuch knelt down to read the report. Someone from the king's retainers raised a glass to wish the emperor ten thousand years of age.

古文：四厢乐作，百官再拜。
现代文：四方奏起音乐，群臣又拜两拜。
English: The quartet played music, and the ministers bowed twice.

古文：已饮，又再拜。
现代文：喝酒后，又拜两拜。
English: After drinking, I took two bites.

古文：谒者引王等还本位。
现代文：谒者引导王等回到原位。
English: The eunuch guides the king and others back to their original positions.

古文：陛下者传就席，群臣皆跪诺。
现代文：皇宫台阶下的人宣告入席，群臣都跪着答应。
English: The people at the foot of the steps of the Imperial Palace were announced to be seated, and the ministers all knelt down to accept.

古文：侍中、中书令、尚书令各于殿上上寿酒。
现代文：侍中、中书令、尚书令分别在殿上敬奉寿酒。
English: Samurai, Chushiryo, and Shoshiryo respectively served Kotobuki sake in the hall.

古文：登歌乐升，太官又行御酒。
现代文：奏起典礼的音乐，太官令又给群臣御酒。
English: The music of the ceremony was played, and the Taikan ordered the ministers to drink sake.

古文：御酒升阶，太官令跪授侍郎，侍郎跪进御坐前。
现代文：御酒拿到台阶上，太官令跪着给侍郎，侍郎跪着奉送到御座前。
English: After receiving the sake on the steps, the grand steward kneeled and gave it to the chamberlain, who kneeled and brought it to the throne.

古文：乃行百官酒。
现代文：于是向百官布酒。
English: As a result, he sold liquor to hundreds of officials.

古文：太乐令跪奏 奏登歌 ，三终乃降。
现代文：太乐令跪着奏 奏登歌 ，奏完三遍才退下。
English: Tai Le ordered everyone to kneel and play the ascending song, and only after playing it three times did they retreat.

古文：太官令跪请具御饭，到阶，群臣皆起。
现代文：太官令跪着请求准备御饭，饭送到阶前，群臣都起立。
English: The eunuch ordered kneeling to request the preparation of the meal, the meal was brought to the front steps, and the ministers all stood up.

古文：太官令持羹跪授司徒，持饭跪授大司农，尚食持案并授持节，持节跪进御坐前。
现代文：太官令拿着勺子跪着递给司徒，拿着饭跪着递给大司农，尚食拿着案几传给持节，持节跪着摆放在御座前。
English: The eunuch kneeled with a spoon and handed it to the chief priest, kneeled with a meal and handed it to the chief priest, and kneeled with a meal and handed it to the chief priest, and kneeled with a meal and handed it to the chief priest and placed it in front of the throne.

古文：群臣就席。
现代文：群臣入席。
English: The courtiers take their seats.

古文：太乐令跪奏 奏食举乐 。
现代文：太乐令跪着上奏 奏食举乐 。
English: Tailei ordered kneeling to play the first part of the music.

古文：太官行百官饭案遍。
现代文：太宫为百官饭案遍布饭食。
English: The Imperial Palace is full of meals for hundreds of officials.

古文：食毕，太乐令跪奏 请进乐 。
现代文：进食已毕，太乐令跪奏 请进乐 。
English: Now that the meal is over, let the music begin.

古文：乐以次作。
现代文：乐曲按顺序演奏。
English: The pieces are played in order.

古文：鼓吹令又前跪奏 请以次进众妓 。
现代文：鼓吹令又上前跪奏 请按顺序引荐众人的才能 。
English: The trumpet call goes out again, and the kneeling music begins. Please introduce the talents of everyone in order.

古文：乃召诸郡计吏前，受敕戒于阶下。
现代文：于是把各郡掌管簿籍的官吏召到前面，在阶下接受皇帝的命令。
English: So he summoned the officials in charge of bookkeeping in each county to the front to receive the emperor's order.

古文：宴乐毕，谒者一人跪奏 请罢退 。
现代文：宴饮乐曲完毕，一位谒者跪着奏 请退朝休息 。
English: After the banquet music is over, a cripple kneels to play Please retire and rest.

古文：钟鼓作，群臣北面再拜，出。 
现代文：钟鼓奏响，群臣面向北两次跪拜，出宫。
English: The bell and drum sounded, and the courtiers faced north, bowed twice, and left the palace.

古文：然则，夜漏未尽七刻谓之晨贺。昼漏上三刻更出，百官奉寿酒，谓之昼会。
现代文：那么夜间计时器不到七刻叫作晨贺，白天计时器到三刻时出来，百官敬奉寿酒，叫作昼会。
English: So the night timer less than seven o'clock is called the morning greeting, the daytime timer comes out at three o'clock, and the dignitaries honor the birthday wine, called the afternoon meeting.

古文：别置女乐三十人于黄帐外，奏房中之歌。
现代文：另外安排女乐师三十人在黄帐外，演奏房中乐。
English: In addition, thirty female musicians were arranged to perform outside the yellow curtain, playing music in the middle of the room.

古文：江左多虞，不复晨贺。
现代文：长江以束不安定，不再有晨贺。
English: The Yangtze River is unstable in bundles, and there is no more morning tide.

古文：夜漏未尽十刻，开宣阳门，至平旦始开殿门，昼漏上五刻，皇帝乃出受贺。
现代文：夜间计时器不到十刻，开宣阳门，到清晨才开殿门，白天计时器到五刻，皇帝才出来接受祝贺。
English: The night timer is less than ten o'clock, open the Xuanyang Gate, open the palace door until the early morning, the daytime timer is five o'clock, and the emperor comes out to receive congratulations.

古文：皇太子出会者，则在三恪下王公上。
现代文：皇太子出来会见的人，包括前三个王朝的子孙被封为王侯的人和王公以上的贵族。
English: The people the crown prince came out to meet included descendants of the first three dynasties who were crowned as princes and nobles above the rank of dukes.

古文：正旦元会，设白兽樽于殿庭，樽盖上施白兽，若有能献直言者，则发此樽饮酒。
现代文：元旦朝会，在宫殿大堂上设置叫白虎樽的酒器，盖上绘有白虎，如果有人能直言进谏，就打开这樽酒喝。
English: On New Year's Day, the imperial court will set up a wine container called the White Tiger Barrel on the palace lobby, with a white tiger painted on the lid. If someone can speak frankly, open this barrel of wine and drink it.

古文：案礼，白兽樽乃杜举之遗式也，为白兽盖，是后代所为，示忌惮也。
现代文：按照礼，白虎樽是宴享礼毕干杯时留下来的仪式，做成白虎盖，是后代的事，表示无所畏惧。
English: According to the etiquette, the white tiger cask is a ritual left over from a banquet after a toast. It is made into a white tiger lid, which is a matter for future generations and expresses fearlessness.

古文：魏制，籓王不得朝觐。
现代文：魏朝的制度，附属国的王不能朝见皇帝。
English: Under the system of the Wei Dynasty, the king of a dependent country could not meet the emperor.

古文：魏明帝时，有朝者皆由特恩，不得以为常。
现代文：魏明帝时，有来朝见的都是经过特别的恩准，不能当做常例。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei Ming, anyone who came to the imperial court had to obtain special permission, and it could not be regarded as a regular practice.

古文：及泰始中，有司奏： 诸侯之国，其王公以下入朝者，四方各为二番，三岁而周，周则更始。
现代文：到了泰始年间，有关官吏奏报： 诸侯各国，王公以下入宫朝见的人，东西南北四方各轮两次，三年后轮一周，轮一周后又重新开始。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the relevant officials reported: the princes of various countries, the princes and those who entered the palace to meet the emperor, the east, west, north and south quadrants twice each round, three years later the round was one week, and the round was restarted after one week.

古文：若临时有故，却在明年。
现代文：如果临时有事，就延续在第二年朝见。
English: If there is a temporary problem, it will be continued in the morning of the second year.

古文：明年来朝之后，更满三岁乃复朝，不得违本数。
现代文：第二年朝见后，要满三年才能再次来朝，不能违反朝见次数的规定。
English: After the morning meeting in the second year, it will take three years to come to the morning meeting again, and you cannot violate the rules on the number of morning meetings.

古文：朝礼皆亲执璧，如旧朝之制。
现代文：朝见的礼仪都是亲自拿着璧，如同旧时朝见的制度。
English: The etiquette of the morning watch is to personally hold the bong, just like the old morning watch system.

古文：不朝之岁，各遣卿奉聘。 
现代文：不朝见的年份，各自派遣卿来访问致意。 
English: In years when they do not see each other, they each send their nobles to visit and pay their respects.

古文：奏可。
现代文：皇帝准奏。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：江左王侯不之国，其有受任居外，则同方伯刺史二千石之礼，亦无朝聘之制，故此礼遂废。
现代文：长江以东王侯不去自己的国，他们中有人接受任命住在外地，就如同一方诸侯之长或刺史二千石的礼制，也没有朝见致意的制度，因此这个礼仪就作废了。
English: The princes east of the Yangtze River did not go to their own country, and some of them accepted the appointment to live in a foreign country, just like the etiquette of the head of the princes of the same party or the two thousand stone of the history, and there was no system of greeting the court, so this etiquette was abolished.

古文：汉以高帝十月定秦，且为岁首。
现代文：汉朝因为高帝是在十月平定的秦朝，姑且把十月定为一年的开始。
English: Since Emperor Gao of the Han Dynasty was in the Qin Dynasty, which was pacified in October, let October be the beginning of the year.

古文：至武帝，虽改用夏正，然每月朔朝，至于十月朔，犹常飨会。
现代文：到了武帝，虽然改用夏朝的以正月为一年的开始，然而每月初一朝会，到了十月初一，还常有宴会。
English: By the time of Emperor Wu, although the beginning of the year was changed to the first month of the year as in the Summer Dynasty, there was still a morning assembly on the first day of each month, and by the first day of October, there were often banquets.

古文：其仪，夜漏未尽七刻，受贺及贽。公侯璧，中二千石、二千石羔，千石、六百石雁，四百石以下雉。
现代文：宴会的礼仪是，夜间时刻不到七刻，接受祝贺和礼物，公侯献璧，中二千石、二千石献羔羊，千石、六百石献大雁，四百石以下献野鶸。
English: The etiquette of the banquet is that the time is less than seven o'clock at night, to accept congratulations and gifts, the prince offers gifts, the middle two thousand koku, two thousand koku offer lambs, one thousand koku, six hundred koku offer geese, and four hundred koku or less offer wild donkeys.

古文：三公奉璧上殿御坐前，北面。
现代文：三公捧着璧上殿到御座前，面向北。
English: The three princes carried the gems up to the Imperial Throne, facing north.

古文：太常赞曰 皇帝为君兴 。
现代文：太常宣布 皇帝为三公起立 。
English: Too often, the emperor declared that he would stand up for the Three Princes.

古文：三公伏。
现代文：三公跪倒。
English: The three princes fell to their knees.

古文：皇帝坐，乃前进璧。
现代文：皇帝坐下，于是上前奉献璧玉。
English: The emperor sat down and then came forward to offer the gems.

古文：百官皆贺，二千石以上上殿称万岁，举觞，御食，司徒奉羹，大司农奉饭，奏食举之乐。
现代文：百官都祝贺，二千石以上上殿高呼万岁，举酒杯。奉进饭食，司徒捧着羹，大司农捧着饭，演奏奉上饮食的音乐。
English: All the officials congratulated him, and those with more than 2,000 koku shouted "Long live!" as they entered the hall, and raised their wine glasses. The meal was served, and Stuto held the soup, and the farmer held the rice, and played the music of the meal.

古文：百官受赐，宴飨，大作乐，如元正之仪。
现代文：百官接受赏赐，宴会开始，大声奏起音乐，如同正月初一的礼仪。
English: The dignitaries receive their awards, the banquet begins, and loud music is played, just like the etiquette of the first day of the first month.

古文：魏晋则冬至日受方国及百僚称贺，因小会。
现代文：魏、晋则在冬至那天接受四方诸侯国及各级官吏的祝贺，于是有小型朝会。
English: On the day of the winter solstice, Wei and Jin received congratulations from the four principalities and officials at all levels, so there was a small imperial meeting.

古文：其仪亚于献岁之旦。
现代文：朝会礼仪的规模次于贺新年那一天。
English: The scale of the morning ceremony is second only to that of the Chinese New Year.

古文：古者帝王莫不巡狩。
现代文：古代帝王没有不巡枧境内的。
English: The ancient emperors did not patrol the territory.

古文：魏文帝值天下三分，方隅多事，皇舆亟动，役无宁岁，盖应时之务，非旧章也。
现代文：魏文帝时天下三分鼎立，边境战事频繁，皇帝的车驾屡屡出动，没有哪一年能安定无事，大概都是应付即时发生的事，并不是依据前代典章。
English: At the time of Emperor Weiwen, the world was divided into three parts, border wars were frequent, the emperor's chauffeur was frequently dispatched, and no year could be stable. Presumably, they were dealing with things that happened immediately, and were not based on the previous generation of regulations.

古文：明帝凡三东巡狩，所过存问高年，恤疾苦，或赐谷帛，有古巡幸之风焉。
现代文：明帝共去东部巡视三次，在路过的地方慰问老人，救济贫困，有时赏赐谷物丝帛，有古代帝王巡视时的风范。
English: The Ming emperor went to the east for inspection three times, consoled the elderly in passing places, alleviated poverty, and sometimes rewarded grain silk cocoons, with the style of ancient emperors during inspection.

古文：齐王正始元年，巡洛阳县，赐高年力田各有差。
现代文：蛮工正盘元年，巡枧洛阳县，对老人和地方农田官员各有不同的赏赐。
English: In the first year of the barbarian work, patrol Luoyang County, the elderly and local farmland officials each have different rewards.

古文：及武帝泰始四年，诏刺史二千石长吏曰： 古之王者，以岁时巡狩方岳，其次则二伯述职，不然则行人顺省。
现代文：到了武帝泰始四年，下诏书给刺史二千石长吏说： 古代的帝王，按年巡视四方山岳，其次则由东西二位诸侯首领述职，再不然就是派使者视察。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Wudi's reign, the following edict was issued to the 2,000-koku chief officials of Jishi: Ancient emperors, inspect the mountains in all directions every year, and then the heads of the two principalities in the east and west will report for duty. Otherwise, an emissary will be sent to inspect.

古文：故虽幽遐侧微，心无壅隔，下情上通，上指远谕，至于鳏寡，罔不得所，用垂风遗烈，休声犹存。
现代文：因此，即便是幽远隐蔽细微的事，也不至于闭塞不知，下面情况上面掌握，上面的意志远方知晓，做到了丧偶的男女，无不得到了归宿，因此，留传下来的风气和功业，美名保留到现在。
English: Therefore, even if it is a remote, hidden and subtle matter, it will not be closed and unknown. The following situation is mastered by the above, and the will of the above is known far and wide. Widowed men and women who have achieved this have no choice but to return home. Therefore, the culture and achievements that have been passed down and the reputation have been preserved to the present.

古文：朕在位累载，如临深川，夙兴夕惕，明发不寝，坐而待旦，思四方水旱灾眚，为之怛然。
现代文：我在皇位好几年了，就像站在深谷的前边，起早贪黑心怀戒惧，黎明还不能入睡，坐等天亮，担心四方天灾人祸，为此悲伤。
English: I have been on the throne for several years. It's like standing in front of a deep valley. I wake up early with a dark heart and a fear of the dark. I can't fall asleep before dawn. I sit and wait for the dawn. I worry about natural and man-made disasters in all directions, and I feel sad about it.

古文：勤躬约己，欲令事事当宜。
现代文：自我勉励，自我约束，希望每件事都办得妥当。
English: Self-encouragement, self-discipline, hope that everything is done properly.

古文：常恐众吏用情，诚心未著，万机兼猥，虑有不周，政刑失谬，而弗获备览。
现代文：常常担心官吏们感情用事，不能表现出真诚，国事繁杂，考虑不周全，政治法律有过失，而不能都看到。
English: They often worry that officials are emotional and cannot show sincerity, that national affairs are complicated and not well thought out, and that political and legal affairs have made mistakes, but they cannot see everything.

古文：百姓有过，在予一人。
现代文：百姓有过失，责任在我。
English: The people are at fault, the responsibility lies with me.

古文：惟岁之不易，未遑卜征巡省之事，下之未乂，其何以恤之。
现代文：祇是岁月艰难，没有闲暇顾及巡视的事情，百姓不能安定，怎么去体恤他们呢?
English: It's just that the times are hard, there's no leisure time to take care of patrols, and the people can't be stable. How can you sympathize with them?

古文：今使使持节侍中副给事黄门侍郎衔命四出，周行天下，亲见刺史二千石长吏，申谕朕心，访求得失损益诸宜，观省政教，问人间患苦。
现代文：现在派使持节侍中副给事黄门侍郎接受使命向四方出发，走遍天下，亲自与刺史二千石长吏见面，阐明我的心意，访问搜求事情的得失优劣，考察政治教化，询问人间疾苦。
English: Now, I have sent Huangmen Zhilong, the vice-chairman of the Zhi Jie, to accept the mission to go to the four directions, travel all over the world, personally meet with the 2,000-koku chiefs of the Zhi Shi, clarify my intentions, visit and search for the pros and cons of things, investigate political enlightenment, and inquire about human suffering.

古文：周典有之曰： 其万姓之利害为一书，其礼俗政事刑禁之逆顺为一书，其暴乱作慝犯令为一书，其札丧凶荒厄贫为一书，其康乐和亲安平为一书，每国辨异之，以返命于王。 旧章前训，今率由之。
现代文：周朝典籍上说： 对人民的利与害写成一部书，人民的礼俗、政治事物、刑罚禁令是否合理写成一部书，暴乱奸邪违犯法令的事写成一部书，疫病丧亡灾荒贫困写成一部书，健康快乐和睦平安写成一部书，每个诸侯国根据书来辨别是非，把结果向王报告，旧朝典章前代训诫，命令都是根据这些。
English: The Zhou Dynasty classics said: "Write a book on the people's benefits and harms, a book on the people's etiquette and customs, political affairs, and whether the punishment ban is reasonable, a book on rioting and violating laws and regulations, a book on epidemics and disasters, a book on poverty, a book on health and happiness, and a book on peace and harmony. Each vassal state should distinguish right and wrong according to the book and report the results to the king. The former dynasty's precepts and orders are all based on these.

古文：还具条奏，俾朕昭然鉴于幽远，若亲行焉。
现代文：又准备条文奏章，使我得以清楚地借鉴远古，就像亲身行事一样。
English: I also prepared a set of rules and regulations, so that I could draw on ancient wisdom as clearly as if I were doing it myself.

古文：大夫君子，其各悉乃心，敬乃事，嘉言令图，苦言至戒，与使者尽之，无所隐讳。
现代文：大夫君子，各自尽你们的心，专心致力于你们的事务，好的谋略计划，刺耳的言论告诫，全都告诉使者，不要有什么隐讳。
English: Doctors and gentlemen, each of you do your best, concentrate on your business, good strategic plan, harsh words of admonition, all tell the messenger, do not have anything to hide.

古文：方将虑心以俟，其勉哉勖之，称朕意焉。 
现代文：我正虚心等你们的意见，努力吧，满足我的意愿。 
English: I'm humbly waiting for your opinion. Do your best to satisfy my wishes.

古文：新礼，巡狩方岳，柴望告设壝宫如礼。
现代文：新的礼仪，巡枧四方大山，烧柴祭天、望祭山川、报告设立行宫都如同以往的礼仪。
English: The new etiquette, cruising the mountains in all directions, burning firewood to worship the heavens, looking at the mountains and rivers, reporting the establishment of the palace are all the same as the previous etiquette.

古文：诸侯之觐者，宾及执贽皆如朝仪，而不建旗。
现代文：诸侯朝见皇帝时，宾客及拿礼物的人都如同朝廷上的仪式，而不设旗帜。
English: When the princes came to see the emperor, the guests and those bearing gifts marched as if it were a court ceremony, but without flags.

古文：挚虞以为： 觐礼，诸侯觐天子，各建其旗。
现代文：挚虞认为： 朝见的礼仪，诸侯见皇帝，各自设置旗帜。
English: Zhengyu believed that: the etiquette of seeing the morning, the princes saw the emperor, and each set up a flag.

古文：旗章所以殊爵命，示等威。
现代文：旗子的圆形是用来区别爵位显示等级威严的。
English: The round shape of the flag is used to distinguish the ranks of nobility to show the level of dignity.

古文：《诗》称 君子至止，言观其旗 。
现代文：《诗经》说 君子到了，观察他的旗帜 。
English: The "Song of Songs" says, "A gentleman has arrived, watch his banner."

古文：宜定新礼，建旗如旧礼。 
现代文：应该制定新礼仪，如同古代礼仪一样设置旗帜。 
English: A new etiquette should be developed, and flags should be set up as in the ancient etiquette.

古文：诏可其议。
现代文：皇帝下韶书同意他的意见。
English: The decree endorsed his opinion.

古文：然终晋代，其礼不行。
现代文：然而一直到晋朝终结，这个礼仪也没有实行。
English: However, this etiquette was not practiced until the end of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：封禅之说，经典无闻。
现代文：封挥的说法在经典上看不到。
English: The term "seal-waving" is not found in the classics.

古文：礼有因天事天，因地事地，因名山升中于天，而凤皇降，龟龙格。
现代文：礼制上有为了天上的事而祭天，为了地上的事而祭地，因为在名山祭天上告成功，而凤凰降落，龟龙到来。
English: In the ceremonial system, the heavens are sacrificed for the sake of heavenly things, and the earth is sacrificed for the sake of earthly things, because the famous mountain festival was successful in heaven, and the phoenix landed, and the turtle and dragon arrived.

古文：天子所以巡狩，至于方岳，燔柴祭天，以告其成功，事似而非也。
现代文：天子在境内巡视，到了四方名山，烧柴祭天，上告事业成功，事情相似而不同。
English: The heavenly son inspected the territory, went to the famous mountains in the four directions, burned firewood to celebrate the day, and successfully appealed. Things are similar but different.

古文：谶纬诸说皆云，王者封泰山，禅梁甫，易姓纪号。
现代文：谶纬一类预测吉凶的说法都说，帝王在泰山祭天，在梁甫祭地，改易朝代纪年国号。
English: All kinds of theories predicting good or bad fortune say that the emperor changed the name of the dynasty, the era, and the country from Taishan Festival and Liangfu Festival.

古文：秦汉行其典，前史各陈其制矣。
现代文：秦、漠实行逭一典礼，前代的史书各自陈述了典礼的制度。
English: The Qin and the Miao dynasties practiced a single ceremony, and the previous history books each described the ceremony system.

古文：魏文帝黄初中，护军蒋济奏曰： 夫帝王大礼，巡狩为先；昭祖扬祢，封禅为首。
现代文：魏明帝太和年间，护军蒋济奏报说： 在帝王大的典礼中，外出巡枧排在最前面；昭告祖先神灵，祭祀天地的封禅礼排在第一。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei Ming and the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, the military escort Jiang Jisong reported: In the grand imperial ceremony, the outing parade ranks first; the announcement of the ancestral deities, the worship of heaven and earth, and the enthronement ceremony rank first.

古文：是以自古革命受符，未有不蹈梁父，登泰山，刊无竟之名，纪天人之际者也。
现代文：因此自古以来改朝换代接受天命，没有不去梁父的，没有不登泰山的，没有不刻写下永久留传的名字的，没有不记录下天人会合这一刻的。
English: Therefore, since ancient times, no one has changed the dynasty and generation to accept the destiny of heaven, no one has not gone to the father of Liang, no one has not climbed Mount Tai, no one has not written down the name that has been passed down forever, and no one has not recorded the moment of the meeting of heaven and man.

古文：故司马相如谓有文以来，七十二君，或顺所繇于前，谨遗教于后。
现代文：因而司马相如说，有文字记载以来，七十二代国君，有的顺随前代典章，有的为后世留下教化。
English: Therefore, Sima Xiangru said that since written records began, the seventy-two generations of sovereigns, some followed the previous generation's regulations, and some left behind enlightenment for future generations.

古文：太史公曰，主上有圣明而不宣布，有司之过也。
现代文：太史公说，皇帝有圣明的思想却不宣布，是官吏们的过失。
English: Taishigong said that it was the fault of the officials that the emperor did not announce that he had a sacred thought.

古文：然则元功懿德，不刊梁山之石，无以显帝王之功，示兆庶不朽之观也。
现代文：那么首创之功美好德行，不刊刻在梁山的石头上，就不能显示帝王的功业，不能为万民展示不朽的景观。
English: So, if the pioneering work is a beautiful virtue, if it is not engraved on the stone of Liangshan, it is impossible to show the emperor's work, and it is impossible to show the immortal landscape for the people.

古文：语曰， 当君而叹尧舜之美，譬犹人子对厥所生而誉他人之父 。
现代文：谚语说， 面对国君而感叹尧、舜的美德，就好比儿子对着生父而夸奖别人的父亲 。
English: A proverb says that, in the face of the sovereign, it is like a son praising someone else's father in the face of his own father.

古文：今大魏承百王之弊乱，拯流遁之艰厄，接千载之衰绪，继百代之废业。
现代文：如今大魏继承的是诸侯割据的弊端混乱，拯救的是流亡逃难的艰难困厄，承接的是千年以来的衰落，继续的是百代荒废的事业。
English: Today, the Great Wei Dynasty has inherited the drawbacks and chaos of the separation of the princes, saved the hardships of exile, inherited the decline of a thousand years, and continued the cause of a hundred generations of desolation.

古文：始自武文，至于圣躬，所以参成天地之道，纲维人神之化。
现代文：从武帝文帝开始，到皇上您本人，因此而参考成就天地间的道义，维护入神的教化。
English: From Emperor Wu and Emperor Wen, to you, the emperor himself, therefore, reference is made to the achievement of the morality of heaven and earth, and the maintenance of the enlightenment of the gods.

古文：上天报应，嘉瑞显祥，以比往古，无所取喻。
现代文：上天报应，呈现出吉祥的景象，和古代相比，找不到相同的例子。
English: Compared with the ancient times, we cannot find the same example of God's retribution, presenting an auspicious scene.

古文：至于历世迄今，未废大礼。
现代文：至于经历几代人到现在，没有举行大的典礼。
English: As for the generations that have passed until now, there was no big ceremony.

古文：虽志在扫尽残盗，荡涤余秽，未遑斯事。
现代文：或许可以推说志向在于扫尽残余的盗贼，涤除剩下的污秽，没精力顾及这件事。
English: Perhaps it can be inferred that the intention is to sweep up the remaining thieves, to clean up the remaining filth, and there is no energy to take care of this matter.

古文：若尔，三苗屈强于江海，大舜当废东巡之仪；徐夷跳梁于淮泗，周成当止岱岳之礼。
现代文：如果是那样，三苗在长江边不顺从，大舜应废除束巡的礼仪；徐夷在淮泗强横，周盛王应废止巡视岱岳的礼仪。
English: If that is the case, if San Miao disobeys at the Yangtze River, Daju should abolish the etiquette of the inspection of the mountains; if Xu Yi disobeys at Huaiyuan, Zhou Sheng should abolish the etiquette of the inspection of the mountains.

古文：且去岁破吴虏于江汉，今兹屠蜀贼于陇右，其震荡内溃，在不复淹，无累于封禅之事也。
现代文：再说去年在昼江汉水打败吴国，今年在陇西杀减蜀国军队，这对敌人造成的震撼溃散无以复加，不会影响封禅的事情。
English: Moreover, defeating Wu last year in the Han River, and defeating the Shu army this year in Shaanxi, can only add to the shock and confusion caused by the enemy, and will not affect the matter of sealing Zen.

古文：此仪久废，非仓卒所定。
现代文：这个礼仪荒废已久，不是在短时间可以确定的。
English: This etiquette has been abandoned for a long time, and it is not something that can be determined in a short time.

古文：宜下公卿，广撰其礼，卜年考时，昭告上帝，以副天下之望。
现代文：应交给公卿，全面地撰写出这个礼仪，占卜考定哪一年哪一刻，昭告上天，让天下人称心。
English: It should be handed over to the nobles, and this etiquette should be written out in an all-round way, and divination should be used to determine which year and which moment, and it should be announced to the heavens, so that the people of the world can be satisfied.

古文：臣待罪军旅，不胜大愿，冒死以闻。 
现代文：我在军旅中服役，完成不了这个大愿望，冒死说出我的想法。 
English: I served in the military, and I can't fulfill this great desire to risk my life to say what I think.

古文：诏曰： 闻蒋济斯言，使吾汗出流足。
现代文：诏书说： 听到蒋济的一番话，使我出汗流到脚面。
English: The edict said: Hearing Jiang Ji's words made my feet sweat.

古文：自开辟以来，封禅者七十余君耳。
现代文：自从开天辟地以来，封禅的有七十多个君主。
English: Since the creation of heaven and earth, there have been more than seventy sovereigns of Fuzhen.

古文：故太史公曰，虽有受命之君，而功有不洽，是以中间旷远者千有馀年，近者数百载，其仪阙不可得记。
现代文：因此太史公说，虽有接受天命的国君，但功业不能周遍，所以中间荒废远的有千余年，近的也有几百年，这个礼仪阙失没有记载。
English: Therefore, Taishi Gong said that although there are sovereigns who accept the fate of heaven, but the work cannot be done everywhere, so there are more than a thousand years of desolation in the middle and hundreds of years in the near future, and there is no record of this etiquette.

古文：吾何德之修，敢庶兹乎！
现代文：我有什么美德，敢做这件事呢!
English: What virtue have I that I dare to do this?

古文：济岂谓世无管仲，以吾有桓公登泰山之志乎！
现代文：整擅难道是说世上没有，而我有担公登童山的志向吗!
English: Does being good at tidiness mean that there is nothing in the world, and I have the ambition to climb Mount Tongzhu!

古文：吾不欺天也。
现代文：我不敢欺骗天。
English: I dare not deceive the heavens.

古文：济之所言，华则华矣，非助我者也。
现代文：蒋济所说的话，漂亮是漂亮，但不是帮助我。
English: What Jiang Jie said, beautiful is beautiful, but it does not help me.

古文：公卿侍中尚书常侍省之而已，勿复有所议，亦不须答诏也。 
现代文：公卿侍中尚书常侍看过就行了，不要再议论此事，也不必答覆这个诏书。 
English: Do not discuss the matter any further, and there is no need to respond to this edict.

古文：天子虽距济议，而实使高堂隆草封禅之仪，以天下未一，不欲便行大礼，会隆卒，不复行之。
现代文：皇帝虽然拒绝了蒋济的奏章，而实际上派直堂隆草拟封挥的礼仪，因天下没有统一，不想很快举行大礼。赶上高堂隆死了，此事作罢。
English: Although the emperor rejected Jiang Ji's music, he actually sent Zhaotang Long to draft the etiquette for the seal-waving ceremony. Because the world was not unified, he did not want to hold a grand ceremony soon. When Gaotang Long died, the matter was dropped.

古文：及武帝平吴，混一区宇，太康元年九月庚寅，尚书令卫瓘、尚书左仆射山涛、右仆射魏舒、尚书刘寔、司空张华等奏曰： 臣闻肇自生灵，则有后辟，年载之数，莫之能纪。
现代文：等到武帝平定吴国，统一国土，太康元年九月庚寅，尚书令卫璇、尚书左仆射山涛、右仆射魏舒、尚书刘塞、司空张华等人上奏说： 我们听说，自有人类开始，就有了王侯，年代的数目，没能记载下来。
English: When Emperor Wu conquered the State of Wu and unified the country, in September of the first year of Taikang, Geng Yin, Shang Shuling Weijun, Shang Shuling Zuoying, Shang Shuling Wei Shu, Shang Shuling Liu Xie, Shang Shuling Zhang Hua and others recited: We have heard that since the beginning of mankind, there have been princes, but the number of years has not been recorded.

古文：立德济世，挥扬仁风，以登封泰山者七十有四家，其谥号可知者十有四焉。
现代文：树立德行，救助天下，发扬仁义之风，为此而登泰山的有七十四家，可以知道他们谧号的有十四人。
English: To establish virtue, save the world, and carry forward the spirit of benevolence and righteousness, there are seventy-four families who have ascended Mount Tai for this purpose, and there are fourteen people who can know their names.

古文：沈沦寂寞，曾无遗声者，不可胜记。
现代文：名字事迹失传，没留下名声的，多得记不下来。
English: Names and deeds have been lost, and those who have not left a reputation are too numerous to remember.

古文：大晋之德，始自重黎，实佐颛顼，至于夏商，世序天地。
现代文：大晋的德行，从重黎开始，辅佐颛顼，到了夏商，世代相承的系统在天地间确立。
English: The moral conduct of the Great Jin Dynasty, from the beginning of Chongli, Sui Zhaojun, to Xia Shang, the system inherited from generation to generation was established in heaven and earth.

古文：其在于周，不失其绪。
现代文：在周朝，没有停止建立功业。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, there was no stopping the establishment of Gongye.

古文：金德将升，世济明圣，外平蜀汉，海内归心，武功之盛，实由文德。
现代文：晋的德行上升，天下帮助明圣的人，在外部平定了蜀汉，四海之内，人心向晋，军事上的胜利，实际上靠的是美德。
English: Jin's virtue is on the rise, the world is helping Ming Sheng's people, Shu Han has been pacified externally, within the four seas, people's hearts are inclined towards Jin, and military victory actually relies on virtue.

古文：至于陛下，受命践阼，弘建大业，群生仰流。
现代文：到了陛下，受天命接遇皇位，扩建大业，百姓仰慕追随。
English: When His Majesty came, he was fated to succeed to the throne, expanded the great cause, and the people followed him with admiration.

古文：惟独江湖沅湘之表，凶桀负固，历代不宾。
现代文：惟独长江、洞庭湖、沅江、湘江边，有暴徒凭藉天险，历代不顺从。
English: However, on the banks of the Yangtze River, Dongting Lake, Minjiang River and Hunan River, there are rioters who rely on natural hazards and have been disobedient for generations.

古文：神谋独断，命将出讨，兵威暂加，数旬荡定。
现代文：陛下神奇的谋略判断，命令军队出征讨伐，军威稍一施展，几十天就扫荡平定。
English: His majesty's miraculous strategic judgment, ordered the army to go on a crusade, and once the military power was exerted, it was swept and settled in dozens of days.

古文：羁其鲸鲵，赦其罪逆，云覆雨施，八方来同，声教所被，达于四极。
现代文：捆缚凶恶之人，赦免他们的罪逆，云气流行，雨泽施布，四面八方，聚集在我们周围，名声教化的影响范围，达到天下各地。
English: Bind up the wicked, and forgive their iniquity; let the clouds circulate, and rainbows be spread out; let them gather around us on every side, and the influence of fame and enlightenment spread to every corner of the earth.

古文：虽黄轩遐征，大禹远略，周之奕世，何以尚今！
现代文：即便是黄轩的征伐，大禹深远的谋略，周朝的盛世，又怎能超过今天呢!
English: Even the conquest of Huang Xuan, the far-reaching strategy of Dayu, and the prosperity of the Zhou Dynasty, how can they surpass today!

古文：若夫玄石素文，底号前载，象以数表，言以事告，虽古《河图洛书》之徵，不是过也。
现代文：至于石碑上发扬圣人之道的文字著称于前代的记载，用数目表示物象，用事件说明言论，即便是古代 河图洛书，表现出的迹象，也超不过这个。
English: As for the inscription on the stele, which promotes the way of the sage and is known from the records of previous generations, using numbers to represent objects, and using events to illustrate speech, even the ancient Book of Hathor, shows signs that are no better than this.

古文：宜宣大典，礼中岳，封泰山，禅梁父，发德号，明至尊，享天休，笃黎庶，勒千载之表，播流后之声，俾百世之下，莫不兴起。
现代文：应举行大典，在中岳行礼，在泰山、梁父祭天地，发布宣扬美德的号令，明确最尊贵的位置，享受天赐的福，真诚对待百姓，刻下千年的表记，播散流传后世的名声，使百世以后，没有不振奋的。
English: It is necessary to hold a grand ceremony, hold a ceremony at Zhongyue, hold a ceremony at Mount Tai and the Liangzhu Festival, issue an order to promote virtue, clarify the most honorable position, enjoy the blessings given by heaven, treat the people sincerely, engrave the mark of a thousand years, and spread the fame passed down to posterity, so that after a hundred generations, there is nothing to be excited about.

古文：斯帝王之盛业，天人之至望也。 
现代文：这是帝王盛大的事业，上天与人最大的愿望。 
English: This is the grand cause of the emperor, the greatest wish of heaven and man.

古文：诏曰： 今逋寇虽殄，外则障塞有警，内则百姓未宁，此盛德之事，所未议也。 
现代文：诏书说： 如今逃亡的敌寇虽然被消灭，但外部阻塞仍有警报，内部百姓还不安宁，遣件光大德行的事，还不该议论。 
English: The edict said: Although the fleeing enemy bandits have been eliminated, there is still a warning of external obstruction, the people are still uneasy inside, and it is not yet time to discuss the matter of sending a large number of troops.

古文：瓘等又奏曰： 今东渐于海，西被流沙，大漠之阴，日南北户，莫不通属，芒芒禹迹，今实过之。
现代文：卫璀等人又上奏说： 如今束至大海，西到沙漠，大沙漠的北面，日南北户，没有不前来归顺的，大禹时代辽阔的疆域，如今确已过之。
English: Wei Xuan and others also made a report, saying: "Nowadays, from the Bund to the sea, to the west to the desert, to the north of the great desert, to the north and south, there is no one who does not come to submit, and the vast territory of Dayu's era has now indeed passed.

古文：天人之道已周，巍巍之功已著，宜修礼地祗，登封泰山，致诚上帝，以答人神之愿也。
现代文：天与人的道义已经圆满，巍巍的功绩已经确立，应当为地神制定礼仪，登上泰山祭祀，向上天表达诚心，以此来报答入神的愿望。
English: The morality of heaven and man has been consummated, and the merits of the dragonfly have been established. It is necessary to formulate a ritual for the gods of the earth, ascend Mount Tai to offer sacrifices, and express sincerity to heaven, in order to reward the desire to enter the gods.

古文：乞如前奏。 
现代文：乞求按前一奏章办。 
English: I beg you to do as you did in the previous section.

古文：诏曰： 今阴阳未和，刑政未当，百姓未得其所，岂可以勒功告成邪！ 
现代文：诏书说： 如今阴阳还没有调和，刑法政令还不妥当，百姓还没有归宿，怎能刻下自己的业迹报告成功呢! 
English: The edict said: Today, the yin and yang have not been reconciled, the criminal law and government decrees are not appropriate, and the people have not yet returned home. How can you carve your own career and report success?

古文：诏不许。
现代文：诏书不准许。
English: The edict does not allow it.

古文：瓘等又奏曰： 臣闻处帝王之位者，必有历运之期，天命之应；济兆庶之功者，必有盛德之容，告成之典。
现代文：卫璀等人又上奏说： 我们听说身处帝王位置的人，必定有天道的气数，必定适应天命；救助百姓有功业的人，必定有盛大美德的仪容，有向天报告成功的典礼。
English: Wei Wei and others also reported: We have heard that those who are in the position of emperors must have the temperament of the heavenly way and must adapt to the destiny of heaven; those who help the people and have merits must have the appearance of grand virtue and have the ceremony of reporting success to heaven.

古文：无不可诬，有不敢让，自古道也。
现代文：无功不能欺骗，有功不敢谦让，这是自古以来的道理。
English: It has been a principle since ancient times that those who have no merit cannot deceive, and those who have merit dare not be modest.

古文：而明诏谦冲，屡辞其礼，虽盛德攸在，推而未居。
现代文：然而诏书表示谦让，屡次推辞封禅的典礼，虽然有美德，但推让而不居功。
English: However, the imperial edict expressed modesty, repeatedly postponing the ceremony of sealing Zen. Although there are virtues, it is better to postpone without taking credit.

古文：夫三公职典天地，实掌人物，国之大事，取议于此。
现代文：三公的职守是主管天地，实际上是掌管人物，国家的大事，从中吸取议论。
English: The duties of the three public officials are to be in charge of heaven and earth, in fact, to be the person in charge, the important thing of the country, and to draw discussions from them.

古文：故汉氏封禅，非是官也，不在其事。
现代文：因此汉代封禅，不是这个官位，就不负责这件事。
English: Therefore, the Han Dynasty Fuzhen, not this official position, is not responsible for this matter.

古文：臣等前奏，盖陈祖考之功，天命又应，陛下之德，合同四海，迹古考今，宜修此礼。
现代文：我们以前的奏章，主要是陈述祖先的功业，又顺应了天命，陛下的美德，会合齐同四海，推求古代考察当今，应当修订这个礼仪。
English: Our previous chant, which mainly recounted the deeds of our forefathers and complied with the destiny of heaven, His Majesty's virtue, gathering together with the four seas, urging the ancient to investigate the present, should revise this etiquette.

古文：至于克定岁月，须五府上议，然后奏闻。 
现代文：至于确定年月，必须经太尉、太傅、司徒、司空、大将军等商议，然后奏报。 
English: As for the determination of the year and month, it must be discussed by the captain, taifu, seto, tsuko, general and so on, and then reported.

古文：诏曰： 虽荡清江表，皆临事者之劳，何足以告成。
现代文：诏书说： 虽然扫荡安定了长江以南，但都是当事者的功劳，不足以向上天报告成功。
English: The edict said: Although the sweeping has stabilized the south of the Yangtze River, it is all the credit of the parties concerned, and it is not enough to report the success to heaven.

古文：方望群后思隆大化，以宁区夏，百姓获乂，与之休息。
现代文：正期望列国诸侯考虑光大教化，来安定中原，百姓得到太平，让他们休养生息。
English: It is expected that the princes of the countries will consider the enlightenment of the light to stabilize the Central Plains, and the people will be peaceful, allowing them to recuperate and live.

古文：斯朕日夜之望，无所复下诸府矣。 
现代文：这是我从早到晚的愿望，没有什么别的要答覆给大家了。 
English: This is my wish from morning to night, I have nothing else to say to you.

古文：瓘等又奏： 臣闻唐虞三代济世弘功之君，莫不仰承天休，俯协人志，登介丘，履梁父，未有辞焉者，盖不可让也。
现代文：卫璀等人又上奏说： 我们听说唐虞三代救助天下建立大功的国君，没有不向上顺从天意，对下协调百姓的意志，登大山，赴梁父，没有推辞遣件事的人，大概是不能推让。
English: Wei Wei and others also made a report, saying: We have heard that Tang Yu and the three generations of emperors who helped the world to establish a great national hero, did not disobey the will of heaven, coordinated the will of the people, climbed the mountain, went to Liang Fati, and did not refuse to send the matter.

古文：今陛下勋高百王，德无与二，茂绩宏规，巍巍之业，固非臣等所能究论。
现代文：如今陛下功勋超越百王，德行无人匹敌，宏大的功绩典范，显赫的事业，肯定不是我们这些人能评论清楚的。
English: Today, His Majesty's merits surpass a hundred kings, his virtues are unrivaled, and his magnificent feats and illustrious career are certainly not something that we can comment on clearly.

古文：而圣旨劳谦，屡自抑损，时至弗应，推美不居，阙皇代之上仪，塞灵祗之款望，何以使大晋之典谟，同风于三五？
现代文：然而圣旨用力谦让，屡次自我贬损，时机到了不响应，推让美名不居功，使皇朝重大礼仪缺漏，也闭塞了神灵的殷切希望，使得大晋的典章，与三皇五帝不同风气。
English: However, the sacred edict forced modesty, repeatedly self-deprecating, did not respond when the time came, did not give credit for the good name, made the important etiquette of the imperial dynasty missing, and also blocked the ardent hope of the gods, making the ceremony of the Great Jin different from the three kings and five emperors.

古文：臣等诚不敢奉诏，请如前奏施行。 
现代文：我们真的不敢遵循诏书，请按先前的奏章施行。 
English: We really dare not follow the edict. Please implement it according to the previous edict.

古文：诏曰： 方当共思弘道，以康庶绩，且俟他年，无所复纷纭也。 
现代文：诏书说： 现在正该共同考虑弘大道义，来完善各种业绩。等到以后再说吧，对各种说法没有什么要回覆了。 
English: The edict said: Now is the time to jointly consider the promotion of virtue, to improve all kinds of performance. Let's wait until later, there is nothing to respond to the various statements.

古文：王公有司又奏： 自古圣明，光宅四海，封禅名山，著于史籍，作者七十四君矣。
现代文：王公和有关官吏又上奏说： 自古以来圣明的帝王，光辉流存于四海，在名山祭天地，记录在史籍上的，有七十四个国君。
English: Wang Gong and the relevant officials also reported: Since ancient times, the emperors of the holy light have existed in the four seas, in the famous mountains and festivals, and recorded in the historical records, there are seventy-four sovereigns.

古文：舜禹之有天下也，巡狩四岳，躬行其道。
现代文：舜禹得到天下以后，到四方大山巡视，亲身推行他们的道义。
English: After Yu Yu became emperor, he went to inspect the mountains in the four directions and personally promoted their moral principles.

古文：《易》著观俗省方，《礼》有升中于天，《诗》颂陟其高山，皆载在方策。
现代文：《易经》上着有考察四方风俗，《礼》上着有登名山向上天报告成功，《诗经》上歌颂了登山祭祀。都记载在史策上。
English: In the I Ching, there is an examination of the customs of the four directions, in the Rite, there is a report on the success of ascending a famous mountain to heaven, and in the Book of Songs, there is a praise of mountaineering rituals. All of these are recorded in the historical strategy.

古文：文王为西伯以服事殷，周公以鲁籓列于诸侯，或享于岐山，或有事泰山，徒以圣德，犹得为其事。
现代文：周文王作为西伯为殷做事，周公衹拥有诸侯国中的一个鲁，他们或在岐山祭天，或在童山封禅，仅凭藉美德，就可以做封禅的事。
English: King Zhou Wen, as Xibe, did things for Yin, and Zhou Gongyi had a Lu in the princely state. They could do things to seal Zen by virtue alone, whether they were in Qishan to celebrate Heaven, or in Tongshan to seal Zen.

古文：自是以来，功薄而僭其义者，不可胜数。号谥不泯，以至于今。
现代文：从那以后，功业不够却超越礼仪封禅的人，多得数不清，名号谧号没有泯灭，流传到今天。
English: Since then, there have been countless people who have not done enough but have surpassed the etiquette of sealing Zen, and the name has not been extinguished, and it has been passed down to this day.

古文：况高祖宣皇帝肇开王业，海外有截；世宗景皇帝济以大功，辑宁区夏；太祖文皇帝受命造晋，荡定蜀汉；陛下应期龙兴，混一六合，泽被群生，威震无外。
现代文：何况高祖宣皇帝开创帝王事业，海外整齐划一；世宗景皇帝辅助了大功业，华夏安宁；太祖文皇帝接受天命缔造了晋，扫荡平定蜀汉；陛下响应天道兴起新王朝，统一天地四方，恩泽广布于百姓，威震四面八方。
English: Not to mention, Emperor Gaozhu Xuan initiated the imperial cause and unified overseas; Emperor Shizongjing assisted the great cause and brought peace to China; Emperor Taizowen accepted the mandate of heaven and created Jin, swept and pacified Shu Han; His Majesty responded to the rise of the new dynasty, unified the country in all directions, spread grace to the people, and was powerful in all directions.

古文：昔汉氏失统，吴蜀鼎峙，兵兴以来，近将百年，地险俗殊，人望绝塞。
现代文：过去汉朝失去了纲纪，与吴蜀三国鼎立，战争开始以来，将近百年，地势险阻风俗不同，人民的愿望断绝阻塞。
English: In the past, the Han Dynasty lost its discipline, and the Three Kingdoms of Wu and Shu were established. Since the beginning of the war, nearly a hundred years, the terrain is different, the customs are different, and the people's wishes are blocked.

古文：今不羁之寇，二代而平，非聪明神武，先天弗违，孰能巍巍其有成功若兹者欤！
现代文：如今不受拘束的敌寇，经两代而被平定，如果不是聪明神武，顺应上天本意，谁能建立如此伟大的功业呢!
English: The enemy invaders, who are now unrestrained, were subdued after two generations. If it were not for the wisdom and skill of the gods, who would have been able to build such a great achievement?

古文：臣等幸以千载得遭运会，亲服大化，目睹太平，至公至美，谁与为让。
现代文：我们有幸赶上千载难逢的机遇，亲身经历这大变化，目睹太平，公正美好到了极至，推让给谁呢?
English: We are fortunate to catch up with a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, experience this great change in person, witness peace, justice and beauty to the extreme, to whom to give?

古文：请告太常，具礼仪复上。 诏曰： 所议诚列代之盛事也，然方今未可以尔。 便报绝之。
现代文：应按先朝遣训，效法古代，在泰山上刻石记功，登山向上天报告成功，弘大礼乐的制度，端正祭祀场所的典章，扬名万代，光宗耀祖。因此把这说不完的最大愿望，冒死报告皇上。请告诉太常，准备礼仪。 皇帝又下诏书说： 所议论的的确是历代的盛事，然而目前不可施行。 此事不再提及。
English: It is necessary to follow the training of the previous dynasties, follow the example of ancient times, carve stones on Mount Tai to record achievements, report success to heaven, propagate the system of liturgy and music, correct the ceremonies of the places of worship, make a name for all generations, and glorify the ancestors of Guangzong. Therefore, the greatest desire that can not be said is to report to the emperor. Please tell the emperor to prepare the etiquette. The emperor also issued an edict saying: What is being discussed is indeed a grand event of all times, but it cannot be implemented at present. This matter will not be mentioned again.

古文：哀帝即位，欲尊崇章皇太妃。
现代文：哀帝即位，想尊崇章皇太妃。
English: Emperor Ai ascended to the throne, and wanted to honor Empress Dowager Zhang.

古文：桓温议宜称太夫人。
现代文：桓温认为应称她为太夫人。
English: Kuan Wen thought that she should be called the Great Lady.

古文：尚书仆射江议曰： 虞舜体仁孝之性，尽事亲之礼，贵为天王，富有四海，而瞽叟无立锥之地，一级之爵。
现代文：尚书仆射江膨议论说： 虞舜推行仁孝的本性，尽力于事奉亲人的礼仪，因而得到天王这样尊贵的地位，富有四海。而瞽叟没有立锥之地，没有任何爵位。
English: Shang Shuxu's servant Sho Jiang puffed out his chest and said, "Guan Yu has promoted the nature of benevolence and filial piety, and has made every effort to serve the etiquette of relatives, and thus has obtained such a noble position as the heavenly king, and is rich in the four seas. But Yu has no place to stand, and has no peerage.

古文：蒸蒸之心，昊天罔极，宁当忍父卑贱，不以徽号显之，岂不以子无爵父之道，理穷义屈，靡所厝情者哉！
现代文：一片孝心，充满天际，宁可忍受父亲地位卑贱，也不用徽号让他显赫，难道不是因为没有儿子给父亲授爵的道理，在理义方面说不通，无法表现自己的亲情吗?
English: A filial piety, full of heaven, would rather endure his father's lowly status than use the badge to make him prominent. Isn't it because the reason for not having a son to give his father a knighthood doesn't make sense in terms of reason and can't show his kinship?

古文：《春秋经》曰 纪季姜归于京师 ，《传》曰 父母之于子，虽为天王后，犹曰吾季姜 ，言子尊不加父母也。
现代文：《春秋经》说 纪季姜出嫁到京师，《传》说 父母对于子女来说，虽然女儿是天王后，仍称为我季姜 ，说的是不因子女尊贵影响到父母。
English: "Spring and Autumn Annals" says Ji Ji Jiang married into the imperial family, and "Legend" says that for parents, although their daughter is the Queen of Heaven, she is still called Ji Ji Jiang. It is said that parents should not be affected by their children's nobility.

古文：或以为子尊不加父母，则武王何以追王太王、王季、文王乎？
现代文：有人认为如果子女尊贵不影响到父母，那么武王为什么给太王、王季、文王追加王号?
English: Some people think that if the dignity of children does not affect their parents, then why did King Wu give additional royal titles to King Taewon, King Ji and King Wen?

古文：周之三王，德配天地，王迹之兴，自此始也。
现代文：周朝的三个王，德行与天地相匹配，帝王业迹的兴起，是从那时开始的。
English: The three kings of the Zhou Dynasty, whose virtues matched the heavens and earth, and the rise of the emperor's career, began at that time.

古文：是以武王仰寻前绪，遂奉天命，追崇祖考，明不以子尊加父母也。
现代文：因此武王仰慕追寻前代的功业，于是根据天命，追加王号尊崇祖先，表明不是因为儿子尊贵而影响到父母的。
English: Therefore, King Wu admired the pursuit of the previous generation's achievements, so according to the Mandate of Heaven, he added the title of king to honor the ancestors, indicating that it was not because of the son's dignity that it affected the parents.

古文：案《礼》 幼不诔长，贱不诔贵 ，幼贱犹不得表彰长贵，况敢锡之以荣命邪！
现代文：根据《礼》 年幼的不能做悼辞歌颂年长的，地位低下的也不能做悼辞歌颂地位尊贵的，年幼低贱的尚且不能表彰年长尊贵的，又怎么敢施予他们荣誉称号呢!
English: According to the "Ritual," the young cannot make eulogies in praise of the elderly, the low-ranking cannot make eulogies in praise of the high-ranking, and the low-ranking cannot commend the high-ranking, how dare they give them honorary titles!

古文：汉祖感家令之言而尊太公，荀悦以为孝莫大于严父，而以子贵加之父母，家令之言过矣。
现代文：漠祖因感悟家训中的话而尊崇太公，荀悦认为孝没有比尊崇父亲更大的了，因而把儿子地位尊贵用在了父母身上，家训中的话错了。
English: Because he was impressed by the words in the family training, the mute ancestor revered the grand duke. Miao Yue thought that there was no greater filial piety than revering the father. Therefore, he used the son's status as honorable to his parents. The words in the family training were wrong.

古文：爰逮孝章，不上贾贵人以尊号，而厚其金宝币帛，非子道之不至也，盖圣典不可逾也。
现代文：至于孝章，不用尊号显赫买贵人，而是多送金银宝物钱币丝帛，逭并不是做儿子不尽孝道，是因为圣人典章不能逾越。
English: As for the title of filial piety, it is not necessary to use the title of honor to buy a noble person, but to send more gold, silver, treasures, coins and silk. This is not to be a son who does not fulfill his filial piety, because the saint's award cannot be exceeded.

古文：当春秋时，庶子承国，其母得为夫人。
现代文：在春秋时，庶子继承国位，他的母亲可以被称作夫人。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, when an illegitimate child succeeds to the throne, his mother may be called Madam.

古文：不审直子命母邪，故当告于宗祧以先君之命命之邪？
现代文：难道在因儿子为母亲授封号的问题不慎重吗?难道应当向宗庙祖先报告，用先代国君的命令来授封号吗?
English: Isn't it prudent to award a title to a mother because of her son? Should it be reported to the ancestors of the ancestral temple and awarded by the order of the previous sovereign?

古文：窃见诏书，当临轩拜授贵人为皇太妃。
现代文：我认为诏书，应当上朝拜授贵人为皇太妃。
English: In my opinion, the imperial rescript should be presented to Her Majesty the Empress Dowager.

古文：今称皇帝策命命贵人，斯则子爵母也。
现代文：现在说皇帝下令为贵人授封，就是儿子为母亲授爵了。
English: Now that the emperor has ordered a title to be conferred on a noble, it means that the son has conferred a title on his mother.

古文：贵人北面拜受，斯则母臣子也。
现代文：要是贵人面朝北跪拜受封，就是母亲做了儿子的臣。
English: If a noble kneels facing north and receives a title of nobility, it means that the mother has become the vassal of her son.

古文：天尊地卑，名位定矣，母贵子贱，人伦序矣。
现代文：天尊地卑，这是名位规定的，母贵子贱，这是人伦的次序。
English: Heaven is exalted and earth is humbled, this is stipulated by the name, mother is noble and son is lowly, this is the order of human relations.

古文：虽欲加崇贵人，而实卑之；虽显明国典，而实废之。
现代文：虽然想使贵人地位更高，而实际上使她卑下；虽然明确了国典，而实际废置了它。
English: Although he wanted to raise the status of the noblewoman, he actually degraded her; although he clarified the national code, he actually abolished it.

古文：且人主举动，史必书之。
现代文：况且国君的一举一动，史官必定记录下来。
English: Moreover, the historian is sure to record every move of the sovereign.

古文：如当载之方策，以示后世，无乃不顺乎！
现代文：如果记载下来的方针策略给后人看了，恐怕不顺吧!
English: If the recorded policies and strategies are shown to future generations, I'm afraid it won't go well!

古文：窃谓应告显宗之庙，称贵人仁淑之至，宜加殊礼，以酬鞠育之惠。
现代文：我认为应报告显宗的神庙，说贵人仁义娴淑无比，应使用特殊的礼仪，来报答养育的恩惠。
English: I think we should report to the temple of Xuanzong, saying that the noble person is extremely benevolent and virtuous, and should use special etiquette to repay the grace of raising.

古文：奉先灵之命，事不在己。
现代文：奉先君神灵的命令，事情不在于自己。
English: By order of the ancestor's deity, the matter does not lie with myself.

古文：妃后虽是配君之名，然自后以下有夫人九嫔，无称妃焉。
现代文：皇妃皇后虽然是国君配偶的名称，然而自皇后以下有夫人和九嫔，没有称作妃的。
English: Although empress consort is the name of the consort of the sovereign, there are wives and nine concubines below the empress, but they are not called empresses.

古文：桓公谓宜进号太夫人，非不允也。
现代文：桓公说应把名号升为太夫人，并非不公允。
English: It is not unfair for Lord Kan to say that the title should be raised to Lady-in-Waiting.

古文：如以夫人为少，可言皇太夫人。
现代文：如果认为夫人的名号还不够，可以称皇太夫人。
English: If you think that the title of Mrs. is not enough, you can call her Empress Dowager.

古文：皇，君也，君太夫人于名礼顺矣。 
现代文：皇的意思是国君，国君太夫人在名和礼上都说得通。 
English: Emperor means the sovereign, and the sovereign's lady-in-waiting makes sense in both name and ceremony.

古文：帝特下诏拜皇太妃。
现代文：皇帝特意下韶书，拜授皇太妃。
English: The emperor specially issued an imperial edict to bestow the title of crown princess on her.

古文：三月丙辰，使兼太保王恬授玺绶仪服，一如太后。
现代文：三月丙辰，派兼太保王恬授玉玺绶带和礼仪服装，与太后完全一样。
English: In March, Hsin-Chen, sent and Taibo Wang to confer the jade sash and ceremonial clothing on Mao, exactly the same as the empress dowager.

古文：又诏曰： 朝臣不为太妃敬，为合礼不？ 
现代文：又下诏书说： 朝廷大臣没有对太妃表示恭敬，这符合礼仪吗? 
English: The Imperial Rescript also said: The Minister of the Imperial Court did not show deference to Tohru, is this in line with etiquette?

古文：太常江逌议： 位号不极，不应尽敬。 
现代文：太常江迪议论说： 地位名号没有到最高，不应致以最大的恭敬。 
English: Jiang Di too often argued that: the status name has not reached the highest, it should not be given the greatest respect.

古文：孝武追崇会稽郑太妃为简文太后，诏问 当开墓不 。
现代文：孝武帝追授会稽郑太妃名号为简文太后以示崇敬，下诏书问 是否该开立墓位 。
English: Emperor Xiaowu posthumously bestowed the title of Empress Dowager Jianwen on Empress Dowager Zheng Taifei as a sign of reverence, and asked whether it was appropriate to open her tomb.

古文：王珣答： 据三祖追赠及中宗敬后，并不开墓位，更为茔域制度耳。 
现代文：王殉回答： 根据三代祖先追蹭及中宗敬后，并不开立墓位，更改墓地制度就是了。 
English: Wang Jie replied: According to the three-generation ancestor tracing and the Zhongzong respect, it is not to open the graves, but to change the cemetery system.

古文：褚太后临朝时，议褚裒进见之典。
现代文：褚太后管理朝政时，议论谴进见时的仪礼。
English: When the empress dowager was in charge of the imperial court, she discussed the etiquette of the imperial court.

古文：蔡谟、王彪之并以： 虞舜、汉高祖犹执子道，况后乎！
现代文：基望、王彪之都认为： 卢灵、还产塑尚且遵从为子之道，何况太后呢!
English: Both Ji Wang and Wang Biao Zhi believed that: Lu Ling is still productive and conforms to the way of being a son, let alone the empress dowager!

古文：王者父无拜礼。 
现代文：帝王的父亲没有拜见的礼仪。 
English: The emperor's father did not have the etiquette to visit.

古文：尚书八座议以为： 纯子则王道缺，纯臣则孝道亏。
现代文：尚书等八位官员的议论认为： 完全按做子女的规矩办有损于王道，完全按君臣的规矩办有损于孝道。
English: Eight officials, including Shangshu, argued that: to follow the rules of being a child is detrimental to the royal way, and to follow the rules of being a prince and a minister is detrimental to filial piety.

古文：谓公庭如臣，私觌则严父为允。 
现代文：在朝廷如同君臣，私下见面则恭敬父亲，这样公允。 
English: At court, he behaved like a prince, but in private, he respected his father. It was so fair.

古文：汉魏故事，皇太子称臣。
现代文：汉、魏的先例是，皇太子对皇帝称臣。
English: The precedent of the Han and Wei dynasties is that the crown prince declared himself a vassal to the emperor.

古文：新礼以太子既以子为名，而又称臣，臣子兼称，于义不通，除太子称臣之制。
现代文：新礼认为，太子既然以子为名，而又称臣，兼有臣和子两个称谓，在义理上讲不通，废除太子称臣的制度。
English: According to the new rite, since the prince is named after his son, but is also called a minister, and there are two titles of minister and son, it is logically incoherent to abolish the system of the prince calling himself a minister.

古文：挚虞以为： 《孝经》 资于事父以事君 ，义兼臣子，则不嫌称臣，宜定新礼皇太子称臣如旧。 
现代文：挚虞认为： 《孝经》 像事奉父亲那样事奉国君 ，义理上兼有臣和子，所以称臣并没有不妥，应制定新礼，皇太子像以前一样称臣。 
English: Zhengyu thought: "The Book of Filial Piety" says to serve the sovereign as one would serve one's father, so there is nothing wrong with calling someone a vassal. Therefore, a new rite should be established, and the crown prince should call someone a vassal as before.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：韶书依从了。
English: He complied.

古文：太宁三年三月戊辰，明帝立皇子衍为皇太子。
现代文：太宁三年三月戊辰，明帝立皇子司马衍为皇太子。
English: In March of the third year of Taining, the Ming Emperor made the prince Sima Yan the crown prince.

古文：癸巳，诏曰： 礼无生而贵者，故帝元子方之于士。
现代文：癸巳，韶书说： 根据礼没有生下来就尊贵的人，因此皇帝的长子等同于士。
English: Now, the imperial edict said: According to the etiquette, those who are not born are honored, so the eldest son of the emperor is equal to the nobles.

古文：而汉魏以来，尊崇储贰，使官属称臣，朝臣咸拜，此甚无谓。
现代文：而汉、魏以来，尊崇皇储，让官吏们对他称臣，朝廷大臣都行拜礼，这样很没有根据。
English: Since the Han and Wei dynasties, however, the crown prince has been revered, with officials praising him as a minister and ministers of the imperial court paying homage to him. There is no basis for this.

古文：吾昔在东宫，未及启革。
现代文：我过去在束宫，没来得及改革。
English: I used to be in Sokgong, but I didn't have time to reform.

古文：今衍幼冲之年，便臣先达，将令日习所见，谓之自然，此岂可以教之邪！
现代文：如今司马衍年幼，善于奉迎的大臣已先到他那裹，将使他逐日习惯他所看到的，认为那都是自然的事，这难道是能教育他的东西吗!
English: Now that Sima Yan is young, the courteous minister has come to him first, and will make him get used to what he sees every day, thinking that it is all natural, is this something that can educate him!

古文：主者其下公卿内外通议，使必允礼中。 
现代文：主事人以下公卿内外一起议论，让此事一定要符合礼制。 
English: The principals and the following court nobles discuss the matter together inside and outside, so that the matter must be in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：尚书令卞壸议以为： 《周礼》王后太子不会，明礼同于君，皆所以重储贰，异正嫡。
现代文：尚书令卞壹的议论认为： 《周礼》中王后太子不朝见帝王，说明在礼制上与国君相同，都是为了尊重王储，使正室嫡长子与他人有所区分。
English: Shang Shuling's first argument was that: "In the "Weekly Rituals," the queen's crown prince does not meet the emperor, indicating that he is the same as the sovereign in terms of etiquette, all in order to respect the crown prince and distinguish the legitimate eldest son from others.

古文：苟奉之如君，不得不拜矣。
现代文：姑且像对国君一样事奉太子，不得不行拜礼。
English: To say nothing of serving the crown prince as if he were the sovereign, he had to perform a religious service.

古文：太子若存谦冲，故宜答拜。
现代文：太子如果心存谦逊，应当答拜。
English: If the prince is humble, he should respond.

古文：臣以为皇太子之立，郊告天地，正位储宫，岂得同之皇子揖让而已。
现代文：我认为皇太子的确立，祭祀报告天地，居正位做皇储，怎能等同于与皇子行宾主相见之礼呢?
English: In my opinion, how can the establishment of the crown prince, the reporting of the sacrificial rites to heaven and earth, and the enthronement of the crown prince be equated with the ceremony of meeting the prince?

古文：谓宜稽则汉魏，阖朝同拜。 
现代文：应当保留漠、魏的规矩，全朝同拜。 
English: The rules of Mu and Wei should be preserved, and the whole dynasty should worship together.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从了他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：太元中，尚书符问王公已下见皇太子仪及所衣服。
现代文：太元年间，尚书符书公文询问王公以下见皇太子的礼仪及所穿的服装。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, Shangshu Fushu Gongwen asked the prince to see the etiquette of the crown prince and the clothes he wore.

古文：侍中领国子博士车胤议： 朝臣宜硃衣褠帻，拜敬，太子答拜。
现代文：侍中领国子博士车胤议论说： 朝廷大臣应穿朱衣戴头巾，行拜礼，太子答拜。
English: The Master of the Household, Dr. Kuniko Chokutane, commented, "A minister of the Imperial Court should wear a vermillion robe and a turban, perform a prayer, and the crown prince should answer the prayer.

古文：案经传不见其文，故太傅羊祜笺庆太子，称叩头死罪，此则拜之证也。
现代文：经传没有这样的记载，前太傅羊祜书信庆贺太子，称叩头死罪，这是行跪拜礼的证据。
English: According to legend, there is no such record. The former Taifu Yangshuo wrote a letter to congratulate the prince, saying that kowtowing was a capital offense, which is evidence of kneeling worship.

古文：又太宁三年诏议其典，尚书卞壸谓宜稽则汉魏，阖朝同拜。
现代文：此外太宁三年诏书议论这个礼仪，尚书令卞壹说应保留汉、魏的规矩，全朝同拜。
English: In addition, the imperial edict of the third year of Taining discussed this etiquette, and the imperial edict said that the rules of Han and Wei should be preserved, and the whole dynasty should worship together.

古文：其硃衣冠冕，惟施之天朝，宜褠帻而已。 
现代文：穿朱衣戴冠冕，祇适用于皇朝之上，所以戴头巾就行了。 
English: Wearing a scarlet robe and a crown is only applicable to the imperial dynasty, so wearing a headscarf is fine.

古文：朝议多同。
现代文：朝廷上的议论大多相同。
English: Most of the arguments in the imperial court were the same.

古文：太元十二年，议二王后与太子先后。
现代文：太元十二年，议论两位王的后人与太子的地位先后。
English: In the twelfth year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, the descendants of the two kings and the status of the crown prince were discussed.

古文：博士庾弘之及尚书参议，并以为： 陈留，国之上宾。
现代文：博士庾弘之及尚书参与商议，都认为： 陈留是国家的上宾。
English: Dr. Zou Hongzhi and Shang Shu, who participated in the discussion, both believed that: Chen Liu is the state's guest of honor.

古文：皇太子虽国之储贰，犹在臣位，陈留王坐应在太子上。 
现代文：皇太子虽然是国家的皇储，仍在臣位，陈留王的位次应在太子之上。 
English: Although the crown prince is the crown prince of the country, he is still a subject, and Chen Liu Wang's rank should be above the crown prince.

古文：陈留王劢表称疾病积年，求放罢，诏礼官博士议之。
现代文：陈留王司马勤上表说自己患病多年，请求罢退，诏书让礼官博士议论此事。
English: Chen Liu Wang Sima diligently made a statement that he had been ill for many years, requested to resign, and issued an edict to let Dr. Liikan discuss the matter.

古文：博士曹耽云： 劢为祭主而无执祭之期，宜与穆子、孟挚事同。 
现代文：博士曹耽说： 司马勘作为祭祀之主而无主持祭祀的日期，应与穆子、孟絷的事相同。 
English: Dr. Cao Tan said: Sima Kan's role as the master of the ritual without presiding over the date of the ritual should be the same as that of Mu Zi and Meng Yao.

古文：王彪之云： 二王之后，不宜轻致废立。
现代文：王彪之说： 两位王的后人，不宜轻易就废立。
English: Wang Biazhi said, "It is not appropriate for the descendants of two kings to be overthrown so easily.

古文：记传未见有已为君而疾病退罢者，当知古无此礼。
现代文：记传中没见到有已经做了国君而因疾病罢退的情况，可知古代没有这个礼制。
English: In the biographies, we do not see any cases in which a sovereign was forced to step down due to illness. It can be seen that there was no such ritual in ancient times.

古文：孟絷、穆子是方应为君，非陈留之比。 
现代文：孟絷、穆子是正要做国君，与陈留王的情况不一样。 
English: Meng Xuan and Mu Zi were about to become sovereigns, which was not the case with Chen Liu Wang.

古文：咸康四年，成帝临轩，遣使拜太傅、太尉、司空。
现代文：咸康四年，成帝到宫殿前，派遣使者拜太傅、太尉、司空。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xiankang, Emperor Cheng visited the palace and sent an envoy to pray to the Grand Master, the Grand Lieutenants, and the First Officer.

古文：《仪注》，太乐宿悬于殿庭。
现代文：《仪注》，太乐在殿庭上守着乐器。
English: In the "Ritual Commentary," Tai Le guards the musical instruments in the courtyard.

古文：门下奏，非祭祀宴飨，则无设乐之制。
现代文：门庭之下奏乐，不是祭祀宴会，就没有设置音乐的制度。
English: The music played under the courtyard door is not a sacrificial banquet, and there is no system for setting the music.

古文：太常蔡谟议曰： 凡敬其事则备其礼，礼备则制有乐。
现代文：太常蔡谟议论说： 凡是对事情恭敬则礼仪完备，礼仪完备则有音乐的制度。
English: "Whenever there is respect for things, the etiquette is perfect, and when the etiquette is perfect, there is a music system," commented Taizhang Zaimu.

古文：乐者，所以敬事而明义，非为耳目之娱，故冠亦用之，不惟宴飨。
现代文：音乐这东西，是用来表示对事情的恭敬并表明义理的，不是为了感官的欢娱，因此冠礼也用音乐，不仅是宴会。
English: Music is something that is used to show respect for things and to show righteousness, not for the pleasure of the senses, so the coronation also uses music, not only the banquet.

古文：宴飨之有乐，亦所以敬宾也。
现代文：宴会上有音乐，也是用来对宾客表示恭敬的。
English: There is music at the banquet, which is also used to show respect to the guests.

古文：故郤至使楚，楚子飨之，郤至辞曰： 不忘先君之好，贶之以大礼，重之以备乐。 
现代文：因此郁至出使楚国，楚子设宴款待他，郁至推辞说： 不忘先代国君的友好，赐给我重大的礼仪，又加上全套的音乐，从他的言辞看，可以知道宴会上有音乐。
English: Therefore, Ikuzu dispatched an envoy to Chu, and Chu set up a banquet to entertain him. Ikuzu said, "I will not forget the friendship of the previous sovereign. He gave me important etiquette, plus a full set of music. From his words, we can see that there is music at the banquet."

古文：寻斯辞也，则宴乐之意可知矣。公侯大臣，人君所重，故御坐为起，在舆为下，言称伯舅。
现代文：公侯大臣，是国君所器重的人，因而在御座上为他们起立，在车驾上为他们下车，说话时称伯舅。
English: Princely ministers are important to the sovereign, so he stands up for them on the throne, gets out of the car for them in the driveway, and calls them uncle when speaking.

古文：《传》曰 国卿，君之贰也 ，是以命使之日，御亲临轩，百僚陪列，此即敬事之意也。
现代文：《传》说 国卿是国君的副手，因此在任命出使的子。皇帝亲临殿庭，百官陪同列队，造就是对事情恭敬的意思。
English: "Legend" says that the secretary of state is the deputy of the sovereign, so he is appointing the son of the envoy. The emperor comes to the court in person, accompanied by hundreds of officials, which means respect for the matter.

古文：古者，天王飨下国之使，及命将帅，遣使臣，皆有乐。
现代文：古代，天王设宴招待诸侯国的使者，以及任命将帅，派遣使臣，都有音乐。
English: In ancient times, heavenly kings held banquets to invite emissaries from the principalities, as well as appointing generals and dispatching envoys, all of which involved music.

古文：故《诗序》曰： 皇皇者华，君遣使臣也。 
现代文：因此《诗序》说： 皇皇者华，是国君派遣使臣的诗歌。 
English: Therefore, the "Sequence of Poems" says: "Emperor's poetry is the poetry of emissaries sent by the sovereign.

古文：又曰： 《采薇》以遣之，《出车》以劳还，《杕杜》以勤归。 
现代文：又说： 《采薇》用于派遣戍役，《出车》用于慰劳回来的将帅，《杖杜》用于慰劳归来者，都奏乐演唱。
English: He also said: "Tsewei" is used for dispatching enlisted men, "Going out" is used for comforting returning generals, and "Jingdu" is used for comforting returnees, all of which are played and sung.

古文：皆作乐而歌之。今命大使，拜辅相，比于下国之臣，轻重殊矣。
现代文：如今任命大使，拜请辅相，与诸侯国的臣相比，轻重不一样。
English: Nowadays, appointing an ambassador and asking for a second opinion is not as important as appointing a vassal of a vassal state.

古文：轻诚有之，重亦宜然。
现代文：轻礼实在要有音乐，重礼也是适宜的。
English: Light salutations should really have music, and heavy salutations are also appropriate.

古文：故谓临轩遣使，宜有金石之乐。 
现代文：所以说亲临殿前派遣使者时，应有钟磬奏乐。 
English: Therefore, it is said that when an envoy is dispatched in front of the main hall, there should be chime music.

古文：议奏从焉。
现代文：议论奏章依从他的看法。
English: The discussion of the movement follows his view.

古文：汉魏故事，王公群妾见于夫人，夫人不答拜。
现代文：汉、魏旧例是，王公的众妾拜见夫人，夫人不答拜。
English: In the Han and Wei dynasties, it was customary for the prince's concubines to visit his wife, but she did not respond.

古文：新礼以为礼无不答，更制妃公侯夫人答妾拜。
现代文：新礼认为礼没有不回敬的，改变制度，妃及公侯夫人回敬妾的拜礼。
English: The new etiquette considered that there was no etiquette without reciprocation, so the system was changed, and the princess and the prince's wife reciprocated the etiquette of the concubine.

古文：挚虞以为： 礼，妾事女君如妇之事姑，妾服女君期，女君不报，则敬与妇同而又加贱也。
现代文：挚虞认为： 按照礼，妾事奉夫人如同媳妇事奉婆婆，妾为夫人服丧一年，夫人没有相应的礼节，可见表示恭敬与做媳妇相同又更加低贱。
English: Zhengyu believed that: According to the etiquette, the concubine served the wife like the daughter-in-law served the mother-in-law, the concubine mourned for the wife for one year, the wife did not have the corresponding etiquette, it can be seen that the deference was the same as that of the daughter-in-law and even lower.

古文：名位不同，本无酬报。
现代文：名分地位不同，本来就没有酬报。
English: Because of the difference in rank and status, there is no reward.

古文：礼无不答，义不谓此。
现代文：礼没有不回敬的，说的不是这种情况。
English: This is not a case of saying thank you but no thanks.

古文：先圣殊嫡庶之别，以绝陵替之渐。
现代文：先代圣人区分嫡庶，目的是断绝凌驾取代的势头。
English: The previous saint distinguished between legitimate and illegitimate, with the aim of breaking the momentum of overriding and replacing.

古文：峻明其防，犹有僭违。
现代文：防范严明，仍然有越轨违礼的情况。
English: Strict precautions are in place, but there are still cases of transgression.

古文：宜定新礼，自如其旧。 
现代文：应该制定新礼，自然如同旧制。 
English: A new rite should be established, naturally following the old system.

古文：诏可其议。
现代文：韶书认可了他的意见。
English: The decree endorsed his opinion.

古文：五礼之别，其四曰军，所以和外宁内，保大定功者也。
现代文：五礼的区分，第四是军事，军队是用来在国外求得和平在国内求得安宁的。
English: The fourth is military. The military is used to seek peace abroad and tranquility at home.

古文：但兵者凶事，故因搜狩而习之。
现代文：但军事是凶事，因此藉狩猎来进行演习。
English: But the military is a dangerous business, so hunting is the best way to practice.

古文：汉仪，立秋之日，自郊礼毕，始扬威武，斩牲于东门，以荐陵庙。
现代文：汉代的礼仪，立秋那天，在郊礼结束后，开始展示威仪武功，在束门斩杀祭祀用的牲畜，奉献给陵寝宗庙。
English: On the day of the beginning of autumn, after the end of the suburb ceremony, the etiquette of the Han Dynasty began to show the dignity of martial arts, slaughtering sacrificial livestock at the Shukumen and dedicating it to the Mausoleum.

古文：其仪，乘舆御戎路，白马硃鬣，躬执弩射牲，牲以鹿麛。
现代文：仪式是，天子驾兵车，白马红鬣，亲自执弩射杀祭品，祭品用幼鹿。
English: The ceremony is that the heavenly son drives a chariot, a white horse and a red donkey, and personally shoots and kills the sacrificial offering. The sacrificial offering is a young deer.

古文：太宰令谒者各一人载以获车，驰送陵庙。
现代文：太宰令、谒者各一人把鹿装到车上，快速送到陵寝和宗庙。
English: Dazai Rong and Zou each loaded a deer onto a car and quickly drove it to the mausoleum and ancestral temple.

古文：还宫，遣使者赍束帛以赐武官。
现代文：回到宫中，派遣使者送束帛赏赐给武官。
English: Returning to the palace, he sent an envoy to bring a bunch of money as a reward to the military attaché.

古文：武官肄兵，习战阵之仪。
现代文：武官练兵，演习战阵的仪式。
English: The ceremony of military officers training soldiers and practicing battle formations.

古文：斩牲之礼，名曰刘。
现代文：斩杀祭品的礼仪，名称叫躯刘。
English: The ritual of beheading the sacrificial offering goes by the name of sō liu.

古文：兵官皆肄孙吴兵法六十四阵。
现代文：官兵都演习孙吴兵法六十四阵。
English: The officers and soldiers are all practicing the sixty-four formations of Sun Wu's Military Law.

古文：既还，公卿已下陈阳前街，乘舆到，公卿已下拜，天子下车，公卿亲识颜色，然后还宫。
现代文：收兵后，公卿以下的官吏在雒阳前街列队，皇帝驾到，公卿以下官吏下拜，天子下车，公卿目睹皇帝容颜，然后回宫。
English: After receiving the soldiers, the officials below the nobility lined up in the streets of Poyang Qianjie. The emperor arrived, the officials below the nobility bowed down, the emperor got off, the nobility witnessed the emperor's face, and then returned to the palace.

古文：古语曰在车下车，则惟此时施行。
现代文：古代有一句话叫在车下车，那么祇是在这时施行。
English: In ancient times, there was a saying that you should get off the bus, so this is the only time to do it.

古文：汉世率以为常。
现代文：汉代大概以此为常礼。
English: During the Han Dynasty, this was probably the usual form of greeting.

古文：至献帝建安二十一年，魏国有司奏： 古四时讲武，皆于农隙。
现代文：到了献帝建安二十一年，魏国官吏上奏： 古代四季演练武功，都在农事间隙。
English: In the twenty-first year of Emperor Jian'an, the officials of the State of Wei played: The four seasons of ancient times to practice martial arts are all in the gap of agricultural affairs.

古文：汉西京承秦制，三时不讲，惟十月都讲。
现代文：漠代西京继承秦代制度，三个季节不演练武功，衹在十月有武功考试。
English: The Western Capital of the Western Desert Dynasty inherited the system of the Qin Dynasty. Martial arts were not practiced for three seasons, but there was a martial arts exam in October.

古文：今金革未偃，士众素习，可无四时讲武。
现代文：如今战事没有平息，军民平素熟悉军事，可以没有四季的演练。
English: Now that the war has not subsided, the military and the people are familiar with the military, and there is no need for four seasons of drills.

古文：但以立秋择吉日大朝车骑，号曰阅兵，上合礼名，下承汉制。 
现代文：但在立秋选择吉利的日子大规模检阅车马兵士，号称阅兵，对上符合礼仪名称，对下继承汉代制度。 
English: However, at the beginning of autumn, the auspicious day was chosen for a large-scale review of chariot and horse soldiers, known as a military parade, which is consistent with the name of the etiquette, and inherits the Han Dynasty system.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏章被认可。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：是冬，阅兵，魏王亲执金鼓以令进退。
现代文：这年冬天，阅兵，魏王亲自掌握金钮战鼓来指挥进退。
English: This winter, in the military parade, Wei Wang personally mastered the golden war drum to direct the advance and retreat.

古文：延康元年，魏文帝为魏王。
现代文：延康元年，魏文帝做魏王。
English: In the first year of Yan Kang, Wei Wendi became the king of Wei.

古文：是年六月立秋，阅兵于东郊，公卿相仪，王御华盖，亲令金鼓之节。
现代文：遣年六月立秋，在束郊阅兵，公卿司仪赞礼，魏王的车用华盖，亲自指挥金釭战鼓的节奏。
English: At the turn of the year in June, a military parade was held in the suburbs of Sokcho, nobles officiated at the ceremony of praise, and the king of Wei personally directed the rhythm of the golden cymbals and war drums.

古文：魏明帝太和元年十月，又阅兵。
现代文：魏明帝太和元年十月，又一次阅兵。
English: In October of the first year of the Wei and Ming Dynasties, there was another military parade.

古文：武帝泰始四年九月，咸守元年，太康四年，六年冬，皆自临宣武观，大阅众军，然不自令进退也。
现代文：武帝泰始四年九月，咸宁元年，太康四年，六年冬季，都亲临宣武观，大规模检阅军队，但不亲自指挥进退。
English: Emperor Wu in September of the 4th year, Emperor Xianning in the 1st year, Emperor Taikang in the 4th year, and Emperor Wu in the winter of the 6th year, all personally visited Xuanwu and inspected the army on a large scale, but did not personally command the advance and retreat.

古文：自惠帝以后，其礼遂废。
现代文：从惠帝以后，这个礼仪被废置了。
English: After Emperor Hui, this etiquette was abolished.

古文：元帝太兴四年，诏左右卫及诸营教习，依大习仪作雁羽仗。
现代文：五童友兴四年，韶书令左右卫及各军营操练，按照大习的仪式制作雁羽仗。
English: In the fourth year of Wudong Youxing, the imperial edict ordered the left and right guards and all military camps to practice, and the goose and feather battle was made according to the ceremony of the big study.

古文：成帝咸和中，诏内外诸军戏兵于南郊之场，故其地因名斗场。
现代文：成帝咸和年间，韶书命令内外各军队在南郊的空场上比武，因此那个地方被称作斗场。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chengxian and the reign of Emperor Xianwu, Zenshu ordered the armies at home and abroad to compete in the open field in the southern suburb, so that place was called the battleground.

古文：自后籓镇桓、庾诸方伯往往阅习，然朝廷无事焉。
现代文：从那以后，地方长官桓、庾等一方首领常常阅兵操练，然而朝廷没有这样的事了。
English: Since then, local governors such as Huan and Zou have often held military parades and drills, but the imperial court has never done so.

古文：汉魏故事，遣将出征，符节郎授节钺于朝堂。
现代文：汉、魏的先例是，派遣将领出征，符节郎在朝廷大堂上授符节和斧铁。
English: The precedent of the Han and Wei dynasties was that generals were dispatched to lead the expedition, and the bearer of the imperial seal was awarded the imperial seal and axe in the imperial hall.

古文：其后荀顗等所定新礼，遣将，御临轩，尚书受节钺，依古兵书跪而推毂之义也。
现代文：后来荀颉等人所制定的新礼是，派遣将领，皇帝亲临殿前，尚书授符节斧钹，这是依据古代兵书帝王任命将帅有为其跪而推车的隆重礼遇而定的。
English: Later, the new rite formulated by Yu and others was to send generals, the emperor personally came to the palace, and Shang Shuxu awarded the festival axe, which was based on the grand courtesy of the ancient emperor appointing generals to kneel and push the cart.

古文：五礼之别，其五曰嘉，宴飨冠婚之道于是乎备。
现代文：五礼的区分，第五叫 嘉 ，宴会、冠礼、婚礼的道理因此而齐备。
English: The distinction of the five rites, the fifth is called Jia, the reason for the banquet, the coronation, and the wedding are therefore complete.

古文：周末崩离，宾射宴飨之则罕复能行，冠婚饮食之法又多迁变。
现代文：周代末年社会动荡，天子以诸侯为宾而在朝上进行的射礼以及宴会的礼仪规，很少还能再施行，冠礼、婚礼及饮食的方式又有了很多变迁。
English: The social upheaval at the end of the Zhou Dynasty, the shooting ceremony performed by the emperor to the emperor as a guest of the princes, and the etiquette rules for banquets, can rarely be enforced again, and there have been many changes in the way of coronation, wedding, and diet.

古文：《周礼》虽有服冕之数，而无天子冠文。
现代文：《周礼》虽然有服饰冠冕的礼数，但没有天子之冠的记载。
English: Although "Zhou Li" has the number of clothing crowns, there is no record of the crown of the Son of Heaven.

古文：又《仪礼》云，公侯之有冠礼，夏之末造也。
现代文：此外《仪礼》说，公侯有冠礼，是从夏朝末年开始的。
English: In addition, "Rituals" says that the prince has a crown ceremony, which began at the end of the Summer Dynasty.

古文：王、郑皆以为夏末上下相乱，篡弑由生，故作公侯冠礼，则明无天子冠礼之审也。
现代文：王、郑都认为夏末上下相乱，篡位弑君的事由此而产生，因此制定公侯冠礼，造就说明确实没有天子冠礼。
English: Both Wang and Zheng believed that there was a turmoil at the end of the summer, and the usurpation of the crown prince occurred as a result. Therefore, they formulated the prince's crown ceremony, which showed that there was indeed no crown ceremony for the son of heaven.

古文：大夫又无冠礼，古者五十而后爵，何大夫冠礼之有。
现代文：大夫也没有冠礼，古代五十岁以后才授爵位，怎么可能有大夫的冠礼呢?
English: There is no coronation for doctors. In ancient times, knighthoods were only awarded after the age of fifty. How could there be a coronation for doctors?

古文：周人年五十而有贤才，则试以大夫之事，犹行士礼也。
现代文：周朝人到了五十岁才可能德才兼备，那时任用他们做大夫的事，如同施行士礼。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, it was only possible for people to be both virtuous and talented when they reached the age of fifty. At that time, appointing them to be doctors was like performing the rite of a scholar.

古文：故筮日筮宾，冠于阼以著代，醮于客位，三加弥尊，皆士礼耳。
现代文：因此为日期和宾客占卦，在大堂东面行冠礼以彰明辈次，在客位行醮礼，三次加冠更表示尊贵，逭都是士礼。
English: Therefore, for the date and the guests, the east side of the lobby is crowned to show the generations, and the guest seat is crowned, and the three crowns are more honorable, and the crowns are ceremonial.

古文：然汉代以来，天子诸侯颇采其仪。
现代文：然而漠代以来，天子诸侯多采用这个礼仪。
English: However, this etiquette has been adopted by most princes since the time of the Muses.

古文：正月甲子若丙子为吉日，可加元服，仪从冠礼是也。
现代文：正月甲子和丙子是吉日，可以施行加冠礼，仪式依从冠礼。
English: The first day of the first month and the second day of the third month are auspicious days, and the crowning ceremony can be performed, and the ceremony follows the crowning ceremony.

古文：汉顺帝冠，又兼用曹褒新礼，乘舆初加缁布进贤，次爵弁、武弁，次通天，皆于高庙，以礼谒见世祖庙。
现代文：漠顺帝加冠，又兼用曹褒新礼，服饰先加缁布进贤冠，然后是雀弁、武弁，再后来是通天冠，都在高庙，按照礼谒见世祖庙。
English: The crown was added by the Emperor Moo Shun, and the Cao Bao New Rite was also used. The clothing was first added with the cloth into the virtuous crown, then the sparrow, the military, and later the crown of heaven, all in the high temple, according to the etiquette of the ancestral temple.

古文：王公已下，初加进贤而已。
现代文：王公以下，开始加进贤冠而已。
English: After Wang Gong, they only started to add Xian Guan.

古文：案此文，始冠缁布，从古制也，冠于宗庙是也。
现代文：根据此文，最初戴缁布冠，是依从古代制度，在宗庙加冠。
English: According to this article, the original wearing of the cloth crown was in accordance with the ancient system, and the crown was added in the ancestral temple.

古文：魏天子冠一加。
现代文：逸天子加冠一次。
English: Yatenzi crowned once.

古文：其说曰： 士礼三加，加有成也。
现代文：这个说法是，士礼加冠三次，表示有所成就。
English: The saying is that if you win three times, it means you have achieved something.

古文：至于天子诸侯无加数之文者，将以践阼临下，尊极德备，岂得与士同也。
现代文：至于天子诸侯没有加冠次数记载，是因为天子将君临天下，地位至尊道德完备，怎能与士相同呢?
English: As for the number of times the crowns of the princes of the sons of heaven are not recorded, it is because the sons of heaven will reign over the world, their status is supreme and their morality is complete. How can they be the same as the nobles?

古文：魏氏太子再加，皇子王公世子乃三加。
现代文：秀抵太子加冠两次，皇子和王公长子加冠三次。
English: The crown was added to the crown of the crown prince twice, the crown was added to the crown of the prince and the eldest son of the prince three times.

古文：孙毓以为一加再加，皆非也。
现代文：逊范认为分别是一次和两次，都不对。
English: Xuanfan believes that it is not right to do it once and twice respectively.

古文：《礼》醮辞曰： 令月吉曰，以岁之正，以月之令。 
现代文：《仪礼》醮辞说： 吉利的月份，吉利的子，因为年份善，因为月份吉。 
English: The preface to "Rituals" says: auspicious month, auspicious son, because the year is good, because the month is auspicious.

古文：案鲁襄公冠以冬，汉惠帝冠以三月，明无定月。
现代文：案鲁襄公在冬天行冠礼，汉惠帝在三月行冠礼，说明没有固定的月份。
English: Emperor Xiang of Qianlu made the coronation in winter, Emperor Han Hui made the coronation in March, indicating that there is no fixed month.

古文：而后汉以来，帝加元服咸以正月。
现代文：而后漠以来，皇帝加冠都在正月。
English: Since then, the emperor's coronation has always been in the first month of the year.

古文：及咸宁二年秋闰九月，遣使冠汝南王柬，此则非必岁首。
现代文：到咸宁二年秋天闰九月，派遣使者为汝南王司马柬加冠，说明不一定在正月。
English: In the autumn of the second year of Xianning, in September, an envoy was sent to crown the king of South Run, Sima Kam, indicating that it was not necessarily in the first month.

古文：礼冠于庙，然武、惠冠太子，太子皆即庙见，斯亦拟在庙之仪也。
现代文：根据礼冠礼在宗庙举行，然而武帝、惠帝为太子加冠，太子都去宗庙参拜祖先，这也是仿照在宗庙的仪式。
English: According to the ritual, the crowning ceremony was held in the ancestral temple, but Emperor Wu and Emperor Hui crowned the prince, and the prince went to the ancestral temple to visit his ancestors, which was also modeled on the ceremony in the ancestral temple.

古文：穆帝、孝武将冠，皆先以币告庙，讫又庙见也。
现代文：穆帝、孝武帝将行冠礼，都先以缯帛祭告宗庙，冠礼之后再次拜谒祖庙。
English: Emperor Mu and Emperor Xiaowu will perform the coronation ceremony. Both will first offer a burnt offering to the ancestral temple, and then pay homage to the ancestral temple again after the coronation.

古文：惠帝之为太子，将冠，武帝临轩，使兼司徒高阳王珪加冠，兼光禄大夫屯骑校尉华暠赞冠。
现代文：惠帝做太子时，将行冠礼，武帝亲临殿前，派兼司徒高阳王司马珪为太子加冠，兼光禄大夫屯骑校尉华虞为加冠礼赞唱司仪。
English: When Hui Di became the crown prince, he would perform the crowning ceremony. Before Emperor Wu himself came to the palace, he sent Gaoyang Wang Sima Qian, who was also a scholar, to crown the crown prince, and Guanglu Dafu Tujiai Lieutenant Hua Yu, who was also a scholar, to sing the crowning ceremony.

古文：江左诸帝将冠，金石宿设，百僚陪位。
现代文：江束几位皇帝将行冠礼，预先设置乐器，百官陪席。
English: Several emperors of Jiangsu Province will perform the coronation ceremony, with musical instruments set up in advance and hundreds of officials in attendance.

古文：又豫于殿上铺大床，御府令奉冕、帻、簪导、衮服以授侍中常侍，太尉加帻，太保加冕。
现代文：又事先在殿上铺设大床，御府令手捧冕、头巾、簪导、衮服交给侍中常侍，太尉负责系头巾，太保加冕。
English: In addition, a large bed was laid in advance in the hall, and the crown, headscarf, sash, and imperial robe were handed over by the imperial commanding officer to the chamberlains. The captain was responsible for tying the headscarf, and the grand chamberlain for crowning.

古文：将加冕，太尉跪读祝文曰： 令月吉日，始加元服。
现代文：将要加冕时，太尉跪着读祝辞说： 吉月吉曰，开始加冕。
English: When the coronation was about to take place, the captain knelt down and read a congratulatory speech, saying: "Kichigetsukichi, begin the coronation."

古文：皇帝穆穆，思弘衮职。
现代文：皇帝敬穆，思考弘大帝王事业。
English: The emperor respected Mu and thought about the cause of promoting great emperors.

古文：钦若昊天，六合是式。
现代文：敬仰吴天，效法天地四方。
English: Admire Wu Tian, imitate heaven and earth, and spread out in all directions.

古文：率遵祖考，永永无极。
现代文：一切遵从祖先，永远没有终点。
English: Everything follows the ancestors, there is never an end.

古文：眉寿惟祺，介兹景福。 
现代文：长寿吉祥，佐助大福。 
English: Long life is auspicious, Sasuke Daifuku.

古文：加冕讫，侍中系玄紞，侍中脱帝绛纱服，加衮服冕冠。
现代文：加冕完毕，侍中系黑色帽带，侍中脱去皇帝的绛纱服，穿戴衮服冕冠。
English: After the coronation, the attendants wore black bonnets. The attendants took off the emperor's robe and put on the imperial crown.

古文：事毕，太保率群臣奉觞上寿，王公以下三称万岁乃退。
现代文：事情结束，太保带领群臣举杯祝寿，王公以下的人高呼三遍万岁然后退下。
English: At the end of the event, the eunuch led the group of courtiers in a toast, and those below the prince shouted hooray three times and then retreated.

古文：案《仪注》，一加帻冕而已。
现代文：根据《仪注》，祇是加一次头巾冠冕而已。
English: According to the "Etiquette Note," it is only necessary to add a turban crown.

古文：泰始十年，南宫王承年十五，依旧应冠。
现代文：泰始十年，南宫王司马承十五岁，依照旧礼应当加冠。
English: In the tenth year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, King Sima Cheng of the Southern Palace was fifteen years old. According to the old rite, he should be crowned.

古文：有司议奏： 礼，十五成童，国君十五而生子，以明可冠之宜。
现代文：官吏议论上奏说： 礼，十五岁进入青年，国君十五岁而生儿子，以此说明了加冠的适合时间。
English: An official commented on the record: "Ri, fifteen years old into youth, the king was fifteen years old and gave birth to a son, thus illustrating the appropriate time for the crowning.

古文：又汉魏遣使冠诸王，非古典。 
现代文：此外汉、魏派遣使者为诸王加冠，不是古代制度。 
English: In addition, the Han Dynasty and the Wei Dynasty sent emissaries to crown the kings, which was not the ancient system.

古文：于是制诸王十五而冠，不复加使命。
现代文：于是制定诸王十五岁加冠，不再派使者。
English: Therefore, it was decreed that all kings should be crowned at the age of fifteen, and that no more emissaries should be sent.

古文：王彪之云，《礼》、《传》冠皆在庙。
现代文：王彪之说，《礼》、《传》记载加冠礼都在宗庙。
English: Wang Biao Zhi said that the "Rite" and "Legend" recorded the crowning ceremony in the ancestral temple.

古文：案成帝既加元服，车驾出拜于太庙，以告成也。
现代文：案成帝加冠以后，乘车出去到太庙行礼，报告成功。
English: After the crowning of the emperor, he went by car to the Great Temple to perform a salute, reporting success.

古文：盖亦犹拟在庙之仪。
现代文：这大概也是模仿在宗庙的仪式。
English: This is probably also an imitation of the ceremony at the ancestral temple.

古文：魏齐王正始四年，立皇后甄氏，其仪不存。
现代文：魏齐王正始四年，立皇后甄氏，那次的仪式没有留存。
English: In the first four years of the reign of King Wei of Qi, the Empress Zhen was established, but the ceremony did not survive.

古文：武帝咸宁二年，临轩，遣太尉贾充策立皇后杨氏，纳悼后也。
现代文：武帝咸宁二年，皇帝亲临殿前，派太尉买充策立皇后杨氏，娶进悼后。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wu's reign, Emperor Xianning personally came to the palace and sent a lieutenant to buy the Yang clan's empress Yang, who married into mourning.

古文：因大赦，赐王公以下各有差，百僚上礼。
现代文：为此大赦，对王公以下有不同赏赐，百官送礼。
English: For this reason, there was an amnesty, and there were different rewards for princes and below, and gifts were given by a hundred officials.

古文：太康八年，有司奏： 婚礼纳徵，大婚用玄纁束帛，加珪，马二驷。
现代文：太康八年，官吏上奏： 婚礼中的纳征礼，天子婚礼用黑色币帛，加珪，马八匹。
English: In the 8th year of Taikang, the officials played the following music: the collection of gifts in the wedding, the wedding of the son of heaven with black coins, gallons, and eight horses.

古文：王侯玄纁束帛，加璧，乘马。
现代文：王侯用黑色币帛，加璧，马四匹。
English: The prince used a black coin purse, added gems, and rode four horses.

古文：大夫用玄纁束帛，加羊。
现代文：大夫用黑色币帛，加羊。
English: The doctor takes a black coin and adds a sheep.

古文：古者以皮马为庭实，天子加以谷珪，诸侯加大璋，可依周礼改璧用璋，其羊雁酒米玄纁如故。
现代文：占代把皮毛马匹作为陈列于中庭的礼品，天子加上谷珪，诸侯加上大璋，可以按照周代礼仪把用璧改为用璋，其他如羊雁酒米丝帛依旧。
English: In the Zhan Dynasty, the fur horses were displayed as gifts in the atrium. The emperor and the emperor's concubines and the princes and the princes' concubines could change the use of "璧" to "" according to the Zhou Dynasty etiquette. Other gifts such as "羊雁酒米丝" remained the same.

古文：诸侯婚礼，加纳采、告期、亲迎各帛五匹，及纳徵马四匹，皆令夫家自备。
现代文：诸侯婚礼，加上纳彩礼、告期礼、亲迎礼各币帛五匹，到纳征礼时所用四匹马，都让夫家自备。
English: For princely weddings, in addition to the bride price, the bride price, and the bride and groom's welcome, the husband's family was allowed to bring their own four horses, which were used to collect the bride price.

古文：惟璋，官为具致之。 
现代文：衹有璋，官府为他准备送去。 
English: However, the government is preparing to send him away.

古文：尚书硃整议： 案魏氏故事，王娶妃、公主嫁之礼，天子诸侯以皮马为庭实，天子加以谷珪，诸侯加以大璋。
现代文：尚书朱整议论说： 根据魏朝旧例，王娶妃、公主出嫁的礼仪，天子诸侯用皮毛马匹作为陈列中庭的礼物，天子加上谷珪，诸侯加上大璋。
English: Shangshu Zhu made a comprehensive discussion and said: According to the old case of the Wei Dynasty, the etiquette of the king marrying a princess and the princess marrying a prince, the princes used fur horses as gifts to display in the atrium, the princes plus the corn stalks, and the princes plus the big stalks.

古文：汉高后制聘，后黄金二百斤，马十二匹。
现代文：漠代高后制定聘礼，皇后黄金二百斤，马十二匹。
English: The bride price was set at 200 jin of the queen's gold and 12 horses.

古文：夫人金五十斤，马四匹。
现代文：夫人黄金五十斤，马四匹。
English: Fifty kilos of gold for his wife, and four horses.

古文：魏氏王娶妃、公主嫁之礼，用绢百九十匹。
现代文：魏朝王娶妃、公主出嫁的礼物，用一百九十匹绢。
English: One hundred and ninety horses were used as wedding gifts for kings and princesses of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：晋兴，故事用绢三百匹。 
现代文：晋朝兴起，先例用三百匹绢。 
English: With the rise of the Jin Dynasty, the precedent was set with three hundred yakitori.

古文：诏曰： 公主嫁由夫氏，不宜皆为备物，赐钱使足而已。
现代文：韶书说： 公主出嫁到夫家，不宜都为她准备好物品，给她足够用的钱就行了。
English: "When a princess marries and goes to her husband's house, it is not proper to prepare all kinds of things for her. It is enough to give her enough money.

古文：惟给璋，余如故事。 
现代文：衹给璋，其他依照先例。 
English: One gives to the other, and the other follows the precedent.

古文：成帝咸康二年，临轩，遣使持节、兼太保、领军将军诸葛恢，兼太尉、护军将军孔愉，六礼备物，拜皇后杜氏。
现代文：成帝咸康二年，皇帝亲临殿前，派使持节、兼太保、领军将军诸葛恢，兼太尉、护军将军孔愉，准备好婚礼的礼物，迎拜皇后杜氏。
English: In the second year of Emperor Kangxi's reign, the emperor himself came to the palace and sent the envoys Ji Jie, concurrently the grand marshal and the leading general Zhu Ge Wei, concurrently the grand marshal and the escort general Kong You, to prepare the wedding gifts and welcome the queen Du Shi.

古文：即日入宫，帝御太极殿，群臣毕贺。
现代文：当天入宫，皇帝到太极殿，大臣们一齐祝贺。
English: On the day he entered the palace, the emperor went to the Taiji Hall, and the ministers congratulated him together.

古文：贺，非礼也。
现代文：祝贺并非礼仪规定。
English: Congratulation is not a rule of etiquette.

古文：王者婚礼，礼无其制。
现代文：帝王的婚礼，礼仪没有定制。
English: The emperor's wedding, the etiquette is not customized.

古文：《春秋》 祭公逆王后于纪 ，《谷梁》、《左氏传》说与《公羊》又不同。
现代文：《春秋》 墓公在纪迎娶王后 ，《谷梁传》、《左传》的说解与《公羊传》又不同。
English: The explanation of "Spring and Autumn," "The Tomb Raider Marries the Queen," "The Tale of the Valley Beam" and "The Tale of the Left" is different from that of "The Tale of the Ram."

古文：而自汉魏遗事，并皆阙略。
现代文：而从汉魏遣留下来的事迹看，都缺漏或省略。
English: But from the perspective of the deeds left behind by the Han and Wei dynasties, they are all missing or omitted.

古文：武、惠纳后，江左又无复《仪注》。
现代文：武帝、惠帝娶皇后，江束又不再依据《仪注》。
English: Emperor Wu and Emperor Hui married empresses, and Empress Jiang was no longer based on the "Commentary."

古文：故成帝将纳杜后，太常华恆始与博士参定其仪。
现代文：因此成帝将娶杜后，太常华恒开始舆博士商定仪式。
English: Therefore, Emperor Cheng will marry Empress Dowager Du, and Emperor Taizhang will begin the pre-arranged ceremony.

古文：据杜预《左氏传》说，主婚是供其婚礼之币而已。
现代文：据杜预的《左传》注说，主婚祇是提供婚礼用的资财而已。
English: According to Du Yuan's "Zo Zhuan" commentary, the main wedding is only to provide funds for the wedding.

古文：又，周灵王求婚于齐，齐侯问于晏桓子，桓子对曰： 夫妇所生若如人，姑姊妹则称先守某公之遗女若如人。 
现代文：此外，周灵王向齐国求婚，齐侯向晏桓子询问答辞，桓子回答说： 夫妻所生的有多少人，没有女儿而有姐妹和姑母，就说先君某公的遣女多少人。 
English: In addition, King Zhou Ling proposed marriage to the State of Qi, and the State of Qi inquired about the reply from the Prince of Qi. The Prince replied: "How many people are born from a married couple, and how many people have sisters and aunts without a daughter, let's say how many women were sent by a certain prince."

古文：此则天子之命自得下达，臣下之答径自上通。
现代文：这样天子的命令可以下达，臣下的回答直接上通。
English: In this way, the emperor's orders can be issued, and the answers of his subjects can be passed on directly.

古文：先儒以为丘明详录其事，盖为王者婚娶之礼也。
现代文：先代儒生认为左丘明详细记录了这些事，大概就是指帝王婚娶的礼仪。
English: The previous generation of Confucians believed that Zuo Qiuming recorded these things in detail, probably referring to the emperor's wedding etiquette.

古文：故成帝临轩，遣使称制拜后，然其《仪注》又不具存。
现代文：因此成帝到殿前，派使者以皇帝的名义迎娶皇后，但是《仪注》又没有完备地保存。
English: Therefore, before Emperor Cheng Rong came to the palace, he sent an envoy to marry the empress in the name of the emperor, but the "Etiquette Note" was not completely preserved.

古文：康帝建元元年，纳皇后褚氏，而《仪注》陛者不设旄头。
现代文：康帝建元元年，娶皇后褚氏，而《仪注》殿堂台阶不设置旄牛尾做饰物的旗子。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, Emperor Kang married the Empress Zou, and the steps of the hall of fame of the "Graphic Note" do not set up the flag of the yakitori as an ornament.

古文：殿中御史奏： 今迎皇后，依成恭皇后入宫御物，而《仪注》至尊衮冕升殿，旄头不设，求量处。
现代文：殿中御史上奏说： 今天迎娶皇后，依照成恭皇后入宫时的用品，而《仪注》说皇帝穿衮服戴皇冠上殿，不设旄牛尾的旗子，请酌情裁处。
English: The Imperial Historian's report in the palace said: Today's wedding of the empress is in accordance with the supplies of the Empress Chenggong when she entered the palace, and the "Graphic Note" says that the emperor will wear the imperial robe and crown to the palace, and there will be no flag with a cow's tail, please judge at your own discretion.

古文：又案，昔迎恭皇后，惟作青龙旗，其余皆即御物。
现代文：又案，过去迎娶恭皇后，祇是做青龙旗，其余都是御用物品。
English: According to another case, in the past, only the Qinglong Banner was made for the wedding of Empress Qiong, and the rest were official items.

古文：今当临轩遣使，而立五牛旗，旄头罼并出即用，故致今阙。 
现代文：今适逢上朝派遣使者，而设立的是五牛旗，旄头旗和毕罕旗都用于别处，因而造成今天没有。 
English: Now is the right time to send an envoy to the previous government, but the five-cow flag, the Shantou flag and the Bihan flag are all used elsewhere, resulting in the absence of today.

古文：诏曰： 所以正法服、升太极者，以敬其始，故备其礼也。
现代文：韶书说： 之所以要按礼制穿戴及登太极殿，是因为要对一件事的开始恭敬，因而要礼仪完备。
English: "The reason why we should dress according to the etiquette and go to the Taiji Temple is because we should respect the beginning of an event, so we should have a complete etiquette.

古文：今云何更阙所重而撤法物邪！
现代文：现在说什么替换或缺少重要物品而要撤去仪仗用品呢!
English: Now, what about replacing or removing ceremonial objects due to lack of important items!

古文：又恭后神主入庙，先帝诏后礼宜降，不宜建五牛旗，而今犹复设之邪！
现代文：再说，恭后的牌位进入宗庙，先帝下诏书说皇后的礼仪应降等级，不宜设立五牛旗，而今天还是又设立了五牛旗!
English: What's more, the card rank of the queen regnant entered the ancestral temple, the former emperor issued an edict saying that the queen's etiquette should be downgraded, and it was not appropriate to set up the five-cow flag, but today the five-cow flag was still set up!

古文：既不设五牛旗，则旄头罼之物易具也。 
现代文：既然不设五牛旗，那么旄头旗、睾罕旗一类物品容易准备。 
English: Since there is no five-cow flag, it is easy to prepare items such as the steamed bread flag and the testicle flag.

古文：又诏曰： 旧制既难准，且于今而备，亦非宜。
现代文：又下诏说： 旧礼制已难以效法，又要在今日完备，也不适宜。
English: He also said, "The old etiquette is difficult to imitate, and it is not appropriate to complete it today."

古文：府库之储，惟当以供军国之费耳。
现代文：仓库中的储备衹应用于军队国家的花费。
English: Stockpiles in warehouses are used to pay for the country's military.

古文：法服仪饰粗令举，其余兼副杂器停之。 
现代文：礼仪用服饰用品稍加准备，其余一物多用的器具停用。 
English: A little preparation is needed for ceremonial clothing items, and the rest of the multi-purpose equipment should not be used.

古文：穆帝升平元年，将纳皇后何氏。
现代文：穆帝升平元年，将娶皇后何氏。
English: In the first year of Mu Di's ascension to the throne, he will marry the Empress He.

古文：太常王彪之大引经传及诸故事以定其礼，深非《公羊》婚礼不称主人之义。
现代文：太常王彪之博引经传及诸多先例来确定婚礼，深切反对《公羊传》婚礼不以天子为主人的说法。
English: Too often, Wang Biao's book quotes scriptures and many precedents to determine the wedding, and is deeply opposed to the saying that the wedding in "The Ram" does not take the heavenly son as the master.

古文：又曰： 王者之于四海，无不臣妾，虽复父兄之亲，师友之贤，皆纯臣也。
现代文：又说： 帝王在四海之内，没有不是他的臣或妾的，虽然还有父兄的亲情，有师长朋友的贤明，但他们绝对是臣。
English: He also said: Within the four seas, there is no emperor who is not his vassal or concubine. Although they have the affection of their father and brother, and the wisdom of their teachers and friends, they are definitely vassals.

古文：夫崇三纲之始，以定乾坤之仪，安有天父之尊，而称臣下之命以纳伉俪。
现代文：推崇三纲的出发点，就是要确定天地间的礼仪，哪有享有天父的尊位，却要按照臣下的命令去娶妻的?
English: The starting point of promoting the three principles is to determine the etiquette between heaven and earth. Who enjoys the dignity of the heavenly father, but wants to marry a wife according to the orders of his subordinates?

古文：安有臣下之卑，而称天父之名以行大礼。
现代文：哪有居臣下的卑位，却要以天父的名义去主持大礼的?
English: Who has a lowly position as a vassal, but wants to preside over a grand ceremony in the name of the heavenly father?

古文：远寻古礼，无王者此制；近求史籍，无王者此比。
现代文：推寻古代的礼仪，没有哪个帝王推行这样的制度；搜求近代的史籍，没有哪个帝王这样做。
English: Search for ancient etiquette, no emperor has implemented such a system; search for modern historical records, no emperor has done so.

古文：于情不安，于义不通。
现代文：在情理上让人不安，在道义上讲不通。
English: It is unsettling from a moral point of view, and it makes no sense from a moral point of view.

古文：案咸宁二年，纳悼皇后时，弘训太后母临天下，而无命戚属之臣为武皇父兄主婚之文。
现代文：案咸宁二年，娶悼皇后时，弘训太后位高权重母临天下，然而没有命令亲属大臣为武皇父兄主婚的文书。
English: In the second year of Xianning, when marrying the mourning empress, Hongxun, the empress dowager's highly influential mother, was on the verge of becoming emperor. However, there was no document ordering the minister of relatives to preside over the marriage of Emperor Wu's father and brother.

古文：又考大晋已行之事，咸宁故事不称父兄师友，则咸康华恆所上礼合于旧。
现代文：又考察晋朝已经做遇的事，咸宁先例不称父兄师友，那么咸康华恒所提出的礼仪符合旧制。
English: He also examined what the Jin Dynasty had already done. The precedent of Xianning was not like that of his father and brother, so the etiquette proposed by Xi Kang Hua Heng was in line with the old system.

古文：臣愚谓今纳后仪制。宜一依咸康故事。 
现代文：我认为今天娶皇后的仪式制度，应完全依照咸康的先例。 
English: I think that today's ceremonial system of marrying the empress should be entirely in accordance with the precedent of Hamkang.

古文：于是从之。
现代文：于是依从了他。
English: So they obeyed him.

古文：华恆所定之礼，依汉旧及晋已行之制，故彪之多从咸康，由此也。
现代文：华恒所定的礼仪，依照汉朝旧制及晋朝已施行的制度，因此王彪之大多依从咸康，正是这个原因。
English: The etiquette established by Hua Heng was in accordance with the old system of the Han Dynasty and the system already implemented by the Jin Dynasty, so Wang Biao mostly followed the Hamkang, which is precisely the reason.

古文：惟以娶妇之家三日不举乐，而咸康群臣贺，为失礼。
现代文：衹有娶妻的家庭三天不奏乐这一项，因咸康群臣祝贺，是失礼的。
English: It is impolite for a married family not to play music for three days in order to receive congratulations from ministers.

古文：故但依咸宁上礼，不复贺。
现代文：因此仅用咸宁年上奏的礼仪，不再贺喜。
English: Therefore, only the etiquette played by Xianning last year will be used, and there will be no congratulatory dance.

古文：其告庙六礼版文等仪，皆彪之所定也。
现代文：至于告祭宗庙六礼简牍文字等仪式，都是王彪之所制定的。
English: As for the ceremonies such as the proclamation ceremony, the six rites of the ancestral temple and the simplified script, they were all formulated by Wang Biao.

古文：其纳采版文玺书曰： 皇帝咨前太尉参军何琦。
现代文：纳彩礼用印章封记的文书上说： 皇帝咨询前太尉参军何琦。
English: In the document sealed with the imperial seal, it said: The emperor consulted the former captain to join the army.

古文：浑元资始，肇经人伦，爰及夫妇，以奉天地宗庙社稷。
现代文：天地之气所凭藉开始的，首先是治理人伦，涉及夫妇，来供奉天地宗庙社稷。
English: The spirit of heaven and earth began, first of all, with the governance of human relations, involving couples, to worship the heavens and earth, the patriarchal temple, and the community.

古文：谋于公卿，咸以宜率由旧典。
现代文：与公卿商议，都认为应一切依照旧的典章。
English: In consultation with the nobles, it was agreed that everything should be done according to the old rules.

古文：今使使持节太常彪之、宗正综以礼纳采。 
现代文：如今派使持节太常彪之、宗正综按礼仪纳彩。 
English: Nowadays, it is common to have a festival to celebrate the emperor's birthday, and it is customary to celebrate the emperor's birthday according to etiquette.

古文：主人曰： 皇帝嘉命，访婚陋族，备数采择。
现代文：主人说： 皇帝下了美好的命令，到我逭卑下的家族中访求婚事，姑且充数供皇帝选择。
English: The master said, "The emperor has given me a fine order to visit my humble family and propose to them. I'll leave it to the emperor to choose.

古文：臣从祖弟故散骑侍郎准之遗女，未闲教训，衣履若如人。
现代文：我的同曾祖堂弟前散骑侍郎何准的遣女，从未荒废教训，衣着如同常人。
English: My great-great-uncle's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin

古文：钦承旧章，肃奉典制。
现代文：恭敬肃穆地遵守典章制度。
English: Respectfully and solemnly abide by the disciplinary system.

古文：前太尉参军、都乡侯粪土臣何琦稽首顿首，再拜承诏。 
现代文：前太尉参军、都乡侯下臣何琦叩首，拜两拜接韶书。 
English: The former captain joined the army, and the vassal of the lord of the capital, He Zhen, bowed his head and bowed twice to receive the imperial edict.

古文：次问名版文曰： 皇帝曰：咨某官某姓。
现代文：依次是问名礼的文书，上面说： 皇帝说：咨询某官某姓。
English: Next is the document of the name-asking ceremony, which says: The emperor said: Consult a certain official with a certain surname.

古文：两仪配合，承天统物，正位乎内，必俟令族，重申旧典。
现代文：天地配合，秉承天意统率百姓，在内部端正名位，必定要等待一个美好的家族，重申旧的典章。
English: To cooperate with heaven and earth, to lead the people by adhering to the will of heaven, and to rectify the position internally, we must wait for a beautiful family and reaffirm the old rules.

古文：今使使持节、太常某，宗正某，以礼问名。 
现代文：今天派使持节、太常某人，宗正某人，按礼仪问名。 
English: Today is the Day of Envoys, so someone from Taizhong and someone from Zongsheng will be asked their names according to etiquette.

古文：主人曰： 皇帝嘉命，使者某到，重宣中诏，问臣名族。
现代文：主人说： 皇帝美好的命令，使者某人到来，重新宣读宫内韶书，向我问询名族。
English: The master said, "The emperor has issued a beautiful order. An emissary has come to re-read the imperial edict and ask me about the noble families.

古文：臣族女父母所生，先臣故光禄大夫、雩娄侯祯之遗玄孙，先臣故豫州刺史、关中侯恽之曾孙，先臣故安丰太守、关中侯睿之孙，先臣故散骑侍郎准之遗女。
现代文：我的族女是父母所生，先代大臣过去的光禄大夫、雩娄侯何祯的遣玄孙女，先代大臣过去的豫州刺史、关中侯何惮的曾孙女，先代大臣过去的安丰太守、关中侯何钡的孙女，先代大臣过去的散骑侍郎何准的遣女。
English: My daughter-in-law was born to my parents. She is the granddaughter of the former minister Guanglu Daifu, the granddaughter of the former minister Ruan, the granddaughter of the former minister Yuzhou Zhishi, the great-granddaughter of the former minister Guanzhong Hou He Zhuo, the granddaughter of the former minister Anfeng Taizhou, the granddaughter of the former minister Guanzhong Hou He Zhuo, and the granddaughter of the former minister He Jun.

古文：外出自先臣故尚书左丞孔胄之外曾孙，先臣故侍中、关内侯夷之外孙女，年十七。
现代文：母系出自先代大臣过去的尚书左丞孔胄的外曾孙女，先代大臣过去的侍中、关内侯孔夷的外孙女，十七岁。
English: The maternal line comes from the great-great-granddaughter of the former minister, the former Shangshu Zuojo Kong Xi, and the 17-year-old granddaughter of the former minister's former chamberlain, Guanai Hou Kong Yi.

古文：钦承旧章，肃奉典制。 
现代文：恭敬肃穆地遵守典章制度。 
English: Respectfully and solemnly abide by the disciplinary system.

古文：次纳吉版文曰： 皇帝曰：咨某官某姓。
现代文：依次是纳吉礼的文书，上面说： 皇帝说：咨询某官某姓。
English: Next is the document of the Najili, which says: The emperor said: Consult a certain official with a certain surname.

古文：人谋龟从，佥曰贞吉，敬从典礼。
现代文：人先谋划占卜随后，都说贞吉，恭敬地依从典礼。
English: People first plan divination and then say "Chong Ji" and respectfully follow the ceremony.

古文：今使使持节、太常某，宗正某以礼纳吉。 
现代文：今天派遣使持节、太常某人，宗正某人，按礼仪纳吉。 
English: Today is the day to send an envoy, usually someone, usually someone, according to the etiquette.

古文：主人曰： 皇帝嘉命，使者某重宣中诏，太卜元吉。
现代文：主人说： 皇帝美好的命令，使者某人重新宣读宫内诏书，太卜占得大吉。
English: The master said: The emperor's beautiful order, the envoy of someone to re-read the palace edict, the lady divined.

古文：臣陋族卑鄙，忧惧不堪。
现代文：我陋族卑微，承受不了担忧恐惧。
English: I am lowly and cannot bear the worry and fear.

古文：钦承旧章，肃奉典制。 
现代文：恭敬肃穆地遵守典章制度。 
English: Respectfully and solemnly abide by the disciplinary system.

古文：次纳徵版文曰： 皇帝曰：咨某官某姓之女，有母仪之德，窈窕之姿，如山如河，宜奉宗庙，永承天祚。
现代文：依次是纳征礼的文书，上面说： 皇帝说：咨询某官某姓的女儿，有做母亲的美德，窈窕的身材，像山像河，适合敬奉宗庙，永远延续上天赐的福。
English: In turn, there is a document for the collection of gifts, which says: The emperor said: "Consult the daughter of a certain official with a certain surname, who has the virtue of being a mother, has a slender body, is like a mountain and a river, is suitable for honoring the ancestral temple, and forever continues the blessing given by heaven.

古文：以玄纁皮帛，马羊钱璧，以章典祀。
现代文：用黑红色皮毛丝帛，马羊钱璧，按典章举行仪式。
English: With black and red fur silk cocoon, horse and sheep money, according to the ceremony.

古文：今使使侍节、司徒某，太常某，以礼纳徵。 
现代文：今天派使持节、司徒某人，太常某人，按礼仪纳征。 
English: Today, I sent an envoy to collect the tax according to the etiquette.

古文：主人曰： 皇帝嘉命，降婚卑陋，崇以上公，宠以典礼，备物典策。
现代文：主人说： 皇帝下达美好的命令，屈尊与地位低下者联姻，用上公的地位尊崇我，用典章礼仪表示宠爱，准备了礼物策命。
English: The master said: The emperor has issued a beautiful order, condescended to marry someone with a lower status, honored me with the status of a high official, expressed his favor with ceremonies and etiquette, and prepared a gift for fate.

古文：钦承旧章，肃奉典制。 
现代文：恭敬肃穆地遵守典章制度。 
English: Respectfully and solemnly abide by the disciplinary system.

古文：次请期版文曰： 皇帝曰：咨某官某姓。
现代文：依次是请期礼的文书，上面说： 皇帝说：咨询某官某姓。
English: Next was the document requesting the ceremony, which said: The emperor said: Consult a certain official with a certain surname.

古文：谋于公卿，泰筮元龟，罔有不臧，率遵典礼。
现代文：与公卿谋划，用蓍草大龟占卜，没有不吉利的，一切依从典章礼仪。
English: He plotted with nobles and divined with a giant tortoise made of reeds. Nothing was unlucky, everything was in accordance with the rules and etiquette.

古文：今使使持节、太常某，宗正某，以礼请期。 
现代文：今天派遣使持节、太常某人，宗正某人，按照礼仪请期。 
English: Today is the day for dispatching envoys. If someone is too common, or someone is too common, please make an appointment according to the etiquette.

古文：主人曰： 皇帝嘉命，使者某重宣中诏，吉日惟某可迎。
现代文：主人说： 皇帝下达美好的命令，使者某人重新宣读宫内诏书，吉惟有某天可以迎娶。
English: The master said, "The emperor has issued a beautiful order, and someone has re-read the imperial edict, and only the lucky ones can get married one day.

古文：臣钦承旧章，肃奉典制。 
现代文：我恭敬肃穆地遵守典章制度。 
English: I respectfully and solemnly abide by the disciplinary system.

古文：次亲迎版文曰： 皇帝曰：咨某官某姓。
现代文：依次是亲迎礼的文书，上面说： 皇帝说：咨询某官某姓。
English: Next was the document of greeting, which said: The emperor said: Consult a certain official with a certain surname.

古文：岁吉月令，吉日惟某，率礼以迎。
现代文：年月吉祥，吉日惟有某天遵循礼仪来迎亲。
English: The years are auspicious, the auspicious day only one day to follow the etiquette to greet relatives.

古文：今使使持节、太保某，太尉某，以礼迎。 
现代文：今天派遣使持节、太保某人，太尉某人，按照礼仪迎亲。 
English: Today, we will send an envoy to hold a festival, someone to be a grand tutor, someone to be a lieutenant, and welcome the relatives according to the etiquette.

古文：主人曰： 皇帝嘉命，使者某重宣中诏，令月吉辰，备礼以迎。
现代文：主人说： 皇帝下达美好的命令，使者某人重新宣读宫中诏书，吉月吉时，准备礼物来迎亲。
English: The master said, "The emperor has issued a beautiful order, and someone has sent someone to re-read the palace edict. In the auspicious month, prepare a gift to welcome the relatives.

古文：上公宗卿兼至，副介近臣百两。
现代文：上公宗卿都来了，副手近臣车百辆。
English: All of Shanggongzongqing came, and the vice-ministers came in a hundred cars.

古文：臣蝼蚁之族，猥承大礼，忧惧战悸。
现代文：我家族卑微，辱承大礼，诚惶诚恐。
English: My family is humble, humble, humble.

古文：钦承旧章，肃奉典制。 
现代文：恭敬肃穆地遵从典章制度。 
English: Respectfully and solemnly abide by the disciplinary system.

古文：某稽首承诏，皆如初答。
现代文：某人跪拜接韶书，都像最初那样应答。
English: When someone kneels to pick up the book, they respond as they did at first.

古文：孝武纳王皇后，其礼亦如之。
现代文：孝武帝娶王皇后，礼仪也像这样。
English: Emperor Xiaowu married Empress Wang, and the etiquette was like this.

古文：其纳采、问名、纳吉、请期、亲迎，皆用白雁、白羊各一头，酒米各十二斛。
现代文：纳采、问名、纳吉、请期、亲迎等礼仪，都用白雁、白羊各一只，酒米各十二斛。
English: For the etiquette of namaste, namecheck, naji, asking for the date, and greeting relatives, one white goose and one white goat are used, and twelve stalks of rice and wine are used.

古文：惟纳徵羊一头，玄纁用帛三匹，绛二匹，绢二百匹，兽皮二枚，钱二百万，玉璧一枚，马六匹，酒米各十二斛。
现代文：祇有纳征礼用羊一只，黑色丝帛用帛三匹，深红色二匹，绢二百匹，虎皮两张，钱二百万，玉璧一枚，马六匹，酒米各十二斛。
English: Only one sheep, three yakitori of black silk, two crimson yakitori, two hundred yakitori, two tiger skins, two million coins, one jade brooch, six horses, and twelve yakitori each will be accepted.

古文：郑玄所谓五雁六礼也。
现代文：这就是郑玄所说的五雁六礼。
English: This is what Zheng Xuan called the Five Geese and Six Rites.

古文：其珪马之制，备物之数，校太康所奏又有不同云。
现代文：至于玉和马的制度，准备礼品的数量，比照太康年的奏章又有不同的地方。
English: As for the system of jade and horse, the number of gifts prepared, according to the report of the Taikang year, has different places.

古文：古者婚冠皆有醮，郑氏醮文三首具存。
现代文：古代婚礼冠礼都有用酒祭神的礼仪，郑氏的三首祭文都保留着。
English: All ancient wedding ceremonies have the ritual of offering the god with wine, and all three of Zheng's sacred texts have been preserved.

古文：升平八年，台符问 迎皇后大驾应作鼓吹不 。
现代文：升平元年，官署问 迎接皇后大驾仪仗是否要奏鼓吹乐 。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the government office asked if they should play music to welcome the queen's grand procession.

古文：博士胡讷议： 临轩《仪注》阙，无施安鼓吹处所，又无举麾鸣钟之条。 
现代文：博士胡讷议论说： 皇帝出殿的《仪注》没有记载，没有演奏鼓吹的处所，又没有举旗岛钟的条文。 
English: Dr. Hune commented: There is no record of the emperor's entry into the palace in the "Ritual Commentary," there is no place to play and preach, and there is no provision for the flag island clock.

古文：太常王彪之以为： 婚礼不乐。
现代文：太常王彪之认为： 婚礼不奏乐。
English: Too often, Wang Biao Zhi believes: The wedding does not play music.

古文：鼓吹亦乐之总名。
现代文：鼓吹也是音乐的总名。
English: Preaching is also the general name of music.

古文：《仪注》所以无者，依婚礼。
现代文：《仪注》之所以没有说明，是因为可以参照婚礼。
English: The reason why the "Etiquette Note" does not explain it is because it can refer to a wedding.

古文：今宜备设而不作。 
现代文：如今应准备乐器而不奏。 
English: Now is the time to prepare the instruments, not to play them.

古文：时用此议。
现代文：当时采用了这个说法。
English: This was the language used at the time.

古文：永和二年纳后，议贺不。
现代文：永和二年娶皇后，议论要不要祝贺。
English: He married the empress in the second year of the Yonghe era and debated whether to congratulate her or not.

古文：王述云： 婚是嘉礼。
现代文：王述说： 婚礼是美好的礼仪。
English: Wang Shu said: "A wedding is a beautiful ceremony.

古文：《春秋传》曰： 娶者大吉，非常吉。 又《传》曰： 郑子罕如晋，贺夫人。 
现代文：《春秋传》说： 娶妻是大吉，不是平常的吉，又《传》说： 郑国子罕去晋国，向夫人贺喜。 
English: "The Spring and Autumn Annals" says: Marrying a wife is a great good luck, not an ordinary good luck, and "The Annals" says: Zheng Guozihan went to Jin Province to congratulate his wife.

古文：邻国犹相贺，况臣下邪！
现代文：邻国尚且互相祝贺，何况大臣呢!
English: Neighbouring countries still congratulate each other, not to mention ministers!

古文：如此，便应贺，但不在三日内耳。
现代文：这样看，就应当祝贺，但不在三天内就是了。
English: From this point of view, congratulations are due, but not in three days.

古文：今因庙见成礼而贺，亦是一节也。 
现代文：如今趁着在宗庙拜见祖先完成礼仪来贺喜，也是一个机会。 
English: Nowadays, it is also an opportunity to take advantage of the opportunity to visit the ancestor in the ancestral temple to complete the etiquette.

古文：王彪之议云： 婚礼不乐不贺，《礼》之明文。
现代文：王彪之议论说： 婚礼不奏乐不祝贺，是《礼》上的明文。
English: Wang Biao's argument said: "The wedding is not played music or congratulated, it is a clear text in the "Rite."

古文：《传》称子罕如晋贺夫人，既无《经》文，又《传》不云礼也。
现代文：《春秋传》称子罕去晋国向夫人贺喜，《春秋经》上没有记载，《传》上也没有说那是礼仪。
English: "Spring and Autumn Annals" said that Zihan went to Jin Province to congratulate his wife. There is no record in "Spring and Autumn Annals," and "Annals" did not say that it was etiquette.

古文：《礼》，取妇三日不举乐，明三日之后自当乐。
现代文：《礼》说，娶妻三天不奏乐，说明三天之后自然可以奏乐。
English: "Li" says that if you don't play music for three days after getting married, it means that you can naturally play music after three days.

古文：至于不贺，无三日之断，恐三日之后故无应贺之礼。 
现代文：至于不祝贺，没有二天的限制，恐怕三天之后也没有应当祝贺的礼仪。 
English: As for not congratulating, there is no two-day limit, and I'm afraid there is no etiquette for congratulating after three days.

古文：又云： 《礼记》所以言贺取妻者，是因就酒食而有庆语也。
现代文：又说： 《礼记》之所以说祝贺娶妻的人，是因为在酒宴上有贺喜的话语。
English: He also said, "The reason why the Book of Rites says, 'Congratulations to the man who marries a woman,' is because there were words of congratulations at the banquet.

古文：愚谓无直相贺之体，而有礼贶共庆会之义，今世所共行。 
现代文：我认为没有特地去贺喜的礼仪，而有赐予礼物共同庆贺的道义，就像当今世上流行的一样。 
English: In my opinion, there is no special etiquette for congratulation, but there is a morality of giving gifts to celebrate together, just as it is popular in today's world.

古文：于时竟不贺。
现代文：在那时最终没有贺喜。
English: In the end, there was no congratulation.

古文：穆帝纳后欲用九月，九月是忌月。
现代文：穆帝想在九月娶皇后，九月是忌讳的月份。
English: Mudi wants to marry the queen in September. September is a taboo month.

古文：范汪问王彪之，答云： 礼无忌月，不敢以所不见，便谓无之。 
现代文：范汪问王彪之，回答说： 礼仪记载上没有忌月，不敢因为自己没看到，就说没有。 
English: Fan Wang asked Wang Biao about it, and he replied, "There is no death month in the records of etiquette. I dare not say no because I haven't seen it.

古文：博士曹耽、荀讷等并谓无忌月之文，不应有妨。
现代文：博士曹耽、荀讷等人都说没有忌月的记载，不应有妨碍。
English: Dr. Cao Tan, Xuan Ne and others all said that there was no record of the taboo month, and there should be no obstacle.

古文：王洽曰： 若有忌月，当复有忌岁。 
现代文：王洽说： 如果有忌讳的月份，也该有忌讳的年度。 
English: Wang Ciao said: If there is a taboo month, there should also be a taboo year.

古文：太元十二年，台符问 皇太子既拜庙，朝臣奉贺，应上礼与不？
现代文：太元十二年，官署问 皇太子参拜宗庙以后，朝廷大臣祝贺，是否应当奉上礼物 ?
English: In the twelfth year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, the government office asked the crown prince to visit the ancestral temple, and the minister of the imperial court congratulated him. Should he be given a gift?

古文：国子博士车胤云： 百辟卿士，咸预盛礼，展敬拜伏，不须复上礼。
现代文：国子博士车胤说： 公卿高官，都参预了盛大的礼仪，表示了恭敬，行了大礼，不必再送礼物。
English: Dr. Kuniko Choketsin said, "Court nobles and high-ranking officials all attended the grand ceremony, expressed their respect, and performed a grand salute. There is no need to send gifts.

古文：惟方伯牧守，不睹大礼，自非酒牢贡羞，无以表其乃诚，故宜有上礼。
现代文：惟有诸侯及州牧太守，不能亲见大礼，假如不送酒肉祭品，无法表达他的诚意，所以应当送礼。
English: However, lords and provincial governors cannot see the grand gift in person. If they do not send wine and meat offerings, they cannot express their sincerity, so they should send gifts.

古文：犹如元正大庆，方伯莫不上礼，朝臣奉璧而已。 
现代文：好比元旦大庆，诸侯没有不送礼的，朝廷大臣奉上璧玉而已。 
English: For example, on the New Year's Day, the lords did not give gifts, but the ministers of the imperial court presented the gems.

古文：太学博士庾弘之议： 案咸宁三年始平、濮阳诸王新拜，有司奏依故事，听京城近臣诸王公主应朝贺者复上礼。
现代文：太学博士庾弘之议论说： 案咸宁三年始平、濮阳几位王新近受封，官吏奏请依照先例，听任京城近臣诸王公主参加朝廷庆贺的人再送礼物。
English: Daigaku hakase Takehiro's argument said: As the third year of the Heian period began, and several kings of Shinyang were newly crowned, government officials should follow the precedent and allow the princes and princesses of the capital's vassals to send gifts to those who participated in the imperial celebration.

古文：今皇太子国之储副，既已崇建，普天同庆。
现代文：如今皇太子是国家的储君，已经确立，天下共同庆贺。
English: Now that the crown prince is the country's crown prince, it has been established that the whole world will celebrate together.

古文：谓应上礼奉贺。 
现代文：我认为应送礼祝贺。 
English: I think congratulations are in order.

古文：徐邈同。
现代文：徐邈赞同。
English: Xu Jun agreed.

古文：又引一有元良，庆在于此。
现代文：又援引一旦有太子，就如此庆贺。
English: He also quoted that once there is a crown prince, this is how to celebrate.

古文：封诸王及新宫上礼，既有前事，亦皆已瞻仰致敬，而又奉觞上寿，应亦无疑也。
现代文：封诸侯王及新建宫室送礼，已有先例，也都是已经瞻仰致敬，而又举杯祝寿，应当也是没有疑问的。
English: There is no doubt that there is a precedent for gift-giving for the enthronement of princes and princes and the construction of a new palace, and that they have already paid tribute and raised a toast to celebrate the anniversary.

古文：江左以来，太子婚，纳徵礼用玉璧一，兽皮二，未详何所准况。
现代文：迁都辽东以来，太子结婚，纳征礼用一块玉璧，两张虎皮，不清楚为什么制定这个标准。
English: Since the relocation of the capital to Liaodong, the prince married, and a piece of jade and two tiger skins were used to collect gifts. It is unclear why this standard was established.

古文：或者兽取其威猛有班彩，玉以象德而有温润。
现代文：也许用虎取它的威猛和皮毛有斑彩，用玉来象征温和圆润的品德。
English: Perhaps the tiger is used to symbolize its power and the color of its fur, and the jade is used to symbolize its gentle and mellow character.

古文：寻珪璋亦玉之美者，豹皮采蔚以譬君子。
现代文：使用珪璋也都是美玉，豹皮色彩美丽用以比喻君子。
English: The use of enamel is also beautiful, and the beautiful color of leopard skin is used as a metaphor for a gentleman.

古文：王肃纳徵辞云： 玄纁束帛，俪皮雁羊。 
现代文：王尽的纳征辞说： 红黑色丝帛，成双的毛皮大雁羔羊。 
English: Wang Yin's acceptance speech said: red and black silk cocoon, pairs of fur geese and lambs.

古文：前汉聘后，黄金二百斤，马十二匹，亦无用羊之旨。
现代文：前汉聘皇后，用黄金二百斤，马十二匹，也没有用羊的意思。
English: The former Han Dynasty hired a queen with two hundred catties of gold and twelve horses, which did not mean using sheep.

古文：郑氏《婚物赞》曰 羊者祥也 ，然则婚之有羊，自汉末始也。
现代文：郑氏《婚物赞》说 羊的意思是祥 ，那么婚事用羊，是从汉末开始的。
English: Zheng's "Wedding Favor" said that the meaning of sheep is auspicious, so the use of sheep for marriage began in the late Han Dynasty.

古文：王者六礼，尚未用焉。
现代文：帝王的六礼，还没有用羊。
English: The emperor's six salutations have not yet been performed with a sheep.

古文：是故太康中有司奏： 太子婚，纳徵用玄纁束帛，加羊马二驷。 
现代文：所以太康年间官吏上奏说： 太子的婚事，纳征礼用红黑色丝帛，羊和马八匹。 
English: Therefore, during the Taikang years, officials made a report saying: "For the prince's wedding, red and black silk sashes, eight sheep and horses will be used to collect gifts.

古文：武帝泰始十年，将聘拜三夫人、九嫔。
现代文：武帝泰始十年，将娶三夫人、九嫔。
English: In the first ten years of Emperor Wu's reign, he would marry three wives and nine concubines.

古文：有司奏： 礼，皇后聘以谷珪，无妾媵礼贽之制。 
现代文：官吏上奏说： 根据礼，皇后的聘礼用谷珪，没有纳妾聘礼的制度。 
English: The official reported, "According to the etiquette, the empress's bride price is paid in grain, and there is no system of bride price for concubines.

古文：诏曰： 拜授可依魏氏故事。 
现代文：诏书说： 迎请可以按照魏氏的先例。 
English: The edict said, "Please follow the precedent of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：于是临轩，使使持节兼太常拜三夫人，兼御史中丞拜九嫔。
现代文：于是亲临殿前，派使持节兼太常拜请三夫人，兼御史中丞拜请九嫔。
English: Therefore, before coming to the Imperial Palace in person, he sent an envoy to ask the third lady to hold the festival and the third lady to pray, and also to ask the ninth son to pray.

古文：汉魏之礼云，公主居第，尚公主者来第成婚。
现代文：漠、魏的礼仪规定，公主居住在宫室，娶公主的人来宫室成婚。
English: According to the etiquette of the Miao and Wei dynasties, the princess lived in the palace, and those who married the princess came to the palace to get married.

古文：司空王朗以为不可，其后乃革。
现代文：司空王朗认为不行，逭以后就改变了。
English: Sikyong Wang Lang thought it was no good, but later changed his mind.

古文：太元中，公主纳徵以兽豹皮各一具礼，岂谓婚礼不辨王公之序，故取兽豹以尊崇其事乎！
现代文：太元年间，公主的纳征礼用虎皮豹皮各一张，难道说婚事的礼仪显示不出王公的地位，所以要用虎豹的皮来表示对此事的恭敬吗?
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, the princess used a piece of tiger skin and a piece of leopard skin to collect gifts. Is it true that the etiquette of marriage does not show the status of the prince, so we should use the skin of the tiger and leopard to show respect for this matter?

古文：《礼》有三王养老胶庠之文，飨射饮酒之制，周末沦废。
现代文：《礼》中有三王在学校对德高年长者行养老之礼的记载，有飨射礼和饮酒的制度，周代末年都荒废了。
English: In the "Rituals," there is a record of the Three Kings performing an end-of-life ceremony at school for the elderly with high moral standards, and there is a system of showering and drinking alcohol. At the end of the Zhou Dynasty, all of these were abandoned.

古文：汉明帝永平二年三月，帝始率群臣躬养三老五更于辟雍，行大射之礼。
现代文：汉明帝永平二年三月，皇帝开始亲自率领群臣在太学行养老礼，并为祭祀择士而举行大射之礼。
English: In March of the second year of Emperor Hanming Yongping's reign, the emperor began to personally lead a group of courtiers to perform a pension ceremony in Taigaku, and held a grand firing ceremony for the ritual of selecting a successor.

古文：郡国县道行乡饮酒于学校，皆祠先圣先师周公孔子，牲以太牢。
现代文：郡国县道在学校施行乡饮酒的礼仪，都祭祀先圣先师周公、孔子，用牛羊猪作祭品。
English: The county-level and county-level roads implement the etiquette of drinking alcohol in the village at schools, and all of them offer sacrifices to the first saint and teacher Zhou Gong and Confucius, and use cattle, sheep and pigs as offerings.

古文：孟冬亦如之。
现代文：冬季第一个月也如此。
English: The same is true for the first month of winter.

古文：及魏高贵乡公甘露二年，天子亲帅群司行养老之礼。
现代文：到了魏高贵乡公甘露二年，天子亲自率各部门官吏施行养老的礼仪。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Gauguin, Emperor Tianzi personally led the officials of various departments to carry out the etiquette of old age.

古文：于是王祥为三老，郑小同为五更。
现代文：于是王祥做了 三老 ，郑小同做了 五更 。
English: As a result, Wang Xiang became the Third Elder, and Zheng Xiaodong became the Fifth Elder.

古文：其《仪注》不存，然汉礼犹在。
现代文：敬老的《仪注》没有留存，然而汉代的礼仪还在。
English: The "Etiquette Note" on respect for the elderly has not survived, but the etiquette of the Han Dynasty still exists.

古文：武帝泰始六年十二月，帝临辟雍，行乡饮酒之礼。
现代文：武帝泰始六年十二月，皇帝亲临太学，举行乡饮酒的礼仪。
English: In December of the sixth year of Emperor Wu's reign, the emperor himself came to Taigaku to hold a township drinking ceremony.

古文：诏曰： 礼仪之废久矣，乃今复讲肄旧典。 
现代文：诏书说： 礼仪的荒废已经很久了，今天重新讲习古代典章。 
English: The edict said: "The etiquette has been abandoned for a long time. Today, ancient ceremonies are being re-examined.

古文：赐太常绢百匹，丞、博士及学生牛酒。
现代文：赐给太常绢一百匹，赐丞、博士及学生牛和酒。
English: One hundred yakitori will be given to the Grand Duchess, and oxen and wine will be given to the junior high school students, doctoral students and students.

古文：咸宁三年，惠帝元康九年，复行其礼。
现代文：咸宁三年，惠帝元康九年，又举行这个礼仪。
English: In the third year of Xianning and the ninth year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, this ceremony was held again.

古文：魏正始中，齐王每讲经遍，辄使太常释奠先圣先师于辟雍，弗躬亲。
现代文：魏正盘年间，变王每讲习一次经书，就让太常在太学祭拜先圣先师，自己不亲自做。
English: During the years of the Wei Zhengban, Zengwang would often have his students pray to the holy forerunner at the Taixue Festival, rather than doing it himself.

古文：及惠帝明帝之为太子，及愍怀太子讲经竟，并亲释奠于太学，太子进爵于先师，中庶子进爵于颜回。
现代文：到了塞童旦瞪做太子时，等到愍怀太子讲习经书结束，都亲自在太学行祭礼，太子向先师敬酒，中庶子向颜回敬酒。
English: When it came time for Sedongdan to be crowned crown prince, and when the prince's scripture study was over, both of them personally performed a ritual at Taigaku. The prince made a toast to his former teacher, and the middle child made a toast to Yan.

古文：成、穆、孝武三帝，亦皆亲释奠。
现代文：成帝、穆帝、孝武帝也都亲自祭拜。
English: Emperor Cheng, Emperor Mu, and Emperor Xiaowu also personally performed the worship.

古文：孝武时，以太学在水南悬远，有司议依升平元年，于中堂权立行太学。
现代文：孝武帝时，因为太学在河水以南路途遥远，有关官吏议论按照升平元年先例，在中堂姑且设立太学堂分部。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, because Taixue was too far south of the river, the relevant officials discussed setting up a branch of Taixue in Zhongtang according to the precedent of the first year of the era.

古文：于时无复国子生，有司奏： 应须复二学生百二十人。
现代文：当时没有重设国子生，有关官吏上奏： 应当再设学生一百二十人。
English: At that time, there was no re-establishment of Kuniko students, and the relevant officials made an appeal: One hundred and twenty more students should be established.

古文：太学生取见人六十，国子生权铨大臣子孙六十人，事讫罢。 
现代文：太学生从现有的人中选取六十人，国子生暂且从大臣子孙中选取六十人，事情结束就作罢。 
English: The students will choose sixty people from the existing people, and the sons and daughters of the country will temporarily choose sixty people from the descendants of the minister, and the matter will be over.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏章获准。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：释奠礼毕，会百官六品以上。
现代文：祭拜先圣先师之礼完毕，会见六品以上官员。
English: After the completion of the ceremony of worshiping the Holy Prophet, he met with more than six officials.

古文：汉仪，季春上巳，官及百姓皆禊于东流水上，洗濯祓除去宿垢。
现代文：汉代礼仪，春季第三个月上旬的巳日，官员及百姓都在东流水中沐浴，祓除不祥，洗去宿垢。
English: According to Han Dynasty etiquette, on the day of the snake in the early third month of spring, officials and common people would bathe in the East River to purify themselves of evil and wash away the dross.

古文：而自魏以后，但用三日，不以上巳也。
现代文：自魏以后，衹用三月三日，不再用上巳曰。
English: Since the Wei Dynasty, March 3rd has been used as the New Year's Day, and the New Year's Day is no longer used.

古文：晋中朝公卿以下至于庶人，皆禊洛水之侧。
现代文：置朝廷中的公卿以下到百姓，都在洛水边沐浴。
English: From the court nobles in the imperial court to the common people, they all bathed at the Luo waterside.

古文：赵王伦篡位，三日会天泉池，诛张林。
现代文：趟王司马伦篡夺皇位，三在天泉池聚会，杀强拯。
English: Wang Sima Lun usurped the throne, and the three of them gathered at Tianquan Pond and killed Qiang Rong.

古文：怀帝亦会天泉池，赋诗。
现代文：堡童也在天泉池聚会，赋诗。
English: The castle children also gather at Tianquan Pond to make poems.

古文：陆机云： 天泉池南石沟引御沟水，池西积石为禊堂。 
现代文：堕尴说： 天泉池南石沟引御沟水，池的西边堆积石头成了沐浴场所。 
English: He said: The south stone ditch of Tianquan Pond drains the water of the ditch, and the stones piled up on the west side of the pond have become a bathing place.

古文：本水流杯饮酒，亦不言曲水。
现代文：把酒杯放入水中，杯子流停人前则饮酒，也还没有说 曲水 。
English: Put the wine glass into the water, drink alcohol before the cup stops flowing, and have not yet said water.

古文：元帝又诏罢三日弄具。
现代文：元帝又下诏书禁止各种博戏之具三日。
English: On the third day, Emperor Yuan issued an edict banning all kinds of playthings.

古文：海西于钟山立流杯曲水，延百僚，皆其事也。
现代文：海西在钟山设立流杯曲水，延请百官，都是造一类事。
English: Haixi set up a flowing cup of curved water in Zhongshan and invited hundreds of officials, all of which are the same kind of thing.

古文：九月九日，马射。
现代文：九月九日，骑马射箭。
English: September 9th, horse riding and archery.

古文：或说云 秋，金之节，讲武习射，象立秋之礼也 。
现代文：有人说： 秋天属于 金 的季节，讲习武功练习射箭，像立秋的礼仪 。
English: Some people say: Autumn belongs to the golden season, martial arts training, archery practice, like the etiquette of the beginning of autumn.

