古文：杜根字伯坚，颍川定陵人也。
现代文：◆杜根传，杜根字伯坚，颍川郡定陵县人。
English: ◆Dugen Chuan, Dugen character Bo Jian, a native of Dingling County, Luochuan County.

古文：父安，字伯夷，少有志节，年十三入太学，号奇童。
现代文：父亲杜安，字伯夷，年轻时有志气，有节操，年十三入太学，号为奇童。
English: Duan's father, surnamed Bo Yi, had ambition and self-discipline when he was young. He entered Taigaku in his thirteenth year and was nicknamed "Wonder Boy."

古文：京师贵戚慕其名，或遗之书，安不发，悉壁藏之。
现代文：京师的达官贵人、皇亲国戚都羡慕他的名声，有的写信给他，杜安不拆开看，都收藏在夹壁里。
English: The great dignitaries and relatives of the emperor in Beijing all envied his reputation. Some of them wrote to him, but Duan did not open them to read them. They were all stored in the wall.

古文：及后捕案贵戚宾客，安开壁出书，印封如故，竟不离其患，时人贵之。
现代文：后来因罪逮捕贵戚宾客，杜安打开夹壁，拿出书来，印封还是原来的一个样，终于没有遭到祸害，当时的人非常尊敬他。
English: Later, Duan opened the wall and took out the book. The seal was still the same as before. Finally, he was not harmed. People at that time respected him very much.

古文：位至巴郡太守，政甚有声。
现代文：位至巴郡太守，很有政声。
English: He rose to the position of Bashir Taishu, and had a strong political reputation.

古文：根性方实，好绞直。
现代文：杜根天性方正笃实，急性子。
English: Dugan is by nature a straight-shooter and a hothead.

古文：永初元年，举孝廉，为郎中。
现代文：永初元年，推举为孝廉，任郎中。
English: In the first year of the Yongchu era, he was selected as a filial son and appointed as a junior vassal.

古文：时和熹邓后临朝，权在外戚。
现代文：当时和熹邓后临朝听政，权柄在外戚手中。
English: At that time, he and Empress Dowager Cixi listened to the government, and the power was in the hands of the foreign relatives.

古文：根以安帝年长，宜亲政事，乃与同时郎上书直谏。
现代文：杜根认为安帝年纪大了，应该亲理政事，于是与同时郎上书直谏。
English: Dugan thought that Emperor An was too old and should be personally in charge of government affairs, so he and his concubine wrote directly to the emperor.

古文：太后大怒，收执根等，令盛以缣囊，于殿上扑杀之。
现代文：太后大怒，逮捕了杜根等人，使用缣袋装着，就在殿上打死。
English: The empress dowager was furious, arrested Dugan and the others, put them in a sack, and beat them to death in the palace.

古文：执法者以根知名，私语行事人使不加力，既而载出城外，根得苏。
现代文：执法的人因杜根有名气，悄悄地告诉打杀的人，不要太用力，后来用车子拉出城外，杜根苏醒过来。
English: Law enforcement officials, aware of Dugan's reputation, quietly told the killers not to use too much force. Dugan was later pulled out of the city in a car and regained consciousness.

古文：太后使人检视，根遂诈死，三日，目中生蛆，因得逃窜，为宜城山中酒家保。
现代文：太后使人检验尸体，杜根假死，三天，眼睛中生了蛆，因此得以逃跑，在宜城山中一家酒店里打杂。
English: The Queen Mother had the body examined, Dugan pretended to be dead for three days and developed a pimple in his eye, so he was able to escape and do odd jobs in a hotel in the middle of the Yicheng Mountains.

古文：积十五年，酒家知其贤，厚敬待之。
现代文：共十五年，酒家知道他是个好人，待他很恭敬。
English: For a total of fifteen years, the bar knew him to be a good man and treated him with respect.

古文：及邓氏诛，左右皆言根等之忠。
现代文：等到邓氏诛杀，皇上左右的人都说杜根等人尽忠。
English: By the time of Deng's assassination, people around the emperor said that Dugan and others were loyal.

古文：帝谓根已死，乃下诏布告天下，录其子孙。
现代文：帝说杜根已经死了，于是下诏布告天下，要录用他的子孙。
English: The emperor said that Dugan was dead, and issued an edict to recruit his descendants.

古文：根方归乡里，征诣公车，拜侍御史。
现代文：杜根刚回到乡里，征召到公车，授侍御史。
English: Dugan had just returned to the countryside when he was summoned to the bus and given a tour of duty.

古文：初，平原郡吏成翊世亦谏太后归政，坐抵罪，与根俱征，擢为尚书郎，并见纳用。
现代文：先是，平原郡吏成诩世也谏太后归政，获罪，这时与杜根同被征召，选为尚书郎，二人都见任用。
English: First of all, the plains county official Cheng Shuxi and the empress dowager returned to politics and was convicted. At that time, he and Dugan were drafted together and selected as Shang Shuro, and both were appointed.

古文：或问根曰： 往者遇祸，天下同义，知故不少，何至自苦如此？ 
现代文：有人问杜根说 ：以前遇祸，天下的人都同情你的忠义，你的朋友又不少，为什么要自苦到这个样子？ 
English: Someone asked Dugan: "When you were in trouble before, people all over the world sympathized with your loyalty, and you had many friends. Why did you have to suffer like this?"

古文：根曰： 周旋民间，非绝迹之处，邂逅发露，祸及知亲，故不为也。 
现代文：杜根说 ：在民间辗转，不可能不露踪迹，偶然被发觉，灾祸就要降临亲友，所以我没有这样做。 
English: Duggan said: "In the civilian world, it's impossible not to leave a trace, to be discovered by accident, disaster is about to befall relatives and friends, so I didn't do it.

古文：顺帝时，稍迁济阴太守。
现代文：顺帝时，稍升济阴太守。
English: When Shun was emperor, he was promoted to Jiyin Taishu.

古文：去官还家，年七十八卒。
现代文：罢官归家，年七十八逝世。
English: Returning home after his dismissal, he died at the age of 78.

古文：翊世字秀明，少好学，深明道术。
现代文：翊世传翊世字季明，年轻时好学，熟悉道术。
English: According to legend, Ji Ming was a studious young man who was familiar with Taoism.

古文：延光中，中常侍樊丰、帝乳母王圣共谮皇太子，废为济阴王。
现代文：延光时，中常侍樊丰，帝乳母王圣共同诽谤皇太子、把皇太子废为济阴王。
English: At the time of Yan Guang, Zhong Chang's attendant Yu Feng and the imperial wet nurse Wang Sheng jointly slandered the crown prince and abolished the crown prince as the king of Jiyin.

古文：翊世连上书讼之，又言樊丰、王圣诬罔之状。
现代文：成翊世连连上书申辩，又说樊丰、王圣诬陷皇太子，欺罔皇上的情状。
English: Cheng Yu repeatedly sent letters to defend himself, and also said that Yu Feng and Wang Sheng slandered the crown prince and bullied the emperor.

古文：帝既不从，而丰等陷以重罪，下狱当死，有诏免官归本郡。
现代文：帝不听他的，樊丰等人于是用重罪陷害他，下狱当处死，有诏只免去他的官，放归本郡。
English: The emperor did not listen to him, and Shufeng and others then framed him with a felony, and he was sentenced to death. There was only a decree to remove his official and return him to his county.

古文：及济阴王立，是为顺帝，司空张告辟之。
现代文：等到济阴王立，即顺帝，司空张皓辟举他。
English: Wait until Jiyin Wang Li, that is, Shun Emperor, Sikuo Zhang Xizhi promoted him.

古文：晧以翊世前讼太子之废，荐为议郎。
现代文：张皓因成翊世前为太子的废黜申辩，荐他为议郎。
English: Zhang Ye recommended him as a mediator because he was the first to plead for the dethronement of the crown prince before he became emperor.

古文：翊世自以其功不显，耻于受位，自劾归。
现代文：成翊世自己认为他的功劳不大，不好意思接受这个职位，自己请求回去。
English: Cheng Xinshe himself thought that his contribution was not great, he was embarrassed to accept this position, and he asked to go back.

古文：三公比辟，不应。
现代文：三公频频征辟，不应。
English: There should not be frequent requisitioning by the three governments.

古文：尚书仆射虞诩雅重之，欲引与共参朝政，乃上书荐之，征拜议郎。
现代文：尚书仆射虞翊最器重成翊世，想招他共参朝政，于是上书推荐他，征授议郎。
English: Shang Shuxu's servant, who wanted to recruit him to participate in court politics, recommended him as a solicitor.

古文：后尚书令左雄、仆射郭虔复举为尚书。
现代文：后来尚书令左雄、仆射郭虔再举他为尚书。
English: Later, Shang Shuling's second-in-command, Zhu Yao Guoqian, promoted him to Shang Shuling again.

古文：在朝正色，百僚敬之。
现代文：在朝廷不苟言笑，百官敬爱他。
English: He was a strict disciplinarian at court and was adored by hundreds of officials.

古文：栾巴字叔元，魏郡内黄人也。
现代文：◆栾巴传，栾巴字叔元，魏郡内黄县人。
English: ◆巴传,巴字叔元, Wei County, Inner Huangshan County.

古文：好道。
现代文：好道术。
English: Good martial arts.

古文：顺帝世，以宦者给事掖庭，补黄门令，非其好也。
现代文：顺帝时，为宦官，供职掖庭。补黄门令，做官不是他的志愿。
English: At the time of Emperor Shun, he was a eunuch, serving in the imperial court. He did not volunteer to be an official.

古文：性质直，学览经典，虽在中官，不与诸常侍交接。
现代文：性情朴实正直，学习儒家的经典，虽然属于中官，不与诸常侍交往。
English: He is simple and honest, and studies Confucian classics. Although he is a middle-ranking official, he does not mingle with the regular attendants.

古文：后阳气通暢，白上乞退，擢拜郎中，四迁桂杨太守。
现代文：后来阳气通畅，身体恢复原形，报告皇上，请求退出宦官，被选任郎中，四迁桂阳太守。
English: Later, his yang qi flowed smoothly, his body was restored to its original shape, he reported to the emperor, requested to withdraw from the eunuch, was selected as a junior vassal, and was transferred four times to become the governor of Guiyang.

古文：以郡处南垂，不闲典训，为吏人定婚姻丧纪之礼，兴立学校，以奖进之。
现代文：因桂阳郡位于南方边陲地区，不熟经典，于是为吏人定婚姻丧纪的礼仪，兴立学校，奖励进步。
English: Because Guiyang County is located in the southern border area, it is not familiar with the classics, so it is for officials to set the etiquette of marriage and death, establish schools, and reward progress.

古文：虽干吏卑末，皆课令习读，程试殿最，随能升授。
现代文：虽干吏小官，都让学习，考试优劣，根据各人的能力提拔或授官。
English: Although cadres are minor officials, they should study, pass examinations, and be promoted or promoted according to their abilities.

古文：政事明察。视事七年，以病乞骸骨。
现代文：政事清明，在职七年，因病请求回家。
English: After seven years in office, he asked to return home due to illness.

古文：荆州刺史李固荐巴治迹，征拜议郎，守光禄大夫，与杜乔、周举等八人徇行州郡。
现代文：荆州刺史李固推荐栾巴的政绩，征召授议郎，署理光禄大夫，与杜乔、周举等八人巡视州郡。
English: Jingzhou Provincial Party Secretary Li Gu recommended Zouba's political achievements, and called for the conferment of the title of the speaker, the deputy doctor Li Guanglu, and eight people such as Du Qiao and Zhou He to inspect the county.

古文：巴使徐州还，再迁豫章太守。
现代文：栾巴使徐州回，再迁豫章太守。
English: Mengba made Xuzhou return, and then moved Yuzhang to be the governor.

古文：郡土多山川鬼怪，小人常破赀产以祈祷。
现代文：郡里多山川鬼怪，山野小人常花钱祈祷。
English: There are many mountain and river ghosts in the county, and mountain and field villains often spend money to pray.

古文：巴素有道术，能役鬼神，乃悉毁坏房祀，剪理奸巫，于是妖异自消。
现代文：栾巴本有道术，能够驱使鬼神，于是把那些房堂的祭祀彻底毁坏，翦灭奸巫，妖怪就自然消除了。
English: Muteba had a technique that could drive away ghosts and gods, so he completely destroyed the sacrificial rites of those halls, annihilated the evil witches, and naturally eliminated the monsters.

古文：百姓始颇为惧，终皆安之。
现代文：开始的时候，百姓有些害怕，后来都安宁了。
English: At first, the people were a little scared, but later they calmed down.

古文：迁沛相。所在有绩，征拜尚书。
现代文：调沛国相，他所到的地方，都有政绩，征授尚书。
English: The Minister of State for Political Affairs, everywhere he went, had political achievements, and was awarded honorary degrees.

古文：会帝崩，营起宪陵。
现代文：遇帝逝世，营筑宪陵。
English: When the emperor died, the mausoleum was built.

古文：陵左右或有小人坟冢，主者欲有所侵毁，巴连上书苦谏。
现代文：陵的左右两边偶有小人的陵墓，主修的人想把它毁掉，栾巴连连上书苦谏。
English: On the right and left sides of the mausoleum, there are occasional small mausoleums. The major wants to destroy it, and the mute is bitterly disappointed.

古文：时梁太后临朝，诏诘巴曰： 大行皇帝晏驾有日，卜择陵园，务从省约，茔域所极，裁二十顷，而巴虚言主者坏人冢墓。
现代文：这时梁太后临朝听政，下诏责问栾巴说： 大行皇帝逝世有几天了，选择陵园，必须节省，墓地才二十顷，栾巴却说什么为主的人坏人冢墓。
English: At this time, the Empress Dowager Liang, who was in attendance at the imperial court to listen to the government, issued an imperial edict to reprimand Zouba, saying, "It has been a few days since the death of the Emperor Da Xing. It is necessary to economize when choosing a cemetery. The cemetery is only 20 hectares, but Zouba said that the main people are bad people and rob graves.

古文：事既非实，寝不报下，巴犹固遂其愚，复上诽谤。苟肆狂瞽，益不可长。 
现代文：既然不是事实，应寝不报下，栾巴却愚而好自用，又上奏诽谤朝廷，胆大妄为，此风更不可长。 
English: Since it is not a fact, it is not reported, the dumbbell is stupid and good for self-use, and it slanders the imperial court, it is audacious, and this trend will not last long.

古文：巴坐下狱，抵罪，禁锢还家。
现代文：栾巴获罪下狱，当抵罪，不准做官，遣送还家。
English: Mengba was convicted and sent to prison. When he confessed, he was not allowed to work as an official and was sent back home.

古文：二十余年，灵帝即位，大将军窦武、太傅陈蕃辅政，征拜议郎。
现代文：过了二十余年，灵帝即位，大将军窦武、太傅陈蕃辅政，征召授议郎。
English: After more than 20 years, Emperor Lingdi ascended to the throne, and Grand General Dou Wu and Grand Master Chen Xiuxu Zheng were conscripted to serve as procurators.

古文：蕃、武被诛，巴以其党，复谪为永昌太守。
现代文：陈蕃、窦武被杀，栾巴因为是他们的同党，复谪为永昌太守。
English: Chen Yao and Dou Wu were killed, and Mengba was reinstated as Yongchang governor because he was a member of the same party as them.

古文：以功自劾，辞病不行，上书极谏，理陈、窦之冤。
现代文：以功自劾，托病不行，上书极谏，申诉陈蕃、窦武的冤案。
English: Accusing oneself of one's own merits, feigning illness is not acceptable, and it is extremely unseemly to submit a written complaint. The grievances of Chen Yao and Dou Wu.

古文：帝怒，下诏切责，收付廷尉。
现代文：帝发怒，下诏痛责，逮捕交廷尉。
English: The emperor was furious and issued a harsh reprimand, arresting the courtier.

古文：巴自杀。子贺，官至云中太守。
现代文：栾巴自杀，儿子栾贺，官至云中太守。
English: Zouba committed suicide, and his son, Zou He, rose to the position of the Empress Dowager of Yunzhong.

古文：刘陶字子奇，一名伟，颍川颍阴人，济北贞王勃之后。
现代文：◆刘陶传，刘陶字子奇，一名伟，颍川郡颍阴县人，济北贞王刘勃之后。
English: ◆Liu Tao Chuan, Liu Tao Ziqi, a Wei, a native of Shuyin County, Beichuan County, after Liu Bo, the king of Jibei Province.

古文：陶为人居简，不修上节。
现代文：刘陶为人平易，不注重小节。
English: Liu Tao is an easy-going person and does not pay attention to details.

古文：所与交友，必也同志。好尚或殊，富贵不求合；情趣苟同，贫贱不易意。
现代文：所交朋友，一定是志同道合的，各人的嗜好不同，虽富贵也不求合；感情趣味如果相同，贫贱也不能改变其意。
English: The friends you make must be like-minded. Everyone's tastes are different. Even if you're rich, you don't have to be. If your emotional tastes are the same, being poor won't change your mind.

古文：同宗刘恺，以雅德知名，独深器陶。
现代文：同宗刘恺，因有雅德著名，他独看得起刘陶。
English: Liu Tao, a member of the same family, is famous for his etiquette. He is the only one who can look up to Liu Tao.

古文：时，大将军梁冀专朝，而桓帝无子，连岁荒饥，灾异数见。
现代文：当时大将军梁冀专权，桓帝没有儿子，连年饥荒，灾异常有发生。
English: At that time, the general Liang Jie had absolute power, Emperor Kuan had no son, there was famine year after year, and natural disasters occurred frequently.

古文：臣闻人非天地无以为生，天地非人无以为灵，是故帝非人不立，人非帝不宁。
现代文：刘陶这时在太学游学，上疏说： 我听说人如果没有天地，就不能生活，天地没有人，就无所谓灵。所以皇帝没有人不立，人没有皇帝就不得安宁。
English: At that time, Liu Tao was on a study tour in Taixu, Shangzhu said: I heard that if there is no heaven and earth, people cannot live, and if there is no heaven and earth, there is no spirit. Therefore, there is no emperor, and people cannot be at peace without an emperor.

古文：夫天之与帝，帝之与人，犹头之与足，相须而行也。
现代文：天和帝，帝和人，就像头与足一样，是相互依存才得行走的。
English: Heaven and God, God and man, like the head and foot, are interdependent to walk.

古文：伏惟陛下年隆德茂，中天称号，袭常存之庆，循不易之制，目不视鸣条之事，耳不闻檀车之声，天灾不有痛于肌肤，震食不即损于圣体，故蔑三光之谬，轻上天之怒。
现代文：我想皇上年壮德高，如日中天，继承常存的庆典，遵循不变的制度，眼不看战争的事，耳不听兵车的声音，天灾没有肌肤之痛，地震、日食也无损于圣体。所以藐视三光的变异，老天爷发怒也置之不理。
English: I think that the emperor was as virtuous as the sun and the sky, inheriting the ever-existing celebration, following the unchanging system, not seeing the war, not hearing the sound of the chariot, the natural disaster did not hurt the skin, and the earthquake and the solar eclipse did not damage the holy body. Therefore, he despised the variation of the three lights, and the god's anger was ignored.

古文：伏念高祖之起，始自布衣，拾暴秦之氅，追亡周之鹿，合散扶伤，克成帝业。
现代文：我想高祖自布衣起兵，收拾暴秦的弊政，消灭各种称王称霸的势力，集合离散的百姓，救死扶伤，才成帝业，功劳很大啊！
English: I think Gao Zu started the army from cloth, cleaned up the tyrannical Qin's maladministration, eliminated all kinds of forces that claimed to be king and hegemony, gathered scattered people, saved lives and helped the injured, and only then became emperor. The merit is great!

古文：功既显矣，勤亦至矣。
现代文：很辛苦啊！福泽流遗皇位，到了陛下。
English: It's been hard work! Fukuzawa abdicated the throne, and it's your majesty's turn.

古文：流福遗祚，至于陛下。陛下既不能增明烈考之轨，而忽高祖之勤，妄假利器，委授国柄，使群丑刑隶，芟刈小民，雕敝诸夏，虐流远近，故天降众异，以戒陛下。
现代文：陛下既不能为祖宗的典则增加光采，反而忽视高祖取天下的勤劳，利器随便借人，国家权力旁落，使一般刑余的小人，残虐百姓，为害国家，不管远近，都受了他们的侵害。
English: His Majesty could not add luster to the code of his ancestors, but instead ignored the hard work of his great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-

古文：陛下不悟，而竞令虎豹窟于麑场，豺狼乳于春囿。斯岂唐咨禹、稷，益典朕虞，议物赋土蒸民之意哉？
现代文：所以上天降下灾异，警戒皇上，皇上还不醒悟，使虎豹纷纷到场里打洞，豺狼在春囿中 养儿育女 ，这难道是唐尧虞舜治理国家，爱惜百姓的意思吗？
English: Therefore, the heavens sent down disasters, alerted the emperor, and the emperor did not wake up, so that the tigers and leopards came to the site to make holes, and the jackals raised children in the spring, is this the meaning of Tang Xuan Yu's governance of the country and cherishing the people?

古文：又今牧守长吏，上下交竟；封豕长蛇，蚕食天下；货殖者为穷冤之魂，贫馁者作饥寒之鬼；高门获东观之辜，丰室罗妖叛之罪；死者悲于窀穸，生者戚于朝野：是愚臣所为咨嗟长怀叹息者也。
现代文：又，现在牧守长吏，上下贪财，好比大猪长蛇，像蚕吃桑叶一样，吞噬国家的财富；钱是平反冤狱的灵魂，贫困的人只能作饥寒的鬼。高门获杀身之祸，富户受妖叛之罪；死了的在坟墓里含悲，生着的愁苦忧伤，遍于天下；这些是我常为之叹息不已的。
English: Moreover, nowadays, the shepherds and officials are greedy for money from top to bottom, like a big pig and a long snake, like a silkworm eating mulberry leaves, devouring the country's wealth; money is the soul of rehabilitating unjust imprisonment, and the poor can only be the ghost of hunger and cold. The high gates are plagued by the scourge of killing, the rich by the sin of demon treason; the dead are sad in the grave, and the born are sad and sad all over the world; these are what I often sigh for.

古文：且秦之将亡，正谏者诛，谀进者赏，嘉言结于忠舌，国命出于谗口，擅阎乐于咸阳，授赵高以车府。
现代文：并且，秦朝将亡的时候，正直不阿进行劝谏的人，往往遭到杀害，而那些阿谀谄媚的人，往往受到奖励，好的言语，忠臣不敢说，国家的命运，出于害人者的口。任赵高为车府令，闫乐就得以在咸阳与赵高同谋杀害胡亥。
English: Moreover, when the Qin Dynasty was about to fall, those who were not honest and did not carry out persuasion were often killed, while those who were flattering were often rewarded. Good words, loyal subjects did not dare to say, the fate of the country, came from the mouths of the perpetrators. If Zhao Gao was the Chefu order, He Le was able to murder and kill Hu Hai with Zhao Gao in Xianyang.

古文：权去已而不知，威离身而不顾。古今一揆，成败同势。原陛下远览强秦之倾，近察哀、平之变，得失昭然，祸福可见。
现代文：权柄自己不能掌握也不知道，威力自己不能行使也不管，成功与失败的形势，古今一样，请皇上远看强秦的所以覆灭，近看哀帝、平帝时的变乱，得与失是明摆着的，为祸为福。
English: The situation of success and failure is the same as that of the past and the present. I would like to ask the emperor to look far and wide to see why the strong Qin dynasty was overthrown, and to look closely at the turmoil during the reigns of Emperor Xian and Emperor Ping. The difference between success and failure is obvious, and it is a blessing in disguise.

古文：臣又闻危非仁不扶，乱非智不救，故武丁得傅说，以消鼎雉之灾，周宣用申、甫，以济夷、厉之荒。
现代文：清楚可见。 我又听说危世不是仁者不能扶，乱世不是智者不能救。所以武丁用傅说，就消除了鼎耳雉鸣的灾祸，位得安宁；周宣王用仲山甫，以解夷王、厉王的荒乱。
English: I also heard that a dangerous world cannot be supported by a benevolent person, and a chaotic world cannot be saved by a wise person. Therefore, Wuding said with Fu, he eliminated the calamity of ringing in the ears and gained peace; Zhou Xuan Wang used Zhong Shan Fu to solve the chaos of Yao Wang and Li Wang.

古文：窃见故冀州刺史南阳朱穆，前乌桓校尉臣同郡李膺，皆履正清平，贞高绝俗。
现代文：前冀州刺史南阳朱穆，前乌桓校尉我同郡人李膺，都是正直清廉，品德纯贞。
English: Former Jizhou assassin Nanyang Zhu Mu, former Wuhuan school captain I and county resident Li Yan, are all honest and incorruptible, with pure moral character.

古文：穆前在冀州，奉宪操平，摧破奸党，扫清万里。
现代文：朱穆从前在冀州，执法公平，摧破奸党，扫清全境。
English: Zhu Mu used to be in Jizhou, enforcing the law fairly, destroying the scoundrels, and clearing the whole territory.

古文：膺历典牧守，正身率下，及掌戎马，威扬朔北。
现代文：李膺为牧守，以身作则，治军作战，威名远扬北方。
English: Li Gan was the shepherd, leading by example, leading the army in battle, and his reputation spread far and wide in the north.

古文：斯实中兴之良佐，国家之柱臣也。
现代文：他们真是中兴优秀的辅佐人才，是国家的柱石。
English: They are truly ZTE's outstanding supporting talents and are the pillars of the country.

古文：宜还本朝，挟辅王室，上齐七燿，下镇万国。
现代文：应当要他返回朝廷，辅助王室，上同七曜，光明普照，下镇万国，天下太平。
English: He should be asked to return to the imperial court, assist the royal family, go up on the 7th day of the 7th month, shine brightly, go down to the town of all nations, and the world will be peaceful.

古文：臣敢吐不时之义于讳言之朝，犹冰霜见日，必至消灭。
现代文：我敢于在拒谏的当朝，说这么一些不合时宜的话，如同冰霜见了太阳，一定要被消灭的。
English: I dare to say such inappropriate words on the morning of the protest, as if the frost saw the sun, it must be eliminated.

古文：臣始悲天下之可悲，今天下亦悲臣之愚惑也。
现代文：我先是悲天下的可悲，现在天下当悲我的愚蠢啊！ 
English: At first I was pitied for my wretchedness, but now the whole world should pity my stupidity!

古文：书奏不省。
现代文：书送上去，皇帝没有采纳。
English: When the calligraphy is played, it cannot be reflected upon.

古文：时，有上书言人以货轻钱薄，故致贫困，宜改铸大钱。
现代文：当时有人上书说因为货轻钱薄，所以国家贫困，应当改铸大钱。
English: At that time, someone wrote a letter saying that because goods are light and money is thin, the country is impoverished, and big money should be made instead.

古文：事下四府群僚及太学能言之士。
现代文：这事皇帝下诏四府百官及太学讨论。
English: The matter was assigned to all officials of the four prefectures and those who are good at talking.

古文：陶上议曰：
现代文：刘陶上议说： 先圣先王奉天造事，与百姓同行同止。
English: Liu Tao said, "The first saint and the first king obeyed the will of heaven and worked alongside the people.

古文：圣王承天制物，与人行止，建功则众悦其事，兴戎而师乐其旅。是故灵台有子来之人，武旅有凫藻之士，皆举合时宜，动顺人道也。
现代文：建功立业，大家都高兴地去干；兴师动众，军士都乐于听命。例如兴建灵台，百姓就如儿子一样都来参加，周武王振旅，战士就如凫得水藻一样喜悦。都是一举一动，合于时宜，顺于人道。
English: For example, the construction of the spiritual platform, the people came to participate as if they were sons, the Zhouwu Wang Zhen trip, and the soldiers were as pleased as if they were picking up algae. Everything was done in a timely and humane manner.

古文：臣伏读铸钱之诏，平轻重之议，访覃幽微，不遗穷贱，是以藿食之人，谬延逮及。
现代文：我敬读铸钱诏知道，皇上为了统一轻重的意见，访到平民百姓，不遗贫贱。 大抵现在可忧的事，不在于钱，而在于百姓饿肚子。
English: I respectfully read the Imperial Rescript on the Minting of Money, and I know that the Emperor, in order to unify the weighty opinions, visited the common people, sparing neither the poor nor the lowly.Most of the things to worry about now are not about money, but about the people going hungry.

古文：盖以为当今之忧，不在于货，在乎民饥。夫生养之道，先食后货。是以先王观象育物，敬授民时，使男不逋亩，女不下机。
现代文：生民养育的原则，是先要使他们有饭吃，然后才谈到有钱用。先王观天象，育万物，教百姓按时劳动，男的努力种田，女的不下机杼。
English: The principle of raising the people is to first make them have food to eat, and then talk about having money to use. The ancestors watched the angels, nurtured all things, taught the people to work on time, the man's efforts to farm, and the woman's ingenuity.

古文：故君臣之道行，王路之教通。
现代文：这样君臣之道得以行，王路的教化得以通。
English: In this way, the way of the king and the way of the subject can be carried out, and the enlightenment of the king's way can be achieved.

古文：由是言之，食者乃有国之所宝，生民之至贵也。
现代文：这样说来，粮食为国家之宝，是百姓最贵重的东西。
English: Thus, grain is a national treasure and the most precious thing for the people.

古文：窃见比年已来，良苗尽于蝗螟之口，杼柚空于公私之求，所急朝夕之餐，所患靡之事，岂谓钱货之厚薄，铢两之轻重哉？
现代文：近年以来，好好的庄稼，被蝗虫吃得干干净净。
English: In recent years, good crops have been eaten clean by locusts.

古文：就使当今沙砾化为南金，瓦石变为和玉，使百姓渴无所饮，饥无所食，虽皇、羲之纯德，唐、虞之文明，犹不能以保萧墙之内也。
现代文：纺织不能满足公私的需求。所急的是一日两餐，所害怕的是国家的劳役无已，难道还谈得上什么钱货的厚薄，铢两的轻重吗！即使现在沙砾化为黄金，瓦石变为卞和之玉，百姓渴了没有喝的，饥了没有吃的，虽有三王的纯德，唐虞的文明，还不能担保国家内部不发生乱子啊！
English: Textiles cannot meet the needs of both the public and the private sector. The most urgent need is for two meals a day, and the greatest fear is that the state's labor service is exhausted. Can we still talk about the thickness of money and goods, and the importance of the two! Even if sand and gravel are now turned into gold, and rocks and pebbles are turned into gems of peace, and the people are thirsty and have nothing to drink, and hungry and have nothing to eat, even though the Three Kings' pure morality and the Tang and Yu civilizations, they still cannot guarantee that there will be no chaos within the country!

古文：盖民可百年无货，不可一朝有饥，故食为至急也。
现代文：百姓可以百年没有钱货，不可一天没有饭吃。所以粮食是最急需的。
English: People can live without money and goods for a hundred years, but they cannot go without food for a day. Therefore, grain is the most urgently needed.

古文：议者不达农殖之本，多言铸冶之便，或欲因缘行诈，以贾国利。
现代文：谈论钱货的人，不知道农业是根本，老是说铸钱最方便。有的甚至想趁机诈骗，谋取国家的财利。
English: The people who are talking about it do not understand the fundamentals of agricultural cultivation. Most of them are talking about the convenience of making money, and some are trying to take advantage of the opportunity to engage in fraud to seek profits from the state.

古文：国利将尽，取者争竞，造铸之端于是乎生。
现代文：国家的财利被谋取得差不多了，他们更加放肆争夺，于是造铸钱货的事发生了。
English: The country's wealth and interests were plundered almost to the point of confiscation, and they fought even more brazenly, so the minting of money and goods took place.

古文：盖万人铸之，一人夺之，犹不能给；况今一人铸之，则万人夺之乎？
现代文：大概一万个人铸钱，一个人夺取，还不能供给，何况现在是一个人铸钱，一万个人夺取呢！
English: Approximately ten thousand people mint money, one person seizes it, and still cannot supply it. What's more, now it is one person minting money, and ten thousand people seizing it!

古文：虽以阴阳为炭，万物为铜，役不食之民，使不饥之士，犹不能足无之求也。
现代文：虽把阴阳作炭，万物当铜，用不吃饭的百姓，使用肚子不饿的官吏，还是不能满足这种无止境的贪求的。
English: Although the yin and yang are used as charcoal and all things as copper, the people who do not eat are used, and the officials who are not hungry are used, they still cannot satisfy this endless craving.

古文：夫欲民殷财阜，要在纸役禁夺，则百姓不劳饵足。
现代文：要想使老百姓丰衣足食，关键在于停止劳役，禁止剥夺。这样百姓不劳苦而自会丰足。
English: If we want the people to be well-fed and clothed, the key lies in stopping forced labor and prohibiting deprivation. In this way, the people will be well-fed without labor.

古文：陛掀圣灯，愍海内之忧戚，伤天下之艰难，欲铸钱齐货以救其敞，此犹养鱼沸鼎之中，栖鸟烈火之上。
现代文：皇上圣德，同情海内百姓的忧愁悲痛，感于天下的财用乏竭，想铸钱统一货币，解决这种困难，这好比养鱼于滚烫的锅中，栖鸟于燃烧的树上。
English: Emperor Shengde, sympathizing with the sorrow and grief of the people at sea, felt that the world's financial resources were exhausted, and wanted to mint a unified currency to solve this difficulty, which was like keeping fish in a hot pot and perching birds on a burning tree.

古文：水木本鱼鸟之所生也，用之不时，必至焦烂。
现代文：水与木，本是鱼和鸟生活的地方，用的不是时候，一定要至焦烂。
English: Water and wood are originally places where fish and birds live. It is not the time to use them. They must be burnt to a crisp.

古文：愿陛下宽锲薄之禁，后冶铸之议，听民庶之谣吟，问路叟之所忧，瞰三光之文耀，视山河之分流。
现代文：请皇上对百姓减轻一点剥削，铸钱的事以后再说。听听百姓的歌谣，采访路人的所悲，看日、月的被食，星辰的错行，山川的崩塌。
English: Ask the emperor to lighten the exploitation of the people a little, and let's talk about the minting of money later. Listen to the songs of the people, interview the sorrows of passers-by, see the eclipse of the sun and moon, the wrong movement of the stars, and the collapse of mountains and rivers.

古文：天下之心，国家大事，粲然皆见，无有遗惑者矣。臣尝诵《诗》，至于鸿雁于野之劳，哀勤堵之事，每喟尔长怀，中篇而叹。
现代文：天下的人心，国家的大事，在这里都可以看得分明，没有任何迷惑的地方了。 我曾经读《诗》，读到鸿雁于野的篇章，叙述百姓的劳苦，实在可怜极了。
English: The human heart of the world and the important affairs of the country can all be seen clearly here, and there is no place for confusion.I once read "Poetry" and read the chapter of the wild goose in the field, describing the hardships of the people, it was really pitiful.

古文：近听征夫饥劳之声，甚于斯歌。
现代文：百堵墙壁，要同时筑起，不顾百姓死活，我喟然长叹，不忍卒读。
English: A hundred walls, to be built at the same time, regardless of the people's lives and deaths, I suddenly sighed and could not bear to read.

古文：是以追悟四妇吟鲁之忧，始于此乎？
现代文：最近听见征夫饥饿劳苦的叫声，比鸿雁之歌，更加凄惨。
English: Recently, I heard the cries of starving laborers, more miserable than the song of wild geese.

古文：见白驹之意，屏营傍徨，不能监寐。
现代文：是以追想到从前鲁国漆室邑的女儿，靠着柱子哭，大概也是看到鲁国征役太重，百姓生活太苦，国家有复亡的危险吗？
English: Was it the memory of the daughter of the former Urushimuro-eup, Lu, crying against the pillar, or perhaps the fact that the conscription in Lu was too heavy, the people's lives were too hard, and the country was in danger of being overthrown?

古文：伏念当今地广而不得耕，民众而无所食。
现代文：我看了《诗经》上 白驹 诗，忧恐徨，不能睡觉。
English: I read the poem about the egret in "The Book of Songs" and couldn't sleep.

古文：群小竞进，秉国之位，鹰扬天下，乌抄求饱，吞肌及骨，并释无。
现代文：现在广阔的土地得不到耕种，百姓没有饭吃。一群害人精，削尖脑壳往上钻，拿了国家的权位，横行天下。乌鸦强夺求饱，肌肤骨头也都吞下，没有个满足。
English: Now the vast land cannot be cultivated, and the people have no food to eat. A group of malevolent spirits, sharpening their skulls to drill upwards, have taken the power of the country and run rampant throughout the world. Crows forcibly grab for food, swallowing skin and bones, and no one is satisfied.

古文：诚恐卒有役夫穷匠，起于板筑之间，投斤攘臂，登高远呼，使愁怨之民，响应云合，八方分崩，中夏鱼渍。虽方尺之钱。何能有救！
现代文：真怕役夫、穷匠，突然兴起于劳作之中，卷起袖子，扔掉斧子，登高一呼，愁苦怨恨的百姓，响应云集，八方分崩离析，国家鱼烂，虽有一尺见方那样大的钱，也不能救。
English: It is to be feared that a laborer or a poor craftsman may suddenly arise in the midst of his toil, roll up his sleeves, throw away his axe, and shout aloud. The sorrowful and resentful people will gather in response. The country will fall apart in all directions, and the country will be ruined. Even if there is as much money as a square foot, it cannot be saved.

古文：其危犹举函牛之鼎，絓纤枯之末，诗人所以眷袒顾之，潸焉出涕者也。
现代文：国家的危险，有如举起函牛那样大的鼎，挂在纤细枯槁的木尖。这是诗人怀念国家，不禁流泪的原因。
English: The danger of the country is like holding up a big ding-dong like a letter cow, hanging on a thin, withered wooden spike. This is the reason why poets can't help but shed tears when they miss the country.

古文：臣东野狂暗，不达大义，缘广及之时，对过所问，知必以身脂鼎镬，为天下笑。
现代文： 我是东野狂夫，暗昧不明大义，今就所问，对答如上。自己知道一定要获罪，为天下的人所耻笑。 
English: I am the madman of Higashino. I do not know what is right and what is wrong. I am asking you now, and my answer is as above. I know that I must be punished, and I am the laughing stock of the world.

古文：帝竟不铸钱。
现代文：帝终于不铸钱。
English: In the end, the emperor did not mint money.

古文：后陶举孝廉，除顺阳长。
现代文：后来刘陶举孝廉，任为顺阳长。
English: Later, Liu Tao promoted Xiaolian and appointed him as the head of Shunyang.

古文：县多奸猾，陶到官，宣募吏民有气力勇猛，能以死易生者，不拘亡命奸臧，于是剽轻剑客之徒过晏等十余人，皆来应募。
现代文：县里大奸巨猾不少，刘陶到任，宣言招募吏民中勇猛有气力，能够不怕死的，不管是不是亡命之徒，或者隐藏的坏人，于是剽捷剑客之流过宴等十多人，都来应募。
English: The county's traitor was very cunning. When Liu Tao took office, he declared that he would recruit officials and people who were brave and powerful and could not be afraid of death, regardless of whether they were outlaws or hidden villains. As a result, more than ten people, including the stream of Qijie swordsmen, came to apply.

古文：陶责其先过，要以后效，使各结所厚少年，得数百人，皆严兵待命。
现代文：刘陶谴责他们以前的罪过，要看他们今后的表现，使他们各个结纳他们的相好，得数百人，都全副武装，等待命令。
English: Liu Tao accused them of their previous sins, depending on their future performance, and made them each arrest their partner, resulting in hundreds of people, all fully armed, waiting for orders.

古文：于是复案奸轨，所发若神。
现代文：于是查办那些奸猾不法分子，捉拿归案，有如神明。
English: As a result, those treacherous and illegal elements were investigated, arrested and brought to justice, like gods.

古文：以病免，吏民思而歌之曰： 邑然不乐，思我刘君。何时复来，安此下民。 
现代文：因病免官，吏民思念他，做了一首歌 ：郁郁不乐，思我陶君，何时再来，安此下民。 
English: Dismissed from office due to illness, the officials and people missed him and made a song: depressed and unhappy, thinking of me, Tao Jun, when will he come again, peace to the people.

古文：陶明《尚书》、《春秋》，为之训诂。
现代文：刘陶熟悉《尚书》、《春秋》，为这两本书作了注解。
English: Liu Tao is familiar with "Shang Shu" and "Spring and Autumn" and has made annotations for these two books.

古文：推三家《尚书》及古文，是正文字七百余事，名曰《中文尚书》。
现代文：推重夏侯建、夏侯胜、欧阳和伯三家《尚书》及古文，改正文字七百多处，名曰《中文尚书》。
English: Emphasizing the "Chinese Classics" and ancient texts of Xia Houjian, Xia Housheng, Ouyang and Bo, and correcting more than 700 words, the name is "Chinese Classics."

古文：顷之，拜侍御史。
现代文：没有好久，授侍御史。
English: Not for long, Your Majesty.

古文：灵帝宿闻其名，数引纳之。
现代文：灵帝久闻其名，几次召见他。
English: Ling Di has known his name for a long time and has summoned him several times.

古文：时，巨鹿张角伪托大道，妖惑小民，陶与奉车都尉乐松、议郎袁贡连名上疏言之，曰：圣王以天下耳目为视听，故能无不闻见。
现代文：当时巨麓张角假托大道，妖惑百姓，刘陶与奉车都尉乐松、议郎袁贡联名上疏说 ：先圣先王用天下人的耳目去看去听，所以没有看不见听不到的事物。
English: At that time, the giant foot Zhangjiajie put up a fake avenue and bewitched the people. Liu Tao, together with the commander of Fengche, Le Song, and the leader of the council, Yuan Gong, jointly said: The first holy king used the eyes and ears of the world to see and hear, so there is nothing that cannot be seen or heard.

古文：今张角支党不可胜计。
现代文：现在张角的党羽，不可胜数。
English: The number of splintered party wings is incalculable.

古文：前司徒杨赐奏下诏书，切敕州郡，护送流民，会赐去位，不复捕录。
现代文：以前司徒杨赐请得诏书，切责州郡，保护遣送流民，因杨赐不在位，没有对张角党羽进行逮捕。
English: In the past, Yang Jie, the governor of Shizuoka Prefecture, issued an imperial edict to urge the county to protect and repatriate the displaced people. However, because Yang Jie was not in office, he did not arrest Zhang Jiao's party members.

古文：虽会赦令，而谋不解散。
现代文：虽然是遇上赦令，但他们还是没有解散。
English: Although they were pardoned, they still did not disband.

古文：四方私言，云角等窃入京师，觇视朝政，鸟声兽心，私共鸣呼。
现代文：四方暗里说，张角等人潜入京师，打听朝廷政事，禽兽为心，互相呼应。
English: Shifang secretly said that Zhang Jiao and others infiltrated the Beijing division to inquire about the affairs of the imperial court, and the animals were the heart and echoed each other.

古文：州郡忌讳，不欲闻之，但更相告语，莫肯公文。
现代文：州郡害怕，不想报告朝廷。只是你告我，我告你，不肯公之于文字。
English: The prefectures and counties are afraid and do not want to report to the imperial court. However, you sue me, I sue you, they refuse to make it public in writing.

古文：宜下明诏，重募角等，赏以国土。
现代文：应该明确下诏，有捉拿到张角的，奖赏为国士。
English: It should be made clear that anyone who catches Zhang Jiao will be rewarded as a national hero.

古文：有敢回避，与之同罪。
现代文：如有看到张角不捉拿的，与张角同罪。 
English: If anyone sees Zhang Jiao and fails to arrest him, they will be guilty of the same crime as Zhang Jiao.

古文：帝殊不悟，方诏陶次第《春秋》条例。
现代文：帝始终不醒悟，正下诏刘陶编次《春秋》条例。
English: The emperor still did not wake up and ordered Liu Tao to compile the "Spring and Autumn" regulations.

古文：明年，张角反乱，海内鼎沸，帝思陶言，封中陵乡侯，三迁尚书令。
现代文：第二年，张角作乱，天下骚动，帝追想刘陶的话，封刘陶为中陵乡侯，三迁尚书令。
English: In the second year, Zhang Jiao caused turmoil, the whole country was in turmoil, the emperor recalled Liu Tao's words, Liu Tao was appointed as Zhongling Township, and Shang Shuling was ordered to relocate three times.

古文：以所举将为尚书，难与齐列，乞从冗散，拜侍中。
现代文：因为他所举荐的人将为尚书，不好与他同列，请求放在编制以外，做个闲散人员。任为侍中。
English: Because the person recommended by him will be Shoshu, it is not good to be listed with him, request to be placed outside the organization, to be an idle person. Appointed as an attendant.

古文：以数切谏，以权臣所惮，徙为京兆尹。
现代文：因为多次痛切劝谏，权臣怕他，调为京兆尹。
English: Because he had repeatedly and earnestly advised him, the powerful ministers were afraid of him and transferred him to the post of Jingzha Yin.

古文：到职，当出修宫钱直千万，陶既清贫，而耻以钱买职，称疾不听政。
现代文：到职，应当出修宫钱直千万。所谓 修宫钱 ，就是 买官钱 ，刘陶清贫，又以花钱买官为可耻，托病不办公。
English: The so-called "repair palace money," that is, money to buy officials, Liu Tao is poor, and it is shameful to spend money to buy officials, and he does not work on sick leave.

古文：帝宿重陶才，原其罪，征拜谏议大夫。
现代文：帝素重刘陶的才华，原宥了他的罪过，征授谏议大夫。
English: Emperor Xu respected Liu Tao's talent, forgave his sins, and awarded him the title of "Doctor of Discourse."

古文：是时，天下日危，寇贼方炽，陶忧致崩乱，复上疏曰：臣闻事之急者不能安言，心之痛者不能缓声。
现代文：当时，国家的局势，一天比一天危险，外寇内贼，极为嚣张，刘陶忧国家崩溃坏乱，又上疏说： 我听说急事来临，说话不能慢条斯理，痛心疾首的事，说起来不能小声小气。
English: At that time, the situation of the country was getting more and more dangerous day by day, foreign invaders and insiders were extremely arrogant. Liu Tao, worried about the country's collapse and chaos, said again: I heard that urgent things were coming, I can't speak slowly, and I can't speak softly about painful things.

古文：窃见天下前遇张角之乱，后遭边章之寇，每闻羽书告急之声，心灼内忍，四体惊竦。
现代文：国家前有张角造乱，后遭边章寇掠。我一听到羽书告急的声音，心中像火一样焚，四体发抖。
English: When I heard the panicked voice of Feather Book, my heart burned like fire and my body trembled.

古文：今西羌逆类，私署将帅，皆多段时吏，晓习战陈，识知山川，变诈万端。
现代文：现在西羌杂种，擅自委派将帅，大多是段赹时的官吏，他们熟习战争，山川形势了如指掌，变诈多端。
English: Now the West Han bastards are appointing generals without authorization, and most of them are officials from the Duan Dynasty. They are familiar with war, know the mountain and river situation like the back of their hands, and are full of deceit.

古文：臣常惧其轻出河东、冯翊，抄西军之后，东之函谷，据厄高望。
现代文：我曾经担心他们出人不意，从河东、冯翊抄袭西军的后路，东去函谷，临高据险。
English: I was once worried that they might surprise people. They copied the western army's back route from Hedong and Fengye, and went east to Hakodate and Lingang.

古文：今果已攻河东，恐遂转更豕突上京。
现代文：现在果然已经进攻河东，可怕的是转而突击上京。
English: Now they have indeed attacked Hedong, but what is terrifying is that they have turned to storming into Beijing.

古文：如是则南道断绝，车骑之军孤立，关东破胆，四方动摇，威之不来，叫之不应，虽有田单、陈平之策，计无所用。
现代文：这样，南边的道路断绝，车骑将军的部队孤立无援，关东惊恐，四方动摇，命令无人来，叫人无人应，虽有田单、陈平的计策，也不起作用。
English: In this way, the roads in the south were cut off, the troops of the cavalry general were isolated and helpless, the Kanto region was terrified, and all sides were shaken. No one ordered anyone to come, and no one called for anyone to come. Although there were strategies of Tian Shan and Chen Ping, they did not work.

古文：臣前驿马上便宜，急绝诸郡赋调，冀尚可安¨事付主者，留连至今，莫肯求间。
现代文：我从前驿马上奏。要马上停止各郡赋调，希望能够安定。事情交主管部门，搁置到今天，无人问讯。
English: I used to play the flute. I want to stop the assignment of counties immediately, I hope to be able to stabilize. The matter was handed over to the competent authorities, shelved to this day, no one asked.

古文：今三郡之民皆以奔亡，南出武关，北徙壶谷，冰解风散，唯恐在后。
现代文：现在三郡的老百姓都已经逃跑了，南走武关，北去壶谷，土崩瓦解，恐怕还在后面呢。
English: Now the people of the three counties have all fled. They went south to Wuguan and north to Jugok, and the country has fallen apart. I'm afraid they're still behind.

古文：今共存者尚十三四，军吏士民悲愁相守，民有百走退死之心，而无一前斗生之计。
现代文：现在剩下来的，还有十分之三四，军吏士民悲愁相守，百姓有逃走退死的思想，没有上前线战斗求生的计策。
English: What is left now is three-fourths of a tenth. The military officials, the judges and the people are sad, the people have the idea of escaping and retreating, and they do not have the strategy of going to the front line to fight for survival.

古文：西寇浸前，去营咫尺，胡骑分布，已至诸陵。
现代文：西边的敌人渐渐向前，离我军的阵地很近了，胡人的骑兵，已经到了各陵园。
English: The enemy in the west gradually advanced, very close to our army's position. Hu's cavalry has already arrived at the cemeteries.

古文：将军张温，天性精勇，而主者旦夕迫促，军无后殿，假令失利，其败不救。
现代文：将军张温，精强勇敢，而领导朝夕迫促，军队没有后援，假使一旦失败，是不可挽救的。
English: General Zhang Wen is strong and brave, but the leadership is pressing day and night, the army has no backup, and if it fails, it is irretrievable.

古文：臣自知言数见厌，而言不自裁者，以为国安则臣蒙其庆，国危则臣亦先亡也。
现代文：我自己知道话说多了讨人厌，但还是说个不停的，是因为国家安宁，我就得到幸福，国家危乱，我就先亡了。
English: I know myself that I have said too much to be annoying, but I still keep saying, because the country is peaceful, I will be happy, the country is in crisis, I will die first.

古文：谨复陈当今要急入事，乞须臾之间，深垂纳省。其八事，大较言天下大乱，皆由宦官。
现代文：特再陈当今紧急要事八条，请马上采纳。 所谓八事，主要是说国家大乱，都是由于宦官。
English: In particular, I would like to reiterate today's eight urgent important matters, please adopt them immediately.The so-called eight matters, mainly referring to the national turmoil, are all due to eunuchs.

古文：宦官事急，共谗陶曰： 前张解事发，诏书示以威恩，自此以来，各各改悔。
现代文：宦官急了，大家诬陷刘陶说 ：从前张角的事发生，诏令、威恩并用，自此以后，各各悔改。
English: The eunuchs were in a hurry, and they all framed Liu Tao, saying, "Once upon a time, the Zhangjiao Incident happened, and both the imperial edict and the imperial edict were used. Since then, everyone has repented."

古文：今者四方安静，而陶疾害圣政，专言妖孽。州郡不上，陶何缘知？
现代文：现在四方安定，刘陶痛恶朝廷政治清明，专门大说特说张角妖孽，州郡没有上报，刘陶根据什么知道的呢？
English: Now the four directions are stable, Liu Tao's abhorrence of the imperial court's politics is clear-cut, and he specifically talks about Zhang Ke's witchcraft. The state and county have not been reported, according to what does Liu Tao know?

古文：疑陶与贼通情。 
现代文：我们怀疑刘陶与贼通来往。 
English: We suspect that Liu Tao is in contact with the thief.

古文：于是收陶，下黄门北寺狱，掠按日急。
现代文：于是逮捕刘陶，关进黄门北寺狱中，天天拷问鞭挞，刘陶自己知道必死无疑。
English: As a result, Liu Tao was arrested, locked up in Huangmen North Temple Prison, tortured and whipped every day. Liu Tao knew that he would die without a doubt.

古文：陶自知必死，对使者曰： 朝廷前封臣云何？
现代文：对使者说 ：朝廷以前封我为中陵乡侯时怎么说的？
English: He said to the messenger, "What did the imperial court say when they made me the vassal of Zhongling Township?"

古文：今反受邪谮，恨不与伊、吕同畴，而以三仁为辈。 
现代文：现在反因此受诬陷。可恨的是不能与伊尹、太公同流，而与微子、箕子、比干同辈。 
English: Now, on the other hand, he is being framed for it. What is hateful is that he cannot be in the same class as Yi Yin and Tai Gong, but is in the same class as Mu Zi, Zang Zi and Bi Gan.

古文：遂闭气而死，天下莫不痛之。
现代文：闭气而死，四海之内，没有不悲痛的。
English: There is no one in the world who dies holding his breath without grief.

古文：陶著书数十万言，又作《七曜论》、《匡老子》、《反韩非》、《复孟轲》，及上书言当世便事、条教、赋、奏、书、记、辩疑，凡百余篇。
现代文：刘陶著书数十万言，又作《七曜论》、《匡老子》、《反韩非》、《复孟轲》及上书言当世便事、条教、赋、奏、书、记、辩疑，共百余篇。
English: Liu Tao wrote hundreds of thousands of words, and also wrote "Seventh Day Discourse," "Kuan Lao Zi," "Anti-Han Fei," "Fu Meng Yao" and more than a hundred pieces of books on current affairs, rules, teachings, plays, books, records and debates.

古文：时，司徒东海陈耽，亦以非罪与陶俱死，耽以忠正称，历位三司。
现代文：这时司徒东海陈耽，也是无罪与刘陶同死，陈耽以忠为人称道，历位三司。
English: At this time, the magistrate, Donghai Chen Tan, was also innocent and died with Liu Tao. Chen Tan was praised for his loyalty and was promoted to the third rank.

古文：光和五年，诏公卿以谣言举刺史、二千石为民蠹害者。
现代文：光和五年，诏令公卿按百姓歌谣检举刺史、二千石为害的。
English: In the 5th year of the Heian period, the Emperor issued an edict to the court nobles that they should slander the history and 2,000 koku of rice in accordance with the folk songs.

古文：时太尉许戫、司空张济承望内官，受取货赂，其宦者子弟宾客，虽贪污秽浊，皆不敢问，而虚纠边远小郡清修有惠化者二十六人。
现代文：当时太尉许有或、司空张济，看着宦官的脸色行事，收取贿赂。宦官的子弟宾客，虽然贪污卑鄙，问都不敢问一问，而虚报纠举边远地区小郡清廉有惠政的刺史二十六人。
English: At that time, the captain Xu You or the steward Zhang Jie looked at the eunuch's face and took bribes. Although the eunuch's children, the guests, were corrupt and despicable, they did not dare to ask any questions, but falsely reported that there were twenty-six people in small counties in remote areas who were clean and honest and had a good political record.

古文：吏人诣阙陈诉，耽与议郎曹操上言： 公卿所举，率党其私，所谓放鸱枭而囚鸾凤。 
现代文：官吏和百姓到京师申诉，陈耽与议郎曹操上书说 ：公卿太多庇护与他们有关系的人，所谓检举，是放走鸱枭囚禁鸾凤。 
English: Officials and common people went to Beijing to appeal to the emperor. Chen Tan and Cao Cao, the mediator, sent a letter saying, "Too many nobles are sheltering people who are related to them. The so-called indictment is to let them go, imprison them, and banish them."

古文：其言忠切，帝以让戫、济，由是诸坐谣言征者悉拜议郎。
现代文：话说得忠切，帝因此责让许有或和张济。由于这个，诸因谣言获罪的，都授以议郎之官。
English: He spoke truthfully, and the emperor therefore ordered Xu You or Zhang Jie to be removed. Because of this, all those who were found guilty because of the rumor were given the post of mediator.

古文：宦官怨之，遂诬陷耽死狱中。
现代文：宦官怀怨，就诬陷陈耽死于狱中。
English: The eunuch held a grudge and framed Chen Tan for his death in prison.

古文：李云字行祖，甘陵人也。
现代文：◆李云传，李云字行祖，甘陵县人。
English: ◆Li Yun Chuan, the founder of the Li Yun character, was from Ganling County.

古文：性好学，善阴阳。
现代文：性好学，通阴阳。
English: They are eager to learn and are good at yin and yang.

古文：初举孝廉，再迁白马令。
现代文：起先举为孝廉，升任白马县令。
English: He was first promoted to Xiaolian and then to the post of Baima County magistrate.

古文：桓帝延熹二年，诛大将军梁冀，而中常侍单超等五人皆以诛冀功并封列侯，专权选举。又立掖庭民女氏为皇后，数月间，后家封者四人，赏赐巨万。
现代文：桓帝延熹二年，诛杀大将军梁冀，中常侍单超等五人因诛杀梁冀有功，都封为列侯，专权选举，又立掖庭民间女亳氏为皇后，几个月的时间，皇后家受封的四人，赏赐巨万。
English: In the second year of Yan's reign, Emperor Kuan killed the general Liang Jie, and five people, including a high-ranking courtier and a high-ranking official, were appointed as lords of the manor due to their meritorious service in killing Liang Jie. An election was held to choose the lords of the manor, and a woman from the Qingting folk clan was appointed as the empress. Over the course of a few months, four members of the empress's family were appointed, and were rewarded with a huge sum of money.

古文：是时，地数震裂，众灾频降。
现代文：这时多次地震，各种灾害接二连三降临。
English: At this time, many earthquakes and various disasters occurred one after another.

古文：云素刚，忧国将危，心不能忍，乃露布上书，移副三府，曰：
现代文：李云平素刚正不阿，忧国家危险，内心实在不能忍了。不得已，公开上奏皇上，同时以副本送三公府。
English: Li Yunping was very upright, worried about the danger of the country, and his heart could not bear it. As a last resort, he publicly appealed to the emperor and sent copies to the three public offices.

古文：臣闻皇后天下母，德配坤灵，得其人则五氏来备，不得其人则地动摇宫。
现代文：奏说 ：我听说皇后是天下的母亲，德与地灵媲美。皇后得人，雨？燠、风、寒 五是 都来，不得其人，地也震动，宫殿也要动摇。
English: He said, "I have heard that the empress is the mother of the world, and that her virtue is equal to that of the spirits of the earth. If the empress is visited by people, rain, hail, wind, and cold will all come, and if she is not visited, the earth will shake, and the palace will be shaken.

古文：比年灾异，可谓多矣，皇天之戒，可谓至矣。
现代文：近年灾异，可说是很多呀！老天的警戒，可说是无以复加呀！
English: In recent years, there have been a lot of disasters! God's vigilance can be said to be immeasurable!

古文：高祖受命，至今三百六十四岁，君期一周，当有黄精代见，姓陈、项、虞、田、许氏，不可令此人居太尉、太傅典兵之官。
现代文：高祖受命，到今已有三百六十四年，君期一周，会有黄精代见。凡是姓陈的，姓项的，姓虞的，姓田的以及许氏，这些人不可居太尉、太傅掌握兵权。
English: It has been 364 years since Gao Zu received the order, and one week has passed since the emperor ascended to the throne. There will be a Huang Jing generation. All surnamed Chen, surnamed Xiang, surnamed Yu, surnamed Tian, as well as the Xu clan, these people must not hold the military power.

古文：举厝至重，不可不慎。
现代文：凡有措施，至关重要，不可不慎。
English: All measures are crucial and must not be taken carelessly.

古文：班功行赏，宜应其实。
现代文：论功行赏，应当名副其实。
English: On the merits of the award, it should be worthy of the name.

古文：梁冀虽持权专擅，糯流天下，今以罪行诛，犹召家臣榏杀之耳。
现代文：梁冀虽然掌权，独断专行，暴虐天下，现在因获罪诛杀，这好比叫一家臣把他杀了罢了，是很容易的。
English: Although Liang Jie was in power, exercising arbitrary power and tyrannizing the world, it is easy for him to be killed for a crime, just like asking a vassal to kill him.

古文：而猥封谋臣万户以上，高祖闻之，得无见非？
现代文：只是他擅封谋臣万户以上，高祖知道了，会不会同意？
English: However, if Gaozu knew that he had arbitrarily appointed more than ten thousand households as his vassals, would he agree?

古文：西钡列将，得无解体？
现代文：西北众将，会不会解体？
English: Northwest Generals, will they be disbanded?

古文：孔子曰： 帝者，谛也。 
现代文：孔子说： 帝者，谛也。 
English: Confucius said, "If you want to be an emperor, you must also be a scholar."

古文：今官位错乱，小人谄进，财货公行，政化日损，尺一拜用不经御省。
现代文：这是说做皇帝的要审察万事万物。现在官位错乱，小人因阿谀奉承进升高位，行贿受贿，公开进行，政治教化，一天不如一天。奏书颁发，也不经皇上审阅。
English: This is to say that the emperor should examine all things. Now the official position is disordered, villains are promoted because of flattery, bribes are openly accepted, and political indoctrination is carried out, day by day. The report is issued, and it is not reviewed by the emperor.

古文：是帝欲不谛乎？
现代文：难道这是皇帝不想谛吗？ 
English: Could it be that the emperor did not want to know?

古文：帝得奏震怒，下有司逮云，诏尚书都护剑戟送黄门北寺狱，使中常侍管霸与御史廷尉杂考之。
现代文：帝看了奏书，大发雷霆，命令官吏把李云逮捕，尚书都护武装押送黄门北寺狱，使中常侍管霸与御史廷尉审讯。
English: The emperor read the report and was furious, ordering officials to arrest Li Yun, escorting him to the Huangmen North Temple Prison with armed guards, and ordering the Vice-Commander-in-Chief to interrogate him and Lieutenant Gosting.

古文：时，弘农五官掾杜众伤云以忠谏获罪，上书愿与云同日死。
现代文：当时，弘农五官掾杜众可怜李云因忠谏获罪，上书愿与李云同日死。
English: At that time, the five officials of the Hongnong County People's Procuratorate all felt sorry for Li Yun, who was found guilty of being a loyalist, and wrote a letter wishing to die on the same day as Li Yun.

古文：帝愈怒，遂并下廷尉。
现代文：帝更加发怒，就把杜众送廷尉。
English: The emperor became even angrier and sent Du Zhong as a court lieutenant.

古文：大鸿胪陈蕃上疏救云曰： 李云所言，虽不识禁忌，干上逆旨，其意归于忠国而已。
现代文：大鸿胪陈蕃上疏救李云说 ：李云说话虽不知道什么应该说，什么是不能说的，以至犯了皇上的旨意，但是他的本意是忠于皇上的。
English: Da Hongzhu Chen Yujing rescued Li Yunzhu and said: Although Li Yunzhu did not know what should be said and what could not be said, and even violated the emperor's will, his intention was to be loyal to the emperor.

古文：昔高祖忍周昌不讳之谏，成帝赦朱云腰领之诛。
现代文：从前高祖容忍了周昌的谏诤，成帝赦免了朱云的死罪。
English: In the past, Gao Zu tolerated Zhou Chang's cruelty, and Emperor Chengdi pardoned Zhu Yun's capital crime.

古文：今日杀云，臣恐剖心之讥即议于世矣。
现代文：今天杀李云，我恐怕前人讥刺纣王剖比干心的事件，又会见之于今天啊！
English: To kill Li Yun today, I'm afraid that the events of the past, when people ridiculed Wang Kaibicheng's heart, will be seen again today!

古文：故敢触龙鳞，冒昧以请。 
现代文：所以敢于触犯龙麟，鲁莽上言。 
English: Therefore, dare to offend the dragon and the unicorn, and speak rashly.

古文：太常杨秉、洛阳市长沐茂、郎中上官资并上疏请云。
现代文：太常杨秉，洛阳市长沐茂，郎中上官资都上疏请求救李云。
English: Yang Bing, the mayor of Luoyang, Mu Mao, and his brother-in-law, the government official, all came to ask for Li Yun's rescue.

古文：帝恚甚，有司奏以为大不敬。
现代文：帝非常恼怒，管事的人上奏认为这些人大不敬。
English: The emperor was very angry, and the person in charge thought that these people were very disrespectful.

古文：诏切责蕃、秉，免归田里；茂、资贬秩二等。
现代文：下诏痛责陈蕃、杨秉，免去官职，送归田里；沐茂、上官资降二级。
English: In the following edict, Chen Xi and Yang Bing were severely reprimanded, relieved of their official posts and sent back to the fields; Mu Mao and Shang Guanzhai were demoted to the second level.

古文：时，帝在濯龙池，管霸奏云等事。
现代文：这时帝在濯龙池，管霸上奏李云等事。
English: At this time, the emperor was in the Dragon Pool, playing Li Yun and other things on the pipe.

古文：霸诡言曰： 李云野泽愚儒，杜众郡中小吏，出于狂戆，不足加罪。 
现代文：管霸请求说： 李云是乡野的愚儒，杜众是郡中小小的官吏，他们由于一时的狂妄，不值得加罪。 
English: Guanba pleaded: Li Yun is a village idiot, Du Zong is a small and medium-sized official in the county. They do not deserve to be punished because of their momentary arrogance.

古文：帝谓霸曰： 帝欲不谛，是何等语，而常侍欲原之邪？ 
现代文：帝对管霸说：  帝欲不谛 ，这是什么话！常侍想原谅他们吗？ 
English: The emperor said to the chief steward, "What is this saying, 'The emperor's wishes are not important'? Does the attendant want to forgive them?"

古文：顾使小黄门可其奏，云、众皆死狱中。
现代文：使小黄门批准了他的奏书。李云、郑众都死在狱中。
English: Li Yun and Zheng Zong both died in prison.

古文：后冀州刺史贾琮使行部，过祠云墓，刻石表之。
现代文：后来冀州刺史贾琮巡视郡部，去李云墓祭祀，刻石表彰他。
English: Later, Jizhou Zhishi Jiaqi inspected the county department, went to Li Yun's tomb for sacrifice, and carved a stone to commend him.

古文：论曰：礼有五谏，讽为上。
现代文：史官评论说：礼有讽谏、顺谏、阙谏、指谏、陷谏等五谏，讽谏第一。
English: The historian commented: There are five etiquettes of etiquette: irony, courtesy, courtesy, fingering, trapping, etc. Irony is the first.

古文：若夫托物见情，因文载旨，使言之者无罪，闻之者足以自戒，贵在于意达言从，理归乎正。
现代文：借物表达自己的感情，写文章申述自己的意旨，最重要的在于意思明白，语言顺畅，道理纯正。
English: The most important thing is that the meaning is clear, the language is smooth, and the reason is pure.

古文：曷其绞讦摩上，以沽成名哉？
现代文：为什么要急切犯上，炫耀自己沽名钓誉呀！
English: Why are you so eager to catch fish and show off your fishing reputation?

古文：李云草茅之生，不识失身之义，遂乃露布帝者，班檄三公，至于诛死而不顾，斯岂古之狂也！
现代文：李云是一个草野的小民不懂得 臣不密，则失身 的道理，竟敢公开上奏天子，致奏三公，置死生于不顾，难道古时候的狂士是这样的吗？
English: Li Yun is a grassland villager who does not understand the principle that if the vassal is not close, then he will lose his life. How dare he publicly play the role of the son of heaven, play the role of the three princes, and be born in disregard of death? Is this what the madmen of ancient times were like?

古文：夫未信而谏，则以为谤己，故说者识其难焉。
现代文：没有取得皇上的信任，对皇上进行谏诤，皇上就认为谏诤是诽谤自己。所以说话应该懂得说话的难处啊！
English: Without gaining the Emperor's trust, he taunted the Emperor, and the Emperor thought that taunting was slandering himself. Therefore, one should know the difficulty of speaking!

古文：刘瑜字季节，广陵人也。
现代文：◆刘瑜传，刘瑜字季节，广陵人。
English: ◆ Liu Yu Chuan, Liu Yu character season, Guangling people.

古文：高祖父广陵靖王。
现代文：高祖父是广陵靖王。
English: His great-great-grandfather was Guangling Jingwang.

古文：父辩，清河太守。
现代文：父亲刘辨，是清河太守。
English: His father, Liu Ben, was the governor of Qinghe.

古文：瑜少好经学，尤善图谶、天文、历算之术。州郡礼请不就。
现代文：刘瑜年轻时喜欢经学，特别精于讠千纬、天文、历算之术，州郡以礼请他，不去。
English: When Liu Yu was young, he liked to study the classics. He was particularly proficient in the art of reading, astronomy, and calendars. The prefecture invited him with courtesy, but he did not go.

古文：延熹八年，太尉杨秉举贤良方正，及到京师，上书陈事曰：臣瑜自念东国鄙陋，得以丰沛枝胤，被蒙复除，不给卒伍。
现代文：延熹八年，太尉杨秉举他为贤良方正，到京师，就上书说：我自想东国鄙陋，因为是刘氏的后裔，被免除徭役，不给卒伍。
English: In the eighth year of Yancheng's reign, Yang Bing, a lieutenant, praised him as a virtuous and upright person. When he arrived in Beijing, he wrote a letter saying, "I think that the East Kingdom is despicable. Because I am a descendant of the Liu clan, I was exempted from military service and was not given a foot soldier.

古文：故太尉杨秉知臣窃窥典籍，猥见显举，诚冀臣愚直，有补万一。
现代文：已故太尉杨秉知道我读了一些典籍，承他看得起，推举我为贤良方正，真正希望我能为国家做点贡献。
English: The late First Lieutenant Yang Bing knew that I had read some classic books. He thought I was a worthy candidate and recommended me as a virtuous person. He truly hoped that I could make some contribution to the country.

古文：而秉忠谟不遂，命先朝露。
现代文：杨秉的为国才略，没有得到施展，不幸死得太早了。
English: Yang Bing's talent for the country was not put to good use, and unfortunately he died too early.

古文：臣在下土，听闻歌谣，骄臣虐政之事，远近呼嗟之音，窃为辛楚，泣血涟如。
现代文：我在乡下，听说了一些歌谣，骄傲的臣子，残暴害民，到处一片呼嗟叹息之声，最为辛酸难闻，使人不禁泪下。
English: In the countryside, I heard some songs, proud courtiers, brutality and harm to the people, everywhere a whirring and sighing sound, the most bitter and unpleasant, making people cry.

古文：幸得引录，备答圣问，泄写至情，不敢庸回。
现代文：我高兴的是受到引荐，回答皇上所问，当本着一片忠心，尽情倾诉，不敢欺罔。
English: I am pleased to be recommended, to answer the emperor's question, to be loyal, to talk freely, and not to bully.

古文：诚愿陛下且以须臾之虑，览今往之事，人何为咨嗟，天曷为动变。
现代文：诚心诚意请皇上以片刻的时间，看看古往今天的事实。人为什么要忧愁叹息，天为什么要动变？
English: Sincerely and sincerely, I would like to ask the Emperor to take a moment to look at the facts from the past to the present. Why do people grieve and sigh, and why does the heavens move?

古文：盖诸侯之位，上法四七，垂文炳燿，关之盛衰者也。
现代文：大抵诸侯的职位，上法二十八宿，为天子守四方，天象闪耀，这是关于国家盛衰的大事。
English: Most of the positions of the princes, the twenty-eight lodges on the law, the protection of the four directions for the heavenly sons, and the shining of the celestial elephant, this is a big thing about the rise and fall of the country.

古文：今中官邪孽，比肩裂土，皆竞立胤嗣，继体传爵，或乞子疏属，或买兒市道，殆乖开国承家之义。
现代文：现在宦官邪孽，纷纷裂土封侯，还争着立后代，继承爵位，有的求子于疏远的亲属，有的就在街上买儿子，这是违背开国承家的原则的。
English: Nowadays, eunuchs are so wicked that they are tearing up the land and seizing lordships one after another, and they are also competing to establish descendants and inherit titles. Some are asking for sons from distant relatives, and some are buying sons on the street. This is contrary to the principle of inheriting the family that founded the country.

古文：古者天子一娶九女，娣侄有序，《河图》授嗣，正在九房。
现代文：古时候天子一娶九女，娣女至有序，不得混乱，河图授嗣，正在九房。
English: In ancient times, the heavenly son married nine daughters, and the daughters were so orderly that there was no confusion, and the river chart was in the ninth house.

古文：今女嬖令色，充积闺帷，皆当盛其玩饰，冗食空宫，劳散精神，生长六疾。
现代文：现在美女令色，充积后宫，都要大大地供给她们珍宝玩饰，不劳而食，宫廷为之空虚，劳散精神，发生各种疾病。
English: Now, when beautiful women are in full bloom and their harems are full, they must be lavishly provided with precious trinkets and trinkets. They do not have to work hard for food. The court is empty, the spirit of work is dissipated, and all kinds of diseases occur.

古文：此国之费也，生之伤也。
现代文：国家受到消耗，身体遭到损伤。
English: The country is exhausted, the body is damaged.

古文：且天地之性，阴阳正纪，隔绝其道，则水旱为并。《诗》云： 五日为期，六日不詹 。
现代文：天地的特点，阴阳正纪，阴阳隔绝不通，就要发生水灾或旱灾。《诗经》上说： 五日为期，六日不詹。 
English: According to the characteristics of heaven and earth, yin and yang are regular, and if yin and yang are completely separated, there will be floods or droughts. "The Book of Songs" says: "Five days are long, six days are short."

古文：怨旷作歌，仲尼所录。
现代文：就是约了五天回来的，六天还没有回。这是妇女思念丈夫的歌，孔子记录下来了。
English: It took her about five days to come back, and she hasn't been back for six days. This is a woman's song of missing her husband, recorded by Confucius.

古文：况从幼至长，幽藏殁身。
现代文：何况这些宫女自幼至长，藏在深宫，她们的怨旷之情，自可想见。
English: What's more, these ladies-in-waiting have been hidden away in the depths of the palace from childhood to old age, and their feelings of bitterness are hard to imagine.

古文：及常侍、黄门，亦广妻娶。怨毒之气，结成妖眚。
现代文：又，常侍、黄门，这些宦官，也多娶妻妾，怨毒之气，结成妖怪罪孽。
English: In addition, the eunuchs, such as the attendant and the yellow door, also married more wives and concubines, and the venomous spirit was formed into a monster of sin.

古文：行路之言，官发略人女，取而复置，转相惊惧。
现代文：道路的行人说，官吏抢掠人家闺女，娶了就不要了，大家为此惊恐。
English: Pedestrians on the road say that officials are robbing people's daughters, and if they marry, they are no longer needed. Everyone is alarmed by this.

古文：熟不悉然，无缘空生此谤。
现代文：谁不知道？决不会无缘无故发生这种流言的。
English: Who doesn't know? This kind of rumor never happens without a reason.

古文：邹衍匹夫，杞氏匹妇，尚有城崩霜陨之异；况乃群辈咨怨，能无感乎！
现代文：邹衍不过一个匹夫，杞氏不过一个匹妇，邹衍尽忠含冤，杞氏伏夫尸而哭，致有五月飞霜，七日城崩的现象，何况是这么一大群人恣嗟怨恨，难道会没有感应吗？
English: Yuanyan is just a husband, the Yu clan is just a wife, Yuanyan is loyal to a fault, the Yu clan wept over the corpse of Fu Fu, resulting in the phenomenon of May flying frost and the collapse of the city on the seventh day, not to mention such a large group of people arbitrarily holding grudges, will there be no response?

古文：昔秦作阿房，国多刑人。
现代文：从前秦始皇建筑阿房宫，国内犯罪的人多。
English: Since the construction of Afang Palace by Qin Shihuang, there have been many domestic crimes.

古文：今第舍增多，穷极奇巧，掘山攻石，不避时令。促以严刑，威以正法。
现代文：现在王侯的第宅增多，十分奇巧，开山挖石头，不管农忙不农忙，用严酷的刑法强迫他们，国家的法令威胁他们。
English: Now the number of princely residences is increasing, which is very strange. They are digging up mountains and quarrying stones, whether they are busy with farming or not. They are forcing them with harsh criminal laws, and threatening them with state decrees.

古文：民无罪而复入之，民有田而复夺之。
现代文：百姓本来无罪，可以随便加罪；百姓本来有田土的，可以随便抢夺。
English: The people were originally innocent and could be made guilty at will; the people originally had land and could be robbed at will.

古文：州郡官府，各自考事，奸情赇赂，皆为吏饵。
现代文：州郡官府，各自审讯犯人，奸情贿赂，都是官吏生财之道。
English: State and county government offices, individual interrogation of prisoners, adultery and bribery are all ways for government officials to make money.

古文：民愁郁结，起入贼党，官辄兴兵，诛讨其罪。
现代文：百姓的愁怨郁结不得发抒，于是起来参加贼党，官府因此动用武装，讨征他们。
English: The people's grievances could not be expressed, so they rose up to join the thieves' party, and the government therefore used armed forces to conscript them.

古文：贫困之民，或有卖其首级以要酬赏，父兄相代残身，妻孥相视分裂。
现代文：贫困的老百姓，甚至有卖掉自己的脑袋来索要报酬奖赏的，父兄互相替代残害身体，夫妻相看分离。
English: Poor people have even sold their own heads to claim rewards. Fathers and brothers mutilate each other's bodies as a substitute, and husbands and wives are separated from each other.

古文：穷之如彼，伐之如此，岂不痛哉！
现代文：穷困如彼，迫害又如此，难道不痛心吗？
English: Isn't it heartbreaking to be as poor as he is and as persecuted as he is?

古文：又陛下以北辰之尊，神器之宝，而微行近习之家，私幸宦者之舍，宾客市买，熏灼道路，因此暴纵，无所不容。
现代文：又，皇上如北辰那样尊贵，国家之主，但是随便走到一些左右人的家庭里，进入宦官的房室，宾客因此在市里买东买西，道路为之喧哗，强暴放纵，到了极点。
English: Moreover, the emperor is as honorable as Beichen, the head of the country, but he casually went to some people's homes and entered the eunuch's room. As a result, the guests bought and sold things in the city. The roads were noisy, and the violence and indulgence reached the extreme.

古文：于是特诏召瑜问灾咎之征，指事案经谶以对。
现代文：现在三公在位，都是一些学识渊博，德行修养很高的人，而他们只是自己正身，对于皇上没有什么帮助，不是他们没有知识能力，他们是害怕死罪呢。
English: Now that the three princes are on the throne, they are all very learned and highly cultivated people, but they are only self-righteous and of little help to the emperor. It's not that they don't have the ability to learn, it's that they are afraid of capital punishment.

古文：势政者欲令瑜依违其辞，而更策以它事。
现代文：我想皇上设置七臣，有三公及前疑、后承、左辅、右弼。
English: I think that the emperor set up seven ministers, with three officials and the former suspect, the latter successor, the left assistant, and the right assistant.

古文：瑜复悉心以对，八千余言，有切于前，帝竟不能用。
现代文：为的是广开谏诤之路，以及开放东序金滕史官的书，遵循尧舜禹汤文武使天下兴隆太平的方法，罢黜那些谄媚作恶的坏人，抛弃郑卫靡靡淫乱之声，这样，自然政获和平，人民普沾教化了。
English: In order to open up the road to the East, as well as open the book of the East-Sequence Jinteng Historian, follow the method of making the world prosperous and peaceful, oust the villains who flatter and do evil, and abandon the voice of Zheng Wei, the natural government has won peace, and the people have been educated.

古文：拜为议郎。及帝崩，大将军窦武欲大诛宦官，乃引瑜为侍中，又以侍中尹勋为尚书令，共同谋画。
现代文：我诚恳陈情，说的话没有值得皇上采择的地方，只怕因此触忤皇上，不胜惶恐。帝逝世，大将军窦武想大杀宦官，引用刘瑜为侍中，又用侍中尹勋为尚书令，共同谋划。
English: I earnestly plead that what I have said is not worthy of the emperor's choice, and I am afraid that it may offend the emperor, and I am very much afraid. When the emperor died, General Dou Wu wanted to kill eunuchs, citing Liu Yu as an attendant, and using the attendant Yin Xun as Shang Shuling to jointly plan.

古文：及武败，瑜、勋并被诛。事在《武传》。
现代文：等到窦武失败，刘瑜、尹勋都被杀，事载在《窦武传》。
English: After Dou Wu's defeat, Liu Yu and Yin Xun were both killed, which was recorded in "The Biography of Dou Wu."

古文：勋字伯元，河南人。
现代文：尹勋字伯元，河南人。
English: Yin Xun, surnamed Bo Yuan, was from Henan Province.

古文：从祖睦为太尉，睦孙颂为司徒。
现代文：叔祖父尹睦曾任太尉，尹睦的孙子尹颂曾任司徒。
English: His great-uncle, Yin Mu, was once a captain, and Yin Mu's grandson, Yin Song, was once a scholar.

古文：勋为人刚毅直方。
现代文：尹勋为人刚正强毅。
English: Yin Xun was a man of integrity and fortitude.

古文：少时每读书，得忠臣义士之事，未尝不投书而仰叹。
现代文：年轻时读书，每读到忠臣义士的事，常常废书仰天叹息。
English: When I was young and read books, whenever I read about a loyal subject or a righteous person, I would often throw away the book and sigh.

古文：自以行不合于当时，不应州郡公府礼命。
现代文：自己认为操行不合于当时，不受州郡公府的礼命。
English: He believed that his actions were not in line with the times and that he was not bound by the state and county government's orders.

古文：桓帝时，以有道征，四迁尚书令。
现代文：桓帝时，因有道德被征召，四迁尚书令。
English: At the time of Emperor Kantei, he was conscripted because of his morality, and was forced to move four times.

古文：延熹中，诛大将军梁冀，帝召勋部分众职，甚有方略，封宜阳乡侯。
现代文：延熹中期，杀大将军梁冀，帝召尹勋部署各职位，很有才能，封宜阳乡侯。
English: In the middle of the Yanxi period, the great general Liang Jie was killed, and the emperor summoned Yin Xun to deploy various positions. He was very talented and was assigned to Yiyang Township.

古文：仆射霍谞，尚书张敬、欧阳参、李伟、虞放、周永，并封亭侯。
现代文：仆射霍、尚书张敬、欧阳参、李伟、虞放、周永，都封亭侯。
English: Fu Sha Huo, Shang Shu Zhang Jing, Ou Yang San, Li Wei, Yu Fang, Zhou Yong, are all princes of Fongting.

古文：勋后再迁至九卿，以病免，拜为侍中。
现代文：尹勋后来升至九卿，因病免官，授为侍中。
English: Later, Yin Xun was promoted to Jiuqing, but was relieved of his post due to illness and was awarded the title of chamberlain.

古文：八年，中常侍具瑗、左忄官等有罪免，夺封邑，因黜勋等爵。
现代文：八年，中常侍具瑗、左忄官等有罪免官，撤了他们的封邑，因罢黜了尹勋的爵位。
English: In the eighth year, the middle and upper eunuchs, including the eunuch of the left eunuch and the eunuch of the right eunuch, were convicted and removed from office, and their fiefdoms were removed, and the peerage of Yin Xun was removed.

古文：瑜诛后，宦官悉焚其上书，以为讹言。
现代文：刘瑜被杀以后，宦官把他的全部上书，统统烧了，认为是错误的言论。
English: After Liu Yu was killed, the eunuchs burned all of his letters, believing them to be false statements.

古文：子琬，传瑜学，明占候，能著灾异。
现代文：刘瑜的儿子刘琬，传刘瑜的学业，懂得占卜的事，能够指明灾异的原因。
English: Liu Yu's son, Liu Wei, who inherited Liu Yu's education, knows about divination and can point out the causes of disasters.

古文：举方正，不行。
现代文：举为方正，不应。
English: It should not be raised as a square.

古文：谢弼字辅宣，东郡武阳人也。
现代文：◆谢弼传，谢弼字辅宣，东郡武阳县人。
English: ◆Xie Yu Chuan, Xie Yu Zi Fu Xuan, from Wuyang County, Dong County.

古文：中直方正，为乡邑所宗师。
现代文：中正方直，为乡邑宗仰敬重。
English: Zhongzheng Fangdao, respected and revered by the township.

古文：建宁二年，诏举有道之士，弼与东海陈敦、玄菟公孙度俱对策，皆除郎中。
现代文：建宁二年，诏举有道之士，谢弼与东海陈敦、玄菟公孙度，都经过考试，授郎中。
English: In the second year of Jianning, there were Taoists in the imperial examination, and Xie Jun, Donghai Chen Dun, and Xuanzang Gong Sundu all passed the examination and were awarded the title of middle son.

古文：时，青蛇见前殿，大风拔木，诏公卿以下陈得失。
现代文：这时，有青蛇出现前殿，大风吹折树木，诏令公卿以下百官，陈述政事的所失。
English: At this time, a blue snake appeared in the vestibule, a gale blew down trees, and hundreds of officials, including court nobles, were ordered to make a statement on the political situation.

古文：弼上封事曰：臣闻和气应于有德，妖异生乎失政。
现代文：谢弼上密奏说：我听说和气是由于有德而来，妖异是因为政事失措而生。
English: Xie Yao's missus said: I heard that harmony comes from virtue, and evil comes from political instability.

古文：上天告谴，则王者思其愆；政道或亏，则奸臣当其罚。夫蛇者，阴气所生；鳞者，甲兵之符也。
现代文：老天爷发出警告，皇上就要想想自己的过错；政教有亏失，就应该惩处奸臣。蛇是阴气生的，与龙同类，龙有鳞，是甲兵的符验。
English: Heaven sent out a warning, the emperor should think about his own mistakes; if there is a loss in politics and religion, he should punish the traitor. The snake is gloomy, the same kind as the dragon, the dragon has scales, it is the proof of the warrior.

古文：《鸿范传》曰： 厥极弱，时则有蛇龙之孽。 
现代文：《鸿范传》说： 厥极弱，时则有蛇龙之孽。 
English: "The Legend of Hong Fan" says: When Jue is extremely weak, then there is the evil of the snake and dragon.

古文：又荧惑守亢，裴回不去，法有近臣谋乱，发于左右。不知陛下所与从容帷幄之内，亲信者为谁？
现代文：是说皇帝暗弱，就会有蛇龙怪异出现。又，荧惑星守亢星，徘徊不去，像有左右近臣阴谋作乱，不知皇上平日在宫中闲处与工作时，谁是您最亲信的人呢。
English: That is to say, if the emperor is weak, there will be a strange snake and dragon. In addition, the fluorescent planet will guard the planet, lingering, like a left and right vassal conspiracy to make trouble. I do not know who is the most trusted person when the emperor is idle and working in the palace on weekdays.

古文：宜急斥黜，以消天戒。
现代文：应当赶快斥退，消除老天的警告。
English: It is necessary to quickly repel and eliminate the warning of God.

古文：臣又闻 惟虺惟蛇，女子之祥 。
现代文：我又听说 惟虺惟蛇，女子之祥 。
English: I've also heard that there is only one snake, the female snake.

古文：伏惟皇太后定策官闼，授立圣明，《书》云： 父子兄弟，罪不相及。 
现代文：我想皇太后定策深宫，援立皇上，《书》说： 父子兄弟，罪不相及。 
English: I think the empress dowager decided to go to the palace to support the emperor. "The Book" says, "Father and son, brother and sister, do not commit the same crime."

古文：窦氏之诛，岂宜咎延太后？
现代文：窦氏的诛杀，难道罪可牵涉到太后吗？
English: Can the empress dowager be implicated in Dou's murder?

古文：幽隔空宫，愁感天心，有如雾露之疾，陛下当何面目以见天下？
现代文：把她幽禁宫中，愁苦上感天心，如果因病而死，皇上有何面目见天下之人呢！
English: Put her in the palace of confinement, sorrowfully feel the heart of heaven, if she dies of illness, what face will the emperor show to the world!

古文：昔周襄王不能敬事其母，戎狄遂至交侵。
现代文：从前周襄王不能敬侍他的母亲，戎狄因而侵犯。
English: Once upon a time, King Zhou Xiang couldn't honor his mother, so he violated her.

古文：孝和皇帝不绝窦后之恩，前世以为美谈。
现代文：孝和皇帝不绝窦后的恩情，历代赞美不绝。
English: Filial piety and the emperor's unceasing benevolence have been praised throughout the ages.

古文：礼为人后者为之子，今以桓帝为父，岂得不以太后为母哉？
现代文：礼为人后的为人的子，现在认桓帝为父，难道可以不认太后为母吗？
English: The Son of Man, who was named after a human, now recognizes Emperor Kuan as his father. Is it possible not to recognize the Empress Dowager as his mother?

古文：《援神契》曰： 天子行孝，四夷和平。 
现代文：《援神契》说： 天子行孝，四夷和平。 
English: The "Charter for Supporting the Gods" says: "Heavenly sons practice filial piety, and the four nations live in peace."

古文：方今边境日蹙，兵革蜂起，自非孝道，何以济之！
现代文：现在边境一天一天地小了，战事连续不断，如果不讲孝道，用什么来挽救呢！
English: Now that the border is shrinking day by day and the war continues, if we don't practice filial piety, what can we use to save ourselves?

古文：愿陛下仰慕有虞蒸蒸之化，俯思《凯风》慰母之念。
现代文：请皇上仰慕虞舜以孝治天下的教化，俯思《凯风》慰母之心。
English: I would like to ask the emperor to admire Yu Xuan's enlightenment of ruling the world with filial piety, and to contemplate the consolation of the mother's heart in Kaifeng.

古文：臣又闻爵赏之设，必酬庸勋；开国承家，小人勿用。
现代文：我又听说国家设置爵赏，以报答有功德的人。开国承家，小人勿用。
English: I also heard that the country has set up a knighthood award to reward people with merits. Don't use it if you are a villain.

古文：今功臣久外，未蒙爵秩，阿母宠私，乃享大封，大风雨雹，亦由于兹。
现代文：现在功臣久居在外，没有获得封官升级，阿母因为私宠的原故，竟享受大封。大风，下冰雹，也是由于这个。
English: Now the meritorious person has been away for a long time and has not been promoted to a higher rank, but my mother, because she is my favorite, actually enjoys a higher rank. The high winds and hailstorms are also due to this.

古文：又故太傅陈蕃，辅相陛下，勤身王室，夙夜匪懈，而见陷群邪，一旦诛灭。
现代文：又已故太傅陈蕃，辅佐皇上，勤劳报国，白天晚上工作，一点也不懈怠。
English: In addition, the late Taifu Chen Xi, assistant to the emperor, diligently reported to the country, worked day and night, and did not slack off at all.

古文：其为酷滥，骇动天下，而门生故吏，并离徙锢。
现代文：而竟被一群坏人陷害，横遭杀戮，滥杀无辜，残酷已极，天下为之震动。陈蕃的学生、旧部下，也都或被禁锢，或被谪徙。
English: However, he was framed by a group of villains, killed in broad daylight, indiscriminately killed innocent people, the cruelty was extreme, and the whole world was shaken by it. Chen Yao's students and former subordinates were also imprisoned or exiled.

古文：蕃身已往，人百何赎！
现代文：陈蕃已经死了，百身莫赎！
English: Chen Yao is dead, there is no redemption for him!

古文：宜还其家属，解除禁网。
现代文：应该把他的家属迁回原籍，解除禁网。
English: His family members should be moved back to their place of origin and the ban on the network should be lifted.

古文：夫台宰重器，国命所继。
现代文：宰相台辅是国家的重器，国家的命脉所关。
English: Prime Minister Taifu is the country's heavy weapon, the country's lifeblood.

古文：今之四公，唯司空刘宠断断守善，余皆素餐致寇之人，必有折足覆餗之凶。
现代文：现在四公，只有司空刘宠不同流合污，洁身自好，其余的都是一些尸位素餐致寇之徒。他们不胜任，一定要坏事。
English: Now, of the four princes, only Liu Jie, the secretary of the imperial court, is different from the others in that he is pure and clean, while the rest are nothing but thieves. They are incompetent and must do bad things.

古文：可因灾异，并加罢黜。
现代文：可以因灾异的发生，都加以撤职或斥退。
English: They can all be dismissed or expelled due to the occurrence of disasters.

古文：征故司空王暢，长乐少府李膺，并居政事，庶灾变可消，国祚惟永。
现代文：征召先前司空王畅，长乐少府李膺，共理政事，这样，庶几灾变可以消除，国祚永宁。
English: Conscript the former Siku Wang Chang, Changle Shao Fu Li Yan, and jointly manage political affairs. In this way, several disasters can be eliminated, and the country will be lasting.

古文：臣山薮顽暗，未达国典。策曰 无有所隐 ，敢不尽愚，用忘讳忌。
现代文：我是山野的老百姓，不知道国家的法典，皇上让 无有所隐 ，就是说不要有什么顾虑。岂敢不畅所欲言，忘记讳忌？
English: I am an ordinary citizen of the mountains and fields, I do not know the country's code of law, the emperor has nothing to hide, that is, do not have any concerns. How dare I not speak freely, forget the taboo?

古文：伏惟陛下裁其诛罚。
现代文：乞皇上惩办我的罪过。
English: I beg the emperor to punish me for my sins.

古文：左右恶其言，出为广陵府丞。
现代文：皇上左右的人，厌恶他说的这些话，把他派出任广陵府丞。
English: The people around the emperor detested his words and sent him to serve as Guangling prefect.

古文：去官归家。
现代文：后来去官归家。
English: Later, he left the government and returned home.

古文：中常侍曹节从子绍为东郡太守，忿疾于弼，遂以它罪收考掠按，死狱中，时人悼伤焉。
现代文：中常侍曹节的侄儿曹绍为东郡太守，恨了谢弼。于是假借别的事，把他逮捕拷打审问，死在监狱里，当时人们哀悼他的死。
English: Cao Shao, the nephew of Cao Jie, the middle-ranking attendant of Cao Jie, became the governor of Dong County and hated Xie Yao. Therefore, under the pretext of other matters, he was arrested, tortured and interrogated, and died in prison. At that time, people mourned his death.

古文：初平二年，司隶校尉赵廉讼弼忠节，求报其怨魂，乃收绍斩之。
现代文：初平二年，司隶校尉赵谦申诉谢弼忠节，请求报他的怨魂，于是逮捕曹绍杀了。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Sili Lieutenant Zhao Qian appealed to Xie Junzhong, requesting that his grudge be reported, so Cao Shao was arrested and killed.

