古文：孝武帝世祖孝武皇帝讳骏，字休龙，小字道民，文帝第三子也。
现代文：世祖孝武皇帝号骏，字休龙，小字道民，文帝的第三个儿子。
English: The third son of Emperor Wen, He Zu Xiaowu was nicknamed "Xiu Long" (休龙) and "Daomin" (道民).

古文：元嘉七年秋八月庚午生。
现代文：元嘉七年秋八月十六日出生。
English: Yuan Jia was born on August 16th, in the autumn of the seventh year.

古文：十二年，立为武陵王，食邑二千户。
现代文：十二年立为武陵王，食邑二千户。
English: In 12 years, he was crowned King of Wuling, feeding 2,000 households.

古文：十六年，都督湘州诸军事、征虏将军、湘州刺史，领石头戍事。
现代文：十六年，都督湘州军事，任征虏将军、湘州刺史，兼管石头戍事务。
English: In 16 years, he served as the military governor of Hunan Province, was appointed as the conscript general and the historian of Hunan Province, and was also in charge of the affairs of the stone quarry.

古文：十七年，迁使持节、都督南豫豫司雍并五州诸军事、南豫州刺史，将军如故，犹戍石头。
现代文：十七年，升迁为使持节，都督南豫豫司雍并五州军事，任南豫州刺史，将军之职照旧担任，还负责石头戍。
English: In the seventeenth year, the promotion was held as the Envoy Day, and the governor of South Henan Province, Siyong, was promoted to the military commander of the five provinces, and he was appointed as the military historian of South Henan Province. He still held the post of general, and was also responsible for the quarry.

古文：二十一年，加督秦州，进号抚军将军。
现代文：二十一年，又管辖秦州，晋升为抚军将军。
English: In the twenty-first year, he also governed Qinzhou and was promoted to the general of the Fuzhou army.

古文：明年，徙都督雍梁南北秦四州荆州之襄阳竟陵南阳顺阳新野随六郡诸军事、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史，持节、将军如故。
现代文：次年，调任都督雍梁南北秦四州荆州的襄阳竟陵南阳顺阳新野随六郡军事、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史，持节、将军职务照旧担任。
English: The following year, he was transferred to the post of the governor of Yongliang, the north and south of Qin, the four states of Jingzhou, Yangyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shinyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang, Shunyang,

古文：自晋氏江左以来，襄阳未有皇子重镇，时太祖欲经略关、河，故有此授。寻给鼓吹一部。
现代文：自从晋朝迁都江南以来，从没有过皇子镇守襄阳，当时太祖想经营关中、黄河流域，所以才授给皇子镇守，不久拨给乐队一支。
English: Since the Jin Dynasty moved the capital to the south of the Yangtze River, there has never been a prince to guard Xiangyang. At that time, the great-grandfather wanted to manage Guanzhong and the Yellow River Basin, so he only awarded the prince to guard the town, and soon allocated one to the band.

古文：二十五年，改授都督南兗徐兗青冀幽六州豫州之梁郡诸军事、安北将军、徐州刺史，持节如故，北镇彭城。
现代文：元嘉二十五年，调任都督南兖徐兖青冀幽六州豫州的梁郡军事、安北将军、徐州刺史，持节照旧担任，镇守彭城。
English: In the 25th year of Yuan Jia, he was transferred to the governor of Nanxun, Xuqi, Qingji, Liang County Military, Anbei General and Xuzhou Zhishi in the six states of Yuzhou, and continued to serve as the governor of Pengcheng.

古文：寻领兗州刺史。
现代文：不久，又兼任兖州刺史。
English: Soon, he also served as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：始兴王浚为南兗州，上解督南兗。
现代文：始兴王浚任南兖州刺史后，皇上不再担任南兖州刺史。
English: After Shixing Wang Jun was appointed as the governor of South Luzhou, the emperor no longer served as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：二十七年，坐汝阳战败，降号镇军将军。
现代文：二十七年，坐镇汝阳战败，降为镇军将军。
English: In the 27th year, he was defeated in the town of Ruyang and demoted to the general of the town army.

古文：又以索虏南侵，降为北中郎将。
现代文：又因索虏南侵，降为北中郎将。
English: He was also demoted to the rank of Northern Middle Captain due to the southern invasion of the Soryu.

古文：二十八年，进督南兗州、南兗州刺史，当镇山阳。
现代文：二十八年，晋升为都督南兖州、南兖州刺史，镇守山阳。
English: In 28 years, he was promoted to the governor of South Luzhou, the governor of South Luzhou, and the town guard of Sanyang.

古文：寻迁都督江州荆州之江夏豫州之西阳晋熙新蔡四郡诸军事、南中郎将、江州刺史，持节如故。
现代文：不久升迁为都督江州荆州的江夏豫州的西阳，晋熙新蔡四郡军事、南中郎将、江州刺史，持节照旧担任。
English: Xiyang of Jiangxia and Yuzhou of Jingzhou of Jiangzhou was soon promoted to the governor of Jiangzhou, and Jinxi Xin Cai served as the military commander of the four counties, the commander of the south, the governor of Jiangzhou, and the commander of the festival.

古文：时缘江蛮为寇，太祖遣太子步兵校尉沈庆之等伐之，使上总统众军。
现代文：当时江蛮叛乱，太祖派太子步兵校尉沈庆之等讨伐，由皇上统领各路大军。
English: At that time, there was a rebellion in the Yangtze River, and the great-grandfather sent the prince, infantry lieutenant Shen Qingzhi, and others to fight, and the emperor led the army in all directions.

古文：三十年正月，上出次西阳之五洲。会元凶弑逆，以上为征南将军，加散骑常侍。
现代文：元嘉三十年正月，皇上至西阳的五州，恰逢元凶叛逆，太祖封皇上为征南将军、散骑常侍。
English: In the first month of the 30th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the Emperor's journey to the five provinces west of the Yangtze River coincided with the rebellion of the ringleaders. The Emperor's great-great-grandfather was appointed as a general of the Southern Expedition and a knight-errant.

古文：上率众入讨，荆州刺史南谯王义宣、雍州刺史臧质并举义兵。
现代文：皇上率众讨伐，荆州刺史南谯王义宣、雍州刺史臧质同举义旗。
English: The emperor led the crusade, and Jingzhou stabbed Nanshan Wang Yixuan, and Yongzhou stabbed Qixi to raise the banner of righteousness.

古文：四月辛酉，上次溧洲。
现代文：四月十九日，皇上到溧州。
English: On April 19, the emperor went to Zhangzhou.

古文：癸亥，冠军将军柳元景前锋至新亭，修建营垒。
现代文：二十一日，冠军将军柳元景打先锋到新亭，修筑工事。
English: On the twenty-first day, the champion general Liu Yuanqing led the way to Xinting for construction work.

古文：甲子，贼劭亲率众攻元景，大败退走。
现代文：二十二日，逆贼劭亲率大军攻打元景，大败撤退。
English: On the 22nd, the rebels led by Guo Jian led a large army to attack Yuanjing, but were defeated and withdrew.

古文：丙寅，上次江宁。
现代文：二十四日，皇上到江宁。
English: On the 24th, the emperor went to Jiangning.

古文：丁卯，大将军江夏王义恭来奔，奉表上尊号。
现代文：二十五日，大将军江夏王义恭来投奔，并上表敬呈尊号。
English: On the 25th, the great general Jiangxia Wang Yigong came to take refuge, and presented his honorary title.

古文：戊辰，上至于新亭。
现代文：二十六日，皇上到新亭。
English: On the 26th, the emperor went to Xinting.

古文：己巳，即皇帝位，大赦天下，文武赐爵一等，从军者二等。
现代文：二十七日，即皇帝位。大赦天下。文武百官各赐爵一等，参加过征战的赐爵二等。
English: On the 27th, that is, the emperor's enthronement, there was a general amnesty for the whole country. A hundred civil and military officials were each given a first-class knighthood, and those who had participated in the war were given a second-class knighthood.

古文：赃污清议，悉皆荡除。
现代文：贪赃受贿空谈的，一律剔除。
English: Those who engage in corruption, bribery and empty talk will all be eliminated.

古文：高年、鳏寡、孤幼、六疾不能自存，人赐谷五斛。
现代文：年迈、鳏夫寡妇、孤儿、病残不能生存的，每人赐谷五斛。
English: The elderly, widows and widowers, orphans, and the infirm who are unable to survive will each receive five mu.

古文：逋租宿债勿复收。
现代文：陈租旧债不再征收。
English: Old rents and debts will no longer be collected.

古文：长徒之身，优量降宥。
现代文：被罚服长期劳役的尽量宽恕。
English: Those sentenced to long-term forced labor will be pardoned as much as possible.

古文：崇改太祖号谥。
现代文：改太祖谥号。
English: He changed his surname to Taizu.

古文：以大将军江夏王义恭为太尉、录尚书六条事、南徐州刺史。
现代文：任命大将军江夏王义恭为太尉、录尚书事、南徐州刺史。
English: The general Jiang Xia Wang Yigong was appointed as the first lieutenant, recorded in the records, and the history of South Xuzhou was recorded.

古文：庚午，以荆州刺史南谯王义宣为中书监、丞相、录尚书六条事、扬州刺史；安东将军随王诞为卫将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史；雍州刺史臧质为车骑将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史；征虏将军沈庆之为领军将军；抚军将军、兗冀二州刺史萧思话为尚书左仆射。
现代文：二十八日，任命荆州刺史南谯王义宣为中书监、丞相、录尚书事、扬州刺史、安东将军随王诞为卫将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史，雍州刺史臧质为车骑将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史，征虏将军沈庆之为领军将军，抚军将军、兖冀二州刺史萧思话为尚书左仆射。
English: On the 28th, King Yixuan of Nanxun of Jingzhou Province was appointed as the chief librarian, chancellor, and recorder of books, Yangzhou was appointed as the chief librarian, General Anton of Yangzhou was appointed as the general of guards, Kaifu was appointed as the general of cavalry, Jingzhou was appointed as the general of cavalry, Yongzhou was appointed as the general of cavalry, Kaifu was appointed as the general of cavalry, Jiangzhou was appointed as the general of cavalry, Shenqing was appointed as the general of cavalry, Fuzhou was appointed as the general of cavalry, and Shaoxing was appointed as the general

古文：壬申，以征虏将军王僧达为尚书右仆射。
现代文：三十日，委任征虏将军王僧达为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 30th, he appointed the conscript general Wang Sonta as his right-hand man.

古文：改新亭为中兴亭。
现代文：改新亭为中兴亭。
English: The new pavilion was renamed Zhongxing Pavilion.

古文：五月甲戌，辅国将军申坦克京城。
现代文：五月二日，辅国将军申坦攻克京城。
English: On May 2nd, Shintan, the general of the Auxiliary Province, attacked the capital.

古文：乙亥，辅国将军硃修之克东府。
现代文：三日，辅国将军朱修之攻克东府。
English: On the third day, Zhu Xiuzhi, the general of the auxiliary state, invaded Dongfu.

古文：朕以眇身，奄承皇业，奉寻历命，鉴寐震怀。
现代文：四日，平定东邑。劭和始兴王浚的同党被处死。九日，下诏说： 我以卑微之身，愧继皇位，主持朝政，寝寐难安。
English: On the fourth day, Dongyur was pacified. On the ninth day, the following edict was issued: "I, with my humble body, am ashamed to succeed to the throne, preside over the imperial government, and sleep uneasily.

古文：万邦风政，人治之本，感念陵替，若疚在心。
现代文：风俗教化，是治人之本，每想到兴衰更迭，心中就愧疚。
English: Custom and education are the foundation of governance. Whenever I think of the ups and downs, I feel guilty in my heart.

古文：可分遣大使巡省方俗。 
现代文：派遣使者巡查各地风俗。 
English: Envoys were sent to inspect local customs.

古文：是日解严。
现代文：同日解除戒严。
English: This was the day martial law was lifted.

古文：辛巳，车驾幸东府城。
现代文：十日，驾临东府城。
English: On the 10th, we arrived in Higashi-fucho.

古文：甲申，尊所生路淑媛为皇太后。
现代文：十三日，尊生母路淑媛为皇太后。
English: On the 13th, Sonsei's mother, Michiyasu, became the empress dowager.

古文：乙酉，立妃王氏为皇后。
现代文：十四日，立王氏为皇后。
English: On the 14th, the Wang clan was established as the empress.

古文：戊子，以左卫将军柳元景为雍州刺史。
现代文：十七日，任命左卫将军柳元景为雍州刺史。
English: On the 17th, Liu Yuanjing, the general of the Left Division, was appointed as the new governor of Yongzhou.

古文：壬辰，以太尉江夏王义恭为太傅，领大司马。
现代文：二十一日，任命太尉江夏王义恭为太傅、兼任大司马。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Jiangxia Wang Yigong, a lieutenant, was appointed taifu and concurrently daishima.

古文：甲午，曲赦京邑二百里内，并蠲今年租税。
现代文：二十三日，赦免京邑方圆二百里以内的地区。并免除今年租税。
English: On the 23rd, areas within a 200-mile radius of Beijing were pardoned and exempted from this year's tax.

古文：戊戌，以抚军将军南平王铄为司空，建平王宏为尚书左仆射，东海王祎为抚军将军，新除尚书左仆射萧思话迁职。
现代文：二十七日，任命抚军将军南平王铄为司空，建平王宏为尚书左仆射，东海王礻韦为抚军将军，新任尚书左仆射萧思话升迁他职。
English: On the 27th, Nanping Wang Yao, the general of the garrison, was appointed as the deputy commander, Jianping Wang Hong was appointed as the left-hand servant of Shangshu, and Donghai Wang Wei was appointed as the general of the garrison. The newly appointed left-hand servant of Shangshu, Xiao Siwei, was promoted to his position.

古文：六月壬寅，以骠骑参军坦护之为冀州刺史。
现代文：六月一日，委任骠骑参军垣护之为冀州刺史。
English: On June 1, he was appointed to participate in the military defense of Jizhou.

古文：甲辰，以山阳太守申恬为青州刺史。
现代文：三日，任命山阴太守申恬为青州刺史。
English: On the third day, the governor of Shanyin Province, Shen Rong, was appointed as the first governor of Qingzhou.

古文：戊申，以新除雍州刺史柳元景为护军将军。己酉，以司州刺史鲁爽为豫州刺史。
现代文：五日，皇上回宫。第一次设置殿门并在上阁驻兵。任命江夏内史朱修之为平西将军、雍州刺史，御史中丞王云生为广州刺史。七日，委任新任雍州刺史鲁爽为豫州刺史。
English: On the fifth day, the emperor returned to the palace. For the first time, he set up the palace gate and stationed soldiers in the upper cabinet. He appointed Jiang Xia Neishi Zhu Xiu as the general of Pingxi, Yongzhou as the historian, and Wang Yunsheng as the historian of Guangzhou. On the seventh day, he appointed the newly appointed Yongzhou as the historian of Yuzhou.

古文：庚戌，以梁、南秦二州刺史刘秀之为益州刺史；太尉司马庞秀之为梁、南秦二州刺史；卫军司马徐遗宝为兗州刺史；宁朔将军王玄谟为徐州刺史；卫将军随王诞进号骠骑大将军。
现代文：九日，调梁、南秦二州刺史刘秀之任益州刺史，太尉司马庞秀之为梁、南秦二州刺史，卫军司马徐遗宝为兖州刺史，宁朔将军王玄谟为徐州刺史，卫将军随王诞晋升为骠骑大将军。
English: On the 9th, Diao Liang and Liu Xiu of the Second Southern Qin State were appointed as the Governor of Yizhou, Lieutenant Ma Pang Xiu of the Second Southern Qin State was appointed as the Governor of Yizhou, Ma Xu Yibao of the Second Southern Qin State was appointed as the Governor of Zhangzhou, General Wang Xuanmu of Ningshuo was appointed as the Governor of Xuzhou, and the General of the Guard was promoted to the General of the Cavalry with the birth of Wang.

古文：尚书右仆射王僧达迁职，丹阳尹褚湛之为尚书右仆射。
现代文：尚书右仆射王僧达升职，丹阳尹褚湛之为尚书右仆射。
English: Shangshu's right-hand man, Sha Wang, was promoted, and Danyang Yinqian became Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：猥以眇躬，属承景业，阐扬遗泽，无废厥心。
现代文：十五日，任命侍中南谯王长子恢为湘州刺史。十六日，下诏说： 我才德低下，愧承帝位，想宏扬先帝的恩泽，不辜负他的希望。
English: On the 15th, he appointed the eldest son of the middle-ranking vassal, Nan Xun Wang, to restore the history of Hunan. On the 16th, he issued the following edict: I am morally inferior, I am ashamed to accept the throne, I want to magnify the grace of the former emperor, and live up to his hope.

古文：夫量入为出，邦有恆典；而经给之宜，多违常度。
现代文：量入为出，国有常规，而治理供给等事，多违背了法规。
English: To live within one's means is the state's usual practice, while matters such as supply management are mostly in violation of the law.

古文：兵役糜耗，府藏散减，外内众供，未加损约，非所以聿遵先旨，敬奉遗图。
现代文：兵役耗费巨大，府库储藏减少，朝廷内外的开支，却与日俱增，没有谨遵先帝遗旨。
English: The cost of military service was enormous, the treasury reserves were dwindling, and the expenses inside and outside the imperial court were increasing day by day, failing to honor the Emperor's last wishes.

古文：自今诸可薄己厚民、去烦从简者，悉宜施行，以称朕意。 
现代文：从现在起自己节俭让民休养生息，去掉繁琐一律从简，切实实行，以合我意。 
English: From now on, I will be frugal so that the people can have a rest and make a living, eliminate the cumbersome and simplify everything, and earnestly implement it to suit my wishes.

古文：庚申，诏有司论功班赏，各有差。
现代文：十九日，下令对有关衙门论功行赏。
English: On the 19th, it was ordered to reward the achievements of the relevant scholars.

古文：辛酉，安西将军、西秦河二州刺史吐谷浑拾寅进号镇西大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十日，安西将军、西秦河二州刺史吐谷浑拾寅晋升为镇西大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: On the 20th, Anxi General, West Qinhe Two-State Chief Historian Tuyun Hunqin was promoted to Zhenxi Major General, Kaifu Yi to Third Division.

古文：庚午，还分南徐，立南兗州。
现代文：二十九日，又从南徐州划出一部分建立南兖州。
English: On the 29th, a part of South Xuzhou was carved out to establish South Luzhou.

古文：辛未，改封南谯王义宣为南郡王，随王诞为竟陵王，义宣次子宜阳侯恺为宜阳县王。
现代文：三十日，改封南谯王义宣为南郡王，随王诞为竟陵王，义宣第二个儿子宜阳侯恺为宜阳县王。
English: On the 30th, Yixuan, the king of Nanxi, was renamed the king of Nan County. With the birth of the king, he became the king of Jingling. Yixuan's second son, Yiyang Houyi, became the king of Yiyang County.

古文：闰月壬申，以领军将军沈庆之为镇军将军、南兗州刺史。
现代文：闰六月一日，任命领军将军沈庆之为镇军将军、南兖州刺史。
English: On the first day of the leap month of June, he appointed the leading general Shen Qing Yi as the general of the town army and the governor of Nanluozhou.

古文：癸酉，以护军将军柳元景为领军将军。
现代文：二日，委任护军将军柳元景为领军将军。
English: On the second day, Liu Yuanjing, the general of the escort, was appointed as the leading general.

古文：丙子，遣兼散骑常侍乐询等十五人巡行风俗。
现代文：五日，派兼任散骑常侍的乐询等十五人巡视各地风俗。
English: On the fifth day, 15 people, including Music Enquiry, who also serves as a horseback riding attendant, were sent to inspect the customs of various regions.

古文：甲申，蠲寻阳、西阳郡租布三年。
现代文：十三日，免除寻阳、西阳郡三年租税。
English: On the 13th, Huan Yang and Xiyang County were exempted from three years of tax.

古文：甲午，丞相南郡王义宣改为荆、湘二州刺史，骠骑大将军、荆州刺史竟陵王诞改为扬州刺史，南蛮校尉王僧达为护军将军。
现代文：二十三日，丞相南郡王义宣调任荆、湘二州刺史、骠骑大将军、荆州刺史竟陵王涎调任扬州刺史，封南蛮校尉王僧达为护军将军。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Yixuan, the chancellor of Nan County, was transferred to Jing, Xiang Erzhou was assigned to Shishi, and He was assigned to the cavalry general, Jingzhou was assigned to Shishi, Jingzhou was assigned to Shishi, Jingzhou was assigned to Shishi, Jingzhou was assigned to Shishi, Jingzhou was assigned to Shishi, Xiang Erzhou was assigned to Shishi, Xiang Erzhou was assigned to Shishi, Jingzhou was assigned to Shishi, Jingzhou was assigned to Shishi, and Jingzhou was assigned to Shishi.

古文：是月，置卫尉官。
现代文：同月，设置卫尉官。
English: In the same month, the post of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guard was established.

古文：秋七月辛丑朔，日有蚀之。甲寅，诏曰： 世道未夷，惟忧在国。
现代文：秋七月一日，日蚀。十四日，下诏说： 世道未太平，国家有忧患。
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued: The world is not at peace, and the country is in distress.

古文：夫使群善毕举，固非一才所议，况以寡德，属衰薄之期，夙宵寅想，永怀待旦。
现代文：要想国泰民安，不是一个人能胜任的，何况我无才无德，国家又是处于衰落时期，彻夜冥思苦想难眠。
English: If we want to ensure the safety of the country and the people, no one can do it alone. What's more, I have no talent or virtue, and the country is in a period of decline. I can't sleep all night thinking about it.

古文：王公卿士，凡有嘉谋善政，可以维风训俗，咸达乃诚，无或依隐。 
现代文：王公大臣士人，凡有好计谋好措施，可以整顿风俗教化的，都坦诚向我进谏、不要有所隐藏。 
English: Wang Gong, minister and scholar, all those who have good plans and good measures to rectify the customs and educate, are candid with me, and do not hide anything.

古文：辛酉，诏曰： 百姓劳弊，徭赋尚繁，言念未乂，宜崇约损。
现代文：二十一日，下诏说： 百姓劳苦贫困，赋税徭役繁重，人心未定，应该节俭。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the following edict was issued: The people are hard-working and poor, the taxes and labor are onerous, the people's minds are undecided, and they should be frugal.

古文：凡用非军国，宜悉停功。
现代文：凡不是军国必需的费用都应该节省。
English: No expense should be spared that is not essential to the military.

古文：可省细作并尚方，雕文靡巧，金银涂饰，事不关实，严为之禁。
现代文：免去精工细作、雕梁画栋、金银装饰，这些都有关大局，应该严禁。
English: Eliminating fine craftsmanship, carved beams, painted buildings, and gold and silver decoration, which are all related to the overall situation, should be strictly prohibited.

古文：供御服膳，减除游侈。
现代文：供给我的衣服膳食，减去奢华的。
English: Provide me with clothes and food, minus the luxuries.

古文：其江海田池公家规固者，详所开弛。
现代文：捕鱼狩猎，应顺应季节。官家与私人交易，一定要公平合理。官家占有的江海田塘，一律开禁。
English: Fishing and hunting should be in accordance with the season. Official and private transactions must be fair and reasonable. The Jianghai Tiantang, which is owned by officials, is prohibited.

古文：贵戚竞利，悉皆禁绝。 
现代文：皇亲显贵逐利，一律禁止。 
English: It is strictly forbidden for the imperial relatives and dignitaries to make profits.

古文：戊戌，以右卫将军宗悫为广州刺史。
现代文：二十二日，任命右卫将军宗悫为广州刺史。
English: On the 22nd, he appointed the right guard general Zong Qi as the Guangzhou chief historian.

古文：己巳，司空南平王铄薨。
现代文：二十九日，司空南平王铄去世。
English: On the 29th, Sikyong Nanping Wang Xi passed away.

古文：八月辛未，武皇帝旧役军身，尝在斋内，人身犹存者，普赐解户。
现代文：八月一日，下令跟随武皇帝征战，现在还活着的人，免除丁税。
English: On August 1st, he ordered that anyone still alive who had followed Emperor Wu to war should be exempted from the Ding tax.

古文：乙亥，尚书左仆射建平王宏加中书监、中军将军。
现代文：五日，尚书左仆射建平王宏加封为中书监、中军将军。
English: On the fifth day, Shang Shuxi's left-hand man, Jianping Wanghong, was promoted to the position of China's book supervisor and general of the Chinese army.

古文：丁亥，以沛郡太守垣闳为宁州刺史。抚军司马费沈为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：十七日，任命沛郡太守坦闳为宁州刺史，抚军司马费沈为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: On the 17th, the governor of Pei County, Tang Jun, was appointed as the governor of Ningzhou, the military governor Ma Fei Shen was appointed as the governor of Liang, and the governor of the two provinces of South Qin was appointed as the governor of Erzhou.

古文：甲午，护军将军王僧达迁职。
现代文：二十四日，护军将军王僧达升职。
English: On the 24th, Wang Songda, the escort general, was promoted.

古文：九月丁巳，以前尚书刘义綦为中护军。
现代文：九月十八日，委任前尚书刘义基为中护军。
English: On September 18th, Liu Yiqi, a former senior official, was appointed as the middle guard.

古文：壬戌，新亭战亡者，复同京城。
现代文：二十三日，在新亭战败逃亡的，都回到京城。
English: On the 23rd, those who were defeated and fled from Xinting all returned to Beijing.

古文：劭党南海太守萧简据广州反。
现代文：劭的同党南海太守萧简在广州谋反。
English: The South China Sea governor Xiao Jian, a staunch member of the same party, plotted a rebellion in Guangzhou.

古文：丁卯，辅国将军邓琬讨平之。
现代文：二十八日，辅国将军邓琬讨伐平定广州。
English: On the 28th, the general of the Auxiliary State, Deng Wei, conquered and settled Guangzhou.

古文：冬十月癸未，车驾于阅武堂听讼。
现代文：冬十月四日，驾临阅武军堂听诉讼。
English: On the 4th of October in winter, I drove to the Military Court to listen to the proceedings.

古文：十一月丙午，以左军将军鲁秀为司州刺史。
现代文：十一月八日，任命左将军鲁秀为司州刺史。
English: On November 8th, Lu Xiu, a left-wing general, was appointed as the governor of Shizhou.

古文：丙辰，停台省众官朔望问讯。
现代文：十八日，停止朝中百官初一、十五前来问候。
English: On the 18th, hundreds of officials from the two Koreas stopped coming to greet each other on the first and fifteenth day of the first month.

古文：丙寅，高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：二十八日，高丽国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 28th, the Koryo Kingdom sent an envoy to the DPRK to present special products.

古文：十二月甲戌，省都水台，罢都水使者官，置水衡令官。
现代文：十二月六日，撤都水台，罢都水使者官，设置水衡令官。
English: On December 6th, the capital water station was withdrawn, the capital water envoy officer was removed, and the water balance officer was set up.

古文：癸未，以将置东宫，省太子率更令、步兵、翊军校尉、旅贲中郎将、冗从仆射、左右积弩将军官。
现代文：十五日，设东宫将，裁撤太子率更令、步兵、翊军校尉、旅贲中郎将、台从仆射、左右积弩将军官。
English: On the 15th, the East Palace General was set up, and the Prince's rate was abolished, the infantry, the Shao Army lieutenant, the brigade commander, the commander of the platform, and the left and right soldiers were abolished.

古文：中庶子、中舍人、庶子、舍人、洗马，各减旧员之半。
现代文：中庶子、中舍人、庶子、舍人、洗马、各减裁一半人员。
English: The middle son-in-law, the middle son-in-law, the middle son-in-law, the son-in-law, the son-in-law, the son-in-law, and the son-in-law were each reduced by half.

古文：孝建元年春正月己亥朔，车驾亲祠南郊，改元，大赦天下。
现代文：孝建元年春正月初一，驾临南郊祭奠，改纪元，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Xiao Jian, he came to the southern suburbs to pay tribute, change the era, and pardon the world.

古文：壬寅，以丹阳尹萧思话为安北将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：四月，任命丹阳尹萧思话为安北将军、徐州刺史。
English: In April, Danyang Yin Xiao Siwa was appointed as the general of Anbei and the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：甲辰，护军将军刘义綦迁职，以尚书令何尚之为左光禄大夫、护军将军。
现代文：六日，护军将军刘义基升职，委任尚书令何尚之为左光禄大夫、护军将军。
English: On the 6th, Liu Yiqi, the general of the garrison, was promoted and appointed by Shang Shuling to be the doctor of Zuo Guanglu and the general of the garrison.

古文：戊申，诏曰： 首食尚农，经邦本务，贡士察行，宁朝当道。
现代文：十日，下诏说： 农业是国家的根本，选贤任能是强国的必由之路。
English: On the tenth day, the following edict was issued: Agriculture is the foundation of the country, and the selection of talents is the only way to become a strong country.

古文：内难甫康，政训未洽；衣食有仍耗之弊，选造无观国之美。
现代文：内难未平，政令不通，衣食浪费，国无栋梁之才，我内心愧疚，睡梦中都忘不了。
English: Internal difficulties are not smooth, government orders are not clear, food and clothing are wasted, the country has no backbone, I feel guilty in my heart, I can't forget it in my sleep.

古文：凡诸守莅亲民之官，可详申旧条，勤尽地利。
现代文：各地官员，要认真根据以前的法规，督导百姓勤劳耕作以尽地利。
English: Officials in various regions should carefully supervise the people's diligent farming to the best of their ability according to the previous regulations.

古文：力田善蓄者，在所具以名闻。
现代文：致力耕田擅于储藏的，为他扬名。
English: He made a name for himself as a hardworking farmer who was good at saving.

古文：褒甄之科，精为其格。
现代文：选拔人才，尤其要认真。
English: Selection of talent, in particular, should be done seriously.

古文：四方秀孝，非才勿举，献答允值，即就铨擢。
现代文：各地士人孝子，没才能的不要举荐，对答中肯的，立即擢用。
English: Local scholars and filial sons, do not recommend those who have no talent, and immediately promote those who can answer pertinently.

古文：若止无可采，犹赐除署；若有不堪酬奉，虚窃荣荐，遣还田里，加以禁锢。
现代文：若没有什么长处，只赐给他名誉；如有收受贿赂，举荐中弄虚作假的，削职为民，永不启用。
English: If there is no merit, only honor is given to him; if there is bribe-taking, fraud in the recommendation, cutting jobs for the people, it will never be opened.

古文：尚书百官之元本，庶绩之枢机，丞郎列曹，局司有在。
现代文：尚书是百官的首脑，政务总汇之处，丞郎列曹，各有职责。
English: Shangshu is the head of a hundred officials, the place of government affairs, and Jorong Letsao, each with their own responsibilities.

古文：而顷事无巨细，悉归令仆，非所以众材成构，群能济业者也。
现代文：而事无巨细，都由令仆处理，不发挥大家的力量，难成大业。
English: And no matter how big or small, it is all handled by subordinates, and without exerting everyone's strength, it is difficult to become a great cause.

古文：可更明体制，咸责厥成，纠核勤惰，严施赏罚。 
现代文：可制定规章，赏勤罚懒，严厉执行。 二十四日，改铸四株钱。
English: Regulations may be formulated to reward diligence and punish laziness, and they shall be strictly enforced. On the 24th, the mintage of four-share coins will be changed.

古文：壬戌，更铸四铢钱。丙寅，立皇子子业为皇太子。
现代文：二十八日，立皇子子业为皇太子。
English: On the 28th, Crown Prince Naruhito was enthroned as Crown Prince.

古文：赐天下为父后者爵一级。
现代文：赐天下做父母者爵一级。
English: Give the world a first-class knighthood to a man who has become a father and has an heir.

古文：孝子、顺孙、义夫、节妇粟帛各有差。
现代文：赏给孝子、顺孙、义夫、节妇粟帛不等。
English: It is awarded to sons and daughters, sons and daughters-in-law, sons and daughters-in-law, sons and daughters-in-law, sons and daughters-in-law, sons and daughters-in-law.

古文：是月，起正光殿。
现代文：同月，建正光殿。
English: In the same month, Jianzheng Light Hall was built.

古文：二月庚午，豫州刺史鲁爽、车骑将军江州刺史臧质、丞相荆州刺史南郡王义宣、兗州刺史徐遗宝举兵反。
现代文：二月三日，豫州刺史鲁爽、车骑将军江州刺史臧质、丞相荆州刺史南郡王义宣、兖州刺史徐遗宝起兵谋反。
English: On February 3rd, Lu Shuang of Yuzhou, Jishu Yujie of Jiangzhou, Wang Yixuan of Nan County of Jingzhou, and Xu Yibao of Zhangzhou rebelled.

古文：乙亥，抚军将军东海王祎迁职。
现代文：八日，抚军将军东海王礻韦升职。
English: On the 8th, the general of the garrison, Donghai Wang Zhenwei, was promoted.

古文：己卯，领军将军柳元景加抚军将军。
现代文：十二日，领军将军柳元景加封为抚军将军。
English: On the 12th, the leading general, Liu Yuanjing, was appointed as the general of the Fuzhou army.

古文：壬午，曲赦豫州。
现代文：十五日，赦免豫州部分地区。
English: On the 15th, he pardoned some areas in Yuzhou.

古文：辛卯，左卫将军王玄谟为豫州刺史。
现代文：二十四日，任命左卫将军王玄谟为豫州刺史。
English: On the 24th, Wang Xuanmu, General of the Left Division, was appointed as the historian of Yuzhou.

古文：癸巳，玄谟进据梁山。
现代文：二十六日，王玄谟进据梁山。
English: On the 26th, Wang Xuanmu entered Liangshan.

古文：丙申，以安北司马夏侯祖欢为兗州刺史。
现代文：二十九日，任命安业司马夏侯祖欢为兖州刺史。
English: On the 29th, Anye Sima Xia Hou Zu Huan was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：三月癸亥，内外戒严。
现代文：三月二日，京城内外戒严。
English: On March 2, martial law was declared in and around the capital.

古文：辛丑，以安北将军、徐州刺史萧思话为安南将军、江州刺史，抚军将军柳元景即本号为雍州刺史。
现代文：三月四日，任命安北将军、徐州刺史萧思话为安南将军、江州刺史，抚军将军柳元景以本封号任雍州刺史。
English: On March 4, General Annan of North Korea, General Xiao Siwei of Xuzhou and General Liu Yuanjing of Fuzhou were appointed as General Annan, General Xiao Siwei of Jiangzhou and General Liu Yuanjing of Yongzhou respectively.

古文：癸卯，以太子左卫率庞秀之为徐州刺史。
现代文：六日，委任太子左卫率庞秀之为徐州刺史。
English: On the 6th, he appointed Prince Zuo Weizhang Pang Xiu as the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：徐遗宝为夏侯祖欢所破，弃众走。
现代文：徐遗宝被夏侯祖欢击败，弃众逃走。
English: Xu Yibao was defeated by Xia Hou Zu Huan and fled.

古文：丙寅，以辅国长史明胤为冀州刺史。
现代文：二十九日，任命辅国长史明胤为冀州刺史。
English: On the 29th, Vice-Governor Shi Mingyan was appointed as the Vice-Governor of Jizhou.

古文：夏四月戊辰，以后将军刘义綦为湘州刺史。
现代文：夏四月二日，任命后将军刘义基为湘州刺史。
English: On April 2nd, after the appointment, General Liu Yiqi became the history of Hunan Province.

古文：甲申，以平西将军、雍州刺史硃修之为安西将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：十八日，委任平西将军、雍州刺史朱修之为安西将军、荆州刺史。
English: On the 18th, he appointed General Pingxi and Yangzhou chief of staff Zhu Xiu as general of Anxi and chief of staff of Jingzhou.

古文：丙戌，镇军将军、南兗州刺史沈庆之大破鲁爽于历阳之小岘，斩爽。
现代文：二十日，镇军将军、南兖州刺史沈庆之在历阳的小岘大败鲁爽，斩杀鲁爽。
English: On the 20th, the general of the town's army, the South Luzhou assassin Shen Qingzhi, defeated and killed Lu Shuang in the small town of Liyang.

古文：癸巳，进庆之号镇北大将军。
现代文：二十七日，晋升沈庆之为镇北大将军。
English: On the 27th, Shen Qing Bin was promoted to be the general of Zhenbei.

古文：封第十六皇弟休倩为东平王。
现代文：封第十六皇弟休倩为东平王。
English: The 16th emperor's younger brother, Huseyn, was named King Dongping.

古文：未拜，薨。
现代文：还没举行仪式，第十六皇子就去世了。
English: Before the ceremony could be held, the sixteenth prince died.

古文：五月甲寅，义宣等攻梁山，王玄谟大破之。
现代文：五月十八日，刘义宣等进攻梁山，被王玄谟击败。
English: On May 18, Liu Yixuan and others attacked Liangshan and were defeated by Wang Xuanmu.

古文：己未，解严。
现代文：二十三日，解除戒严。
English: On the 23rd, martial law was lifted.

古文：癸亥，以吴兴太守刘延孙为尚书右仆射。
现代文：二十七日，任命吴兴太守刘延孙为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 27th, Liu Yansun, the governor of Wu Xing, was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：六月戊辰，臧质走至武昌，为人所斩，传首京师。
现代文：六月三日，臧质逃到武昌，被人斩杀，头颅在京城传递示众。
English: On June 3, Gongye fled to Wuchang, where he was beheaded and his head displayed in the capital.

古文：甲戌，抚军将军柳元景进号抚军大将军，镇北大将军沈庆之并开府仪同三司。
现代文：九日，抚军将军柳元景晋升为抚军大将军、镇北大将军兼任开府仪同三司。
English: On the 9th, Liu Yuanqing, the general of the Fuzhou army, was promoted to the general of the Fuzhou army, and the general of the Zhenbei army was concurrently appointed to the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments.

古文：丙子，以征虏将军武昌王浑为雍州刺史。
现代文：十一日，委任征西将军武昌王浑为雍州刺史。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wuchang Wanghun, the general of the Western Expedition, was appointed as the prefect of Yongzhou.

古文：癸未，分扬州立东扬州；分荆、湘、江、豫州立郢州。
现代文：十八日，从扬州划出一部分设立东扬州。从荆、湘、江、豫州分出一部分设立郢州。
English: On the 18th, a part of Yangzhou was set aside to establish East Yangzhou, and a part of Jing, Hunan, Jiangsu and Yuzhou was set aside to establish Ganzhou.

古文：罢南蛮校尉。
现代文：撤南蛮校尉。
English: Captain Nanban retreated.

古文：戊子，省录尚书事。
现代文：二十三日，裁录尚书事。
English: On the 23rd, the cutting of the record is over.

古文：庚寅，义宣于江陵赐死。
现代文：二十五日，义宣在江陵被赐死。
English: On the 25th, Yixuan was sentenced to death in Jiangling.

古文：秋七月丙申朔，日有蚀之。丙辰，大赦天下。
现代文：秋七月一日，日蚀。二十七日，大赦天下。
English: A solar eclipse falls on the first day of July. On the 27th, there is a general amnesty.

古文：文武赐爵一级；逋租宿债勿复收。
现代文：文武百官各赐爵一级。旧租旧债不再征收。
English: All civil and military officials will be given a first-class knighthood. Old rents and debts will no longer be levied.

古文：辛酉，于雍州立建昌郡。
现代文：二十六日，在雍州设立建昌郡。
English: On the 26th, Jianchang County was established in Yongzhou.

古文：以会稽太守义阳王昶为东扬州刺史。
现代文：委任会稽太守义阳王昶为东扬州刺史。
English: Yiyang Wang Yao, the Auditor-General of the Appointment Committee, is the history of East Yangzhou.

古文：八月庚午，抚军大将军柳元景复为领军将军，本号如故。
现代文：八月六日，抚军大将军柳元景又被封为领军将军，原来的称号不变。
English: On August 6th, Liu Yuanqing, the general of the Fuzhou army, was named the leading general again, and the original title remained unchanged.

古文：壬申，以游击将军垣护之为徐州刺史。
现代文：八日，任命游击将军垣护之为徐州刺史。
English: On the 8th, he appointed the guerrilla general, Guo Jing, as the leader of Xuzhou.

古文：壬辰，以安西司马梁坦为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：三十日，任命安西司马为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: On the 30th, he appointed Anxi Sima as the leader and Southern Qin Erzhou as the historian.

古文：九月丙申，以强弩将军尹怀顺为宁州刺史。
现代文：九月二日，委任强弩将军尹怀顺为宁州刺史。
English: On September 2, Yin Huai Shun, a general of the Qiangyu army, was appointed as the governor of Ningzhou.

古文：丁酉，左光禄大夫何尚之解护军将军。
现代文：三日，解除左光禄大夫何尚之护军将军职务。
English: On the third day, he relieved Dr. He Shang, the doctor of the Left Guanglu, of his duties as a military escort.

古文：甲辰，加尚之特进。
现代文：十日，加封何尚之为特进。
English: On the 10th, he was given a special promotion.

古文：丙午，以安南将军、江州刺史萧思话为镇西将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：十二日，任命安南将军、江州刺史萧思话为镇西将军、郢州刺史。
English: On the 12th, he appointed General Annan, Jiangzhou Governor Xiao Siwei as Zhenxi General, and Zhangzhou Governor.

古文：先朝远存遗范，有诏缮立，世故妨道，事未克就。国难频深，忠勇奋厉，实凭圣义，大教所敦。
现代文：冬十月十五日，下诏说： 孔子的思想恩泽天下，周朝的维持、汉朝的兴隆全依靠孔子思想。
English: On the 15th day of October in winter, the following edict was issued: Confucius' thought is a blessing to the world, the maintenance of the Zhou Dynasty and the prosperity of the Han Dynasty all depend on Confucius' thought.

古文：永惟兼怀，无忘待旦。
现代文：历朝历代，都很推崇。
English: It has been revered throughout the ages.

古文：可开建庙制，同诸侯之礼。
现代文：而我朝却没有祭祀。国家灾难深重，奋力为国的忠勇之士，就是孔子学说教导出来的。
English: However, my dynasty did not have any sacrificial rites. The national calamity was severe, and the loyal and brave men who fought for the country were taught by the Confucius doctrine.

古文：详择爽垲，厚给祭秩。 
现代文：应时刻记着孔子的恩泽，不要忘记。建造孔庙，用诸侯之礼祭祀他。 
English: We should always remember the grace of Confucius, do not forget, build a Confucius temple, and worship him with the rites of princes.

古文：丁亥，以秘书监东海王祎为抚军将军、江州刺史。
现代文：二十四日，委任秘书监东海王礻韦为抚军将军、江州刺史。
English: On the 24th, the secretary and supervisor of the East China Sea, Wang Zhiwei, was appointed as the general of the army and the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：于郢州立安陆郡。
现代文：在郢州设立安陆郡。
English: Anlu County was established in Zhangzhou.

古文：十一月癸卯，复立都水台，置都水使者官。
现代文：十一月十日，又设立都水台，设置都水使者官。
English: On November 10th, the Metropolitan Water Bureau and the Metropolitan Water Envoy Office were established.

古文：是岁，始课南徐州侨民租。
现代文：同年，开始课征南徐州侨民的税。
English: In the same year, the tax collection of the overseas Chinese in South Xuzhou began.

古文：二年正月壬寅，以冠军将军湘东王讳为中护军。
现代文：孝建二年正月十日，任命冠军将军湘东王为中护军。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the second year of Xiao Jian, the champion general Xiang Dongwang was appointed as the middle protector.

古文：二月己丑，婆皇国遣使献方物。
现代文：二月二十八日，婆皇国派使者来进献特产。
English: On February 28th, the Emperor's motherland sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：丙寅，以镇北大将军、南兗州刺史沈庆之为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十九日，任命镇北大将军、南兖州刺史沈庆之为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
English: On the 29th, he appointed Zhenbei General, Nanxizhou Provincial Secretary Shen Qing Tong as the doctor of Zuo Guanglu, and Kaifu Yi as the third secretary.

古文：辛巳，以尚书右仆射刘延孙为南兗州刺史。
现代文：三十日，委任尚书右仆射刘延孙为南兖州刺史。
English: On the 30th, he appointed his right-hand man Liu Yansun to write the history of Southern Luzhou.

古文：三月辛亥，以吴兴太守刘遵考为湘州刺史。
现代文：三月二十日，委任吴兴太守刘遵考为湘州刺史。
English: On March 20th, Wu Xingtao appointed Liu Zunkao as the governor of Hunan Province.

古文：壬子，以行征西将军杨文智为征西将军、北秦州刺史。
现代文：二十一日，委任行征西将军杨文智为征西将军、北秦州刺史。
English: On the twenty-first day, Yang Wenzhi, the general who led the Western Expedition, was appointed as the Western Expedition general and the governor of North Qin.

古文：夏四月壬申，河南国遣使献方物。
现代文：夏四月十一日，河南国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of the summer, Henan Province sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：壬午，以豫章太守檀和之为豫州刺史。
现代文：二十一日，任命豫章太守檀和之为豫州刺史。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Yu Zhang was appointed as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：五月戊戌，以湘州刺史刘遵考为尚书右仆射，前军司马垣闳为交州刺史。
现代文：五月八日，任命湘州刺史刘遵考为尚书右仆射、前军司马垣闳为交州刺史。
English: On May 8, Liu Zunkao, the military governor of Hunan Province, was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, and the former military governor, Magaki Yao, was appointed as the military governor of Jiaozhou Province.

古文：庚子，以辅国将军申坦为徐、兗二州刺史。
现代文：十日，任命辅国将军申坦为徐、兖二州刺史。
English: On the 10th, Shentan, the general of the Auxiliary Province, was appointed as the chief historian of the two prefectures of Xu and Handan.

古文：癸卯，以右卫将军顾觊之为湘州刺史。
现代文：十三日，委任右卫将军顾觊之为湘州刺史。
English: On the 13th, he appointed the general of the Right Division, Gu Xun, as the governor of Hunan Province.

古文：丁未，以金紫光禄大夫王偃为右光禄大夫。
现代文：十七日，任命金紫光禄大夫王偃为右光禄大夫。
English: On the 17th, Wang Qi, the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, was appointed as the doctor of Uguanglu.

古文：六月甲子，以国哀除释，大赦天下。
现代文：六月四日，国哀守孝期满，除去丧服，大赦天下。
English: On June 4, the period of national mourning and filial piety expired, the mourning clothes were removed, and the world was pardoned.

古文：庚辰，以曲江县侯王玄谟为豫州刺史。
现代文：二十日，委任曲江县侯王玄谟为豫州刺史。
English: On the 20th, Wang Xuanmu, Marquis of Qujiang County, was appointed as the Henan Provincial Historian.

古文：秋七月癸巳，立第十三皇弟休祐为山阳王，第十四皇弟休茂为海陵王，第十五皇弟休业为鄱阳王。
现代文：秋七月四日，封第十三皇弟休为山阳王，第十四皇弟休茂为海陵王，第十五皇弟休业为鄱阳王。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of autumn, the 13th emperor's younger brother Hugh was named the king of Sanyang, the 14th emperor's younger brother Hugh Mao was named the king of Hailing, and the 15th emperor's younger brother retired as the king of Shenyang.

古文：戊戌，镇西将军萧思话卒。
现代文：九日，镇西将军萧思话去世。
English: On the 9th, Zhenxi General Xiao Siwei passed away.

古文：己酉，以益州刺史刘秀之为郢州刺史。
现代文：二十日调益州刺史刘秀之任郢州刺史。
English: On the 20th, Liu Xiu, the governor of Yizhou Province, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou Province.

古文：盘盘国遣使献方物。
现代文：般木般木国派使者来进献特产。
English: Countries around the world send envoys to offer tribute to local special products.

古文：甲寅，以义兴太守到元度为益州刺史。
现代文：二十五日，委任义兴太守到元度为益州刺史。
English: On the 25th, Yixing Taishu was appointed to be the governor of Yizhou until the end of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：八月庚申，雍州刺史武昌王浑有罪，废为庶人，自杀。
现代文：八月一日，雍州刺史武昌王浑因犯罪，被废为平民，自杀身亡。
English: On August 1st, Wang Hun, the Yangzhou assassin Wuchang Wang, who was sentenced to life in prison for a crime, was turned into a civilian and committed suicide.

古文：辛酉，以南兗州刺史刘延孙为镇军将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：二日，委任南兖州刺史刘延孙为镇西将军、雍州刺史。
English: On the second day, Liu Yansun, the governor of South Luzhou, was appointed as the general of Zhenxi and the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：斤陀利国遣使献方物。
现代文：斤陀利国派使者来进献特产。
English: The State of Jindo sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：三吴民饥，癸酉，诏所在赈贷。
现代文：三吴发生饥荒，十四日，下令当地官员赈济灾民。
English: On the 14th day of the famine in Sam Wu, local officials were ordered to provide relief to the victims.

古文：丙子，诏曰： 诸苑禁制绵远，有妨肄业。
现代文：十七日，下诏说： 各园苑圈占面积太大，妨碍商业活动。
English: On the 17th, the next edict said: Each park and garden area occupies too large an area, hindering commercial activities.

古文：可详所开弛，假与贫民。 
现代文：可尽量开放，给予贫民经营。 
English: It can be as open as possible, and it can be operated by the poor.

古文：壬午，以新除豫州刺史王玄谟为青、冀二州刺史，青州刺史申恬为豫州刺史。
现代文：二十三日，调新任豫州刺史王玄谟为青、冀二州刺史，调青州刺史申恬为豫州刺史。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Xuanmu, the newly-appointed governor of Yuzhou, was promoted to the post of the governor of Qinghai and Hebei Provinces, and the newly-appointed governor of Qinghai and Hebei Provinces, Shen Yi, was promoted to the post of governor of Yuzhou.

古文：永言勤虑，寤寐载怀。在朕受命之前，凡以罪徙放，悉听还本。犯衅之门，尚有存者，子弟可随才署吏。 冬十月壬午，太傅江夏王义恭领扬州刺史，骠骑大将军、扬州刺史竟陵王诞为司空、南徐州刺史，中书监、尚书左仆射、中军将军建平王宏为尚书令，将军如故。
现代文：冬十月二十四日，太傅江夏王义恭兼任扬州刺史，骠骑大将军、扬州刺史竟陵王诞担任司空、南徐州刺史，中书监、尚书左仆射、中军将军建平王宏担任尚书令，将军之职照旧担任。
English: On the 24th day of winter in October, the Taifu of Jiangxia Wang Yigong also served as the Yangzhou scribe, the general of the imperial cavalry, the Yangzhou scribe Jingling Wang Xizhao served as the Siku, the South Xuzhou scribe, the Chinese scribe, the left-handed scribe, the Chinese general Jianping Wang Hong served as the scribe, and the general's post was still held.

古文：十一月戊子，中护军湘东王讳迁职，镇军将军刘延孙为护军将军。
现代文：十一月一日，中护军湘东王升职，镇军将军刘延孙担任护军将军。
English: On November 1st, Wang Xiangdong of the Central Garrison was promoted, and Liu Yansun, the general of the town garrison, became the general of the garrison.

古文：青、冀二州刺史王玄谟为雍州刺史。
现代文：调青、冀二州刺史王玄谟为雍州刺史。
English: Tingqing and Hebei two-state embroiderer Wang Xuanmu is the embroiderer of Yongzhou.

古文：甲午，以大司马垣护之为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：七日，任命大司马垣护之为青、冀二州刺史。
English: On the 7th, he appointed Magaki Mamoru, the chief of the division, as the chief historian of the two prefectures of Qing and Jie.

古文：辛亥，高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：二十四日，高丽国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 24th, the Koryo Kingdom sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：十二月癸亥，以前交州刺史萧景宪为交州刺史。
现代文：十二月六日，任命前交州刺史萧景宪为交州刺史。
English: On December 6, Xiao Jingxian, the former secretary of Jiaozhou, was appointed as the secretary of Jiaozhou.

古文：三年春正月庚寅，立第十八皇弟休范为顺阳王，第十九皇弟休若为巴陵王。
现代文：孝建三年春正月初四，立第十八皇弟休范为顺阳王，第十九皇弟休若为巴陵王。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the third year of Xiao Jian's reign in the spring, the 18th emperor's younger brother, Xu Fan, was established as the king of Shunyang, and the 19th emperor's younger brother, Xu Ruo, as the king of Baling.

古文：戊戌，立第二皇子子尚为西阳王。
现代文：十二日，立第二皇子尚为西阳王。
English: On the twelfth day, the second prince was still the king of Xiyang.

古文：辛丑，车驾亲祠南郊。
现代文：十五日，驾临南郊祭祀。
English: On the fifteenth day, they arrived in the southern suburbs for a religious service.

古文：壬子，立皇太子妃何氏。甲寅，大赦天下。
现代文：二十八日，立何氏为皇太子妃。三十日，大赦天下。
English: On the 28th, Ms. He became the Crown Princess, and on the 30th, she was pardoned.

古文：二月癸亥，右光禄大夫王偃卒。
现代文：二月七日，右光禄大夫王偃去世。
English: On February 7th, Wang Qi, a doctor at the Uguanglu Hospital, passed away.

古文：甲子，以广州刺史宗悫为平西将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：八日，任命广州刺史宗悫为平西将军、豫州刺史。
English: On the 8th, he appointed Zonglu, the governor of Guangzhou, as the general of Pingxi and the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：丁卯，以新除御史中丞王翼为广州刺史。
现代文：十一日，调新任御史中丞王翼为广州刺史。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wang Ying, the newly appointed chief historian, was transferred to Guangzhou.

古文：丁丑，始制朔望临西堂接群下，受奏事。
现代文：十八日，开始初一、十五到西堂接见群臣，受理奏章。
English: On the 18th, from the 1st day of the first month to the 15th day of the first month, he went to the West Hall to receive the courtiers and accept the report.

古文：壬午，内外官有田在近道，听遣所给吏僮附业。
现代文：二十三日，京城内外官员有田靠近驿道的，听凭给予仆从作为副业耕种。
English: On the 23rd, officials in and out of the capital had a field close to the main road, and allowed their servants to cultivate it as a sideline.

古文：三月癸丑，以西阳王子尚为南兗州刺史。
现代文：三月二十八日，任命西阳王子尚为南兖州刺史。
English: On March 28th, Xiyang Prince Shang was appointed to write the history of South Luzhou.

古文：闰月戊午，尚书右仆射刘遵考迁职。
现代文：闰三月三日，尚书右仆射刘遵考升职。
English: On March 3rd, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Liu Zunka, was promoted.

古文：癸酉，鄱阳王休业薨。
现代文：十六日，鄱阳王休业去世。
English: On the 16th, Shenyang Wang retired and passed away.

古文：庚辰，停元嘉三十年以前兵工考剔。
现代文：二十三日，停止了元嘉三十年以前的兵工考查剔除制度。
English: On the 23rd, the elimination system of the military engineering examination before the 30th anniversary of Yuan Jia was stopped.

古文：夏五月辛酉，制荆、徐、兗、豫、雍、青、冀七州统内，家有马一匹者，蠲复一丁。
现代文：夏五月七日，规定荆、徐、兖、豫、雍、青、冀七州之内，家里养一匹马，免除一人丁税。
English: On the 7th day of the fifth month of the summer, it was stipulated that within the seven prefectures of Jing, Xu, Handan, Yu, Yong, Qing and Hebei, if a household raised a horse, it would be exempt from the Ding tax.

古文：壬戌，以右卫将军刘瑀为益州刺史。
现代文：八日，委任右将军刘王禹为益州刺史。
English: On the 8th, he appointed the Right General Liu Wangyu as the chief historian of Yizhou.

古文：六月，上于华林园听讼。
现代文：六月，皇上到华林园听诉讼。
English: In June, the emperor went to Hua Lin Yuan to listen to the lawsuit.

古文：秋七月，太傅江夏王义恭解扬州。
现代文：秋七月，解除太傅江夏王义恭扬州刺史职务。
English: In the autumn of July, Tai Fu Jiangxia Wang Yigong Yangzhou was relieved of his duties as chief historian.

古文：丙子，以南兗州刺史西阳王子尚为扬州刺史，秘书监建安王休仁为南兗州刺史。
现代文：二十三日，任命南兖州刺史西阳王子尚为扬州刺史，秘书监建安王休仁为南兖州刺史。
English: On the 23rd, Xiyang Prince Shang was appointed as the governor of South Luzhou and Yangzhou, and Wang Xuren, the secretary of Supervision and Construction, was appointed as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：八月戊戌，以北军中郎谘议参军费淹为交州刺史。
现代文：八月十五日，任命北中郎咨议参军费淹为交州刺史。
English: On August 15th, Kitanakura was appointed as a member of the advisory council on military expenditure.

古文：丁未，以尚书吏部王琨为广州刺史。
现代文：二十四日，任命尚书吏部郎王琨为广州刺史。
English: On the 24th, he appointed the secretary of the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy, Lang Wangyao, as the official historian of Guangzhou.

古文：九月壬戌，以丹阳尹刘遵考为尚书左仆射。
现代文：九月十日，委任丹阳尹刘遵考为尚书右仆射。
English: On September 10, he appointed Danyang Yin Liu Zunkao as his right-hand man.

古文：冬十月癸未，以寻阳太守张悦为益州刺史。
现代文：冬十月一日，任命寻阳太守张悦为益州刺史。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Zhang Yue, the dynast of Xuanyang, was appointed as the crown prince of Yizhou.

古文：丙午，太傅江夏王义恭进位太宰，领司徒。
现代文：二十四日，太傅江夏王义恭晋升为太宰，兼任司徒。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Taifu Jiangxia Wang Yigong was promoted to Dazai, and also served as a disciple.

古文：丁未，领军将军柳元景加骠骑将军，尚书令建平王宏加中书监、卫将军，抚军将军、江州刺史东海王祎进号平南将军。
现代文：二十五日，领军将军柳元景加封为骠骑将军，尚书令建平王宏加封为中书监、卫将军，抚军将军、江州刺史东海王礻韦晋升为平南将军。
English: On the 25th, Liu Yuanjing, the leading general of the army, was promoted to the general of the cavalry, and Jianping Wanghong was promoted to the general of the guard, the general of the army, and the general of the east sea of Jiangsu Province, and the general of the south of the country.

古文：十一月癸丑，淮南太守袁景有罪弃市。
现代文：十一月十二日，淮南太守袁景因犯罪被处死。
English: On November 12th, Yuan Jing, the deputy governor of Huainan, was executed for his crimes.

古文：十二月丙午，以侍中孔灵符为郢州刺史。
现代文：十二月二十五日，任命侍中孔灵符为郢州刺史。
English: On December 25th, the attendant Kong Lingfu was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：大明元年春正月辛亥朔，改元，大赦天下。
现代文：大明元年春正月初一，改纪年，大赦天下。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 17

古文：赐高年、孤疾粟帛各有差。
现代文：赐给年迈、孤儿、病残者粟帛。
English: The elderly, orphans and the infirm were given cornflowers.

古文：庚午，护军将军刘延孙迁职，右卫将军湘东王讳为中护军。
现代文：二十日，护军将军刘延孙升职，右卫将军湘东王担任中护军。
English: On the 20th, Liu Yansun, the escort general, was promoted, and the right guard general, Xiangdong Wang, became the middle escort.

古文：京邑雨水，辛未，遣使检行，赐以樵米。
现代文：京城郊外发水灾，二十一日，派使臣巡视，赐给灾民柴米。
English: Floods hit the outskirts of Kyoto, and on the 21st, envoys were sent to inspect and give firewood and rice to the victims.

古文：二月己亥，复亲民职公田。
现代文：二月十九日，恢复皇上亲自耕田的仪式。
English: On February 19th, the ceremony of the Emperor personally ploughing the fields was resumed.

古文：索虏寇兗州。
现代文：索虏侵犯兖州。
English: Saurup invades Luzhou.

古文：三月壬戌，制大臣加班剑者，不得入宫城门。
现代文：三月十三日，规定带班剑的大臣，不得进入宫城门。
English: On the 13th of March, it was decreed that no minister carrying a sword would be allowed to enter the Miyagi-mon Gate.

古文：梁州獠求内属，立怀汉郡。
现代文：梁州獠请求归附，设立怀汉郡。
English: Liangzhou County requested to be annexed and established as Waihan County.

古文：夏四月，京邑疾疫。丙申，遣使按行，赐给医药。
现代文：夏四月，京城城郊流行瘟疫，十七日，派使者巡行，赐给医药。
English: In the summer of April, an epidemic of plague broke out in the suburbs of Beijing. On the 17th, an envoy was sent on a tour to give medicine.

古文：死而无收敛者，官为敛埋。
现代文：无人收殓的死者，收敛埋葬。
English: If there is no one to collect the dead, they should be collected and buried.

古文：庚子，省湘州宋建郡并临贺。
现代文：二十一日，将湘州宋建郡并入临贤郡。
English: On the 21st, Songjian County of Hunan Province was merged into Linxian County.

古文：五月，吴兴、义兴大水，民饥。
现代文：五月，吴义、义兴发生洪水，爆发饥荒。
English: In May, floods occurred in Wuyi and Yixing, and famine broke out.

古文：乙卯，遣使开仓赈恤。
现代文：七日，派使者开仓放粮赈济灾民。
English: On the seventh day, an envoy was sent to open storehouses and distribute grain to help the victims.

古文：癸酉，于华林园听讼。
现代文：二十五日，到华林园听诉讼。
English: On the 25th, he went to Hua Lin Yuan to listen to the lawsuit.

古文：乙亥，以左卫将军沈昙庆为徐州刺史，辅国将军梁瑾葱为河州刺史、宕昌王。
现代文：二十七日，任命左卫将军沈云庆为徐州刺史，辅国将军梁瑾葱为河州刺史、宕昌王。
English: On the 27th, General of the Left Division Shen Yunqing was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou, and General of the Auxiliary Province Liang Bingyi was appointed as the governor of Hezhou and the king of Tangchang.

古文：六月己卯，以前太子步兵校尉刘祗子歆继南丰王朗。
现代文：六月一日，由前太子步兵校尉刘祗的儿子刘歆继南丰王朗的位子。
English: On June 1, Liu Wei, the son of Liu Wei, the former prince's infantry lieutenant, succeeded Nanfeng Wanglang.

古文：辛巳，以长水校尉山阳王休祐为东扬州刺史。
现代文：三日，委任长水校尉山阴王休为东扬州刺史。
English: On the third day, Changshui Lieutenant Colonel Sanyin Wangxu was appointed as the official historian of East Yangzhou.

古文：丁亥，休祐改为湘州刺史。
现代文：九日，休改任湘州刺史。
English: On the 9th, he was relieved of his duties and reassigned to the post of Hunan Provincial Historian.

古文：以丹阳尹颜竣为东扬州刺史。
现代文：由丹阳尹颜竣任东扬州刺史。
English: From Danyang Yinyan to complete the history of East Yangzhou.

古文：秋七月辛未，土断雍州诸侨郡县。
现代文：秋七月二十四日，撤雍州各侨郡县。
English: On the 24th day of the 7th month of autumn, all overseas Chinese in Yongzhou were evacuated.

古文：八月戊戌，于兗州立阳平郡。
现代文：八月二十一日，在兖州设立阳平郡。
English: On August 21, Yangping County was established in Zhangzhou.

古文：壬寅，于华林园听讼。
现代文：二十五日，到华林园听诉讼。
English: On the 25th, he went to Hua Lin Yuan to listen to the lawsuit.

古文：甲辰，司空、南徐州刺史竟陵王诞改为南兗州刺史，太子詹事刘延孙为镇军将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：二十七日，司空、南豫州刺史竟陵王诞改任南兖州刺史，太子詹事刘延孙任镇军将军、南徐州刺史。
English: On the 27th day of the month, Siku and the prince of southern Yuzhou were appointed as the prince of southern Luzhou, the prince of Zhanjiang Liu Yansun was appointed as the general of the town army, and the prince of southern Xuzhou was appointed as the prince of southern Zhejiang.

古文：冬十月丙申，诏曰： 旒纩之道，有孚于结绳，日昃之勤，已切于姬后。
现代文：冬十月二十日，下诏说： 礼义之道，结绳记事时代就为人民所信服，日日勤勉，文王就是这样做的。
English: On the 20th day of October in winter, the following edict was issued: The way of courtesy and righteousness, the tying of ropes and the recording of events have been believed by the people since ancient times, and they are diligent day by day. This is what King Wen did.

古文：况世弊教浅，岁月浇季。
现代文：何况现在世事凋敝，孔教浅薄，处于世风日薄的末世呢。
English: What's more, now that the world is withering away, Confucianism is shallow, and we are in the last days of a fading world style.

古文：朕虽戮力宇内，未明求衣，而识狭前王，务广昔代，永言菲德，其愧良深。
现代文：我虽致力于治理天下，但未明治理，见识又比前人少，想宏扬先王的做法，但自己道德浅薄，深感惭愧。
English: Although I am committed to governing the world, I do not know how to govern, and I have less insight than my predecessors. I want to carry forward the practices of my predecessors, but I am deeply ashamed of my shallow morals.

古文：朝咨野怨，自达者寡，惠民利公，所昧实众。
现代文：朝中的咨议、民间的怨恨，能传到我耳中的少，利国利民的事，我不知道的多。
English: Consultation between the government and the people and the resentment of the people are few things that can reach my ears. I don't know much about what is good for the country and good for the people.

古文：自今百辟庶尹，下民贱隶，有怀诚抱志，拥郁衡闾，失理负谤，未闻朝听者，皆听躬自申奏，小大以闻。
现代文：自今日起，不论是官吏百姓，贱民奴仆，凡是真心实意关心国事，受诽谤，不得志，意见没传到朝廷的，听凭他们自己上奏，不管事情大小。
English: From now on, whether they are officials or commoners, untouchables or servants, all those who sincerely care about state affairs, who have been slandered, discouraged, and whose opinions have not reached the imperial court, are left to play by themselves, no matter how big or small the matter is.

古文：朕因听政之日，亲对览焉。 
现代文：我利用听政的日子，亲自翻阅。 
English: I took advantage of the days when I was in government to look through it myself.

古文：甲辰，以百济王余庆为镇东大将军。
现代文：二十八日，委任百济王余庆为镇东大将军。
English: On the 28th, Baekje King Yuqing was appointed as the general of the town of Dongda.

古文：十二月丁亥，顺阳王休范改封桂阳王。
现代文：十二月十二日，顺阴王休范改封为桂阳王。
English: On December 12, Shunyin King Xuanfan changed his title to Guiyang King.

古文：壬戌，诏曰： 先帝灵命初兴，龙飞西楚，岁纪浸远，感往缠心。
现代文：二十三日，到华林园听诉讼。大明二年正月初六，驾临南郊祭祀。七日，下诏说： 先帝灵魂才显，魂飞西楚。时间虽久，往事在心。
English: On the 23rd, he went to the Hualing Garden to listen to the lawsuit. On the 6th day of the first month of the second year of the Ming Dynasty, he came to the southern suburb for the sacrifice. On the 7th, he said: The soul of the former emperor has just appeared, and his soul is flying westward. Although it has been a long time, the past is in my heart.

古文：奉迎文武，情深常隶，思弘殊泽，以申永怀。
现代文：迎奉我的文武大臣的情义深切，我总记得，想施给恩泽，以偿我的长久的心愿。
English: I always remember that I was deeply moved by the minister of literature and armed forces who greeted me, and I wanted to grant him a favor to fulfill my long-cherished wish.

古文：吏身可赐爵一级，军户免为平民。 
现代文：官吏赐爵一等，军户免除军籍成为平民。 
English: Government officials were given first-class knighthoods, and military families were exempted from military registration and became civilians.

古文：二月丙子，诏曰： 政道未著，俗弊尚深，豪侈兼并，贫弱困窘，存阙衣裳，没无敛槥，朕甚伤之。
现代文：二月二日，下诏说： 治道未彰著，流弊尚很多，豪强兼并，小民困窘，缺衣少食，死了也无力收殓，我为此很伤心。
English: On February 2nd, he said in his last will and testament, "I am saddened by the fact that the path of governance has not yet been established, there are still many evils and abuses, there are strong and powerful mergers, the common people are in a predicament, they lack food and clothing, and even if I die, I will not be able to recover.

古文：其明敕守宰，勤加存恤。赙赠之科，速为条品。 
现代文：下令地方官吏，好好体贴百姓，赈济部门，速拟定方法。 
English: Order the local officials to be considerate of the people, and the economic departments to quickly work out a method.

古文：乙酉，以金紫光禄大夫褚湛之为尚书左仆射。
现代文：十一日，委任金紫光禄大夫湛之为尚书左仆射。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he appointed Jin Zi Guanglu as the doctor.

古文：丙戌，中书监、尚书令、卫将军建平王宏以本号开府仪同三司，中书监如故。
现代文：十二日，任命中书监、尚书令、卫将军建平王宏为开府仪同三司，封号保留，中书监照旧担任。
English: On the 12th, Jianping Wanghong was appointed as the chief librarian, the chief librarian, and the general of the imperial guard to be the keeper of the imperial rescript and the three departments. The seal number was retained, and the chief librarian continued to serve as before.

古文：丁酉，骠骑将军柳元景以本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十三日，骠骑将军柳元景保留骠骑将军称号，担任开府仪同三司。
English: On the 23rd, the cavalry general Liu Yuanqing retained the title of cavalry general and served as the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：甲辰，散骑常侍义阳王昶为中军将军。
现代文：三十日，任命散骑常侍义阳王昶为中军将军。
English: On the 30th, the cavalry officer Yiyang Wang Yao was appointed as the general of the Chinese army.

古文：三月丁未，中书监、尚书令、卫将军建平王宏薨。
现代文：三月三日，中书监、尚书令、卫将军建平王宏去世。
English: On March 3, Jianping Wanghong, China's chief librarian, chief librarian, and general of the imperial guard, passed away.

古文：乙卯，以田农要月，太官停杀牛。
现代文：十一日，因为三月是农忙春耕之时，太官停止宰牛。
English: On the 11th day, because March is a time of busy spring farming, the eunuch stopped slaughtering cattle.

古文：丁卯，上于华林园听讼。
现代文：二十三日，皇上到华林园听诉讼。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor went to Hualin Garden to listen to the proceedings.

古文：癸酉，以宁朔将军刘季之为司州刺史。
现代文：二十九日，任命宁朔将军刘季之为司州刺史。
English: On the 29th, Ningshuo General Liu Ji was appointed as the governor of Shizhou.

古文：夏四月甲申，立皇子子绥为安陆王。
现代文：夏四月十一日，立皇子子绥为安陆王。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of the summer, the crown prince was enthroned as the King of Anlu.

古文：甲午，以海陵王休茂为雍州刺史。
现代文：二十一日，委任海陵王休茂为雍州刺史。
English: On the 21st, Hai Ling Wang Xiumao was appointed as the prefect of Yongzhou.

古文：辛丑，地震。
现代文：二十八日，发生地震。
English: On the 28th, an earthquake occurred.

古文：五月戊申，复西阳郡。
现代文：五月五日，恢复西阳郡。
English: On May 5, Xiyang County was restored.

古文：六月戊寅，增置吏部尚书一人，省五兵尚书。
现代文：六月六日，增设一户吏部尚书，裁撤五兵尚书。
English: On June 6th, an additional post of librarian was established, and five posts of soldiers were abolished.

古文：丁亥，左光禄大夫何尚之加开府仪同三司。
现代文：十五日，左光禄大夫何尚之加封为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 15th, Dr. He Shang, a doctor of the Left Guanglu Hospital, was appointed as the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：戊子，以金紫光禄大夫羊玄保为右光禄大夫。
现代文：十六日，任命金光禄大夫羊玄保为右光禄大夫。
English: On the 16th, Yang Xuanbao, the doctor of Jinguanglu, was appointed as the doctor of Uguanglu.

古文：丙申，诏曰： 往因师旅，多有逋亡。
现代文：二十四日，下诏说： 往昔军队、士兵逃亡众多。
English: On the 24th, the next edict said: In the past, many armies and soldiers fled.

古文：或连山染逆，惧致军宪；或辞役惮劳，苟免刑罚。
现代文：有的占山为匪，惧怕军法处罚；有的逃避劳役，想幸免刑罚。
English: Some occupied the mountain as bandits, fearing punishment by the military law; some evaded labor service, hoping to escape punishment.

古文：虽约法从简，务思弘宥，恩令骤下，而逃伏犹多，岂习愚为性，忸恶难反；将在所长吏，宣导乖方。
现代文：虽然法律简约，宽大为怀，赦免宽恕的命令不断下达，但逃跑的仍很多。难道是本性愚昧，积恶难返？通知地方官，疏导教训。
English: Although the laws are simple and lenient, and the orders to pardon and forgive are constantly issued, there are still many people who escape. Is it natural stupidity, accumulation of evil and no return? Notify local officials, guide and teach a lesson.

古文：可普加宽申，咸与更始。 
现代文：从现在开始，逃亡者一律宽恕。 
English: From now on, all fugitives will be pardoned.

古文：秋七月甲辰，彭城民高阇等谋反伏诛。
现代文：秋七月二日，彭城百姓高等谋反被杀。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, a high-ranking rebel was killed in Pengcheng.

古文：癸亥，以右卫将军颜师伯为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：二十七日，委任右卫将军颜师伯为青、冀二州刺史。
English: On the 27th, Yan Shibao, the right guard general, was appointed as the general of the Qing Dynasty, and Ji Erzhou was appointed as the general of the Zhi Dynasty.

古文：八月乙酉，河南王遣使献方物。
现代文：八月十四日，河南王派使者来进献特产。
English: On August 14th, the king of Henan sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：丙戌，中书令王僧达有罪，下狱死。
现代文：十五日，中书令王僧达因犯罪，被投入监狱并死在监狱里。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Wang Xiangda was sentenced to prison for a crime and died in prison.

古文：己丑，以强弩将军杜叔文为宁州刺史，交州刺史费淹为广州刺史，南海太守垣阆为交州刺史。
现代文：十八日，任命强弩将军杜叔文为宁州刺史，调交州刺史费淹为广州刺史，南海太守垣阆为交州刺史。
English: On the 18th, General Du Shouwen of Qiangfan was appointed as the governor of Ningzhou, Fei Dun, the governor of Jiaozhou, was transferred to Guangzhou, and the governor of Nanhai was appointed as the governor of Jiaozhou.

古文：甲午，以宁朔将军沈僧荣为兗州刺史。
现代文：二十三日，任命宁朗将军沈僧荣为兖州刺史。
English: On the 23rd, Ninglang General Shen Sang Rong was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：九月癸卯，于华林园听讼。
现代文：九月二日，到华林园听诉讼。
English: On September 2nd, he went to the Huarim Garden to listen to the lawsuit.

古文：壬戌，以宁朔将军刘道隆为徐州刺史。
现代文：二十一日，任命宁朔将军刘道隆为徐州刺史。
English: On the 21st, Ningshuo General Liu Daolong was appointed as the leader of Xuzhou.

古文：襄阳大水，遣使巡行赈赡。
现代文：襄阳发洪水，派使者去安抚赈济。
English: When floods hit Xiangyang, an envoy was sent to appease the people of Fuxi.

古文：庚午，置武卫将军、武骑常侍官。
现代文：二十九日，设置武卫将军、武骑常侍官。
English: On the 29th, the position of General of the Horse Guards and the Permanent Attendant of the Horse Guards was established.

古文：冬十月甲午，以中军将军义阳王昶为江州刺史。
现代文：冬十月二十四日，委任中军将军义阳王昶为江州刺史。
English: In the winter of October 24th, the Chinese army general, Yiyang Wang Qi, was appointed as the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：乙未，高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：二十五日，高丽国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 25th, the Koryo Kingdom sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：十一月壬子，扬州刺史西阳王子尚加抚军将军。
现代文：十一月十二日，加封扬州刺史西阳王子尚为抚军将军。
English: On November 12th, Prince Xiyang of Yangzhou Province was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：凡寰卫贡职，山渊采捕，皆当详辨产殖，考顺岁时，勿使牵课虚悬，睽忤气序。
现代文：十二月三十日，各王和王妃及享受公爵地位的，办丧事可以设丧门，其余的都禁止。闰十二月一日，下诏说： 居住在山里的人，不把鱼鳌作为礼物。灾年多忧虑，军队调动频繁。总想大举革新，随我的心愿。
English: On the 30th of December, all kings and queens and those who enjoy the status of dukes can set up funeral doors for funerals, and the rest are prohibited. On the 1st of December, the following edict said: People who live in the mountains do not give fish hooks as gifts. Disaster years are worried, troops are frequently mobilized. I always want to make great innovations, as I wish.

古文：庶简约之风，有孚于品性；惠敏之训，无漏于幽仄。 
现代文：上山狩猎、下水捕鱼，都要考察并顺应季节，不要违背节令。简朴节约的风气，合乎事物的品性；启人心智的教诲，不要使偏僻的地方遗漏。 
English: Hunting in the mountains and fishing in the sewers should be examined and adapted to the season, and should not violate the seasons. The simple and economical culture is in line with the character of things; the teachings that enlighten the mind and heart should not be omitted in remote places.

古文：庚申，上于华林园听讼。
现代文：二十一日，皇上到华林园听诉讼。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor went to Hualin Garden to listen to the proceedings.

古文：壬戌，林邑国遣使献方物。
现代文：二十三日，林邑国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 23rd, Lin'yi sent an envoy to bring in special products.

古文：是冬，索虏寇青州，刺史颜师伯频大破之。
现代文：同年冬天，索虏侵犯青州，刺史颜师伯多次打败他们。
English: In the winter of the same year, the Sorbs invaded Qingzhou, and Shiyan repeatedly defeated them.

古文：三年春正月丁亥，割豫州梁郡属徐州。
现代文：大明三年春正月十九日，划豫州梁郡归属徐州。
English: On the 19th day of the first month of the third year of Daming, Liang County of Yuzhou was assigned to Xuzhou.

古文：己丑，以骠骑将军、领军将军柳元景为尚书令，尚书右仆射刘遵考为领军将军。
现代文：二十一日，任命骠骑、领军将军柳元景为尚书令，尚书右仆射刘遵考为领军将军。
English: On the twenty-first day, Liu Yuanjing, the leading general of the cavalry, was appointed as Shang Shuling, and Liu Zunkao, the right-hand man of Shang Shuling, was appointed as the leading general.

古文：丙申，婆皇国遣使献方物。
现代文：二十八日，婆皇国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 28th, the Queen Mother's country sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：二月乙卯，以扬州所统六郡为王畿。
现代文：二月十七日，将扬州所辖六郡划作京城管辖地区。
English: On February 17th, the six counties under the jurisdiction of Yangzhou were designated as areas under the jurisdiction of Beijing.

古文：以东扬州隶扬州。
现代文：改东扬州为扬州。
English: East Yangzhou was changed to Yangzhou.

古文：时欲立司隶校尉，以元凶已立乃止。
现代文：当时想设司隶校尉，因为元凶已立作罢。
English: At that time, he wanted to appoint Lieutenant Sisli, because the culprit had already resigned.

古文：抚军将军、扬州刺史西阳王子尚徙为扬州刺史。
现代文：降抚军将军、扬州刺史西阿王子尚为扬州刺史。
English: The General of the General Staff of the Chinese People's Liberation Army of Korea, Yangzhou Zhi Shi Prince is still Yangzhou Zhi Shi.

古文：甲子，复置廷尉监官。
现代文：二十六日，又设置廷尉监官。
English: On the 26th, a court lieutenant supervisor was also set up.

古文：荆州饥，三月甲申，原田租布各有差。
现代文：荆州饥荒，三月十七日，免除荆州部分租税。
English: Jingzhou famine, March 17th, Jingzhou partial tax exemption.

古文：庚寅，以义兴太守垣阆为兗州刺史。
现代文：二十六日，调义举太守垣阆为兖州刺史。
English: On the 26th day of the month, Shouyi held a grand ceremony to celebrate the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：壬辰，中护军湘东王讳迁职，以中书令东海王祎为卫将军、护军将军。
现代文：二十八日，中护军湘东王升职，中书令东海王礻韦升为卫将军、护军将军。
English: On the 28th, the Middle Protector, the King of Eastern Hunan, was promoted, and the Central Government ordered the King of the East China Sea, Zou Wei, to be promoted to General of the Guards and General of the Protectorate.

古文：癸巳，太宰江夏王义恭加中书监。
现代文：二十九日，太宰江夏王义恭加封为中书监。
English: On the 29th, the Dazai of Jiangxia, Wang Yigong, was appointed as the Supervisor of Chinese Books.

古文：夏四月癸卯，上于华林园听讼。
现代文：夏四月六日，皇上到华林园听诉讼。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, the emperor went to the Hualin Garden to listen to the lawsuit.

古文：丙午，以建宁太守苻仲子为宁州刺史。
现代文：九日，委任建宁太守符仲子为宁州刺史。
English: On the 9th, Jianning Taishou Fu Zhongzi was appointed as the governor of Ningzhou.

古文：乙卯，司空、南兗州刺史竟陵王诞有罪，贬爵；诞不受命，据广陵城反，杀兗州刺史垣阆。
现代文：十八日，司空、南兖州刺史竟陵王诞因犯罪，被剥去爵位。诞不服，占据广陵城谋反，杀兖州刺史垣阆。
English: On the 18th day of the month, Siku and Jinshi Qingting Wangzheng of Nanluozhou were stripped of their titles for committing crimes. Unable to accept this, they occupied Guangling City and plotted a rebellion, killing Jinshu Jinshi Qingting.

古文：以始兴公沈庆之为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、南兗州刺史讨诞。
现代文：任命始兴公沈庆之为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、南兖州刺史，讨伐诞。
English: Shih Xing Gong Shen Qing Bin was appointed as the General of Cavalry and Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, Nanxing State History, and the anniversary of the Crusade.

古文：甲子，上亲御六师，车驾出顿宣武堂。
现代文：二十七日，皇上亲率大军，驻扎宣武堂。
English: On the 27th, the emperor's relatives led a large army and stationed in Xuanwu Hall.

古文：司州刺史刘季之反叛，徐州刺史刘道隆讨斩之。
现代文：司州刺史刘季之谋反叛乱，徐州刺史刘道隆讨伐并斩杀刘季之。
English: Sizhou assassinated Liu Jizhi in a counter-insurgency, and Xuzhou assassinated Liu Daolong in a counter-insurgency and killed Liu Jizhi.

古文：秋七月己巳，克广陵城，斩诞。
现代文：秋七月三日，攻下广陵城、斩诞。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, Guangling City was captured, marking the birth of a new era.

古文：悉诛城内男丁，以女口为军赏；是日解严。
现代文：诛杀城内所有男子，城内的女人作为军队的犒赏。同时解除戒严。
English: Kill all the men in the city, and the women in the city as a reward for the army. At the same time, lift martial law.

古文：辛未，大赦天下。
现代文：五日，大赦天下。
English: On the fifth day, there was a general amnesty.

古文：尚方长徒、奚官奴婢老疾者原放。
现代文：正在服无期徒刑、官吏奴婢中的老弱病残者全都恢复自由。
English: The old, the weak, the sick and the disabled, who were serving life sentences and were slaves of officials, have all regained their freedom.

古文：孝子、顺孙、义夫、节妇，赐粟帛各有差。
现代文：孝子、贤孙、义夫、节妇，赐给粟米布帛。
English: To the filial son, the wise grandson, the righteous husband, and the woman of the feast, corn-cloth is given.

古文：王畿下贫之家，与近行顿所由，并蠲租一年。
现代文：京城管辖内的贫困之家，与最近皇上行幸住过的地方，都减免一年租税。
English: The poor houses within the jurisdiction of the capital city, as well as the places where the emperors were fortunate enough to live recently, are all exempt from one year's tax.

古文：丙子，以丹阳尹刘秀之为尚书右仆射。
现代文：十日，委任丹阳尹刘秀之为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 10th, he appointed Danyang Yin Liu Xiu as his right-hand man.

古文：丙戌，分淮南北复置二豫州。
现代文：二十日，以淮河为界又设置南北豫州。
English: On the 20th, the north and south of Yuzhou were set up with the Huaihe River as the boundary.

古文：以新除车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、南兗州刺史沈庆之为司空，刺史如故。
现代文：任命新任车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、南兖州刺史沈庆之为司空，刺史照旧担任。
English: The newly-appointed General of Cavalry and Cavalry, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and South Luzhou chief historian Shen Qingwei were appointed as deputy commanders, and the chief historian continued to serve as before.

古文：戊子，以卫将军、护军将军东海王祎为南豫州刺史，卫将军如故。
现代文：二十二日，委任卫将军、护军将军东海王礻韦为南豫州刺史，卫将军继续担任。
English: On the 22nd, the General of the Guards and the General of the Guards, Donghai Wang Zhenwei, was appointed as the prefect of South Henan Province, and the General of the Guards continued to serve.

古文：江州刺史义阳王昶为护军将军，冠军将军桂阳王休范为江州刺史。
现代文：江州刺史义阳王昶任护军将军，冠军将军桂阳王休范任江州刺史。
English: In the history of Jiangsu Province, Yiyang Wang Xi served as the general of the guard, and the champion general Guiyang Wang Xuan served as the general of the history of Jiangsu Province.

古文：癸巳，以前左卫将军王玄谟为郢州刺史。
现代文：二十七日，委任前左卫将军王玄谟为郢州刺史。
English: On the 27th, Wang Xuanmu, the former left guard general, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：八月丙申，诏曰： 近北讨文武，于军亡没，或殒身矢石，或疠疾死亡，并尽勤王事，而敛槥卑薄。
现代文：八月一日，下诏说： 最近北伐，文臣武将在战斗中，有的死于敌人箭石，有的死于疾病，他们勤勤恳恳，但只是草草收敛薄葬。
English: On August 1st, the following edict was issued: "Recently, during the Northern Expedition, some scholars and soldiers died in battle, some were killed by the enemy's arrows and stones, and some died of disease. They were diligent and earnest, but they were only gradually buried.

古文：可普更赙给，务令丰厚。 
现代文：现在都要给予赏赐，务必丰厚。 
English: Now is the time to give, and the reward must be great.

古文：己酉，以车骑长史庾深之为豫州刺史。
现代文：十四日，任命车骑长史庾深之为豫州刺史。
English: On the 14th, he appointed the chief of the cavalry, Shi Shuxen, as the chief of the cavalry in Yuzhou.

古文：故沿情察讼，鲁师致捷；市狱勿扰，汉史飞声。
现代文：二十九日，下诏说： 今百姓民俗浮薄，诚实的少虚伪的多，用低下的道德，不能感化百姓。
English: On the 29th, the next edict said: Nowadays, the people's folk customs are shallow, the honest are few and the hypocritical are many, and it is impossible to influence the people with low morality.

古文：廷尉远迩疑谳，平决攸归，而一蹈幽圄，动逾时岁。民婴其困，吏容其私。
现代文：离国泰民安，还隔得远，更加感到惭愧。可尽量宽恕。 九月四日，下诏说； 廷尉对于远近疑案，本应作判决，但一遇到疑难案子，动辄要过很长时间，百姓为此困苦，官吏乘机徇私情。
English: On September 4th, the following edict was issued: the imperial lieutenant was supposed to make a judgment on the far and near doubtful cases, but when he encountered a difficult case, it often took a long time, the people were in trouble because of this, and the officials took the opportunity to indulge their personal feelings.

古文：冬十月丁酉，诏曰： 古者荐鞠青坛，聿祈多庆，分茧玄郊，以供纯服。
现代文：从今日起，犯人押到，卷宗文书送到了就通报，我要仔细审理，不积压案件。如果文案繁杂，证据不足，必须亲自审查，以弄清真相。
English: From today, when a prisoner is brought in and the case file is delivered, I will announce it, I will carefully examine it, and there will be no backlog of cases. If the case file is complicated and the evidence is insufficient, I must personally review it to find out the truth.

古文：来岁，可使六宫妃嫔修亲桑之礼。 
现代文：从今以后依旧听诉讼。 二十七日，在玄武湖北岸上建上林苑。冬十月三日，下诏说： 明年，举行六官妃嫔种桑养蚕仪式。 
English: On the 27th, a forest park was built on the north shore of Lake Xuanwu, and on the 3rd of October in winter, the following edict was issued: Next year, a ceremony will be held to raise mulberry serpents.

古文：庚子，镇军将军、南徐州刺史刘延孙进号车骑将军。
现代文：六日，镇军将军、南徐州刺史刘延孙晋升为车骑将军。
English: On the 6th, Liu Yansun, the general of the town army and the leader of South Xuzhou, was promoted to the general of chariot and cavalry.

古文：戊申，河西国遣使献方物。
现代文：十四日，河西国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 14th, the State of Hexi sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：庚戌，以河西王大沮渠安周为征虏将军、凉州刺史。
现代文：十六日，委任河西王大沮渠安周为征虏将军、凉州刺史。
English: On the 16th, he appointed An Zhou, the king of Hexi, as the general of the conquest and the historian of Liangzhou.

古文：十一月己巳，高丽国遣使献方物；肃慎国重译献楛矢、石砮；西域献舞马。
现代文：十一月五日，高丽国派使者来进献特产。肃慎国翻译官进献木苦矢、石奴石。西域进献舞马。
English: On November 5th, envoys from Goryeo offered special products, while interpreters from Shushan offered wood, arrow and stone. The western region offered dancing horses.

古文：十二月戊午，上于华林园听讼。
现代文：十二月二十五日，皇上到华林园听诉讼。
English: On December 25th, the emperor went to Hua Lin Yuan to listen to the lawsuit.

古文：辛酉，置谒者仆射官。
现代文：二十八日，设置谒者仆射官。
English: On the 28th, an archery range was set up.

古文：四年春正月辛未，四驾祠南郊。
现代文：大明四年春正月初八，皇上驾临南郊祭祀。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the fourth year of the Ming Dynasty, the emperor arrived in the southern suburbs for a religious service.

古文：甲戌，宕昌王奉表献方物。
现代文：十一日，宕昌王上表进献特产。
English: On the 11th day of the month, King Go-Chang came to the table to present special products.

古文：乙亥，车驾躬耕藉田，大赦天下。
现代文：十二日，皇上亲自耕田。大赦天下。
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor personally ploughed the fields.

古文：尚方徒系及逋租宿债，大明元年以前，一皆原除。
现代文：大明三年以前被判正在服刑的一律释放，大明三年以前的旧租旧债，一律免除。
English: Daming was sentenced three years ago and is currently serving a prison sentence. He will be released without exception. Daming's old rent and debt from three years ago will be forgiven without exception.

古文：力田之民，随才叙用。
现代文：勤劳耕作的百姓，量才录用。
English: People who work hard in agriculture are only hired on merit.

古文：孝悌义顺，赐爵一级。
现代文：孝悌仁义之士，赐爵一级。
English: A man of filial piety, benevolence and righteousness, he was awarded a first-class knighthood.

古文：孤老贫疾，人谷十斛。
现代文：孤老贫疾者，每人赐谷十斛。
English: Orphans, the elderly, the poor and the sick will each receive ten mu of grain.

古文：藉田职司，优沾普赉。
现代文：督百姓耕作的官吏，全都有赏。
English: Officials who supervise the work of the people are all rewarded.

古文：百姓乏粮种，随宜贷给。
现代文：百姓缺粮种，随时贷给。
English: The people are short of grain seeds, which can be lent to them at any time.

古文：吏宣劝有章者，详加褒进。
现代文：有办法劝导百姓勤耕细作的官吏，提升官职。
English: Officials who have the means to persuade the people to work hard will be promoted.

古文：壬午，以北中郎司马柳叔仁为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：十九日，委任北中郎司马柳叔仁为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: On the 19th, he appointed Ma Liu Shujin, the vice-governor of the Northern Middle Kingdom, as the leader and the Southern Qin as the governor of Erzhou.

古文：左将军、荆州刺史硃修之进号镇军将军。
现代文：左将军、荆州刺史朱修之晋升为镇军将军。
English: General Zuo and Jingzhou chief of staff Zhu Xiu were promoted to general of the town army.

古文：庚寅，立第三皇子勋为晋安王，第六皇子房为寻阳王，第七皇子子顼为历阳王，第八皇子子鸾为襄阳王。
现代文：二十七日，立第二皇子子勋为晋安王，立第三皇子子房为寻阳王，第七皇子子玩为历阳王，第八皇子子鸾为襄阳王。
English: On the 27th, the second prince, Son Heung, was named King Jinan, the third prince, Son Bo, was named King Yang, the seventh prince, Son Heung, was named King Liyang, and the eighth prince, Son Heung, was named King Yangyang.

古文：二月庚子，侍中建安王休仁为湘州刺史。
现代文：二月八日，任命侍中建安王休仁为湘州刺史。
English: On February 8th, Jian'an Wang Huiren, an aide-de-camp to the emperor, was appointed as the official historian of Hunan.

古文：己未，以员外散骑侍郎费景绪为宁州刺史。
现代文：二十七日，委任员外散骑侍郎费景绪为宁州刺史。
English: On the 27th, Fai Jingxu, a non-commissioned officer, was sent to Ningzhou to make history.

古文：三月甲子，以冠军将军巴陵王休若为徐州刺史。
现代文：三月二日，任命冠军将军巴陵王休若为徐州刺史。
English: On March 2nd, the champion general Baling Wang Xurrao was appointed to write the history of Xuzhou.

古文：丁卯，以安陆王子绥为郢州刺史。
现代文：五日，任命安陆王子绥为郢州刺史。
English: On the 5th, Prince Anlu was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：癸酉，以徐州刺史刘道隆为青、冀二州刺史。索虏寇北阴平孔堤，太守杨归子击破之。
现代文：十一日，任命徐州刺史刘道隆为青、冀二州刺史，索虏侵犯北阴平孔堤，太守杨归子击败索虏。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Liu Daolong, the governor of Xuzhou, was appointed as the governor of Qing and Hebei two provinces, the garrison violated the Hebei Yinping dike, and Yang Guizi, the governor, defeated the garrison.

古文：甲申，皇后亲桑于西郊。
现代文：二十二日，皇后在京城西郊亲自植桑。
English: On the 22nd, the empress personally planted mulberry trees in the western suburbs of the capital.

古文：夏四月癸卯，以南琅邪隶王畿。
现代文：夏四月十二日，将南琅王牙划归京城管辖。
English: On the 12th day of the 4th month of summer, Nanluo Wangya was placed under the jurisdiction of Beijing.

古文：四时供限，可详减太半。
现代文：十五日，下诏说： 昔日全国穿缝补过的衣服，用土做的食器，是为了昭示节俭。
English: On the fifteenth day, the next edict said: In the past, the whole country wore clothes with patched seams and tableware made of soil in order to show frugality.

古文：庶裘絺顺典，有偃民华；纂组伤工，无竞廛市。 
现代文：我想让天下穿上丝帛的愿望，一直藏在心里。虽然多次下令有关衙门，去虚务实，但每年开支很大，财政年年亏空。
English: I have always kept in my heart the wish to make the world wear silk stockings. Although I have repeatedly ordered the relevant government departments to be pragmatic, but the annual expenditure is very large, and the financial deficit is year after year.

古文：辛酉，诏曰： 都邑节气未调，疠疫犹众，言念民瘼，情有矜伤。
现代文：难道用增加捐税，来合我的节约心愿。四季给我的供给，可减少一大半。 三十日，下诏说： 都市节气不顺，染病者众多，想到百姓的疾苦，很伤感。
English: On the 30th, the next edict said, "The urban solar terms are not going well, there are a lot of people with illnesses, and I feel sad when I think of the people's suffering."

古文：可遣使存问，并给医药；其死亡者，随宜恤赡。 
现代文：可派使臣安抚慰问，并给他们药物，死了人的家庭，适当给予赈济。 
English: Envoys can be sent to comfort the bereaved and give them medicine, and the families of the dead can be given appropriate relief.

古文：五月庚辰，于华林园听讼。
现代文：五月十九日，到华林园听诉讼。
English: On May 19th, he went to Huarimyuan to listen to the lawsuit.

古文：乙酉，以徐州之梁郡还属豫州。
现代文：二十四日，划徐州的梁郡归属豫州。
English: On the 24th, Liang County in Xuzhou was assigned to Yuzhou.

古文：丙戌，尚书左仆射褚湛之卒。
现代文：二十五日，尚书左仆射褚湛之去世。
English: On the 25th, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Shao Xuan Zhan, passed away.

古文：以抚军长史刘思考为益州刺史。
现代文：委任抚军长史刘思考为益州刺史。
English: Appointed the commander of the army, Liu Xie, as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：庚寅，以南下邳并南彭城郡。
现代文：二十九日，将南下邳并入南彭城郡。
English: On the 29th, Nanjia County was merged into Nanpeng County.

古文：秋七月甲戌，左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司何尚之薨。
现代文：秋七月十四日，左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司何尚之去世。
English: On the 14th day of the 7th month of autumn, Dr. Sakoroku, Kaifu Yi, and the 3rd secretary, He Shang, passed away.

古文：八月壬寅，宕昌王遣使献方物。
现代文：八月十二日，宕昌王派使者来进献特产。
English: On August 12th, Emperor Gaochang sent an envoy to present the special products.

古文：己酉，以晋安王子勋为南兗州刺史。
现代文：十九日，任命晋安王子勋为南兖州刺史。
English: On the 19th, Prince Jinan was appointed to be the crown prince of South Luzhou.

古文：雍州大水，甲寅，遣军部赈给。
现代文：雍州发洪水，二十四日，派兵部前往赈给。
English: Floods occurred in Yongzhou, and on the 24th, the military department was sent to Lijiang.

古文：九月辛未，以冠军将军垣护之为豫州刺史。
现代文：九月十二日，任命冠军将军垣护之为豫州刺史。
English: On September 12th, the champion general, Faki Yugo, was appointed as the leader of the history of Yuzhou.

古文：甲申，上于华林园听讼。
现代文：二十五日，皇上到华林园听诉讼。
English: On the 25th, the emperor went to the Hualin Garden to listen to the proceedings.

古文：丁亥，改封襄阳王子鸾为新安王。
现代文：二十八日，改封襄阳王子鸾为新安王。
English: On the 28th, the title of Prince of Xiangyang was changed to King of Xin'an.

古文：冬十月庚寅，遣新除司空沈庆之讨沿江蛮。
现代文：冬十月一日，派新任司空沈庆之讨伐江蛮。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the newly appointed Sikyong, Shen Qing, was sent to fight against the barbarians.

古文：壬辰，制郡县减禄，并先充公限。
现代文：三日，规定减少郡县官吏俸禄，并将减损下来的俸禄充归国库。
English: On the third day, it was stipulated that the salaries of county and county officials would be reduced, and the reduced salaries would be returned to the national treasury.

古文：十一月戊辰，改细作署令为左右御府令。
现代文：十一月十日，改细作署令为左右御府令。
English: On November 10th, the decree was changed to the Left and Right Imperial Edicts.

古文：丙戌，复置大司农官。
现代文：二十八日，又恢复设大司农官。
English: On the 28th, the post of Chief Agricultural Officer was reinstated.

古文：十二月乙未，上于华林园听讼。
现代文：十二月七日，皇上到华林园听诉讼。
English: On December 7th, the emperor went to Hua Lin Yuan to listen to the lawsuit.

古文：辛巳，车驾幸廷尉寺，凡囚系咸悉原遣。
现代文：十三日，驾临廷尉寺，凡是被拘留的全部放还。
English: On the 13th, they arrived at Tingfu Temple, and everyone who had been detained was released.

古文：索虏遣使请和。
现代文：索虏派使者来和谈。
English: The Sorbs sent emissaries to negotiate peace.

古文：丁未，车驾幸建康县，原放狱囚。
现代文：十九日，驾幸建康县，释放狱中囚犯。
English: On the 19th, Jiankang County released prisoners.

古文：倭国遣使献方物。
现代文：倭国派使者来进献特产。
English: The country of Wakoku sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：五年春正月丁卯，以宕昌王梁唐子为河州刺史。
现代文：大明五年正月十三日，委任宕昌王梁唐子为简州刺史。
English: On the 13th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of the Ming Dynasty, Tang Chang Wang Liang Tang Zi was appointed as the governor of Jianzhou.

古文：二月癸己，车驾阅武。
现代文：二月四日，皇上检阅部队。
English: On February 4, the Emperor reviewed the troops.

古文：诏曰： 昔人称人道何先，于兵为首，虽淹纪勿用，忘之必危。
现代文：下诏说： 古人说治理国家，军队应摆在首位，即使过了一百年没用军队，也不能忘记这一点，否则国家就危险。
English: The next edict said: The ancients said that in governing the country, the army should be placed first. Even if the army is not used for a hundred years, we must not forget this, otherwise the country will be in danger.

古文：朕以听览余闲，因时讲事，坐作有仪，进退无爽。军幢以下，普量班锡。
现代文：我时时关注着军队，军队一举一动都没出什么差错。军旗之下，人人有赏。
English: I always pay attention to the army, and there is nothing wrong with the army's every move. Under the military banner, everyone has a reward.

古文：顷化弗能孚，而民未知禁，逭役违调，起触刑网。
现代文：先前百姓不知教化，不知禁忌，逃避徭役租税，触犯刑法。
English: Previously, people did not know how to be educated, did not know the taboos, evaded taxes, and violated the criminal law.

古文：凡诸逃亡，在今昧爽以前，悉皆原赦；已滞囹圄者，释还本役；其逋负在大明三年以前，一赐原停。自此以还，鳏贫疾老，详所申减，伐蛮之家，蠲租税之半。
现代文：在没明白事理前，逃跑的，都赦免不追究。已被关进监狱的，释放回家乡。在大明三年以前欠的债，全部免除。自此以后，鳏夫贫民残疾老人，一一上报减免租税。
English: Those who ran away before they understood the reason were pardoned and not pursued. Those who had been imprisoned were released to their hometowns. Debts owed to Daming three years ago were completely forgiven. Since then, widowers, the poor, and the disabled elderly have all applied for tax reductions and exemptions.

古文：近籍改新制，在所承用，殊谬实多，可普更符下，听以今为始。
现代文：最近户籍改用新规定，原来所沿用的，错误实在太多。从今日起，可全部都改正过来。
English: Recently, the new regulations for household registration have been adopted, and there are too many mistakes in the original ones. From today, they can all be corrected.

古文：若先已犯制，亦同荡然。 
现代文：如果先前犯过法的，也不追究。 
English: If they have previously broken the law, they will not be prosecuted.

古文：甲寅，加右光禄大夫羊玄保特进。
现代文：十日，加封右光禄大夫羊玄保为特进。
English: On the 10th, Dr. Yang Xuanbao of Uguanglu Hospital was promoted to special promotion.

古文：夏四月癸巳，改封西阳王子尚为豫章王。
现代文：夏四月七日，改封西阳王子尚为豫章王。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, the title of Xiyang Prince was changed to Yuanzhang King.

古文：丙申，加尚书令柳元景左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
现代文：八日，加封尚书令柳元景为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
English: On the eighth day of the month, Liu Yuanjing was given the additional titles of Doctor of the Left Hand and Doctor of the Right Hand, Keifu Yi and Sanji.

古文：戊戌，诏曰： 南徐、兗二州去岁水潦伤年，民多困窭。
现代文：十六日，下诏说： 南徐、兖二州去年发水灾年成不好，百姓穷困。
English: On the 16th, the next edict said: Last year's floods in the two states of Nanxu and Handan were not a good year, and the people were poor.

古文：逋租未入者，可申至秋登。 
现代文：没收起来的租税可延迟到秋收后征收。 
English: Confiscated taxes can be delayed until after the autumn harvest.

古文：丙午，雍州刺史海陵王休茂杀司马庾深之，举兵反，义成太守薛继考讨斩之。
现代文：二十日，雍州刺史海陵王休茂杀了司马庾深之，起兵谋反，义城太守薛继考征讨斩杀休茂。
English: On the 20th day of the month, King Shumo of Hailing, the governor of Yongzhou, assassinated Sima Yushan, and raised an army to plot a rebellion. Xue, the governor of Yicheng, went to investigate and assassinate Shumo.

古文：甲寅，以第九皇子子仁为雍州刺史。
现代文：二十日，任命第九皇子子仁为雍州刺史。
English: On the 20th, the ninth prince Zang Zi Ren was appointed as the Yongzhou prefect.

古文：五月癸亥，制帝室期亲，朝官非禄官者，月给钱十万。
现代文：五月三日，划定皇室亲戚范围，不拿俸禄的朝廷命官，每月给钱十万。
English: On May 3, the range of relatives of the imperial family was delineated, and officials appointed by the imperial court who did not take a salary were paid 100,000 yuan per month.

古文：丙辰，车驾幸阅武堂听讼。
现代文：五日，驾幸阅武堂听诉讼。
English: On the fifth day, Jiuxing read the martial arts hall to listen to the lawsuit.

古文：六月丙午，以护军将军义阳王昶为中军将军。
现代文：六月六日，委任护军将军义阳王昶为中军将军。
English: On June 6th, the general of the escorting army, Yiyang Wang Qi, was appointed as the general of the Chinese army.

古文：壬子，分广陵置沛郡，省东平郡并广陵。
现代文：七日，从广陵郡划出一部分设置沛郡，将东平郡并入广陵郡。
English: On the 7th, a part of Guangling County was set aside as Pei County, and Dongping County was merged into Guangling County.

古文：秋七月丙辰，诏曰： 雨水猥降，街衢泛溢，可遣使巡行。
现代文：秋七月十二日，下诏说： 骤降暴雨，洪水泛滥，派使臣巡视。
English: On the 12th day of the 7th month of autumn, the following edict was issued: "Due to the sudden heavy rain and flooding, dispatch envoys to inspect the situation.

古文：穷弊之家，赐以薪粟。 
现代文：穷困之家，赐给柴米。 
English: To the poor house, give sticky rice.

古文：丁卯，高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：十九日，高丽国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 19th, the State of Korea sent an envoy to South Korea to present special products.

古文：庚午，曲赦雍州。
现代文：二十六日，赦免雍州地区。
English: On the 26th, the Yongzhou region was pardoned.

古文：八月戊子，立第九皇子子仁为永嘉王，第十一皇子子真为始安王。
现代文：八月八日，立第九皇子子仁为嘉王，第十一皇子子真为始安王。
English: On August 8th, the ninth prince, Jin, was named King Jia, and the eleventh prince, Zhen, was named King Shiuan.

古文：庚寅，制方镇所假白板郡县，年限依台除，食禄三分之一，不给送故。卫将军东海王祎以本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：任命北中郎参军费伯弘为宁州刺史。十七日，下诏说： 今边境安定，国内太平，深山有栈道，大海有航船，乡间思慕仁义，教化百姓养成好风俗，现在是时候了，来年修整学校，聘请饱学之士任教。 十九日，卫将军东海王礻韦晋升为开府仪同三司，原来的称号不变。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued: Now that the border is stable, the country is peaceful, the mountains have boardwalks, the sea has sailing ships, the countryside thinks of benevolence, and the people are educated to develop good customs, now is the time to renovate the school next year and hire well-educated people to teach. On the 19th, the general of the East China Sea, Wang Weiwei, was promoted to the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony, and the original title remained unchanged.

古文：九月甲寅朔，日有食之。丁卯，行幸琅邪郡，囚系悉原遣。
现代文：九月一日，日蚀。三日，皇上驾临琅王牙郡，琅王牙郡监狱囚犯全部释放。
English: September 1st, the solar eclipse. On the 3rd, the emperor drove to Wangya County, Shandong Province, and all the prisoners of Wangya County Prison were released.

古文：甲戌，移南豫州治淮南于湖县。
现代文：十日，将南豫州州府从淮南迁到湖县。
English: On the 10th, the state capital of South Yuzhou was moved from Huainan to Huxian.

古文：丁丑，以冠军将军寻阳王子房为南豫州刺史。
现代文：十六日，任命冠军将军寻阳王子房为南豫州刺史。
English: On the 16th, the champion general, Huan Yang Wuzhifang, was appointed as the leader of the history of South Henan Province.

古文：闰月戊子，皇太子妃何氏薨。
现代文：闰九月七日，皇太子妃何氏去世。
English: On September 7, Crown Princess He passed away.

古文：乙卯，以东中郎将新安王子鸾为南徐州刺史。
现代文：十一日，第一次修筑驿道，从阊阖门修到朱雀门，从承明门修到玄武湖。二十三日，改封历阳王子玩为临海王。
English: On the 11th day, the first pier was built, from the pier to the Suzaku gate, and from the Chengming gate to the Xuanwu Lake. On the 23rd day, Liyang Prince was renamed as the King of Linhai.

古文：十一月壬辰，诏曰： 王畿内奉京师，外表众夏，民殷务广，宜思简惠。
现代文：冬十月二日，下诏说： 王畿内供奉京城，外作各地表率，百姓殷实民风淳厚，法律简约，普施恩惠。
English: On the second day of October in winter, the following edict was issued: Wang Guizhong should dedicate the capital city, and set an example for other regions, the people should be affluent, the people's customs should be simple, the laws should be simple, and the favors should be generous.

古文：可遣尚书就加详检，并与守宰平治庶狱。
现代文：可派尚书认真检查，与守宰一起审理案件。
English: You can send Shang Shu to carefully check and review the case with the sheriff.

古文：其有疑滞，具以状闻。 
现代文：有疑问的，登记上报。 
English: If in doubt, register and report.

古文：丁酉，增置少府丞一人。
现代文：八日，增设少府丞一名。
English: On the 8th, an additional Shofu-jo post was created.

古文：十二月壬申，以领军将军刘遵考为尚书右仆射。
现代文：十二月二日，委任领军将军刘遵考为尚书右仆射。
English: On December 2nd, he appointed Liu Zunkao, the leading general, as his right-hand man.

古文：甲戌，制天下民户岁输布四匹。
现代文：二十三日，规定天下百姓每户捐布四疋。
English: On the 23rd, the people of the world were required to donate four baht per household.

古文：庚辰，以太常王玄谟为平北将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：二十六日，任命太常王玄谟为平北将军、徐州刺史。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Taizong appointed Wang Xuanmu as the general of Pingbei and the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：六年春正月己丑，湘州刺史建安王休仁加平南将军。
现代文：大明六年春正月四日，湘州刺史建安王休仁加封为平南将军。
English: On the 4th day of the 1st month of the 6th year of the Ming Dynasty, King Jianan of Xiangzhou was crowned as the general of Pingnan.

古文：辛卯，车驾亲祠南郊。
现代文：五日，皇上到南郊祭祀。
English: On the fifth day, the emperor went to the southern suburbs for a religious service.

古文：是日，又宗祀明堂，大赦天下。
现代文：同日，又在明堂祭奠祖宗。大赦天下。
English: On the same day, a memorial service was held in Myeongdong to pay tribute to the ancestors.

古文：孝子、顺孙、义夫、悌弟，赐爵一级；慈姑、节妇及孤老、六疾，赐帛五匹，谷十斛。
现代文：孝子、贤孙、义夫、悌弟，赐帛五匹、谷十斛。
English: A filial son, a wise grandson, a righteous husband, and a righteous younger brother are given five yakitori and ten yakitori.

古文：下四方旌赏茂异，其有怀真抱素，志行清白，恬退自守，不交当世，或识通古今，才经军国，奉公廉直，高誉在民，具以名奏。
现代文：下令各地奖赏才能卓著的人士，确有真才实学，品德高洁，淡漠名利，不攀权贵，或学贯古今，能经邦纬国，正直廉洁奉公，在百姓中德高望重的，都登记姓名报上来。
English: All regions were ordered to reward people with outstanding talents, who have real talent, real learning, high moral character, indifferent fame and fortune, do not seek power and wealth, or have studied from ancient times to the present, can go through countries and countries, are honest and clean, and serve the public, and are highly respected among the people, are registered and reported.

古文：乙未，置五官中郎将、左右中郎将官。
现代文：七日，设上官中郎将、左右中郎将。
English: On the seventh day, the upper-ranked middle-ranked general and the left- and right-ranked middle-ranked general were established.

古文：二月乙卯，复百官禄。
现代文：二月二十四日，恢复百官原来的俸禄。
English: On February 24th, the original salary of 100 officials was restored.

古文：三月庚寅，立第十三皇子子元为邵陵王。
现代文：三月二十五日，立第十三皇子子元为邵陵王。
English: On March 25th, the 13th Prince Yuan was enthroned as King Shao Ling.

古文：壬寅，以倭国王世子兴为安东将军。
现代文：二十六日，任命倭国王长子兴为安东将军。
English: On the 26th, the eldest son of the king of Wa, Heung, was appointed General Anton.

古文：乙巳，改豫州南梁郡为淮南郡，旧淮南郡并宣城。
现代文：二十八日，改豫州南梁郡为淮南郡，原来的淮南郡并入宣城。
English: On the 28th, Nanliang County of Yuzhou was changed to Huainan County, and the original Huainan County was merged into Xuancheng.

古文：丁未，辅国将军、征虏长史、广陵太守沈怀文有罪，下狱死。
现代文：三十日，辅国将军、征虏长史、广陵太守沈怀文犯罪，被投进监狱，死在监狱里面。
English: On the 30th, the general of Fu Guo, the conscript Chang Shi, and the governor of Guangling, Shen Huaiwen, committed crimes, were thrown into prison, and died in prison.

古文：四月庚申，原除南兗州大明三年以前逋租。
现代文：四月七日，免除南兖州大明三年以前的旧租旧税。
English: On April 7, the three-year-old old rent and old tax of Nanluozhou Daming were exempted.

古文：新作大航门。
现代文：新建大航门。
English: A new navigation gate will be built.

古文：五月丙戌，置凌室，修藏冰之礼。
现代文：五月十二日，设置凌室，举行藏冰之礼。
English: On May 12th, the ice-making room was set up, and the ice-hiding ceremony was held.

古文：壬寅，太宰江夏王义恭解领司徒。
现代文：十八日，太宰江夏王义恭改任司徒。
English: On the 18th, the Dazai of Jiangxia, Wang Yigong, was appointed as a disciple.

古文：六月辛酉，尚书左仆射、护军将军刘延孙卒。
现代文：六月二十七日，尚书左仆射、护军将军刘延孙去世。
English: On June 27th, Liu Yansun, Shangshu's right-hand man and general of the escort army, passed away.

古文：秋七月庚辰，以荆州刺史硃修之为领军将军，广州刺史临海王子顼为荆州刺史。
现代文：秋七月十六日，任命荆州刺史朱修之为领军将军，调广州刺史临海王子顼为荆州刺史。
English: On the 16th day of the 7th month of autumn, Zhu Xiu, the governor of Jingzhou, was appointed as the leading general, and the governor of Guangzhou, Linhai Prince, was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：甲申，地震。
现代文：十九日，发地震。
English: On the 19th, an earthquake occurred.

古文：戊子，以辅国将军王翼之为广州刺史。
现代文：二十一日，任命辅国将军王翼之为广州刺史。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he appointed the auxiliary general Wang Yixing as the new governor of Guangzhou.

古文：辛卯，以西阳太守檀翼之为交州刺史。
现代文：二十四日，任命西阳太守檀翼之为交州刺史。
English: On the 24th, Xiyang Dazhong was appointed as the governor of Xiyang.

古文：乙未，立第十九皇子子云为晋陵王。
现代文：二十六日，立第十九皇子子云为晋陵王。
English: On the 26th, the 19th Prince Yun was established as the King of Jinling.

古文：八月癸亥，原除雍州大明四年以前逋租。
现代文：八月四日，免去雍州大明四年以前欠的租税。
English: On August 4th, Yongzhou Daming was exempted from the tax owed four years ago.

古文：乙亥，置清台令。
现代文：十七日，设置清台令。
English: On the 17th, the order to clear the stage was issued.

古文：九月戊寅，制沙门致敬人主。
现代文：九月三日，规定家人要敬重皇帝。
English: On September 3, it was stipulated that family members should respect the emperor.

古文：戊子，以前金紫光禄大夫宗悫为中护军。
现代文：十五日，任命前金紫光禄大夫宗悫为中护军。
English: On the 15th, the former Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor Zong Qi was appointed as the middle guard.

古文：乙未，尚书右仆射刘遵考为尚书左仆射，丹阳尹王僧朗为尚书右仆射。
现代文：二十四日，委任尚书右仆射刘遵考为尚书左仆射，丹阳尹王僧朗为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 24th, he appointed Liu Zunkao, Shangshu's right-hand man, as Shangshu's left-hand man, and Danyang Yin Wang Monk Lang as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：冬十月丁巳，以山阳王休祐子士弘继鄱阳哀王休业。
现代文：冬十月二十五日，把山阳王休的儿子士弘过继给鄱阳哀王休业。
English: On the 25th day of winter in October, Shihong, the son of Sanyang Wangxiu, was succeeded by Shiyang Aiwang.

古文：上林苑内民庶丘墓欲还合葬者，勿禁。
现代文：二十七日，下诏住在上林苑内的百姓死后想葬在上林苑内，可以允许。
English: On the 27th, it was announced that if people who lived in Shanglinyuan wanted to be buried in Shanglinyuan after death, they could be allowed.

古文：十一月己卯，陈留王曹虔秀薨。
现代文：十一月七日，陈留王曹虔秀去世。
English: On November 7, Chen Liuwang Cao Qianxiu passed away.

古文：辛巳，以尚书令柳元景为司空，尚书令如故。
现代文：九日，任命尚书令柳元景为司空，尚书令照旧担任。
English: On the 9th, Shang Shuling appointed Liu Yuanjing as Siku, and Shang Shuling continued to serve as before.

古文：七年春正月癸未，诏曰： 春搜之礼，著自周令；讲事之语，书于鲁史。
现代文：大明七年春正月五日，下诏说： 春天打猎，始自周朝；有关记载，见于鲁国史书。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the seventh year of the Ming Dynasty, the following edict was issued: Spring hunting began in the Zhou Dynasty; the relevant records can be found in the History of the State of Lu.

古文：所以昭宣德度，示民轨则。
现代文：用打猎来向百姓宣传道德、法律规范。
English: Hunting is used to spread moral and legal norms to the people.

古文：今岁稔气荣，中外宁晏。
现代文：今岁熟年丰，生气勃发，边境安定，国内太平。
English: This year's harvest is ripe and plentiful, the people are angry, the border is stable, and the country is peaceful.

古文：当因农隙，葺是旧章。
现代文：应当利用农闲时间，恢复春天打猎的礼仪。
English: Farmers should use their leisure time to restore the etiquette of hunting in spring.

古文：可克日于玄武湖大阅水师，并巡江右，讲武校猎。 
现代文：可约定个日子在玄武湖检阅水军，并巡视长江以西地区，操练打猎。 
English: It is possible to agree on a day to review the navy in Xuanwu Lake, and to inspect the area west of the Yangtze River to practice hunting.

古文：丁亥，以尚书右仆射王僧朗为太常，卫将军颜师伯为尚书右仆射。
现代文：八日，调尚书右仆射王僧朗任太常，卫将军颜师伯任尚书右仆射。
English: On the 8th day of the month, the right-hand man of Shang Shuxu, Shaowang Monk Lang, was transferred to Taizhong, and the general of the guards, Yan Shi Bo, was transferred to Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Shaowang.

古文：己丑，以尚书令柳元景为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：十三日，任命尚书令柳元景为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: On the 13th, Shang Shuling appointed Liu Yuanjing as the commander-in-chief of the imperial cavalry and the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：庚寅，以南兗州刺史晋安王子勋为江州刺史。
现代文：十五日，任命南兖州刺史晋安王子勋为江州刺史。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Jinan Prince Xun, the governor of South Luzhou, was appointed governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：癸巳，割吴郡属南徐州。
现代文：二十日，将吴郡划归南徐州。
English: On the 20th, Wu County was transferred to South Xuzhou.

古文：二月甲寅，车驾巡南豫、南兗二州。
现代文：二月二日，皇上视察南豫，尊奉周礼，到盛唐祭九疑，往勃海祀蓬莱，是历朝的垂训，前贤的遗教。
English: On February 2, the emperor inspected Nanyu, revered Zhou worship, went to the Tang festival of Nine Doubts, and went to Bohai to worship Penglai, which is the training of all dynasties and the teachings of the sages.

古文：丙辰，诏曰： 江汉楚望，咸秩周禋，礼九疑于盛唐，祀蓬莱于渤海，皆前载流训，列圣遗式。霍山是曰南岳，实维国镇，韫灵呈瑞，肇光宋道。朕驻驆于野，有事岐阳，瞻睇风云，徘徊以想。可遣使奠祭。 
现代文：南霍山岳，镇国之宝，云呈祥端，兆示我宋兴起。可派使臣前往祭奠。
English: Nanhuo Mountain, the treasure of the town and the country, the cloud is auspicious, signifying the rise of the Song Dynasty. Envoys can be sent to pay tribute.

古文：丁巳，车驾校猎于历阳之乌江。
现代文：五日，皇上到历阳的乌江主持狩猎比武。
English: On the fifth day, the emperor went to the Wujiang River in Liyang to preside over a hunting competition.

古文：己未，车驾登乌江县六合山。
现代文：七日，皇上登上乌江县的六合山。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor ascended Mount Liuhe in Wujiang County.

古文：庚申，割历阳秦郡置临江郡。
现代文：八日，从历阳秦郡中划出一部分设立临江郡。
English: On the 8th, a part of Liyang Qin County was set up as Linjiang County.

古文：壬戌，诏曰： 朕受天庆命，十一年于兹矣。
现代文：十二日，下诏说： 我受天命即位，到现在已十三年了。
English: On the twelfth day, he issued the following edict: "It has been thirteen years since I ascended the throne by God's command.

古文：八风循通，卿云丛聚，尽天罄瑞，率宇竭欢。
现代文：靠祖宗在天之灵，靠上天保佑，礼播四海，威震天下。
English: Relying on the ancestors in the spirit of heaven, relying on God's blessing, spreading across the four seas, and dominating the world.

古文：思散太极之泉，以福无方之外。可大赦天下，行幸所经，无出今岁租布。
现代文：想广播恩泽，造福百姓。可大赦天下，视察所到过的地方，不交今年租税。
English: I want to broadcast grace and benefit the people. I can pardon the world, inspect the places I have visited, and not pay this year's taxes.

古文：其逋租余债，勿复收。
现代文：旧租旧债，不再征收。
English: Old rents and debts will no longer be collected.

古文：赐民爵一级，女子百户牛酒。
现代文：赐给百姓爵一级，女子每百户赐给牛和酒。
English: The peasants were given the first class of peerage, and the women were given cattle and wine for every hundred households.

古文：年世未远，歼亡太半，抚迹惟事，倾慨兼著。
现代文：参加了打猎的地方官和百姓都给赏赐。 又下诏说： 我年少掌权，治理司州雍州，执行政令宣讲道德多年。
English: Local officials and people who took part in the hunting were rewarded. He also said: I took power when I was young, governed Sizhou and Yongzhou, and carried out decrees and preached morality for many years.

古文：太宗燕故，晋阳洽恩；世祖流仁，济畿暢泽。
现代文：国家中道衰落，我在长江附近练军队，难忘的情义，记在心头。
English: In the middle of the country's decline, I was training troops near the Yangtze River. I remember the unforgettable feeling.

古文：永言往猷，思广前赉。
现代文：今天狩猎操练兵，经过此地，原来的故旧，活着的很少。
English: Today, hunting drill soldiers pass through this place, the same as before, with very few still alive.

古文：可蠲历阳郡租输三年。
现代文：时间不长，却死去大半，到旧地重游，思念往事，感慨万千。免历阳三年租税。
English: Time is not long, but most of them die, revisit the old place, miss the past, and have a lot of feelings. Liyang is exempt from tax for three years.

古文：遣使巡慰，问民疾苦，鳏寡、孤老、六疾不能自存者，厚赐粟帛。
现代文：派使臣巡视慰问，了解百姓疾苦，鳏寡、孤老、病残难以自存的，赐给粟帛。
English: He sent envoys to inspect and offer condolences, to understand the hardships of the people, and to give maize straw to widows, the elderly, and those who were too ill to survive.

古文：高年加以羊酒。
现代文：年迈的另赐给羊酒。
English: The aged are given sheep's wine.

古文：凡一介之善，随才铨贯；前国名臣及府州佐吏，量所沾锡。
现代文：凡是善良之士，又有才干；前朝的名臣和府州官吏，适当给予赏赐。
English: All good-hearted people have talents; famous ministers and prefectural and state officials of the former dynasty should be appropriately rewarded.

古文：人身已往，施及子孙。 
现代文：本人已去世了的，赏给他的子孙。 
English: He died and it was given to his children and grandchildren.

古文：壬申，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十一日，皇上回宫。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：夏四月甲寅，以领军将军硃修之为特进。
现代文：夏四月十四日，加封领军将军朱修之为特进。
English: On the 14th day of the 4th month of the summer, Zhu Shuxing, the leading general of Gafeng, made a special advance.

古文：丙辰，以尚书湘东王讳为领军将军。
现代文：十五日，任命尚书湘东王为领军将军。
English: On the 15th, he appointed Shangshu Xiangdong Wang as the leading general.

古文：甲子，诏曰： 自非临军战陈，一不得专杀。
现代文：十九日，下诏说： 不是临阵作战，不再擅自杀人。
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued: "Do not go to the front to fight, and do not commit suicide."

古文：其罪甚重辟者，皆如旧先上须报，有司严加听察。
现代文：如罪大恶极该当处死的，都遵旧例先行上报，有关衙门要严加督察。
English: If the crime is extremely heinous and should be punished by death, it should be reported in advance according to the old practice, and the relevant gate should be strictly inspected.

古文：犯者以杀人罪论。 
现代文：违犯者以杀人罪论处。 
English: Violators will be charged with homicide.

古文：五月乙亥，抚军将军、扬州刺史豫章王子尚进号车骑将军，辅国将军始安王子真为广州刺史。
现代文：五月二十一日，抚军将军、扬州刺史豫章王子尚晋升为车骑将军，辅国将军始安王子真加封为广州刺史。
English: On May 21st, the general of the Fuzhou army, the Yangzhou general, Prince Yu Zhang, was promoted to the general of the cavalry, and the general of the auxiliary country, Prince Shi'an, was awarded the title of the Guangzhou general.

古文：丙子，诏曰： 自今刺史守宰，动民兴军，皆须手诏施行。唯边隅外警，及奸衅内发，变起仓卒者，不从此例。 
现代文：二十四日，下诏说： 自今日起刺史郡守县宰，动用民力或军队，都得有我的诏谕，除非边境外敌入侵，内地发生叛乱，这些突发事件，不在此规定之内。 
English: On the 24th, he issued the following edict: "From today onward, the appointment of county magistrates and the use of civilian or military forces must be based on my edict, unless there is an invasion by a foreign enemy at the border or a rebellion in the inland, these emergencies are not included in this regulation."

古文：六月甲辰，以北中郎司马柳元怙为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：六月七日，委任北中郎司马柳元怙为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: On June 7th, he appointed the Northern Middle Elder, Ma Liu Yuanjun, to be the leader and the Southern Qin Erzhou to be the historian.

古文：戊申，芮芮国、高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：十四日，芮芮国、高丽国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 14th, envoys from South Korea and North Korea came to present special products.

古文：戊辰，以秦郡太守刘德愿为豫州刺史。
现代文：二十六日，任命秦郡太守刘德愿为豫州刺史。
English: On the 26th, Liu Deyan, the governor of Qin County, was appointed to write the history of Yuzhou.

古文：七月乙亥，征东大将军高丽王高琏进号车骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：七月十九日，征东大将军高丽王高琏晋升为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: On July 19th, the General of the Eastern Expeditionary Force, Goryeo's Wang Gaojun, was promoted to the General of the Cavalry and Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry and Cavalry.

古文：秋七月丙申，诏曰： 前诏江海田池，与民共利。
现代文：二十一日，下诏说： 以前曾下诏江河湖海山川，百姓可以捕鱼狩猎。
English: On the twenty-first day, the edict said: In the past, there was an edict for rivers, lakes, seas and mountains, and the common people could go fishing and hunting.

古文：历岁未久，浸以弛替。
现代文：没过几年，就不遵诏令。
English: After a few years, they don't follow the edict.

古文：名山大川，往往占固。
现代文：名山大川，多被圈占。
English: The famous Yamayama River is mostly occupied by cormorants.

古文：有司严加检纠，申明旧制。 
现代文：有关衙门要严加清查，重申原来的规定。 
English: Relevant violations should be strictly investigated, and the original provisions should be reiterated.

古文：八月丁巳，诏曰： 昔匹妇含怨，山焦北鄙；孀妻哀恸，台倾东国。
现代文：八月七日，下诏说： 民妇怨恨，国家就不安定。得民心，弱的变强；失民心，强大的也会灭亡。
English: On August 7th, the following edict was issued: "If the people are resentful, the country will not be stable. If you win the hearts of the people, the weak will become strong; if you lose the hearts of the people, the strong will perish."

古文：遂令炎精损河，阳偏不施，岁云不稔，咎实朕由。
现代文：我视察民间，志向虽大，但不能纠正腐败。导致了天气失常，年岁不熟，责任确实在我。
English: I inspected the people, and although I had a great ambition, I could not correct the corruption. It led to abnormal weather, I was too young, and the responsibility was indeed mine.

古文：大官供膳，宜从贬撤。
现代文：太官供应的膳食从简。
English: The meal served by the eunuch is from Jane.

古文：近道刑狱，当亲料省。
现代文：离京城不远发生的案件，我亲自审理。
English: Cases that occur not far from the capital will be tried by me personally.

古文：其王畿内及神州所统，可遣尚书与所在共详；畿外诸州，委之刺史。
现代文：王畿之内发生的案子，派尚书与当地地方官共同审理。京畿之外发生的案件，交由刺史处理。
English: Cases that occurred within Gyeonggi Province were sent to Shangshu for joint trial with local local officials, while cases that occurred outside Gyeonggi Province were sent to Suanseong.

古文：并详省律令，思存利民。
现代文：简约法律，要考虑到有利于百姓。
English: Simplified laws should take into account the interests of the people.

古文：其考谪贸袭，在大明七年以前，一切勿治；尤弊之家，开仓赈给。 
现代文：发生在大明七年以前对官员的考核升降世袭处理决定，一律取消。特别是贫困的家庭，开仓给以赈济。 
English: The hereditary decision on the promotion and demotion of officials, which took place seven years before the Great Ming Dynasty, was abolished. In particular, poor families were encouraged to open warehouses to earn money.

古文：乙丑，立第十六皇子子孟为淮南王，第十八皇子子产为临贺王。
现代文：十五日，立第十六皇子子孟为淮南王，第十八皇子子产为临贺王。
English: On the 15th, the 16th prince Meng was proclaimed King of Huainan, and the 18th prince Lin He.

古文：车驾幸建康秣陵县，讯狱囚。
现代文：驾临建康秣陵县审讯案件。
English: He arrived in Jiankang to attend the trial of a case in Fuling County.

古文：九月巳卯，诏曰： 近炎精亢序，苗稼多伤。
现代文：九月三日，下诏说； 近来天气干旱，禾苗受灾。
English: On September 3, the next edict said: Recently, the weather has been dry, and the seedlings have been affected.

古文：今二麦未晚，甘泽频降，可下东境郡，勤课垦殖。
现代文：现在种第二季麦不晚，上天又降雨水，通告东方各郡，勤恳耕种。
English: Now it is not too late to plant the second season of wheat, and rainwater is sent to the sky, informing the eastern counties to cultivate diligently.

古文：外详考旧典，以副侧席之怀。 
现代文：特困之家，适量贷给麦种。 四日，下诏说； 我受天命，治理天下，想借鉴典籍治道，以补智谋之不足。
English: On the fourth day, he issued the following edict: I have been given the mandate by Heaven to govern the world, and I would like to draw on the classics to govern the way, to make up for the lack of wisdom.

古文：庚寅，南徐州刺史新安王子鸾兼司徒。
现代文：随时视察各地，视察民风民俗。另外仔细查阅旧典籍，以满足我的心愿。 
English: At any time, I will inspect various regions, observe folk customs, and carefully read ancient classics to fulfill my wish.

古文：乙未，车驾幸廷尉，讯狱囚。
现代文：八日，皇上亲自到廷尉审讯案件。
English: On the eighth day, the emperor himself came to the palace to hear the case.

古文：丙申，立第十七皇子子嗣为东平王。
现代文：十二日，立第十七皇子子嗣为东平王。
English: On the twelfth day, the seventeenth prince's son became King Dongping.

古文：冬十月壬寅，太子冠，赐王公以下帛各有差。
现代文：冬十月五日，太子举行冠礼，赐王公以下各官员布帛。
English: On the 5th of October in winter, the crown prince held a ceremonial coronation and gave the crown to the officials below the crown prince.

古文：戊申，车驾巡南豫州。
现代文：十四日，皇上视察南豫州。
English: On the 14th, the emperor inspected the southern part of Yuzhou.

古文：诏曰： 朕巡幸所经，先见百年者，及孤寡老疾，并赐粟帛。
现代文：下诏说： 我视察所到一处，先见白发老人，孤寡老人残疾者，都赐给粟米布帛。
English: The next edict said: I went to one place in the inspection, and the first thing I saw was that the white-haired elderly, the lonely elderly and the disabled were all given corn cloth.

古文：狱系刑罪，并亲听讼。
现代文：狱中关有罪犯的，亲自去听诉讼。
English: If you are a criminal in prison, you should go to hear the proceedings in person.

古文：其士庶或怨郁危滞，受抑吏司，或隐约洁立，负摈州里，皆听进朕前，面自陈诉。
现代文：士人百姓有怨言，但受到官吏压抑的，有才能洁身自好，但遭到排斥的，都可以到我面前，向我控诉。
English: All the people, both men and women, who have complaints but have been suppressed by officials, and those who are talented and self-righteous but have been ostracized, can come before me and complain to me.

古文：若忠信孝义，力田殖谷，一介之能，一艺之美，悉加旌赏。
现代文：忠信孝义之士，致力耕种之人，有一技之长者，都给予褒扬奖赏。
English: Those who are loyal and filial, those who are dedicated to farming, and those who have skills are all given praise and rewards.

古文：虽秋泽频降，而夏旱婴弊。可即开行仓，并加赈赐。 
现代文：虽然秋天不断下雨，但夏旱造成的灾害严重，可即刻开仓，赈济百姓。 
English: Although it keeps raining in the fall, the disasters caused by the summer drought are serious, and the warehouses can be opened immediately to help the people.

古文：癸丑，行幸江宁县，讯狱囚。
现代文：十六日，皇上到江宁县听诉讼。
English: On the 16th, the emperor went to Jiangning County to listen to the lawsuit.

古文：车骑将军、扬州刺史豫章王子尚加开府仪同三司。
现代文：车骑将军、扬州刺史豫章王子尚加封为开府仪同三司。
English: The general of chariot and cavalry and the prince of Yangzhou Zishi Yuzhang were awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi.

古文：癸亥，卫将军、开府仪同三司东海王祎为司空，中军将军义阳王昶加开府仪同三司。
现代文：十九日，卫将军、开府仪同三司东海王礻韦升任司空，中军将军义阳王昶加封为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 19th, General Wei, Kaifu Yi and the three departments of the East Sea Wang Zhiwei were promoted to the position of Siku, and the Chinese army general Yiyang Wang Zhi was promoted to the position of Kaifu Yi and the three departments.

古文：丙寅，诏曰： 赏庆刑威，奄国彝轨，黜幽升明，辟宇恆宪。
现代文：二十四日，下诏说： 奖优罚劣，是治国的根本，黜除昏官提升清官，是治国的原则。
English: On the 24th, he issued the following edict: Rewarding the good and punishing the bad is the basis of governing the country. Eliminating incompetent officials and promoting clean officials is the principle of governing the country.

古文：故采言聆风，式观侈质，贬爵加地，于是乎在。
现代文：收集民言民风，考察官吏是贪赃还是廉洁，并据此奖罚。
English: Collect folk sayings and customs, investigate whether officials are corrupt or incorruptible, and reward and punish accordingly.

古文：今类帝宜社，亲巡江甸，因觐岳守，躬求民瘼。
现代文：今我亲自视察长江一带，亲自听案件的审理，访求百姓的疾苦。
English: Now I personally inspect the Yangtze River area, personally listen to the trial of cases, and visit the sufferings of the people.

古文：思弘明试之典，以申考绩之义。
现代文：想发挥考察官吏政绩的作用。我视察所到之地，一心为民的官员可将自己的政绩向我报告，我当即甄别奖赏。
English: I want to play the role of inspecting the political achievements of officials. When I visit a place, officials who are dedicated to the people can report their political achievements to me, and I will immediately screen and reward them.

古文：行幸所经，莅民之职，功宣于德，即加甄赏；若废务乱民，随愆议罚，主者详察以闻。 
现代文：如果荒废政务危害百姓，根据情况马上处罚。
English: If wasteful government affairs harm the people, they will be punished immediately according to the situation.

古文：己巳，车驾校猎于姑孰。
现代文：主事者仔细考察并上报。 
English: The person in charge examined it carefully and reported it.

古文：十一月丙子，曲赦南豫州殊死以下。
现代文：二十七日，皇上到姑苏检阅狩猎军队。十一月二日，赦免南豫州除死刑以外的罪犯。
English: On the 27th, the emperor went to Gusu to review the hunting troops. On November 2nd, he pardoned the criminals in South Yuzhou except for the death penalty.

古文：巡幸所经，详减今岁田租。
现代文：视察所经之地，减免今年田租。
English: This year's farmland rent will be reduced or exempted in the inspected areas.

古文：乙酉，诏遣祭晋大司马桓温、征西将军毛璩墓。
现代文：五日，下诏派使臣祭奠东晋大司马桓温、征西将军王琚之墓。
English: On the fifth day, the emperor sent envoys to pay tribute to the tomb of the East Jin Grand Master Ma Kanwen and the Western Conquest General Wang Qi.

古文：上于行所讯溧阳、永世、丹阳县囚。
现代文：皇上在行宫审讯溧阳、永世、丹阳县的囚犯。
English: The emperor interrogated the prisoners from Fenyang, Yongxing and Danyang counties in the palace.

古文：癸巳，车驾习水军于梁山，有白爵二集华盖，有司奏改大明七年为神爵元年，诏不许。
现代文：九日，皇上到梁山训练水军，有白鸟二次飞到华盖下，有官员上奏建议改大明七年为神爵元年，皇上没同意。
English: On the 9th, the emperor went to Liangshan to train the navy. A white bird flew twice under the huagai. An official submitted a proposal to change the seventh year of the Ming Dynasty to the first year of the Jinzhe Dynasty, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：乙未，原放行狱徒系。
现代文：十一日，释放狱中罪犯。
English: On the 11th, criminals in prison were released.

古文：东诸郡大狱，壬寅，遣使开仓贷恤，听受杂物当租。
现代文：东部各郡发生大旱灾，十八日，派使臣开仓赈济百姓，允许用杂物抵租税。
English: On the 18th, envoys were dispatched to open storehouses to help the people in the eastern counties, which were suffering from a severe drought, and allowed the use of miscellaneous goods to deduct taxes.

古文：十二月丙午，行幸历阳。
现代文：十二月四日，皇上视察历阳。
English: On December 4, the emperor inspected Liyang.

古文：甲寅，大赦天下。
现代文：六日，大赦天下。
English: On the 6th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：南豫州别署敕系长徒，一切原散。
现代文：南豫州被判长期徒刑的犯人，全部释放。
English: All prisoners sentenced to long-term imprisonment in South Henan Province have been released.

古文：其兵期考袭谪戍，悉停。
现代文：考察世袭军职和贬戍边防的制度，废止。
English: Examine the system of hereditary military posts and demeaning border defense, and abolish them.

古文：历阳郡女子百户牛酒；高年孤疾，赐帛十匹，蠲郡租十年。
现代文：历阳女子每百户赐牛酒，年迈、孤儿、病人，每人赐帛十匹，免除历阳郡十三年租税。
English: In Liyang, every hundred households of women were given cow wine, and the elderly, orphans, and the sick were each given ten yakitori, exempting Liyang County from thirteen years of tax.

古文：己未，太宰江夏王义恭加尚书令。
现代文：十三日，太宰江夏王义恭加封为尚书令。
English: On the 13th, Dazai Jiangxia Wang Yigong was awarded the title of Shang Shuling.

古文：于博望梁山立双阙。
现代文：皇上到博望、梁山立双阙。
English: The emperor went to Bohang, and Liangshan set up a double yakitori.

古文：癸亥，车驾至自历阳。
现代文：十九日，皇上从历阳回宫。
English: On the 19th, the emperor returned to the palace from Liyang.

古文：八年春正月甲戌，诏曰： 东境去岁不稔，宜广商货。
现代文：大明八年正月六日，下诏说： 东方去年收成不好，宜广泛组织货源。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 8th year of the Daming Dynasty, the following edict was issued: Last year's harvest in the East was not good, and it is advisable to widely organize the supply of goods.

古文：远近贩鬻米粟者，可停道中杂税。
现代文：贩米粟的商人，不征收途中杂税。
English: Merchants who sell rice poppy will not be charged any additional taxes on the way.

古文：其以仗自防，悉勿禁。 
现代文：带武器自卫的，不禁止。 
English: It is not prohibited to carry weapons for self-defence.

古文：癸未，安北将军、雍州刺史刘秀之卒。
现代文：十二日，安北将军、雍州刺史刘秀之去世。
English: On the 12th, Liu Xiuzhi, the general of Anbei and the leader of Yongzhou, passed away.

古文：戊子，以平南将军、湘州刺史建安王休仁为安南将军、江州刺史，晋安王子勋为镇军将军、雍州刺史，徐州刺史新安王子鸾为抚军将军，领司徒、刺史如故，辅国将军江夏王世子伯禽为湘州刺史。
现代文：十六日，委任平南将军、湘州刺史建安王休仁为安南将军、江州刺史，晋安王子勋为镇军将军、雍州刺史，南徐州刺史新安王子蛮为抚军将军，领司徒，刺史照旧担任，辅国将军江夏王长子伯禽为湘州刺史。
English: On the 16th, he appointed General Pingnan, Hunan General Jian'an Wang Xuren as General Annan, Jiangzhou General Jian'an, Jinan Prince Xun as General Zhen, Yongzhou General Jian'an, South Xuzhou General Jian'an, Xin'an Prince Maban as General Fuzhou, leader Sittu, General Jian'an as before, and Vice-General Jiangxia Wang's eldest son Bo Jian as General Hunan.

古文：或下穷流冗，顿伏街巷，朕甚闵之。
现代文：二月七日，特进朱修之去世。十日，下诏说： 去年东方干旱，收成锐减。
English: On February 7th, Zhu Xiuzhi passed away. On the 10th, he issued the following edict: Last year, there was a drought in the East, and the harvest was sharply reduced.

古文：可出仓米付建康、秣陵二县，随宜赡恤。
现代文：穷困之家离乡逃荒，流落街头，我很同情他们。可开仓放粮给建康、秣陵二县，适时赈济。
English: I sympathize with the poor families who have left their hometowns to escape the famine and live on the streets. I can open warehouses to distribute grain to Jiankang and Fuling counties to provide timely relief.

古文：若济拯不时，以至捐弃者，严加纠劾。 
现代文：若救灾不及时，导致社会动荡，要严加法办。 
English: If disaster relief is not timely, leading to social unrest, it should be strictly dealt with by law.

古文：乙巳，以镇军将军湘东王讳为镇北将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：十四日，任命镇军将军湘东王为镇北将军、徐州刺史。
English: On the 14th, he appointed the general of the Zhenjun Army, Xiangdong Wang, as the general of Zhenbei and the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：平北将军、徐州刺史王玄谟为领军将军。
现代文：平北将军、徐州刺史王玄谟为领军将军。
English: The general of Pingbei and the general of Xuzhou Zhishi Wang Xuanmu are the leading generals.

古文：夏闰五月辛丑，以前御史中丞萧惠开为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：夏闰五月十二日，委任前御史丞萧惠升为青、冀二州刺史。
English: On the twelfth day of the fifth lunar month, Xia Huisheng, the former imperial historian, was appointed as the new imperial historian of the two prefectures of Qing and Hebei.

古文：壬寅，太宰江夏王义恭领太尉。
现代文：二十一日，太宰江夏王义恭兼任太尉。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Dazaifu Jiangxia Wang Yigong was concurrently promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：特进、右光禄大夫羊玄保卒。
现代文：特进、右光禄大夫羊玄保去世。
English: Dr. Yang Xuanbao, a specially promoted doctor from the Right Guanglu Hospital, passed away.

古文：庚申，帝崩于玉烛殿，时年三十五。
现代文：十六日，皇上在玉烛殿驾崩，时年三十五岁。
English: On the 16th, the emperor died in the Jade Candle Hall, at the age of thirty-five.

古文：秋七月丙午，葬丹阳秣陵县岩山景宁陵。
现代文：秋七月三日，葬于丹阳秣陵县岩山景宁陵。
English: On July 3rd, he was buried in Iwasanjingning Mausoleum, Danyanguling County.

古文：史臣曰：役己以利天下，尧、舜之心也；利己以及万物，中主之志也；尽民命以自养，桀、纣之行也。
现代文：史臣说：劳苦自己以利天下，这是尧、舜的心怀；既利己又利万物，是中等君主的想法；耗尽民力来满足自己的欲望，是桀、纣的行径。
English: Shichen said: "Toiling oneself to benefit the world is the mind of a lazy person; to benefit oneself and benefit all things is the thought of a mediocre monarch; to exhaust the people's strength to satisfy one's own desires is the action of a lazy person."

古文：观大明之世，其将尽民命乎！
现代文：纵观大明八年，几乎到了耗尽民力的程度！
English: Looking back over the past eight years, it has almost reached the point of exhausting the people's power!

古文：虽有周公之才之美，犹终之以乱，何益哉！
现代文：虽然像周公一样有才干有仪表，还是以动乱告终，有什么用呢？
English: What is the use of having talent and appearance like Zhou Gong, but still ending up in turmoil?

