古文：又东过平县北，湛水从北来注之。
现代文：又往东流过平县北边，湛水从北方流来注人。
English: It also flowed eastward across the northern edge of Ping County, and the waterlogged water flowed from the north.

古文：河水又东径河阳县故城南。
现代文：河水又往东流经河阳县旧城南边。
English: The river then flows eastward through the southern part of the old city of Heyang County.

古文：《春秋经》书天王狩于河阳，王申，公朝于王所，晋侯执卫侯归于京师，《春秋左传》僖公二十八年，冬，会于温，执卫侯。是会也，晋侯召襄王以诸侯见，且使王狩。
现代文：这次会盟，晋侯召请周襄王，约了诸侯去会见他，并要襄王去田猎。
English: For this alliance, Jin Hou invited Zhou Xiang Wang, arranged for the princes to meet him, and asked Xiang Wang to go deer hunting.

古文：仲尼曰：以臣召君，不可以训。
现代文：仲尼说：做臣子的召请君主，这件事不可效法。
English: Zhongni said, "Being a vassal and summoning the sovereign is not the way to do it.

古文：故书曰天王狩于河阳，言非其狩地。
现代文：所以写道：天子在河阳田猎，意思是说这不是周王田猎的地方。
English: Therefore, he wrote: "The Son of Heaven hunts in Kawayan, which means that this is not the place where King Zhou hunts."

古文：服虔、贾逵曰：河阳，温也。
现代文：服虔、贾速说：河阳就是温。
English: Zhu Qian and Jia Zuo said: "Hayang means warm."

古文：班固《汉书。地理志》，司马彪、袁山松《郡国志》，《晋太康地道记》，《十二州志》：河阳别县，非温邑也。
现代文：班固《汉书•地理志》、司马彪、袁山松《郡国志》、《晋太康地道记》、《十三州志》都说：河阳是另一个县，并不是温邑。
English: Banggu "Hanshu•Geography," Sima Biao, Yuan Shansong "County National History," "Jin Taikang Local History" and "History of the Thirteen Provinces" all said: Heyang is another county, not Wenyu.

古文：汉高帝六年，封陈涓为侯国，王莽之河亭也。
现代文：汉高帝六年前，把这里封给陈涓，立为侯国，也就是王莽的河亭。
English: Six years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave this place to Chen Xi and established it as a principality, that is, Wang Mang's river pavilion.

古文：《十三州志》曰：治河上，河，孟津河也。
现代文：《十三州志》说：治所在河上，这条河就是孟津河。
English: "The History of the Thirteen Provinces" says: The seat of government is on a river, and this river is the Mengjin River.

古文：郭缘生《述征记》曰：践土，今冶坂城。
现代文：郭缘生《述征记》说：践土就是今天的冶坂城。
English: Guo Yansheng said in "Record of the Conquest": "Trampling the soil is today's Yezang City."

古文：是名异《春秋》焉，非也。
现代文：但冶坂这地方与《春秋》相异，这不是践土。
English: But this place, Yezaka, is different from "Spring and Autumn," this is not trampling.

古文：今河北见者，河阳城故县也，在冶坂西北，盖晋之温地，故群儒有温之论矣。
现代文：现在河北所见的，是河阳城这旧县城，在冶坂西北，是晋国温的地方，所以学者们有河阳为温的论点。
English: What we see in Hebei now is the old county seat of Kheyangcheng, in the northwest of Yezhan, which is the warmest place in Jin Province, so scholars have the argument that Kheyang is the warmest.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：冶坂城旧名汉祖渡，城险固，南临孟津河。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：冶坂城从前叫汉祖渡，城池险要难攻，南濒孟津河。
English: "Wei Shui Ji" said: Yezang City was formerly called Han Zu Du, the city is difficult to attack, and the south is near the Mengjin River.

古文：河水右径临平亭北。
现代文：河水右岸流经临平亭北边。
English: The right bank of the river flows through the northern side of Linping Pavilion.

古文：《帝王世纪》曰：光武葬临平亭南，西望平阴者也。
现代文：《帝王世纪》说：光武帝葬在临平亭南边，西与平阴相望。
English: "The Century of Emperors" says: Emperor Guangwu was buried on the south side of Linping Pavilion, facing Pingyin on the west.

古文：河水又东径洛阳县北，河之南岸有一碑，北面题云：洛阳北界，津水二渚，分属之也。
现代文：河水又往东流经洛阳县北边。河水南岸有一块石碑，朝北一面题着：洛阳北界，水中的两个沙洲分属两县。
English: The river also flows eastward through the north of Luoyang County. There is a stone monument on the south bank of the river, inscribed on the north-facing side: Luoyang North Boundary, the two sandbars in the water belong to two counties.

古文：上旧有河平侯祠，祠前有碑，今不知所在。
现代文：洲上从前有河平侯祠，祠前有碑，现在已不知原址所在了。
English: On the mainland, there used to be a Kheping ancestral hall with a monument in front of it, but the original site is no longer known.

古文：郭颁《世语》曰：晋文王之世，大鱼见孟津，长数百步，高五丈，头在南岸，尾在中渚，河平侯祠即斯祠也。
现代文：郭颁《世语》说：晋文王时，孟津出现大鱼，长数百步，高五丈，头在南岸，尾在水中沙洲上的河平侯祠旁，说的就是此祠。
English: Guo Zi's "World Language" said: "At the time of King Jinwen, a large fish appeared in Mengjin, hundreds of paces long and five meters high, with its head on the south bank and its tail in the water on the sandbar next to the Kheping Hou Temple. It was this temple.

古文：河水又东径平县故城北。
现代文：河水又往东流经平县旧城北边。
English: The river then flows east through the northern part of the old town of Ping County.

古文：汉武帝元朔三年，封济北贞王子刘遂为侯国，王莽之所谓治平矣，俗谓之小平也。
现代文：汉武帝元朔三年前,把这地方封给济北贞王的儿子刘遂，立为侯国，也就是王莽所谓的治平，俗称小平。
English: Three years before Emperor Hanwu Yuan Shuo, this place was given to Liu Sui, the son of Jeibei Zhenwang, and established as a principality, that is, Wang Mang's so-called Jiping, commonly known as Xiaoping.

古文：有高祖讲武场，河北侧岸有二城相对，置北中郎府，徙诸徒隶府户，并羽林虎贲领队防之。
现代文：这里有高祖的讲武场。河北岸边有两城相对，设置北中郎府，把服役者编入府中户口，由羽林、虎责领队防守。
English: There are two cities on the opposite side of the Hebei coast, setting up the North Zhonglang Prefecture, assigning the servicemen to the Fuzhong hukou, and leading the defense by Ulin and Tiger.

古文：河水南对首阳山。
现代文：河水向南面对首阳山，就是《春秋》中所说的首戴。
English: The river water faces Shouyang Mountain to the south, which is the Shou Dai mentioned in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：《春秋》所谓首戴也，《夷齐之歌》所以曰登彼西山矣。上有夷齐之庙，前有二碑。并是后汉河南尹广陵陈导、洛阳令徐循与处士平原苏腾、南阳何进等立，事见其碑。
现代文：伯夷、叔齐歌中唱道：登上那边的西山。山上有伯夷、叔齐庙，庙前有两块石碑，是后汉河南尹广陵陈导、锥阳令徐循以及处士平原苏腾、南阳何进等人所立，事迹见碑上所载。
English: In the Po Yi, Uncle Qi song, it is sung: "Climb up the West Mountain over there." On the mountain, there is the Po Yi, Uncle Qi Temple. In front of the temple, there are two stone monuments, which were erected by the Southern Han Dynasty Yin Guang Ling Chen Du, Duryang Ling Xu Cui, and the officials Pingyuan Su Teng and Nanyang He Jin, and their deeds are recorded on the monument.

古文：又有周公庙，魏氏起玄武观于芒垂，张景阳《玄武观赋》所谓高楼特起，竦跱岧峣，直亭亭以孤立，延千里之清飙也。
现代文：又有周公庙。魏时在芒山旁建玄武观，张景阳《玄武观赋》中说：高楼拔地而起，巍然凌空高耸；独自亭亭屹立，招来千里外的清风。
English: There is also the Zhou Gong Temple. In the Wei Dynasty, the Xuanwu Temple was built next to the Mangshan Mountain. Zhang Jingyang said in "Xuanwu Gu Fu": The high-rise building rises from the ground, soaring high into the sky; a unique pavilion stands, attracting the breeze from thousands of miles away.

古文：朝廷又置冰室于斯阜，室内有冰井。
现代文：朝廷又在这座山上造了冰室，室内有冰井。
English: The imperial court also built an ice house on this mountain, with an ice well inside.

古文：《春秋左传》曰：日在北陆而藏冰。
现代文：《春秋左传》说：太阳轨道倾斜到虚宿与危宿时，就开始藏冰。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn" says: When the sun's orbit is tilted to the imaginary destination and the dangerous destination, it begins to hide ice.

古文：常以十二月采冰于河津之隘，峡石之阿，北阴之中，即《邠诗》二之日凿冰冲冲矣。
现代文：常于十二月在河津的隘口、峡石的角隅、朝北的阴处采冰。《幽风》诗中说：十二月里凿冰响咚咚，就是描写采冰的。
English: Ice is often mined in December in the passes of Kawazu, in the corners of the canyons, and in the shade of the northern morning. In the poem "Gust of Wind," it says: "In December, the chiseled ice resounds," which is a description of ice mining.

古文：而内于井室，所谓纳于凌阴者也。
现代文：采了冰就放进冰室里，就是所谓纳于凌阴。
English: After picking up the ice, they put it in the ice room, which is called nayu lingyin.

古文：河南有钩陈垒，世传武王伐纣，八百诸侯所会处，《尚书》所谓不期同时也。
现代文：南岸有钩陈垒，传说是武王讨伐封王时八百诸侯会集之处，《尚书》说：事先没有约定，却都同时到达。
English: On the south bank, there is a jetty. According to legend, it is the place where 800 lords gathered when King Wu was fighting against King Cao. According to "Shang Shu," there was no prior agreement, but they all arrived at the same time.

古文：紫微有钩陈之宿主，斗讼兵阵，故遁甲攻取之法以所攻神，与钩陈并气下制，所临之辰，则决禽敌，是以垒资其名矣。河水子斯，有盟津之目。《论衡》曰：武王伐纣，升舟，阳侯波起，疾风逆流，武王操黄钺而麾之，风波毕除，中流，白鱼入于舟，燔以告天，与八百诸侯咸同此盟。
现代文：水神阳侯掀起巨浪，刮起狂风，使河水倒流。武王挥舞黄钱，风波就完全平息了。船到中流，有白鱼跳入船舱。
English: The god of water, Yang Hou, whipped up huge waves and strong winds, causing the river to flow backwards. King Wu waved the gold coin, and the storm completely subsided. When the boat reached the middle of the stream, a white fish jumped into the cabin.

古文：《尚书》所谓不谋同辞也。
现代文：武王烤鱼向天祷告，与八百诸侯一同盟誓，就是《尚书》所说：未经商量但人人异口同声。
English: King Wu roasted fish and prayed to the heavens, and swore an alliance with eight hundred princes, which is what "Shang Shu" said: without consultation, but everyone spoke with one voice.

古文：故曰孟津，亦曰盟津。
现代文：因而把这地方叫孟津，又称盟津。
English: Therefore, this place is called Mengjin, also known as Mengjin.

古文：《尚书》所谓东至于孟津者也。
现代文：《尚书》所谓东至孟津，就指此处。
English: The so-called east to Mengjin in "Shang Shu" refers to this place.

古文：又曰富平津。
现代文：孟津又名富平津。
English: Mengjin, also known as Fupingjin.

古文：《晋阳秋》曰：杜预造河桥于富平津。
现代文：《晋阳秋》说：杜预在富平津造河桥，就是造船搭浮桥。
English: "Jinyang Autumn" said: Du Yueh built a river bridge in Fupingjin, that is, shipbuilding and floating bridge.

古文：所谓造舟为梁也。又谓之为陶河。魏尚书仆射杜畿，以帝将幸许，试楼船，覆于陶河，谓此也。
现代文：此水又称陶河。魏尚书仆射杜瓷，因文帝将巡视许昌，开了楼船试航，在陶河覆没，就指这条河。
English: This water is also known as the Tao River. Wei Shang's writing servant shot Du porcelain, because Emperor Wen would inspect Xu Chang, opened the ship for trial sailing, and sank in the Tao River, it refers to this river.

古文：昔禹治洪水，观于河，见白面长人，鱼身，出曰：吾河精也。授禹《河图》而还于渊。
现代文：从前禹治洪水，来视察大河，看见一个白面鱼身的长人从水中出来，自称：我是河中精灵，就拿了《河图》交给禹，遂又回到深渊中去。
English: Once upon a time, Yu Zhifu, came to inspect the great river, saw a white-faced fish-bodied old man come out of the water, claiming: I am a river spirit, took the "river map" and handed it to Yu, and then returned to the abyss.

古文：及子朝篡位，与敬王战，乃取周之宝玉沉河以祈福。
现代文：王子朝篡位时，与敬王作战，拿了周的宝玉，投入水中求福。
English: When the prince usurped the throne, he fought against King Kei, took Zhou's precious stone, and plunged into the water to seek fortune.

古文：后二日，津人得之于河上，将卖之，则变而为石；及敬王位定，得玉者献之，复为玉也。
现代文：两天后，摆渡的船夫在河边拾到宝玉，想把它卖掉，却变成了石头。到敬王坐稳了王位，拾玉者把它献给敬王，又变成宝玉了。
English: Two days later, the ferryman picked up a precious stone on the river and wanted to sell it, but it turned into stone. When King Kei was firmly seated on the throne, the collector gave it to King Kei, and it turned into a precious stone again.

古文：河水又东，溴水入焉。
现代文：河水又往东流，溪水注入。
English: The river then flows to the east, where it is fed by the stream.

古文：《山海经》曰：和山，上无草木，而多瑶碧，实惟河之九都。
现代文：《山海经》说：和山上面没有草木，却有许多瑶碧，这里实际上是大河九水的汇集之处。
English: "Shanhai Jing" said: "There are no plants and trees on the mountain, but there are many azure, here is actually the confluence of rivers and streams.

古文：是山也，五曲，九水出焉，合而北流，注于河。
现代文：这座山有五个弯，九条水就发源在这里，汇合后往北流，注入河水。
English: The mountain has five bends, and nine streams of water originate here. After merging, they flow north and feed into the river.

古文：其阳多苍玉，吉神泰逢司之，是于萯山之阳，出入有光。
现代文：山南多苍玉，由吉神泰逢掌管，他在贫山南面，出入都有灵光。
English: Shannan has a lot of jade, controlled by Jishen Taifeng, he is in the south of the poor mountain, and has a bright light.

古文：《吕氏春秋》曰：夏后氏孔甲，田于东阳萯山，遇大风雨，迷惑，人于民室。
现代文：《吕氏春秋》说：夏后氏孔甲在东阳贫山田猎，碰到狂风暴雨，迷了路，躲进老百姓的屋子里。
English: "The Spring and Autumn of Lv Shi" said: Xia Guo Shi Kong Jia hunted in the poor mountain fields in the east, encountered the storm, lost his way, and hid in the houses of the common people.

古文：皇甫谧《帝王世纪》以为即东首阳山也，盖是山之殊目矣。
现代文：但现在首阳东山却没有相应的水，这一定是由于古今时代相隔太远，水流地貌都有了很大变化的缘故。
English: But now there is no corresponding water in Shouyang Dongshan, which must be due to the fact that the ancient and modern times are too far apart, and the water flow and landform have changed a lot.

古文：今于首阳东山，无水以应之，当是今古世悬，川域改状矣。昔帝尧修坛河、洛，择良议沈，率舜等升于首山，而遵河渚，有五老游焉，相谓：《河图》将来告帝，以期知我者，重瞳也。
现代文：从前帝尧在河、洛修建祭坛，选定吉日良辰沉璧于水。他带领舜等登上首山，然后又沿着河边走。有五位老人也在那里漫游，相互谈话间说：《河图》就要来了，把日期告知大帝吧。知道我们的，就是那位有两个眸子的人。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Gaozong built altars in He and Luo, and selected Ji Rilang Chen to immerse himself in the water. He led Gaozong and others up the first hill, and then walked along the river. Five old men also roamed there, and said to each other in conversation: "The river map is coming, let the great emperor know the date. The one who knows us is the one with two eyes."

古文：五老乃翻为流星而升于昴，即于此也。
现代文：说罢，五老就都化作流星，飞向晶宿。这一事迹就出现在这里。
English: Say it, and the five old men turn into meteors and fly to the Crystal Inn. This is what happened here.

古文：又东，济水注焉。
现代文：河水又东流，济水注入。
English: The river also flows to the east, feeding water into the swamp.

古文：又东过巩县北，河水于此有五社渡，为五社津。
现代文：又往东流过巩县北边，河水在这里有个五社渡，就是五社津。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Gong County. Here, the river has a Wushadu, that is, Wushazin.

古文：建武元年，朱鲔遣持节使者贾强、讨难将军苏茂，将三万人，从五社津渡，攻温。
现代文：建武元年，朱鲸派持节使者贾强、讨难将军苏茂，带领三万人从五社津渡河，去攻打温县。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, Zhu Yueh sent Jia Qiang, the messenger of the festival, and Su Mao, the general of the tribulation, to lead 30,000 people from Wushejin to cross the river and attack Wenshan.

古文：冯异遣校尉与寇恂合击之，大败，追至河上，生擒万余人，投河而死者数千人。
现代文：冯异派校尉与寇询合力反击，大败敌军，追到河上，俘虏了万余人，投河而死的也有好几千。
English: Captain Feng He dispatched a joint counterattack with Kuo Enquiring, defeated the enemy army, chased it to the river, captured more than 10,000 people, and several thousand died in the river.

古文：县北有山临河，谓之崟原丘，其下有穴，谓之巩穴，言潜通淮浦，北达于河。
现代文：县北有一座临河的山，叫鉴原丘，山下有个山洞，叫巩穴，据说地下暗通淮浦，北至大河。
English: In the north of the county, there is a mountain close to the river, called Jingyuan Hill, and there is a cave at the bottom of the mountain, called Gongyuan. It is said that the underground leads to Huaipu, north to the big river.

古文：直穴有渚，谓之鲔渚。
现代文：正对山洞有个沙洲，叫鲸清。
English: There is a sandbar just opposite the cave, called Whale Beach.

古文：成公子安《大河赋》曰：鱣鲤王鲔，春暮来游。
现代文：成公子安《大河赋》说：缠鱼、鲤鱼、大鳍鱼，暮春时节都游到这里来。
English: Chenggong Zi'an, "The Great River Fu," said: the perch, catfish, big catfish, all swim here in the late spring.

古文：《周礼》，春荐鲔。
现代文：《周礼》：春季进献鳍鱼。
English: "Weekly Rituals": carp as a springtime offering.

古文：然非时及他处则无。
现代文：但不是鱼汛季节或在别处，都没有这种鱼。
English: But not in the spawning season or anywhere else, there is no such fish.

古文：故河自鲔穴已上，又兼鲔称。
现代文：所以河水从鲸穴以上，又兼称鳍水。
English: Therefore, the river water flows from the whale hole and above, also known as the swamp water.

古文：《吕氏春秋》称武王代纣至鲔水，纣使胶鬲候周师，即是处矣。
现代文：《吕氏春秋》说：周武王讨伐封王，到了鲸水，封王派胶扁等守候周的部队，就在这里。
English: "Rui's Spring and Autumn" said: Zhou Wu Wang fought against Fong Wang, and when he arrived at Whale Water, Fong Wang sent Jiaobian and other troops to guard Zhou, right here.

古文：洛水从县西北流注之。
现代文：洛水从巩县西北流来注人。
English: Luo water flows from the northwest of Gong County.

古文：洛水于巩县东径洛汭，北对琅邪渚，入于河，谓之洛口矣。
现代文：洛水在巩县往东流经洛纳一一北面正对琅邪清一一注入河水，汇流处叫洛口。
English: Luoshui flows eastward through Luona in Gongxian County, and the north side of Luoshui is being injected into the river water, and the confluence is called Luokou.

古文：自县西来，而北流注河，清浊异流，皦焉殊别。
现代文：水从县西流来，往北注入河水，二水一清一浊，水色分明。
English: The water flows from the west of the county and is injected into the river water to the north. The two waters are one clear and one turbid. The water color is distinct.

古文：应玚《灵河赋》曰：资灵川之遐源，出昆仑之神丘，涉津洛之阪泉，播九道于中州者也。
现代文：应场《灵河赋》说：若问灵河遥远的水源，它出自神仙所居的昆仑之丘；它流过津洛的阪泉，在中原大地布开九大支流。
English: In response, "Linghe Fu" said: If you ask about the distant water source of the Linghe, it comes from the Kunlun Hill where the gods live; it flows through the Hanquan Spring in Jinluo and spreads nine major tributaries in the Central Plains.

古文：又东过成皋县北，济水从北来注之。
现代文：又往东流过成皋县北边，济水从北边流来注人。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Chengdu County, and the water supply comes from the north to the people.

古文：河水自洛口又东，左径平皋县南，又东径怀县南，济水故道之所入，与成皋分河，河水右径黄马坂北，谓之黄马关。
现代文：河水从洛口继续东流，左边经过平皋县南面，又往东流经怀县南面。济水旧水道就在这里注入河水，怀县、成皋就以河水为分界。河水右边流经黄马坂北面，地名叫黄马关。
English: The river continues to flow eastward from Lokou, passing through the south of Pingyao County on the left, and flowing eastward through the south of Huai County. The old waterway of Jishui is where the river water is injected, and Huai County and Chengdu are delimited by the river water. The right side of the river flows through the north side of Huangma Slope, the place is called Huangma Guan.

古文：孙登之去，杨骏作书与洛中敌人处也。
现代文：孙登离开杨骏，写信给洛阳故友，就是这里。
English: It was here that Sun Deng left Yang Hui and wrote to his old friend in Luoyang.

古文：河水又东径旋门坂北，今成皋西大坂者也。
现代文：河水又往东流经旋门坂北面，就是今天成皋西面的大山坡。
English: The river then flowed eastward through the north face of the swing gate slope, which is today the large hillside on the west side of Chengdu.

古文：升陟此坂，而东趣成皋也。
现代文：登上这道山坡，往东去就是成皋。
English: If you go up this hill, you'll come to Chenghuang if you go east.

古文：曹大家《东征赋》曰：望河洛之交流，看成皋之旋门者也。
现代文：曹大家《东征赋》说：眺望河洛二水相汇流，观看成皋的旋门。
English: Cao Dangdai's "Eastern Expedition" said: look at the confluence of the two water phases of the river Luo, and watch the turnstile of Chenglu.

古文：河水又东径成皋大伾山下，《尔雅》曰：山一成谓之伾。
现代文：河水又往东流经成皋大坯山脚下。《尔雅》说：山只有一层的叫坯。
English: The river also flows eastward through the foot of the large hill of Chengluo. "Lya" said: the mountain has only one layer, called the hill.

古文：许慎、吕忱等并以为丘一成也。
现代文：许慎、吕忱等人都认为是指只有一层的小丘。
English: Xu Shen, Lu Zhen and others all think that it refers to a hill with only one floor.

古文：孔安国以为再成曰怔，亦或以为地名，非也。
现代文：孔安国认为有两层叫坯，也有人以为坯是地名，其实不对。
English: Kong An Guo believes that there are two layers called billet, and some people think that billet is a place name, but it is actually wrong.

古文：《尚书。禹贡》曰过洛伾，至大伾者也。
现代文：《尚书•禹责》说：过了洛油，到达大任。
English: "Shangshu•Yu Rong" said: After Luoyang, arrive at Dafeng.

古文：郑康成曰：地喉也，沇出伾际矣。
现代文：郑康成说：大坯山是大地的胳膊，沈水就发源于山边。
English: Zheng Kangcheng said: Dabaoshan is the arm of the earth, and the sinking water originates from the mountainside.

古文：在河内修武、武德之界，济沇之水与荥播泽出入自此。然则大伾即是山矣。
现代文：山在河内惰武、武德的边界上，济沈的水与荣播泽都从这里出入，那么大呸山就是这座山了。
English: The mountain is located on the border of Hanoi, Lazy, and Wude. The water of Jishen and Rongban Lake both flow in and out from here, so Dabaoshan is this mountain.

古文：伾北，即《经》所谓济水从北来注之者也。
现代文：坯北，《水经》说，济水从北方流来注入，就指这地方。
English: Obaku Kita, "Water Sutra" says that the water flowing from the north to inject, refers to this place.

古文：今济水自温县入河，不于此也。
现代文：今天济水从温县入河，而不是从这里。
English: Today, the water supply enters the river from Wenzhou County, not from here.

古文：所入者，奉沟水耳，即济沇之故渎矣。
现代文：在这里注入河水的是奉沟水，也就是济沈的旧河道。
English: The river water injected here is the Fenggou water, which is the old river of Jishen.

古文：成皋县之故城在伾上，萦带伾阜，绝岸峻周，高四十许丈，城张翕险，崎而不平。
现代文：成皋县旧城在大坯山上，像一条带子萦绕着坯山，周围的崖岸险峻陡绝，高四十余丈，凭险而筑，崎岖不平。
English: The old town of Chengdu County is on the Dabaoshan Mountain, like a ribbon around the Dabaoshan Mountain. The cliff around the cliff is extremely steep, more than forty meters high, built with danger, and rugged.

古文：《春秋传》曰：制，岩邑也，虢叔死焉。
现代文：《春秋传》说：制是建在险岩上的城，藐叔就死在此城，也就是东藐。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn" said: the system is a city built on a dangerous rock, and the uncle died in this city, that is, the East Tower.

古文：即东虢也。鲁襄公二年七月，晋成公与诸侯会于戚，遂城虎牢以逼郑求平也。
现代文：鲁襄公二年七月，晋成公与诸侯会盟于戚，就在虎牢筑城来逼迫郑国，以求议和。
English: In July of the second year of King Lu Xiang's reign, Emperor Jincheng made an alliance with the Council of Princes and Princes, and built a fortress at the Tiger's Stronghold to force Zheng to negotiate a peace.

古文：盖修故耳。
现代文：那次是利用旧城重修而成的。
English: That time, it was rebuilt using the old city.

古文：《穆天子传》曰：天子射鸟猎兽于郑圃，命虞人掠林。
现代文：《穆天子传》说：穆天子在郑国的园林里射鸟猎兽，令虞人去砍伐山林。
English: "The Biography of Mu Tianzi" says: Mu Tianzi shot birds and hunted beasts in the gardens of Zheng Guo, and ordered the young men to cut down the mountain forests.

古文：有虎在于葭中，天子将至，七萃之士高奔戎生捕虎而献之天子，命之为柙言之东虢，是曰虎牢矣。
现代文：有一只老虎藏身在芦苇中，穆天子将到时，禁卫军勇士高奔戎活捉了老虎献给他。穆天子叫他做了一个虎栏，把虎养在东貌，因而叫虎牢。
English: There was a tiger hiding in the reeds, and when Mu Tianzi was about to arrive, the imperial guard warrior Gaoban Rong captured the tiger alive and presented it to him. Mu Tianzi asked him to make a tiger pen and raise the tiger in Dongmao, hence the name "tiger prison."

古文：然则虎牢之名，自此始也。
现代文：照此看来，虎牢的地名是从那时起就有的。
English: According to this view, the place name "Tiger's Lair" has existed since that time.

古文：秦以为关，汉乃县之。
现代文：秦时在这里设关，汉时才立县。
English: The Qin Dynasty set up a pass here, and the Han Dynasty established a county.

古文：城西北隅有小城，周三里，北面列观，临河岧岧孤上。
现代文：城的西北角有一座小城，周围长三里，北面建了城楼，在河边巍然凌空高耸。
English: In the northwest corner of the city there is a small town, three miles in circumference, with a castle to the north, soaring high above the river.

古文：景明中，言之寿春，路值兹邑，升眺清远，势尽川陆，羁途游至，有伤深情。
现代文：景明年间，我去寿春，途经此城，登楼远眺，山川形胜一览无余。旅途中漫游到了这里，不免伤怀感慨起来。
English: During the next year, I went to Shuchun, passing through this city, climbing the building to look far and wide, with a sweeping view of the mountains and rivers. When I roamed here on my journey, I couldn't help but feel sad.

古文：河水南对玉门。
现代文：河水南朝玉门。
English: The water of the river flows into the South Dynasty's Jade Gate.

古文：昔汉祖与滕公潜出，济于是处也。
现代文：从前汉高祖与滕公偷偷出城，就是在这里渡河的。
English: It was here that the ancestors of the Han Dynasty, Gaozu and Tenggong, crossed the river after sneaking out of the city.

古文：门东对临河，侧岸有土穴，魏攻北司州刺史毛德祖于虎牢，战经二百日，不克。
现代文：玉门东面临河，岸边有个土洞。魏军在虎牢围攻北司州刺史毛德祖，一连打了二百日，还是打不下来。
English: The east side of the Jade Gate faces the river, and there is an earthen cave on the bank. The Wei army besieged Mao Dezu, the prince of North Sichuan, in the Tiger Stronghold, and fought for two hundred days in a row, but still could not defeat him.

古文：城惟一井，井深四十丈，山势峻峭，不容防捍，潜作地道取井。
现代文：城里只有一口井，深四十丈，而山势峻峭，无法防御，于是暗中挖了一条地道夺取了这口井。
English: There was only one well in the city, forty meters deep, and the mountain was so steep that it could not be defended, so they secretly dug a tunnel to capture the well.

古文：余顷因公至彼，故往寻之，其穴处犹存。
现代文：我因公事到那里，所以就乘便去寻访旧迹，看到挖洞的地方还在。
English: I was there on business, so I took the opportunity to visit the old site and saw that the excavation site was still there.

古文：河水又东合汜水，水南出浮戏山，世谓之曰方山也。北流合东关水。
现代文：河水又东流与把水汇合。把水发源于南方的浮戏山―世人称为方山，北流与东关水汇合。
English: The east stream of the river also merges with the diverted water. The diverted water originates from the south at Mount Float - known to the world as Fangshan. The north stream merges with the Dongguan water.

古文：水出嵩渚之山，泉发于层阜之上，一源两枝，分流泻注，世谓之石泉水也。
现代文：东关水发源于篙诸之山，泉水在层沓的丘冈上流出，一个源头裂成两条，分道流泻，世人称为石泉水。
English: Dongguan water originates from the mountains of Shizhu, and the spring water flows out on the rugged hills. One source splits into two, and the two separate streams flow. The world calls it stone spring water.

古文：东为索水，西为东关之水。
现代文：东流的一条叫索水，西流的一条就是东关之水。
English: The one in the east stream is called Suoshui, and the one in the west stream is Dongguan water.

古文：西北流，杨兰水注之，水出非山，西北流注东关水。
现代文：东关水往西北流，杨兰水注入。杨兰水发源于非山，往西北流，注入东关水。
English: Dongguan water flows to the northwest, and Yanglan water is injected. Yanglan water originates from the non-mountain, flows to the northwest, and is injected into Dongguan water.

古文：东关水又西北，清水入焉。
现代文：东关水又往西北流，清水注入。
English: The Dongguan water also flows to the northwest, injecting fresh water.

古文：水自东浦西流，与东关水合，而乱流注于汜。
现代文：清水从东浦往西流，与东关水汇合，乱流注入祀水。
English: The clear water flows from Dongpu to the west, merging with Dongguan water, and the turbulent flow injects the holy water.

古文：汜水又北，右合石城水，水出石城山。
现代文：把水又往北流，在右边与石城水汇合。
English: The water flows north again, and merges with the Shicheng Water on the right.

古文：其山复涧重岭，敧叠若城，山顶泉流，瀑布悬泻，下有滥泉，东流泄注。边有数十石畦，畦有数野蔬。岩侧石窟数口，隐迹存焉，而不知谁所经始也。
现代文：石城水发源于石城山，山中涧水纵横，峰岭重重，斜叠有如城墙。山顶的泉水成为瀑布流泻下来，下面有地下泉涌出，往东流注，水边有数十片多石的畦圃，长着各种野菜；岩边有几个石洞，还留着有人隐居过的痕迹，但不知是谁营建的。
English: Shicheng Water originates from Shicheng Mountain. The water flows vertically and horizontally in the mountain, the peaks are heavy, and the slopes are stacked like city walls. The spring water at the top of the mountain flows down as a waterfall, and underground springs gush out below and flow eastward. There are dozens of multi-rock reed beds along the water's edge, growing all kinds of vegetables; there are several rock caves on the edge of the rock, and there are still traces of people living in seclusion, but it is not known who built them.

古文：又东北流注于汜水。
现代文：石城水又往东北流，注入把水。
English: Shicheng water flows to the northeast, injecting fresh water.

古文：汜水又北合鄤水，水西出娄山，至冬则暖，故世谓之温泉。
现代文：祀水又北流，汇合了郧水。郧水发源于西方的娄山，到了冬天水很温暖，所以世人称为温泉。
English: The Shishimizu River flows north and merges with the Surabaya River. The Surabaya River originates in the western part of Mount Surabaya. In winter, the water is very warm, which is why the world calls it a hot spring.

古文：东北流径田鄤谷，谓之田鄤溪水，东流注于汜水。
现代文：水往东北流过田郧谷，称为田郧溪水，东流注入把水。
English: The water flows to the northeast through the Tianyu Valley, known as the Tianyu Creek Water, and the east stream injects the water.

古文：汜水又北径虎牢城东。
现代文：把水又往北流经虎牢城东边。
English: The water flowed north again, passing to the east of the castle.

古文：汉破司马欣、曹咎于是水之上。汜水又北流注于河。
现代文：汉军在这条水上打垮了司马欣和曹咎。把水又北流，注入河水。
English: The Chinese army defeated Sima Xin and Cao Gui on this stretch of water and forced the water to flow north, injecting it into the river.

古文：《征艰赋》所谓步汜口之芳草，吊周襄之鄙馆者也。
现代文：《征艰赋》说：在沮口踏着绿草漫步，凭吊周襄王郊外的别馆。
English: "Seeking Hardship" said: walk on the green grass at the mouth of the depression, and visit the other pavilions in the suburbs of Zhou Xiangwang by hanging.

古文：余案昔儒之论，周襄所居在颍川襄城县，是乃城名，非为水目，原夫致谬之由，俱以汜郑为名故也，是为爽矣。
现代文：我按从前学者的说法，周襄王居住过的把在颖川襄城县，沱是城名，不是水名。推想造成错误的原因，大概都是以把、郑为名的缘故。
English: According to a former scholar, the place where Zhou Xiang Wang lived was called Putu in Xiangcheng County, Yingchuan, which is the name of the city, not the name of the water. The reason for the error is probably due to the names Putu and Zheng.

古文：又案郭缘生《述征纪》，刘澄之《永初记》，并言高祖即帝位于是水之阳，今不复知旧坛所在，卢谌、崔云，亦言是矣。
现代文：又据郭缘生《述征记》、刘澄之《永初记》，都说汉高祖是在水北即帝位的，当时的旧坛到底在哪里，现在已不知道了。卢湛、崔云也这么说。
English: In addition, according to Guo Yansheng's "Record of the Conquest" and Liu Chengru's "Eternal First Chronicle," it is said that Han Gao Zu was in the north of the water, that is, the imperial throne, and it is no longer known where the old altar was at that time. Lu Zhan and Cui Yun also said so.

古文：于是求坛，故无仿佛矣。河水又东径板城北，有律，谓之板城渚口。
现代文：我按汉高帝是在定陶把水受天之命登位的，不是在这里，当然在这里连旧坛的影子也找不到了。河水又往东流过板城北边，有个渡口叫板城诸口。
English: According to me, Emperor Han Gao ascended to the throne by Heaven's command when he brought water to Dingtao, not here, of course, not even the shadow of the old altar can be found here. The river also flows eastward through the north side of Pancheng, and there is a ferry called Pancheng Zhukou.

古文：河水又东径五龙坞北，坞临长河。有五龙祠。
现代文：河水又往东流经五龙坞北边，坞在长河旁，有五龙祠。
English: The river also flows eastward through the north side of the Wulong dock. The dock is next to the Changhe River, and there is the Wulong Temple.

古文：应劭云：昆仑山庙在河南荥阳县。
现代文：应韵说：昆仑山庙在河南荣阳县。
English: According to the rhyme: Kunlun Mountain Temple is located in Rongyang County, Henan Province.

古文：明年渠成，帝亲巡行，诏滨河郡国置河堤员吏，如西京旧制。
现代文：我怀疑就是此祠，但不清楚。又往东流过荣阳县北，菠蔼渠在这里分出。
English: I suspect that it is this shrine, but it is not clear. It flows eastward through the north of Rongyang County, and the Pineapple Canal branches out here.

古文：景由是显名，王吴及诸从事者，皆增秩一等。
现代文：大禹堵塞了荣泽，开渠与淮水、泅水相通―这就是《水经》所谓的菠蔼渠。
English: Dayu blocked Rongze, opening a canal to connect with Huai Water and Surabaya Water - this is the so-called "water channel" of the "Water Sutra."

古文：顺帝阳嘉中，又自汴口以东，缘河积石，为堰通渠，咸曰金堤。
现代文：汉平帝时，河水、汁水决堤，来不及修治，汁渠向东侵蚀，日积月累，愈来愈宽阔了，原来的聚落房舍都被淹没了。汉明帝永平十二年又从沐口以东沿河叠石筑、成堤堰，与渠相通，都叫金堤。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanping, the river and its tributary water broke through the dike, and it was too late to repair it. The dike was eroded to the east, and it became wider and wider day by day. The original settlement houses were all flooded. In the twelfth year of Emperor Hanming Yongping, stones were piled up along the river from the east of Mukou to form a dike and weir, which connected to the ditch. Both are called the Golden Dike.

古文：灵帝建宁中，又增修石门，以遏渠口。
现代文：灵帝建宁年间一，又增建石门，拦截渠口。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jianning, a stone gate was added to block the canal entrance.

古文：水盛则通注，津耗则辍流。
现代文：水大时就开闸放水，水枯时关闸断流。
English: When the water level is high, the sluice gate is opened to release water. When the water level is low, the sluice gate is closed to cut off the flow.

古文：河水又东北径卷之扈亭北。
现代文：河水又往东北流经卷县启亭北边。
English: The river then flows northeast through the northern part of Kaitei, Wome County.

古文：《春秋左传》曰：文公七年，晋赵盾与诸侯盟于扈。
现代文：《春秋左传》说：文公七年前,晋国赵盾与诸侯在息会盟。
English: "Shunqiu Zuo Zhen" said: Seven years ago, Zhao Dun of Jin Province made an alliance with the princes.

古文：《竹书纪年》，晋出公十二年，河绝于扈，即于是也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》：晋出公十二年前，河水到息断流，就是这地方。
English: "The Bamboo Annals": Twelve years before Jinshi became emperor, the river stopped flowing. This is the place.

古文：河水又东径八激堤北。
现代文：河水又往东流经八激堤北边。
English: The river then flows east along the north side of the eight-levee embankment.

古文：汉安帝永初七年，令谒者太山于岑，于石门东积石八所，皆如小山，以捍冲波，谓之八激堤。
现代文：汉安帝永初七年，命令渴者太山于岑在石门以东八处堆积岩石，堆得像小山那么高，以阻挡波浪的冲击，称为八激堤。
English: In the seventh year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Ande ordered the thirsty people to pile up rocks at eight places east of the stone gate, piled as high as a hill, to block the impact of waves, known as the eight-shocked embankment.

古文：河水又东径卷县北。
现代文：河水又往东流经卷县北边。
English: The river then flows eastward through the northern part of Wuchang County.

古文：晋、楚之战，晋军争济，舟中之指可掬，楚庄祀河告成而还，即是处也。
现代文：晋、楚战争时，晋军争渡，竞相攀着船舷企图登船，船中被砍下的手指可以用手来捧。楚庄王祭祀河神，祝告得胜后回去，就是在这地方。
English: During the Jin-Chu War, the Jin army fought for passage, clinging to the side of the ship in a race to try to board the ship. The fingers cut off in the ship can be held by hand. It is in this place that the king of Chu Zhuang sacrificed the river god, congratulated the victory and went back.

古文：河水又东北径赤岸固北，而东北注。
现代文：河水又往东北流经赤岸固北边，一直往东北流去。
English: The river then flows northeast through the northern part of the Red Bank and flows all the way to the northeast.

古文：又东北过武德县东，沁水从西北来注之。
现代文：又往东北流过武德县东边，沁水从西北流来注人。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the eastern edge of Wude County, and the Surabaya River flows from the northwest.

古文：河水自武德县，汉献帝延康元年，封曹叡为侯国，即魏明帝也。东至酸枣县西，濮水东出焉。
现代文：献帝延康元年，把武德县封给曹敏―即魏明帝，立为侯国。河水自武德县往东流到酸枣县西边，淮水在这里向东分支流出。
English: In the first year of Emperor Yan Kang, Wude County was given to Cao Min - that is, Wei Ming Emperor, and established as a vassal state. The river water from Wude County flows eastward to the west of Yaju County, and the Huai Water branches out to the east here.

古文：汉兴三十有九年，孝文时，河决酸枣，东溃金堤，大发卒塞之。
现代文：汉代兴起后三十九年，到了孝文帝时，河水在酸枣县决口，往东冲垮了金堤，朝廷调动了大部队把溃决处堵住。
English: Thirty-nine years after the rise of the Han Dynasty, when Emperor Xiaowen came to the throne, the river broke through the golden dike at the mouth of Jujia County, and the court mobilized a large force to block the breach.

古文：故班固云：文堙枣野，武作《瓠歌》。
现代文：所以班固说：文帝堵塞枣野，武帝作《靓子歌》。
English: Therefore, Banggu said: Emperor Wen blocked the jujube field, and Emperor Wu wrote the "Song of the Goat."

古文：谓断此口也。
现代文：说的就是堵塞决口的事。
English: I'm talking about plugging the leak.

古文：今无水。
现代文：今天此水已枯涸无水了。
English: Today, this water has dried up and there is no more water.

古文：河水又东北，通谓之延津。
现代文：河水又往东北流，通称延津。
English: The river then flows to the northeast, and is commonly known as the Yangtze.

古文：石勒之袭刘曜，途出于此，以河冰泮为神灵之助，号是处为灵昌津。
现代文：石勒袭击刘暇，行军路线就经过这里。当时河水结冰，即将封冻，军队到时忽然融化，津渡畅通，石勒以为是神灵相助，所以称为灵昌津。
English: Shi Le attacked Liu Bai, and the marching route passed through here. At that time, the river froze and was about to freeze, the army suddenly melted when it arrived, and the Tsudo was smooth. Shi Le thought it was the help of the gods, so it was called Lingchangjin.

古文：昔澹台子羽赍千金之壁渡河，阳侯波起，两蛟挟舟，子羽曰：吾可以义求，不可以威劫。
现代文：从前澹台子羽带了价值千金的玉璧渡河，水神掀起巨浪，两条蛟龙从两边夹住他的船。子羽说：你可以好好地向我请求，却不能用暴力胁迫我屈服！
English: From the front of the raft, Zi Yu took the priceless jade to cross the river. The water god set off a huge wave, and two dragons clamped his boat from both sides. Zi Yu said: "You can ask me nicely, but you can't force me to give in!"

古文：操剑斩蛟，蛟死波休。
现代文：于是他挥剑斩了蛟龙，蛟龙死了，波浪也平静了。
English: So he swung his sword and beheaded the dragon. The dragon died and the waves calmed down.

古文：乃投壁于河，三投而辄跃出，乃毁璧而去，示无吝意。
现代文：于是子羽把璧投入河中，但一投下立即又跳了出来，如此接连三次。他就砸破了璧然后离去，表示并不吝惜。
English: So Zi Yu threw the stone into the river, but as soon as he threw it, the fish immediately jumped out again, and this happened three times in a row. He broke the stone and left, saying that he did not regret it.

古文：赵建武中，造浮桥于津上，采石为中济，石无大小，下辄流去，用工百万，经年不就。
现代文：赵建武年间，在渡口建造浮桥，采石在河心筑墩，但石块不论大小，一投下去立即就随水漂走了，枉费了上百万人工，一整年还是筑不起来。
English: During Zhao Jianwu's time, a pontoon bridge was built at the ferry, and quarrymen built a pier in the middle of the river, but no matter how big or small the stones were, as soon as they were thrown down, they immediately floated away with the water. Millions of laborers were wasted, and the bridge could not be built for a whole year.

古文：石虎亲阅作工，沉璧于河，明日，壁流渚上，波荡上岸，遂斩匠而还。
现代文：石虎亲自来视察工程，沉璧于河中致祭，但第二天璧却被冲到沙洲上，水波把它激荡上岸，他就杀了匠人回去。
English: The stone tiger himself came to inspect the project, immersed himself in the river and made a sacrifice, but the next day, the stone tiger was washed onto the sandbar, the waves stirred it ashore, and he killed the craftsman and went back.

古文：河水又径东燕县故城北，河水于是有棘津之名，亦谓之石济津，故南津也。
现代文：河水又流经东燕县老城北边，这里有个渡口叫棘津，又称石济津，就是旧时的南津。
English: The river also flows through the north side of the old town of Dongyan County, where there is a ferry called Spinejin, also known as Shi Jijin, which is the old Nanzin.

古文：《春秋》僖公二十八年，晋将伐曹，曹在卫东，假道于卫，卫人不许，还自南河济，即此也。
现代文：《春秋》嘻公二十八年：晋国要攻打曹国，而曹国却在卫国以东，因而向卫借路。但卫人不答应，只得返回再从南河过渡，就是这地方。
English: "Spring and Autumn" in the 28th year of King He: Jin wanted to attack Cao, but Cao was to the east of Wei, so he asked Wei for help. However, Wei did not agree, so he had to return and cross the Nanhe River. This is the place.

古文：晋伐陆浑，亦于此渡。
现代文：晋国打陆浑，也是从这里渡河的。
English: It was also from here that the cormorants crossed the river to land in Jin Province.

古文：宋元嘉中，遣辅国将军萧斌率宁朔将军王玄谟北入，宣威将军垣护之，以水军守石济，即此处也。
现代文：宋元嘉年间一，派辅国将军萧斌率领宁朔将军王玄漠向北方进军，宣威将军垣护之以水军防守石济，就是这里。
English: In the first year of Song Yuan Jia, Xiao Bin, the general of the auxiliary state, led the Ningshuo general Wang Xuanmai to march to the north, and Xuan Wei was guarded by the navy to defend Shiji, which is here.

古文：河水又东，淇水入焉。又东径遮害亭南。
现代文：河水又东流，淇水注入；又往东流经遮害亭南边。
English: The river also flows to the east, and the water is injected; it also flows to the east through the south side of the shelter.

古文：《汉书。沟洫志》曰：在淇水口东十八里，有金堤，堤高一丈。
现代文：《汉书•沟恤志》说：亭在淇水口东边十八里，有金堤，高一丈。
English: "Hanshu•Gou Xizhi" said: The pavilion is 18 li east of Qishikou, has a golden dike, and is one story high.

古文：自淇口东，地稍下，堤稍高，至遮害亭，高四五丈。
现代文：从淇口以东，地势渐低，堤也渐高，到遮害亭时，堤高已有四五丈了。
English: From the east of Qikou, the terrain is getting lower and the embankment is getting higher. By the time of the sheltering pavilion, the embankment is already four or five meters high.

古文：又有宿胥口，旧河水北入处也。
现代文：又有宿青口，是旧河道流入北方之处。
English: There is also Shukuseiguchi, where the old river flows into the north.

古文：河水又东右径滑台城北。
现代文：河水又东流，右边经过滑台城北。
English: The river also flows east, passing the north of the city of Slidai on the right.

古文：城有三重，中小城谓之滑台城，旧传滑台人自修筑此城，因以名焉。
现代文：城有三重，中央的小城叫滑台城，相传滑台人修筑此城，因此叫滑台城。
English: There are three parts to the city. The small city in the centre is called Slide Town. Legend has it that the Slide People built this city, hence the name Slide Town.

古文：城即故郑廪延邑也。下有延津。
现代文：此城也就是旧时郑国的凛延邑，下流有延津。
English: This city was also known as Rin Yeon-eup in the old days of Zheng, with Yeonjin downstream.

古文：《春秋传》曰孔悝为蒯聩所逐，载伯姬于平阳，行于延津是也。
现代文：《春秋传》说：孔惶被蒯馈所逐，在平阳以车载了伯娅，往延津而去。
English: "Spring and Autumn Legend" says: Kong Rong was driven away by Bao Fei, and in Pingyang, he took Boya in his car and drove to Yanjin.

古文：廪延南故城，即卫之平阳亭也。今时人谓此津为延寿津。
现代文：凛延南面的老城就是卫国的平阳亭，现在人们称渡口为延寿津。
English: The old city on the south side of Rin Yan is the Pingyang Pavilion of the National Guard, and now people call the ferry port Yan Shoujin.

古文：宋元嘉中，右将军到彦之，留建成将军朱修之守此城。
现代文：宋元嘉年间，右将军到彦之留下建威将军朱修之驻守此城，魏军南征，朱修之守节不降，他母亲十分忧愁。
English: During the Song and Yuan Dynasties, General Zhu Xiu of the Wei army was stationed in this city, while General Zu Yan of the Song and Yuan Dynasties was stationed here, and General Zhu Xiu of the Jian Wei army was stationed here. His mother was very sad.

古文：魏军南伐，修之执节不下，其母悲忧，一旦乳汁惊出，母乃号踊，告家人曰：我年老，非有乳时，今忽如此，吾儿必没矣，修之绝援，果以其日陷没。
现代文：一天忽然心惊，竟流出乳汁来，她顿足捶胸嚎陶大哭，对一家人说：我老了，到这年纪本来不会再有奶了，现在忽然如此，我儿一定战死了！朱修之得不到援军，果然就在那天城陷阵亡了。
English: One day, she was suddenly shocked to find that her milk was leaking out. She burst into tears and said to her family: "I'm old. At this age, I wouldn't have had any more milk. Now, all of a sudden, this has happened. My son must have died in the war! Zhu Xiuzhi couldn't get reinforcements, so he died in the battle that day.

古文：城，故东郡治。
现代文：此城即旧时东郡的治所。
English: This city was the seat of the former East County.

古文：《续汉书》曰：延熹九年，济阴、东郡、济北、平原河水清。
现代文：《续汉书》说：延熹九年，济阴、东郡、济北、平原一带河水变清了。
English: The "Continuation of the Book of Han" said: In the ninth year of Yancheng, the rivers in the areas of Jiyin, Dongxun, Jibei and the plains became clear.

古文：襄楷上疏曰：《春秋》注记未有河清，而今有之。
现代文：襄楷呈上奏疏说：《春秋》没有河水变清的记载，但今天却有了这样的事。
English: "In Spring and Autumn, there is no record of the river becoming clear, but today such a thing has happened," said Xiang Kai, who presented the report.

古文：《易乾凿度》曰：上天将降嘉应，河水先清。
现代文：《易乾凿度》说：上天将有吉兆下降，河水就先变清。
English: "Easy dry chiseling degree" said: the sky will have a good omen, and the river will become clear first.

古文：京房《易传》曰：河水清，天下平，天垂异，地吐妖，民厉疾，三者并作而有何清。
现代文：京房《易传》说：河水变清，天下太平。现在上天昭示反常的预兆，地上出现妖异，民间疫病流行，这三件事同时发生，河水才变清的。
English: Jingfang's "I Chuan" said: "The river becomes clear, the world is peaceful. Now the heavens show abnormal omens, the earth appears strange, the folk epidemic, these three things happen at the same time, the river becomes clear.

古文：《春秋》麟不当见而见，孔子书以为异。
现代文：《春秋》中麟原不该出现而出现，孔子把这当作灾异记载下来。
English: The unicorn originally appeared in "Spring and Autumn" when it should not have, and Confucius recorded this as a calamity.

古文：河者，诸侯之象，清者，阳明之征，岂独诸侯有窥京师也？
现代文：河是诸侯的象征，清是光明的征兆，难道这是预示诸侯有袭击京师的阴谋吗？
English: The river is a symbol of the princes, and clearness is a sign of light. Is this a sign that the princes have a plot to attack the capital?

古文：明年，宫车宴驾，征解渎侯为汉嗣，是为灵帝。
现代文：次年桓帝死了，征召解读侯来做汉室的后嗣，这就是灵帝。
English: The following year, Emperor Kuan died, and Xie Hou was conscripted to be the heir of the Han family. This is Ling Di.

古文：建宁四年二月，河水又清也。
现代文：建宁四年二月，河水又清了。
English: In February of the fourth year of Jianning, the river was clear again.

古文：又东北过黎阳县南，黎，侯国也。
现代文：又往东北流过黎阳县南边，黎是侯国。
English: It also flows northeast through the southern part of Liyang County. Liyang is the county seat.

古文：《诗。式微》，黎侯寓于卫是也。
现代文：《诗•式微》：黎侯寓于卫，可以说明。
English: "Poetry • Style Weakness": Lihou resides in Wei, it can be explained.

古文：晋灼曰：黎山在其南，河水径其东。
现代文：晋灼说：黎山在县南，河水流经县东。
English: Jin Jiao said: Lishan is in the south of the county, and the river flows through the east of the county.

古文：其山上碑云：县取山之名，取水之阳，以为名也。
现代文：山上有碑，碑文说：黎阳县是按山名，并按地在水北而命名的。
English: There is a monument on the mountain, the inscription says: Liyang County is named after the mountain, and named after the north of the water.

古文：王莽之黎蒸也。
现代文：就是王莽的黎蒸。
English: It is Wang Mang's Li Steam.

古文：今黎山之东北故城，盖黎阳县之故城也。
现代文：现在黎山东北的老城，就是黎阳县老城。
English: Now the old city in the northeast of Lishan is the old city of Liyang County.

古文：山在城西，城凭山为基，东阻于河。
现代文：山在城西，城依山为基，东边隔着河水。
English: The mountain is in the west of the city, the city is based on the mountain, and the east is separated by the river.

古文：故刘桢《黎阳山赋》曰：南荫黄河，左覆金城，青坛承祀，高碑颂灵。
现代文：所以刘祯《黎阳山赋》说：南边屏蔽着黄河，左边掩护着坚城，青坛上举行祭祀，高碑颂扬神灵。
English: Therefore, Liu Wei said in "Li Yang Shan Fu": The south side shields the Yellow River, the left side shields the fortified city, sacrifices are held on the altar, and the high monument celebrates the gods.

古文：昔慕容玄明自邺率众南徙滑台，既无舟楫，将保黎阳，昏而流澌，冰合于夜中，济讫，旦而冰泮，燕民谓是处为天桥津。
现代文：从前慕容玄明从邺率领部属南迁于滑台，但没有船只渡河，于是打算据守黎阳。到了傍晚，流动的冰块封冻起来了，他们就连夜从冰上过河；次日，冰又化了。因而燕人就把这地方称为天桥津。
English: Once upon a time, Murong Xuanming, the leader of the Guan clan, moved south to Slide, but there was no ship to cross the river, so he planned to defend Liyang. In the evening, the flowing ice blocks froze, and they crossed the river from the ice overnight; the next day, the ice melted again. Therefore, the swallows called this place Tianqiaojin.

古文：东岸有故城，险带长河。
现代文：东岸有一座老城，旁边有长河的天险。
English: There is an old city on the east bank, with the natural hazards of the Yangtze River nearby.

古文：戴延之谓之逯明垒，周二十里，言逯明，石勒十八骑中之一，城因名焉。
现代文：城周长二十里，戴延之把它称为途明垒。途明是石勒十八骑之一，城就是以此命名的。
English: The perimeter of the city is twenty miles long, and Dai Yanzhi called it Tu-Ming Fort. Tu-Ming is one of the eighteen ridges of Shiloh, and the city is named after it.

古文：郭缘生曰：城，袁绍时筑。
现代文：郭缘生说：这座城是袁绍时所筑。
English: Guo Yansheng said: This city was built by Yuan Shaoqin.

古文：左渎又北径经城东、缭城西，又径南宫县西，北注绛渎。
现代文：这些说法都不正确。我按《竹书纪年》，梁惠成王十一年所立。河水又往东北流，就是长寿津。《述征记》说：凉城到长寿津六十里，河水旧道就从这里流出。
English: These statements are not correct. According to the "Bamboo Annals," I established in the eleventh year of King Liang Huicheng. The river also flows to the northeast, that is, Changshoujin. "Recorded Records" said: Liangcheng is sixty miles to Changshoujin, and the river water flows out of the old road here.

古文：右渎东北径广宗县故城南，又东北径界城亭北，又东北径长乐郡枣强县故城东。
现代文：《汉书•沟恤志》说：大河对中原危害特别严重，所以从积石开始疏导河水，经过龙门，疏通了两条渠道来引导大河的水流。
English: "Hanshu•Gou Xizhi" said: the great river is particularly harmful to the Central Plains, so the river water is diverted from the sedimentary rock, through the gantry, and two channels are dredged to guide the water flow of the great river.

古文：长乐，故信都也，晋太康五年，改从今名，又东北径广川县，与绛渎水故道合。又东北径广川县故城西，又东径棘津亭南。
现代文：这两条渠道一条是漂川，就是今天通水的那一条；另一条是北读，王莽时无水，所以民间把它叫王莽河。旧河道往东北通过戚城西。《春秋》：哀公二年改为今名。又往东北流经广川县，与绛读水旧道汇合，又往东北流经广川县老城西边，又往东流经棘津亭南边。
English: One of these two channels is the Drifting River, which is the one that carries water today; the other is the North Reading River, which was called the Wang Mang River by the people when there was no water in Wang Mang. The old river went northeast through the west of Qi Cheng. "Spring and Autumn": changed to its current name in the second year of Yigong. It also flowed northeast through Guangchuan County, where it merged with the Old Reading Waterway. It also flowed northeast through the west side of the old city of Guangchuan County, and eastward through the south side of Acanthus Ting.

古文：徐广曰：棘津在广川。
现代文：徐广说：棘津在广川。
English: Xu Guang said, "Hangzhou is in Guangchuan.

古文：司马彪曰：县北有棘津城，吕尚卖食之困，疑在此也。
现代文：司马彪说：县北有棘津城，吕尚穷困时卖点心，可能就在这里。
English: Sima Biao said: In the north of the county, there is the city of Jianjin. Lushang sold snacks when he was poor, and it may have been here.

古文：刘澄之云：谯郡酇县东北有棘津亭，故邑也，吕尚所困处也。
现代文：刘澄之说：谁郡部县东北有棘津亭，是个旧城，吕尚穷困时就住在这里。
English: Liu Chengzhi said, "Who would have thought that in the northeast of Guibu County, there would be an old town, where Lushang lived when he was poor?

古文：余案《春秋左传》，伐巢、克棘、入州来，无津字。
现代文：我按《春秋左传》：讨伐曹国，攻下棘，进入州来―这里不叫棘津，没有津字。
English: I followed the "Spring and Autumn Legend": to fight against Cao, to conquer Thorn, to enter the state - here is not called Thorn, there is no word "Tsu."

古文：杜预《春秋释地》又言，棘亭在酇县东北，亦不云有津字矣。
现代文：杜预《春秋释地》又说：棘亭在部县东北，地名中也没有津字。
English: Du Yuanyuan, "Spring and Autumn Interpretation," also said: Xianting is in the northeast of Bu County, and there is no Tsu character in the place name.

古文：屯氏别河南渎自平原东绝大河故渎，又径平原县故城北，枝津右出，东北至安德县界，东会商河。
现代文：不知道刘澄之是从哪里找到这个说法的。但天下以棘为名的地方多得很，总不能都认为就是棘津吧。又《春秋》：昭公十七年，阳信县是渤海郡的属县。屯氏别河南支从平原东流穿过大河旧河道，又绕经平原县旧城北边，有支流向右分出，往东北流到安德县边界，往东流与商河汇合。
English: I don't know where Liu Chengzhi found this saying. However, there are many places in the world that are named after thorns, so they can't all be considered thorns. Also, "Spring and Autumn": In the seventeenth year of Zhaogong, Yangxin County was a county belonging to Bohai County. The southern branch of the Tunzibei River flows from the east of the plain through the old river channel of the Great River, and passes around the north side of the old city of the Plain County. Some tributaries branch off to the right, flow to the northeast to the border of Anda County, and flow to the east to merge with the Shanghe River

古文：屯氏别河南渎又东北于平原界，又有枝渠右出，至安德县遂绝。
现代文：屯氏别河南支又往东北流，在平原县边界，又有一条支流向右分出，到安德县就断了。
English: The Tunxibei Henan branch also flows to the northeast, and at the border of Pingyuan County, another tributary branches off to the right, and breaks off at Ande County.

古文：屯氏别河南读自平原城北首受大河故渎，东出，亦通谓之笃马河，即《地理志》所谓平原县有笃马河，东北入海，行五百六十里者也，东北径安德县故城西，又东北径临齐城南。
现代文：屯氏别河南支上口在平原城北边承接大河，往东流出，也通称笃马河，就是《地理志》所说平原县的笃马河，往东北注入大海，流程五百六十里。笃马河往东北流经安德县老城西边，又往东北流经临齐城南边。
English: The upper outlet of the southern branch of the Tunzibei River joins the big river on the north side of the plain city and flows out to the east. It is also commonly known as the Tuduma River. It is the Tuduma River of the plain county mentioned in the "Geography" and flows into the sea to the northeast, with a flow of 560 miles. The Tuduma River flows to the northeast through the west of the old city of Anda County, and to the northeast through the south of Linqi City.

古文：始东齐未宾，大魏筑城以临之，故城得其名也。
现代文：先前东齐没有归服，大魏筑城防备，城就因此得名。
English: Previously, Dongqi did not submit, and the Great Wei Dynasty built the city to defend it, hence the name of the city.

古文：又屈径其城东，故读广四十步，又东北径重丘县故城西。
现代文：水又转弯流经城东旧河道，河宽四十步，又往东北流经重丘县老城西边。
English: The water turns and flows through the old river east of the city, the river is forty paces wide, and flows to the northeast through the west of the old city of Chongqiu County.

古文：《春秋》襄公二十五年，秋，同盟于重丘，伐齐故也。
现代文：《春秋》：襄公二十五年秋，在重丘会盟，为了讨伐齐国。
English: "Spring and Autumn": In the autumn of the 25th year of Xianggong, in the heavy hill alliance, in order to fight against Qi.

古文：应劭曰，安德县北五十里有重丘乡，故县也。
现代文：应肋说：安德县北五十里有重丘乡，是个旧县址。
English: Ying Li said: There is a heavy hill township in the north fifty of Anda County, which is an old county site.

古文：又东北径西平昌县故城北。
现代文：又往东北流经西平昌县旧城北边。
English: It also flows northeast through the northern part of the old city of West Pyeongchang County.

古文：北海有平昌县，故加西。
现代文：北海郡有平昌县，所以这里加西字，叫西平昌县。
English: There is a PyeongChang County in Beihai County, so it is called West PyeongChang County.

古文：汉宣帝元康元年，封王长君为侯国。
现代文：汉宣帝元康元年前，把该县封给王长君，立为侯国。
English: Before the first year of the Hanzhong Emperor Yuan Kang, the county was given to Wang Changjun and established as a principality.

古文：故渠川派，东入般县为般河。盖亦九河之一道也。
现代文：旧渠分支往东流入般县，就是般河，是九河中的一支。
English: The branch of the old canal flowing east into Hann County is the Hann River, one of the nine rivers.

古文：《后汉书》称公孙瓒破黄巾于般河，即此渎也。
现代文：《后汉书》说：公孙攒在般河打垮黄巾，就指此河。
English: "Hou Han Shu" said: Gongsun gathered in the Han River to defeat the Yellow Scarf, referring to this river.

古文：又东为白鹿渊水，南北三百步，东西千余步，深三丈余。
现代文：又东流，就是白鹿渊水，南北三百步，东西千余步，深三丈余。
English: And the east stream is the Bailuyuan Water, three hundred paces from north to south, more than a thousand paces from east to west, and more than three meters deep.

古文：其水冬清而夏浊，渟而不流，若夏水洪泛，水深五丈，方乃通注。
现代文：这条水冬天澄清，夏天变浊，静止不流。如果夏天洪水泛滥，水的深度达到五丈，方才流通，注入般河。
English: This water clears up in winter, becomes turbid in summer, and does not flow. If there is a flood in summer and the water reaches a depth of five meters, it will not flow until it is injected into the Han River.

古文：般渎又径般县故城北，王莽更之曰分明也。东径乐陵县故城北。
现代文：又流经般县旧城北边―王莽改名为分明，往东流经乐陵县老城北边。
English: It also flows through the northern side of the old city of Banzhong County - Wang Mang changed its name to Benguang, and flows eastward through the northern side of the old city of Leling County.

古文：《地理志》曰：故都尉治。
现代文：《地理志》说：这是旧都尉治所。
English: "Geography" said: This is the old governor's office.

古文：伏琛、晏谟言平原邑，今分为郡。
现代文：伏深、晏漠说：这是平原郡的一座城，现在分出另立为郡了。
English: Fushin and Zou said: "This is a city in Pingyuan County, and now it has been separated and established as a county.

古文：又东北径阳信县故城南，东北入海。
现代文：又往东北流经阳信县老城南边，往东北注入大海。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the southern side of the old city of Yangxin County and flows to the northeast into the sea.

古文：屯氏河故渎自别河东径甘陵之信乡县故城南。
现代文：屯氏河旧道从别河往东流经甘陵郡信乡县老城南边。
English: The Tunjihe Old Road flows eastward from the Behe River through the south of the old city of Xinxiang County, Ganling County.

古文：《地理志》曰：安帝更名安平。
现代文：《地理志》说：安帝时改名安平。
English: "Geography" said: An Di changed his name to Anping.

古文：应劭曰：甘陵西北十七里有信乡，故县也。
现代文：应韵说：甘陵西北十七里有信乡，是个旧县址。
English: According to the rhyme: There is a letter township in the northwest seventeenth of Ganling, which is an old county site.

古文：屯氏故渎又东径甘陵县故城北，又东径灵县北，又东北径鄃县，与鸣犊河故渎合，上承大河故渎于灵县南。
现代文：屯氏河旧道又往东流经甘陵县老城北边，又往东流经灵县北边，又往东北流经挪县，与鸣犊河旧道汇合。鸣犊河上流在县南承接大河旧道。
English: The Tunzihe Old Road also flows eastward through the northern part of the old city of Ganling County, eastward through the northern part of Ling County, and northeastward through No County, merging with the Mingye River Old Road. The upper reaches of the Mingye River connect to the old Dahe Road in the south of the county.

古文：《地理志》曰：河水自灵县别出为鸣犊河者也。
现代文：《地理志》说：河水从灵县分支流出，就是鸣犊河。
English: "Geography" said: the river water flows out from the branch of Ling County, that is, the Mingyuan River.

古文：东北径灵县东，东入鄃县，而北合屯氏渎。
现代文：往东北流经灵县东边，往东流入邮县，然后北流与屯氏读汇合。
English: The northeastern stream flows through the eastern part of Ling County, flows eastward into Yixian County, and then the northern stream merges with Tun's Yangtze River.

古文：屯氏渎兼鸣犊之称也。
现代文：屯氏读又兼有鸣犊河之称。
English: Tun's pronunciation is also known as Ming's River.

古文：又东径鄃县故城北，东北合大河故渎，谓之鸣犊口。
现代文：又往东流经邮县老城北边，往东北与大河旧道汇合，汇流处称为鸣犊口。
English: It also flows eastward to the north of the old town of Yuchi County, and northeastward to the confluence with the old Dahe Road. The confluence is called the Mingyu mouth.

古文：《十三州志》曰：鸣犊河东北至修入屯氏，考渎则不至也。
现代文：《十三州志》说：鸣犊河往东北流，到惰县注入屯氏河，但经查核，这条河却不流到惰县。
English: "The History of the Thirteen Prefectures" said: The Mingyuan River flows to the northeast and flows into the Tunxi River in Neixian County, but after investigation, this river does not flow into Neixian County.

古文：又东北过卫县南，又东北过濮阳县北，瓠子河出焉。
现代文：又往东北流过卫县南边，又往东北流过簇阳县北边，瓤子河从这里分出。
English: It flows to the northeast through the south of Wei County, and to the northeast through the north of Tuxiyang County. The Lazy River branches off from here.

古文：河水东径铁丘南。
现代文：河水往东流经铁丘南边。
English: The river flows eastwards through the southern side of the iron hill.

古文：《春秋左氏传》哀公二年，郑罕达帅师，邮无恤御简子，卫太子为右，登铁上，望见郑师，卫太子自投车下，即此处也。
现代文：《春秋左传》：哀公二年前,郑国罕达率领部队，邮无恤为简子驾车，卫太子坐在右边，升登铁上，望见郑国的军队，卫太子吓得跌下车来，就是在这地方。
English: "Chunqiu Zuo Zhen": Two years ago, Zheng Guo Handa led the troops, and drove for Jianzi without a shirt. Wei Taizi sat on the right side, climbed onto the train, and saw Zheng Guo's army. Wei Taizi was scared and fell off the train. It was in this place.

古文：京相璠曰：铁，丘名也。
现代文：京相潘说：铁是丘名。杜预说：在戚的南边。
English: Beijing Minister Pan said: Iron is the name of the hill. Du Yu said: on the south side of the relative.

古文：杜预曰：在戚南河之北岸，有古城，戚邑也。
现代文：河水北岸有古城，就是戚邑。
English: There is an ancient city on the north bank of the river, which is Tsuru.

古文：东城有子路冢，河之西岸有竿城。
现代文：东城有子路墓，大河西岸有竿城。
English: Dongcheng has the Zilu Tomb, and the west bank of the Tahe River has the Jiancheng Tomb.

古文：《郡国志》曰：卫县有竿城者也。
现代文：《郡国志》说：卫县有竿城。大河南岸有龙渊宫。
English: "County National History" said: Wei County has a pole city. The south bank of the Tahe River has a Longyuan Palace.

古文：河南有龙渊宫，武帝元光中，河决濮阳、汜郡十六，发卒十万人塞决河，起龙渊宫。
现代文：武帝元光年间前～前，河水在蹼阳决口，淹没了十六郡，调动了十万兵丁去堵塞决口，在那里建了龙渊宫。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu Yuan Guang, the river flooded 16 counties at the mouth of the Poyang River, and 100,000 soldiers were mobilized to block the mouth of the river, where Longyuan Palace was built.

古文：盖武帝起宫于决河之傍，龙渊之侧，故曰龙渊宫也。
现代文：因武帝在决口近旁龙渊一侧建宫，所以叫龙渊宫。
English: Because Emperor Wu built a palace on the side of Longyuan near the breach, it is called Longyuan Palace.

古文：河水东北流而径濮阳县北，为濮阳津。
现代文：河水往东北流经淮阳县北边，就是淮阳津，旧城在南边。
English: The river flows to the northeast through the north of Huaiyang County, that is, Huaiyangjin, and the old city is in the south.

古文：故城在南，与卫县分水。
现代文：淮阳县与卫县以水为分界。
English: Huaiyang County and Wei County are separated by water.

古文：城北十里有瓠河口，有金堤、宣房堰。
现代文：城北十里有瓤河口，有金堤、宣房堰。
English: In the north of the city, there are ten estuaries of the Min River, including the Jin Dike and the Xuanfang Weir.

古文：粤在汉世，河决金堤，涿郡王尊，自徐州刺史迁东郡太守。
现代文：汉时大河在金堤决口。琢郡王尊从徐州刺史调任东郡太守。
English: At the time of the Han Dynasty, the Great River was at the mouth of the Jintai. Wang Zun of Taku County was transferred from the governor of Xuzhou to the governor of Dong County.

古文：河水盛溢，泛浸瓠子，金堤决坏，尊躬率民吏，投沉白马，祈水神河伯，亲执圭璧，请身填堤，庐居其上，民吏皆走，尊立不动而水波齐足而止，公私壮其勇节。
现代文：王尊亲自率领民众和官吏，把白马沉入水中致祭，祈求水神河伯，并亲自捧着圭璧，请求让他以自己的肉体来填塞河堤决口。他在堤上搭了棚屋，就住在那里。民众和官吏都逃开了，王尊却一动也不动地站着，水涨到与他两脚相平就停止了。
English: Wang Zun personally led the people and officials to immerse the white horse into the water as a sacrifice, praying to the water god He Bo, and personally holding Gui Bi, asking him to fill the river dike breach with his own body. He built a shed on the dike and lived there. The people and officials all fled, but Wang Zun stood still. The water rose to his feet and stopped.

古文：河水又东北径卫国县南，东为郭口津。
现代文：朝野人士都夸赞他的勇敢坚毅。河水又往东北流经卫国县南边，东边就是郭口津。
English: People from both the imperial court and the countryside praised his bravery and tenacity. The river then flowed northeast through the southern part of Weiguo County, and to the east was Guokoujin.

古文：河水又东径鄄城县北。故城在河南十八里，王莽之鄄良也，沇州旧治。
现代文：河水又往东流经哪城县北边，老城在河南十八里，就是王莽的哪良，也是沈州的旧治所。
English: The river also flows eastward through the northern part of Necheng County. The old city is 18 li in Henan Province, which is Wang Mang's Neglian, and is also the old capital of Shenzhou.

古文：古斟观。应劭曰：夏有观扈，即此城也。《竹书纪年》，梁惠成王二年，齐田寿率师伐我，围观，观降。
现代文：城南有魏使持节征西将军太尉方城侯邓艾庙，庙南有邓艾碑，是秦建元十二年，齐国田寿率领军队来攻打我国，包围了观，观终于投降了。
English: In the south of the city, there is the Temple of Deng Ai, the envoy of the Wei Dynasty to the West, the general of the Western Expeditionary Force, the lieutenant Fang, the lord of the city, and the monument of Deng Ai in the south of the temple. In the twelfth year of Qin Jianyuan, Tian Shou of the State of Qi led an army to attack our country, surrounded Guan, and Guan finally surrendered.

古文：浮水故渎又东径河牧城而东北出。
现代文：浮水旧道又往东流经河牧城，然后转向东北流去。
English: The old path of floating water flowed eastward through He Mucheng, and then turned to the northeast.

古文：《郡国志》曰：卫本观故国，姚姓，有河牧城。
现代文：《郡国志》说：卫本来是观的故国，姓姚，有河牧城。
English: "County History" said: Wei was originally the hometown of Guan, surnamed Yao, and Yihe Pastoral City.

古文：又东北入东武阳县，东入河，又有漯水出焉，戴延之谓之武水也。
现代文：又往东北流入东武阳县，东流注入大河。又有漂水从这里分支流出，戴延之称为武水。
English: It also flows to the northeast into Dongwuyang County, and the east stream is injected into the big river. There is also drifting water branching out from here, which is called Wu Shui.

古文：河水又东径武阳县东、范县西，而东北流也。
现代文：河水又往东流经武阳县东边、范县西边，往东北流去。
English: The river also flows eastward through the eastern part of Wuyang County and the western part of Fan County, and flows to the northeast.

古文：又东北过东阿县北，河水于范县东北流为仓亭津。
现代文：又往东北流过东阿县北边，河水从范县往东北流，就到仓亭津。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the northern part of Donga County. The river flows from Fan County to the northeast, reaching Kurateijin.

古文：《述征记》曰：仓亭津在范县界，去东阿六十里。
现代文：《述征记》说：仓亭津在范县边界，离东阿六十里。
English: "Description of requisition" said: Kurateijin is on the border of Fan County, sixty miles from Donga.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：津在武阳县东北七十里。津，河济名也。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：渡头在武阳县东北七十里，仓亭津是大河上的渡头名。
English: "Wei Shiji Ji" said: Watanabe is seventy miles northeast of Wuyang County, and Kurateijin is the name of Watanabe on the big river.

古文：河水右历柯泽。《春秋左传》襄公十四年，卫孙文子败公徒于阿泽者也。
现代文：河水右边流经柯泽，《春秋左传》：襄公十四年前，卫国孙文子在阿泽打败献公的兵，就指这地方。
English: The right side of the river flows through Kozhe. "Spring and Autumn Left Passing": Fourteen years ago, the defender of the country, Sun Yat-sen, defeated the dedicated soldiers in Aze, referring to this place.

古文：又东北径东阿县故城西，而东北出流注。河水枝津东出，谓之邓里渠也。
现代文：又往东北流经东阿县老城西边，然后往东北流，注入河水；一条支流向东分出，叫邓里渠。
English: It flows to the northeast through the west of the old city of Dong'a County, and then flows to the northeast, injecting river water; a tributary branches off to the east, called Dengli Canal.

古文：又东北过茌平县西，河自邓里渠东北径昌乡亭北，又东北径碻磝城西。
现代文：又往东北流过在平县西边，大河从邓里渠往东北流经昌乡亭北边，又往东北流经搞傲城西边。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the west of Ping County. The big river flows from the Dengli Canal to the northeast through the north of Changxiangting, and then flows to the northeast through the west of Yiguang City.

古文：《述证记》曰：碻磝，津名也，自黄河泛舟而渡者，皆为津也。
现代文：《述征记》说搞傲是个渡头名，从黄河摇船过渡的地方，都是渡头。
English: "Description" says that Jie Gao is a ferryman's name, and all the places where the Yellow River shakes the boat are ferrymen.

古文：其城临水，西南崩于河。
现代文：搞傲城濒水。西南角已崩塌到河中了。
English: The southwestern corner has collapsed into the river.

古文：宋元嘉二十七年，以王玄谟为宁朔将军，前锋入河，平碻磝，守之。
现代文：宋元嘉二十七年，任王玄漠为宁朔将军，前锋直打到河边，平定了搞傲，驻守于此。
English: In the 27th year of Song Yuan Jia, Wang Xuanmai was appointed as the general of Ningshuo. The forward hit the river directly, calmed down the arrogance, and stationed here.

古文：都督刘义恭以沙城不堪守，召玄谟令毁城而还，后更城之。
现代文：都督刘义恭认为沙城不能守，召回王玄漠，命令他毁城退回，以后又重新建城。
English: The governor Liu Yigong thought that Shacheng could not be defended, recalled Wang Xuanmai, ordered him to destroy the city and return, and then rebuild the city.

古文：魏立济州，治此也。
现代文：魏设济州，以此城为治所。
English: Wei established Jeju as the capital.

古文：河水冲其西南隅，又崩于河，即故茌平县也。应劭曰：茌，山名也。
现代文：河水冲激城西南角，又崩塌到河中。搞傲就是旧时的在平县，应肋说：在是山名，县在山边平地上，所以叫往平。
English: The river surged through the southwest corner of the city and collapsed into the river. The pride was in Ping County in the old days, and it was said: in the name of the mountain, the county is on the flatland on the edge of the mountain, so it is called Ping.

古文：县在山之平地，故曰茌平也，王莽之功崇矣。《经》曰大河在其西，邓里渠历其东。
现代文：也就是王莽的功崇。《水经》说：大河在往平县西，邓里渠流经城东，就是此城。
English: That is, Wang Mang's merit. "Water Sutra" said: The big river is in the west of Ping County, and the Dunli Canal flows through the east of the city, which is this city.

古文：即斯邑也。昔石勒之隶师欢，屯耕于茌平，闻鼓角碑铎之声，于是县也。
现代文：从前石勒在师灌手下做奴仆，在在平耕田时，听到鼓角和铃声，就是在这县内。
English: It was in this prefecture that Shi Le, who once worked as a slave under Shikan, heard the sound of drums and bells while ploughing fields.

古文：西与聊城分河。
现代文：往平西与聊城以河水为分界。
English: To the west of Pingxi and Liaocheng, the river separates them.

古文：河水又东北与邓里渠合，水上承大河于东阿县西，东径东阿县故城北。故卫邑也。
现代文：河水又往东北流，与邓里渠汇合。邓里渠上流在东阿县西边承接大河，往东流经东阿县老城北边，就是旧时的卫邑。
English: The river then flows to the northeast, merging with the Dengli Canal. The upstream of the Dengli Canal joins the big river on the west side of Dong'a County, and flows eastward through the north side of the old city of Dong'a County, which was the old Weiyu.

古文：应仲瑗曰，有西，故称东。
现代文：应仲缓说：因为有西阿县，所以叫东阿。
English: Ying Zhongyan said: Because there is West A County, it is called East A County.

古文：魏封曹植为王国。
现代文：魏时封给曹植，立为王国。
English: Wei Dynasty was given to Cao Zhi and established as a kingdom.

古文：大城北门内西侧，皋上有大井，其巨若轮，深六七丈，岁尝煮胶，以贡天府。《本草》所谓阿胶也。
现代文：大城北门内西侧高地上有一口井，大如车轮，深六七丈，每年汲水煮胶，进贡朝廷府库，就是《本草》所说的阿胶。
English: There is a well on the highland on the west side of the north gate of Dacheng. It is as big as a wheel and is 67 meters deep. Every year, it is used to pump boiled glue, which is a tribute to the imperial palace treasury. It is called "Ajiao" in "Honcho."

古文：故世俗有阿井之名。
现代文：所以民间称此井为阿井。
English: Therefore, people call this well "Ai."

古文：县出佳缯缣，故《史记》云秦昭王服太阿之剑，阿缟之衣也。
现代文：县里出产优质丝织品。所以《史记》说：秦昭王佩着太阿宝剑，穿着东阿绸衣。
English: The county produces high-quality silk fabrics. Therefore, "Histories" said: Qin Zhao Wang wore a Taia treasure sword and wore Donga silk clothes.

古文：又东北径临邑县，与将渠合。
现代文：又往东北流经临邑县，与将渠汇合。
English: It also flows to the northeast through Linyi County, where it merges with the Zengdu River.

古文：又北径茌平县东，临邑县故城西，北流入于河。
现代文：又往北流经在平县东边，临邑县老城西边，北流注入大河。
English: The northerly flow passes through the east side of Ping County and the west side of the old city of Linyi County, and the northerly flow flows into the Big River.

古文：河水又东北流径四渎津，津西侧岸，临河有四渎祠，东对四渎口。
现代文：河水又往东北流经四读津，这个渡头靠西侧岸边临河，有四读祠，东边对着四读口。
English: The river then flows to the northeast through Shichiryo-tsu. This ferry dock is located on the west side of the river bank. There is a Shichiryo-jinja Shrine, and the east side faces the Shichiryo-guchi.

古文：河水东分济，亦曰济水受河也。
现代文：河水向东分出济水，换言之也就是济水承接大河。
English: The river water branches off the Jishui River to the east, in other words, the Jishui River is connected to the big river.

古文：然荥口石门水断不通，始自是出东北流，径九里与清水合。故济渎也。
现代文：但荣口石门水断，已不再流通了，才从这里分出，往东北流经九里，与清水汇合，这就是济水旧道。
English: However, the water of Rongkou Shimen was cut off, and it was no longer in circulation. It was only separated from here, flowing northeast for nine miles and merging with Qingshui. This is the old road of Jishui.

古文：自河入济，自济入淮，自淮达江，水径周通，故有四渎之名也。
现代文：从大河进入济水，从济水进入淮水，从淮水到达大江，水路都能相通，所以称为四读。
English: From the big river into the Jishui, from the Jishui into the Huai Shui, from the Huai Shui to the big river, the waterways can be connected, so it is called the fourth reading.

古文：昔赵杀鸣犊，仲尼临河而叹。自是而返曰，丘之不济，命也。
现代文：从前赵国杀鸣犊，仲尼到河边时听到消息，啃然长叹，就从这里掉头返回，说道；我不能渡过河水，该是命当如此了！
English: Once upon a time, when Zhao Guozhong was chanting, Zhong Ni heard the news when he came to the river, sighed, turned around and returned from here, saying; I can't cross the river, it's my fate!

古文：夫《琴操》以为孔子临狄水而歌矣。曰：狄水衍兮风扬波，船揖颠倒更相加。
现代文：琴操》则以为孔子到了狄水，作歌唱道：狄水浩荡奔流，狂风激起巨浪，船只颠来倒去，相互东碰西撞。
English: "Qinqiu" thought that Confucius had arrived at Di Shui, and made a song: Di Shui is a turbulent torrent, the fierce wind stirs up huge waves, the ships are upside down, and they collide with each other.

古文：余案临济，故狄也。是济所径，得其通称也。
现代文：我按：临济就是旧时的狄，因为济水流经这里，所以也得到这个通称了。
English: I press: Linji is the old Di, because the water flows through here, so it also got this nickname.

古文：河水又径杨墟县之故城东，俗犹谓是城曰阳城矣。河水又径茌平城东，疑县徒也。
现代文：河水又流经杨墟县老城东边，俗称阳城。河水又流经往平城东边，我怀疑县城曾迁到这里。
English: The river also flows to the east of Yangshuo County's old city, commonly known as Yangcheng. The river also flows to the east of Pingcheng. I suspect that the county seat once moved here.

古文：城内有故台，世谓之时平城，非也。盖在、时音相近耳。
现代文：城内有旧台，世人称为时平城，因为在、时二字音近，所以致误。
English: There is an old platform in the city, and the world calls it Ji Ping City, because it is close to the sound of the word Ji, so it is a mistake.

古文：又东北过高唐县东，河水于县，漯水注之。
现代文：又往东北流过高唐县东边，河水流到高唐县，有漂水注入。
English: It also flowed northeast past the eastern edge of Gaotang County, and the river water flowed to Gaotang County, with drifting water injection.

古文：《地理志》曰：漯水出东武阳。
现代文：《地理志》说：漂水发源于东武阳。
English: "Geography" said: the drifting water originated in Dongbuyang.

古文：今漯水上承河水于武阳县东南，西北径武阳新城东。曹操为东郡所治也。
现代文：现在漂水上流在武阳县东南承接河水，往西北流经武阳新城东边，这是曹操当东郡太守时的治所。
English: At present, the upstream of the drifting water receives the river water in the southeast of Wuyang County and flows to the northwest through the east of Wuyang New Town, which was Cao Cao's residence when he was the governor of Dong County.

古文：引水自东门石窦北注于堂池，他南故基尚存。
现代文：从东门的石沟引水往北流入堂池，池南还留有遗址。
English: Water is diverted from the stone ditch at the east gate to flow north into the pond, and there are still ruins south of the pond.

古文：城内有一石甚大，城西门名冰井门，门内曲中，冰井犹存。
现代文：城内有一块大石，城西门叫冰井门，门内弯曲处，还留有冰井。
English: There is a large rock in the city. The west gate of the city is called the Ice Well Gate. At the bend in the gate, there is still an ice well.

古文：门外有故台，号武阳台，匝台亦有隅雉遗迹。
现代文：城门外有个古台，叫武阳台，周围也有墙角难谍的遗迹。
English: There is an ancient terrace outside the city gate, called Wuyang Terrace, and there are also remains of wall corners around.

古文：水自城东北径东武阳县故城南。
现代文：水从新城往东北流经东武阳县旧城南边。
English: The water flows from Xincheng in the northeast to the south of the old city in Dongwuyang County.

古文：应劭曰，县在武水之阳，王莽之武昌也，然则漯水亦或武水矣。
现代文：应肋说：县在武水北边，就是王莽的武昌，那末深水也许就是武水了。
English: Ying Li said: County in the north of Wushui is Wang Mang's Wuchang, then perhaps Shamshui is Wushui.

古文：臧洪为东郡太守，治此。
现代文：藏洪做东郡太守时，治所就在此城。
English: When Za Hong was the governor of Dong County, the capital was in this city.

古文：曹操围张超于雍丘，洪以情义，请袁绍救之，不许，洪与绍绝。
现代文：曹操在雍丘包围了张超，减洪出于友情和义气，请求袁绍来救援他，被袁绍拒绝了，减洪就与袁绍绝交。
English: Cao Cao surrounded Zhang Chao in Yongqiu. Yan Hong, out of friendship and loyalty, asked Yuan Shao to rescue him. Yuan Shao refused, and Yan Hong broke off diplomatic relations with Yuan Shao.

古文：绍围洪，城中无食，洪呼吏士曰：洪于大义，不得不死，诸君无事，空与此祸。
现代文：袁绍包围藏洪，城中没有粮食，减洪向下属呼叫道：我为了大义不能不死，诸位都是不相干的，不要平白无故地跟我同遭此祸。
English: Yuan Shao besieged Zanghong, there was no food in the city, and Yan Hong called out to his subordinates: I cannot but die for the sake of justice, you are all irrelevant, do not suffer this misfortune with me for no reason.

古文：众泣曰：何忍舍明府也。
现代文：众人都哭泣着说：我们怎能忍心抛弃你呀！
English: And all wept, saying, How can we give thee up?

古文：男女八千余人，相枕而死。
现代文：男女八千余人都交错倒地，死在一起。
English: More than eight thousand men and women staggered to the ground and died together.

古文：洪不屈，绍杀洪。
现代文：减洪坚强不屈，被袁绍杀了。
English: Yan Hong was strong and unyielding, and was killed by Yuan Shao.

古文：邑人陈容为丞，谓曰：宁与臧洪同日死，不与将军同日生。
现代文：县人陈容当郡皿，说道：我宁愿与减洪同日死，也不愿与你同日生。
English: Chen Rong, a county resident, said, "I would rather die on the same day as flood alleviation than be born on the same day as you."

古文：绍又杀之，士为伤叹。
现代文：袁绍又杀了他。士人都为他悲伤感叹。
English: Yuan Shao killed him again. The scholars all lamented for his sorrow.

古文：今城四周，绍围郭尚存。水匝隍堑，于城东北合为一渎，东北出郭，径阳平县之冈成城西。
现代文：现在城的四面，袁绍包围时的外城还在，水绕护城河而流，在城的东北面合成一条，往东北流出外城，流经阳平县冈成城西边。
English: The four sides of the city now, the outer city when Yuan Shao was besieged is still there, the water flows around the moat, forms a line on the northeast side of the city, flows out of the outer city to the northeast, and flows through the west side of Okancheng City, Yangping County.

古文：《郡国志》曰：阳平县有冈成亭。
现代文：《郡国志》说：阳平县有冈成亭。
English: "County History" said: Yangping County has Okancheng Pavilion.

古文：应劭曰：临济县西北五十里有建信城，都尉治故城者也。漯水又东北径千乘县二城间。汉高帝六年，以为千乘郡，王莽之建信也。
现代文：汉昭帝元平元年，把阳平封给垂相蔡义，立为侯国。漂水又北流，横穿过萃的大路。城的西北角有苹亭。《春秋》：桓公十六年常七年立为千乘郡。也就是王莽的建信。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Zhao of the Han Dynasty, Yangping was assigned to the emperor of the Sui Dynasty, Cai Yi, and was established as a vassal state. The water flowed north, and the main road ran across the river. There is an apple pavilion in the northwest corner of the city. "Spring and Autumn": In the sixteenth year of King Huan, it was established for seven years as the county of Senzheng. That is Wang Mang's founding belief.

古文：章帝建初四年为王国，和帝永元七年，改为乐安郡。故齐地。
现代文：章帝建初四年，立为王国，和帝永元七年，改为乐安郡，从前是齐国地方。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Zhang Jianchu, it was established as a kingdom, and in the seventh year of Emperor Yongzheng, it was changed to Le'an County, formerly a place in Qi Province.

古文：伏琛曰：千乘城在齐城西北百五十里，隔会水，即漯水之别名也。
现代文：伏深说：千乘城在齐城西北一百五十里，中间隔着会水，就是深水的别名。
English: Fushin said: Qianren City is one hundred and fifty miles northwest of Qi City, and across the middle is the meeting water, which is another name for the deep water.

古文：又东北为马常坑，坑东西八十里，南北三十里，乱河枝流而入于海。
现代文：又往东北流，就是马常坑，这片洼地东西八十里，南北三十里。漂水由此穿过河水的支流注入大海。
English: Further to the north-east is the Ma Chang Keng, a depression 80 miles east to west and 30 miles north to south, through which the drifting water flows into the sea through the river's tributaries.

古文：河、海之饶，兹焉为最。
现代文：河海物产的富饶，这里要首屈一指了。
English: The richness of river and sea products is second to none here.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：漯水东北至千乘入海，河盛则通津委海，水耗则微涓绝流。
现代文：《地理风俗传》说：深水往东北流，到千乘注入大海。河水升涨时，水流畅通，泻入大海；枯涸时就只有一缕细水，至于断流。
English: "History of Geography and Customs" says: Deep water flows to the northeast, and pours into the sea at Chijo. When the river rises, the water flow is smooth and flows into the sea; when it dries up, there is only a wisp of thin water, and the flow is cut off.

古文：《书》浮于济、漯，亦是水者也。
现代文：《尚书》：在济水、漂水航行，指的就是此水。
English: "Shangshu": sailing on water, floating on water, refers to this water.

古文：县西有东方朔冢，冢侧有祠，祠有神验。
现代文：又往东北流过杨虚县东边，商河从这里分支流出。《地理志》：杨虚，是平原郡的属县。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the eastern side of Yangxu County, and the Shanghe River branches out from here. "Geography": Yangxu is a county belonging to Pingyuan County.

古文：水侧有云城，汉武帝元封四年，封齐孝王子刘信为侯国也。
现代文：汉文帝四年改称厌次。按《史记•高祖功臣侯者年表》，高帝六年把这里封给齐孝王的儿子刘信，立为侯国。
English: Emperor Hanwen changed the name to Hanji in the fourth year. According to the "Historical Records • Gaozhu Gongshen Hou Calendar," Emperor Gao assigned this place to Liu Xin, the son of King Qi Xiao, in the sixth year and established it as a princely state.

古文：商河又分为二水，南水谓之长丛沟，东流倾注于海。沟南海侧，有蒲台，台高八丈，方二百步。
现代文：商河又分成两支，南支叫长丛沟，东流注入大海，沟南海边有蒲台，高八丈，方圆二百步。
English: The Shanghe River is divided into two branches. The southern branch is called the Changconggou, and the eastern stream flows into the sea. There is a footbridge on the south coast of the ditch, which is eight stories high and 200 paces in circumference.

古文：《三齐略记》曰：鬲城东南有蒲台，秦始皇东游海上，于台上蟠蒲系马，至今每岁蒲生，萦委若有系状，似水杨，可以为箭。
现代文：《三齐略记》说：扁城东南有蒲台，秦始皇东游于海上，在台上把蒲柳盘结起来拴马。直到今天，每年蒲柳长出以后，还是盘盘曲曲，像是拴过什么似的。蒲柳很像水杨，可以制箭。
English: "The Abridged Records of the Three Emperors" says: Southeast of Biancheng, there was a footbridge. Qin Shihuang traveled eastward across the sea and tied a string of willow branches to a horse. To this day, every year, after the willow branches have grown, they are still twisted and twisted, as if something had been plowed through them. The willow branches are very similar to poplars and can be used to make arrows.

古文：今东去海三十里。
现代文：现在东边离海三十里。
English: Now the east side is thirty miles from the sea.

古文：北水世又谓之百薄渎，东北流注于海水矣。
现代文：北支世人又称百薄读，往东北流，注入大海。
English: The Beizhi River, also known as the Baibo River, flows to the northeast and pours into the sea.

古文：汉高帝六年置，王莽改曰河平也。
现代文：大河又往东北流经高唐县老城西边。《春秋左传》：襄公十九年所置，王莽改名为河平。
English: The great river flows to the northeast through the west side of the old city of Gaotang County. "Spring and Autumn Legend": It was set in the 19th year of Xianggong, and Wang Mang changed his name to He Ping.

古文：晋灼曰：齐西有平原。
现代文：晋灼说：齐的西部有平原。
English: Jin Jiao said: There is a plain in the west of Qi.

古文：河水东北过高唐，高唐，即平原也。
现代文：河水往东北流经高唐，高唐就是平原。
English: The river flows northeast through the High Tang, which is the plain.

古文：故《经》言，河水径高唐县东。
现代文：所以《水经》说：河水流过高唐县东边，却弄错了。
English: Therefore, Shui Jing said that the river water flowed through the eastern part of Gaotang County, but it was a mistake.

古文：非也。按《地理志》曰：高唐漂水所出，平原则笃马河导焉，明平原非高唐，大河不得出其东审矣。
现代文：按《地理志》说：高唐是漂水的发源地，平原则是笃马河经过的地方，这说明平原不是高唐，大河不可能流过县东，这是一清二楚的事。
English: According to the "Geography," Gaotang is the birthplace of drifting water, and Ping is the place where the Tuduma River passes. This shows that the plain is not Gaotang, and the river cannot flow through the east of the county. This is a clear matter.

古文：大河右溢，世谓之甘枣沟。水侧多枣，故俗取名焉。
现代文：大河从右边溢出，世人称为甘枣沟，水边多枣，所以民间取了这水名。
English: The large river overflows from the right, and the world calls it the Sweet Date Ditch. There are a lot of dates on the water's edge, which is why people took this name for the water.

古文：河盛则委泛，水耗则辍流。
现代文：河水盛大时向此沟溢出，水枯时就断流。
English: When the river is full, it overflows into this ditch, and when the water dries up, the flow is cut off.

古文：故沟又东北历长堤，径漯阴里北，东径著城北，东为陂淀渊潭相接，世谓之秽野薄。
现代文：老沟又往东北流经长堤，流过漂阴县北边，往东流过著城北边。东边是湖荡，渊潭相接，世人称为秽野薄。
English: The old ditch also flows to the northeast through the long embankment, flows through the north side of Fuyin County, and flows eastward through the north side of the city. On the east side is the lake, the pond and the pond are connected, and the world is called the ugly field.

古文：河水又东北径阿阳县故城西。
现代文：河水又往东北流经阿阳县老城西边。
English: The river then flows northeast through the western side of the old city of Ayang County.

古文：汉高帝六年，封郎中万訢为侯国。
现代文：汉高帝六年前，把这里封给郎中万诉，立为侯国。
English: Six years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave this land to his son-in-law Wan Sui and established it as a principality.

古文：应劭曰：漯阴县东南五十里有阿阳乡，故县也。
现代文：应劫说：漂阴县东南五十里有阿阳乡，是个旧县址，
English: Ying Cao said: There is an old county seat, Ayang Township, in the southeastern 50s of Blowing Yin County.

古文：又东北过漯阳县北，河水自平原左径安德城东，而北为鹿角津。
现代文：又往东北流过深阳县北边，河水从平原县左边流经安德城东边，往北是鹿角津。
English: It also flows northeast through the northern part of Shinyang County. The river water flows from the left side of Pingyuan County through the east side of Andes, and to the north is Kazunootsu.

古文：东北径般县、乐陵、朸乡至厌次县故城南，为厌次河。
现代文：水往东北流经般县、乐陵、初乡，到厌次县旧城南边，称为厌次河。
English: The water flows to the northeast through Ban County, Le Ling, and Hatsugo, to the south of the old city of Xieji County, and is called the Xieji River.

古文：汉安帝永初二年，剧贼毕豪等数百乘船寇平原，县令刘雄，门下小吏所辅，浮舟追至厌次津，与贼合战，并为贼擒。
现代文：汉安帝永初二年，强盗毕豪等数百人乘船来抢劫平原，县令刘雄、下属小吏所辅，开船追至厌次津，与强盗作战，都被强盗俘虏了。
English: In the first two years of the Han Dynasty, the robber Bi Hao and hundreds of others came by boat to rob the plain. The county magistrate Liu Xiong, assisted by subordinate minor officials, drove the boat to Yanzi Jin, fought with the robbers, and were all captured by the robbers.

古文：求代雄，豪纵雄于此津。
现代文：所辅请求为刘雄替死，毕豪就在这渡头释放了刘雄。
English: He also asked for Liu Xiong to die in his place, and Bi Hao released Liu Xiong at this crossing.

古文：所辅可谓孝尽爱敬，义极君臣矣。
现代文：所辅可说在孝道上尽了敬爱之心，在节义上做到了下属忠于上级的极点了。
English: In addition, it can be said that the filial piety has been respected and the subordinates have been loyal to the superiors in the meaning of the festival.

古文：河水右径漯阴县故城北，王莽之巨武县也。
现代文：河水右边流经漂阴县老城北边，就是王莽的巨武县。
English: The right side of the river flows through the north side of the old city of Blouin County, which is Wang Mang's Geowu County.

古文：河水又东北为漯沃津，在漯沃县故城南，王莽之延亭者也。
现代文：河水又往东北流，就到漂沃县老城南边，这就是王莽的延亭。
English: The river then flows to the northeast, to the south of the old town of Fluvo County. This is Wang Mang's Yan Ting.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：千乘县西北五十里有大河，河北有漯沃城，故县也。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：千乘县西北五十里有大河。河北有深沃城，是个旧县城。
English: "Geography and Customs" says: There are fifty large rivers in the northwest of Qianren County. Hebei has Shenvo City, which is an old county seat.

古文：魏改为后部亭，今俗遂名之曰右辅城。
现代文：魏时改为后部亭，现在俗称右辅城。
English: During the Wei Dynasty, it was changed to Houbu Pavilion, and is now commonly known as Zuoxu Castle.

古文：河水又东径千乘城北。伏琛之所谓千乘北城者也。
现代文：河水又往东流经千乘城北边，就是伏深所说的千乘北城。
English: The river then flows east through the northern side of Chijo Castle, which is Fushin's Chijo North Castle.

古文：又东北过利县北，又东北过甲下邑，济水从西来注之。又东北入于海。
现代文：又往东北流过利县北边，又往东北流过甲下邑，济水从西边流来注人，又往东北流人大海。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the north of Lixian County, and to the northeast through Jiaxie Township. The Jishui River flows from the west to Jiuyuan, and then to the northeast to the sea.

古文：河水又东分为二水，枝津东径甲下城南，东南历马常坑注济。
现代文：河水又东流，分成两条，支流往东流经甲下城南边，往东南流经马常沉注入济水。
English: The river also flows to the east, splitting into two. The tributary flows to the east through the southern part of the lower city of A, and flows to the southeast through Ma Chang Sheng into Jishui.

古文：《经》言济水注河，非也。
现代文：《水经》说济水注入河水，实际上并不是。
English: "Suikei" says that the water is injected into the river, but in fact it is not.

古文：河水自枝津东北流，径甲下邑北，世谓之仓子城。又东北流，入于海。
现代文：河水从支流分出处往东北流经下甲邑北边，世人称为仓子城；又往东北流，注入大海。
English: The river water flows from the source of the tributary to the northeast through the northern part of Lower Jiayuguan, known to the world as Cangzicheng; it also flows to the northeast and flows into the sea.

古文：《淮南子》曰：九折注于海，而流不绝者，昆仑之输也。
现代文：《淮南子》说：河水打了九个弯注入大海，而水流仍源源不断，这是因为有昆仑不断供水的缘故。
English: "Huainanzi" said: The river has made nine bends into the sea, and the water flow is still continuous. This is due to the continuous supply of water by the Kunlun River.

古文：《尚书。禹贡》曰：夹右碣石入于河。
现代文：《尚书•禹贡》说：右边傍着褐石进入大河。
English: "Shangshu • Yugong" said: On the right side next to the brown stone into the big river.

古文：《山海经》曰：碣石之山，绳水出焉，东流注于河。
现代文：《山海经》说：竭石之山，绳水就发源在那里，东流注入河水。
English: "Mountain and Sea Sutra" says: "The source of rope-water is in the mountains of exhausted stone, and the east current is injected into the river water.

古文：河之入海，旧在碣石，今川流所导，非禹渎也。
现代文：河水从前原在褐石注入大海，现在水流经过的地方，已不是大禹时的旧河道了。
English: The river water from Maehara flows into the sea at the brownstone. The place where the water flows through now is no longer the old river channel.

古文：周定王五年，河徙故渎。
现代文：周定王五年前，大河改道。
English: Five years ago, Zhou Dingwang changed the course of the great river.

古文：故班固曰：商竭，周移也。
现代文：所以班固说：商时枯竭，周时改道。
English: Therefore, Banggu said: the business time is exhausted, and the weekly time is diverted.

古文：又以汉武帝元光二年，河又徙东郡，更注渤海。
现代文：在汉武帝元光二年前，大河又改道，于东郡注入渤海。
English: Two years before Emperor Yuan Guang of Hanwu, the great river changed its course again and flowed into the Bohai Sea in Dong County.

古文：是以汉司空掾王璜言曰：往者，天尝连雨，东北风，海水溢，西南出侵数百里。
现代文：所以汉司空椽王磺说：从前曾连日下雨，刮东北风，海水横溢，向西南涌去，入侵达数百里。
English: Therefore, the Hanshi sky god Wang Zhuang said: In the past, it rained for days on end, the northeast wind blew, the seawater overflowed, surged to the southwest, and invaded hundreds of miles.

古文：故张折云：碣石在海中。
现代文：所以张折说：褐石在海中。
English: Therefore, Zhang Ori said: the brownstone is in the sea.

古文：盖沦于海水也。
现代文：大概褐石是沉没到海水中去了。
English: Presumably the brownstone sank into the sea.

古文：昔燕、齐辽旷，分置营州，今城届海滨，海水北侵，城垂沦者半。
现代文：从前燕、齐土地辽阔，因此划出部分土地设置营州。现在城已靠近海边，海水北侵，半个城就将被淹没了。
English: In the past, Yan and Qi had a vast land, so they set aside a part of the land to establish Yingzhou. Now that the city is close to the sea, if the sea encroaches to the north, half of the city will be flooded.

古文：王璜之言，信而有征；碣石入海，非无证矣。
现代文：王横的话有根有据，可以相信；竭石陷入海中，不是全无凭据的。
English: Wang Yang's words are well-founded and can be believed; the stone falling into the sea is not completely without evidence.

