古文：司马相如字长卿，蜀郡成都人也。
现代文：司马相如，字长卿，蜀郡成都人。
English: Sima Xiangru, also known as Zhaochangqing, is from Chengdu, Shu County.

古文：少时好读书，学击剑，名犬子。
现代文：少年时好读书，还练习击剑，取名犬子。
English: When he was a boy, he was good at reading. He also practiced fencing and was nicknamed "Inuko."

古文：相如既学，慕蔺相如之为人也，更名相如。
现代文：相如学业完成，仰慕蔺相如的为人，改名相如。
English: They completed their studies, admired each other, and changed their names.

古文：以訾为郎，事孝景帝，为武骑常侍，非其好也。
现代文：用家资买了个郎官，奉事汉景帝，任武骑常侍，但这并不是他的爱好。
English: He bought a steward with his family's money, served Emperor Han Jing, and was a knight's equerry, but this was not his hobby.

古文：会景帝不好辞赋，是时梁孝王来朝，从游说之士齐人邹阳、淮阴枚乘、吴严忌夫子之徒，相如见而说之，因病免，客游梁，得与诸侯游士居，数岁，乃著《子虚之赋》。
现代文：恰巧景帝不喜好辞赋，这时候梁孝王来京朝见皇上，齐郡人邹阳、淮阴人枚乘、吴县人严忌先生等游说之士随同来京，相如一见就喜欢他们，藉有病辞去了官职，旅居梁国，得到和儒生们住在一起的机会，相如与许多儒生和游说之士交往了几天，于是写下了《子虚之赋》。
English: It just so happened that Emperor Jing did not like the resignation of Fu, at this time, Liang Xiaowang came to Beijing to see the emperor, and the lobbyists from Qi County, Puyang, Huaiyin, and Wuxian, such as Mr. Yanqi, came to Beijing with him. He liked them at first sight, resigned from his official position due to illness, traveled to Liang Province, and got the opportunity to live with Confucians. He also met with many Confucians and lobbyists for a few days, so he wrote "Zihu Fu."

古文：会梁孝王薨，相如归，而家贫无以自业。
现代文：遇上梁孝王去世，相如返回家中，家中贫穷，无事可干。
English: When Liang Xiaowang passed away, it was like returning home. The family was poor and had nothing to do.

古文：索与临邛令王吉相善，吉曰： 长卿久宦游，不遂而困，来过我。 
现代文：他一向与临印县令王吉相好，王吉说： 长卿多年在外求官不大称心，你可到我这儿来。 
English: He had always been friendly with Wang Ji, the governor of Linyin County. Wang Ji said, "Changqing has not been satisfied with seeking a post abroad for many years. You can come to me.

古文：于是相如往舍都亭，临邛令缪为恭敬，日往朝相如。
现代文：于是相如前往临印。
English: So I went to Linyi.

古文：相如初尚见之，后称病，使从者谢吉，吉愈益谨肃。
现代文：居住在城外的旅舍里。临印县令假献殷勤，每天去拜访相如。相如开头还接见他，后来声称有病，让随从辞谢王吉，王吉更加谨慎恭敬。
English: He lived in a hostel outside the city. Lin'in County's magistrate paid a lot of attention to him and visited him every day. At the beginning, he also received him. Later, he claimed to be ill and asked his attendant to thank Wang Ji. Wang Ji was more cautious and respectful.

古文：临邛多富人，卓王孙僮客八百人，程郑亦数百人，乃相谓曰： 令有贵客，为具召之。
现代文：临印城中富人多，卓王孙有家奴八百人，程鄞也有几百人，两人便互相称说： 县令有贵宾，我们得办酒食宴请他一下。
English: There are many rich people in Lin'in City. Zhuo Wangsun has 800 slaves, and Cheng Yao also has several hundred. The two of them said to each other, "The county magistrate has a distinguished guest, we have to hold a banquet to invite him."

古文：并召令。 
现代文：一并邀请县令。 
English: He also invited the county magistrate.

古文：令既至，卓氏客以百数，至日中请司马长卿，长卿谢病不能临。
现代文：县令已经来到，卓氏宾客以百计算。到了中午，请司马长卿，长卿托言有病不能前往，临印县令不敢尝一尝饭食，亲自去迎接相如。
English: The county magistrate had already arrived, and Zhuo's guests numbered in the hundreds. At noon, he asked Sima Changqing, who could not go due to illness, and Linyin County magistrate, who did not dare to try a meal, to personally meet him.

古文：临邛令不敢尝食，身自迎相如，相如为不得已而强往，一坐尽倾。
现代文：相如不得已。
English: As if it was a last resort.

古文：酒酣，临邛令前奏琴曰： 窃闻长卿好之，愿以自娱。 
现代文：勉强前往，满座的人都倾慕他的风采。酒兴正浓时，临印县令捧着琴上前说： 我私下听说长卿喜爱这个，希望能弹弹使自己快乐快乐。 
English: He reluctantly went, and a full house of people admired his style. When the wine was in full swing, the governor of Linyin County held the piano and said: I have heard in private that Changqing loves this, and I hope to make myself happy and happy.

古文：相如辞谢，为鼓一再行。
现代文：相如推谢了一下，给弹奏了一两支曲子。
English: As if to say thank you, he played a tune or two.

古文：是时，卓王孙有女文君新寡，好音，故相如缪与令相重而以琴心挑之。
现代文：这时卓王孙有个女儿叫作文君，刚死了丈夫，喜爱音乐，因此相如假装与县令相敬重，而用琴声挑逗她。
English: At this time, Zhuo Wangsun had a daughter named Composition Jun, who had just lost her husband and loved music. Therefore, he pretended to respect the county magistrate and teased her with the sound of the piano.

古文：相如时从车骑，雍容闲雅，甚都。及饮卓氏弄琴，文君窃从户窥，心说而好之，恐不得当也。
现代文：相如到临工口来，车马随行，举止大方甚为俊秀；及至在皇氐家中饮酒、玩琴，塞君私自从门缝中偷看他，心中欢喜而仰慕他，担心不能配得上。
English: When he came to the construction site, he was accompanied by chariots and horses, and his manners were generous and very handsome; and when he came to drink alcohol and play the piano in the emperor's house, I peeked at him through the cracks in the door and admired him with joy in my heart, worried that I could not be worthy of him.

古文：既罢，相如乃令侍人重赐文君侍者通殷勤。
现代文：弹琴结束，相如便使人重赏文君侍者以此向她转达私衷。
English: At the end of the concert, the waiter who had been playing the harp paid tribute to Wenjun and conveyed his personal feelings to her.

古文：文君夜亡奔相如，相如与驰归成都。
现代文：文君夜间逃出家中私奔相如，相如于是与文君赶着车马急返成都。
English: Wenjun ran away from home at night, and she and Wenjun rushed back to Chengdu by car and horse.

古文：家徒四壁立。
现代文：家中空空，惟有四面墙壁直立。
English: The house was empty except for four walls.

古文：卓王孙大怒曰： 女不材，我不忍杀，一钱不分也！ 
现代文：卓王孙大发脾气说： 女儿不成才到了极点，我不忍心杀死她，但绝不分给她一个钱！ 
English: Zhuo Wangsun Da lost his temper and said, "My daughter's lack of talent has reached the extreme, I can't bear to kill her, but I will never give her any money!"

古文：人或谓王孙，王孙终不听。
现代文：有的人劝说王孙，王孙始终不听。
English: Some people tried to persuade Zhuo Wangsun, but he still refused to listen.

古文：文君久之不乐，谓长卿曰： 弟俱如临邛，比昆弟假貣，犹足以为生，何至自苦如此！ 
现代文：文君过了很长时间心中不快，说道： 长卿衹管和我一同前往临印，从弟兄中借贷也足以维持生活，何至于让自己困苦到这个样子！ 
English: After a long time, Wenjun was unhappy in his heart and said, "Changqing Gongguan and I are going to Linyin together. Borrowing from brothers is enough to sustain life. How can you make yourself miserable like this!"

古文：相如与俱之临邛，尽卖车骑，买酒舍，乃令文君当卢。相如身自著犊鼻裈，与庸保杂作，涤器于市中。
现代文：相如与文君一同来到了临印，把车马统统卖了，买了一个酒店做起酒生意来，他让文君坐在炉前卖酒，自己亲自穿上牛鼻围裙和奴婢及雇工们共同操作，在市中洗涤酒器。
English: Just as he came to Linyin with Wenjun, sold all the cars and horses, bought a hotel to start a wine business, he let Wenjun sit in front of the stove to sell wine, put on the bull nose apron himself, and worked together with the slaves and employees to wash the wine vessels in the city.

古文：卓王孙耻之，为杜门不出。
现代文：卓王孙听说后认为是奇耻大辱，为此闭门不出。
English: When Zhuo Wangsun heard about it, he thought it was a great shame and humiliation. Therefore, he did not want to close the door.

古文：昆弟诸公更谓王孙曰： 有一男两女，所不足者非财也。
现代文：兄弟和长辈们轮流前去劝说王孙说： 你衹有一儿两女，所缺的不是钱财啊。
English: Some brothers and elders tried to persuade Zhuo Wangsun, saying, "You have one son and two daughters. What your family lacks is not money.

古文：今文君既失身于司马长卿，长卿故倦游，虽贫，其人材足依也。且又令客，奈何相辱如此！ 
现代文：如今文君已经委身于司马长卿，长卿本为厌倦作官，虽然家贫，那个人的才能是可以依靠的，况且又是县令的客人，为什么偏偏如此相辱呢！ 
English: Now Wenjun has committed himself to Sima Changqing, Changqing is tired of being an official, although his family is poor, that person's talent can be relied on, moreover, he is a guest of the county magistrate, why is he so humiliated!

古文：卓王孙不得已，分与文君僮百人，钱百万，及其嫁时衣被财物。
现代文：卓王孙不得已，分给文君家奴一百人，钱一百万，还有她出嫁时的衣裳、被褥和钱财、物品。
English: As a last resort, Zhuo Wangsun distributed one million yuan to one hundred of Wenjun's slaves, as well as her wedding clothes, bedding, money and goods.

古文：文君乃与相如归成都，买田宅，为富人。
现代文：文君便与相如回到成都，置买田地房屋，成为富人。
English: Wenjun returned to Chengdu in the same way, bought farmland and houses, and became a rich man.

古文：居久之，蜀人杨得意为狗监，侍上。
现代文：过了不久，蜀郡人杨得意任狗监，服侍汉武童。
English: After a long period of time, Yang, a resident of Shu County, served the emperor as a dog warden.

古文：上读《子虚赋》而善之，曰： 朕独不得与此人同时哉！ 
现代文：还亘瞳读《子虚赋》，极力称赞，说到： 偏偏我不能够和这个人同时啊！ 
English: Watanabe also read "Son of a Whore" and praised it highly, saying, "I can't be with this person at the same time!

古文：得意曰： 臣邑人司马相如自言为此赋。 
现代文：得意说： 我的同乡司马相如称这赋是他作的。 
English: Yang said proudly: My countryman Sima Xiangru claimed that he wrote this fu.

古文：上惊，乃召问相如。
现代文：皇上大惊，便召见询问相如。
English: Emperor Wu was very surprised and summoned Zong Rong to inquire.

古文：相如曰： 有是。
现代文：相如说： 有这回事。
English: As if to say: There's this thing.

古文：然此乃诸侯之事，未足观，请为天子游猎之赋。 
现代文：然而这是写的诸侯之事，不值得一看。请允许我作天子游猎之赋，赋作好后进献。 
English: However, this is a matter for the princes, and is not worth looking at. Please allow me to make a gift for the son of heaven, a gift for the future.

古文：上令尚书给笔札，相如以 子虚 ，虚言也，为楚称； 乌有先生 者，乌有此事也，为齐难； 亡是公 者，亡是人也，欲明天子之义。
现代文：皇上答应了他，让尚书发给了他书写的毛笔和木简。相如以 子虚 为空言虚语，是为了称说楚国之美； 乌有先生 ，是为了替齐诘难楚国； 亡是公，为无此人，是为了阐明作天子的道理。
English: The emperor agreed to his request, and had Shang Shuxu send him a writing brush and a wooden tablet. For example, "Son chu" (子虚) was used as an empty phrase to praise the beauty of Chu; "Wu yi" (乌有先生) was used to describe the difficulties of conquering Chu; "Rui xi guo" (亡是公) was used to describe the virtues of being the son of Heaven.

古文：故虚借此三人为辞，以推天子诸侯之苑囿。
现代文：因而凭空假藉造三个人写成文章，用以推想天子诸侯在苑囿游玩打猎的情景。
English: Therefore, he fabricated three people out of thin air to write an article, which was used to conjecture the scene of the princes of heaven playing and hunting in the garden.

古文：其卒章归之于节俭，因以风谏。
现代文：那篇文章结束，归结到 节俭 二字，想以此劝谏天子。
English: At the end of that article, it boiled down to the word "frugality," and I wanted to use it to persuade him.

古文：奏之天子，天子大说。
现代文：进献给天子，天子大为高兴，他的文章写道：
English: After presenting Fu Jin to Tian Zi, Tian Zi was particularly happy.

古文：其辞曰：楚使子虚使于齐，齐王悉发车骑与使者出田。
现代文：楚国派子虚出使到齐国，齐王派出所有的车马与使者一起去野外打猎。
English: The State of Chu sent a false envoy to the State of Qi, and the King of Qi sent all his horses and chariots to go hunting with the envoy.

古文：田罢，子虚过姹乌有先生，亡是公存焉。
现代文：打猎回来以后子虚便去拜访乌有先生，为这件事情夸口，这时亡是公也在子虚这裹。
English: After returning from hunting, Zi Hui went to visit Mr. Wu You and boasted about this matter. At this time, the death of the prince was also in Zi Hui's arms.

古文：坐定，乌有先生问曰： 今日田乐乎？ 
现代文：大家分宾主坐定之后，乌有先生问： 今天野外打猎高兴吗？ 
English: After everyone was seated, Mr. Wu You asked Zi Hu: Are you happy hunting today?

古文：子虚曰： 乐。  获多乎？ 
现代文：子虚回答说： 很是高兴 。 捕捉的猎物多吗？  不多。 
English: Zi Hu said, "Happy. There's a lot of prey, right?"

古文：曰： 少。 
现代文： 收获不多为什么还这样高兴呀？ 
English: Zi Hu replied: Very few.

古文： 然则何乐？ 对曰： 仆乐王之欲夸仆以车骑之众，而仆对以云梦之事也。 
现代文：子虚回答说： 我高兴的是齐王原本想向我炫耀齐王的车马众多，而我却反过来向他夸讲楚国跨长江的大泽云梦泽的雄伟壮观。 乌有说： 能讲给我听听吗？ 
English: Zi Hu replied, "I am glad that King Qi originally wanted to show off the many chariots and horses of King Qi to me, but I, in turn, praised to him the grandeur of Chu's crossing of the Yangtze River." Wu You said, "Can you tell me?"

古文：曰： 可得闻乎？ 
现代文：子虚说： 当然可以，齐王亲自率领精选的千车万马精兵强将到海滨去打猎，当时，士卒们分散列队在草泽的各个角落，满山遍野撤下了捕捉野兽的罗网。
English: Han Di said: May I listen to the contents of your watch?

古文：子虚曰： 可。王驾车千乘，选徒万骑，田于海滨，列卒满泽，罘罔弥山。
现代文：野兔撞入猎网，飞奔的鹿被车轮压死，角麋被箭矢射杀，雄麟被倒提着一只腿拉着。
English: A hare crashed into a hunting net, a galloping deer was crushed to death by a car wheel, a wildebeest was shot by an arrow, and a male unicorn was carried upside down on one leg.

古文：掩菟辚鹿，射麋格麟，鹜于盐浦，割鲜染轮。
现代文：狩猎的千车万马飞奔在海滨的盐滩上。猎杀的飞鸟野兽的鲜血将车轮染成红色。
English: The chariots and horses of the hunters race across the salt flats of the coast, their wheels stained red with the blood of the birds and beasts they have killed.

古文：射中获多，矜而自功，顾谓仆曰： 楚亦有平原广泽游猎之地饶乐若此者乎？
现代文：猎杀了很多的鸟兽，齐王沾沾自喜地夸耀自己打猎的本领。齐王回过头来对我说： 你们楚国也有如此富饶的平原，广阔的草泽地供狩猎取乐吗？
English: Having hunted down many birds and beasts, King Qi boasted of his hunting prowess with self-satisfaction. King Qi turned to me and said, "Does your country of Chu also have such rich plains and vast grasslands for hunting pleasure?"

古文：楚王之猎孰与寡人？ 
现代文：你们楚王到野外狩猎规模与我相比如何呀？ 
English: How does the scale of your wild goose hunting compare to mine?

古文：仆下车对曰： 臣，楚国之鄙人也，幸得宿卫十有余年，时从出游，游于后园，览于有无，然犹未能遍睹也。
现代文：我跳下车来对齐王说： 臣是楚国最微鄙的小人物，见识极少，有幸在宫中当了十多年的侍卫，时常跟随楚王出游打猎，打猎的猎场多在后苑，苑中各处有的地方去过，有的地方看都没看过。
English: I jumped out of the car to align myself with the king and said, "The minister is the most despicable little person in Chu. He has seen very little. I was fortunate to be a bodyguard in the palace for more than ten years. I often went hunting with the king of Chu. The hunting grounds were mostly in the backyard. I have been to some places in the garden, but I have never seen some places.

古文：又乌足以言其外泽乎？ 
现代文：从来没有见过后苑的全貌，又怎能描述外泽的情况呢？ 
English: I have never seen the backyard in its entirety, so how can I describe the condition of the exterior?

古文：齐王曰： 虽然，略以子之所闻见言之。  仆对曰： 唯唯。
现代文：齐王说： 既然是这样，你就把你所看到的和听说的情况大概地说说吧！  我对答道： 好吧！
English: King Qi said, "Since this is the case, please roughly describe what you saw and heard." I replied, "Okay!"

古文：臣闻楚有七泽，尝见其一，未睹其余也。
现代文：臣听说楚国有七个大草泽，而我衹见过其中的一个，其他六个都没见过。
English: The minister heard that there are seven large grasslands in the state of Chu, and I have only seen one of them, and have not seen the other six.

古文：臣之所见，盖特其小小者耳，名曰云梦。
现代文：而且臣下我所见到过的这个草泽是特别小的一个，名字叫云梦。
English: The one I saw was the smallest of the seven, named Yunmen.

古文：云梦者，方九百里，其中有山焉。
现代文：这个草泽周边九百里，草泽中有山峦。
English: Yunmeng has a circumference of nine hundred li, among which there are mountains.

古文：其山则盘纡岪郁，隆崇律崒；岑崟参差，日月蔽亏；交错纠纷，上干青云；罢池陂陁，下属江河。
现代文：这些山，山势纡迥曲折，高峻雄伟，高矮不齐犬牙相错，群山之中明月时隐时现。山峰高矮交错，高峰直上青云，山脉连绵不断伸向远方，与江河相连。
English: These mountains, mountains with twists and turns, lofty and majestic, high and low, are intertwined, and the bright moon is always present in the mountains. The peaks are intertwined, the peaks are straight up to the blue clouds, and the mountains continue to stretch into the distance, connected to the rivers.

古文：其土则丹青赭垩，雌黄白坿，锡碧金银，众色炫耀，照烂龙鳞。
现代文：大地土壤有朱红、石青、赤土、白土、雄黄、石灰、锡、碧玉、金、银，五颜六色光彩炫耀照人，色彩相杂互相交错，好像龙鳞泛光相杂。
English: The soil of the earth has vermilion, stone blue, red soil, white soil, yellow soil, lime, tin, jasper, gold, and silver. The colorful brilliance shines brightly, and the colors are intertwined with each other, like dragon scales mixed with light.

古文：其石则赤玉玫瑰，琳珉昆吾，瑊玏玄厉，礝石武夫。
现代文：山石有赤色红玉、美玉有玫瑰、琳球、美石有珉石、昆吾、似玉的碱功，黑色可以磨刀的玄厉、白如冰，半有赤色似玉的孺石，赤地白纹，色龙蒽不分明的赋殊石。
English: Mountain stone has red jade, beauty jade has rose, rhinestone, beauty stone has zircon, kungu, jade-like alkali, black can sharpen the knife, white is like ice, half have red jade-like zircon, red ground has white stripe, and the color is indistinguishable.

古文：其东则有蕙圃，衡兰芷若，穹穷昌蒲，江离蘪芜，诸柘巴且。
现代文：云梦泽东部有生长蕙草的园圃，其中生长着蘅、兰、白芷、杜若四种香草，还有穹穷、昌蒲、江离、藤芜、甘蔗和芭蕉等植物。
English: In the eastern part of Yunmengze, there is a garden where eucalyptus grows. There are four kinds of vanilla, including aconite, orchid, eucalyptus, and rhododendron, as well as plants such as jujube, magnolia, juniper, wisteria, sugar cane, and banana.

古文：其南则有平原广泽，登降阤靡，案衍坛曼，缘以大江，限以巫山。
现代文：云梦泽的南部是平原广泽，地势上下不平多斜坡，泽域宽广，以长江为边缘，以巫山为界限。
English: The southern part of Yunmenze is a vast plain. The terrain is uneven and has many slopes. The lake area is wide, with the Yangtze River as the edge and Wushan Mountain as the boundary.

古文：其高燥则生析苞荔，薜莎青薠。
现代文：泽的高处干燥的地方生长着马蓝草、荠草中的菥草、席草中的苞草、似蒲的荔草，当归、香附子、青苹草。
English: In the higher, drier parts of the meadow, there grows horse-blue grass, rush grass in rush grass, rush grass in rush grass, litchi grass that looks like a crabapple, angelica, incense, and green apple grass.

古文：其埤湿则生藏莨蒹葭，东蘠雕胡，莲藉觚卢，奄闾轩于。
现代文：低洼潮湿的地方生长有藏草、莨草、芦苇、水蓼、菰米、觚卢、奄间草、箔草。
English: In low-lying humid places, there are Tibetan grasses, rushes, reeds, water hyacinths, glutinous rice, hellebore, aman grass, and foil grass.

古文：众物居之，不可胜图。
现代文：许许多多的植物在这裹生长数都数不过来。
English: There are too many plants to count.

古文：其西则有涌泉清池，激水推移，外发夫容华，内隐巨石白沙。
现代文：云梦泽的西部有涌出的泉水和清澈见底的水池。湍急的流水不停地激荡流动。巨石、白沙隐现在池中。
English: In the west of Yunmenze, there are gushing springs and crystal-clear pools. The rushing water is constantly agitating and flowing. Boulders and white sand are hidden in the pool.

古文：其中则有神龟蛟鼍，毒冒鳖鼋。
现代文：池中还存活着神龟、蛟鼍、玳瑁、鳖鼂。
English: In the pond, there are still living tortoises, dragonflies, dragonflies and dragonflies.

古文：其北则有阴林巨树，楩楠豫章，桂椒木兰，檗离朱杨，樝梨梬栗，橘柚芬芳。
现代文：云梦泽的北部有茂密的森林和参天的大树，有椎树、楠树、枕树、樟树、桂树、椒树、木兰树、黄蘗树、山梨树、河柳树、山楂树、黑枣树和栗子树，以及橘子和袖子的果实香气四溢。
English: In the northern part of Yunmenze, there are dense forests and towering trees, including conifers, camphor trees, pillow trees, eucalyptus trees, cinnamon trees, pepper trees, magnolia trees, yellow birch trees, sorrel trees, willow trees, hawthorn trees, black jujube trees and chestnut trees, and the fruit aromas of oranges and pears are overflowing.

古文：其上则有宛雏孔鸾，腾远射干。其下则有白虎玄豹，蟃蜒貙豻。
现代文：在云梦泽的树林中，树上有美丽似鸾凤的鹅鶸、孔雀、鸾鸟，有舒臂轻柔在树间善于腾跳的猿猴、有筑巢于绝壁高树上的野干。树下有白虎、黑豹，有似狼的猩挺，似狐狸的躯和似野狗的轩。
English: In the woods of Yunmenze, there are beautiful geese, peacocks, and ostriches that look like pheasants, monkeys that are good at jumping gently between trees, and wild dogs that build nests on high trees. Under the trees, there are white tigers and black leopards, orangutans that look like wolves, bodies that look like foxes, and wild dogs.

古文：于是乎乃使剸诸之伦，手格此兽。
现代文：  于是乎楚王就命令像割诸一类的勇士们，不使用任何器械徒手与这些豺狼猛兽格斗。
English: As a result, King Chu ordered warriors such as Matsu to fight these wolves with their bare hands without using any tools.

古文：楚王乃驾驯驳之驷，乘雕玉之舆，靡鱼须之桡旃，曳明月之珠旗，建干将之雄戟，左鸟号之雕弓，右夏服之劲箭；阳子骖乘，孅阿为御；案节未舒，即陵狡兽，蹴蛩蛩，辚距虚，轶野马，车惠騊駼；乘遗风，射游骐，倏胂倩浰，雷动焱至，星流电击，弓不虚发，中必决眦，洞胸达掖，绝乎心系，获若雨兽，揜草蔽地。
现代文：楚王亲自驾驶着驯服的四匹马拉的战车，坐着由美玉雕饰的轿车，摇晃着用大鱼胡须做旗穗的曲杆战旗，摆动着镶嵌着明珠的大旗。
English: King Chu himself drove a tame four-horse chariot, sat in a chariot carved with gems, waved a curved war flag made of fish whiskers, and waved a large flag inlaid with pearls.

古文：于是楚王乃弭节徘徊，翱翔容与览乎阴林，观壮士之暴怒，与猛兽之恐惧，徼烋受诎，殚睹众物之变态。
现代文：高高举起干将锻造的三刃戟，左手拿着有雕画的乌号弓，右手握着夏代后羿氏箭囊中的硬利箭。车舆中有善于相马的孙阳子伯乐陪乘。
English: He held aloft a three-edged gong forged by a general. In his left hand he held a carved black-flag bow, and in his right hand he held a hardened arrow from the quiver of the Xia Dynasty's Empress Dowager. Accompanying him in the carriage was Sun Yang Zibo Le, who was good at horse-drawn carriages.

古文：于是郑女曼姬，被阿锡，揄纻缟，杂纤罗，垂雾縠，襞积褰绉，郁桡溪谷；衯々裶々，扬衪戌削，蜚襳垂髾；扶舆猗靡，翕呷萃蔡下摩兰蕙，上拂羽盖；错翡翠之葳蕤，缪绕玉绥；眇眇忽忽，若神之仿佛。于是乃群相与獠于蕙圃，媻姗勃窣，上金堤，揜翡翠，射鵕鸃，微矰出，孅缴施，弋白鹄，连驾鹅，双仓鸟下，扬旌枻，张翠帷，建羽盖。罔毒冒，钓紫贝，摐金鼓，吹鸣籁，榜人歌，声流喝，水虫骇，波鸿沸，涌泉起，奔扬会，礧石相击，琅琅礚々，若雷霆之声，闻乎数百里外。  将息獠者，击灵鼓，起烽燧，车案行，骑就队，纚乎淫淫，般乎裔裔。
现代文：给楚王驾车的是给月神驾车的娥阿。骏马按照节拍缓缓起步，还没跑起来就已经把灵健的野兽凌踏在脚下。
English: It is Ea who drives the car for the Moon God to drive the car for the King of Chu. The horse slowly starts according to the beat, and has already trampled the nimble beast underfoot before it has started to run.

古文：于是楚王乃登阳云之台，泊乎无为，淡乎自持，勺药之和具而后御之。不若大王终日驰骋，曾不下舆，脟割轮焠，自以为娱。臣窃观之，齐殆不如。 
现代文：用芍药调和五味食物然后服用。不像齐王您整天受着车骑之劳的煎熬，驰骋在疆场。随便将一些生肉切成块，在轮问烧烤一下就吃了。而且您自己还以为是一种乐事。以臣看来，齐王您恐怕不如楚王。 
English: Mix five-flavor food with ginger medicine and then take it. Unlike King Qi, you are not tormented by the hardships of driving and riding all day, galloping in the battlefield. Casually cut some raw meat into pieces, grill it in the round and eat it. And you yourself thought it was a pleasure. In my opinion, King Qi, you are probably not as good as King Chu.

古文：于是王无以应仆也。 
现代文：于是齐王对我所说的无话可说，默默无言。 
English: As a result, King Qi had nothing to say about what I said, he was speechless.

古文：乌有先生曰： 是何言之过也！足下不远千里，来况齐国，王悉境内之士，备车骑之众，与使者出田，乃欲戮力致获，以娱左右也，何名为夸哉！
现代文：乌有先生说： 先生这样说就不对了，先生您不怕千里路远光临齐国，齐王调动国内士兵准备了许多车辆马匹，陪同您楚国的使者出外狩猎，原本想竭尽全力捕捉大量的飞禽野兽来讨好款待楚国的使者您，怎能说是向您夸耀呢？
English: Mr. Wu You said: "Sir, it is not right to say so. Sir, you are not afraid to travel thousands of miles to visit the State of Qi. The King of Qi has mobilized domestic soldiers to prepare many vehicles and horses to accompany your emissary of the State of Chu on hunting trips. Originally, he wanted to do his best to catch a large number of birds and beasts to please the emissary of the State of Chu. How can I say that I am proud of you?

古文：问楚地之有无者，愿闻大国之风烈，先生之余论也。
现代文：向您询问楚国的地域中都有什么丰富的物产，是想要了解楚国这样的大国好的治国政策和业绩以及先生您的宏韬大略。
English: I am asking you about the wealth of products in the region of Chugoku in order to understand the good governance policies and performance of a large country like Chugoku, as well as your grand strategy.

古文：今足下不称楚王之德厚，而盛推云梦以为骄，奢言淫乐而显侈靡，窃为足下不取也。
现代文：而今天先生您不但不称赞歌颂楚王的仁厚的德行，反而极力大肆吹捧云梦泽并以此为骄傲。用过多的言语来宣扬过分的贪图享乐反而暴露出侈靡的缺点，我以为先生您的这种做法是不可取的。
English: But today, sir, instead of praising and extolling the benevolent virtues of King Chu, you are trying your best to tout the dream and be proud of it. Using too many words to promote excessive greed for pleasure, on the other hand, exposes the shortcomings of luxury. I thought this approach of yours was undesirable.

古文：必若所言，固非楚国之美也。
现代文：正像先生您所说的，这也未必是楚国的美德。
English: If it really is as you say, then it would not be a good thing for the state of Chu.

古文：有而言之，是章君之恶也；无而言之，是害足下之信也。
现代文：您所说的这些事，如果确实是真的，确有其事，那先生您是在宣扬楚王的丑恶行径。如果是假的，没有这么回事，是伤害了先生您的信义呀！
English: If what you say is true, then you are propagating the evil deeds of King Chu. If it is not true, then you have hurt your credibility.

古文：章君恶，伤私义，二者无一可，而先生行之，必且轻于齐而累于楚矣。
现代文：宣扬君王的丑恶行径，伤害了先生您自己的信义名节，两者没有一样是可取的。而先生却这样做了，这样做必然会遭到齐国的轻视，也会给楚国带来损害受到拖累。
English: It is not advisable to publicize the king's heinous acts and hurt your own credibility and reputation. However, if you do so, you will certainly be despised by the Qi country, and it will also bring damage to the Chu country.

古文：且齐东陼巨海，南有琅邪，观乎成山，射乎之罘，浮勃澥，游孟诸，邪与肃慎为邻，右以汤谷为界。秋田乎青丘，仿偟乎海外，吞若云梦者八九，其于匈中曾不蒂芥。若乃俶倘瑰玮，异方殊类，珍怪鸟兽，万端鳞崒，充仞其中者，不可胜记，禹不能名，卨不能计。
现代文：秋季时可在朝鲜半岛的青丘狩猎。自由自在地云游在四海之外。纵然像云梦泽这样的大泽有八九个，置于齐国境内，也就像芒刺或芥蒂吞于胸中一样，不会有什么感觉。至于说，各种各样的奇珍异宝，千万种珍禽野兽，就像鱼鳞一般聚集在齐国，多的不可计算。就连大禹都说不出它们的名字，肉也计算不出它们的数目。
English: In autumn, you can go hunting in the green hills of the Korean Peninsula. You can travel freely beyond the four seas. Even if there are eight or nine Osawa like Yunmenze, placed in the territory of Qi, it will not feel like a thorn or a mustard seed swallowed in the chest. As for all kinds of rare treasures, tens of thousands of rare birds and beasts, like fish scales, are gathered in Qi, too many to count. Even Dayu can not say their names, and meat can not count their number.

古文：然在诸侯之位，不敢言游戏之乐，苑囿之大；先生又见客，是以王辞不复，何为无以应哉！ 
现代文：然而齐王在诸侯的位置上，不敢随便说游玩狩猎的欢乐和夸口苑囿的广阔宽大。而且先生是被当作宾客请来，受到礼遇接待。所以齐王没有做任何回答，这哪裹是什么无言以对呀！ 
English: However, in his position as a vassal, King Qi did not dare to casually talk about the joy of hunting and the vastness of the garden. Moreover, he was invited as a guest and received with courtesy. Therefore, King Qi did not make any reply, which is beyond words!

古文：亡是公听然而笑曰： 楚则失矣，而齐亦未为得也。
现代文：亡是公听了他们俩的话后哈哈大笑，说： 楚国错了，而齐国也不一定就对了。
English: After listening to the two of them, Du Zhe Gong laughed out loud and said: Chu is wrong, and Qi is not necessarily right.

古文：夫使诸侯纳贡者，非为财币，所以述职也；封疆画界者，非为守御，所以禁淫也。
现代文：所谓天子要诸侯们交纳贡品，并不是为了得到财宝钱币，而是要诸侯们前来陈述政务事宜。
English: The reason why the Son of Heaven asked the lords to pay tribute was not for the sake of wealth, but in order to allow them to report to the imperial court on the performance of their duties; therefore, the boundaries of the country should be divided, not to guard the border, but to prevent the lords from violating the law.

古文：今齐列为东蕃，而外私肃慎，捐国隃限，越海而田，其于义固未可也。
现代文：天子为诸侯们划出疆界，不是为了防御诸侯们，而是为了防止诸侯们放纵自己越轨互相侵犯边境。
English: The Son of Heaven drew the boundaries for the princes, not to defend the princes, but to prevent the princes from indulging in their transgression and encroaching on each other's borders.

古文：且二君之论，不务明君臣之义，正诸侯之礼，徒事争于游戏之乐，苑囿之大，欲以奢侈相胜，荒淫相越，此不可以扬名发誉，而适足以贬君自损也。
现代文：如今齐国作为东方对中央起屏护作用的藩国，却对外与肃慎交往私通。离开本国疆土，超越它国边境，跨海去狩猎，这种做法从道义和礼仪上来讲是不符合诸侯的身份的。况且二位先生所讲的都不是在说君臣之间的道义，不是在端正诸侯之间的礼仪。而衹是一味地在夸耀自己的君主游猎时的欢乐趣味，苑囿范围广阔无边，互相争强斗胜，以奢侈荒淫为傲，这种做法，不但不能够为您的国家扬名扬威，提高荣誉名望，抬高你个人的名誉地位，反而却正好起到了贬低了你的国君，破坏了你自己的名誉的作用。
English: Today, as a vassal state of the East that acts as a screen to protect the central government, Qi has been fornicating with the outside world. To leave the territory of one's own country, to go beyond the borders of other countries, to go hunting across the sea, this practice is not consistent with the status of princes in terms of morality and etiquette. Moreover, what the two gentlemen are talking about is not about the morality between princes and vassals, nor is it about the proper etiquette between princes. On the contrary, they are just boasting about their monarch's pleasure in hunting. The range of hunting grounds is vast and boundless, they compete with each other

古文： 且夫齐、楚之事又乌足道乎！
现代文： 而且齐楚两国的这点事又哪裹值得您们这样宣扬称赞呢？
English: And what is it about the two countries that is so worthy of your praise?

古文：君未睹夫巨丽也，独不闻天子之上林乎？
现代文：二位先生可能从来没有亲眼见过极尽豪华瑰丽令人惊心动魄的壮观景色吧。难道先生们从来就没有听说过天子的上林苑吗？
English: Gentlemen, have you not seen with your own eyes the grandeur of the scene? Have you not heard of Shanglin Court?

古文：左苍梧，右西极，丹水更其南，紫渊径其北。
现代文：上林苑的东方与苍梧郡相接，西方直达西极。苑的南方有丹水流过。紫渊丛在上挞茧的北方流过。
English: The east of Shanglin Garden is connected to Cangwu County, and the west is directly connected to the West Pole. Dan water flows through the south of the garden. Wisteria bushes flow through the north of Shangluo.

古文：终始霸、产，出入泾、渭，酆、镐、潦、潏，纡余委蛇，经营其内。
现代文：荡丞、撞源于苑内，终于苑内。泾水，渭水纵穿上林苑而过，从苑外流入又从苑内流出。酆水、镐、辽丞、迩丞逶迤回转地在苑内盘旋流过。
English: The ding dong and crash originated in the garden, and finally in the garden. The ding dong and ding dong flowed through the forest garden, flowing in from the outside of the garden and flowing out from the inside of the garden. The ding dong, ding dong, ding dong and ding dong swirled around in the garden.

古文：荡荡乎八川分流，相背异态，东西南北，驰骛往来，出乎椒丘之阙，行乎州淤之浦，径乎桂林之中，过乎泱莽之野，汩乎混流，顺阿而下，赴隘陿之口，触穹石，激堆埼，沸乎暴怒，汹涌彭湃，滭弗宓汩，逼侧泌瀄，横流逆折，转腾潎洌，滂濞沆溉，穹隆云桡，宛氵单胶盭，逾波趋乂，莅莅下濑，批岩冲拥，奔扬滞沛，临坻注壑，瀺灂霣队，沈沈隐隐，砰磅訇礚，潏潏淈々，氵抬潗鼎沸，驰波跳沫，汩氵急漂疾，悠远长怀。
现代文：浩浩荡荡的八条河水在上林苑内分布流经。波涛汹涌水势形态各有不同，向着东西南北向各自奔流而过。
English: The vast and turbulent waters of eight rivers are distributed throughout Shanglin Garden. The turbulent water potential forms are different, and they rush past each other in the east, west, north and south.

古文：寂漻无声，肆乎永归。然后灏溔潢漾，安翔徐佪，翯乎滈滈，东注大湖，衍溢陂池。
现代文：河水从树木丛生的对峙的双峰中流出，流经洲淤的涯浦，从桂树林中穿过，越过广阔的草莽原野。
English: The river flows from the twin peaks of the wooded confrontation, flows through the silt of the peninsula, passes through the cassia forest, and crosses the vast grassland.

古文：于是蛟龙赤螭，鱼恒鱼瞢渐离，鰅鰫鰬魠禺禺魼鳎，健鳍掉尾，振鳞奋翼，潜处乎深岩。鱼鳖欢声，万物众伙。
现代文：湍急河水沿着险峻的山势奔流而下直奔山峡隘口。冲刷拍击着巨大的山石，冲激着沙壅成的曲折河岸高坡。
English: The rapid river water rushes down along the precipitous mountain range and goes straight to the mountain pass. The scouring beats the huge mountain rocks and stimulates the twisted river bank high slope made of sand.

古文：明月珠子，的皪江靡，蜀石黄碝，水玉磊砢，磷磷烂烂，采色澔汗，丛积乎其中。
现代文：波涛滚滚，浪花飞溅，水流湍急，水击石岸发出阵阵的轰隆声。水势澎湃汹涌，激起的旋回水浪有如云彩。
English: The waves are rolling, the waves are splashing, the current is fast, the water hits the shore with a roar. The water is surging, the swirling waves are like clouds.

古文：工鸟鹔鹄鸨，鴽鹅属玉，交精旋目，烦鹜庸渠，箴疵卢，群浮乎其上。
现代文：水流曲折逶延，后浪拍击前浪直泻峡谷深潭。奔腾的河水冲刷着河底沙石，撞击着石岸和河堤，奔腾的波涛，激扬起阵阵雾气。
English: The meandering flow of the water, the backwash lapping against the frontwash straight into the lagoon canyon and the deep pool. The rushing water washes the sand and stones at the bottom of the river, hitting the stone bank and the embankment, and the rushing waves stir up the mist.

古文：浮淫泛滥，随风澹淡，与波摇荡，奄薄水忄者，唼喋菁藻，咀嚼鞭藕。
现代文：水势从高处流入深深的沟壑中后渐渐缓慢下来。发出的声音也变的涓涓细小。而后，水势深广宏大，激荡起砰磅訇磕的鼓怒的击水巨响。涌浪翻滚如鼎中沸水。
English: After flowing from a high place into a deep ravine, the force of the water gradually slows down. The sound it emits also becomes smaller and smaller. Then, the force of the water is deep and vast, and it stirs up a tremendous and furious sound of water hitting the water. The swell roils like boiling water in a boiling pot.

古文： 于是乎崇山矗矗，巃嵸崔巍，深林巨木，崭岩参差。
现代文：奔驰的水波击起层层泡沫，迅速地旋转着漂流向远方。
English: The rushing water waves hit layers of foam, spinning rapidly and drifting far away.

古文：九嵕■，南山峨峨，岩阤甗锜，崛崎，振溪通谷，蹇产沟渎，谷今呀豁閜，阜陵别隝，崴磈山畏廆，丘陵崛礨，隐辚郁山垒，登降施靡，陂池貏豸。
现代文：这时寂静寥阔的天空静静无声河水安然而长往，然后流向无边无际的广浩的水域，水流缓慢流动形成一些漩窝，泛着白光的浩翰水面，向东流入大湖裹，湖满后水渐渐溢出，聚集在湖边的陂池和小湖裹。
English: At this time, the vast sky was silent, and the silent river water flowed peacefully, and then flowed to the boundless vast waters. The water flowed slowly to form some whirlpools, and the vast water surface with white light flowed to the east into the big lake. After the lake was full, the water gradually overflowed and gathered in the ponds and small lakes around the lake.

古文：允溶淫鬻，散涣夷陆，亭皋千里，靡不被筑。揜以绿蕙，被以江离，糅以蘼芜，杂以留夷。布结缕，攒戾莎，揭车衡兰，稿本射干，茈姜蘘荷，持若荪，鲜支黄砾，蒋芧青薠，布濩闳泽，延曼太原，离靡广衍，应风披靡，吐芳扬烈，郁郁菲菲，众香发越，肸蚃布写，晻薆咇茀。
现代文：于是水中的蛟龙、无角的赤螭、似鳝的躯鳍、渐离、鲶类中的鲳、花鲢中的馆、大鲇鱼中的蚝、黄颊负中的蚝、黄地黑纹鱼皮有毛的禺禺鱼、比目鱼中的鲑、鲵鱼中的鳎都挺直背鳍，用力摇摆着尾巴，奋然举起双翅。躲藏在深渊岩石下的鱼鳖振奋高声喧哗，万物聚集在一起。
English: As a result, the water dragon, the hornless red dragonfly, the beak-like body of the cormorant, the cormorant, the cormorant in the cormorant, the pavilion in the flower cormorant, the cormorant in the large eel, the cormorant in the yellow-cheeked eel, the hairy eel in the yellowfish, the salmon in the flounder, and the cormorant in the eel all stood upright, swung their tails vigorously, and raised their wings. The eels hiding under the rocks of the abyss vibrated loudly, and everything gathered together.

古文： 于是乎周览泛观，缜纷轧芴，芒芒恍忽，视之无端，察之无涯。日出东沼，入乎西陂。
现代文：明月珍珠在江边闪烁着。如玉的蜀石、黄色的硬石、水晶石堆积在一起，闪烁发出宝石般的光彩，聚集在水中。
English: The pearls of the bright moon glittered on the edge of the river. The jade-like shu stone, the yellow hard stone, and the crystal stone were piled up together, glittering and emitting a jewel-like brilliance, and gathered in the water.

古文：其南则隆冬生长，涌水跃波；其兽则庸旄貘犛，沈牛麝麋，赤首圜题，穷奇象犀。
现代文：鸿、鹉、鹄、鸨四种鸟和驾鹅鸥鸡、鶫、旋目、烦骛、水鸡、鲢鹧、鶫卢这些水乌成群结队地漂游在水面上，自由自在地随风漂荡，随波漂游出没无常。它们在水草中嬉戏。嘴里时而叨着青藻，时而嚼着菱藕。 这里山高巍峨陡峭，险峻高矗入云，山峰高矮不一。
English: Four kinds of birds, including the rooster, the cock, the cormorant and the cormorant, as well as the goose, the pheasant, the rooster, the water fowl, the cormorant and the cormorant, roam in flocks on the surface of the water, freely drifting with the wind and drifting with the waves. They play in the aquatic plants. In the mouth, they sometimes talk about the green algae, and sometimes chew the hawthorn. The mountains here are high and steep, and the steep mountains plunge into the clouds. The peaks are of different heights.

古文：其北则盛夏含冻裂地，涉冰揭河；其兽则麒麟角端，騊駼橐驼，蛩蛩驒騱，驒騠驴骡。 于是乎离宫别馆，弥山跨谷，高廊四注，重坐曲阁，华榱璧榼，辇道纚属，步櫩周流，长途中宿。
现代文：九峻山雄伟险峻，终南山巍峨高峻，山峰倾斜险峻。
English: The nine mountains are majestic and precipitous, the final Nanshan is towering and precipitous, and the mountains are steep and precipitous.

古文：夷嵕筑堂，累台增成，岩突洞房。
现代文：山坡陡峭，山路崔巍崎岖。因山间巨石而收敛的溪水，穿过山谷，形成了弯曲幽深的山问水潭，宽广而空旷的涧谷。
English: The mountain slopes are steep and the mountain roads are rugged. Streams, constrained by the boulders between the mountains, pass through the valley, forming a curved, deep mountain pool, a wide and open valley.

古文：俯杳眇而无见，仰攀橑而扪天，奔星更于闺闼，宛虹拖于楯轩。
现代文：深山中的丘陵高坡和水中的岛屿都高峻崔巍不平，山势起伏绵延，山坡下山势渐渐趋向平坦。水势缓慢，渐渐平坦而成为陆地。平坦的水边陆地全都平坦如筑。
English: The hills and high slopes in the deep mountains and the islands in the water are all high and uneven, the mountains are undulating and rolling, and the mountains are gradually flattening down the slopes. The water is slow, gradually flattening and becoming land. The flat waterside land is all flat.

古文：青龙蚴蟉于东箱，象舆婉僤于西清，灵圉燕于闲馆，偓佺之伦暴于南荣，醴泉涌于清室，通川过于中庭。
现代文：苑中到处被绿色的蕙草、江离香草所铺盖，蘼芜与香草留夷相间杂生，遍地生长结缕。丛生着深绿色的沙草。
English: The middle of the garden is covered with green eucalyptus and vanilla. There are weeds between the eucalyptus and the vanilla, and knots grow everywhere. Dark green sand grass is clumped together.

古文：磐石裖崖，嵚岩倚倾，嵯峨嶪，刻削峥嵘，玫瑰碧琳，珊瑚丛生，珉玉旁唐，玢豳文磷，赤瑕驳荦，杂臿其间，晁采琬琰，和氏出焉。
现代文：高处的岩石高大险峻，高耸的山岩险峻陡峭纹理有如人工削刻。玫瑰、碧琳珊瑚聚集丛生，如玉的珉玉岩分布广大，气势磅礴，纹理斑然如鳞。赤红色玉石，色彩斑驳错杂，杂乱错落在山崖之间。著名的美：巨晁采、琬琰与和氏璧都出于上林苑。
English: The rocks at high altitudes are tall and precipitous, the towering mountain rocks are steep and steep, and the texture is like artificial carving. Roses and jasmine corals are clustered in clusters, the jade-like emerald jade is widely distributed, magnificent, and the texture is mottled like scales. Red-red jade, the color is mottled and jumbled, and it is jumbled between the cliffs. Famous beauty: giant dragonflies, dragonflies and wasabi are all from Shanglin Yuan.

古文： 于是乎卢橘夏孰，黄甘橙楱，楷杷橪柿，亭柰厚朴，梬枣杨梅，樱桃蒲陶，隐夫薁棣，答遝离支，罗乎后宫，列乎北园，贝也丘陵，下平原，扬翠叶，扤紫茎，发红华，垂朱荣，煌煌扈扈，照曜巨野。
现代文： 卢橘、黄柑、橙子、楱子、枇杷、小酸枣、海棠、沙果、厚朴、俜枣、杨梅、樱桃、葡萄、常棣、唐棣、荔枝各种水果，星罗棋布地遍长在后宫裹，按序排列种植在北园，绵延到丘陵地带，向下伸达到平原地带。翠绿的树叶不停地摇摆，紫色的树干摇动不定，地上盛开着红花，树上的红花向下怒放，光彩相照，映红大地。
English: Lu tangerine, mandarin orange, orange, hazelnut, loquat, small sour jujube, crabapple, sand fruit, thick park, jujube, Yangmei, cherry, grape, mandarin orange, sweet mandarin orange, lychee, all kinds of fruits, are arranged in the north garden, stretching to the hilly area and stretching down to the plain area. The emerald green leaves sway incessantly, the purple tree trunks sway unsteadily, the ground is in full bloom with red flowers, and the red flowers on the trees radiate downward, shining and reflecting the red earth.

古文：沙棠栎槠，华枫枰栌，留落胥邪，仁频并闾，欃檀木兰，豫章女贞，长千仞，大连抱，夸条直畅，实叶葰茂，攒立丛倚，连卷欐佹，崔错癹骫，坑稀閜砢，垂条扶疏，落英幡纚，纷溶萷蔘，猗柅从风，藰莅卉歙，盖象金石之声，管籥之声音。
现代文：沙果树、橡、槠树，桦树、枫树、银杏树、黄植树、石榴树、椰子树、槟榔树、棕橺树、搀檀树、木兰树、豫樟树、女贞树这些树长得高千仞，树大好几个人张臂合抱才抱得过来。树卜的枝叶茂盛伸展开来，硕大的果实挂满枝头。树木丛生在一起相互簇立着，树枝相互屈曲交错或相背而生。枝条错杂盘行而生，枝干相抚或相互抗衡或互相扶持而生长。树枝四布，飞落的花办随风飘落。
English: Sandalwood, oak, eucalyptus, birch, maple, ginkgo, box tree, pomegranate, coconut tree, betel nut, palm tree, sandalwood, magnolia tree, yakitori tree, privet tree - these trees grow so tall that it takes several people to hold them in their arms. The branches and leaves of the trees spread out luxuriously, and the huge fruits hang all over the branches. The trees are clustered together and stand up against each other, and the branches bend and intertwine with each other or grow back-to-back. The branches come out in a jumble, and the branches grow by stroking or

古文：柴池茈虒，旋还乎后宫，杂袭累辑，被山缘谷，循阪下隰，视之无端，究之亡穷。
现代文：草木茂盛随风飘舞婀娜多姿。阵风吹来有如打击乐和丝竹乐演奏出的美妙声音。
English: The lush plants and trees dance with the wind, and the gusts of wind make beautiful sounds like percussion and silk bamboo music.

古文： 于是乎玄猨素雌，蜼玃飞蠝，蛭蜩玃蝚，獑胡豰蛫，栖息乎其间。
现代文：苑内树木参差不齐，环绕着后宫。山缘峡谷被茂密的树木所覆盖，漫山遍野，顺着山势，沿着溪谷，从山坡到川泽全是茂密的树木，一眼望不到边。
English: The trees in the garden are jagged and uneven, surrounding the harem. The mountain gorge is covered with dense trees, the mountains are full of fields, along the mountains, along the valley, from the hillside to the river, there are dense trees, and you can't see the edge at a glance.

古文：长啸哀鸣，翩幡互经，夭蟜枝格，偃蹇杪颠，逾绝梁，腾殊榛，捷垂条，掉希间，牢落陆离，烂温远迁。
现代文：详细察考无穷无尽。 苑中黑色的雄猿猴、白色的雌猿猴，长尾猴、大母猴、鼯鼠、蛭、蜩、获蛛、撕猢、壳蛇居住生长在树林裹，或高声长吼或低声哀鸣，动作矫健敏捷地上下欢跳，在树上嬉戏玩耍。群兽越过断桥，跳过奇状的树丛。抓着垂下的树枝，荡悠在空间，它们或分散或聚集乱跑乱跳自由自在。
English: The detailed examination is endless. The black male ape, white female ape, vervet monkey, large female monkey, weasel, baboon, baboon, spider, rattlesnake, and shell snake in the garden live and grow in the woods, or roar loudly or moan in a low voice, with agile movements and jumping up and down, playing and playing in the trees. The animals cross the broken bridge and jump over the strange bushes. Grasping the hanging branches, they wander in space. They are either scattered or gathered and run and jump freely.

古文： 若此者数百千处，娱游往来，宫宿馆舍，疱厨不徙，后宫不移，百官备具。
现代文： 像这样的地方在上林苑里有几百上千处。
English: There are hundreds and thousands of places like this in Shanglin Court.

古文： 于是乎背秋涉冬，天子校猎。
现代文： 秋去冬来，天子在围场中狩猎。
English: When autumn turns to winter, Tenshi is hunting in the paddock.

古文：乘镂象，六玉虯，拖蜺旌，靡云旗，前皮轩，后道游；孙叔奉辔，卫公参乘，扈从横行，出乎四校之中。
现代文：天子乘坐着用象牙镶镂装饰车辂的车辆，驾着由六匹戴着玉饰的骏马拉着的马车，摇曳着缀饰五彩羽毛好似霓虹的旌旗，挥动着画有熊虎长飘带如云气的大旗，车队前有驱驾着蒙了虎皮的车开道，虎皮车之后有游车作前导。由善于驾驭车辆的人驾车，由善于骑乘的大将参与驾车。天子的卫队横队排列行进。
English: Tianzi rode in a vehicle decorated with ivory inlaid rims, drove a carriage pulled by six horses wearing jade ornaments, waved a banner decorated with multicolored feathers resembling neon, waved a large flag with long streamers painted with bears and tigers like clouds, drove a car covered with tiger skins to open the road in front of the convoy, and led a tour car after the tiger skin car. The car was driven by a person who was good at driving vehicles, and a general who was good at riding participated in the driving. Tianzi's guards lined up and marched.

古文：鼓严簿，纵猎者，江河为阹，泰山为橹，车骑雷起，殷天动地，先后陆离，离散别追，淫淫裔裔，缘陵流泽，云布雨施。
现代文：出列在阑校四周之中，天子的仪卫队中传出敲严鼓声，于是狩猎者开始纵情奔驰。猎场以长江、黄河为圈界，以泰山为望楼。战车与骑兵跑起来，声似雷霆，惊天动地。先后分散开去追逐禽兽。沿着山岗，顺着川泽满山遍野都布满狩猎的人与车马。
English: Standing in the middle of the four sides of the imperial school, the sound of beating drums was heard in the ceremonial guard of the heavenly son, so the hunters began to indulge in galloping. The hunting ground was bounded by the Yangtze River and the Yellow River, with Mount Tai as the watchtower. The chariots and cavalrymen ran up, sounding like thunder and shaking the earth. They dispersed one after another to chase the animals. Along the hills and along the mountains of Kawazawa, the fields were full of hunting people and horses.

古文：生貔豹，搏豺狼，手熊罴，足野羊。
现代文：生擒貔豹这样的猛兽，搏击豺狼，手捉熊熊，脚踏野羊。
English: Ferocious beasts such as the cheetah fight jackals, catch bears by hand, and trample wild sheep by foot.

古文：蒙鹖苏，绔白虎，被斑文，跨野马，陵三嵕之危，下碛历之坻，径峻赴险，越壑厉水。
现代文：勇士们头戴鵾尾羽毛装饰的帽子，以白虎皮为裤子，穿着有虎豹纹皮子的上衣，骑上野马，登上层层叠嶂的山峰顶，下到山阪不平山坡。不畏艰险，跨过山谷，趟过河流。
English: The warriors, wearing caps decorated with iris tail feathers, white tiger skins for trousers, and tops with tiger and leopard patterns, mounted wild horses, climbed to the top of the cascading peaks, descended to the uneven slopes of the mountains, and braved the dangers to cross the valleys and wade through the rivers.

古文：推蜚廉，弄解廌，格虾蛤，铤猛氏，羂要褭，射封豕。
现代文：排弄蜚廉，戏弄獬豸，格杀猛兽虾蛤，用短矛刺杀猛氏，用绳索绊取神马要裹，箭射封豕。
English: Trained to tease the dragonfly, teased the dragonfly, killed the predator shrimp, stabbed the predator with a short spear, tripped the horse with a rope, and shot the dragonfly with an arrow.

古文：箭不苟害，解脰陷脑；弓不虚发，应声而倒。
现代文：箭不随便射出，射必中颈穿脑，箭无虚发，猎物应声倒下。
English: The arrow does not shoot at random to kill the beast, one arrow shot, it will crack the neck, pierce the head. The bow is not vain, the beast all fall down in response.

古文： 于是乘舆弭节徘徊，皋翔往来，睨部曲之进退，览将帅之变态。
现代文： 这时，天子乘车按节拍缓慢徘徊，远望士兵、家丁们的进退，观看将校们应变的状态。
English: At this time, Tianzi slowly wandered by car according to the beat, looking forward to the advance and retreat of soldiers and family members, and watching the state of the officers.

古文：然后侵淫促节，倏敻远去，流离轻禽，蹴履狡兽，车惠白鹿，捷狡菟。
现代文：然后由慢渐快地步步靠近，突然向远去。用网将轻捷的飞鸟罩住，使它们困苦挣扎而无法逃脱。
English: Then it approaches slowly and quickly, and suddenly moves away. It covers the light flying birds with a net, making them struggle and unable to escape.

古文：轶赤电，遗光耀，追怪物，出宇宙，弯蕃弱，满白羽，射游枭，栎蜚遽。
现代文：用脚践踏幼兽，用战车冲击白鹿，迅速捕捉狡猾敏捷的兔子，速度快的超过雷电，把闪光甩在身后。
English: They trample young animals with their feet, ram white deer with chariots, quickly catch cunning and agile rabbits, and are faster than lightning, leaving lightning behind.

古文：择肉而后发，先中而命处，弦矢分，蓺殪仆。
现代文：追逐野兽追出了宇宙之外。拉开名弓蕃弱，搭上神箭白羽，射向四处游走的狒狒，旁击神兽飞遽。
English: Chasing the beast, he chased it out of the universe. He pulled out his famous bow and arrow, mounted his divine arrow, shot at the dragonfly that was swimming around, and hit the divine beast in a hurry.

古文： 然后扬节而上浮，陵惊风，历骇焱，乘虚亡，与神俱，蔺玄鹤，乱昆鸡，遒孔鸾，促鵕鸃，指翳鸟，捎凤凰，捷鹓雏，揜焦明。
现代文：先选中肥胖的野兽而后放箭，先说出要射中的部位，箭离弦上，一箭射中要害，野兽应声倒毙。 然后，天子乘战车高举旌旗节鞭有如上游于天空，乘风登上虚幻的宇宙天空，与天上的神仙同在，脚下踩踏着黑鹤，冲乱了鸥鶸的行列。追迫孔鸾，迫促鸱鹅，击打翳鸟，竿击凤凰，捉捕鹅雏，掩捉焦明。
English: First of all, the fat beast is selected, and then the arrows are released. First of all, the part to be shot is said. The arrow is released from the string, the key is hit by an arrow, and the beast falls dead. Then, the heavenly son rides a chariot and holds high the banner of the festival whip as if upstream in the sky, riding the wind up to the illusory cosmic sky, with the heavenly immortals, trampling the black cranes under his feet, and rushing the ranks of the dragonflies. Chasing the stork, urging the goose, beating the ostrich, striking the phoenix with a rod, catching the goslings

古文： 道尽涂殚，回车而还。
现代文： 道路走到了尽头，才驾车回还，逍遥而又安闲地步行，由天而降到苑的最北方才停止。
English: It was only at the end of the road that we turned around and headed back.

古文：消■乎襄羊，降集乎北纮，率乎直指，揜乎反乡，蹶石关，历封峦，过支隹鹊，望露寒，下堂梨，息宜春，西驰宣曲，濯鹢牛首，登龙台，掩细柳，观士大夫之勤略，钧猎者之所得获。
现代文：再向下去到堂黎宫，到宜春宫歇息。向西骑马跑向宣曲，在牛首池裹持桨划着鹤之舟。登上龙台观，在细柳观裹休息，观看读书人和作官的人的辛勤劳作和成果，平均分配打猎所得的收获。
English: Then go down to the Dongli Palace and rest at the Yichun Palace. Go west on horseback to the Xuanqu, paddle a crane boat with a paddle in the Cow's Head Pool. Climb the Longtai View, rest in the Willow View, watch the hard work and achievements of readers and officials, and evenly distribute the harvest of hunting.

古文：徒车之所■轹，骑之所蹂若，人之所蹈藉，与其穷极倦烋，惮詟伏，不被创刃而死者，它它藉藉，填坑满谷，掩平弥泽。
现代文：被士卒车辆所践踏辗轧，被骑兵所蹂躏，被人们所踩踏，那些疲惫不堪、因惊恐惧怕而趴倒不能动的，不是被刀剑利刃所杀死的野兽，满山遍野纵横交错，填平了大坑，堆满了山谷，掩盖住了平原，填满了大泽。
English: Trampled and rolled by soldiers and vehicles, ravaged by cavalry, trampled by people, those who are exhausted, unable to move because of shock and fear, are not killed by the sword and the blade of the beast, the mountains are crisscrossed, filled the pits, piled up the valleys, covered the plains, and filled Osawa.

古文： 于是乎游戏懈怠，置酒乎颢天之台，张乐乎胶葛之宇，撞千石之钟，立万石之虡，建翠北之旗，树灵鼍之鼓，奏陶唐氏之舞，听葛天氏之歌，千人倡，万人和，山陵为之震动，川谷为之荡波。
现代文： 天子这时用游戏来放松精神，在上千昊天的高台上摆上酒席，在廖廓的宇宙摆上乐器，敲击千石大钟，架立起悬挂万石钟的钟架。竖立起有翠羽装饰的大旗，摆上用鼍皮做的大鼓，演奏着陶唐氏尧的舞乐，聆听葛天氏的歌曲。千人合唱，万人和呼，山岗被震动，山谷中的小河被激起波浪。
English: At this time, the heavenly son used games to relax his spirit. He set up a banquet on the high platform of the upper thousand and a half days, set up musical instruments in the vast universe, struck the great clock of a thousand stones, set up a clock rack hanging the great clock of a thousand stones, erected a large flag decorated with cedar feathers, set up a large drum made of mink, played the dance music of the Tao Tang Clan, and listened to the songs of the Ge Tian Clan. A thousand people chorused, everyone shouted, the mountains were shaken, and the small rivers in the valley were stirred up by waves.

古文：巴、俞、宋、蔡，淮南《干遮》，文成颠歌，族居递奏，金鼓迭起，铿鎗闛鞈，洞心骇耳。
现代文：巴俞宋蔡的音乐，淮南的《干遮》曲，文成县人唱的滇歌，时而一起演奏时而交替演奏。
English: The music of Baju Song Cai, Huainan's "Gan Zha" song, and the folk song sung by the people of Wencheng County are sometimes played together and sometimes played alternately.

古文：荆、吴、郑、卫之声《韶》、《濩》、《武》、《象》之乐，阴淫案衍之音，鄢、郢缤纷，《激楚》、《结风》，俳优侏儒，狄鞮之倡，所以娱耳目乐心意者，丽靡烂漫于前，靡曼美色于后。
现代文：锣声鼓声一高一低迭起钟声鼓声铿锵有力发出震耳的响声。
English: The gongs and drums beat high and low, the bells and drums beat loudly, creating a deafening sound.

古文： 若夫青琴、虙妃之徒，绝殊离俗，妖冶闲都，靓庄刻饰，便嬛繛约，柔桡■■，妩媚纤弱，曳独茧之褕袣，眇阎易以恤削，便姗嫳屑，与世殊服，芬芳沤郁，酷烈淑郁，皓齿粲烂，宜笑的皪，长眉连娟，微睇绵藐，色授魂予，心愉于侧。
现代文：荆、吴、郑、卫的歌声、《韶》《濩》《武》《象》的音乐淫靡放纵没有节制音调，楚国的鄢、郢歌舞交杂进行。楚国的《激》《楚》、《结》《风》歌舞曲，杂戏艺人和矮小的人，狄千族的舞女，凡是能使入耳目欢悦的，音乐演奏在前，美丽的舞女献舞在后。
English: The songs of Jing, Wu, Zheng and Wei, the music of the,,, 武, and 象 are lascivious, indulgent, and have no moderation of tone. The  and  songs and dances of Chu are mixed and performed. The 激, 楚, 结, and 风 songs and dances of Chu, the acrobats and short people, and the dancers of the Diqen people, are all pleasing to the ear and eye. The music is played first, and the beautiful dancers dance after.

古文： 于是酒中乐酣，天子芒然而思，似若有亡，曰： 嗟乎，此大奢侈！
现代文：眉毛捆长弯曲，微微流盼，这种美色真是勾心动魄，心倾神往。 酒喝到一半，音乐正在演奏最欢畅的时候，天子突然惘然而思，好像失去了什么地说： 唉呀，逭真是太奢侈了！
English: His eyebrows were long and arched, slightly expectant, and this beauty really stirred his soul and filled his heart with longing.Halfway through the drink, when the music was playing at its most joyful, the heavenly son suddenly paused, as if he had lost something, and said: Alas, it's so extravagant!

古文：朕以览听馀闲，无事弃日，顺天道以杀伐，时休息于此，恐后世靡丽，遂往而不返，非所以为继嗣创业垂统也。 于是乎乃解酒罢猎，而命有司曰： 地可垦辟，悉为农郊，以赡氓隶，隤墙填堑，使山泽之民得至焉。
现代文：我因为没事干虚度时曰，顺应自然季节在秋曰裹去打猎。经常到此处来休息，担心后代子孙曰趋侈靡，沉湎在享乐之中，迷途而不知返。这绝不是教育后代创业继承传统的办法，于是马上停止了酒宴，放弃狩猎，命令有关官员说： 凡是可以开荒垦田的土地都要叫农民耕种，以此来赡养爱护百姓。推倒围墙，填平沟河，使在山泽中靠此生活的百姓有了放牧和打柴的地方。
English: When I was idle because I had nothing to do, I went hunting in the autumn in accordance with the natural season. I often came here to rest, worried that future generations would become extravagant, indulge in pleasure, and get lost and never return. This is by no means a way to educate future generations to inherit traditions, so I immediately stopped the wine banquet, gave up hunting, and ordered the relevant officials to say: Any land that can be cleared of wasteland should be cultivated by farmers to support and protect the people. Tear down the walls, fill the ditches, and give the people who live in the mountains and streams a place to graze and gather firewood.

古文：实陂池而勿禁，虚官馆而勿仞。
现代文：在陂池中养鱼鳖而不禁止捕捞，空着行宫别馆而不聚集人众。
English: Raising fish bait in the cormorant pond without prohibiting fishing, going to the palace annex empty-handed without gathering people.

古文：发仓廪以救贫穷，补不足，恤鳏寡，存孤独。
现代文：发放仓粮以赈济贫民，补给没有吃的人，抚恤孤寡老人，存问孤独，发布施德于民的号令。
English: Distribute granary grain to feed the poor, supply those who have not eaten, support the lonely elderly, prevent loneliness, and issue a call for generosity to the people.

古文：出德号，省刑罚，改制度，易服色，革正朔，与天下为始。  
现代文：减轻刑罚，改革制度，更换服色，改革历法，使全国的人都有一个新的开始，
English: The reduction of sentences, the reform of the system, the change of clothing, the reform of the calendar, so that people across the country have a new beginning,

古文： 于是历吉日以斋戒，袭朝服，乘当驾，建华旗，鸣玉鸾，游于六艺之囿，驰骛乎仁义之涂，览观《春秋》之林，射《貍首》，兼《驺虞》，弋玄鹤，舞干戚，戴云罕，揜群雅，悲《伐檀》，乐乐胥，修容乎《礼》园，翱翔乎《书》圃，述《易》道，放怪兽，登明堂，坐清庙，恣群臣，奏得失，四海之内，靡不受获。
现代文： 选择良辰吉日守斋戒行沐浴，穿上上朝的服装，坐着天子的车舆，举起华丽的旌旗，敲响玉铃，优游在以六经为内容的苑囿之中，在充满了道义的大道上奔驰，观看阅读在有六经之一《春秋》的林圃中，诸侯行射礼时要演奏《狸首》的乐章作为节拍。
English: Choose a good time, observe fasting, take a bath, put on the clothing of the last dynasty, sit in the chariot of the son of heaven, raise a gorgeous banner, ring a jade bell. You will be in the middle of the courtyard with the content of the six sutras, gallop on the road full of morality, watch reading in the forest garden with one of the six sutras "Spring and Autumn," and play the music of "Bullhead" as a beat when the princes perform the shooting ceremony.

古文：于欺之时，天下大说，乡风而听，随流而化，芔然兴道而迁义，刑错而不用，德隆于三皇，功羡于五帝。
现代文：这时天下百姓都十分喜悦，百姓跟随潮流接受教化，很快就提倡道、亲近仁义。废除刑罚的器具，就能使德政兴隆超过三皇，功绩之伟大超越五帝。
English: At this time, the people all over the world were very happy. The people followed the trend to accept enlightenment, and soon advocated Taoism, and were close to benevolence and righteousness. The device of abolishing punishments could make the German government flourish more than the three emperors, and the greatness of the merits exceeded the five emperors.

古文：若此，故猎乃可喜也。 
现代文：像这样的狩猎才是可喜的事呢！
English: A hunt like this is something to be celebrated!

古文： 若夫终日驰骋，劳神苦形，罢车马之用，抏士卒之精，费府库之财，而无德厚之恩，务在独乐，不顾众庶，忘国家之政，贪雉菟之获，则仁者不繇也。
现代文： 假如成天地在野外奔驰，使精神和体力都受其劳苦，使车马都受到磨损，马匹和兵士都疲惫不堪。耗尽国库的钱财，但并没有使人民得到恩惠和德政。衹顾自己的享乐，而不顾人民大众的疾苦，为贪图野鸡、兔子的收获却忘了国家的政要大事。这绝不是仁者所做的事。
English: It is not the act of a benevolent person to run around in the open all day, exhausting his mental and physical strength, wearing out his chariots and horses, and exhausting his soldiers. It is not the act of a benevolent person to drain the treasury of money and wealth, but to fail to provide the people with benevolence and good governance. It is not the act of a benevolent person to neglect his own pleasures and ignore the sufferings of the people, and to forget the important affairs of the state for the sake of harvesting pheasants and rabbits.

古文：从此观之，齐、楚之事，岂不哀哉！
现代文：从这件事来看，齐国、楚国的做法，岂不是十分可悲的吗？
English: From this point of view, isn't the approach of the states of Qi and Chu quite deplorable?

古文：地方不过千里，而囿居九百，是草木不得垦辟，而民无所食也。夫以诸侯之细，而乐万乘之所侈，仆恐百姓被其尤也。 
现代文：国土衹有千里，而苑囿就占去了九百里，这样，土地得不到开垦，而庶民百姓就没有粮食可吃，然而诸侯的地位低下，却享受大国天子都认为是十分奢侈的生活，我担心百姓会被他的错误过失所坑害。 
English: There are thousands of miles of land in China, but only nine hundred miles of gardens. Thus, the land cannot be cultivated, and the common people have no food to eat. However, the status of the princes is low, but they enjoy a very luxurious life, which is considered to be a great luxury. I am afraid that the people will be ruined by his mistakes.

古文：于是二子愀然改容，超若自失，逡巡避席，曰： 鄙人固陋，不知忌讳，乃今日见教，谨受命矣。 
现代文：听完这些话子虚与乌有二位先生，面容改变，怅惘若有所失，向后退了几步，离开了坐席说： 在下孤陋寡闻，不知有什么应该忌讳的，今天听到您的教诲，受益不浅，领教了。 
English: After listening to these words, the two gentlemen, one of whom was imaginary and one of whom was nonexistent, changed their faces and, if they had lost something, retreated a few steps and left the table, saying, "I didn't know much about it before, and I don't know what should be avoided. Today, after listening to your teachings, I have benefited a lot and learned a lot.

古文：赋奏，天子以为郎。
现代文：赋成奏上，天子以他为郎官。
English: This article was written as a gift to the emperor, and the emperor appointed him as a vassal.

古文：亡是公言上林广大，山谷水泉万物，及子虚言云梦所有甚众，侈靡多过其实，且非义理所止，故删取其要，归正道而论之。
现代文：亡是公说天子的上林苑辽阔广大，有山谷水泉和万物，连及子虚说楚国的云梦泽景物很多，夸奢靡丽，言过其实，况且不是礼义所崇尚的。因此节取它的要点，归入正道给予记述。
English: The Shanglin Garden of the Son of Heaven is said to be vast and vast, with valleys, springs and all things, and there are also many dreams and landscapes of Chu, which are said to be extravagant, exaggerated, and not revered by etiquette. Therefore, it is necessary to extract its main points and classify it as a righteous path.

