古文：江谧荀伯玉江谧，字令和，济阳考城人也。
现代文：江谧字令和，济阳考城人。
English: The characters of Jiangxi are Linghe and those of Jiyang are Kaocheng.

古文：祖秉之，临海太守，宋世清吏。
现代文：他祖父名秉之，做过临海太守，是宋时的清官。
English: His grandfather, named Bingzhi, was the governor of Linhai and a Qing official during the Song Dynasty.

古文：父徽，尚书都官郎，吴令，为太初所杀。
现代文：他父亲名徽，做过尚书都官郎，吴县县令，被太初皇帝杀害。
English: His father's family crest, who had served as Shang Shudu's vassal and Wuxian County magistrate, was killed by the first emperor.

古文：谧系尚方，孝武平京邑，乃得出。
现代文：江谧也被拘押在掌管制造供应帝王用的器物的官署，即名为尚方的地方，待到孝武帝平定京城后才得脱身出来。
English: Jiang Wei was also detained in the government office in charge of manufacturing supplies for the emperor, a place called Shangfang. He had to wait until Emperor Xiaowu conquered the capital before he could escape.

古文：解褐奉朝请，辅国行参军，于湖令，强济称职。
现代文：脱去布衣入仕做奉朝请，又为辅国行参军，于湖令，能干称职。
English: He took off his clothes and entered the service to serve the imperial court, and also joined the army to assist the country. He was able to perform his duties well.

古文：宋明帝为南豫州，谧倾身奉之，为帝所亲待。
现代文：宋明帝刘或为南豫州刺史时，江谧竭尽全力侍奉他，被刘或当作亲信看待。
English: When the Song Emperor Liu He was writing the history of South Henan, Jiang Yu did his best to serve him, and was regarded by Liu He as a close confidant.

古文：即位，以为骠骑参军。
现代文：刘或即皇帝位，以江谧为骠骑参军。
English: Liu, or the emperor, rode into the army with Jiang Chen as his horse.

古文：弟蒙貌丑，帝常召见狎侮之。
现代文：他弟弟江蒙面相丑陋，明帝经常召见，同他玩笑戏弄。
English: His younger brother, Jiang, was ugly with a masked face. Emperor Ming would often call him to see him and play jokes on him.

古文：谧转尚书度支郎，俄迁右丞兼比部郎。
现代文：江谧转尚书度支郎，很快迁右丞，兼比部郎。
English: Jiang Zang changed his name to Shang Shudo Shiro, and soon changed his name to Ujo, and also to Hiburo.

古文：泰始四年，江夏王义恭第十五女卒，年十九，未笄。
现代文：泰始四年，江夏王义恭第十五女死了，十九岁，未行成年的仪礼。
English: In the first four years of the Tai Dynasty, the fifteenth daughter of King Yigong of Jiangxia died at the age of nineteen, before she had performed the rites of adulthood.

古文：礼官议从成人服，诸王服大功。
现代文：礼官提议依照成人丧礼穿戴丧服，诸王服大功。
English: The etiquette officer suggested that they wear mourning clothes in accordance with adult funerals, and the kings did a great job.

古文：左丞孙夐重奏：《礼记》女子十五而笄，郑云应年许嫁者也。
现代文：左丞孙复义奏告说： 《礼记》上有女子十五岁行成年礼，郑注说这年龄是指已许嫁的人。
English: Zuo Zheng's grandson Fu Rongyi reported: "In the "Li Ji," there is a passage about a 15-year-old girl performing a coming-of-age ceremony. Zheng Zhi said that this age refers to a person who has already been married.

古文：其未许嫁者，则二十而笄。
现代文：那些没许嫁的则是二十岁才算成年。
English: Those who are not allowed to marry are considered adults at the age of twenty.

古文：射慈云十九犹为殇。
现代文：射慈说十九岁死还应算是未成年死。
English: She Ci said that the death of a nineteen-year-old should also be considered a minor death.

古文：礼官违越经典，于礼无据。 博士太常以下结免赎论；谧坐杖督五十，夺劳百日，谧又奏： 夐先不研辨，混同谬议。准以事例，亦宜及咎。 
现代文：礼官背离经典，丧服礼仪没有依据博士、太常以下官职以免官赎罪论处；江谧因罪过杖责五十，罚扣百日劳俸。江谧又启奏说： 孙复原先不研讨分辨清楚，附和错误议论，参照有关事例，也应该追究他的责任。 
English: The etiquette officer deviated from the classics, the funeral dress etiquette did not follow the doctor, the official position below the official position to avoid the official atonement; Jiang Wei was punished for the crime with a cane and a fine of one hundred days' salary. Jiang Wei also said: Sun Fu originally did not study the distinction clearly, and added the wrong discussion. Referring to the relevant cases, he should also be held accountable.

古文：夐又结免赎论。
现代文：孙复也应以免官赎罪论处。
English: Sun Fu should also be punished to avoid official atonement.

古文：诏 可 。
现代文：皇上下诏 可以 。
English: The next edict said yes.

古文：出为建平王景素冠军长史、长沙内史，行湘州事。
现代文：江谧外出任建平王景素冠军长史、长沙内史，行湘州事。
English: Jiang Wei was appointed as the champion of Jianping Wang Jingsu Long History and Changsha Inner History in Hunan Province.

古文：政治苛刻。
现代文：执政治理繁琐刻薄。
English: The administrative procedures are cumbersome and tedious.

古文：僧遵道人与谧情款，随谧莅郡，犯小事，饿系郡狱，僧遵裂三衣食之，既尽而死。
现代文：僧遵道人与江谧交情深厚，跟随一起到任所，因小事犯了过错，就被关进郡狱让他挨饿，僧遵道人撕裂身上的法衣吃，吃完后就饿死了。
English: The monk Zun Dao had a deep friendship with Jiang Chen, and they followed him to the government office together. Because he made a mistake in a small matter, he was put into the county jail and starved. The monk Zun Dao tore his robe to eat, and after eating, he died of starvation.

古文：为有司所奏，征还。
现代文：江谧被有关官吏弹劾，被征返京。
English: Jiang Wei was impeached by the relevant officials and was conscripted back to Beijing.

古文：明帝崩，遇赦得免。
现代文：明帝崩，遇赦，免受处罚。
English: When Emperor Ming died, he was pardoned and exempted from punishment.

古文：为正员郎，右军将军。
现代文：为正员郎，右军将军。
English: He was the right-hand man, the general of the right army.

古文：太祖领南兖州，谧为镇军长史、广陵太守，入为游击将军。
现代文：太祖领南兖州时，江谧为镇军长史、广陵太守，入朝为游击将军。
English: When his great-grandfather was in charge of South Luzhou, Jiang Yu was the commander of the town army, the governor of Guangling, and entered the imperial court as a guerrilla general.

古文：性流俗，善趋势利。
现代文：秉性鄙俗，善于趋炎附势。
English: He is vulgar by nature and is good at attracting attention.

古文：元徽末，朝野咸属意建平王景素，谧深自委结，景素事败，仅得免祸。
现代文：元徽末年，朝野都属意于建平王景素，江谧更是曲意逢迎巴结，景素在京口起兵败死，江谧仅仅能躲免受牵连的祸害。
English: In the last years of the Yuan Dynasty, the emperor and the country all belonged to Jianping Wang Jingsu, and Jiang Chen was even more popular. Jingsu was defeated and killed in the Battle of Jingkou, and Jiang Chen was only able to escape the scourge of being implicated.

古文：苍梧王废后，物情尚怀疑惑，谧独竭诚归事太祖，以本官领尚书左丞。
现代文：苍梧王被废黜后，人心归向尚在犹疑困惑，而江谧却独自竭诚归附太祖，原任官职未动又领尚书左丞。
English: After the dethronement of King Cangwu, the hearts of the people were still hesitant and puzzled, but Jiang Zang single-handedly devoted himself to the great-grandfather. He did not move from his original post and led Shang Shuzhong.

古文：升明元年，迁黄门侍郎，左丞如故。
现代文：升明元年，迁黄门侍郎，尚书左丞职务依前不变。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the position of Huangmen waiter was relocated, and the position of Shangshu Sajo remained unchanged.

古文：沈攸之事起，议加太祖黄皞，谧所建也。
现代文：沈攸之起兵发难事起，朝臣议论把天子用的仪仗黄铁加给太祖，就是江谧的提议。
English: When Shen You's troops were mobilized and the situation became difficult, the courtiers began to discuss adding the yellow iron, the ceremonial weapon used by the emperor, to Taizu, which was Jiang Chen's suggestion.

古文：事平，迁吏部郎，稍被亲待。
现代文：沈攸之的事平定后，江谧迁吏部郎，逐渐被太祖当亲信看待。
English: After the matter of Shen You was settled, Jiang Xuan moved to the position of secretary and was gradually regarded as a close confidant of the great-grandfather.

古文：迁太尉谘议，领录事参军。
现代文：迁太尉谘议，领绿事参军。
English: After consulting with the transfer captain, he decided to enlist in the army.

古文：齐台建，为右卫将军。
现代文：齐朝建立，江谧为右卫将军。
English: The Qi Dynasty was established, and Jiang Zang became the right guard general.

古文：建元元年，迁侍中。出为临川王平西长史、冠军将军、长沙内史、行湘州留事，先遣之镇，既而骠骑豫章王嶷领湘州，以谧为长史，将军、内史、知州留事如故。
现代文：建元元年，迁侍中，外出做临川乇平西长史、冠军将军、长沙内史、行湘州留事，先派他到湘州镇治，不久骠骑豫章王萧嶷领湘州刺史，以江谧为长史，将军、内史、知州留事依前不变。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, when he was in the process of relocating, he went out to Linchuan to record the history of Western Pingxi, the champion general, the history of Changsha, and to record the history of Hunan. First, he was sent to Hunan to administer. Soon after, he rode the horse of Yu Zhang Wang Xiao to record the history of Hunan, with the history of Jiangxi as the long history, and the records of general, internal history, and Chizhou remained unchanged.

古文：封永新县伯，四百户。
现代文：封永新县伯，食邑四百户。
English: There are 400 households in Bo, Fengyongxin County.

古文：三年，为左民尚书。
现代文：建元三年，为左民尚书。
English: In the third year of Jianyuan, it was renamed Zuomin Shangshu.

古文：诸皇子出阁用文武主帅，皆以委谧。
现代文：诸皇子离开朝廷到自己的封地做藩王时用文武主帅的事，都委派江谧料理。
English: When princes left the imperial court to become feudal lords in their own fiefdoms, they all appointed Jiangxi Cuisine to be the head chef.

古文：寻敕曰： 江谧寒士，诚当不得竞等华侪。
现代文：不久诏旨说： 江谧是个出身寒微的读书人，确实不能和贵族们竞争高低等第。
English: Soon, the imperial edict said: Jiang Chen was a scholar from a humble background, and he really couldn't compete with the aristocrats.

古文：然甚有才干，堪为委遇，可迁掌吏部。 
现代文：然而他很有才干，可以赏识托付，可提升他执掌吏部。 
English: However, he is very talented, can appreciate the entrustment, can promote him to be in charge of the personnel department.

古文：谧才长刀笔，所在事办。
现代文：江谧的才干尤其长于主办文案，他任职的部门事情都办得不错。
English: Jiang Wei's talent is especially good at organizing copywriting, and the department he works for has done well.

古文：太祖崩，谧称疾不入，众颇疑其怨不豫顾命也。
现代文：太祖驾崩，江谧谎称有病不上朝，大家很怀疑他抱怨未能受太祖临终托付的缘故。
English: After the death of his great-grandfather, Jiang Wei falsely claimed that he was ill and would not go to the court. Everyone was very suspicious that he was complaining about not being able to accept his great-grandfather's dying request.

古文：世祖即位，谧又不迁官，以此怨望。
现代文：世祖即皇帝位，江谧又没能升官，因此。心怀不满。
English: The founder of the dynasty was the emperor, and Jiang Chen was not promoted, so he was dissatisfied.

古文：时世祖不豫，谧诣豫章王嶷请间曰： 至尊非起疾，东宫又非才，公今欲作何计？ 
现代文：当时世祖有病，江谧拜访豫章王萧嶷挑拨离间说： 太祖皇帝驾崩发生太快，束宫太子又不具备天子的才干，明公现在有何计划? 
English: At that time, the founder of the dynasty was ill, and Jiang Yu visited Yu Zhang Wang Xiao Wei to sow discord, saying: The death of the great-grandfather emperor happened too quickly, and Prince Sokong did not have the talent of a son of heaven. What is Ming Gong's plan now?

古文：世祖知之，出谧为征虏将军、镇北长史、南东海太守。
现代文：世担知道这些后，调江谧外出任征虏将军、镇北长史、尘塞迤太守。
English: After the Council of Elders knew about this, they transferred Jiang Zhe to the position of conscript general, Zhenbei Changshi, and Deng Jie to the position of grand marshal.

古文：未发，上使御史中丞沈冲奏谧前后罪曰： 谧少怀轻躁，长习谄薄，交无义合，行必利动。
现代文：辽箠尚未动身，世旦暗使御史中丞沈冲弹劾江谧前前后后的罪行，说：江谧从小轻浮暴躁，长大惯于谄媚刻薄，交友不凭仁义聚合，行事定由利益动作。
English: Before Liao Wei set off, the world secretly sent the imperial historian Shen Chong to impeach Jiang Wei for his previous and subsequent crimes, saying: Jiang Wei has been frivolous and petulant since childhood, has grown up accustomed to being charming and mean, does not make friends based on benevolence and righteousness, and acts according to interests.

古文：特以奕世更局，见擢宋朝，而阿谀内外，货路公行，咎盈宪简，戾彰朝听，舆金辇宝，取容近习。
现代文：祇不过因累代更迭，被前宋提拔，可是他阿谀内臣外勋，公开行授贿赂，过错充满法纪文告，罪恶显露朝野视听，大车小车，装金载穴，去巴结讨好能亲近皇帝的人。
English: He was only promoted to the top by the former Song Dynasty due to the successive generations, but he was a grandpa, a vassal, and a granddaughter-in-law, openly giving bribes, full of faults in legal documents, revealing the evils of the audio-visual field, large cars, small cars, loaded with money, and going to curry favor with people who could get close to the emperor.

古文：以沈攸之地胜兵强，终当得志，委心托身，岁暮相结；以刘景素亲属望重，物应乐推，献诚荐子，窥窬非望。
现代文：江谧以为沈攸之兵强地利，终究会得志，就将自己身心托付于他，晚年互相勾结。以为刘景素在诸皇亲中名望厚重，他顺应流俗，贡献挚诚，荐举亲子，伺机而动，希图非分之望。
English: Jiang Yu thought that Shen You's soldiers were strong and would eventually succeed, so he entrusted his body and mind to him, and they colluded with each other in his later years. He thought that Liu Jing Su had a high reputation among the emperors' relatives, he conformed to the customs, contributed sincerely, recommended his relatives and children, waited for the opportunity, and hoped for the best.

古文：时艰网漏，得全首领。
现代文：由于当时时局艰难，法网疏漏，才得以保全了性命。
English: Due to the difficult situation at that time, the legal network was negligent, and only then was his life saved.

古文：太祖匡饬天地，方弘远图，薄其难洗之瑕，许其革音之效，加以非分之宠，推以不次之荣，列迹勋良，比肩朝德。
现代文：太祖整治匡扶天地，正在弘大自己的远大规划，因而轻视他那难以洗刷的污点，允许他尽些革音之劳，用非分的宠幸待他，把很高的荣誉给他，使他能与勋良之臣并列，和朝德之士比肩。
English: The great-grandfather was rectifying and supporting heaven and earth, and was expanding his own great plan. Therefore, he despised his hard-to-wash stain, allowed him to do some revolutionary work, treated him with undivided favor, and gave him a high honor, so that he could be on a par with the noble vassals, and on a par with the people of the German Empire.

古文：以往者微勤，刀笔小用，赏厕河山，任忝出入。
现代文：以往虽有微劳，刀笔小技，但朝廷的赏赐足可使他侧足河山，任用的官职足能使他居之羞愧。
English: In the past, although he had little labor and little skill with a knife and pen, the rewards from the imperial court could make him walk on mountains and rivers, and the official positions he was appointed to could make him feel ashamed.

古文：轻险之性，在贵弥彰；贪昧之情，虽富无满。
现代文：而他轻浮邪恶的秉性，处在权要的地位就更加显露；贪财昧物的心思，虽然富有了但永远也不满足。
English: But when he is in a position of power, his frivolous and evil nature is even more exposed; his greed for money and obscene things is never satisfied, even though he is rich.

古文：重莅湘部，显行断盗；及居铨衡，肆意受纳。
现代文：两次莅临湘州，品行光明的人被他断作盗贼；待到身居品评选拔人才的要职，他就放肆地营私结纳。
English: Twice he visited Hunan Province, where he denounced people of good moral character as thieves; when he was appointed to the important position of selecting talents, he brazenly engaged in bribery.

古文：连席同乘，皆诐黩旧侣；密筵闲宴，必货贿常客。
现代文：同席同车坐过的人，都被他拉作老朋友；亲朋疏友杯酒吃喝，也一定会用财物去笼络。
English: People who have sat at the same table and in the same car are all regarded by him as old friends; relatives and friends drink wine and eat, and they will certainly use their wealth to entice.

古文：理合升进者，以为己惠；事宜贬退者，并称中旨。
现代文：理当升迁的，他把这当作是自己的恩惠；事该贬退的，都称作皇上的意思。
English: Those who deserved to be promoted, he regarded as his own favour; those who deserved to be demoted, he called the emperor's will.

古文：谓贩鬻威权，奸自不露，欺主罔上，谤议可掩。
现代文：真可说贩卖威权，奸而不露；欺主罔上，可以掩饰非议。
English: It can truly be said that if you sell authority, you can cheat without revealing it; if you deceive, you can cover up criticism.

古文：先帝寝疾弥留，人神忧震。谧托病私舍，曾无变容。
现代文：先帝卧床不起、病处弥留之际，是人是神都为此忧愁震惊，可是江谧谎称有病，置身私宅，竟然没有忧愁之色。
English: When the former emperor was bedridden and dying of illness, people and gods alike were shocked by this sorrow, but Jiang Yu lied that he was ill and stayed at a private home, and there was no sadness.

古文：国讳经旬，甫暂入殿，参访遗诏，觇忖时旨。
现代文：国丧经旬，他才上朝，参访遣韶，窥伺时局。
English: When the national mourning was in full swing, he went to the Imperial Palace to visit the imperial residences and observe the current situation.

古文：以身列朝流，宜蒙兼带，先顾不逮，旧位无加，遂崇饰恶言，肆丑纵悖，讥诽朝政，讪毁皇猷，遍蚩忠贤，历诋台相。
现代文：他自觉跻身朝班，应当再蒙赏赐，兼带更多职衔。可是先帝顾命大事他未能参与，旧有的官位又未能添加，于是他大大地伪饰那些恶毒语言，放纵哮德丑行，讥讽诽谤朝政，讪笑诋毁皇帝的谋划，处处嘲弄忠贞贤良，时时贬责台臣宰辅。
English: He consciously joined the imperial staff, and should have been rewarded again, with more titles. However, the former emperor was unable to participate in the great event of his life, and the old official position could not be added. Therefore, he greatly falsified those vicious words, indulged in moral outrage, ridiculed and slandered the imperial government, ridiculed and slandered the emperor's plan, mocked the loyal and virtuous everywhere, and constantly disparaged the Taiwanese vassal Zaisuke.

古文：至于蕃岳入授，列代恒规，勋戚出抚，前王彝则，而谧妄发枢机，坐构嚣论。
现代文：至于边陲外藩首领入朝受封，亲戚勋臣外出镇抚，前王有定则，列代有常规。可是江谴妄动国家机要，由此招致众人议论。
English: As for the leaders of the outlying fiefdoms entering the imperial court and receiving titles, and the relatives, heroes and ministers going out to pacify the country, the former king had a rule, and the successive generations had a routine. However, Jiang Dang dared to move the national opportunity, which led to many people's discussion.

古文：复敢贬谤储后，不顾辞端，毁折宗王，每穷舌杪。
现代文：还敢恶意议论贬责太子，不顾辞端，毁损宗王，每每穷尽唇舌。
English: He also dared to maliciously talk about and disparage the crown prince, disregarding the end of the speech, damaging the patriarch, and exhausting his lips.

古文：皆云诰誓乖礼，崇树失宜，仰指天，俯画地，希幸灾故，以申积愤。
现代文：都说是诰封誓词违背礼仪，崇替建树有失妥当。他仰指天，俯画地，希图发生灾祸变故，以便发泄他的积愤。
English: They all said that it was against etiquette to seal an oath, and that it was inappropriate to build a tree. He pointed to the sky and drew a picture of the earth, hoping for a disaster to happen in order to vent his anger.

古文：犯上之迹既彰，反噬之情已著。
现代文：犯上不轨的迹象既已明显，恩将仇报的心思又已昭著。
English: The signs of committing misconduct have already become obvious, and the thought of repaying favors has also become apparent.

古文：请免官削爵土，收送廷尉狱治罪。 
现代文：请罢免江谧的官职、削除他的爵位、取消他的封土，擒拿押送廷尉狱治罪。
English: Please remove Jiang Qi from his official position, remove his title, cancel his fief, and arrest and send the courtier to prison.

古文：诏赐死，时年五十二。
现代文：世祖下诏赐死，时年五十二岁。
English: The founder died at the age of fifty-two.

古文：子介，建武中，为吴令，治亦深切。
现代文：江谧的儿子江介，建武年间，做过吴县县令，治理也算深入严谨。
English: Jiang Wei's son Jiang Jie, during the Jianwu era, was the governor of Wuxian County, and his governance was also considered to be in-depth and rigorous.

古文：民间榜死人髑髅为谧首，介弃官而去。
现代文：民间悬挂死人的髑髅说是江谧的头颅，于是江介辞官而去。
English: It was said that the dead man's skull was the head of Jiang Chen, so Jiang Jie resigned and left.

古文：荀伯玉，字弄璋，广陵人也。
现代文：荀伯玉字弄璋，广陵人。
English: He was born in Guangling, Hebei Province.

古文：祖永，南谯太守。父阐之，给事中。
现代文：他祖父荀永曾做过南谯太守，他父亲萄阐之，做过给事中。
English: His grandfather Jian Yong was once the governor of Nanxun, and his father Jian Yanzhi was once the vice-governor.

古文：伯玉少为柳元景抚军板行参军，南徐州祭酒，晋安王子勋镇军行参军。
现代文：荀伯玉年轻时做过柳元景抚军板行参军，南徐州祭酒，晋安王子勋镇军行参军。
English: When she was young, Zou Bo-yu did the military parade of Liu Yuan Jing Fuzi, the military parade of South Xuzhou, and the military parade of Jinan Prince Xun Zhen.

古文：泰始初，子勋举事，伯玉友人孙冲为将帅，伯玉隶其驱使，封新亭侯。
现代文：泰始初年，子勋在江州起兵，荀伯玉的朋友孙冲为将帅，荀伯玉隶属他调遣，封新亭侯。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, Zixun raised an army in Jiangzhou. Sun Chong, a friend of Zou Bo-yu, was the commander-in-chief. Zou Bo-yu was under his command and was given the title of Xin Ting Hou.

古文：事败，伯玉还都卖卜自业。
现代文：子勋事败，荀伯玉返回京城以占卜作谋生的职业。
English: After her son's defeat, Zou Bo-yu returned to Beijing to earn a living as a fortune-teller.

古文：建平王景素闻而招之，伯玉不往。
现代文：建平王景素听说后招荀伯玉去，荀伯玉不去。
English: When Jianping Wang Jingsu heard about it, he invited Zou Boyu to go, but Zou Boyu did not go.

古文：太祖镇淮阴，伯玉归身结事，为太祖冠军刑狱参军。
现代文：太祖萧道成镇守淮阴，旬伯玉投奔太祖结交任事，为太祖冠军刑狱参军。
English: The great-grandfather Xiao Daocheng was the town guard of Huaiyin, and Shun BoYu went to work for the great-grandfather, and joined the army as the great-grandfather's champion.

古文：太祖为明帝所疑，及征为黄门郎，深怀忧虑。
现代文：太祖被明帝刘或猜疑，待到征太祖为黄门郎，太祖心中非常忧虑。
English: The great-grandfather was suspected by the Ming Emperor Liu, and waited until the great-grandfather was selected as Huangmen Lang. The great-grandfather was very worried.

古文：伯玉劝太祖遣数十骑入虏界，安置标榜，于是虏游骑数百履行界上，太祖以闻，犹惧不得留，令伯玉卜，伯玉断卦不成行，而明帝诏果复太祖本任，由是见亲待。
现代文：荀伯玉劝太祖派遣数十骑兵潜入魏虏地界内，设置标榜，于是魏虏数百骑兵在魏齐边界游荡，太祖把这种情状上报，但还是害怕不能留驻淮阴，让荀伯玉占卜，荀伯玉断卦说不要动身前去，而明帝果然有诏恢复太祖本任官职，荀伯玉由此更被太祖当作亲信看待。
English: Zou Bo-yu advised the great-grandfather to send dozens of cavalry to sneak into the Wei-Qi border and set up a banner. As a result, hundreds of Wei-Qi cavalry roamed the Wei-Qi border. The great-grandfather reported this situation, but he was still afraid of not being able to stay in Huaiyin. He asked Zou Bo-yu to make a divination. Zou Bo-yu said not to go forward, and the Ming emperor indeed had an edict to restore the great-grandfather to his official post. Zou Bo-yu was therefore regarded as a close confidant by the great-grandfather.

古文：从太祖还都，除奉朝请。
现代文：跟随太祖返京都，被授予奉朝请。
English: He returned to Kyoto with his great-grandfather and was awarded the title of Bongcho.

古文：令伯玉看宅，知家事。
现代文：太祖让荀伯玉看管宅院，主持家务。
English: The great-grandfather asked Zou Bo-yu to look after the mansion and preside over the housework.

古文：世祖罢广兴还，立别宅，遣人于大宅掘树数株，伯玉不与，驰以闻。
现代文：世祖萧赜离开广陵返回京城，另建宅院，派人从大宅院中挖掘几棵树去，荀伯玉不给挖，骑马去报告太祖。
English: The founder of the world, Xiao Yu, left Guangling and returned to Beijing. He built another mansion, sent someone to dig up a few trees from the mansion, but did not dig up the gems, and rode to report to the founder.

古文：太祖曰： 卿执之是也。 
现代文：太祖说： 你作主就是了。 
English: The great-grandfather said: You are the master.

古文：转太祖平南府，晋熙王府参军。
现代文：荀伯玉转太祖平南府，晋熙王府参军。
English: Zou Bo-yu became the grand ancestor of Pingnan Prefecture, and Jinxi Wangfu joined the army.

古文：太祖为南兖州，伯玉转为上镇军中兵参军，带广陵令。
现代文：太祖为南兖州刺史，荀伯玉转为上镇军中兵参军，兼广陵令。
English: The great-grandfather was a military historian in southern Luzhou, and Zibo Yu became a soldier in the Shangzheng Army, and also the Guanglinglingling.

古文：除羽林监，不拜。
现代文：授予羽林监，但他未接受任命。
English: but he did not accept the appointment.

古文：初，太祖在淮南，伯玉假还广陵，梦上广陵城南楼上，有二青衣小儿语伯玉云： 草中肃，九五相追逐。 
现代文：当初，太祖在淮南，荀伯玉休假回广陵，梦见登上广陵城南楼，有两个身穿青衣的小孩告诉值王说： 草中肃，九五相追逐。 
English: At the beginning, the great-grandfather was in Huainan, and Zibo Yu took a vacation to return to Guangling. He dreamed of boarding the south tower of Guangling City. Two children wearing blue clothes told the value king: Grass in the middle, chasing the nine-five phase.

古文：伯玉视城下人头上皆有草。
现代文：苞伯玉看见城下的人头上都有草。
English: Zou Bo-yu saw that people under the city had grass on their heads.

古文：泰始七年，伯玉又梦太祖乘船在广陵北渚，见上两掖下有翅不舒。
现代文：泰始一年，苟伯玉又梦见太祖在广陵北渚乘船，太祖两腋下有翅膀没有张开。
English: In the first year of Taizhi, Gongbo Yu also dreamed that the great-grandfather was on a boat in Guangling Beizhu, and the great-grandfather had wings under his armpits, but they were not open.

古文：伯玉问何当舒，上曰： 却后三年。 
现代文：荀伯玉问何时可张开，太祖说： 退后三年。 
English: Zou Boyu asked when it could be opened, and Taizu said, "Three years later."

古文：伯玉梦中自谓是咒师，向上唾咒之，凡六咒，有六龙出，两掖下翅皆舒，还而复敛。
现代文：荀伯玉在梦中自称是咒师，向着太祖念咒语，咒六次，有六条龙出来，两腋下的翅都展开了，后来又收拢了。
English: In her dream, Zou Bo-yu claimed to be an exorcist. She recited a spell to her great-grandfather. The spell was cast six times, and six dragons came out. The wings under the two armpits were opened, and then closed again.

古文：元徽二年而太祖破桂阳，威名大震；五年而废苍梧。
现代文：元徽二年，太祖破桂阳王体箠，威名大震。丞徽五年废黜苍梧王。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Hui Dynasty, King Taizu defeated King Guiyang, and his prestige was shaken. In the fifth year of the Yuan Hui Dynasty, King Cangwu was deposed.

古文：太祖谓伯玉曰： 卿时乘之梦，今且效矣。 
现代文：太祖对值玉说： 爱卿那时的梦，现在都应验了。 
English: The great-grandfather said to Zhengyu: Aicheng's dream at that time has now come true.

古文：升明初，仍为太祖骠骑中兵参军，除步兵校尉，不拜。
现代文：升明初年，仍为左担骠骑中兵参军，授予他步兵校尉，他没有接受任职命令。
English: In the first year of his promotion, he still joined the army as a left-armored cavalry soldier and was awarded the rank of infantry captain. He did not accept the appointment order.

古文：仍带济阳太守，中兵如故。
现代文：仍兼济阳太守，中兵官职依前未变。
English: He is still the governor of Jiyang, and his position as a middle-ranking military officer remains unchanged.

古文：霸业既建，伯玉忠勤尽心，常卫左右。
现代文：太祖既已建立霸王的勋业，荀伯玉对立担更加忠贞勤劳尽心尽力，常常侍卫左担左右。
English: Since the great-grandfather had already established the glory of the overlord, Zibo Yu was more loyal, diligent and dedicated, and often guarded the left and right sides of the left shoulder.

古文：加前军将军。
现代文：加封茎值王为前军将军。
English: The former army general is also known as Kofu Tsukuda Wang.

古文：随太祖太尉府转中兵，将军、太守如故。
现代文：随太祖太尉府转中兵，将军、太守官职依前未变。
English: With the great-great-grandfather's promotion to the rank of lieutenant-general, the posts of general and governor-general remained unchanged.

古文：建元元年，封南丰县子，四百户。
现代文：建元元年，封南丰县子，食邑四百户。
English: In the first year after the founding of the People's Republic of China, 400 households in Fengnan Fengxianzi, a food village, were established.

古文：转辅国将军，武陵王征虏司马，太守如故。
现代文：转任辅国将军，武陵王征虏司马，太守依前未变。
English: He was transferred to the post of general of the auxiliary province, the king of Wuling recruited Sima, and the governor-general remained unchanged.

古文：徙为安成王冠军司马，转豫章王司空谘议，太守如故。
现代文：徙为安成王冠军司马，转速童工司空谘议，太守官职依前未变。
English: He will be the champion of Ancheng Wang, the speed child laborer, the space advisory, and the position of the officer remains unchanged.

古文：世祖在东宫，专断用事，颇不如法。
现代文：世祖在东宫时，行事专断，颇不合法规。
English: When the patriarch was in the East Palace, he acted arbitrarily and quite illegally.

古文：任左右张景真，使领东宫主衣食官谷帛，赏赐什物，皆御所服用。
现代文：任用近侍退量真，让他主管东宫的衣食谷帛，赏赐的什物，都属皇帝御用的东西。
English: He appointed a close attendant to be in charge of the food and clothing of the East Palace, and the gifts were all things that belonged to the emperor.

古文：景真于南涧寺舍身斋，有元徽紫皮裤褶，余物称是。
现代文：张景真在南涧寺舍身供佛，有元徽皇帝用的紫皮裤褶，其余物品大都是这样。
English: Zhang Jingzhen offered his body to the Buddha at Nanlu Temple, and the purple leather trousers used by the Yuan Hui Emperor are on display, as are most of the other items.

古文：于乐游设会，伎人皆著御衣。
现代文：在銮游设会，伎人都穿着御用衣服。
English: A meeting was held in Mino, and all the Go people were dressed in their official clothes.

古文：又度丝锦与昆仑舶营货，辄使传令防送过南州津。
现代文：还把丝锦运输到蝓同外国商船买卖货物，每每让传令防送过童丛婆。
English: Silk brocade was also transported to Shandong to trade goods with foreign merchant ships, and every time a messenger was sent to prevent it from being sent to Tongcongba.

古文：世祖拜陵还，景真白服乘画舴艋，坐胡床，观者咸疑是太子。
现代文：世担拜陵返回时，张旦真身穿白服乘图画舴艋小船，坐胡床，观看的人都疑心是太子。
English: When the undertaker returned to the mausoleum, Zhang Danzhen, dressed in a white robe, rode a small boat decorated with pictures and sat on a wooden bed. The onlookers were suspicious that it was the prince.

古文：内外祗畏，莫敢有言。
现代文：内外害怕，没有人敢出来说话。
English: No one dared to speak out for fear, both inside and outside.

古文：伯玉谓亲人曰： 太子所为，官终不知，岂得顾死蔽官耳目！我不启闻，谁应启者？ 
现代文：荀伯玉对亲近的人说： 太子的作为，皇上始终不知道，怎能衹顾个人死活而使皇上的耳目受蒙蔽呢，我不告诉皇上知道，谁会告诉? 
English: Zou Bo-yu said to those close to him, "The emperor has never known about the prince's actions. How can he blind the emperor's eyes and ears, regardless of his own life and death? If I don't tell the emperor, who will?

古文：因世祖拜陵后密启之。
现代文：因而在世担拜陵后暗暗禀告立担。
English: Therefore, after paying homage to the mausoleum in the world, he secretly announced the establishment of the tomb.

古文：上大怒，检校东宫。
现代文：叁担大怒，检查东宫。
English: He was very angry and inspected the East Palace.

古文：世祖还至方山，日暮将泊。
现代文：世担返程时走到友山，曰暮打算停泊。
English: On the way back, Shetan walked to Yuyama, saying that he was going to anchor.

古文：豫章王于东府乘飞燕东迎，具白上怒之意。
现代文：豫童王从塞应乘飞燕快马向东来迎接世祖，把皇上生气的意思一一说明。
English: King Yutong came from Xieying to the east on a swift horse to meet the ancestor, and explained the meaning of the emperor's anger one by one.

古文：世祖夜归，上亦停门籥待之，二更尽，方入宫。
现代文：世祖连夜返回，皇上停锁宫门等候他，二更尽，才入宫。
English: When the ancestor returned overnight, the emperor locked the palace door and waited for him. He had to wait two more hours before he could enter the palace.

古文：上明日遣文惠太子、闻喜公子良宣敕，以景真罪状示世祖。
现代文：皇上第二天派遣文惠太子、闻喜公王旦宣读皇上旨意，把张景真的罪状诏告世担。
English: The next day, the emperor sent Prince Wen Hui and Wang Dan, the prince of Wensi, to read out the emperor's will and announce Zhang Jingjin's guilt to the world.

古文：称太子令，收景真杀之。
现代文：用太子的名义发令，收捕张量真并把他杀了。
English: He issued an order in the name of the crown prince to arrest Tenzing Zhen and killed him.

古文：世祖忧惧，称疾月余日。
现代文：世担为此又忧又怕，称病一个多月。
English: For this reason, Shetan was worried and afraid, and said that he had been ill for more than a month.

古文：上怒不解。
现代文：皇上怒气仍未消除。
English: The Emperor's anger has not yet dissipated.

古文：昼卧太阳殿，王敬则直入，叩头启上曰： 官有天下日浅，太子无事被责，人情恐惧，愿官往东宫解释之。 
现代文：太祖白昼在太阳殿躺卧，翅直接闯进来，叩头奏说： 皇上拥有天下的子不长，太子无过错而被谴责，人情恐惧，希望皇上往东宫解释这次事件。 
English: The great-grandfather was lying in the sun hall in the daytime, and the wing directly broke in, kowtowing and said: The emperor does not have a son for a long time, the prince was condemned without fault, he was afraid of human feelings, and he hoped that the emperor would go to the East Palace to explain this incident.

古文：太祖乃幸宫，召诸王以下于玄圃园为家宴，致醉乃还。
现代文：太祖于是驾临束宫，召集诸王以下的人在玄圃园设家宴，醉了才回去。
English: The great-grandfather then came to Sok Palace, gathered people from the kings down to have a house party in the garden, and only went back when he was drunk.

古文：上嘉伯玉尽心，愈见亲信，军国密事，多委使之。
现代文：太祖欣赏荀伯玉对他尽心尽力，更加亲信他，关系军国的机密大事，多委派他去办。
English: The great-grandfather appreciated that Zou Bo-yu did his best for him, trusted him more, and sent him to handle many confidential matters related to the military.

古文：时人为之语曰： 十敕五令，不如荀伯玉命。 
现代文：当时的人为此说： 十敕五令，不如苟伯玉的命令。 
English: The people at the time said: "It's not as good as Gobo's order.

古文：世祖深怨伯玉。
现代文：世祖对荀伯玉的怨恨很深。
English: The ancestor held a deep grudge against Zou Bo-yu.

古文：上临崩，指伯玉谓世祖曰： 此人事我忠，我身后，人必为其作口过，汝勿信也。
现代文：太祖临死时，手指荀伯玉对世祖说： 这个人对我很忠心，我身故后，必定有人给他捏造言语过失，你不要相信。
English: When the great-grandfather was about to die, he said to his great-grandfather with a waggle of his finger, "This man was loyal to me. After my death, someone must have fabricated his words and faults. Don't believe it."

古文：可令往东宫长侍白泽，小却以南兖州处之。 
现代文：可以让他到束宫长期侍奉白泽，最低也得用南兖州安置他。 
English: He can be sent to Sokgong to serve Baizhe for a long time, and at the very least, he must be placed in Nanluozhou.

古文：伯玉遭父忧，除冠军将军、南濮阳太守，未拜，除黄门郎，本官如故。
现代文：荀伯玉遭逢父丧，授予他冠军将军、南濮阳太守，他没有接受任职命令，授予他黄门郎，原本官职依前不变。
English: Zou Bo-yu suffered the death of his father and was awarded the title of champion general and the governor of Nan Poyang. He did not accept the appointment order and was awarded the title of Huangmenro. The original official position remains unchanged.

古文：世祖转为豫章王太尉谘议，太守如故。
现代文：世祖转苟伯玉为豫章王太尉谘议，太守职依前不变。
English: Grandfather Zeng Guobiao consults with Lieutenant Yuzhang Wang, and the position of Tai Shou remains unchanged.

古文：俄迁散骑常侍，太守如故。
现代文：不久又迁荀伯玉为散骑常侍，太守职仍依前不变。
English: Soon after that, she was transferred to the position of a riding attendant, and her duties remained unchanged.

古文：伯玉忧惧无计，上闻之，以其与垣崇祖善，虑相扇为乱，加意抚之，伯玉乃安。
现代文：苟伯玉对世祖心存忧惧却又无计可施，世祖听说这种情况，又因他与垣崇祖关系密切，担心他们相互勾结而作乱，加意抚慰荀伯玉，荀伯玉才心安。
English: Gong Bo-yul was worried about Shizuo, but there was nothing she could do. Shizuo heard about this situation, and because he was closely related to Gaki Chong-soo, he was worried that they would collude with each other and cause a disturbance. He tried to comfort Gong Bo-yul, but only Gong Bo-yul was at peace.

古文：永明元年，垣崇祖诛，伯玉并伏法。
现代文：永明元年，诛杀垣崇祖，荀伯玉也被诛杀。
English: In the first year of the Yongming Dynasty, Gong killed Gaki Chongzu, and Gong Bo-yul was also killed.

古文：初，善相墓者见伯玉家墓，谓其父曰： 当出暴贵而不久也。 
现代文：起先，会占卜墓地风水的人看见荀伯玉家的墓地，对他的父亲说： 会出骤然尊贵的人，可惜不会长久。 
English: At first, a cemetery fortune-teller saw the tomb of Zibo Yu Jia and said to his father, "A noble person will suddenly appear, but unfortunately it won't last long."

古文：伯玉后闻之，曰： 朝闻道，夕死可矣。 
现代文：荀伯玉后来听说这些，就说： 朝闻道，夕死可矣。 
English: When Zou Bo-yu heard about this later, she said, "Hearing the Tao in the morning, I can die in the evening."

古文：死时年五十。
现代文：苞值玉死时五十岁。
English: She was fifty years old when she died.

古文：史臣曰：君老不事太子，义烈之遗训也。
现代文：史臣曰：君王老了不能再侍奉太子，这是义烈的遣训。
English: Shichen said, "When the monarch is old, he can no longer serve the crown prince. This is the training of a valiant man."

古文：欲夫专心所奉，在节无贰，虽人子之亲，尚宜自别，则偏党为论，岂或傍启！
现代文：要想专心侍奉，在节操上就不能兼顾两个人，即使像人子这样的亲缘关系，尚且应自行分别，就旁人来说，怎可从中多嘴呢。
English: For it is impossible for a man to serve two masters at the same time. For if even such a kinship as the Son of Man must be divided, how can one man serve two masters?

古文：察江、荀之行也，虽异术而同亡。
现代文：考察江谧、荀伯玉的行为，表现方法虽说不同，却同样遭到了诛杀。
English: Examining the behavior of Jiang Chen and Zou Bo-yu, although the performance methods are different, they were also beaten to death.

古文：以古道而居今世，难乎免矣。
现代文：用古代的道行而生活在当今的社会，要避免灾祸实在困难啊。
English: Living in today's society with the ancient Taoism, it is really difficult to avoid disaster.

古文：赞曰：谧口祸门，荀言亟尽。
现代文：赞曰：江谧的嘴是招祸之门，伯玉的话是催命的鬼。
English: Zang said: Jiang Chen's mouth is the door to disaster, and Bo Yu's words are the ghost of death.

古文：时清主异，并合同殒。
现代文：时世清平，遭遇君主不同，结果却是同样送命。
English: The times were peaceful, the monarchs were different, but the result was the same.

