古文：赵善字僧庆，太傅、楚国公贵之从祖兄也。
现代文：赵善字坦庆，是太傅、楚国公赵贵的同曾祖的堂兄。
English: Zhao Zenzhi Tanqing was the cousin of the great-great-grandfather Zhao Guo, the Duke of Chu.

古文：祖国，魏龙骧将军、洛州刺史。
现代文：祖父赵国，任魏龙骧将军、洛州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Zhao Guo, was a general in the Wei and Longjing Dynasties and the first governor of Lozhou.

古文：父更，安乐太守。
现代文：父亲赵更，任安乐太守。
English: His father, Zhao Jian, held the position of Anle Taishu.

古文：善少好学，涉猎经史，美容仪，沉毅有远量。
现代文：赵善年少时爱好学习，涉猎经书史籍，容貌和仪表很漂亮，性格深沉而刚毅，有远大的器量。
English: When he was young, Zhao Shan loved to study and dabbled in books on history and scriptures. He had a beautiful face and appearance, a deep and strong character, and a great capacity.

古文：永安初，尔朱天光为肆州刺史，辟为主簿，深器重之。
现代文：永安初年，尔朱天光任肆州刺史，征召为主簿，对他深为器重。
English: In the first year of Yongan, Er Zhu Tianguang was appointed as the chief historian of Zhouzhou, and was conscripted as the main book, which was very important to him.

古文：天光讨邢杲及万俟丑奴，以善为长史。
现代文：尔朱天光征讨邢呆及万俟丑扭，任赵善为长史。
English: Zhu Tianguangzheng discussed the demented and the ugly, and Zhao Shan was appointed for a long time.

古文：军中谋议，每参预之。
现代文：军中的谋划商议，他都经常参预。
English: He often takes part in the army's planning and deliberation.

古文：天光为关右行台，表善为行台左丞，加都督、征虏将军。
现代文：尔朱天光任闽右行台，上表任赵善为行台左丞，加授都督、征虏将军。
English: Er Zhu Tianguang served as the commander of the right-hand line, and Zhao Shan served as the left-hand man of the right-hand line on the upper table, and was awarded the title of governor and conscript general.

古文：普泰初，赏平关、陇之功，拜骠骑将军、大行台、散骑常侍，封山北县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：普泰初年，奖赏平定阗、胧的功劳，授任骠骑将军、大行台、散骑常侍，封为山北县伯，食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of Putai, rewards were given to those who had made outstanding contributions to the pacification of the war, and they were awarded the titles of General of Horse Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Horse Cavalry, and General of Horse Cavalry, and were given the title of 500 households in Bao, Shandong County.

古文：俄除持节、东雍州诸军事、雍州刺史。
现代文：不久授持节、束雍州诸军事、壅州刺史。
English: Soon, the conferring festival, the military of Yongzhou and the history of Zhangzhou will be held.

古文：天光东拒齐神武于韩陵，善又以长史从。
现代文：尔朱天光在整堕向东抗拒齐神武帝，蛊峦又以长史的身份跟随。
English: Er Zhu Tianguang resisted Emperor Qishenwu in the rectification of the eastward decline, and Yao followed in the capacity of the long history.

古文：及天光败见杀，善请收葬其尸，齐神武义而许之。
现代文：到尔朱天光失败被杀，赵善请求收殓埋葬他的尸体，齐神武帝认为他有义气而答应了他。
English: After Zhu Tianguang failed and was killed, Zhao Zhen requested to collect and bury his body. Emperor Qizhenwu believed that he was a man of integrity and agreed to his request.

古文：贺拔岳总关中兵，乃遣迎善，复以为长史。
现代文：贺拔岳统率阗中军队，就派人迎回赵善，又任他为长史。
English: He Ba Yue Tong, who led the Central Yunnan Army, sent someone to welcome back Zhao Shan, and appointed him as his successor.

古文：岳为侯莫陈悦所害，善共诸将翊戴太祖，仍从平悦。
现代文：鲤远岳被侯莫陈悦杀害，鱼缮与各将领拥戴左担，并跟随平定侯莫陈悦。
English: Zouyuan Yue was killed by Hou Mo Chen Yue. Yu Zuo and the generals embraced the left shoulder, and followed the pacification of Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：魏孝武西迁，除都官尚书，改封襄城县伯，增邑五百户。
现代文：魏孝武帝向西迁徙，授任都官尚书，改封为襄墟瑟伯，增加食邑五百户。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu migrated to the west, appointed Shangshu as the capital official, changed his title to Xiangshui Subo, and increased the number of food villages by 500 households.

古文：顷之，为北道行台，与仪同李虎等讨曹泥，克之。
现代文：不久，任北道行台，与仪同奎处等人讨伐直握，打败了他。
English: Soon, Ren Bei Dao Xing Tai, together with Yi Tong Kui and others, fought and defeated him.

古文：迁车骑大将军、仪同三司、尚书右仆射，进爵为公，增邑并前一千五百户。
现代文：升为车骑大将军、仪同三司、尚书右仆射，晋为公爵，食邑增至一千五百户
English: He was promoted to General of Cavalry and Cavalry, Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Third Secretary of the Ministry of Letters, promoted to Duke, and the number of restaurants increased to 1,500

古文：大统三年，转左仆射，兼侍中，监著作，领太子詹事。
现代文：大统三年，改任左仆射，兼侍中，监著作，领太子詹事。
English: In the third year of the Great Reunification, he was reassigned to the position of Left Footman, and concurrently served as an aide-de-camp, overseer of works, and leader of Prince Zhanji.

古文：善性温恭，有器局，虽位居端右，而逾自谦退。
现代文：鱼搓性格温和恭谨，有器量，虽然职位居于尚书省长官，但自己更加谦虚退让。
English: The fish bait character is gentle, respectful, and resourceful. Although his position is the governor of Shangshu Province, he is more humble and conceded.

古文：其职务克举，则曰某官之力；若有罪责，则曰善之咎也。
现代文：如果有政绩，他就说是某位官员之力；如果有罪责，他就说是自己的过错。
English: If there is a political achievement, he will say that it is the strength of a certain official; if there is guilt, he will say that it is his own fault.

古文：时人称其公辅之量。
现代文：当时人们称赞他有三公和辅相的器量。
English: At that time, people praised him for his ability to do three things at once.

古文：太祖亦雅敬重焉。
现代文：太祖也非常敬重他。
English: His great-grandfather also held him in high regard.

古文：九年，从战邙山，属大军不利，善为敌所获，遂卒于东魏。
现代文：九年，跟随到邙山作战，适逢大军失利，赵善被敌军俘获，就在柬魏去世。
English: In the ninth year, he followed to Lushan to fight, coincided with the defeat of the great army, Zhao Shan was captured by the enemy army, and died in Cambodia.

古文：建德初，朝廷与齐通好，齐人乃归其柩。
现代文：建德初年，朝廷与齐来往交好，齐人就归还他的灵柩。
English: In the first year of Jiande, the imperial court became friendly with Qi, and the Qi people returned his coffin.

古文：其子绚表请赠谥。
现代文：他的儿子赵绚上表请求赠谧。
English: His son, Zhao Hua, went to the table to ask for a gift.

古文：诏赠大将军、大都督、岐宜宁豳四州诸军事、岐州刺史。
现代文：下韶追赠大将军、大都督、岐宜宁豳四州诸军事、岐州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of general, grand governor, and military governor of the four prefectures of Gifu and Ningxia, and the title of prefectural governor of Gifu.

古文：谥曰敬。
现代文：谧号为敬。
English: His nickname is Zeng.

古文：子度，字幼济，车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：儿子垄遮，字乡妪，任车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: His son, Ren Zha, surnamed Xiang Zha, was appointed as the General of Chariot and Cavalry and the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies.

古文：度弟绚，字会绩，骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、淅资二州刺史。
现代文：赵庐的弟弟赵翅，字会董，任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、逝宣二州刺史。
English: Zhao Yu's younger brother, Zhao Yu, was the director of the Chinese character association, and served as the general of the imperial cavalry, the secretary of the imperial household, and the governor of two states.

古文：元定字愿安，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：元定字愿安，是河南洛阳人。
English: The original Chinese character "愿安" is from Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：祖比颓，魏安西将军、务州刺史。
现代文：祖父元比颓，任魏安西将军、务州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Yuan Bijun, served as Wei Anxi general and the governor of Wuzhou.

古文：父道龙，征虏将军、钜鹿郡守。
现代文：父亲元道龙，任征虏将军、钜鹿郡太守。
English: His father, the former Doryu, was a conscript general and the governor of Elk County.

古文：定惇厚少言，内沉审而外刚毅。
现代文：元定敦厚寡言，内心深沉慎重而外表坚强刚毅。
English: Yuan Ding was reserved and reticent, his heart was deep and cautious, but he was strong and courageous on the outside.

古文：永安初，从尔朱天光讨关陇群贼，并破之。
现代文：永安初年，跟随尔朱天光征讨关陇群贼，都打败了他们。
English: In the first year of Yongan, he followed Er Zhu Tian Guangzheng to negotiate with a group of thieves and defeated them.

古文：除襄将军。
现代文：授任襄威将军。
English: He was given the title of General Xiang Wei.

古文：及贺拔岳被害，定从太祖讨侯莫陈悦，以功拜平远将军、步兵校尉。
现代文：到贺拔岳被害时，元定跟随太祖讨伐侯莫陈悦，凭功任平远将军、步兵校尉。
English: When He Baturake was killed, Yuan Ding followed his great-grandfather to fight against Hou Mo Chen Yue, and was promoted to General Pingyuan and Infantry Lieutenant Colonel for his service.

古文：魏孝武西迁，封高邑县男，邑二百户。
现代文：魏孝武帝向西迁移，封为高邑县男，食邑二百户。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu migrated to the west and was named the man of Gaoyi County, with 200 households in the county.

古文：从击潼关，拔回洛城，进爵为伯，增邑三百户，加前将军、太中大夫。
现代文：跟随攻打潼关，攻下回洛城，晋爵为伯，增加食邑三百户，加授前将军、太中大夫。
English: Following the attack on Shaoguan, the city of Luocheng was recaptured, Jinzhe was promoted to Bao, 300 households were added to the county, and former generals and senior middle-ranking doctors were promoted.

古文：从擒窦泰，复弘农，破沙苑，战河桥，定皆先锋，当其前者，无不披靡。
现代文：跟随活捉窦泰，收复弘农，攻破沙苑，战于河桥，元定都是先锋，在他面前的敌人，没有不望风披靡的。
English: Following the capture of Dou Tai, the recovery of Hong Nong, the conquest of Sha Yuan, and the battle at He Qiao, Yuan Ding was the vanguard. In front of him, there was no enemy that was invincible.

古文：以前后功，累迁都督、征东将军、金紫光禄大夫、帅都督，增邑三百户。
现代文：凭着前后功劳，屡经升迁为都督、征东将军、金紫光禄大夫、帅都督，增加食邑三百户。
English: With his merits, he was repeatedly promoted to the governor of the capital, the general of the eastward expedition, the doctor of the gold and purple light, and the governor of the capital, and increased the number of food villages by three hundred.

古文：邙山之役，敌人如堵，定夺矛冲之，杀伤甚众，无敢当者。
现代文：邙山战役中，敌人密集，元定以长矛奋勇冲击，杀伤很多敌人，没有人敢抵挡。
English: In the Battle of Lushan, the enemy was dense, and Yuan Ding bravely attacked with a spear, killing many enemies, and no one dared to resist.

古文：太祖亲观之，论功为最，赏物甚厚。
现代文：太祖亲临观看，评论功劳为最大，赏赐物品非常丰厚。
English: The great-grandfather came to watch, commented that the merit was the greatest, and the reward items were very rich.

古文：十三年，授河北郡守，加大都督、通直散骑常侍，增邑通前一千户。
现代文：十三年，任河北郡太守，加授大都督、通直散骑常侍，食邑增至一千户。
English: In the thirteenth year, he served as the governor of Hebei County, was awarded the title of grand governor, and became a regular attendant on horseback. The number of restaurants increased to one thousand.

古文：定有勇略，每战必陷阵，然未尝自言其功。
现代文：元定勇猛而有谋略，每次作战必定冲锋陷阵，但是未曾自表其功。
English: Originally brave and resourceful, every battle must be a charge, but he has never shown his merit.

古文：太祖深重之，诸将亦称其长者。
现代文：太祖对他深为重视，各将领也称他为长者。
English: The great-grandfather attached great importance to him, and the generals also called him an elder.

古文：十五年，迁使持节、车骑大将军、开府仪同三司，进爵为公。
现代文：十五年，升任使持节、车骑大将军、开府仪同三司，晋爵为公。
English: In the fifteenth year, he was promoted to envoy, general of chariot and cavalry, Kaifu ceremony and three departments, and promoted to the peerage.

古文：魏废帝二年，以宗室，进封建城郡王。
现代文：魏废帝二年，以宗室的资格，晋封建城郡王。
English: In the second year of the Wei Dynasty, he was promoted to the king of Jiancheng County.

古文：年，行周礼，爵随例改，封长湖郡公。
现代文：三年，按照《周礼》，爵位随例更改，封长湖郡公。
English: Three years later, according to "Zhou Li," the title of nobility was changed as a matter of course, and he was named the Duke of Changhu County.

古文：世宗初，拜岷州刺史。
现代文：世宗初年，任岷州刺史。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he was appointed as the governor of Bozhou.

古文：威恩兼济，甚得羌豪之情。
现代文：威严和恩惠并用，很能得到羌人豪强的欢心。
English: By combining majesty and grace, it is very possible to win the favor of the people.

古文：先时生羌据险不宾者，至是并出山谷，从征赋焉。
现代文：以前生羌占据险阻不服从的人，到这时都走出山谷，跟着交纳赋税。
English: The disobedient people, who had previously occupied the perilous obstacle, came out of the valley at this time and paid taxes.

古文：及定代还，羌豪等感恋之。
现代文：到元定重新被调回朝廷任职时，羌人豪强等人都很感念留恋他。
English: When Yuan Ding was transferred back to the imperial court, people such as Xingren Haoqang missed him very much.

古文：保定中，授左宫伯中大夫。
现代文：保定年间，任左宫伯中大夫。
English: During his time in Baoding, he served as Saguo Haku junior high school doctor.

古文：久之，转左武伯中大夫，进位大将军。天和二年，陈湘州刺史华皎举州归梁，梁主欲因其隙，更图攻取，乃遣使请兵。
现代文：遇了很久，调任左武伯中大夫，晋为大将军天和二年，陈湘州刺史华皎举州归附梁，梁主想趁这个机会，再囤谋攻取，就派遣使者请求派兵。
English: After a long time, he was transferred to the post of Zuo Bu Zhong Daifu and promoted to the rank of general. In 1902, Chen Xiangzhou, Shihhua and Qiuzhou were annexed to Liang. The master of Liang wanted to take advantage of this opportunity and try to capture it again, so he sent an envoy to request the dispatch of troops.

古文：诏定从卫公直率众赴之。
现代文：诏令元定跟随卫公宇文直率兵前往。
English: The emperor ordered Yuan Ding to go with Wei Gong Uwen and his soldiers.

古文：梁人与华皎皆为水军，定为陆军，直总督之，俱至夏口。
现代文：梁人与华皎都是水军，元定是陆军，宇文直总管监督他们，一起到夏口。
English: Liang and Huayu were both sailors, and Yuan Ding was an army officer. Uwen Zhi, the general manager, supervised them, and they went to Xiakou together.

古文：而陈郢州坚守不下。
现代文：陈郢州坚持守御不能攻下。
English: Chen Yanzhou insisted that he would not be able to attack.

古文：直令定率步骑数千围之。
现代文：宇文直下令元定带领步兵骑兵数千人包围他们。
English: Uwen Zhi ordered Yuan Ding to lead thousands of infantry and cavalry to surround them.

古文：陈遣其将淳于量、徐度、吴明彻等水陆来拒。
现代文：陈派遣将领淳于量、徐度、吴明彻等从水陆两方面来抗拒。
English: Chen dispatched generals Chun Yu Quan, Xu Du, Wu Ming Che and others to resist from both land and sea.

古文：量等以定已度江，势分，遂先与水军交战。
现代文：淳于量等人认为元定已经渡江，势力分散，就先与水军交战。
English: Jun Yuquan and others thought that Yuan Ding had already crossed the river and the forces were dispersed, so they first fought with the navy.

古文：而华皎所统之兵，更怀疑贰，遂为陈人所败。
现代文：华皎所统率的军队，又怀着疑虑异心，于是被陈人打败。
English: The army led by Hua Tuo, with doubts and dissent, was defeated by the Chen people.

古文：皎得脱身归梁。
现代文：华皎得以脱身回梁。
English: Hua Wei was able to escape and return to the beam.

古文：定既孤军悬隔，进退路绝，陈人乘胜，水陆逼之。
现代文：元定已经孤军深入相隔很远，进退的道路断绝，陈人乘胜从水陆两方面来进逼他。
English: Yuan Zheng was already a lone army, deeply separated and far away, with no way to advance or retreat. Chen Ren took advantage of the victory to advance and force him from both land and sea.

古文：定乃率所部斫竹开路，且行且战，欲趣湘州，而湘州已陷。
现代文：元定就带领部下砍竹开路，一边走路一边作战，想赶往湘州，但湘州已经失陷。
English: Yuan Ding led his subordinates to cut bamboo to open the road, and fought while walking. He wanted to rush to Hunan, but Hunan had already fallen.

古文：徐度等知定穷迫，遣使伪与定通和，重为盟誓，许放还国。
现代文：徐度等人知道元定走投无路，派遣使者假装与元定讲和，郑重进行盟誓，答应放他回国。
English: Xu Du and others knew that Yuan Ding was cornered, so they sent an envoy to pretend to make peace with Yuan Ding, solemnly swore an oath, and promised to let him return to China.

古文：定疑其诡诈，欲力战死之。
现代文：元定怀疑其中有诈，想拼力作战而死？
English: Did you originally suspect that there was fraud, and did you want to fight hard and die?

古文：而定长史孙隆及诸将等多劝定和，定乃许之。于是与度等刑牲歃血，解仗就船。遂为度等所执，众军亦被囚虏，送诣丹阳。居数月，忧愤发病卒。
现代文：但元定长史长孙隆及各将领多劝元定讲和，元定才答应了他们于是与徐度等人杀牲歃血为盟，解除兵器上船就被徐度等人逮捕，部下军士也被囚禁俘虏，押送到丹阳过了数月，忧愁愤恨发病而死。
English: However, Yuan Ding, Sun Long, the chief historian, and the generals tried to persuade Yuan Ding to make peace, but it was not until Yuan Ding agreed to make peace that they made an alliance with Xu Du and others to kill animals and shed blood. When they disarmed and boarded the ship, they were arrested by Xu Du and others. Their subordinate sergeants were also imprisoned and taken to Danyang. After several months, they died of grief and resentment.

古文：子乐嗣。
现代文：儿子元乐继嗣。
English: He is succeeded by his son, Genroku.

古文：杨摽字显进，正平高凉人也。
现代文：杨摽字显进，是正平高凉人。
English: Yang Hao's character is a forward-moving, level-headed and cool person.

古文：祖贵、父猛，并为县令。
现代文：祖父杨贵、父亲杨猛，都任县令。
English: Yang Mi, Zha Xian Jin, Zheng Ping Gao Liang Ren.

古文：摽少豪侠有志气。
现代文：杨摽年少时豪爽侠义，很有志向和气概。
English: When he was young, Yang Hui was brave and chivalrous. He was very ambitious and spirited.

古文：魏孝昌中，尔朱荣杀害朝士，大司马、城阳王元徽逃难投摽，摽藏而免之。
现代文：魏孝昌年间，尔朱荣杀害朝中官吏，大司马、城阳王元徽逃难投奔杨摽，杨摽把他隐藏起来使他免于祸难。
English: During the Wei and Xiaochang dynasties, Er Zhurong killed the officials of the central government of the DPRK, and the grand steward Ma and the king of Chengyang, Yuan Hui, fled to Yang Hui. Yang Hui hid him and saved him from disaster.

古文：孝庄帝立，徽乃出，复为司州牧。
现代文：孝庄帝即位，元徽才出来，又任司州牧。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang ascended to the throne, the original emblem came out, and he was appointed as the provincial governor.

古文：由是摽以义烈闻。
现代文：从此杨摽以仗义正直而闻名。
English: Since then, Yang Hui has been known for his righteousness and honesty.

古文：擢拜伏波将军、给事中。
现代文：提拔任伏波将军、给事中。
English: Promoted to General Fubo, now on leave.

古文：元颢入洛，孝庄欲往晋阳就尔朱荣，诏摽率其宗人收船马渚。
现代文：元颢入洛，孝庄帝想前往晋阳投靠尔朱荣，下诏杨摽带领他的同族人到马渚收集船只。
English: When Yuan Xuan entered Luo, Emperor Xiaozhuang wanted to go to Jinyang to stay with Zhu Rong, so Yang Xuan led his compatriots to Maruzi to collect ships.

古文：摽未至，帝已北度太行，摽遂匿所收船，不以资敌。
现代文：杨摽未到，皇帝已经向北越过太行，杨摽就藏匿他所收集到的船只，不使其资助敌人。
English: Before Yang Xuan arrived, the emperor had already crossed the Taihang River to the north. Yang Xuan hid the ships he had collected to prevent them from aiding the enemy.

古文：及尔朱荣奉帝南讨，至马渚，摽乃具船以济王师。
现代文：到尔朱荣奉帝往南征讨，来到马渚，杨尉就安排船只来渡帝王的军队过河。
English: When Zhu Rong Bongdi went to the south to conquer and conquer, when he came to Mazhu, Lieutenant Yang arranged for ships to ferry the emperor's army across the river.

古文：颢平，封肥如五百户，加镇远将军、步兵校尉，行济北郡事。
现代文：元颢被平定，封肥如县伯，食邑五百户，加授镇远将军、步兵校尉，代理济北郡政事。
English: Yuancheng was pacified, and Fongfei was given the title of county magistrate, 500 households in the county were provided with food, Zhenyuan was awarded the title of general, he was given the title of infantry lieutenant, and he was appointed as the deputy governor of Jibei County.

古文：进都督、平东将军、太中大夫。
现代文：晋为都督、乎束将军、太中大夫。
English: Zhu Rong took Emperor Xiaozhuang to fight against Yuan Shao, and the army went to Mazhu, and Yang Shao prepared ships to let the army cross the Yellow River.

古文：从魏孝武入关，进爵为侯，增邑八百户，加抚军、银青光禄大夫。
现代文：跟随魏孝武帝入关，晋为侯爵，增加食邑八百户，加授抚军、银青光禄大夫。
English: Following Emperor Wei Xiaowu's entry into the customs, he was promoted to marquis, increased the number of food villages by 800 households, and added a military doctor and a silver Qingguanglu doctor.

古文：时东魏迁邺，太祖欲知其所为，乃遣摽间行诣邺以观察之。
现代文：当时束魏迁都到邺，太祖想知道其迁都所做的事情，就派遣杨摽从小路到邺以观察他们。
English: At that time, Emperor Wei moved the capital to Handan, and Emperor Taizu wanted to know what they had done, so he sent Yang Hui to observe them from a path in Handan.

古文：使还，称旨，授通直散骑常侍、车骑将军。
现代文：出使回来，符合皇帝的意旨，任通直散骑常侍、车骑将军。
English: In accordance with the emperor's will, he returned from the expedition with a number of equerries and cavalry generals.

古文：稽胡恃险不宾，屡行抄窃，以摽兼黄门侍郎，往慰抚之。
现代文：稽胡倚仗险阻不肯归顺，屡次抢劫偷盗，任杨搦兼黄门侍郎，前往慰问安抚他们。
English: He refused to surrender, repeatedly robbed and stole, and was appointed Yang Xuan and Huangmen waiter, and went to comfort and appease them.

古文：摽颇有权略，能得边情，诱化酋渠，多来款附，乃有随摽入朝者。
现代文：杨摽很有权变的策略，能懂得边防的情况，诱导感化酋长首领，使他们大多来诚心归附，甚至有人跟随杨摽入朝。
English: Yang Hui had the power to change strategies, understand the situation of border defense, and induce and influence the chiefs, so that most of them came to sincerely adhere, and even some people followed Yang Hui into the North.

古文：时弘农为东魏守，摽从太祖攻拔之。
现代文：当时弘农被束魏把守，杨摽跟随太祖攻下了它。
English: At that time, Hongnong was under the control of Shu Wei, and Yang Zhe followed his great-grandfather to conquer it.

古文：然自河以北，犹附东魏。
现代文：但是从黄河以北，还是归附束魏。
English: However, everything north of the Yellow River still belonged to the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：摽父猛先为邵郡白水令，摽与其豪右相知，请微行诣邵郡，举兵以应朝廷。
现代文：杨摽父亲杨猛先前任邵郡白水县令，杨摽与那些豪强大族是知己挚友，请求走小路到邵郡，组织军队来接应朝廷。
English: Yang Wei's father, Yang Meng, had previously served as the governor of Baishui County, Shao County. Yang Wei was a close friend of those powerful and powerful families. He asked them to go to Shao County and organize an army to meet the imperial court.

古文：太祖许之。
现代文：太祖答应丁他。
English: His great-grandfather allowed him to enter the capital.

古文：摽遂行，与土豪王覆怜等阴谋举事，密相应会者三千人，内外俱发，遂拔邵郡。
现代文：杨摽就出发了，与当地的豪强王覆怜等人暗中商议起事，秘密接应聚会的有三干人，内外一起发动，就攻下了邵郡。
English: Yang Xuan set out, and secretly discussed the uprising with the local strongman Wang Zhirong and others. There were three people who secretly received the meeting, and launched it together inside and outside, and captured Shao County.

古文：擒郡守程保及令四人，并斩之。
现代文：活捉郡守程保及令四人，都杀死了他们。
English: He captured alive four people, including the county guard Cheng Bao, and killed them.

古文：众议推摽行郡事，摽以因覆怜成事，遂表覆怜为邵郡守。
现代文：众人商议推选杨摽代理郡中事务，杨摽认为因王覆怜而使事情成功，就上表王覆怜为邵郡太守。
English: Everyone deliberated on the selection of Yang Jie as the representative of the county middle school affairs. Yang Jie believed that the success of the matter was due to Wang Zhe Lian, so he presented Wang Zhe Lian as the governor of Shao County.

古文：以功授大行台左丞，率义徒更为经略。
现代文：以功任大行台左承，率领义军再进行策划。
English: In recognition of his service, he was appointed as the left-hand successor of the Grand Marshal Taigang and led the rebel army to carry out the plan.

古文：于是遣谍人诱说东魏城堡，旬月之间，正平、河北、南、二绛、建州、宁等城，并有请为内应者，大军因攻而拔之。
现代文：于是派遣间谍引诱游说束魏的城堡，一个月之间，正平、河北、南汾、二绛、建州、人宁等城，都有请求作为内应的人，大军趁此进攻，攻下了它们。
English: Therefore, they sent spies to lure and lobby Shu Wei's castle. Within a month, Zhengping, Hebei, Nanxun, Erqun, Jianzhou, Rening and other cities were asked to serve as internal correspondents, and the army took advantage of this to attack and capture them.

古文：以摽行正平郡事，左丞如故。
现代文：任命杨摽代行正平郡政事，左丞照旧。
English: Yang Hao was appointed to act as the governor of Zhengping County, and Zuo Rong remained as before.

古文：齐神武败于沙苑，其将韩轨、潘洛、可朱浑元等为殿，摽分兵要截，杀伤甚众。
现代文：齐神武帝在沙苑战败，他的将领韩轨、潘洛、可朱浑元等人走在最后面，杨挂分兵拦截，杀伤很多。
English: Emperor Qishenwu was defeated at Shayuan, and his generals Han Zhaoli, Pan Luo, Zhu Hun Yuan and others were at the end of the line. Yang Huan's detachment intercepted and killed many soldiers.

古文：东雍州刺史马恭惧摽威声，弃城遁走。
现代文：束雍州刺史马基害怕杨摽的威名，弃城逃走。
English: The governor of Yongzhou, Shishi Maki, was afraid of Yang Hui's prestige and fled the city.

古文：摽遂移据东雍州。
现代文：杨摽就转移占据束雍州。
English: Yang Hui on the transfer to occupy a bunch of Yongzhou.

古文：太祖以摽有谋略，堪委边任，乃表行建州事。
现代文：太祖认为杨摽多计谋策略，可委以边防重任，就上表任命他代理建州的政事。
English: The great-great-grandfather thought that Yang Hui was more strategic and could be entrusted with the border defense, and appointed him as the representative of the political affairs of Jiangzhou.

古文：时建州远在敌境三百余里，然摽威恩夙着，所经之处，多并赢粮附之。
现代文：当时建州远距敞境三百多里，但是杨摽威名恩惠早巳著名，所经过的地方，很多人一起带着粮食归附他。
English: At that time, Jianzhou was more than three hundred miles away from the mainland, but Yang Weiwei's name and favors were already famous. Wherever he passed, many people brought grain to him.

古文：比至建州，众已一万。
现代文：到了建州，部下已有一万人。
English: By the time they reached Jianzhou, there were already ten thousand people.

古文：东魏刺史车折于洛出兵逆战，摽击败之。
现代文：束魏刺史车折于洛出兵迎战，杨摽打败了他。
English: When Wei Zishi's car broke down in Luo, he sent troops to meet the battle, and Yang Xuan defeated him.

古文：又破其行台斛律俱步骑二万于州西，大获甲仗及军资，以给义士。
现代文：又在州西打败束魏行台斛律俱步兵骑兵二万人，缴获大量的兵器和军用物资，用来供给忠义之士。
English: In addition, in the west of the state, they defeated 20,000 foot soldiers and cavalrymen of the Sok Wei, Xingtai, and Ritsu clubs, and seized a large number of weapons and military supplies to supply the loyalists.

古文：由是威名大振。
现代文：因此威名大振。
English: That's why he's so famous.

古文：东魏遣太保侯景攻陷正平，复遣行台薛循义率兵与斛律俱相会，于是敌众渐盛。
现代文：东魏派遣太保侯景攻陷正平，又派遣行台薛循义带兵与斛律俱相会，于是敌军逐渐强盛。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty dispatched Taibo Houjing to attack and capture Zhengping, and also dispatched Xue Xunyi to march to Taiwan to lead the troops to meet with Yan Ritsu, so the enemy army gradually became stronger.

古文：摽以孤军无援，且腹背受敌，谋欲拔还。
现代文：杨摽因为孤单无援，况且腹背受敌，谋划想班师回去。
English: Because Yang Xuan was alone and had no help, and moreover, he suffered from the enemy, he planned to go back.

古文：恐义徒背叛，遂伪为太祖书，遣人若从外送来者，云已遣军四道赴援。
现代文：恐怕义军背叛，就伪造太祖书信，派人好像从外面送来似的，说已派遣军队四路奔赴支援。
English: Afraid that the rebels would betray him, he forged a letter from his great-grandfather and sent it to them as if it had been sent from outside, saying that he had sent troops in all directions to support them.

古文：因令人漏泄，使所在知之。
现代文：于是让人泄露消息，使所在之地的人知道。
English: To deliberately leak the news so that everyone would know.

古文：又分土人义首，令领所部四出抄掠，拟供军费。
现代文：他又分派当地的人和义军的首领，下令带领部下四出抢掠，打算供给军费。
English: He also dispatched local people and the leader of the rebel army, and ordered his men to go out and loot, intending to provide money for military expenses.

古文：摽分遣讫，遂于夜中拔还邵郡。
现代文：杨摽分派完毕，就在半夜撤军回到邵郡。
English: After Yang Hui dispatched his troops, he withdrew them back to Shao County in the middle of the night.

古文：朝廷嘉其权以全军，即授建州刺史。
现代文：朝廷嘉奖他用权谋保全了军队，立即任为建州刺史。
English: The imperial court commended him for using power to preserve the army, and he was immediately appointed as the founder of Jiangsu Province.

古文：时东魏以正平为东雍州，遣薛荣祖镇之。
现代文：当时束魏以正平为束雍州，派遣薛荣祖镇守。
English: At this time, the Eastern Wei Dynasty set up Dongyang Prefecture in Zhengping and sent Xue Rongzu to guard the town.

古文：摽将谋取之，乃先遣奇兵，急攻汾桥。
现代文：杨摽想谋划攻取，就先派遣奇兵，急攻汾桥。
English: When Yang Hui wanted to plan an attack, he first dispatched a special force to attack Qianqiao.

古文：荣祖果尽出城中战士，于汾桥拒守。
现代文：薛荣祖果然调出城中全部战士，到汾桥抗拒防守。
English: Xue Rongzu sent out all the defenders of the city to guard the bridge.

古文：其夜，摽率步骑二千，从他道济，遂袭克之。
现代文：那天夜晚，杨摽率领步兵骑兵二千人，从别的道路渡河，就偷袭攻克了该城。
English: That night, Yang Hui led two thousand infantry and cavalry to cross the river from another road and attacked the city.

古文：进骠骑将军。
现代文：升骠骑将军。
English: He rose to the rank of general.

古文：既而邵郡民以郡东叛，郡守郭武安脱身走免。
现代文：不久邵郡百姓在郡束叛乱，郡守郭武安脱身逃走免于难。
English: Not long after, the people of Shao County rebelled against the county government, and the county governor, Guo Wu'an, escaped and escaped from danger.

古文：摽又率兵攻而复之。
现代文：杨摽又带兵进攻收复了邵郡。
English: Yang Hui once again led troops to attack and recapture Shao County.

古文：转正平郡守。
现代文：调任正垩塑太守。
English: Transferred to the post of Zhengzhuangzhuangdao governor.

古文：又击破东魏南绛郡，虏其郡守屈僧珍。
现代文：又攻下越坚直缝选，俘虏了郡守星僧珍。
English: He also captured Yue Jianzhi and captured the county governor Xing Sozhen.

古文：录前后功，别封合阳县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：记录前后功劳，另封郃阳县伯，食邑五百户。
English: Another 500 households in Buyeo, Shueiyang County, were awarded for their achievements.

古文：邙山之战，摽攻拔柏谷坞，因即镇之。
现代文：亡旺山战役中，杨摽攻下柏谷坞，就立即镇守。
English: During the Battle of Zhwangshan, Yang Hui captured the Kashiwa Valley Dock and immediately defended the town.

古文：及大军不利，摽亦拔还。
现代文：到大军失利，杨摽也移师返回。
English: After the defeat of the great army, Yang Hui also transferred to another division and returned.

古文：而东魏将侯景率骑追摽，摽与仪同韦法保同心抗御，且前经十数里，景乃引退。
现代文：束魏将领侯量率领骑兵追击圭鲢，握翅与仪同韦洼堡同心抵抗防御，一边作战，一边前进，经过十多里，侯基就引兵退却了。
English: General Sok Wei led the cavalry in pursuit of Gui Lan. He held his wings and instruments together with Wei Wa Fort to resist the defense. While fighting, he advanced. After more than ten miles, Houji withdrew his troops.

古文：太祖嘉之，赐帛三百疋。
现代文：立担嘉奖他，赏赐帛三百匹。
English: He was rewarded with three hundred yakitori.

古文：复授建州刺史，镇车箱。
现代文：又任建州刺史，镇守车箱。
English: He was also appointed as the chief historian of Jianzhou and the town caretaker.

古文：摽久从军役，未及葬父，至是表请还葬。
现代文：杨摽长期从军服役，没来得及埋葬父亲，到这时就上表请求回乡葬父。
English: Yang Hao served in the military for a long time, and before he had time to bury his father, he requested to go back to his hometown to bury his father.

古文：诏赠其父车骑大将军、仪同三司、晋州刺史，赠其母夏阳县君，并给仪卫。
现代文：下诏追赠他的父亲为车骑大将军、仪同三司、置业刺史，赠他的母亲为夏阳县君，一起供给仪仗侍卫。
English: He posthumously presented his father with the titles of General of Chariot and Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the People's Liberation Army, Grand Marshal of the People's Liberation Army, Grand Marshal of the People's Liberation Army, Grand Marshal of the People's Liberation Army, Grand Marshal of the People's Liberation Army, Grand Marshal of the People's Liberation Army, and Grand Marshal of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：州里荣之。
现代文：家乡以此为荣。
English: My hometown is proud of this.

古文：及齐神武围玉壁，别令侯景趣齐子岭。
现代文：到齐神武帝包围玉壁，另外下令堡垦急赴齐王岭。
English: He was promoted to the general of the cavalry. Gao Huan attacked the Jade Wall, and Mihou Jing captured the Qi Ziling.

古文：摽恐入寇邵郡，率骑御之。
现代文：扰塑恐怕他进犯巡噩，率领骑兵防御他。
English: I am afraid that he will attack the patrol and lead the cavalry to defend him.

古文：景闻摽至，斫木断路者六十余里，犹惊而不安，遂退还河阳，其见惮如此。
现代文：尽量听说握荡到了，砍树断路六十多里，还是惊慌不能安定，就退回洛阳，他害怕杨搦到如此地步。
English: As far as possible, he heard that the shaking had arrived, the trees had been cut and the road had been broken for more than sixty miles, but he still panicked and could not be stable, so he returned to Luoyang. He was afraid of Yang Xuan to such an extent.

古文：十二年，进授大都督，加晋建二州诸军事。
现代文：十二年，升任大都督，加授晋、建二州诸军事。
English: In 12 years, he was promoted to the position of grand governor, and was awarded the promotion, and built two military states.

古文：又攻破蓼坞，获魏将李显，进仪同三司。
现代文：又攻下蓼坞，俘获东魏将领李显，晋为仪同三司。
English: He also captured Shu dock, captured the Eastern Wei general Li Xian, and was promoted to the Third Division.

古文：寻迁开府，复除建州邵郡河内汲郡黎阳等诸军事，领邵郡。
现代文：不久升开府，又授任建州邵郡河内汲郡黎阳等诸军事，领邵郡。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of governor, and was also appointed as the military leader of Jianzhou, Shao County, Hanoi, Gu County, Liyang and other military leaders of Shao County.

古文：十六年，大军东讨，授大行台尚书，率义众先驱敌境，攻其四戍，拔之。
现代文：十六年，大军向东征讨，任大行台尚书，带领义兵抢先赶到敌境，攻打他们四方营垒，攻下了。
English: In the 16th year, the great army went to the east to fight and conquer. Ren Da Xing Tai Shang Shu, leading the volunteers, rushed to the enemy territory ahead of time, attacked their four-sided camp, and captured it.

古文：时以齐军不出，乃追摽还。
现代文：当时因为齐军不出战，就追回了杨摽。
English: At that time, because the Qi army did not fight, they chased back Yang Xuan.

古文：并肥如、合阳二邑，合一千八百户，改封华阳县侯。
现代文：合并肥如、郃阳二邑，共一千八百户，改封为华阳县侯。
English: The two towns of Hiryu and Shenyang were merged, with a total of 1,800 households, and renamed Huayang County.

古文：又于邵郡置邵州，以摽为刺史，率所部兵镇之。
现代文：又在邵郡设置邵州，任命杨摽为刺史，率领部下的军队镇守。
English: He also set up Shaozhou in Shao County and appointed Yang Jie as the chief historian, leading the troops under his command to guard the town.

古文：保定四年，迁少师。
现代文：保定四年，升为少师。
English: Due to the fact that the enemy troops did not retreat, the imperial court ordered him to withdraw. Four years later, he was transferred to the position of junior division commander.

古文：其年，大军围洛阳，诏摽率义兵万余人出轵关。
现代文：这年，大军包围洛阳，诏令杨撩带领义兵一万多人出轵关。
English: That year, a large army surrounded Luoyang and ordered Yang Jie to lead more than ten thousand volunteers out of Shaoguan.

古文：然摽自镇东境二十余年，数与齐人战，每常克获，以此遂有轻敌之心。
现代文：但是杨摽自从镇守束部边境二十多年，多次与齐人交战，经常取胜，因此就有轻视敌人的心意。
English: However, for more than 20 years since he was the town guard of the Sokobe border, Yang Hui has repeatedly fought with the Qi people and often won, so he has the mind to despise the enemy.

古文：时洛阳未下，而摽深入敌境，又不设备。
现代文：当时洛阳没有攻下，而杨摽深入敌境，又不加防备。
English: At that time, Luoyang was not conquered, while Yang Hui penetrated deep into the enemy territory and did not take precautions.

古文：齐人奄至，大破摽军。
现代文：齐人突然来到，大败杨挂的军队。
English: Qi people suddenly came and defeated Yang Hang's army.

古文：摽以众败，遂降于齐。
现代文：杨搦因为部众失败，就向齐投降。
English: Yang Xuan surrendered because his subordinates failed.

古文：摽之立勋也，有慷慨壮烈之志，及军败，遂就虏以求苟免。
现代文：杨搦立功的时候，有慷慨壮烈的志气，到军队失败，就投降作俘虏以求苟且偷生。
English: When Yang Hui was making meritorious contributions, he had a generous and strong spirit. When the army failed, he surrendered as a prisoner in order to survive.

古文：时论以此鄙之。
现代文：当时的舆论因此鄙视他。
English: Public opinion at the time despised him for it.

古文：朝廷犹录其功，不以为罪，令其子袭爵。
现代文：朝廷还是记录他的功劳，不把他作为罪人，下令让他的儿子因袭爵位。
English: The court still recorded his merit, did not treat him as a criminal, and ordered his son to inherit the title.

古文：摽之败也，新平郡守韩盛亦于洛阳战没。盛字文炽，南阳阳人也。
现代文：杨摽失败的时候，新乎郡太守韩盛也在洛阳战死韩盛字文炽，是南阳堵阳人。
English: When Yang Xuan failed, Xinhu County Governor Han Sheng also died in Luoyang. Han Sheng was an incandescent man, and he was from Nanyang.

古文：五世祖远，为郑县令，因徙居京兆之渭南焉。
现代文：五世祖韩远，任郑县县令，于是迁居到京兆的渭南。
English: The fifth generation ancestor, Han Yuan, was appointed as the county magistrate of Zheng County, so he moved to the southern part of Jingzhao.

古文：曾祖良，举秀才，奉朝请、姑臧令。
现代文：曾祖韩良，推举为秀才，任奉朝请、姑臧令。
English: Zengzu Han Liang was selected as a talented person, and was appointed as a guest of the imperial court and a courtier.

古文：祖与，魏傥城郡守，赠直州刺史。
现代文：祖父韩与，任魏傥城郡太守，追赠直州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Han Ye, served as the governor of Weiqicheng County, and was posthumously awarded the title of Jiu Zhou.

古文：父先藻，安夷鄜城二郡守，赠镇远将军、义州刺史。
现代文：父亲韩先藻，任安夷鄘城二郡太守，追蹭镇远将军、义州刺史。
English: His father, Han Xianmao, served as the governor of two counties in An'yizhu City, the general of Zhenyuan County and the governor of Yizhou Province.

古文：盛幼有操行，涉猎经史，兼善骑射，膂力过人。
现代文：韩盛幼年时有操守品行，涉猎经籍史书，又擅长骑马射箭，膂力过人。
English: When Han Sheng was a child, he had a good moral character, dabbled in history books, and was good at riding horses and archery.

古文：魏大统初，起家开府行参军。
现代文：魏大统初年，由开府行参军起家做官。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification of China, he joined the army from Kaifu and became an officer.

古文：转参军事。
现代文：转为参军事。
English: He transferred to the military.

古文：从李远积年征讨，每有战功。
现代文：跟随李远多年征讨，常有战功。
English: He followed Li Yuan's expeditions for many years and often achieved military exploits.

古文：累迁至都督、辅国将军、中散大夫、帅都督、持节、平东将军、太中大夫、银青光禄大夫、大都督。
现代文：屡经升迁为都督、辅国将军、中散大夫、帅都督、持节、平东将军、太中大夫、银青光禄大夫、大都督。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the position of the governor, assistant provincial general, middle-ranked doctor, high-ranking governor, grand marshal, general of Pingdong, grand middle-ranked doctor, silver-ranked doctor, and grand governor.

古文：明帝二年，封临湍县子，邑三百户。
现代文：明帝二年，封为临湍县子，食邑三百户。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, it was given the title of Linyi County, with 300 households in the food village.

古文：保定四年，授使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、虞部下大夫，出为新平郡守。
现代文：保定四年，任使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、虞部下大夫，出任新平郡太守。
English: In the fourth year of Baoding, he was appointed as the Grand Marshal of Xinping County, the General of Chariots and Cavalry, the Third Secretary of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, and the Third Doctor of the State Council.

古文：居官清静，严而不残，矜恤孤贫，抑挫豪右，贼盗止息，郡治肃然。
现代文：为官清静，严格而不残酷，同情体恤孤贫，抑制豪强大族，贼盗平息，郡治肃然。
English: The officials are calm, strict but not cruel, sympathetic to the poor, restrain the powerful and powerful, quell the thieves and robbers, and govern the county solemnly.

古文：寻以本官从晋公护东讨，于洛阳战没。
现代文：不久以本官的身份跟随晋公宇文护向东征讨，在洛阳战死。
English: Soon after, he followed Jin Gong Uwenguo to the east as his own official, and died in battle in Luoyang.

古文：赠淅洛义三州刺史，谥曰壮。
现代文：追赠淅洛义三州刺史，谧号为壮。
English: He was posthumously awarded the 洛义三州刺史, and his nickname was Zhuang.

古文：子谦嗣。
现代文：儿子韩谦继嗣。
English: His son, Han Qian, became his successor.

古文：官至大都督。盛二兄，德舆、仲恭。
现代文：官至大都督韩盛有两个哥哥，叫做韩德舆、韩仲恭。
English: Han Sheng, the highest-ranking official and governor of the capital, has two older brothers, named Han Deyu and Han Zhonggyong.

古文：德舆姿貌魁杰，有异常人。
现代文：韩德舆姿态容貌高大壮美，与普通人不同。
English: Han Deyu's posture and appearance are tall and magnificent, different from ordinary people.

古文：历官持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、通洛慈涧防主、邵州刺史、任城县男。
现代文：历任持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、通洛慈涧防主、邵史、任城县男。
English: He was successively appointed as the commander of the festival, the general of the chariot and cavalry, the third secretary of the ceremony, the chief of defense of Tongluo Cixi, Shao Shi, and the man of Rencheng County.

古文：仲恭美容仪，澹于荣利。
现代文：韩仲恭容貌仪表漂亮，对荣华名利很淡泊。
English: Han Zhongyong has a beautiful appearance and is indifferent to Ronghua's fame and fortune.

古文：郡累辟为功曹、中正。
现代文：郡多次征召其为功曹、中正。
English: The county repeatedly conscripted him as a meritorious student and vice-premier.

古文：仲恭答曰： 第五之号，岂减骠骑乎！ 后历广原、灵原、新丰三县令，所在皆有声绩。
现代文：韩仲恭回答说； 第五的名号，难道比骠骑减低吗? 后来历任广原、灵原、新丰三县县令，所到之处都有名声和政绩。
English: Han Zhonggyong replied, "Is the fifth name lower than that of a knight?" Later, successive county magistrates of Guangyuan, Lingyuan and Xinfeng counties had fame and political achievements everywhere they went.

古文：有八子，并有志操。
现代文：有八个儿子，都有志气节操。
English: They have eight sons, all of whom have strong wills.

古文：少子纫约，后最知名。
现代文：小儿子韩纫约，后来最知名。
English: The youngest son, Han Zhi Guo, later became the most famous.

古文：裴宽字长宽，河东闻喜人也。
现代文：裴宽字长宽，是河东闻喜人。
English: Pei Kuan's characters are long and wide, and he is the epitome of the people of Hedong.

古文：祖德欢，魏中书郎、河内郡守。
现代文：祖父裴德欢，任魏中书郎、河内郡太守。
English: His grandfather, Pei Dehuan, was Wei Zhongshuro and the governor of Hanoi County.

古文：父静虑，银青光禄大夫，赠汾州刺史。
现代文：父亲裴静虑，任银青光禄大夫，追赠汾州刺史。
English: His father, Pei Jingxian, was appointed as a silver Qingguanglu doctor, and was posthumously awarded the title of Zhangzhou Sashihong.

古文：宽仪貌瑰伟，博涉群书，弱冠为州里所称。
现代文：裴宽仪表容貌气概非凡，广泛涉猎各种书籍，二十岁时被家乡人所称道。
English: Pei Kuan's appearance, looks and temperament are extraordinary. He is widely involved in various books. At the age of twenty, he was praised by his hometown people.

古文：与二弟汉、尼是和知名。
现代文：与两个弟弟裴汉、裴尼一起知名。
English: He is famous together with his two younger brothers, Pei Han and Pei Ni.

古文：亲殁，抚弟以笃友闻。
现代文：父母去世，抚养弟弟以深厚的友爱而闻名。
English: After the death of his parents, he raised his younger brother, who was known for his deep brotherly love.

古文：荥阳郑孝穆常谓从弟文直曰： 裴长宽兄弟，天伦笃睦，人之师表。
现代文：荣阳郑孝穆经常对堂弟郑文直说： 裴长宽兄弟之间，天伦深厚和睦，是人的表率。
English: Rongyang Zheng Xiaomu often said to his cousin Zheng Wenzhong: The deep harmony between the brothers Pei Changguan is an example of humanity.

古文：吾爱之重之。
现代文：我喜欢他，重视他。
English: I like him, I value him.

古文：汝可与之游处。 年十三，以选为魏孝明帝挽郎，释褐员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：你可以与他们交游相处。 十三岁，推选为魏孝明帝挽郎，出仕为员外散骑侍郎。
English: You can get along with them. Thirteen years old, he was elected as Wei Xiaoming's groomsman, and served as a non-commissioned horseman.

古文：魏孝武末，除广陵王府直兵参军，加宁朔将军、员外散骑常侍。
现代文：魏孝武帝末年，任广陵王府直兵参军，加授宁朔将军、员外散骑常侍。
English: In the last years of Emperor Wei Xiaowu, he joined the army as a direct soldier of the Guangling royal court, was awarded the title of Ningshuo general, and served as a non-commissioned officer.

古文：及孝武西迁，宽谓其诸弟曰： 权臣擅命，乘舆播越，战争方始，当何所依？ 诸弟咸不能对。
现代文：到孝武帝向西迁徙，裴宽对他的弟弟们说： 有权势的臣子擅自发号施令，皇帝流离失所，战争刚刚开始，将要依附谁呢? 弟弟们都不能回答。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu moved to the west, Pei Kuan said to his younger brothers: Powerful courtiers issue orders without authorization, the emperor has been displaced, the war has just begun, who are you going to follow?

古文：宽曰： 君臣逆顺，大义昭然。
现代文：裴宽说： 君臣之间的叛逆归顺，大道理清清楚楚。
English: Pei Kuan said, "Between princes and ministers, rebellion is followed by submission. The principle is very clear.

古文：今天子西幸，理无东面，以亏臣节。 乃将家属避难于大石岩。
现代文：现今天子往西去，按道理没有向东的，以免使臣子气节受损。 就带领家属到大石岩避难。
English: Now, when the son went west, he did not go east, so as not to damage the vassal's qi, so he led his family members to take refuge in Dashiyan.

古文：独孤信镇洛阳，始出见焉。
现代文：独孤信镇守洛阳，才出来相见。
English: He only came out to see her when he was alone in Luoyang.

古文：时汾州刺史韦子粲降于东魏，子粲兄弟在关中者，咸已从坐。
现代文：当时汾州刺史韦子粲向东魏投降，韦子粲的兄弟在关中的，都已经受牵连坐罪。
English: At that time, Wei Zixuan, the governor of Zhangzhou, surrendered to the Eastern Wei Dynasty. Wei Zixuan's brothers in Guanzhong had already been implicated in the crime.

古文：其季弟子爽先在洛，窘急，乃投宽。
现代文：他的小弟弟韦王塞先在渔，走投无路，就投奔姜宽。
English: His little brother Wei Wang Xie was fishing first, and when he had no other choice, he ran to Jiang Kuan.

古文：宽开怀纳之。
现代文：墓真敞开心怀接纳了他。
English: The tomb really accepted him with an open heart.

古文：遇有大赦，或传子爽合免，因尔遂出。
现代文：遇上大赦，有人传说韦子爽应该免罪，因而就出来。
English: In the case of amnesty, some people said that Wei Zishang should be exonerated, so he came out.

古文：子爽卒以伏法。
现代文：韦子爽最终伏法。
English: Wei Zi Shuang did the final push-up.

古文：独孤信召而责之。
现代文：独孤信召见菱宽责备他。
English: Seeing him alone, Ling Guan reproached him.

古文：宽曰： 穷来见归，义无执送。
现代文：盏远说： 走投无路才来归附我，按道理不能逮捕送官。
English: Zhenyuan said: It is only when you are at a dead end that you come to join me. According to reason, you cannot be arrested and sent to an official.

古文：今日获罪，是所甘心。 以经赦宥，遂得不坐。
现代文：今有罪，这是我甘心情愿的。 因已赦免宽恕，得以不受牵连治罪。
English: Now I am guilty, which I willingly am; for I have received a pardon, that I might be guiltless.

古文：大统五年，授都督、同轨防长史，加征虏将军。
现代文：大统五年，任都督、同轨防长史，加授征虏将军。
English: In the fifth year of unification, he was appointed as the governor of the capital and the defense minister of the same track, and was awarded the title of conscript general.

古文：十三年，从防主韦法保向颍川，解侯景围。
现代文：十三年，跟随防主韦法保奔向颖川，解除侯景的围困。
English: In the thirteenth year, he followed Wei Fa Bao, the main defender, to Yingchuan to lift the siege of Houjing.

古文：景密图南叛，军中颇有知者。
现代文：侯景密谋向南叛逃，军中有很多人知道。
English: Hou Jing plotted to defect to the south, and many people in the army knew about it.

古文：以其事计未成，外示无贰，往来诸军间，侍从寡少。
现代文：因为他的事情计划未能成功，对外表示没有异心，往来各军之间，侍从很少。
English: Because his business plan did not succeed, he expressed no hostility to the outside world, and there were few attendants between the armies.

古文：军中名将，必躬自造，至于法保，尤被亲附。
现代文：对军中名将，必定亲身造访，至于韦法保，尤其亲近。
English: He is sure to visit famous generals in the army in person, and he is especially close to Wei Fabao.

古文：宽谓法保曰： 侯景狡猾，必不肯入关。
现代文：裴宽告诉韦法保说： 侯景为人狡猾，必定不肯入关。
English: Pei Kuan told Wei Fabao: "Hou Jing is a cunning person, he will definitely refuse to enter the customs.

古文：虽托款于公，恐未可信。
现代文：虽然对您寄托诚心，但恐怕不可相信。
English: Although I trust in your sincerity, I'm afraid I can't believe it.

古文：若仗兵以斩之，亦一时之计也。
现代文：如果凭藉兵力来杀掉他，也是一时的计策。
English: If he is killed by military force, it will only be a temporary measure.

古文：如曰不然，便须深加严警，不得信其诳诱，自贻后悔。 法保纳之，然不能图景，但自固而已。
现代文：如果不这样。就必须加强严防警戒，不能相信他的欺骗引诱，自己留下后悔。 韦法保采纳了他的意见，但是不能谋取侯景，祇是巩固自己而已。
English: If this is not the case, it is necessary to strengthen the prevention and vigilance, can not believe his deception and seduction, and leave himself with regret. Wei Fabao adopted his opinion, but he could not seek the future, only to consolidate himself.

古文：十四年，与东魏将彭乐、恂战于新城，因伤被擒。至河阴，见齐文襄。
现代文：十四年，与束魏将领彭乐、乐恂在新城交战，因为受伤被俘到了河阴，见到齐文襄。
English: In the 14th year, he fought against the Shu Wei generals Peng Le and Le Yao in Xincheng. Because he was injured, he was taken prisoner to Heyin, where he met Qi Wenzhong.

古文：宽举止详雅，善于占对，文襄甚赏异之。
现代文：裴宽举止安详文雅，善于随口应答，齐文襄非常赏识他。
English: Pei Kuan's demeanor is calm and elegant, and he is good at answering questions. Qi Wenzhong appreciates him very much.

古文：谓宽曰： 卿三河冠盖，材识如此，我必使卿富贵。
现代文：告诉裴宽说： 您是三河的贵官，有这样的才能和见识，我必定使您享尽富贵。
English: Tell Pei Kuan: You are a dignitary of the Three Rivers, with such talent and insight, I will surely make you rich.

古文：关中贫，何足可依，勿怀异图也。 因解锁付馆，厚加其礼。
现代文：关中贫困狭小，哪裹值得依附呢，不要怀有别的意图了。 于是解除锁枷，交付宾馆，优厚地加以礼遇。
English: Guanzhong poverty is narrow and small, what is worth clinging to, do not have any other intention. So the shackles were removed, delivered to the hotel, and treated courteously.

古文：宽乃裁卧毡，夜缒而出，因得遁还，见于太祖。
现代文：裴宽就裁开睡毡，在夜裹系成绳子鲢下城逃出，因此得以逃回，见到太祖，太祖顾视各位官员说：
English: Pei Kuan cut the sleeping cocoon and escaped from the city at night, wrapped in a rope under the cocoon, so he was able to escape back and see Taizu. Taizu looked at the officials and said:

古文：太祖顾谓诸公曰： 被坚执锐，或有其人，疾风劲草，岁寒方验。
现代文： 披着坚固的锁甲，拿着锐利的兵器，也许有人做得到，疾风识劲草，天气寒冷才能检验出来。
English: Wearing a sturdy lock of armor, holding a sharp weapon, maybe someone can do it, the wind knows the grass, and the cold weather can be tested.

古文：裴长宽为高澄如此厚遇，乃能冒死归我。
现代文：裴长宽被高澄,优厚礼遇，却能冒着生命危险回到我身边。
English: Pei Changkuan was highly praised and treated with great courtesy, but he was able to risk his life to come back to me.

古文：虽古之竹帛所载，何以加之！ 乃手书署宽名下，授持节、帅都督，封夏阳县男,邑三百户，并赐马一疋、衣一袭，即除孔城城主。
现代文：虽然在古代史书有记载，怎么可以超过他呢! 就亲手书写署在裴宽名下，任持节、帅都督，封为夏阳县男，食邑三百户，并赏赐马一匹、衣服一套，立即任孔城城主。
English: Although it is recorded in ancient history books, how can it be better than him! He personally wrote down the names of Pei Kuan, appointed him as the festival, handsome governor, named him as the man of Xiayang County, and fed three hundred households, and rewarded him with a horse and a set of clothes, and immediately became the lord of Kongcheng.

古文：十六年，迁河南郡守，仍镇孔城。
现代文：十六年，升河南郡太守，仍镇守孔城。
English: Sixteen years later, he ascended to the position of the governor of Henan County, and still served as the governor of Kongcheng.

古文：寻加抚军、大都督、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：不久加授抚军、大都督、通直散骑常侍。
English: He was soon promoted to Jufu army, grand governor, and sanshaku (free riding) regular attendant.

古文：魏废帝元年，进使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
现代文：魏废帝元年，晋为使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, he was promoted to the envoy of the festival, the general of the chariot and cavalry, the three departments of the ceremony, and the rider of the horseback.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进爵为子。
现代文：孝闵帝登位，晋为子爵。
English: Emperor Xiaozhun ascended to the throne, and he was promoted to viscount.

古文：宽在孔城十三年，与齐洛州刺史独孤永业相对。
现代文：裴宽在孔城十三年，与齐洛州刺史独孤永业相对峙。
English: Pei Kuan has been in Kongcheng for 13 years, facing off against Qiluo County's history-making longevity.

古文：永业有计谋，多谲诈，或声言春发，秋乃出兵，掩蔽消息，倏忽而至。
现代文：独孤永业有计谋，多诡诈，有时声称春天出发，直到秋天才出兵，封闭消息，转眼间就到了。
English: Loneliness has always been cunning and deceitful, sometimes claiming to start in the spring and not sending troops until the autumn, closing the news and arriving in the blink of an eye.

古文：宽每揣知其情，用兵邀击，无不克之。
现代文：裴宽每次都能揣测到他的实情，带兵拦截打击，没有不取胜的。
English: Pei Kuan was able to guess his true situation every time, and led soldiers to intercept the attack. There was no way he could not win.

古文：永业常戒其所部曰： 但好镇孔城，自外无足虑。 其见惮如此。
现代文：独孤永业经常告诫他的部下说： 衹要好好地慎对孔城。此外不值得忧虑。 他害怕裴宽到如此地步。
English: Duolong Yongye often admonished his subordinates, "You should be very careful with Kongcheng. Besides, it's not worth worrying about. He's afraid of Pei Kuan to such an extent."

古文：齐伊川郡守梁鲊，常在境首抄掠。太祖患之，命宽经略焉。
现代文：齐伊川郡太守梁舴，经常在边境抢掠，太祖担忧这件事，下令裴宽策划处理。
English: Liang Kun, the governor of Qiichuan County, often plundered at the border. Taizu was worried about this and ordered Pei Kuan to plan and deal with it.

古文：鲊行过妻家，椎牛宴饮，既醉之后，不复自防。
现代文：梁齰出行经过妻子的家，杀牛设宴饮酒，醉倒之后，不再防备。
English: Liang Yao passed by his wife's home on his way to work. He slaughtered a cow, held a banquet and drank alcohol. After he got drunk, he was no longer prepared.

古文：宽密知之，遣兵往袭，遂斩之。
现代文：壬遮秘密知道这个消息，派兵前往偷袭，就杀了他。
English: Secretly aware of this news, Imbaka sent soldiers to make a surprise attack and killed him.

古文：太祖嘉焉，赐奴婢、金带、粟帛等。
现代文：左坦对此嘉奖，赏赐奴婢、金带、粟帛等。
English: Zuotan praised this, awarding slaves, servants, gold belts, millet gourds, etc.

古文：武成二年，征拜司中大夫。
现代文：武成二年，征入任司土中大夫。
English: In the second year of Wucheng, he was conscripted into the post of the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：保定元年，出为州刺史。
现代文：保定元年，出任沔州刺史。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he served as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：寻转鲁山防主。
现代文：不久调任鲁山防主。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Luzhan Defense Chief.

古文：四年，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：四年，加授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In four years, he was awarded the title of General of the Horse Cavalry and the title of General of the Three Departments.

古文：天和二年，行复州事。
现代文：天和二年，代理复州政事。
English: Tianhe two years, acting Fuzhou government.

古文：三年，除温州刺史。
现代文：三年，任温州刺史。
English: For three years, he served as the mayor of Wenzhou.

古文：初陈氏与国通和，每修聘好。
现代文：起初陈与周交往和好，经常访问修好。
English: At first, Chen and Zhou made peace with each other and often visited each other to mend fences.

古文：自华皎附后，乃图寇掠。
现代文：自从华皎归附之后，就围谋侵犯抢掠。
English: Since the annexation of Hualien, they have been plotting to invade and plunder.

古文：沔州既接敌境，事资守备，于是复以宽为沔州刺史。
现代文：沔州连接敌境，事关把守防备，于是又以裴宽为沔州刺史。
English: Bozhou is connected to the enemy's border, and it is a matter of guarding and preparing, so Pei Kuan was chosen as the history of Bozhou.

古文：而州城埤狭，器械又少，宽知其难守，深以为忧。
现代文：但州城低洼狭窄，器物用具又少，裴宽知道难守，深为忧虑。
English: However, Zhucheng is low-lying and narrow, and there are few goods and equipment. Pei Kuan knew that it was difficult to defend, and he was deeply worried.

古文：又恐秋水暴长，陈人得乘其便。
现代文：又恐怕秋水突然上涨，陈人得以乘其便利。
English: I'm also afraid that the autumn tides will suddenly rise, and Chen people will be able to take advantage of it.

古文：即白襄州总管，请戍兵，并请移城于羊蹄山，权以避水。总管府许增兵守御，不许迁移城。
现代文：就禀告襄州总管，请求增加防守的兵士，并请移城到羊蹄山，姑且避开水患总管府答应增兵守御，但不许迁移州城。
English: He complained to the governor of Xiangzhou, asking for more soldiers to defend the city, and requesting that the city be moved to Mount Yotei to avoid flooding. The governor agreed to increase the number of soldiers to defend the city, but was not allowed to move the city.

古文：宽乃量度年常水至之处，竖大木于岸，以备船行。
现代文：裴宽就丈量每年大水所到之处，在岸上竖起大木，以防备船只行走。
English: Pei Kuan measured where the floodwaters went every year, and erected large trees on the shore to prevent ships from sailing.

古文：襄州所遣兵未至，陈将程灵洗已率众至于城下。
现代文：襄州所派的兵未到，而陈将程灵洗已经率兵到达城下。
English: The soldiers sent by Xiangzhou had not yet arrived, but Chen Zhe Cheng Lingqi had already led his troops to the outskirts of the city.

古文：遂分布战舰，四面攻之。
现代文：就分别布置战船，四面进攻。
English: They arranged their warships separately and attacked on all four sides.

古文：水势犹小，灵洗未得近城。
现代文：水势尚小，程灵洗未能靠近州城。
English: The water level was still low, so Cheng Ling Zai could not get close to the state capital.

古文：宽每简募骁兵，令夜掩击，频挫其锐。
现代文：裴宽经常挑选招募勇猛的兵士，下令在夜晚乘敌不备进行偷袭，多次挫伤对方的锐气。
English: Pei Kuan often chose to recruit brave soldiers, ordered sneak attacks at night to take advantage of the enemy's unpreparedness, and repeatedly bruised the other side's spirit.

古文：相持旬日，灵洗无如之何。
现代文：相持十，程灵洗对此无可奈何。
English: With a combined age of ten, there was nothing Cheng Ling Xi could do about it.

古文：俄而雨水暴长，所竖木上，皆通船过。
现代文：不久雨水突然上涨，所竖立的大木上面，都能通过船只。
English: Soon, the rainwater suddenly rose, and boats could pass over the large trees that had been erected.

古文：灵洗乃以大舰临逼，拍干打楼，应即摧碎，弓弩大石，昼夜攻之。
现代文：程灵洗就用大船临近进逼，拍干打楼，应手立即摧毁破碎，弓弩大石，日夜攻打。
English: Cheng Lingzai used a large ship to approach and force, beat and beat the building, immediately destroyed and broken by hand, bow and arrows and large stones, and attacked day and night.

古文：苦战三十余日，死伤过半。
现代文：苦战三十多曰，死伤超过一半。
English: After more than 30 days of hard fighting, more than half of them were killed or injured.

古文：女垣崩尽，陈人遂得上城。
现代文：城墙上面呈凹凸形的小墙全部崩坍，陈人就得以上城。
English: The small wall with a concave-convex shape on top of the city wall all collapsed, and the Chen people had to go up to the city.

古文：短兵相拒，犹经二日。
现代文：短兵相接，还经过了两曰。
English: It was a close call, but it still took two days.

古文：外无继援，力屈。
现代文：外面没有增援，兵力屈竭。
English: Without reinforcements from the outside, the troops were exhausted.

古文：城陷之后，水便退缩。
现代文：城被攻陷之后，水便退缩。
English: After the city was taken, the water receded.

古文：陈人乃执宽至扬州，寻被送岭外。
现代文：陈人就逮捕裴宽到扬州，不久被送到岭外。
English: Chen Ren arrested Pei Kuan in Yangzhou, and he was soon sent to the outskirts of Ling.

古文：经数载，后还建业，遂卒于江左。
现代文：经过数年，后来回到建业，就在江左去世。
English: After several years, he later returned to Jianye, where he died.

古文：时年六十七。
现代文：终年六十七岁。
English: He was sixty-seven years old.

古文：子义宣后从御正杜杲使于陈，始得将宽柩还。
现代文：儿子裴义宣后来跟随御正杜呆出使到陈，才得以将裴宽的灵柩运回。
English: His son, Pei Yixuan, later followed Gozhengdu and sent an envoy to Chen, only to be able to transport Pei Kuan's coffin back.

古文：开皇元年，隋文帝诏赠襄郢二州刺史。
现代文：开皇元年，隋文帝下诏追赠襄郢二州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, Emperor Sui Wen issued an edict to bestow the history of the two states of Xiangfan.

古文：义宣起家谯王俭府记室，转司金二命士，合江令。
现代文：裴义宣由尽王室主俭府记室起家做官，改任司金二命士，合江县令。
English: Pei Yixuan started his career as an official in the office of the royal family's chief official, and was later appointed as the secretary of finance, and the governor of Hejiang County.

古文：宽弟汉。
现代文：裴宽的弟弟叫裴汉。
English: Pei Kuan's younger brother is called Pei Han.

古文：汉字仲霄，操尚弘雅，聪敏好学。
现代文：壬遝字使霞。品德理想宏大文雅，为人聪明敏捷，爱好学习。
English: His moral ideal is grand and elegant, he is clever and quick, and he loves to learn.

古文：尝见人作百字诗，一览便诵。
现代文：曾经见到有人作百字诗，他阅览一次就能背诵。
English: I once saw someone make a hundred-character poem, and he could recite it after reading it once.

古文：魏孝武初，解褐员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：魏孝武帝初年，出仕为员外散骑侍郎。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wei Xiaowu, he served as a non-commissioned officer.

古文：大统五年，除大丞相府士曹行参军，补墨曹参军。
现代文：大统五年，任大丞相府士曹行参军，补墨曹参军。
English: In the fifth year of the Great Reunification, Cao Xing, a prefectural magistrate who was appointed as the grand chancellor, joined the army, and Shu Mo Cao also joined the army.

古文：汉善尺牍，尤便簿领，理识明赡，决断如流。
现代文：裴汉擅长书信写作，尤其熟习登记的文簿，为政见解异常高明，处理事情果断迅速。
English: Pei Han is good at writing letters, especially familiar with registration books, has unusually high political opinions, and deals with things decisively and quickly.

古文：相府为之语曰： 日下粲烂有裴汉。 十一年，李远出镇弘农，启汉为司马。
现代文：相府为他下评语说： 太阳之下光彩鲜明的有裴汉。 十一年，李远出镇弘农，启奏裴汉为司马。
English: The neighboring prefectural government commented on him as follows: The most brilliant under the sun is Peihan. In the eleventh year, Li Yuan left the town of Hongnong and appointed Peihan as his assistant.

古文：远特相器遇。
现代文：李远特别器重礼遇他。
English: Li Yuan treated him with great courtesy.

古文：寻加安东将军、银青光禄大夫、成都上士。
现代文：不久加授安束将军、银青光禄大夫、成都上士。
English: He was soon promoted to General Anzuk, Silver Qingguanglu Doctor, and Chengdu Staff Sergeant.

古文：寻转司车路下大夫。
现代文：不久改任司车路下大夫。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of a driver and roadside doctor.

古文：与工部郭彦、太府高宾等参议格令，每较量时事，必有条理，彦等咸敬异之。
现代文：与工部郭彦、太府高宾等人参与商议法令，经常比较衡量当时的事情，必定有条有理，郭彦等人都敬重他。
English: He participated in the deliberation of laws and ordinances with Guo Yan of the Ministry of Industry and Guo Yan and Daifu Gaobin and others, and often compared and measured the things at that time. There must be order and reason. Guo Yan and others all respected him.

古文：加帅都督。
现代文：加授帅都督。
English: He was also awarded the title of Stadtholder.

古文：天和中，复与司宗孙恕、典祀薛慎同为八使，巡察风俗。
现代文：天和年间，又与司宗孙恕、典祀薛慎一起充当八使，巡视观察风俗。
English: During the Heian and Kamakura periods, he also served as one of the eight envoys, together with the patriarch Sun Myung Seok and the priest Xue Shin, to inspect and observe customs.

古文：五年，加车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：五年，加授车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Five years later, he was additionally awarded the rank of General of Chariot and Cavalry and the rank of Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：汉少有宿疾，恒带虚羸，剧职烦官，非其好也。
现代文：裴漠年少时有旧病，经常虚弱消瘦，繁重的事务和官职，不足他所爱好的。
English: When he was young, Pei Mo had an old disease, he was often weak and emaciated, and heavy affairs and official duties were not enough for his hobbies.

古文：时晋公护擅权，搢绅等多谄附之，以图仕进。
现代文：当时晋公宇文护专权，官员们多数谄媚依附他，以图谋仕途进取。
English: At that time, Jin Gongyu had the exclusive power to protect literature and culture, and most of the officials attached themselves to him in an attempt to advance their careers.

古文：唯汉直道固守，八年不徙职。
现代文：衹有裴漠固守正直之道，八年不调职。
English: However, Pei Mo adhered to the principle of honesty and did not change jobs for eight years.

古文：性不饮酒，而雅好宾游。
现代文：性不饮酒，但很爱好与客人游玩。
English: He doesn't drink, but he likes to hang out with his guests.

古文：每良辰美景，必招引时彦，宴赏留连，间以篇什。
现代文：每逢良辰美景，必定招引当时的贤士，设宴玩赏，留恋不肯离开，用诗篇参与其事。
English: Whenever there is a good time and beautiful scenery, it will surely attract the sages of the time, set up a banquet to play, linger and refuse to leave, and participate in the matter with poems.

古文：当时人物，以此重之。
现代文：当时的人物，因此敬重他。
English: He was a man of his time, and for that he is revered.

古文：自宽没后，遂断绝游从，不听琴瑟，岁时伏腊，哀恸而已。
现代文：自从裴宽死后，就断绝交游来往，不听音乐，一年中的节日，哀伤动哭而已。
English: Since Pei Kuan's death, she has cut off all contacts, does not listen to music, does not celebrate the festivals of the year, and only cries when she is sad.

古文：抚养兄弟子，情甚笃至。
现代文：抚养兄弟之子，感情非常深厚。
English: Raising a sibling's child, the emotions run very deep.

古文：借人异书，必躬自录本。
现代文：借人新奇之书，必定亲自抄录。
English: If you lend someone a novel book, you must copy it yourself.

古文：至于疹疾弥年，亦未尝释卷。
现代文：直到卧病满整年，也未曾放下书卷。
English: He didn't put the book down until he had been ill for a whole year.

古文：建德元年卒，时年五十九。
现代文：建德元年去世，终年五十九岁。
English: Jian De died in the first year of the year, at the age of 59.

古文：赠晋州刺史。
现代文：追赠晋州刺史。
English: The imperial court posthumously bestowed him with the title of "Jinzhou sashimi master."

古文：子镜民，少聪敏，涉猎经史。
现代文：儿子裴镜民，年少时聪明敏捷，广泛涉猎经书史籍。
English: His son, Pei Jingmin, was smart and agile when he was young, and was widely involved in the study of scriptures and historical books.

古文：为大将军、谭公会记室参军。
现代文：任大将军、谭公宇文会记室参军。
English: Appointed as a general, Tan Gong Yuwen joined the army.

古文：后历宋王寔侍读，转记室，迁司录。
现代文：后来历任宋王宇文蹇侍读，改任记室，升司录。
English: Later, successive presidents of the Song Dynasty, Wang Yuwenqiu, became a reader-in-waiting, a recorder, and a recorder.

古文：宣政初，吏部上士。
现代文：宣政初年，任吏部上士。
English: In the first year of the proclamation of the Republic of China, he was appointed as a staff sergeant.

古文：大象末，春官府都上士。
现代文：大象末年，任春官府都上士。
English: At the end of his life, he became a staff sergeant of the Spring Government.

古文：汉弟尼。
现代文：裴汉的弟弟叫裴尼。
English: Pei Han's younger brother is called Pei Ni.

古文：尼字景尼，性弘雅，有器局。
现代文：裴尼字景尼，性格高雅，有器量和才干。
English: Peni, also known as Jingni, has an elegant personality, and is resourceful and talented.

古文：起家奉朝请。
现代文：由奉朝请起家做官。
English: If you'd like to serve the Emperor, go ahead.

古文：除梁王东合祭酒，迁从事中郎，加通直散骑常侍。
现代文：任梁王束合祭酒，升从事中郎，加授通直散骑常侍。
English: He was appointed as the Liang Wang Sokai Festival Liquor, promoted to the position of middle-ranking official, and given the additional title of non-commissioned officer.

古文：陇西李际、范阳卢诞并有高名于世，与尼结忘年之交。
现代文：陇西李际、范阳卢诞在当世都有很高的名望，与裴尼结为忘年之交。
English: Shaanxi Li Ji and Fan Yang Lu Xing both have a high reputation in the contemporary world, and they have a long-lasting friendship with Pei Ni.

古文：魏恭帝元年，以本官从于谨平江陵，大获军实，谨恣诸将校取之。
现代文：魏恭帝元年，以本官身份跟随于谨平定江陵，缴获大量军用器械物资，于谨听任各将领取用。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, he followed Yu Jiading Gangneung as his own official and seized a large amount of military equipment and materials. Yu Jiading allowed the generals to collect them.

古文：余人皆竞取珍玩，尼唯取梁元帝素琴一张而已。
现代文：其余的人都争着取走珍宝玩好，裴尼衹取了梁元帝素琴一张而已。
English: The rest of the people scrambled to take away the precious treasure and had a good time, but Pei Ni won only a Liang Yuan Di suqin.

古文：谨深叹美之。
现代文：于谨对他深为感叹赞美。
English: I would like to express my deep admiration and praise for him.

古文：六官建，拜御正下大夫。
现代文：六官建立，任御正下大夫。
English: Six offices were established, with the post of Imperial Vice-Minister of Health.

古文：寻以疾卒。
现代文：不久因病去世。
English: He died of illness shortly afterwards.

古文：赠辅国将军、随州刺史。
现代文：追赠辅国将军、随州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Auxiliary Province and the title of Suizhou Historian.

古文：子之隐，赵王招府记室参军。
现代文：儿子裴之隐，任赵王宇文招府记室参军。
English: His son, Pei Zhiyin, was appointed as Zhao Wang Yuwen of the recruiting office to join the army.

古文：之隐弟师民，好学有识度，见称于时。
现代文：裴之隐的弟弟裴师民，爱好学习，有见识和度量，被当时人所称道。
English: Pei Shimin, the younger brother of Pei Zhiyin, was known for his love of learning, insight and moderation.

古文：起家秦王府记室参军，仍兼侍读。
现代文：初仕为秦王宇文蛰府记室参军，兼侍读。
English: He first joined the army as an aide-de-camp of Qin King Yuwen of the Office of the Prefectural Recorder, and also served as a reader.

古文：宽族弟鸿。
现代文：裴宽的族弟叫裴鸿。
English: Pei Kuan's younger brother is called Pei Hung.

古文：鸿少恭谨，有干略，历官内外。
现代文：裴鸿年少时恭顺严谨，有才干和策略，在京城内外历任官职。
English: When he was young, Pei Hongjun was rigorous, talented and strategic, and held various official positions in and out of Beijing.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，拜辅城公司马，加仪同三司。
现代文：孝闵帝登位，任辅城公司马，加授仪同三司。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, and he was appointed as the second-in-command of the Shicheng Company, as well as the third-in-command of the Third Division.

古文：为晋公护雍州治中，累迁御正中大夫，进位开府仪同三司，转民部中大夫。
现代文：任晋公宇文护雍州治中，屡经升迁为御正中大夫，晋为开府仪同三司，改民部中大夫。
English: He was appointed as the highest-ranking civil servant in Yongzhou, and was repeatedly promoted to the post of chief doctor, promoted to the post of the third secretary of Kaifu Rites and Decrees, and became the chief doctor of the Ministry of People's Affairs.

古文：保定末，出为中州刺史、九曲城主。
现代文：保定末年，出任中州刺史、九曲城主。
English: In the last years of Baoding, he served as the chancellor of Zhongzhou and the lord of Jiuquan.

古文：镇守边鄙，甚有扞御之能。
现代文：镇守边境，很有抵御的才能。
English: Town guarding the border, very resistant talent.

古文：卫公直出镇襄州，以鸿为襄州司马。
现代文：卫公宇文直出镇襄州，以裴鸿为襄州司马。
English: Wei Gong Uwen went straight from the town to Xiangzhou, with Pei Hong as the Xiangzhou Sima.

古文：天和初，拜郢州刺史，转襄州总管府长史，赐爵高邑县侯。
现代文：天和初年，任郢州刺史，改襄州总管府长史，赐爵高邑县侯。
English: In the first year of Tianhe, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, changed to the governor of Xiangzhou, and was given the title of Gaoyi County.

古文：从直南征，军败，遂没。
现代文：跟随字文直向南征讨，大军失败，就被沦没。
English: Follow the words and go straight to the south to fight, and if the army fails, it will be destroyed.

古文：寻卒于陈。
现代文：不久在陈去世。
English: He died soon after in Chen Cang.

古文：朝廷哀之，赠丰资遂三州刺史。
现代文：朝廷哀悼他，追赠丰资遂三州刺史。
English: The imperial court mourned him and gave him a large sum of money as a posthumous gift.

古文：杨敷字文衍，华山公宽之兄子也。
现代文：杨敷字文衍，是华山公杨宽哥哥的儿子。
English: Yang Jiki Zi Wenyan was the son of Huashan Gong Yang Kuan's elder brother.

古文：父暄，字景和。
现代文：父亲杨暄，字景和。
English: His father, Yang Hui, wrote the characters "和."

古文：性朗悟，有识学。
现代文：性格聪敏，有见识和学问。
English: Intelligent, insightful and learned.

古文：弱冠拜奉朝请，历员外散骑侍郎、华州别驾、尚书右中兵郎中、辅国将军、谏议大夫。
现代文：二十岁拜奉朝请，历任员外散骑侍郎、华州别驾、尚书右中兵郎中、辅国将军、谏议大夫。
English: At the age of twenty, he was invited to serve the Emperor, and successively held the positions of non-commissioned officer, horseback riding attendant, governor of Huazhou, Shangshu right middle soldier, middle soldier, general of the auxiliary province, and doctor of deliberation.

古文：以别将从魏广阳王深征葛荣，为荣所害。
现代文：以别将身份跟随魏广阳王元渊深征讨葛荣，被葛荣杀害。
English: He followed Wei Guangyang Wang Yuan Yuan to fight Ge Rong, and was killed by Ge Rong.

古文：赠殿中尚书、华夏二州诸军事、镇西将军、华州刺史。
现代文：追赠殿中尚书、华夏二州诸军事、镇西将军、华州刺史。
English: Among the posthumous gifts are the Imperial Rescript, the military records of the two states of Huaxia, the General of Zhenxi, and the History of the Battle of Huazhou.

古文：敷少有志操，重然诺。
现代文：杨敷年少时有志气和节操，重视承诺。
English: When he was young, Yang Jiki had ambition and discipline, and valued commitment.

古文：每览书传，见忠臣烈士之事，常慨然景慕之。
现代文：每次阅览书传，见到忠臣烈士的事迹，经常慷慨仰慕他们。
English: Every time I read the biographies and see the deeds of the loyalists and martyrs, I often admire them generously.

古文：魏建义初，袭祖钧爵临贞县伯，邑四百户。
现代文：魏建义初年，因袭祖父杨钩的爵位临贞县伯，食邑四百户。
English: In the first year of Wei Jianyi, 400 households in Linzhen County and food villages were created by inheriting the peerage of his grandfather Yang Hu.

古文：除员外羽林监。
现代文：任员外羽林监。
English: Appointment of Waigao Forest Supervisor.

古文：大统元年，拜奉车都尉。
现代文：大统元年，任奉车都尉。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was appointed to the post of lieutenant.

古文：历尚书左士郎中、祠部郎中、大丞相府墨曹参军、帅都督、平东将军、太中大夫，加抚军将军、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：历任尚书左士郎中、祠部郎中、大丞相府墨曹参军、帅都督、平东将军、太中大夫，加授抚军将军、通直散骑常侍。
English: Successive incumbents include Shoshu Zuo Shiro Junior High School, Shokube Shiro Junior High School, Dajo Shofu Mozo Sangun, Shuai Tudoku, General Pingdong, Taichung Daifu, Gaozuo Army General, and Tsundao Sanzai Jojishi.

古文：魏恭帝二年，迁廷尉少卿。
现代文：魏恭帝二年，升廷尉少卿。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, he was promoted to the rank of courtier.

古文：所断之狱，号称平允。
现代文：所判定的案件，号称公平允当。
English: The cases decided are said to be fair.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进爵为侯，增邑并前八百户。
现代文：孝闵帝登位，晋爵为侯，食邑增至八百户。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, Jinjue became the lord of the manor, and the number of households increased to 800.

古文：除小载师下大夫，使北豫州迎司马消难，还，授使持节、蒙州诸军事、蒙州刺史。
现代文：授小载师下大夫，出使北豫州迎接司马消难，回来，授使持节、蒙州诸军事、蒙州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title of junior doctor, dispatched to North Henan Province to meet the Sima disaster, and returned to confer the title of "Holding Festival," "Mongolian Military," and "Mongolian History."

古文：先是蛮左等多受齐假署，数为乱逆。
现代文：在此之前，蛮夷等多接受齐的伪职，屡次叛乱。
English: Prior to this, barbarians such as the barbarians mostly accepted the false post of Qi and repeatedly rebelled.

古文：敷推诚布信，随方慰抚，蛮左等感之，相率归附。
现代文：杨敷以诚意相待，展示信用，根据情况加以慰问安抚，蛮夷等受到感动，相继归附。
English: Yangshiki treated each other with sincerity, demonstrated trust, consoled and pacified according to the situation, and the barbarians were moved and successively attached.

古文：敷乃送其首四十余人赴阙，请因齐所假而授之。
现代文：杨敷就送他们的首领四十多人到京师，请求按齐所授的职务给他们授官。
English: Yangshiki sent more than forty of their leaders to the capital to request that they be appointed to the positions they had been given.

古文：诸蛮等愈更感悦，州境获宁。
现代文：各处蛮人更加感动喜悦，州内全境获得安宁。
English: The savages everywhere were more moved with joy, and the whole territory of the state was pacified.

古文：特降玺书劳问，加车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：特意降下皇帝的诏书慰劳问候，加授车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: The emperor's imperial rescript of condolence and greetings was specially issued, and the general of cavalry and the three divisions of the imperial guard were also awarded.

古文：保定中，征为司水中大夫。
现代文：保定年间，征入任司水中大夫。
English: During his time in Baoding, he was conscripted to serve as a doctor in the Bureau of Hydrography.

古文：夷夏吏民，乃荆州总管长孙俭并表请留之。
现代文：各族的官员百姓以及荆州总管长孙俭一起上表请求挽留他。
English: Officials and citizens of all ethnic groups, as well as the governor of Jingzhou, Sun Jian, jointly petitioned to retain him.

古文：时议欲东讨，将委敷以舟舰转输之事，故弗许焉。
现代文：当时商议想向东征讨，将委托杨敷负责船只运输的事务，所以不答应。
English: At that time, they wanted to discuss the eastward expedition, but Yangshiki would be entrusted with the ship transport affairs, so they did not agree.

古文：陈公纯镇陕，以敷为总管长史。
现代文：陈公字文纯镇守陕州，以杨敷为总管长史。
English: Chen Gongzi and Wenzhun were the warlords of Shaanxi Province, with Yang Shiki as the chief warlord.

古文：五年，转司木中大夫、军器副监。
现代文：天和五年，改任司木中大夫、军器副监。
English: Five years later, he was reassigned to the post of junior doctor and deputy inspector of military equipment.

古文：敷明习吏事，所在以勤察著名，每岁奏课居最，累获优赏。
现代文：杨敷明白熟习官吏的事务，所在之处以勤劳明察而著名，每年奏课居第一，多次获得丰厚的奖赏。
English: Yang Shiki is familiar with the affairs of officials. The place where he is located is famous for its diligence and observation. Every year, he ranks first in his class and has won many rich rewards.

古文：进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：晋为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: He was promoted to General of the Horse Cavalry and appointed to the post of Kaifu Yi and Sanji.

古文：天和六年，出为汾州诸军事、汾州刺史，进爵为公，增邑一千五百户。
现代文：天和六年，出任汾州诸军事、汾州刺史，晋爵为公，增加食邑一千五百户。
English: In the past six years, he has served as the military commander of Bozhou, the historian of Bozhou, and the prince of Jinzhe, and has increased the number of food villages by 1,500.

古文：齐将段孝先率众五万来寇，梯冲地道，昼夜攻城。
现代文：齐将段孝先带兵五万人来犯，驾云梯和冲车，挖掘地道，夜攻城。
English: Qi sent Duan Xiaoxian with an army of fifty thousand to attack, driving ladders and rushing cars, digging tunnels, and attacking the city at night.

古文：敷亲当矢石，随事扞御，拒守累旬。
现代文：杨敷亲白面对飞箭大石，随时抵御，拒守数十曰。
English: In the face of flying arrows and large stones, Yangshiki pro-white resisted at any time and refused to defend for dozens of days.

古文：孝先攻之愈急。
现代文：段孝先攻城更加急迫。
English: It was even more urgent for Duan Xiao to attack the city first.

古文：时城中兵不满二千，战死者已十四五，粮储又尽，公私穷蹙。
现代文：当时城中兵士不满二千，战死的已有卜分之四五，粮食储蓄也用完了，公私都走投无路。
English: At that time, there were less than two thousand soldiers in the city, four-fifths of them had been killed in battle, grain savings had been exhausted, and both the public and private sectors were desperate.

古文：齐公宪总兵赴救，惮孝先，不敢进军。
现代文：齐公宇文宪统兵赴救，害怕段孝先，不敢进军。
English: Qigong Uwen's gendarmes came to the rescue. They were afraid of Duan Xiaoxian and did not dare to march in.

古文：敷知必陷没，乃召其众谓之曰： 吾与卿等，俱在边镇，实愿同心戮力，破贼全城。
现代文：杨敷知道州城必然陷没，就召集他的部下告诉他们说： 我和你们都在边镇，确实愿意同心合力，打败贼军，保全州城。
English: Knowing that the state capital would inevitably fall, Yang Shiki gathered his subordinates and told them: "I and all of you are in the border town, and we are truly willing to work together to defeat the bandits and preserve the state capital.

古文：但强寇四面攻围日久，吾等粮食已尽，救援断绝。
现代文：衹是强寇四面围攻时间已经很久，我们粮食已经用尽，救援已经断绝。
English: It has been a long time since we were besieged on all sides by invaders, our grain has been exhausted, and relief has been cut off.

古文：守死穷城，非丈夫也。
现代文：为守穷城而死，不是大丈夫。
English: It's not okay to die defending a poor town.

古文：今胜兵之士，犹数百人，欲突围出战，死生一决。
现代文：现今胜任打仗的兵士，尚有数百人，想突围出战，死生在此一决。
English: Today, there are still hundreds of soldiers who are competent to fight, who want to break out and go to war, and die in this showdown.

古文：傥或得免，犹冀生还，受罪阙庭，孰与死于寇乎！
现代文：如果得以免死，还希望活着回去，在朝廷上接受罪责，比起死在敌人手裹哪个好呢?
English: If you are spared death, and still hope to return alive and take the blame before the court, what is better than dying in the hands of the enemy?

古文：吾计决矣，于诸君意何如？ 众咸涕泣从命。
现代文：我的主意已经决定了，各位的意见怎么样呢? 部下都痛哭流涕服从命令。
English: My mind is made up, what do you think of that? My men obeyed orders with tears streaming down their faces.

古文：敷乃率见兵夜出，击杀齐军数十人。齐军众稍却。
现代文：杨敷就率领现存的兵士连夜出战，杀死齐军数十人，齐军兵士稍作退却。
English: Yangshiki led the existing soldiers to fight overnight, killing dozens of Qi soldiers, and the Qi soldiers retreated slightly.

古文：俄而孝先率诸军尽锐围之，敷殊死战，矢尽，为孝先所擒。
现代文：不久段孝先率领各军全部包围他们，杨敷拼死作战，箭用完了，被段孝先活捉。
English: Not long after, Duan Xiaoqian led all the armies to surround them, Yang Shiji fought to the death, ran out of arrows, and was captured alive by Duan Xiaoqian.

古文：齐人方欲任用之，敷不为之屈，遂以忧惧卒于邺。
现代文：齐人正想任用他，杨敷不为之屈服，于是因为忧愁愤慨而在邺去世。
English: Qi people were trying to appoint him, Yangshiki did not give in, so he died of sadness and indignation.

古文：高祖平齐，赠使持节、大将军、淮广复三州诸军事、三州刺史，谥曰忠壮。
现代文：高祖乎定齐，追蹭使持节、大将军、淮广复三州诸军事、三州刺史，谧号为忠壮。
English: Gao Zu was almost the same as Ding Qi, and he was also known as the Chasing Dragon Envoy, the Great General, Huai Guangfu, the Military Commander of the Three Provinces, and the Historian of the Three Provinces. His nickname was Zhong Zhuang.

古文：葬于华阴旧茔。
现代文：埋葬在华阴旧时墓地。
English: He was buried in Huayin Old Time Cemetery.

古文：子素，有文武材略。大象末，上柱国、清河郡公。
现代文：儿子杨素，有文武才能大象末年，任上柱国，封为清河郡公。
English: His son Yang Su, who had the literary and military talent of an elephant in his later years, served as a pillar of the state, and was named the governor of Qinghe County.

古文：史臣曰：自三方鼎峙，群雄竞逐，俊能驰骛，各吠非主。
现代文：史臣曰：自从三方鼎立对峙，群雄竞争奔逐，俊士能人都在奔走，各自为了自己的主人。
English: Shichen said: Since the confrontation between the three parties, the heroes have been competing, and the good men have been running, each for their own master.

古文：争奋厉其智勇，思赴蹈于仁义。
现代文：争着振奋磨砺他们的才智勇气，考虑赴汤蹈火到仁义中去。
English: They are eager to sharpen their talents and courage, and are willing to go through fire and water to pursue righteousness.

古文：临危不顾，前哲所难。
现代文：面临危险也不顾及，这是前代贤哲难以做到的。
English: In the face of danger, they do not care, which is difficult for the previous generation of sages.

古文：赵善等或行彰于孝友，或诚显于忠概，咸躬志力，俱徇功名。
现代文：赵善等人有的在孝友方面行为昭彰，有的在忠贞方面诚心明显，都亲自献出心志力量，一起为功名献身。
English: Zhao Shan and others, some of whom are outstanding in filial piety, and some of whom are sincere in loyalty, have personally dedicated their willpower and devoted themselves to the cause.

古文：兵凶战危，城孤援绝。
现代文：战事凶险战争危难，城池孤守，救援断绝。
English: The war is dangerous, the war is in danger, the city is alone, and the rescue is cut off.

古文：杨敷、赵善，类庞德之势穷；元定、裴宽，同黄权之无路。
现代文：杨敷、赵善，类似庞德的势力困窘；元定、裴宽，如同黄权的走投无路。
English: Yang Shiki, Zhao Shan, similar to Pound's power predicament; Yuan Ding, Pei Kuan, like Huang Quan's cornered.

古文：王旅不振，非其罪也。
现代文：皇家的军队不振作，不是他们的罪遇。
English: It is not the fault of the royal army that they are not energetic.

古文：敷少而慷慨，终能立节，仁而有勇，其最优乎。
现代文：杨敷年少时为人慷慨，最终能够树立节操，仁爱而勇敢，大概是最优秀的吧。
English: When he was young, Yang Jiki was a generous person, eventually able to establish discipline, benevolence and courage, probably the best.

古文：杨摽屡有奇功，狃于数胜，轻敌无备，兵破身囚，未能远谋，良可嗟矣。
现代文：杨摽屡次立有奇功，习惯于多次取胜，轻视敌人，毫无戒备，以致兵败身囚，未能作长远的考虑，真是值得嗟叹了。
English: Yang Hui repeatedly performed miraculous feats, was accustomed to repeatedly winning, despised the enemy, and was unprepared, so that he was defeated and taken prisoner, and failed to make long-term considerations. It is really worth lamenting.

古文：易曰： 师出以律，否臧凶。 传曰： 不备不虞，不可以师。 
现代文：《易经》上说： 如果失律出师，那么无论其成败，都有凶险。 《传》说： 不戒备不预料，不能出师。 
English: "I Ching" says: "If an ill-regulated person becomes a disciple, then no matter whether he succeeds or fails, there will be grave danger." "Zhuan" says: "If you are not prepared and do not expect, you cannot become a disciple."

古文：其杨摽之谓也？
现代文：这大概是说杨摽吧?
English: This is probably about Yang Mi, isn't it?

