古文：吕大防，字微仲，其先汲郡人。
现代文：吕大防字微仲，他的先辈是汲郡人。
English: His forebear was a native of Kumo County.

古文：祖通，太常博士。
现代文：祖父吕通，太常博士。
English: His grandfather, Lütong, was a doctor.

古文：父贲，比部郎中。
现代文：父亲吕贲，比部郎中。
English: His father, Lü Qi, was a middle child of Hibe.

古文：通葬京兆蓝田，遂家焉。
现代文：吕通葬在京兆蓝田，于是定居在这里。
English: Lütong was buried in Lantian, Beijing, so he settled here.

古文：大防进士及第，调冯翊主簿、永寿令。
现代文：大防进士及第，调任冯翊主簿、永寿县令。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Dahejinji (大防进士) and Daiji (大防进士) and transferred to the position of Fengye's chief secretary and Yongshou County magistrate.

古文：县无井，远汲于涧，大防行近境，得二泉，欲导而入县，地势高下，众疑无成理。
现代文：永寿县没有井，人们要到很远的山谷去汲水，大防巡行近境，得到二泉，打算疏导而使之进入永寿县，因地势高低不平，众人怀疑没有成功的道理。
English: There is no well in Yongshou County. People have to go to a far-away valley to draw water. The Great Wall patrols the vicinity, obtains two springs, and intends to guide them into Yongshou County. Due to the uneven terrain, many people suspect that there is no reason for success.

古文：大防用《考工》水地置泉之法以准之，不旬日，果疏为渠，民赖之，号曰 吕公泉 。
现代文：大防采用《考工》中的水地置泉法来使之水平，不到十天，果然疏导为渠，百姓依赖，号称 吕公泉 。
English: Dafo adopted the method of placing a spring on the ground to make it level. In less than ten days, it was successfully diverted into a canal, and the people relied on it. It is known as Lugang Spring.

古文：迁著作佐郎、知青城县。
现代文：升任著作佐郎、知青城县。
English: Promoted to Shoseki Saro, Chiseijo.

古文：故时，圭田粟入以大斗而出以公斗，获利三倍，民虽病不敢诉。
现代文：以前，祭田粟米用大斗收进而用公斗放出，获三倍之利，百姓虽然不满，但不敢上诉。
English: In the past, the sacrificial field corn was harvested with a large bucket and then released with a bucket, gaining three times the profit. Although the people were dissatisfied, they did not dare to appeal.

古文：大防始均出纳以平其直，事转闻，诏立法禁，命一路悉输租于官概给之。
现代文：大防开始均定放出纳进以平均其值，此事转传给皇帝，诏令立定法禁，命一路全输送租给官府，用概器给还。
English: At the beginning of the Great Defense, it was decided to release the amount of subsidy evenly to average its value. The matter was passed on to the emperor, who issued a decree to establish a legal ban, and ordered all the way to transfer the rent to the government, and to return it with a general instrument.

古文：青城外控汶川，与敌相接。
现代文：青城县外控汶川，与敌人相接。
English: Wenchuan, Qingcheng County, is under foreign control and is in close contact with the enemy.

古文：大防据要置逻，密为之防，禁山之樵采，以严障蔽。
现代文：大防占据要地设置巡逻，秘密设防，禁止上山砍柴采摘，以严障碍屏蔽。
English: Patrols have been set up to occupy important areas of the Great Wall, secret fortifications have been set up, it is forbidden to go up the mountain to cut and collect firewood, and it is shielded by strict barriers.

古文：韩绛镇蜀，称其有王佐才。
现代文：韩绛镇守蜀州，称大防有佐辅帝王创业治国的才能。
English: Han Yu Zhen, the governor of Shuzhou, said that Dafo had the talent of Emperor Zuoying to start a business and govern the country.

古文：入权盐铁判官。
现代文：入朝暂代盐铁判官。
English: Entered the imperial court as the temporary judge of salt and iron.

古文：英宗即位，改太常博士。
现代文：英宗即皇帝位，改任太常博士。
English: Yingzong became emperor, and changed his title to Doctor Taizang.

古文：御史阙，内出大防与范纯仁姓名，命为监察御史里行。
现代文：御史空缺，内廷出示大防与范纯仁的姓名，任命他为监察御史里行。
English: The position of Imperial Historian was vacant, and the Inner Court presented the names of Dao and Fan Chunren, and appointed him as the supervisor of the Imperial Historian.

古文：首言： 纪纲赏罚，未厌四方之望者有五：进用大臣而权不归上；大臣疲老而不得时退；外国骄蹇而不择将帅；议论之臣裨益阙失，而大臣沮之；疆场左右之臣，有败事而被赏、举职而获罪者。 又言： 富弼病足请解机务，章十余上而不纳；张昪年几八十，聪明已耗，哀乞骸骨而不从；吴奎有三年之丧，以其子召之者再，遣使召之者又再；程戡辞老不能守边，恐死塞上，免以尸柩还家为请，亦不许。
现代文：大防首先说： 纪纲赏罚，不适合天下希望的有五：进用大臣但权不归皇帝；大臣疲倦年老但不能按时引退；外国傲慢但不挑选将帅；提出建议的臣子对朝政阙失有所裨益但执政大臣压制他；疆场左右大臣，有败事却被奖赏，推荐官员却获罪的。 又说： 富弼有脚病请求解除重要的行政职务，十几次上奏章却不被接纳；张年近八十，智慧已经耗尽，哀请退休却不同意；吴奎有三年守丧期，又以其子召他回朝，又再次派使臣召他；程戡因年老不能守边辞谢，担心死在边塞上，请求罢免回家，也不答应。
English: First of all, the Defense Minister said: There are five rewards and punishments in the disciplinary system that are not suitable for the world's hope: the minister is promoted but the power does not return to the emperor; the minister is tired and old but cannot retire on time; the foreign country is arrogant but does not select the general; the vassal who makes a suggestion is beneficial to the loss of the imperial government but the ruling minister suppresses him; the minister around the battlefield has a defeat but is rewarded, and the recommended official is guilty. He also said: Fugu has foot disease and requests to be relieved of important administrative duties, but is not accepted more than a dozen times; Zhang is nearly eighty years old

古文：陛下欲尽君臣之分，使病者得休，丧者得终，老者得尽其余年，则进退尽礼，亦何必过为虚饰，使四人之诚，不得自达邪？ 
现代文：陛下想要尽君臣的本分，使病者得以休息，守丧者得以终丧，老者得以尽其余年，那么进退尽礼，也何必过分为虚饰，使得他们四人的诚心，不得自达呢？ 
English: If His Majesty wants to do his duty as a monarch and a minister, so that the sick can rest, the mourners can die, and the elderly can live out the rest of their years, then why not go through the motions, so that the sincerity of the four of them is not self-defeating?

古文：是岁，京师大水，大防曰： 雨水之患，至入宫城庐舍，杀人害物，此阴阳之沴也。 即陈八事，曰：主威不立，臣权太盛，邪议干正，私恩害公，辽、夏连谋，盗贼恣行，群情失职，刑罚失平。
现代文：当年，京师发大水，大防说 ：雨水之患，至于进入宫城房舍，杀人害物，这是因阴阳不和而发生的灾害。 立即陈述八件事，叫作：皇帝的威严没有树立，臣权太盛，邪议冒犯正义，私恩妨害公正，辽、夏联合谋划，盗贼横行，群情失职，刑罚有失公平。
English: In that year, when the capital of China was flooded, the Great Protector said, "Rainwater is a disaster. As for entering the buildings of Miyagi, murderous pests, this is a disaster caused by the discord between yin and yang. Immediately state eight things, called: the emperor's majesty is not established, the sovereignty is too strong, the evil discussion offends justice, the private favor obstructs justice, the Liao and Xia jointly plan, the thieves are rampant, the group situation is derelict in duty, and the punishment is unfair.

古文：会执政议濮王称考，大防上言： 先帝起陛下为皇子，馆于宫中，凭几之命，绪言在耳，皇天后土，实知所托。
现代文：恰逢执政大臣讨论濮王称考，大防上言： 先帝起用陛下为皇子，住在宫中，凭几之命，已发而未尽的言论就在耳边，皇天后土，实在知其所托。
English: At the same time as the ruling ministers were discussing the examination of the king, the defense minister said: The former emperor appointed His Majesty as the prince, lived in the palace, and with a few orders, the words that have been issued and not yet exhausted are in the ear, and the empress dowager really knows what she has entrusted.

古文：设使先帝万寿，陛下犹为皇子，则安懿之称伯，于理不疑。
现代文：假使先帝不死，陛下还是皇子，那么安懿称伯，在义理上没有疑问。
English: Assuming that the former emperor does not die and that his majesty is still the prince, then there is no doubt in the sense of justice that he will be called a great-grandfather.

古文：岂可生以为子，没而背之哉？
现代文：难道能够生前作为儿子，死后而背叛吗？
English: Is it possible to be a son in life and a traitor in death?

古文：夫人君临御之始，宜有至公大义厌服天下，以结其心。
现代文：大概人君即皇帝位的初始，应有至公大义压服天下，以结交人心。
English: It is likely that at the beginning of the emperor's reign, there should have been a great public interest in conquering the world in order to win the hearts of the people.

古文：今大臣首欲加王以非正之号，使陛下顾私恩而违公义，非所以结天下之心也。 章累十数上，出知休宁县。
现代文：现在大臣想要加王以非正统称号，使陛下顾恋私恩而违背公义，这不是结交天下人心的办法。 奏章几十次上呈，出知休宁县。
English: Now the minister wants to give the king an unorthodox title, so that his majesty will violate justice out of selfishness, which is not a way to win the hearts and minds of the world.

古文：神宗立，通判淄州。
现代文：神宗即位，大防任淄州通判。
English: Shenzong ascended to the throne, and Dafo was appointed as the magistrate of Bozhou.

古文：熙宁元年，知泗州，为河北转运副使。
现代文：熙宁元年，知泗州，为河北转运副使。
English: In the first year of Xi'ning, he was the deputy envoy of Hebei transshipment for Zhili Prefecture.

古文：召直舍人院。
现代文：召为直舍人院。
English: It was called the Jikiseiren-in.

古文：韩绛宣抚陕西，命为判官，又兼河东宣抚判官，除知制诰。
现代文：韩绛为陕西宣抚使，命他为判官，又兼河东宣抚判官，被任命为知制诰。
English: Han Qi was the Shaanxi proclamation envoy, he was appointed as the judge, and he was also the judge of the proclamation in Hedong, and he was appointed as the governor of Zhizhe.

古文：四年，知廷州。
现代文：熙宁四年，知延州。
English: Xi Ning, four years old, from Chiyan Prefecture.

古文：大防、昉欲城河外荒堆砦，众谓不可守，大防留戍兵修堡障，有不从者斩以徇。
现代文：大防开始打算在黄河外荒堆砦筑城，众人认为不可防守，大防就留戍兵修建堡垒屏障，有不听从的斩首示众。
English: The Great Defense began to plan to build a fortress on a barren heap outside the Yellow River. Everyone thought that it could not be defended, so the Great Defense kept the soldiers to build a fortress barrier. Those who did not obey were beheaded.

古文：会环庆兵乱，绛坐黜，大防亦落知制诰，以太常博士知临江军。
现代文：恰逢环庆兵乱，韩绛因之被贬官，大防也落职知制诰，以太常博士的身份知临江军。
English: It coincided with the Huanqing Rebellion, for which Han Zheng was demoted, and the Great Defense was also demoted, and the Linjiang Army knew the identity of Dr. Tai Chang.

古文：数月，徙知华州。
现代文：几个月后，移知华州。
English: A few months later, he moved to Huazhou.

古文：华岳摧，自山属渭河，被害者众。
现代文：华岳崩裂，泥石从山下倾注渭河，被害的人很多。
English: Mount Hua cracked, and mud and rock poured down the mountain into the Wei River, causing many casualties.

古文：大防奏疏，援经质史，以验时事。
现代文：大防上奏分条陈述，援引经典质以史实，以验当时之事。
English: The Great Defense is presented in the form of a narrative, invoking the classics and historical facts to examine the events of the time.

古文：其略曰：  畏天之威，于时保之。
现代文：其大略说：  畏惧天的威严，于时保之。 
English: It roughly says: Fear the majesty of heaven, and you will be safe.

古文：先王所以兴也；我生不有命在天，后王所以坏也。
现代文：这是先王所以兴盛的原因 ；我生不有命在天 ，这是后来王者所以败坏的原因。
English: This was the reason for the prosperity of the former king; whether I live or die is up to heaven, and this is the reason for the corruption of the later king.

古文：《书》云： 惟先格王，正厥事。
现代文：《书》说 ：惟有先纠正国王，才能端正此事。 
English: "The Book" says: Only by correcting the king first can this matter be rectified.

古文：愿仰承天威，俯酌时变，为社稷至计。 除龙图阁待制、知秦州。
现代文：希望仰承天威，俯身斟酌时事的变化，替社稷至为计议。 被任命为龙图阁待制、秦州知州。
English: Hoping to follow the will of heaven, bowing down to consider the changes in current affairs, and acting as the representative of the company, he was appointed as the chairman of Longtuge, Qinzhou and Chizhou.

古文：元丰初，徙永兴。
现代文：元丰初年，移任永兴军。
English: In the first year of Yuanfeng, he was transferred to Yongxing Army.

古文：神宗以彗星求言，大防陈三说九宜：曰治本，曰缓末，曰纳言。
现代文：神宗因彗星出现求言，大防陈述三说九宜：曰治本、曰缓末、曰纳言。
English: Shenzong asked for advice due to the appearance of the comet, and the great defense statement said that there were three things that should be done: saying that the cause should be cured, saying that it should be delayed, and saying that it should be recommended.

古文：养民、教士、重谷，治本之宜三也；治边、治兵，缓末之宜二也；广受言之路，宽侵官之罚，恕诽谤之罪，容异同之论，此纳言之宜四也。
现代文：养民、教士、重谷，这三者是治本之宜；治边、治兵，这二者是缓末之宜；广开受言之路，宽大侵官的惩罚，宽恕诽谤的罪行，宽容不同的、相同的意见，这四者是纳言之宜。
English: Feeding the people, the clergy, and Shigetani, these three are to deal with the root cause; governing the border and the army, these two are to delay the end; widening the road of being talked about, lenient punishment of officials, forgiving the crime of slander, and tolerating different and the same opinions, these four are to be said.

古文：累数千言。
现代文：累计数千言。
English: Thousands of words in total.

古文：时用兵西夏，调度百出，有不便者辄上闻，务在宽民。
现代文：当时对西夏用兵，调度百出，有不方便的大防往往向朝廷报告，务在宽民。
English: At that time, soldiers were used in Western Xia, and there was a lot of scheduling. If there was an inconvenient large defense, it was often reported to the imperial court, and it was up to the general public.

古文：及兵罢，民力比他路为饶，供亿军须亦无乏绝。
现代文：等到兵事解除，华州民力比其他路富饶，军需供应也不缺乏。
English: By the time the draft was lifted, Washington had more manpower than any other state, and there was no shortage of military supplies.

古文：进直学士。
现代文：进官直学士。
English: Straight A's for promotion.

古文：居数年，知成都府。
现代文：居位数年，任成都府知府。
English: He held the position for several years and was appointed as the prefect of Chengdu.

古文：哲宗即位，召为翰林学士、权开封府。
现代文：哲宗即皇帝位，召大防为翰林学士、权开封府。
English: Zhezong, that is, the emperor, summoned Dafo to be a scholar of Hanlin, and the right to open the fief.

古文：有僧诳民取财，因讼至廷下。
现代文：有僧人欺骗百姓骗取资财，因而诉讼到朝廷。
English: A monk defrauded the people of money and property, and the case went to the imperial court.

古文：验治得情，命抱具狱，即其所杖之，他挟奸者皆遁去。
现代文：验证得到实情，命令拘系成立狱案，就在僧人住所施以杖刑，其他怀藏奸心的人都逃走。
English: After verifying the facts, he ordered the detention department to set up a prison case, and the monk's residence was punished with a cane. Other people harboring evil intentions fled.

古文：馆伴契丹使，其使黠，语颇及朝廷，大防密擿其隐事，诘之曰： 北朝试进士《至心独运赋》，不知此题于书何出？ 使错遌不能对，自是不敢复出嫚词。
现代文：曾相伴契丹使者。契丹使者狡黠，说话很多涉及到朝廷，大防秘密揭发他的隐秘事，诘问契丹使者说： 北朝考试进士《至心独运赋》，不知此题出自什么书？ 使者仓猝惊诧不能对答，从此不敢再口出傲慢之词。
English: He was once accompanied by the emissary of the Khitan Empire. The emissary of the Khitan Empire was cunning and spoke a lot about the imperial court, and the Great Guard secretly revealed his secrets. He asked the emissary of the Khitan Empire, "I don't know what book this question is from, but it's from the Northern Dynasty's examination candidate, "The Heart of Independence." The emissary was surprised and could not answer, and from then on, he dared not utter arrogant words.

古文：迁吏部尚书。
现代文：大防升任吏部尚书。
English: He was also promoted to the post of secretary.

古文：夏使来，诏访以待遇之计，且曰： 向者所得边地，虽建立城堡，终虑孤绝难保。
现代文：西夏使者来，诏令访询以待遇之计，而且说： 过去所得边地，虽然建立城堡，终虑孤绝难保。
English: The envoys from Western Xia came, and the emperor ordered the inquiry to be carried out as a matter of treatment, and said: The marginal land obtained in the past, although the castle was built, was ultimately isolated and difficult to protect.

古文：弃之则弱国，守之又有后悔，为当奈何？ 大防言： 夏本无能为，然屡遣使而不布诚款者，盖料我急于议和耳。
现代文：放弃它则削弱国家，守住它又有后悔，该当如何做呢？ 大防说 ：西夏本来无能为力，但多次派使者而不宣布诚心真意的原因，大概是料到我方急于议和而已。
English: To give it up would weaken the country, but to keep it would be regrettable, so what should be done? Dafo said: Xixia was powerless to do anything, but the reason why he repeatedly sent envoys without declaring his sincerity and true intentions was probably because he expected that we would be eager to negotiate.

古文：今使者到阙，宜令押伴臣僚，扣其不贺登极，以观厥意，足以测情伪矣。
现代文：现在使者到达朝廷，应令押伴官员，扣住他不让祝贺登皇帝位，以观其意，这足以推测事情的真假了。
English: Now that the envoy has arrived at the imperial court, the escorting officials should be ordered to detain him to prevent him from congratulating the enthronement of the emperor, and to observe his thoughts. This is enough to speculate on the truth or falsity of the matter.

古文：新收疆土，议者多言可弃，此虑之不熟也。
现代文：刚收复的疆土，议论的人多说可以放弃，这种考虑不成熟。
English: Most people who discuss the newly recovered territory say that it can be given up. This kind of consideration is not mature.

古文：至于守御之策，惟择将帅为先。
现代文：至于守御的办法，惟以选择将帅为先。
English: As for how to defend, the first thing to do is to choose a captain.

古文：太祖用姚内斌、董遵诲守环、庆，西人不敢入侵。
现代文：太祖任用姚内斌、董遵诲防守环、庆州，西夏人不敢入侵。
English: The great ancestor appointed Yao Neibin and Dong Zunyi to defend the ring and Gyeongju, and the Xixia people dared not invade.

古文：昔以二州之力，御敌而有余；今以九州之大，奉边而不足。
现代文：过去以二州的力量，御敌而有余；现在以九州之广大，供奉边地而不足。
English: In the past, the strength of the two states was more than enough to defeat the enemy; now, the vastness of Kyushu is not enough to defeat the enemy.

古文：由是言之，在于得人而已。 元祐元年，拜尚书右丞，进中书侍郎，封汲郡公。
现代文：由此说来，在于得人而已。 元祐元年，被授予尚书右丞，进中书侍郎，封汲郡公。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Shang Shuyujo (尚書右丞), the title of Jin Zhongshuizhiro (进中書侍郎), and the title of Fongqu County Gong (封汲郡公).

古文：西方息兵，青唐羌以为中国怯，使大将鬼章青宜结犯边。
现代文：西边停止打仗，青唐羌认为中国怯懦，派大将鬼章青宜结进犯边境。
English: When the West stopped fighting, Qing Tang Yao thought that China was cowardly and sent the general Qizhang Qing Yi to invade the border.

古文：大防命洮州诸将乘间致讨，生擒之。
现代文：大防命洮州众将乘机致讨，活捉了鬼章青宜结。
English: The people of Bozhou, who are on high alert, will take the opportunity to discuss the matter and capture the ghost Zhang Qingyi.

古文：三年，吕公著告老，宣仁后欲留之京师。
现代文：元祐三年，吕公著年老告退，宣仁皇太后想要把他留在京城开封。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, Lu Gongzhao retired due to old age, and Empress Dowager Xuanren wanted to keep him in Beijing and Kaifeng.

古文：手札密访至于四五，超拜大防尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，提举修《神宗实录》。
现代文：亲手写信密访至于四五次，越级提拔大防为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，提举修撰《神宗实录》。
English: As for the four or five times that he personally wrote secret letters and made secret visits, he was promoted to the rank of Shoshu's left-hand servant, Shaku, as well as his manservant, and was appointed to compile "The True Record of the Shenzong."

古文：大防见哲宗年益壮，日以进学为急，请敕讲读官取仁宗迩英御书解释上之，置于坐右。
现代文：大防见哲宗年纪日大，每天以进学为急务，请敕令讲读官取仁宗迩英殿御书解释呈上，放在哲宗座位的右边。
English: Seeing that Tetsuzo was getting older and taking his studies as an urgent task every day, Daho ordered the reading officer to take the explanation of the book from the Ninsong Yingden and place it on the right side of Tetsuzo's seat.

古文：又摭乾兴以来四十一事足以为劝戒者，分上下篇，标曰《仁祖圣学》，使人主有欣慕不足之意。
现代文：又摘录乾兴以来足以作为劝戒的四十一事，分为上下两篇，标题叫《仁祖圣学》，使哲宗有欣慕不满足的想法。
English: It also excerpts the forty-one things that have been sufficient as exhortations since the time of Emperor Qianxing, and is divided into two parts, the title of which is "Renzu Sectology," which makes Zhezong have the idea of admiration and dissatisfaction.

古文：哲宗御迩英阁，召宰执、讲读官读《宝训》，至 汉武帝籍南山提封为上林苑，仁宗曰： 山泽之利当与众共之，何用此也。
现代文：哲宗御驾迩英殿，召来执政大臣、讲读官读《宝训》，读到 汉武帝征用南山提封为上林苑 ，仁宗说 ：山泽之利应与大家共同拥有，这没什么必要。 
English: Zhezong drove to the Shunying Hall, summoned the ruling minister, and the lecturer read the "Homilies," and read that Emperor Hanwu requisitioned the Nanshan Tifeng for Shanglin Yuan. Renzong said, "The profits of the mountains and rivers should be jointly owned by everyone, this is not necessary."

古文：丁度曰： 臣事陛下二十年，每奉德音，未始不及于忧勤，此盖祖宗家法尔。 大防因推广祖宗家法以进，曰： 自三代以后，唯本朝百二十年中外无事，盖由祖宗所立家法最善，臣请举其略。
现代文：丁度说： 我事奉陛下二十年，每奉诏命，还没有不涉及到忧劳勤政的，这大概是祖宗家法吧。 大防因而推广祖宗家法以进呈，说 ：从三代以后，只有本朝一百二十年中外无事。这是由于祖宗所立的家法最好，我请求举其大概。
English: Just said: I have been serving Your Majesty for twenty years, and every time I receive an imperial order, there is no one who is not involved in hard work and diligence, which is probably the ancestral family law. Dao therefore promoted the ancestral family law to present, saying: After three generations, only this dynasty has been without incident for one hundred and twenty years. This is because the family law established by the ancestors is the best, I would like to ask for a rough estimate.

古文：自古人主事母后，朝见有时，如汉武帝五日一朝长乐宫；祖宗以来事母后，皆朝夕见，此事亲之法也。
现代文：自古以来皇帝事奉母后，不定时朝见，如汉武帝五天一朝长乐宫。祖宗以来事奉母后，都是早晚朝见，这是事亲之法。
English: Since ancient times, emperors have served their mothers and met in the morning at irregular times, such as Emperor Hanwu's five-day visit to Changle Palace. Since the ancestors served their mothers, they have met in the morning and evening, which is the way of relatives.

古文：前代大长公主用臣妾之礼；本朝必先致恭，仁宗以姪事姑之礼见献穆大长公主，此事长之法也。
现代文：前代大长公主使用臣妾之礼，本朝必先致献恭辞，仁宗以侄儿的身份事姑母之礼见献穆大长公主，这是事奉长辈之法。
English: The previous generation of the eldest princess used the courtesy of the vassal and concubine, and this generation must first offer a compliment, and Rinzong, as a nephew, saw the courtesy of the aunt and offered it to the eldest princess, which is the way to serve the elders.

古文：前代宫闱多不肃，宫人或与廷臣相见，唐入阁图有昭容位；本朝宫禁严密，内外整肃，此治内之法也。
现代文：前代后妃所居之处多不整肃，宫人有时与朝廷大臣相见，唐代宫人入阁图有昭容位。本朝宫禁严密，内外整肃，这是治理内廷之法。
English: Most of the places where the empresses of the previous generation and the empresses of the next generation lived were not tidied up, the courtiers sometimes met with the ministers of the imperial court, and the courtiers of the Tang Dynasty entered the cabinet. This imperial palace is strictly forbidden, and it is tidied up inside and outside, which is the law governing the inner court.

古文：前代外戚多预政事，常致败乱；本朝母后之族皆不预，此待外戚之法也。
现代文：前代外戚多干预政事，常常导致败乱。本朝母后之族都不参预政事，这是对待外戚之法。
English: The previous generation of maternal relatives often intervened in political affairs, which often led to chaos. This dynasty's maternal relatives did not participate in political affairs, which is the way to treat maternal relatives.

古文：前代宫室多尚华侈；本朝宫殿止用赤白，此尚俭之法也。
现代文：前代皇帝虽在禁宫，但出入都坐轿。我祖宗都步行从内庭出御后殿。
English: Although the previous emperor was in the Forbidden City, he entered and left in a sedan chair. My ancestors walked from the inner court to the inner court.

古文：前代人君虽在宫禁，出舆入辇；祖宗皆步自内庭，出御后殿，岂乏人力哉，亦欲涉历广庭，稍冒寒暑，此勤身之法也。前代人主，在禁中冠服苟简；祖宗以来，燕居必以礼，窃闻陛下昨郊礼毕，具礼谢太皇太后，此尚礼之法也。
现代文：难道是缺乏人力吗？只是也想涉历广庭，稍稍冒寒冷暑热，这是勤身之法。前代皇帝，在禁宫中帽子衣服苟且简略。祖宗以来，闲居必定符合礼节。私下听说陛下昨天郊礼完毕后，备礼谢太皇太后，这是崇尚礼节之法。
English: Is it a lack of manpower? It's just that they also want to walk through the vast courtyard and get a little cold and hot, which is a method of diligence. The previous emperor wore a hat and simple clothes in the Forbidden City. Since the ancestors, idling must be in line with etiquette. I heard in private that after the completion of yesterday's suburban ceremony, His Majesty prepared to thank the Empress Dowager, which is a method of advocating etiquette.

古文：前代多深于用刑，大者诛戮，小者远窜；惟本朝用法最轻，臣下有罪，止于罢黜，此宽仁之法也。
现代文：前代多严于用刑，大者杀戮，小者流窜远地。只有本朝使用刑法最轻，臣下有罪，只是免职贬官，这是宽厚仁政之法。
English: The previous generation was much stricter on the use of punishment. The big ones killed, and the small ones went far away. Only this dynasty used the criminal law the least. If a vassal was guilty, he was only dismissed and demoted. This was the law of lenient and benevolent government.

古文：至于虚己纳谏，不好畋猎，不尚玩好，不用玉器，不贵异味，此皆祖宗家法，所以致太平者。
现代文：至于虚己纳谏，不好打猎，不崇尚玩味研习，不使用玉器，不贵珍奇异味，这都是祖宗家法，之所以致太平的原因。
English: As for the false self-conceit, it is not good to hunt, it does not advocate the study of play, it does not use jade, it is not precious and strange, these are the reasons for the ancestral family law to cause peace.

古文：陛下不须远法前代，但尽行家法，足以为天下。 哲宗甚然之。
现代文：陛下不必远远效法前代，只要尽行家法，足以为天下。 哲宗很赞同。
English: His Majesty does not have to follow the example of his predecessors, as long as he practices the family law, it is enough for the world. Tetsuzo agrees.

古文：大防朴厚惷直，不植党朋，与范纯仁并位，同心戮力，以相王室。
现代文：大防朴实厚道憨直，不树朋党，与范纯仁同时为相，同心协力，来辅佐王室。
English: Dafo was unpretentious, virtuous and upright, and did not join any party. He and Fan Chunren worked together to support the royal family.

古文：立朝挺挺，进退百官，不可干以私，不市恩嫁怨以邀声誉，凡八年，始终如一。
现代文：在朝正直，进用贬退百官，不以私心干预，不讨好转嫁怨恨，以希求声誉，一共八年，始终如一。
English: For a total of eight years, it has been consistent to be honest in the DPRK, to make use of disparaging officials, not to interfere with selfishness, not to please and pass on resentment, and to seek reputation.

古文：恳乞避位，宣仁后曰： 上方富于春秋，公未可即去，少须岁月，吾亦就东朝矣。 未果而后崩。
现代文：恳请避相位，宣仁太后说： 皇帝正是壮年，您不可以就离开，稍等一年半载，我也就该到太后所应居的东朝去了。 没有实行而太后去世。
English: The empress dowager, Xuanren, pleaded with him to stay out of the limelight, saying, "The emperor is in his prime, you can't just leave, wait a year and a half, I should also go to the Eastern Court, where the empress dowager should live.

古文：为山陵使，复命以观文殿大学士、左光禄大夫知颍昌府。
现代文：大防为山陵使，又命他以观文殿大学士、左光禄大夫的身份知颍昌府。
English: Dafo was the envoy of the mausoleum, and he was also ordered to visit Junchangfu as a scholar of the University of Literature and Culture and a doctor of the Western Han Dynasty.

古文：寻改永兴军，使便其乡社。
现代文：不久改任永兴军，使方便他的乡社。
English: He was soon transferred to the Yongxing Army to make his hometown more convenient.

古文：入辞，哲宗劳慰甚渥，曰： 卿暂归故乡，行即召矣。 未几，左正言上官均论其隳坏役法，右正言张商英、御史周秩、刘拯相继攻之，夺学士，知随州，贬秘书监，分司南京，居郢州。
现代文：入朝辞谢，哲宗对他慰劳很优厚，说： 你暂归故乡，将马上召用。 不久，左正言上官均论大防败坏役法，右正言张商英，御史周秩、刘拯相继攻击他，被削去学士，任随州知州，贬为秘书监，分掌南京，居住郢州。
English: Soon, the left mandarin, Shang Guanjun, attacked him about the "great prevention of defeat and bad service method," the right mandarin, Zhang Shangying, the imperial historian, Zhou Ritchie, and Liu Zheng attacked him one after another, and he was stripped of his bachelor's degree, appointed to Suzhou and Zhizhou, demoted to secretary supervisor, put in charge of Nanjing, and lived in Zhangzhou.

古文：言者又以修《神宗实录》直书其事为诬诋，徙安州。
现代文：言官又以他主修《神宗实录》直书其事为诬蔑诋毁，迁居安州。
English: The official also slandered and slandered him by saying that he majored in "The True Record of the Shenzong" and moved to Anzhou.

古文：兄大忠自渭入对，哲宗询大防安否，且曰： 执政欲迁诸岭南，朕独令处安陆，为朕寄声问之。
现代文：兄长吕大忠从渭州入朝应对，哲宗询问大防是否平安，而且说： 执政大臣想要把他迁移到岭南，朕独令居住安陆，替朕传话问候他。
English: In response to his elder brother Lü Dazhong's entry into the North from Bozhou, Zhezong inquired whether Daguo was safe, and said: The ruling minister wants to relocate him to Lingnan, I will live alone and send greetings to him for me.

古文：大防朴直，为人所卖，三二年可复相见也。 大忠泄其语于章惇，惇惧，绳之愈力。
现代文：大防朴实正直被人所叛卖，三二年后可以再相见。 大忠把哲宗的话泄露给章，章恐惧，惩治更加卖力。
English: Dafo Naive and Honest was betrayed by someone, and they can meet again in three or two years. Dazhong leaked Zhezong's words to Zhang, Zhang was afraid, and punished him even harder.

古文：绍圣四年，遂贬舒州团练副使，安置循州。
现代文：绍圣四年，于是贬为舒州团练副使，指定在循州居住。
English: Shaosheng for four years, then reduced to Shuzhou group training deputy envoy, designated to live in Shuzhou.

古文：至虔州信丰而病，语其子景山曰： 吾不复南矣！
现代文：大防到达虔州信丰而生病，告诉他的儿子吕景山说 ：我不再向南了！
English: When the Great Protector arrived at Kenzhou Xinfeng and fell ill, he told his son Lü Jingshan: "I will no longer go south!"

古文：吾死汝归，吕氏尚有遗种。 遂薨，年七十一。
现代文：我死后你回去，吕氏还有传人。 于是去世，终年七十一岁。
English: After my death, you went back, and there were still descendants of the Lü clan. So he passed away, at the age of seventy-one.

古文：大忠请归葬，许之。
现代文：大忠请求把大防归葬，得到允许。
English: Daizhong requested that Daifo be buried and was granted permission.

古文：大防身长七尺，眉目秀发，声音如钟。
现代文：大防身高七尺，眉目秀发，声如洪钟。
English: He is seven feet tall, with a handsome face and hair, and a booming voice.

古文：自少持重，无嗜好，过市不左右游目，燕居如对宾客。
现代文：从小端肃稳重，没有嗜好，经过街市眼睛不斜视，闲居像接待宾客一样。
English: From the small end, they are sober and steady, have no hobbies, do not squint their eyes when passing through the street market, and live idly like receiving guests.

古文：每朝会，威仪翼如，神宗常目送之。
现代文：每次朝会，威容仪表敬肃，神宗常常目送他。
English: At every imperial court meeting, he was always dignified and solemn, and Shintsune often saw him off.

古文：与大忠及弟大临同居，相切磋论道考礼，冠昏丧祭，一本于古，关中言《礼》学者推吕氏。
现代文：与大忠及弟弟大临同住，相与切磋论道考礼，弱冠婚姻丧祭全部本于古代，关中地区言《礼》学的当推吕氏。
English: He lived with Daizhong and his younger brother Dazhong, and the two of them discussed the etiquette of the Dao examination, and the marriage and funeral rites of the weak crown were all based on ancient times. The Guanzhong dialect of "Rite" was taught by the Lu family.

古文：尝为《乡约》曰： 凡同约者，德业相劝，过失相规，礼俗相交，患难相恤，有善则书于籍，有过若违约者亦书之，三犯而行罚，不悛者绝之。 
现代文：大防曾为《乡约》说 ：凡是同约者，德业相劝，过失相规，礼俗相交，患难相恤，有善行就写在册上，有过失如违背乡约的也写上，三次犯过就实行惩罚，不改过的人绝迹。 
English: Dafo once said of the "Treaty of Hometown": All those who are in the same covenant, the virtues are to be persuaded, the faults are to be regulated, the etiquette and customs are to be intermingled, the hardships are to be pitied, the good deeds are to be written in the book, the faults are to be written if they violate the "Treaty of Hometown," the punishment is to be carried out after three offenses, and those who do not change are to be eliminated.

古文：徽宗即位，复其官。
现代文：徽宗即皇帝位，恢复大防的官职。
English: Emperor Huizong reinstated the post of Defense Minister.

古文：或谓： 君止一子，独不可少宽邪？ 居正曰： 正以一子，不可纵也。 十岁而孤，鞠于外氏，就学东平，因家焉。
现代文：高宗绍兴初年，又恢复大学士，赠太师、宣国公，谥号叫 正愍 。刘挚字莘老，永静东光人。小时候，父亲刘居正教他读书，早晚一点都不间断。有人认为： 您只有一个儿子，难道不能稍稍放宽吗？ 居正说 ：正是因为只有一个儿子，不可以放纵他。 刘挚十岁时父亲去世，由外祖父家抚养，就学于东平，因而定居在此。
English: In the first year of Gao Zong Shaoxing, he was reinstated as a university scholar, granted the title of grandmaster, proclaimed the country, and his nickname was Zheng Yao. Liu Zhiqi was the eldest, Yongjing Dongguang people. As a child, his father Liu Ju Zheng taught him to read, and he did not stop at all. Some people thought: You only have one son, can't you relax a little? Ru Zheng said: Just because you only have one son, you can't indulge him. Liu Zhiqi's father died when he was ten years old, he was raised by his grandfather's family, he studied in Dong

古文：嘉祐中，擢甲科，历冀州南宫令。
现代文：嘉祐年中，登进士甲科第，历任冀州南宫县令。
English: In the middle of the Jiayu era, he was promoted to Jia Ke Di, and successively served as the county magistrate of Nangong County, Jizhou.

古文：县比不得入，俗化凋敝，其赋甚重，输绢匹折税钱五百，绵两折钱三十，民多破产。
现代文：该县过去守令不得其人，风俗凋敝，赋税很重，输纳绢每匹折税钱五百，绵每两折钱三十，百姓多破产。
English: In the past, no one was allowed to keep order in the county, customs were fading, taxes were very heavy, 500 tax money per horse and 30 tax money per horse were lost, and many people went bankrupt.

古文：挚援例旁郡，条请裁以中价。
现代文：刘挚援引附近郡县之例，条陈请求减少到适中价格。
English: Liu Zhengyi cited the example of a nearby county and requested that the price be reduced to a reasonable price.

古文：转运使怒，将劾之。
现代文：转运使生怒，打算弹劾他。
English: They are furious and want to impeach him.

古文：挚固请曰： 独一州六邑被此苦，决非法意，但朝廷不知耳。 遂告于朝。
现代文：刘挚坚决请求说 ：唯独一州六县遭受此种苦害，这决不是礼法的原意，只是朝廷不知道罢了。 于是向朝廷报告。
English: Liu Jing firmly requested, "Only one state and six counties have suffered this kind of suffering, this is by no means the original intention of the etiquette, but the imperial court does not know about it," and then reported to the imperial court.

古文：三司使包拯奏从其议，自是绢为钱千三百，绵七十有六。
现代文：三司使包拯奏请同意刘挚的意见，从此绢一匹为钱一千三百，绵一两为钱七十六。
English: Please agree with Liu Zhengyi's opinion, from now on, one horse is worth thirteen hundred, and one or two horses are worth seventy-six.

古文：民欢呼至泣下，曰： 刘长官活我！ 是时，挚与信都令李冲、清河令黄莘皆以治行闻，人称为 河朔三令 。
现代文：百姓欢呼至于泪下，说： 是刘长官救活了我们！ 当时，刘挚与信都县令李冲、清河县令黄莘都以治绩德行著名，人们称他们为 河朔三令 。
English: At that time, Liu Zhengyi, together with Li Chong, the governor of Xindu County, and Huang Qi, the governor of Qinghe County, were famous for their performance and virtue. People called them the three governors of Hexuo.

古文：徙江陵观察推官，用韩琦荐，得馆阁校勘。
现代文：移任江陵观察推官，因韩琦推荐，得为馆阁校勘。
English: Transferred to the post of Gangneung observation officer, because of Han Zheng's recommendation, he had to become a pavilion inspector.

古文：王安石一见器异之，擢检正中书礼房，默默非所好也。
现代文：王安石一见刘挚就特别器重他，提升他为检正中书礼房，默默寡言不是王安石所喜好的。
English: As soon as Wang Anshi saw Liu Zhengyi, he attached great importance to him and promoted him to the examination room of the Middle School. Wang Anshi did not like to be silent.

古文：才月余，为监察御史里行，欣然就职，归语家人曰： 趣装，毋为安居计。 未及陛对，即奏论： 亳州狱起不止，小人意在倾富弼以市进，今弼已得罪，愿少宽之。 又言： 程昉开漳河，调发猝迫，人不堪命。
现代文：才一个多月，任监察御史里行，欣然就职，回家告诉家人说 ：赶快整理行装，不要为安居计议。 没来得及为皇帝召对，就上奏议论： 亳州狱案兴起不止，小人意在搞倒富弼以希求进用，现在富弼已经获罪，希望稍加宽待他。 又说： 程日方开漳河，调发仓猝急迫，人不堪命。
English: Just over a month later, he was appointed as the inspector of imperial history, took office with pleasure, and went home to tell his family, "Hurry up and get things in order, don't make plans for a safe place to live." Before he had time to summon the right person for the emperor, he made a speech: The Zhangzhou prison case has been on the rise, and villains have been trying to bring down Fuxi in hopes of advancing their careers. Now that Fuxi has been convicted, they hope to treat him a little more leniently. He also said, "It is unbearable for people to have to wait for the Japanese side to reopen the Diaohe

古文：赵子几擅升畿县等，使纳役钱，县民日数千人遮诉宰相，京师喧然，何以示四方？
现代文：赵子几擅自提高畿县等级，使交纳役钱，县民每天几千人遮道上诉宰相，京城喧哗，拿什么来谕示天下？
English: Zhao Ziqian arbitrarily raised the level of Kixian, made the payment of service money, the county people blocked the road of appeal to the prime minister by several thousand people every day, and the capital was noisy. What did he use to show the world?

古文：张靓、王廷老擅增两浙役钱，督赋严急，人情嗟怨。
现代文：张靓、王廷老擅自增加两浙役钱，督促赋税严厉急迫，人情叹息怨恨。
English: Zhang Ye and Wang Ting always increased two zhe yuans without authorization, urged the taxation to be strict and urgent, and the people sighed with resentment.

古文：此皆欲以羡余希赏，愿行显责，明朝廷本无聚敛之意。 
现代文：这都是想用羡余希图奖赏，希望实行重责，表明朝廷本来没有聚敛的意思。 
English: All of this is intended to use envy to seek reward and hope to carry out heavy responsibilities, indicating that the imperial court originally had no intention of gathering horses.

古文：及入见，神宗面赐褒谕。因问： 卿从学王安石邪？
现代文：回答说 ：我是东北人，从小孤苦独学，不认识王安石。 
English: He replied, "I am from the Northeast, I have been self-taught since I was a child, and I do not know Wang Anshi.

古文：安石极称卿器识。 对曰： 臣东北人，少孤独学，不识安石也。 退而上疏曰： 君子小人之分，在义利而已。
现代文：退朝而上奏疏说： 君子小人的区别，在于义与利而已。
English: The difference between a gentleman and a villain lies in righteousness and benefit.

古文：小人才非不足用，特心之所向，不在乎义。
现代文：小人的才能不是不足用，只是心里所向往的，不在乎义。
English: A villain's talent is not a lack of use, but only what his heart yearns for, regardless of righteousness.

古文：故希赏之志，每在事先；奉公之心，每在私后。
现代文：所以希求奖赏的志向，每每在事情之先；奉公之心，每每在私利之后。
English: Therefore, the desire for reward is always before things; the spirit of service is always after self-interest.

古文：陛下有劝农之意，今变而为烦扰；陛下有均役之意，今倚以为聚敛。
现代文：陛下有劝农的意思，现在变而成为烦杂扰乱；陛下有均平赋役的意思，现在依仗它来聚敛钱财。
English: His Majesty had the idea of persuading farmers, but now it has turned into a nuisance; His Majesty had the idea of equalizing taxes, but now relies on it to collect money.

古文：其有爱君之心，忧国之言者，皆无以容于其间。
现代文：其有爱君之心、忧国之言的人，都无以被容纳在其间。
English: Those who love the emperor and care about the country cannot be accommodated among them.

古文：今天下有喜于敢为，有乐于无事。
现代文：现在天下有人喜欢于敢作敢为，有人乐于安居无事。
English: Nowadays, there are people in the world who like to be daredevils, and there are people who are happy to live in peace.

古文：彼以此为流俗，此以彼为乱常。
现代文：彼以此为流俗，此以彼为乱常。
English: He has made a habit of it, and he has made a habit of it.

古文：畏义者以进取为可耻，嗜利者以守道为无能。
现代文：害怕议论的人以进取为可耻，追求利益的人以守道为无能。
English: Those who are afraid of discussion are ashamed of being enterprising, and those who pursue profit are incapable of keeping the path.

古文：此风浸成，汉、唐党祸必起矣。
现代文：此风逐渐形成，汉、唐的朋党之祸必然兴起。
English: This trend gradually took shape, and the scourge of Han and Tang cronyism inevitably arose.

古文：惟君子为能通天下之志。
现代文：只有君子能通达天下之志。
English: Only a gentleman can reach the world's aspiration.

古文：臣愿陛下虚心平听，审察好恶，前日意以为是者，今更察其非；前日意以为短者，今更用其长。
现代文：我希望陛下虚心平听，审察好恶，以前认为是对的，现觉察为不对；以前认为短处，现在改用他的长处。
English: I hope his majesty will listen with an open mind, examine his likes and dislikes, consider what he thought was right, and what he now perceives to be wrong; consider his weaknesses, and use his strengths.

古文：稍抑虚哗轻伪、志近忘远、幸于苟合之人，渐察忠厚慎重、难进易退、可与有为之士。
现代文：稍加抑制虚华轻伪、志近忘远、侥幸于苟合的人，渐渐察用忠厚慎重、难进易退、可与有为之士。
English: Those who are a little restrained from being false and frivolous, forgetful of the near and far, and lucky in sexual intercourse, gradually become loyal and prudent, difficult to advance and easy to retreat, and can be a good person.

古文：收过与不及之俗，使会于大中之道，则施设变化，惟陛下号令之而已。 
现代文：停止过分与不及的风俗；使其会聚于大中之道，那么行事变化，惟听陛下号令而已。 
English: To put an end to the customs of excess and deficiency; to unite them in the great middle way, and then to act and change only at His Majesty's bidding.

古文：又论率钱助役、官自雇人有十害，其略曰： 天下州县户役，虚实重轻不同。今等以为率，则非一法所能齐；随其所宜，各自立法，则纷扰散殊，何以统率？
现代文：又论率钱助役，官府自己雇人有十害，其大略说： 天下州县户役，虚实轻重不同，现在划分等级作为标准，那么这不是一条法令所能够齐平的；随其所宜，各自立法，那么纷乱分散各异，怎么去统领呢？
English: On the subject of tax-payer-funded domestic helpers, the government's own hiring of people is ten times more harmful, which roughly says: Household servants in counties and prefectures around the world have different weights and measures, and now classifications are used as a standard, so this is not something that can be leveled out by a single decree; how can they be governed by their own legislation as they see fit, when they are so scattered and disparate?

古文：一也。
现代文：这是第一。
English: So he gave it a thumbs down.

古文：新法谓版籍不实，故令别立等第。
现代文：新法认为版籍不实，所以令另外立等级。
English: The new law believes that the copyright is not true, so it is ordered to set up a separate grade.

古文：且旧籍既不可信，今何以得其无失？
现代文：况且旧有的户籍既然不可信，现在怎么能没有失误呢？
English: Moreover, since the old household registration cannot be trusted, how can there be no mistakes now?

古文：不独搔扰生事患，将使富输少，贫输多，二也。
现代文：不仅仅骚扰惹起祸患，而且将使富户少交，贫户多交，这是第二。
English: This is the second: not only will the harassment cause trouble, but it will also make the rich less friendly and the poor more friendly.

古文：天下上户少，中户多。
现代文：天下上等户少，中等户多。
English: There are fewer upper-class households and more middle-class households.

古文：上户役数而重，故以助钱为幸。
现代文：上等户役多而重，故以助役钱为幸运。
English: Higher-ranking household servants are more numerous and more important, so it is lucky to get money from a helper.

古文：中户役简而轻，下户役所不及。
现代文：中户役简而轻，下户役所不及。
English: The middle household is simple and light, and the lower household is not.

古文：今概使输钱，则为不幸，三也。
现代文：现一律使其输纳役钱，则是不幸，这是第三。
English: It is unfortunate that they now have to pay for it all, which is the third reason.

古文：有司欲多得雇钱，而患上户之寡，故不用旧籍，临时升降，使民何以堪命？
现代文：官员想多得到雇役钱，却担心上户太少，所以不用旧有的户籍，临时升降等次，使百姓何以堪命？
English: Officials want to get more money from employees, but they are worried that there are too few households, so they do not use the old household registration, temporary promotion and demotion, etc., so why make the people suffer?

古文：四也。
现代文：这是第四。
English: Four, too.

古文：岁有丰凶，而役人有定数，助钱不可阙。
现代文：年有丰歉，但役使人有定数，助役钱不可缺少。
English: There is an abundance of excuses, but the service makes people have a fixed number, and the service fee is indispensable.

古文：非若税赋有倚阁、减放之期，五也。
现代文：不是像赋税有依靠、减放的时候，这是第五。
English: It's not like when taxes are dependent, when they are reduced, this is the fifth.

古文：谷、麦、布、帛，岁有所出，而助法必输见钱，六也。
现代文：谷、麦、布、帛每年有所出，但助役法必须输纳现钱，这是第六。
English: Grain, wheat, cloth, and straw are produced every year, but the auxiliary method must lose cash, which is the sixth.

古文：二税科买，色目已多，又概率钱以竭其所有，斯民无有悦而愿为农者，户口当日耗失，七也。
现代文：二税科买，名目已经很多，又一律率钱以尽其所有，这样百姓没有高兴而愿意做农民的，户、口数当一天比一天耗失，这是第七。
English: Second, there are already a lot of taxes and fees, and everyone has to spend money to the best of their ability, so if the people are not happy and want to be farmers, the number of households and households will be depleted day by day, which is the seventh.

古文：侥幸者又将缘法生奸，如近日两浙倍科钱数，自以为功，八也。
现代文：侥幸获得意外利益的人又将因法生奸，如近来两浙成倍科敷钱数，自以为是功劳，这是第八。
English: Those who are lucky enough to get unexpected benefits will also commit treason, such as the recent double-dealing of Zhejiang Chengbei, and think that it is a merit, which is the eighth.

古文：差法近者十余年，远或二十年，乃一充役，民安习之久矣。
现代文：按差役法近者十多年，远者二十年，乃一律充役，百姓习惯很久了。
English: According to the dispatched labor law, those who are more recent than ten years and those who are more distant than twenty years are all conscripted, and the people have been accustomed to it for a long time.

古文：今官自雇人，直重则民不堪，轻则人不愿，不免以力殴之就役，九也。
现代文：现在官府自己雇人，钱重则民不堪，轻了则人不愿意，不免用强力驱赶百姓就役，这是第九。
English: Now the government itself hires people. If the pay is too high, people can't stand it. If the pay is too low, people don't want to do it. People are forced to go into service. This is the ninth.

古文：且役人必用乡户，家有常产，则必知自爱；性既愚实，则罕有盗欺。
现代文：而且役人必定使用乡村户，家有固定财产，那么必定知道自爱；性情既愚笨朴实，那么就很少有盗贼欺骗。
English: Moreover, officials must use rural households. If the family has fixed assets, then it must know self-love; if the temperament is stupid and simple, then there are few thieves who cheat.

古文：今一切雇募，但得轻猾浮伪之人，巧诈相资，何所不至？
现代文：现在一切雇用招募，只得到轻率狡猾虚浮之人，巧佞欺诈相资，何所不至？
English: Now all hiring and recruiting is done by the quick-witted, the cunning, the vain, and the artful dodger. What is there not to like?

古文：十也。 
现代文：这是第十。 
English: That's ten.

古文：会御史中丞杨绘亦言其非，安石使张琥作十难以诘之，琥辞不为，司农曾布请为之。
现代文：恰逢御史中丞杨绘也言助役法的不是，王安石指使张琥作十难以诘问刘挚，张琥辞谢不作，司农曾布请求撰写。
English: Coinciding with the death of the imperial historian Yang Ping, Wang Anshi ordered Zhang Jian to write ten difficult questions to ask Liu Zhi, Zhang Jian refused to do so, and Sino Zengbu requested to write.

古文：既作十难，且劾挚、绘欺诞怀向背。
现代文：既作十难，又弹劾刘挚、杨绘欺诈荒诞心怀不满。
English: They are dissatisfied with the absurdity of not only doing the ten difficult tasks, but also impeaching Liu Zhen and Yang Bi for fraud.

古文：诏问状，绘惧谢罪。
现代文：诏令询问情状，杨绘恐惧谢罪。
English: Dahirun inquired about the situation, Yang painted fear and guilt.

古文：挚奋曰： 为人臣岂可压于权势，使天子不知利害之实！ 即条对所难，以伸其说。
现代文：刘挚奋起说 ：为人臣子岂能被权势所压服，使天子不知利害的实际情况！ 马上分条列举回答所诘难的问题，以申明他的观点。
English: Liu Zhengyi stood up and said, "How can a human subject be overwhelmed by power, so that the heavenly son does not know the actual situation of the interests!" He immediately listed and answered the difficult questions in order to affirm his point of view.

古文：且曰： 臣待罪言责，采士民之说以闻于上，职也。
现代文：而且说： 我待罪言责，采纳士人百姓的观点以报告皇上，这是我的职责。
English: Moreover, he said, "It is my duty to be responsible and to adopt the views of scholars and the people to report to the emperor.

古文：今有司遽令分析，是使之较是非，争胜负，交口相直，无乃辱陛下耳目之任哉！
现代文：现在官员突然命令分析，这是使之较是非，争胜负，交口相直，无非是侮辱陛下所信任的大臣！
English: Now officials suddenly order analysis, which is to make it a matter of right and wrong, competition, and direct communication, which is nothing more than an insult to His Majesty's trusted ministers!

古文：所谓向背，则臣所向者义，所背者利；所向者君父，所背者权臣。
现代文：所谓向背，那么我所向往的是仁义，所背叛的是功利；所向往的是君父，所背叛的是权臣。
English: So-called backwards, then what I yearn for is benevolence and righteousness, and what I betray is utilitarianism; what I yearn for is the sovereign father, and what I betray is the powerful minister.

古文：愿以臣章并司农奏宣示百官，考定当否。
现代文：希望以我的奏章并司农寺所奏宣示百官，考究决定当否。
English: I hope that hundreds of officials will use my performance and the performance of the Sionnoji Temple to decide whether or not it is worthy.

古文：如臣言有取，幸早施行，若稍涉欺罔，甘就窜逐。 不报。
现代文：如果我说的有可取之处，希望早点施行，如果稍稍涉及欺骗，甘愿受流窜贬逐。 
English: If what I say has merit, I hope that it will be implemented sooner, if it involves a little deception, I am willing to be scorned.

古文：挚明日复上疏曰： 陛下起居言动，躬蹈德礼，夙夜厉精，以亲庶政。
现代文：没有得到答复。刘挚第二天再次上奏疏说 ：陛下起居言行，亲自履行德礼，日夜励精图治，以亲自处理各种重要政务。
English: There was no reply. Liu Zhi again wrote to Zou the next day, saying, "Your majesty lives up to his words and deeds, personally performs his duties, and works hard day and night to deal with various important government affairs.

古文：天下未至于安且治者，谁致之耶？
现代文：天下没有达到安定治理，这是谁导致的呢？
English: The world has not achieved stable governance. Who caused this?

古文：陛下注意以望太平，而自以太平为己任，得君专政者是也。二三年间，开阖动摇，举天下无一物得安其所者。
现代文：陛下殚精竭虑以望太平，而那些专擅君权的大臣，也自以致太平之世为己任。二三年时间里，开放关闭动摇不定，全天下没有一物得以安得其所。
English: His majesty has worked hard for peace, and those ministers who have usurped the power of the monarchy have also taken it upon themselves to bring about a world of peace. For twenty-three years, opening and closing have fluctuated, and nothing in the world has been able to find its place.

古文：盖自青苗之议起，而天下始有聚敛之疑；青苗之议未允，而均输之法行；均输之法方扰，而边鄙之谋动；边鄙之祸未艾，而助役之事兴。
现代文：大概从青苗的建议起，而天下开始有聚敛之疑；青苗之议没有允准，而均输法颁行；均输法正扰乱人心，而边地的计谋开始；边地的祸患没有平息，而助役之事兴起。
English: It was probably from the suggestion of the young seedlings that the world began to have doubts about the concentration; the young seedlings were not allowed, but the equalization law was issued; the equalization law was disturbing the hearts of the people, but the schemes of the outlying areas began; the scourge of the outlying areas did not subside, and the matter of assistants arose.

古文：至于求水利，行淤田，并州县，兴事起新，难以遍举。
现代文：至于求水利，行淤田，合并州县，兴事起新，难以一一列举。
English: As for water conservancy, it is difficult to enumerate the silting up of fields, the merging of prefectures and counties, and the emergence of new issues.

古文：其议财，则市井屠贩之人，皆召至政事堂。
现代文：其议论财利，就把市井屠贩这些人，都召到政事堂。
English: When they talked about money and profit, they called all these butchers to the government building.

古文：其征利，则下至历日，而官自鬻之。
现代文：其征取赢利，那么下至历书，都由官府自己卖掉。
English: The government collects the profits and then sells everything, down to the almanacs, itself.

古文：推此而往，不可究言。
现代文：由此推究，不可尽言。
English: Inferring from this, it is impossible to say.

古文：轻用名器，淆混贤否：忠厚老成者，摈之为无能；狭少儇辩者，取之为可用；守道忧国者，谓之流俗；败常害民者，谓之通变。
现代文：轻率使用朝廷的爵号仪制，淆混贤能不肖：忠厚老成的人，斥之为无能；狭隘无知巧佞的人，取之为可用；遵守道德忧国的人，认为是流俗；败坏常伦危害百姓的人，认为是通变。
English: Reckless use of the imperial title system confuses what is capable and what is not: those who are loyal and mature are dismissed as incompetent; those who are narrow-minded, ignorant and skillful are used as useful; those who abide by morality and care about the country are considered to be vulgar; those who corrupt Changlun and endanger the people are considered to be commoners.

古文：凡政府谋议经画，除用进退，独与一掾属决之，然后落笔。
现代文：凡是政府谋划计议经画，升用进退，仅与一吏属决断，然后最后决定。
English: Whenever the government plans and discusses the scriptures and paintings, the promotion, use, advancement and retreat, it is decided with only one official, and then finally decided.

古文：同列预闻，反在其后。
现代文：同僚参预过问，反而在此之后。
English: Colleagues pre-interviewed, but not afterwards.

古文：故奔走乞丐之人，其门如市。
现代文：所以到处活动乞求官职的人，门庭如市。
English: That's why people who go around begging for official positions are so popular.

古文：今西夏之款未入，反侧之兵未安，三边疮痍，流溃未定。
现代文：现在送交西夏的款项没有收入，不顺从的军队没有安定，三边创伤，流移未定。
English: Now there is no income from the money sent to Xixia, the disobedient army is not stable, the three sides are traumatized, and the migration is undecided.

古文：河北大旱，诸路大水，民劳财乏，县官减耗。
现代文：河北发生大的旱灾，各路发大水，百姓劳困财力困乏，县官减耗。
English: Hebei experienced a major drought, all roads were flooded, the people were hard-pressed financially, and the county officials were forced to reduce consumption.

古文：圣上忧勤念治之时，而政事如此，皆大臣误陛下，而大臣所用者，误大臣也。 疏奏，安石欲窜之岭外，神宗不听，但谪监衡州盐仓。
现代文：陛下忧劳勤政思念治理的时候，却政事如此，都是大臣误了陛下，而且大臣所任用的人，又误大臣。 疏书上奏，王安石打算把刘挚流窜到岭外，神宗不同意，只是贬为监衡州盐仓。
English: When His Majesty was preoccupied with hard work and diligent politics and thinking about governance, the government affairs turned out to be like this. It was the minister who misled His Majesty, and the person appointed by the minister also misled the minister. According to the book, Wang Anshi planned to take Liu Jiayu outside the ridge, but Shenzong did not agree, but only downgraded it to supervising the Hengzhou salt warehouse.

古文：绘出知郑州，琥亦落职。
现代文：杨绘出任邓州知州，张琥也落职。
English: Yang Miao took up the post of Dengzhou Zhizhou, and Zhang Ying also resigned.

古文：挚乞诣郓迁葬，然后奔赴贬所，许之。
现代文：刘挚请求到郓州迁葬，然后奔赴贬谪之地，得到准许。
English: Liu Zhengyi requested to move the funeral to Zhangzhou, and then rushed to the place of his death, and was granted permission.

古文：先是，仓吏与纲兵奸利相市，盐中杂以伪恶，远人未尝食善盐。
现代文：开始，衡州盐仓胥吏与纲运兵士非法求利互相交易，在盐中掺杂假劣物质，边远地区的人从没有吃到好盐。
English: At the beginning, the officials of the Hengzhou salt warehouse traded with the soldiers of the mass movement for illegal profits, and the salt was adulterated with fake and inferior substances. People in remote areas have never had good salt.

古文：挚悉意核视，且储其羡以为赏，弊减什七。
现代文：刘挚全心核查察究，而且把羡余储蓄起来作为赏金，弊病减少了十分之七。
English: Liu Zhengyi checked and investigated with all his heart, and saved the surplus as a reward, and the malady was reduced by seven-tenths.

古文：父老目为 学士盐 。
现代文：父老乡亲把它称为 学士盐 。
English: My father's fellow countrymen called it "bachelor's salt."

古文：久之，签书南京判官。会司农新令，尽斥卖天下祠庙，依坊场河度法收净利。
现代文：过了很长时间，刘挚任南京签书判官，恰逢司农寺发布新的法令，全部变卖天下祠堂庙宇，依照坊场河渡法收取纯利。
English: After a long time, Liu Zhengyin, the judge of the Nanjing signing, coincided with the issuance of a new decree by Sinoon Temple to sell all the ancestral halls and temples in the world and collect the net profit according to the square river crossing method.

古文：南京阏伯庙岁钱四十六贯，微子庙十三贯。
现代文：南京阏伯庙每年四十六万贯钱，微子庙十三万贯。
English: The Zibo Temple in Nanjing receives 460,000 yuan per year, while the Weizi Temple receives 130,000 yuan.

古文：挚叹曰： 一至于此！ 往见留守张方平曰： 独不能为朝廷言之耶？ 方平瞿然，托挚为奏曰： 阏伯迁商丘，主祀大火，火为国家盛德所乘，历世尊为大祀。
现代文：刘挚叹息说 ：都到了这样的地步！ 前去求见留守张方平说 ：难道不能替朝廷说说吗？ 张方平为之动容。委托刘挚替他上奏说 ：阏伯迁到商丘，主掌祭祀大火，火为国家盛德所乘，历代尊为大的祭祀。
English: Liu Jing sighed and said, "It's all come to this!" Zhang Fangping, who was left behind, said, "Couldn't you speak for the imperial court?" Zhang Fangping was moved. He asked Liu Jing to speak for him and said, "The eunuchs moved to Shangqiu, and the main ritual was to make a great fire. Fire is the symbol of national virtue, and it has been revered as a great ritual throughout the ages."

古文：微子，宋始封之君，开国此地，本朝受命，建号所因。
现代文：微子，宋国始封的国王，在此地创建国家，本朝承受天命，建国号因袭其国号。
English: Guizi, the first emperor of the Song Dynasty, founded the country in this place. This dynasty was destined by heaven, and the founding name of the country is derived from its country name.

古文：又有双庙者，唐张巡、许远孤城死贼，能捍大患。
现代文：又有双庙，是唐代张巡、许远孤城守御死于贼人，能抵御大的祸患。
English: There are also double temples. Zhang Jun in the Tang Dynasty, the guardian of a faraway lonely city, was killed by a thief, and was able to withstand great disasters.

古文：今若令承买小人规利，冗亵渎慢，何所不为，岁收微细，实损大体。
现代文：现在如果命令承买，小人规取利益，繁杂轻慢，有什么不做，每年收入微小，实际上损伤国家大体。
English: Now if the order is to undertake the purchase, the villain will take advantage of the benefits, the complex will be negligent, there is nothing to do, the annual income is small, in fact, the country will be damaged.

古文：欲望留此三庙，以慰邦人崇奉之意。 从之。
现代文：希望留下这三庙，以安慰国人崇奉的心意。 
English: It is hoped that these three temples will remain to comfort the hearts of the people of the country.

古文：又见《方平传》。
现代文：朝廷同意了这一建议。此事又见《张方平传》。
English: The imperial court agreed to this suggestion. For more on this, see "The Biography of Zhang Fangping."

古文：入同知太常礼院。
现代文：入为太常礼院同知。
English: He became a member of the Taijō Ryoin Temple.

古文：元丰初，改集贤校理、知大宗正寺丞，为开封府推官。
现代文：元丰初年，改任集贤校理、知大宗正寺丞，为开封府推官。
English: In the first year of Yuanfeng, he was reappointed as Shixian proofreader and Zhidaizongzhengjiro, and became the deputy governor of Kaifeng.

古文：神宗开天章阁，议新官制，除至礼部郎中，曰： 此南宫舍人，非他曹比，无出刘挚者。 即命之。
现代文：神宗开天章阁，议论新的官制，刘挚被任命为礼部郎中，神宗说： 这南宫舍人，不是其他官曹可比，不能少了刘挚。 就任命了他。
English: Shenzong opened the book of heaven and discussed the new official system. Liu Zhi was appointed as a member of the ministry of etiquette. Shenzong said: This Nan Gong shepherd is not comparable to other officials, and Liu Zhi cannot be omitted. He appointed him.

古文：俄迁右司郎中。
现代文：不久升任右司郎中。
English: He was soon promoted to Utsushiro Junior High School.

古文：初，宰掾每于执政分厅时，请间白事，多持两端伺意指。
现代文：开始，宰令官吏每每在执政大臣分堂处理政事时，多持两端刺探意旨。
English: At the beginning, when dealing with government affairs in the cabinet hall of the ruling minister, the prime minister's officials often held the intention of probing at both ends.

古文：挚始请以公礼聚见，共决可否。
现代文：刘挚开始请求以公礼相聚会见，共同决定可以还是不可以。
English: Liu Zhengyi began to request that they meet at a public ceremony to decide whether or not they could meet.

古文：或不便挚所请，坐以开封不置历事罢归。
现代文：有的认为刘挚的请求不适宜，刘挚因开封没有设置历事而免职归家。
English: Some people thought Liu Zhengyi's request was inappropriate. Liu Zhengyi was relieved of his duties and returned home because there was no record of the opening of the envelope.

古文：明年，起知滑州。
现代文：第二年，起用为滑州知州。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the governor of Chizhou.

古文：哲宗即位，宣仁后同听政，召为吏部郎中，改秘书少监，擢侍御史。
现代文：哲宗即皇帝位，宣仁太后同朝听政，召为吏部郎中，改任秘书少监，提升为侍御史。
English: Tetsuzo was the emperor, and Empress Dowager Shonin listened to politics in the same way as the emperor, was called to be a junior member of the cadre department, was reassigned as a secretary and junior supervisor, and was promoted to an attendant to the emperor.

古文：上疏曰： 昔者周成王幼冲践祚，师保之臣，周公、太公其人也。
现代文：刘挚上疏说： 过去周成王年幼登帝位，负责教导的大臣，是周公、太公这些人。
English: Liu Jinglian said: In the past, Zhou Cheng Wang ascended the throne at a young age, and the ministers responsible for teaching were Zhou Gong and Tai Gong.

古文：仁宗皇帝盛年嗣服，用李维、晏殊为侍读，孙奭、冯元为侍讲，听断之暇，召使入侍。
现代文：仁宗皇帝壮年即位，任用李维、晏殊为侍读，孙、冯元为侍讲，听政决断之闲暇时，召他们入侍。
English: Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne in his prime. He appointed Li Wei and Jinshu as attendants, and Sun and Feng Yuan as assistant lecturers. When he was at leisure to listen to the political decisions, he summoned them to be attendants.

古文：陛下春秋鼎盛，在所资养。
现代文：陛下春秋正盛，正是滋养道德之时。
English: Your Majesty, spring and autumn are in full bloom, which is exactly the time to nurture morality.

古文：愿选忠信孝悌、惇茂老成之人，以充劝讲进读之任，便殿燕坐，时赐延对，执经诵说，以广睿智，仰副善继求治之志。 
现代文：希望能挑选那些忠信孝悌、敦厚老成之人，充任劝讲进读之职，召他们到便殿闲坐，时常赐予廷对，执经诵说，以广博聪明才智，以期实现善继求治的志向。 
English: It is hoped that those who are loyal, filial and diligent can be selected to perform the duty of persuading students to study. They will be called to sit idly in the hall, and will often be given the right to the court, to recite the sutras, and to use their broad intelligence and wisdom in order to achieve the goal of good governance.

古文：他日讲筵进读，至仁宗不避庚戌临奠张士逊，侍读曰： 国朝故事，多避国音。
现代文：后来在讲筵进读，读到仁宗不避庚戌日临奠张干逊，侍读说： 国朝旧例，多回避国号的发音。
English: Later, during the recitation of the sutra, it was read that Rinzong did not avoid the Geng Zi Day, and the attendant said: In the old days of the Qing Dynasty, the pronunciation of the national anthem was avoided.

古文：国朝角音，木也，故畏庚辛。 哲宗问： 果当避否？ 挚进曰： 阴阳拘忌，圣人不取，如正月祈谷必用上辛，此岂可改也？
现代文：国朝角音，是木，所以畏庚辛。 哲宗说 ：果真应回避吗？ 刘挚进言说 ：阴阳拘忌，圣人不取，像正月祈谷必用上辛，这难道可以改变吗？
English: Zhezong said, "Should we really avoid it?" Liu Zhijin said, "The yin and yang should be avoided, the saints should not be taken, and like the New Year's prayer valley, it is necessary to use Shangxin. Can this be changed?

古文：汉章帝以反支日受章奏，唐太宗以辰日哭张公谨，仁宗不避庚戌日，皆陛下所宜取法。 哲宗然之。
现代文：汉章帝以忌日接受奏章表奏，唐太宗以辰日哭悼张公瑾，仁宗不避庚戌日，这都是陛下所应效法的。 哲宗认为这是对的。
English: Emperor Zhang of Han accepted the performance of the music on the day of his death, Emperor Taizong of Tang mourned Zhang Gongyi with tears on the day of his death, and Emperor Nianzong did not avoid the day of his death, all of which should be emulated by His Majesty. Zhezong thought this was right.

古文：挚又言： 谏官御史员缺未补，监察虽满六员，专以察治官司公事，而不预言责。
现代文：刘挚又说 ：谏官御史台人员空缺没有补充，监察虽然满了六员，专门来察治官衙公事，却不参预上谏的责任。
English: Liu Zhengyi also said that the vacancy of the eunuchs and historians was not replenished, and although the supervision was filled with six members, they came specifically to investigate the official business of the eunuchs, but did not participate in the responsibility of the eunuchs.

古文：臣请增补台谏，并许言事。 时蔡确、章惇在政地，与司马光不相能。
现代文：我请求增补御史台谏官名额，并且允许言事。 当时蔡确、章处政要之职，与司马光不相协调。
English: I request that the number of eunuchs of the Imperial Historian's Office be increased and that they be allowed to speak. At that time, Cai Ji and Zhang held important political positions, which was not compatible with Sima Guang.

古文：挚因久旱上言： 《洪范》： 庶征肃，时雨若。
现代文：刘挚因久旱上言 ：《洪范》说 ：差不多征询整肃，及时雨降下。 
English: Because of the long drought, Liu Zhengyi said: "Hong Fan" said: almost asked for rectification, timely rain fell.

古文：《五行传》： 政缓则冬旱。
现代文：《五行传》载： 政缓则冬天干旱。 
English: "The Legend of the Five Elements" contains: If the government is relaxed, there will be a drought in winter.

古文：今庙堂大臣，情志乖暌，议政之际，依违排狠，语播于外，可谓不肃。
现代文：现在朝廷大臣，情趣志向相背违失，议政的时候，依违埋怨，语词传播在外，可说是不整肃。
English: Now that he is a minister of the Imperial Court, his passions and aspirations are contrary to each other, and when he discusses politics, he defers to complaints, and his words are spread outside. It can be said that he is not disciplined.

古文：政令二三，舒缓不振。
现代文：政令没有定准，迟缓不振。
English: Government decrees are not set in stone and are slow to take effect.

古文：比日日青无光，风霾昏曀，上天警告，皆非小变。
现代文：近日太阳发青无光，风气混浊昏黑阴暗，这是上天警告，都不是小的灾变。
English: In recent days, the sun has been bluish and dull, and the atmosphere has been cloudy, dark and gloomy. This is a warning from heaven, and it is not a small catastrophe.

古文：愿进忠良、通壅塞，以答天戒。 
现代文：希望进用忠良，通达阻塞，以答谢上天的劝戒。 
English: It is hoped that they will be loyal and diligent in their service, and that they will not obstruct the passage of traffic, so as to thank God for His admonition.

古文：蔡确为山陵使，神宗灵驾发引前夕不入宿，挚劾之，不报。
现代文：蔡确为山陵使，神宗灵柩发引前天晚上没有入宿，刘挚弹劾他，没有得到答复。
English: Cai Zhengyi was the envoy to the mausoleum, but he did not stay the night before the Shenzong funeral procession. Liu Zhengyi impeached him, but received no reply.

古文：及使回，既朝即视事，挚又奏确不引咎自劾。
现代文：等到出使回来，蔡确又上朝马上处理政事，刘挚又奏说蔡确没有引咎自行弹劾。
English: When the envoy returned, Cai Ji went to the DPRK to immediately deal with political affairs. Liu Zhi also said that Cai Ji did not blame himself for the impeachment.

古文：无何，确上表自陈，尝请收拔当世之耆艾，以陪辅王室，蠲省有司之烦碎，以慰安民心。
现代文：没多久，蔡确上奏表自己陈述，曾请求收拢提拔当世的年老人，以辅助王室，免除减省官府的烦杂琐碎，来安慰民心。
English: Not long after, Cai Jizhen submitted his own statement, requesting that the current generation of elderly people be promoted to assist the royal family and to relieve the provincial government from the tedious and trivial to comfort the people's hearts.

古文：挚谓： 使确诚有是请，不言于先朝，为不忠之罪；言于今日，为取容之计。
现代文：刘挚认为 ：即使蔡确确实有这样的请求，对先朝不说，为不忠的罪名；在今天说，为取悦之计。
English: Liu Zhengyi believes that even if Cai Zhengyi does indeed have such a request, it would be a crime of disloyalty not to tell the former dynasty; today, it would be a ploy to please.

古文：诚无是请，则欺君莫大于此。 又疏确过恶大略有十，论章惇凶悍轻侻，无大臣体，皆罢去。
现代文：如果确实没有这样的请求，那么没有比这更欺骗君主的。 又分条开列蔡确的过失罪行大致有十条，论章凶悍轻率，没有大臣的样子，二人都被免职离去。
English: If indeed there is no such request, then there is no greater deception of the monarch than this. There are also roughly ten negligent crimes of Cai Jizhen listed in sections, the argument is fierce and imprudent, there is no appearance of a minister, and both were dismissed and left.

古文：初，神宗更新学制，养士以千数，有司立为约束，过于烦密。
现代文：开始，神宗更新学校制度，养士以千计算，有关部门订立条约加以管束，过于烦杂。
English: At first, it was too cumbersome for the Shenzong to update the school system, to count the nurses in thousands, and for the relevant departments to conclude treaties to control them.

古文：挚上疏曰： 学校为育材首善之地，教化所从出，非行法之所。
现代文：刘挚上疏说 ：学校是培育人才最好的地方，教化所从出，不是行法的地方。
English: Liu Zhengjing said: School is the best place to nurture talent, and the indoctrination center is the starting point, not the place to practice law.

古文：虽群居众聚，帅而齐之，不可无法，亦有礼义存焉。
现代文：虽然群居众聚，统帅而协同，不能没有制度，也有礼义存在于此。
English: Although the crowd gathers, commands and cooperates, there can be no system, and there is courtesy here.

古文：先帝体道制法，超汉轶唐，养士之盛，比隆三代。
现代文：行帝体道法令制度，超过汉代唐代，养士盛况，超越三代。
English: The system of imperial etiquette and laws has surpassed the Han Dynasty and the Tang Dynasty, and the prosperity of cultivators has surpassed three generations.

古文：然而比以太学屡起狱讼，有司缘此造为法禁，烦苛愈于治狱，条目多于防盗，上下疑贰，以求苟免。
现代文：但是近来因太学多次兴起狱讼，官府因此制定为法禁，烦杂苛严超过了治理狱案，条目比防盗还多，上下怀疑，以求得目前免于损害。
English: However, recently, due to the rise of too much learning, there have been many prison lawsuits, and the government has therefore made it a legal ban. It is more complicated and severe than the prison management case, and there are more items than anti-theft, and it is doubtful that it will be able to avoid damage.

古文：甚可怪者，博士、诸生禁不相见，教谕无所施，质问无所从，月巡所隶之斋而已。
现代文：特别令人奇怪的是，博士、学生禁止不能相见，教谕无所施教，询问无所从，每月巡视所属学斋而已。
English: What is particularly strange is that doctors and students are prohibited from seeing each other, there is nothing to teach, there is nothing to ask, and there is only a monthly inspection of the school.

古文：斋舍既不一，随经分隶，则又《易》博士兼巡《礼》斋，《诗》博士兼巡《书》斋，所至备礼请问，相与揖诺，亦或不交一言而退，以防私请，以杜贿赂。
现代文：学舍既不统一，随经分录，那么又《易》博士兼巡《礼》学斋，《诗》博士兼巡《书》学斋，所到一处备礼请问，相与拱手答应，也有人没有交谈一句话而退，以防止私下请谒，以杜绝贿赂。
English: The school buildings are not unified. As the sutras are recorded, the "Easy" doctor also visits the "Rite" study room, and the "Poetry" doctor also visits the "Book" study room. When they go to a place to prepare for the ceremony, they will ask for permission, and some people will leave without a word of conversation, in order to prevent them from asking for money in private, and to prevent bribery.

古文：学校如此，岂先帝所以造士之意哉？
现代文：学校这样，难道是先帝所用来培养士人的意思吗？
English: Is this what the former emperor meant by using schools to train scholars?

古文：治天下者，遇人以君子、长者之道，则下必有君子、长者之行而应乎上。
现代文：治理天下，待人以君子、长者之道，那臣下必定有君子、长者的德行而呼应君上。
English: If you govern the world and treat people with the manners of a gentleman and an elder, then your subjects must have the manners of a gentleman and an elder and respond to you.

古文：若以小人、犬彘遇之，彼将以小人、犬彘自为，而况以此行于学校之间乎？
现代文：如果以小人、猪狗待之，他将以小人、猪狗自为，何况用此实行于学校中呢？
English: If he is treated as a villain, a pig and a dog, he will act as a villain, a pig and a dog, and what's more, he will do it in school?

古文：愿罢其制。 又请杂用经义、诗赋取士，复贤良方正科，罢常平、免役，引朱光庭、王岩叟为言官。
现代文：希望废除这个制度。 又请求杂用经义、诗赋取士，恢复贤良方正科，废除常平、免役法，引用朱光庭、王岩叟为谏官。
English: He hoped that this system would be abolished, and also requested that scholars of miscellaneous classics and poetry should be appointed, that the virtuous and upright subjects should be restored, that the Changping and exemption from military service laws should be abolished, and that Zhu Guangting and Wang Yanzhong should be cited as eunuchs.

古文：执宪数月，正色弹劾，多所贬黜，百僚敬惮，时人以比包拯、吕晦。
现代文：执行法令几个月，正色弹劾，贬退了许多官员，百官敬畏，当时人们把刘挚比作包拯、吕晦。
English: A few months after the implementation of the decree, many officials were impeached, many officials were demoted, and hundreds of officials were in awe. At that time, people compared Liu Zhengyi to Bao Zheng and Lü Yue.

古文：元祐元年，擢御史中丞。
现代文：元元年，刘挚被提拔为御史中丞。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Liu Zhengyi was promoted to goshi chujo.

古文：挚上疏曰： 上之所好，下必有甚。
现代文：刘挚上疏道： 皇上所喜好，下面必定有过之而无不及。
English: Liu Zhenzhong said, "As far as the emperor's preferences are concerned, the following must be superior and not inferior.

古文：朝廷意在总核，下必有刻薄之行；朝廷务在宽大，下必有苟简之事。
现代文：朝廷意在全面核实，下面必有刻薄的行动；朝廷致力于宽大，下面必有苟且简略的事。
English: The imperial court intends to comprehensively verify, the following must be a mean action; the imperial court is committed to leniency, the following must be meticulous and concise.

古文：习俗怀利，迎意趋和，所为近似，而非上之意本然也。
现代文：习俗归向功利，迎合趋和，所作所为近似，但不是陛下的本意。
English: The custom is attributed to utilitarianism, caters to convergence, and acts in a similar way, but it is not His Majesty's intention.

古文：今因革之政本殊，而观望之俗故在。
现代文：现因袭变革的政法本来不同，但观望的风俗仍在。
English: The political and legal systems that are now undergoing change are fundamentally different, but the custom of waiting and seeing is still in place.

古文：昨差役初行，监司已有迎合争先，不校利害，一概定差，一路为之骚动者。
现代文：前此差役法刚实行，监司已有迎合事先，不计较利弊，一概定差，一路为之骚动的。
English: Previously, this penalty system had just been implemented, and the supervisors had already catered in advance, regardless of the pros and cons, it was a fixed penalty, and there was a commotion all the way.

古文：朝廷察其如此，固已黜之矣。
现代文：朝廷觉察这种情况，本来已经废除了。
English: The Imperial Court, aware of this situation, had already abolished it.

古文：以是观之，大约类此。
现代文：由此观之，大约类似这种情况。
English: Viewed from this perspective, the situation is roughly similar.

古文：向来黜责数人者，皆以非法掊克，市进害民，然非欲使之漫不省事。
现代文：过去被贬斥责罚的几人，都是因违法掊克，希求进用危害百姓，而不是想使之漫不省事。
English: Several people who were reprimanded and punished in the past were all punished for violating the law, hoping to use them to harm the people, rather than to make them careless.

古文：昧者不达，矫枉过正，顾可不为之禁哉？
现代文：愚昧的人不通达，矫枉过正，难道不能禁止吗？
English: Can't we ban stupid people who don't know the difference between right and wrong?

古文：请立监司考绩之制。 
现代文：请建立监司考核政绩的制度。 
English: Please establish a system for supervisors to evaluate government performance.

古文：拜尚书右丞，连进左丞、中书侍郎，迁门下侍郎。
现代文：刘挚被授官尚书右丞，连升左丞、中书侍郎，迁门下侍郎。
English: Liu Zhi was awarded the posts of Shangshu Yu Rong, Lian Sheng Zu Rong, Zhongshu Jirong, and Qianmen Shimo Jirong.

古文：胡宗愈除右丞，谏议大夫王觌疏其非是，宣仁后怒，将加深谴。
现代文：胡宗愈被任命为尚书右丞，谏议大夫王觌分条开列胡宗愈的过失，宣仁太后发怒，打算加以重重谪谴。
English: Hu Zongyu was appointed as Shang Shuyujo, and the deliberation doctor Wang Xi listed Hu Zongyu's faults in detail. Empress Dowager Xuanren was angry and planned to punish him severely.

古文：挚开救甚力，帘中厉声曰： 若有人以门下侍郎为奸邪，甘受之否？ 挚曰： 陛下审察毁誉每如此，天下幸甚！
现代文：刘挚救助很得力，宣仁太后在帘中厉声说 ：如果有人认为门下侍郎是奸恶邪佞，你甘愿接受吗？ 刘挚说： 陛下审察毁誉每每如此，天下幸甚！
English: Liu Zhi's help was very effective. In the curtain, Empress Dowager Xuanren said sharply, "If someone thinks that the footman under your door is a treacherous and evil person, would you be willing to accept it?" Liu Zhi said, "Your Majesty is very fortunate to be able to check the damage to his reputation!

古文：然愿顾大体，宗愈进用，自有公议，必致贬谏官而后进，恐宗愈亦所未安。 宣仁后意解，觌得补郡守。
现代文：但愿顾念大局，胡宗愈进用，自有公议，一定要导致贬谏官而后进用，恐怕胡宗愈也不会安心。 宣仁太后怒气消解，王觌得以补外郡离开朝廷。
English: It is hoped that, considering the overall situation, the more Hu Zong is promoted and has his own public discussion, it must lead to the eunuch being demoted and then promoted, and I am afraid that the more Hu Zong is promoted, the more he will not be at ease. Empress Dowager Xuanren's anger dissipated, and Wang Xi was able to leave the imperial court.

古文：挚与同列奏事论人才，挚曰： 人才难得，能否不一。
现代文：刘挚与同僚奏事议论人才，刘挚说： 人才难得，贤能不肖不一。
English: Liu Zhengyi and his colleagues discussed talent, and Liu Zhengyi said: Talent is rare, and talents vary.

古文：性忠实而才识有余，上也；才识不逮而忠实有余，次也；有才而难保，可藉以集事，又其次也。
现代文：性情忠厚而且才能学识有余，这是上等；才能学识不足但忠厚老实有余，这是次等；有才能而难以保持，可以借以成就事业，这是又次等；心怀邪念观望，随着时势而改变，这是小人，终不可以任用。 
English: A loyal disposition and ability to learn more is superior; ability to learn less but be loyal and honest is inferior; ability that is difficult to maintain and can be used to achieve a career is also inferior; watching with evil thoughts and changing with the times is a villain and cannot be appointed.

古文：怀邪观望，随时势改变，此小人也，终不可用。 哲宗及宣仁后曰： 卿常能如此用人，国家何忧！ 六年，拜尚书右仆射。挚性峭直，有气节，通达明锐，触机辄发，不为利怵威诱。
现代文：哲宗及宣仁太后说 ：你常常能这样用人，国家还有什么忧虑！ 元六年，被授官尚书右仆射。刘挚性情严峻刚直，有气节，通达明锐，触机就发，不为利益威权所诱惑而动心。
English: Zhezong and Empress Dowager Xuanren said: "You can often use people like this, what worries does the country have! In the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was awarded the post of Shangshu Rongbai. Liu Wei's temperament is stern and upright, he has a temper, he has a sharp mind, he is quick on the trigger, and he is not tempted by the temptation of profit and authority.

古文：自初辅政至为相，修严宪法，辨白邪正，专以人物处心，孤立一意，不受谒请。
现代文：从开始辅政到为宰相，修严法令，辨别邪恶正直，专以人物存心，孤立一意，不接受拜谒请求。
English: From the beginning of the auxiliary government to the prime minister, he revised strict laws, distinguished evil and honesty, focused on people, isolated himself, and did not accept requests for worship.

古文：子弟亲戚入官，皆令赴铨部以格调选，未尝以干朝廷。
现代文：子弟亲戚入官，全部令他们赴铨部以按标准调选，从没有因此希求朝廷。
English: When his children and relatives entered the government, he ordered them all to go to the Ministry of the Interior to be selected according to the standard. He never wanted to go to the imperial court for this reason.

古文：与吕大防同位，国家大事，多决于大防，惟进退士大夫，实执其柄。
现代文：与吕大防同时在位，国家大事，多由吕大防决定，只有进用斥退士大夫，才实握其权。
English: With Lv Dafo on the throne at the same time, most of the national events were decided by Lv Dafo, and only the use of the retired shifu could really hold its power.

古文：然持心少恕，勇于去恶，竟为朋谗奇中。
现代文：但他持心少恕，勇于除去邪恶，终被众多谗言出人意外地中伤。
English: But he had a forgiving heart and the courage to eliminate evil, and was eventually slandered unexpectedly by many critics.

古文：先是，邢恕谪官永州，以书抵挚。挚故与恕善，答其书，有 永州佳处，第往以俟休复 之语。排岸官茹东济，倾险人也，有求于挚，不得，见其书，阴录以示御史中丞郑雍、侍御史杨畏。
现代文：开始，邢恕谪官永州，写信给刘挚，刘挚原来与邢恕友好，回了一封信，其中有 永州佳处，但往以俟休复 的句子，排岸官茹东济，是险诈之人，有求于刘挚，没有如愿，看见刘挚给邢恕的信，偷偷摘录给御史中丞郑雍、侍御史杨畏看。
English: At the beginning, the eunuch Yongzhou, who was originally friendly with the eunuch Liu Zhen, wrote a letter to Liu Zhen, who was originally friendly with the eunuch Liu Zhen, and sent back a letter, which included the sentence that Yongzhou was a good place, but the eunuch Zhu Dongji, the eunuch Zhu Dongji, was a treacherous person, and he wanted to ask Liu Zhen, but he did not get what he wanted. He saw the letter from Liu Zhen to the eunuch Liu Zhen, and secretly excerpted it for the imperial historian Zheng Yong and the attendant Shi Yangwei to read.

古文：二人方交章击挚，遂笺释其语上之，曰：  休复 者，语出《周易》， 以俟休复 者，俟他日太皇太后复子明辟也。 又章惇诸子故与挚之子游，挚亦间与之接。
现代文：郑、杨二人相互上奏章攻击刘挚，就铨释刘挚的话上呈，说：  休复 ，语出自《周易》， 以俟休复 的意思，是等待将来太皇太后复子明辟。 又章众子以前与刘挚的儿子交游，刘挚也间或与他们结交。
English: Zheng and Yang both wrote articles attacking Liu Zhengyi, and then wrote an explanation of Liu Zhengyi's words, saying: "Cease and desist," the words are from "Zhou Yi," and the meaning of "cease and desist" is to wait for the future Empress Dowager Fushi to make it clear. In addition, Zhang's sons had previously traveled with Liu Zhengyi's son, and Liu Zhengyi may have made friends with them.

古文：雍、畏谓延见接纳，为牢笼之计，以冀后福。
现代文：郑雍、杨畏认为这是延见接纳，作制驭的打算，以希望后来福运。
English: Zheng Yong and Yang Dang believed that this was an attempt to gain acceptance and control, with the hope of later good fortune.

古文：宣仁后于是面喻挚曰： 言者谓卿交通匪人，为异日地，卿当一心王室。
现代文：宣仁太后于是当面晓谕刘挚说： 言者认为你交结非人，为了将来的地位，你应专心于王室。
English: Empress Dowager Xuanren then told Liu Zhengrong in person: "The speaker thinks that you are not a human being. For the sake of your future position, you should concentrate on the royal family.

古文：若章惇者，虽以宰相处之，未必乐也。 挚皇惧退，上章自辨，执政亦为之言。
现代文：像章，虽然以宰相的职位安排他，未必乐意。 刘挚惶恐而退，上奏章自辩，执政大臣也替他说话。
English: Like Zhang, although he was not necessarily happy to be appointed to the post of prime minister, Liu Jing panicked and retreated, insisting that Zhang defend himself, and the ruling minister also spoke for him.

古文：宣仁后曰： 垂帘之初，挚排斥奸邪，实为忠直。
现代文：宣仁太后说 ：垂帘听政之初，刘挚排斥奸恶邪佞，实在是忠心正直。
English: Empress Dowager Xuanren said: At the beginning of his political career, Liu Zhengyi was loyal and honest, rejecting evil and wickedness.

古文：但此二事，非所当为也。 以观文殿学士罢知郓州。
现代文：但这二件事，不是他所应该做的。 刘挚以观文殿学士的身份罢知郓州。
English: But these two things were not what he should have done. Liu Zhi, as an academician of the Academy of Fine Arts, went to visit Zhangzhou.

古文：给事中朱光庭驳云： 挚忠义自奋，朝廷擢之大位，一旦以疑而罢，天下不见其过。 光庭亦罢。
现代文：给事中朱光庭辩驳说 ：刘挚忠义自奋，朝廷提拔他到高位，一时因被怀疑而免除职务，天下人不见他的过错。 朱光庭也被免职。
English: In the case, Zhu Guangting argued that: Liu Zhi Zhongyi was self-motivated, the court promoted him to a high position, and he was temporarily relieved of his duties because he was suspected, and the people of the world did not see his fault. Zhu Guangting was also dismissed.

古文：七年，徙大名，又为雍等所遏，徙知青州。
现代文：元七年，移任大名，又被郑雍等人所阻止，移任青州知州。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred to the position of daimyo, and was prevented by Zheng Yong and others from transferring to the position of Qingzhou Chizhou.

古文：绍圣初，来之邵、周秩论挚变法、弃地罪，夺职知黄州，再贬光禄卿，分司南京，蕲州居住。
现代文：绍圣初年，来之邵、周秩论刘挚变法、弃地罪状，削职知黄州，再贬为光禄卿，分掌南京，指定在蕲州居住。
English: In the first year of Shaosheng, Lai Zhi Shao and Zhou Zicheng discussed Liu Xizhe's change of law and abandonment of land crime, reduced his duties to Huangzhou, and then relegated to Guangluqing, in charge of Nanjing, designated to live in Zhangzhou.

古文：将行，语诸子曰： 上用章惇，吾且得罪。
现代文：将要出发，告诉众子说： 皇帝任用章，我又获罪。
English: He was about to set out, and he told his sons, "I have been found guilty of violating the Emperor's Appointment Law.

古文：若惇顾国事，不迁怒百姓，但责吾曹，死无所恨。
现代文：如果章执掌国家大权，不迁怒于百姓，只责斥我们这些人，死而无恨。
English: If Zhang wields the power of the state and does not take his anger out on the people, but only reprimands us, he will die without hatred.

古文：正虑意在报复，法令益峻，奈天下何！ 忧形于色，无一言及迁谪意。
现代文：只是担心他意在报复，法令更加严峻，天下奈何？ 忧形于色，没有一句话涉及到降官贬谪的意思。
English: Just worried that he intends to retaliate, the decree is more severe, what can the world do? Sadness, not a word is involved in the meaning of demotion.

古文：四年，陷邢恕之谤，贬鼎州团练副使，新州安置。
现代文：绍圣四年，被邢恕的诽谤陷害，贬为鼎州团练副使，指定在新州居住。
English: Four years ago, Shao Sheng was slandered and framed by the gossips. He was relegated to the vice-envoy of the Dingzhou Rehearsal Team, and was designated to live in Xinzhou.

古文：惟一子从。
现代文：只有一个儿子跟随。
English: Only one son followed.

古文：家人涕泣愿侍，皆不听。
现代文：家人哭泣希望侍从，都没有得到同意。
English: The family wept and hoped for an attendant, but none was granted.

古文：至数月，以疾卒，年六十八。
现代文：到新州后几个月，因病去世，终年六十八岁。
English: A few months after arriving in NSW, he died of illness, aged 68.

古文：初，挚与吕大防为相，文及甫居丧，在洛怨望，服除，恐不得京官，抵书邢恕曰： 改月遂除，入朝之计未可必。
现代文：开始，刘挚与吕大防任宰相，文及甫居丧，在洛阳怨恨，脱下丧服，恐怕不能得到京官，写信给邢恕说： 下个月就丧期满，入朝之计未必可行。
English: At the beginning, Liu Zhiqi and Lu Dafo were appointed as prime ministers, Wen Jiabao died, he resented Luoyang, took off his mourning clothes, and was afraid that he would not be able to get the Beijing post. He wrote to Zou Ji, saying: I will die next month, and the plan to enter the imperial court may not be feasible.

古文：当涂猜怨于鹰扬者益深，其徒实繁。
现代文：当权者对才俊之士猜疑怨恨越来越深，其信徒实在繁多。
English: Those in power are becoming more and more suspicious and resentful of talented people, and there are a lot of believers.

古文：司马昭之心，路人所知也，济之以 粉昆 ，必欲以眇躬为甘心快意之地，可为寒心。 其谓司马昭者，指吕大防独当国久； 粉昆 者，世以驸马都尉为 粉侯 ，韩嘉彦尚主，以兄忠彦为 粉昆 也。
现代文：司马昭之心，路人皆知，济之以 粉昆 ，必定是想置微贱之人于权位重之地，令人寒心。 所谓司马昭，是指吕大防独自当权很久 ；粉昆 ，世人以驸马都尉为 粉侯 ，韩嘉彦娶公主为妻，以他的兄长韩忠彦为 粉昆 。
English: The so-called Sima Zhao refers to the fact that Lv Dago had been in power alone for a long time; the world knows Sima Zhao as the prince; Han Jiahong married a princess as his wife; and his brother Han Tadahong was the prince.

古文：恕以书示蔡硕、蔡渭，渭上书讼挚及大防等十余人陷其父确，谋危宗社，引及甫书为证。
现代文：邢恕把信给蔡硕、蔡渭看，蔡渭上书讼告刘挚及吕大防等十多人陷害他的父亲蔡确，图谋危倾社稷，引用文及甫的信作为证据。
English: He showed the letter to Cai Shuo and Cai Xuan. Cai Xuan sued Liu Zhi and Lv Dabao and more than a dozen others for framing his father Cai Jizhen and plotting to overthrow the government, citing the letter from Wen and Fu as evidence.

古文：时章惇、蔡卞诬造元祐诸人事不已，因是欲杀挚及梁焘、王岩叟等。
现代文：当时章、蔡卞诬陷捏造元众人的事不休，因此想要杀掉刘挚及梁焘、王岩叟等人。
English: At that time, Zhang and Cai Jun were constantly accusing others of fabrication, so they wanted to kill Liu Zhengyi, Liang Zhengyi, Wang Yanyuan and others.

古文：以为挚有废立之意，遂起同文馆狱，用蔡京、安惇杂治，逮问及甫。
现代文：认为刘挚有废立皇帝的意思，于是兴起同文馆狱，任用蔡京、安共同治狱，逮捕审问文及甫。
English: He thought that Liu Zhengyi had the intention of overthrowing the emperor, so he set up the Tongwen Library Prison, appointed Cai Jing and An to jointly run the prison, and arrested and interrogated Wen and Fu.

古文：及甫元祐末德大防除权侍郎，又忠彦虽罢，哲宗眷之未衰，乃托其亡父尝说司马昭指刘挚， 粉 谓王岩叟面白如粉， 昆 谓梁焘字况之， 况 犹 兄 也。
现代文：文及甫感念元末年因吕大防之故被任命代理侍郎，又韩忠彦虽然被罢免，但哲宗对他的眷顾之心并没有衰减，于是托言其死去的父亲曾说司马昭指刘挚， 粉 指王岩叟面白如粉， 昆 指梁焘字况之， 况 即是 兄 。
English: At the end of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Wen and Fuxin were appointed as acting attendants due to Lv Dafen. Although Han Tadahiko was dismissed, Zhezong's concern for him did not wane. Therefore, he used the excuse that his deceased father had said that Sima Zhao refers to Liu Zhi, Fan refers to Wang Iwatsuki, Baizuo refers to Fan, Kun refers to Liang Zhe, and Fan is his brother.

古文：又问实状，但云： 疑其事势如此。 会挚卒，京奏不及考验，遂免其子官，与家属徙英州，凡三年，死于瘴者十人。
现代文：又询问实际情状，文及甫只说： 疑其事势如此。 恰逢刘挚去世，蔡京所奏来不及考究验证，于是罢免刘挚的儿子的官职，与家属移居英州，共三年，有十人死于瘴毒。
English: When asked about the actual situation, Wen Jiabao only said, "I suspect that this is the case." Coinciding with Liu Zhengyi's death, Cai Jing's report was too late to be verified, so Liu Zhengyi's son was removed from his official position, and he and his family moved to Yingzhou for a total of three years. Ten people died of poisoning.

古文：徽宗立，诏反其家属，用子跂请，得归葬。
现代文：徽宗即皇帝位，诏令平反刘挚的家属，因其子刘请求，得以归葬。
English: The family members of Huizong, the emperor who was rehabilitated by the edict of the emperor, were able to be buried at the request of his son Liu.

古文：跂又伏阙诉及甫之诬，遂贬及甫并渭于湖外，复挚中大夫。
现代文：刘又拜伏于宫阙下上诉文及甫的诬陷，于是贬斥文及甫并同蔡渭于湖外，恢复刘挚中大夫之职。
English: Liu also bowed to the imperial court to appeal the slander of Wen and Fu, so he rebuked Wen and Fu together with Cai Xuan outside the lake and reinstated Liu Zhenzhong as a doctor.

古文：蔡京为相，降朝散大夫。
现代文：蔡京为宰相，降刘挚为朝散大夫。
English: Cai Jing is the prime minister, and Liu Zhen is the doctor of the morning sun.

古文：后又复观文殿大学士、太中大夫。
现代文：后又恢复观文殿大学士、太中大夫的爵位。
English: Later, the titles of Kumon-den University scholar and Taichung doctor were restored.

古文：绍兴初，赠少师，谥曰忠肃。
现代文：绍兴初年，赠少师，谥号叫 忠肃 。
English: In the first year of Shaoxing, he was awarded the title of "Junior Teacher" and his nickname was "Chungsu."

古文：挚嗜书，自幼至老，未尝释卷。
现代文：刘挚嗜好读书，自小到老，从没有放下书卷。
English: Liu Jing's hobby is reading. From childhood to old age, he has never put down his books.

古文：家藏书多自雠校，得善本或手抄录，孜孜无倦。
现代文：家里藏书多自己雠校，得到善本有时亲手抄录，孜孜不倦。
English: At home, most of the books are self-edited, and when I get a good book, I sometimes copy it by hand, tirelessly.

古文：少好《礼》学，其究《三礼》，视诸经尤粹。
现代文：年轻时喜好《礼》学，他研究《三礼》，与其他经比较尤为精粹。
English: When he was young, he liked the study of "Rite." He studied the "Three Rites," and compared it with other scriptures, it was particularly refined.

古文：晚好《春秋》，考诸儒异同，辨其得失，通圣人经意为多。
现代文：晚学喜好《春秋》，考证诸儒异同，辨其得失，通达圣人经意为多。
English: He likes to study "Spring and Autumn" in the evening. According to the research, there are many similarities and differences between Confucianism and Buddhism, and there are many gains and losses.

古文：其教子孙，先行实，后文艺。
现代文：他教导子孙，首先行实，然后文艺。
English: He taught his children and grandchildren, first practical, then literature and art.

古文：每曰： 士当以器识为先，一号为文人，无足观矣。 
现代文：每每说 ：士人当以器量识见为先，一旦号称文人，就不足观了。 
English: It has been said time and time again that a scholar should be a person who measures and perceives first. Once you are known as a man of letters, you are no longer a man of vision.

古文：跂能为文章，遭党事，为官拓落，家居避祸，以寿终。
现代文：刘跂能写文章，遭逢党祸，仕途坎坷，家居避祸，终其天年。
English: Liu Wei can write an article, suffered a party disaster, had a bumpy career, avoided disaster at home, and lived happily ever after.

