古文：王琳字子珩，会稽山阴人也。本兵家。
现代文：王琳字子珩，会稽山阴人，出身军人之家。
English: Wang Lin Zizixuan, a member of the Shanyin Club, comes from a military family.

古文：元帝居蕃，琳姊妹并入后庭见幸，琳由此未弱冠得在左右。少好武，遂爲将帅。
现代文：梁元帝萧绎作藩王时，他的姐妹都成为萧绎的妻妾并受到宠爱，他因此不到二十岁便能跟随在萧绎左右，从小好武，于是就作了军官。
English: When Emperor Liang Yuan made Xiao Yu the king of the domain, his sisters all became Xiao Yu's wives and concubines and were favored. As a result, he was able to follow around Xiao Yu when he was less than twenty years old. He was good at martial arts since he was a child, so he became an officer.

古文：太清二年，帝遣琳献米万石，未至，都城陷，乃中江沈米，轻舸还荆。
现代文：太清二年，元帝派他进奉一万石米到建邺，还没赶到，都城已经陷落，于是就把米沉在江心，轻舟而回荆州。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, Emperor Yuan sent him to carry 10,000 koku of rice to Jianye, but before he arrived, the capital had fallen, so he sank the rice in the middle of the river and returned to Jingzhou by boat.

古文：稍迁岳阳内史，以军功封建甯县侯。
现代文：后来逐渐升任岳阳内史，凭军功封建宁县侯。
English: Later, he gradually rose to the position of Yueyang Inner Historian, and became the feudal lord of Jianning County through his military exploits.

古文：侯景遣将宋子仙据郢州，琳攻克之，禽子仙。
现代文：侯景派他的部将宋子仙占据郢州，王琳攻克郢州，擒获子仙。
English: Hou Jing sent his subordinate Song Zixian to occupy Bozhou, while Wang Lin conquered Bozhou and captured Zixian.

古文：又随王僧辩破景。
现代文：又跟随王僧辩破侯景。
English: He also followed Wang Sangye to defeat Houjing.

古文：后拜湘州刺史。
现代文：后来官拜湘州刺史。
English: Later, officials paid homage to the history of Hunan.

古文：琳果劲绝人，又能倾身下士，所得赏物不以入家，麾下万人，多是江淮群盗。
现代文：王琳果敢强劲超越常人，又能折节下士，所得到的赏赐不据为己有。他部下万把人，多是江淮一带盗贼。
English: Wang Lin dared to be stronger than ordinary people and was able to defeat a corporal. The rewards he received were beyond his control. He had tens of thousands of subordinates, most of whom were thieves from the Jianghuai region.

古文：平景之勋，与杜龛俱爲第一。
现代文：平定侯景的功劳，他和杜龛都当推第一。
English: To the credit of pacifying Houjing, he and Du Juan should be promoted to the first place.

古文：恃宠纵暴于建邺，王僧辩禁之不可，惧将爲乱，啓请诛之。
现代文：他仗恃有功在建邺横行暴虐，王僧辩禁止不住，怕他作乱，奏请杀了他。
English: He was instrumental in the rampant brutality at Jianye, and the king could not stop him. Fearing that he would start a riot, he asked the king to kill him.

古文：琳亦疑祸，令长史陆纳率部曲前赴湘州，身轻上江陵陈谢。
现代文：王琳也疑心招祸，令他的长史陆纳带领他的军队到湘州，他自己不带武装到江陵见元帝谢罪并说明情况。
English: Wang Lin was also suspicious, so he ordered his Long Shilun to lead his army to Hunan, and he himself went to Jiangling without weapons to see the Yuan Emperor Xie Sin and explain the situation.

古文：将行谓纳等曰： 吾若不反，子将安之？ 
现代文：临行前向陆纳等人说： 我要是回不来，你们怎么办？ 
English: Before leaving, he said to Lu Na and others: "If I can't come back, what will you do?

古文：咸曰： 请死 。
现代文：众人都回答说： 愿和你同死。 
English: And all the people answered and said, We will surely die with thee.

古文：相泣而别。
现代文：挥泪而别。
English: They parted in tears.

古文：及至，帝以下吏，而使廷尉卿黄罗汉、太舟卿张载宣喻琳军。
现代文：到了江陵，元帝把他交给司法官吏处置，而派遣廷尉卿黄罗汉、太舟卿张载到王琳军中宣布处置王琳命令。
English: When he arrived in Gangneung, the Yuan Emperor handed him over to the judicial officials for disposition, and dispatched the imperial lieutenant Huang Rohan and the grand marshal Zhang Zhao to Wang Lin's army to announce the disposition of Wang Lin.

古文：陆纳等及军人并哭对使者，莫肯受命。
现代文：陆纳等人和兵士们对使者大哭，不肯接受这命令。
English: Lu Na and the other soldiers burst into tears at the messenger and refused to accept the order.

古文：乃絷黄罗汉，杀张载。
现代文：于是扣押黄罗汉，杀了张载。
English: As a result, Huang Rohan was detained and Zhang Zang was killed.

古文：载性刻，爲帝所信，荆州疾之如雠，故纳等因人之欲，抽其肠系马脚，使绕而走，肠尽气绝，又脔割备五刑而斩之。
现代文：张载性情刻薄，被元帝信任，荆州人恨他如仇人，所以陆纳等人顺应大家的心意，抽出他的肠子系在马腿上，让马围着他转，把他肠子抽光气绝而死，又把他的肉一块块儿割下来，用尽五刑而斩首。
English: Zhang Zhaozhe was mean-spirited and trusted by the Yuan Emperor. The people of Jingzhou hated him as an enemy, so Lu Na and others complied with everyone's wishes. They extracted his intestines, tied them to the horse's leg, let the horse circle around him, exhausted his intestines and died. They also cut off his flesh piece by piece and beheaded him after using up the five punishments.

古文：元帝遣王僧辩讨纳，纳等败走长沙。
现代文：元帝派王僧辩讨伐陆纳，陆纳等人败逃长沙。
English: The former emperor sent Wang Sangye to argue with Lu Na, and Lu Na and others fled to Changsha in defeat.

古文：是时湘州未平，武陵王兵下又甚盛，江陵公私恐惧，人有异图。
现代文：当时湘州没有平定，武陵王萧纪进兵的气势又很盛，江陵上下惶恐不安，人人都另有打算。
English: At that time, Hunan was not pacified, Wuling's King Xiao Ji's invasion was in full swing, and Gangneung was in a state of panic. Everyone had other plans.

古文：纳啓申琳无罪，请复本位，求爲奴婢。
现代文：陆纳上书申述王琳无罪，请求恢复他原来的职位，自己甘愿作奴婢。
English: Lu Na wrote a letter to plead Wang Lin's innocence, requesting to resume his original position, and he was willing to be a slave.

古文：元帝乃锁琳送僧辩。
现代文：在这种形势下，元帝把王琳用铁链锁起来押送前线交给王僧辩。
English: In this situation, Emperor Yuan put Wang Lin in chains and sent her to the front line to be handed over to Wang Sangbo.

古文：时纳出兵方战，会琳至，僧辩升诸楼车以示之。
现代文：当时陆纳正出兵交战，碰上王琳押到，僧辩把王琳送到楼车顶上让陆纳看。
English: At that time, Lu Na was dispatching soldiers to engage in battle. When he encountered Wang Lin, the monk sent Wang Lin to the roof of the car for Lu Na to see.

古文：纳等投戈俱拜，举军皆哭，曰： 乞王郎入城即出。 
现代文：陆纳等人都扔下兵器下拜，全军痛哭，说： 请求放王郎入城我们就出城投降。 
English: Lu Na and the others threw down their weapons and bowed, and the whole army cried bitterly, saying, "If you ask for Wang Lang to be let into the city, we will surrender outside the city."

古文：乃放琳入，纳等乃降。
现代文：于是把王琳放进城内，陆纳等人便投降了。
English: So they put Wang Lin inside the city, and Lu Na and the others surrendered.

古文：湘州平，仍复琳本位，使拒武陵王纪。
现代文：湘州平定，恢复了王琳以前的职位，让他去抗击武陵王萧纪。
English: Xiangzhou was pacified, Wang Lin's former position was restored, and he was allowed to fight against Wuling King Xiaoji.

古文：纪平，授衡州刺史。
现代文：平定萧纪后，委任他为衡州刺史。
English: After subduing Xiao Ji, he appointed him as the governor of Hengzhou.

古文：元帝性多忌，以琳所部甚盛，又得衆心，故出之岭外。又授都督、广州刺史。
现代文：元帝生性爱猜忌，因为王琳的部众势大，他又能得军心，所以把他派到岭南去，又任命他为都督、广州刺史。
English: Because Wang Lin's subordinates were powerful and he could win the hearts and minds of soldiers, he sent him to Lingnan and appointed him as the governor of the city and the chief historian of Guangzhou.

古文：其友人主书李膺，帝所任遇，琳告之曰： 琳蒙拔擢，常欲毕命以报国恩。
现代文：他的朋友主书李膺，是元帝所信用的人，王琳对他说： 我承蒙提拔，常想尽力效命以报国恩。
English: His friend and chief scribe, Li Lan, was a person trusted by the former emperor. Wang Lin said to him, "I have been promoted, and I always want to do my best to serve the country.

古文：今天下未平，迁琳岭外，如有万一不虞，安得琳力。
现代文：如今天下尚不太平，把我调到岭南，如果万一国家有急难，怎能使我效力呢。
English: If there is no peace today, how can I be effective if there is a national emergency and I am transferred to Lingnan?

古文：忖官正疑琳耳，琳分望有限，可得与官争爲帝乎？
现代文：我想皇上不过是怀疑我罢了，我的欲望有限，难道还能和他争作皇帝吗？
English: I think the emperor is just suspicious of me. My desires are limited. Can I really compete with him to become emperor?

古文：何不以琳爲雍州刺史，使镇武宁。
现代文：为什么不让我作雍州刺史，使我坐镇武宁。
English: Why not let me make a history of Yongzhou, let me sit in the town of Wu Ning.

古文：琳自放兵作田，爲国御捍，若警急动静相知。孰若远弃岭南，相去万里，一日有变，将欲如何！
现代文：我自然会让兵士从事耕种，也能作为国家的屏障，如果有紧急情况也可让朝廷得知，强似远放岭南，相距万里，一旦国家有变故，该怎么办！
English: Naturally, I will let soldiers engage in farming, but also as a barrier to the country. If there is an emergency, I can also let the court know that it is better to be far away from Lingnan, thousands of miles away, and what to do if the country changes!

古文：琳非愿长坐荆南，政以国计如此耳。 
现代文：我不愿长期待在岭南，正是出于为国家考虑罢了。 
English: I don't want to stay in Lingnan for a long time, just for the sake of the country.

古文：膺然其言而不敢啓，故遂率其衆镇岭南。
现代文：李膺赞同他的话却不敢替他上奏，因此王琳还是率领他的部众镇守岭南去了。
English: Li Yao agreed with his words but did not dare to play for him, so Wang Lin still led his subordinates to defend Lingnan.

古文：元帝爲魏围逼，乃征琳赴援，除湘州刺史。
现代文：元帝被西魏围攻进逼，于是征召王琳来救援，委任他为湘州刺史。
English: Emperor Yuan was besieged by the Western Wei Dynasty, so he conscripted Wang Lin to come to the rescue and appointed him as the crown prince of Hunan.

古文：琳师次长沙，知魏平江陵，已立梁王察，乃爲元帝举哀，三军缟素。
现代文：王琳军队驻在长沙时，已听说西魏攻下了江陵，立梁王萧鮞为帝，于是为元帝举哀，三军戴孝。
English: When Wang Lin's army was stationed in Changsha, they had already heard that the Western Wei Dynasty had conquered Jiangling and made Liang Wang Xiaoqi the emperor, so they mourned for the Yuan Emperor and the three armies paid tribute to Xiao.

古文：遣别将侯平率舟师攻梁，琳屯兵长沙，传檄诸方，爲进趣之计。
现代文：派遣别将侯平率领水军攻萧鮞的梁朝，王琳屯兵长沙，向四方传送檄文，制定进攻的计划。
English: He dispatched General Hou Ping to lead the naval forces to attack the Liang Dynasty in Xiao'an, and Wang Lin to garrison Changsha, to transmit the imperial edict to the four directions, and to draw up a plan of attack.

古文：时长沙蕃王萧韶及上游诸将推琳主盟。
现代文：当时长沙的藩王萧韶和镇守长江上游诸将推举王琳为盟主。
English: At that time, the king of Changsha, Xiao Wei, and the town guards of the upper reaches of the Yangtze River all nominated Wang Lin as the leader.

古文：侯平虽不能度江，频破梁军。
现代文：侯平虽然不能攻过江去，却屡次打败梁军。
English: Although Hou Ping could not attack across the river, he repeatedly defeated Liang's army.

古文：又以琳兵威不接，翻更不受指麾，琳遣将讨之，不克。
现代文：又因为王琳鞭长莫及，便翻脸不受他的指挥，王琳派兵讨伐他，不能胜。
English: And because Wang Lin's whip was too long to reach, she turned her face away from his command. Wang Lin sent soldiers to fight him, but they could not win.

古文：又师老兵疲不能进，乃遣使奉表诣齐，并献驯象；又使献款于魏求其妻子；亦称臣于梁。
现代文：加上长期作战，军队劳累不堪而不能有所进取，于是就派使者到北齐奉表称臣，并献驯象；又派使者到西魏表示归附，要求归还他的老婆孩子；同时也到梁朝称臣。
English: In addition to the long-term war, the army was exhausted and unable to make any progress, so he sent an envoy to North Qi to pay tribute to the minister and offer a tamed elephant; he also sent an envoy to West Wei to express his allegiance and demand the return of his wife and children; he also went to Liang Dynasty to pay tribute to the minister.

古文：陈武帝既杀王僧辩，推立敬帝，以侍中、司空征琳。
现代文：陈武帝杀了王僧辩以后，拥立梁敬帝，以侍中、司空的官位征召王琳。
English: After Emperor Chen Wu killed Wang Sofen, he supported Emperor Liang Jing and conscripted Wang Lin with the official ranks of chamberlain and magistrate.

古文：不从命，乃大营楼舰，将图义举。
现代文：王琳不从命，大量修造船舰，为攻击陈武帝作准备。
English: Wang Lin disobeyed the order and repaired a large number of ships to prepare for the attack on Chen Wudi.

古文：琳将张平宅乘一舰，每将战胜，舰则有声如野猪，故琳战舰以千数，以野猪爲名。
现代文：王琳的部将张平宅乘坐的一条战舰，每到要打胜仗时，就发出野猪一样的叫声，因此王琳的上千条战舰，都以野猪命名。
English: Whenever Wang Lin's subordinate Zhang Pingzhu rode on a warship to win a battle, he would cry out like a wild boar. Therefore, Wang Lin's thousands of warships are all named after wild boars.

古文：陈武帝遣将侯安都、周文育等讨琳，仍受梁禅。
现代文：陈武帝派大将侯安都、周文育讨伐王琳，代梁自立为帝。
English: Emperor Chen Wu sent generals Hou Andu and Zhou Wenyu to fight Wang Lin, and Liang became emperor in his place.

古文：安都叹曰： 我其败乎，师无名矣。 
现代文：安都叹息道： 我们怕是要打败仗了，已经师出无名了。 
English: Ando sighed, "We're afraid that we're going to lose the war, and we'll be left without a name.

古文：逆战于沌口。
现代文：迎战王琳军于沌口。
English: Wang Lin's army met in Chaoskou.

古文：琳乘平肩舆，执钺而麾之，禽安都、文育，其馀无所漏，唯以周铁武一人背恩，斩之。
现代文：王琳乘坐平肩舆，手执钺指挥作战，擒获安都、文育，其余的人也都一个不漏。只有周铁武一人因背恩被杀。
English: Wang Lin rode on the flat-shouldered horse and led the battle with his hand, capturing Andu and Wenyu, and the rest of the people did not miss a thing. Only Zhou Tiewu was killed for his betrayal.

古文：锁安都、文育，置琳所坐舰中，令一阉竖监守之。
现代文：把安都、文育捆起来，放在王琳所乘的舰船上，派一名太监看守他们。
English: They tied up Ando and Wenyu, put them on the ship Wang Lin was on, and sent a eunuch to watch over them.

古文：琳乃移湘州军府就郢城，带甲十万，练兵于白水浦。
现代文：王琳把湘州的军事指挥机关迁到郢城，率十万大军，在白水浦练兵。
English: Wang Lin moved the military command authority of Hunan to Shicheng, led a hundred thousand troops, and trained soldiers in Baishuipu.

古文：琳巡军而言曰： 可以爲勤王之师矣，温太真何人哉！ 
现代文：王琳巡视了部队说： 可以作为勤王之师了，温太真又算得了什么呢！ 
English: Wang Lin inspected the troops and said, "I can be a diligent teacher, but what is Wen Taizhen?

古文：南江渠帅熊昙朗、周迪怀贰，琳遣李孝钦、樊猛与馀孝顷同讨之。
现代文：南江的首领熊昙朗、周迪怀有二心，王琳派李孝钦、樊猛和余孝倾去讨伐。
English: The leaders of the Nanjiang River, Xiong Yulang and Zhou Di, were of two minds, and Wang Lin sent Li Xiaoqin, Zhuang Meng and Yu Xiao to fight.

古文：三将军败，并爲迪所囚。
现代文：三人吃了败仗，都被周迪抓获。
English: The three were defeated and captured by Zhou Di.

古文：安都、文育等尽逃还建邺。
现代文：安都、文育等人也都逃回建邺。
English: Ando, Wenyu and others also fled back to Jianye.

古文：初，魏克江陵之时，永嘉王庄年甫七岁，逃匿人家。
现代文：当时，西魏攻下江陵时，永嘉王萧庄年方七岁，逃避在别人家里。
English: At that time, when the Western Wei Dynasty conquered Jiangling, Yongjia Wang Xiaozhuang was seven years old and fled to someone else's home.

古文：后琳迎还湘中，卫送东下。
现代文：后来王琳把他接到湘中，护送他东下。
English: Later, Wang Lin took him to Hunan Middle School and escorted him to the east.

古文：及敬帝立，出质于齐，请纳庄爲梁主。
现代文：等到敬帝即位，萧庄到齐国为人质，王琳请求迎萧庄回国为梁主。
English: When Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, Xiao Zhuang went to Qi as a hostage, and Wang Lin asked Ying Xiao Zhuang to return to China as the leader.

古文：齐文宣遣兵援送，仍遣兼中书令李騊駼册拜琳爲梁丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事。
现代文：齐文宣帝派兵护送萧庄回去，并派兼中书令李马余带诏书拜王琳为梁丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事。
English: Emperor Qimen Xuan sent soldiers to escort Xiaozhuang back, and sent Li Ma Yu, who was also in charge of the imperial edict, to bring the imperial edict to worship Wang Lin as the prime minister of Liang, the governor of the armies at home and abroad, and record the imperial edict.

古文：又遣中书舍人辛悫、游诠之等齎玺书江表宣劳，自琳以下皆有颁赐。
现代文：又派中书舍人辛悫、游诠之等带上玉玺文书到江南表彰他们的功劳，自王琳以下都有赏赐。
English: In addition, they sent Chinese scholars such as Xin Qi and You Yan to the south of the Yangtze River with jade-encrusted documents to commend their services, and rewards were given to everyone from Wang Lin down.

古文：琳乃遣兄子叔宝率所部十州刺史子弟赴邺，奉庄纂梁祚于郢州。
现代文：王琳于是派遣他哥哥的儿子王叔宝率他势力范围内十州刺史的子弟到北齐都城邺城为质，并拥立萧庄在郢州篡梁为帝。
English: Wang Lin then dispatched his brother's son, Wang Shubao, to lead the children of the ten states in his sphere of influence to the North Qidu city of Shicheng as a pledge, and supported Xiao Zhuang to usurp Liang as emperor in Zhangzhou.

古文：庄授琳侍中、使持节、大将军、中书监，改封安成郡公，其馀并依齐朝前命。
现代文：萧庄委任王琳为侍中、使持节、大将军、中书监，改封为安成郡公，其他官职都承继以前梁朝的任命。
English: Xiaozhuang appointed Wang Lin as a chamberlain, envoy, general, and librarian, and changed her title to Ancheng County official. Other official positions followed the previous appointment of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：及陈文帝立，琳乃辅庄次于濡须口。
现代文：等陈文帝即位，王琳辅佐萧庄驻军濡须口。
English: When Emperor Chen Wen ascended to the throne, Wang Linfu assisted Xiaozhuang in stationing troops at Nusu.

古文：齐遣扬州道行台慕容俨率衆临江，爲其声援。
现代文：北齐派遣扬州道行台慕容俨率兵到长江边，来声援王琳。
English: North Qi dispatched Yangzhou Daogangdai Murongjun and his soldiers to the Yangtze River to support Wang Lin.

古文：陈遣安州刺史吴明彻江中夜上，将袭盆城。
现代文：陈朝派遣安州刺史吴明彻从江中溯流而上，要偷袭盆城。
English: The Chen dynasty sent the Anzhou cutter Wu Mingche upstream from the middle of the river to raid the basin city.

古文：琳遣巴陵太守任忠大败之，明彻仅以身免。
现代文：王琳派巴陵太守任忠大败吴明彻，明彻只身脱逃。
English: Wang Lin sent Wu Mingcher, who was defeated by Baling Taizhu Renzhong, and Mingcher escaped.

古文：琳兵因东下，陈遣太尉侯瑱、司空侯安都等拒之。
现代文：王琳军队趁势东下，陈派太尉侯王真、司空侯安都等抵御他。
English: Wang Lin's army took advantage of the situation to move eastward, and Chen sent Lieutenant Hou Wang Zhen and Sikuo Hou An to resist him.

古文：瑱等以琳军方盛，引军入芜湖避之。
现代文：侯王真等人因为王琳军气势正盛，便引军入芜湖避其锋芒。
English: Because Wang Lin's army was in full swing, Hou Wang Zhen and others led the army into the Bohai Lake to avoid its sharp edge.

古文：时西南风至急，琳谓得天道，将直取扬州，侯瑱等徐出芜湖蹑其后。
现代文：当时西南风很急，王琳认为得了天助，打算直取扬州，侯王真等慢慢从芜湖出来跟在他后面。
English: At that time, the southwesterly wind was very strong. Wang Lin thought that he had received help from heaven and planned to take Yangzhou directly. Hou Wang Zhen and others slowly came out of Lugu Lake to follow him.

古文：比及兵交，西南风翻爲瑱用，琳兵放火燧以掷瑱船者，皆反烧其船。
现代文：等到交战时，西南风反被侯王真利用，王琳兵点燃火把往侯王真的船上扔，反而都烧光了自己的船。
English: When the war broke out, the southwesterly wind was taken advantage of by Hou Wangzhen. Wang Lin's soldiers lit torches and threw them at Hou Wangzhen's ship, but they all burned down their own ships.

古文：琳船舰溃乱，兵士透水死者十二三。
现代文：王琳战舰大乱，兵士跳水而死的有十之二三。
English: Wang Lin's warship was in a big mess, and two-thirds of the soldiers died from diving.

古文：其馀皆弃船上岸，爲陈军所杀殆尽。
现代文：其余的都弃船上岸，被陈军几乎杀光。
English: The rest were abandoned on the boat and were almost all killed by Chen's army.

古文：初，琳命左长史袁泌、御史中丞刘仲威同典兵侍卫庄，及军败，泌遂降陈。
现代文：当初，王琳命左长史袁泌、御史中丞刘仲威掌军事保卫萧庄，等他兵败，袁泌就投降了陈朝。
English: At first, Wang Lin ordered the Left Chief Historian Yuan Xiu and the Imperial Historian Liu Zhongwei to take charge of the military defense of Xiaozhuang. After he was defeated, Yuan Xiu surrendered to the Chen Dynasty.

古文：仲威以庄投历阳，又送寿阳。
现代文：仲威带着萧庄投奔到历阳，又把他送到寿阳，王琳不久与萧庄一同入齐。
English: Zhong Wei took Xiao Zhuang to Liyang and sent him to Shouyang. Wang Lin soon joined Xiao Zhuang.

古文：琳寻与庄同入齐，齐孝昭帝遣琳出合肥，鸠集义故，更图进取。
现代文：齐孝昭帝派王琳到合肥，纠集旧部，再图进取。
English: Emperor Qixiao Zhaozhou sent Wang Lin to Hefei to collect the old members and try again.

古文：琳乃缮舰，分遣招募淮南伧楚，皆愿戮力。
现代文：王琳于是修理战船，分派人去招募淮南民众，这些人都愿意和他同心协力。
English: Wang Lin then repaired the warship and sent people to recruit the people of Huainan, who were all willing to work with him.

古文：陈合州刺史裴景晖，琳兄瑉之婿也，请以私属导引齐师，孝昭委琳与行台左丞卢潜率兵应赴。
现代文：陈合州刺史裴景晖，是王琳的哥哥王珉的女婿，请求用自己私人下属为齐军作内应，齐孝昭帝委派王琳和行台左丞卢潜率兵前去接应。
English: Chen Hezhou's secretary Pei Jingyao, the son-in-law of Wang Lin's brother Wang Yao, requested to use his personal subordinates to provide internal support for the Qi army. Emperor Xiao Zhao of Qi sent Wang Lin and Xiangtai Zuo Rucan to meet the soldiers.

古文：沈吟不决，景晖惧事泄，挺身归齐。
现代文：王琳迟疑不决，景晖怕事情泄漏，就投奔了齐国。
English: Wang Lin hesitated to make a decision, and Jing Yi, fearing that things would leak out, fled to Qi.

古文：齐孝昭赐琳玺书令镇寿阳，其部下将帅悉听以从，乃除琳骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史，封会稽郡公。
现代文：齐孝昭帝赐王琳印封文书让他镇守寿阳，准许他部下将帅还都跟从他，任王琳为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史，封他为会稽郡公。
English: Emperor Qixiao Zhao gave Wang Lin a sealed document to let him guard Shouyang, and allowed his subordinates to follow him. Wang Lin was appointed as the cavalry general, Kaifu ceremony with three divisions, Yangzhou stabbing history, and he was appointed as the county auditor.

古文：又增兵秩，兼给铙吹。
现代文：又增发他军饷，还赐给他一班铙吹乐器。
English: He also increased his pay and gave him a set of cymbals.

古文：琳水陆戒严，将观衅而动，属陈氏结好于齐，使琳更听后图。
现代文：王琳水陆军严阵以待，准备待机而动。这时陈朝与齐结好，所以齐使王琳以后再作打算。
English: At this time, the Chen Dynasty and Qi made peace, so Qi asked Wang Lin to make plans later.

古文：琳在寿阳，与行台尚书卢潜不协，更相是非，被召还邺。
现代文：王琳在寿阳，与行台尚书卢潜不和，屡次产生矛盾，被召还邺城。
English: In Shouyang, Wang Lin was at odds with Shangshu Luqian, the governor of Xingtai, and repeatedly came into conflict with him. Wang Lin was called back to Shucheng.

古文：齐武成置而不问，除沧州刺史。
现代文：齐武成帝置而不问，任命他为沧州刺史。
English: Qi Wucheng, regardless of the emperor, appointed him as the chief historian of Cangzhou.

古文：后以琳爲特进、侍中。
现代文：后来又任他为特进、侍中。
English: Later, he was appointed as Tokujin and Samurai.

古文：所居屋脊无故剥破，出赤蛆数升，落地化爲血，蠕动。
现代文：王琳所住房子的屋脊无故破裂剥落，出来几升红色的蛆，落地后变成血，并蠕动。
English: The roof of the house where Wang Lin lived cracked and peeled off for no reason, and several liters of red pus came out. After falling to the ground, it turned into blood and wriggled.

古文：有龙出于门外之池，云雾起，昼晦。
现代文：有龙从他门外的池中跃出，生出云雾，白昼昏暗。
English: A dragon leaps out of the pool outside his door, creating a mist that darkens the day.

古文：会陈将吴明彻寇齐，齐帝敕领军将军尉破胡等出援秦州，令琳共爲经略。
现代文：这时陈将吴明彻攻打北齐，齐帝派领军将军尉破胡等出兵救援秦州，并令王琳等参与谋划。
English: At this time, Chen sent Wu Mingche to attack North Qi, and Emperor Qi sent the leading army lieutenant to break Hu and other soldiers to rescue Qinzhou, and made Wang Lin and others participate in the planning.

古文：琳谓所亲曰： 今太岁在东南，岁星居牛斗分，太白已高，皆利爲客，我将有丧。 
现代文：王琳对自己的亲信说： 如今太岁在东南，岁星居于牛斗的位置，太白已经升高，这些天象都对客军有利，我们将有丧败。 
English: Wang Lin said to her relatives: Today, the Tai Lian is in the southeast, the Tai Xing is in the position of the bullfight, and the Tai Bai has risen. These celestial objects are all beneficial to the guest army, and we will be defeated.

古文：又谓破胡曰： 吴兵甚锐，宜长策制之，慎勿轻斗。 
现代文：又对破胡说： 吴兵势头很猛，要用长远之计来胜它，要谨慎不要轻易出战。 
English: He also said to Baohu, "Wu's army has a strong momentum, we should use long-term strategies to defeat it, and we should be careful not to go to war easily.

古文：破胡不从。
现代文：破胡不听。
English: Don't listen to him.

古文：战，军大败。
现代文：与陈军战，大败。
English: He fought against Chen Jun and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：琳单马突围，仅而获免。
现代文：王琳单骑突围，幸免逃脱。
English: Wang Lin single-handedly broke through the encirclement and escaped.

古文：还至彭城，齐令便赴寿阳，并许召募。
现代文：逃回到彭城，齐国令他就地到寿阳去，并准许他招募军队。
English: After he fled back to Pengcheng, the State of Qi ordered him to go to Shouyang and allowed him to recruit troops.

古文：又进封琳巴陵郡王。
现代文：又晋封他为巴陵郡王。
English: He was also promoted to be the King of Baling County.

古文：陈将吴明彻进兵围之，堰肥水灌城。
现代文：陈将吴明彻进兵围寿阳，堵肥水灌城。
English: Chen sent Wu Mingche into the army to encircle Shouyang, block the fertilizing water and irrigate the city.

古文：而齐将皮景和等屯于淮西，竟不赴救。
现代文：而齐将皮景和等屯兵在淮西，居然不去救援。
English: But General Qi and other soldiers stationed in Huaxi did not go to the rescue.

古文：明彻昼夜攻击，城内水气转侵，人皆患肿，死病相枕。
现代文：明彻昼夜攻打，城内水气侵袭，人人浑身肿胀，死者和重病人互相枕藉。
English: The city was attacked day and night, the air and water in the city were attacked, everyone was swollen, the dead and the seriously ill were lying next to each other.

古文：从七月至十月，城陷被执，百姓泣而从之。吴明彻恐其爲变，杀之城东北二十里，时年四十八。
现代文：从七月攻城到十月，城陷王琳被抓获，百姓都哭泣着跟随他不去，吴明彻怕生变乱，把他在城东北二十里杀死，时年四十八。
English: From July to October, the siege of the city, Wang Lin was captured, the people were crying to follow him not to go, Wu Ming Che was afraid of chaos, and killed him twenty miles northeast of the city, at the age of forty-eight.

古文：哭者声如雷。
现代文：很多人为他痛哭，声如雷震。
English: Many people cried for him, their voices like thunder.

古文：由此言之，抑有其例。
现代文：有一个老头儿带着酒肉前来，号哭以酒洒地祭奠他，把他的血收起来带走了。
English: An old man came with meat and wine, wept and poured wine in his honour, collected his blood and took it away.

古文：不使寿春城下，唯传报葛之人，沧洲岛上，独有悲田之客。昧死陈祈，伏待刑宪。
现代文：吴明彻把他的头传送到建康，悬挂在街市上。王琳的旧日部下梁朝骠骑府仓曹参军朱蠩写信给陈尚书仆射徐陵求王琳的首级。
English: Wu Mingcher sent his head to Jiankang and hung it in the market. Wang Lin's old subordinate Liang Zhaohui sent a letter to Chen Shang's servant, Xu Ling, asking for Wang Lin's head.

古文：陵嘉其志节，又明彻亦数梦琳求首，并爲啓陈主而许之。
现代文：徐陵赞许他的义气，又加上吴明彻也屡次梦见王琳向他讨还自己的头，所以二人都向陈主上书而获准。
English: Xu Ling praised his loyalty, and Wu Mingcher also repeatedly dreamed that Wang Lin asked him to return his head, so both of them wrote to Chen and were approved.

古文：仍与开府主簿刘韶慧等持其首还于淮南，权瘗八公山侧，义故会葬者数千人。
现代文：于是朱蠩就和开府主簿刘韶慧等带着王琳的首级到淮南，暂时埋在八公山旁，受过他好处的故旧来参加葬礼的有几千人。
English: As a result, Zhu Xi, together with Liu Qianhui, the chief accountant of the Kaifu, and others, took Wang Lin's head to Huainan and temporarily buried it next to the Eight Kingdoms Mountain. Several thousand people came to attend the funeral who had benefited from his kindness.

古文：瑒等乃间道北归，别议迎接。
现代文：朱蠩等人从小道偷偷跑到北齐，与北齐商议把他的首级接过来。
English: Zhu Xi and others secretly ran from the trail to Beiqi, and negotiated with Beiqi to take over his head.

古文：寻有扬州人茅智胜等五人密送丧柩达于邺，赠十五州诸军事、扬州刺史、侍中、特进、开府、录尚书事，諡曰忠武王，葬给轀輬车。
现代文：不久有扬州人茅智胜等五人秘密护送他的灵柩到邺城。北齐追赠他统领十五州诸军事、扬州刺史、侍中、特进、开府、录尚书事，谥为忠武王，用鍂车京车给他送葬。
English: Soon, five people, including Yangzhou resident Mao Zhisheng, secretly escorted his coffin to Shicheng. Northern Qi posthumously presented him with the titles of Commander of the Fifteen Military Provinces, Yangzhou Historian, Chamberlain, Special Envoy, Keeper of the Capital, and Recorder of Records. He was known as the Prince of Chungwu, and was buried in a carriage from Beijing.

古文：琳体貌闲雅，立发委地，喜怒不形于色。
现代文：王琳体态容貌闲静文雅，站起来头发能垂到地下，喜怒不形于色。
English: Wang Lin's physical appearance is calm and elegant. When she stands up, her hair can hang down to the ground, and she can be happy or angry.

古文：虽无学业，而强记内敏，军府佐史千数，皆识其姓名。
现代文：虽然没什么学问，但聪敏强记，他军府中佐史上千人，他都记得他们的姓名。
English: Although he has little knowledge, he has a keen memory and can remember the names of more than a thousand people in the history of his career as a lieutenant colonel.

古文：刑罚不滥，轻财爱士，得将卒之心。
现代文：他不滥用刑罚，轻财爱士，在将士中很得人心。
English: He does not abuse punishment, loves easy money, and is very popular among soldiers.

古文：少爲将帅，屡经丧乱，雅有忠义之节。虽本图不遂，齐人亦以此重之，待遇甚厚。
现代文：他年轻时就为将帅，屡经丧乱，常怀有忠义气节，虽本来的意图没有达到，齐人却也因此而看重他，对待他很优厚。
English: When he was young, he was a great general. He experienced many disasters and was always loyal. Although he did not achieve his original intention, the Qi people valued him for this and treated him very generously.

古文：及败爲陈军所执，吴明彻欲全之，而其下将领多琳故吏，争来致请，并相资给，明彻由此忌之，故及于难。
现代文：等他兵败被陈军抓获，吴明彻本想保全他，而他部下将领多是王琳的旧将，争相来表示问候，并送给他财物用品，明彻因此对他畏忌，所以遇难。
English: When he was defeated and captured by Chen's army, Wu Mingche wanted to save him, but his subordinate generals, most of whom were Wang Lin's old generals, scrambled to express their greetings and give him property and supplies. As a result, Mingche was afraid of him, so he died.

古文：当时田夫野老，知与不知，莫不爲之歔欷流泣。
现代文：当时的山野百姓，不管是认识还是不认识他的，没有不为他虚欠欷下泪的。
English: The people of the mountains and fields at that time, whether they knew him or not, shed tears for him.

古文：观其诚信感物，虽李将军之恂恂善诱，殆无以加焉。
现代文：从他的诚信感人来看，即使是循循善诱的李广，恐怕也不过如此。
English: Judging from his touching sincerity, I'm afraid that even Li Guang, who is a good inducer, is nothing more than that.

