古文：起玄黓困敦，尽上章涒滩，凡九年。
现代文：起，止，一共九年。汉纪四十九汉灵帝熹平元年
English: a total of nine years. The 49th year of the Han Dynasty, the first year of Emperor Lingping

古文：孝灵皇帝上之下熹平元年
现代文：春季，正月，灵帝前往光武帝原陵祭祀。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, Emperor Lingdi went to the imperial mausoleum of Emperor Guangwu for a ritual.

古文：春，正月，车驾上原陵。司徒掾陈留蔡邕曰： 吾闻古不墓祭。
现代文：司徒掾陈留郡人蔡邕说： 我曾经听说，古代君王从不到墓前祭祀。
English: I once heard that ancient emperors never attended funerals before their tombs.

古文：朝廷有上陵之礼，始谓可损；今见威仪，察其本意，乃知孝明皇帝至孝恻隐，不易夺也。
现代文：皇帝有上陵举行墓祭的礼仪，最初认为可以减损。而今亲眼看到墓祭的威仪，体察它的本来用意，方才了解明帝的至孝隐衷，的确不能取消。
English: The emperor had the etiquette of holding a tomb festival on the tomb, and initially thought that it could be derogated. But now, after seeing the dignity of the tomb festival with my own eyes and observing its original intention, I have come to understand the filial piety of Emperor Ming, and it really cannot be canceled.

古文：礼有烦而不可省者，此之谓也。 
现代文：有的礼仪似乎多余，但实际上是必不可少的，大概就是指此。 
English: Some etiquette seems superfluous, but is actually essential, probably referring to this.

古文：三月，壬戌，太傅胡广薨，年八十二。
现代文：三月壬戌，太傅胡广去世，享年八十二岁。
English: In March, Grand Master Hu Guang passed away at the age of 82.

古文：广周流四公，三十馀年，历事六帝，礼任极优，罢免未尝满岁，辄复升进。
现代文：胡广，字伯始，历任太傅、太尉、司徒和司空，前后任职三十余年，曾侍奉过安、顺、冲、质、桓、灵等六个皇帝，受到极优厚的礼遇，每次被免职，不出一年，即又复职。
English: Hu Guang, also known as Bo Shi, successively held the positions of Taifu, Taifu, Sitou and Siku, and served for more than 30 years. He served six emperors, including An, Shun, Chong, Qiao, Huan and Ling, and was treated with great courtesy. He was dismissed every time, and reinstated after less than a year.

古文：所辟多天下名士，与故吏陈蕃、李咸并为三司。
现代文：他所聘用的大都是天下的知名人士，曾和他过去的部属陈蕃、李咸并列三公。
English: Most of the people he has hired are world-renowned celebrities. He and his former subordinates, Chen Qi and Li Xian, were once ranked as the world's top three celebrities.

古文：练达故事，明解朝章，故京师谚曰： 万事不理，问伯始；天下中庸，有胡公。 
现代文：他非常熟悉先朝的典章制度，通晓当代的朝廷规章，所以京都洛阳有谚语说： 万事不理问伯始，不偏不倚有胡公。 
English: He was very familiar with the previous dynasty's ceremonial system and was well-versed in contemporary imperial court regulations, so there is a saying in Kyoto's Luoyang: "If you don't pay attention to the beginning, you'll get the wrong end of the stick."

古文：然温柔谨悫，常逊言恭色以取媚于时，无忠直之风，天下以此薄之。
现代文：然而，胡广温柔敦厚，谨小慎微，以此取媚朝廷，没有忠贞正直的气节，天下的人因此而轻视他。
English: However, Hu Guang was gentle and thoughtful, cautious and prudent, and used this to charm the imperial court. He did not have the temperament of loyalty and honesty, so people around the world despised him.

古文：五月，己巳，赦天下，改元。
现代文：五月己巳，大赦天下，改年号。
English: In May, there was a general amnesty and the name of the year was changed.

古文：长乐太仆侯览坐专权骄奢，策收印绶，自杀。
现代文：长乐太仆侯览因专权跋扈和骄横奢侈获罪，灵帝下令收回印信，侯览自杀。
English: Hou Xiang, the Great Servant of Changle, was found guilty of arrogance and extravagance, the Emperor ordered to withdraw the seal letter, and Hou Xiang committed suicide.

古文：六月，京师大水。
现代文：六月，京都洛阳发生大水灾。
English: In June, a major flood occurred in Kyoto's Luoyang district.

古文：窦太后母卒于比景，太后忧思感疾，癸巳，崩于云台。
现代文：窦太后的母亲于比景病故，窦太后过度忧伤，思念成疾。癸巳，在南宫云台去世。
English: Empress Dowager Dou's mother died of illness in Bijing, and Empress Dowager Dou's excessive sadness and longing became a disease. She passed away in Yuntai, Nangu.

古文：宦者积怨窦氏，以衣车载太后尸置城南市舍，数日，曹节、王甫欲用贵人礼殡。
现代文：因宦官们对窦姓家族积怨甚深，所以用运载衣服的车，把窦太后的尸体运到洛阳城南的市舍，停放数日后，曹节、王甫想用贵人的礼仪来埋葬窦太后。
English: Because the eunuchs were deeply resentful of the Dou family, they used a car carrying clothes to transport the body of the Dou Empress to the townhouse in the south of Luoyang. After a few days of parking, Cao Jie and Wang Fu wanted to use the etiquette of nobles to bury the Dou Empress.

古文：帝曰： 太后亲立朕躬，统承大业，岂宜以贵人终乎！ 
现代文：灵帝说： 窦太后亲自拥立朕为皇帝，继承大业，怎么能用贵人的礼仪为她送终？ 
English: Lingdi said, "Empress Dowager Dou personally appointed me as the emperor to succeed the great cause. How can I send her off with the etiquette of a noblewoman?

古文：于是发丧成礼。
现代文：于是仍照皇太后的礼仪发丧。
English: As a result, the funeral was conducted according to protocol.

古文：节等欲别葬太后，而以冯贵人配祔。
现代文：曹节等人又打算将窦太后埋葬到别处，而把冯贵人的尸体移来和桓帝合葬。
English: Cao Jie and others also planned to bury Empress Dowager Dou elsewhere, while transferring the body of Feng Guijin to be buried with Emperor Huan.

古文：诏公卿大会朝堂，令中常侍赵忠监议。
现代文：灵帝下诏，召集三公、九卿等文武百官，在朝堂上集会议论，命中常侍赵忠监督集议。
English: The imperial edict ordered the court nobles to assemble in the temple hall, and ordered the middle chamberlain, Zhao Zhong, to supervise the discussion.

古文：太尉李咸时病，扶舆而起，捣椒自随，谓妻子曰： 若皇太后不得配食桓帝，吾不生还矣！ 
现代文：当时，太尉李咸正卧病在床，挣扎着抱病上车，并且随身携带了毒药，临走时对妻子说： 倘若皇太后不能随桓帝一同祭祀，我决不活着回家！ 
English: At that time, Lieutenant Li Xian was ill in bed, struggling to get on the bus, and carried poison with him. Before leaving, he said to his wife: If the Empress Dowager cannot attend the sacrifice with Emperor Huan, I will never return home alive!

古文：既议，坐者数百人，各瞻望良久，莫肯先言。
现代文：会议开始后，与会者数百人，互相观望了很久，没有人肯先发言。
English: After the meeting began, the hundreds of participants looked at each other for a long time, and no one was willing to speak first.

古文：赵忠曰： 议当时定！ 
现代文：赵忠催促说： 议案应当迅速确定！ 
English: Zhao Zhong urged: The motion should be determined quickly!

古文：廷尉陈球曰： 皇太后以盛德良家，母临天下，宜配先帝，是无所疑。 
现代文：廷尉陈球说： 皇太后品德高尚，出身清白，以母仪治理天下，应该配享先帝，这是毫无疑问的。 
English: The courtier Chen Qiu said, "There is no doubt that the empress dowager is of high moral character, of pure birth, and rules the world with motherly dignity. She should be worthy of the former emperor.

古文：忠笑而言曰： 陈廷尉宜便操笔。 
现代文：赵忠笑着说： 那就请陈廷尉赶快执笔起草议案。 
English: Zhao Zhong smiled and said: Lieutenant Chen Ting, please take a pen and write down your reasons.

古文：球即下议曰： 皇太后自在椒房，有聪明母仪之德；遭时不造，援立圣明承继宗庙，功烈至重。
现代文：陈球立即下笔写道： 窦太后身处深宫之中，天赋聪明，兼备天下之母的仪容和品德。遭逢时世艰危，窦太后援立陛下为帝，继承皇家宗庙祭祀，功勋卓著。
English: Chen Qiu immediately wrote: Empress Dowager Dou is in the middle of a deep palace, gifted and intelligent, and has both the appearance and character of the mother of the world. Faced with difficult times, Empress Dowager Dou supported the enthronement of His Majesty, inherited the royal ancestral temple rituals, and has made outstanding contributions.

古文：先帝晏驾，因遇大狱，迁居空宫，不幸早世，家虽获罪，事非太后，今若别葬，诚失天下之望。
现代文：先帝去世后，不幸兴起大狱，窦太后被迁往空宫居住，过早离开人世。窦家虽然有罪，但事情并非太后主使发动。而今倘若改葬别处，确实使天下失望。
English: After the death of the former emperor, the unfortunate rise of the Great Prison, the Dowager Dou was moved to live in the Empty Palace, and died prematurely. Although the Dou family was guilty, the matter was not initiated by the Dowager. And now, if the burial place is changed, it will really disappoint the world.

古文：且冯贵人冢尝被发掘，骸骨暴露，与贼并尸，魂灵污染，且无功于国，何宜上配至尊！ 
现代文：并且冯贵人的坟墓曾经被盗贼发掘过，骨骸已经暴露，与贼寇尸骨混杂，魂灵蒙受污染。何况冯贵人对国家又没有任何功劳，怎么有资格配享至尊？ 
English: Moreover, the grave of Feng Guizhen had been excavated by thieves, the bones had been exposed, mixed with the bones of thieves and robbers, and the soul was polluted. Moreover, Feng Guizhen did not do any service to the country, so how could he be eligible to receive the Supreme?

古文：忠省球议，作色俯仰，蚩球曰： 陈廷尉建此议甚健！ 
现代文：赵忠看完陈球起草的议案，气得脸色大变，全身发抖，嗤笑说： 陈廷尉起草的议案真好！ 
English: Zhao Zhong looked at Chen Qiu's reason, and between bending over and laughing, Chen Qiu said: Chen Tingfei's proposal is very insightful!

古文：球曰： 陈、窦既冤，皇太后无故幽闭，臣常痛心，天下愤叹！
现代文：陈球回答说： 陈蕃、窦武既已遭受冤枉，窦太后又无缘无故地被幽禁，我一直很痛心，天下之人无不愤慨叹息！
English: Chen Qiu replied, "Chen Xuan and Dou Wu have been wronged, and Empress Dowager Dou has been imprisoned for no reason. I have been very distressed. People all over the world are sighing with indignation!"

古文：今日言之，退而受罪，宿昔之愿也！ 
现代文：今天，我既然已经把话说了出来，即使是会议之后遭到报复，决不后悔，这正是我一向的愿望。 
English: Today, since I have spoken out, even if I am retaliated against after the meeting, I will never regret it, which is exactly what I have always wanted.

古文：李咸曰： 臣本谓宜尔，诚与意合。 
现代文：太尉李咸紧接着说： 我原来就认为应该如此，陈廷尉的议案和我的意见完全相同。 
English: Lieutenant Li Xian immediately said: I originally thought that this should be the case, Lieutenant Chen Tingmou's motion and my opinion are exactly the same.

古文：于是公卿以下皆从球议。
现代文：于是三公、九卿以下的文武百官全都赞成陈球的意见。
English: As a result, all the civil and military officials below the three princes and nine nobles agreed with Chen Qu's opinion.

古文：曹节、王甫犹争，以为： 梁后家犯恶逆，别葬懿陵，武帝黜废卫后，而以李夫人配食，今窦氏罪深，岂得合葬先帝！ 
现代文：曹节、王甫仍继续争辩，他们认为： 梁皇后为先帝正妻，后因梁家犯恶逆大罪，将梁皇后别葬在懿陵。汉武帝废黜正妻卫皇后，而以李夫人配享。现在窦家罪恶如此深重，怎么能和先帝合葬？ 
English: Cao Si and Wang Fu still continue to argue. They think: Empress Liang was the first emperor's lawful wife. Later, because the Liang family committed a heinous crime, Empress Liang was not buried in the imperial mausoleum. Emperor Han Wu deposed his lawful wife, Empress Wei, and gave her to Lady Li. Now that the sins of the Dou family are so serious, how can they be buried together with the first emperor?

古文：李咸复上疏曰： 臣伏惟章德窦后虐害恭怀，安思阎后家犯恶逆，而和帝无异葬之议，顺朝无贬降之文。
现代文：太尉李咸又向灵帝上书说： 我俯伏回想，章帝窦皇后陷害梁贵人，安帝阎皇后家犯恶逆大罪，然而和帝并没有提出将嫡母窦皇后改葬别处，顺帝也没有下诏贬降嫡母阎皇后。
English: Second Lieutenant Li Xian also wrote to Emperor Ling, saying: I prostrate myself and recall that Emperor Zhang and Empress Dou framed Liang Guiren and Emperor An and Empress Yan's family committed the crime of high treason. However, Emperor He did not propose that Empress Dou's mother be reburied elsewhere, and Emperor Shun did not issue an edict to demean Empress Yan's mother.

古文：至于卫后，孝武皇帝身所废弃，不可以为比。
现代文：至于废黜卫皇后，那是武帝在世时亲自作出的决定，不可以用来相比。
English: As for the Imperial Guard, it cannot be compared to the one abandoned by Emperor Xiaowu himself.

古文：今长乐太后尊号在身，亲尝称制，且援立圣明，光隆皇祚。
现代文：而今长乐太后一直拥有皇太后的尊号，又曾亲身临朝治理天下，况且援立陛下为帝，使皇位光大兴隆。
English: Now, Empress Dowager Changle has always had the honorific title of empress dowager, and she has personally visited the imperial court to govern the world. Moreover, she supported the enthronement of His Majesty, making the imperial throne flourish.

古文：太后以陛下为子，陛下岂得不以太后为母！
现代文：皇太后既然把陛下当作儿子，陛下怎能不把皇太后当作母亲？
English: Since the Empress Dowager regards Your Majesty as a son, how can Your Majesty not regard the Empress Dowager as a mother?

古文：子无黜母，臣无贬君，宜合葬宣陵，一如旧制。 
现代文：儿子没有废黜母亲的，臣属没有贬谪君王的。所以应将窦太后与先帝合葬宣陵，一切都要遵从旧制。 
English: A son cannot dispense with his mother, and a courtier cannot disparage the emperor. They should be buried together in the Xuanling Mausoleum, and they should fully abide by the old system.

古文：帝省奏，从之。
现代文：灵帝看了奏章，完全采纳李咸的意见。
English: Ling Di read the score and fully adopted Li Xian's opinion.

古文：秋，七月，甲寅，葬桓思皇后于宣陵。
现代文：秋季，七月甲寅，将窦太后安葬在宣陵，谥号为桓思皇后。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Dowager Empress Dou was buried in the Xuanling Mausoleum. Her posthumous name was Empress Huan Si.

古文：有人书硃雀阙，言： 天下大乱，曹节、王甫幽杀太后，公卿皆尸禄，无忠言者。 
现代文：有人在朱雀门上书写，说： 天下大乱，曹节、王甫幽禁谋杀太后，三公、九卿，空受俸禄而不治事，没有人敢说忠言。 
English: Someone wrote on the Suzaku Gate, saying: The world is in turmoil, Cao Jie and Wang Fu are under house arrest for the murder of the empress dowager, the three princes and nine nobles are receiving salaries but doing nothing, and no one dares to speak the truth.

古文：诏司隶校尉刘猛逐捕，十日一会。
现代文：灵帝下诏，命司隶校尉刘猛负责追查搜捕，每十天作一次汇报。
English: Ling Di decreed that Lieutenant Liu Meng, the commander, would be responsible for the investigation and search, and would report every ten days.

古文：猛以诽书言直，不肯急捕。
现代文：刘猛认为所书写的话与实际情况相符，因此不肯加紧搜捕。
English: Liu Meng believed that the written words were consistent with the actual situation, so he refused to step up the search.

古文：月馀，主名不立；猛坐左转谏议大夫，以御史中丞段颎代之。
现代文：过了一月有余，仍然没有搜捕到书写的人犯。刘猛因此坐罪，被贬为谏议大夫，又任命御史中丞段接替刘猛。
English: After more than a month, there was still no search for the person who wrote the letter. As a result, Liu Meng committed a crime, was demoted to the position of a doctor of deliberation, and was appointed to succeed Liu Meng.

古文：颎乃四出逐捕，及太学游生系者千馀人。
现代文：于是段派人四出追查搜捕，包括在太学游学的学生在内，逮捕和关押的有一千余人。
English: As a result, Duan sent people out to search and arrest, including students from Taishu Tour School. More than a thousand people were arrested and detained.

古文：节等又使颎以它事奏猛，论输左校。
现代文：曹节等人又指使段寻找别的借口弹劾刘猛，判处将他遣送到左校营罚服苦役。
English: Cao Jie and others also instructed Duan to find another excuse to impeach Liu Meng and sentenced him to be sent to Zuo School Camp to serve hard labor.

古文：初，司隶校尉王寓依倚宦官，求荐于太常张奂，奂拒之，寓遂陷奂以党罪禁锢。
现代文：最初，前司隶校尉王寓依靠宦官的势力，曾请求太常张奂推荐，被张奂拒绝。王寓便诬陷张奂为党人，使他遭受禁锢，不许做官。
English: At first, the former sub-lieutenant Wang Ye relied on the power of eunuchs. He had asked Zhang Ye for a recommendation, but Zhang Ye refused. Wang Ye then framed Zhang Ye as a party member, and he was imprisoned and not allowed to work as an official.

古文：奂尝与段颎争击羌，不相平，颎为司隶，欲逐奂归敦煌而害之；奂奏记哀请于颎，乃得免。
现代文：而张奂跟段之间曾经因对西羌战争有过争执，互相怨恨不平。所以段担任司隶校尉以后，打算把张奂驱逐到敦煌郡，然后加以杀害。后因张奂向段写信苦苦哀求，才免于难。
English: However, Zhang Ye and Duan had a grudge against each other due to a dispute over the Xidi War. Therefore, Duan, after serving as a sergeant major, planned to expel Zhang Ye to Dunhuang County and then kill him. Later, he was spared because Zhang Ye wrote to Duan and pleaded with him.

古文：初，魏郡李暠为司隶校尉，以旧怨杀扶风苏谦；谦子不韦瘗而不葬，变姓名，结客报仇。
现代文：当初，魏郡人李担任司隶校尉，因为从前的怨恨而杀害左扶风人苏谦。苏谦的儿子苏不韦将父亲的尸体浅埋在地面上，不肯入土下葬。然后，改名换姓，结交宾客，决心为父报仇。
English: At first, Li, a native of Wei County, served as the captain of Sili, and killed Su Qian, a left-footer, because of old grudges. Su Qian's son, Su Bu Wei, buried his father's body shallowly on the ground, refusing to be buried in the ground. Then, he changed his name, made friends with guests, and was determined to avenge his father.

古文：暠迁大司农，不韦匿于谕廥中，凿地旁达暠之寝室，杀其妾并小儿。
现代文：稍后，李擢升为大司农，苏不韦躲藏在草料库中，挖掘地道，一直通到李的卧室，杀死李的妾和幼儿。
English: Later, when Li was promoted to the post of chief farmer, Su Buwei hid in a hay warehouse, dug a tunnel all the way to Li's bedroom, and killed Li's concubine and a toddler.

古文：暠大惧，以板藉地，一夕九徙。
现代文：李十分恐惧，用木板遍铺地面，一夜之间，搬动九次。
English: Li was so scared that he covered the floor with wooden planks and moved them nine times in one night.

古文：又掘暠父冢，断取其头，标之于市。
现代文：苏不韦又挖掘李父亲的坟墓，砍下死尸的头，悬挂到集市上。
English: Su Buwei also dug up the grave of Li's father, cut off the dead body's head, and hung it in the market.

古文：暠求捕不获，愤恚，呕血死。
现代文：李请求官府派人缉捕，未能抓获，他愤恨以极，竟至吐血而死。
English: Li asked the authorities to send someone to look for him, but they were unable to catch him. He was so angry that he vomited blood and died.

古文：不韦遇赦还家，乃葬父行丧。
现代文：后来，苏不韦遇到朝廷颁布赦令，才敢回到家乡，安葬父亲，举行丧礼。
English: Later, when the imperial court issued a pardon, Su Buwei dared to return to his hometown to bury his father and hold a funeral.

古文：张奂素睦于苏氏，而段颎与暠善，颎辟不韦为司隶从事，不韦惧，称病不诣。
现代文：张奂一向和苏家和睦，而段和李亲善。段延聘苏不韦为司隶从事，苏不韦感到恐惧，声称有病不肯就职。
English: Zhang Ye had always been on good terms with Su, while Duan was on good terms with Li. Duan hired Su Buwei as a subordinate, but Su Buwei was afraid and claimed to be ill and refused to take up the post.

古文：颎怒，使从事张贤就家杀之，先以鸩与贤父曰： 若贤不得不韦，便可饮此！ 
现代文：段勃然大怒，派遣从事张贤在苏家将苏不韦杀死。行前，段先将一杯毒酒交给张贤的父亲，并且威胁他说： 如果张贤此去杀不了苏不韦，你就把这杯毒酒喝下去！ 
English: Duan flew into a rage and dispatched Zhang Xian to kill Su Buwei at Su's home. Before leaving, Duan first gave a cup of poisoned wine to Zhang Xian's father and threatened him, saying, "If Zhang Xian can't kill Su Buwei, then drink this poisoned wine!"

古文：贤遂收不韦，并其一门六十馀人，尽诛之。
现代文：张贤便逮捕苏不韦，连同他的一家共六十余人，全都杀死。
English: Zhang Xian then arrested Su Buwei, together with his family, a total of more than sixty people, all killed.

古文：渤海王悝之贬瘿陶也，因中常侍王甫求复国，许谢钱五千万；既而桓帝遗诏复悝国，悝知非甫功，不肯还谢钱。
现代文：勃海王刘悝当初被贬降为瘿陶王时，请托中常侍王甫游说桓帝，如果能够恢复原来的封国，愿送给五千万钱作为谢礼。不久，桓帝去世，遗诏恢复刘悝原来的封国。刘悝知道，这不是王甫的功劳，因此不肯送给王甫这笔谢钱。
English: When Liu Xuan, the king of Bo Hai, was initially demoted to the status of the king of Shantou, he asked Wang Fu, the vice-minister of the CPC Central Committee, to lobby Emperor Huan. If he could restore the original fief, he would be willing to give fifty million yuan as a thank-you gift. Soon after, Emperor Huan died and issued a will to restore Liu Xuan's original fief. Liu Xuan knew that this was not Wang Fu's achievement, so he refused to give Wang Fu this thank-you money.

古文：中常侍郑飒、中黄门董腾数与悝交通，甫密司察以告段颎。
现代文：中常侍郑飒、中黄门董腾经常和勃海王刘悝来往，王甫秘密派人监督，将情况告诉段。
English: Zhongzheng's personal attendant Zheng Qi and Zhonghuangmen's Dong Teng often went back and forth with Bo Hai's King Liu Bei. Wang Fu secretly sent someone to supervise and report the situation to Duan.

古文：冬，十月，收飒送北寺狱，使尚书令廉忠诬奏 飒等谋迎立悝，大逆不道 ，遂诏冀州刺史收悝考实，迫责悝，令自杀；妃妾十一人、子女七十人、伎女二十四人皆死狱中，傅、相以下悉伏诛。
现代文：冬季，十月，逮捕郑飒，羁押北寺监狱。王甫又指使尚书令廉忠诬告说： 郑飒等人阴谋迎立勃海王刘悝当皇帝，大逆不道。 于是灵帝下诏，命冀州刺史逮捕刘悝，就地审问核实，责令他自杀。刘悝的妃妾十一人、子女七十人，歌舞伎女二十四人，全都死在狱中。封国太傅、宰相以下官吏，全都伏诛。
English: In the winter, in October, Zheng Qi was arrested and detained in Beiji Prison. Wang Fuxiong also instructed Shang Shuling to falsely accuse Liang Zhong, saying: Zheng Qi and others conspired to make Bo Hai King Liu Qi the emperor, which was a great treason. Therefore, Emperor Lingdi issued an edict, ordered the state to arrest Liu Qi, interrogated and verified on the spot, and ordered him to commit suicide. Liu Qi's eleven concubines, seventy children, and twenty-four kabuki actresses all died in prison. The grand tutor of the state, the prime minister and other officials were all hanged.

古文：甫等十二人皆以功封列侯。
现代文：王甫等十二人都因此有功被朝廷封为列侯。
English: Twelve people, including Wang Fu, were awarded the title of vassal lord by the imperial court.

古文：十一月，会稽妖贼许生起句章，自称阳明皇帝，众以万数；遣扬州刺史臧旻、丹杨太守陈寅讨之。
现代文：十一月，会稽郡妖贼许生在句章县聚众起兵，自称 阳明皇帝 ，部众多达以万计数。朝廷派遣扬州刺史臧、丹阳郡太守陈寅率军前往讨伐。
English: In November, Xu Sheng, the villain of Huiqi County, gathered thousands of soldiers in Juzhang County, claiming to be the Yangming Emperor. The imperial court sent Yangzhou Zhisheng and Danyang County Governor Chen Yin to lead the army to the crusade.

古文：十二月，司徒许栩罢，以大鸿胪袁隗为司徒。
现代文：十二月，司徒许栩被罢免，擢升大鸿胪袁隗为司徒。
English: In December, Szeto Hsu was removed from his post and promoted to the post of Szeto.

古文：鲜卑寇并州。
现代文：鲜卑侵犯并州。
English: The newly conquered provinces were annexed by the Berber raiders.

古文：是岁，单于车儿死，子屠特若尸逐就单于立。
现代文：同年，南匈奴汗国伊陵若尸逐就单于栾提车儿去世，儿子继位，号为屠特若尸逐就单于。
English: In the same year, the Southern Hunnic Khanate of Iling passed away, and his son succeeded to the throne, with the name Tu Te.

古文：孝灵皇帝上之下熹平二年
现代文：熹平二年春季，正月，发生大瘟疫。
English: In the spring of the second year of Heping, in the first month of the year, a great plague occurred.

古文：春，正月，大疫。丁丑，司空宗俱薨。
现代文：丁丑，司空宗俱去世。
English: Ding Yuxiu, Secretary of the Communist Party of China, passed away.

古文：二月，壬午，赦天下。
现代文：二月壬午，大赦天下。
English: At noon on February 2nd, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：以光禄勋杨赐为司空。
现代文：擢升光禄勋杨赐为司空。
English: Ren Guanglu Xun Yang was given the title of Siku.

古文：三月，太尉李咸免。
现代文：三月，太尉李咸被免官。
English: In March, Lieutenant Li Xian was relieved of duty.

古文：夏，五月，以司隶校尉段颎为太尉。
现代文：夏季，五月，擢升司隶校尉段为太尉。
English: In the summer, in May, he was promoted to first lieutenant.

古文：六月，北海地震。
现代文：六月，北海国发生地震。
English: In June, the North Sea earthquake.

古文：秋，七月，司空杨赐免；以太常颍川唐珍为司空。
现代文：秋季，七月，司空杨赐被免官，擢升太常颍川郡人唐珍为司空。
English: In the autumn, in July, Yang Jie, the secretary of the Air Force, was removed from his post, and Tang Zhen, a man from Taichung County, was promoted to secretary of the Air Force.

古文：珍，衡之弟也。
现代文：唐珍是唐衡的弟弟。
English: Tang Zhen is Tang Heng's younger brother.

古文：冬，十二月，太尉段颎罢。
现代文：冬季，十二月，太尉段被罢免。
English: In the winter, in December, Taifeng Duan was dismissed.

古文：鲜卑寇幽、并二州。
现代文：鲜卑侵犯幽州、并州。
English: A fresh-faced bandit raids a town and takes control of two states.

古文：癸酉晦，日有食之。
现代文：癸酉晦，发生日食。
English: On the evening of the 30th, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：孝灵皇帝上之下熹平三年春，二月，己巳，赦天下。
现代文：熹平三年春季，二月己巳，大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Heian period, in February, it was time for the general amnesty.

古文：以太常东海陈耽为太尉。
现代文：擢升太常东海郡陈耽为太尉。
English: Chen Tan of Taizhong Donghai County was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：三月，中山穆王畅薨，无子，国除。
现代文：三月，中山王刘畅去世，无子继承，封国被撤除。
English: In March, the king of Zhongshan, Liu Chang, died without a son to succeed him, and the state seal was removed.

古文：夏，六月，封河间王利子康为济南王，奉孝仁皇祀。
现代文：夏季，六月，封河间王刘利的儿子刘康为济南王，侍奉灵帝父亲、孝仁皇刘苌的祭祀。
English: In the summer, in June, Liu Kang, the son of Liu Li, the king of Huazhong, was made the king of Jinan, and served the sacrificial rites of Emperor Lingdi's father, Emperor Xiaoren.

古文：吴郡司马富春孙坚召募精勇，得千馀人，助州郡讨许生。
现代文：吴郡司马富春县人孙坚招募精锐强悍的勇士，集结千余人，帮助州郡官府讨伐妖贼许生。
English: Sun Jian, the county magistrate of Ma Fuchun County in Wu County, recruited elite strong warriors and gathered more than a thousand people to help the state and county government to fight the demon thief Xu Sheng.

古文：冬，十一月，臧旻、陈寅大破生于会稽，斩之。
现代文：冬季，十一月，臧、陈寅在会稽郡大破许生，并将许生斩杀。
English: In winter, in November, Zhai and Chen Yin brutally beat Xu Sheng in Heji County and beheaded him.

古文：任城王博薨，无子，国绝。
现代文：任城王刘博去世，无子继承，封国撤销。
English: Liu Bo, the appointed king of the city, died without a son to succeed him, and the fief was revoked.

古文：十二月，鲜卑入北地，太守夏育率屠各追击，破之。
现代文：十二月，鲜卑攻入北地郡，太守夏育率领屠各兵前往追击，将其击破。
English: In December, Xianbei invaded Beidai County, and the governor Xia Yu led the soldiers to pursue and defeat it.

古文：迁育为护乌桓校尉。
现代文：夏育被朝廷擢升为护乌桓校尉。
English: The imperial court transferred Li Yu to the post of Wu Huan's bodyguard.

古文：鲜卑又寇并州。
现代文：鲜卑又侵犯并州。
English: Newly humiliated and plundered and annexed the state.

古文：司空唐珍罢，以永乐少府许训为司空。
现代文：司空唐珍被罢免，擢升永乐少府许训为司空。
English: Sikyong Tang Zhen was dismissed and Yongle Shophu Xu Xun was promoted to Sikyong.

古文：孝灵皇帝上之下熹平四年
现代文：熹平四年
English: Hao Ping four years old

古文：春，三月，诏诸儒正《五经》文字，命议郎蔡邕为古文、篆、隶三体书之，刻石，立于太学门外，使后儒晚学咸取正焉。
现代文：春季，三月，灵帝下诏，命儒学大师们校正《五经》文字，命议郎蔡邕用古文、大篆、隶书三种字体书写，刻在石碑上，竖立在太学门外，使后来的儒生晚辈，都以此作为标准。
English: In the spring, in March, Emperor Lingdi issued an edict, ordering the masters of Confucianism to correct the text of the Five Classics, and ordering the master of Confucianism, Cai Qi, to write in the three fonts of ancient, large and small, engraved on a stone monument, and erected outside the gate of Taiyue, so that the later generations of Confucians would all use this as a standard.

古文：碑始立，其观视及摹写者车乘日千馀两，填塞街陌。
现代文：石碑刚竖立时，坐车前来观看以及临摹和抄写的，每天有一千余辆之多，填满大街小巷。
English: When the stone monument was first erected, more than a thousand cars a day came to see, copy and copy it, filling the streets and alleys.

古文：初，朝议以州郡相党，人情比周，乃制昏姻之家及两州人士不得对相监临，至是复有三互法，禁忌转密，选用艰难，幽、冀二州久缺不补。
现代文：最初，朝廷集议，因州郡之间互相勾结，徇私舞弊，于是制定法律，规定有婚姻关系的家庭，以及两州的人士，不得互相担任负责督察对方的上官。到现在，更制定 三互法 ，禁忌更加严密，朝廷选用州郡等地方官员时非崐常艰难。
English: At first, the imperial court deliberated, and because of the collusion between the states and counties and the self-serving fraud, it enacted a law stipulating that families with a marital relationship, as well as people from the two states, should not serve as superiors responsible for inspecting each other. To date, the Three Reciprocal Laws have been enacted, and the taboos have become stricter. It is often difficult for the imperial court to select state, county and other local officials.

古文：蔡邕上疏曰： 伏见幽、冀旧壤，铠、马所出，比年兵饥，渐至空耗。
现代文：所以，幽州、冀州的刺史，职位空缺很久，一直找不到合适的人选来接任。于是蔡邕上书说： 我俯伏观察，幽州、冀州故土，本来是盛产铠甲和骑马的地方，连年以来，遭受兵灾和饥馑，逐渐使得两州的物力和财力损耗殆尽。
English: Therefore, in the history of Yuzhou and Jizhou, the position has been vacant for a long time, and a suitable candidate has not been found to take over. So Cai Wei wrote: I prostrated myself and observed that the native land of Yuzhou and Jizhou, which was originally a place rich in armor and horseback riding, has suffered from military disasters and famine for years, gradually causing the material and financial resources of the two states to be depleted.

古文：今者阙职经时，吏民延属，而三府选举，逾月不定。
现代文：而今两州刺史职位长期空缺，官吏和人民都延颈盼望。可是三公推荐的人选，却长期不能确定。
English: Now, the posts of the two states' chief historian have been vacant for a long time, and the officials and people are looking forward to it. However, the candidates recommended by the three kings cannot be determined for a long time.

古文：臣怪问其故，云避三互。
现代文：我深感奇怪，打听原因何在，据有关官吏回答说，是为了避免 三互法 。
English: I am deeply puzzled. When I asked why, the relevant official replied that it was to avoid the "Three Reciprocal Laws."

古文：十一月有禁，当取二州而已。
现代文：其他十一州也都同样存在禁止 三互法 的问题，非独这两州应当禁止而已。
English: The other eleven states also have the same problem of prohibiting the three reciprocal laws, but these two states should be banned.

古文：又，二州之士或复限以岁月，狐疑迟淹，两州悬空，万里萧条，无所管系。
现代文：此外，这两州的人士，有的又因受年资的限制，狐疑不定，拖延时间。结果，使两州刺史的职位长期空缺，万里疆域一片萧条，没有人去管理。
English: In addition, the people of these two states, some of whom are limited by seniority, are uncertain and delay the time. As a result, the positions of the two states have been vacant for a long time, and the vast territory is in a depression, and there is no one to manage.

古文：愚以为三互之禁，禁之薄者。
现代文：我认为， 三互法 不过是最轻微的禁令。
English: In my opinion, the Three Reciprocal Laws are only the slightest of prohibitions.

古文：今但申以威灵，明其宪令，对相部主，尚畏惧不敢营私；况乃三互，何足为嫌！
现代文：而今只要利用朝廷的威权，申明国家的法令，即使是两州的人士互相交换担任刺史尚且畏惧，不敢结党营私，何况还有 三互法 的限制，又有什么嫌疑？
English: But now, as long as the authority of the imperial court is used, and the laws of the country are affirmed, even if the people of the two states are afraid to exchange and serve as each other's leaders, and dare not form a party, not to mention the restrictions of the Three Reciprocal Laws, what is there to suspect?

古文：昔韩安国起自徒中，硃买臣出于幽贱，并以才宜，还守本邦，岂复顾循三互，系以末制乎！
现代文：过去，韩安国拔起于囚徒之中，朱买臣出身于微贱家庭，都是因为他们的才能胜任，才被派回他们出身的本郡、本封国为官，难道还要顾及 三互法 的禁忌，受这种非根本制度的束缚？
English: In the past, Han An Guo was plucked up from among the prisoners, and Zhu Mei Sheng was born from a lowly family. It was only because of their talent that they were sent back to their home counties and fiefdoms to serve as officials. Is it necessary to take into account the taboos of the Three Reciprocal Laws and be bound by this non-fundamental system?

古文：臣愿陛下上则先帝，蠲除近禁，其诸州刺史器用可换者，无拘日月、三互，以差厥中。 
现代文：我希望陛下对上效法先帝，撤消最近制定的 三互法 禁令，对于各州刺史，凡是才能可以胜任的，应该及时任命和调换，不再受年资、 三互法 的限制，使之成为定制。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will follow the example of the former emperor and revoke the recently enacted "Three Reciprocal Laws" ban. For the history of each state, all talents that can be competent should be appointed and transferred in a timely manner, and no longer be subject to seniority, "Three Reciprocal Laws" restrictions, making it a custom.

古文：朝廷不从。
现代文：朝廷不肯听从。
English: The court did not follow his advice.

古文：臣光曰：叔向有言： 国将亡，必多制。 
现代文：臣司马光曰：叔向曾经说过： 国家行将灭亡，法令规章一定繁多。 
English: Minister Sima Guang said: Uncle Xiang once said: The country will perish, there must be many laws and regulations.

古文：明王之政，谨择忠贤而任之，凡中外之臣，有功则赏，有罪则诛，无所阿私，法制不烦而天下大治。
现代文：圣明君王治理国家，谨慎选择忠良贤能加以任用。无论是对朝廷和地方的臣属，凡是有功的加以奖赏，有罪的则加以诛杀，没有任何偏袒。法令规章并不繁多，却能做到天下大治。
English: The Sage Monarch governs the country, carefully choosing the most loyal, good and capable to be appointed. For both the imperial court and local subjects, those who are meritorious are rewarded, and those who are guilty are killed, without any favoritism. There are not many laws and regulations, but they can achieve world domination.

古文：所以然者何哉？
现代文：为什么会如此？
English: Why is that?

古文：执其本故也。
现代文：是因为抓住了治理国家的根本。
English: It is because they have grasped the fundamentals of governing the country.

古文：及其衰也，百官之任不能择人，而禁令益多，防闲益密，有功者以阂文不赏，为奸者以巧法免诛，上下劳扰而天下大乱。
现代文：等到国家行将衰败灭亡之时，文武百官不能选择合适的人才担任，各种禁令愈来愈多，防范措施也愈来愈严密。有功的因碍于条文得不到奖赏，作奸犯罪的却巧妙地利用法律，得以免除诛杀，上下劳苦骚扰，天下反而大乱。
English: By the time the country was on the brink of decline and ruin, the civil and military officials could not choose the right talent to serve, various prohibitions were more and more numerous, and preventive measures were more and more stringent. The meritorious could not be rewarded because of the provisions, but the criminal was cleverly using the law to be exempted from fighting and harassment, and the world was in turmoil.

古文：所以然者何哉？
现代文：为什么会如此？
English: Why is that?

古文：逐其末故也。
现代文：是因为治理国家舍本逐末的缘故。
English: This is due to the fact that the governance of the country has become more and more lax.

古文：孝灵之时，刺史、二千石贪如豺虎，暴殄烝民，而朝廷方守三互之禁。
现代文：汉灵帝时，州刺史、郡太守贪婪暴虐，如狼似虎，残害人民，无以复加。然而，朝廷却还在严格遵守 三互法 的禁令，以防止官吏结党营私。
English: At the time of Emperor Hanling, the prefectural governor and the county magistrate were greedy and tyrannical, like wolves and tigers, and they could not be more cruel to the people. However, the imperial court was still strictly abiding by the prohibition of the Three Reciprocal Laws to prevent officials from forming parties and engaging in private business.

古文：以今视之，岂不适足为笑而深可为戒哉！
现代文：现在回顾起来，岂不正好是一场笑话，应该深深地引为鉴戒。
English: Looking back on it now, it was a joke that should serve as a warning.

古文：封河间王建孙佗为任城王。
现代文：封河间王刘建的孙子刘佗为任城王。
English: Liu Jian, the grandson of Liu Jian, the feudal lord of Hechuan, became the king of the city.

古文：夏，四月，郡、国七大水。
现代文：夏季，四月，有七个郡、封国发生大水灾。
English: In the summer, in April, there were major floods in seven counties and fiefdoms.

古文：五月，丁卯，赦天下。
现代文：五月丁卯，大赦天下。
English: In May, Dingwu was granted amnesty.

古文：延陵园灾。
现代文：汉成帝陵园延陵失火。
English: The Yanling Mausoleum in the Hancheng Imperial Necropolis caught fire.

古文：鲜卑寇幽州。
现代文：鲜卑侵犯幽州。
English: The Xianbei Cossacks plundered Yuzhou.

古文：六月，弘农、三辅螟。
现代文：六月，弘农郡和三辅地区螟虫成灾。
English: In June, Gongnong and Sanfu were devastated by floods.

古文：于窴王安国攻拘弥，大破之，杀其王。
现代文：于阗王国国王安国攻打拘弥王国，大破拘弥军。斩杀拘弥王。
English: King Ankoku of the Kingdom of Yuri attacked the Kingdom of Tsunemi and defeated the army of Tsunemi. He killed King Tsunemi.

古文：戊己校尉、西域长史各发兵辅立拘弥侍子定兴为王，人众裁千口。
现代文：戊己校尉、西域长史分别出兵援救，并帮助拥立拘弥王国送到朝廷当人质的王子定兴为拘弥王国的国王，全国的人口只有一千人。
English: Captain Wu Zi and Western Regions Long History separately sent troops to rescue Prince Ding Xing, who had been held hostage at the imperial court and helped to establish the Jimi Kingdom. He became the king of the Jimi Kingdom, which had a population of only one thousand people.

古文：孝灵皇帝上之下熹平五年夏，四月，癸亥，赦天下。
现代文：熹平五年夏季，四月癸亥，大赦天下。
English: In the summer of the 5th year of the Heian period, in April, the Boer War broke out, and there was general amnesty.

古文：益州郡夷反，太守李颙讨平之。
现代文：益州郡夷族起兵反叛，太守李率军前往讨伐，将其平定下去。
English: The Yi people of Yizhou County rebelled, and the Empress Dowager Li led the army to fight and subdue them.

古文：大雩。
现代文：朝廷举行祈雨祭祀大典。
English: The festival is held to pray for rain.

古文：五月，太尉陈耽罢，以司空许训为太尉。
现代文：五月，太尉陈耽被罢免，任命司空许训为太尉。
English: In May, First Lieutenant Chen Tan was removed from his post and Sifu Xu Xun was appointed First Lieutenant.

古文：闰月，永昌太守曹鸾上书曰： 夫党人者，或耆年渊德，或衣冠英贤，皆宜股肱王室，左右大猷者也；而久被禁锢，辱在涂泥。
现代文：闰月，永昌郡太守曹鸾上书说： 所谓党人，有的是老年高德，有的是士大夫中的英俊贤才，都应该辅佐皇室，在陛下左右参与朝廷的重大决策。然而竟被长期禁锢，不许做官，甚至被驱逐到泥泞地带，备受羞辱。
English: In the intercalary month, Cao Jun, the governor of Yongchang County, wrote: The so-called party members, some of whom are old and virtuous, and some of whom are handsome and wise, should support the royal family and participate in the major decision-making of the imperial court around His Majesty. However, they were imprisoned for a long time, not allowed to work as officials, and even deported to the muddy area, suffering humiliation.

古文：谋反大逆尚蒙赦宥，党人何罪，独不开恕乎！
现代文：犯了谋反大逆的重罪，尚且能蒙陛下的赦免，党人又有什么罪过，独独不能受到宽恕？
English: Having committed the felony of conspiring to commit high treason, even though they can be pardoned by His Majesty, what are the sins of party members that cannot be forgiven?

古文：所以灾异屡见，水旱荐臻，皆由于斯。
现代文：之所以灾异经常出现，水灾和旱灾接踵而至，原因都由于此。
English: This is the reason why disasters often occur, floods and droughts come one after another.

古文：宜加沛然，以副天心。 
现代文：陛下应该赐下恩典，以符合上天的心意。 
English: Your Majesty should bestow grace in accordance with Heaven's will.

古文：帝省奏，大怒，即诏司隶、益州槛车收鸾，送槐里狱，掠杀之。
现代文：灵帝看完奏章，勃然大怒，立即下诏，命司隶和益州官府逮捕曹鸾，用囚车押到京都洛阳监禁，严刑拷打而死。
English: After the Emperor Lingdi finished reading the music, he flew into a rage and immediately issued an edict. The magistrate and the Yizhou government arrested Cao Cao, took him to Kyoto's Luoyang in a prison van, and tortured him to death.

古文：于是诏州郡更考党人门生、故吏、父子、兄弟在位者，悉免官禁锢，爰及五属。
现代文：于是灵帝又下诏各州、各郡官府，重新调查党人的学生门徒、旧时的部属、父亲、儿子、兄弟，凡是当官的，全都被免职，加以禁锢，不许再做官。
English: As a result, Emperor Lingdi also issued an edict to all prefectural and county government offices to reinvestigate the students and disciples of Party members, old subordinates, fathers, sons, brothers, and all those in positions of authority. They were all removed from their posts, imprisoned, and prohibited from serving as officials again.

古文：六月，壬戌，以太常南阳刘逸为司空。
现代文：这种处分，扩大到包括党人同一家族中五服之内的亲属。六月壬戌，擢升太常南阳郡人刘逸为司空。
English: This punishment was expanded to include relatives within five generations of the same family who were party members. In June, Liu Yatong, a resident of Nanyang County in Taichang, was promoted to the position of secretary.

古文：秋，七月，太尉许训罢。以光禄勋刘宽为太尉。
现代文：秋季，七月，太尉许训被罢免，擢升光禄勋刘宽为太尉。
English: In the autumn, in July, Captain Xu Xun was dismissed and promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：冬，十月，司徒袁隗罢；十一月，丙戌，以光禄大夫杨赐为司徒。
现代文：冬季，十月，司徒袁隗被罢免。十一月丙戌，擢升光禄大夫杨赐为司徒。
English: In the winter, in October, the scholar, Yuan Qi, was dismissed. In November, the scholar, Guanglu Doctor Yang Jie, was promoted to the scholar.

古文：是岁，鲜卑寇幽州。
现代文：这一年，鲜卑侵犯幽州。
English: In that year, the Xianbei corsair raided Yuzhou.

古文：孝灵皇帝上之下熹平六年春，正月，辛丑，赦天下。
现代文：熹平六年春季，正月辛丑，大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the 6th year of the Heian period, the first month of the year was ugly, and there was a general amnesty.

古文：夏，四月，大旱，七州蝗。
现代文：夏季，四月，大旱，有七个州蝗虫成灾。
English: Summer, April, drought, locusts in seven states.

古文：令三公条奏长吏苛酷贪污者，罢免之。
现代文：灵帝下诏，命三公分别举奏苛刻酷虐和贪污的地方官员，一律将他们罢免。
English: Ling Di issued an edict, ordering the three princes to punish the local officials who were harsh, cruel and corrupt, and to dismiss them all.

古文：平原相渔阳阳球坐严酷，征诣廷尉。
现代文：平原国宰相渔阳郡人阳球被指控为严刑酷罚，征召回京都洛阳，送往廷尉处治罪。
English: The prime minister of the Plains State, Rinyangqiu of Yuyang County, was accused of severe punishment and summoned back to Luoyang, Kyoto, and sent to Tingye to be punished.

古文：帝以球前为九江太守讨贼有功，特赦之，拜议郎。
现代文：灵帝因阳球从前担任九江郡太守时，讨伐盗贼建立过功勋，特别下令将他赦免，任命他为议郎。
English: When Ling Di once served as the governor of Jiujiang County, he made a special order to pardon him and appoint him as a mediator.

古文：鲜卑寇三边。
现代文：鲜卑侵犯东、西、北等三边。
English: The fresh pied curlew raids the east, west, and north.

古文：市贾小民有相聚为宣陵孝子者数十人，诏皆除太子舍人。
现代文：京都洛阳有数十名小市民共同聚集到桓帝陵园宣陵，自称是 宣陵孝子 。灵帝下诏，一律将他们任命为太子舍人。
English: Dozens of small citizens from Kyoto's Luoyang gathered at the Imperial Mausoleum of Emperor Kantei, claiming to be the sons and daughters of Emperor Kantei. Emperor Lingdi decreed that all of them would be appointed as Prince Consorts.

古文：秋，七月，司空刘逸免，以卫尉陈球为司空。
现代文：秋季，七月，司空刘逸被免官，擢升卫尉陈球为司空。
English: In the autumn, in July, Liu Yat, the flight attendant, was removed from his post, and Lieutenant Chen Ku was promoted to flight attendant.

古文：初，帝好文学，自造《皇羲篇》五十章，因引诸生能为文赋者并待制鸿都门下。
现代文：起初，灵帝喜好文学创作，自己撰写《皇羲篇》五十章，遴选太学中能创作辞赋的学生，集中到鸿都门下，等待灵帝的诏令。
English: At first, Emperor Lingdi was fond of literary creation. He wrote fifty chapters of the "Imperial Decrees" himself, selected students who could write words in the Imperial Academy, gathered them under Hongdu, and waited for Emperor Lingdi's edict.

古文：后诸为尺牍及工书鸟篆者，皆加引召，遂至数十人。
现代文：后来，善于起草诏书和擅长书写鸟篆的人，也都加以征召引见，便达到数十人之多。
English: Later, people who were good at drafting the imperial edict and good at writing the bird's beak were also conscripted and brought to the court, reaching dozens of people.

古文：侍中祭酒乐松、贾护多引无行趣势之徒置其间，熹陈闾里小事；帝甚悦之，待以不次之位；又久不亲行郊庙之礼。
现代文：侍中祭酒乐松、贾护，又引荐了许多没有品行，趋炎附势之徒，夹杂在他们中间。每当灵帝召见时，喜欢说一些民间街头巷尾的琐碎趣事，灵帝非常喜悦，于是不按照通常的次序，往往对他们越级擢升。
English: The middle attendants of the festival, Shule Song, and Jia You, also introduced many immoral, inflamed and powerful people, mixed in among them. Whenever the Holy Spirit was summoned, he liked to talk about some trivial fun things at the end of the folk street. The Holy Spirit was very pleased, so he did not follow the usual order, and often promoted them to a higher level.

古文：会诏群臣各陈政要，蔡邕上封事曰： 夫迎气五郊，清庙祭祀，养老辟雍，皆帝者之大业，祖宗所祗奉也。
现代文：而灵帝很久没有亲自前往宗庙祭祀祖宗，到郊外祭祀天地。正好遇到灵帝下诏，命朝廷文武百官分别上书陈述施政的要领，于是蔡邕上密封奏章说： 迎接四季节气于五郊，到宗庙去祭祀祖宗，在太学举行养老之礼，都是皇帝的重大事情，受到祖宗们的重视。
English: But Lingdi did not personally go to the ancestral temple to worship the ancestors for a long time, and went to the suburbs to worship heaven and earth. It just so happened that Lingdi issued an edict, ordering the imperial court and military officials to separately submit a letter to state the essentials of governance, so Cai Xuan sealed the score and said: To welcome the four seasons in the suburbs, to go to the ancestral temple to worship the ancestors, and to hold a pension ceremony in Taixu, are all important things for the emperor, and are valued by the ancestors.

古文：而有司数以蕃国疏丧、宫内产生及吏卒小污，废阙不行，忘礼敬之大，任禁忌之书，拘信小故，以亏大典。
现代文：可是有关官吏却多次借口血缘关系已经非常疏远的王、侯们的丧事，或者皇宫内妇女生小孩，以及吏卒患病或死亡，而停止举行这些大典。结果，忘却了礼敬天地神明和祖宗这一类大事，专门听信那些禁忌之书，拘泥于小事，以致减损和毁坏国家大典。
English: However, the officials concerned have repeatedly stopped holding these grand ceremonies on the pretext of the funerals of kings and lords who are distantly related by blood, or the birth of children by women in the imperial palace, and the illness or death of officials. As a result, they have forgotten the major events such as the worship of the gods of heaven and earth and ancestors, listened to the taboo books, and stuck to minor matters, thus impairing and ruining the national grand ceremony.

古文：自今斋制宜如故典，庶答风霆、灾妖之异。
现代文：从今以后，一切斋戒制度都应恢复正常，以平息上天震怒和妖异灾变。
English: Henceforth, all fasting regimes should return to normal in order to appease God's wrath and demonic cataclysms.

古文：又，古者取士必使诸侯岁贡。
现代文：此外，古代朝廷任用官员，总是命令各国诸侯定期向天子推荐。
English: In addition, officials appointed by the ancient imperial court always ordered the princes of various countries to regularly recommend them to the Son of Heaven.

古文：孝武之世，郡举孝廉，又有贤良、文学之选，于是名臣辈出，文武并兴。
现代文：到汉武帝时期，除了由每郡官府推荐孝廉以外，还遴选贤良、文学等科目的人才，于是著名的大臣不断出现，文官武吏都很兴盛。
English: By the time of Emperor Hanwu, in addition to recommending the best filial piety from the government office in each county, they also selected talents in subjects such as virtue and literature. As a result, famous ministers kept appearing, and civil and military officials were very prosperous.

古文：汉之得人，数路而已。
现代文：汉王朝遴选国家官吏，也只不过是通过这几个渠道而已。
English: The Han Dynasty selected state officials only through these channels.

古文：夫书画辞赋，才之小者；匡国治政，未有其能。
现代文：至于书法、绘画、辞赋，不过是小小的才能，对于匡正国家，治理政事，则无能为力。
English: As for calligraphy, painting, and writing, they are only small talents, and they are powerless to rectify the country and manage political affairs.

古文：陛下即位之初，先涉经术，听政馀日，观省篇章，聊以游意当代博奕，非以为教化取士之本。
现代文：陛下即位初期，先行涉猎儒家经学，在处理朝廷政事的空暇时间，观看文学作品，不过是用来代替赌博、下棋，当作消遣而已，并不是把它作为教化风俗和遴选人才的标准。
English: In the early days of His Majesty's accession to the throne, he first dabbled in Confucian classics, and in his spare time when dealing with the affairs of the imperial court, he watched literary works, but it was only used as a substitute for gambling and playing chess, as a pastime, and not as a standard for enlightening customs and selecting talents.

古文：而诸生竞利，作者鼎沸，其高者颇引经训风喻之言，下则连偶俗语，有类徘优，或窃成文，虚冒名氏。
现代文：然而，太学的学生们竞相贪图名利，写作的人情绪沸腾，其中高雅的，还能引用儒家经书中有益教化的言论；而庸俗的，却通篇是俚语俗话，好象艺人的戏文；有些人甚至抄袭别人的文章，或冒充别人的姓名。
English: However, the students of Taigaku are competing for fame and fortune, and the writers are in high spirits. Among them, the elegant ones can also quote the edifying words in the Confucian scriptures; while the vulgar ones are full of slang, like an artist's play; some even plagiarize other people's articles or impersonate other people's names.

古文：臣每受诏于盛化门，差次录第，其未及者，亦复随辈皆见拜擢。
现代文：我每次在盛化门接受诏书，看到对他们分别等级一一录用，其中一些实在不够格的人，也都追随他们的后面，得到任命或擢升。
English: Every time I received the imperial rescript at Shenghua Gate, I saw that they were recruited one by one in different grades, and some of them who were really unqualified also followed them and were appointed or promoted.

古文：既加之恩，难复收改，但守奉禄，于义已弘，不可复使治民及在州郡。
现代文：恩典既已赏赐，难以重新收回更改，准许他们领取俸禄，已是宽宏大量，不能再任命他们做官，或者派遣他们到州郡官府任职。
English: Once the grace has been given, it is difficult to take back the change. Allowing them to receive salaries is already generous, and they can no longer be appointed as officials, or send them to serve in the state and county government.

古文：昔孝宣会诸儒于石渠，章帝集学士于白虎，通经释义，其事优大，文武之道，所宜从之。
现代文：过去，汉宣帝在石渠阁会聚诸儒，汉章帝在白虎观集中经学博士，统一对经书的解释，这是非常美好的大事，周文王、武王的圣王大道，应该遵从去做。
English: In the past, Emperor Han Xuan gathered all the Confucian scholars in Shiquijie, and Emperor Han Zhang received the Doctor of Theology in the White Tiger Viewing Center to unify the interpretation of the scriptures. This is a very wonderful event. King Zhou Wen and King Wu's Sacred King Road should be followed.

古文：若乃不能小善，虽有可观，孔子以为致远则泥，君子固当志其大者。
现代文：倘若是小的才能、小的善行，虽然也有它的价值，但正如孔丘所认为的那样，从长远的观点观察却行不通。所以，正人君子应当追求远大的目标。
English: If a small talent, a small good deed, although it has its value, as Confucius believed, cannot be observed from a long-term point of view, then a gentleman should pursue a lofty goal.

古文：又，前一切以宣陵孝子为太子舍人，臣闻孝文皇帝制丧服三十六日，虽继体之君，父子至亲，公卿列臣受恩之重，皆屈情从制，不敢逾越。
现代文：还有，不久之前，陛下把 宣陵孝子 一律任命他们为太子舍人。我曾经听说过，汉文帝规定，服丧只需三十六日，即令是继承帝位的皇帝，又是父子至亲，以及身受重恩的三公、九卿等文武大臣，都要克制自己的感情，遵守这项制度，不得超越。
English: Furthermore, not long ago, His Majesty appointed all of them, including the sons and daughters of Emperor Xuanling, to be the Prince's pallbearers. I once heard that Emperor Hanwen stipulated that it only takes 36 days to hold a funeral, so that even the emperor who inherits the imperial throne, the father and son, and the ministers of culture and armed forces, such as the three princes and nine nobles, who have been highly favored, should restrain their feelings, abide by this system, and not exceed it.

古文：今虚伪小人，本非骨肉，既无幸私之恩，又无禄仕之实，恻隐之心，义无所依，至有奸轨之人通容其中。
现代文：而今这批弄虚作假的市井小人，跟先帝并非骨肉之亲，既没有受过先帝的厚恩，又没有享受过官位和俸禄，他们的孝心，从道理上说没有任何依据。甚至有一些为非作歹的人，也乘机混到里面。
English: But now, this group of small-town villains, who have been making a sham of things, are not flesh and blood relatives of the former emperor. They have neither received the former emperor's favor, nor have they enjoyed an official position or salary. Their filial piety, from a rational point of view, has no basis. Even some people who have done nothing wrong have taken the opportunity to get mixed up in it.

古文：桓思皇后祖载之时，东郡有盗人妻者，亡在孝中，本县追捕，乃伏其辜。
现代文：窦太后的棺柩抬上丧车时，东郡有一位犯通奸罪的逃亡犯混进孝子行列之中，幸而被原籍的县府追查逮捕，他才服罪。
English: When the coffin of Empress Dowager Dou was carried onto the hearse, a fugitive from Dong County who had committed adultery mingled among the ranks of filial sons and daughters. Fortunately, he was tracked down and arrested by the county government where he was originally from, and only then did he plead guilty.

古文：虚伪杂秽，难得胜言。
现代文：象这一类弄虚作假的肮脏行径，难以胜数。
English: There are countless examples of this kind of deceitful and dirty practice.

古文：太子官属，宜搜选令德，岂有但取丘墓凶丑之人！
现代文：皇太子的属官，应该挑选有美德的人士担任，岂能专门录用坟墓旁的凶恶丑陋之徒？
English: Should virtuous men be chosen to serve as the crown prince's subordinates, can they specifically hire the cruel and ugly people next to the tomb?

古文：其为不祥，莫与大焉，宜遣归田里，以明诈伪。 
现代文：这种不吉祥的征兆，没有比它更大的了。应该把他们都遣归故乡，以便辨明诈骗和虚伪的奸佞小人。 
English: There is no greater portent than this, that they should all be sent back to their own country, that the hypocrites and impostors may be known for what they are.

古文：书奏，帝乃亲迎气北郊及行辟雍之礼。
现代文：奏章呈上去后，于是灵帝亲自到崐北郊举行迎接节气的祭祀，以及前往太学主持典礼。
English: After the score was presented, Ling Di himself went to the northern suburb of Handan to hold a festival to welcome the solar terms, and also went to Taegu to preside over the ceremony.

古文：又诏宣陵孝子为舍人者悉改为丞、尉焉。
现代文：又下诏，凡是 宣陵孝子 被任命为太子舍人的，一律改任县级丞、尉。
English: It was also decreed that if any of the sons of Emperor Xuanling who had been appointed as Prince's son-in-law were to resign, they would all be promoted to county-level officials.

古文：护乌桓校尉夏育上言： 鲜卑寇边，自春以来三十馀发，请征幽州诸郡兵出塞击之，一冬、二春，必能禽灭。 
现代文：护乌桓校尉夏育上书说： 鲜卑侵犯边界，自春季以来，已经发动了三十余次进攻。请求征调幽州各郡的郡兵出塞进行反击，只需经过一个冬季、两个春季，一定能够将他们完全擒获歼灭。 
English: Xia Yu, the captain of Wuhu, said in the letter: Xianbei has invaded the border and launched more than 30 attacks since the spring. It is requested to recruit county soldiers from all counties in Yuzhou to counterattack. It only takes one winter and two springs to completely capture and annihilate them.

古文：先是护羌校尉田晏坐事论刑，被原，欲立功自效，乃请中常侍王甫求得为将。
现代文：在此之先，护羌校尉田晏因事坐罪判刑，受到恕免，打算立功报答朝廷；于是请托中常侍王甫，请求朝廷准许他为将，率军出击。
English: Prior to this, the garrison lieutenant, Tian Xuan, was sentenced for the crime of sedition, was pardoned, and intended to repay the court for his service; he then asked the vice-commander, Wang Fu, to request the court to allow him to lead the army to attack.

古文：甫因此议遣兵与育并力讨贼，帝乃拜晏为破鲜卑中郎将；大臣多有不同，乃召百官议于朝堂。
现代文：因此，王甫极力主张派兵和夏育联合进军，讨伐鲜卑。灵帝便任命田晏为破鲜卑中郎将。可是大臣多半反对派兵，于是召集文武百官在朝常上集议。
English: Therefore, Wang Fu strongly advocated sending soldiers and Xia Yu to march together to fight against the Xianbei. Emperor Lingdi then appointed Tian Qi as the general to defeat the Xianbei. However, most of the ministers were opposed to the soldiers, so they convened hundreds of civil and military officials to discuss it at the morning assembly.

古文：蔡邕议曰： 征讨殊类，所由尚矣。
现代文：蔡邕发表意见说： 征讨外族，由来久远。
English: Cai Wei expressed his opinion, saying, "The collection of money from foreigners has a long history.

古文：然而时有同异，势有可否，故谋有得失，事有成败，不可齐也。
现代文：然而时间有同有异，形势有可有不可，所以谋略有得有失，事情有成功有失败，不能等量齐观。
English: However, the times have the same places and different places, the situation has conditions that can be done and conditions that cannot be done, so there are gains and losses in planning, things have successes and failures, and they cannot be viewed the same way.

古文：夫以世宗神武，将帅良猛，财赋充实，所括广远，数十年间，官民俱匮，犹有悔焉。
现代文：以汉武帝的神明威武，将帅优良勇猛，财物军赋都很充实，开拓的疆土广袤辽远，然而经过数十年的时间，官府和人民都陷于贫困，尚且深感后悔。
English: With Emperor Hanwu's divine power and military prowess, his generals were handsome, excellent and brave, his wealth and military resources were abundant, and the territory he explored was vast and far away. However, after decades of time, the government and the people were impoverished, and they still deeply regretted it.

古文：况今人财并乏，事劣昔时乎！
现代文：何况今天，人财两缺，和过去相比国力又处于劣势！
English: What's more, both human and material resources are now inadequate, and things are much worse than before.

古文：自匈奴遁逃，鲜卑强盛，据其故地，称兵十万，才力劲健，意智益生；加以关塞不严，禁网多漏，精金良铁，皆为贼有，汉人逋逃为之谋主，兵利马疾，过于匈奴。
现代文：自从匈奴向远方逃走以后，鲜卑日益强盛，占据了匈奴汗国的故土，号称拥有十万军队，士卒精锐勇健，智谋层出不穷。加上边关要塞并不严密，法网禁令多有疏漏，各种精炼的金属和优良的铁器，都外流到敌人手里。汉族人中的逃犯成为他们的智囊。他们的兵器锐利，战马迅疾，都已超过了匈奴。
English: Since the Xiongnu fled far away, the Xianbei became increasingly powerful and occupied the homeland of the Xiongnu Khanate, claiming to have a hundred thousand troops, elite and brave soldiers, and endless ingenuity. In addition, the border fortifications were not strict, the legal ban was often omitted, and all kinds of refined metals and fine ironware flowed out into the hands of the enemy. The fugitives among the Han people became their brains. Their weapons were sharp, and their horses were fast. They had surpassed the Xiongnu.

古文：昔段颎良将，习兵善战，有事西羌，犹十馀年。
现代文：过去，段是一代良将，熟悉军旅，骁勇善战。然而，对西羌的战事，仍持续了十余年之久。
English: In the past, Duan was a generation of good generals, familiar with the army brigade, brave and good at war. However, the war against Xidi still lasted for more than ten years.

古文：今育、晏才策未必过颎，鲜卑种众不弱曩时，而虚计二载，自许有成，若祸结兵连，岂得中休？
现代文：而今夏育、田晏才能和谋略未必超过段，而鲜卑民众的势力却不弱于以往。竟然凭空提出两年的灭敌计划，自认为可以成功。
English: However, this summer, the talent and strategy of Xia Yu and Tian Qi may not exceed the paragraph, but the power of the people is not weaker than in the past. He even proposed a two-year plan to destroy the enemy out of thin air, believing that it could be successful.

古文：当复征发众人，转运无已，是为耗竭诸夏，并力蛮夷。
现代文：倘若兵连祸结，就不能中途停止，不得不继续征兵增援，不断转运粮秣，结果为了全力对付蛮夷各族，使内地虚耗殆尽。
English: It is certain that many people will have to be conscripted again to transport things endlessly. This will deplete the strength of the Central Plains and increase the strength of the barbarians.

古文：夫边垂之患，手足之疥搔，中国之困，胸背之瘭疽，方今郡县盗贼尚不能禁，况此丑虏而可伏乎！
现代文：边疆的祸患，不过是生在手脚上的疥癣一类的小患，内地困顿，才是生在胸背上毒疮一类的大患。而今郡县的盗贼尚且无法禁止，怎能使强大的外族降服？
English: The scourge of the frontier is only a small disease like a boil on the hand and foot, while the trouble in the inland is a big disease like a poisonous sore on the chest and back. And now that the county thieves cannot be banned, how can the powerful foreign tribes be subdued?

古文：昔高祖忍平城之耻，吕后弃慢书之诟，方之于今，何者为甚？
现代文：过去，高帝忍受平城失败的羞耻，吕太后忍受匈奴单于傲慢书信的侮辱，和今天相比，哪个时代强盛？
English: Compared to now, which is more serious, the humiliation Gaozu endured in Pingcheng, or the humiliation inflicted by Lv Hou, who cast aside the contemptuous letters of the Xiongnu?

古文：天设山河，秦筑长城，汉起塞垣，所以别内外，异殊俗也。
现代文：上天设置山河，秦王朝修筑长城，汉王朝建立关塞亭障，用意就在于隔离内地和边疆，使不同风俗习惯的民族远远分开。
English: The mountains and rivers created by heaven, the Great Wall built by the Qin Dynasty, and the Border Wall built by the Han Dynasty, are all used to separate domestic and foreign countries and distinguish different customs.

古文：苟无蹙国内侮之患则可矣，岂与虫蚁之虏，校往来之数哉！
现代文：只要国家内地没有紧迫和忧患的事就可以了，岂能和那种昆虫、蚂蚁一样的野蛮人计较长短？
English: As long as there are no pressing and troubling matters in the interior of the country, it's fine. Can we really compare ourselves to that insect, ant-like savage?

古文：虽或破之，岂可殄尽，而方令本朝为之旰食乎！
现代文：即使能把他们打败，又岂能把他们歼灭干净，使朝廷高枕无忧？
English: Although we sometimes defeat the lowly, can we eliminate them all?

古文：昔淮南王安谏伐越曰： 如使越人蒙死以逆执事，厮舆之卒有一不备而归者，虽得越王之首，犹为大汉羞之。 
现代文：过去，淮南王刘安劝阻讨伐闽越王国时说过： 如果闽越王国冒死迎战，打柴和驾车的士卒只要有一个受到伤害，虽然砍下闽越国王的人头，还是为大汉王朝感到羞耻。 
English: In the past, Liu An, the king of Huainan, said when discouraging the attack on the Kingdom of Yunnan and Yunnan: If the Kingdom of Yunnan and Yunnan risked their lives to fight, as long as only one of the firemen and drivers were injured, even though they cut off the head of the King of Yunnan and Yunnan, they would still be ashamed of the Han Dynasty.

古文：而欲以齐民易丑虏，皇威辱外夷，就如其言，犹已危矣，况乎得失不可量邪！ 
现代文：而竟打算把内地的人民和边疆的外族等量齐观，将皇帝的威严受辱于边民，即便能象夏育、田晏所说的那样，尚且仍有危机，何况得失成败又不可预料？ 
English: Moreover, if they intend to exchange the people for a large number of captives, and take the emperor's prestige to suffer the insults of foreigners, even if it is as they say, it is already dangerous, and what's more, success or failure cannot be estimated?

古文：帝不从。
现代文：灵帝不肯听从。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：八月，遣夏育出高柳，田晏出云中，匈奴中郎将臧旻率南单于出雁门，各将万骑，三道出塞二千馀里。
现代文：八月，派遣夏育大军出高柳，田晏大军出云中，匈奴中郎将臧率领南匈奴屠特若尸逐就单于出雁门，各率骑兵一万余人，分三路出塞，深入鲜崐卑国土二千余里。
English: In August, Xia Yu's large army was sent out of Gaoliu, Tian Yu's large army was sent out of the clouds, and the Xiongnu Zhongro led the Southern Xiongnu Tu Te if the corpse was sent out of the wild goose gate alone, with more than 10,000 cavalry at each rate, divided into three routes out of the dam, and more than 2,000 miles deep into the land of Xianbei.

古文：檀石槐命三部大人各帅众逆战，育等大败，丧其节传辎重，各将数十骑奔还，死者什七八。
现代文：鲜卑酋长檀石槐命令东、中、西等三部大人各率领部众迎战。夏育等人遭到惨败，甚至连符节和辎重全都丧失，各人只率领骑兵数十人逃命奔回，死去的士卒占十分之七八。
English: Xianbei chieftain Danshihong ordered the adults of the three departments of the East, Middle and West to lead the troops to fight. Xia Yu and others were defeated, and even lost all the symbols and weights. Each person only led dozens of cavalrymen to run back for their lives, and the dead soldiers accounted for seven or eight out of ten.

古文：三将槛车征下狱，赎为庶人。
现代文：夏育、田晏、臧等三位将领被装入囚车，押回京都洛阳，关进监狱，后用钱赎罪，贬为平民百姓。
English: The three generals were called out of prison in a prison van by the court, and they used the money to redeem themselves as ordinary people.

古文：冬，十月，癸丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十月癸丑朔，发生日食。
English: In winter, in October, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：太尉刘宽免。
现代文：太尉刘宽被免官。
English: Captain Liu Guang was relieved of his duties.

古文：辛丑，京师地震。
现代文：辛丑，京都洛阳发生地震。
English: October 22nd, Beijing earthquake.

古文：十一月，司空陈球免。
现代文：十一月，司空陈球被免官。
English: In November, Siku Chenqiu was relieved of his duties.

古文：十二月，甲寅，以太常河南孟彧为太尉。
现代文：十二月甲寅，擢升太常河南尹人孟为太尉。
English: In December, Jia Yin was promoted to the rank of Tai Chang, Henan Yin Ren Meng was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant.

古文：庚辰，司徒杨赐免。
现代文：庚辰，司徒杨赐被免官。
English: On the 29th, Szu Yang was relieved of his duties.

古文：以太常陈耽为司空。
现代文：擢升太常陈耽为司空。
English: Chen Tan was promoted to the position of Sifu too often.

古文：辽西太守甘陵赵苞到官，遣使迎母及妻子，垂当到郡；道经柳城，值鲜卑万馀人入塞寇钞，苞母及妻子遂为所劫质，载以击郡。
现代文：辽西郡太守甘陵国人赵苞到任之后，派人到故乡迎接母亲和妻子，将到辽西郡城时，路上经过柳城，正遇着鲜卑一万余人侵入边塞劫掠，赵苞的母亲和妻子全被劫持作为人质，用车载着她们来攻打辽西郡城。
English: After Zhao Wei, the governor of Liaoxi County and a native of Ganling, took office, he sent someone to his hometown to meet his mother and wife. On the way to the county seat of Liaoxi, he passed through Liucheng on the way, and was confronted by more than 10,000 Xianbei people invading the border fortress and looting. Zhao Wei's mother and wife were all taken hostage, and they were carried by car to attack the county seat of Liaoxi.

古文：苞率骑二万与贼对陈，贼出母以示苞，苞悲号，谓母曰： 为子无状，欲以微禄奉养朝夕，不图为母作祸，昔为母子，今为王臣，义不得顾私恩，毁忠节，唯当万死，无以塞罪。 
现代文：赵苞率领骑兵二万人布阵迎战，鲜卑在阵前推出赵苞的母亲给赵苞看，赵苞悲痛号哭，对母亲说： 当儿子的罪恶实在不可名状，本来打算用微薄的俸禄早晚在您左右供养，想不到反而为您招来大祸。过去我是您的儿子，现在我是朝廷的大臣，大义不能顾及私恩，自毁忠节，只有拚死一战，否则没有别的办法来弥补我的罪恶。 
English: Zhao Hong led a cavalry of twenty thousand men to face the battle. He humbly presented Zhao Hong's mother to Zhao Hong in front of the battle. Zhao Hong cried with grief and said to his mother: When the son's sin is really indescribable, I originally planned to use the meager salary to provide for you sooner or later, but unexpectedly brought you a great disaster. In the past, I was your son, now I am a minister of the court. Great righteousness cannot take into account personal favor, self-destruction loyalty, only a fight to the death, otherwise there is no other way to make up for my sin.

古文：母遥谓曰： 威豪，人各有命，何得相顾以亏忠义，尔其勉之！ 
现代文：母亲远望着嘱咐他说： 我儿，各人生死有命，怎能为了顾及我而亏损忠义？你应该尽力去做。 
English: His mother, looking on from afar, admonished him: "My son, every life is precious. How can you lose your loyalty to care for me? You should do your best."

古文：苞即时进战，贼悉摧破，其母妻皆为所害。
现代文：于是赵苞立即下令出击，鲜卑全被摧毁攻破，可是他的母亲和妻子也被鲜卑杀害。
English: Zhao Wei immediately attacked, the thieves were all defeated, but Zhao Wei's mother, wife and son were all killed by the thieves.

古文：苞自上归葬，帝遣使吊慰，封鄃侯。
现代文：赵苞上奏朝廷，请求护送母亲、妻子的棺柩回故乡安葬。灵帝派遣使节前往吊丧和慰问，封赵苞为侯。
English: Zhao Zhe appealed to the imperial court, requesting that the coffins of his mother and wife be escorted back to their hometown for burial. The Holy Spirit sent envoys to the funeral and condolences, and Zhao Zhe was made a marquess.

古文：苞葬讫，谓乡人曰： 食禄而避难，非忠也；杀母以全义，非孝也。
现代文：赵苞将母亲、妻子安葬已毕，对他家乡的人们说： 食朝廷的俸禄而逃避灾难，不是忠臣；杀了母亲而保全忠义，不是孝子。
English: After burying his mother in peace, Zhao Yao said to the villagers: "If you run away from misfortune, you are disloyal; if you kill your mother, you are full of righteousness and unfilial."

古文：如是，有何面目立于天下！ 
现代文：如此，我还有什么脸面活在人世？ 
English: What is the face of such a person born into the world?

古文：遂欧血而死。
现代文：便吐血而死。
English: He vomited blood and died.

古文：孝灵皇帝上之下光和元年
现代文：光和元年
English: Year of the Light and the First

古文：春，正月，合浦、交趾乌浒蛮反，招引九真、日南民攻没郡县。
现代文：春季，正月，合浦郡、交趾郡乌浒蛮族起兵反叛，并招诱九真郡、日南郡百姓攻陷郡县。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, the Wuyi barbarians in Hepu County and Jiaozi County rebelled and invited the people of Jiu Zhen County and Nichinan County to invade the county.

古文：太尉孟彧罢。
现代文：太尉孟被罢免。
English: First Lieutenant Meng was dismissed.

古文：二月，辛亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月辛亥朔，发生日食。
English: In February, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：癸丑，以光禄勋陈国袁滂为司徒。
现代文：癸丑，擢升光禄勋陈国人袁滂为司徒。
English: Chen Guozhong's son, Yuan Qi, was promoted to the rank of honorable mention and became a disciple.

古文：己未，地震。
现代文：己未，发生地震。
English: On the 11th, there was an earthquake.

古文：置鸿都门学，其诸生皆敕州郡、三公举用辟召，或出为刺史、太守，入为尚书、侍中，有封侯、赐爵者；士君子皆耻与为列焉。
现代文：设立鸿都门学校，学生全都命各州、郡、三公推荐征召，有的被任命崐出任州刺史、郡太守，有的入皇宫担任尚书、侍中，有的被封为侯，有的被赐给关内侯以下的爵称。
English: Hongdumen School was established, and all the students were called up by the states, counties and the Three Kingdoms. Some were appointed to serve as state magistrates and county governors, some entered the imperial palace to serve as officials and attendants, some were made marquesses, and some were given peerages below the Marquis of Guanai.

古文：三月，辛丑，赦天下，改元。
现代文：有志操和有学问的人，都以和这些人为伍而感到羞耻。三月辛丑，大赦天下，改年号。
English: People with ambition and knowledge are ashamed to be associated with these people. March is ugly, the world is forgiven, and the year is changed.

古文：以太常常山张颢为太尉。
现代文：擢升太常常山国人张颢为太尉。
English: Zhang Ye, a native of Shan State, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant too often.

古文：颢，中常侍奉之弟也。
现代文：张颢是中常侍张奉的弟弟。
English: Zhang Rong is the younger brother of the middle-ranking attendant Zhang Bong.

古文：夏，四月，丙辰，地震。
现代文：夏季，四月丙辰，发生地震。
English: In the summer, in April, there was an earthquake.

古文：侍中寺雌鸡化为雄。
现代文：侍中官署有一只母鸡变成公鸡。
English: Samurai Nakadera's hen turns into a rooster.

古文：司空陈耽免；以太常来艳为司空。
现代文：司空陈耽被免官，擢升太常来艳为司空。
English: SFC Chen Tan was relieved of his duties, and his promotion to SFC came too often.

古文：六月，丁丑，有黑气堕帝所御温德殿东庭中，长十馀丈，似龙。
现代文：六月丁丑，有一道黑气从天而降，坠落到灵帝常去的温德殿东侧庭院中，长十余丈，好象一条黑龙。
English: In the ugly month of June, a black cloud descended from the sky and fell into the eastern courtyard of the Winter Palace, where the Emperor often went. It was more than ten meters long, like a black dragon.

古文：秋，七月，壬子，青虹见玉堂后殿庭中。
现代文：秋季，七月壬子，南宫玉堂后殿庭院中发现青色彩虹。
English: In autumn, in July, a blue rainbow was found in the courtyard behind the South Palace's Gyokudo.

古文：诏召光禄大夫杨赐等诣金商门，问以灾异及消复之术。
现代文：灵帝下诏，召集光禄大夫杨赐等人到金商门，向他们询问天降灾异的原因，以及消除的方法。
English: Ling Di issued an edict, summoning Guanglu doctor Yang Zi and others to Jinshanmen, asking them the reasons for the natural disaster, as well as how to eliminate it.

古文：赐对曰： 《春秋讠韯》曰： 天投蜺，天下怨，海内乱。 
现代文：杨赐回答说： 《春秋谶》书上说： 天上投下彩虹，天下怨恨，海内大乱。 
English: Yang Jie replied: "Spring and Autumn Equinox" says: A rainbow will be cast in the sky, there will be hatred in the world, and there will be great turmoil at sea.

古文：加四百之期，亦复垂及。
现代文：再加上四百岁的周期，将要来到，而今妃嫔、侍妾以及宦官之辈共同专断国家朝政，欺罔帝王臣民。
English: In addition, the four-hundred-year cycle will come, and now the concubines, concubines and eunuchs jointly arbitrate the country's court politics and bully the emperor's subjects.

古文：今妾媵、阉尹之徒共专国朝，欺罔日月；又，鸿都门下招会群小，造作赋说，见宠于时，更相荐说，旬月之间，并各拔擢。
现代文：还有在鸿都门下招集一群小人，依靠写作辞赋，受到宠爱，互相推荐，不出十天到一月的时间内，每个人都得到越级提拔和擢升。
English: There is also a group of villains gathered under the Hongdu Gate, relying on writing ability, being favored, recommending each other, and within ten days to one month, everyone will be promoted and promoted.

古文：乐松处常伯，任芝居纳言，郤俭、梁鹄各受丰爵不次之宠，而令搢绅之徒委伏畎畮，口诵尧、舜之言，身蹈绝俗之行，弃捐沟壑，不见逮及。
现代文：乐松担任了侍中的职务，任芝做了尚书的官职，俭、梁鹄都受到封为高爵和越级提拔的荣宠。而今却令士大夫们屈身乡村田野，口中朗诵唐尧、虞舜的言论，亲自实践超出世俗之上的行为，而他们却被遗弃在水沟山谷，不能把才能贡献给国家。
English: Le Song held the position of chamberlain, Ren Zhi held the official position of Shang Shu, and Jian and Liang Jian were honored with the honor of being knighted and promoted to higher ranks. But now they have made the scholars and doctors bow down to the rural fields, recite the words of Tang Xuan and Gu Yao, and personally practice actions that are above the world, but they are abandoned in the valley of the ditch, unable to contribute their talents to the country.

古文：冠履倒易，陵谷代处，幸赖皇天垂象谴告。
现代文：这是一种帽子和鞋子颠倒穿戴，山陵和深谷交换位置的反常现象。幸赖上天降下灾异，谴告陛下。
English: This is an abnormal phenomenon of wearing the hat and shoes upside down, and exchanging the position of the mountains and valleys. Fortunately, the heavens brought down the disaster and condemned His Majesty.

古文：《周书》曰： 天子见怪则修德，诸侯见怪则修政，卿大夫见怪则修职，士庶人见怪则修身。 
现代文：《周书》说： 天子遇见怪异则反省恩德，诸侯遇见怪异则反省政事，卿、大夫遇见怪异则反省是否尽忠职守，士、庶民遇见怪异则反省自己的言论和行为。 
English: "Zhou Shu" said: If the heavenly son encounters a strange person, he will reflect on virtue; if the princes encounter a strange person, they will reflect on politics; if the lords and doctors encounter a strange person, they will reflect on whether they have fulfilled their duties; if the nobles and common people encounter a strange person, they will reflect on their own words and deeds.

古文：唯陛下斥远佞巧之臣，速征鹤鸣之士，断绝尺一，抑止槃游，冀上天还威，众变可弭！ 
现代文：所以只有请陛下斥退和疏远奸佞的臣属，迅速征召品德高尚，言行一致，被世人所称道的人士，断绝假传圣旨的渠道，停止没有节制的娱乐游戏，才能希望上天平息愤怒，各种灾异才能消除。 
English: Therefore, only by asking His Majesty to expel and alienate the vassals of the traitors, quickly conscript those who are of high moral character, consistent in words and deeds, and praised by the world, cut off the channels of false transmission of the holy will, and stop the unrestrained entertainment and games, can we hope that heaven will quell the anger and various disasters can be eliminated.

古文：议郎蔡邕对曰： 臣伏思诸异，皆亡国之怪也。
现代文：议郎蔡邕也回答说： 我俯伏思念各种灾异，都是亡国之怪。
English: The mediator, Cai Ye, also replied: I prostrate myself and think of all kinds of disasters, all of which are the specter of a ruined country.

古文：天于大汉殷勤不已，故屡出祅变以当谴责，欲令人君感悟，改危即安。
现代文：只国为上天对汉王朝仍有旧情，所以屡次显示妖孽变异的反常现象作为警告和谴责，希望让人君感动悔悟，远离危险，转向平安。
English: However, for the sake of Heaven, the country still has old feelings for the Han Dynasty, so it has repeatedly shown the abnormal phenomenon of witchcraft as a warning and condemnation, hoping to move people to repent, stay away from danger, and turn to peace.

古文：今蜺堕、鸡化，皆妇人干政之所致也。
现代文：而今青虹下坠，母鸡变成公鸡，都是妇人干涉朝政的结果。
English: But now the rainbow is fading and the hen is turning into a rooster, both of which are the result of women's interference in imperial politics.

古文：前者乳母赵娆，贵重天下，谗谀骄溢，续以永乐门史霍玉，依阻城社，又为奸邪。
现代文：从前乳母赵娆位尊权重，闻名全国，谗害忠良，谄媚求宠，骄纵横溢。接着是永乐门史霍玉依仗国家的权势，作奸犯科。
English: Former nanny Zhao Bingyi was respected and respected, famous throughout the country, abusing the faithful, charming, and arrogant. Next was Yongle Menshi Huo Yu, who relied on the power of the state to commit crimes.

古文：今道路纷纷，复云有程大人者，察其风声，将为国患；宜高为堤防，明设禁令，深惟赵、霍，以为至戒。
现代文：而今道路上纷纷传言，又说宫内出了一位程大人，看他的声势，将要成为国家的祸患。应该高筑堤防，明白设置禁令，以赵娆、霍玉作为最深刻的鉴戒。
English: And now there are rumors on the road, and it is said that an adult Cheng has appeared in the palace. Looking at his popularity, he will become a scourge of the country. It is necessary to build a high embankment, clearly set a ban, and take Zhao Wei and Huo Yu as the most profound warning.

古文：今太尉张颢，为玉所进；光禄勋伟璋，有名贪浊；又长水校尉赵玹，屯骑校尉盖升，并叨时幸，荣富优足；宜念小人在位之咎，退思引身避贤之福。
现代文：现在的太尉张颢是霍玉推荐引进的；光禄勋伟璋是有名的贪官，还有长水校尉赵、屯骑校尉盖升，都同时得到宠幸，享尽荣华富贵。应该顾念小人在位的灾祸，退而思考抽身让贤的福佑。
English: The current First Lieutenant Zhang Jun was recommended by Huo Yu; Guanglu Xun Wei Jun is a famous corrupt official, as well as Changshui Lieutenant Zhao and Tuncai Lieutenant Gai Sheng, all of whom were favored at the same time and enjoyed their glory and wealth. We should pay attention to the scourge of small people in power and retreat to think about the blessing of withdrawing and letting the virtuous.

古文：伏见廷尉郭禧，纯厚老成；光禄大夫桥玄，聪达方直；故太尉刘宠，忠实守正；并宜为谋主，数见访问。
现代文：我曾见到廷尉郭禧忠纯笃厚，年高有德；光禄大夫桥玄聪明通达，端平正直；前太尉刘宠忠诚老实，笃守正道，都应该成为主谋的人，陛下应该多向他们征求意见。
English: I have seen the imperial lieutenant Guo Xizhong, who is pure and virtuous, and is of advanced age; the doctor Guanglu, who is clever and clever, and is honest; the former captain Liu Jie, who is loyal and honest, and who sticks to the right path. They should all become masterminds, and His Majesty should solicit more opinions from them.

古文：夫宰相大臣，君之四体，委任责成，优劣已分，不宜听纳小吏，雕琢大臣也，又，尚方工技之作，鸿都篇赋之文，可且消息，以示惟优。
现代文：宰相等三公大臣是君王的四肢，应该委以重任，责令他们成功，优劣既已分明，不应该再听信小吏的谗言，罗织大臣的罪状。同时，宫廷百工技艺的制作，鸿都门学校创作辞赋的篇章，似乎应该暂时停止，以表示专心国家的忧患。
English: The three ministers of state, including the prime minister, are the limbs of the monarch. They should be entrusted with important tasks and ordered to succeed. Since their strengths and weaknesses have been clearly identified, they should no longer listen to the advice of petty officials, the guilt of Minister Luo Wei. At the same time, the production of the palace's hundred crafts, the chapter of Hongdumen School's creative writing, seems to be temporarily suspended to express the country's worries.

古文：宰府孝廉，士之高选，近者以辟召不慎，切责三公，而今并以小文超取选举，开请托之门，违明王之黄，众心不厌，莫之敢言。
现代文：出任州刺史、郡太守的孝廉，本是读书人中的优秀人才，近来因推荐征召不当，又下诏严辞谴责三公。而今都只因为写了一篇小文章，便得越级提拔，因而大开请托之门，违背圣明君王的典章制度，众心不服，没有人敢说出来。
English: Xiaolian, who served as the prefectural governor and the county magistrate, was originally an outstanding talent among the readers. Recently, due to improper recommendation for recruitment, he severely condemned the three princes. But now, just because he wrote a small article, he was promoted beyond the level. Therefore, he opened the door wide to ask for support. In violation of the ceremonial system of the Holy Emperor, everyone was dissatisfied, and no one dared to speak out.

古文：臣愿陛下忍而绝之，思惟万机，以答天望。
现代文：我希望陛下忍痛割舍，专心致志治理国家大事，以报答上天的厚望。
English: I hope that His Majesty will endure the pain of giving up and concentrate on governing the national affairs to repay the high hopes of heaven.

古文：圣朝既自约厉，左右近臣亦宜从化，人自抑损，以塞咎戒，则天道亏满，鬼神福谦矣。
现代文：陛下既亲自带头约束限制，左右亲近的大臣也应当跟着效法，上下人人谦卑，以堵塞灾祸的警戒，则上天将把灾祸惩罚骄傲自满的人，鬼神将把福佑赏赐谦卑的人。
English: Since His Majesty has personally taken the lead in restricting restrictions, the ministers around him should also follow suit, and everyone should be humble. In order to block the warning of disaster, heaven will punish the proud and complacent with disaster, and the spirits will reward the humble with blessing.

古文：夫君臣不密，上有漏言之戒，下有失身之祸，愿寝臣表，无使尽忠之吏受怨奸仇。 
现代文：君王和臣属之间，如果说话不能严守秘密，则君王将会受到泄漏言语的指责，臣属将有遭到丧失生命的大祸。请陛下千万不要泄漏我的奏章，以免尽忠的官吏遭到奸佞邪恶的怨恨和报复。 
English: Between the sovereign and his subjects, if words cannot be kept strictly confidential, the sovereign will be accused of leaking words, and his subjects will suffer the great misfortune of losing their lives. Please, Your Majesty, do not leak my transcript, so that loyal officials will not be subject to treacherous and evil grudges and retaliation.

古文：章奏，帝览而叹息。
现代文：奏章呈上去后，灵帝一边观看，一边叹息。
English: After the score was presented, Ling Di watched and sighed.

古文：因起更衣，曹节于后窃视之，悉宣语左右，事遂漏露。
现代文：后因灵帝起身更换衣服，曹节在后面偷偷观看，把内容全告诉他左右的人，事情被泄露出去。
English: After that, because Lingdi got up to change his clothes, Cao Zi secretly watched from behind and told the people around him everything. The matter was leaked out.

古文：其为邕所裁黜者，侧目思报。
现代文：其中被蔡邕提出要制裁和废黜的人，都对他恨之入骨图谋报复。
English: Among them, those who were proposed to be sanctioned and dethroned by Cai Qi all harbored deep hatred for him and plotted revenge.

古文：初，邕与大鸿胪刘命素不相平，叔父卫尉质又与将作大匠阳球有隙。
现代文：当初，蔡邕和大鸿胪刘一向互相不服。蔡邕的叔父卫尉蔡质又和将作大匠阳球有怨恨。
English: At the beginning, Cai Qi and Liu Daihongqi were always at odds with each other. Cai Qi, Cai Qi's uncle and Wei's lieutenant, also had a grudge against Yangqiu, who would become a great craftsman.

古文：球即中常侍程璜女夫也。
现代文：而阳球正是中常侍程璜的女婿。
English: And Yangqiu is the son-in-law of the middle chamberlain Cheng Yao.

古文：璜遂使人飞章言 邕、质数以私事请托于郃，郃不听。邕含隐切，志欲相中。 
现代文：于是程璜便唆使别人用匿名信诬告说： 蔡邕、蔡质多次因私事请托刘，都被刘拒绝，因此蔡邕怀恨在心，蓄意打算中伤刘。 
English: As a result, Cheng Yao instigated others to use anonymous letters to make false accusations, saying: Cai Yao and Cai Jian repeatedly asked Liu to help them with their private affairs, but were rejected by Liu. Therefore, Cai Yao harbored a grudge and deliberately planned to defame Liu.

古文：于中诏下尚书召邕诘状。
现代文：于是灵帝下诏，命尚书召唤蔡邕质问情况。
English: As a result, Ling Di issued an edict, ordering Shang Shu to summon Cai Qi to question the situation.

古文：邕上书曰： 臣实愚戆，不顾后害，陛下不念忠臣直言，宜加掩蔽，诽谤卒至，便用疑怪。
现代文：蔡邕上书说： 我实在愚昧而又憨直，完全没有顾及到日后的祸害，陛下不垂怜忠臣直言的苦心，应该加以掩蔽和保护，诽谤一旦出现，便对我产生怀疑和责怪。
English: Cai Qi said in his letter: I am really ignorant and insincere, completely unaware of the future calamity. Your Majesty does not pity the painstaking efforts of loyal subjects to speak out, it should be covered up and protected. Once the slander appears, it will cause suspicion and blame to me.

古文：臣年四十有六，孤特一身，得托名忠臣，死有馀荣，恐陛下于此不复闻至言矣！ 
现代文：我今年已有四十六岁，孑然一身，孤立无援，得以寄托忠臣而显名，虽然身死也有余荣，但恐怕陛下从此再也不能听到真实的言语。 
English: I am forty-six years old this year, all alone, without help, able to rely on loyal subjects and become famous, although I have the honor of dying, but I am afraid that His Majesty will never hear true words from now on.

古文：于是下邕、质于雒阳狱，劾以 仇怨奉公，议害大臣，大不敬，弃市。 
现代文：结果，逮捕蔡邕、蔡质，关押到洛阳监狱。有关官吏弹劾他俩说： 公报私仇，企图伤害大臣，犯了大不敬的罪，应绑赴街市斩首示众。 
English: As a result, Cai Qi and Cai Jian were arrested and detained in Luoyang Prison. Relevant officials impeached them both and said: "The communique was a personal vendetta, an attempt to harm the minister, and a crime of great disrespect. They should be tied up and taken to the market to be beheaded in public."

古文：事奏，中常侍河南吕强愍邕无罪，力为伸请。帝亦更思其章，有诏： 减死一等，与家属髡钅甘，徙朔钳方，不得以赦令除。 
现代文：奏报上去后，中常侍、河南尹人吕强，怜悯蔡邕无辜冤枉，竭力为他求情，灵帝也重新回想蔡邕的密封奏章，下诏说： 减死罪一等，和家属一道全都剃去头发，用铁圈束颈，贬逐到朔方郡，即使遇到赦令也不得赦免。 
English: After the report went up, Lu Qiang, the middle attendant and Henan Yin, took pity on Cai Qi, who was innocent and wronged, and tried his best to intercede for him. Lingdi also recalled Cai Qi's sealed report, and issued the following edict: Reduce the death penalty to the first class, shave off all the hair with the family members, tie the neck with an iron ring, and deport to Shuofang County. Even if there is a pardon order, it cannot be pardoned.

古文：阳球使客追路刺邕，客感其义，皆莫为用。
现代文：阳球一路上接连派出刺客，追赶和刺杀蔡邕，所有的刺客都为蔡邕的大义所感动，不肯听命。
English: Yangqiu sent assassins to chase and assassinate Cai Qi. The assassins were moved by Cai Qi's justice, and they were not used by Yangqiu.

古文：球又赂其部主，使加毒害，所赂者反以其情戒邕，由是得免。
现代文：阳球又贿赂并州刺史、朔方郡太守，命他们下毒手杀害，并州刺史、朔方郡太守反将实情告诉蔡邕，让他戒备，蔡邕这才得以死里逃生。
English: Yangqiu also bribed the county magistrate and the governor of Shuofang County and ordered them to kill him. The county magistrate and the governor of Shuofang County told Cai Qi the truth and put him on his guard. Cai Qi was able to escape death.

古文：八月，有星孛于天市。
现代文：八月，有异星出现在天市星旁。
English: The August Comet appears in the sky.

古文：九月，太尉张颢罢，以太常陈球为太尉。
现代文：九月，太尉张颢被罢免，擢升太常陈球为太尉。
English: In September, First Lieutenant Zhang Jun was dismissed and promoted to Second Lieutenant.

古文：司空来艳薨。
现代文：司空来艳去世。
English: Siku Laiyan passed away.

古文：冬，十月，以屯骑校尉袁逢为司空。
现代文：冬季，十月，擢升屯骑校尉袁逢为司空。
English: In the winter, in October, Yuan Feng, a cavalry lieutenant, was promoted to the rank of second lieutenant.

古文：宋皇后无宠，后宫幸姬众共谮毁。
现代文：因宋皇后得不到灵帝的宠爱，于是后宫一些受到灵帝宠爱的妃嫔便共同诬陷和诋毁她。
English: Because the Song Empress was not favored by the Holy Spirit, some concubines in the harem who were favored by the Holy Spirit jointly framed and slandered her.

古文：渤海王悝妃宋氏，即后之姑也，中常侍王甫恐后怨之，因谮后挟左道祝诅；帝信之，遂策收玺绶。
现代文：勃海王刘悝的正妻宋妃是宋皇后的姑母，中常侍王甫恐怕宋皇后因她的姑母被诛杀而怨恨他，也乘机诬告宋皇后采用巫蛊、方术等邪门旁道诅咒皇帝。灵帝信以为真，下令收缴皇后印信。
English: Songfei, the legal wife of Bo Hai King Liu Bei, was the aunt of Empress Song. The middle-ranking attendant Wang Fu feared that Empress Song resented him because her aunt had been killed, and also took the opportunity to falsely accuse Empress Song of cursing the emperor by using witchcraft, magic, and other evil methods. Emperor Ling believed it to be true and ordered to confiscate the queen's seal letter.

古文：后自致暴室，以忧死。
现代文：宋皇后自行前往暴室监狱，在狱中忧郁而死。
English: Empress Song herself walked into the torture chamber and died of melancholy.

古文：父不其乡侯酆及兄弟并被诛。
现代文：她的父亲不其乡侯宋酆以及兄弟们，都一同被诛杀。
English: Her father, Song Tao, and her brothers were all killed together.

古文：丙子晦，日有食之。
现代文：丙子晦，发生日食。
English: On the 30th, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：尚书卢植上言： 凡诸党锢多非其罪，可加赦恕，申宥回枉。
现代文：尚书卢植上书说： 凡是遭朝廷禁锢的党人，多数没有犯罪，应加赦免和宽恕，使他们的冤枉得到昭雪。
English: Shangshu Lu wrote: Most of the party members who were imprisoned by the imperial court did not commit any crimes. They should be pardoned and pardoned, so that their wrongdoing would be cleared up.

古文：又，宋后家属并以无辜委骸横尸，不得敛葬，宜敕收拾，以安游魂。
现代文：宋皇后的家属都以无辜受罪，抛弃骨骸，尸首纵横，不能得到收殓埋葬，应该准予收拾掩埋，使游魂得到安宁。
English: The family members of Empress Song are all guilty of the crime of innocent, abandoning the bones, the corpse is vertical and horizontal, can not be buried, should be allowed to clean up and bury, so that the wandering soul can get peace.

古文：又，郡守、刺史一月数迁，宜依黜陟以章能否，纵不九载，可满三岁。
现代文：郡太守、州刺史一个月内往往调动数次，应该按照正常的升进和黜退制度，考核他们能否胜任，即令不能任满九年，至少也应任满三年。
English: County daimyos and prefectural governors are often transferred several times within a month. They should be promoted and demoted in accordance with the normal promotion and demotion system, and their competence should be assessed. Even if they cannot serve for nine years, they should serve for at least three years.

古文：又，请谒希求，一宜禁塞，选举之事，责成主者。
现代文：私人请托，一律应该禁止，推荐和选举人才，应该责成主管官吏负责。
English: It should be prohibited for anyone to solicit, recommend and elect talents, and the responsible officials should be held accountable.

古文：又，天子之体，理无私积，宜弘大务，蠲略细微。 
现代文：天子以国为家，按照道理不能有私人的积蓄，应该放眼国家大事，忽略细微末节。 
English: The Son of God takes the country as his home. According to the principle, there can be no private savings. We should focus on national affairs and ignore minor details.

古文：帝不省。
现代文：灵帝不理。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：十一月，太尉陈球免。
现代文：十一月，太尉陈球被免官。
English: In November, Lieutenant Chen Qiu was dismissed.

古文：十二月，丁巳，以光禄大夫桥玄为太尉。
现代文：十二月丁巳，擢升光禄大夫桥玄为太尉。
English: In December of the same year, Guanglu Doctor Qiao Xuan was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：鲜卑寇酒泉；种众日多，缘边莫不被毒。
现代文：鲜卑侵犯酒泉郡，出动的兵力日益增多，边界一带都深受他们的毒害。
English: Xianbei invaded Jiuquan County, the number of troops dispatched increased day by day, and the border area was deeply poisoned by them.

古文：诏中尚方为鸿都文学乐松、江览等三十二人图象立赞，以劝学者。
现代文：灵帝下诏，命中尚方官署为鸿都门的文学之士乐松、江览等三十二人，各画一张肖像，分别配上赞美的言辞，作为对后学晚辈的劝告和勉励。
English: Emperor Ling decreed that thirty-two people, including the literary heroes Le Song and Jiang Zhan of Hongdu Gate, were ordered by the Shangfang Government Office to paint a portrait each, respectively, with words of praise, as an exhortation and encouragement to the younger generation of students.

古文：尚书令阳球谏曰： 臣案松、览等皆出于微蔑，斗筲小人，依凭世戚，附托权豪，俛眉承睫，徼进明时。
现代文：尚书令阳球上书劝阻说： 我查考乐松、江览等人都出身微贱，不过是才识短浅的斗筲小人，依靠和皇室世代有婚姻关系的国戚，依附和请托有权势的豪门，看人眼色，阿谀奉承，侥幸得以上进。
English: Shang Shuling Yangqiu Shang Shuling dissuaded him, saying: I have researched that Leshong, Jiangzhan and others were all from humble backgrounds, but they were petty villains with shallow knowledge, relying on relatives of the country who had marriage relations with the royal family generation, adhering to and asking powerful powerful families, looking at people's eyes, flattering, and getting lucky to get ahead.

古文：或献赋一篇，或鸟篆盈简，而位升郎中，形图丹青。
现代文：有的呈献一篇辞赋，有的写出满简的鸟篆，竟然被擢升为郎中，还要用丹青画像。
English: Some present a resignation, some write a bird's beak full of jane, and are even promoted to the rank of roju, and also use Dan Qing's image.

古文：亦有笔不点牍，辞不辨心，假手请字，妖伪百品，莫不被蒙殊恩，蝉蜕滓浊。
现代文：也有一个字没写，一句辞不会作，完全请别人代替出手，怪诞诈伪，花样百出，可是全都蒙受特殊的恩典，好象鸣蝉脱壳一样，从微贱的地位中解脱出来。
English: There is also a word that is not written, a sentence that cannot be made, completely asking others to replace the shot, grotesque fraud, full of tricks, but all of them have received special grace, like a cicada shedding its shell, freed from its lowly status.

古文：是以有识掩口，天下嗟叹。
现代文：以致有见识的人无不对此掩口而笑，天下一片嗟叹之声。
English: That's why people with insight hide their mouths and laugh, and people all over the world marvel at it.

古文：臣闻图象之设，以昭劝戒，欲令人君动鉴得失，未闻竖子小人诈作文颂，而可妄窃天官，垂象图素者也。
现代文：我听说之所以设立画像，是为了表示劝勉告诫，希望君主的举动能够借鉴前人的得失成败，却从来没有听说竖子小人们弄虚作假，写作了几篇歌颂文章，就可以妄自窃取高官厚禄，并且在素帛上留下画像。
English: I have heard that the reason for setting up the image is to express exhortation and admonition, hoping that the monarch's actions can learn from the successes and failures of predecessors, but I have never heard that the small-handed people have cheated and written several praise articles, so they can steal the high official's wealth and leave the image on the plain.

古文：今太学、东观足以宣明圣化，愿罢鸿都之选，以销天下之谤。 
现代文：而今有太学、东观这两个地方，已经足够宣传圣明的教化，请陛下废止鸿都门文学的推荐和选举，以解除天下的谴责。 
English: Now that there are two places, Taigaku and Dongguan, which are already enough to propagate the enlightenment of the Holy Light, I would like to ask His Majesty to abolish the recommendation and election of Hongdumen literature, so as to lift the condemnation of the world.

古文：书奏，不省。
现代文：奏章呈上去后，灵帝不理。
English: The book went up and was not accepted.

古文：是岁，初开西邸卖官，入钱各有差；二千石二千万；四百石四百万；其以德次应选者半之，或三分之一；于西园立库以贮之。
现代文：同年，第一次开设 西邸 机构，公开出卖官爵，按照官位高低收钱多少不等。俸禄等级为二千石的官卖钱二千万，四百石的官卖钱四百万，其中按着德行依次当选的出一半的钱，或者至少出三分之一的钱。凡是卖官所得到的钱，在西园另外设立一个钱库贮藏起来。
English: In the same year, the West Residence was opened for the first time. Officials with a salary grade of 2,000 koku sold 20 million, and those with a salary grade of 400 koku sold 4 million. Those who were elected in order of merit sold half of the money, or at least one-third of the money. All the money received by the selling officials was stored in a separate treasury in the West Garden.

古文：或诣阙上书占令长，随县好丑，丰约有贾。
现代文：有人曾到宫门上书，指定要买某县的县令、长官职，根据每个县的大小、贫富等好坏情况，县令、长的价格多少不等。
English: Someone once went to the palace gate and wrote a letter, specifying that he wanted to buy the county magistrate and chief magistrate of a certain county. According to the size, wealth and other good and bad conditions of each county, the price of the county magistrate and chief magistrate varies.

古文：富者则先入钱，贫者到官然后倍输。
现代文：有钱的富人先交现钱买官，贫困的人到任以后照原定价格加倍偿还。
English: Rich people with money first pay cash to buy officials, and poor people pay double the original price after taking office.

古文：又私令左右卖公卿，公千万，卿五百万。
现代文：灵帝还私下命令左右的人出卖三公、九卿等朝廷大臣的官职，每个公卖钱一千万，每个卿卖钱五百万。
English: Lingdi also privately ordered those around him to sell the official positions of the three princes, nine lords and other imperial court ministers, selling ten million yuan for each prince and five million yuan for each lord.

古文：初，帝为侯时常苦贫，及即位，每叹桓帝不能作家居，曾无私钱，故卖官聚钱以为私藏。
现代文：当初，灵帝为侯时经常苦于家境贫困，等到当了皇帝以后，常常叹息桓帝不懂经营家产，没有私钱。所以，大肆卖官，聚敛钱财，作为自己的私人积蓄。
English: At first, when Emperor Lingdi was a groom, he often suffered from the poverty of his family, and when he became emperor, he often lamented that Emperor Huan did not know how to manage the family property and did not have private money. Therefore, he sold officials and collected money as his own private savings.

古文：帝尝问侍中杨奇曰： 朕何如桓帝？ 
现代文：灵帝曾经询问侍中杨奇说： 朕比桓帝如何？ 
English: Ling Di once asked the chamberlain Yang Qi: How am I compared to Emperor Huan?

古文：对曰： 陛下之于桓帝，亦犹虞舜比德唐尧。 
现代文：杨奇回答说： 陛下和桓帝相比，犹如虞舜和唐尧相比一样。 
English: Yang Qi replied, "Compared to Emperor Huan, Your Majesty is like comparing to Emperor Wu and Emperor Tang.

古文：帝不悦曰： 卿强项，真杨震子孙，死后必复致大鸟矣。 
现代文：灵帝大不高兴，说： 你的性格刚强，不肯向别人低头，真不愧是杨震的子孙，死后一定会再引来大鸟。 
English: Ling Di was very displeased and said, "Your character is strong and you are not willing to bow down to others. You are truly a descendant of Yang Zhen. After your death, you will surely attract big birds again."

古文：奇，震之曾孙也。
现代文：杨奇是杨震的曾孙。
English: Yang Qi is the great-grandson of Yang Zhen.

古文：南匈奴屠特若尸逐就单于死，子呼征立。
现代文：南匈奴汗国屠特若尸逐就单于去世，他的儿子栾提呼征继位为单于。
English: Southern Hunnic Khanate Tu Te Ruo died alone, and his son Jie Ti Ying Zheng succeeded to the throne alone.

古文：孝灵皇帝上之下光和二年
现代文：光和二年春季，发生大瘟疫。
English: In the spring of 1902, a great plague broke out.

古文：春，大疫。三月，司徒袁滂免，以大鸿胪刘郃为司徒。
现代文：三月，司徒袁滂被免官，擢升大鸿胪刘为司徒。
English: In March, the leading disciple Yuan Shao was removed from his post, and the great scholar Liu was promoted to the leading disciple.

古文：乙丑，太尉桥玄罢，拜太中大夫；以太中大夫段颎为太尉。
现代文：乙丑，太尉桥玄被罢免，任命他为太中大夫；擢升太中大夫段为太尉。
English: Second Ugly, Second Lieutenant Qiao Xuan was dismissed, and he was appointed as the Second Lieutenant; he was promoted from the Second Lieutenant to the First Lieutenant.

古文：玄幼子游门次，为人所劫，登楼求货；玄不与。
现代文：桥玄最小的儿子在门口游玩，被匪徒劫持，当作人质，登楼要求钱货作赎金，桥玄不肯给。
English: Qiao Xuan's youngest son was playing in the doorway. He was taken hostage by the bandits, who demanded money and goods as ransom. Qiao Xuan refused to pay.

古文：司隶校尉、河南尹围守玄家，不敢迫。
现代文：司隶校尉、河南尹等派人将桥玄的家宅包围守住，不敢向前进逼。
English: Captain Sisli, Yin Henan and others sent people to surround and guard the home of Qiao Xuan, and did not dare to advance.

古文：玄瞋目呼曰： 奸人无状，玄岂以一子之命而纵国贼乎！ 
现代文：桥玄怒目大声呼喊说： 奸人的罪恶数不胜数，我岂能因一个儿子的性命，而让国贼逃脱法网？ 
English: Xiao Xuan shouted angrily, "The crimes of traitors are countless. Can I let a traitor escape justice for the sake of my son's life?

古文：促令攻之，玄子亦死。
现代文：催促他们迅速进攻，桥玄的儿子也被杀害。
English: urged them to attack quickly, and Hashiharu's son was also killed.

古文：玄因上言： 天下凡有劫质，皆并杀之，不得赎以财宝，开张奸路。 
现代文：桥玄因而向朝廷上书说： 天下凡是有劫持人质勒索财物的，都应该同时诛杀，不准许用钱财宝物赎回人质，为奸邪开路。 
English: As a result, Hashiharu wrote to the Imperial Court, "In this world, anyone who takes hostages to extort money should be killed at the same time. It is not allowed to use money and treasure to ransom hostages, which opens the way for evil.

古文：由是劫质遂绝。
现代文：从此，劫持人质的事件绝迹。
English: Hostage-taking has since disappeared.

古文：京兆地震。
现代文：京兆发生地震。
English: The Keicho earthquake.

古文：司空袁逢罢；以太常张济为司空。
现代文：司空袁逢被罢免，擢升太常张济为司空。
English: Yuan Feng, the secretary of airspace, was dismissed, and Zhang Jie, the deputy secretary of airspace, was promoted.

古文：夏，四月，甲戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月甲戌朔，发生日食。
English: In summer, in April, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：王甫、曹节等奸虐弄权，扇动内外，太尉段颎阿附之。
现代文：王甫、曹节等人奸邪暴虐，玩弄权势，朝廷内外无不插手，太尉段又迎合顺从他们。
English: Wang Fu, Cao Jie and others plotted evil and brutality, and played with power. Both inside and outside the imperial court, they meddled, and the Taiyi clique catered to and obeyed them.

古文：节、甫父兄子弟为卿、校、牧、守、令、长者布满天下，所在贪暴。
现代文：曹节、王甫的父亲和兄弟，以及养子，侄儿们，都分别担任九卿、校尉、州牧、郡太守、县令、长等重要官职，几乎布满全国各地，他们所到之处，贪污残暴。
English: Cao Jie and Wang Fu's father and brother, as well as their adopted son and nephews, all held important official positions such as Jiuqing, school captain, state pastor, county magistrate, county magistrate, and governor, respectively. Corruption and brutality were rampant in almost every corner of the country.

古文：甫养子吉为沛相，尤残酷，凡杀人，皆磔尸车上，随其罪目，宣示属县，夏月腐烂，则以绳连其骨，周遍一郡乃止，见者骇惧。
现代文：王甫的养子王吉担任沛国的宰相，更为残酷，每逢杀人，都把尸体剖成几块放到囚车上，张贴罪状，拉到所属各县陈尸示众。遇到夏崐季尸体腐烂，则用绳索把骨骼穿连起来，游遍一郡方才罢休，看到这种惨状的人，无不震骇恐惧。
English: Wang Ji, the adopted son of Wang Fu, served as the prime minister of Pei Province, and was even more cruel. Whenever there was a killing, the bodies were dissected into several pieces and placed on a prison wagon, criminal charges were posted, and the bodies were dragged to their respective counties to be displayed to the public. When the corpse of Xia Bingji was found to be rotting, the bones were strung together with ropes and traveled through a county before being abandoned. People who saw this kind of misery were shocked and horrified.

古文：视事五年，凡杀万馀人。
现代文：他在任五年，共诛杀一万余人。
English: During his five years in office, he killed more than 10,000 people.

古文：尚书令阳球常拊髀发愤曰： 若阳球作司隶，此曹子安得容乎！ 
现代文：尚书令阳球曾用手拍着大腿发愤说： 如果有一天我阳球担任了司隶校尉，这一群宦官崽子怎能容他们横行？ 
English: Shang Shuling Yangqiu once clapped his hands on his thighs and said angrily: "If one day I, Yangqiu, serve as a Sili captain, how can this group of eunuch pimps allow them to run amok?

古文：即而球果迁司隶。
现代文：过了不久，阳球果然调任司隶校尉。
English: Soon after, Yangqiu was transferred to the post of Sili's lieutenant.

古文：甫使门生于京兆界辜榷官财物七千馀万，京兆尹杨彪发其奸，言之司隶。
现代文：这时，正好王甫派他的门生在京兆的境界内独自侵占公家财物七千余万钱，被京兆尹杨彪检举揭发，并呈报给司隶校尉。
English: At this time, it just so happened that Wang Fu sent his protégé to independently embezzle more than seventy million yuan of public property within the boundaries of Beijing Zhao, which was exposed by Beijing Zhao Yin Yang Biao's investigation and reported to Captain Sili.

古文：彪，赐之子也。
现代文：杨彪是杨赐的儿子。
English: Yang Biao is the son of Yang Qi.

古文：时甫休沐里舍，颎方以日食自劾。
现代文：当时，王甫正在家中休假，段也正好因发生日食而对自己提出弹劾。
English: At that time, Wang Fu was on vacation at home, and Duan also impeached himself because of the solar eclipse.

古文：球诣阙谢恩，因奏甫、颎及中常侍淳于登、袁赦、封羽等罪恶，辛巳，悉收甫、颎等送洛阳狱，及甫子永乐少府萌、沛相吉。
现代文：阳球入宫谢恩，于是趁着这个机会，向灵帝当面弹劾王甫、段，以及中常侍淳于登、袁赦、封等人的罪恶。辛巳，便将王甫、段等，以及王甫的养子、永乐少府王萌，沛国的宰相王吉，全都逮捕，关押在洛阳监狱。
English: Yangqiu entered the palace with gratitude, so he took advantage of this opportunity to impeach Wang Fu, Duan, and the middle attendants Chun Yu Deng, Yuan Meng, Feng and other people's sins in front of the Holy Emperor. Soon, he arrested Wang Fu, Duan and others, as well as Wang Fu's adopted son, Yongle Shofu Wang Meng, and the prime minister of Pei, Wang Ji, and detained them all in Luoyang Prison.

古文：球自临考甫等，五毒备极；萌先尝为司隶，乃谓球曰： 父子既当伏诛，亦以先后之义，少以楚毒假借老父。 
现代文：阳球亲自审问王甫等人，五种酷刑全都用上。王萌先前曾经担任过司隶校尉，于是他对阳球说： 我们父子当然应该被诛杀，但求你念及我们前后同官，宽恕我的老父亲，教他少受点苦刑。 
English: Yangqiu personally interrogated Wang Fu and others, and all five types of torture were used. Wang Meng had previously served as a sergeant major, so he said to Yangqiu: Of course, our father and son should be killed, but please remember our colleagues before and after, forgive my old father, and teach him to suffer less torture.

古文：球曰： 尔罪恶无状，死不灭责，乃欲论先后求假借邪！ 
现代文：阳球说： 你的罪恶举不胜举，即令是死了也不会磨灭你的罪过，还跟我说什么前后同官，请求宽恕你的老父？ 
English: Yangqiu said, "Your sins are too numerous to count. Even if you die, it will not erase your sins. What else can you tell me, comrade, about asking your father for forgiveness?

古文：萌乃骂曰： 尔前奉事吾父子如奴，奴敢反汝主乎！
现代文：王萌便破口大骂说： 你从前侍奉我们父子，就象一个奴才一样，奴才竟然胆敢反叛你的主子！
English: Wang Meng lashed out, saying: "You once served our father and son, just like a slave. How dare a slave rebel against your master!

古文：今日临坑相挤，行自及也！ 
现代文：今天乘人之危，落井下石，你会自己受到报应。 
English: If you take advantage of others today, you will be punished.

古文：球使以土窒萌口，箠扑交至，父子悉死于杖下；颎亦自杀。
现代文：阳球命从人用泥土塞住王萌的嘴巴，鞭棍齐下，王甫父子全被活活打死。段也自杀。
English: Yangqiu shoved mud into Wang Meng's mouth and beat him with a whip. Wang Fu and his son were both beaten to death. Duan also committed suicide.

古文：乃僵磔甫尸于夏城门，大署榜曰： 贼臣王甫。 
现代文：于是阳球把王甫的僵尸剖成几块，堆放在夏城门示众，并且张贴布告说： 这是贼臣王甫！ 
English: So Yangqiu cut Wang Fu's corpse into several pieces, piled them up at the Summer City Gate for the public to see, and posted a notice saying: This is the thief Wang Fu!

古文：尽没入其财产，妻子皆徙比景。
现代文：把王甫的家产全部没收，并将他的家属全都放逐到比景。
English: confiscate all of Wang Fu's family assets, and banish all of his family members to the mountains.

古文：球既诛甫，欲以次表曹节等，乃敕中都官从事曰： 且先去权贵大猾，乃议其馀耳。
现代文：阳球既已将王甫诛杀，打算按照次序，弹劾曹节等人，于是，他告诉中都官从事说： 暂且先将权贵大奸除掉，再帝议除掉其他的奸佞。
English: Since Yangqiu had already killed Wang Fuzheng, he planned to impeach Cao Jie and others according to the order. Therefore, he told the central government official to do as follows: First, get rid of the powerful traitors, and then get rid of the other traitors.

古文：公卿豪右若袁氏儿辈，从事自办之，何须校尉邪！ 
现代文：至于三公、九卿中的豪强大族，象袁姓家族那一群小孩子，你这位从事自己去惩办就行了，何必还要我这位校尉出面动手！ 
English: As for the great and powerful families among the Three Princes and Nine Lords, like the group of children of the Yuan family, you only need to punish yourself. Why do you need me, the captain, to take action?

古文：权门闻之，莫不屏气。曹节等皆不敢出沐。
现代文：权贵豪门听到这个消息，无不吓得不敢大声呼吸。曹节等人连休假日也都不敢出宫回家。
English: Upon hearing this news, the powerful and wealthy dared not breathe loudly out of fear. Cao Si and others even dared not leave the palace to go home on holidays.

古文：会顺帝虞贵人葬，百官会丧还，曹节见磔甫尸道次，慨然抆泪曰： 我曹可自相食，何宜使犬舐其汁乎！ 
现代文：正好遇着顺帝的妃子虞贵人去世，举行葬礼，文武百官送葬回城，曹节看见已被剁碎了的王甫尸体抛弃在道路旁边，禁不住悲愤地擦着眼泪说： 我们可以自相残杀，却怎能教狗来舔我们的血？ 
English: It just so happened that Emperor Shun's concubine, the noblewoman Gu Gui, passed away, a funeral was held, and hundreds of civil and military officials were sent back to the city for burial. Cao Si saw Wang Fu's body, which had already been chopped up, abandoned on the side of the road. He couldn't help but wipe his tears with sorrow and anger and said: "We can kill each other, but how can we teach dogs to lick our blood?"

古文：语诸常侍： 今且俱入，勿过里舍也。 
现代文：于是他对其他中常侍说： 现在我们暂且都一起进宫，不要回家。 
English: Then he said to the other middle-ranking attendants, "For the time being, let's all go into the palace together. Don't go home."

古文：节直入省，白帝曰： 阳球故酷暴吏，前三府奏当免官，以九江微功，复见擢用。
现代文：曹节一直来到后宫，向灵帝禀报说： 阳球过去本是一个暴虐的酷吏，司徒、司空、太尉等三府曾经对他提出过弹劾，应当将他免官。只因他在担任九江郡太守任期内微不足道的功劳，才再任命他做官。
English: Cao Si went straight to the palace and reported to Emperor Lingdi: "Yangqiu was originally a brutal official. Previously, the three departments had impeached him and he should be dismissed. Because of Jiujiang's small merit, he was promoted and used.

古文：愆过之人，好为妄作，不宜使在司隶，以骋毒虐。 
现代文：犯过罪的人，喜爱妄作非为，不应该教他担任司隶校尉，任他暴虐。 
English: Guilty people often act recklessly, and it is not appropriate to serve as a sergeant major, allowing him to be cruel and tyrannical.

古文：帝乃徙球为卫尉。
现代文：灵帝便调任阳球为卫尉。
English: As a result, Ling Di demoted Zou Yangqiu to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：时球出谒陵，节敕尚书令召拜，不得稽留尺一。
现代文：当时，阳球正在外出晋见皇家陵园，曹节命尚书令立即召见阳球，宣布这项任命，不得拖延诏令。
English: At that time, Yangqiu was on his way to visit the royal cemetery. Cao Si ordered that Yangqiu should be summoned immediately and the appointment should be announced without delay.

古文：球被召急，因求见帝，叩头曰： 臣无清高之行，横蒙鹰犬之任，前虽诛王甫、段颎，盖狐狸小丑，未足宣示天下。
现代文：阳球见到被召急迫，因此请求面见灵帝，说： 我虽然没有清洁高尚的德行，却承蒙陛下教我担任犹如飞鹰和走狗一样的重任。前些时虽然诛杀王甫、段，不过是几个狐狸小丑，不足以布告天下。
English: Seeing that he was urgently summoned, Yangqiu asked to see Lingdi, saying, "Although I do not have a pure and noble virtue, I have been taught by Your Majesty to perform the same important duties as a flying eagle and a dog. Although I killed Wang Fu and Duan some time ago, they were just a few fox clowns, not enough to announce to the world.

古文：愿假臣一月，必令豺狼鸱枭各服其辜。 叩头流血。
现代文：请求陛下准许我再任职一个月，一定会让犹如豺狼和恶鸟一样的奸佞邪恶全都低头认罪。 说罢，又叩崐头不止地向灵帝请求，竟然出血。
English: Asking your majesty to allow me to serve for another month will surely make all the evil, like the jackals and the evil birds, bow their heads and confess their sins.

古文：殿上呵叱曰： 卫尉扞诏邪！ 
现代文：宦官们在殿上大声斥责说： 卫尉，你敢违抗圣旨呀！ 
English: The eunuchs loudly rebuked him in the hall, saying, "Officer, how dare you defy the sacred edict!

古文：至于再三，乃受拜。
现代文：一连喝斥了两三次，阳球只好接受任命。
English: After repeated scolding, Yangqiu finally accepted the appointment of a lieutenant.

古文：于是曹节、硃瑀等权势复盛。
现代文：因此，曹节、朱等人的权势又重新兴盛起来。
English: As a result, the power of Cao Jie, Zhu and others began to flourish again.

古文：节领尚书令。
现代文：曹节兼任尚书令。
English: Cao Jie also served as Shang Shuling.

古文：郎中梁人审忠上书曰： 陛下即位之初，未能万机，皇太后念在抚育，权时摄政，故中常侍苏康、管霸应时诛殄。
现代文：郎中梁国人审忠上书说： 陛下即位的最初几年，不能亲自处理国家的政事，皇太后思念抚养和培育的恩情，暂时代理主持朝政。前任中常侍苏康、管霸及时伏诛。
English: His son-in-law, Liang Guozhong, wrote: "In the first few years of His Majesty's accession to the throne, he was unable to personally handle the country's political affairs. The Empress Dowager, mindful of the grace of raising and nurturing him, temporarily assumed the role of acting regent of the Imperial Court. The former Vice-Regent Su Kang and Chief Steward Guan Bao were promptly executed.

古文：太傅陈蕃、大将军窦武考其党与，志清朝政。
现代文：太傅陈蕃、大将军窦武考讯审问他们的余党，目的在于肃清朝政。
English: Grand Master Chen Xi and General Dou Wu examined their party members, determined to clean up the politics of the imperial court.

古文：华容侯硃瑀知事觉露，祸及其身，遂兴造逆谋，作乱王室，撞蹋省闼，执夺玺绶，迫胁陛下，聚会群臣，离间骨肉母子之恩，遂诛蕃、武及尹勋等。
现代文：华容侯朱知道事情被发觉暴露，祸害将要降临到自己身上，于是便无端制造逆谋，扰乱王室，冲击皇宫，抢夺皇帝玺印，逼迫和威胁陛下，集合群臣，挑拨离间皇太后与陛下之间的母子骨肉恩情，而竟诛杀陈蕃、窦武以及尹勋等人。
English: Hua Rong Hou Zhu knew that the matter had been discovered and exposed, and that a calamity was about to befall him, so he made a counter-plot without any reason, disturbed the royal family, stormed the imperial palace, robbed the emperor's seal, persecuted and threatened His Majesty, gathered a group of ministers, stirred up the mother-and-son relationship between the empress dowager and His Majesty, and even killed Chen Xi, Dou Wu and Yin Xun.

古文：因共割裂城社，自相封赏，父子兄弟，被蒙尊荣，素所亲厚，布在州郡，或登九列，或据三司。
现代文：结果，宦官们共同割裂国土，互相封爵赏赐，父子兄弟，都受到尊崇荣宠。他们一向亲近信任和厚待的人，都分布在各州各郡，有的被擢升为九卿，有的甚至担任了三公的高位。
English: As a result, the eunuchs jointly divided the land, knighted each other, and both father and son brothers were honored and favored. The people they had always been close to, trusted and treated well were distributed in all states and counties, and some were promoted to nine Lords, and some even held the high position of the three dukes.

古文：不惟禄重位尊之责，而苟营私门，多蓄财货，缮修第舍，连里竟巷，盗取御水，以作渔钓，车马服玩，拟于天家。
现代文：他们不考虑俸禄丰厚和官位尊贵的责任，却随便钻营私人请托的门路，多方设法积蓄财物，大肆扩建家宅，连街接巷，甚至盗取流经皇宫的御水，用来垂钓；而车马衣服，玩赏物品，上比君王。
English: They do not consider the responsibility of the rich salary and high rank, but they casually drill the doorway of the private trust, try to accumulate wealth in many ways, expand their homes, connect streets, and even steal the water flowing through the palace and use it for fishing; and the chariot and horse clothes, play items, are better than the king.

古文：群公卿士，杜口吞声，莫敢有言；州牧郡守，承顺风旨，辟召选举，释贤取愚。
现代文：三公、九卿等朝廷大臣，闭口吞声，谁也不敢说话。州牧、郡太守顺从和迎合他们的意旨，征聘和推荐人才时，摒弃贤能，任用愚蠢无能。
English: The three princes, nine nobles, and other imperial court ministers were silent, and no one dared to speak. The prefectural and county magistrates obeyed and catered to their wishes, and when recruiting and recommending talents, they abandoned the talented and appointed the stupid and incompetent.

古文：故虫蝗为之生，夷寇为之起，天意愤盈，积十馀年，故频岁日食于上，地震于下，所以谴戒人主，欲令觉悟，诛钅甘无状。
现代文：因此蝗虫成灾，外族起兵反叛。上天的愤怒，已积有十余年之久。所以连年以来，天上发生日食，地下发生地震，就是为了谴责和警戒君主，想让君主早日悔悟，诛杀罪恶不可名状的人。
English: As a result, the locusts became a plague, and the foreigners raised an army to rebel. Heaven's wrath has been accumulating for more than ten years. Therefore, for years, solar eclipses have occurred in the sky, and earthquakes have occurred underground, in order to condemn and warn the monarch, to make the monarch repent as soon as possible, and to fight and kill people whose sins cannot be named.

古文：昔高宗以雉雊之变，故获中兴之功；近者神祇启悟陛下，发赫斯之怒，故王甫父子应时馘截，路人士女莫不称善，若除父母之仇。
现代文：过去，商高宗因发生野鸡飞到鼎耳啼叫的变异，因而修德，使商王朝得以中兴。最近，天地神明为了促使陛下醒悟，发雷霆之怒，所以王甫父子及时伏诛，路上行人和成年男女无不拍手称快，好象报了杀父母的冤仇一样。
English: In the past, Shang Gaozong had a mutation of pheasants flying to their ears, thus cultivating virtue and enabling the Shang dynasty to flourish. Recently, the gods of heaven and earth, in order to make His Majesty wake up, were furious, so Wang Fu and his son promptly fled. On the road, pedestrians and adult men and women were all clapping their hands, as if they had avenged their parents.

古文：诚恐陛下复忍孽臣之类，不悉殄灭。
现代文：只是抱怨陛下为什么继续容忍残余的丑类，不将他们一网打尽？
English: Why does His Majesty continue to tolerate the remaining scum, instead of wiping them out once and for all?

古文：昔秦信赵高，以危其国；吴使刑人，身遘其祸。
现代文：过去，秦王朝信任宦官赵高，终于使秦王朝灭亡；吴王余祭信任受刑之人，结果竟被他刺杀身亡。
English: In the past, Qin Xin Zhao Gao was killed for overthrowing the state, and Wu appointed the executioner, but was killed by the executioner.

古文：今以不忍之恩，赦夷族之罪，奸谋一成，悔亦何及！
现代文：而今陛下以不忍心诛杀的恩德，赦免他们灭族的大罪，如果他们的奸谋一旦成功，即使后悔也来不及了。
English: Now, with unbearable benevolence, pardon the heinous crime of the barbarians, the evil plot is complete, and it is too late to repent!

古文：臣为郎十五年，皆耳目闻见，瑀之所为，诚皇天所不复赦。
现代文：我为郎已有十五年之久，所有这些情况都是亲眼看见，亲耳听到的。朱的所作所为，连皇天都不会原谅。
English: I have been his son-in-law for fifteen years, and I have seen and heard all these things with my own eyes. Even the emperor will not forgive Zhu for what he has done.

古文：愿陛下留漏刻之听，裁省臣表，扫灭丑类，以答天怒。
现代文：请求陛下抽出片刻的时间，垂听我的陈述，察看和裁决我的奏章，扫清和诛杀奸邪，回报上天的愤怒。
English: I ask Your Majesty to spare a few moments to listen to my testimony, to examine and judge my record, to purge and kill the wicked, and to repay the wrath of Heaven.

古文：与瑀考验，有不如言，愿受汤镬之诛，妻子并徙，以绝妄言之路。 
现代文：我愿意跟朱当面对质，如果有一句假话，甘愿接受身被烹杀，妻子和儿子都被放逐的惩罚，以杜绝乱说的道路。 
English: The examiner asked Zhu Wangyu that if there were any untrue words, he would be willing to be beaten to death, and his wife would also be deported, in order to prevent him from saying anything untrue.

古文：章寝不报。
现代文：奏章呈上去后，被搁置起来，没有回报。
English: The score is suppressed.

古文：中常侍吕强清忠奉公，帝以众例封为都乡侯，强固辞不受，因上疏陈事曰： 臣闻高祖重约，非功臣不侯，所以重天爵、明劝戒也。
现代文：中常侍吕强清廉忠直，奉公守法。灵帝按照众人的成例，封他为都乡侯。吕强坚决推辞，不肯接受，因而上书陈述政事说： 我曾经听说，汉高祖郑重约定，不是功臣不可封侯。这是为了尊重国家的封爵，明白劝勉和告诫后人。
English: Lyu Qiang, the middle-ranking attendant, was pure, honest, and law-abiding. Emperor Lingdi, in accordance with the example of many people, appointed him as the mayor of the capital. Lyu Qiang resolutely refused to accept, so he submitted a letter stating the government affairs, saying: I once heard that Han Gao Zu solemnly agreed that if he was not a meritorious subject, he could not be made a mayor. This was to respect the country's knighthood, and to clearly exhort and admonish future generations.

古文：中常侍曹节等，宦官祐薄，品卑人贱，谗谄媚主，佞邪徼宠，有赵高之祸，未被轘裂之诛。
现代文：中常侍曹节等人身为宦官，福菲薄，品格卑下，出身微贱，依靠谗言和谄媚取悦人主，使用奸佞邪恶的手段邀取恩宠，有赵高的祸害，却还没有受到车裂酷刑的诛杀。
English: Zhongzheng's attendant Cao Jie and others were eunuchs, weak, inferior in character, from a lowly background, relying on flattery and charm to please the master, using treacherous and evil means to invite favor, the scourge of Zhao Gao, but they had not yet been killed by chariot torture.

古文：陛下不悟，妄授茅土，开国承家，小人是用，又并及家人，重金兼紫，交结邪党，下比群佞。
现代文：陛下不知悔悟，妄自赐给食邑，建立侯国，使邪恶小人得到任用，家人们一同晋升，印绶重叠，互相结成邪党，下面又勾结一群奸佞小人。
English: His majesty did not know how to repent, he arrogantly gave food villages, established a principality, appointed evil villains, promoted families together, overlapped seals, formed evil parties with each other, and colluded with a group of traitorous villains.

古文：阴阳乖剌，稼穑荒芜，人用不康，罔不由兹。
现代文：阴阳违背，农田荒芜，人民缺吃少穿，全都由此而起。
English: Yin and yang go against each other, farmland is barren, and the people have little to eat and wear. All of this started from this.

古文：臣诚知封事已行，言之无逮，所以冒死干触陈愚忠者，实愿陛下损改既谬，从此一止。
现代文：我又听说，后宫的采女有数千余人，仅仅衣食一项的费用，每天都要耗费数百金之多。近来，谷价虽然降低，但家家户户，面有饥色。
English: I also heard that there are more than thousands of harem prostitutes, and the cost of food and clothing alone costs hundreds of gold every day. Recently, although grain prices have fallen, every family is hungry.

古文：臣又闻后宫采女数千馀人，衣食之费日数百金，比谷虽贱而户有饥色，案法当贵而今更贱者，由赋发繁数，以解县官，寒不敢衣，饥不敢食，民有斯厄而莫之恤。
现代文：按照道理，谷价应该涨价，而现在反而降低，是由于赋敛和征发繁多，需要限期交给官府，只好故意压低谷价。农民天冷时不敢买衣服穿，饥饿时不敢吃饱，他们如此困苦，又有谁来怜恤？
English: According to reason, the price of grain should have risen, but now it has fallen. This is due to the multiplicity of subsidies and levies, which need to be handed over to the government within a time limit, and the price of grain had to be deliberately kept low. Farmers dare not buy clothes when it is cold, and they dare not eat enough when they are hungry. They are so poor, who will take pity on them?

古文：宫女无用，填积后庭，天下虽复尽力耕桑，犹不能供。
现代文：宫女们毫无用处，却塞满后宫，即使是全国都尽力耕田种桑，尚且无法供养。
English: Palace maids are useless, but they fill the harem, even if the whole country is trying to cultivate fields and plant mulberries, they still can't provide for them.

古文：又，前召议郎蔡邕对问于金商门，邕不敢怀道迷国，而切言极对，毁刺贵臣，讥呵宦官。
现代文：去年，命议郎蔡邕前往金商门回答陛下的询问，蔡邕不敢隐瞒真情，迷惑朝廷，极力直言回答，抨击到权贵大臣，责备到当权的宦官。
English: Last year, Cai Ye, the man of the order, went to the Golden Gate to answer His Majesty's inquiry. Cai Ye did not dare to hide the truth, confuse the court, and tried his best to answer frankly. He criticized the powerful ministers and reproached the eunuchs in power.

古文：陛下不密其言，至令宣露，群邪项领，膏脣拭舌，竞欲咀嚼，造作飞条。
现代文：陛下不能为他保守秘密，以致泄漏出去，奸佞邪恶之辈，肆无忌惮，张牙舞爪，恨不得把蔡邕咬碎嚼烂，于是制作匿名信进行诬陷。
English: His Majesty could not keep a secret for him, so that it leaked out, and the evil people, unscrupulous and unscrupulous, opened their teeth and claws, eager to chew Cai Wei into pieces, so they made an anonymous letter to frame him.

古文：陛下回受诽谤，致邕刑罪，室家徙放，老幼流离，岂不负忠臣哉！
现代文：陛下听信他们的诽谤，以至蔡邕被判处重刑，家属也遭到放逐，老幼流离失所，岂不辜负了忠臣？
English: His Majesty listened to their slander, so that Cai Xuan was sentenced to a heavy sentence, his family members were also banished, and his children and grandchildren were displaced. Did he not live up to his loyal vassal?

古文：今群臣皆以邕为戒，上畏不测之难，下惧剑客之害，臣知朝廷不复得闻忠言矣！
现代文：而今群臣都以蔡邕作为警戒，上怕意外的灾难，下惧刺客的杀害，我知道朝廷从此再也听不到忠直的言语！
English: Now, however, the courtiers regard Cai Ye as a cautionary tale, fearing an unexpected disaster on the one hand and an assassin's murder on the other. I know that the imperial court will never again hear words of loyalty!

古文：故太尉段颎，武勇冠世，习于边事，垂发服戎，功成皓首，历事二主，勋烈独昭。
现代文：已故太尉段威武和勇猛盖世，尤其是熟悉边防事务，童年时就投身军旅，直到老年白头时才完成大功，历事二帝，功业特别显著。
English: The late First Lieutenant Duan was a man of great military prowess and bravery. He was particularly familiar with border defense affairs. He joined the military in his childhood, and accomplished great feats only in his old age. He lived through two empires, and his feats are particularly remarkable.

古文：陛下既已式序，位登台司，而为司隶校尉阳球所见诬胁，一身既毙，而妻子远播，天下惆怅，功臣失望。
现代文：陛下既已按次第叙灵功劳，位列三公，然而却遭到司隶校尉阳球的诬陷和胁迫，身既死亡，妻子被放逐到边远地方，天下的人伤心，功臣失望。
English: His Majesty had already been awarded the Order of the Three Sovereigns for his spiritual merits, yet he was framed and coerced by Sili Lieutenant Yangqiu. He died, his wife was banished to a remote place, the world was saddened, and the heroes were disappointed.

古文：宜征邕更加授任，反颎家属，则忠贞路开，众怨以弭矣。 
现代文：应该把蔡邕召回京都洛阳，重新委任官职，迁回段的家属，则忠贞路开，众人的怨恨可以平息。 
English: If Cai Wei were to be recalled to Kyoto's Luoyang, reappointed to an official post, and his family members moved back to Duan, then the path of loyalty would be opened and the resentment of the people could be calmed.

古文：帝知其忠而不能用。
现代文：灵帝知道吕强忠心，但不能采纳他的建议。
English: Lingdi knew that Lu Qiang was loyal, but could not accept his suggestion.

古文：丁酉，赦天下。
现代文：丁酉，大赦天下。
English: Ding Jun, the world is at your mercy.

古文：上禄长和海上言： 礼，从祖兄弟别居异财，恩义已轻，服属疏末。
现代文：上禄县长和海上书灵帝说： 根据礼制，同曾祖而不同祖父的兄弟，已经分开居住，家财也已分开，恩德和情义已经很轻，从丧服上说只不过是疏远的家族。
English: Shanglu County Governor and Maritime Shuling Emperor said: According to the etiquette, brothers who are the same as their great-grandfathers but different from their grandfathers have been living separately, their family wealth has also been separated, their kindness and feelings have been very light, and from the perspective of funeral clothes, they are just an estranged family.

古文：而今党人锢及五族，既乖典训之文，有谬经常之法。 
现代文：而今禁锢党人却扩大到这类疏远亲属，既不符合古代的典章制度，也不符合正常的法令规章。 
English: But now the ban on party members has been extended to such estranged relatives, which is not in line with the ancient legal system, nor with normal laws and regulations.

古文：帝览之而悟，于是党锢自从祖以下皆得解释。
现代文：灵帝看到奏章后醒悟，于是对党人的禁锢从伯叔祖父以下都得到解除。
English: Lingdi woke up after seeing the record, so the ban on party members from uncle to grandfather was lifted.

古文：五月，以卫尉刘宽为太尉。
现代文：五月，擢升卫尉刘宽为太尉。
English: In May, Guards Lieutenant Liu Guang was promoted to Second Lieutenant.

古文：护匈奴中郎将张修与南单于呼征不相能，修擅斩之，更立右贤王羌渠为单于。
现代文：护匈奴中郎将张与南匈奴汗国单于栾提呼徵不和睦，张擅自斩杀栾提呼征，并改立右贤王栾提羌渠为南匈奴汗国单于。
English: Zhonglang, the protector of the Xiongnu, did not get along with Zhang and the Southern Xiongnu Khanate, Zhang arbitrarily killed the Xiongti Emperor and re-established the Right Wise King Xiongti as the Southern Xiongnu Khanate.

古文：秋，七月，修坐不先请而擅诛杀，槛车征诣廷尉，死。
现代文：秋季，七月，张被指控事先没有奏请朝廷批准而擅自诛杀，被用囚车押回京都洛阳，送往廷尉监狱处死。
English: In the autumn, in July, Zhang was accused of killing without asking the imperial court for permission in advance. He was taken back to Luoyang in Kyoto in a prison van and sent to Tingyi Prison where he was executed.

古文：初，司徒刘郃兄侍中鯈与窦武同谋，俱死。
现代文：当初，司徒刘的哥哥侍中刘因和窦武共同策划诛杀宦官，一同被杀。
English: At first, Liu's brother Liu, a chamberlain, was killed together with Dou Wu for plotting to kill the eunuch.

古文：永乐少府陈球说郃曰： 公出自宗室，位登台鼎，天下瞻望，社稷镇卫，岂得雷同，容容无违而已。
现代文：永乐少府陈球向刘进言说： 您出身皇族，位居三公，天下的人都仰望着您镇守和捍卫国家，怎么可以随声附和，唯唯诺诺，深恐得罪别人？
English: Yongle Minor Prefect Chen Ku said to Liu Jin, "You are from the imperial family, you are in the Three Kingdoms, and people all over the world look up to you to guard and defend the country. How can you follow the voice, be obedient, and deeply afraid of offending others?

古文：今曹节等放纵为害，而久在左右，又公兄侍中受害节等，今可表徙卫尉阳球为司隶校尉，以次收节等诛之，政出圣主，天下太平，可翘足而待也！ 
现代文：现今曹节等人为所欲为，放任为害。而且他们久居在皇帝左右，您的哥哥侍中刘就是被曹节等人杀害的。您可以上书朝廷，推荐卫尉阳球重新出任司隶校尉，将曹节等人逐个逮捕诛杀，由圣明的君主亲自主持朝政，天下太平，只要一举足的短时间内即可到来。 
English: Nowadays, Cao Jie and others do whatever they want, and it is harmful to allow them to do so. Moreover, they have been around the emperor for a long time. Your brother Liu, the chamberlain, was killed by Cao Jie and others. You can send a letter to the imperial court, recommend that the guard Yang Qiu be reappointed as the captain of the regiment, that Cao Jie and others be arrested and killed one by one, and that the sovereign of the Holy Light personally hold the imperial government, and the world is peaceful, as long as it can come in a short time.

古文：郃曰： 凶竖多耳目，恐事未会，先受其祸。 
现代文：刘说： 宦官等凶恶小人的耳目很多，恐怕事情还没有等到机会，反则先受到灾祸。 
English: Liu said, "Vicious eunuchs have many eyes and ears. If things are not ready yet, they will be the first to be harmed.

古文：尚书刘纳曰： 为国栋梁，倾危不持，焉用延彼相邪！ 
现代文：尚书刘纳进言说： 身为国家的栋梁大臣，国家行将倾覆而不扶持，还要您这种辅佐干什么？ 
English: Shangshu Liu Na said: As a pillar minister of the country, the country is about to be overturned without support. Why do you need this kind of assistance?

古文：郃许诺，亦与阳球结谋。
现代文：于是刘应允承诺，也和阳球密谋。
English: So Liu agreed to the promise and also conspired with Yangqiu.

古文：球小妻，程璜之女，由是节等颇得闻知，乃重赂璜，且胁之。
现代文：阳球的妾是中常侍程璜的女儿，因此曹节等人逐渐得到消息。于是用厚重的礼物贿赂程璜，并且对他进行威胁。
English: Yangqiu's concubine was the daughter of the middle-ranking attendant Cheng Yao, so Cao Jie and others gradually got the news. So they bribed Cheng Yao with heavy gifts and threatened him.

古文：璜惧迫，以球谋告节，节因共白帝曰： 郃与刘纳、陈球、阳球交通书疏，谋议不轨。 
现代文：程璜恐惧迫急，就把阳球等人的密谋全都告诉了曹节。于是曹节等人共同向灵帝报告说： 刘跟刘纳、陈球、阳球互通书信，往来勾结，密谋越出常轨的行动。 
English: Cheng Yao's fear was urgent, so he told Cao Zi all about the conspiracy of Yangqiu and others. So Cao Zi and others jointly reported to Lingdi: Liu and Liu Na, Chen Qiu and Yangqiu exchanged letters, colluded with each other, and conspired to deviate from the normal course of action.

古文：帝大怒。
现代文：灵帝勃然大怒。
English: Ling Di flew into a rage.

古文：冬，十月，甲申，刘郃、陈球、刘纳、阳球皆下狱死。
现代文：冬季，十月甲申，将刘、陈球、刘纳、阳球逮捕下狱，都在狱中处死。
English: In winter, in October, Jiashen arrested Liu, Chenqiu, Liu Na and Yangqiu and sent them to prison. They were all executed in prison.

古文：巴郡板楯蛮反，遣御史中丞萧瑗督益州刺史讨之，不克。
现代文：巴郡板部蛮族起兵反叛，朝廷派遣御史中丞萧瑗督促益州刺史率军前往讨伐，未能取胜。
English: The barbarians of Itabe, Ba County, rebelled, and the imperial court sent the imperial historian, Chujo Xiao, to urge Yishu Shishi to lead the army to fight, but failed to win.

古文：十二月，以光禄勋杨赐为司徒。
现代文：十二月，擢升光禄勋杨赐为司徒。
English: In December, Yang Zi was promoted to the position of disciple.

古文：孝灵皇帝上之下光和三年春，正月，癸酉，赦天下。
现代文：光和三年春季，正月癸酉，大赦天下。
English: Light and three years of spring, the first month of the new year, the general amnesty.

古文：夏，四月，江夏蛮反。
现代文：夏季，四月，江夏郡蛮族起兵反叛。
English: In the summer, in April, the barbarians of Jiangxia County rebelled.

古文：秋，酒泉地震。
现代文：秋季，酒泉郡发生地震。
English: In autumn, an earthquake occurred in Jiuquan County.

古文：冬，有星孛于狼、弧。
现代文：冬季，有异星出现于狼星、弧星之间。
English: In winter, a strange star appears between the wolf star and the arc star.

古文：十二月，己巳，立贵人何氏为皇后。
现代文：十二月己巳，封何贵人为皇后。
English: In December, Feng He Guizhong became the empress.

古文：征后兄颖川太守进为侍中。
现代文：征召何皇后的哥哥、颍川郡太守何进为侍中。
English: Queen He's brother, Shukawa County Governor He Jin, was conscripted as a chamberlain.

古文：后本南阳屠家，以选入掖庭，生皇子辩，故立之。
现代文：何皇后本是南阳郡一个屠户家的女儿，后被选进宫廷，生下皇子刘辨，所以被灵帝立为皇后。
English: Originally, Empress He was the daughter of a butcher family in Nanyang County. Later, she was elected to the court and gave birth to Prince Liu Ben. Therefore, she was appointed as empress by Emperor Ling.

古文：是岁作罼圭、灵昆苑。
现代文：同年，灵帝下令兴建圭苑、灵昆苑。
English: In the same year, Ling Di ordered the construction of Gui Yuan and Ling Kun Yuan.

古文：司徒杨赐谏曰： 先帝之制，左开鸿池，右作上林，不奢不约，以合礼中。
现代文：司徒杨赐上书劝阻说： 先帝创立制度，左边开辟鸿池，右边兴建上林苑，既不算奢侈，也不算十分节约，正好符合礼仪法度。
English: Szeto Yang Zhi wrote a letter to dissuade him, saying: The system established by the former emperor, with the opening of Honchi on the left and the construction of Shanglinyuan on the right, is neither extravagant nor very economical, and is just in line with etiquette laws.

古文：今猥规郊城之地以为苑囿，坏沃衍，废田园，驱居民，畜禽兽，殆非所谓若保赤子之义。
现代文：而今增多规划城郊之地，作为皇家苑囿，破坏肥沃的土地，荒废田园，把农民驱逐出去，畜养飞禽走兽，这大概不是爱民如子的大义。
English: However, the increasing number of planned suburban areas as royal gardens, the destruction of fertile land, the waste of pastures, the expulsion of farmers, and the breeding of birds and beasts are probably not the great righteousness of loving the people like a son.

古文：今城外之苑已有五六，可以逞情意，顺四节也。
现代文：崐况且现在城外的皇家苑囿已经有五六个之多，足够陛下任情游乐，满足四季的需要。
English: Moreover, there are already five or six royal gardens outside the city, which is enough for His Majesty to enjoy and meet the needs of the four seasons.

古文：宜惟夏禹卑宫、太宗露台之意，以尉下民之劳。 
现代文：应该好好回想一下夏禹宫室简陋，汉文帝拒绝兴建露台的本意，体恤小民的劳苦。 
English: It is worth recalling that the rooms of the Summer Palace were very simple, and Emperor Hanwen refused to build a terrace out of consideration for the hard work of the common people.

古文：书奏，帝欲止，以问侍中任芝、乐松；对曰： 昔文王之囿百里，人以为小；齐宣五里，人以为大。
现代文：奏章呈上去后，灵帝打算停止兴建，询问侍中任芝、乐松的意见。他们二人回答说： 过去，周文王的苑囿，方圆有一百里，人们尚且认为太小；齐宣王的苑囿，方圆只有五里，人们却认为太大。
English: After the report was submitted, Emperor Lingdi planned to stop construction and asked the opinions of the chamberlains Ren Zhi and Le Song. They both replied: In the past, the courtyard of King Zhou Wen, with a radius of one hundred miles, was still considered too small; the courtyard of King Qi Xuan, with a radius of only five miles, was considered too large.

古文：今与百姓共之，无害于政也。 
现代文：现今如果陛下和老百姓共同享用，对政事没有什么妨害。 
English: Nowadays, if His Majesty and the common people enjoy it together, there will be no obstruction to the political affairs.

古文：帝悦，遂为之。
现代文：灵帝听了非常喜悦，便下令兴建。
English: Emperor Lingdi was very pleased to hear this and ordered the construction.

古文：巴郡板楯蛮反。
现代文：巴郡板部蛮族再度起兵反叛。
English: The barbarians of Itabe, Ba County, rebelled again.

古文：苍梧、桂阳贼攻郡县，零陵太守杨璇制马车数十乘，以排囊盛石灰于车上，系布索于马尾；又为兵车，专彀弓弩。
现代文：苍梧郡、桂阳郡盗贼联合攻打郡县。零陵郡太守杨制作了马车数十辆，在马车上放着盛满石灰的大袋，把绑袋口的布索系在马尾巴上；另外，又专门准备载着张满弓弩的战车。
English: Thieves from Cangwu and Guiyang counties jointly attacked the counties. Yang, the governor of Luling County, made dozens of horse-drawn carriages, put large bags full of lime on the carriage, and tied the rope at the mouth of the bag to the horse's tail; in addition, he specially prepared a chariot full of bows.

古文：及战，令马车居前，顺风鼓灰，贼不得视，因以火烧布然，马惊，奔突贼阵，因使后车弓弩乱发，钲鼓鸣震，群盗波骇破散，追逐伤斩无数，枭其渠帅，郡境以清。
现代文：等到战斗开始时，命马车在前面冲锋，石灰顺着风势飞扬，盗贼都睁不开眼睛。再用火点燃布索，马受惊后，向盗贼的阵地狂奔乱跑，跟在后面的战车弓弩齐发，战鼓震天动地，群盗犹如波涛一样惊骇破散。杨挥军追击，杀伤和杀死的不计其数，并将盗贼首领斩首，将他的头悬挂在木头上，郡境得以完全平静。
English: At the beginning of the battle, the chariot of death charged in front, the lime flew with the wind, and the thieves could not open their eyes. Then the rope was lit with fire, and the horse was frightened and ran wildly to the position of the thieves, followed by the chariot of bows and arrows, the war drums shook the earth, and the bandits were scattered like waves. The Yangwei army chased, killed and killed countless people, and beheaded the leader of the thieves and hung his head on a tree, and the county was completely calm.

古文：荆州刺史赵凯诬奏璇实非身破贼，而妄有其功；璇与相章奏。
现代文：荆州刺史赵凯向朝廷上书诬告说，杨实际上不是亲自上阵破贼，而妄说自己有功。杨也向朝廷上书进行答辩。
English: Jingzhou assassin Zhao Kai falsely accused Yang in a letter to the imperial court, saying that Yang did not actually personally go into battle to break the thieves, but falsely said that he had a merit. Yang also replied to the imperial court in a letter.

古文：凯有党助，遂槛车征璇，防禁严密，无由自讼；乃噬臂出血，书衣为章，具陈破贼形势，及言凯所诬状，潜令亲属诣厥通之。
现代文：但因赵凯在朝廷有同党的帮助，便下令逮捕杨，用囚车押解回京都洛阳，囚禁在监狱，由于防范和戒备森严，杨无法申诉。于是他咬破手臂，撕裂衣服，写成血书作为奏章，详细陈述自己破贼的形势，以及反驳赵凯诬陷自己的情况，秘密交给前来探监的亲属，到宫门呈递。
English: However, because Zhao Kai had the help of the same party in the imperial court, he ordered the arrest of Yang, escorted him back to Kyoto Luoyang in a prison van, and imprisoned him in prison. Due to precautions and strict security, Yang could not appeal. So he bit his arm, tore his clothes, wrote a blood book as a record, detailed the situation of his thief, and refuted Zhao Kai's false accusation of himself, secretly handed it to relatives who came to visit the prison, and presented it to the palace gate.

古文：诏书原璇，拜议郎；凯受诬人之罪。
现代文：结果，灵帝下诏，赦免杨无罪，任命他为议郎。赵凯受到诬告反坐的惩处。
English: As a result, Emperor Lingdi issued an edict, pardoning Yang and appointing him as a mediator. Zhao Kai was punished for making a false accusation.

古文：璇，乔之弟也。
现代文：杨是杨乔的弟弟。
English: Yang is the younger brother of Yang Qiao.

