古文：始兴王叔陵，字子嵩，高宗之第二子也。
现代文：始兴王叔陵字子嵩，是高宗的第二个儿子。
English: Shixing Wang Shuling Zizong was Gao Zong's second son.

古文：梁承圣中，高宗在江陵为直阁将军，而叔陵生焉。
现代文：梁代承圣年间，高宗在江陵担任直合将军，而叔陵出生于此。
English: During the Liang Dynasty, Gaozong served as the general of Zhihe in Jiangling, and Shuling was born here.

古文：江陵陷，高宗迁关右，叔陵留于穰城。
现代文：江陵沦陷，高宗被迁徙到关右，叔陵留在穣城。
English: After the fall of Gangneung, Gaozong was moved to Guanzhong, while Shuling remained in Handan.

古文：高宗之还也，以后主及叔陵为质。
现代文：高宗返回，把后主和叔陵做人质。
English: Gaozong returned and took his heir and uncle as hostages.

古文：天嘉三年，随后主还朝，封康乐侯，邑五百户。
现代文：天嘉三年，叔陵随后主回国，被封为康乐侯，食邑五百户。
English: After three years in Tianjia, Shuling returned to China and was given the title of Kangle Hou, with 500 households in the food village.

古文：叔陵少机辩，徇声名，强梁无所推屈。
现代文：叔陵年轻时机敏善辩，舍身为名，强悍果决没有推尊屈挠。
English: Shuling was young, opportunistic, and good at debate. He sacrificed himself for the sake of fame. He was strong and brave, and never pushed, respected, or caved in.

古文：光大元年，除中书侍郎。
现代文：光大元年，授任中书侍郎。
English: In the first year of Kōdai, he was assigned to the position of junior secretary.

古文：二年，出为持节、都督江州诸军事、南中郎将、江州刺史。
现代文：二年，外出任持节、都督江州诸军事、南中郎将、江州刺史。
English: In the second year, he was appointed to hold the festival, the military governor of Jiangzhou, the general of the Southern Middle Kingdom, and the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：太建元年，封始兴郡王，奉昭烈王祀。
现代文：太建元年，被封为始兴郡王，侍奉昭烈王的祭祀。
English: In the first year of the Tai Jian era, he was named the king of Shixing County and served the sacrificial rites of King Zhaoling.

古文：进授使持节、都督江、郢、晋三州诸军事、军师将军，刺史如故。
现代文：进位为使持节、都督江郢晋三州诸军事、军师将军，刺史照旧。
English: The promotion was to the position of the commander-in-chief, the military governor of Jiangxi and Jin Provinces, and the general of the army division, and the history was as before.

古文：叔陵时年十六，政自己出，僚佐莫预焉。
现代文：叔陵遣年十六岁，政令由自己决定，僚佐无人参预。
English: Shuling was 16 years old at the time of his investiture. He decided on the government decree by himself, and none of his colleagues attended the ceremony.

古文：性严刻，部下慑惮。
现代文：性格严厉苛刻，部下畏惧。
English: His personality is stern and demanding, and his subordinates are afraid of him.

古文：诸公子侄及罢县令长，皆逼令事己。
现代文：诸公子侄以及罢除的县官，都逼迫他们侍奉自己。
English: Their sons and nephews, as well as the dismissed county officials, all forced them to serve themselves.

古文：豫章内史钱法成诣府进谒，即配其子季卿将领马仗，季卿惭耻，不时至，叔陵大怒，侵辱法成，法成愤怨自缢而死。
现代文：豫章内史钱法成前往府中拜谒，叔陵就安排他的儿子季卿带领马队，季卿惭愧羞耻，没按时赶到，叔陵大发脾气，凌辱法成，法成气愤怨恨自缢而死。
English: When Qian Fa Cheng, a historian in the Henan chapter, went to the capital to pay homage, Shuling arranged for his son Ji Qing to lead the cavalcade. Shuling was ashamed that Ji Qing did not arrive on time, Shuling lost his temper, insulted Fa Cheng, and Fa Cheng died of anger and resentment.

古文：州县非其部内，亦征摄案治之，朝贵及下吏有乖忤者，辄诬奏其罪，陷以重辟。
现代文：不属叔陵管辖的州县，叔陵也征召案察加以治理，朝中显贵和下层吏员如有违忤，就诬奏他们的罪状，陷人于重刑死罪之中。
English: In the prefectures and counties that are not under the jurisdiction of Shuling, Shuling also calls for the investigation of cases to be governed. If there is any breach of duty, the court dignitaries and lower-level officials will falsely play their crimes and trap people in heavy punishment and death.

古文：寻进号云麾将军，加散骑常侍。
现代文：不久升军号为云麾将军，加授散骑常侍。
English: He was soon promoted to the military rank of General Yun Qi, and given the additional rank of straggler.

古文：三年，加侍中。
现代文：三年，加授侍中。
English: Three years later, he was awarded the title of Junior Courtier.

古文：四年，迁都督湘、衡、桂、武四州诸军事、平南将军、湘州刺史，侍中、使持节如故。诸州镇闻其至，皆震恐股栗。
现代文：四年，调任都督湘衡桂毖四州诸军事、乎南将军、湘州刺史，侍中、使持节照旧。各州镇听说叔陵到来，都震慑害怕。
English: In four years, he was reassigned as the governor of Hunan, Hengxi, Guizhou, and the four states of the military, the general of Hunan, the historian of Hunan, the chamberlain, and the envoy. All the towns in the states heard that his tomb had arrived, and they were shocked and afraid.

古文：叔陵日益暴横，征伐夷獠，所得皆入己，丝毫不以赏赐。
现代文：叔陵日益凶暴强横，征伐夷蛮，所获都归入自己名下，丝毫不拿来赏赐。
English: Shuling became more and more ferocious and domineering, conquering and subduing barbarians. Everything he gained fell under his own name, and he did not take anything as a reward.

古文：征求役使，无有纪极。
现代文：征收财货役使劳力，没有限度。
English: There is no limit to the amount of money, goods and labor that can be collected.

古文：夜常不卧，烧烛达晓，呼召宾客，说民间细事，戏谑无所不为。
现代文：夜晚经常不睡觉，烧火烛到天亮，呼唤宾客，讲民间小事、取笑，无所不做。
English: At night, they often do not sleep, burn candles until dawn, call for guests, talk about folk trifles, make fun, and do everything.

古文：性不饮酒，唯多置肴脔，昼夜食啖而已。
现代文：天生不能饮酒，衹是多摆大块的肉，昼夜食用而已。
English: By nature, they cannot drink alcohol. Toads are mostly large pieces of meat, which are eaten day and night.

古文：自旦至中，方始寝寐。
现代文：从早晨到中午，才开始就寝。
English: From morning to noon, they only start going to bed.

古文：其曹局文案，非呼不得辄自呈。
现代文：官署文书，不呼唤不能擅自送呈。
English: If you don't call for the official document, you can't submit it without authorization.

古文：笞罪者皆系狱，动数年不省视。
现代文：犯笞罪的人都关入监狱，动辄几年不审察。
English: People who commit crimes are put in prison and often not examined for several years.

古文：潇湘以南，皆逼为左右，廛里殆无遗者。
现代文：潇水、湘水以南，都逼迫成为自己的左右，乡里差不多没有遗留者。
English: Xiaoshui, south of Xiangshui, have been forced to become their own left and right, and there are almost no survivors in the countryside.

古文：其中脱有逃窜，辄杀其妻子。
现代文：其中如有人逃跑，就杀死逃跑者的妻子儿女。
English: If any of them escape, the wife and children of the one who escaped shall be put to death.

古文：州县无敢上言，高宗弗之知也。寻进号镇南将军，给鼓吹一部，迁中卫将军。
现代文：州县不敢上告，高宗不知道这些事不久升军号为镇南将军，给予鼓吹一部，调任中卫将军。
English: The prefectures and counties did not dare to appeal, and Gaozong did not know about these things, but he was soon promoted to the military rank of Zhenan General, given a part of the propaganda, and transferred to the General of the Middle Guard.

古文：九年，除使持节、都督扬、徐、东扬、南豫四州诸军事、扬州刺史，侍中、将军、鼓吹如故。
现代文：九年，授任使持节、都督扬徐东扬南豫四州诸军事、扬州刺史，侍中、将军、鼓吹照旧。
English: In the ninth year, he was awarded the title of envoy, and became the governor of Yang, Xudong, Yang, Nanyuan, Yangzhou Military, Yangzhou historian, chamberlain, general, and propagandist.

古文：十年，至都，加扶，给油幢车。
现代文：十年，到京城，加赐扶掖之人，赐给油幢车。
English: Ten years later, when he came to Beijing, he gave a gift to the people who helped him, a tanker truck.

古文：叔陵治在东府，事务多关涉省阁，执事之司，承意顺旨，即讽上进用之，微致违忤，必抵以大罪，重者至殊死，道路籍籍，皆言其有非常志。
现代文：叔陵的治所在东府，事务多涉及省阎，执掌事务的官府，秉承意向顺应旨趣，就暗示皇上升任他，稍微有违忤，他一定以大罪加以诬陷，重者直至处死，道路上纷纷传言，都说他有不寻常的志向。
English: Shuling's seat of governance was in Dongfu, and most of the affairs involved Gu Yan. The government office in charge of affairs, adhering to the intention of conforming to the interests of the emperor, suggested that the emperor should be appointed to him, and if there was a slight violation, he must be framed for a serious crime, and if it was serious, he would be executed. There were rumors on the road that he had unusual aspirations.

古文：叔陵修饰虚名，每入朝，常于车中马上执卷读书，高声长诵，阳阳自若。
现代文：拯堕文饰虚假的名声，每当入朝时，常在车中马上拿书阅读，高声地长篇朗诵，扬扬得意。
English: He has a false reputation as a savior of literature. Whenever he enters the palace, he often takes a book to read immediately in the car, reads a long story aloud, and is very proud of it.

古文：归坐斋中，或自执斧斤为沐猴百戏。
现代文：回到房舍中，有时亲自拿着刀斧演杂技。
English: Back in the house, sometimes he himself performs acrobatics with a knife and axe.

古文：又好游冢墓间，遇有茔表主名可知者，辄令左右发掘，取其石志古器，并骸骨肘胫，持为玩弄，藏之库中。
现代文：又喜好到坟墓间游荡，遇到墓表上可确知死者身份的，就命令左右的人发掘，收取石志和古器。以及骸骨肘陉，拿着品玩摆弄，收藏在府库中。
English: He also likes to wander among the tombs, and when he comes across tombstones on which the identity of the deceased can be ascertained, he orders the people around him to excavate and collect the stone records and ancient tools. As well as the skeleton elbow, he plays with the toys and collects them in the prefectural treasury.

古文：府内民间少妻处女，微有色貌者，并即逼纳。
现代文：府内民间的年轻媳妇和少女，稍微有姿色的，都逼迫娶入家中。
English: The young daughters-in-law and young girls of the people in the prefecture, who are a little more attractive, are all forced to marry into the family.

古文：十一年，丁所生母彭氏忧去职。
现代文：十一年，因生母彭氏去世而离职。
English: Eleven years later, due to the death of his birth mother Peng, he left the company.

古文：顷之，起为中卫将军，使持节、都督、刺史如故。
现代文：不久，复出任中卫将军，使持节、都督、刺史照旧。
English: Soon after, Fuxi was appointed as the General of the Middle Guard, and he continued to hold the posts of Jisetsu, the governor of the capital, and the secretary of state.

古文：晋世王公贵人，多葬梅岭，及彭卒，叔陵启求于梅岭葬之，乃发故太傅谢安旧墓，弃去安柩，以葬其母。
现代文：晋世的王公贵人，很多安葬在梅岭，到彭氏去世，叔堕启请在堕岭安葬她，于是发掘从前太傅谢安的旧墓，丢弃谢室的棺材，来安葬自己的母亲。
English: Many princes and noblemen of the Jin Dynasty were buried in Meiling. When Peng died, his uncle Pukai asked him to bury her in Puiling. So he excavated the old tomb of the former Grandmaster Xie An, discarded Xie Shuxu's coffin, and came to bury his mother.

古文：初丧之日，伪为哀毁，自称刺血写《涅槃经》，未及十日，乃令庖厨击鲜，日进甘膳。
现代文：开始服丧的时候，假装哀伤消瘦，自称刺出鲜血书写涅槃经》，不到十天，就命令厨师杀牲畜，每天送上甘美的膳食。
English: At the beginning of the mourning, he pretended to be sad and emaciated, claiming to have stabbed blood to write the Nirvana Sutra. Within ten days, he ordered the chef to kill livestock and serve sweet meals every day.

古文：又私召左右妻女，与之奸合，所作尤不轨，侵淫上闻。
现代文：又私自召唤身边人的妻子女儿，和她们通奸，所作所为很不合法度，逐渐为皇上得知。
English: He also summoned the wives and daughters of those around him, and committed adultery with them. His actions were highly illegal, and the emperor gradually became aware of them.

古文：高宗谴责御史中丞王政，以不举奏免政官，又黜其典签亲事，仍加鞭捶。
现代文：尘塞谴责御史中丞王政，因不检举上奏免去型的官职，又罢黜他的典签亲事，随之加以鞭打。
English: He denounced Wang Zheng, a member of the Imperial Historian's Office, for not reporting him to the authorities, dismissed him from his post, and then whipped him.

古文：高宗素爱叔陵，不绳之以法，但责让而已。
现代文：产塞一向喜爱圭遍，不对他绳之以法，衹是责备而已。
English: The obstetrician has always liked Gui Quan. If he is not brought to justice, it is only a reproach.

古文：服阕，又为侍中、中军大将军。
现代文：扭瞳服丧期满，又担任侍中、中军大将军。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he served as an aide-de-camp and general of the Chinese army.

古文：及高宗不豫，太子诸王并入侍疾。
现代文：到高宗病重时，太子诸王都入宫侍奉疾病。
English: When Gaozong fell seriously ill, the princes and kings all entered the palace to serve the illness.

古文：高宗崩于宣福殿，翌日旦，后主哀顿俯伏，叔陵以剉药刀斫后主中项。
现代文：高宗在宣福殿逝世，次日早晨，后主哀痛伏在地上，叔陵用判药刀砍后主伤及颈项。
English: Gao Zong passed away in the Xuanfu Hall. The next morning, the deceased lay on the ground in grief. His uncle cut his neck with a knife.

古文：太后驰来救焉，叔陵又斫太后数下。
现代文：太后赶来救护，叔陵又砍了太后几刀。
English: The empress dowager came to the rescue, and Shuling slashed the empress dowager several times.

古文：后主乳媪吴氏，时在太后侧，自后掣其肘，后主因得起。
现代文：后主的乳母吴氏，当时在太后旁边，从后面拉住叔陵的胳膊肘，后主因之得以起身。
English: Mr. Wu, the nanny of the heiress, was next to the empress dowager at the time, and pulled the uncle's elbow from behind, which allowed the heiress to get up.

古文：叔陵仍持后主衣，后主自奋得免。
现代文：叔陵随之抓住后主的衣服，后主自己奋斗得以免难。
English: Shuling then grabbed the empress's clothes, and the empress herself was able to escape.

古文：长沙王叔坚手搤叔陵，夺去其刀，仍牵就柱，以其褶袖缚之。
现代文：长沙王叔坚用手掐住叔陵，夺去他的刀，随之牵他到宫柱边，用他的衣袖捆住他。
English: Changsha Wang Shujian covered his uncle's tomb with his hand, took away his sword, followed him to the edge of the palace pillar, and tied him with his sleeve.

古文：时吴媪已扶后主避贼，叔坚求后主所在，将受命焉。
现代文：当时吴媪已扶后主逃避贼寇，叔坚寻找后主所在的地方，将要接受命令。
English: At that time, Wu Gan had already helped his master to escape from the bandits. Shujian was looking for his master's whereabouts and was about to receive an order.

古文：叔陵因奋袖得脱，突走出云龙门，驰车还东府，呼其甲士，散金银以赏赐，外召诸王将帅，莫有应者，唯新安王伯固闻而赴之。
现代文：叔陵乘机拉扯衣袖得以脱身，冲出云龙门，乘车飞奔回到束府，呼唤兵士，散发金银来加以赏赐，向外召唤诸王将帅，没有响应的，仅新安王伯固听说后而赶往他那襄。
English: Shuling took advantage of the opportunity to pull his sleeves to escape, rushed out of the cloud dragon gate, rushed back to Sokfu by car, called the soldiers, distributed gold and silver to reward them, and called out the kings and generals. If there was no response, only the king of Xin'an, Bo Gu, heard about it and rushed to him.

古文：叔陵聚兵仅千人，初欲据城保守，俄而右卫将军萧摩诃将兵至府西门，叔陵事急惶恐，乃遣记室韦谅送其鼓吹与摩诃，仍谓之曰： 如其事捷，必以公为台鼎。 
现代文：叔陵聚集兵士仅有千把人，起初想占据城池守卫，不久右卫将军萧摩诃率领兵士到了东府的西门，叔陵见事情危急惶恐不安，就派遣记室韦谅送自己的鼓吹给摩诃，随后对他说： 如果事情成功，一定任命你为三公。 
English: Shuling gathered only a thousand soldiers. At first, he wanted to occupy the city guard. Soon, the right guard general Xiao Maqun led the soldiers to the West Gate of Dongfu. Shuling saw that the situation was critical and panicked. He sent the secretary Wei Tong to deliver his propaganda to Maqun, and then said to him: If things are successful, I will definitely appoint you as the Third Prince.

古文：摩诃绐报之，曰 须王心膂节将自来，方敢从命 。
现代文：摩诃假意答覆，说 必须大王的心腹节将亲自前来，才敢服从命令 。
English: The Capricorn replied in a feigned manner, saying that the great king's heart and stomach would have to come out in person before he dared to obey the order.

古文：叔陵即遣戴温、谭骐驎二人诣摩诃所，摩诃执以送台，斩于阁道下。
现代文：叔陵当即派遣戴温、谭驳骈二人前往摩诃那裹，摩诃捉住二人送到朝廷，斩杀在阁道下。
English: Shuling immediately dispatched Dai Wen and Tan Jiejun to go to the capital. The capital caught the two and sent them to the imperial court, where they were beheaded under the pavilion.

古文：叔陵自知不济，遂入内沈其妃张氏及宠妾七人于井中。
现代文：叔陵自知不能成功，于是进入内室把妃子张氏和宠妾七人沉到井中。
English: Shuling knew that he could not succeed, so he went into the inner room to sink the concubine Zhang and the seven concubines into the well.

古文：叔陵有部下兵先在新林，于是率人马数百，自小航渡，欲趋新林，以舟舰入北。
现代文：叔陵部下兵士原来有人在新林，逭时率领几百兵马，从小航渡河，想赶往新林，乘船舰进入北方。
English: Shuling's subordinate soldiers originally had someone in Xinlin, and when he was young, he led several hundred soldiers and horses to cross the river from a small boat. He wanted to rush to Xinlin and enter the north by ship.

古文：行至白杨路，为台军所邀，伯固见兵至，旋避入巷，叔陵驰骑拔刃追之，伯固复还。
现代文：行进到白杨路，被朝廷军队拦截，伯固见军队到来，旋即避入巷内，叔陵骑马拔刀追赶他，伯固又返回。
English: He marched to Poplar Road and was intercepted by the imperial army. When Bo Gu saw the army coming, he immediately dodged into the alley. Shuling chased him on horseback with a drawn sword, and Bo Gu returned.

古文：叔陵部下，多弃甲溃散，摩诃马容陈智深迎刺叔陵，僵毙于地，阉竖王飞禽抽刀斫之十数下，马容陈仲华就斩其首，送于台。
现代文：叔陵的部下，很多人抛弃镜甲逃散，摩诃的尖兵陈智深迎上前去刺杀叔陵，叔陵倒伏在地，宦官王飞禽拔刀砍了十几刀，尖兵陈仲华上前斩下查噬的首级，送到朝廷。
English: Shuling's subordinates, many of whom abandoned the mirror armor and fled, were greeted by the Capricorn's top soldier, Chen Zhishen, who went forward to assassinate Shuling. Shuling fell to the ground, the eunuch Wang Feiying drew his sword and slashed more than a dozen knives, and the top soldier, Chen Zhonghua, went forward to cut off the head of Zagao and sent it to the imperial court.

古文：自寅至巳乃定。
现代文：变乱自寅时到巳时就平定了。
English: The upheaval was quelled from the middle of the year to the end of the year.

古文：尚书八座奏曰： 逆贼故侍中、中军大将军、始兴王叔陵，幼而很戾，长肆贪虐。
现代文：尚书八座上奏说： 叛逆的贼寇故侍中、中军大将军、始兴王叔陵，自幼凶暴乖张，成人后肆行贪婪暴虐。
English: Shangshu Eight-Tower Shangso said: The rebellious thief and robber, the Chinese general, and Shi Xing Wang Shuling, have been violent and mischievous since childhood, and have been greedy and tyrannical as adults.

古文：出抚湘南，及镇九水，两籓庶，扫地无遗。
现代文：出外镇抚湘南，以及镇抚九丞，两个藩镇的民众，没有遗余。
English: There is nothing left of the citizens of the two towns, Zhenfu Shonan and Zhenfu Jiujo.

古文：蜂目豺声，狎近轻薄，不孝不仁，阻兵安忍，无礼无义，唯戮是闻。
现代文：他眼睛像胡蜂声音似豺狼，亲近轻浮刻薄的人，不孝顺不仁义，依仗武力做事残忍，没有礼节没有道义，衹以杀戮为务。
English: He has eyes like a wasp and a voice like a jackal. He is close to those who are frivolous and mean. He is neither filial nor benevolent. He uses force to do cruel things. He has no etiquette or morals. He is obsessed with killing.

古文：及居偏忧，淫乐自恣，产子就馆，日月相接。
现代文：为母亲服丧期间，放肆地奸淫玩乐，在别室生下孩子，每每月相交媾。
English: During the period of mourning for his mother, he had sexual intercourse with her every month, indulging in sexual play and giving birth to a child in another room.

古文：昼伏夜游，恒习奸诡，抄掠居民，历发丘墓。
现代文：白天睡觉夜晚出游，素来习惯奸猾诡诈，抄掠居民，多次发掘坟墓。
English: They sleep during the day and travel at night. They are used to being cunning and deceitful, stealing from residents and digging up graves many times.

古文：谢太傅晋朝佐命，草创江左，斫棺露骸，事惊听视。
现代文：谢太傅是晋朝的辅佐大臣，在江左初创根基，却被斫坏棺材露出骨骸，事情让人震惊。
English: Xie Taifu was the Vice-Minister of the Jin Dynasty. He was the founder of Jiangzao, but his coffin was broken and his bones were exposed. It was shocking.

古文：自大行皇帝寝疾，翌日未瘳，叔陵以贵介之地，参侍医药，外无戚容，内怀逆弑。
现代文：自从大行皇帝患病，次没有痊愈，叔陵以尊贵的身份，参与服侍医药，外表没有悲伤的容貌，内心怀有作乱的打算。
English: Ever since the Emperor Da Xing fell ill and did not recover, Shuling, as a dignitary, participated in the service of medicine. He did not look sad on the outside, but harbored the intention of creating turmoil in his heart.

古文：大渐之后，圣躬号擗，遂因匍匐，手犯乘舆。
现代文：大行皇帝逝世后，圣上号哭捶胸，竟至于倒地，叔陵却亲手侵犯圣上。
English: After the death of Emperor Da Xing, Sheng Shangguo cried and beat his chest. As for falling to the ground, Shuling actually violated Sheng Shangguo with his own hands.

古文：皇太后奉临，又加锋刃，穷凶极逆，旷古未俦。
现代文：皇太后赶来，叔陵又施加利刀，穷凶极恶，自古没有可比拟的。
English: When the empress dowager arrived, Shuling was brandishing a sword. He was extremely vicious, and there was nothing comparable since ancient times.

古文：赖长沙王叔坚诚孝恳至，英果奋发，手加挫拉，身蔽圣躬。
现代文：依赖长沙王叔坚忠诚孝顺恳切备至，英勇果敢奋发而起，亲手加以摧折拉扯，以身体遮蔽圣上。
English: Relying on Changsha Wang Shujian's loyalty, filial piety, and earnest preparation, he bravely and courageously took the initiative, tugged and pulled with his own hands, and covered the saint with his body.

古文：叔陵仍奔东城，招集凶党，馀毒方炽，自害妻孥。
现代文：叔陵随之奔往东城，招集凶恶的党羽，余毒正猛烈，他亲手杀害妻子儿女。
English: Shuling then rushed to Dongcheng, summoned the vicious party members, the after-effects were fierce, and he personally killed his wife and children.

古文：虽应时枭悬，犹未摅愤怨，臣等参议，请依宋代故事，流尸中江，污潴其室，并毁其所生彭氏坟庙，还谢氏之茔。 
现代文：虽然他已适时被枭首示众，还不能消除人们的怨恨，臣等合议，请求依照宋代旧例，把他的尸体流到江中，污秽他的房舍，并毁弃他的生母堑压的坟墓庙寝，归还谢氏的墓地。 
English: Although he had been publicly beheaded in a timely manner, it still could not dispel people's resentment. The ministers and others held a collegial discussion and requested that, in accordance with the old Song Dynasty practice, his body should be flushed into the river, his house should be polluted, and the tomb of his birth mother should be destroyed and returned to Mr. Xie's cemetery.

古文：制曰： 凶逆枭獍，反噬宫闱，赖宗庙之灵，时从殄灭。
现代文：制令说： 拯坠凶恶作乱如恶鸟恶兽，反咬于宫廷之中，依赖宗庙的威灵，他当即被扑灭。
English: The edict said: "Zheng Keng wreaked havoc like an evil bird and beast, biting back in the court, relying on the power of the ancestral temple, he was immediately extinguished.

古文：抚情语事，酸愤兼怀，朝议有章，宜从所奏也。 
现代文：体念情理谈论事实，兼有辛酸与气愤，朝中议处有典章，应依从上奏的做法。 
English: Talking about facts in a rational manner, with bitterness and anger, there are rules for the discussion between the two Koreas, which should be followed.

古文：叔陵诸子，即日并赐死。
现代文：叔陵的各个儿子，当天都被赐令自杀。
English: All of Shuling's sons were ordered to commit suicide that day.

古文：前衡阳内史彭暠谘议参军兼记室郑信、中录事参军兼记室韦谅、典签俞公喜，并伏诛。
现代文：前衡阳内史彭暠、谘议参军兼记室郑信、中录事参军兼记室韦谅、典签愈公台，都受死刑。
English: Former Hengyang insider Shi Pengyao, Zheng Xin, who was a member of the military advisory and record office, Wei Yuan, who was a member of the military record and record office, and Yu Gongtai, who was a signer of the record, were all sentenced to death.

古文：暠，叔陵舅也，初随高宗在关中，颇有勤效，因藉叔陵将领历阳、衡阳二郡。
现代文：彭嵩，是主遮的舅舅，起初跟随高宗在关中，颇有劳绩，凭藉圭逦统领历阳、衡阳二郡。
English: Peng Song, the uncle of the main shield, initially followed Gaozong in Guanzhong, and had quite a lot of achievements. With the help of Guizhong, he led Liyang and Hengyang counties.

古文：信以便书记，有宠，谋谟皆预焉。
现代文：姜隘因擅长书牍记录，受宠信，谋划都参预遇。
English: Because Jiang Yan is good at writing and recording, he is favored by letters, and he is involved in planning.

古文：谅，京兆人，梁侍中、护军将军粲之子也，以学业为叔陵所引。
现代文：韦谅，京兆人。是梁朝侍中、护军将军韦粲的儿子，因学问好被叔陵所延引。
English: Wei Tong, a native of Beijing and Shandong, was the son of Wei Wei, a courtier of the Liang Dynasty and a general of the military escort. He was buried in his uncle's mausoleum because he was good at his studies.

古文：陈智深以诛叔陵之功为巴陵内史，封游安县子。
现代文：陈智深因诛杀童噬的功劳担任巴陵内史，封游安县子。
English: Chen Zhishen was awarded the title of "Balinese History" for his contribution to the killing of children. He was exiled to An County.

古文：陈仲华为下巂太守，封新夷县子。
现代文：陈仲华担任下巂太守，封新夷县子。
English: Chen Zhonghua served as the governor of the Lower Yangtze River, and was given the title of the son of Xinyi County.

古文：王飞禽除伏波将军。
现代文：王飞禽授任伏波将军。
English: Wang Feiqi was appointed General of Fubao.

古文：赐金各有差。
现代文：赏赐黄金各有等级。
English: There are different levels for awarding gold.

古文：新安王伯固，字牢之，世祖之第五子也。
现代文：新安王伯固，字牢之，是世祖的第五个儿子。
English: Xin'an King Baogu, also known as Baogu, was the fifth son of King Shizuo.

古文：生而龟胸，目通精扬白，形状眇小，而俊辩善言论。
现代文：出生时就是龟胸，眼睛通体露，身体矮小，而才智出众善于言谈。
English: He was born with a turtle's chest, his eyes were completely uncovered, his body was small, but his intellect was outstanding and he was good at talking.

古文：天嘉六年，立为新安郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：玉台六年，被立为新安郡王，食邑二千户。
English: In the sixth year of Yutai, it was established as the county king of Xin'an, with 2,000 households in the food village.

古文：废帝嗣立，为使持节、都督南琅邪、彭城、东海三郡诸军事、云麾将军、彭城、琅邪二郡太守。
现代文：废帝继位，伯固担任使持节、都督南琅邪、彭城、东海三郡诸军事、云麾将军、彭城、琅邪二郡太守。
English: The dethroned emperor succeeded to the throne, and Bo Gu served as the envoy of the festival, the governor of Nanzhongye, Pengcheng, the military of the three counties in the East China Sea, the general of Yunnan, and the governor of the two counties of Pengcheng and Nanzhongye.

古文：寻入为丹阳尹，将军如故。
现代文：不久入京担任丹阳尹，将军照旧。
English: He soon entered Beijing as Danyang Yin, and the generals continued as before.

古文：太建元年，进号智武将军，尹如故。
现代文：太建元年，进升军号为智武将军，丹阳尹照旧。
English: In the first year of the Tai Jian era, Danyang Yin was promoted to the military rank of General Zhiwu.

古文：秩满，进号翊右将军。
现代文：任职期限满，进升军号为翊右将军。
English: After the expiration of his term of office, he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：寻授使持节、都督吴兴诸军事、平东将军、吴兴太守。
现代文：不久授任使持节、都督吴兴诸军事、平东将军、吴兴太守。
English: He was soon given the positions of envoy, military governor of Wu Xingzhu, general of Pingdong, and governor of Wu Xing.

古文：四年，入为侍中、翊前将军，迁安前将军、中领军。
现代文：四年，入京任侍中、翊前将军，迁任安前将军、中领军。
English: Four years later, he entered the capital as a chamberlain and former general of the imperial army, and was transferred to the position of former general of the imperial army and leader of the imperial army.

古文：七年，出为使持节、散骑常侍、都督南徐、南豫、南、北兗四州诸军事、镇北将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：七年，外出任使持节、散骑常侍、都督南徐南豫南北兖四州诸军事、镇北将军、南徐州刺史。
English: In the seventh year, he was appointed as an envoy to Jiji, a horseback riding attendant, the governor of South Xuzhou, the governor of South Henan, the governor of the four states of the military, the general of Zhenbei, and the governor of South Xuzhou.

古文：伯固性嗜酒，而不好积聚，所得禄俸，用度无节。酣醉以后，多所乞丐，于诸王之中，最为贫窭。高宗每矜之，特加赏赐。
现代文：伯固天性嗜酒，而不喜好积聚财物，所获得的俸禄，花费没有节制，沉醉之后，多有乞讨，在诸王之中，最为贫困，高宗时常同情他，特地加以赏赐。
English: Bo Gu was an alcoholic by nature, and did not like to accumulate wealth. He spent his salary without restraint, and often begged when he was drunk. He was the poorest of the kings, and Gaozong often sympathized with him and specially rewarded him.

古文：伯固雅性轻率，好行鞭捶，在州不知政事，日出田猎，或乘眠轝至于草间，辄呼民下从游，动至旬日，所捕麞鹿，多使生致。高宗颇知之，遣使责让者数矣。
现代文：伯固秉性不稳重，喜好鞭打下人，在州中不料理政事，每日出去打猎，有时乘坐可供卧息的车子到民间，就呼唤民众下人随从游乐，动不动到十来天，所捕到的獐鹿，多使活着送入府中，高宗知道了一些情况，多次派遣使者责备他。
English: Bo Guxing was unstable and liked to whip his subordinates. He did not deal with political affairs in the prefecture. He went out hunting every day, sometimes taking a car that could be used for sleeping to the people. He called on the people to follow him and play. He did not move for about ten days. Most of the elk he caught were sent to the prefecture alive. Gaozong knew some of the circumstances and sent emissaries to rebuke him many times.

古文：十年，入朝，又为侍中、镇右将军，寻除护军将军。
现代文：十年，回到朝廷，又担任侍中、镇右将军，不久除授护军将军。
English: Ten years later, he returned to the imperial court and served as a chamberlain, Zhenyu general, and soon after, the general of the escort army.

古文：其年，为国子祭酒，领左骁骑将军，侍中、镇右并如故。
现代文：这一年，担任国子祭酒，兼任左骁骑将军，侍中、镇右将军都照旧。
English: In this year, he served as the national son's sacrificial liquor, concurrently serving as the general of the left cheek, the general of the middle, and the general of the right cheek.

古文：伯固颇知玄理，而堕业无所通，至于擿句问难，往往有奇意。
现代文：伯固比较了解玄学理论，而懈怠学业没有贯通，至于挑出章句诘问辩驳，往往有独到的见解。
English: Bo Gu is relatively familiar with the theory of metaphysics, while the lazy students are not well-versed in it. As for picking out passages for questioning and refuting, they often have unique opinions.

古文：为政严苛，国学有堕游不修习者，重加槚楚，生徒惧焉，由是学业颇进。
现代文：为政严厉苛刻，国子学中有懒惰游荡不研习学问的，他重加鞭挞，学生畏惧他，因此学业较有提高。
English: He is strict and harsh in politics, and if there is a lazy wanderer who does not study and learn in his school, he will give him a heavy whipping. Students are afraid of him, so their studies have improved.

古文：十二年，领宗正卿。
现代文：十二年，兼任宗正卿。
English: In 1912, he also assumed the post of Sojo-kyo.

古文：十三年，为使持节、都督扬、南徐、东扬、南豫四州诸军事、扬州刺史，侍中、将军如故。
现代文：十三年，担任使持节、都督扬南徐东扬南豫四州诸军事、扬州刺史，侍中、将军照旧。
English: In the 13th year, he served as the military governor of Yangnan, Xudong, Yangnan and Yunnan, the military governor of Yangzhou, the military governor of Yangzhou, the general and the general as before.

古文：斋后主初在东宫，与伯固甚相亲狎，伯固又善嘲谑，高宗每宴集，多引之。
现代文：后主起初在束宫，和伯固互相十分亲密，伯固又善于讥讽开玩笑，高宗每当宴请群臣时，多要招引他。
English: At first, the heir apparent was at Sokgong, and he and Bo Gu were very close to each other. Bo Gu was also good at mocking and joking. Whenever Gaozong had a banquet for his courtiers, he would often invite him.

古文：叔陵在江州，心害其宠，阴求疵瑕，将中之以法。
现代文：叔陵在江州，心中忌妒他的受宠，暗中寻他的过失，将要据法律中伤他。
English: Shuling is in Jiangzhou, envious of his favor in his heart, secretly looking for his fault, and will slander him according to the law.

古文：及叔陵入朝，伯固惧罪，谄求其意，乃共讪毁朝贤，历诋文武，虽耆年高位，皆面折之，无所畏忌。
现代文：到叔陵回到朝廷，伯固畏惧获罪，谄媚迎合他的心意，于是共同毁谤朝廷贤臣，普遍诬蠛文武官员，即使对年老位高之人，他们都当面折辱，没有一点畏惧忌讳。
English: When he returned to the imperial court at his uncle's mausoleum, Bo Gu was afraid of being convicted of a crime, and Meiling catered to his wishes, so they jointly slandered the imperial court's wise men and women, and generally slandered the literary and military officials. Even for the elderly and high-ranking people, they all insulted them in person, without any fear of taboo.

古文：伯因性好射雉，叔陵又好开发冢墓，出游野外，必与偕行，于是情好大叶，遂谋不轨。
现代文：伯固性格喜好田猎，叔陵又喜好挖掘坟墓，出游到野外，必定同行，于是性情爱好大为相合，就谋划做越轨的事。
English: Bo Gu's character likes to go hunting in the fields, Shuling likes to dig graves and travel to the field, so they must go together. Therefore, their temperament and hobbies are very compatible, and they plan to do something deviant.

古文：伯固侍禁中，每有密语，必报叔陵。
现代文：伯固在宫中侍奉，每当有秘密的话，必定报告叔陵。
English: Bo Gu served in the palace, and whenever there was a secret, he would certainly report it to Shuling.

古文：及叔陵出奔东府，遣使告之，伯固单马驰赴，助叔陵指挥。
现代文：等到叔陵出奔到东府，派遣使者告诉他，伯固单人匹马赶去，协助叔陵指挥兵士。
English: When Shuling fled to Dongfu, an envoy was sent to tell him that Bo Gu had rushed there alone on horseback to help Shuling command the soldiers.

古文：知事不捷，便欲遁走，会四门已闭不得出，因同趣白扬道。
现代文：知道事情不能成功，便想逃跑，遇上四门已经关闭不能出去，就一同赶往白杨道。
English: Knowing that things could not succeed, they wanted to escape. When they found that the four doors had been closed and they could not get out, they rushed to Poplar Road.

古文：台马容至，为乱兵所杀，尸于东昌馆门，时年二十八。
现代文：朝廷前驱部队到来，伯固被乱兵杀死，尸体陈列在东昌馆门前，这年二十八岁。
English: When the imperial advance troops arrived, Bo Gu was killed by the soldiers, and his body was displayed in front of the Dongchang Pavilion. He was twenty-eight years old.

古文：诏曰： 伯固同兹悖逆，殒身途路。
现代文：诏书说： 伯固协同叛逆，丧命于道路上。
English: The edict said: Bo Gu cooperated with the rebels and died on the road.

古文：今依外议，意犹弗忍，可特许以庶人礼葬。 
现代文：现在依照外界的舆论，于心有所不忍，可特别准许以平民的礼仪安葬他。 
English: Now, in accordance with the public opinion of the outside world, if there is something intolerable in the heart, it may be specially permitted to bury him with the etiquette of civilians.

古文：又诏曰： 伯固随同巨逆，自绝于天，俾无遗育，抑有恒典。
现代文：又下诏书说： 伯固跟随大叛贼，自绝于上天，使他没有子嗣，当是有通常的典章可循。
English: The next edict said: "Since Bo Gu followed the great traitor and renounced heaven, so that he had no children, there should be the usual rules to follow.

古文：但童孺靡识，兼预葭莩，置之甸人，良以恻悯，及伯固所生王氏，可并特宥为庶人。 
现代文：不过儿童无知，加上是亲属，安置到乡间，实在令人悲恻怜悯，以及伯固的生母王氏，可都特别宽恕为平民。 
English: However, the child's ignorance, coupled with relatives, placed in the countryside, is really sad and pitiful, and the Wang clan, the birth mother of Bo Gu, can be particularly forgiving for civilians.

古文：国除。
现代文：伯固的封国被削除。
English: His fiefdom was abolished.

古文：史臣曰：孔子称 富与贵，是人之所欲，非其道得之，不处也 。
现代文：史臣日：孔子说 富裕与尊贵，是人们所想得到的，不能用正当的途径得到它，不应该接受 。
English: Shi Zhenri: Confucius said that wealth and dignity are what people want, and they cannot be obtained through legitimate means, and should not be accepted.

古文：上自帝王，至于黎献，莫不嫡庶有差，长幼攸序。
现代文：上自帝王，下到百姓，无不嫡庶有差别，长幼有次序。
English: Up from the emperor, down to the people, there is no difference between the illegitimate and the legitimate, and there is an order between the eldest and the youngest.

古文：叔陵险躁奔竞，遂行悖逆，辕袴形骸，未臻其罪，污潴居处，不足彰过，悲哉！
现代文：叔陵阴险浮躁四处钻营，以至于抗命作乱，车裂他的躯体，没有极尽他的罪恶，污秽他的住所，不足以显示他的过失。可悲啊！
English: The uncle's insidious impetuousness drills around the camp, so that he resists orders, splits his body, does not exhaust his sins, defiles his residence, is not enough to show his fault. Pathetic!

