古文：昔者师旷奏白雪之音，而神物为之下降，风雨暴至，平公癃病，晋国赤地。
现代文：以前师旷不得已而为晋平公演奏《白雪》乐曲，神物玄鹤被感召而从天降临，狂风暴雨骤然发作，晋平公因此得了重病，晋国还因此大旱，赤地三年。
English: In the past, the master had to play the "White Snow" music for Jinping Gong, the sacred crane was inspired and descended from the sky, the storm and rain suddenly occurred, Jinping Gong became seriously ill, and Jin Province suffered from a drought for three years.

古文：庶女叫天，雷电下击，景公台陨，支体伤折，海水大出。
现代文：同样，齐国一位贫贱的寡妇含冤呼告苍天，引起雷鸣电闪，并击中齐景公的高台楼阁，坠入物砸伤景公的肢体，海水也随之汹涌漫溢到陆上。
English: In the same way, a poor widow in Qi complained to the heavens, causing thunder and lightning, and hit the high-rise tower of Qi Jing Gong, falling into things and injuring Jing Gong's limbs, and the sea water also flooded onto the land.

古文：夫瞽师、庶女，位贱尚葈，权轻飞羽，然而专精厉意，委务积神，上通九天，激励至精。
现代文：这些音乐师、贱寡妇的地位比尚还低，权比羽毛还轻，但是由于他们精神专一，意志坚定，精力集中，全神贯注，所以最终上通九天，以诚以精感动神灵。
English: These musicians, lowly widows, have a lower status than the high priest and less power than a feather, but because of their single-mindedness, strong will, concentrated energy and full attention, they finally went through nine days and moved the gods with sincerity and spirit.

古文：由此观之，上天之诛也，虽在圹虚幽闲，辽远隐匿，重袭石室，界障险阴，其无所逃之亦明矣。
现代文：由此看来，当上天要惩罚那些逆天意的人时，即使这些人处圹虚幽僻之中，远远地躲藏起来，或钻入层层重叠的石室里，相隔层层关隘险阻，也无法逃避这上天的惩罚，这是再清楚不过的了。
English: From this, it is clear that when Heaven wants to punish those who go against Heaven's will, even if these people are in remote places, hiding far away, or burrow into overlapping stone chambers, separated by barriers, they cannot escape Heaven's punishment.

古文：武王伐纣，渡于孟津，阳侯之波，逆流而击，疾风晦冥，人马不相见。
现代文：周武王讨伐纣王，在孟津渡黄河时，波神阳侯掀起大浪，迎面扑卷过来，狂风大作，天昏地暗，人马都看不清楚。
English: King Zhou Wu fought against King Gong, and when he crossed the Yellow River at Mengjin, the waves of the gods and suns whipped up large waves and swept across his face. The wind was fierce, the sky was dark, and he could not see clearly.

古文：于是武王左操黄钺，右秉白旄，瞋目而撝之曰： 余任天下，谁敢害吾意者！ 
现代文：这时周武王左手握着黄钺，右手掌着军旗，瞋目喝道： 由我在此，谁敢违逆我的意志！ 
English: At this time, King Zhouwu stood up holding the yellow scepter in his left hand and the military flag in his right hand, and cried out: "Since I am here, who would dare to go against my will!

古文：于是风济而波罢。
现代文：于是风浪随话音平静而平静。
English: So the wind and waves are calm and calm.

古文：鲁阳公与韩搆难，战酣日暮，援戈而撝之，日为之反三舍。
现代文：还有过去鲁阳公与韩国结仇交战，战斗正处难分难解、太阳西沉之时，鲁阳公挥戈大喝，太阳竟为之退避三舍。
English: There was also a time when the Duke of Luyang was at war with the Republic of Korea. When the battle was in full swing and the sun was setting, the Duke of Luyang waved his sword and the sun actually retreated.

古文：夫全性保真，不亏其身，遭急迫难，精通于天，若乃未始出其宗者，何为而不成？
现代文：这样看来，那些全性保真、不使身形损亏的人，当处危难时刻，他的精诚就能上通天帝而得到助佑。
English: In this way, those who are all-round fidelity and do not make the body loss, when in danger, his sincerity will be able to go to the Heavenly Emperor and be blessed.

古文：夫死生同域，不可胁陵，勇武一人，为三军雄。
现代文：如果一个人从未曾偏离道之根本，那么做什么事都会成功。那些将生死视为同一的人，是无法将他胁迫欺凌的；同样威武勇猛的人是可以称雄三军的。
English: If a person has never deviated from the fundamentals of the path, then everything will be successful. Those who regard life and death as the same will not be able to coerce and bully him; those who are equally powerful and courageous can be called the three armies.

古文：彼直求名耳，而能自要者尚犹若此，又况夫宫天地、怀万物而友造化，含至和，直偶于人形，观九钻一，知之所不知，而心未尝死者乎！
现代文：当然，这样威武勇猛的人只不过是为了追求功名，那么，这些追求功名的人都能如此，更不用说有些包裹天地自然、胸怀容纳万物、与造化为友、内心蕴含中和之气的人了，他们这些人真是只将人的形体视为 道 所寄托的躯壳，钻研专一的 道 ，就能知道未曾知道的许多事情；他们真正做到了心性与道同存共在。
English: Of course, such mighty and courageous people are only in pursuit of fame, so these fame-seeking people can all do so, not to mention some people who wrap the heavens and the earth in nature, hold all things in their hearts, are friends with creation, and have a neutral spirit in their hearts. These people really only regard the human form as the body supported by the Way, and by studying the unique Way, they can know many things that they have never known; they have truly achieved the coexistence of the mind and the Way.

古文：昔雍门子以哭见于孟尝君，已而陈辞通意，抚心发声，孟尝君为之增欷歍唈，流涕狼戾不可止。
现代文：过去雍门子因善于悲歌而受到孟尝君的接见，见面后，雍门子叙述了人只有在悲切忧愁的环境中才能被悲歌哀乐触动的道理，然后雍门子手抚胸部开始唱起悲切的歌，这正好激发触动了孟尝君的原本悲痛处，于是也就情不自禁地欷歔叹息，后又泣不成声，眼泪纵横不能制止。
English: In the past, Yongmenzi was received by Meng Yaojun because he was good at sad songs. After the meeting, Yongmenzi described the reason why people can only be touched by sad songs and sad music in a sad and sad environment. Then Yongmenzi stroked his chest and began to sing a sad song. This just inspired and touched Meng Yaojun's original sad place, so he couldn't help but sigh, and then he couldn't stop crying.

古文：精神形于内而外谕哀于人心，此不传之道。使俗人不得其君形者而效其容，必为人笑。
现代文：这说明人如果有悲惨经历就会在内心精神世界形成悲情，以后一旦触境生情就会在言语和歌声中流露出来，并引起有同类经历人的共鸣；因为这种悲惨经历、悲切感情都是每个个人的自身体验，所以是无法传授给人家的；同样无这种悲惨经历的人是无法向人学会这种悲切感情的。
English: This shows that if a person has a tragic experience, it will form a sad feeling in the inner spiritual world. Once the boundary is touched, the feeling will be revealed in words and songs, and it will resonate with people who have similar experiences. Because this tragic experience and sad feelings are each individual's own experience, they cannot be taught to others. Similarly, people who do not have such a tragic experience cannot learn this sad feeling from others.

古文：故蒲且子之连鸟于百仞之上，而詹何之鹜鱼于大渊之中，此皆得清净之道、太浩之和也。
现代文：所以假使那些平庸的人不懂这道理而一味模仿别人的悲切表情想引起人的共鸣，这非但学不像反而会被人嘲笑。由此，蒲且子能射下百仞高空的飞鸟、詹何能钓取万丈深渊的游鱼，都是在于他们掌握了清静之道、和浩之志的缘故。
English: Therefore, if those mediocre people do not understand this principle and just imitate the sad expressions of others in order to arouse people's sympathy, they will not only fail to learn but will be ridiculed. Therefore, the reason why Puketso can shoot down hundreds of birds flying high in the sky and how Zhan can catch fish swimming in the abyss is because they have mastered the way of tranquility and the aspiration of harmony.

古文：夫物类之相应，玄妙深微，知不能论，辩不能解。
现代文：各种事物间的互相感应，其中的奥秘玄妙深微，靠智慧无法讲清，用辩说不能解释。
English: The interaction between all kinds of things, the mysteries of which are subtle and profound, cannot be clarified by wisdom, and cannot be explained by argument.

古文：故东风至而酒湛溢，蚕咡丝而商弦绝，或感之也。
现代文：所以东风吹拂则酒满溢出，家蚕吐丝商弦断绝，这或许就是事物间的互相感应。
English: Therefore, when the east wind blows, the wine is full and overflowing, and the silkworm spits silk and the merchant's string is broken, which may be the mutual induction between things.

古文：画随灰而月运阙，鲸鱼死而彗星出，或动之也。
现代文：用芦苇灰在月光照射的地面上画圆留缺则月晕也会随之缺损，鲸鱼死于海边则彗星也会随之出现，这或许就是事物间的互相触动。
English: If you draw a circle with reed ash on the ground illuminated by moonlight, if there is a defect, the moon halo will also be defective, if a whale dies at the seaside, a comet will also appear, which may be the interaction between things.

古文：故圣人在位，怀道而不言，泽及万民。
现代文：所以圣人在位执政，怀道而无言，不作绝对肯定绝对否定，这样反而恩泽所有大众百姓。
English: That is why sages reign and rule without words, without making absolute affirmation or absolute denial. This, on the contrary, is a blessing for all the people.

古文：君臣乖心，则背谲见于天，神气相应，征矣。
现代文：君臣乖悖离心离德，则太阳旁就会出现异常云气。
English: If the princes and ministers disobey, alienate the heart and alienate the virtue, abnormal clouds will appear next to the sun.

古文：故山云草莽，水云鱼鳞，旱云烟火，涔云波水，各象其形类，所以感之。
现代文：这神与气的互相感应，总会有一定的徵兆和应验。所以山中云气像草莽，水上云气如鱼鳞，旱天云气似烟火，雨天云气若水波，各种云气的形状都和产生它们的环境相类似，这就是所谓的 感应 。
English: This mutual induction of God and air always has a certain sign and fulfillment. Therefore, the clouds in the mountains are like grass, the clouds on the water are like fish scales, the clouds in dry weather are like fireworks, and the clouds in rainy weather are like water waves. The shapes of all kinds of clouds are similar to the environment that produces them. This is the so-called induction.

古文：夫阳燧取火于日，方诸取露于月。
现代文：这阳燧从太阳的日光那里取火，方诸从月亮的月光那里取露水。
English: This impotent dragon draws fire from the sunlight of the sun, and the powers draw dew from the moonlight of the moon.

古文：天地之间，巧历不能举其数；手征忽怳，不能览其光。
现代文：天地间的神奇玄妙的感应现象，正是使善计巧术者都无法弄清有多少，玄微惚恍不能览其兆。
English: It is precisely because of the magical and mysterious phenomenon of induction between heaven and earth that those who are good at tricks cannot figure out how much there is, and the mystery cannot be seen.

古文：然以掌握之中，引类于太极之上，而水火可立致者，阴阳同气相动敢，此傅说之所以骑辰尾也。
现代文：然而如果手中掌握了阳燧和方诸，由九天之上的太阳月亮中引出火与水，这说明阴阳同气同类是能互相感应触动的。也因为这样，所以傅说死后其英魂能飞升九天坐骑辰尾星宿。
English: However, if one has mastered the power of Yin and Yang and the power to draw fire and water from the sun and moon above the nine days, this shows that the yin and yang of the same kind can touch each other. It is also because of this that Fu said that after his death, his heroic soul could soar for nine days riding the star of the tail.

古文：故至阴飂飂，至阳赫赫，两者交接成和而万物生焉。
现代文：因此至阴寒冷，至阳酷暑，只有阴阳接触交融合成中和之气，万物才会产生。
English: Therefore, it is cold in the shade and hot in the sun. Only when yin and yang come into contact with each other and fuse into a neutral atmosphere can all things come into being.

古文：众雄而无雌，又何化之所能造乎？
现代文：如果只有雄性而无雌性，又怎么能化育生成万物呢？
English: If there are only males and no females, how can all things be created?

古文：所谓不言之辩，不道之道也。
现代文：这就是所谓的不言之辩，不道之道。
English: This is the so-called unspoken argument, the wrong way.

古文：故召远者使无为焉，亲近者使无事焉，惟夜行者为能有之。
现代文：所以召抚边远的四夷靠无为，亲附诸夏的诸侯凭无事，由无为无事推出只有舍弃作为者才能归服人心、占据天下。
English: Therefore, to call up the outlying Shii by means of inaction, and to personally attach the vassals of Zhu Xia by means of inaction, only those who abandon action can win the hearts and minds of the people and occupy the world.

古文：故却走马以粪，而车轨不接于远方之外，是谓坐驰陆沈，昼冥宵明，以冬铄胶，以夏造冰。
现代文：因为推行无为无事舍弃作为，所以战马有可能从战场上撤下而用于耕田，战事不至于出现在遥远的地方而用于战争。这实际上就是无为而无不为，犹如静坐而奔驰，陆地而沉没，白天而黑暗，黑夜而光明，冬天熔化胶，夏天能制冰。
English: Because of the promotion of doing nothing and abandoning action, war horses may be withdrawn from the battlefield and used for farming, and battles may not appear in distant places and be used for war. This is actually doing nothing and doing nothing, just like sitting and speeding, land and sinking, day and darkness, night and light, melting glue in winter, and making ice in summer.

古文：夫道者，无私就也，无私去也；能者有余，拙者不足；顺之者利，逆之者凶。
现代文：这也是无为而无不为这种至德所含有的功效。天道无私，是说它不会存心亲近谁，也不会存心疏远谁。能够掌握天道的功德有余，不能掌握天道的就功德不足；顺应天道就顺利，违逆天道就凶险。
English: This is also the effect contained in this supreme virtue of doing nothing and not doing anything. The heavenly way is selfless, which means that it will not purposely approach anyone, nor will it purposely alienate anyone. If you can master the heavenly way, you will have more merits; if you cannot master the heavenly way, you will not have enough merits; if you follow the heavenly way, you will be successful, and if you disobey the heavenly way, you will be in danger.

古文：譬如隋侯之珠，和氏之壁，得之者富，失之者贫；得失之度，深微窈冥，难以知论，不可以辩说也。
现代文：这就好比得到隋侯之珠、和氏之璧的人富裕，失去隋侯之珠、和氏之璧的人贫穷一样。这得和失的衡量标准非常精微玄妙，难以凭智慧来评价，也无法辩论清楚的。
English: This is just like the people who get the pearl of the Sui and the gem of the master are rich, and the people who lose the pearl of the Sui and the gem of the master are poor. This measure of gain and loss is very subtle and mysterious, it is difficult to evaluate with wisdom, and it is impossible to debate clearly.

古文：何以知其然？
现代文：怎么知道是这样的呢？
English: How do you know this is the case?

古文：今夫地黄主属骨，而甘草主生肉之药也，以其属骨，责其生肉，以其生肉，论其属骨，是犹王孙绰之欲倍偏枯之药而欲以生殊死之人，亦可谓失论矣。
现代文：那就是地黄用来生长骨骼的，而甘草用来生长肌肉的，但如果现在硬要原本生骨的去长肉，硬要原本生肉的去长骨，这就像王孙绰想用大剂量的治偏枯之症的药去救已死的人一样，是违背常理的。
English: That is, digitalis is used to grow bones, while licorice is used to grow muscles. But if we now insist on removing long bones from raw meat, this is just like Wang Sun Quan wanting to use a large dose of medicine to cure the withering disease to save the dead, it is contrary to common sense.

古文：若夫以火能焦木也，因使销金，则道行矣。
现代文：若因火能烧焦木而用火去销熔金，这样做是行得通的。
English: If you use fire to melt gold because fire can burn wood, this is feasible.

古文：若以慈石之能连铁也，而求其引瓦，则难矣。物固不可以轻重论也。
现代文：但是如果用原本吸铁的磁石去吸瓦，这就既不可能也不合常理了，在这里是否能吸铁或吸瓦不是以物的轻重来决定的。
English: However, if you use the magnet that originally attracted the iron to attract the tile, this is neither possible nor reasonable. Here, whether you can attract the iron or the tile is not determined by the weight of the object.

古文：夫燧之取火于日，慈石之引铁，蟹之败漆，葵之向日，虽有明智，弗能然也。
现代文：对于这种阳燧取火、磁石吸铁、螃蟹败漆、葵花向阳等现象，还是一句话，即使你再聪明有智慧，还是不能解释这些现象的所以然。
English: For this phenomenon of impotence catching fire, magnets attracting iron, crabs losing paint, sunflowers facing the sun, etc., it is still a sentence. Even if you are smart and wise, you still cannot explain the reason for these phenomena.

古文：故耳目之察，不足以分物理；心意之论，不足以定是非。
现代文：所以只凭耳目感官的考察，是无法分清认识事物这些原理的；同样就靠内心的分析也是无法确定这些事物的感应现象的。
English: Therefore, it is impossible to distinguish the principles of knowing things only by examining the senses of the ears and eyes; similarly, it is impossible to determine the sensory phenomena of these things by internal analysis.

古文：故以智力治者，难以持国，唯通于太和而持自然之应者，为能有之。
现代文：由此推衍开来，仅靠聪明或所谓的智力是难以治理好国家的，只有那些精通阴阳变化而又能掌握自然感应的人才能持国治政。
English: From this, it is deduced that it is difficult to govern a country well by relying only on cleverness or so-called intelligence. Only those who are proficient in yin and yang changes and can master natural sensing can govern the country.

古文：故峣山崩而薄落之水涸，区冶生而淳钩之剑成；纣为无道，左强在侧；大公并世，故武王之功立。
现代文：峣山崩塌则随之薄落河干涸，区冶出生则淳钩之剑得以铸成，纣王无道则佞臣左强才会出现在他身旁，姜太公与武王同时并世，武王才能够建功立业。
English: The collapse of Mount Lushan was followed by the drying up of the thin falling river, the birth of Gu Ye was followed by the casting of the sword of Jun Hook, the king of Lushan had no way, and the vassal Zuo Qiang appeared next to him, Jiang Taigong and King Wu were both alive at the same time, and King Wu was able to make contributions.

古文：由是观之，利害之路，祸福之门，不可求而得也。
现代文：诸如此类看出，利害祸福的来龙去脉，是难以把握和预见的。
English: As can be seen from the above, it is difficult to grasp and predict the ins and outs of interests, calamities and blessings.

古文：夫道之与德，若韦之与革，远之则迩，近之则远；不得其道，若观鲦鱼。
现代文：道与德的区别就如同革与韦的不同一样。 道 ，你感到它远不可及，却有时又觉得近在眼前，你感到它近在眼前，却有时又觉得远不可及，人们不得其道的感觉就如同观看深水中游的小鱼，可望不可及。
English: The difference between Tao and virtue is the same as the difference between leather and weave. Tao, you feel it is far away, but sometimes it feels close at hand. You feel it is close at hand, but sometimes it feels far away. The feeling that people do not have their way is like watching small fish swimming in deep water.

古文：故圣若镜，不将不迎，应而不藏，故万化而无伤。
现代文：所以圣道如铜镜，不送不迎，任凭物来来去去，不藏留物像于镜中，因此事物就是有千变万化也无法伤害到它。
English: Therefore, the holy path is like a bronze mirror, it does not give or receive, it allows things to come and go, and does not hide things like in a mirror. Therefore, even if things are ever-changing, they cannot harm it.

古文：其得之乃失之，其失之非乃得之也。
现代文：它得到的正是所失去的，失去的不正是要得到的吗？
English: What it has gained is exactly what it has lost, and what it has lost is not exactly what it wants to gain?

古文：今夫调弦者，叩宫宫应，弹角角动，此同声相和者也。
现代文：那些调整瑟弦的人，当他叩击这一宫弦，则另一瑟上的宫弦也会应和发声，当他弹奏这一角弦，则另一瑟上的角弦也会感应共鸣，这就是同音同声互相应和的现象。
English: Those who adjust the tuning chord, when he hits this tuning chord, the tuning chord on the other tuning chord will also resonate, when he plays this horn chord, the horn chord on the other tuning chord will also sense resonance, which is the phenomenon of the same tone and the same sound.

古文：夫有改调一弦，其于五音无所比，鼓之而二十五弦皆应，此未始异于声，而音之君已形也。
现代文：同样，如改调一弦，它的声音就和五音不相合，但如果弹拨叩击它却会引起二十五根弦都发声应和，这种改调后的音调就声乐音调来说并没有什么不同，因而它也能成为一定声乐音调的主音。
English: In the same way, if a string is tuned so that its sound is out of harmony with the pentatonic scale, but if it is plucked and struck, it will cause all twenty-five strings to sound in harmony. This tuned tone is no different from the vocal tone, so it can also become the main tone of a certain vocal tone.

古文：故通于大和者，惛若纯醉而甘卧，以游其中，而不知其所由至也。
现代文：所以，通达大道太和的人，昏昏然如同醉后酣睡，在这大道太和中遨游，而不深究如何到达这种境界。
English: Therefore, people who have access to Taihe Avenue, sleepy as if they were drunk, wander in and out of this avenue, without investigating how to reach this state.

古文：纯温以沦，钝闷以终。若未始出其宗，是谓大通。
现代文：他纯朴温和隐没在其中，无情蒙混地始终与道同在，就若从未离偏过 道 这个根本，这就叫大彻大悟的通达。
English: He is pure, gentle, and hidden in it. He is always with the Way, mercilessly confused. If he has never deviated from the Way, this fundamental, this is called the attainment of great enlightenment.

古文：今夫赤螭、青虬之游冀州也，天清地定，毒兽不作，飞鸟不骇，入榛薄，食荐梅，嗜味含甘，步不出顷亩之区，而蛇鳝轻之，以为不能与之争于江海之中；若乃至于玄云之素朝，阴阳交争，降扶风，杂冻雨，扶摇而登之，威动天地，声震海内，蛇蟮著泥百仞之中，熊罴匍匐丘山磛岩，虎豹袭穴而不敢咆，猨狖颠蹶而失木枝，又况直蛇鳝之类乎！
现代文：当那赤螭和青虬在冀州大地遨游的时候，天空晴朗，大地安宁，毒虫猛兽不作恶，飞鸟翱翔不惊骇，然后进入树林草丛，寻觅荐梅，品尝甘甜美味，活动范围不超过百亩区域。
English: When the red maple and the green maple are migrating in the land of Jizhou, the sky is clear, the land is peaceful, the poisonous insects and beasts do not do evil, the flying birds are not frightened, and then they enter the woods and grasses, search for the recommended plum, taste the sweet and delicious, and the range of activities does not exceed one hundred mu.

古文：风皇之翔至德也，雷霆不作，风雨不兴，川谷不澹，草木不摇，而燕雀佼之，以为不能与之争于宇宙之间；还至其曾逝万仞之上，翱翔四海之外，过昆仑之疏圃，饮砥柱之湍濑，邅回蒙汜之诸，尚佯冀州之际，径蹑都广，人日抑节，羽翼弱水，暮宿风穴，当此之时，鸿鹄鸧鸖，莫不惮惊伏窜，注喙江裔，又况直燕雀之类乎！
现代文：这时蛇和鳝就因此小看它们，认为赤螭、青虬无法与自己同在江海中争个高低。但待到赤螭、青虬在乌云密布的清晨、阴阳二气交相争斗、暴风骤雨兴起之际，乘风沐雨腾空盘旋飞升，其威力震动大地、其声音振荡四海，这时使得鼍都钻进百仞深的泥潭藏身，熊罴趴伏于山岗岩石间不敢动弹，虎豹钻入洞穴不敢咆啸，猿狖吓得从树枝上跌落一一这些动物都被吓成如此，更何况是蛇鳝之类的小动物呢！同样，当凤凰飞翔在开明有德的国度时，雷霆收敛不发作，狂风骤雨不兴起，河流江海不掀浪，树木花草安稳挺立，这燕子麻雀因此轻侮凤凰，认为凤凰无法与自己同在屋檐梁柱间争雄。后来等到凤凰盘旋升飞到万仞高空、翱翔在四海之外、穿飞过昆仑山的疏圃、畅饮砥柱山下的湍急流水、又漫步徘徊于蒙汜之水洲、徜徉在冀州大地、飞越经过都广山岭、送夕阳回日落之地抑节后、到弱水之地沐浴洗刷羽翼，最后休息在风穴之中。在这个时候，鸿鹄、鸧鹤吓得无不惊慌逃逸，趴在江边藏头嘴于江滨不敢动弹一一这鸿鹄、鸧鹤都被吓成这样，更何况燕雀之类的小动物呢！
English: At this time, the snakes and dragonflies looked down on them, thinking that the red dragonfly and the green dragonfly could not compete with themselves in the river and the sea. However, when the red dragonfly and the green dragonfly were in the early morning when the clouds were thick, the yin and yang were fighting each other, and the storm was raging, they took advantage of the wind and the rain to hover in the sky and fly up. Their power shook the earth and their sound oscillated the four seas. At this time, the dragonflies all sank into the hundred-deep muddy pond to hide. The bear cormorant lay down between the mountain rocks and dared not move

古文：此明于小动之迹，而不知大节之所由者也。
现代文：它们平时只处屋檐梁柱间看到的都是一些琐碎小动作，哪里知道豪行壮举大动作是怎么回事！
English: They usually only see some trivial small movements between the pillars of the eaves beam, where do they know what is going on!

古文：昔者王良、造父之御也，上车摄辔，马为整齐而敛谐，投足调均，劳逸若一；心怡气和，体便轻毕；安劳乐进，驰鹜若灭；左右若鞭，周旋若环；世皆以为巧，然未见其贵者也。
现代文：过去，王良、造父两位御手驾车，上车后就握着缰绳，马便随着他们的控制整齐和谐起步行进，步伐均匀，奔跑和慢行都不乱套，心怡气和，动作轻盈敏捷，安于劳苦，以进为乐，驾车奔驰瞬间消逝，或左或右如被鞭教过的那样，周旋绕圈似如圆规，世人都以为他们驾车技艺精巧，可人们还没有见到真正高明的御术。
English: In the past, Wang Liang and his father-in-law drove the car with their two hands. After getting on the car, they held the reins, and the horse walked with their control neatly and harmoniously. The pace was even, the running and slow walking were not disorderly, the heart was pleasant, the movement was light and agile, it was easy to work hard, and it was fun to advance. The driving speed was instantaneous, or left or right, as if it had been whipped, and the circling was like a compass. The world thought that they had exquisite driving skills, but people had not seen a truly masterful driving skill.

古文：若夫钳且、大丙之御也，除辔衔，去鞭弃策，车莫动而自举，马莫使而自走也。
现代文：像日月运行自然而然，如星星闪烁天体运作，又似电光急驰鬼神腾飞，进退屈伸无迹可寻。
English: Like the sun and moon move naturally, like stars twinkling celestial bodies operate, and like lightning speeding ghosts take off, into boredom stretch without a trace to be found.

古文：日行月动，星耀而玄运，电奔而鬼腾；进退屈伸，不见朕垠，故不招指、不咄叱，过归雁于碣石，轶鶤鸡于姑余，骋若飞，鹜若绝；纵矢蹑风，追猋归忽；朝发博桑，日入落棠，此假弗用而能以成其用者也。非虑思之察、手爪之巧也。嗜欲形于胸中，而精神逾于六马，此以弗御御之者也。
现代文：所以是无须招呼指挥，不用呵斥吆喝，瞬间在碣石山处超过归飞的大雁，转眼又在姑余处超过鶤鸡。奔跑如飞，驰骋疾速，像踩踏着飞箭大风，能赶上飙，清晨随旭日从扶桑出发，傍晚随夕阳归宿于落棠。他们是凭着 不用 而成其 大用 、借 无为 而取得 有为 ，不靠思虑精细、手脚灵巧；他们是将欲念意愿藏于心中，而以精神感化支配六马，这便是用不御来达到驾御， 无为 达到 有为 。
English: Therefore, there is no need to beckon the command, no need to shout and scream, and instantly surpass the returning geese at the flint mountain, and in the blink of an eye surpass the pheasants at the aunt's place. Running like flying, galloping at high speed, like stepping on the flying arrows of the wind, can catch up with the soaring, in the morning with the rising sun from Fusang, in the evening with the setting sun back to Luotang. They are by means of not using and become their great use, by doing nothing and achieve something, not by thinking, fine, dexterous; they are hiding the desire desire in their hearts, and

古文：昔者黄帝治天下，而力牧、太山稽辅之，以治日月之行律，治阴阳之气；节四时之度，正律历之数；别男女，异雌雄，明上下，等贵贱；使强不掩弱，众不暴寡；人民保命而不夭，岁时熟而不凶；百官正而无私，上下调而无尤；法令明而不暗，辅佐公而不阿；田者不侵畔，渔者不争限；道不拾遗，市不豫贾；城郭不关，邑无盗贼；鄙旅之人，相让以财；狗彘吐菽粟于路，而无忿争之心；于是日月精明，星辰不失其行；风雨时节，五谷登熟；虎狼不妄噬，鸷鸟不妄博；凤皇翔于庭，麒麟游于郊；青龙进驾，飞黄伏皁；诸北、儋耳之国，莫不献其贡职，然犹未及虑戏氏之道也。
现代文：以前，黄帝治理天下，有力牧、太山稽两位贤臣辅佐他，所以能顺应日月运行、阴阳变化的规律来调节四季的法度，修正律历的标准，区别男女雌雄，明确上下贵贱等级，使社会强不凌弱、众不欺寡。人民百姓能保天命而不无故夭折，年成按时成熟丰收而不闹灾异；各级官吏公正无私、上下协调而无过失；法令严明而不昏暗，辅佐大臣公正不阿；耕田者间不互相侵犯田界，猎渔者间不争夺鱼多水域；路途无人贪拾失物，市场无人哄抬物价；城门昼夜敞开，城镇没有盗贼；穷乡僻壤之处的人还互相谦让财物，这时连猪狗都因粮食丰富而将豆谷吐弃在路旁，所以百姓无争论之心、怨恨之情。这样天下清平安定、日月明亮，星辰运行正常不偏离轨道，风调雨顺而五谷丰登；虎狼不随意扑咬，猛禽不随便搏击，凤凰都飞临庭院，麒麟都闲游郊外；青龙进献车驾，神马安伏马槽，诸北、儋耳等边远国家无不奉献贡品。但是，这些还比不上伏羲氏的道术。
English: In the past, the Yellow Emperor ruled the world. He was assisted by two powerful wise men, the powerful herdsman and the great mountaineer, so he could adjust the laws of the four seasons in accordance with the laws of the movement of the sun and the moon and the changes of yin and yang, revise the standards of the legal calendar, distinguish between men and women, and make clear the rank of nobility and lowliness, so that the society would be strong and not weak, and the people would not be cheated. The people could protect the fate of heaven without dying for no reason, and the harvest would mature on time without causing disasters; the officials at all levels were impartial and selfless,

古文：往古之时，四极废，九州裂；天不兼覆，地不周载；火爁炎而不灭，水浩洋而不息；猛兽食颛民，鸷鸟攫老弱。
现代文：远古时代，四根擎天大柱倾倒，九州大地裂毁，天不能覆盖大地，大地无法承载万物，大火蔓延不熄，洪水泛滥不止，猛兽吞食良民，凶禽捕击老弱。
English: In ancient times, the four pillars of heaven were toppled, the earth of Kyushu was torn apart, the sky could not cover the earth, the earth could not carry all things, the fire did not go out, the flood continued to spread, the beast devoured the good people, and the birds hunted the old and weak.

古文：于是女娲炼五色石以补苍天，断鳌足以立四极，杀黑龙以济冀州，积芦灰以止淫水。
现代文：于是女娲冶炼五色石来修补苍天，砍下鳌足当擎天大柱，堆积芦灰来制止洪水，斩杀黑龙来平息冀州。
English: Therefore, the dame smelted the five-colored stone to repair the sky, cut down the pillar of the sky, piled up the reed ash to stop the flood, and killed the black dragon to pacify Jizhou.

古文：苍天补，四极正；淫水涸，冀州平；狡虫死，颛民生；背方州，抱圆天；和春阳夏，杀秋约冬，枕方寝绳；阴阳之所壅沈不通者，窍理之；逆气戾物、伤民厚积者，绝止之。
现代文：苍天补好，四柱擎立，洪水消退，冀州平定，狡诈禽兽杀死了，这时善良百姓有生路了。
English: The heavens mended, the four pillars were erected, the flood subsided, Jizhou was pacified, and the cunning animals were killed. At this time, the good people had a way out.

古文：当此之时，卧倨倨，兴眄眄；一自以为马，一自以为牛；其行蹎蹎，其视瞑瞑；侗然皆得其和，莫知所由生，浮游不知所求，魍魉不知所往。
现代文：女娲背靠大地、怀抱青天，让春天温暖，夏天炽热，秋天肃杀，冬天寒冷。她头枕着方尺、身躺着准绳，当阴阳之气阻塞不通时，便给予疏理贯通；当逆气伤物危害百姓积聚财物时，便给予禁止消除。到这个时候，天清平地安定，人们睡时无忧无虑，醒时弃智无谋；或以为牛，或以为马，随人呼召；行动舒缓沉稳，走路漫无目的，视物若明若暗；膧朦无知天真幼稚与天道万物和协，谁也不知产生缘由，随意闲荡不知所归不求所需，飘惚不定没有目标。
English: The female dragonfly rests her back on the earth and embraces the blue sky, making the spring warm, the summer hot, the autumn cold, and the winter cold. She has a square ruler under her head and a measuring line lying on her body. When the yin and yang air is blocked, she will give the smoothness and penetration; when the adverse weather harms the people's accumulation of wealth, she will give the prohibition and elimination. At this time, the sky is clear and stable, people sleep without worries, and when they wake up, they have no idea; either they think of a cow or a horse, they are called by people; they move smoothly and steadily, walk aimlessly, and see

古文：当此之时，禽兽蝮蛇，无不匿其爪牙，藏其螫毒，无有攫噬之心。
现代文：到了这时，野兽毒蛇全都收敛藏匿爪牙、毒刺，没有捕捉吞食的欲念。
English: By this time, all the wild beasts and vipers had retreated to hide their fangs and venomous spines, and there was no desire to capture and devour.

古文：考其功烈，上际九天，下契黄垆；名声被后世，光晖重万物。
现代文：考察伏羲氏、女娲他们的丰功伟绩，上可以通九天，下可以契合到黄泉下的垆土上，名声流传后世，光晖熏炙万物。
English: An examination of the Fuxi clan and their great exploits and feats can take nine days to get to the top and nine days to get to the bottom, and the fame will be passed down to future generations, shining brightly on all things.

古文：乘雷车，服驾应龙，骖青虬，援绝瑞，席萝图，黄云络，前白螭，后奔蛇，浮游消摇，道鬼神，登九天，朝帝于灵门，宓穆休于太祖之下。
现代文：他们以雷电为车，应龙居中驾辕，青虬配以两旁，手持稀奇的瑞玉，铺上带有图案的车垫席，上有黄色的彩云缭绕，前面由白螭开道，后有腾蛇簇拥追随，悠闲遨游，鬼神为之引导，上登九天，于灵门朝见天帝，安详静穆地在大道太祖那里休息。
English: They used the thunder and lightning as a vehicle, driving the dragon in the middle of the dragon's house, the green dragon on both sides, holding the rare rare jade, laying the cushion seat with a pattern, with yellow colored clouds around, the front of the road is opened by the egret, followed by the snakes, leisurely wandering, guided by ghosts and gods, climbing nine days, meeting the emperor at the gate, and resting peacefully at Taizu Avenue.

古文：然而不彰其功，不扬其声，隐真人之道，以从天地之固然。
现代文：尽管如此，他们从来不标榜炫耀自己的功绩，从来不张扬彰显自己的名声，他们隐藏起真人之道，以遵从天地自然。
English: In spite of this, they never flaunt or show off their merits, never make a show of their fame, and they hide the true way of man in order to follow the nature of heaven and earth.

古文：何则？
现代文：为何这样呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：道德上通，而智故消灭也。
现代文：因为是道德上通九天，所以智巧奸诈就无法生存。
English: Because it is morally nine days, so clever and treacherous can not survive.

古文：逮至夏桀之时，主暗晦而不明，道澜漫而不修；弃捐五帝之恩刑，推蹶三王之法籍；是以至德灭而不扬，帝道掩而不兴；举事戾苍天，发号逆四时；春秋缩其和，大地除其德；仁君处位而不安，大夫隐道而不言；群臣准上意而怀当，疏骨肉而自容；邪人参偶比周而阴谋，居君臣父子之间而况载；骄主而象其意，乱人以成其事。
现代文：到了夏桀统治的时代，君主昏庸不明事理，政道散乱而不加治理，抛弃了五帝恩威并用的施政措施，又推翻了三王治政的正确法规。因此至高的道德被泯灭而无法弘扬，先帝的道统被遮掩而无法新兴。
English: In the era of the reign of Emperor Xiaojun, the monarch was confused and irrational, the political path was scattered and not governed, the five emperors abandoned the measures of governance that were used together, and the correct laws and regulations for the governance of the three kings were overthrown. Therefore, the highest morality was destroyed and could not be promoted, and the former emperor's moral principles were covered up and could not emerge.

古文：是故君臣乖而不亲，骨肉疏而不附；植社槁而裂，容台振而掩覆；犬群曝而入渊，豕衔藤而席澳；美人挐首墨面而不容，曼声吞炭内闭而不歌；丧不尽其哀，猎不听其乐；西老折胜，黄神啸吟；飞鸟铩翼，走兽废脚；山无峻干，泽无洼水；狐狸首穴，马牛放失；田无立禾，路无莎薠；金积折廉，壁袭无理；磬龟无腹，蓄策日施。晚世之时，七国异族；诸侯制法，各殊习俗；纵横间之，举兵而相角；攻城滥杀，覆高危安；掘坟墓，扬人骸；大冲车，高重京；除战道，便死路；犯严敌，残不义；百往一反，名声苟盛也。
现代文：他们攻略城市，滥杀无辜，高城夷为平地，平安化作危险；挖掘他人的坟墓，抛洒坟中的尸骨；攻城的战车越造越大，防御的城墙越垒越高；清理疏通战争通道、路径；进犯强劲对手，残杀无辜百姓。百人出征一人生还，换取所谓的盛名。
English: They attacked the city, killing innocent people indiscriminately, razed the high city to the ground, and turned peace into danger; dug up the graves of others, and scattered the bones in the graves; built bigger and bigger chariots to attack the city, and built higher and higher defensive walls; cleared and dredged war passages and paths; attacked strong opponents, and killed innocent people. One hundred people went to war and saved one life, in exchange for so-called fame.

古文：是故质壮轻足者为甲卒千里之外，家老赢弱姜枪于内；厮徒马围，軵车奉饟，道路辽远，霜雪亟集，短褐不完，人赢车弊，泥涂至膝；相携于道，奋首于路，身枕格而死。
现代文：那些体质强壮行动敏捷的人被征为兵卒在千里之外拼杀，而老弱病残者在家悲怆凄凉。那些服役的兵卒马，推拉着车子运送粮饷，道路遥远，一路风雪交加，破衣烂衫难以御寒，人困马乏车辆破损；遇到深达膝盖的泥泞道路，人们只能互相搀扶拉扯，拼命奋力向前，这样常常有人累冻而死，倒在挽车的横木上。
English: Those who are physically strong and quick-moving are conscripted as soldiers to fight thousands of miles away, while the old, weak and sick are miserable at home. Those soldiers and horses who serve are pushing and pulling cars to transport grain, the roads are far away, the wind and snow are mixed, the ragged clothes are difficult to keep out of the cold, the people are tired and the vehicles are damaged; when encountering knee-deep muddy roads, people can only pull each other and push forward desperately. In this way, people often freeze to death and fall down on the crossbar of the car.

古文：所谓兼国有地者，伏尸数十万，破车以千百数，伤弓弩矛戟矢石之创者，扶举于路。
现代文：所谓兼并别国领土，是以横尸几十万人、毁坏战车千百辆为代价的；还有无数被弓箭、矛戟、滚石致伤致残者，被扶被搀被抬着，一路可见。
English: The so-called annexation of another country's territory came at the cost of hundreds of thousands of corpses and the destruction of hundreds of chariots; countless others were injured by bows and arrows, spears, and rolling stones, and were carried along on stretchers.

古文：故世至于枕人头，食人肉，葅人肝，饮人血，甘之于刍豢。
现代文：以致这些战犯竟到了枕骷髅、吃人肉，脍人肝、喝人血比吃牛肉猪肉都甜美的地步。
English: So much so that these war criminals have actually reached the point where eating human flesh, eating human liver, and drinking human blood is sweeter than eating beef and pork.

古文：故自三代以后者，天下未尝得安其情性而乐其习俗，保其修命，天而不夭于人虐也。
现代文：所以从三代以后的那些日子里，天下的人们再也不能安定他们的性情，无法享乐到纯朴的风俗民情、保全自己珍贵的生命以享天年而不夭折于战争人祸之中。
English: Therefore, in those days after the third generation, the people of the world could no longer stabilize their temperament, enjoy the simple customs and folk customs, and preserve their precious lives to enjoy the heavenly years without dying in the war and man-made disasters.

古文：所以然者，何也？
现代文：造成这种现状的原因是什么呢？
English: What are the reasons for such a result?

古文：诸侯力征，天下不合而为一家。
现代文：就是因为诸侯间的长年征伐讨战，天下不能融为一家。
English: It is precisely because of the long years of conquest and war between the lords that the whole world cannot be integrated into one family.

古文：逮至当今之时，天子在上位，持以道德，辅以仁义；近者献其智，远者怀其德；拱揖指麾，而四海宾服；春秋冬夏，皆献其贡职；天下混而为一，子孙相代，此五帝之所以迎天德也。
现代文：到了当今时代，天子处最高地位，以道德治理天下，并辅以仁义，所以天子身边的大臣奉献出他们的智慧，广大百姓则感怀天子的恩德，天子从容指挥，天下便会归服，春夏秋冬四季都会按时节献上各自的贡品，天下统一为一个整体，子孙代代相传。这就是五帝顺从天意应顺天德的做法。
English: In today's era, the heavenly son is in the highest position, governing the world with morality, supplemented by benevolence and righteousness, so the ministers around the heavenly son offer their wisdom, the broad masses of the people feel the benevolence of the heavenly son, the heavenly son commands with ease, the world will submit, the four seasons of spring, summer, autumn and winter will present their tributes according to the time, the world will be unified as a whole, and the descendants will pass it down from generation to generation. This is the practice of the five emperors to obey the will of heaven and follow the laws of heaven.

古文：夫圣人者，不能生时，时至而弗失也。
现代文：实际上，圣人也无法创造时运，只不过当时运来到之际他能及时地抓着它而不丧失机遇。
English: In fact, a sage can't create luck, but he can grasp it in time when luck comes without losing the opportunity.

古文：辅佐有能，黜谗佞之端，息巧辩之说；除刻削之法，去烦苛之事；屏流言之迹，塞朋党之门；消知能，修太常；隳肢体，继聪明；大通混冥，解意释神；漠然若无魂魄，使万物各复归其根；则是所修伏牺氏之迹而反五帝之道也。
现代文：还遇上贤能的人辅佐，就能贬斥谗佞之徒的歪门邪道，平息肃清巧辩之人的胡说八道，废除严酷的刑法，去掉烦杂的事务，屏弃堵塞流言蜚语的传播，阻塞营党结私的门径；消除所谓的智巧之能，循遵重大的礼法规则，根除禁绝各种情欲贪念，废弃小聪明，持守纯朴本性而彻底通悟，混混沌沌，解意释神，淡泊茫然如同丧魂落魄，不刻意干涉使万事万物都能归复到它们的根本。这就是走上了伏羲氏所开辟的道路，返回到五帝所遵循的道统。
English: With the help of a virtuous person, it is possible to denounce the crooked ways of the scoundrels, quell the nonsense of the clever debaters, abolish the harsh criminal law, eliminate the complicated affairs, abandon the spread of gossip, block the path of party and private interests, eliminate the so-called cleverness, follow the important rules of etiquette, eradicate and prohibit all kinds of passions and greed, abandon the small cleverness, adhere to the pure nature and thoroughly understand, chaos, disillusionment, indifference as if lost, and unintentional interference so that everything can return to their roots. This is the way to Fuxi.

古文：夫钳且、大丙不施辔衔，而以善御闻于天下；伏戏、女娲不设法度，而以至德遗于后世。
现代文：那钳且、大丙不用缰绳马衔却以善于驾御而闻名天下，伏羲、女娲不设法律制度却以至高德性而流传后世，为什么呢？
English: So, why is it that Dai Bong, who does not use a bridle-horse rank, is famous for being good at driving, while Fuchu and Onna, who do not have a legal system, have been passed down to future generations with the highest morality?

古文：何则？至虚无纯一，而不喋苛事也。
现代文：是因为他们达到了虚静无为纯粹专一的境界，而不是忙于琐碎的政事。
English: It is because they have reached a state of emptiness, nothingness and pure singleness, rather than being busy with petty politics.

古文：《周书》曰： 掩雉不得，更顺其风。 
现代文：《周书》中说到 如果捕猎不到雉鸡，就应该顺着它飞走的风向去寻找 。
English: The "Weekly Book" says that if you can't catch a cormorant, you should follow the wind direction it flies away to find it.

古文：今若夫申、韩、商鞅之为治也，桲拔其根，芜弃其本，而不穷究其所由生，何以至此也？
现代文：这说的是顺其道理的重要性。今天像申不害、韩非、商鞅等人的法家治国方针，只是在拔掉事物的根本，抛弃事物的本源，因为是不强调治本的重要，所以这些人也不会去追究社会弊端的由来根源、又为何能发展到这种状态？
English: What this says is the importance of going with the flow. Today's legalistic approach to governing the country by people like Shin Nihon, Han Nihong, Sanghyo and others is just pulling out the root of things and abandoning the origin of things. Because they do not emphasize the importance of treating the root cause, these people will not investigate the origin of social ills and why they can develop to this state.

古文：凿五刑，为刻削，乃背道德之本而争于锥刀之未，斩艾百姓，弹尽太半，而忻忻然常自以为治，是犹抱薪而救火，凿窦而出水。
现代文：他们只就事论事地刻意制定各种刑法，并加以无情地实施，这样一来，真的是违背了道之根本，一门心思去追求竞争那些刀尖锥末样的利益，而不惜牺牲百姓利益，消耗殚尽他们的大半东西，却还欣欣然以为天下太平无事，这就像抱着柴草去救火、凿开孔洞来蓄水一样荒谬。
English: They deliberately enact all kinds of criminal laws and implement them mercilessly, only on a case-by-case basis. In this way, they have really violated the fundamentals of the Way. Their single-minded pursuit of competing interests, which are like those of the sharp-pointed cone, at the expense of the interests of the people, consumes most of their things, but they are happy to think that the world is peaceful. This is as absurd as holding firewood to save fire and digging holes to store water.

古文：夫井植生梓而不容瓮，沟植生条而不容舟，不过三月必死。
现代文：那些井边树木生出的蘖枝经不起汲水瓦瓮的频繁碰撞，河边树木长出的弱枝受不了来回舟船的经常挤压，所以这些蘖枝弱枝是不出三月必死无疑。
English: The weak branches of the trees along the river cannot withstand the constant squeezing of the boats, so these weak branches will undoubtedly die in March.

古文：所以然者何也？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：皆狂生而无其本者也。
现代文：都是由于这些枝条疯狂乱长而背离了它所能生长的根本条件。
English: It is all due to the fact that these branches grow wildly and deviate from the fundamental conditions under which it can grow.

古文：河九折注于海而流不绝者，昆仑之输也。潦水不泄，瀇瀁极望，旬月不雨，则涸而枯泽，受瀷而无源者。
现代文：黄河九曲弯转才注入大海，河水流长不绝断，是因为有昆仑雪山输送了无尽的水源；积水不泄而发展到汪洋一片，一望无尽，但如果十天半月不降雨水的话，这一片积水就会干涸蒸发干净，这是因为积水没有得到水源补充。
English: It takes the Yellow River nine bends to flow into the sea. The river's long and uninterrupted flow is due to the Kunlun Snow Mountain transporting an endless source of water. The accumulated water does not leak and develops into a vast ocean, with an endless view. However, if there is no rainfall for ten and a half days, this piece of accumulated water will dry up and evaporate cleanly. This is because the accumulated water has not been replenished by water sources.

古文：譬若羿请不死之药于西王母，姮娥窃以奔月，怅然有丧，无以续之。
现代文：就像羿向西王母请求而得到的一点长生药被姮娥偷吃后飞往月宫，羿就为此惆怅若失，惋惜再也无法得到长生药，为什么会有这种感觉呢？
English: Just as the little bit of elixir of life that the dragonfly asked the Queen of the West for was stolen by Chang'e and flown to the Moon Palace, the dragonfly felt lost and regretted that it could no longer get the elixir of life. Why did it feel like that?

古文：何则？不知不死之药所由生也。
现代文：是因为羿不知道这长生药是怎样炼成的。
English: That's because baboons don't know how the elixir is made.

古文：是故乞火不若取燧，寄汲不若凿井。
现代文：所以说凡事都应掌握根本为好，就像向邻居借火不如自己掌握取火的燧和技术，借别人的井汲水不如自己家院里凿口井。
English: Therefore, it is better to master the fundamentals of everything, just as it is not as good to borrow fire from a neighbor as it is to master the skills of fire, and it is not as good to draw water from someone else's well as to dig a well in your own yard.

