古文：切韵之学，本出于西域。
现代文：切韵这门学术，发源于西域语言学。
English: The academic discipline of rhyming originated in Western linguistics.

古文：汉人训字，止曰 读如某字 ，未用反切。
现代文：汉代学者为汉字注音，只称 读如某字 ，还未曾用过反切的方法。
English: Han Dynasty scholars called the pronunciation of Chinese characters 讀如某字 (pronounced like a certain word) and had never used the back-cutting method.

古文：然古语已有二声合为一字者，如 不可 为 叵 ， 何不 为 盍 ， 如是 为 尔 ， 而已 为 耳  之乎 为 诸 之类，以西域二合之音，盖切字之原也。如 朿 字文从而、犬，亦切音也。
现代文：然而古汉语中已有用两个字的发音拼合成一个字的，如 不可 拼合成 叵 字、 何不 拼合成 盍 字、 如是 拼合成 尔 字、 而已 拼合成 耳 字、 之乎 拼合成 诸 字之类，用的都是西域以两个音拼合成一个字的方法，这大概就是反切注音的源头。又如 輭 字，右旁由 而 、 犬 合成而表字音，也是一种拼音。
English: However, in ancient Chinese, it was already possible to use the pronunciation of two words to spell a word. For example, it is not possible to spell the  character, why not spell the  character, if it is, spell the 爾 character, but it has been spelled the 耳 character, and so on. The method of spelling a word with two sounds is used in the western region, which is probably the source of the back-cut sound. Also, such as the  character, from the right side, the dog is synthesized and the word sound is also a spelling sound.

古文：殆与声俱生，莫知从来。
现代文：大约拼音是和语言一起产生的，人们无从知道它们起于哪个时代。
English: Pinyin, for example, was created together with the language, and people have no way of knowing in which era they originated.

古文：文潞公归洛日，年七十八。同时有中散大夫程煦、朝议大夫司马旦、司封郎中致仕席汝言，皆年七十八。
现代文：文潞公致仕回洛阳时，高年七十八，同时有中散大夫程珦、朝议大夫司马旦、致仕司封郎中席汝言，都是七十八岁。
English: When King Wenliang returned to Luoyang, he was 78 years old. At the same time, Zhongshan doctor Cheng Qi, court council doctor Sima Dan, and minister Sifeng Lang, middle seat Rugen, were all 78 years old.

古文：尝为同甲会，各赋诗一首。
现代文：四人曾举行同甲会，各赋诗一首。
English: The four of them once held a class reunion, each reciting a poem.

古文：潞公诗曰： 四人三百十二歳，况是同生丙午年。
现代文：潞公诗说： 四人三百十二岁，况是同生丙午年。
English: Zang Gongshi said: The four of them are three hundred and two years old, moreover, they were born in the same year.

古文：河中府鹳雀楼，三层，前瞻中条，下瞰大河。唐人留诗者甚多，唯李益、王之奂、畅诸三篇能状其景。
现代文：河中府的三层鹳雀楼，前望中条山，下瞰黄河，唐人在此留诗的很多，而只有李益、王之涣、畅诸的三篇诗最能描绘出登楼的景象情怀。
English: The three-story Hanzhajiao Tower in Hanzhong Prefecture, overlooking Zhongjiao Mountain in the foreground and the Yellow River below, has been the subject of many poems by the Chinese people, but only the three poems by Li Yi, Wang Zhi Yao and Chang Zhu can best depict the scenery and feelings of climbing the tower.

古文：李益诗曰： 鹳雀楼西百尺墙，汀洲云树共茫茫。
现代文：李益诗说： 鹳雀楼西百尺墙，汀洲云树共茫茫。
English: Li Yixi said: The hundred-foot wall west of the Hunchback Building, and the clouds and trees of Dingzhou are all over the place.

古文：汉家箫鼓随流水，魏国山河半夕阳。
现代文：汉家箫鼓随流水，魏国山河半夕阳。
English: The Han Dynasty's gongs and drums follow the flowing water, and the mountains and rivers of Wei Province are in the middle of the sunset.

古文：事去千年犹恨速，秋来一日即知长。
现代文：事去千年犹恨速，愁来一日即知长。
English: A thousand years pass by too quickly, but a day of sorrow comes too soon.

古文：风烟并在思归处，远目非春亦自伤。 
现代文：风烟并在思归处，远目非春亦自伤。 
English: The wind and smoke are also in the place where I want to return, and the far-sighted non-spring also self-injures.

古文：王之奂诗曰： 白日依山尽，黄河入海流。
现代文：王之涣诗说： 白日依山尽，黄河入海流。
English: Wang Zhiyao's poem says: The sun sets behind the mountains, and the Yellow River flows into the sea.

古文：欲穷千里目，更上一层楼。 
现代文：欲穷千里目，更上一层楼。 
English: If you want to be poor, you have to go to the next level.

古文：畅诸诗曰： 迥临飞鸟上，高出世尘间，天势围平野，河流入断山。 
现代文：畅诸诗说： 迥临飞鸟上，高出世尘间。天势围平野，河流入断山。 
English: It is said in many poems: "Coming down on the birds, high above the world. The heavens surround the plains, and the rivers flow into the mountains."

古文：欧阳文忠好推挽后学。
现代文：欧阳修欧阳文忠公喜欢提携好学的年轻人。
English: Ouyang Xiu Ouyang Wenzhong likes to partner with young people who are eager to learn.

古文：王向少时为三班奉职，干当滁州一镇，时文忠守滁州。
现代文：王向年轻时以三班奉职的衔名，管理滁州一个镇的公事，当时文忠公为滁州知州。
English: When Wang Xiang was young, he managed the public affairs of a town in Bozhou with the title of three-shift duty. At that time, Wen Zhonggong was the leader of Bozhou Zhizhou.

古文：有书生为学子不行束脩，自往诣之，学子闭门不接。
现代文：有个教书的儒生因为学生不交学费入学，就亲自到学生叫授课，结果学生关着门不接纳。
English: A Confucian scholar who was teaching, because the students did not pay tuition to enter the school, personally went to the students to give lectures. As a result, the students were not admitted behind closed doors.

古文：书生讼于向，向判其牒曰： 礼闻来学，不闻往教。
现代文：儒生就找王向递状子告这个学生，王向在他的状子上批写判词说： 自古礼数，只听说过学生来学的，没听说过要先生去教的。
English: The Confucian scholar asked Wang Xiang to submit a petition to sue the student. Wang Xiang wrote a judgment on his petition, saying: Since ancient times, I have only heard of students coming to study, but I have never heard of a teacher going to teach.

古文：先生既已自屈，弟子宁不少高？
现代文：先生既然已经屈尊前往，弟子又怎能不会慢待师道？
English: Since the teacher has condescended to go, how can the disciple not wait for the teacher?

古文：盍二物以收威，岂两辞而造狱？ 
现代文：何不行罚以收回你的师尊，哪用双方争竞来对簿公堂！ 
English: Why not punish to reclaim your master, rather than use both sides of the dispute to litigate!

古文：书生不直向判，径持牒以见欧公。
现代文：儒生以为王向的判决不公正，就直接拿着状子去找欧公。
English: Confucianism students thought Wang Xiang's sentence was unfair, so they went directly to Ou Gong with the writ.

古文：公一阅，大称其才，遂为之延誉奖进，成就美名，卒为闻人。
现代文：欧公一看王向的判词，对他的才华大为称赏，因而为他传布名誉，鼓励他进取，终于让他功成名就，成为了名人。
English: When Ou Gong saw Wang Xiang's judgment, he greatly appreciated his talent, so he spread his reputation, encouraged him to forge ahead, and finally made him famous and became a celebrity.

古文：枣与棘相类，皆有刺。
现代文：枣树与酸枣树很相似，都有刺。
English: The jujube tree is very similar to the sour jujube tree, both have thorns.

古文：枣独生，高而少横枝；棘列生，痹而成林；以此为别，其文皆从朿音刺，木芒刺也。
现代文：枣树是单株独生的，树干高且枝丫少；酸枣树是多株丛生，树干低并且枝干很多，这就是它们的区别。枣和棘的字形都从 朿 ，读作 刺 ，是 树木所长的芒刺 的意思。
English: Jujube trees are single-stemmed, with a tall trunk and few branches; sour jujube trees are multi-stemmed, with a low trunk and many branches, and this is the difference between them.The glyphs of jujube and thorn both start with, pronounced 刺, which means the thorn of the tree.

古文：朿而相戴立生者枣也。朿而相比横生者棘也。
现代文：树木的枝条一层层往上长的，就是枣树；枝条丛生、相互紧挨着长成一片的，就是酸枣树。
English: The branches of trees that grow upward layer by layer are jujube trees; branches that are clumped and grow into one piece next to each other are sour jujube trees.

古文：不识二物者，观文可辨。
现代文：不认识这两种树的人，看看文字的字形也就能够辨别了。
English: People who do not know these two trees can also distinguish them by looking at the glyphs of the words.

