古文：以明示下者暗，有过不知者蔽，迷而不返者惑，
现代文：以真正的情况示于臣下的人是不明智的。犯了错而不能自知的人，一定会受到蒙蔽。走入迷途而不知返回正道，一定是神志惑乱。
English: It is unwise for a man to show his subjects the true state of affairs. A man who has made a mistake and does not know it is sure to be deceived. A man who goes astray and does not know how to return to the right path is sure to be deluded.

古文：以言取怨者祸，令与心乖者废，后令缪前者毁，
现代文：因为语言招致怨恨，一定会有祸患。思想与政令矛盾，一定会坏事。政令前后不一，一定会失败。
English: For where there is hatred, there will be strife; where there is discord, there will be evil; and where there is discord, there will be failure.

古文：怒而无威者犯，好众辱人者殃，戮辱所任者危，
现代文：发怒却无人畏惧，一定会受到侵犯。喜欢当众侮辱别人，一定会有灾难。对手下的大将罚之过当，一定会有危险。
English: He that is quick to anger, and feareth not, is a danger to himself: he that loveth to oppress, and chastiseth in public, is a danger to himself: and he that chastiseth his neighbour without knowledge, is a danger to himself.

古文：慢其所敬者凶，貌合心离者孤，亲谗远忠者亡，
现代文：怠慢应受尊重的人，一定会招致不幸。表面上关系密切，实际上心怀异志的，一定会陷于孤独。亲近谗慝，远离忠良，一定会灭亡。
English: He who neglects respectable people is sure to meet with misfortune. He who is outwardly close-knit, but in reality is of a different mind, is sure to fall into solitude. He who is close to the yakuza, but far from the faithful, is sure to perish.

古文：近色远贤者昏，女谒公行者乱，私人以官者浮，
现代文：亲近女色，疏远贤人，必是昏瞆目盲。女子干涉大政，一定会有动乱。
English: To be close to a woman and distant from a wise man is to be blind. If a woman interferes in politics, there is sure to be turmoil.

古文：凌下取胜者侵，名不胜实者耗。
现代文：随便将官职到处乱送，政治就会出现乱相。欺凌下属而获得胜利的，自己也一定会受到下属的侵犯。
English: If you throw your official position around, politics will be chaotic. If you bully your subordinates and win, you will certainly be violated by your subordinates.

古文：略己而责人者不治，自厚而薄人者弃废。
现代文：所享受的名声超过自己的实际才能，即使耗尽精力也治理不好事务。对自己马虎，对别人求全责备的，无法处理事务。
English: Those who enjoy a reputation that exceeds their actual ability, who are not able to manage affairs well even if they exhaust their energy, who are careless with themselves and blame others for everything, are unable to handle affairs.

古文：以过弃功者损，群下外异者沦，既用不任者疏，
现代文：对自己宽厚，对别人刻薄的，一定被众人遗弃。
English: He who is kind to himself, but cruel to others, is sure to be abandoned by everyone.

古文：行赏吝色者沮，多许少与者怨，既迎而拒者乖。
现代文：论功行赏时吝啬小气，形于颜色，必定使人感到沮丧。承诺多，兑现少，必招致怨恨。起初竭诚欢迎，末了又拒于门外，一定会恩断义绝。
English: When it comes to reward and recognition, stinginess and pettiness, in the form of color, are sure to make people feel frustrated. More promises, less fulfillment, will lead to resentment. At first wholeheartedly welcome, and finally shut out, will certainly be cut off.

古文：薄施厚望者不报，贵而忘贱者不久。
现代文：给予别人很少，却希望得到厚报的，一定会大失所望。富贵之后就忘却贫贱时候的情状，一定不会长久。
English: Those who give little to others, but hope to receive much in return, are sure to be disappointed. Those who forget their poverty after becoming rich will not last long.

古文：念旧恶而弃新功者凶，用人不得正者殆，强用人者不畜，
现代文：念及别人旧恶，忘记其所立新功的，一定遭来大凶。任用邪恶之徒，一定会有危险。勉强用人，一定留不住人。
English: If you think about the old evils of others and forget the new achievements they have made, you will surely suffer great harm. If you appoint evil people, there will definitely be danger. If you barely employ people, you will definitely not be able to retain people.

古文：为人择官者乱，失其所强者弱，决策于不仁者险，
现代文：用人无法摆脱人情纠结，政事必越理越乱。失去自己的优势，力量必然削弱。处理问题、制定决策时向不仁之人问计，必有危险。
English: It is impossible to get rid of the entanglement of human feelings, and political affairs will inevitably become more and more chaotic. If you lose your own advantages, your strength will inevitably weaken. When dealing with problems and making decisions, there is always a danger of asking people who are not kind for advice.

古文：阴计外泄者败，厚敛薄施者凋。
现代文：秘密的计划泄露出去，一定会失败。横征暴敛、薄施寡恩，一定会衰落。
English: If a secret plan is leaked, it is sure to fail. If there is rampant embezzlement and grudges, there is sure to be decline.

古文：战士贫，游士富者衰；货赂公行者昧；
现代文：奋勇征战的将士生活贫穷，鼓舌摇唇的游士安享富贵，国势一定会衰落。
English: The soldiers who fight bravely live in poverty, while the wanderers with their tongues wagging enjoy wealth and luxury. The national situation will inevitably decline.

古文：闻善忽略，记过不忘者暴；所任不可信，所信不可任者浊。
现代文：贿赂‮府政‬官员的事到处可见，政治必定十分昏暗。知道别人的优点长处却不重视，对别人的缺点错误反而耿耿于怀的，则是作风粗暴。使用的人不堪信任，信任的人又不能胜任其职，这样的政治一定很混浊。
English: Bribery of government officials can be seen everywhere, and politics must be very dark. Those who know the merits and strengths of others but do not attach importance to them, and those who are deeply concerned about the shortcomings and mistakes of others, have a rough style. Those who use them cannot be trusted, and those who trust them cannot perform their duties. Such politics must be very turbulent.

古文：牧人以德者集，绳人以刑者散。
现代文：依靠道德的力量来治理人民，人民就会团结；若一味地依靠刑法来维持统治，则人民将离散而去。
English: Relying on the power of morality to govern the people, the people will be united; if they rely on criminal law to maintain their rule, the people will disperse.

古文：小功不赏，则大功不立；小怨不赦，则大怨必生。
现代文：小的功劳不奖赏，便不会建立大功劳；小的怨恨不宽赦，大的怨恨便会产生。
English: If small merits are not rewarded, great merits will not be established; if small grudges are not forgiven, great grudges will arise.

古文：赏不服人，罚不甘心者叛。赏及无功，罚及无罪者酷。
现代文：奖赏不能服人，处罚不能让人甘心，必定引起叛乱；赏及无功之人，罚及无罪之人，就是所谓的残酷。
English: Reward cannot serve man, punishment cannot make man willing, it must cause rebellion; to reward those who have done nothing, to punish those who are not guilty, is so-called cruelty.

古文：听谗而美，闻谏而仇者亡。
现代文：听到谗佞之言就十分高兴，听到忠谏之言便心生怨恨，一定灭亡。
English: If you listen to the words of a scoundrel, you will be very happy. If you listen to the words of a loyalist, your heart will be filled with resentment and you will surely perish.

古文：能有其有者安，贪人之有者残。
现代文：藏富于民，以百姓的富有作为本身的富有，这样才会安定；欲壑难填，总是贪求别人所有的，必然残民以逞。
English: Hiding wealth from the people and taking the people's wealth as one's own wealth, only in this way can one be stable; if one's desire is insatiable and one is always greedy for what others have, the remnants of the people will inevitably try their best.

