古文：张美，字玄圭，贝州清河人。
现代文：张美字玄圭，贝州清河人。
English: Zhang Mei Zi Xuan Gui, a native of Qinghe, Beizhou.

古文：少善书计，初为左藏小吏，以强干闻。
现代文：年轻时善于做会计工作，初时担任左藏小吏，以强干闻名。
English: When he was young, he was good at doing accounting work. At the beginning, he served as a minor official of Zuozang, and was known for his strength.

古文：三司荐奏，特补本库专知，出为澶州粮料使。
现代文：三司上奏推荐，特补任本库专知，出任澶州粮料使。
English: He was recommended by the Third Division for promotion, specially appointed as the expert of this library, and served as the grain envoy of Zhangzhou.

古文：周世宗镇澶渊，每有求取，美必曲为供给。
现代文：周世宗镇守澶渊，每次求取，张美一定曲意供给。
English: Zhou Shizong was the warden of Qianyuan, and Zhang Mei provided a certain amount of music for every request.

古文：周祖闻之怒，将谴责之，而恐伤世宗意，徙美为濮州马步军都虞候。
现代文：周太祖听说后大怒，准备遣人去斥责他，又恐怕伤害世宗的意思，改任张美为濮州马步军都虞候。
English: Upon hearing of this, Zhou Taizu flew into a rage and prepared to send someone to reprimand him. Fearing that this would hurt Shizong's feelings, he appointed Zhang Mei as the commander of the Zhangzhou Horse Cavalry.

古文：世宗即位，召为枢密承旨。
现代文：世宗即皇帝位，召他入朝授任枢密承旨。
English: Sejong, that is, the emperor, summoned him to the court and appointed him as a privy councilor.

古文：时宰相景范判三司，被疾，世宗命美为右领军卫大将军，权判三司。
现代文：当时宰相景范兼管三司，有病，世宗任命张美为右领军卫大将军，暂代主管三司。
English: At that time, the prime minister, Jing Fan, who was also in charge of the Third Division, was ill, and Shizong appointed Zhang Mei as the right leader of the army, General Wei, and the interim head of the Third Division.

古文：世宗征淮南，留美为大内部署。
现代文：世宗征讨淮南，留张美任大内部署。
English: Shizong enlisted Huainan, leaving Zhang Meiren to be deployed within the university.

古文：一日，方假寐，忽觉心动，遽惊起行视宫城中。
现代文：一天，正在午睡，忽然感觉心有所动，急忙起来巡视宫城中。
English: One day, while taking an afternoon nap, he suddenly felt something stirring in his heart and hurriedly got up to inspect Miyagi.

古文：少顷，内酝署火起，既有备，即扑灭之。
现代文：不久，内酝署起火，因为有准备，马上扑灭了大火。
English: Shortly afterwards, a fire broke out in the building, but the fire was immediately put out because preparations had been made.

古文：俄真授三司使。
现代文：不久，正式授任三司使。
English: Soon after, he was officially appointed as the Third Divisional Envoy.

古文：四年，世宗再幸淮上，皆为大内都点检。
现代文：显德四年，世宗再次到淮南，任命张美为大内都点检。
English: In the fourth year of Xiande, Shizong went to Huainan again and appointed Zhang Mei as the top inspector of the university.

古文：北征，又为大内都部署。
现代文：世宗北伐，又任命他为大内都部署。
English: Sejong of the Northern Expedition, he also appointed him to be deployed in Daini.

古文：师还，为左监门卫上将军，充宣徽北院使，判三司。
现代文：部队回朝，任左监门卫上大将军，充任宣徽北院使，主管三司。
English: When the troops returned to the imperial court, he was appointed as the left supervisor of the gate guards, and he served as the envoy of the Northern Court of Xuanhui, in charge of the three departments.

古文：美强力有心计，周知其利病，每有所条奏厘革，上多可之，常以干敏称。
现代文：张美强力有心计，能全面理解事情的利弊，每次上奏条列改革主张，皇上常常同意他的意见，常以干敏著称。
English: Zhang Mei had a strong mind and was able to fully understand the advantages and disadvantages of things. Every time he proposed reforms, the emperor often agreed with his opinion and was often known for his shrewdness.

古文：世宗连岁征讨，粮馈不乏，深委赖焉。
现代文：世宗连年征讨，粮食供给不乏，实在依赖他的努力。
English: Sejong has been collecting taxes year after year, and there is no shortage of grain supply, which really depends on his efforts.

古文：然以澶渊有所求假，颇薄之，美亦自愧。恭帝嗣位，加检校太傅。
现代文：但因为在澶渊时作假逢迎，非常看不起他，张美也自感惭愧，恭帝即帝位，加任他为检校太傅。
English: However, because he pretended to be welcoming when he was in the Abyss, he was very despised. Zhang Mei also felt ashamed, and he was appointed as the school inspector.

古文：宋初，加检校太尉。
现代文：宋朝初期，加任检校太尉。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, he was promoted to the position of inspector.

古文：初，李筠镇上党，募亡命，多为不法，渐倔强难制。
现代文：当初，李筠镇守上党，招募亡命之徒，常干不法之事，渐渐倔强难以制服。
English: At the beginning, Li Yuzhen defended the party, recruited outlaws, often did illegal things, and gradually became stubborn and difficult to subdue.

古文：美度筠必叛，阴积粟于怀、孟间。
现代文：张美料想到李筠一定会叛乱，暗地在怀、孟之间积聚粮食。
English: Zhang Meili thought that Li Yao would definitely rebel, and secretly gathered grain between Huai and Meng.

古文：后筠果叛，太祖亲讨之，大军十万出太行，经费无阙，美有力焉。
现代文：后来李筠果然叛乱，太祖亲自率兵讨伐，大军十万从太行出发，经费不缺，是张美的功劳。
English: Later, Li Xuan successfully rebelled, the great-grandfather personally led the troops to fight, a large army of 100,000 set out from Taihang, and there was no shortage of funds, which was the merit of Zhang Mei.

古文：拜定国军节度。
现代文：授任定国军节度。
English: Awarded the title of Commander of the Korean People's Army.

古文：县官市木关中，同州岁出缗钱数十万以假民，长吏十取其一，谓之率分钱，岁至数百万，美独不取。
现代文：朝廷在关中买木材，同州每年拿出缗钱数十万借给百姓，长吏取走十分之一，称为率分钱。每年达数百万，只有张美不收取此钱。
English: The imperial court bought timber in Guanzhong, and the prefecture lent hundreds of thousands of rupees to the people every year. The officials took away one-tenth of the money, which was called the rate. It amounted to millions every year, and only Zhang Mei did not collect this money.

古文：未几，他郡有诣阙诉长吏受率分钱者，皆命偿之。
现代文：不久，别的郡里有人到朝廷告发长吏受率分钱，朝廷命令长吏们都偿还出来。
English: Soon, someone from another county went to the court to report that the officials were receiving a percentage of the money, and the court ordered the officials to pay it all back.

古文：乾德五年，移镇沧州。
现代文：乾德五年，改为镇守沧州。
English: In the fifth year of Qiande, it was changed to Zhenshu Cangzhou.

古文：太平兴国初来朝，改左骁卫上将军。
现代文：太平兴国初期来京朝见，改任左骁卫上将军。
English: In the early days of the Taiping Xingguo, he came to see the imperial court in Beijing and was appointed General of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards.

古文：美献都城西河曲湾果园二、蔬圃六、亭舍六十余区。
现代文：张美献出京城西边河曲湾果园二座、菜园六处、亭舍六十多栋。
English: Zhang Mei donated two orchards, six vegetable gardens, and more than 60 pavilions in Xibeihequwan, Beijing.

古文：八年，请老，以本官致仕。
现代文：太平兴国八年，请求告老，以本官衔退休。
English: In the eighth year of the Taiping Xingguo, he asked to retire and retired with his official title.

古文：雍熙二年，卒，年六十八。
现代文：雍熙二年，去世，终年六十八岁。
English: He died in the second year of Yongxi, at the age of sixty-eight.

古文：淳化初，谥恭惠。
现代文：淳化初年，赐谥号为恭惠。
English: In the first year of Chunhua, his posthumous name was Chonghui.

古文：子守瑛，至供备库使。
现代文：其子守瑛官至供备府使。
English: His son-in-law, Eikan, became an envoy to the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：孙士宗，至内殿承制。
现代文：其孙士宗，官至内殿承制。
English: His grandson, Shizong, succeeded him in the office of Inner Court.

古文：士宗卒，士禹为崇班，士安至阁门祗候，士宣为礼宾副使。
现代文：士宗去世，士禹任崇班，士安官至门合门祗候，士宣任礼宾副使。
English: After Shizong's death, Shiyu was appointed as a high-ranking official, officers and security officers waited for him from door to door, and Shixuan was appointed as a vice-envoy of protocol.

古文：郭守文，并州太原人。
现代文：郭守文，并州太原人。
English: Guo Shouwen, a native of Taiyuan.

古文：父晖，仕汉为护圣军使，从周祖征河中，战死。
现代文：其父郭晖，在后汉任护圣军使，跟从周太祖征讨河中，战死。
English: His father, Guo Wei, was an envoy to protect the holy army in the later Han Dynasty. He followed Zhou Taizu in conquering the river and died in battle.

古文：守文年十四，居丧哀毁，周祖怜之，召隶帐下。
现代文：守文时年十四岁，守丧尽哀，周太祖可怜他，把他召到军中。
English: Shouwen was fourteen years old at the time. Shouwen mourned his death deeply. Grandfather Zhou took pity on him and called him to the army.

古文：广顺初，补左班殿直，再迁东第二班副都知。
现代文：广顺初年，补官任左班殿直，再升东第二班副都知。
English: In the first year of Guangshun, he was appointed as the second-in-command of the left squad, and then promoted to the second-in-command of the east squad.

古文：宋初，迁西头供奉官。
现代文：宋朝初期，升任西头供奉官。
English: In the early days of the Song Dynasty, he was promoted to the post of the West Head Funeral Officiant.

古文：蜀平，迁知简州。
现代文：蜀地平定后，选任为知简州。
English: After Shu was settled, he was appointed as the leader of Zhijian Province.

古文：时剑外多寇，守文悉招来集附。
现代文：当时剑门外有很多贼寇，守文把他们都招附了。
English: At that time, there were many thieves and robbers outside the Jianmen Gate, and Shouwen invited them all.

古文：从潘美征岭南，会擒刘鋹，遣守文驰传告捷，迁翰林副使。
现代文：跟从潘美进攻南汉，正好擒俘刘钅长，潘美派守文乘驿车到朝廷告捷，升任翰林副使。
English: Following Pan Mei's attack on Southern Han, it was just right to capture Liu Xuanchang. Pan Mei sent Shouwen to the imperial court by stagecoach, and he was promoted to vice-envoy of Hanlin.

古文：从曹彬等平金陵，护送李煜归阙下。
现代文：跟从曹彬等人平定金陵，护送李煜到京城。
English: He followed Cao Bin and others to pacify Jinling and escorted Li Xi to Beijing.

古文：时煜以拒命颇自歉，不欲生见太祖。
现代文：当时李煜因为拒命非常自惭，不愿活着见太祖。
English: At that time, Li Yao was very ashamed because he refused the order and did not want to see his grandfather alive.

古文：守文察知之，因谓煜曰： 国家止务恢复疆土，以致太平，岂复有后至之责耶？ 煜心遂安。
现代文：守文观察得知，于是对李煜说 ：国家只求恢复国土，天下太平，哪里还有后到而受责呢？ 李煜才安心。
English: Shouwen Observation learned of this, so it said to Li Qian: The country only seeks to restore the country, the world is at peace, where else can it be blamed for coming late? Li Qian was relieved.

古文：改西京作坊使、领翰林司事。
现代文：改任西京作坊使、兼任翰林司事。
English: He was transferred to the post of Saikyo workshop assistant and concurrently held the post of Kanrin secretary.

古文：俄从党进破并寇于团柏谷。
现代文：不久跟从党进在团柏谷大败并州敌人。
English: Soon after, the party's followers suffered a crushing defeat in Tuanpo Valley and became enemies of the state.

古文：太平兴国初，秦州内附，蕃部骚动，命守文乘传抚谕，西夏悦伏。
现代文：太平兴国初年，秦州降附朝廷，蕃部骚动，朝廷命守文乘驿车前去抚谕，西夏悦伏。
English: In the first year of the Taiping Xingguo, Qinzhou was subordinated to the imperial court, there was turmoil in Hebei, the imperial court ordered Shouwen to go to the imperial court by carriage, and Xixia Yuefu.

古文：三年，迁西上阁门使。
现代文：太平兴国三年，升任西上门合门使。
English: In the third year of Taiping Xingguo, he was promoted to the West Upper Gate Gate Envoy.

古文：是夏，汴水决于宁陵，发宋、亳丁壮四千五百塞之，命守文董其役。
现代文：这年夏天，汴河在宁陵决口，朝廷征发宋州、亳州壮丁四千五百人去堵塞，命令守文主管这个工程。
English: In the summer of that year, when the Li River burst its banks in Ningling, the imperial court sent Songzhou and Zhangzhou Zhuangding 4500 people to block it, and ordered Shouwen to be in charge of the project.

古文：是冬，又与阁门副使王侁、西入作副使石全振护塞灵河县决河。
现代文：这年冬天，他又与门副使王亻先、西八作副使石全振监督在灵河县的黄河决口的堵塞工程。
English: In the winter of the same year, he supervised the blockage project of the mouth of the Yellow River in Linghe County with Wang Xuanxian and Xi Baxi as deputy commissioners.

古文：及征太原，守文与判四方馆事梁迥分护行营马步军。
现代文：征伐太原时，守文与判四方馆事梁迥分别统率行营马步军。
English: When conquering Taiyuan, Shouwen and the judge of the four quarters, Liang Jie, respectively led the camp horse army.

古文：会刘继元降，其弟继文据代州，依辽人之援以拒命，遣守文讨平之。
现代文：刘继元投降后，他的弟弟刘继文占据代州，依恃辽人的援助抗拒朝廷命令，朝廷派遣守文讨平他。
English: After Liu Jiyuan's surrender, his younger brother Liu Jiwen occupied Daizhou and, with the help of the Liao people, resisted the imperial order. The imperial court dispatched Shouwen to level him.

古文：俄受诏护定州屯兵，大破辽人于蒲城。
现代文：不久受诏统率定州屯兵，在满城大败辽人。
English: Soon after, he was put in charge of the Dingzhou garrison, which was defeated by the Liao in Mancheng.

古文：以功迁东上阁门使、领澶州刺史。
现代文：因战功升任东上门合门使、兼任澶州刺史。
English: As a result of his war service, he was promoted to the post of Dongshangmen Hecheng envoy and concurrently served as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：召还，擢拜内客省使。
现代文：被召回朝，提升为内客省使。
English: He was recalled in the morning and promoted to Naikaku provincial envoy.

古文：八年，滑州房村河决，发卒塞之，命守文董其役。
现代文：太平兴国八年，黄河在滑州房村决口，朝廷调发士卒堵塞，命令守文主管这一工程。
English: In the eighth year of the Taiping Xingguo, when the Yellow River burst its banks at Fangcun in Slanzhou, the imperial court dispatched an official to block it and ordered Shouwen to be in charge of the project.

古文：辽人扰雄州，命守文率禁兵数万人赴援，既至，辽人遁去。
现代文：辽人侵扰雄州，朝廷命令守文率领数万禁兵赴援，守文率兵到雄州后，辽人逃走了。
English: The Liao people invaded Xiongzhou. The imperial court ordered Shouwen to lead tens of thousands of forbidden soldiers to help. After Shouwen led the soldiers to Xiongzhou, the Liao people fled.

古文：雍熙二年，诏守文率兵屯三交，俄加领武州团练使。
现代文：雍熙二年，诏令守文率兵屯守三交，不久加职兼任武州团练使。
English: In the second year of the reign of the Yongxi Emperor, he was ordered by the emperor to lead the troops to guard the Three Crossings, and soon he was assigned to the post of Buzhou Regimental Training Officer.

古文：属夏人扰攘，命守文帅师讨之，破夏州盐城镇岌罗腻等十四族，斩首数千级，俘获生畜万计。
现代文：遇西夏军队扰攘边境，朝廷命令守文率领军队前去抵抗，打败夏州盐城镇岌罗腻等十四族，杀敌数千人，俘获上万人。
English: When the Western Xia army disturbed the border, the imperial court ordered Shouwen to lead the army to resist, defeat the 14 ethnic groups in the salt towns of Xiazhou, kill thousands of enemies, and capture tens of thousands of people.

古文：又破咩嵬族，歼焉。
现代文：又打败咩嵬族，把他们全部杀死。
English: He defeated the Yao people and killed them all.

古文：诸部畏惧，相率来降，凡银、麟、夏三州归附者百二十五族、万六千余户，西鄙遂宁。
现代文：各少数民族部落非常恐惧，相继来投降，银、麟、夏三州归附者共计一百二十五族、一万六千多户，西部于是安宁下来。
English: The various ethnic minority tribes were very afraid and surrendered one after another. A total of 125 ethnic groups and more than 16,000 households were annexed to the three states of Yin, Lin and Xia. The western region was thus pacified.

古文：五年春，大举北伐，为幽州道行营前军步军水陆都监。
现代文：雍熙三年春天，宋军大举北伐，任命守文为幽州行营前军步军水陆都监。
English: In the spring of the third year of the reign of Yongxi, the Song army launched a large-scale northern expedition, and appointed Shouwen as the water and land metropolitan supervisor of the Yuzhou marching army.

古文：卒与辽人遇，为流矢所中，气色不挠，督战益急，军中服其量。
现代文：与辽兵遭遇，被流箭射中，面色不改，督战愈急，军中佩服他的胆量。
English: Encountered with Liao soldiers, shot by a stray arrow, his countenance did not change, the battle became more urgent, and the army admired his courage.

古文：会大军不利，坐违诏逗遛退军，左迁右屯卫大将军。
现代文：正好大军作战失利，因违诏逗留退军，被贬任右屯卫大将军。
English: Just as the great army was defeated in battle, he was dismissed from the army for staying behind in violation of the edict, and was demoted to the position of General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards.

古文：事具《曹彬传》。
现代文：此事详情见《曹彬传》。
English: For more details, please refer to the biography of Cao Bin.

古文：明年复旧职，裁三月，拜宣徽北院使。
现代文：第二年，恢复旧职，才过三个月，授任宣徽北院使。
English: In the second year, he resumed his old post, and only three months later, he was appointed as the envoy of the Northern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：又与田钦祚并为北面排阵使，屯镇州。
现代文：又与田钦祚一起任北面排阵使，驻屯镇州。
English: Together with Tian Qinqian, he also served as the north-facing platoon commander, stationed in Zhenzhou.

古文：端拱初，改南院使、镇州路都部署。
现代文：端拱初年，改任宣徽南院使、镇州路都部署。
English: In the first year of the end of the arch, he was reassigned as the envoy of the Southern Hospital of Xuanhui and deployed to Zhenzhou Road.

古文：又为北面行营都部署兼镇定、高阳关两路排阵使。
现代文：又任北面行营都部署兼镇定、高阳关两路排阵使。
English: In addition, he served as the commander of the two lines of Gaoyang Pass in the north.

古文：是冬，辽骑南侵，大破之唐河。
现代文：这年冬天，辽军骑兵南下侵犯，守文率兵在唐河大败辽军。
English: This winter, the Liao Army cavalry invaded the south, and Shouwen led the soldiers to defeat the Liao Army in the Tang River.

古文：端拱三年十月，卒，年五十五。
现代文：端拱二年十月，去世，终年五十五岁。
English: Duan Gong died in October of the second year, at the age of fifty-five.

古文：守文既丧月余，中使自北边来言： 守文死，军士皆流涕。 帝问： 何以得此？ 对曰： 守文得奉禄赐赉悉犒劳士卒，死之日，家无余财。 帝嗟叹久之，赐其家钱五百万，为真宗纳其女为夫人，即章穆皇后也。
现代文：太宗深为痛惜，追赠侍中，赐谥号为忠武，追封谯王，派中使护送，归葬京城。守文为人沉厚有谋略，很精通书法，每次退朝后，练字至百，言谈温雅，从未违背别人的心意。从前，武将戍边者常常招引敌人以求取战功，河朔各州几乎没有一年安宁，歧沟关失败后，于是命令守文以朝臣身份统率军队镇守常山来处理边事。守文死后一个多月，中使自北边回来说： 守文之死，军士们都流涕痛哭。 太宗问 ：为什么会这样？ 中使回答说： 守文把所得俸禄赏赐全部犒劳士卒，他死的那天，家里没有余财。 太宗叹息了很久，赐给他家五百万钱，替真宗娶他的女儿为夫人，就是后来的章穆皇后。
English: Emperor Taizong deeply regretted it. He rewarded the attendants, gave them the title of "loyal soldiers," conferred the title of "royal prince," and sent the envoys to escort them to be buried in the capital. Shouwen was a man of profound strategy and was very proficient in calligraphy. After each return to the imperial court, he practiced his calligraphy to a hundred, spoke with gentleness, and never went against the will of others. In the past, military commanders who were on the wrong side of the border often attracted enemies in order to gain military merit. There was hardly a year of peace in all the states of Hebei. After the failure of the

古文：子永德至内殿崇班，永恭至西京作坊副使，永和为内殿承制，永锡至崇班，永保、永昌、永规并至阁门祗候，永崇为崇班，永宁及孙允忠并为阁门祗候。袁继忠，其先振武人，后徙并州。
现代文：他的儿子崇德官至太子中舍。崇信官至西京左藏副使、同知皇城司，追赠福州观察使。崇俨官至崇仪使、全州刺史，追赠润州观察使。袁继忠，他的祖先是振武人，后来迁徙到并州。
English: His son, Chong Deguan, became the prince's middle son; Chong Xinguan, the deputy envoy to Western Beijing and Zuozang, and Tongzhi, the imperial city administrator, were posthumously awarded the Fuzhou observation envoy; Chong Yingguan, the envoy to Chongyi, the state historian, was posthumously awarded the Rongzhou observation envoy; and Yuan Jizhong, his ancestor, was from Zhenwu, and later migrated to Nianzhou.

古文：父进，仕周为阶州防御使。
现代文：其父袁进，在后周任阶州防御使。
English: His father, Yuan Jin, later served as Chaozhou Defense Envoy.

古文：继忠以父任补右班殿直。
现代文：继忠因父亲的官职补任右班殿直。
English: Due to his father's official position, Tsuchitada was appointed to fill the post of the Right Division of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：太祖平泽、潞，讨并、汾，悉预攻战。
现代文：太祖平定泽、潞，讨伐并、汾诸地时，继忠都参加战斗。
English: When the great-great-grandfather subdued Dingze, Shao, and fought and conquered various regions, Jitong took part in the battle.

古文：乾德中征蜀，隶大将刘廷让麾下。
现代文：乾德年间宋军征讨蜀地，他隶属于大将刘廷让军中。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qiande, the Song Army conquered Shu, and he belonged to the army of General Liu Tingzang.

古文：既克蜀，知云安军，历嘉、蜀二州监军。
现代文：攻克蜀地后，任知云安军，历任嘉、蜀二州监军。
English: After conquering Shu, Ren Zhi Yunan Army, successively Ren Jia and Shu Erzhou Supervision Army.

古文：开宝中伐广南，为先锋壕砦。
现代文：开宝年间宋军进攻广南时，他任先锋壕砦。
English: During the Kibo years, when the Song Army attacked Guangnan, he served as the pioneer of the trench fort.

古文：广南平，以功迁供奉官，护隰州白壁关屯兵。
现代文：广南被攻克后，因战功升任供奉官，统率隰州白壁关屯兵。
English: After Guangnan was conquered, he was promoted to the post of tributary officer due to his war service, and led the troops of Baijie Pass in Zhangzhou.

古文：时河东拒命，继忠累入其境，破三砦，擒将校二人，得生口、马牛羊、铠仗逾万计。
现代文：当时河东抗拒朝廷命令，继忠多次攻入河东，攻破三个营寨，擒俘将校二人，俘得百姓、马牛羊、兵器以万计。
English: At that time, Hedong resisted the order of the imperial court, and Jizhong repeatedly invaded Hedong, broke through three camps, captured two officers, and captured tens of thousands of people, horses, cattle, and weapons.

古文：近戍主将惧无功受谴，以诚告继忠，继忠以所获分与之，遂与都巡检郭进略地忻、代州，改天平军巡检。
现代文：近戍主将害怕没有战功遭受朝廷谴责，以实话告诉继忠，继忠把俘缴所获分给他们，于是与都巡检郭进进攻忻州、代州，改任天平军巡检。
English: Fearing that he would be condemned by the imperial court for his lack of war exploits, the lord of nearby Gansu told the truth to Jizhong. Jizhong gave them what he had captured, so he went with the capital's inspection detachment to attack Gansu and Daizhou, and was reassigned as a Tianping Army inspector.

古文：太宗即位，以为阁门祗候，令击梅山洞贼，破之。
现代文：太宗即帝位，任命他为门合门祗候，令他进攻梅山洞贼寇，大获全胜。
English: Emperor Taizong, who was then on the throne, appointed him to be the gatekeeper and ordered him to attack the thieves in Meishan Cave, and he won a complete victory.

古文：又巡遏边部于唐龙镇。
现代文：又在唐龙镇巡视边疆。
English: He also inspected the border in Tanglong Town.

古文：太宗征太原，继忠预破鹰扬军，先登陷阵。
现代文：太宗率兵进攻太原，继忠参预打败鹰扬军之战，最先攻入敌阵。
English: Taizong led the troops to attack Taiyuan, following the defeat of the Yingyang Army by Zhongshan Prefect, and was the first to break into the enemy's lines.

古文：契丹入代境，继忠率兵击走之。
现代文：契丹兵进入代州，继忠率兵赶走了他们。
English: The Khitan soldiers entered Daizhou, and Ji Zhong led the soldiers to drive them away.

古文：以功迁通事舍人，护高阳关屯兵。
现代文：因战功升任通事舍人，统率高阳关屯兵。
English: Due to his war service, he was promoted to the post of commander, leading the Gaoyang Pass garrison.

古文：与崔彦进破契丹长城口，杀获数万众，玺书褒美。
现代文：与崔彦进一起在长城口大败契丹军队，杀死俘捉敌人数万人，太宗下诏褒奖表扬。
English: Together with Cui Yanjin, he defeated the Khitan army at the mouth of the Great Wall, killed and captured tens of thousands of enemies, and was praised by Emperor Taizong.

古文：时有劝继忠自论其功者，继忠不答。
现代文：当时有人劝继忠自己表述自己的功劳，继忠不同意。
English: At that time, someone urged Jizhong to describe his own merits, but Jizhong did not agree.

古文：会赵保忠来朝献其地，绥州刺史李克宪偃蹇不奉诏，遣继忠谕旨，竟率克宪入朝。迁西上阁门副使。
现代文：正好赵保忠来朝廷献地，绥州刺史李克宪迟迟不遵从朝廷命令，朝廷派继忠前去宣谕圣旨，最终带着克宪入朝，升任西上门合门副使。
English: Just as Zhao Baozhong came to the imperial court to offer land, Li Keqian, the governor of Zhangzhou, did not comply with the imperial court's order. The imperial court sent Jizhong to proclaim the holy will, and finally he entered the imperial court with Keqian and was promoted to the vice-envoy of the west gate.

古文：诏与田仁朗率兵定河西诸州，大破西人于葭芦州，迁引进副使，护定州屯兵。
现代文：诏令他与田仁朗率兵平定河西诸州，在葭芦川大败西夏军队，升任引进副使，统率定州屯兵。
English: The emperor ordered him and Tian Renlang to lead the troops to subdue the states in the west of the Dinghe River, defeat the Western Xia army in the Huluchuan River, and be promoted to vice-envoy of introduction to lead the troops in Dingzhou.

古文：雍熙二年，迁西上阁门使。
现代文：雍熙二年，升任西上门合门使。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Yongxi, he was promoted to the post of the west gate gatekeeper.

古文：三年，大将田重进征契丹，命继忠为定州路行营马步军都监。
现代文：雍熙三年，大将田重进进攻契丹，任命继忠为定州路行营马步军都监。
English: In the third year of Yongxi, General Tian Chongjin attacked Khitan and appointed Jizhong as the inspector of the Dingzhou Road Campaign Horse Cavalry Army.

古文：领师取飞狐，下灵丘，平蔚州，擒其帅大鹏翼以献，事见重进传。
现代文：率领军队攻下飞狐、灵丘、蔚州，擒得敌人主将大鹏翼献给朝廷，此事记录在《田重进传》中。
English: He led the army to conquer the Flying Fox, Lingqiu, and Ulshu, and won the enemy to dedicate the Dapeng Wing to the imperial court, which was recorded in "Tianzhong Biography."

古文：师还，继忠为后殿，行列甚整。
现代文：部队回师，继忠任殿后，行军阵法严整。
English: The troops returned to the division, and after the appointment of Zhong Ren, the marching formation was strict.

古文：至定州，重进欲斩降卒后期至者，继忠谕以杀降不祥，皆救免之。
现代文：走到定州时，重进想斩杀后到的降卒，继忠劝说他杀死降卒不吉祥，降卒得以免死。
English: When he came to Dingzhou, he re-entered and wanted to kill the subordinate who came after him. Ji Zhong persuaded him that killing the subordinate was not auspicious, and the subordinate was spared from death.

古文：迁判四方馆事、领播州刺史，护屯兵如故。
现代文：升任判四方馆事、兼任播州刺史，依旧统率屯兵。
English: He was promoted to the post of Shifang Museum Clerk and concurrently served as the Banzhou Historian, still leading the troops.

古文：大将李继隆以易州静塞骑兵尤骁果，取隶麾下，畜其妻子城中。
现代文：大将李继隆认为易州静塞骑兵非常骁勇，收编在自己军中，把军士们的妻子儿女留在城中。
English: General Li Jilong thought that the cavalry of Yizhou Jingsai was very brave, incorporated them into his own army, and left the wives and children of the sergeants in the city.

古文：继忠言于继隆曰： 此精卒，止可守城，万一敌至，城中谁与悍者？ 继隆不从。
现代文：继忠劝继隆说 ：这些精卒，只可守城，万一敌人攻来，城中由谁来保卫呢？ 继隆不听。
English: Jitada advised Jitaka, saying, "These elite soldiers can only defend the city. In case the enemy attacks, who will defend the city? Jitaka did not listen.

古文：既而契丹入寇，城陷，卒妻子皆为所俘。
现代文：后来契丹攻入，易州城失陷，军士的妻子儿女都被敌人俘去。
English: Later, the Khitans invaded, the city of Yizhou fell, and the sergeant's wife and children were all captured by the enemy.

古文：继隆疑此卒怨己，欲分隶诸军。
现代文：继隆怀疑这些士兵怨恨自己，打算把他们分编到各军。
English: Jilong suspected that these soldiers resented him and planned to divide them into different armies.

古文：继忠曰： 不可，但奏升其军额，优以廪给，使之尽节可也。 从之，众皆感悦。
现代文：继忠说 ：不行，只要上奏扩大他们的军额，从优付给粮食，使他们尽忠就可以了。 继隆采纳了这一建议，士兵们都很感激。
English: Jitong said, "No, as long as we increase the number of soldiers and give them more food, they will be loyal." Jitong accepted this suggestion, and the soldiers were very grateful.

古文：继忠因自请以隶麾下。
现代文：继忠于是请求把自己的军队隶属继隆管辖。
English: Jizhong then requested that his army be subordinated to Jilong's jurisdiction.

古文：会契丹骑大至，驻唐河北，诸将欲坚壁待之。
现代文：遇到契丹骑兵攻来，驻扎在唐河北面，诸将想坚壁以待不主动出击。
English: When the Khitan cavalry came to attack, they were stationed in the north of the Tang River. The generals wanted to wait and not attack.

古文：继忠曰： 今强敌在近，城中屯重兵不能剪灭，令长驱深入，侵略他郡，虽欲谋自安之计，岂折冲御侮之用乎？
现代文：继忠说 ：现在强敌临近，城中驻扎着重兵不去消灭敌人，让他们长驱直入，侵略别郡，虽然作自安的打算，哪里是朝廷养兵御侮的用意呢？
English: Jizhong said, "Nowadays, when a strong enemy is approaching, it is better to station heavy troops in the city than to annihilate the enemy, let them drive straight in, and invade other counties. Although it is a plan for self-sufficiency, what is the intention of the imperial court to raise troops and avoid reproach?"

古文：我将身先士卒，死于寇矣！ 辞气慷慨，众壮之。
现代文：我准备身先士卒，死在敌人手里。 言辞慷慨，诸将都感到他气势雄壮。
English: I am ready to be the first to die at the hands of the enemy. His words are generous, and generals feel that he is powerful.

古文：静塞军摧锋先入，契丹兵大溃。
现代文：静塞军摧锋先入，契丹骑兵大败。
English: The Jingye army entered the front first, and the Khitan cavalry suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：太宗闻之，降玺书奖谕，赐予甚厚。
现代文：太宗听说后，下诏书褒奖他，赏赐丰厚。
English: When Emperor Taizong heard of this, he issued an edict praising him and rewarded him generously.

古文：淳化初，迁引进使，护镇定、高阳关两路屯兵。
现代文：淳化初年，升引进使，统率镇定、高阳关两路屯兵。
English: In the first year of Chunhua, Sheng introduced envoys and led the calm, high-yangguan two-way garrison.

古文：三年，被病，召赴阙，卒，年五十五。
现代文：淳化三年，有病，太宗召他回京，去世，终年五十五岁。
English: When Junhua was three years old and ill, Taizong called him back to Beijing, where he died at the age of fifty-five.

古文：继忠长厚忠谨，士大夫多与游，前后赐赉钜万计，悉以犒赏士卒。
现代文：继忠为人长厚忠谨，士大夫喜欢与他交游，前后受到的赏赐达到万万，都拿来犒赏士卒。
English: Ji Zhong was a man of great loyalty, and the magistrate liked to travel with him. He received tens of thousands of rewards, all of which were used to reward his subordinates.

古文：身死之日，家无余财，搢绅称之。子用成，雍熙初登进士第，至太常博士。
现代文：身死后，家里没有余财，大臣们都称赞他的美德，他的儿子名用成，雍熙初年考中进士，官至太常博士。
English: After his death, there was no money left in the family. The ministers all praised his virtues. His son, Nanyoucheng, was promoted to the rank of junior middle school student in the first year of the Yongxi examination, and he was promoted to the rank of doctor.

古文：崔彦进，大名人。
现代文：崔彦进，大名人。
English: Cui Yanjin, a big celebrity.

古文：纯质有胆略，善骑射。
现代文：为人纯朴有胆略，擅长骑射。
English: He is a man of simplicity and daring, good at riding and shooting.

古文：汉乾祐中，隶周祖帐下。
现代文：后汉乾年间，隶属于周太祖军中。
English: During the post-Han Qian period, it was subordinated to the Zhou Taizu Army.

古文：广顺初，补卫士。
现代文：广顺初年，补任卫士。
English: In the first year of Guangshun, he was appointed as a guard.

古文：世宗镇澶渊，令领禁兵以从。
现代文：世宗镇守澶渊时，命令他率领禁兵跟随。
English: When Shizong Zhen was guarding Gongyuan, he ordered him to lead the forbidden soldiers to follow.

古文：显德初，为控鹤指挥使。
现代文：显德初年，任控鹤指挥使。
English: In the first year of Xiande, he was appointed as the commander of the controlling cranes.

古文：从征淮南，以功迁散员都虞候。
现代文：跟从世宗攻打南唐，因战功升任散员都虞候。
English: He followed Shizong in attacking Southern Tang, and was promoted to the rank of Sanzhan in recognition of his war service.

古文：从平瓦桥关，改东西班指挥使、领昭州刺史。
现代文：跟随世宗平定瓦桥关，改任东西班指挥使，兼任昭州刺史。
English: He followed Shizong in pacifying the tile bridge pass, and was reassigned as the commander of the East-West squad, and also served as the governor of Zhaozhou.

古文：宋初，改控鹤右厢指挥使、领果州团练使。
现代文：宋朝初年，改任控鹤右厢指挥使，兼任果州团练使。
English: In the first year of the Song Dynasty, he was appointed as the commander of the right compartment of the controlling crane, and also served as the training envoy of the Guozhou Regiment.

古文：征李筠，为先锋部署，以功迁常州防御使。
现代文：征伐李筠时，任先锋部署，因战功升任常州防御使。
English: He was deployed as a vanguard during the conquest of Lishui, and was promoted to the post of Changzhou defense envoy for his war service.

古文：从平李重进，改虎捷右厢。
现代文：跟从太祖平定李重进，改任虎捷右厢指挥使。
English: He followed Li Chongjin, the great ancestor's subordinate, and was appointed as the commander of the right compartment of the Tiger Train.

古文：建隆二年，迁侍卫步军都指挥使、领武信军节度。
现代文：建隆二年，升任侍卫步军都指挥使，兼任武信军节度。
English: In the second year of Jianlong, he was promoted to the post of commander of the bodyguards and foot soldiers, and also served as the military commander of the Wuxin Army.

古文：大举伐蜀，为凤州路行营前军副都部署。
现代文：朝廷发兵大举进攻后蜀，任凤州路行营前军副都部署。
English: After the imperial court launched a large-scale attack on Shu, the former deputy commander of the Fengzhou Road Campaign was deployed.

古文：蜀平，坐纵部下略玉帛、子女及诸不法事，左迁昭化军节度观察留后。
现代文：后蜀平定后，因犯放纵部下抢掠玉帛、子女及其他不法之罪，贬任昭化军节度观察留后。
English: Later, after Shu was pacified, he was demoted to observe the festival of the Zhaohua army for committing the crime of indulging his subordinates to loot the jade bowl, children and other illegal crimes.

古文：太祖郊祀西洛，彦进来朝，授彰信军节度。
现代文：太祖在西洛举行郊祀时，彦进来朝见，授任他为彰信军节度使。
English: When the great-grandfather held a suburban service in Shiloh, Hiko came to see him in the morning, and he was appointed as the festival envoy of the Zhangxin Army.

古文：太平兴国二年，移镇河阳。
现代文：太平兴国二年，移镇河阳。
English: In the second year of Taiping Xingguo, he moved to the town of Heyang.

古文：四年正月，遣将征太原，分命攻城，以彦进与郢州防御使尹勋攻其东，彰德军节度李汉琼、冀州刺史牛思进攻其南，桂州观察使曹翰、翰林使杜彦圭攻其西，彰信军节度刘遇、光州刺史史珪攻其北。
现代文：太平兴国四年正月，朝廷派遣将领征伐太原，分路攻城，派彦进与郢州防御使尹勋攻城东，彰德军节度李汉琼、冀州刺史牛思进攻城南，桂州观察使曹翰、翰林使杜彦圭攻城西，彰信军节度刘遇、光州刺史史王圭攻城北。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Taiping Revolution, the imperial court dispatched generals to conquer Taiyuan and attack the city in separate routes. They sent Yan Jin and Zhangzhou Defense to attack the east of the city, Changde Army commander Li Hanqiong and Jizhou commander Zhishi Niu Si attacked the south of the city, Guizhou observation envoy Cao Han and Hanlin sent Du Yangui to attack the west of the city, Changxin Army commander Liu Yu and Gwangju commander Zhishi Wanggui attacked the north of the city.

古文：彦进督战甚急，太祖嘉之。
现代文：彦进督战非常急迫，太祖表扬了他。
English: Hikoh Susumu's battle was very urgent, and his great-grandfather praised him.

古文：晋阳平，从征幽州，又与内供奉官江守钧率兵攻城之西北。
现代文：晋阳平定后，跟从太宗征伐幽州，又与内供奉官江守钧率兵攻城之西北。
English: After the subjugation of Jinyang, he followed Taizong in the conquest of Yuzhou, and led the troops to attack the northwest of the city with Jiang Shouyi, who served as an official of the Inner Court.

古文：及班师，诏彦进与西上阁门副使薛继兴、阁门祗候李守斌领兵屯关南，以功加检校太尉。
现代文：到班师时，诏令彦进与西上门合门副使薛继兴、门合门祗候李守斌率领军队屯兵关南，因战功加官检校太尉。
English: When he arrived at the division, he was accompanied by Xue Jixing, the deputy envoy to the west gate, and Li Shubin, who led the army to Guannan and was promoted to the rank of lieutenant for his military service.

古文：是秋，契丹侵遂城，彦进与刘廷翰、崔翰等击破之，斩首万级。
现代文：这年秋天，契丹兵进攻遂城，彦进与刘廷翰、崔翰等人打败契丹军队，斩敌一万多人。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Khitan soldiers attacked and conquered the city. Hikojin, Liu Tinghan, Cui Han and others defeated the Khitan army, killing more than ten thousand people.

古文：五年，车驾北巡，以彦进为关南都部署，败契丹于唐兴口。
现代文：太平兴国五年，太宗北巡，任命彦进为关南都部署，在唐兴口打败契丹军队。
English: In the fifth year of Taiping Xingguo, Taizong made a northern inspection tour, appointed Yanjin to be deployed in Guannan, and defeated the Khitan army in Tang Xingkou.

古文：雍熙三年正月，命将北伐，分兵三路，诏彦进为幽州道行营马步军水陆副都部署，与曹彬、米信出雄州。
现代文：雍熙三年正月，命令将领北伐，分兵三路，诏令彦进任幽州道行营马步军水陆副都部署，与曹彬、米信一同从雄州出发。
English: In the first month of the third year of the reign of Yongxi, he ordered the generals of the Northern Expedition to divide the army into three parts, and ordered Yan Yan to be deployed as the deputy commander of the army, navy and air force in the Yuzhou Road Campaign, and set out from Xiongzhou together with Cao Bin and Yixin.

古文：大军失利，彦进坐违彬节制，别道回军，为敌所败，召还，贬右武卫上将军，事具彬传。
现代文：大军失利，彦进因违抗曹彬节制，别道回军，被敌人打败，召回朝廷后，贬任右武卫上将军，具体细节见曹彬传。
English: After the defeat of the great army, because of his defiance of Cao Bin's restraint, Yan Jin left the army and returned to the army. He was defeated by the enemy. After he was recalled to the imperial court, he was demoted to the post of general of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards. For details, see Cao Bin's biography.

古文：四年春，授保静军节度。
现代文：雍熙四年春天，授任他为保静军节度。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of the reign of Yongxi, he was appointed to be the commander of the Peace Preservation Army.

古文：端拱元年，被病，召归阙，卒，年六十七。
现代文：端拱元年，染病，召他回朝，去世，终年六十七岁。
English: In the first year of the end of the arch, he fell ill, called him back to the morning, and died at the age of sixty-seven.

古文：赠侍中。
现代文：追赠侍中。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Samurai Junior High School.

古文：彦进频立战功，然好聚财货，所至无善政。
现代文：彦进多次立下战功，但喜欢聚敛财货，所到各地没有善政。
English: Hikojin made war achievements many times, but he liked to accumulate wealth and goods, and there was no good governance in the places he visited.

古文：没后，诸子争家财，有司摄治。
现代文：死后，几个儿子争夺家财，有关部门出面处理。
English: After the death, several sons competed for the family fortune, and the relevant departments came forward to deal with it.

古文：太宗召见，为决之，谓左右曰： 此细务，朕不宜亲临，但以彦进尝任节制，不欲令其子辱于父耳。 
现代文：太宗召见，替他们决断，太宗对身边的大臣们说 ：这本是小事，我不应当亲自过问，但因为彦进曾经任节度使，不想让他的儿子玷辱他们的父亲罢了。 
English: Taizong summoned him and made the decision for them. Taizong said to the ministers around him, "This is a small matter, I should not personally inquire into it, but because Hikohjin was once the festival commissioner, he did not want his son to dishonor their father."

