古文：曹望之，字景萧，其先临潢人，辽季移家宣德。
现代文：曹望之，字景萧，他的祖先是临潢人，辽代末年，把家迁移到宣德。
English: Cao Wangzhi and Zijing Xiao, whose ancestors were from Linyi, moved their family to Xuande at the end of the Liao Dynasty.

古文：天会间，以秀民子选充女直字学生。
现代文：天会年间，曹望之以秀民之子的条件被选为女真字学生。
English: During the year of the Heavenly Association, Cao Wangli was selected as a female true character student on the condition of being a son of a prominent citizen.

古文：年十四，业成，除西京教授。
现代文：十四岁，学业有成，任西京教授。
English: Fourteen years old, academic success, appointed professor of West Beijing.

古文：为元帅府书令史，补正令史，转行台省令史。
现代文：后任元帅府书令史，补正令史，又转任行台省令史。
English: He later served as the marshal's office book order history, supplement the correct order history, and was transferred to the order history of Xingtai Province.

古文：录教授资，补修武校尉，除右司都事。
现代文：因有教授资历，又补授修武校尉，出任右司都事。
English: Because of his qualifications as a professor, he was also given the additional post of Shouwu school captain, and was appointed to the Right Division of Capital Affairs.

古文：吏部侍郎田珏素薄望之，望之愿交不肯纳，遂与蔡松年、许霖构致党狱。
现代文：吏部侍郎田一向轻视望之，望之愿意交往，但不肯接受田的态度，于是和蔡松年、许霖构成结党罪案。
English: Nozomi's servant-lord, Tan, has always despised Nozomi. Nozomi is willing to socialize, but refuses to accept Tan's attitude. As a result, he and Tsai Songnian and Xu Lin are charged with the crime of forming a political party.

古文：改行台吏部员外郎。
现代文：改任行台吏部员外郎。
English: Gairo, a member of the stationmaster's office, was reassigned.

古文：海陵为相，尝以书致其私，望之不从。
现代文：海陵王完颜亮任宰相的时候，曾经用书信告诉望之自己的私欲，望之不服从他。
English: When King Hailing was appointed prime minister after Yan Liang's death, he used a letter to tell Nozomu about his selfish desires, and Nozomu disobeyed him.

古文：天德元年，调同知石州军州事，坐事免。
现代文：天德元年，望之被调任同知石州军州事，免于被治罪。
English: In the first year of the Tiande era, Nozomu was transferred to the same position as Shishizhou military governor, and was exempted from punishment.

古文：丁母忧，久之，除绛阳军节度副使，入为户部员外郎。
现代文：为母服丧，很长时间后，出任绛阳军节度副使，又入朝做了户部员外郎。
English: For his mother's funeral, after a long time, he served as the deputy envoy of the Shenyang Army for the festival, and entered the court as a member of the household department.

古文：诏买牛万头给按出虎八猛安徙居南京者，望之主给之。
现代文：皇帝诏令望之买一万头牛给按出虎八猛安迁居南京的人，望之主持买牛并分给了他们。
English: The emperor ordered Wanzhi to buy ten thousand head of cattle for the people who migrated to Nanjing from Tibet, and Wanzhi presided over the purchase of cattle and distributed them to them.

古文：撒八反，转致甲仗八万自洺州输燕子城。
现代文：撒八造反，从州将八万甲仗转运到燕子城。
English: Sabah rebelled and transferred 80,000 jars of rice from the state to Yalanzicheng.

古文：运米八十万斛由蔡水入淮，馈伐宋诸军，期以一日。
现代文：运米八十万斛由蔡水进入淮，赠送给攻打宋国的各路军队，限期一日。
English: Eight hundred thousand mu of rice was transported from Cai Shui to Huai and presented to the various armies attacking Song, with a deadline of one day.

古文：望之如期集事。
现代文：望之按期完成了任务。
English: Nozomu completed the task on schedule.

古文：进本部郎中，特赐进士及第。
现代文：被任命为本部郎中，特别赐予进士及第。
English: He was appointed as Motobu's junior vassal, and was specially awarded the rank of Shinshi and the first rank.

古文：大定初，讨窝斡，望之主军食，给与有节，凡省粮三十万石，省剉草五十万石。
现代文：大定初年，讨伐窝斡，望之主管军队粮食，分发很有节度，大约节省粮食三十万石，节省坐刂草五十万石。
English: In the first year of the Great Lent, Mochizuki, who was in charge of the army's grain, distributed grain very sparingly, saving about 300,000 koku of grain and 500,000 koku of rice.

古文：帅府以捷入告，议者欲遂罢转输，望之以为元恶未诛，不可弛备。
现代文：帅府入朝告捷，议事的人想就此停止转运粮草，望之认为元凶未杀，不能松弛倦怠。
English: The general's arrival in the morning heralded a victory, and the negotiators wanted to stop the transfer of grain and grass, hoping that the culprit had not been killed, and could not relax their fatigue.

古文：既而大军追讨，果赖以济。
现代文：接着大军去追讨敌军，果然依赖转运来的粮草接济。
English: Next, the large army went in pursuit of the enemy army, and finally relied on the grain and grass brought by the transfer.

古文：以劳进一阶，兼同修国史。
现代文：望之因有功劳晋升一级，兼同修国史。
English: He was promoted to the first grade for meritorious service, and studied national history at the same time.

古文：请于大盐泺设官榷盐，听民以米贸易，民成聚落，可以固边圉，其利无穷。
现代文：望之请求在大盐泺设官专卖盐，顺从的百姓拿米来贸易，百姓聚集多了成为部落，可以巩固边防，这样做将获利无穷。
English: Nozomu's request was to set up an official to sell salt exclusively in Dairen, and the obedient people would trade rice. The people gathered more and became a tribe, which could consolidate the border defense, and doing so would be infinitely profitable.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：其后凡贮米二十余万石。
现代文：从此以后大概贮存米二十余万石。
English: Since then, more than 200,000 koku of rice have been stored.

古文：及东北路岁饥，赖以济者不可胜数。
现代文：等到东北路闹饥荒，依仗这些米救济的人不可胜数。
English: Wait until there is a famine in the Northeast, and the number of people who rely on these rice reliefs will be countless.

古文：三年，上曰： 自正隆兵兴，农桑失业，猛安谋克屯田多不如法。 
现代文：三年，皇上说： 自从正隆年间兴兵打仗，农桑业荒废了，猛安谋克屯田多数不依法执行。 
English: In the third year, the emperor said: Since Zhenglong's time, soldiers have been raised to fight, the agricultural mulberry industry has been devastated, and most of the plans to fortify and fortify the tundra have not been carried out according to law.

古文：诏遣户部侍郎魏子平、大兴少尹同知中都转运事李涤、礼部侍郎李愿、礼部郎中移剌道、户部员外郎完颜兀古出、监察御史夹谷阿里补及望之分道劝农，廉问职官臧否。
现代文：皇帝诏令派遣户部侍郎魏子平、大兴少尹同知中都转运事李涤、礼部侍郎李愿、礼部郎中移刺道、户部员外郎完颜兀古出、监察御史夹谷阿里补及曹望之分道劝农，同时调查在职官员有否贪赃行为。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to dispatch Wei Ziping, the head of the Household Division, and Daxing Shao Yin Tongzhi, the head of the General Office, to transfer Li Jia, the head of the Ceremonial Department, Li Zhen, the head of the Ceremonial Department, to the assassination road, and the head of the Household Department, Wai Lang, to the ancient road, to supervise the branch road of Guizhigaya Ali Zhi and Cao Wang to persuade farmers, and to investigate whether the officials in office had acted corruptly.

古文：望之还言，乞汰诸路胥吏，可减其半。
现代文：望之回皇上话，请求淘汰诸路官府中办理文书的小吏，可以精减一半这样的人员。
English: Hoping to return to the emperor's words, he requested that the petty officials who handled documents in various government offices be eliminated, and that such personnel could be reduced by half.

古文：诏胥吏如故。
现代文：皇帝诏令对这些小吏要保留如故。
English: The emperor decreed that these minor officials should remain as they were.

古文：于是始禁用贴书云。
现代文：于是开始禁用贴书，即书吏的助手。
English: So they began to prohibit the posting of books, that is, the clerk's assistant.

古文：迁本部侍郎，领复实缮修大内财用，费用大省。
现代文：望之迁任本部侍郎，领导复核修缮大内财政支出，费用大大节省。
English: After the move, Nozaki was appointed as the head office's chamberlain, leading a review of the university's financial expenditure on renovations, which resulted in significant cost savings.

古文：复以劳进阶，上召见谕勉之。
现代文：又因功劳进级，皇上召见他当面勉励他。
English: He was also promoted due to his merits, and the emperor summoned him to encourage him in person.

古文：望之家奴袁一言涉妖妄，大兴府鞫治。
现代文：曹望之的家奴袁一说话涉嫌妖妄，大兴府审理处治。
English: Cao Wangzhi's house slave Yuan Yi's speech was suspected of being delusional, and was dealt with by the Daxing prefectural court.

古文：望之恐，使户部令史刘公辅问其事于大兴少尹王全，全具其事语公辅，公辅以语望之。
现代文：望之惊恐，让户部令史刘公辅向大兴少尹王全询问袁一的案情，王全把袁一的案情全部告诉了刘公辅，公辅告诉了望之。
English: Horrified, Wang Zhi asked Liu Gongyu, the head of the household department, to inquire about Yuan Yi's case from Daxing Shosho Yin Wangquan. Wangquan told Liu Gongyu all about Yuan Yi's case, and Wangquan told Wang Zhi.

古文：御史台劾奏刘公辅言泄狱情。
现代文：御史台劾奏刘公辅泄漏狱情。
English: State broadcaster China Central Television (CCTV) has accused Liu Gongyu of leaking information about his imprisonment.

古文：上曰： 妖妄之言，交相传说何也？ 
现代文：皇上说： 妖妄之言，为什么要互相传说？ 
English: The emperor said, "That's nonsense. Why do we have to tell each other stories?

古文：于是，望之决杖一百，王全杖八十，刘公辅杖一百五十，除名。
现代文：于是，望之被打一百棍，王全被打八十棍，刘公辅被打一百五十棍，并被解除职务。
English: As a result, Wang Zhi was beaten with a hundred sticks, Wang Quan was beaten with eighty sticks, Liu Gongyu was beaten with a hundred and fifty sticks, and was relieved of his duties.

古文：顷之，运河堙塞，世宗出郊见之，问其故。
现代文：不久，运河堵塞了，世宗到郊外看见这情况，问是什么原因。
English: Soon, the canal was blocked, and Sejong went to the suburbs to see the situation and ask what the reason was.

古文：主者奏曰： 户部不肯经画，岁久以致如此。 
现代文：主管的人奏道： 户部不肯统筹规划，年岁久了以致如此。 
English: The person in charge said, "The household department is not willing to make overall plans, and it has been like this for a long time.

古文：上责望之曰： 有水运不浚治，乃用陆运，烦费民力，罪在汝等，其往治之。 
现代文：皇上指责望之说 ：有水运不疏通治理，于是用陆运，劳民费力，罪在你们这些人，速去治理！ 
English: The emperor reproached him, saying, "If there is water transportation, it is not possible to clear the road, so land transportation is used, labor and people are laborious, the fault lies with you people, hurry to govern!"

古文：尚书省奏当用夫役数万人。
现代文：尚书省上奏说需要用夫役数万人。
English: The Ministry of Education and Culture said that tens of thousands of people would be needed.

古文：上曰： 方春耕作，不可劳民。
现代文：皇上说： 正在春耕，不能劳民。
English: The emperor said, "It is spring ploughing, so no one can work."

古文：以宫籍监户及摘东宫、诸王人从充役，若不足即以五百里内军夫补之。 
现代文：把在宫籍监户的以及选择东宫、诸王的随从充当劳役，如果人力不足就叫五百里以内的军人补充上。 
English: If there is a shortage of manpower, soldiers within five hundred li will be called in to supplement the labor of the palace supervisors and the attendants of the kings who choose the East Palace.

古文：《太宗实录》成，监修国史纥石烈良弼赐金带一、重彩二十端。同修国史张景仁、刘仲渊、望之皆赐银币有差。
现代文：《太宗实录》编写成书，皇上赐给监修国史纥石烈良弼一条金带、二十端彩绸，赐给同修国史的张景仁、刘仲渊、曹望之的都是银币，但数目有差别。
English: When the "Taisong Record" was compiled into a book, the emperor gave a gold belt and 20 pieces of colored silk to the overseer of the national history, Shi Lerong, and silver coins to the national historians Zhang Jingren, Liu Zhongyuan and Cao Bang, but the amounts were different.

古文：望之叹赏薄，谓人曰： 栽花接本乃加爵命，勤劳者不迁官。 
现代文：望之感叹给他的赏赐薄，对旁人说： 栽花接木的加爵命，勤恳劳作的不迁官。 
English: Nozomu lamented that the reward given to him was too little, and said to the others: "The life of a nobleman who plants flowers and grafts is a life of hard work.

古文：无何，张景仁迁翰林学士，望之又曰： 止与他人便遣，独不及我哉。 
现代文：张景仁迁升翰林学士，望之又说： 只给他人便宜占，独独不给我啊！ 
English: Zhang Jingren was promoted to the rank of Hanlin Baccalaureate, and Wang Zhi also said: Only give others the advantage, but not me!

古文：世宗闻之，出望之德州防御使，谓之曰： 汝为人能干而心不忠实。
现代文：世宗听说这话，把望之从宫中派出任德州防御使，对他说 ：你为人虽然能干然而心不忠实。
English: When Sejong heard of this, he sent Nozomu from the palace as the Texas defense envoy and said to him, "Although you are a capable person, your heart is not faithful.

古文：朕前往安州春水，人言汝无事君之义。
现代文：朕前往安州春水，人家说你没有事奉君主的义气。
English: I went to Chunshui, Anzhou, and they said you didn't have the spirit to serve the monarch.

古文：朕敕臣下，有过即当谏争。
现代文：朕命令臣下，朕有过失就应当劝谏争议。
English: I order my vassal, if I am at fault, to mediate the dispute.

古文：汝但面从，退则谤议，此不忠不孝也。
现代文：你表面上服从，退下去就诽谤非议，这是不忠不孝啊。
English: You obey on the surface, but when you retreat, you slander and criticize. This is disloyalty.

古文：汝自五品起迁四品，《太宗皇帝实录》成，优赐银币，不思尽心竭力，惟官赏是觊。
现代文：你从五品迁升到四品，《太宗皇帝实录》编成，优厚地赐予你银币，你不考虑尽心竭力，只贪图官赏。
English: You have been promoted from the fifth grade to the fourth grade, "The Record of Emperor Taizong" has been compiled, and you have been generously given silver coins. You do not consider doing your best, but only covet official rewards.

古文：今出汝于外，宜改心涤虑。
现代文：今天调你出京到外地任职，应该洗心涤脑。
English: Today, you have been transferred from Beijing to a post in a foreign country. You should wash your heart and mind.

古文：不然，则身亦莫保。 
现代文：不然，则身家性命也难保了。 
English: Otherwise, it will be difficult to save your own life.

古文：望之到德州，有惠政，百姓为立生祠。
现代文：望之到了德州，有良好的政绩，百姓为他建立了生祠。
English: When Wang Zhi arrived in Texas, he had a good political record, and the people built a shrine for him.

古文：改同知西京留守事。
现代文：于是，皇上诏令他改任同知西京留守事。
English: As a result, the Emperor issued an imperial edict ordering him to be reassigned to stay with his friend in Western Kyoto.

古文：上书论便宜事：其一，论山东、河北猛安谋克与百姓杂处，民多失业。
现代文：曹望之上书论可斟酌的事势所宜： 其一，论山东、河北猛安谋克与百姓杂居在一起，百姓多数失业。
English: Regarding Cao Wang's book, the following matters are worthy of consideration: First, regarding Shandong and Hebei, Meng'an planned to live together with the common people, and the majority of the common people were unemployed.

古文：陈、蔡、汝、颍之间土广人稀，宜徙百姓以实其处，复数年之赋以安辑之。
现代文：陈、蔡、汝、颍四州之间地广人稀，应该让百姓迁去居住以充实那里，免除数年的赋税来安顿他们。
English: The land between Chen, Cai, Ru and Handan is vast and sparsely populated, and people should be allowed to move to live there to enrich it, and they should be exempted from paying taxes for several years to settle them.

古文：百姓亡命及避役军中者，阅实其人，使还本贯。
现代文：百姓中逃亡的以及逃避服军役的，落实是哪些人，让他们回归原籍。
English: The people who fled or evaded military service should be tracked down and allowed to return to their hometowns.

古文：或编近县以为客户，或留为佃户者，亦籍其姓名。
现代文：有的编入临近县户口作为客户，或者留用作为佃户的，也要注册他们的姓名。
English: Some people who are registered as customers in nearby counties or retained as tenants will also have their names registered.

古文：州县与猛安事干涉者无相党匿，庶几军民协和，盗贼弭息。
现代文：州县和猛安参与干涉的人不能互相勾结成党，不久军民和谐，盗贼失去了踪迹。
English: The states and counties and the people who participated in the intervention of Meng'an could not collude with each other to form a party. Soon the military and the people were in harmony, and the thieves lost track.

古文：其二，论荐举之法虚文无实。
现代文： 其二，论荐举人才的规定有文无实。
English: Secondly, the stipulation on recommending and nominating talents is unsubstantiated.

古文：宰相拔擢及其所识，不及其所不识。
现代文：宰相选拔提升的是他们熟识的人，不会涉及他所不熟识的人。
English: The prime minister selects and promotes people they know well, and does not involve people he does not know well.

古文：内外官所举亦辄不用，或指以为朋党，遂不敢复举。
现代文：内、外官员所推举的也不任用，或者指斥他们是朋党，于是不敢再举荐。
English: Internal and external officials do not appoint those they recommend, or they denounce them as party cronies, so they do not dare to recommend them again.

古文：宜令宰执岁举三品二人，御史大夫以下内外官终秩举二人，自此以下以品杀为差等。
现代文：应该命令宰执每年举荐三品官员二人，御史大夫以下内外官任期届满时举荐二人，自御史大夫以下官员按品位减少举荐人数以区分等次。
English: They should order the chief to recommend two officials of the third grade every year, two officials of the second grade and below at the expiration of the term of office, and reduce the number of officials of the first grade and below according to the grade to distinguish the rank.

古文：终秩不举者遇转官勒不迁，三品者削后任俸三月。
现代文：任期届满不举荐的遇转官机会勒令不予迁升，三品官员削职后任俸只发三个月。
English: If no recommendation is made at the expiration of the term of office, the transfer officer will be ordered not to be promoted, and the salary will only be paid for three months after the three-grade officials are demoted.

古文：其举者已改除，吏部以类品第，季而上之。
现代文：那些举贤的官员予以改授官职，吏部按类别定品第，定为第三品以上官职。
English: Those officials who have raised their talents will be re-assigned to official positions, and the personnel department will be assigned to the third grade or higher official position according to the category.

古文：三品阙则于类第四品中补授，四品五品以下视此为差。
现代文：三品官员空缺则从相当于第四品官员中选拔补授，四品、五品以下按这个标准依次补缺。
English: Vacancies for officers of the third class will be selected from officers of the equivalent of the fourth class, and those below the fourth and fifth classes will be filled in turn according to this standard.

古文：其待以不次者，宰执具才行功实以闻。
现代文：其中待遇而不入选的，宰相按他的才能功绩据实汇报。
English: Among them, if he is not selected, the Prime Minister shall report to the Prime Minister according to his ability and merits.

古文：举当否罪当如律。
现代文：举荐妥当与否按律条判罪。
English: Whether the recommendation is appropriate or not is determined by the law.

古文：廉介之士老于令幕无举主者、七考无赃私罪者，准朝官三考劳叙。
现代文：廉洁耿直的士人老在令幕内而没有举荐人的、通过七次考核没有贪赃枉法罪的，准许他们见官反复考核并陈叙己见。
English: If there is an incorruptible and upright scholar who has never been promoted and who has passed the seven-time assessment and is not guilty of corruption, they are allowed to see the officials for repeated assessment and report their own views.

古文：吏部每季图上外路职官姓名，路为一图，大书赃污者于其名下，使知畏慎。
现代文：吏部每季画出外路任职官员姓名图，上报朝廷，一路为一幅图，在贪污受贿者的名下大书其罪行，让大家知道从而畏惧、谨慎。
English: Every quarter, the Ministry of Public Administration draws a map of the names of external officials, and reports it to the Imperial Court. It is a map all the way, and their crimes are written under the names of the corrupt and bribe-takers, so that everyone knows and is afraid and cautious.

古文：外任五品以上官改除，令代之者具功过以闻。
现代文：在朝外任职的五品以上官员改职授官，要让代替他的人详细了解他任职时的功与过。
English: When officials with five or more pins who have served outside the DPRK are transferred to a new post, it is necessary to let the person who replaces him have a detailed understanding of his achievements and mistakes during his service.

古文：年六十以上者，终更赴调，有司察其视听精力，老疾不堪厘务，给以半禄罢遣。
现代文：年纪在六十岁以上的官员，任期届满改职调动，有司要考察他的视力、听力、精力，老而有病承受不了哪怕是百分之一的公务，发给他百分之五十的俸禄解除职务遣送回家。
English: An official over the age of 60, whose term of office has expired, shall be transferred to another post, and his eyesight, hearing, and energy shall be examined by the department. If he is old and sick, he cannot bear even one percent of his official duties, and he shall be paid 50 percent of his salary. He shall be relieved of his duties and sent home.

古文：其三，论守边将帅及沿边州县官渔剥军民，擅兴力役，宜岁遣监察御史周行察之。
现代文： 其三，论守卫边境的将帅以及沿边境州县的官吏盘剥军民从中渔利，擅自施行苦力徭役，应该每年派遣监察御史巡边视察这些地方。
English: Thirdly, as for the generals guarding the border and the officials along the border states and counties plundering the soldiers and civilians for profit and forcing them to work as coolies without authorization, inspectors should be sent to inspect these places every year.

古文：边部有讼，招讨司无得辄遣白身人征断，宜于省部有出身女直、契丹人及县令丞簿中择廉能者，因其风俗，略定科条，务为简易。
现代文：边疆有民事诉讼案件，招讨司不得差遣无功名的人去讯问断案，应该从省部有出身女真、契丹族的人以及县令丞簿中挑选廉洁能干的人，按照当地风俗，大致制定科律，务必要简易一些。
English: If there is a civil litigation case in the border area, the investigation department must not send a person without merit to interrogate and adjudicate the case. It is necessary to select a person of integrity and ability from the people of Jurchen origin, Khitan people and county magistrates from the provincial and municipal departments. According to local customs, the code of ethics should be roughly formulated, and it must be simpler.

古文：征断羊马入官籍数，如边部遇饥馑，即以此赈给之。
现代文：判决征用羊、马入官注册数目，假如边境遇到饥荒年岁，就把这些羊、马拿出来赈济分给灾民。
English: It was decided to requisition the officially registered number of sheep and horses. If there is a famine on the border, these sheep and horses will be taken out and distributed to the victims of the disaster.

古文：招讨及都监视事，宜限边部馈送驼马。
现代文：招讨和都监视察边情，应该限令边疆各部落赠送骆驼、马匹。
English: Invite and monitor the border situation, and limit the gifts of camels and horses from the border tribes.

古文：招讨司女直人户，或撷野菜以济艰食，而军中旧籍马死，则一村均钱补买，往往鬻妻子、卖耕牛以备之。
现代文：招讨司中女真人家有的采野菜充饥，然而军队中旧籍马匹死亡，女真全村人分摊集资补买马匹，往往卖妻和子、卖耕牛来筹钱。
English: To appease the hunger, the middle-ranking official, Nanzhen, had her family harvest vegetables. However, the old horses in the army died, and the whole village of Nanzhen shared the funds to buy horses. They often sold their wives and children, and sold farm cattle to raise money.

古文：臣恐数年之后，边防困弊，临时赈济，费财十倍而无益，早为之所，则财用省而边备实矣。
现代文：臣恐怕数年之后边防陷入困境，临时赈济，那样费财十倍也补不上了。早些为边防事安排，那么，财力花费节省并且边防备用充实。
English: I am afraid that after a few years, the border defense will be in trouble, and the temporary relief will not be able to make up for the tenfold cost. If the border defense is arranged earlier, then the financial resources will be saved and the border defense reserve will be enriched.

古文：官给军箭用尽，则市以补之，皆朽钝不堪用，可每岁给官箭一分，以补其阙。
现代文：官方供给的军用箭矢用完了，就从市场买来补充军用的，却都腐朽粗钝不能用，可以每年由统供给箭矢一分，来补充军用的不足。
English: When the official supply of military arrows runs out, they are bought from the market to supplement the military ones, but they are all rotten and blunt and cannot be used. The government can supply one point of arrows each year to supplement the military shortage.

古文：边民阙食给米，地远负重，往往就仓贱卖而去，可计口支钱，则公私两便。
现代文：边民缺吃的供给米，押运者往往因边地遥远不愿负重，就近将粮食贱价出售入仓了事，押运者可以按人口支钱，公私两便。
English: Border residents lack the supply of rice to eat, and the escorts are often unwilling to bear the burden due to the remoteness of the border, so they recently sold the grain at a low price into the warehouse. The escorts can spend money according to the population, both public and private.

古文：陕西正副，宜如猛安谋克用土人一员，队将亦宜参用土人，久居其任。
现代文：陕西正副官员，应该像猛安谋克那样用一名当地人，军队将来也应该使用适量当地人，长久地留任。
English: Shaanxi officials should use a local person like Meng Anmouke, and the army should also use an appropriate number of local people in the future to stay in office for a long time.

古文：增弓箭田，复其赋役。
现代文：增设弓箭田，免这部分田地的徭役。
English: Bow and arrow fields will be added, and this part of the fields will be exempted from ploughing.

古文：以廉吏为提举，举察总管府以下官。
现代文：举荐提拔是廉洁的官吏，考察推举总督府以下官员。
English: It is the incorruptible officials who are recommended and promoted, and the officials below the Governor-General's Office who are investigated and promoted.

古文：农隙校阅，以严武备。
现代文：农忙空隙时间训练检阅队伍，以期严整武装防御。
English: The inspection team is trained in the spare time of the busy farmers, with a view to strengthening the armed defense.

古文：则太平之时有经略之制矣。
现代文：如果这样做，那么太平时期就有了经营谋略的制度了。
English: If this is done, then in times of peace there will be a system of business strategy.

古文：又论六盐场用人，宜令户部公议辟举。
现代文： 又论六盐场用人，应该让户部集体讨论推举。
English: As for the six salt farm employees, they should be collectively discussed and selected by the household department.

古文：论漕运，先计河仓见在几何，通州容受几何，京师岁费几何。
现代文： 论水道运粮，先计算河岸距离粮仓有多远，通州粮仓能容纳多少，京师每年运粮费多少。
English: For grain transportation by waterway, first calculate how far the riverbank is from the grain silo, how much the Tongzhou grain silo can accommodate, and how much the annual grain transportation cost is in Beijing Division.

古文：今近河州县岁税或六七万石，小民有入资之费，富室收转输之利，宜计实数以科税入。
现代文：现在临近河的州县年税有的六、七万石，普通百姓交纳集资的费用，富贵人家却收取转运的利钱，应该计算实际拥有资金的数量来收取赋税。
English: At present, the annual taxes of the counties and prefectures adjacent to the river are as high as 60,000 to 70,000 koku. Ordinary people pay the cost of fund-raising, but rich people collect the profits from transshipment. It is necessary to calculate the amount of funds actually owned to collect taxes.

古文：论民间私钱苦恶，宜以官钱五百易私钱千，期以一月易之，过期以销钱法坐之。
现代文： 论民间私人积攒的钱币苦于损坏，应当拿官府库中钱币与他们兑换，官钱五百换私钱一千，限期在一个月内兑换，过期不兑按销钱法治罪。
English: On the subject of the money and coins accumulated by the people and private individuals suffering from damage, it is necessary to take the money from the government treasury and exchange it with them. Five hundred yuan of government money is exchanged for one thousand yuan of private money. The time limit for exchange is one month. If the money is not redeemed within the time limit, it is a crime under the rule of law.

古文：论州府力役钱物，户部颁印署白簿，使尽书之，以俟审阅，有畏避不书者坐之。
现代文： 论州府的力役钱物，户部颁发有印章的空白登记簿，让州府一一登记清楚，以备审阅，有畏惧回避不登记的依法治罪。
English: Regarding the state government's hard-earned money and property, the Household Department issued a blank register with a seal, so that the state government could clearly register each one for review and avoid the crime of non-registration.

古文：论工部营造调发，妨民生业。
现代文： 论工部营造工程调动民工，妨碍百姓安居乐业。
English: On the construction project of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, the mobilization of migrant workers has begun, hindering the people to live and work in peace.

古文：诸路射粮军约量人数，习武艺，期以三年成，以息调民。
现代文：诸路征取粮食的军队要精减人数，练习武艺，限期三年完成，拿利息调动民工。 
English: The army that collects grain from all directions should reduce the number of people, practice martial arts, complete the three-year deadline, and take interest to mobilize migrant workers.

古文：书奏，多见采纳。
现代文：曹望之写的奏折，多数被采纳。
English: Most of the reports written by Cao Wang were adopted.

古文：以本官行六部事于北边，召拜户部尚书。
现代文：望之在北部边疆以本官的身份行使六部职责，皇帝召见拜他为户部尚书，皇上当面指出望之的错误说： 你以前是侍郎，因为不忠的过错补了外职。
English: When the emperor summoned Nozomu to appear before him, he pointed out Nozomu's mistake in front of the emperor and said, "You used to be a chamberlain, but because of your unfaithfulness, you filled in for someone else.

古文：上数之曰： 汝前为侍郎，以不忠外补，颇能练习钱谷，故任以尚书之重，宜改前非，以图新效也。 
现代文：你很能学习钱币、粮食的事，所以委任你尚书这一重要职务，你应该痛改前非，在这个职位上立新功啊！ 
English: You are very capable of learning about money and grain, so you should make amends for appointing you to the important position of Shangshu, and make new achievements in this position!

古文：是时，户部尚书高德基坐高估俸粟责降，世宗念望之吝出纳或惩德基也，既出，使人谕之曰： 勿以高德基下粟直，要在平估而已。 
现代文：当时，户部尚书高德基因高估俸粟触犯法律而被斥责降职，世宗念望之节约出纳或者是惩罚德基，已经出来了，又派人传话给望之说 ：不要按照高德基的标准降下俸粟的值，要在平估罢了。 
English: At that time, the head of the household, Shangshu Gaode, was reprimanded and demoted for violating the law by overestimating the salary, and Shizong's desire to save money or punish Deji had already come out. He also sent a message to him saying: Don't reduce the value of the salary according to Gaodeji's standard, just estimate it.

古文：十五年新宫成，世宗幸新宫，敕望之曰： 新宫中所须，毋取于民间也。 
现代文：十五年，皇帝新宫落成，世宗驾临新宫，命令望之说： 新宫中所需要的东西，不要从民间索取。 
English: Fifteen years later, when the emperor's new palace was completed, Shizong arrived at the new palace and ordered Wang Zhi to say, "Don't ask the people for the things you need in the new palace.

古文：有良民夫妇质身于东京留守完颜彀英家，期终而不遣，尚书省下东京鞫治。
现代文：有一对良民夫妇被作为人质抵押在东京留守完颜彀英家中，期满了却不遣送他们回家，尚书省派员下东京审查处理这件事。
English: There was a good-hearted couple who had been kept as hostages in Yan Xingying's house in Tokyo. When their time was up, they were not sent home. The Ministry of Education and Culture sent an official to Tokyo to investigate and deal with the matter.

古文：望之言彀英为留守，其同官必且阿徇，不肯穷竟，当移他州。
现代文：曹望之说彀英是留守，与他同级的官员将一定是在询问时偏袒他，不肯穷追到底，应当将彀英调到别的州去。
English: Cao Wangzhi said that Xing Ying was absent, and the officials at the same level as him would certainly favor him during the inquiry and would not pursue it to the end. Xing Ying should be transferred to another state.

古文：望之久习事，有治钱谷名，性刚愎，颇沾沾自露，希觊执政。
现代文：望之长期以来学习有关事务，有善于治理钱、谷的名声，性格刚愎自用，很是沾沾自喜自我表露，希图执政。
English: Mochizuki has long studied relevant affairs, has a reputation for being good at managing money and grain, and has a tough and self-serving personality. He is very self-satisfied and wants to govern.

古文：而刑部尚书梁肃自详问宋国使还，世宗尝欲以为执政，久而未用，亦颇炫耀求进。
现代文：而刑部尚书梁肃自从出使详细访问宋国归来，世宗曾经想让他执政，然而长时间没有启用他，因为梁肃也很炫耀企图上进。
English: However, the Minister of Justice, Shangshu Liangsu, had been on a detailed visit to Song since his return. Shizong had wanted to put him in power, but did not put him in office for a long time, because Liangsu was also very ostentatious in his attempts to advance.

古文：世宗谓左丞相纥石烈良弼曰： 曹望之、梁肃急于见知，涉于躁进。 
现代文：世宗对左丞相纥石烈良弼说： 曹望之、梁肃急于被别人了解自己的长处，急躁地想进取。 
English: Sejong said to the Left Vice-Minister of War, Seolye Ryonghyo: Cao Wangzhi and Liang Soo are anxious for others to understand their strengths, and impatiently want to make progress.

古文：遂出梁肃为济南尹。
现代文：于是下令梁肃出任济南府尹。
English: So he ordered Liang Su to take the post of Jinan governor.

古文：数年，乃召拜参知政事。
现代文：过了几年，才召见梁肃拜参知政事。
English: It took several years before Liang Su Bai was summoned to participate in the political affairs of the governor.

古文：而望之终于户部尚书，年五十六。
现代文：而曹望之终老在户部尚书任上，享年五十六岁。
English: Cao Wanzhi, however, remained in the position of household secretary until his death at the age of fifty-six.

古文：世宗惜其未及用，赐钱三千贯，敕使致祭，赙银五百两、重彩二十端、绢二百匹，以其子渊为奉御，泽为笔砚承奉。
现代文：世宗惋惜他没等到任用，赐予钱三千贯，命令官员前往祭奠，赐给办丧事用的白银五百两，彩绸二十端、绢二百匹，让他的儿子曹渊作为奉御，曹泽为笔砚承奉。
English: The Sejong regretted that he had not waited until he was appointed, and gave him 3,000 kan in money, ordered officials to go to the memorial service, and gave him 500 taels of silver, 20 taels of colored silk, and 200 horses for the funeral service. He asked his son Cao Yuan to serve him, and Cao Ze to serve him as his pen pal.

古文：其后，尚辇局举出身人年六十余可以临事，世宗曰： 岂为此辈惜官邪，但此辈专以盗取官钱为谋生计，不可用也。 
现代文：在此之后，尚辇局举荐出身人年六十多名可以临事，世宗说： 难道为了此辈而爱惜官位吗？但是此辈专门用盗取的官钱来谋生计，不能任用他们！ 
English: After this, the Sangye Bureau recommended that more than sixty people who were born in the same year could be appointed, and Sejong said: Is it possible to cherish the official position for the sake of this generation? But this generation specifically uses stolen government money to make a living, they cannot be appointed!

古文：赞曰：毛硕、李上达、曹望之、李偲之流，皆金之能吏也。
现代文：于是想更改监临格式，向户部尚书刘玮问这件事。刘玮恐怕监官诽谤自己，不肯据实相告。世宗因此思念曹望之，感叹地说 ：刘玮不如望之敢说敢做啊！ 
English: Therefore, he wanted to change the supervision format and asked the head of the household department, Shangshu Liu Xi, about this. Liu Xi was afraid that the supervisor would slander himself and would not tell the truth. Therefore, Shizong thought of Cao Bangzhi and said with a sigh: Liu Xi is not as brave as Wangzhi!

古文：望之悻悻然以求大用，君子无取焉。
现代文：望之起初不肯学习，及到富贵，稍微知道读书，于是刻苦自学成功，留下诗集三十卷。
English: At first, Nozomu did not want to study, but when he became rich, he knew a little about reading, so he studied hard and succeeded, leaving thirty volumes of poetry.

古文：徒单克宁，本名习显，其先金源县人，徙居比古土之地，后徙置猛安于山东，遂占籍莱州。
现代文：徒单克宁，本名徒单习显，其祖先是金源县人，但迁居到比古土，后来在山东设置猛安，其祖先于是占住莱州。
English: Tutan Kening, whose real name is Tutan Shan Xi Xian, whose ancestors were from Jinyuan County, but moved to the ancient land, and later set up Meng'an in Shandong, and his ancestors then occupied Laizhou.

古文：父况者，官至汾阳军节度使。
现代文：其父徒单况者，官至汾阳军节度使。
English: His father, who was an ordinary soldier, was an officer of the Shenyang Army.

古文：克宁资质浑厚，寡言笑，善骑射，有勇略，通女直、契丹字。
现代文：徒单克宁资质纯厚，不苟言笑，善骑马射箭，有勇有谋，通晓女真、契丹文字。
English: He is a man of pure qualities, he is not quick-tempered, he is good at horse riding and archery, he is brave and resourceful, and he is familiar with Jurchen and Khitan characters.

古文：左丞相希尹，克宁母舅。
现代文：左丞相完颜希尹是徒单克宁的舅舅。
English: Yan Xiyin, the left-wing vice-premier, is the uncle of Tu Shan Kening.

古文：熙宗问希尹表戚中谁可侍卫者，希尹奏曰： 习显可用。 
现代文：熙宗皇帝问完颜希尹表亲中谁可以做侍卫，完颜希尹上奏： 徒单习显可以任用。 
English: After Emperor Xizong asked Yan Xiyin which of his cousins could serve as bodyguards, Yan Xiyin replied, "Tu Shan Xi Xian can be appointed."

古文：以为符宝祗候。
现代文：徒单克宁被任为符宝祗候。
English: Tutan Kening was appointed as the leader of the treasure.

古文：是时，悼后干政，后弟裴满忽土侮克宁，克宁殴之。
现代文：这时，悼平皇后干预朝政，她的弟弟裴满忽土侮辱徒单克宁，徒单克宁打了他。
English: At this time, Empress Muiping intervened in the politics of the dynasty, her brother Pei Manhukutto insulted Tutankhamun, and Tutankhamun beat him.

古文：明日，忽土以告悼后，后曰： 习显刚直，必汝之过也。 
现代文：第二天，裴满忽土把此事告诉了悼平皇后，皇后说 ：徒单习显刚烈正直，一定是你的过错。 
English: The next day, Pei Manhuk Tso told this to Empress Weiping. Empress Weiping said, "It must be your fault for being so tough and honest."

古文：已而充护卫，转符宝郎，迁侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使，改忠顺军节度使。
现代文：不久，徒单克宁为护卫，转为符宝郎，升为侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使，改任忠顺军节度使。
English: Soon, Tutankhaten became an escort, turned into a treasure hunter, was promoted to the guard of honor, commanded the pro-army horse-and-foot troops, and was reappointed as the festival envoy of the Zhongshun Army.

古文：克宁娶宗干女嘉祥县主，同母兄蒲甲判大宗正事，海陵心忌之，出为西京留守，构致其罪诛之，因降克宁知滕阳军。
现代文：徒单克宁娶了完颜宗干的女儿嘉祥县主，他同母的哥哥徒单蒲甲为判大宗正事，海陵皇帝心里憎恨他，让他离朝去任西京留守，并构造罪状杀了他，因此徒单克宁也降职为知胜阳军。
English: Tutan Kening married the daughter of Yan Zonggan, the head of Jiaxiang County, and his mother's brother, Tutan Pujia, was judged to be a serious matter. The Emperor of Hailing hated him in his heart, let him leave the court to stay in West Beijing, and constructed a crime to kill him. Therefore, Tutan Kening was also demoted to the Zhishengyang Army.

古文：历宿州防御使、胡里改路节度使、曷懒路兵马都总管。
现代文：他历任宿州防御使、胡里改路节度使、曷懒路兵马都总管。
English: He has successively served as the defense envoy to Cangzhou, the envoy to change the road to Huli, and the general manager of the Lazy Road.

古文：大定初，诏克宁以本路兵会东京。
现代文：大定初年，诏令徒单克宁率领本路兵到东京会合。
English: In the first year of the Taisho era, Emperor Dairei led his troops to meet in Tokyo.

古文：迁左翼都统。
现代文：升为左翼都统。
English: He was promoted to the left wing of the party.

古文：诏与广宁尹仆散浑坦、同知广宁尹完颜岩雅、肇州防御使唐括乌也，从右副元帅完颜谋衍讨契丹窝斡。
现代文：诏令他与广宁尹仆散浑坦、同知广宁尹完颜岩雅、肇州防御使唐括乌也，跟从右副元帅完颜谋衍讨伐契丹移剌窝斡。
English: The imperial edict ordered him and Guangning Yin's servant Sanhuntan, his friend Guangning Yin's subordinate Guanyan Yanya, and Zhaozhou's defense envoy Tang Huwu, to follow the right deputy marshal Guanyan to fight against the Khitan and move to Xiwu.

古文：趋济州。
现代文：金军奔赴济州。
English: The gold army rushed to Jeju.

古文：谋衍用契丹降吏飐者计策袭贼辎重，克宁与纥石烈志宁为殿，与贼遇于长泺。
现代文：完颜谋衍用契丹投降的官吏礣者的计策攻击叛军的辎重，徒单克宁与纥石烈志宁殿后，在长泺与叛军相遇。
English: After using the tactics of the officials who had surrendered to Khitan to attack the rebels, he met with the rebels in Nagatoro.

古文：谋衍使伏兵于左翼之侧。
现代文：完颜谋衍在左翼埋伏军队。
English: The ambush troops on the left flank are in full swing.

古文：贼二万余蹑吾后，又以骑四百余突出左翼伏兵之间，欲绕出阵后攻我。
现代文：叛军两万多人跟在后面，又用四百多骑兵突然从左翼伏兵之间出来，想绕出阵地后面来攻击。
English: More than twenty thousand rebels followed behind, and more than four hundred cavalry suddenly emerged from between the left-wing ambushes, trying to get around the back of the position to attack.

古文：克宁与善射二十余人拒之。
现代文：徒单克宁与二十多善于射箭的人抵抗叛军。
English: Takan Kening and more than twenty people who were good at archery resisted the rebels.

古文：众曰： 贼众我寡，不若与伏兵合击，或与大军相依，可以万全。 
现代文：大家说： 叛军人多我们人少，不如同伏兵联合攻击，或者与大部队相依靠，这样可以万无一失。 
English: Everyone said: "The more rebels there are, the fewer of us there are. It is better to attack jointly with the ambush soldiers, or to rely on the large army, so that we can be sure of nothing."

古文：克宁曰： 不可。
现代文：徒单克宁说 ：不可以那样。
English: Tutankhaten said: "That's not allowed."

古文：若贼出阵后，则前后夹击，我败矣，大军不可俟也。 
现代文：如果叛军在阵地后出现，就是前后夹击，我们会失败，也不能等大部队来。 
English: If the rebels appear behind the position, it is a pincer attack, we will fail, and we can't wait for the big troops to come.

古文：于是奋击，贼乃却。
现代文：于是他们奋力出击，叛军被打退。
English: So they pushed on, and the rebels were driven back.

古文：左翼万户襄与大军合击之，贼遂败，追奔十余里，二年四月一日也。
现代文：左翼万户完颜襄与大军联合攻击，叛军于是大败，追了十多里地，这一天是大定二年四月一日。
English: The left-wing Wanyuanhu and the army jointly attacked, and the rebels were defeated and chased for more than ten miles. This day was April 1st, the second year of Dading.

古文：越九日，复追及贼于霿河。
现代文：过了九天，在駒雨松河又追上了叛军。
English: Nine days later, they caught up with the rebels again at the Koma Uzumatsu River.

古文：左翼军先与贼战，克宁以骑二千追掩十五里，贼迫涧不得亟渡，杀伤甚众。
现代文：左翼军队先同叛军作战，徒单克宁率二千骑兵突然追击叛军十五里，叛军跑到山涧边不能很快渡过，被杀伤了很多。
English: The left-wing army first fought with the rebels, and suddenly chased the rebels for fifteen miles with two thousand cavalry led by Tanchonin. The rebels ran to the edge of the mountains and could not cross quickly, and many were killed and wounded.

古文：贼收军返旆，大军尚未至，克宁令军士下马射贼，贼遂引而南。
现代文：叛军收军返师，大军还未到，徒单克宁命令战士下马射叛军，叛军于是向南撤退。
English: The rebels withdrew, but before the big army arrived, Tutankhaten ordered his soldiers to dismount and shoot the rebels, who then retreated south.

古文：是时，窝斡已再北，元帅谋衍利卤掠，驻师白泺。
现代文：此时，移剌窝斡已经再次败北，元帅完颜谋衍为了利益进行掠夺，故驻军白泺。
English: At this time, the Empress Dowager had been defeated again, and the marshal had plundered for profit, so the garrison fled.

古文：世宗讶其持久，遣问之。
现代文：世宗皇帝对他长时间驻兵惊讶，派人前去问情况。
English: Emperor Sejong was surprised at his long stay and sent someone to inquire about the situation.

古文：谋衍曰： 贼骑壮，我骑弱，此少驻所以完养马力也。
现代文：完颜谋衍说 ：叛军的马强壮，我们的马瘦弱，在这驻一段时间是养马。
English: Guan Yan Muyan said, "The rebels' horses are strong, but ours are weak. We have been raising horses here for some time."

古文：不然，非益万骑不可胜。 
现代文：不然，不增加骑兵就不能打胜。 
English: Otherwise, we can't win without more cavalry.

古文：克宁奋然而言曰： 吾马固不少，但帅不得人耳。
现代文：徒单克宁忿然说： 我们的马本来不少，只是没有得到好统帅罢了。
English: Tutankhaten said angrily, "We have quite a few horses, but we just haven't got a good leader."

古文：其意常利虏掠，贼至则引避，贼去则缓随之，故贼常得善牧，而我常拾其蹂践之余，此吾马所以弱也。
现代文：他的意思是为了利益掠夺，叛军到了就退避，叛军走了就慢慢跟随着他们，所以叛军常常得到好牧草，而我们的马常吃他们的马吃剩踏过的牧草，这就是我们的马体弱的原因。
English: He means for profit, the rebels retreat when they arrive, the rebels slowly follow them when they leave, so the rebels often get good pasture, and our horses often eat their horses and leftover pasture, which is why our horses are weak.

古文：今诚能更置良帅，虽不益兵，可以有功。
现代文：现在如果能更换统帅，即使不增加兵力，也可以有功。
English: Now if you can change the commander, even if you don't increase the number of troops, you can be successful.

古文：不然，骑虽十倍，未见其利也。 
现代文：不然，即使有十倍的骑兵，也不能取胜。 
English: Otherwise, even if there were ten times as many cavalry, they could not win.

古文：朝廷知其议，召还谋衍，以平章政事仆散忠义兼右副元帅。
现代文：朝廷知道了徒单克宁的议论，召回完颜谋衍，用平章政事仆散忠义兼右副元帅。
English: The imperial court learned of the discussion of the coup, recalled Yan Muyan, and used Pingzhang's political servant, San Zhongyi, who was also the right deputy marshal.

古文：师将发，贼声言乞降。
现代文：部队准备出发，叛军声言乞求投降。
English: Troops prepare to leave as rebels plead for surrender.

古文：克宁曰： 贼初困蹙，且无降意，所以扬言者，是欲缓吾师期也。
现代文：徒单克宁说 ：叛军始初困窘，且无投降之意，他们扬言乞和的原因，是想延缓我军的时间。
English: Tutankhamun said: The rebels were initially embarrassed and had no intention of surrendering. The reason they threatened to sue for peace was to delay our army.

古文：不若攻其未备，贼若挫衄，则其降必速。
现代文：不如乘其不备袭击他们，叛军如果被打败，那么他们会很快投降。
English: Better to take them by surprise. If the rebels are defeated, they will quickly surrender.

古文：如其不降，乘其怠而急击之，可一战而定也。 
现代文：如果他们不投降，乘他们懈怠而急速进攻他们，可以凭一次战斗平定他们。 
English: If they do not surrender, take advantage of their slackness and attack them quickly, they can be defeated in one battle.

古文：忠义以为然，乃与克宁出中路，遂败贼兵于罗不鲁之地。
现代文：仆散忠义认为是这样，于是同徒单克宁出击中路，在罗不鲁打败了叛军。
English: Dousan Tadayoshi thought so, so his companions single-mindedly went out to strike the middle path and defeated the rebels in Lop Nur.

古文：贼奔七渡河，负险为栅，克宁觇知贼栅之背其势可上，乃潜师夜登，俯射之，大军自下攻，贼溃，皆遁去。
现代文：叛军逃奔七渡河，负险设栅栏，徒单克宁侦察得知叛军栅栏背后的山可以上去，于是夜里派部队攀登，朝下射箭，大军又从下边攻击，叛军溃败，都逃跑了。
English: The rebels fled to Qidu River, set up a fence at great risk, and the reconnaissance team learned that the mountain behind the rebel fence could be climbed, so they sent troops to climb and shoot arrows at night. The large army attacked from below, the rebels were defeated, and they all fled.

古文：契丹平，克宁除太原尹。
现代文：契丹平定，徒单克宁被授予太原尹。
English: Khitan was pacified, and the title of Tutankhamun was awarded to Taiyuan Yin.

古文：未阅月，宋吴璘侵陕右，元帅左都监徒单合喜乞益兵，遣克宁佩金牌，驻军平凉。
现代文：不到一月，宋朝吴瞞侵略陕右，元帅左都监徒单合喜乞求增加兵力，派徒单克宁佩带金牌驻军平凉。
English: Less than a month later, the Song Dynasty and the Wu Dynasty invaded the right side of the Shaanxi Province. The marshal of the left side of the capital, the overseer of the soldiers, Shan Hexi, begged for more troops, and sent the soldiers to the garrison of Ping Liang with the gold medal.

古文：诏合喜曰： 朕遣克宁参议军事，此其智勇足敌万人，不必益军也。 
现代文：皇帝金世宗下诏徒单合喜说： 朕派徒单克宁参议军事，他的智勇足以敌万人，不必增加军队。 
English: Emperor Kim Il-sung issued an edict to single-handedly unite the Korean people, saying: "We have sent a single-handed military adviser, and his wisdom and courage are enough to defeat tens of thousands of people. There is no need to increase the number of troops.

古文：克宁至，下令安辑，未几，民皆完聚。
现代文：徒单克宁到，下令安抚，不久，百姓都安定团聚。
English: Tutankhamun arrived, ordered to pacify, and soon the people were safely reunited.

古文：治兵伐宋，右丞相仆散忠义驻南京节制诸军，左副元帅纥石烈志宁经略边事，克宁改益都尹，兼山东路兵马都总管、行军都统。
现代文：金朝治兵攻打宋朝，右丞相仆散忠义驻南京节制诸军，左副元帅纥石烈志宁巡视边疆事，徒单克宁改任益都尹，兼山东路兵马都总管、行军都统。
English: The Kim dynasty led the troops to attack the Song dynasty, and the minister of the right, San Zhongyi, stationed in Nanjing, restrained the troops. The left vice-marshal, Zou Shi Leshining, inspected the frontier affairs, and Tuan Kening was transferred to the post of Yidu Yin, and also served as the head of the Shandong Road, and the marching troops were unified.

古文：四年，元帅府欲遣左都监璋以兵四千由水路进，诏曰： 可付都统徒单习显，仍益兵二千，择良将副之。
现代文：大定四年，元帅府想派遣左都监完颜璋率四千兵由水路进军，金世宗皇帝下诏说 ：此事可交付给都统徒单习显，仍旧增加二千兵，选良将作为副职。
English: In the fourth year of the Taisho era, the Marshal's Office wanted to send four thousand soldiers from Zuo Duan to march by water, and Emperor Kim Sejong issued an edict saying that the matter could be handed over to Duotong disciple Shan Xi Xian, still adding two thousand soldiers, and Choe Ryong would serve as a deputy.

古文：璋可经略山东。 
现代文：完颜璋可以巡视山东。 
English: After completing the inspection, they can inspect Shandong.

古文：于是，克宁出军楚、泗之间，与宋将魏胜相拒于楚州之十八里口。
现代文：于是，徒单克宁出兵楚州、泗州之间，与宋将魏胜在楚州的十八里口相遇。
English: As a result, Tochan Kening sent troops between Chuzhou and Zhangzhou, and met Song general Wei Sheng at the eighteen-mile mouth of Chuzhou.

古文：魏胜取弊舟凿其底，贯以大木，列植水中，别以船载巨石贯以铁锁，沉之水底，以塞十八里口及淮渡舟路。
现代文：魏胜找来破船凿掉船底，用大木头连贯，排列竖在水中，另外用船载着大石头用铁钅巢连贯，沉到水底，用来堵塞十八里口及淮渡的船路。
English: Wei Sheng found a shipwrecked ship and chiseled off the bottom of the ship. He used large pieces of wood to make a continuous line and arranged them vertically in the water. In addition, he used a ship carrying large stones to make a continuous line with an anvil nest and sink to the bottom of the water, which was used to block the eighteen-mile mouth and the shipping route of Huai Du.

古文：以步兵四万人屯于淮渡南岸、运河之间。
现代文：他用四万步兵防守在淮渡南岸、运河之间。
English: He used forty thousand infantry to defend the south bank of Huai Du, between the canals.

古文：克宁使斜卯和尚选善游者没水，系大绳植木上，数百人于岸上引绳曳一植木，皆拔出之，彻去沉船。
现代文：徒单克宁派斜卯和尚选择善于游泳的人潜到水中，把大绳子系在竖木上，几百人在岸上拉绳扯竖木，全部拔出了它们，又撤除沉船。
English: Tutankhamun's monks chose a good swimmer to dive into the water and tie a large rope to the upright tree. Hundreds of people on the shore pulled the rope and pulled the upright tree, pulled them all out, and removed the sunken ship.

古文：进至淮口，宋兵来拒，隔水矢石俱发。斜卯和尚以竹编篱捍矢石，复拔去植木沉船，师遂入淮。
现代文：进军到淮河口，宋兵来抵抗，隔河箭石齐发，斜卯和尚用竹编篱笆抵御箭石，又拔去竖木撤除沉船，军队于是进入淮河。
English: Marching to the mouth of the Huai River, the Song soldiers came to resist, the cross-river arrow stones were launched, and the Xiangwu Monk used a bamboo fence to resist the arrow stones, and pulled out the stumps to remove the sunken ship. The army then entered the Huai River.

古文：与宋兵夺渡口，合战数四，猛安长寿先行薄岸，水浅，先率劲卒数人涉水登岸，败其津口兵五百人，余众皆济。
现代文：金军与宋兵夺渡口，交战几个回合，猛安长寿先行到达岸边，河水浅，先率领强兵几人锳水登岸，打败了津口宋兵五百人，其余的人都渡过了河。
English: The gold army and the Song soldiers seized the ferry, fought several rounds, and Meng An and Chang Shou reached the shore ahead of them. The river was shallow, and they first led several strong soldiers ashore in Surabaya. They defeated five hundred Song soldiers from Tsugou, and the rest of them crossed the river.

古文：宋兵四百余自清河口来，镇国上将军蒲察阿离合懑以步兵百人御之。
现代文：宋兵四百多人从清河口来，镇国上将军蒲察阿离合懑用一百步兵抵御。
English: More than four hundred Song soldiers came from the mouth of the Qing River, and the town's warlord, Putsaha Yinghe, used a hundred infantrymen to resist.

古文：克宁自与紥也银术可五骑先行六七里与战，银术可先登，奋击败之。
现代文：徒单克宁亲自与扎也银术可五骑先行六七里同宋兵作战，银术可先登上，奋力攻击打败了宋兵。
English: Tutankhaten himself and Zaya Yinzhu could ride five or seven miles ahead of the Song soldiers in battle, and Yinzhu could board first and attack and defeat the Song soldiers.

古文：宋大兵整阵来拒，克宁麾兵前战，自旦至午，宋兵败，逾运河为阵，余众数千皆走入营中。
现代文：宋大部队整阵来抵抗，徒单克宁指挥军队前去作战，从早晨到中午，宋兵被打败，他们越过运河摆阵，其他的兵都跑回营中。
English: From morning to noon, the Song soldiers were defeated. They crossed the canal and took up positions, while the other soldiers ran back to the camp.

古文：克宁使以火箭射其营舍，尽焚，逾河撤桥，与其大军相会。
现代文：徒单克宁派人用火箭射宋兵的营帐，全部烧毁了它们，宋兵越过河拆去桥梁，与他们的大军会合。
English: Tuchan Kening sent people to fire rockets at the camp of the Song soldiers and burned them all. The Song soldiers crossed the river, tore down the bridge and joined their army.

古文：隔水射之，宋兵不能为阵。
现代文：金军隔河射箭，宋兵不能布阵。
English: The Chinese army was shooting arrows across the river, and the Song soldiers could not set up their lines.

古文：猛安钞兀以六十骑击宋骑兵千余，不利，少却。
现代文：猛安钞兀用六十个骑兵攻击宋一千多骑兵，战况不利，金兵稍微退却。
English: With sixty cavalrymen, Meng'an attacked Song's more than one thousand cavalrymen. The war situation was unfavorable, and the gold soldiers retreated slightly.

古文：克宁以猛安赛剌九十骑横击之，宋兵大败。
现代文：徒单克宁用猛安赛剌九十个骑兵出其不意前去攻击，宋兵大败。
English: Tochan Kening used Meng'an Sai ninety cavalry to attack unexpectedly, and the Song soldiers were defeated.

古文：追至楚州，射杀魏胜，遂取楚州及淮阴县。
现代文：追到楚州，射死魏胜，于是攻取楚州及淮阴县。
English: He chased them to Chuzhou, shot and killed Wei Sheng, and then captured Chuzhou and Huaiyin County.

古文：是役也，赛剌功居多。
现代文：这次战役赛剌的功最大。
English: In this battle, the greatest contribution was made by Sai Yeon.

古文：是时，宋屡遣使请和，仆散忠义、纥石烈志宁约以世为叔侄国，割还海、泗、唐、邓四州。
现代文：此时，宋朝多次派遣使者请求和议，仆散忠义、纥石烈志宁向宋约定金宋两国世代为叔侄国，割还海、泗、唐、邓四州。
English: At this time, the Song Dynasty repeatedly sent envoys to the Song Dynasty to request peace talks, and their servants, Zan Zhongyi and Zou Shi Lv Zhining, made an agreement with the Song Dynasty that the two countries of the Jin and Song dynasties would be uncle and nephew countries, and would return to the four states of Hai, Lu, Tang, and Deng.

古文：宋人尚迁延有请，及克宁取楚州，宋人乃大惧，一一如约。
现代文：宋人故意拖延归还，等到徒单克宁攻下楚州，宋人很害怕，于是一一按约执行。
English: The Song people deliberately delayed the return, and waited until the Tutankhaten conquered Chuzhou. The Song people were very afraid, so they carried out the agreement one by one.

古文：兵罢，改大名尹，历河间、东平尹，召为都点检。
现代文：金朝罢兵休战，徒单克宁改任大名尹，历任河间、东平尹，召为都点检。
English: The Kim dynasty called a truce, and Duan Kening was replaced by the daimyo Yin, and the successors of Kawama and Dongping Yin were summoned to the capital for inspection.

古文：十一年，从丞相志宁北伐，还师。
现代文：大定十一年，他跟从丞相纥石烈志宁北伐，不久班师。
English: In the eleventh year of Dading, he followed the Northern Expedition of the Minister of War, Shishilezhinin, and soon became a squad leader.

古文：十一月皇太子生日，世宗置酒东宫，赐克宁金带。
现代文：十一月皇太子生日，金世宗在东宫设酒宴，赐徒单克宁金带。
English: In November, on the Crown Prince's birthday, Kim Sejong held a banquet at the East Palace and gave the prince a gold band.

古文：明年，迁枢密副使，兼知大兴府事，改太子太保，枢密副使如故。
现代文：第二年，他升为枢密副使，兼知大兴府事，后改为太子太保，枢密副使不变。
English: In the following year, he was promoted to Privy Vice-Minister, and was also in charge of promoting the prosperity of the government. Later, he was changed to Crown Prince Taibo, and the position of Privy Vice-Minister remained unchanged.

古文：拜平章政事，封密国公。
现代文：徒单克宁被授予平章政事，封为密国公。
English: Tutankhaten was awarded the title of "Pyeongjang Seongji" and given the title of "Minister of State Security."

古文：克宁女嫁为沈王永成妃，得罪，克宁不悦，求致仕，不许，罢为东京留守。
现代文：徒单克宁的女儿嫁给渖王完颜永成做妃子，徒单克宁不高兴，请求退休，没被批准，罢职为东京留守。
English: Tutankhamun's daughter was married to the king of Kush and became a concubine. Tutankhamun was not happy. He asked to retire, but was not allowed to do so. He resigned and stayed in Tokyo.

古文：明年，上将复相克宁，改南京留守，兼河南统军使。
现代文：第二年，皇帝金世宗想恢复他的官职，改任他为南京留守，兼河南统军使。
English: The following year, Emperor Jin Shizong wanted to restore him to his official position, so he was reassigned to stay in Nanjing and serve as the Henan Unification Envoy.

古文：遣使者谕之曰： 统军使未尝以留守兼之，此朕意也。
现代文：皇帝派使者告诉他 ：统军使未曾用留守兼职的，这是朕的意思。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to tell him, "The envoy of the United Front has never stayed part-time. This is what I mean."

古文：可过京师入见。 
现代文：经过京城时你可入朝拜见。 
English: When you pass through the capital, you can pay homage to the emperor.

古文：克宁至京师，复拜平章政事，授世袭不紥土河猛安兼亲管谋克。
现代文：徒单克宁到京城，又授予为平章政事，并授世袭不扎土河猛安兼亲管谋克。
English: He went to Beijing and was awarded the title of Pingzang Zhengji, as well as the hereditary title of Zhuozhe Mengyuan. He was also in charge of political affairs.

古文：世宗欲以制书亲授克宁，主者不知上意，及克宁已受制，上谓克宁曰： 此制朕欲亲授与卿，误授之于外也。 
现代文：金世宗皇帝想用制书亲自授给徒单克宁，主持此事的人不了解皇帝的意思，等到徒单克宁接受了命令，皇帝金世宗对徒单克宁说： 此命令朕想亲自授给你，不想被外人授给你。 
English: Emperor Jin Shizong wanted to use the book-making to personally give it to Tutankhamun. The person who presided over the matter did not understand the emperor's meaning. When Tutankhamun accepted the order, Emperor Jin Shizong said to Tutankhamun: I want to give this order to you personally, I do not want to be given to you by outsiders.

古文：又曰： 朕欲尽徙卿宗族在山东者居之近地，卿族多，官田少，无以尽给之。 
现代文：金世宗又说： 朕想把你在山东的宗族迁到距京城近的地方居住，你宗族人多，公田少，他们不能全部到这里。 
English: Jin Shizong also said, "I want to relocate your clan in Shandong to a place close to the capital. There are many people from your clan, but few public lands. They can't all come here.

古文：乃选其最亲者徙之。
现代文：于是挑选他最亲的人迁居。
English: So he chose his closest relatives to move in with him.

古文：十九年，拜右丞相，徙封谭国公。
现代文：大定十九年，徒单克宁被授予右丞相，升封谭国公。
English: In the 19th year of Dading, Tuchan Kening was awarded the title of Minister of the Right and promoted to Tan Guogong.

古文：克宁辞曰： 臣无功，不明国家大事，更内外重任，当自愧。
现代文：徒单克宁推辞说 ：臣没有功劳，不清楚国家大事，更是内外受重用，很惭愧。
English: Tutankhaten declined, saying, "I am ashamed to say that I am a minister who has no merit, who does not know the important matters of the state, and, moreover, who is highly regarded both at home and abroad."

古文：乞归田里，以尽余年。 
现代文：臣乞求回归田园故乡，以享晚年。 
English: The vassal begged to return to his rural hometown to enjoy his old age.

古文：上曰： 朕念众人之功无出卿右者，卿慎重得大臣体，毋复多让。 
现代文：皇帝金世宗说： 朕考虑众人的功劳没有比你大的，你慎重能为大臣着想，不要再多谦让。 
English: Emperor Kim Sejong said, "I consider that the merit of all people is no greater than yours. You should carefully think about what you can do for the minister, and do not be too humble.

古文：克宁出朝，上使徒单怀忠谕之曰： 凡人醉时醒时处事不同，卿今日亲宾庆会，可一饮，过今日可勿饮也。 
现代文：徒单克宁离开朝廷，皇帝金世宗派徒单怀忠告诉他说： 凡人醉时和醒时处事不相同，你今天亲临庆祝宴会，可以饮酒，过了今天可不要再饮酒了。 
English: After Tutankhamun left the imperial court, Emperor Tutankhamen told him, "Everyman's behavior is different when he is drunk and when he is awake. If you come to celebrate the banquet today, you can drink alcohol. After today, you can stop drinking alcohol."

古文：克宁顿首谢曰： 陛下念臣及此，臣之福也。 
现代文：徒单克宁叩头致谢说 ：陛下这样为臣着想，这是臣的福气。 
English: Tutankhamun bowed his head in gratitude and said, "Your Majesty, it is your good fortune to think of your subjects in this way.

古文：克宁为相，持正守大体，至于簿书期会，不屑屑然也。
现代文：徒单克宁任丞相，坚持正守大体，至于簿书期会，不屑一顾。
English: Tochan Kening was appointed as chancellor, insisting on the general observance of the law. As for the book-writing session, he disdained it.

古文：世宗尝曰： 习显在枢密，未尝有过举。 
现代文：世宗皇帝曾经说 ：徒单习显在枢密职上，不曾有过荐举。 
English: Emperor Sejong once said, "Only a single disciple can appear in a privy position, and there has never been a recommendation."

古文：谓克宁曰： 宰相之职，进贤为上。 
现代文：他对徒单克宁说： 宰相的职责，荐举贤能是上策。 
English: He said to Tutankhamun: "It is the prime minister's duty to recommend and promote talent.

古文：克宁谢曰： 臣愚幸得备位宰辅，但不能明于知人，以此为恨耳。 
现代文：徒单克宁谢罪说 ：臣愚笨有幸为宰辅，却不能明察了解人，因此常悔恨。 
English: Tutchankenning Xie Sin said: "Vice Minister Gukong was fortunate to be a vice-premier, but he could not see and understand people, so he often regretted it.

古文：二十一年，左丞相守道为尚书令，克宁为左丞相，徙封定国公，恳求致仕。
现代文：大定二十一年，左丞相完颜守道为尚书令，徒单克宁为左丞相，迁封定国公，他恳求退休。
English: In the twenty-first year of the Taisho era, when Kanen Shodo, the chancellor of the left, became Shosho Rei, and Tochan Kening, the chancellor of the left, became Kokuo, he begged to retire.

古文：上曰： 上相坐而论道，不惟其官惟其人，岂可屡改易之邪？ 
现代文：金世宗皇帝说 ：你立功立事，才登上相位，朝廷需要你，你年龄虽到了，但不能离去。 
English: Emperor Kim Sejong said, "You can only ascend to the throne if you perform meritorious deeds. The imperial court needs you. Although you are old, you cannot leave."

古文：顷之，克宁改枢密使，而难其代。
现代文：三天后，徒单克宁与完颜守道上奏，都跪下请求说 ：我们牙齿脱落，头发发白，幸求陛下赐给我们晚年。 
English: Three days later, both Tutankhamun and Guanyin knelt down and begged: "Our teeth are falling out, our hair is turning white. I hope and pray that Your Majesty will grant us a long life."

古文：复以守道为左丞相，虚尚书令位者数年，其重如此。
现代文：金世宗皇帝说 ：皇帝丞相坐下讨论道理，不图他的官职只图人，岂可多次改变？ 
English: Emperor Kim Sejong said, "The emperor and the prime minister should sit down and discuss the truth. He does not seek his official position, he only seeks people. How can he change his position so many times?"

古文：未几，以司徒兼枢密使。
现代文：不久，徒单克宁改任枢密使，而很难去上任。
English: Soon after, Tutankhaten was made a Privy Counsellor, a difficult post to hold.

古文：二十二年，诏赐今名。
现代文：又任完颜守道为左丞相。大定二十二年，金世宗皇帝下诏赐徒单习显名为徒单克宁。
English: In the 22nd year of the Taisho era, Emperor Kim Il-sung issued an edict giving the title of Tochan Kenin to Tochan Shosei.

古文：二十三年，克宁复以年老为请。
现代文：大定二十三年，徒单克宁再次因年老而求退休。
English: In the 23rd year of Dading, Tu Shan Kening once again asked for retirement due to old age.

古文：上曰： 卿昔在政府，勤劳夙夜，除卿枢密使亦可以优逸矣。
现代文：金世宗皇帝说 ：你昔日在政府，整夜操劳，任你为枢密使也可以悠闲安逸了。
English: Emperor Kim Sejong said, "You used to work all night in the government, but now you can relax as a privy councilor.

古文：朕念旧臣无几人，万一边隅有警，选将帅，授方略，山川险要，兵道军谋，舍卿谁可与共者？
现代文：朕想旧臣没有几人，万一边疆有警报，选举将帅，授谋略，山川险要如何用兵，舍你谁可以与之讨论？
English: I think that there are not many old ministers. If there is an alarm in one side of the country, the election will be the general, the strategy will be given, and the mountain and river risks will be how to use the soldiers. Who can discuss with you?

古文：勉为朕留！ 
现代文：尽力为我留下！ 
English: Do your best to stay for me!

古文：克宁乃不敢复言。
现代文：徒单克宁于是不敢再说退休。
English: So I don't dare to say "retirement" any more.

古文：二十四年，世宗幸上京，皇太子守国，诏左丞相守道与克宁俱留中都辅太子。
现代文：大定二十四年，金世宗皇帝前往上京，皇太子守京城，诏令左丞相完颜守道与徒单克宁都留在中都辅助太子。
English: In the 24th year of Dading, the Emperor Kim Sejong went to the capital, the crown prince guarded the capital, and the Emperor ordered the left minister, Kanyan, to guard the road and Tutan Kening to stay in the capital to assist the crown prince.

古文：上谓克宁曰： 朕巡省之后，万一有事，卿必躬亲之，毋忽细微，图难于其易可也。 
现代文：皇帝金世宗对徒单克宁说 ：朕巡省之后，万一有情况，你一定要过问，不管细微，把难的变成容易的，就可以了。 
English: Emperor Jin Shizong said to Tutankhamun, "After my inspection of the province, if there is any situation, you must inquire, no matter how small, and turn the difficult into easy.

古文：二十五年，左丞相守道赐宴北部，诏克宁行左丞相事。
现代文：大定二十五年，左丞相完颜守道被赐宴北部边区，诏令徒单克宁执行左丞相之职。
English: In the 25th year of the Dading era, the Northern Border Region was given a banquet for the Left Chancellor, Guanyinshu Dao, and he was ordered to perform the duties of the Left Chancellor.

古文：是时，世宗自上京还，次天平山清暑，皇太子薨于京师，诸王妃主入宫吊哭，奴婢从入者多，颇喧杂不严。
现代文：此时，金世宗皇帝从上京返朝，临时驻在天平山避暑，皇太子死于京城，诸王妃都进宫哭悼，奴婢跟的很多，喧嚣嘈杂。
English: At this time, Emperor Kim Sejong returned to Korea from Beijing, temporarily residing in Mount Tianping for the summer, the crown prince died in Beijing, all the princesses went to the palace to mourn, there were many slaves and servants, and the noise was noisy.

古文：克宁遣出之，身护宫门，严饬殿廷宫门禁卫如法，然后听宗室外戚入临，从者有数。
现代文：徒单克宁赶出了他们，亲自在宫门把守，严厉按制度整顿殿廷宫门门卫，然后，让宗室外戚进去凭悼，跟从的人有限制。
English: Tutankhamun drove them out, personally guarded the palace gate, strictly reorganized the palace gate guards according to the system, and then allowed the relatives outside the palace to enter in mourning, with restrictions on those who followed.

古文：谓东宫官属曰： 主上巡幸，未还宫阙，太子不幸至于大故，汝等此时能以死报国乎？
现代文：徒单克宁对东宫的官吏说 ：皇上前去巡视，没回宫中，太子不幸死了，你们此时能以死报国吗？
English: Tutankhaten said to the officials of the East Palace, "The emperor went to inspect, but did not return to the palace. Unfortunately, the prince died. At this time, can you claim the country by death?"

古文：吾亦不敢爱吾生也。 
现代文：我也不敢爱惜我的生命。 
English: I dare not spare my life.

古文：辞色俱厉，闻者肃然敬惮。
现代文：言辞脸色都严厉，听的人都肃然敬畏。
English: The words are harsh, the faces are stern, and the listeners are awestruck.

古文：章宗时为金源郡王，哀毁过甚，克宁谏曰： 哭泣，常礼也。
现代文：章宗当时为金源郡王，悲哀过度，徒单克宁劝谏说： 哭，是常礼。
English: At that time, Zhang Zong was the King of Jinyuan County. He was overwhelmed with grief. He tried to dissuade her, saying, "It is customary to cry.

古文：郡王身居冢嗣，岂以常礼而忘宗社之重乎？ 
现代文：郡王你身居冢嗣，难道因为常礼而忘了宗族社稷之重任吗？ 
English: County king, you are the heir to the throne. Have you forgotten the heavy responsibility of being the head of the clan because of your frequent etiquette?

古文：召太子侍读完颜匡曰： 尔侍太子日久，亲臣也。
现代文：徒单克宁召唤太子侍读完颜匡说 ：你侍候太子很长时间，是亲臣。
English: After Yan Kuang finished reading, he said: "You have been waiting for the prince for a long time, you are a relative.

古文：郡王哀毁过甚，尔当固谏。
现代文：郡王悲哀过度，你应当坚决劝谏。
English: The county king is too sad, you should strongly advise him.

古文：谨视郡王，勿去左右。 
现代文：谨慎看待郡王，不要离开他身边。 
English: Take a cautious view of the county king and do not leave his side.

古文：世宗在天平山，皇太子讣至，哀恸者屡矣。
现代文：金世宗皇帝在天平山，皇太子讣告至，他十分悲哀。
English: He was very sad when the crown prince announced the death of Emperor Kim Il-sung on the Tianping Mountain.

古文：闻克宁严饬宫卫，谨护皇孙，嘉其忠诚而愈重之。
现代文：金世宗听说徒单克宁严厉整顿宫廷警卫，谨慎保护皇孙，表扬他的忠诚且更加看重他。
English: Kim Sejong heard that Tutankhamun severely rectified the palace guards, carefully protected the grandson, praised his loyalty and valued him more.

古文：九月，世宗还京师。
现代文：九月，金世宗回到京城。
English: In September, Kim Sejong returned to the capital.

古文：十一月，克宁表请立金源郡王为皇太孙，以系天下之望。
现代文：十一月，徒单克宁上表请求立金源郡王为皇太孙，以安天下人的愿望。
English: In November, he went to the table to request that the King of Jinyuan County be made the Emperor's great-grandson, in accordance with the wishes of the people of the world.

古文：缓之则起觊觎之心，来谗佞之言。谗佞之言起，虽欲无疑得乎？兹事深可畏、大可慎，而不畏不慎，岂惟储位久虚，而骨肉之祸，自此始矣。
现代文：其奏表大略说 ：现在宣孝皇太子埋葬已完毕，东宫无人住居，这是社稷安危的大事，陛下明圣超过以往，难道没有觉察这件事，此事贵在果断，不可以延缓。延缓此事就会起觊觎之心，流传谗言。此事很可怕，大大需要慎重，东宫的位子不能空虚，否则骨肉相残的祸患，从此就会开始。
English: His report card said roughly: Now that the burial of Crown Prince Xuan Xiao has been completed, there is no one living in the East Palace. This is a serious matter of social safety and security. Your Majesty is more enlightened than ever. Did you not notice this matter? This matter is decisive and cannot be delayed. Delaying this matter will cause heartache and rumor. This matter is terrible and requires great caution. The seat of the East Palace cannot be empty, otherwise the scourge of flesh and blood will begin.

古文：臣愚不避危身之罪，伏愿亟立嫡孙金源郡王为皇太孙，以释天下之惑，塞觊觎之端，绝构祸之萌，则宗庙获安，臣民蒙福。
现代文：臣不避危害自身的罪状，惟愿皇上赶快立嫡孙金源郡王为皇太孙，以解除天下的迷惑，堵塞觊觎的苗头，断绝构成祸患的萌发，那么宗庙就会获得安定，臣民就会有福。
English: The vassal does not shy away from the crime of endangering himself. I wish the emperor would quickly appoint his legitimate grandson, King Jinyuan County, as the grandchild of the emperor, so as to remove the confusion of the world, block the seedling of the chrysalis, and cut off the germination of the disaster. Then the ancestral temple will be stable, and the subjects will be blessed.

古文：臣备位宰相，不敢不尽言，惟陛下裁察。 
现代文：臣为宰相，不敢不尽言，惟陛下裁决明察。 
English: As a vassal of the Prime Minister, I dare not say too much, but His Majesty's decision is clear.

古文：逾月，有诏起复皇孙金源郡王判大兴尹，封原王。
现代文：一个月后，诏令起用皇孙金源郡王章宗为判大兴尹，封为原王。
English: A month later, the imperial edict appointed the emperor's grandson, King Zhangzong of Jinyuan County, as the Grand Prince Xingyin and named him the original king.

古文：世宗诸子中赵王永中最长，其母张玄征女，玄征子汝弼为尚书左丞。
现代文：世宗皇帝诸子中赵王完颜永中最大，其母是张玄征的女儿，张玄征的儿子张汝弼为尚书左丞。
English: Among the sons of Emperor Sejong, Zhao Wangan Yan Yong was the eldest. His mother was the daughter of Zhang Xuanzheng, and Zhang Xuanzheng's son, Zhang Ruxuan, was Shangshu Zuorong.

古文：二十六年，世宗出汝弼为广宁尹。
现代文：大定二十六年，世宗皇帝调张汝弼离开朝廷前去任广宁尹。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of Dading, Emperor Shizong transferred Zhang Ruxuan from the imperial court to Guangningyin.

古文：于是，左丞相守道致仕，遂以克宁为太尉，兼左丞相，原王为右丞相，因使克宁辅导之。
现代文：在这时，左丞相完颜守道退休，于是用徒单克宁为太尉，兼左丞相，原王章宗为右丞相，让徒单克宁辅导他。
English: At this time, when Yan Shouda retired from the Left Chancellery, he used Tutan Kening as the first lieutenant and also as the Left Chancellery, and the former Wang Zhangzong as the Right Chancellery, and let Tutan Kening advise him.

古文：原王为丞相方四日，世宗问之曰： 汝治事几日矣？ 
现代文：原王章宗任丞相刚四天，世宗皇帝问他说 ：你治理政事几天了？ 
English: It had been just four days since the former King Zhangzong was appointed prime minister, when Emperor Shizong asked him, "How many days have you been in charge of government affairs?"

古文：对曰： 四日。 
现代文：原王回答说 ：四天。 
English: The former king replied: "Four days."

古文： 京尹与省事同乎？ 
现代文：世宗皇帝又问 ：京尹与省事相同吗？ 
English: Emperor Sejong also asked: Is the capital Yin the same as the provincial capital?

古文：对曰： 不同。 
现代文：原王回答说 ：不同。 
English: The former king replied, "It's different."

古文：上笑曰： 京尹浩穰，尚书省总大体，所以不同也。 
现代文：皇帝世宗笑着说 ：京尹广大兴盛，尚书省统领大事，所以不同。 
English: Emperor Shizong smiled and said, "Beijing and Yin are prosperous, Shangshu and Shandong are in charge of major events, so they are different.

古文：数日，复谓原王曰： 宫中有四方地图，汝可观之，知远近厄塞也。 
现代文：几天后，皇帝又对原王说 ：宫中有四方的地图，你可以看看，了解边疆远近及要塞地方。 
English: A few days later, the emperor said to the former king, "There is a four-sided map in the palace. You can look at it and learn about the far and near borders and fortresses.

古文：世宗与宰相论钱币，上曰： 中外皆患钱少，今京师积钱止五百万贯，除屯兵路分其他郡县钱可运至京师。 
现代文：世宗皇帝与宰相讨论钱的事，皇帝说： 中外都担忧钱少，现在京城积累的钱只五百万贯，除了屯兵路，其他郡县的钱可以运到京城。 
English: Emperor Sejong discussed the matter of money with the prime minister, and the emperor said: Both China and foreign countries are worried about the shortage of money. The money accumulated in Beijing is only five million yuan. Except for Tunbei Road, the money from other counties can be transported to Beijing.

古文：克宁曰： 郡县钱尽入京师，民间钱益少矣。
现代文：徒单克宁说： 郡县的钱都运到京城，民间的钱就更少了。
English: Tutan Kening said, "County and county money is all transported to Beijing, and private money is even less.

古文：若起运其半，其半变折轻赍，庶几钱货流布也。 
现代文：如果只运一半，其余一半改运物质，差不多钱和物都能流通铺开。 
English: If only half of the goods are transported, and the remaining half is used to transport materials, almost all money and goods can circulate.

古文：上嘉纳之。
现代文：皇帝高兴地接受了他的建议。
English: The Emperor approved and adopted his opinion.

古文：章宗虽封原王，为丞相，克宁犹以未正太孙之位，屡请于世宗，世宗叹曰： 克宁，社稷之臣也。 
现代文：章宗虽然被封为原王，任丞相，徒单克宁还因为他没有被立为皇太孙，屡次向世宗皇帝请求。金世宗叹说 ：徒单克宁是社稷的大臣。 
English: Although Jangjong was crowned as the original king and appointed as the prime minister, because he was not appointed as the grandson of the emperor, Tutankhamun repeatedly petitioned Emperor Sejong. Kim Sejong sighed: Tutankhamun was the minister of the shogunate.

古文：十一月戊午，宰相入见于香阁，既退，原王已出，克宁率宰臣屏左右奏立太孙，世宗许之。
现代文：大定二十六年十一月十五日，宰相入朝在香拜见，退下后，原王出来，徒单克宁率宰臣屏退左右奏立太孙，世宗皇帝允许了。
English: On November 15th, Dading 26th, the prime minister entered the court and met with the emperor in Shaba. After he withdrew, the former king came out and, with the help of Han Kening and the prime minister Ping Hui, established the great-grandson. Emperor Sejong allowed it.

古文：庚申，诏立原王右丞相为皇太孙。
现代文：十一月十七日，皇帝金世宗下诏立原王右丞相章宗为皇太孙。
English: On November 17th, the Emperor Kim Sejong decreed that the former Wang Ujong minister Zhang Zong was the emperor's great-grandson.

古文：明日，徒单公弼尚息国公主纳币，赐六品以上宴于庆和殿。
现代文：第二天，徒单公弼向息国公主下聘礼，皇帝在庆和殿赐宴六品以上官员。
English: The next day, Emperor Taizan made a betrothal gift to Princess Suiko, and the emperor gave a banquet for officials of six or more ranks at the Keiwa-den.

古文：上谓诸王大臣曰： 太尉忠实明达，汉之周勃也。 
现代文：皇帝金世宗对诸王大臣说 ：太尉忠诚明达，似汉朝的周勃。 
English: Emperor Jin Shizong said to the ministers of the kings: "Taifeng is loyal and intelligent, similar to Zhou Bo of the Han Dynasty.

古文：称叹再三。
现代文：再三称赞。
English: Praise again and again.

古文：克宁进酒，上举觞为之酹。有诏给太尉假三日。
现代文：徒单克宁进酒，皇帝举杯。下诏书给太尉三天假。
English: The emperor raised his glass and gave the captain a three-day leave.

古文：明年正月，复求解机务。
现代文：第二年正月，徒单克宁再请求退休。
English: In the first month of the second year, Tutankhaten again asked to retire.

古文：上曰： 卿遽求去邪？岂朕用卿有未尽乎？
现代文：皇帝金世宗说： 你急切要求退休，难道朕用你未尽其才？
English: Emperor Kim Sejong said, "You eagerly asked to retire. Did I not use you to the best of my ability?

古文：或因喜怒用刑赏乎？
现代文：或是因为喜怒用于刑罚和奖赏吗？
English: Or is it because emotions are used for punishment and reward?

古文：其他宰相未有能如卿者，宜勉留以辅朕。
现代文：其他宰相没有你的能力，你应该尽力留下来辅佐朕。
English: The other prime ministers don't have your ability. You should do your best to stay and help me.

古文：卿若思念乡土，可以一往，不必谢政事。
现代文：你如果思念乡土，可以回去一趟，不必辞公职。
English: If you miss your hometown, you can go back without having to resign from your job.

古文：三月一日朕之生辰，卿不必到，从容至暑月还京师相见。 
现代文：三月一日是朕的生日，你不必到朝祝贺，你从从容容到暑天再回京城相见。 
English: March 1st is my birthday. You don't have to go to the morning to congratulate me. You can take your time and come back to see me in the summer.

古文：四月，克宁还朝，入见上。
现代文：四月，徒单克宁返回京城，进朝拜见皇帝。
English: In April, Tutankhaten returned to the capital to pay homage to the emperor.

古文：上问曰： 卿往乡中，百姓皆安业否？ 
现代文：皇帝世宗问他： 你回到家乡，百姓都安居乐业吗？ 
English: Emperor Shizong asked him: When you return to your hometown, will the people be able to live and work in peace?

古文：克宁曰： 生业颇安，然初起移至彼，未能滋殖耳。 
现代文：徒单克宁说： 都很安居乐业，只是刚迁移到那里，没有更大的发展罢了。 
English: Tutankhaten said: They all live and work peacefully, but they just moved there and there is no greater development.

古文：未几，以丞相监修国史。
现代文：不久，用丞相监督修国史。
English: Soon, he used the post of chancellor to supervise the revision of national history.

古文：上问史事，奏曰： 臣闻古者人君不观史，愿陛下勿观。 
现代文：皇帝问史事，徒单克宁上奏说： 我听说古代君主不观史，希望陛下不要观。 
English: When the emperor asked about history, he said, "I heard that ancient monarchs did not watch history. I hope your majesty does not watch it."

古文：上曰： 朕岂欲观此？
现代文：皇帝说： 朕难道想观史？
English: The emperor said: Do I want to watch history?

古文：深知史事不详，故问之耳。 
现代文：朕深知史事不详尽，所以问起它。 
English: Knowing full well that history is never complete, I asked about it.

古文：初，泸沟河决久不能塞，加封安平侯，久之，水复故道。
现代文：起初，泸沟河决口很长时间不能堵上，徒单克宁加封安平侯不久，河水又流入故道。
English: At first, it took a long time to block the mouth of the Shugu River, and it was not long before the water flowed back into the old channel.

古文：上曰： 鬼神虽不可窥测，即获感应如此。 
现代文：皇帝金世宗说 ：鬼神不能窥测，只是有所感觉。 
English: Emperor Kim Sejong said, "Ghosts and gods cannot be seen, only sensed."

古文：克宁奏曰： 神之所佑者正也，人事乖，则弗享矣。报应之来皆由人事。 
现代文：徒单克宁上奏说 ：神帮助的人都是正人君子，此人如果违背了人心，就不能再享受神的辅佐，报应来源于违背人心。 皇帝说 ：你说的对。 
English: Tutankhamun said, "Those who are helped by God are all upright and respectable people. If such a person goes against the people's will, he can no longer enjoy God's assistance. Retribution comes from going against the people's will." The emperor said, "You are right."

古文：上曰： 卿言是也。 世宗颇信神仙浮图之事，故克宁及之。
现代文：世宗很信神仙佛教之事，所以徒单克宁说这些。
English: Sejong is a firm believer in the immortality of Buddhism, so he said these things without hesitation.

古文：宋前主殂，宋主遣使进遗留物，上怪其礼物薄。
现代文：宋朝前皇帝死去，宋皇帝派使者向金朝进献遗留物，皇帝金世宗责怪礼物少。
English: When the former emperor of the Song Dynasty died, Emperor Song sent an envoy to the Kim Dynasty to present the leftovers. Emperor Kim Sejong blamed the lack of gifts.

古文：克宁曰： 此非常贡，责之近于好利。 
现代文：徒单克宁说： 这不是常规的进贡，斥责他们近似好利。 
English: Tutankhamun said: This is not a regular tribute, and scolded them for being greedy.

古文：上曰： 卿言是也。 
现代文：皇帝世宗说 ：你说的对。 
English: The emperor said: Your words are right.

古文：乃以其玉器五事、玻璃器大小二十事及茶器刀剑等还之。
现代文：于是拿五件玉器、二十件大小玻璃器及茶具刀剑等返还宋朝。
English: So he took five pieces of jade, twenty pieces of large and small glassware, tea sets, swords, etc. and returned them to the Song Dynasty.

古文：二十八年十一月癸丑，上幸克宁第。
现代文：大定二十八年十一月二十二日，金世宗皇帝前去徒单克宁家。
English: On the 22nd day of November in the 28th year of Dading, Emperor Jin Shizong went to the house of Tan Kening.

古文：初，上欲以甲第赐克宁，克宁固辞，乃赐钱，因其旧居宏大之。
现代文：起初，皇帝想用好房子赐给徒单克宁，徒单克宁坚决推辞，于是赐钱把旧家改造扩大。
English: At first, the emperor wanted to use the good house to give it to Tutankhamun, but Tutankhamun firmly refused, so he gave money to renovate and expand the old house.

古文：毕工，上临幸，赐金器锦绣重彩，克宁亦有献。上饮欢甚，解御衣以衣之。
现代文：竣工后，皇帝亲临，赐给金器锦绣彩绸。皇帝饮酒饮得很高兴，脱去御衣给徒单克宁穿。
English: After the completion, the emperor came in person and gave the goldware, brocade and colored silk. The emperor was very happy to drink alcohol, and took off his imperial robe to wear it.

古文：诏画克宁像藏内府。
现代文：皇帝下诏画徒单克宁的像藏在内府。
English: The statue of Han Kening, a painter under Emperor Zhao, is hidden in Neifu.

古文：十二月乙亥，世宗不豫。
现代文：大定二十八十二月十四日，金世宗皇帝不快乐。
English: On the 14th day of the 12th month of the 28th year of the Daejeon era, Emperor Kim Sejong became unhappy.

古文：甲申，克宁率宰执入问起居。
现代文：十二月二十三日，徒单克宁率领宰执入朝问安。
English: On December 23rd, Tu Shan Kening led the marchers into the Imperial Palace to pay their respects.

古文：上曰： 朕疾殆矣。 
现代文：皇帝世宗说 ：朕的病很危险了。 
English: Emperor Shizong said, "My illness is very dangerous."

古文：谓克宁曰： 皇太孙年虽弱冠，生而明达，卿等竭力辅之。 
现代文：他对徒单克宁说 ：皇太孙年纪刚及弱冠，不过生性明达，你们要竭力辅助他。 
English: He said to Tutankhamun, "The great-grandson of the emperor is young and weak, but he has a shrewd nature. You should do your best to help him.

古文：又曰： 尚书省政务权听于皇太孙。 
现代文：又说： 尚书省的政务权且听从皇太孙的决定。 
English: He also said: Shang Shuxuan has the power of government affairs and obeys the decision of the Emperor's grandson.

古文：克宁奏曰： 陛下幸上京时，宣孝太子守国，许除六品以下官，今可权行也。 
现代文：徒单克宁启奏说： 陛下前往上京时，宣孝太子守国，允许他授予六品以下的官吏，今天也可以给皇太孙这种权力。 
English: Tutankhamun said: "When His Majesty went to Beijing, Prince Xuanxiao was in charge of the country, and he was allowed to grant officials below the sixth grade. Today, this power can also be given to the Emperor's grandson.

古文：上曰： 五品以下亦何不可。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：五品以下也没有不可以的。 
English: The emperor said, "There is nothing wrong with eating five or fewer dishes."

古文：乙酉，诏皇太孙摄行政事，注授五品以下官。
现代文：二十四日，诏令皇太孙掌管政事，可授予五品以下官吏。
English: On the 24th, the Emperor issued a decree that the Emperor's grandson would be in charge of government affairs, and that officials below the fifth grade could be awarded.

古文：诏太孙与诸王大臣俱宿禁中。
现代文：诏令皇太孙与诸王大臣都宿在禁宫中。
English: The imperial edict ordered the emperor's grandson and all the king's ministers to stay in the Forbidden Palace.

古文：克宁奏曰： 皇太孙与诸王宜别嫌疑，正名分，宿止同处，礼有未安。 
现代文：徒单克宁上奏说 ：皇太孙与诸王应该有区别，在一处住宿，不合礼仪。 
English: Tutankhamun's son-in-law said, "There should be a difference between the great-grandson of the emperor and the kings, and it is not proper etiquette to stay in the same place."

古文：诏太孙居庆和殿东庑。
现代文：诏令皇太孙住庆和殿东厢房。
English: The imperial edict ordered the great-grandson of the emperor to live in the east wing of the Qinghe Hall.

古文：丙戌，诏克宁以太尉兼尚书令，封延安郡王。
现代文：二十五日，下诏徒单克宁以太尉兼尚书令，封为延安郡王。
English: On the 25th day of the month, he was awarded the title of County King of Yan'an.

古文：平章政事襄为右丞相，右丞张汝霖为平章政事。
现代文：平章政事完颜襄为右丞相，右丞张汝霖为平章政事。
English: After the conclusion of the Taira no Shosho government, Yanjo became the right-hand minister, and the right-hand minister, Zhang Rulin, became the Taira no Shosho government.

古文：戊子，诏克宁、襄、汝霖宿于内殿。
现代文：二十七日，诏令徒单克宁、完颜襄、张汝霖在内殿住宿。
English: On the 27th day of the month, the emperor ordered Tutankhamun, Kangyan Xiang, and Zhang Rulin to stay in the inner hall.

古文：二十九年正月癸巳，世宗崩于福安殿。
现代文：大定二十九年正月初二，金世宗皇帝在福安殿死去。
English: On the second day of the first month of the 29th year of Dading, Emperor Jin Shizong died at Fu'an Palace.

古文：是日，克宁等宣遗诏，立皇太孙为皇帝，是为章宗。
现代文：这天，徒单克宁等宣读皇帝世宗的遗诏立皇太孙做皇帝，这就是金章宗。
English: On this day, Tochan Kening and others read out Emperor Shizong's last will and testament to establish the emperor's great-grandson as emperor. This is Jinzhangzong.

古文：徙封为东平郡王。
现代文：徒单克宁改封为东平郡王。
English: Tutan Kening changed his title to King of Dongping County.

古文：诏克宁朝朔望，朝日设坐殿上。
现代文：章宗皇帝诏令徒单克宁每月初一、十五朝拜，朝拜时为其在殿上设座。
English: Emperor Zhangzong ordered Tutankhaten to pay homage on the first day of the month and the fifteenth day of the month, and to set up a seat for him in the palace during the worship.

古文：克宁固辞，诏近臣勉谕。
现代文：徒单克宁坚决推辞，皇帝章宗诏令近臣告诉他。
English: Emperor Zhang Zong issued an edict to his vassal to tell him to withdraw.

古文：克宁涕泣谢曰： 怜悯老臣，幸免常朝，岂敢当坐礼。 
现代文：徒单克宁感动得流泪致谢说： 怜悯老臣，有幸免去我常常朝拜，岂敢有坐下之礼。 
English: Touched and moved to tears, Tutan Kening expressed his gratitude, saying, "I pity you, old minister. I have been fortunate enough to be able to worship regularly. How dare you have a sitting ceremony.

古文：其后，每朝必为克宁设坐，克宁侍立益敬。
现代文：其后，每次朝拜必为徒单克宁设立座位，徒单克宁更加尊敬地侍立着。
English: After that, a seat was always set up for Tutankhamun at every morning worship, and Tutankhamun stood there more respectfully.

古文：即位诏文 凡除名开落官吏并量材录用 ，张汝霖奏真盗枉法不可恕，克宁曰： 陛下初即位，行非常之典，赃吏误沾恩宥其害小，国之大信不可失也。 
现代文：章宗即皇帝位下诏文说 凡是除名开除的官吏一并要量才录用 。张汝霖上奏偷盗枉法不可饶恕，徒单克宁说： 陛下刚即皇帝位行非常之制度，贪官污吏使皇恩受害可宽恕他们的小罪过，国家的大信用不可失。 
English: Zhang Zong, i.e. the emperor, issued an imperial edict saying that all officials who had been removed from their posts and fired from their posts should be hired together. Zhang Rulin, in his speech, said that theft was unforgivable, and Tutankhaten said: His Majesty the emperor has just ascended to the throne and has implemented an extraordinary system. Corrupt officials who have offended the imperial grace may be forgiven for their minor sins, but the great trust of the country must not be lost.

古文：章宗深然之。
现代文：章宗认为他说的对。
English: Zhang Zong thinks he is right.

古文：无何，进拜太傅，兼尚书令，赐尚衣玉带。
现代文：不久，徒单克宁进升为太傅，兼尚书令，赐给尚衣玉带。
English: Not long after, Tutan Kening was promoted to Taifu, and he was also given the title of Shurei, and he also gave Shang Yuling a jade belt.

古文：乞致仕，不许。
现代文：徒单克宁请求退休，没被批准。
English: His request to retire was not approved.

古文：诏译《诸葛孔明传》赐之。
现代文：皇帝章宗诏令译《诸葛孔明传》赐给徒单克宁。
English: Emperor Zhang Zong gave the translation of "The Biography of Zhuge Kongming" to Tu Tan Kening.

古文：诏尚书省曰： 太傅年高，旬休外四日一居休，大事录之，细事不须亲也。 
现代文：皇帝诏令尚书省说： 太傅年高，除每旬休息外每四天休息一天，大事情记录下来给他看，小事情不须他亲为。 
English: The emperor's edict to Shang Shuxuan said: Tai Fu is too old, in addition to taking a break every four days, take a day off every four days, record the big things and show them to him, the small things do not need to be done by him.

古文：赐金五百两、银五千两、钱千万、重彩二百端、绢二千匹。
现代文：赐徒单克宁五百两黄金、五千两白银、千万钱，二百端彩缎、二千匹绢。
English: He gave the disciples five hundred taels of gold, five thousand taels of silver, ten thousand taels of money, two hundred taels of colored copper, and two thousand taels of horses.

古文：尚书省奏猛安谋克愿试进士者听之，上曰： 其应袭猛安谋克者学于太学可乎？ 
现代文：尚书省上奏猛安谋克愿意考进士的人听便，皇帝章宗说： 世袭猛安谋克的人在太学学习可以吗？ 
English: The Emperor Zhang Zong said: "Is it okay for those who are hereditary Meng An Moke to study at Taiyue?

古文：克宁曰： 承平日久，今之猛安谋克其材武已不及前辈，万一有警，使谁御之？
现代文：徒单克宁说 ：太平日子太久，现在的猛安谋克其才能武功不如前辈人，万一有警报，派谁去抵御？
English: Tutankhaten said: The days of peace have been too long, and the current Meng'an conspiracy is not as capable as its predecessors. In the event of an alarm, who will be sent to resist?

古文：习辞艺，忘武备，于国弗便。 
现代文：学习文章六艺，忘了武功，对国家不利。 
English: It is not good for the country to learn the six arts and forget the martial arts.

古文：上曰： 太傅言是也。 
现代文：皇帝金章宗说 ：太傅说的对。 
English: Emperor Jinzhangzong said, "Taifu is right.

古文：章宗初即位，颇好辞章，而疆埸方有事，故克宁言及之。
现代文：章宗初即皇帝位，颇好辞章，而边疆正有战事，所以徒单克宁说到这些。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Zhangzong, Zhangzong's words were quite good, but there was a war on the frontier, so Tuankening said these things.

古文：明昌二年，克宁属疾，章宗往视之。
现代文：明昌二年，徒单克宁生病，章宗前往探视。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, when Tutankhaten fell ill, Zhang Zong went to visit him.

古文：克宁顿首谢曰： 臣无似，尝蒙先帝任使，陛下即位，属以上相，今臣老病，将先犬马填沟壑，无以辅明主绥四方。
现代文：徒单克宁叩头致谢说 ：臣没有才，曾蒙先帝重用，陛下即位，授予我上相，现在臣年老有病，没有辅助好明主安抚四方百姓。
English: Tutankhamun bowed his head in gratitude and said: "I have no talent. I was once used by the previous emperor. His majesty enthroned me and gave me the title of prime minister. Now I am old and sick, and I have not been able to help my lord pacify the people in the four directions."

古文：陛下念臣驽怯，亲枉车驾临幸，死有余罪矣。 是日，即榻前拜太师，封淄王，加赐甚厚。
现代文：陛下亲自来看我，我死也有罪呀。 这天，在病榻前授予徒单克宁太师，封为淄王，赐赏很丰厚。
English: His Majesty himself came to see me, I am guilty of death. On this day, before his deathbed, he awarded Tutankhaten the Grand Master, the title of King of Kush, and the reward was very rich.

古文：是岁二月，薨，遗表，其大概言： 人君往往重君子而反疏之，轻小人而终昵之。
现代文：这年二月，徒单克宁死去，他遗留下奏章，其大意是： 人君往往重君子而后反而疏远他，轻小人而最终爱昵他。
English: In February of this year, Tutankhamun died, and he left behind a piece of music, the meaning of which is: People often respect a gentleman and then alienate him, despise a small person and eventually love him.

古文：愿陛下慎终如始，安不忘危，而言不及私。 
现代文：愿陛下始终如一，安不忘危，言不及私。 
English: May His Majesty be consistent, never forget the dangers, and never fail to keep his word.

古文：诏有司护丧事，归葬于莱州，谥曰忠烈。
现代文：皇帝下诏有司统辖徒单克宁的丧事，送回莱州安葬，谥号忠烈。
English: Emperor Zhao Yu Si presided over the funeral of the disciple Shan Kening, and sent him back to Laizhou for burial. His posthumous name was Zhong Rong.

古文：明昌五年，配享世宗庙廷，图像衍庆宫。
现代文：明昌五年，徒单克宁配享世宗庙廷祭祀，图像挂于衍庆宫。
English: In the 5th year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, Tu Han Kening accompanied the temple and court rituals of the dynasty, and the image hangs in the Yanqing Palace.

古文：大安元年，改配享章宗庙廷。
现代文：大安元年，他改为配享章宗庙廷祭祀。
English: In the first year of the Taian era, he was assigned to the Zhangzong Temple and the Imperial Court.

