古文：十七日晨起，雨色霏霏。
现代文：十七日早晨起床，雨色霏霏。
English: On the morning of the 17th, I got up and it was raining.

古文：饭而行，泥深及膝，出门即仆向前摔倒。
现代文：饭后出发，泥浆深陷到膝盖，出门就摔倒。
English: We set out after dinner, the mud was knee-deep, and we fell over on our way out.

古文：北行一里，有水自东南坞来，西向注峡而去，石桥跨之。为绿生桥。
现代文：往北走一里，有河水从东南边的山坞中流来，向西边的峡谷中流去，一座石桥横跨在河上，叫绿生桥。
English: One mile to the north, there is a river flowing from the docks in the southeast to the canyon in the west. A stone bridge spans the river, called the Green Bridge.

古文：过桥，行坞中一里，北上坡。
现代文：过桥后，在坞中走了一里，往北上坡。
English: After crossing the bridge, I walked a mile in the docks, heading north uphill.

古文：遵坡行八里，东山始北断成峡，水自峡中西出，有寨当峡而峙，不知何名。
现代文：顺着坡走八里，东边的山才从北面断开，形成峡谷，河水从峡谷中向西流出，有村寨坐落在峡谷里，不知叫什么名称。
English: Walking along the slope for eight miles, the mountain on the east side was cut off from the north to form a canyon. The river flowed from the canyon to the west. There was a village in the canyon, I don't know what it was called.

古文：余从西坡北下，则峡水西流所经也。
现代文：我顺着西面的山坡往北下，就是峡谷水流向西经过的地方。
English: I followed the western slope of the mountain to the north, where the canyon water flowed westward.

古文：坡下亦有茅舍数家，为往来居停之所，是曰大河口。
现代文：坡下也有好几间茅草屋，是来往行人停留休息的场所，这里叫大河口。
English: There are also several thatched cottages at the foot of the slope, which are places for pedestrians to stop and rest. This is called the large estuary.

古文：河不甚巨，而两旁沮洳特甚，有石梁跨之，与绿生同，其水势亦与绿生相似。
现代文：河流不太大，但河流两边的地特别低湿，一座石桥横跨在河流上，和绿生桥一样，水势也和绿生桥的相似。
English: The river is not very big, but the land on both sides of the river is particularly low and wet. A stone bridge spans the river, just like the Lv Sheng Bridge, and the water potential is also similar to that of the Lv Sheng Bridge.

古文：过桥北行，度坞。
现代文：过桥后往北走，穿越山坞。
English: After crossing the bridge, walk north and go through the dock.

古文：坞北复有山自东北横亘西南，一里陟其坡，循之东向行。
现代文：坞北又有一座山从东北横贯西南，走一里后上坡，顺着山坡往东走。
English: To the north of the dock, there is another mountain that runs from the northeast across the southwest. After walking one mile, walk uphill and follow the slope to the east.

古文：三里，越坡东下。
现代文：三里，翻过山坡往东下。
English: Three miles, over the hillside, heading east.

古文：坞中沮洳，有小水自北而南入大河。
现代文：坞中低洼潮湿，有条小溪从北往南流入大河。
English: The dock is low-lying and damp, with a small stream flowing from north to south into the river.

古文：溪上流有四五人索哨钱于此，因架木为小桥以渡。
现代文：小溪上游有四五个人在那里索要哨钱，因而搭根木头作为小桥让人过溪。
English: Upstream of the creek, four or five people were asking for money to pay the toll, so they built a wooden bridge to cross the creek.

古文：见余，不索哨而乞造桥之犒，余畀以二文，各交口称谢。
现代文：这几个人见到我，没有索要哨钱而索要造桥的酬劳钱，我给了两文铜钱，他们众口同声地道谢。
English: When these men saw me, they didn't ask for the toll money, but for the fee for building the bridge. I gave them two pennies, and they all thanked me in unison.

古文：既渡，半里，余随车路东行，诸人哄然大呼，余还顾，则以罗平大道宜向东北，余东行为误故也。
现代文：过桥后走半里，我顺着车路往东走，这几个人乱哄哄地大叫，我转身询问，原来是去罗平州的大路应该向东北走，我往东走错了。
English: After crossing the bridge and walking for half a mile, I followed the road to the east. These few people shouted in confusion. I turned around to inquire. It turned out that the main road to Lopingzhou should go to the northeast, and I went to the east by mistake.

古文：亟还从东北半里，复上坡东行，于是皆荒坡遥陇，夙雾远迷，重茅四塞。
现代文：我急忙返回来往东北走半里，又上坡朝东走，从这里起都是荒坡遥陇，晨雾从远方弥漫过来，重重的茅草遍布四周。
English: I hurried back and walked half a mile to the northeast, and then walked uphill to the east. From here on, it was all barren slopes, the morning mist coming from far away, and heavy thatch all around.

古文：十五里，东逾冈，始望见东北冈上有寨一屯，其前即环山成洼，中有盘壑，水绕其底而成田塍，四顾皆高，不知水从所出。
现代文：走了十五里，往东翻越山冈，才看到东北冈上有个村寨，村寨前是山环围而形成的洼地，洼地中间有盘壑，溪水流绕过洼地底部而形成土埂，洼地四周都是高地，不知道水从哪里流出去。
English: After walking for fifteen miles and climbing over the mountains to the east, I saw a village on the northeast ridge. In front of the village was a depression formed by the surrounding mountains. In the middle of the depression, there was a mound. The stream flowed around the bottom of the depression and formed a mound. The depression was surrounded by highlands. I don't know where the water flowed out from.

古文：从冈东下一里，越坞中细流。
现代文：顺着山冈往东下一里，越过坞中的细流。
English: Follow the mountain range to the east for one mile, crossing the small stream in the dock.

古文：其坞与流，皆自南而北，即东通盘壑者。
现代文：这道山坞和细流，都是从南往北走向，和东边的盘壑是相通的。
English: Both the dock and the stream run from south to north, and are connected to the anchorage on the east.

古文：又东上一里，循壑之南脊行，与所望北冈之寨正隔坞相对矣。
现代文：又往东上一里，顺着盘壑南面的山脊走，和所看到的北冈村寨正好隔坞相对了。
English: Another mile to the east, along the ridge on the south side of the anchor, and the Kitaoka village that I saw was just opposite the anchorage.

古文：又逾东冈稍下一里，则盘壑之东，有峡穿陇中而至，其峡自东南大山破壁而至者。
现代文：又翻越东冈，逐渐往下走一里，是盘壑的东面，有道峡谷是从土陇中穿过来，这道峡谷从东南大山破壁而来。
English: I climbed over Donggang again, and gradually walked down for one mile. It was the east side of the mound, and there was a canyon coming through the mound. This canyon came from the southeastern mountains.

古文：峡两崖皆亘壁，其上或中剖而成峡，或上覆而成梁，一坞之中，倏断倏续，水亦自东南流穿盘壑，但壑中不知何泄。
现代文：峡谷两边的山崖都是连绵的峭壁，壁上有时从中间剖开而形成峡沟，有时从上面覆盖而形成桥梁，一坞之中，峡沟时断时续，水流也从东南穿过盘壑，只是不知道怎样从盘壑中流出去。
English: The cliffs on both sides of the canyon are continuous cliffs. The walls are sometimes cut from the middle to form a canyon, sometimes covered from above to form a bridge. In the middle of the dock, the canyon is intermittent. The water flow also passes through the cocoon from the southeast, but I don't know how to flow out of the cocoon.

古文：时余从石梁而度，水流其下，不知其为梁也。
现代文：当时我从石桥上走过，水在桥下流，却不知道是桥。
English: At that time, I walked across the stone bridge, and water was flowing under the bridge, but I didn't know it was a bridge.

古文：望南北峡中水，一从梁洞出，一从梁洞入。
现代文：看到南北峡谷中的水，一股从桥洞中流出，一股流入桥洞。
English: Seeing the water in the north-south canyon, one stream flows out of the bridge hole and one stream flows into the bridge hole.

古文：乃从梁东选石踞胜，瞰峡而坐。
现代文：于是在石桥东面挑选能览胜的地方，俯瞰着峡谷而坐。
English: So I chose a place on the east side of the stone bridge with a great view and sat overlooking the canyon.

古文：睇其下，如连环夹壁，明暗不一，曲折透空，但峡峭壁削，无从下穿其穴耳。
现代文：从侧面往下看，洞穴像连环夹壁，明暗不一，曲折透空，只是峡谷陡峭，崖壁如削，无法下去钻这些洞穴。
English: Looking down from the side, the caves look like a series of walls, varying in light and dark, with twists and turns, but the canyon is steep and the cliff walls are sharp. It is impossible to go down and drill these caves.

古文：于是又东，愈冈坞相错，再上再下。
现代文：于是又往东走，更是冈坞互相交错，两上两下。
English: So I went east again, and even more so, the gondolas interlaced with each other, two up and two down.

古文：八里，盘岭再上，至是夙雾尽开，北有削崖近峙，南有崇岭遥穹。
现代文：走了八里，又盘岭而上，到这时晨雾才完全散开，北面有刀削般的石崖就近峙立，南面有崇山峻岭远远隆起。
English: After walking for eight miles, the morning mist had completely dispersed by the time I reached the top of the ridge. To the north, a knife-like rock cliff stood nearby, and to the south, there were high mountains rising far away.

古文：取道其间，横陟岭脊，始逼北崖，旋向南岭。
现代文：取道南北之间，横攀岭脊，刚走近北面的石崖，马上又转向南面的崇岭。
English: Take the road between north and south, cross-climb the ridge, just approach the stone cliff in the north, and immediately turn to the Chongling in the south.

古文：二里，复逾高脊，北转东下。
现代文：二里，又越过高高的山脊，转北后往东下山。
English: After another two miles, we crossed a high ridge, turned north and headed east down the mountain.

古文：二里，有茅当两峰峡间，前植哨竿，空而无人，是曰张飞哨，山中之最幽险处也。又东下三里，悬壑深阒ｑù沉寂无声，草木蒙密，泥泞及膝，是名偏头哨。
现代文：二里，有茅草房位于两座山峰之间的峡谷里，房前设有哨竿，但空无一人，这黑叫张飞哨，是山中最僻静、最险要的地方，又往东下三里，又高又陡的沟壑十分寂静，复盖着丛密的草木，泥浆陷到膝盖，这里名偏头哨。
English: Two miles away, there is a thatched hut in a canyon between two peaks. There is a sentry post in front of the hut, but no one is there. This is called Zhang Fei Sentinel. It is the most secluded and dangerous place in the mountains. Three miles to the east, the high and steep gully is very quiet. It is covered with thick grasses. Mud sinks to the knees. This is called the partial whistle.

古文：哨不见居庐，路口止有一人，悬刀植枪而索钱，余不之与而过。
现代文：偏头哨看不到有住房，只是在路口有一个人，挎刀拄枪地索要钱，我没有给钱就过去了。
English: I couldn't see any houses from my vantage point, but there was a man at the junction who demanded money with a scythe. I didn't give him any money and walked past.

古文：此哨之南即南穹崇岭，罗平贼首阿吉所窟处，为中道最险，故何兵哨守焉；又名新哨，而师宗界止此矣。
现代文：哨南就是隆起在南面的崇山峻岭，罗平州土匪头子阿吉的巢穴就在这里，是途中最险要的地方，所以何天衙的军队守在这里；偏头哨又叫新哨，师宗州州界到此为止了。
English: South sentry post is a high mountain ridge rising in the south. The lair of the bandit leader of Loping Prefecture, Aji, is located here. It is the most dangerous place on the way, so the army of Tianyao guards here. The outpost is also called the new sentry post. The border of Shizong Prefecture ends here.

古文：过哨，又东上岭。岭更峻，石骨棱厉。
现代文：过了哨，又往东上岭，岭更陡，岭上的石头棱角突出。
English: After passing the sentry post, we headed east to Shangling Ridge. The ridge was steeper, and the stones on the ridge were more prominent.

古文：二里跻其巅，是为罗平、师宗之分界，亦东西二山之分界也。
现代文：走二里登上岭巅，这里是罗平州、师宗州的分界，也是东部山、西部山的分界。
English: Walk two miles to the top of the ridge. This is the border between Luoping and Shizong, as well as the border between the Eastern Mountain and the Western Mountain.

古文：岭重山复，上下六十里，险峻为迤东之冠。其山盖南自额勒度脉，分支北下，结成崇岭，北度此脊而为白腊、束龙，而东尽于河底、盘江交会处者也。
现代文：其山南起自越过额勒哨的山脉，分出一支往北延伸，聚结为崇山峻岭，再往北越过这座山脊，为白腊山和束龙山；然后往东延伸到河底河、盘江交汇之处结束。
English: Its mountains start in the south from the mountains that pass over the Erle Sentinel, branch out and extend to the north, coalesce into a high mountain range, and then pass over the ridge to the north to become Mount Pailashan and Mount Sokuryongshan; and then extend to the east to the confluence of the Hedi River and Pan River.

古文：从岭上东向平行，其间多坠壑成穽ｊǐｎｇ同 阱 ，小者为眢井即枯井，大者为盘洼，皆丛木其中，密不可窥，而峰头亦多树多石，不若师宗皆土山茅脊也。
现代文：从岭上向东平行，途中有很多坠壑形成的弈，小的是普井，大的是盘洼，其中都长满了草丛树木，因草木稠密而不能窥探，并且峰头上也是树多石多，不像师宗州都是土山和茅草脊。
English: Running parallel to the east from the ridge, there are many crags along the way. The small ones are pits and the large ones are depressions. All of them are covered with clumps of grass and trees, which cannot be seen due to the dense vegetation, and there are also many trees and rocks on the peak. Unlike Shizongzhou, they are all dirt hills and thatched ridges.

古文：平行岭上五里，路左有场，宿火树间，是为中火铺，乃罗平、师宗适中之地。
现代文：在岭上平走五里，路的左边有块平地，住宿做饭处在树林中，这里叫中火铺，正好位于罗平州、师宗州之间。
English: It is a five-mile flat walk on the ridge. There is a flat land on the left side of the road. The accommodation and cooking place is in the woods. It is called Zhonghuabu. It is located between Luoping Prefecture and Shizhong Prefecture.

古文：当午，有土人担具携炊，卖饭于此，而既过时辄去，余不及矣，乃冷餐所携饭。
现代文：到中午时，有当地人肩挑手提炊具到这里卖饭，但时辰一过就离去，我没有赶上，于是吃自己携带的冷饭。
English: At noon, a local man came to sell rice with a cooking utensil on his shoulder, but he left as soon as the hour passed. I didn't catch up, so I ate the cold rice I had brought with me.

古文：又东一里，渐下。
现代文：又往东走一里，逐渐下山。
English: Walk another mile east and gradually descend.

古文：又一里，南向下丛中。
现代文：又一里，往南下到草丛中。
English: Another mile, down south into the scrub.

古文：其路在箐石间，泥泞弥甚。
现代文：道路在警沟石间，泥泞得更加厉害。
English: The road between the stones of the police ditch was even more muddy.

古文：一里，遂架木为栈，嵌石隙中，非悬崖沿壁，而或断或续，每每平铺当道，想其下皆石孔眢井，故用木补填之也。
现代文：一里，就有架木头修成的栈道，嵌在石缝中，而不是悬空山崖、攀缘峭壁，因而时断时续，常常平铺在路上，想来栈道下面都是石孔、普井，所以用木头来填补道路。
English: One mile, there is a boardwalk made of wood, embedded in the stone cracks, rather than hanging cliffs, climbing cliffs, so from time to time, often paved on the road, if you want to come to the bottom of the boardwalk, there are stone holes and wells, so use wood to fill the road.

古文：又东下一里，始出峡口。
现代文：又往东下一里，才出到峡口。
English: Another mile to the east and you reach the mouth of the gorge.

古文：回顾四壑，崇岭高恳，皆丛箐密翳，中有人声，想有彝人之居，而外不能见。
现代文：回头看西边的沟壑，崇山峻岭悬在空中，全都复盖着丛丛密密的竹林，其中有人声，想来有彝人的房屋，但外面看不见。
English: Looking back at the western gully, the lofty mountains hang in the air, all covered with dense bamboo groves, among which there are human voices, houses with human voices, but they can't be seen outside.

古文：东眺则南界山冈平亘，北界则崇峰屏立，相持而东。
现代文：往东眺望则南部山冈平缓，北部高山耸立如屏，互相对峙着向东延伸。
English: Looking to the east, the mountains and hills in the south are flat, while the high mountains in the north tower like a screen, facing each other and extending to the east.

古文：于是循北坡东行。
现代文：从这里顺着北坡往东走。
English: From here, walk east along the north slope.

古文：三里，复北上坡，直抵北界峰腰，缘之。
现代文：三里，又往北上坡，直达北部峰腰，顺着峰腰走。
English: Three miles, and then north uphill, straight to the northern peak waist, walk along the peak waist.

古文：三里，峰尽东下，有坞纵横，一坞从北峡来，一坞从东峡来，一坞从西峡来，一坞向东南去。
现代文：三里，走完山峰往东下，有丛横交错的山坞，一道从北峡伸过来，一道从东峡过来，一道从西峡过来，一道往东南边伸过去。
English: For three miles, after walking down the mountain peak to the east, there are clumps of interlaced docks, stretching from the North Gorge, from the East Gorge, from the West Gorge, and stretching to the southeast.

古文：时雨色复来，路复泥泞，计至罗平尚四十里，行不能及，闻此中有营房一所可宿，欲投之。
现代文：这时天又下雨，道路更加泥泞，估计到罗平州还有四十里，走不到了，听说此处有一所营房能够住宿，想去投宿。
English: At this time, it was raining again, and the roads were even muddier. It was estimated that there were still forty miles to go to Luoping Prefecture, but I couldn't make it. I heard that there was a barracks here where I could stay, and I wanted to stay there.

古文：四顾茫无所见，只从大道北转入峡，遂缘峡东小岭而上。
现代文：环顾四周，雨雾茫茫，一无所见，只好顺着大路往北转入峡谷，然后顺着峡谷东面的小岭往上走。
English: Looking around, the rain and fog were so thick that I couldn't see anything, so I had to follow the main road north into the canyon, and then follow the ridge on the east side of the canyon.

古文：一里，忽遇五六人持矛挟刃而至，顾余曰： 行不及州矣。 
现代文：一里，忽然遇到五六个手持长矛大刀的人走过来，他们看着我说： 走不到罗平州了。 
English: One mile, I suddenly encountered five or six men with spears and large swords. They looked at me and said, "We can't go to Lopin State."

古文：予问： 营房何在？ 曰： 已过。 
现代文：我问道： 营房在什么地方？  他们说： 已经过了。 
English: I asked: Where is the barracks? They said: It's over.

古文： 可宿乎？ 
现代文：我又问： 可以住宿吗？ 
English: I also asked: Can I stay in Cozumel?

古文：曰： 可。 
现代文：他们说： 可以。 
English: A: Yes.

古文：遂挟余还。
现代文：于是就带着我往回走。
English: So they took me back.

古文：盖此辈即营兵。乃送地方巡官过岭而返者。
现代文：原来他们就是军营的士兵，才送地方巡查官员过岭回来。
English: They turned out to be soldiers from the military camp, who had just sent local patrol officers back across the ridge.

古文：仍一里，下山抵坞中，乃向东坞入。
现代文：仍旧走一里，下山来到坞中，于是向东走进山坞。
English: He still walked one mile, down the mountain to the dock, and then walked east into the dock.

古文：半里，抵小峰之下，南向攀峰而上，峻滑不可着足。
现代文：半里，到达一座小峰之下，向南往上攀登，路又陡又滑，难以落脚。
English: After half a mile, we reached the bottom of a small peak and climbed southward. The road was steep and slippery, and it was difficult to land.

古文：半里登其巅，则营房在焉。
现代文：攀登半里到达峰顶，营房就在顶上。
English: After climbing half a mile to the peak, the barracks are at the top.

古文：营中茅舍如蜗，上漏下湿，人畜杂处。
现代文：营中的茅草屋像蜗牛壳一样，上漏下湿，人畜混杂居住。
English: The thatched huts in the camp are like snail shells, wet from top to bottom, inhabited by a mixture of people and animals.

古文：虽营房卑隘，犹胜彝居十倍也。 
现代文：那几个士兵还沾沾自喜地对我说： 您是贵人，假如没遇上我们，而前面无处投宿，又怎么办呢？
English: The soldiers also said to me smugly: You are an honorable man. What if you don't meet us and there is no place to stay ahead?

古文：彝谓黑、白彝与儸儸。
现代文：营房虽然低矮狭窄，还是此彝人家强十倍。 
English: Although the barracks are low and narrow, they are still ten times stronger.

古文：余颔之。
现代文：我点头同意。
English: I nodded in agreement.

古文：索水炊粥。
现代文：找水煮粥。
English: Look for boiled porridge.

古文：峰头水甚艰，以一掬濯足而已。
现代文：峰顶上用水很艰难，用一捧水洗洗脚而已。
English: It's very difficult to use water on the peak. You just have to wash your feet with a bucket of water.

古文：十八日平明，雨色霏霏。
现代文：十八日天亮时，雨色霏霏。
English: At dawn on the 18th, the rain turned to sleet.

古文：余谓： 自初一漾田晴后，半月无雨。
现代文：我说： 从初一在漾田时天晴后，半个月无雨。
English: I said: From the first day of the new year in Putian, after the weather was fine, there was no rain for half a month.

古文：恰中秋之夕，在万寿寺，狂风酿雨，当复有半月之阴。 
现代文：恰好中秋之夜，在万寿寺时，狂风酿成雨，应当又有半个月的阴天了。 
English: On the night of the Mid-Autumn Festival, when I was at Wanzhou Temple, a strong wind brought rain. It was supposed to be cloudy for another half month.

古文：营兵曰： 不然。
现代文：军营士兵说： 不是这样。
English: The soldiers at the barracks said, "That's not true.

古文：予罗平自月初即雨，并无一日之晴。
现代文：我们罗平州从月初就下雨，至今没晴过一天。
English: It's been raining since the beginning of the month in Luoping, and we haven't had a single day of sunshine.

古文：盖与师宗隔一山，而山之西今始雨，山之东雨已久甚。
现代文：因为和师宗州隔一座山，山西边至今才下雨，山东边已经下了很久。
English: Because there is a mountain separating it from Shizhongzhou, it has only rained on the west side of Shanxi so far, but it has been raining for a long time on the east side of Shanxi.

古文：乃此地之常，非偶然也。 余不信。
现代文：这是此地的常情，并非偶然。 我不相信。
English: It's the norm here, it's not a coincidence, I don't believe it.

古文：泞滑更甚于昨，而浓雾充塞，较昨亦更甚。
现代文：吃过饭下山。路比昨天更烂、更滑，而且浓雾迷漫，也比昨天更厉害。
English: After eating, I went down the mountain. The road was worse and more slippery than yesterday, and the fog was thicker and more severe than yesterday.

古文：一里，抵昨所入坞中，东北上一里，过昨所返辕处。
现代文：一里，来到昨天所进入的坞中，往东北上一里，经过昨天折转往回走的地方。
English: One mile to the dock we entered yesterday, one mile to the northeast, past where we turned around yesterday and headed back.

古文：又一里，逾山之冈，于是或东或北，盘旋岭上。
现代文：又一里，越过山冈，从这里便时而向东，时而向北，在岭上盘旋。
English: Another mile, over the hill, and from here they circled the ridge, now to the east, now to the north.

古文：八里稍下，有泉一缕，出路左石穴中。
现代文：走了八里逐渐往下，有一缕泉水，从路左边的石洞中流出。
English: After walking eight miles and gradually descending, there was a stream of spring water flowing out of a stone cave on the left side of the road.

古文：其石高四尺，形如虎头，下层若舌之吐，而上有一孔如喉，水从喉中溢出，垂石端而下坠。
现代文：这块岩石四尺高，形状像虎头，岩石下层像老虎吐出的舌头，而上面有一个喉咙般的圆孔，泉水从喉孔中溢出，流到石端后往下淌。
English: The rock is four feet high and shaped like a tiger's head. The bottom of the rock is shaped like a tiger's tongue, while the top has a round hole like a throat. Spring water overflows from the throat hole, flows to the end of the rock and then flows down.

古文：喉孔圆而平，仅容一拳，尽臂探之，大小如一，亦石穴之最奇者。
现代文：喉孔圆而平整，只能容进一拳，整支手臂探进去，前后大小一致，真是最奇异的石洞。
English: The larynx is round and flat, it can only hold one punch, the whole arm can be put in, the front and back are the same size, it's really the most bizarre stone cave.

古文：余时右足为污泥所染，以足向舌下就下坠水濯之。
现代文：当时我右脚沾染了污泥，我就把脚伸到下面，就着淌下来的泉水洗脚。
English: At that time, my right foot was stained with sludge, so I put my foot down and washed it with the spring water that was running down.

古文：行未几，右足忽痛不止。
现代文：走了没多远，右脚忽然疼痛不止。
English: I hadn't gone far when my right foot suddenly started to ache.

古文：余思其故而不得，曰： 此灵泉而以濯足，山灵罪我矣。
现代文：我思考痛因而不得其解，便说： 这是灵泉却用来洗脚，山灵惩罚我了。
English: I thought about the pain and couldn't figure it out, so I said: This is a spiritual spring, but it's used to wash feet. The mountain spirit is punishing me.

古文：请以佛氏忏法解之。
现代文：请允许我用佛教的忏法解脱惩罚。
English: Please allow me to use the Buddhist confession method to get rid of the punishment.

古文：如果神之所为，祈十步内痛止。 及十步而痛忽止。
现代文：如果真是神灵所作所为，祈求十步以内止住疼痛。 走到第十步时疼痛忽然止住。
English: If it is really the work of the spirit, pray for the pain to stop within ten steps, and when you reach the tenth step, the pain suddenly stops.

古文：余行山中，不喜语怪，此事余所亲验而识之者，不敢自讳以没山灵也。
现代文：我在山中行走，不喜欢谈论神怪，这是我亲身体验和见识的事，不敢因自己忌讳而埋没山神显灵。
English: When I walk in the mountains, I don't like to talk about gods and monsters. This is something I have experienced and seen firsthand. I don't dare to bury the manifestation of mountain gods because of my taboo.

古文：从此渐东下，五里抵一盘壑中，有小水自北而南，四围山如环堵，此中洼之底也，岂南流亦透穴而去者耶？
现代文：从这里逐渐朝东下山，走五里来到一片盘壑中，有条小河从北向南流，四周的山如同墙壁环绕，这是中洼地的底部，难道往南的流水也是钻洞而去吗？
English: From here, I gradually went down the mountain to the east, walked five miles and came to a plateau. There was a small river flowing from north to south, surrounded by mountains like walls. This was the bottom of the depression. Was the water flowing south also drilled out?

古文：又上东冈，二里逾冈。
现代文：又攀登东边的山冈，二里越过山冈。
English: He also climbed the hill to the east and crossed the hill for two miles.

古文：又东下一里，行坞中者三里，有小水自西北向东南，至是始遇明流之涧，有小桥跨之。
现代文：再往东下一里，在坞中走三里，有条小溪从西北流向东南，到这里才遇到露出地表的涧水，一座小桥横跨在上面。
English: A mile further east, three miles into the dock, there is a stream flowing from northwest to southeast, and only here do you encounter surface water, with a small bridge across it.

古文：既度，涧从东南去，路复东上冈。
现代文：过了桥，洞水向东南淌去，道路仍然往东上冈。
English: After crossing the bridge, the cave water flowed to the southeast, and the road still went up the hill to the east.

古文：三里，逾冈之东，始见东坞大辟，自南而北。
现代文：三里，翻到山冈东面，方才看到的东边山坞十分开阔，从南到北走向。
English: Three miles away, to the east of the mountain, the east side of the dock that I just saw is very open, from south to north.

古文：横排于两界缺处，而犹远不睹罗平城，近莫见兴哆啰也。兴哆啰即在山下，以岭峻不能下瞰耳。
现代文：山坞东部是陡峭森然的远峰，并列着耸立在东南方；西部则是巍峨的崇山峻岭，屏风般地屹立在西北方。
English: To the east of the dockyard, there are steep and distant peaks, which stand side by side in the southeast; to the west, there are towering mountains, which stand like a screen in the northwest.

古文：又东，稍下者二里，峻下者一里，遂抵坞中，则兴哆罗茅舍数间，倚西山东麓焉。
现代文：东北部还有一座山，横列在东西部之间的空缺处，可是远处仍然看不到罗平州城，近处看不见兴哆锣寨。又往东走，缓缓一了二里陡陡地下了一里，于是抵达坞中，兴哆锣的数间茅草房就傍靠在西山东麓。
English: There is also a mountain in the northeast, lying horizontally in the gap between the east and west, but you still can't see the city of Luoping in the distance, and you can't see the village of Xinglu in the vicinity. Then you go east and slowly descend a mile or two, and then you arrive at the dock, and the several thatched houses of Xinglu are adjacent to the eastern foot of the West Mountain.

古文：从此遂转而北行坞中。
现代文：从这里转朝北顺山坞行走。
English: From here, turn north and walk along Shun Mountain Dock.

古文：其坞西傍白蜡，东瞻罗庄，南去甚遥，则罗庄自西界老脊分枝而东环处也。
现代文：山坞西靠白蜡山，东望罗庄山，南边延伸很远，是罗庄山从西部分出的支脉向东环绕之处。
English: To the west of the dock is Mount Baiwax, to the east is Mount Luozhuang, and the south side extends far away. It is the place where the branch of Mount Luozhuang extends from the west to the east.

古文：坞中时有土冈自西界东走，又有石峰自东界西突。
现代文：坞中时常有土冈从西向东伸去，还有石峰从东部向西突起。
English: In the docks, there are often earth mounds extending from west to east, as well as rock pinnacles protruding from east to west.

古文：路依西界北行，遥望东界遥峰下，峭峰离立，分行竞颖，复见粤西面目。
现代文：道路顺着西边往北走，遥望东边远峰之下，峻峭的山峰分开耸立，排列成行，脱颖争异，又呈现出广西的风貌。
English: Walking north along the west side of the road, looking far below the distant peaks on the east side, the steep peaks stand apart, line up in rows, stand out, and show the style of Guangxi.

古文：盖此丛立之峰，西南始于此，东北尽于道州，磅礡数千里，为西南奇胜，而此又其西南之极云。
现代文：大致这一类丛林般耸立的山峰，西南从这里开始出现，东北到道州结束，气势磅礴地分布在数千里之内，是西南地区的奇妙景观，而这里又是这胜景的西南极边了。
English: Generally speaking, this kind of jungle-like towering mountain peaks, the southwest begins to appear from here, the northeast ends in Daozhou, and it is magnificently distributed within thousands of miles. It is a wonderful landscape in the southwest region, and here is the southwest extreme of this spectacle.

古文：过兴哆啰北，一重土冈东走，即有一重小水随之。
现代文：经过兴哆呷后往北走，上冈向东延伸一层，就有一条小河随冈东流。
English: After passing through Xingyao and heading north, the upper hill extends one layer to the east, and there is a small river flowing east along the hill.

古文：想土冈之东，有溪北注，以受此诸水。
现代文：想来土冈东边，有向北流的河川，以便接纳这一道道的小河水。
English: If you want to come to the eastern side of the hill, there are rivers flowing to the north, in order to receive this small river water.

古文：数涉水逾冈，北五里，望西山高处有寨，聚居颇众，此儸儸寨也。
现代文：数次渡过小河、翻越土冈，往北走五里，看到西山高处有村寨，聚居的人家较多，是锣锣村寨。
English: After crossing a small river several times and climbing over a hillock, I walked five miles to the north and saw a village high up in the western mountains. There were a lot of people living there, and it was a reed village.

古文：又北二里，有池在东冈之下，又北二里，有池在西冈之下，皆冈坞环转，中洼而成者。
现代文：又往北走二里，东边冈下有池塘，再往北走二里，西边冈下也有池塘，都是冈坞环转，中洼而成的。
English: Walk another two miles to the north, and there is a pond at the east side of the hill. Walk another two miles to the north, and there is also a pond at the west side of the hill. They are all around the hill, and are formed by depressions.

古文：又北三里，有水成溪，自西而东向注，甚急，一石粱跨之，是为鲁彝桥，桥下水东南数里入穴中。
现代文：再往北走三里，有水形成溪流，从西向东流去，流速很急，一座石桥横跨溪流上，这是鲁彝桥，桥下的水向东南流淌数里后进入洞穴。
English: Another three miles to the north, there is water forming a stream, flowing from west to east, the flow speed is very fast, a stone bridge across the stream, this is the Lushan Bridge, the water under the bridge flows southeast for several miles and then enters the cave.

古文：越桥北，始有夹路之居。
现代文：过鲁彝桥后往北，路两边才有居家住户。
English: After crossing the Luzhu Bridge to the north, there are only households on both sides of the road.

古文：又北半里，有水自西而东注，其水不及鲁彝之半，即从上流分来，亦东里余而灭，亦一石梁跨之。
现代文：又往北走半里，有条小河从西向东流，水量不到鲁彝河的一半，是从鲁彝河上游分流过来的，也是向东流一里多就不见了，也有一座石桥横跨河流上。
English: Another half-mile to the north, there is a small river flowing from west to east, with less than half the water volume of the Lulu River. It is diverted from the upper reaches of the Lulu River, and it also flows more than a mile to the east and disappears. There is also a stone bridge across the river.

古文：二水同出于西门外白蜡山麓龙潭中，分流城东南而各坠地穴，亦一奇也。
现代文：两条河都出自罗平州城西门外白蜡山麓的龙潭中，分别流经州城东南后又各自坠入地穴，也是一处奇观。
English: Both rivers originate from the Longtan Lake at the foot of the White Wax Mountain outside the west gate of Luoping Prefecture. They flow through the southeast of the prefecture and then fall into the hole, which is also a wonder.

古文：桥之南，始有盈禾之塍。
现代文：石桥南面，开始有了种满庄稼的田地。
English: To the south of the stone bridge, fields full of crops are beginning to grow.

古文：又北半里，入罗平南门。
现代文：又往北走半里，从罗平州城南门进城。
English: Walk another half-mile north and enter the city from the South Gate of Luoping City.

古文：半里，转东，一里，出东门，停憩于杨店。
现代文：半里，向东转，一里从东门出城，在杨店住宿。
English: Half a mile, turn east, one mile from the east gate out of the city, stay in Yangdian.

古文：是日为东门之市。
现代文：这一天是东门的赶集日。
English: This day is the East Gate's collection day.

古文：既至而日影中露，市犹未散，因饭于肆，观于市。
现代文：我到时太阳正当空，集市还没散，于是在店中吃饭，到集市上看看。
English: When I arrived, the sun was just about to set and the market had not yet dispersed, so I ate in a shop and went to the market to have a look.

古文：市新榛子、薰鸡葼还杨店，而雨濛濛复至。
现代文：买了新棒子、薰鸡萝回到杨店，而蒙蒙细雨又下了起来。
English: I bought a new stick and a pickled radish and went back to the Yang store, and it started to drizzle again.

古文：时有杨婿姜渭滨者，荆州人，赘此三载矣，颇读书，知青乌术，询以盘江曲折，能随口而对，似有可据者。
现代文：当时杨店主人有个叫姜渭滨的女婿，是荆州人，上门到杨店三年了，读书较多，懂相地术，问他盘江曲折流向的情况，能随口回答，似乎言之有据。
English: At that time, the owner of Yangdian had a son-in-law named Jiang Qibin, who was from Jingzhou. He had been coming to Yangdian for three years. He read a lot and understood geomancy. When asked about the tortuous flow of the Panjiang River, he was able to answer casually, which seemed to be well-founded.

古文：先是余过南门桥，有老者巾服而踞桥坐，见余过，拉之俱坐。
现代文：在前我过南门桥时，有位戴儒巾穿儒服的老人盘坐在桥上，见我过桥，拉我和他一道坐下。
English: When I crossed the South Gate Bridge before, there was an old man wearing a Confucian scarf and a Confucian robe sitting on the bridge. He saw me crossing the bridge and pulled me to sit down with him.

古文：予知其为土人，因讯以盘江，彼茫然也。
现代文：我知道他是当地人后，便讯问盘江的情况，他茫然无所知。
English: After I knew he was a local, I asked him about the situation in Panjiang. He was clueless.

古文：彼又执一人代讯，其人谓由澂江返天上，可笑也。
现代文：他又拉住一个人代我询间，那个人说流到激江后返回天上，真可笑。
English: He also got hold of someone to ask on my behalf, and that person said that it was ridiculous that it would flow into the river and then return to the sky.

古文：渭滨言： 盘江南自广西府流东北师宗界，入罗平之东南隅罗庄山外，抵八达彝寨会江底河，经巴泽、河格、巴吉、兴龙、那贡，至坝楼为坝楼江，遂东南下田州。
现代文：姜渭滨说： 盘江从南边的广西府向东北流入师宗州界，流到罗平州东南边的罗庄山之外，在八达彝寨与江底河汇合，然后流经巴泽、河格、巴吉、兴龙、那贡，流到坝楼时被称为坝楼江，于是往东南流到田州。
English: Jiang Yibin said: The Pan River flows from the southern Guangxi Prefecture to the northeast into the Shizhong State boundary, flows to the southeast of Luozhuang Mountain in Luoping State, merges with the Jiangdi River in Badajozhai, and then flows through Baze, Hege, Badji, Xinglong, and Nagong. When it flows to Damlou, it is called Damlou River, and then flows southeast to Tianzhou.

古文：不北至黄土坝，亦不至普安州。 
现代文：盘江不往北流到黄土坝，也没流到普安州。 
English: The Pan River does not flow north to the Loess Dam, nor does it flow to Pu'an Prefecture.

古文：第坝楼诸处与普安界亦相交错，是南盘亦经普安之东南界，特未尝与东北之北盘合耳。
现代文：但是坝楼江流经的各个地方和普安州界互相交错，这说明南盘江也流经了普安州的东南边，只是未曾和东北边的北盘江汇合。
English: However, the Ba Lou River flows through various places and intersects with the border of Pu'an Prefecture. This shows that the Nanpan River also flows through the southeastern part of Pu'an Prefecture, but has not yet merged with the Beipan River in the northeast.

古文：罗平在曲靖府东南二百余里，旧名罗雄，亦土州也。
现代文：罗平州在曲靖府东南二百余里处，原名罗雄州，也是土司领地。
English: Luoping Prefecture is located more than 200 miles southeast of Qujing Prefecture. It was formerly known as Luoxiong Prefecture and is also a Tusi territory.

古文：万历十三年，土酋者继荣作乱，都御史刘世曾奉命征讨，临元道文作率万人由师宗进，夹攻平之，改为罗平。
现代文：万历十三年，本地首领者继荣作乱，都御史刘世曾奉命征讨，临元道的文作率领一万军队从师宗州进攻，两面夹攻平定了叛乱，改名为罗平州。
English: In the 13th year of Wanli, the local leader Sui Rong made a disturbance. The governor of the capital, Liu Shizeng, was ordered to investigate. Lin Yuandao's Wenku led 10,000 troops to attack from Shizongzhou. The two-pronged attack quelled the rebellion and changed the name to Luopingzhou.

古文：明年，继荣目把董仲文等复叛，羁知州何倓。
现代文：第二年，者继荣手下的土目、把事董仲文等人又发动叛乱，拘押了罗平州知州何佚。
English: In the second year, those who followed Rong's subordinates, such as Tsuchimoku, and the person in charge of the situation, Dong Zhongwen, launched another rebellion, and detained He Yao from Chizhou, Luoping Prefecture.

古文：文作以计出之，复率兵由师宗进，讨平之。
现代文：文作用计让何佚逃出，又率领军队从师宗州进攻，讨伐平定了叛乱。
English: Wen played a role in letting He Jun escape, and also led the army to attack from Shizongzhou, and the crusade quelled the rebellion.

古文：今逐为迤东要地。
现代文：现今罗平州已成为滇东的要地。
English: Nowadays, Luoping Prefecture has become an important place in Shandong.

古文：罗平州城西倚白蜡山下，东南六十里为罗庄山，东北四十里为束龙山。
现代文：罗平州城西靠白蜡山脚，东南六十处里是罗庄山，东北四十里处是束龙山。
English: The west of Luoping City is at the foot of Mount Baiwax, 60 miles to the southeast is Mount Luozhuang, and 40 miles to the northeast is Mount Shuo Long.

古文：有水自白蜡麓龙潭出，名鲁彝河，东环城，南出鲁彝桥，而东入地穴。
现代文：有水从白蜡山麓龙潭中流出，名鲁彝河，河水向东绕城流过，转向南流出鲁彝桥，然后往东注入地穴。
English: Water flows out of Longtan at the foot of the White Wax Mountains, known as the Lulun River. The river flows east around the city, turns south to flow out of Lulun Bridge, and then flows east into the hole.

古文：其北有分流小水亦如之。
现代文：鲁彝桥北面有分流的小河，也同样注入地穴。
English: On the north side of the Luzhu Bridge, there is a small river that is diverted, and it is also injected into the hole.

古文：此内界之水也。
现代文：这是州界内的河流。
English: It's a river within the state.

古文：其西有蛇场河，自州西南环州东北，抵江底河，俱在白蜡、束龙二山外。
现代文：罗平州西部有蛇场河，从州西南绕流到州东北，流抵江底河，所流经的地方都在白蜡山、束龙山以外。
English: In the western part of Luoping Prefecture, there is the Snake Farm River, which flows from the southwest of the prefecture to the northeast of the prefecture, reaching the bottom of the river. The places it flows through are all outside of Baiwax Mountain and Shuanglong Mountain.

古文：其东南有盘江，自师宗东北入境，东南抵八达，俱在罗庄山外。
现代文：州东南有盘江，从师宗州向东北流入州境，往东南流到八达彝寨，所流经的地方都在罗庄山外。
English: There is the Pan River in the southeast of the state. It flows from Shizongzhou to the northeast into the state border, and flows southeast to Badajozhai. The places it flows through are all outside Luozhuang Mountain.

古文：阿吉儸儸，在州西南七十里偏头南大山下。二寇不时劫掠，民不能居。
现代文：州城的西门、南门，因为盗贼首领官霸、阿吉二寇不时地前来抢劫、掠夺，百姓不能安居。
English: The West Gate and the South Gate of the state capital, because the thief leaders, the official oppressors, and the Agi two robbers came from time to time to rob and plunder, the people could not live in peace.

古文：白蜡山，在城西南十余里，顶高十余里，其麓即在西门外二里。
现代文：白蜡山在罗平州城西南十余里处，山顶高达十余里，山脚则在州城西门外二里处，山上有尖峰。
English: Mount Baiwaxan is more than ten miles southwest of the city of Luoping, the summit is more than ten miles high, and the foot of the mountain is two miles outside the west gate of the city of Luoping. There are sharp peaks on the mountain.

古文：上有尖峰，南自偏头寨，北抵州西北，为磨盘山过脉，而东又起为束龙山者也。
现代文：白蜡山南起自偏头哨，往北延伸到州城西北，为磨盘山的过脉；向东延伸又耸立为束龙山。
English: Mount Baiwax rises in the south from Yangtou Sentinel and extends northward to the northwest of Suzhou City. It is the overflow of Mount Grinding Wheel; it extends eastward and rises as a cluster of dragon mountains.

古文：此山虽晴霁之极，亦有白云一缕，横亘其腰如带围，为州中一景。
现代文：白蜡山即使在最晴朗的时候，也有一缕白云，像腰带般地横贯山腰，这是州中的一处美景。
English: Even on the clearest days, Mount Shirawase has a streak of white clouds that stretches like a girdle across the mountainside. This is one of the most beautiful views in the state.

古文：束龙山，在城东北四十里。
现代文：束龙山在州城东北四十里处。
English: Sokryong Mountain is located 40 miles northeast of Suzhou.

古文：者继荣叛时，结营其上为巢窟，官兵攻围久之，内溃而破。
现代文：者继荣反叛时，在山上安营扎寨，据为巢穴，官兵围攻了很长时间，因内部瓦解后才攻破。
English: When the rebels rebelled in Jirong, they camped on the mountain and used it as a lair. The officers and soldiers besieged it for a long time, and only broke through after it collapsed internally.

古文：今其上尚有二隘门。
现代文：至今山上还有两道关隘门。
English: To this day, there are still two pass gates on the mountain.

古文：罗庄山，在城东南六十里。
现代文：罗庄山在罗平州城东南六十里处。
English: Luo Zhuang Mountain is 60 miles southeast of Luoping City.

古文：其山参差森列，下多卓锥拔笋之岫，粤西石山之发轫开始也。
现代文：其山参差不齐、森林般地耸列，山下有很多如同锥尖卓立、竹笋拔地而起的小石峰，是广西石山风貌的起始。
English: Its mountains are jagged and forest-like, and there are many small stone peaks at the bottom of the mountain that stand out like cones and bamboo shoots, which is the beginning of the stone mountain style in Guangxi.

古文：罗平州东至广南八达界二百里，西南至师宗州偏头哨六十里，南至师宗州乌鲁河界八十五里，西南至陆凉蛇场河界一百里，西北至旧越州界发郎九十里，北至亦佐县桃源界一百二十里，东北至亦佐县、黄草坝二百里。
现代文：罗平州东面距离广南府八达彝寨界二百里，西南方距离师宗州偏头哨六十里，南面距离师宗州乌鲁河界八十五里，西南方距离陆凉州蛇场河界一百里，西北方距离旧越州界的发郎九十里，北面距离亦佐县桃源界一百二十里，东北方距离亦佐县、黄草坝二百里。
English: The east side of Luoping Prefecture is 200 miles away from the Badajozhai boundary of Guangnan Prefecture, the southwest side is 60 miles away from the Shizongzhou Yangtze River outpost, the south side is 85 miles away from the Shizongzhou Ulu River boundary, the southwest side is 100 miles away from the Liangzhou Snake Farm River boundary, the northwest side is 90 miles away from the old Yuezhou boundary, the north side is 120 miles away from the Taoyuan boundary of Yisa County, and the northeast side is 200 miles away from Yisa County and Huangcao Dam.

古文：罗平州正西与滇省对，正东与广西思恩府对，正北与平彝卫对，正南与广西府永安哨对。
现代文：罗平州正西方和云南省城相对，正东方和广西省思恩府相对，正北方和平彝卫相对，正南方和广西府永安哨相对。
English: Luoping Prefecture is directly opposite the city of Yunnan Province in the west, opposite the Shine Prefecture in Guangxi Province in the east, opposite the Peace Guard in the north, and opposite the Yongan Sentinel in Guangxi Province in the south.

古文：十九日坐雨逆旅，阅《广西府志》。
现代文：十九日因为下雨而不能出游，在旅店中阅读《广西府志》。
English: On the 19th, unable to travel because of the rain, he read the "Guangxi Prefectural History" in a hotel.

古文：下午，有伍、左、李三生来拜。
现代文：下午有姓伍、姓左、姓李的三人来拜访。
English: In the afternoon, three people surnamed Wu, Zuo and Li came to visit.

古文：二十日雨阻逆旅。
现代文：二十日被雨阻拦，不能出游。
English: On the 20th, it was blocked by rain, so I couldn't go out.

古文：二十一日亦雨阻逆旅。
现代文：二十一日还是被雨阻拦，不能出游。
English: On the twenty-first day, it was still blocked by rain, so I couldn't go out.

古文：二十二日早犹雨霏霏，将午乃霁。
现代文：二十二日早上仍然是淫雨霏霏的天气，将近中午才晴开。
English: On the morning of the 22nd, the weather was still rainy and gloomy, and it didn't clear up until nearly noon.

古文：浣濯污衣，且补纫之。
现代文：洗脏衣服，又缝补衣服。
English: Washing dirty clothes and mending clothes.

古文：下午入东门，仍出南门，登门外二桥，观鲁彝河。
现代文：下午从州城东门进城，仍旧从南门出城，去南门外的两座桥上，观看鲁彝河。
English: In the afternoon, I entered the city from the east gate of the state capital, and still left the city from the south gate. I went to the two bridges outside the south gate to watch the Luling River.

古文：询之土人，始知其西出白蜡山麓龙潭，仍东入地穴者也。
现代文：询问当地人，才知道鲁彝河发源于西边的白蜡山麓龙潭，并且往东流入地穴。
English: After asking the locals, I learned that the Lulun River originates in Longtan, the foot of the White Wax Mountains in the west, and flows into a sinkhole in the east.

古文：还入南门，上城行，抵西门。
现代文：返回城时进入南门，从城墙上走，抵达西门。
English: When returning to the city, enter the south gate, walk along the city wall and arrive at the west gate.

古文：望白蜡山麓，相去仅三里，外有土冈一层；回之，鲁彝发源，即从其麓透穴而西出者也。
现代文：眺望白蜡山麓，相距仅有三里，山麓外有一层土冈围着，鲁彝河的上源，就是从白蜡山麓穿过洞穴，然后从西边流出来。
English: Looking out over the foot of the White Wax Mountains, only three miles apart, with a layer of earth mounds surrounding the foot of the mountains, the upper source of the Lulu River is from the foot of the White Wax Mountains through the cave, and then flows out from the west.

古文：稍北，即东转经北门。
现代文：稍微向北，就往东转经过北门。
English: Head slightly north, then turn east and go through the north gate.

古文：其西北则磨盘山峙焉，为州城来脉。
现代文：北门西北边有磨盘山屹立，磨盘山是从州城过来的山脉。
English: On the northwest side of the north gate, there is the Mill Hill, which is a mountain range coming from the state capital.

古文：城东北隅汇水一塘，其下始有禾畦，即东门接壤矣。
现代文：城东北隅汇聚着一塘水，水塘下面才有稻田，稻田就与城东门接壤。
English: A pond of water gathers in the northeast corner of the city, and only rice paddies can be found below the pond. The rice paddies border the east gate of the city.

古文：其城乃东西长而南北狭者也。
现代文：州城的地形是东西长而南北狭窄。
English: The topography of the state capital is long from east to west and narrow from north to south.

古文：二十三日晨起，阴云四布。
现代文：二十三日早晨起床，阴云遍布四方。
English: On the morning of the 23rd, I woke up to dark clouds in all directions.

古文：饭而后行。
现代文：饭后启程。
English: After dinner, it's time to leave.

古文：其街从北去，居民颇盛。
现代文：其街道向北伸去，居民很多。
English: Its streets stretch to the north, and there are many residents.

古文：一里，出北隘门，有岐直北过岭者，为发郎道，其岭即自西界磨盘山转而东行者。板桥大道，从岭南东转东北向行。
现代文：一里，走出北关门，有岔道直直往北越过山岭，是去发郎的路，其岭起自西部磨盘山，然后转向东延伸；去板桥的大路，从岭南往东。
English: One mile out of the north gate, there is a narrow road straight to the north across the mountains. It is the road to Falao, whose ridge extends from the west of the mill hill and then turns to the east; the road to Banqiao, from the south of the ridge to the east.

古文：十里，有村在北山之下，曰发近德。
现代文：转朝东北走十里，有村寨坐落在北面山下，名发近德。
English: Turn to the northeast and walk for ten miles. There is a village at the foot of the mountain to the north. It is famous for its proximity to Germany.

古文：其处南开大坞，西南即白蜡，东南即大堡营山。
现代文：这里南面敞开大坞，西南是白蜡山，东南是大堡营山。
English: In the south, there is a large dock, in the south-west there is the Baiwax Mountain, and in the south-east there is the Dabaoying Mountain.

古文：大堡营之南，一支西转，卓起一峰，特立于是村之南，为正案。
现代文：大堡营山南部，一支山脉朝西转，突起一座峰，奇特地耸立在村庄南面，是正中间的案山。
English: In the southern part of the Dabaoying Mountain, a mountain range turns westward, protruding a peak, which rises strangely in the south of the village, and is the middle of the mountain.

古文：其南则石峰参差遥列，即昨兴哆啰所望东南界山也。
现代文：其南有石峰参差不齐地遥遥耸列，是以前过兴哆哆时所看到的东南部之山。
English: To the south, jagged stone peaks rise far and wide. This is the mountain in the southeast that I saw when I was in Xingyao.

古文：又东，屡有小水南去，渡之。
现代文：又往东走，多次遇到向南流的小河，渡过这些小河。
English: Going east again, I repeatedly encountered small rivers flowing southward and crossed these small rivers.

古文：东五里，有石峰突兀当关。
现代文：往东走五里，有座高高的石峰耸立在关口。
English: Five miles to the east, a high stone peak rises at the pass.

古文：北界即磨盘东转之山，南界即大堡山诸石峰，相凑成峡，而石峰当其中，若蹲虎然。
现代文：北部是磨盘山转东延伸的山脉，南部是大堡营山诸多的石峰，南北会合形成峡谷，而石峰矗立其中，如同猛虎蹲着一般。
English: In the north are the mountains stretching east from Mount Grinding Wheel, and in the south are the many stone peaks of Mount Taihuying. The north and south meet to form a canyon, and the stone peaks stand in the middle, like a tiger crouching.

古文：由其东南腋行，南界石山森森成队南去，而路渐东北上。
现代文：顺着石峰东南侧行走，南部石山高耸，成行成队地向南伸去，而道路逐渐向东北上。
English: Walking along the southeast side of the stone peak, the southern stone mountain is towering, stretching southward in a line, while the road gradually rises to the northeast.

古文：五里出当关峰之东，其东垂有石特立，上有斜骞向旁斜出高高伸展之势，是曰金鸡山，所谓 金鸡独立 也。
现代文：走五里出到当关石峰东面，其东边有石头奇特地耸立着，石头上部呈现出斜斜的腾飞之势，这是金鸡山，就是所说的 金鸡独立 。
English: Go five miles out to the east of Danggu Rock Peak. On the east side of it, there is a stone towering strangely. The upper part of the stone shows a sloping take-off. This is Jingu Mountain, which is the so-called Jingu Independence.

古文：又东一里，一洞在南小峰下，时雨阵复来，避入其中，饭。
现代文：又往东走一里，南边小峰下有一个洞，这时又下起阵雨，进洞躲雨，吃饭。
English: Another mile to the east, there is a hole under a small peak on the south side. At this time, it started to rain again. We went into the hole to shelter from the rain and eat.

古文：又东三里，东上峡脊。
现代文：又往东走三里，朝东攀登峡脊。
English: I walked another three miles to the east and climbed the ridge of the canyon.

古文：其脊即磨盘山东走脉，至此又度而南，为大堡营东山者也。
现代文：这脊是磨盘山往东走向的山脉，延伸到这里后又向南伸过去，成为大堡营东边的山。
English: This ridge is the mountain range to the east of Mount Grindstone, which extends to here and then to the south, becoming the mountain to the east of the Great Castle Camp.

古文：一里，逾脊之东，其上有岐南去，不知往何彝寨。
现代文：一里，翻越到脊东面，其上有岔路向南去，不知通到哪一个彝寨。
English: One mile, climb over to the east of the ridge, there is a fork in the road to the south, I do not know which village to go to.

古文：脊东环洼成坞，有小水北下，注东南坞中，稻禾盈塍。
现代文：脊东圆形的洼地形成山坞，有条小溪从北边流来，注入东南边的山坞中，田里种满稻禾。
English: A circular depression to the east of the ridge forms a dock. A stream flows from the north and flows into the dock to the southeast. The fields are full of rice.

古文：有数家倚北峰下，曰没奈德。
现代文：有数户人家靠在北峰下居住，地名叫没奈德。
English: A few families live just below the northern peak, in a place called Mannaide.

古文：东峰下有古殿二重，时雨势大至，趋避久之。
现代文：东边山峰下有两重古殿，这时雨势来得很猛，赶忙过去避了很久的雨。
English: There are two ancient halls under the peak on the east side of the mountain. At that time, the rain was very heavy, so I hurried to avoid the rain for a long time.

古文：乃随水下东南峡，峡逼路下，两旁山势，仍觉当人面而起。
现代文：于是随着小溪进入东南峡谷，峡谷很窄，路往下走，两旁的山势，觉得就耸立在人面前。
English: So as the stream enters the southeast canyon, the canyon is very narrow, the road goes down, and the mountains on both sides feel like they are towering in front of people.

古文：东行峡中二里，有水自峡南洞穴出，与峡水同东注。
现代文：往东在峡谷中走了二里，有股水从峡谷南面的洞穴流出，和峡中的溪水一齐向东流去。
English: After walking two miles eastward in the canyon, some water flowed out of the cave on the south side of the canyon and flowed eastward along with the stream in the canyon.

古文：又一里，有小石梁跨溪，逾之。
现代文：又走一里，有道小石桥横跨溪流，过桥。
English: After another mile, there is a small stone bridge across the stream and over the bridge.

古文：从溪南东行，一里，溪北注峡，路东逾冈。
现代文：从溪水南岸往东走，一里，溪水往北注入峡谷，道路往东翻越山冈。
English: From the south bank of the stream to the east, one mile, the stream to the north into the canyon, the road to the east over the mountains.

古文：一里余，有坞自西北来，环而南，其中田禾芃彧ｐéｎｇｙù茂盛，村落高下。
现代文：走了一里多，有山坞从西北延伸过来，绕向南，坞中土地肥沃，庄稼茂盛，村落高高低低。
English: After walking more than a mile, there is a dock extending from the northwest to the south. The land in the dock is fertile, the crops are lush, and the villages are high and low.

古文：东二里，有数十家夹路，曰山马彝，亦重山中一聚落也。
现代文：往东二里，有数十家人居住在道路两旁，名山马彝，也是重山中的一个村寨。
English: Two miles to the east, there are dozens of families living on both sides of the road, the famous mountain Matsu, is also a village in the heavy mountains.

古文：于是又东北一里，石峰高亘，逾其南坡，抵峰下。
现代文：从这里又往东北走一里，石峰高耸横贯，越过南坡，抵达石峰下。
English: From here, I walked another mile to the northeast, and the towering stone peak stretched across the southern slope, reaching the foot of the stone peak.

古文：又东南一里，有塘在山坞，五六家傍坞而栖，曰挨泽村。
现代文：又往东南走了一里，山坞中有池塘，五六家人沿着山坞居住，名挨泽村。
English: Another mile to the southeast, there is a pond in the dockyard, five or six families live along the dockyard, and the name of the village is Poze.

古文：又东北二里，为三板桥。
现代文：又往东北走二里，到三板桥。
English: Walk another two miles to the northeast to Sanbanqiao.

古文：数家踞山之冈，其桥尚在冈下。
现代文：数家人靠着山冈居住，其桥还在冈下。
English: Several families live close to the hill, and their bridge is still under the hill.

古文：时雷雨大至，遂止于冈头上寨。
现代文：这时雷雨突然来临，于是就在冈头的上寨住宿。
English: At this time, a thunderstorm suddenly came, so we stayed in the upper village of Gangtou.

古文：二十四日主人炊饭甚早，平明即行。
现代文：二十四日主人很早做好了饭，我们天刚亮就出发了。
English: On the 24th, my host prepared the meal very early, and we set off at first light.

古文：雨色霏霏，路滑殊甚。
现代文：雨色霏霏，道路特别地滑。
English: The rain was torrential and the road was extremely slippery.

古文：下坡即有小石梁，其下水亦不大，自西而东注，乃出于西北石穴，而复入东北穴中者。
现代文：下完坡后有小石桥，桥下的水流也不大，从西向东流，是从西北的石洞流出，然后又流入东北的洞中。
English: After descending the slope, there is a small stone bridge. The water flow under the bridge is not large. It flows from west to east. It flows out of the northwest stone cave and then flows into the northeast cave.

古文：其桥非板而石，而犹仍其旧名。
现代文：其桥不是木板而是石头，但仍然沿用原来的桥名。
English: Its bridge is not wooden but stone, but it still bears the original name.

古文：桥南复过一寨，乃东向行坡间。
现代文：过桥往南又经过一个村寨，于是往东从坡上行。
English: Cross the bridge to the south and pass a village, then head east up the slope.

古文：二里，有歧当峡：从东北者，乃入寨道；从直东者，为大道，从之。
现代文：二里，有岔道横在峡谷前：朝东北去的，是进村寨的路；一直朝东去的，是大路，我顺大路走。
English: For two miles, there is a paved road in front of the canyon: if you go northeast, it is the road into the village; if you go all the way east, it is the main road, and I go along the main road.

古文：直东一里，登冈上。
现代文：径直往东一里，登上山冈。
English: Go straight one mile east and climb up the mountain.

古文：其北有坞在北大山下，即寨聚所托，中有禾芃芃焉。
现代文：冈北有山坞在北部大山下，是村寨所在之处，坞中有茂盛的庄稼。
English: There is a dock in the northern part of Gangbei, under the big mountain, where the village is located. There are lush crops in the dock.

古文：冈南小石峰排立冈头，自东而西，遂与北山环峙为峡。
现代文：冈南小石峰排排立在冈头，从东往西走向，于是与北部山环形对峙，形成峡谷。
English: The row of small stone peaks in the southern part of Gangnam is located at the head of Gangnam, moving from east to west, thus forming a ring-shaped confrontation with the northern mountains, forming a canyon.

古文：入峡，东行四里，逾脊北上，半里入其坳。其北四峰环合，中有平坞，经之而北，西峰尤突兀焉。
现代文：进入峡谷，往东走四里，越过山梁朝北上，半里进入山坳•山坳北边四座山峰环连在一起，其中有平坞，穿过平坞往北走，西边的山峰特别高大。
English: Enter the canyon, walk four miles to the east, cross the mountain ridge to the north, and walk half a mile into the mountains. The four peaks on the north side of the mountains are linked together, including Ping Dock. Walk north through Ping Dock. The peaks on the west side are particularly high.

古文：北半里，又穿坳半里，复由峡中上一里，直抵北巨峰下。
现代文：往北走半里，又穿山坳半里，再从峡谷中上一里，一直抵达北边的巨峰下。
English: I walked half a mile north, then half a mile through the mountains, and then a mile up through the canyon, until I reached the foot of the giant peak on the north side.

古文：其峰耸亘危削，如屏北障。
现代文：其峰高耸横贯，陡峭如削，像座屏风堵在北面。
English: Its peak is towering across, steep as a chisel, like a screen jammed in the north.

古文：其西有坞下坠北去，其中箐深雾黑，望之杳然。
现代文：巨峰西边有深陷的山坞往北延伸，坞中著沟深、雾气浓，看上去昏暗幽远。
English: On the west side of the giant peak, there is a deeply sunken dock extending to the north. In the dock, there is a deep ditch, thick fog, and it looks dark and distant.

古文：路从峰南东转，遂与南峰凑峡甚逼。
现代文：道路顺巨峰南面朝东转，巨峰便和南边的山峰凑成很窄的峡谷。
English: The road turned east along the south side of the giant peak, and the giant peak and the peaks on the south side merged into a very narrow canyon.

古文：披隙而东半里，其东四山攒沓，峰高峡逼，丛木蒙密，亦幽险之境也。
现代文：穿越窄缝往东走半里，其东部四周群山簇拥，山峰高耸，山谷狭窄，丛林密密层层复盖，也是幽静险要的境地。
English: Half a mile to the east through a narrow gap, the eastern part is surrounded by mountains, towering peaks, narrow valleys, and dense jungle. It is also a quiet and dangerous place.

古文：遂循南峰之东，南向入坞，半里，乃东南上。
现代文：于是顺着南峰东面，往南走进山坞，半里，往东南上。
English: So I followed the eastern side of the South Peak, walked south into the dock, half a mile, and headed southeast.

古文：半里，逾冈脊而东，其东有坞东下，路从冈头南向行。
现代文：半里，越过冈脊往东走，冈东有山坞往东延伸，道路顺着冈头往南走。
English: Half a mile, cross the ridge to the east, there is a dock to the east of the ridge, and the road follows the ridge to the south.

古文：一里，复出南坳。
现代文：一里，又走出南坳。
English: One mile, and out of Nanlu.

古文：其坳东西两峰，从冈脊起，路出其侧，复东向行。
现代文：其坳东西两边的山峰，顺着冈脊耸起，路从其侧出去，又往东面走。
English: The mountain peaks on both sides of it, east and west, rise up along the ridge, and the road goes out from its side and goes east.

古文：三里，始稍降而复上。
现代文：三里，才稍稍下坡就又往上走。
English: Three miles, just a little bit downhill, then up again.

古文：于是升降曲折，多循北岭行，与南山相持成坞。
现代文：从此道路上下曲折，大多顺北岭走，北岭和南山相对成坞。
English: From here, the road zigzags up and down, mostly going along Beilingshan. Beilingshan and Nanshan are relatively docked.

古文：六里，路从坞而东。
现代文：走六里，道路顺着山坞向东走。
English: Walk six miles, the road follows the dockyard to the east.

古文：又五里，稍上逾坳，南北峡始开。
现代文：又五里，逐渐往上越过山坳，南北走向的峡谷方才开阔。
English: Another five miles, gradually up over the mountains, the north-south direction of the canyon is just beginning to open.

古文：再东盘北岭之南三里，始见路旁余薪爂灰，知为中火之地。
现代文：再往东绕着北岭南面走了三里，才看到路旁有余下的木柴和灰烬，知道是途中烧火做饭的地方。
English: Further east, he walked three miles around the southern face of the North Ridge, only to see the remaining firewood and ashes on the roadside, and knew that it was a place to cook on the way.

古文：从其东一里下峡，始得石路，迤逦南向。
现代文：从这里往东下一里到峡谷，开始有石头路，曲折连绵往南伸去。
English: From here, a mile east into the canyon, a stone path begins, winding its way south.

古文：平行下二里，俯见南坞甚沓。
现代文：平缓地朝下走了二里，低头看到南边的山坞很深。
English: I walked two miles smoothly downhill, and looked down to see that the dock on the south side was very deep.

古文：循北岭东向行一里，忽闻溪声沸然。
现代文：顺着北岭向东走一里，忽然听到沸腾的溪水声。
English: Walking one mile east along the North Ridge, I suddenly heard the sound of the boiling stream.

古文：又南下抵坞中，一溪自东而西，有石梁跨之，溪中水颇大而甚急。
现代文：又往南下，抵达坞中，一股溪水从东向西流，有石桥横跨溪匕溪中的水量颇大，水流很急。
English: Further south, arriving at the dock, a stream of water flows from east to west. There is a stone bridge across the creek, and the water volume in the creek is quite large, and the water flow is very rapid.

古文：四顾山回谷密，毫无片隙，不知东北之从何来，不知西南之从何泄，当亦是出入于窍穴中者。
现代文：环顾四周，群山环绕，峡谷密闭，丝毫没有一点缝隙，不知道溪水从东北什么地方流来，也不知道向西南什么地方流去，想来也都是从洞穴中流出、流进。
English: Looking around, surrounded by mountains, the canyon is tightly closed, there is no gap at all, I don't know where the stream water comes from in the northeast, and I don't know where it goes to in the southwest, I think it all flows out of the cave and flows in.

古文：欲候行人问之，因坐饭桥上。
现代文：想等候行人询问，因而坐在桥上吃饭。
English: He wanted to wait for pedestrians to ask questions, so he sat on the bridge to eat.

古文：久之不得过者，乃南越桥行。
现代文：很久都没有人路过，于是过桥往南走。
English: No one had passed by for a long time, so I crossed the bridge and walked south.

古文：仰见桥南有歧蹑峰直上，有大道则溯溪而东。
现代文：抬头看见桥南有小路顺着山峰直上，有大路沿溪水往东上。
English: Looking up, I saw that south of the bridge, there was a small road going straight up along the mountain peak, and there was a large road going east along the stream.

古文：时溪涨路渰，攀南峰之麓行。
现代文：时逢溪水涨得淹没了道路，便顺南峰之麓攀行。
English: Whenever the stream water rose and flooded the road, they climbed along the foot of the South Peak.

古文：念自金鸡山东上，一路所上者多，而下者无几，此溪虽流坞中，犹是山巅之水也。
现代文：回想从金鸡山开始往东上，一路上上的时候多，而下的时候几乎没有，这股溪水虽然在坞中流，仍然是山巅之水。
English: Thinking back to the time when I started going east from Mt. Jinji, I spent more time going up and less time going down. Although this stream was in the middle of the dock, it was still water from the top of the mountain.

古文：东一里，循南峰东麓，转而南。
现代文：往东一里，顺着南峰东麓走，再转向南走。
English: Go one mile east, walk along the eastern foot of the South Peak, and then turn south.

古文：隔坞东望，溪自东北峡中破崖而出，其内甚逼。
现代文：隔着山坞向东眺望，溪水从东北峡谷中破崖而出，峡内非常狭窄。
English: Looking east across the dock, the stream emerges from the cliff in the northeast canyon. The canyon is very narrow.

古文：路舍之南，半里，复循南峰南麓，转而西向入坞。
现代文：道路离开溪流往南走，半里，又顺着南峰南麓，向西转入山坞。
English: The road leaves the stream to go south, half a mile, and then follows the southern foot of the South Peak, turning west into the dock.

古文：一里，坞穷，遂西上岭。
现代文：一里，走完山坞，于是朝西上岭。
English: One mile later, after walking through the docks, I started walking west up the ridge.

古文：一里，逾岭头，始见有路自北来。
现代文：一里，翻越岭头，就看见有路从北边伸过来。
English: One mile over the ridge, I saw a road coming from the north.

古文：合并由岭上南去；此即桥南直上之岐，逾高岭而下者，较此为迳直云。
现代文：两条路合并顺着岭上往南去；仲过来的路就是桥南顺着山峰直上，又翻越高岭后下来的小路，比所走的大路直。
English: The two roads merge and go south along the ridge; the way to get there is to go straight up along the peak south of the bridge, and to go down the path after crossing the ridge, which is straighter than the main road.

古文：由岭南行，西瞰坞甚深，而箐密泉沸，亦不辨其从何流也。
现代文：顺着岭往南走，往西俯视，山坞很深，而且鲁沟密集，山泉沸腾，还是分辨不出泉水往什么地方流。
English: Walking along the ridge to the south, looking down to the west, the dock is very deep, and the gully is dense, the mountain spring is boiling, and it is still impossible to distinguish where the spring water flows.

古文：又南二里，转而东，循北岭南崖东向行，亦与南山下夹成坞，下瞰深密，与西坞同。
现代文：又往南走二里，向东转，顺着北岭南崖往东走，也和南山在山下对夹成山坞，往下看坞深沟密，和西坞相同。
English: Another two miles to the south, turn to the east, go east along the South Cliff of Beilingshan, and also make a dock with Nanshan at the bottom of the mountain. Looking down, the dock is deep and narrow, the same as the west dock.

古文：东五里，其坞渐与西坞并，始知山从东环，坞乃西下者。
现代文：往东走五里，其坞渐渐和西坞合并，才知道山从东边绕，坞则往西边伸下去。
English: After walking five miles to the east, its dock gradually merged with the west dock, only to find out that the mountain went around the east side, while the dock extended to the west.

古文：又东向逾冈，东北一里，度一脊，其脊东西度。
现代文：又往东翻越山冈，往东北走一里，翻过一道山脊，其脊东西走向。
English: Then he climbed over the mountains and hills to the east, walked one mile to the northeast, climbed over a ridge, and the ridge went east to west.

古文：从其东复上岭，一里，则岭东有坞南北辟。
现代文：顺着山脊往东又上岭，一里，则岭东有南北走向的山坞。
English: Along the ridge to the east and up the ridge, one mile, the ridge east has a north-south dock.

古文：乃北转循西山行坞上，一里，坞穷。
现代文：于是转北顺着西山从坞边走，一里，走完山坞。
English: So I turned north and walked along the West Mountain from the dock, one mile, and finished the dock.

古文：从坞北平转，逾东岭之东，共二里，有数家在路北坡间，是曰界头寨，以罗平村落东止于此也。
现代文：沿着山坞北端平转，越过东岭往东走，一共二里，有数家人居住在路北坡上，这里叫界头寨，因为罗平州所辖村落东边到这里为止。
English: Walk along the north end of the dock, cross the Dongling and walk eastward for a total of two miles. There are several families living on the north slope of the road. This is called Jie Tou Zhai, because the eastern part of the village under the jurisdiction of Luoping State ends here.

古文：又东行冈上二里，再上岭一里，逾而东，则有深峡下嵌，惟闻水声汹涌，而不见水。
现代文：又往东在冈上走了两里，再攀登山岭一里，越过山岭向东走，于是有深谷往下陷落，只听到水声汹涌，但看不到水流。
English: I walked two miles further east on the hill, then climbed a mountain ridge for one mile, crossed the mountain ridge to the east, and there was a deep valley falling down. I only heard the sound of rushing water, but I couldn't see the current.

古文：从岭上转而南行，东瞰东界山麓，石崖悬削，时突于松梢箐影中，而不知西界所行之下，其崖更耸也。
现代文：从岭上转向朝南走，往东俯瞰东部山麓，石头悬空，崖壁陡峭，不时地从松梢竹影中突显出来，却不知道所行走的西部山下，其崖壁更加高耸。
English: From the ridge, turn to the south and walk, overlooking the eastern foothills to the east, the stones are suspended, the cliffs are steep, occasionally protruding from the pines and bamboo shadows, but they do not know that the cliffs are higher in the western part of the mountain.

古文：南行一里，始沿崖南下。
现代文：往南行一里，开始沿着崖壁南下。
English: Go south for a mile and start following the cliff face south.

古文：又一里，仰见路西之峰，亦变而为穹崖峭壁，极危峻之势焉。
现代文：又走一里，抬头看见道路西边的山峰，也变成弯形的悬崖峭壁，极尽陡峻的气势。
English: After walking another mile, I looked up and saw that the mountain peak on the west side of the road had also become a curved cliff, extremely steep.

古文：从此瞰东崖之下，江流转曲，西南破壁去；隔江有茅两三点，倚崖而居。
现代文：从这里俯视东边崖壁下面，江流弯转曲折，朝西南破壁而去；江对面有两三间茅草房，背靠悬崖而坐。
English: From here, you can look down below the cliff wall on the eastern side. The river bends and twists as it breaks through the wall to the southwest. On the other side of the river, there are two or three thatched houses sitting with their backs against the cliff.

古文：乃东向拾级直下，一里，瞰江甚近，而犹未至也。
现代文：于是朝东顺着石阶一直下，一里，看江水离得很近，但仍然没有走到。
English: So he walked eastward along the stone steps all the way down, one mile, and saw that the river was very close, but he still did not get there.

古文：转而北，始见西崖矗立插天，与东崖隔江对峙。
现代文：转朝北走，才看见西部的山崖高高矗立，直插云天，和东部山崖隔江对峙。
English: Turning to the north, I saw the western cliffs towering high above the clouds, facing the eastern cliffs across the river.

古文：其崖乃上下二层，向行其上，止见上崖而不得下见，亦不得下达，故必迂而南，乃得拾级云。
现代文：西崖是上下两层，刚才在上层行走，只看得到上层崖壁而不能看见下层，也下不到江边，所以必须迂回绕向南，才得以顺着石阶走。
English: The west cliff has two levels, up and down. When I walked on the upper level just now, I could only see the upper cliff wall, but I couldn't see the lower level, and I couldn't get down to the river, so I had to take a detour to the south before I could walk along the stone steps.

古文：北经矗崖下半里，下濒江流，则破崖急涌，势若万马之奔驰，盖当暴涨时也。
现代文：往北经过矗立的西崖朝下走半里，崖下濒临江流，江水急涌破崖，水势犹如万马奔腾，大概是正值江水暴涨的季节。
English: Walking northward for half a mile down the west cliff, the cliff is on the edge of the river flow, the river rushes through the cliff, the water is like a gallop, it is probably the season of the river.

古文：其水发源于师宗西南龙扩北，合陆凉诸水为蛇场河，由龙甸及罗平旧州，乃东北至伊泽，过束龙山后，转东南抵此，即西南入峡，又二百里而会八达盘江者也。
现代文：这条江发源于师宗州西南龙扩北面，汇聚陆凉州各条河流后形成蛇场河，流经龙甸和罗平旧州，于是往东北流到伊泽，流过束龙山后，转朝东南流到这里，立即往西南流入峡谷，又流二百里后在八达彝寨汇入盘江。
English: This river originates in the southwestern part of Shizhongzhou and stretches to the north. After the rivers of Lu and Liangzhou converge, it forms the Snake Farm River. It flows through Longdian and Luoping Old Prefecture, and then flows northeast to Ize. After flowing through Shu Longshan, it flows southeast to here. It immediately flows southwest into the canyon. After flowing for another 200 miles, it flows into the Panjiang River in Badajozhai.

古文：罗平、普安以此江为界，亦遂为滇东、黔西分界焉。
现代文：罗平州、普安州以这条江为界，这条江也就成为滇东、黔西的分界线。
English: Luoping Prefecture and Pu'an Prefecture are bordered by this river, and this river has also become the dividing line between eastern and western Shaanxi.

古文：有舟在江东，频呼之，莫为出渡者。
现代文：江东岸有舟，我频频呼唤，没有一个人出来摆渡。
English: There is a boat on the east bank of the river. I frequently call out for it, but no one comes out to ferry it.

古文：薄暮雨止，始有一人出曰： 江涨难渡，须多人操舟乃可。 
现代文：夭快黑时雨停了，才有一个人出来说： 江水上涨，很难渡江，需要好几个人划船才行。 
English: It was almost dark when the rain stopped, and only then did a man come out and say: The river is rising, it is difficult to cross the river, and several people are needed to row the boat.

古文：不过乘急为索钱计耳。
现代文：这不过是乘我急于过江而勒索钱财的计谋罢了。
English: It was just a ploy to extort money from me in my haste to cross the river.

古文：又久之，始以五人划舟来，复不近涯，以一人涉水而上，索钱盈壑，乃以舟受，已昏黑矣。
现代文：又过一阵，才有五个人划着船过来，又不划到岸边，却让一个人淌水上岸，索要钱财填平欲壑后，才用船载人，天已经全黑了。
English: After a while, only five people came rowing in a boat, and did not row to the shore, but let a person run ashore, asking for money to fill their bellies, and then used the boat to carry people. The sky was already completely dark.

古文：雨复淋漓，截流东渡，登涯入旅店。
现代文：雨又下了起来，乘船横穿江流东渡，上岸后走进旅店。
English: It started to rain again. We took a boat across the Dongdu River and went ashore to the hotel.

古文：店主人他出，其妻黠而恶，见渡舟者乘急取盈，亦尤而效之，先索钱而后授餐，餐又恶而鲜，且嫚亵轻慢余，盖与诸少狎而笑余之老也。
现代文：店主人外出，他的妻子狡黯而凶恶，看到划渡船的人乘我所急索取盈利，也就加信地效仿，先索要钱，然后才给饭吃，饭菜又坏又少，而且轻慢我，和那些年青人押昵并嘲笑我年老。
English: The shopkeeper was out, his wife sly and wicked, and when she saw the rowers of the ferry-boat taking advantage of my haste to make a profit, she faithfully followed suit, first demanding money, and then giving me food, which was bad and scarce, and scorning me, and the young men teasing me and laughing at my old age.

古文：此妇奸肠毒手，必是冯文所所记地羊寨中一流人，幸余老，不为所中耳！
现代文：这妇人心术不正，手段毒辣，必定是冯文所所记载的地羊寨中的那一类人，幸亏我年老，不被她看中！
English: This woman's heart is not in the right place, her methods are poisonous, she must be the type of person in the sheepfold recorded by Feng Wen. Fortunately, I am old and she does not like me!

古文：江底寨乃儸儸；只此一家歇客，为汉人。
现代文：江底寨是锣锣寨，只有这一家旅店是汉人开的。
English: Jiangdizhai is a walled city, and this is the only hotel in Jiangdizhai that is run by Chinese.

古文：其人皆不良，如儸儸之要渡，汉妇之索客，俱南中诸彝境所无者。
现代文：这里的人都不善良，例如锣锣要挟渡江人，汉族妇女勒索旅客，都是南中地区其他少数民族聚居地所没有过的事。
English: People here are not kind. For example, a baboon tried to kidnap a man crossing the Yangtze River, and a Han woman tried to blackmail a tourist. These are things that have never happened in other ethnic minority settlements in the south-central region.

古文：其地为步雄属，乃普安十二营长官所辖也。
现代文：这地方隶属于步雄，是普安州十二营长官司的辖地。
English: This place belongs to Bu Xiong and is under the jurisdiction of the 12th battalion commander of Pu'an.

古文：土酋龙姓。
现代文：步雄的首领姓龙。
English: The leader of Bu Xiong is surnamed Long.

古文：据土人曰： 今为侬姓者所夺。 
现代文：据当地人说： 龙土司的权力现在被侬姓的夺了。 
English: According to locals: "Long Tusi's power has now been usurped by Nong Surname."

古文：步雄之界，东抵黄草坝二十里，西抵此江六十里，南抵河格为广南界一百余里，北至本司十二营界亦不下三四十里，亦平原中一小邑也。
现代文：步雄的地界，东边到黄草坝有二十里，西边到这条江边有六十里，南边到河格，为广南府界，有一百多里，北边到所属的十二营长官司边界也不会少于三四十里，也是平坝中的一个小城镇。
English: The geographical boundary of Bu Xiong is 20 miles to the east of Huang Cao Dam, 60 miles to the west of this river, more than 100 miles to the south of the river grid, which is the border of Guangnan Prefecture, and not less than 30-40 miles to the north of the border of the 12th battalion commander. It is also a small town in Pingba.

