古文：恭帝，讳宗训，世宗子也。
现代文：恭帝，讳名宗训，是世宗的儿子。
English: Emperor Gao, alias Zongxun, was the son of King Sejong.

古文：广顺三年，岁在癸丑，八月四日，生于澶州之府第。
现代文：广顺三年八月四日，生在澶州府第。
English: Guang Shun was born on August 4th in the third year of his reign in Ganzhou Prefecture.

古文：显德六年六月癸未，制授特进左卫上将军，封梁王，食邑三千户，实封五百户。
现代文：显德六年六月九日，诏令授予特进、左卫上将军，封为梁王。十九日，世宗驾崩。
English: On the 9th of June in the 6th year of Emperor Xiande's reign, a decree was issued to confer the title of "King of Liang" to the special envoy, General of the Left Division. On the 19th, King Sejong passed away.

古文：癸巳，世宗崩。甲午，内出遗制，命帝柩前即皇帝位。
现代文：二十日，公布世宗遗诏，命恭帝在灵柩前即皇帝位。
English: On the 20th, Sejong's last will and testament was announced, ordering Emperor Goryeo to be enthroned before the coffin.

古文：是日，群臣奉帝即位而退。
现代文：这天，群臣奉恭帝即位后退下。
English: On this day, the vassals withdrew after Emperor Bongyeong ascended the throne.

古文：丁酉，北面兵马都部署韩令坤奏，败契丹五百骑于霸州北。
现代文：二十三日，北面兵马都部署韩令坤上奏，在霸州以北打败契丹五百骑兵。
English: On the 23rd, the northern soldiers and horses were all deployed by Han Lingkun to defeat the 500 cavalry of Khitan in the north of Bazhou.

古文：戊戌，文武百僚、宰臣范质等上表请听政，表三上，允之。
现代文：二十四日，宰臣范质等上表请恭帝临朝听政，上表三次，才答应。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Emperor Gao was asked to come to the Imperial Court to listen to the government, and he only agreed to do so after being asked three times.

古文：壬寅，文武臣僚上表，请以八月四日为天寿节，从之。
现代文：二十八日，文武臣僚上表，请将八月四日定为天寿节，恭帝准允。
English: On the 28th, Wen Wu and his ministers presented a list, asking for August 4 to be designated as Tianshou Festival, which was approved by Emperor Gong.

古文：癸卯，以司徒、平章事范质为山陵使，以翰林学士、判太常寺事窦俨为礼仪使，以兵部尚书张昭为卤簿使，以御史中丞边归谠为仪仗使，以宣徽南院使、判开封府事昝居润为桥道顿递使。
现代文：本月，十六州上奏大雨数十天不止。秋七月七日，以今上赵匡胤为宋州节度使，依旧为检校太尉、殿前都检点，进封为开国侯。
English: This month, the 16 prefectures were affected by heavy rain for dozens of days. On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Zhao Kuangyin, the current prefect, was appointed as the Song State festival envoy, and he was still the inspector of the school, the inspector of the front of the palace, and the prince of Jinfu.

古文：是月，州郡十六奏大雨连旬不止。
现代文：二十三日，诏令大赦天下。本月，各道相继报告，天下大雨，各地河川水溢泛滥，漂走房屋淹死人民，损害禾苗庄稼。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor issued a general amnesty to the whole country. This month, each province reported successively that there was heavy rain in the world, rivers in various regions overflowed, houses were swept away, people were drowned, and crops were damaged.

古文：甲午，西京奏，左屯卫上将军致仕李萼卒。
现代文：八月二十九日，高丽国派使者上朝进贡，又进上《别序孝经》一卷、《越王孝经新义》一卷、《皇灵孝经》一卷、《孝经雌图》三卷。
English: On August 29, the Koryo Kingdom sent an envoy to the DPRK to pay tribute. The envoy also brought one volume of the "Second Precedence of the Filial Piety Sutra," one volume of the "New Meaning of the Yue Wang Filial Piety Sutra," one volume of the "Imperial Soul Filial Piety Sutra," and three volumes of the "Female Figure of the Filial Piety Sutra."

古文：乙未，大霖，昼昏，凡四日而止，分命使臣赈给诸州遭水人户。
现代文：九月，京城及各州大雨十多天，洪水成灾，河川泛滥。冬十月二十五日，世宗皇帝的灵车上路，二十九日，南唐国主李景报告，南唐太子李弘冀去世，恭帝派御厨使张延范充任吊祭使前往吊唁。
English: In September, there were more than ten days of heavy rain in Beijing and various provinces, resulting in floods and overflowing rivers. In winter, on October 25, Emperor Shizong's hearse set out on the road. On the 29th, Li Jing, the ruler of Southern Tang, reported that the prince of Southern Tang, Li Hongji, had died. Emperor Qian sent the imperial chef Zhang Yanfan to act as the messenger to the funeral.

古文：显德七年春正月辛丑朔，文武百僚进名奉贺。
现代文：十一月一日，将世宗皇帝葬在庆陵。十二月一日，史馆上奏，请派官员撰修世宗实录，恭帝应允。
English: On November 1st, Emperor Shizong was buried in the Qing Mausoleum. On December 1st, there was a performance at the History Museum, and officials were asked to write a record of Shizong's life. Emperor Qian agreed.

古文：禀上圣之姿，有神武之略，佐我高祖，格于皇天，逮事世宗，功存纳麓，东征西怨，厥绩懋焉。
现代文：二十四日，天下大雨，白天昏暗不明，共下了四天才停雨，恭帝命使分赴各州赈济遭受水灾的灾民。显德七年春正月一日，镇、定二州飞报，契丹入侵，河东贼军从土门东下，与契丹人会合兵力，恭帝诏令今上赵匡胤领兵北伐。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, it rained heavily, and the daylight was dim and unclear. It rained for a total of four days, and the rain stopped. Emperor Gongdi ordered the troops to go to each state to help the flood victims. On the first day of spring of the seventh year of Xiande, the towns and villages of the two states reported that the Khitan had invaded, and the Khitan invaders from the east of the river had come down from Tuymen to join forces with the Khitan. Emperor Gongdi ordered Zhao Kuangyin to lead the Northern Expedition.

古文：天地鬼神享于有德，讴谣狱讼附于至仁，应天顺民，法尧禅舜，如释重负，予其作宾，呜呼钦哉！祗畏天命。 今上于是诣崇元殿受命，百官朝贺而退。
现代文：三日，今上赵匡胤领兵从京城出发，当夜住宿在陈桥驿。天还未亮，发生兵变，将士大声呐喊高呼万岁，披着铠甲拿着刀枪，推戴赵匡胤上登帝位，扶他上马，拥逼着南回。这天，恭帝下诏，禅位与赵匡胤。赵匡胤于是到崇元殿接受天命，百官朝拜庆贺而退下。
English: On the third day, the current Zhao Kuangyin led the troops from Beijing and stayed at Chenqiao on the same night. It was still dark, there was a mutiny, the soldiers shouted loudly and chanted "long live," wearing armor and holding swords and guns, pushing Zhao Kuangyin to ascend to the throne, supporting him on a horse, and forcing him to return to the south. On this day, Emperor Gongyi issued an edict to meditate with Zhao Kuangyin. Zhao Kuangyin then went to the Chongyuan Hall to accept his heavenly destiny, and the hundred officials bowed to celebrate and withdrew.

古文：《续通鉴长编》：开宝六年三月乙卯，房州上言，周郑王殂，上素服发哀，辍视朝十日。
现代文：诏令封恭帝为郑王，以奉持后周的祭祀。正朔服色全依旧制，奉皇太后为周太后。宋太祖开宝六年春天，恭帝在房陵去世。宋太祖赵匡胤听到后震惊悲痛，在便殿举行哀悼穿上丧服，百官上前安慰。旋即派朝廷使者监护恭帝的丧事。
English: Emperor Zheng decreed that Emperor Gongyang should be named King Zheng, in order to honor Emperor Zhou's funeral rites. The formal dress code remained the same, with the empress dowager being honored as Empress Dowager Zhou. Emperor Gongyang died in the imperial mausoleum in the spring of the sixth year of King Bao's reign. Emperor Zhao Kuangyin was shocked and grief-stricken when he heard the news. He held a mourning ceremony in the hall of residence, donned mourning clothes, and hundreds of officials came forward to offer consolation. He immediately sent an emissary from the imperial court to oversee Emperor Gongyang's funeral.

古文：以其年十月，归葬于世宗庆陵之侧。
现代文：在当年十月，将恭帝葬在周世宗的庆陵旁边。
English: In October of that year, Emperor Gongde was buried next to the Qing Mausoleum of Zhou Shizong.

古文：诏有司定谥曰恭皇帝，陵曰顺陵。
现代文：太祖诏令有关官员议定谥号叫恭皇帝，陵墓叫顺陵。
English: Emperor Taizu decreed that the relevant officials agreed that the imperial name would be Emperor Qiong and the mausoleum would be called Shunling.

