古文：十有二年春，王二月，莒人伐我东鄙，围台。
现代文：十二年春季，周历二月，莒国人进攻我国东部边境，包围台地。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year, in February of the lunar calendar, the Qiang people attacked the eastern border of our country and surrounded the plateau.

古文：季孙宿帅师救台，遂入郓。
现代文：季孙宿率领军队救援台地，就乘机进入郓国。
English: Qisunjuku led the army to rescue the plateau, and took the opportunity to enter the country.

古文：夏，晋侯使士鲂来聘。
现代文：夏季，晋侯派遣士鲂来鲁国聘问。
English: In the summer, the Jin princes sent envoys to Lu to solicit his services.

古文：秋九月，吴子乘卒。
现代文：秋季九月，吴王寿梦去世。
English: In the autumn of September, Wu Wang Shoumen passed away.

古文：冬，楚公子贞帅师侵宋。
现代文：冬季，楚国公子贞率领军队攻打宋国。
English: In winter, Prince Zhen of Chu led an army to attack Song.

古文：公如晋。
现代文：襄公去到晋国。
English: Lu Zhaogong went to Jin Province.

古文：十二年春，莒人伐我东鄙，围台。
现代文：十二年春季，莒国人进攻我国东部边境，包围台地。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year, the Qiang people attacked the eastern border of our country and surrounded the plateau.

古文：季武子救台，遂入郓，取其钟以为公盘。
现代文：季武子救援台地，就乘机进入郓国，掠取了他们的钟，改铸为鲁襄公的盘。
English: Ji Wuzi, who came to the rescue of Taiwan, took the opportunity to enter Shandong Province, plundered their bells, and recast them as Lu Xianggong's discs.

古文：夏，晋士鲂来聘，且拜师。
现代文：夏季，晋国的士鲂来鲁国聘问，同时拜谢我国出兵。
English: In the summer, Jin soldiers came to Lu to ask questions, and at the same time to thank China for sending troops.

古文：秋，吴子寿梦卒。临于周庙，礼也。
现代文：秋季，吴王寿梦死了，鲁襄公在周文王庙哭泣吊唁，这是合于礼的。
English: In autumn, Wu Wang Shou Meng died, and Lu Xiang Gong cried condolences at the Zhouwen Wang Temple, which was appropriate.

古文：凡诸侯之丧，异姓临于外，同姓于宗庙，同宗于祖庙，同族于祢庙。
现代文：诸侯的丧事，异姓的在城外哭泣吊唁，同姓的在宗庙里，同宗的在祖庙里，同族的在父庙里。
English: At the funerals of princes, people with different surnames cry condolences outside the city, people with the same surname in the family temple, people of the same clan in the ancestral temple, and people of the same race in the father's temple.

古文：是故鲁为诸姬，临于周庙。
现代文：因为这样，鲁国为了姬姓诸国，到周文王庙里哭泣吊唁。
English: Because of this, Lu Guo went to the Zhouwen Wang Temple to weep condolences for the sake of her surname Zhu Guo.

古文：为邢、凡、蒋、茅、胙、祭，临于周公之庙。
现代文：为了邢、凡、蒋、茅、胙、祭各国，在周公庙里哭泣吊唁。
English: Weeping and condolences are offered in the Zhou Gong Temple for the national festivals of Zhou, Fan, Jiang, Mao, Zhou and other countries.

古文：冬，楚子囊、秦庶长无地伐宋，师于扬梁，以报晋之取郑也。
现代文：冬季，楚国子囊、秦国庶长无地进攻宋国，军队驻扎在杨梁，以报复晋国的得到郑国。
English: In the winter, Zizang of Chu and the second-in-command of Qin attacked Song, and the army was stationed in Yangliang to retaliate for Jin's capture of Zheng.

古文：灵王求后于齐。
现代文：周灵王在齐国求娶王后，齐灵公向晏桓子询问如何答复。
English: King Zhou Ling asked for the queen's hand in marriage in the State of Qi, and the Prince of Qi Ling inquired of Zou Huanzi how to respond.

古文：齐侯问对于晏桓子，桓子对曰： 先王之礼辞有之，天子求后于诸侯，诸侯对曰： 夫妇所生若而人。妾妇之子若而人。 
现代文：桓子回答说： 先王的礼仪辞令有这样的话：天子在诸侯那里求取王后，诸侯回答说： 夫人所生的若干人，妾妇所生的若干人。 
English: Huan Zi replied, "The previous king's etiquette dictated the following: The heavenly son asked the lords for a queen, and the lords replied, 'Some people are born from a wife, and some people are born from a concubine.'

古文：无女而有姊妹及姑姊妹，则曰： 先守某公之遗女若而人。  
现代文：没有女儿而有姐妹和姑母，就说： 先君某公的遗女若干人。 
English: Having no daughters, but having sisters and an aunt, he said, "There are several widows of a certain lord.

古文：齐侯许昏，王使阴里结之。
现代文：齐灵公答应了婚事，周灵王派遣阴里作了口头约定。
English: Qilinggong consented to the marriage, and Zhou Lingwang made a verbal agreement.

古文：公如晋，朝，且拜士鲂之辱，礼也。
现代文：鲁襄公去到晋国朝见，同时拜谢士鲂的到来，这是合于礼的。
English: It is proper for Prince Lu Xiang to go to the Jin court to meet with the emperor and at the same time to thank Shi Yan for his arrival.

古文：秦嬴归于楚。楚司马子庚聘于秦，为夫人宁，礼也。
现代文：秦赢嫁给楚国，楚国的司马子庚到秦国聘问，为了夫人回娘家，这是合于礼的。
English: Qin Wen married to Chu, and Sima Zi Geng of Chu went to Qin to ask for advice, and returned to his mother's house for the sake of his wife, which was proper.

