古文：六年春正月丙辰，改舂陵乡为章陵县。世世复徭役，比丰、沛，无有所豫。
现代文：六年春正月十六日，改舂陵乡为章陵县，世世代代免除徭役，比照高祖家乡丰邑、沛县的旧例，使章陵县人民不再担忧以后会再有徭役。
English: On the 16th day of the 1st month of the 6th year of the Spring, Gongling Township was changed to Zhangling County. The people of Zhangling County will no longer be worried about being exempted from corvee service, according to the old example of Gao Zuo's hometown Fengyi and Pei County. There will be corvee service again.

古文：辛酉，诏曰： 往岁水、旱、蝗虫为灾，谷价腾跃，人用困乏。
现代文：二十一日，颁布诏令说： 往年水、旱、蝗灾，致使谷价暴涨，百姓困苦。
English: On the twenty-first day, the imperial edict was issued, saying: In previous years, floods, droughts, and locust plagues caused grain prices to skyrocket, and the people suffered hardship.

古文：朕惟百姓无以自赡，恻然愍之。
现代文：我看着老百姓不能养活自己，心中十分悲悯。
English: I look at the people who can't feed themselves and feel very sorry for them.

古文：其命郡国有谷者，给禀高年、鳏、寡、孤、独及笃癃、无家属贫不能自存者，如《律》。
现代文：命令尚有存粮的郡国，赈济老人、鳏夫、寡妇、孤儿、老而无子、病重困苦，以及无家可归无法自立的人，一切都要遵照《汉律》的规定。
English: He ordered the counties that still had grain reserves to provide assistance to the elderly, widowers, widows, orphans, the childless, the seriously ill, the destitute, and those who were homeless and unable to support themselves, all in accordance with the provisions of the Hanru.

古文：二千石勉加循抚，无令失职。 
现代文：郡守要努力安抚百姓，不要失职。 
English: The county governor should make efforts to appease the people and not neglect his duties.

古文：扬武将军马成等拔舒，获李宪。
现代文：扬武将军马成等攻下舒县，抓获李宪。
English: Yangwu General Ma Cheng and others conquered Shu County and captured Li Xian.

古文：二月，大司马吴汉拔朐，获董宪、庞萌，山东悉平。诸将还京师，置酒赏赐。
现代文：二月，大司马吴汉攻下朐县，抓获董宪、庞萌，太行山以东全部平定，诸将回京师，宴饮赏赐。
English: In February, Daishi Ma Wuhan conquered Min County, captured Dong Xian, Pang Meng, and pacified everything east of Taihang Mountain. They all returned to Beijing and were rewarded with a banquet.

古文：三月，公孙述遣将任满寇南郡。
现代文：三月，公孙述派将军任满侵犯南郡。
English: In March, Gongsun Sur sent a general to invade Nan County.

古文：夏四月丙子，幸长安，始谒高庙，遂有事十一陵。
现代文：夏四月初八，光武帝到长安，始拜谒高庙，祭祀十一陵。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month of the summer, Emperor Guangwu came to Chang'an and began to pay homage to the Gonggao Temple and offer sacrifices to the eleven mausoleums.

古文：遣虎牙大将军盖延等七将军从陇道伐公孙述。
现代文：派虎牙大将军盖延等七将军从陇道讨伐公孙述。
English: He sent seven generals, including General Gai Yan, the commander of the Koga army, to fight against the Gongsun army.

古文：五月己未，至自长安。
现代文：五月二十一日，光武帝从长安回洛阳。
English: On May 21, Emperor Guangwu returned to Luoyang from Chang'an.

古文：隗嚣反，盖延等因与嚣战于陇阺，诸将败绩。
现代文：隗嚣反叛，盖延等于是在陇阝氐与隗嚣战斗，盖延等大败。
English: To rebel against arrogance, Gai Yan is to fight against arrogance in Gai, and Gai Yan has suffered a great defeat.

古文：辛丑，诏曰： 惟天水、陇西、安定、北地吏人为隗嚣所诖误者，又三辅遭难赤眉，有犯法不道者，自殊死以下，皆赦除之。 
现代文：辛丑，光武帝诏令说： 天水、陇西、安定、北地的官员，被隗嚣欺骗所牵连的，还有三辅遭难赤眉时犯法不守正道的，凡判斩首以下的，都免罪不究。 
English: The Emperor Guangwu's edict said, "Officials from Tianshui, Shaanxi, Shandong, and Hubei provinces who are implicated in violent deception, as well as officials from the three auxiliary provinces who violate the law and do not keep to the right path when they are in trouble, and those who are sentenced to beheading or less, are all exempt from prosecution."

古文：六月辛卯，诏曰： 夫张官置吏，所以为人也。今百姓遭难，户口耗少，而县官吏职所置尚繁，其令司隶、州牧各实所部，省减吏员。
现代文：六月二十四日，诏令说： 国家设置大小官吏，完全是为了百姓，现在百姓遭难，户口减少，但国家所置官吏尚多，命令司隶校尉及各州长官，核实所辖各部，裁减官吏人员。
English: On June 24th, the imperial edict said: The state set up officials of all ranks and sizes solely for the sake of the people. Now that the people are suffering and the number of households has decreased, but there are still many officials set up by the state. It ordered the sub-lieutenants and governors to verify the departments under their jurisdiction and reduce the number of officials.

古文：县国不足置长吏可并合者，上大司徒、大司空二府。 于是条奏并省四百余县，吏职减损，十置其一。
现代文：将那些不足以单位长官而可以合并的郡县，上报大司徒、大司空二府。 于是司肃校尉、各州牧守条陈奏请合并减少四百余县，裁剪官员，仅保留过去的十分之一。
English: Those counties and prefectures that are not enough for unit chiefs and can be merged will be reported to the two prefectures of Daishi-to and Daishi-ku. Therefore, Lieutenant Sisoo and the prefectural governors of all prefectures requested the merger to reduce more than 400 counties and cut officials, retaining only one-tenth of the past.

古文：代郡太守刘兴击卢芳将贾览于高柳，战殁。
现代文：六月，代郡太守刘兴在高柳攻打卢芳将领贾览，刘兴战死。
English: In June, Liu Xing, acting governor of the county, attacked Lu Fang's general Jia Qian in Gaoliu. Liu Xing was killed in the battle.

古文：初，乐浪人王调据郡不服。
现代文：以前，乐浪人王调占据郡地不服。
English: In the past, the King's Music Ronin was not satisfied with occupying the county.

古文：秋，遣乐浪太守王遵击之，郡吏杀调降。
现代文：这年秋天，派乐浪太守王遵去攻打，郡吏杀了王调投降。
English: In the autumn of that year, Wang Zun, the governor of Lelang, was sent to attack, and the county officials killed Wang Zhe and surrendered.

古文：遣前将军李通率二将军，与公孙述将战于西城，破之。
现代文：派前将军李通率领二将军，与公孙述将领在西城战斗，把他打败。
English: He sent the former general Li Tong, leading two generals, to fight with the general Gongsun Su in the West City and defeat him.

古文：夏，蝗。
现代文：夏天，蝗灾。
English: In summer, locust plagues occur.

古文：秋九月庚子，赦乐浪谋反大逆殊死已下。
现代文：秋九月初四，对乐浪犯罪的人，除非谋反死罪，均免罪不究。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month of the autumn, anyone who committed a crime in Le Lang would be exempted from punishment unless they conspired to commit a crime punishable by death.

古文：丙寅晦，日有食之。
现代文：三十日，晦，日蚀。
English: On the 30th, at the end of the month, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：冬十月丁丑，诏曰： 吾德薄不明，寇贼为害，强弱相陵，元元失所。
现代文：冬十月十一日，诏令说： 我德薄不英明，寇贼为害，强暴欺凌弱小，老百姓流离失所。
English: On the 11th day of October in winter, the imperial edict said: I am weak and unwise, robbers are harmful, violence bullies the weak, and the common people are displaced.

古文：《诗》云： 日月告凶，不用其行。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 日月有凶象，这是不用其道的征兆。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "The sun and the moon have a malevolent appearance, which is a sign that they should not be used."

古文：永念厥咎，内疚于心。
现代文：我常念我的过失，内心难过。
English: I often think about my mistakes and feel sad inside.

古文：其敕公卿举贤良、方正各一人；百僚并上封事，无有隐讳；有司修职，务遵法度。 
现代文：现敕令公卿推荐贤良、方正各一人，百官都要奏上密封的报告，不要隐瞒顾忌；官员履行职责务必遵守法律制度。 
English: It is hereby ordered that one person each from the Kugyo (court nobles) should recommend a virtuous person and a righteous person, and that all officials should submit a sealed report and not hide their scruples; officials must abide by the legal system when performing their duties.

古文：十一月丁卯，诏王莽时吏人没人为奴婢不应旧法者，皆免为庶人。
现代文：十一月丁卯，诏令王莽时官吏民众籍没为奴婢不合旧法的，都免为平民。
English: In November of Dingwu, when Wang Mang issued the edict, officials and citizens who were not slaves did not conform to the old law, and were exempted from being civilians.

古文：十二月壬辰，大司空宋弘免。
现代文：十二月二十七日，大司空宋弘免职。
English: On December 27th, the chief of Ku Songhong was relieved of duty.

古文：癸巳，诏曰： 顷者师旅未解，用度不足，故行什一之税。今军士屯田，粮储差积。
现代文：二十八日，光武帝诏令说： 过去因为战事不断，军队费用太大，所以实行十税一的赋税，现在军队实行了屯田，粮食略有储积。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Guangwu issued an edict saying: In the past, because of the continuous war and the high cost of the army, a tax of one tenth of the tax was imposed. Now, the army has set up a garrison, and grain is slightly stored.

古文：其令郡国收见田租三十税一，如旧制。 
现代文：现在命令各郡国恢复三十税一的旧制度。 
English: Now the counties are ordered to restore the old system of thirty-one tax.

古文：隗嚣遣将行巡寇扶风，征西大将军冯异拒破之。
现代文：十二月，隗嚣派将行巡侵扰扶风，征西大将军冯异抵抗并打败了他。
English: In December, the turbulent faction will go on a patrol to disturb Fufeng, and the general of the Western Expedition, Feng Yi, will resist and defeat him.

古文：是岁，初罢郡国都慰官。
现代文：这年，开始罢去郡国都尉官。
English: That year, the dismissal of county governors began.

古文：又诏曰： 世以厚葬为德，薄终为鄙，至于富者奢僣，贫者单财，法令不能禁，礼义不能止，仓卒乃知其咎。其布告天下，令知忠臣、孝子、慈兄、悌弟薄葬送终之义。 
现代文：开始派列侯进入到自己的封国。匈奴派使者来献礼，光武帝派中郎将回访。七年春正月初二，光武帝诏令中都官、三辅、郡、国放出在押囚犯，除死罪外，一律免除查办，服劳役的免刑为平民，判刑二年以上而逃亡的，把他们的名字记下，以备查考。又下诏说： 世人都把厚葬作为美德，鄙视那些从俭办丧事的做法。以致富人过度奢侈，贫人耗尽财物，法令不能禁止，礼义不能限制，一遇乱世，才知厚葬的害处。今布告天下，希望大家明白作忠臣、孝子、仁兄、贤弟，为死去的人薄葬送终，才是合乎道义的英明之举。 
English: On the second day of the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, Emperor Guangwu issued an edict to the officials of the capital, the three provinces, the counties and the country to release the prisoners in custody. Except for the death penalty, all prisoners were exempted from investigation, and the labor service was exempted for civilians. Those who had been sentenced to more than two years and had escaped were to write down their names for investigation. The next edict said: The world regards a rich funeral as a virtue, and despises those who run funerals frugally. So that the rich are excessively extravagant, the poor exhaust their wealth, the law cannot prohibit, and politeness cannot be

古文：二月辛巳，罢护漕都尉官。
现代文：二月十七日，免去护漕都尉官。
English: On February 17th, he was removed from the post of Captain of the Escort.

古文：三月丁酉，诏曰： 今国有众军，并多精勇，宜且罢轻车、骑士、材官、楼船士及军假吏，令还复民伍。 
现代文：三月初四日，光武帝诏令说： 现在国家有大量军队，多属精锐，应当减去轻车、骑士、材官、楼船士及军中临时增设的官，让他们还乡为民。 
English: On the 4th day of the 3rd month, Emperor Guangwu issued an edict saying, "Nowadays, the country has a large number of soldiers, most of whom belong to the elite. Light vehicles, knights, quartermasters, deckhands, and officers temporarily added to the army should be subtracted, and they should return to their hometowns as citizens."

古文：公孙述立隗嚣为朔宁王。
现代文：公孙述立隗嚣为朔宁王。
English: His great-great-grandson, Su Liqian, was crowned King of Shuanning.

古文：癸亥晦，日有食之，避正殿，寝兵，不听事五日。
现代文：三十日，晦，日蚀。光武帝回避正殿，不动干戈，五日不理国事。
English: On the eve of the 30th, there was a solar eclipse. Emperor Guangwu avoided the main hall, did not move to fight, and ignored state affairs for five days.

古文：诏曰： 吾德薄致灾，谪见日月，战栗恐惧，夫何言哉！
现代文：下诏说： 我德行菲薄，招致灾害，上天谴责现于日月，我战忄栗恐惧，有什么话讲呢！
English: The next edict said: I am a man of poor virtue, I have caused disasters, Heaven's condemnation is now in the sun and moon, I tremble with fear, what can I say!

古文：今方念愆，庶消厥咎。
现代文：现在当反省过失，希望消除我的过错。
English: Now I have to reflect on my mistakes and hope to eliminate my faults.

古文：其令有司各修职任，奉遵法度，惠兹元元。
现代文：官员们要尽忠职守，遵纪守法，使百姓受惠。
English: Officials should perform their duties faithfully, abide by discipline and the law, and benefit the people.

古文：百僚各上封事，无有所讳。
现代文：百官各上密封奏事，不要隐讳。
English: Don't hide the fact that hundreds of officials have all filed sealed reports.

古文：其上书者，不得言圣。 
现代文：上书的，不要说我是圣哲。 
English: Don't call me a saint for writing this.

古文：夏四月壬午，诏曰： 比阴阳错谬，日月薄食。百姓有过，在予一人，大赦天下。
现代文：夏四月十九日，光武帝下诏说： 近来阴阳颠倒，日月迫近相食，百姓有过，归咎于我一人，大赦天下。
English: On the 19th day of the 4th month of the summer, Emperor Guangwu issued an edict saying, "Recently, the yin and yang have been reversed, the sun and moon are about to devour each other, the people have suffered, I alone am to blame, and the whole world is to be pardoned."

古文：公、卿、司隶、州牧举贤良、方正各一人，遣诣公车，朕将览试焉。 
现代文：公、卿、司隶、州牧推荐贤良、方正各一人，到公车门，我要去接见并考试他们。 
English: I will meet and examine one person each from the public, the noble, the clerk, the state pastor, the recommended virtuous person, and the founder at the bus gate.

古文：五月戊戌，前将军李通为大司空。
现代文：五月初六，前将军李通为大司空。
English: On the sixth day of the fifth month, the former general Li Tong became the chief of the Air Force.

古文：甲寅，诏吏人遭饥乱及为青、徐贼所略为奴婢下妻，欲去留者，恣听之。
现代文：二十二日，诏令吏人遭受灾荒兵乱，及被青州、徐州贼抢为奴婢和小妻的，或去或留，听各人意愿。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor issued an edict that the officials who suffered from natural disasters, wars and turmoil, as well as those who were robbed by thieves in Qingzhou and Xuzhou as slaves and concubines, could either go or stay, according to their own wishes.

古文：敢拘制不还，以卖人法从事。
现代文：敢有扣押不放，以贩卖人口治罪。
English: People who dare to do so will be detained and prosecuted for human trafficking.

古文：是夏，连雨水。
现代文：这年夏天，雨水连绵。
English: This summer, it rained incessantly.

古文：汉忠将军王常为横野大将军。
现代文：任汉忠将军王常为横野大将军。
English: General Wang Chang, who had been appointed as Han Zhong, became General Yokono.

古文：八月丁亥，封前河间王邵为河间王。
现代文：八月二十六日，封前河间王刘邵为河间王。
English: On August 26th, Liu Shao, the former King of Kawama, was crowned King of Kawama.

古文：隗嚣寇安定，征西大将军冯异、征虏将军祭遵击却之。
现代文：隗嚣侵犯安定，征西大将军冯异、征虏将军祭遵把他打退。
English: He aggressively encroached on stability, and the general of the Western Conquest, Feng Yi, and the general of the War of Conquest, Matsu Zun, drove him back.

古文：冬，卢芳所置朔方太守田飒、云中太守乔扈各举郡降。
现代文：冬天，卢芳设置的朔方太守田飒、云中太守乔扈各领全郡投降。
English: In the winter, the Shuo faction's Tai Shou Tan Kui and Yunzhong Tai Shou Qiao Kui, both of whom were set up by Lu Fang, surrendered the entire county.

古文：是岁，省长水、射声二校尉官。
现代文：这年，省去长水、射声二校尉官。
English: This year, Changshui and Yingxuan Second Lieutenant were omitted.

古文：八年春正月，中郎将来歙袭略阳，杀隗嚣守将而据其城。
现代文：八年春正月，中郎将来歙袭击略阳，杀隗嚣守将并占据此城。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of the Spring, Zhong Lang attacked Liaoyang, killed the tyrannical governor and occupied the city.

古文：夏四月，司隶校尉傅抗下狱死。
现代文：夏四月，司隶校尉傅抗监死狱中。
English: In the summer of April, Captain Sisli Fu protested and died in prison.

古文：隗嚣攻来歙，不能下。
现代文：隗嚣攻来歙，没有攻下。
English: They rushed to attack, but did not capture.

古文：闰月，帝自征嚣，河西大将军窦融率五郡太守与车驾会高平。
现代文：闰月，光武帝亲征隗嚣，河西大将军窦融率五个郡的太守与光武帝会于高平。
English: In the leap month, Emperor Guangwu himself was in a hurry to conquer the country, and the general Dou Rong of Hexi, the governor of five counties, met with Emperor Guangwu in Gaoping.

古文：陇右溃，隗嚣奔西城，遗大司马吴汉、征南大将军岑彭围之；进幸上邽，不降，命虎牙大将军盖延、建威大将军耿弇攻之。
现代文：隗嚣在陇右溃败了，逃奔西城。光武帝派大司马吴汉、征南大将军岑彭包围西城；光武帝到上圭阝，隗嚣不投降，派虎牙大将军盖延、建威大将军耿攻打他。
English: Emperor Guangwu sent Major-General Ma Wuhan and General of the Southern Expedition Zhou Peng to encircle the West City; Emperor Guangwu went to Shangguiyang, where Zhou Hong refused to surrender and sent General Hu Ya, General Gaien and General Jian Wei to attack him.

古文：颍川盗贼寇没属县，河东守守兵亦叛，京师骚动。
现代文：颍川盗贼侵犯并攻陷颍川所属各县，河东太守及守兵也反叛，京都震惊骚动。
English: The thieves of Shukawa invaded and conquered the counties belonging to Shukawa. The governor of the eastern part of the province and the guards also rebelled. Kyoto was shocked by the turmoil.

古文：秋，大水。
现代文：秋天，大水泛滥。
English: In autumn, there is a lot of flooding.

古文：八月，帝自上邽晨夜东驰。
现代文：八月，光武帝从上邽日夜东赶。
English: In August, Emperor Guangwu traveled eastward from Shangguan day and night.

古文：九月乙卯，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月初一，回到洛阳。
English: On the first day of September, I returned to Luoyang.

古文：庚申，帝自征颍川盗贼，皆降。
现代文：初六，光武帝亲征颍川盗贼，都降附。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Emperor Guangwu personally subdued the Thieves of the Li River.

古文：安丘侯张步叛归琅邪，琅邪太守陈俊讨获之。
现代文：安丘侯张步反叛后返回琅笽，琅笽太守陈俊讨伐张步并活捉了他。
English: Anqiu marquis Zhangbu returned to Handan after the rebellion, Handan eunuch Chen Jun fought against Zhangbu and captured him alive.

古文：戊寅，至自颍川。
现代文：二十四日，光武帝从颍川回京。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Guangwu returned to Beijing from Luochuan.

古文：冬十月丙午，幸怀。
现代文：冬十月二十二日，光武帝到怀县。
English: On the 22nd day of October in winter, Emperor Guangwu went to Huai County.

古文：十一月乙丑，至自怀。
现代文：十一月十二日，从怀县回京。
English: On November 12, he returned to Beijing from Huai County.

古文：公孙述遣兵救隗器，吴汉、盖延等还军长安。
现代文：公孙述派兵援救隗嚣，吴汉、盖延等领军回长安。
English: Gongsun Su dispatched troops to rescue Gonglang, and Wu Han, Gai Yan and other leaders led the troops back to Chang'an.

古文：天水、陇西复反归嚣。
现代文：天水、陇西又反叛归附隗嚣。
English: Tianshui and Shaanxi rebelled and were annexed.

古文：十二月，高句丽王遣使奉贡。
现代文：十二月，高句丽王派使者进贡。
English: In December, the King of Goguryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：是岁大水。
现代文：这年，大水泛滥。
English: This year, there was a lot of flooding.

古文：九年春正月，隗器病死，其将王元、周宗复立嚣子纯为王。
现代文：九年春正月，隗嚣病死，他的部将王元、周宗又立隗嚣子隗纯为王。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of the Spring, Ganran died of illness, and his subordinates, Wang Yuan and Zhou Zong, appointed Ganran's son, Ganjun, as king.

古文：徙雁门吏人于太原。
现代文：将雁门官吏百姓迁到太原。
English: The officials and common people of Ganmen were moved to Taiyuan.

古文：三月辛亥，初置青巾左校尉官。
现代文：三月初一，开始设置青巾左校尉官。
English: On the first day of March, the new position of Lieutenant Commander of the Left Division of the Blue Scarf Corps was established.

古文：公孙述遣将田戎、任满据荆门。
现代文：公孙述派将田戎、任满占据荆门。
English: His great-great-grandson, Su, sent his general, Tian Rong, to occupy Jingmen.

古文：夏六月丙戌，幸缑氏，登轘辕。
现代文：夏六月初六，光武帝到缑氏，登上轘辕山。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the summer, Emperor Guangwu went to Shanshi and climbed Shaoshan.

古文：遣大司马吴汉率四将军击卢芳将贾览于高柳，战不利。
现代文：派大司马吴汉率领四将军在高柳攻打卢芳将贾览，战斗不利。
English: He sent four generals led by Major-General Ma Wuhan to attack Lu Fang and General Jia Qian in Gaoliu, but the battle was unfavorable.

古文：秋八月，遣中郎将来歙监征西大将军冯异等五将军讨隗纯于天水。
现代文：秋八月，派中郎将来歙监督征西大将军冯异等五将军在天水讨伐隗纯。
English: In autumn and August, he sent five generals including Zhong Lang, who would later supervise the general of the Western Expeditionary Force, Feng Yi, to fight against Qizhun in Tianshui.

古文：骠骑大将军杜茂与贾览战于繁畤，茂军败绩。
现代文：骠骑大将军杜茂在繁畤与贾览战斗，杜茂大败。
English: The cavalry general, Du Mao, fought against Jia Zhang in Zhuozhuang. Du Mao suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：是岁，省关都尉，复置护羌校尉官。
现代文：这年，撤销关都尉，恢复设置护羌校尉官。
English: In the same year, Captain Guan was revoked, and the post of Lieutenant of Escort was reinstated.

古文：十年春正月，大司马吴汉率捕虏将军王霸等五将军击贾览于高柳，匈奴遣骑救览，诸将与战，却之。
现代文：十年春正月，大司马吴汉率领捕虏将军王霸等五将军在高柳攻打贾览，匈奴派骑兵援救贾览，诸将与之交战，把他们打退。
English: In the first month of the tenth year of the Spring, five generals led by the commander Ma Wuhan, including the captured general Wang Ba, attacked Jiaxiang in Gaoliu. The Xiongnu sent cavalry to rescue Jiaxiang. They fought against them and drove them back.

古文：修理长安高庙。
现代文：修理长安高庙。
English: Chang'an High Temple was repaired.

古文：夏，征西大将军冯异破公孙述将赵匡于天水，斩之。
现代文：夏天，征西大将军冯异在天水打败公孙述将领赵匡，并把他杀了。
English: In the summer, the general of the Western Conquest, Feng Yi, defeated the general of Gongsun Shu, Zhao Kuang, in Tianshui and killed him.

古文：征西大将军冯异薨。
现代文：征西大将军冯异去世。
English: General of the Western Expedition Feng Yi passed away.

古文：秋八月己亥，幸长安，祠高庙，遂有事十一陵。
现代文：秋八月二十五日，光武帝到长安，祀高庙，祭祀十一陵。
English: On the 25th day of the 8th month of autumn, Emperor Guangwu went to Chang'an to worship the high temple and the eleven mausoleums.

古文：戊戌，进幸氵幵。隗嚣将高峻降。
现代文：戊戌，光武帝行进到县，隗嚣将高峻投降。
English: In Wuyi, Emperor Guangwu marched to the county, and the clamor will be a high-level surrender.

古文：冬十月，中郎将来歙等大破隗纯于落门，其将王元奔蜀，纯与周宗降，陇右平。
现代文：冬十月，中郎将来歙等大破隗纯于落门，隗纯将王元逃奔去蜀，隗纯与周宗投降，陇右平定。
English: In the winter of October, the middle vassals, including the future Zhou Zong, defeated and killed Wang Yuan, Wang Yuan fled to Shu, Zhou Zong and Wang Yuan surrendered, and Zhou Yu was defeated.

古文：先零羌寇金城、陇西，来歙率诸将击羌于五溪，大破之。
现代文：先零羌寇扰金城、陇西，来歙率诸将在五溪进攻羌人，把羌人打个大败。
English: The first few raiders attacked Jincheng and western Shaanxi, and the raiding party led by Zhao attacked the Jurchens in Wuxi and defeated the Jurchens.

古文：庚寅，车驾还宫。
现代文：十七日，光武帝回到洛阳。
English: On the 24th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：是岁，省定襄郡，徙其民于西河。
现代文：这年，撤销定襄郡，将老百姓迁到西河。
English: This year, Dingxiang County was abolished, and the people were moved to the West River.

古文：泗水王歙薨。淄川王终薨。
现代文：泗水王刘歙、淄川王刘终去世。
English: The king of Yeosu, Liu Ye, and the king of Yeokcheon, Liu Ye, have finally passed away.

古文：十一年春二月己卯，诏曰： 天地之性人为贵。
现代文：十一年春二月初八，下诏说： 天地之间的灵性以人最为宝贵。
English: On the 8th day of the 2nd month of the 11th year of the Spring, the following edict was issued: "Spirituality is the most precious thing between heaven and earth.

古文：其杀奴婢，不得减罪。 
现代文：即使杀死的是奴仆婢女也不得减轻杀人罪。 
English: Even if it is a male or female slave who kills, the crime of homicide shall not be mitigated.

古文：三月己酉，幸南阳；还，幸章陵，祠园陵。
现代文：三月初九，光武帝到南阳；回洛阳时途经章陵，祭祀园寝陵墓。
English: On the 9th day of March, Emperor Guangwu went to Nanyang. On his way back to Luoyang, he passed through the mausoleum and went to the mausoleum in the sacrificial garden.

古文：城阳王祉薨。
现代文：城阳王刘祉去世。
English: Liu Zhi, the King of Chengyang, passed away.

古文：庚午，车驾还宫。
现代文：三十日，光武帝回到洛阳。
English: On the 30th, Emperor Guangwu returned to Luoyang.

古文：闰月，征南大将军岑彭率三将军与公孙述将田戎、任满战于荆门，大破之，获任满。
现代文：闰三月，征南大将军岑彭率领三将军在荆门与公孙述将田戎、任满战斗，打他个大败，活捉任满。
English: In intercalary March, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, Zou Peng, led three generals to fight with Gongsun Shu in Jingmen against the general Tian Rong and Ren Man. They defeated him and captured Ren Man alive.

古文：威虏将军冯骏围田戎于江州，岑彭遂率舟师伐公孙述，平巴郡。
现代文：威虏将军冯骏在江州围攻田戎，岑彭率领水师讨伐公孙述，平定巴郡。
English: The tyrannical general Feng Yu besieged Tian Rong in Jiangzhou, and Zi Peng led the sailors to fight against Gong Sun Su and pacify Ba County.

古文：夏四月丁卯，省大司徒司直官。
现代文：夏四月二十八日，撤销大司徒直官。
English: On the 28th day of the 4th month of the summer, the direct post of Daisetsu was revoked.

古文：先零羌寇临洮。
现代文：先零羌寇掠临洮。
English: At the beginning of the game, the bandits are attacking Linyi.

古文：六月，中郎将来歙率扬武将军马成破公孙述将王元、环安于下辩。
现代文：六月，中郎将来歙率领扬武将军马成在下辩打败公孙述将王元、环安。
English: In June, Zhong Lang led the Yangwu General Ma Cheng to defeat his grandsons Wang Yuan and Huan An.

古文：安遣间人刺杀中郎将来歙。
现代文：环安派间谍刺杀中郎将来歙。
English: Huanan sent spies to assassinate Zhong Lang, who later died.

古文：帝自将征公孙述。
现代文：光武帝亲征公孙述。
English: Emperor Guangwu's grandson recounts the story.

古文：秋七月，次长安。
现代文：秋七月，驻长安。
English: Autumn July, stationed in Chang'an.

古文：八月，岑彭破公孙述将侯丹于黄石。
现代文：八月，岑彭在黄石滩打败公孙述将侯丹。
English: In August, Zhaopeng defeated Gongsun Su's general Hou Dan in Huangshi Beach.

古文：辅威将军臧宫与公孙述将延岑战于沈水，大破之。
现代文：辅威将军臧宫在沈水与公孙述将延岑战斗，延岑大败。
English: In Shenshui, General Fu Wei and Gongsun Shu fought in Yancheng, and Yancheng suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：王元降。
现代文：王元投降。
English: Wang Yuan surrendered.

古文：至自长安。
现代文：光武帝从长安回洛阳。
English: Emperor Guangwu returned to Luoyang from Chang'an.

古文：癸亥，诏曰： 敢灸灼奴婢，论如律，免所灸灼者为庶人。 
现代文：八月二十六日，诏令说： 敢有烧灼奴仆婢女的，照法律治罪，并将被烧灼的奴婢免为平民。 
English: On August 26th, the imperial edict said: Anyone who dares to burn slaves, male and female, will be punished according to the law, and the slaves and female servants who were burned will be exempted from being civilians.

古文：冬十月壬午，诏除奴婢射伤人弃市律。
现代文：冬十月壬午，诏令废除奴仆婢女射伤了人要被处死示众的法律。
English: In the winter of October, at noon, the imperial edict abolished the law that slaves and maidservants who shot and wounded people would be put to death.

古文：公孙述遣间人刺杀征南大将军岑彭。
现代文：公孙述派间谍刺杀征南大将军岑彭。
English: Gwangsun sent a spy to assassinate the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, Zou Peng.

古文：马成平武都，因陇西太守马援击破先零羌，徙致天水、陇西、扶风。
现代文：马成平定武都。趁陇西太守马援打败了先零羌，便把武都民众迁到天水、陇西、扶风。
English: Ma Chengflattened Wudu. Taking advantage of the fact that Ma Yuan, the governor of Shaanxi Province, had defeated the first Zilu, he moved the people of Wudu to Tianshui, Shaanxi, and Fufeng.

古文：十二月，大司马吴汉率舟师伐公孙述。
现代文：十二月，大司马吴汉率领水师讨伐公孙述。
English: In December, Grand Master Ma Wuhan led the sailors to fight against Gongsun Zu.

古文：是岁，省朔方牧，并并州。
现代文：这年，裁去朔方牧，合并并州。
English: In the same year, Shuo Fangmu was abolished and merged with Zhou.

古文：初断州牧自还奏事。
现代文：开始停止州牧岁末入京报告政务的制度。
English: The system of reporting on government affairs to the Beijing Municipal Government at the end of the year began to be discontinued.

古文：十二年春正月，大司马吴汉与公孙述将史兴战于武阳，斩之。
现代文：十二年春正月，大司马吴汉在武阳与公孙述将领史兴战斗，杀史兴。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 12th year, the commander Ma Wuhan fought with the general Shi Xing in Wuyang and killed him.

古文：三月癸酉，诏陇、蜀民被略为奴婢自讼者，及狱官未报，一切免为庶人。
现代文：三月初九，诏令陇、蜀人民被抢去做奴仆婢女后到官府诉讼的，以及司法官吏没有判决的，一律免为平民。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month, according to the imperial edict, all the Shu people who went to the government to sue after being robbed to become slaves, and the judicial officials who did not make a judgment, were exempted from being civilians.

古文：夏，甘露降南行唐。
现代文：夏天，南行唐降下及时雨。
English: In summer, the southbound Tang falls timely rain.

古文：六月，黄龙见东阿。
现代文：六月，东阳出现黄龙。
English: In June, a yellow dragon appeared in Dongyang.

古文：秋七月，威虏将军冯骏拔江州，获田戎。
现代文：秋七月，威虏将军冯骏攻下江州，抓住田戎。
English: In the autumn and July, the tyrant general Feng Yu conquered Jiangzhou and seized Tian Rong.

古文：九月，吴汉大破公孙述将谢丰于广都，斩之。
现代文：九月，吴汉在广都大败公孙述将谢丰，并把他杀掉。
English: In September, Wu Han defeated Gongsun Shu's general Xie Feng in Guangdong and killed him.

古文：辅威将军臧宫拔涪城，斩公孙恢。
现代文：辅威将军臧宫攻下涪城，杀公孙恢。
English: Fu Wei's general, Gong Gong, conquered Gongcheng and killed Sun Hui.

古文：大司空李通罢。
现代文：大司空李通免职。
English: Chief Secretary Ku Li Tong has been relieved of his duties.

古文：冬十一月戊寅，吴汉、臧宫与公孙述战于成都，大破之。
现代文：冬十一月十八日，吴汉、臧宫在成都与公孙述战斗，大败公孙述。
English: In the winter of November 18th, Wu Han and Gong Gong fought with Gong Sun Su in Chengdu, and Gong Sun Su was defeated.

古文：述被创，夜死。
现代文：公孙述受重伤，当夜死去。
English: His great-grandson suffered serious injuries and died that night.

古文：辛巳，吴汉屠成都，夷述宗族及延岑等。
现代文：二十一日，吴汉对成都进行屠城，将公孙述的亲族及延岑等全部处死。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wu Han carried out a massacre of Chengdu, and all the relatives and Yan Xuan mentioned by Gongsun were executed.

古文：十二月辛卯，扬武将军马成行大司空事。
现代文：十二月初一，扬武将军马成代行大司空职事。
English: On the first day of December, Yangwu General Ma Cheng took over as acting commander.

古文：是岁，九真徼外蛮夷张游率种人内属，封为归汉里君。
现代文：这年，九真界外蛮夷张游率领同部族人归附，被封为归汉里君。
English: In that year, Zhang You, a barbarian from outside the Jiu Zhen area, led his fellow tribesmen to Guizhou and was given the title of Gui Hanli Jun.

古文：省金城郡属陇西。
现代文：撤去金城郡，归属陇西。
English: Jincheng County was removed and became part of Shaanxi Province.

古文：参狼羌寇武都，陇西太守马援讨降之。
现代文：参狼羌侵扰武都，陇西太守马援讨伐，迫使其投降。
English: The gannet intruded into Wudu, and the Shaanxi Taizhou Horse Aid Campaign was launched to force it to surrender.

古文：诏边吏力不足战则守，追虏料敌不拘以逗留法。
现代文：诏令边塞官兵力量不够不能打就防守，追击敌人远近可根据情况而定，不以 逗留法 论处。
English: The edict ordered the frontier garrison officers and soldiers to defend themselves if they were not strong enough to fight, and to pursue the enemy far and near according to the situation, and not to stay.

古文：横野大将军王常薨。遣骠骑大将军杜茂将众郡施刑屯北边，筑亭候，修烽燧。
现代文：横野大将军王常去世，派骠骑大将军杜茂带领各郡解除了镣铐赭衣的囚犯屯守北边，筑了望所，修烽火台。
English: After the death of Yokono's general Wang Chang, he sent his cavalry general Du Mao to lead the counties to release the prisoners from their shackles and keep them in the north, build a watchtower, and repair the campfire.

古文：十三年春正月庚申，大司徒侯霸薨。
现代文：十三年春正月初一，大司徒侯霸去世。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 13th year of the Spring, Daisetsu Houba passed away.

古文：戊子，诏曰： 往年已敕郡国，异味不得有所献御，今犹未止，非徒有豫养导择之劳，至乃烦扰道上，疲费过所。
现代文：二十九日，光武帝诏令说： 往年我曾命令各郡国，不要贡献奇异的美味，在还没有停止，不仅只有预先饲养和选择的劳苦，还有转运输送的烦劳搅扰。
English: On the 29th, Emperor Guangwu issued an edict saying, "In previous years, I have ordered all counties and states not to contribute strange delicacies, but I have not yet stopped, not only the labor of pre-breeding and selection, but also the troublesome interference of transportation.

古文：其令太官勿复受。
现代文：增加运送所经过地区的劳累和费用。应叫管理御膳的太官不再收受。
English: Increase the effort and cost of the area through which the delivery passes. The eunuch who manages the meal should be asked to stop accepting it.

古文：明敕下以远方口实所以荐宗庙，自如旧制。 
现代文：我曾敕令远方食物是用来荐奉宗庙，现仍按原来的制度。 
English: I once decreed that food from distant places should be used to endow ancestral temples, but the original system is still in place.

古文：二月，遣捕虏将军马武屯滹沱河以备匈奴。
现代文：二月，派捕虏将军马武屯兵滹沱河，防备匈奴。
English: In February, he sent the captive general Ma Wu to garrison the Li River to guard against the Xiongnu.

古文：卢芳自五原亡入匈奴。
现代文：卢芳从五原叛匈奴。
English: Lu Fang rebelled against the Huns from Wuhuan.

古文：丙辰，诏曰： 长沙王兴、真定王得、河间王邵、中山王茂，皆袭爵为王，不应经义。
现代文：二十七日，光武帝下诏说： 长沙王刘兴、真定王刘得、河间王刘邵、中山王刘茂，都袭爵为王，但血统疏远，当王不合经典义理。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Guangwu issued an edict saying: Changsha King Liu Xing, Zhending King Liu De, Hema King Liu Shao, Zhongshan King Liu Mao, all succeeded to the title of king, but their bloodlines were distant, and being king did not conform to the classical principles.

古文：其以兴为临湘侯，得为真定侯，邵为乐成侯，茂为单父侯。 其宗室及绝国封侯者凡一百三十七人。
现代文：改封刘兴为临湘侯，刘得为真定侯，刘邵为乐成侯，刘茂为单父侯。 宗室及中断了国嗣改封为侯的共一百三十七人。
English: Liu Xing was changed to Linxiang Hou, Liu De to Zhending Hou, Liu Shao to Lecheng Hou, and Liu Mao to Single Father Hou.

古文：丁巳，降赵王良为赵公，太原王章为齐公，鲁王兴为鲁公。
现代文：二十八日，降赵王刘良为赵公，太原王刘章为齐公，鲁王刘兴为鲁公。
English: On the 28th, Zhao King Liu Liang was demoted to Zhao Gong, Taiyuan King Liu Zhang was demoted to Qi Gong, and Lu King Liu Xing was demoted to Lu Gong.

古文：庚午，以殷绍嘉公孔安为宋公，周承休公姬武为卫公。
现代文：三月十一日，封殷绍嘉公孔安为宋公，周承休公姬武为卫公。
English: On March 11th, Kong An of Yin Shao Jia Gong was named Song Gong, and Zhou Chengyu of Gong Ji Wu was named Wei Gong.

古文：省并西京十三国：广平属巨鹿，真定属常山，河间属信都，城阳属琅邪，泗水属广陵，淄川属高密，胶东属北海，六安属庐江，广阳属上谷。
现代文：省去合并了西汉时的九个封国：广平并入巨鹿、真定并入常山，河间并入信都，城阳并入琅笽，泗水并入广陵，淄川并入高密，胶东并入北海，六安并入庐江，广阳并入上谷。
English: The nine fiefdoms of the Western Han Dynasty that were merged were omitted: Guangping was merged into Guolu, Zhending into Changshan, Hema into Xindu, Chengyang into Handan, Lishui into Guangling, Handan into Gaomi, Jiaodong into Beihai, Liuan into Lijiang, and Guangyang into Shanggu.

古文：三月辛未，沛郡太守韩歆为大司徒。
现代文：三月十二日，任沛郡太守韩歆为大司徒。
English: On March 12th, Han Zheng, the deputy governor of Renpei County, was promoted to daishi.

古文：丙子，行大司空马成罢。
现代文：三月十七日，代理大司空马成免职。
English: On March 17th, the acting director, Ku Ma Cheng, was relieved of his duties.

古文：夏四月，大司马吴汉自蜀还京师，于是大飨将士，班劳策勋。
现代文：夏四月，大司马吴汉从蜀回京师，于是大摆筵席犒赏将士，颁布各人功劳并记录在册。
English: In the summer of April, Grand Master Ma Wuhan returned to Beijing from Shu to teach, so he held a grand banquet to reward the soldiers, announced the merits of each person and recorded them in the record.

古文：功臣增邑更封，凡三百六十五人。
现代文：功臣增加封邑更新的爵位，共三百六十五人。
English: A total of three hundred and sixty-five meritorious retainers received new titles of nobility with additional fiefs.

古文：其外戚恩泽封者四十五人。
现代文：外戚沾光受封的四十五人。
English: Forty-five people, all of them relatives of the emperor, received the title.

古文：罢左右将军官。
现代文：免去左右将军官。
English: Remove the generals on the left and right.

古文：建威大将军耿弇罢。
现代文：建威大将军耿弇免职。
English: General Geng Wei was relieved of his duties.

古文：益州传送公孙述瞽师、郊庙乐器、葆车、舆辇，于是法物始备。
现代文：益州辗转递送公孙述瞽师、郊庙乐器、葆车、舆辇，至此皇宫举行各种仪式的器物，才开始完备。
English: It was not until the imperial palace began to be completed that the imperial grandson's reciters, suburban temple musical instruments, chariots, and minarets were transferred from Yizhou to the palace.

古文：时，兵革既息，天下少事，文书调役，务从简寡，至乃十存一焉。
现代文：这时战争已经结束，天下太平少事，公文征发差役，务必简单减少，以至于数量只有以前的十分之一。
English: At this time, the war has ended, the world is too small, and the collection and issuance of official documents must be simply reduced, so that the number is only one-tenth of the previous one.

古文：甲寅，冀州牧窦融为大司空。
现代文：二十六日，任冀州牧窦融为大司空。
English: On the 26th, Jizhou Muco was merged into Daishi Air.

古文：五月，匈奴寇河东。
现代文：五月，匈奴侵扰河东。
English: In May, the Huns invaded the east of the river.

古文：秋七月，广汉徼外白马羌豪率种人内属。
现代文：秋七月，广汉塞外白马羌豪率领同部族人归附。
English: In autumn and July, Guanghan, Baima and Gao led their tribesmen to annexation.

古文：九月，日南徼外蛮夷献白雉、白兔。
现代文：九月，日南塞外蛮夷进献白雉、白兔。
English: In September, barbarians from Japan, South Korea and other countries came to offer egrets and white rabbits.

古文：冬十二月甲寅，诏益州民自八年以来被略为奴婢者，皆一切免为庶人；或依托为人下妻，欲去者，恣听之；敢拘留者，比青、徐二州以略人法从事。
现代文：冬十二月三十日，诏告益州居民从公孙述八年来被抢夺为奴仆婢女的，一律恢复平民身份。有依附别人成妾而想离去的，听其自愿；敢有留难扣押的，比照青、徐二州的办法，以抢掠人口法论罪。
English: On the 30th of December in winter, Zhao told the residents of Yizhou who had been robbed of their rights as slaves and maidservants for eight years by their sons and grandsons, that they would all be restored to their civilian status. If any of them wanted to leave because they had become dependent on others as concubines, they were free to do so; if any of them dared to stay and could not be detained, they would be tried according to the methods of Qing and Xu Erzhou, and found guilty of robbing the population.

古文：复置金城郡。
现代文：恢复设置金城郡。
English: Restore the setting of Jincheng County.

古文：十四年春正月，起南宫前殿。
现代文：十四年春正月，修建南宫前殿。
English: In the first month of the 14th year of the Heian period, the front hall of the Southern Palace was completed.

古文：匈奴遣使奉献，使中郎将报命。
现代文：匈奴派使者进贡，光武帝派中郎将刘襄去匈奴回访。
English: The Xiongnu sent an envoy to pay tribute, and Emperor Guangwu sent Liu Xiang to the Xiongnu for a return visit.

古文：夏四月辛巳，封孔子后志为褒成侯。
现代文：夏四月二十九日，封孔子后人孔志为褒成侯。
English: On the 29th day of the 4th month of the summer, the descendant of Confucius, Kong Zhi, was awarded the title of Houcheng Hou.

古文：越巂人任贵自称太守，遣使奉计。
现代文：越巂人任贵自称太守，派使者送来百姓名籍。
English: Ren Gui, a resident of Yueyang, claimed to be the governor and sent an envoy to collect the names of the people.

古文：秋九月，平城人贾丹杀卢芳将尹由来降。
现代文：秋季九月，平城人贾丹杀卢芳将尹由归降。
English: In the autumn of September, Jia Dan, a resident of Pingcheng, killed Lu Fang and forced Yin Yu to abdicate.

古文：是岁，会稽大疫。
现代文：这一年，会稽瘟疫大范围流行。
English: In this year, the plague of plague was widespread.

古文：莎车国、鄯善国遣使奉献。
现代文：莎车国、鄯善国派使者进贡。
English: Shakyo Province and Shosan Province sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：十二月癸卯，诏益、凉二州奴婢，自八年以来自讼在所官，一切免为庶人，卖者无还直。
现代文：十二月癸卯，诏令益、凉二州奴婢，八年来自己申诉在案的，一律恢复平民身份，卖主无需偿还身价。
English: At the end of December, Zhao Lingyi and Liang Erzhou, who have been slaves for eight years and have their own complaints on file, were all restored to civilian status, and the seller did not have to repay the value.

古文：十五年春正月辛丑，大司徒韩歆免，自杀。
现代文：十五年，春正月二十三日，大司徒韩歆免职，自杀。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of spring in the 15th year, Han Ye, the head monk of the monastery, was dismissed from his post and committed suicide.

古文：丁未，有星孛于昴。
现代文：二十九日，彗星出现于昴宿。
English: On the 29th, the comet appeared in Oshuku.

古文：汝南太守欧阳歙为大司徒。
现代文：任汝南太守欧阳歙为大司徒。
English: Ouyang Jian, the governor of the Southern Province, was appointed as the chief disciple.

古文：建义大将军朱祐罢。
现代文：建义大将军朱祐免职。
English: General Zhu Yu of Jianyi was relieved of his duties.

古文：丁未，有星孛于营室。
现代文：二十九日，彗星出现于营室。
English: On the 29th, the comet appeared in the camp.

古文：二月，徙雁门、代郡、上谷三郡民，置常山关、居庸关以东。
现代文：二月，迁移雁门、代郡、上谷三郡居民，安置在常山关、居庸关以东。
English: In February, residents of the three counties of Yanmen, Daigun and Shanggu were relocated and resettled east of Changshan Pass and Juyong Pass.

古文：初，巴蜀既平，大司马吴汉上书请封皇子，不许，重奏连岁。
现代文：当初，巴蜀已平定，大司马吴汉上书请封皇子，光武帝不许，吴汉便几年来不断地为此事连续上书。
English: At the beginning, Ba Shu had been pacified, and the grand secretary Ma Wu Han wrote to the emperor to request the crown prince, but Emperor Guangwu did not allow it, and Wu Han continued to write to the emperor for several years.

古文：三月，乃诏群臣议。
现代文：三月，光武帝才诏令官员们讨论。
English: In March, Emperor Guangwu finally ordered officials to discuss it.

古文：大司空融、固始侯通、胶东侯复、高密侯禹、太常登等奏议曰： 古者封建诸侯，以藩屏京师。
现代文：大司空窦融，国始侯李通，胶东侯贾复，高密侯邓禹，太常登等上书说 ：古时候分封诸侯，建立封国，来作为京师的屏障。
English: Daishi Ku Dou Rong, Guozhi Hou Li Tong, Jia Dong Hou Jia Fu, Gaomi Hou Deng Yu, Taizhong Deng and others wrote: In ancient times, princes were divided into fiefs, and fiefdoms were established to serve as a barrier to Beijing division.

古文：周封八百，同姓诸姬并为建国，夹辅王室，尊事天子，享国永长，为后世法。
现代文：周朝封诸侯八百，只要是姬姓的都建立侯国，在周围辅助王室，恭敬地侍奉天子，因之国运长久，为后世的榜样。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty, there were 800 feudal lords, and all of them with the surname of Ji established a feudal state, assisted the royal family around them, and respectfully served the Son of Heaven. Because of this, the national fortune lasted for a long time, serving as an example for future generations.

古文：故《诗》云： 大启尔宇，为周室辅。
现代文：所以《诗经》上说 ：大大地开放经营你所管辖的地方，作为我周家天下的辅佐。 
English: Therefore, the "Song of Songs" said: greatly open and manage the place under your jurisdiction, as an assistant to my Zhou family around the world.

古文：高祖圣德，光有天下，亦务亲亲，封立兄弟诸子，不违旧章。陛下德横天地，兴复宗统，褒德赏勋，亲睦九族，功臣宗室，咸蒙封爵，多受广地，或连属县。
现代文：高祖英明，广有天下，也重视亲族的关系，封立兄弟诸子，不违背过去的典章，皇上德泽充满天地，复兴祖宗传统，表彰有品德的，奖励有功劳的，亲睦九族，功臣宗室，都受到封爵，大多得到大片土地，有的甚至连接数县。
English: Gao Zu is wise, has a wide world, also attaches importance to the relationship between relatives, appoints brothers and sons, does not violate the past regulations, Emperor Dezer fills the world, revives the ancestral tradition, commends the virtuous, rewards the meritorious, befriends the nine ethnic groups, the family of the meritorious, all have been knighted, most have received large tracts of land, and some have even connected several counties.

古文：今皇子赖天，能胜衣趋拜，陛下恭谦克让，抑而未议，群臣百姓，莫不失望。
现代文：现在皇子赖上天保佑长成，已能穿着衣冠进行拜揖，皇上却谦让抑制不予封爵，群臣百姓，都很失望。
English: Now that the prince has grown up, relying on God's blessing, and has been able to wear a crown for worship, the emperor has humbly agreed not to give him a knighthood, and the courtiers and commoners are disappointed.

古文：宜因盛夏吉时，定号位，以广藩辅，明亲亲，尊宗庙，重社稷，应古合旧，厌塞众心。
现代文：应当趁这盛夏良辰，确定皇子号位，以便扩大藩辅，昭示亲亲大义，尊重宗庙社稷，合乎古制旧章，满足大家心愿。
English: It is necessary to take advantage of this midsummer good time to determine the position of the prince, in order to expand the domain auxiliary, show the great righteousness of relatives, respect the family temple and shrine, conform to the ancient system and old chapter, and satisfy everyone's wishes.

古文：臣请大司空上舆地图，太常择吉日，具礼仪。 制曰： 可。 
现代文：我们请让大司空奉上舆图，太常择定好日子，准备好典礼事宜。 
English: We would like to ask the grand marshal to send us a map, so that we can choose a good day and prepare for the ceremony.

古文：夏四月戊申，以太牢告祠宗庙。
现代文：光武帝下令说 ：可以。 夏四月初二，用牛、羊、猪三牲祭祀祖先。十一日，派大司空窦融告祀宗庙。
English: Emperor Guangwu gave the order and said, "Yes." On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the ancestors were sacrificed with cattle, sheep, and pigs. On the eleventh day, Grand Master Ku Dou Rong was sent to worship the ancestral temple.

古文：丁巳，使大司空融告庙，封皇子辅为右翊公，英为楚公，阳为东海公，康为济南公，苍为东平公，延为淮阳公，荆为山阳公，衡为临淮公，焉为左翊公，京为琅邪公。
现代文：封皇子刘辅为右翊公、刘英为楚公、刘阳为东海公、刘康为济南公、刘苍为东平公、刘延为淮阳公、刘荆为山阳公、刘衡为临淮公。刘焉为左翊公、刘京为琅笽公。
English: Liu Ying is Chu, Liu Yang is Donghai, Liu Kang is Jinan, Liu Cang is Dongping, Liu Yan is Huaiyang, Liu Jing is Sanyang, Liu Heng is Linhuai, Liu Yan is Zuo and Liu Jing is Yan.

古文：癸丑，追谥兄伯升为齐武公，兄仲为鲁哀公。
现代文：癸丑，追谥兄伯升为齐武公、兄刘仲为鲁哀公。
English: Zou Ying's elder brother, Bo, was promoted to Qiwu Gong, and his elder brother, Liu Zhong, was promoted to Luye Gong.

古文：六月庚午，复置屯骑、长水、射声三校尉官，改青巾左校尉为越骑校尉。
现代文：六月二十五日，恢复设置屯骑、长水、射声三校尉官；改青巾左校尉为越骑校尉。
English: On June 25th, the establishment of the three lieutenants of Tuncai, Changshui and Yixing was resumed; the left lieutenant of the Qing Dynasty was changed to the left lieutenant of the Yue Dynasty.

古文：诏下州郡检核垦田顷亩及户口年纪，又考实二千石长吏阿枉不平者。
现代文：下诏命州郡检查核实开垦田亩以及户口年龄情况及数目。又考查二千石长吏办事枉法或偏袒不公平的。
English: The following edict ordered the county to check and verify the number of mu of cultivated farmland and the age and number of household registration. It also examined whether the 2,000-koku chieftain had acted inappropriately or with unfair favoritism.

古文：冬十一月甲戌，大司徒欧阳歙下狱死。
现代文：冬十一月初一，大司徒欧阳歙犯入狱，监死狱中。
English: On the first day of the first month of November in winter, the chief disciple Ouyang Xuan went to prison and was sentenced to death.

古文：十二月庚午，关内侯戴涉为大司徒。
现代文：十二月二十七日，任关内侯戴涉为大司徒。
English: On December 27th, Dai Watanabe, the governor of Kwanai Province, was promoted to Daisetsu.

古文：卢芳自匈奴入居高柳。
现代文：卢芳从匈奴入居高柳。
English: Lu Fang moved from Xiongnu to Gaoliu.

古文：是岁，骠骑大将军杜茂免。
现代文：这年，骠骑大将军杜茂免职。
English: In the same year, General Du Mao was relieved of his duties.

古文：虎牙大将军盖延薨。
现代文：虎牙大将军盖延去世。
English: General Koga Gaien passed away.

古文：十六年春二月，交阯女子微侧反，略有城邑。
现代文：十六年春二月，交阝止女子征侧谋反，占领一些城镇。
English: In the spring and February of the 16th year of the Jiajing Emperor, the women of the Jiajing army plotted a rebellion and occupied a number of towns.

古文：三月辛丑晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：三月三十日，晦，日蚀。
English: March 30th, New Year's Eve, Solar Eclipse.

古文：秋九月，河南尹张伋及诸郡守十余人，坐度田不实，皆下狱死。
现代文：秋九月，河南尹张伋及诸郡守十余人，因度量田地弄虚作假，都下狱牢死。
English: In the autumn and September, Yin Zhangye of Henan Province and more than ten county governors went to prison and died for falsifying field measurements.

古文：郡国大姓及兵长、群盗处处并起，攻劫在所，害杀长吏。
现代文：郡国大姓、兵长、群盗到处作乱，打劫官府，杀害官员。
English: County governors, military commanders, and bandits ran riot everywhere, looting government offices and killing officials.

古文：郡县追讨，到则解散，去复屯结。
现代文：郡县的军队去讨伐，兵他们就解散，兵走就又集结在一块。
English: When the county troops went to fight, they disbanded the soldiers and then gathered them together again.

古文：青、徐、幽、冀四州尤甚。
现代文：青、徐、幽、冀四州更厉害。
English: Qing, Xu, Yu and Hebei provinces are more severe.

古文：冬十月，遣使者下郡国，听群盗自相纠擿，五人共斩一人者，除其罪。
现代文：冬十月，派使者下到各郡国传达诏令：让匪徒们互相检举揭发，五人合伙杀掉一人的，可免去杀人罪。
English: In the winter of October, an envoy was sent down to each county to convey the edict: let the bandits report and expose each other, and if five people work together to kill one person, they can be exempted from the crime of murder.

古文：吏虽逗留回避故纵者，皆勿问，听以禽讨为效。
现代文：官员过去有回避、放纵的，也不追究责任，只看他们最后擒捕讨伐的结果。
English: Even if the officials delay, evade, or deliberately indulge the thieves, they will not be questioned, but will only be punished according to the effectiveness of the capture and crusade.

古文：其牧守令长坐界内盗贼而不收捕者，又以畏忄耎捐城委守者，皆不以为负，但取获贼多少为殿最，唯蔽匿者乃罪之。
现代文：牧守令长因犯有对境内盗贼不收编捕捉之罪的，以及畏惧软弱放弃所守地盘的，都不以失职论罪，只看最后消灭盗贼多少为要。只有掩护窝藏盗贼的才治罪。
English: If the chief of the herdsmen's garrison is guilty of not gathering and capturing the thieves in the territory, and if he is afraid and weak to give up the territory he is guarding, he is not guilty of dereliction of duty, only the final elimination of the thieves is important. Only the crime of covering and hiding the thieves is punishable.

古文：于是更相追捕，贼并解散。
现代文：於是互相协同追捕，群贼因而解体。
English: As a result, they chased each other and the thieves broke up and fled.

古文：徙其魁帅于它郡，赋田受禀，使安生业。
现代文：并且将他们的头目迁移到别郡，给以耕地，并赐谷养老，使他们安居乐业。
English: He also relocated their leaders to other counties, gave them farmland, and provided them with grain for their old age, so that they could live and work in peace.

古文：自是牛马放牧，邑门不闭。
现代文：从此放牧牛马无须看守，城门都不用关闭。
English: From now on, there is no need to guard the grazing of cattle and horses, and the gates do not have to be closed.

古文：卢芳遣使乞降，十二月甲辰，封芳为代王。
现代文：卢芳派使者求降，十二月甲辰，封卢芳为代王。
English: Lu Fang sent an envoy to ask for abdication, and in December, Jia Chen, appointed Lu Fang as the acting king.

古文：初，王莽乱后，货币杂用布、帛、金、粟。是岁，始行五铢钱。
现代文：起初，王莽乱后，货币杂用布、帛、金、粟，这年，开始使用五铢钱。
English: At first, after Wang Mangran, the money miscellaneous cloth, silk, gold, millet, this year, began to use five-baht money.

古文：十七年春正月，赵公良薨。
现代文：十七年春正月，赵公良去世。
English: In the first month of the 17th year of the Spring, Zhao Gongliang passed away.

古文：二月乙未晦，日有食之。
现代文：二月二十九日，晦，有日食出现。
English: On the evening of February 29th, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：夏四月乙卯，南巡狩，皇太子及右翊公辅、楚公英、东海公阳、济南公康、东平公苍从，幸颍川，进幸叶、章陵。
现代文：夏四月乙卯，光武帝南巡。皇太子及右翊公刘辅、楚公刘英、东海公刘阳、济南公刘康、东海公刘苍随行，到颍川，进而到叶县、章陵。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Guangwu went on a southern tour, accompanied by the crown prince, Liu Fu (右), Liu Ying (楚英), Liu Yang (东海公), Liu Kang (济南公) and Liu Cang (东海公), and went to Luochuan, Ye County and Zhangling.

古文：五月乙卯，车驾还宫。
现代文：五月二十一日，回到洛阳。
English: On May 21, he returned to Luoyang.

古文：六月癸巳，临淮公衡薨。
现代文：六月二十九日，临淮公刘衡去世。
English: On June 29, Lin Huai Gong Liu Heng passed away.

古文：秋七月，妖巫李广等群起据皖城，遣虎贲中郎将马援、骠骑将军段志讨之。
现代文：秋七月，玩弄妖法巫术的李广等群起占据皖城，光武帝派虎贲中郎将马援、骠骑将军段志去讨伐。
English: In autumn and July, Li Guang, who played with demonic magic and sorcery, and others occupied Lucheng in droves, and Emperor Guangwu sent the middle son of Tigress, Ma Yuan, and the cavalry general, Duanzhi, to fight.

古文：九月，破皖城，斩李广等。
现代文：九月，攻克皖城，杀李广等。
English: In September, he conquered Lucheng and killed Li Guang.

古文：冬十月辛巳，废皇后郭氏为中山太后，立贵人阴氏为皇后。
现代文：冬十月十九日，废皇后郭氏为中山太后，立贵人阴氏为皇后。
English: In the winter of October 19th, the former empress Guo became the empress dowager of Zhongshan, and the noblewoman Yin became the empress.

古文：进右翊公辅为中山王，食常山郡。
现代文：晋升右翊公刘辅为中山王，以常山郡为食邑。
English: The Right Hand Man Liu Fu was promoted to the King of Zhongshan, with Changshan County as his food county.

古文：其余九国公，皆即旧封进爵为王。
现代文：其余九国公就原来的封地晋爵为王。
English: The remaining nine princes became kings of their original fiefs.

古文：甲申，幸章陵。
现代文：二十二日，光武帝到章陵。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Guangwu went to Zhangling.

古文：修园庙，祠旧宅，观田庐，置酒作乐，赏赐。
现代文：修理园寝宗庙，祭祀旧宅，察看田地房屋，置酒作乐，赏赐钱物。
English: They repaired gardens, slept in the ancestral temple, worshipped old houses, inspected houses in the fields, enjoyed wine, and were rewarded with money.

古文：时，宗室诸母因酣悦，相与语曰： 文叔少时谨信，与人不款曲，唯直柔耳。
现代文：这时宗室众多母亲趁着喝得畅快，互相谈论说： 文叔少年时谨慎诚实，与人相处不会殷勤应酬，一味的忠直温和，而今天竟然当上了皇帝！ 
English: At this time, many mothers in the family took the opportunity to have a drink and talk to each other, saying, "Uncle Wen was cautious and honest when he was a young man, he would not socialize with people, he was always loyal and gentle, but today he became the emperor!"

古文：今乃能如此！ 帝闻之，大笑曰： 吾理天下，亦欲以柔道行之。 乃悉为舂陵宗室起祠堂。
现代文：光武听了，大笑说： 我治理天下，也要用柔道来施行政教。 于是为舂陵宗室一律修起祠堂。
English: When Guangwu heard this, he laughed loudly and said, "I rule the world, and I want to use judo to teach government." So, he built a family shrine for all the members of the Huling family.

古文：有五凤凰见于颍川之郏县。
现代文：这时有五只凤凰出现于颍川的郏县。
English: At this time, five phoenixes appeared in the county of Yingchuan in Yingchuan.

古文：十二月，至自章陵。
现代文：十二月，光武从章陵还洛阳。
English: In December, Guangwu returned to Luoyang from Zhangling.

古文：是岁，莎车国遣使贡献。
现代文：这年，莎车国派遣使者进贡。
English: This year, the country of Yarkand sent an envoy to bring tribute.

古文：十八年春二月，蜀郡守将史歆叛，遣大司马吴汉率二将军讨之，围成都。
现代文：十八年春二月，蜀郡守将史歆反叛，派大司马吴汉率领二将军讨伐，包围成都。
English: In the spring and February of the 18th year, Shu County Governor Shi Yan rebelled and sent Major General Ma Wuhan to lead two generals to besiege and encircle Chengdu.

古文：甲寅，西巡狩，幸长安。
现代文：甲寅，光武帝西去巡察，到长安。
English: Jia Yin, Guangwu Di West to inspect, to Chang'an.

古文：三月壬午，祠高庙，遂有事十一陵。
现代文：三月壬午，参拜高庙，祭祀十一陵。
English: In March at noon, visit Gao Temple and pay homage to the Eleven Mausoleums.

古文：历冯翊界，进幸蒲坂，祠后土。
现代文：经冯翊境地，行进到蒲坂，在后土祠祭地。
English: Passing through Fengxu County, marching to Pusaka, at the Houdu Shrine.

古文：夏四月癸酉，车驾还宫。
现代文：夏四月初八，光武帝回到洛阳。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth month of the summer, Emperor Guangwu returned to Luoyang.

古文：甲戌，诏曰： 今边郡盗谷五十斛，罪至于死，开残吏妄杀之路，其蠲除此法，同之内郡。 
现代文：十五日，诏令说： 现在边境各郡偷盗五十斛谷米的，就判死刑，开残忍官吏妄杀的先例。应取消这种苛刻的法律，定罪标准同内地各郡相同。 
English: On the 15th, the imperial edict said: "Nowadays, in border counties, the theft of 50 bushels of rice is punishable by death, setting a precedent for the brutal murder of officials. This harsh law should be abolished, and the conviction standard should be the same as that of counties in the mainland."

古文：遣伏波将军马援率楼船将军段志等击交阯贼微侧等。
现代文：派伏波将军马援率领楼船将军段志等攻击，交阯寇贼征侧等。
English: He sent General Fubo Ma'an to lead the attack on General Duan Zhi of the Lou Ship, and the other side was attacked by the bandits.

古文：甲申，幸河内。
现代文：二十五日，光武帝到河内。
English: On the 25th, Emperor Guangwu arrived in Hanoi.

古文：戊子，至自河内。
现代文：二十九日，从河内回洛阳。
English: On the 29th, he returned to Luoyang from Hanoi.

古文：五月，旱。
现代文：五月，天旱。
English: In May, there was a drought.

古文：卢芳复亡入匈奴。
现代文：卢芳又逃入匈奴。
English: Lu Fang fled to the Huns again.

古文：秋七月，吴汉拔成都，斩史歆等。
现代文：秋七月，吴汉攻下成都，杀史歆等。
English: In the autumn and July, Wu Han conquered Chengdu, killed Shi Yan, and so on.

古文：壬戌，赦益州所部殊死已下。
现代文：壬戌，对益州叛乱的罪犯，除了非处死不可的以外一律免罪。
English: For the criminals of the Yizhou Rebellion, all of them will be pardoned except those who must be executed.

古文：冬十月庚辰，幸宜城。还，祠章陵。
现代文：冬十月二十四日，光武帝到宜城，回洛阳时，祭祀章陵。
English: On the 24th day of October in winter, Emperor Guangwu went to Yicheng, and when he returned to Luoyang, he made a sacrificial offering at the mausoleum.

古文：十二月乙丑，车驾还宫。
现代文：十二月十日，光武帝回到洛阳。
English: On December 10, Emperor Guangwu returned to Luoyang.

古文：是岁，罢州牧，置刺史。
现代文：这年，罢去州牧，设置刺史。
English: This year, he went to the provincial capital to set a new record.

古文：十九年春正月庚子，追遵孝宣皇帝曰中宗。
现代文：十九年春正月十五，追尊孝宣皇帝为中宗。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the 19th year of the Spring, Emperor Suizong Xiaoxuan was enthroned as the head of the Middle Sect.

古文：始祠昭帝、元帝于太庙，成帝、哀帝、平帝于长安，舂陵节侯以下四世于章陵。
现代文：开始供祠昭帝、元帝于太庙；成帝、哀帝、平帝于长安，舂陵节侯以下四世于章陵。
English: At the beginning, the shrines were dedicated to Emperor Zhao and Emperor Yuan in Taimiao; Emperor Cheng, Emperor Pao and Emperor Ping in Chang'an, and the fourth generation after Emperor Fuling in Zhangling.

古文：妖巫单臣、傅镇等反，据原武，遣太中大夫臧宫围之。
现代文：玩弄妖法巫术的单臣、傅镇等反叛，占据原武，派太中大夫臧宫围剿。
English: The lone vassal, Fu Zhen, who played with demonic magic and sorcery, and other rebels occupied the Yuanwu and sent the Taizhong Doctor to encircle the palace.

古文：夏四月，拔原武，斩臣、镇等。
现代文：夏四月，攻克原武、杀单臣、傅镇等。
English: In the summer of April, Genbu was conquered, and Shanchen and Fuzhen were killed.

古文：伏波将军马援破交阯，斩微侧等。因击破九真贼都阳等，降之。
现代文：伏波将军马援攻克交阯，杀征侧等，趁机击败九真贼都阳等，使其投降。
English: General Ma of Fubo assisted in conquering Jiaotong, killed the invading side, and took advantage of the opportunity to defeat Duyang, the Nine Thieves, and make them surrender.

古文：闰月戊申，进赵、齐、鲁三国公爵为王。
现代文：闰四月二十五日，晋升赵、齐、鲁三国公爵王。
English: On the 25th day of the 4th lunar month, he was promoted to Duke of Zhao, Qi and Lu.

古文：六月戊申，诏曰： 《春秋》之义，立子以贵。
现代文：六月二十六日，诏令说： 按《春秋》的义理，立太子以出身尊贵为标准。
English: On June 26, the imperial edict said: According to the principle of "Spring and Autumn," the crown prince should be of noble birth.

古文：东海王阳，皇后之子，宜承大统。
现代文：东海王刘阳，皇后之子，应当继承帝位。
English: East Sea King Liu Yang, the son of the empress, should succeed to the throne.

古文：皇太子彊，崇执谦退，愿备藩国。
现代文：皇太子刘强，推重谦让，愿意到诸侯国为王。
English: Crown Prince Liu Qiang, emphasizing modesty, is willing to become the king of the principality.

古文：父子之情，重久违之。
现代文：父子的感情，使我很难长久地违背他的意愿。
English: The feelings of father and son make it difficult for me to go against his wishes for long.

古文：其以彊为东海王，立阳为皇太子，改名庄。 
现代文：现以刘强为东海王，立刘阳为皇太子，改名庄。 
English: Now with Liu Qiang as the king of the East Sea and Liu Yang as the crown prince, the name of the village has been changed.

古文：秋九月，南巡狩。
现代文：秋九月，光武帝南巡。
English: In autumn and September, Emperor Guangwu went on a southern tour.

古文：壬申，幸南阳，进幸汝南南顿县舍，置酒会，赐吏人，复南顿田租岁。
现代文：二十一日，到南阳，进而到汝南郡南顿县舍，设酒宴赏赐官员，免南顿县田租一年。
English: On the 21st, he went to Nanyang and then to Nantong County, Runan County, to hold a banquet to reward officials and waive the land rent of Nantong County for one year.

古文：父老前叩头言： 皇考居此日久，陛下识知寺舍，每来辄加厚恩，愿赐复十年。 帝曰： 天下重器，常恐不任，日复一日，安敢远期十岁乎？ 吏人又言： 陛下实惜之，何言谦也？ 帝大笑，复增一岁。
现代文：父老趋前叩头说 ：皇上的父亲居住这里很久，皇上熟悉这里的官府房舍，每次来都赏赐很多。请免南顿县田租十年。 皇帝说： 治理天下责任重大，我经常担心不能胜任，一天过一天还怕出问题，怎敢预期十年之久呢？ 官民们又说 ：皇上实际是舍不得减免，何以讲得这样谦逊呢？ 光武帝大笑，又把免租的期限加了一年。
English: The emperor bowed before his father and said: The emperor's father has lived here for a long time, the emperor is familiar with the government buildings here, and every time he comes, he is rewarded a lot. Please waive the land rent in Nantong County for ten years. The emperor said: The responsibility of governing the world is great, I often worry that I am not competent, and I am afraid of problems day by day, how dare I expect ten years? The officials and the people also said: The emperor is actually reluctant to reduce and exempt, why is he so humble? Emperor Guangwu laughed loudly and added a year to the rent-free period.

古文：进幸淮阳、梁、沛。
现代文：光武帝行进到淮阳、梁、沛等地。
English: Emperor Guangwu marched to Huaiyang, Liang, Pei and other places.

古文：西南夷寇益州郡，遣武威将军刘尚讨之。
现代文：西南夷侵犯益州郡，光武帝派武威将军刘尚去讨伐。
English: The Nanxi Yi invaded Yizhou County, and Emperor Guangwu sent General Liu Shang to fight them.

古文：越巂太守任贵谋叛，十二月，刘尚袭贵，诛之。
现代文：越巂太守任贵反叛，十二月，刘尚袭击任贵，把他杀掉。
English: In December, Liu Shang attacked Ren Gui and killed him.

古文：是岁，复置函谷关都尉。
现代文：这年，恢复设置函谷关都尉。
English: In the same year, the post of Lieutenant of Hakodate was reinstated.

古文：修西京宫室。
现代文：修缮长安的宫室。
English: Renovating Chang'an's Imperial Palace.

古文：二十年春二月戊子，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十年春二月初十，光武帝回洛阳。
English: On the tenth day of the second month in the spring of the 20th year, Emperor Guangwu returned to Luoyang.

古文：夏四月庚辰，大司徒戴涉下狱死。
现代文：夏四月初三，大司徒戴涉犯罪，监死狱中。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, Daishi Tutodei was involved in a crime and sentenced to death in prison.

古文：大司空窦融免。
现代文：大司空窦融免职。
English: Daishi Ku Dou Rong was removed from his post.

古文：五月辛亥，大司马吴汉薨。
现代文：五月初四，大司马吴汉去世。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, Senior Secretary Ma Wuhan passed away.

古文：匈奴寇上党、天水，遂至扶风。
现代文：匈奴入侵上党、天水，直至扶风。
English: The Xiongnu invaded Shangdang, Tianshui, and Fufeng.

古文：六月庚寅，广汉太守蔡茂为大司徒，太仆朱浮为大司空。
现代文：六月十四日，广汉太守蔡茂为大司徒，太仆朱浮为大司空。
English: On June 14th, Cai Mao, the governor of Guanghan, became the grand steward, and Zhu Fu, the eunuch, became the grand steward.

古文：壬辰，左中郎将刘隆为骠骑将军，行大司马事。
现代文：十八日，左中郎将刘隆为骠骑将军，代行大司马事。
English: On the 18th, Zuochung Lang promoted Liu Long to the general of the cavalry, acting as the chief of the cavalry.

古文：乙未，徙中山王辅为沛王。
现代文：二十一日，调动中山王刘辅为沛王。
English: On the twenty-first day, Liu Fu, the king of Zhongshan, was transferred to be the king of Pae.

古文：秋，东夷韩国人率众诣乐浪内附。
现代文：秋天，东夷韩国人率领民众到乐浪归附内地。
English: In autumn, Dongyi Koreans led the people to Lopu to annex the mainland.

古文：冬十月，东巡狩。甲午，幸鲁，进幸东海、楚、沛国。
现代文：冬十月，光武帝东巡视察，二十日，到鲁，并行进到东海、楚、沛国。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Guangwu made an inspection tour of the East. On the 20th, he arrived in Lu and traveled to the East Sea, Chu, and Pei.

古文：十二月，匈奴寇天水。
现代文：十二月，匈奴入寇天水。
English: In December, the Xiongnu invaded Tianshui.

古文：壬寅，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十八日，光武帝回到洛阳。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Guangwu returned to Luoyang.

古文：是岁，省五原郡，徙其吏人置河东。复济阳县徭役六岁。
现代文：这年，撤销五原郡，迁移官民安置到河东，免除济阳县徭役六年。
English: This year, Wuhuan County was revoked, officials and citizens were relocated and resettled in Hedong, and Jiyang County was exempted from forced labor for six years.

古文：二十一年春正月，武威将军刘尚破益州夷，平之。
现代文：二十一年春正月，武威将军刘尚打败益州夷人，地方平定。
English: In the first month of the spring of the twenty-first year, Wuwei General Liu Shang defeated the Yizhou barbarians, and the region was pacified.

古文：夏四月，安定属国胡叛，屯聚青山，遣将兵长史陈讨平之。
现代文：夏四月，安定属国胡反叛，驻扎聚集在青山，光武帝派将兵长史陈讠斤讨伐平定叛乱。
English: In the summer of April, when the Hu rebels of the State of Stability gathered in Aoyama, Emperor Guangwu sent the commander Shi Chen Bingjin to fight and quell the rebellion.

古文：秋，鲜卑寇辽东，辽东太守祭肜大破之。
现代文：秋天，鲜卑入寇辽东，辽东太守祭月彡大败鲜卑。
English: In autumn, Xianbei entered the eastern part of Liaodong, and the Liaodong Empress Dowager Festival greatly defeated Xianbei.

古文：冬十月，遣伏波将军马援出塞击乌桓，不克。
现代文：冬十月，派伏波将军马援到塞北攻打乌桓，没有获胜。
English: In the winter of October, he sent Fu Bo's general Ma Yuan to the north of Sa to attack Wu Huan, but he did not win.

古文：匈奴寇上谷、中山。
现代文：匈奴入寇上谷、中山。
English: The Xiongnu invaded Shanggu and Zhongshan.

古文：其冬，鄯善王、车师王等十六国皆遣子入侍奉献，愿请都护。
现代文：这年冬，鄯善王、车师王等十六国都派遣儿子入侍王宫，贡献礼品，请设立都护去保护他们。
English: In the winter of that year, sixteen countries sent their sons to the palace to serve the king, including King Gong Son and King Che Shi Wang, and contributed gifts. Please set up a tutelary to protect them.

古文：帝以中国初定，未遑外事，乃还其侍子，厚加赏赐。
现代文：光武帝考虑国家刚刚平定，无暇顾及边外的事，于是将他们派来侍奉的儿子送还，并赏赐他们很多礼品。
English: Emperor Guangwu, considering that the country had just been pacified, had no time to worry about the outside world, so he sent back the son they had sent to serve, and rewarded them with many gifts.

古文：二十二年春闰月丙戌，幸长安，祠高庙，遂有事十一陵。
现代文：二十二年春闰一月十九日，光武帝到长安，祭祀高庙，以及十一陵。
English: On January 19th, the 22nd year of the Spring Leap, Emperor Guangwu went to Chang'an to offer sacrifices at the high temple and eleven mausoleums.

古文：二月己巳，至自长安。
现代文：二月己巳，从长安回到洛阳。
English: In February, I returned to Luoyang from Chang'an.

古文：夏五月乙未晦，日有食之。
现代文：夏五月三十日，晦，有日食出现。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the evening of the 30th day of the 5th lunar month.

古文：秋七月，司隶校尉苏邺下狱死。
现代文：秋七月，司隶校尉苏邺下狱死。
English: In the autumn of July, Captain Su Su died in prison.

古文：九月戊辰，地震裂。
现代文：九月初五，地震。
English: On the 5th of September, there was an earthquake.

古文：制诏曰： 日者地震，南阳尤甚。
现代文：下诏令说： 日前地震，南阳特别厉害。
English: The edict said: "The earthquake occurred a few days ago, and Nanyang was hit particularly hard.

古文：夫地者，任物至重，静而不动者也。
现代文：本来大地载物很重，是平静而不动摇的。
English: Originally, the earth was a heavy load-bearing object, but it is now calm and unshakable.

古文：而今震裂，咎在君上。
现代文：而今震动裂开，罪咎在君王身上。
English: And now the tremors are breaking, and the blame is on the king.

古文：鬼神不顺无德，灾殃将及吏人，朕甚惧焉。
现代文：鬼神不满意缺德的行为，灾殃降临在官民头上，我十分恐惧。
English: Ghosts and gods are not satisfied with immoral behavior, and calamities have fallen on the heads of officials and the people. I am very afraid.

古文：其令南阳勿输今年田租刍稿。
现代文：现命令南阳今年不要交纳田租、柴草。
English: Nanyang is now ordered not to pay land rent and firewood this year.

古文：遣谒者案行，其死罪系囚在戊辰以前，减死罪一等；徒皆弛解钳，衣丝絮。赐郡中居人压死者棺钱，人三千。
现代文：派谒者进行检查，判处死刑的囚犯在九月初五日以前的，免死减罪一等；判徒刑的解除镣铐，可以穿丝絮衣裳，郡中居民被压死的，每人给棺材钱三千。
English: The dispatchers conducted an inspection, and the prisoners who were sentenced to death before the fifth day of early September were exempted from death and commuted to the first class; the prisoners who were released from the sentence could wear silk clothes, and the county residents who were crushed to death each gave the coffin money of three thousand.

古文：其口赋逋税而庐宅尤破坏者，勿收责。
现代文：欠田赋人口税和住宅特别破坏的，不要收缴欠债。
English: Do not collect arrears of land tax and residential special damage.

古文：吏人死亡，或在坏垣毁屋之下，而家羸弱不能收拾者，其以见钱谷取佣，为寻求之。 
现代文：官员平民死亡，有压在毁坏的墙垣和房屋下，而家里穷得无力收殓的，用现钱谷物雇人寻找死者，料理后事。 
English: Officials and civilians have died, some crushed under the rubble of destroyed walls and houses, while families, desperately poor, have used cash and grain to hire people to search for the dead and clean up the aftermath.

古文：冬十月壬子，大司空朱浮免。
现代文：冬十月十八日，大司空朱浮被免职。
English: On the winter of October 18th, Daishi Ku Zhu Fu was removed from his post.

古文：癸丑，光禄勋杜林为大司空。
现代文：十九日，任光禄勋杜林为大司空。
English: On the 19th, Ren Guanglu awarded Du Lin with the Grand Division of the Air Force.

古文：是岁，齐王章薨。
现代文：这年，齐王刘章去世。
English: In this year, Liu Zhang, the king of Qi, passed away.

古文：青州蝗。
现代文：青州遭蝗灾。
English: Qingzhou hit by locusts.

古文：匈奴薁鞬日逐王比遣使诣渔阳请和亲，使中郎将李茂报命。
现代文：匈奴薁鞬日逐王比，派人到渔阳请求和亲，光武帝派中郎将李茂回访。
English: The Xiongnu sent emissaries to Yuyang to ask for a reconciliation, and Emperor Guangwu sent Zhong Lang to pay a return visit to Li Mao.

古文：乌桓击破匈奴，匈奴北徒，幕南地空。诏罢诸边郡亭侯吏卒。
现代文：乌桓打败匈奴，匈奴向北迁移，沙漠南部空无人烟，下诏令免去各边郡的哨所官兵。
English: Wu Huan defeated the Xiongnu, the Xiongnu migrated to the north, the southern desert was empty of people, and a decree was issued to remove the sentry posts of officers and soldiers in all counties.

古文：二十三年春正月，南郡蛮叛，遣武将军刘尚讨破之，徒其种人于江夏。
现代文：二十三年春正月，南郡蛮反叛，派武威将军刘尚打败他们，并将这部族的人迁移到江夏。
English: In the first month of the spring of 23rd, Nan County rebelled violently, and sent Wuwei General Liu Shang to defeat them and relocate the people of this tribe to Jiangxia.

古文：夏五月丁卯，大司徒蔡茂薨。
现代文：夏五月初八，大司徒蔡茂去世。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth month of the summer, the senior disciple Cai Mao passed away.

古文：秋八月丙戌，大司空杜林薨。
现代文：秋八月丙戌，大司空杜林去世。
English: In the autumn and August of the same year, Daishi Ku Durin passed away.

古文：九月辛未，陈留太守玉况为大司徒。
现代文：九月十三日，任陈留太守玉况为大司徒。
English: On September 13th, Chen Rui was appointed as the grand marshal and Yu Quan was appointed as the grand steward.

古文：冬十月丙申，太仆张纯为大司空。
现代文：冬十月初九，任太仆张纯为大司空。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of the winter, Zhang Jun, who had been appointed as a servant of the Emperor, was promoted to Daishi Ku.

古文：高句丽率种人诣乐浪内属。
现代文：高句丽率领部族到乐浪归附。
English: Goguryeo led the tribe to annexation of Leshan.

古文：十二月，武陵蛮叛，寇掠郡县，遣刘尚讨之，战于沅水，尚军败殁。
现代文：十二月，武陵蛮反叛，抢掠郡县，派刘尚讨伐，在沅水大战，刘尚全军战死。
English: In December, Wuling rebelled violently, plundered counties, and sent Liu Shang to fight. In the Battle of Surabaya, Liu Shang's entire army was killed.

古文：是岁，匈奴薁鞬日逐王比率部曲遣使诣西河内附。
现代文：这年，匈奴薁鞬日逐王比率领部属派使者到西河内附。
English: In the same year, the leader of the Xiongnu sent an envoy to West Hebei Province.

古文：二十四年春正月乙亥，大赦天下。
现代文：二十四年春正月十九日，大赦天下罪犯。
English: On the 19th day of the first month of the spring of the 24th year, the world's criminals were pardoned.

古文：匈奴薁鞬日逐王比遣使款五原塞，求扞御北虏。
现代文：匈奴薁鞬日逐王比派人到五原塞表示友好，要求为汉家抵御北方各族。
English: The Xiongnu sent emissaries to Wuhansi one after another, day after day, to express their friendship and to request that the Han family defend themselves against the northern tribes.

古文：秋七月，武陵蛮寇临沅，遣谒者李嵩、中山太守马成讨蛮，不克，于是伏波将军马援率四将军讨之。
现代文：秋七月，武陵蛮侵扰临沅，派谒者李嵩、中山太守马成讨伐，没有取胜，于是伏波将军马援率领四将军去讨伐。
English: In autumn and July, Wuling brutally invaded Linyi. Li Song and Zhongshan Taishou Ma Cheng, who sent troops to fight, did not win, so General Fubo Ma Yuan led four generals to fight.

古文：诏有司申明旧制阿附蕃王法。
现代文：命令有部门申明以前制定的阿附诸侯王应受重处的法律。
English: The order has a section affirming the previously enacted law that the princes of Aizu should bear the brunt.

古文：冬十月，匈奴薁鞬日逐王比自立为南单于，于是分为南、北匈奴。
现代文：冬十月，匈奴薁鞬日逐王比自封为南单于，于是匈奴分为南、北两部。
English: In the winter of October, the Xiongnu divided into two parts, the North and the South.

古文：二十五年春正月，辽东徼外貊人寇右北平、渔阳、上谷、太原，辽东太守祭肜招降之。
现代文：二十五年春正月，辽东边外貊人入寇右北平、渔阳、上谷、太原，辽东太守祭肜投降他们。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 25th year, people from Liaodong's outlying areas, including Beiping, Yuyang, Shangdani, and Taiyuan, invaded the eastern part of Liaodong and surrendered to them.

古文：乌桓大人来朝。
现代文：乌桓渠帅来朝拜。
English: Wu Kanquanshuai came to pay homage.

古文：南单于遣使诣厥贡献，奉蕃称臣；又遣其左贤王击破北匈奴，却地千余里。
现代文：南单于派使者到京城进贡，行藩国之礼称臣；又派他的左贤王打败北匈奴，拓地千余里。
English: Nan Shan Yu sent an emissary to the capital to pay tribute and pay homage to his vassals; he also sent his Zaxian Wang to defeat the Northern Xiongnu and expand his territory by more than a thousand miles.

古文：三月，南单于遗子入侍。
现代文：三月，南单于派儿子侍奉光武帝。
English: In March, Nan Shan Yu sent his son to serve Emperor Guangwu.

古文：戊申晦，日有食之。
现代文：二十八日，晦，有日食出现。
English: On the 29th, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：伏波将军马援等破武陵蛮于临沅。
现代文：伏波将军马援等在临沅打败武陵蛮。
English: General Ma Yuan of Fubo defeated Wuling in Linyi.

古文：冬十月，叛蛮悉降。
现代文：冬十月，叛将蛮都降附。
English: In the winter of October, all the rebel generals surrendered.

古文：夫馀王遣使奉献。
现代文：夫余王派使者进贡。
English: Her husband, Yu Wang, sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：是岁，乌桓大人率众内属，诣厥朝贡。
现代文：这年，乌桓渠帅率领民众归附，到朝廷贡献礼物。
English: In this year, Wu Kuanqiu led the people to attach themselves, and went to the imperial court to contribute gifts.

古文：二十六年春正月，诏有司增百官奉。其千石已上，减于西京旧制；六百石已下，增于旧秩。
现代文：二十六年春正月，命令有关部门增加百官俸禄，千石以上的，比西汉时旧有标准要减少，六百石以下的，比西汉旧有等级有所增加。
English: In the first month of the spring of the twenty-sixth year, the relevant departments were ordered to increase the salary of 100 officials. Those with more than 1,000 koku should be reduced from the old standard in Western Han Dynasty, and those with less than 600 koku should be increased from the old level in Western Han Dynasty.

古文：初作寿陵。
现代文：开始修建寿陵。
English: Construction of the mausoleum began.

古文：将作大匠窦融上言： 园陵广袤，无虑所用。 帝曰： 古者帝王之葬，皆陶人瓦器，木车茅马，使后世之人不知其处。
现代文：将作大匠窦融上书说明园陵占地面积，及一切所需器物。光武说 ：古时帝王的陪葬，都是陶人瓦器，木车茅马，使后世的人不知它的处所。
English: It will be made by the great master Dou Rong, with a letter explaining the size of the garden and all the necessary utensils. Guangwu said: In ancient times, the burial of the emperor was accompanied by pottery, wooden chariots and horses, so that future generations did not know its location.

古文：太宗识终始之义，景帝能述遵孝道，遭天下反覆，而霸陵独完受其福，岂不美哉！
现代文：太宗了解生死大义，景帝能遵从孝道，历天下变乱，惟独霸陵完好无损，难道不是好事吗？
English: Emperor Taizong understood the great meaning of life and death, Emperor Jing could follow the filial piety, the history of the world was chaotic, but his tomb was intact. Isn't it a good thing?

古文：令所制地不过二三顷，无为山陵，陂池裁令流水而已。 
现代文：现在所规划的地不过二三顷，不起山陵，陂池能散水就行了。 
English: The land now planned is only two or three hectares, it can't build a mausoleum, and it's enough to sprinkle water in the pond.

古文：遣中郎将段郴授南单于玺绶，令入居云中，始置使匈奴中郎将，将兵卫护之。
现代文：光武帝派中郎将段郴授予南单于玺印，让他入内地居于云中郡，开始设置使匈奴中郎将，领兵卫护南匈奴。
English: Emperor Guangwu sent a middle-ranking official to confer the title of Duan Zang to Nan Shan in Yunnan, let him enter the mainland to live in Yunnan County, and began to set up a middle-ranking official for the Xiongnu and a leader to guard the southern Xiongnu.

古文：南单于遣子入侍，奉奏诣厥。
现代文：南单于派儿子入朝侍奉光武，呈上奏书。
English: Nan Shan Yu sent his son to enter the imperial court to serve Guangwu, and submitted a report.

古文：于是云中、五原、朔方、北地、定襄、雁门、上谷、代八郡民归于本土。
现代文：于是云中、五原、朔方、北地、定襄、雁门，上谷和代等八郡民众归本士。
English: As a result, people from eight counties, including Yunzhong, Wuhara, Shuo Fang, Hokkien, Dingxiang, Ganmen, and Shangtani, became bonshi.

古文：遣谒者分将施刑补理城郭。
现代文：派谒者分别将解除判刑的人修补整理城郭。
English: The person who sent the letter will repair and tidy up the castle separately from the person who lifted the sentence.

古文：发遣边民在中国者，布还诸县，皆赐以装钱，转输给食。
现代文：调发遣送在内地的边民，分别让他们返回原籍各县，都发给治理行装费，用车辆运送供应给养。
English: The border residents who were transferred and repatriated to the inland were allowed to return to their counties of origin separately, and all of them were paid the handling and loading fees, and supplies were transported by vehicles.

古文：二十七年夏四月戊午，大司徒玉况薨。
现代文：二十七年夏四月二十一日，大司徒玉况去世。
English: On the 21st of April in the summer of the 27th year, Grand Master Tsuchiyama passed away.

古文：五月丁丑，诏曰： 昔契作司徒，禹作司空，皆无 大 名，其令二府去 大 。 又改大司马为太尉。
现代文：五月十一日，光武帝下诏说： 从前契作司徒，禹作司空，都没有 大 字，今命令两府去掉 大 字。 
English: On May 11th, Emperor Guangwu issued an edict saying, "Previously, there was no Da Zi in the names of Jie Zuo and Yu Zuo. Now, the two prefectures are ordered to remove the Da Zi.

古文：骠骑大将军行大司马刘隆即日罢，以太仆赵熹为太尉，大司农冯勤为司徒。
现代文：又改大司马为太尉，骠骑大将军代理大司马，刘隆即日免职，以太仆赵宪为太尉，任大司农冯勤为司徒。
English: He also changed the grand steward Ma to the lieutenant, the acting grand steward Ma to the lieutenant general, Liu Long was dismissed on the same day, the ethereal servant Zhao Xian to the lieutenant, and the appointed grand steward Nong Feng Qin to the steward.

古文：益州郡徼外蛮夷率种人内属。
现代文：益州郡界外蛮夷率领部族归属。
English: Barbarians from outside the boundaries of Yezhou County led the tribe to belong to the tribe.

古文：北匈奴遣使诣武威乞和亲。
现代文：北匈奴派使者到武威要求和亲。
English: The Northern Xiongnu sent an envoy to Wuwei to demand a reconciliation.

古文：冬，鲁王兴、齐王石始就国。
现代文：冬天，鲁王刘兴、齐王刘石始进入封地。
English: In winter, Lu King Liu Xing and Qi King Liu Shishi entered the fief.

古文：二十八年春正月己巳，徙鲁王兴为北海王，以鲁国益东海。
现代文：二十八年春正月己巳，调鲁王刘兴为北海王，以鲁国地加入东海。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 28th year, Liu Xing, the king of Lu, was appointed the king of the North Sea, and the country of Lu was added to the East Sea.

古文：赐东海王彊虎贲、旄头、钟虡之乐。
现代文：赏赐东海王刘强虎贲、旄头、钟虡之乐。
English: Rewarding the king of the East Sea, Liu Qiang, with the music of the tiger cormorant, cormorant, and bell cormorant.

古文：夏六月丁卯，沛太后郭氏薨，因诏郡县捕王侯宾客，坐死者数千人。
现代文：夏六月初七，沛太后郭氏去世，更始的儿子刘鲤借助沛献王刘辅杀掉了刘盆子的哥哥刘恭，光武帝诏令郡县捕捉王侯宾客，因此而死者数千人。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the summer, Empress Dowager Pei Guo passed away. Her eldest son Liu Xuan killed Liu Bonsi's brother Liu Gong with the help of King Pei Xian Liu Fu. Emperor Guangwu issued an edict to capture the prince's guests from county to county. As a result, thousands of people died.

古文：秋八月戊寅，东海王彊、沛王辅、楚王英、济南王康、淮阳王延始就国。
现代文：秋八月十九日，东海王刘强、沛王刘辅、楚王刘英、济南王刘康、淮阳王刘延开始进入封地。
English: On the 19th day of the 8th month of autumn, the East Sea King Liu Qiang, the Pei King Liu Fu, the Chu King Liu Ying, the Jinan King Liu Kang, and the Huaiyang King Liu Yan began to enter the fief.

古文：冬十月癸酉，诏死罪系囚皆一切募下蚕室，其女子宫。
现代文：冬十月十五日，诏令判死刑的囚犯，一律召下蚕室施腐刑，女子实施宫刑。
English: On the 15th day of October in winter, the prisoners sentenced to death by the imperial edict were all called down to the silkworm room to be tortured, and the women were subjected to palace punishment.

古文：北匈奴遣使贡献，乞和亲。
现代文：北匈奴派使者进贡，乞求和亲。
English: The Northern Xiongnu sent envoys to pay tribute and beg for peace.

古文：二十九年春二月丁巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：二十九年春二月丁酉朔，日蚀。
English: In the spring and February of the 29th year, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：遣使者举冤狱，出系囚。
现代文：光武帝派人平反冤狱，释放囚犯。
English: Emperor Guangwu sent someone to rectify the unjust imprisonment and release the prisoners.

古文：庚申，赐天下男子爵，人二级；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃、贫不能自存者粟，人五斛。
现代文：庚申，赏赐天下男子爵位，每人二级；鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症、穷得无法生存的，每人发粟五斛。
English: Goshun, bestow upon the world men's peerage, second class per person; widows, widowers, orphans, the terminally ill, and those who are too poor to survive, five millet corns per person.

古文：夏四月乙丑，诏令天下系囚自殊死已下及徒各减本罪一等，其余赎罪输作各有差。
现代文：夏四月初十，诏令天下在押囚犯自斩首以下的徒刑各减本罪一等，其余赎罪分别罚作苦役各不等。
English: On the 10th day of the 4th month of the summer, the imperial edict decreed that all the prisoners in custody in the world would have their prison sentences of less than beheading reduced by one grade, and the rest of the atonement would be punished separately with varying degrees of hard labor.

古文：三十年春正月，鲜卑大人内属，朝贺。
现代文：三十年春正月，鲜卑渠帅归附内地，朝贡祝贺。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 30th year, Xianbei Qiu Shuai was annexed to the mainland, and the tributes congratulated him.

古文：二月，东巡狩。甲子，幸鲁，进幸济南。
现代文：二月，光武帝东巡视察，十三日，到鲁，行进到济南。
English: In February, Emperor Guangwu made an inspection tour to the east, and on the 13th, he arrived in Lu and marched to Jinan.

古文：闰月癸丑，车驾还宫。
现代文：闰月癸丑，光武帝回到洛阳。
English: The intercalary month was ugly, and Emperor Guangwu returned to Luoyang.

古文：有星孛于紫宫。
现代文：有彗星出现于紫宫。
English: Order the special advance to wear fish charms.

古文：夏四月戊子，徙左翊王焉为中山王。
现代文：夏四月初九，调左翊王刘焉为中山王。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the summer, Liu Yan, the king of the left-hander, became the king of Zhongshan.

古文：五月，大水。
现代文：五月，涨大水。
English: In May, there was a big flood.

古文：赐天下男子爵，人二级；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃、贫不能自存者粟，人五斛。
现代文：赏赐天下男子爵位，每人二级；鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症、穷得无法生存的，每人发给粟五斛。
English: Awarded the world men's peerage, second-class per person; widows, widowers, orphans, single people, the terminally ill, the poor can not survive, each person is given five millet.

古文：秋七月丁酉。幸鲁国。
现代文：秋七月丁酉，光武帝到鲁国。
English: In the autumn and July of Dingwu, Emperor Guangwu arrived in Lu.

古文：复济阳县是年徭役。
现代文：免除济阳县这年徭役。
English: Jiyang County was exempted from this year's duty.

古文：冬十一月丁酉，至自鲁。
现代文：冬十一月丁酉，从鲁回到洛阳。
English: In the winter of November, Ding Yao returned from Lu to Luoyang.

古文：三十一年夏五月，大水。
现代文：三十一年夏五月，涨大水。
English: In the summer and May of 31st, the water level rose sharply.

古文：戊辰，赐天下男子爵，人二级；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃、贫不能自存者粟，人六斛。
现代文：二十五日，赏赐天下男子爵位，每人二级；鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症、穷得无法生存的，每人发给六斛粟。
English: On the 25th, the world's men were awarded a knighthood, each second class; widows, widowers, orphans, the terminally ill, and those too poor to survive were each given six poppies.

古文：癸酉晦，日有食之。
现代文：三十日，晦，有日食发生。
English: On the evening of the 30th, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：是夏，蝗。
现代文：这年夏，蝗灾。
English: This summer, the locust plague began.

古文：秋九月甲辰，诏令死罪系囚皆一切募下蚕室，其女子宫。
现代文：秋九月初三，诏令判死刑在押囚犯一律召下蚕室实施腐刑，女子实行宫刑。
English: On the third day of the ninth month of the autumn, the prisoners sentenced to death in custody were all called down to the silkworm room to carry out corruption punishment, and the women were subjected to palace punishment.

古文：是岁，陈留雨谷，形如稗实。
现代文：这年，陈留地方天降谷子，形状像稗子。
English: In this year, the Chenliu region received the heavenly corn, shaped like a hazelnut.

古文：北匈奴遣使奉献。
现代文：北匈奴派使者进贡。
English: The Northern Xiongnu sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：中元元年春正月，东海王彊、沛王辅、楚王英、济南王康、淮阳王延、赵王盱皆来朝。
现代文：中元元年春正月，东海王刘强，沛王刘辅、楚王刘英、济南王刘康、淮阳王刘延、赵王刘盱，都进京朝拜。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Middle Ages, the king of the East Sea, Liu Qiang, the king of Pae, Liu Fu, the king of Chu, Liu Ying, the king of Jinan, Liu Kang, the king of Huaiyang, Liu Yan, and the king of Zhao, Liu Yao, all went to Beijing to worship.

古文：丁卯，东巡狩。
现代文：二十八日，光武帝东巡视察。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Guangwu made an inspection tour in the East.

古文：二月己卯，幸鲁，进幸太山。
现代文：二月初十，光武帝到鲁，行进到泰山。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month, Emperor Guangwu arrived in Lu and marched to Mount Tai.

古文：北海王兴、齐王石朝于东岳。
现代文：北海王刘兴，齐王刘右在东岳朝拜皇帝。
English: Liu Xing, the king of the North Sea, and Liu Yu, the king of Qi, paid homage to the emperor at Dongyue.

古文：辛卯，柴望岱宗，登封太山；甲午，禅于梁父。
现代文：二十二日，烧柴望祭岱宗，登泰山祭天，二十五日，在梁父山祭地。
English: On the 22nd, the wood-burning festival of Wangzong, the ascension to Mount Tai for the festival of Heaven, and on the 25th, at the Liangchishan festival site.

古文：三月戊辰，司空张纯薨。
现代文：三月三十日，司空张纯去世。
English: On March 30th, Siku Zhang Jun passed away.

古文：夏四月癸酉，车驾还宫。
现代文：夏四月初五，光武帝回到洛阳。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth month of the summer, Emperor Guangwu returned to Luoyang.

古文：己卯，大赦天下。
现代文：十一日，大赦天下。
English: On the 11th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：复嬴、博、梁父、奉高，勿出今年田租刍稿。改年为中元。
现代文：免除嬴、博、梁父、奉高今年田租柴草。改年号为中元。
English: Zou, Bo, Liang Chou and Feng Gao were exempted from this year's rice field rent. The new year's name is Zhongyuan.

古文：行幸长安。
现代文：光武帝到长安。
English: Emperor Guangwu came to Chang'an.

古文：戊子，祀长陵。
现代文：二十日，祭祀长陵。
English: On the 20th, the memorial service for Nagare no longer takes place.

古文：五月乙丑，至自长安。
现代文：五月二十八日，帝从长安回洛阳。
English: On May 28, the emperor returned to Luoyang from Chang'an.

古文：六月辛卯，太仆冯鲂为司空。
现代文：六月二十四日，任太仆冯鲂为司空。
English: On June 24th, he appointed his manservant Feng Jun as the new governor.

古文：乙未，司徒冯勤薨。
现代文：二十八日，司徒冯勤去世。
English: On the 28th, Szu Feng Qin passed away.

古文：是夏，京师醴泉涌出，饮之者固疾皆愈，惟眇、蹇者不瘳。
现代文：这年夏天，京城涌出甘美的泉水，喝了的老病都好了，只有眼瞎的跛脚的无效。
English: In the summer of that year, luscious spring water gushed out of the capital, and all the old diseases were cured after drinking it. Only the blind and lame were not cured.

古文：又有赤草生于水崖。
现代文：又有红草生于水边山崖。
English: There is also red grass growing on the water's edge cliffs.

古文：郡国频上甘露。
现代文：郡国多次上报得了及时雨。
English: The county has repeatedly reported timely rain.

古文：群臣奏言： 地祇灵应而朱草萌生。
现代文：众臣上报告说 ：地神有灵而朱草萌生。
English: The vassals reported to the emperor: the earth god has a spirit and vermilion grass sprouts.

古文：孝宣帝每有嘉瑞，辄以改元、神爵、五凤、甘露、黄龙，列为年纪，盖以感致神祇，表彰德信。
现代文：孝宣帝每当有吉祥的现象出现，便根据祥瑞改纪元，神爵、五凤、甘露，黄龙列为年号，大概是用它们感谢神祗，表彰自己的德行和诚信。
English: Whenever an auspicious phenomenon occurred, Emperor Xiao Xuan ranked the years according to the auspicious and auspicious changes of the era, such as Shenjie, Wufeng, Nectar, and Huanglong, and probably used them to thank the gods and commend his own virtue and integrity.

古文：是以化致升平，称为中兴。
现代文：所以才教化普及而天下升平。称为中兴。
English: That's why the enlightenment spread and the world was leveled. It's called ZTE.

古文：今天下清宁，灵物仍降。
现代文：现天下太平，灵物迭降。
English: At present, the world is at peace, and spirits are on the decline.

古文：陛下情存损挹，推而不居，岂可使祥符显庆，没而无闻？
现代文：皇上谦虚退让，推辞不受，难道可以使吉祥符瑞显示的吉庆淹没不闻？
English: Can the emperor's modest concession, which is not subject to rejection, drown out the auspicious celebration shown by the auspicious charm?

古文：宜令太史撰集，以传来世。 帝不纳。
现代文：应当命令太史撰写汇集，以便流传后世。 光武帝不采纳。
English: Emperor Guangwu should order that a compilation of the history of Tai should be written, so that it could be passed down to future generations.

古文：常自谦无德，每郡国所上，辄抑而不当，故史官罕得记焉。
现代文：经常自谦无德，郡国每次上报的祥瑞，则压住而不宣扬，所以史官很少记载。
English: He was often self-effacing and unprincipled. Every time the county reported Xiang Rui, he suppressed it and did not publicize it, so historians rarely recorded him.

古文：秋，郡国三蝗。
现代文：秋天，郡国三次蝗灾。
English: In autumn, there were three locust plagues in the county.

古文：冬十月辛未，司隶校尉东莱李为司徒。
现代文：冬十月初六，任司隶校尉东莱人李讠斤为司徒。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of the winter, the Donglai native Li Shujin, who had been appointed as the captain of Sili, became Sidi.

古文：甲申，使司空告祠高庙曰： 高皇帝与群臣约，非刘氏不王。
现代文：十九日，派司空祭祀高庙说： 高皇帝与群臣相约，非刘氏子孙不得为王。
English: On the 19th, Gao Miao, a priest of the Kuo cult, said: Emperor Gao has made an agreement with his courtiers that no one but a descendant of the Liu clan may become king.

古文：吕太后贼害三赵，专王吕氏，赖社稷之灵，禄、产伏诛，天命几坠，危朝更安。
现代文：吕太后残害赵幽王刘友、赵恭王刘恢、赵隐王刘如意，专任吕氏子为王。赖天地灵应，吕禄、吕产伏法受诛。天命不坠，朝廷转危为安。
English: Empress Dowager Lv mutilated Zhao Yu Wang Liu You, Zhao Gong Wang Liu Wei, and Zhao Yin Wang Liu Ruyi, and appointed Lv's son as king. Relying on the spirit of heaven and earth, Lv Lu and Lv Sheng Fu Fa were enthroned. Heaven's will did not fall, and the imperial court was safe.

古文：吕太后不宜配食高庙，同祧至尊。
现代文：吕太后不宜配享高庙，同享至尊。
English: It is not appropriate for Empress Dowager Lv to enjoy the high temple, but to share the supreme.

古文：薄太后母德慈仁，孝文皇帝贤明临国，子孙赖福，延祚至今。
现代文：薄太后母德慈仁，孝文皇帝贤明治国，子孙受福，国家命脉得以延续至今。
English: The Dowager Empress Dowager Dowager Dowager Empress Dowager Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：其上薄太后尊号曰高皇后，配食地祇。
现代文：应上薄太后号为高皇后，配食地祗。
English: The name of the empress dowager should be Gao Qiong, and the food distribution mantle should be crescent.

古文：迁吕太后庙主于园，四时上祭。 
现代文：迁吕太后神主牌位置于茔域园寝，四时祭祀。 
English: The main shrine of the relocated Empress Dowager Lv is located in the Summer Palace Garden, and is dedicated at 4:00 p.m.

古文：十一月甲子晦，日有食之。
现代文：十一月二十九日，晦，有日食发生。
English: On the evening of November 29th, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：是岁，初起明堂、灵台、辟雍，及北郊兆域。
现代文：这年，开始建造明堂、灵台、辟雍，及北郊兆域。
English: In this year, the construction of Myeongdong, Lingdae, Biyong, and the northern suburb Zhaowei began.

古文：宣布图谶于天下。
现代文：宣布图谶于天下。
English: The announcement of the film was made to the world.

古文：复济阳、南顿是年徭役。
现代文：免除济阳、南顿这年徭役。
English: Jiyang and Nantong will be exempted from this year's role.

古文：参狼羌寇武都，败郡兵，陇西太守刘盱遣军救之，及武都郡兵讨叛羌，皆破之。
现代文：参狼羌入寇武都，打败郡兵，陇西太守刘盱派兵救援，武都郡兵讨伐叛羌，都打败了他们。
English: They entered the county capital of Wudu and defeated the county soldiers. The governor of Shaanxi Province, Liu Ye, sent soldiers to rescue them, and the Wudu county soldiers fought against the rebels and defeated them.

古文：二年春正月辛未，初立北郊，祀后土。
现代文：二年春正月初八，初立北郊坛，祭祀后土。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the second year of spring, the northern suburb altar was erected for the first time, and the ritual began.

古文：东夷倭奴国王遣使奉献。
现代文：东夷倭奴国王派使者进贡。
English: The king of the Eastern barbarians, the Wano, sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：二月戊戌，帝崩于南宫前殿，年六十二。
现代文：二月初五，光武帝在南宫前殿逝世，享年六十二岁。
English: On February 5th, Emperor Guangwu passed away at the age of 62.

古文：遗诏曰： 朕无益百姓，皆如孝文皇帝制度，务从约省。
现代文：遗诏说： 我无益于百姓，后事都照孝文皇帝制度，务必俭省。
English: The last will and testament said: I am of no benefit to the people. I will follow the Emperor Xiaowen's system. I will be frugal.

古文：刺史、二千石长吏皆无离城郭，无遣吏及因邮奏。 
现代文：刺史、二千石长吏都不要离开自己所在的城邑，不要派官员或通过驿传邮寄唁函吊唁。 
English: Do not leave the town where you are, do not send officials or send letters of condolence by mail.

古文：初，帝在兵间久，厌武事，且知天下疲耗，思乐息肩。
现代文：以前，光武帝久于戎马生涯，厌倦打仗，并且深知国家疲敝虚耗，很想卸去重担轻松一下。
English: In the past, Emperor Guangwu had been in the army for a long time. He was tired of fighting and knew that the country was exhausted. He wanted to take off the burden and relax.

古文：自陇、蜀平后，非儆急，未尝复言军旅。
现代文：自陇、蜀平定后，不是形势紧迫，很少再谈用兵的事。
English: After the Self-Defense Forces and Shu were pacified, the situation was not urgent, and the use of troops was rarely discussed.

古文：皇太子尝问攻战之事，帝曰： 昔卫灵公问陈，孔子不对，此非尔所及。 每旦视朝，日仄乃罢。
现代文：皇太子曾请问打仗的事，光武说： 从前卫灵公向孔子请教军事问题，孔子不回答。这不是你所要研究的。 每日早晨上朝办公，日影西斜才停止。
English: The crown prince once asked about the war, and Guangwu said: From the avant-garde spirit, he asked Confucius for military questions, but Confucius did not answer. This is not what you want to study. Every morning when you go to work, the sun's shadow stops tilting to the west.

古文：数引公卿、郎、将讲论经理，夜分乃寐。
现代文：屡屡召集公卿、郎、将，讨论经书的道理，半夜才睡。
English: He repeatedly convened court nobles, retainers, and generals to discuss the principles of the scriptures, and only went to bed at midnight.

古文：皇太子见帝勤劳不怠，承间谏曰： 陛下有禹、汤之明，而失黄、老养性之福，愿颐爱精神，优游自宁。 帝曰： 我自乐此，不为疲也。 虽身济大业，兢兢如不及，故能明慎政体，总揽权纲，量时度力，举无过事。
现代文：皇太子看到皇上勤劳不懈，趁空隙劝谏道： 皇上有禹、汤的英明，却没有黄、老修养性灵的福气，但愿颐情保养，悠闲自得。 光武说 ：我甘心这样，并不以为疲苦。 光武帝虽成就了大业，却小心翼翼，只怕有所失误，所以能对政事清明谨慎，总揽权纲，审时度力，全无过错。
English: The crown prince saw that the emperor was working tirelessly, and took advantage of the gap to advise him: The emperor has the wisdom of Yu and Tang, but does not have the luck of Huang and Lao to cultivate his spirit, but I hope you can maintain your feelings and take it easy. Guangwu said: I am willing to do so, and I do not think it is tiring. Although Emperor Guangwu has achieved a great cause, he is careful, just afraid of making mistakes, so he can be clear and cautious about political affairs, the overall power grab, and the power to judge time, all without fault.

古文：退功臣而进文吏，戢弓矢而散马牛，虽道未方古，斯亦止戈之武焉。
现代文：退去有功的武臣而任用文官，收藏武器，马放南山。虽治国之道不能和古代圣贤相比，但毕竟也是偃武息戈，讲求文治呢！
English: Although the way of governing the country cannot be compared to that of the ancient sages, it is, after all, the way of the warrior, the way of the scholar!

古文：论曰：皇考南顿君初为济阳令，以建平元年十二月甲子夜生光武于县舍，有赤光照室中。
现代文：史家评论说：光武帝的父亲南顿君刘钦开始为济阳令，在建平元年十二月初六夜生光武于县舍，有赤光照室中。
English: Historians commented: Emperor Guangwu's father, Nandongjun Liuqin, began as a Jiyang ruler. On the 6th night of December in the first year of Jianping, Emperor Guangwu was born in the county residence, in a room with a red light.

古文：钦异焉，使卜者王长占之。
现代文：刘钦很怪异，要占卜的人王长占卜吉凶。
English: Liu Qin is very strange, people who want to divination Wang Chang divination auspicious.

古文：长辟左右曰： 此兆吉不可言。 是岁县界有嘉禾生，一茎九穗，因名光武曰秀。
现代文：王长避开左右的人说 ：占卜的结果，显示的吉祥妙不可言。 这年县境内长出美丽的禾苗，一茎九穗，因而给光武取名为秀。
English: Wang Chang avoided the people around and said: The result of divination, the auspiciousness shown cannot be said. This year, beautiful seedlings grew in the county, one stem and nine ears, so he named Guangwu Shu.

古文：明年，方士有夏贺良者，上言哀帝，云汉家历运中衰，当再受命。
现代文：第二年，方士夏贺良上书哀帝说汉家的国运中途衰落，应当重新受命。
English: The following year, the Fang scholar Xia He Liang wrote a letter to the emperor lamenting that the Han dynasty's national fortune had declined in the middle of the year, and that he should be reappointed.

古文：于是改号为太初元年，称 陈圣刘太平皇帝 ，以厌胜之。
现代文：于是改号为太初元年，称 陈圣刘太平皇帝 ，想用来压制厄运。
English: As a result, he changed his name to Taishu 1st Year, calling Chen Sheng Liu the Taiping Emperor, which he wanted to use to suppress bad luck.

古文：及王莽篡位，忌恶刘氏，以钱文有金刀，故改为货泉。
现代文：王莽篡位后，忌恶刘氏，因钱面文字有金刀，所以改货币为货泉。
English: After Wang Mang usurped the throne, he abhorred the Liu clan. Because the money had a golden sword on the obverse, he changed the currency to goods.

古文：或以货泉字文为 白水真人 。
现代文：有人说货泉字文象 白水真人 。
English: Some people say that the character of the goods spring is like the real person of the white water.

古文：后望气者苏伯阿为王莽使至南阳，遥望见舂陵郭，唶曰： 气佳哉！
现代文：后有望云气预言吉凶的苏伯阿，任王莽的使者到达南阳，远远地望见舂陵城郭，惊叹说： 云气多好啊，郁郁葱葱！ 
English: Later, Su Boa, an envoy of Ren Wang Mang, who was expected to predict the fortunes of the clouds, arrived in Nanyang, saw the city of Fuling in the distance, and marveled, "How beautiful the clouds are, so lush!"

古文：郁郁葱葱然。 及始起兵还舂陵，远望舍南，火光赫然属天，有顷不见。
现代文：到光武刚起兵回舂陵，远望住宅南面，火光融融冲天，很有一会儿才不见了。
English: When Guangwu just raised an army to return to Fuling, he looked to the south of the residence, and the flames melted into the sky. It took a while before they disappeared.

古文：初，道士西门君惠、李守等亦云刘秀当为天子。
现代文：从前，道士西门君惠、李守等也说过刘秀一定会当天子。
English: Once upon a time, Taoists such as Ximen Junhui and Li Shou also said that Liu Xiu would definitely be the son of Heaven.

古文：其王者受命，信有符乎？
现代文：大概是王者承受天命，真的有祥瑞的兆头吧？
English: It is probably the king who bears the fate of heaven. Is there really a sign of auspiciousness?

古文：不然，何以能乘时龙而御天哉！
现代文：不然的话，何以能顺时乘龙主宰天下呢！
English: Otherwise, how can it be possible to rule the world by the grace of the dragon!

