古文：定王使单襄公聘于宋。遂假道于陈，以聘于楚。
现代文：周定王派单襄公出使宋国，此后又借道陈国访问楚国。
English: Zhou Dingwang sent an envoy to the Song Dynasty, and later visited the Chu Dynasty through the Chen Dynasty.

古文：火朝觌矣，道茀不可行，候不在疆，司空不视涂，泽不陂，川不梁，野有庾积，场功未毕，道无列树，垦田若艺，膳宰不致饩，司里不授馆，国无寄寓，县无施舍，民将筑台于夏氏。
现代文：已是清晨能见到大火星的季节了，道路杂草丛生无法通行，负责接待宾客的官员也未在边境迎候，司空不巡视道路，湖泽不筑堤坝，河流未曾架设桥梁，野外堆放着谷物，谷场没有修整，路旁没有种植树木，田里的庄稼稀稀拉拉，膳夫不供应食物，里宰不安排住宿，都邑内连客房都没有，郊县里没有旅舍，百姓将去为夏氏修筑台观。
English: It is already the season to see the Great Martian early in the morning, the roads are overgrown and impassable, the officials responsible for receiving guests are not waiting at the border, the civil aviation authority does not patrol the roads, the lakes do not build dykes, the rivers have not been bridged, the grain is piled up in the open, the grain fields are not groomed, the roadside is not planted with trees, the crops in the fields are sparse, the caterer does not supply food, the village does not arrange accommodation, there is not even a guest room in the capital, there is no hostel in the suburbs, the people will go to build a platform for Xia.

古文：及陈，陈灵公与孔宁、仪行父南冠以如夏氏，留宾不见。
现代文：到了陈国都城，陈灵公与大臣孔宁、仪行父穿戴着楚地流行的服饰到夏氏家玩乐，丢下客人不会见。
English: When they arrived at the capital city of Chen Guo, Chen Linggong, Minister Kong Ning, and Yi Xingfu, wearing the popular clothing of Chu, went to Xia's house to have fun. They would not leave the guests behind.

古文：单子归，告王曰： 陈侯不有大咎，国必亡。 
现代文：单襄公回朝后告诉周定王说： 陈侯如果不遭遇凶险灾祸，国家也会灭亡。 
English: After returning to the imperial court, Prince Shanxiang told King Zhou Ding that: "If Chen Hou does not encounter a terrible disaster, the country will also perish.

古文：王曰： 何故？ 
现代文：周定王问： 什么原因呢？ 
English: Zhou Dingwang asked: What is the reason?

古文：对曰： 夫辰角见而雨毕，天根见而水涸，本见而草木节解，驷见而陨霜，火见而清风戒寒。
现代文：单襄公答道： 角星在早晨出现时表示雨水结束，天根在早晨出现时表示河流将干枯，氐星在早晨出现时表示草木将凋落，房星在早晨出现时便要降霜了，大火星在早晨出现时表示天气已冷，该准备过冬了。
English: Shan Xianggong replied, "When the horn star appears in the morning, it means that the rain has ended. When the heavenly root appears in the morning, it means that the river will dry up. When the hail star appears in the morning, it means that the grass will fall. When the house star appears in the morning, it means that the frost will fall. When the great Mars appears in the morning, it means that the weather is cold and it is time to prepare for winter.

古文：故先王之教曰： 雨毕而除道，水涸而成梁，草木节解而备藏，陨霜而冬裘具，清风至而修城郭宫室。 
现代文：所以先王的教诲说： 雨季结束便修整道路，河流干枯便修造桥梁，草木凋谢便储藏谷物，霜降来临使备好冬衣，寒风吹起就修整城郭宫室。 
English: Therefore, the teachings of the former king said: At the end of the rainy season, the roads will be repaired, the rivers will dry up and bridges will be built, the grass will wither and grains will be stored, the frost will come and winter clothes will be prepared, and the cold wind will blow and the castle palace will be repaired.

古文：故《夏令》曰： 九月除道，十月成梁。 
现代文：所以《夏令》说： 九月修路，十月架桥。 
English: That's why "Summertime" says: Build roads in September and bridges in October.

古文：其时做曰： 收而场功，待而畚梮，营室之中，土功其始。
现代文：届时又提醒人们说： 结束场院的农活，备好土箕和扁担，当营室之星见于中天时，营造工作就要开始。
English: At that time, he also reminded people that: the farm work of the yard should be completed, the earthen mound and flat pile should be prepared, and the construction work should begin when the star of the camp is seen in the middle of the sky.

古文：火之初见，期于司里。 
现代文：在大火星刚出现时，到司里那儿去集合。 
English: At the first appearance of the Great Mars, go to Sili to assemble.

古文：此先王所以不用财贿，而广施德于天下者也。
现代文：这正是先王能够不费钱财而向民众广施恩惠的原因啊。
English: This is precisely the reason why the former king was able to grant favors to the people without spending money.

古文：今陈国火朝觌矣，而道路若塞，野场若弃，泽不陂障，川无舟梁，是废先王之教也。
现代文：现在陈国早晨就能够看见大火星了，但是道路已经被杂草覆盖，农村的谷场已经被废弃，湖泊不筑堤坝，河流不备舟桥，这是荒废了先王的遗教。
English: Now Chen Guo can see the Great Mars in the morning, but the road has been covered with weeds, the rural valley has been abandoned, the lakes do not build dams, and the rivers do not have boat bridges. This is the legacy of the former king.

古文： 周制有之曰： 列树以表道，立鄙食以守路。
现代文： 周代的制度规定： 种植树木以标明道路，郊外提供食宿以款待旅客。
English: Zhou Dynasty's system stipulates: planting trees to mark roads, providing accommodation in the suburbs to entertain travelers.

古文：国有郊牧，疆有寓望，薮有圃草，囿有林池，所以御灾也。
现代文：国家有专设的牧场，边境有接待宾客的设施，洼地里有茂盛的水草，园苑中有林木和水池，这都是用来防备灾害的。
English: The country has special pastures, the border has facilities for receiving guests, there are lush aquatic plants in the lowlands, and there are trees and ponds in the gardens, all of which are used to prevent disasters.

古文：其余无非谷土，民无悬耜，野无奥草。
现代文：其余的地方无不是农田，百姓没有闲置的农具，田野不曾杂草丛生。
English: The rest of the place is nothing but farmland, the people have no idle farm tools, the fields have never been overgrown with weeds.

古文：不夺民时，不蔑民功。
现代文：农时不被耽误，没有看不起百姓的劳动。
English: He did not waste time in farming and did not despise the labor of the people.

古文：有优无匮，有逸无罢。
现代文：生活富裕而不穷困，百姓安逸而不疲惫。
English: The life is rich but not poor, the people are comfortable but not tired.

古文：国有班事，县有序民。 
现代文：都城中各类人员职责分明，郊外的民众劳作井然有序。 
English: All types of personnel in the capital have clear responsibilities, and people in the suburbs work in an orderly manner.

古文：今陈国道路不可知，田在草间，功成而不收，民罢于逸乐，是弃先王之法制也。
现代文：如今陈国的道路无法辨认，农田被杂草淹没，庄稼成熟了也没有人收割，百姓为国君的享乐而疲于劳作，这是抛弃了先王的法度。
English: Today, the roads of Chen Guo are unrecognizable, the farmland is flooded with weeds, the crops are ripe and no one is harvesting, and the people are tired of working for the pleasure of the sovereign. This is the abandonment of the law of the former king.

古文： 周之《秩官》有之曰： 敌国宾至，关尹以告，行理以节逆之，候人为导，卿出郊劳，门尹除门，宗祝执祀，司里授馆，司徒具徒，司空视涂，司寇诘奸，虞人入材，甸人积薪，火师监燎，水师监濯，膳宰致饔，廪人献饩，司马陈刍，工人展车，百官以物至，宾入如归。
现代文： 周的《秩官》上说： 地位相等国家的宾客来访，关尹便向上报告，行理手持符节去迎接，候人引路，卿士到郊外表示慰问，门尹清扫门庭，宗祝陪同客人行祭礼，司里安排住处，司徒调派仆役，司空视察道路，司寇查禁奸盗，虞人供应物品，甸人运送燃料，火师照看火烛，水师料理盥洗，膳宰进送熟食，廪人献奉粮米，司马备齐草料，工人检修车辆，百官各按职责照应，客人来访如同回到了家里。
English: Zhou's "Chancellor" said: When a guest from a country of equal status comes to visit, Guan Yin will report to the upper echelon, the host will go to meet the guest with a hand-held festival, the host will lead the way, the noblemen will go to the suburbs to express condolences, the host will sweep the courtyard, the guests will accompany the guests to perform the ritual, the host will arrange the accommodation, the host will dispatch the servants, the host will inspect the road, the host will investigate the theft, the guest will supply the goods, the guest will transport the fuel, the fireman will take care of the candles, the sailor will cook and wash,

古文：是故小大莫不怀爱。
现代文：因此大小宾客无不感到满意。
English: As a result, both large and small guests are satisfied.

古文：其贵国之宾至，则以班加二等，益虔。
现代文：如果大国的客人到了，接待的规格就提高一个等级，更加恭敬。
English: If a guest from a big country arrives, the standard of the reception is raised to a higher level, more respectful.

古文：至于王吏，则皆官正莅事，上卿监之。
现代文：至于天子派官员到来，则由各部门的长官接待，上卿加以督察。
English: As for the arrival of officials sent by the Son of Heaven, they were received by the chiefs of various departments and inspected by the high lords.

古文：若王巡守，则君亲监之。 
现代文：如果天子下来巡视，就由国君亲临督察。 
English: If the Son of Heaven comes down to inspect, the sovereign himself will come to inspect.

古文：今虽朝也不才，有分族于周，承王命以为过宾于陈，而司事莫至，是蔑先王之官也。
现代文：如今臣虽然没有什么才能，但还是天子的亲族，是奉了天子的使命作为宾客而途经陈国，然而主管的官员却不来照应，这是蔑视先王所制定的官职。
English: Today, although the vassal has no talent, he is still a relative of the Son of Heaven. He is on a mission from the Son of Heaven and is passing through Chen Guo as a guest. However, the officials in charge do not come to attend to him. This is contempt for the official position established by the former king.

古文： 先王之令有之曰： 天道赏善而罚淫，故凡我造国，无从非彝，无即慆淫，各守尔典，以承天休。 
现代文： 先王的法令中说： 天道是奖善惩恶的，所以凡由我们周室治国，不允许违背法令，不迁就怠惰放纵，各自遵守你们的职责，以接受上天的赐福。 
English: The decree of the former king said: "The way of heaven rewards the good and punishes the evil. Therefore, those of us who govern the country are not allowed to violate the law and indulge in laziness and indulgence. Each of you must abide by your duties in order to receive the blessings of heaven.

古文：今陈侯不念胤续之常，弃其伉俪妃嫔，而帅其卿佐以淫于夏氏，不亦渎姓矣乎？
现代文：如今陈侯不顾念历代相承的法度，抛弃自己的夫人妃嫔，带领下属到夏氏那里去恣意淫乐，这不是亵渎了姬姓吗？
English: Nowadays, Chen Hou disregards the laws passed down from generation to generation, abandons his wife and concubines, and leads his subordinates to Xia's place for wanton sexual pleasure. Isn't this a desecration of her maiden name?

古文：陈，我大姬之后也。弃衮冕而南冠以出，不亦简彝乎？
现代文：陈侯是我们大姬的后裔，却丢弃正式的礼服而穿戴楚地的服饰外出，这不是简慢了礼制吗？
English: Chen Hou is the descendant of our great-grandmother, but he discards the formal dress and goes out wearing Chu clothing. Isn't this a simplified form of etiquette?

古文：是又犯先王之令也。
现代文：这又违背了先王的政令。
English: This, in turn, is a violation of the former king's decree.

古文： 昔先王之教，懋帅其德也犹恐殒越。
现代文： 过去先王的教诲，即使认真遵行也害怕有差池。
English: In the past, the teachings of the former king, even if seriously followed, were afraid of deviations.

古文：若废其教而弃其制，蔑其官而犯其令，将何以守国？
现代文：像这样荒废先王的遗教、抛弃先王的法度、蔑视先王的分职、违背先王的政令，那用什么来守卫国家呢？
English: If the last teachings of the former king are thus destroyed, if the former king's laws are abandoned, if the former king's offices are despised, and if the former king's decrees are violated, what will be used to defend the country?

古文：居大国之间而无此四者，其能久乎？ 
现代文：地处大国的中间而不仰仗先王的遗教、法度、分职、政令，能够支持长久吗？ 
English: Is it possible to support a coup for a long time while being located in the middle of a large country and not relying on the late king's teachings, laws, division of duties, and decrees?

古文：六年，单子如楚。
现代文：周定王六年，单襄公到楚国。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of King Zhou Ding, Duke Xiang went to the State of Chu.

古文：八年，陈侯杀于夏氏。
现代文：定王八年，陈灵公被夏征舒杀害。
English: In the eighth year of King Ding, Chen Linggong was killed by Xia Zhengshu.

古文：九年，楚子入陈。
现代文：定王九年，楚庄王攻入陈国。
English: In the ninth year of King Ding, King Zhuang invaded the State of Chen.

