古文：天文下史臣曰：天文设象，宜备内外两宫。但灾之所躔，不必遍行景纬，五星精晷与二曜而为七，妖祥是主，历数攸司，盖有殊于列宿也。
现代文：史臣曰：天文陈列历象，应当遍及内外两宫的星辰，但是灾异所运行的轨迹，不一定遍及景星纬星，五大行星的光影与日月共是七颗，主管妖异吉祥，关系天象历数，因而有别于一般星宿。
English: The historian said: the astronomical display calendar should cover the stars of the two palaces at home and abroad, but the trajectory of the disaster does not necessarily cover the stars of the stars. The light and shadow of the five planets and the sun and the moon are a total of seven, which is auspicious and auspicious, and is related to the number of celestial calendars, so it is different from ordinary stars.

古文：建元元年八月辛亥，太白犯轩辕大星。九月癸丑，太白从行于轸犯填星。二年六月丙子，太白昼见。
现代文：如果北极星不移动，占据在杠轴位置，众星流动，实是维系了天体，五大行星按照一定的轨道运行，并没有其他意思，所以徐颢思认为五大行星不是一般的星，虞喜对此论述得很详细。纽元年八月辛亥，金星冲犯轩辕大星。九月癸丑，金星顺行在轸宿冲犯土星。二年六月丙子，金星在白天出现。
English: If the North Star does not move, occupies the position of the bar axis, and the stars flow, it actually maintains the celestial bodies. The five planets run according to a certain orbit, and there is no other meaning. Therefore, Xu Yuxi believes that the five planets are not ordinary stars. Yu Xi discussed this in detail. In August of the first year of the New Year of the Pig, Venus collided with the great star of Xinghai. In September, Venus collided with Saturn in Puxi. In June of the second year of the Pig, Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：四年二月丙戌，太白昼见在午上。
现代文：四年二月丙戌，金星白天出现在午位上。
English: In February of the fourth year, Venus appeared in the morning sky during the day.

古文：六月辛卯，太白昼见午上。
现代文：六月辛卯，金星白天出现在午位上。
English: In June, Venus appears in the morning sky during the day.

古文：庚子，太白入东井，无所犯。
现代文：庚子，金星进入井宿，无所冲犯。
English: Geng Zi, Venus enters the well, there is nothing to offend.

古文：七月己未，太白有光影。
现代文：七月己未，金星有光影。
English: It's not even July yet, and Venus is shining.

古文：八月戊子，太白从轩辕犯女主星。
现代文：八月戊子，金星从轩辕星冲犯女主星。
English: August Bosi, Venus from Xuan Zi Xing stormed the female main star.

古文：甲辰，太白从行犯轩辕少民星。
现代文：甲辰，金星顺行冲犯轩辕少民星。
English: Jia Chen, Venus, along the way, offend Xuan Zi, a minor star.

古文：九月己卯，太白从行犯太微西蕃上将。
现代文：九月己卯，金星顺行冲犯太微垣西部上将星。
English: In September, Venus will move in a straight line and collide with the star in the western part of Taikogaki.

古文：辛酉，太白从行入太微，在右执法星西北一尺。
现代文：辛酉，金星顺行进入太微垣，在右执法星西北一尺。
English: In the morning, Venus moves into Taibiao, one foot northwest of the star on the right.

古文：戊辰，太白从行犯太微左执法。
现代文：戊辰，金星顺行冲犯太微垣左执法星。
English: Bo Chen, Venus along the line of the impact of the criminal is too small, and the left law enforcement star.

古文：十二月壬子，太白从行犯填星，在氐度。
现代文：十二月壬子，金星顺行冲犯土星，在氐宿方位。
English: In December, Venus will retrograde and collide with Saturn, in the sign of Aries.

古文：丙辰，太白从行犯房北头第一星。
现代文：丙辰，金星顺行冲犯房宿北头第一颗星。
English: B star, Venus along the line of the first star in the north.

古文：丁卯，太白犯楗闭星。
现代文：丁卯，金星冲犯楗闭星。
English: Dingwu, Venus collides with the Pleiades.

古文：永明元年六月己酉，太白行犯太微上将星。
现代文：永明元年六月己酉，金星运行冲犯太微垣上将星。
English: In June of the first year of the Yongming era, Venus was in retrograde motion, impinging on the star of Admiral Taibaki.

古文：辛酉，太白行犯太微左执法。
现代文：辛酉，金星运行冲犯太微垣左执法星。
English: Xin Xuan, Venus run impact offender too weak, left law enforcement star.

古文：八月甲申，太白犯南斗第四星。
现代文：八月甲申，金星冲犯南斗的第四颗星。
English: August Jiaxun, the fourth star of the fourth star of the fourth star of the fourth star.

古文：九月乙酉，太白犯南斗第三星。
现代文：九月乙酉，金星冲犯南斗的第三颗星。
English: September Acetylene, Venus collides with the third star of the Southern Cross.

古文：壬辰，太白、荧惑合同在南斗度。
现代文：壬辰，金星火星会合在南斗方位。
English: At Imjin, Venus and Mars will meet in the southern direction.

古文：十月丁卯，太白犯哭星。
现代文：十月丁卯，金星冲犯哭星。
English: October Dingwu, Venus rushes to the crying star.

古文：二年正月戊戌，太白昼见当午上。
现代文：二年正月戊戌，金星白天出现在午位上。
English: In the first month of the second year, Venus appeared at the noon position during the day.

古文：三月甲戌，太白从行入羽林。
现代文：三月甲戌，金星顺行进入羽林星。
English: March is the month of armor, and Venus moves into the feathered forest.

古文：四月丙申，太白从行犯东井钺星。
现代文：四月丙申，金星顺行冲犯井宿的铁星。
English: In April, when Venus is in retrograde, it will collide with the iron star of the well.

古文：六月戊辰，太白、荧惑合同在舆鬼度。
现代文：六月戊辰，金星火星会合在舆鬼星方位。
English: On June 24th, Venus and Mars will meet in the sign of the Zodiac.

古文：己巳，太白从行舆鬼度犯岁星。
现代文：己巳，金星顺行至舆鬼星方位冲犯木星。
English: Right now, Venus is moving along until it collides with Jupiter.

古文：三年四月丁未，太白昼见。
现代文：三年四月丁未，金星白天出现。
English: On the evening of April 3, Venus appeared during the day.

古文：癸亥，太白昼见当午上。
现代文：癸亥，金星白天出现在午位上。
English: In winter, Venus appears in the afternoon sky.

古文：五月戊子，太白犯少民星。
现代文：五月戊子，金星冲犯少民星。
English: May is the month of the child, and Venus is the month of the offender.

古文：八月丁巳，太白昼见当午上。
现代文：八月丁巳，金星白天出现在午位上。
English: In August, Venus appears in the morning sky during the day.

古文：十一月壬申，太白从行入氐。
现代文：十一月壬申，金星顺行进入氐宿。
English: In November, according to the lunar calendar, Venus moves into Aries.

古文：十二月己酉，太白填星合在箕度。
现代文：十二月己酉，金星土星会合在箕宿方位。
English: At the end of December, Venus and Saturn meet at the Pleiades.

古文：四年九月壬辰，太白昼见当午。
现代文：四年九月壬辰，金星白天出现在午位。
English: In September of the fourth year, Venus appeared at the noon position during the day.

古文：丙午，太白犯南斗。
现代文：丙午，金星冲犯南斗星。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Venus will collide with the Southern Dipper.

古文：十一月庚子，太白入羽林，又犯天关。
现代文：十一月庚子，金星进入羽林星，又冲犯天关。
English: November Geng Zi, Venus enters the feathered forest star, and it collides with the celestial pass.

古文：五年五月丁酉，太白昼见当午上。
现代文：五年五月丁酉，金星白天出现在午位上。
English: In May of the year five, Venus appears in the afternoon sky.

古文：庚子，太白三犯毕左股第一星西南一尺。六月甲戌，太白犯东井北辕第三星，在西一尺。
现代文：庚子，金星三次在毕宿左股第一颗星西南一尺处冲犯六月甲戌，金星冲犯井宿北辕第三颗星，在西一尺处。
English: Geng Zi, Venus three times in Biju left the first star at one foot southwest of the first star, and hit the June Armor, and Venus hit the third star in Jingju north of the third star, at one foot west.

古文：八月甲寅，太白从行入轩辕，在女主星东北一尺二寸，不为犯。
现代文：八月甲寅，金星顺行进入轩辕星，在女主星东北一尺二寸处，没有冲犯。
English: In August, Venus transits along the ecliptic into Regulus, and there is no impact at the northeast one foot and two inches of the primary star.

古文：戊辰，太白从在太微西蕃上将星西南五寸。
现代文：戊辰，金星顺行到太微垣西部上将星西南五寸处。
English: At Pentecost, Venus moves along to five centimeters southwest of the western admiral star of Taiyukagaki.

古文：辛巳，太白从在太微左执法星西北四寸。
现代文：辛巳，金星顺行到太微垣左执法星西北四寸处。
English: Suddenly, Venus moves along to a point four centimeters northwest of the left planet.

古文：六年四月辛酉，太白从在荧惑北三寸，为犯，并在东井度。
现代文：六年四月辛酉，金星顺行到火星北三寸处，造成冲犯，都是在束井宿方位。
English: In April of the sixth year, Venus passed three centimeters to the north of Mars, causing an impact, all in the direction of Sokai.

古文：五月癸卯，太白昼见当午上。
现代文：五月癸卯，金星白天出现在午位上。
English: At the end of May, Venus appears in the morning sky during the day.

古文：六月己巳，太白从在太微西蕃右执法星东南四寸，为犯。
现代文：六月己巳，金星顺行到太微垣西部右执法星东南四寸处，造成冲犯。
English: In June, Venus passed to the west of Taiyukagaki, four centimeters to the southeast of the star, resulting in a collision.

古文：七月癸巳，太白在氐角星东北一尺，为犯。
现代文：七月癸巳，金星在氐宿角星东北一尺，造成冲犯。
English: At the end of July, Venus moves one foot to the northeast of the Pleiades, causing a collision.

古文：八月乙亥，太白从行在房南第二左股次将星西南一尺，为犯。
现代文：八月乙亥，金星顺行到房宿南第二左股次将星西南一尺处，造成冲犯。
English: In August of the Year of the Boar, Venus passed to the south of the second left-hand star, one foot southwest of the second left-hand star, causing a collision.

古文：闰八月甲午，太白昼见当午。
现代文：闰八月甲午，金星白天出现在午位上。
English: On the afternoon of leap August, Venus appears at the noon position during the day.

古文：十一月戊午，太白从在岁星西北四尺，同在尾度。
现代文：十一月戊午，金星顺行到木星西北四尺，同在尾宿方位。
English: In November at noon, Venus moves along to four feet northwest of Jupiter, the same position as the cusp.

古文：又在荧惑东北六尺五寸，在心度，合宿。
现代文：又在火星东北六尺五寸，在心宿方位，形成合宿。
English: And in the northeast of Mars, six feet and five inches, in the direction of the heart, forming a training camp.

古文：十二月壬寅，太白从行在填星西南二尺五寸斗度。
现代文：十二月壬寅，金星顺行到土星西南二尺五寸斗星方位。
English: On December's Moon, Venus moves along to Saturn's southwestern two-foot-five-inch Dipper position.

古文：七年二月辛巳，太白从行入羽林。
现代文：七年二月辛巳，金星顺行进入羽林星。
English: In February of the seventh year, Venus entered Uranus.

古文：十月癸酉，太白在岁星南，相去一尺六寸，从在箕度为合。
现代文：十月癸酉，金星在木星之南，相距一尺六寸，顺行在箕宿方位会合。
English: At the October solstice, Venus is south of Jupiter, one foot six inches apart, and they meet at the Pleiades.

古文：十一月丁卯，太白从行入午林。
现代文：十一月丁卯，金星顺行进入羽林星。
English: In November, Venus moves into Aquarius.

古文：八年正月丁未，太白昼见当午上。六月戊子，太白从行入东井。
现代文：八年正月丁未，金星白天出现在午位上六月戊子，金星顺行进入井宿。
English: On the evening of the first day of the eighth lunar month, Venus appeared in the daytime at noon on the first day of the sixth lunar month, and Venus entered the well along the line.

古文：己丑，太白昼见当午。
现代文：己丑，金星白天出现在午位上。
English: In spite of its ugliness, Venus appears at the noon position during the day.

古文：八月庚辰，太白从在轩辕女主星南七尺，为犯。
现代文：八月庚辰，金星顺行在轩辕女主星南七尺，造成冲犯。
English: At Gengchen in August, Venus was seven feet south of the main planet Venus, causing a collision.

古文：九月丙申，太白从行在太微西蕃上将星西南一尺，为犯。
现代文：九月丙申，金星顺行到太微垣西部上将星西南一尺处，造成冲犯。
English: In September, Venus passed to within one foot of the southwest of the western admiral star of Taiyukagaki, resulting in a collision.

古文：丁未，太白从行入太微。
现代文：丁未，金星顺行进入太微垣。
English: Just before dusk, Venus makes its way into the night sky.

古文：辛酉，太白从行在进贤西五寸，为犯。
现代文：辛酉，金星顺行到进贤星西五寸处，造成冲犯。
English: In the morning, Venus moves along to five centimeters west of the waxing gibbous star, causing a collision.

古文：十月乙亥，太白从行在亢南第二星西南一尺，为犯。
现代文：十月乙亥，金星顺行到亢宿南第二颗星西南一尺，造成冲犯。
English: In October, at the time of the autumn equinox, Venus moves along the second star to the south of Oshuku, one foot to the southwest, causing a collision.

古文：甲申，太白从行入氐。
现代文：甲申，金星顺行进入氐宿。
English: A-shin, Venus is moving into Oshuku.

古文：十一月戊戌，太白从行在房北头第二星东北一寸，又在楗闭星西南七寸，并为犯。
现代文：十一月戊戌，金星顺行到房宿北头第二颗星东北一寸，又在楗闭星西南七寸，都造成冲犯。
English: In November, Venus passed one inch northeast of the second star and seven inches southwest of the third star, both of which caused impacts.

古文：又在荧惑西北二尺，为合宿。
现代文：又在火星西北二尺，形成合宿。
English: They also formed a training camp two meters northwest of Mars.

古文：癸卯，太白从行在荧惑东北一尺，为犯。
现代文：癸卯，金星顺行在火星东北一尺，造成冲犯。
English: At the same time, Venus moves one foot to the northeast of Mars, causing a collision.

古文：九年四月癸未，太白从历，夕见西方，从疾参宿一度。比来多阴，至己丑开除，已见在日北，当西北维上，薄昏不见宿星，则为先历而见。
现代文：九年四月癸未，金星随历运行，傍晚出现在西方，比参宿快一度，近来多阴天，到己丑日晴朗，已出现在曰北，正当西北维宿上，傍晚看不到星宿，就是先于日历而出现。
English: In the middle of April in the ninth year, Venus followed the course of the calendar, and appeared in the west in the evening. It was one degree faster than Betelgeuse. It had been cloudy recently, and it was fine until the ugly day. It had appeared in the north of the day, just north-west of Betelgeuse, and the star could not be seen in the evening. It had appeared before the calendar.

古文：六月丙子，太白昼见当午上。
现代文：六月丙子，金星白天出现在午位上。
English: In June, Venus appears in the morning sky during the day.

古文：七月辛卯，太白从行入太微，在西蕃上将星北四寸，为犯。
现代文：七月辛卯，金星顺行进入太微垣，在西部上将星北四寸，造成冲犯。
English: In July, Venus entered Taibugaki in a retrograde motion, and moved four centimeters north of the star in the west, causing a collision.

古文：九月乙亥，太白从行在南斗第四星北二寸，为犯。
现代文：九月乙亥，金星顺行在南斗第四颗星北二寸，造成冲犯。
English: In September of the Year of the Boar, Venus moves along the fourth star of the Southern Cross, two centimeters to the north, causing an impact.

古文：丁卯，太白在南斗第三星西一寸，为犯。
现代文：丁卯，金星在南斗第三颗星西一寸，造成冲犯。
English: Dingwu, Venus is one inch west of the third star in the Southern Cross, causing a collision.

古文：十年二月甲辰，太白从行入羽林。
现代文：十年二月甲辰，金星顺行进入羽林星。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the year, Venus moves into the constellation of Aquarius.

古文：五月辛巳，太白从行入东井，在轩辕西第一星东六寸，为犯。
现代文：五月辛巳，金星顺行进入井宿，在轩辕星西第一颗星束六寸，造成冲犯。
English: At the end of May, Venus entered the well along the line, and the first star in the west of the Xuanwu star cluster was six centimeters, causing a collision.

古文：七月乙丑，太白从行在轩辕大星东八寸，为犯。
现代文：七月乙丑，金星顺行在轩辕大星东八寸，造成冲犯。
English: In July, the second month of the year, Venus moves in the direction of the East Star, causing an impact.

古文：十一年正月戊辰，太白从行在岁星西北六寸，为犯，在奎度。
现代文：十一年正月戊辰，金星顺行在木星西北六寸，造成冲犯，在奎宿方位。
English: On the 11th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1

古文：二月丁丑，太白从行东井北辕西头第一星东北一尺，为犯。
现代文：二月丁丑，金星顺行到井宿北辕西头第一颗星东北一尺，造成冲犯。
English: February Ding Ugly, Venus travels along to the first star northeast of Ijuku Kitabatake Nishigashira, causing a collision.

古文：四月戊子，太白在五诸侯东第二星西北六寸，为犯。
现代文：四月戊子，金星在五诸侯东第二颗星西北六寸，造成冲犯。
English: April Boson, Venus in the Five Provinces East second star northwest six inches, resulting in a collision.

古文：辛丑，太白从行入舆鬼，在东北星西南四寸，为犯。
现代文：辛丑，金星顺行进入舆鬼星，在东北星西南四寸，造成冲犯。
English: Xin ugly, Venus along the line into the ghost star, four inches southwest of the northeast star, resulting in impact crime.

古文：五月戊午，太白昼见当午，名为经天。
现代文：五月戊午，金星白天出现在午位，名叫经天。
English: In the afternoon of May, Venus appears at the noon position during the day, which is called the meridian.

古文：癸亥，太白从行入轩辕大星北一尺二寸，无所犯。
现代文：癸亥，金星顺行进入轩辕大星北一尺二寸。无所冲犯。
English: In the year of the boar, Venus moves into the north one foot and two inches of the Great Star of Xuanwu. There is no offense.

古文：九月己酉，太白昼见当午上。
现代文：九月己酉，金星白天出现在午位上。
English: In September, Venus appears in the morning sky during the day.

古文：十月丙戌，太白行在进贤星西南四寸，为犯。
现代文：十月丙戌，金星运行在进贤星西南四寸，造成冲犯。
English: In October, Venus moves four inches southwest of the waxing gibbous star, causing a shock.

古文：十一月戊戌，太白从行入氐。
现代文：十一月戊戌，金星顺行进入氐宿。
English: In November, Venus moves into Scorpio.

古文：丁卯，太白从行在楗闭星西北六寸，为犯。
现代文：丁卯，金星顺行在楗闭星西北六寸，造成冲犯。
English: Dingwu, Venus moves along the northwest six inches of the Pleiades, causing a collision.

古文：十二月壬辰，太白从行在南斗第六星东南一尺，为犯。
现代文：十二月壬辰，金星顺行在南斗第六颗星东南一尺，造成冲犯。
English: At the end of December, Venus moves along one foot southeast of the sixth star of the Southern Cross, causing a collision.

古文：辛丑，太白从行在西建东星西南一尺，为犯。
现代文：辛丑，金星顺行在西建东星西南一尺，造成冲犯。
English: It was very ugly, with Venus moving along one foot south-west of the East Star in the west, causing the collision.

古文：建元元年五月己未，荧惑犯太微西蕃上将，又犯东蕃上将。
现代文：建元元年五月己未，火星冲犯太微垣西部上将星，又冲犯东部上将星。
English: In May of the first year of the Jianyuan era, Mars collided with the western Admiral Star of the Taiyue Mountains, and collided with the eastern Admiral Star.

古文：二年十月辛酉，荧惑守太微。
现代文：二年十月辛酉，火星守卫太微垣。
English: In October of the second year of Hsinchu, the Mars guard was too weak.

古文：四年六月戊子，荧惑从行入东井，无所犯。
现代文：四年六月戊子，火星顺行进入井宿，无所冲犯。
English: In June of the fourth year, the Mars entered the well along the line and did not collide with anything.

古文：戊戌，荧惑在东井度，形色小而黄黑不明。
现代文：戊戌，火星在井宿方位，形色小而且黄黑不明。
English: The planet Mars is in the direction of the well, small and yellow-black.

古文：丁丑，荧惑、太白同在东井度。
现代文：丁丑，火星金星同在井宿方位。星。
English: Ding Yuxi, Mars and Venus are in the same direction as the well.

古文：七月甲戌，荧惑从行入舆鬼，犯积尸。十月癸未，荧惑从行犯太微西蕃上将星。
现代文：七月甲戌，火星顺行进入舆鬼星，冲犯积尸十月癸未，火星顺行冲犯太微垣西部的上将星。
English: In July, Mercury transits into Cancer, Mars transits into Virgo, and Mars transits into Capricorn in October, Mars transits into Capricorn in November, and Mars transits into Capricorn in December.

古文：丙戌，荧惑从入太微。
现代文：丙戌，火星顺行进入太微垣。
English: The planet Mars is moving along the ecliptic and entering the asteroid belt.

古文：十一月丙辰，荧惑从行在太微，犯右执法。
现代文：十一月丙辰，火星顺行在太微垣，冲犯右执法星。
English: In November, the planet Mars will be moving in the same direction as Tai Weigaki, impinging on the right law enforcement star.

古文：永明元年正月己亥，荧惑逆犯上相。
现代文：永明元年正月己亥，火星逆行冲犯上相星。
English: In the first month of the first year of the year, the retrograde motion of Mars collided with the rising phase star.

古文：辛亥，荧惑守角。
现代文：辛亥，火星守卫角宿。
English: Xinhai, Mars guarding the corner inn.

古文：庚子，荧惑逆入太微。
现代文：庚子，火星逆行进入太微垣。
English: Geng Zi, Mars retrograde enters Taibo.

古文：三月丁卯，荧惑守太白。
现代文：三月丁卯，火星守卫金星。
English: March ding dong, Mars guarding Venus.

古文：六月戊申，荧惑从犯亢。
现代文：六月戊申，火星顺行冲犯亢宿。
English: In June, the Mars retrograde will collide with the Pleiades.

古文：己巳，荧惑从行犯氐东南星。
现代文：己巳，火星顺行冲犯氐宿东南星。
English: Right now, Mars is moving along and colliding with the southeastern star of Pescadore.

古文：七月戊寅，荧惑、填星同在氐度。
现代文：七月戊寅，火星土星同在氐宿方位。
English: In July, Mars and Saturn are in the Pleiades.

古文：丁亥，荧惑行犯房北头第二星。
现代文：丁亥，火星运行冲犯房宿北头第二颗星。
English: Dinghai, the second star of the North Star, is the second star of the North Star.

古文：八月乙丑，荧惑从行犯天江。
现代文：八月乙丑，火星顺行冲犯天江。
English: In August, the second month of the year is ugly, and the Mars is heading straight for the Tianjiang River.

古文：甲戌，荧惑犯南斗第五星。
现代文：甲戌，火星冲犯南斗的第五颗星。
English: Kuching, the fifth star of the Southern Cross, is impacted by Mars.

古文：十一月丙申，荧惑入羽林。
现代文：十一月丙申，火星进入羽林星。
English: In November, Mars enters Capricorn.

古文：二年八月庚午，荧惑犯太微西蕃上将。
现代文：二年八月庚午，火星冲犯太微垣西部上将星。
English: In the late afternoon of August of the second year, Mars collided with the star of the Western Admiral of the Taiyukagaki.

古文：癸未，荧惑犯太微右执法。
现代文：癸未，火星冲犯太微垣右执法星。
English: In the meantime, the Mars offender is too small to be a right-wing law enforcement star.

古文：丁酉，荧惑犯太微右执法。
现代文：丁酉，火星冲犯太微垣右执法星。
English: Ding Hao, the Mars offender is too weak, the right law enforcement star.

古文：十月庚申，荧惑犯进贤。
现代文：十月庚申，火星冲犯进贤星。
English: In October Koshin, Mars crashes into Hyosung.

古文：十一月壬辰，荧惑犯亢南第二星。
现代文：十一月壬辰，火星冲犯亢宿南第二颗星。
English: In November, Mars will collide with the second star in the southern constellation of Pleiades.

古文：丙申，荧惑犯亢南星。
现代文：丙申，火星冲犯亢宿南星。
English: Bishin, Mars will collide with Pleiades.

古文：十二月乙卯，荧惑入氐。
现代文：十二月乙卯，火星进入氐宿。
English: On the second day of December, Mars enters Pisces.

古文：三年二月乙卯，荧惑在房北头第一星西北一尺，徘徊守房。
现代文：三年二月乙卯，火星在房宿北头第一颗星西北一尺，徘徊守卫房宿。
English: In February of the third year, Mars hovered one foot northwest of the first star at the north end of the roost, guarding the roost.

古文：四月戊戌，荧惑犯。
现代文：四月戊戌，火星冲犯。
English: April gongs, Mars crashes.

古文：六月乙亥，荧惑犯房。
现代文：六月乙亥，火星冲犯房宿。
English: In June, at the time of the Year of the Boar, the planet Mars crashes into the house.

古文：癸亥，荧惑犯天江南头第二星。
现代文：癸亥，火星冲犯天江星南头第二颗星。
English: In the year of the boar, Mars collides with the second star in the southern constellation of the Milky Way.

古文：八月丁巳，荧惑犯南斗第五星。
现代文：八月丁巳，火星冲犯南斗的第五颗星。
English: In August, Mars will collide with the fifth star of the Southern Cross.

古文：十一月丙戌，荧惑从行入羽林。
现代文：十一月丙戌，火星顺行进入羽林星。
English: In November, Mars moves direct into Aquarius.

古文：四年八月戊辰，荧惑入太微。
现代文：四年八月戊辰，火星进入太微垣。
English: In August of the fourth year, the planet Mars entered the solar eclipses.

古文：癸酉，荧惑犯太微右执法。
现代文：癸酉，火星冲犯太微垣右执法星。
English: , the Mars impactor is too close to the right law enforcement star.

古文：戊子，荧惑在太微。
现代文：戊子，火星在太微垣。
English: Satoshi, Mars is in Taikogaki.

古文：九月戊申，荧惑犯岁星。
现代文：九月戊申，火星冲犯木星。
English: In September, Mars will collide with Jupiter.

古文：己酉，荧惑犯岁星，芒角相接。
现代文：己酉，火星冲犯木星，光芒星角相接。
English: The Earth and Mars collide with Jupiter, and the radiant angles of the stars are conjoined.

古文：十月丁丑，荧惑犯亢南头第一星。
现代文：十月丁丑，火星冲犯亢宿南头第一颗星。
English: In October, Mars will collide with the first star in the southern part of Oshuku.

古文：十一月庚寅，荧惑犯氐西南星。
现代文：十一月庚寅，火星冲犯氐宿西南星。
English: In November, Mars will collide with the southwest star of Pune.

古文：十二月己未，荧惑犯房北头第一星。
现代文：十二月己未，火星冲犯房宿北头第一颗星。
English: In December, Mars will collide with the first star in the northern sky.

古文：庚申，荧惑入房北犯钩钤星。
现代文：庚申，火星进入房宿北头冲犯钩铃星。
English: Koshin, Mars enters the room and lodges the north head, colliding with the hook star.

古文：五年二月乙亥，荧惑、填星同在南斗度，为合宿。
现代文：五年二月乙亥，火星土星同在南斗方位，形成合宿。
English: In February of the fifth year, Mars-Saturn was in the southern direction, forming a training camp.

古文：九月乙未，荧惑从行在哭星东，相去半寸。
现代文：九月乙未，火星顺行在哭星束，相距半寸。
English: On September 25th, Mars will pass in front of the crying star cluster, half an inch apart.

古文：六年四月癸丑，荧惑伏在参度，去太白二尺五寸，辰星去太白五尺三寸，为合宿。
现代文：六年四月癸丑，火星伏在参宿方位，离金星二尺五寸，水星离金星五尺，三星成为合宿。
English: In April of the sixth year, Mars was in the position of the roost, two feet and five inches away from Venus, Mercury was five feet away from Venus, and the three stars became the training camp.

古文：甲戌，荧惑在辰星东南二尺五寸，俱从行，入东井旷中，无所犯。
现代文：甲戌，火星在水星东南二尺五寸，一起顺行，进入井宿空隙中，无所冲犯。
English: Armor, Mars is two feet and five inches southeast of Mercury, moving along together, entering the well lodging gap, nowhere to impinge.

古文：闰四月丁丑，荧惑从行在氐西南星北七寸，为犯。
现代文：闰四月丁丑，火星顺行在氐宿西南星北七寸，造成冲犯。
English: Leap April Ding Ugly, Mars moves along in the southwest of Pescadero, seven centimeters north of the star, causing an impact.

古文：己卯，荧惑从行入氐，无所犯。
现代文：己卯，火星顺行进入氐宿，无所冲犯。
English: At the same time, the planet Mars entered Shibuya along the line, without any impact.

古文：乙巳，荧惑从行在房北头第一上将右骖星南六寸，为犯。
现代文：乙巳，火星顺行在房宿北头第一上将星右骖星南六寸，造成冲犯。
English: At that moment, the planet Mars aligned with the first star to the north of the room, the star to the right of the star, and the star to the south, creating a collision.

古文：又在钩钤星西北五寸。
现代文：又在钩钤星西北五寸。
English: It is also five centimeters northwest of the hook star.

古文：十一月丙寅，荧惑从行在岁星西，相去四尺，同在尾度，为合宿。
现代文：十一月丙寅，火星顺行在木星西，相距四尺，同在尾宿方位，形成合宿。
English: In November, Mars is in the west of Jupiter, four feet apart, and in the cusp, forming a training camp.

古文：七年二月丙子，荧惑从行在填星西，相去二尺，同在牵牛度，为合宿。
现代文：七年二月丙子，火星顺行在土星西，相距二尺，同在牵牛星方位，形成合宿。
English: In February of the seventh year, Mars was in transit to the west of Saturn, two feet apart, in the same position as the Cowherd, forming a training camp.

古文：三月戊午，荧惑从在泣星西北七寸。
现代文：三月戊午，火星顺行在泣星西北七寸。
English: At noon on March 3rd, Mars will be 7 cm to the northwest of the Weeping Star.

古文：戊辰，荧惑从行入羽林。
现代文：戊辰，火星顺行进入羽林星。
English: At the same time, Mars moves into the constellation of Aquila.

古文：八月戊戌，荧惑逆入羽林。
现代文：八月戊戌，火星逆行进入羽林星。
English: August Pentecost, Mars retrograde enters the feathered star.

古文：九月乙丑，荧惑入羽林，成句己。
现代文：九月乙丑，火星进入羽林星，形成句己状。
English: In September, the second month of the year, Mars enters Uranus, forming a square.

古文：八年四月丙申，荧惑从行入舆鬼，在西北星东南二寸，为犯。
现代文：八年四月丙申，火星顺行进入舆鬼星，在西北星东南二寸，造成冲犯。
English: In April of the eighth year, Mars entered the ghost planet along the line, two inches southeast of the northwest star, causing a collision.

古文：十月乙亥，荧惑入氐。
现代文：十月乙亥，火星进入氐宿。
English: In October at the time of the Year of the Boar, the planet Mars enters Oshuku.

古文：十一月乙未，荧惑从入北落门，在第一星东南，去钩钤三寸，为犯。
现代文：十一月乙未，火星顺行进入北落门，在第一颗星东南，离钩钤星三寸，造成冲犯。
English: On November 25th, Mars entered the North Node of the Zodiac, and in the southeast of the first star, it was three inches off the hook of the Pleiades, causing an impact.

古文：九年三月甲午，荧惑从在填星东七寸，在岁星南六寸，同在虚度，为犯，为合宿。
现代文：九年三月甲午，火星顺行在土星束七寸，在木星南六寸，同在虚宿方位，造成冲犯，成为合宿。
English: In the afternoon of March 9th, Mars was 7 inches away from Saturn and 6 inches south of Jupiter, and it was in the false position, causing an impact and becoming a training camp.

古文：四月癸亥，荧惑从行入羽林。
现代文：四月癸亥，火星顺行进入羽林星。
English: In April, at the time of the Year of the Boar, Mars moves into the sign of the Feathered Forest.

古文：闰七月辛酉，荧惑从行在毕左股星西北一寸，为犯。
现代文：闰七月辛酉，火星顺行在毕宿左股星西北一寸，造成冲犯。
English: In the intercalary month of July, Mars is retrograde one inch northwest of Pisces, causing an impact.

古文：八月十四日，荧惑应伏在昴三度，前先历在毕度，二十一日始逆行北转，垂及玄冬荧惑囚死之时，而形色渐大于常。
现代文：八月十四日，火星应当伏在昴宿三度，此前先于日历在毕宿方位，二十一日才逆行北转，延及冬季，是火星困死的时候，因而形色逐渐比平常大。
English: On the 14th of August, Mars should have been in the sign of Aries for three degrees. Previously, it was ahead of the calendar in the sign of Aries, and only on the 21st day did it retrograde to the north, extending into the winter, when Mars was stuck, and thus its shape gradually became larger than usual.

古文：十年二月庚子，荧惑从入东井北辕西头第一星西二寸，为犯。
现代文：十年二月庚子，火星顺行进入井宿北辕西头第一颗星西二寸，造成冲犯。
English: In February of the 10th year of the Geng Zi, the Mars entered the first star of the west two-inch west of the west head of Ijuku North, causing a collision.

古文：三月癸未，荧惑从行在舆鬼西北七寸，为犯。
现代文：三月癸未，火星顺行在舆鬼星西北七寸，造成冲犯。
English: On the last day of March, Mars will pass to the northwest of the Moon, causing an impact.

古文：乙酉，荧惑从行入舆鬼。
现代文：乙酉，火星顺行进入舆鬼星。
English: Acetylene, Mars is moving into the zodiac.

古文：六月壬寅，荧惑从行入太微。
现代文：六月壬寅，火星顺行进入太微垣。
English: In June, Minshin, Mars moves along and enters Taibugaki.

古文：十一年二月庚戌，荧惑从在填星西北六寸，为犯，同在营室。
现代文：十一年二月庚戌，火星顺行在土星西北六寸，造成冲犯，同在室宿。
English: In February of the 11th year of the Geng Zi, Mars was in transit six centimeters northwest of Saturn, causing an impact, and he stayed in the room.

古文：五月戊午，荧惑从行在岁星西南六寸，为犯，同在娄度。
现代文：五月戊午，火星顺行在木星西南六寸，造成冲犯，同在娄宿方位。
English: In May at noon, Mars will transit six inches southwest of Jupiter, causing a collision, and will be in the Pleiades position.

古文：八月辛巳，荧惑从行入东井，在南辕西第一星东北一尺四寸。
现代文：八月辛巳，火星顺行进入井宿，在南辕西第一颗星东北一尺四寸。
English: As August draws to a close, the planet Mars moves into Ijuku, the first star in the west of Nanjo, and moves one shaku and four suns northeast.

古文：十一月丁巳，荧惑逆行在五诸侯东星北四寸，为犯。
现代文：十一月丁巳，火星逆行在五诸侯东星北四寸，造成冲犯。
English: In November, Mars retrogrades four centimeters north of the East Star of the Five Kingdoms, causing an impact.

古文：隆昌元年三月乙丑，荧惑从行入舆鬼西北星东一寸，为犯。
现代文：隆昌元年三月乙丑，火星顺行进入舆鬼西北星束一寸，造成冲犯。
English: In the first year of Longchang, in March of the second month of the ugly, Mars went into the northwest star cluster one inch, causing the impact.

古文：癸酉，荧惑从行在舆鬼积尸星东北七寸，为犯。
现代文：癸酉，火星顺行在舆鬼积尸星东北七寸，造成冲犯。
English: At the same time, Mars is moving along at seven centimeters to the northeast of the Zodiac, causing an impact.

古文：闰三月甲寅，荧惑从入轩辕。
现代文：闰三月甲寅，火星顺行进入轩辕星。
English: In the intercalary month of March, Mars moves into the sign of Aries.

古文：五月丁酉，荧惑从入太微，在右执法北二寸，为犯。
现代文：五月丁酉，火星顺行进入太微垣，在右执法星北二寸，造成冲犯。
English: In May, Ding Xuan, Mars, moving forward, entered Taibiao, and the North Star, two centimeters to the right, caused a collision.

古文：建元四年正月己卯，岁星、太白俱从行，同在娄度为合宿。
现代文：建元四年正月己卯，木星金星都顺行，同在娄宿成为合宿。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Jupiter and Venus both moved in the same direction, and together they became a training camp.

古文：六月丁酉，岁星昼见。
现代文：六月丁酉，木星白天出现。
English: June ding dong, Jupiter appears during the day.

古文：永明元年五月甲午，岁星入东井。
现代文：永明元年五月甲午，木星进入井宿。
English: In the early afternoon of May in the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Jupiter entered Ijuku.

古文：七月壬午，岁星昼见。
现代文：七月壬午，木星白天出现。
English: At midday in July, Jupiter appears during the day.

古文：三年五月丙子，岁星与太白合。
现代文：三年五月丙子，木星与金星会合。
English: In May of the third year, Jupiter and Venus meet.

古文：六月辛丑，岁星与辰星合。
现代文：六月辛丑，木星与水星会合。
English: June is gloomy, Jupiter meets Mercury.

古文：十月己巳，岁星从入太微。
现代文：十月己巳，木星顺行进入太微垣。
English: It's October already, and Jupiter is moving into the evening sky.

古文：十一月甲子，岁星从入太微，犯右执法。
现代文：十一月甲子，木星顺行进入太微垣，冲犯右执法星。
English: In November, Jupiter will move into Taibai, impinging on the right law enforcement star.

古文：四年闰二月丙辰，岁星犯太微上将。
现代文：四年闰二月丙辰，木星冲犯太微垣上将星。
English: In leap February of the fourth year, Jupiter will collide with the star of the general.

古文：三月庚申，岁星犯太微上将。四月己未，岁星犯右执法。
现代文：三月庚申，木星冲犯太微垣上将星四月己未，木星冲犯右执法星。
English: In March, Koshin, Jupiter impinged on Taikogaki Admiral Star in April, Jupiter impinged on Right Law Enforcement Star.

古文：八月乙巳，岁星犯进贤，又与荧惑于轸度合宿。
现代文：八月乙巳，木星冲犯进贤星，又与火星在轸宿方位合宿。
English: At the end of August, Jupiter collided with Hyosung, and he and Mars camped in the Pleiades.

古文：五年二月癸卯，岁星犯进贤。
现代文：五年二月癸卯，木星冲犯进贤星。
English: In February of the fifth year, Jupiter crashed into Hyosung.

古文：六月甲子，岁星昼见在轸度。
现代文：六月甲子，木星白天在轸宿方位出现。
English: In June, Jupiter appears in the daytime in the Pleiades.

古文：十月己未，岁星从在氐西南星北七寸，又辰星从入氐，在岁星西四尺五寸，又太白从在辰星东，相去一尺，同在氐度，三星为合宿。
现代文：十月己未，木星顺行在氐宿西南星北七寸，另外水星顺行进入氐宿，在木星西四尺五寸，另外金星顺行在水星东，相距一尺，同在氐宿方位，三星成为合宿。
English: It was not yet October, Jupiter was passing by 7 centimeters to the north of the southwest star of Pescadore, Mercury was passing by to enter Pescadore, 4 feet 5 inches to the west of Jupiter, and Venus was passing by to the east of Mercury, 1 foot apart, and in the same direction as Pescadore. The three stars became a training camp.

古文：十二月甲戌，岁星昼见。
现代文：十二月甲戌，木星白天出现。
English: December Armor, Jupiter appears during the day.

古文：六年三月甲申，岁星逆行入氐宿。
现代文：六年三月甲申，木星逆行进入氐宿。
English: In March of the sixth year of Jiaxing, Jupiter retrograde entered Pengshu.

古文：六月丙寅，岁星昼见在氐度。
现代文：六月丙寅，木星白天在氐宿方位出现。
English: In June, Jupiter appears in the daytime in the Pleiades.

古文：八年三月庚申，岁星守牵牛。
现代文：八年三月庚申，木星守卫牵牛星。
English: In March of the eighth year of Koshin, Jupiter guards the Cowherd Star.

古文：九年二月壬午，岁星从在填星西七寸，同在虚度为合宿。闰七月辛酉，岁星在泣星北五寸，为犯，又守填星。
现代文：九年二月壬午，木星顺行在土星西七寸，同在虚宿方位成为合宿闰七月辛酉，木星在位星北五寸，造成冲犯，又守卫土星。
English: At noon on February 9, Jupiter was 7 centimeters to the west of Saturn, and at the same time, it became a training camp in July. Jupiter was 5 centimeters to the north of the star, causing an impact and guarding Saturn.

古文：九月辛卯，在泣星西一尺五寸，为合宿。
现代文：九月辛卯，在位星西一尺五寸，成为合宿。
English: In September, Xinwu, one foot five inches west of Xingxi, became a training camp.

古文：永明元年六月，辰星从行入太微，在太白西北一尺。
现代文：丞塱元年六月，水星顺行进入太微垣，在金星西北一尺。
English: In June of the first year of the Joseon Dynasty, Mercury moved along the ecliptic and entered the Taibo ridge, one foot northwest of Venus.

古文：二年八月甲寅，辰星于翼犯太白。
现代文：二年八月甲寅，水星在翼宿冲犯金星。
English: In August of the second year, Mercury will collide with Venus in Aries.

古文：九年六月丙子，辰星随太白于西方，在七星度，相去一尺四寸，为合宿。
现代文：九年六月丙子，水星随金星在西方，在七星方位，相距一尺四寸，成为合宿。
English: In June of the ninth year, Mercury followed Venus in the west, in the seven-star direction, at a distance of one foot four inches, becoming a training camp.

古文：十一年九月丙辰，辰星依历应夕见西方亢宿一度，至九月八日不见。
现代文：十一年九月丙辰，水星依照历法应当傍晚在西方亢宿一度出现，到九月八日看不到了。
English: According to the calendar, Mercury was supposed to appear once in the evening of September 11th in the west of Oshuku, but it was not visible until September 8th.

古文：隆昌元年正月丙戌，辰星见危度，在太白北一尺，为犯。
现代文：塑元年正月丙戌，水星出现在危宿方位。在金星北一尺，造成冲犯。
English: In the first month of the first year of the year, Mercury appeared in the critical position, one foot north of Venus, causing a collision.

古文：建元三年十月癸丑，填星逆行守氐。
现代文：重纽三年十月癸丑，土星逆行守卫氐宿。
English: The new moon in October of the third year is ugly, and Saturn retrograde is guarding the pagoda.

古文：四年七月戊辰，填星从行入氐。
现代文：四年七月戊辰，土星顺行进入氐宿。
English: In July of the 4th year of the Bo era, Saturn moved into Oshuku.

古文：永明元年正月庚寅，填星守房心。
现代文：丞塱元年正月庚寅，土星守卫房宿心宿。
English: In the first month of the first year of Joseon Dynasty, Goyang, Saturn guarding the room and lodging in the heart.

古文：三月甲子，填星逆行犯西咸星。
现代文：三月甲子，土星逆行冲犯西咸星。
English: In March, Saturn will retrograde and collide with the star Xi'an.

古文：二年二月戊辰，填星犯东咸星。
现代文：二年二月戊辰，土星冲犯东咸星。
English: In February of the second year, Saturn collided with the East Ham star.

古文：四年十二月辛巳，填星犯建星。
现代文：四年十二月辛巳，土星冲犯建星。
English: In December of the fourth year, Saturn collided with the star.

古文：七年十二月戊辰，填星在须女度，又辰星从在填星西南一尺一寸，为合宿。
现代文：七年十二月戊辰，土星在须女星方位，又水星顺行在土星西南一尺一寸，成为合宿。
English: In December of the 7th year of the Horse year, Saturn was in the position of the Pleiades, and Mercury was one foot and one inch southwest of Saturn, becoming a training camp.

古文：八年三月庚申，填星守哭星。
现代文：八年三月庚申，土星守卫哭星和尾宿。
English: In March of the eighth year, Koshin, Saturn guards Weeping Star and Owake.

古文：九年七月庚戌，填星逆在泣西星东北七寸，为犯。
现代文：九年七月庚戌，土星逆行在泣西星东北七寸，造成冲犯。
English: In July of the ninth year, Saturn retrograde seven centimeters to the northeast of the Western Star, causing a collision.

古文：十月甲午，填星从行在泣星西北五寸，为犯。
现代文：十月甲午，土星顺行在泣星西北五寸，造成冲犯。
English: On the afternoon of October 1st, Saturn was 5 cm to the northwest of the Weeping Star, resulting in a collision.

古文：流星灾建元元年十月癸酉，有流星大如三升塸，色白，尾长五丈，从南河东北二尺出，北行历舆鬼西过，未至轩辕后星而没；没后余中央，曲如车轮，俄顷化为白云，久乃灭。
现代文：建元元年十月癸酉，有颗流星像三升堰一样大，白色，尾长五丈，从南河东北二尺处出现，向北经过舆鬼星西去，没有到轩辕后星就消失，消失后中央剩余部分，弯如车轮，一会儿化作白云，很久才消失。
English: In October of the first year of Jianyuan, there was a meteor as large as a three-liter weir, white, with a tail length of five meters. It appeared two feet from the northeast of Nanhe, went north through the west of the ghost star, and disappeared without reaching the back star. After the disappearance, the remaining part of the center, bent like a wheel, turned into a white cloud for a while, and disappeared for a long time.

古文：流星自下而升，名曰飞星。
现代文：流星从下向上升起，名叫飞星。
English: The meteor rises up from below and is called a shooting star.

古文：三年十月丙午，有流星大如月，赤白色，尾长七丈，西北行入紫宫中，光照墙垣。
现代文：三年十月丙午，有颗流星像月一样大，赤白色，尾长七丈，向西北飞入紫宫中，光照墙垣。
English: On the afternoon of October 3rd, a meteor as big as the moon, red and white, with a tail seven meters long, flew northwest into the Purple Palace, illuminating the walls.

古文：四年正月辛未，有流星大如三升塸，赤色，从北极第二星北一尺出，北行一丈而没。
现代文：四年正月辛未，有颗流星像三升堰一样大，赤色，从北极星的第二颗星北一尺出现，向北飞行一丈后消失。
English: In the early morning of the first month of the fourth year, a meteor as big as a three-meter weir, red, appeared one foot north of the second star of the North Star, flew one foot north and disappeared.

古文：九月壬子，流星如鹅卵，从柳北出，入轩辕。
现代文：九月壬子，有颗鹅卵大小的流星，从柳宿北出现，进入轩辕星。
English: In September, a meteor the size of a goose egg appeared from the north of Yanagisukuba and entered the constellation of Lupus.

古文：又一枚如瓜大，出西行没空中。
现代文：又有一颗像瓜一样大，出现后向西飞行消失在空中。
English: Another, the size of a melon, appeared and then disappeared into the sky as it flew west.

古文：永明元年六月己酉，有流星如二升碗，从紫宫出，南行没氐。
现代文：永明元年六月己酉，有颗流星像二升碗一样大小，从紫宫出现，向南飞行消失在氐宿。
English: In June of the first year of the Yongming Dynasty, there was a meteor as big as a two-liter bowl. It appeared from the Purple Palace, flew south and disappeared in Poyang.

古文：二年三月庚辰，有流星如二升碗，从天市中出，南行在心后。
现代文：二年三月庚辰，有颗流星像二升碗一样大小，从天市星中飞出，向南飞行在心宿后。
English: In March of the second year of Geng Chen, there was a meteor as big as a two-liter bowl, flying out of the celestial city and flying south after the heart.

古文：四年二月乙丑，有流星大如一升器。
现代文：四年二月乙丑，有颗一升器具大小的流星。
English: In February 2004, there was a meteor the size of a one-litre appliance.

古文：戊辰，有流星大如五升器。
现代文：戊辰，有颗五升器具大小的流星。
English: A meteor the size of a five-litre appliance was seen in Boshin.

古文：四月丁卯，有流星大如一升器，从南斗东北出，西行经斗入氐。
现代文：四月丁卯，有颗一升器具大小的流星，从南斗星东北飞出，向西飞行经斗宿进入氐宿。
English: In April, a meteor the size of a one-liter appliance flew out of the northeast of the Southern Dipper and flew westward through the Dipper into the Pengshui.

古文：六月丙戌，有流星大如鸭卵，从匏瓜南出，至虚而入。
现代文：六月丙戌，有颗鸭卵大小的流星，从匏瓜星南飞出，到虚宿后进入。
English: In June, there was a meteor the size of a duck's egg, which flew out of the southern part of the Manchurian constellation and entered after passing through a hollow.

古文：八月辛未，有流星大如三升塸，从觜星南出，西南行入天濛没。
现代文：八月辛未，有颗三升堰大小的流星，从觜星南飞出，向西南飞行进入天濛星后消失。
English: In late August, a meteor the size of a three-liter weir flew out of the south of the Pleiades and disappeared after flying southwest into the Pleiades.

古文：十一月戊寅，有流星大如二升塸，白色，从亢东北出，行入天市。
现代文：十一月戊寅，有颗二升堰大小的流星，白色，从亢宿东北飞出，飞行进入天市星。
English: In November, there was a meteor the size of a two-liter weir, white, flying out of the northeast of Oshuku and flying into Tianshi Xing.

古文：十二月丁巳，有流星大如三升碗，白色，从天市帝座出，东北行一丈而没。
现代文：十二月丁巳，有颗三升碗大小的流星，白色，从天市帝座飞出，向东北飞行一丈而消失。
English: In December, a meteor the size of a three-liter bowl, white, flew out of the constellation Draco, flew northeast and disappeared.

古文：五年六月辛未，有流星大如三升器，没后有痕。
现代文：五年六月辛未，有颗三升器具大小的流星，消失后有痕迹。
English: In June 2005, there was a meteor the size of a three-litre appliance. After it disappeared, there were traces of it.

古文：九月丙申，有流星大如四升器，白色，有光照地。
现代文：九月丙申，有颗四升器具大小的流星，白色，有光照地。
English: In September, there was a meteor the size of a four-litre appliance. It was white and lit up the ground.

古文：十二月甲子，西北有流星大如鸭卵，黄白色，尾长六尺，西南行一丈余没。
现代文：十二月甲子，西北有颗鸭卵大小的流星，黄白色，尾长六尺，向西南飞行一丈多后消失。
English: In December, a meteor the size of a duck's egg, yellow and white, with a tail six feet long, flew southwest and disappeared.

古文：六年三月癸酉，有流星大如鸭卵，赤色，无尾。
现代文：六年三月癸酉，有颗鸭卵大小的流星，赤色，无尾。
English: On March 6th, there was a meteor the size of a duck's egg. It was red and had no tail.

古文：四月丙辰，北面有流星大如二升器，白色，北行六尺而没。
现代文：四月丙辰，北面有颗二升器具大小的流星，白色，向北飞行六尺而消失。
English: In April, a meteor the size of a two-liter appliance, white, flew six feet north and disappeared.

古文：七月癸巳，有流星大如鹅卵，白色，从匏瓜南出，西南行一丈没空中。
现代文：七月癸巳，有颗鹅卵大小的流星，白色，从匏瓜星南飞出，向西南飞行一丈消失在空中。
English: At the end of July, a meteor the size of a goose egg, white, flew out of the southern part of the country, flew southwest and disappeared into the sky.

古文：须臾，又有流星大如五升器，白色，从北河南出，东北行一丈三尺没空中。
现代文：不久，又有一颗五升器具大小的流星，白色，从北河南飞出，向东北飞行一丈三尺消失在空中。
English: Soon, there was another meteor the size of a five-liter appliance, white, flying out of the north and south of Henan, flying northeast and disappearing into the air.

古文：十月戊寅，南面有流星，大如鸡卵，赤色，在东南行没，没后如连珠。
现代文：十月戊寅，南面有流星，像鶸蛋一样大，赤色，在东南飞行消失，消失后如同连珠。
English: In October, there was a meteor to the south. It was as big and red as a quail's egg, and it disappeared in the southeast. After it disappeared, it was like a string of pearls.

古文：十二月壬寅，有流星大如鹅卵，黄白色，尾长三丈，有光，没后有痕从梗河出，西行一丈许，没空中。
现代文：十二月壬寅，有颗鹅卵大小的流星，黄白色，尾长三丈，有光，消失后有痕迹从梗河出现，向西行一丈左右，消失在空中。
English: In December, there was a meteor about the size of a goose egg, yellow-white, with a tail three meters long, with light, and after disappearing, it appeared from the Yinghe River with traces, moved westward about one meter, and disappeared in the air.

古文：七年正月甲寅，有流星如五升器，白色，尾长四尺，从坐旗星出，西行入五车而过，没空中。
现代文：七年正月甲寅，有颗五升器具大小的流星。白色，尾长四尺，从坐旗星出现，向西行进入五车星而经过，消失在空中。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of the Jia Yin, there was a meteor the size of a five-liter appliance. White, with a tail four feet long, it appeared from the flag star, traveled westward into the five-chariot star and passed, disappearing into the air.

古文：六月丁丑，流星大如二升器，黄赤色，有光，尾长六尺许，从亢南出，西行入翼中而没，没后如连珠。
现代文：六月丁丑，有颗流星像二升器具一样大，黄赤色，有光芒，尾长六尺左右，从亢宿南出现，向西行进入翼宿中消失，消失后如同连珠。
English: In June, Ding Ugly, a meteor as big as a two-liter appliance, yellow-red, with a glow, with a tail length of about six feet, appeared from the south of Oshuku, traveled westward into Tsubame, and disappeared, after disappearing like a string of beads.

古文：十月乙丑，有流星如三升器，赤黄色，尾长六尺，出紫宫内北极星，东南行三丈没空中。
现代文：十月乙丑，有颗流星像三升器具一样大，赤黄色，尾长六尺，从紫宫内的北极星飞出，向东南飞行三丈消失在空中。
English: In October, the second month of the year, a meteor as big as a three-liter appliance, red and yellow, with a tail six feet long, flew out of the North Star in the Purple Palace, flew southeast and disappeared three feet into the air.

古文：壬辰，流星如三升器，白色，有光，从五车北出，行入紫宫，抵北极第一第二星而过，落空中，尾如连珠，仍有音响似雷。
现代文：壬辰，有颗流星像三升器具一样大，白色，有光芒从五车星北射出，飞行进入紫宫，抵达北极星的第一第二颗星而掠过，落在空中，尾如连珠，仍然有雷一样的音响。
English: In Imjin, there was a meteor as big as a three-liter appliance, white, with a ray of light shooting out from the north of the five-chariot star, flying into the Purple Palace, reaching the first and second stars of the North Star and passing by, falling in the air, trailing like a string of beads, still having a thunder-like sound.

古文：太史奏名曰 天狗 。
现代文：太吏上奏名称叫 天狗 。
English: The official's name is Tengou.

古文：八年四月癸巳，有流星如二升器，黄白色，有光，从心星南一尺许出，南行二丈没，没后如连珠。
现代文：八年四月癸巳，有颗二升器具大小的流星，黄白色，有光芒，从心宿南一尺左右出现，向南行二丈消失，消失后如同连珠响。
English: In April of the eighth year, there was a meteor the size of a two-liter appliance. It was yellow-white and had a glow. It appeared about one foot south of Shinshuku, traveled south and disappeared. After it disappeared, it was like a string of beads.

古文：丁巳，流星如鹅卵，白色，长五丈许，从角星东北二尺出，西北行没太微西蕃上将星间。
现代文：丁巳，流星像鹅卵，白色，长五丈多，从角星东北二尺出现，向西北行消失在太微垣西部上将星间。
English: Sure enough, the meteor resembled a goose egg, white, and more than five feet long. It appeared two feet northeast of Capricorn, and then disappeared northwestward into the western part of the Taibo ridge, between the stars.

古文：六月癸未，有流星如鸭卵，赤色，从紫宫中出，西南行未至大角五尺许没。
现代文：六月癸未，有颗像鸭卵一样的流星，赤色，从紫宫中飞出，向西南行在离大角星五尺左右消失。
English: At the end of June, a red meteor, like a duck egg, flew out of the Purple Palace, heading southwest and disappearing about five feet from the Great Horned Star.

古文：七月戊申，有流星如五升器，赤白色，长七尺，东南行二丈，没空中。
现代文：七月戊申，有颗流星像五升器具，赤白色，长七尺，向东南行二丈，消失在空中。
English: In July, there was a meteor like a five-liter appliance, red and white, seven feet long, traveling southeast and disappearing into the sky.

古文：十月乙亥，有流星如鹅卵，白色，从紫宫中出，西北行三丈许，没空中。
现代文：十月乙亥，有颗流星像鹅卵大小，白色，从紫宫中飞出，向西北行三丈左右，消失在空中。
English: In October, there was a white meteor the size of a goose egg that flew out of the Purple Palace and disappeared into the sky.

古文：十一月乙未，有流星如鹅卵，赤白色，有光无尾，从氐北一丈出，南行入氐中没。
现代文：十一月乙未，有颗鹅卵大小的流星，赤白色，有光芒无尾巴，从氐宿北一丈飞出，向南行进入氐宿中消失。
English: In November of the same year, a meteor the size of a goose egg, red and white, with a beam and no tail, flew out of the northern part of Oshuku and headed south into Oshuku, where it disappeared.

古文：辛丑，流星如鹅卵，白色，从参伐出，南行一丈没空中。
现代文：辛丑，流星如同鹅卵，白色，从参宿伐宿飞出，向南行一丈消失在空中。
English: Harsh and ugly, the meteor is like a goose egg, white, and flies out of Betelgeuse, heading south and disappearing into the sky.

古文：又有一流星大如三升器，白色，从轸中出，东南行入娄中没。
现代文：又有一颗流星像三升器具一样大，白色，从轸宿中飞出，向东南行进入娄宿中消失。
English: Another meteor, as big and white as a three-litre appliance, flew out of Oshuku, travelled south-east and entered Oshuku, where it disappeared.

古文：九年五月庚子，有流星如鸡子，白色无尾，从紫宫里黄帝座星西二尺出，南行一丈没空中。
现代文：九年五月庚子，有颗鸡蛋一样的流星，白色，没有尾巴，从紫宫裹黄帝座星西二尺飞出，向南行一丈消失在空中。
English: In May of the ninth year, Geng Zi, a meteor like an egg, white, without a tail, flew out from the Purple Palace wrapped in the Yellow Emperor star two feet west and disappeared into the sky heading south.

古文：丁未，流星如李子，白色无尾，从奎东北大星东二尺出，东北行至天将军而没。
现代文：丁未，有颗李子大小的流星，白色，没有尾巴，从奎宿东北大星东二尺飞出，向东北行到天将军星而消失。
English: Ding Wei, a meteor about the size of a plum, white, without a tail, flew out of Kuishuku, two feet east of the Northeast Star, traveled northeast to the Heavenly General Star and disappeared.

古文：戊申，流星如鹅卵，黄白色，尾长二丈，从箕星东一尺出，南行四丈没。
现代文：戊申，有鹅卵大小的流星，黄白色，尾长二丈，从箕星东一尺飞出，向南行四丈消失。
English: Boshin, a meteor the size of a goose egg, yellow-white, with a tail two feet long, flew out of the planet one foot east and disappeared four feet to the south.

古文：七月乙卯，西南有流星大如二升器，白色无尾，西南行一丈余没。
现代文：七月乙卯，西南有颗像二升器具大的流星，白色，没有尾巴，向西南行一丈多消失。
English: In July, a meteor as large as a two-liter appliance, white, without a tail, traveled southwest and disappeared.

古文：戊午，有流星如二升器，黄白色，有光从天江星西出，东北经天入参中而没，没后如连珠。
现代文：戊午，有颗像二升器具大小的流星，黄白色，有道光芒从天江星西射出，向东北经天进入参宿中消失，消失后如连珠般响。
English: At noon, there was a meteor the size of a two-liter appliance. It was yellow and white, and a ray of light shot out from the west of the Celestial River. It passed through the sky to the northeast and disappeared into the Betelgeuse. After it disappeared, it sounded like a string of beads.

古文：闰七月戊辰，流星如鹅卵，赤色，尾长二尺，从文昌西行入紫宫没。
现代文：闰七月戊辰，有流星像鹅卵大小，赤色，尾长二尺，从文昌星西行进入紫宫消失。
English: At the intercalary month of July, there was a meteor the size of a goose egg, red in color, with a tail two feet long. It entered the Purple Palace from the westbound Wenchang Star and disappeared.

古文：己巳，西南有流星如二升器，白色，西南行一丈没。
现代文：己巳，西南有二升器具大小的流星，白色，向西南行一丈消失。
English: Suddenly, a meteor the size of a two-liter appliance appeared in the southwest. It was white and headed southwest and disappeared.

古文：九月戊子，有流星大如鸡卵，白色，从少微星北头出，东行入太微，抵帝座星而过，未至东蕃次相一尺没，如散珠。
现代文：九月戊子，有颗鶸蛋大的流星，白色，从少微星北头飞出，向东行进入太微垣抵达帝座星而飞过，距离束部次相星一尺消失，如同散珠。
English: September Boson, a meteor the size of a quail's egg, white, flew out of the north end of the Minor Planet, traveled eastward into the Great Wall, reached the Star of the Empire and flew past, disappearing a foot from the star of the second phase of the Trapezium, like a loose bead.

古文：十年正月甲戌，有流星如五升器，白色，从氐中出，东南行经房道过，从心星南二尺没。
现代文：十年正月甲戌，有颗流星像五升器具大小，白色，从氐宿中飞出，向东南行路过房宿，从心宿南二尺消失。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, a white meteorite, the size of a five-liter appliance, flew out of the inn, traveled southeast past the inn, and disappeared two feet south of the inn.

古文：三月癸未，有流星如鸡卵，青白色，尾长四尺，从牵牛南八寸出，南行一丈没空中。
现代文：三月癸未，有颗流星像鶸蛋大小，青白色，尾长四尺，从牵牛星南八寸飞出，向南行一丈消失在空中。
English: On the last day of March, a meteor the size of a quail's egg, bluish-white, with a tail four feet long, flew out of Altair eight inches to the south and disappeared into the sky.

古文：十一年二月壬寅，东北有流星如一升器，白色，无尾，北行三丈而没。
现代文：十一年二月壬寅，东北方有颗流星像一升器具大小，白色，没有尾巴，向北行三丈而消失。
English: In February of the 11th year of Ren Yin, there was a meteor in the northeast that was the size of a one-liter appliance, white, without a tail, traveling north and disappearing.

古文：四月丙申，有流星如三升器，白色，有光，尾长一丈许，从箕星东北一尺出，行二丈许入斗度，没空中，临没如连珠。
现代文：四月丙申，有颗流星像三升器具大小，白色，有光芒，尾长一丈左右，从箕宿东北一尺飞出，飞行二丈左右，进入斗宿方位，消失在空中，临消失时像连珠一样。
English: In April, there was a meteor the size of a three-liter appliance, white, with a glow, with a tail length of about one meter, flying out of northeastern Shibuya, flying about two meters, entering the direction of Doushuku, disappearing in the air, and disappearing like a string of beads.

古文：五月壬申，有流星大如鸡子，黄白色，从太微端门出，无所犯，西南行一丈许没，没后有痕。
现代文：五月壬申，有颗流星像鶸蛋大小，黄白色，从太微垣端门飞出，无所冲犯，向西南行一丈左右消失，消失后留有痕迹。
English: In May, in Jinshin, there was a meteor the size of a quail's egg, yellow-white in color, which flew out of the Taiyukagata Gate, collided with nothing, and disappeared to the southwest by about one meter, leaving traces behind.

古文：七月辛酉，有流星如鸡子，赤色，无尾，从氐中出，西行一丈五尺没空中。
现代文：七月辛酉，有颗流星像鸡蛋大小，赤色，没有尾巴，从氐宿中飞出，向西行一丈五尺消失在空中。
English: In July, a meteor the size of an egg, red in color and without a tail, flew out of Oshuku, heading west and disappearing into the sky.

古文：戊寅，有流星如鸡卵，黄白色，从紫宫东蕃内出，东北行一丈五尺，至北极第五星西北四尺没。
现代文：戊寅，有颗流星像鸡蛋大小，黄白色，从紫宫束部飞出，向东北行一丈五尺，到北极星第五颗星西北四尺处消失。
English: In Wu Yin, there was a meteor the size of an egg, yellow-white, flying out from the bundles of the Purple Palace, traveling northeast at a height of five feet, and disappearing four feet northwest of the fifth star of the North Star.

古文：九月乙酉，有流星如鸭卵，黄白色，从娄南一尺出，东行二丈没。
现代文：九月乙酉，有颗流星像鸭蛋大小，黄白色，从娄宿南一尺飞出，向东行二丈后消失。
English: September Acetylene, a meteor the size of a duck's egg, yellow-white, flew out of Oshuku one foot south, traveled east two feet, and then disappeared.

古文：十二月己丑，西南有流星如三升器，黄赤色，无尾，西南行三丈许没，散如遗火。
现代文：十二月己丑，西南方有颗流星像三升器具大小，黄赤色，没有尾巴，向西南行三丈左右消失，散掉时好像残留的火。
English: December is ugly, there is a meteor in the southwest that is the size of a three-liter appliance, yellow-red, without a tail, traveling southwest and disappearing around three feet. When it is scattered, it looks like residual fire.

古文：永元三年夜，天开黄色明照，须臾有物，绛色，如小瓮，渐渐大如仓廪，声隆隆如雷，坠太湖中，野雉皆雊，世人呼为 木殃 。
现代文：永元三年某夜，天空中发出黄色的光亮，不久有件小瓮大小的绛色物品，渐渐大得像粮仓一样，发出雷鸣般的隆隆声，坠入太湖中，野雉都发出呜叫，世人称为 木灾异 。
English: One night in the third year of the Yongyuan era, a yellow light shone in the sky. Soon, an ochre-colored object the size of a small beak appeared. It gradually grew as large as a granary, emitted a thunderous rumble, and fell into the Taihu Lake. The wild boars all howled. The world called it a tree disaster.

古文：史臣案：《春秋纬》： 天狗如大奔星，有声，望之如火，见则四方相射。 
现代文：史臣据《春秋鳓 天狗像大奔星，有声响，望起来像火光，它出现就会四方相互攻击 。
English: According to Shi Shen, "In spring and autumn, Tengu is like a great star, it has a sound, it looks like fire, and when it appears, it will attack each other in four directions.

古文：汉史云： 西北有三大星，如日状，名曰天狗。
现代文：汉史记载： 西北有三颗大星，像太阳的样子，名叫天狗。
English: Chinese history records: In the northwest, there are three large stars that look like the sun, called Tengu.

古文：天狗出则人相食。 
现代文：天狗出现就会发生人吃人。 
English: When tengu appear, cannibalism will occur.

古文：《天官》云： 天狗状如大奔星。 
现代文：《天官书》说： 天狗的形状像大镜星。 
English: "The Book of Heavenly Officials" says: "The shape of the tengu is like a great mirror star.

古文：又云： 如大流星，色黄，有声。
现代文：又说： 像大流星，黄色，有声响。
English: And he said, It is like a great shooting star, yellow, and it makes a noise.

古文：其止地类狗所坠。
现代文：它落在地上像狗坠地。
English: It fell to the ground like a dog.

古文：望之如火光，炎炎冲天，其上锐，其下圆，如数顷田。
现代文：望起来像火光，炎炎冲天。它的上部尖锐，下部是圆的，就像几顷田一样大。
English: It looked like a blaze, with flames shooting into the sky. Its upper part was sharp, while the lower part was round, as big as several hectares of fields.

古文：见则流血千里，破军杀将。 
现代文：出现就会流血千里，击败军队杀死将领。 
English: Appearance will bleed a thousand miles, defeat the army and kill the general.

古文：汉史又云： 昭明下为天狗，所下兵起血流。 
现代文：漠史又说： 照明下边是天狗，它坠落的地方会有战争和流血。 
English: Moushi also said: Below the illumination is a tengu, and where it falls, there will be war and bloodshed.

古文：昭明，星也。
现代文：昭明是颗星。
English: Akira is a star.

古文：《洛书》云： 昭明见而霸者出。 
现代文：《洛书》说： 昭明星出现会有霸王问世。 
English: "The Book of Luo" says: When a bright star appears, a tyrant will come into the world.

古文：《运斗枢》云： 昭明有芒角，兵徵也。 
现代文：《运斗枢》说： 昭明星有光芒和角，是战事的征兆。 
English: "Yun Dou Zu" said: "The bright star has light and horns, which is a sign of war.

古文：《河图》云： 太白散为天狗。 
现代文：《河图》说： 金星散为天狗。 
English: "The river map" says: Venus is scattered as a tengu.

古文：汉史又云： 有星出，其状赤白有光，即为天狗，其下小无足，所下国易政。 
现代文：汉史又说： 有颗星出现，它的形状是赤白色有光芒，就是天狗。它的下部小而且没有脚，它坠落的地方国家政权易手。 
English: Han Shi also said: A star appeared, its shape was red-white and shiny, it was the Tengu, its lower part was small and had no feet, and the local state power changed hands when it fell.

古文：众说不同，未详孰是。
现代文：众说不一，不清楚谁是正确的。
English: Opinions are mixed, and it is not clear who is right.

古文：推乱亡之运，此其必天狗乎？
现代文：推算混乱灭亡的运数，造必定是天狗吧。
English: Calculating the number of operations of chaos and destruction, it must be Tengu.

古文：老人星建元元年十一月戊辰，老人星见南方丙上。
现代文：建元元年十一月戊辰，老人星出现在南方丙位上。
English: In November of the first year of Jianyuan, the old man's star appeared in the southern C position.

古文：八月癸卯，祠老人星。
现代文：八月癸卯，祭祀老人星。
English: In August, a festival is held to honor the elderly.

古文：永明三年八月丁酉，老人星见南方丙上。
现代文：永明三年八月丁酉，老人星出现在南方丙位上。
English: In August of the third year of Sun Myung Moon's reign, the elderly star appeared in the southern C position.

古文：六年八月壬戌，老人星见南方丙上。
现代文：六年八月壬戌，老人星出现在南方丙位上。
English: In August of the sixth year, the elderly star appeared in the southern C position.

古文：建元四年二月辛卯，白虹贯日。永明十年七月癸酉，西方有白虹，须臾灭。
现代文：七年七月壬戌，老人星出现在南方丙位上。九年闰七月戊寅，老人星出现在南方丙位十年八月乙酉，老人星出现。十一年九月丙寅，老人星出现在南方丙位建元四年二月辛卯，白虹贯穿日。永明十年七月癸酉，西方出现白虹，不久消失。
English: In July of the seventh year, the old man's star appeared in the southern C position. In July of the ninth year, the old man's star appeared in the southern C position. In August of the tenth year, the old man's star appeared. In September of the eleventh year, the old man's star appeared in the southern C position. In February of the fourth year of the founding of the Republic of China, the white rainbow ran through the sun. In July of the tenth year of the Ming Dynasty, the white rainbow appeared in the west, and soon disappeared.

古文：十一年九月甲午，西方有白虹，南头指申，北头指戌上，久久消灭。
现代文：十一年九月甲午，西方出现白虹，南头指向申位，北头指在戌位上，很久才消失。
English: On the afternoon of September 11th, a white rainbow appeared in the west, with the south pointing to the throne and the north pointing to the throne. It took a long time for it to disappear.

古文：建元四年二月辛卯，黑气大小二枚，东至卯，西至酉，广五丈，久久消灭。
现代文：建元四年二月辛卯，大小二股黑气，束到卯位，西到酉位，宽五丈，很久才消失。
English: In February of the fourth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Xinwu, the size of the two black gas, the bundle to the u, the west to the xi, the width of the five, it took a long time to disappear.

古文：永明二年四月丁未，北斗第六第七星间有一白气。
现代文：丞塱二年四月丁未，北斗第六第七颗星之间有一股白气。
English: In April of the second year of the Joseon Dynasty, there was a white gas between the sixth and seventh stars of the Big Dipper.

古文：四年正月辛未，黄白气长丈五尺许，入太微。
现代文：四年正月辛未，有股黄白气长一丈五尺左右，进入太微垣。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, there was a yellow and white gas that grew about five feet in height and entered Taibu-gaki.

古文：永明四年正月癸未，南面有阵云一丈许。
现代文：丞塱四年正月癸未，南面有阵云一丈左右。
English: It was late in the first month of the fourth year of the Joseon Dynasty, and there was a cloudburst about a meter high to the south.

古文：五年四月己巳，有云色黑，广五尺，东头指丑，西头指酉，并至地。
现代文：五年四月己巳，有股黑色云，宽五尺，东头指向丑位，西头指向酉位，都落到地上。
English: In April of the fifth year, there was a black cloud, five feet wide, with the east end pointing to the ugly place and the west end pointing to the ugly place, both of which fell to the ground.

古文：十一月乙巳，东南有阵云高一丈，北至卯，东南至巳，久久散没。
现代文：十一月乙巳，东南有阵云高一丈，北到卯位，东南到巳位，很久才消散。
English: At the eleventh hour of November, there was a cloudburst in the southeast, reaching as high as the sky. It lasted for a long time before dissipating.

古文：六年二月癸亥，东西有一梗云，半天，曲向西，苍白色。
现代文：六年二月癸亥，东西有一梗云漫布半天，弯曲向西，苍白色。
English: In February of the sixth year of the Heian period, there was a stalk of cloud covering the sky from east to west for half a day, curving to the west and pale white.

古文：三月庚辰，南面有梗云，黑色，广六寸。
现代文：三月庚辰，南面有梗云，黑色，宽六寸。
English: In March, Gengchen, there is a stalk cloud to the south, black, six inches wide.

古文：七年十月辛未，有梗云，苍黑色，东头至寅，西头指酉，广三尺，贯紫宫，久久消漫。
现代文：七年十月辛未，有梗云，苍黑色，柬头到寅西头指向酉位，宽三尺，贯穿紫宫，很久才消散。
English: In October of the seventh year of Xinwei, there was a stalked cloud, pale black, from the camel's head to the west end of the eagle's head, it was three feet wide, running through the Purple Palace, and it took a long time to dissipate.

古文：八年十一月乙未，有梗云，黑色，六尺许，东头至卯，西头至酉，久久散漫。
现代文：八年十一月乙未，有梗云，黑色，六尺左右，柬头到卯位，西头到酉位，很久才消散。
English: In November of the eighth year, there was a cloud, black, six feet or so, with the cameraman's head to the abbot's place, and the west head to the priest's place. It took a long time for it to dissipate.

古文：十二月庚辰，南面有阵云，黑色，高一丈许，东头至巳，西头至未，久久散漫。
现代文：十二月庚辰，南面有一阵云，黑色，高一丈左右，东头到巳位，西头到未位，很久才消散。
English: In December, Geng Chen, there was a burst of clouds in the south, black, about one meter high, the east end to the middle, the west end to the middle, and it took a long time to dissipate.

古文：十一年七月丙辰，东面有梗云，苍白色，广二尺三寸，南头指巳至地，北头指子至地，久久渐散漫。
现代文：十一年七月丙辰，束面有梗云，苍白色，宽二尺三寸，南头指向巳位到地，北头指向子位到地，很久后逐渐消散。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd month of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 7th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 7th year of the 11th year of the 11

古文：赞曰：阳精火镜，阴灵水存。
现代文：赞曰：太阳是火的精灵，月亮之灵在水中留存。
English: Zang Zai said: The sun is the spirit of fire, and the spirit of the moon remains in the water.

古文：有禀有射，代为明昏。
现代文：有禀承有反射，交替变化为明暗。
English: There are reflections, alternating between light and dark.

古文：垂光满盖，列景周浑。
现代文：垂下满天光芒，照遍各项景致。
English: Hanging down the sky full of light, shining all over the scenery.

古文：具位臣辅，备象街门。
现代文：列具臣下辅佐之位，齐备星辰象征的街门。
English: The streets are lined with the ranks of vassals and assistants, complete with gates symbolizing the stars.

古文：灾生霣薄，祟起飞奔。
现代文：灾异生自星辰坠落，鬼祟起于流星飞奔。
English: Catastrophes are born from the falling of stars, and mysteries arise from the darting of meteors.

古文：弗忘人惧，瑜瑕辩论。
现代文：不要忘记人的恐惧，辩论好坏。
English: Don't forget people's fears, debate is good or bad.

古文：若任天道，灶亦多言。
现代文：如果听任天道，灶神也会多言多语。
English: If left to the will of heaven, the god of the hearth would be a man of many words.

