古文：曹参被召，将行，属其后相： 以齐狱市为寄。 
现代文：原文汉惠帝时，曹参为齐国丞相，萧何死后，曹参被召往长安继萧何在中央任丞相。临别的时候，他嘱咐继他任齐相的人说： 要把齐国的刑狱和集市留意好。 
English: When Han Hui was emperor, Cao San was the chancellor of Qi. After the death of Xiao He, Cao San was called to Chang'an to succeed Xiao He as the chancellor of the central government. At the time of parting, he instructed his successor, Qi Xiang, saying: Pay attention to the prisons and markets in Qi.

古文：后相曰： 治无大此者乎？ 
现代文：继任的齐相问道： 国家的政治没有比这些更重要的事情了吗？ 
English: Successor Qi Xiang asked: Isn't the country's politics more important than these things?

古文：参曰： 狱市所以并容也，今扰之，奸人何所容乎？ 
现代文：曹参说： 监狱和集市都是安排坏人的场所，你现在如果处理不好二者的平衡关系，把坏人安置到什么地方去呢？ 
English: Cao San said, "Prisons and bazaars are both places for placing bad people. If you can't handle the balance between the two, where will you place the bad people?

古文：参既入相，一遵何约束，唯日夜饮醇酒，无所事事。宾客来者皆欲有言，至，则参辄饮以醇酒；间有言，又饮之，醉而后已，终莫能开说。
现代文：曹参到中央继任丞相后，一切遵守萧何原来的法规办事，他自己只是日夜饮酒作乐，没有出台什么新举措，来访的客人们都想跟他谈些事，一到他那里，就被曹参招待喝酒；其间想谈事，又被一个劲儿劝酒，直到被灌醉方才罢休，到底也没能说成什么事。
English: After Cao San took over the post of chancellor of the Central Government, he complied with all of Xiao He's original rules and regulations. He only drank alcohol day and night to amuse himself, and did not introduce any new measures. The visiting guests wanted to talk to him about something, and as soon as they got to his place, they were invited to drink by Cao San. While they wanted to talk about something, they were strongly urged to drink until they were drunk, and then they stopped. In the end, they were unable to talk about anything.

古文：惠帝怪参不治事，嘱其子中大夫窋私以意叩之。窋以休沭归，谏参。
现代文：汉惠帝刘盈责怪曹参不治理政事，就让曹参的儿子、中大夫曹窋私下里把自己的责备之意去问一问曹参。
English: Liu Ying, the emperor of the Han Dynasty, accused Cao San of not managing the affairs of state, so he asked Cao San's son, Cao Jie, a middle-ranking official, to privately ask Cao San about his reproach.

古文：参怒，笞之二百。
现代文：曹窋以休息、沐浴为理由回家，劝谏曹参去治理朝政。
English: Cao Pi went home on the pretext of resting and bathing, and advised Cao Pi to take part in governing the imperial court.

古文：帝让参曰： 与窋何治乎？
现代文：曹参听了大怒，抽了曹窋二百鞭子。
English: Cao San was so angry that he gave Cao Zhen 200 lashes.

古文：乃者吾使谏君耳。 
现代文：汉惠帝责问曹参说： 你为什么要打曹窋呢？
English: Emperor Han Hui scolded Cao San, saying, "Why are you beating Cao Zhen?

古文：参免冠谢曰： 陛下自察圣武孰与高帝？ 上曰： 朕安敢望先帝？ 
现代文：这是朕派他去劝你的。 曹参取下帽子行礼谢罪说： 陛下自己掂量掂量，陛下与高帝相比谁更圣明英武？ 惠帝说： 朕怎敢与高帝相比呢？ 
English: This is what I sent him to advise you. Cao Zhan took off his hat and bowed to Xie Sin and said: Your Majesty, weigh yourself. Compared to Gao Di, who is more holy, wise and valiant? Hui Di said: How dare I compare myself to Gao Di?

古文：又曰： 视臣能孰曹参与萧何？ 
现代文：曹参又说： 陛下看臣的才干与萧何相比谁更强？ 
English: Cao San also said, "Compared to Xiao He, who is stronger in the ability to look after his subjects?"

古文：帝曰： 君似不及也。 
现代文：惠帝说： 你似乎比不上萧何。 
English: Hui Di said: You seem to be no match for Xiao He.

古文：参曰： 陛下言是也。
现代文：曹参说： 陛下所说的很对呀。
English: Cao San said, "Your Majesty is quite right.

古文：高帝与何定天下，法令既明。今陛下垂拱，参等守职，遵而勿失，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：高帝与萧何平定了全国，法令已经订得很清楚了，陛下无为而治，臣等谨守职分，遵循着既定的法令不脱离，不也就行了吗！ 
English: Emperor Gao and Emperor Xiao He have pacified the whole country. The decrees have been clearly stipulated. His Majesty does nothing and rules. The courtiers are careful to perform their duties and follow the established decrees. Isn't it enough?

古文：帝曰： 君休矣。 
现代文：惠帝明白了曹参的心意，就对他说： 那你就去休息吧！ 
English: Hui Di understood Cao San's intention, and said to him: Then you should go and rest!

古文：吏廨邻相国园。
现代文：丞相曹参的衙门和相府的后花园相邻。
English: The front gate of Cao San, the chancellor, is adjacent to the back garden of the chancellery.

古文：群吏日欢呼饮酒，声达于外。
现代文：衙门中的属吏们成天在衙中欢呼饮酒，喧哗声音传到墙外很远。
English: The subordinate officials in the gate cheered and drank in the gate all day long, and the noise was heard far beyond the wall.

古文：左右幸相国游园中，闻而治之。
现代文：曹参的随从们随他到后花园游玩，心里幸灾乐祸，心想曹丞相听到他们的喧闹声，一定会整治他们。
English: Cao San's followers followed him to the back garden to play. They were gloating in their hearts, thinking that when Cao Zhengyuan heard their noise, he would surely rectify them.

古文：参闻，乃布席取酒，亦欢呼相应。左右乃不复言。
现代文：谁知曹参听到隔墙的热闹声后，就命人摆席取酒，也欢呼喧闹，和衙中属吏们相呼应，曹参的随从们这才不再说什么了。
English: Who knows, after Cao San heard the boisterous noise of the partition wall, he ordered someone to set up a table to fetch wine, and also cheered noisily, echoing the officials in the middle, and Cao San's followers stopped saying anything.

古文：不是覆短，适以见长。
现代文：这不是在掩饰自己的短处，却是在发挥自己的长处。
English: It's not about hiding your weaknesses, it's about playing to your strengths.

古文：极绘太平之景，阴消近习之谗。
现代文：极力铺陈太平时期的景象，实际上又有约束近臣玩弄谗言的作用。
English: They tried their best to present a picture of a peaceful period, but in fact they had the effect of restraining their close vassals from indulging in gossip.

