古文：二十五日其妇平明始觅炊，迟迟得餐。
现代文：二十五日天亮后店主妇才找柴做饭，饭吃得很晚。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the shopkeeper did not look for firewood to cook until after dawn, and the meal was eaten very late.

古文：雨时作时止。
现代文：雨下一阵停一阵。
English: The rain paused.

古文：出门即东上岭。
现代文：出门后立即向东攀登山岭。
English: After leaving home, I immediately climbed the mountain ridge to the east.

古文：盖其江自北而南，两崖夹壁，惟此西崖有一线可下，东崖有片隙可庐，其南有山横列，江折而西向入峡，有小水自东峡来注，故西崖之南，江勒而无余地，东崖之南，曲转而存小塍。
现代文：因为这条江从北向南流，两岸悬崖峭壁，只有西边崖壁上那一线小路能下到江边，东边崖壁上这片空隙可以居住，南边有大山横列，江水因此转向西流入峡谷，有条小河从东边峡谷流来注入江水，所以西崖南面，因江水限制而毫无余地；东崖南面，曲折弯转而有小土埂。
English: Because this river flows from north to south, cliffs on both sides of the cliff, only the lane on the west cliff can go down to the river, the gap on the east cliff can be lived in, there are mountains on the south side, so the river flows into the canyon from the west, and a small river flows from the east canyon to inject the river, so the south side of the west cliff has no room due to the limitation of river water; the south side of the east cliff has small mounds due to the twists and turns.

古文：过此江，乃知布雄之地，西南随此江，其界更远；南抵广南，其界即盘江，此《统志》所云东入普安州境也。
现代文：渡过这条江，才知道步雄的地域，西南部沿着江流，其边界延伸得更远；南部抵达广南府，其边界是盘江，就是《一统志》所说的往东进入普安州境。
English: After crossing this river, it is only known that Bu Xiong's region, in the southwest, is along the river flow, and its border extends further; in the south, it reaches Guangnan Prefecture, and its border is the Panjiang River, which is the eastward entry into the border of Pu'an State mentioned in the "Historical Record."

古文：步雄属贵州普安州。盘旋东北共三里，逾岭头，遂与南山成南北两界。峡中深逼，自东而西；路循北山岭南行，自西而东。
现代文：绕着往东北一共走三里，翻过岭头，岭就和南山分成南北两派。其中的峡谷又深又窄，是东西走向；道路顺着北边山岭的南面走，从西向东。
English: Walk three miles around to the northeast, turn over the top of the ridge, and the ridge is divided into the south and north sides of the Nanshan. The canyon is deep and narrow, going east to west; the road goes along the south side of the mountain ridge on the north side, from west to east.

古文：又五里，则北山忽断如中剖者，下陷如深坑，底有细流，沿石底自北而泻于南峡。
现代文：又五里，北山忽然像被从中切断，如同深坑一样地往下陷落，山底有细流，顺着石底从北泻入南峡。
English: After another five miles, the North Mountain suddenly seemed to be cut off from it, falling down like a deep pit. There was a thin stream at the bottom of the mountain, running along the stone floor from the North Estuary into the South Gorge.

古文：路乃转北而下，历悬石，披仄崿获窄的山崖，下抵石底，践流稍南，复攀石隙，上跻东崖。
现代文：道路于是转朝北下，经过悬空的岩石，穿越倾斜的山崖，下到石底。踩着细流稍稍往南，又顺着石缝攀援，登攀东边的山崖。
English: The road then turned northwards, past overhanging rocks, through sloping cliffs, down to the stone bottom, stepping on a small stream a little to the south, and climbing along the stone crevice, climbing the eastern cliff.

古文：由石底北望，断崖中剖，对夹如一线，并起各千仞，丛翠披云，飞流溅沫，真幽险之极观，逼仄之异境也。
现代文：从石底向北眺望，断崖从中剖开，对峙之间只能见到一线天，两边各耸起千仍高，丛林翠竹、云披雾绕，瀑布飞流、水花四溅，真是极其幽深险要的景观，异常罕见的狭窄之境。
English: Looking north from the bottom of the stone, the cliff is cut in the middle, and only one line of the sky can be seen between the confrontation. The mountains on both sides are still high, the jungle is green, the clouds are foggy, the waterfall is flying, and the water splashes everywhere. It is really a very deep and dangerous landscape, an extremely rare narrow landscape.

古文：既上，复循北岭东行。
现代文：登上东崖后，又顺着北岭往东走。
English: After climbing the East Cliff, I walked along the North Ridge to the east.

古文：五里稍降，行坞中二里，于是路南复有峰突起，不沿南坞，忽穿北坳矣。
现代文：逐渐下五里，在坞中走了二里，于是道路南边又有山峰拔地而起，没有沿山坞向南延伸，而是突然穿向北边山坳。
English: Gradually down five miles, walked two miles in the dock, so the road south of the mountain peaks rise up, not along the dock to the south, but suddenly through the mountains to the north.

古文：时零雨间作，路无行人。
现代文：这时阵雨不时地下，路上没有行人。
English: At this time, rain showers fell from time to time, and there were no pedestrians on the road.

古文：既而风驰雨骤，山深路僻，两人者勃窣其间，觉树影溪声，俱有灵幻之气。
现代文：不久风紧雨急，山深路静，我们两人在其间甸甸而行，只觉得树影溪声，都有灵幻之气。
English: Soon, the wind and rain were very strong, the mountain road was quiet, and the two of us walked between them, feeling only the shadows of the trees and the sound of the stream, all of which had a spiritual atmosphere.

古文：又二里，度东脊，稍转而南，复逾冈而上。二里，一岐东南，一岐直北，顾奴前驰从东南者。
现代文：又走二里，往东越过山脊，逐渐向南转，又翻越山冈而上，二里，一条岔道伸向东南，一条岔道一直向北，顾仆在前面朝东南快步走。
English: He walked another two miles, crossing the ridge to the east, gradually turning south, and then climbing over the mountain. For two miles, a narrow path stretched to the southeast, and a narrow path went all the way to the north. Gu Min walked briskly in front of him toward the southeast.

古文：穿山腋间二里，忽见数十家倚北坞间，余觉有异，趋问之，则大路尚在北大山后，此乃山中别聚，皆儸儸也。
现代文：在山丛中穿行二里，忽然看到数十家人居住在北山坞中，我感到有些奇怪，赶忙过去询问，原来大路还在北面的大山背后，这里是山中另一个聚落，居民都是锣锣。
English: After traveling two miles through the mountains, I suddenly saw dozens of families living in the northern mountain dock. I felt a bit strange and hurried over to inquire. Originally, the highway was still behind the big mountain in the north. Here is another settlement in the mountains, and the residents are baboons.

古文：见人伥伥，间有解语者，问其名，曰坡头甸。
现代文：见有生人而无所适从，其中有懂汉语的，我询问这里的地名，叫坡头甸。
English: When I saw a group of bewildered people, some of whom understood Chinese, I asked them what the name of the place was. It was called Po Toutian.

古文：问去黄草坝，曰尚五十里。
现代文：询问去黄草坝路程，说还有五十里。
English: He asked how far it was to the Yellow Grass Dam, and was told that it was another fifty miles.

古文：问北出大路若干里，曰不一里。
现代文：又问走到北边大路有几里，说不到一里。
English: He also asked how many miles it was to the main road to the north, and was told it was less than a mile.

古文：盖其后有大山，北列最高，抱此甸而南，若隔绝人境者。
现代文：原来坡头甸背后有大山，是北面排列最高的山，环抱着坡头甸往南延伸，如同与世隔绝、没有人烟之境。
English: Originally, there was a large mountain behind the Pudongdian, which was the highest mountain in the north, and it extended southward around the Pudongdian, as if it was isolated from the world and uninhabited.

古文：随其指，逾岭之西北腋，果一里而得大道。
现代文：顺着村民指的路走，翻越到山岭西北侧，果然走一里就到了大路。
English: He walked along the road pointed out by the villagers, climbed over to the northwest side of the mountain, and finally walked one mile to the main road.

古文：遂从之，缘大山之北而上。
现代文：于是顺着大路走，沿着大山往北攀登。
English: So I walked along the main road and climbed north along the mountain.

古文：直挤者一里，望北坞甚深而辟，霾开树杪树枝间的雾气散去，每伫视之，惟见其中丛茅盘谷，阒ｑù寂静无片塍半椽也。
现代文：直直上了一里，看到北面的山坞很深，很开阔，阴霆散开，树木稀少，每次停下来观看，只见坞中丛密的茅草遍布山谷，寂静无声，没有一片田地半间房屋。
English: I went straight up for a mile and saw that the dock to the north was very deep, very open, overcast, and sparsely wooded. Every time I stopped to look at it, I saw dense thatch in the dock all over the valley, silence, not a single field and half a house.

古文：盘大山之东，又上半里，忽见有峡东坠。
现代文：绕着大山往东走，又上了半里，忽然看见有峡谷往东坠延下去。
English: I walked around the mountain to the east for another half-mile, and suddenly saw a canyon extending down to the east.

古文：稍东南降半里，平行大山东南支，又见其西复有峡南坠，已与大山东西隔陇矣。
现代文：稍向东南下半里，顺着大山的东南分支平走，又看见西边还有峡谷向南坠延下去，已经与大山东西两边隔陇了。
English: A little to the south-east of the lower half, along the southeastern branch of the mountain, I saw the west side of the canyon extending to the south, and it was already separated from the east and west sides of the mountain.

古文：于是降陟岭坞十里，有两三家居北冈之上，是曰柳树。
现代文：从这时下坞登岭共十里，有两三家人住在北面冈上，此地名柳树。
English: From this time, a total of ten miles from the dock to the mountain, two or three families lived on the north hill, this place is called Willow.

古文：止而炊汤以饭；而雨势不止，讯去黄草坝不及，遂留止焉。
现代文：停下来烧水吃饭；而雨仍然不停，讯问去黄草坝，说到不了了，于是在柳树住宿。
English: Stopped to boil water to eat; while the rain is still non-stop, the interrogation to the Yellow Grass Dam, can't say, so stay in the willow.

古文：其人皆汉语，非儸儸。
现代文：这里的人都讲汉语，不是锣锣。
English: People here speak Chinese, not Cantonese.

古文：居停之老陈姓，甚贫而能重客，一见辄煨榾柮以燎湿衣。
现代文：留我们住宿的老人姓陈，家里很穷却能厚待客人，一见面就点燃柴块以便烘烤湿淋淋的衣服。
English: The old man who let us stay, surnamed Chen, was from a very poor family, but he treated his guests well. As soon as he saw us, he lit a piece of wood to bake our wet clothes.

古文：余浣污而炙之。
现代文：我洗去污泥然后烘烤。
English: I wash the sludge off and bake it.

古文：虽食无盐，卧无草，甚乐也。
现代文：虽然吃饭无盐，睡卧无草，但十分愉快。
English: Although we eat without salt and sleep without grass, it is very pleasant.

古文：二十六日平明起，炊饭。
现代文：二十六日天一亮起床，烧火做饭。
English: On the 26th day, I got up at dawn and started cooking.

古文：风霾飘雨，余仍就火，久之乃行。
现代文：风中夹雾，天上飘雨，我便坐在火边，过了很久才出发。
English: With mist in the wind and rain in the sky, I sat by the fire and waited a long time before setting out.

古文：降坡循坞，其坞犹西下者。
现代文：下坡后顺坞走，这座山坞仍然往西延伸下去。
English: After descending the slope and walking along the dock, the dock still extends to the west.

古文：东三里坞穷，有小水自北坞来，横渡之。
现代文：往东三里走完山坞，有条小河从北坞流来，横渡小河。
English: After walking three miles to the east, there is a small river flowing from the north dock, crossing the small river.

古文：复东上坡，宛转岭坳，五里，有场在北坡下。
现代文：又往东上坡，绕着岭坳转，五里，有块平地在北边坡下。
English: Further east uphill, around the ridge, five miles, there is a flat area at the bottom of the northern slope.

古文：由其东又五里，逾冈而下，坞忽东西大开。
现代文：从平地往东又走五里，翻越山冈而下，山坞忽然为东西走向，十分开阔。
English: After walking another five miles from the flat land to the east, crossing the mountains and hills, the dock suddenly became east-west, very open.

古文：其西南冈脊甚平，而东北若深坠；南北皆巨山，而南山势尤崇，黑雾间时露岩岩气色。
现代文：坞西南冈脊很平，但东北好像下坠很深；南边北边都是大山，但南边的山势尤为高大，高峻的山势不时从浓黑的云雾中显露出来。
English: The southwest ridge is very flat, but the northeast seems to be very deep; the south and north are all big mountains, but the mountains on the south are particularly high, and the high mountains are revealed from time to time from the thick black clouds.

古文：坞中无巨流，亦无田塍居人，一里皆深茅充塞。
现代文：坞中没有大河，也没有田地居民，一眼望去，全被茂密的茅草充塞。
English: There is no big river in the dock, no field dwellers, at a glance, it is all filled with thick thatch.

古文：路本正东去，有岐南向崇山之腋，顾奴前驰，从之。
现代文：路直直朝东延伸，有岔路往南延伸到深山中，顾仆在前走得很快，我紧跟他走。
English: The road stretches straight to the east, and there is a winding road that extends south into the mountains. Gu Min walked quickly in front of me, and I followed him closely.

古文：一里，南竟坞，将陟山坡上，余觉其误，复返辙而北，从大路东行。
现代文：一里，往南走到坞边，快要登山坡往上走时，我觉得此路有误，又朝北返回原路，顺着大路往东走。
English: One mile, I walked south to the dock, and when I was about to walk up the mountain slope, I felt that this path was wrong, and I returned to the original path to the north and walked east along the main road.

古文：披茅履湿，三里，东竟坞。
现代文：披开茅草，踩着潮湿的路，三里，往东走完山坞。
English: Pulling away the thatch, stepping on the wet road, three miles, walking east to complete the dock.

古文：有峰中峙坞东，坞从东北坠而下，路从东南陟而上。
现代文：有座山峰矗立在坞东正中，坞顺东北边坠落而下，道路往东南边攀越而上。
English: A mountain peak stands in the middle of the dock in the east, the dock falls down along the northeast side, and the road climbs up to the southeast side.

古文：二里，南穿山腋。
现代文：二里，往南穿过山腋。
English: Two miles, south through the mountains.

古文：又东半里，逾其东坳，俯见东山南向列，下界为峡，其中泉声轰轰，想为南流者。
现代文：又往东走半里，越过其东边山坳，俯身看到东边的山向南延伸，山下是峡谷，峡中水声轰鸣，想来是向南流去。
English: I walked another half-mile to the east, crossed the mountains to the east, bent down and saw that the mountains to the east extended southward. Below the mountains was a canyon, and the roar of the water in the canyon seemed to be flowing southward.

古文：从岭上转南半里，逾其南拗，又俯见西山南向列，下界为峡，其中泉声轰轰，想亦南流者。
现代文：从岭上转朝南走，半里，越过其南边的山坳，又俯身看到西边的山向南延伸，山下是峡谷，峡中水声轰鸣，想来也是向南流去。
English: From the ridge, turn to the south, walk half a mile, cross the ridge on the south side, and lean over to see the mountain on the west side extending southward. Below the mountain is a canyon, and the roar of the water in the canyon seems to flow southward.

古文：盖其东北皆有层峦夹谷，而是山中悬其间。
现代文：大概其东边北边都是层层山峦夹着山谷，而这座山耸立在层峦夹谷之间。
English: The north and east sides of the mountain are covered with mountains and valleys, and this mountain stands between the mountains and valleys.

古文：遂从其西沿岭南下，二里，有小水自东崖横注西谷，遂踞其上，濯足而饭。
现代文：于是从其西顺着山岭南下，二里，有条小河从东边山崖向西边山谷横流，于是蹲在小河边，洗脚后吃饭。
English: So he followed the mountains to the south from the west. Two miles away, a small river flowed from the eastern cliff to the western valley, so he squatted by the small river, washed his feet and ate.

古文：既饭，从坞上南行。
现代文：饭后，顺着坞边往南走。
English: After dinner, walk south along the dock.

古文：隔坞见西峰高柯丛蔓，蒙密无纤隙。
现代文：隔着山坞看到西边山峰树林高大，草丛蔓延，山峰被遮盖得毫无缝隙。
English: Across from the dock, I could see the tall trees on the western side of the mountain peak, the grass spreading, and the mountain peak completely covered.

古文：南二里，坞将尽，闻伐木声，则抡材取薪者，从其南渐北焉。
现代文：往南走二里，即将走完山坞，听到伐木声，是选木材、砍柴火的人，从坞南逐渐向北而去。
English: Walking two miles south, about to finish the dock, I heard the sound of logging. It was the people who were selecting wood and chopping firewood, gradually moving from the dock south to north.

古文：又南一里，下至坞中，则坞乃度脊，虽不甚中高，而北面反下。
现代文：又往南走一里，下到坞中，这坞是延伸过来的山脊，不是很直很高，而且北面反而低下去。
English: Another mile to the south, down to the dock, this dock is an extended ridge, not very straight and high, and the north side is lower.

古文：脊南峡，南下甚逼，中满田禾。
现代文：山脊南边的峡谷，往南延伸，十分狭窄，峡中全是种满庄稼的田地。
English: The canyon on the south side of the ridge, extending southward, is very narrow, and the canyon is full of fields full of crops.

古文：透峡而出，遂盘一壑，丰禾成塍。
现代文：从峡谷穿出来，就绕着一道沟壑走，沟中茂盛的庄稼成陇。
English: Coming out of the canyon, you go around a gully, and the lush crops in the gully turn into reeds.

古文：有小水自东北峡下注，南有尖峰中突，水从其西南坠去，路从其东北逾岭。
现代文：有条小河从东北峡谷中流下来，南边有座尖峰突立在正中，河水沿尖峰西南边坠落下去，道路从尖峰东北边越岭。
English: There is a small river flowing down from the northeast canyon. On the south side, there is a peak protruding in the middle. The river water falls down along the southwest side of the peak. The road crosses the ridge from the northeast side of the peak.

古文：一里半涉壑，一里半登岭。
现代文：一里半穿越沟壑，一里半攀登山岭。
English: A mile and a half across the gully, a mile and a half up the ridge.

古文：又东俯，有峡南下，其中水声甚急。
现代文：又往东俯视，有峡谷往南伸下去，峡中水声很急。
English: Looking down to the east again, there is a canyon stretching southwards, and the sound of rushing water in the canyon.

古文：拾级直下，一里抵坞底，东峡水西南注，遂横涉之。
现代文：逐级沿石阶直下，一里抵达山坞底部，东峡谷的水流向西南，于是横渡过去。
English: Step by step down the stone steps, one mile to the bottom of the dock, the water of the East Canyon flows to the southwest, and then crosses over.

古文：稍南，又东峡一水，自东而西注，复横涉之，二水遂合流南行。
现代文：稍微偏南，又有一股东峡谷之水，从东向西流淌，又横渡过去，两股水最终合并向南流。
English: Slightly to the south, there is another tributary of canyon water, flowing from east to west, and crossing over, the two streams eventually merge and flow south.

古文：路随涧东而南，二里出峡，有巨石峰突立东南，水从坞中直南去。
现代文：道路顺着沟涧东岸向南走，二里走出峡谷，有巨大的石峰突立在东南方，水从坞中一直往南流去。
English: The road followed the east bank of the ravine to the south, and two miles out of the canyon, there were huge stone peaks protruding in the southeast, and the water flowed south from the dock.

古文：坞中田塍鳞次，黄云被陇，西瞰步雄，止隔一岭。
现代文：坞中的田陇鳞次栉比，黄澄澄的庄稼像彩云一样覆盖在田陇上，往西瞻望步雄，只相隔一座岭。
English: In the middle of the dock, the rice paddies are smaller and smaller, and the yellow and clear crops cover the rice paddies like colorful clouds. Looking westward, they are only separated by a ridge.

古文：路从坞东上岭，转突峰之南，一里，有数家倚北冈上，是曰沙涧村，始知前所出坞为沙涧也。
现代文：道路从山坞东边攀登山岭，转到巨峰南面，一里，有数家人居住在北冈上，这是沙涧村，才知道先前走出的山坞名沙涧。
English: The road climbs from the east side of the dock to the mountain ridge, turns to the south of the giant peak, one mile, there are several families living on the north hill, this is Shajing village, only to know that the dock that came out earlier is called Shajing.

古文：由其前东下而复上，又东南逾一冈而下，共一里余，有溪自北而南，较前诸流为大，其上有石梁跨之。过梁，复东上坡一里，冈头石齿萦泥，滑泞廉利，备诸艰楚。
现代文：从村前往东下然后再上，又往东南越过一山冈后下山，一共走了一里多，有股溪水从北向南流，比先前各条水流都大，溪上有石桥横跨，过桥，又往东上坡一里，冈头上齿状的石块满是污泥，滑溜、泥泞、锋利，行走起来十分艰难。
English: From the village to the east and then up, and then to the southeast over a mountain ridge and down the mountain, a total of more than a mile. There are streams flowing from north to south, which are larger than the previous streams. There is a stone bridge across the stream. After crossing the bridge, it is another mile uphill to the east. The jagged stones on the top of the ridge are full of sludge, slippery, muddy, sharp, and it is very difficult to walk.

古文：一里东下，又东南转逾一冈，一里透峡出，始见东小山南悬坞中，其上室庐累累，是为黄草坝。
现代文：一里后往东下山，又往东南转，越过一座山冈，走一里从峡谷穿出，才看到东边的小山往南悬在坞中，山上房屋累累，这就是黄草坝。
English: After a mile, I went down the mountain to the east, then turned to the southeast, crossed a mountain ridge, and walked a mile out of the canyon. Only then did I see the hill to the east hanging in the dock to the south, with many houses on the mountain. This is Huangcao Dam.

古文：乃东行田塍间一里，遂经坞而东，有水自北坞来，石坡横截之，坡东隙则叠石齐坡，水冒其上，南泻而下。
现代文：于是往东在田埂上走一里，直接穿过山坞往东走，有条河从北边山坞流过来，被石坡横截住，石坡东边的空隙处有堆砌得齐坡的石块，河水从上面流过，南泻而下。
English: So I walked one mile east on the ridge, directly through the dock to the east. A river flowed from the dock on the north side and was intercepted by the stone slope. At the gap on the east side of the stone slope, there were stones piled up so steeply that the river water flowed over the top and slackened down to the south.

古文：其水小于西石梁之水，然皆自北而南，抵巴吉而入盘江者也。
现代文：这条河比西边石桥下的小，但两股水都从北往南流，抵达巴吉后流入盘江。
English: This river is smaller than the one under the stone bridge to the west, but both streams flow from north to south, reaching Bagu and flowing into the Pan River.

古文：自沙涧至此，诸水俱清澈可爱，非复潢污浑浊之比，岂滇、黔分界，而水即殊状耶？
现代文：从沙涧到黄草坝，条条河流都清澈可爱，再不是停积不流的浑浊之水，难道滇、黔分界，水质就不一样了吗？
English: From the Sand Dunes to the Yellow Grass Dam, all the rivers are clear and lovely. If it were not for the stagnant turbid water, wouldn't the water quality be different at the border?

古文：此处有石濑，而复甃堰以补其缺，东上即为黄草坝营聚，坝之得名，岂以此耶？
现代文：这里有水激石坡形成的急流，而且又堆砌砖为拦水坝来弥补石坡的缺口，往东上去就是黄草坝营的聚居区，之所以得名为坝，会不会是因为这道拦水坝呢？
English: There are rapids formed by water-driven rock slopes here, and bricks are piled up as dams to make up for the gaps in the rock slopes. To the east is the settlement area of the Yellow Grass Dam Camp. Could it be because of this dam that it was named a dam?

古文：时樵者俱浣濯坝上，亦就濯之，污衣垢膝，为之顿易。
现代文：当时砍柴人都在坝上洗灌，我也就着坝水洗起来，肮脏的衣物和没膝的泥垢，顿时为之改变。
English: At that time, the woodcutters were washing and rinsing on the dam, and I also washed with the dam water. Dirty clothes and dirt without knees were instantly changed.

古文：然龙氏又为侬氏所攻而代之矣。
现代文：于是往东上坡，顺着墙垣向东走，有街道横绕山冈南面，但都是低矮的草房，很不整齐、很不开阔。
English: So I walked east uphill, following the wall to the east. There are streets running around the southern side of the mountain, but they are all low grass huts, very untidy and very open.

古文：其北峰顶，即土司黄氏之居在焉。
现代文：黄草坝北面的峰顶上，就是黄土司居住的地方。
English: On the top of the peak north of the Yellow Grass Dam is the place where the Yellow Soil Division lives.

古文：乃人息于吴氏。
现代文：于是到吴家住宿。
English: So they stayed at Wu's house.

古文：吴，汉人，男妇俱重客，蔬醴俱备云。
现代文：吴家是汉族，夫妇都好客，菜蔬酒水都齐备。
English: The Wu family is Han Chinese. Both husband and wife are hospitable. Vegetables, vegetables and wine are all well-stocked.

古文：二十七日晨起雨犹不止。
现代文：二十七日早晨起床，雨仍然没停。
English: I woke up on the morning of the 27th, and it was still raining.

古文：即而霁，泥泞犹甚。
现代文：不久天晴了，道路仍然十分泥泞。
English: The weather cleared soon after, but the road was still very muddy.

古文：姑少憩一日，询盘江曲折，为明日行计。
现代文：姑且稍作休息，住上一日，询问盘江源流的曲折，考虑明天出发事宜。
English: Let's take a short break, stay for a day, ask about the twists and turns of the source of the Pan River, and consider leaving tomorrow.

古文：乃匡坐作记。
现代文：于是端坐着写日记。
English: So I sat down and wrote in my diary.

古文：薄暮复雨，中夜弥甚，衣被俱沾透焉。
现代文：将近傍晚时又下雨，到半夜下得更大，衣服被子都被浸湿透了。
English: Near evening it rained again, and by midnight it was raining harder, soaking our clothes and quilts.

古文：二十八日晨雨不止。
现代文：二十八日早晨雨还没停。
English: On the morning of the 28th, the rain had not stopped.

古文：是日此处马场，人集颇盛。
现代文：衣服潮湿而难以启程，等烤干衣服才能动身。
English: Wet clothes make it difficult to set off, so wait for dry clothes before setting off.

古文：市中无他异物，惟黄蜡与细笋为多。
现代文：一整天都是雨淋淋的。黄草坝今天逢马场，来赶集的人很多。集市上没有其它罕见的物品，只有黄蜡和细笋最多。
English: It's been raining all day. Huangcaoba is a horse market today, and many people come to the fair. There are no other rare items at the fair, only yellow wax and fine reeds.

古文：乃煨笋煮肉，竟日守雨。
现代文：于是偎笋煮肉，一整天坐等雨停。
English: So they simmered the meat and waited all day for the rain to stop.

古文：黄草坝土司黄姓，加都司衔。
现代文：黄草坝土司姓黄，是普安州十二营长官司的下属。
English: Huang Cao Ba Tusi, surnamed Huang, is a subordinate of the 12th battalion commander of Pu'an.

古文：乃普安十二营长官司之属。十二营以归顺为首，而钱赋之数则推黄草坝，土地之远则推步雄焉。
现代文：十二营长官司以归顺营排列第一，但缴纳钱赋的数量则首推黄草坝营，土地的广阔则首推步雄营。
English: The 12 battalion chief magistrates ranked the first with the Guishun battalion, but the number of money paid was the first to push the Yellow Grass Dam battalion, and the vastness of the land was the first to push the Shuangxiong battalion.

古文：黄草坝东十五里为马鼻河，又东五十里抵龙光，乃广西右江分界；西二十里为步雄，又西五十里抵江底，乃云南罗平州分界；南三十里为安障，又南四十里抵巴吉，乃云南广南府分界；北三十里为丰塘，又北二十里抵碧洞，乃云南亦佐县分界。
现代文：黄草坝东边十五里处是马鼻河，再往东五十里到达龙光，与广西省右江道分界；西边二十里处是步雄，再往西五十里抵达江底，与云南省罗平州分界；南边三十里处是安障，再往南四十里抵达巴吉，与云南省广南府分界；北边三十里处是丰塘，再往北二十里抵达碧洞，与云南省亦佐县分界。
English: The east side of the Yellow Grass Dam is 15 miles from the Horseshoe River, and it is another 50 miles east to Longguang, which is the border with the Right River Road of Guangxi Province; the west side is 20 miles from Buxiong, and it is another 50 miles west to the bottom of the river, which is the border with Luoping Prefecture of Yunnan Province; the south side is 30 miles from Angao, and it is another 40 miles south to Baiji, which is the border with Guangnan Prefecture of Yunnan Province; the north side is 30 miles from Fengtang, and it is another 20 miles north to Bidong, which is the border with Y

古文：东西南三面与两异省错壤，北去普安二百二十里。
现代文：黄草坝东西南三面与两个省交错接壤，北面距离普安州二百二十里。
English: Huangcao Dam is interlaced with two provinces on the three sides of the east, west and south, and is 220 miles away from Pu'an in the north.

古文：自安隆无土官，泗城代署，广南以兵争之，据其大半，道路不能，实由于此。按盘江自八达、与罗平分界。巴泽、河格、巴吉、兴隆、那贡，以上俱安隆土司地，今俱为广南有。
现代文：其中有广阔的田地，道路四通八达，人口较为集中，可以设置一个县；但土司担心自已的权力被剥夺，州官担心自己的利益被分走，所以没有谁愿举办这事。黄草坝东南边，经过龙光、警口、者恐、板屯、坝楼、八蜡、者香到达田州，是从前的大路。自从安隆长官司没有土官，泅城州代后，广南府凭借武力争夺，占据了安隆土司的大半领地，道路不通，其实就是因为这种情况。
English: Among them, there are vast fields, roads in all directions, and the population is relatively concentrated, and a county can be set up; but the Toji feared that their power would be deprived, and the prefectural officials feared that their interests would be separated, so no one was willing to hold this event. The southeast side of the Yellow Grass Dam, through Longguang, Police Gate, Zhihang, Pingtun, Dam Tower, Yaxing, and Zhixiang to Tianzhou, was once a major road. Since the Anlong Chief Magistrate did not have a magistrate, and the Lucheng Prefecture took over, Guangnan Prefecture occupied most of the territory of the Anlong T

古文：抵坝楼，遂下八蜡、者香。
现代文：考察盘江流经八达彝寨、巴泽、河格、巴吉、兴隆、那贡，到达坝楼，于是流往八蜡、者香。
English: The study of the Pan River flowed through Badajozhai, Baze, Hege, Baji, Xinglong, Nagong, reached the dam, and then flowed to Yaxing and Zhixiang.

古文：又有一水自东北来合，土人以为即安南卫北盘江，恐非是。
现代文：还有一条河从东北流过来汇合，当地人认为是从安南卫流来的北盘江，恐怕并非如此。
English: There is also a river that flows from the northeast and merges with it. Locals believe that it is the Beipanjiang River flowing from Annanwei, but I am afraid this is not the case.

古文：安南北盘，合胆寒、罗运、白水河之流，已东南下都泥，由泗城东北界，经那地、永顺，出罗木渡，下迁江。
现代文：安南卫的北盘江，汇合胆寒、罗运、白水河各条水后，已往东南流入都泥江，顺着洒城州东北部，流经那地、永顺，从罗木渡流出，到达迁江县。
English: The Beipan River of Annanwei, after the confluence of the waters of the Chill, Luo Yun and Baishui Rivers, has flowed to the southeast into the Du Di River, along the northeastern part of Saricheng Prefecture, flowing through that place and Yongshun, flowing out of Luo Midu, and reaching Qianjiang County.

古文：则此东北来之水，自是泗城西北界山箐所出，其非北盘可知也。
现代文：那么这条从东北流过来的河，自然是从泅城州西北部的山鲁中流出，它不是北盘江是显而易见的。
English: So this river flowing from the northeast naturally flows out of Shanlu in the northwest of Lucheng Prefecture. It is obvious that it is not the Beipan River.

古文：按云南抵广西间道有三。
现代文：从这里盘江就称为右江。
English: From here, the Pan River is called the Right River.

古文：一在临安府之东，由阿迷州、维摩州本州昔置干沟、倒马坡、石天井、阿九、抹甲等哨，东通广南。
现代文：再往下又有广南府、富州的水，从者格、葛间、历里流过来汇合，然后流到田州，这条河是志书上所称的南旺诸溪。两条河一是源出洒州城西北，一是源出广南府的东部，都是右江的支流，而不是右江的源头；右江的源头只有南盘江能够充当。
English: Further downstream are the waters of Guangnan Prefecture and Fuzhou, flowing from Zhigu, Gezi and Lili to meet and then flow to Tianzhou. This river is called the Nanwang Creeks in the book. The two rivers, one originating from the northwest of the city of Shanzhou, and the other from the east of Guangnan Prefecture, are all tributaries of the Yangtze River, not the source of the Yangtze River; only the Nanpan River can serve as the source of the Yangtze River.

古文：每哨拨陆凉卫百户一员、军兵十五名、民兵十五名把守。
现代文：胆寒、罗运水从白水河流出，是都泥江的支流，而不是都泥江的源头；都泥江的源头只有北盘江能够充当。
English: The Gikan and Luo Yun water flows from the Baishui River and is a tributary of the Dudue River, not the source of the Dudue River; only the Beipan River can serve as the source of the Dudue River.

古文：后州治湮没，哨悉废弛。
现代文：各条水道并不互相混乱。
English: The watercourses do not interfere with each other.

古文：抵广南富州，入广西归顺、下雷，而出驮伏，下南宁。
现代文：考察从云南省进入广西省有三条路：一条在临安府东面，经过阿迷州、维摩州抵达广南府富州，进入广西省归顺州、下雷州，然后从驮伏出去，到达南宁府。
English: There are three ways to enter Guangxi Province from Yunnan Province: one is in the east of Lin'an Province, passing through Amanzhou and Wimao Province to arrive in Fuzhou, Guangnan Province; enter Guangxi Province to go to Shunzhou and Hailei Province, and then go out of Suifu to reach Nanning Province.

古文：此余初从左江取道至归顺，而卒阻于交彝者也，是为南路。
现代文：这是我当初准备从左江道取道至归顺州，但最终被交彝阻隔的路，是南路。
English: This is the road that I originally planned to take from Zuojiang Road to Guizhou, but was eventually blocked by traffic jams. It is the south road.

古文：一在平越府之南，由独山州丰宁上下司，入广西南丹河池州，出庆远。
现代文：一条在平越府南面，经过独山州的丰宁上、下长官司，进入广西省南丹州、河池州，再出到庆远府。
English: The first one is in the south of Pingyue Prefecture, passing through Fengning upstream and downstream of Dushan Prefecture, into Nantan Prefecture and Hechi Prefecture of Guangxi Province, and then out to Qingyuan Prefecture.

古文：此余后从罗木渡取道而入黔、滇者也，是为北路。
现代文：这是我后来从罗木渡取道后进入黔、滇的路，是北路。
English: This is the road I took later, after taking the road from Luo Mu Ferry, to enter Handan and Handan. It is the north road.

古文：一在普安之南、罗平之东，由黄草坝，即安隆坝楼之下田州，出南宁者。
现代文：一条在普安州南面、罗平州东面，经过黄草坝，沿着安隆长官司的坝楼到达田州，再出到南宁府。
English: One is in the south of Pu'an Prefecture, in the east of Luoping Prefecture, passing through Huangcao Dam, along the dam building of Anlong Chief Magistrate to Tianzhou, and then to Nanning Prefecture.

古文：此余初徘徊于田州界上，人皆以为不可行，而久候无同侣，竟不得行者也，是为中路。
现代文：这是我当初在田州边界上徘徊不定，人人都认为是不能走，因而等了很久找不到旅伴同行，最终没有能走成的路，是中路。
English: At first, I was uncertain about the border of Tianzhou. Everyone thought I couldn't go, so I waited for a long time and couldn't find a travel companion. In the end, there was no way I could go, it was the middle way.

古文：中路为南盘入粤出黔之交；南路为南盘萦滇之始，与下粤之末；北路为北盘经黔环粤之会。
现代文：中路是南盘江流入广西省、流出贵州省的交界处，南路是南盘江开始绕流云南省、最后流到广西省所过的地区；北路是北盘江流经贵州省、环绕广西省的会合处。
English: The middle route is the junction where the South Panyu River flows into Guangxi Province and flows out of Guizhou Province; the south route is the area where the South Panyu River begins to flow around Yunnan Province and finally flows to Guangxi Province; the north route is the meeting place of the North Panyu River flowing through Guizhou Province and around Guangxi Province.

古文：然此三路今皆阻塞。
现代文：然而这三条路如今都阻塞不通。
English: However, all three routes are now blocked.

古文：南阻于阿迷之普，富州之李、沈，见《广西小纪》。归顺之交彝：中阻于广南之蚕食，田州之狂狺ｙíｎ狗狂叫；北阻于下司之草窃，八寨之伏莽。
现代文：南路受阻于阿迷州的普氏，富州的李氏、沈氏，归顺府的交彝；中路受阻于广南府的蚕食兼并，田州人的狂妄；北路受阻于丰宁下长官司的草野盗贼，八寨潜藏的盗匪。
English: The southern route was blocked by the Pu clan in Amanzhou, the Li and Shen clans in Fuzhou, and the Kushun clan in Shunfu; the middle route was blocked by the encroachment and annexation of Guangnanfu, and the arrogance of the people of Tianzhou; the northern route was blocked by the grassland thieves under the chief magistrate of Fengning, and the hidden bandits in Bazhai.

古文：既宦辙之不敢入，亦商旅之莫能从。
现代文：既然政府派去的流官不敢进入这些地区，商人旅客也没有谁愿从这儿条路走。
English: Since officials sent by the government do not dare to enter these areas, no business travelers are willing to go all the way from here.

古文：惟东路由沅、靖而越沙泥恐州，为今人所趋。
现代文：只有东路顺着沉州、靖州并越过沙泥，人多对侗族恐惧，是今天人们所走的路。
English: Only the east road along Shenzhou, Jingzhou and over the sand and mud, many people are afraid of the Yao people, is the road people take today.

古文：然怀远沙泥，亦多黎人之恐，且迂陟湖南，又多历一省矣。
现代文：然而怀远县、沙泥一带，也常对黎人恐惧，而且绕路进入湖南省，又要多走一个省。
English: However, people in Huaiyuan County and the Sand and Mud area are also often afraid of the Lai people, and they have to take a detour to enter Hunan Province, and have to go to one more province.

古文：黄草坝东一百五十里为安笼所，又东为新城所，皆南与粤西之安隆、泗城接壤。
现代文：黄草坝东边一百五十里处是安笼所，再往东是新城所，其南部都和广西省西部的安隆长官司、洒城州接壤。
English: One hundred and fifty miles to the east of Huangcao Dam is Ancheng, and further east is Xincheng. In the south, it borders with Anlong, Changgan and Shencheng in the west of Guangxi Province.

古文：然在黔曰 笼 ，在粤曰 隆 ，一音而各异字，一处而各异名、何也？
现代文：然而在黔叫 笼 ，在粤叫 隆 ，一个音却是两个不同的字，一处地方却有两个不同的名称，是什么原因呢？
English: However, in the howling cage, in the Cantonese called Long, a sound is two different words, but a place has two different names, what is the reason?

古文：岂两名本同一字，传写之异耶？
现代文：会不会是两处地名本来用的是同一个字，因传抄而导致各异呢？
English: Could it be that the two place names originally used the same word, but were copied and became different?

古文：按安庄之东，大路所经，亦有安笼箐山，与安笼所相距四百里，乃远者同而近者异，又何耶？
现代文：考察安庄以东，大路所经过的地方，也有安笼臀山，和安笼所相距四百里，离得远的地名相同，而离得近的地名相异，又是什么原因呢？
English: Investigate the east of Anzhuang, where the highway passes, there is also Ancai Buttocks Mountain. It is four hundred miles away from Ancai, and the distant place names are the same, but the nearby place names are different. What is the reason?

古文：大抵黔中多用 笼 字，粤中多用 隆 字，如隆安县之类。故各从其地，而不知其地之相近，其取名必非二也。
现代文：大抵贵州省中多用 笼 字，广西省中多用 隆 字，所以地名各从其所属省份，而不知道安笼所、安隆司两地相近，取名不必两样。
English: In Guizhou Province, the characters 笼 (cage) and 隆 (long) are mostly used, and in Guangxi Province, the characters 隆 (long) and 笼 (cage) are mostly used. Therefore, the place names are from the provinces they belong to, and it is not known that the two places, Ancoushe and Anlongsi, are similar, so the names do not have to be different.

古文：黄草坝著名黔西，而居聚阛阓俱不及罗平州；罗平著名迤东，而居聚阛阓又不及广西府。
现代文：黄草坝著称于贵州省西部，但居民、集市都赶不上罗平州；罗平州著称于云南省东部，但居民、集市又赶不上广西府。
English: Huangcao Dam is famous in the west of Guizhou Province, but its residents and markets are not as good as Luoping Province; Luoping Province is famous in the east of Yunnan Province, but its residents and markets are not as good as Guangxi Province.

古文：此府、州、营、堡之异也。
现代文：这就是府、州、营、堡之间的差异。
English: This is the difference between prefectures, counties, battalions and forts.

古文：闻澂江府湖山最胜，而居聚阛阓亦让广西府。
现代文：听说微江府的湖泊山川最佳妙，但居民、集市也逊于广西府。
English: I heard that the lakes, mountains and rivers in Weijiang Prefecture are the best, but the residents and markets are also inferior to Guangxi Prefecture.

古文：临安府为滇中首郡，而今为普氏所残，凋敞未复，人民虽多，居聚虽远，而光景止与广西府同也。
现代文：临安府是滇中第一郡，但如今被普名胜所摧残，还没从衰败中恢复过来，人口虽然多，居住地区虽然广大，但情景只和广西府相同。
English: Lin'an is the first county in the middle of Yunnan, but now it has been devastated by the famous places. It has not recovered from the decline. Although the population is large and the residential area is vast, the situation is only the same as that of Guangxi.

古文：迤东之县，通海为最盛；迤东之州，石屏为最盛；迤东之堡聚，宝秀为最盛：皆以免于普祸也。
现代文：迤东的县，通海最为兴盛；滇东的州，石屏最为兴盛；滇东的堡聚，宝秀最为兴盛：都是由于没遭受普名胜祸害的缘故。
English: In the counties of Shandong, Tonghai is the most prosperous; in the prefectures of Shandong, Shiping is the most prosperous; in the castles of Shandong, Baoshu is the most prosperous: all are due to the fact that they have not suffered from the scourge of universal fame.

古文：今广南势大，安隆之地，为占去八九矣。
现代文：县以江川最为凋零，州以师宗最为衰败，堡聚以南庄等处最为凄惨；都是因为遭受了普名胜蹂嗬。
English: Jiangchuan County is the most withered, Shizong County is the most decayed, and Nanzhuang County and other places are the most miserable; all because they have suffered the ravages of universal fame.

古文：土司糜烂人民，乃其本性，而紊及朝廷之封疆，不可长也。
现代文：以至于步雄龙土司、侬土司互相取代的斗争，黄草坝被龙土司、沙土司互相争夺，安隆土司的岑氏、侬氏纷争。土司糜烂人民，是土司的本性，而且扰乱朝廷的边疆，是不能助长的。
English: So much so that there was a struggle for the succession between Long Long Tusi and Nong Tusi, the Yellow Grass Dam was fought over by Long Tusi and Sha Tusi, and the Anlong Tusi was fought over by the Sui and Nong clans. It is the nature of the Tusi to corrupt the people, and it is not conducive to disturbing the frontiers of the imperial court.

古文：诸彝种之苦于土司糜烂，真是痛心疾首，第势为所压，生死惟命耳，非真有恋主思旧之心，牢不可破也。
现代文：各部彝人遭受土司蹂厢糟踏的痛苦，真是令人痛心疾首。只是为土司权势所迫，生死只有看命了，并非真的怀着恋主思归之心而牢不可破。
English: It is truly heartbreaking to see the sufferings of the people of various provinces who have been trampled on by the local government. It is only because they are forced by the local government's power that they have no choice but to live or die. They do not really have a heart of love for the Lord and cannot be broken.

古文：其所以乐于反侧者，不过是遗孽煽动。
现代文：彝人乐于反叛的原因，不过是受残渣余孽煽动。
English: The reason why the Xiongnu people are willing to rebel is that they are incited by the remnants of evil.

古文：其人不习汉语，而素昵彝风，故勾引为易。
现代文：这些人不熟习汉语，却向来和彝风彝人相亲近，所以勾引彝人反叛容易。
English: These people are not familiar with the Chinese language, but they have always been close to the rebels, so it is easy to seduce the rebels.

古文：而遗孽亦非果有殷之顽、田横之客也，第跳梁伏莽之奸，藉口愚众，以行其狡猾耳。
现代文：但残渣余孽也并非真的拥有商殷遗民、田横门客那样顽固不化、宁死不屈的部众，他们只不过靠跳梁小丑、潜伏盗贼一类的奸邪之徒，凭借口舌愚弄民众，并施以狡猾的手段罢了。
English: However, the remnants of the remaining evil do not really have the stubborn and unyielding followers like the Shangyin survivors and Tianyang gatekeepers. They are just traitors such as vaulting clowns and lurking thieves, fooling the people with their words and using cunning means.

古文：所度诸山之险，远以罗平、师宗界偏头哨为最；其次则通海之建通关，其险峻虽同，而无此荒寂；再次则阿迷之中道岭，沈家坟处。其深杳虽同，而无此崇隘；又次则步雄之江底东岭，其曲折虽同，而无此逼削。
现代文：所越过的众多险山，远以罗平州、师宗州交界处的偏头哨最险要；其次是通海县建通关，其险峻虽然和偏头哨相同，却不像那样荒凉空寂；再次是阿迷州的中道岭，其幽深、沉寂虽然和偏头哨相同，却没有那种高耸、狭窄；再其次是步雄的江底寨东岭，其曲折虽然和偏头哨相同，却没有那种陡峭。
English: Of the many perilous mountains they have crossed, the most perilous is the remote outpost at the junction of Luoping Prefecture and Shizong Prefecture; the second is the Tonghai County Customs Clearance, which, although it is as precipitous as the remote outpost, is not as desolate and empty; the second is the Midway Ridge in Amanzhou, which, although it is as deep and quiet as the remote outpost, is not as tall and narrow; and the third is the Jiangdizhai East Ridge in Bu Xiong, which, although it has the same twists and turns as the remote outpost, is not as steep.

古文：若溪渡之险，莫如江底，崖削九天，堑嵌九地，盘江朋圃之渡，皆莫及焉。
现代文：至于一路上所渡过的溪水之险，则没有一处比得上江底寨，那里悬崖峭壁高插九重天，峡谷沟壑嵌进九层地，盘江上的朋圃渡口，都赶不上。
English: As for the dangers of the streams that are crossed along the way, there is no place that can compare to the village at the bottom of the river, where the cliffs and cliffs are nine stories high, the canyons and gullies are nine stories deep, and the pangpo ferry on the Pan River cannot keep up.

古文：粤西之山，有纯石者，有间石者，各自分行独挺，不相混杂。
现代文：广西省西部的山，有的完全是石峰，有的是土石相间，各自分开排列、单独挺立，不互相混杂。
English: The mountains in the western part of Guangxi Province, some of which are completely made of stone, and some of which are made of earth and stone, are arranged separately, stand alone, and are not mixed with each other.

古文：滇南之山，皆土峰缭绕，间有缀石，亦十不一二，故环洼为多。
现代文：云南省的山，都是层层环绕的土峰，其中有石峰点缀的，也不到十分之一二，所以山中有很多环洼。
English: The mountains of Yunnan Province are all surrounded by layers of earthen peaks, among which there are stone peaks dotted, less than one-tenth of two, so there are many depressions in the mountains.

古文：黔南之山，则界于二者之间，独以逼耸见奇，滇山惟多土，故多壅流成海，而流多浑浊。
现代文：贵州省的山，则介于二者之间，唯独以陡峭、高耸见奇。云南省的山土多，所以经常塌落下来堵塞溪流，形成湖泊，而且溪流大多浑浊。
English: The mountains in Guizhou Province are in between the two, but they are surprisingly steep and high. Yunnan Province has a lot of mountainous soil, so it often collapses to block streams and form lakes, and the streams are mostly turbid.

古文：惟抚仙湖最清。粤山惟石，故多穿穴之流，而水悉澄清。
现代文：广西省的山只有石头，所以有很多从洞穴穿流出来的河流，而且河水全都清澈见底。
English: The mountains of Guangxi Province are only stone, so there are many rivers flowing from caves, and the water is all clear to the bottom.

古文：而黔流亦界于二者之间。
现代文：而贵州省河流的清浊也介于二者之间。
English: The cleanliness of rivers in Guizhou Province is also between the two.

古文：二十九日晨雨霏霏。
现代文：二十九日晨雨霏霏地下着。
English: On the morning of the 29th, the rain suddenly stopped.

古文：既饭，辞主人行。
现代文：吃过饭后，告别主人出发。
English: After the meal, we bid farewell to our hosts and set off.

古文：从街东南出，半里，绕东峰之南而北，入其坞。
现代文：顺着街道往东南走出去，半里，绕到东峰的南面然后往北走，进入山坞。
English: Walk southeast along the street for half a mile, go around to the south of the east peak and then walk north to enter the dock.

古文：伫而回睇，始见其前大坞开于南，群山丛突，小石峰或朝或拱，参立前坞中。
现代文：停下来四处瞻望，才看见前面大山坞朝南敞开，周围群山丛立，有的小石峰像在朝拜，有的像在拱手，参差不齐地立在前面坞中。
English: When I stopped and looked around, I saw the large dock in front of me open to the south, surrounded by mountains. Some small pinnacles looked like they were bowing, others looked like they were arching, and they stood jaggedly in the dock in front.

古文：而遥望坞外，南山横亘最雄，犹半与云气相氤氲，此即巴吉之东，障盘江而南趋者也。
现代文：而遥望山坞之外，横贯南部的山脉最为雄伟，还有一半被浓密的云气所笼罩，这就是位于巴吉东面，阻碍盘江而往南延伸的山脉。
English: Beyond the watchtower, the southern mountains are the most majestic, and half of them are shrouded in thick clouds. These are the mountains located in the east of Baguio, which block the Pan River from extending southward.

古文：坞中复四面开坞：西则沙涧所从来之道，东则马鼻河所从出之峡，而南则东西诸水所下巴吉之区，北则今所入丰塘之路也。
现代文：坞中朝四面又敞开山坞：西坞是来时经过的沙涧，东坞是马鼻河流经的峡谷，而南坞则是东西坞中各条水流往巴吉的所经之地，北坞则是我现在去丰塘要走的道路。
English: In the middle of the dock, there are open docks on all four sides: the west dock is the sand dune that I passed when I came, the east dock is the canyon through which the Horse Nose River flows, and the south dock is the place through which all the water flows to Baji in the east and west docks, and the north dock is the road I now want to take to Fengtang.

古文：计其地，北与为对，南与富州为对，西与杨林为对，东与安笼所为对。
现代文：估计这片大坞的位置，北边和口口口相对，南边和富州相对，西边和杨林所相对，东边和安笼所相对。
English: Estimating the location of this large dock, the north side is opposite the mouth of the mouth, the south side is opposite Fuzhou, the west side is opposite Yanglin, and the east side is opposite Ancai.

古文：其遥对者，直东则粤西之庆远，直北则四川之重庆矣。
现代文：和大坞遥对的地方，正东是广西省西部的庆远府，正北是四川省的重庆府。
English: Directly to the east is Qingyuan Prefecture in western Guangxi Province, and directly to the north is Chongqing Prefecture in Sichuan Province.

古文：入北坞又半里，其西峰盘崖削石，岩岩独异，其中有小水南来。
现代文：进入北坞后又走半里，坞西的山峰层崖削壁，每一块岩石各不相同，坞中有股小溪往南流。
English: After entering the north dock, I walked another half mile. To the west of the dock, there is a mountain peak, a cliff wall, and every rock is different. There is a stream flowing south from the dock.

古文：溯之北又二里，循东峰北上，逾脊稍降，陟坞复上，始见东坞焉。
现代文：逆溪水向北又走了二里，顺着东边的山峰往北上，越过山脊后逐渐往下走，穿过山坞后再往上攀登，才看见东坞。
English: The water of the upstream creek walked another two miles to the north, following the peaks on the east to the north, crossing the ridge and gradually going down, passing through the dock and then climbing up to see the dock.

古文：共二里，再上北坳，转而西，坳中有水自西来，出坳下坠东坞，坳上丰禾被陇即禾苗茂盛遮盖了田陇。
现代文：一共走了二里，再上北坳，向西转，坳中有条河从西边流来，流出坳后坠人东坞，坳边茁壮的庄稼覆盖着田野。
English: We walked a total of two miles, then went up to Beilun and turned west. In Beilun, there was a river flowing from the west. After flowing out of Beilun, it crashed into Dongduk, and the fields were covered with flourishing crops.

古文：透之而西，沿北岭上西向行。
现代文：穿过山坳往西走，沿着北岭向西上。
English: Go west across the ridge, and go west along the north ridge.

古文：二里稍降，陟北坞。
现代文：二里后逐渐往下走，越过北坞。
English: After two miles, walk gradually downhill, passing the north dock.

古文：一里复西北上，二里逾北坳，从岭脊西北行。
现代文：一里后又朝西北攀登，二里翻越北坳，顺着岭脊向西北行。
English: After one mile, it climbed northwestward, climbed two miles over the North Col, and followed the ridge ridge to the northwest.

古文：途中忽雨忽霁，大抵雨多于日也。
现代文：一路上时而下雨，时而天晴，大抵下雨的时候比出太阳的时候多。
English: Along the way, sometimes it rained, sometimes it was sunny, and most of the time it rained more than the sun came out.

古文：稍降，复盘陟其西北坡冈，左右时有大洼旋峡，共五里，逾西坳而下。
现代文：逐渐往下走，又绕着登上西北边的坡冈，左右不时地出现大洼坑和弯曲的峡谷，一共走了五里，越过西坳往下走。
English: Gradually walk down, and then walk around the hill on the northwest side, from time to time large depressions and curved canyons appear on the right and left. Walk a total of five miles, cross the West Bank and walk down.

古文：又三里抵坞中，闻水声淙淙，然四山回合，方疑水从何出。
现代文：又三里抵达坞中，听到涂涂的水流声，但四周群山环抱，正好猜想水从什么地方流出去。
English: After another three miles, we arrived at the dock and heard the sound of rushing water, but surrounded by mountains, we just had to guess where the water was coming from.

古文：又西北一里，忽见坞中有坑，中坠如井，盖此水之所入者矣。
现代文：又往西北走一里，忽然看见坞中有坑，坑的正中像井一样坠陷下去，原来这就是坞水流走的地方了。
English: I walked another mile to the northwest and suddenly saw a pit in the dock. The middle of the pit fell down like a well. It turned out that this was the place where the dock water flowed.

古文：从坞右半里，又西北陟岭半里，透脊夹而出，于是稍降，从长峡中行。
现代文：顺着山坞东边走了半里，又向西北登岭半里，从狭窄的山脊穿出去，于是逐渐往下，在长长的峡谷中行走。
English: I walked half a mile along the east side of the dock, and half a mile to the northwest of the ridge, through the narrow ridge, and then gradually down, walking in a long canyon.

古文：西北三里，复稍上，始知此峡亦中洼而无下泄之道者也。
现代文：向西北走了三里，又逐渐往上，才知道这条峡谷也是中洼，而没有往下流的水道。
English: After walking three miles to the northwest and gradually going up again, I realized that this canyon is also a depression, but there is no downstream waterway.

古文：饭于路旁石上。
现代文：坐在路旁石头上吃饭。
English: Sit on a stone by the side of the road and eat.

古文：出岭之西，始见西坞中盘，内皆嘉禾芃芃北有小山绾坞口，庐舍悬其上，是曰丰塘。
现代文：走出山岭西面，才看见西边山坞环绕在群山之中，坞内全是茂盛茁壮的庄稼。北边有座小山给在坞口，房屋高高地建在山上，这是丰塘。
English: Coming out of the western side of the mountain range, I saw the western dock surrounded by mountains. The dock was full of flourishing crops. To the north, there was a hill at the dock entrance, and houses were built high up on the hill. This was Fengtang.

古文：东西南皆回峰环之，水从西南二坞交注其间，北向坠峡。
现代文：东西南三面都被回旋的山峰环抱，水从西坞、南坞交汇流来，向北坠入峡谷。
English: All three sides, east, west and south, are surrounded by swirling mountain peaks. Water flows from the confluence of the west dock and the south dock, and falls into the canyon to the north.

古文：由坞东南降岭，循坞南盘南山北麓，共二里，北与绾口庐舍隔坞相对。
现代文：从山坞东南边下岭，顺着坞南盘绕南山北麓，一共走二里，和北面给在坞口的房舍隔坞相对。
English: From the south-eastern edge of the dock to the lower ridge, along the dock to the south, around the northern foot of Nanshan, a total of two miles, opposite the houses at the dock entrance to the north.

古文：见路旁有歧，南向入山，疑为分歧之处，过而复还。
现代文：看见路旁有条岔路，朝南伸向山中，我怀疑是分路之处，走过岔路口然后又返回来。
English: I saw a fork in the road, heading south into the mountains. I suspected it was a fork, went through the fork and then came back.

古文：始登，见其内道颇大，以为是；再上，路分为二，西者既渐小，南者又盘南山，又疑为非。
现代文：于是上岔路，看到伸向山中的路还比较宽大，以为走对了；再往上走，道路又分成两条，伸向西边的很快越来越狭小，往南去的又绕着南山走，又让人怀疑走错了。
English: As a result, the road to the upper fork, seeing that the road extending into the mountains was still relatively wide, thought that it was the right way to go; further up, the road was divided into two, extending to the west and quickly becoming narrower and narrower, and going south, it went around Nanshan, and it was suspected that it was the wrong way.

古文：往算数四，莫可从问。
现代文：来来回回往返了四次，找不到人询问。
English: I went back and forth four times and couldn't find anyone to ask.

古文：而坞北居庐相距二里余，往返既遥；见南山有牧者，急趋就之，而隔峰间壑，不能即至。
现代文：而距离坞北的居家有二里多路，往返太远了；看见南山上有放牧的人，急忙向他走去，但隔着山峰、沟壑，不能很快走到。
English: But there is more than two miles of road from the house north of the dock, and it is too far to go back and forth. When he saw a grazing person on the South Mountain, he hurriedly walked to him, but across the peaks and gullies, he could not walk quickly.

古文：忽有负木三人从前岭下，问之，乃知其非。
现代文：忽然有三个人背着木头从前面的岭上下来，向他们问路，才知道走错了。
English: Suddenly, three people with logs on their backs came down from the ridge in front of them and asked them for directions, only to realize that they had taken a wrong turn.

古文：随之二里，北出大路。
现代文：跟着他们走了二里，往北出到大路上。
English: I followed them for two miles, heading north to the main road.

古文：其人言： 分岐之处尚在岭西。
现代文：他们说： 分路的地方还在山岭西南。
English: They said: The parting of the ways is still southwest of the mountains.

古文：此处南岐，乃南坞小路之入山者，大路在西坞入也。
现代文：这里朝南进去的岔路，是南坞进山的小路，大路从西坞进去。
English: The branch road that enters here from the south is a small road from the south dock into the mountain, and the main road enters from the west dock.

古文：然此去已不及黄泥河，正可从碧峒托宿矣。 
现代文：但现在顺大路走已经赶不到黄泥河了，刚好能到碧炯住宿。 
English: But now, walking along the main road, I can't catch up with the Yellow Mud River, and I can only just get to Baguio for accommodation.

古文：乃西向入坞。
现代文：于是往西走进山坞。
English: So he walked west into the dockyard.

古文：有小水自西来，路逾坡西上，下而复陟，三里逾坳。
现代文：有条小溪从西边流来，道路翻越山坡往西上，下坡后又往上走，三里后越过山坳。
English: There is a stream coming from the west, the road climbs over the hillside to the west, downhill and then uphill, and after three miles it crosses the mountains.

古文：坳不高而接两山之间，为南山过北之脊；东水下丰塘，西水复西北流，俱入马鼻者；脊西遥开坞直去。
现代文：山坳不高，但连接在两座山之间，是南山往北延伸的山脊；东边的溪水流下丰塘，西边的溪水仍然向西北流，两边的水都流入马鼻河；山脊西部的远方有开阔的山坞直伸下去。
English: The ridge is not high, but it is connected between two mountains. It is the ridge of Nanshan extending to the north. The stream on the east flows down to Fengtang, the stream on the west still flows to the northwest, and the water on both sides flows into the Horse Nose River. In the far west of the ridge, there is an open dock stretching straight down.

古文：循北岭又西二里，歧始两分：沿北岭西向出坞，为普安州道；横度坞南，陟岭南上，为亦佐道。
现代文：顺着北岭又往西走二里，大路才分成两条岔道；沿着北岭往西走出山坞，是去普安州的路；往南横穿山坞，再攀登山岭往南上，是去亦佐县的路。
English: Walking west along the North Ridge for another two miles, the highway is divided into two branch roads; walking west along the North Ridge out of the dock is the road to Puanzhou; walking south across the dock and then climbing the mountain ridge to the south is the road to Yiza County.

古文：遂南度坞，路渐微，深茅覆水，曲磴欹坡石级盘曲随坡回转，无非行潦小水塘。
现代文：于是往南越过山坞，路越来越狭小，深深的茅草淹没在泥水中，曲折的石阶顺坡延伸，没有哪里不是积水。
English: So we drove south past the dockyard, the road getting narrower and narrower, the deep thatch submerged in muddy water, the winding stone steps extending downhill, and there was nothing but standing water.

古文：缘之南上坡，一里，西南盘岭角，始望见北界遥山横亘，蜿蜒天末。
现代文：顺着路往南上坡，一里，往西南绕过岭角，才看见北部远山横贯，蜿蜒伸向天际。
English: Follow the road south uphill, one mile, southwest around the ridge, only to see the distant mountains in the north cross and stretch out to the sky.

古文：此即亦字孔西南东转之脊，从丹霞山东南，迤逦环狗场、归顺二营以走安笼所，北界普安南北板桥诸水入北盘，南界黄草坝马鼻河诸水入南盘者也。
现代文：这是亦字孔骚西南转向东延伸的山脊，从丹霞山东南，曲折连绵地绕过狗场营和归顺营，然后延伸到安笼所，北部普安州南北板桥各条水流汇入北盘江，南部黄草坝、马鼻河各条水流汇入南盘江。
English: This is the ridge extending from the southwest of Kongxu to the east. From the southeast of Danxia Mountain, it twists and turns continuously around the dog park camp and Guishun camp, and then extends to the caging station. In the northern part of Pu'an Prefecture, the water streams of the north and south Banqiao converge into the Beipanjiang River, and in the southern part, the water streams of the Yellow Grass Dam and the Horse Nose River converge into the Nanpanjiang River.

古文：又西南入峡一里余，复南跻岭巅。
现代文：又向西南进入峡谷，走一里多，再往南朝山顶攀登。
English: I went southwest into the canyon, walked more than a mile, and then climbed to the top of the mountain.

古文：一里，得石磴，由脊南转。
现代文：一里，走上石阶，顺着山脊往南转。
English: One mile, walk up the stone steps and follow the ridge to the south.

古文：其脊茅深路曲，非此石道，复疑其误矣。
现代文：山脊上茅草丛生，道路弯曲，要没有石阶路，又让人怀疑走错了。
English: The ridge is overgrown with thatch, the road is curved, and if there are no stone steps, people will suspect that they have taken a wrong turn.

古文：循磴西下，复转而南，曲折一里，抵山麓。
现代文：顺着石阶往西下山，再转向南，曲曲弯弯地走了一里，下到山麓。
English: I followed the stone steps down the mountain to the west, then turned south and walked for a mile, winding my way down to the foot of the mountain.

古文：其麓复开大坞西去。
现代文：山麓边又敞开大坞向西伸去。
English: At the foot of the mountain, a large dock stretches out to the west.

古文：坞虽大，皆荒茅盘错，绝无禾塍人烟。
现代文：山坞虽然大，但全是盘根错节的野草，根本见不到庄稼田地和人烟。
English: Although the dockyard is large, it is all tangled weeds, and there are no crops or people to be seen.

古文：于是随山麓西行，三里，坞直西去，路西南截坞行。
现代文：于是顺着山麓往西走，三里，山坞直向西伸去，道路横穿山坞往西南走。
English: So I walked west along the foot of the mountain. For three miles, the dock stretched straight west, and the road cut across the dock to the southwest.

古文：坞南北界，巨岭森削，中环一壑，圆匝合沓重重叠叠聚集在一起，令人有四面芙蓉之想。
现代文：山坞南北部，巨岭森然陡峭，中间盘着一道沟壑，环绕成圆形，重重叠叠地聚合，令人联想到四周群山如同莲花。
English: From the south to the north of the dock, the giant ridge is steep and steep, with a gully in the middle, surrounded by a circle, overlapping and overlapping, reminiscent of the surrounding mountains like a lotus.

古文：惟瞑色欲合，山雨复来，而路绝茅深，不知人烟何处，不胜惴惴。
现代文：只是黑夜即将来临，山雨又起，而且路断草深，不知道什么地方才有人烟，心中不禁恐惧不安。
English: It's just that the night is approaching, the mountain rain is starting again, and the road is broken and the grass is deep. I don't know where there are people, and I can't help but feel scared and uneasy.

古文：又西南一里，穿峡脊而过，其脊中平而夹甚逼。
现代文：又往西南走一里，越过峡脊，其脊正中间平坦，但两边很陡。
English: Another mile to the southwest, over the ridge of the gorge, the ridge is flat in the middle, but very steep on both sides.

古文：出其西，长峡西去，南北两界夹之甚遥，其中一望荒茅，而路复若断若续，上则重茅偃雨，下则停潦盈蹊满路上都是小水塘。
现代文：走出峡脊西面，长长的峡谷向西伸去，南北两边相距甚远，一眼望去，峡谷中尽是野草，而道路又时断时续，上面是被雨淋倒的层层野草，下边则道路淹没在积水之中。
English: On the west side of the canyon ridge, a long canyon stretches to the west. The north and south sides are very far apart. At a glance, the canyon is full of weeds, and the road is intermittent, with layers of rain-drenched weeds above and roads submerged in standing water below.

古文：时昏黑逼人，惟向暗中踯躅。
现代文：此时昏暗逼人，只能在黑暗中摸索着走。
English: At this time, it was so dark that we could only feel our way in the darkness.

古文：三里，忽闻犬声，继闻人语在路南，计已出峡口，然已不辨为峡为坡，亦不辨南向从何入。
现代文：三里，忽然听到狗叫声，接着听到有人在路南边说话，估计走出了峡谷口，但是已经分辨不出是峡谷还是山坡，也分辩不出向南要从哪里去。
English: Three miles later, he suddenly heard a dog barking, then someone talking on the south side of the road. He estimated that he had walked out of the mouth of the canyon, but he could not tell whether it was a canyon or a hillside, nor could he tell where to go south.

古文：又半里，大道似从西北，而人声在南，从莽中横赴之，遂陷棘刺中。
现代文：又走半里，似乎觉得大路往西北走，但人声却在南面，从草丛中横冲过去，于是陷入荆棘刺丛之中。
English: After walking another half-mile, it seemed that the highway was heading northwest, but the human voice was in the south, rushing through the grass and then falling into the thorn bushes.

古文：久之，又半里，乃得石径。
现代文：过了很久，又走了半里，才走上石头路。
English: After a long time, I walked another half-mile before I reached the stone path.

古文：入寨门，则门闭久矣。
现代文：走到寨门，寨门早已关闭。
English: When I got to the village gate, it was already closed.

古文：听其舂声甚遥，号呼之，有应者；久之，有询者；又久之，见有火影出；又久之，闻启内隘门声，始得启外门入。
现代文：听到门内有春东西的声音，于是高声呼叫，有人答应了；过了很久，有人询问；又过了很久，看见有火把人影出现；再过了一阵，听到打开内隘门的声音，又打开外门，我们才得进去。
English: Hearing the sound of something springing inside the door, we shouted loudly, and someone answered; after a long time, someone asked; after another long time, we saw the shadow of a torch appear; after a while, we heard the sound of opening the inner door, and opened the outer door, and we had to go in.

古文：即随火入舂者家，炊粥浣足。
现代文：于是跟着火把来到春东西人家里，煮粥吃，烧水洗脚。
English: So they followed the torches to the home of the Spring Dragon Crab, cooked porridge to eat, and boiled water to wash their feet.

古文：虽拥青茅而卧，犹幸得其所矣。
现代文：虽然铺盖着青草睡，但还是庆幸找到了住处。
English: Although they sleep on the grass, they are glad to have found a place to live.

古文：既定，问其地名，即碧峒也，为亦佐东北界。
现代文：安顿下来之后，询间其地名，原来就是碧酮，位于亦佐县东北部。
English: After settling down, I inquired about the name of the place, which turned out to be Bizerte, located in the northeastern part of Isa County.

古文：问红板桥何在？
现代文：询问红板桥在哪个位置？
English: Inquire about the location of Hongban Bridge.

古文：即在此北峰之麓。为黄草坝西界，与此盖南北隔一坞云。
现代文：就在碧炯北峰之麓，位于黄草坝西部，和碧炯只是南北相隔一道山坞而已。
English: It is just at the foot of the northern peak of Baguio, located in the west of Huangcao Dam, and Baguio is only separated by a dock from north to south.

