古文：昔自在古，历建正作於孟春。
现代文：上古时候，历法以孟春月作为正月。
English: In ancient times, the calendar was based on the lunar month of Mengchun as the first month.

古文：於时冰泮发蛰，百草奋兴，秭鳺先滜。
现代文：这时冰雪开始消融，蛰虫苏醒过来，百草萌生新芽，杜鹃鸟率先在原野中啼鸣。
English: At this time, the ice and snow began to melt, the aphids woke up, the grass sprouted new shoots, and the cuckoo bird was the first to chirp in the field.

古文：物乃岁具，生於东，次顺四时，卒于冬分。
现代文：万物都长了一岁：它们从东春时降生，顺次经历夏季和秋季，最后结束在冬尽春分之时。
English: All things are one year old: they are born from the eastern spring, go through summer and autumn in turn, and finally end in winter at the vernal equinox.

古文：时鸡三号，卒明。
现代文：雄鸡三唱，天色渐明。
English: The rooster crows three times, the sky gradually brightens.

古文：抚十二节，卒于丑。日月成，故明也。
现代文：正月从寅月开始，经过了十二个月的节气，直到丑月即腊月结束，日月运行都已成周。
English: The first month of the year begins with the month of Yin, and after twelve months of solar terms, until the end of the month of Ugly, that is, the month of Wax, the movement of the sun and the moon has become a week.

古文：明者孟也，幽者幼也，幽明者雌雄也。
现代文：日、月组成一个 明 字，所以才有了正月的这第一个黎明。 明 就是 孟 的意思， 幽 就是 幼 ， 幽明 就是指雌雄。
English: The day and the month form a clear character, which is why there is this first dawn of the first month. 明 is the meaning of 孟, 幽 is 幼, and 幽明 refers to the male and female.

古文：雌雄代兴，而顺至正之统也。
现代文：雌雄交替出现，而又与以孟春为正月的历法相符合。
English: The male and female appear alternately, which is consistent with the calendar with Mengchun as the first month.

古文：日归于西，起明於东；月归於东，起明于西。
现代文：太阳从西边落下，自东方升起；残月逐渐消失在东方，新月在西方露出来。
English: The sun sets in the west and rises in the east; the last moon gradually disappears in the east, and the new moon appears in the west.

古文：正不率天，又不由人，则凡事易坏而难成矣。
现代文：当政的不按天时行事，又不顺应民心，所以凡事都易于破坏，难以促成了。
English: When the government does not act according to the times and does not conform to the people's will, everything is easy to destroy and difficult to achieve.

古文：王者易姓受命，必慎始初，改正朔，易服色，推本天元，顺承厥意。
现代文：帝王受天命而改朝换代，对于开始必十分慎重，所以要更改历法，改变服装崇尚的颜色，推算历法的起始点历元，以顺承天的意旨。
English: When emperors are fated by heaven to change the dynasty, they must be very careful about the beginning, so they must change the calendar, change the color of clothing, and calculate the starting point of the calendar, the calendar, in order to follow the will of heaven.

古文：太史公曰：神农以前尚矣。
现代文：太史公说：神农以前年代太过久远，就不必论了。
English: Taishikong said: Shennong ago is too long ago, it is unnecessary to discuss.

古文：盖黄帝考定星历，建立五行，起消息，正闰馀，於是有天地神祇物类之官，是谓五官。
现代文：黄帝时考察星度，制定历法，建立了五行序列，确立起阴阳死生消长的规律，纠正了闰月余分数值的大小，于是有了分管天地神祗和其他物类的官员，称作五官。
English: During the time of the Yellow Emperor, he examined the magnitude of the stars, formulated a calendar, established the sequence of the five elements, established the law of the waxing and waning of yin and yang, and corrected the size of the residual value of the leap month. As a result, he had officials in charge of the gods and goddesses of heaven and earth and other things, known as the five officials.

古文：各司其序，不相乱也。
现代文：他们各自掌管属于自己的事物，不相杂乱。
English: They each manage their own affairs and do not interfere with each other.

古文：民是以能有信，神是以能有明德。
现代文：所以百姓能够有所信赖，神能有灵明。
English: Therefore, the people can have confidence, and God can have wisdom.

古文：民神异业，敬而不渎，故神降之嘉生，民以物享，灾祸不生，所求不匮。
现代文：民众与神明各尽其职，民众对神明礼敬而不亵渎，神明因此赐给民众好的收成，百姓以丰洁的礼品飨祭神，以致灾祸不生，养生所需，永不匮乏。
English: The people and the gods each fulfilled their duties. The people paid homage to the gods without desecrating them. As a result, the gods gave the people a good harvest, and the people sacrificed to the gods with rich gifts, so that disasters would not occur and there would never be a shortage of things needed for health.

古文：少昚氏之衰也，九黎乱德，民神杂扰，不可放物，祸菑荐至，莫尽其气。
现代文：少暤氏衰落以后，九黎的诸侯作乱，民众与神明都受到了惊扰，失去了依托，灾祸接连发生，恶气犹不能尽。
English: After the decline of the Shao Wei clan, the princes of Jiu Li made a disturbance, the people and the gods were disturbed, lost their support, disasters occurred one after another, and the evil spirit could not be exhausted.

古文：颛顼受之，乃命南正重司天以属神，命火正黎司地以属民，使复旧常，无相侵渎。
现代文：直到颛顼即位，任命南正重负责天事，属领神事；任命火正黎负责地事，属领民事，这才让一切恢复到以前的样子，不致于相互侵扰渎乱。
English: It wasn't until the enthronement of Emperor Xizong and the appointment of Nan Zheng heavy in charge of heavenly affairs, belonging to the territory of the gods; the appointment of Hu Zheng Li in charge of earthly affairs, belonging to the territory of civil affairs, that everything was restored to its previous appearance, without causing mutual interference and disturbance.

古文：其後三苗服九黎之德，故二官咸废所职，而闰馀乖次，孟陬殄灭，摄提无纪，历数失序。
现代文：后来诸侯三苗随九黎一起作乱，所以重、黎二官都不修所职，闰余的排列失了次序，正月的设置也与节气不相符合，摄提星方位与月建业不一致，历法与天运的次第不符。
English: Later, the three princes and the three seedlings together with the nine Li made a disturbance, so the heavy, the Li and the two officials did not perform their duties, the arrangement of the intercalary was out of order, the setting of the first month was also inconsistent with the solar terms, the shooting star position was inconsistent with the lunar construction industry, and the calendar was inconsistent with the order of the celestial fortune.

古文：尧复遂重黎之後，不忘旧者，使复典之，而立羲和之官。
现代文：直到尧继位，重新任命重黎二氏的后人中还能推算历法的人，让他们担任历官，还设立了羲氏、和氏这两个官职。
English: Until the Sui succession, the descendants of the Chongli II clan who could calculate the calendar were reappointed to serve as calendar officials, and the two official positions of the Sui clan and the He clan were established.

古文：明时正度，则阴阳调，风雨节，茂气至，民无夭疫。
现代文：推明时令，矫正历度，使天气阴阳调和，风雨有节，这才有了兴旺景象，百姓没有夭殇疾疫。
English: By deducing the seasons and correcting the history, the weather was adjusted from yin to yang, and the wind and rain were adjusted to the seasons. This is why there was a prosperous scene, and the people did not have the cholera epidemic.

古文：年耆禅舜，申戒文祖，云 天之历数在尔躬 。
现代文：尧年老禅位给舜的时候，在文祖庙中告诚舜说 按天体运行规律制定和实施历法的重担就托付给你了 。
English: When I was ordained as a Zen priest at the age of twenty-three, I made a solemn declaration in the Ancestor's Temple that the burden of formulating and implementing the calendar according to the laws of celestial movement was entrusted to you.

古文：舜亦以命禹。
现代文：后来，舜也用同样的话告诫禹。
English: Later, Hao also used the same words to admonish Yu.

古文：由是观之，王者所重也。
现代文：由此看来，历法是帝王很为重视的事。
English: From this point of view, the calendar was a matter of great importance to the emperor.

古文：夏正以正月，殷正以十二月，周正以十一月。
现代文：夏朝以正月为历正，殷朝以十二月为历正，周朝以十一月为历正。
English: In the Summer Dynasty, the first month of the year was the New Year's Day, in the Yin Dynasty, December was the New Year's Day, and in the Zhou Dynasty, November was the New Year's Day.

古文：盖三王之正若循环，穷则反本。
现代文：夏、殷、商的正月一次循环，周而复始。
English: Xia, Yin and Shang cycle once in the first month, and the cycle repeats.

古文：天下有道，则不失纪序；无道，则正朔不行於诸侯。
现代文：天下治理得好，历法就不会乱了次第；天下混乱，连诸侯也不会执行王者的历法。
English: If the country is well governed, the calendar will not be out of order; if the country is chaotic, even the princes will not implement the king's calendar.

古文：幽、厉之後，周室微，陪臣执政，史不记时，君不告朔，故畴人子弟分散，或在诸夏，或在夷狄，是以其禨祥废而不统。
现代文：周幽王、周厉王以后，周朝衰微，列国大夫执国政，史官不记时日，为君者不行告朔礼，所以历算世家的子弟纷纷出走。有的在中原诸侯国任职，有的流入夷狄，所以祝祷祭祀的制度荒废而不能统一。
English: After Zhou Yu Wang and Zhou Li Wang, the Zhou Dynasty declined, the doctors of the nations were in charge of state affairs, the historians did not record the time and date, and the monarchs did not make the new year's greetings, so the children of the family of the calendar went out one after another. Some served in the Central Plains states, and some flowed into the Yidi, so the system of prayer and sacrifice was abandoned and could not be unified.

古文：周襄王二十六年闰三月，而春秋非之。
现代文：周襄王二十六年有闰三月，《春秋》书中非难它置闰月不当。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of King Zhou Xiang, there was a leap March, and the book "Spring and Autumn" criticized it for improperly placing a leap month.

古文：先王之正时也，履端於始，举正於中，归邪於终。
现代文：先王制定历法的规则是，先定历元和年、月、日等开始的时刻，再由中气纠正十二月的位置，有日月余分则归于年末。
English: The rules of the calendar established by the previous king were that the calendar element and the time of the beginning of the year, month, day, etc. were predetermined, and then the position of December was corrected by the central air, and the extra minutes of the sun and moon were attributed to the end of the year.

古文：履端於始，序则不愆；举正於中，民则不惑；归邪於终，事则不悖。
现代文：历法的起始点确定好，接续下来的年月日等也不会有错误；以中气纠正月位，百姓才不会感到迷惑；将闰余置于年终，诸事才不悖乱。
English: If the starting point of the calendar is well determined, there will be no mistakes in the following years, dates, etc.; if the month position is corrected with the middle air, the people will not feel confused; if the intercalary period is placed at the end of the year, everything will not be out of order.

古文：其後战国并争，在於彊国禽敌，救急解纷而已，岂遑念斯哉！
现代文：后来，到了战国诸雄并争的时期，各国的目的都只在于强国胜敌，挽救危机，解决纠纷而已，哪有精力顾及编制历法的事情！
English: Later, when the warring states were in a period of struggle, the purpose of all countries was only to defeat the enemy, save the crisis, and resolve the dispute. How could they have the energy to take care of the preparation of the calendar!

古文：是时独有邹衍，明於五德之传，而散消息之分，以显诸侯。
现代文：那时候只有邹衍懂得五德终始相传，而且散布阴阳消长的分限等理论，因此而显名于诸侯。
English: At that time, only Qianyan understood that the five virtues were passed down from generation to generation, and spread theories such as the division of yin and yang, and therefore became famous in the provinces.

古文：而亦因秦灭六国，兵戎极烦，又升至尊之日浅，未暇遑也。
现代文：同时也由于秦灭六国，战争频繁，后来嬴政虽然做了皇帝，时日太短，也顾不上历法的事。
English: At the same time, due to Qin's annihilation of the Six Kingdoms and frequent wars, although Hezheng later became emperor, the time was too short to pay attention to the calendar.

古文：而亦颇推五胜，而自以为获水德之瑞，更名河曰 德水 ，而正以十月，色上黑。
现代文：但是秦时颇为注重推求五行胜克，自以为是得了五行中水德的祥瑞，将黄河改名为 德水 ，沿用夏朝的历法，以十月为正月，崇尚黑色。
English: However, the Qin Dynasty paid a lot of attention to promoting the Five Elements, and thought that they had won the auspiciousness of the Five Elements and the virtue of water. They renamed the Yellow River as the virtue of water, followed the calendar of the Summer Dynasty, with October as the first month, and advocated black.

古文：然历度闰馀，未能睹其真也。
现代文：然而历法星度闰月余分等，未能做到更为准确一些。
English: However, the calendar failed to be more accurate, such as the leap month's extra minutes.

古文：汉兴，高祖曰 北畤待我而起 ，亦自以为获水德之瑞。
现代文：汉朝刚刚兴起的时候，高祖说 北畤祀黑帝的事待我来创建 ，也是自认为得了水德的祥瑞。
English: When the Han Dynasty was just emerging, Gao Zu said, "Let me be the one to establish the North Pagoda to worship the Black Emperor," and he also believed that he had acquired the virtue of water, Xiang Rui.

古文：虽明习历及张苍等，咸以为然。
现代文：纵然是一些明习历法的人以及丞相张苍等，也都认为如此。
English: Even some people who are familiar with the calendar and the prime minister, Zhang Cang, also think so.

古文：是时天下初定，方纲纪大基，高后女主，皆未遑，故袭秦正朔服色。
现代文：当时天下刚刚平定，正着力在大的方面建纲设纪，此后高后以女子主政，都没有考虑到历法的事情，所以仍然承袭了秦朝的历法和朝服的颜色。
English: At that time, the country had just been pacified, and efforts were being made to establish a program and discipline in major areas. After that, the high school was headed by a woman, and they did not take into account the calendar, so they still inherited the calendar of the Qin Dynasty and the color of the court dress.

古文：至孝文时，鲁人公孙臣以终始五德上书，言 汉得土德，宜更元，改正朔，易服色。
现代文：到孝文帝的时候，鲁人公孙臣以五德循环的理论上书，说 汉朝所得是土德，应该改变历元，更改历法，更换。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiaowen, Sun Zhen, the Prince of Lu, wrote a theoretical book based on the cycle of the Five Virtues, saying that the Han Dynasty's achievements were local virtues, and that the era should be changed, the calendar should be changed, and the calendar should be replaced.

古文：当有瑞，瑞黄龙见 。
现代文：这样天就会降朝服的颜色。这样上天就会降下祥瑞，有黄龙出现 。
English: In this way, the sky will lower the color of the morning dress. In this way, the sky will lower the auspiciousness, and a yellow dragon will appear.

古文：事下丞相张苍，张苍亦学律历，以为非是，罢之。
现代文：文帝将此事交给丞相张苍处理，张苍也是习学律历的人，认为他说得不对，就把事情搁了起来。
English: Emperor Wen handed the matter over to the prime minister, Zhang Cang, to deal with. Zhang Cang was also a student of the legal calendar, and thought he was wrong, so he put the matter on hold.

古文：其後黄龙见成纪，张苍自黜，所欲论著不成。
现代文：此后果然有黄龙出现于成纪地区，张苍上书自请罢黜，他论述汉朝获得水德瑞兆的著作也没有写成。
English: As a result, Huanglong appeared in the Chengji area, Zhang Cang's petition was voluntarily withdrawn, and his work on the Han Dynasty's acquisition of water from Derizhao was not written.

古文：而新垣平以望气见，颇言正历服色事，贵幸，後作乱，故孝文帝废不复问。
现代文：后来，又有新垣平以善于观望云气得见天子，也对天子说了些改正历法和服色的事，很得天子信任，后来却发动叛乱，所以孝文帝再也不谈改历的事。
English: Later, there was also Niigaki Taira, who was good at watching the clouds and was able to see the heavenly son. He also told the heavenly son some things about correcting the calendar and clothing, which gained the heavenly son's trust, but later he launched a rebellion, so Emperor Kobun never talked about changing the calendar again.

古文：至今上即位，招致方士唐都，分其天部；而巴落下闳运算转历，然後日辰之度与夏正同。
现代文：直到当今皇帝即位，招致方士唐都，测量周天各部的星宿度数；而由巴郡的落下闳运算制历，然后日辰星度得与夏历相同。
English: Until today's emperor ascended the throne, the Fang Shi Tang Du was invited to measure the number of stars in each part of the week and day; and the calendar was calculated by the falling star operation of Bachu County, and then the sundial star degree had to be the same as the summer calendar.

古文：乃改元，更官号，封泰山。
现代文：于是改定历元，更改官号，到泰山封禅。
English: As a result, the calendar was revised, the official title was changed, and the name changed to Taishan Fuzhen.

古文：因诏御史曰： 乃者，有司言星度之未定也，广延宣问，以理星度，未能詹也。
现代文：并下诏书对御史说道： 过去，主管星历的官员说星度没有测定，于是朕广泛征求、询问臣下意见，该怎样测定星度，但未能得到满意的答复。
English: He also said to the Emperor: In the past, the official in charge of the star calendar said that the star was not determined, so I extensively solicited and inquired the opinions of my subjects on how to determine the star, but I could not get a satisfactory answer.

古文：盖闻昔者黄帝合而不死，名察度验，定清浊，起五部，建气物分数。
现代文：听说古时黄帝制历因为与季节相符，所以能循环地使用下去，这种历法用实际天象检验，审定律吕的清浊，确立起四时与五行的关系，创建了节气的日分余数。
English: It is said that in ancient times, the Yellow Emperor's calendar was able to be used repeatedly because it was in line with the seasons. This calendar used actual celestial phenomena to test and examine the clarity of the laws, established the relationship between the four o'clock and the five elements, and created the remaining number of days for the solar terms.

古文：然盖尚矣。
现代文：然而年代太远了。
English: But that was a long time ago.

古文：书缺乐弛，朕甚闵焉。
现代文：如今有关天文历法这方面的典籍缺少，礼乐废弛，朕深觉遗憾。
English: Nowadays, there is a lack of books on the astronomical calendar, and I deeply regret that the ritual music has been wasted.

古文：朕唯未能循明也，绩日分，率应水德之胜。今日顺夏至，黄钟为宫，林钟为徵，太蔟为商，南吕为羽，姑洗为角。
现代文：只是朕又无力把它们补修完备。现在的历法经过周密的测量和运算，全都与能克制水德的土德相合，如今已临近夏至，以黄钟为宫声，林钟为徵声，太蔟为商声，南吕为羽声，姑洗为角声。
English: However, I am not able to repair them completely. After careful measurement and calculation, the current calendar is all in line with the local customs that can control water. Now the summer solstice is approaching, with the Yellow Bell as the palace sound, the Lin Bell as the call, the Taishan Bell as the merchant sound, the Nan Lu as the feather sound, and the Gubao as the horn sound.

古文：自是以後，气复正，羽声复清，名复正变，以至子日当冬至，则阴阳离合之道行焉。
现代文：从此之后，节气重新得正，羽声重新成为最清音，律名等复又得到纠正，以子日作为冬至日，此后的阴阳离自合可循道而行了。
English: Since then, the solar terms have been re-adjusted, the sound of the feather has become the clearest sound again, the name of the law has been corrected again, and the day of the son has been used as the winter solstice. Since then, the yin and yang have been separated from each other and can be guided by the method.

古文：十一月甲子朔旦冬至已詹，其更以七年为太初元年。
现代文：已经算得十一月甲子日夜半时为月朔冬至，更定元封七年为太初元年。
English: It has been calculated that midnight on November 1st is the new moon and the winter solstice, and it has been determined that the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty is the first year of the Taihu era.

古文：年名 焉逢摄提格 ，月名 毕聚 ，日得甲子，夜半朔旦冬至。 
现代文：年名是 焉逢摄提格 ，月名是 毕聚 ，日名已算得为甲子，又算得月朔夜半时为冬至。 
English: The name of the year is 焉逢摄提格, the name of the month is 毕聚, the name of the day has been calculated as甲子, and the winter solstice has been calculated as the midnight of the new moon.

古文：◎历术甲子篇
现代文：历术甲子篇
English: The Tale of Genghis Khan

古文：太初元年，岁名 焉逢摄提格 ，月名 毕聚 ，日得甲子，夜半朔旦冬至。
现代文：太初元年，岁名是 焉逢摄提格 ，月名是 毕聚 ，十一月朔旦日名得甲子，夜半时为冬至节。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, the name of the year was 焉逢摄提格, the name of the month was 毕聚, the name of the day in November was 甲子, and the winter solstice festival was at midnight.

古文：正北
现代文：冬至在子时，方位为正北。
English: During the winter solstice, the direction is due north.

古文：十二无大馀，无小馀；无大馀，无小馀；
现代文：全年为十二个月月朔无大余，无小余；冬至无大余，无小余；
English: For the whole year, there is no big surplus and no small surplus in the twelve months of the lunar new year; there is no big surplus and no small surplus in the winter solstice;

古文：焉逢摄提格太初元年。
现代文：焉逢摄提格，即太初元年。
English: The photo was taken in the first year of the Taisho era.

古文：十二
现代文：全年为十二个月，
English: There are twelve months in the year,

古文：大馀五十四，小馀三百四十八；大馀五，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余为五十四日，小余为三百四十八分；冬至大余为五日，小余为八分。
English: The lunar new year is 54 days and 348 minutes old; the winter solstice is 5 days and 8 minutes old.

古文：端蒙单阏二年。
现代文：端蒙单阏，即太初二年。
English: Duan Mengshan, that is, the first two years.

古文：闰十三
现代文：有闰月，全年为十三个月，
English: There is a leap month, so there are thirteen months in a year.

古文：大馀四十八，小馀六百九十六；大馀十，小馀十六；
现代文：月朔大余四十八日，小余六百九十六分；冬至大余十日，小余十六分；
English: The new moon is 48 days old, 696 minutes old; the winter solstice is 10 days old, 16 minutes old;

古文：游兆执徐三年。
现代文：游兆执徐，即太初三年。
English: Yu Zhaoxu, that is, the first three years.

古文：大馀十二，小馀六百三；大馀十五，小馀二十四；
现代文：月朔大余十二日，小余六百零三分；冬至大余十五日，小余二十四分；
English: On the twelfth day of the new moon, the small remainder is 603 minutes; on the fifteenth day of the winter solstice, the small remainder is 24 minutes;

古文：彊梧大荒落四年。
现代文：强梧大荒落，即太初四年。
English: Strong, vigorous, and desolate, that is, the first four years of the year.

古文：大馀七，小馀十一；大馀二十一，无小馀；
现代文：月朔大余七日，小余十一分；冬至大余二十一日，无小余；
English: The new moon has seven days of big surplus and eleven minutes of small surplus; the winter solstice has twenty-one days of big surplus and no small surplus;

古文：徒维敦牂天汉元年。
现代文：徒维敦牂，即天汉元年。
English: Tu Wei Dun Dun, that is, the first year of the Han Dynasty.

古文：大馀一，小馀三百五十九；大馀二十六，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余一日，小余三百五十九分；冬至大余二十六日，小余八分；
English: At the new moon, one day remains, and three hundred and fifty-nine minutes remain; at the winter solstice, twenty-six days remain, and eight minutes remain;

古文：祝犁协洽二年。
现代文：祝犁协洽，即天汉二年。
English: I wish you two years of cooperation, that is, the second year of the Han Dynasty.

古文：大馀二十五，小馀二百六十六；大馀三十一，小馀十六；
现代文：月朔大余二十五日，小余二百六十六分；冬至大余三十一日，小余十六分；
English: On the 25th day of the new moon, the small remainder is 266 minutes; on the 31st day of the winter solstice, the small remainder is 16 minutes;

古文：商横涒滩三年。
现代文：商横涒滩，即天汉三年。
English: Shang and Yan fought for three years, that is, the three years of the Han Dynasty.

古文：大馀十九，小馀六百一十四；大馀三十六，小馀二十四；
现代文：月朔大余十九日，小余六百一十四分；冬至大余三十六日，小余二十四分；
English: The 19th day of the new moon, 614 minutes; the 36th day of the winter solstice, 24 minutes;

古文：昭阳作鄂四年。
现代文：昭阳作鄂，即天汉四年。
English: Zhao Yang served for four years, that is, four years of the Han Dynasty.

古文：大馀十四，小馀二十二；大馀四十二，无小馀；横艾淹茂太始元年。
现代文：月朔大余十四日，小余二十二分；冬至大余四十二日，无小余；横艾淹茂，即太始元年。
English: On the 14th day of the lunar new year, the small remainder is 22 minutes; on the 42nd day of the winter solstice, there is no small remainder; and in the first year of the Taishi era, there is no small surplus.

古文：大馀三十七，小馀八百六十九；大馀四十七，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余三十七日，小余八百六十九分；冬至大余四十七日，小余八分；
English: Thirty-seven days after the new moon, 869 minutes after the small moon; 47 days after the winter solstice, 8 minutes after the small moon;

古文：尚章大渊献二年。
现代文：尚章大渊献，即太始二年。
English: Shangzhang Dayuan dedicated, that is, the first two years.

古文：大馀三十二，小馀二百七十七；大馀五十二，小馀一十六；
现代文：月朔大余三十二日，小余二百七十七分；冬至大余五十二日，小余十六分；
English: The new moon is 32 days old, 277 minutes old; the winter solstice is 52 days old, 16 minutes old;

古文：焉逢困敦三年。
现代文：焉逢困敦，即太始三年。
English: It has been three years since the beginning of the year.

古文：大馀五十六，小馀一百八十四；大馀五十七，小馀二十四；
现代文：月朔大余五十六日，小余一百八十四分；冬至大余五十七日，小余二十四分；
English: The new moon is 56 days and 184 minutes away; the winter solstice is 57 days and 24 minutes away;

古文：端蒙赤奋若四年。
现代文：端蒙赤奋若，即太始四年。
English: If the end is red, that is, the first four years.

古文：大馀五十，小馀五百三十二；大馀三，无小馀；
现代文：月朔大余五十日，小余五百三十二分；冬至大余三日，无小余；
English: The new moon has fifty days of big surplus and five hundred and thirty-two minutes of small surplus; the winter solstice has three days of big surplus and no small surplus;

古文：游兆摄提格征和元年。
现代文：游兆摄提格，即征和元年。
English: Yu Zhao Zettig, that is, Zheng He in the first year.

古文：大馀四十四，小馀八百八十；大馀八，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余四十四日，小余八百八十分；冬至大余八日，小余八分；
English: The new moon is 44 days old and 880 minutes old; the winter solstice is 8 days old and 8 minutes old;

古文：彊梧单阏二年。
现代文：强梧单阏，即建始二年。
English: Qiangwu Sanzhao, which has been under construction for two years.

古文：大馀八，小馀七百八十七；大馀十三，小馀十六；
现代文：月朔大余八日，小余七百八十七分；冬至大余十三日，小余十六分；
English: The new moon is 8 days after new moon, 787 minutes after new moon; the winter solstice is 13 days after new moon, 16 minutes after new moon;

古文：徒维执徐三年。
现代文：徒维执徐，即建始三年。
English: It took three years to build the bridge.

古文：大馀三，小馀一百九十五；大馀十八，小馀二十四；
现代文：月朔大余三日，小余一百九十五分；冬至大余十八，小余二十四分；
English: At the new moon, there are three days of big surplus and one hundred and ninety-five minutes of small surplus; at the winter solstice, there are eighteen days of big surplus and twenty-four minutes of small surplus;

古文：祝犁大芒落四年。
现代文：祝犁大芒落，即征和四年。
English: I wish you a big smile, that is, four years of military service.

古文：大馀五十七，小馀五百四十三；大馀二十四，无小馀；
现代文：月朔大余五十七日，小余五百四十三分；冬至大余二十四日，无小余；
English: 57th day of the lunar new year, 543rd minute of the lunar new year; 24th day of the winter solstice, no minute of the lunar new year;

古文：商横敦牂後元元年。
现代文：商横敦牂，即后元元年。
English: Business is booming, that is, the first year of the 21st century.

古文：大馀二十一，小馀四百五十；大馀二十九，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余二十一日，小余四百五十分；冬至大余二十九日，小余八分；
English: On the 21st day of the new moon, the small remainder is 450 minutes; on the 29th day of the winter solstice, the small remainder is 8 minutes;

古文：昭阳汁洽二年。
现代文：昭阳汁洽，即后元二年。
English: Shoyang Juji, two years after the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：大馀十五，小馀七百九十八；大馀三十四，小馀十六；横艾涒滩始元元年。
现代文：横艾涒滩，即始元元年。
English: It is the first year of the first year of the first year.

古文：正西十二
现代文：冬至在酉时，方位正西；
English: The winter solstice is in the morning, the direction is due west;

古文：大馀三十九，小馀七百五；大馀三十九，小馀二十四；
现代文：全年为十二个月，月朔大余三十九日，小余七百零五分；冬至大余三十九日，小余二十四分；
English: There are twelve months in a year. The new moon has thirty-nine days and seven hundred and five minutes. The winter solstice has thirty-nine days and twenty-four minutes.

古文：尚章作噩二年。
现代文：尚章作噩，即始元二年。
English: Shangzhang made his debut in the second year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：大馀三十四，小馀一百一十三；大馀四十五，无小馀；
现代文：月朔大余三十四日，小余一百一十三分；冬至大余四十五日，无小余；
English: The new moon has a large remainder of 34 days and a small remainder of 113 minutes; the winter solstice has a large remainder of 45 days and no small remainder;

古文：焉逢淹茂三年。
现代文：焉逢淹茂，即始元三年。
English: It was in the third year of the first year of the first year.

古文：大馀二十八，小馀四百六十一；大馀五十，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余二十八日，小余四百六十一分；冬至大余五十日，小余八分；
English: The new moon is 28 days after the new moon, 461 minutes after the new moon; the winter solstice is 50 days after the new moon, 8 minutes after the new moon;

古文：端蒙大渊献四年。
现代文：端蒙大渊献，即始元四年。
English: It was built in the 4th year of the 1st year of the 8th month of the 8th year of the 9th month of the 10th year of the 11th month of the 11th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month

古文：大馀五十二，小馀三百六十八；大馀五十五，小馀十六；
现代文：月朔大余五十二日，小余三百六十八分；冬至大余五十五日，小余十六分；
English: The new moon is 52 days old and 368 minutes old; the winter solstice is 55 days old and 16 minutes old;

古文：游兆困敦五年。
现代文：游兆困敦，即始元五年。
English: You Zhao was in a difficult situation in the first five years of the first century.

古文：大馀四十六，小馀七百一十六；无大馀，小馀二十四；
现代文：月朔大余四十六日，小余七百一十六分；冬至无大余，小余二十四分；
English: The new moon has a large remainder of 46 days and a small remainder of 716 minutes; the winter solstice has no large remainder and a small remainder of 24 minutes;

古文：彊梧赤奋若六年。
现代文：强梧赤奋若，即始元六年。
English: Qiangwu Chifenruo, born in the first six years of the year.

古文：大馀四十一，小馀一百二十四；大馀六，无小馀；
现代文：月朔大余四十一日，小余一百二十四分；冬至大余六日，无小余；
English: The new moon has a large remainder of 41 days and a small remainder of 124 minutes; the winter solstice has a large remainder of six days and no small remainder;

古文：徒维摄提格元凤元年。
现代文：徒维摄提格，即元凤元年。
English: Tu Wei shot Tig, that is, the first year of the first year of the first year of the phoenix.

古文：大馀五，小馀三十一；大馀十一，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余五日，小余三十一分；冬至大余十一日，小余八分；
English: The new moon has five days remaining and thirty-one minutes remaining; the winter solstice has eleven days remaining and eight minutes remaining;

古文：祝犁单阏二年。
现代文：祝犁单阏，即元凤二年。
English: I congratulate you on the second anniversary of the founding of Yuanfeng.

古文：大馀五十九，小馀三百七十九；大馀十六，小馀十六；
现代文：月朔大余五十九日，小余三百七十九分；冬至大余十六日，小余十六分；
English: The new moon is 59 days and 379 minutes after new moon; the winter solstice is 16 days and 16 minutes after new moon;

古文：商横执徐三年。
现代文：商横执徐，即元凤三年。
English: Yuan Feng has been in business for three years.

古文：大馀五十三，小馀七百二十七；大馀二十一，小馀二十四；
现代文：月朔大余五十三日，小余七百二十七分；冬至大余二十一日，小余二十四分；
English: The new moon is 53 days old, 727 minutes old; the winter solstice is 21 days old, 24 minutes old;

古文：昭阳大荒落四年。
现代文：昭阳大荒落，即元凤四年。
English: The great desolation of Shoyang, that is, the four years of Yuanfeng.

古文：大馀十七，小馀六百三十四；大馀二十七，无小馀；
现代文：月朔大余十七日，小余六百三十四分；冬至大余二十七日，无小余；
English: On the 17th day of the lunar new year, there are 634 minutes left; on the 27th day of the winter solstice, there are no minutes left;

古文：横艾敦牂五年。
现代文：横艾敦牂，即元凤五年。
English: It is five years since the birth of Yuan Feng.

古文：大馀十二，小馀四十二；大馀三十二，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余十二日，小余四十二分；冬至大余三十二日，小余八分；
English: The new moon is 12 days after new moon, 42 minutes after new moon; the winter solstice is 32 days after new moon, 8 minutes after new moon;

古文：尚章汁洽六年。
现代文：尚章汁洽，即元凤六年。
English: Shang Zhangjua, that is, Yuan Feng six years.

古文：大馀三十五，小馀八百八十九；大馀三十七，小馀十六；
现代文：月朔大余三十五日，小余八百八十九分；冬至大余三十七日，小余十六分；
English: The new moon is 35 days old, 889 minutes old; the winter solstice is 37 days old, 16 minutes old;

古文：焉逢涒滩元平元年
现代文：焉逢涒滩，即元平元年。
English: It was the first year of the Yuan dynasty.

古文：大馀三十，小馀二百九十七；大馀四十二，小馀二十四；
现代文：月朔大余三十日，小余二百九十七分；冬至大余四十二日，小余二十四分；
English: The new moon is 30 days after new moon and 297 minutes after new moon; the winter solstice is 42 days after new moon and 24 minutes after new moon;

古文：端蒙作噩本始元年。
现代文：端蒙作噩，即本始元年。
English: It was the beginning of the first year.

古文：大馀二十四，小馀六百四十五；大馀四十八，无小馀；
现代文：月朔大余二十四日，小余六百四十五分；冬至大余四十八日，无小余；
English: The new moon is 24 days old, 645 minutes old; the winter solstice is 48 days old, and there is no small surplus;

古文：游兆阉茂二年。
现代文：游兆阉茂，即本始二年。
English: Yu Zhaojunmao, that is, the first two years.

古文：大馀四十八，小馀五百五十二；大馀五十三，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余四十八日，小余五百五十二分；冬至大余五十三日，小余八分；
English: The new moon is 48 days old, 552 minutes old; the winter solstice is 53 days old, 8 minutes old;

古文：彊梧大渊献三年。
现代文：强梧大渊献，即本始三年。
English: Qiangwu Dayuan dedication, that is, the beginning of three years.

古文：大馀四十二，小馀九百；大馀五十八，小馀十六；徒维困敦四年。
现代文：月朔大余四十二日，小余九百分；冬至大余五十八日，小余十六分；徒维困敦，即本始四年。
English: The 42nd day of the lunar new year, a small surplus of nine hundred; the winter solstice, a large surplus of fifty-eight days, a small surplus of sixteen points; Tuwei, the first four years.

古文：大馀三十七，小馀三百八；大馀三，小馀二十四；
现代文：月朔大余三十七日，小余三百零八分；冬至大余三日，小余二十四分；
English: Thirty-seven days after the new moon, three hundred and eight minutes after the small moon; three days after the winter solstice, twenty-four minutes after the small moon;

古文：祝犁赤奋若地节元年。
现代文：祝犁赤奋若，即地节元年。
English: I wish you a red-hot year, the first year of the festival.

古文：大馀一，小馀二百一十五；大馀九，无小馀；
现代文：月朔大余一日，小余二百一十五分；冬至大余九日，无小余；
English: The new moon has one day more than the old moon and two hundred and fifteen minutes less than the old moon; the winter solstice has nine days more than the old moon and no less than the old moon;

古文：商横摄提格二年。
现代文：商横摄提格，即地节二年。
English: Shang Heng shot Tig, that is, the second year of the festival.

古文：大馀五十五，小馀五百六十三；大馀十四，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余五十五日，小余五百六十三分；冬至大余十四日，小余八分；
English: The new moon is 55 days old, 563 minutes old; the winter solstice is 14 days old, 8 minutes old;

古文：昭阳单阏三年。
现代文：昭阳单阏，即地节三年。
English: Zhaoyang, that is, the third year of the festival.

古文：正南十二
现代文：冬至在午时，方位为正南；全年为十二个月，
English: The winter solstice is at noon, the direction is due south; the whole year is twelve months,

古文：大馀十九，小馀四百七十；大馀十九，小馀十六；
现代文：月朔大余十九日，小余四百七十分；冬至大余十九日，小余十六分；
English: On the 19th day of the lunar new year, the small surplus is 470 minutes; on the 19th day of the winter solstice, the small surplus is 16 minutes;

古文：横艾执徐四年。
现代文：横艾执徐，即地节四年。
English: It has been held for four years.

古文：大馀十三，小馀八百一十八；大馀二十四，小馀二十四；
现代文：月朔大余十三日，小余八百一十八分；冬至大余二十四日，小余二十四分；
English: On the 13th day after the new moon, the small remaining 818 minutes; on the 24th day after the winter solstice, the small remaining 24 minutes;

古文：尚章大荒落元康元年。
现代文：尚章大荒落，即元康元年。
English: Shangzhang fell into disrepair in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：大馀八，小馀二百二十六；大馀三十，无小馀；
现代文：月朔大余八日，小余二百二十六分；冬至大余三十日，无小余；
English: The new moon has eight days of big surplus and 226 minutes of small surplus; the winter solstice has 30 days of big surplus and no small surplus;

古文：焉逢敦牂二年。
现代文：焉逢敦牂，即元康二年。
English: It was the second year of Yuan Kang.

古文：大馀三十二，小馀一百三十三；大馀三十五，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余三十二日，小余一百三十三分；冬至大余三十五日，小余八分；
English: Thirty-two days after the new moon, one hundred and thirty-three minutes after the new moon; thirty-five days after the winter solstice, eight minutes after the new moon;

古文：端蒙协洽三年。
现代文：端蒙协洽，即元康三年。
English: Duan Meng cooperation, that is, Yuan Kang three years.

古文：大馀二十六，小馀四百八十一；大馀四十，小馀十六；
现代文：月朔大余二十六日，小余四百八十一分；冬至大余四十日，小余十六分；
English: The new moon is 26 days old and 481 minutes old; the winter solstice is 40 days old and 16 minutes old;

古文：游兆涒滩四年。
现代文：游兆涒滩，即元康四年。
English: Yu Zhaobing, that is, the four years of Yuan Kang.

古文：大馀二十，小馀八百二十九；大馀四十五，小馀二十四；
现代文：月朔大余二十日，小余八百二十九分；冬至大余四十五日，小余二十四分；
English: On the 20th day after the new moon, the small remaining 829 minutes; on the 45th day after the winter solstice, the small remaining 24 minutes;

古文：彊梧作噩神雀元年。
现代文：强梧作噩，即神雀元年。
English: Qiang Wu Zong, that is, the first year of the Divine Bird.

古文：大馀四十四，小馀七百三十六；大馀五十一，无小馀；
现代文：月朔大余四十四日，小余七百三十六分；冬至大余五十一日，无小余；
English: The new moon is 44 days after new moon, 736 minutes after new moon; the winter solstice is 51 days after new moon, and there is no new moon;

古文：徒维淹茂二年。
现代文：徒维淹茂，即神雀二年。
English: Tuwei inundated, that is, the divine sparrow two years.

古文：大馀三十九，小馀一百四十四；大馀五十六，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余三十九日，小余一百四十四分；冬至大余五十六日，小余八分；
English: Thirty-nine days after the new moon, one hundred and forty-four minutes after the new moon; fifty-six days after the winter solstice, eight minutes after the new moon;

古文：祝犁大渊献三年。
现代文：祝犁大渊献，即神雀三年。
English: I wish you three years of the divine bird, the great abyss.

古文：大馀三十三，小馀四百九十二；大馀一，小馀十六；
现代文：月朔大余三十三日，小余四百九十二分；冬至大余一日，小余十六分；
English: The 33rd day of the lunar new year is a small surplus of 492 minutes; the winter solstice is a large surplus of one day and a small surplus of 16 minutes;

古文：商横困敦四年。
现代文：商横困敦，即神雀四年。
English: The business was in a difficult situation, and the divine sparrow had to suffer for four years.

古文：大馀五十七，小馀三百九十九；大馀六，小馀二十四；
现代文：月朔大余五十七日，小余三百九十九分；冬至大余六日，小余二十四分；
English: The new moon is fifty-seven days old and three hundred and ninety-nine minutes old; the winter solstice is six days old and twenty-four minutes old;

古文：昭阳赤奋若五凤元年。
现代文：昭阳赤奋若，即五凤元年。
English: Zhao Yang was born in the year of the five phoenixes.

古文：大馀五十一，小馀七百四十七；大馀十二，无小馀；
现代文：月朔大余五十一日，小余七百四十七分；冬至大余十二日，无小余；
English: The new moon is 51 days after new moon and 747 minutes after new moon; the winter solstice is 12 days after new moon and there is no new moon;

古文：横艾摄提格二年。
现代文：横艾摄提格，即五凤二年。
English: It's been two years since the birth of Tigger, also known as Wufeng.

古文：大馀十五，小馀六百五十四；大馀十七，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余十五日，小余六百五十四分；冬至大余十七日，小余八分；
English: On the fifteenth day of the lunar new year, the small remainder is six hundred and fifty-four points; on the seventeenth day of the winter solstice, the small remainder is eight points;

古文：尚章单阏三年。
现代文：尚章单阏，即五凤三年。
English: Shangzhang Sanzhong, that is, Wufeng three years.

古文：大馀十，小馀六十二；大馀二十二，小馀十六；
现代文：月朔大余十日，小余六十二分；冬至大余二十二日，小余十六分；
English: The new moon is on the 10th day of the lunar month, with a small remainder of 62 minutes; the winter solstice is on the 22nd day of the lunar month, with a small remainder of 16 minutes;

古文：焉逢执徐四年。
现代文：焉逢执徐，即五凤四年。
English: That is, five phoenixes in four years.

古文：大馀四，小馀四百一十；大馀二十七，小馀二十四；
现代文：月朔大余四日，小余四百一十分；冬至大余二十七日，小余二十四分；
English: The new moon is four days old and four hundred and ten minutes old; the winter solstice is twenty-seven days old and twenty-four minutes old;

古文：端蒙大荒落甘露元年。
现代文：端蒙大荒落，即甘露元年。
English: The end of the Mongolian Great Desolation, that is, the first year of the Kamloops.

古文：大馀二十八，小馀三百一十七；大馀三十三，无小馀；
现代文：月朔大余二十八日，小余三百一十七分；冬至大余三十三日，无小余；
English: On the 28th day after the new moon, there are 317 minutes left; on the 33rd day after the winter solstice, there are no minutes left;

古文：游兆敦牂二年。
现代文：游兆敦牂，即甘露二年。
English: You Zhaodun, that is, the second year of nectar.

古文：大馀二十二，小馀六百六十五；大馀三十八，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余二十二日，小余六百六十五分；冬至大余三十八日，小余八分；
English: The new moon is 22 days old, 665 minutes old; the winter solstice is 38 days old, 8 minutes old;

古文：彊梧协洽三年。
现代文：强梧协洽，即甘露三年。
English: Strong and cooperative, that is, three years of nectar.

古文：大馀十七，小馀七十三；大馀四十三，小馀十六；
现代文：月朔大余十七日，小余七十三分；冬至大余四十三日，小余十六分；
English: The lunar new year falls on the 17th day of the lunar month, with a small remainder of 73 minutes; the winter solstice falls on the 43rd day of the lunar month, with a small remainder of 16 minutes;

古文：徒维涒滩四年。
现代文：徒维涒滩，即甘露四年。
English: Tuwei beach, that is, the nectar of the four years.

古文：大馀四十，小馀九百二十；大馀四十八，小馀二十四；
现代文：月朔大余四十日，小余九百二十分；冬至大余四十八日，小余二十四分；
English: The new moon is forty days old and nine hundred and twenty minutes old; the winter solstice is forty-eight days old and twenty-four minutes old;

古文：祝犁作噩黄龙元年。
现代文：祝犁作噩，即黄龙元年。
English: I wish you a prosperous year, the first year of the Yellow Dragon.

古文：大馀三十五，小馀三百二十八；大馀五十四，无小馀；
现代文：月朔大余三十五日，小余三百二十八分；冬至大余五十四日，无小余；
English: Thirty-five days after the new moon, three hundred and twenty-eight minutes after the small moon; fifty-four days after the winter solstice, no small moon;

古文：商横淹茂初元元年。
现代文：商横淹茂，即初元元年。
English: Merchants flooded in, that is, the first year of the first century.

古文：正东十二
现代文：冬至在卯时，方位正东；全年为十二个月，
English: The winter solstice is at midnight, the direction is due east; the whole year is twelve months,

古文：大馀五十九，小馀二百三十五；大馀五十九，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余五十九日，小余二百三十五分；冬至大余五十九日，小余八分；
English: The new moon is 59 days old, 235 minutes old; the winter solstice is 59 days old, 8 minutes old;

古文：昭阳大渊献二年。
现代文：昭阳大渊献，即初元二年。
English: It was dedicated to Shoyang Dayuan in the second year of the Heian period.

古文：大馀五十三，小馀五百八十三；大馀四，小馀十六；
现代文：月朔大余五十三日，小余五百八十三分；冬至大余四日，小余十六分；
English: The new moon is 53 days old, 583 minutes old; the winter solstice is 4 days old, 16 minutes old;

古文：横艾困敦三年。
现代文：横艾困敦，即初元三年。
English: It was the third year of the first year of the year.

古文：大馀四十七，小馀九百三十一；大馀九，小馀二十四；
现代文：月朔大余四十七日，小余九百三十一分；冬至大余九日，小余二十四分；
English: The new moon is 47 days old and 931 minutes old; the winter solstice is 9 days old and 24 minutes old;

古文：尚章赤奋若四年。
现代文：尚章赤奋若，即初元四年。
English: Shang Zhang was a red-blooded young man in the first year of the 4th century.

古文：大馀十一，小馀八百三十八；大馀十五，无小馀；
现代文：月朔大余十一日，小余八百三十六分；冬至大余十五日，无小余；
English: On the 11th day of the new moon, there are 836 minutes left; on the 15th day of the winter solstice, there are no minutes left;

古文：焉逢摄提格五年。
现代文：焉逢摄提格，即初元五年。
English: The photo was taken in Tigre, in the first year of the fifth century.

古文：大馀六，小馀二百四十六；大馀二十，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余六日，小余二百四十六分；冬至大余二十日，小余八分；
English: The new moon is six days old and two hundred and forty-six minutes old; the winter solstice is twenty days old and eight minutes old;

古文：端蒙单阏永光元年。
现代文：端蒙单阏，即永光元年。
English: The end is decorated with a single bead, i.e. the first year of Yongguang.

古文：无大馀，小馀五百九十四；大馀二十五，小馀十六；
现代文：月朔无大余，小余五百九十四分；冬至大余二十五日，小余十六分；
English: The new moon has no large surplus, but a small surplus of 594 minutes; the winter solstice has a large surplus of 25 days, but a small surplus of 16 minutes;

古文：游兆执徐二年。
现代文：游兆执徐，即永光二年。
English: Yu Zhaoxu, that is, the second year of Yongguang.

古文：大馀二十四，小馀五百一；大馀三十，小馀二十四；
现代文：月朔大余二十四日，小余五百零一分；冬至大余三十日，小余二十四分；
English: The lunisolar solstice is on the 24th, with a small remainder of 500.1; the winter solstice is on the 30th, with a small remainder of 24.

古文：彊梧大荒落三年。
现代文：强梧大荒落，即永光三年。
English: Qiangwu great desolation, that is, Yongguang three years.

古文：大馀十八，小馀八百四十九；大馀三十六，无小馀；
现代文：月朔大余十八日，小余八百四十九分；冬至大余三十六日，无小余；
English: On the 18th day of the lunar new year, the small remainder is 849 minutes; on the 36th day of the winter solstice, there is no small remainder;

古文：徒维敦牂四年。
现代文：徒维敦牂，即永光四年。
English: Tu Wei Dun Dun, that is, Yongguang four years.

古文：大馀十三，小馀二百五十七；大馀四十一，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余十三日，小余二百五十七分；冬至大余四十一日，小余八分；
English: On the 13th day of the new moon, the small remainder is two hundred and fifty-seven points; on the 41st day of the winter solstice, the small remainder is eight points;

古文：祝犁协洽五年。
现代文：祝犁协洽，即永光五年。
English: I wish you cooperation, that is, five years of Yongguang.

古文：大馀三十七，小馀一百六十四；大馀四十六，小馀十六；
现代文：月朔大余三十七日，小余一百六十四分；冬至大余四十六日，小余十六分；
English: Thirty-seven days after the new moon, one hundred and sixty-four minutes after the new moon; forty-six days after the winter solstice, sixteen minutes after the new moon;

古文：商横涒滩建昭元年。
现代文：商横涒滩，即建昭元年。
English: Shangyang Fengtan, founded in the first year of the Shao Dynasty.

古文：大馀三十一，小馀五百一十二；大馀五十一，小馀二十四；
现代文：月朔大余三十一日，小余五百一十二分；冬至大余五十一日，小余二十四分；
English: The new moon is 31 days after new moon and 512 minutes after new moon; the winter solstice is 51 days after new moon and 24 minutes after new moon;

古文：昭阳作噩二年。
现代文：昭阳作噩，即建昭二年。
English: It was the second year of Shoyang's reign.

古文：大馀五十五，小馀四百一十九；大馀五十七，无小馀；
现代文：月朔大余五十五日，小余四百一十九分；冬至大余五十七日，无小余；
English: The 55th day of the lunar new year has a small surplus of 419 minutes; the 57th day of the winter solstice has a large surplus, with no small surplus;

古文：横艾阉茂三年。
现代文：横艾阉茂，即建昭三年。
English: It's been three years since Jian Zhao took office.

古文：大馀四十九，小馀七百六十七；大馀二，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余四十九日，小余七百六十七分；冬至大余二日，小余八分；
English: The new moon is 49 days old, 767 minutes old; the winter solstice is 2 days old, 8 minutes old;

古文：尚章大渊献四年。
现代文：尚章大渊献，即建昭四年。
English: Shangzhang Dayuan dedicated, that is, Jian Zhao four years.

古文：大馀四十四，小馀一百七十五；大馀七，小馀十六；
现代文：月朔大余四十四日，小余一百七十五分；冬至大余七日，小余十六分；
English: The new moon is 44 days old, 175 minutes old; the winter solstice is 7 days old, 16 minutes old;

古文：焉逢困敦五年。
现代文：焉逢困敦，即建昭五年。
English: In spite of the difficulties, it has been five years since the founding of the company.

古文：大馀八，小馀八十二；大馀十二，小馀二十四；
现代文：月朔大余八日，小余八十二分；冬至大余十二日，小余二十四分；
English: The new moon is 8 days after new moon and 82 minutes after new moon; the winter solstice is 12 days after new moon and 24 minutes after new moon;

古文：端蒙赤奋若竟宁元年。
现代文：端蒙赤奋若，即竟宁元年。
English: If the end of the year is bright red, it is the first year of the year.

古文：大馀二，小馀四百三十；大馀十八，无小馀；
现代文：月朔大余二日，小余四百三十分；冬至大余十八日，无小余；
English: The new moon is two days after the new moon and four hundred and thirty minutes after the new moon; the winter solstice is eighteen days after the new moon and there is no new moon;

古文：游兆摄提格建始元年。
现代文：游兆摄提格，即建始元年。
English: Yu Zhao Zettig, that is, the first year of construction.

古文：大馀五十六，小馀七百七十八；大馀二十三，小馀八；
现代文：月朔大余五十六日，小余七百七十八分；冬至大余二十三日，小余八分；
English: The new moon is 56 days old, 778 minutes old; the winter solstice is 23 days old, 8 minutes old;

古文：大馀二十，小馀六百八十五；大馀二十八，小馀十六；
现代文：月朔大余二十日，小余六百八十五分；冬至大余二十八日，小余十六分；
English: On the 20th day of the new moon, the small remaining 685 minutes; on the 28th day of the winter solstice, the small remaining 16 minutes;

古文：大馀十五，小馀九十三；大馀三十三，小馀二十四；
现代文：月朔大余十五日，小余九十三分；冬至大余三十三日，小余二十四分；
English: On the 15th day of the new moon, the small remaining ninety-three points; on the 33rd day of the winter solstice, the small remaining twenty-four points;

古文：祝犁大荒落四年。
现代文：祝犁大荒落，即建始四年。
English: Congratulations on the great desolation, that is, the first four years of construction.

古文：右历书：大馀者，日也。
现代文：以上《历书》中：大余，是指剩余的日数。
English: In the above-mentioned "Calendar Book": large surplus, refers to the remaining number of days.

古文：小馀者，月也。
现代文：小余，是指剩余的分数。
English: Small remainder refers to the remaining score.

古文：端蒙者，年名也。
现代文：端蒙等，是年的名字。
English: "Tao Meng et al." is the name of the year.

古文：支：丑名赤奋若，寅名摄提格。干：丙名游兆。
现代文：年名包括干支两部分，地支：例如丑叫作赤奋若，寅叫作摄提格；天干：例如丙叫作游兆。
English: The year name includes two parts of the stem branch, the earth branch: for example, the ugly branch is called the red-browed branch, the crab branch is called the crab branch; the heavenly stem branch: for example, the crab branch is called the crab branch.

古文：正北，冬至加子时；正西，加酉时；正南，加午时；正东，加卯时。
现代文：正北，表示冬至在子时；正西，表示冬至在酉时；正南，表示冬至在午时；正东，表示冬至在卯时。
English: Due north means the winter solstice is in the morning; due west means the winter solstice is in the afternoon; due south means the winter solstice is in the afternoon; due east means the winter solstice is in the evening.

