古文：杜笃字季雅，京兆杜陵人也。
现代文：◆杜笃传，杜笃字季雅，京兆杜陵人。
English: ◆Tu Duc Chuan, Du Duc Zi Ji Ya, Jing Zhao Tu Ling Ren.

古文：高祖延年，宣帝时为御史大夫。
现代文：高祖为杜延年，宣帝时做御史大夫。
English: His great-great-grandfather was Du Yannian, who served as a goshi taifu during the reign of Emperor Xuan.

古文：笃少博学，不修小节，不为乡人所礼。
现代文：杜笃年轻时博学多闻，不修小节，乡里人对他不怎么好。
English: When he was young, Du Du was erudite and well-informed. He did not study music, and the villagers were not very kind to him.

古文：徒垂意于持平守实，务在爱育元元，苟有便于王政者，圣主纳焉。
现代文：居住美阳，与美阳令往来相好，多次请他为自己谋事，美阳令没有为他办，恨了他。美阳令一怒之下，收捕了杜笃送京师。
English: He lived in Miyang and had a good relationship with Miyang Rong. He asked him many times to do something for him, but Miyang Rong did not do it for him and hated him. Miyang Rong got angry and arrested Du Du for sending a teacher to Beijing.

古文：何则？物罔挹而不损，道无隆而不移，阳盛则运，阴满则亏，故存不忘亡，安不讳危，虽有仁义，犹设城池也。客以利器不可久虚，而国家亦不忘乎西都，何必去洛邑之渟瀯与？
现代文：正值大司马吴汉逝世，光武诏令诸儒生为文吊唁，杜笃在狱中做了一篇诔文，辞旨高雅，光武称赞写得好，赐帛并免了他的处分。杜笃认为关中内山外河，是先帝的旧京，不应当改建洛邑，于是做了一篇《论都赋》，上奏皇上。
English: At the time of the death of Grand Master Ma Wuhan, Guangwu Da ordered all Confucian scholars to offer their condolences. Du Du wrote an elegantly worded eulogy in prison, praising Guangwu for his well-written eulogy and absolving him of his punishment. Du Du believed that Guanzhong Inner Mountain Outer River was the former emperor's old Beijing and should not be rebuilt as Luoyang, so he wrote a "On Du Fu" and submitted it to the emperor.

古文：笃后仕郡文学掾。以目疾，二十余年不窥京师。
现代文：杜笃后来出仕郡文学掾，因有眼病，二十多年没有去京师。
English: Due to an eye disease, Du Du did not go to Beijing for more than 20 years.

古文：笃之外高祖破羌将军辛武贤，以武略称。
现代文：杜笃的外高祖破羌将军辛武贤，以有军事谋略著名。
English: Du Du's maternal great-great-grandfather, General Xin Wu Xian, was famous for his military strategy.

古文：笃常叹曰： 杜氏文明善政，而笃不任为吏；辛氏秉义经武，而笃又怯于事。
现代文：杜笃常叹息道 ：杜氏文明善于政治，而杜笃不被任为吏，辛氏秉义有武，而笃又胆小怕事。
English: Du Du Du often sighed: Du Shi civilization is good at politics, but Du Du Du is not appointed as an official, Xin Shi upholds justice and has military power, but Du Du is timid and afraid of things.

古文：外内五世，至笃衰矣！ 
现代文：外内五代，到了我笃这一代衰微了啊！ 
English: Five generations inside and out, but by the time I got here, this generation had withered away!

古文：女弟适扶风马氏。
现代文：杜笃的妹妹嫁给扶风马氏。
English: Du Du's sister married Fu Feng Ma.

古文：建初三年，车骑将军马防击西羌，请笃为从事中郎，战没于射姑山。
现代文：建新三年，车骑将军马防攻击西羌，请杜笃做从事中郎，在射姑山战死。
English: Three years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, the general of the cavalry and cavalry defense attacked Xidi, and asked Du Du to be the middle man. He died in the battle of Shaigu Mountain.

古文：所著赋、诔、吊、书、赞、《七言》、《女诫》及杂文，凡十八篇。
现代文：杜笃著有赋、诔、吊、书、讠赞、《七言》、《女诫》及杂文，共十八篇。
English: Du Du was the author of Fu Rong, Zou, Hanging, Book, Praise, Seven Sayings, Female Commandments, and miscellaneous essays, a total of eighteen articles.

古文：又著《明世论》十五篇。
现代文：又著《明世论》十五篇。
English: He is also the author of fifteen articles in "Ming Shixian."

古文：子硕，豪侠，以货殖闻。
现代文：儿子杜顾，豪侠，以经商著名。
English: His son, Du Gu, a hero, is famous for his business.

古文：王隆字文山，冯翊云阳人也。
现代文：◆王隆传，王隆字文山，冯翊云阳人。
English: ◆ Wang Long Chuan, Wang Long Zi Wenshan, Feng Xuan Yunyang Ren.

古文：王莽时，以父任为郎，后避难河西，为窦融左护军。
现代文：王莽时，因父亲的关系被任为郎，后来逃难河西，任窦融的左护军。
English: Wang Mangshi, due to his father's relationship, was appointed as his brother-in-law. Later, he fled to Hexi and served as Dou Rong's left guard.

古文：建武中，为新汲令。
现代文：建武中，做新汲县令。
English: In the middle of the Jianwu period, he was appointed as the governor of Xinqu County.

古文：能文章，所著诗、赋、铭、书凡二十六篇。
现代文：能文章，所著诗、赋、铭、书共二十六篇。
English: He is the author of twenty-six poems, fusas, epitaphs, and books.

古文：初，王莽末，沛国史岑子孝亦以文章显，莽以为谒者，著颂、诔、《复神》、《说疾》凡四篇。
现代文：先时，王莽末年，沛国史岑子孝也以文章著名，王莽任为谒者，著颂、诔、《复神》、《说疾》共四篇。
English: Earlier, in Wang Mang's later years, Pei Guo Shi and Zhi Zi Xiao were also famous for their articles. Wang Mang was the author of four articles, including "Ode," "Eulogy," "Finding God" and "Talking about Illness."

古文：夏恭字敬公，梁国蒙人也。
现代文：夏恭传夏恭字敬公，梁国蒙人。
English: Xia Qiong passed down the word "Xia Qiong" in honor of the emperor, and Liang Guomeng was born.

古文：习《韩诗》、《孟氏易》，讲授门徒常千余人。
现代文：学《韩诗》、《孟氏易》，门徒常千多人。
English: There are often more than a thousand disciples studying "Korean Poetry" and "Meng Shiyi."

古文：王莽末，盗贼从横，攻没郡县。恭以恩信为众所附，拥兵固守，独安全。
现代文：王莽末年，盗贼蜂起，攻陷郡县，夏恭因为恩信素著，为大众所附，拥兵固守，独得安全。
English: At the end of Wang Mang's life, the thieves rose up and attacked the county. Xia Qiong, because of his trustworthiness, was attached to the public, supported the soldiers, and was safe.

古文：光武即位，嘉其忠果，召拜郎中，再迁太山都尉。
现代文：光武即位，表扬他忠义果敢，召授郎中，再升太山都尉。
English: When Guangwu ascended to the throne, he was praised for his loyalty and courage, promoted to junior lieutenant, and then promoted to lieutenant of Taishan.

古文：和集百姓，甚得其欢心。
现代文：安集百姓，很得百姓的欢心。
English: The people of Anji are very popular.

古文：恭善为文，著赋、颂、诗、《励学》凡二十篇。
现代文：夏恭擅长写文章，著赋、颂、诗、《励学》共二十篇。
English: Xia Qiong is good at writing articles, with a total of twenty works, odes, poems, and "Encouraging Learning."

古文：年四十九卒官，诸儒共谥曰宣明君。
现代文：年四十九，死在任上，诸儒生共同为他起个谥号曰 宣明君 。
English: In the 49th year of his reign, he died in office, and all the Confucian scholars jointly gave him a nickname, "Xuanmingjun."

古文：子牙，少习家业，著赋、颂、赞、诔凡四十篇。
现代文：儿子夏牙，年轻时学家业，著赋、颂、讠赞、诔共四十篇。
English: His son, Xia Ya, was a scholar when he was young. He wrote forty works, including poems, eulogies, eulogies, and eulogies.

古文：建初中，肃宗博召文学之士，以毅为兰台令史，拜郎中，与班固、贾逵共典校书。
现代文：建初中，肃宗广泛地罗致文学之士，任傅毅为兰台令史，授郎中，与班固、贾逵共同掌管校正群书。
English: In the junior high school, Su Zong extensively invited literary figures, and appointed Fu Yi as the director of the school. In the middle school, he was in charge of proofreading books together with Bangu and Jia Wei.

古文：毅追美李明皇帝功德最盛，而庙颂未立，乃依《清庙》作《显宗颂》十篇奏之，由是文雅显于朝廷。
现代文：傅毅认为孝明皇帝功德最高，但是庙颂没有，于是仿效《清庙》作《显宗颂》十篇上奏皇帝，由是他的文雅在朝廷显彰著名。
English: Fu Yi thought that Emperor Xiaoming had the highest merit, but there was no temple ode, so he imitated the "Qing Temple" to make the "Hengzong Ode" and played the emperor ten times, which is why his gentleness was famous in the imperial court.

古文：车骑将军马防，外戚尊重，请毅为军司马，待以师友之礼。
现代文：车骑将军马防，作为外戚，极为尊重，请傅毅任军司马，以师友的礼对待他。
English: As a relative, he had great respect for the chariot and cavalry general Ma Bao. He asked Fu Yi to serve as the commander of the army and treated him with the courtesy of a mentor.

古文：及马氏败，免官归。
现代文：马氏败，被免官回乡里。
English: Ma's defeat, he was dismissed and returned to his hometown.

古文：永元元年，车骑将军窦宪，复请毅为主记室，崔骃为主簿。
现代文：永元元年，车骑将军窦宪又请傅毅为主记室，崔骃为主簿。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, the cavalry general Dou Xian also asked Fu Yi to be the main record room, and Cui Yao to be the main book.

古文：及宪迁大将军，复以毅为司马，班固为中护军。宪府文章之盛，冠于当世。
现代文：窦宪升大将军，再以傅毅为司马，班固为中护军、窦宪大将军府掾，文章之盛，当时第一。
English: Dou Xian rose to the rank of general, with Fu Yi as his secretary, Ban Gu as the middle guard, and Dou Xian as the general's deputy. The article was very popular and ranked first at the time.

古文：毅早卒，著诗、赋、诔、颂、祝文、《七激》、连珠凡二十八篇。
现代文：傅毅死得早，著诗、赋、诔、颂、祝文、《七激》、连珠共二十八篇。
English: Fu Yi died early. He wrote 28 poems, fus, poems, eulogies, eulogies, "Seven Spirits" and "The String of Pearls."

古文：黄香字文强，江夏安陆人也。
现代文：◆黄香传，黄香字文强，江夏郡安陆县人。
English: ◆Huangxiang Chuan, Huangxiang Zi Wenqiang, from Anlu County, Jiangxia County.

古文：年九岁，失母，思慕憔悴，殆不免丧，乡人称其至孝。
现代文：九岁失母，思念至极，形容憔悴，几乎死掉。乡人称赞他是个孝子。
English: He lost his mother when he was nine years old, missed her terribly, described her as a hag, and almost died. The villagers praised him as a filial son.

古文：年十二，大守刘护闻而召之，署门下孝子，甚见爱敬。
现代文：十二岁时，太守刘护听说了，召他去，叫 门下孝子 ，十分喜欢他，敬重他。
English: When he was twelve years old, the daimyō Liu You heard about it and summoned him to be his disciple. He liked him very much and respected him.

古文：香家贫，内无仆妾，躬执苦勤，尽心奉养。
现代文：黄香家境清贫，家里没有仆妾，自己操劳，尽心奉养，并且广泛地诵习经典，研究道术，文章也写得好。
English: Huang Xiang's family was poor and had no servants or concubines. He worked hard and devoted himself to his family. He also extensively studied the classics and Taoism, and his articles were well written.

古文：遂博学经典，究精道术，能文章，京师号曰 天下无双江夏黄童 。
现代文：京师流行着这样一句话 ：天下无双江夏黄童。 
English: There is a popular saying in Beijing: There is no such thing as a double-figure summer child.

古文：初除郎中，元和元年，肃宗诏香诣东观，读所未尝见书。
现代文：最初任郎中，元和元年，肃宗诏命黄香到东观，黄香读了未曾见过的书。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty and the first year of Su Zong, Huang Xiang went to Dongguan as ordered by Su Zong. Huang Xiang read a book he had never seen before.

古文：香后告休，及归京师，时千乘王冠，帝会中山邸，乃诏香殿下，顾谓诸王曰： 此 天下无双江夏黄童 者也。 
现代文：黄香后来请假，回京师时，千乘王行加冠礼，皇帝在中山府第，召黄香至殿下，回顾诸王说 ：这就是 天下无双江夏黄童 啊。 
English: Huang Xiang later took a leave of absence, and when he returned to Beijing to teach, he was crowned by the emperor. The emperor summoned Huang Xiang to his royal highness in Zhongshan Prefecture, recalling the kings and saying, "This is the unparalleled Jiangxia Huang Tong."

古文：左右莫不改观。
现代文：左右的人没有不为之另眼相看。
English: People on both sides didn't look the other way.

古文：后召诣安福殿言政事，拜尚书郎，数陈得失，赏赉增加。
现代文：后来又召到安福殿谈政事，授尚书郎，多次陈述朝廷得失，赏赐增加。
English: Later, he was summoned to the Anfu Palace to discuss political affairs, conferred the title of Shuro, repeatedly stated the gains and losses of the imperial court, and increased the reward.

古文：常独止宿台上，昼夜不离省闼，帝闻善之。
现代文：曾经一个人宿于台上，白天黑夜不离宫门。皇帝听说了，表扬他。
English: Once upon a time, a man lived on a platform and never left the palace gate, day or night. When the emperor heard about this, he praised him.

古文：永元四年，拜左丞。功满当迁，和帝留，增秩。
现代文：永元四年，授左丞，功满应当升迁，和帝留他，增加了俸禄。
English: In the fourth year of the Yongyuan era, he was awarded the title of Zojo, and his merit deserved promotion, and the emperor kept him and increased his salary.

古文：六年，累迁尚书令。
现代文：六年，升到尚书令。
English: Six years later, he was promoted to Shang Shuling.

古文：后以为东郡太守，香上疏让曰： 臣江淮孤贱，愚矇小生，经学行能，无可算录。
现代文：后来任为东郡太守，黄香上疏辞让说 ：我是江淮地方一个孤苦微贱、愚蔽无知的小人，经学品行能力，没有可以称说的。
English: Later, when he was appointed as the governor of Dong County, Huang Xiang made an excuse and said: I am a lonely, lowly, stupid and ignorant villain in the Jianghuai region, and I have no academic ability to speak of.

古文：遭值太平，先人余福，得以弱冠特蒙征用，连阶累任，遂极台阁。
现代文：遭遇太平盛世，得了先人的余福，因此能够在弱冠之时特蒙皇上征用，连续升迁，以至尚书。
English: Encountered the Taiping and prosperous times, gained the remaining blessings of the ancestors, and thus was able to be specially requisitioned by the emperor at the time of the weak crown, continuously promoted, and even promoted.

古文：讫无纤介称，报恩效死，诚不意悟。卒被非望，显拜近郡，尊位千里。
现代文：至今没有纤微的功劳可以称述，应该报恩效死，不料又出于意外，命为京师近郡太守，位尊千里。
English: Up to now, there has been no subtle merit that can be described, it should be rewarded with death, but unexpectedly, due to an accident, he was appointed as the governor of the county near Beijing, and his position was respected for thousands of miles.

古文：臣闻量能授官，则职无废事；因劳施爵，则贤愚得宜。
现代文：我听说根据人的能力授官，工作就做得好，按功劳封爵，贤愚就各得其所。
English: I have heard it said that a man is appointed to a post according to his ability and his work is done well, that a man is knighted according to his merits, and that the wise and the foolish each have their place.

古文：臣香小丑，少为诸生，典郡从政，固非所堪。
现代文：我黄香是个无名小卒，出身诸生，守郡从政，本不胜任。
English: I, Huang Xiang, am a nobody. I come from a humble background. I have been a county magistrate and a politician. I am not qualified.

古文：诚恐矇顿，孤忝圣恩。
现代文：真恐因为糊涂，辜负皇上的恩德。
English: I'm really afraid that I'll fail to live up to the emperor's kindness because I'm confused.

古文：又惟机密端首，至为尊要，复非臣香所当久奉。
现代文：又想尚书令职务最为机密尊贵，也不是我黄香所应当长期担任的。
English: I also want to remind you that the secretarial position is the most confidential and honorable, and it is not something that I, Huang Xiang, should hold for a long time.

古文：承诏惊惶，不知所裁。
现代文：接了皇上的诏书，诚惶诚恐，不知怎么办才好。
English: After receiving the Emperor's edict, he was terrified and did not know what to do.

古文：臣香年在方刚，适可驱使。
现代文：我黄香年纪轻，正好驱使。
English: My Huang Xiang is young, just driven.

古文：愿乞余恩，留备冗官，赐以督责小职，任之宫台烦事，以毕臣香蝼蚁小志，诚瞑目至愿，土灰极荣。 
现代文：愿乞施恩，留作冗官，督责小职，在宫廷里作上些杂事，实现我黄香的蝼蚁一样的小志，这是我至死的大愿，死后极大的光荣。 
English: I wish to beg for mercy, to be kept on as a superfluous official, to supervise minor duties, to do some chores in the court, and to realize my ambition of being like a yellow-scented ant. This is my great wish until death, and a great honor after death.

古文：帝亦惜香干用，久习旧事，复留为尚书令，增秩二千石，赐钱三十万。
现代文：皇帝也很爱黄香能干，又长时间研习历史旧事，仍然留任尚书令，增加俸禄二千石，赐钱三十万，从这以后掌管机要，极为亲信他，重用他。
English: The emperor was also very fond of Huang Xiang and capable, and studied history and old affairs for a long time. He still remained in the post of Shang Shuling, increased the salary by 2,000 koku, and gave 300,000 yuan. Since then, he has been in charge of the machine, extremely trusted him, and reused him.

古文：是后遂管枢机，甚见亲重，而香亦祗勤物务，忧公如家。十二年，东平清河奏訞言卿仲辽等，所连及且千人。
现代文：黄香也勤勤恳恳工作，操心国事和操心家事一样。十二年，东平、清河报告朝廷卿仲辽等人谣言惑众，牵连近千人。
English: Huang Xiang also worked diligently and conscientiously, worrying about state affairs as much as he did about family affairs. In 12 years, Dongping and Qinghe reported that the court noble Zhong Liao and others had spread rumors, implicating nearly a thousand people.

古文：香料别据奏，全活甚众。
现代文：黄香分别据实上奏，救活了不少人。
English: Huang Xiang played the music in accordance with the facts, and saved many people.

古文：每郡国疑罪，辄务求轻科，爱惜人命，每存忧济。
现代文：郡国疑案，往往从轻处理，爱惜人命，只恐做不到。
English: Suspected cases in counties and provinces are often treated lightly, and human lives are cherished, but it may not be possible.

古文：又晓习边事，均量军政，皆得事宜。
现代文：又通晓熟习边防事务。调度军政，都很适当。
English: He is also well-versed in border defense affairs, and has a good grasp of military and political scheduling.

古文：帝知其精勤，数加恩赏。疾病存问，赐医药。
现代文：皇帝知道他勤劳为国，多次赏赐，有病慰问，赐医药。
English: The emperor knew that he worked hard for the country, rewarded him many times, comforted him when he was sick, and gave him medicine.

古文：在位多所荐达，宠遇甚盛，议者讥其过幸。
现代文：在位推荐颇多，皇帝对他十分宠信，舆论讥他亲幸得过了头。
English: He received a lot of recommendations during his reign, the emperor was very fond of him, and the public opinion ridiculed him for being too lucky.

古文：延平元年，迁魏郡太守。
现代文：延平元年，升魏郡太守。
English: In the first year of Yanping, he became the governor of Shengwei County.

古文：郡旧有内外园田，常与人分种，收谷岁数千斛。
现代文：郡里原有内外园田，常与人分种，一年收谷几千斛。
English: There used to be inner and outer gardens in the county, which were often planted separately from each other, bringing in several thousand yakitori a year.

古文：香曰： 《田令》 商者不农 ，《王制》 仕者不耕 ，伐冰食禄之人，不与百姓争利。 
现代文：黄香说： 《田令》 商人不务农 ，《王制》 做官的不耕田 ，做官拿工资的人，不与百姓争利。 
English: Huang Xiang said: "Tian Ling" merchants do not work in agriculture, "King System" officials do not cultivate fields, officials who receive wages do not compete with the people.

古文：乃悉以赋人，课令耕种。
现代文：一进郡就把内外园田出租给人耕种。
English: As soon as they enter the county, they rent out the inner and outer gardens to people for cultivation.

古文：时被水年肌，乃分奉禄及所得赏赐班赡贫者，于是丰富之家各出义谷，助官禀贷，荒民获全。
现代文：这年遭了水灾，百姓饥荒，他于是把工资及所得的赏赐，分给贫者，丰富户也各出义谷，补公家贷放的不足，饥民获得保全。
English: In that year, there was a flood and the people were starving, so he distributed the wages and income rewards to the poor, and the rich households also came out of the valley to make up for the shortage of public loans and loans, and the hungry people were protected.

古文：后坐水潦事免，数月，卒于家。
现代文：后来因水潦免官，几个月后，卒于家。
English: He was later relieved of his duties due to waterlogging, and died at home a few months later.

古文：所著贼、笺、奏、书、令、凡五篇。子琼，自有传。
现代文：所著赋、笺、奏、书、令共五篇。儿子黄琼另有传。
English: He wrote a total of five pieces of fu, so, so, so, shu, and ryo. His son Huang Qiong also wrote a piece.

古文：刘毅，北海敬王子也。
现代文：◆刘毅传，刘毅，北海敬王的儿子。
English: ◆Liu Yi Chuan, Liu Yi, the son of Beihai Jingwang.

古文：初封平望侯，永元中，坐事夺爵。
现代文：先封平望侯，永元中，获罪罢了他的封爵。
English: The first to be ennobled was Pingwang Hou, and Yongyuan Zhong was convicted and deprived of his knighthood.

古文：毅少有文辩称。
现代文：刘毅年轻时以有文学辩论之才著名。
English: When he was young, Liu Yi was famous for his talent in literary debate.

古文：元初元年，上《汉德论》并《宪论》十二篇。
现代文：元初元年，上《汉德论》及《宪论》十二篇。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, twelve articles of "Hand Theory" and "Constitutional Theory" were published.

古文：时，刘珍、邓耽、尹兑、马融共上书称其美，安帝嘉之，赐钱三万，拜议郎。
现代文：当时刘珍、邓耽、尹兑、马融共同上书称刘毅写得好，安帝嘉奖他，赐钱三万，授议郎。
English: At that time, Liu Zhen, Deng Tan, Yin Dui, and Ma Rong jointly wrote a letter saying that Liu Yi had written well, and An Di commended him, gave him thirty thousand yuan, and awarded him the title.

古文：李尤字伯仁，广汉雒人也。
现代文：◆李尤传，李尤字伯仁，广汉雒县人。
English: ◆ Li Yuchuan, Li Yuzi Bo Ren, from Guanghan County.

古文：少以文章显。
现代文：年轻时以文章著名。
English: He became famous for his articles when he was young.

古文：和帝时，侍中贾逵荐尤有相如、杨雄之风，召诣东观，受诏作赋，拜兰台令史。
现代文：和帝时，侍中贾逵荐李尤有司马相如、扬雄的风格，召到东观，受诏命作赋，授兰台令史。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu, the attendant Jia Jun recommended that Li You have the style of Sima Xiangru and Yang Xiong, and he was summoned to Dongguan. He was ordered by the emperor to make Fu and was awarded the history of Lantai.

古文：稍迁，安帝时为谏议大夫，受诏与谒者仆射刘珍等俱撰《汉记》。
现代文：稍稍升迁，至安帝时为谏议大夫，受诏与谒者仆射刘珍等共著《汉记》。
English: He was promoted a little bit, and when he came to the emperor, he was the doctor of the imperial edict, and he co-authored "Hanki" with Liu Zhen, the imperial edict's servant.

古文：后帝废太子为济阴王，尤上书谏争。
现代文：后来安帝废太子为济阴王，李尤上书劝谏。
English: Later, An Di, the former crown prince, became the king of Jiyin, and Li You sent a letter to persuade him.

古文：顺帝立，迁乐安相。
现代文：顺帝立，升乐安相。
English: Shun dili, shengleanshan.

古文：年八十三卒。所著诗、赋、铭、诔、颂、《七叹》、《哀典》，凡二十八篇。
现代文：年八十三岁逝世，所著诗、赋、铭、诔、颂、《七叹》、《哀典》共二十八篇。
English: He died at the age of eighty-three, having written a total of twenty-eight poems, fus, inscriptions, poems, odes, "Seven Lamentations," and "Lamentations."

古文：尤同郡李胜，亦有文才，为东观郎，著赋、诔、颂、论数十篇。
现代文：李尤同郡人李胜，也有文才，任东观郎，著赋、诔、颂、论数十篇。
English: Li You and Li Sheng, a native of the county, also have literary talent, including Ren Dongguanro, who has written dozens of works, poems, odes, and essays.

古文：苏顺字孝山，京兆霸陵人也。
现代文：◆苏顺传，苏顺字孝山，京兆霸陵人。
English: ◆Su Shun Chuan, Su Shun Zi Xiaoshan, the founder of the Beijing Zhao Dynasty.

古文：和安间以才学见称。
现代文：和帝安帝时，以才学著名。
English: He was famous for his ability to learn when he was emperor.

古文：好养生术，隐处求道。
现代文：喜养生之术，隐居求道。
English: He likes the art of health care, seclusion and seeking the way.

古文：晚乃仕，拜郎中，卒于官。
现代文：到了晚年才出仕，授郎中，死在任上。
English: He became a minister late in life and died in office.

古文：所著贼、论、诔、哀辞、杂文，凡十六篇。
现代文：所著赋、论、诔、哀辞、杂文共十六篇。
English: His works, essays, poems, laments, and miscellaneous essays total sixteen.

古文：时，三辅多士，扶风曹众伯师亦有才学，著诔、书、论四篇。
现代文：当时三辅人才很盛，扶风曹众、伯师也有才学，著诔、书、论四篇。
English: At that time, the three auxiliary talents were very prosperous, and Fu Feng Caozhong and Bo Shi also had the ability to learn, and wrote four essays, books and articles.

古文：又有曹朔，不知何许人，作《汉颂》四篇。
现代文：又有曹朔，不知是什么地方的人，作《汉颂》四篇。
English: There was also Cao Shuo, a man from I don't know where, who wrote four "Hansongs."

古文：刘珍字秋孙，一名宝，南阳蔡阳人也。
现代文：◆刘珍传，刘珍字秋孙，名宝，南阴郡蔡阳县人。
English: ◆ Liu Zhenchuan, Liu Zhenzhi Qiu Sun, famous treasure, from Caiyang County, Nanyin County.

古文：少好学。
现代文：年轻时好学。
English: Very studious when young.

古文：永初中，为谒者仆射。
现代文：永初中，为谒者仆射。
English: Yongjun Middle School, shooting for the deaf.

古文：邓太后诏，使与校书刘騊駼、马融及《五经》博士，校定东观《五观》、诸子传记、百家艺术，整齐脱误，是正文字。
现代文：邓太后诏使与校书刘马余、马融及《五经》博士，校定东观《五经》、诸子传记、百家艺术，整理脱落、错误，改正文字。
English: Empress Dowager Deng sent emissaries with the school books Liu Ma Yu, Ma Rong and the "Five Classics" doctor to proofread the "Five Classics" of the Eastern Outlook, the biographies of the sons and daughters, and the art of a hundred families, sort out the omissions and errors, and correct the text.

古文：永宁元年，太后又诏珍与騊駼作建武已来名臣传，迁侍中、越骑校尉。
现代文：永宁元年，太后又令刘珍与刘马余作建武以来名臣传记，升侍中、越骑校尉。
English: In the first year of the Yongning era, the empress dowager also ordered Liu Zhen and Liu Ma Yu to write biographies of eminent vassals since the Jianwu era, and they were promoted to middle-ranking attendants and Viet cavalry officers.

古文：延光四年，拜宗正。
现代文：延光四年，授宗正。
English: Four years later, he was awarded the title of Zongzheng.

古文：明年，转卫尉，卒官。
现代文：第二年，调卫尉，死在任上。
English: The following year, Lieutenant of the Watch, he died in office.

古文：著诔、颂、连珠凡七篇。
现代文：著诔、颂、连珠共七篇。
English: There are seven chapters in total, including poems, odes, and renditions.

古文：又撰《释名》三十篇，以辩万物之称号云。
现代文：又撰《释名》三十篇，以弄清万物的名称。
English: He also wrote 30 "Explanations of Names" to clarify the names of all things.

古文：葛龚字元甫，梁国宁陵人也。
现代文：◆葛龚传，葛龚字元甫，梁国宁陵人。
English: ◆Ge Ying Chuan, Ge Ying Zi Yuan Fu, Liang Guo Ning Ling Ren.

古文：和帝时，以善文记知名。
现代文：和帝时，以擅长文章、书记著名。
English: He was famous for being good at writing and secretarial work.

古文：性慷慨壮烈，勇力过人。
现代文：性情慷慨壮烈，勇力过人。
English: He is generous and strong-willed, and his courage is second to none.

古文：安帝永初中，举孝廉，为太官丞，上便宜四事，拜荡阴令。
现代文：安帝永初中，举孝廉，为太官丞，上对国家有利应做的事四条，授荡阴令。
English: At Andiyong Junior High School, the honor of filial piety is the highest honor, and the four things that should be done for the benefit of the country are the most important.

古文：辟太尉府，病不就。
现代文：征召太尉府，因病不去。
English: Called up to the captain's office, but couldn't go because of illness.

古文：州举茂才，为临汾令。
现代文：州举茂才，任临汾令。
English: Shigeru Shigeru was appointed to the post of Linyi governor.

古文：居二县，皆有称绩。
现代文：在所任的荡阴、临汾两县，都有政绩，为人称赞。
English: In the two counties of Lingyin and Linyi, he has made political achievements and has been praised.

古文：著文、贼、碑、诔、书记，凡十二篇。
现代文：著文、赋、碑、诔、书记共十二篇。
English: There are a total of twelve articles, essays, memorials, inscriptions, and records.

古文：王逸字叔师，南郡宜城人也。
现代文：◆王逸传，王逸字叔师，南郡宜城人。
English: ◆Wang Yizhong, uncle of Wang Yizhong, a resident of Yicheng, Nan County.

古文：元初中，举上计吏，为校书郎。
现代文：元初中，举上计吏，为校书郎。
English: A former junior high school teacher, he rose through the ranks to become a school librarian.

古文：顺帝时，为侍中。
现代文：顺帝时，为侍中。
English: When Shun was emperor, he was a chamberlain.

古文：著《楚辞章句》行于世。
现代文：著《楚辞章句》行于世。
English: He is famous for his book "Chu Zhi Zhang Qu."

古文：其赋、诔、书、论及杂文，凡二十一篇。
现代文：其赋、诔、书、论及杂文共二十一篇。
English: There are a total of twenty-one articles on his fu, shu, shu, treatises and miscellaneous writings.

古文：又作《汉诗》百二十三篇。
现代文：又作《汉诗》一百二十三篇。
English: He also wrote one hundred and twenty-three "Chinese poems."

古文：子延寿，字文考，有俊才。
现代文：儿子王延寿，字文考，有美才。
English: His son, Wang Yanshou, excelled in the examination of Chinese characters and had a talent for beauty.

古文：少游鲁国，作《灵光殿赋》。
现代文：年轻时游鲁国，作《灵光殿赋》。
English: When he was young, he traveled to the country of Lu and wrote "Ling Guang Dian Fu."

古文：后蔡邕亦造此赋，未成，及见延寿所为，甚奇之，遂辍翰而已。
现代文：后来蔡邕也作此赋，未作成，及见延寿作的，非常赞赏，于是自己就不作了。
English: Later, Cai Qi also made this fu, but it was not made, and when he saw that it was made by Yan Shou, he was very appreciative, so he did not make it.

古文：曾有异梦，意恶之，乃作《梦赋》以自厉。
现代文：曾经作了个奇怪的梦，很不快意，就作了一篇《梦赋》来勉励自己。
English: Once I had a strange dream, I was very unhappy, so I made a "Dream Gift" to encourage myself.

古文：后溺水死，时年二十余。
现代文：后来落水溺死，时年才二十几岁。
English: He later drowned after falling into the water, when he was in his twenties.

古文：崔琦字子玮，涿郡安平人，济北相瑗之宗也。
现代文：◆崔琦传，崔琦字子玮，涿郡安平人，济北相崔瑗的先人。
English: ◆Cui Yu Chuan, Cui Yu Zi Yu, the Anping people of Yu County, the ancestors of Jibei Siang Cui Yu.

古文：少游学京师，以文章博通称。
现代文：年轻时在京师游学，以文章博通著名。
English: When he was young, he studied in Beijing and became famous for his articles.

古文：初举考廉，为郎。
现代文：先举孝廉，为郎。
English: First, let's call him Takakage, then he'll be my son.

古文：梁冀见之，呼琦问曰： 百官外内，各有司存，天下云云，岂独吾人之尤，君何激刺之过乎！ 
现代文：河南尹梁冀听说崔琦有才华，要求与他交为朋友。梁冀多行不法，崔琦多次引用古今成败事劝戒他，梁冀不能接受，于是作《外戚箴》。崔琦因为自己的话不被梁冀采纳，很失意，又作《白鹄赋》劝他。梁冀看了，叫了崔琦问道： 百官内外，各人有各人所管的事，天下这么广阔，难道只有我们特别坏吗？你未免刺激得太过了一点吧！ 
English: Henan Yin Liang Ji heard that Cui Yao was talented, and asked Cui Yao to be his friend. Liang Ji had committed many illegal acts, and Cui Yao repeatedly cited past and present successes and failures to admonish him. Liang Ji could not accept this, so he wrote "Mother-in-law's Saying." Cui Yao was very disappointed because his words were not accepted by Liang Ji, so he wrote "White Gift" to persuade him. Liang Ji read it, called Cui Yao and asked: In and out of the hundred officials, each person has their own affairs, the world is so vast, are we the only ones who are particularly

古文：琦对曰： 昔管仲相齐，乐闻机谏之言；萧何佐汉，乃设书过之吏。
现代文：崔琦回答道 ：以前管仲做齐国的宰相，愿听劝谏的话；萧何辅佐汉高祖，设立了书记过失的官吏。
English: Cui Yao replied, "Previously, Guanzhong was the prime minister of Qi, and I am willing to listen to your advice; Xiao He assisted Han Gao Zu to set up a secretarial official.

古文：今将军累世台辅，任齐伊、公，而德政未闻，黎元涂炭。不能结纳贞良，以救祸败，反复欲钳塞士口，杜蔽主听，将使玄黄改色，马鹿易形乎？ 
现代文：现在将军是几代的宰相，任比伊尹、周公，但是德政不显著，老百姓困苦不堪，你不能结纳贞良之士，挽救祸败，反而想不让人说话，杜蔽主上的耳朵，莫是要使玄黄改色，马鹿变形吗？ 
English: Now the general is the prime minister of several generations, Ren BiYiYin, Zhou Gong, but the German government is not significant, the common people are in dire straits, you can't marry virtuous people and save the disaster, but you want to prevent people from talking and cover the ears of the Lord. Is it to change the hue of the yellow and the shape of the deer?

古文：冀无以对，因遣琦归。
现代文：梁冀没有话回答，就打发崔琦回去了。
English: Liang Jie didn't have a word to say in reply, so he sent Cui Jun back home.

古文：后除为临济长，不敢之职，解印绶去。
现代文：后来被任为临济长，不敢去任职，解印绶走了。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Linji Province, but he did not dare to take up the post.

古文：冀遂令刺客阴求杀之。
现代文：梁冀令刺客暗暗地把他杀掉。
English: Liang Jie ordered the assassins to kill him secretly.

古文：客见琦耕于陌上，怀书一卷，息辄偃而咏之。
现代文：刺客看见崔琦在陌上耕田，怀里装着一册书，休息时就卧在垄上吟咏。
English: The assassin saw Cui Yao ploughing a field in Mogao, carrying a book in his arms, and lying on a ridge while chanting at rest.

古文：客哀其志，以实告琦，曰： 将军令吾要子，今见君贤者，情怀忍忍。可亟自逃，吾亦于此亡矣。 
现代文：刺客可怜他，用实话告诉崔琦，说 ：梁将军要我把你杀了，你是一个贤人，我不忍下手，你应赶快逃走，我也从此跑了算了。 
English: The assassin took pity on him and told Cui Yong the truth, saying: General Liang asked me to kill you, you are a wise man, I can't bear to do it, you should run away quickly, I'll run away from now on.

古文：琦得脱走，冀后竟捕杀之。
现代文：崔琦得以脱走，梁冀后来终于还是把他逮捕杀了。
English: Cui Gan was able to escape, but Liang Ji eventually arrested and killed him.

古文：所著赋、颂、铭、诔、箴、吊、论、《九咨》、《七言》，凡十五篇。
现代文：所著赋、颂、铭、诔、箴、吊、论、《九咨》、《七言》，共十五篇。
English: His works include Fu, Ode, Miao, Zhao, Zhen, Hanging, On, Nine Commentaries, and Seven Sayings, a total of 15 articles.

古文：边韶字孝先，陈留浚仪人也。
现代文：◆边韶传，边韶字孝先，陈留郡浚仪县人。
English: ◆He was a descendant of Yuan Shao, a son of Yuan Shao, a son of Xiao Xian, and a native of Jianyi County, Chenlu County.

古文：以文章知名，教授数百人。
现代文：以写文章著名，教授学生几百人。
English: He is famous for writing articles and has taught hundreds of students.

古文：韶口辩，曾昼日假卧，弟子私嘲之曰： 边孝先，腹便便。懒读书，但欲眠。 
现代文：边韶有口才，曾经白天假卧，学生们暗暗地嘲笑道 ：边孝先，腹便便，懒读书，只想眠。 
English: Students secretly laughed at the fact that Benko had the gift of gab and used to lie in bed during the day, saying: "Benko-sensei, he has diarrhea, he is lazy when it comes to studying, he just wants to sleep."

古文：韶潜闻之，应时对曰： 边为姓、孝为字。
现代文：边韶悄悄地听了，应时回答道： 边为姓，孝为字。
English: Bentham listened quietly, and then replied: "Bentham is my surname, and filial piety is my character."

古文：腹便便，《五经》笥。
现代文：腹便便，《五经》笥。
English: "The Five Classics" is a masterpiece.

古文：但欲眠，思经事。
现代文：只想眠，思经事。
English: If I want to sleep, it's to think about what's in the Bible.

古文：寐与周公通梦，静与孔子同意。
现代文：寐与周公通梦，静与孔子同意。
English: Sleep with Zhou Gong in a dream to hook up with each other, lying down is to exchange with the old man how to understand the meaning of the sutra.

古文：师而可嘲，出何典记？ 
现代文：师而可嘲，出何典记。 
English: What a classic.

古文：嘲者大惭。
现代文：嘲笑他的学生，惭愧无地自容。
English: Laughing at his students, shamelessly self-righteous.

古文：韶之才捷皆此类也。
现代文：边韶的才华敏捷，大多如此。
English: Bentham's talent was quick, mostly.

古文：桓帝时，为临颍侯相，征拜太中大夫，著作东观。
现代文：桓帝时，任临颍侯相，征授大中大夫，在东观从事著作。
English: During the reign of Emperor Kan, he served as Linyi's courtier, was awarded the title of university junior high school doctor, and engaged in writing in Dongguan.

古文：再迁北地太守，入拜尚书令。
现代文：再升北地太守，入朝授尚书令。
English: He was promoted to the position of the governor of the Northern Provinces again, and was given the title of Shang Shuling when he entered the imperial court.

古文：后为陈相，卒官。
现代文：后来做陈相，死在任上。
English: He later became prime minister and died in office.

古文：著诗、颂、碑、铭、书、策，凡十五篇。
现代文：著诗、颂、碑、铭、书、策共十五篇。
English: He wrote a total of fifteen poems, odes, monuments, inscriptions, books and policies.

