古文：起旃蒙单阏，尽柔兆执徐，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。晋安帝义熙十一年
English: a total of two years. It was the eleventh year of Emperor Jian's reign.

古文：安皇帝壬义熙十一年
现代文：春季，正月，丙辰，北魏国主拓跋嗣回到平城。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the Northern Wei Emperor Tuoba returned to Pingcheng.

古文：春，正月，丙长，魏主嗣还平城。太尉裕收司马休之次子文宝、兄子文祖，并赐死；发兵击之。
现代文：东晋太尉刘裕逮捕了司马休之的次子司马文宝、侄子司马文祖，并命令他们自杀。刘裕发动军队，西上进攻司马休之。
English: Eastern Jin Dynasty Lieutenant Liu Yu arrested Sima Huizhi's second son, Sima Wenbao, and nephew, Sima Wenzhu, and ordered them to commit suicide. Liu Yu launched an army to attack Sima Huizhi in the west.

古文：诏加裕黄钺，领荆州刺史。
现代文：安帝下诏把皇帝专门用来诛杀的黄钺加授给刘裕，并命令他兼任荆州刺史。
English: Emperor An decreed that Huang Qi, who was specially used by the emperor to fight and kill, be given to Liu Yu, and ordered him to also serve as the chief of Jingzhou.

古文：庚午，大赦。
现代文：庚午，实行大赦。
English: At noon, the Eastern Jin Dynasty implemented an amnesty.

古文：丁丑，以吏部尚书谢裕为尚书左仆射。
现代文：丁丑，东晋朝廷任命吏部尚书谢裕为尚书左仆射。
English: Ding Yuxi, the Eastern Jin Dynasty court appointed Shang Shuxu Xie Yu as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：辛巳，太尉裕发建康。
现代文：辛巳，东晋太尉刘裕统辖的军队，从京城建康出发。
English: Soon after, the army under the command of Eastern Jin Lieutenant Liu Yu set out from Jiankang, Beijing.

古文：以中军将军刘道怜监留府事，刘穆之兼右仆射。
现代文：刘裕任命中军将军刘道怜监留府事，任命刘穆之兼右仆射。
English: Liu Yu appointed the Chinese general Liu Daorian to stay in charge of the government, and appointed Liu Muzhi as his right-hand man.

古文：事无大小，皆决于穆之。
现代文：朝廷的事情，无论大小，都由刘穆之决定。
English: The affairs of the imperial court, no matter how big or small, were all decided by Liu Mu.

古文：又以高阳内史刘钟领石头戍事，屯冶亭。
现代文：他又任命高阳内史刘钟领石头戍事，屯扎在冶亭。
English: He also appointed Gaoyang Inner Historian Liu Zhonglian of the Stone Anecdote to live in Yatei.

古文：休之府司马张裕、南平太守檀范之闻之，皆逃归建康。
现代文：司马休之府内的司马张裕、南平太守檀范之听说这事之后，都逃回到建康。
English: After hearing about this, Zhang Yu Sima and Dan Fan, the governor of Nanping, both of whom were in Sima Xiu's palace, fled back to Jiankang.

古文：裕，邵之兄也。
现代文：张裕，是张邵的哥哥。
English: Zhang Yu is Zhang Shao's older brother.

古文：雍州刺史鲁宗之自疑不为太尉裕所容，与其子竟陵太守轨起兵应休之。
现代文：雍州刺史鲁宗之怀疑自己终究不会被刘裕宽容，便与他的儿子竟陵太守鲁轨起兵响应司马休之。
English: Suspecting that he would not be tolerated by Liu Yu after all, Yongzhou's ruler Shiluzong and his son Jingting set out in response to Sima Xiu.

古文：二月，休之上表罪状裕，勒兵拒之。
现代文：二月，司马休之呈上奏书给安帝，列举刘裕的罪状，同时也率领军队，准备抵抗刘裕。
English: In February, Sima Huizhi sent a report to Emperor An, listing Liu Yu's crimes, and at the same time led the army to prepare to resist Liu Yu.

古文：裕密书招休之府录事参军南阳韩延之，延之复书曰： 承亲帅戎马，远履西畿，阖境士庶，莫不惶骇。
现代文：刘裕写密信给司马休之府的录事参军、南阳人韩延之，招请他背叛司马休之，为自己效力。韩延之回信说： 承蒙你亲自统领军马，踏上遥远的西方疆域，荆州全境的士民庶人，没有不惊慌震骇的。
English: Liu Yu wrote a secret letter to Han Yan Zhi, a Nanyang man, inviting him to betray Sima Xiu and serve himself. Han Yan Zi replied: "Thanks to you personally leading the army and setting foot on the far western territory, the common people throughout Jingzhou are shocked and shocked.

古文：辱疏，知以谯王前事，良增叹息。
现代文：你屈尊给我写信，我才知道这次起兵完全是因为谯王司马文思过去的那件事，更使我增加许多感叹。
English: Receiving your letter, and knowing that it was because of the events before Shao Wang, made me even more sad.

古文：司马平西体国忠贞，款怀待物。以公有匡复之勋，家国蒙赖，推德委诚，每事询仰。
现代文：司马休之忠心爱国，待人处事又宽怀诚恳，因为你立过匡复朝廷的巨大功勋，朝廷与宗室还需依赖你辅佐，因此推重你的德行，对你一片赤诚，几乎做每件事都听你的指教，看你的脸色。
English: Sima Xiu is loyal and patriotic, and treats everyone with generosity and sincerity, because you have made a great contribution to the restoration of the imperial court, and the imperial court and the imperial family still need to rely on you for support. Therefore, he emphasizes your virtues, is sincere to you, and listens to your advice and looks at your face in almost everything he does.

古文：谯王往以微事见劾，犹自表逊位；况以大过，而录嘿然邪！
现代文：谯王司马文思过去因为一件小事受到弹劾责难，司马休之还曾自己上表请求辞职，何况谯王如果再犯大错，司马休之哪能闭口无言！
English: King Sima Wensi was impeached and reprimanded for a small matter in the past, and King Sima Huizhi himself had asked for his resignation. What's more, if King Sima makes another big mistake, how can King Sima Huizhi keep his mouth shut!

古文：前已表奏废之，所不尽者命耳。
现代文：前一段时间司马休之已经上表奏请撤销了谯王的王位，唯一没有做绝的不过是留下了司马文思的一条命罢了。
English: Some time ago, Sima Huizhi had already made a request to revoke the throne of King Zou. The only thing he did not do was to leave Sima Wensi a life.

古文：推寄相与，正当如此。
现代文：推己及人，把这事交给别人，谁都会这么做的。
English: Anyone would do the same if they had to put themselves out there and give it to someone else.

古文：而遽兴兵甲，所谓 欲加之罪，其无辞乎！ 
现代文：但是你却因此突然兴师问罪，这真是 欲加之罪，何患无辞 ！
English: But you suddenly blame the teacher for this, which is really an added sin, what a pity!

古文：刘裕足下，海内之人，谁不见足下此心，而复欲欺逛国士！
现代文：刘裕，四海之内的人，谁看不出你的这番用心？但是你却还要说谎欺骗国内的通达之士！
English: Liu Yu, who among the four seas can't see your intention? But you still want to lie and deceive the domestic sages!

古文：来示云 处怀期物，自有由来 ，今伐人之君，啖人以利，真可谓 处怀期物，自有由来 者乎！
现代文：你的来信说： 怀有谦敬之心，对别人的要求历来如此。 今天，你出兵征伐别人的君主，写信用私利引诱别人，这难道真是所谓的 怀有谦敬之心，对别人的要求历来如此 吗？
English: Your letter says: "Having a sense of humility, you have always demanded the same from others. " Today, you have sent troops to invade other people's monarchs, and written letters to lure others for personal gain. Is this really the so-called "having a sense of humility, you have always demanded the same from others"?

古文：刘籓死于阊阖之门，诸葛毙于左右之手；甘言诧方伯，袭之以轻兵；遂使席上靡款怀之士，阃外无自信诸侯，以是为得算，良可耻也！
现代文：刘藩死在皇宫的阊阖门，诸葛长民死在你的侍卫之手；用甜言蜜语夸耀地方要员，先稳住他们，然后再用轻装部队对他们发动突然袭击；于是，使朝廷的座席之上没有诚信忠贞的人，使京城之外没有了对自己的性命放心的封疆大吏，把这看成是实现了自己的目的，实在是可耻！
English: The Liu clan died at the gate of the imperial palace, the Zhuge Changmin died at the hands of your bodyguards; you praised local dignitaries with sweet words, first stabilized them, and then launched a surprise attack on them with light-armed troops; therefore, it is shameful that there is no honest and loyal person on the seat of the imperial court, and that there is no feudal official outside the capital who is confident of his life, seeing this as the realization of his own purpose!

古文：贵府将佐及朝廷贤德，寄命过日。吾诚鄙劣，尝闻道于君子，以平西之至德，宁可无授命之臣乎！
现代文：你手下的那些将领佐僚以及朝廷里的贤明有德之人，都在把性命交给你过日子，我诚然是鄙陋粗劣，但是也曾经向君子学过做人的道理。像司马休之这样的德性好的人，怎么可以没有以性命相托的臣下呢？
English: The generals and advisers under your command, as well as the wise and virtuous people in the imperial court, are all entrusting their lives to you to live. I am admittedly mean and vulgar, but I have also learned the principles of being a gentleman from a gentleman. How can a virtuous person like Simasyu not have a vassal who entrusts his life to him?

古文：必未能自投虎口，比迹郗僧施之徒明矣。
现代文：我一定不能去自投虎口，这种迹象，郗僧施这些人的遭遇已经表现得很明确了的。
English: I must not throw myself into the jaws of the tiger, the signs of which have been clearly shown by the sufferings of these people.

古文：假令天长丧乱，九流浑浊，当与臧洪游于地下，不复多言。 
现代文：假如上天注定丧乱的局面还要延长，各派的纷争还要继续污浊不堪，那么我自然要与臧洪那样的人一起到九泉之下去游荡了，不再多言。 
English: If Heaven wants to cause long-term turmoil and rampant tyranny in the world, I should go to Hades with Gong Hong. There is no need to say more.

古文：裕视书叹息，以示将佐曰： 事人当如此矣！ 
现代文：刘裕看到他的信，不禁叹息。他把信拿给手下的将领和官员们看，说： 做别人的属下，应当这样呵！ 
English: When Liu Yu saw his letter, he couldn't help but sigh. He showed it to the generals and officials under his command and said, "This is how it should be to be someone else's subordinate!"

古文：延之以裕父名翘，字显宗。乃更其字曰显宗，名其子曰翘，以示不臣刘氏。
现代文：朝延之因为刘裕的父亲名叫刘翘，字显宗，于是，把自己的字改成显宗，并给他的儿子取名叫韩翘，用这表示绝不做刘氏的臣下。
English: Asanobu, because Liu Yu's father's name was Liu Gao and his family name was Xian Zong, changed his family name to Xian Zong and named his son Han Gao, which meant that he would never be a vassal of the Liu clan.

古文：琅邪太守刘朗帅二千馀家降魏。
现代文：东晋琅邪太守刘朗率领二千多家百姓投降了北魏。
English: Liu Lang, the evil governor of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, led more than two thousand people to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：庚子，河西胡刘云等帅数万户降魏。
现代文：庚子，河西一带的胡族首领刘云等人统率几万户投降北魏。
English: Geng Zi, Liu Yun, the leader of the Hu people in the Hexi area, and others led tens of thousands of households to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：太尉裕吏参军檀道济、硃超石将步骑出襄阳。
现代文：东晋太尉刘裕派遣参军檀道济、朱超石带领步兵骑兵进攻襄阳。
English: Eastern Jin Dynasty Lieutenant Liu Yu sent to join the army, Zhu Chaoishi led the infantry and cavalry to attack Yangyang.

古文：超石，龄石之弟也。
现代文：朱超石是朱龄石的弟弟。
English: Zhu Chaoishi is Zhu Lingshi's younger brother.

古文：江夏太守刘虔之将兵屯三连，立桥聚粮以待，道济等积日不至。
现代文：江夏太守刘虔之带领部队屯驻在三连，修筑桥梁，积聚粮草，等待他们的到来，但是檀道济的军队却过了许多天也没有到来。
English: Liu Qianzhi, the governor of Jiangxia, stationed his troops in Sanlian, built bridges, accumulated grain and grass, and waited for their arrival. However, after many days, the army of Tang Daozi did not arrive.

古文：鲁轨袭击虔之，杀之。
现代文：鲁轨袭击刘虔之，并把他杀了。
English: Lu Lu attacked Liu Qianzhi and killed him.

古文：裕使其婿振威将军东海徐逵之统参军蒯恩、王允之、沈渊子为前锋，出江夏口。
现代文：刘裕派他的女婿、振威将军、东海人徐逵之统领参军蒯恩、王允之、沈渊子等为前锋，出击江夏口。
English: Liu Yu sent his son-in-law, General Zhen Wei, and the leader of the East China Sea people, Xu Xizhu, to join the army, and Xiong En, Wang Yunzhi, Shen Yuanzi, etc. were the forwards, and attacked Jiangxiakou.

古文：逵之等与鲁轨战于破冢，兵败，逵之、允之、渊子皆死，独蒯恩勒兵不动。
现代文：徐逵之等人在破冢与鲁轨交战，大军失败，徐逵之、王允之、沈渊子等都被杀，只有蒯恩的部队压住了阵脚，没有败退下去。
English: Xu Xizhi and others fought with Lu Luo in the breach, and the large army failed. Xu Xizhi, Wang Yunzhi, Shen Yuanzi and others were all killed. Only Xiong's troops held the line of battle and did not retreat.

古文：轨乘胜力攻之，不能克，乃退。
现代文：鲁轨乘胜对他发动了猛攻，却不能攻克他的防守，于是退了下去。
English: Lu Railing launched a fierce attack on him, but could not overcome his defense, so he retreated.

古文：渊子，林子之兄也。
现代文：沈渊子是沈林子的哥哥。
English: Shen Yuan Zi is the elder brother of Shen Lin Zi.

古文：裕军于马头，闻逵之死，怒甚。
现代文：刘裕在马头集结军队，听说徐逵之战死，愤怒异常。
English: Liu Yu was amassing troops in Mato and was furious when he heard of Xu Xi's death in battle.

古文：三月，壬午，帅诸将济江。
现代文：三月，壬午，率领各位将领渡过长江。
English: In March, at noon, he led the generals across the Yangtze River.

古文：鲁轨、司马文思将休之兵四万，临峭岸置陈，军士无能登者。
现代文：鲁轨、司马文思统领着司马休之的军队四万人，依傍着陡峭的江岸排下战阵，刘裕的军队士卒，没有人能攀登上去。
English: Lu Lu and Sima Wensi led 40,000 soldiers of Sima Xiuqi's army, lined up along the steep riverbank, and Liu Yu's army soldiers, no one could climb up.

古文：裕自被甲欲登，诸将谏，不从，怒愈甚。
现代文：刘裕披挂起铠甲，打算亲自攀登，各位将领纷纷劝阻，他却坚决不听，越发怒不可遏。
English: Liu Yu put on his armor and planned to climb it himself. The generals tried to dissuade him, but he refused to listen and became increasingly angry.

古文：太尉主簿谢晦前抱持裕，裕抽剑指晦曰： 我斩卿！ 
现代文：太尉主簿谢晦上前抱住刘裕，刘裕拔着佩剑指着谢晦说： 我杀了你！ 
English: The captain's chief clerk Xie Yao stepped forward and hugged Liu Yu. Liu Yu drew his sword and pointed at Xie Yao and said, "I'll kill you!"

古文：晦曰： 天下可无晦，不可无公！ 
现代文：谢晦说： 天下可以没有我谢晦，但是却不可以没有您！ 
English: Xie Yao said: The world can do without me, Xie Yao, but it cannot do without you!

古文：建武将军胡籓领游兵在江津，裕呼籓使登，籓有疑色。
现代文：建武将军胡藩率领游击部队，此时正在江津，刘裕派人去叫胡藩，让他登岸，胡藩有些疑虑。
English: General Jianwu of the Hu clan led the guerrilla forces, and at this time he was in Jiangjin. Liu Yu sent someone to call the Hu clan to let him go ashore, and the Hu clan had some doubts.

古文：裕命左右录来，欲斩之。
现代文：刘裕命令身边的侍从去把他抓来，打算杀了他。
English: Liu Yu ordered the attendants around him to catch him, intending to kill him.

古文：籓顾曰： 正欲击贼，不得奉教！ 
现代文：胡藩看着来人说： 我正打算去进攻贼兵，没时间前去受教！ 
English: Hu Han looked at the newcomer and said, "I'm just about to attack the bandits, I don't have time to be taught!"

古文：乃以刀头穿岸，劣容足指，腾之而上，随之者稍多。
现代文：于是，用刀尖在江岸上掘出小洞，仅能容下脚趾，他便踩着飞身跃上江岸，后边跟着他向上爬的人渐渐多了。
English: As a result, he used the tip of his knife to dig a small hole on the riverbank, which could only accommodate his toes. He then stepped on it and leapt onto the riverbank. The number of people climbing up behind him gradually increased.

古文：既登岸，直前力战。
现代文：登上江岸之后，便直奔上前，拚力死战。
English: After landing on the riverbank, they ran straight ahead and fought to the death.

古文：休之兵不能当，稍引却。
现代文：司马休之的军队无法抵挡，渐渐向后撤退。
English: Sima Xizhi's army could not resist and gradually retreated.

古文：裕兵因而乘之，休之兵大溃，遂克江陵。
现代文：刘裕军队因此趁机猛攻，司马休之的部队完全溃败，刘裕于是攻克江陵。
English: As a result, Liu Yu's army took the opportunity to attack fiercely. Sima Huizhi's troops were completely routed, and Liu Yu was able to conquer Jiangling.

古文：休之、宗之俱北走，轨留石城。
现代文：司马休之、鲁宗之一齐向北逃走，鲁轨留守在石城。
English: Sima Xiuqi and Lu Zong fled north together, while Lu Lu stayed behind in Shicheng.

古文：裕命阆中侯下邳赵伦之、太尉参军沈林子攻之；遣武陵内史王镇恶以舟师追休之等。
现代文：刘裕命令阆中侯下邳人赵伦之、太尉参军沈林子进攻鲁轨；派遣武陵内史王镇恶带领水军船队追击司马休之等人。
English: Liu Yu ordered Zhao Lenzhi, the middle lord and lower eunuch, and Shen Linzi, the second lieutenant who joined the army, to attack Lu Lu; sent Wuling Neishi Wang Zhenxiong to lead the naval fleet to pursue Sima Xiu and others.

古文：有群盗数百夜袭冶亭，京师震骇；刘钟讨平之。
现代文：有一群盗匪共几百人在夜色掩护下袭击治亭，京师震惊恐慌。刘钟带兵讨伐，把他们剿灭。
English: A group of bandits, totaling several hundred people, attacked Jiting under the cover of night. The capital was shocked and panicked. Liu Zhong led the troops in a crusade to annihilate them.

古文：秦广平公弼谮姚宣于秦王兴，宣司马权丕至长安，兴责以不能辅导，将诛之；丕惧，诬宣罪恶以求自免。
现代文：后秦国广平公姚弼向后秦王姚兴进谗言诬陷姚宣，正好姚宣的司马权丕到长安办事，姚兴责备他不能很好地辅助引导姚宣，准备杀了他。权丕大为恐惧，也诬陷姚宣罪恶深重，以此求得对自己的宽恕。
English: Later, Yao Xingjin, the king of the Qin Dynasty, told Yao Xingjin, the king of the Qin Dynasty, to frame Yao Xuan. It happened that Yao Xing's steed, Quanzhang, went to Chang'an to work. Yao Xing accused him of not being able to help guide Yao Xuan well and prepared to kill him. Quanzhang was very afraid and also framed Yao Xun for serious crimes, in order to seek forgiveness for himself.

古文：兴怒，遣使就杏城收宣下狱，命弼将三万人镇秦州。
现代文：姚兴大怒，派遣使节到杏城把姚宣抓起来打入牢狱，命令姚弼带领三万人去镇守秦州。
English: Yao Xing was furious and sent envoys to Ancheng to arrest Yao Xuan and put him in prison. He ordered Yao Xi to lead 30,000 men to defend Qinzhou.

古文：尹昭曰： 广平公与皇太子不平，今握强兵于外，陛下一旦不讳，社稷必危。 小不忍，乱大谋 ，陛下之谓也。 
现代文：尹昭说： 广平公与皇太子关系不和，现在让他手握重兵，在外镇守，将来如果陛下一旦去世，那么国家一定就会面临危险。 小不忍则乱大谋 ，正是对陛下的最好形容。 
English: Yin Zhao said: Guangping Gong and the crown prince are not on good terms, now let him hold the heavy soldiers and guard the outlying towns, in the future, if His Majesty dies, then the country will certainly face danger.

古文：兴不从。
现代文：姚兴不听。
English: Yao Xing did not listen.

古文：夏王勃勃攻秦杏城，拔之，执守将姚逵，坑士卒二万人。
现代文：夏王赫连勃勃进攻后秦杏城，攻克，抓获了那里的守将姚逵，把敌军的二万士卒全部活埋。
English: Xia Wang Herlian vigorously attacked and conquered Qin Ancheng after the attack, captured the guard there, Yao Wei, and buried all the enemy's twenty thousand soldiers alive.

古文：秦王兴如北地，遣广平公弼及辅国将军敛曼嵬向新平，兴还长安。
现代文：后秦王姚兴前往北地，派遣广平公姚弼以及辅国将军敛曼嵬率军向新平进发，姚兴回长安。
English: Afterward, Qin King Yao Xing went to the north and sent Guangping Gong Yao Xing and the auxiliary country's general Yan Mengyuan to march to Xinping, and Yao Xing returned to Chang'an.

古文：河西王蒙逊攻西秦广武郡，拔之。
现代文：河西王沮渠蒙逊进攻西秦的广武郡，攻克。
English: The King of Western Heze attacked Guangwu County in Western Qin and conquered it.

古文：西秦王炽磐遣将军乞伏魋尼寅邀蒙逊于浩宜，蒙逊击斩之；又遣将军折斐等帅骑一万据勒姐岭，蒙孙击禽之。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐派遣将军乞伏尼寅在浩拦截沮渠蒙逊，沮渠蒙逊进攻他并把他杀了。乞伏炽磐又派遣将军折斐等率领一万骑兵据守勒姐岭，沮渠蒙逊进击并把他擒获。
English: Western Qin King Qibao sent General Qibao Ni Yin to intercept Qibao Mengxiong in Hao, Qibao Mengxiong attacked him and killed him. Qibao also sent General Renfei and 10,000 cavalrymen to defend Leshi Ridge, Qibao Mengxiong attacked and captured him.

古文：河西饥胡相聚于上党，推胡人白恶栗斯为单于，改元建平，以司马顺宰为谋主，寇魏河内。
现代文：河西一带受饥饿困扰的胡族人在上党聚集在一起，推举胡人白亚栗斯为单于，改年号为建平。他们任用司马顺宰为主要谋士，进犯北魏的河内。
English: Hungry Hu people in the west of the river gathered in Shangdang and elected the Hu man Bai Yagurs as the ruler, and changed the name of the year to Jianping. They appointed Sima Shunzai as the main strategist to invade Hanoi in the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：夏，四月，魏主嗣命公孙表等五将讨之。
现代文：夏季，四月，北魏国主拓跋嗣命令公孙表等五位大将前去讨伐他们。
English: In the summer, in April, the ruler of Northern Wei, Tuoba Zi, ordered Gongsun Bo and five other generals to go and fight them.

古文：青、冀二州刺史刘敬宣参军司马道赐，宗室之疏属也。
现代文：东晋青、冀二州刺史刘敬宣的参军司马道赐是晋朝宗室的远亲。
English: Liu Jingxuan, a member of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, was a distant relative of Emperor Jin's family.

古文：闻太尉裕攻司马休之，道赐与同府辟闾道秀、左右小将王猛子谋杀敬宣，据广固以应休之。
现代文：听说太尉刘裕进攻司马休之，司马道赐便与同僚辟闾道秀、身边的小将王猛子阴谋刺杀刘敬宣，然后占据广固，响应司马休之。
English: Hearing that Lieutenant Liu Yu had attacked Sima Xiu, Sima Daozhi and his colleagues, including the young general Wang Mengzi, plotted to assassinate Liu Jingxuan, and then occupied Guanggu in response to Sima Xiu.

古文：乙卯，敬宣召道秀，屏人语，左右悉出户。
现代文：乙卯，刘敬宣召见辟闾道秀，把别人全部屏退，秘密交谈，他身边的侍卫也全部被隔在窗外。
English: Second, Liu Jing called out to see Pizhao Daoxiu, screened everyone else away, and had a secret conversation. The guards around him were also all separated outside the window.

古文：猛子逡巡在后，取敬宣备身刀杀敬宣。
现代文：王猛子慢慢绕到刘敬宣身后，突然抢过刘敬宣防身用的佩刀，把刘敬宣杀了。
English: Wang Mengzi slowly walked around to Liu Jing Xuan's back, and suddenly grabbed the sword that Liu Jing Xuan used to defend himself, and killed Liu Jing Xuan.

古文：文武佐吏即时讨道赐等，皆斩之。
现代文：刘敬宣手下的文武将佐、官吏马上声讨司马道赐等人，并把他们全部斩杀。
English: Liu Jingxuan's generals and officials immediately condemned Sima Daozhi and others, and killed them all.

古文：己卯，魏主嗣北巡。
现代文：己卯，北魏国主拓跋嗣向北巡视。
English: At the same time, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, went on a tour to the north.

古文：西秦王炽磐子元基自长安逃归，炽磐以为尚书左仆射。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐的儿子乞伏元基从长安逃了回来。乞伏炽磐任命他为尚书左仆射。
English: Western Qin King Qibuzhuangyan's son, Qibuzhuangyuanji, fled back from Chang'an. Qibuzhuangyuan appointed him as Shangshu's second-in-command.

古文：五月，丁亥，魏主嗣如大宁。
现代文：五月，丁亥，北魏国主拓跋嗣前往大宁。
English: In May, Emperor Dinghai, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, traveled to Danning.

古文：赵伦之、沈林子破鲁轨于石城，司马休之、鲁宗之救之不及，遂与轨奔襄阳，宗之参军李应之闭门不纳。
现代文：东晋赵伦之、沈林子在石城打败鲁轨，司马休之、鲁宗之准备营救，却没有来得及，于是，与鲁轨一起逃奔襄阳，鲁宗之的参军李应之紧闭城门，不让他们进去。
English: East Jin Zhao Lunzhi and Shen Linzi defeated Lu Lu in Shicheng, Sima Xiu and Lu Zong prepared to rescue, but did not have time, so they fled to Xiangyang together with Lu Lu, and Lu Zong's army Li Ying closed the gate tightly and did not let them enter.

古文：甲午，休之、宗之、轨及谯王文思、新蔡王道赐、梁州刺史马敬、南阳太守鲁范俱奔秦。
现代文：甲午，司马休之、鲁宗之、鲁轨，以及谯王司马文思、新蔡王司马道赐、梁州刺史马敬、南阳太守鲁范等人全部逃奔后秦。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, Sima Xiu Zhi, Lu Zong Zhi, Lu Lu, as well as Shao Wang Sima Wensi, New Cai Wang Sima Dao Zhi, Liangzhou Zhi Sima Jing, Nanyang Taishu Lu Fan and others all fled to Houqin.

古文：宗之素得士民心，争为之卫送出境。
现代文：鲁宗之平时很受百姓拥护，人们纷纷掩护、保卫他，把他送出国境。
English: In peacetime, Luzong was very popular with the people, and people rushed to cover and protect him, and sent him out of the country.

古文：王镇晋等追之，尽境而还。
现代文：王镇恶等人前来追捕他们，到了国境没有追上，使回去了。
English: Wang Zhenxiong and others came to hunt them down, but did not catch up with them when they reached the border, and sent them back.

古文：初，休之等求救于秦、魏，秦征虏将军姚成王及司马国璠引兵至南阳，魏长孙嵩至河东，闻休之等败，皆引还。
现代文：当初，司马休之等向后秦、北魏国请求救助，后秦征虏将军姚成王及司马国带兵抵达南阳，北魏长孙嵩抵达河东，听说司马休之等已经失败，便都带兵回去了。
English: At first, Sima Xiu and others requested help from Later Qin and Northern Wei. Later Qin's conscript general, Yao Chengwang, and Sima's troops arrived in Nanyang, and Northern Wei's leader, Sun Song, arrived in Hedong. Hearing that Sima Xiu and others had failed, they all returned with their troops.

古文：休之至长安，秦王兴以为扬州刺史，使侵扰襄阳。
现代文：司马休之到了长安，后秦王姚兴任命他为扬州刺史，让他去侵袭骚扰襄阳。
English: After Sima Xiu arrived in Chang'an, the Qin king Yao Xing appointed him as Yangzhou's magistrate, and asked him to invade and harass Xiangyang.

古文：待御史唐盛言于兴曰： 据符谶之文，司马氏当复得河、洛。
现代文：侍御史唐盛对姚兴说： 根据预言帝王受命吉凶的符命谶讳说，司马氏应当重新夺取河、洛一带。
English: The attendant Shi Tang Sheng said to Yao Xing: According to the prophecy that the emperor was ordered to tell the fortunes, the Sima clan should recapture the areas around He and Luo.

古文：今使休之擅兵于外，犹纵鱼于渊也；不如以高爵厚礼，留之京师。 
现代文：现在让他带兵在外，就像把鱼又放回湖海一样。我看不如封他高官，给他优厚的待遇，把他留在京师。 
English: Letting him lead troops out now is like releasing fish back into the lake. I don't see how he can be made a high-ranking official, given generous treatment, and kept in the Beijing division.

古文：兴曰： 昔文王卒羑里，高祖不毙鸿门；苟天命所在，谁能违之！
现代文：姚兴说： 过去，周文王最终在里得到赦免，汉高祖在鸿门没有被杀，这都是天命在左右，谁能违抗得了！
English: Yao Xing said: In the past, Zhou Wen Wang was finally pardoned in Li, and Han Gao Zu was not killed in Hongmen. This is all about the fate of heaven. Who can resist!

古文：脱如符谶之言，留之适足为害。 
现代文：如果真像符谶所说的那样，把他留下来却正好是促使灾害加重。 
English: If it's true that he was left behind, as he said, it will only make the disaster worse.

古文：遂遣之。
现代文：于是，派遣司马休之去了。
English: So he repatriated his captives.

古文：诏加太尉裕太傅、扬州牧，剑履上殿，入朝不趋，赞拜不名。
现代文：东晋下诏加封太尉刘裕为太傅、扬州牧，特许他可以带剑穿鞋上殿，进宫朝见皇帝不必小步走，奏事时不必司仪称名通报。
English: Under the Eastern Jin Dynasty, it was decreed that Liu Yu, the second lieutenant of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, would be appointed as the Tai Fu and Yangzhou Patriarch, and he was specially allowed to wear shoes and carry a sword to the palace. He did not have to walk a short distance to enter the palace to meet the emperor, and he did not have to be announced by the master of ceremonies when reporting the matter.

古文：以兗、青二州刺史刘道怜为都督荆、湘、益、秦、宁？雍七州诸军事、骠骑将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：任命兖、青二州刺史刘道怜为都督荆、湘、益、秦、宁、梁、雍七州诸军事，骠骑将军，荆州刺史。
English: He appointed Liu Daorai, the military governor of the two states of Min and Qing, as the military governor of the seven states of Jing, Hunan, Yixing, Qin, Ning, Liang and Yong, the general of the cavalry, and the military governor of Jing.

古文：道怜贪鄙，无才能，裕以中军长史晋陵太守谢方明为骠骑长史、南郡相，道怜府中众事皆咨决于方明。
现代文：刘道怜为人贪婪鄙俗，没有才能。刘裕任命中军长史、晋陵太守谢方明为骠骑长史、南郡相，刘道怜府中的所有事务都向谢方明请教后再决定。
English: Liu Daolei was a greedy and vulgar person with no talent. Liu Yu appointed the Chinese military commander and the governor of Jin Mausoleum, Xie Fangming, as the commander and the governor of Nan County. All affairs in Liu Daolei's government were decided after consulting with Xie Fangming.

古文：方明，冲之子也。
现代文：谢方明是谢冲的儿子。
English: Xie Fangming is the son of Xie Chong.

古文：益州刺史硃龄石遣使诣河西王蒙逊，谕以朝廷威德。
现代文：东晋益州刺史朱龄石派遣使节前去拜见北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊，宣扬东晋朝廷的威势和德政。
English: Zhu Lingshi, a scholar of the East Jin Dynasty in Yizhou, sent an envoy to visit the Western King of the Beiliang River, Qiuqiu Mengsong, to promote the prestige and virtue of the East Jin Dynasty.

古文：蒙逊遣舍人黄迅诣龄石，且上表言： 伏闻车骑将军裕欲清中原，愿为右翼，驱除戎虏。 
现代文：沮渠蒙逊派遣舍人黄迅前来拜见朱龄石，并且呈上奏表，说： 听说车骑将军刘裕打算清剿中原地区，我甘愿做他的右翼部队，帮助他驱逐戎族强盗。 
English: Dejected, Mengxun sent his subordinate Huang Xun to visit Zhu Lingshi, and submitted a report, saying: I heard that the cavalry general Liu Yu planned to clean up the Central Plains region. I am willing to be his right-wing troops and help him expel the Jurchen bandits.

古文：夏王勃勃遣御史中丞乌洛孤与蒙逊结盟，蒙逊遣其弟湟河太守汉平莅盟于夏。
现代文：夏王赫连勃勃派遣御史中丞乌洛孤与沮渠蒙逊缔结盟约，沮渠蒙逊派他的弟弟湟河太守沮渠汉平前往夏国，在盟约上签字。
English: King He Lian of Xia vigorously dispatched the Grand Historian Uluoguo to sign an alliance treaty with Deshu Mengxun, and Deshu Mengxun sent his brother Hanping, the governor of Li River, to Xia to sign the alliance treaty.

古文：西秦王炽磐帅众三万袭湟河，沮渠汉平拒之，遣司马隗仁夜出击炽磐，破之。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐统率三万大军袭击湟河，沮渠汉平抵抗，派遣司马隗仁连夜出击乞伏炽磐，把他打败。
English: Western Qin King Qibao led a 30,000-strong army to attack Minhe, crushing Hanping's resistance and dispatching Sima Qianren to attack Qibao overnight and defeat him.

古文：炽磐将引去，汉平长史焦昶、将军段景潜召炽磐，炽磐复攻之，昶、景因说汉平出降。
现代文：乞伏炽磐刚打算带兵回去，沮渠汉平的长史焦昶、将军段景暗地里召引乞伏炽磐来攻，乞伏炽磐再次挥师进攻，焦昶、段景于是劝说沮渠汉平出城投降。
English: As soon as Beggar Blazing Rock planned to take his soldiers back, the long history of Hanping's frustration, Jiao Tong and General Duan Jing secretly summoned Beggar Blazing Rock to attack, Beggar Blazing Rock once again waved his division to attack, Jiao Tong and Duan Jing then persuaded the frustration of Hanping to leave the city and surrender.

古文：仁勒壮士百馀据南门楼，三日不下，力屈，为炽磐所禽。
现代文：隗仁带领一百多名壮士占据南门楼，坚决不投降，围攻了三天也没有攻下，最后，他们精疲力尽，被乞伏炽磐抓获。
English: Yanren led more than a hundred strong men to occupy the south gate tower, resolutely did not surrender, besieged for three days and did not capture, finally, they were exhausted and captured by Yibuxingyan.

古文：炽磐欲斩之，散骑常侍武威段晖谏曰： 仁临难不畏死，忠臣也，宜宥之以厉事君。 
现代文：乞伏炽磐打算杀了他，散骑常侍武威人段晖劝说道： 隗仁面临危难不怕死，是一个忠臣，应该宽宥他，以此鼓励那些忠于君王的人们。 
English: He planned to kill him, but was dissuaded by the knight-errant Duan Zhaowei, who was a frequent attendant of the emperor. Duan Zhaowei said, "In the face of danger, Xunren is not afraid of death. He is a loyal subject, and he should be pardoned in order to encourage those who are loyal to the emperor."

古文：乃囚之。
现代文：于是，把他囚禁起来。
English: So they put him in prison.

古文：炽磐以左卫将军匹达为湟河太守，击乙弗窟乾，降其三千馀户而归。
现代文：乞伏炽磐任命左卫将军乞伏匹达为湟河太守，进攻乙弗窟乾，收降了那里的三千多户百姓回来。
English: Qibul blazing rock appointed the left guard general Qibul Pida as the governor of the Li River, attacked the Yifu Grottoes, and brought back more than three thousand people who had surrendered there.

古文：以尚书右仆射出连虔为都督岭北诸军事、凉州刺史；以凉州刺史谦屯为镇军大将军、河州牧。
现代文：又任命尚书右仆射出连虔为都督岭北诸军事、凉州刺史；任命凉州刺史乞伏谦屯为镇军大将军、河州牧。
English: He also appointed Yangshuo's right-hand man, Liang Qian, as the military governor of the northern provinces of Lingyin, and Liangzhou's chief historian; appointed Liangzhou's chief historian, Beiwu Qiantun, as the general of the town army, and Hezhou Maki.

古文：隗仁在西秦五年，段晖又为之请，炽磐免之，使还姑臧。
现代文：隗仁在西秦被囚五年之后，段晖又为他求情，乞伏炽磐赦免了他，让他回姑臧。
English: After five years of imprisonment in the Western Qin Dynasty, Duan Yu again pleaded for him, begged Blazing Rock to pardon him, and let him return to Guzheng.

古文：戊午，魏主嗣行如濡源，遂至上谷、涿鹿、广宁。
现代文：戊午，北魏国主拓跋嗣前往濡源，于是又到上谷、涿鹿、广宁等地。
English: In the afternoon, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, went to Nureyuan, and then went to Shangyuan, Menglu, Guangning and other places.

古文：秋，七月，癸未，还平城。
现代文：秋季，七月，癸未，回到平城。
English: Autumn, July, September, back to Pingcheng.

古文：西秦王炽磐以秦州刺史昙达为尚书令，光禄勋王松寿为秦州刺史。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐任命秦州刺史乞伏昙达为尚书令，任命光禄勋王松寿为秦州刺史。
English: The Western Qin Emperor Qibuxue appointed Qin State Historian Qibuxueda as Shang Shuling, and appointed Guanglu Xun Wang Songshou as Qin State Historian.

古文：辛亥晦，日有食之。
现代文：辛亥晦，出现日食。
English: On the eve of the Chinese New Year, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：八月，甲子，太尉裕还建康，固辞太傅、州牧，其馀受命。
现代文：八月，甲子，东晋太尉刘裕回到建康，坚决辞让太傅、扬州牧，接受其余任命。
English: In August, the East Jin Tai Fu Liu Yu returned to Jiankang, resolutely resigned from Tai Fu and Yangzhou Mu, and accepted the remaining appointments.

古文：以豫章公世子义符为兗州刺史。
现代文：任命世子豫章公刘义符为兖州刺史。
English: He appointed Liu Yifu, the heir of Yu Zhang, as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：丁未，谢裕卒；以刘穆之为左仆射。
现代文：丁未，东晋尚书左仆射谢裕去世，任命刘穆之为尚书左仆射。
English: Ding Wei, the Eastern Jin Dynasty Shangshu's left-hand man, Sho Xieyu, died, and Liu Mu was appointed as Shangshu's left-hand man, Sho.

古文：九月，己亥，大赦。
现代文：九月，己亥，东晋实行大赦。
English: In September, Ji Hai and Eastern Jin implemented an amnesty.

古文：魏比岁霜旱，云、代之民多饥死。
现代文：北魏一连几年发生霜旱，收成不好，云中、代郡一带的老百姓有很多都饿死了。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, frost and drought occurred for several years in a row, the harvest was not good, and many ordinary people in and around Yunzhong and Dayi County starved to death.

古文：太史令王亮、苏坦言于魏主嗣曰： 按谶书，魏当都鄴，可得丰乐。 
现代文：太史令王亮、苏坦向北魏国主拓跋嗣进言道： 按着谶书的说法，我们魏国应把都城建在邺城，那样的话，才可以得到富足欢乐。 
English: Taishi ordered Wang Liang and Su Tan to make a speech to the head of the Northern Wei State, Tuoba Zi: According to the saying of the imperial edict, we, the Wei State, should build the capital city in Shicheng, in that case, we can get wealth and happiness.

古文：嗣以问群臣，博士祭酒崔浩、特进京兆周澹曰： 迁都于鄴，可以救今年之饥，非久长之计也。
现代文：拓跋嗣向各位大臣征求对这事的意见，博士祭酒崔浩、特进京兆周澹说： 迁都城到邺地，可以解救今年的饥荒，但却不是长久的办法。
English: Tuoba Zi asked the ministers for their opinions on this matter, and the doctor's sacrificial wine Cui Hao and the special envoy Jing Zhao Zhou Qi said: Relocating the capital city to Handan can relieve this year's famine, but it is not a long-term solution.

古文：山东之人，以国家居广漠之地，谓其民畜无涯，号曰 牛毛之众 。
现代文：崤山以东的人民，认为国家本来居住在辽阔的大漠之上，以为国民和牲畜一定无数，因此，称作是 牛毛那样多 。
English: The people east of Lushan believed that the country was originally located in a vast desert, and that the number of people and livestock must be countless. Therefore, it was said to be as much as a cow's hair.

古文：今留兵守旧都，分家南徙，不能满诸州之地，参居郡县，情见事露，恐四方皆有轻侮之心；且百姓不便水土，疾疫死伤者必多。
现代文：现在，一旦迁都，便要留下军队戍守旧都，只能分出一部分人向南迁移，这些人不可能住满几个州的土地，只好与汉人参杂居住在各郡各县，这样，我们人少的情势就会暴露，恐怕四方的邻国也都会因此产生轻视我们的想法。况且我们的百姓，不习惯那里的水土，得病、受伤、死亡的人一定很多。
English: Now, once the capital is moved, the army will be left to guard the old capital, and only a part of the people can be separated to migrate south. These people cannot live in several states, and they have to live in counties and counties with the Chinese. In this way, the situation of our few people will be exposed, and I am afraid that the neighbors in the four directions will also have the idea of despising us. Moreover, our people are not used to the water and soil there, and there must be many people who get sick, injured, and die.

古文：又，旧都守兵既少，屈丐、柔然将有窥窬之心，举国而来，云中、平城必危，朝廷隔恒、代千里之险，难以赴救，此则声实俱损也。
现代文：再者，旧都的守兵减少之后，屈丐、柔然等国就会有窃取我们的想法，假如他们动员全国的军队前来进攻，云中、平城一定会发生危机，南迁后的朝廷由于有恒山、代郡的千里险要重重阻隔，很难前去营救，这样的话，就会在名声和实际利益上都爱到损害。
English: Furthermore, after the number of soldiers guarding the old capital is reduced, countries such as Quigai and Zhuoran will have the idea of stealing us. If they mobilize the army of the whole country to attack, Yunzhong and Pingcheng will certainly have a crisis, and the imperial court after moving south will be blocked by the thousands of miles of Hengshan and Dai County, and it will be difficult to move forward to rescue. In this case, both reputation and actual interests will be damaged.

古文：今居北方，假令山东有变，我轻骑南下，布濩林薄之间，孰能知其多少！
现代文：现在我们居住在北方，假如崤山之东的地区有什么变乱，我们派遣轻装骑兵向南进攻，把部队分布在林野中间，谁能知道我们人数的多少？
English: Now that we live in the north, if there is any trouble in the area east of Lushan, we will send light cavalry to attack the south and distribute the troops in the middle of the forest, who knows how many of us there are?

古文：百姓望尘慑服，此国家所以威制诸夏也。
现代文：老百姓看见我们的征尘就会畏慑敬服，这就是我们国之所以用威力制服汉人的真正原因。
English: When the common people see us collecting dust, they will be awed and respect us. This is the real reason why our country used force to subdue the Han Chinese.

古文：来春草生，湩酪将出，兼以菜果，得以秋熟，则事济矣。 
现代文：明年春天到来之后，杂草生长起来，家畜吃饱之后，牛奶乳酪等也便可以供应上了，再加上蔬菜水果，便可以维持到秋天粮食成熟的季节，我们面临的这些暂时困难便可以克服了。 
English: After the arrival of next spring, weeds will grow, and after the livestock have eaten their fill, milk cheese, etc. can also be supplied. Together with vegetables and fruits, it can be maintained until the autumn grain ripening season. These temporary difficulties we face can be overcome.

古文：嗣曰： 今仓廪空竭，既无以待来秋，若来秋又饥，将若之何？ 
现代文：拓跋嗣说： 现在国库彻底空了，已经没有办法再等到来年的秋天，如果明年秋天又出现饥荒，我们将怎么对付呢？ 
English: Tuoba Zi said: Now that the treasury is completely empty, there is no way to wait for the autumn of next year. If there is another famine next autumn, how will we deal with it?

古文：对曰： 宜简饥贫之户，使就谷山东；若来秋复饥，当更图之，但方今不可迁都耳。 
现代文：崔浩等回答说： 应该把最贫穷饥馁的人家挑选出来，让他们去太行山以东的地区去谋生，找饭吃。如果明年再饥荒，到时候再想办法，只是现在不可迁都。 
English: Cui Hao et al. replied: It is necessary to select the poorest and hungriest families and let them go to the area east of Taihang Mountain to earn a living and find food. If there is another famine next year, we will think about it then, but we cannot move the capital now.

古文：嗣悦，曰： 唯二人与朕意同。 
现代文：拓跋嗣高兴地说： 只有你们二人与我的想法一致。 
English: Tuoba Zi said happily, "You two are the only ones who agree with me."

古文：乃简国人尤贫者诣山东三州就食，遣左部尚书代人周几帅众镇鲁口以安集之。
现代文：于是挑选百姓中最贫寒的人家前往太行山以东的三个州去谋生，并派左部尚书代郡人周几统率军队镇守鲁口，安抚召集他们。
English: Therefore, he selected the poorest people among the people to go to the three states east of Taihang Mountain to earn a living, and sent Zhou Qi, the left Shangshu County deputy, to lead the army to guard Lukou, pacify and gather them.

古文：嗣躬耕藉田，且命有司劝课农桑。
现代文：拓跋嗣本人也亲自下农田耕种，又命令有关部门劝勉指导人们从事农业和种桑养蚕的劳动。
English: Tuoba Zi himself also personally went to farmland to cultivate, and ordered the relevant departments to encourage and guide people to engage in agriculture and the work of planting mulberry and raising silkworms.

古文：明年，大熟，民遂富安。
现代文：第二年，庄稼丰收，人民于是富足安定。
English: In the second year, the harvest was bountiful, and the people became prosperous and stable.

古文：夏赫连建将兵击秦，执平凉太守姚周都。遂入新平。
现代文：夏国赫连建带领部队进攻后秦，抓获了平凉太守姚军都，于是又进犯新平。
English: Xia Guohe Lianjian led the troops to attack Houqin, captured the capital of the Pingliang Emperor Yao Jundu, and then attacked Xinping.

古文：广平公弼与战于龙尾堡，禽之。
现代文：后秦广平公姚弼与他们在龙尾堡接战，把赫连建活捉。
English: Later, Qin Guangping's son Yao Jie fought with them at Longwei Fort and captured He Lianjian alive.

古文：秦王兴药动。
现代文：后秦王姚兴药性发作。
English: After the Qin Dynasty, King Yao Xing suffered a drug-induced seizure.

古文：广平公弼称疾不朝，聚兵于第。
现代文：广平公姚弼声称有病，不去参加朝见，却把手下的部队聚集在自己的府第之中。
English: Guangping Gong Yao Wei claimed that he was ill and would not attend the imperial court, but he gathered his troops in his capital.

古文：兴闻之，怒，收弼党唐盛、孙玄等杀之。
现代文：姚兴听说这事后，大怒，抓住姚弼的党羽唐盛、孙玄等人，杀掉。
English: After Yao Xing heard about this, he flew into a rage, seized Yao Yao's followers Tang Sheng, Sun Xuan and others, and killed them.

古文：太子泓请曰： 臣不肖，不能缉谐兄弟，使至于此，皆臣之罪也。
现代文：太子姚泓请求说： 臣子不肖，不能团结兄弟，所以才导致这样的结果，这都是我的罪过。
English: Prince Yao Wei pleaded: "The vassal is not handsome, and cannot unite the brothers, which is why it led to such a result. This is all my fault."

古文：若臣死而国家安，愿赐臣死；若陛下不忍杀臣，乞退就籓。 
现代文：如果我死之后国家可以得到安定，我希望您命我自杀。如果陛下不忍心杀掉我，那么我请求退居藩属的位置。 
English: If the country can be stabilized after my death, I hope you will order me to commit suicide. If Your Majesty does not have the heart to kill me, then I ask to retire to the position of a feudal retainer.

古文：兴恻然悯之，召姚赞、梁喜、尹昭、敛曼嵬与之谋，囚弼，将杀之，穷治党与。
现代文：姚兴心中悲悯姚泓，召见姚、梁喜、尹昭、敛曼嵬等，与他们商议，逮捕了姚弼，准备杀掉他，并彻底追查处理了他的亲信党羽。
English: Yao Xing felt sorry for Yao Yao in his heart, summoned Yao, Liang Xi, Yin Zhao, Zhuan Mengyao, etc. to consult with them, arrested Yao Yao, prepared to kill him, and thoroughly investigated and dealt with his trusted party members.

古文：泓流涕固请，乃并其党赦之。泓待弼如初，无忿恨之色。
现代文：姚泓流着眼泪，一再请求，姚兴这才赦免了姚弼和他的那些同党。
English: With tears streaming down his face, Yao Yao repeatedly begged Yao Xing to pardon Yao Yao and his fellow party members.

古文：魏太史奏： 荧惑在匏瓜中，忽亡不知所在，于法当入危亡之国，先为童谣妖言，然后行其祸罚。 
现代文：姚泓对待姚弼跟以前一样，没有丝毫愤恨的样子。北魏太史启奏说： 火星在匏瓜星座中出现，忽然又不知跑到哪里去了。按道理说，它应该到形势危险严峻、马上就要灭亡的国家去，先出现童谣妖言，然后再发生祸乱，实行对该国的惩罚。 
English: Yao Zhen treated Yao Zhen as before, without the slightest look of resentment. The opening of the Northern Wei History said: Mars appeared in the maple constellation, and suddenly did not know where to go. According to the theory, it should go to a country where the situation is dangerous and serious, and it is about to perish. First, children's rhymes and fairy tales will appear, and then disasters will occur, and the country will be punished.

古文：魏主嗣召名儒十馀人使与太史议荧惑所诣，崔浩对曰： 按《春秋左氏传》， 神降于莘 ，以其至之日推知其物。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣召见十几个有名的儒士，让他们与太史一起讨论参悟火星所示的含义，推测星落的方位。崔浩对答说： 按照《春秋左氏传》的说法： 神灵在莘地降落 ，根据它降落的日期推测，可以得知这个神灵是谁。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, summoned more than a dozen famous Confucianists and asked them to discuss with Tai Shi the meaning of the image of the planet Mars and to guess the position of the stars. Cui Hao replied: According to "The Legend of Spring and Autumn Zuo," the deity landed in the Badlands. According to the date of its landing, we can guess who this deity is.

古文：庚午之夕，辛未之朝，天有阴云；荧惑之亡，当在二日。
现代文：庚午的晚上，辛未的早晨，天上有阴云密布，火星失踪的时间，应该是在这两天。
English: In the evening of Geng's day, in the morning of Xinwei's day, the sky was overcast, and the time of Mars' disappearance should be in these two days.

古文：庚之与午，皆主于秦；辛为西夷。
现代文：庚和午，在地上指的都是秦国，辛指的是西方的夷族。
English: The characters "庚" and "午" on the ground refer to the Qin state, while "辛" refers to the western barbarians.

古文：今姚兴据长安，荧惑必入秦矣。 
现代文：现在姚兴据守在长安，火星一定是降临到秦国去了。 
English: Now that Yao Xing is entrenched in Chang'an, Mars must have descended on Qin.

古文：众皆怒曰： 天上失星，人间安知所诣！ 
现代文：众人都不客气地说： 天上没有了一颗星，人间怎么能够知道它掉到哪里去了！ 
English: Many people unceremoniously said: There is no star in the sky, how can the world know where it fell!

古文：浩笑而不应。
现代文：崔浩微笑着并不回答。
English: Cui Hao smiled and did not answer.

古文：后八十馀日，荧惑出东井，留守句己，久之乃去。
现代文：八十多天以后，火星突然又从井宿附近出现了，在那里若明若暗，很长时间才消失。
English: After more than eighty days, Mars suddenly reappeared from the vicinity of the well, where it was bright and dark for a long time before disappearing.

古文：秦大旱，昆明池竭，童谣讹言，国人不安，间一岁而秦亡。
现代文：后秦出现大旱，昆明池中的水也已枯竭，儿童歌谣和各种谣传纷纷四起，国中的百姓人心不安，只隔一年，后秦国便灭亡了。
English: After the Qin Dynasty, there was a drought, the water in the Kunming Pool was exhausted, children's songs and all kinds of rumors were circulated, and the people in the country were uneasy. After only one year, the Qin Dynasty was destroyed.

古文：众乃服浩之精妙。
现代文：大家这才佩服崔浩的神奇精妙。
English: This is why everyone admires Cui Hao's magical and exquisite performance.

古文：冬，十月，壬子，秦王兴使散骑常侍姚敞等，送其女西平公主于魏，魏主嗣以后礼纳之。
现代文：冬季，十月，壬子，后秦王姚兴派遣散骑常侍姚敞等人护送他的女儿西平公主出嫁到北魏。
English: In the winter, in October, the Emperor Yao Xing of the Later Qin Dynasty dispatched the cavalryman Yao Zhan and others to escort his daughter, Xiping Princess, to the Northern Wei Dynasty for her wedding.

古文：铸金人不成，乃以为夫人，而宠甚。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣以皇后的礼节迎娶了她，但是铸金人没有成功，所以，按照北魏国的传统，她便不能做皇后。
English: The head of the Northern Wei State, Tuoba Zhi, married her with the etiquette of an empress, but the goldsmith did not succeed, so, according to the tradition of the Northern Wei State, she could not be a queen.

古文：辛酉，魏主嗣如沮洳城；癸亥，还平城。
现代文：拓跋嗣于是封她为夫人，但对她的宠爱和照顾极为优厚。辛酉，北魏国主拓跋嗣前往沮洳城。癸亥，回到平城。
English: Tuoba Zi then made her his wife, but his love and care for her was extremely generous. Xin Zi, the ruler of Northern Wei, Tuoba Zi went to Debao. Zi Hai, he returned to Pingcheng.

古文：十一月，丁亥，复如豺山宫；庚子，还。
现代文：十一月丁亥，他又前往豺出宫。庚子，返回。
English: In November of Dinghai, he went to Xingde Palace again. Geng Zi left and returned.

古文：西秦王炽磐遣襄武侯昙达等将骑一万，击南羌弥姐、康薄于赤水，降之；以王孟保为略阳太守，镇赤水。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐派遣襄武侯乞伏昙达等带领一万骑兵，袭击南羌的弥姐部落和康薄部落所据守的赤水，收降了他们。乞伏炽磐任命王孟保为略阳太守，镇守赤水。
English: Western Qin King Qibao Yarban dispatched Xiangwu Marquis Qibao Dadu and others, leading 10,000 cavalry, to attack the Mijia tribe of Nanlu and the Chashui tribe of Kangbo, and captured them. Qibao Yarban appointed Wang Mengbo as Liaoyang Daju, the town guard of Chashui.

古文：燕尚书令孙护之弟伯仁为昌黎尹，与其弟叱支拔皆有才勇，从燕王跋起兵有功，求开府不得，有怨言，跋皆杀之。
现代文：北燕尚书令孙护的弟弟孙伯仁为昌黎尹，与他的另一个弟弟孙叱支乙跋都有才略勇武，他们跟随燕王冯跋起兵，立过汗马功劳，但是，他们请求开府的待遇，却没有得到朝廷的同意，因此口出怨言，表示不满，冯跋把他们全部杀掉。
English: The Northern Yan Shangshu ordered Sun Guo's brother Sun Boren to be Chang Liyin, and he and his other brother, Sun Shizhi, both had the ability to be brave. They followed Yan King Feng Bao to raise an army and made great achievements. However, they requested the treatment of the Kaifu, but did not get the consent of the imperial court. Therefore, they complained and expressed their dissatisfaction. Feng Bao killed them all.

古文：进护开府仪同三司、录尚书事，以慰其心，护怏怏不悦，跋鸩杀之。
现代文：却提升孙护为开府仪同三司、录尚书事，用来安慰他。孙护一直闷闷不乐，冯跋于是就用毒酒把他杀了。
English: However, he promoted Sun Guo to the post of Kaifu Yi Tong San Zuo, and recorded his letters to comfort him. Sun Guo was unhappy all the time, so Feng Bao killed him with poisoned wine.

古文：辽东太守务银提自以有功，出为边郡，怨望，谋外叛，跋亦杀之。
现代文：辽东太守务银提也自认为有功，却被派出镇守边郡，心中愤愤不平，图谋叛变投奔外邦，冯跋也把他杀了。
English: Yinti, Liaodong's deputy warden, also considered himself to be meritorious, but he was sent to the town of Shoubian County. He was resentful and tried to defect to a foreign country, and Fengba also killed him.

古文：林邑寇交州，州将击败之。
现代文：林邑进犯东晋的交州，州的守将把来敌打败。
English: Lin'e attacked Jiaozhou of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, and the defenders of Jiaozhou defeated the invaders.

古文：安皇帝壬义熙十二年春，正月，甲申，魏主嗣如豺山宫。
现代文：十二年春季，正月，甲申，北魏国主拓跋嗣前往豺山宫。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year, the first month, Jia Shen, the Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba Zi went to Shaoshan Palace.

古文：戊子，还平城。
现代文：戊子，回到平城。
English: Boshi, go back to Heijo.

古文：加太尉裕兗州刺吏、都督南秦州，凡都督二十二州；以世子义符为豫州刺史。
现代文：东晋加封太尉刘裕为兖州刺史，都督南秦州，至此，他共都督二十二州。任命他的世子刘义符为豫州刺史。
English: In the Eastern Jin Dynasty, Liu Yu, the first lieutenant of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou and the governor of South Qin Province, and thus he became the governor of 22 provinces. He appointed his son Liu Yifu as the governor of Henan Province.

古文：秦王兴使鲁宗之将兵寇襄阳，未至而卒。
现代文：后秦王姚兴派遣鲁宗之带兵进犯襄阳，还没有到，鲁宗之便突然去世。
English: Later, Qin King Yao Xing sent Lu Zong to invade Xiangyang with an army, but before he arrived, Lu Zong suddenly died.

古文：其子轨引兵入寇，雍州刺史赵伦之击败之。
现代文：他的儿子鲁轨继续带兵进犯。雍州刺史赵伦之把他打败。
English: His son Lu Lu continued to attack with his troops. He was defeated by the Yongzhou vassal Zhao Lunzhi.

古文：西秦王炽磐攻秦洮阳公彭利和于漒川，沮渠蒙逊攻石泉以救之。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐在川进攻后秦洮阳公彭利和，沮渠蒙逊进攻西秦所属的石泉，以此解救彭利和。
English: The Western Qin King begged the Blazing Rock to rescue the Western Qin Prince Peng Liyang from the attack of the Western Qin Prince Peng Liyang after the attack of the Western Qin King, and the Western Qin Prince Mengxuan attacked the Western Qin Prince Shiquan.

古文：炽磐至沓中，引还。
现代文：乞伏炽磐的大军抵达沓中，听说消息后，带兵回国。
English: A large army of beggars arrived in Yuzhong, and after hearing the news, they returned to China with their soldiers.

古文：二月，炽磐遣襄武侯昙达救石泉，蒙逊亦引去。
现代文：二月，乞伏炽磐派遣襄武侯乞伏昙达营救石泉，沮渠蒙逊也带兵回去了。
English: In February, Xiangwu Blazing Rock dispatched Xiangwu Marquis to rescue Shiquan, and Mengxun also took the soldiers back.

古文：蒙逊遂与炽磐结和亲。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊于是和乞伏炽磐通婚讲和。
English: Despondent, Monson then made peace with the beggar.

古文：秦王兴如华阴，使太子泓监国，入居西宫。
现代文：后秦王姚兴前往华阴，让太子姚泓主持朝廷政务，进入西宫居住。
English: Later, Qin King Yao Xing went to Huayin and let Prince Yao Tong preside over the affairs of the imperial court and live in the West Palace.

古文：兴疾笃，还长安，黄门侍郎尹冲谋因泓出迎而杀之。
现代文：姚兴病重，回长安。黄门侍郎尹冲谋划，要趁姚泓出去迎接的机会杀掉他。
English: Yao Xing was seriously ill and returned to Chang'an. Huangmen waiter Yin Chong plotted to take advantage of the opportunity for Yao Xing to go out to meet him and kill him.

古文：兴至，泓将出迎，宫臣谏曰： 主上疾笃，奸臣在侧，殿下今出，进不得见主上，退有不测之祸。 
现代文：姚兴驾到，姚泓准备出去迎接，宫中官员劝阻道： 主上病危，奸臣就在身旁，殿下现在如果出去，向前也看不见主上，后退则一定有难以预料的灾祸。 
English: Yao Xing arrived, Yao Yao prepared to go out to meet him, but the palace officials dissuaded him, saying, "The lord is critically ill, and the traitor is right next to him. If His Imperial Highness goes out now, he won't be able to see the lord ahead, and if he retreats, there will be an unforeseen disaster."

古文：泓曰： 臣子闻君父疾笃而端居不出，何以自安！ 
现代文：姚泓说： 作为臣下和儿子听说君王和父亲病重，却稳稳当当地坐在那里不出去迎候，心里哪能平安呢？ 
English: Yao Yao said, "As a subject and a son, I heard that the king and my father were seriously ill, but I sat there quietly and did not go out to greet them. How can I have peace of mind?

古文：对曰： 全身以安社稷，孝之大者也。 
现代文：下属们回答说： 保全自己目的是为了使国家稳定，这是最大的孝心了。 
English: The subordinates replied: The purpose of self-preservation is to make the country stable, which is the greatest filial piety.

古文：泓乃止。
现代文：姚泓这才没有出去。
English: This is why Yao Yao didn't go out.

古文：尚书姚沙弥谓尹冲曰； 太子不出迎，宜奉乘舆幸广平公第；宿卫将士闻乘舆所在，自当来集，太子谁与守乎！
现代文：尚书姚沙弥对尹冲说： 太子不出来迎接，我们应该把皇帝的车轿抬到广平公的府第去。禁卫军的将士听说皇上在这里，自然应当集中过来，谁去保护太子呢？
English: Shangshu Yao Shami said to Yin Chong: If the prince doesn't come out to greet us, we should carry the emperor's carriage to the Guangping Palace. When the guards heard that the emperor was here, they should naturally come together. Who will protect the prince?

古文：且吾属以广平公之故，已陷名逆节，将何所自容！
现代文：况且我们因为广平公的缘故，名字已经被注定是叛逆了，将来到哪里安身？
English: Moreover, for the sake of Guangping Gong, our names have been doomed to be rebellious. Where will we settle down?

古文：今奉乘舆以举事，乃杖大顺，不惟救广平之祸，吾属前罪亦尽雪矣。 
现代文：现在趁机挟持皇帝发动事变，是名正言顺的，不但是把广平公从祸患中解救出来，而且我们这些人以前的罪名也可以全部洗雪了。 
English: Now, taking the opportunity to hold the emperor hostage to launch an incident is justifiable, not only to rescue Guangping from the calamity, but also to wash away all the previous crimes of our people.

古文：冲以兴死生未可知，欲随兴入宫作乱，不用沙弥之言。
现代文：尹冲因为姚兴的死活还不知道，打算跟随姚兴进宫，然后再寻找机会叛乱，便不采纳姚沙弥的建议。
English: Because Yin Chong did not yet know the fate of Yao Xing, he planned to follow Yao Xing into the palace and then look for an opportunity to rebel, so he did not accept Yao Shami's suggestion.

古文：兴入宫，命太子泓录尚书事，东平公绍及右卫将军胡翼度典兵禁中，防制内外。
现代文：姚兴进了内宫，命令太子姚泓录尚书事，命令东平公姚绍及右卫将军胡翼度带兵驻防王宫，对内外情势，严加防御。
English: Yao Xing entered the inner palace, ordered the prince Yao Zhen to record the records, ordered the Dongping Gong Yao Shao and the right guard general Hu Yingduo to garrison the royal palace, and strictly defended the internal and external situation.

古文：遣殿中上将军敛曼嵬收弼等中甲仗，内之武库。
现代文：派遣殿中上将军敛曼嵬搜查收缴姚弼府第中的武器装备，存入国家的武器仓库。
English: He dispatched the vice admiral of the palace to search and confiscate the weapons and equipment in the middle of Yaoqin Prefecture and store them in the national weapons warehouse.

古文：兴疾转笃，其妹南安长公主问疾，不应。
现代文：姚兴的病越来越重，他的妹妹南安长公主前来探病，问候他，他没有回答。
English: Yao Xing's illness became more and more serious. His sister, Nan'an Elder Princess, came to visit him and greet him, but he did not answer.

古文：幼子耕儿出，告其兄南阳公愔曰： 上已崩矣，宜速决计！ 
现代文：他的小儿子姚耕儿出宫，告诉他的哥哥南阳公姚说： 皇上已经驾崩了，应该快点决定对策。 
English: His youngest son, Yao Gang'er, came out of the palace and told his brother, Nanyang Gong Yao, "The emperor has passed away, we should quickly decide on a countermeasure."

古文：愔即与尹冲帅甲士攻端门，敛曼嵬，胡翼度等勒兵闭门拒战。
现代文：姚便与尹冲率领全副武装的战士进攻端门，敛曼嵬、胡翼度等人指挥军队紧闭宫门拒守力战。
English: Yao and Yin Chong then led the fully armed soldiers to attack the front gate, and Mandao, Hu Yingdu and others commanded the army to close the palace gate and refuse to fight.

古文：愔等遣壮士登门，缘屋而入，及于马道。
现代文：姚等人派遣精壮的士兵登上门楼，沿着屋檐前进，到了马道的地方。
English: Yao and the others sent strong soldiers up to the gate tower, advanced along the eaves, and arrived at the horse path.

古文：泓侍疾在咨议堂，太子右卫率姚和都帅东宫兵入屯马道南。
现代文：她泓在谘议堂侍奉父亲的病，太子右卫率姚和都率领太子宫的军队进驻马道以南。
English: While she was serving her father's illness in the consultation hall, Prince Uwei led Yao Wudu to lead the army of the prince's womb to the south of Ma Dao.

古文：愔等不得进，遂烧端门。
现代文：姚等没有办法前进，于是，便放火烧了端门。
English: Yao and the others had no way to advance, so they set fire to the front door.

古文：兴力疾临前殿，赐弼死。
现代文：姚兴勉强支撑起来，来到前殿，命令姚弼自杀。
English: Yao Xing reluctantly braced himself, came to the front hall, and ordered Yao Yao to commit suicide.

古文：禁兵见兴，喜跃，争进赴贼，贼众惊扰，和都以东宫兵自后击之愔等大败。
现代文：禁卫部队看到姚兴，欢呼跳跃，争先恐后地发动冲锋攻击敌兵，敌兵惊慌失措。姚和都又带领太子宫卫队从后面夹击敌人，姚等人大败。
English: When the guards saw Yao Xing, they cheered and jumped, scrambling to launch a charge to attack the enemy soldiers. The enemy soldiers panicked. Yao He again led the Imperial Palace Guards to attack the enemy from behind, and Yao and others were defeated.

古文：愔逃于骊山，其党建康公吕隆奔雍，尹冲及弟泓来奔。
现代文：姚逃奔骊山，他的同党建康公吕隆逃奔雍城，尹冲和他的弟弟尹泓逃奔东晋。
English: Yao fled to Shaoshan, his party colleague Jiankang Lulong fled to Yongcheng, and Yin Chong and his brother Yin Yao fled to Dongjin.

古文：兴引东平公绍及妙赞、梁喜、尹昭、敛曼嵬入内寝，受遗诏辅政。
现代文：姚兴把东平公姚绍以及姚、梁喜、尹昭、敛曼嵬召进内宫他的床边，交给他们遗诏，让他们辅佐朝政。
English: Yao Xing summoned Dongping Gong Yao Shao and Yao, Liang Xi, Yin Zhao, and Zhuan Mengqi to his bedside in the Inner Palace, and gave them his last will and testament, asking them to assist the imperial government.

古文：明日，兴卒。
现代文：第二天，姚兴去世。
English: The next day, Yao Xing passed away.

古文：泓秘不发丧，捕南阳公愔及吕隆、大将军尹元等，皆诛之。乃发丧，即皇帝位，大赦，改元永和。
现代文：姚泓封锁姚兴的死讯，不发布消息，下令逮捕南阳公姚和吕隆、大将军尹元等人，全部杀掉，然后才公布父亲去世的消息，登上帝位，下令大赦，改年号为永和。
English: Yao Wei blocked the news of Yao Xing's death, did not release the news, ordered the arrest of Nanyang Gong Yao and Lulong, General Yin Yuan and others, all killed, and then announced the news of his father's death, ascended to the throne, ordered an amnesty, and changed the year to Yonghe.

古文：泓命齐公恢杀安定太守吕超，恢犹豫久之，乃杀之。
现代文：姚泓命令齐公姚恢杀掉安定太守吕超。姚恢犹豫很久，才把吕超杀了。
English: Yao Wei ordered Qigong Yao Wei to kill the Prince of Anhui, Luchao. Yao Wei hesitated for a long time before killing Luchao.

古文：泓疑恢有贰心，恢由是惧，阴聚兵谋作乱。
现代文：姚泓怀疑姚恢对他有二心，姚恢因此非常害怕，暗地里聚集军队阴谋叛乱。
English: Yao Yao suspected that Yao Huai had a grudge against him, so Yao Huai was very afraid and secretly gathered an army to plot a rebellion.

古文：泓葬兴于偶陵，谥曰文桓皇帝，庙号高祖。
现代文：姚泓把姚兴安葬在偶陵，追谥为文桓皇帝，庙号高祖。
English: Yao Xuan buried Yao Xing'an in a mausoleum. He was known as Emperor Wenhuan and the temple's founder Gao Zu.

古文：初，兴徙李平羌三千户于安定。
现代文：当初，姚兴把李闰的羌族三千户强行迁移到安定居住。
English: At first, Yao Xing forcibly relocated 3,000 families of Li Yue's Yi ethnic group to a stable residence.

古文：兴卒。
现代文：姚兴去世之后，羌族首领党容反叛。
English: After the death of Yao Xing, the leader of the Yao people rebelled.

古文：羌酋党容叛，泓遣抚军将军姚赞讨降之，徙其酋豪于长安，馀遣还李闰，北地太守毛雍据赵氏坞以叛，东平公绍讨禽之。
现代文：姚泓派遣抚军将军姚前去讨伐并收降了他们，把他们的首领和豪族强行迁到长安，其他的都遣回李闰。北地太守毛雍据守赵氏坞叛变，东平公姚绍前往征讨并把他抓获。
English: Yao Wei sent General Yao of the Fuxing Army to fight and subdue them, and forcibly relocated their chiefs and powerful clans to Chang'an, and sent the rest back to Li Yue. The northern governor Mao Yong rebelled against the governor Zhao Shi Wu, and Dongping Gong Yao Shao went to fight and captured him.

古文：时姚宣镇李闰，参军韦宗闻毛雍叛，说宣曰： 主上新立，威德未著，国家之难，未可量也，殿下不可不为深虑。
现代文：这时姚宣镇守李闰，参军韦宗听说毛雍反叛，劝说姚宣道： 主上刚刚登基，威望和德行还没有表现得很明显，国家的灾难是无法预测的，殿下不能不为此多想一想。
English: At this time, Yao Xuan was guarding Li Yue, and Wei Zong, who had joined the army, heard that Mao had rebelled, and persuaded Yao Xuan to say: The Lord has just ascended to the throne, prestige and virtue have not yet manifested themselves clearly, the country's disaster is unpredictable, and His Royal Highness cannot help but think about it.

古文：邢望险要，宜徙据之，此霸王之资也。 
现代文：邢望那里地势险要，应该迁到那里去据守，那是称王称霸的基本条件呵！ 
English: Look, the terrain there is precarious, you should move there to defend it, that is the basic condition for claiming supremacy!

古文：宣从之，帅户三万八千，弃李闰，南保邢望。
现代文：姚宣听从了他的话，率领三万八千户居民，放弃李闰，向南去保守邢望。
English: Yao Xuan obeyed his words and led 38,000 residents to give up Li Yue and go south to keep a watchful eye.

古文：诸羌据李闰以叛，东平公绍进讨破之。
现代文：几个羌族部落占据李闰反叛，东平公姚绍进兵讨伐，把他们打败。
English: Several Yi tribes rebelled against Li Yue, and Dongping Gong Yao Shao marched in and defeated them.

古文：宣诣绍归罪，绍杀之。
现代文：姚宣前去拜见姚绍请罪，姚绍把他杀了。
English: Yao Xuan went to see Yao Shao to plead guilty, and Yao Shao killed him.

古文：二月，加太尉裕中外大都督。
现代文：二月，东晋朝廷加授太尉刘裕为中外大都督。
English: In February, the Eastern Jin Dynasty promoted Lieutenant Liu Yu to the post of Grand Governor of China and foreign countries.

古文：裕戒严将伐秦。诏加裕领司、豫二州刺史，以其世子义符为徐、兗二州刺史。
现代文：刘裕动员军队严加戒备，准备讨伐后秦，安帝下诏加授刘裕兼任司、豫二州刺史，任命他的世子刘义符为徐、兖二州刺史。
English: Liu Yu mobilized the army to be on high alert to prepare for the post-Qin crusade, and Emperor An issued an edict awarding Liu Yu the post of secretary and the post of prefect of the two prefectures of Henan, and appointed his son Liu Yifu as the prefect of the two prefectures of Xu and Qin.

古文：琅邪王德文请启行戌路，修敬山陵；诏许之。
现代文：琅邪王司马德文请求率领部队在前开路，到洛阳去整修祖先的陵墓。安帝下诏允许。
English: The evil king, Sima Dewen, requested that the troops lead the way forward and go to Luoyang to renovate the ancestor's mausoleum. Emperor An decreed permission.

古文：夏，四月，壬子，魏大赦，改元泰常。
现代文：夏季，四月，壬子，北魏实行大赦，改年号为泰常。
English: In the summer, April, Ren Zi, the Northern Wei Dynasty implemented an amnesty, and changed the year name to Tai Chang.

古文：西秦襄武候昙达等击秦秦州刺史姚艾于上邽，破之，徙其民五千馀户于枹罕。
现代文：西秦国襄武侯乞伏昙达等在上袭击后秦国秦州刺史姚艾，并把他打败，把当地的五千多户居民强行迁移到罕。
English: Western Qin State Xiangwu marquis Qifu Xingda and others attacked Qin State Qin Prefecture Yao Ai, and defeated him, and forcibly relocated more than five thousand local residents to Han.

古文：五月，癸巳，加太尉裕领北雍州刺史。
现代文：五月，癸巳，东晋加授太尉刘裕兼任北雍州刺史。
English: In May, the Eastern Jin Dynasty promoted Lieutenant Liu Yu to be the governor of North Yongzhou.

古文：六月，丁巳，魏主嗣北巡。
现代文：六月，丁已，北魏国主拓跋嗣巡视北方。
English: In June, Ding Ya, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, went on a tour of the north.

古文：并州胡数万落叛秦，入于平阳，推匈奴曹弘为大单于，攻立义将军姚成都于匈奴堡。
现代文：并州的几万帐落的胡人背叛后秦，来到平阳，推举匈奴人曹弘为大单于，向匈奴堡开进，攻伐立义将军姚成都。
English: After Qin's betrayal, tens of thousands of Hu people who had settled in and around the prefecture came to Pingyang, elected the Hun Cao Hong as the grand commander, marched to the Hun Fort, and attacked the Yi general Yao Chengdu.

古文：征东将军姚懿自蒲阪讨之，执弘，送长安，徙其豪右万五千落于雍州。
现代文：征东将军姚懿从蒲坂发兵讨伐他们，抓住了曹弘，押送到长安，并把他们中间的一万五千落篷帐的豪门大族迁往雍州。
English: The general of the East Conquest, Yao Zheng, sent troops from Busan to fight them, captured Cao Hong, escorted him to Chang'an, and moved the fifteen thousand tents of the big families among them to Yongzhou.

古文：氐王杨盛攻秦祁山，拔之，进逼秦州。
现代文：氐王杨盛进攻后秦的祁山，攻克了那里，并进而向秦州逼近。
English: After attacking Qin's Lushan, the king of Qin, Yang Sheng, conquered there, and then approached Qinzhou.

古文：秦后将军姚平救之，盛引兵退；平与上邽守将姚嵩追之。
现代文：后秦后将军姚平赶来援救。杨盛带兵撤退，姚平与上守将姚嵩追击他。
English: Yang Sheng retreated with his troops, and Yao Ping and his commander, Yao Song, pursued him.

古文：夏王勃勃帅骑四万袭上邽，未至，嵩与盛战于竹岭，败死。
现代文：夏王赫连勃勃率领四万骑兵袭击上，还未赶到，姚嵩便在竹岭与杨盛的激战中兵败身死。
English: Xia Wang Herlian energetically led forty thousand cavalry to attack, but before they arrived, Yao Song was killed in a fierce battle with Yang Sheng in Zhuling.

古文：勃勃攻上邽二旬，克之，杀秦州刺史姚军都及将士五千馀人，因毁其城。
现代文：赫连勃勃进攻上，二十天之后，攻克，杀死秦州刺史姚军都及将士五千多人，并摧毁了城墙。
English: Helian vigorously attacked, and twenty days later, he defeated and killed the Qin State Governor Shi Yao and more than five thousand soldiers, and destroyed the city wall.

古文：进攻阴密，又杀秦将姚良子及将士万馀人；以其子昌为雍州刺史，镇阴密。
现代文：他进而进攻阴密，又杀死了后秦国守将姚良子以及一万多将领军卒。他任命自己的儿子赫连昌为雍州刺史，镇守阴密。
English: He then attacked Yinmi, and killed the post-Qin commander, Yao Liangzi, and more than ten thousand generals and soldiers. He appointed his son, Herenchang, as the governor of Yinmi.

古文：征北将军姚恢弃安定，奔还长安，安定人胡俨等帅户五万据城降于夏。
现代文：后秦征北将军姚恢放弃安定，逃奔回长安，安定人胡俨等率领五万户居民占据城池向夏国投降。
English: After the Qin conquered the north, the general Yao Wei abandoned stability and fled back to Chang'an. The stabilizer Hu Wei and others led 50,000 residents to occupy the city and surrender to Xia Guo.

古文：勃勃使镇东将军羊苟儿将鲜卑五千镇安定，进攻秦镇西将军姚谌于雍城，谌委镇奔长安。
现代文：赫连勃勃让镇东将军羊苟儿带领五千鲜卑人镇守安定，去雍城进攻后秦镇西将军姚谌，姚谌放弃了防地逃奔长安。
English: Herlian vigorously let the town's east general Yang Guor lead five thousand freshmen to keep the town stable. After the attack on Yongcheng, the Qin town's west general Yao Jun abandoned the defense and fled to Chang'an.

古文：勃勃据雍，进掠郿城。
现代文：赫连勃勃据守雍城，进军劫掠城。
English: Heren vigorously defended Yongcheng and marched to plunder the city.

古文：秦东平公绍及征虏将军尹昭等将步骑五万击之，勃勃退趋安定，胡俨闭门拒之，杀羊苟儿及所将鲜卑，复以安定降秦。
现代文：后秦东平公姚绍及征虏将军尹昭等率领步兵、骑兵五万人迎击他们，赫连勃勃退至安定，胡俨紧闭城门抵抗他，并杀了羊苟儿和他所带领的鲜卑人，再次献出安定，归降后秦。
English: After Qin Dongping Gong, Yao Shao and the conscript general Yin Zhao led 50,000 infantry and cavalry to meet them, Herengong retreated to stability, Hu Yao tightly closed the gate to resist him, and killed Yang Guo Er and the humble people he led, once again offered stability, and returned to Qin.

古文：绍进击勃勃于马鞍阪，破之，追至朝那，不及而还。
现代文：姚绍进军到马鞍阪，向赫连勃勃发动攻击，并把他打败，一直追到朝那，没有追上便回来了。
English: Yao Shao marched to Maanshan, launched an attack on Herengong, defeated him, and chased him all the way to Chaonan. He did not catch up and came back.

古文：勃勃归杏城。
现代文：赫连勃勃回杏城。
English: Heren vigorously returned to Anseongseong.

古文：杨盛复遣兄子倦击秦，至陈仓，秦敛曼嵬击却之。
现代文：杨盛再次派遣侄儿杨倦进攻后秦，抵达陈仓，后秦的敛曼嵬把他击退。
English: Yang Sheng once again sent his nephew Yang Tired to attack Houqin and arrived at Chencang. Houqin's astringent mantras repelled him.

古文：夏王勃勃复遣兄提南侵泄阳，秦车骑将军姚裕等击却之。
现代文：夏王赫连勃勃又派侄儿赫连提向南侵犯泄阳，后秦车骑将军姚裕等把他打跑。
English: Xia Wang Herlian vigorously sent his nephew Herlian Ti to the south to invade Deyang, after which the Qin chariot riding general Yao Yu and others beat him.

古文：凉司马索承明上书劝凉公暠伐河西王蒙逊，暠引见，谓之曰： 蒙逊为百姓患，孤岂忘之？
现代文：西凉司马索承明呈上奏疏，劝说凉公李讨伐北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊。李召他进宫见面，对他说： 沮渠蒙逊成为百姓的祸患，我怎么能够忘了他！
English: The Western Liang Dynasty's Sima So was reluctant to go to war, so he persuaded Liang Gong Li to fight the Western King of the Northern Liang River, Deqiu Mengxun. Li called him to the palace to meet him and said to him: Deqiu Mengxun has become a scourge to the people, how can I forget him!

古文：顾势力未能除耳。
现代文：只不过我的气势力量还不能把他除掉罢了。
English: It's just that I don't have enough power to get rid of him.

古文：卿有必禽之策，当为孤陈之；直唱大言，使孤东讨，此与言 石虎小竖，宜肆诸市朝 者何异！ 
现代文：你如果有一定可以擒获他的计策，就应该把它告诉我。只是一味地唱高调、说大话，让我向东讨伐，这和说 石虎这小崽子，应该抓起来绑到市井上去斩首 的人有什么差别？ 
English: If you have a sure way to capture him, you should tell it to me. Just sing a high note, talk big, and let me march eastward. What is the difference between this and saying that Shihu, this little louse, should be caught, tied up and beheaded in the streets?

古文：承明惭惧而退。
现代文：索承明羞惭惶恐而退。
English: Somesho retreated in shame and fear.

古文：秋，七月，魏主嗣大猎于牛川，临殷繁水而还。
现代文：秋季，七月，北魏国主拓跋嗣在牛川大规模打猎，到了殷繁水才回来。
English: In the autumn, in July, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, hunted on a large scale in the Niu River, and only came back when the water was abundant.

古文：戊戌，至平城。
现代文：戊戌，抵达平城。
English: Wuyi, arrived in Pingcheng.

古文：八月，丙午，大赦。
现代文：八月，丙午，东晋实行大赦。
English: In the afternoon of August, Eastern Jin implemented an amnesty.

古文：宁州献琥珀枕于太尉裕。
现代文：东晋宁州把一个琥珀做的枕头进献给太尉刘裕。
English: East Jin Ningzhou presented an amber pillow to Lieutenant Liu Yu.

古文：裕以琥珀治金创，得之大喜，命碎捣分赐北征将士。
现代文：刘裕因为琥珀可以治疗外伤，所以得到这个枕头非常高兴，命令把它捣碎，分别赐给即将要去北方征战的将士。
English: Liu Yu was very happy to get this pillow because amber can treat trauma, so he ordered it to be crushed and given separately to the soldiers who were going to fight in the north.

古文：裕以世子义符为中军将军，监太尉留府事。
现代文：刘裕任命自己的世子刘义符为中军将军，监太尉留府事。
English: Liu Yu appointed his own son Liu Yifu as the general of the Chinese army, and the captain of the guard stayed in the capital.

古文：刘穆之为左仆射，领监军、中军二府军司，入居东府，总摄内外。
现代文：任命刘穆之为左仆射，兼任监军、中军二府军司，并让他进入东府居住，总管朝廷内外的一切事务。
English: He appointed Liu Muxin as his second-in-command, concurrently serving as the supervisor of the army and the second prefectural military commander of the Chinese army, and let him live in the eastern prefecture to be in charge of all affairs inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：以太尉左司马东海徐羡之为穆之之副，左将军硃龄石守卫殿省，徐州刺史刘怀慎守卫京师，扬州别驾从事史张裕任留州事。
现代文：任命太尉左司马东海人徐羡之为刘穆之的副手，命左将军朱龄石守卫宫廷及国家办事机构，命徐州刺史刘怀慎守卫京师，命扬州别驾从事史张裕任留州事。
English: He appointed Captain Zuo's subordinate, Ma Donghai's subordinate, Xu En, as Liu Mu Rong's deputy, ordered Zuo's general Zhu Lingshi to guard the court and state offices, ordered Xuzhou's general Liu Huai Shen to guard the Beijing division, and ordered Yangzhou's general to engage in Zhang Yu's stay in the state affairs.

古文：怀慎，怀敬之弟也。
现代文：刘怀慎是刘怀敬的弟弟。
English: Liu Huaixin is the younger brother of Liu Huaiqing.

古文：刘穆之内总朝政，外供军旅，决断如流，事无拥滞。
现代文：刘穆之在内总管朝廷政务，在外供应军旅的给养，遇事当机立断，快如流水，因此一切事情，没有堆积迟滞的。
English: Liu Mu Zhi was in-charge of the government affairs of the imperial court, and supplied the army brigade outside. In case of emergency, he was quick to make decisions, so everything was not delayed.

古文：宾客辐凑，求诉百端，内外咨禀，盈阶满室；目鉴辞讼，手答笺书，耳行听受，口并酬应，不相参涉，悉皆赡举。
现代文：各方宾客从四面八方集中到这里，各种请求诉讼千头万绪，内内外外，谘询禀报，堆满台阶屋子。他竟然能够眼睛看辞作讼书，手写答复信件，耳朵同时听属下的汇报，嘴里也应酬自如，而且同时进行的这四种工作互相之间又不混淆错乱，全都处置得当。
English: All kinds of guests gathered here from all directions, all kinds of requests for lawsuits were piled up, inside and outside, consultations and reports, and the staircase was full of houses. He was able to read the resignation letter with his eyes, answer letters with his hand, listen to the report of his subordinates with his ears, and speak freely with his mouth. Moreover, these four kinds of work carried out at the same time were not confused with each other, and were all handled properly.

古文：又喜宾客，言谈赏笑，弥日无倦。
现代文：他又喜欢宾客来往，说笑谈天，从早到晚，毫无倦意。
English: He also likes guests to come and go, talking and joking, from morning to night, without tiring.

古文：裁有闲暇，手自写书，寻鉴校定。
现代文：偶尔有闲暇时间，他便亲自抄书，参阅古籍，校订错误。
English: Occasionally, when he has leisure time, he copies books himself, consults ancient books, and corrects mistakes.

古文：性奢豪，食必方丈，旦辄为十人馔，未尝独餐。
现代文：他的性格奢放豪迈，吃饭一定要宽大的饭桌，一大早便经常要准备十个人左右的饭食，从来没有一个人单独进餐。
English: His character is extravagant and heroic. He always has a large dining table for meals. In the early morning, he often has to prepare meals for about ten people. He never eats alone.

古文：尝白裕曰： 穆之家本贫贱，赡生多阙。
现代文：他曾经告诉刘裕说： 我刘穆之的家庭出身本来贫穷微贱，维持生计都很艰难。
English: He once told Liu Yu: My family, Liu Mu Zhi's family, was originally poor, and it was very difficult to make a living.

古文：自叨忝以来，虽每存约损，而朝夕所须，微为过丰。自此外，一毫不以负公。 
现代文：自从得到您的信任忝任高位以来，虽然心中常常想着节俭，但从早到晚所需要的花销，仍然稍微显得过于丰厚了一点，除此而外，没有一点儿是对不起您的了。 
English: Since I gained your confidence and assumed high office, although I have often thought of frugality in my heart, the expenses required from morning to night are still a little too rich, and apart from this, I do not feel sorry for you at all.

古文：中军咨议参军张邵言于裕曰： 人生危脆，必当远虑。
现代文：中军谘议参军张邵对刘裕说： 人生危机脆弱，必须有一个长远的打算。
English: Zhang Shao said to Liu Yu: Life crisis is fragile, you must have a long-term plan.

古文：穆之若邂逅不幸，谁可代之？
现代文：刘穆之如果遇到什么不幸，谁可以代替他呢？
English: If Liu Muzhi were to meet with some misfortune, who could replace him?

古文：尊业如此。苟有不讳，处分云何？ 
现代文：而你所开创的功业已经到了这种程度，如果一旦发生不幸，你说该如何处理后事？ 
English: And your pioneering work has reached such a level that if misfortune happens, how do you deal with the aftermath?

古文：裕曰： 此自委穆之及卿耳。 
现代文：刘裕说： 这自然要完全交给刘穆之和你了。 
English: Liu Yu said, "Naturally, this is entirely up to Liu Muzhong and you.

古文：丁巳，裕发建康，遣龙骧将军王镇恶、冠军将军檀道济将步军自淮、淝向许、洛，新野太守硃超石、宁朔将军胡籓趋阳城，振武将军沈田子、建威将军傅弘之趋武关，建武将军沈林子、彭城内史刘遵考将水军出石门，自汴入河，以冀州刺史五仲德督前锋诸军，开巨野入河。
现代文：丁巳，刘裕从建康出发。他派遣龙骧将军王镇恶、冠军将军檀道济带领步兵从淮河、淝水向许昌、洛阳进发；派遣新野太守朱超石、宁朔将军胡藩进军阳城；派遣振武将军沈田子、建威将军傅弘之进军武关；派遣建武将军沈林子、彭城内史刘遵考带领水师从石门出发，自汴水入黄河；派遣冀州刺史王仲德督领前锋的几支部队，开通钜野被淤塞的旧河道，进入黄河。
English: He dispatched Longjing General Wang Zhenxiong and Champion General Dang Daoji to lead the infantry from Huaihe and Surabaya to Xuchang and Luoyang; dispatched Hsino Governor Zhu Chaoishi and Ningshuo General Hu Han to march into Yangcheng; dispatched Zhenwu General Shen Tianzi and Jianwei General Fu Hongzhi to march into Wuguan; dispatched Jianwu General Shen Linzi and Pengcheng Inner Historian Liu Zunkao to lead the sailors from Shimen to enter the Yellow River from Surabaya; dispatched Jizhou Governor Wang Zhongde to lead several forward troops to open the old

古文：遵考，裕之族弟也。
现代文：刘遵考是刘裕的本家弟弟。
English: Liu Zunkao is Liu Yu's younger brother.

古文：刘穆之谓王镇恶曰： 公今委卿以伐秦之任，卿其勉之！ 
现代文：刘穆之对王镇恶说： 刘公这次交给你讨伐秦国的重任，你可要努力呀！ 
English: Liu Muzhi said to Wang Zhenjun: Liu Gong has given you the important task of fighting against Qin this time, you must work hard!

古文：镇恶曰： 吾不克关中，誓不复济江！ 
现代文：王镇恶说： 我如果不攻克收复关中地区，发誓不再过长江！ 
English: Wang Zhenxiong said: If I do not conquer and recover the Guanzhong area, I swear not to cross the Yangtze River again!

古文：裕既行，青州刺史檀祗自广陵辄帅众至涂中掩讨亡命。
现代文：刘裕起兵出发之后，青州刺史檀祗便从广陵擅自率领军队到涂中掩杀讨伐逃亡的人。
English: After Liu Yu's army set out, the Qing Zhi Shi Danzhong led the army from Guangling to Tuzhong without authorization to kill those who fled the crusade.

古文：刘穆之恐祗为变，议欲遣军。
现代文：刘穆之担心檀祗趁机制造变乱，商议准备派军队防备。
English: Liu Muzhi was worried that Dang Xuan would take advantage of the situation to create turmoil, and discussed sending troops to guard against this.

古文：时檀韶为江州刺史，张邵曰： 今韶据中流，道济为军首，若有相疑之迹，则大府立危，不如逆遣慰劳以观其意，必无患也。 
现代文：当时，檀韶任江州刺史，张邵说： 现在檀韶占据长江中游，檀道济为讨伐秦国军队的重要将领，如果露出一些怀疑他的迹象，那么，留在京都的太尉府乃至朝廷，便会马上陷入危险，不如派人迎上去慰劳他，顺便观察一下他的意图，一定没什么可担忧的。 
English: At that time, Dangdang was in charge of the history of Jiangzhou, Zhang Shao said: Now Dangdang occupies the middle reaches of the Yangtze River, and Dangdang is an important general in the army of the Qin State. If he shows some signs of suspicion, then the captain's office and even the imperial court in Kyoto will immediately be in danger. It is better to send someone to meet him and comfort him, and by the way observe his intentions. There must be nothing to worry about.

古文：穆之乃止。
现代文：刘穆之这才停止行动。
English: Only then did Liu Mu Zhi stop the action.

古文：初，魏主嗣使公孙表讨白亚栗斯，曰： 必先与秦洛阳戍将相闻，使备河南岸，然后击之。 
现代文：当初，北魏国主拓跋嗣派遣公孙表前去讨伐白亚栗斯，说： 一定事先通知秦国的洛阳守将，让他们在黄河南岸严密设防，然后进攻他。 
English: At first, Tuoba Zi, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, sent Gongsun Bo to fight Bai Aris, saying: Be sure to inform the Luoyang governor of Qin in advance, let them set up a tight defense on the south bank of the Yellow River, and then attack him.

古文：表未至，胡人废白亚栗斯，更立刘虎为率善王。
现代文：公孙表还没有到达，胡人便废黜了白亚栗斯，重新拥立刘虎为率善王。
English: Before the grandson-in-law list arrived, the Hu people dethroned Bai Aris and re-established Liu Hu as the leading good king.

古文：表以胡人内自携贰，势必败散，遂不告秦将而击之，大为虎所败，士卒死伤甚众。
现代文：公孙表以为胡人内部勾心斗角、毫不团结，结果一定会失败溃散，于是并不通告后秦的守将，便发动了进攻，被刘虎打得大败，士卒中死伤的人很多。
English: The Gongsun table thought that the Hu people had internal quarrels and no unity, and the result would certainly fail and break up. Therefore, it did not inform the defenders of Houqin, and launched an attack. It was defeated by Liu Hu, and there were many dead and wounded among the soldiers.

古文：嗣谋于群臣曰： 胡叛逾年，讨之不克，其众繁多，为患日深。
现代文：拓跋嗣与各位大臣商议说： 胡人背叛我们，已超过了一年，征讨他们也没有获胜，他们的人数又很多，制造的祸患也一天比一天深。
English: "It's been more than a year since the Hu people betrayed us. They haven't won the battle, they're many in number, and the evil they've created is getting worse by the day," said Tuoba Zi, in consultation with the ministers.

古文：今盛秋不可复发兵，妨民农务，将若之何？ 
现代文：现在又正值盛秋，不可以再次发动军队前去讨伐，以免妨碍百姓收获庄稼，怎么办好呢？ 
English: Now that it is the height of autumn, what should be done if the army cannot be mobilized again to prevent the people from harvesting their crops?

古文：白马侯崔宏曰： 胡众虽多，无健将御之，终不能成大患。
现代文：白马侯崔宏说： 胡人虽然数量很多，却没有特别称职的大将统辖他们，终究不能成为太大的祸患。
English: Bai Ma Hou Cui Hong said: Although the Hu people are numerous, they do not have a particularly competent general to govern them. After all, they cannot become too big a scourge.

古文：表等诸军，不为不足，但法令不整，处分失宜，以致败耳。
现代文：公孙表等的几支军队，不能说力量不够，但是他们的军纪法令却不能严格统一，对战机的把握和对事情的处理都有失妥当，因此才导致了失败。
English: It cannot be said that several armies, such as the Gongsun table, are not strong enough, but their military discipline laws cannot be strictly unified. The grasp of the fighter plane and the handling of the matter are all inappropriate, which is why it led to failure.

古文：得大将素有威望者将数百骑往摄表军，无不克矣。
现代文：我看只要选好一员平时便很有威望的大将带领几百名骑兵，前去统御公孙表的军队，便没有不打胜仗的。
English: I think that as long as we choose a good general who is very prestigious in peacetime to lead hundreds of cavalry and go forward to control the army of Gongsun watch, there is no war without victory.

古文：相州刺史叔孙建前在并州，为胡、魏所畏服，诸将莫及，可遣也。 
现代文：相州刺史叔孙建，以前在并州任职，胡人、汉人对他都很害怕敬服，其他将领都赶不上他，可以派他去。 
English: Sun Jian, the commander of the Xiangzhou Military Region, previously served in Bozhou. Hu people and Han people are very afraid of and respect him. Other generals can't catch up with him and can send him there.

古文：嗣从之，以建为中领军，督表等讨虎。
现代文：拓跋嗣依从了他的建议，任命叔孙建为中领军，监督公孙表等人去讨伐刘虎。
English: Tuoba Zi followed his suggestion and appointed his uncle Sun Jian as the central leader, supervising Gongsun He and others to fight against Liu Hu.

古文：九月，戊午，大破之，斩首万馀级，虎及司马顺宰皆死，俘其众十万馀口。
现代文：九月，戊午，把敌军打得大败，杀死了一万多人，刘虎和司马顺宰全部战死，俘虏了那里的百姓十万多口。
English: In September, Wu Wu defeated the enemy army and killed more than ten thousand people. Liu Hu and Sima Shunzai all died in battle, and more than one hundred thousand people were captured there.

古文：太尉裕至彭城，加领徐州刺史；以太原王玄谟为从事史。
现代文：东晋太尉刘裕抵达彭城，朝廷加任他领徐州刺史。任命太原人王玄谟为从事史。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty's Lieutenant Liu Yu arrived in Pengcheng, and the imperial court appointed him as the leader of Xuzhou and appointed the Taiyuan person Wang Xuan Moo as the leader of history.

古文：初，王廞之败也，沙门昙永匿其幼子华，使提衣襆自随，津逻疑之。
现代文：当初，王失败的时候，僧人昙永把他的小儿子王华藏了起来，让他扮做童仆，提着自己的衣裳行李，跟在后面。
English: At first, when Wang failed, the monk Shanyong hid his little son Wang Hua, and let him dress up as a servant and carry his clothes and luggage behind him.

古文：昙永呵华曰： 奴子何不速行！ 
现代文：码头巡逻检查的人对这孩子产生怀疑，昙永呵斥王华说： 你这小奴才，为什么不快走？ 
English: The person patrolling and inspecting the dock became suspicious of the child. Hao Yong yelled at Wang Hua and said, "You little minion, why don't you leave?

古文：棰之数十，由是得免；遇赦，还吴。
现代文：用棍子打了他几十下，因此才免于被识破。后来，遇到大赦，他才到吴郡。
English: He was beaten dozens of times with a stick to avoid detection, and only later, after an amnesty, did he come to Wuxi County.

古文：以其父存亡不测，布蔬食，绝交游不仕，十馀年。
现代文：他因为父亲下落不明，不知是死是活，所以只穿布衣，只吃蔬菜，拒绝与别人交游，不出来做官，这样过了十几年。
English: Because his father's whereabouts were unknown, and he did not know whether he was alive or dead, he only wore cloth clothes, ate vegetables, refused to travel with others, and did not go out to work as an official. This went on for more than ten years.

古文：裕闻华贤，欲用之，乃发廞丧，使华制服。
现代文：刘裕听说王华贤明，打算征用他，于是便为王发丧，让王华穿了三年的丧服。
English: Liu Yu heard that Wang Huaxianming planned to requisition him, so he held a funeral for Wang Huaxianming and made Wang Huaxianming wear a three-year mourning dress.

古文：服阕，辟为徐州主簿。
现代文：三年之后，征召他为徐州主簿。
English: Three years later, he was recruited as the Xuzhou master.

古文：王镇恶、檀道济入秦境，所向皆捷。
现代文：王镇恶、檀道济进入了后秦的境界，所过之处，全部告捷。
English: Wang Zhenxiong and Dang Daozi entered the realm of the post-Qin Dynasty, and wherever they went, they were all successful.

古文：秦将王苟生以漆丘降镇恶，徐州刺史姚掌以项城降道济，诸屯守皆望风款附。
现代文：后秦将领王苟生献出漆丘，向王镇恶投降；后秦徐州刺史姚掌献出项城，投降了檀道济。
English: Later Qin generals Wang Guosheng offered Shizuoka, and surrendered to Wang Zhenxiong; later Qin Xuzhou general Zhi Shi Yao Pan offered Xiangcheng, and surrendered to Tang.

古文：惟新蔡太守董遵不下，道济攻拔其城，执遵，杀之。
现代文：其他的那些保卫地方的守军也都听见东晋军消息便前来归顺，只有新蔡太守董遵不肯屈服。檀道济攻克了他所坚守的城池，抓住了董遵，把他杀了。
English: The other defenders of the region also heard the news of the East Jin army and came to surrender. Only the new Empress Dowager Cai's guardian, Dong Zun, refused to give in. Dandoji attacked the castle he was defending, captured Dong Zun, and killed him.

古文：进克许昌，获秦颍川太守姚垣及大将杨业。
现代文：他们进军克复了许昌，抓获了后秦颖川太守姚垣，以及大将军杨业。
English: They marched in and defeated Xu Chang, captured the late Qin Yingchuan's governor Yao Qi, as well as the general Yang Ye.

古文：沈林子自汴入河，襄邑人董神虎聚众千馀人来降。太尉裕版为参军。
现代文：沈林子从汴水进入黄河，襄邑人董神虎聚集了一千多部众赶来投降，太尉刘裕任命他为参军。
English: Shen Linzi entered the Yellow River from Surabaya. Dong Shenhu, a resident of Xiangyuan, gathered more than a thousand people to come and surrender. Lieutenant Liu Yu appointed him to join the army.

古文：林子与神虎共攻仓垣，克之，秦兗州刺史韦华降。神虎擅还襄邑，林子杀之。
现代文：沈林子与董神虎一起进攻仓垣，并把那里攻破，后秦兖州刺史韦华投降，董神虎擅自回到家乡襄邑，沈林子把他杀了。
English: Shen Linzi and Dong Shenhu attacked Cangyuan together, and broke through there. After Qin Shanzhou stabbed Shi Weihua to surrender, Dong Shenhu returned to his hometown of Xiangyuan without authorization, and Shen Linzi killed him.

古文：秦东平公绍言于秦主泓曰： 晋兵已过许昌，安定孤远，难以救卫，宜迁其镇户，内实京畿，可得精兵十万，虽晋、夏交侵，犹不亡国。
现代文：后秦东平公姚绍向后秦国主姚泓进言道： 晋军已经过了许昌，安定遥远孤立，很难救援守卫，应该把迁到那里充实防务和农耕的镇户全部迁回，充实京畿的力量，这样，可以得到十万精锐部队，虽然晋朝和夏国轮流入侵，也还不至于使国家沦亡。
English: Yao Shao, the post-Qin Dongping Gong, said to Yao Jun, the post-Qin sovereign, "The Jin army has passed Xuchang, it is stable, distant and isolated, and it is difficult to rescue and guard. All the townspeople who moved there to strengthen defense and agriculture should be moved back, and the strength of Gyeonggi should be strengthened. In this way, one hundred thousand elite troops can be obtained. Although the Jin dynasty and Xia country take turns to invade, they will not cause the country to fall.

古文：不然，晋攻豫州，夏攻安定，将若之何？
现代文：如果不这样的话，晋国进攻豫州，夏国进攻安定，我们怎么办呢？
English: Otherwise, what should we do if Jin attacked Yuzhou, while Xia attacked and stabilized?

古文：事机已至，宜在速决。 
现代文：事情的关键时刻已经到来，应该尽快决定。 
English: The crunch time has come and it should be decided as soon as possible.

古文：左仆射梁喜曰： 刘公恢有威名，为岭北所惮，镇人已与勃勃深仇，理应守死无贰。
现代文：左仆射梁喜说： 齐公姚恢一向有威勇的名声，岭北一带的军民对他都很害怕，镇守在那里的人也已与赫连勃勃结下深仇，所以理所应当拚死拒守，没有别的想法。
English: His left-hand man, Xie Liangxi, said: "Qigong Yao Wei has always had a reputation for bravery. The soldiers and civilians in the northern part of Lingbei are very afraid of him. The town guards there have also formed a deep-rooted enmity with Herengong. Therefore, it is only natural that they should stubbornly refuse to defend themselves. They have no other thoughts.

古文：勃勃终不能越安定远寇京畿；若无安定，虏马必至于郿。
现代文：赫连勃勃到最后也不会越过安定，远征京师。如果没有安定这座屏障，强盗的战马一定会进发到县。
English: Kherlian vigorously to the end will not cross the stable, expeditionary Beijing division. If this barrier is not stable, the robber's warhorse will certainly enter and leave the county.

古文：今关中兵足以拒晋，无为豫自损削也。 
现代文：现在，关中的兵马足可以抵抗东晋，不应该自己先损害削弱自己。 
English: Now, Guanzhong's Terracotta Army can resist the Eastern Jin Dynasty, it should not weaken itself first.

古文：泓从之。
现代文：姚泓听从了他的话。
English: Yao Yao obeyed his words.

古文：吏部郎懿横密言于泓曰： 恢于广平之难，有忠勋于毕下。
现代文：吏部郎懿横秘密地向姚泓进言道： 姚恢在广平之难的时候，对陛下忠诚不二，立下大功。
English: The secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Lang Xuan, secretly said to Yao Xuan: Yao Xuan, in the difficult time of Guangping, was loyal to His Majesty and made great achievements.

古文：自陛下龙飞绍统，未有殊赏为答其意。
现代文：自从陛下继承大统当上皇帝之后，也没有给他特别的封赏，报答他的忠心。
English: Since His Majesty succeeded to the throne, there has been no special reward for his loyalty.

古文：今外则致之死地，内则不豫朝权，安定人自以孤危逼寇，思南迁者十室而九，若恢拥精兵数万，鼓行而向京师，得不为社稷之累乎！
现代文：现在，对他来说，在外是把他遗弃在必死之地，在内又不让他参预朝廷的决策，安定的百姓自认为一座孤城岌岌可危，强敌又渐渐逼近，因此希望迁回南方的人十有九个。如果姚恢操纵几万精锐部队，擂起战鼓向京师进发，岂不是国家的大麻烦吗？
English: Now, for him, the outside world is abandoning him to a place of certain death, and he is not allowed to participate in the decision-making of the imperial court. The stable people think that a lonely city is precarious, and a strong enemy is gradually approaching, so nine out of ten people hope to move back to the south. If Yao Jiao manipulates tens of thousands of elite troops and sets up a war drum to march to the Beijing division, is it not a big trouble for the country?

古文：宜征还朝廷以慰其心。 
现代文：应该把他征召回朝廷，安慰他的情绪。 
English: He should be called back to the court to soothe his emotions.

古文：泓曰、 恢若怀不逞之心，征之适所以速祸耳。 
现代文：姚泓说： 姚恢如果心怀不轨，阴谋叛逆，把他征召回朝，不过正好加速灾祸的到来罢了。 
English: Yao Wei said: "If Yao Wei is a traitor and a conspirator, calling him back to the North will only speed up the arrival of the disaster.

古文：又不从。
现代文：又不接受他的意见。
English: Wang Yao again did not listen.

古文：王仲德水军入河，将逼滑台。
现代文：东晋王仲德率领的水师进入黄河，即将迫近滑台。
English: The sailors led by East Jin King Zhongde entered the Yellow River and were about to approach the slide.

古文：魏兗州刺史尉建畏懦，帅众弃城，北渡河。
现代文：北魏兖州刺史尉建怯懦畏惧，统率部众放弃守城，向北渡过黄河。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, the governor of Bozhou, Shishi Jian, was afraid and cowardly, so he led the people to abandon the defense of the city and crossed the Yellow River to the north.

古文：仲德入滑台，宣言曰： 晋本欲以布帛七万匹假道于魏，不谓魏之守将弃城遽去。 
现代文：王仲德进入了滑台，并宣告说： 我们晋朝本来打算用七万匹布帛做代价向魏国借道，却想不到魏国的守将却突然放弃城池逃跑。 
English: Wang Zhongde entered the slide and announced: We, the Jin dynasty, had originally planned to use seventy thousand cloth donkeys as a price to take a detour to Wei, but we did not expect that the defenders of Wei would suddenly abandon the city and flee.

古文：魏主嗣闻之，遣叔孙建、公孙表自河内向枋头，因引兵济河，斩尉建于城下，投尸于河。呼仲德军人，问以侵寇之状。仲德使司马竺和之对曰： 刘太尉使王征虏自河入洛，清扫山陵，非敢为寇于魏也。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣听说后，派遣叔孙建、公孙表从河内向枋头进军，又带兵渡过黄河，在滑台城下杀掉尉建，把他的尸体投入黄河，并向王仲德的部下诘问为什么入侵进犯，王仲德派司马竺和之上前回答说： 刘太尉派遣征虏将军王仲德从黄河进军洛阳，去清扫晋室的祖先陵墓，并不敢向魏国发动进攻。
English: Upon hearing of this, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tu Baji, sent his uncle Sun Jian and his father-in-law Sun Bo to march from Hanoi to Shantou. He also led his troops across the Yellow River, killed Yi Jian under the city of Niu Tai, threw his body into the Yellow River, and asked Wang Zhongde's subordinates why they were invading. Wang Zhongde sent Sima Yanhe to answer: "Lieutenant Liu sent the conscript general Wang Zhongde to march from the Yellow River to Luoyang to clean the ancestral tombs of the Jin family, and did not dare to launch an attack on Wei.

古文：魏之守将自弃滑台去，王征虏借空城以息兵，行当西引，于晋、魏之好无废也，何必扬旗鸣鼓以曜威乎！ 
现代文：魏的守将自己放弃滑台逃走，王将军才借助这座空城安歇部队，我们马上就要向西进发，对晋、魏的和睦关系并不妨碍。你们有什么必要高扬战旗，紧擂战鼓显示威力呢？ 
English: The Wei defenders gave up their base and fled. It was only with the help of this empty city that General Wang was able to rest his troops. We are about to head west. This does not interfere with the harmonious relationship between Jin and Wei. Why do you need to raise the battle flag and clench the war drums to show your power?

古文：嗣使建以问太尉裕，裕逊辞谢之曰： 洛阳，晋之旧都，而羌据之；晋欲修复山陵久矣。
现代文：拓跋嗣又派叔孙建质问东晋太尉刘裕，刘裕谦逊地道歉说： 洛阳是我们晋朝的旧都，但是，却被羌人占据了，我们晋朝打算修复晋室祖先陵墓已经有很长时间了。
English: Tuoba Zi also sent his uncle and grandson Jian to question the Eastern Jin's Lieutenant Liu Yu. Liu Yu humbly apologized and said: Luoyang is the old capital of our Jin Dynasty, but it has been occupied by barbarians. Our Jin Dynasty has been planning to repair the mausoleum of the ancestors of the Jin Dynasty for a long time.

古文：诸醒宗族，司马休之、国璠兄弟，鲁宗之父子，皆晋之蠹也，而羌收之以为晋患。
现代文：而桓氏的同属亲属，司马休之、司马国兄弟，鲁宗之父子等人，都是晋朝的蠹虫和叛逆，但是羌贼们却收留他们，给我们留下后患。
English: And the relatives of the same family of the Huan clan, Sima Xiu Zhi, Sima Guo brothers, Lu Zong's father and son, and so on, were all maggots and rebels of the Jin Dynasty, but the bandits took them in, leaving us a legacy.

古文：今晋将伐之，欲假道于魏，非敢为不利也。 
现代文：现在我们晋朝准备讨伐他，打算向你们魏国借一条道，不敢对你们有什么不利的举动。 
English: Now we, the Jin dynasty, are preparing to fight him, intending to borrow a path from you, the Wei dynasty, and dare not take any adverse action against you.

古文：魏河内镇将于栗磾有勇名，筑垒于河上以备侵轶。
现代文：北魏镇守河内的大将于栗有勇武的名声，在黄河岸上构筑堡垒，防备东晋的侵扰。
English: The Great General of the Northern Wei Dynasty, who guarded Hanoi, had a reputation for bravery and built a fortress on the banks of the Yellow River to guard against the invasion of the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：裕以书与之，题曰 黑槊公麾下 。
现代文：刘裕写一封信给他，上面的称呼是： 黑公麾下。 
English: Liu Yu wrote a letter to him, the salutation on it was: "Heigong's subordinate."

古文：栗磾好操黑槊以自标，故裕以此目之。
现代文：于栗喜欢使用黑做武器，因此这成了他的标志，所以，刘裕才这样称呼他。
English: Yu Chul liked to use black as a weapon, so it became his trademark, so Liu Yu just called him that.

古文：魏因拜栗磾为黑槊将军。
现代文：北魏于是拜授于栗为黑将军。
English: Therefore, the Northern Wei Dynasty honored Yu Chestnut as the Black General.

古文：冬，十月，壬戌，魏主嗣如豺山宫。
现代文：冬季，十月，壬戌，北魏国主拓跋嗣前往豺山宫。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty went to Shaoshan Palace.

古文：初，燕将库傉官斌降魏，既而复叛归燕。
现代文：当初，北燕将领库宫斌投降了北魏，不久又背叛北魏重新归附北燕。
English: At first, Beiyan general Ku Gongbin surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty, but soon he betrayed the Northern Wei Dynasty and rejoined Beiyan.

古文：魏主嗣遣骁骑将军延普渡濡水击斌，斩之；遂攻燕幽州刺史傉官昌、征北将军库傉官提，皆斩之。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣派遣骁骑将军延普，渡过濡水去进攻库官斌，把他杀了。于是，他们又乘胜进攻北燕幽州刺史库官昌、征北将军库官提，把他们全部杀掉。
English: The Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba sent the cavalry general Yan Pu across the wet water to attack Kuang Bin and killed him. Therefore, they took advantage of the victory to attack the Northern Yan Yuzhou cavalry general Kuang Chang and the Northern Expeditionary cavalry general Kuang Ti and killed them all.

古文：秦阳城、荥阳二城皆降，晋兵进至成皋。
现代文：后秦阳城、荥阳两座城全部投降，东晋部队进发到成皋。
English: After Qin Yangcheng and Shenyang both surrendered, the East Jin forces marched to Chengdu.

古文：秦征南将军陈留公洸镇洛阳，遣使求救于长安。
现代文：后秦征南将军陈留公姚镇守洛阳，派遣信使向长安请求救援。
English: After the Qin conquered the south, the general Chen Liugong Yao Zhen guarded Luoyang and sent a messenger to Chang'an to request rescue.

古文：秦主泓遣越骑校尉阎生帅骑三千救之，武卫将军姚益男将步卒一万助守洛阳，又遣并州牧姚懿南屯陕津，为之声援。
现代文：后秦王姚泓派遣越骑校尉阎生率领三千骑兵赶来救助，派遣武卫将军姚益男带领一万步兵去协助镇守洛阳，又派并州牧姚懿向南去屯扎在陕津，作为他们的声援。
English: Afterward, Qin King Yao Jie sent Viet Cavalry Captain Yan Sheng to lead 3,000 cavalrymen to come to the rescue, sent Wuwei General Yao Yixuan to lead 10,000 infantrymen to assist in the defense of Luoyang, and sent the provincial governor Yao Jie to the south to camp in Shaanxi, as their solidarity.

古文：宁朔将军赵玄言于洸曰： 今晋寇益深，人情骇动，众寡不敌，若出战不捷，则大事去矣。
现代文：宁朔将军赵玄对姚进言道： 现在晋寇越来越深入我们国土，人心震骇动摇。他们人多我们人少无法抵挡他们，如果出去迎战，反而不能取胜，那么我们的宏伟事业便会一去不复返了。
English: Ningshuo General Zhao Xuan said to Yao Jin, "Now that the Jin and Qiang armies are penetrating deeper and deeper into our territory, our hearts are shaken and shaken. They are more numerous than we are, and we are less able to resist them. If we go out to fight, but fail to win, then our great cause will be gone forever."

古文：宜摄诸戍之兵，固守金墉，以待西师之救。
现代文：所以，我们应该按几处镇守的大军不动，坚守金墉，以等待西部的军队前来救援。
English: Therefore, we should not move the large army of several town guards and hold on to Jinlu to wait for the western army to come to the rescue.

古文：金墉不下，晋必不敢越我而西，是我不战而坐收其弊也。 
现代文：金墉不被攻克，晋军一定不敢越过我们向西进发，这样，我们便可以不去迎战，坐在这里等待他们出现漏洞。 
English: If Jinju is not conquered, the Jin army will not dare to advance westward past us. In this way, we can not go to war, but sit here and wait for them to find loopholes.

古文：司马姚禹阴与檀道济通，主簿阎恢、杨虔，皆禹之党也，共嫉玄，言于洸曰： 殿下以英武之略，受任方面；今婴城示弱，得无为朝廷所责乎！ 
现代文：司马姚禹暗地里与东晋的檀道济勾结、通谋，主簿阎恢、杨虔都是姚禹的党羽，他们都非常嫉妒、厌恶赵玄，所以便对姚进言道： 殿下因为有英明勇武的谋略和能力，接受独当一面的国家重任。现在只是环城坚守，向敌人显示自己的懦弱，怎么能不受到朝廷的责备呢？ 
English: Sima Yao Yu secretly colluded and conspired with the Eastern Jin's worship of Taoism and economy, and Yan Hui and Yang Qian were Yao Yu's followers. They were all very jealous and disgusted with Zhao Xuan, so they said to Yao Jin: Your highness, because of your heroic and courageous strategy and ability, accepted the sole responsibility of the country. Now you are just holding on to Huancheng and showing your cowardice to the enemy. How can you not be reproached by the court?

古文：洸以为然，乃遣赵玄将兵千馀南守柏谷坞，广武将军石无讳东戍巩城。
现代文：姚也认为是这样，于是派遣赵玄带领部众一千多人，向南驻守柏谷坞，派广武将军石无讳向东戍卫巩城。
English: Yao also thought so, so he sent Zhao Xuan to lead more than a thousand people to the south to garrison Baiyun Dock, and sent Guangwu General Shi Muxin to the east to defend Gongcheng.

古文：玄泣谓洸曰： 玄受三帝重恩，所守正有死耳。
现代文：赵玄流着泪对姚说： 我赵玄接受三代皇帝的重恩，所一直坚守的志向正是以死相报而已。
English: With tears streaming down his face, Zhao Xuan said to Yao: I, Zhao Xuan, have received the great favor of three generations of emperors. The ambition I have always adhered to has been rewarded with death.

古文：但明公不用忠臣之言，为奸人所误，后必悔之。 
现代文：但是您不采纳忠臣的良言，被奸臣耽误，以后一定后悔。 
English: But if you do not accept the good advice of a loyal subject and are delayed by a treacherous subject, you will surely regret it in the future.

古文：既而成皋、虎牢皆来降，檀道济等长驱而进，无讳至石关，奔还。
现代文：不久，成皋、虎牢都投降东晋，檀道济等人带领大部队长驱直入。石无讳抵达石关，逃了回来。
English: Soon after, Chengyu and Hougang surrendered to the East Jin, and Dangdoji and others drove straight in with the leader of the large force. Shi Muxing arrived at Shiguan and escaped back.

古文：龙骧司马荥阳毛德祖与玄战于柏谷，玄兵败，被十馀创，据地大呼。
现代文：东晋龙骧司马荥阳人毛德祖，在柏谷与赵玄展开战斗，赵玄的军队失败，他身受十几处伤，跌倒在地，大声呼喊。
English: Mao Tse-tung, the founder of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, fought against Zhao Xuan in the Kashi Valley. Zhao Xuan's army was defeated, he suffered more than a dozen injuries, fell to the ground, and shouted loudly.

古文：玄司马蹇鉴冒刃抱玄而泣，玄曰： 吾创已重，君宜速去！ 
现代文：赵玄的司马蹇鉴，冒着被杀的危险，抱住赵玄而哭。赵玄说： 我的伤太重了，你应该快点逃走！ 
English: Zhao Xuan's horse trainer, risking being killed, hugged Zhao Xuan and cried. Zhao Xuan said: My injury is too severe, you should run away quickly!

古文：鉴曰： 将军不济，鉴去安之！ 
现代文：蹇鉴说： 将军不脱离危险，我蹇鉴到哪里去？ 
English: Yan Jian said: If the general is not out of danger, where should I go?

古文：与之皆死。
现代文：最后与他一起死了。
English: He committed suicide together with Shin Min.

古文：姚禹逾城奔道济，甲子，道济进逼洛阳。丙寅，洸出降。
现代文：姚禹跳出城来投奔檀道济。甲子，檀道济进军逼近洛阳，丙寅，姚出城投降。
English: Yao Yu jumped out of the city to join the Buddhist Daoists. Gao Zi, the Buddhist Daoists marched into Luoyang, and Yin Yin, Yao went out of the city to surrender.

古文：道济获秦人四千馀人，议者欲尽坑之以为京观。
现代文：檀道济俘获后秦国人四千多，有提建议的人打算把他们全部活埋，筑起一座土丘。
English: After the capture of Dandooji, there were more than four thousand Qin people. Some people proposed to bury them all alive and build a mound.

古文：道济曰： 伐罪吊民，正在今日！ 
现代文：檀道济说： 讨伐罪人，安抚平民，今天正是时候！ 
English: "Today is the right time to crack down on criminals and pacify the public," he said.

古文：皆释而遣之。
现代文：于是，把他们全部释放，遣送回家。
English: Release all the prisoners and send them away.

古文：于是夷、夏感悦，归之者甚众。
现代文：从此，不管是夷族还是汉族，都非常感激高兴，前来归附的人非常多。
English: Since then, both Yi and Han people have been very grateful and happy, and many people have come to join.

古文：阎生、姚益男未至，闻洛阳已没，不敢进。
现代文：阎生、姚益男还没有赶到，听说洛阳已经沦陷，没有敢继续前进。
English: Yan Sheng and Yao Yizhong had not arrived yet. They heard that Luoyang had fallen and did not dare to continue.

古文：己丑，诏遣兼司空高密王恢之修谒五陵，置守卫。
现代文：乙丑，东晋安帝下诏派遣兼司空、高密王司马恢之修复拜谒五位皇帝的陵墓，并设置守卫部队。
English: In the second year of the ugly, Eastern Jin Dynasty, Emperor An issued an edict to dispatch concurrently Siku and Gaomi Wang Sima to restore the mausoleums of the five emperors, and set up a guard force.

古文：太尉裕以冠军将军毛修之为河南、河内二郡太守，行司州事，戍洛阳。
现代文：太尉刘裕任命冠军将军毛之为河南、河内二郡太守，代理司州的政事，戍守洛阳。
English: Captain Liu Yu appointed the champion general Mao Xicheng as the governor of two counties in Henan and Hanoi, acting as the governor of the state, and the governor of Luoyang.

古文：西秦王炽磐使秦州刺史王松寿镇马头，以逼秦之上邽。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐派遣秦州刺史王松寿镇守马头，用来对后秦的上造成压力。
English: The Western Qin king, Guzhuagang, dispatched the Qin governor, Wang Songshou, to guard the horse's head, which was used to put pressure on the Upper Qin.

古文：十一月，甲戌，魏主嗣还平城。
现代文：十一月，甲戌，北魏国主拓跋嗣回到平城。
English: In November, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, returned to Pingcheng.

古文：太尉裕遣左长史王弘还建康，讽朝廷求九锡。
现代文：太尉刘裕派遣左长史王弘返回建康，委婉地向安帝请求，加授自己九锡。
English: The captain Liu Yu sent the left captain Shi Wang Hong to return to Jiankang, and asked An Di to award him Jiuxi.

古文：时刘穆之掌留任，而旨从北来，穆之由是愧惧发病。
现代文：这时刘穆之执掌留守的大权，但是这旨意却是刘裕自己在北方提出，又通过别人传来，刘穆之从此既惭愧又害怕，得了疾病。
English: At this time, Liu Mu Zhi was left in charge of the power, but this order was proposed by Liu Yu himself in the north and passed on by others. Liu Mu Zhi was ashamed and afraid and got sick.

古文：弘，珣之子也。
现代文：王弘是王的儿子。
English: Wang Hong is the son of a king.

古文：十二月，壬申，诏以裕为相国、总百揆、扬州牧，封十郡为宋公，备九锡之礼，位在诸侯王上，领征西将军、司、豫、北徐、雍四州刺史如故，裕辞不受。
现代文：十二月，壬申，安帝下诏任命刘裕为相国、总百揆、扬州牧，加封为食邑十郡的宋公，备办九锡的礼仪，尊位在各诸侯王之上，并仍像原来那样兼任征西将军，司、豫、北徐、雍四州刺史。刘裕推辞，不接受任命。
English: In December, in Jinshin, Emperor An issued an edict appointing Liu Yu as the father of the country, the general of Baekje and Yangzhou, the governor of Yangzhou, and the Song Emperor of the Ten Counties, preparing the ceremony of Jiuxi, and the dignity above the princes and kings, and still serving as the general of the Western Expedition, and the historian of Si, Yu, Beixu and Yong. Liu Yu declined and did not accept the appointment.

古文：西秦王炽磐遣使诣太尉裕，求击秦以自效。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐派遣使节前来拜见东晋太尉刘裕，请求进攻后秦，主动为刘裕效力。
English: The king of Western Qin begged the Great Wall to send an envoy to visit Liu Yu, the Eastern Jin's first lieutenant, and asked him to attack Western Qin. He then volunteered to serve Liu Yu.

古文：裕拜炽磐平西将军、河南公。
现代文：刘裕授乞伏炽磐为平西将军、河南公。
English: Liu Yuzhu became the general of Pingxi and the prince of Henan.

古文：秦姚懿司马孙畅说懿使袭长安，诛东平公绍，废秦主泓而代之。
现代文：后秦姚懿的司马孙畅劝说姚懿，让他去回击长安，杀死东平公姚绍，废掉国主姚泓，自己代替他登基。
English: Later, Qin Yao Jie's secretary Ma Sun Chang persuaded Yao Jie to counterattack Chang'an, kill Dongping Gong Yao Shao, depose the head of state Yao Jie, and ascend to the throne in his place.

古文：懿以为然，乃散谷以赐河北夷、夏，欲树私恩。
现代文：姚懿认为很对，于是把粮食发放给河北的夷族与汉族，打算以此树立一些个人的恩德，收买民心。
English: Yao Wei thought it was right, so he distributed grain to the Yi and Han ethnic groups in Hebei, intending to use it to establish some personal benevolence and win the hearts of the people.

古文：左常侍张敞、侍郎左雅谏曰： 殿下以母弟居方面，安危休戚，与国同之。
现代文：左常侍张敞、侍郎左雅劝阻他说： 殿下以皇帝的同母弟弟的身份坐镇一方，自己的安危悲喜，与皇帝和国家是一样的。
English: Zuo's personal attendant Zhang Zhang and his valet Zuo Ya dissuaded him, saying, "Your highness, as the emperor's younger brother by the same mother, sits on one side of the town, and your own safety, happiness and sorrow are the same as the emperor and the country.

古文：今吴寇内侵。四州倾没，西虏扰边，秦、凉覆败，朝廷之危，有如累卵。
现代文：现在吴地的敌人前来侵犯，四州已经丧失，西部的强盗也不断地骚扰边境，秦州、凉州已经倾覆失败，朝廷的危险程度，像垒在一起的鸡蛋那样。
English: Now the enemies of Wu have come to invade, the four states have been lost, the western bandits are constantly harassing the border, Qinzhou and Liangzhou have been overthrown and defeated, and the danger level of the imperial court is like eggs that are stacked together.

古文：谷者，国之本也，而殿下无故散之，虚损国储，将若之何？ 
现代文：粮食是国家政权稳定的基础，殿下无缘无故地把它散发掉，倒空损耗国家的储备，将来怎么办？ 
English: Grain is the basis for the stability of state power. Your highness is distributing it for no reason, depleting the country's reserves. What will happen in the future?

古文：懿怒，笞杀之。
现代文：姚懿勃然大怒，鞭打他们至死。
English: Yao Yao flew into a rage and whipped them to death.

古文：泓闻之，召东平公绍，密与之谋。
现代文：姚泓听说了这个消息，召东平公姚绍进宫与他秘密商议。
English: Yao Zhe heard the news and called Dongping Gong Yao Shao into the palace to secretly discuss with him.

古文：绍曰： 懿性识鄙浅，从物推移。造此谋者，必孙畅也。
现代文：姚绍说： 姚懿性格卑鄙，见识浅薄，听人话行事，想出这种主意的，一定是孙畅。
English: Yao Shao said: Yao Yao's character is despicable, his knowledge is shallow, he listens to others, and it must be Sun Chang who came up with this idea.

古文：但驰使征畅，遣抚军将军赞据陕城，臣向潼关为诸军节度，若畅奉诏而至，臣当遣懿帅河东见兵共御晋师；若不受诏命，便当声其罪而讨之。 
现代文：只要派信使飞马去把孙畅征召来，再派抚军将军姚据守陕城，我再去潼关调遣指挥各支军队。如果孙畅接受诏书来京，我便派遣姚懿统领河东的现有部队去抵抗晋军；如果他不接受征召，便可以公布他的罪状，公开讨伐他。 
English: As long as I send the messenger Pegasus to call up Sun Chang, and then send General Yao of the General Staff to guard Shaanxi City, I will then go to Shaoguan to dispatch the command of each army. If Sun Chang accepts the edict to come to Beijing, I will send Yao Jun to lead the existing troops in Hedong to resist the Jin army; if he does not accept the call-up, he can announce his crimes and openly fight him.

古文：泓曰： 叔父之言，杜稷之计也。 
现代文：姚泓说： 叔叔这些话，真是拯救国家的好办法。 
English: Yao Wei said: Uncle, these words are really a good way to save the country.

古文：乃遣姚赞及冠军将军司马国璠、建义将军也玄屯陕津，武卫将军姚驴屯潼关。
现代文：于是派遣姚和冠军将军司马国、建义将军玄，驻扎在陕津，派遣武卫将军姚驴屯扎在潼关。
English: As a result, they sent Yao and champion generals Sima Guo and Jianyi General Xuan to be stationed in Shaanxi and Jin, and sent Wuwei General Yao Ass Tun to be stationed in Shaoguan.

古文：懿遂举兵称帝，传檄州郡，欲运匈奴堡谷以给镇人。
现代文：姚懿于是发动大军，自称皇帝，向各州郡传递公告檄文，打算把匈奴堡的粮食运来蒲阪供应自己的部众。
English: Yao Wei then launched a large army, claimed to be the emperor, and sent a proclamation to the states and counties, intending to transport the grain from Xiongnu Fort to Busan to supply his troops.

古文：宁东将军姚成都拒之，懿卑辞诱之，送佩刀为誓，成都不从。
现代文：宁东将军姚成都拒绝，姚懿用谦卑的话引诱他，并把自己的佩刀送给他做盟誓的见证，姚成都仍然不听从。
English: Yao Chengdu, the general of Ningdong, refused. Yao Yao lured him with humble words and gave him his own saber as a witness to the oath. Yao Chengdu still did not obey.

古文：懿遣骁骑将军王国帅甲士数百攻成都，成都击禽之，遣使让懿曰： 明公以至亲当重任，国危不能救，而更图非望；三祖之灵，其肯佐明公乎！
现代文：姚懿派遣骁骑将军王国带领几百名全副武装的士卒去袭击姚成都，姚成都把他们击败抓获，派遣使者责备姚懿说： 您以皇帝至亲的身份担当重任，国家危急的时候不能上前解救，却反倒图谋非分的想望。三位祖先的在天神灵，怎么能够保佑您呢？
English: Yao Zheng dispatched the General of the Kingdom of Horse Cavalry to attack Yao Chengdu with several hundred fully armed soldiers. Yao Chengdu defeated and captured them, and sent an envoy to reproach Yao Zheng, saying: You, as the emperor's closest relative, are responsible for a heavy task. When the country is in a critical situation, you cannot go forward to rescue, but on the contrary, you try to find fault. How can the three ancestors bless you in the spirit of the gods?

古文：成都将纠合义兵，往见明公于河上耳。 
现代文：我姚成都准备纠集义兵，前往黄河之上与您相见。 
English: I, Yao Chengdu, am preparing to gather volunteers and go to the Yellow River to meet you.

古文：于是传檄诸城，谕以逆顺，征兵调食以讨懿。
现代文：于是向各个城池传送檄文，明确告诉他们什么是顺天，什么是叛逆，征集部队调动军粮，用来讨伐姚懿。
English: Therefore, the imperial edict was sent to all cities and towns, clearly telling them what was auspicious and what was rebellious, and conscripting troops to mobilize military grain to be used to fight against Yao Xuan.

古文：懿亦发诸城兵，莫有应者，惟临晋数千户应懿。
现代文：姚懿也发动几个城的守军，但是却没有响应他的，只有临晋的几千户人家响应。
English: Yao Wei also launched the defenders of several cities, but they did not respond to him. Only several thousand households in Linjin responded.

古文：成都引兵济河，击临晋叛者，破之。
现代文：姚成都带兵渡过黄河，对临晋的叛军发动进攻，把他们打败。
English: Yao Chengdu led his troops across the Yellow River and launched an attack on the rebels in Linjin, defeating them.

古文：镇人安定郭纯等起兵围懿。
现代文：姚懿手下的蒲阪士兵、安定人郭纯等人拉起队伍包围姚懿。
English: The Busan soldiers under Yao Yao's command, the stableman Guo Chun, and others surrounded Yao Yao.

古文：东平公绍入蒲阪，执懿，诛孙畅等。
现代文：东平公姚绍进入蒲阪，抓获姚懿，杀死孙畅等人。
English: Dongping Gong Yao Shao entered Busan, captured Yao Yao, killed Sun Chang and others.

古文：是岁，魏卫将军安城孝元王叔孙俊卒。
现代文：这一年，北魏卫将军、安城孝元王叔孙俊去世。
English: In this year, the Northern Wei Wei general, Ancheng Xiao Yuan Wang's uncle Sun Jun passed away.

古文：魏主嗣甚惜之，谓其妻桓氏曰： 生同其荣，能没同其戚乎？ 
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣非常惋惜他，对他的妻子桓氏说： 生的时候可以和他一起享受荣华富贵，死后能和他一起承受悲哀吗？ 
English: Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba Zi felt very sorry for him, and said to his wife Huan: "When you are alive, you can enjoy the glory and wealth with him, but when you die, can you bear the sorrow with him?"

古文：桓氏乃缢而袝焉。
现代文：桓氏于是自己上吊而死，死后二人合葬。
English: Mr. Kan therefore hanged himself and died, and after his death the two were buried together.

古文：丁零翟猛雀驱略吏民，入白三间为乱；魏内都大官河内张蒲与冀州刺史长孙道生讨之。
现代文：北魏境内的丁零部落酋长翟猛雀掠挟驱赶当地的官民，进入白涧山叛乱。北魏内都大官、河内人张蒲与冀州刺史长孙道生讨伐他们。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, the chiefs of the Dingye Tribe in the territory of the Northern Wei Dynasty drove the local officials and people into the Baiyun Mountain Rebellion. Zhang Pu, a senior official of the Northern Wei Dynasty and a native of Hanoi, and Sun Daosheng, the chief historian of Jizhou, fought against them.

古文：道生，嵩之从子也。
现代文：长孙道生是长孙嵩的侄儿。
English: The eldest grandson, Dousheng, is the nephew of the eldest grandson, Song.

古文：道生欲进兵击猛雀，蒲曰： 吏民非乐为乱，为猛雀所迫胁耳。
现代文：长孙道生打算直接进兵袭击翟猛雀，张蒲说： 官民们不愿意制造叛乱，不过是被翟猛雀逼迫威胁罢了。
English: The eldest grandson, Dousheng, intends to march directly into the army to attack the blackbird. Zhang Pu said: Officials and people are not willing to create a rebellion, but they are being forced and threatened by the blackbird.

古文：今不分别，并击之，虽欲返善，其道无由，必同心协力，据险以拒官军，未易猝平也。
现代文：现在如果不加以分别，对他们一并进攻，他们虽然打算弃恶从善，但是也已经无路可走，因此，他们一定会同心协力，据守险要抵抗官军的进攻，那样，就不容易马上把他们剿平了。
English: Now, if they are not separated and attacked together, although they intend to abandon evil and follow good, they have no way to go. Therefore, they will surely work together to resist the attack of the government army. In that way, it will not be easy to level them immediately.

古文：不如先遣使谕之，以不与猛雀同谋者皆不坐，则必喜而离散矣。 
现代文：不如先派遣使者前去告诉他们，说不和翟猛雀一同谋反的人一律不予株连定罪，那么，他们一定非常高兴地叛离翟猛雀，主动散去。 
English: It would have been better to send an envoy to them first and tell them that anyone who said that they would not conspire with the blackbird would not be convicted, so they must have been very happy to betray the blackbird and voluntarily disperse.

古文：道生从之，降者数千家，使复旧业。
现代文：长孙道生听从了他的话，投降过来的果然有几千家，让他们恢复过去的家业。
English: His eldest grandson, Dousheng, obeyed his words, and several thousand families surrendered, allowing them to resume the family business of the past.

古文：猛雀与其党百馀人出走，蒲等追斩猛雀首，左部沿书周几穷讨馀党，悉诛之。
现代文：翟猛雀和他的一百多名死党出逃，张蒲等人追上，把他杀掉。左部尚书周几对他的余党穷追不舍，严加讨伐，终于把他们全部杀掉。
English: Yan Mengjia and more than a hundred of his dead comrades fled, and Zhang Pu and others caught up with him and killed him. Leftist Shang Shuxu Zhou several relentlessly pursued the rest of his party, fought hard, and finally killed them all.

