古文：刘哈剌不花，其先江西人。
现代文：刘哈剌不花，他的祖先是江西人。
English: Liu Hao is not a flower, his ancestors are from Jiangxi.

古文：倜傥好义，不事家产，有古侠士风。
现代文：豪爽好义，不治理家产，有古侠之风。
English: He is brave and good-natured, does not manage the family property, and has the style of an ancient knight.

古文：居燕赵有年，遂为探马赤军户。
现代文：居燕赵多年，成为探马赤军户。
English: After living in Yan Zhao for many years, he became a member of the Red Army.

古文：至正十二年，颍、亳盗起，朝迁以泰不花为河南行省平章政事，总兵讨之。
现代文：至正十二年，颍、亳人民起兵反元，朝廷用泰不花任河南行省平章政事，统领兵马讨伐。
English: In the 12th year of the Zhou Dynasty, the people of Yunnan and Shandong revolted against the Yuan Dynasty, and the imperial court appointed Tai Fuxian as the governor of Henan Province to lead the troops and horses to fight.

古文：哈剌不花上书陈十事，其七言兵机及攻守方略。泰不花大喜，即辟为掾史。未几，奏除左右司都事。
现代文：哈剌不花上书陈述十件事，第七件是关于军机及攻守的策谋，泰不花非常高兴，就征召为部属，不久，上奏朝廷任左右司都事。
English: Harunobu wrote a letter stating ten things, and the seventh was about military aircraft and offensive and defensive strategies. Taifuka was very happy and was recruited as a subordinate. Soon, he reported to the court and was appointed as the director of the left and right affairs.

古文：泰不花以哈剌不花尝为探马赤，有膂力，善骑射，俾统前八翼军，为先锋将。
现代文：泰不花因哈剌不花曾是探马赤，有臂力，善于骑射，就使他统帅前八翼军，为先锋官。
English: Because Tai Fuxia was a famous explorer, strong-armed, and good at riding and shooting, he was made commander of the front eight-wing army and the vanguard officer.

古文：明号令，信赏罚，士皆乐为之用，而料敌成败，所向无失。
现代文：哈剌不花号令明确，赏罚分明，士兵们都乐于听他的调遣，而在预料敌人胜败方面，是所向无敌。
English: His orders are clear, his rewards and punishments are clear, and the soldiers are happy to listen to his instructions. In terms of predicting the enemy's victory or defeat, he is invincible.

古文：是时，答失八都鲁军溃于长葛，收集散卒，复屯中牟。
现代文：这时答失八都鲁的军队被敌军在长葛击溃。收集失散的士兵，再次屯兵中牟。
English: At this time, the lost troops of Badulu were defeated by the enemy in Changge. Gather the scattered soldiers, and once again set up camp in Zhongmou.

古文：哈剌不花军于汴梁南彭子冈。
现代文：哈剌不花军驻于汴梁之南的彭子冈。
English: The Harbin Flower Army was stationed in Peng Zi Gang in the south of Huliang.

古文：有自长葛来者言，总兵官已为贼所败，次中牟。
现代文：有个从长葛来的人说 ：总兵官已被义军打败，下一步就是攻打中牟。 
English: A man from Changge said: "The general has been defeated by the rebels, the next step is to attack Zhongmou."

古文：哈剌不花曰： 贼既捷，兵必再至，我不可不往援。 
现代文：哈剌不花说 ：贼既取胜，兵必再至，我不能不去援助。 
English: It is no use saying: "Once the thieves have won, the soldiers will come again. I cannot but help."

古文：遂整兵而前。
现代文：于是就整兵前往。
English: So the whole army went there.

古文：既而有使驰报：夜四鼓，贼从洧川渡河，未知其所向。
现代文：不久有信使飞报：夜四更时，义军从洧川渡河，不知向什么地方去了。
English: Soon a courier reported: At four o'clock in the evening, the rebels crossed the river from the Li River, and I don't know where they went.

古文：哈剌不花曰： 是必袭答失八都鲁营耳。
现代文：哈剌不花说： 那必然是袭击答失八都鲁军营去了。
English: Harunobu said, "That must have been the attack on the Batoru military camp."

古文：我行已缓，不及事，不若以精锐断贼归路，覆之必矣。 
现代文：我军行动缓慢，来不及了，不如以精锐军断贼归路，必然打败他们。 
English: Our army is moving slowly and is too late. It is better to use the elite army to cut off the path of the thieves and defeat them.

古文：于是领军徐行。
现代文：于是领兵慢行。
English: So the leader marched slowly.

古文：天未明，伏军其归路。
现代文：天未明，将军队埋伏在敌兵归路之上。
English: In the early hours of the morning, the army was ambushed on the enemy's way back.

古文：贼果袭答失八都鲁营，大掠辎重而回。
现代文：贼兵果然袭击答失八都鲁营，掳掠大量辎重而还。
English: The bandits indeed attacked and lost the Battullu camp, plundered a large number of treasures and returned.

古文：哈剌不花伏军四起，贼大败，尽俘获之。
现代文：哈剌不花伏军四起，义军大败，全部被俘。
English: The retreating army launched four attacks, the rebels were soundly defeated, and all were captured.

古文：当是时，答失八都鲁虽以平章政事总大兵，而哈剌不花功名与之相埒。
现代文：当时答失八都鲁虽然任平章政事，统领大军，而哈剌不花的功名与他相等。
English: At that time, although he was appointed as the political affairs of Pingzhang and commanded a large army, he did not spend much, and his achievements were equal to him.

古文：十七年，山东毛贵率其贼众，由河间趋直沽，遂犯漷州，至枣林。
现代文：十七年，山东义军毛贵率兵由河间直趋直沽，进攻氵郭州，到枣林。
English: In the seventeenth year, Mao Gui, the leader of the Shandong Uyghur Army, led his troops from Hema to Zhouzhuang, attacking Ziguozhou and reaching Zaolin.

古文：已而略柳林，逼畿甸，枢密副使达国珍战死，京师人心大骇。
现代文：不久攻取柳林，逼近京畿，枢密副使达国珍战死，京师人心慌乱。
English: Soon after, Liulin was captured, Gyeonggi Province was approaching, the vice-secretary of the privy council, Da Guozhen, was killed in battle, and the people of Gyeonggi Province were in a state of panic.

古文：在廷之臣，或劝乘舆北巡以避之，或劝迁都关陕，众议纷然，独左丞相太平执不可。哈剌不花时为同知枢密院事，奉诏以兵拒之，与之战于柳林，大捷。
现代文：朝廷的大臣，有的劝皇帝逃向北部避难，有的劝帝迁都关陕，众人议论纷纷，只有左丞相太平执意说不能这样做，哈剌不花当时任同知枢密院事，奉诏领兵拒敌，与敌军在柳林作战，大胜。
English: The ministers of the imperial court, some advised the emperor to flee to the north to take refuge, some advised the emperor to relocate the capital to Guanshan, and everyone discussed it. Only the left-handed Prime Minister Taiping insisted that this could not be done. He did not spend his time as a Privy Councillor, he led the army to resist the enemy, and fought with the enemy army in Liulin, and won a great victory.

古文：哈剌不花后迁河南行省平章政事以卒。
现代文：义军退至济南，京师安定，哈剌不花功劳最大。后转任河南平章政事后逝世。
English: The rebel army retreated to Jinan, Beijing was stabilized, and Harbin did not spend the greatest merit. Later, he was transferred to Henan Pingzhang Government and died after the event.

古文：初，哈剌不花与信州人倪晦字孟晰同事泰不花为掾史。
现代文：当初哈剌不花与信州人倪晦，字孟日折，一同为泰不花部属。
English: At the beginning, Harbin Flower and Shinshu people Ni Ying, Zi Meng Rong, were both subordinates of Taihu Flower.

古文：山东宣慰使普颜不花及宪司请恤典于朝，有曰： 不食寇粟，饿死芹泉，有夷、齐之风，为臣之清者也。 
现代文：晦读过书史，精于文墨，机智聪明，泰不花很信任他并委以重任，对他言听计从；而对哈剌不花则说他不行。因而哈剌不花心中对泰不花不满。
English: He had read the history of books, was good at writing and printing, and was witty and clever. Tai Nianhua trusted him very much and entrusted him with important tasks, and obeyed his every word; but he said that he could not do it to Huan Nianhua. Therefore, Huan Nianhua was dissatisfied with Tai Nianhua.

古文：芹泉，谷名，英所居也。石抹宜孙迈里古思石抹宜孙，字申之。
现代文：待泰不花失败，前往哈剌不花处求援，哈剌不花将泰不花押送京师，致他于死地，君子对此有所非议。石抹宜孙字申之。
English: Waiting for Tai to fail, he went to Harbin to ask for help. Harbin escorted Tai to Beijing, leading to his death. The gentleman criticized this.

古文：其先辽之迪烈糺人。
现代文：其祖先是辽的迪烈纠人。
English: Its ancestor is Liao's Dilekang people.

古文：五世祖曰也先，事太祖为御史大夫，自有传。
现代文：五世祖名也先，太祖时官任御史大夫，自有传。
English: The name of the fifth-generation ancestor is also the first, and the official at the time of the great-great-grandfather was a doctor of history, which is a legend.

古文：也先之曾孙曰继祖，字伯善，袭父职，为沿海上副万户。
现代文：也先的曾孙名继祖，字伯善，继承父亲的官职，为沿海上副万户。
English: The great-grandson of the previous great-grandfather, Zi Bo Shan, inherited his father's official position and became the deputy head of 10,000 households along the coast.

古文：初以沿海军分镇台州，皇庆元年，又移镇婺、处两州。
现代文：最初以沿海之军分别镇守台州，皇庆元年，又迁移到婺、处两州镇守。
English: At first, the coastal army was used to guard Taizhou separately, and in the first year of the Emperor's reign, it was moved to Shao, the capital of the two states.

古文：驭军严肃，平宁都寇，有战功；且明达政事，讲究盐策，多合时宜。
现代文：治军严肃，平定宁都寇有战功；且明达政事，讲究盐策，多适合时宜。
English: He was a serious military leader, and was credited with the successful suppression of the Ningduqo; he was also a shrewd politician, and was particular about the salt policy, which was more suitable for the times.

古文：为学本于经术，而兼通名法、纵横、天文、地理、术数、方技、释老之说，见称荐绅间。
现代文：在做学问方面，讲究经术，而且兼通名法、纵横、天文、地理、术数、方技、佛学、老子学说，在士绅中很受称赞。
English: In terms of learning, he paid attention to the study of Chinese classics, and combined the study of Chinese classics, Chinese classics, astronomy, geography, arithmetic, geometry, Buddhism, and Laozi's theory, which was highly praised by the gentry.

古文：宜孙其子也。
现代文：宜孙就是他的儿子。
English: Yisun is his son.

古文：宜孙性警敏，嗜学问，于书务博览，而长于诗歌。
现代文：宜孙性格机警，聪明好学，博览群书，擅长于诗歌。
English: Yi Sun is alert, clever, eager to learn, well-read, and good at poetry.

古文：尝借嫡弟厚孙荫，袭父职，为沿海上副万户，守处州。
现代文：曾任沿海上副万户，镇守处州。
English: He once served as the deputy of 10,000 households along the coast, and the town guard was in charge of the county.

古文：及弟长，即让其职还之，退居台州。
现代文：后退居台州。
English: He retreated to Taizhou.

古文：至正十一年，方国珍起海上，江浙行省檄宜孙守温州，宜孙即起任其事。
现代文：至正十一年，方国珍从海上起事，江浙行省行文宜孙守温州，宜孙随即前往担任这项任务。
English: In the eleventh year of the Taisho era, Fang Guozhen rose from the sea, Jiangsu and Zhejiang went to the provinces, Wen and Yisun guarded Wenzhou, and Yisun immediately went to take on this task.

古文：其年闽寇犯处州，复檄宜孙以兵平之。
现代文：这一年闽寇窜犯处州，再行文宜孙以兵前往平定。
English: In this year, the bandits committed the crime in Zhoushu, and then Wen Yisun and his soldiers went to pacify it.

古文：以功升浙东宣慰副使，分府于台州。
现代文：因功升为浙东宣慰副使，在台州建立分府。
English: He was promoted to vice-envoy of Zhedong Xuanjie and established a branch office in Taizhou.

古文：顷之，处之属县山寇并起，宜孙复奉省檄往讨之。
现代文：不久，处之县境内山寇四起，宜孙又奉省檄前往讨伐。
English: Soon, there were four mountain robberies in the county, and Yishun also went to the provincial capital to fight them.

古文：至则筑处州城，为御敌计。
现代文：到了那里就筑处州城，做御敌准备。
English: When they got there, they built a prefectural capital to prepare for the enemy.

古文：十七年，江浙行省左丞相达识铁睦迩承制升宜孙行枢密院判官，总制处州，分院治于处。又以江浙儒学副提举刘基为其院经历，萧山县尹苏友龙为照磨，而宜孙又辟郡人胡深、叶琛、章溢参谋其军事。
现代文：十七年，江浙行省左丞相达识铁睦迩按规定，升宜孙行枢密院判官，总管处州，分院受处州管理，又以江浙儒学副提举刘基任其院的经历，萧山县尹苏友龙任照磨，而宜孙又征聘同郡人胡深、叶琛、章溢充当他的军事参谋。
English: In the seventeenth year, in accordance with the regulations, Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial Minister of the Left, Dazhong Zhitong, promoted Yishun to the judge of the Privy Council, the general management of the prefecture, the branch of the prefecture was managed by the prefecture, and Liu Ji was appointed as the deputy of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Confucianism, Yin Suyulong of Xiaoshan County was appointed as the general, and Yishun also recruited Hu Sheng, Ye Xuan and Zhang Yue from the same county to serve as his military staff.

古文：处为郡，山谷联络，盗贼凭据险阻，辄窃发，不易平治。
现代文：处州郡山谷连绵，山寇凭据险阻，不易平定。
English: Wenzhou County has a continuous valley, and mountain banditry is a dangerous obstacle, and it is not easy to subdue.

古文：宜孙用基等谋，或捣以兵，或诱以计，未几，皆歼殄无遗类。寻升同佥行枢密院事。
现代文：宜孙采用刘基等人的谋略，有时以兵攻击，有时用计引诱，没有多久，全歼无遗，接着就升为同佥行枢密院事。
English: Yishun adopted the strategy of Liu Ji and others, sometimes attacking with soldiers, sometimes using tricks to lure, not long, completely annihilated, and then rose to the same level of the Privy Council.

古文：当是之时，天下已多故，所在守将各自为计相保守。
现代文：这时天下扰攘不安，各地守将都各自为政保自己。
English: At this time, the world is in a state of turmoil and unrest, and the governors of various regions are each acting as their own political guarantors.

古文：于是浙东则宜孙在处州，迈里古思在绍兴为称首。十八年十二月，大明兵取兰溪，且逼婺，而宜孙母实在婺城。
现代文：浙东以处州宜孙为首，绍兴以迈里古思为首。十八年十二月，大明军夺取兰溪，进逼婺城，而宜孙的母亲就在婺城。
English: Eastern Zhejiang was led by Yuanzhou Yisun, and Shaoxing was led by Meili Gu Si. In December 18th, the Great Ming Army captured Lanxi and forced its way into Lucheng, and Yisun's mother was in Lucheng.

古文：宜孙泣曰： 义莫重于君亲，食禄而不事其事，是无君也；母在难而不赴，是无亲也。
现代文：宜孙哭诉说 ：义莫重于君亲，食俸禄而不为他做事，就是无君；母亲有难而不前去救护，就是无亲。
English: Yishun cried and said, "There is nothing more important than your relatives. If you eat your salary and don't do things for them, then you have no relatives. If you don't go to help your mother when she is in trouble, then you have no relatives."

古文：无君无亲，尚可立天地间哉！ 
现代文：无君无亲，还可以立于天地之间么！ 
English: No prince, no relative, can you still stand between heaven and earth?

古文：即遣胡深等将民兵数万往赴援，而亲率精锐为之殿。
现代文：于是立即派遣胡琛等带领民兵数万，前往救援婺州，自己则亲率精锐军兵为之殿后。
English: As a result, he immediately dispatched tens of thousands of militia led by Hu Yao and others to rescue Zhangzhou, while he personally led elite soldiers to rescue the palace.

古文：兵至婺，与大明兵甫接，即败绩而还。
现代文：兵至婺，与大明兵一交战立即溃败而回。
English: The soldiers were defeated, and after a battle with the Daiming soldiers, they were immediately defeated and returned.

古文：时经略使李国凤至浙东，承制拜宜孙江浙行省参知政事，阶中奉大夫。
现代文：当时经略使李国凤到浙东，承旨授宜孙为江浙行省参知政事，官阶为中奉大夫。
English: At that time, Li Guofeng was sent to East Zhejiang by the emperor, and Yi Sun was appointed as the governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, with the official rank of Zhongfeng Dafu.

古文：明年，大明兵入处州，宜孙将数十骑走福建境上，欲图报复，而所至人心已散，事不可复为。
现代文：第二年，大明兵进入处州，宜孙率领数十骑兵逃往福建，以图报复，但他所到之处人心已散，报复是不可能了。
English: In the following year, the Great Ming Army entered Zhanzhou, and Yishun led dozens of cavalrymen to flee to Fujian in an attempt to take revenge, but everywhere he went, people had already dispersed, and revenge was no longer possible.

古文：叹曰： 处州，吾所守者也。今吾势已穷，无所于往，不如还处州境，死亦为处州鬼耳！ 
现代文：他感叹地说 ：处州是我守的地方，今天我势单力薄，无处可去，不如回处州去，死也要当处州的鬼。 
English: He sighed and said, "Zhenzhou is where I belong. Today, I am powerless and have nowhere to go. It is better to go back to Zhenzhou. I want to die as a ghost of Zhenzhou."

古文：既还，至处之庆元县，为乱兵所害。
现代文：回到处州境的庆元县后，被乱兵杀害。
English: After returning to Qingyuan County on the provincial border, he was killed by soldiers.

古文：事闻，朝廷赠推诚宣力效节功臣、集贤大学士、荣禄大夫、上柱国，追封越国公，谥忠愍。
现代文：朝廷得知此事后，赠封推诚宣力效节功臣、集贤大学士、荣禄大夫、上柱国，追封越国公，谥号忠愍。
English: After the Imperial Court learned of this matter, he was awarded the titles of meritorious subject, meritorious scholar, honorable doctor, and high-ranking provincial official, with the posthumous title of Yue Guoguang and the posthumous title of Zhongyi.

