古文：○柴守礼周太祖圣穆皇后柴氏，无子，养后兄守礼之子以为子，是为世宗。
现代文：周太祖圣穆皇后柴氏，没有儿子，收养哥哥柴守礼的儿子作为养子，这就是周世宗。
English: Zhou Shizong, the great-great-great-grandfather of Queen Shengmu of the Chai clan, had no son, but adopted the son of his brother, Chai Shouli, as an adopted son.

古文：守礼字克让，以后族拜银青光禄大夫、检校吏部尚书、兼御史大夫。
现代文：柴守礼字克让，因是皇后的亲族，拜为银青光禄大夫、检校吏部尚书、兼御史大夫。
English: Because he was a relative of the empress, Chai Shou Li Zi Kujang was given the titles of Silver Qingguanglu Doctor, Inspection Officer Shangshu, and Imperial Historian.

古文：世宗即位，加金紫光禄大夫、检校司空、光禄卿。
现代文：周世宗登位，加授金紫光禄大夫、检校司空、光禄卿。
English: Zhou Shizong ascended to the throne, and was awarded the titles of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, Jiankuo, and Guanglu Sir.

古文：致仕，居于洛阳，终世宗之世，未尝至京师，而左右亦莫敢言，第以元舅礼之，而守礼亦颇恣横，尝杀人于市，有司有闻，世宗不问。
现代文：退休后，住在洛阳，整个周世宗朝，不曾到过京城，手下人也没有谁敢提起这件事，只是把他当国舅礼待。柴守礼也很放纵蛮横，曾经在大街上杀人，官府上报，周世宗并不追究。
English: After his retirement, he lived in Luoyang. During the entire reign of Zhou Shizong, he had never been to Beijing. None of his subordinates dared to mention this to him, but treated him as an uncle of the country. Chai Shouli was also very indulgent and arrogant. He once killed someone on the street and reported it to the government, but Zhou Shizong did not investigate.

古文：是时，王溥、汪晏、王彦超、韩令坤等同时将相，皆有父在洛阳，与守礼朝夕往来，惟意所为，洛阳人多畏避之，号 十阿父。 
现代文：这时，王溥、王晏、王彦超、韩令坤等人同时在朝任将相，都有父亲住在洛阳，和柴守礼每天来往，想做什么就做什么，洛阳人大多害怕他们而躲开，号称为 十阿父 。
English: At this time, Wang Qian, Wang Qian, Wang Yanchao, Han Lingkun and others, who were appointed as generals at the same time, all had fathers living in Luoyang. They came and went with Chai Shouli every day and did whatever they wanted to do. Most Luoyang people were afraid of them and avoided them. They were called the Ten Fathers.

古文：守礼卒年七十二，官至太傅。
现代文：柴守礼死时七十二岁，做官到太传。
English: At the time of his death, Chai Shouli was 72 years old and had been an official in Taichuan.

古文：呜呼，父子之恩至矣！
现代文：唉！父子的恩情太深了！
English: Alas! The father's and son's gratitude is too deep!

古文：孟子言：舜为天子，而瞽叟杀人，则弃天下，窃负之而逃。
现代文：孟子说：虞舜作天子，而父亲瞽叟杀了人，于是虞舜抛弃天下，悄悄背着瞽叟逃跑了。
English: Mencius said, "Yu Xi is the son of heaven, but his father killed a man, so Yu Xi abandoned the world and quietly ran away with his donkey.

古文：以谓天下可无舜，不可无至公，舜可弃天下，不可刑其父，此为世立言之说也。
现代文：孟子认为天下可以没有虞舜，但不能没有公道，虞舜可以抛弃天下，但不能对他的父亲用刑，这是作为垂教后世之名言的说法。
English: Mencius believed that the world could do without the yakuza, but it could not do without justice. The yakuza could abandon the world, but he could not punish his father. This is a famous saying for posterity.

古文：然事固有不得如其意者多矣！
现代文：然而事情本来就有很多不能按意愿去做的！
English: However, there are many things that cannot be done as intended!

古文：盖天子有宗庙社稷之重、百官之卫、朝廷之严，其不幸有不得窃而逃，则如之何而可？
现代文：天子有宗庙国家的重任、百官的护卫、朝廷规矩严密，如果不幸不能悄悄逃掉，那么怎么办纔行呢？
English: The heavenly son has the heavy responsibility of the patriarchal temple and the country, the escort of hundreds of officials, and the strict rules of the imperial court. If unfortunately he cannot escape quietly, then how can he escape?

古文：予读周史，见守礼杀人，世宗寝而不问，盖进任天下重矣，而子于其父亦至矣，故宁受屈法之过，以申父子之道，其所以合于义者，盖知权也。
现代文：我读周的历史，读到柴守礼杀人，周世宗放过而不追究，这是因为已经挺身而出，承担天下重任，但儿子对于父亲的义务也很重大，因此宁愿承担违背法律的过失，来伸张父子之道，它之所以符合道义，大概就在于懂得权宜变通的道理。
English: I read Zhou's history, and read that Chai Shouli killed people, but Zhou Shizong let it go without investigation. This is because he has stepped forward and shouldered the heavy responsibility of the world, but the son's obligation to the father is also very important, so he would rather bear the fault of violating the law to promote the father-son way. The reason why it is in line with morality is probably to understand the principle of expediency.

古文：君子之于事，择其轻重而处之耳。
现代文：君子对人处事，不过依照事情的轻重来处理罢了。
English: A gentleman deals with people, but he deals with them according to the importance of the matter.

古文：失刑轻，不孝重也。
现代文：刑律执行不严事小，对父亲不孝事大。
English: Lax enforcement of criminal law is a minor matter, but being unfilial to one's father is a major matter.

古文：刑者所以禁人为非，孝者所以教人为善，其意一也，孰为重？
现代文：刑律是用来禁止人们为非作歹的，孝道是用来教导人们行善的，它们的宗旨是一样的，哪个重要呢？
English: Criminal law is used to prohibit people from doing evil, and filial piety is used to teach people to do good. Their purposes are the same. Which is more important?

古文：刑一人，未必能使天下无杀人，而杀其父，灭天性而绝人道，孰为重？
现代文：加刑于一个人，未必能使天下不杀人，而杀死父亲，就灭绝了人道天性，哪个严重呢？
English: Punishing a person may not be able to make the world not kill people, but killing a father will exterminate human nature. Which is more serious?

古文：权其所谓轻重者，则天下虽不可弃，而父亦不可刑也。
现代文：权衡所说的事情轻重，那么天下虽然不能抛弃，但对父亲也不可以施加刑罚。
English: Weighing the importance of what was said, although the world cannot discard it, it cannot impose a penalty on the father.

古文：然则为舜与世宗者，宜如何无使瞽叟、守礼至于杀人，则可谓孝矣！
现代文：既然这样，那么作为虞舜和周世宗这样的人，应当设法不使瞽叟、柴守礼这样的人杀人，做到这点就堪称孝顺了！
English: Since this is the case, then, as people like Gu Yu and Zhou Shizong, we should try not to make people like Yao and Chai Shouli kill people. To do this would be called filial piety!

古文：然而有不得如其意，则择其轻重而处之焉。
现代文：但是如果碰上不能两全其美的事情，就应按事情的轻重来处理。
English: However, if you come across something that is not the best of both worlds, you should deal with it according to the importance of the matter.

古文：世宗之知权，明矣夫！
现代文：周世宗懂得权宜变通，这是很明白的了！
English: Zhou Shizong knows how to be flexible, this is very clear!

古文：○世宗贞惠皇后刘氏
现代文：周世宗有三个皇后。
English: Zhou Shizong had three queens.

古文：世宗三皇后。贞惠皇后刘氏，不知其世家，盖微时所娶也，世宗为左监门卫将军，得封彭城县君。
现代文：贞惠皇后刘氏，不知道她的家世，因为是周世宗微贱时娶的。周世宗任左监门卫将军时，得以封为彭城县君。
English: Empress Dowager Liu did not know her family history, because she married Zhou Shizong when he was still a minor. When Zhou Shizong served as the left guard gatekeeper general, he was awarded the title of Pengcheng County Prince.

古文：世宗从太祖于魏，后留京师，太祖举兵，汉诛其族家属，后见杀。
现代文：周世宗跟随周太祖到魏州，皇后留在京城，周太祖起兵，漠诛杀了她全家。
English: Zhou Shizong followed Zhou Taizu to Weizhou, the empress stayed in Beijing, Zhou Taizu raised an army and killed her entire family.

古文：太祖即位，追封彭城郡夫人。
现代文：周太祖登位，追封她为彭城郡夫人。
English: Zhou Taizu ascended the throne and posthumously made her the wife of Pengcheng County.

古文：世宗显德四年夏四月，始诏彭城郡夫人刘氏追册为皇后，有司谥曰贞惠，陵曰惠陵。
现代文：周世宗颖德四年夏四月，纔下诏追封彭城郡夫人刘氏为皇后，官府加谧号贞惠，陵墓名惠陵。
English: In April in the summer of the fourth year of Zhou Shizong Yingde's reign, Liu, the wife of Pengcheng County, was enthroned as empress, and the official residence was named Zhenhui, and the mausoleum was named Huiling.

古文：○宣懿皇后符氏宣懿皇后符氏，其祖秦王存审，父魏王彦卿。
现代文：宣懿皇后符氏，她的祖父是秦王符存审，父亲是魏千符彦卿。
English: Her grandfather was Qin King Fu Cunxun, and her father was Wei Qian Fu Yanqing.

古文：后世王家，出于将相之贵，为人明果有大志。
现代文：皇居家世代为王，出生于高贵的将相之家，为人明敏果断，胸怀大志。
English: The generation of the imperial family is the king, born in the noble family of generals, he is a bright and decisive person, with great aspirations.

古文：初适李守贞子崇训。
现代文：最初嫁给李守贞的儿子李崇训。
English: She was first married to Li Chongxun, the son of Li Shouzhen.

古文：守贞事汉为河中节度使，已挟异志。
现代文：李守贞在汉做官，任河中节度使时，已有二心。
English: When Li Shouzhen was an official in the Han Dynasty and appointed as an envoy of the Central Government of the Han Dynasty, she already had two hearts.

古文：有术者善听人声以知吉凶，守贞出其家人使听之，术者闻后声，惊曰： 此天下之母也！ 
现代文：有一个术士善于听人的声音来判断吉凶，李守贞让家里人出来叫他听各人的声音，他听到皇后的声音，吃惊地叫道： 这是天下的母亲！ 
English: There was a sorcerer who was good at listening to people's voices to judge their fortunes. Li Shouzhen asked his family members to come out and ask him to listen to everyone's voices. He heard the queen's voice and exclaimed in surprise, "This is the mother of the world!"

古文：守贞益自负，曰： 吾妇犹为天下母，吾取天下复何疑哉！ 
现代文：李守贞更加自负，说： 我儿媳都是天下的母亲，我夺取天下还有什么疑义呢！ 
English: Li Shouzhen was even more conceited, saying: My daughter-in-law is the mother of the whole world, I have no doubt that I can conquer the whole world!

古文：于是决反。
现代文：于是决定反叛。
English: So they decided to rebel.

古文：而汉遣周太祖讨之，逾年，攻破其城。
现代文：这时汉派遣周太祖讨伐他，过了一年，攻破他的城池。
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty sent Zhou Taizu to fight him, and after a year, broke through his castle.

古文：崇训知不免，手自杀其家人，次以及后，后走匿，以帷幔自蔽，崇训惶遽求后不得，遂自杀。
现代文：李崇训知道不免一死，亲手杀掉家人，然后轮到皇后，皇后逃跑躲藏，用幕帐遮住自己，李崇训慌乱中没有找到皇后，于是自杀。
English: Knowing that death was inevitable, Li Chongxun killed his family members with his own hands, and then it was the turn of the queen. The queen ran away and hid, covering herself with a curtain. Li Chongxun did not find the queen in the panic, so he committed suicide.

古文：汉兵入其家，后俨然坐堂上，顾军士曰： 郭公与吾王父有旧，汝辈无犯我！ 
现代文：汉兵进入他家，皇后庄严地坐在大厅上，看着军士说： 郭公和我父亲有交情，你们不要动我！ 
English: The Chinese soldiers entered his house. The empress sat solemnly in the hall, looked at the sergeant and said: Guo Gong and my father have a friendship. Don't touch me!

古文：军士见之不敢迫。
现代文：军士们见此情景不敢逼迫。
English: Seeing this, the sergeants did not dare to pursue.

古文：太祖闻之，以谓一女子能使乱兵不敢犯，奇之，为加慰勉，以归彦卿。
现代文：周太祖听说后，认为一个女子能使乱兵不敢冒犯，很惊奇，对她加以安慰勉励，送回给符彦卿。
English: After hearing this, Zhou Taizu thought it was amazing that a woman could make a ruffian not dare to offend, so he consoled and encouraged her and sent her back to Fu Yanqing.

古文：后感太祖不杀，拜太祖为父。
现代文：皇后感激周太祖不杀之恩，拜周太祖为义父。
English: The empress was grateful to Zhou Taizu for not killing her, and called Zhou Taizu her father-in-law.

古文：其母以后夫家灭亡，而独脱死兵刃之间，以为天幸，欲使削发为尼，后不肯曰： 死生有命，天也。
现代文：她的母亲因皇后夫家灭亡，而她一人在战乱中免于一死，认为是天幸，想让皇后削发为尼，皇后不愿意，说： 死生有命，这是天意。
English: Her mother died as a result of the death of the empress's husband's family, and she alone was spared death in the war, which she considered to be a blessing. She wanted the empress to cut her hair for her, but the empress did not want to, saying: "It is the will of heaven to live and die."

古文：何必妄毁形发为！ 
现代文：何必轻率地毁掉我的容貌头发！ 
English: Don't you dare ruin my looks with hair!

古文：太祖于后有恩，而世宗性特英锐，闻后如此，益奇之。
现代文：周太祖对皇后有恩，而周世宗天性尤其英气勃勃，听说皇后这样，更加把她看得神奇不凡。
English: Zhou Taizu was kind to the empress, and Zhou Shizong's nature was particularly heroic. Hearing that the empress was like this made her seem even more extraordinary.

古文：及刘夫人卒，遂纳以为继室。
现代文：到刘夫入死后，就娶她做继室。
English: After Liu Fu Rong's death, he married her to become his second wife.

古文：世宗即位，册为皇后。
现代文：周世宗登位后，册封为皇后。
English: After Zhou Shizong ascended the throne, she was crowned as empress.

古文：世宗办急多暴怒，而后尝追悔，每怒左右，后必从容伺颜色，渐为解说，世宗意亦随解，由是益重之。
现代文：周世宗性情急躁常常暴怒，而事后又往往追悔，每次对手下人发怒，皇后必定从容地观察他的脸色，慢慢为手下人开脱，周世宗怒气也随之而消，因此更加看重皇后。
English: Zhou Shizong was quick-tempered, often angry, and often regretted afterwards. Every time a rival subordinate was angry, the empress must calmly observe his face and slowly excuse the subordinate. Zhou Shizong's anger also disappeared, so he valued the empress more.

古文：世宗征淮，后以帝不宜亲行，切谏止之，世宗不听。
现代文：周世宗征伐淮南，皇后认为皇帝不宜亲自出征，坚决地劝阻他，周世宗不听。
English: Zhou Shizong went to conquer Huainan. The empress thought that it was not appropriate for the emperor to go to war in person, and resolutely dissuaded him. Zhou Shizong did not listen.

古文：师久无功，遭大暑雨，后以忧成疾而崩。
现代文：出师很久一无所获，又碰上酷暑大雨，皇后忧虑成疾而死去。
English: For a long time, the apprentice did not achieve anything, and then he encountered extreme heat and heavy rain. The empress became worried and died of illness.

古文：议者以方用兵，请杀丧礼，于是百官朝临于西宫，三日而释服，帝亦七日而释，葬于新郑，陵曰懿陵。
现代文：议事的人因为正用兵打仗，请求简化丧礼，于是百官在西宫上朝祭吊，三天后脱去丧服，皇帝也在七天后脱去丧服，安葬在新郑，陵墓名懿陵。
English: The people in charge of the meeting requested that the funeral ceremony be simplified because they were using soldiers to fight, so the officials held a morning ceremony at the West Palace and took off their mourning clothes three days later. The emperor also took off his mourning clothes seven days later and was buried in Xinzheng. The mausoleum is known as Gongling.

古文：后立皇后符氏。后妹也。
现代文：后来立皇后符氏，是皇后的妹妹。
English: Later, the Empress Fu clan was established. She was the younger sister of the Empress.

古文：国初，迁西宫，号周太后。
现代文：建国之初，迁到西宫，称周太后。
English: At the beginning of the founding of the country, she moved to the West Palace and was called Empress Dowager Zhou.

古文：○世宗七子世宗子七人：长曰宜哥，次二皆未名，次曰恭皇帝，次曰熙让，次曰熙谨，次曰熙诲，皆不知其母为谁氏。
现代文：周世宗的儿子七人：长子叫柴宜哥，其次二子都役取名，接若是恭皇帝、柴熙让、柴熙谨、柴熙诲，都不知道他们的母亲是谁。
English: There are seven sons of Zhou Shizong: the eldest son is called Chai Yiguo, the next two sons are all named after him, and if they are named Emperor Gong, Chai Xizang, Chai Xizhen, and Chai Xizhen, they do not know who their mother is.

古文：宜哥与其二，皆为汉诛。
现代文：柴宜哥和下面两个弟弟，都被汉人杀死。
English: Chai Yigo and his two younger brothers were all killed by the Han.

古文：太祖即位，诏赐皇孙名谊，赠左骁卫大将军；诚，左武卫大将军；諴，左屯卫大将军。
现代文：周太祖登位，下诏赐皇孙名：柴谊，赠左骁卫大将军；柴诚，赠左武卫大将军；柴诚，赠左屯卫大将军。
English: Zhou Taizu ascended the throne, and the following edict was issued to bestow the names of the emperor's grandchildren: Chai Yi, presented with General Zuo Wei; Chai Cheng, presented with General Zuo Wu Wei; Chai Cheng, presented with General Zuo Tun Wei.

古文：显德三年，群臣请封宗室，世宗以谓为国日浅，恩信未及于人，而须功德大成，庆流于世，而后议之可也。
现代文：显德三年，众臣请求封赠宗室，周世宗认为建国时间还不长，恩德和信誉还没有施及百姓，必须大功大德告成，幸福充满人间，然后商议这件事纔行。
English: In the three years after Emperor Xiande's death, many courtiers requested that his ancestral residence be given to him as a gift. Zhou Shizong thought that the founding of the country was still in its infancy, that the people had yet to be treated with kindness and trust, that great deeds and virtues must be accomplished, and that happiness should fill the world. He then deliberated on the matter.

古文：明年夏四月癸未，先封太祖诸子。
现代文：第二年夏四月癸未，先封赠周太祖的几个儿子。
English: In the summer of the second year, in April, several sons of Zhou Taizu were given the first seal.

古文：又诏曰： 父子之道，圣贤不忘，再思天阏之端，愈动悲伤之抱。
现代文：又下诏说： 父子之道，圣贤不曾忘怀，每每想到夭折的情形，更加触动悲伤的情怀。
English: He also said, "A sage never forgets the path of his father and son. Every time I think of the circumstances of his premature death, I am even more touched by feelings of sadness.

古文：故皇子左骁卫大将军谊、左武卫大将军諴、左屯卫大将军诚等，载惟往事，有足伤怀，宜增一字之封，仍赠三台之秩。
现代文：已故皇帝的儿子左骁卫大将军柴谊、左武卫大将军柴诚、左屯卫大将军柴诫等人，想到往事，足以伤情，应当增加一个字的封号，再赠三台的俸禄。
English: The late emperor's sons, Zuo Wei General Chai Yi, Zuo Wu Wei General Chai Cheng, Zuo Tun Wei General Chai Jiao and others, thought of the past, enough to hurt, should add a word of the seal number, and then give three units of salary.

古文：谊可赠太尉，追封越王；诚太傅，吴王；諴太保，韩王。 
现代文：柴谊可以赠太尉，追封为越王；柴诚可以赠太傅，追封为昊王；柴诚可以赠太保，封为韩王。 
English: Chai Yiyi can be given the title of captain and the posthumous title of Yue Wang; Chai Cheng can be given the title of taifu and the posthumous title of Hao Wang; Chai Cheng can be given the title of taibo and the posthumous title of Han Wang.

古文：而皇子在者皆不封。
现代文：在世的皇子都不加封。
English: Living princes do not receive the title.

古文：六年，北复三关，遇疾，还京师。
现代文：六年，在北方收复三关，世宗患病，返回京城。
English: Six years later, after recovering San-guan in the north, Shizong fell ill and returned to Beijing.

古文：六月癸未，皇子宗训，特进左卫上将军，封梁王；而宗让亦拜左骁卫上将军，封燕国公。
现代文：六月癸未，皇子柴宗训，特进左卫上将军，封为梁王；柴宗让也拜为左骁卫上将军，封为燕国公。
English: At the end of June, Prince Chai Zongxun was promoted to the rank of Senior General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards and given the title of Prince of Liang; Prince Chai Zongzhan was also promoted to Senior General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards and given the title of Prince of Yan.

古文：后十日而世宗崩，梁王即位，是为恭皇帝。
现代文：十天后周世宗死，梁王登位，造就是恭皇帝。
English: Ten days later, Zhou Shizong died and Liang Wang ascended to the throne, making him Emperor Gong.

古文：其年八月，宗让更名熙让，封曹王。
现代文：这年八月，柴宗让改名叫熙让，封为曹王。
English: In August of that year, Chai Zongzang changed his name to Xi Zongzang and was given the title Cao Wang.

古文：熙谨、熙诲皆前未封爵，遂拜熙谨右武卫大将军，封纪王；熙诲左领军卫大将军，蕲王。
现代文：柴熙谨、柴熙诲先前都没有封爵，于是拜柴熙谨为右武卫大将军，封为纪王；拜柴熙诲为左领军卫大将军，封焉薪王。
English: Neither Chai Xizhen nor Chai Xizhen had been knighted before, so Baichai Xizhen was appointed as the right wing grand marshal of the Imperial Guards and given the title of Prince Ji; Baichai Xizhen was appointed as the left wing grand marshal of the Imperial Guards and given the title of Prince Yan.

古文：皇朝乾德二年十月，熙谨卒。
现代文：我朝干德二年十月，柴熙谨死。
English: In October of the second year of my reign, Chai Xi died.

古文：熙让、熙诲，不知其所终。
现代文：柴熙让、柴熙诲，不知他们最终如何。
English: Chai Xizhen, Chai Xizhen, I don't know how they will end up.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：唉！
English: Alas!

古文：至公，天下之所共也。
现代文：大公之道，是天下共同遵循的。
English: The way of the great duke is followed by the whole world.

古文：其是非曲直之际，虽父爱其子，亦或有所不得私焉。
现代文：事有是非曲直，即使父亲怜爱儿子，有时也不能为他谋私。
English: Even if a father pities his son, sometimes he can't do anything for him.

古文：当周太祖举兵于魏，汉遣刘铢诛其家族于京师，酷毒备至；后太祖入立，遣人责铢，铢辞不屈，太祖虽深恨之，然以铢辞直，终不及其家也。
现代文：周太祖在魏州起兵时，漠派遣刘铢在京城诛杀他的家族，残酷狠毒到了极点；后来周太祖入京称帝，派人责问刘铢，刘铢言辞毫不屈服，周太祖虽恨透了他，但因刘铢言辞耿直，最终没有伤害他的家人。
English: When Zhou Taizu raised an army in Weizhou, he sent Liu Bei to fight and kill his family in Beijing, which was extremely cruel. Later, Zhou Taizu went to Beijing to proclaim himself emperor and sent someone to question Liu Bei. Liu Bei did not give in to his words. Although Zhou Taizu hated him, he did not hurt his family because of Liu Bei's honest words.

古文：及追封妻子之被杀者，其言深自隐痛之而已，不敢有非汉之辞焉，盖知其曲在己也。
现代文：到追封被杀死的妻子和儿女时，其言语深深地自我哀痛罢了，不敢有斥责汉的言语，大概知道自己理亏。
English: When he chased his wife and children who had been killed, his words were nothing but deep self-pity. He did not dare to have words of reproach, probably knowing that he was at fault.

古文：故略存其辞，以见周之有愧于其心者矣！
现代文：因此大略记下这些言辞，从中可见周有对不住自己良心的地方。
English: Therefore, make a rough note of these words, from which it can be seen that Zhou has a place that does not excuse his conscience.

