古文：起昭阳大渊献，尽阏逢困敦七月，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起昭阳大渊献，尽阏逢困敦七月，凡一年有奇。
English: From Zhaoyang to Dayuan, every year is special.

古文：武宗至道昭肃孝皇帝中会昌三年
现代文：唐武宗会昌三年
English: Three years of Tang Wusong Huichang

古文：春，正月，回鹘乌介可汗帅众侵逼振武，刘沔遣麟州刺史石雄、都知兵马使王逢帅沙陀硃邪赤心三部及契苾、拓跋三千骑袭其牙帐，沔自以大军继之。
现代文：春季，正月，回鹘乌介可汗率兵逼近振武，河东节度使刘沔派遣麟州刺史石雄、都知兵马使王逢率领沙陀朱邪赤心三部，以及契、党项族三千骑兵袭击可汗的牙帐，刘沔亲率大军随后赶来。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Hui Wuxu Khan and his soldiers approached Zhenwu, and the East Hedong Festival made Liu Bei send Linshou Jishi Shixiong, and the Tudor soldiers and horses sent Wang Feng to lead the three departments of Shatou, Zhuye and Chixin, as well as 3,000 cavalrymen from the Qi and Dangxiang ethnic groups to attack the Khan's denture, and Liu Bei's relatives led a large army to come later.

古文：雄至振武，登城望回鹘之众寡，见氈车数十乘，从者皆衣硃碧，类华人。
现代文：石雄到达振武后，登到城上察看回鹘有多少兵马，发现回鹘的队伍中有十来辆毡车，跟随毡车的人都穿着红色和青绿色的衣服，类似汉人。
English: After Shi Xiong arrived in Zhenwu, he went up to the city to see how many soldiers and horses there were in Huizhou. He found that there were more than ten wagons in the procession of Huizhou, and the people following the wagons were wearing red and turquoise clothes, similar to the Han people.

古文：使谍问之，曰： 公主帐也。 
现代文：于是，派侦探前去询问，随从毡车的人回答说： 这是太和公主的帐幕。 
English: So they sent a detective to inquire. The attendant of the carriage replied: "This is the tent of the lady and the princess."

古文：雄使谍告之曰： 公主至此，家也，当求归路！
现代文：石雄又派侦探去告诉公主说： 公主到这里，也就算是到家啦，应当寻找安全返回的办法。
English: Shi Xiong also sent a detective to tell the princess, "When the princess comes here, she has come home. She should find a way to return safely."

古文：今将出兵击可汗，请公主潜与侍从相保，驻车勿动！ 
现代文：现在，官军即将出兵袭击可汗，请公主秘密地和侍从相互保护，毡车驻守原地，不要惊慌乱动！ 
English: Now, the government army is about to send troops to attack the khan. Ask the princess to secretly protect herself and her attendants. Keep the carriage in place. Don't panic!

古文：雄乃凿城为十馀穴，引兵夜出，直攻可汗牙帐。
现代文：石雄随即下令从城里向城外挖凿十多个地道，半夜率兵从地道冲出，直攻可汗的牙帐。
English: Shi Xiong then ordered more than ten tunnels to be dug from the city to the outside of the city. At midnight, the soldiers rushed out of the tunnels and directly attacked the Khan's dentition.

古文：至其帐下，虏乃觉之。可汗大惊，不知所为，弃辎重走，雄追击之。
现代文：石雄的兵马抵达可汗牙帐外面的时候，回鹘兵才发觉，可汗大惊失色，不知所措，丢弃辎重逃走。
English: When Shi Xiong's soldiers and horses arrived outside the khan's tent, the Hui soldiers only discovered that the khan was shocked, overwhelmed, abandoned his baggage and fled.

古文：庚子，大破回鹘于杀胡山，可汗被疮，与数百骑遁去，雄迎太和公主以归。
现代文：石雄率兵追击，庚子，在杀胡山大败回鹘兵，可汗被枪刺伤，和几百名骑兵慌忙逃走。于是，石雄迎接太和公主返回。
English: Shi Xiong led the troops in pursuit, Geng Zi, in killing Hu Shanshan, defeated the enemy, Khan was wounded by a gunshot, and several hundred cavalrymen hurriedly fled. Therefore, Shi Xiong welcomed the Queen Mother and the princess to return.

古文：斩首万级，降其部落二万馀人。
现代文：这一仗，石雄斩首回鹘一万人，收降回鹘部落二万多人。
English: In this battle, Shi Xiong beheaded 10,000 people who had returned to Shao, and more than 20,000 people who had retreated to the Shao tribe.

古文：丙午，刘沔捷奏至。
现代文：丙午，刘沔上奏朝廷的捷报到达京城。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Liu Ye arrived in Beijing with a report on the success of the imperial court.

古文：李思忠入朝，自以回鹘降将，惧边将猜忌，乞并弟思贞等及爱弘顺皆归阙庭。
现代文：归义军使李思忠来京城朝拜，李思忠鉴于自己是回鹘的降将，惧怕朝廷边防将领的猜忌，于是，乞请自己和弟弟李思贞等人，以及副使爱弘顺都留居京城。
English: Li Sizhong was sent to Beijing to pay homage by the returning rebels. Since Li Sizhong was a surrendered general of the Hui Dynasty, he feared the suspicion of the imperial border guards. Therefore, he begged himself, his brother Li Sizhen and others, as well as the deputy envoy Ai Hongshun, to stay in Beijing.

古文：上从之。庚戌，以石雄为丰州都防御使。
现代文：庚戌，唐武宗任命石雄为丰州都防御使。
English: Geng Zong, Tang Wuzong appointed Shi Xiong as the leading envoy for the defense of Fuzhou.

古文：乌介可汗走保黑车子族，其溃兵多诣幽州降。
现代文：乌介可汗往东北方向逃去，依附黑车子族，回鹘溃散的士兵大多到幽州投降。
English: Ushiekhan fled to the northeast, clinging to the Black Chariot tribe, and most of the soldiers who fled back to Yuzhou surrendered.

古文：二月，庚申朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月，庚申朔，出现日食。
English: In February, Geng Sheng Shuo, a solar eclipse.

古文：诏停归义军，以其士卒分隶诸道为骑兵，优给粮赐。
现代文：唐武宗下诏，停罢归义军，归义军的回鹘士卒分别隶属各道为骑兵，从优供给衣粮。
English: Emperor Wuzong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict to stop the strike and return to the rebel army. The returnees who returned to the rebel army belonged to each province as cavalry, and were provided with clothing and grain from the superior.

古文：辛未，黠戛斯遣使者注吾合索献名马二，诏太仆卿赵蕃饮劳之。
现代文：辛未，黠戛斯派遣使者注吾合索来长安，向唐武宗奉献两匹名马。
English: In Xinwei, Jiaxing sent an envoy to Chang'an to dedicate two famous horses to Tang Wuzong.

古文：甲戌，上引对，班在勃海使之上。
现代文：武宗命太仆卿赵蕃设宴招待注吾合索。甲戌，武宗召见各族使者，命注吾合索列班于勃海国使者的前面。
English: Emperor Wuzong summoned emissaries from various ethnic groups and ordered them to stand in a row in front of the envoys from Bohai.

古文：上欲令赵蕃就颉戛斯求安西、北庭，李德裕等上言： 安西去京师七千馀里，北庭五千馀里，借使得之，当复置都护，以唐兵万人戍之。
现代文：唐武宗打算命赵蕃出使黠戛斯，要求把安西、北庭归还唐朝。宰相李德裕等人上言说： 安西离京城长安七千多里，北庭五千多里，假如黠戛斯归还，朝廷就必须重新设置都护府，征发一万名唐兵防守。
English: Emperor Wuzong of Tang intended to order Zhao Bei to send an envoy to Chang'an, requesting the return of Anxi and Beiting to the Tang Dynasty. The prime minister Li Deyu and others appealed: Anxi is more than seven thousand miles away from the capital Chang'an, and Beiting is more than five thousand miles away. If Chang'an were to be returned, the imperial court would have to re-establish the capital guard and conscript ten thousand Tang soldiers to defend it.

古文：不知此兵于何处追发，馈运从何道得通，此乃用实费以易虚名，非计也。 
现代文：不知道这么多的兵力从哪里征发，军需物资从哪条路打通运输。这实在是耗费大量的钱财去换取一个收复失地的好名声，恐怕不妥。 
English: I don't know where so many troops were conscripted from, or which routes were used to transport military supplies. I'm afraid it's not right to spend a lot of money in exchange for a good reputation for recovering lost territory.

古文：上乃止。
现代文：武宗于是作罢。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：中书侍郎、同平章事崔珙罢为右仆射。
现代文：中书侍郎、同平章事崔珙被罢免宰相职务，担任右仆射。
English: Chusho's attendant and Tongpei's subordinate, Choi Min, was removed from the prime minister's post and took the post of right-hand man.

古文：黠戛斯求册命，李德裕奏，宜与之结欢，令自将兵求杀使者罪人，及讨黑车子。
现代文：黠戛斯请求唐武宗下诏正式册封自己为可汗。宰相李德裕上奏认为，应当册封黠戛斯为可汗，这样，可以下令让他率兵搜捕当年杀黠戛斯送太和公主返唐使者的回鹘罪犯，以及出兵征讨黑车子族。
English: Emperor Gaozu requested Emperor Wuzong to issue an edict to officially crown him as Khan. Prime Minister Li Deyu believed that Emperor Gaozu should be crowned as Khan. In this way, he could be ordered to lead his troops to search for the criminals who killed Emperor Gaozu's envoys to send the Empress Dowager and the princess back to Tang, as well as to send troops to fight the Black Chariot people.

古文：上恐加可汗之名即不修臣礼，踵回鹘故事求岁遗及卖马，犹豫未决。
现代文：武宗恐怕册封黠戛斯可汗以后，黠戛斯不再对朝廷称臣纳贡，反而沿袭回鹘以往的惯例，要求朝廷每年赐给他们丝绢以及卖马交易，因而犹豫不决。
English: Wuzong feared that after the enthronement of Wuxi Khan, Wuxi would no longer pay tribute to the imperial court, but instead follow the previous practice of Hui, demanding that the imperial court give them silk and horse trading every year, and therefore hesitated.

古文：德裕奏： 黠戛斯已自称可汗，今欲藉其力，恐不可吝此名。
现代文：李德裕上奏说： 黠戛斯已经自称可汗，现在，朝廷要想借助他的兵力消灭回鹘残余，恐怕不应当吝惜一个可汗的名号。
English: Li Deyu said, "Gangaseki has already called himself Khan. Now, if the imperial court wants to use his forces to eliminate the remnants of Uighurs, I am afraid it should not begrudge a Khan's name.

古文：回鹘有平安、史之功，故岁赐绢二万匹，且与之和市。
现代文：回鹘当年帮助国家平定安史之乱，立有大功，所以才每年赐予丝绢二万匹，同时许可在边境进行交易。
English: Back in the day, the reed warbler played a great role in helping the country to quell the Anshi Rebellion, which is why it is given 20,000 reed warblers every year, as well as permission to trade them at the border.

古文：黠戛斯未尝有功于中国，岂敢遽求赂遗乎！
现代文：黠戛斯未曾对国家有功，怎敢随便要求朝廷赐给丝绢贿赂他们呢！
English: How dare they ask the imperial court to give them silk money to bribe them, when they have never done anything for the country!

古文：若虑其不臣，当与之约，必如回鹘称臣，乃行册命；又当叙同姓以亲之，使执子孙之礼。 
现代文：如果担忧黠戛斯不再称臣纳贡，可以和他首先约定，必须象回鹘可汗当年向朝廷称臣以后，才能进行册封。同时，黠戛斯自称是汉朝李陵的后裔，和皇上同姓李，所以，还应当和他叙说同姓的关系，以便更加亲近，今后，按照同姓子孙的礼节对待皇上。 
English: If you are worried that kas will no longer pay tribute, you can first make an agreement with him that he must become a vassal to the imperial court like khan did that year. At the same time, kas claims to be a descendant of Li Ling in the Han Dynasty and shares the same surname as the emperor. Therefore, you should also talk to him about the relationship of the same surname in order to be closer. In the future, treat the emperor according to the etiquette of the descendants of the same surname.

古文：上从之。
现代文：武宗批准。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：庚寅，太和公主至京师，改封安定大长公主，诏宰相帅百官迎谒于章敬寺前。
现代文：庚寅，太和公主抵达京城，唐武宗改封公主为安定大长公主，下诏命宰相率领百官在章敬寺的前面迎接拜见公主。
English: The Emperor Go-In, the Empress Dowager and the Princess arrived in the capital. Emperor Wuzong changed the title of the princess to Princess Stable Elder, and issued an edict ordering the prime minister to lead hundreds of officials to meet the princess in front of Zhangjing Temple.

古文：公主诣光顺门，去盛服，脱簪珥，谢回鹘负恩、和亲无状之罪。
现代文：公主到光顺门时，脱去华丽的服装，卸掉头上的首饰，对于回鹘辜负国家的恩德以及自己和亲未达到预期目的表示谢罪。
English: When the princess arrived at the Guangshun Gate, she took off her gorgeous clothes, removed the jewelry on her head, and expressed her gratitude for the kindness of the country and the failure of herself and her relatives to achieve the expected goal.

古文：上遣中使慰谕，然后入宫。
现代文：武宗派宦官慰问公主，然后公主回到宫中。
English: Emperor Wu sent eunuchs to console the princess, and then the princess returned to the palace.

古文：阳安等六公主不来慰问安定公主，各罚俸物及封绢。
现代文：阳安等七位公主没有出宫来慰问安定大长公主，被罚俸禄以及朝廷每年供给他们的丝绢。
English: The seven princesses, including Yang'an, who did not leave the palace to offer condolences to the eldest princess, were fined their salaries and the silk cocoons that the court provided them with every year.

古文：赐魏博节度使何重顺名弘敬。
现代文：唐武宗赐魏博节度使何重顺名叫何弘敬。
English: Emperor Wuzong of Tang Dynasty gave the Wei Bo Festival to He Chong Shun, who was named He Hong Kei.

古文：三月，以太仆卿赵蕃为安抚黠戛斯使。上命李德草《赐黠戛斯可汗书》，谕以 贞观二十一年，黠戛斯先君身自入朝，授左屯卫将军、坚昆都督，迄于天宝，朝贡不绝。
现代文：三月，任命太仆卿赵蕃为安抚黠戛斯使；命宰相李德裕起草《赐黠戛斯可汗书》，说： 贞观二十一年，黠戛斯的祖辈酋长来长安拜见太宗，被任命为左屯卫将军、坚昆都督。
English: In March, he appointed the servant of the Emperor Zhao Jie as the envoy to pacify the Qajars; he ordered the Prime Minister Li Deyu to draft the "Gift to the Qajars Khan," saying: "In the 21st year of Zhenguan, the ancestral chiefs of the Qajars came to Chang'an to meet the Emperor Taizong, and was appointed the General of the Left Tunwei and the Governor of Jiankun.

古文：比为回鹘所隔，回鹘凌虐诸蕃，可汗能复仇雪怨，茂功壮节，近古无俦。
现代文：此后一直到天宝年间，向朝廷贡献不绝，但近年来被回鹘阻挠隔断。回鹘凌辱虐待周围的各藩国，可汗能够举兵而报仇雪恨，劳苦功高，近代以来无人可比。
English: From then until the Tenpo era, he continued to make contributions to the imperial court, but in recent years he was blocked by the Hui. The Hui abused and mistreated the surrounding domains, and the Khan was able to raise an army to take revenge. His hard work was high, and no one has been comparable since modern times.

古文：今回鹘残兵不满千人，散投山谷，可汗既与为怨，须尽歼夷。
现代文：现在，回鹘的残兵不到一千人，散居在山谷中，可汗既然和回鹘有深仇大恨，那么，就应当继续出兵，把回鹘全部歼灭。
English: Now, the remnants of the Uighurs are less than a thousand, scattered in the valley. Since the Khan has a deep hatred for the Uighurs, then he should continue to send troops to wipe out all the Uighurs.

古文：倘留馀烬，必生后患。
现代文：如果留下残余，将来必有后患。
English: If you leave a residue, there will be trouble in the future.

古文：又闻可汗受氏之原，与我同族，国家承北平太守之后，可汗乃都尉苗裔。
现代文：听说可汗姓氏的渊源，和我大唐同族。大唐是汉朝北平太守李广的后代，可汗是汉朝都尉李陵的后裔。
English: I heard that the origin of Khan's surname is the same family as my Datang. Datang is a descendant of the Han dynasty Beiping governor Li Guang, and Khan is a descendant of the Han dynasty captain Li Ling.

古文：以此合族，尊卑可知。
现代文：按照这种情况，我们合为同族一姓，尊卑上下的名份也就很清楚了。
English: According to this situation, we are united as one family of the same race, and the names of superiority and inferiority are very clear.

古文：今欲册命可汗，特加美号，缘未知可汗意，且遣谕怀。待赵蕃回日，别命使展礼。 
现代文：现在，朝廷打算册封你为可汗，特意授予你美好的名号，但由于还不知道可汗的意向，所以，先派使者传达朝廷的意图，等赵蕃返回后，再另外派遣使者正式册封。 
English: Now, the imperial court intends to canonize you as a khan and specially grant you a beautiful name. However, since the intention of the khan is not yet known, an envoy was sent first to convey the intention of the imperial court. After Zhao Zhen returned, another envoy was sent to officially canonize him.

古文：自回鹘至塞上及黠戛斯入贡，每有诏敕，上多命德裕草之。
现代文：自从回鹘亡国后逃到边境，以及黠戛斯来长安上贡，武宗每次发布诏书敕令，大多命李德裕起草。
English: Since he fled to the border after the fall of the Ming Dynasty, and when he came to Chang'an to pay tribute, every time Emperor Wuzong issued an edict, he mostly ordered Li Deyu to draft it.

古文：德裕请委翰林学士，上曰： 学士不能尽人意，须卿自为之。 
现代文：李德裕请求委托翰林学士起草，武宗说： 翰林学士的手笔不能尽如人意，我要你亲自动手起草。 
English: Li Deyu requested to entrust Hanlin with the drafting. Wu Zong said: Hanlin's handwriting is not as good as it should be. I want you to draft it by yourself.

古文：刘沔奏： 归义军回鹘三千馀人及酋长四十三人准诏分隶诸道，皆大呼，连营据滹沱河，不肯从命，已尽诛之。
现代文：河东节度使刘沔奏报： 归义军回鹘三千人，以及酋长四十三人按照陛下诏令分别隶属各道。回鹘人得知后，都大声喧哗，聚集并占据滹沱河，不肯听从诏令，已经被我全部诛杀。
English: The festival of Hedong made Liu Ye report: "Three thousand Uighurs were returned to the rebels, and forty-three chiefs were subordinated to each province in accordance with His Majesty's edict. After the Uighurs were informed, they all made a loud noise, gathered and occupied Luohe, refused to obey the edict, and were all killed by me.

古文：回鹘降幽州者前后三万馀人，皆散录诸道。 
现代文：回鹘乌介可汗被官军打败逃亡后，溃散的兵马相继有三万人投降幽州，都被分散隶属各道。 
English: After Utsuke Khan, the returnee, was defeated by the government army and fled, 30,000 soldiers and horses that had been scattered surrendered to Yuzhou one after another. They were all dispersed and subordinated to various provinces.

古文：李德裕追论维州悉怛谋事云： 维州据高山绝顶，三面临江，在戎虏平川之冲，是汉地入兵之路。
现代文：宰相李德裕追诉太和五年，吐蕃国维州守将悉怛谋降唐后又被送回而惨曹杀害的事件，说： 维州城位于高山险峻的地方，三面临江，是吐蕃和西川平原之间的交通要道，也是我们出兵攻打吐蕃的必经之地。
English: Prime Minister Li Deyu, who prosecuted Tahe for five years for the incident in which the governor of the state of Tujia, Wizhou, was brutally murdered after he had been sent back to Cangzhou after plotting the fall of Tang, said: Wizhou City is located in a high and steep mountain area, facing the river on three sides. It is an important transportation route between Cangzhou and the West River Plain, and it is also a necessary place for us to send troops to attack Cangzhou.

古文：初，河、陇并没，唯此独存。
现代文：当初，河西、陇右地区被吐蕃攻占后，只有维州还在我们手中。
English: At the beginning, only Wizhou was still in our hands after the west of Hebei and the right bank of the Yangtze River were occupied by the Tuobao.

古文：吐蕃潜以妇人嫁此州门者，二十年后，两男长成，窃开垒门，引兵夜入，遂为所陷，号曰无忧城。
现代文：后来，吐蕃秘密地把一个妇女嫁给维州的守门人。过了二十年，守门人的两个儿子长大成人，于是，一天夜里，偷偷地打开城门，把吐蕃兵引进城中，维州因此被吐蕃攻占，称为无忧城。
English: Twenty years later, when the gatekeeper's two sons had grown up, he secretly opened the city gate one night and led the Tibetan soldiers into the city. As a result, Victoria was conquered by the Tibetans and became known as the City of No Worries.

古文：从此得并力于西边，更无虞于南路。凭陵近甸，旰食累朝。
现代文：从此以后，吐蕃在南路无后顾之忧，集中兵力进攻我国的西部边境，连年侵犯京畿地区，以致几朝皇上都为此寝食不安。
English: From then on, Tubo had no worries on the southern route, concentrated its forces to attack the western border of our country, and invaded the Gyeonggi region for years, so that the emperors of several dynasties were worried about this.

古文：贞元中，韦皋欲经略河、湟，须此城为始。
现代文：贞元年中，西川节度使韦皋准备出兵收复河、湟地区，但必须从维州首先下手，于是，调动一万多名精兵，昼夜攻打了好几年。
English: In the middle of the first year of the Zhengyuan era, the West River Festival made Wei Gan prepare to send troops to recover the He River and Min River areas, but they had to start from Wizhou first. Therefore, they mobilized more than 10,000 elite soldiers and attacked day and night for several years.

古文：万旅尽锐，急攻数年，虽擒论莽热而还，城坚卒不可克。臣初到西蜀，外扬国威，中缉边备。
现代文：最后，虽然擒获了吐蕃大将论莽热，班师告捷，但维州因城池坚固，始终未能攻克。 我最初到西川担任节度使时，对外宣扬国家的威严，对内则加强边防守备。
English: In the end, although General Tu Youyou's reckless enthusiasm was captured and his team was successful, Victoria was never able to be conquered due to the strength of the city.When I first went to Xichuan to serve as the festival envoy, I preached the majesty of the country to the outside world, and strengthened the border defense preparation to the inside.

古文：其维州熟臣信令，空壁来归。
现代文：吐蕃维州守将悉怛谋熟知我的政令和信誉后，举城前来归降。
English: The Governor of the State of Victoria, Tubo, after carefully studying and familiarizing himself with my edict and reputation, came to the city to surrender.

古文：臣始受其降，南蛮震慑，山西八国，皆愿内属。其吐蕃合水、妻鸡等城，既失险厄，自须抽归，可减八处镇兵，坐收千馀里旧地。
现代文：我刚开始接受悉怛谋的归降，南诏国就受到极大的震惊和威慑；邛崃山以西的八国，都表示愿意前来归附；吐蕃国的合水、栖鸡等城，在失去维州作为屏障后，自然会退兵。这样，不仅我国可减少八个地方的镇守兵力，而且不必出兵，即可收复一千多里的失地。
English: As soon as I began to accept the surrender of the Southern Xiao State, I was greatly shocked and deterred; the eight countries west of Shaoshan all expressed their willingness to come to annex; the cities of He Shui and Jixi in Tubo State, after losing Victoria as a barrier, would naturally withdraw. In this way, not only could China reduce the garrison strength in eight places, but without sending troops, it could recover more than a thousand miles of lost land.

古文：且维州未降前一年，吐蕃犹围鲁州，岂顾盟约！
现代文：况且吐蕃在维州归降的前一年，仍在围攻鲁州，这难道表明他们真有诚意遵守两国签订的长庆盟约！
English: Moreover, a year before the fall of Wizhou, Tubo was still besieging Luzhou. Does this indicate that they really have the sincerity to abide by the Changqing Covenant signed by the two countries?

古文：臣受降之初，指天为誓，面许奏闻，各加酬赏。
现代文：我在接受悉怛谋归降时，曾经指天发誓，当面保证要向朝廷上奏，对悉怛谋等人酬劳赏赐。
English: When I accepted the surrender of Siyuan Muo, I once swore by heaven that I would personally guarantee to appeal to the imperial court and reward Siyuan Muo and others.

古文：当时不与臣者，望风疾臣，诏臣执送悉怛谋等令彼自戮，臣宁忍以三百馀人命弃信偷安！
现代文：当时，朝廷中执意和我作对的牛僧孺等人，百般对我进行攻击。于是，文宗皇帝下诏，命将悉怛谋等人逮捕送还，任凭吐蕃诛杀。我怎么能忍心背弃信义，不顾这三百人的生命，自己苟且偷安呢！
English: At that time, I was being attacked in every possible way by the court's bull monks and others who were determined to oppose me. Therefore, Emperor Wenzong issued an edict ordering the arrest and repatriation of Siyuan and others, leaving them to be killed. How could I bear to betray my faith, disregard the lives of these three hundred people, and steal my own peace!

古文：累表陈论，乞垂矜舍，答诏严切，竟令执还。
现代文：因而，多次上表朝廷，请求可怜赦免他们，但朝廷诏书答复严厉，命令必须逮捕送还。
English: As a result, they repeatedly petitioned the imperial court to pardon them, but the imperial decree responded harshly, ordering that they must be arrested and sent back.

古文：体备三木，舆于竹畚，及将就路，冤叫呜呜，将吏对臣，无不陨涕。
现代文：结果，只好把悉怛谋等人捆绑起来，甚于不惜用竹筐抬着押送吐蕃。悉怛谋等人在即将上路时，齐声喊冤，西川的将士官吏也无不对我流泪哭泣。
English: As a result, it was necessary to tie up Shishimoto and others, rather than using a bamboo basket to carry and push the raft. When Shishimoto and others were about to go on the road, they shouted their grievances in unison, and all the officers and officials in Nishikawa shed tears for me.

古文：其部送者更为蕃帅讥诮，云既已降彼，何须送来！
现代文：押送悉怛谋等人的西川将士还遭到吐蕃人的讥笑，说： 他既然已经投降你们了，为什么又要送回来！ 
English: The Nishikawa officers who escorted Shibata and the others were also ridiculed by the spitters, saying, "Since he has already surrendered to you, why should he be sent back again!"

古文：复以此降人戮于汉境之上，恣行残忍，用固携离，至乃掷其婴孩，承以枪槊。
现代文：朝廷这种处置办法，实在是自我断绝今后再有人效忠归降朝廷的门路，而使吐蕃人心大快。从古至今，再没有比这件事更愚蠢的了！
English: The imperial court's way of handling this is really a way of cutting off the path for anyone to be loyal to the imperial court in the future, and it makes people's hearts beat faster. From ancient times to the present, there has never been anything more stupid than this matter!

古文：绝忠款之路，快凶虐之情，从古已来，未有此事。虽时更一纪，而运属千年，乞追奖忠魂，各加褒赠！ 
现代文：现在，这起事件已经过去十二年了，恰逢陛下即位这千载难遇的好机会，请求追念奖励悉怛谋等人的忠魂，对他们加以褒奖并追赠官爵！ 
English: Now, twelve years have passed since the incident, which coincided with the golden opportunity of His Majesty's ascension to the throne, to ask for the remembrance of and reward the loyal souls of those who were involved in the conspiracy, to give them awards and posthumous peerages!

古文：诏赠悉怛谋右卫将军。
现代文：于是，唐武宗下诏，追赠悉怛谋为右卫将军。
English: As a result, Emperor Wuzong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict, posthumously awarding him the title of General of the Right Division.

古文：臣光曰： 论者多疑维州之取舍，不能决牛、李之是非。
现代文：臣司马光说：以往凡谈论维州事件的人，都对维州究竟应当夺取还是丢弃而感到疑惑，不能判断牛僧孺和李德裕之间的是非曲直。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: In the past, all those who talked about the Victoria State incident were puzzled about whether Victoria State should be seized or discarded, and could not judge the rights and wrongs between Niu Sangyu and Li Deyu.

古文：臣以为昔荀吴围鼓，鼓人或请以城叛，吴弗许，曰： 或以吾城叛，吾所甚恶也，人以城来，吾独何好焉！
现代文：我认为，过去春秋的时候，荀吴有一次围攻鼓城，城中有人请求举城投降，荀吴不许，他说： 如果我国有人举城叛变，我肯定痛恨他们；但别国的人举城叛变而投降我，我怎么能反而喜欢他们呢！
English: I think that in the past spring and autumn, Gongwu once besieged Ducheng. Some people in the city asked Gongwu to surrender the city, but Gongwu did not allow it. He said: "If someone in our country rebels, I will certainly hate them; but if someone from another country rebels and surrenders to me, how can I like them?

古文：吾不可以欲城而迩奸。 
现代文：我不能因为想夺取鼓城就容纳他们的奸谋。 
English: I can't accept their treachery just because they want to take over Drum City.

古文：使鼓人杀叛者而缮守备。
现代文：于是，纵使鼓人杀掉叛变的人，并让他们加强防守。
English: Thus, even if the drummer killed the mutineers, and let them strengthen the defense.

古文：是时唐新与吐蕃修好而纳其维州，以利言之，则维州大而信大；以害言之，则维州缓而关中急。
现代文：当时，唐朝和吐蕃签订长庆盟约不久，就接纳吐蕃维州守将的归降。从国家的利益来说，夺取维州的事小，而遵守盟约的信义为大；从吐蕃对国家危害的程度来说，也是维州稍缓而关中最为紧迫。
English: At that time, not long after the Tang Dynasty and Tubo signed the Changqing Treaty, they accepted the surrender of Tubo's garrison commander of Wizhou. From the perspective of national interests, the seizure of Wizhou was a small matter, while the loyalty to the treaty was great; from the perspective of the extent of Tubo's harm to the country, it was also the most urgent in Wizhou.

古文：然则为唐计者，宜何先乎？
现代文：那么，从唐朝来说，究竟利益和信义、维州和关中，哪方面更重要呢？
English: So, from the perspective of the Tang Dynasty, which aspect is more important, the interests and loyalty, or the viceroyalty and customs?

古文：悉怛谋在唐则为向化，在吐蕃不免为叛臣，其受诛也又何矜焉！
现代文：悉怛谋降唐，从唐朝方面说，他这样做是向化；但从吐蕃方面说，则不免为叛臣。因此，他被诛杀，又有什么理由值得同情呢！
English: From the Tang Dynasty's point of view, he was a traitor for plotting to overthrow the Tang Dynasty, but from the Tibetan's point of view, he was a traitor. Therefore, why should he be pitied for being killed?

古文：且德裕所言者利也，僧孺所言者义也，匹夫徇利而亡义犹耻之，况天子乎！
现代文：同时，李德裕所考虑的是国家的利益，而牛僧孺所考虑的则是国家的信义。即使老百姓对见利忘义的行为都以为耻，何况一个国家的天子！
English: At the same time, Li Deyu considered the interests of the country, while Niu Zanglu considered the loyalty of the country. Even if the common people are ashamed of the behavior of seeing profit and forgetting righteousness, let alone the heavenly son of a country!

古文：譬如邻人有牛，逸而入于家，或劝其兄归之，或劝其弟攘之。
现代文：打个譬喻来说，如果邻居家的牛丢了，跑到自己家里，有人劝这家人的哥哥把牛还给邻居，有人劝他的弟弟把牛留下。
English: By way of example, if a neighbour's cow gets lost and runs into one's own house, some people would advise the brother of the family to return the cow to the neighbour, while others would advise his brother to keep the cow.

古文：劝归者曰： 攘之不义也，且致讼。 
现代文：劝还的人说： 留下来不仁义，而且可能被人告发。 
English: Those who tried to persuade them to return said: "It's not fair to stay, and you might be reported."

古文：劝攘者曰： 彼尝攘吾羊矣，何义之拘！
现代文：劝留的人说： 邻居过去曾偷过我的羊，对他还拘泥什么仁义！
English: The persuader said: My neighbour stole my sheep in the past, how can I be fair to him?

古文：牛大畜也，鬻之可以富家。 
现代文：牛是大牲畜，卖了可以使家里富裕。 
English: Cows are large livestock, and selling them can make a family rich.

古文：以是观之，牛、李之是非，端可见矣。
现代文：对于牛僧孺和李德裕争论维州事件的是非曲直，由此最终可以作出明确的判断了。
English: For the merits and demerits of the dispute between Niu Zangyao and Li Deyu over the Victoria incident, a clear judgment can finally be made.

古文：夏，四月，辛未，李德裕乞退就闲局。
现代文：夏季，四月，辛未，宰相李德裕乞请辞职，退居闲散的职位。
English: In the summer, in April, Xin Wei, Prime Minister Li Deyu begged to resign and retired to an idle position.

古文：上曰： 卿每辞位，使我旬日不得听。今大事皆未就，卿岂得求去！ 
现代文：唐武宗说： 你每次提出辞职，都让我十来天心神不宁，现在，朝廷的大政方针还都没有安排就序，你怎么能辞职呢！ 
English: Tang Wuzong said, "Every time you have offered to resign, it has made my mind restless for more than ten days. Now, the major policies of the imperial court have not yet been arranged in order. How can you resign?"

古文：初，昭义节度使刘从谏累表言仇士良罪恶，士良亦言从谏窥伺朝廷。
现代文：当初，昭义节度使刘从谏多次上表指斥左神策军护军中尉仇士良的罪行，仇士良也向朝廷上言，说刘从谏窥伺朝廷的动向。
English: At first, the Shouyi Festival made Liu Conglu repeatedly denounce the crimes of Zuo Shengchao's military escort lieutenant Qiu Shiliang. Qiu Shiliang also appealed to the imperial court, saying that Liu Conglu was spying on the movement of the imperial court.

古文：及上即位，从谏有马高九尺，献之，上不受。
现代文：唐武宗即位以后，刘从谏把自己一匹高达九尺的良马献给武宗，武宗拒绝没有接受。
English: After Emperor Wuzong of Tang ascended to the throne, Liu Conglu presented a fine horse of nine feet high to Emperor Wuzong. Emperor Wuzong refused to accept it.

古文：从谏以为士良所为，怒杀其马，由是与朝廷相猜恨。
现代文：刘从谏认为是仇士良从中作梗，大怒，杀掉了这匹良马。从此以后，和朝廷之间相互猜忌怨恨。
English: Liu Conglu thought that his enemy Liang was interfering, and in a rage, he killed the good horse. Since then, there has been mutual suspicion and resentment between Liu Conglu and the court.

古文：遂招纳亡命，缮完兵械，邻境皆潜为之备。
现代文：于是，招收亡命之徒，修造完善各种兵器军械。与昭义邻接的藩镇都秘密地防备他。
English: As a result, he recruited desperadoes, built and perfected all kinds of weapons and armaments, and the towns adjacent to Shouyi secretly guarded against him.

古文：从谏榷马牧及商旅，岁入钱五万缗，又卖铁、煮盐亦数万缗。
现代文：刘从谏对昭义境内的马场和商业实行专卖，每年收入钱五万缗。同时，又由官府主持卖铁和盐，每年收入也有几万缗。
English: Liu Conglu has a monopoly on the sale of horse farms and businesses in the territory of Zhaoyi, with an annual income of 50,000 baht. At the same time, the government presides over the sale of iron and salt, with an annual income of tens of thousands of baht.

古文：大商皆假以牙职，使通好诸道，因为贩易。
现代文：对于大商人，刘从谏授予他们节度使衙前的军职，然后，派他们出使各个藩镇，发展双方的友好关系，同时贩运买卖商品。
English: As for the big merchants, Liu Conglu gave them military positions before the festival, and then sent them to various provinces and towns to develop friendly relations between the two sides, and at the same time to trade goods.

古文：商人倚从谏势，所至多陵轹将吏，诸道皆恶之。
现代文：商人都依赖刘从谏的权势，每到一个地方，往往凌辱将士官吏，各个藩镇无不厌恶他们。
English: The merchants all relied on the power of Liu Conglu. Whenever they went to a place, they often abused and humiliated the non-commissioned officers and officials. The various towns and villages all detested them.

古文：从谏疾病，谓妻裴氏曰： 吾以忠直事朝廷，而朝廷不明我志，诸道皆不我与。
现代文：后来，刘从谏身患疾病，对他的妻子裴氏说： 我对朝廷忠心直言，但朝廷却不明了我的心意，各个藩镇也都不了解我。
English: Later, Liu Zongzang fell ill and said to his wife, Pei Zang: "I have been loyal to the imperial court, but the imperial court did not know my intentions, and the various towns did not understand me.

古文：我死，它人主此军，则吾家无炊火矣！ 
现代文：我死了以后，如果朝廷另外派人来担任昭义节度使，我们家的香火从此也就断绝了！ 
English: After my death, if the imperial court sends another person to serve as the messenger of the Shoi festival, our family's incense will be cut off from now on!

古文：乃与幕客张谷、陈扬庭谋效河北诸镇，以弟右骁卫将军从素之子稹为牙内都知兵马使，从子匡周为中军兵马使，孔目官王协为押牙亲事兵马使，以奴李士贵为使宅十将兵马使，刘守义、刘衬忠、董可武、崔玄度分将牙兵。
现代文：于是，他和幕僚张谷、陈扬庭密谋效法河北藩镇，实行割据，任命他的弟弟右骁卫将军刘从素的儿子刘稹为牙内都知兵马使，侄子刘匡周为中军兵马使，孔目官王协为押牙亲事兵马使，家奴李士贵为使宅十将兵马使。命令刘守义、刘守忠、董可武、崔玄度分别统辖亲兵。
English: As a result, he and his staff Zhang Gu and Chen Yang Ting conspired to follow the example of the Hebei hanzhong and implement the separation of powers, appointing his brother, General Liu Cong Su's son, Liu Wei, as the Inner Mongolian Military Envoy, his nephew, Liu Kuang Zhou, as the Chinese Military Military Military Envoy, the Kongmu official, Wang Xie, as the Inner Mongolian Military Envoy, and his son, Li Shigui, as the Inner Mongolian Military Envoy. They ordered Liu Shou Yi, Liu Shou Zhong, Dong Ke Wu, and Cui Xandu to supervise their relatives separately.

古文：谷，郓州人，扬庭，洪州人也。
现代文：张谷是郓州人；陈扬庭是洪州人。
English: Zhang Gu is from Zhangzhou; Chen Yangting is from Hongzhou.

古文：从谏寻薨，稹秘不发丧。
现代文：不久，刘从谏去世，刘稹封锁消息，不为刘从谏治丧。
English: Soon after, Liu Conglu died. Liu Conglu blocked the news and did not mourn for Liu Conglu.

古文：王协为稹谋曰： 正当如宝历年样为之，不出百日，旌节自至。但严奉监军，厚遗敕使，四境勿出兵，城中暗为备而已。 
现代文：王协为刘稹谋划说： 现在，只要你按照宝历元年刘悟去世后，刘从谏得以世袭而为节度使那样行事，尊奉监军，对朝廷的使者厚加贿赂，四邻边境切勿出兵侵扰，城中秘密地进行防备。
English: Wang Xie made a plan for Liu Bei, saying, "Now, as long as you act in accordance with the rules of succession after the death of Liu Wuguo in the first year of the Baoli era, Liu Congkun will be able to act in such a way for the festival, respect the supervisors of the army, bribe the emissaries of the imperial court, do not send troops to invade the four neighboring borders, and secretly prepare in the city.

古文：使押牙姜崟奏求国医，上遣中使解朝政以医往问疾。
现代文：这样，不出一百天，朝廷任命你为节度使的旌节自然就会送来。 于是，刘稹命押牙姜向朝廷上奏，请求派宫廷中著名的医生为刘从谏治病。
English: In this way, within a hundred days, the imperial court will naturally send you to the imperial court to appoint you as the official of the imperial court. Therefore, Liu Zhen gave his life to Ota Jiang to appeal to the imperial court and requested that a famous doctor in the imperial court be sent to treat Liu Zhen.

古文：稹又逼监军崔士康奏称从谏疾病，请命其子稹为留后。
现代文：武宗派遣宦官解朝政携朝廷医官前往昭义，为刘从谏诊断。刘稹又逼迫监军崔士康上奏，说刘从谏身患疾病，请求朝廷任命他的侄子刘稹为留后。
English: Emperor Wuzong sent eunuchs to explain the situation to the court and brought a court physician to Shouyi to diagnose Liu Congkun. Liu Congkun also forced the overseer, Cui Shikang, to report that Liu Congkun was ill and asked the court to appoint his nephew, Liu Congkun, as his successor.

古文：上遣供奉官薛士幹往谕指云： 恐从谏疾未平，宜且就东部疗之；俟稍瘳，别有任使。
现代文：武宗于是又派供奉官薛士干出使昭义，传达武宗的旨意说： 朝廷恐怕刘从谏的病一直不好，因此让他暂且到东都洛阳去治病，等到病情逐渐好转，再另外安排任命。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wuzong also sent Xue Shigang, a tributary official, as an envoy to convey Emperor Wuzong's will, saying, "The imperial court is afraid that Liu Congyao's illness has not been good, so let him temporarily go to Luoyang, the eastern capital, for treatment, and wait until his condition gradually improves before arranging another appointment.

古文：仍遣稹入朝，必厚加官爵。 
现代文：并让刘从谏命刘稹到京城朝拜，朝廷必定授予优厚的官爵。 
English: And let Liu worship from the death of Liu Bei to the capital, the court will certainly award him a generous official title.

古文：上以泽潞事谋于宰相，宰相多以为： 回鹘馀烬未灭，边鄙犹须警备，复讨泽潞，国力不支，请以刘稹权知军事。 
现代文：唐武宗召集宰相商议如何处置昭义的事宜，多数宰相认为： 回鹘的残余还未消灭，边境仍然需要加强防守。现在，又要征讨昭义，恐怕国家的财政难以支持。因此，请求任命刘稹暂为昭义留后。 
English: Tang Wuzong convened the chancellors to discuss how to deal with the matter of Shouyi, and most of the chancellors believed that: the remnants of the Uighurs had not yet been eliminated, and the border still needed to be strengthened defensively. Now, if Shouyi were to be requisitioned again, I am afraid that the state's finances would be difficult to support. Therefore, it was requested that Liu Ye be appointed as Shouyi for the time being.

古文：谏官及群臣上言者亦然。
现代文：谏官和凡是上言朝廷的百官也都持同样看法。
English: The eunuchs and all the eunuchs of the imperial court held the same opinion.

古文：李德裕独曰： 泽潞事体与河朔三镇不同。
现代文：只有宰相李德裕说： 昭义的情况和河朔地区的魏博、成德、幽州三个割据跋扈的藩镇不同。
English: Only the Prime Minister Li Deyu said: The situation of Zhao Yi is different from that of the three strongholds Wei Bo, Chengde and Yuzhou in the Hexuo region.

古文：河朔习乱已久，人心难化。是故累朝以来，置之度外。
现代文：河朔地区割据跋扈已有很长时间，人心难以感化，所以，几朝皇上都承认现状，不再讨伐他们。
English: It has been a long time since there was a stronghold in the Hexuo region, and it is difficult to influence people's minds. Therefore, emperors of several dynasties have acknowledged the current situation and no longer fight them.

古文：泽潞近处心腹，一军素称忠义，尝破走硃滔，擒卢从史。
现代文：昭义则邻近京城，处于国家的心腹地区。昭义的将士向来以忠义而闻名，曾经在贞元元年出兵击退幽州节度使朱滔的叛乱，元和三年擒拿本镇的叛将卢从史。
English: Akiyoshi, on the other hand, is close to the capital and is located in the heart of the country. The soldiers of Akiyoshi have always been famous for their loyalty. In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, they sent troops to repel the rebellion of Yuzhou Jiedu Zhu Tao, and in the first and third years of the Yuan Dynasty, they captured the traitor Lu Congshi.

古文：顷时多用儒臣为帅，如李抱真成立此军，德宗犹不许承袭，使李缄护丧归东都。
现代文：过去，朝廷大多任用文官担任昭义节度使。如李抱真，最初组建昭义的军队，有很大的功劳，唐德宗仍不许他的儿子李缄世袭为该镇的节度使，命令他护送父亲的灵柩回归东都洛阳。
English: In the past, the imperial court mostly appointed civil servants to serve as the festival envoys of Zhao Yi. For example, Li Bu Zhen, who initially formed the army of Zhao Yi, had great merit. Tang De Zong still did not allow his son Li Xi to succeed as the festival envoy of the town, and ordered him to escort his father's coffin back to the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：敬宗不恤国务，宰相又无远略，刘悟之死，因循以授从谏。
现代文：后来，唐敬宗不理朝政，当时的宰相也缺乏远见卓识，因此，在节度使刘悟去世后，命他的儿子刘从谏世袭担任了节度使。
English: Later, Emperor Jingzong of Tang ignored the politics of the imperial court, and the prime minister at that time lacked foresight. Therefore, after the death of Liu Gou, he ordered his son Liu Zengqi to succeed him as the festival envoy.

古文：从谏跋扈难制，累上表迫胁朝廷，今垂死之际，复以兵权擅付竖子。
现代文：刘从谏跋扈骄横，朝廷难以控制，他多次上表逼迫威胁朝廷。现在，在临死的时候，又擅自把兵权传给自己的侄子。
English: Liu was always arrogant and difficult for the imperial court to control. He repeatedly threatened the imperial court with persecution. Now, when he was about to die, he passed the military power to his nephew without authorization.

古文：朝廷若又因而授之，则四方诸镇谁不思效其所为，天子威令不复行矣！ 
现代文：如果朝廷又沿袭过去的惯例，任命刘稹为节度使，那么，全国各地的藩镇谁不想效法他们的做法。这样一来，皇上的威严和诏令也就难以在全国贯彻执行了！ 
English: If the imperial court follows the past practice and appoints Liu Ye as the festival envoy, then who would not want to follow their example in all the provinces and towns across the country. In this way, it will be difficult to implement the emperor's majesty and edict throughout the country!

古文：上曰： 卿以何术制之，果可克否？ 
现代文：武宗问： 你有什么办法能够制服刘稹？而且，果真能够奏效吗？ 
English: Wu Zong asked: Do you have any way to subdue Liu Ye? Moreover, will it really work?

古文：对曰： 稹所恃者河朔三镇。
现代文：李德裕回答说： 刘稹所依赖的是河朔魏博、成德和幽州三个割据藩镇。
English: Li Deyu replied: What Liu Bei relies on is the three divided townships of Heshou Weibo, Chengde and Yuzhou.

古文：但得镇、魏不与之同。则稹无能为也。
现代文：如果能使成德和魏博不与他相互勾结，那么，刘稹就无所作为了。
English: If Chengde and Weibo can be prevented from colluding with him, then Liu Bei will have nothing to do.

古文：若遣重臣往谕王元逵、何弘敬，以河朔自艰难以来，列圣许其传袭，已成故事，与泽潞不同。
现代文：假如朝廷能够派遣一位德高望重的大臣前往成德和魏博，向两镇的节度使王元逵、何弘敬转达皇上的旨意，说明自从安史之乱以后，历代皇上许可他们传位子孙，世袭节度使，已经成为惯例，和昭义不同。
English: If the imperial court can send a highly respected minister to Chengde and Weibo to convey the emperor's will to the two towns of Wang Yuanqi and He Hongjing, it shows that since the Anshi Rebellion, successive emperors have allowed them to pass on the throne to their children and grandchildren, and hereditary festival envoys have become common practice, which is different from Shouyi.

古文：今朝廷将加兵泽潞，不欲更出禁军至山东。
现代文：现在，朝廷准备出兵讨伐昭义，但不打算派禁军攻打昭义在太行山以东的邢？
English: Now, the imperial court is preparing to send troops to fight against Akiyoshi, but it does not plan to send a forbidden army to attack Akiyoshi in Tsuru, east of Mount Taihang?

古文：其山东三州隶昭义者，委两镇攻之。兼令遍谕将士，以贼平之日厚加官赏。
现代文：磁三州，而命成德和魏博两镇攻讨；同时也向这两个藩镇的将士转达皇上的旨意，在平定昭义的叛乱后，朝廷将给予将士优厚的官爵和赏赐。
English: He ordered the two towns of Chengde and Weibo to be attacked. At the same time, the emperor's will was conveyed to the soldiers of these two towns. After the rebellion of Zhao Yi was quelled, the court would give the soldiers a generous rank and reward.

古文：苟两镇听命，不从旁沮桡官军，则稹必成擒矣！ 
现代文：如果成德和魏博听从朝廷的命令，不从旁阻挠官军的行动，那么，刘稹肯定会被官军擒获！ 
English: If Chengde and Wei Bo obeyed the order of the imperial court and did not obstruct the actions of the government army, then Liu Bei would certainly be captured by the government army!

古文：上喜曰： 吾与德裕同之，保无后悔。 
现代文：武宗大喜，说： 我和德裕意见一致，以后保证不后悔。 
English: Bu Zong was overjoyed and said: I agree with Deyu, and I promise not to regret it in the future.

古文：遂决意讨稹，群臣言者不复入矣。
现代文：于是，决心讨伐刘稹，百官再有人上言劝阻，武宗不再听取。
English: As a result, he was determined to fight Liu Bei, but the officials were dissuaded by others, and Emperor Wuzong no longer listened.

古文：上命德裕草诏赐成德节度使王元逵、魏博节度使何弘敬，其略曰： 泽潞一镇，与卿事体不同，勿为子孙之谋，欲存辅车之势。
现代文：武宗命李德裕起草给成德节度使王元逵、魏博节度使何弘敬的诏令，大略说： 昭义和你们两镇的情况不同，你们不必为自己的子孙考虑，而和刘稹相互勾结，互相依存。
English: Wu Zong ordered Li Deyu to draft the edict for the Chengde Festival to Wang Yuanjun and the Weibo Festival to He Hongjing, roughly saying: Unlike the situation of Shouyi and your two towns, you do not have to consider your children and grandchildren, but cooperate with Liu Bei and depend on each other.

古文：但能显立功效，自然福及后昆。 
现代文：只要在讨伐刘稹时卓立战功，朝廷自然承认你们两镇的现状，允许传位于子孙。 
English: As long as you have distinguished yourselves in the fight against Liu Bei, the imperial court will naturally recognize the current situation of your two towns and allow you to pass it on to your descendants.

古文：丁丑，上临朝，称其语要切，曰： 当如此直告之是也！ 
现代文：丁丑，武宗上朝时，称赞李德裕起草的诏令切中要害，说： 就应当这样直言不讳地告诉他们！ 
English: When Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, he praised Li Deyu's edict for being to the point, saying, "You should tell them so bluntly!"

古文：又赐张仲武诏，以 回鹘馀烬未灭，塞上多虞，专委卿御侮。 
现代文：接着，又命德裕起草给幽州节度使张仲武的诏令，说： 回鹘的残余还没有消灭干净，北方边境不免遭受侵扰。
English: Next, he ordered Deyu to draft the edict of Zhang Zhongwu for the Yuzhou Festival, saying: The remnants of the Hui Dynasty have not yet been completely eliminated, and the northern border will inevitably be disturbed.

古文：元逵、弘敬得诏，悚息听命。
现代文：现在，朝廷委任你专门防备。 王元逵、何弘敬二人接到朝廷诏令后，都恐惧惊慌，表示听从。
English: Now, the imperial court has assigned you to take special precautions. After receiving the imperial edict, Wang Yuanzhang and He Hongjing both panicked and obeyed.

古文：解朝政至上党，刘稹见朝政曰： 相公危困，不任拜诏。 
现代文：朝廷派宦官解朝政出使昭义，抵达昭义的治所上党后，刘稹会见解朝政，说： 相公刘从谏病重，无法出来接诏。 
English: The imperial court sent an eunuch to release the imperial envoy, Zhao Yi, and after he arrived at Zhao Yi's place of residence and joined the party, Liu Yao would comment on the imperial government, saying, "My father-in-law, Liu Zongyao, is seriously ill and cannot come out to receive the imperial edict.

古文：朝政欲突入，兵马使刘武德、董可武蹑帘而立，朝政恐有他变。遽走出。
现代文：解朝政想乘其不备，突然冲进去，看看刘从谏到底病情如何，忽然发现昭义兵马使刘武德、董可武踩着门帘站在门口。解朝政恐怕有什么变故，急忙走出。
English: Xie Douzheng wanted to take advantage of his unpreparedness and suddenly rushed in to see how sick Liu Conglu really was. Suddenly, he found that Liu Wude and Dong Kewu, who had been sent by Shao Yi, were standing at the door, stepping on the door curtain. Xie Douzheng feared that something had changed and hurried out.

古文：稹赠赆直数千缗，复遣牙将梁叔文入谢。
现代文：随后，刘稹赠送解朝政钱几千缗，又派牙将梁叔文向朝廷拜谢。
English: Subsequently, Liu Bei presented several thousand yuans of money for solving the political problems of the imperial court, and also sent Liang Shouwen to the imperial court to express his gratitude.

古文：薛士幹入境，俱不问从谏之疾，直为已知其死之意。
现代文：供奉官薛士干抵达昭义境内后，从不询问刘从谏的病情如何，好象他已经知道刘从谏死去的样子。
English: After Xue Shigang, the offering official, arrived in Zhao Yi, he never inquired about Liu Conglu's condition, as if he already knew how Liu Conglu died.

古文：都押牙郭谊等乃大出军，至龙泉驿迎候敕使，请用河朔事体。
现代文：昭义都押牙郭谊得知后，出动大批人马，前往龙泉驿迎接薛士干，请他向朝廷上奏，按照河朔藩镇的惯例，任命刘稹为昭义的留后。
English: After learning that Shouyi had been sent to Guoji, he dispatched a large number of people and horses to Longquan to meet Xue Shikan, and asked him to appeal to the imperial court and, in accordance with the practice of the Heshuo town, to appoint Liu Jie as Shouyi's heir.

古文：又见监军言之，崔士康懦怯，不敢违。
现代文：郭谊又去见昭义的监军崔士康，向他表明同样的意图。崔士康性情怯懦，不敢违抗。
English: Guo Yiyi also went to see Choe Si Kang, Choe Si Kang's overseer, and expressed the same intention to him. Choe Si Kang was timid and did not dare to disobey.

古文：于是将吏扶稹出见士众，发丧。
现代文：于是，昭义节度使府的部将和官吏扶刘稹出来，与将士见面，公开为刘从谏治丧。
English: As a result, the Shouyi Festival made the prefectural ministers and officials come out to support Liu Xuan, meet with the soldiers, and publicly mourn for Liu Xuan.

古文：士幹竟不得入牙门，稹亦不受敕命。
现代文：薛士干最后竟然未能进入昭义节度使的衙门，刘稹也不接受朝廷命他赴京城另有任命的敕令。
English: In the end, Xie Shigang was unable to enter the imperial gate of the Shouyi Emperor's envoy, and Liu Bei did not accept the imperial order to go to Beijing.

古文：谊，兗州人也。
现代文：郭谊是兖州人。
English: Guo Yiyi is from Zhangzhou.

古文：解朝政复命，上怒，杖之，配恭陵。
现代文：解朝政回到京城后，向武宗报告出使昭义的经过。
English: After the dissolution of the imperial court and the return to the capital, he reported to Emperor Takemune about what had happened to the envoy, Akiyoshi.

古文：囚姜崟、梁叔文。辛巳，始为从谏辍朝，赠太傅，诏刘稹护丧归东都。
现代文：武宗大怒，下令用刑仗责打，然后，发配守护恭陵；同时下令拘捕昭义的使者姜、梁叔文。辛巳，唐武宗下令停止上朝，为刘从谏去世哀悼，追封刘从谏为太子太傅，同时下诏，命刘稹护送刘从谏的灵柩回东都洛阳。
English: Wu Zong was enraged and ordered that Liu Conglu be punished with capital punishment, and then he was assigned to guard Gong Ling; at the same time, he ordered the arrest of Jiang and Liang Shuwen, the emissaries of Zhao Yi. At this time, Tang Wuzong ordered to stop going to the imperial court, to mourn Liu Conglu's death, to crown Liu Conglu as the crown prince, and at the same time, to order Liu Conglu to escort Liu Conglu's coffin back to the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：又召见刘从素，令以书谕稹，稹不从。
现代文：武宗又召见刘从素，命他写信给儿子刘稹，劝他执行朝廷的诏令。刘稹拒不服从。
English: Emperor Wuzong also summoned Liu Congsu and ordered him to write to his son Liu Ye to persuade him to carry out the imperial edict. Liu Ye refused to obey.

古文：丁亥，以忠武节度使王茂元为河阳节度使，邠宁节度使王宰为忠武节度使。
现代文：丁亥，武宗任命忠武节度使王茂元为河阳节度使，宁节度使王宰为忠武节度使。
English: In Dinghai, Emperor Wu appointed Zhongwu Jiedu to make Wang Maoyuan the Jiedu envoy to Kheyang, and Ning Jiedu to make Wang Zai the Jiedu envoy to Zhongwu.

古文：茂元，栖曜之子；宰，智兴之子也。
现代文：王茂元是王栖曜的儿子；王宰是王智兴的儿子。
English: Wang Maoyuan is the son of Wang Suiyou; Wang Zai is the son of Wang Zhixing.

古文：黄州刺史杜牧上李德裕书，自言： 尝问淮西将董重制以三州之众四岁不破之由，重质以为由朝廷征兵太杂，客军数少，既不能自成一军，事须贴付地主。
现代文：黄州刺史杜牧向宰相李德裕上书，说： 我曾经询问淮西的大将董重质，为什么淮西只有三个州的兵力，当年官军四面围攻四年却不能攻克。董重质认为，主要是因为朝廷征发各个藩镇的兵力太杂，从远地调来的藩镇兵力人数较少，不能独挡一面，因而，必须依附于当地的藩镇军队。
English: I once asked the general of Huaixi, Dong Jiuquan, why Huaixi had only three states of troops, when the government army besieged it from all sides for four years but could not conquer it. Dong Jiuquan believed that it was mainly because the troops conscripted by the imperial court from various townships were too mixed, and the number of troops from townships transferred from far away was too small to stand alone, so they had to rely on the local township army.

古文：势赢力弱，心志不一，多致败亡。
现代文：这样，官军各支兵马势单力弱，众心不齐，就经常招致失败。
English: In this way, the strength of each branch of the government army is weak, and the hearts of the people are not the same, which often leads to failure.

古文：故初战二年以来，战则必胜，是多杀客军。
现代文：所以，在最初交战的两年中，淮西出战必胜，主要是杀伤从远地调来的藩镇军队。
English: Therefore, in the first two years of the war, Huaxi played a decisive role in the war, mainly killing and wounding the troops of the provinces and towns that were transferred from far away.

古文：及二年已后，客军殚少，止与陈许、河阳全军相搏，纵使唐州兵不能因虚取城，蔡州事力亦不支矣。
现代文：两年以后，从远地调来的藩镇军队人数减少，淮西只与陈许、河阳两个藩镇的军队作战，即使李不能率唐州兵乘虚攻取淮西的治所蔡州，淮西的兵力也难于继续和官军抗衡。
English: Two years later, the number of troops from provinces and towns transferred from far away decreased, and Huaxi only fought against the armies of two provinces and towns, Chen Xu and Heyang. Even if Li could not lead the Tang soldiers to take advantage of Huaxi's capital, Caizhou, it would be difficult for Huaxi's troops to continue to compete with the government army.

古文：其时朝廷若使鄂州、寿州、唐州只保境，不用进战，但用陈许、郑滑两道全军，贴以宣、润弩手，令其守隘，即不出一岁，无蔡州矣。
现代文：当时，如果朝廷命令鄂州、寿州、唐州不用出兵，仅仅防守州境；只用陈许、郑滑两个藩镇的全部兵力攻打淮西，同时，命宣州、润州的弓箭手防守淮西周围的交通要塞，不出一年，淮西就可平定。
English: At that time, if the imperial court ordered Ezhou, Shoushou and Tangzhou not to send troops, but only to defend the state border; only to attack Huaxi with the full strength of the two towns of Chenxu and Zhenglu, and at the same time ordered the archers of Xuanzhou and Runzhou to defend the traffic fortress around Huaxi, Huaxi could be pacified in less than a year.

古文：今者上党之叛，复与淮西不同。
现代文：现在，昭义叛变的情况和淮西很不相同。
English: Now, the situation of the rebellion in Shouyi is very different from that in Huaxi.

古文：淮西为寇仅五十岁，其人味为寇之腴，见为寇之利，风俗益固，气焰已成，自以为天下之兵莫与我敌，根深源阔，取之固难。
现代文：当年淮西割据跋扈将近五十年，那里的将士和官吏都亲身体会到割据的实际好处，亲眼看到割据给自己带来的很多利益，所以，桀傲不驯的风俗日益强化，骄横跋扈的嚣张气焰业已形成，自认为天下的兵马无人敢与我为敌，割据势力盘根错节，出兵攻讨确实困难。
English: At that time, it had been nearly 50 years since the Huaxi Partition, and the soldiers, officers and officials there had all experienced the practical benefits of the Partition, and had seen with their own eyes the many benefits that the Partition had brought to them. Therefore, the customs of arrogance and disobedience had been increasingly strengthened, the arrogance and arrogance of arrogance had been formed, and they thought that no soldiers and horses in the world would dare to be my enemy. The forces of the Partition were entangled, and it was really difficult to send troops to attack them.

古文：夫上党则不然。自安、史南下，不甚附柰；建中之后，每奋忠义。是以郳公抱真能窘田悦，走硃滔，常以孤穷寒苦之军，横折河朔强梁之众。
现代文：但是，昭义则不同，早在安史叛军大举南下时，昭义曾顽强坚守，不肯依附叛军；建中年以后，国家多难，昭义将士每每以忠义而激奋报效朝廷，所以，当时担任该镇节度使的李抱真，常常在孤立无援的情况下，率领这支处于贫寒之地的军队，多次挫败河朔叛乱藩镇的骄兵悍将。
English: However, Shouyi is different. As early as when the Anshi rebels went south in a big way, Shouyi had stubbornly adhered and refused to attach to the rebels. After the middle of the Jian period, the country was difficult, and Shouyi soldiers were always loyal and eager to serve the imperial court. Therefore, Li Bozhen, who served as the town's festival envoy at that time, often led this army in a poor and cold country in a helpless situation, and repeatedly defeated the proud soldiers of the rebellious hanzhong in Hexuo.

古文：以此证验，人心忠赤，习尚专一，可以尽见。刘悟卒，从谏求继，与扶同者，只郓州随来中军二千耳。
现代文：后来，昭义节度使刘悟去世后，他的儿子刘从谏请求继承父亲的职务，真正同心同德支持他的，也不过是当初刘悟从郓州带去的二千亲兵。
English: Later, after the death of Liu Wugu, his son Liu Congluo requested to inherit his father's position. The only ones who truly supported him with one heart and one mind were the two thousand soldiers Liu Congluo had brought from Zhangzhou.

古文：值宝历多故，因以授之。
现代文：当时正值宝历年间朝廷多事之秋，所以，只好任命他为节度使。
English: At that time, it was the autumn of the eventful years of the imperial court, so he had no choice but to appoint him as the festival envoy.

古文：今才二十馀岁，风俗未改，故老尚存，虽欲劫之，必不用命。
现代文：至今才二十多年，昭义的风俗未变，过去的将士和官吏也还有不少人在世，虽然刘稹企图胁迫他们一起叛乱，肯定他们不会轻易跟从。
English: It has only been more than 20 years, and the customs of Zhao Yi have not changed. There are still many soldiers and officials from the past alive. Although Liu Bei tried to coerce them to rebel together, they certainly would not follow easily.

古文：今成德、魏博虽尽节效顺，亦不过围一城，攻一堡，系累稚老而已。
现代文：成德、魏博这两个河朔地区的藩镇，目前尽管已表示尽力效忠朝廷，但他们如果出兵攻打昭义，最多不过围一城，攻一堡。然后乘机俘掠那里的人口而已。
English: Chengde and Weibo, two towns of the Heshaku region, although they have shown their utmost loyalty to the imperial court, if they send troops to attack Akiyoshi, they can only encircle one city and attack one castle at most, and then take the opportunity to capture the population there.

古文：若使河阳万人为垒，窒天井之口，高壁深堑，勿与之战。只以忠武、武宁两军，贴以青州五千精甲，宣、润二千弩手，径捣上党，不过数月，必覆其巢穴矣！ 
现代文：假如朝廷命令河阳出动一万兵力在天井关修筑营垒，堵塞昭义向南的通道，高壁深沟，坚守而不出战；同时，只要征调忠武、武宁两个藩镇的军队，加上青州的五千精兵，宣州和润州的二千弓箭手，大军长驱直捣上党，不出几个月，必定倾复刘稹的巢穴！ 
English: If the imperial court ordered Heyang to dispatch ten thousand troops to build a camp at the ceiling pass, block the southward passage of Zhao Yi, high walls and deep ditches, and stick to it without going to war; at the same time, as long as the armies of the two towns of Zhongwu and Wuming were conscripted, plus the five thousand elite soldiers from Qingzhou, the two thousand archers from Xuanzhou and Runzhou, and the great army commander drove straight into the party, within a few months, Liu Bei's lair would certainly be overturned!

古文：时德裕制置泽潞，亦颇采牧言。
现代文：这时，李德裕正在制定讨伐昭义的军事方案，对杜牧的建议，多所采纳。
English: At this time, Li Deyu was working out a military plan to crack down on Zhao Yi, and many of Du Mu's suggestions were adopted.

古文：上虽外尊宠仇士良，内实忌恶之。
现代文：唐武宗虽然在外表上尊重和宠遇左神策军护军中尉仇士良，心中其实非常忌恨厌恶他。
English: Although Tang Wuzong outwardly respected and favored Lieutenant Qiu Shiliang of the Zuo Sheng Army, he actually loathed and detested him in his heart.

古文：士良颇觉之，遂以老病求散秩，诏以左卫上将军兼内侍监、知省事。
现代文：仇士良也逐渐感觉到了，于是，以年老多病为由，请求辞职担任散官。武宗因此下诏，任命他为左卫上将军兼内侍监，主持内侍省的事宜。
English: Qiu Shiliang also gradually felt it, so, on the grounds of old age and illness, he asked to resign from his post as Sanzhan. Therefore, Emperor Wuzong issued an edict, appointing him as General of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards and Inner Chamberlain to preside over the affairs of the Inner Court.

古文：李德裕言于上曰： 议者皆云刘悟有功，稹未可亟诛，宜全恩礼。
现代文：李德裕对武宗说： 现在，凡是议论昭义的官员都说，刘悟曾经立过战功，因此不可匆忙诛讨他的孙子刘稹，应当保全朝廷对他以往的恩典。
English: Li Deyu said to Wuzong, "Nowadays, all the officials who are talking about Zhao Yi are saying that Liu Wuxu had made war exploits, so he should not hastily punish his grandson Liu Ye, and should preserve the court's past grace to him.

古文：请下百官议，以尽人情。 
现代文：我请求陛下将此事交百官讨论，以便让大家充分发表意见。 
English: I request Your Majesty to refer this matter to the Council of Ministers for discussion so that everyone can fully express their opinions.

古文：上曰： 悟亦何功，当时迫于救死耳，非素心徇国也。
现代文：武宗说： 刘悟有什么功劳，当年他起兵诛杀李师道，只不过是迫于李师道要杀他，为了自救而已，并非一贯忠于朝廷。
English: Wu Zong said: What is Liu Wugu's merit? When he raised an army to kill Li Shidao, it was only because Li Shidao was forced to kill him, in order to save himself. He was not always loyal to the imperial court.

古文：籍使有功，父子为将相二十馀年，国家报之足矣，稹何得复自言！
现代文：即使他有战功，父子二人担任将相职务二十多年，国家对他的报答也足够了。现在，刘稹凭什么又要世袭自立！
English: Even if he has war achievements, the father and son have served as generals for more than 20 years, and the state has rewarded him enough. Now, why should Liu Ye rely on hereditary independence!

古文：朕以为凡有功当显赏，有罪亦不可苟免也。 
现代文：朕认为凡是对国家有功的人，都应当重赏。但如果犯罪，也不可苟且赦免。 
English: I believe that all those who have contributed to the country should be rewarded, but if they commit a crime, they should not be pardoned.

古文：德裕曰： 陛下之言，诚得理国之要。 
现代文：李德裕说： 陛下这番话，确实抓住了治理国家的关键。 
English: Li Deyu said, "His Majesty's words really captured the key to governing the country.

古文：五月，李德裕言太子宾客、分司李宗闵与刘从谏交通，不宜置之东都。
现代文：五月，李德裕对武宗说，太子宾客、分司东都李宗闵曾和刘从谏交结，不宜再让他继续留在东都，以免妨碍讨代昭义的军事行动。
English: In May, Li Deyu said to Wu Zong that the prince's guest, the sub-director of the Dongdu, Li Zongyao, had a relationship with Liu Congyao, and it was not appropriate for him to continue to stay in the Dongdu, so as not to interfere with the military operation to replace Zhao Yi.

古文：戊戌，以宗闵为湖州刺史。
现代文：戊戌，武宗任命李宗闵为湖州刺史。
English: Wu Zong appointed Li Zongyi as the chief historian of Huzhou.

古文：河阳节度使王茂元以步骑三千守万善；河东节度使刘沔步骑二千守芒车关，步兵一千五百军榆社；成德节度使王元逵以步骑三千守临洺，掠尧山；河中节度使陈夷行以步骑一千守翼城，步兵五百益冀氏。
现代文：河阳节度使王茂元命三千步兵和骑兵防守万善镇；河东节度使刘沔命二千步兵和骑兵防守芒车关，一千五百步兵驻屯于榆社县；成德节度使王元逵命三千步兵和骑兵防守临，进而掠夺昭义的尧山；河中节度使陈夷命一千步兵和骑兵屯守翼城，五百步兵增援冀氏县。
English: The Heyang Festival made Wang Maoyuan order three thousand infantry and cavalry to defend Wanshan Town; the Hedong Festival made Liu Xi order two thousand infantry and cavalry to defend Mengcheguan, and one thousand five hundred infantry were stationed in Yushe County; the Chengde Festival made Wang Yuan order three thousand infantry and cavalry to defend and then plunder Lushan in Zhao Yi; the Mid-River Festival made Chen Yi order one thousand infantry and cavalry to defend Yingcheng, and five hundred infantry to reinforce Jishi County.

古文：辛丑，制削夺刘从谏及子稹官爵，以元逵为泽潞北面招讨使，何弘敬为南面招讨使，与夷行、刘沔、茂元合力攻讨。
现代文：辛丑，武宗下制令，削除刘从谏和他的侄子刘稹的官爵，任命王元逵为昭义北面招讨使，何弘敬为南面招讨使，与陈夷行、刘沔、王茂元共同出兵，讨伐刘稹。
English: Xin ugly, Wu Zong issued an order to remove the official title of Liu Conglu and his nephew Liu Jie, appointed Wang Yuanqi as the north side recruiting envoy of Zhao Yi, and He Hongjing as the south side recruiting envoy, and jointly dispatched troops with Chen Yixing, Liu Jie and Wang Maoyuan to fight Liu Jie.

古文：先是河北诸镇有自立者，朝廷必先有吊祭使，次册赠使、宣慰使继往商度军情。
现代文：此前，河朔地区的藩镇凡是有节度使去世，他们的子孙世袭自立，朝廷一般先派遣吊祭使，然后册赠使、宣慰使相继前往了解军心向背。
English: Previously, all the feudal lords of the hanzhong towns in the Hexuo region had passed away, and their descendants had become self-reliant through heredity. The imperial court generally dispatched the hanging envoys first, and then the envoys and comfort envoys successively went to understand the military spirit.

古文：必不可与节，则别除一官；俟军中不听出，然后始用兵。
现代文：如果肯定不可任命，则另外授予一个职务；如果他们拒不从命，然后才开始发兵征讨。
English: If it is certain that they cannot be appointed, then they are given another post; if they refuse to obey, then conscription begins.

古文：故常及半岁，军中得缮完为备。
现代文：所以，从朝廷开始派遣吊祭使到最后发兵征讨，往往中间有半年的时间，以致他们能够做好防守的准备。
English: Therefore, it often took half a year from the time the imperial court began to dispatch the imperial envoys to the final conscription, so that they could prepare for defense.

古文：至是，宰相亦欲且遣使开谕，上即命下诏讨之。
现代文：这时，宰相仍打算先派遣使者前往昭义，开导规劝刘稹听从朝廷的诏令，武宗则立即命令下诏讨伐。
English: At this time, the prime minister still planned to first send an envoy to Shouyi to persuade Liu Bei to obey the imperial edict, and Wu Zong immediately ordered an imperial edict crackdown.

古文：王元逵受诏之日，出师屯赵州。
现代文：王元逵接到诏令的当天，出兵屯驻赵州。
English: On the day of receiving the imperial edict, Wang Yuanhui sent troops to Zhaozhou.

古文：壬寅，以翰林学士承旨崔铉为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：壬寅，唐武宗任命翰林学士承旨崔铉为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: At the same time, Emperor Wuzong of Tang appointed Hanlin Scholar Choe Hee to be the secretary of the middle school and the secretary of the same level.

古文：铉，元略之子也。
现代文：崔铉是崔元略的儿子。
English: Cui Wei is the son of Cui Yuanliu.

古文：上夜召学士韦琮，以铉名授之，令草制，宰相、枢密皆不之知。
现代文：此前，武宗在夜里召见翰林学士韦琮，把崔铉的名字告诉他，令他起草任命的制书，宰相和枢密使都不得知。
English: Previously, Emperor Wuzong summoned Hanlin Scholar Wei Xuan in the middle of the night, told him the name of Cui Xuan, and ordered him to draft the appointment document, which neither the prime minister nor the envoy knew.

古文：时枢密使刘行深、杨钦义皆愿悫，不敢预事，老宦者尤之曰： 此由刘、杨懦怯，堕败旧风故也。 
现代文：这时，枢密使刘行深、杨钦义二人都谨慎朴实，不敢干预朝政。老宦官们都埋怨二人说： 这都是由于刘、杨二人懦弱胆怯，败坏以往风气的缘故。 
English: At this time, Liu Xingshen and Yang Qinyi, both of whom were privy councilors, were prudent and unpretentious, and did not dare to interfere in the imperial government. The old eunuchs all complained about the two, saying: This is all due to the cowardice of Liu and Yang, and the corruption of the previous culture.

古文：悰，乾度之子也。
现代文：韦琮是韦乾度的儿子。
English: Wei Xuan is the son of Wei Qiandu.

古文：以武宁节度使李彦佐为晋绛行营诸军节度招讨使。
现代文：唐武宗任命武宁节度使李彦佐为晋绛行营诸军节度招讨使。
English: Emperor Wuzong of Tang appointed Li Yanzu, the military commander of the Jin Dynasty, as the military commander of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：刘沔自代州还太原。
现代文：河东节度使刘沔从代州返回太原。
English: The festival of Hedong made Liu Ye return to Taiyuan from Daizhou.

古文：筑望仙台于禁中。
现代文：唐武宗下令，在宫中修建望仙观。
English: Emperor Wuzong of the Tang Dynasty ordered the construction of the Wangxian View in the palace.

古文：六月，王茂元遣兵马使马继等将步骑二千军于天井关南科斗店，刘稹遣衙内十将薛茂卿将亲军二千拒之。
现代文：六月，河阳节度使王茂元命兵马使马继等人率步兵和骑兵二千人，屯驻于天井关南面的科斗店。刘稹命衙内十将薛茂卿率亲军二千人前往抵抗。
English: In June, the Heyang Festival made Wang Maoyuan order the soldiers and horses to follow the horse and others with two thousand infantry and cavalry, stationed in the Science Store on the south side of the Ceiling Pass. Liu Bei ordered the 10th General Xue Maoxing to lead the pro-army of two thousand people to resist.

古文：黠戛斯可汗遣将军温仵合入贡。
现代文：黠戛斯可汗派遣将军温仵合来长安向唐朝贡献物产。
English: At that time, the Khan of Kansu dispatched General Wen Xuan to Chang'an to contribute goods to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：上赐之书，谕以速平回鹘、黑车子，乃遣使行册命。
现代文：武宗写信给黠戛斯可汗，让他从速出兵平定回鹘和黑车子族。唐朝派遣使者正式册命他为可汗。
English: Emperor Wuzong wrote a letter to the Qajar Khan, asking him to quickly send troops to subdue the Qajars and the Black Chariots. The Tang Dynasty sent an envoy to officially appoint him as Khan.

古文：癸酉，仇士良以左卫上将军、内侍监致仕。
现代文：癸酉，仇士良以左卫上将军、内侍监的职位退休。
English: At the same time, Qiu Shiliang retired from the post of General of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards and Chamberlain.

古文：其党送归私第，士良教以固权宠之术曰： 天子不可令闲，常宜以奢靡娱其耳目，使日新月盛，无暇更及它事，然后吾辈可以得志。
现代文：他的党羽送他返回家中，仇士良教给他们保持权力和恩宠的秘诀，说： 对于天子，不能让他有闲暇的时间。应当经常变换花样，供他游戏玩乐，以便沉湎于骄奢侈靡的生活之中，无暇顾及朝政。这样，我们才可以得志。
English: His party sent him back home, and his enemies taught them the secret of maintaining power and grace, saying: "For the son of heaven, he should not be allowed to have leisure time. He should constantly change his tricks, for him to play games and have fun, so that he can indulge in a luxurious life, and have no time to care about the government. In this way, we can be ambitious.

古文：慎勿使之读书，亲近儒生，彼见前代兴亡，心知忧惧，则吾蜚疏斥矣。 
现代文：千万不要让他读书，亲近读书人。如果天子喜爱读书，明白了以前各个朝代兴亡更替的经验教训，惧怕丧失政权，就会励精图治，那么，我们就会被斥责疏远。 
English: Don't let him read and get close to people who read. If the Son of Heaven likes to read, understands the lessons of the rise and fall of previous dynasties, and is afraid of losing power, he will work hard to rule, then we will be rebuked and alienated.

古文：其党拜谢而去。
现代文：他的党羽都下拜感谢，然后离去。
English: His party members bowed and thanked him before leaving.

古文：丙子，诏王元逵、李彦佐、刘沔、王茂元、何弘敬以七月中旬五道齐进，刘稹求降皆不得受。
现代文：丙子，唐武宗下诏，命王元逵、李彦佐、刘沔、王茂元、何弘敬五个藩镇，于七月中旬共同进兵讨伐刘稹。刘稹如果请求投降，都不得接受。
English: According to the edict issued by Emperor Wu of the Tang Dynasty, the five towns of Wangyuan, Li Yanzao, Liu Xuan, Wang Maoyuan and He Hongjing were ordered to march together in mid-July to fight against Liu Xuan. If Liu Xuan asked for surrender, it would not be accepted.

古文：又诏刘沔自将兵取仰车关路以临贼境。
现代文：同时又下诏命刘沔亲自率兵，取道仰车关，以兵临昭义的边境。
English: At the same time, he issued an imperial edict ordering Liu Bei to personally lead the troops, take the road to Yangze Pass, and march with the soldiers to the border of Zhao Yi.

古文：吐蕃鄯州节度使尚婢婢，世为吐蕃相，婢婢好读书，不乐仕进，国人敬之。
现代文：吐蕃国鄯州节度使尚婢婢，世代担任吐蕃国宰相。尚婢婢爱好读书，不愿做官，国内人民都很敬重他。
English: He was the minister of the Bozhou Festival of Tubo Province and served as the prime minister of Tubo Province for generations. He was fond of reading and did not want to be an official, and the people in the country respected him.

古文：年四十馀，彝泰赞普强起之，使镇鄯州。
现代文：尚婢婢四十多岁，彝泰赞普强行召他出来做官，任命为鄯州节度使。
English: He was still in his forties when Emperor Taizan Pu forcibly summoned him to become an official and appointed him as the envoy of the Zhangzhou Festival.

古文：婢婢宽厚沉勇，有谋略，训练士卒多精勇。
现代文：尚婢婢性情宽厚大度，深沉果敢，很有计谋权略，训练的士卒大多精锐勇敢。
English: Shang Yibai's disposition is generous and generous, deep and courageous, very cunning and strategical, and most of the trained soldiers are elite and brave.

古文：论恐热虽名义兵，实谋篡国，忌婢婢，恐袭其后，欲先灭之。
现代文：论恐热虽然自称是义兵，实际上密谋篡夺国家大权，因此，忌恨尚婢婢。他恐怕尚婢婢袭击他的后方，打算先歼灭尚婢婢的军队。
English: Although he claimed to be a volunteer soldier, he actually plotted to usurp the power of the state. Therefore, he hated Shangdi. He feared that Shangdi would attack his rear and planned to destroy Shangdi's army first.

古文：是月，大举兵击婢婢，旌旗杂畜千里不绝。
现代文：本月，论恐热大举出兵进攻尚婢婢，旌旗和各种家畜长达一千里，绵延不绝。
English: This month, the fear of a large-scale attack by soldiers is still high, and the flags and all kinds of livestock are up to a thousand miles long, stretching endlessly.

古文：至镇西，大风震电，天火烧杀裨将十馀人，杂畜以百数，恐热恶之，盘桓不进。
现代文：到达镇西时，碰到大风雷电，十几个部将和几百头家畜被雷电引起的大火烧死。论恐热认为是不祥之兆，心中厌恶，犹豫不进。
English: When they reached the west of the town, they encountered strong wind and lightning, and more than a dozen captains and hundreds of livestock were burned to death by the fire caused by lightning. On the other hand, the fear of heat was considered to be an ominous sign, and they were disgusted and hesitant.

古文：婢婢谓其下曰： 恐热之来，视我如蝼蚁，以为不足屠也。
现代文：这时，尚婢婢对部下说： 论恐热这次出兵，把我们看作蝼蛄和蚂蚁，以为可以轻易地消灭。
English: At this time, Shang Yibing said to his subordinates: "Regarding the fear and heat of this dispatch of troops, they regard us as grasshoppers and ants, and think that we can be easily eliminated.

古文：今遇天灾，犹豫不进，吾不如迎伏以却之，使其志益骄而不为备，然后可图也。 
现代文：现在，他在途中遇到天灾，犹豫不进，我们不如假装欢迎并服从他，以便让他退兵，使他更加骄横而不防备，然后乘机消灭他。 
English: Now that he has encountered natural disasters on the way and hesitates to advance, we might as well pretend to welcome and obey him in order to make him retreat, make him more arrogant and unprepared, and then take the opportunity to eliminate him.

古文：乃遣使以金帛、牛酒犒师，且致书言： 相公举义兵以匡国难，阖境之内，孰不向风！
现代文：于是派遣使者带大批金银、丝帛和牛、酒前往犒劳论恐热的军队，同时写信给论恐热说： 您这次大举义兵挽救国家的危难，国内谁不闻风而仰慕您的作为。
English: Therefore, he sent an envoy with a large amount of gold and silver, silk and wool, cattle, and wine to the army of the laborers, and at the same time wrote a letter to the laborers, saying: You have this time made a large number of volunteers to save the country's peril, and no one in the country has heard the wind and admires your actions.

古文：苟遣一介，赐之折简，敢不承命！
现代文：如果您写信派遣一个使者送来，我怎么敢不服从！
English: If you write and send a messenger, how dare I disobey!

古文：何必远辱士众，亲临下籓！
现代文：何必兴师动众，劳您大驾亲临鄯州！
English: Why do you need to motivate people, why don't you come to Zhangzhou!

古文：婢婢资性愚僻，惟嗜读书，先赞普授以籓维，诚为非据，夙夜惭惕，惟求退居。
现代文：我的本性愚笨，只是爱好读书。已经去世的彝泰赞普命我镇守鄯州，我感到很不称职，昼夜惶恐不安，只求能够辞职引退。
English: My nature is stupid, just a love of reading. I was appointed by the late Zhai Taizan Pu to guard Zhangzhou. I felt very incompetent, I was worried day and night, I just wanted to resign and retire.

古文：相公若赐以骸骨，听归田骨，乃惬平生之素愿也。 
现代文：现在，假如您同意我辞职回家，也就了却了我平生的愿望。 
English: Now, if you agree that I should resign and return home, it will be the fulfillment of my lifelong wish.

古文：恐热得书喜，遍示诸将曰： 婢婢惟把书券，安知用兵！
现代文：论恐热接到尚婢婢的信后大喜，拿给部将看，说： 尚婢婢只知道读书，怎么会用兵作战呢！
English: On the subject of fear and heat, he was overjoyed to receive a letter from Shang Yi, and showed it to his commander, saying: Shang Yi only knows how to read, how can he fight with soldiers!

古文：待吾得国，当位以宰相，坐之于家，亦无所用也。 
现代文：等我夺取国家大权，就任命他为宰相，让他坐在家里，也不会有所作为。 
English: When I seize state power, I will appoint him as prime minister and let him sit at home and do nothing.

古文：乃复为书，勤厚答之，引兵归。
现代文：于是，复信给尚婢婢，用好言好语答复，随后引兵退去。
English: As a result, the reply letter was sent to Shang, who replied with kind words, and then withdrew the troops.

古文：婢婢闻之，抚髀笑曰： 我国无主，则归大唐，岂能事此犬鼠乎！ 
现代文：尚婢婢得知后，拍着大腿大笑说： 即使我国没有赞普，则归降大唐，怎能服从像论恐热这种老鼠和狗一样的败类呢！ 
English: After learning of this, Shang Yibing slapped his thigh and laughed loudly, saying, "Even if our country does not have Zampu, it will be relegated to Datang. How can we obey scum like Ong Xuan He, who is like a rat and a dog!"

古文：秋，七月，以山南东道节度使卢钧为昭义节度招抚使。
现代文：秋季，七月，唐武宗任命山南东道节度使卢钧为昭义节度使。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Wu of Tang appointed Lu Wei, the host of the Shannan Festival, as the chief envoy of the Shouyi Festival.

古文：朝廷以钧在襄阳宽厚有惠政，得众心，故使领昭义以招怀之。
现代文：朝廷认为卢钧在山南东道宽厚大度，很有政绩，得到人们的拥护，所以任命他担任昭义节度使，以便招抚昭义的将士、官吏和百姓。
English: The imperial court believed that Lu Wei was a generous host in Shannan, had a lot of political achievements, and was supported by the people. Therefore, he was appointed as the envoy of the Shouyi Festival in order to attract Shouyi's soldiers, officials, and people.

古文：上遣刑部侍郎兼御史中丞李回宣慰河北三镇，令幽州乘秋早平回鹘，镇、魏早平泽潞。
现代文：唐武宗命刑部侍郎兼御史中丞李回出使安抚河北的幽州、成德、魏博三个藩镇，令幽州乘秋季早日平定回鹘余部；令成德和魏博早日进兵平定昭义的叛乱。
English: Li Hui, the attendant of Tang Wusong's Ministry of Justice and the middle-ranking official of the Ministry of History, sent an envoy to pacify the three towns of Yuzhou, Chengde and Weibo in Hebei, and ordered Yuzhou to take advantage of the autumn to quell the remaining part of the rebellion as early as possible; and ordered Chengde and Weibo to enter the army as early as possible to quell the rebellion of Zhao Yi.

古文：回，太祖之八世孙也。
现代文：李回是唐太祖李虎的第八代子孙。
English: Li Hui is the eighth generation descendant of the Tang Emperor's ancestor Li Hu.

古文：甲辰，李德裕言于上曰： 臣见向日河朔用兵，诸道利于出境仰给度支。
现代文：甲辰，宰相李德裕对唐武宗说： 据我观察，朝廷过去发兵讨伐河朔的叛乱藩镇时，各个藩镇都贪图出兵离开自己管辖区域后，由朝廷度支供给军需。
English: At that time, the prime minister Li Deyu said to Tang Wuzong: According to my observation, when the imperial court sent troops to fight the rebellious towns of Heshaku in the past, all the towns were eager to send troops to leave their own jurisdiction, and were supported by the imperial court to supply military supplies.

古文：或阴与贼通，借一县一栅据之，自以为功，坐食转输，延引岁时。
现代文：有的甚至与敌军秘密交往，暂借敌人一个县城或一个营地驻屯，然后向朝廷谎报战功，坐食朝廷的军需供给，故意拖延时间。
English: Some even secretly interacted with the enemy, temporarily borrowing a county seat or a camp from the enemy, and then lying to the court about their war exploits, eating the court's military supplies, and deliberately delaying time.

古文：今请赐诸军诏指，令王元逵取邢州，何弘敬取洺州，王茂元取泽州，李彦佐、刘沔取潞州，毋得取县。 
现代文：现在，我请陛下下诏给各个藩镇，令王元逵攻取昭义管辖的邢州，何弘敬攻取州，王茂元攻取泽州，李彦佐、刘沔攻取潞州，不许进攻县城。 
English: Now, I would like to ask Your Majesty to issue an edict to the various towns and villages, ordering Wang Yuanzhang to capture Zhangzhou under the jurisdiction of Zhao Yi, He Hongjing to capture Zhangzhou, Wang Maoyuan to capture Zhezhou, and Li Yanzu and Liu Yu to capture Zhangzhou, and not to attack the county seat.

古文：上从之。
现代文：武宗同意李德裕的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：晋绛行营节度使李彦佐自发徐州，行甚缓，又请休兵于绛州，兼请益兵。
现代文：晋绛行营节度使李彦佐自从徐州出发赴任后，行动十分缓慢，他又请求在绛州暂且休整部队，又请求朝廷给他增加兵力。
English: The timing of the Jin and Qin campaigns made Li Yanzu move very slowly after leaving Xuzhou to take office. He also requested to temporarily rest the troops in Zhangzhou and asked the court to give him more troops.

古文：李德裕言于上曰： 彦佐逗遛顾望，殊无讨贼之意，所请皆不可许，宜赐诏切责，令进军翼城。 
现代文：李德裕对唐武宗说： 李彦佐在沿途不断停顿观望，根本没有讨伐贼兵的意向，凡是他的请求，都不能准许。应当下诏严厉责斥，命令他向翼城进发。 
English: Li Deyu said to Tang Wuzong: "Li Yanzu is constantly pausing along the way to wait and see. He has no intention of fighting the bandits at all. Whatever he asks for cannot be allowed. He should be severely reprimanded by the edict and ordered to go to the wing city."

古文：上从之。
现代文：武宗同意。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：德裕因请以天德防御使石雄为彦佐之副，俟至军中，令代之。
现代文：李德裕于是请求任命天德防御使石雄为李彦佐的副手，等石雄上任后，代替李彦佐。
English: Li Deyu then requested the appointment of Tiande Defense to make Shi Xiong the deputy of Li Yanzo, and after Shi Xiong took office, he replaced Li Yanzo.

古文：乙巳，以雄为晋绛行营节度副使，仍诏彦佐进屯翼城。
现代文：乙巳，武宗任命石雄为晋绛行营节度副使，同时下诏，命李彦佐进兵屯驻翼城。
English: At this time, Emperor Wuzong appointed Shi Xiong as the vice-envoy of the Jin and Xing Battalions, and at the same time issued an edict ordering Li Yanzu to enter the military camp in Yingcheng.

古文：刘稹上表自陈： 亡父从谏为李训雪冤，言仇士良罪恶，由此为权幸所疾，谓臣父潜怀异志，臣所以不敢举族归朝。
现代文：刘稹上表向朝廷陈诉说： 伯父刘从谏曾为李训申冤，指责仇士良的罪恶，因此而遭朝廷中得宠的当权大臣的憎恨，认为伯父在暗地里心怀异志。所以我不敢按朝廷诏令要求，带全族人赶赴京城，归顺朝廷。
English: Liu Xuan told the imperial court: "Uncle Liu Conglu had pleaded for Li Xun and accused him of the evil of hating Shiliang. As a result, he was hated by the minister in power who was favored by the imperial court. He thought that my uncle secretly harbored dissent. Therefore, I did not dare to rush to Beijing with the whole family to submit to the imperial court as required by the imperial edict.

古文：李回至河朔，何弘敬、王元逵、张仲武皆具橐鞬郊迎，立于道左，不敢令人控马，让制使先行，自兵兴以来，未之有也。回明辩有胆气，三镇无不奉诏。
现代文：李回到达后，他们让李回走在前面，自己跟在后面，也不敢让人为自己牵马。自从安史之乱以来，河朔地区的藩镇还没有对朝廷的使者如此恭敬过。李回既能明辨是非，而且很有胆量，三个藩镇节度使都表示服从朝廷诏令。
English: After Li returned to Dadu, they let Li Hui walk in front, and they themselves followed behind, not daring to let anyone lead the horse for themselves. Since the Anshi Rebellion, the towns in the Hexuo region have not been so respectful of the imperial court's envoys. Li Hui is able to distinguish right from wrong, and he is very courageous, and the three town festival envoys have all expressed their obedience to the imperial decree.

古文：王元逵奏拔宣务栅，击尧山。
现代文：王元逵奏报攻拔昭义的宣务栅，进攻尧山。
English: Wang Yuanxuan reported that he would attack Shouyi's Xuanwu Grate and attack Shaoshan.

古文：刘稹遣兵救尧山，元逵击败之，诏切责李彦佐、刘沔、王茂元，使速进兵逼贼境，且称元逵之功以激厉之，加元逵同平章事。
现代文：刘稹派兵援救尧山，被王元逵打败。唐武宗下诏，严厉指责李彦佐、刘沔、王茂元行动迟缓，命三人迅速进兵逼近昭义边境。诏书中还称赞王元逵的战功，以便激励三人。同时任命王元逵兼任同平章事的荣誉职务。
English: Liu Bei sent troops to rescue Lushan and was defeated by Wang Yuanzhang. Tang Wuzong issued an edict, severely criticizing Li Yanzhao, Liu Bei and Wang Maoyuan for being slow to act, and ordered the three to quickly march into the border of Zhao Yi. The edict also praised Wang Yuanzhang's war exploits in order to inspire the three. At the same time, Wang Yuanzhang was also appointed to the honorary post of Tongping.

古文：八月，乙丑，昭义大将李丕来降。
现代文：八月，乙丑，昭义大将李丕前来向朝廷投降。
English: In August, the second Ugly, General of the Shouyi Li Yu came to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：议者或谓贼故遣丕降，欲以疑误官军。
现代文：这时，议论这件事的官员有人认为，刘稹故意派李丕归降，以便疑惑官军。
English: At this time, some officials who discussed this matter believed that Liu Bei deliberately sent Li Jun to surrender in order to cast doubt on the official army.

古文：李德裕言于上曰： 自用兵半年，未有降者，今安问诚之与诈？
现代文：李德裕对武宗说： 自从出兵至今已有半年，一直没有人来归降。
English: Li Deyu said to Wuzong, "It has been half a year since the dispatch of troops, and no one has come to surrender.

古文：且须厚赏以劝将来，但不可置之要地耳。 
现代文：现在李丕来降，不管是真是假，都必须给予优厚的赏赐，以使鼓励再来投降的将士。只是任命他时，不要安排到重要的地方。 
English: Now that Li Qiye has surrendered, whether it is true or not, a generous reward must be given to encourage the soldiers who surrender again. However, when appointing him, do not arrange him in an important place.

古文：上从容言： 文宗好听外议，谏官言事多不著名，有如匿名书。 
现代文：唐武宗从容不迫地说： 文宗爱听取朝廷以外的议论，因此，谏官向朝廷上言，大多不署名，就象匿名信一样。 
English: Tang Wuzong said unhurriedly: Wenzong loves to listen to discussions outside the imperial court. Therefore, eunuchs appeal to the imperial court, mostly without signing, just like anonymous letters.

古文：李德裕曰： 臣顷在中书，文宗犹不尔。
现代文：李德裕说： 我当时担任宰相，文宗并不这样。
English: Li Deyu said: I was the prime minister at the time, but that was not the case with Wenzong.

古文：此乃李训、郑注教文宗以术御下，遂成此风。
现代文：这都是以后李训、郑注教给文宗的，让文宗用这种权术来驾驭百官，以致形成风气。
English: All of this was later taught to Wenzong by Li Xun and Zheng Zh, allowing Wenzong to use this kind of power to control hundreds of officials, resulting in the formation of a culture.

古文：人主但当推诚任人，有欺罔者，威以明刑，孰敢哉！ 
现代文：我认为，作为皇上，应当对任用的官员以诚相待。如果有人欺骗皇上，就严刑惩罚。这样，谁还再敢如此！ 
English: I believe that, as the Emperor, I should treat the appointed officials with sincerity. If someone deceives the Emperor, they will be severely punished. So, who would dare to do so!

古文：上善之。
现代文：武宗称赞他说的对。
English: The emperor thought Sima Xiangru spoke very well.

古文：王元逵前锋入邢州境已逾月，何弘敬犹未出师，元逵屡有密表，称弘敬怀两端。
现代文：成德节度使王元逵的前锋兵力进入昭义邢州境内已超过一个月，而魏博节度使何弘敬仍未出兵。王元逵多次秘密地上表朝廷，说何弘敬骑墙观望，对朝廷不忠。
English: It has been more than a month since the Chengde Festival brought Wang Yuanzhang's forward troops into the territory of Shouyi County, while the Weibo Festival has kept He Hongjing from sending troops. Wang Yuanzhang repeatedly secretly went to the imperial court and said that He Hongjing was riding on the wall to watch and was disloyal to the imperial court.

古文：丁卯，李德裕上言： 忠武累战有功，军声颇振。
现代文：丁卯，李德裕上言说： 忠武的军队过去曾多次立过战功，有很高的声誉。
English: Dingwu, Li Deyu said: The loyal army has made many war exploits in the past and has a high reputation.

古文：王宰年力方壮，谋略可称。
现代文：节度使王宰正值年富力强，足智多谋，为人们所称道。
English: The festival made Wang Zai rich and powerful, resourceful and resourceful, and was praised by the people.

古文：请赐弘敬诏，以 河阳、河东皆阂山险，未能进军，贼屡出兵焚掠晋、绛。
现代文：请求陛下下诏给何弘敬，说： 河阳、河东两道与昭义之间，都隔着高山峻岭，不便进兵，以致贼军多次出兵焚烧掠夺晋、绛二州。
English: He requested His Majesty to issue an edict to He Hongjing, saying, "Between the two provinces of Koyang and Hedong and Shouyi, there are high mountains and steep hills, making it difficult to march in troops. As a result, the invaders repeatedly sent troops to burn and plunder the two provinces of Jin and Qin.

古文：今遣王宰将忠武全军径魏博，直抵磁州，以分贼势。 
现代文：现在，朝廷命王宰率领忠武的全部人马通过魏博，直抵昭义的磁州，以便分散贼军的兵力。 
English: Now, the imperial court ordered Wang Zai to lead all the loyal soldiers and horses through Weibo and straight to the magnetic state of Zhao Yi in order to disperse the strength of the thief army.

古文：弘敬必惧，此攻心伐谋之术也。 
现代文：这样，何弘敬肯定恐惧，必然出兵。这就是用计谋而攻心的策略。 武宗同意。
English: In this way, He Hongjing affirmed the fear and inevitably sent troops. This is the strategy of attacking the heart with cunning. Wuzong agreed.

古文：从之。诏宰悉选步骑精兵自相、魏趣磁州。
现代文：于是下诏，命王宰挑选步兵和骑兵的精锐兵力从魏博的相、魏二州前往磁州。
English: Therefore, an edict was issued, ordering Wang Zai to select the elite troops of infantry and cavalry from Weibo's phase, Wei Erzhou, and go to the magnetic state.

古文：甲戌，薛茂卿破科斗寨，擒河阳大将马继等，焚掠小寨一十七，距怀州才十馀里。
现代文：甲戌，昭义衙内十将薛茂卿率兵攻破河阳的科斗寨，擒获河阳大将马继等人，焚烧并掠夺河阳的小营寨十七个，进兵距怀州十几里才停止。
English: Xue Maoxing, the 10th commander of the Inner Palace Guards, led the troops to break through the science village of Heyang, captured the general of Heyang, Ma Ji and others, burned and plundered seventeen small camps in Heyang, and only stopped marching more than ten miles away from Waizhou.

古文：茂卿以无刘稹之命，故不敢入。
现代文：薛茂卿鉴于没有刘稹的命令，所以才没敢进攻怀州。
English: Xue Maoxing did not dare to attack Waizhou because he did not have the order from Liu Bei.

古文：时议者鼎沸，以为刘悟有功，不可绝其嗣。
现代文：朝廷得知后，议论哗然，百官都认为刘悟过去有功，不应该讨伐灭绝他的后代。
English: After the imperial court learned of this, there was an uproar of discussion. All officials agreed that Liu Wuxu had made great contributions in the past, and that it was not right to exterminate his descendants.

古文：又，从谏养精兵十万，粮支十年，如何可取！
现代文：又有人说，刘从谏豢养精兵十万，储存的粮食可以支持十年，怎么能够轻易攻取！
English: Another person said that Liu Congtao raised 100,000 elite soldiers, and the stored grain can support ten years, how can it be easily captured!

古文：上亦疑之，以问李德裕，对曰： 小小进退，兵家之常。
现代文：武宗也感到疑惑，问李德裕，李德裕说： 小小失败，是兵家的常事。
English: Wu Zong was also puzzled, and asked Li Deyu about it. Li Deyu said, "Small failures are a common occurrence for soldiers.

古文：愿陛下勿听外议，则成功必矣！ 
现代文：希望陛下不要听外人的议论，肯定讨伐昭义能够成功！ 
English: I hope that His Majesty will not listen to the opinions of outsiders, and that his crusade for justice will be successful!

古文：上乃谓宰相曰： 为我语朝士：有上疏沮议者，我必于贼境上斩之！ 
现代文：于是，武宗对宰相说： 请向百官转达我的命令，如果有人胆敢上疏劝阻讨伐昭义，我一定要在贼兵的边境上把他斩首！ 
English: Therefore, Wuzong said to the prime minister, "Please convey my order to the hundred officials. If anyone dares to dissuade the crusade, I must behead him on the border of the robber soldiers!"

古文：议者乃止。
现代文：百官的议论这才停止。
English: Only then did the officials stop talking.

古文：何弘敬闻王宰将至，恐忠武兵入魏境，军中有变，苍黄出师。
现代文：魏博节度使何弘敬听说王宰率兵即将到来，恐怕忠武兵进入魏博境内后，自己军中发生变乱，于是仓促出兵。
English: The Weibo festival made He Hongjing heard that Wang Zai and his soldiers were about to arrive. I am afraid that after the loyal soldiers entered the territory of Weibo, there was a mutiny in his own army, so he hastily sent troops.

古文：丙子，弘敬奏，已自将全军渡漳水，趣磁州。
现代文：丙子，何弘敬奏报已率魏博全部人马渡过漳河，向昭义的磁州进发。
English: After all, He Hongjing reported that he had led all the men and horses of Wei Bo to cross the Fenhe River and set out for the magnetic state of Zhao Yi.

古文：庚辰，李德裕上言： 河阳兵力寡弱，自科斗店之败，贼势愈炽。
现代文：庚辰，李德裕上言说： 河阳的兵力寡弱，自从在科斗店被昭义军打败后，贼兵的气焰越来越嚣张。
English: Geng Chen, Li Deyu said: "Hayang's military strength is weak. Since they were defeated by the Shao Yi Army at the Science and Technology Store, the robber soldiers have become more and more arrogant.

古文：王茂元复有疾，人情危怯，欲退保怀州。
现代文：节度使王茂元现在又在生病，因此，河阳的人都惊慌胆怯，准备退守怀州。
English: Wang Maoyuan is now ill again, so the people of Heyang are panicking and preparing to retreat to Waizhou.

古文：臣窃见元和以来诸贼，常视官军寡弱之处，并力攻之，一军不支，然后更攻它处。
现代文：我发现，自从元和年以来，朝廷发兵讨伐叛乱，贼兵往往窥测官军兵力寡弱的地方，集中兵力进攻，得手以后，又集中兵力再攻别处。
English: I found that since the Yuan and He years, when the imperial court sent troops to fight the rebellion, the bandits often spied on places where the official army was weak and concentrated their forces to attack. After they succeeded, they concentrated their forces to attack other places.

古文：今魏博未与贼战，西军阂险不进，故贼得并力南下。
现代文：现在，魏博出兵还未与贼兵交战；西面的官军由于和昭义隔着高山峻岭，暂时不便进攻。所以，贼兵得以集中全力南下，进攻河阳。
English: At present, Wei Bo has not yet sent troops to fight against the bandits; the government troops in the west are temporarily unable to attack because of the high mountains separating them from Zhao Yi. Therefore, the bandits were able to concentrate all their efforts on the south and attack Heyang.

古文：若河阳退缩，不惟亏沮军声，兼恐震惊洛师。
现代文：如果河阳败退，不仅影响官军士气，而且恐怕震惊东都洛阳。
English: If Heyang is defeated, it will not only affect the morale of officials and soldiers, but may also shock the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：望诏王宰更不之磁州，亟以忠武军应援河阳；不惟扞蔽东都，兼可临制魏博。
现代文：希望陛下下诏，命王宰不再率军前往磁州，急速援救河阳。这样，不仅能够保障东都安全，而且还可临近制约魏博。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will issue a decree ordering Wang Zai to no longer lead the army to Magizhou and quickly rescue Heyang. In this way, it will not only be possible to ensure the safety of Dongdu, but also to closely control Weibo.

古文：若虑全军供饷难给，且令发先锋五千人赴河阳，亦足张声势。 
现代文：假如命王宰全部人马出动，朝廷军需供给困难，可以先让他征发先锋五千人援救河阳，也足以壮大河阳的声势。 
English: If Wang Zai was ordered to send out all the men and horses, and the imperial court had difficulty supplying the army, he could first send five thousand pioneers to rescue Kheyang, which would also be enough to strengthen Kheyang's reputation.

古文：甲申，又奏请敕王宰以全军继进，仍急以器械缯帛助河阳窘乏。
现代文：甲申，李德裕又请武宗下敕，命王宰率忠武的全部人马随后出发，援救河阳；同时，急速运军械和丝帛救助河阳的窘困。
English: Jiashen, Li Deyu also asked Wu Zong to descend, and then the king and all the loyal men and horses set off to rescue Kheyang; at the same time, the rapid transport of armaments and silk cocoons to rescue Kheyang's predicament.

古文：上皆从之。
现代文：武宗对李德裕的建议都予以采纳。
English: The emperor obeyed him.

古文：王茂元军万善，刘稹遣牙将张巨、刘公直等会薛茂卿共攻之，期以九月朔围万善。
现代文：河阳节度使王茂元率兵屯驻在万善，刘稹命牙将张巨、刘公直等人会同薛茂卿一起进攻，准备在九月初一包围万善。
English: The Heyang Festival made Wang Maoyuan and his soldiers stationed in Wanshan, and Liu Ye, the commander Zhang Jiu, Liu Gongzhi and others would attack together with Xue Maoxing, preparing to encircle Wanshan at the beginning of September.

古文：乙酉，公直等潜师先过万善南五里，焚雍店。
现代文：乙酉，刘公直等人先率军秘密地从万善南面五里的地方通过，焚烧雍店。
English: Acetylene, Liu Gongzhi and others led the army to secretly pass five miles south of Wanshan and burn Yongdian.

古文：巨引兵继之，过万善，觇知城中守备单弱，欲专有功，遂攻之。
现代文：张巨率兵随后应接，从万善城外经过的时候，探知城中守备薄弱，张巨想独占战功，于是，率兵攻城。
English: Zhang Jiu and his soldiers then responded. When they passed outside Wanshan City, they detected the weak defenses in the city. Zhang Jiu wanted to monopolize the battle, so he led his soldiers to attack the city.

古文：日昃，城且拔，乃使人告公直等。
现代文：太阳快落的时候，眼看万善城就要攻克，才派人去转告刘公直等人。
English: When the sun was about to set, he sent someone to tell Liu Gongzhi and others that Wanshan City was about to be conquered.

古文：时义成军适至，茂元困急，欲帅众弃城走。
现代文：这时，义成的军队奉命援助河阳，恰好赶到。
English: At this time, Yicheng's army was ordered to assist Heyang and arrived just in time.

古文：都虞候孟章遮马谏曰： 贼众自有前却，半在雍店，半在此，乃乱兵耳。
现代文：王茂元被攻打的困乏危急，准备率兵弃城逃走，都虞候孟章劝阻他说： 贼兵自然应当有进有退。现在，贼兵一半在雍店，一半在这里攻城，可见不过是乱兵而已。
English: Wang Maoyuan was attacked and was in a critical situation. He was preparing to lead his soldiers to abandon the city and flee. The governor waited for Meng Zhang to dissuade him, saying: Naturally, the thief soldiers should enter and retreat. Now, half of the thief soldiers are in Yongdian, and half are attacking the city here. It can be seen that they are nothing but disorderly soldiers.

古文：今义成军才至，尚未食，闻仆射走，则自溃矣。愿且强留！ 
现代文：义成兵现在刚刚到达，还没有吃饭，如果知道您率兵逃走，就会不战自溃。希望暂且留下坚守！ 
English: The volunteer soldiers have just arrived and have not yet eaten. If they know that you and your soldiers have fled, they will self-destruct without a fight. I hope you will stay firm for the time being!

古文：茂元乃止。
现代文：王茂元这才作罢。
English: Wang Maoyuan only gave up after this.

古文：会日暮，公直等不至，巨引兵退，始登山，微雨晦黑，自相惊曰： 追兵近矣！ 
现代文：等到傍晚的时候，刘公直仍未率兵来到，张巨只好引兵退走。他们开始登太行山，天已昏暗，又下起毛毛细雨，士卒自相惊扰，说： 追兵来了！ 
English: When evening came, Liu Gongzhi still hadn't arrived with his soldiers, so Zhang Jiu had no choice but to withdraw his soldiers. They began to climb Mount Taihang. It was already dark, and it was drizzling. The soldiers were startled and said to each other, "The pursuers are coming!"

古文：皆走，人马相践，坠崖谷死者甚众。
现代文：都拼命逃跑，人马相互践踏，很多士卒从山崖上被挤下去跌死。
English: Everyone tried to escape, people trampled on each other, and many soldiers were pushed off the cliff and fell to their deaths.

古文：上以王茂元、王宰两节度使共处河阳非宜，庚寅，李德裕等奏： 茂元习吏事而非将才，请以宰为河阳行营攻讨使。
现代文：唐武宗认为王茂元、王宰两个节度使同处河阳一地，很不妥当。唐寅，李德裕等人上奏说： 王茂元熟悉吏治，而非将才，请求任命王宰为河阳行营攻讨使。
English: Tang Wuzong thought that it was very inappropriate for Wang Maoyuan and Wang Zai to be stationed in the same place at the same time. Tang Yin, Li Deyu and others made a report: Wang Maoyuan was familiar with government officials, but not a general, and requested that Wang Zai be appointed as a campaigning envoy to Kahyang.

古文：茂元病愈，止令镇河阳，病困亦免他虞。 
现代文：王茂元病好以后，只让他镇守河阳，即使再病重也没有关系。 
English: After Wang Maoyuan recovered from his illness, he was only allowed to guard Heyang, even if he was seriously ill.

古文：九月，辛卿，以宰兼河阳行营攻讨使。
现代文：九月，辛卯，唐武宗任命王宰兼河阳行营攻讨使。
English: In September, Emperor Wuzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Wang Zairong as the commander-in-chief.

古文：何弘敬奏拔肥乡、平恩，杀伤甚众。
现代文：何弘敬奏报攻拔昭义州的肥乡、平恩两县，杀伤很多贼兵。
English: He Hongjing reported the attack on Feixiang and Ping'en two counties in Shouyi Prefecture, killing and wounding many soldiers.

古文：得刘稹榜贴，皆谓官军为贼，云遇之即须痛杀。
现代文：同时报告说，缴获刘稹公开张贴的告示，都把官军称为贼，说如果遇到官军，即应痛杀。
English: At the same time, the report said that the notices publicly posted by Liu Wei, who was captured, all called the government army thieves and said that if they encountered the government army, they should be killed.

古文：癸已，上谓宰相： 何弘敬已克两县，可释前疑。
现代文：癸已，武宗对宰相说： 何弘敬已攻克昭义两县，可以消除以前对他的怀疑。
English: At that time, Emperor Wuzong said to the prime minister: He Hongjing has conquered two counties in Shao Yi, which can eliminate the previous doubts about him.

古文：既有杀伤，虽欲持两端，不可得已。 
现代文：既然他已经杀伤了昭义的兵马，再想采取骑墙观望的态度，谁也不得罪，已经不可能了。 
English: Now that he has killed and wounded the soldiers and horses of Zhao Yi, it is no longer possible to take the attitude of riding on the wall and watching, without offending anyone.

古文：乃加弘敬检校左仆射。
现代文：于是，擢拔何弘敬为检校左仆射。
English: As a result, He Hongjing was promoted to the position of school inspector.

古文：丙午，河阳奏王茂元薨。
现代文：丙午，河阳奏报：王茂元去世。
English: On the afternoon of the 3rd, the Kheyang Songpo reported: Wang Maoyuan passed away.

古文：李德裕奏： 王宰止可令以忠武节度使将万善营兵，不可使兼领河阳，恐其不爱河阳州县，恣为侵扰，又，河阳节度先领怀州刺史，常以判官摄事，割河南五县租赋隶河阳，不若遂以五县置孟州，其怀州别置刺史。
现代文：李德裕上奏说： 对于王宰，只可令他以忠武节度使的身份统辖万善的行营兵，不可让他兼任河阳节度使，以免他不爱惜河阳的州县百姓，恣意侵扰。河阳节度使以前曾兼怀州刺史，而通常由判官主持州里的政事，河南府有五个县的租税被朝廷割让隶属河阳。不如现在以这五个县设置孟州，怀州也另外任命刺史；等昭义平定以后，把泽州割让归属河阳。
English: Li Deyu said: As for Wang Zai, he can only be made to supervise the all-good marching soldiers as a loyal martial arts festival envoy. He should not be allowed to serve as a Heyang festival envoy at the same time, so that he does not cherish the people of Heyang's prefectures and counties and intrude arbitrarily. The Heyang festival envoy had previously served as the governor of Huai Prefecture, but the judge usually presided over the state's political affairs. The taxes of five counties in Henan Prefecture were ceded to Heyang by the court. It is better to set up Mengzhou with these five counties now, and Huai

古文：俟昭义平日，仍割泽州隶河阳节度，则太行之险不在昭义，而河阳遂为重镇，东都无复忧矣！ 
现代文：这样，太行山的天险就不全为昭义所有，而河阳则成为重要的藩镇，东都洛阳的安危就不必再忧虑了！ 
English: In this way, the natural hazards of Taihang Mountain are not all owned by Zhao Yi, and Kheyang has become an important town. The safety of Luoyang, the eastern capital, no longer needs to be worried about!

古文：上采其言。
现代文：武宗采纳了李德裕的意见。
English: Wu Zong adopted Li Deyu's opinion.

古文：戊申，以河南尹敬昕为河阳节度、怀孟观察使，王宰将行营以扞敌，昕供馈饷而已。
现代文：戊申，任命河南尹敬昕为河阳节度使、怀孟观察使，王宰率行营兵攻讨昭义，敬昕供给军饷而已。
English: Wushin appointed Henan's Yin Jingyao as the envoy of the Heyang Festival and the observer of the Huai Meng Festival. Wang Zai led the troops to attack and subjugate Shouyi, and Jingyao only supplied military supplies.

古文：庚戌，以石雄代李彦佐为晋绛行营节度使，令自冀氏取潞州，仍分兵屯翼城以备侵轶。
现代文：庚戌，唐武宗任命石雄代替李彦佐为晋绛行营节度使，令他由冀氏县进兵攻取昭义的治所潞州，同时分兵屯守翼城，以便防备昭义军队的侵扰。
English: At the same time, Tang Wuzong appointed Shi Xiong to replace Li Yanzo as the envoy of the Jin Dynasty, and ordered him to march from Jishi County to capture Shoushou, the capital of Shouyi, and at the same time to detach troops to guard Yingsheng, so as to prevent the intrusion of Shouyi's army.

古文：是月，吐蕃论恐热屯大夏川，尚婢婢遣其将厖结心及莽罗薛吕将精兵五万击之。
现代文：本月，吐蕃国论恐热屯驻于河州大夏川，鄯州节度使尚婢婢命部将结心和莽罗薛吕率五万精兵进击论恐热。
English: This month, the Tibetans stationed themselves in Daxia River, Hezhou, and the Zhangzhou Festival made the Shang Dynasty general Zi Xin and the reckless Luo Xuerlu lead fifty thousand elite soldiers to attack the Tibetans.

古文：至河州南，莽罗薛吕伏兵四万于险阻，厖结心伏万人于柳林中，以千骑登山，飞矢系书骂之。
现代文：到了河州的南面，莽罗薛吕率四万人埋伏在险要的地方，结心率一万人埋伏在柳树林中，然后，率一千骑兵登山，写信辱骂论恐热，把信系在箭上，射向论恐热的军营。
English: In the south of Hezhou, the reckless Luo Xuerlu led forty thousand people to ambush in the critical place, and the determined ten thousand people ambushed in the willow forest. Then, he led a thousand cavalry to climb the mountain, wrote a letter of abuse about the fear of heat, tied the letter to an arrow, and shot it to the military camp of the fear of heat.

古文：恐热怒，将兵数万追之，厖结心阳败走，时为马乏不进之状。
现代文：论恐热接信后大怒，率兵几万人追击，结心假装败逃。逃跑中，经常表现出马匹困乏跑不动的样子。
English: After receiving the letter, he flew into a rage, led tens of thousands of soldiers in pursuit, and pretended to run away. During the escape, he often showed the appearance that the horses were tired and unable to run.

古文：恐热追之益急，不觉行数十里，伏兵发，断其归路，夹击之。
现代文：于是，论恐热追击的更加性急，不知不觉已追了几十里。这时，伏兵冲出，切断他的归路，结心和莽罗薛吕前后夹击。
English: As a result, he became more anxious about the hot pursuit, and unknowingly had chased dozens of miles. At this time, the ambush rushed out, cut off his return route, and clamped down on the reckless Luo Xuerlu.

古文：会大风飞沙，溪谷皆溢，恐热大败，伏尸五十里，溺死者不可胜数，恐热单骑遁归。
现代文：正好天又刮起大风，飞沙走石，山谷中的溪水四溢而出。论恐热大败，尸体横卧五十里，淹死者不计其数。论恐热一人骑马逃回。
English: Just at the right time, a gale blew up, the sand drifted, and the streams in the valley overflowed. On the fear of heat, there was a big defeat, the bodies lay fifty miles away, and the drowned were countless. On the fear of heat, one person fled back on horseback.

古文：石雄代李彦佐之明日，即引兵逾乌岭，破五寨，杀获千计。
现代文：石雄接到朝廷任命自己代替李彦佐职务的第二天，立即率兵从翼城出发，越过乌岭，攻破昭义五个营寨，杀死和擒获近千人。
English: The day after Shi Xiong was appointed by the imperial court to replace Li Yanzu, he immediately led his troops from the wing city, crossed the Wuling Mountains, broke through five camps in Zhao Yi, and killed and captured nearly a thousand people.

古文：时王宰军万善，刘沔军石会，皆顾望未进。
现代文：这时，王宰屯驻于万善，刘沔屯驻在石会，都观望不进。
English: At this time, Wang Zaitun was stationed in Wanshan, and Liu Qitun was stationed in Shikai, but they could not enter.

古文：上得雄捷书，喜甚。
现代文：唐武宗接到石雄上奏的捷报，大喜。
English: Tang Wuzong was overjoyed to receive the good news of Shi Xiong's ascension.

古文：冬，十月，庚申，临朝，谓宰相曰： 雄真良将！ 
现代文：冬季，十月，庚申，武宗上朝时，对宰相说： 石雄真是一员优秀的将领！ 
English: In winter, October, Goshun, when Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, he said to the prime minister: Shixiong is really an excellent general!

古文：李德裕因言： 比年前潞州市有男子磬折唱曰： 石雄七千人至矣！ 
现代文：李德裕借机说： 几年前，潞州集市上有一个男人卷曲着身体喊道： 石雄率七千人来了！ 
English: Li Deyu took the opportunity to say: A few years ago, there was a man at the Zhangzhou Fair who curled up his body and shouted: "Seven thousand people led by Shi Xiong have come!"

古文：刘从谏以为妖言，斩之。
现代文：刘从谏认为是荒诞不经的妖言，下令将他斩首。
English: Liu Conglu thought that it was an absurd fairy tale and ordered him to be beheaded.

古文：破潞州者必雄也。 
现代文：看来，能够攻破潞州的人肯定是石雄了。 
English: It seems that the person who can break through Zhangzhou must be Shixiong.

古文：诏赐雄帛为优赏，雄悉置军门，自依士卒例先取一匹，馀悉分将士，故士卒乐为之致死。
现代文：武宗下诏，命赐予石雄大批丝帛作为重赏。石雄把丝帛都放在军营门口，自己先按士卒应得的份额拿一匹，其余都分给将士，所以士卒都甘愿为他尽死效力。
English: Emperor Wuzong issued an edict to give Shi Xiong a large number of silk cocoons as a reward. Shi Xiong put the silk cocoons at the gate of the military camp, and he first took one horse according to the soldiers' share, and the rest were distributed to the soldiers, so the soldiers were willing to work for him to the death.

古文：初，刘沔破回鹘，得太和公主，张仲武疾之，由是有隙；上使李回至幽州和解之，仲武意终不平。
现代文：当初，河东节度使刘沔击败回鹘乌介可汗，接回太和公主，幽州节度使张仲武忌妒刘沔的功劳，由此二人产生矛盾。武宗派李回赴幽州进行调解，但张仲武仍然很不服气。
English: At first, the Hedong Festival made Liu Bei defeat Hui Wusuke Khan and take back the Empress Dowager and the princess, and the Yuzhou Festival made Zhang Zhongwu jealous of Liu Bei's achievements, which caused a conflict between the two. Wu Zong sent Li back to Yuzhou to mediate, but Zhang Zhongwu was still very unconvinced.

古文：朝廷恐其以私憾败事，辛未，徙沔为义成节度使，以前荆南节度使李石为河东节度使。
现代文：朝廷担忧张仲武由于个人的恩怨而影响讨伐昭义的军事行动，辛未，调刘沔担任义成节度使，任命前荆南节度使李石为河东节度使。
English: The imperial court was worried that Zhang Zhongwu's personal grudge would affect the military campaign against Zhao Yi. Xin Wei transferred Liu Wei to serve as Yicheng Festival envoy, and appointed former Jingnan Festival envoy Li Shi to serve as Hedong Festival envoy.

古文：党项寇盐州，以前武宁节度使李彦佐为朔方灵盐节度使。
现代文：党项族侵扰盐州，唐武宗任命前武宁节度使李彦佐为朔方灵盐节度使。
English: The Dangxiang people invaded Yanzhou, and Emperor Wu of Tang appointed Li Yanzu, the former military governor of Wu Ning, as the military governor of Yanzhou.

古文：十一月，邠宁奏党项入寇。
现代文：十一月，宁奏报党项族侵扰。
English: In November, Ning Songbo reported the intrusion of the Xiang nationality by the Party.

古文：李德裕奏： 党项愈炽，不可不为区处。
现代文：李德裕上奏说： 党项族的势力越来越强盛，不能不制定对策了。
English: Li Deyu said: The power of the party and clan is becoming more and more powerful, and it is necessary to formulate countermeasures.

古文：闻党项分隶诸镇，剽掠于此则亡逃归彼。
现代文：我听说以往由于党项族的部落分别隶属各个藩镇统辖，他们在这里剽掠，然后就逃到那里，各个节度使都贪图他们的骆驼和马匹。
English: I heard that in the past, because the tribes of the Dangxiang people were under the jurisdiction of various provinces and towns, they plundered here and then fled there, and all festivals made them covet their camels and horses.

古文：节度使各利其驼马，不为擒送，以此无由禁戢。
现代文：因此，也不擒拿送回。这样，就一直不能禁止。
English: Therefore, they don't take it back, so it can't be banned.

古文：臣屡奏不若使一镇统之，陛下以为一镇专领党项权太重。
现代文：我曾多次上奏朝廷，认为不如让一个藩镇统辖党项族。陛下认为如果由一个藩镇专门统辖，权力太大，所以没有批准。
English: I have appealed to the Imperial Court many times, arguing that it would be better to let a domain and town govern the party and clan. His Majesty believed that if a domain and town were to govern exclusively, the power would be too great, so he did not approve.

古文：臣今请以皇子兼统诸道，择中朝廉干之臣为之副，居于夏州，理其辞讼，庶为得宜。 
现代文：现在，我请求由陛下的一个皇子兼领各个有党项族部落的藩镇，从朝廷中挑选一位廉正能干的臣僚作为他的副手，居留在夏州，统一处理党项族的诉讼是非。这样，估计比较适宜。 
English: Now, I request that one of His Majesty's princes concurrently lead all the provinces and towns that have Dangxiang tribes, select an honest and competent minister from the imperial court as his deputy, stay in Xiazhou, and uniformly deal with the litigation of Dangxiang tribes. In this way, the estimate is more appropriate.

古文：乃以兗王岐为灵、夏等六道元帅兼安抚党项大使，又以御史中丞李回为安抚党项副使，史馆修撰郑亚为元帅判官，令赍诏往安抚党项及六镇百姓。
现代文：武宗同意，于是，任命兖王李岐为灵、夏等六道元帅兼安抚党项大使，御史中丞李回为安抚党项副使，史馆修撰郑亚为元帅判官，令他们携带诏书前往安抚党项族以及灵、夏等六个藩镇的百姓。
English: Therefore, Wu Zong agreed to appoint King Li Qi as the Marshal of the Six Provinces including Ling and Xia and the Ambassador of Pacification of the Six Provinces, Li Hui as the Deputy Envoy of Pacification of the Six Provinces including Ling and Xia, and Zheng Ya as the Judge of the Marshal of the Six Provinces including Ling and Xia, and ordered them to go to pacify the people of the Six Provinces including Ling and Xia and the people of the Six Provinces including Ling and Xia.

古文：安南经略使武浑役将士治城，将士作乱，烧城楼，劫府库。
现代文：安南经略使武浑役使将士修筑城池，将士不满而作乱，焚烧城楼，劫夺仓库。
English: Annan ordered Wu Hun to send soldiers to build the city, but the soldiers were dissatisfied and rioted, burning city buildings and looting warehouses.

古文：浑奔广州，监军段士则抚安乱众。
现代文：武浑逃奔广州，监军段士则安抚作乱的将士，使他们安定下来。
English: Wu Hun fled to Guangzhou, while the supervising sergeant pacified the disorderly soldiers and settled them down.

古文：忠武军素号精勇，王宰治军严整，昭义人甚惮之。
现代文：忠武藩镇的军队向来以精锐勇敢闻名，节度使王宰治军严格，昭义人对王宰十分惧怕。
English: The army of Zhongwu has always been famous for its elite bravery. The festival makes Wangzai rule the army strictly, and the righteous people are very afraid of Wangzai.

古文：薛茂卿以科斗寨之功，意望超迁。
现代文：昭义衙内十将薛茂卿在科斗寨战役立功后，希望能够得到升迁。
English: Xue Maoxing, the 10th general of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court

古文：或谓刘稹曰： 留后所求者节耳。茂卿太深入，多杀官军，激怒朝廷，此节所以来益迟也。 
现代文：有人对刘稹说： 您所企求的是节度使的职位，薛茂卿入河阳境内太深，杀死很多官军，激怒了朝廷，这正是朝廷迟迟不任命您的缘故。 
English: Someone said to Liu Bei, "What you are seeking is the post of the Minister of State Security. Xue Maoxing went too deep into the territory of Heyang, killed many government troops, and angered the imperial court. This is precisely why the imperial court delayed appointing you.

古文：由是无赏。
现代文：于是，刘稹对薛茂卿不加赏赐。
English: As a result, Liu Ye did not reward Xue Maoxing.

古文：茂卿温怼，密与王宰通谋。十一月，丁巳，宰引兵攻天井关，茂卿小战，遽引兵走，宰遂克天井关守之。
现代文：薛茂卿十分怨恨，秘密地和王宰通谋，十二月，丁已，王宰率兵进攻天井关，薛茂卿假装交战一会儿，就率兵退走，王宰于是攻克天井关，进行防守。
English: Xue Maoxing was very resentful, and secretly conspired with Wang Zai. In December, Ding Ya, Wang Zai led the soldiers to attack the ceiling pass. Xue Maoxing pretended to fight for a while, then led the soldiers to retreat. Wang Zai then attacked the ceiling pass and defended it.

古文：关东西寨闻茂卿不守，皆退走，宰遂焚大小箕村。
现代文：天井关东西两翼的昭义营寨得知薛茂卿失守，也都退走。于是，王宰出兵焚掠大小箕村。
English: When the Shouyi encampment on the east and west sides of Tianjing Pass learned that Xue Maoxing had been lost, they also retreated. Therefore, Wang Zai sent soldiers to burn and plunder the large and small villages.

古文：茂卿入泽州，密使谍召宰进攻泽州，当为内应。
现代文：薛茂卿退回泽州，密派侦探召王宰进攻泽州，表示愿做内应。
English: Xue Maoxing returned to Zezhou, and secretly sent detectives to summon Wang Zai to attack Zezhou, expressing his willingness to do so.

古文：宰疑，不敢进，失期不至，茂卿拊膺顿足而已。
现代文：王宰猜疑有诈，不敢出兵，按约定的日期没有到达。薛茂卿捶胸顿足，无可奈何。
English: Wang Zai was suspicious and deceitful, did not dare to send troops, and did not arrive on the agreed date. Xue Maoxing was heartbroken, but there was nothing he could do.

古文：稹知之，诱茂卿至潞州，杀之，并其族，以兵马使刘公直代茂卿，安全庆守乌岭，李佐尧守雕黄岭，郭僚守石会，康良佺守武乡。
现代文：刘稹得知后，把薛茂卿诱骗到潞州，连同他的宗族，全部杀死。然后，命兵马使刘公直代替薛茂卿；命安全庆防守乌岭，李佐尧防守雕黄岭，郭僚防守石会关，康良守武乡县。
English: After Liu Bei learned of this, he lured Xue Maoxing to Zhangzhou and killed him and his entire clan. Then, he ordered soldiers and horses to make Liu Gongzhi replace Xue Maoxing; Jin Shengqing defended Wuling, Li Zuoxi defended Zhihuangling, Guo Liang defended Shishi Huiguan, and Kangliang defended Wuxiang County.

古文：僚，谊之侄也。
现代文：郭僚是郭谊的侄子。
English: Guo Liang is Guo Rui's nephew.

古文：戊辰，王宰进攻泽州，与刘公直战，不利，公直乘胜复天井关。
现代文：戊辰，王宰率军进攻泽州，与刘公直交战失利，刘公直乘胜收复天井关。
English: At the time of Wu Chen, Wang Zai led the army to attack Zeshu, and lost the battle with Liu Gongzhi. Liu Gongzhi won the victory and recovered the ceiling pass.

古文：甲戌，宰进击公直，大破之，遂围陵川，克之。
现代文：甲戌，王宰率军进击刘公直，大败刘公直的军队。
English: Armor-plated, Wang Zai led the army to attack Liu Gongzhi, and defeated Liu Gongzhi's army.

古文：河东奏克石会关。
现代文：于是，进兵围攻陵川县城，随即攻克。这时，河东奏报攻克石会关。
English: As a result, the marching troops besieged the county seat of Lingchuan, and then conquered it. At this time, Hedong reported the conquest of Shiguehui Pass.

古文：洺州刺史李恬，石之从兄也。
现代文：昭义州刺史李恬，是河东节度使李石的堂兄。
English: Zhi Shi Li Zhen from Shouyi Prefecture is the cousin of Li Shi, the head of the Eastern Hedong Festival.

古文：石至太原，刘稹遣军将贾群诣石，以恬书与石云： 稹愿举族归命相公，奉从谏丧归葬东都。 
现代文：李石抵达太原后，刘稹派遣军将贾群携带李恬的书信去见李石，信中说： 刘稹愿率全族人归降您，同时，护送刘从谏的灵柩回东都洛阳埋葬。 
English: After Li Shih arrived in Taiyuan, Liu Bei sent an army to take Jia Qun to see Li Shih with Li Shih's letter. The letter said: Liu Bei is willing to lead the whole nation to surrender to you, and at the same time, escort Liu from Shih's coffin back to the eastern capital Luoyang for burial.

古文：石囚群，以其书闻。
现代文：李石把贾群拘禁起来，将李恬的书信上奏朝廷。
English: Li Shishi put Jia Qun under arrest and reported Li Yao's letter to the imperial court.

古文：李德裕上言： 今官军四合，捷书日至，贼势穷蹙，故伪输诚款，翼以缓师，稍得自完，复来侵轶。
现代文：李德裕上言说： 现在，官军四面围攻昭义，捷报频传，贼军内外交困，所以伪装投降，企图暂缓官军的讨伐，得以喘息休整，然后再来侵扰。
English: Li Deyu said at the top: Now, the government army is besieging Zhao Yi on all sides, the news of victory is frequent, and the internal and external affairs of the thief army are in trouble. Therefore, it is disguised as surrender, in an attempt to delay the government army's crusade, so that it can take a breather and rest, and then come back to intrude.

古文：望诏石答恬书云： 前书未敢闻奏。
现代文：因此，希望陛下下诏，命李石写信答复李恬说： 前此来信未敢向朝廷奏报。
English: Therefore, I hope that His Majesty will issue an edict, ordering Li Shih to write a letter in reply to Li Yao, saying: I did not dare to report this letter to the imperial court.

古文：若郎君诚能悔过，举族面缚，待罪境上，则石当亲往受降，护送归阙。
现代文：如果刘稹真心悔过自新，那么，就应把自己和全族亲戚的双手反绑，到边境上待罪投降。这样，我就会亲自前往接受他的归降，然后派人把他护送到京城。
English: If Liu Xuan truly repented and reformed, then he should tie his own hands and the hands of all his relatives and go to the border to surrender. In this way, I will personally go to accept his surrender, and then send someone to escort him to Beijing.

古文：若虚为诚款，先求解兵，次望洗雪，则石必不敢以百口保人。 
现代文：如果刘稹伪装投降，企图借此机会暂缓官军的进攻，进而再让朝廷为他洗冤雪耻，那么，我就肯定不敢用我宗族一百多人的性命为您替刘稹作保。 
English: If Liu Bei surrenders in disguise, trying to use this opportunity to delay the attack of the government army, and then let the court exonerate him, then I will certainly not dare to use the lives of more than a hundred people of my clan to protect you for Liu Bei.

古文：仍望招诸道，乘其上下离心，速进兵攻讨，不过旬朔，必内自生变。 
现代文：陛下同时给前线各个藩镇下诏，命他们乘刘稹上下离心离德的机会，迅速进兵攻讨。这样，不出一个月，刘稹的内部肯定会发生变乱。 
English: At the same time, His Majesty issued an edict to the frontline towns and ordered them to take advantage of the opportunity of Liu Bei's centrifugal separation from Germany and quickly enter the army to attack. In this way, within a month, there will definitely be turmoil within Liu Bei.

古文：上从之。
现代文：武宗同意。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：右拾遗崔碣上疏请受其降，上怒，贬碣邓城令。
现代文：右拾遗崔碣上疏，请求接受刘稹的归降。武宗大怒，贬崔碣为邓城令。
English: Wu Zong was furious and denounced Cui Jian as Deng Cheng Rong.

古文：初，刘沔破回鹘，留兵三千戍横水栅。
现代文：当初，河东节度使刘沔击败回鹘乌介可汗后，留下三千兵马防戍横水栅。
English: At first, the Hedong Festival made Liu Bei defeat the Hui Wuxi Khan, leaving three thousand soldiers and horses to guard the cross-water fence.

古文：河东行营都知兵马使王逢奏乞益榆社兵，诏河东以兵二千赴之。
现代文：这时，河东行营都知兵马使王逢率军讨伐刘稹，驻屯在榆社县，上奏乞请增援。朝廷诏命河东出兵二千人赴援。
English: At this time, Wang Feng led an army to fight against Liu Bei and was stationed in Jinsha County, begging for reinforcements. The imperial court ordered the east side of the river to send two thousand soldiers to help.

古文：时河东无兵，守仓库者及工匠皆出从军，李石召横水戍卒千五百人，使都将杨弁将之诣逢，壬午，戍卒至太原。
现代文：河东的兵马都已调往前线，无兵可发。于是，守仓库的差役和工匠都被征发从军，仍然不够，新任河东节度使李石下令调横水栅的戍卒一千五百人，命都将杨弁率领前往榆社。壬午，戍卒到达太原。
English: The soldiers and horses of Hedong had all been transferred to the front line, and there were no soldiers to send. As a result, the warehouse guards and craftsmen were conscripted to serve in the army, but it was still not enough. The new Hedong governor Li Shi ordered the transfer of 1,500 soldiers from the water gate, and ordered Yang Ben to lead them to Shisha. At noon, the soldiers arrived in Taiyuan.

古文：先是，军士出征，人给绢二匹。
现代文：此前，凡军士出征，每人赏赐丝绢二匹。
English: Previously, every sergeant who went to war was awarded two silk cocoons.

古文：刘沔之去，竭府库自随，石初至，军用乏，以己绢益之，人才得一匹。
现代文：刘沔从河东离任时，把仓库的储备几乎全部随身带走。因而，李石刚刚上任时，军需物资十分困乏，李石便把自己家中的丝绢拿出来添补，这样，每个士卒也才得到一匹。
English: Therefore, when Li Shih just took office, the military supplies were very scarce, Li Shih took out the silk cocoons from his home to supplement, so that each soldier only got one.

古文：时已岁尽，军士求过正旦而行，监军吕义忠累牒趣之。
现代文：这时，又正值年终，士卒请求过了初一上路，监军吕义忠却多次催促。
English: At this time, which also coincided with the end of the year, the soldiers requested to go on the road after the first day of the year, but the supervisor, Lü Yizhong, repeatedly urged them to go.

古文：杨弁因众心之怒，又知城中空虚，遂作乱。
现代文：杨弁乘士卒怨怒，又得知太原城中空虚，于是发动兵变。
English: Yang Ben took advantage of the resentment of the soldiers and learned that Taiyuan City was empty, so he launched a mutiny.

古文：春，正月，乙酉朔，杨弁帅其众剽掠城市，杀都头梁季叶，李石奔汾州。
现代文：会昌四年春季，正月，乙酉朔，杨弁率士卒剽掠太原集市。杀死都头梁季叶，李石逃奔汾州。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Huichang, in the first month of the year, Yang Ben led his soldiers to plunder the Taiyuan Bazaar. He killed the head of the capital, Li Qiye, and Li Shi fled to Ganzhou.

古文：弁据军府，释贾群之囚，使其侄与之俱诣刘稹，约为兄弟。稹大喜。
现代文：杨弁占据河东节度使府衙门，释放昭义的使者贾群，派自己的侄子和贾群一起前往昭义去见刘稹，和刘稹结拜为兄弟，刘稹大喜。
English: Yang Ben occupied the capital gate of the Hedong Festival, released Jia Qun, the messenger of Zhao Yi, and sent his nephew and Jia Qun to Zhao Yi to meet Liu Bei. Liu Bei and Liu Bei became brothers, and Liu Bei was overjoyed.

古文：石会关守将杨珍闻太原乱，复以关降于稹。
现代文：石会关守将杨珍得知太原发生兵乱，又以石会关投降刘稹。
English: Yang Zhen, the keeper of the stone community gate, learned that there was a mutiny in Taiyuan, and surrendered to Liu Ye at the stone community gate.

古文：戊子，吕义忠遣使言状，朝议喧然。
现代文：戊子，河东监军吕义忠派遣使者向朝廷奏报杨弁兵乱的情况，百官议论哗然。
English: When Lu Yizhong, the military governor of Hedong, sent an envoy to the imperial court to report the situation of the Yangben Rebellion, the officials were in an uproar.

古文：或言两地皆应罢兵，王宰又上言： 游弈将得刘稹表，臣近遣人至泽潞，贼有意归附。
现代文：有人认为朝廷对昭义和河东两地都应罢兵休战。这时，王宰又上言说： 前不久，我部下的游弈将收到刘稹送来的上表；近日，我又派人到昭义的泽州，发现贼军确实有诚意归降。
English: Some people think that the imperial court should call a truce for both Shouyi and Hedong. At this time, Wang Zai also said: Not long ago, the game of my subordinates will receive the table sent by Liu Wei; Recently, I sent someone to Zeshou in Shouyi, and found that the thief army really has the sincerity to surrender.

古文：若许招纳，乞降诏命！ 
现代文：如果朝廷许可我招降贼军。请求下达诏书！ 
English: If the Imperial Court permits me to recruit and surrender the Kleptocratic Army, I request that an imperial decree be issued!

古文：李德裕上言： 宰擅受稹表，遣人入贼中，曾不闻奏，观宰意似欲擅招抚之功。
现代文：李德裕上言说： 王宰擅自接收刘稹的表章，又派人到贼军中去，却从不向朝廷奏报。我看他的用意似乎是想独占招降刘稹的功劳。
English: Li Deyu said, "Wang Zai received Liu Ye's insignia without authorization, and sent people to join the bandit army, but never reported to the imperial court. I think his intention seems to be to monopolize Liu Ye's merit.

古文：昔韩信破田荣，李靖擒颉利，皆因其请降，潜兵掩袭。
现代文：过去，韩信击败田横，李靖擒获突厥颉利可汗，都是乘他们请求投降的时候，秘密地出兵袭击，而大获全胜的。
English: In the past, when Han Xin defeated Tian Yang and Li Jingyi defeated Turku Qili Khan, they used their request for surrender to secretly send troops to attack and won a great victory.

古文：止可令王宰失信，岂得损朝廷威命！
现代文：所以，现在只能让王宰对刘稹失信，而不能损害朝廷的威严。
English: Therefore, it is now only possible for Wang Zai to betray Liu Ye, but not to damage the dignity of the imperial court.

古文：建立奇功，实在今日，必不可以太原小扰，失此事机。
现代文：自从讨伐昭义以来，官军建立奇功，一举平定贼军的机遇，正是在今天。所以，绝不可由于杨弁在太原的小小骚扰丧此良机。
English: Since the battle of Zhaoyi, the opportunity for the government army to create a miracle and defeat the bandit army in one fell swoop is precisely today. Therefore, we must not lose this good opportunity due to Yang Ben's minor harassment in Taiyuan.

古文：望即遣供奉官至行营，督其进兵，掩其无备，必须刘稹与诸将皆举族面缚，方可受纳。
现代文：希望陛下立即派遣供奉官到前线行营，乘贼军没有防备的机会，督促各个藩镇急速进兵攻讨。只有刘稹和他的部将与同族的亲戚一起把双手反绑前来投降，才可接受。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will immediately dispatch the tributary officials to the front line, take advantage of the opportunity for the thief army to be unprepared, and urge the various provinces and towns to rapidly enter the army to attack. Only Liu Wei and his group will be accepted if they come to surrender with their hands tied together with relatives of the same ethnic group.

古文：兼遣供奉官至晋绛行营，密谕石雄以王宰若纳刘稹，则雄无功可纪。
现代文：同时，再派一名供奉官到晋绛行营，秘密地转告石雄，如果王宰招降刘稹成功，那么，石雄就无功可言。
English: At the same time, he also sent a tributary official to the Jinbei encampment to secretly tell Shi Xiong that if Wang Zai's recruitment of Liu Bei was successful, then Shi Xiong would be useless.

古文：雄于垂成之际，须自取奇功，勿失此便。 
现代文：石雄现在正处于垂手可破昭义的时候，肯定会自动进兵，建立奇功，而不会放弃目前的机遇。 
English: Shi Xiong is now at a time when he can break the law, and he will certainly enter the army automatically and build a miracle, but he will not give up the current opportunity.

古文：又为相府与宰书，言： 昔王承宗虽逆命，犹遣弟承恭奉表诣张相祈哀，又遣其子知感、知信入朝，宪宗犹未之许。
现代文：李德裕又为政事堂起草一封给王宰的书信，说： 过去，成德节度使王承宗虽然叛乱抗拒朝廷，还派自己的弟弟王承恭向宰相张弘靖祈请哀怜，请求朝廷赦免，后又把儿子王知感、王知信遣送京城，作为人质，宪宗仍然不许。
English: Li Deyu also drafted a letter to Wang Zhaotong for the State Council, saying: In the past, the Chengde Festival made Wang Chengzong rebel against the imperial court, but he also sent his brother Wang Chenggong to the prime minister Zhang Hongjing to pray for mercy and ask the imperial court for pardon. Later, he sent his sons Wang Zhixin and Wang Zhixin to Beijing as hostages. Constitutionalism is still not allowed.

古文：今刘稹不诣尚书面缚，又不遣血属祈哀，置章表于衢路之间，游弈将不即毁除，实恐非是。
现代文：现在，刘稹既不把自己反绑起来向你请降，又不派遣亲属到京城作人质，请求朝廷哀怜，而在野外的道路上向游弈将递交请降的章表。
English: Now, Liu Bei will neither tie himself up to ask you to surrender, nor will he send his relatives to the capital as hostages to ask for the mercy of the imperial court. Instead, he will submit a petition for surrender to Youyi on the open road.

古文：况稹与杨弁通奸，逆状如此，而将帅大臣容受其诈，是私惠归于臣下，不赦在于朝廷，事体之间，交恐不可。
现代文：游弈将接到后不及时焚毁，反而向上奏报，恐怕很不妥当。况且刘稹和杨弁勾结为奸，反叛朝廷如此严重，你作为朝廷的将帅大臣，竟然接受他的欺诈。这样做，就是把个人的恩惠归于臣下，而不予赦免的名声归于朝廷，从国家大局出发，恐怕不妥。
English: I'm afraid it's very inappropriate that you didn't burn the game in time after receiving it, but instead reported it to the emperor. Moreover, Liu Bei and Yang Ben colluded and rebelled against the imperial court so seriously that you, as the commander-in-chief of the imperial court, actually accepted his fraud. To do so is to attribute personal favors to subjects, but to attribute the reputation of not granting amnesty to the imperial court. From the perspective of the overall national situation, I'm afraid it's not appropriate.

古文：自今更有章表，宣即所在焚之。
现代文：从今以后，如果刘镇再有请降的章表，应当命接收的将吏当即焚毁。
English: From now on, if there is another petition for abdication in Liu Town, the generals who should be ordered to accept it will be burned immediately.

古文：惟面缚而来，始可容受。 
现代文：只有刘稹把自己反绑着前来投降，才能接受。 
English: Only if Liu Ye comes to surrender with his hands tied behind his back can he be accepted.

古文：德裕又上言： 太原人心从来忠顺，止是贫虚，赏犒不足。
现代文：李德裕又上言说： 太原的人心从来就忠于朝廷，只是由于一时贫乏，对士卒犒赏不足，才导致兵乱。
English: Li Deyu went on to say: The people of Taiyuan have always been loyal to the imperial court. It was only because of temporary poverty and insufficient reward for the soldiers that led to the mutiny.

古文：况千五百人何能为事！
现代文：况且一千五百人怎么能闹事成功！
English: Besides, how could fifteen hundred people succeed in starting a riot?

古文：必不可姑息宽纵。
现代文：因此，决不可对杨弁姑息放纵。
English: Therefore, we must not indulge the Yang dialect.

古文：且用兵未罢，深虑所在动心。
现代文：而且，现在朝廷正用兵讨伐昭义，如果姑息族纵杨弁，恐怕又有人会效法作乱。
English: Moreover, now that the imperial court is using soldiers to fight against Zhao Yi, if the appeasers are indulged, I am afraid that others will follow suit.

古文：顷张延赏为张出所逐，逃奔汉州，还入成都。
现代文：过去，西川节度使张延赏被部将张驱逐，逃奔汉州，后来又攻入成都，杀张。
English: In the past, Saikawa Setsudou had Zhang Yanbo expelled by the subordinate general Zhang, fled to Hanzhou, and later invaded Chengdu and killed Zhang.

古文：望诏李石、义忠还赴太原行营，召旁近之兵讨除乱者。 
现代文：所以，希望陛下下诏，命李石和吕义忠返回太原行营，召集驻屯在附近的兵马讨除杨弁。 
English: Therefore, I hope that His Majesty will issue an edict ordering Li Shih and Lü Yizhong to return to the Taiyuan encampment and summon the soldiers and horses stationed nearby to remove Yang Ben.

古文：上皆从之。
现代文：武宗都予以采纳。
English: The emperor obeyed him.

古文：是时，李石已至晋州，诏复还太原。
现代文：这时，李石已到达晋州，武宗诏命他返回太原。
English: By this time, Li Shih had arrived in Jinzhou, and Emperor Wu ordered him to return to Taiyuan.

古文：辛卯，诏王逢悉留太原兵守榆社，以易定千骑、宣武兗海步兵三千讨杨弁；又诏王元逵以步骑五千自土门入，应接逢军。
现代文：辛卯，武宗下诏，命王逢将河东兵全部留守榆社县，率易定的一千骑兵、宣武和兖海的三千步兵讨伐杨弁；又命王元逵率五千步兵和骑兵从土门进发，接应王逢。
English: Xinwu, Wu Zong issued an edict, ordering Wang Feng to leave all the soldiers from the east of the river to stay in Shensha County, with the rate of one thousand cavalry and three thousand infantry from Xuanwu and Bohai to fight against Yang Ben; he also ordered Wang Yuanzhang to lead five thousand infantry and cavalry from Dumen to meet Wang Feng.

古文：忻州刺史李丕奏： 杨弁遣人来为游说，臣已斩之，兼断其北出之路，发兵讨之。 
现代文：忻州刺史李丕上奏说： 杨弁派人前来游说，我已经将他斩首，并切断杨弁往北方的出路，同时发兵南下讨伐杨弁。 
English: "Yang Ben sent people to come and lobby, I have beheaded him, and cut off Yang Ben's way to the north, while sending troops to the south to fight Yang Ben.

古文：辛丑，上与宰相议太原事，李德裕曰： 今太原兵皆在外，为乱者止千馀人，诸州镇必无应者。
现代文：辛丑，唐武宗和宰相商议太原杨弁作乱的事，李德裕说： 现在，太原兵都在前线讨伐昭义，作乱者仅一千多人，各州镇肯定无人响应，估计不出几天就可诛除。
English: Xin Xi, Tang Wuzong and the prime minister discussed the matter of Taiyuan Yang Ben's rebellion, Li Deyu said: Now, Taiyuan soldiers are all on the front line to fight against Zhao Yi, there are only more than a thousand people who have caused disturbances, and there is certainly no response from any state town. It is estimated that they can be eliminated within a few days.

古文：计不日诛翦，惟应速诏王逢进军，至城下必自有变。 
现代文：只要下诏命王逢迅速进兵，到太原城下，杨弁的内部就会发生变乱。 
English: As long as the emperor ordered Wang Feng to quickly enter the army and go to Taiyuan Castle, there would be turmoil inside Yang Ben.

古文：上曰： 仲武见镇、魏讨泽潞有功，必有慕羡之心，使之讨太原何如？ 
现代文：武宗说： 幽州节度使张仲武眼看成德、魏博讨伐昭义有功，必定十分羡慕，如果让他出兵讨伐杨弁怎样？ 
English: Wu Zong said: The Yuzhou Festival made Zhang Zhongwu's eyes see Chengde and Weibo's crusade as meritorious. He must have been very envious. What if he sent troops to fight Yang Ben?

古文：德裕对曰： 镇州趣太原路最便近。
现代文：李德裕回答说： 成德出兵太原，距离最近，也最方便。
English: Li Deyu replied: Chengde's dispatch of troops to Taiyuan is the closest and most convenient.

古文：仲武去年讨回鹘，与太原争功，恐其不戢士卒，平人受害。 
现代文：张仲武去年讨伐回鹘时，和前河东节度使刘沔争功，恐怕他出兵不加约束士卒，使百姓受害。 
English: During Zhang Zhongwu's last year's campaign to recapture Yunnan, he competed with the former Hedong governor Liu Bei for the credit. I am afraid that he sent troops without restraining the soldiers, causing the people to suffer.

古文：乃止。
现代文：武宗于是作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：上遣中使马元实至太原，晓谕乱兵，且觇其强弱。
现代文：武宗派遣宦官马元实出使太原，向乱兵讲明利害得失，规劝他们归顺朝廷，同时窥测杨弁的兵力强弱。
English: Emperor Wuzong dispatched eunuch Ma Yuanshi to Taiyuan to explain the advantages and disadvantages to the rebels, to persuade them to submit to the imperial court, and to spy on the strength of Yang Ben's army.

古文：陈弁与之酣饮三日，且赂之。
现代文：杨弁盛宴接待马元实，二人醉饮了三天。杨弁又向马元实行贿。
English: Yang Ben hosted a banquet for Ma Yuanshi, and the two got drunk for three days. Yang Ben also bribed Ma Yuan.

古文：戊申，元实自太原还，上遣诣宰相议之，元实于众中大言： 相公须早与之节！ 
现代文：戊申，马元实从太原返回京城，武宗命马元实与宰相一起商议太原的情况，马元实在众人中夸大其辞地说： 你们应当早日任命杨弁为节度使！ 
English: According to Wu Shen, Ma Yuanshi returned to Beijing from Taiyuan. Wu Zong ordered Ma Yuanshi to discuss the situation in Taiyuan with the prime minister. Ma Yuanshi exaggeratedly said among the crowd: You should appoint Yang Ben as the festival envoy as soon as possible!

古文：李德裕曰： 何故？ 
现代文：李德裕说： 为什么呢？ 
English: Li Deyu said: Why?

古文：元实曰： 自牙门至柳子列十五里曳地光明甲，若之何取之！ 
现代文：马元实说： 从河东节度使衙门到柳子列之间十五里内，遍地都是光明甲。这么强盛的兵力，怎么能讨伐平定呢？ 
English: Ma Yuanshi said: "Within fifteen miles from the Hedong Festival to the Yamen Gate to the Willow Column, everywhere is bright red. How can such a strong force be fought and pacified?

古文：德裕曰： 李相正以太原无兵，故发横水兵赴榆社。库中之甲尽在行营，弁何能遽致如此之众乎？ 
现代文：李德裕说： 李石正是由于太原无兵可发，才命横水栅的戍兵赴榆社增援，库房中的兵器都已带到前线行营，杨弁怎么能骤然有这么多的兵士和兵器！ 
English: Li Deyu said: It was precisely because Taiyuan had no soldiers to send that Li Shih ordered the soldiers of the Wei army to reinforce the Wei army. The weapons in the warehouse had all been brought to the front line. How could Yang Ben suddenly have so many soldiers and weapons!

古文：元实曰： 太原人劲悍，皆可为兵，弁召募所致耳。 
现代文：马元实说： 太原人性情剽悍，都可当兵。这些兵士都是杨弁召募的。 
English: Ma Yuanshi said: Taiyuan people are tough and can be soldiers. These soldiers were recruited by Yang Ben.

古文：德裕曰： 召募须有货财，李相止以欠军士绢一匹，无从可得，故致此乱，弁何从得之？ 
现代文：李德裕说： 招募兵士必须要有财物，李石正是由于欠兵一匹丝绢无处可得，才导致兵乱。杨弁又从哪里得到财物呢？ 
English: Li Deyu said: To recruit soldiers, one must have property. It was precisely because Li Shih had no place to get a donkey when he was short of soldiers that led to the mutiny. Where did Yang Ben get his property?

古文：元实辞屈。
现代文：马元实被问得无言可答。
English: Ma Yuanshi was left speechless by the question.

古文：德裕曰： 从其有十五里光明甲，必须杀此贼！ 
现代文：李德裕说： 即使杨弁有十五里光明甲，也必须诛杀这个叛贼！ 
English: Li Deyu said, "Even if Yang Ben has fifteen miles of light armor, he must fight and kill this traitor!"

古文：因奏称： 杨弁微贼，决不可恕。
现代文：于是，上奏说： 杨弁小贼，决不可宽恕。
English: As a result, the prelude said: Yang Ben is a petty thief and should never be forgiven.

古文：如国力不及，宁舍刘稹。 
现代文：如果朝廷顾虑昭义和太原两处用兵，财力不支，那么，宁愿赦免刘稹。 
English: If national strength is not enough, it is better to give up pacifying Liu Bei.

古文：河东兵戍榆社者闻朝廷令客军取太原，恐妻孥为所屠灭，乃拥监军吕义忠自取太原。
现代文：这时，在榆社县屯戍的河东兵听说朝廷命其它藩镇的兵马进攻太原，恐怕自己的妻子儿女被他们所屠杀，于是，簇拥着监军吕义忠，自动出兵攻取太原。
English: At this time, the soldiers from the eastern part of the river, who were encamped in Jinsha County, heard that the imperial court had ordered the soldiers and horses of other towns to attack Taiyuan, and they were afraid that their wives and children would be slaughtered by them. Therefore, they gathered around the supervisor of the army, Lü Yizhong, and automatically sent troops to capture Taiyuan.

古文：壬子，克之，生擒杨弁，尽诛乱卒。
现代文：壬子，河东兵攻克太原，活捉杨弁，把乱卒全部诛杀。
English: The Imzi and Hedong soldiers conquered Taiyuan, captured Yang Ben alive, and killed all the ruffians.

古文：三月，甲寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月，甲寅朔，出现日食。
English: In March, at the turn of the year, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：乙卯，吕义忠奏克太原。
现代文：乙卯，吕义忠奏报攻克太原。
English: At the same time, Lü Yizhong announced the conquest of Taiyuan.

古文：丙辰，李德裕言于上曰： 王宰久应取泽州，今已迁延两月。
现代文：丙辰，李德裕对唐武宗说： 王宰早就应当攻取昭义的泽州，至今已拖延两个月了。
English: According to Yi Chen, Li Deyu said to Tang Wuzong: Wang Zai should have captured Zhezhou of Zhao Yi a long time ago, but it has been delayed for two months.

古文：盖宰与石雄素不叶，今得泽州，距上党犹二百里；而石雄所屯距上党才百五十里。
现代文：原因是他和石雄向来不和，如果他攻取了泽州，距离昭义的治所上党还有二百里，而石雄现在屯驻的地方距离上党只有一百五十里。
English: The reason is that he and Ishio have always been at odds. If he captures Zezhou, he will still be two hundred miles away from Shōyō's headquarters, while the place where Ishio is currently stationed is only one hundred and fifty miles away from the headquarters.

古文：宰恐攻泽州缀昭义大军，而雄得乘虚入上党独有其功耳。
现代文：王宰恐怕攻取泽州后牵制昭义的大军，石雄得以乘虚攻入上党独有战功。
English: Wang Zai probably captured Zeshu and held back the large army of Shao Yi, and Shi Xiong was able to take advantage of the bluff to enter the unique war achievement of the upper party.

古文：又宰生子晏实，其父智兴爱而子之，晏实今为磁州刺史，为刘稹所质。
现代文：另外，王宰有一个儿子名叫王晏实，王宰的父亲王智兴喜爱晏实，把他作为自己的儿子对待。晏实现在担任昭义磁州刺史，被刘稹扣押作为人质。
English: In addition, Wang Zai had a son named Wang Jinshi. Wang Zai's father, Wang Zhixing, loved Jinshi and treated him as his own son. Jinshi is now working as a historian of Zhao Yi Magnetic Prefecture and is being held hostage by Liu Bei.

古文：宰之顾望不敢进，或为此也。 
现代文：王宰观望迟迟不敢进兵，可能是由于这个缘故。 
English: This may have been the reason why the king hesitated to enter the army.

古文：上命德裕草诏赐宰，督其进兵。
现代文：武宗命李德裕起草给王宰的诏令，督促他进兵。
English: Wu Zong ordered Li Deyu to draft a decree to Wang Zai, urging him to join the army.

古文：且曰： 朕顾兹小寇，终不贷刑。
现代文：诏令说： 朕对于刘稹这个小贼，决不宽恕。
English: The edict said: "I will never forgive Liu Ye, the petty thief.

古文：亦知晏实是卿爱弟，将申大义，在抑私怀。 
现代文：但也知道晏实是你的爱子，希望你从大义出发，暂且抑制自己的私情。 
English: But I also know that Hao is really your beloved son, and I hope that you will proceed from the greater good and temporarily restrain your personal feelings.

古文：丁巳，以李石为太子少傅、分司，以河中节度使崔元式为河东节度使，石雄为河中节度使。
现代文：丁巳，唐武宗任命李石为太子少傅、分司东都；任命河中节度使崔元式为河东节度使，石雄为河中节度使。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu of Tang appointed Li Shih as the young prince and the deputy governor of Dongdu; appointed He Zhong Jie as the deputy governor of Dongdu; appointed Cui Yuan Shi as the deputy governor of He Dong; and appointed Shi Xiong as the deputy governor of He Zhong Jie.

古文：元式，元略之弟也。
现代文：崔元式是崔元略的弟弟。
English: Cui Yuanxie is the younger brother of Cui Yuanliu.

古文：乙未，石雄拔良马等三寨一堡。
现代文：己未，石雄攻拔昭义的良马等三个营寨，一个城堡。
English: Before he knew it, Shixiong had captured three camps and a castle, including the good horse of Zhao Yi.

古文：辛酉，太原献杨弁及其党五十四人，皆斩于狗脊岭。
现代文：辛酉，太原把杨弁和他的党羽五十四人押送到京城，奉献朝廷，全部被斩首于京城东市的狗脊岭。
English: Sincerely, Taiyuan sent Yang Ben and fifty-four of his followers to the capital to be dedicated to the imperial court, and they were all beheaded in Gongji Ridge in the east of the capital.

古文：壬申，李德裕言于上曰： 事固有激发而成功者：陛下命王宰趣磁州，而何弘敬出师；遣客军讨太原，而戍兵先取杨弁。
现代文：壬申，李德裕对唐武宗说： 有些事只有给予必要的刺激才能成功，例如：陛下命王宰取道魏博攻打昭义的磁州，魏博节度使何弘敬担忧内部发生变故，慌忙出兵讨伐昭义；陛下命讨伐昭义的各个藩镇出兵诛讨河东杨弁的乱兵，结果河东驻屯榆社的戍兵恐怕妻子儿女遭受蹂躏，自动出兵平定了杨弁的叛乱。
English: Jinshin, Li Deyu said to Tang Wuzong: Some things can only be successful if they are given the necessary stimulus. For example: His Majesty ordered the king to seize the magnetic state of Wei Bo to attack Zhao Yi; the Wei Bo festival made He Hongjing worry about internal changes and hurriedly sent troops to fight Zhao Yi; His Majesty ordered the towns to fight Zhao Yi to send troops to fight the chaotic soldiers of Yang Ben in Hedong. As a result, the soldiers stationed in Tuen Mun Society in Hedong were afraid that their wives and children would be ravaged, and they automatically sent troops to quell Yang Ben's rebellion.

古文：今王宰久不进军，请徙刘沔镇河阳，仍令以义成精兵二千直抵万善，处宰肘腋之下。
现代文：现在，王宰拖延很久而不进兵，请调义成节度使刘沔为河阳节度使，令他率义成精兵二千人直达万善，和王宰邻近相处。
English: Now, since Wang Zai has delayed joining the army for a long time, please change the meaning of the festival to make Liu Xuan the festival of the River Yang, and let him lead the two thousand soldiers to be good and good, and get along with Wang Zai.

古文：若宰识朝廷此意，必不敢淹留。若宰进军，沔以重兵在南，声势亦壮。 
现代文：如果王宰理解朝廷的意图，必定不敢再观望不前；如果他随即出兵，刘沔率精兵在南面，也可为他声援。 武宗说： 好！ 
English: If Wang Zai understood the intention of the imperial court, he would not dare to wait any longer to move forward; if he then sent troops, Liu Ye, leading elite soldiers in the south, could also support him.

古文：上曰： 善！ 戊寅，以义成节度使刘沔为河阳节度使。
现代文：戊寅，任命刘沔为河阳节度使。
English: Wu Yin, appointed Liu Wei as the chief envoy of the Heyang Festival.

古文：王逢击昭义将康良佺，败之。良佺弃石会关，退屯鼓腰岭。
现代文：王逢出兵打败昭义将康良。康良丢弃石会关，退兵屯守腰鼓岭。
English: Wang Feng dispatched troops to defeat Akiyoshi's general, Kangryo. Kangryo abandoned Shikai Pass and retreated to defend Koseguri Ridge.

古文：黠戛斯遣将军谛德伊斯难珠等入贡，言欲徙居回鹘牙帐，请发兵之期，集会之地。
现代文：黠戛斯可汗派遣将军谛德伊斯难珠等人来京城页献物产，说可汗打算迁居原回鹘国可汗居住的牙帐；同时请示出兵平定回鹘乌介可汗的日期，以及和唐兵会合的地点。
English: At the same time, he asked the Khan to send soldiers to determine the date of the Khan's return to Wu, as well as the location of the meeting with Tang soldiers.

古文：上赐诏，谕以 今秋可汗击回鹘、黑车子之时，当令幽州、太原、振武、天德四镇出兵要路，邀其亡逸，便申册命，并依回鹘故事。 
现代文：武宗下诏给黠戛斯可汗说： 今年秋季，可汗出兵攻击回鹘和黑车子族的时候，朕下令，让幽州、河东、振武、天德四个藩镇出兵屯守于交通要道，拦击回鹘和黑车子族的逃亡人员。
English: Wu Zong issued an edict to the Yunnan Kansu Khan, saying: "This autumn, when the Khan sent troops to attack the Uygur and Hezekiah clans, I ordered the four towns of Yuzhou, Hedong, Zhenwu, and Tiantai to send troops to guard the important transportation routes and intercept the fugitives of the Uygur and Hezekiah clans.

古文：朝廷以回鹘衰微，吐蕃内乱，议复河、湟四镇十八州。
现代文：然后，按照过去册封回鹘国可汗的惯例，册封您为可汗。 朝廷鉴于回鹘国已灭亡，部落逃散，吐蕃国也发生了内战，商议收复河、湟地区的四个藩镇，总共十八个州的失地。
English: Then, in accordance with the past practice of canonizing the khan of Urumqi, the imperial court canonized you as a khan.In view of the fact that Urumqi has perished, the tribes have fled, and a civil war has also occurred in Tubo, the imperial court is discussing the recovery of four townships in the Fuzhou and Handan regions, a total of eighteen states.

古文：乃以给事中刘氵蒙为巡边使，使之先备器械糗粮及诇吐蕃守兵众寡。
现代文：于是，任命给事中刘为巡边使，让他先准备兵器、干粮，并侦察吐蕃防守兵力的情况。
English: As a result, Liu was appointed as a patrol envoy in the matter, and he was first asked to prepare weapons and dry rations, and to reconnoitre the situation of the defense forces of Tubo.

古文：又令天德、振武、河东训卒砺兵，以俟今秋黠越斯击回鹘，邀其溃败之众南来者，皆委氵蒙与节度团练使详议以闻。
现代文：又命天德、振武、河东三个藩镇训练士卒，修造兵器，等待今年秋季黠戛斯攻击回鹘残余时，拦击回鹘向南逃亡的残兵败将。上述部署，都委托刘和各个藩镇的节度使、团练使详细商议安排，然后向朝廷报告。
English: He also ordered the training officers of Tiande, Zhenwu and the three towns of Hedong to build weapons and wait for this autumn's attack on the remnants of Huizhou to intercept the remnants of Huizhou fleeing south. The above-mentioned deployments were entrusted to Liu and the festival envoys and group training envoys of various towns to discuss the detailed arrangements, and then report to the imperial court.

古文：氵蒙，晏之孙也。
现代文：刘是刘晏的孙子。
English: Liu is the grandson of Liu Ye.

古文：以道士赵归真为右街道门教授先生。
现代文：唐武宗任命道士赵归真为右街道门教授先生。
English: Tang Wuzong appointed Taoist Zhao Guizhen as Right Street Gate Professor.

古文：吐蕃论恐热之将岌藏丰赞恶恐热残忍，降于尚婢婢。
现代文：吐蕃国论恐热的部将岌藏丰赞厌恶论恐热残忍无道，投降鄯州节度使尚婢婢。
English: The fear of heat in the province of Tubo will be stored, praised, and abhorred, the fear of heat will be cruel, and the surrender of the Bozhou Festival will be made.

古文：恐热发兵击婢婢于鄯州，婢婢分兵为五道拒之。
现代文：论恐热出兵前往鄯州攻击尚婢，尚婢婢将军队分成五支兵马，拒抗论恐热。
English: On the pretext of fear of heat, he sent troops to Bozhou to attack Shang Yi. Shang Yi divided the army into five troops and horses to resist on the pretext of fear of heat.

古文：恐热退保东谷，婢婢为木栅围之，绝其水原。
现代文：论恐热退兵屯守河州的东谷。尚婢婢命将士伐木修筑栅栏，围困论恐热；同时，切断论恐热的水源。
English: He ordered his soldiers to cut down trees, build a fence, and besiege Hefei; at the same time, cut off Hefei's water source.

古文：恐热将百馀骑突围走保薄寒山，馀众皆降于婢婢。
现代文：于是，论恐热率一百多名骑兵突围逃跑，屯守薄寒山，其余将士都投降了尚婢婢。
English: As a result, more than a hundred horsemen broke out of the encirclement and fled, keeping watch on Mount Sukand, while the rest of the soldiers surrendered.

古文：夏，四月，王宰进攻泽州。
现代文：夏季四月，王宰出兵进攻昭义的泽州。
English: In the summer of April, Wang Zai sent troops to attack Zhezhou in Shao Yi.

古文：上好神仙，道士赵归真得幸，谏官屡以为言。
现代文：唐武宗喜好道教的神仙，于是，道士赵归真等人得到宠爱。谏官多次上言劝阻武宗。
English: Emperor Wuzong of Tang favored Taoist immortals, and as a result, Taoist Zhao Guizhen and others were favored. Eunuchs repeatedly petitioned Emperor Wuzong to dissuade him.

古文：丙子，李德裕亦谏曰： 归真，敬宗朝罪人，不宜亲近！ 
现代文：丙子，李德裕劝阻武宗说： 赵归真是敬宗朝的罪人，这种人不应当亲近！ 
English: Son of a bitch, Li Deyu dissuaded Wu Zong, saying: Zhao Guizhen is a sinner who respects the Zong Dynasty, such a person should not be close to Wu Zong!

古文：上曰： 朕宫中无事时与之谈道涤烦耳。
现代文：武宗说： 朕只不过是在宫中没事的时候和他谈论道教，以便解除烦闷罢了。
English: Wuzong said, "I just talk to him about Taoism when there is nothing going on in the palace to relieve my boredom.

古文：至于政事，朕必问卿等与次对官，虽百归真不能惑也。 
现代文：至于朝政大事，朕肯定要和你以及其他宰相、次对官商议，即使有一百个赵归真，也不可能迷惑我。 
English: As for the major events of the imperial government, I will certainly have to discuss with you and other prime ministers and vice-premiers. Even if there are a hundred Zhao Guzheng, it will not be possible to confuse me.

古文：德裕曰： 小人见势利所在，则奔趣之，如夜蛾之投烛。
现代文：李德裕说： 小人唯利是图，看到有利的地方，就拼命钻营，就象黑夜中的飞蛾扑向烛火一样。
English: Li Deyu said: The villain is a mercenary, and when he sees a favorable place, he desperately drills the camp, just like a moth in the dark pouncing on a candle.

古文：闻旬日以来，归真之门，车马辐凑，愿陛下深戒之！ 
现代文：听说近十多天以来，赵归真的门口，车马拥挤，不少人看他得陛下的宠爱，争相去和他交结。希望陛下深加戒备。 
English: It is said that for more than ten days, the gates of Zhao Guizhong have been crowded with carriages and horses. Many people see that he is favored by His Majesty and are rushing to meet him. I hope that His Majesty is on high alert.

古文：戊寅，以左仆射王起同平章事，充山南西道节度使。
现代文：戊寅，唐武宗任命左仆射王起以同平章事的头衔，充任山南西道节度使。
English: Wu Yin, Tang Wuzong appointed his left-hand man Sha Wangqi with the title of Tongping, to serve as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road.

古文：起以文臣未尝执政，直除使相，前无此比，固辞。
现代文：王起鉴于自己是文官，并未曾担任宰相，现在，直接被任命为使相，以前还没有这种先例，因此，一再推辞。
English: Wang Qi, in view of the fact that he is a civil servant and has not served as a prime minister, has now been directly appointed as an envoy. There was no such precedent before, so he repeatedly declined.

古文：上曰： 宰相无内外之异，朕有阙失，卿飞表以闻！ 
现代文：武宗说： 作为宰相，无论是在朝廷执政，还是出任藩镇节度使，都没有什么不同。今后，如果朕有缺点失误，你就送紧急的奏表指出。 
English: Wu Zong said, "As the prime minister, there is no difference between ruling in the imperial court and serving as the festival envoy of a domain town. In the future, if I have any shortcomings or mistakes, you should send an urgent report form to point it out.

古文：李德裕以州县佐官太冗，奏令吏部郎中柳仲郢裁减。
现代文：宰相李德裕鉴于州县的僚佐官员太多，奏请命吏部郎中柳仲郢裁减。
English: In view of the fact that there are too many officials and assistant officials in the prefectures and counties, Prime Minister Li Deyu requested that the number of officials and assistant officials be reduced.

古文：六月，仲郢奏减一千二百一十四员。
现代文：六月，柳仲郢奏报减少州县僚佐官员一千二百一十四人。
English: In June, Liu Zhongxun reported that the number of state and county deputy officials was reduced by 1,214 people.

古文：仲郢，公绰之子也。
现代文：柳仲郢是柳公绰的儿子。
English: Liu Zhongyao is the son of Liu Gongchao.

古文：宦官有发仇士良宿恶，于其家得兵仗数千。
现代文：宦官中有人揭发仇士良过去的罪恶，朝廷派人在仇士良家中检查，发现几千件兵器。
English: Some of the eunuchs exposed Qiu Shiliang's past crimes, and the imperial court sent people to inspect Qiu Shiliang's home and found thousands of weapons.

古文：诏削其官爵，籍没家赀。
现代文：于是，武宗下诏，削除仇士良的官爵，没收所有家产。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu issued an edict to remove Qiu Shiliang's official title and confiscate all family property.

古文：秋，七月，辛卯，上与李德裕议以王逢将兵屯翼城，上曰： 闻逢用法太严，有诸？ 
现代文：秋季七月，辛卯，唐武宗和李德裕商议命王逢率兵屯守翼城县，武宗说： 听说王逢在军中用法太严，有没有这回事？ 
English: In the autumn of July, Xinwu, Tang Wuzong and Li Deyu discussed the appointment of Wang Feng to lead the troops to defend Yingcheng County. Wu Zong said: I heard that Wang Feng's usage in the army was too strict, is there such a thing?

古文：对曰： 臣亦尝以此诘之，逢言： 前有白刃，法不严，其谁肯进？  
现代文：李德裕回答说： 我曾经当面问过王逢，他说： 军队打仗前有刀枪，军法不严，士卒谁肯冒死前进！  
English: Li Deyu replied, "I once asked Wang Feng face-to-face. He said, "Before the army goes to war, there are swords and guns. The military law is not strict. Who is willing to risk his life to advance?"

古文：上曰： 言亦有理，卿更召而戒之！ 
现代文：武宗说： 这样说也有道理，不过，你要再召见他，告诫不要太严了。 
English: Wuzong said, "It's reasonable to say that, but you should summon him again and warn him not to be too strict."

古文：德裕因言刘稹不可赦。
现代文：李德裕借机说，对刘稹千万不可赦免。
English: Li Deyu took the opportunity to say that Liu Xuan must not be pardoned.

古文：上曰： 固然。 
现代文：武宗说： 当然。 
English: Takemune said, "Of course."

古文：德裕曰： 昔李怀光未平，京师蝗旱，米斗千钱，太仓米供天子及六宫无数旬之储。
现代文：李德裕说： 过去，李怀光叛乱尚未平定的时候，京城一带发生蝗灾和旱灾，一斗米涨价到一千钱，国家太仓的米不够供给天子和六宫几十天。
English: Li Deyu said: In the past, when Li Huai Guang's rebellion had not yet been quelled, locust plagues and droughts occurred in the Beijing area, the price of a barrel of rice rose to one thousand yuan, and the rice in Taicang was not enough to supply Tianzi and Liugong for dozens of days.

古文：德宗集百官，遣中使马钦绪询之。
现代文：德宗召集百官，让他们讨论讨伐李怀光还能不继续进行，随后，派宦官马钦绪去询问讨论的结果。
English: Dezong called together a hundred officials to discuss whether or not to continue the campaign against Li Huaiguang, and then sent eunuch Ma Qingsu to inquire about the outcome of the discussion.

古文：左散骑常侍李泌取桐叶抟破，以授钦绪献之。
现代文：左散骑常侍李拿一片桐树叶子，用手拍破，送给马钦绪，让他转献德宗。
English: Left straggler Li, a regular attendant, took a piece of paulownia leaf, tapped it with his hand, and gave it to Ma Qingsu, asking him to pass it on to Dezong.

古文：德宗召问其故，对曰： 陛下与怀光君臣之分，如此叶不可复合矣！ 
现代文：德宗召见李，问他这是什么意思。李回答说： 陛下和李怀光的君臣关系，就象这片树叶一样，不可能再重新复合了！ 
English: Dezong summoned Li and asked him what this meant. Li replied, "The relationship between Your Majesty and Li Huaiqing, as a prince and a vassal, is just like this leaf, it is impossible to recombine again!

古文：由是德宗意定。
现代文：于是，德宗平定李怀光的决心大大坚定。
English: As a result, Dezong's determination to subdue Li Huaiqing was greatly strengthened.

古文：既破怀光，遂用为相，独任数年。 
现代文：平定李怀光以后，就任命李为宰相，让他主持朝政好几年。 
English: After suppressing Li Huaguang, he appointed Li as prime minister and let him preside over the imperial government for several years.

古文：上曰： 亦大是奇士！ 
现代文：武宗说： 李也确实是一个奇才！ 
English: Wu Zong said: Li is indeed a prodigy!

古文：上闻扬州倡女善为酒令，敕淮南监军选十七人献之。
现代文：唐武宗听说扬州的歌女擅长酒令，命淮南监军挑选十七人奉献宫中。
English: Tang Wuzong heard that Yangzhou's female singers were good at making wine, and ordered the Huainan overseers to select seventeen people to dedicate to the palace.

古文：监军请节度使杜悰同选，且欲更择良家美女，教而献之。
现代文：监军请求节度使杜一同挑选，同时打算再挑几个良家美女，教会酒令后一并奉献给武宗。
English: The overseer of the troops requested the festival to let Du choose together. At the same time, he planned to choose a few more beautiful women from good families, and the church would then dedicate the wine to Wu Zong.

古文：悰曰： 监军自受敕，悰不敢预闻！ 
现代文：杜说： 你个人接受皇上敕令，我不敢参预这件事！ 
English: Du said: You personally accept the Emperor's edict, I dare not take part in this matter!

古文：监军再三请之，不从。
现代文：监军再三请求，杜仍然不同意。
English: Du still did not agree to the supervisor's repeated requests.

古文：监军怒，具表其状，上览表默然。
现代文：监军大怒，把杜的情况上奏武宗，武宗看后沉默不语。
English: The superintendent was furious and called Wuzong on the situation of Du. Wuzong was silent after seeing this.

古文：左右请并敕节度使同选，上曰： 敕籓方选倡女入宫，岂圣天子所为！
现代文：左右侍从请求武宗下敕，命杜和监军一起挑选，武宗说： 敕令藩镇挑选歌女入宫，难道是圣明的天子应该做的事吗！
English: The attendants on his right and left asked Emperor Wuzong to issue an edict, ordering the duke and the overseer to choose together. Emperor Wuzong said, "Is it something that the Son of Heaven should do to order the town to choose a songstress to enter the palace?

古文：杜悰不徇监军意，得大臣体，真宰相才也。
现代文：杜不曲从监军的意见，很符合大臣的身份，真正具有宰相才能。
English: Du Wuzhong's opinion from supervising the army is very consistent with the identity of the minister, and truly has the ability of the prime minister.

古文：朕甚愧之！ 
现代文：朕感到非常惭愧！ 
English: I feel very ashamed!

古文：遽敕监军勿复选。
现代文：随即敕令监军停止挑选歌女。
English: He then ordered the supervisors to stop selecting singers.

古文：甲辰，以悰同平章事，兼度支、盐铁转过使。
现代文：甲辰，任命杜为同平章事，兼度支、盐铁转运使。
English: Jia Chen, appointed Du as Tongping Zhengji, and concurrently as Du Du Shi, Salt and Iron Transportation Envoy.

古文：及悰中谢，上劳之曰： 卿不从监军之言，朕知卿有致君之心，今相卿，如得一魏征矣！ 
现代文：杜向武宗感谢任命时，武宗安慰他说： 你不曲从监军的请求，朕知道你有爱护朕的心意。现在，任命你为宰相，朕如同得到一个魏徵！ 
English: When Du thanked Wu Zong for the appointment, Wu Zong consoled him saying, "You did not bend to the request from the supervisor of the army. I know that you have the heart to care for me. Now, appointing you as prime minister, I feel like I have received a Wei Zheng!"

