古文：皇甫规张奂段颎皇甫规字威明，安定朝那人也。
现代文：皇甫规传，皇甫规字威明，安定郡朝那县人。
English: According to the legend of Emperor Fu Jie, Emperor Fu Jie's family name was Weiming, and he was from Chaona County, Anhui Province.

古文：祖父棱，度辽将军。
现代文：祖父皇甫棱，度辽将军。
English: His grandfather, Emperor Furen, was General Du Liao.

古文：父旗，扶风都尉。
现代文：父亲皇甫旗，扶风都尉。
English: His father, Emperor Fuqi, was the captain of Fufeng.

古文：永和六年，西羌大寇三辅，围安定，征西将军马贤将诸郡兵击之，不能克。
现代文：永和六年，西羌大举侵犯长安及其附近的关中之地，包围了安定，征西将军马贤统率各郡兵力攻打羌人，但是没有取胜。
English: In the sixth year of the Yonghe era, Xishu invaded Chang'an and nearby Guanzhong in a big way, encircled the stable, and the general Ma Xian led the troops from all counties to attack and defeat the Xiongnu, but did not win.

古文：规虽在布衣，见贤不恤军事，审其必败，乃上书言状。寻而贤果为羌所没。
现代文：皇甫规这时虽然身为平民，但发现马贤对这次战争轻视不忧，判断他必然要失败，就给朝廷上书陈述了马贤的情况和自己的看法。
English: At this time, although he was a commoner, the Emperor Fuhe found that Ma Xian was not worried about this war, and judged that he would inevitably fail. He wrote a letter to the court stating Ma Xian's situation and his own views.

古文：郡将知规有兵略，乃命为功曹，使率甲士八百，与羌交战，斩首数级，贼遂退却。
现代文：不久马贤果然被西羌打得大败。郡守知道皇甫规有用兵的谋略，就任命他担任功曹，派他率领八百武装的兵士，同羌人交战，杀死几个敌人，贼寇于是退却了。
English: Soon after, Ma Xian was soundly defeated by Xidi. The county governor knew that the emperor had a plan to use soldiers, so he appointed him as a meritorious officer and sent him to lead eight hundred armed soldiers to fight with the Xidi people and kill several enemies. The bandits then retreated.

古文：举规上计掾。
现代文：接着举荐皇甫规担任计掾的职务。
English: Next, he recommended that Emperor Fu Jie be appointed to the post of strategist.

古文：其后羌众大合，攻烧陇西，朝廷患之。
现代文：后来羌兵大集合，攻击烧掠陇西，朝廷以为祸患。
English: Later, the Xiongnu gathered a large number of soldiers and attacked and plundered the west of Xiongnu, which was considered a disaster by the imperial court.

古文：规乃上疏求乞自效，曰：臣比年以来，数陈便宜。
现代文：皇甫规上疏朝廷，自己请求报效国家，说： 我近年以来，多次陈述关于对付西羌的措施。
English: The emperor ordered the imperial court to be evacuated, and himself asked to serve the country, saying: In recent years, I have repeatedly stated the measures to deal with Xidi.

古文：羌戎未动，策其将反，马贤始出，颇知必败。
现代文：羌戎还没有动静，我就料他会反叛，马贤刚刚出兵我就知道他一定要吃败仗。
English: When there was still no movement in Qian Rong, I expected him to rebel. As soon as Ma Xian sent troops, I knew he would be defeated.

古文：误中之言，在可考校。
现代文：偶然说中的这些话，倒处处有事实可作证。
English: These words, spoken by chance, are everywhere supported by facts.

古文：臣每惟贤等拥众四年，未有成功，悬师之费且百亿计，出于平人，回入奸吏。
现代文：我常想马贤等人拥兵四年没有获得成功，停师的用费要以百亿来计算，这些钱出于老百姓，落入了奸吏的荷包。
English: I often think that Ma Xian and others have not been successful in supporting the troops for four years. The cost of suspending the division should be calculated in tens of billions. This money came from the people and fell into the pockets of the traitors.

古文：故江湖之人，群为盗贼，青、徐荒饥，襁负流散。
现代文：所以江湖老百姓，群起为盗贼，青州、徐州闹饥荒，老弱流散。
English: As a result, the common people of the provinces and regions have banded together to become thieves, Qingzhou and Xuzhou are suffering from famine, and the old and weak are scattered.

古文：夫羌戎溃叛，不由承平，皆由边将失于绥御。
现代文：原来，羌戎反叛，不在天下太平之时，都是因为边将没有抚慰治理好。
English: It turns out that when the world was not at peace, it was because the generals did not have the comfort of good governance.

古文：乘常守安，则加侵暴，苟竞小利，则致大害，微胜则虚张首级，军败则隐匿不言。
现代文：应该平安无事的，却去侵暴他们，为了求得小小的好处，终于引来大害。为了证明打了胜仗，往往虚报斩首多少多少，打了败仗就瞒了不说。
English: They should have been safe and sound, but they violated them, and in order to obtain a small benefit, they finally caused great harm. In order to prove that they had won the war, they often falsely reported the number of beheadings, and hid the fact that they had lost the war.

古文：军士劳怨，困于猾吏，进不得快战以徼功，退不得温饱以全命，饿死沟渠，暴骨中原。徒见王师之出，不闻振旅之声。
现代文：士兵劳苦，一肚子怨气，被奸诈的官长困逼，进不得快战以取功名，退不得温饱以活命，饿死沟渠，暴尸四野，白白地看到王师出兵，不看见王师回来。
English: The soldiers were hard-working, full of resentment, trapped by treacherous officials, unable to fight a quick war to win glory, unable to retreat with food and clothing to survive, starving to death in the ditches, dead bodies everywhere, seeing Wang Shi send out troops in vain, and not seeing Wang Shi return.

古文：酋豪泣血，惊惧生变。
现代文：为上的悲哭泣血，害怕发生变故。
English: Weeping blood for the sorrow above, fearing that something will go wrong.

古文：是以安不能久，败则经年。
现代文：所以平安时期是很少的，一败乱下来，就是多少年。
English: Therefore, the Heian period is rare, and once the country falls into chaos, how many years will it be?

古文：臣所以搏手叩心而增叹者也。
现代文：这是我拍掌叩心所叹息的啊。
English: That's what I'm patting myself on the back for.

古文：愿假臣两营二郡，屯列坐食之兵五千，出其不意，与护羌校尉赵冲共相首尾。
现代文：希望给我以马贤、赵冲两营的兵力和安定、陇西两郡之地，率领坐食的兵士五千，出羌戎意外，与护羌校尉赵冲首尾相应。
English: I hope to be given the strength and stability of the two battalions of Ma Xian and Zhao Chong, the land of the two counties in Shaanxi Province, and lead five thousand soldiers who are sitting down to eat. If there is an accident, it will be the same as that of Colonel Zhao Chong.

古文：土地山谷，臣所晓习；兵势巧便，臣已更之。
现代文：土地山谷的形势，是我所熟悉的；兵势巧便，我已加以整顿。
English: The situation of the land and valley is familiar to me; the troops are handy and I have put them in order.

古文：可不烦方寸之印，尺帛之赐，高可以涤患，下可以纳降。
现代文：可以不烦用一颗方寸之印，发布文书，一尺之帛作为赏赐，高可以涤除忧患，下可以纳降。
English: You can use a one-square-inch seal to issue documents, and a one-foot shovel as a reward. The high can be used to remove worries, and the lower can be reduced.

古文：若谓臣年少官轻，不足用者，凡诸败将，非官爵之不高，年齿之不迈。
现代文：如果说我年少官轻，不可以用，那些败兵之将，不是官爵不高，年龄不大。
English: If I say that I am too young to be an officer, I can't use it. Those defeated generals are not noblemen, they are not tall, and they are not old.

古文：臣不胜至诚，没死自陈。
现代文：这就怎么说呢？我不胜至诚，冒死自陈。 
English: What does that mean? I'm very sincere, and I'll risk my life.

古文：时帝不能用。
现代文：当时皇上没有用他。
English: At that time, the emperor did not use him.

古文：冲、质之间，梁太后临朝，规举贤良方正。
现代文：冲帝、质帝时，梁太后执政，皇甫规被举贤良方正。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Chong and Emperor Quan, Empress Dowager Liang was in power, and Empress Dowager Gui was promoted to the position of Xianliang Fangzheng.

古文：对策曰：伏惟孝顺皇帝，初勤王政，纪纲四方，几以获安。
现代文：皇甫规对策问说： 想孝顺皇帝，执政时期，树立朝廷纲纪，国家快获安宁。
English: In response to the question, Emperor Fu Zheng said: If you want to be filial to the emperor, during the reign, establish the imperial discipline, and the country will soon be at peace.

古文：后遭奸伪，威分近习，畜货聚马，戏谑是闻。又因缘嬖幸，受赂卖爵，轻使宾客，交错其间，天下扰扰，从乱如归。
现代文：后来遭到奸伪弄权，权威被亲近小人所掌握，蓄积财货，戏谑是闻；又假手嬖亻幸小人，接受贿赂，卖官卖爵，随便使用宾客，交相错乱，天下扰扰，从乱如归。
English: Later, the power was manipulated by trickery, the authority was controlled by close villains, the wealth was accumulated, the jokes were heard; and the lucky villains were deceived, the bribes were accepted, the officials were sold, the guests were used at will, the intermingling was disorderly, the world was disturbed, and the chaos returned.

古文：故每有征战，鲜不挫伤，官民并竭，上下穷虚。
现代文：每有征伐，没有不失败挫伤，官与老百姓都乏竭，上下空虚。
English: Every time there is a conquest, there is no failure, frustration, officials and ordinary people are exhausted, and the top and bottom are empty.

古文：臣在关西，窃听风声，未闻国家有所先后，而威福之来，咸归权幸。
现代文：我在关西，听到消息，国家对此没有采取办法，权势佞亻幸之徒，作威作福，为所欲为。
English: When I was in Kansai, I heard the news that the state had not taken any measures to deal with this, and that those in power would do whatever they wanted.

古文：陛下体兼乾坤，聪哲纯茂。
现代文：皇上伟大，聪明纯茂。
English: The emperor is great, clever and pure.

古文：摄政之初，拔用忠贞，其余维纲，多所改正。远近翕然，望见太平。
现代文：摄政初期，选拔任用忠良，各种政治措施，也作了不少改正，不管远近，都很快地听从号令，太平治世，可拭目以待。
English: At the beginning of the regency, various political measures, including the selection and appointment of Tadayoshi, were also made a lot of corrections. No matter how far or near, they quickly obeyed the order, and the world was peaceful. We can only wait and see.

古文：而地震之后，雾气白浊，日月不光，旱魃为虐，大贼从横，流血丹野，庶品不安，谴诫累至，殆以奸臣权重之所致也。
现代文：但是地震之后，雾气白浊，日月无光，旱魃为灾，大贼到处横行，流血丹野，百姓物类都为之不安，老天爷谴责警戒相继而来，大概是奸臣权势太重所致的啊。
English: But after the earthquake, the fog was white, the sun and moon were dark, droughts and floods were disasters, thieves were rampant everywhere, bloodshed was rampant, and the people and animals were uneasy. God condemned the warning to come one after another, probably caused by the power of the traitor.

古文：其常侍尤无状者，亟便黜遣，披埽凶党，收入财贿，以塞痛怨，以答天诫。
现代文：那些特别坏的常侍，应该赶快斥退遣送，扫除凶党，没收他们的财产，以堵塞痛恨怨愤之源，以报答老天爷的警戒。
English: Those regular attendants who are particularly bad should quickly expel and deport, sweep away the thugs, confiscate their property, to block the source of hatred and resentment, and to repay God's vigilance.

古文：今大将军梁冀、河南尹不疑，处周、邵之任，为社稷之镇，加与王室世为姻族，今日立号虽尊可也，实宜增修谦节，辅以儒术，省去游娱不急之务，割减庐第无益之饰。
现代文：现在大将军梁冀、河南尹不疑，担任着周公、邵公重任，为国家的重镇，加之与王室世世代代为婚姻，现在立号虽然尊贵一些可以，但真正应当谦虚节俭，讲求儒家的治术，除去游乐不急的事务，砍掉房屋无益的修饰。
English: Now, the great generals Liang Jie and Henan Yin undoubtedly hold the important positions of Zhou Gong and Shao Gong, and are the important towns of the country. In addition, they have been married to the royal family for generations. Now, although it is possible to be more distinguished, it is really necessary to be modest and frugal, to teach Confucian management skills, to remove matters that are not urgent, and to cut off useless decoration of houses.

古文：夫君者舟也，人者水也。群臣乖舟者也，将军兄弟操楫者也。
现代文：打个比方来说，君主是船，老百姓是水，百官群臣是乘船的人，将军兄弟是操桨驾船的人。
English: To use an analogy, the monarch is the boat, the common people are the water, the officials and ministers are the people on the boat, and the general's brothers are the people who steer the boat.

古文：若能平志毕力，以度元元，所谓福也。如其怠，将沦波涛。可不慎乎！
现代文：如果能够平心合力，以渡元元百姓，这是福；如果怠惰松劲，就会沦没于波涛之中，难道不值得谨慎吗？
English: If we can work together in a fair-minded manner to lead the Chinese people, this is a blessing; if we are lazy and slack, we will sink into the waves. Isn't it worth being cautious?

古文：夫德不称禄，犹凿墉之趾，以益其高。
现代文：一个人的品德与他的禄位不相称，这好比凿墙脚以增其高。
English: If a man's character is not commensurate with his station, it is like chiseling the foot of a wall to make it higher.

古文：岂量力审功安固之道哉？
现代文：难道是量力、审功、安固的办法吗？
English: Is it a measure of strength, merit, and security?

古文：凡诸宿猾、酒徒、戏客，皆耳纳邪声，口出谄言，甘心逸游，唱造不义。
现代文：凡是那些老奸巨猾、酒徒、戏客，都是耳纳邪声，口出谄媚之言，称心游乐，倡导不义。
English: All those old traitors, drunkards, and playboys, are listening to evil voices, uttering flattering words, praising pleasure, and advocating injustice.

古文：亦宜贬斥，以惩不轨。
现代文：应该贬谪的贬谪，应该斥退的斥退，以惩处不法分子。
English: It is necessary to punish the lawbreakers with the punishment of the lawbreaker and the punishment of the lawbreaker.

古文：令冀等深思得贤之福，失人之累。
现代文：令梁冀等人深切考虑得贤人的好处，失去人才的不幸。
English: Let Liang Jie and others deeply consider the benefits of gaining sages and the misfortune of losing talents.

古文：又在位素餐，尚书怠职，有司依违，莫肯纠察，故使陛下专受谄谀之言，不闻户牖之外。
现代文：又尸位素餐，不干事，尚书怠职，官吏依违两可，唯唯否否，也不纠察，因此使皇上专门听了一些谄谀的话，连窗户以外的事情，也听不到。
English: In addition, there were no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials, no officials

古文：臣诚知阿谀有福，深言近祸，岂敢隐心以避诛责乎！
现代文：我真的知道阿谀谄媚会得到好处，讲老实话会惹祸，但是，我难道敢于昧着良心以逃避诛责吗？
English: I really know that flattery can bring benefits, and telling the truth can cause trouble, but do I dare to hide my conscience to avoid blame?

古文：臣生长边远，希涉紫庭，恢慑失守，言不尽心。
现代文：我生长边远地方，很少到京师来，诚惶诚恐，没有把我的心里的话都说出来。 
English: I grew up in a remote area and rarely came to Beijing to study. I was so scared that I didn't say everything that was in my heart.

古文：梁冀忿其刺己，以规为下第，拜郎中。
现代文：梁冀恨皇甫规讽刺了他，以皇甫规为下第，命他为郎中。
English: Liang Ji hated Emperor Fuxi and made fun of him. He put Emperor Fuxi at the bottom and appointed him as his assistant.

古文：托疾免归，州郡承冀旨，几陷死者再三。
现代文：皇甫规托疾免官回家。州郡秉承梁冀的旨意，好几次几乎把他陷害致死。
English: Emperor Fu Jie sent him home on medical parole. Zhu County, adhering to the will of Liang Jie, almost framed him to death several times.

古文：遂以《诗》、《易》教授，门徒三百余人，积十四年。
现代文：皇甫规用《诗》、《易》教授学生三百多人，共十四年。
English: Emperor Fu Zheng used "Poetry" and "Easy" to teach more than three hundred students for a total of fourteen years.

古文：后梁冀被诛，旬月之间，礼命五至，皆不就。
现代文：后来梁冀被杀，一月之内，朝廷五次以礼征召他，都不应。
English: Later, Liang Jie was killed, and within a month, the imperial court summoned him five times as a courtesy, but he did not respond.

古文：时，太山贼叔孙无忌侵乱郡县，中郎将宗资讨之未服。
现代文：这时，太山贼叔孙无忌侵扰郡县，中郎将宗资征讨，没有成功。
English: At this time, the great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great

古文：公车特征规，拜太山太守。
现代文：公车特征召皇甫规，任为太山太守。
English: He was summoned by Emperor Fu Zi and appointed as the governor of Taishan.

古文：规到官，广设方略，寇贼悉平。
现代文：皇甫规到任，开展了各种征讨方略，寇贼全部平定。
English: When Emperor Fu Zi came to office, he carried out various strategies of conquest, and the bandits were all subdued.

古文：延熹四年秋，叛羌零吾等与先零别种寇抄关中，护羌校尉段颎坐征。
现代文：延熹四年秋，叛羌零吾等与先零羌别种侵扰掳掠关中，护羌校尉段赹获罪被召。
English: In the autumn of the 4th year of Yancheng's reign, in the middle of the invasion and plunder of other kinds by the traitorous "we" and the previous "we," the guard lieutenant Duan Yu was convicted and summoned.

古文：后先零诸种陆梁，覆没营坞。
现代文：后先零诸种猖獗，覆没营坞。
English: After the first zero, all kinds of rampant, covering the camp dock.

古文：规素悉羌事，志自奋效，乃上疏曰：自臣受任，志竭愚钝，实赖兗州刺史牵颢之清猛，中郎将宗资之信义，得承节度，幸无咎誉。
现代文：皇甫规平常熟悉羌事，有志奋发效力，于是上疏说 ：我自从委任以来，志虑愚钝，实赖兖州刺史牵颢清廉勇猛，中郎将宗资的信义，得以秉承节度，幸亏没有什么不好的名声。
English: Emperor Fuxi is usually familiar with anecdotes and has the will to work hard, so Shang Zuo said: Since I was appointed, I have been dull-witted, relying on the history of Zhangzhou to lead me to be clean and brave, and the middle brother has been able to uphold the integrity of the dowry. Fortunately, there is no bad reputation.

古文：今猾贼就灭，太山略平，复闻群羌并皆反逆。
现代文：现在狡猾的羌贼已经扑灭，太山贼也大都平定了，又听说诸羌群起反叛。
English: Now the cunning bandits have been extinguished, and most of the mountain bandits have been subdued, and it is also said that groups of bandits have rebelled.

古文：臣生长邠岐，年五十有九，昔为郡吏，再更叛羌，豫筹其事，有误中之言。
现代文：我生长岐，现年五十九岁，从前作郡吏，经过诸羌几次叛乱，事先筹划，常有说对了的话。
English: I am 59 years old. I used to be a county magistrate. After several rebellions, I often said the right thing.

古文：臣素有固疾，恐犬马齿穷，不报大恩，愿乞冗官，备单车一介之使，劳来三辅，宣国威泽，以所习地形兵势，佐助诸军。
现代文：我有顽固的病症，害怕犬马之身，一旦死去，无报效皇上的大恩，请任我以散官，备单车一介之使，抚慰三辅，宣传国家的威信与恩泽，用所熟习的地形兵势，帮助诸军。
English: I have a stubborn disease, I am afraid of dogs and horses, once I die, I will not repay the emperor's great favor, please allow me to be a messenger, prepare a bicycle, soothe the three auxiliaries, promote the country's prestige and grace, and use the familiar terrain and troop strength to help the army.

古文：臣穷居孤危之中，坐观郡将，已数十年矣。
现代文：我穷居孤立危困之中，静观郡将，几十年了。
English: I've been living in poverty, isolation, and danger for decades.

古文：自鸟鼠至于东岱，其病一也。力求猛敌，不如清平；勤明吴、孙，未若奉法。
现代文：自鸟鼠至于东岱都是因为郡守对诸羌不加绥靖抚慰，致使反叛，祸害的原因是相同的。若求勇猛之将，不如清明治平的政治，明习吴起、孙武兵法，不如郡守奉法，使他们不反。
English: From the birds and mice to the Dongluo, the reasons for the disaster are the same. The reason for the disaster is that the county governors did not pacify and appease the county magistrates, causing them to rebel. If you want a brave general, it is not as good as the politics of the Qing and Meiji dynasties. If you want to learn the Wuqi and Sunwu methods of warfare, it is not as good as the county governors obeying the law, so that they do not rebel.

古文：前变未远，臣诚戚之。
现代文：以前诸羌反叛的事，记忆犹新，我真为此而忧戚。
English: I remember vividly the events of the previous rebellion, and I am truly saddened by this.

古文：是以越职，尽其区区。
现代文：所以越职上书，以尽我区区爱国之意。 
English: That's why I'm putting in my resignation, to fulfill my patriotic duty.

古文：至冬，羌遂大合，朝廷为忧。
现代文：到冬天，诸羌大合，蠢蠢欲动，朝廷以为忧患。
English: By the winter, Zhu Xi's forces were massed and ready to move, which the imperial court considered a great misfortune.

古文：三公举规为中郎将，持节监关西兵，讨零吾等，破之，斩首八百级。
现代文：三公举皇甫规为中郎将，持天子符节监关西兵，征讨零吾等，打败了他们，斩首八百级。
English: The three princes appointed the emperor as the middle-ranking general, supervised the western soldiers with the heavenly son's festival, and defeated them by beheading eight hundred soldiers.

古文：先零诸种羌慕规威信，相劝降者十余万。
现代文：先零诸种羌羡慕皇甫规的威信，互相劝降的十余万。
English: There are more than one hundred thousand people who admire the prestige of Emperor Fu Zi and encourage each other to abdicate.

古文：明年，规因发其骑共讨陇右，而道路隔绝，军中大疫，死者十三四。
现代文：第二年，皇甫规趁机发动骑兵，共同讨伐陇右，但道路阻隔，军中发生疾疫，十个人中病死的就有三四个。
English: In the second year, Emperor Fu Zheng took the opportunity to launch cavalry to jointly fight against the right, but the road was blocked, and a disease occurred in the army, and three or four of the ten people died of the disease.

古文：规亲入庵庐，巡视将士，三军感悦。
现代文：皇甫规亲身进入庵庐，慰问将士，三军感激喜悦。
English: The emperor personally entered the hermitage to offer condolences to the soldiers, and the three armies were grateful and happy.

古文：东羌遂遣使乞降，凉州复通。
现代文：东羌因派使者乞降，凉州又没有阻隔了。
English: Donglu sent an envoy to beg for surrender, but Liangzhou did not stop them.

古文：先是，安定太守孙受取狼籍，属国都尉李翕、督军御史张禀多杀降羌，凉州剌史郭闳、汉阳大守越熹并老弱不堪任职，而皆倚恃权贵，不遵法度。
现代文：先时，安定太守孙亻受贿贪污，十分严重，属国都尉李翕、督军御史张禀多杀降羌，凉州刺史郭闳、汉阳太守赵熹都是老弱，不堪任职，但是他们倚靠权势贵戚，还不遵守国家的法度。
English: In the past, Sun Yat-sen, the Prince of Stability, took bribes and engaged in corruption, which was very serious. Li Yan, the Captain of the State, Zhang Xuan, the Governor of the Army and the Historian, mostly killed and demoted; Guo Yan, the Governor of Liangzhou, and Zhao Jun, the Prince of Hanyang, were old and weak and unfit for office. However, they relied on powerful relatives and did not abide by the laws of the country.

古文：规到州界，悉条奏其罪，或免或诛。
现代文：皇甫规到达州界，统统一条一条上奏他们的罪行，有的免去官职，有的处以极刑。
English: When the imperial edict reached the state border, all of their crimes were reported one by one, some were removed from office, and some were sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：羌人闻之，翕然反善。沈氐大豪滇昌、饥恬等十余万口，复诣规降。
现代文：羌人听了，很快就归附，沈氏大豪滇昌、饥恬等十余万人，再向皇甫规投降。
English: After listening to this, they quickly agreed, and more than one hundred thousand people, including the great heroes of the Shen Dynasty, the Qichang and the Hungry, then surrendered to the emperor.

古文：规出身数年，持节为将，拥众立功，还督乡里，既无他私惠，而多所举奏，又恶绝宦官，不与交通，于是中外并怨，遂共诬规货赂群羌，令其文降。
现代文：皇甫规出身几年，持天子符节为将，率众立功，还督乡里，也没有私惠，相反，对于坏人坏事，还举报不少。又对于宦官深恶痛绝，不与他们来往。于是朝廷内外都怨了他，都诬陷皇甫规收买群羌，使他们假降。
English: Emperor Fuhe was born a few years ago. He held the "Son of Heaven" festival as his mission, led the people to perform meritorious deeds, and governed the countryside. He did not seek personal gain. On the contrary, he reported a lot of bad people and bad things. He also hated eunuchs and did not socialize with them. Therefore, both inside and outside the court resented him, and they all accused Emperor Fuhe of bribing the eunuchs to make them pretend to submit.

古文：天子玺书诮让相属。
现代文：天子的诏书责让一个接一个。
English: The Emperor's edicts were issued one after another.

古文：规惧不免，上疏自讼曰：四年之秋，戎丑蠢戾，爰自西州，侵及泾阳，旧都惧骇，朝廷西顾。
现代文：皇甫规害怕不免于被害，上疏申诉说 ：四年之秋，戎丑蠢动作乱，自西州到了泾阳，旧都恐惧惊骇，朝廷西顾。
English: Emperor Fuxi was afraid that he would not be spared from harm, and Shang Suo complained: In the autumn of the fourth year, Emperor Fuxi's ugly and stupid actions were chaotic. From Xizhou to Fenyang, the old people were afraid and shocked, and the imperial court looked westward.

古文：明诏不以臣愚驽，急使军就道。
现代文：明诏不以我愚驽，令我紧急带军上道。
English: The emperor did not think I was stupid and ordered me to lead the army to the road urgently.

古文：幸蒙威灵，遂振国命，羌戎诸种，大小稽首，辄移书营郡，以访诛纳，所省之费，一亿以上。
现代文：幸亏皇上威灵，得以大振国命，羌戎诸种大大小小，叩头归服，我当即移书军营及郡守，勘问他们杀了多少，受降多少，节省费用，一亿以上。
English: Fortunately, thanks to Emperor Wieling, I was able to greatly strengthen the country's reputation, win over all kinds of large and small troops, and win their obedience. I immediately wrote to the military camps and county governors, inquired how many they had killed, how many they had surrendered, and saved costs, more than 100 million.

古文：以为忠臣之义，不敢告劳，故耻以片言自及微效。
现代文：认为这是忠臣应尽的责任，不敢说有什么功劳。并且认为任何以片言只字自述微功都是可耻的。
English: He thought that this was the duty of a loyal subject, and he did not dare to say what merit he had. He also thought that it was shameful to describe one's own feeble achievements in a few words.

古文：然比方先事，庶免罪悔。
现代文：但是与前辈的损将折兵相比，庶几可以免于罪悔了。
English: However, compared to their predecessors who were conscripted into the military, the commoners can be free from remorse.

古文：前践州界，先奏郡守孙，次及属国都尉李翕、督军御史张禀；旋师南征，又上凉州刺史郭闳、汉阳太守赵熹，陈其过恶，执据大辟。
现代文：以前我到州界，先奏郡守孙亻，第二个就是属国都尉李翕以及督军御史张禀；我回师南征，又上奏凉州刺史郭闳、汉阳太守赵熹，揭发他们的罪恶，执据加以死刑。
English: In the past, when I went to the state border, I first played the county governor Sun Qian, and the second was the national captain Li Qian and the military governor Zhang Qian; I returned to the south, and also played the governor of Liangzhou, Guo Qian, and the governor of Hanyang, Zhao Qian, to expose their crimes, and to impose the death penalty.

古文：凡此五臣，支党半国，其余墨绶，下至小吏，所连及者，复有百余。
现代文：这五个臣子，他们的支党到处都有，其余县令，下至小吏，所连及的，又有百余。
English: These five courtiers have their branch parties everywhere, and the remaining county magistrates, down to minor officials, are connected to more than a hundred.

古文：吏托报将之怨，子思复父之耻，载贽驰车，怀粮步走，交构豪门，竞流谤讟，云臣私报诸羌，谢其钱货。
现代文：吏托报将的仇怨，儿子想复父亲的耻辱，车载礼物，怀粮步走，交结豪门，大肆毁谤，说我私自报答诸羌，送他们钱财货物。
English: The officials paid off the general's grudge, the son wanted to avenge his father's disgrace, the car-carrying gift, the food-bearing walk, the alliance with the wealthy, the wanton slander, saying that I had personally repaid the vultures and sent them money and goods.

古文：若臣以私财，则家无担石；如物出于官，则文簿易考。
现代文：如果我以私财相送，我家里担石的储蓄也没有，如果送的东西是公家的，那有文书簿籍可以查考。
English: If I send something with my own money, I don't have any savings for stone-laying at home. If I send something from the public sector, there is a register to check.

古文：就臣愚惑，信如言音，前世尚遗匈奴以官姬，镇乌孙以公主。今臣但费千万，以怀叛羌。
现代文：使我迷惑不解的，真正如诽谤我的人所说，前代还把王嫱送给匈奴把细君公主嫁给乌孙。现在我只费千万，怀柔叛羌。
English: What baffles me is that, as my detractors say, the previous generation gave the throne to the Xiongnu and the princess to the grandson. Now I only spend tens of thousands of dollars to betray the throne.

古文：则良臣之才略，兵家之所贵，将有何罪，负义违理乎？
现代文：这是良臣的才略，兵家所贵，这有何罪，负了什么义，违背了什么理呢？
English: This is the tactic of a good minister, and it is valued by soldiers. What is the sin, what is the righteousness, and what is the reason?

古文：自永初以来，将出不少，覆军有五，动资巨亿。
现代文：自永初以来，将出不少，复军五次，动用资财巨亿。
English: Since the beginning of forever, it has made a lot of money, reinstated the army five times, and spent huge amounts of money.

古文：有旋车完封，写之权门，而名成功立，厚加爵封。
现代文：而师还的日子，车载珍宝，封印完全，送入权门。于是名成功立，大加爵封。
English: However, in the days of the division, the vehicle-mounted treasures, sealed completely, were sent to the right door. So the name was successfully established, and the royal seal was added.

古文：今臣还督本土，纠举诸郡，绝交离亲，戮辱旧故，众谤阴害，固其宜也。
现代文：现在我回督本土，检举劾察诸郡，与亲戚朋友断绝往来，杀辱故旧，大家诽谤我，暗害我，这是理所当然的。
English: Now that I have returned to the mainland, I have been sued, accused and investigated by various counties, cut off contacts with relatives and friends, killed and humiliated the old ways, and everyone has slandered me and plotted against me. This is natural.

古文：臣虽污秽，廉洁无闻，今见覆没，耻痛实深。
现代文：我虽然陷于有罪，廉洁的事没有人知道，马上就要死去，可耻可痛实在太深了。
English: Although I am guilty, no one knows about my integrity, and I am about to die, the shame and pain are too deep.

古文：传称 鹿死不择音 ，谨冒味略上。
现代文：《传》称 鹿死不择音 ，我也顾不上什么了，谨轻率地略上。 
English: "Biography" said that the deer does not choose the sound of death, and I did not pay attention to anything, but rashly skimmed over it.

古文：其年冬，征还拜议郎。论功当封。
现代文：这年冬天，征召还朝廷任议郎，按他的功劳，应当封爵。
English: In the winter of that year, he was also summoned to the Imperial Court to serve as a councillor. According to his merits, he should be knighted.

古文：而中常侍徐璜、左忄官欲从求货，数遣宾客就问功状，规终不答。
现代文：中常侍徐璜、左想向他索取钱财，多次打发宾客问他的立功情状，皇甫规始终没有作答。
English: The middle attendants, Xu Xi and Zuo, wanted to ask him for money, and repeatedly sent guests to ask him about his meritorious service. The emperor did not answer at all.

古文：璜乘忿怒，陷以前事，下之于吏。
现代文：徐璜等人忿怒，以前事诬陷他，交吏审讯。
English: Xu Yao and others were angry, framed him for the previous incident, and brought him to the officials for interrogation.

古文：官属欲赋敛请谢，规誓而不听，遂以余寇不绝，坐系廷尉，论输左校。
现代文：官属想为他收集一些钱财谢罪，皇甫规发誓不听，于是按余寇没有扫清，获罪系廷尉，判为输左校劳动改造。
English: The officials and retainers wanted to collect some money and property for him to atone for the crime, but the emperor swore not to listen, so he was punished as a courtier and sentenced to reeducation through labor.

古文：诸公及太学生张凤等三百余人诣阙讼之。
现代文：诸公及太学生张凤等三百多人到朝廷为他申诉。
English: More than three hundred people, including Zhu Gong and student Zhang Feng, went to the imperial court to appeal for him.

古文：会赦，归家。
现代文：遇上大赦，归家。
English: After the amnesty, he returned home.

古文：征拜度辽将军，至营数月，上书荐中郎将张奂以自代。
现代文：征召任度辽将军，到营几个月，上书荐中郎将张奂代替自己。
English: He was called up by General Du Liao and was in the camp for a few months. He was recommended by Zhong Lang, who sent a letter to Zhang Xuan to replace him.

古文：曰： 臣闻人无常俗，而政有治乱；兵无强弱，而将有能否。
现代文：说 ：我听说人无不变的风俗，政治有治有乱，兵没有所谓强兵弱兵，而将有能力强的，有能力差的。
English: He said, "I have heard that there are unchanging customs, that there is order and disorder in politics, and that there are no so-called strong soldiers or weak soldiers, but that there are strong and weak soldiers.

古文：伏见中郎将张奂，才略兼优，宜正元帅，以从众望。
现代文：中郎将张奂，才气与谋略都极好，应当正位元帅，以符合大家所希望的。
English: Zhong Lang will Zhang Ye, talent and strategy are excellent, should be the marshal, in line with everyone's wishes.

古文：若犹谓愚臣宜充军事者，愿乞冗官，以为奂副。 
现代文：如果说我还可以担任军事，愿给我一个散官，作为张奂的助手。 
English: If I can still serve in the military, I am willing to give me a non-commissioned officer as Zhang Ye's assistant.

古文：朝廷从之，以奂代为度辽将军，规为使匈奴中郎将。及奂迁大司农，规复代为度辽将军。
现代文：朝廷批准了他的请求，以张奂代为度辽将军，皇甫规为使匈奴中郎将，后来张奂升大司农，皇甫规再次代为度辽将军。
English: The imperial court approved his request, with Zhang Ye taking the place of General Du Liao, and Wang Fuhe taking the place of the General of the Xiongnu. Later, Zhang Ye was promoted to the position of the Chief Secretary of the Peasants, and Wang Fuhe again took the place of General Du Liao.

古文：规为人多意算，自以连在大位，欲退身避第，数上病，不见听。
现代文：皇甫规为人多心计，自己认为连在大位，想急流引退，不再仕宦，多次托病上书，不见听。
English: Emperor Fu Zheng is a man of many plans. He thinks that he is still in a great position. He wants to retire from the rapids and no longer serve as an official, and he has written in sick several times, which is not acceptable.

古文：会友人上郡太守王旻丧还，规缟素越界，到下亭迎之。
现代文：遇友人上郡太守王逝世灵柩还乡，皇甫规穿着白素衣越界，到下亭迎丧。
English: When the coffin of his friend, the Shang County Taizhou Wang, returned to his hometown after his death, Emperor Fu Jie crossed the border in his white plain clothes and went to the lower pavilion to mourn.

古文：因令客密告并州刺史胡芳，言规擅远军营，公违禁宪，当急举奏。
现代文：因令客秘密地告诉并州刺史胡芳，说皇甫规擅自远离军营，公然违反禁令，当急举报。
English: Due to the fact that the guest secretly told Hu Fang, the military attaché, that the emperor had left the military camp without permission, in flagrant violation of the ban, it was urgent to report it.

古文：芳曰： 威明欲避第仕涂，故激发我耳。
现代文：胡芳说： 威明想归第，离开仕途，所以激发我啊。
English: Hu Fang said, "Weiming wants to come in second and leave the career path, so inspire me."

古文：吾当为朝廷爱才，何能申此子计邪！ 
现代文：我应当为朝廷爱才，哪能助他用计呢？ 
English: I am supposed to love talent for the imperial court. How can I help him with his plans?

古文：遂无所问。
现代文：没有理会他。
English: They ignored him.

古文：及党事大起，天下名贤多见染逮，规虽为名将，素誉不高。
现代文：后来党事大起，天下名人贤者不少人被牵连，皇甫规虽然是名将，平日名气不高。
English: Later, with the rise of party affairs, many celebrities and sages in the world were implicated. Although Emperor Fuxi was a famous general, his reputation was not high on weekdays.

古文：自以西州豪桀，耻不得豫，乃先自上言： 臣前荐故大司农张奂，是附党也。
现代文：自己认为是西州豪杰，以没有为党事牵连可耻，于是先自己上书说： 我以前荐故大司农张奂，这是攀附党人。
English: He thought that he was a hero of Xizhou and that it was shameful for him not to be involved in party affairs, so he first wrote a letter saying: I used to recommend the late director-general, farmer Zhang Jun, who was a party follower.

古文：又臣昔论输左校时，太学生张凤等上书讼臣，是为党人所附也。
现代文：又我以前在左校劳动改造时，太学生张凤等人上书为我申诉，这是党人拉拢我，我应当论罪。 
English: Also, when I was in reform through labor at the Zuo School, Zhang Feng, a student at the same school, and others wrote a letter to appeal for me. This was the party members co-opting me, and I should plead guilty.

古文：朝廷知而不问，时人以为规贤。
现代文：朝廷知道这些，却不予责问。时人认为皇甫规是个贤者。
English: The imperial court knew about this, but did not question him. At the time, people thought that the emperor was a wise man.

古文：在事数岁，北边威服，永康元年，征为尚书。其夏日食，诏公卿举贤良方正，下问得失。
现代文：在事数年，北方边境无事。永康元年，征召为尚书，这年夏天日蚀，皇上诏令公卿推举贤良方正，问政治的得失。
English: In the first year of Yongkang, conscription was made mandatory, and during the summer eclipse of that year, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the court nobles to promote the virtuous Fang Zheng, and to ask about the political gains and losses.

古文：规对曰：天之于王者，如君之于臣，父之于子也。诫以灾妖，使从福祥。
现代文：皇甫规答说： 上天对于国王，如君王对于臣子，父亲对于儿子，以灾害妖异警诫他，使他至于福祥。
English: The emperor's father-in-law replied, "Heaven is to the king as the king is to his vassal, as the father is to his son. It warns him of calamities and monsters and brings him good fortune.

古文：陛下八年之中，三断大狱，一除内嬖，再诛外臣。
现代文：皇上八年之中，三断大狱，一除内嬖，再诛外臣。
English: In the first eight years of the Emperor's reign, the Great Prison was broken three times, internal strife was eliminated, and foreign ministers were reappointed.

古文：而灾异犹见，人情未安者，殆贤愚进退，威刑所加，有非其理也。
现代文：但是还是出现灾异，人情不安，大概是贤愚的任用，刑法的施行，还有不合理的地方。
English: However, there are still disasters, human insecurity, probably wise and foolish appointments, the enforcement of criminal law, and unreasonable places.

古文：前太尉陈蕃、刘矩，忠谋高世，废在里巷；刘祜、冯绲、赵典、尹勋，正直多怨，流放家门；李膺、王暢、孔翊，洁身守礼，终无宰相之阶。
现代文：前太尉陈蕃、刘矩，忠心耿耿，才略特出，而废弃不用；刘、冯绲、赵典、尹勋，正直多怨，流放家门；李膺、王畅、孔翊，廉洁奉公守法，始终没有任用为宰相。
English: Former First Lieutenants Chen Qi and Liu Qi were loyal, outstanding in talent, and did not need to be discarded; Liu, Feng Qi, Zhao Dian, and Yin Xun were honest and resentful, and their families were exiled; Li Qi, Wang Chang, and Kong Qi were honest and law-abiding, and they were never appointed as prime ministers.

古文：至于钩党之衅，事起无端，虐贤伤善，哀及无辜。
现代文：至于所谓党锢的事，根本是无中生有，虐害好人，使许多无罪的人遭到祸害。
English: As for the so-called "Party coup," it was completely fabricated, abused good people, and caused many innocent people to be harmed.

古文：今兴改善政，易于覆手，而群臣杜口，鉴畏前害，互相瞻顾，莫肯正言。
现代文：现在兴善除弊，易如反掌，群臣闭口不言，是把从前的事情作为鉴戒，互相观看，不敢说老实话。
English: Nowadays, it is as easy to do good as it is to do harm, and the ministers are silent. They regard the past events as a warning, look at each other, and dare not speak the truth.

古文：伏愿陛下暂留圣明，容受謇直，则前责可弭，后福必降。
现代文：惟望皇上圣明，容纳耿直的忠言，那以前的错误可以消除，后福就降临了。 
English: However, if we look to the emperor for enlightenment and accept Geng Zi's advice, the previous mistakes can be eliminated, and the blessing will come.

古文：对奏，不省。
现代文：皇上对他的话，没有理会。
English: The Emperor paid no attention to his words.

古文：迁规弘农太守，封寿成亭侯，邑二百户，让封不受。
现代文：调皇甫规任弘农太守，封寿成亭侯，邑二百户，皇甫规谦让不受。
English: Emperor Fuxi appointed him as the governor of Hongnong, and made him the lord of Shoujing, with 200 households in the county. Emperor Fuxi was not amused.

古文：再转为护羌校尉。
现代文：再调为护羌校尉。
English: He was re-assigned to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：熹平三年，以疾召还，未至，卒于穀城，年七十一。
现代文：熹平三年，因病召回朝廷，没到，死在彀城，年七十一。
English: Three years later, he was recalled to the imperial court due to illness, but did not arrive. He died in Shicheng at the age of seventy-one.

古文：所著赋、铭、碑、赞、祷文、吊、章表、教令、书、檄、笺记，凡二十七篇。
现代文：所著赋、铭、碑、赞、祷文、吊、章表、教令、书、檄、笺记，共二十七篇。
English: There are a total of twenty-seven articles, including the author's attribution, inscription, monument, praise, prayer, hanging, chapter list, edict, book, sermon, and commentary.

古文：论曰：孔子称 其言之不怍，则其为之也难 。
现代文：史官评论：孔子说： 说的话上得算，就不会感到惭愧，但作起来是不容易的。 
English: Historian's comment: Confucius said, "If you speak well, you will not feel ashamed, but it is not easy to do.

古文：察皇甫规之言，其心不怍哉！
现代文：考察皇甫规所说的话，他的内心是不会惭愧的呀！
English: If you look at what Emperor Fu Jie said, his heart will not be ashamed!

古文：夫其审己则干禄，见贤则委位，故干禄不为贪，而委位不求让；称己不疑伐，而让人无惧情。
现代文：根据自己的才能求仕，看见比自己高明的人就把职位给别人；所以他的求仕，不算贪，把职位给别人，不是求让；对自己的才能不怀疑，也不吹牛，让人没有恐惧之情。
English: He seeks a position according to his own ability, and when he sees someone who is better than him, he gives the position to others. Therefore, his request for a position is not greedy, and giving the position to others is not a concession; he does not doubt his own ability, nor does he brag, and there is no fear.

古文：故能功成于戎狄，身全于邦家也。
现代文：所以能够功成于戎狄，得善终于家邦啊。
English: Therefore, if you can succeed in the army, you can succeed in the country.

古文：张奂字然明，敦煌渊泉人也。
现代文：◆张奂传，张奂字然明，敦煌郡渊泉县人。
English: ◆Zhang Xuan, Zhang Xuan Zi Ranming, from Yuanquan County, Dunhuang County.

古文：父忄享，为汉阳太守。
现代文：父亲张，为汉阳太守。
English: His father, Zhang, was the ruler of Hanyang.

古文：奂少游三辅，师事太尉朱宠，学《欧阳尚书》。
现代文：张奂年轻时游学三辅，以太尉朱宠为师，学《欧阳尚书》。
English: When Zhang Ye was young, he traveled to study Sanfu, and his teacher was the ethereal lieutenant Zhu Ji, who taught him the "Book of the Western Yang Dynasty."

古文：初，《牟氏章句》浮辞繁多，有四十五万余言，奂减为九万言。
现代文：起先，《牟氏章句》重复多余的词句很多，有四十五万多字，张奂删减为九万字。
English: At first, "Mou's Chapter" had a lot of redundant phrases, with more than four hundred and fifty thousand words, and Zhang Xi cut it down to ninety thousand words.

古文：后辟大将军梁冀府，乃上书桓帝，奏其《章句》，诏下东观，以疾去官，复举贤良，对策第一，擢拜议郎。
现代文：后来征召大将军梁冀府，于是上书桓帝，呈上他的《章句》，诏命任职东观。因病去官，再被推举贤良，皇上问策，对答第一，升为议郎。
English: Later, the general Liang Jifu was called up, so he wrote to Emperor Huan, presented his "Chapter," and was ordered to serve in Dongguan. Due to illness, he left the post, and was then promoted to the position of a wise man. The emperor asked the first question and answer, and he was promoted to the position of a negotiator.

古文：永寿元年，迁安定属国都尉。
现代文：永寿元年，调安定属国都尉。
English: In the first year of his life, he was transferred to the post of provincial governor.

古文：初到职，而南匈奴左薁鞬台耆、且渠伯德等七千余人寇美稷，东羌复举种应之，而奂壁唯有二百许人，闻即勒兵而出。
现代文：刚刚到职，南匈奴左革建台省、且渠伯德等七千多人侵扰美稷，东羌也再次全种响应他们，张奂阵地仅有二百多人，听到警报就率兵而出。
English: Just after taking office, more than seven thousand people, including the Southern Huns, left-wing revolutionaries from JianTai Province, and Kuibode, invaded Meizhou. Dongcheng also responded to them in an all-round way. Zhangye's position had only more than two hundred people. When they heard the alarm, they led the troops out.

古文：军吏以为力不敌，叩头争止之。奂不听，遂进屯长城，收集兵士，遣将王卫招诱东羌，因据龟兹，使南匈奴不得交通东羌。
现代文：军吏认为力量不及敌人，叩头阻止，张奂不听，进驻长城，收集兵士，派将王卫招诱东羌，因此占据龟兹，使南匈奴不能与东羌取得联络。
English: The military officials thought that they were not as strong as the enemy, they kowtowed to prevent it, Zhang Ye did not listen, stationed at the Great Wall, collected soldiers, sent Wang Wei to lure Donglu, and thus occupied Guizi, so that the Southern Xiongnu could not get in touch with Donglu.

古文：诸豪遂相率与奂和亲，共击薁鞬等，连战破之。
现代文：各部首领相率与张奂和好，一起攻击革建等部，连续几次战役，打败了革建等部。
English: The leaders of various ministries made peace with Zhang Ye, attacked the revolutionary and construction ministries together, and defeated the revolutionary and construction ministries in several consecutive battles.

古文：伯德惶恐，将其众降，郡界以宁。
现代文：伯德害怕了，率领他们的部众投降，郡界得以安宁。
English: Terrified, Byrd and his men surrendered, and the county was pacified.

古文：羌豪帅感奂恩德，上马二十匹，先零酋长又遗金八枚，奂并受之，而召主簿于诸羌前，以酒酹地曰： 使马如羊，不以入厩；使金如粟，不以入怀。 
现代文：羌大帅感激张奂的恩德，送上马二十匹，先零酋长又送金餎八枚。张奂都接受了，却把主簿叫到各羌面前，用酒浇地说： 使马如羊，不以入厩；使金如粟，不以入怀。 
English: In gratitude for Zhang Xuan's kindness, the grand marshal Zou sent twenty horses, and the chief Zi sent eight gold ingots. Zhang Xuan accepted them all, but he called the master book to each of them and said with wine: "Make the horse like a sheep, so that it cannot enter the stable; make the gold like a millet, so that it cannot enter the bosom."

古文：悉以金马还之。
现代文：把全部金马送还了大帅和酋长。
English: He returned all the golden horses to the general and the chieftain.

古文：羌性贪而贵吏清，前有八都尉率好财货，为所患苦，及奂正身洁己，威化大行。
现代文：羌人性贪，但对清廉的官吏最尊敬，以前八都尉都好财货，为他们所苦，张奂正身洁己，于是威德大行。
English: He was greedy by nature, but he had the greatest respect for honest officials. In the past, the eight captains were all rich, and he suffered from them. Zhang Xuan kept himself clean, so he became a great virtue.

古文：迁使匈奴中郎将。
现代文：升使匈奴中郎将。
English: The middle son of the Xiongnu was promoted to general.

古文：时，休屠各及朔方乌桓并同反叛，烧度辽将军门，引屯赤坑，烟火相望。
现代文：这时休屠各及朔方乌桓同时反叛，焚烧了度辽将军门，进驻赤阝亢，烟火相望。
English: At this time, both Xiu Tuo and Shuo Fang Wuhuan rebelled at the same time, burned the General Du Liao's Gate, and stationed themselves in Chek Lap, watching the fireworks.

古文：兵众大恐，各欲亡去。
现代文：军队大恐，都想逃跑。
English: The troops were terrified and wanted to run away.

古文：奂安坐帷中，与弟子讲诵自若，军士稍安。
现代文：张奂安然坐在帷中，与弟子讲诵自如，部属才稍稍安定下来。
English: Zhang Ye sat calmly in the middle of the curtain, chanting freely with his disciples. Only then did his subordinates calm down a little.

古文：乃潜诱乌桓阴与和通，遂使斩屠各渠帅，袭破其众。诸胡悉降。
现代文：于是暗暗地引诱乌桓与他和好，使斩杀休屠各大帅，突然袭击，打败他们，诸胡统统投降了。
English: Therefore, he secretly enticed Wu Huan to make peace with him, so that he killed and slaughtered the great generals, suddenly attacked and defeated them, and Zhu Hu surrendered.

古文：延熹元年，鲜卑寇边，奂率南单于击之，斩首数百级。
现代文：延熹元年，鲜卑侵掠边境，张奂率领南单于攻击他们，斩首数百级。
English: In the first year of Yancheng, the Xianbei invaded and plundered the border, and Zhang Jun led Nan Shan to attack them, beheading hundreds of people.

古文：明年，梁冀被诛，奂以故吏免官禁锢。
现代文：第二年，梁冀被诛，张奂因为是梁冀的部属，被免官，并且禁止做官。
English: The following year, Liang Jie was arrested and Zhang Jie was removed from his post and banned from working as an official because he was Liang Jie's subordinate.

古文：奂与皇甫规友善，奂既被锢，凡诸交旧莫敢为言，唯规荐举前后七上。
现代文：张奂与皇甫规是好朋友，张奂已经被禁锢了，所有的故交旧属，没有敢为张奂说话的。只有皇甫规荐张奂前后七次。
English: Zhang Ye was a good friend of Emperor Fu Zi. Zhang Ye had been imprisoned. All his old friends and relatives did not dare to speak up for Zhang Ye. Only Emperor Fu Zi recommended Zhang Ye seven times.

古文：在家四岁，复拜武威太守。
现代文：在家里住了四年，又任命为武威太守。
English: He lived at home for four years, and was appointed as the Wuwei governor.

古文：平均徭赋，率厉散败，常为诸郡最，河西由是而全。
现代文：平均老百姓的负担，统率训练逃散的军民，是各郡做得最好的。河西因此保全。
English: The burden of the average citizen, leading the training of fleeing soldiers and civilians, is the best done by each county. Therefore, Hexi is preserved.

古文：其俗多妖忌，凡二月、五月产子及与父母同月生者，悉杀之。
现代文：河西的风俗多妖怪禁忌，凡是二月、五月生的儿子以及与父母同月生的，都要杀掉。
English: In the west of the river, there are many monsters and taboos. All sons born in February and May, as well as those born in the same month as their parents, are to be killed.

古文：奂示以义方，严加赏罚，风俗遂改，百姓生为立祠。
现代文：张奂教以做父母的责任，赏罚严明，风俗因此改变了，百姓为他立生祠。
English: Zhang Rongjiao took the responsibility of being a parent, and the rewards and punishments were strict. As a result, the customs changed, and the people built a shrine for him.

古文：举尤异，迁度辽将军。
现代文：被以尤异推举，为调度辽将军。
English: He was specially selected as General Liao's dispatching officer.

古文：数载间，幽、并清静。
现代文：几年之间，幽州、并州清静，平安无事。
English: In the past few years, Yuzhou and Binzhou have been calm and peaceful.

古文：九年春，征拜大司农。
现代文：九年的春天，征召任为大司农。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, he was conscripted and appointed as the Chief Farmer.

古文：鲜卑闻奂去，其夏，遂招结南匈奴、乌桓数道入塞，或五六千骑，或三四千骑，寇掠缘边九郡，杀略百姓。
现代文：鲜卑听到张奂调动了，这年夏天，就招集南匈奴、乌桓分几路侵入塞内，有的五六千骑兵，有的三四千骑兵，侵扰掳掠缘边九郡，杀害劫掠百姓。
English: Xianbei heard that Zhang Ye had mobilized, and in the summer of that year, he summoned the Southern Xiongnu and the Wuhuan to invade Senai in several directions, some with five or six thousand cavalry, and some with three or four thousand cavalry, to invade and plunder nine counties along the border, killing and plundering the people.

古文：秋，鲜卑复率八九千骑入塞，诱引东羌与共盟诅。
现代文：秋天，鲜卑又率领八九千骑兵侵入塞内，引诱东羌与他们共立盟誓。
English: In the autumn, Xianbei also led eight or nine thousand cavalry to invade Senai, luring Donglu to make an oath with them.

古文：于是上郡沈氐、安定先零诸种共寇武威、张掖，缘边大被其毒。
现代文：于是上郡沈氏、安定先零诸种一起侵扰武威、张掖，边境一带大受祸害。
English: As a result, the Shang County Shen clan and the Stability First Zero all invaded Wuwei and Zhangye, and the border area suffered greatly.

古文：朝廷以为忧，复拜奂为护匈奴中郎将，以九卿秩督幽、并、凉三州及度辽、乌桓二营，兼察刺史、二千石能否，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：朝廷以为忧患。再命张奂为护匈奴中郎将，按九卿职位督幽、并、凉三州及度辽、乌桓二营，兼考察刺史、二千石称职与不称职，赏赐很多。
English: The imperial court thought it was a disaster. Zhang Ye was reappointed as the Xiongnu middle warlord, and he was given many rewards according to the positions of the nine chieftains, the governor of Yu, Bian, Liang, Sanzhou and Du Liao, Wu Huan and two battalions, as well as the investigation of the history, and the two thousand koku of competence and incompetence.

古文：匈奴、乌桓闻奂至，因相率还降，凡二十万口。
现代文：匈奴、乌桓听见张奂来了，相率回来，投降的共二十万人。
English: The Xiongnu and the Wuhuan heard that Zhang Ye had arrived and came back to escort him. A total of 200,000 people surrendered.

古文：奂但诛其首恶，余皆慰纳之。
现代文：张奂只杀了罪大恶极的，其余的人都抚慰接纳了他们。
English: Zhang Ye only killed those who had committed the most heinous crimes, and the rest of the people accepted them.

古文：唯鲜卑出塞去。
现代文：只有鲜卑去了塞外。
English: Only Xianbei went abroad.

古文：永康元年春，东羌、先零五六千骑寇关中，围礻殳礻羽，掠云阳。
现代文：永康元年春，东羌、先零五六千骑兵侵入关中，包围礻殳礻羽，掳掠云阳。
English: In the spring of the first year of Yongkang, 5,000-6,000 cavalrymen invaded Guanzhong, encircled Zouyu, and captured Yunyang.

古文：夏，复攻没两营，杀千余人。
现代文：夏天，又攻没雨营，杀死一千多人。
English: In the summer, they attacked the rain camp again, killing more than a thousand people.

古文：冬，羌岸尾、摩錜等胁同种复抄三辅。
现代文：冬天，羌岸尾、摩錜等，裹胁同种再次抄劫三辅。
English: In winter, the black-tailed godwit, black-crowned godwit, and other similar species will once again invade Sanju.

古文：奂遣司马尹端、董卓并击，大破之，斩其酋豪，首虏万余人，三州清定。
现代文：张奂派司马尹端、董卓共击，把他们打得一败涂地，斩了他们的首脑，首虏一万多人，三州平定。
English: Zhang Ye sent Sima Yin Duan and Dong Zhuo to make a joint attack. They were soundly defeated, their heads were chopped off, more than ten thousand people were beheaded, and the three states were pacified.

古文：论功当封，奂不事宦官，故赏遂不行，唯赐钱二十万，除家一人为郎。并辞不受，而愿徙属弘农华阴。
现代文：论功，张奂当封，张奂不交结宦官，所以封爵的事没有实行，只赐钱二十万，任命家中一人为郎，张奂辞却没有接受，请求迁入弘农华阴县。
English: On the basis of merit, Zhang Xuan was awarded a title and Zhang Xuan did not become an eunuch, so the knighthood was not implemented. He only gave 200,000 yuan in money and appointed one person in his family as his son. Zhang Xuan did not accept his resignation and requested to move to Hongnong Huayin County.

古文：旧制边人不得内移，唯奂因功特听，故始为弘农人焉。
现代文：旧的制度边境的人不得内移，只有张奂因功特准，所以张奂由此成为弘农人。
English: Under the old system, people on the border were not allowed to move in. Only Zhang Rong was allowed to move in because of his ability, so Zhang Rong became a Hongnong person.

古文：建宁元年，振旅而还。
现代文：建宁元年，率军回朝。
English: In the first year of Jianning, he led his army back to the imperial court.

古文：时窦太后临朝，大将军窦武与大傅陈蕃谋诛宦官，事泄，中常侍遭节等于中作乱，以奂新征，不知本谋，矫制使奂与少府周靖率五营士围武。武自杀，蕃因见害。
现代文：这时窦太后临朝掌政，大将军窦武与太傅陈蕃谋划诛杀宦官，事情泄露出去了，中常侍曹节等人从中作乱，因张奂新被征召，不知道这次谋划，曹节等假托朝命使张奂与少府周靖率五营兵包围了窦武，窦武自杀，陈蕃也因被害。
English: At this time, the Dowager Empress Dowager Dou was in charge of the imperial court. General Dou Wu and Grand Master Chen Xi were plotting to assassinate the eunuch. The affair leaked out, and the middle-ranking attendant Cao Jie and others created a disturbance. Because Zhang Jianxin was conscripted, he did not know about this plan. Cao Jie and others, under the guise of the imperial command, made Zhang Jian and Shao Fu Zhou Jing lead five battalions to surround Dou Wu. Dou Wu committed suicide, and Chen Xi was also killed.

古文：奂迁少府，又拜大司农，以功封侯。
现代文：张奂升任少府，又任大司农，因有功封侯。
English: Zhang Qian was promoted to the position of minor prefect, and also to the position of major secretary of agriculture, because of his meritorious deeds.

古文：奂深病为节所卖，上书固让，封还印绶，卒不肯当。
现代文：张奂痛心被曹节所卖，上书坚决辞让，封还印绶，终不肯接受。
English: Zhang Ye was heartbroken to be sold by Cao Jie. He sent a letter of resolute resignation, sealed and returned the seal, and finally refused to accept.

古文：明年夏，青蛇见于御坐轩前，又大风雨雹，霹雳拔树，诏使百僚各言灾应。
现代文：第二年夏天，御坐轩前发现青蛇，又大风雨雹，雷霆拔树，诏令百官说灾异感应。
English: In the summer of the second year, the emperor found a green snake in front of the imperial residence, and the stormy weather, thunder and lightning uprooted trees, and ordered the officials to say that the disaster was caused by the earthquake.

古文：奂上疏曰：臣闻风为号令，动物通气。木生于火，相须乃明。
现代文：张奂上疏说： 我听说风是号令，动物通气，木生于火，风火相互作用，发生光明。
English: Zhang Yuxiang said: I have heard that wind is a signal, animals breathe air, trees are born from fire, wind and fire interact, and light occurs.

古文：蛇能屈申，配龙腾蛰。
现代文：蛇能屈能伸，配合龙的腾蛰。
English: The snake can bend and stretch, with the dragon's soaring.

古文：顺至为休征，逆来为殃咎。
现代文：顺至是好的征象，逆来是祸害。
English: A positive sign is a good sign and a negative sign is a bad sign.

古文：阴气专用，则凝精为雹。
现代文：阴气专用，就凝精为雹。
English: If it is used exclusively for yin qi, the condensed essence will turn into pus.

古文：故大将军窦武、太傅陈蕃，或志宁社稷，或方直不回，前以谗胜，并伏诛戮，海内默默，人怀震愤。
现代文：已故大将军窦武、太傅陈蕃，或者志在安宁国家，或者方正刚直，前因奸人说坏话，都被诛杀，海内默默，不敢说话，人怀震愤。
English: The late great generals Dou Wu and Taifu Chen Xi, or those who aspired to a peaceful country, or Fang Zheng Gang Zhi, were all killed because they said bad words before. The sea was silent, they did not dare to speak, and people were shocked and angry.

古文：昔周公葬不如礼，天乃动威。
现代文：从前周公葬不合礼，老天爷因此动威。
English: Since last week, public funerals have not been appropriate, so God has moved.

古文：今武、蕃忠贞，未被明宥，妖眚之来，皆为此也。
现代文：现在窦武、陈蕃忠贞被杀，没有昭雪，妖祸的产生，都是为了这个呀。
English: Now Dou Wu and Chen Xi Zhongzheng have been killed, there is no Zhaoxue, and the emergence of evil is all for this.

古文：宜急为改葬，徙还家属。
现代文：应当赶快改葬，把他们家属迁回原籍。
English: They should be quickly reburied and their families should be moved back to their places of origin.

古文：其从坐禁锢，一切蠲除。
现代文：因他们关系牵连获罪而被禁锢的人，都要平反，推翻一切诬蔑不实之词。
English: Those who have been jailed for crimes related to their relationships should be rehabilitated, and all slanderous and untrue words should be overturned.

古文：又皇太后虽居南宫，而恩礼不接，朝臣莫言，远近失望。
现代文：又皇太后虽然居在南宫，但对她恩礼不接，朝廷里的臣子不敢说话，远近的人大为失望。
English: In addition, although the Empress Dowager resided in the Southern Palace, she was not well received. The courtiers in the Imperial Court did not dare to speak, and people near and far were greatly disappointed.

古文：宜思大义顾复之报。
现代文：要思念父母生我鞠我的恩情，应该有所报答的大义。 
English: To think of the parents who gave birth to me and showered me with kindness is a great act of justice that should be rewarded.

古文：天子深纳奂言，以问诸黄门常侍，左右皆恶之，帝不得自从。
现代文：天子完全采纳张奂的话，因此问各黄门常侍，他们都反对不同意。天子不敢自己作主。
English: Tianzi completely accepted Zhang Ye's words, so he asked the attendants at the Yellow Gate, and they all disagreed. Tianzi did not dare to make his own decisions.

古文：转奂太常，与尚书刘猛、刁韪、卫良同荐王暢、李膺可参三公之选，而曹节等弥疾其言，遂下诏切责之。
现代文：调张奂为太常，与尚书刘猛、刁韪、卫良同荐王畅、李膺可以参加三公的选拔，但曹节等人痛恨他们的荐举，下诏严责他们。
English: Zhang Jie was promoted to the highest rank, and Wang Chang and Li Xi, who were recommended by Shangshu Liu Meng, Zou and Wei Liang, were allowed to participate in the selection of the three princes, but Cao Jie and others hated their recommendation and severely punished them.

古文：奂等皆自囚廷尉，数日乃得出，并以三月俸赎罪。
现代文：张奂等人都自己去廷尉作囚犯，好几天才得出来，并且用三个月的俸资赎罪。
English: Zhang Xuan and the others all went to the palace to serve as prisoners themselves. It took several days to get them out, and they used three months' salary to atone for their sins.

古文：司隶校尉王寓，出于宦官，欲借宠公卿，公求荐举，百僚畏惮，莫不许诺，唯奂独拒之。
现代文：司隶校尉王寓，宦官出身，想借宠宦官，以求荐举，百官畏怕他，没有不答应的，只有张奂一个人反对。
English: Wang Ye, a eunuch by birth, wanted to curry favor with the eunuchs by asking them to recommend him. The eunuchs were afraid of him, and there was no one who would say no. Only Zhang Ye objected.

古文：寓怒，因此遂陷以党罪，禁锢归田里。
现代文：王寓发怒，以党罪陷害他，禁止他做官，送归田里。
English: Wang Yue was furious, framed him for a party crime, banned him from working as an official, and sent him back to the fields.

古文：奂前为度辽将军，与段颎争击羌，不相平。
现代文：张奂以前任度辽将军时，与段赹争着进击羌人，不和睦。
English: When Zhang Qian was General Du Liao, he fought with Duan Qian to attack the Qian people, and they did not get along well.

古文：及颎为司隶校尉，欲逐奂归敦煌，将害之。
现代文：段赹任司隶校尉时，想把张奂赶回敦煌，陷害他。
English: When Duan Yu was a captain of Sili, he wanted to drive Zhang Ye back to Dunhuang and frame him.

古文：奂忧惧，奏记谢颎曰：小人不明，得过州将，千里委命，以情相归。足下仁笃，照其辛苦，使人未反，复获邮书。
现代文：张奂忧愁恐惧，上书段赹说： 小人愚昧无知，得罪州将，千里托命，以情相见，您仁爱笃实，看我辛苦，我打发去您那儿的人还没有回来，又接了您的信，恩诏很清楚，前已写明。
English: Zhang Yao was sad and afraid. In the last paragraph of the letter, Yao said: "The villain is stupid and ignorant, he has offended the prefect of the state, he has spared his life by a thousand miles, he has met with sympathy, your benevolence is sincere, look at my hard work, the person I sent to you has not returned, and I have received your letter again. The edict is very clear, it has been written before.

古文：恩诏分明，前以写白，而州期切促，郡县惶惧，屏营延企，侧待归命。
现代文：只是州里限期切促，郡县惶恐。我延颈企足，忧心惶惶地等待着去人的报命。
English: It's just that the deadline is very tight in the state, and the counties are panicking. I'm on tenterhooks, anxiously waiting for the news of my death.

古文：父母朽骨，孤魂相托，若蒙矜怜，壹惠咳唾，则泽流黄泉，施及冥寞，非奂生死所能报塞。
现代文：我父母的骨虽已腐朽，而孤魂相托，如果蒙您怜悯我，为我说说话，那您的恩泽流于黄泉，及于后者，这不是我张奂生死所能报答的。
English: Although the bones of my parents have decayed, and their souls are intertwined, if you have mercy on me and speak for me, then your grace will flow to the underworld, and to the latter, this is not something I can repay with my life and death.

古文：夫无毛发之劳，而欲求人丘山之用，此淳于髡所以拍髀仰天而笑者也。
现代文：没有毛发的微劳，却想求人丘山之用，这是淳于髡所以拍着大腿仰天大笑的啊。
English: It's no small feat to have no hair, but you want to use it to become a mountain climber. That's why Jun Yu Yao clapped his thighs and laughed out loud.

古文：诚知言必见讥，然犹未能无望。
现代文：确实晓得所说的话，一定要为您所讥笑，但是，还是寄以希望，为什么呢？
English: Surely knowing what was said, you must have scoffed, but, still hoping, why?

古文：何者？朽骨无益于人，而文王葬之；死马无所复用，而燕昭宝之。
现代文：朽骨对人本来已没有什么用处了，文王却把他用棺埋葬；死马已再没有什么用了，但燕昭王以为是宝。
English: The bones were no longer of any use to the man, but King Wen buried him in a coffin; the dead horse was no longer of any use, but King Yan Zhao thought it was a treasure.

古文：党同文、昭之德，岂不大哉！
现代文：党同文王、燕昭王的德，难道不伟大吗？
English: Isn't the virtue of the Party's King Tongwen and King Yan Zhao great?

古文：凡人之情，冤而呼天，穷则叩心。
现代文：大凡人之常情，受了冤枉就喊天，在困穷之际，就槌心。
English: The ordinary human being, when wronged, cries out to the heavens. When in need, he beats his heart with a hammer.

古文：今呼天不闻，叩心无益，诚自伤痛。
现代文：现在喊天天不应，槌心也无益，真正伤痛到了极点。
English: Now shouting every day should not, hammer heart is also unhelpful, really hurt to the extreme.

古文：俱生圣世，独为匪人。
现代文：我同您都生在圣世，我独为人所不理的人。
English: I was born with you in the holy world, I am the only one who is ignored by people.

古文：孤微之人，无所告诉。
现代文：孤独微贱，无人可与告诉。
English: Alone and humble, with no one to tell.

古文：如不哀怜，便为鱼肉。
现代文：您如果不哀怜我，我便为鱼肉。
English: If you don't take pity on me, I'll be fish meat.

古文：企心东望，无所复言。
现代文：企心东望，没有别的话可说了。 
English: Looking ahead, there is nothing else to say.

古文：颎虽刚猛，省书哀之，卒不忍也。
现代文：段颎虽然为人刚猛，看了他的信，可怜他，终于不忍害他。
English: Although Duan Yu was a headstrong person, he read his letter, pitied him, and finally could not bear to harm him.

古文：时，禁锢者多不能守静，或死或徙。
现代文：当时禁锢的多不老实，有的被处死，有的被迁徙。
English: Most of those imprisoned at that time were not honest, some were executed, and some were relocated.

古文：奂闭门不出，养徒千人，著《尚书记难》三十余万言。
现代文：张奂闭门不出，教养徒弟千人，著《尚书记难》三十多万字。
English: Zhang Ye did not close the door, educated a thousand apprentices, and wrote more than 300,000 words of "The Difficulty of Shang Clery."

古文：奂少立志节，尝与士友言曰： 大丈夫处世，当为国家立功边境。 
现代文：张奂年轻时立志，有节概。曾经与朋友们说： 大丈夫处世，应当为国家立功边境。 
English: When Zhang Ye was young, he had a strong will and determination. He once said to his friends, "If you want to be a good person, you should do something for the country."

古文：及为将帅，果有勋名。
现代文：后来为将帅，真有功名。
English: Later he became a general, which was quite an achievement.

古文：董卓慕之，使其兄遗缣百匹。
现代文：董卓羡慕他，派他的哥哥送缣百匹给张奂。
English: Dong Zhuo envied him and sent his brother to send a hundred yakitori to Zhang Ye.

古文：奂恶卓为人，绝而不受。
现代文：张奂认为董卓可恶，拒绝不受。
English: Zhang Ye thought that Dong Zhuo was detestable and refused to accept it.

古文：光和四年卒，年七十八。
现代文：光和四年逝世，年七十八。
English: He died four years later, at the age of 78.

古文：遗命曰： 吾前后仕进，十要银艾，不能和光同尘，为谗邪所忌。
现代文：遗嘱说： 我前后为官，十要银艾，不能同流合污，被坏人忌妒。
English: The will said: I have been an official before and after, I want silver and gold, I can't go along with the bad people, and I am envied by the bad people.

古文：通塞命也，始终常也。
现代文：一个人的富贵与穷困，这是命中注定的，一个人的生死，这是自然规律所决定的。
English: A person's wealth and poverty are predetermined by fate, and a person's life and death are determined by the laws of nature.

古文：但地冥冥，长无晓期，而复缠以纩绵，牢以钉密，为不喜耳。
现代文：但是地底下黑暗，永远没有天亮的时候，却用纩帛缠身，还在棺材上密密麻麻钉着钉子，这是我所不喜欢的。
English: But I don't like it when it's dark underground, when there's never any daylight, but you're wrapped in cocoons and the coffin is packed with nails.

古文：幸有前窀，朝殒夕下，措尸灵床，幅巾而已。
现代文：以前准备了窟穴，这就很好。早上死了，晚上就埋葬，把尸体放在灵床上，用幅巾盖着就算了。
English: They used to prepare a pit, and that was fine. If you died in the morning, you were buried in the evening. You just put the body on a cot and covered it with a blanket.

古文：奢非晋文，俭非王孙，推情从意，庶无咎吝。 
现代文：奢不学晋文，俭不学王孙，缘情从意，庶几没有罪咎。 
English: Luxury does not learn Jinwen, frugality does not learn Wangsun, predestination does not care, and there is no guilt in being a commoner.

古文：诸子从之。
现代文：几个儿子依照他的遗嘱做了。
English: Several of his sons did the same, in accordance with his will.

古文：武威多为立祠，世世不绝。
现代文：武威多为立祠，世世祭祀不绝。
English: Wuwei is mostly an ancestral shrine, and the sacrifices are never ending.

古文：所著铭、颂、书、教、诫述、志、对策、章表二十四篇。
现代文：所著铭、颂、书、教、诫述、志、对策、章表二十四篇。
English: The work consists of twenty-four articles, including the inscription, ode, book, teaching, exhortation, aspiration, countermeasure, and chapter table.

古文：长子芝，字伯英，最知名。芝及弟昶，字文舒，并善草书，至今称传之。
现代文：长子张芝，字伯英，最有名，张芝及弟弟张昶，字文舒，都善草书，流传至今为人称赞。
English: The eldest son of Zhang Zhi, the character Bo Ying, the most famous, Zhang Zhi and his brother Zhang Yao, the character Wen Shu, are all good cursive, and have been praised by people so far.

古文：初，奂为武威太守，其妻怀孕，梦带奂印绶登楼而歌。讯之占者，曰： 必将生男，复临兹邦，命终此楼。 
现代文：起初，张奂任武威太守，他的妻子怀了孕，梦见带着张奂的印绶登楼唱歌，问占梦的人，说： 一定生个男孩，也守此邦，命终此楼。 
English: At the beginning, Zhang Ye was the military governor of Wuwei, and his wife was pregnant. She dreamed that she went upstairs to sing with Zhang Ye's seal, and asked the person who interpreted her dream, saying, "I will definitely have a boy, and I will also protect this country, and my life will end in this building."

古文：既而生子猛，以建安中为武威太守，杀刺史邯郸商，州兵围之急，猛耻见擒，乃登楼自烧而死，卒如占云。
现代文：后来生了张猛，在建安中任武威太守，杀刺史邯郸商，州兵包围了他，形势危急，张猛以被捉可耻，登楼自己烧死，终于如占梦人所说。
English: Later, Zhang Meng was born. In Jian'an, he served as a powerful military governor, assassinated a merchant, and the National Guard surrounded him. The situation was critical. Zhang Meng was ashamed to be caught, and went upstairs to burn himself to death. Finally, as the dreamer said.

古文：论曰：自鄛乡之封，中官世盛，暴恣数十年间，四海之内，莫不切齿愤盈，愿投兵于其族。
现代文：史官评论：自从宦官郑众封巢乡侯以后，宦官世世弄权，为祸害数十年，四海之内，没有不切齿痛恨、希望消灭其族类的。
English: Historian's comment: Ever since the eunuch Zheng Zongzhu sealed the nests of the villagers, the eunuch's power-grabbing has been a scourge for decades. In the four seas, there is no hatred and hope to eliminate his kind.

古文：陈蕃、窦武奋义草谋，征会天下，名士有识所共闻也，而张奂见欺竖子，扬戈以断忠烈。虽恨毒在心，辞爵谢咎。
现代文：陈蕃、窦武奋起谋划，号召天下，这是名士有识者都知道的，张奂却被宦官欺骗，操戈杀戮忠烈之士，虽然他怀恨终生，辞赏谢罪，《诗》云： 泪流满面啊！
English: Chen Xi and Dou Wu worked hard to plan and call out to the world, which is what celebrities and people with insight know. Zhang Xi, however, was deceived by eunuchs and killed the loyal martyrs. Although he held a grudge for the rest of his life and refused to apologize, the poem was full of tears.

古文：《诗》云： 啜其泣矣，何嗟及矣！ 
现代文：哀叹来不及了呢！ 
English: It's too late to lament!

古文：段颎字纪明，武威姑臧人也。
现代文：◆段颎传，段颎字纪明，武威郡姑臧县人，他的祖先出自郑共叔段颎。
English: ◆Courtesy of Duan Xuan, Duan Xuan Zi Ji Ming, a native of Guzheng County, Wuwei County, whose ancestors came from Zheng Gong's uncle Duan Xuan.

古文：其先出郑共叔段，西域都护会宗之从曾孙也。
现代文：是西域都护会宗的从曾孙。
English: He was a great-great-grandson of the Western Dōgo sect.

古文：颎少便习弓马，尚游侠，轻财贿，长乃折节好古学。
现代文：段颎年轻时便学习驰马射箭，喜游侠，轻财贿，长大以后，改变了年轻时的志向，爱好古学。
English: When he was young, Duan Yu learned horseback riding, archery, gladiator, easy money and bribery. When he grew up, he changed his youthful ambition and loved ancient studies.

古文：初举孝廉，为宪陵园丞、阳陵令，所在有能政。
现代文：开始被推举为孝廉，任宪陵园丞、阳陵令，在任表现了很好的才能。
English: At the beginning, he was elected as Xiaolian, appointed as the chief of the Mausoleum Garden and the Yanglingling, and showed great talent during his tenure.

古文：迁辽东属国都尉。时鲜卑犯塞，颎即率所领驰赴之。
现代文：当他升辽东属国都尉时，鲜卑侵犯边塞，段颎就率所部赶往边塞。
English: When he was promoted to the captain of Liaodong Province, Xianbei invaded the border fortress, and Duan Yu led the headquarters to rush to the border fortress.

古文：既而恐贼惊去，乃使驿骑诈赍玺书诏颎，颎于道伪退，潜于还路设伏。
现代文：因为怕贼会因惊恐逃走，于是派驿骑假送玺书诏令段颎退兵，段颎在道上伪装撤退，并在退路上暗设伏兵。
English: Because they were afraid that the thieves would run away in fright, they ordered Duan Er to retreat. Duan Er disguised himself on the road and set up an ambush on the way back.

古文：虏以为信然，乃入追颎。
现代文：鲜卑认为段颎真的撤退，追赶段颎。
English: Xianbei thought that Duan Er really withdrew and pursued Duan Er.

古文：颎因大纵兵，悉斩获之。
现代文：段颎于是大发兵，侵犯的鲜卑，全被斩获。
English: As a result, Duan Rong sent out a large army, and all of the invaders were defeated.

古文：坐诈玺书伏重刑，以有功论司寇。
现代文：段颎却因假称玺书，应伏重刑，因有功，以司寇论，罚到边境防敌。
English: On the other hand, Duan Yu was sentenced to hard labor for falsely claiming to be a scribe, and for meritorious service, he was punished to go to the border to defend against the enemy.

古文：刑竟，征拜议郎。
现代文：刑期满，征为议郎。
English: At the end of his sentence, he was conscripted as a hirō.

古文：时，太山、琅邪贼东郭窦、公孙举等聚众三万人，破坏郡县，遣兵讨之，连年不克。
现代文：这时太山、琅笽贼东郭窦、公孙举等聚众三万人，破坏郡县，朝廷派兵剿讨，几年不能平息。
English: At this time, Taishan, Dongguo Dou, Gongsunzhu and others gathered a crowd of 30,000 people, destroyed counties and counties, and the imperial court sent soldiers to settle the dispute, which could not be calmed down for several years.

古文：永寿二年，桓帝诏公卿选将有文武者，司徒尹颂荐颎，乃拜为中郎将。
现代文：永寿二年，桓帝诏令公卿选举有文武全才者为将，司徒尹颂荐举段颎，于是授段颎为中郎将。
English: In the second year of his eternal life, Emperor Kuan issued an edict ordering the court nobles to elect a general who was well versed in literature and military arts, and Sitoru Yin recommended that he be given the rank of dan so he was given the rank of chūro so.

古文：击窦、举等，大破斩之，获首万余级，余党降散。
现代文：讨伐东郭窦、公孙举等，获得大胜，斩了东郭窦、公孙举，获首万余级，余党有的逃散了，有的投降了。
English: They fought against Dongguo Dou and Gongsunju and won a great victory. They defeated Dongguo Dou and Gongsunju and won more than 10,000 ranks. Some of the remaining party members fled or surrendered.

古文：封颎为列侯，赐钱五十万，除一子为郎中。
现代文：封段颎为列侯，赏赐钱五十万，任命他一个儿子为郎中。
English: He made Duan Rong a vassal lord, rewarded him with five hundred thousand yuan, and appointed one of his sons as his vassal.

古文：延熹二年，迁护羌校尉。
现代文：延熹二年，升为护羌校尉。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：会烧当、烧何、当煎、勒姐等八种羌寇陇西、金城塞，颎将兵及湟中义从羌万二千骑出湟谷，击破之。
现代文：值烧当、烧何、当煎、勒姐等八种羌侵犯陇西、金城边关，段颎率兵及湟中起义羌一万二千骑兵出湟谷，击败他们。
English: Eight kinds of bands, including Xian, Xiang Ho, Dang Rong, and Le Jie, invaded the border of Shaanxi and Jincheng, and Duan Yu led his soldiers and the 12,000 cavalrymen of the Yuzhong Uprising out of Shibuya to defeat them.

古文：追讨南度河，使军吏田晏、夏育募先登，悬索相引，复战于罗亭，大破之，斩其酋豪以下二千级，获生口万余人，虏皆奔走。
现代文：追击渡黄河南逃的余部，使军吏田晏、夏育招募勇士先登，用绳索吊引，再战于罗亭，大胜，杀了他们的首领以下二千人，获俘虏一万多人，余虏都逃走了。
English: They pursued the remnants of those who had fled to the south of the Yellow River, so that the military officers Tian Qi and Xia Yu recruited warriors to go first, dragged them with ropes, then fought in Luoting, won a great victory, killed two thousand people under their leaders, captured more than ten thousand people, and the remaining captives all fled.

古文：明年春，余羌复与烧何大豪寇张掖，攻没钜鹿坞，杀属国吏民，又招同种千余落，并兵晨奔颎军。
现代文：二年春天，剩下的羌虏又与烧何大帅侵犯张掖，攻陷巨鹿坞，杀害属国的官吏百姓。又召集他们的同种一千多部落，集中兵力向段颎的部队在拂晓发起攻击。
English: In the spring of the second year, the remaining captives invaded Zhangye again with the great general Qian He, captured Jiulu dock, and killed the officials and people of the country. They also gathered more than a thousand tribes of their kind and concentrated their forces to launch an attack on the troops of Duan Yu at dawn.

古文：颎下马大战，至日中，刀折矢尽，虏亦引退。
现代文：段颎下马与他们大战，战斗到中午，刀折矢尽，虏兵也撤退。
English: Duan Yan dismounted his horse and fought with them. The battle lasted until noon. The battle ended in a draw, and the invaders retreated.

古文：颎追之，且斗且行，昼夜相攻，割肉食雪，四十余日，遂至河首积石山，出塞二千余里，斩烧何大帅，首虏五千余人。
现代文：段颎追击，一边战一边走，白天黑夜战斗，割肉吞雪。四十多天，到了黄河的源头积石山，出塞外二千余里，斩烧何大帅，斩杀俘获五千多人。
English: For more than forty days, they chased Duan Yu, fighting and marching side by side, fighting day and night, cutting meat and eating snow. When they reached the source of the Yellow River, there was a mountain of stones, more than two thousand miles outside of Tibet, and they burned many great generals and killed and captured more than five thousand people.

古文：又分兵击石城羌，斩首溺死者千六百人。
现代文：又分兵攻击石城羌，杀死溺死的一千六百人。
English: Separate troops also attacked Shichengyu, killing 1,600 people who drowned.

古文：烧当种九十余口诣颎降。
现代文：烧当种九十多人投降段颎。
English: More than 90 people have surrendered to the authorities.

古文：又杂种羌屯聚白石，颎复进击，首虏三千余人。
现代文：又杂种羌驻扎白石，段颎派兵进击，斩首俘虏三千多人。
English: In addition, a hybrid warlord stationed in Shiroishi, Duan Yu sent troops to attack and beheaded more than three thousand captives.

古文：冬，勒姐、零吾种围允街，杀略吏民，颎排营救之，斩获数百人。
现代文：冬天，勒姐、零吾种包围允街，杀害掳掠官吏人民，段颎排营救援，斩获几百人。
English: In winter, Le Jie and Zou Wei surrounded Yun Street, killed and captured officials and people, and sent troops to rescue them, and captured several hundred people.

古文：四年冬，上郡沈氐、陇西牢姐、乌吾诸种羌共寇并、凉二州，颎将湟中义从讨之。
现代文：四年冬，上郡沈氐、陇西牢姐、乌吾诸种羌联合侵犯并、凉二州，段颎率领湟中起义羌征讨。
English: In the winter of the fourth year, Shang County, Shen Yi, Shaanxi, and Wu Wu jointly invaded and subjugated Liang Erzhou, and Duan Yi led the uprising and subjugation.

古文：凉州刺史郭闳贪共其功，稽固颎军，使不得进。
现代文：凉州刺史郭闳贪与段颎共享战功，拖延阻止段颎军使不得前进。
English: Liangzhou assassin Guo Bingyao shared the war exploits with Duan Yu, delaying to prevent Duan Yu's army from advancing.

古文：义从役久，亦恋旧，皆悉反叛。
现代文：起义羌从战太久，思念家乡故旧，全部反叛。
English: Uprising  from the war for too long, miss their hometown, all rebelled.

古文：郭闳归罪于颎，颎坐征下狱，输作左校。
现代文：郭闳把罪责推到段颎身上，段颎因此被捕入狱，罚作苦工。
English: Guo Yao put the blame on Duan Yao, and Duan Yao was arrested and sentenced to hard labor.

古文：羌遂陆梁，覆没营坞，转相招结，唐突诸郡，于是吏人守阙讼颎以千数。
现代文：羌虏更加猖獗，攻陷营坞，又互相勾结，扰乱各郡。于是官吏人民守在朝廷为段颎申诉的数以千计。
English: The banditry became even more rampant, attacking camps and docks, and also colluding with each other to disrupt the counties. As a result, thousands of officials and people filed complaints with the imperial court against the bandits.

古文：朝廷知颎为郭闳所诬，诏问其状。
现代文：朝廷知道段颎被郭闳诬陷，皇帝下诏问段颎的情状。
English: The imperial court knew that Duan Qi had been framed by Guo Qi, and the emperor issued an edict to inquire about Duan Qi's situation.

古文：颎但谢罪，不敢言枉，京师称为长者。
现代文：段颎只是请罪，不敢说受了冤枉，京师称段颎为长者。
English: Duan Rong only pleaded guilty, not daring to say that he had been wronged. The Beijing Teacher called Duan Rong an elder.

古文：起于徒中，复拜议郎，迁并州刺史。
现代文：从罪人中调出来，再任为议郎，升并州刺史。
English: He was transferred from the sinners, reappointed as a member of the council, and promoted to the top of the state history.

古文：时，滇那等诸种羌五六千人寇武威、张掖、酒泉，烧人庐舍。
现代文：当时滇那等诸种羌五六千人侵犯武威、张掖、酒泉，焚烧人民的房屋。
English: At that time, fifty-six thousand people from all walks of life invaded Wuwei, Zhangye and Jiuquan, and burned people's houses.

古文：六年，寇势转盛，凉州几亡。
现代文：六年，敌寇的势力更加强盛了，凉州几乎沦陷。
English: In the sixth year, the influence of the enemy bandits became even more powerful, and Liangzhou almost fell.

古文：冬，复以颎为护羌校尉，乘驿之职。
现代文：冬天，再任段颎为护羌校尉，乘驿马赶到任所。
English: In the winter, he was re-appointed as the captain of the guard, and rushed to the post on a donkey.

古文：明年春，羌封、良多、滇那等酋豪三百五十五人率三千落诣颎降。
现代文：第二年春天，羌封眀、良多、滇那等大帅三百五十五人率三千部落至段颎军前投降。
English: In the spring of the following year, the three hundred and fifty-five generals of the three thousand tribes led by the three hundred and fifty-five generals of the three thousand tribes led by the three hundred and fifty-five generals led by the three hundred and fifty-five generals led by the three thousand tribes led by the three hundred and fifty-five generals led by the three hundred and fifty-five generals led by the three hundred and fifty-five generals led by the three thousand tribes led by the three hundred and fifty-five generals led by the three thousand tribes led by the three hundred and fifty-five generals led by the three hundred and fifty-five generals led by the three

古文：当煎、勒姐种犹自屯结。
现代文：当煎、勒姐种还自集结屯驻。
English: Dangren and Lejia also set up their own encampments.

古文：冬，颎将万余人击破之，斩其酋豪，首虏四千余人。
现代文：冬天，段颎将万多人把他们击败，斩了他们的大帅，杀死俘虏四千多人。
English: In winter, Duan Yu defeated more than ten thousand of them, beheaded their general, and killed more than four thousand captives.

古文：八年春，颎复击勒姐种，斩首四百余级，降者二千余人。
现代文：八年春天，段颎又进击勒姐种，斩首四百余级，投降的二千多人。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, Duan Yu attacked Leshizong again, beheaded more than four hundred people, and more than two thousand people surrendered.

古文：夏，进军击当煎种于湟中，颎兵败，被围三日，用隐士樊志张策，潜师夜出，鸣鼓还战，大破之，首虏数千人。
现代文：夏天，进军击当煎种於湟中，段颎兵被打败，被围困三天，用隐士樊志张计策，悄悄地黑夜出兵，击鼓还战，大破贼军，杀虏几千人。
English: In the summer, marching into the middle of the reed, the soldiers of the Duan Dynasty were defeated and besieged for three days. They used the hermit's eagerness to devise a strategy, quietly dispatched troops in the dark, fought back with drums, smashed the thief army, and killed thousands of people.

古文：颎遂穷追，展转山谷间，自春及秋，无日不战，虏遂饥困败散，北略武威间。
现代文：段颎穷打猛追，辗转山谷间，从春天到秋天，无日不战，敌人因此又饥又困，各自逃散，北去侵略武威一带。
English: Duan Xuan desperately fought and chased the enemy, circling the valleys, from spring to autumn, never a day without fighting. As a result, the enemy was starving and exhausted. They fled separately and went north to invade the Wuwei area.

古文：颎凡破西羌，斩首二万三千级，获生口数万人，马牛羊八百万头，降者万余落。
现代文：段颎击败西羌，共斩首二万三千级，获俘虏几万人，马牛羊八百万头，一万多部落投降。
English: Duan Yu defeated Xidi, beheaded a total of 23,000 people, captured tens of thousands of people, eight million head of cattle and sheep, and more than 10,000 tribes surrendered.

古文：封颎都乡侯，邑五百户。
现代文：封段颎都乡侯，食邑五百户。
English: There are five hundred households in the food village.

古文：永康元年，当煎诸种复反，合四千余人，欲攻武威，颎复追击于鸾鸟，大破之，杀其渠帅，斩首三千余级，西羌于此弭定。
现代文：永康元年，当煎诸种又反，集合四千多人，想进攻武威，段颎又追击至鸾鸟，彻底击败他们，杀了他们的主帅，斩首三千余级，西羌从此平定。
English: In the first year of Yongkang, more than four thousand people gathered to attack Wuwei, and Duan Yu chased them to Ostrich, completely defeated them, killed their boss, and beheaded more than three thousand levels. Xidi has been pacified since then.

古文：而东羌先零等，自覆没征西将军马贤后，朝廷不能讨，遂数寇扰三辅。
现代文：东羌先零等自从大败征西将军马贤以后，朝廷不能征讨，经常侵扰三辅。
English: Since the great defeat of the Western General Ma Xian, the Imperial Court could not collect taxes, and often harassed the Three Auxiliaries.

古文：其后度辽将军皇甫规、中郎将张奂招之连年，既降又叛。
现代文：后来度辽将军皇甫规、中郎将张奂连年招降，总是投降了，又反叛。
English: Later, Du Liao's generals, Emperor Fuxi and Zhong Lang, invited Zhang Qilian to surrender, but he always surrendered and rebelled again.

古文：桓帝诏问颎曰： 先零东羌造恶反逆，而皇甫规、张奂各拥强众，不时辑定。
现代文：桓帝下诏问段颎说 ：先零东羌为恶反叛，而皇甫规、张奂各拥精兵，不能按时平定。
English: When Emperor Kuan issued an imperial edict, he asked Duan Qi, saying, "First, Zi Dongqi is an evil rebel, and the Emperor Hu Jie and Zhang Qi each have elite soldiers, and it is impossible to quell it in time.

古文：欲颎移兵东讨，未识其宜，可参思术略。 
现代文：想要你带兵东讨，不知怎样才合适，可不可以提出些策略呢？ 
English: If you want to have a discussion with soldiers, I don't know how to do it, can you suggest some strategies?

古文：颎因上言曰： 臣伏见先零东羌虽数叛逆，而降于皇甫规者，已二万许落，善恶既分，余寇无几。
现代文：段颎上言说 ：我看到先零东羌虽然多次叛变，但已经大约有二万个部落向皇甫规投降。谁好谁恶，已经分清，剩下的寇虏不多了。
English: Duan Yu said in his last words, "I have seen that although there have been many mutinies in the former Eastern Wei, about 20,000 tribes have already surrendered to the emperor. It is already clear who is good and who is evil, and there are not many remaining invaders.

古文：今张奂踌躇久不进者，当虑外离内合，兵往必惊。
现代文：现在张奂迟迟不前进，可能是怕敌寇外离内合，派兵前往，投降的就会惊恐。
English: Now Zhang Ye is hesitant to advance, probably because he is afraid that the enemy will attack from the outside and retreat from the inside. If he sends troops, those who surrender will be terrified.

古文：且自冬践春，屯结不散，人畜疲羸，自亡之势，徒更招降，坐制强敌耳。
现代文：并且他们自冬到春，集结驻扎不散，人马疲乏病弱，这是一种自亡的形势，只要抓紧招降，可以不发一兵而制服强大的敌人呢。
English: Moreover, from winter to spring, they were stationed and stationed, and the men and horses were tired and weak. This was a self-defeating situation. As long as they paid close attention to recruiting, they could subdue the powerful enemy without sending a single soldier.

古文：臣以为狼子野心，难以恩纳，势穷虽服，兵去复动。
现代文：我认为狼子野心，不容易用恩德结纳，他们走投无路时，虽然降服，但一收兵，他们又会骚动起来。
English: I don't think it's easy to appease the ambitions of werewolves with charity. When they're cornered, they'll surrender, but as soon as they pull back, they'll start rioting again.

古文：唯当长子挟胁，白刃加颈耳。
现代文：只有用长矛挟胁白刃加在他们的颈上才害怕啊！
English: It is only when a spear is held against their necks that they are afraid!

古文：计东种所余三万余落，居近塞内，路无险折，非有燕、齐、秦、赵从横之势，而久乱并、凉，累侵三辅，西河、上郡，已各内徙，安定、北地，复至单危，自云中、五原，西至汉阳二千余里，匈奴，种羌，并擅其地，是为痈疽伏疾，留滞胁下，如不加诛，转就滋大。
现代文：估计东种所剩三万多部落，靠近塞内，道路平坦，没有燕、齐、秦、赵纵横的形势，但他们长时间骚扰并州、凉州，累次侵犯三辅，西河、上郡，已经各自迁入塞内，安定、北地又单薄危险，从云中、五原，西至汉阳二千多里，匈奴、种羌，全部占领。这好比毒瘤暗疾，留在胁下，如果不加诛灭，很快就会长大。
English: It is estimated that there are more than 30,000 tribes remaining in Dongzhu, close to Sene, the road is flat, there is no Yan, Qi, Qin, Zhao vertical and horizontal situation, but they have long harassed Nianzhou and Liangzhou, repeatedly invaded Sanshu, West River, and Shangguan, and have moved into Sene, stable, north and slightly dangerous, from Yunchu, Wuhuan, west to Hanyang more than two thousand miles, Hunnu and Zonglu, all occupied. This is like a cancer, left under threat, if not extinguished, it will soon grow up.

古文：今若以骑五千，步万人，车三千两，三冬二夏，足以破定，无虑用费为钱五十四亿。
现代文：现在如果用骑兵五千，步兵一万，车三千辆，二三年，完全可击破他们，平定他们，也不用担心用费为钱五十四亿。
English: Now, if we use five thousand cavalry, ten thousand infantry, three thousand vehicles, twenty-three years, we can completely defeat them and pacify them, and we don't have to worry about spending 5.4 billion yuan.

古文：如此，则可令群羌破尽，匈奴长服，内徙郡县，得反本土。
现代文：这样，就可以使群羌破尽，匈奴长服。迁入塞内郡县的，可以返回本土。
English: In this way, the hordes can be destroyed and the Xiongnu subdued. Those who move to Sene County can return to the mainland.

古文：伏计永初中，诸羌反叛，十有四年，用二百四十亿；永和之末，复经七年，用八十余亿。
现代文：我想永初年间，诸羌反叛，十有四年，用费二百四十亿；永和末，又经七年，用八十多亿。
English: I think that in the first year of Yongzheng, Zhu Xi rebelled, four years out of ten, with an expenditure of twenty-four billion; in the last year of Yongzheng, after seven years, with more than eight billion.

古文：费耗若此，犹不诛尽，余孽复起，于兹作害。今不暂疲人，则永宁无期。
现代文：花了这么多金钱与时间，还没有杀尽，余孽再起，至今为害，现在如果不暂时疲劳民众一点，那么就永远无安宁之日了。
English: After spending so much money and time, we have not yet killed them all, and the remaining evil has reappeared, causing harm to this day. Now, if we do not temporarily fatigue the people a little, then there will never be a day of peace.

古文：臣庶竭驽劣，伏待节度。 
现代文：我愿意竭尽驽钝之才，敬候节命调度。 
English: I am willing to do my best to wait for the schedule of the festival.

古文：帝许之，悉听如所上。
现代文：皇帝嘉许他，完全听了他的上言。
English: The emperor praised him and fully listened to his exhortation.

古文：建宁元年春，颎将兵万余人，赍十五日粮，从彭阳直指高平，与先零诸种战于逢义山。
现代文：建宁元年春，段颎带兵一万多人，携带十五天的粮草，从彭阳直往高平，与先零诸种战于逢义山。
English: In the spring of the first year of Jianning, Duan Yu led more than ten thousand soldiers, carrying fifteen days of grain and grass, from Pengyang to Gaoping, and fought with the first zero species in Fengyi Mountain.

古文：虏兵盛，颎众恐。
现代文：虏兵多，段颎的部队害怕起来。
English: There were many enemy soldiers, and Duan Xuan's troops were afraid.

古文：颎乃令军中张镞利刃，长矛三重，挟以强弩，列轻骑为左右翼。激怒兵将曰： 今去家数千里，进则事成，走必尽死，努力共功名！ 
现代文：段颎命令军中拉紧弓弦，磨快刀枪，长矛三重，挟以强弩，左右两翼，布置轻骑，激励兵将说 ：现在我们离家几千里，前进，事业就成功；逃走，死路一条，大家努力共取功名吧！ 
English: Duan Yu ordered the middle of the army to tighten the bow strings, sharpen the knives and guns, triple the spears, sandwiched with strong crossbows, the left and right wings, arrange light cavalry, and encourage the soldiers to say: Now we are thousands of miles away from home, advance, the cause will be successful; escape, a dead end, let's all work hard to win fame!

古文：因大呼，众皆应声腾赴，颎驰骑于傍，突而击之，虏众大溃，斩首八千余级，获牛马羊二十八万头。
现代文：于是大呼喊叫，军队应声跳跃上阵，段颎驰马在旁，突然袭击，虏军大崩溃，斩首八千余级，获牛马羊二十八万头。
English: So they shouted loudly, and the army responded by jumping into battle, with Duan Xizhi riding alongside, and suddenly attacked, causing the Rui army to collapse, beheading more than eight thousand people, and capturing two hundred and eighty thousand cattle, horses, and sheep.

古文：时，窦太后临朝，下诏曰： 先零东羌历载为患，颎前陈状，欲必埽灭。
现代文：这时窦太后临朝当政，下诏说： 先零东羌历年为害，段颎以前陈述情况，认为必须扫灭。
English: At this time, the Dowager Empress Dowager Dou Lin came to power, and issued the following edict: The year before zero was a calamity, Duan Er had previously stated the situation, and believed that it must be eliminated.

古文：涉履霜雪，兼行晨夜，身当矢石，感厉吏士。
现代文：段颎履霜冒雪，白天晚上快速行军。身当矢石，使战士感奋。
English: The soldiers marched at a fast pace during the day and at night with snow on their feet. They were like arrowheads, which made the soldiers excited.

古文：曾未浃日，凶丑奔破，连尸积俘，掠获无算。
现代文：不到十天，敌寇逃跑溃散，尸体相连，活捉不少，掳获无法统计。
English: In less than ten days, the enemy bandits fled and dispersed, the bodies were connected, many were captured alive, and the number of captives could not be counted.

古文：洗雪百年之逋负，以慰忠将之亡魂。功用显著，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：洗雪了百年来的败恨，安慰了忠将的亡魂，功劳显著，我极为嘉赏他。
English: He has washed away the hatred of the past hundred years, and consoled the souls of the fallen soldiers. He has made remarkable contributions, and I highly commend him.

古文：须东羌尽定，当并录功勤。
现代文：等到东羌完全平定，应当一起记他的功勋。
English: When Donglu is completely pacified, his merits should be remembered together.

古文：今且赐颎钱二十万，以家一人为郎中。 
现代文：现在暂时赐段颎钱二十万，用他家一人为郎中。 
English: For the time being, I will give Duan Xuan 200,000 yuan and use one of his family members as my assistant.

古文：敕中藏府调金钱彩物，增助军费。
现代文：同时下令中藏府调拨金钱彩物，增助军费。
English: At the same time, he ordered the Central Tibetan Administration to allocate money and decorations to increase military spending.

古文：拜颎破羌将军。
现代文：任命段颎为破羌将军。
English: He appointed Duan Yu to be the general who broke the shackles.

古文：夏，颎复追羌出桥门，至走马水上。
现代文：夏天，段颎再追击羌出桥门，到走马水上。
English: In the summer, Duan Yu chased Yu out of the bridge gate and onto the water.

古文：寻闻虏在奢延泽，乃将轻兵兼行，一日一夜二百余里，晨及赋，击破之。余虏走向落川，复相屯结。
现代文：不久，听到消息，虏在奢延泽，于是率轻快部队快速前进，一日一夜走二百多里，早晨追到贼，击败了他们，剩下来的寇虏，逃到落川，又集合起来。
English: Soon after, he heard the news that the captives were in Yanze, so he led the light troops to advance rapidly, walking more than two hundred miles a day and night. In the morning, he chased the thieves and defeated them. The remaining captives fled to Ochkawa and gathered again.

古文：颎乃分遣骑司马田晏将五千人出其东，假司马夏育将二千人绕其西。羌分六七千人攻围晏等，晏等与战，羌溃走。
现代文：段颎于是分别派骑司马田晏率五千人出其东面，假司马夏育带二千人绕其西面，羌分六七千人围攻田晏等，田晏等与虏寇战斗，虏寇溃散逃走。
English: Therefore, Duan Di separately sent 5,000 horsemen led by Sima Tianyi to the east, 2,000 horsemen led by Sima Xiayu to the west, and 67,000 horsemen to besiege Tianyi. Tianyi fought with the robbers, and the robbers scattered and fled.

古文：颎急进，与晏等共追之于令鲜水上。
现代文：段颎急进，与田晏等一起追击于令鲜水上。
English: Duan Qi rushed forward, and together with Tian Qi and others, they chased Yu Lingshu on the water.

古文：颎士卒饥渴，乃勒众推方夺其水，虏复散走。
现代文：段颎士卒又饥又渴，于是命令部队齐头并进，夺其水，虏又溃散逃走了。
English: Hungry and thirsty, Duan Yu's soldiers ordered the troops to march in unison to seize the water, and the captives scattered and fled.

古文：颎遂与相连缀，且斗且引，及于灵武谷。
现代文：段颎尾追其后，虏边战边退，一直追到灵武谷。
English: Duan Shanwei chased after him, and Ruibian fought back and chased him all the way to Lingwu Valley.

古文：颎乃被甲先登，士卒无敢后者。
现代文：段颎披甲率先上阵，战士没有敢于不前的。
English: Duan Yu, wearing armor, took the lead in the battle, and the soldiers did not dare to stop.

古文：羌遂大败，弃兵而走。
现代文：羌虏大败，丢弃武器逃走。
English: The invaders were soundly defeated, abandoned their weapons and fled.

古文：追之三日三夜，士皆重茧。
现代文：追击三天三夜，战士的脚走得起了层层厚茧。
English: After three days and three nights of pursuit, the soldiers' feet were covered with layers of thick calluses.

古文：既到泾阳，余寇四千落，悉散入汉阳山谷间。
现代文：追到泾阳，余寇四千部落，全部分散进入汉阳山谷之间。
English: After being chased to Fenyang, the remaining 4,000 tribes scattered into the Hanyang Valley.

古文：时，张奂上言： 东羌虽破，余种难尽，颎性轻果，虑负败难常。
现代文：这时张奂上言： 东羌虽破，余种还不易消灭，段颎性情轻浮而果敢，担心他吃败仗，难保常胜。
English: At this time, Zhang Xuan said: Although the Dongluo is broken, the remaining species are not easy to eliminate. The Duanluo is frivolous and bold, and he is afraid of losing the battle, and it is difficult to ensure constant victory.

古文：宜且以恩降，可无后悔。 
现代文：应当用恩招降，才没有后悔。 
English: You should use grace to invite surrender, so that there is no regret.

古文：诏书下颎。
现代文：诏书下达段颎。
English: The imperial rescript is hereby issued.

古文：颎复上言：臣本知东羌虽众，而软弱易制，所以比陈愚虑，思为永宁之算。
现代文：段颎又上言说 ：我本来知道东羌虽然兵多，但软弱容易制服，所以近陈愚见，想为永久安宁计。
English: Duan Yu also said: I knew that although Donglu had many soldiers, they were weak and easy to subdue, so I was close to Chen Yu and wanted to work for permanent peace.

古文：而中郎将张奂，说虏强难破，宜用招降。
现代文：而中郎将张奂说虏强不易击败，应当招降。
English: However, Zhong Lang told Zhang Ye that Ruqiang was not easy to defeat and should be invited to surrender.

古文：圣朝明监，信纳瞽言，故臣谋得利，奂计不用。
现代文：皇上圣明，相信并采纳了我的无见之言，使我的谋划得以实现，张奂的计策不用。
English: Emperor Shengming, you believed in and adopted my visionary words, so that my plan could be realized, and Zhang Ye's stratagem was unnecessary.

古文：事势相反，遂怀猜恨。
现代文：事实表明，与张奂所说的相反，张奂于是心怀猜恨。
English: The facts show that, contrary to what Zhang Jun said, Zhang Jun harbored suspicion and hatred.

古文：信叛羌之诉，饰润辞意，云臣兵累见折衄，又言羌一气所生，不可诛尽，山谷广大，不可空静，血流污野，伤和致灾。
现代文：信了叛羌的话，而又修改了他们原来的词意，说我的兵多次伤败，又说羌也是秉天之一气所生，是杀不尽的，山谷广大，不可空静，血流遍野，伤和气，招灾祸。
English: Believing the words of the traitor, he changed the original meaning of the words, saying that my soldiers had been wounded and defeated many times. He also said that the dragon was born of one of the spirits of heaven and could not be killed. The valley was vast, there was no peace and quiet, blood flowed everywhere, wounding and spirit, inviting disaster.

古文：臣伏念周秦之际，戎狄为害，中兴以来，羌寇最盛，诛之不尽，虽降复叛。
现代文：我想周秦之际，戎狄为害；光武中兴以来，羌寇很强盛，杀也杀不尽，已经投降，又反叛。
English: I think that on the occasion of Zhou Qin, Yong Di was harmed; since Guangwu Zhongxing, Yan Qiao is very strong, killing can not kill, has surrendered, and rebelled.

古文：今先零杂种，累以反覆，攻没县邑，剽略人物，发冢露尸，祸及生死，上天震怒，假手行诛。
现代文：现在先零杂种，反复无常，攻陷县邑，剽劫人物，掘冢抛尸，不管生的死的，都受他们的祸害，老天震怒，借我的手以讨伐。
English: Now, first of all, the bastards, the capricious, the attacks on counties and towns, the looting of people, the digging of graves and the throwing of corpses, regardless of whether they are alive or dead, all suffer from their scourge, the wrath of God, lend me a hand to fight.

古文：昔邢为无道，卫国伐之，师兴而雨。臣动兵涉夏，连获甘澍，岁时丰稔，人无疵疫。
现代文：从前邢国无道，卫国讨伐它，出兵而天降霖雨，解缓了旱灾；我进军经炎热的夏天，接连不断获得好雨，年岁丰收，人民没有疾疫。
English: Once upon a time, there was no way to defend the country, the country fought against it, sent troops and the sky rained, alleviating the drought; I marched through the hot summer, continued to get good rain, a bumper harvest every year, and the people had no disease.

古文：上占天心，不为灾伤；下察人事，众和师克。
现代文：上占天心，不降灾伤；下察人事，很得人心，所以能够打胜仗。
English: Heaven's heart prevails above, no disaster or injury is reduced; people's hearts are very popular when they look down on others, so they are able to win the war.

古文：自桥门以西，落川以东，故官县邑，更相通属，非为深险绝域之地，车骑安行，无应折衄。
现代文：自桥门以西、落川以东，原来的官府县邑，连续不断，不是深险绝域的地方，兵车骑兵行走安全，没有伤败。
English: From the west of the bridge gate and the east of the Ochkawa River, the original prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures.

古文：按奂为汉吏，身当武职，驻军二年，不能平寇，虚欲修文戢戈，招降犷敌，诞辞空说，僭而无征。
现代文：张奂为汉朝官吏，身为军官，驻军两年，不能平定寇乱，只想修文，不想用武，招降凶猛的敌人，荒诞无稽的空话，大而无当。
English: Zhang Ye was an official of the Han Dynasty. As an officer, he was stationed for two years. Unable to quell the rebellion, he only wanted to revise the text, not to use military force. He invited the surrender of the ferocious enemy. Absurd and absurd empty talk.

古文：何以言之？
现代文：为什么这么说呢？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：昔先零作寇，赵充国徙令居内，煎当乱边，马援迁之三辅，始服终叛，至今为鲠。
现代文：从前先零寇边，赵充国把他们迁到内地；煎当扰边境，马援把他们徙到三辅，开始归服，最后还是叛变了，至今为害。
English: In the past, Zhao Chongguo first moved them to the inland; when the border was disturbed, Ma Yuan moved them to Sanfu, began to submit, and finally rebelled, and has been harmed to this day.

古文：故远识之士，以为深忧。
现代文：所以有远大眼光的人，认为这是最可忧患的。
English: That's why people with a broad vision think this is the most worrisome.

古文：今傍郡户口单少，数为羌所创毒，而欲令降徒与之杂居，是犹种枳棘于良田，养虺蛇于室内也。
现代文：现在边郡户口稀少，屡次被羌侵害，想要投降的寇虏与平民杂居，正如种植多刺的枳木和棘木于良田中，养毒蛇于室内一样，多么危险啊！
English: At present, the number of hukou in Bian County is scarce. It has been repeatedly encroached upon by baboons. The invaders who want to surrender are mixed with civilians. It is just as dangerous as planting prickly birch and thorn tree in good fields and raising poisonous snakes indoors.

古文：故臣奉大汉之威。建长久之策，欲绝其本根，不使能殖。本规三岁之费，用五十四亿，今适期年，所耗未半，而余寇残烬，将向殄灭。
现代文：所以我遵奉大汉的声威，建立长久的策略，要斩断根本，不能让其再度繁殖生长，原来计划三年的费用五十四亿，现在还刚刚一年，花耗不到一半，余寇已成残焰，不久即可消灭。
English: Therefore, I followed the great man's advice and established a long-term strategy to cut off the grassroots and not allow it to grow again. The original three-year plan cost 5.4 billion yuan, and now it is just one year, and the expenditure is less than half. The remaining bandits have become remnants and will soon be eliminated.

古文：臣每奉诏书，军不内御，愿卒斯言，一以任臣，临时量宜，不失权便。
现代文：我每奉诏书，军队在外，不可由内指挥，希望完全如这句话说，任我专责，临机应变，不失权宜。 
English: Every time I issue an edict, the army is outside, and cannot be commanded from within. I hope that it is completely as this sentence says, that I will be entrusted with special responsibilities, and that I will be able to adapt to the situation, without losing expediency.

古文：二年，诏遣谒者冯禅说降汉阳散羌。
现代文：二年，诏派谒者冯禅劝说汉阳散羌投降。
English: In the second year, the emperor sent Feng Zen to persuade Hanyang Sanzhong to surrender.

古文：颎以春农，百姓布野，羌虽暂降，而县官无廪，必当复为盗贼，不知乘虚放兵，势必殄灭。
现代文：段颎认为正是春播时间，百姓都在田野劳动，羌虽然暂时投降，公家没有粮食，羌虏一定再要为盗贼，不如乘虚进兵，势必消灭。
English: Duan Yu thought that it was the time of spring sowing, the people were all working in the fields, although Yu Yu temporarily surrendered, the public had no grain, the captives must be thieves again, it would be better to take advantage of the false entry of soldiers, it was bound to be eliminated.

古文：夏，颎自进营，去羌所屯凡亭山四五十里，遣田晏、夏育将五千人据其山上。
现代文：夏天，段颎自己进营，离羌驻扎的凡亭山四五十里，派田晏、夏育率领五千人据守山上。
English: In the summer, Duan Yu himself entered the camp, forty or fifty miles away from the Fan Ting Mountain where Yu was stationed, and sent Tian Yu and Xia Yu led by five thousand people to guard the mountain.

古文：羌悉众攻之，厉声问曰： 田晏、夏育在此不？
现代文：羌虏全军发起攻击，厉声问说： 田晏、夏育在这里不？
English: The whole army launched an attack and asked in a loud voice: Aren't Tian Qi and Xia Yu here?

古文：湟中义从羌悉在何面？
现代文：湟中投降的羌都在何面？
English: On which side of the fence are all the surrendering mules?

古文：今日欲决死生。
现代文：今天要决一生死。 
English: Today is do or die.

古文：军中恐，晏等劝激兵士，殊死大战，遂破之。
现代文：军中害怕，田晏等激励士兵，拚命大战，打败了羌虏。
English: The army was afraid, and Tian Qi and others inspired the soldiers to fight to the death and defeat the invaders.

古文：羌众溃，东奔，复聚射虎谷，分兵守诸谷上下门。
现代文：羌军溃散，向东逃跑，又聚集在射虎谷，分兵把守各谷上下门。
English: The Han army broke up, fled to the east, and gathered again in the Tiger Valley, with soldiers guarding the upper and lower gates of each valley.

古文：颎规一举灭之，不欲复令散走，乃遣千人于西县结木为栅，广二十步，长四十里，遮之。
现代文：段颎计划一举消灭，不使他们再逃散了，于是派千人在西县结木为栅，广二十步，长四十里，阻拦他们。
English: In order to prevent them from escaping and dispersing, he sent a thousand men to block them with a wooden fence in Xixian County, twenty paces wide and forty miles long.

古文：分遣晏、育等将七千人，衔枚夜上西山，结营穿堑，去虏一里许。
现代文：分派田晏、夏育率七千人，悄悄地黑夜上西山，构筑阵地，离羌虏一里许。
English: They dispatched seven thousand men, led by Tian Qi and Xia Yu, to quietly climb the West Mountain in the dark and build a position about a mile away from the enemy.

古文：又遣司马张恺等将三千人上东山。
现代文：又派司马张恺等率三千人上东山。
English: He also sent Sima Zhangye and three thousand others to climb Dongshan Mountain.

古文：虏乃觉之，遂攻晏等，分遮汲水道。
现代文：羌虏于是发觉了，向田晏等进攻，分别遮堵汲水道。
English: The invaders then discovered this and attacked the rice fields, blocking the water supply.

古文：颎自率步骑进击水上，羌却走。
现代文：段颎自己率步兵、骑兵进击水上。
English: Duan Yu himself led the infantry and cavalry into the water.

古文：因与恺等挟东西山，纵兵击破之，羌复败散。
现代文：羌虏退走，因与张恺等挟东西山，挥兵进击，羌虏大败溃散。
English: The invaders retreated, because they were surrounded by the East and West Mountains, including Zhangye, and they launched an attack. The invaders were defeated and dispersed.

古文：颎追至谷上下门穷山深谷之中，处处破之，斩其渠帅以下万九千级，获牛马驴骡氈裘庐帐什物，不可胜数。
现代文：段颎追至谷上下门穷山深谷之中，处处击破。斩其主帅以下一万九千级，获牛马骡驴毡裘庐帐什物，不可胜数。
English: Duan Yu chased them up and down the valley, through the deep valleys of the poor mountains, and defeated them everywhere. He cut off nineteen thousand levels below his boss, and won countless cattle, horses, donkeys, donkeys, and goats.

古文：冯禅等所招降四千人，分置安定、汉阳、陇西三郡，于是东羌悉平。
现代文：冯禅所招降的四千人，分别安置在安定、汉阳、陇西三郡，至此东羌全部平定。
English: The four thousand people recruited by Feng Zen were resettled in the three counties of Ding'an, Hanyang, and Shaanxi, and by this time, all of Dong'an had been pacified.

古文：凡百八十战，斩三万八千六百余级，获牛马骡驴驼四十二万七千五百余头，费用四十四亿，军士死者四百余人。
现代文：共一百八十战，斩敌首三万八千六百余级，获牛马羊骡驴骆驼四十二万七千五百余头，用费四十四亿，军士死四百余人。
English: A total of 180 battles were fought, with more than 38,600 enemy heads cut off, more than 427,500 heads of cattle, horses, sheep, donkeys and camels captured, expenditure of 4.4 billion yuan, and more than 400 soldiers and sergeants killed.

古文：更封新丰县侯，邑万户。
现代文：段颎改封新丰县侯，邑万户。
English: Duanqi was renamed Xinfeng County, with more than ten thousand households.

古文：颎行军仁爱，士卒疾病者，亲自瞻省，手为裹创。
现代文：段颎行军仁爱，士卒有疾病，亲自慰问、裹伤。
English: Duan Er marched with benevolence and love. If a soldier was ill, he would personally offer his condolences and bandage the wound.

古文：在边十余年，未尝一日蓐寝。
现代文：在边境十多年，没有睡过一晚好觉。
English: I haven't had a good night's sleep in more than ten years at the border.

古文：与将士同苦，故皆乐为死战。
现代文：与将士同甘共苦，所以军士都愿为他死战。
English: He shared the joys and hardships with the soldiers, so the soldiers were all willing to die for him.

古文：三年春，征还京师，将秦胡步骑五万余人，及汗血千里马，生口万余人。
现代文：三年春，召还京师，带秦、胡步兵骑兵五万多人，和汗血千里马，俘虏万余人。
English: In the spring of the third year, the Beijing Division was called back, bringing more than 50,000 Qin and Hu infantry and cavalry, and sweating and blood, capturing more than 10,000 people.

古文：诏遣大鸿胪持节慰劳于镐。
现代文：皇帝派大鸿胪持节慰劳于镐。
English: The emperor sent Dahong Zhi Jie as a consolation gift to Zhou.

古文：军至，拜侍中，转执金吾河南尹。
现代文：部队到达，授段颎为侍中。调执金吾河南尹。
English: When the troops arrived, he was given the title of chamberlain. The commander was King Henan Yin.

古文：有盗发冯贵人冢，坐左转谏议大夫，再迁司隶校尉。
现代文：有盗挖掘冯贵人冢，获罪降为谏议大夫，再升司隶校尉。
English: He was found guilty of digging up the tomb of Feng Guizhun, and was demoted to the rank of doctor of the imperial court, and then promoted to the rank of lieutenant colonel.

古文：颎曲意宦官，故得保其富贵，遂党中常侍王甫，枉诛中常侍郑飒、董腾等，增封四千户，并前万四千户。
现代文：段颎依附宦官，所以能够保其富贵，与中常侍王甫结为党羽，冤杀了中常侍郑飒、董腾等人，增封四千户，加上以前的共一万四千户。
English: Duan Yu depended on eunuchs, so he was able to maintain his wealth. He formed a faction with the middle chamberlain Wang Fu, and unjustly killed the middle chamberlain Zheng Yu, Dong Teng and others, increasing the number of eunuchs by four thousand, adding to the previous total of fourteen thousand.

古文：明年，代李咸为太尉，其冬病罢，复为司隶校尉。
现代文：第二年，代李咸为太尉，这年冬因病罢免，再命为司隶校尉。
English: The following year, he was promoted to the rank of captain on behalf of Li Xian, but was dismissed due to illness in the winter of the same year, and was reappointed to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：数岁，转颎川太守，征拜太中大夫。
现代文：过了几年，调颍川太守，征授太中大夫。
English: A few years later, he was transferred to the position of the governor of the Beichuan Province and was awarded the title of the junior doctor of the Taichung Province.

古文：光和二年，复代桥玄为太尉。
现代文：光和二年，又代桥玄为太尉。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Hashiharu Hashimoto was promoted to the rank of second lieutenant.

古文：在位月余，会日食自劾，有司举奏，诏收印绶，诣廷尉。
现代文：在位月余，因日食上奏弹劾自己，官吏上奏检举，诏命收了他的印绶，送廷尉受审。
English: In the last month of his reign, because of the solar eclipse, he was impeached, the officials were reported to the procuratorate, the imperial command collected his seal, and sent the court lieutenant to stand trial.

古文：时司隶校尉阳球奏诛王甫，并及颎，就狱中诘责之，遂饮鸩死，家属徙边。
现代文：这时司隶校尉阳球上奏诛杀王甫，牵连到段颎，就在狱中诘问责斥他，段颎于是服鸩自杀，家属徙迁往边境。
English: At this time, the officer-in-charge of the school, Wang Fu, was implicated in the murder of Wang Fu, and he was held accountable and reprimanded in prison. As a result, he committed suicide, and his family moved to the border.

古文：后中常侍吕强上疏，追讼颎功，灵帝诏颎妻子还本郡。
现代文：后来中常侍吕强上疏，追诉段颎的功绩，灵帝下诏段颎的妻子儿女归还本郡。
English: Later, Lu Qiang Shangzhao, a middle-ranking courtier, prosecuted the exploits of Duan Qi, and Lingdi issued an edict to return Duan Qi's wife and children to the county.

古文：初，颎与皇甫威明、张然明，并知名显达，京师称为 凉州三明 云。
现代文：以前，段颎与皇甫威明、张然明，都声名显达，京师称为 凉州三明 。
English: In the past, Duan Yu and Wang Fu Weiming and Zhang Ranming were all famous, and the Beijing division was called Liangzhou Sanming.

