古文：异域下突厥吐谷浑高昌鄯善焉耆龟兹于阗献哒粟特安息波斯突厥者，盖匈奴之别种，姓阿史那氏。
现代文：突厥，是匈奴的分支，姓阿史那。
English: Turk, a branch of the Xiongnu, surnamed Ashina.

古文：别为部落。
现代文：另外成一个部落。
English: They also became a tribe.

古文：后为邻国所破，尽灭其族。
现代文：后来被邻国攻破，其族被灭绝。
English: It was later defeated by its neighbours and its entire ethnic group was exterminated.

古文：有一儿，年且十岁，兵人见其小，不忍杀之，乃刖其足，弃草泽中。
现代文：有一个孩子，将近十岁，兵士见他年龄小，不忍杀他，就将他的脚砍掉，抛弃在草泽之中。
English: There was a child, about ten years old, whom the soldiers could not bear to kill, so they cut off his feet and left him in the grass.

古文：有牝狼以肉饲之，及长，与狼合，遂有孕焉。
现代文：有一母狼用肉喂养他，长大后，与狼交配，由此有孕。
English: A she-wolf fed him with meat, and when she grew up, she mated with a wolf and became pregnant.

古文：彼王闻此儿尚在，重遣杀之。
现代文：邻国国王听说此儿未死，又派人去杀他。
English: When the king of a neighbouring country heard that he was still alive, he sent someone to kill him.

古文：使者见狼在侧，并欲杀狼。
现代文：使者见他身旁有狼，想把狼一并杀死。
English: The messenger saw a wolf next to him and wanted to kill the wolf as well.

古文：狼遂逃于高昌国之北山。
现代文：狼逃奔到高昌国的北山。
English: The wolf fled to the North Mountain of Gaochang.

古文：山有洞穴，穴内有平壤茂草，周回数百里，四面俱山。
现代文：山上有洞穴，洞穴内部有平坦茂盛的草地，方圆数百里，四面全是山。
English: There are caves on the mountain, and inside the caves there is a flat, lush meadow, hundreds of miles in circumference, with mountains on all sides.

古文：狼匿其中，遂生十男。
现代文：狼在其中藏匿，生下十个男儿。
English: The wolf hid here and later gave birth to ten cubs.

古文：十男长大，外托妻孕，其后各有一姓，阿史那即一也。
现代文：十男长大后，在外娶妻生子，他们的后代各有一姓。阿史那就是其中之一。
English: After the tenth son grew up, he married a wife and had a child outside, and their descendants each have a surname. Ashi is one of them.

古文：子孙蕃育，渐至数百家。
现代文：子孙繁殖生育，渐渐至数百家之多。
English: Descendants reproduce and have children, and gradually there are hundreds of families.

古文：经数世，相与出穴，臣于茹茹。
现代文：经过数代，共同出穴，臣服于茎苞。
English: After several generations, they emerged from the hole together and surrendered to the stalk.

古文：居金山之阳，为茹茹铁工。
现代文：居住在金山的南面，为蕴苞的铁工。
English: He lives in the south of Jinshan and is a retired ironworker.

古文：金山形似兜鍪，其俗谓兜鍪为 突厥 ，遂因以为号焉。
现代文：金山的形状似头盔，其风俗称头盔为 突厥 ，于是以此为称号。
English: The shape of Jinshan resembles a helmet, and its custom is to call the helmet "Turk," hence the name.

古文：或云突厥之先出于索国，在匈奴之北。
现代文：有人说塞巫先人出于塞迩，在包塑的北面。
English: Some people say that the ancestors of the Jie witches came from Jie, in the north of the envelope.

古文：其部落大人曰阿谤步，兄弟十七人。
现代文：其部落大人是囤谴步，有十七名兄弟。
English: The headman of his tribe is a yakitori dancer, and he has seventeen brothers.

古文：其一曰伊质泥师都，狼所生也。
现代文：其中一名称伊质泥师都，为狼所生。
English: One of them, known as Icicles, was born of a wolf.

古文：谤步等性并愚痴，国遂被灭。
现代文：谤步等人都很愚痴，国家因而被减。
English: People like Zhabo and others complained that it was stupid, so the country was downgraded.

古文：泥师都既别感异气，能征召风雨。
现代文：迟匝都另外有神异的气质，能够呼风唤雨。
English: In addition, they all have a supernatural temperament and can call for wind and rain.

古文：娶二妻，云是夏神、冬神之女也。
现代文：娶了二位妻子，说是夏神、冬神之女。
English: He married two wives and claimed to be the daughter of the god of summer and the god of winter.

古文：一孕而生四男。
现代文：一胎生下四个儿子。
English: She gave birth to four sons.

古文：其一变为白鸿；其一国于阿辅水、剑水之间，号为契骨；其一国于处折水；其一居践斯处折施山，即其大儿也。
现代文：其一变为白鸿；其一于四越丞、翅丞之间立国，国号为契骨；其一于处堑丞立国；其一居住于践斯处折施山，是他的大儿子。
English: One of them became Bai Hong; one of them founded the country between Si Yue Zheng and Ling Zheng Zheng, and the country was named after him; one of them founded the country in Zhengyu Zheng Zheng Zheng; one of them lived in Zhan Shi Zheng Orshi Shan, and was his eldest son.

古文：山上仍有阿谤步种类，并多寒露。
现代文：山上仍有阿谤步的族类，大多数饥餐露宿。
English: There are still tribes living in the mountains, and most of them are homeless and starving.

古文：大儿为出火温养之，咸得全济。
现代文：大儿生火给他们温暖并抚养他们，都得以生存。
English: The eldest son built a fire to keep them warm and raised them, and they all managed to survive.

古文：遂共奉大儿为主，号为突厥，即讷都六设也。
现代文：因而共同奉大儿为主，称号为突厥，即是讷都六设。
English: As a result, the eldest son was jointly honored as the main, and the title was Turk, that is, there were six.

古文：讷都六有十妻，所生子皆以母族为姓，阿史那是其小妻之子也。
现代文：讷都六有十位妻子，所生子皆以母亲家族为姓，阿史那是其小妻之子。
English: There were ten wives in Nadu-roku, and all the children bore the surname of their mother's family. Ashina was the son of his younger wife.

古文：讷都六死，十母子内欲择立一人，乃相率于大树下，共为约曰，向树跳跃，能最高者，即推立之。
现代文：讷都六死后，要在十母所生各子中选择一人继位，于是集中在大树下，共同约定说，向树跳跃，谁跳得最高，便推立谁。
English: After the death of Nadu the Sixth, they had to choose one person from each of the ten sons born to the mother to succeed to the throne, so they gathered under a large tree and jointly agreed to say, "Jump to the tree, whoever jumps the highest will be promoted."

古文：阿史那子年幼而跳最高者，诸子遂奉以为主，号阿贤设。
现代文：阿史那年幼而跳得最高，诸子因而奉以为主，称号阿贤设。
English: Ashi was the youngest and jumped the highest, so his sons were given the title of "Axian."

古文：此说虽殊，然终狼种也。
现代文：这一说法虽然不同，然而终究是狼的后代。
English: Although this is a different story, they are, after all, descendants of wolves.

古文：其后曰土门，部落稍盛，始至塞上市缯絮，愿通中国。
现代文：其后代称为土门，部落逐渐强盛，开始到边塞买卖缯帛丝棉，愿意和中原交往。
English: After Ashina, it was called Domon, and when the tribe became a little more powerful, they began to buy and sell yakitori and were willing to trade with China.

古文：大统十一年，太祖遣酒泉胡安诺盘陀使焉。
现代文：大统十一年，太祖派遣酒泉胡人安诺槃陁出使该部落。
English: In the eleventh year of unification, the great ancestor dispatched Jiuquan Hu people to the tribe.

古文：其国皆相庆曰： 今大国使至，我国将兴也。 十二年，土门遂遣使献方物。
现代文：其国人皆庆贺说： 如今大国的使者来到，我国将要兴盛了。 十二年，土门派遣使者贡献特产。
English: His countrymen all celebrated, saying, "Nowadays, the emissary of a great power has come, and our country will prosper." In the twelfth year, the Dumen sent an emissary to contribute special products.

古文：时铁勒将伐茹茹，土门率所部邀击，破之，尽降其众五万余落。
现代文：当时铁勒将要征伐茹茹，土门率领部众半路狙击，击败他们，使他们五万多落全部投降。
English: At that time, Tiler was going to invade Zhuru, and Tu Men led the troops to snipe halfway, defeated them, and made more than fifty thousand of them surrender.

古文：恃其强盛，乃求婚于茹茹。
现代文：仗恃着力量强盛，于是向茹茹族求婚。
English: As his strength increased, he proposed marriage to a member of the Zhu Ru tribe.

古文：茹茹主阿那瑰大怒，使人骂辱之曰： 尔是我锻奴，何敢发是言也？ 土门亦怒，杀其使者。
现代文：茹茹的统领阿那瓖大怒，派人辱骂说： 你是我的锻奴，怎么敢提出如此要求? 土门也大怒，将其使者杀死。
English: Anaxagoras, the ruler of Juru, was furious and sent men to insult him, saying: "You are my blacksmith, how dare you make such a demand? The local ruler was also furious and killed his messenger.

古文：遂与之绝，而求婚于我。
现代文：因此与他绝交，另向本朝求婚。太祖同意。
English: Therefore, he broke off diplomatic relations with him and proposed marriage to this dynasty. The great-grandfather agreed.

古文：太祖许之。十七年六月，以魏长乐公主妻之。是岁，魏文帝崩，土门遣使来吊，赠马二百匹。
现代文：十七年六月，以魏长乐公主嫁给他为妻。这一年，魏文帝去世，土门派使者来吊唁，赠送二百匹马。
English: In June of the seventeenth year, he married Princess Wei Changle. In the same year, Emperor Weiwen passed away, and Tu Men sent an envoy to offer condolences and a gift of two hundred horses.

古文：魏废帝元年正月，土门发兵击茹茹，大破之于怀荒北。
现代文：魏废帝元年正月，土门出兵进攻茹茹，于怀荒北面大破之。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Wei Emperor, Tu Men sent troops to attack Zhu Ru, and they made a great breakthrough in the north of Huaihai.

古文：阿那瑰自杀，其子庵罗辰奔齐，余众复立阿那瑰叔父邓叔子为主。
现代文：阿那瓖自杀，其子庵罗辰投奔到齐，剩下的族人又立阿那瓖叔父邓叔子为主。
English: Ananyan committed suicide, his son An Luo Chen fled to Beiqi, and the rest of the people re-established Ananyan's uncle Deng Shuzi as the leader.

古文：土门遂自号伊利可汗，犹古之单于也。
现代文：土门因而自称伊利可汗，如同古代的单于。
English: As a result, the local ruler called himself Ili Khan, just like the ancient Shanyu.

古文：号其妻为可贺敦，亦犹古之阏氏也。
现代文：把他的妻称为可贺敦，如同古代的辟氏。
English: He referred to his wife as Koha-don, like the ancient Naga clan.

古文：土门死，子科罗立。
现代文：土门死后。其子科罗即位。
English: After Domon's death, his son Koro succeeded to the throne.

古文：科罗号乙息记可汗。
现代文：圣堡号称乙息记可汗。
English: The holy castle is known as the home of Aung San Khan.

古文：又破叔子于沃野北木赖山。
现代文：又于送墅北面的立题山击败圭巳王。
English: In addition, he defeated Gui Si Wang in Lijiishan, north of the villa.

古文：二年三月，科罗遣使献马五万匹。
现代文：二年三月，圣啰派遣使者贡献五万匹马。
English: In March of the following year, the Holy See dispatched an envoy to bring 50,000 horses.

古文：科罗死，弟俟斤立，号木汗可汗。
现代文：型罗死后，其弟俭丘即位，称号为木汗可迂。
English: After Typhon's death, his younger brother Thrifty Hill ascended to the throne, taking the title of Wood Sweeper.

古文：俟斤一名燕都，状貌多奇异，面广尺余，其色甚赤，眼若琉璃。
现代文：蚯又叫游都，长相奇特，面有一尺多宽，面色赤红，眼睛如同琉璃。
English: Yu Du, also known as Yu Du, has a peculiar appearance. His face is more than a foot wide, his complexion is red, and his eyes are like glass.

古文：性刚暴，务于征伐。
现代文：性情刚烈暴躁，喜好征战。
English: His temperament is tough and hot-tempered, and he likes to go to war.

古文：乃率兵击邓叔子，灭之。
现代文：率兵攻击邓叔子，将其消灭。
English: He led the troops to attack Deng Shuzi and eliminated him.

古文：叔子以其余烬来奔。
现代文：叔子率领战后余民来投奔。
English: My uncle led the rest of the people to flee after the war.

古文：俟斤又西破献哒，东走契丹，北并契骨，威服塞外诸国。
现代文：俟斤又打败西面的嗽嚏，东方击走契丹，北方吞并契骨，用威力慑服塞外诸国。
English: He defeated the sneezing of the West, the East drove away the Khitan, the North annexed the bones, and used the power to deter foreign countries.

古文：其地东自辽海以西，西至西海万里，南自沙漠以北，北至北海五六千里，皆属焉。
现代文：他所占据的地方东方自辽海以西，西方至西海万里，南方自沙漠以北，北方至北海五六千里，都隶属于他。
English: The areas occupied by him, from the Liao Sea in the east to the West Sea in the west, from the desert in the south to the North Sea in the north, all belong to him.

古文：其俗被发左衽，穹庐毡帐，随水草迁徙，以畜牧射猎为务。
现代文：其风俗头发披散不柬，衣襟向左掩，居住帐篷，随着水草迁徙，以放牧射猎为生。
English: Their customs are to wear their hair long and loose, to wear their collars turned to the left, to live in tents, to follow the migration of aquatic plants, and to live by grazing and shooting.

古文：贱老贵壮，寡廉耻，无礼义，犹古之匈奴也。
现代文：轻视老人看重青壮年，不知廉耻，没有礼义，如同古代的匈奴。
English: They despise the elderly and value the young. They are shameless and have no sense of propriety, just like the ancient Xiongnu.

古文：其主初立，近侍重臣等舆之以毡，随日转九回，每一回，臣下皆拜。
现代文：其主初立的时候，近侍重臣的车用毡子来装饰，随着太阳转九回，每一回，臣下都下拜。
English: When the lord was first enthroned, the chariots of the chief retainers were decorated with braids. They turned nine times with the sun, and each time, the retainers bowed down.

古文：拜讫，乃扶令乘马，以帛绞其颈，使纔不至绝,然后释而急问之曰： 你能作几年可汗？ 其主既神情瞀乱，不能详定多少。
现代文：拜完后，就扶他骑上马，用束帛勒住他的脖子，不等到死的时候，将束帛打开而突然问他： 你能作几年可汗? 其主此时精神错乱，不能详定有多少年。
English: After the prayer, they helped him to mount his horse, and tied a sash around his neck. Before he died, they opened the sash and suddenly asked him: "How many years have you been khan? His master was insane at the time and could not specify how many years."

古文：臣下等随其所言,以验修短之数。
现代文：臣下等人便以其随口所言，以验证长短时间。
English: Subordinates and others then use their casual remarks to verify the length of time.

古文：大官有叶护,次，次特，次俟利发，次吐屯发，及余小官凡二十八等，皆世为之。
现代文：官制中大官有叶护，其次为设，再次为特勤，又次为俟利发，更次一等的是吐屯发，其余小官共二十八等，都是世代所为的。
English: According to the official system, Ye Guo was the highest-ranking official, followed by Zheng, then Xing Xing, then Gong Li Fa, followed by Tutun Fa, and the remaining 28 minor officials were all generational.

古文：兵器有弓矢鸣镝甲矛刀剑，其佩饰则兼有伏突。
现代文：兵器有弓矢鸣镝甲稍刀剑，其佩饰则兼有短刀。
English: Their weapons include bows and arrows, armor, and swords, and they are also equipped with knives.

古文：旗纛之上，施金狼头。
现代文：大小旗帜上都加上金狼头。
English: Above the large flag, a golden wolf's head is embroidered.

古文：侍卫之士，谓之附离，夏言亦狼也。
现代文：侍卫将士，称之为附离，汉语就是狼。
English: The bodyguards are called "subsidiaries," and the Chinese word for "subsidiary" is "wolf."

古文：盖本狼生，志不忘旧。
现代文：他们原本就是狼所生的，其志不忘本。
English: Probably Turks were originally born from wolves, to show that they have not forgotten this.

古文：其征发兵马，科税杂畜，辄刻木为数，并一金镞箭，蜡封印之，以为信契。
现代文：征召兵马，征收杂畜税赋，都将数量刻在木头上，连同一枝金镞箭，共同用蜡封印好，作为凭证契约。
English: The number of soldiers and horses to be conscripted, and the number of animals to be taxed, were all engraved on the wood, and together with a golden arrow, they were sealed with wax as a certificate contract.

古文：其刑法：反叛、杀人及奸人之妇、盗马绊者，皆死；奸人女者，重责财物，即以其女妻之；斗伤人者，随轻重输物；盗马及杂物者，各十余倍征之。
现代文：其刑法有：反叛、杀人及强奸人家妇女、偷盗马绊者，都处死刑；与人家女子通奸的，重罚其财物，就把这个女子嫁给他为妻；相争伤了人的，以伤势轻重罚取财物；偷盗马匹和杂物的，各以十余倍加以惩罚。
English: Its criminal laws include: rebellion, homicide and rape of other women, theft of horses and tripping, are all punishable by death; adultery with another woman, heavily punish his property, then marry this woman to him as a wife; quarrel and injure someone, punish the property according to the severity of the injury; steal horses and miscellaneous goods, punish more than ten times.

古文：死者，停尸于帐，子孙及诸亲属男女，各杀羊马，陈于帐前，祭之。
现代文：死了的人，于帐内停放尸体，子孙及诸亲属男女，分别杀马羊，陈设在帐前，进行祭拜。
English: The bodies of the deceased are placed in the tabernacle, and their descendants and relatives, both men and women, separately slaughter a sheep and a horse, and display them in front of the tabernacle for worship.

古文：绕帐走马七匝，一诣帐门，以刀剺面，且哭，血泪俱流，如此者七度，乃止。
现代文：围绕其帐走马七圈，一到帐门，以刀割面，并且哭泣，血泪俱流，如此七次，方才停止。
English: He circled his tent seven times, and when he came to the door of the tent, he cut it open with a knife, and wept and shed blood and tears seven times before he stopped.

古文：择日，取亡者所乘马及经服用之物，并尸俱焚之，收其余灰，待时而葬。
现代文：选择好日子，取亡者所乘的马及曾经使用过的物品，与尸体一起焚烧，收取骨灰，选择时间再下葬。
English: Choose a date, and burn the horse that the deceased was riding and the objects that were used to pass through, together with the corpse. Put away the ashes left over from the burning, and wait for the burial season.

古文：春夏死者，候草木黄落，秋冬死者，候华叶荣茂，然始坎而瘗之。
现代文：春夏时候死的人，等到草木枯黄时，秋冬时候死的，等到草木茂盛时，才可掘坑埋葬。
English: People who die in spring and summer should wait until the plants are withered, and those who die in autumn and winter should wait until the plants are in full bloom before they can be buried.

古文：葬之日，亲属设祭，及走马剺面，如初死之仪。
现代文：下葬的时候，亲属设立祭祀，依然骑马割面，就如初死时的仪式。
English: At the time of burial, relatives set up a ritual, still riding horses, just like the ceremony at the first death.

古文：葬讫，于墓所立石建标。
现代文：安葬之后，于墓上立石作为标记。
English: After the burial, a stone was placed on the grave as a marker.

古文：其石多少，依平生所杀人数。
现代文：石标的多少，以生平所杀人数的多少来确定。
English: The number of stone markers is determined by the number of people killed in life.

古文：又以祭之羊马头，尽悬挂于标上。
现代文：又以羊马的头祭祀，都悬挂于石标的上面。
English: In addition, the heads of sheep and horses were sacrificed and hung above the stone markers.

古文：是日也，男女咸盛服饰，会于葬所。
现代文：这一天，男女都穿戴漂亮的衣服和装饰，在所葬之地会聚。
English: On this day, both men and women wear beautiful clothes and decorations and gather at the burial place.

古文：男有悦爱于女者，归即遣人娉问，其父母多不违也。
现代文：男人有所喜爱的女人，回去就派人带礼品去求婚，其父母一般不会拒绝。
English: If a man likes a woman, he will send someone back with a gift to propose marriage, and her parents will generally not refuse.

古文：父伯叔死者，子弟及侄等妻其后母、世叔母及嫂，唯尊者不得下淫。
现代文：父兄伯叔死后，子弟及侄等可以将其后母、世叔母及嫂作为妻子，衹是辈分高的人不能与小辈淫乱。
English: After the death of a father, brother or uncle, the children and nephews can take their stepmother, great-aunt and sister-in-law as their wives. However, those who are of a higher generation cannot fornicate with the younger generation.

古文：虽移徙无常，而各有地分。
现代文：虽然迁徙来去不固定，但各有一定的地域。
English: Although migration is not fixed, there is a certain region for each.

古文：可汗恒处于都斤山，牙帐东开，盖敬日之所出也。
现代文：可汗通常都在于都斤山居住，将帅的营帐门朝束，敬仰太阳所出的地方。
English: The khans usually lived in the mountains of Dujin, where they would close the doors of their tents in the morning and worship the place where the sun rises.

古文：每岁率诸贵人，祭其先窟。
现代文：每年率领诸贵人，祭祀其先祖的洞窟。
English: Every year, the khan leads a group of dignitaries to the ancestral cave.

古文：又以五月中旬，集他人水，拜祭天神。
现代文：又以五月中旬，集合他人的水，拜祭天神。
English: In the middle of May, people gather water to worship the deities.

古文：于都斤四五百里，有高山迥出，上无草树，谓其为勃登凝黎，夏言地神也。
现代文：于都斤西方五百里，有一突出的高山，山上没有草树，称其为勃登凝黎，汉语就是地神。
English: Five hundred miles west of Yudukin, there is a prominent mountain. There is no grass or trees on the mountain. It is called Burdenghenli, which means "God of the Earth" in Chinese.

古文：其书字类胡，而不知年历，唯以草青为记。
现代文：其文字类似于胡人，而不知道日历，惟以草的青黄来纪年。
English: Their writing is similar to that of the Hu people. They do not know the calendar, but use the grass turning green as a sign.

古文：俟斤部众既盛，乃遣使请诛邓叔子等。
现代文：俟斤部族兵众强盛后，就派遣使者请求诛杀邓叔子等人。
English: After the soldiers of the Shujin tribe became strong, they sent an envoy to request that Deng Shuzi and others be killed.

古文：太祖许之。
现代文：太祖同意。
English: His great-grandfather allowed him to enter the capital.

古文：收叔子以下三千人，付其使者，杀之于青门外。
现代文：擒拿叔子及其部下三千人，交给其使者，于青门外处死。
English: He took his son-in-law and three thousand of his men, handed them over to his emissaries, and they were executed outside the Qingmen Gate.

古文：三年，俟斤袭击吐谷浑，破之。语在吐谷浑传。
现代文：三年，俟斤袭击吐谷浑，将其击破，事情记载在《吐谷浑传》中。
English: Three years later, the Jiaojin attacked and defeated the Tugu Hun, which was recorded in the "Tugu Hun Biography."

古文：明帝二年，俟斤遣使来献方物。
现代文：明帝二年，俟斤派遣使者来贡献特产。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, Jiaojin sent an envoy to contribute special products.

古文：保定元年，又三辈遣使贡其方物。
现代文：保定元年，又三次遣使贡献特产。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was sent three times to contribute special products.

古文：时与齐人交争，戎车岁动，故每连结之，以为外援。
现代文：当时周与齐人争战，每年都打仗，所以经常联合俟斤，作为外援。
English: At that time, Zhou and Qi were at war, and they fought every year, so they often joined forces to help each other as foreign aid.

古文：初，魏恭帝世，俟斤许进女于太祖，契未定而太祖崩。
现代文：当初。魏恭帝的时候，俟斤同意把自己的女儿送给太祖，尚未订立婚约而太祖去世。
English: At the time of Emperor Wei Gong, Yaojin agreed to give his daughter to his grandfather, but they had not yet entered into a marriage contract, and his grandfather passed away.

古文：寻而俟斤又以他女许高祖，未及结纳，齐人亦遣求婚，俟斤贪其币厚，将悔之。
现代文：不久俟斤又以另一女儿许给高祖，尚未送去聘礼，齐人也派人求婚，俟斤贪求其财礼更多，准备悔约。
English: Soon after, Yan Jin promised Gao Zu another daughter, but had yet to send a betrothal gift. Qi also sent someone to propose marriage, and Yan Jin coveted more of Gao Zu's financial gifts and prepared to renege on the agreement.

古文：至是，诏遣凉州刺史杨荐、武伯王庆等往结之。
现代文：到此时，高祖又令凉州刺史杨荐、武伯王庆等人前往结交。
English: At this time, Gao Zu also sent Yang Sheng, Wubo Wang Qing and others to Liangzhou to make friends.

古文：庆等至，谕以信义。
现代文：王庆等人到后，告诉他要讲信义。
English: When Wang Qing and the others arrived, they told him to speak about faith.

古文：俟斤遂绝齐使而定婚焉。
现代文：俟斤于是谢绝齐使而定下舆周的婚姻。
English: Therefore, Xing Jin refused to be coerced and decided on the marriage of the public opinion.

古文：仍请举国东伐。
现代文：仍请求举国束伐。
English: They are still calling for a nationwide ban on logging.

古文：语在荐等传。
现代文：其事情记载在杨荐等人的传中。
English: His story is recorded in the biography of Yang Ruiqi and others.

古文：三年，诏随公杨忠率众一万，与突厥伐齐。
现代文：三年，高祖令随公杨忠率领一万兵士，与突题一起征伐变迩。
English: In the third year, Gao Zu Ling followed Gong Yang Zhong and led ten thousand soldiers, and together with Pu Zhi, they went to conquer and transform the country.

古文：忠军度陉岭，俟斤率骑十万来会。
现代文：圭疆的军队越过陉岭，蝗丘率领十万骑兵来会师。
English: Guizhong's army crossed the Fuling, and Locust Hill led a hundred thousand cavalry to join the division.

古文：明年正月，攻齐主于晋阳，不克。
现代文：第二年正月，于晋阳进攻齐主，未能攻克。
English: In the first month of the second year, Jinyang was attacked by all sides and could not be conquered.

古文：俟斤遂纵兵大掠而还。
现代文：俟斤于是放纵其兵士大肆劫掠而归。
English: He then allowed his soldiers to return home with a great deal of plunder.

古文：忠言于高祖曰： 突厥甲兵恶，爵赏轻，首领多而无法令，何谓难制驭。
现代文：扰盅对直担说： 空题兵士凶恶，爵禄和赏赐少，首领多却没有法令，何以说难以制服。
English: Zhaozhou said to Zhitang: The soldiers of the empty title are vicious, the rewards and rewards are few, the leaders are many but there is no law, so why is it difficult to subdue.

古文：正由比者使人妄道其强盛，欲令国家厚其使者，身往重取其报。
现代文：衹是近来使者没有根据地说它强盛，想让国家重视其使者，亲自前往获取丰厚的回赠。
English: Recently, the emissary said that it was strong without any basis, and wanted the country to pay attention to its emissary and go there in person to obtain a rich reward.

古文：朝廷受其虚言，将士望风畏慑。
现代文：朝廷听信了这种虚言，将士望风畏惧。
English: The imperial court was deceived by his false words, and the generals were afraid of him.

古文：但虏态诈健，而实易与耳。
现代文：虽然虏寇善于伪装欺诈，其实容易对付。
English: However, the Turks look strong and are actually easy to deal with.

古文：今以臣观之，前后使人皆可斩也。 高祖不纳。
现代文：如今以臣的观察，前后使者都可斩首。 高祖没有采纳此意见。
English: Today, emissaries can be beheaded on the basis of a minister's observation, but Gaozu did not accept this opinion.

古文：是岁，俟斤复遣使来献，更请东伐。
现代文：这一年，俟斤又遣使来贡献，又请求束伐。
English: In the same year, Emperor He again sent an envoy to present gifts and to request a crusade against Qi.

古文：诏杨忠率兵出沃野，晋公护趣洛阳以应之。
现代文：高祖令杨忠率兵出沃野，晋公宇文护率兵至洛阳接应。
English: The imperial edict ordered Yang Zhong to lead his troops out of Wuye, and Jin Gong Uwenguo rushed to Luoyang to meet Yang Zhong.

古文：会护战不利，俟斤引还。
现代文：当宇文护接战失利，俟斤退兵而回。
English: At the time of the unfavorable engagement of Uwenguo, Xingjin withdrew and returned.

古文：五年，诏陈公纯、大司徒宇文贵、神武公窦毅、南安公杨荐等往逆女。
现代文：五年，高祖令陈公宇文纯、大司徒宇文贵、神武公窦毅、南安公杨荐等人前往迎娶俟斤女儿。
English: In the fifth year, Gao Zu ordered Chen Gongwu Wenzhong, Daishi Tutu Wenzhong, Shenwu Gongwu Yi, Nan'an Gongwu Yang, and others to go to marry the daughter of Xingjin.

古文：天和二年，俟斤又遣使来献。
现代文：天和二年，俟斤又遣使来贡献。
English: Two years later, he was sent again to contribute.

古文：陈公纯等至，俟斤复贰于齐。
现代文：陈公宇文纯等人到后，俟斤又勾结齐国。
English: Chen Gongjun and others arrived in Turkey, and the two countries aligned their interests.

古文：会有风雷变，乃许纯等以后归。
现代文：当时正值上天警示有天灾人祸，于是允许宇文纯等人和皇后归还。
English: At that time, it was the time when the heavens warned that there would be natural and man-made disasters, so they allowed Uwenjun and others and the queen to return it.

古文：语在皇后传。
现代文：其事记载在《皇后传》中。
English: The event is recorded in the "Queen's Biography."

古文：四年，俟斤又遣使献马。
现代文：四年，俟斤又遣使来进献马匹。
English: In the fourth year, He Jin sent another envoy to bring in horses for offering.

古文：俟斤死，弟他钵可汗立。
现代文：俟斤死后，其弟他钵可汗嗣立。
English: After his death, his younger brother, Tashi Khan, succeeded him.

古文：自俟斤以来，其国富强，有凌轹中夏志。
现代文：自俟斤以来，其国富有强盛，便想侵犯华夏。
English: Since the Qing Dynasty, his country has been rich and powerful, and he wants to invade China.

古文：朝廷既与和亲，岁给缯絮锦彩十万段。
现代文：朝廷与其和亲，每年给予十万段缯絮锦彩。
English: Every year, the Imperial Court awards 100,000 pieces of silverware to those who make peace with their relatives.

古文：突厥在京师者，又待以优礼，衣锦食肉者，常以千数。
现代文：在京师的突厥人，都待以优厚的礼仪，衣锦食肉的人，经常有干人之多。
English: The Turks who studied in Beijing were all treated with gracious etiquette, and meat-eaters often had a lot of followers.

古文：齐人惧其寇掠，亦倾府藏以给之。
现代文：齐人惧怕其侵犯劫掠，所以倾尽仓库给予财物。
English: The state of Qi was afraid of being plundered by the Turks, and gave everything in the treasury to the Turks.

古文：他钵弥复骄傲，至乃率其徒属曰： 但使我在南两个儿孝顺，何忧无物邪。 建德二年，他钵遣使献马。
现代文：他钵越来越骄傲，以致率领徒众说： 衹要我在南方的两个儿子孝顺，就不用担心没有财物。 建德二年，他钵派遣使者来献马。
English: They became more and more proud, so much so that they led the disciples to say, "If you want my two sons in the south to be obedient, you don't have to worry about money."

古文：及齐灭，齐定州刺史、范阳王高绍义自马邑奔之。
现代文：及齐灭亡，齐定州刺史、范阳王高绍义自马邑逃奔而至。
English: When the State of Qi was eliminated, Dingzhou of the State of Qi and Gao Shao Yi, the King of Fanyang, fled from Mayi to Turku.

古文：他钵立绍义为齐帝，召集所部，云为之复雠。
现代文：他钵立绍义为齐帝，召集部下兵众，说是为高绍义复仇。
English: He set up Shao Yi as Emperor Zi, called up his subordinates and soldiers, and said that he was taking revenge for Gao Shao Yi.

古文：宣政元年四月，他钵遂入寇幽州，杀略居民。
现代文：宣政元年四月，他钵因此侵犯幽州，杀害掠夺居民。
English: In April of the first year of the proclamation of the Republic, he invaded Yuzhou, killing and plundering residents.

古文：柱国刘雄率兵拒战，兵败，死之。
现代文：柱国刘雄率兵抵抗，兵败，战死。
English: Liu Xiong, the pillar state, led the resistance, was defeated, and died in battle.

古文：高祖亲总六军，将北伐，会帝崩，乃班师。
现代文：高祖亲自率领六军，将要北伐，但是病逝，因而班师回朝。
English: Gaozu personally led the Six Armies and was going to lead the Northern Expedition, but he died of illness, so the team returned to the imperial court.

古文：是冬，他钵复寇边，围酒泉，大掠而去。
现代文：这年冬天，他钵又侵犯边境，围攻酒泉，大肆劫掠而去。
English: This winter, they encroached on the border again, besieged Jiuquan, plundered it and then left.

古文：大象元年，他钵复请和亲。
现代文：大象元年，他钵又请求和亲。
English: In the first year of the elephant, he again asked to be reconciled.

古文：帝册赵王招女为千金公主以嫁之，并遣执绍义送阙。
现代文：帝册立赵王宇文招的女儿为千金公主嫁给他，并让他将绍义捉拿回朝廷。
English: The emperor decreed that Zhao Wang Yuwenzhao's daughter should marry him as the Princess of Thousand Gold, and ordered him to capture Shao Yi and bring him back to the imperial court.

古文：他钵不奉诏，仍寇并州。
现代文：他钵不服从皇帝的命令，仍侵犯并州。
English: They disobeyed the emperor's order and still invaded and annexed the state.

古文：大象二年，始遣使奉献，且逆公主，而绍义尚留不遣。
现代文：大象二年，又开始遣使奉献，并且迎娶公主，但是留住叁珏盏不加遣送。
English: In the second year of the elephant's life, he began to send offerings again, and married a princess, but kept the calf and did not send it away.

古文：帝又令贺若谊往谕之，始送绍义云。
现代文：帝又令贺若谊前往告谕，这才将绍义送来。
English: The emperor also ordered He Rongjiao to go to the capital to deliver a message, which is when he sent Shao Yi.

古文：吐谷浑，本辽东鲜卑慕容廆之庶兄也。
现代文：吐谷浑，本是渔塞馑卑慕容魔的庶兄。
English: He is originally the half-brother of the fisherman, Hime Murayama.

古文：初，吐谷浑马与廆马斗而廆马伤，廆遣让之。
现代文：当初，谷运的马踢伤了慕容魔的马，基容廛加以责备。
English: At first, Gu Yun's horse kicked Murongma's horse, and Ji Rongjun scolded him.

古文：吐谷浑怒，率其部落去之，止于枹罕，自为君长。
现代文：吐谷浑发怒，率领部落离去，于晅居住，自为君长。
English: Angered, Tu Gu led the tribe away and settled in Yunnan, where he became the ruler.

古文：及孙叶延，颇视书传。
现代文：至其孙墓延，读过很多书。
English: Until his grandson's death, he read a lot of books.

古文：以古有王父字为氏，遂以吐谷浑为氏焉。
现代文：以占代有以祖父名字为姓氏的，因而以吐谷浑为姓氏。
English: In the Edo period, there were people who took their grandfather's name as their family name, so the family name became Togakunin.

古文：自吐谷浑至伏连筹一十四世。
现代文：白吐谷浑至伏连筹共十四代。
English: A total of fourteen generations have been traced from Baitu Valley to Fulian.

古文：伏连筹死，子夸吕立，始自号为可汗。
现代文：伏连筹死后，其子童旦嗣立，开始自称为可汗。
English: After the death of Fulian, his son, Kuo Luling, began to call himself a khan.

古文：治伏俟城，在青海西十五里。
现代文：治理丛俊越，在青海西边十五里。
English: Congjun Yue is located 15 miles west of Qinghai.

古文：虽有城郭，而不居之，恒处穹庐，随水草畜牧。
现代文：虽然有城郭，却不居住，通常居住帐篷，随水草的丰茂游牧。
English: Although there is a castle, they do not live there, usually living in tents, nomadic with the abundance of aquatic plants.

古文：其地东西三千里，南北千余里。
现代文：其地东西三千里，南北千余里。
English: It is 3,000 miles from east to west and more than 1,000 miles from north to south.

古文：官有王公、仆射、尚书及郎中、将军之号。
现代文：官职有王公、仆射、尚书及郎中、将军等名号。
English: The official posts had titles such as Wang Gong, Hubei, Shangshu, Langzhong, and General.

古文：夸吕椎髻、毦、珠，以皂为帽，坐金师子床。
现代文：夸吕梳椎形发髻，用羽毛、珍珠装饰，戴黑色帽子，坐金狮子床。
English: He wears a combed-back hair bun, feathers and pearls, a black hat, and a gold lion bed.

古文：号其妻为恪尊，衣织成裙，披锦大袍，辫发于后，首戴金花。
现代文：其妻子称号为恪尊，穿编织的裙子，披锦锻大袍子，发辫梳于脑后，头上戴金花。
English: His wife's title is "Kakuzon," and she wears a knitted skirt, a large embroidered robe, a hair bun combed behind her head, and a gold flower on her head.

古文：其俗丈夫衣服略同于华夏，多以羃罗为冠，亦以缯为帽。
现代文：其风俗男子衣服基本上与华夏相同，大多以方巾为帽子，也以丝绸做帽子。
English: The custom of men's clothing is basically the same as that of China, mostly with a square scarf as a hat, and also with silk as a hat.

古文：妇人皆贯珠束发，以多为贵。
现代文：妇女都戴珍珠项链，把头发束成髻，以多为尊贵。
English: Women wear pearl necklaces and wear their hair in braids, as many are considered to be noble.

古文：兵器有弓刀甲矛。
现代文：兵器有弓刀甲捎。
English: Weapons include bows, swords, and armor.

古文：国无常赋，须则税富室商人以充用焉。
现代文：国内没有正常的赋税，需要时则向富家商人收税以供使用。
English: The state does not have a fixed tax, and when necessary, it will tax the rich merchants to enrich the state.

古文：其刑罚，杀人及盗马者死，余则征物，量事决杖。
现代文：其刑罚有杀人及盗马者处死，其他的罚财物，根据情况决定杖罚。
English: The punishments included the death penalty for homicide and horse theft, and the cane as a punishment for other punishments involving property, depending on the circumstances.

古文：刑人必以毡蒙头，持石从高击杀之。
现代文：被行刑的人必定以毡蒙住头，用石头从高处击杀。
English: The person to be executed must be blindfolded and killed with a stone from a high place.

古文：父兄亡后，妻后母及嫂等，与突厥俗同。
现代文：父兄死亡后，以后母及嫂等为妻，与突厥风俗相同。
English: After the death of his father and brother, his mother and sister-in-law became his wife, which is the same as the Turkish custom.

古文：至于婚姻，贫不能备财物者，辄盗女将去。
现代文：婚姻风俗方面，贫穷不能备齐财物的，就将其女盗抢而去。
English: In terms of marriage customs, if a poor man cannot provide for his family, he will steal his wife away.

古文：死者亦皆埋殡。
现代文：死者亦都埋葬。
English: The dead were also buried.

古文：其服制，葬讫则除之。
现代文：其丧服制度，安葬之后就可脱下丧服。
English: After burial, the mourners can take off their mourning clothes according to the mourning dress system.

古文：性贪婪，忍于杀害。
现代文：性情贪婪，狠心于杀害。
English: He is greedy and has the heart to kill.

古文：好射猎，以肉酪为粮。
现代文：喜好射猎，食物以肉及乳酪为主。
English: He likes to shoot and hunt, using meat and cheese as food.

古文：亦知种田，然其北界，气候多寒，唯得芜菁、大麦。
现代文：亦知道种田，然而其地在北方，气候寒冷，衹能种蔓菁、大麦。
English: Farming is also known, but it is in the north, the climate is cold, and the reeds can grow cranberries and barley.

古文：故其俗贫多富少。
现代文：所以他们贫穷者多富裕者少。
English: So they have more poor people and fewer rich people.

古文：青海周回千余里，海内有小山。
现代文：青海方圆千余里，海内有小山。
English: There are more than a thousand miles around Qinghai, and there are small mountains in the sea.

古文：每冬冰合后，以良牝马置此山，至来冬收之，马皆有孕，所生得驹，号为龙种，必多骏异，世传青海者也。
现代文：每当冬天结冰之后，以优良的母马放置此山，至第二年冬天收回，马皆有孕，所生下的马驹，号称为龙种，必定有很多骏马，世代相传称为壹迤骢。
English: Every winter, after the ice has frozen, the mountain is stocked with excellent mares and taken back the following winter. The horses are all pregnant, and the foals they produce, known as dragon foals, must have many foals, which are passed down from generation to generation as one foal.

古文：土出牦牛，鸟多鹦鹉。
现代文：当地出产牦牛，鸟类多为鹦鹉。
English: Local production of snails, birds are mostly parrots.

古文：大统中，夸吕再遣使献马及羊牛等。
现代文：左统年间，夸旦两次派遣使者来献马及羊牛等。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zuo, Kuatan twice sent emissaries to offer horses and cattle.

古文：然犹寇抄不止，缘边多被其害。
现代文：然而经常侵犯抄掠，边境地区常受其侵害。
English: However, they often invade and plunder, and the border areas are often invaded.

古文：魏废帝二年，太祖勒大兵至姑臧，夸吕震惧，遣使贡方物。
现代文：魏庆查二年，左担率领大军至姑越，童旦相当惧怕，派遣使者贡献特产。
English: In the second year of Wei Qingcha, Zuo Dan led a large army to Gu Yue. Tong Dan was quite afraid and sent an envoy to contribute special products.

古文：是岁，夸吕又通使于齐氏。
现代文：这一年，夸吕又与齐氏交往。
English: In the same year, Kou Lu was in contact with Qi again.

古文：凉州刺史史宁觇知其还，率轻骑袭之于州西赤泉，获其仆射乞伏触扳、将军翟潘密、商胡二百四十人，驼骡六百头，杂彩丝绢以万计。
现代文：远业刺史史空暗中了解到夸吕回来，率领轻骑于州西边的壶星袭击，擒获其仆射乞伏触返、将军翟潘蜜、经商的胡人二百四十人，驼骡六百头，上万匹各色丝绸等。
English: Yuan Ying, a historian, secretly learned that QuLu had returned, and led a light cavalry attack on the west side of the state, capturing his minions, generals, 240 merchants, 600 camels, and tens of thousands of silks.

古文：魏恭帝二年，史宁又与突厥木汗可汗袭击夸吕，破之，虏其妻子，大获珍物及杂畜。
现代文：魏恭帝二年，史宁又与空巫木汗可汗袭击昼旦，大败之，擒获其妻子儿女，获取大量珍贵物品及杂畜。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, Shi Ning and Empty Wushu Khan Khan attacked the daytime, defeated, captured his wife and children, and obtained a large number of precious items and livestock.

古文：语在史宁传。
现代文：事情记载在《史宁传》中。
English: The incident is recorded in "The Story of Shi Ning."

古文：武成初，夸吕复寇凉州，刺史是云宝战没。
现代文：武成初年，夸吕又侵犯凉州，刺史是云宝战死。
English: At the beginning of the Wucheng period, the Kwalu invaded Liangzhou again, and Gu Shi was killed in the battle.

古文：诏贺兰祥、宇文贵率兵讨之。
现代文：诏令贺兰祥、宇文贵率兵征讨。
English: He ordered Horan Shiang and Uwen Gui to lead the army.

古文：夸吕遣其广定王、钟留王拒战，祥等破之，广定等遁走。
现代文：夸吕派遣其广定王、钟留王抵御，贺兰祥等人攻破之，广定等逃走。
English: King Kwangding and King Zhongliu were dispatched by Kwang-lu to defend the city, but they were defeated by Helan-sang and others, and Kwangding and others fled.

古文：又攻拔其洮阳、洪和二城，置洮州以还。
现代文：又攻克其洮阳、洪和二城，设置洮州后班师。
English: He also conquered its two cities of Shenyang and Honghe, and set up the Shenzhou Rear Division.

古文：保定中，夸吕前后三辈遣使献方物。
现代文：保定年间，夸吕前后派遣三批使者来贡献特产。
English: During the Baoding period, the three generations before and after the Kwalu sent emissaries to present local products.

古文：天和初，其龙涸王莫昌率众降，以其地为扶州。
现代文：天和初年，其龙涸王莫昌率领部下兵众归降，以其地为扶州。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, King Mochang led his troops to surrender, and his land became Fuzhou.

古文：二年五月，复遣使来献。
现代文：二年五月，再次派遣使者来贡献。
English: In May of the following year, an envoy was sent to present the offering.

古文：建德五年，其国大乱。
现代文：塑五年，塑国中大乱。
English: Five years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, the country was in turmoil.

古文：高祖诏皇太子征之，军渡青海，至伏俟城。
现代文：直回韶令皇太子率军征讨，军队渡过直涂，至伏俟城。
English: Zonghuan ordered the crown prince to lead the army to conquer, and the army crossed Zonghu to Fuxin City.

古文：夸吕遁走，虏其余众而还。
现代文：昼旦逃走俘虏其余兵众而还。
English: In the afternoon, the remaining prisoners escaped and were recaptured by the rest of the soldiers.

古文：明年，又再遣奉献。
现代文：第二年，宣旦又两次派遣使者来奉献。
English: In the second year, Emperor Xuandan sent two more emissaries to make offerings.

古文：宣政初，其赵王他娄屯来降。自是朝献遂绝。
现代文：宣政初年，其趟王他娄屯来归降从此就不再朝见贡献。
English: In the first year of the proclamation of the new government, Wang Taguotun came to the capital to abdicate. From then on, he no longer contributed to the imperial court.

古文：高昌者，车师前王之故地。
现代文：高昌，其地为车师先王的故地。
English: Gaochang, the birthplace of the first king of drivers.

古文：东去长安四千九百里，汉西域长史及戊己校尉，并治于此。
现代文：往东至长安四千九百里。漠代西域长史及戊己校尉，治所都在此地。
English: It is 4,900 miles eastward to Chang'an. In the Western Desert Period, Chang Shi and Captain Wu Ji both had their legal residences here.

古文：晋以其地为高昌郡。
现代文：晋朝以其地设置高昌郡。
English: The Jin Dynasty set up Gaochang County in its place.

古文：张轨、吕光、沮渠蒙逊据河西，皆置太守以统之。
现代文：张轨、吕光、沮渠蒙逊占据河西，都设置太守统领。
English: Zhang Railing, Luguang and Deshu Mengxun occupied the west of the river, all of which were led by emperors.

古文：其后有阚爽及沮渠无讳，并自署为太守。
现代文：后来的阐爽及沮渠无讳，都自称为太守。
English: Later, both the Emperor and the Empress called themselves the Empress Dowager.

古文：无讳死，茹茹杀其弟安周，以阚伯周为高昌王。
现代文：无讳死后，茹茹杀掉其弟安周，以阙伯周为高昌王。
English: After the death of Mu Xuchang, Zhu Ru killed his brother An Zhou and made Zibo Zhou the king of Gaochang.

古文：高昌之称王，自此始也。
现代文：高昌称王，自此开始。
English: Gaochang reigns supreme, and this is where it all begins.

古文：伯周之从子首归，为高车所灭。
现代文：伯周的侄子首归，被高车所减。
English: Bo Zhou's nephew was the first to return, but he was run over by a truck.

古文：次有张孟明、马儒相继王之，并为国人所害。
现代文：其次有张孟明、马儒相继称王，都被国人杀害。
English: Next, Zhang Mengming and Ma Ju, who had successively proclaimed themselves kings, were both killed by the Chinese.

古文：乃更推立曲嘉为王。
现代文：于是又推立曲嘉为王。
English: So he promoted Qu Jia to be the king.

古文：嘉字灵凤，金城榆中人，本为儒右长史。
现代文：曲嘉字灵凤，是金城榆中人，本来任马儒的右长史。
English: Qu Jia Zi Ling Feng, a native of Jincheng Yizhong Middle School, was originally the right-hand man of Maru.

古文：魏太和末立。
现代文：魏太和末年所立。
English: It was established at the end of the Wei and Taihe Dynasties.

古文：嘉死，子立。
现代文：曲嘉死后，其子曲坚嗣立。
English: After Qu Jia's death, his son Qu Jian succeeded him.

古文：其地东西三百里，南北五百里。
现代文：他的领地东西三百里，南北五百里。
English: His territory extends 300 miles east to west and 500 miles north to south.

古文：国内总有城一十六。
现代文：国内共有十六座城。
English: There are a total of sixteen cities in the country.

古文：官有令尹一人，比中夏相国；次有公二人，皆其王子也，一为交河公，一为田地公；次有左右卫；次有八长史，曰吏部、祠部、库部、仓部、主客、礼部、民部、兵部等长史也；次有建武、威远、陵江、殿中、伏波等将军；次有八司马，长史之副也；次有侍郎、校书郎、主簿、从事，阶位相次，分掌诸事；次有省事，专掌导引。
现代文：官职有令尹一人，相当于华夏的丞相；其次有公二人，都是其王子，一为交河公，一为田地公；其次有左右卫；再次有八长史，称为吏部、祠部、库部、仓部、主客、礼部、民部、兵部等长史；其次有建武、威远、陵江、殿中、伏波等将军；再次有八司马，是长史的副职；其次有侍郎、校书郎、主簿、从事，官阶依次为第，分掌诸事；其次有省事，专门掌管接待。
English: There was one Ling Yin, equivalent to the chancellor of China; followed by two princes, both of whom were princes, one of whom was the duke of Jiahe and one of whom was the duke of Tianchi; followed by the left and right guards; again, there were eight long histories, called the long histories of the cadre, ancestral hall, treasury, warehouse, host and guest, ceremonial department, people's department, and military department; followed by generals such as Jianwu, Weiyuan, Lingjiang, Tianzhong, and Fubo; again, there were eight Sima, which was the deputy of the long history; followed by

古文：其大事决之于王，小事则世子及二公随状断决。
现代文：大事由王来决定，小事则由太子及二公随情况决定。
English: Major matters are decided by the king, while minor matters are decided by the crown prince and the two dukes according to the situation.

古文：平章录记，事讫即除。
现代文：文件档案，事情处理完了就不要了。
English: Documents and files, don't need them after the matter is dealt with.

古文：籍书之外，无久掌文桉。
现代文：书籍之外，没有长期的档案。
English: Outside of books, there are no long-term archives.

古文：官人虽有列位，并无曹府，唯每旦集于牙门评议众事。
现代文：职官虽然排列位置，却没有办公的地方，惟有每天早晨集中于牙门评议众事。
English: Although the officials are arranged in a row, there is no place to work, but they concentrate on the discussion of all matters in the morning.

古文：诸城各有户曹、水曹、田曹。
现代文：诸城各设有户曹、水曹、田曹。
English: Each city has its own hot spring, water spring, and rice field.

古文：每城遣司马、侍郎相监检校，名为城令。
现代文：每城派遣司马、侍郎相互监督查核察看，名为城令。
English: Each city dispatched a steward and a chamberlain to supervise and inspect each other. This was called a city ordinance.

古文：服饰，丈夫从胡法，妇人略同华夏。
现代文：服饰，男子依从胡人之俗，妇女基本上与华夏相同。
English: In terms of clothing, men follow the customs of the Hu people, and women are basically the same as the Huaxia.

古文：兵器有弓箭刀楯甲矛。
现代文：兵器有弓箭刀盾甲稍。
English: Weapons include a bow, arrow, sword and shield.

古文：文字亦同华夏，兼用胡书。
现代文：文字也基本上与华夏相同，同时兼用胡人的文字。
English: The script is also basically the same as that of Huaxia, while at the same time using the script of the Hu people.

古文：有毛诗、论语、孝经，置学官弟子，以相教授。
现代文：有《毛诗》、《论韶》、《孝经》，设置学校招收学生，加以教授。
English: There are "Mao Shi," "On Xing" and "Xiao Jing," and schools are set up to enroll students and teach them.

古文：虽习读之，而皆为胡语。
现代文：学习时，全都使用胡语。
English: When studying, they all use the Hu language.

古文：赋税则计输银钱，无者输麻布。
现代文：赋税交纳用银钱计算，没有银钱的就交纳麻布。
English: The payment of taxes was calculated in terms of money, and those who did not have money had to pay for linen.

古文：其刑法、风俗、婚姻、丧葬，与华夏小异而大同。
现代文：其刑法、风俗、婚姻、丧葬，与华夏小有区别但大都相同。
English: Its criminal law, customs, marriage, and funerals are different from Huaxia Elementary School, but most of them are the same.

古文：地多石碛，气候温暖，谷麦再熟，宜蚕，多五果。
现代文：其地多为沙石，气候温暖，谷麦有两季，宜于养蚕，水果较多。
English: Its land is mostly sand and stone, the climate is warm, the grain and wheat have two seasons, it is suitable for raising silkworms, and there are more fruits.

古文：有草曰羊剌，其上生蜜焉。
现代文：有种草称为羊剌，可以生产出蜜糖。
English: There is a kind of grass called ramson, which can produce honey.

古文：自嘉以来，世修蕃职于魏。
现代文：自曲嘉以来，世代都为魏朝尽藩国的职守。
English: Since Qu Jia, all generations have fulfilled the duties of the domain for the Wei Dynasty.

古文：大统十四年，诏以其世子玄喜为王。
现代文：太铲十四年，诏令以其太子面互皇为王。
English: In the 14th year of the Taisho era, Emperor Dairei was crowned king in the guise of his son.

古文：恭帝二年，又以其田地公茂嗣位。
现代文：茎童二年，又以其田地公曲茂继位。
English: In the second year of his reign, he was succeeded by his field official, Qu Mao.

古文：武成元年，其王遣使献方物。
现代文：武成元年，其王派遣使者来贡献特产。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, the king sent an envoy to contribute special products.

古文：保定初，又遣使来贡。
现代文：保定初年，又派遣使者来进贡。
English: In the first year of Baoding, an envoy was sent to pay tribute.

古文：自炖煌向其国，多沙碛，道里不可准记，唯以人畜骸骨及驼马粪为验，又有魍魉怪异。
现代文：白炖煌到其国，路途多沙漠，道路不能记得准确，惟有以人畜的骸骨及骆驼马粪来辨别，又有一些怪异之事。
English: When Bai Yuhuang arrived in his country, the road was mostly desert, and he couldn't remember the exact route. The only way to distinguish it was by the skeletons of people and animals and camel and horse dung. There were also some strange things.

古文：故商旅来往，多取伊吾路云。
现代文：所以商旅来往，大多取道于伊吾。
English: As a result, most business travelers come and go from Igu.

古文：鄯善，古楼兰国也。
现代文：鄯善，是古楼兰国。
English: Xizhen is an ancient Loulan country.

古文：东去长安五千里。
现代文：往东距长安五千里。
English: It is five thousand miles east of Chang'an.

古文：所治城方一里。
现代文：治所之城方圆一里。
English: The city of Jisho is one mile in circumference.

古文：地多沙卤，少水草。
现代文：地多为沙性碱地，很少水草。
English: The soil is mostly sandy and alkaline, with few aquatic plants.

古文：北即白龙堆路。
现代文：北边就是通往白龙堆的路。
English: To the north is the road to the White Dragon Mound.

古文：魏太武时，为沮渠安周所攻，其王西奔且末。
现代文：魏太武帝的时候，为沮猩安周所攻，其王向西逃奔至且末。
English: When Emperor Wei Taiwu was attacked by the despondent An Zhou, his king fled westward to the bitter end.

古文：西北有流沙数百里，夏日有热风，为行旅之患。
现代文：西北有数百里流沙，夏季有热风，足旅行者所害怕的灾难。
English: There are hundreds of miles of quicksand in the northwest, hot winds in the summer, and disasters that travelers fear.

古文：风之欲至，唯老驼知之，即鸣而聚立，埋其口鼻于沙中。
现代文：当热风将要到来的时候，衹有老骆驼知道，它们聚在一起岛叫，并把口鼻埋于沙中。
English: When the hot wind is about to come, the old camels know that they gather together to howl and bury their noses in the sand.

古文：人每以为候，亦即将毡拥蔽鼻口。
现代文：每当旅人观察到这情况，也用毡子捂住鼻。
English: Whenever a traveller observes this, he also covers his nose with a pair of pliers.

古文：其风迅驶，斯须过尽。
现代文：其风速度很快，片刻就过去了。
English: Its wind speed is fast, and a moment passes.

古文：若不防者，必至危毙。
现代文：如果不加以防备，必定会危殆死亡。
English: If left untreated, it can be fatal.

古文：大统八年，其兄鄯米率众内附。
现代文：左面八年，其王兄塑苤率领部下兵众归附。
English: Eight years later, his brother Wang Shuxuan led his troops to annexation.

古文：焉耆国在白山之南七十里，东去长安五千八百里。
现代文：噩昼厘在直山之南七十里，往东距长安五千八百里。
English: At noon, it was 70 miles south of Zhoushan and 5,800 miles east of Chang'an.

古文：其王姓龙，即前凉张轨所龙熙之胤。
现代文：其王姓龙，是前凉张轨所征讨的龙熙的后人。
English: Its king, surnamed Long, is the descendant of Longxi, who was solicited by the former Liang Liangzhang.

古文：所治城方二里。
现代文：治所之城方圆二里。
English: Jisho is two miles from the city.

古文：部内凡有九城。
现代文：部落内共有九城。
English: There are a total of nine towns in the tribe.

古文：国小民贫，无纲纪法令。
现代文：国家小，民众贫穷，没有纲纪法令。
English: The country is small, the people are poor, and there are no codes of conduct.

古文：兵有弓刀甲矛。
现代文：兵器有弓刀甲捎。
English: Weapons include bows, swords, and armor.

古文：婚姻略同华夏。
现代文：婚姻风俗基本上与华夏相同。
English: Marriage customs are basically the same as in China.

古文：死亡者皆焚而后葬，其服制满七日则除之。
现代文：死亡者都焚烧以后安葬，服丧满了七就除去丧服。
English: The deceased were all cremated and buried, and the mourning clothes were removed after seven days.

古文：丈夫并剪发以为首饰。
现代文：男子都剪发作为装饰。
English: The men all cut their hair as decoration.

古文：文字与婆罗门同。
现代文：文字与婆罗门相同。
English: The script is the same as that of the Brahmins.

古文：俗事天神，并崇信佛法。尤重二月八日、四月八日。
现代文：习俗侍奉天神，都崇信佛教尤其重视二月八日、四月八日。
English: It is customary to serve Tenjin, and they all believe in Buddhism, with particular emphasis on February 8th and April 8th.

古文：是日也，其国咸依释教，斋戒行道焉。
现代文：到了遣两曰，全国的人都依照佛教，斋戒行道。
English: On the second day of the Lunar New Year, people all over the country follow the Buddhist path of fasting.

古文：气候寒，土田良沃。
现代文：气候寒冷，土地肥沃。
English: The climate is cold and the land is fertile.

古文：谷有稻粟菽麦。
现代文：农作物有稻粟菽麦。
English: Crops include rice, millet and buckwheat.

古文：畜有驼马牛羊。
现代文：畜产有骆驼马牛羊。
English: Livestock includes camels, horses, cattle and sheep.

古文：养蚕不以为丝，唯充绵纩。
现代文：养蚕不制丝鲢，衹是作为丝绵絮。
English: Silkworm rearing does not produce silk cocoons, the cocoons are used as lint.

古文：俗尚蒲桃酒，兼爱音乐。
现代文：风俗喜好葡萄酒，喜好音乐。
English: The custom favors wine, favors music.

古文：南去海十余里，有鱼盐蒲苇之饶。
现代文：南边距海十余里，有丰富的鱼盐蒲苇。
English: The south side is more than ten miles away from the sea, and there are abundant fish salt crabs.

古文：保定四年，其王遣使献名马。
现代文：惺宣四年，其王派遣使者来贡献名马。
English: In the fourth year of Xuan Xuan, his king sent an envoy to bring back a famous horse.

古文：龟兹国在白山之南一百七十里，东去长安六千七百里。
现代文：龟兹国在白山之南一百七十里，东距长安六千七百里。
English: Kuez Province is 170 miles south of Baishan and 6,700 miles east of Chang'an.

古文：其王姓白，即后凉吕光所立白震之后。
现代文：其王姓白，即后凉吕光所册立的白震的后人。
English: Its king was surnamed Bai, that is, the descendant of Bai Zhen, who was recorded by Hou Liang and Liguang.

古文：所治城方五六里。
现代文：治所之城郭方圆五六里。
English: The perimeter of the castle of Jisho is five or six miles.

古文：其刑法，杀人者死，劫贼则断其一臂，并刖一足。
现代文：其刑法为，杀人者处死，劫贼则砍断一只胳臂，截断一只脚。
English: Its penal code states that murderers will be put to death, while robbers will have an arm amputated and a foot amputated.

古文：赋税，准地征租，无田者则税银钱。
现代文：征收赋税，根据田地收取租税，没有田地的则收取银钱。
English: Taxes are levied and collected according to the fields, and if there are no fields, money is collected.

古文：婚姻、丧葬、风俗、物产与焉支略同。
现代文：婚姻、丧葬、风俗、物产与焉耆基本相同。
English: Marriage, funerals, customs, and property are basically the same as those in Yancheng.

古文：唯气候少温为异。
现代文：惟有气候较温暖而有所不同。
English: The only difference is that the climate is warmer.

古文：又出细毡、麖皮、毡氇、铙、盐绿、雌黄、胡粉及良马、封牛等。
现代文：又出产细毡、马鹿皮、毛毯、铙沙、绿盐、雌黄、胡粉及良马、封牛等物。
English: It also produces fine silk, horse deerskin, blankets, borax, green salt, yakitori, goose down, and fine horseradish, sealing cattle and other things.

古文：东有轮台，即汉贰师将军李广利所屠。
现代文：束边有轮台，即是漠代贰师将军李广利分割建立的。
English: There is a wheeled platform on the edge of the bund, which was built by the general Li Guangli of the Desert Dynasty.

古文：其南三百里有大水东流，号计戍水，即黄河也。
现代文：其南面三百里有大河往东流，称为计戍水，也就是黄河。
English: To its south, there are three hundred large rivers flowing eastward, known as the Yellow River.

古文：保定元年，其王遣使来献。
现代文：惺定元年，其王派遣使者来贡献。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jing, the king sent an envoy to make a contribution.

古文：于阗国在葱岭之北二百余里，东去长安七千七百里。
现代文：了阗国在葱岭之北二百余里，往东距长安七千七百里。
English: It is said that Shan State is more than 200 miles north of Qiuling, and 7,700 miles east of Chang'an.

古文：所治城方八九里。
现代文：治所之城郭方圆八九里。
English: The castle of Jisho is 89 li in circumference.

古文：部内有大城五，小城数十。
现代文：国内有五座大城，敷十座小城。
English: There are five large cities and ten small cities in China.

古文：其刑法，杀人者死，余罪各随轻重惩罚之。
现代文：其刑法有，杀人者处死，其他的罪行各自随轻重加以惩罚。
English: Its criminal law states that murderers are to be put to death, and other crimes are to be punished according to their severity.

古文：自外风俗物产与龟兹略同。
现代文：除此之外风俗物产基本上与龟兹相同。
English: Other than that, the customs and products are basically the same as those of the Kamezi.

古文：俗重佛法，寺塔僧尼甚众。
现代文：风俗尊崇佛教，有很多寺庙佛塔及僧人尼姑。
English: The custom reveres Buddhism, and there are many temples, stupas and monks and nuns.

古文：王尤信向，每设斋日，必亲自洒扫馈食焉。
现代文：其王特别崇信，每当向僧尼施食的子，必定亲自洒扫送食物给僧尼。
English: The king especially revered that whenever he gave food to the monks and nuns, he must personally sprinkle the food to the monks and nuns.

古文：城南五十里有赞摩寺，即昔罗汉比丘比卢旃为其王造覆盆浮图之所。
现代文：城南五十里有赞摩寺，即是往昔罗汉比丘比卢旃为其王建造覆盆状佛塔的地方。
English: In the southern part of the city, there is Zammo Temple, which is the place where Luo Hanbi built a raspberry-shaped stupa for his king in the past.

古文：石上有辟支佛趺处，双迹犹存。
现代文：石上有辟支佛赤脚之处，足迹依然存在。
English: There are still footprints on the stone where the Buddha stood barefoot.

古文：自高昌以西，诸国人等多深目高此一国，貌不甚胡，颇类华夏。
现代文：自高昌以西，各国的人大多深目高鼻，衹有这一国，相貌不似胡人，接近于华夏人。
English: From west of Gaochang, people from all over the world are mostly dark-eyed and high-nosed, like this country. They do not look like Hu people, but are close to Huaxia people.

古文：城东二十里有大水北流，号树枝水，即黄河也。
现代文：城束二十里有大河往北流，称为树枝丞，也就是董回。
English: There is a large river flowing northward in the 20th of Chengzhuang, which is called Shuxiezheng, that is, Dongbei.

古文：城西十五里亦有大水，名达利水，与树枝俱北流，同会于计戍。
现代文：城西十五里也有大水，名称是达王哒，与鲎挂都往北流，于讧虚汇流。
English: Fifteen miles west of the city, there is also a large body of water, known as the Dahuang River, which flows northwards with the Yunnan River and joins the Yunnan River at the Huixu River.

古文：建德三年，其王遣使献名马。
现代文：垩塑三年，其王派遣使者来贡献名马。
English: After three years of hard work, the king sent an envoy to bring back a famous horse.

古文：献哒国，大月氐之种类，在于阗之西，东去长安一万百里。
现代文：嗽哇国，是大月氏的分支，在于阗之西，往东距长安有一万零一百里。
English: Utsuwa Province, a branch of the Otsuki clan, is located west of Shizuku and 10,100 miles east of Chang'an.

古文：其王治拔底延城，盖王舍城也。
现代文：其王治所在拔底延城，即王舍城。
English: Its capital was Bati Yancheng, also known as Wang Shecheng.

古文：其城方十余里。
现代文：其城方圆十余里。
English: It is more than ten miles from the city.

古文：刑法、风俗，与突厥略同。
现代文：刑法、风俗。与突厥基本相同。
English: The criminal law and customs are basically the same as those of the Turks.

古文：其俗又兄弟共娶一妻。夫无兄弟者，其妻戴一角帽；若有兄弟者，依其多少之数，更加帽角焉。
现代文：其风俗又允许兄弟共娶一个妻子丈夫没有兄弟的，其妻子戴一个角的帽子；如果有兄弟，依照其数量的多少，确定帽角的多少。
English: Their customs also allow brothers to marry a wife together, and if the husband has no brothers, his wife wears a horned hat; if there are brothers, according to their number, determine the number of horns.

古文：其人凶悍，能战斗。
现代文：其人凶悍，勇于战斗。
English: His men are fierce and brave in battle.

古文：于阗、安息等大小二十余国，皆役属之。
现代文：于阗、安息等大小二十多个国家，都隶属于此国。
English: More than twenty countries, large and small, such as Yunnan and Shandong, belong to this country.

古文：大统十二年，遣使献其方物。
现代文：大统十二年，派遣使者来贡献特产。
English: In the twelfth year of the Great Reunification, envoys were sent to contribute special products.

古文：魏废帝二年，明帝二年，并遣使来献。
现代文：魏废帝二年，旦眯二年，都遣使来贡献。
English: In the second year of the Wei Dynasty and the second year of the Tang Dynasty, envoys were sent to make contributions.

古文：后为突厥所破，部落分散，职贡遂绝。
现代文：后来被塞腿攻破，部落分散，从此没有向朝廷纳贡。
English: Later, it was defeated by the leg of the plug, the tribe dispersed, and since then there has been no tribute to the imperial court.

古文：粟特国在葱岭之西，盖古之庵蔡，一名温那沙。
现代文：粟特国在茎岭之西，是古代的卢基，又称为逼那丝。
English: Sogdia in the west of the stem ridge is the ancient Luki, also known as Jainas.

古文：治于大泽，在康居西北。
现代文：治所在大泽，在尘昼西北面。
English: It is located in Osawa, northwest of Tsuru.

古文：保定四年，其王遣使献方物。
现代文：皑四年。其王派遣使者来贡献特产。
English: Thirty-four years later, the king sent an envoy to contribute special products.

古文：安息国在葱岭之西，治蔚搜城。
现代文：安息国在茎岭之西，治所为壁王幽。
English: The country of peace is in the west of the stem ridge, and its capital is Kabeo-yu.

古文：北与康居、西与波斯相接，东去长安一万七百五十里。
现代文：北与尘屋、西与波斯相连接，往东距昼窒一万零七百五十里。
English: It is bounded on the north by the House of Dust, on the west by Persia, and on the east by the meridian of 10,750 miles.

古文：天和二年，其王遣使来献。
现代文：玉和二年，其王派遣使者来贡献。
English: In the second year of the Gyokuwa era, the king sent an envoy to make a contribution.

古文：波斯国，大月氐之别种，治苏利城，古条支国也。
现代文：波斯国，是大月氏的分支，其治所为苏利城，是古时的条支国。
English: Persia, a branch of the Otsuki clan, whose capital was Suri, was a tributary state of ancient times.

古文：东去长安一万五千三百里。
现代文：往东距长安一万五千三百里。
English: It is 15,300 miles east of Chang'an.

古文：城方十余里，户十余万。
现代文：城市方圆十余里，有十余万户人家。
English: The city is more than ten miles in circumference, with more than one hundred thousand households.

古文：王姓波斯氐。
现代文：其王姓波斯氏。
English: Its king's family name was Persia.

古文：坐金羊床，戴金花冠，衣锦袍、织成帔，皆饰以珍珠宝物。
现代文：坐金羊床，戴金花冠，穿锦袍和彩帛织成的披肩，都装饰以珍珠宝物。
English: She sits on a bed of golden sheep, wears a crown of golden flowers, a gown of brocade and a shawl of embroidered satin, and is adorned with pearls.

古文：其俗：丈夫剪发，戴白皮帽，贯头衫，两厢近下开之，并有巾帔，缘以织成；妇女服大衫，披大帔，其发前为髻，后被之，饰以金银华，仍贯五色珠，络之于膊。
现代文：其风俗：男子剪发，戴白皮帽，穿套头衫，两边下襟开缝，并有头巾披肩，编织而成；妇女衣服为长衫，披大披肩，头发前面是髻，后面散披着，饰以华丽的金银，穿五色珠链，戴在手臂上。
English: Its customs: men cut their hair, wear a white leather cap, wear a pullover, with a slit at the bottom of the collar on both sides, and have a headscarf shawl, woven; women's clothing is a long shirt, covered with a large shawl, the front of the hair is braided, the back is loose, decorated with gorgeous gold and silver, wearing a five-color bead chain, worn on the arm.

古文：王于其国内别有小牙十余所，犹中国之离宫也，每年四月出游处之，十月乃还。
现代文：波斯王于其国内有十余所小牙，犹如中原的离宫，每年的四月巡游居住，十月才回来。
English: The king of Persia has more than ten small cedars in his country, just like the Central Plains outposts. Every year in April, he goes on a cruise to live, and only comes back in October.

古文：王即位以后，择诸子内贤者，密书其名，封之于库，诸子及大臣皆莫之知也。
现代文：王即位以后，选择诸子中德才兼备的人，秘密书写其名字，封藏在库中，诸子及大臣都不知道。
English: After the king ascended the throne, he chose the most virtuous and talented among his sons, wrote their names in secret, and sealed them in the treasury. Neither his sons nor his ministers knew about it.

古文：王死，乃众共发书视之，其封内有名者，即立以为王，余子各出就边任。
现代文：王死后，众人乃共同启封看其书，其密封内有名字的，就立为王，其余的任为边境官员。
English: After the king's death, all the people jointly opened the seal to read his book. The one whose name was inside the seal was made king, and the rest were appointed as border officials.

古文：兄弟更不相见也。
现代文：兄弟不再相见。
English: The brothers no longer see each other.

古文：国人号王曰翳囋，妃曰防步率，王之诸子曰杀野。
现代文：国人对王称为翳啧，妃子称为防步率，王的诸子称为杀野。
English: The people of the country call the king the dragonfly, the concubine the guard, and the king's sons the killing fields.

古文：大官有摸胡坛，掌国内狱讼；泥忽汗，掌库藏关禁；地卑勃，掌文书及众务。
现代文：大官有摸胡坛，执掌国内的法律；泥忽汗，执掌财务和关卡；地卑勃，执掌文书及各方面的事情。
English: A high-ranking official has the power to handle domestic laws; the power to handle finances and customs; the power to handle documents and all aspects of affairs.

古文：次有遏罗诃地，掌王之内事；萨波勃，掌四方兵马。
现代文：其次有遏罗诃地，执掌国王宫内的事；萨波勃，执掌四方兵马军事。
English: Next, there was Sarobor, who was in charge of the affairs of the king's palace, and Sabobor, who was in charge of the military in the four directions.

古文：其下皆有属官，分统其事。
现代文：其下都有属官，分别统领各种事务。
English: There are subordinate officers under him, who are in charge of various affairs.

古文：兵器有甲矛圆排剑弩弓箭。
现代文：兵器有甲稍圆排剑弩弓箭。
English: Weapons include an A-flat circular array of swords, crossbows, and arrows.

古文：战并乘象，每象百人随之。
现代文：作战时都乘象，每只象有百人随后。
English: Elephants were used in battle, and each elephant was followed by a hundred men.

古文：其刑法：重罪悬诸竿上，射而杀之；次则系狱，新王立乃释之；轻罪则劓、刖若髡，或翦半须，及系排于项上，以为耻辱；犯强盗者，禁之终身；奸贵人妻者，男子流，妇人割其耳鼻。
现代文：其刑法：重罪悬挂在竿上，将其射杀；轻罪则囚禁于牢狱之中，新王册立后就可以赦免他；轻罪有割鼻、砍足或剃去头发，或者剪去半边须，以及在颈项上扣上刑具，以为耻辱；犯盗窃罪的，终身囚禁；如果与贵人妻子通奸，男子流放，妇女割去其耳鼻。
English: Its penal code: felons are hanged on a pole and shot; misdemeanors are imprisoned in prison and can be pardoned after the new king is crowned; misdemeanors include cutting the nose, cutting the feet or shaving the hair, or cutting off half the whiskers, and tying the torture device around the neck for shame; those who commit theft are imprisoned for life; if they commit adultery with a noble wife, the man is exiled, and the woman cuts off her ears and nose.

古文：赋税则准地输银钱。
现代文：赋税是以地的多少交纳银钱。
English: Taxation is based on the amount of money paid in.

古文：俗事火祆神。
现代文：一般人侍奉火袄神。
English: Ordinary people serve the fire god.

古文：婚合亦不择尊卑，诸夷之中，最为丑秽矣。
现代文：婚姻相合则不分尊卑，在各少数民族之中，风俗最差。
English: There is no distinction between superior and inferior when it comes to marriage. Among all ethnic minorities, the customs are the worst.

古文：民女年十岁以上有姿貌者，王收养之，有功勋人，即以分赐。
现代文：十岁以上民女姿貌美丽的，被王收养，分别赐给有功劳的人员。
English: People's daughters over ten years old, beautiful in appearance, were adopted by the king and given to meritorious personnel.

古文：死者多弃尸于山，一月治服。
现代文：死者大多弃尸体于山上，办理一个月丧事。
English: Most of the dead abandoned their bodies on the mountain, and it took a month to carry out the funeral.

古文：城外有人别居，唯知丧葬之事，号为不净人。
现代文：城外有人居住，衹知道丧葬之事，被称为不净的人。
English: Those who live outside the city and do not know the funeral rites are called unclean.

古文：若入城市，摇铃自别。
现代文：如果进入城中，摇铃来加以区别。
English: If you enter a town, ring the bell to distinguish it.

古文：以六月为岁首，尤重七月七日、十二月一日。
现代文：六月是每年的开始，尤其重视七月七日、十二月一日。
English: June is the start of the year, with particular emphasis on July 7 and December 1.

古文：其日，民庶以上，各相命召，设会作乐，以极欢娱。
现代文：到逭两时，庶民百姓以上的人，互相招呼，设立娱乐聚会场所，尽情欢乐。
English: At two o'clock in the morning, people above the common people greet each other, set up entertainment meeting places, and enjoy themselves.

古文：又以每年正月二十日，各祭其先死者。
现代文：又在每年正月二十，各自祭祀死去的亲人。
English: Also, on the 20th day of the first month of each year, people make offerings to their deceased relatives.

古文：气候暑热，家自藏冰。
现代文：天气暑热时，各家都窖藏冰砖。
English: When the weather is hot, every family has a cellar full of ice bricks.

古文：地多沙碛，引水溉灌。
现代文：土地多为沙漠碱地，要引水灌溉。
English: Most of the land is desert and alkaline, requiring water diversion for irrigation.

古文：其五谷及禽兽等，与中夏略同，唯无稻及黍秫。
现代文：其农作物和禽兽等，基本上与华夏相同，衹是没有稻及黍秫。
English: Its crops and animals are basically the same as those in China, except for the absence of rice and millet.

古文：土出名马及驼，富室至有数千头者。
现代文：当地出产名马及骆驼，富有人家多达数千头。
English: Famous horses and camels are produced locally, and there are as many as thousands of heads belonging to wealthy families.

古文：又出白象、师子、大鸟卵、珍珠、离珠、颇黎、珊瑚、琥珀、琉璃、马瑙、水晶、瑟瑟、金、银、俞石、金刚、火齐、镔铁、铜、锡、朱沙、水银、绫、锦、白叠、毼、氍毹、囗儵、赤廘皮，及熏六、郁金、苏合、青木等香，胡椒、荜拨、石蜜、千枣、香附子、诃灾勒、无食子、盐绿、雌黄等物。
现代文：又出产白象、狮子、大乌卵、珍珠、离珠、颇黎、珊瑚、琥珀、琉璃、玛瑙、水晶、瑟瑟、金、银、蝓石、金刚、火齐、镂铁、铜、锡、朱沙、水银、绫、锦、白叠、毡、氍毹、毹毡、赤獐皮，及薰六、郁金、苏合、青木等香，胡椒、摹拨、石蜜、千年枣、香附子、诃梨勒、无食子、绿盐、雌黄等物。
English: It also produces white elephants, lions, large black eggs, pearls, pearls, pearls, coral, coral, amber, glaze, agate, crystal, glitter, gold, silver, flint, emerald, fire, pig iron, copper, tin, cinnamon, mercury, antimony, brocade, white laminate, antimony, antimony, antimony, red antimony, and incense, such as tulips, acacia, and green wood, pepper, peppermint, stone honey, thousand-year jujube, incense, pearl barley, acacia seedless, green salt, rhubarb, and other products.

古文：魏废帝二年，其王遣使来献方物。
现代文：魏废帝二年，其王派遣使者来贡献特产。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wei's dethronement, the king sent an envoy to contribute special products.

古文：史臣曰：四夷之为中国患也久矣，而北狄尤甚焉。
现代文：史臣曰：东夷、西戎、南蛮、北狄对中原的患害已经很久了，而北狄尤其突出。
English: Shichen said: Dongyi, Xirong, Nanban and Beidi have been harming the Central Plains for a long time, and Beidi is particularly prominent.

古文：昔严尤、班固咸以周及秦汉未有得其上策，虽通贤之宏议，而史臣尝以为疑。
现代文：往昔严尤、班固都认为周代及秦汉的策略都不是上策，虽然是名士的议论，史臣却曾经有疑问。
English: In the past, Yan Yu and Ban Gu both believed that the strategies of the Zhou Dynasty and the Qin and Han Dynasties were not the best. Although it was a discussion of celebrities, Shisen once had doubts.

古文：夫步骤之来，绵自今古；浇淳之变，无隔华戎。
现代文：不管历史发展的快与慢，从古绵延至今；各种变化，都无法隔断华夏舆戎族。
English: Regardless of the speed and slowness of historical development, it stretches from ancient times to the present; all kinds of changes cannot cut off the Chinese public from the military.

古文：是以反道德，弃仁义，凌之风岁广；至泾阳，入北地，充斥之衅日深。
现代文：因此违反道德，摒弃仁义，不守本分的风气不断发展；至泾阳，进入北地，这种坏的风气愈来愈盛行。
English: As a result, the culture of violating morality, abandoning benevolence and righteousness, and not keeping one's duty has continued to develop; to Fenyang, into the north, this bad culture has become more and more prevalent.

古文：爰自金行，逮乎水运，戎夏离错，风俗混并。
现代文：爰自金行，逮乎水运，戎夏相互杂居，风俗混同。
English: zi jin line, Fang chu water transport, wu xia mutual miscegenation, mixed customs.

古文：夷裔之情伪，中国毕知之矣；中国之得失，夷裔备闻之矣。
现代文：边疆的少数民族的情况，中原都知道；中原的得失，边疆的少数民族都知道。
English: The Central Plains are all aware of the situation of the ethnic minorities in the border areas; the ethnic minorities in the border areas are all aware of the gains and losses in the Central Plains.

古文：若乃不与约誓，不就攻伐，来而御之，去而守之；夫然则敌有余力，我无宁岁，将士疲于奔命，疆埸苦其交侵。
现代文：如果不与他们约定誓言，即使来攻伐，来了加以防御，去了加以守卫；然则敌人有足够的实力，我方则没有安宁的时候，将士疲于奔命，边疆苦于侵扰。
English: If we do not make an oath with them, even if we come to attack, we will come to defend, and we will go to guard; but when the enemy has enough strength, and we do not have peace, our soldiers are tired of running for their lives, and the border suffers from intrusion.

古文：欲使偃伯灵台，世仁寿，其可得乎。
现代文：如果想休战，举世尽享仁寿，衹怕不可得到。
English: If you want to call a truce and enjoy a benevolent life to the full, you can't get it.

古文：是知秩宗之雅旨，护军之诚说，实有会于当时，而未允于后代也。
现代文：因此知道秩宗之雅正的意旨，护军之真心的悦服，在当时是合适的，不一定对后世也合适。
English: Therefore, it was appropriate at the time to know the intention of Chichizong's elegance, the true heart of the escort, and it is not necessarily appropriate for future generations.

古文：然则易称 见几而作 ，传云 相时而动 。
现代文：然则《易》称 事前明察事物细微的变化，抓住有利时机而有所动作 ，《传》说 观察时机而采取行动 。
English: On the other hand, "Yi" said to observe the subtle changes of things in advance, seize the favorable opportunity and take action, "Zhuan" said to observe the opportunity and take action.

古文：夫时者，得失之所系；几者，吉凶之所由。
现代文：时运，是得失的关键；机遇。是吉凶的由来。
English: Fortune is the key to gain and loss; opportunity is the origin of good luck and bad luck.

古文：况乎诸夏之朝，治乱之运代有；戎狄之地，强弱之势无恒。
现代文：何况华夏各朝各代，各代有治有乱；戎狄之地，强弱势力不是一定的。
English: What's more, every dynasty and generation in China has had its ups and downs, and every generation has had its ups and downs; in the land of military dictatorship, strong and weak forces are not certain.

古文：若使臣畜之与羁縻，和亲之与征伐，因其时而制变，观其几而立权，则举无遗策，谋多上算，兽心之虏，革面匪难，沙幕之北，云撤何远。
现代文：如果对待使臣容纳或者牵制，和亲或征伐，都因情况而不同，因为情况而确定，则言行就不会失策，谋划许多好的主意，有野心的虏寇，并非难以改造，沙漠北面，亦不是太遥远。
English: If the treatment of envoys to accommodate or contain, and relatives or conquest, are different depending on the situation, because the situation is determined, then words and deeds will not fail, planning a lot of good ideas, ambitious pirates, is not difficult to transform, desert north, is not too far away.

古文：安有周、秦、汉、魏优劣在其间哉。
现代文：不应该有周、秦、汉、魏的优劣在其间。
English: There should be no superiority or inferiority of Zhou, Qin, Han and Wei.

