古文：柳归舜元藏几文广通杨伯丑刘法师
现代文：柳归舜元藏几文广通杨伯丑刘法师
English: Liu Guiwen, Liu Yuanzang, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Yang Bo, Liu Baoshi

古文：柳归舜
现代文：柳归舜
English: Willow's Return to the Forest

古文：吴兴柳归舜，隋开皇二十年，自江南抵巴陵，大风吹至君山下，因维舟登岸。
现代文：柳归舜是吴兴人。隋文帝开皇二十年时，柳归舜从江南乘船去巴陵，江上起了大风，把船吹到君山下面，只好拴船登岸。
English: When Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty ascended to the throne 20 years ago, Liu Qichen took a boat from the south of the Yangtze River to go to Baling. A strong wind blew up on the river and blew the boat to the bottom of Junshan Mountain, so he had to pull the boat ashore.

古文：寻小径，不觉行四五里，兴酣，逾越溪涧，不由径路。
现代文：顺着小路不觉走了四五里，兴致很高地跨过小溪山涧，也不顺着路走了。
English: I walked along the path for four or five miles without noticing. I straddled the creek and ridge with great enthusiasm, and did not walk along the path.

古文：忽道旁有一大石，表里洞澈，圆而砥平，周匝六七亩。
现代文：忽见道旁有一块大石头，整个石头都透明铮亮，又圆又平，方圆六七亩大小。
English: Suddenly, there was a large stone next to the road. The entire stone was transparent and shiny, round and flat, with a circumference of sixty-seven mu.

古文：其外尽生翠竹，圆大如盘，高百余尺。叶曳白云，森罗映天。
现代文：石外都长满了翠绿的竹子，像盆口那么粗，有一百多尺高，顶端都触到了云彩，郁郁森森映着蓝天。
English: Outside the stones are overgrown with emerald green bamboo, as thick as the mouth of a basin, more than a hundred feet high, the tops of which touch the clouds, and the dense forest reflects the blue sky.

古文：清风徐吹，戛为丝竹音。
现代文：一阵清风吹过，竹林发出了动听的乐声。
English: A breeze blew through, and the bamboo grove emitted beautiful music.

古文：石中央又生一树，高百余尺，条干偃阴为五色，翠叶如盘，花径尺余，色深碧，蕊深红，异香成烟，著物霏霏。
现代文：大石的中央长着一棵树，一百多尺高，枝干是彩色的，树叶有盘子那样大，花的直径有一尺宽，花瓣深蓝色，花中飘出奇异的香气笼罩着周围，如烟似雾。
English: In the center of the boulder grew a tree, more than a hundred feet tall, the branches were colored, the leaves were as big as plates, the diameter of the flowers was a foot wide, the petals were dark blue, and a strange aroma wafted from the flowers and enveloped the surroundings like smoke.

古文：有鹦鹉数千，丹嘴翠衣，尾长二三尺，翱翔其间。相呼姓字，音旨清越，有名武游郎者，有名阿苏儿者，有名武仙郎者，有名自在先生者。有名踏莲露者，有名凤花台者，有名戴蝉儿者，有名多花子者。
现代文：树上有好几千只红嘴绿毛二三尺长尾巴的鹦鹉上下翻飞，互相叫着彼此的姓名，有的名叫 武游郎 ，有的名叫 阿苏儿 ，有的叫 武仙郎 ，有的叫 自在先生 ，还有的名叫 踏莲露 、 凤花台 、 戴蝉儿 、 多花子 。
English: There are several thousand red-billed, green-furred, two-to-three-foot-long-tailed parrots flipping up and down in the trees, calling each other's names. Some are named Takeyuro, some are named Asuer, some are called Takezensenro, some are called Zizai-sensei, and others are named Taolian dew, Fenghuatai, Dai cicada, and Polyanthus.

古文：或有唱歌者曰： 吾此曲是汉武钩弋夫人常所唱，词曰： 戴蝉儿，分明传与君王语。
现代文：有个鹦鹉唱着歌，并说： 我这个歌儿是汉武帝时的钩弋夫人常唱的，歌词是 戴蝉儿，分明传于君王语。
English: A parrot sang a song and said, "This song of mine was often sung by Lady Hook-Beak during the reign of Emperor Hanwu. The lyrics were written by Dai Cimier, and were clearly passed down in the royal language.

古文：建章殿里未得归，朱箔金缸双凤舞。  
现代文：建章殿里未得归，朱箔金缸双凤舞 。 
English: Before returning to the hall, the two phoenixes dance in the vermilion-leaf gold bowl.

古文：名阿苏儿者曰： 我忆阿娇深宫下泪，唱曰： 昔请司马相如为作《长门赋》，徒使费百金，君王终不顾。 
现代文：名叫阿苏儿的鹦鹉说： 我记得阿娇听了这个歌以后在深宫里流泪了。 接着就唱到： 昔请司马相如为作《长门赋》，徒使费百金，君王终不顾。 
English: The parrot, named Asuer, said, "I remember that after hearing this song, Ah Jiao shed tears in the depths of the palace." Then it sang, "Once upon a time, Sima Xiangru was asked to compose "Long Gate Fu," and he was asked to pay a hundred gold coins, but the king eventually ignored him.

古文：又有诵司马相如大人赋者曰： 吾初学赋时，为赵昭仪抽七宝钗横鞭，余痛不彻，今日诵得，还是终身一艺。 
现代文：这时又有只鹦鹉开始背诵司马相如的《大人赋》。这鹦鹉背完了《大人赋》后说： 我当初学这首赋时，被赵昭仪用头上的宝钗狠抽了一顿，当时把我痛坏了，但我到底还是背出来了，成了我的一件绝活儿。 
English: At this time, another parrot began to recite Sima Xiangru's "Adult Fu." After completing the recitation of "Adult Fu," this parrot said: When I first learned this Fu, I was severely beaten by Zhao Zhaoyi with a treasure hammer on my head. At that time, it hurt me badly, but I still recited it, and it became my job.

古文：名武游郎者言： 余昔见汉武帝，乘郁金楫，泛积翠池，自吹紫玉笛，音韵朗畅。帝意欢适，李夫人歌以随，歌曰： 顾鄙贱，奉恩私。
现代文：名叫武游郎的鹦鹉说： 我当年见过汉武帝，他乘着镶金的船在宫中的积翠池里泛游，自己吹起了紫玉笛，吹得十分动听，皇上十分高兴，李夫人就伴着笛子唱起了歌，歌词是： 顾鄙贱，奉恩私。
English: The parrot, named Takeyuro, said, "I once met Emperor Han Wudi. He took a gold-plated boat to travel around the jade pond in the palace. He blew the purple and jade flute himself, and it sounded very beautiful. The emperor was very happy. Mrs. Li accompanied the flute and sang a song. The lyrics were: "Take care of the lowly, and be kind to me."

古文：愿吾君，万岁期。  
现代文：愿吾君，万岁期。  
English: Long live my lord.

古文：又名武仙郎者问归舜曰： 君何姓氏行第？ 
现代文：这时叫武仙郎的那只鹦鹉就问柳归舜， 你贵姓？排行第几？ 
English: At this time, the parrot called Wuxian Lang asked Liu Guizhen, what is your noble name? What is your rank?

古文：归舜曰： 姓柳，第十二。 
现代文：柳归舜说： 我姓柳，排行十二。 
English: Liu Guizhou said: My surname is Liu, ranking 12th.

古文：曰： 柳十二自何处来？ 
现代文：鹦鹉说： 柳十二郎从哪里来？ 
English: The parrot said, "Where did Liu Juro come from?"

古文：归舜曰： 吾将至巴陵，遭风泊舟，兴酣至此耳。 
现代文：柳归舜说： 我要去巴陵，遇到大风船靠了岸，一时高兴走到了这里。 
English: Liu Guizhou said: I want to go to Baling. I met a big wind ship that came ashore. I was happy to come here for a moment.

古文：武仙郎曰： 柳十二官，偶因遭风，得臻异境，此所谓因病致妍耳。
现代文：武仙郎就说： 柳十二郎由于遇风得以来到这仙境，这真可谓因祸得福了，然而我只是一只鸟，不能为你效什么力。
English: Wu Xian Lang said, "Ryujun Rong has come to this fairyland because of the wind. This is truly a blessing in disguise. However, I am just a bird and cannot do anything for you.

古文：然下官禽鸟，不能致力生人，为足下转达桂家三十娘子。 因遥呼曰： 阿春，此间有客。 
现代文：不过我可以为你转达桂家三十娘子，请她接待你。 说完就向远处喊道： 阿春，来客人了！ 
English: However, I can convey to the thirty daughters of the Gui family for you, and ask her to receive you.After saying this, he shouted to the distance: Ah Chun, a guest has come!

古文：即有紫云数片，自西南飞来，去地丈余，云气渐散，遂见珠楼翠幕，重槛飞楹，周匝石际。
现代文：立刻空中就有几团紫色的云从西南飞来，离地面一丈多高时云彩渐渐散去，露出了垂着绿帘幕的红楼，楼阁上一重重门窗十分华丽，整个楼立在那块大石上。
English: Immediately, there were several purple clouds in the sky coming from the southwest. When they were a few feet above the ground, the clouds gradually dispersed, revealing a red building with a green curtain hanging down. The attic was full of doors and windows that were very ornate, and the entire building stood on that large rock.

古文：一青衣自户出，年始十三四，身衣珠翠，颜甚姝美，谓归舜曰： 三十娘子使阿春传语郎君，贫居僻远，劳此检校，不知朝来食否？
现代文：这时一个青衣女子从楼门里走出来，看年纪有十三四，身穿缀有珠翠的衣服，容貌美丽，女子对柳归舜说： 我家三十娘子让我转告郎君，我的家太偏僻了，使你来一趟这么辛苦劳累。
English: At this time, a woman in a blue dress came out of the door of the building. She looked to be about thirteen or fourteen years old, wearing a dress decorated with pearls and emeralds, and her face was beautiful. The woman said to Yu Guizhen: My thirty-year-old daughter asked me to tell my husband that my home is too remote, making your trip so hard and tiring.

古文：请垂略坐，以具蔬馔。 
现代文：不知郎君从早晨到现在用饭了吗？请先稍坐，立刻给你开饭。 
English: I don't know if your husband has eaten since this morning. Please sit down for a moment, and I'll prepare dinner for you immediately.

古文：即有捧水精床出者，归舜再让而坐。
现代文：接着就有女子捧着水晶做的坐榻，柳归舜谢了坐。
English: Next, there was a woman holding a crystal made couch, and Liu Gui thanked her and sat down.

古文：阿春因教凤花台鸟 何不看客？
现代文：这时那位阿春姑娘就说：  凤花台 ，你这个鹦鹉为什么不好好接待客人呢？
English: At this time, that Ah Chun girl said: Feng Huatai, you parrot, why don't you receive guests well?

古文：三十娘子以黄郎不在，不敢接对郎君。
现代文：三十娘子因为黄郎不在家不便出来接待客人。
English: The thirty-year-old maid comes out to receive guests because Huang Lang is not at home.

古文：汝若等闲，似前度受捶。 
现代文：你们如果怠慢了客人，看不像上次那样捶你们！ 
English: If you neglect your guests, I won't beat you up like last time!

古文：有一鹦鹉即飞至曰： 吾乃凤花台也。
现代文：这时立刻有一个鹦鹉飞到柳生面前说： 我就是凤花台。
English: At this time, a parrot immediately flew to Yoo Sang-soo and said, "I am Feng Huatai."

古文：近有一篇，君能听乎？ 
现代文：最近我写了一首诗，不知柳郎愿不愿意听一听？ 
English: I recently wrote a poem, I wonder if Yanagiro would like to hear it?

古文：归舜曰： 平生所好，实契所愿。 
现代文：柳归舜说： 我平生最喜欢诗词，当然愿意听。 
English: Liu Guizhou said: I've always loved poetry, so of course I'm willing to listen.

古文：凤花台乃曰： 吾昨过蓬莱玉楼，因有一章诗曰：露接朝阳生，海波翻水晶。
现代文：凤花台就说： 我昨天飞过蓬莱仙洲上的玉楼时作了一首诗：露接朝阳生，海波翻水晶。
English: Fenghuatai said, "I wrote a poem yesterday when I flew over the Jade Pagoda on the Penglai Fairyland: The morning sun is born, the sea waves turn the crystal.

古文：玉楼瞰寥廓，天地相照明。
现代文：玉楼瞰寥廓，天地相照明。
English: The view of the Jade Pagoda is narrow, and the sky and the earth are illuminated.

古文：此时下栖止，投迹依旧楹。
现代文：此时下栖止，投迹依旧楹。
English: At this time, they stopped roosting, and the tracks are still unmarked.

古文：顾余复何忝，日侍群仙行。 
现代文：顾余复何忝，日侍群仙行。 
English: Gu Yu-Fu He Xuan, the sun attendant group of immortals.

古文：归舜曰： 丽则丽矣，足下师乃谁人？ 
现代文：柳归舜说： 这首诗真是美极了，谁是你作诗的老师呢？ 
English: Liu Guizhou said, "This poem is really beautiful. Who is your poetry teacher?

古文：凤花台曰： 仆在王丹左右，一千余岁，杜兰香教我真箓，东方朔授我秘诀。
现代文：凤花台说： 我在王丹身旁一千多年，杜兰香教给我修道的秘文，东方朔传给我道术的秘诀。
English: Feng Huatai said: I have been with Wang Dan for more than a thousand years. Tulan Xiang taught me the secret of cultivation, and Dongfang Shuo passed on to me the secret of Taoism.

古文：汉武帝求太中大夫，遂在石渠署见扬雄、王褒等赋颂，始晓箴论。
现代文：当时汉武帝想给朝里选拔太中大夫，就在石渠署召见扬雄、王褒等文人，命他们作赋和颂，我才从他们那里学到了箴论。
English: At that time, Emperor Hanwu wanted to select a Taichung doctor for the Imperial Court, so he summoned literati such as Yang Xiong and Wang Bao to the Stone Canal Office and ordered them to make a tribute to Fu He. It was from them that I learned the maxim.

古文：王莽之乱，方得还吴。后为朱然所得，转遗陆逊，复见机、云制作，方学缀篇什。
现代文：到三莽之乱时，我才回到江南吴地，后来朱然又把我要了去，又把我转赠给陆逊，从他那儿我又见识了陆机、陆云文章，我也学着写文章，后来陆机、陆云被杀，我才来到了这里。
English: At the time of the Three Rebellions, I returned to Wudi in the south of the Yangtze River. Later, Zhu Ran asked me to go and gave me to Lu Xun. From him, I saw Lu Jia and Lu Yun's articles, and I learned to write articles. Later, Lu Jia and Lu Yun were killed, and I came here.

古文：机、云被戮，便至于此，殊不知近日谁为宗匠。 归舜曰： 薛道衡、江总也。 
现代文：我不知道当代在文章上面谁是宗师呢？ 柳归舜说： 当代的文章数薛道衡和江总最好。 
English: I don't know who the contemporary is in the article above, who is the master? Liu Guizhou said: The contemporary article number Xue Daoheng and Jiang Zong are the best.

古文：因诵数篇示之。
现代文：接着就背诵了几篇。
English: Then he recited a few passages.

古文：凤花台曰： 近代非不靡丽，殊少骨气。 
现代文：凤花台说： 近代的文章不是不华丽，只是太缺少风骨。 
English: Feng Huatai said: Modern articles are not unflattering, but they are too lacking in style.

古文：俄而阿春捧赤玉盘，珍馐万品，目所不识，甘香裂鼻。
现代文：不一会儿，阿春捧着一只红玉盘，里面装着珍馐美味，芳香扑鼻。
English: Soon after, Ah Chun was holding a red jade plate, which contained a rare and delicious plum, fragrant to the nose.

古文：饮食讫，忽有二道士自空飞下，顾见归舜曰： 太难得，与鹦鹉相对。
现代文：柳归舜吃完后，忽然有两名道士从空中飞出来，看见柳归舜后说： 你可真不简单，能和鹦鹉对读文章。
English: After Liu Qiji finished eating, two Taoists suddenly flew out of the sky. After seeing Liu Qiji, they said, "You are really not simple, you can read articles with a parrot."

古文：君非柳十二乎？
现代文：你是不是柳十二郎？
English: Are you Willow Twelfth?

古文：君船以风便，索君甚急，何不促回？ 
现代文：你的船因为风已顺了马上要开，正到处找你呢，你还不赶快回去！ 
English: Your boat is about to set sail because the wind has died down. It's been looking for you everywhere. Why don't you hurry back!

古文：因投一尺绮曰： 以此掩眼，即去矣。 
现代文：说罢扔给他一块一尺长的绸子说： 用它蒙上眼睛，你就上路吧！ 
English: Throw him a foot-long piece of silk and say: "Wear it over your eyes, and you're on your way!"

古文：归舜从之，忽如身飞，却坠巴陵，达舟所。
现代文：柳归舜蒙上眼，立刻觉得身子飞了起来，转眼间到巴陵自己的船上。
English: Yu Guizhen blindfolded, immediately felt his body fly up, and in the blink of an eye he was on his own boat in Baling.

古文：舟人欲发，问之，失归舜已三日矣。
现代文：船马上要开，一问，才知道已经三天找不到柳归舜了。
English: The boat was about to leave, but when I asked about it, I learned that it had been three days since I had been able to find the boat.

古文：后却至此，泊舟寻访，不复再见也。
现代文：后来柳归舜又来到这里江边，弃舟登岸再去找那个地方，什么也没有了。
English: Later, Liu Guixuan came to this side of the river again, abandoned the boat and went ashore to look for that place. There was nothing left.

古文：元藏几
现代文：元藏几
English: Mototsuko

古文：处士元藏几，自言后魏清河孝王之孙也。
现代文：元藏几是一位处士，自称是南北朝时北朝后魏清河孝王的孙子。
English: Yuan Zokei was an official who claimed to be the grandson of Emperor Xiaowang of the Northern and Southern Dynasties.

古文：隋炀帝时，官任奉信郎。
现代文：隋炀帝时期，他官拜奉信郎。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, he worshipped Bongxin Lang.

古文：大业九年，为过海使判官。无何，风浪坏船，黑雾四合，同济者皆不免，而藏几独为破木所载，殆经半月，忽达于洲岛间。
现代文：隋炀帝大业九年，派他为判官出海，航行中遇到风暴，船被撞坏，空中黑云四合，船上的人都落海淹死，只有元藏几抱着一块木头在海上漂流，历经半个月，漂到一个岛上落了脚。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Sui and Emperor Pu, he was sent out to sea as a judge. During the voyage, the ship encountered a storm, the ship was wrecked, the sky was covered with black clouds, and the people on board fell into the sea and drowned. Only a few Yuan Zang people drifted in the sea holding a piece of wood. After half a month, they floated to an island and landed.

古文：洲人问其从来，则瞀然具以事告。
现代文：岛上的人问他从哪儿来的，他就颠三倒四地讲了海上遇难的经过和自己的来历。
English: When the people on the island asked him where he was from, he gave a rambling account of the shipwreck and his background.

古文：洲人曰： 此沧洲，去中国已数万里。 
现代文：岛上的人说这里是北海中的仙岛沧州，离中国好几万里。
English: People on the island say that this is Cangzhou, a fairy island in the North Sea, tens of thousands of miles away from China.

古文：乃出菖蒲花桃花酒饮之，而神气清爽。
现代文：他们就拿出菖蒲花和桃花酿的酒请元藏几喝，喝了这酒立刻感到神清气爽。
English: They took out some wine made from iris flowers and peach blossoms and invited Yuan Zang to have a few drinks. He immediately felt refreshed after drinking the wine.

古文：其洲方千里，花木常如二月，地土宜五谷，人多不死。
现代文：这沧州周围有一千里大，岛上花草树木总像阳春二月那样繁茂，土地肥沃五谷丰登，岛上的人都长生不死，出产凤凰、孔雀、神牛神马等珍奇的动物。
English: This Cangzhou has a thousand-mile circumference, and the flowers and trees on the island are always as luxuriant as the yang, spring and February, and the land is fertile and rich in grain. The people on the island are immortal, producing phoenixes, peacocks, sacred cows, horses and other rare animals.

古文：出凤凰、孔雀、灵牛、神马之属；更产分蒂瓜，长二尺，其色如椹，二颗二蒂；有碧枣丹栗，皆大如梨。
现代文：还出产一种分蒂瓜，瓜长二尺，颜色像桑椹呈紫红色，一个瓜上有两个瓜蒂。还出产绿枣红栗，都像梨子那么大。
English: They also produce a kind of split melon, the melon is two feet long, the color is purple-red like mulberry, and there are two melons on one melon. They also produce red chestnut jujube, both as big as pears.

古文：其洲人多衣缝掖衣，戴远游冠，与之话中国事，则历历如在目前。
现代文：岛上的人大都穿宽袖单衣，戴远游冠。他们和元藏几谈起几万里外的中国的事，简直了如指掌。
English: Most of the people on the island wear wide-sleeved singlets and long-distance crowns. They talk to the couple about China, which is tens of thousands of miles away, and they know it like the back of their hands.

古文：所居或金阙银台，玉楼紫阁，奏箫韶之乐，饮香露之醑。
现代文：岛上人住的大都是镶金饰银的阁楼，用箫演奏周朝的《韶乐》，喝用香露酿造的酒。
English: Most of the people on the island live in gold-and-silver-encrusted attics, play the Zhou Dynasty's "Gongle" with gongs, and drink wine brewed with fragrant dew.

古文：洲上有久视之山，山下出澄水泉，其泉阔一百步，亦谓之流渠，虽投之金石，终不沉没，故洲人以瓦铁为船舫。
现代文：洲上有一座 长生山 ，山上有一泓清水泉，泉有一百步宽，人们也叫它为流渠，把金子、玉石扔进泉水也不沉，所以这里的人用铁瓦造船。
English: There is a Mount Changsheng on the mainland, and on the mountain there is a spring of clear water. The spring is a hundred paces wide, and people also call it a channel. It is not heavy to throw gold and jade into the spring water, so people here use iron tiles to build ships.

古文：更有金池，方十数里，水石泥沙，皆如金色。其中有四足鱼，今刑部卢员外寻云： 金义岭有池如盆，其中有鱼皆四足。 
现代文：还有一个十几里见方的金池，金池的水石泥沙都呈金色，池里生长一种四脚鱼，正如当时刑部卢员外说的金义岭池中的那种四脚鱼一样。
English: There is also a gold pool that is more than a dozen miles square. The water and stone sediment of the gold pool are all golden. A four-legged fish grows in the pool, just like the four-legged fish in the Jinyiling pool, which was said by Lu, a member of the Criminal Investigation Department at that time.

古文：又有金莲花，洲人研之如泥，以间彩绘，光辉焕烂，与真无异，但不能拒火而已。
现代文：洲上还有一种金莲花，岛上人把这种莲花碾碎成泥用来画画，画出来的东西和真的完全一样，只是怕火烧。
English: There is also a kind of golden lotus on the mainland. The islanders grind this lotus into mud and use it to paint. The result is exactly the same as the real thing, but they are afraid of fire.

古文：更有金茎花，如蝶，每微风至，则摇荡如飞，妇人竞采之以为首饰，且有语曰： 不戴金茎花，不得在仙家。 
现代文：还有一种金茎花，花像蝴蝶，每当微风吹来，花儿就摇动如飞，女人们都抢着采这种花做首饰，岛上有句俗话说 不戴金茎花，不得在仙家。 
English: There is also a kind of gold flower, the flower looks like a butterfly. Whenever a breeze blows, the flower shakes like a fly. Women are rushing to pick this flower to make jewelry. There is a saying on the island that if you don't wear gold flowers, you can't be in Fairyland.

古文：更以强木造船，其上多饰珠玉，以为游戏。
现代文：岛上人还用强木造船，船上装饰了很多珍珠宝玉，这船主要用来游乐。
English: The islanders also used strong wood to build a boat. The boat was decorated with a lot of pearl gems. The boat was mainly used for pleasure.

古文：强木，不沉木也。
现代文：所谓 强木 就是 不沉木 。
English: The so-called strong tree is the tree that does not sink.

古文：方一尺，重八百斤，巨石缒之，终不没。
现代文：一尺见方的一块 强木 就有八百斤重，但是用大石坠上它，它也不沉没。
English: A block of wood one foot square weighs eight hundred pounds, but if you drop a large stone on it, it will not sink.

古文：藏几淹留既久，忽念中国，洲人遂制凌风舸以送焉。
现代文：元藏几在这沧洲岛上停留了很久，后来就十分想念中国，想回故乡，岛上的人就为他制造了一只叫 凌风 的船，送他回中国。
English: He stayed on Cangzhou Island for a long time. Later, he missed China so much that he wanted to go back to his hometown. The people on the island built him a boat called Lingfeng and sent him back to China.

古文：激水如箭，不旬即达于东莱。
现代文：元藏几乘上船。船在海上像箭一般疾驰，不到十天就到了东莱郡。
English: Mototsuko boarded the ship several times. The ship sped like an arrow on the sea, and arrived in Donglai County in less than ten days.

古文：问其国，乃皇唐也；询其年号，即贞元也。
现代文：元藏几问这是什么国，回答说是大唐，再问年号，说是唐德宗贞元年。
English: When asked what country it was, they replied that it was the Great Tang Dynasty, and when asked the year, they said it was the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of Tang.

古文：访其乡里，榛芜也；追其子孙，疏属也。
现代文：他回到故乡，自己的家已变成一片长满野草的荒地，寻访他的子孙，只有一些远亲了。
English: He returned to his hometown, his home had become a wasteland full of weeds, to visit his children and grandchildren, only some distant relatives.

古文：有隋大业元年至贞元年末，已二百年矣。
现代文：从隋朝大业元年他到了北海的沧洲仙岛，到唐贞元年末他回到中国，算一算，竟已过去了二百年！
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, he went to the North Sea island of Cangzhou, and by the end of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, he returned to China. If you do the math, two hundred years have already passed!

古文：有二鸟，大类黄鹂，每翔翥空中，藏几呼之即至，或令衔珠，或令受人语。
现代文：元藏几回来后，常常有两个像黄鹂的鸟在他家上空飞，他一叫，鸟就落下来，或者让它口衔珠子赠人，或者让它代为传话，这鸟都能做到。
English: After Yuan Zang returned several times, there were often two birds like the yellow warbler flying over his house. When he called, the bird would fall down, or he would ask it to give beads as a gift, or he would ask it to deliver a message on his behalf. This bird could do it all.

古文：乃谓之转言鸟，出沧州也。
现代文：这种鸟就是出在沧洲的 转言鸟 。
English: This kind of bird is the "turning point bird" from Cangzhou.

古文：藏几工诗好酒，混俗无拘检，十数年间，遍游江表，人莫之知。
现代文：元藏几善作诗，又好喝酒，在世俗中自在逍遥毫无拘束，十几年间游遍了长江以南的地区，人们不知道他到底是个什么人。
English: He was a good poet and a good drinker. He was at ease in the world without restraint. For more than ten years, he traveled throughout the areas south of the Yangtze River. People didn't know who he really was.

古文：而赵归真常与藏几弟子九华道士叶通微相遇，求得其实，归真以藏几之异备奏上。
现代文：后来，有个赵归真曾与元藏几的弟子、九华山道士叶通微相遇，赵归真从叶通微那儿证实了元藏几的确不是凡俗之辈，并向皇帝奏报了元藏几已活了二百多岁并到过仙岛沧洲的事。
English: Later, a certain Zhao Guizhen once met Ye Tongwei, a disciple of Yuan Zangqian and a Taoist of Jihua Mountain. From Ye Tongwei, Zhao Guizhen confirmed that Yuan Zangqian was indeed not an ordinary person, and reported to the emperor that Yuan Zangqian had lived for more than two hundred years and had been to the island of Cangzhou.

古文：上令谒者赍手诏急徵。
现代文：皇帝令赵归真带着他亲自写的诏书立刻召元藏几进宫。
English: The emperor ordered Zhao Guizhen to immediately summon Yuan Zangqian to the palace with an edict written by himself.

古文：及至中路，忽然亡去。
现代文：元藏几跟着赵归真赴京，半路突然不见了。
English: A few of the original Tibetans followed Zhao Guizhen to Beijing, and suddenly disappeared halfway.

古文：谒者惶恐，即上疏具言其故，上览疏咨嗟曰： 朕不如明皇帝，以降异人。 
现代文：赵归真很惶恐地赶快把这情形奏报皇上，皇上看了奏章后感叹地说： 朕不如明皇帝，所以特殊的人才不来归服我。 
English: Zhao Guizhen was very frightened and quickly reported this situation to the emperor. After reading the report, the emperor said with regret: I am not as good as Emperor Ming, so special talents do not come to submit to me.

古文：后有人见藏几泛小舟于海上。
现代文：后来有人看见元藏几驾一叶小舟在海上漂流。
English: Later, some people saw Yuan Zang driving a small boat and drifting on the sea.

古文：至今江表道流，大传其事焉。
现代文：至今江南一带学道的人们还在传说着元藏几的事迹。
English: To this day, people who study Taoism in the southern part of the Yangtze River are still talking about the story of the original Tibetans.

古文：文广通
现代文：文广通
English: Wenguang Street

古文：文广通者，辰溪县滕村人也。
现代文：文广通是辰溪滕村人。
English: Wen Guangtong is from Chenxi Teng village.

古文：县属辰州。
现代文：这个县归辰州管。
English: This county is under the administration of Chenzhou.

古文：溯州一百里，北岸次有滕村，广通居焉。
现代文：从辰州乘船逆流而上去一百里，北岸有个滕村，文广通家就住在那里。
English: A hundred miles upstream from Chenzhou by boat, there is a village of Teng on the north bank, where the Wenguang Tong family lives.

古文：本汉辰陵县。《武陵记》云：广通以宋元嘉二十六年，见有野猪食其稼，因举弩射中之。
现代文：辰溪县在汉朝叫辰陵县，《武陵记》中说，南朝宋文帝元嘉二十六年，文广通看见有头野猪吃他家的庄稼，就用箭射中了野猪。
English: Chenxi County was called Chenling County in the Han Dynasty. According to "Wuling Ji," in the 26th year of the Southern Song Dynasty Emperor Wen Yuanjia, Wen Guangtong saw a wild boar eating his family's crops, and shot the boar with an arrow.

古文：流血而走，寻血迹，越十余里，入一穴中。行三百许步，豁然明晓，忽见数百家居止，莫测其由来，视所射猪，已归村人圈中。
现代文：野猪流着血逃走，文广通顺着血迹追出去十几里，进入一个洞中，在洞里走了三百来步，忽然周围大亮，眼前出现了几百家房舍，不知道是什么地方，再看他射的野猪，已经跑进村里人的猪圈中了。
English: The wild boar fled with blood, and Wen Guangtong followed the blood trail for more than ten miles, entered a hole, and walked about three hundred paces in the hole. Suddenly, there was a bright light all around, and hundreds of houses appeared in front of him. I don't know where they were, but when I looked at the wild boar he shot, it had already run into the pigsty of the villagers.

古文：俄有一叟出门曰： 汝非射吾猪者乎？ 
现代文：不一会儿有个老翁走出门来问： 你就是射我猪的人吧？ 
English: Soon an old man came out of the door and asked: Are you the one who shot my pig?

古文：文曰： 猪来犯仆，非仆犯猪。 
现代文：文广通说： 猪吃我的庄稼，并不是我无故射它。 
English: Wen Guangtong said: "The pig eats my crops, it's not like I shot it for no reason.

古文：翁曰： 牵牛蹊人之田，信有罪矣。而夺之牛者，罪又重矣。 
现代文：老翁说： 牵着牛踩了人的庄稼是不对，但因为这就把人家的牛抢走，就更不对了。 
English: The old man said, "It's not right to lead a cow to trample on someone's crops, but it's even more wrong to take away someone's cow.

古文：文因稽首谢过。
现代文：文广通走向老翁赔礼叩头。
English: Wen Guangtong bowed to the old man.

古文：翁云： 过而知改，是无过矣。
现代文：老翁说： 有了过错知道改，就不算错误。
English: The old man said, "If you know how to correct a mistake, it's not a mistake.

古文：此猪前缘，应有其报，君无谢焉。 
现代文：这个猪命中该得这样的报应，你就不必赔罪了。 
English: This pig deserved what he got, and you don't have to pay for it.

古文：翁呼文通至厅上，见十数书生，皆冠章甫之冠，服缝掖之衣，有博士，独一榻面南谈《老子》。
现代文：老翁把文广通请到屋里，见屋里有十几个书生，都戴着章甫冠，穿着宽袖单衣，有位博士独自面朝南坐在一个卧榻上讲授《老子》。
English: The old man invited Wen Guangtong to the room. There were more than a dozen students in the room, all wearing Zhangfu crowns and wide-sleeved singlets. A doctor was sitting alone on a bed, facing south, lecturing on "Lao Zi."

古文：又见西斋有十人相对，弹一弦琴，而五声自韵。
现代文：又见西屋有十个人对坐着弹琴，音律很好听。
English: I also saw ten people in the West Wing playing the piano while sitting in pairs. The music was very nice.

古文：有童子酌酒，呼令设客。
现代文：这时有位童子上来摆了酒菜，老翁拉过文广通饮酒。
English: At this time, a boy came up and set out wine and vegetables, and the old man pulled over Wen Guangtong to drink.

古文：文饮半酣，四体怡然，因尔辞退。
现代文：文广通喝得半醉，身体十分舒坦，就辞谢不再喝了。
English: Wen Guangtong was half-drunk, and his body was very comfortable, so he quit drinking.

古文：观其墟陌人事，不异外间，觉其清虚独远，自是胜地，徘徊欲住。
现代文：他观察外边路上的行人，和外界没什么不同，只是觉得这里环境幽美清静，真是个难在人间找到的好地方，就打算留在这里不走了。
English: He observes the pedestrians on the outer road, no different from the outside world, but he thinks that the environment here is beautiful and quiet, it's really a good place that is hard to find in the world, so he plans to stay here and not leave.

古文：翁乃遣小儿送之，令坚关门，勿复令外人来也。
现代文：老翁不答应就派了个小孩给他领路送他出去，并嘱咐关好大门不要让外人进来。
English: When the old man did not agree, he sent a child to show him the way out, and told him to close the gate and not let outsiders in.

古文：文与小儿行，问其始末，答曰： 彼诸贤避夏桀难来此，因学道得仙。
现代文：文广通和小孩一同溜达时问他这里到底是什么地方，那小孩说： 屋里的那些人都是胜贤，他们当初为逃避夏桀的残酷统治来到这里，因学道而成了神仙。
English: When walking with a child, Wen Guangtong asked him what this place was all about. The child said, "The people in this house are all sages. They originally came here to escape the cruel rule of Xia Yao, and became immortals by studying Taoism.

古文：独榻座谈《老子》者，昔河上公也。
现代文：那位讲授《老子》的博士，就是河上公。
English: The doctor who teaches "Lao Zi" is Kawakami Gong.

古文：仆汉时山阳王辅嗣，至此请问，《老子》滞义。
现代文：我是汉代山阳人王辅嗣，到这里是为向河上公请教《老子》中的一些疑意。
English: I am Wang Fuxi, a man from the Sanyang Mountains in the Han Dynasty. I have come here to consult with He Shangguo about some doubts in "Lao Zi."

古文：仆自扫门已来，于兹十纪，始蒙召进，得预门人，犹未深受要诀，只令守门。 
现代文：我在他门下已当了十纪的扫地仆人才让我当了守门人，至今还没有得到道经的要诀呢。 
English: I have been under his tutelage for ten years as a servant sweeping the floor before he made me the gatekeeper, and I still haven't got the key to the Tao Te Ching.

古文：至洞口，分别殷勤，自言相见未期。
现代文：文广通又走到来时的洞口，和那小孩依依不舍地告别，估计今后再也不会相见了。
English: Wen Guangtong went to the entrance of the cave again, and reluctantly said goodbye to the child. It is estimated that they will never meet again in the future.

古文：文通自所入处，见所用弩皆已朽断。
现代文：到了洞口，见射野猪的弓箭都朽了。
English: When we reached the mouth of the cave, we saw that the bows and arrows used to shoot the wild boar were all rotten.

古文：初谓少顷。已十二年矣。
现代文：他在洞中只呆了不久，世上已是十二年了。
English: He's only been in the cave for a short time, he's been alive for 12 years.

古文：文通家已成丧讫，闻其归，乃举村惊疑。
现代文：他家早已给他办了丧事，见他回来全村人都大吃一惊。
English: His family had already held a funeral for him, and the whole village was stunned to see him return.

古文：明日，与村人寻其穴口，唯见巨石塞之，烧凿不可为攻焉。杨伯丑
现代文：第二天他和村里人找那个洞，只见大石堵住洞口怎么凿也凿不开了。杨伯丑
English: The next day, he and the villagers went to look for the hole, only to find a large rock blocking the entrance. No matter how hard they tried, they could not open the hole.

古文：杨伯丑，冯翊武乡人。好读《易》，隐于华山。
现代文：杨伯丑是冯翊武乡人，好研究《易经》，隐居在华山。
English: Yang Boqiu is a villager of Fengyongwu Township. He is good at studying the "I Ching" and lives in seclusion in Huashan.

古文：隋开皇初，文帝搜访逸隐，闻其有道，徵至京师。
现代文：隋文帝开皇初年，文帝访察隐居的贤人，听说杨伯丑懂道术，就把他请到京城。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wen of Sui Dynasty, Emperor Wen visited the hermit sage and heard that Yang Boqiu knew Taoism, so he invited him to Beijing.

古文：见公卿不为礼，人无贵贱，皆汝之，人不能测。
现代文：杨伯丑看见王公大臣们从不行礼，他认为人就是人，没有贵贱之分，所以对谁都是一样的称谓，人们也莫测他的高深。
English: Yang Bochu saw that Wang Gong's ministers never bowed. He believed that people are people, and there is no distinction between high and low, so they all have the same title, and people can't tell how high or low they are.

古文：帝赐衣，着至朝堂，舍之而去。
现代文：皇帝赏给杨伯丑一件华丽的衣服，他举到金殿外面的百官议事厅里就脱下扔掉了。
English: The emperor gave Yang Bo Chou a magnificent robe, which he lifted up to the hall of the hundred officials outside the golden hall, took off and threw away.

古文：常被发徉狂，游行市里，形体垢秽，未尝栉沐。
现代文：杨伯丑经常披散着头发疯疯癫癫在街市上逛，满身污垢也从不洗澡。
English: Yang Boqiu often walks around the market with his hair wildly disheveled. He is covered in dirt and never takes a shower.

古文：亦开肆卖卜，卦无不中。
现代文：他还摆了个卦摊，他的卦非常灵。
English: He also set up a game booth, and his game was very clever.

古文：有人失马，诣伯丑卜之，伯丑方为太子所召，在途遇之，立为作卦，曰： 可于西市东壁南第三店，为我买鱼作鲙。 
现代文：有人丢了马，来找伯丑算卦，伯丑刚被太子召见，在路上看见了丢马的人，立刻给他算了一卦说： 你要在西街东墙南边的第三家店铺里，给我买鱼吃。 
English: Someone lost a horse and came to look for Bo Xiu to calculate a fortune. Bo Xiu had just been summoned by the prince. He saw the person who lost the horse on the road and immediately calculated a fortune for him and said: You should buy fish for me in the third shop on the south side of the east wall of West Street.

古文：如其言，诣所指店中，果有人牵所失马而至，遂擒之。
现代文：丢马的人按他的话去了那店里，果然有人牵着他丢的马进了店，被他当场抓住。
English: The man who had lost the horse went to the store as he had said, and sure enough, someone led the horse he had lost into the store and was caught by him on the spot.

古文：何妥尝与论《易》，闻妥之言，笑曰： 何用郑玄、王弼之言乎？ 
现代文：何妥曾和他谈论《易经》，他听了之后嘲笑地说： 你读的不都是郑玄和王弼的那一套理论吗？ 
English: He once talked to him about the I Ching, and after listening to him, he mockingly said: Aren't you reading the same theory as Zheng Xuan and Wang Xi?

古文：于是别理辨答，思理玄妙，大异先儒之旨。
现代文：于是就用自己的独到见解讲解辨答《易经》中的疑难，谈得十分玄妙深刻，论点和过去的大学者大不相同。
English: So he used his own unique insights to explain and answer the difficulties in the I Ching, talking about very profound and profound, and the arguments are very different from those of the past university.

古文：论者谓其有玄机，因问其所学，曰： 太华之下，金天洞中，我曾受羲皇所教之《易》，与大道 玄同 ，理穷众妙，岂可与世儒常谈，而测神仙之旨乎？ 
现代文：一些道学家认为伯丑真正得到了道学中神奥玄妙的真谛，就问他在哪里学的，杨伯丑说： 我在太华山下的金天洞中蒙受伏羲皇帝教我《易经》，还有天地为一的 玄同 大道理，这些深奥的道理，和你们这些世俗的学者们是谈不明白的，你们也不可能理解神仙的道义。 
English: Some moralists believed that Bo Chou had truly obtained the true essence of the divine mysteries in Taoism, and asked him where he had learned them. Yang Bo Chou said: I was taught the I Ching by the Emperor Fu Xi in the Golden Cave under Mount Taihua, as well as the Great Principle of the Unification of Heaven and Earth. These profound principles are incomprehensible to you secular scholars, and you cannot possibly understand the morality of the immortals.

古文：数年复归华山上，后世世有人见之。
现代文：几年后，杨伯丑又回了华山，后世的代代人都曾有见过他的。
English: A few years later, Yang Boxiu returned to Huashan, and later generations have seen him.

古文：刘法师
现代文：刘法师
English: Master Liu Zeng

古文：唐贞观中，华阴云台观有刘法师者，炼气绝粒，迨二十年。
现代文：唐太宗贞观年间，华阴的云台观有一个姓刘的法师绝了食修炼道家的闭气之功，一炼就是二十年。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty, a monk surnamed Liu of Huayin's Yuntai sect fasted for twenty years to cultivate the virtue of shutting his qi.

古文：每三元设斋，则见一人，衣缝掖，回黧瘦，来居末坐，斋毕而去。
现代文：他每到正月、七月、十月的十五这天设素斋时，就会有一个穿宽袖单衣面容黑瘦的人来到他这里，坐在最末的座位上，吃完了斋就走。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month, the fifteenth day of the seventh month, and the fifteenth day of the tenth month, when he was to break his fast, a thin, dark-skinned man in a wide-sleeved shirt came to him, sat down on the lowest seat, finished his meal, and left.

古文：如此者十余年，而衣服颜色不改。
现代文：十多年间这个人总是准时来吃斋饭，衣服容貌也没有丝毫变化。
English: For more than ten years, this man has always come to the meal on time, and his clothes and appearance have not changed in the slightest.

古文：法师异而问之，对曰： 余姓张，名公弼，住莲花峰东隅。 
现代文：刘法师很奇怪，就问那人的来历。那人说： 我叫张公弼，住在莲花峰的东山凹里。 
English: Master Liu was very puzzled and asked the man where he was from. The man said, "My name is Zhang Gongyao. I live in Dongshan concave of Lotus Peak.

古文：法师意此处无人之境，请同往。
现代文：刘法师心想那里是个人迹不到的地方，就让张公弼带他去看看。
English: Master Liu thought that it was a place where no one could find him, so he asked Zhang Gongyi to take him to see it.

古文：公弼怡然许之曰： 此中甚乐，师能便住，亦当无闷。 
现代文：张公弼很痛快地答应说： 我那里很好玩，你去看看，一定非常开心。 
English: Zhang Gongyao cheerfully promised, "It's very fun there. If you go and have a look, you will be very happy."

古文：法师遂随公弼行。
现代文：刘法师就随着张公弼走了。
English: Master Liu then left with Zhang Gongyao.

古文：三二十里，扳萝攀葛，才有鸟径。
现代文：走了二三十里地就没有路了，只好扯着滕子攀着葛萝勉强寻路走。
English: After walking for twenty or thirty miles, there was no road, so I had to pull the tent and climb on the arrow to find my way.

古文：其崖谷险绝，虽猿猟不能过也，而公弼履之若夷途。
现代文：悬崖绝壁十分陡峭，就是猿猴怕也难以越过，但张公弼像走平坦的大道一样毫不在乎。
English: The cliff is so steep that even a monkey would find it difficult to get over, but Zhang Gongyao is as unconcerned as if he were walking on a flat road.

古文：法师从行，亦无难。
现代文：刘法师跟着翻山越崖竟一点也不费劲。
English: Master Liu followed him up the mountain and over the cliff with no effort at all.

古文：遂至一石壁，削成，高直千余仞，下临无底之谷。
现代文：后来两个人来到一面石壁前，石壁有一千多仞高，像刀削的一样陡峭，下面是无底深谷。
English: Then the two men came to a wall of stone more than a thousand fathoms high, as steep as a knife's edge, with a bottomless chasm below.

古文：一迳阔数寸，法师与公弼，侧足而立。
现代文：石壁前只有几寸大的一块地方，刘法师与张公弼踮着脚才能站得下。
English: There was only a few inches of space in front of the stone wall, and Master Liu and Zhang Gong had to stand on tiptoe.

古文：公弼乃以指扣石壁，中有人问曰： 为谁？ 
现代文：这时张公弼用手指敲了敲石壁，只听石壁里有人问： 是谁？ 
English: At this time, Zhang Gongyao tapped the stone wall with his finger, only to hear someone in the stone wall ask: Who is it?

古文：对曰： 某。 
现代文：回答说： 是张公弼。 
English: He replied, "It is Zhang Gongyao."

古文：遂划然开一门，门中有天地日月。
现代文：然后壁上突然开了一扇门，门里能看到天地日月，是另一个世界。
English: Then a door suddenly opened on the wall. Inside the door, I could see the heavens and the earth, the sun and the moon. It was another world.

古文：公弼将入，法师随公弼亦入。其人乃怒谓公弼曰： 何故引外人来？ 
现代文：公弼往门里走，刘法师也要跟进去，开门的人怒气冲冲地问张公弼： 你怎么随便领外人来？ 
English: Gongjun walked to the door, and Master Liu followed. The person who opened the door angrily asked Zhang Gongjun, "How can you just bring in a stranger?"

古文：其人因阖门，则又成石壁矣。
现代文：说着就把门关上，又成了一面石壁。
English: Saying this, he closed the door, and it became a stone wall again.

古文：公弼曰： 此非他人，乃云台刘法师也，与余久故，故请此来。
现代文：张公弼在外面对看门人说： 他不是外人，是云台观的刘法师，我的老朋友，所以我才请他来。
English: Zhang Gongyao said to the gatekeeper outside: He is not a stranger, he is Liu Fashi of Yuntai Gu, my old friend, that is why I invited him.

古文：何见拒之深也？ 
现代文：何必把他拒之门外呢？ 
English: Why should he be shut out?

古文：又开门，纳公弼及法师。
现代文：于是门才又开了，让他俩进去。
English: Only then did the door open again, allowing the two to enter.

古文：公弼曰： 法师此来甚饥，君可丰食遣之。 
现代文：张公弼说， 刘法师已经很饿了，请给他准备一顿丰盛的饭菜吧。 
English: Zhang Gongyao said, Master Liu is already very hungry, please prepare a hearty meal for him.

古文：其人遂问法师便住否？
现代文：那开门人就问刘法师要住下吗？
English: The doorkeeper then asked Master Liu if he wanted to stay.

古文：法师请以后期。
现代文：刘法师说以后再来住。
English: Master Liu said that he would come back later.

古文：其人遂取一盂水，以肘后青囊中刀圭粉和之以饮法师，其味甚甘香，饮毕而饥渴之想顿除矣。
现代文：那人就端来一碗水，从胳膊后面一个青布袋里用匙舀出一点药粉和在水里，让刘法师喝下去，刘法师觉得那水特别香甜，喝下去立刻不渴也不饿了。
English: The man brought a bowl of water, and with a spoon, he scooped out a little bit of powdered medicine from a blue cloth bag on the back of his arm and put it in the water for Master Liu to drink. Master Liu found the water to be very sweet, and was neither thirsty nor hungry after drinking it.

古文：公弼曰： 余昨云山中甚乐，君盍为戏，令法师观之？ 
现代文：张公弼对那人说： 我昨天对刘法师说这里很好玩，你何不给他变个戏法让他看看呢？ 
English: Zhang Gongyao said to the man, "I told Master Liu yesterday that it was very fun here. Why don't you show him a different trick?

古文：其人乃以水噀东谷中，俄有苍龙白象各一，对舞，舞甚妙；威凤彩鸾各一，对歌，歌甚清。
现代文：那人就把一口水喷到东面山谷里，片刻间就有一只青龙和一只白象出现在空中，跳起了美妙的舞蹈。接着又有两只凤和鸾对歌，歌声清亮动听。
English: The man sprayed a mouthful of water into the valley on the east side, and in an instant a blue dragon and a white elephant appeared in the air and danced a wonderful dance. Then there were two phoenixes and dragonflies singing together, their voices clear and beautiful.

古文：顷之，公弼送法师回。
现代文：过了一会儿，张公弼就送刘法师出了石壁，送他回家。
English: After a while, Zhang Gongyao sent Liu Mage out of the stone wall and sent him home.

古文：师却顾，唯见青崖丹壑，向之歌舞，一无所睹矣。
现代文：刘法师回头再看，只见仍是悬崖峭壁，刚才的一切都荡然无存了。
English: Master Liu looked back and saw that it was still a cliff. Everything that had just happened was gone.

古文：及去观将近，公弼乃辞。
现代文：到了离云台观不远的地方，张公弼就告辞了。
English: When he reached a place not far from Yuntaiyuan, Zhang Gongyao said goodbye.

古文：法师至观，处置事毕，却寻公弼。
现代文：刘法师回到云台观后，把一些事处理完后又去寻找张公弼。
English: After returning to Yuntai for observation, Master Liu dealt with some matters and then went to look for Zhang Gongyao.

古文：则步步险阻，杳不可阶。
现代文：然而山高路险，再也找不到通向那面石壁的路了。
English: However, the mountain road is dangerous, and there is no way to find the way to that stone wall.

古文：法师痛恨前者不住，号天叫地，遂成腰疾。
现代文：刘法师万分悔恨当初没有留在石壁中，一想起来就呼天号地，甚至为此得了腰痛病。
English: Liu Fashi deeply regretted not staying in the stone wall at the beginning, and cried out loudly when he remembered, and even got a backache disease for this.

古文：公弼更不复至矣。
现代文：张公弼从此也再没到云台观来过。
English: Zhang Gongyao never came to Yuntaiyuan again.

