古文：陈献章，字公甫，新会人。
现代文：陈献章，字公甫，新会人。
English: Chen Xianzhang, Zi Gongfu, Xinhui people.

古文：举正统十二年乡试，再上礼部，不第。从吴与弼讲学。居半载归，读书穷日夜不辍。
现代文：正统十二年乡试中举，但后来礼部会试落榜，随吴与弼讲学，仅半年而归，日夜苦读。
English: In the 12th year of orthodoxy, he passed the junior high school entrance examination, but later he failed the examination of the etiquette club, followed Wu and Zou's lectures, and only returned for half a year, studying hard day and night.

古文：筑阳春台，静坐其中，数年无户外迹。
现代文：自建 阳春台 ，静坐其中，数年足不出户。
English: He built himself a veranda, sat quietly in it, and did not leave the house for several years.

古文：久之，复游太学。祭酒邢让试和杨时《此日不再得》诗一篇，惊曰： 龟山不如也。 
现代文：后游学于太学，闻祭酒邢让和宋代杨时《此日不再得》诗一首，大加赞赏说 ：龟山不如也。 。
English: Houyou learned from Taixue, Wensai, Shujuan, and Song Dynasty poet Yang Shi's poem "This Day Is No Longer" and greatly appreciated it, saying: "Kameyama is not as good...

古文：扬言于朝，以为真儒复出。由是名震京师。
现代文：这话传闻于朝廷，大家以为有真儒再出，因此陈献章名震京师。
English: This was rumored in the imperial court, and everyone thought that a true Confucianist had re-emerged, so Chen Xianzhang became known as Zhenjing Shi.

古文：给事中贺钦听其议论，即日抗疏解官，执弟子礼事献章。献章既归，四方来学者日进。
现代文：给事中贺钦听了献章的议论，辞官不做，宁愿去拜献章为师，献章归家后，四方来向他求学的日益增多。
English: In the middle of the matter, He Qin listened to the discussion of the dedication of the medal, but did not do it, preferring to worship the medal as a teacher. After returning home with the medal, more and more people from all over the world came to learn from him.

古文：广东布政使彭韶、总督朱英交荐。
现代文：广东布政使彭韶、总督朱英都向朝廷推荐。
English: The political envoy of Guangdong Province, Peng Jun, and the governor, Zhu Ying, both recommended it to the imperial court.

古文：召至京，令就试吏部。屡辞疾不赴，疏乞终养，授翰林院检讨以归。
现代文：朝廷召他至京接受吏部考试，献章虽至京师，但多次拒绝参加考试，上疏恳求回乡颐养天年，朝廷只得授与他翰林院检讨的头衔，放回故里，以后又有人多次推荐，而他始终不肯出来做官。
English: The imperial court summoned him to Beijing to take the cadre department examination. Although he was awarded the medal to the Beijing division, he repeatedly refused to take the examination. Shang So pleaded with him to go back to his hometown to recuperate. The imperial court had no choice but to award him the title of Hanlin Academy examiner and send him back to his hometown. Later, he was recommended many times, but he always refused to become an official.

古文：自是屡荐，卒不起。献章之学，以静为主。其教学者，但令端坐澄心，于静中养出端倪。或劝之著述，不答。尝自言曰： 吾年二十七，始从吴聘君学，于古圣贤之书无所不讲，然未知入处。比归白沙，专求用力之方，亦卒未有得。
现代文：献章之学以静修为主，教授学生正坐静心，从静中悟出个道理来，有人劝他著书立说以传后世，他不置可否，曾说： 我二十七岁才拜吴聘君为师，古圣贤之书无所不讲，也未得其门而入，直到回到家乡新会之白沙里，专心致力于学习方法，也还是一无所得。
English: He once said, "I was twenty-seven years old when I followed Wu Heijun as my teacher. The book of ancient sages and sages explains everything, but I didn't gain access to it. Until I returned to my hometown, Baishari of the New Association, I devoted myself to learning methods, but I still didn't gain anything.

古文：于是舍繁求约，静坐久之，然后见吾心之体隐然呈露，日用应酬随吾所欲，如马之御勒也。 
现代文：于是舍繁求简，长时间静坐，然后才有所悟，致使日常言行虽随心所欲，也不越出规范，有如骥马御勒一般。 
English: As a result, they are reluctant to seek simplicity, meditate for a long time, and only then become enlightened. As a result, although their daily words and deeds are whatever they want, they do not go beyond the norm, just like a horse rider.

古文：其学洒然独得，论者谓有鸢飞鱼跃之乐，而兰溪姜麟至以为 活孟子 云。
现代文：可见其学有独到之处。正如有人所评价的那样，献章的学问中有鸢飞鱼跃之乐。兰奚谷姜麟称献章为 活孟子 。
English: It can be seen that there is something unique about his learning. As some people have commented, there is the music of flying fish leaping in the culture of offering medals. Lan Yugu Jianglin said that offering medals is a living men's son.

古文：卒年六十。
现代文：追谥文恭。
English: Chasing after Yu Wenyong.

古文：娄谅，字克贞，上饶人。
现代文：娄谅，字克贞，上饶人。
English: 諒,字克貞,上饶人.

古文：少有志绝学。
现代文：少年时有志于研究宏伟独到的学术。
English: When he was a boy, he was interested in studying grand and unique academic works.

古文：闻吴与弼在临川，往从之。
现代文：闻吴与弼在临川，便去向他求学。
English: When Wen Wu and Zou were in Linchuan, they went to learn from him.

古文：一日，与弼治地，召谅往视，云学者须亲细务。
现代文：有一天，与弼种地，召谅去看看，并对他说，学者须亲自做一些琐细的事。
English: One day, he was summoned to see a farmer and was told that scholars had to do some of the menial tasks themselves.

古文：谅素豪迈，由此折节。虽扫除之事，必身亲之。
现代文：谅平素豪放不羁，从此以后有所改变，虽洒扫房屋台阶之事，也必亲身去做。
English: From then on, things have changed. Even if you have to sweep the house steps, you have to do it yourself.

古文：景泰四年举于乡。
现代文：景泰四年乡试中举。
English: Jing Tai won the junior middle school examination of the fourth year.

古文：天顺末，选为成都训导。
现代文：天顺末年选为成都训导。
English: At the end of Tianshun year, he was selected as the coach of Chengdu.

古文：寻告归，闭门著书，成《日录》四十卷、《三礼订讹》四十卷。
现代文：不久告假回家，闭门著书。著《目录》四十卷，《三礼订讹》四十卷。
English: He soon went home on leave and wrote books behind closed doors, including the forty-volume "Catalogue" and the forty-volume "Three Rites of Fasting."

古文：谓《周礼》皆天子之礼，为国礼。《仪礼》皆公卿大夫士庶人之礼，为家礼。
现代文：他认为《周礼》所记都是天子之礼，是国礼；《仪礼》所述皆公卿大夫及士庶人之礼，是家礼。
English: He believed that all of the rituals recorded in "Zhouli" were divine rites and national rites; all of the rituals described in "LiLi" were the rites of court nobles, doctors, and commoners, and were family rites.

古文：以《礼记》为二经之传，分附各篇，如《冠礼》附《冠义》之类。
现代文：把《礼记》作为前二经的解说，其内容附于各篇，如《冠礼》附《冠义》。
English: The "Book of Rites" is interpreted as the first two sutras, and its contents are attached to each chapter, such as "Crown Rites" attached to "Crown Meanings."

古文：不可附各篇者，各附一经之后。
现代文：不可附各篇者，各附一经之后。
English: If it is not possible to attach each chapter, then each chapter should be attached after one verse.

古文：不可附一经者，总附二经之后。
现代文：不可附于一经者，总附于二经之后。
English: If you cannot attach it to the first sutra, always attach it after the second sutra.

古文：其为诸儒附会者，以程子论黜之。
现代文：诸儒对三礼的解释有牵强附会者，则以二程的有关议论进行批驳。
English: Confucianism's interpretation of the Three Rites is far-fetched, and the attendees refute it with the relevant discussion of the two courses.

古文：著《春秋本意》十二篇，不采三传事实，言： 是非必待三传而后明，是《春秋》为弃书矣。 
现代文：著《春秋本意》十二篇，不采用《左传》、《公羊传》、《谷梁传》的事实，认为 ：是非必待有三传而后才明白，那么《春秋》就可以成为不必要的书了。 
English: He wrote twelve "Spring and Autumn Original Intentions," but did not use the facts of "Zo Zhuan," "Ram Zhuan" and "Gu Liang Zhuan," and believed that: it is necessary to wait until there are three biographies to understand, then "Spring and Autumn" can become an unnecessary book.

古文：其学以收放心为居敬之门，以何思何虑、勿忘勿助为居敬要旨。
现代文：其学说认为：收回放纵之心是为了达到独慎之入门，勿忘勿助是独慎的主旨。
English: Its doctrine holds that: the withdrawal of indulgence is to achieve the entry of self-restraint, and do not forget to help is the main purpose of self-restraint.

古文：谅子姓皆捕系，遗文遂散轶矣。
现代文：当时胡居仁批评娄谅的学术思想近于宋代的陆九渊，后来罗钦顺也认为类似禅学。
English: At that time, Hu Jueren criticized the academic thought of Yu Peng as being close to that of Lu Jiuyuan in the Song Dynasty, and later Luo Qinshun also thought that it was similar to Zen.

古文：门人夏尚朴，字敦夫，广信永丰人。
现代文：王守仁少年时也曾受业于娄谅。夏尚朴，字敦夫，广信永丰人，娄谅的弟子。
English: Wang Shouren was also a pupil of Yu Peng when he was a young boy. Xia Shangpu, Zi Dunfu, Guangxin Yongfeng, are all disciples of Yu Peng.

古文：正德初，会试赴京。见刘瑾乱政，慨然叹曰： 时事如此，尚可干进乎？ 
现代文：正德初年，尚朴赴京会试，见刘瑾乱政，感慨地说： 时事如此，还求什么功名？ 
English: In the first year of Zhengde, Shang Pu went to Beijing to take the entrance examination, saw Liu Bei's chaotic politics, and said with emotion: The current situation is so, what merit do you seek?

古文：不试而归。
现代文：不参加考试就回去了。
English: He went back without taking the exam.

古文：六年成进士，授南京礼部主事。
现代文：正德五年，刘瑾被诛。六年，尚朴中进士，授南京礼部主事。
English: Zhengde was imprisoned for five years, Liu Bei was imprisoned for six years, and Shang Pu was promoted to middle school and became the head of the Nanjing etiquette department.

古文：岁饥，条上救荒数事。
现代文：这年闹饥荒，尚朴条陈救荒数事。
English: This year, there was a famine, and there were several cases of famine relief.

古文：再迁惠州知府，投劾归。
现代文：又调任惠州知府，上书弹劾自己，去职归家。
English: He was also transferred to the post of governor of Huizhou, submitted a letter of impeachment against himself, resigned from his post and returned home.

古文：嘉靖初，起山东提学副使。
现代文：嘉靖初，起任山东提学副使。
English: At the beginning of the Jiajing era, he was appointed deputy envoy of Shandong to promote education.

古文：擢南京太仆少卿，与魏校、湛若水辈日相讲习。
现代文：后升南京太仆少卿，与魏校、湛若水等每日相互讲习学问。
English: Later, he was promoted to Nanjing Taigu Shaoqing, and he and Wei Xie, Zhan Ruoshui and others had daily mutual study sessions.

古文：所著有《中庸语》《东岩文集》。
现代文：谏官弹劾大学士桂、萼，其中牵连到尚朴。吏部尚书方献夫为他辩白。
English: The eunuchs impeached the university judges Gui and Caly, implicating Shang Pu. Shang Shufang, a member of the personnel department, defended him.

古文：王守仁少时，亦尝受业于谅。
现代文：不久称病辞官归家。其著作有《中庸语》、《东岩文集》。
English: Soon after, the so-called "sick dictionary" returned home. His works include "Chung Yeong Woo" and "Eastern Rock Anthology."

古文：贺钦，字克恭，义州卫人。
现代文：贺钦，字克恭，义州卫人。
English: Heqin, Keking, Yizhou guardsmen.

古文：少好学，读《近思录》有悟。
现代文：少时好学，读朱熹与吕祖谦合撰的《近思录》，有所领悟。
English: When he was young, he was eager to learn. He read "Recent Thoughts" co-authored by Zhu Xi and Lu Zuqian, and gained some understanding.

古文：成化二年以进士授户科给事中。已而师事陈献章。
现代文：成化二年中进士，授户科给事中之职，随后拜陈献章为师。
English: In the second year of his studies, he was promoted to the rank of junior scholar, and was assigned to the household science department. Later, he became a teacher of Chen Xizhang.

古文：既归，肖其像事之。
现代文：归家后绘陈献章的肖像行尊师之礼。
English: After returning home, he painted a portrait of Chen Xizhang as a tribute to his teacher.

古文：弘治改元，用阁臣荐，起为陕西参议。
现代文：弘治改元，因阁臣的举荐，起用为陕西参议。
English: On the recommendation of a cabinet minister, Hongzhi was appointed as a Shaanxi councillor.

古文：檄未至而母死，乃上疏恳辞，且陈四事。
现代文：任命诏书未到，因母亲去世而上疏辞职归家守丧。
English: The imperial edict of appointment did not arrive, and due to the death of his mother, Shangsu resigned and went home to mourn.

古文：一，谓今日要务莫先经筵，当博访真儒，以资启沃。
现代文：同时疏陈四事：一、今日政务要事莫先于开经筵，当访求真儒为皇帝讲学，以治国之道来开导皇上。
English: At the same time, four things should be kept in mind: First, today's important political affairs should not precede the opening of the sutra, when visiting, seek true Confucius to lecture the emperor, and enlighten the emperor with the way of governing the country.

古文：二，荐检讨陈献章学术醇正，称为大贤，宜以非常之礼起之，或俾参大政，或任经筵，以养君德。
现代文：二、检讨陈献章，学术淳正，称为大贤，应以非常之礼起用他，或让他参预国家大政，或担任经筵讲官，以养君主的德性。
English: Second, review Chen Xizhang, academically honest, known as a great scholar, and should use him with great courtesy, or let him participate in national politics, or serve as an economic lecturer, in order to cultivate the virtue of the monarch.

古文：三，内官职掌，载在《祖训》，不过备洒扫、司启闭而已。
现代文：三、宦官职掌，《祖训》规定不过洒扫宫庭，开关门户而已。
English: Third, the duties of eunuchs, according to the "Ancestor's Teaching," are nothing more than sweeping the palace yard and opening and closing the gate.

古文：近如王振、曹吉祥、汪直等，或参预机宜，干政令，招权纳宠，邀功启衅。或引左道，进淫巧，以荡上心。
现代文：而近来如王振、李吉祥、汪直等人，或参预国家机要，干预朝政，揽权纳宠，邀功生事，或引巫术邪道入宫；呈进淫巧之物，动摇皇帝治国安邦之心。
English: But recently, people such as Wang Zhen, Li Jixiang, Wang Zhi and others have either participated in the preparation of national opportunities, intervened in the court politics, grabbed power and favors, invited meritorious deeds, or brought witchcraft into the palace; presented themselves as objects of lewdness, shaking the heart of the emperor to govern the country.

古文：误国殃民，莫此为甚。
现代文：误国殃民，以此为甚。
English: Misleading the nation and harming the people, to say the least.

古文：宜慎饬将来，内不使干预政事，外不使镇守地方掌握兵权。
现代文：宜戒谕未来，内不使他们干预此事，外不让他们镇守地方，掌握兵权。
English: It is advisable to admonish the future, not to allow them to intervene in this matter internally, and not to allow them to defend the localities and seize military power externally.

古文：四，兴礼乐以化天下。 陛下绍基之初，举行朱子丧葬之礼，而颓败之俗因仍不改，乞申明正礼，革去教坊俗乐，以广治化。 
现代文：四、兴礼乐，以教化天下。
English: Fourthly, to enlighten the world with entertainment.

古文：疏凡数万言。
现代文：奏疏万言。
English: It's a lot of words.

古文：奏入，报闻。正德四年，刘瑾括辽东田，东人震恐，而义州守又贪横，民变，聚众劫掠。顾相戒曰： 毋惊贺黄门。 
现代文：正德四年，刘瑾清查辽东田亩，百姓惶恐不安，义州郡守又贪婪横暴，激起民变聚众劫掠，但他们相互提醒说 ：不要惊动贺黄门。 
English: In the four years of Zhengde, Liu Yuqing surveyed the eastern mu of Liao, the people were frightened and uneasy, and the Yizhou county governor was greedy and violent, provoking the people to gather and loot, but they reminded each other: Don't disturb He Huangmen.

古文：谓为学不必求之高远，在主敬以收放心而已。
现代文：贺钦闻知，急向他们讲明祸福，平息叛乱。贺钦做学问不求广博，而是专读《四书》、《六经》、《小学》，目的是为日后亲身实践。
English: He Qin listened to and learned from them, eager to explain to them the good and bad, and quell the rebellion. He Qin did not seek to learn widely, but read the "Four Books," "Six Classics," and "Elementary School," with the aim of practicing personally in the future.

古文：卒年七十四。子士谘，乡贡士，尝陈十二事论王政，不报。终身不仕。
现代文：他认为，做学问不必好高骛远，而在于戒慎，在于收回放纵了的心。
English: He believed that learning did not have to be lofty and far-reaching, but rather involved caution and the withdrawal of an indulgent heart.

古文：陈茂烈，字时周，莆田人。
现代文：终年七十四岁。陈茂烈，字时周，莆田人。
English: He was seventy-four years old. Chen Maoli, also known as Shi Zhou, was from Putian.

古文：年十八，作《省克录》，谓颜之克己，曾之日省，学之法也。
现代文：十八岁做《省克录》，认为颜渊之 克己 ，曾子之 日省 ，都是做学问的方法。
English: At the age of eighteen, he wrote the "Record of Self-Criticism" and believed that Yan Yuan's self-denial and his great-grandson's self-criticism were both methods of learning.

古文：弘治八年举进士。
现代文：弘治八年进士及第。
English: He entered the priesthood in 8th year of Koji era.

古文：奉使广东，受业陈献章之门，献章语以主静之学。
现代文：奉使至广东，拜陈献章为师，献章对他讲主静之学。
English: He was sent to Guangdong to learn from Chen Xianzhang, who taught him the principles of calmness.

古文：退而与张诩论难，作《静思录》。
现代文：与张诩辩论而做《静思录》。
English: Debate with Zhang Ye to make "Meditation."

古文：寻授吉安府推官，考绩过淮，寒无絮衣，冻几殆。
现代文：不久，授吉安府推官，为考核官吏政绩而过淮，天寒无棉衣，几乎冻死。
English: Not long after, he was awarded the post of Ji'an prefectural governor. He was too cold to wear a winter coat, and almost froze to death.

古文：入为监察御史，袍服朴陋，乘一疲马，人望而敬之。
现代文：入朝任监察御史，袍服简朴，骑一疲马。人们望而敬之。
English: He entered the imperial court as an inspector of imperial history. He wore simple robes and rode a tired horse. People looked up to him.

古文：以母老终养。
现代文：因母亲年老，请求归家奉养。
English: Due to his mother's old age, he asked to be brought up at home.

古文：供母之外，不办一帷。
现代文：家中除供养母亲所需物品外，连一床帷帐都没有。
English: In addition to the items needed to support his mother, there is not even a bed curtain in the house.

古文：治畦汲水，身自操作。
现代文：种菜、挑水，都是自己动手。
English: They grow vegetables and fetch water by themselves.

古文：太守闻其劳，进二卒助之，三日遣之还。
现代文：太守听说他如此劳苦，特派二名衙役前去帮助他，三天后，他就将二衙役打发回去了。
English: Hearing of his hard work, the governor sent two eunuchs to help him. Three days later, he sent the two eunuchs back.

古文：吏部以其贫，禄以晋江教谕，不受。
现代文：吏部念其家贫，任他为晋江教谕，使他可得俸禄以养家，他不肯接受。
English: The magistrate thought his family was poor, and asked him to teach in Jinjiang so that he could earn a salary to support his family, but he refused.

古文：又奏给月米，上书言： 臣素贫，食本俭薄，故臣母自安于臣之家，而臣亦得以自逭其贫，非有及人之廉，尽己之孝也。
现代文：又奏请每月给他米若干。他上书说 ：臣素来贫寒，衣食本来简朴，故臣母能安心住臣之家，而臣也得以避免贫苦。臣并没有像别人那样廉洁，只是自己尽孝罢了。
English: He also asked for a certain amount of rice to be given to him each month. He wrote a letter saying: My father-in-law used to be poor, and his food and clothing were originally simple. My mother-in-law was able to live at ease in my father-in-law's house, and my father-in-law was also able to avoid poverty. My father-in-law was not as honest as others, he was just being a filial son.

古文：古人行备负米，皆以为亲，臣之贫尚未至是。
现代文：古人帮工背米，以养父母，臣还未贫到这等程度。
English: The ancients helped the workers carry rice, and supported their parents. The vassals were not so poor.

古文：而臣母鞠臣艰苦，今年八十有六，来日无多。
现代文：母亲辛辛苦苦将臣养育成人，今年已八十六岁，来日不多。
English: My mother worked hard to raise me to adulthood. She is eighty-six years old this year and does not come to Japan often.

古文：臣欲自尽心力，尚恐不及，上烦官帑，心窃未安。 
现代文：臣欲尽自己孝心尚恐不及，还要烦朝廷以官钱助我养母，实在内心不安。 
English: It is not enough for a vassal to want to fulfill his filial duty, but he also has to annoy the imperial court to help me raise my mother with government money. He is really uneasy inside.

古文：奏上不允。
现代文：朝廷不允许他的推却。
English: The court did not allow his dismissal.

古文：母卒，茂烈亦卒。
现代文：茂烈在母亲去世后，也相继去世。
English: After her mother's death, Murei also died one after another.

古文：茂烈为诸生时，韩文问莆田人物于林俊，曰： 从吾。 谓彭时也。
现代文：茂烈当学生时，韩文问林俊，莆田有哪些人物，回答说有从吾，即彭时。
English: When Moli was a student, Han Wen asked Lin Jun what kind of people there were in Putian, and he replied that there was a follower of mine, namely Peng Shi.

古文：又问，曰： 时周。 且曰： 与时周语，沉疴顿去。 
现代文：又问还有谁，回答说还有时周，并说 ：与时周谈话，重病会立即消除。 
English: When asked who else, he replied that he still had Saizhou, and said, "If you talk to Saizhou, your serious illness will be eliminated immediately."

古文：其为所重如此。
现代文：对茂烈的器重由此可知。
English: The weight of a vigorous plant can be seen from this.

古文：湛若水，字元明，增城人。
现代文：湛若水，字元明，号甘泉，增城人。
English: Zhan Ruoshui, Zi Yuanming, Guo Ganquan, Zengcheng people.

古文：弘治五年举于乡，从陈献章游，不乐仕进。母命之出，乃入南京国子监。
现代文：弘治五年，科考乡试中举。从陈献章学习，不乐于求功名，后奉母亲之命，入南京国子监。
English: In the fifth year of Hongzhi, he won the junior high school science examination. He studied from Chen Xianzhang and was not willing to seek fame. Later, he was ordered by his mother to enter the Nanjing State Children's Supervisor.

古文：十八年会试，学士张元祯、杨廷和为考官，抚其卷曰： 非白沙之徒不能为此。 
现代文：弘治十八年参加会试，学士张元祯、杨廷和为考官，看了他的考卷赞叹道 ：不是白沙陈献章的学生写不出这样的文章。 
English: In the 18th year of Hongzhi's participation in the examination, the bachelor Zhang Yuanzhang and Yang Tinghe were the examiners. They read his examination paper and said with admiration: Students who are not Baisha Chen's students cannot write such an article.

古文：置第二。
现代文：列为第二名。
English: Ranked second.

古文：赐进士，选庶吉士，授翰林院编修。
现代文：朝廷赐他进士，选为庶吉士，授翰林院编修。
English: The Imperial Court gave him the title of "Junior Scholar," elected him as "Junior Scholar," and awarded him the title of "Editor of Hanlin Academy."

古文：时王守仁在吏部讲学，若水与相应和。
现代文：这时王守仁正在吏部讲学，若水与他一唱一和，互相呼应。
English: At this time, Wang Shouren was lecturing at the cadre department, and Ruo Shui was singing in unison with him, echoing each other.

古文：寻丁母忧，庐墓三年。
现代文：不久母亲去世，他在墓边守孝三年。
English: Soon after, his mother died, and he remained at her grave for three years.

古文：筑西樵讲舍，士子来学者，先令习礼，然后听讲。
现代文：建 西樵讲舍 。各地士子来求学的，先教他们学习礼节，然后听讲。
English: Build a lecture hall in Xidi. When scholars from various regions come to study, first teach them to study etiquette, and then listen to lectures.

古文：嘉靖初，入朝，上经筵讲学疏，谓圣学以求仁为要。
现代文：嘉靖初年入朝，陈奏《经筵讲学》疏，认为圣学以求仁为目的。
English: In the first year of his entry into the imperial court, Jiajing recited the "Lecture on Confucianism" and believed that the purpose of sacred learning was to seek benevolence.

古文：已复上疏言： 陛下初政，渐不克终。左右近侍争以声色异教蛊惑上心。
现代文：随后又上疏道 ：陛下初临朝听政，渐渐不能克制自己，左右近臣以声色邪教来迷惑陛下。
English: He then went on a rampage: His Majesty was attending his first coronation to listen to the government, and gradually he could not restrain himself, and his right and left courtiers tried to confuse His Majesty with a false cult.

古文：大臣林俊、孙交等不得守法，多自引去，可为寒心。
现代文：大臣林俊、孙交等因不得治国安邦之法，而多辞官而去，实可寒心。
English: The ministers Lin Jun and Sun Jiao resigned from their posts because they were not allowed to govern the country according to the law of national security.

古文：亟请亲贤远奸，穷理讲学，以隆太平之业。 
现代文：切望陛下亲贤人，远奸佞，穷理讲学，以兴旺太平之世。 
English: Longing for His Majesty's relatives and sages, distant traitors, poor lectures, to flourish in a peaceful world.

古文：又疏言日讲不宜停止，报闻。
现代文：又上疏建议不要停止经筵讲学。
English: It is also recommended not to stop the lectures.

古文：明年进侍读，复疏言： 一二年间，天变地震，山崩川涌，人饥相食，殆无虚月。
现代文：第二年，进为侍读。上疏说： 近一二年间，天变地震，山崩水涌，饥荒不断，人自相食。
English: In the second year, Jin served as an attendant. Shang Su said: In the past one or two years, the sky has changed, earthquakes, landslides and floods, famine has continued, and people have eaten each other.

古文：夫圣人不以屯否之时而后视贤之训，明医不以深锢之疾而废元气之剂，宜博求修明先王之道者，日侍文华，以裨圣学。 
现代文：圣人不是等到艰难困苦之时才去听取贤者的意见，明医不因为病情沉重无治而不用恢复元气的药。应广求能阐明先王之道的人，每日在文华殿为陛下讲学，以有益于圣人学说之发扬光大。 
English: A sage does not wait until a time of difficulty and hardship to listen to the opinions of wise men. A sage does not wait until a time of difficulty and hardship to listen to the opinions of wise men. A sage does not wait until a time of difficulty and hardship to listen to the opinions of wise men. A sage does not wait until a time of difficulty and hardship to listen to the opinions of wise men. A sage does not wait until a time of difficulty and hardship to listen to the opinions of wise men. A sage does not wait until a time of difficulty and hardship to listen to the opinions of wise men. A sage does not wait until a time of difficulty and hardship to listen to the opinions of wise men. A

古文：已，迁南京国子监祭酒，作《心性图说》以教士。
现代文：其后，调任南京国子监祭酒，做《心性图说》，以教导士子。
English: After that, he was transferred to the Nanjing Provincial Son Supervisor of Sacrificial Wine to do the "Heart Chart" to teach the scholars.

古文：拜礼部侍郎。
现代文：拜礼部侍郎。
English: He is a waiter in the prayer club.

古文：仿《大学衍义补》，作《格物通》，上于朝。
现代文：仿《大学衍义补》而做《格物通》，进呈朝廷。
English: Imitating "College Supplement" and making it into "Lattice Knowledge," it was presented to the imperial court.

古文：历南京吏、礼、兵三部尚书。
现代文：后历任南京吏、礼、兵三部尚书。
English: Later, successive Nanjing officials, etiquette, and soldiers were recorded in three books.

古文：南京欲尚侈靡，为定丧葬之制颁行之。
现代文：南京民俗崇尚侈靡，若水制定丧葬制度颁布施行。
English: Nanjing folk customs advocate extravagance, and the newly established funeral system was promulgated and implemented.

古文：老，请致仕。年九十五卒。
现代文：因年老退休，终年九十五岁。
English: Due to old age, he retired at the age of 95.

古文：若水生平所至，必建书院以祀献章。
现代文：若水在他一生所到之处，必建书院，以纪念陈献章。
English: If water was everywhere he went in his life, a college would be built to commemorate Chen's dedication.

古文：年九十，犹为南京之游。
现代文：九十高龄还漫游南京。
English: At the age of ninety, he still roams around Nanjing.

古文：过江西，安福邹守益，守仁弟子也，戒其同志曰： 甘泉先生来，吾辈当宪老而不乞言，慎毋轻有所论辨。 
现代文：路经江西时，王守仁的弟子安福邹守益告诫他们的同仁说： 甘泉先生来，我们应当尊敬这位老人，而不要妄自讨教，更不要轻易妄与论辩。 
English: When passing through Jiangxi Province, Wang Shouren's disciple An Fuyao Shouyi admonished their colleagues: "Mr. Ganquan, come, we should respect this old man, and not presume to ask for advice, let alone argue with him.

古文：若水初与守仁同讲学，后各立宗旨，守仁以致良知为宗，若水以随处体验天理为宗。
现代文：若水原与守仁一同讲学，学术思想相同，后各主宗旨，守仁以 致良知 为宗旨，若水则以 随处体认天理 为宗旨。
English: If Mizuhara and Morihito were to lecture together and share the same academic thought, then each would have their own purpose. Morihito's purpose would be to "promote conscience," and if Mizuhara and Morihito were to lecture together, their purpose would be to "recognize the truth of God everywhere."

古文：授南京大理评事，数有条奏，历官福建佥事，擒杀武平贼渠黄友胜。
现代文：守仁说若水之学为求之于外。若水认为守仁的 格物 之说有四点不可信，还说： 阳明所谓的心与我所说的心不同。
English: Shujin said that if the study of water is to be sought outside. If the water believes that Shujin's characteristics, there are four points that can not be trusted, and said: Yangming's so-called heart is different from what I said.

古文：居家以孝友称。守益举正德六年会试第一，出王守仁门。
现代文：阳明所谓的心是存在于万物之中，无处不在，故他认为我的学说是主张求之于外。 当时学术思想分为王、湛两派。邹守益，字谦之，号东廓，江西安福人，王守仁弟子。
English: Yang Ming's so-called heart exists in all things and is everywhere, so he thought that my theory was to advocate seeking it from the outside. At that time, academic thought was divided into two schools: Wang and Zhan. There were two schools of thought: Zhai Shouyi, Zha Qian Zhi, Guodong Guo, Jiangxi Anfu Ren, and Wang Shouren's disciples.

古文：以廷对第三人授翰林院编修。
现代文：正德六年，科考会试第一，廷对第三，授翰林院编修。
English: Zhengde in the sixth year, the first in the examination of the Science Research Society, the third in the Ting Dynasty, and the editor of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：逾年告归，谒守仁，讲学于赣州。
现代文：第二年告假归乡，拜谒王守仁，讲学于赣州。
English: In the second year, he went back to his hometown after taking a leave of absence, paid homage to Wang Shuren, and lectured in Zhangzhou.

古文：宸濠反，与守仁军事。
现代文：宁王宸濠谋反，他参与王守仁军务。
English: He participated in the military affairs of Wang Shouren.

古文：世宗即位，始赴官。
现代文：世宗即位，始回朝居官任职。
English: Sejong ascended to the throne, and served as a court official for the first time.

古文：嘉靖三年二月，帝欲去兴献帝本生之称。守益疏谏，忤旨，被责。
现代文：嘉靖三年二月，世宗欲尊其生父兴献王为皇考恭穆献皇帝，守益上疏表示不同意见。
English: In February of the third year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Shizong wanted to honor his biological father, Xingxian Wang, as the emperor of the imperial examination and tribute to the emperor, but Shouyi Shangxiao expressed a different opinion.

古文：逾月，复上疏曰：
现代文：受到谴责，一个月后又上疏说：
English: He was reprimanded, but a month later he was back on Twitter saying:

古文：陛下欲隆本生之恩，屡下群臣会议，群臣据礼正言，致蒙诘让，道路相传，有孝长子之称。
现代文： 陛下欲尊重本生父亲之恩，屡令群臣会议商讨。群臣根据礼仪直言极谏，却受到指责。世上传说陛下是孝长子。
English: In order to respect the grace of his natural father, His Majesty repeatedly ordered the council of ministers to discuss. According to the etiquette, the ministers spoke very bluntly, but they were criticized. It is said in the world that His Majesty is a filial eldest son.

古文：昔曾元以父寝疾，惮于易箦，盖爱之至也。
现代文：古代曾元的父亲曾子病重，临终时，叫人把大夫刚使用的华丽竹席换掉，曾元则因爱父亲而不肯换。
English: In ancient times, Zeng Yuan's father Zeng Zi was seriously ill. On his deathbed, he asked someone to replace the gorgeous bamboo chair that the doctor had just used. Zeng Yuan refused to replace it because he loved his father.

古文：而曾子责之曰： 姑息 。
现代文：曾子批评他是姑息。
English: Zengzi criticized him for appeasement.

古文：鲁公受天子礼乐，以祀周公，盖尊之至也。
现代文：鲁公以天子礼乐来祭周公，以表示对周公莫大的尊敬。
English: In order to show his great respect for Zhou Gong, Lu Gong performed the Divine Liturgy.

古文：而孔子伤之曰 周公其衰矣 。
现代文：孔子却叹息道 ：周公名声受到损害了。 
English: But Confucius sighed: Zhou Gong's reputation has been damaged.

古文：臣愿陛下勿以姑息事献帝，而使后世有其衰之叹。
现代文：臣希望陛下勿以姑息来侍奉献帝，而使后世有所叹息。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will not serve the emperor with leniency, but will make future generations sigh.

古文：且群臣援经证古，欲陛下专意正统，此皆为陛下忠谋，乃不察而督过之，谓忤且慢。
现代文： 且群臣引经证古，是希望陛下维护正统，这是为陛下着想，陛下不理解而责怪他们，说他们违反圣上旨意，不严肃庄重。
English: Moreover, the courtiers quoted Zhengu, hoping that His Majesty would maintain the orthodoxy. This was for His Majesty's sake. His Majesty did not understand and blamed them, saying that they violated the sacred will and were not serious and solemn.

古文：臣历观前史，如冷褒、段犹之徒，当时所谓忠爱，后世所斥以为邪媚也。
现代文：臣考察历史，如冷褒、段犹之徒，当时所谓忠爱，后世斥为邪佞谄媚小人。
English: The minister examined the history, such as the cold praise, Duan Yuzhitu, the so-called loyalty at that time, and the future generations were rejected as evil and charming villains.

古文：师丹、司马光之徒，当时所谓欺慢，后世所仰以为正直也。
现代文：师丹、司马光等，当时说他们欺蒙轻忽，后世都认为他们正直，敬仰他们。
English: Shidan, Sima Guang, etc., said at the time that they were deceived and careless, and later generations all thought they were honest and admired them.

古文：后之视今，犹今之视古。望陛下不吝改过，察群臣之忠爱，信而用之，复召其去国者，无使奸人动摇国是，离间宫闱。
现代文：将来的人看今天的事，如同今天的人看待古代事情一样，望陛下不要怕改正错误，要体察群臣对陛下忠爱之心。信任他们，任用他们，把离职的大臣招回来，不使奸佞之徒动摇国家的大政方针，使宫中不和。
English: People in the future will look at today's events, just as people today look at ancient events, and hope that His Majesty will not be afraid to correct his mistakes, and that he will appreciate the loyalty of his ministers to His Majesty. Trust them, appoint them, and bring back the ministers who have left office, so that the traitors will not shake the country's general policy and cause discord in the palace.

古文：昔先帝南巡，群臣交章谏阻，先帝赫然震怒，岂不谓欺慢可罪哉。
现代文： 昔日先帝武宗南巡，群臣相继上书谏阻，先帝大怒，岂不是说他们是欺慢皇上而可治罪。
English: A long time ago, when Emperor Wuzong was on a tour of the south, a group of courtiers wrote to him one after another to oppose him, and the emperor was furious. Wasn't it said that they were mocking the emperor and could be punished?

古文：陛下在藩邸闻之，必以是为尽忠于先帝。
现代文：陛下在王府闻其事，必认为这是尽忠于先帝。
English: His Majesty heard about it in the royal palace and must have thought that it was out of loyalty to the former emperor.

古文：今入继大统，独不容群臣尽忠于陛下乎。
现代文：如今陛下即位，能不容许群臣尽忠于陛下吗？ 
English: Now that Your Majesty has ascended the throne, can you not allow your courtiers to be loyal to Your Majesty?

古文：帝大怒，下诏狱拷掠，谪广德州判官。
现代文：世宗看了守益的奏疏大怒，诏令将守益下狱拷打，贬为广德州判官。
English: Sejong saw Shouyi's letter and was furious. He ordered Shouyi to be tortured in prison and degraded to the status of a judge in Canton.

古文：废淫祠，建复初书院，与学者讲授其间。
现代文：守益在广德拆毁淫祠，建立 复初书院 。与学者在这里讲学。
English: Shouyi demolished the temple of prostitution in Guangde and established the Fuzhu Academy, where he lectured with scholars.

古文：稍迁南京礼部郎中，州人立生祠以祀。
现代文：不久，调任南京礼部郎中。广德州人立生祠来纪念他。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to Nanjing as the vice-chairman of the Ministry of Ceremonies. People in Guangzhou set up an ancestral shrine to commemorate him.

古文：闻守仁卒，为位哭，服心丧，日与吕柟、湛若水、钱德洪、王畿、薛侃辈论学。
现代文：守益闻王守仁逝世，供立灵位，悼念不已。他每日与吕木冉、湛若水、钱德洪、王畿、薛侃等人讨论学问。
English: Shou Yi heard that Wang Shou Ren had passed away, offered to set up a shrine for him, and mourned for him endlessly. He discussed culture with Lv Mujan, Zhan Ruoshui, Qian Dehong, Wang Gui, Xue Kan, and others every day.

古文：考满入都，即引疾归。
现代文：任期满，政绩考核合格，回至京都，但立即称病归乡。
English: At the end of his term of office, he passed the performance appraisal and returned to Kyoto, but immediately said he was ill and returned home.

古文：久之，以荐起南京吏部郎中，召为司经局洗马。
现代文：很久以后，被举荐起任南京吏部郎中，随后朝廷招为司经局洗马。
English: After a long time, he was recommended to serve as a junior member of the Nanjing cadre, and then recruited by the imperial court to be a member of the Bureau of Economic Affairs.

古文：守益以太子幼，未能出阁，乃与霍韬上《圣功图》，自神尧茅茨土阶，至帝西苑耕稼蚕桑，凡为图十三。
现代文：守益因见太子年幼，不能出朝至其藩封之地，便与霍韬一道进呈《圣功图》。图中绘有自神农、唐尧住的茅屋，屋前土阶，至世宗在西苑耕田养蚕，共十三幅。
English: Seeing that the crown prince was too young to travel to his fief, Shomei, together with Hōjō, submitted the "Sacred Merit Map." The map contains thirteen pictures, from Shinnō, the thatched cottage where Tang Jie lived, the steps in front of the house, to Shōjō raising silkworms in the fields of Sai-en.

古文：帝以为谤讪，几得罪，赖韬受帝知，事乃解。
现代文：世宗认为是在诽谤他，几乎得罪皇上，幸因霍韬为世宗所器重，才得无事。
English: Sejong thought he was slandering him, almost offending the emperor, but fortunately, because Ho Ho was so important to Sejong, nothing happened.

古文：明年迁太常少卿兼侍读学士，出掌南京翰林院，夏言欲远之也。
现代文：第二年，调守益为太常少卿兼侍读学士。由于夏言一心要使他远离京师，故调他去南京掌管翰林院。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to Taizhong Shaoqing (太常少卿) and attendant bachelor. Since Xia Yan was determined to keep him away from the Beijing division, he was transferred to Nanjing to take charge of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：御史毛恺请留侍东宫，被谪。
现代文：御史毛恺奏请留守益侍奉太子，而被贬谪。
English: Mishima Mochizuki asked to stay and serve the crown prince, but was demoted.

古文：寻改南京祭酒。
现代文：不久，改任守益为南京国子监祭酒。
English: Soon after, it was renamed Shouyi and became the Nanjing Guozijian Festival Liquor.

古文：九庙灾，守益陈上下交修之道，言： 殷中宗、高宗，反妖为祥，亨国长久。 
现代文：皇帝祖庙遭火灾，守益陈请朝廷上下都要反省，并说： 殷中宗、高宗这样做了，化妖孽为吉祥，国运长久。 
English: When the emperor's ancestral temple was set on fire, Chen Shouyi asked the imperial court to reflect, saying, "Yin Zhongzong and Gao Zong did this, turning evil into good, and bringing long-term national prosperity.

古文：帝大怒，落职归。
现代文：世宗大怒，削其职为民。
English: Sejong flew into a rage, and resigned from his post.

古文：守益天姿纯粹。
现代文：守益禀性纯正。
English: The integrity of Shouyishou is pure.

古文：守仁尝曰： 有若无，实若虚，犯而不校，谦之近之矣。 
现代文：守仁曾引《论语》的话说： 有若无，实若虚，别人侵犯他，都不计较。
English: Shujin once quoted from the Analects of Confucius, saying: "If there is nothing, it is true; if there is nothing, it is false; if others encroach on him, he does not care."

古文：里居，日事讲学，四方从游者踵至，学者称东廓先生。
现代文：谦之的修养已接近这境界了。 守益在家乡每天讲学，四方向他求学的人接踵而至，学者称他 东廓先生 。
English: Shouyi lectures in his hometown every day, and people from all over come to study with him. Scholars call him Mr. Dongguk.

古文：居家二十余年卒。
现代文：在家居二十余年而逝世。
English: He died after more than 20 years at home.

古文：隆庆初，赠南京礼部右侍郎，谥文庄。
现代文：隆庆初年，赠南京礼部右侍郎。谥文庄。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, he was given the title of Right Attendant of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department.

古文：四方士踵至，德洪与王畿先为疏通其大旨，而后卒业于守仁。
现代文：钱德洪，名宽，字德洪，后改字洪甫，号绪山，余姚人。王守仁自辞尚书职归还故里，德洪同数十人去拜门下求学。其后，四方学子相继而至。
English: Qian Dehong, also known as Nankan and Dehong, later changed to Hongfu, Xushan and Yuyao. Wang Shuren resigned from his post and returned to his hometown. Dehong and dozens of others went to study under his tutelage. After that, students from all over the country came one after another.

古文：嘉靖五年举会试，径归。
现代文：嘉靖五年赴京会试，但未参加廷试便回家了。
English: Jiajing went to Beijing for the imperial examination five years ago, but returned home without taking part in the imperial examination.

古文：七年冬，偕畿赴廷试，闻守仁讣，乃奔丧至贵溪。
现代文：七年冬，同王畿赴京参加廷试，闻守仁逝世，便奔丧至贵溪。
English: In the winter of the seventh year, Wang Gui went to Beijing to participate in the court trials, and after the death of Mun Shuren, he went to Guixi to mourn.

古文：议丧服，德洪曰： 某有亲在，麻衣布绖弗敢有加焉。 畿曰： 我无亲。 
现代文：在讨论丧服时，德洪说： 我双亲尚在，不能为先生披麻戴孝。 王畿说： 我已无亲。 
English: When discussing the funeral attire, Dehong said, "My parents are still alive, so I can't wear the mourning garb for my husband." Wang Gui said, "I have no relatives."

古文：遂服斩衰。
现代文：便着丧服。
English: He was dressed in his mourning clothes.

古文：丧归，德洪与畿筑室于场，以终心丧。
现代文：丧事毕，德洪与畿都归家，仍悼念不已。
English: After the funeral, Dehong and Kidu returned home, still mourning.

古文：十一年始成进士。累官刑部郎中。
现代文：十一年，德洪中进士，官至刑部郎中。
English: In the eleventh year of his junior high school career, Dehong became a junior high school official in the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：所司上其罪，已出狱矣。帝曰： 始朕命刑官毋梏勋，德洪故违之，与勋不领敕何异。 
现代文：郭勋下狱，移交刑部定罪，德洪据供，判郭勋死罪，而廷臣想只判不守法度之罪，并妄说德洪不懂刑罚。皇帝也不愿处死郭勋。
English: Guo Xun was released from prison, handed over to the criminal department for conviction, Dehong testified, and Guo Xun was sentenced to death, but the courtier only wanted to convict the crime of not abiding by the law, and falsely said that Dehong did not understand the punishment. The emperor also did not want to execute Guo Xun.

古文：再下狱。御史杨爵、都督赵卿亦在系，德洪与讲《易》不辍。
现代文：由于谏官的陈奏，奉诏反将德洪两次下狱。御史杨爵、都督赵卿也同在狱中，德洪一直为他们讲述《易经》。
English: As a result of the eunuch's recitation, Dehong was sent to prison twice. Emperor Shi Yangjie and Governor Zhaoqing were also in prison, and Dehong had been reciting the "I Ching" to them.

古文：久之，斥为民。
现代文：此后，被削职为民。
English: After that, he was demoted.

古文：德洪既废，遂周游四方，讲良知学。
现代文：德洪被夺官后，周游四方，讲 良知 之学。
English: After Dehong was deprived of his post, he traveled around the country, lecturing on the science of conscience.

古文：时士大夫率务讲学为名高，而德洪、畿以守仁高第弟子，尤为人所宗。
现代文：当时士大夫都以讲学来沽名钓誉。而德洪、王畿都因是王守仁的高足，尤为人所尊崇。
English: At that time, the shidafu were all lecturing to make a name for themselves, and Dehong and Wang Gui were especially revered because of their high status as Wang Shuren.

古文：德洪彻悟不如畿，畿持循亦不如德洪，然畿竟入于禅，而德洪犹不失儒者矩矱云。
现代文：德洪对问题的思考不如王畿透彻，而在身体力行方面又比王畿强。最后畿入于禅学，而德洪还没有超出儒学的范围。
English: Dehong's thinking on the problem is not as thorough as Wang Gui, but he is stronger than Wang Gui in terms of physical practice. Finally, Gui entered Zen studies, while Dehong has not gone beyond the scope of Confucianism.

古文：穆宗立，复官，进阶朝列大夫，致仕。
现代文：穆宗即位，复德洪官职，并进阶朝列大夫。
English: Mu Zong ascended to the throne, reinstated Dehong as an official, and promoted him to the rank of imperial doctor.

古文：神宗嗣位，复进一阶。
现代文：不久退休。神宗即位，又升德洪官阶一级。
English: Soon he retired. Shinshu ascended to the throne, and Dehong was promoted to the first level of official ranks.

古文：卒年七十九。
现代文：终年七十九岁。
English: He was 79 years old.

古文：后受业王守仁，闻其言，无底滞，守仁大喜。
现代文：学者称他为 绪山先生 。王畿，字汝中，号龙溪，浙江山阴人。
English: Scholars call him Mr. Xushan. Wang Gui, middle name Ru, surnamed Longxi, is from Shanyin, Zhejiang.

古文：嘉靖五年举进士，与钱德洪并不就廷对归。
现代文：二十岁中举，后受业于王守仁。嘉靖五年考进士，但与钱德洪都未参加廷试而归。
English: At the age of 20, he participated in the junior high school entrance examination, and later studied under Wang Shouren. He was admitted to the Jiajing five-year examination, but he and Qian Dehong did not participate in the court examination and returned home.

古文：守仁征思、田，留畿、德洪主书院。
现代文：守仁征讨云南思州府与广西田州府，留王畿与德洪共同主持书院。
English: Shuren Zheng discussed Yunnan Shizhou Prefecture and Guangxi Tianzhou Prefecture, and Ruo Wangji and Dehong co-chaired the college.

古文：已，奔守仁丧，经纪葬事，持心丧三年。
现代文：其后守仁去世，二人经办丧事，归家后仍内心哀悼不已。
English: After that, Shujin passed away, and after the two of them had a funeral, they still mourned deeply after returning home.

古文：久之，与德洪同第进士。授南京兵部主事，进郎中。
现代文：这以后，才与德洪同登进士榜，授南京兵部主事，进为郎中。
English: It was only after this that he and Dehong were both promoted to the rank of officer, given the post of the head of the Nanjing Military Department, and promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：给事中戚贤等荐畿。夏言斥畿伪学，夺贤职，畿乃谢病归。
现代文：给事中戚贤等向朝廷举荐王畿，但夏言斥责王畿之学为伪学，剥夺了他的官职。畿称病归家。
English: Relatives and sages recommended Wang Gui to the imperial court, but Xia Yan denounced Wang Gui's learning as pseudoscience and deprived him of his official position.

古文：畿尝云： 学当致知见性而已，应事有小过不足累。 
现代文：他曾说 ：做学问目的在于认识事物，发现人的本性而已，办事有小错误，不足放在心上。 
English: He once said: The purpose of learning is to know things and discover human nature. There are small mistakes in doing things, and shortcomings should be taken to heart.

古文：故在官弗免干请，以不谨斥。
现代文：故为官难免冒犯上级，以不谨慎罪而被罢官。
English: Therefore, it is inevitable for officials to offend their superiors and be dismissed for imprudence.

古文：畿既废，益务讲学，足迹遍东南，吴、楚、闽、越皆有讲舍，年八十余不肯已。
现代文：畿被罢官之后，更加致力于讲学，足迹遍于东南，吴、楚、闽、越都有他的讲堂，年高八十还不肯停止。
English: After Kii was dismissed from his post, he devoted himself even more to lecturing. His footprints can be found all over Southeast Asia. Wu, Chu, Handan, and Yue all have his lecture halls. At the age of 80, he still refuses to stop.

古文：善谈说，能动人，所至听者云集。
现代文：善于言词，所到之处，听者云集。
English: Good at words, wherever he goes, listeners gather.

古文：阳明学派，以龙溪、心斋为得其宗。艮，字汝止。初名银，王守仁为更名。
现代文：每次讲学都杂有禅学，自己也不否认。学者称他为 龙溪先生 。王艮，字汝止，初名银，王守仁为他改名艮，号心斋，泰州人。
English: Every lecture is mixed with meditation, and he does not deny it. Scholars call him Mr. Longxi. Wang Yao, first name Yujie, changed his name to Yin. Wang Shuren changed his name to Yao, first name Xinzhai, from Taizhou.

古文：七岁受书乡塾，贫不能竟学。
现代文：七岁在乡村私塾读书，因家贫不能读完。
English: At the age of seven, he was studying at a private school in the countryside, but he couldn't finish because his family was poor.

古文：父灶丁，冬晨犯寒，役于官。艮哭曰： 为人子，令父至此，得为人乎！ 
现代文：父亲做灶丁，冬天清晨冒寒去为官府服役，艮哭道： 为人之子，让父如此辛劳，还算是人？ 
English: His father worked as a cook, and in the early morning of winter he went out in the cold to serve the government, crying: "Son of man, is it human to make my father work so hard?

古文：出代父役，入定省，惟谨。
现代文：于是代父服役。早晚向父母问安，十分谨慎。
English: As a result, my stepfather served in the army. I was very careful to say hello to my parents in the morning and evening.

古文：艮读书，止《孝经》、《论语》、《大学》，信口谈说，中理解。
现代文：艮专读《孝经》、《论语》、《大学》，信口谈论，易为人所理解。
English: He read "The Filial Piety Sutra," "The Analects of Confucius" and "The Analects of Confucius" and talked about them with confidence, which is easy for people to understand.

古文：有客闻艮言，诧言： 何类王中丞语。 
现代文：有人听了他的言论，惊异地说： 多像王中丞的话。 
English: Some people listened to his speech and said in amazement: It sounds a lot like Wang Zhongxiao's speech.

古文：艮乃谒守仁江西，与守仁辨久之，大服，拜为弟子。
现代文：艮去江西求见守仁，与他辩论许久，十分佩服，即拜守仁为师。
English: He went to Jiangxi to meet with Shou Ren, and debated with him for a long time. He was very impressed, that is, he took Shou Ren as his teacher.

古文：明日告之悔，复就宾位自如。已，心折，卒称弟子。
现代文：第二天又有些后悔，仍坐在宾客席上，随即又心服，终于成为守仁弟子。
English: The next day, he regretted a little and still sat at the guest table, but then he was convinced again and finally became a disciple of Shujin.

古文：从守仁归里，叹曰： 吾师倡明绝学，何风之不广也！ 
现代文：随守仁回到他故乡余姚，叹息说 ：我师阐发宏伟学说，为何传播不广！ 
English: When he returned to his hometown Yuyao with Shuren, he sighed and said, "My teacher has expounded a great doctrine, why is it not widely spread?"

古文：还家，制小车北上，所过招要人士，告以守仁之道，人聚观者千百。
现代文：回到家中自制小车北上，沿途对人大讲王守仁的学术思想，前来听讲的人成千上百。
English: After returning home, he drove north in his self-made car. Along the way, he spoke about Wang Shouren's academic thought to the NPC. Hundreds of people came to listen to the lecture.

古文：抵京师，同门生骇异，匿其车，趣使返。
现代文：到达京师后，同学感到惊讶，隐匿了他的小车，要他返家。
English: After arriving in Beijing, his classmates were surprised, hid his car and asked him to return home.

古文：守仁闻之，不悦。
现代文：守仁闻知也不高兴。
English: Morihito Huncho wasn't happy either.

古文：艮往谒，拒不见，长跪谢过乃已。
现代文：艮去拜见他，遭到拒绝，只得叩头认错。
English: She went to see him, was refused, and had to bow down and admit her mistake.

古文：清操亮节，淮西人宗之。欧阳德，字崇一，泰和人。
现代文：王艮的学术思想比其老师更加高远。欧阳德，字崇一，泰和人。
English: Wang Yao's academic thoughts are more far-reaching than those of his teachers, including Ouyang De, Zha Chong Yi, Tai He Ren.

古文：甫冠举乡试。
现代文：刚二十岁就乡试中举。
English: At the age of just twenty, he passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：之赣州，从王守仁学。不应会试者再。
现代文：后去赣南，拜王守仁为师，两次不参加会试。
English: After that, he went to South Hunan Province, where he studied under Wang Shuren, and twice did not take part in the audition.

古文：嘉靖二年策问阴诋守仁，德与魏良弼等直发师训无所阿，竟登第。
现代文：嘉靖二年，会试策问中有诋毁王守仁的意思，德与魏良弼在考卷中坦率地阐发老师的学术，但不偏袒，结果进士及第，授六安州知州。
English: In the second year of Jiajing, there was an attempt to discredit Wang Shouren in the examination questions. De and Wei Liangyao frankly explained the teacher's scholarship in the examination papers, but without favoritism. As a result, they were awarded the first place and awarded the sixth Anzhou Chizhou.

古文：除知六安州，建龙津书院，聚生徒论学。
现代文：他在六安建立了 龙津书院 。聚集生徒讲学。
English: He established the Longjin Academy in Lu'an, gathering students for lectures.

古文：入为刑部员外郎。
现代文：后调入北京任刑部员外郎。
English: Afterward, he was transferred to Beijing as a member of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：六年诏简朝士有学行者为翰林，乃改德编修。
现代文：嘉靖六年，诏令选择朝中有学问和有德行者为翰林，于是改德为编修。
English: In the sixth year of Jiajing, the imperial edict selected scholars and virtuous practitioners in the court as Hanlin, and then changed the virtue to compiler.

古文：迁南京国子司业，作讲亭，进诸生与四方学者论道其中。
现代文：后调任南京国子监司业。设置讲亭，集国子生与四方学者在那里论道。
English: Afterward, he was transferred to the post of governor of Nanjing, where he set up a lecture hall and gathered scholars from the four provinces to discuss Taoism.

古文：寻改南京尚宝卿。
现代文：不久，改任南京尚宝卿。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the post of Nanjing Shang Baoqing.

古文：召为太仆少卿。
现代文：随后，召入京为太仆少卿。
English: Subsequently, he was summoned to Kyoto as Taihoku shochikyo.

古文：以便养，复改南京鸿胪卿。
现代文：为便于奉养父母，又调任南京鸿胪卿。
English: In order to facilitate the upbringing of his parents, he was also transferred to Nanjing Hongyuqing.

古文：父忧，服阕，留养其母，与邹守益、聂豹、罗洪先日讲学。
现代文：父死，守孝期满，仍留家奉养母亲。此时，与邹守益、聂豹、罗洪先等每日讲学。
English: When his father died and his term of filial piety expired, he still stayed at home to support his mother. At this time, he gave daily lectures with Zou Shouyi, Zou Pan, Luo Hongxian and others.

古文：以荐起故官。累迁吏部左侍郎兼学士，掌詹事府。
现代文：其后，被荐举起任原官，又转任吏部左侍郎兼学士，掌管詹事府。
English: After that, he was recommended to be promoted to the post of the original official, and then he was transferred to the post of the left attendant and bachelor of the cadre department, in charge of the Zhan Shifu.

古文：母忧归，服未阕，即用为礼部尚书。
现代文：母亲去世，归家服丧，期未满即起用为礼部尚书，但等到服丧期满才赴任。
English: After his mother's death, he returned home to mourn, and before the period was over, he was appointed to the Ministry of Ceremonies, but he did not take office until the mourning period was over.

古文：宣宗、孝宗以兄婚弟，始出外府。
现代文：当时，迟迟不立皇太子，因为世宗相信陶仲文的 二龙不相见 之说，讳言立皇太子之事。
English: At that time, there was a delay in appointing the crown prince, because the Sejong believed that the two dragons did not see each other in the Tao Zhongwen, and kept silent about the appointment of the crown prince.

古文：今事与太祖同，请从初制。 帝不许。
现代文：德恳请建储。世宗诏令裕王出京至其分封藩地，并于同日完婚。德则认为太子不应出京。世宗不许。
English: Sejong issued an edict ordering Prince Hiroo to leave the capital for his fiefdom, and they were married on the same day. Sejong did not allow the prince to leave the capital.

古文：德又言： 《会典》醮词，主器则曰承宗，分藩则曰承家。
现代文：德奏道 ：《会典》关于婚礼中说，太子结婚曰 承宗 ，分藩诸王结婚曰 承家 。
English: Desoto: According to the "Charter" on weddings, the prince's marriage is called "succession," and the marriage of the kings of the sub-domains is called "succession."

古文：今裕王当何从？ 
现代文：今裕王是承宗还是承家？ 
English: Is Yu Wang the heir or the heiress?

古文：帝不悦曰： 既云王礼，自有典制。
现代文：世宗不高兴地说： 既然是王礼，自有典章制度。
English: Unhappily, Sejong said, "Since it is a royal ritual, it has its own system of rules and regulations.

古文：如若言，何不竟行册立耶？ 
现代文：如你所言，何不册立裕王为太子？ 
English: As you said, why not make Yu Wang the crown prince?

古文：德即具册立仪上。
现代文：德立即准备册立礼仪。
English: Germany immediately prepared to institute the rite.

古文：当是时，德与徐阶、聂豹、程文德并以宿学都显位。
现代文：帝更加不高兴，然知德的忠诚，便原谅了他。裕王的母亲康妃杜氏死，德奏按成化朝纪淑妃的成例丧葬。帝不从。当时，德与徐阶、聂豹、程文德都是饱学之士，居显要地位。
English: The emperor was even more displeased, but knowing De's loyalty, he forgave him. Yu Wang's mother, Kangfei Du, died, and De So was buried according to the tradition of Chenghua's mother, Ji Shu Fei. The emperor did not comply. At that time, De, Xu Ji, Yaobao, and Cheng Wende were all well-educated people and held prominent positions.

古文：于是集四方名士于灵济宫，与论良知之学。赴者五千人。
现代文：他们集四方名士于灵济宫，共同讨论 良知 之学，聚会者有五千人。
English: They gathered famous people from the four directions at Lingzhi Palace to discuss the study of conscience, with five thousand people in attendance.

古文：都城讲学之会，于斯为盛。
现代文：都城讲学以此为盛。
English: This is the reason why lectures in the capital are so popular.

古文：德器宇温粹，学务实践，不尚空虚。
现代文：德风度温和，学问讲求实际，不尚空谈。
English: The moral demeanor is gentle, the learning is practical, and it is not empty talk.

古文：循历知镇江、淮安二府，徐州兵备副使，咸有声。
现代文：皇帝很晚才了解他，将任用他掌握大权时，德却突然去世。赠太子少保，谥文庄。罗洪先，字达夫，吉水人。其父罗循，历任兵部武选郎中，镇江、淮安知府，徐州兵备副使。
English: The emperor learned about him very late, and when he was about to appoint him to take control of power, De suddenly died. He was given the title of prince, Shao Bao. He was born in Shouwenzhuang. Luo Hongxian, known as Dafu, was from Jishui. His father, Luo Xun, was one of the generals of the military department, Zhenjiang, Huai'an Prefecture, and the deputy military envoy of Xuzhou.

古文：洪先幼慕罗伦为人。
现代文：洪先年幼时慕罗伦的为人。
English: When Hongxian was young, he was a man of morals.

古文：年十五，读王守仁《传习录》好之，欲往受业，循不可而止。
现代文：十五岁读王守仁《传习录》，非常喜爱，欲去从王守仁受业，父亲制止了他。
English: At the age of fifteen, he read Wang Shouren's "Biography," which he liked very much. He wanted to study under Wang Shouren, but his father stopped him.

古文：乃师事同邑李中，传其学。
现代文：于是，改拜同乡李中为师。
English: As a result, he turned to his countryman Li Zhong as his teacher.

古文：嘉靖八年举进士第一，授修撰，即请告归。
现代文：嘉靖八年中进士第一名，授修撰，立即告假归乡。
English: In the eighth year of Jiajing, he was the first to enter the scholar, taught and compiled, and immediately returned home.

古文：外舅太仆卿曾直喜曰： 幸吾婿成大名。 
现代文：岳父太仆卿曾直高兴地说 ：吾婿成大名了。 
English: His father-in-law, Taichu-kyo, once said happily, "My son-in-law has become a daimyo."

古文：父每肃客，洪先冠带行酒、拂席、授几甚恭。
现代文：洪先说 ：儒者的事还有比这大的。进士第一，三年就有一人，何足为喜。 
English: Hongxian said, "There are greater things for a Confucianist than this. I am so happy that there is only one person in the first three years of entering the priesthood.

古文：居二年，诏劾请告逾期者，乃赴官。寻遭父丧，苫块蔬食，不入室者三年。
现代文：洪先孝敬父母，父亲每次请客，他都站在一旁依次斟酒、拂席。不久父丧，在墓边，以草为席，土块为枕，蔬菜为食，守孝三年。
English: Hongxian respected his parents. Every time his father invited guests, he stood by, pouring wine and whisking the table in turn. Soon after his father passed away, he sat at the graveside, eating grass as a seat, clods as pillows, and vegetables. He kept his filial piety for three years.

古文：继遭母忧，亦如之。
现代文：继母死，也是如此服丧。
English: When my stepmother died, it was the same.

古文：十八年简宫僚，召拜春坊左赞善。
现代文：嘉靖十八年，选任宫中官员，召拜春坊左赞善。
English: In the 18th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, he was elected as an official in the palace, and summoned Shunfang Zuozanzen.

古文：明年冬，与司谏唐顺之、校书赵时春疏请来岁朝正后，皇太子出御文华殿，受群臣朝贺。
现代文：第二年冬，与司谏唐顺之、校书赵时春，上书奏请明年岁首祭太庙之后，皇太子出御文华殿，受群臣朝贺。
English: In the winter of the following year, together with the priest, Tang Shun, and the school book, Zhao Shichun, the Crown Prince went to the Imperial Temple for the New Year's first festival, after which he was congratulated by a group of retainers.

古文：时帝数称疾不视朝，讳言储贰临朝事，见洪先等疏，大怒曰： 是料朕必不起也。 
现代文：当时，世宗称病不临朝，讳言太子临朝事，见洪先等人的奏疏，大怒道 ：是料定朕一病不起！ 
English: At that time, Shizong said that he would not go to the imperial court due to illness, but he did not say anything about the crown prince going to the imperial court. Seeing Hongxian's and other people's excuses, he said angrily, "I'm sure I can't afford to get sick!"

古文：降手诏百余言切责之，遂除三人名。
现代文：亲手下诏谴责他们，并剥夺三人官职。
English: His own aides denounced them and stripped the three of them of their posts.

古文：洪先归，益寻求守仁学。
现代文：洪先归家后，更加钻研守仁的学说，而安于淡泊生活。
English: After Hong returned home, he studied more about the teachings of Shou Ren, but settled for a life of indifference.

古文：甘淡泊，炼寒暑，跃马挽强，考图观史，自天文、地志、礼乐、典章、河渠、边塞、战阵攻守，下逮阴阳、算数，靡不精究。至人才、吏事、国计、民情，悉加意谘访。曰： 苟当其任，皆吾事也。 
现代文：他考图观史，凡天文、地理、礼乐、典章、河渠、边塞、战略战术、阴阳、算术等等，无不精通。至于人才、吏事、国计、民情都加访察。认为 ：如果有一日为官，这些都是我要做的事情。 
English: He is well versed in astronomy, geography, music, ceremonies, canals, border fortresses, strategy and tactics, yin and yang, arithmetic, etc. As for talent, officials, national accounts, and people's conditions, he believes that if I become an official one day, these are the things I want to do.

古文：邑田赋多宿弊，请所司均之，所司即以属。
现代文：本县田赋一向有不均之弊，他呈请官府，要使百姓合理负担。
English: The county's rice fields have always had the disadvantage of being unevenly distributed. He petitioned the government to place a reasonable burden on the people.

古文：洪先精心体察，弊顿除。
现代文：官府将此委托于他，他便细心调查，清除了弊病。
English: The government entrusted this to him, and he carefully investigated and eliminated the maladies.

古文：岁饥，移书郡邑，得粟数十石，率友人躬振给。
现代文：饥荒年月，他写信给郡守，得粟数十石，亲自与友人同去赈济饥民。
English: During the famine years, he wrote a letter to the county governor, gained dozens of kilos of maize, and personally went with his friends to feed the hungry.

古文：流寇入吉安，主者失措。为画策战守，寇引去。
现代文：流寇侵入吉安，知府张惶失措，洪先为他策划战略，使寇撤走。
English: The robbers invaded Ji'an, the governor Zhang panicked, Hong first planned a strategy for him to make the robbers withdraw.

古文：素与顺之友善。顺之应召，欲挽之出，严嵩以同乡故，擢假边才起用，皆力辞。
现代文：洪先素与唐顺之友好，顺之应召出仕，想约他同去做官，严嵩与他同乡，也准备起用他，都被他拒绝。
English: Due to the friendship between Hong Xian Su and Tang Shun, Shun responded to the call to serve and wanted to make an appointment with him to become an official. Yan Song, a fellow villager, was also ready to employ him, but he refused.

古文：洪先虽宗良知学，然未尝及守仁门，恒举《易大传》 寂然不动 、周子 无欲故静 之旨以告学人。
现代文：洪先虽崇信 良知 学，但未曾向守仁登门求教，总是以《易大传》所云 寂然不动 、周敦颐的 无欲故静 的主题思想来教导学人。
English: Although Hongxian revered conscientious learning, he never went to Shuren to seek advice. He always taught scholars with the theme of "lonely and immobile" and "desire-free and tranquil" as mentioned in the "Biography of Yi Da."

古文：又曰： 儒者学在经世，而以无欲为本。惟无欲，然后出而经世，识精而力钜。 
现代文：他说 ：读书人要学经邦济世，须以无欲为本，只有无欲才能出来治国，才能见识深远，精力充沛。 
English: He said, "To study the sutras and benefit the world, a reader must be free of desire. Only free of desire can one govern a country, see far and wide, and be full of energy."

古文：乔微讽之，厉声曰： 君不闻志士不忘在沟壑耶？ 
现代文：王畿认为良知本于自然，不借丝毫人力。洪先则不以为然，认为 世上岂有现成的良知者？ 
English: Wang Gui believes that conscience is natural and does not require any human effort. Hong Xian disagrees and believes that there is no ready-made conscience in the world.

古文：江涨，坏其室，巡抚马森欲为营之，固辞不可。
现代文：他虽与畿友好，但二人观点始终不同。山中有一石洞，过去是个虎穴，洪先移住在里面，命名 石莲 。在那里谢客静坐，三年不出户。
English: Although he is friendly with Kii, their views are always different. There is a stone cave in the mountains, which used to be a tiger's den, and Hong first moved into it, naming it Shi Lin. There, Xie Ke meditated and did not leave the house for three years.

古文：隆庆初卒，赠光禄少卿，谥文庄。
现代文：隆庆初逝世，赠光禄少卿，谥文庄。
English: When Longqing died at the beginning of the year, he was awarded the title of Shaoqing and given the title of Shaowenzhuang.

古文：程文德，字舜敷，永康人。
现代文：程文德，字舜敷，永康人。
English: Cheng Wende, Zhaojishiki, Yongkang people.

古文：初受业章懋，后从王守仁游。
现代文：初受业于章懋，后追随王守仁。
English: He first studied under Zhang Ye, and later under Wang Shouren.

古文：登洪先榜进士第二，授翰林编修。
现代文：嘉靖八年，与罗洪先同登进士。洪先第一，他第二，授翰林编修。
English: In the eighth year of Jiajing, he and Luo Hongxian were promoted to the same rank. Hongxian was the first and he was the second to be awarded the title of Hanlin Editor.

古文：坐同年生杨名劾汪鋐事，下诏狱，谪信宜典史。
现代文：因同年进士杨名弹劾汪钅宏，他被株连下狱，贬为信宜典史。
English: In the same year, as a result of the impeachment of Wang Binghong by Yang Ming, he was sent to prison and relegated to the annals of history.

古文：鋐罢，量移安福知县，迁兵部员外郎。
现代文：钅宏罢官后，他被调任安福知县，后升兵部员外郎。
English: After Zou Hong was dismissed from his post, he was transferred to Anfu County, and later he was promoted to a member of the military department.

古文：父忧，庐墓侧，终丧不入内。
现代文：父亲去世，他在墓侧守丧，三年不入室。
English: When his father died, he kept vigil at the grave and did not enter the house for three years.

古文：起兵部郎中，擢广东提学副使，未赴，改南京国子祭酒。
现代文：服孝期满，起任兵部郎中，后升广东提学副使。但未赴任，又改为南京国子祭酒。
English: At the end of his term of filial piety, he was appointed as a vice-minister of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and later promoted to vice-envoy of Guangdong to promote learning. However, he did not take up the post, and changed it to Nanjing Guozi Festival Wine.

古文：母忧，服阕，起礼部右侍郎。
现代文：母亲去世，服孝期满，起任礼部右侍郎。
English: After his mother passed away and his term of filial piety expired, he was appointed as the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department.

古文：俺答犯京师，分守宣武门，尽纳乡民避寇者。
现代文：俺答侵犯京师，文德分守宣武门，将避难乡民都迁入城内。
English: In response to the encroachment of the Beijing Division, the Wende Division guarded the Xuanwu Gate and moved the fleeing villagers into the city.

古文：调吏部为左。已，改掌詹事府。
现代文：调任吏部左侍郎，随后，改掌詹事府。
English: He was transferred to the position of the Left Attendant of the Administration Department, and later, he was transferred to the Zhanji Prefecture.

古文：三十三年，供事西苑。
现代文：嘉靖三十三年，在西苑任职。
English: Jiajing was 33 years old and worked at Xiyuan.

古文：所撰青词，颇有所规讽，帝衔之。
现代文：所撰青词，颇有规劝皇帝的意思，世宗怀怨于心。
English: The youthful words he wrote had the meaning of exhorting the emperor, and Shizong harbored resentment.

古文：会推南京吏部尚书，帝疑文德欲远己，命调南京工部右侍郎。
现代文：有人推举他为南京吏部尚书，世宗怀疑文德是要远离他，故而命调南京工部右侍郎。
English: Some people suggested that he should be appointed as the secretary of the Nanjing Administration Department, but Shizong suspected that Wende wanted to stay away from him, so he appointed him as the right hand man of the Nanjing Administration Department.

古文：文德疏辞，劝帝享安静和平之福。
现代文：文德上书辞职，并劝帝享安静和平之福。
English: Wende submitted his resignation in writing and advised the emperor to enjoy the blessings of peace and tranquility.

古文：帝以为谤讪，除其名。
现代文：世宗认为是在讥笑他，而将文德削职为民。
English: The Sejong thought he was mocking him, and demoted Wente to the rank of a commoner.

古文：既归，聚徒讲学。
现代文：文德归家后，招收学生讲学。
English: After Wende returned home, he began to recruit students to give lectures.

古文：卒，贫不能殓。
现代文：死后，因家贫不能置寿衣入棺安葬。
English: After his death, due to his family's poverty, he was unable to have his coffin placed in a casket for burial.

古文：万历间，追赠礼部尚书，谥文恭。
现代文：万历年间，追赠礼部尚书，谥文恭。
English: During the Wanli years, the posthumous gift of the book of etiquette, 文恭, was issued.

古文：吴悌，字思诚，金溪人。
现代文：吴悌，字思诚，金奚谷人。
English: Wu Yao, a character named Sincere, is from the Jinyu Valley.

古文：嘉靖十一年进士。
现代文：嘉靖十一年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 11th year of Jiajing.

古文：除乐安知县，调繁宣城，征授御史。
现代文：授乐安知县，后调宣城知县，召入朝任御史。
English: He was sent to Anchi County for entertainment, and later to Xuancheng County, and was called to the imperial court.

古文：十六年，应天府进试录，考官评语失书名，诸生答策多讥时政。
现代文：十六年，应天府进呈录取学生试卷，考官评语失书名，学生策问答卷多讥讽朝政。
English: In the 16th year of the Emperor's reign, the examination papers of the students who were admitted to the Imperial Academy were submitted, the examiner's comments lost the name of the book, and the students' question and answer papers mostly ridiculed the imperial government.

古文：帝怒，逮考官谕德江汝璧、洗马欧阳衢诏狱，贬官，府尹孙懋等下南京法司，寻得还职，而停举子会试。
现代文：世宗大怒，逮考官谕德江汝璧、洗马欧阳衢，诏令下狱，贬官，知府孙懋等交南京法司惩处，停举子会试。
English: Shizong was furious, arrested examiners Dejiang Rubei and Zima Ouyang, and ordered them to go to prison. The officials who were demoted, such as the prefect Sun Qian, were punished by the Nanjing Law Department and suspended from the examination.

古文：悌为举子求宽，坐下诏狱，出视两淮盐政。
现代文：悌为举子请求宽恕，因而也被诏令下狱，后出京巡视两淮盐政。
English: He asked for forgiveness for his son-in-law, and was therefore ordered to be released from prison. He then went to Beijing to inspect the two Huai and Yan governments.

古文：海溢，没通、泰民庐，悌先发漕振之而后奏闻。
现代文：海水淹没通州、泰州民舍，悌先以漕运粮食赈济，后奏报朝廷。
English: The seawater inundated the houses in Tongzhou and Taizhou. At first, they used rowing to transport grain to save money, and later reported the situation to the imperial court.

古文：寻引疾归，还朝，按河南。
现代文：不久，因病辞归故里。后还朝奉诏巡按河南。
English: Soon after, he returned to his hometown due to illness. Later, he went on a tour of Henan after receiving the imperial edict.

古文：伊王典楧骄横，惮悌，遗书称为友。
现代文：伊王典英骄横，但怕吴悌，致书称悌为友。
English: Yi Wang Dian was arrogant, but he was afraid of Wu Xi, and wrote a letter saying that Xi was his friend.

古文：悌报曰： 殿下，天子亲藩，非悌所敢友。
现代文：悌回信说： 殿下是天子的亲藩，悌不敢为友。
English: He wrote back saying, "Your highness is a close relative of the heavenly son, and I dare not be your friend."

古文：悌，天子宪臣，非殿下所得友。 
现代文：悌是天子的朝臣，也不是殿下之友。 
English: He is a courtier of the Son of Heaven, not a friend of His Imperial Highness.

古文：王愈惮之。
现代文：伊王更加怕他。
English: King Yi was even more afraid of him.

古文：夏言、严嵩当国，与悌乡里。尝谒言，众见言新服宫袍，竞前誉之，悌却立不进。
现代文：夏言、严嵩都是吴悌的同乡，掌握朝政，众官都去拜见，看夏言穿着新做的官服，争着上前去恭维主人，而悌却站着不动。
English: Both Xia Yan and Yan Song were Wu Yao's countrymen, and they were in charge of the imperial government. All the officials went to pay their respects, and saw Xia Yan wearing a newly-made official uniform and rushing forward to pay homage to his master, while Yao stood still.

古文：言问故，徐曰： 俟谈少间，当以政请。 
现代文：夏言问他何以如此，他从容地回答说 ：等他们谈一会儿，然后我请示政务。 
English: Xia Yan asked him why this was so, and he calmly replied: Wait for them to talk for a while, and then I will ask for instructions from the government.

古文：言为改容。
现代文：言的神色为之一变。
English: His expression changed completely.

古文：及嵩擅政，悌恶之，引疾家居垂二十年。
现代文：严嵩专政，悌深恶痛绝，称病不出，居家达二十年之久。
English: Yan Song's dictatorship, Yan Yan deeply hated, said that he could not get sick, and lived at home for twenty years.

古文：嵩败，起故官，一岁中累迁至南京大理卿。
现代文：嵩垮台后，才起任原职。一年后，升为南京大理寺卿。
English: He only took up his original post after the fall of the Song dynasty. A year later, he was promoted to the position of Nanjing Daliji chancellor.

古文：时吴岳、胡松、毛恺并以耆俊为卿贰，与悌称 南都四君子 。
现代文：当时吴岳、胡松、毛恺这些年逾花甲、久负声望的老人都是大理寺副卿，与悌并称 南都四君子 。
English: At that time, Wu Yue, Hu Song, and Mao Xuan, all of whom were older than Hua Jia and had long-standing reputations, were all vice-lords of Dali Temple, and they were also known as the Four Gentlemen of Nantou.

古文：隆庆元年就迁刑部侍郎。
现代文：隆庆元年，升悌为刑部侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, he was promoted to the position of the attendant of the criminal investigation department.

古文：明年卒。
现代文：隆庆二年逝世。
English: He died the following year.

古文：悌为王守仁学，然清修果介，反躬自得为多。
现代文：悌崇信王守仁的学说。万历年间，其子仁度奏请朝廷抚恤。
English: He was a great believer in the teachings of King Shujin. During the Wanli era, his son Jinduo asked the imperial court for a pension.

古文：万历中，子仁度请恤。吏部尚书孙丕扬曰： 悌，理学名臣，不宜循常格。 遂用黄孔昭例，赠礼部尚书，谥文庄。
现代文：吏部尚书孙丕扬认为 ：悌是理学名臣，不能按平常规格抚恤。 于是援黄孔昭的先例，赠礼部尚书，谥文庄。
English: Sun Qiangyang, the secretary of the Ministry of Education and Culture, believed that Zou was a distinguished scholar and could not receive a pension according to the usual rules, so he followed Huang Kongzhao's precedent and presented the gift of the Ministry of Education and Culture to Zou Wenzhuang.

古文：乡人建祠，与陆九渊、吴澄、吴与弼、陈九川并祀，曰五贤祠，学者称疏山先生。
现代文：他家乡的人为他建祠，与陆九渊、吴澄、吴与弼、陈九川一同祭祀，称为 五贤祠 。学者称悌为 疏山先生 。
English: People in his hometown built a shrine for him, and together with Lu Jiuyuan, Wu Cheng, Wu Yingtao, and Chen Jiuchuan, they offered sacrifices to him. It is called the Five Sages' Shrine. Scholars call him Mr. Shaoshan.

古文：皆雩都人。
现代文：何廷仁，初名秦，字性之，雩都人。
English: He Tingren, whose first name is Qin, is a native of Chengdu.

古文：廷仁和厚，与人接，诚意盎溢。
现代文：禀性温和敦厚，待人接物，满腔诚意。
English: She is warm-hearted, kind, and full of sincerity.

古文：而弘纲难近，未尝假色笑于人。然两人志行相准。
现代文：而同乡黄弘纲则相反，很难接近，对人从来不是和颜悦色，然而两人的志向、德行却相同。
English: On the other hand, Huang Honggang, a fellow villager, is difficult to get close to, and is never pleasant to people. However, the aspirations and virtues of the two people are the same.

古文：廷仁初慕陈献章，后闻王守仁之学于弘纲。
现代文：廷仁起初仰慕陈献章学说，后来从弘纲那里得知王守仁的学说。
English: At first, Tingren admired Chen Xianzhang's theory, and later learned Wang Shouren's theory from Honggang.

古文：守仁征桶冈，诣军门谒，遂师事焉。
现代文：守仁征讨江西南安府桶罔时，廷仁去军中求见，拜他为师。
English: When Shujin was enlisting soldiers to fight against the Anfu caskets in southwestern Jiangsu Province, Tingren went to the army to ask for advice and became his mentor.

古文：嘉靖元年举于乡，复从守仁浙东。
现代文：嘉靖元年，乡试中举后，又随守仁去浙东。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, after the township exam was held, he went to East Zhejiang with Shuren.

古文：廷仁立论尚平实，守仁殁后，有为过高之论者，辄曰： 此非吾师言也。 
现代文：廷仁治学立论平实。守仁死后，有人做过高之论，廷仁立即说 ：这不是我老师的话。 
English: After Morihito's death, someone made a high-sounding remark, and Tingnin immediately said, "That's not what my teacher said."

古文：除新会知县，释菜献章祠，而后视事。
现代文：授任新会知县后，他先去献章祠祭祀后，才到职视事。
English: After being assigned to Xinhui County, he first went to the dedication of the shrine before he arrived at work.

古文：政尚简易，士民爱之。
现代文：他注重宽政简刑，受到士民的爱戴。
English: He paid attention to lenient and simple punishment, and was loved by the people.

古文：迁南京工部主事，分司仪真，榷芜湖税，不私一钱。
现代文：升南京工部主事，分管仪真，在征收芜湖税时，不私占一钱。
English: Sheng is in charge of the Nanjing Engineering Department and is in charge of the instrumentation. When collecting taxes from Wuhu, he will not take a penny for himself.

古文：满考，即致仕。
现代文：任期满，即退休。
English: He will retire at the end of his term.

古文：良弼尝言， 吾梦见师伊，辄汗浃背 ，其为兄惮如此。
现代文：到守仁家求学的经常有数百人，来自浙东、江西的最多。
English: Hundreds of people often come to study at Shuren's house, most of them from eastern Zhejiang and Jiangxi.

古文：良器，字师颜。性超颖绝人，虽宗良知，践履务平实。
现代文：其中善于阐发老师学说的要数黄弘纲、何廷仁、钱德洪、王畿。当时有人说： 江有何、黄，浙有钱、王。 
English: Among them, Huang Honggang, He Tingren, Qian Dehong, and Wang Gui were good at expounding the teacher's doctrine. At that time, some people said: Jiang You, Huang You, Zhe You Qian, Wang You.

古文：良弼，自有传。良贵，官右副都御史。王时槐，字子植，安福人。
现代文：然守仁的学说传至山阴、泰州者，流弊无穷，只有江西多注重实践。王时槐，字子植，安福人。
English: However, the doctrine of Shuren was transmitted to Shanyin and Taizhou, and only Jiangxi paid more attention to practice. Wang Shijun, Zhizi Zhi, Anfu people.

古文：嘉靖二十六年进士。授南京兵部主事。
现代文：嘉靖二十六年进士，授南京兵部主事。
English: In the 26th year of Jiajing's reign, he was awarded the post of chief of the Nanjing Military Department.

古文：历礼部郎中、福建佥事。累官太仆少卿，降光禄少卿。
现代文：后历任礼部郎中、福建佥事，直至太仆少卿，后降为光禄少卿。
English: Later, he served successively as vice-chairman of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Minister of Fujian Province until he was promoted to Taigu Shoken, and later to Koroku Shoken.

古文：隆庆末，出为陕西参政。
现代文：隆庆末年，出京任陕西参政。
English: At the end of Longqing's life, he went to Beijing to participate in politics in Shaanxi.

古文：张居正柄国，以京察罢归。
现代文：张居正执政时，在京官的考核中罢官归家。
English: When Zhang Ju was in power, he was dismissed and returned home in the assessment of Beijing officials.

古文：万历中，南赣巡抚张岳疏荐之。吏部言： 六年京察，祖制也。若执政有所驱除，非时一举，谓之闰察。
现代文：万历年间，南赣巡抚张岳上疏推荐，吏部也上疏说： 京官六年考核一次，这是祖宗定下的制度，若当政者罢了某人的官，不到一定时候不举用，这叫作 闰察 。
English: During the Wanli era, Zhang Yue Shangsuo, the governor of Nanlu, recommended and the cadre department also said: the Beijing officials are evaluated once every six years. This is a system set by the ancestors. If the person in power dismisses someone's official, it will not be used until a certain time. This is called "leap inspection."

古文：时槐在闰察中，群情不服，请召时槐，且永停闰察。 
现代文：时槐现在闰察之中，群情不服。请召回时槐，且永远停止闰察。 
English: The time trial is now in the middle of the interception, the crowd is not satisfied. Please recall the time trial and stop the interception forever.

古文：报可。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：久之，陆光祖掌铨，起贵州参政，旋擢南京鸿胪卿，进太常，皆不赴。
现代文：许久之后，陆光祖掌管选拔官吏事，起用时槐为贵州参政。不久，即升为南京鸿胪卿，又进为太常寺卿。
English: After a long time, Lu Guangzu was in charge of the selection of officials, and appointed Shijie to participate in politics in Guizhou. Soon, he was promoted to Nanjing Hongyeqing, and then to Taijijiqing.

古文：时槐师同县刘文敏，及仕，遍质四方学者，自谓终无所得。
现代文：时槐都未赴任。
English: Both of them did not take up their posts.

古文：年五十，罢官，反身实证，始悟造化生生之几，不随念虑起灭。
现代文：时槐拜同县刘文敏为师。做官后，向四方学者求教，自己说终无所得。五十岁时被罢官，经自己亲自实践，才明白事物的变化和新生事物的产生，并不随人们的思想而产生和灭亡。
English: At that time, he followed Liu Wenmin from the same county as his teacher. After becoming an official, he sought advice from scholars in the four directions, but he said that he had no income. At the age of fifty, he was dismissed from his post, and only through his own personal practice did he understand that things change and new things arise, and do not arise and perish with people's thoughts.

古文：学者欲识真几，当从慎独入。
现代文：学者要认识其真理，应从 慎独 入手。
English: In order to recognize its truth, scholars should start from "prudence and independence."

古文：其论性曰： 孟子性善之说，决不可易。
现代文：他在论性中说 ：孟子的性善之说，决不可改变。
English: On the subject of sex, he said: Mencius's theory of sexual goodness must never be changed.

古文：使性中本无仁义，则恻隐羞恶更何从生。
现代文：假若性中本无仁义，则恻隐之心、羞恶之心由何产生。
English: If there is no benevolence in nature, then where does compassion and shame come from?

古文：且人应事接物，如是则安，不如是则不安，非善而何？ 
现代文：人们办事接物，做得好就心安，否则心不安，这不性善又是什么？ 
English: People take care of things, and when they do a good job, they feel at ease, but when they don't, they feel uneasy. What is that if not kindness?

古文：又曰： 居敬、穷理，二者不可废一。
现代文：还说 ：居敬、穷理，二者不可偏废。
English: He also said, "Respect and reason are the most important things, and they should not be neglected."

古文：要之，居敬二字尽之。
现代文：扼要地说，居敬二字可包括一切。
English: In a nutshell, the word "Jiejing" can cover everything.

古文：历湖广参政，乞休归，专用力于学。
现代文：从居敬能明白一切事物而言，居敬就是穷理。
English: From the point of view that respect can understand all things, respect is poor.

古文：凡及其门者，告之曰： 有塘南在，可往师之。 
现代文：就是思考、探索、讨论，也是居敬中的一部分。
English: It's thinking, exploring, discussing, and that's part of the fun.

古文：塘南，时槐别号也。
现代文：敬包括一切，敬之外再没有其他什么事。 
English: Respect is everything, and nothing else matters.

古文：年八十三卒。
现代文：终年八十四岁。
English: He was 84 years old.

古文：许孚远，字孟中，德清人，受学同郡唐枢。
现代文：许孚远，字孟中，德清人，受业于同乡唐枢。
English: Xu Fuyuan, surnamed Mengzhong, a person of virtue and purity, was educated in his hometown Tangzu.

古文：嘉靖四十一年成进士，授南京工部主事，就改吏部。
现代文：嘉靖四十一年进士，授南京工部主事，随即改为吏部主事。
English: In the 41st year of Jiajing's reign, he was promoted to the position of the head of the Nanjing Engineering Department, and then changed to the head of the Personnel Department.

古文：已，调北部。
现代文：其后，调北京吏部主事。
English: After that, he was transferred to be in charge of the Beijing Personnel Department.

古文：尚书杨博恶孚远讲学，会大计京朝官，黜浙人几半，博乡山西无一焉。
现代文：吏部尚书杨博讨厌孚远讲学，乘考核京师朝官之时，将浙江的官员罢除了几乎一半，而杨博的家乡山西无一人罢黜。
English: Yang Bo, the head of the personnel department, hated Fuyuan's lectures. When he took the opportunity to examine Beijing's officials, he dismissed almost half of Zhejiang's officials, while none of Yang Bo's hometown, Shanxi, were dismissed.

古文：孚远有后言，博不悦，孚远遂移疾去。
现代文：孚远在背后议论此事，杨博不高兴，孚远便称病离去。
English: Fuyuan discussed the matter behind Yang Bo's back. Yang Bo was not happy, so Fuyuan called in sick and left.

古文：隆庆初，高拱荐起考功主事，出为广东佥事，招大盗李茂、许俊美，擒倭党七十余辈以降，录功，赉银币。旋移福建。
现代文：隆庆初年，内阁首辅高拱举荐起用孚远为考功主事，出任广东佥事。他在广东招安了大盗李茂、许俊美等，并由他们擒拿倭寇七十余人，因功受赏，不久调至福建。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, Gao Gong, the chief assistant of the cabinet, recommended that Fuyuan be used as the main subject of the merit examination and served as the Guangdong anecdote. He recruited the great thieves Li Mao and Xu Junmei in Guangdong, and they captured more than 70 wokou. They were rewarded for their services and soon transferred to Fujian.

古文：神宗立，拱罢政，张居正议逐拱党，复大计京官。
现代文：神宗即位，高拱罢职，张居正任首辅，计划驱逐高拱的党羽，因而再度考核京官。
English: Shenzong ascends the throne, Gao Gong resigns, Zhang Jiusheng is appointed as chief aide, plans to expel Gao Gong's party members, and thus Beijing officials are re-evaluated.

古文：王篆为考功，诬孚远党拱，谪两淮盐运司判官。
现代文：王篆为考功，诬陷孚远与高拱同党，贬为两淮盐运司判官。
English: Wang Qi, as a test of merit, accused Fuyuan and Gao Gong of being members of the same party, and was demoted to judge of the two Huaihai Salt Transportation Departments.

古文：历兵部郎中，出知建昌府，暇辄集诸生讲学，引贡士邓元锡、刘元卿为友。
现代文：后历任兵部郎中、建昌知府。在建昌，闲暇时，招集诸生讲学，与贡士邓元锡、刘元卿为友。
English: Later, he successively served as Hyobusho and Jianchang prefectural governor. In Jianchang, in his spare time, he invited all the students to give lectures, and became friends with the gongsmen Deng Yuanxi and Liu Yuanqing.

古文：寻以给事中邹元标荐，擢陕西提学副使，敬礼贡士王之士，移书当路，并元卿、元锡荐之。
现代文：不久，由于给事中邹元标的举荐，提升为陕西提学副使，对贡士王之士以最恭敬礼节接待，并致书当政者，荐举之士、元卿、元锡。
English: Not long after, he was promoted to the vice-envoy of Shaanxi to promote learning due to the recommendation of Yu Yuanbiao in the matter. He received the people of Gongshi Wang with the most respectful etiquette, and sent a letter to the politicians, recommending the people, Yuanqing, and Yuanxi.

古文：后三人并得征，由孚远倡也。
现代文：后来，这三人为朝廷征用，是由于孚远的举荐。
English: Later, these three were requisitioned by the imperial court, due to Fu Yuan's recommendation.

古文：迁应天府丞，坐为李材讼冤，贬二秩，由广东佥事再迁右通政。
现代文：孚远调任应天府丞，因李材的诉冤案而获罪，降官阶二级，由广东佥事再调任右通政。
English: Fuyuan was transferred to Ying Tianfu Zheng, was found guilty of Li Zai's lawsuit, reduced to the second level of official rank, and then transferred from Guangdong Anji to Yutong Zheng.

古文：二十年擢右佥都御史，巡抚福建。
现代文：万历二十年，升右佥都御史，巡抚福建。
English: After twenty years of hard work, he was promoted to the post of the Governor of Fujian Province.

古文：倭陷朝鲜，议封贡，孚远请敕谕日本，擒斩平秀吉，不从。
现代文：日本军队攻陷朝鲜，朝廷商议对日封贡事，孚远奏请谕令日本国王擒斩平秀吉，这个意见未被采纳。
English: The Japanese army invaded Korea, the imperial court discussed the tribute to Japan, and Fu Yuan made a request to the Japanese king to behead Hideyoshi, but this opinion was not adopted.

古文：吕宋国酋子讼商人袭杀其父，孚远以闻，诏戮罪人，厚犒其使。
现代文：吕宋国酋长之子指控中国商人杀其父亲，孚远报告了朝廷，皇帝诏令斩杀凶手，厚赏来使。
English: The son of the chief of Luzon accused a Chinese merchant of killing his father, Fuyuan reported to the imperial court, the emperor ordered to kill the murderer, and a large reward was offered.

古文：福州饥，民掠官府，孚远擒倡首者，乱稍定，而给事中耿随龙、御史甘士价等劾孚远宜斥，帝不问。
现代文：福州发生饥荒，百姓劫掠官府，孚远擒斩首领，平定祸乱。给事中耿随龙、御史甘士价等弹劾孚远，皇帝并不问罪。
English: Famine occurred in Fuzhou, the people looted government offices, Fuyuan Zang decapitated the leader, and calmed the calamity. During the incident, Geng Xulong, Mishi Ganshi Quan and others impeached Fuyuan, and the emperor did not find fault.

古文：所部多僧田，孚远入其六于官。
现代文：福建寺庙田地甚多，孚远将其十分之六没收入官有。
English: There are a lot of temple fields in Fujian, and six-tenths of them are owned by the government.

古文：又募民垦海坛地八万三千有奇，筑城建营舍，聚兵以守，因请推行于南日、彭湖及浙中陈钱、金塘、玉环、南麂诸岛，皆报可。
现代文：又募民开垦海地八万三千亩，筑城建营房，屯兵防守，并请将此法推行到南日、澎湖及浙中之陈钱、金塘、玉环、南麂诸岛，均得到朝廷的批准。
English: He also called on the people to reclaim 83,000 mu of Haitian territory, build towns, barracks, and garrisons for defense, and requested that this law be implemented in southern Japan, Penghu, and the islands of Chenqian, Jintang, Yuhuan, and Nanxun in central Zhejiang, all of which were approved by the imperial court.

古文：居三年，入为南京大理卿，就迁兵部右侍郎，改左，调北部。
现代文：在福建三年，后调任南京大理寺卿，随即升兵部右侍郎，改左侍郎，又调任北京兵部左侍郎。
English: After three years in Fujian, he was transferred to Nanjing Dali Temple, and then he was promoted to the right attendant of the military department, changed to the left attendant, and then transferred to the left attendant of the Beijing military department.

古文：甫半道，被论。
现代文：行至中途被弹劾。
English: He was impeached halfway through his term.

古文：乞休，疏屡上，乃许。
现代文：他多次上书请求辞职返乡，最后才允准。
English: He wrote several times asking to resign and return home, but was finally allowed to do so.

古文：又数年，卒于家，赠南京工部尚书，后谥恭简。
现代文：在家数年而逝，赠南京工部尚书，后谥恭简。
English: He died at home a few years later, and was presented with a book by the Nanjing Ministry of Industry, which was later translated into Chinese.

古文：孚远笃信良知，而恶夫援良知以入佛者。
现代文：孚远深信良知之说，而厌恶把良知之学引入佛学。
English: Fu Yuan was a firm believer in the doctrine of conscience, but he was loath to introduce the doctrine of conscience into Buddhism.

古文：知建昌，与郡人罗汝芳讲学不合。
现代文：任建昌知府时，与该府人罗汝芳所讲之学不合。
English: When he was appointed as the governor of Jianchang, he did not agree with the teachings of Luo Rufang, the governor of Jianchang.

古文：及官南京，与汝芳门人礼部侍郎杨起元、尚宝司卿周汝登，并主讲席。
现代文：在南京做官时，与汝芳门人礼部侍郎杨起元、尚宝司卿周汝登，一同主持讲座。
English: When he was an official in Nanjing, he presided over a lecture together with Yang Qimuan, the attendant of the ceremonial department of the people of Yu Fangmen, and Zhou Ruden, the Secretary of the Treasury.

古文：汝登以无善无恶为宗，孚远作《九谛》以难之，言： 文成宗旨，原与圣门不异，以性无不善，故知无不良。良知即是未发之中，立论至为明析。
现代文：汝登以性无善无恶为基本思想，孚远做《九谛》来进行辩驳，文中说： 文成公的宗旨原与圣人之徒无异，认为性无有不善，故知无有不良，良知即存在于未表现出来之前，其主论至为明白清楚。
English: Youden took the idea that there is no good or evil in sex as the basic idea, and Fuyuan made the "Nine Truths" to refute it. The article said: The purpose of Wen Chenggong was originally the same as that of the saints, believing that there is no bad in sex, so there is no bad in knowledge, and conscience exists before it is not expressed, and its main argument is very clear.

古文：无善无恶心之体一语，盖指其未发时，廓然寂然者而言之，止形容得一静字，合下三语，始为无病。
现代文：所谓 无善无恶心之体 一语，是指良知未显现出来时寂静存在而言，止表明为一 静 字，与下面三句话连读才没有问题。
English: The so-called no-good, no-disgusting body refers to the silent existence when the conscience is not revealed. It is a silent word, and there is no problem reading it in conjunction with the following three sentences.

古文：今以心意知物，俱无善恶可言者，非文成之正传也。 
现代文：如今说以心意知物，皆无善恶可言，这不是对文成学术思想的真正继承。 
English: Nowadays, it is said that there is no good or evil in knowing things with the mind. This is not a true inheritance of Wencheng's academic thought.

古文：彼此论益龃龆。
现代文：彼此争辩，意见更加不合。
English: They argued with each other and disagreed even more.

古文：而孚远抚福建，与巡按御史陈子贞不相得，子贞督学南畿，遂密讽同列拾遗劾之。
现代文：孚远在巡抚福建时，又与巡按御史陈子贞的意见不合，子贞督学南京时，暗示同僚收集材料弹劾孚远。
English: When Fuyuan was the governor of Fujian, he also disagreed with Chen Zizhen, the governor of Fujian. When Zizhen was an inspector in Nanjing, he suggested that his colleagues collect materials to impeach Fuyuan.

古文：从孚远游者，冯从吾、刘宗周、丁元荐，皆为名儒。
现代文：随从孚远求学者有冯从吾、刘宗周、丁元荐，皆为当时名儒。
English: Feng Zongwu, Liu Zongzhou and Ding Yuan, all famous Confucianists at the time, recommended scholars to Fuyuan.

古文：尤时熙，字季美，洛阳人。
现代文：尤时熙，字季美，洛阳人。
English: Yu Shih-hsi, surnamed Ji-mei, from Luoyang.

古文：生而警敏不群，弱冠举嘉靖元年乡试。
现代文：禀性机灵，但不合群。嘉靖元年，他正二十岁，乡试中举。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, when he was twenty years old, he won the junior high school examination in his hometown.

古文：时王守仁《传习录》始出，士大夫多力排之，时熙一见叹曰： 道不在是乎？
现代文：这时王守仁的《传习录》刚问世，士大夫多极力排斥，时熙一看惊叹道 ：道不就在其中吗？
English: At this time, Wang Shuren's "Biography" had just come out, and many scholars and doctors strongly rejected it. When Xi Xi saw it, he exclaimed, "Isn't Tao in it?"

古文：已而以疾稍从事养生家。
现代文：过去我致力于词章，是舍本求末。 其后，因有病在家调养。
English: In the past, I devoted myself to songwriting, but eventually gave it up, and then, due to illness, I was raised at home.

古文：授元氏教谕，父丧除，改官章丘，一以致良知为教，两邑士亦知新建学。
现代文：授元氏县教谕。父死守丧，期满改在章丘任职。一贯以良知之学来教育诸生。
English: He was awarded the title of Magistrate of Genji County. After his father's death, he was appointed to the post of Magistrate of Zhangqiu County. He has always been committed to educating all sentient beings through conscientious learning.

古文：入为国子博士，徐阶为祭酒，命六馆士咸取法焉。居常以不获师事守仁为恨，闻郎中刘魁得守仁之传，遂师事之。
现代文：入京为国子监博士，徐阶为国子监祭酒。时熙常以不能面受守仁教导为憾事，闻郎中刘魁得守仁之真传，于是拜魁为师。
English: He entered the capital as a doctor of the Imperial Procuratorate, and Xu Cha as the Imperial Procurator of Sacrificial Wine. Shi Xi often regretted that he could not face Shujin's teaching, and he heard the true story of Shujin from Liu Kui, so he followed Shujin as his teacher.

古文：魁以直言锢诏狱，则书所疑，时时从狱中质问。
现代文：魁因直言亟谏而被诏令下狱，时熙读书中遇到疑难便经常到狱中去求教。
English: Kui was sentenced to prison for his outspokenness, while Shi Xi often went to prison to seek advice when he encountered difficulties in reading books.

古文：寻以户部主事榷税浒墅，课足而止，不私一钱。
现代文：不久，时熙以户部主事之职在浒墅征税，课足而止，自己不私取一文。
English: Soon, Shih-hsi, as the head of the household department, levied taxes at the villa. He did not take a penny for himself.

古文：念母老，乞终养归，遂不出，日以修己淑人为事，足未尝涉公府。
现代文：因挂念老母，请求归家奉养，从此不再出来做官，每天自我修养，良善待人，从不涉足官府。
English: Because of his concern for his mother, he asked to return home and be supported. From then on, he no longer went out to work as an official. He cultivated himself every day, treated people well, and never set foot in the government office.

古文：斋中设守仁位，晨兴必焚香肃拜，来学者亦令民谒。
现代文：书斋中，设立守仁牌位，清晨起床便焚香膜拜，来向他求学的也令他们拜谒。
English: In the study hall, they set up a Shou Ren plaque, get up early in the morning and burn incense to worship, and they also worship him when they come to learn from him.

古文：晚年，病学者凭虚见而忽躬行，甚且越绳墨自恣，故其论议切于日用，不为空虚隐怪之谈。
现代文：晚年深恶一些学者尚空谈而忽视躬身实践，而且其行为越出规范，放纵不羁，故其议论针对所见的社会现象，不做空泛奇怪之谈。
English: In his later years, he was deeply disgusted by some scholars who talked too much and neglected to practice, and whose behavior went beyond the norm and was indulgent. Therefore, his discussions were aimed at the social phenomena he saw, and did not make empty and strange talk.

古文：卒于万历八年，年七十有八，学者称西川先生。
现代文：逝于万历八年，终年七十八岁。学者称他为 西川先生 。
English: He died in the 8th year of Wanli, at the age of 78. Scholars call him Mr. Nishikawa.

古文：来知德，字矣鲜，梁山人。
现代文：其弟子以孟化鲤最著名，自有传。来知德，字矣鲜，梁山人。
English: His disciple Meng Huan is the most famous, self-taught. Let's learn virtue, the word is fresh, Liangshan people.

古文：幼有至行，有司举为孝童。
现代文：自幼品行优良，官府荐举为孝童。
English: He was recommended by the government as a child of filial piety since he was a child.

古文：嘉靖三十一年举于乡。
现代文：嘉靖三十一年乡试中举。
English: Jiajing held the 31st year of the township exam.

古文：二亲相继殁，庐墓六年，不饮酒茹荤。
现代文：双亲相继去世，他在墓边守孝六年，不饮酒、不食荤。
English: His parents died one after another, and he spent six years at their graveside, not drinking alcohol or eating meat.

古文：服除，伤不及禄养，终身麻衣蔬食，誓不见有司。
现代文：虽守孝期满，由于想到未来及做官以俸禄养亲，因而终身穿孝服，吃素食，誓不见政府官吏。
English: Although the period of filial piety has expired, because of the thought of the future and being an official with a salary to raise relatives, he will wear filial piety clothes for life, eat vegetarian food, and swear not to see government officials.

古文：其学以致知为本，尽伦为要。
现代文：其学说以 致知 为本，以尽人伦为要。
English: Its doctrine is based on the principle of imparting knowledge and on the principle of embracing all people.

古文：所著有《省觉录》、《省事录》、《理学辨疑》、《心学晦明解》诸书，而《周易集注》一篇用功尤笃。
现代文：其著作有《省觉录》、《省事录》、《理学辨疑》、《心学晦明解》等。在其《周易集注》一书中，尤下功夫。
English: His works include "Record of Insight," "Record of Insight," "Discernment of Science," "Elucidation of Mentalism," etc. In his book "Zhou Yi Jie," he put a lot of effort.

古文：自言学莫邃于《易》。
现代文：自言对《易》学得最深。
English: He said that he learned the most from Yi.

古文：初，结庐釜山，学之六年无所得。
现代文：原在釜山建屋居住，闭门学了六年而无所得。
English: Originally living in a house in Busan, he studied behind closed doors for six years without any income.

古文：后远客求溪山中，覃思者数年，始悟《易》象。
现代文：后远至求溪山中深思了六年，才明白《易》中的卦象。
English: Afterward, he pondered for six years in the mountains of Qiuxi before he understood the elephant in "Yi."

古文：又数年始悟文王《序卦》、孔子《杂卦》之意。
现代文：又数年才懂得文王《序卦》、孔子《杂卦》的意思。
English: It took several more years to understand the meaning of King Wen's "Introduction" and Confucius's "Miscellaneous Stories."

古文：又数年始悟卦变之非。
现代文：又数年才明白卦变的错误。
English: It took a few more years to understand the mistake of Gua Xuan.

古文：盖二十九年而后书成。
现代文：共费时二十九年才写出《周易集注》一书。
English: It took him a total of 29 years to write "Zhou Yi Shu Shu."

古文：万历三十年，总督王象乾、巡抚郭子章合词论荐，特授翰林待诏。
现代文：万历三十年，总督王象乾、巡抚郭子章联合上章举荐，特授翰林待诏。
English: After 30 years, Governor Wang Xiangqian and Governor Guo Zizhang jointly recommended Shangzhang and specially awarded Hanlin.

古文：知德力辞，诏以所授官致仕，有司月给米三石，终其身。
现代文：知德坚决辞谢。诏令以所任官职退休，地方官府每月给米三石，直到去世为止。
English: Zhaire retired from his post, and the local government gave him three kilos of rice every month until his death.

古文：邓元锡，字汝极，南城人。
现代文：邓元锡，字汝极，江西南城人。
English: Deng Yuanxi, a native of Chengdu in southwest China's Jiangsu Province.

古文：十五丧父，水浆不入口。十七行社仓法，惠其乡人。
现代文：十五岁丧父，十七岁行 社仓法 ，对乡里贫民赈济。
English: He lost his father at the age of fifteen, and at the age of seventeen he began to practice the social warehouse method, providing for the poor in the countryside.

古文：已为诸生，游邑人罗汝芳门，又走吉安，学于诸先达。
现代文：向同邑人罗汝芳登门求教，去吉安向有德行、有学问的前辈求学。
English: He went to Luo Rufang, a fellow villager, to ask for advice, and went to Ji'an to learn from the virtuous and learned predecessors.

古文：嘉靖三十四年举于乡，复从邹守益、刘邦采、刘阳诸宿儒论学。
现代文：嘉靖三十四年乡试中举，又从邹守益、刘邦采、刘阳等这些素有声望的学者讨论学问。
English: In the 34th year of Jiajing, the township exam was held, and renowned scholars such as Zou Shouyi, Liu Bangcai, and Liu Yang discussed learning.

古文：后不复会试，杜门著述，逾三十年，《五经》皆有成书，闳深博奥，学者称潜谷先生。
现代文：后不参加会试，闭门著述时达三十年，对《五经》均有著述，广大精深，学者称他 谷先生 。
English: After that, he did not take part in the examination, and wrote behind closed doors for thirty years. He has written about the "Five Classics" and is very profound. Scholars call him Mr. Gu.

古文：休宁范涞知南城时，重元锡。
现代文：休宁的范涞为南城知县时，器重元锡。
English: When Fan Xuan of Huning was Nancheng Zhixian, the weight of the vessel was originally made of tin.

古文：后为南昌知府，万历十六年入觐，荐元锡及刘元卿、章潢于朝。
现代文：范涞后为南昌知府，万历十六年入京朝见皇帝时，向朝廷举荐元锡及刘元卿、章潢。
English: Fan Xuan later became the governor of Nanchang, and when he went to Beijing to meet the emperor in 1609, he recommended Yuan Xi, Liu Yuanqing and Zhang Ye to the imperial court.

古文：南京祭酒赵用贤亦请征聘，如吴与弼、陈献章故事。
现代文：南京国子监祭酒赵用贤也奏请聘用元锡，如以前聘用吴与弼、陈献章一样。
English: Zhao Yixian, the regent of Nanjing, also requested the appointment of Yuan Zi, just as he had previously hired Wu and Zou, Chen Xizhang.

古文：得旨，有司起送部试，元锡固辞。
现代文：朝廷旨令当地官府送元锡到部考试，元锡坚决不肯。
English: The imperial court ordered the local government to send Yuan Xie to the ministry for examination, but Yuan Xie resolutely refused.

古文：明年，御史王道显复以元锡、元卿并荐，且请仿祖宗征辟故事，无拘部试。
现代文：第二年，御史王道显又举荐元锡、元卿，且请仿效祖宗征用的前例，不必送部考试。
English: In the second year, King Daoxian of Gishi recommended that Yuan Xi and Yuan Jie should be promoted to higher ranks, and that they should follow the precedent of requisitioning their ancestors, so that they would not have to pass the examination.

古文：诏令有司问病，痊可起送赴部，竟不行。
现代文：这时，元锡有病，朝廷诏令地方政府，待病愈送部，元锡仍未去。
English: At this time, Yuan Xi was ill, and the imperial court ordered the local government to send him to a hospital as soon as possible. Yuan Xi still did not go.

古文：二十一年，巡按御史秦大夔复并荐二人，诏以翰林待诏征之，有司敦遣上道，甫离家而卒。
现代文：万历二十一年，巡按御史秦大夔又举荐二人，诏令征为翰林待诏。地方官府催他起程，但刚离家即卒。
English: In the 21st year of Wanli, the Inspector-General of the Qin Dynasty, Qin Daxuan, recommended two more people to be recruited as Hanlin. The local government urged him to start, but he just left home.

古文：乡人私谥文统先生。
现代文：本乡人民称他为 文统先生 。
English: The local people called him Mr. Wen Tong Zhou.

古文：元锡之学，渊源王守仁，不尽宗其说。
现代文：元锡之学，渊源于王守仁，但又不完全秉承守仁的学说。
English: Originally, the study of tin was originated by Wang Shou-Ren, but it did not fully adhere to Shou-Ren's theory.

古文：时心学盛行，谓学惟无觉，一觉即无余蕴，九容、九思、四教、六艺皆桎梏也。
现代文：当时，心学盛行，认为感到世界空虚无物才是学问，否则就没有什么深奥之处。九容、九思、四教、六艺都是做学问的桎梏，元锡极力排斥。
English: At that time, mind-study was prevalent, and it was believed that the only way to learn was to feel that the world was empty and devoid of anything, otherwise there would be nothing profound about it. Jiulong, Jiuxi, Shijiao, and Liujia were all ways to learn, and Yuanxi strongly rejected them.

古文：元锡力排之，故生平博极群书，而要归于《六经》。
现代文：他生平博览群书，而归宗于《六经》。
English: His life was full of books, and he belonged to the "Six Classics."

古文：所著《五经绎》、《函史上下编》、《皇明书》，并行于世。
现代文：所著《五经绎》、《函史上下编》、《皇明书》，均流行于世。
English: His works "Five Classics Interpretation," "History of Hakodate, Second Edition" and "Imperial Rescript" are all popular in the world.

古文：元卿，字调父，安福人。
现代文：刘元卿，字调父，安福人。
English: Liu Yuanqing, the father of calligraphy, is a blessed man.

古文：举隆庆四年乡试，明年会试，对策极陈时弊，主者不敢录。
现代文：隆庆四年乡试中举，第二年会试，在对策中，陈述当时弊政，主考官不敢录取。
English: In the middle of the fourth year of the Longqing Township Examination, the second year of the examination, in the countermeasure, the statement was that the government was bad, and the examiner did not dare to admit.

古文：张居正闻而大怒，下所司申饬，且令人密诇之，其人反以情告，乃获免。
现代文：张居正闻后大怒，令当地官府告诫元卿，且派人秘密侦察，侦察的人反倒为他说情，因而获免。
English: After hearing this, Zhang Jizheng was furious and ordered the local government to admonish Yuanqing, and sent someone to secretly investigate. The investigator, on the other hand, interceded on his behalf, and was thus released.

古文：既归，师同邑刘阳，王守仁弟子也。
现代文：归家后拜同乡王守仁弟子刘阳为师。
English: After returning home, he studied under Liu Yang, a disciple of Wang Shouren.

古文：万历二年，会试不第，遂绝意科名，务以求道为事。
现代文：万历二年会试落第，从此绝意于科举之途，而以求道为事。
English: He failed in the second year of the Manchurian Candidate Examination, and from then on, he was determined to pursue a career in science.

古文：既累被荐，乃召为国子博士。
现代文：后累被推荐，朝廷召为国子监博士。
English: He was later recommended and called by the Imperial Court to become a doctor of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：擢礼部主事，疏请早朝勤政，又请从祀邹守益、王艮于文庙，厘正外蕃朝贡旧仪。寻引疾归，肆力撰述，有《山居草》、《还山续草》、《诸儒学案》、《贤弈编》、《思问编》、《礼律类要》、《大学新编》诸书。
现代文：升礼部尚书，疏请皇帝早朝勤政。订正旧有的外蕃朝贡礼仪。不久，称病回家，致力于著述，撰有《山居草》、《还山续草》、《诸儒学案》、《贤弈编》、《思问编》、《礼律类要》、《大学新编》等书。
English: He revised the old etiquette for foreign dignitaries paying tribute to the emperor. Soon, he went home saying he was ill, and devoted himself to writing, authoring books such as "Mountain Residence," "Returning to the Mountain," "Confucianism," "Wisdom," "Questions," "Rituals," and "New University Edition."

古文：潢，字本清，南昌人。
现代文：章潢，字本清，南昌人。
English: Zhang Ye, Zhabon Qing, Nanchang people.

古文：居父丧，哀毁血溢。
现代文：父死服丧，哀痛欲绝。
English: Mourning the death of my father, I was overwhelmed with grief.

古文：构此洗堂，联同志讲学。
现代文：建 此洗堂 ，联络同志讲学其中。
English: Build this wash hall, contact comrades to lecture in it.

古文：辑群书百二十七卷，曰《图书编》。
现代文：纂辑群书一百二十七卷，名曰《图书编》。
English: There are one hundred and twenty-seven volumes in the collection, called the "Book Series."

古文：又著《周易象义》、《时经原体》、《书经原始》、《春秋窃义》、《礼记劄言》、《论语约言》诸书。
现代文：著有《周易象仪》、《诗经原体》、《书经原始》、《春秋窃义》、《礼记答刂言》、《论语约言》等书。
English: He is the author of "Zhou Yi Xiang Yi," "Poetry Original," "Book Original," "Spring and Autumn Espionage," "Rituals and Sayings," "Discourse on Words" and other books.

古文：从游者甚众。
现代文：随从他求学的甚多。
English: He has a large number of students following in his footsteps.

古文：数被荐，从吏部侍郎杨时乔请，遥授顺天训导，如陈献章、来知德故事，有司月给米三石赡其家。
现代文：多次被荐举。从吏部侍郎杨时乔的奏请，按陈献章、来知德的成例，遥授为顺天训导，当地官府每月给米三斗以供养家。
English: He was recommended for promotion many times. At the request of Yang Shijiao, the attendant of the cadre department, according to the precedent of Chen Xizhang and Lai Zhide, he was awarded the title of Shun Tian Xiu Dao from afar, and the local government gave him three buckets of rice every month to support his family.

古文：卒于万历三十六年，年八十二。
现代文：卒于万历三十六年，年八十二岁。
English: He passed away at the age of 82, in the 36th year of Wanli.

古文：其乡人称潢自少迄老，口无非礼之言，身无非礼之行，交无非礼之友，目无非礼之书，乃私谥文德先生。
现代文：乡里人说，潢对人无论老少，口无非礼之言，身无非礼之行，交无非礼之友，目不看非礼之书，他们私谥潢 文德先生 。
English: The villagers said that no matter how old or young he was, he would never say anything disrespectful, never do anything disrespectful, never befriend anyone disrespectful, and never read anything disrespectful. They called him Mr. Wende.

古文：自吴与弼后，元锡、元卿、潢并蒙荐辟，号 江右四君子 。
现代文：自吴与弼之后，元锡、元卿、潢，都蒙举荐征召，号称 江右四君子 。
English: After Wu and Zou, Yuan Xi, Yuan Qing, and Zou were all recommended and called up, known as the four gentlemen of Jiangyou.

