古文：穆王命君牙，为周大司徒，作《君牙》。
现代文：周穆王下令君牙任大司徒，史官作《君牙》。
English: King Zhou Mu ordered that Junya be appointed as the grand steward, and the historian wrote "Junya."

古文：王若曰： 呜呼！
现代文：穆王这样说： 啊！
English: Zhou Kangwang said: Ah!

古文：君牙，惟乃祖乃父，世笃忠贞，服劳王家，厥有成绩，纪于太常。
现代文：君牙。你的祖父和你的父亲，世世纯厚忠正；尽心尽力地辅助周王室，很有成绩，已经记录在画有日月的旗子上。
English: Your grandfather and your father were pure and loyal; they did their best to assist the Zhou royal family, with great success, which has been recorded on the flag with the sun and the moon.

古文：惟予小子嗣守文、武、成、康遗绪，亦惟先正之臣，克左右乱四方。
现代文：年幼的我将继承守文、武、成、康的遗业，也想让先王的臣子能够辅助我治理四方。
English: As a young man, I will inherit the legacy of Shouwen, Wu, Cheng and Kang, and I also want the former king's vassals to assist me in governing the four directions.

古文：心之忧危，若蹈虎尾，涉于春冰。
现代文：任大才弱，我心里的忧虑危惧，就像踩着虎尾和走着春天的冰。
English: I am too weak, and the worries and fears in my heart are like stepping on the tail of a tiger and walking on spring ice.

古文：今命尔予翼，作股肱心膂，缵乃旧服。
现代文：现在我命令你辅助我，作我的心腹重臣。要继续你旧日的行事，不要累及你的祖考！
English: Now I am commanding you to be my helper and the captain of my life. Continue to do what you have been doing, and do not grieve the Holy One of Israel.

古文：无忝祖考，弘敷五典，式和民则。
现代文：广泛宣扬五典之教，将和谐友善作为人民的准则。
English: to widely propagate the doctrine of the Five Classics, and to take harmony and amity as the people's standard.

古文：尔身克正，罔敢弗正，民心罔中，惟尔之中。
现代文：只要你自身能正，人民就不敢不正；民心没有标准，只考虑你的标准。
English: As long as you can be righteous, the people will not dare to be unrighteous; the people's heart has no standard, only your standard is considered.

古文：夏暑雨，小民惟曰怨咨：冬祁寒，小民亦惟曰怨咨。
现代文：夏天炎热多雨，百姓只是怨恨嗟叹；冬天严寒，百姓也只是怨恨嗟叹。
English: The summer is hot and rainy, and the people only resent it; the winter is cold, and the people only resent it.

古文：厥惟艰哉！
现代文：治民艰难呀！
English: Governing the people is difficult!

古文：思其艰以图其易，民乃宁。
现代文：你要想到他们的艰难，因而谋求那些治理的办法，人民才会安宁。啊！
English: If you think about their hardships, and therefore seek those means of governance, the people will be at peace.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：光明呀！
English: Alas!

古文：丕显哉，文王谟！
现代文：我们文王的谋略；相承呀！
English: We follow the strategy of King Wen; let's succeed each other!

古文：丕承哉，武王烈！
现代文：我们武王的功业。
English: We are doing the work of King Wu.

古文：启佑我后人，咸以正罔缺。
现代文：它可以启示佑助我们后人，使我们都依从正道而无邪缺。
English: It can enlighten and help our descendants, so that we can all follow the right path and be free from evil.

古文：尔惟敬明乃训，用奉若于先王，对扬文、武之光命，追配于前人。 
现代文：你当不懈地宣扬你的教训，以此恭顺于先王。你当报答并发扬文王、武王善良光辉的天命，以德政之美去追随和超越您的前人。 
English: You should tirelessly preach your teachings, thereby obeying the former king. You should repay and promote the good and glorious destiny of King Wen and King Wu, and follow and surpass your predecessors with the beauty of German politics.

古文：王若曰： 君牙，乃惟由先正旧典时式，民之治乱在兹。
现代文：穆王这样说： 君牙！你当奉行先正的旧典善法，人民治乱的关键，就在这里。
English: King Mu said, "Your majesty, you should follow the ancient and righteous law of virtue and virtue, which is the key to the people's governance.

古文：率乃祖考之攸行，昭乃辟之有乂。 
现代文：你应当遵循你祖父和父亲的行为，让君王的治世之功可以彰显于天下。 
English: You should follow the example of your grandfather and father, so that the merits of the king's reign can be shown to the world.

