古文：维周公旦、太公望，开嗣王业，建功于牧之野，终将葬，乃制谥。遂叙谥法。
现代文：周公旦与太公望开创了成王基业。因为武王在牧野建了大功，死后将安葬，就制定了谥号，于是叙明制谥法则。
English: Zhou Gongdan and Taigongwang created the foundation of Wangcheng. Because King Wu built a great achievement in Makino and will be buried after his death, he formulated the name of the tomb, and then clarified the rules for making the tomb.

古文：谥者，行之迹也。号者，功之表也。车服者，位之章也。
现代文：谥，是行为的记录；号，是功劳的标志；车马服饰，是地位的表现。
English: , is the record of behavior; 号, is the mark of merit; 车馬服饰, is the performance of status.

古文：是以大行受大名，细行受细名，行出于己，名生于人。
现代文：所以，道德高尚就得到大名号；道德低下就得到小名号道德行为出于自身，而名号生于别人。
English: Therefore, high morals get a big name; low morals get a small name. Moral behavior comes from oneself, and the name is born from others.

古文：民无能名曰神。
现代文：无法让人给他命名的称 神 。
English: God, who cannot be named.

古文：称善赋简曰圣，敬宾厚礼曰圣。
现代文：举良善选贤才的称 圣 ，敬宾客厚礼仪的称 圣 。
English: Those who are good at selecting and selecting talents are called saints, and those who are good at welcoming guests are called saints.

古文：德象天地曰帝。
现代文：德行如天高地厚的称 帝 。
English: Virtue is praised to the skies.

古文：静民则法曰皇。
现代文：安定百姓以法为准的称 皇 。
English: Stable people who abide by the law are called emperors.

古文：仁义所在曰王。
现代文：集仁、义在身的称 王 。
English: He who is benevolent and righteous is called a king.

古文：赏庆刑威曰君，从之成群曰君。
现代文：赏罚公道的称 君 ，民众都归从他的称 君 。
English: The people all obeyed him who said that reward and punishment should be fair.

古文：立制及众曰公。
现代文：为大家设立制度的称 公 。
English: It's a public service to set up a system for everyone.

古文：执应八方曰侯。
现代文：行为被八方响应的称 侯 。
English: The act is known as the eight-party response.

古文：壹德不解曰简。平易不疵曰简。
现代文：道德专一而不懈怠的谥号 简 ，平易而不诋诽他人的谥号 简 。
English: The epithet "Jane" denotes one who is morally upright and does not slander others, and the epithet "Jane" denotes one who is easygoing and does not slander others.

古文：经纬天地曰文，道德博闻曰文，学勤好问曰文，慈惠爱民曰文，愍民惠礼曰文。锡民爵位曰文。
现代文：顺应天地自然规律的谥号 文 ，道德广博深厚的谥号 文 ，勤学好问的谥号 文 ，慈惠爱民的谥号 文 ，怜悯百姓又施恩惠有礼貌的谥号 文 ，赐给百姓爵位的谥号 文 。
English: He is a man who conforms to the natural laws of heaven and earth, a man of profound morality, a man of diligent study, a man of benevolence, a man who loves the people, a man of mercy and kindness, and a man who gives peerages to the people.

古文：刚强理直曰武，威强澼德曰武，克定祸乱曰武，刑民克服曰武，夸志多穷曰武。
现代文：刚强而理端的谥号 武 ，威猛而英明有德的谥号 武 ，战胜祸灾又平定动乱的谥号 武 ，以法治民能使民服的谥号 武 ，贪大功而屡用兵的谥号 武 。
English: Wu, the strong and rational one, Wu, the powerful and wise and virtuous one, Wu, the one who overcame disasters and quelled turmoil, Wu, the one who ruled the people and made them wear civilian clothes, Wu, the one who was greedy for great achievements and repeatedly used soldiers.

古文：敬事供上曰恭，尊贤贵义曰恭，尊贤敬让曰恭，既过能改曰恭，执事坚固曰恭，爱民长弟曰恭，执礼御宾曰恭，芘亲之阙曰恭，尊贤让善曰恭，渊源流通曰恭。
现代文：认真办事又尊从主上的谥号 恭 ，尊重贤才又崇尚礼义的谥号 恭 ，尊重贤能又恭敬谦让的谥号 恭 ，已有过错能够改正的谥号 恭 ，办事坚定不动摇的谥号 恭 ，爱护百姓、抚养兄弟的谥号 恭 ，讲礼仪、迎宾客的谥号 恭 ，庇护父母过失的谥号 恭 ，尊重贤良、礼让友善的谥号 恭 。
English: Those who work conscientiously and respect and obey the Lord, those who respect and respect the virtuous and respect propriety, those who respect and respect the virtuous and respect the humble, those who can correct their mistakes, those who work firmly and unswervingly, those who love the people and raise their brothers, those who speak of etiquette and welcome guests, those who protect their parents' faults, and those who respect the virtuous and are polite and friendly.

古文：照临四方曰明，谮诉不行曰明。
现代文：了解四方安危的谥号 明 ，诬陷怨谤不生的谥号 明 。
English: To understand the safety and security of the four sides, the false accusation of the false accusation of the false accusation.

古文：威仪悉备曰钦。
现代文：威仪见于外表的谥号 钦 。
English: Her dignity is reflected in her nickname, Chin.

古文：大虑静民曰定，安民大虑曰定，安民法古曰定，纯行不二曰定。
现代文：深谋远虑又安定百姓的谥号 定 ，安定百姓又效法古人的谥号 定 ，行为纯正无差错的谥号 定 。
English: The foresight and stability of the people, the stability of the people and the imitation of the ancients, the behavior of pure and error-free.

古文：谏争不威曰德。辟地有德曰襄，甲胄有劳曰襄。
现代文：征战能返回的谥号 麓 ，思虑深远又接受规劝的谥号 嫠 。
English: 號 麓, who can return from the war, and 號, who is far-sighted and accepts persuasion.

古文：有伐而还曰厘，质渊受谏曰厘。
现代文：通古今又多才能的谥号 宪 。聪明而富于哲理的谥号 献 ，心性通达事理的谥号 献 。
English: The ancient and modern multi-talented 號 憲, the clever and philosophical 號 献, and the rational 號 献.

古文：博闻多能曰宪。
现代文：性温柔，明事理又善良的谥号 懿 。
English: The nickname, which means gentle, reasonable and kind, is derived from.

古文：聪明澼哲曰献。
现代文：使五世同宗祖的都安宁，谥号 孝 ；惠顾下民，尊爱长辈的
English: to make the fifth generation of the same ancestors have peace, the nickname is filial; to patronize the people and respect the elders

古文：温柔圣善曰懿。
现代文：谥号 孝 ；祭祀适时的谥号 孝 。
English: His posthumous name was Takashi; his posthumous name was Takashi at the right time for the ritual.

古文：五宗安之曰孝，慈惠爱亲曰孝，协时肇享曰孝，秉德不回曰孝。
现代文：秉承遗德而不违背的谥号 考 ，深谋远虑而成就气节的谥号 考 。
English: Adhering to the legacy of virtue and not violating the principle of virtue, and achieving the principle of virtue through forethought and foresight.

古文：大虑行节曰考。执心克庄曰齐，资辅供就曰齐。
现代文：控制心性，能使行为庄重的谥号 齐 ，出力辅佐促使成功的谥号 齐 。
English: Controlling the nature of the mind, can make the behavior of the solemn 號 齐, output assistance to promote the success of 號 齐.

古文：丰年好乐曰康，安乐抚民曰康，令民安乐曰康。
现代文：源头远长而流动通畅的谥号 康 ，年成丰而民和乐的谥号 康 ，以安乐抚慰民众的谥号 康 ，使百姓自得安乐的谥号 康 。
English: The source of the long-distance and smooth flow is called Kang, the year is prosperous and the people are happy is called Kang, the people are comforted by comfort is called Kang, and the people are self-satisfied is called Kang.

古文：安民立政曰成。
现代文：安定百姓设立政令的谥号 成 。
English: The nickname of the decree to establish a stable population is Cheng.

古文：布德执以曰穆，中情见貌曰穆。
现代文：推行道德又主持正义的谥号 穆 ，内心所想表露于处的问谥号 穆 。
English: The one who promotes morality and presides over justice is called Mu, and the one who questions what he wants to express in his heart is called Mu.

古文：敏以敬顺曰顷。昭德有劳曰昭，容仪恭美听昭，圣闻周达曰昭。
现代文：敏捷而慎重的谥号 顿 ，勤勉能追悔过失的谥号 顷 爱护百姓又协和万民的谥号 顷 。彰明道德而有功的谥号 昭 ，仪容恭敬而美好的谥号 昭 ，美名传播四方的谥号 昭 。
English: The swift and prudent Zhuang Zhao, the diligent and repentant Zhuang Zhao, the one who loves the people and reconciles the people with the people, the moral and meritorious Zhuang Zhao, the respectful and beautiful Zhuang Zhao, and the famous Zhuang Zhao.

古文：保民耆艾曰胡，弥年寿考曰胡。
现代文：保护百姓中的老年人的谥号 胡 ，年高寿长的谥号 胡 。
English: The nickname "Hu" for the protection of the elderly among the people, and the nickname "Hu" for the long life of the elderly.

古文：强毅果敢曰刚，追补前过曰刚。
现代文：意志坚毅又行为果敢的谥号 刚 ，追补以往过失的谥号 刚 。
English: Gong Gang, who is strong-willed and resolute, has made up for his past mistakes.

古文：柔德考众曰静，恭己鲜言曰静，宽乐令终曰静。
现代文：以宽和之德安定众人的谥号 静 ，谦恭有礼又沉静少言的谥号 静 ，宽宏乐观而善终的谥号 静 。
English: It is the virtue of broad-mindedness that stabilizes everyone's virtue of calmness, the virtue of modesty and politeness that is calm and quiet, the virtue of broad-mindedness that is optimistic and optimistic, and the virtue of good ending.

古文：治而无眚曰平，执事有制曰平，布纲治纪曰平。
现代文：治理政事而无过失的谥号 平 ，办事依章法的谥号 平 ，布纲纪把握准则的谥号 平 。
English: Guiding political affairs without fault, acting in accordance with the Constitution and the law, and adhering to the principles of discipline.

古文：由义而济曰景，布义行刚曰景，耆意大虑曰景。
现代文：依照正义而达到目的的谥号 景 ，推行正义而行为果断的谥号 景 ，想得久远又深思熟虑的谥号 景 。
English: A vision that achieves its goals in accordance with justice, a vision that acts decisively to promote justice, a vision that is far-sighted and thoughtful.

古文：清白守节曰贞，大虑克就曰贞，不隐无屈曰贞。
现代文：行为清白而守节操的谥号 贞 ，深谋远虑又能成功的谥号 贞 ，不隐瞒又公正无私的谥号 贞 ，表里如一的谥号、 贞 。
English: She is called Zhen for her pure and virtuous behavior, Zhen for her forethought and success, Zhen for her honesty and selflessness, and Zhen for her sincerity.

古文：猛以刚果曰威，猛以强果曰威，强毅信正曰威。
现代文：勇猛而刚毅果敢的谥号 威 ，勇猛而强力果敢的谥号 威 ，果断行事以伸张正义的谥号 威 。
English: Courageous and strong-willed, courageous and strong-willed, courageous and strong-willed, courageous and strong-willed, courageous and strong-willed, courageous and strong-willed, courageous and strong-willed, courageous and strong-willed, courageous and strong-willed, courageous and strong-willed.

古文：辟屠服远曰桓，克敬勤民曰桓，辟土兼国曰桓。
现代文：治理政事依法典而不衰的谥号 祁 。开辟疆土使远国归服的谥号 桓 ，能慎重行事又勉励民众的谥号 桓 ，开辟疆土兼并方国的谥号 桓 。
English: It is the                                   .

古文：道德纯一曰思，大省兆民曰思，外内思索曰思。追悔前过曰思。
现代文：道德纯一完备的谥号 思 。普察万民疾苦的谥号 思 ，通盘考虑事事用心的谥号 思 ，能追悔先前过失的谥号 思 。
English: Morality is a pure and complete virtue. It is a virtue to be aware of the suffering of all people, a virtue to consider everything thoroughly, and a virtue to be able to repent of previous mistakes.

古文：柔质慈民曰惠，爱民好与曰惠。
现代文：性格宽柔又慈爱百姓的谥号 惠 ，爱百姓好施舍的谥号 惠 。
English: She has a gentle and kind personality and loves the people. Her nickname is Hui. She loves the people and is good at giving.

古文：柔质受谏曰慧。
现代文：性格温和又能接受规劝的谥号 慧 。
English: She is nicknamed "Hui" for her gentle nature and ability to accept persuasion.

古文：能思辩众曰元，行义说民曰元，始建国都曰元，主义行德曰元。
现代文：善思考又能区别人的地位的谥号 元 ，多行义事而百姓高兴的谥号 元 ，开始建立国都的谥号  元 ，主持正义又推行德政的谥号 元 。
English: Good at thinking and able to distinguish people's status, do a lot of good deeds and make the people happy, begin to build the capital, preside over justice and promote moral government.

古文：兵甲亟作曰庄，澼圉克服曰庄，胜敌志强曰庄，死于原野曰庄，屡征杀伐曰庄，武而不遂曰庄。
现代文：屡次发动战事的谥号  庄 ，聪慧而坚强使人顺服的谥号 庄 ，战胜敌人克服动乱的谥号 庄 ，为国捐躯死于原野的谥号 庄 ，屡次征战讨伐的谥号 庄 ，使用武力而不成功的谥号 庄 。
English: Zhuang Zi, who repeatedly launched wars, Zhuang Zi, who was clever and strong, who made people obey, Zhuang Zi, who defeated the enemy and overcame turmoil, Zhuang Zi, who died in the field for the country, Zhuang Zi, who repeatedly went to war, Zhuang Zi, who used force unsuccessfully.

古文：克杀秉政曰夷，安心好静曰夷。
现代文：克制杀伐执掌国政的谥号 夷 ，安定百姓喜好安静的谥号 夷 。
English: The 號 夷 that holds the reins of state affairs by refraining from killing and pillaging, and the 号 夷 that is favored by the stable people.

古文：执义扬善曰怀，慈仁短折曰怀。
现代文：主持正义赞扬善事的谥号 怀 ，慈惠仁德而短寿的谥号 怀 。
English: Presiding over the justice and praising the good deeds, the benevolence and benevolence, and the short life.

古文：夙夜警戒曰敬，夙夜恭事曰敬，象方益平曰敬，善合法典曰敬。
现代文：早晚警戒自己的谥号 敬 ，早晚认真办事的谥号 敬 ，善于顺合法典的谥号 敬 。
English: In the morning and in the evening, guard your honor, in the morning and in the evening, be conscientious, and be good at following the law.

古文：述义不克曰丁，迷而不悌曰丁。
现代文：口说仁义而不能兑现的谥号 丁 ，糊涂而不顺从的谥号 丁 。
English: He who speaks righteousness and judgment, but has no power to carry it out, he who is confused and does not obey.

古文：有功安民曰烈，秉德遵业曰烈。
现代文：以武立功又安定百姓的谥号 烈 ，主持德政又遵循祖业的谥号 烈 。
English: Those who have distinguished themselves in the military and stabilized the people are called "martyrs," and those who have presided over the German government and followed the ancestral line are called "martyrs."

古文：刚克为伐曰翼，思虑深远曰翼。
现代文：刚强而能成功的谥号 翼 ，有深谋远虑的谥号 翼 。
English: The sturdy and successful Dragonfly Wing, the far-sighted Dragonfly Wing.

古文：执心决断曰肃。爱民好治曰戴，典礼不忄寒曰戴。
现代文：刚强有德能成事的谥号 肃 ，成竹在胸而能决断的谥号 肃 。爱护百姓而喜欢办事的谥号 戴 ，典礼不出现差错的谥号 戴 。
English: Those who are strong and have the ability to get things done are called "Shu," those who are confident and can make decisions are called "Shu." Those who love the people and like to do things are called "Dai," and those who do not make mistakes in ceremonies are called "Dai."

古文：死而志成曰灵，乱而不损曰灵，极知鬼神曰灵，不勤成名曰灵，死见神能曰灵，好祭鬼神曰灵。
现代文：死后心愿得以实现的谥号 灵 ，乱法行私而不知减的谥号 灵 ，尽知鬼神之事的谥号 灵 ，不经努力而成名的谥号 灵 ，死后现出鬼神之态的谥号 灵 ，喜好祭祀鬼神的谥号 灵 。
English: The so-called spirit whose wish can be realized after death, the so-called spirit who practices lawlessness without diminishing, the so-called spirit who knows everything about ghosts and gods, the so-called spirit who becomes famous without effort, the so-called spirit who appears in the form of ghosts and gods after death, the so-called spirit who likes to sacrifice ghosts and gods.

古文：短折不成曰殇，未家短折曰殇。
现代文：短寿夭折未成人的谥号 殇 ，未成家而短命夭折的 殇 。
English: The nickname  for those who died young and did not become adults is, and  for those who died young and did not marry is.

古文：不显尸国曰隐，隐拂不成曰隐。
现代文：德行不明而空占君位的谥号 隐 ，无心在位而偏又不成的谥号 隐 。
English: There are two types of emperors: those whose virtue is unknown and who occupy the throne without any intention, and those who are in power without any intention and yet do not become emperors.

古文：年中早夭曰悼，肆行劳祀曰悼，恐惧从处曰悼。
现代文：中年早逝的谥号 悼 ，在恐惧中度日的谥号 悼 。
English: Those who die early in middle age are mourned, and those who live in fear are mourned.

古文：不思忘爱曰刺，愎狠遂过曰刺。
现代文：不思恩惠又忘记恩惠的谥号 剌 ，固执反常又坚持错误的谥号 刺 。
English: Not thinking of favors and forgetting the favor of the nickname, stubbornly abnormal and insisting on the wrong nickname 刺.

古文：外内从乱曰荒，好乐怠政曰荒。
现代文：不理政事不治家任其紊乱的谥号 荒 ，喜好逸乐懈怠政事的谥号 荒 。
English: Those who do not care about government affairs and do not govern their families, and allow their families to be disordered are called barren, and those who like to enjoy themselves and slack off in government affairs are called barren.

古文：在国逢难曰愍，使民折伤曰愍，在国连忧曰愍，祸乱方作曰愍。
现代文：在位期间遭遇外患的谥号 愍 ，使百姓死伤的谥号 愍 ，在位期间连续发生水旱疫灾的谥号 愍 ，灾害与暴乱同时发生的谥号 愍 。
English: During his reign,

古文：蚤孤短折曰哀，恭仁短折曰哀。
现代文：早年孤单又短寿天折的谥号 哀 ，谦恭仁惠而短寿夭折的谥号 哀 。
English: In the early years of loneliness and short life, the epithet of the day is sorrow, and the epithet of humility and benevolence and short life is sorrow.

古文：蚤孤铺位曰幽，壅遏不通曰幽，动祭乱常曰幽。
现代文：早年孤单而失去君位的谥号 幽 ，心思蔽塞而昏乱的谥号 幽 ，起居无节号令不时的谥号 幽 。
English: In his early years, he was lonely and lost his position as a prince. He was confused and dizzy. He lived without a fixed schedule.

古文：克威捷行曰魏，克威惠礼曰魏。
现代文：能有威严而行动敏捷的谥号 魏 ，能有威严而仁惠有礼的谥号 魏 。
English: You can have a dignified and quick-moving nickname Wei, you can have a dignified and benevolent nickname Wei.

古文：去礼远众曰炀，好内远礼曰炀，好内怠政曰炀。
现代文：废弃礼仪又疏远众人的谥号 炀 ，好女色又远礼仪的谥号 炀 ，好女色又荒政事的谥号 炀 ，行为放纵而精神衰疲的谥号 炀 。
English: Abandoning etiquette and alienating everyone is called, being a womanizer and distancing oneself from etiquette is called, being a womanizer and being involved in political affairs is called, and indulgent behavior and mental exhaustion are called.

古文：甄心动惧曰顷。
现代文：心知耻丑而动则戒惧的谥号 顷 。
English: The epithet of shyness and fear comes to mind.

古文：威德刚武曰圉。
现代文：有威德又刚强勇武的谥号 圉 。
English: There is a virtue and a strong and brave nickname.

古文：圣善周闻曰宣。
现代文：名声好又通情达理的谥号 宣 。
English: He was nicknamed "Xuan" because of his good reputation and reasonableness.

古文：治民克尽曰使。
现代文：治理百姓而没有恩德的谥号 使 。
English: Govern the people without the patronising title of envoy.

古文：行见中外曰悫。
现代文：所作所为表里如一的谥号 憨 。
English: What he has done is a perfect example of the symbol.

古文：胜敌壮志曰勇。
现代文：战胜敌人又有壮志雄心的谥号 勇 。
English: He was nicknamed "Yong" (勇) because of his great ambition to defeat the enemy.

古文：昭功宁民曰商。
现代文：昭示功劳以安定百姓的谥号 商 。
English: The so-called merchant who showed his merit in stabilizing the people.

古文：状古述今曰誉。
现代文：以文章描述古今的谥号 誉 。
English: An article describing the reputation of the nickname from the past to the present.

古文：心能制义曰度，好和不争曰安。
现代文：心里能揣度诸事是否合宜的谥号 度 。爱好平和不与人争的谥号 安 。
English: It is the degree of being able to calculate in one's heart whether or not various things are appropriate. It is the degree of being peace-loving and non-confrontational.

古文：外内贞复曰白。
现代文：表里中正又始终如一的谥号 白 。
English: The correct and consistent middle initial in the table is 白.

古文：不生其国曰声。
现代文：不出生在自己的国家的谥号 声 。
English: Not to be born in one's own country.

古文：杀戮无辜曰厉。
现代文：暴戾而不认亲情的谥号 厉 ，杀戮无罪之人的谥号 厉 。
English: A violent man who does not recognize kinship, a man who kills innocent people.

古文：官人应实曰知。
现代文：任人为官能符合他的实际能力的谥号 知 。
English: Let a man's functional ability correspond to his practical ability.

古文：凶年无谷曰糠。
现代文：遭遇荒年而没有粮食的谥号 穅 。
English: If there is a bad year and there is no grain, the nickname is.

古文：名实不爽曰质。
现代文：名与实相符合的谥号 质 。
English: A nickname that matches the name to the reality.

古文：不悔前过曰戾。
现代文：不追悔以前的过错的谥号 戾 。
English: The nickname  for not repenting of previous mistakes.

古文：温良好乐曰良。
现代文：温厚贤良令人爱之乐之的谥号 良 。
English: The nickname "Ryo" (良) for the gentle, virtuous, and lovable Ryo is popular.

古文：怙威肆行曰丑。
现代文：恃仗威势而行为放纵的谥号 醌 。
English: He was nicknamed  () for his domineering and self-indulgent behavior.

古文：德正应和曰莫。
现代文：道德纯正令天下响应韵谥号 莫 。
English: Moral purity makes the world respond to the rhyme Mo.

古文：勤施无私曰类。
现代文：尽力施舍而无私心的谥号 类 。
English: Try to be charitable and selfless 號 class.

古文：好变动民曰躁。
现代文：好变易而动乱百姓的谥号 躁 。
English: The nickname of the changeable and turbulent people is "manic."

古文：慈和便服曰顺。
现代文：仁慈祥和普遍顺从的谥号 顺 。
English: Shun is the nickname for benevolence and universal obedience.

古文：满志多穷曰感。
现代文：满怀志向而多不得志的谥号 感 。
English: The feeling of being full of aspiration, but lacking aspiration.

古文：危身奉上曰忠。
现代文：身冒危险而事奉主上的谥号 忠 。
English: Serve the Lord at your own peril.

古文：果虑果远曰趕。
现代文：思虑果断而深远的谥号 赶 ，
English: Thoughtful, decisive and far-reaching,

古文：息政外交曰携。
现代文：懈怠国政而与外国交通的谥号 携 
English: slack national policy and to compete with foreign traffic.

古文：疏远继位曰绍。
现代文：遭疏远而又承继大位的谥号 绍 。
English: He was estranged from and succeeded to the throne under the name Shao.

古文：彰义掩过曰坚。
现代文：显明义行而掩盖过错的谥号 坚 。
English: The nickname "Jian" comes from the fact that he acts righteously while concealing his faults.

古文：肇敏行成曰直。
现代文：一开始就敏捷行事而行事得成的谥号 直 。
English: The nickname "Zhi" (直) was given to him because he acted quickly at the beginning.

古文：内外宾服曰正。
现代文：内内外外都归顺的谥号 正 。
English: The epithet of being submissive at home and abroad is correct.

古文：华言无实曰夸。
现代文：言华美而无实质的谥号 夸 。
English: Flamboyant rhetoric without substance is just so much bluster.

古文：教诲不倦曰长。
现代文：教诲人而不知倦的谥号 长 。
English: A tireless and inspirational leader.

古文：爱民在刑曰克。
现代文：爱护百姓表现在用刑的谥号 克 。
English: Caring for the people is shown in the use of the capital letter, K.

古文：逆天虐民曰抗。
现代文：对赐予显得吝啬的谥号 爱 。违天理害百姓的谥号 抗 。
English: Love the nickname given to those who appear to be stingy. Oppose the nickname given to those who harm the people against the laws of heaven.

古文：好廉自克曰节。
现代文：喜欢廉洁又能自我克制的谥号 节 。
English: I like the incorruptible and self-restrained Wu Hong Festival.

古文：择善而从曰比。
现代文：选择好的跟着去做的谥号 比 。
English: Choose a good syllable ratio to go with.

古文：好更改旧曰易。
现代文：喜欢改换旧有的谥号 易 。
English: He likes to change the old nickname "Yi."

古文：名与实爽曰缪。
现代文：名与实不相符合的谥号 缪 。
English: The nickname "Mie" is a misnomer.

古文：思厚不爽曰愿。
现代文：思虑未出现差错的谥号 厚 。
English: Thoughts do not appear erroneously nicknamed "thick."

古文：贞心大度曰匡。
现代文：心地纯正有大度的谥号 匡 。
English: His nickname, Kuang, means "pure in heart" and "generous."

古文：隐哀之方，景武之方也，施为文也，除为武也，辟地为襄，服远为桓，刚克为发，柔克为懿，履正为庄，有过为僖，施而不成为宣，惠无内德为平。
现代文：谥 隐 ，有哀怜之类的意思。谥 景 ，有勇武之类的意思。施德，是 文 ；除恶，是 武 。开辟土地是 襄 ，征服远方是 桓 。以刚克人是 发 ，以柔克人是 懿 。履行正道是 庄 ，犯有过失是 僖 。敢做而不成功是 宣 ，欲惠爱而内无德是 平 。
English: 隐, has the meaning of pity.  景, has the meaning of bravery. Shi De, is Wen; eliminate evil, is Wu. To open up the land is Xiang, to conquer the distance is Huan. To Gangke people is Fa, to Joke people is Yao. To fulfill the right path is Zhuang, to commit a mistake is Yao. To dare to do without success is Xuan, to desire favor without virtue is Ping.

古文：失志无转，则以其明，余皆象也。
现代文：取意坚定不移，以其明显特征为准，其余都与其相象。
English: The intention is unswerving, its obvious characteristics prevail, and the rest are similar to it.

古文：和，会也；勤，劳也。遵，循也；爽，伤也；肇，始也；憹，治也；康，安也；怙，恃也。
现代文： 和 ，是会合之意。 勤 ，是操劳之意。 遵 ，是遵循之意。 爽 ，是伤的意思。 肇 ，是开始之意。 义 ，是治理之意。 康 ，是安宁之意。 怙 ，是依仗之意。 享 ；是祭祀之意。
English: 和, is the meaning of meeting. 勤, is the meaning of exertion. 遵, is the meaning of following. 爽, is the meaning of injury. 肇, is the meaning of beginning. 義, is the meaning of governance. 康, is the meaning of tranquility., is the meaning of reliance. 享; is the meaning of sacrifice.

古文：享，祀也；胡，大也；服，败也。秉，顺也；就，会也；忄寒，过也；锡，与也；典，常也；肆，放也；穅，虚也；澼圣也；惠，爱也；绥，安也；坚，长也；耆，强也；考，成也；周，至也；怀，思也；式，法也；布，施也；敏，疾也；捷，克也；载，事也；弥，久也。
现代文： 胡 是大的意思。 服 是战败使服之意。 秉 ，是顺从之意。 就 是聚合之意。 意 ，是过的意思。 锡 ，是给予之意。 典 是常的意思。 肆 ，是放纵之意。 稼 ，是虚空之意。 睿 是圣明之意。 惠 ，是仁爱之意。 绥 ，是安抚之意， 坚 是增长之意。 耆 ，是强的意思。 考 ，是完成之意。 周 是至极之意。 怀 ，是思念之意。 式 ，是法式之意。 布 是施放之意。 敏 ，是疾速之意。 捷 ，是攻克之意。 载 是记事之意。 弥 ，是长久之意。
English: Hu means great. 服 means defeat and submission. 秉 means obedience. 就 means gathering. 意 means past. 锡 means giving. 典 means always. 肆 means indulgence. 稼 means emptiness. 睿 means sacredness. 惠 means benevolence.  means pacification. 坚 means growth.  means strength. 考 means completion. 周 means supreme. 怀 means contemplation. 式 means French style. 布 means charity.

