古文：开平元年春正月壬寅，天子使御史大夫薛贻矩来劳军。
现代文：开平元年正月二十五日，唐天子派御史大夫薛贻矩来劳军。
English: On the twenty-fifth day of the first month of the first year of Kaiping, Tang Tianzi sent the imperial historian Xue Bing to the labor army.

古文：宰相张文蔚率百官来劝进。
现代文：宰相张文蔚率百官来劝朱温当皇帝。
English: Prime Minister Zhang Wenwei led hundreds of officials to persuade Zhu Wen to become emperor.

古文：夏四月壬戌，更名晃。
现代文：四月十六日，更名晃。
English: On April 16, he changed his name to Akira.

古文：甲子，皇帝即位。
现代文：十八日，即帝位。
English: On the 18th, the emperor abdicated.

古文：戊辰，大赦，改元，国号梁。
现代文：二十二日，大赦天下，改元开平，改国号梁。
English: On the 22nd, the world was amnestied, the era was changed to Kaiping and the country was changed to Liang.

古文：封唐主为济阴王。
现代文：封唐天子为济阴王。
English: Tang Tianzi was named the King of Jieyin.

古文：升汴州为开封府，建为东都，以唐东都为西都。
现代文：升汴州为开封府，定为东都，以唐东都洛阳为西都。
English: Shengbanzhou was designated as Kaifeng Prefecture, the eastern capital, and Luoyang, the eastern capital of Tang Dynasty, was designated as the western capital.

古文：废京兆府为雍州。
现代文：废京兆府为雍州。
English: The former Gyeongju is now Yongju.

古文：赐东都酺一日。
现代文：赏赐东都民众欢庆一日。
English: The people of Tōdō were rewarded with a day of celebration.

古文：契丹阿保机使袍笏梅老来。
现代文：契丹族酋长阿保机派使臣梅老来朝贺。
English: The chief of the Khitan tribe, Aboki, sent an envoy, Mei Lao, to congratulate the emperor.

古文：五月丁丑朔，以唐相张文蔚杨涉为门下侍郎，御史大夫薛贻矩为中书侍郎；同中书门下平章事。
现代文：五月初一，以唐相张文蔚、杨涉为门下侍郎，御史大夫薛贻矩为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the first day of May, Zhang Wenwei and Yang Zhan were appointed as the attendants of the Tang Dynasty, and Grand Historian Xue Xuanru was appointed as the attendant of the Middle School and He Ping as the attendant of the Middle School.

古文：戊寅，渤海、契丹遣使者来。
现代文：二日，渤海、契丹派使者来朝贺。
English: On the second day, Bohai and Qidan sent envoys to congratulate the Emperor.

古文：乙酉，封兄全昱为广王，子友文博王，友珪郢王，友璋福王，友贞均王，友徽建王，侄友谅衡王，友能惠王，友诲邵王。
现代文：九日，封兄存昱为广王，子友文为博王，友皀为郢王，友璋为福王，友贞为均王，友徽为建王，侄友谅为衡王，友能为惠王，友诲为邵王。
English: On the 9th, Fang's elder brother Cun Rong was Guang Wang, his son Youwen was Bo Wang, You Rong was Yao Wang, You Rong was Fu Wang, You Zhen was Jun Wang, You Hui was Jian Wang, his nephew You Rong was Heng Wang, You Rong was Hui Wang, and You Yao was Shao Wang.

古文：甲午，改枢密院为崇政院，太府卿敬翔为使。
现代文：十八日，改枢密院为崇政院，任太府卿敬翔为使。
English: On the 18th, the Privy Council was changed to the Supreme Council of State, and Taifu-kyo Keisho was appointed as the envoy.

古文：是月，潞州行营都指挥使李思安及晋人战，败绩。
现代文：同月，潞州行营都指挥使李思安被晋军击败。
English: In the same month, Li Si'an was defeated by the Jin army at the command of the Bozhou encampment.

古文：六月甲寅，平卢军节度使韩建守司徒，同中书门下平章事。
现代文：六月九日，任命平卢军节度使韩建为司徒，同中书门下平章事。
English: On June 9th, Han Jian was appointed as the commander of the Pinglu Military Festival, and he signed a peace treaty with the Qing Dynasty.

古文：秋七月己亥，追尊祖考为皇帝，妣为皇后；皇高祖黯谥曰宣元，庙号肃祖，祖妣范氏谥曰宣僖；曾祖茂琳谥曰光献，庙号敬祖，祖妣杨氏谥曰光孝；祖信谥曰昭武，庙号宪祖，祖妣刘氏谥曰昭懿；考诚谥曰文穆，庙号烈祖，妣王氏谥曰文惠。
现代文：七月二十四日，追尊祖考为皇帝，妣为皇后：皇高祖黯谥曰宣元，庙号肃祖，祖妣范氏谥曰宣僖；曾祖茂琳谥曰光献，庙号敬祖，祖妣杨氏谥曰光孝；祖信谥曰昭武，庙号宪祖，祖妣刘氏谥曰昭懿；考诚谥曰文穆，庙号烈祖，妣王氏谥曰文惠。
English: On July 24, the emperor and empress were named after the revered ancestors: Emperor Gaozong was named Xuan Yuan, the temple was named Su Zu, the ancestor Fan was named Xuan Zi; the ancestor Maolin was named Guang Xian, the temple was named Keizhu, the ancestor Yang was named Guang Xiao; the ancestor Xin was named Zhaowu, the temple was named Guanzhu, the ancestor Liu was named Zhaozhu; the ancestor Cao Cheng was named Wen Mu, the temple was named Rui Zu, and the ancestor Wang was named Wen Hui.

古文：八月丁卯，同州虸蚄虫生。
现代文：八月二十二日，同州庄稼生虫。
English: On August 22nd, insects began to grow in the state's crops.

古文：隰州黄河清。
现代文：隰州黄河水清。
English: The water of the Yellow River in Luzhou is clear.

古文：九月，括马。
现代文：九月，收刮战马。
English: In September, scraping horses.

古文：冬十月己未，讲武于繁台。
现代文：十月十五日，在繁台讲武。
English: On October 15th, he gave a speech on martial arts in Taiwan.

古文：十一月壬寅，赦亡命背军髡黥刑徒。
现代文：十一月二十九日，赦逃亡士卒和已剃发刺面的刑徒。
English: On November 29, he pardoned a fugitive and a convict who had shaved his face.

古文：二年春正月丁酉，渤海遣使者来。
现代文：开平二年正月二十五日，渤海派使者来。
English: On the 25th day of the first month of the second year of Kaiping, Bohai sent an envoy.

古文：己亥，卜郊于西都。弑济阴王。
现代文：二十七日，在西京郊外占卜，弑济阴王。
English: On the 27th, he divined in the suburbs of West Beijing, and the King of Yin was born.

古文：二月辛未，契丹阿保机遣使者来。
现代文：二月三十日，契丹阿保机派使者来。
English: On February 30th, Khitan Aboki sent an envoy.

古文：三月壬申朔，如西都。
现代文：三月初一，往西京。五日，往怀州。
English: On the first day of March, to Saikyo. On the fifth day, to Waizhou.

古文：丙子，如怀州。
现代文：六日，往泽州。
English: On the 6th, they went to Zezhou.

古文：丁丑，如泽州。戊寅，封鸿胪卿李崧介国公，为二王后。
现代文：七日，封鸿胪卿李崧为莱国公，为二王后。
English: On the seventh day of the month, Li Yan, who was given the title of Hongyuqing, became the prince of Lai and the second queen.

古文：壬午，匡国军节度使刘知俊为潞州行营招讨使。
现代文：十一日，任命匡国军节度使刘知俊为潞州行营招讨使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Liu Zhijun was appointed as the envoy to invite the Kuangguo Army to camp in Zhangzhou.

古文：癸巳，改卜郊。
现代文：二十二日，修改郊卜的规定。
English: On the 22nd, the regulations on suburbs were amended.

古文：张文蔚薨。
现代文：张文蔚去世。
English: Zhang Wenwei passed away.

古文：夏四月癸卯，杨涉罢，吏部侍郎于兢为中书侍郎，翰林学士承旨礼部侍郎张策为刑部侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：四月三日，杨涉罢相。任吏部侍郎于兢为中书侍郎，翰林学士承旨礼部侍郎张策为刑部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On April 3rd, Yang Wubo resigned from the position of minister. He appointed Yu Jing, the attendant of the cadre department, as the attendant of the middle school, and Zhang Ce, the attendant of the ceremony department of the Hanlin Academy, as the attendant of the criminal department, and Shimohei Shoji, the disciple of the middle school.

古文：壬子，至泽州。
现代文：十二日，到达泽州。
English: On the 12th, they arrived in Zezhou.

古文：六月壬寅，忠武军节度使刘知俊为西路行营招讨使，以伐岐。
现代文：五月十九日，潞州行营都虞候康怀英在夹城与晋军交战大败。二十八日，任命忠武军节度使刘知俊为西路行营招讨使去伐岐。
English: On the 19th of May, Kang Huaiying, the commander-in-chief of the encampment in Zhangzhou, suffered a great defeat in the battle with the Jin army. On the 28th, Liu Zhijun was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the loyal army to invite the envoy to the west road encampment.

古文：己酉，杀右金吾卫上将军王师范，灭其族。
现代文：十日，杀右金吾卫上将军王师范，灭其族。
English: On the 10th, he killed Wang Shifan, the commander of the Right Wing Defense Force, and exterminated his people.

古文：丙辰，刘知俊及岐人战于漠谷，败之。秋九月丁丑，如陕州，博王友文留守东都。冬十月丁未，至自陕州。
现代文：十七日，刘知俊在漠谷打败岐军。九月九日，往陕州，命博王友文留守东都。十月九日，从陕州回到京城。
English: On the 17th, Liu Zhijun defeated the Qi army in the valley. On the 9th of September, he went to Shaanxi, leaving Wang Youwen to stay in Dongdu. On the 9th of October, he returned to Beijing from Shaanxi.

古文：十一月癸巳，张策罢，左仆射杨涉同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十月二十五日，张策罢相，任左仆射杨涉同中书门下平章事。
English: On October 25th, Zhang Ce retired from the scene, and his second-in-command, Yang Sha, was implicated in the scandal at Zhongshumen.

古文：十二月己亥，以介国公为三恪，酅国公、莱国公为二王后。
现代文：十二月二日，以介国公为三恪，阝国公、莱国公为二王后。
English: On December 2nd, three queens were crowned, including Empress Guo, and two queens were crowned, Empress Zhao and Empress Lai.

古文：三年春正月甲戌，如西都。
现代文：开平三年正月七日，往西京。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the third year of Kaiping, he went to West Beijing.

古文：复然灯以祈福。
现代文：举行奢华灯会与民同乐，以祈福于天。
English: and held a luxurious lantern festival to enjoy with the people and pray for good fortune.

古文：庚寅，享于太庙。
现代文：二十三日，祭太庙。
English: On the 23rd, the temple held a festival.

古文：辛卯，有事于南郊，大赦。
现代文：二十四日，在南郊祭天，颁大赦令。
English: On the third day of the new year, an amnesty will be implemented in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：丙申，群臣上尊号，曰睿文圣武广孝皇帝。
现代文：二十九日，受群臣上尊号曰：睿文圣武广孝皇帝。
English: On the 29th, he was given the honorific title of "Emperor Ruiwen Shengwu Guangxiao" by his subjects.

古文：二月壬戌，讲武于西杏园。
现代文：二月二十六日，讲武于西杏园。
English: On February 26th, a martial arts lecture was held at Xixiangyuan.

古文：甲子，延州高万兴叛于岐，来降。
现代文：二十八日，延州高万兴背叛岐王来归降。
English: On the 28th, Yanzhou Gao Wanxing betrayed Qi Wanglai and surrendered.

古文：三月辛未，渤海国王大諲譔遣使者来。
现代文：三月六日，渤海国王大讠巽派使者来。
English: On March 6th, the king of Bohai, Dafu, sent an envoy.

古文：甲戌，如河中。
现代文：九日，往河中。
English: On the 9th, to the middle of the river.

古文：山南东道节度使杨师厚为潞州四面行营招讨使。
现代文：任命山南东道节度使杨师厚为潞州四面行营招讨使。
English: The appointment of Shannan as the host of the festival made Yang Shihou the chief envoy to invite people from all over Ganzhou.

古文：刘知俊取丹州。
现代文：刘知俊夺取丹州。
English: Liu Zhijun captured Danzhou.

古文：夏四月丙午，知俊克延、鄜、坊三州。
现代文：四月十一日，刘知俊攻克延？坊三州。
English: On April 11, Liu Zhijun conquered Yan'an, Fang and Sanshou.

古文：五月己卯，至自河中，杀佑国军节度使王重师。
现代文：五月十五日，从河中回到京城，杀佑国军节度使王重师。
English: On May 15th, he returned to the capital from the middle of the river to kill Wang Chongshi, the commander of the National Army.

古文：六月庚戌，刘知俊执佑国军节度使刘捍，叛附于岐。
现代文：六月十六日，刘知俊捉拿佑国军节度使刘捍，叛梁归附岐王。
English: On June 16th, Liu Zhijun captured and killed Liu Han, and Liu Han became the king of Qi.

古文：辛亥，如陕州。
现代文：十七日，往陕州。
English: On the 17th, to Shaanxi Province.

古文：乙卯，冀王硃友谦为同州东面行营招讨使。刘知俊奔于岐。
现代文：二十一日，任命冀王朱友谦为同州东面行营招讨使，刘知俊逃奔岐王。
English: On the 21st, Zhu Youqian, the King of Hebei, was appointed as the envoy to the eastern part of the same state, and Liu Zhijun fled to the King of Qi.

古文：丹州军乱，逐其刺史宋知诲。
现代文：丹州军内乱，赶走刺史宋知诲。
English: Danzhou military civil strife, drive away the sting of Song Dynasty.

古文：秋七月，商州军乱，逐其刺史李稠，稠奔于岐。
现代文：七月，商州军乱，赶走刺史李稠，李稠逃到岐。
English: In July, the Shangzhou Rebellion drove away the assassin Li Cong, and Li Cong fled to Qi.

古文：乙丑，克丹州，执其首恶王行思。
现代文：七月二日，攻克丹州，捉住首恶王行思。
English: On July 2, he conquered Danzhou and captured the chief villain, Wang Xingshi.

古文：乙亥，至自陕州。
现代文：十二日，从陕州回到京城。
English: On the 12th, he returned to Beijing from Shaanxi Province.

古文：甲申，襄州军乱，杀其留后王班。
现代文：二十一日，襄州军内乱，杀留后王班。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, there was a civil disturbance in the Xiangzhou army, and Hou Wangban was killed.

古文：房州刺史杨虔叛附于蜀。
现代文：房州刺史杨虔叛梁归附后蜀。
English: Fangzhou Jishi Yangqian traitor Liang was annexed to Hou Shu.

古文：八月辛亥，降死罪囚。
现代文：八月十八日，对死罪犯人减刑。
English: On August 18th, the death penalty was commuted.

古文：辛酉，均州刺史张敬方克房州，执杨虔。
现代文：二十八日，均州刺史张敬方攻克房州，捉住杨虔。
English: On the 28th, Zhang Jing, a famous historian from Junzhou, conquered Fangzhou and captured Yang Qian.

古文：闰月癸酉，契丹遣使者来。
现代文：闰八月十一日，契丹派使者来。
English: On August 11, Khitan sent an envoy.

古文：己卯，阅稼于西苑。
现代文：十七日，到西苑巡视农民庄稼。
English: On the 17th, it went to Xiyuan to inspect farmers' crops.

古文：九月壬寅，行营招讨使左卫上将军陈晖克襄州，执其首恶李洪。
现代文：九月十日，行营招讨使左卫上将军陈晖攻克襄州，捉住首恶李洪。
English: On September 10th, the encampment solicitation made the left guard general Chen Yu conquer Xiangzhou and capture the chief villain Li Hong.

古文：丁未，保义军节度使王檀为潞州东面行营招讨使。
现代文：十五日，任命保义军节度使王檀为潞州东面行营招讨使。
English: On the fifteenth day, Wang Dan was appointed as the envoy to the eastern camp of Zhangzhou.

古文：辛亥，韩建、杨涉罢。
现代文：十九日，韩建、杨涉罢相。
English: On the 19th, Han Jian and Yang Wanzhong went on strike.

古文：太常卿赵光逢为中书侍郎、翰林学士承旨工部侍郎杜晓为户部侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：任太常卿赵光逢为中书侍郎，翰林学士承旨工部侍郎杜晓为户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Ren Taizongqing Zhao Guangfeng was the junior secretary of the middle school, and Du Xiao, the junior secretary of the engineering department, was the junior secretary of the household department and the junior secretary of the middle school.

古文：辛酉，李洪、杨虔伏诛。
现代文：二十九日，杀李洪、杨虔。
English: On the 29th, Li Hong and Yang Qian were killed.

古文：冬十一月甲午，日南至，告谢于南郊。
现代文：十一月二日，冬至，在南郊告谢上天。
English: On November 2nd, the winter solstice, I went to the southern suburbs to thank the heavens.

古文：己酉，搜访贤良。
现代文：十七日，搜访贤良。
English: On the 17th, they went to search for her.

古文：镇国军节度使康怀英伐岐。
现代文：派镇国军节度使康怀英讨伐岐王。
English: He sent the town's national army to the festival to make Kang Huaiying fight against the King of Qi.

古文：十二月，怀英克宁、庆、衍三州。
现代文：十二月，康怀英攻克宁、庆、衍三州。
English: In December, Kang Huaiying conquered Ning, Qing and Yan three states.

古文：及刘知俊战于升平，败绩。
现代文：与刘知俊在升平交战失败。
English: He lost the battle with Liu Zhijun in the promotion round.

古文：四年春正月壬辰朔，始用乐。
现代文：开平四年正月初一，朝祀开始用音乐。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of Kaiping, the morning worship began with music.

古文：丁未，讲武于榆林。
现代文：十六日，在榆林讲武。
English: On the 16th, he gave a speech on martial arts in Yulin.

古文：二月己丑，阅稼于谷水。
现代文：二月二十九日，在谷水巡视农民庄稼。
English: On February 29th, inspecting farmers' crops in Guishui.

古文：秋八月丙寅，如陕州。
现代文：八月九日，往陕州。
English: On August 9, to Shaanxi Province.

古文：河南尹张宗奭留守西都。
现代文：命河南尹张宗留守西都。
English: Yin Zhangzong of Henan Province was ordered to stay in the western capital.

古文：辛未，护国军节度使杨师厚为西路行营招讨使以伐岐。
现代文：十四日，任命护国军节度使杨师厚为西路行营招讨使，讨伐岐王。
English: On the 14th, Yang Shihou was appointed as the envoy of the National Defense Army to go to the west to fight against the king of Qi.

古文：九月己丑，至自陕州。
现代文：九月三日，从陕州回到京城。
English: On September 3, he returned to Beijing from Shaanxi Province.

古文：辛亥，搜访贤良。
现代文：二十五日，搜访贤良。
English: On the 25th, they went to search for Xianliang.

古文：冬十一月己丑，宁国军节度使王景仁为北面行营招讨使以伐赵。赵王王熔、北平王王处直叛附于晋，晋人救赵。
现代文：十一月三日，任命宁国军节度使王景仁为北面行营招讨使讨伐赵，赵王王、北平王王处直叛梁归晋，晋兵救赵。
English: On November 3, the Ningguo Army Festival was appointed to make Wang Jingren go to the north to recruit soldiers to fight against Zhao. Zhao Wang Wang and Peiping Wang Wang directly rebelled against Liang and returned to Jin, and Jin soldiers rescued Zhao.

古文：十二月癸酉，颁律令格式。
现代文：十二月十七日，颁布律令格式。
English: On December 17th, the format of the Ruling was promulgated.

古文：乾化元年春正月丁亥，王景仁及晋人战于柏乡，败绩。
现代文：乾化元年正月初二，王景仁与晋军在柏乡交战失败。
English: On the second day of the first month of the first month of the first year of the Qianhua era, Wang Jingren and the Jin army failed in the battle of Baoxiang.

古文：庚寅，赦流罪以下囚，求危言正谏。
现代文：五日，大赦流放罪以下的囚犯，要求群臣大胆提出意见和建议。
English: On the fifth day, prisoners with less than the crime of banishment were amnestied, and ministers were required to boldly put forward their opinions and suggestions.

古文：癸巳，天雄军节度使杨师厚为北面行营招讨使。
现代文：八日，任命天雄军节度使杨师厚为北面行营招讨使。
English: On the 8th, Yang Shihou was appointed as the envoy to invite Tianxiong's army to march to the north.

古文：夏四月壬申，契丹阿保机遣使者来。
现代文：四月十八日，契丹阿保机派使者来。
English: On the 18th of April, Khitan Aboki sent an envoy.

古文：五月甲申朔，大赦，改元。
现代文：五月一日，大赦，改元乾化。
English: On May 1st, an amnesty was declared, and the era was changed to a dry one.

古文：癸巳，幸张宗奭第。秋八月戊辰，阅稼于榆林。
现代文：十日，到张宗家。八月十七日，到榆林巡视农民庄稼。
English: On the 10th, he went to Zhang Zong's home. On August 17th, he went to Yulin to inspect farmers' crops.

古文：渤海遣使者来。
现代文：渤海王派使者来。
English: The king of Bohai sent an envoy.

古文：戊寅，大阅于兴安鞠场。
现代文：二十七日，在兴安鞠场进行大规模阅兵。
English: On the 27th, a large-scale military parade was held at the Xing'an Martial Arts Stadium.

古文：九月辛巳朔，御文明殿，入阁。
现代文：九月一日，太祖坐文明殿，群臣入阁议事。
English: On the first day of September, Taizu sat in the Hall of Civilisation, and a group of ministers entered the cabinet for deliberation.

古文：庚子，如魏州。
现代文：二十日，往魏州。
English: On the 20th, to Weizhou.

古文：张宗奭留守西都。
现代文：命张宗留守西都。
English: Zhang Zong was ordered to stay in the western capital.

古文：冬十月丙子，大阅于魏东郊。
现代文：十月二十六日，在魏州东郊进行大规模阅兵。
English: On October 26, a large-scale military parade was held in the eastern suburb of Weizhou.

古文：十一月，高万兴取盐州。
现代文：十一月，高万兴攻取盐州。
English: In November, Gao Wanxing captured Yanzhou.

古文：壬辰，至自魏州。
现代文：十二日，从魏州回到京城。
English: On the 12th, he returned to Beijing from Weizhou.

古文：乙未，回鹘、吐蕃遣使者来。
现代文：十五日，回鹘、吐蕃派使者来。
English: On the fifteenth day, Huizhou and Tubo sent envoys.

古文：二年春二月丁巳，光禄卿卢玭使于蜀。
现代文：乾化二年二月八日，派光禄卿卢王比出使后蜀。
English: On February 8th of the second year of the Qianhua era, Emperor Guanglu sent Lu Wangbi as an envoy to the Later Shu.

古文：甲子，如魏州，张宗奭留守西都。
现代文：十五日，往魏州，命张宗留守西都。
English: On the 15th, he went to Weizhou and ordered Zhang Zong to stay in the western capital.

古文：次白马，杀左散骑常侍孙骘、右谏议大夫张衍、兵部郎中张俊。
现代文：到白马，杀左散骑常侍孙陟马、右谏议大夫张衍、兵部郎中张俊。
English: He went to Baima and killed the left rider, the regular attendant Sun Ye Ma, the right rider, the doctor Zhang Yan, and the middle-ranking soldier Zhang Jun.

古文：戊寅，如贝州。
现代文：二十九日，往贝州。
English: On the 29th, to Bozhou.

古文：三月丙戌，屠枣强。
现代文：三月七日，在枣强进行大屠杀。
English: On March 7, a massacre was carried out in Zaoqiang.

古文：丁未，复如魏州。
现代文：二十八日，复往魏州。
English: On the 28th, he returned to Weizhou.

古文：夏四月己巳，至自魏州。
现代文：四月二十一日，从魏州回到东都。
English: On April 21, he returned to Dongdu from Weizhou.

古文：戊寅，如西都。
现代文：三十日，又往西都。
English: On the 30th, I went to the western capital again.

古文：五月丁亥，德音降死罪已下囚。
现代文：五月九日，下诏死罪以下囚犯减刑。
English: On May 9, the Supreme People's Procuratorate announced the commutation of the sentences of prisoners sentenced to death or less.

古文：罢役徒，禁屠及捕生。
现代文：免徭役，禁乱捕乱杀。
English: They are exempted from military service, and are forbidden to hunt and kill indiscriminately.

古文：渤海遣使者来。
现代文：渤海王派使者来。
English: The king of Bohai sent an envoy.

古文：是月，薛贻矩薨。
现代文：同月，薛贻矩去世。
English: In the same month, Xue Yanzhong died.

古文：六月，疾革，郢王友珪反。
现代文：六月，梁太祖病重，子郢王友皀造反。
English: In June, Liang Taizu fell seriously ill, and his son Wang Youjun rebelled.

古文：戊寅，皇帝崩。
现代文：二日，皇帝崩。
English: On the second day, the emperor died.

古文：呜呼，天下之恶梁久矣！
现代文：唉！天下人对梁的罪恶统治不满已很久了！
English: Alas! The people of the world have been dissatisfied with Liang's evil rule for a long time!

古文：自后唐以来，皆以为伪也。
现代文：自后唐以来，都把它称为伪朝。
English: Since the late Tang Dynasty, it has been referred to as a pseudo-dynasty.

古文：至予论次五代，独不伪梁，而议者或讥予大失《春秋》之旨，以谓 梁负大恶，当加诛绝，而反进之，是奖篡也，非《春秋》之志也。 
现代文：我写五代史，不以伪朝论，有人讥笑我失掉《春秋》的宗旨，说什么 梁罪大恶极，应当口诛笔伐，却反而加以肯定，是奖励篡夺，不符合孔子《春秋》的大义 。
English: I write the history of the Five Dynasties and do not use the theory of false dynasties. Some people ridicule me for losing the purpose of "Spring and Autumn," saying that Liang's crime is extremely evil and should be spoken and written, but affirming it instead is a reward usurpation and does not conform to the great righteousness of Confucius' "Spring and Autumn."

古文：予应之曰： 是《春秋》之志尔。
现代文：我回答说 ：什么是《春秋》的大义呢？
English: I replied: What is the great justice of "Spring and Autumn"?

古文：鲁桓公弑隐公而自立者，宣公弑子赤而自立者，郑厉公逐世子忽而自立者，卫公孙剽逐其君衎而自立者，圣人于《春秋》，皆不绝其为君。
现代文：鲁桓公弑隐公而自立，宣公弑子赤而自立，郑厉公赶走世子忽而自立，卫公孙剽赶走国君絗而自立，孔圣人在《春秋》一书里都称他们为君。
English: Lu Kuan Gong drove away his son-in-law and became independent, Xuan Gong drove away his son-in-law and became independent, Zheng Li Gong drove away his son-in-law and became independent, Wei Gong's son-in-law drove away his son-in-law and became independent, and Kong Shengren called them all "jun" in the book "Spring and Autumn."

古文：此予所以不伪梁者，用《春秋》之法也。 
现代文：这就是我之所以不称伪梁的原因了，是依照《春秋》的惯例而这样做的。 
English: That's why I didn't call it a false beam, I did it according to the practice of "Spring and Autumn."

古文： 然则《春秋》亦奖篡乎？ 
现代文： 那么《春秋》也奖励臣下篡权吗？ 
English: So does "Spring and Autumn" also reward vassals for usurping power?

古文：曰： 惟不绝四者之为君，于此见《春秋》之意也。圣人之于《春秋》，用意深，故能劝戒切，为言信，然后善恶明。
现代文：我的答复是 ：只要看到称前四者为君，就可知孔子《春秋》用意之深了，《春秋》之所以能起劝诫作用，说的是事实，才能使后人善恶分明。
English: My answer is: as long as you see that the first four are called Jun, you can see that Confucius' "Spring and Autumn" has a deep intention. The reason why "Spring and Autumn" can play the role of exhortation is that it tells the truth, so that future generations can distinguish between good and evil.

古文：夫欲著其罪于后世，在乎不没其实。其实尝为君矣，书其为君。
现代文：要书其罪于后世，也要尊重事实。其事实是伪君，就写其伪君。
English: If you want to write about your sins for posterity, you should also respect the truth. If you are a hypocrite, write about your hypocrisy.

古文：其实篡也，书其篡。
现代文：其事实是篡，就书其篡。
English: If the facts are fabricated, the book is fabricated.

古文：各传其实，而使后世信之，则四君之罪，不可得而掩尔。
现代文：尊重事实，才能使后人相信，那么四君之罪，就不可能掩盖了。
English: Only by respecting the facts can future generations be convinced, and then the sin of the four princes cannot be covered up.

古文：使为君者不得掩其恶，然后人知恶名不可逃，则为恶者庶乎其息矣。
现代文：使为国君的人不能掩盖罪恶，然后使后人知道恶名不可逃，那么为恶的人就会改正恶习了。
English: So that those who are kings cannot cover up their sins, and then let future generations know that the bad name cannot escape, then those who are evil will correct their bad habits.

古文：是谓用意深而劝戒切，为言信而善恶明也。
现代文：这就是《春秋》用意之深而劝诫真切，为的是尊重事实使善恶自明啊。
English: This is what makes "Spring and Autumn" a profound and earnest exhortation, in order to respect facts and make good and evil self-evident.

古文：桀、纣，不待贬其王，而万世所共恶者也。
现代文：桀、纣，用不着贬他们的王位，然而万世都知其是恶人。
English: Toad, toad, there is no need to dethrone them, yet all the world knows them to be wicked.

古文：《春秋》于大恶之君不诛绝之者，不害其褒善贬恶之旨也，惟不没其实以著其罪，而信乎后世，与其为君而不得掩其恶，以息人之为恶。
现代文：《春秋》对于罪恶的君主照实写出，并不影响其褒善贬恶的宗旨，只要将其罪恶事实写出来，史实传之后世，即使国君也不掩盖其罪恶，这样就可劝诫恶人改正错误。
English: The fact that "Spring and Autumn" is written truthfully about the evil monarch does not affect its purpose of praising good and disparaging evil. As long as its evil facts are written out, history will be handed down to posterity, even if the sovereign does not cover up his sins. In this way, the wicked can be exhorted to correct their mistakes.

古文：能知《春秋》之此意，然后知予不伪梁之旨也。 
现代文：知道了《春秋》的这种用意，也就知道我写书不称伪梁的用意了。 
English: Knowing this intention of "Spring and Autumn," I also know that my intention to write a book is not a false beam.

