古文：始建国元年正月朔，莽帅公侯卿士奉皇太后玺韨，上太皇太后，顺符命，去汉号焉。
现代文：始建国元年正月朔日，王莽率领公侯卿士捧着新制的皇太后御玺，送上太皇太后，遵从符命的意思，去掉了汉朝的名号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Wang Mang led the princes and courtiers holding the newly-made empress dowager's imperial scepter and presented it to the great empress dowager. In accordance with the meaning of the mission, the name of the Han Dynasty was removed.

古文：初，莽妻宜春侯王氏女，立为皇后。
现代文：原先，王莽娶了宜春侯王家的女儿，立她作皇后。
English: Originally, Wang Mang married the daughter of the Yichun royal family and made her the empress.

古文：本生四男：宇、获、安、临。
现代文：本来生了四个儿子：王字、王获、王安、王临。
English: Originally, she gave birth to four sons: Wang Zi, Wang Huo, Wang An and Wang Lin.

古文：二子前诛死，安颇荒忽，乃以临为皇太子，安为新嘉辟。
现代文：有两个儿子早些时候被处死了，王安很有点糊裹糊涂的样子，便把王临立为皇太子，把王安封为新嘉辟。
English: Two of Wang An's sons had been executed earlier. Wang An, somewhat confused, made Wang Lin the crown prince and Wang An the crown prince of Xinjia Bei.

古文：封宇子六人：千为功隆公，寿为功明公，吉为功成公，宗为功崇以，世为功昭公，利为功著公。
现代文：赐封王字的儿子六人：王千为功隆公，王寿为功明公，王吉为功成公，王宗为功崇公，王世为功昭公，王利为功着公。
English: Six sons of Wang Zi were given titles: Wang Qian as Gong Long, Wang Shou as Gong Ming, Wang Ji as Gong Cheng, Wang Zong as Gong Chong, Wang Shih as Gong Zhao, and Wang Li as Gong Cheng.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：宣布大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：莽乃策命孺子曰： 咨尔婴，昔皇天右乃太祖，历世十二，享国二百一十载，历数在于予躬。
现代文：王莽便下策书命令孺子道： 唉！你刘婴，从前上天帮助你的始祖，已经传递了十二代，享有国家政权二百一十年，天命的历数轮到了我。
English: Wang Mang then ordered Zangzi: Alas! You Liu Baby, the heavens have helped your forefathers in the past. They have been passed down for twelve generations and have enjoyed state power for two hundred and ten years. It is my turn to receive the decrees of heaven.

古文：《诗》不云乎？ 侯服于周，天命靡常。 封尔为定安公，永为新室宾。
现代文：《诗经》不是说过吗？ 殷朝的后代成为了诸侯，臣服于周朝，可见天命是没有一定的，赐封你为定安公，永远作新朝的国宾。
English: Isn't it said in the "Book of Songs"? The descendants of the Yin Dynasty became princes, and submitted to the Zhou Dynasty. It can be seen that the fate of heaven is not certain. You are given the title of Ding'an and will always be a state guest of the new dynasty.

古文：於戏！
现代文：哎哟！
English: Alas!

古文：敬天之休，往践乃位，毋废予命。 
现代文：你要感激上天的好意，前去就你的公位，不要违背我的命令。 
English: You should be grateful for God's kindness. Go ahead and take up your official position. Don't disobey my orders.

古文：又曰： 其以平原、安德、漯阴、鬲、重丘，凡户万，地方百里，为定安公国。
现代文：又说： 应当把平原县、安德县、漯阴县、鬲县、重丘县居民总共一万户，土地纵横各一百里，作为定安公国。
English: He also said: A total of ten thousand households of residents in Pingyuan County, Ande County, Suyin County, Handan County and Chongqiu County, with a land of one hundred miles in length and breadth, should be regarded as Ding'an Principality.

古文：立汉祖宗之庙于其国，与周后并，行其正朔、服色。
现代文：在你的封国裹建立汉朝祖宗的祠庙，跟周朝的后代同等看待，可以采用自己的历法和车马、服饰的颜色。
English: If you want to build an ancestral temple of the Han Dynasty in your fiefdom, you should treat it the same as the descendants of the Zhou Dynasty, and you can use your own calendar, chariot and horse, and the color of clothing.

古文：世世以事其祖宗，永以命德茂功，享历代之祀焉。
现代文：世世代代服事你的祖宗，永远依靠崇高的德行和卓著的功绩，享受无穷后代的祭祀。
English: Serve your ancestors from generation to generation, always rely on lofty virtues and outstanding achievements, and enjoy the sacrifices of endless generations.

古文：以孝平皇后为定安太后。 
现代文：把孝干皇后封为定安太后。 
English: He crowned Empress Xiaogan as Empress Dowager Ding'an.

古文：读策毕，莽亲执孺子手，流涕歔欷，曰： 昔周公摄位，终得复子明辟，今予独迫皇天威命，不得如意！ 
现代文：宣读策书完毕，王莽亲自握着孺子的手，流着眼泪叹息，说道： 从前周公代理王位，最后能够把明君的权力归还周成王，现在我偏偏迫于上天的威严命令，不能够如自己的心意！ 
English: After the reading of the policy book, Wang Mang personally held the hand of the mule, sighed with tears, and said: From the previous Zhou Gong acting throne, I was finally able to return the power of the Ming King to Zhou Cheng Wang, but now I am forced by the majesty of heaven's command, I can't do what I want!

古文：哀叹良久。
现代文：悲伤叹息很久。
English: Sorrow sighs for a long time.

古文：中傅将孺子下殿，北面而称臣。
现代文：中傅带着孺子下了殿堂，向着北面自称臣子。
English: Nakafu went down to the hall of fame with his mule and headed north, calling himself a vassal.

古文：百僚陪位，莫不感动。
现代文：百官陪在旁边，没有人不受感动。
English: Accompanied by hundreds of officials, no one could fail to be moved.

古文：又按金匮，辅臣皆封拜。
现代文：又按照金柜图画的说明，辅政大臣都举行授任仪式。
English: In addition, according to the description of the gold cabinet picture, the Vice-Minister of State held an appointment ceremony.

古文：以太傅、左辅、骠骑将军安阳侯王舜为太师，封安新公；大司徒就德侯平晏为太傅，就新公；少阿、羲和、京兆尹、红休侯刘歆为国师，嘉新公；广汉梓潼哀章为国将，美新公：是为四辅，位上公。
现代文：任命太傅、左辅、骠骑将军安阳侯王舜为太师，赐封安新公；大司徒就德侯平晏为太傅，赐封就新公；少阿、羲和、京兆尹红休侯刘歆为国师，赐封嘉新公；广汉郡梓潼县人哀章为国将，赐封美新公：这是四辅，位列上公。
English: Appointed Taifu, Zuoying, and Zouqi generals Anyang marquis Wang Qiao as Taishi, and bestowed the title of Anxin Gong; Daisitou appointed Dehong Ping Qiao as Taifu, and bestowed the title of Xin Gong; Shaoa, Zouhe, Jingzha Yinhong Xiu marquis Liu Qiao as Guoshi, and bestowed the title of Jiaxin Gong; Guanghan county Zizhi county people mourned Zhang as Guoshi, and bestowed the title of Meixin Gong: This is four auxiliary, ranked as Shangguo.

古文：太保、后承承阳侯甄邯为大司马，承新公；丕进侯王寻为大司徒，章新公；步兵将军成都侯王邑为大司空，隆新公：是为三公。
现代文：太保、后承承阳侯甄邯为大司马，赐封承新功；丕进侯王寻为大司徒，赐封章新公；步兵将军成都侯王邑为大司空，赐封隆新公：这是三公。
English: Tai Bao, the successor of Chengyang Hou Zhenyao, was the grand steward, and bestowed the title of Fucheng Shinkong; Shujin Hou Wangxu was the grand steward, and bestowed the title of Shinkong; the infantry general Chengdu Hou Wangyi was the grand steward, and bestowed the title of Hulong Shinkong: these are the three kings.

古文：大阿、右拂；大司空、卫将军广阳侯甄丰为更始将军，广新公；京兆王兴为卫将军，奉新公；轻车将军成武侯孙建为立国将军，成新公；京兆王盛为前将军，崇新公：是为四将。
现代文：大阿、右拂、大司空、卫将军广阳侯甄丰为更始将军，赐封广新公；京兆尹人王兴为卫将军，赐封奉新公；轻车将军成武侯孙建为立国将军，赐封成新公；京兆尹人王盛为前将军，赐封崇新公：这是四将。
English: General Guangyang Hou Zhenfeng, commander of the Great Army, the Right Division, the Grand Division of the Air Force, and the Air Defense Force, was appointed as the new general and given the title of Guangxin Gong; General Jing Zhaoyin Wang Xing was appointed as the general of the Air Defense Force and given the title of Fengxin Gong; General Chengwu Hou Sun Jian, commander of the Light Cavalry, was appointed as the general of the founding of the country and given the title of Fengxin Gong; General Jing Zhaoyin Wang Sheng was appointed as the former general and given the title of Chongxin Gong: These are the four generals.

古文：凡十一公。
现代文：总共十一公。
English: There are a total of eleven princes.

古文：王兴者，故城门令史。
现代文：王兴是原城门令史。
English: Wang Xing is the original gate keeper.

古文：王盛者，卖饼。
现代文：王盛是卖饼的。
English: Wang Sheng is a baker.

古文：莽按符命求得此姓名十余人，两人容貌应卜相，径从布衣登用，以视神焉。
现代文：王莽按照符命找到这样的姓名有十多人，这两个人的相貌符合占卜和看相的要求，直接从平民起用，以显示神奇。
English: Wang Meng found more than a dozen people with such names according to the fate, and the appearance of these two people met the requirements of divination and physiognomy. They were used directly from civilians to show magic.

古文：余皆拜为郎。
现代文：其他同姓名的人都授任郎官。
English: Other people with the same name were given the title of vassal.

古文：是日，封拜卿大夫、侍中、尚书官凡数百人。
现代文：这一天，授任卿大夫、侍中、尚书官职总共几百人。
English: On this day, a total of several hundred people were appointed to the posts of chancellor, doctor, chamberlain, and secretary.

古文：诸刘为郡守，皆徙为谏大夫。
现代文：各刘姓皇族担任郡太守的，都调任谏大夫。
English: All members of the imperial family with the surname of Liu who served as county governors were transferred to the post of magistrate.

古文：改明光宫为定安馆，定安太后居之。
现代文：把明光宫改为定安馆，让定安太后住在那裹。
English: The Mingguang Palace was changed to the Ding'an Pavilion, and the Empress Dowager Ding'an was allowed to live there.

古文：以故大鸿胪府为定安公第，皆置门卫使者监领。
现代文：把原大鸿胪官署作为定安公住宅，都设置门卫、使者监护管理。
English: The former Dahongwe government office was designated as Ding'an public housing, with guards and messengers supervising the management.

古文：敕阿乳母不得与语，常在四壁中，至于长大，不能名六畜。
现代文：告诫保育人员和奶妈不准跟他谈话，让他经常呆在四壁合围的小屋子裹，一直到长大，还不会叫出六畜的名称。
English: He warned the nursery staff and his wet nurse not to talk to him, and let him stay wrapped up in the four-walled hut until he was old enough to call out the names of six animals.

古文：后莽以女孙宇子妻之。
现代文：后来王菱把孙女王宇的女儿嫁给了他。
English: Later, Wang Ling married the daughter of Sun Qiuyu to him.

古文：莽策群司曰： 岁星司肃，东岳太师典致时雨，青炜登平，考景以晷。
现代文：王莽颁发策书规定百官的职责说： 木星要求庄敬，是东方的长官太师，负责实现雨水适时适量，青色的光辉滋润万物生育均平，考究曰影和曰规。
English: Wang Mang issued a policy book stipulating the duties of the hundred officials, saying: Jupiter requires solemnity, is the governor of the East, is responsible for achieving the right amount of rain at the right time, the blue radiance moisturizes the growth of all things, and studies the sun shadow and sun rule.

古文：荧惑司哲，南岳太傅典致时奥，赤炜颂平，考声以律。
现代文：火星要求明智，是南方的长官太傅，负责实现炎热适时适度，红色的光辉发展均平，考究声音和曲调。
English: Mars asks for wisdom, is the governor of the south, is responsible for achieving hot, timely and appropriate, red radiance is evenly developed, and the sound and tune are exquisite.

古文：太白司艾，西岳国师典致时阳，白炜象平，考量以铨。
现代文：金星要求安定，是西方的长官国师，负责实现干燥适时适度，白色的光辉成长均平，考究度量和权衡。
English: Venus requires stability, is the Western prefect and national teacher, responsible for achieving timely and appropriate drying, uniform growth of white brilliance, and exquisite measurement and trade-off.

古文：辰星司谋，北岳国将典致时寒，玄炜和平，考星以漏。
现代文：水星要求精明，是北方的长官国将，负责实现寒冷适时适度，黑色的光辉休养均平，考究星辰和漏刻。
English: Mercury requires shrewdness. It is the northern governor of the country, responsible for achieving the right amount of cold at the right time, the brightness of the black rest is even, and the stars and leaks are studied.

古文：月刑元股左，司马典致武应，考方法矩，主司天文，钦若昊天，敬授民时，力来农事，以丰年谷。
现代文：月亮象征威刑，好像皇帝的左腿，即大司马，负责实现武功要注意方正，效法矩尺，主管天文，恭敬地顺从伟大的上天。谨慎地传授人民生产的时节，鼓励发展农业生产，使粮食获得丰收。
English: The moon symbolizes the threat of punishment, like the emperor's left leg, that is, the great horse, responsible for the realization of martial arts, pay attention to the square, follow the ruler, in charge of astronomy, respectfully obey the great heaven, carefully teach the people the production season, encourage the development of agricultural production, and make the grain harvest abundant.

古文：日德元厷右，司徒典致文瑞，考圜合规，主司人道，五教是辅，帅民承上，宣美风俗，五品乃训。
现代文：太阳象征德政，好像皇帝的右臂，即大司徒，负责实现文治，要注意融和，合乎圆规，主管人道，辅导五种伦理道德，率领人民服从上级，倡导改良风俗习惯，五种人伦关系才能正常。
English: The sun symbolizes good governance, as if it were the right arm of the emperor, that is, the great saint, responsible for realizing civil government, paying attention to harmony, conforming to the rules, supervising humanity, counseling the five ethics and morals, leading the people to obey their superiors, advocating the improvement of customs and habits, and the five kinds of human relations can be normal.

古文：斗平元心中，司空典致物图，考度以绳，主司地里，平治水土，掌名山川，众殖鸟兽，蕃茂草木。 
现代文：北斗象征最高标准，好像皇帝的内心，即大司空，负责实现太平景象，要注意事物的规范化、标准化，以准绳作为榜样，主管地理，开垦土地，兴修水利，管理大山丘、大河流，繁殖鸟兽，促使草木长得茂盛。 
English: The Big Dipper symbolizes the highest standard, as if the heart of the emperor, that is, the Big Sky, is responsible for achieving a peaceful scene, paying attention to the standardization of things, taking the yardstick as an example, in charge of geography, reclaiming land, building water conservancy, managing large hills and large rivers, breeding birds and beasts, and promoting the growth of plants and trees.

古文：各策命以其职，如典诰之文。
现代文：其他官吏都按照他们的职务作出了规定，像典谟训诰的文章一样。
English: Other officials have made provisions in accordance with their duties, like the articles of the Imperial Edict.

古文：置大司马司允，大司徒司直，大司空司若，位皆孤卿。
现代文：设置大司马司允，大司徒司直，大司空司若，职位都是孤卿。
English: The positions of Daishi Ma Siyun, Daishi To Siyu, and Daishi Ku Siyu were all vacant.

古文：更名大司农曰羲和，后更为纳言，大理曰作士，太常曰秩宗，大鸿胪曰典乐，少府曰共工，水衡都尉曰予虞，与三公司卿凡九卿，分属三公。
现代文：把大司农改名叫羲和，后来改为纳言，大理改名叫作士，太常改名叫秩宗，大鸿胪改名叫典乐，少府改名叫共工，水衡都尉改名叫予虞，加上三公司卿共九卿，分别归三公管辖。
English: The name of the chief farmer was changed to Yuhe, later changed to Nagan, the name of Dali was changed to Zuoxi, the name of Taizang was changed to Chichizong, the name of Dahongyu was changed to Tingle, the name of Shofu was changed to Co-worker, the name of Captain Shui Heng was changed to Yougu, and the names of the three company chiefs were changed to a total of nine chiefs, all of which were under the jurisdiction of the three kings.

古文：每一卿置大夫三人，一大夫置元士三人，凡二十七大夫，八十一元士，分主中都官诸职。
现代文：每一个卿下面设置大夫三人，每一大夫下面设置元士三人，总共二十七大夫，八十一元士，分别主管首都各官府的所有职务。
English: There are three doctors under each lord and three magistrates under each magistrate, for a total of twenty-seven magistrates and eighty-one magistrates in charge of all posts in the capital's government offices.

古文：更名光禄勋曰司中，太仆曰太御，卫尉曰太卫，执金吾曰奋武，中尉曰军正，又置大赘官，主乘舆服御物，后又典兵秩，位皆上卿，号曰六监。
现代文：把光禄勋改名叫司中，太仆改名叫太御，卫尉改名叫太卫，执金吾改名叫奋武，中尉改名叫军正，又设置大赘官，主管皇帝的车辆、衣服和用具，后来又掌管军需供应，职位都是上卿，称为六监。
English: He changed the name of Guanglu Xun to Shizhong, the name of the eunuch to Dajing, the name of the guard lieutenant to Taiwei, the name of the goldsmith to Tengwu, and the name of the lieutenant to Junzheng. He also set up a grand eunuch to be in charge of the emperor's vehicles, clothes and utensils, and later in charge of military supplies. The posts were all Shangye, known as the six supervisors.

古文：改郡太守曰大尹，都尉曰太尉，县令长曰宰，御史曰执法，公车司马曰王路四门，长乐宫曰常乐室，未央宫曰寿成室，前殿曰王路堂，长安曰常安。
现代文：把郡太守改名叫太尹，都尉改名叫太尉，县令、县长改名叫宰，御史改名叫执法，公车司马改名叫王路四门，长乐宫改名叫常乐室，未央宫改名叫寿成室，前殿改名叫王路堂，长安改名叫常安。
English: The name of the county governor was changed to Tai Yin, the captain was changed to Lieutenant, the county magistrate and the county governor were changed to Zai, the history was changed to law enforcement, the bus driver was changed to Wang Lu Shimen, the Changle Palace was changed to Changle Room, the Weiyang Palace was changed to Shoucheng Room, the front hall was changed to Wang Lu Hall, and Chang'an was changed to Chang'an.

古文：更名秩百名曰庶士，三百石曰下士，四百石曰中士，五百石曰命士，六百石曰元士，千石曰下大夫，比二千石曰中大夫，二千石曰上大夫，中二千石曰卿。
现代文：把俸禄百石级改名叫庶士，三百石级改名叫下士，四百石级改名叫中士，五百石级改名叫命士，六百石级改名叫元士，千石级改名叫下大夫，比二千石级改名叫中大夫，二千石级改名叫上大夫，中二千石级改名叫卿。
English: He changed the name of the 100 koku salary class to commoner, the 300 koku class to corporal, the 400 koku class to sergeant, the 500 koku class to warrant officer, the 600 koku class to warrant officer, the 1000 koku class to junior doctor, the 2000 koku class to junior doctor, the 2000 koku class to senior doctor, and the 2000 koku class to sir.

古文：车服黻冕，各有差品。
现代文：他们使用的车马和礼服、礼帽，各有不同的等级。
English: The chariots and horses they use, as well as the ceremonial robes and hats, all have different ranks.

古文：又置司恭、司徒、司明、司聪、司中大夫及诵诗工、彻膳宰，以司过。
现代文：又设置司恭大夫、司徒大夫、司明大夫、司聪大夫、司中大夫和诵诗工、彻膳宰，去侦察过失。
English: In addition, Dr. Sikyong, Dr. Sitou, Dr. Siming, Dr. Siatong, Dr. Shizhong, the poet, and the chef were set up to investigate the fault.

古文：策曰： 予闻上圣欲昭厥德，罔不慎修厥身，用绥于远，是用建尔司于五事。
现代文：策书说： 我听说上圣想要彰明自己的德行，无不谨慎地修养自己的身心，以贯彻到久远，因此设置你们这些官职从五个方面进行监督。
English: The policy book said: I heard that Shang Sheng wanted to highlight his virtues and cultivate his mind and body in a prudent manner to carry it out for a long time, so he set up these official positions to supervise from five aspects.

古文：毋隐尤，毋将虚，好恶不愆，立于厥中。
现代文：不要掩盖错误，不要助长虚荣，才能够作到对于自己的好恶都不会产生差错，站在事理的正中，大公无私。哎哟，勉励呀！ 
English: Don't cover up mistakes, don't encourage vanity, only then will you be able to make no mistakes about your own likes and dislikes, stand in the middle of things, and be selfless. Alas, cheer up!

古文：於戏，勖哉！ 令王路设进善之旌，非谤之木，敢谏之鼓。
现代文：下令在皇宫周围设置建议的旗帜、批评的木牌和登闻鼓。
English: An order was issued to set up banners of suggestion, wooden plaques of criticism and sounding drums around the palace.

古文：谏大夫四人常坐王路门受言事者。
现代文：派谏大夫四人经常坐在王路四门接待反映情况的人。
English: Dr. Pai's four people often sit at the four gates of Wanglu to receive people who report the situation.

古文：封王氏齐縗之属为侯，大功为伯，小功为子，緦麻为男，其女皆为任。
现代文：赐封王家丧服为一年的亲属为侯爵，丧服为九个月的亲属为伯爵，丧服为五个月的亲属为子爵，丧服为三个月的亲属为男爵，以上的女亲属都为任爵。
English: The royal family bestowed the title of marquess on relatives who had been in mourning for one year, the title of earl on relatives who had been in mourning for nine months, the title of viscount on relatives who had been in mourning for five months, the title of baron on relatives who had been in mourning for three months, and the title of knight on all of these female relatives.

古文：男以 睦 、女以 隆 为号焉，皆授印韨。
现代文：男的用 睦 字作称号，女的用 隆 字作称号，都授予印信。
English: Men use 睦 字 as their title, and women use 隆 字 as their title, both of which are awarded by seal.

古文：令诸侯立太夫人、夫人、世子，亦受印韨。
现代文：让诸侯立太夫人、夫人和世子，也授予印信。
English: Let the lords and ladies, wives and heirs, also grant the seal.

古文：又曰： 天无二日，土无二王，百王不易这道也。
现代文：又说道： 天上没有两个太阳，地上没有两个国王，这是百代帝王不能改变的原则。
English: He also said: There are no two suns in the sky, and no two kings on the earth. This is a principle that cannot be changed by a hundred emperors.

古文：汉氏诸侯或称王，至于四夷亦如之，违于古典，缪于一统。
现代文：汉朝的诸侯有的称王，直到四方外族也仿照这样称呼，违反了古代制度，背离了一统的原则。
English: Some of the princes of the Han Dynasty were called kings, until the foreign ethnic groups in the four directions followed suit, violating the ancient system and deviating from the principle of unity.

古文：其定诸侯王之号皆称公，及四夷僣号称王者皆更为侯。 
现代文：应当确定诸侯王的名号都称为公，以及四方外族盗窃名号自称为王的都改为侯。 
English: It should be ascertained that the titles of princes and kings are to be called "Kong" and that those who call themselves "Kong" are to be changed to "Hou."

古文：又曰： 帝王之道，相因而通；盛德之祚，百世享祀。
现代文：又说道： 帝王的道统，应当继承、发展和贯通；具有崇高德行的世系，应当长久享受祭祀。
English: He also said: The emperor's lineage should be inherited, developed and carried through; the lineage with lofty virtues should enjoy long-term worship.

古文：予惟黄帝、帝少昊、帝颛顼、帝喾、帝尧、帝舜、帝夏禹、皋陶、伊尹咸有圣德，假于皇天，功烈巍巍，光施于远。
现代文：我想到黄帝、少昊、颛顼、帝譬、唐尧、虞舜、夏禹、皋陶、伊尹都具有圣明的德行，感通上天，功业巍巍，光辉流传久远。
English: I think of the Yellow Emperor, Shao Hao, Yao Zi, Emperor Pei, Tang Zi, Yu Zi, Xia Yu, Jintao, and Yi Yin, all of whom had the virtues of wisdom and virtue, inspired the heavens, accomplished great feats, and passed on their brilliance for a long time.

古文：予甚嘉之，营求其后，将祚厥祀。 
现代文：我很赞赏他们，寻求他们的后代，打算延续他们的祭祀。 
English: I admire them very much, seek their descendants, intend to continue their sacrifice.

古文：惟王氏，虞帝之后也，出自帝喾；刘氏，尧之后也，出自颛顼。
现代文：他认为王姓是虞舜的后代，出于帝学；刘姓是唐尧的后代，出于颛顼。
English: He believes that the surname Wang is a descendant of Yu Xi, from the imperial school; the surname Liu is a descendant of Tang Xi, from the imperial school.

古文：于是封姚恂为初睦侯，奉黄帝后；梁护为脩远伯，奉少昊后；皇孙功隆公千，奉帝喾后；刘歆为祁烈伯，奉颛顼后；国师刘歆子叠为伊休侯，奉尧后；妫昌为始睦侯，奉虞帝后；山遵为褒谋子，奉皋陶后；伊玄为褒衡子，奉伊尹后。
现代文：于是赐封姚恂为初睦侯，继承黄帝的后代；梁护为脩远伯，继承少吴的后代；皇孙功隆公王千，继承帝誉的后代；刘歆为祁烈伯，继承颛顼的后代；国师刘歆的儿子刘叠为伊休侯，继承唐尧的后代；妈昌为始睦侯，继承虞舜的后代；山遵为裹谋子，继承皋陶的后代；伊玄为褒衡子，继承伊尹的后代。
English: As a result, Yao Jie was given the title of the first prince of the Ming Dynasty, succeeding the descendants of the Yellow Emperor; Liang Jie was given the title of the first prince of the Yuan Dynasty, succeeding the descendants of the Shao Wu Dynasty; the grandson of the Emperor Gong Long, Wang Qian, succeeded the descendants of the Emperor; Liu Jie was given the title of the first prince of the Qin Dynasty, succeeding the descendants of the Qin Dynasty; the son of the national teacher Liu Jie, Liu Jie, was given the title of the Ixiu Prince, succeeding the descendants of the Tang Dynasty; Ma Chang was given the title of the first prince

古文：汉后定安公刘婴，位为宾。
现代文：汉朝的后代定安公刘婴，地位是国宾。
English: The descendants of the Han Dynasty, Ding'an Gong Liu Jiao, have the status of state guests.

古文：周后卫公姬党，更封为章平公，亦为宾。
现代文：周朝的后代卫公姬党，改封为章平公，也是国宾。
English: The descendant of the Zhou Dynasty, Wei Gonghui Party, changed his name to Zhang Ping Gong, and was also a state guest.

古文：殷后宋公孔弘，运转次移，更封为章昭侯，位为恪。
现代文：殷朝的后代宋公孔弘，时运转变了，位次移动了，改封为章昭侯，地位是贵客。
English: Songgong Konghong, a descendant of the Yin Dynasty, has changed with the times, and his rank has moved. He has been renamed Zhang Zhaohong, and his status is that of a distinguished guest.

古文：夏后辽西姒丰，封为章功侯，亦为恪。
现代文：夏朝的后代辽西郡人姒丰，赐封为章功侯，也是贵客。
English: The descendants of the Xia Dynasty, the people of Liaoxi County, Zoufeng, were awarded the title of Zhang Gonghou, and were also distinguished guests.

古文：四代古宗，宗祀于明堂，以配皇始祖考虞帝。
现代文：夏朝、殷朝、周朝、汉朝的始祖，在明堂合祭，让他们跟着伟大的皇始祖考虞舜配享。
English: The forefathers of the Xia, Yin, Zhou and Han dynasties held a joint festival in the Ming Hall, allowing them to share the yakitori with the great imperial forefathers.

古文：周公后褒鲁子姬就、宣尼公后褒成子孔钧，已前定焉。
现代文：周公后代褒鲁子姬就，孔子的后代褒成子孑钩，从前已经确定了。
English: Zhou Gong's descendant, Bao Lu Zi Ji, and Confucius' descendant, Bao Cheng Zi Ya Hook, have already been determined.

古文：莽又曰： 予前在摄时，建郊宫，定祧庙，立社稷，神祇报况，或光自上复于下，流为乌，或典气熏烝，昭耀章明，以著黄、虞之烈焉。
现代文：王莽又说道： 我从前在摄政的时候，建筑郊祀坛址，制定远祖祠庙，设立土谷神社，神明报应，有光华从上面笼罩下面，流下来变成了老鸦，有黄气升腾，照耀鲜明，来显扬黄帝、虞舜的余辉。
English: Wang Mang also said: When I was a regent, I used to build a suburb worship site, formulate a distant ancestral temple, set up a Tsuchiya Shrine, a divine retribution, a radiance enveloped from above and below, flowing down to become a crow, a yellow rising, shining brightly, to show the afterglow of the Yellow Emperor and the Gooseberry.

古文：自黄帝至于济南伯王，高祖世氏姓有五矣。
现代文：从黄帝直到济南伯王，祖辈的姓氏有五个。
English: From the Yellow Emperor to Jinan Bo Wang, the ancestors have five surnames.

古文：黄帝二十五子，分赐厥姓十有二氏。
现代文：黄帝有二十五个儿子，分赐他们的姓氏十二个。
English: The Yellow Emperor had twenty-five sons and gave them twelve surnames.

古文：虞帝之先，受姓曰姚，其在陶唐曰妫，在周曰陈，在齐曰田，在济南曰王。
现代文：虞舜的先代接受的姓氏是姚，在陶唐时姓媪，在周代姓陈，在齐国姓田，在济南姓王。
English: The family name accepted by the predecessors of Yu Yao was Yao. In the Tang Dynasty, the family name was Yao. In the Zhou Dynasty, the family name was Chen. In the Qi Dynasty, the family name was Tian. In Jinan, the family name was Wang.

古文：予伏念皇初祖考黄帝，皇始祖考虞帝，以宗祀于明堂，宜序于祖宗之亲庙。
现代文：我俯伏思念伟大的皇初祖考黄帝，伟大的皇始祖考虞舜，已经在明堂合祭，还应当列入祖宗的亲庙。
English: I prostrate myself and think of the great imperial ancestor, Emperor Gao of the Yellow Emperor, and the great imperial ancestor, Emperor Gao of the Yue Emperor, who have already been enshrined in the Ming Hall, and should also be included in the ancestral temple.

古文：其立祖庙五，亲庙四，后夫人皆配食。
现代文：应当建立五所祖庙，四所亲庙，他们的王后或夫人都配享。
English: Five ancestral temples and four family temples should be established, and their queens or wives should all share in them.

古文：郊祀黄帝以配天，黄后以配地。
现代文：祭祀天地时让黄帝跟上天配享，让黄后跟大地配享。
English: When worshipping heaven and earth, let the Yellow Emperor share with the heavens, and let the Yellow Empress share with the earth.

古文：以新都侯东弟为大禖，岁时以祀。
现代文：把新都侯的东宅作为太庙，二年按时祭祀。
English: The east residence of the new lord of the capital will be used as a grand temple, with a two-year ritual.

古文：家之所尚，种祀天下。
现代文：民家所尊敬的祖先，也应当世世代代祭祀，朝廷已经给全国作出了榜样。
English: The ancestors respected by the people should also be sacrificed for generations, and the Imperial Court has set an example for the whole country.

古文：姚、妫、陈、田、王氏凡五姓者，皆黄、虞苗裔，予之同族也。
现代文：姓姚的、姓妈的、姓陈的、姓田的、姓王的共五姓的人，都是黄帝、虞舜的后代子孙，都是我的族。
English: People with the surnames of Yao, Momo, Chen, Tian and Wang, all five surnames, are descendants and descendants of the Yellow Emperor and Yu Xi, and are my tribe.

古文：《书》不云乎？ 惇序九族 。其令天下上此五姓名籍于秩宗，皆以为宗室。
现代文：《书经》不是说过吗？ 按照顺序促使九族都亲爱和睦，应当命令全国各地把这五姓的名册上报秩宗，都作为皇族。
English: Didn't the "Shu Jing" say that in order to promote the amity and harmony of the nine ethnic groups, the whole country should be ordered to report the names of these five surnames to the Chizong, and they should all be regarded as the imperial family.

古文：世世复，无有所与。
现代文：给他们世世代代免除赋税和劳役，不要有所牵涉。
English: Give them tax exemption and labor service for generations, and don't get involved.

古文：其元城王氏，勿令相嫁娶，以别族理亲焉。 
现代文：其中元城县的王姓，不准跟姚姓、嫣姓、陈姓、田姓互相结为婚姻，从而区别宗族，分理亲疏。 
English: Among them, the Wang surname in Yuancheng County is not allowed to marry with the Yao surname, the Zou surname, the Chen surname, and the Tian surname, thus distinguishing the clan and separating the relatives.

古文：封陈崇为统睦侯，奉胡王后；田丰为世睦侯，奉敬王后。
现代文：赐封陈崇为统睦侯，继承胡王的后代；田丰为世睦侯，继承敬王的后代。
English: Chen Chong was given the title of Prince of Harmony, succeeding the descendants of King Hu; Tian Feng was given the title of Prince of Peace, succeeding the descendants of King Qian.

古文：天下牧守皆以前有翟义、赵明等领州郡，怀忠孝，封牧为男，守以附城。
现代文：全国的州牧和郡太守都因为从前有翟义和趟明等人的叛乱，却能够据有州郡，心怀忠孝，赐封州牧为男爵，太守为附城。
English: All the provincial governors and county governors of the whole country, because of the rebellion of Zhai Yi and Wu Ming and others in the past, were able to hold the state and county, with loyalty and filial piety, and awarded the provincial governor as a baron, and the governor as an attached city.

古文：又封旧恩戴崇、金涉、箕闳、杨并等子皆为男。
现代文：又赐封旧曰恩人戴崇、金涉、箕闳和杨并等人的儿子部为男爵。
English: He also gave the title of baron to the sons of the old benefactors Dai Chong, Jin Zang, Zou and Yang Nian.

古文：遣骑都尉嚣等分治黄帝园位于上都桥畤，虞帝于零陵九疑，胡王于淮阳陈，敬王于齐临淄，愍王于城阳莒，伯王于济南东平陵，孺王于魏郡元城，使者四时致祠。
现代文：派遣骑都尉嚣等人分别到上都桥时修理黄帝的坟墓，到零陵郡九疑修理虞舜的坟墓，到淮阳郡陈县修理胡王的坟墓，到齐郡临淄县修理敬王的坟墓，到城阳国莒县修理愍王的坟墓，到济南郡束平陵县修理伯王的坟墓，到魏郡元城县修理孺王的坟墓，派遣使者按四季前往祭祀。
English: He dispatched cavalry captain Han and others to repair the tomb of the Yellow Emperor at Shangdu Bridge, to repair the tomb of Yu Xuan in Jiuxi, Liling County, to repair the tomb of King Hu in Chen County, Huaiyang County, to repair the tomb of King Jing in Linyi County, Qi County, to repair the tomb of King Zhou in Shiyang County, to repair the tomb of King Bo in Sokpingling County, Jinan County, to repair the tomb of King Bo in Yuancheng County, Wei County, and to repair the tomb of King Zhou. He dispatched envoys to the sacrificial rites according to the four seasons.

古文：其庙当作者，以天下初定，且祫祭于明堂太庙。
现代文：他们的祠庙应当修建的，因为全国刚刚平定，暂且在明堂太庙举行合祭。
English: Their ancestral temple should be built, because the whole country has just been pacified, and the closing ceremony is temporarily held in the Myeongdong Grand Temple.

古文：以汉高庙为文祖庙。
现代文：把汉高帝庙作为文祖庙。
English: The Hangoo Imperial Temple is regarded as the ancestral temple.

古文：莽曰： 予之皇始祖考虞帝受嬗于唐，汉氏初祖唐帝，世有传国之象，予复亲受金策于汉高皇帝之灵。
现代文：王莽说： 我的伟大的皇始祖考虞舜从唐尧手里接受了惮让的政权，汉朝的远初祖先是唐尧，他们世世代代有禅让政权的风格，我又亲自在漠高帝的神灵面前接受了金策书。
English: Wang Mang said, "My great imperial ancestor, Cao Yuquan, accepted the power of Zhuozhen from Tang Xuan. The earliest ancestor of the Han Dynasty was Tang Xuan. For generations, they had a zen style of ceding power. I personally accepted the Book of the Golden Rule in front of the deities of Emperor Gao.

古文：惟思褒厚前代，何有忘时？
现代文：心想表彰优待前朝，哪有忘记的时候？
English: In the morning before you want to commend the preferential treatment, when do you forget?

古文：汉氏祖宗有七，以礼立庙于定安国。
现代文：汉朝的宗祖有七位，应当在定安国按照礼仪建立祠庙。
English: There are seven patriarchs of the Han Dynasty, and according to the etiquette, ancestral temples should be established in Ding'an.

古文：其园寝庙在京师者，勿罢，祠荐如故。
现代文：他们在京城的墓地附设的祠庙，不要废除，祭礼照旧。
English: The ancestral temple attached to the cemetery in the capital should not be abolished, and the festival should continue as before.

古文：予以秋九月亲入汉氏高、元、成、平之庙。
现代文：我将要在秋季九月亲自到汉朝高帝、元帝、成帝、平帝的祠庙祭祀。
English: I will personally go to the ancestral temples of Emperor Gao, Emperor Yuan, Emperor Cheng and Emperor Ping of the Han Dynasty in the autumn of September.

古文：诸刘更属籍京兆大尹，勿解其复，各终厥身，州牧数存问，勿令有侵冤。 
现代文：各刘姓皇族的名籍改归京兆大尹管理，不要取消他们的免除赋税劳役的特权，各止于他们本身，州牧要时常去慰问，不要让他们遭受冤枉和迫害。 
English: The names of all the imperial family members with the surname of Liu should be transferred to the administration of Beijing Zhaoda Yin, and their privilege of exemption from taxation and labor service should not be canceled, and each should be limited to themselves. The prefectural pastors should often go to offer condolences, and should not let them suffer from injustice and persecution.

古文：又曰： 予前在大麓，至于摄假，深惟汉氏三七之厄，赤德气尽，思索广求，所以辅刘延期之术，靡所不用，以故作金刀之利，几以济之。
现代文：又说道： 我从前在担任要职直到居位摄政的时候，深切地考虑汉朝传到二百一十来年的不幸遭遇，汉朝的命运气数已经到了尽头，想方设法，凡是能够用来辅佐刘家延长政权寿命的办法，没有不采用的。因此制作金刀货币的便利，希望藉此有益于它。
English: He also said, "When I held important positions until I became regent, I thought deeply about the misfortune of the Han Dynasty that lasted for 210 years. The Han Dynasty's fate has come to an end, and I tried my best to find ways to help the Liu family extend the life of the regime. Therefore, I hope that the convenience of making gold sword money will benefit it.

古文：然自孔子作《春秋》以为后王法，至于哀之十四而一代毕，协之于今，亦哀之十四也。
现代文：然而自从孔子撰写《春秋》作为后代帝王的准则，写到鲁哀公十四年一个时代便宣告结束，跟今天来类比，也正是漠哀帝以来的十四年。
English: However, since Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn" as a guideline for future emperors, an era was declared to be over in the 14th year of Lu Yigong. By analogy with today, it is also the 14th year since Emperor Miao.

古文：赤世计尽，终不可强济。
现代文：汉朝的寿命期限已经到了尽头，终究不能勉强挽救。
English: The Han Dynasty has reached the end of its lifespan and cannot be saved.

古文：皇天明威，黄德当兴，隆显大命，属予以天下。
现代文：上天显赫威灵，新朝的命运应当兴起，隆重地显示重大的命令，把国家的统治权委托给我。
English: The destiny of the new dynasty should arise, grandly display the great command, and entrust the sovereignty of the country to me.

古文：今百姓咸言皇天革汉而立新，废刘而兴王。
现代文：现在百姓都说上天革除汉朝，建立新朝，抛弃刘家，振兴王家。
English: Now the common people are all saying that it is time to abolish the Han Dynasty, establish a new dynasty, abandon the Liu family, and revitalize the royal family.

古文：夫 刘 之为字 卯、金、刀 也，正月刚卯，金刀之利，皆不得行。
现代文：那 刘，字的形状结构就是 卯、金、刀 ，因此正月刚卯的佩饰和金刀货币的便利，都不准再通行。
English: That Liu, the shape structure of the character is 卯,金,刀, so the decoration of the New Year and the convenience of the gold knife currency are no longer allowed to pass.

古文：博谋卿士，佥曰天人同应，昭然著明。
现代文：广泛地征求公卿士大夫的意见，都说天道人事互相感应，是很明白的。
English: Extensively soliciting the opinions of noble doctors, they all said that it is very clear that Tiandao personnel interact with each other.

古文：其去刚卯莫以为佩，除刀钱勿以为利，承顺天心，快百姓意。 
现代文：应当摘掉刚卯不要把它作为佩饰，废止刀钱不要把它看作便利，这样来遵循上天意旨，满足百姓的心愿。 
English: It is necessary to remove the gong and not to use it as a decoration, to abolish the sword and not to regard it as a convenience, so as to follow God's will and satisfy the people's wishes.

古文：乃更作小钱，径六分，重一铢，文曰 小钱直一 ，与前 大钱五十 者为二品，并行。
现代文：便改铸小钱，直径六分，重量一铢，上面铸有 小钱直一 的字样，加上以前的 大钱五十 的货币为两类，同时流通。
English: Small money, with a diameter of six points and a weight of one baht, with the words "small money, straight one" minted on it, and the former "big money, fifty" were added to the two types of currency and circulated at the same time.

古文：欲防民盗铸，乃禁不得挟铜炭。
现代文：想要防止民间私自铸造，便下禁令不准私藏铜和炭。
English: In order to prevent people from making their own castings, a ban was imposed on the private possession of copper and charcoal.

古文：四月，徐乡侯刘快结党数千人起兵于其国。
现代文：四月，徐乡侯刘快集结党羽几千人在他的封国裹起兵。
English: In April, Xu Xianghou Liu Kuai gathered several thousand party members to form an army in his fiefdom.

古文：快兄殷，故汉胶东王，时改为扶崇公。
现代文：刘快的兄长刘殷，是原汉朝的胶束王，这时已经改为扶崇公。
English: Liu Kai's elder brother, Liu Yin, was the former Han Dynasty's Prince of Micelles, but by this time he had been changed to Fu Chonggong.

古文：快举兵攻即墨，殷闭城门，自系狱。
现代文：刘快起兵进攻即墨城，刘殷关闭城门，自动投入监狱。
English: Liu Kuai raised an army to attack the city of Mocheng. Liu Yin closed the city gate and was automatically thrown into prison.

古文：吏民距快，快败走，至长广死。
现代文：城裹的官吏和民众抵抗刘快，刘快失败逃跑，退到长广县死了。
English: The besieged officials and people resisted Liu Kai. Liu Kai failed to escape and retreated to Changguang County, where he died.

古文：莽曰： 昔予之祖济南愍王困于燕寇，自齐临淄出保于莒。
现代文：王莽说： 从前我的祖先济南愍王被燕寇围困，从齐国的都城临淄退到莒邑自保。
English: Wang Mang said, "Once upon a time, my ancestor, Jinan Shao Wang, was besieged by swifts, and he retreated from the capital city of Qi, Linyi, to Shaoqiu to protect himself.

古文：宗人田单广设奇谋，获杀燕将，复定齐国。
现代文：族人田单想出了很多的好计策，擒杀了燕国的主将，重新安定了齐国。
English: The tribesman Tian Shan came up with a lot of good strategies, killed the captain of Yan, and re-stabilized Qi.

古文：今即墨士大夫复同心殄灭反虏，予甚嘉其忠者，怜其无辜。
现代文：现在即墨城的士大夫又同心协力歼灭反贼，我很赞许那些尽忠的人，怜悯那些无罪的人。
English: Now that the magistrates of Mexico City have made a concerted effort to annihilate the anti-thieves, I applaud those who are loyal and pity those who are innocent.

古文：其赦殷等，非快之妻子它亲属当坐者皆勿治。
现代文：应当赦免刘殷等人，除刘快的妻子儿女以外，其他应当连坐受罚的亲属都不要惩办。
English: Liu Yin and others should be pardoned. Except for Liu Qiao's wife and children, other relatives who should be punished should not be punished.

古文：吊问死伤，赐亡者葬钱，人五万。
现代文：吊唁死者，慰问伤者，给死者赏赐丧葬费，每人五万钱。
English: Condolences to the dead, condolences to the injured, funeral expenses awarded to the deceased, up to fifty thousand yuan per person.

古文：殷知大命，深疾恶快，以故辄伏厥辜。
现代文：刘殷懂得天命，深刻憎恨刘快，刘快因为这样的缘故就受到应得的惩罚。
English: Liu Yin understood the fate of the world and deeply hated Liu Kai. Because of this, Liu Kai received the punishment he deserved.

古文：其满殷国户万，地方百里。 
现代文：应当满足刘殷的封国一万户，土地纵横各一百里。 
English: Liu Yin should be satisfied with 10,000 households and 100 miles of land in each direction.

古文：又封符命臣十余人。
现代文：又封赏了进献符命的臣子十多人。
English: In addition, more than a dozen vassals who donated their lives were rewarded.

古文：莽曰： 古者，设庐井八家，一夫一妇田百亩，什一而税，则国给民富而颂声作。
现代文：王莽说： 古代八家同作一井田，耕作时同住一个棚子，一夫一妇分田一百亩，按十分之一交租税，就能够国家丰裕，百姓富足，于是歌颂的舆论兴起来了。
English: Wang Mang said: In ancient times, eight families worked together to make a well field, and lived together in a shed while farming. A husband and wife were allotted a field of 100 mu, and paid tax at one-tenth. This enabled the country to be prosperous and the people to be rich. As a result, the public opinion of praise arose.

古文：此唐、虞之道，三代所遵行也。
现代文：这是唐、虞时代的政策，夏、商、周三代所遵行的。
English: This was the policy of the Tang and Yu dynasties, which was followed by the Xia, Shang and San dynasties.

古文：秦为无道，厚赋税以自供奉，罢民力以极欲，坏圣制，废井田，是以兼并起，贪鄙生，强者规田以千数，弱者曾无立锥之居。
现代文：秦朝凶暴无道，增加赋税来供自己享受，竭尽民力来满足自己的无穷欲望，毁坏圣人的制度，废除井田，因此富贵人家并吞贫苦人民的财产的现象出现了，贪婪卑鄙的行为发生了，强者占田要用千来计算，弱者竟没有立锥之地。
English: The Qin Dynasty was ruthless, increasing taxes for its own enjoyment, exhausting the people's strength to satisfy its infinite desires, destroying the system of saints, and abolishing the well field. As a result, the phenomenon of rich people's property devouring the poor people's property appeared, greed and despicable behavior occurred, the strong occupied the field with thousands, and the weak had no place to stand.

古文：又置奴婢之市，与牛马同兰，制于民臣，颛断其命。
现代文：又设置买卖奴婢的市场，跟牛马同栏，控制平民和奴隶，专横地操纵他们的命运。
English: It also set up a market for the sale and purchase of slaves and maidservants, the same as for cattle and horses, to control civilians and slaves and arbitrarily manipulate their fate.

古文：奸虐之人因缘为利，至略卖人妻子，逆天心，悖人伦，缪于 天地之性人为贵 之义。
现代文：奸诈残暴之徒凭藉这些办法来牟利，甚至强抢强卖人家的妻子儿女，违抗了上天的心意，违反了人与入之间的关系准则，违背了 天地间的生命人类最尊贵 的原则。
English: Treacherous and cruel people use these methods to make a profit, and even forcibly rob and sell other people's wives and children, defying God's will, violating the relationship between man and nature, and violating the most precious principle of human life in heaven and earth.

古文：《书》曰 予则奴戮女 ，唯不用命者，然后被此辜矣。
现代文：《书经》说 我就要奴役和侮辱你，衹有不遵行命令的人，才会遭受这样的罪殃。
English: The scriptures say that I will enslave and humiliate you, and only those who disobey my orders will suffer such a fate.

古文：汉氏减轻田租，三十而税一，常有更赋，罢癃咸出，而豪民侵陵，分田劫假。
现代文：汉朝减轻土地税，按三十分一征税，但是经常有代役税，病残而丧失劳力的都要出，而且恶霸侵犯欺压，利用租佃关系掠夺财物。
English: The Han Dynasty reduced the land tax and levied it at a rate of thirty-one percent, but there was often a substitute service tax, sick people and those who lost their labor had to pay, and bullies violated and oppressed, and used the tenancy relationship to plunder property.

古文：厥名三十税一，实什税五也。
现代文：其名按三十分之一征税，实际上征收了十分之五的税。
English: They were taxed at one-thirtieth of the nominal rate, but in fact they were taxed at five-tenths of the rate.

古文：父子夫妇终年耕芸，所得不足以自存。
现代文：父子夫妇一年到头在田间劳动，所得的收入不足以维持自己的生存。
English: The father and son work in the fields all year round, and the income they earn is not enough to sustain themselves.

古文：故富者犬马余菽粟，骄而为邪；贫者不厌糟糠，穷而为奸。
现代文：所以富人的家畜有吃不完的粮食，因骄奢而作邪恶的事；穷人却吃不到酒渣糠皮，因贫困而作邪恶的事。
English: Wherefore the cattle of the rich man eat bread by the bushel, and are wicked through pride: but the cattle of the poor man eat not the dregs of the cup, and are wicked through want.

古文：俱陷于辜，刑用不错。
现代文：他们都陷于犯罪，刑罚因此不能搁置不用。
English: They are all involved in crime, so the punishment cannot be suspended.

古文：予前在大麓，始令天下公田口井，时则有嘉禾之祥，遭以虏逆贼且止。
现代文：我从前在担任要职的时候，开始命令把全国的公田按人口规划井田，那时就出现了嘉禾的祥瑞，因为遭到反贼和叛乱头目的干扰而暂时停止。
English: When I was in an important position, I began to order the planning of public land according to the population of the whole country. At that time, Jiahe's Xiangrui appeared, which was temporarily suspended due to interference from anti-thieves and rebel leaders.

古文：今更名天下田曰 王田 ，奴婢曰 私属 ，皆不得卖买。
现代文：现在把全国的田改名叫 王田，奴婢叫 私属，都不准买卖。
English: Now the fields across the country have been renamed "King's fields," and the slaves and maidservants are called "private servants," and they are not allowed to be bought and sold.

古文：其男口不盈八，而田过一井者，分余田予九族邻里乡党。
现代文：那些家庭人口男性不满八人，而占有田亩超过一井的，把多余的田亩分给亲属和乡邻。
English: Those families with a male population of less than eight people who own more than one mu of farmland and one well shall distribute the extra mu of farmland to their relatives and neighbors.

古文：故无田，今当受田者，如制度。
现代文：原来没有田，现在应当分得田的，按照规定办。
English: Originally, there were no fields. Now, those who should be allocated fields should do so in accordance with the regulations.

古文：敢有非井田圣制，无法惑众者，投诸四裔，以御魑魅，如皇始祖考虞帝故事。 
现代文：敢有反对井田这种圣人首创的制度，无视法律惑乱民众的，把他们流放到四方极远的地方去，从而杜绝坏家伙，依照伟大的皇始祖考虞舜惩罚四凶的成例。 
English: If anyone dares to oppose the system pioneered by saints such as Ida, and disregards the law to mislead the people, they will be exiled to places far away in all directions, thus eliminating the bad guys, and punishing the four villains in accordance with the example of the great imperial ancestor Koga.

古文：是时，百姓便安汉五铢钱，以莽钱大小两行难知，又数变改不信，皆私以五铢钱市买。
现代文：这个时候，百姓习惯于使用汉朝的五铢钱，认为王莽的钱大小两种同时流通难以认识，又多次改变不守信用，都暗地裹用五铢钱买卖。
English: At this time, the people were accustomed to using the Han Dynasty's five-baht coins. They thought that it was difficult to understand that Wang Mang's two sizes of money were circulating at the same time, and that it was not trustworthy to change it many times. They all secretly used the five-baht coins to buy and sell.

古文：讹言大钱当罢，莫肯挟。
现代文：谣传说大钱会要废除，没有人肯携带。
English: Rumor has it that big money will be abolished, and no one will carry it.

古文：莽患之。复下书： 诸挟五铢钱，言大钱当罢者，比非井田制，投四裔。 
现代文：王莽担心逭件事，再下文告： 所有私藏五铢钱，说大钱会要废除的，比照反对井田制惩办，流放到四方极远的地方去。 
English: Wang Meng was worried about this matter, and then announced: All the people who have been hiding 50 yuan coins and saying that big money will be abolished will be banished to places far away in all directions, as opposed to the Ida system of punishment.

古文：于是农商失业，食货俱废，民人至涕泣于市道。
现代文：于是农民和商人失业，财政经济陷于瘫痪状态，人民甚至在市场上、大路上伤心流泪。
English: As a result, farmers and merchants lost their jobs, the financial economy was paralyzed, and people even shed tears in the market and on the highway.

古文：及坐卖买田宅、奴婢，铸钱，自诸侯、卿、大夫至于庶民，抵罪者不可胜数。
现代文：以及由于买卖田宅、奴婢和私自铸钱，从诸侯、卿大夫直到平民，犯罪受罚的数也数不清。
English: and the number of people punished for crimes, from lords and nobles to commoners, for buying and selling fields and houses, slaves and maidservants, and minting money from their own pockets, is also incalculable.

古文：秋，遣五威将王奇等十二人班《符命》四十二篇于天下。
现代文：秋季里，派遣五威将王奇等十二人颁布《符命》四十二篇到全国。
English: In the autumn, Wuwei sent Wang Qi and twelve others to promulgate the forty-two chapters of "Fu Mui" to the whole country.

古文：德祥五事，符命二十五，福应十二，凡四十二篇。
现代文：德祥类五篇，符命类二十五篇，福应类十二篇，总共四十二篇。
English: There are five articles on virtue and auspiciousness, twenty-five articles on life and death, and twelve articles on good fortune, for a total of forty-two articles.

古文：其德祥言文、宣之世黄龙见于成纪、新都，高祖考王伯墓门梓柱生枝叶之属。
现代文：其中德祥类说汉文帝、汉宣帝的时期在成纪县、新都县有黄龙出现，高祖考王伯墓门的梓木柱子上长出枝叶一类事情。
English: Among them, De Xiang said that during the reigns of Emperor Hanwen and Emperor Han Xuan, yellow dragons appeared in Chengji County and Xindu County, and branches and leaves grew on the azuki wood pillar of Gao Zukao Wang Bo's tomb.

古文：符命言井石、金匮之属。
现代文：符命类说武功县井石、高帝庙金柜图策一类的事情。
English: It is said that things such as the well stone in Wugong County and the gold coffer in the Gao Di Temple are the signs of life.

古文：福应言雌鸡化为雄之属。
现代文：福应类说母鸡变成公鸡一类的事情。
English: It's like saying a hen will turn into a rooster.

古文：其文尔雅依托，皆为作说，大归言莽当代汉有天下云。
现代文：那些文章接近正式经文，都是依据古义作出解说，大要说王莽应当代替汉朝统治国家。
English: Those articles are close to the official scriptures, and they are all based on the ancient meaning, basically saying that Wang Mang should rule the country instead of the Han Dynasty.

古文：总有说之曰： 帝王受命，必有德祥之符瑞，协成五命，申以福应，然后能立巍巍之功，传于子孙，永享无穷之祚。
现代文：总括说明它们道： 帝王承受天命，一定有依靠德行获得祥瑞的征兆，配合成为五命，加上依靠福气而获得的报应，然后才能建立伟大崇高的功业，传给子孙后代，永享无穷的国祚。
English: To sum up, they said: If an emperor is destined by heaven, he must have the signs of relying on virtue to obtain auspiciousness, cooperation to become the five lives, and the reward obtained by relying on good fortune, and then he can establish a great and noble cause, pass it on to future generations, and enjoy endless glory.

古文：故新室之兴也，德祥发于汉三七九世之后。
现代文：所以新朝的兴起，德祥发生于汉朝传递九代，经历二百一十年之后。
English: Therefore, the rise of the new dynasty, Dexiang, occurred nine generations after the Han Dynasty, after 210 years of experience.

古文：肇命于新都，受瑞于黄支，开王于威功，定命于子同，成命于巴宕，申福于十二应，天所以保祐新室者深矣，固矣！
现代文：从新都国初始受命，从黄支国接受祥瑞，从武功县开创王业，从子同县决定受命，到巴郡岩渠县完成受命，再加上十二次福应，上天用来保佑新朝的态度，既恳切又坚决！
English: From the initial order received from the new capital, from Huangzhi Province to accept Xiang Rui, from Wugong County to create a king's career, from Zidong County to decide to receive orders, to Ba County Iwakuchi County to complete the order, plus twelve blessings, the attitude used by God to bless the new dynasty is both earnest and resolute!

古文：武功丹石出于汉氏平帝末年，火德销尽，土德当代，皇天眷然，去汉与新，以丹石始命于皇帝。
现代文：武功县的丹书白石出现于汉朝平帝末年，汉朝的命运快完了，新朝的权力应当取而代之，上天关怀备至，抛弃汉朝，扶助新朝，用丹书白石开始授命给皇帝。
English: Wugong County's Danshu Baishi appeared in the last years of the Han Dynasty of Emperor Ping. The fate of the Han Dynasty was about to end, and the power of the new dynasty should take its place. Heaven cared for it, abandoned the Han Dynasty, supported the new dynasty, and began to give orders to the emperor with Danshu Baishi.

古文：皇帝谦让，以摄居之，未当天意，故其秋七月，天重以三能文马。
现代文：皇帝谦虚地推辞，用摄皇帝的名义代居皇位，还不能够符合上天的心意，因此那年秋季七月，上天又加上三台星和文马。
English: The emperor humbly declined, using the name of the emperor to take the throne, but it was not able to meet the will of heaven, so in the autumn of that year, in July, heaven added three stars and a horse.

古文：皇帝复谦让，未即位，故三以铁契，四以石龟，五以虞符，六以文圭，七以玄印，八以茂陵石书，九以玄龙石，十以神井，十一以大神石，十二以铜符帛图。
现代文：皇帝又谦虚地推辞，没有登上皇位，因此第三次出现了铁契，第四次出现了石龟，第五次出现了虞符，第六次出现了文圭，第七次出现了玄印，第八次出现了茂陵石书，第九次出现了玄龙石，第十次出现了神井，第十一次出现了大神石，第十二次出现了铜符帛图。
English: The emperor humbly declined again and did not ascend the throne. As a result, the third appearance of the iron deed, the fourth appearance of the stone turtle, the fifth appearance of the cone, the sixth appearance of the seal, the seventh appearance of the black seal, the eighth appearance of the mausoleum stone book, the ninth appearance of the black dragon stone, the tenth appearance of the god well, the eleventh appearance of the great god stone, and the twelfth appearance of the bronze seal.

古文：申命之瑞，浸以显著，至于十二，以昭告新皇帝。
现代文：申明天命的祥瑞，逐渐显著，直到十二次之多，用来明白告示新皇帝。
English: The auspiciousness of pronouncing tomorrow's name gradually became more pronounced, until it was used as many as twelve times to clearly announce the new emperor.

古文：皇帝深惟上天之威不可不畏，故去摄号，犹尚称假，改元为初始，欲以承塞天命，克厌上帝之心。
现代文：皇帝深深地想到上天的威严不可以不畏惧，所以去掉摄皇帝的称号，还是称假皇帝，改年号初始，想要用这样的办法来抵挡天命，能够满足上天的心意。
English: The emperor deeply thought that the majesty of heaven must not be feared, so he removed the title of the emperor, or called him a false emperor, and changed the beginning of the year. If he wanted to use such a method to resist the fate of heaven, he could satisfy the will of heaven.

古文：然非皇天所以郑重降符命之意，故是日天复决以龟书。
现代文：可是遣还不是上天所以反复恳切地赐降符命的意图，因此这天上天又赐降金策书，决断他的疑虑，劝勉他当皇帝。
English: However, it was not yet heaven that sent him, so he repeatedly and earnestly expressed his intention to be given the imperial pennant. Therefore, on that day, heaven also bestowed the imperial pennant, decided his doubts, and encouraged him to become emperor.

古文：又侍郎王盱见人衣白布单衣，赤缋方领，冠小冠，立于王路殿前，谓盱曰： 今日天同色，以天下人民属皇帝。 盱怪之，行十余步，人忽不见。
现代文：还有侍郎王盱看见一个人穿着白布单衣，方形衣领上面有火红彩画，戴着小帽子，站在王路殿前面，告诉王盱道： 今天五方天神同心合意，把万民委托给皇帝，王盱感到惊异，走了十多步，那个人忽然不见了。
English: Also, the attendant Wang Yao saw a person wearing a white cloth singlet, a square collar with a fiery red color painting on the top, and a small hat, standing in front of the King's Road Hall and telling Wang Yao: Today, the five heavenly deities unanimously agreed to entrust the people to the emperor. Wang Yao was surprised, walked more than ten steps, and the person suddenly disappeared.

古文：至丙寅暮，汉氏高庙有金匮图策： 高帝承天命，以国传新皇帝。 明旦，宗伯忠孝侯刘宏以闻，乃召公卿议，未决，而大神石人谈曰： 趣新皇帝之高庙受命。
现代文：到丙寅曰傍晚，汉朝高帝庙出现了金柜图策：高帝秉承天命，把国家传给新皇帝，第二天早晨，宗伯忠孝侯刘宏把这件事情上报，便召集公卿大臣商议，还没有作出决定，而大神石像人一样发话道： 赶快叫新皇帝前往高帝庙接受天命，不要耽搁了！
English: In the evening of the same day, a golden casket appeared in the temple of Emperor Gao of the Han Dynasty: Emperor Gao, adhering to the Mandate of Heaven, passed the country to the new emperor. The next morning, Liu Hong, the patriarch, reported the matter to the emperor, and summoned the noblemen and ministers to discuss the matter. No decision had been made, but the Great God Stone spoke like a human: Quickly call the new emperor to go to the temple of Emperor Gao to accept the Mandate of Heaven. Don't delay!

古文：毋留！ 于是新皇帝立登车，之汉氏高庙受命，受命之日，丁卯也。丁，火，汉氏之德也。
现代文：于是新皇帝立即上车，前往汉朝高帝庙接受天命。接受天命的那天，是丁卯日，丁属火，是汉朝命运的象征。
English: Therefore, the new emperor immediately got on the bus and went to the Han Dynasty Gao Di Temple to accept the fate of heaven. The day he accepted the fate of heaven was Dingwu Day, and Ding is fire, which is a symbol of the fate of the Han Dynasty.

古文：卯，刘姓所以为字也。
现代文：卯，是构成 刘，字的一部分。
English: The u is a part of the character that makes up the liu.

古文：明汉刘火德尽，而传于新室也。
现代文：这表明汉朝刘姓的命运已经完了，气运传到了新朝。
English: This indicates that the fate of the Han Dynasty Liu surname has been completed, and the luck has been passed on to the new dynasty.

古文：皇帝谦谦，既备固让，十二符应迫著，命不可辞，惧然祗畏，苇然闵汉氏之终不可济，亹亹左右之不得从意，为之三夜不御寝，三日不御食。
现代文：皇帝谦虚逊让，已经多方坚决推辞，十二次符应催促紧迫，天命不能推辞，惊疑敬畏，忐忑不安，怜悯汉朝终于不可挽救，千方百计帮助它都不能如愿，为着这件事，三夜没有睡觉，三天没有吃饭。
English: The emperor humbly conceded, and has been firmly rebuffed by many parties. Twelve times, he should be urged and urged. The fate of heaven cannot be rebuffed. Surprised and awed, he is uneasy. The Han Dynasty's pity is finally irredeemable. Every possible way to help it cannot be as desired. For this matter, he did not sleep for three nights and did not eat for three days.

古文：延问公侯卿大夫，佥曰： 宜奉如上天威命。 
现代文：接见询问公侯、士大夫，都说： 应当按照上天的威命执行。 
English: Both the prince and the scholar who received and questioned him said: It should be carried out in accordance with the majesty of heaven.

古文：于是乃改元定号，海内更始。
现代文：于是才改年号，定国号，全国更新。
English: As a result, the name of the year was changed, the name of the country was fixed, and the whole country was updated.

古文：新室既定，神祗欢喜，申以福应，吉瑞累仍。
现代文：新朝一经建立，神明欢喜，重新赐降福应，祥瑞接二连三。
English: As soon as the new dynasty was established, the gods rejoiced, bestowed new blessings, and prosperity followed one after another.

古文：《诗》曰： 宜民宜人，受禄于天；保右命之，自天申之。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 有功德于人民因而受到人民爱戴的人，就能够从上天承受福气；上天会保佑他，授予帝王的高位，并申明这个意思。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "He who has merit with the people and is loved by the people will be able to receive blessings from heaven; heaven will bless him and grant him the high position of emperor, and affirm this meaning.

古文：此之谓也。 
现代文：说的就是这种情况。 
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：五威将奉《符命》，赍印绶，王侯以下及吏官名更者，外及匈奴、西域，徼外蛮夷，皆即授新室印绶，因收故汉印绶。
现代文：五威将恭敬地拿着《符命》，带着印信，给王侯以下和官吏的官名更改了，国外远及匈奴、西域各国和边界以外的外族，都就地授予新朝的印信，并收缴原来汉朝的印信。
English: Wu Wei will respectfully hold the "Fu Mu" and carry the seal, and the official names of the princes and officials will be changed. Foreign countries as far away as the Xiongnu, the western countries and the foreigners outside the borders will grant the new dynasty's seal on the spot and collect the original Han dynasty's seal.

古文：赐吏爵人二级，民爵人一级，女子百户羊、酒、蛮夷币、帛各有差。
现代文：赏赐官吏每人两级爵位，赏赐民家家长每人一级爵位，赏赐民家主妇羊和酒，按每百户为单位进行分配，赏赐外族财物各有等级。
English: Each official was awarded a two-level title, each head of a private family was awarded a one-level title, each housewife was awarded a sheep and wine, which were distributed according to the units of each hundred households, and each level of foreign property was awarded.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：宣布全国大赦。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：五威将乘《乾》文车，驾《坤》六马，背负鷩鸟之毛，服饰甚伟。
现代文：五威将坐着绘有天文图像的车子，套着六匹母马，背上插着锦鸡的羽毛，服装佩饰很威武。
English: Wu Wei will sit in a chariot painted with astronomical images, wearing six mares, with feathers of brocade chickens on his back, and wearing a very powerful costume.

古文：每一将各置左右前后中帅，凡五帅。
现代文：每一将下面各设置左帅、右帅、前帅、后帅和中帅，共五帅。
English: Each team will have a left, right, front, back and middle linesman, for a total of five linesmen.

古文：衣冠车服驾马，各如其方面色数。
现代文：衣帽、车饰和套车的马，各按照他们的方位的颜色和数目。
English: Hats, carriages and carriage horses, each according to the color and number of their position.

古文：将持节，称太一之使；帅持幢，称五帝之使。
现代文：五威将举着使节，称为天帝太一的使者；五帅举着旗帜，分别称为五帝的使者。
English: Wuwei will hold up the envoy, known as the messenger of the Heavenly Emperor Taichi; Wusai will hold up the banner, respectively known as the messenger of the Five Emperors.

古文：莽策命曰： 普天之下，迄于四表，靡所不至。 
现代文：王莽下策书说： 普天之下，直到四周极远的地方，没有不到达的。 
English: Wang Mang said in his strategy book: Under the whole sky, up to the farthest places around, there is nothing that cannot be reached.

古文：其东出者，至玄菟、乐浪、高句骊、夫馀；南出者，逾徼外，历益州，贬句町王为侯；西出者，至西域，尽改其王为侯；北出者，至匈奴庭，授单于印，改汉印文，去 玺 曰 章 。
现代文：那些前往东方的，到达了玄菟郡、乐浪郡、高句骊国和夫余国；前往南方的，越过了边界，经过益州郡，贬降句町王为侯；前往西方的，到达了西域，把那里的王全都改为侯；前往北方的，到达了匈奴王庭，授予单于印信，更改了汉朝印信的文字，去掉了 玺 改叫 章 。
English: Those who went to the east arrived at Xuanwu County, Lelangu County, Gaogu County and Fuyu County; those who went to the south crossed the border, passed through Yizhou County and demoted the king of the town to the prince; those who went to the west arrived at the western region and changed all the kings there to princes; those who went to the north arrived at the court of the Xiongnu King, granted the letters to the Han Dynasty, changed the characters of the Han Dynasty letters, and removed the "改叫" chapter.

古文：单于欲求故印，陈饶椎破之。语在《匈奴传》。
现代文：单于想要索取原来的印信，陈铙用椎打碎了它，这些话记载在《匈奴传》里。
English: Just wanting to retrieve the original seal, Chen Yao broke it with a spindle, and these words are recorded in the "History of the Xiongnu."

古文：单于大怒，而句町、西域后卒以此皆畔。
现代文：单于大发怒火，至于句町和西域各国后来终于因为这个缘故都背叛了。
English: Not only was there great anger, but eventually Kucho and the countries of the western region all rebelled because of this.

古文：饶还，拜为大将军，封威德子。
现代文：陈饶回来，被任命为大将军，赐封威德子。
English: When Chen Rao returned, he was appointed as a great general and granted the title of Weidetsu.

古文：冬，雷，桐华。
现代文：冬季裹，打雷，桐树开了花。
English: In the winter, when it thundered, the paulownia trees blossomed.

古文：置五威司命，中城四关将军。
现代文：设置五威司命和中城四关将军。
English: Set up a five-pronged mission and a four-pronged general in Zhongcheng.

古文：司命司上公以下，中城主十二城门。
现代文：五威司命纠察弹劾上公以下的官吏，五威中城将军掌管京城的十二座城门。
English: Wuwei's subordinates ordered to picket and impeach officials below the Shangguo, and Wuwei's Midtown General took charge of the twelve gates of the capital.

古文：策命统睦侯陈崇曰： 咨尔崇。
现代文：下策书命令统睦侯陈崇道： 唉！
English: Chen Chongdao: Alas!

古文：夫不用命者，乱之原也；大奸猾者，贼之本也；铸伪金钱者，妨宝货之道也；骄奢逾制者，凶害之端也；漏泄省中及尚书事者， 机事不密则害成 也；拜爵王庭，谢恩私门者，禄去公室，政从亡矣：凡此六条，国之纲纪。
现代文：你陈崇要知道，不遵行命令，是祸乱的根源；异常的奸诈狡猾，是阴毒的本源；铸造伪金钱，是损害货币的行为；骄横奢侈，超越制度，是邪恶的开端；泄露省中和尚书的机密，机密要事泄露了就会妨害成功；从朝廷接受了官职爵位，到私家去表示感谢，任官授爵的大权不是由朝廷掌握，政权从此衰亡啦：概括造么六条，都是国家的根本法纪。
English: You, Chen Chong, should know that not following orders is the root of evil; unusual treachery and cunning is the source of poison; minting counterfeit money is an act that damages the currency; arrogance and extravagance, transcending the system, is the beginning of evil; leaking the secrets of the provincial monk's book, leaking confidential important matters will hinder success; accepting official titles from the court and going to a private home to express gratitude, the great power of appointing officials and awarding titles is not controlled by the court, and the regime has since declined: summarizing the six articles, they are the fundamental laws and regulations of the country.

古文：是用建尔作司命， 柔亦不茹，刚亦不吐，不侮鳏寡，不畏强圉 ，帝命帅由，统睦于朝。 
现代文：因此任命你作五威司命， 软的也不吞，硬的也不吐，不欺负弱小，不畏惧强暴 ，皇帝命令你照办，在朝廷统制百官，使他们都能遵纪守法。 
English: For this reason, the emperor has appointed you to be the commander of the five forces, not to swallow what is soft, not to spit out what is hard, not to bully the weak, and not to fear violence. The emperor orders you to do as you are told, and to supervise all officials in the imperial court so that they can all abide by discipline and the law.

古文：命说符侯崔发曰：  重门击柝，以待暴客。 女作五威中城将军，中德既成，天下说符。 
现代文：命令说符侯崔发道：  关闭多层门户，夜晚巡逻警戒，以防备盗贼，你作五威中城将军，京城的治安警卫任务完成了，对全国的治安保卫工作起着榜样的作用。 
English: The order said: "Close the multi-storey portals, patrol at night to guard against thieves, you are the general of Wuwei Zhongcheng, the security guard of Beijing has completed its mission, and plays an exemplary role in the national security work.

古文：命明威侯王级曰： 绕霤之固，南当荆楚。
现代文：命令明威侯王级道： 七盘十二绕的坚固，南面当着荆、楚古国的旧地。
English: He ordered the Mingwei-Houwang Road to be laid out as follows: seven pans, twelve laps of solid ground, facing the south, and the old land of Chu Guo.

古文：女作五威前关将军，振武奋卫，明威于前。 
现代文：你作五威前关将军，发扬勇武，奋力保卫，在前面显示威严。 
English: You are the general of the Five Prefectures of Wei and Guan, displaying valor, struggling to defend, and displaying majesty in front.

古文：命尉睦侯王嘉曰： 羊头之厄，北当燕、赵。
现代文：命令尉睦侯王嘉道： 羊头山的险要，北面当着燕国、赵国的旧地。
English: Wang Jiadao, the lord of Mutsu County, gave the order: The Yangtou Mountain is very important. To the north is the old land of Yan Province and Zhao Province.

古文：女作五威后关将军，壶口捶扼，尉睦于后。 
现代文：你作五威后关将军，凭据壶口关的险要去攻击，在后面安抚平定。 
English: You are the general of the Wuwei Rear Gate, you should attack according to the danger of the Hukou Gate, and pacify and pacify in the rear.

古文：命掌威侯王奇曰： 肴、黾之险，东当郑、卫。
现代文：命令掌威侯王奇道： 崤山、渑池的险要，束面当着郑国、卫国的旧地。
English: He ordered the head of the warlord Wang Qidao: the key points of Lushan and Dianchi should be faced with the old land of Zheng and the defense of the country.

古文：女作五威左关将军，函谷批难，掌威于左。 
现代文：你作五威左关将军，扼守函谷关排除危险，在左翼执掌威权。 
English: You will act as the general of the Five Forces and the Left Gate, closely guard the Hakodate Gate to eliminate danger, and wield authority on the left.

古文：命怀羌子王福曰： 汧陇之阻，西当戎狄。
现代文：命令怀羌子王福道： 沂山、陇阪的阻塞，西面当着西戎和北狄。
English: Ordered the Huaiyanzi Wangfu Road: the blockage of Lushan and Lishan, the west is in front of Xi Rong and Beidi.

古文：女作五威右关将军，成固据守地，怀羌于右。 
现代文：你作五威右关将军，据守成固县，在右翼安抚外族。 
English: You are the general of Wuwei Uguanshan, guarding Chenggu County, and appeasing foreigners on the right wing.

古文：又遣谏大夫五十人分铸钱于郡国。
现代文：又派遣谏大夫五十人分别到各郡国铸钱。
English: In addition, Dr. Zou sent fifty people to mint money in each county and country.

古文：是岁，长安狂女子碧呼道中曰： 高皇帝大怒，趣归我国。
现代文：这一年，旦叁有个名叫碧的女疯子在大路上呼喊道： 高皇帝大发怒火，赶快把国家归还我。
English: That year, a madwoman named Bi shouted on the highway: "Emperor Gao is furious, hurry up and return the country to me."

古文：不者，九月必杀汝！ 
现代文：不然的话，到九月间一定杀死你！ 
English: If you don't, I'll kill you by September!

古文：莽收捕杀之。
现代文：王菱把她拘捕起来杀掉了。
English: Wang Ling arrested her and killed her.

古文：治者掌寇大夫陈咸自免去官。
现代文：主管官吏掌寇大夫速盛自动请求离职，丢了官。
English: The official in charge, the head of the KGB, Dr. Hayamori, automatically requested to leave his post and lost his position.

古文：真定刘都等谋举兵，发觉，皆诛。
现代文：真定国刘都等人计划起兵，被发觉了，都被处死。
English: Liu Du and others from the State of Zhending planned to raise an army, but they were discovered and all of them were executed.

古文：真定、常山大雨雹。
现代文：真定国、常山郡下大冰雹。
English: Large hailstones fell in Jinding Province and Changshan County.

古文：二年二月，赦天下。
现代文：二年二月间，宣布全国大赦。
English: In February of the following year, a national amnesty was announced.

古文：五威将帅七十二人还奏事，汉诸侯王为公者，悉上玺绶为民，无违命者。
现代文：五威将帅七十二人回来报告工作，汉朝的诸侯王去掉王号改称为公的，全都缴上印信作平民，没有违抗命令的。
English: Seventy-two generals and admirals of the Five Dynasties returned to report on their work. The princes and kings of the Han Dynasty removed their royal titles and changed their names to official ones. They all submitted their seal letters as civilians, who did not disobey orders.

古文：封将为子，帅为男。
现代文：赐封将为子爵，封帅为男爵。
English: The bestowal will be a viscount, the bestowal a baron.

古文：初设六管之令。
现代文：开始设立六项财政经济管理制度。
English: The establishment of six financial and economic management systems began.

古文：命县官酤酒，卖盐铁器，铸钱，诸采取名山大泽众物者税之。
现代文：规定由官府专卖酒，专卖食盐和铁器，铸钱，凡是开采收取大山大湖各种资源的，向他们征收赋税。
English: It was stipulated that the government should exclusively sell liquor, salt and ironware, mint money, and collect all kinds of resources from the Great Mountain Lake, and collect taxes from them.

古文：又令市官收贱卖贵，赊贷予民，收息百月三。
现代文：又规定由市官收购低价货物，出售高价货物，发放贷款给人民，按月利率百分之三收息。
English: It also stipulated that city officials should purchase low-priced goods, sell high-priced goods, issue loans to the people, and collect interest at a monthly interest rate of three percent.

古文：牺和置酒士，郡一人，乘传督酒利，禁民不得挟弩铠，徙西海。
现代文：牺和下面设置酒士，每郡一人，乘坐传车去催缴卖酒的利润，下禁令民间不准私藏弩弓和铵甲，违犯了的流放到西海郡去。
English: The sacrificial offering and the following set up a sommelier, one person per county, to take a car to collect the profits of selling alcohol, under the ban, the people were not allowed to hide the bow and armor, and the violators were banished to the West Sea County.

古文：匈奴单于求故玺，莽不与，遂寇边郡，杀略吏民。
现代文：匈奴单于索取原来的印信，王莽不给，便侵犯沿边郡县，杀戮、抢劫官吏和平民。
English: The Huns simply demanded the original seal letter, but Wang Mang refused to give it, so they invaded the counties along the border, killing and robbing officials and civilians.

古文：十一月，立国将军建奏： 西域将钦上言，九月辛已，戊己校尉中陈良、终带共贼杀校尉刁护，劫略吏士，自称废汉大将军，亡入匈奴。
现代文：十一月间，立国将军孙建报告： 西域将领但钦上报，九月辛巳，戊己校尉史陈良和终带一道杀害戊己校尉刁护，胁迫官吏和士兵，自称已被废除的汉朝的大将军，逃到匈奴去丫。
English: In November, Sun Jian, the founding general of the Republic, reported: "The general of the Western Regions, Dan Qin, has reported. In September, Lieutenant Shi Chen Lianghe, the leader of Wuxi, together with Lieutenant Shi Chen Lianghe, finally killed Lieutenant Wuxi, coerced officials and soldiers, and the great general of the Han Dynasty, who claimed to have been abolished, fled to the Xiongnu.

古文：又今月癸酉，不知何一男子遮臣建车前，自称 汉氏刘子舆，成帝下妻子也。
现代文：又本月癸酉曰，不知道哪来的一个男子拦在我孙建的车子前面，自称 汉朝刘子舆，是汉成帝的小老婆的儿子。
English: On the third day of this month, a man I don't know where he is from stopped in front of my Sun Jian's car, claiming to be Han Dynasty Liu Ziwu, the son of Emperor Han Zheng's little wife.

古文：刘氏当复，趣空宫。 
现代文：刘家应当复兴，赶快空出皇宫来！ 
English: The Liu family should be revived. Come out of the palace as soon as possible!

古文：收系男子，即常安姓武字仲。
现代文：拘禁那个男子，原来是常安人姓武名仲。
English: The detained man turned out to be a Chang'an resident surnamed Wu Mianzhong.

古文：皆逆天违命，大逆无道。
现代文：都是对抗上天，违背天命，大逆不道。
English: All of them are against Heaven, against the Mandate of Heaven, and against the Way.

古文：请论仲及陈良等亲属当坐者。
现代文：请判处武仲和陈良等人应当亲属连坐受罚。
English: Please sentence Wu Zhong and Chen Liang and the others to be punished together with their relatives.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏章被批准了。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：汉氏高皇帝比著戒云，罢吏卒，为宾食，诚欲承天心，全子孙也。
现代文：汉朝高皇帝近来明白告诫道，应当撤销守卫汉朝宗庙的官吏和士兵，愿意作为新朝宗庙中的宾客分享祭祀。他的确是想要顺从天意，保全子孙。
English: Emperor Gao of the Han Dynasty recently clearly warned that the officials and soldiers guarding the Han Dynasty's ancestral temple should be removed, and he was willing to share the sacrificial rites as a guest in the new dynasty's ancestral temple. He really wanted to obey the will of heaven and protect his children and grandchildren.

古文：其宗庙不当在常安城中，及诸刘为诸侯者当与汉俱废。
现代文：他们的宗庙不应当留在长安城中，以及所有刘姓皇族作诸侯的应当随着汉朝一道被废除。
English: Their ancestral temple should not remain in Chang'an City, and all princes of the imperial family with the surname Liu should be abolished together with the Han Dynasty.

古文：陛下至仁，久未定。
现代文：您最仁慈，以致很久没有决定下来。
English: You are so kind that you have not decided to leave for a long time.

古文：前故安众侯刘崇、徐乡侯刘快、陵乡侯刘曾、扶恩侯刘贵等更聚众谋反。
现代文：以前原安众侯刘崇、徐乡侯刘快、陵乡侯刘曾和扶恩侯刘贵等人连续聚集军队，图谋反叛。
English: In the past, Liu Chong, Xuxiang Hou Liu Kai, Lingxiang Hou Liu Zeng and Fu'en Hou Liu Gui continuously gathered armies and plotted to rebel.

古文：今狂狡之虏或妄自称亡汉将军，或称成帝子子舆，至犯夷灭，连未止者，此圣恩不蚤绝其萌牙故也。
现代文：现在一些狂妄狡猾的家伙，有的狂妄地自称是被灭亡的汉朝的将军，有的冒称汉成帝的儿子刘子舆，直到犯下杀身减族的罪行，接连没有停止，造就是由于您的恩德以致没有及早杜绝他们的萌芽之时的缘故。
English: Now some arrogant and cunning fellows, some of whom arrogantly claimed to be generals of the perished Han Dynasty, and some of whom pretended to be Liu Ziyou, the son of Han Chengdi, did not stop until they committed the crime of killing and reducing the ethnic group. This was due to your grace that they did not stop their budding early.

古文：芳愚以为汉高皇帝为新室宾，享食明堂。
现代文：我愚蠢地认为汉高帝可以作为新朝的国宾，在明堂享受祭祀。
English: I foolishly thought that Emperor Hango could enjoy the sacrificial rites at Myeongdong as a state guest of the new dynasty.

古文：成帝，异姓之兄弟；平帝，婿也；皆不宜复入其庙。
现代文：汉成帝是您的姑表兄弟，汉平帝是您的女婿，都不应当再进入他们的祠庙。
English: Emperor Hancheng is your aunt's cousin, Emperor Hanping is your son-in-law, neither of them should enter their ancestral temple again.

古文：元帝与皇太后为体，圣恩所隆，礼亦宜之。
现代文：汉元帝跟皇太后成为夫妇一体，是您的恩情所要尊崇的，根据礼制也适合那样对待。
English: Emperor Han Yuan and Empress Dowager have become a married couple, which is what you should respect, and it is also appropriate to treat them that way according to the etiquette.

古文：臣请汉氏诸庙在京师者皆罢。诸刘为诸侯者，以户多少就五等之差；其为吏者皆罢，待除于家。
现代文：我请求您全部废除设在京城的汉朝各祠庙，所有作诸侯的刘姓皇族，根据封户的多少来套公侯伯子男的等级；那些做官吏的都给予罢免，在家裹等待授予新官职。
English: I request you to abolish all the temples and shrines of the Han Dynasty that are located in Beijing. All the princes of the imperial family with the surname of Liu should be ranked according to the number of households; those who are government officials should be dismissed and wait at home to be awarded new official positions.

古文：上当天心，称高皇帝神灵，塞狂狡之萌。 
现代文：这样办，对上符合天意，符合汉高帝神灵的心愿，杜绝狂妄狡猾思想的萌芽。 
English: In this way, it is in line with the will of heaven, in line with the wishes of the gods of the Emperor of the Han Dynasty, and eliminates the sprouting of arrogant and cunning thoughts.

古文：莽曰： 可。
现代文：王莽说： 可以。
English: Wang Mang said: Yes.

古文：嘉新公国师以符命为予四辅，明务侯刘龚、率礼侯刘嘉等凡三十二人皆知天命，或献天符，或贡昌言，或捕告反虏，厥功茂焉。
现代文：嘉新公国师根据符命担任我的四辅，明德侯刘龚、率礼侯刘嘉等三十二人都懂得天命，有的进献天符，有的提出好意见，有的拘捕、告发反贼，他们的功劳巨大。
English: Jiaxin Gongguoshi served as my four assistants according to the mission of the charms, and the thirty-two people including Mingde Hou Liu Yao and the leader of the ceremony, Hou Liu Jia, understood the mission of heaven. Some presented the charms, some put forward good opinions, and some arrested and reported the anti-thieves. Their merits are huge.

古文：诸刘与三十二人同宗共祖者勿罢，赐姓曰王。 
现代文：各刘姓皇族跟这三十二人同宗共祖的不罢免，赏赐他们姓王。 
English: Each member of the imperial family with the surname of Liu will not renounce the same ancestor as these thirty-two people, and will reward them with the surname of Wang.

古文：唯国师以女配莽子，故不赐姓。
现代文：衹有国师把女儿配给了王莽的儿子，所以不赐姓。
English: Zou You Guosi gave his daughter to Wang Mangluo's son, so he did not give her a surname.

古文：改定安太后号曰 黄皇室主 ，绝之于汉也。
现代文：更改定安太后的称号叫黄皇室主，表明她跟汉朝断绝了关系。
English: The change of the title of the Dowager Empress Dowager An was called the Yellow Royal Master, indicating that she had severed ties with the Han Dynasty.

古文：冬十二月，雷。
现代文：冬季十二月间，打雷。
English: In winter, in December, there is thunder.

古文：更名匈奴单于曰 降奴服于。 
现代文：把匈奴单于的名称改叫降奴服于。
English: He changed the name of Xiongnu Zhanyu to Xiongnu Zhubei.

古文：莽曰： 降奴服于知威侮五行，背畔四条，侵犯西域，延及边垂，为元元害，罪当夷灭。
现代文：王莽说： 降奴服于囊知牙斯侮辱国家尊严，背叛四条协议，侵犯西域，蔓延到了我国的边境，给百姓造成了危害，所犯的罪行应当杀身灭族。
English: Wang Mang said: "To surrender and submit to Zanzibaris is an insult to the national dignity, a betrayal of the four agreements, a violation of the western region, and has spread to the border of our country, causing harm to the people. The crimes committed should be killed to exterminate the tribe."

古文：命遣立国将军孙建等凡十二将，十道并出，共行皇天之威，罚于知之身。
现代文：派遣立国将军孙建等共十二位将领，分兵十路并出，共同昭示皇天之威，惩罚囊知牙斯本人。
English: A total of twelve generals, including the founding general Sun Jian, were dispatched, and ten detachments of soldiers were sent out simultaneously, to jointly demonstrate the might of the emperor and punish Zacchaeus himself.

古文：惟知先祖故呼韩邪单于稽侯犭册累世忠孝，保塞守徼，不忍以一知之罪，灭稽侯犭册之世。
现代文：想到囊知牙斯的先祖原呼韩邪单于稽侯狐几代忠孝，保卫边界险要地方，不忍心因为一个囊知牙斯的罪行，就消灭稽侯狮的后代。
English: It comes to mind that the ancestors of the Cangzhi Yasi originally called Han Yasi to be loyal and filial to the Cangzhi Yasi for several generations, to defend the border of a dangerous place, and could not bear to destroy the descendants of the Cangzhi Yasi because of the crime of a Cangzhi Yasi.

古文：今分匈奴国土人民以为十五，立稽侯犭册子孙十五人为单于。
现代文：现在决定把匈奴的国土和人民分为十五国，立稽侯珊的十五个子孙作单于。
English: Now it was decided to divide the land and people of the Xiongnu into fifteen countries, and the fifteen descendants of the Xiongnu were singled out.

古文：遣中郎将蔺苞、戴级驰塞下，召拜当为单于者。
现代文：派遣中郎将蔺苞、戴级飞快前往边界，召集、赐封那些应当作单于的人。
English: He dispatched a middle-ranking official to quickly go to the border to gather and seal those who should be isolated.

古文：诸匈奴人当坐虏知之法者，皆赦除之 。
现代文：所有应当跟叛虏囊知牙斯犯法连坐判罪的匈奴人都赦免他们。 
English: The Huns pardoned all those who should have been sentenced for breaking the law together with the rebel Cossacks.

古文：遣五威将军苗、虎贲将军王况出五原，厌难将军陈钦、震狄将军王巡出云中，振武将军王嘉、平狄将军王萌出代郡，相威将军李棽、镇远将军李翁出西河，诛貉将军阳俊、讨秽将军严尤出渔阳，奋武将军王骏、定胡将军王晏出张掖，及偏裨以下百八十人。
现代文：派遣五威将军苗欣和虎贲将军王况从五原郡出击，厌难将军陈钦和震狄将军王巡从云中郡出击，振武将军王嘉和平狄将军王萌从代郡出击，相威将军李琴和镇远将军李翁从西河郡出击，诛貉将军阳俊和讨秽将军严尤从渔阳郡出击，奋武将军王骏和定胡将军王晏从张掖郡出击，以及偏将裨将以下军官共一百八十人。
English: He dispatched Wuwei General Miao Xin and Tigress General Wang Quanzhang to attack from Wuyuan County, Boredom General Chen Qin and Shendi General Wang Jun to attack from Yunzhong County, Zhenwu General Wang Jia and Pingdi General Wang Meng to attack from Dai County, Xiangwei General Li Qin and Zhenyuan General Li On to attack from Xihe County, Zhai General Yang Jun and Obscene General Yan You to attack from Yuyang County, and Zhenwu General Wang Qin and Dinghu General Wang Qin to attack from Zhangye County, as well as the following officers, a total of one hundred and eighty people.

古文：募天下囚徒、丁男、甲卒三十万人，转众郡委输五大夫衣裘、兵器、粮食，长吏送自负海江淮至北边，使者驰传督趣，以军兴法从事，天下骚动。
现代文：召集全国监狱犯人、壮丁和武装士兵三十万人，传令各郡转运军服皮衣、兵器和粮食，县级官吏从沿海长江、淮河流域运送到北部边郡，使者乘坐传车监督催促，按战争时暂行法令办事，全国骚动。
English: He summoned 300,000 prisoners, able-bodied men and armed soldiers from prisons across the country, ordered all counties to transfer military uniforms, furs, weapons and grain, transported county-level officials from the coastal Yangtze River and Huaihe River basin to the northern border counties, and sent envoys to supervise and urge them to act in accordance with the temporary laws and regulations during the war. The whole country was in turmoil.

古文：先至者屯边郡，须皆具乃同时出。
现代文：先到达的部队在边郡驻扎，要等全部到齐才同时出击。
English: The troops that arrived first were stationed in the border county, and they had to wait until they were all together before they could attack at the same time.

古文：莽以钱币讫不行，复下书曰： 民以食为命，以货为资，是以八政以食为首。
现代文：王莽因为钱币一直不能流通，又下文告说： 人民把粮食看作性命，把物资和金钱看作生活的需要，因此八项施政方针把粮食摆在首位。
English: Wang Mang, because coins have not been able to circulate, also announced below: The people regard food as life, and materials and money as the necessities of life. Therefore, the eight policy guidelines put food first.

古文：宝货皆重则小用不给，皆轻则僦载烦费，轻重大小各有差品，则用便而民乐。 
现代文：货币都是贵重的，那么小使用就不方便，都是轻贱的，那么运输装载就麻烦费事，轻的、重的、大的、小的各有等级，那么使用方便，人民就欢迎。 
English: All currencies are precious, so it is inconvenient to use them if they are too small, and all are cheap and light, so it is troublesome and time-consuming to transport and load them. Light, heavy, large, and small all have their own grades, so if they are convenient to use, people will welcome them.

古文：于是造宝货五品，语在《食货志》。
现代文：于是制造货币五种，这些话记载在《食货志》裹面。
English: As a result, five kinds of money were made, and these words are recorded in the "Shopping Guide" for the noodles.

古文：百姓不从，但行小大钱二品而已。
现代文：百姓不依从，衹通用小钱和大钱两种而已。
English: The people do not obey, and the two kinds of small money and big money are used.

古文：盗铸钱者不可禁，乃重其法，一家铸钱，五家坐之，没入为奴婢。
现代文：私自铸钱的无法禁止，便加重逭方面的刑法，一家铸钱，邻居五家跟着连坐，没收这些人到宫府作奴婢。
English: Since it was impossible to prohibit the private minting of money, they increased the punishment for the crime of usury. One family would mint money, and five neighboring families would sit together, confiscating these people to work as slaves in the palace.

古文：吏民出入，持布钱以副符传，不持者，厨传勿舍，关津苛留。
现代文：官吏和人民出外和回来，要携带布钱作为通行证的副证，对于不携带的人，馆舍不让他住宿，关卡和渡口要盘问留难。
English: Government officials and the people who go abroad and come back must carry cloth money as a supplement to the pass. For those who do not carry it, the buildings will not allow him to stay, and it will be difficult to cross-examine at checkpoints and ferries.

古文：公卿皆持以入宫殿门，欲以重而行之。
现代文：公卿大臣都要携带它才能进宫殿门，想要用这样的办法提高它的身价从而得以流通。
English: The Prince of Wales and the Prime Minister had to carry it to enter the palace gates, and they wanted to use this method to increase its value so that it could circulate.

古文：是时，争为符命封侯，其不为者相戏曰： 独无天帝除书乎？ 
现代文：这时人们争着制作符命以求封侯，那些没有搞过的人互相开玩笑说： 你独独没有天帝的任命状吗？ 
English: At this time, people were competing to make life-signs in order to obtain a title of nobility, and those who had not done so joked with each other, saying: Do you alone not have the appointment certificate of the Heavenly Emperor?

古文：司命陈崇白莽曰： 此开奸臣作福之路而乱天命，宜绝其原。 
现代文：五威司命陈崇报告王莽道： 这是打开了奸臣追求利禄的道路，而且混乱了天命，应当断绝这个根源。 
English: Wang Mang said, "This has opened the way for the treacherous vassal to pursue Li Luo, and it has confused the Mandate of Heaven. This root cause should be cut off."

古文：莽亦厌之，遂使尚书大夫赵并验治，非五威将率所班，皆下狱。
现代文：王莽也讨厌这种事，便让尚书大夫趟并去检查处理，不是五威将帅所颁布的符命，制作的人都关进监狱。
English: Wang Mang also hated this kind of thing, so he asked Shang Shufu to go and check and deal with it. It was not the fate decreed by Wu Wei, the commander-in-chief, and those who made it were put in prison.

古文：初，甄丰、刘歆、王舜为莽腹心，倡导在位，褒扬功德； 安汉 、 宰衡 之号及封莽母、两子、兄子，皆丰等所共谋，而丰、舜、歆亦受其赐，并富贵矣，非复欲令莽居摄也。
现代文：起初，甄丰、刘歆和王舜是王莽的心腹。首先提议让王莽据有高位大权，赞美表彰他的功德； 安汉公 和 宰衡 的称号以及赐封王莽的母亲、两个儿子和侄儿，都是甄丰等人所共策划的，从而甄丰、王舜和刘歆也得到了他的恩惠，都获得了名利，没有再想要让王莽居位摄政。
English: At first, Zhenfeng, Liu Wei and Wang Wei were Wang Mang's confidants. First, they proposed that Wang Mang be given high-ranking power, praised and commended his merits; the titles of An Han Gong and Zai Heng, as well as the title of Wang Mang's mother, two sons and nephew, were all planned by Zhenfeng and others. As a result, Zhenfeng, Wang Wei and Liu Wei also received his favor, gained fame and fortune, and no longer wanted to let Wang Mang be the regent.

古文：居摄之萌，出于泉陵侯刘庆、前煇光谢嚣、长安令田终术。
现代文：居位摄政的起端，来自泉陵侯刘庆、前辉光谢嚣和长安令田终术。
English: The beginning of the regency came from Liu Qing, the lord of Quanling, Xie Guang, and Chang'an Ling Tian.

古文：莽羽翼已成，意欲称摄。
现代文：王莽的羽毛已经丰满，内心想要代掌政权。
English: Wang Mang's feathers are already plump, and he wants to take the reins of power.

古文：丰等承顺其意，莽辄复封舜、歆两子及丰孙。
现代文：甄丰等人顺从了他的意图，王莽就再封赏了王舜和刘歆的两个儿子以及甄丰的孙子。
English: Zhenfeng and others complied with his intention, and Wang Mang then rewarded the two sons of Wang Yao and Liu Yao, as well as Zhenfeng's grandson.

古文：丰等爵位已盛，心意既满，又实畏汉宗室、天下豪桀。
现代文：甄丰等人爵位已经尊显，欲望已经满足，又实在害怕汉朝皇族和天下豪杰之士。
English: Zhenfeng and others' titles have been honored, their desires have been satisfied, and they are really afraid of the Han Dynasty imperial family and the world's heroes.

古文：而疏远欲进者，并作符命，莽遂据以即真，舜、歆内惧而已。
现代文：而那些统治集团的外围人物想要向上爬的，纷纷制作符命，王莽便依靠这些势力正式登上皇位，王舜和刘歆内心恐惧而已。
English: Those on the periphery of the ruling group, who wanted to climb up the ladder, made a series of omens, and Wang Mang relied on these forces to officially ascend to the throne. Wang Yao and Liu Yao were just afraid.

古文：丰素刚强，莽觉其不说，故徙大阿、右拂、大司空丰、托符命文，为更始将军，与卖饼儿王盛同列。
现代文：甄丰一向刚强，王莽察觉他不高兴，所以假藉符命文辞，把担任大阿、右拂、大司空的甄丰调任更始将军，让他跟卖饼儿的王盛地位相等。
English: Zhenfeng had always been tough, and Wang Mang sensed that he was not happy, so he took the opportunity to transfer Zhenfeng, who had served as Daa, Right Whisk, and Daisikai, to be the new general, giving him the same status as Wang Sheng, who sold cakes.

古文：丰父子默默。
现代文：甄丰父子默不吭声。
English: Zhenfeng and his son remained silent.

古文：时子寻为侍中京兆大君茂德侯，即作符命，言新室当分陕，立二伯，以丰为右伯，太傅平晏为左伯，如周、召故事。
现代文：这时甄丰的儿子甄寻任职侍中京兆大尹，封爵茂德侯，便制作符命，说新朝应当把京城附近地方以陕县为界分开治理，设立两个地方长官，任命甄丰作右伯，太傅平晏作左伯，仿照周公、召公的成例。
English: At this time, Zhenfeng's son, Zhenxing, who served as the attendant of the Beijing Zhaodaiyin and was given the title of Maodehou, made a decree, saying that the new dynasty should govern the places near the capital separately with Shaanxi as the boundary, set up two local governors, and appoint Zhenfeng as the right brother and Taifu Pingyao as the left brother, following the example of Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong.

古文：莽即从之，拜丰为右伯。
现代文：王莽就照着这样办了，授任甄丰作右伯。
English: Wang Mang did as he was told and appointed Zhenfeng as his right-hand man.

古文：当述职西出，未行，寻复作符命，言故汉氏平帝后黄皇室主为寻之妻。
现代文：应当任职西行，还没有起行，甄寻又制作了一道符命，说原汉朝平帝的皇后黄皇室主是甄寻的妻子。
English: She was supposed to travel to the West, but before she left, Zhenxing made another omen, saying that the head of the Huang royal family, the queen of the former Han Dynasty, was Zhenxing's wife.

古文：莽以诈立，心疑大臣怨谤，欲震威以惧下，因是发怒曰： 黄皇室主天下母，此何谓也！ 
现代文：王莽靠骗术登上皇位，心裹怀疑大臣怨恨诽谤，正想要显示威严来慑服臣下，因此发怒说： 黄皇室主是国母，说足甄寻的妻子，这是什么话！ 
English: Wang Mang ascended the throne by trickery. He was suspicious of the minister's grudge and slander. He was trying to show majesty to deter his subordinates. Therefore, he became angry and said: The head of the Huang royal family is the mother of the country, the wife of the foot searcher, what is this word!

古文：收捕寻。
现代文：便下命令拘捕甄寻。
English: He then ordered the arrest of Yan Xiang.

古文：寻亡，丰自杀。
现代文：甄寻逃跑了，甄丰自杀。
English: Zhenxing ran away and Zhenfeng committed suicide.

古文：寻随方士入华山，岁余捕得，辞连国师公歆子侍中东通灵将、五司大夫隆威侯棻，棻弟右曹长水校尉伐虏侯泳，大司空邑弟左关将军掌威侯奇，及歆门人侍中骑都尉丁隆等，牵引公卿党亲列侯以下，死者数百人。
现代文：甄寻跟着江湖骗子躲进了华山，过了一年多才捉到，供词牵涉到国师公刘歆的儿子侍中东通灵将、五司大夫隆威侯刘茉，刘菜的弟弟右曹长水校尉伐虏侯刘泳，大司空王邑的弟弟左关将军掌威侯王奇，以及刘歆的学生侍中骑都尉丁隆等人，牵连公卿、亲族、列侯以下，死的有几百人。
English: Zhenxu followed the charlatan Rong into Huashan, and it took more than a year to catch him. The confessions implicated the son of the national teacher Liu Zhen, the attendant of the Middle East channeling general, the fifth division doctor Long Wei Hou Liu Miao, the brother of Liu Cai, the right Cao Changshui, the captain Liu Yong, the brother of the chief officer Kuo Wangyi, the general of the left pass, the attendant Hou Wang Qi, and the student of Liu Zhen, the cavalry lieutenant Ding Long, and so on, involving the court noble, relatives, and the feudal lords and below, with hundreds of people

古文：寻手理有 天子 字，莽解其臂入视之，曰： 此一大子也，或曰一六子也。
现代文：甄寻手上的纹理有 天子 的字样，王莽割下他的胳膊到皇宫裹面观察它，说道： 这是 一大子 ，或为 一六子 。
English: The texture on Yan Xun's hand had the words "Son of Heaven" on it. Wang Mang cut off his arm, went to the palace, wrapped his face around it, and observed it. He said, "This is a big son, or a six-year-old son."

古文：六者，戮也。明寻父子当戮死也。 
现代文：六，就是戮，这表明甄寻父子应当被杀死。 
English: Sixth, is killing, which indicates that Yan Xing and his son should be killed.

古文：乃流棻于幽州，放寻于三危，殛隆于羽山，皆驿车载其尸传致云。
现代文：于是把刘菜流放到幽州，把甄寻驱逐到三危，把丁隆杀死在羽山，都是用驿站的传车装着他们的尸体递送去的。
English: As a result, Liu Cai was exiled to Yuzhou, Zhen Xiang was banished to Sanxia, and Ding Long was killed in Hasan. All of them were transported with their dead bodies by train.

古文：莽为人侈口蹶顄，露眼赤精，大声而嘶。
现代文：王莽相貌是口腔大，下巴短，眼球凸出，晶体血红，声音粗大沙哑。
English: Wang Mang's appearance is a large mouth, short chin, protruding eyeballs, blood-red crystals, and his voice is thick and hoarse.

古文：长七尺五寸，好厚履高冠，以氂装衣，反膺高视，瞰临左右。
现代文：他身高七尺五寸，喜欢穿厚底鞋子，戴高帽子，穿硬毛絮衣，挺胸仰视，远远地向下看左右两边。
English: He is seven feet five inches tall, likes to wear thick-soled shoes, wear a tall hat, wear a stiff woolen coat, look up with his chest up, and look down to the left and right from a distance.

古文：是时，有用方技待诏黄门者，或问以莽形貌，待诏曰： 莽所谓鸱目虎吻豺狼之声者也，故能食人，亦当为人所食。 
现代文：这时有个凭医术在黄门等候任用的人，有人间他王莽的相貌，那个等候任用的人说： 王莽是一个人们所说的眼睛像猫头鹰，嘴巴像老虎，声音像豺狼的人，所以能够吃人，将来也会被别人吃掉。 
English: At this time, there was a man who was waiting for an appointment at the Yellow Gate by virtue of his medical skills. Some people said that he looked like Wang Mang. The man who was waiting for an appointment said: Wang Mang is what people call a man with eyes like an owl, a mouth like a tiger, and a voice like a jackal, so he can eat people and will be eaten by others in the future.

古文：问者告之，莽诛灭待诏，而封告者。
现代文：发问的人告发了这件事，王莽处死了那个等候任用的人，封赏了那个告发的人。
English: The questioner reported the matter. Wang Mang executed the person who was waiting for the appointment and rewarded the person who reported the matter.

古文：后常翳云母屏面，非亲近莫得见也。
现代文：他以后经常用云母屏面遮掩自己，不是亲近的不能见他。
English: From then on, he often covered himself with a mica screen, and those who were not close to him could not see him.

古文：是岁，以初睦侯姚恂为宁始将军。
现代文：这一年，任命初睦侯姚恂作宁始将军。
English: In the same year, Hatsumitsu Hou Yao Jun was appointed as the first general of Ningshi.

古文：三年，莽曰： 百官改更，职事分移，律令仪法，未及悉定，且因汉律令仪法以从事。
现代文：三年，王莽说道： 百官的名称有更改，职务有变动，法律制度和礼仪规则，没有来得及全部制定，权且沿袭汉朝的法律制度和礼仪规则来办事。
English: In three years, Wang Mang said: The names of the officials have changed, the positions have changed, the legal system and etiquette rules have not been fully formulated, and the authority has followed the legal system and etiquette rules of the Han Dynasty.

古文：令公卿、大夫、诸侯、二千石举吏民有德行通政事能言语明文学者各一人，诣王路四门。
现代文：着令公卿大夫、诸侯、二千石级官吏推举官吏或平民中具有道德修养、熟悉政策法令、擅长辞令、精通文献典籍的专家各一人，前来王路四门。 
English: Court nobles, lords, and 2,000-koku-class officials were invited to nominate one official or civilian with moral cultivation, familiar with policies and laws, good at rhetoric, and proficient in literature and classics.

古文：遣尚书大夫赵并使劳北边，还言五原北假膏壤殖谷，异时常置田官。
现代文：派遣尚书大夫趟并出使慰劳北方边郡驻军，回来说五原郡北假地区土壤肥沃，能够种植谷物，从前经常设置管理农田的官吏。
English: He dispatched Dr. Shang Shuxu to visit and comfort the troops stationed in Beilun County, and returned to say that the soil in Beilun District of Wuhuan County is fertile and can grow grain. In the past, officials were often set up to manage farmland.

古文：乃以并为田禾将军，以戍卒屯田北假，以助军粮。
现代文：便任命赵并作田禾将军，发动驻防士兵在北假地区开垦耕种田地，用来资助军粮。
English: He then appointed Zhao Jian as General Tianhe, and sent soldiers to reclaim and cultivate fields in the North Forbidden Area, which was used to subsidize military rations.

古文：是时，诸将在边，须大众集，吏士放纵，而内郡愁于征发，民弃城郭流亡为盗贼，并州、平州尤甚。
现代文：这时各将领驻扎边境，等待各路大军齐集，军官和士兵胡作非为，而内地各郡正因官府征发人员和物资弄得愁苦不堪，以致人民抛弃家园去流亡作盗贼，并州和平州尤其厉害。
English: At this time, the generals were stationed at the border, waiting for the armies of all directions to gather, the officers and soldiers were misbehaving, and the counties in the inland were suffering from the government's recruitment and dispatch of personnel and materials, so that the people abandoned their homes and went into exile as thieves, and the state of peace was particularly severe.

古文：莽令七公六卿号皆兼称将军，遣著武将军逮并等填名都，中郎将、绣衣执法各五十五人，分填缘边大郡，督大奸猾擅弄兵者，皆便为奸于外，挠乱州郡，货赂为市，侵渔百姓。
现代文：王莽命令七公六卿的官号都要兼称将军，派遣着武将军逯并等人镇守著名的城市，派遣中郎将和绣衣执法各五十五人，分别镇守靠边境的大郡，监察擅动干戈举兵作乱的大奸之徒，而他们便都在外地干坏事，扰乱州郡，贿赂像做买卖一样公开交易，掠夺百姓的财物。
English: Wang Mang ordered that the official titles of the seven princes and six nobles should also be called generals, dispatched military generals and others to guard famous cities, dispatched fifty-five middlemen and embroidered law enforcement officers to guard large counties near the border, and monitored the great traitors who arbitrarily waged war and raised troops to cause turmoil. And they all did bad things in other places, disturbed counties and states, traded bribes openly like doing business, and plundered the people's property.

古文：莽下书曰： 虏知罪当夷灭，故遣猛将分十二部，将同时出，一举而决绝之矣。
现代文：王莽下文告说： 匈奴囊知牙斯所犯罪行应当杀身灭族，所以派遣猛将分为十二路大军，将要同时出击，一举把他们消灭干净。
English: Wang Mang said in the following: The crimes committed by the Huns should kill and exterminate the people, so the dispatch of the Mongols will be divided into twelve armies, which will attack at the same time and wipe them out at one stroke.

古文：内置司命军正，外设军监十有二人，诚欲以司不奉命，令军人咸正也。
现代文：朝廷设置司命军正，各路大军设置军监十二二人，本来想要靠他们来监察不遵行命令的现象，让全体军人都能够行为正当。
English: The imperial court set up the Simei Junzheng, and the various armies set up twelve military inspectors. Originally, they wanted to rely on them to monitor the phenomenon of non-compliance with orders, so that all soldiers could behave properly.

古文：今则不然，各为权势，恐猲良民，妄封人颈，得钱者去。
现代文：现在却不是这个样子，每每玩弄权势，恐吓善良的老百姓，胆大妄为，用锁链系着他们的脖子，强迫他们作奴隶，勒索到了金钱的才给取下。
English: Now, however, it is not like that. They often play with power, intimidate the good people, and act recklessly. They tie chains around their necks, force them to be slaves, and only take them off when they have extorted money.

古文：毒蠚并作，农民离散。
现代文：灾难一齐发生，以致农民流离失所。
English: The disasters came at the same time, leading to the displacement of farmers.

古文：司监若此，可谓称不？
现代文：司命军正和军监履行职责像这个样子，可以说得上称职吗？
English: Is it fair to say that the secretary of the general staff of the armed forces is performing his duties with the military overseer like this?

古文：自今以来，敢犯此者，辄捕系，以名闻。 
现代文：自今以后，胆敢再犯这类罪行的，就逮捕监禁，把名字报上来。 
English: From now on, if anyone dares to commit such crimes again, they will be arrested and imprisoned, and their names will be reported.

古文：然犹放纵自若。
现代文：然而还是照样胡作非为。
English: However, he still misbehaved.

古文：而蔺苞、戴级到塞下，招诱单于弟咸、咸子登入塞，胁拜咸为孝单于，赐黄金千斤，锦绣甚多，遣去；将登至长安，拜为顺单于，留邸。
现代文：蔺苞和戴级到达边界，引诱单于的弟弟咸及咸的儿子登侵入边境，强迫赐封咸为孝单于，赏赐黄金一千斤，高级绸缎很多，打发回去；把登带到长安，赐封他为顺单于，留在外宾馆舍。
English: Zou and Dai reached the border, lured Shan Yu's younger brother Xian and Xian's son Deng into invading the border, forced Xian to be granted the title of filial son of Shan Yu, awarded a thousand pounds of gold and a lot of high-grade silk and silk, and sent back; took Deng to Chang'an, granted him the title of Shun Xian Yu, and stayed in a foreign hotel.

古文：太师王舜自莽篡位后病悸，浸剧，死。
现代文：太师王舜自从王莽窃取王位以后害了心悸病，逐渐加剧，死了。
English: After Wang Mang stole the throne, Grand Master Wang Yao suffered from heart palpitations, which gradually worsened, and died.

古文：莽曰： 昔齐太公以淑德累世，为周氏太师，盖予之所监也。
现代文：王莽说： 从前齐太公靠着善良美好的德行流传许多代，作周朝的太师，本来是我所取法的。
English: Wang Mang said: Once upon a time, Qi Taigong relied on good and beautiful virtues to spread for many generations. To be the Taishi of the Zhou Dynasty was originally what I took.

古文：其以舜子延袭父爵，为安新公，延弟褒新侯匡为太师将军，永为新室辅。 
现代文：应当让王舜的儿子王延继承父亲的爵位，为安新公，王延的弟弟褒新侯王匡担任太师将军，世代作新朝的辅佐。 
English: Wang Yan, the son of Wang Xuan, should be allowed to inherit his father's title, and become An Xin Gong. Wang Yan's younger brother, Bo Xin Hou Wang Kuang, should serve as Grand Master General, and be an assistant to the new dynasty for generations.

古文：为太子置师友各四人，秩以大夫。
现代文：给太子设置师和友各四人，俸禄比照大夫。
English: The prince was assigned four teachers and four friends, with a salary equivalent to that of a doctor.

古文：以故大司徒马宫为师疑，故少府宗伯凤为傅丞，博士袁圣为阿辅，京兆尹王嘉为保拂，是为四师；故尚书令唐林为胥附，博士李充为奔走，谏大夫赵襄为先后，中郎将廉丹为御侮，是为四友。
现代文：任命原大司徒马宫作师疑，原少府宗伯凤作傅丞，博士袁圣作阿辅，京兆尹王嘉作保拂，这是四师；原尚书令唐林作胥附，博士李充作奔走，谏大夫趟襄作先后，中郎将廉丹作御侮，这是四友。
English: The appointment of the former grandmaster Tu Ma Gong as the teacher suspect, the former minor prefect Zong Bo Feng as the chief, the doctor Yuan Sheng as the assistant, and the prince Jing Zhao Yin Wang Jia as the guardian, these are the four divisions; the former Shang Shuling Tanglin as the assistant, the doctor Li Cong as the running, the doctor Zong Bo Feng as the traveling, and the middle brother will be Li Dan as the insult, these are the four friends.

古文：又置师友祭酒及侍中、谏议、《六经》祭酒各一人，凡九祭酒，秩上卿。
现代文：又设置师友祭酒和侍中祭酒、谏议祭酒以及《六经》祭酒各一人，共九个祭酒，俸禄比照上卿。
English: In addition, there will be one person each of the master's and friend's sacrificial wine, the attendant's sacrificial wine, the eulogy sacrificial wine, and the "Six Classics" sacrificial wine, for a total of nine sacrificial wines, and the salary will be commensurate with the high rank.

古文：琅邪左咸为讲《春秋》、颍川满昌为讲《诗》、长安国由为讲《易》、平阳唐昌为讲《书》、沛郡陈咸为讲《礼》、崔发为讲《乐》祭酒。
现代文：琅邪郡人左咸作讲《春秋》祭酒，颖川郡人满昌作讲《诗经》祭酒，长安人国由作讲《易经》祭酒，平阳县人唐昌作讲《书经》祭酒，沛郡人陈咸作讲《礼经》祭酒，崔发作讲《乐经》祭酒。
English: Zuo Xian from Yuya County made the "Spring and Autumn" sacrificial wine, Manchang from Yingchuan County made the "Song and Song" sacrificial wine, Guo Yu from Chang'an made the "I Ching" sacrificial wine, Tang Chang from Pingyang County made the "Book and Song" sacrificial wine, Chen Xian from Pei County made the "Rite and Song" sacrificial wine, and Cui Hui made the "Music and Song" sacrificial wine.

古文：遣谒者持安车印绶，即拜楚国龚胜为太子师友祭酒，胜不应征，不食而死。
现代文：派遣传达官携带坐车和印信，就地授任楚国人龚胜作太子师友祭酒，龚胜不肯接受任命，绝食死了。
English: A messenger was dispatched with a car and a stamped letter, and the local people of Chuxing were appointed to make the prince's teacher and friend sacrificial wine, but they refused to accept the appointment and went on a hunger strike.

古文：宁始将军姚恂免，侍中、崇禄侯孔永为宁始将军。
现代文：宁始将军姚恂免职，侍中崇禄侯孔永担任宁始将军。
English: The general of Ningshi, Yao Jun, was dismissed, and the chamberlain, Chonglu Hou Kongyong, became the general of Ningshi.

古文：是岁，池阳县有小人景，长尺余，或乘车马，或步行，操持万物，小大各相称，三日止。
现代文：这一年，池阳县出现小人影子，高一尺多，有的乘坐车马，有的步行，拿着各种各样的器物，器物的大小跟人影正好配合得上，三天才停止。
English: This year, a shadowy little man appeared in Chiyang County. He was more than a foot tall, sometimes riding in a carriage, sometimes on foot, holding a variety of objects. The size of the objects matched the shadow perfectly, and he did not stop for three days.

古文：濒河郡蝗生。
现代文：沿黄河各郡出现了蝗虫。
English: Locusts have appeared in counties along the Yellow River.

古文：河决魏郡，泛清河以东数郡。
现代文：黄河在魏郡境内决口，泛滥清河郡以束几郡。
English: The Yellow River burst its banks in Wei County, flooding Qinghe County and several counties.

古文：先是，莽恐河决为元城冢墓害。
现代文：原先，王莽恐怕黄河决口成为元城县他的祖宗坟墓的灾害。
English: Originally, Wang Mang feared that the mouth of the Yellow River would become a disaster for his ancestor's grave in Yuancheng County.

古文：及决东去，元城不忧水，故遂不堤塞。
现代文：等到决口河水向东流去，元城县境不用担心水灾，因此就不筑堤堵水。
English: As long as the waters of the Duekou River flow eastward, there is no need to worry about flooding in the territory of Yuancheng County. Therefore, there is no need to build a dike to block the water.

古文：四年二月，赦天下。
现代文：四年二月间，宣布全国大赦。
English: In February 2004, a nationwide amnesty was announced.

古文：夏，赤气出东南，竟天。
现代文：夏季里，有火红云气从东南升起，上齐天际。
English: In summer, fiery red clouds rise from the southeast, filling the sky.

古文：厌难将军陈钦言捕虏生口，虏犯边者皆孝单于咸子角所为。
现代文：厌难将军陈钦说捉得俘虏，敌人侵犯边境的事都是孝单于咸的儿子角所干的。
English: General Chen Qin said that the captured prisoners and the enemy's invasion of the border were all the work of the son of Xiaodan Yu Xian.

古文：莽怒，斩其子登于长安，以视诸蛮夷。
现代文：王莽发火了，在长安杀死了咸的儿子登，给在长安的各外族人士一个颜色看看。
English: Wang Mang got angry and killed Xian's son, Deng, in Chang'an, to make a point to the foreigners in Chang'an.

古文：大司马甄邯死，宁始将军孔永为大司马，侍中大赘侯辅为宁始将军。
现代文：大司马甄邯死了，宁始将军孔永担任大司马，侍中大赘侯辅担任宁始将军。
English: Grand Secretary Ma Zhenyu died, and Ningshi General Kong Yong served as Grand Secretary Ma, and the Vice-Middle-ranking Grand Steward Hou Fu served as General Ningshi.

古文：莽每当出，辄先搜索城中，名曰 横搜 。
现代文：王莽每当外出，总要先搜查城裹，称为 普遍搜查 。
English: Whenever Wang Mang goes out, he always searches the city first, which is called "universal search."

古文：是月，横搜五日。
现代文：这个月，普遍搜查了五天。
English: This month, there were five days of general searches.

古文：莽至明堂，授诸侯茅土。
现代文：王莽来到明堂，授予诸侯象征封国的茅土。
English: Wang Mang came to Myeongdong and awarded the feudal lords with the symbolic fief of the country.

古文：下书曰： 予以不德，袭于圣祖，为万国主。
现代文：下文告说： 我没有德行，继承了黄帝、虞舜的事业，成为各诸侯国的君主。
English: The following message says: I am not virtuous, I inherited the cause of the Yellow Emperor and the State of Yu, and became the monarch of all the principalities.

古文：思安黎元，在于建侯，分州正惑，以美风俗。
现代文：想到要安定老百姓，在于建立诸侯，分州分国划定疆界，从而改良风俗。
English: The idea of stabilizing the common people was to establish vassals, divide the country into states, and delineate borders, thereby improving customs.

古文：追监前代，爰纲爰纪。
现代文：取法古代，这是原则，也是方法。
English: This is the principle as well as the method of adopting ancient methods.

古文：惟在《尧典》，十有二州，卫有五服。
现代文：根据《尧典》记载，有十二州，帝王直属领地以外分为五等地带。
English: According to the records of the "Imperial Code," there were twelve provinces, which were divided into five zones in addition to the territories directly under the emperor.

古文：《诗》国十五，布遍九州。
现代文：《诗经》记载有十五国，分布九州。
English: "Shikyo" is recorded in fifteen countries, most of which are in Kyushu.

古文：《殷颂》有 奄有九有 之言。
现代文：《殷颂》有 包括九州 的话。
English: "Ode to Yin" has words that include Kyushu.

古文：《禹贡》之九州无并、幽，《周礼·司马》则无徐、梁。
现代文：《书经。禹贡》记载的九州中没有并州和幽州，《周礼。司马》的记载却是没有徐州和梁州。
English: There are no merged Xuzhou and Yuzhou in the Kyushu recorded in "Shu Jing. Yugong," but there are no Xuzhou and Liangzhou in the records of "Zhou Li. Sima."

古文：帝王相改，各有云为。
现代文：帝王先后更改，各有各的意义和作用。
English: The emperors were successively changed, each with its own meaning and role.

古文：或昭其事，或大其本，厥义著明，其务一矣。
现代文：有的在于显示他的事业，有的在于扩大他的根基，这些意义很明显，他们所致力追求的都是一个目的。
English: Some to show his work, some to enlarge his foundation, these meanings are clear, they are committed to the pursuit of a goal.

古文：昔周二后受命，故有东都、西都之居。
现代文：从前周文王、周武王先后承受天命，所以有束都、西都的建设。
English: Once upon a time, King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu received the Mandate of Heaven successively, so there was the construction of the Bund Capital and the West Capital.

古文：予之受命，盖亦如之。
现代文：我承受天命，本来也像他们一样。
English: I was destined to be just like them.

古文：其以洛阳为新室东都，常安为新室西都。
现代文：应当把洛阳作为新朝的束都，把长安作为新朝的西都。
English: Luoyang should be regarded as the capital of the new dynasty, and Chang'an as the western capital of the new dynasty.

古文：邦畿连体，各有采任。
现代文：两个都城和它们的外围地区连成一个整体，包括着一些公卿和任爵的封地。
English: The two capitals and their outlying areas were linked as a whole, comprising a number of noble and baronial fiefdoms.

古文：州从《禹贡》为九，爵从周氏有五。
现代文：分州依照《禹贡》分为九州，封爵依照周朝的制度分为五等。
English: Wenzhou was divided into Kyushu according to "Yugong," and the peerage was divided into five grades according to the system of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：诸侯之员千有八百，附城之数亦如之，以俟有功。
现代文：诸侯的名额定为一千八百，附城的数目也像诸侯一样，以等待有功劳的人来接受这些爵位。
English: The number of lordships was set at eighteen hundred, and the number of townships was set at the same level as the number of lordships, with the expectation that meritorious people would receive these titles.

古文：诸公一同，有众万户，土方百里。
现代文：各公爵的封地叫作一同，有居民一万户，土地纵横各一百里。
English: The fiefdoms of the dukes were called together, with ten thousand inhabitants and a hundred miles of land in each direction.

古文：侯伯一国，众户五千，土方七十里。
现代文：侯爵伯爵的封地叫作一国，有居民五千户，土地纵横各十里。
English: The fiefdom of a marquis count is called a country, it has five thousand inhabitants, and the land is ten miles long and wide.

古文：子男一则，众户二千有五百，土方五十里。
现代文：子爵男爵的封地叫作一则，有居民二千五百户，土地纵横各五十里。
English: The fiefdom of a viscount and baron is called a zheng, with 2,500 households and a land area of 50 li in length and width.

古文：附城大者食邑九成，众户九百，土方三十里。
现代文：附城最大的封地九成，有居民九百户，土地纵横各三十里。
English: The largest fief of the annexed city accounted for 90%, with 900 residents and a land area of 30 miles in length and 30 miles in width.

古文：自九以下，降杀以两，至于一城。
现代文：从九成以下，每降低一等减少两成，最后减少到一成为止。
English: From 90% and below, the first-class fare will be reduced by 20%, and the final fare will be reduced to 10%.

古文：五差备具，合当一则。
现代文：五个不同等级的附城的封地总面积，相当于一个子爵男爵的封地。
English: The total area of the fiefs of the five different levels of the attached city is equivalent to the fief of a viscount baron.

古文：今已受茅土者，公十四人、侯九十三人、伯二十一人、子百七十一人、男四百九十七人，凡七百九十六人。
现代文：现在已经接受茅土的，有公爵十四人，侯爵九十三人，伯爵二十一人，子爵一百七十一人，男爵四百九十七人，共七百九十六人。
English: Fourteen dukes, ninety-three marquesses, twenty-one counts, one hundred and seventy-one viscounts, four hundred and ninety-seven barons, seven hundred and ninety-six in all, have now accepted the fescue.

古文：附城千五百一十一人。
现代文：附城一千五百一十一人。
English: The number of people living in the city rose to 1,511.

古文：九族之女为任者，八十三人。
现代文：九族的女儿受封任爵的，有八十三人。
English: There are 83 daughters of the nine ethnic groups who have been knighted.

古文：及汉氏女孙中山承礼君、遵德君、修义君更以为任。
现代文：以及汉朝的孙女中山国承礼君、遵德君、修义君改称为任爵。
English: and the granddaughters of the Han Dynasty, Zhongshan Guo Chengrei Jun, Zun De Jun and Xiu Yi Jun, were renamed as peeresses.

古文：萎有一公，九卿，十二大夫，二十四元士。
现代文：还有十一公，九卿，十二大夫，二十四元士。
English: There are also eleven princes, nine lords, twelve magistrates, and twenty-four officials.

古文：定诸国邑采之处，使侍中讲礼大夫孔秉等与州部众郡晓知地理图籍者，共校治于寿成朱鸟堂。
现代文：划定所有封国、食邑、采地的地址，让侍中讲礼大夫孔秉等人和各州部、各郡通晓地理图表和户籍册的官吏，在寿成室朱乌堂共同核对整理。
English: The addresses of all fiefdoms, food towns, and mining areas were delineated, and the attendants, including the lecturer Dr. Kong Bing, and the officials from all prefectures and counties who were familiar with the geographical charts and household registers, checked and arranged them together in the Shoucheng Room of Zhu Wu Hall.

古文：予数与群公祭酒上卿亲听视，咸已通矣。
现代文：我多次和各公、祭酒、上卿亲自检查、听取汇报，都已经了解了。
English: I have personally inspected and heard reports from various officials, sacrificial liquors, and nobles many times, and I have understood everything.

古文：夫褒德赏功，所以显仁贤也；九族和睦，所以褒亲亲也。
现代文：表彰德行，赏赐功勋，是用来表明皇帝仁爱、臣下贤能；九族和睦，是用来宣扬亲属要互相亲爱。
English: Commending virtues and awarding merits are used to show the emperor's benevolence and his vassals' virtue; the harmony of the nine ethnic groups is used to promote the need for relatives to love each other.

古文：予永惟匪解，思稽前人，将章黜陟，以明好恶，安元元焉。 
现代文：我永远也不想无所作为，衹想效法古人，将要公开赏罚，从而表明爱憎，安定善良的老百姓。 
English: I never want to do nothing, I want to imitate the ancients, I will openly reward and punish, thus showing love and hate, stable and kind people.

古文：以图簿未定，未授国邑，且令受奉都内，月钱数千。
现代文：由于地图和户籍还没有规划好，没有授予国土，暂时让他们在京城官署领取俸禄，每月给几千钱。
English: Since the map and household registration have not yet been planned and the land has not been granted, let them receive their salaries at the Beijing Municipal Government for the time being, and give them a few thousand dollars a month.

古文：诸侯皆困乏，至有庸作者。
现代文：诸侯都生活困难，甚至有受雇替别人做工的。
English: All the lords were having a hard time, and some were even hired to work for others.

古文：中郎区博谏莽曰： 井田虽圣王法，其废久矣。
现代文：中郎区博规劝王莽道： 井田制虽然是英明帝王的制度，它被废弃已经很久了。
English: Zhonglang District's Bo Ji advised Wang Mengdao: Although the Ida system is the system of Emperor Yingming, it has been abandoned for a long time.

古文：周道既衰，而民不从。
现代文：周朝的制度已经衰落，因而人民不依从。
English: The system of Zhou Dynasty has declined, so the people do not obey it.

古文：秦知顺民之心，可以获大利也，故灭庐井而置阡陌，遂王诸夏，讫今海内未厌其敝。
现代文：秦朝懂得顺从人民的心愿，可以获得巨大的利益，所以废除井田制，开垦闲废土地，便统一了中原，直到今天，全国人民还没有嫌弃这种制度的弊害。
English: The Qin Dynasty knew that it could obtain huge benefits by obeying the wishes of the people. Therefore, it abolished the well-field system and reclaimed idle land, thus unifying the Central Plains. To this day, the people of the whole country have not abandoned the evils of this system.

古文：今欲违民心，追复千载绝迹，虽尧、舜夏起，而无百年之渐，弗能行也。
现代文：现在想要违反人民的心愿，回过头去恢复千百年前的卓越功业，就是唐尧、虞舜再出现，如果没有上百年的酝酿过程，也不可能实行。
English: If we now want to go against the wishes of the people and turn back the clock to restore the outstanding achievements of thousands of years ago, that is, the reappearance of Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan. If there is no hundred-year brewing process, it is impossible to implement.

古文：天下初定，万民新附，诚未可施行。 
现代文：现在国家政权刚刚建立，全国人民刚刚归附，的确不可以施行。 
English: Now that the state power has just been established and the people of the whole country have just been returned to the motherland, it really cannot be implemented.

古文：莽知民怨，乃下书曰： 诸名食王田，皆得卖之，勿拘以法。
现代文：王莽知道人民怨恨，便下文告说： 所有私人占有或朝廷赏赐的王田，都准许出卖它，不要用法律去限制。
English: Wang Mang, aware of the people's resentment, announced: "All Wang Tian that is privately owned or granted by the imperial court is allowed to be sold, and should not be restricted by law.

古文：犯私买卖庶人者，且一切勿治。 
现代文：违犯了私自买卖平民的禁令的人，暂时一概不予追究。 
English: For the time being, no one will be prosecuted for violating the ban on the private sale and purchase of civilians.

古文：初，五威将帅出，改句町王以为侯，王邯怨怒不附。
现代文：当初，五威将帅出巡，把句町王改为侯，句町王邯怨恨愤怒，不顺从。
English: At first, Wu Wei sent his general out on a tour, and changed the title of the town's king to marquis. The town's king became angry and disobedient.

古文：莽讽牂柯大尹周歆诈杀邯。
现代文：王莽示意胖柯郡大尹周歆采用欺骗手段杀死了邯。
English: Wang Mang gestured to Fat Ke County Mayor Yin Zhou to use deception to kill Zou.

古文：邯弟承起兵攻杀歆。
现代文：邯的弟弟承起兵进攻，杀死周歆。
English: Zhou's younger brother took the offensive and killed Zhou.

古文：先是，莽发高句骊兵，当伐胡，不欲行，郡强迫之，皆亡出塞，因犯法为冠。
现代文：原先，王莽调动高句骊的军队，让他们进攻匈奴，他们不想去，郡裹强迫他们，都逃出边界，于是冒犯法律，抢劫杀人。
English: Originally, Wang Mang mobilized Gao Guanzhong's army, let them attack the Xiongnu, they did not want to go, the county forced them, they all fled the border, so they violated the law, robbed and killed.

古文：辽西大尹田谭追击之，为所杀。
现代文：辽西郡大尹田谭追击他们，被他们杀死了。
English: Liaoxi County Mayor Yin Tian Tan chased them and was killed by them.

古文：州郡归咎于高句骊侯驺。
现代文：州郡长官把罪责归在高句骊侯鞠的身上。
English: The county magistrate put the blame on Gao Guo.

古文：严尤奏言： 貉人犯法，不从驺起，正有它心，宜令州郡且尉安之。
现代文：严尤报告说： 貉人犯法，不是从骝开始的，假使他们有别的用心，应当命令州郡权且安抚他。
English: Yan Yu reported: "If a thief breaks the law, it does not start from the thief. If they have other intentions, they should order the state and county power to appease him.

古文：今猥被以大罪，恐其遂畔，夫馀之属必有和者。
现代文：现在多加给重大罪名，恐怕他们于是叛乱，夫余那些部族一定会有附和的。
English: Now they are adding more serious charges, and I'm afraid that they will rebel, and the remaining tribes will certainly follow suit.

古文：匈奴未克，夫馀、秽貉复起，此大忧也。 
现代文：匈奴没有克胜，夫余和秽貉又起来，这就是大忧患呀。 
English: The Xiongnu could not be defeated, and the excesses and abominations arose again. This was a great sorrow.

古文：莽不尉安，秽貉遂反，诏尤击之。
现代文：王莽不加安抚，秽貉于是反叛，命令严尤进击它。
English: Wang Mang would not be appeased, and Cixi rebelled, ordering a special attack on it.

古文：尤诱高句骊侯驺至而斩焉，传首长安。
现代文：严尤引诱高句骊侯鞠到来就把他杀了，传递首级到长安。
English: Yan You lured Gao Guo to come and killed him, passing the head to Chang'an.

古文：莽大说，下书曰： 乃者，命遣猛将，共行天罚，诛灭虏知，分为十二部，或断其右臂，或斩其左腋，或溃其胸腹，或其两胁。
现代文：王莽非常高兴，下文告说： 前些日子，派遣猛将恭敬地执行上天的惩罚，去剿灭匈奴囊知牙斯，分为十二路大军，有的砍下了他的右臂，有的斩断了他的左肩，有的毁伤了他的胸腹，有的拔掉了他的两肋。
English: Wang Mang was very happy, and reported as follows: A few days ago, a fierce general was respectfully dispatched to carry out heaven's punishment to annihilate the Hun, Zacchaeus. Divided into twelve armies, some cut off his right arm, some cut off his left shoulder, some injured his chest and abdomen, and some plucked out his two ribs.

古文：今年刑在东方，诛貉之部先纵焉。
现代文：今年刑罚杀戮会出现在东方，讨伐貉人的部队先走一步啦。
English: This year, the punishment killings will appear in the East, and the anti-Shiite troops are one step ahead.

古文：捕斩虏驺，平定东域，虏知殄灭，在于漏刻。
现代文：擒杀了骝奴辈，平定丁东方地区，匈奴囊知牙斯的歼灭，就在眼前。
English: The annihilation of the Xiongnu, the Eastern region of Ding, and the annihilation of the Xiongnu, Zacchaeus, is just around the corner.

古文：此乃天地群神、社稷、宗庙佑助之福，公卿、大夫、士民同心将率虓虎之力也。
现代文：这是天地、众神灵、土谷神、祖宗保佑帮助的福气，公卿大夫、士人、民众同心同德和将领们英勇奋战的力量。
English: This is the blessing of heaven and earth, the gods, the gods of the valley, the ancestors' blessing and help, the power of the nobles, doctors, politicians, the people and the generals to fight bravely.

古文：予甚嘉之。
现代文：我很赞赏这些。
English: I appreciate that.

古文：其更名高句骊为下句骊，布告天下，令咸知焉。 
现代文：应当把高句骊改名为下句骊，布告天下，让大家都知道。 
English: We should rename the high sentence  as the next sentence  and announce it to the world so that everyone knows about it.

古文：于是貉人愈犯边，东北与西南夷皆乱云。
现代文：于是貉人更加侵犯边境，东北和西南夷都乱起来。
English: As a result, the Xiongnu further encroached on the border, and the Northeastern and Southwestern Yidu rebelled.

古文：莽志方盛，以为四夷不足吞灭，专念稽古之事，复下书曰： 伏念予之皇始祖考虞帝，受终文祖，在璇玑玉衡以齐七政，遂类于上帝，禋于六宗，望秩于山川，遍于群神，巡狩五岳，群后四朝，敷奏以言，明试以功。
现代文：王莽正在得意，认为四方外族用不着费多大力气就能够加以吞并消灭，一味想从古代典籍当中寻找旧例，又下文告说： 俯伏思念我的伟大的皇始祖考虞舜，在文祖庙接受政权的禅让，观察天文，考究清楚太阳、月亮和五大行星，于是祭祀上天，升烟祭祀天地间的各种自然势力，遥望祭祀大山大河，普遍祭祀各种神灵，巡视五岳，分区集中会见四方诸侯，让他们口头或书面奏事，根据事理详细准确地进行考核。
English: Wang Mang boasted that the foreign ethnic groups in the four directions could be swallowed up and eliminated without much effort. He was eager to find old examples from ancient classics, and reported below: prostrating himself and thinking of my great imperial ancestor, Guo Yu, accepted the transfer of power in the Temple of the Ancestors, observed astronomy, studied the sun, the moon and the five planets, and then sacrificed to the heavens, sacrificed to various natural forces in heaven and earth, worshiped the great mountain river from afar, and generally sacrificed to various gods, visited the five mountains, and met with the princes of the four directions in separate areas, and let them make oral or written reports, and conduct detailed and accurate assessment

古文：予之受命即真，到于建国五年，已五载矣。
现代文：我承受天命正式登上皇位，到建国五年，已经五年了。
English: It has been five years since I officially ascended to the throne in accordance with God's will, five years since the founding of our country.

古文：阳九之厄既度，百霹之会已过。
现代文：不幸的命运既然脱离，灾难的周期已经过去。
English: Now that the ill-fated fate has departed, the cycle of calamity has passed.

古文：岁在寿星，填在明堂，仓龙癸酉，德在中宫。
现代文：木星在寿星宫，土星在明堂座，太岁在癸酉，旺气在北极天区。
English: Jupiter is in the House of the Birthday Star, Saturn is in the Pleiades, Taisei is in the sign of the Rooster, and vigor is in the north celestial region.

古文：观晋掌岁，龟策告从，其以此年二月建寅之节东巡狩，具礼仪调度。 
现代文：观卦、晋卦值年，占卜告诉人们应当怎么行动，应当在这年二月建寅的初春时节到束部地区巡视，把礼仪程序安排开列出来。 
English: Since it is the year of Guan Gua and Jin Gua, divination tells people how they should act. They should visit Sokube district in the early spring season of Jian Yin in February this year and list the etiquette procedures.

古文：群公奏请募吏民人马布帛绵，又请内郡国十二买马，发帛四十五万匹，输常安，前后毋相须。
现代文：各大臣报告提议向官府和民间征集人员、马匹、麻布、绸绢和丝绵，又提议内地十二个郡国买马匹，征调绸绢四十五万匹，运送到长安，前前后后不要彼此观望等待。
English: The reports of the ministers proposed to recruit personnel, horses, linen, silk and silk from the government and the people, and also proposed that the twelve counties of the mainland should buy horses, conscript 450,000 silk and silk, and transport them to Chang'an. Don't wait and watch each other.

古文：至者过半，莽下书曰： 文母太后体不安，其且止待后。 
现代文：到达的超过了一半，王莽下文告说： 文母太后身体不安，应当暂时停止，等待以后再看。 
English: After more than half of them had arrived, Wang Mang announced: "The empress dowager is not feeling well. She should stop for a while and wait and see later."

古文：是岁，改十一公号，以 新 为 心 ，后又改 心 为 信 。
现代文：这一年，更改了十一公的称号，把 新 字改成了 心 字，以后又把 心 字改成 信 字。
English: In this year, the title of the Eleven Princes was changed, the new character was changed to the heart character, and later the heart character was changed to the letter character.

古文：五年二月，文母皇太后崩，葬渭陵，与元帝合而沟绝之。
现代文：五年二月间，文母皇太后逝世，安葬在渭陵，跟元帝合葬一处，中间开了一条沟把他们隔开来。
English: In February of the fifth year, Empress Dowager Wenmu passed away and was buried in Fuling. She was buried together with Emperor Yuan, with a ditch separating them.

古文：立庙于长安，新室世世献祭。
现代文：在长安设立祠庙，规定新朝要世世代代上祭。
English: An ancestral temple was set up in Chang'an, and it was stipulated that the new dynasty should offer sacrifices for generations.

古文：元帝配食，坐于床下。
现代文：元帝配享，他的神主安放在她的神主的宠架下面。
English: The former emperor shared it, and his god was placed under her god's pet.

古文：葬为太倔服丧三年。
现代文：王莽为王太后守了三年丧。
English: Wang Mang held a three-year funeral for the Queen Mother.

古文：大司马孔永乞骸骨，赐安车驷马，以特进就朝位。
现代文：大司马孔永请求退休，赏赐坐车一辆和套马四匹，按照特进的荣誉官衔参加朝会。
English: Daishi Ma Kongyong asked to retire, was rewarded with a carriage and four horses, and participated in the imperial court according to the honorary title of the special advance.

古文：同风侯逯并为大司马。
现代文：同风侯逯并担任大司马。
English: He also served as the grand steward.

古文：是时，长安民闻莽欲都雒阳，不肯缮治室宅，或颇彻之。
现代文：这时候，长安百姓听到了王莽想要建都雒阳，不愿意修理房屋，有的人部分地拆掉了一些房屋。
English: At this time, the people of Chang'an heard that Wang Mang wanted to build the capital, Shenyang, and were unwilling to repair the houses. Some people partially demolished some houses.

古文：莽曰： 玄龙石文曰 定帝德，国雒阳 。
现代文：王莽说： 玄龙石的文辞说 安定皇帝的命运，国都建在洛阳 。
English: Wang Mang said: "The text of the Dragon Stone originates from the stable fate of the emperor, and the country is built in Luoyang.

古文：符命著明，敢不钦奉！
现代文：符命明明白白，敢不敬谨遵行！
English: The precepts of destiny are clear and unambiguous. Dare to be irreverent, but follow them!

古文：以始建国八年，岁缠星纪，在雒阳之都。
现代文：到始建国八年，木星居于星纪宫，奠定雒阳都城。
English: In the eighth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Jupiter resided in the Celestial Palace and founded the capital city of Shenyang.

古文：其谨缮修常安之都，勿令坏败。
现代文：应当很好地修理长安都城，不要让它毁败了。
English: Chang'an Capital City should be well repaired, and should not be allowed to fall into ruin.

古文：敢有犯者，辄以名闻，请其罪。 
现代文：敢有违犯的，就把名字报上来，查办他的罪行。 
English: If anyone dares to violate the law, his name will be reported to the police, and his crime will be investigated.

古文：是岁，乌孙大小昆弥遣使贡献。
现代文：这一年，乌孙国的大昆弥和小昆弥派遣使者来进贡。
English: In that year, Great Kunmi and Little Kunmi of the Wusun Kingdom sent emissaries to pay tribute.

古文：大昆弥者，中国外孙也。
现代文：大昆弥是中原的外孙。
English: Da Kunya is Nakahara's grandson.

古文：其胡妇子为小昆弥，而乌孙归附之。
现代文：前代昆弥的包坦妻子的儿子作了昆弥，可是乌瑟人归附他。
English: The son of Kunmi's previous wife, Bautan, became Kunmi, but the people of Ussur became attached to him.

古文：莽见匈奴诸边并侵，意欲得乌孙心，乃遣使者引小昆弥使置大昆弥使上。
现代文：王莽看到匈奴和许多边境外族同时入侵，心裹想要博得乌孙人的欢心，便派使者带领小昆弥的使者坐在大昆弥的使者的上位。
English: Wang Mang saw that the Xiongnu and many foreign border tribes invaded at the same time, and in order to win the favor of the Wusun people, he sent an envoy to lead the envoy of Xiao Kunmi to sit on the top of the envoy of Da Kunmi.

古文：保成师友祭酒满昌劾奏使者曰： 夷狄以中国有礼谊，故诎而服从。
现代文：保成师友祭酒迈旦上奏章弹劾使者道： 外族因为中原讲究礼义，所以委屈服从。
English: Ho Shing's mentor and friend, offering wine to Maidan, played a song to impeach the envoy, saying, "Foreigners, because Nakahara is particular about etiquette, are wronged and obey.

古文：大昆弥，君也。今序臣使于君使之上，非所以有夷狄也。
现代文：大昆弥是国君，现在安排臣子的使者坐在国君的使者的上位，这不是统治外族的办法。
English: Da Kuniya was the sovereign, and now he was arranging for the envoys of his vassals to sit higher than the envoys of the sovereign. This was not the way to rule a foreign nation.

古文：奉使大不敬！ 
现代文：被派遣担任招待的使者大不敬！ 
English: To be sent as an invited emissary is a great insult!

古文：莽怒，免昌官。
现代文：王菱发火了，罢免了满昌的官职。
English: Wang Ling became angry and dismissed Manchang from his post.

古文：西域诸国以莽积失恩信，焉耆先畔，杀都护但钦。
现代文：西域各国由于王莽长期失去了好感和信用，焉耆国首先背叛，杀死了堕继都护但筮。
English: Due to Wang Mang's long-term loss of goodwill and trust, the Western countries were the first to betray and kill the fallen successor of the capital guard, Danzhang.

古文：十一月，彗星出，二十余日，不见。
现代文：十一月间，彗星出现，经过二十多天，不见了。
English: In November, the comet appeared, and after more than twenty days, it disappeared.

古文：是岁，以犯挟铜炭者多，除其法。
现代文：这一年，由于违犯私藏铜炭禁令的人太多，废除了那项法令。
English: That year, the law was repealed because too many people were violating the ban on the illegal possession of copper and coal.

古文：明年改元曰 天凤 。
现代文：第二年改年号叫天凤。
English: The following year, the name was changed to Tianfeng.

古文：天凤元年正月，赦天下。
现代文：天凤元年正月间，宣布全国大赦。
English: In the first month of the first year of Tianfeng, a national amnesty was announced.

古文：莽曰： 予以二月建寅之节行巡狩之礼，太官赍糒干肉，内者行张坐卧，所过毋得有所给。
现代文：王莽说： 我将要在二月建寅的初春时节进行巡视活动，太官携带干粮干肉，内者在途中陈设床席被帐，所经过的地方不要有什么供给。
English: Wang Mang said: I will carry out inspection activities in the early spring season of Jianyin in February. The eunuchs will carry dry grain and meat, and the insiders will set up beds and bedding on the way. Do not provide any supplies to the places you pass.

古文：予之东巡，必躬载耒，每县则耕，以劝东作。
现代文：我往东方巡视，一定亲自携带犁铎，每到一县就要参加耕作，从而倡导春耕。
English: When I toured the East, I made sure to carry the plough with me. Every time I visited a county, I had to take part in farming, thus advocating spring ploughing.

古文：予之南巡，必躬载耨，每县则耨，以劝南伪。
现代文：我往南方巡视，一定亲自携带锄头，每到一县就要参加锄草，从而鼓励中耕。
English: I went on a tour to the south, and I made sure to personally carry hoes. Every county I went to, I had to participate in weeding, thus encouraging mid-cropping.

古文：予之西巡，必躬载铚，每县则获，以劝西成。
现代文：我往西方巡视，一定亲自携带镰刀，每到一县就要参加收割，从而鼓励秋收。
English: I toured to the west, I must personally carry a sickle, and every county I visited I had to participate in the harvest, thus encouraging the autumn harvest.

古文：予之北巡，必躬载拂，每县则粟，以劝盖藏。
现代文：我往北方巡视，一定亲自携带连枷，每到一县就要参加打场，从而鼓励储藏。
English: I went on a tour to the north, and I made sure to personally carry flails. Every county I visited, I had to take part in a game, thus encouraging the storage of flails.

古文：毕北巡狩之礼，即于土中居雒阳之都焉。
现代文：结束北方的巡视活动之后，就在全国的中心奠定洛阳都城。
English: After completing the inspection activities in the north, Luoyang Capital City was established in the center of the country.

古文：敢有趋讠雚犯法，辄以军法从事。 
现代文：敢有奔跑吵闸触犯法纪的，就按照军法处理。 
English: Anyone who dares to break the law by running and shouting will be dealt with according to military law.

古文：群公奏言： 皇帝至考，往年文母圣体不豫，躬亲供养，衣冠稀解。
现代文：各大臣报告道： 皇帝最孝顺，前年文母圣体有病，您亲自侍候，衣服都很少脱下。
English: The ministers reported: The emperor is the most dutiful, the previous year the Blessed Virgin Mary was ill, you personally waited on her, and you rarely took off your clothes.

古文：因遭弃群臣悲哀，颜色未复，饮食损少。
现代文：因为遭遇文母逝世的悲痛，容颜没有恢复，饮食减少。
English: Because of the grief of encountering the death of his literary mother, his face did not recover, and his diet decreased.

古文：今一岁四巡，道路万里，春秋尊，非糒干肉之所能堪。
现代文：现在要一年巡视四方，路程上万里，年岁这样高，不是干粮干肉所能适应的了。
English: Now it is necessary to inspect the four directions for a year, the distance is over ten thousand miles, and the age is so high, it is not possible to adapt to dry grain and dry meat.

古文：且无巡狩，须阕大服，以安圣体，臣等尽力养牧兆民，奉称明诏。 
现代文：暂时不要去巡视，等待国丧期满，从而保养圣体。我们尽力抚育管教全国百姓，实现您的英明指示。 
English: For the time being, do not go on inspection, wait for the expiration of the national mourning period, and thus maintain the Holy Body. We will do our best to educate and discipline the people of the whole country to implement your wise instructions.

古文：莽曰： 群公、群牧、群司、诸侯、庶尹愿尽力相帅养牧兆民，欲以称予，繇此敬听，其勖之哉！
现代文：王莽说： 各公、各州牧、各主管大臣、诸侯、各郡大尹愿意尽力互相督促抚育管教好全国百姓，力图符合我的心愿，因此采纳你们的意见，应当勉励呀！
English: Wang Mang said: All princes, all prefectural pastors, all ministers in charge, all lords, and all county magistrates are willing to do their best to supervise each other in educating and disciplining the people of the whole country, and strive to meet my wishes. Therefore, we should adopt your opinions and encourage them!

古文：毋食言焉。
现代文：不要忘记了自己的诺言。
English: Don't forget your promise.

古文：更以天凤七年，岁在大梁，仓龙庚辰，行巡狩之礼。
现代文：改到天凤七年，木星在大梁宫，太岁在庚辰，进行巡视活动。
English: It was changed to Tianfeng for seven years, Jupiter was in Dalian Palace, and Taishi was in Gengchen, conducting inspection activities.

古文：厥明年，岁在实沈，仓龙辛已，即土之中雒阳之都。 
现代文：再明年，木星在实沉宫，太岁在辛巳，前往全国的中心洛阳都城。 
English: Next year, with Jupiter in Sagittarius and the Chinese New Year in Cancer, they will travel to the country's capital, Luoyang.

古文：乃遣太傅平晏、大司空王邑之雒阳，营相宅兆，图起宗庙、社稷、郊兆云。
现代文：便派太傅平晏和大司空王邑前往洛阳，选择地基，打算兴建皇家祠庙、土谷神社和祭祀天地的坛址。
English: He then sent Taifu Pingyao and Daishi Kuo Wangyi to Luoyang to choose a foundation, intending to build a royal ancestral temple, Tsuchiya Shrine and a sacrificial altar site for heaven and earth.

古文：三月壬申晦，日有食之。
现代文：三月壬申最后一天，出现了日食。
English: On the last day of March in Jinshin, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：宣布全国大赦。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：策大司马逯并曰： 日食无光，干戈不戢，其上大司马印韨，就侯氏朝位。
现代文：下策书给大司马逯并说： 日食出现，太阳全被吞没，战争没有停止，你应当缴上大司马的印信，按照侯爵的身份参加朝会。
English: He sent a policy paper to the Grand Marshal and said: The solar eclipse has appeared, the sun has been completely engulfed, the war has not stopped, you should submit the seal of the Grand Marshal and participate in the imperial meeting as a marquis.

古文：太傅平晏勿领尚书事，省侍中、诸曹兼官者。
现代文：太傅平晏不要兼管尚书事务，取消兼任的侍中诸曹。
English: Tai Fu Ping did not want to be in charge of the official book affairs, and cancelled the concurrent position of the attendant Zhu Cao.

古文：以？男苗为大司马。 
现代文：任命利苗男欣作大司马。 
English: Appointed Lin Miao's son, Xin, as the chief secretary.

古文：莽即真，尤备大臣，抑夺下权，朝臣有言其过失者，辄拔擢。
现代文：王莽正式登上皇位以后，特别防备大臣，限制、削弱大臣的权力，臣下有指责大臣的错误的，总是受到提拔。
English: After Wang Mang officially ascended the throne, he became the special minister of defense, restricting and weakening the power of the minister. If a subject accused the minister of a mistake, he was always promoted.

古文：孔仁、赵博、费兴等以敢击大臣，故见信任，择名官而居之。
现代文：孔仁、赵博和费兴等人因为敢于抨击大臣，所以获得信任，选择好官职让他们担任。
English: Kong Ren, Zhao Bo and Feixing and others gained trust because they dared to criticize the minister, and they were allowed to hold the posts they had chosen.

古文：公卿入宫，吏有常数，太傅平晏从吏过例，掖门仆射苛差问不逊，戊曹士收系仆射。
现代文：公卿大臣进入宫殿，随从官吏有定额，有一次，太傅平晏携带官吏超过了规定，掖门仆射加以盘问，态度不好，太傅府的戊曹办事人员拘捕了仆射。
English: The minister of the public secretary entered the palace, and there was a quota for the officials accompanying the officials. On one occasion, Taifu Pingyao carried more officials than the regulation. He was interrogated at the gate and his attitude was not good. The Taifu government's Wu Cao clerk arrested him.

古文：莽大怒，使执法发车骑数百围太傅府，捕士，即时死。
现代文：王莽大发怒火，让执法调动战车几百辆包围太傅府，逮捕了那些办事人员，立刻处死。
English: Wang Mang flew into a rage and ordered law enforcement to mobilize hundreds of chariots to surround Taifu, arrest the clerks and execute them immediately.

古文：大司空士夜过奉常亭，亭长苛之，告以官名，亭长醉曰： 宁有符传邪？ 
现代文：又有一次，大司空的办事人员夜裹经过奉常亭，亭长责问他，他把自己的官职告诉了亭长，亭长喝醉了，说道： 有没有证明呢？ 
English: On another occasion, an empty-chaired clerk passed through the Bongjong Pavilion at night, and the pavilion manager scolded him. He told the pavilion manager about his official position. The pavilion manager was drunk and said, "Do you have any proof?

古文：士以马棰击亭长，亭长斩士，亡，郡县逐之。
现代文：那个办事人员用马鞭子打了亭长，亭长要斩办事人员，逃跑了，郡裹县裹要追捕他。
English: The clerk hit the pavilion manager with a horse whip, the pavilion manager wanted to cut off the clerk and ran away, the county wanted to hunt him down.

古文：家上书，莽曰： 亭长奉公，勿逐。 
现代文：他家人上书申诉，王莽说： 亭长奉行公事，不要追捕了。 
English: His family members submitted a written complaint, and Wang Mang said: "The prince's father-in-law is doing his duty, so don't chase him."

古文：大司空邑斥士以谢。
现代文：大司空王邑斥责了那个办事人员来请罪。
English: The magistrate rebuked the clerk for pleading guilty.

古文：国将哀章颇不清，莽为选置和叔，敕曰： 非但保国将闺门，当保亲属在西州者。 
现代文：国将哀章行为很不端正，王莽给他选择设置了和叔，告诫道： 不仅要在公府裹帮助国将本人，还应当帮助他在西州的亲属。 
English: Wang Mang gave him the choice of setting up an uncle and admonished him: "You should not only help the general himself, but also help his relatives in Xizhou.

古文：诸公皆轻贱，而章尤甚。
现代文：各大臣都被瞧不起，而哀章尤其厉害。
English: Ministers are held in contempt, and the laments are particularly virulent.

古文：四月，陨霜，杀草木，海濒尤甚。
现代文：四月间，降了霜，冻死了草木，沿海尤其严重。
English: In April, frosts fell and the plants froze to death, especially along the coast.

古文：六月，黄雾四塞。
现代文：六月间，黄沙满天。
English: In June, the sky is covered with yellow sand.

古文：七月，大风拔树，飞北阙直城门屋瓦。
现代文：七月间，大风吹倒了树木，刮走了北阙直城门屋上的瓦。
English: In July, high winds blew down trees and tore away the tiles on the roof of the north gate.

古文：雨雹，杀牛羊。
现代文：落了冰雹，打死了牛羊。
English: Hail fell, killing cattle and sheep.

古文：莽以《周官》、《王制》之文，置卒正、连率、大尹，职如太守；属令、属长，职如都尉。
现代文：王莽按照《周官》和《王制》的经文，设置卒正、连率、大尹，职务像太守一样；设置属令、属长，职务像都尉一样。
English: Wang Mang, in accordance with the scriptures of "Zhou Guan" and "King System," set up the post of general, company commander and grand commander, with the same duties as the governor; set up subordinate orders and subordinate commanders, with the same duties as captains.

古文：置州牧、部监二十五人，见礼如三公。
现代文：设置少牧、设置部监二十五人，皇帝接见他们的礼仪像接见三公一样。
English: Twenty-five young pastors and overseers were appointed, and the emperor received them with the same etiquette as if he were receiving the three princes.

古文：监位上大夫，各主五郡。
现代文：职位是上大夫，每人管辖五郡。
English: The position is a senior doctor, each of whom has jurisdiction over five counties.

古文：公氏作牧，侯氏卒正，伯氏连率，子氏属令，男氏属长，皆世其官。
现代文：公爵作州牧，侯爵作卒正，伯爵作连率，子爵作属令，男爵作属长，这些官职都实行世袭制。
English: The duke was the prefect, the marquis the petty officer, the count the company commander, the viscount the subordinate, and the baron the superior. All of these offices were hereditary.

古文：其无爵者为尹。
现代文：那些没有爵位的称为大尹。
English: Those who do not have a title of nobility are called the Great Yin.

古文：分长安城旁六乡，置帅各一人。
现代文：把长安郊区划分六乡，每乡设置乡帅一人。
English: Chang'an suburb will be divided into six townships, and each township will have one township marshal.

古文：分三辅为六尉郡，河东、河内、弘农、河南、颍川、南阳为六队郡，置大夫，职如太守；属正，职如都尉。
现代文：把三辅地区划分为六尉郡，把河东郡、河内郡、弘农郡、河南郡、颖川郡、南阳郡作为六队郡，都设置大夫，职务像太守一样；设置属正，职务像都尉一样。
English: The Sanfu region was divided into six lieutenant counties, and the counties of Hedong County, Hanoi County, Hongnong County, Henan County, Yingchuan County, and Nanyang County were set up as six team counties. Doctors were set up, with the same duties as governors; subordinate officers were set up, with the same duties as captains.

古文：更名河南大尹曰保忠信卿。
现代文：把河南郡大尹改名叫保忠信卿。
English: He changed the name of Henan County Grand Yin to Bao Zhongxinqing.

古文：益河南属县满三十。
现代文：增加河南郡属县满三十县。
English: The number of counties in Henan has increased to more than 30.

古文：置六郊州长各一人，人主五县。
现代文：设置六郊州长各一人，每人管辖五县。
English: Six sub-district governors will be set up, each with jurisdiction over five counties.

古文：及它官名悉改。
现代文：以及其他官名全部改定。
English: and all other official names were revised.

古文：大郡至分为五。
现代文：大郡甚至划分为五郡。
English: The large county is even divided into five counties.

古文：郡县以亭为名者三百六十，以应符命文也。
现代文：郡和县用 亭 字作为名称的有三百六十个，用来符合符命的文辞。
English: There are 360 counties and prefectures that use the word "tei" as their name, which is used to match the words of their names.

古文：缘边又置竟尉，以男为之。
现代文：边境地区又设置竟尉，用男爵去担任这个职务。
English: In the border area, a lieutenant was also set up, and a baron was used to hold this position.

古文：诸侯国闲田，为黜陟增减云。
现代文：各诸侯国之间的剩余田地，留作赏赐有功或惩罚有罪时使用。
English: The remaining fields between each vassal state were reserved for rewarding meritorious deeds or punishing guilty ones.

古文：莽下书曰： 常安西都曰六乡，众县曰六尉。
现代文：王莽下文告说： 长安西都近郊区分为六乡，外围各县分属六尉。
English: Wang Meng reported below: Chang'an Xidu near the suburbs is divided into six townships, and the outlying counties are divided into six sub-districts.

古文：义阳东都曰六州，众县曰六队。
现代文：义阳东都远郊区分为六州，外围各县分属六队。
English: The outlying suburbs of Yiyang Dongdu are divided into six prefectures, and the outlying counties are divided into six teams.

古文：粟米之内曰内郡，其外曰近郡。
现代文：离束都、西都四五百里以内的地方叫作内郡，以外的地方叫作近郡。
English: The place within four or five hundred miles from the capital and the western capital is called the inner county, and the place outside is called the near county.

古文：有障徼者曰边郡。合百二十有五郡。
现代文：有边界要塞的地方叫作边郡，合计一百二十五郡。
English: A place with a border fortress is called a border county, for a total of 125 counties.

古文：九州之内，县二千二百有三。
现代文：九州的范围裹，有二干二百零三县。
English: Kyushu covers an area of 2,203 counties.

古文：公作甸服，是为惟城；诸在侯服，是为惟宁；在采、任诸侯，是为惟翰；在宾服，是为惟屏；在揆文教，奋武卫，是为惟垣；在九州之外，是为惟藩：各以其方为称，总为万国焉。 
现代文：公爵作国甸服，这是城堡；所有在侯服的诸侯，这是依靠；在采服、任服的诸侯，这是支柱；在宾服的诸侯，这是屏障；在揆文教、奋武卫地带的诸侯，这是墙垣；在九州以外的外族，这是藩篱：各按自己所在的区域定称号，总起来就是全天下。 
English: The duke as the national costume, this is the castle; all the princes in the court costume, this is the reliance; in the court costume, the princes in the service, this is the pillar; in the guest costume, this is the barrier; in the literature and culture, the princes in the defense zone, this is the wall; in the foreign ethnic groups outside of Kyushu, this is the fence: each according to their own region, the total is the whole world.

古文：其后，岁复变更，一郡至五易名，而还复其故。
现代文：这以后，每年有变动，一郡甚至改了五次名称，终于恢复原来的名称。
English: After that, there were changes every year, and one county even changed its name five times before finally restoring its original name.

古文：吏民不能纪，每下诏书，辄系其故名，曰： 制诏陈留大尹、太尉：其以益岁以南付新平。
现代文：官吏和人民不能够记录这么多，每次下韶书，总要附记原来的名称，比如说： 命令陈留郡大尹、太尉：着令把益岁县以南的地区划归新平郡。
English: The officials and the people cannot keep so many records. Every time they issue an edict, they should always add the original name, for example: Order Chenliu County Daiyin and Taiyi: Order the area south of Yixian County to be transferred to Xinping County.

古文：新平，故淮阳。
现代文：新平郡就是原来的淮阳郡。
English: Xinping County is the original Huaiyang County.

古文：以雍丘以东付陈定。
现代文：把雍丘县以东的地区划归陈定郡。
English: The area east of Yongqiu County was assigned to Chending County.

古文：陈定，故梁郡。
现代文：陈定郡就是原来的梁郡。
English: Chending County is the original Liang County.

古文：以封丘以东付治亭。
现代文：把封丘县以束的地区划归治亭郡。
English: The district of Izuka in Funchu County was transferred to Jiting County.

古文：治亭，故东郡。
现代文：治亭郡就是原来的东郡。
English: Jiting County is the original Dong County.

古文：以陈留以西付祈隧。
现代文：把陈留县以西的地区划归祈隧。
English: The area west of Chenliu County was assigned to Qidong Tunnel.

古文：祈隧，故荥阳。
现代文：祈隧就是原来的荣阳。
English: Qitun is the original Rongyang.

古文：陈留已无复有郡矣。
现代文：陈留郡已经不再存在了。
English: Chen Liu County no longer exists.

古文：大尹、太尉，皆诣行在所。 
现代文：大尹和太尉都到皇帝跟前来。 
English: Both the Grand Yin and the Second Lieutenant came to the emperor.

古文：其号令变易，皆此类也。
现代文：他的政令变化，都是这一类样子。
English: His executive order changes are all of this type.

古文：今天下小学，戊子代甲子为六旬首。
现代文：命令全国的学校，用戊子曰代替甲子日作为每六十天的开始。
English: ordered the nation's schools to start every 60th day of the year with "Wu Zi Hai" instead of "Kou Zi Day."

古文：冠以戊子为元日，昏以戊寅之旬为忌日。
现代文：举行冠礼把戊子日作为吉利的日子，举行婚礼把从戊寅开始的十天作为不吉利的日子。
English: The crowning ceremony is held to mark the auspicious day of Bosi, and the wedding is held to mark the unlucky day of the ten days from Bosin.

古文：百姓多不从者。
现代文：百姓有很多不依从的。
English: There are a lot of non-compliant people.

古文：匈奴单于知死，弟咸立为单于，求和亲。
现代文：匈奴单于囊知牙斯死了，他的弟弟咸作了单于，要求跟中原和好。
English: Xiongnu died alone in Cuxi, and his brother Ham made a request for peace with the Central Plains.

古文：莽遣使者厚赂之，诈还许其侍子登，因购求陈良、终带等。
现代文：王莽派遣使者多多赠送财物给他，欺骗他答应送还他的来中原侍奉皇帝的儿子登，出钱要求引渡陈良和终带等人。
English: Wang Mang sent emissaries to give him a lot of gifts, tricked him into promising to return his son Deng, who had come to the Central Plains to serve the emperor, and demanded money to extradite Chen Liang and others.

古文：单于即执良等付使者，槛车诣长安。
现代文：单于便逮住陈良等人交给了使者，用囚车送到长安。
English: They simply arrested Chen Liang and others, handed them over to the envoy, and sent them to Chang'an in a prison van.

古文：莽燔烧良等于城北，令吏民会观之。
现代文：王莽在长安城北烧死陈良等人，让官吏和人民集合去看行刑。
English: Wang Mang burned Chen Liang and others to death in the north of Chang'an City, and ordered officials and people to gather to watch the execution.

古文：缘边大饥，人相食。
现代文：沿边境地区发生了严重的饥荒，人吃人。
English: Severe famine has occurred along the border areas, and people are eating each other.

古文：谏大夫如普行边兵，还言 军士久屯塞苦，边郡无以相赡。
现代文：谏大夫如普巡视边境驻军，回来说： 士兵长期驻扎边界，生活很苦，边郡没有东西供应。
English: Dr. Zou Rupu inspected the border garrison and came back saying, "The soldiers have been stationed at the border for a long time, their lives are very hard, and the border county has no supplies.

古文：今单于新和，宜因是罢兵。 
现代文：现在单于刚跟我们和好，应当趁此机会退兵。 
English: Now that you have just made peace with us, you should take this opportunity to leave the army.

古文：校尉韩威进曰： 以新室之威而吞胡虏，无异口中蚤虱。
现代文：校尉韩威建议道： 凭新朝的威力去吃掉匈奴，正好像吃掉口裹的跳蚤虱子一样。
English: School Lieutenant Han Wei suggested: "Using the power of the new dynasty to eat the Xiongnu is just like eating the mouth-wrapped flea lice.

古文：臣愿得勇敢之士五千人，不赍斗粮，饥食虏肉，渴饮其血，可以横行。 
现代文：我愿意求得勇敢的士兵五千人，不携带一斗粮食，饿了就吃敌人的肉，渴了就喝他们的血，可以在匈奴境内横冲直撞。 
English: I would like to ask for five thousand brave soldiers, without carrying a bucket of grain, hungry to eat the flesh of the enemy, thirsty to drink their blood, to rampage in the territory of the Huns.

古文：莽壮其言，以威为将军。
现代文：王莽认为他的话很豪壮，任命韩威作将军。
English: Wang Mang thought his words were very brave and appointed Han Wei as general.

古文：然采普言，征还诸将在边者。
现代文：然而采纳如普的意见，调回驻扎在边境的各将领。
English: However, he accepted the general opinion and recalled the generals stationed at the border.

古文：免陈钦等十八人，又罢四关填都尉诸屯兵。
现代文：免去陈钦等十八人的将军职务，又撤销前、后、左、右四关将军镇守都城和六尉的各部驻军。
English: Eighteen people, including Chen Qin, were relieved of their duties as generals, and four generals, including the former, the latter, the left, and the right, were removed from the garrison of the capital and the garrisons of various ministries.

古文：会匈奴使还，单于知侍子登前诛死，发兵寇边，莽复发军屯。
现代文：当匈奴使者回去，单于知道来中原侍奉皇帝的儿子登前些时候已被处死，便出兵侵犯边境，王莽又调集军队去驻守。
English: When the Hun emissary returned, knowing that the emperor's son who had come to the Central Plains to serve the emperor had been executed some time earlier, he sent troops to violate the border, and Wang Mang also mobilized troops to garrison.

古文：于是边民流入内郡，为人奴婢，乃禁吏民敢挟边民者弃市。
现代文：于是边境人民流亡到内郡，作人家的奴隶，便下禁令：官吏和平民敢有私藏边境流亡人民的处死刑。
English: As a result, the border people were exiled to the inner county and became slaves of others, and a ban was issued: officials and civilians who dared to secretly hide the border exiled people were sentenced to death.

古文：益州蛮夷杀大尹程隆，三边尽反。
现代文：益州郡部族杀死了大尹程隆，边境许多部族全都反叛。
English: The tribe of Yizhou County killed the great Yin Chenglong, and many tribes along the border all rebelled.

古文：遣平蛮将军冯茂将兵击之。
现代文：派遣平蛮将军冯茂率领军队攻打他们。
English: He dispatched General Feng Mao to lead the army to attack them.

古文：宁始将军侯辅免，讲《易》祭酒戴参为宁始将军。
现代文：宁始将军侯辅免职，讲《易》祭酒戴参担任宁始将军。
English: Ningxi General Hou Fu was relieved of his duties, and the "Yi" sacrificial wine Dai Zhan was appointed as Ningxi General.

古文：二年二月，置酒王路堂，公卿、大夫皆佐酒。
现代文：二年二月间，在王路堂举行宴会，公卿大夫都参加宴会。
English: In February of the second year, a banquet was held in Wanglu Hall, and all the noble doctors attended the banquet.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：宣布全国大赦。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：是时，日中见星。
现代文：这时候，中午时分出现了星光。
English: At this time, around noon, starlight appeared.

古文：大司马苗左迁司命，以延德侯陈茂为大司马。
现代文：大司马苗欣降职担任司命，任命延德侯陈茂作大司马。
English: The chief secretary Ma Miaoxin was demoted to the position of secretary and appointed Yan Dehuo Chen Mao as the chief secretary.

古文：讹言黄龙堕死黄山宫中，百姓奔走往观者以万数。
现代文：谣传有黄龙摔死在黄山宫中，老百姓飞跑前往看热闸的以万计。
English: Rumor has it that Huanglong fell to his death in the Huangshan Palace, and thousands of people rushed to see the fire.

古文：莽恶之，捕系问语所从起，不能得。
现代文：王莽讨厌这件事，拘捕了一些人询问谣言从哪个传起，没有能够找到。
English: Wang Mang hated it, arrested some people and asked where the rumor came from, but couldn't find it.

古文：单于咸既和亲，求其子登尸，莽欲遣使送致，恐咸怨恨害使者，乃收前言当诛侍子者故将军陈钦，以他罪系狱。
现代文：单于咸既已跟中原和好，索取他的儿子登的尸体，王莽想要派遣使者送去，恐怕咸怨恨伤害使者，便逮捕从前提议要处死登的原将军陈钦，用别的罪名把他关进监狱。
English: Wang Mang wanted to send an envoy to claim the body of his son Deng, but since Han had already made peace with Zhongyuan, Wang Mang was afraid that Han would resent and harm the envoy, so he arrested the former general Chen Qin, who had previously proposed to execute Deng, and put him in prison on other charges.

古文：钦曰： 是欲以我为说于匈奴也。 
现代文：陈钦说： 这是想要拿我当替罪羊向匈奴解释呀。 
English: Chen Qin said: This is an attempt to use me as a scapegoat to explain to the Xiongnu.

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：便自杀了。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：莽选儒生能颛对者济南王咸为大使，五威将琅邪伏黯等为帅，使送登尸。
现代文：王莽挑选擅长交涉对答的儒生济南郡人王咸作特使，五威将琅邪郡人伏黯等作武官，让他们送还登的尸体。
English: Wang Mang selected Wang Xianrong, a Confucian scholar from Jinan County, who was good at negotiating and answering questions, as a special envoy, and Wu Wei selected Fu Qian, a Confucian scholar from Ziyang County, as a military attaché, and asked them to return the body.

古文：敕令掘单于知墓，棘鞭其尸。
现代文：命令匈奴方面掘毁单于囊知牙斯的坟墓，用棘条抽打他的尸体。
English: He ordered the Xiongnu to dig up the grave of Zanzichi Das, who was buried alone, and to beat his corpse with thorns.

古文：又令匈奴却塞于漠北，责单于马万争，牛三万头，羊十万头，及稍所略边民生口在者皆还之。
现代文：又命令匈奴把边界撤退到大戈壁以北，向单于索取一万匹马、三万头牛和十万只羊，以及把他们随便抢去现在还活着的边民俘虏都交回来。
English: He also ordered the Xiongnu to withdraw the border to the north of the Great Gobi, to demand ten thousand horses, thirty thousand cattle and one hundred thousand sheep from Yidan, and to return all the border prisoners they had arbitrarily taken and who were still alive.

古文：莽好为大言如此。
现代文：王莽喜欢说大话像这个样子。
English: Wang Mang likes to talk big like this.

古文：咸到单于庭，陈莽威德，责单于背畔之罪，应敌从横，单于不能诎，遂致命而还之。
现代文：王咸到了单于的王庭，陈述王莽的声威德行，谴责单于背叛的罪行，随机应变，对答如流，单于不能够压倒他，于是传达完命令就回来了。
English: Wang Xian arrived at the royal court of Shan Yu, stated Wang Mang's heroic deeds, condemned Shan Yu's treasonous crimes, made random contingency plans, answered questions fluently, but could not overpower him, and then returned after conveying the order.

古文：入塞，咸病死，封其子为伯，伏黯等皆为子。
现代文：进入边界，王咸病死，赐封他的儿子为伯爵，伏黯等人都为子爵。
English: Entering the border, Wang Xian died of illness, his son was given the title of count, and Fu Qian and others were viscounts.

古文：莽意以为制定则天下自平，故锐思于地理，制礼作乐，讲合《六经》之说。
现代文：王莽心中认为制度。经确定，那么天下自然太平，所以精心思考于地理，制定礼法，创作乐教，讲求符合《六经》的理论。
English: Wang Mang's heart believed in the system. It was determined that the world would be naturally peaceful, so he carefully thought about geography, formulated etiquette, created music and teaching, and sought to conform to the theory of the "Six Classics."

古文：公卿旦入暮出，议论连年不决，不暇省狱讼冤结民之急务。
现代文：公卿大臣早晨上朝，傍晚出朝，议论连年，不能够作出决断，没有工夫处理诉讼官司解决这些人民迫切需要解决的问题。
English: The Minister of Justice and the Minister of Justice in the morning, in the evening, in the morning, discuss for years, unable to make a decision, and have no time to deal with litigation to solve these problems that the people urgently need to solve.

古文：县宰缺者，数年守兼，一切贪残日甚。
现代文：县长缺人的，时常好几年由别人代理，一切贪脏枉法的现象，一天比一天更厉害。
English: County governors are understaffed and are often deputized by others for several years, and all the corrupt practices are getting worse by the day.

古文：中郎将、绣衣执法在郡国者，并乘权势，传相举奏。
现代文：派驻各郡国的中郎将和绣衣执法，纷纷利用权势，到处牵连检举上报。
English: The middlemen assigned to each county and prefecture, as well as the law enforcement officials, have used their power to implicate and report everywhere.

古文：又十一公士分布劝农桑，班时令，案诸章，冠盖相望，交错道路，召会吏民，逮捕证左，郡县赋敛，递相赇赂，白黑纷然，守阙告诉者多。
现代文：还有十一公的办事人员分布各地，督促农耕和蚕桑，颁行关于农政的政令，检查各种规章制度的执行情况，使者前后相继，在大路上来来往往，召集官吏和平民，逮捕见证人，郡裹县裹搜刮财物，层层贿赂，是非混淆，清浊不分，守在朝廷申诉冤苦的很多。
English: There are also 11 public officials distributed all over the country, urging farming and silkworms, issuing decrees on agricultural policy, checking the implementation of various rules and regulations, emissaries coming and going in succession, coming and going on the highway, summoning officials and civilians, arresting witnesses, sweeping the county to search for property, bribing, confusing right and wrong, and keeping a lot of grievances in the court.

古文：莽自见前颛权以得汉政，故务自揽众事，有司受成苟免。
现代文：王莽看到自己从前专权从而取得了汉朝的政权，所以务必自己包揽一切事务，负责官吏接受既定的政令，奉行故事，衹图能够免除罪责。
English: Wang Mang saw that he had gained the power of the Han Dynasty from the former dictatorship, so he must take care of all affairs himself, responsible officials accept the established decrees, follow the story, and the map can absolve criminal responsibility.

古文：诸宝物名、帑藏、钱谷官，皆宦者领之；吏民上封事书，宦官左右开发，尚书不得知。
现代文：各机要部门、国库和钱粮官，都由宦官管理；官吏和平民上密封报告，由宦官在他身边开拆，尚书不得而知。
English: All the important departments of the government, the treasury and the commissariat, were managed by eunuchs; officials and commoners received sealed reports, which were opened by eunuchs at his side. The contents of the reports are unknown.

古文：其畏备臣下如此。
现代文：他的提防臣下像这个样子。
English: This is what his wary subjects look like.

古文：又好变改制度，政令烦多，当奉行者，辄质问乃以从前，前后相乘，愦眊不渫。
现代文：又喜欢改变制度，政令烦多，本来应当由下面接受执行的，总要反复请示以后才按照指示去办理，以致前面的事情没有处理，后面的事情又赶上来了，混乱糊涂，没完没了。
English: They also like to change the system. Government orders are tiresome, and those that should be executed from below should always be carried out after repeated requests for instructions, so that the things in front are not handled, and the things behind are caught up again. It is chaotic and endless.

古文：莽常御灯火至明，犹不能胜。
现代文：王莽时常照着灯火直到天明，还没有办完。
English: Wang Mang often lights the lanterns until dawn, and has not yet finished.

古文：尚书因是为奸寝事，上书待报者连年不得去，拘系郡县者逢赦而后出，卫卒不交代三岁矣。
现代文：尚书藉此机会舞弊，阻塞下情，上报告等待回答的几年不能够离开，被关押在郡县监狱裹的要遇到大赦才得出去，京城卫戍士兵不更换达三年之久。
English: Shang Shu took advantage of this opportunity to commit fraud and obstruct justice. He was unable to leave the city for several years while waiting for an answer to his report. Those who were imprisoned in county jails had to receive amnesty before they could leave. The soldiers of the Capital Garrison were not replaced for three years.

古文：谷常贵，边兵二十余万人仰衣食，县官愁若。
现代文：谷物常常很贵，边防部队二十多万人等着要吃要穿，官府也大伤脑筋。
English: Grain is often very expensive, more than two hundred thousand border guards are waiting to eat and wear, and the government is also worried.

古文：五原、代郡尤被其毒，起为盗贼，数千人为辈，转入旁郡。
现代文：五原郡和代郡尤其遭殃，人民艇而走险进行抢劫，几千人成群结队，转到邻近各郡。
English: Wuhara-gun and Dai-gun were particularly hard hit. People's boats risked their lives to carry out robberies, and several thousand people flocked to neighboring counties.

古文：莽遣捕盗将军孔仁将与兵郡县合击，岁余乃定，边郡亦略将尽。
现代文：王莽派遣捕盗将军孔仁率领军队会同地方部队联合进击，经过一年多才平定，边郡人民流亡，差不多走光了。
English: Wang Mang dispatched General Kong Ren, a thief-catcher, to lead the army in a joint attack with local troops. It took more than a year to pacify the area, and the people of Bian County were forced into exile, and almost all of them left.

古文：邯郸以北大雨雾，水出，深者数丈，流杀数千人。
现代文：邯郸城以北地区降了大雨大雾，地下水涌出，水深的地方有几丈深，冲走淹死几千人。
English: Heavy rain and fog fell in the area north of Lucheng, groundwater gushed out, and the water depth was several feet deep, washing away and drowning thousands of people.

古文：立国将军孙建死，司命赵闳为立国将军。
现代文：立国将军孙建死了，司命赵闳担任立国将军。
English: The founding general, Sun Jian, died, and his successor, Zhao Jun, became the founding general.

古文：宁始将军戴参归故官，南城将军廉丹为宁始将军。
现代文：宁始将军戴参回任原职，南城将军廉丹担任宁始将军。
English: General Ningshi Dai Sang returned to his original post, and Nancheng General Lian Dan assumed the post of General Ningshi.

古文：三年二月乙酉，地震，大雨雪，关东尤甚，深者一丈，竹柏或枯。
现代文：三年二月乙酉曰，发生了地震，落大雪，关东地区尤其厉害，雪深的地方有一丈，竹子、柏树有的枯死了。
English: In February of the third year, there was an earthquake, and heavy snow fell. The Kanto region was particularly hard hit. The snow was a foot deep in some places, and some bamboo and cypress trees died.

古文：大司空王邑上书言： 视事八年，功业不效，司空之职尤独废顿，至乃有地震之变。
现代文：大司空王邑上报告说： 到职八年，工作没有成绩，司空的职务尤其近于瘫痪，乃至发生地震的变故。
English: Daishi Kuo Wangyurang reported: After eight years in office, there is no achievement in the work. In particular, the duties of Daishi Kuo are close to paralysis, and even an earthquake has occurred.

古文：愿乞骸骨。 
现代文：我愿意请求退休。 
English: I would like to request retirement.

古文：莽曰： 夫地有动有震，震者有害，动者不害。
现代文：王莽说： 地有小动有大震，大震有害，小动无害。
English: Wang Mang said: The earth has small movements and large earthquakes. Large earthquakes are harmful, while small movements are harmless.

古文：《春秋》记地震，《易·系》 坤 动，动静辟胁，万物生焉。
现代文：《春秋》记载了地震，《易系。坤》上说到了地动，动的时候就张开，静的时候就合拢，万物由此发生。
English: "Spring and Autumn" recorded the earthquake, and "Easy system. Kun" mentioned the earth movement. When it moves, it opens, when it is quiet, it closes, and everything happens from this.

古文：灾异之变，各有云为。
现代文：灾害和怪异现象的发生，各有不同的意义和作用。
English: The occurrence of disasters and strange phenomena have different meanings and functions.

古文：天地动威，以戒予躬，公何辜焉，而乞骸骨，非所以助予者也。
现代文：天地表示威严，用来警戒我自己，您有什么过错呢，而要请求退休，造就不是用来帮助我的态度了。
English: To ask for retirement is to create an attitude that is not designed to help me.

古文：使诸吏散骑司禄大卫脩宁男遵谕予意焉。 
现代文：派诸吏散骑司禄大卫脩宁男遵转告我的意思。 
English: I sent officers to scatter, and Siroku David Shinno came to tell me what I wanted.

古文：五月，莽下吏禄制度，曰： 予遭阳九之厄，百六之会，国用不足，民人骚动，自公卿以下，一月之禄十緵布二匹，或帛一匹。
现代文：五月间。王莽下达官吏俸禄制度，说道： 我遭遇不幸的命运，灾难的周期，国家财政开支不足，人民骚动，从公卿以下，一个月的俸禄衹有八十缕麻线布二匹或绸绢一匹。
English: In May, Wang Mang issued the salary system for officials, saying: I have encountered an unfortunate fate, a cycle of disaster, insufficient state financial expenditure, and people's agitation. From the nobility on down, a month's salary includes two pairs of eighty-thread count linen or one pair of silk stockings.

古文：予每念之，未尝不戚焉。
现代文：我每一想到这件事，没有不忧愁的。
English: Every time I think about it, I get sad.

古文：今厄会已度，府帑虽未能充，略颇稍给，其以六月朔庚寅始，赋吏禄皆如制度。 
现代文：现在困难时期已经过去，国库储备虽然还不充足，但略微比较宽裕，应当从六月朔日庚寅开始，按照制度发给官吏俸禄。 
English: Now that the difficult times have passed, although the treasury reserves are not yet sufficient, they are slightly more abundant. Starting from the last day of June, officials should be paid a salary according to the system.

古文：四辅公、卿、大夫、士，下至舆僚，凡十五等。
现代文：从四辅、公、卿、大夫、士，下至众多的幕僚，共分十五等。
English: There are a total of 15 ranks, from the four auxiliary ranks, court officials, nobles, doctors, and officers, down to the numerous staff officers.

古文：僚禄一岁六十六斛，稍以差增，上至四辅而为万斛云。
现代文：幕僚的俸禄一年是六十六斛，逐步按等级增加，上至四辅是一万斛。
English: An aide's annual salary is 66 mon, gradually increasing according to rank, up to 10,000 mon for the fourth assistant.

古文：莽又曰： 普天之下，莫非王土；率土之宾，莫非王臣。盖以天下养焉。
现代文：王莽又说：  普天之下，没有地方不是国王的土地；全国范围内，没有人不是国王的臣下，原本是拿天下的财物来供养你们。
English: Wang Mang also said: In the whole world, there is no place that is not the king's land; in the whole country, there is no one who is not the king's vassal, originally taking the world's wealth to support you.

古文：《周礼》膳羞百有二十品，今诸侯各食其同、国、则；辟、任、附城食其邑；公、卿、大夫、元士食其采。
现代文：《周礼》规定进献皇帝的美好食物有一百二十种，现在诸侯各取给予他们的同、国、则；辟爵、任爵、附城各取给予他们的封邑；公、卿、大夫、元士各取给予他们的采地。
English: "Zhou Li" stipulates that there are one hundred and twenty kinds of fine food to be presented to the emperor. Now, the lords each take the same, country, and prize given to them; the barons, the barons, and the attached cities each take the fiefs given to them; the princes, the lords, the doctors, and the generals each take the mining land given to them.

古文：多少之差，咸有条品。
现代文：多少不同的等级，都有一定的条例。
English: There are certain regulations for different levels.

古文：岁丰穰则充其礼，有灾害则有所损，与百姓同忧喜也。
现代文：年成丰收就尽量按礼制备足，遇到灾害就有所减少，跟老百姓同甘共苦。
English: When the year ends with a bumper harvest, they try to prepare as much as possible according to etiquette, and when they encounter disasters, they reduce the number of disasters. They share their joys and sorrows with the common people.

古文：其用上计时通计，天下幸无灾害者，太官膳羞备其品矣；即有灾害，以什率多少而损膳焉。
现代文：应当采用年终决算时的统计数目作为根据，全国幸而没有灾害，太宫进献的美好食物备齐它们的种类；如果遇到灾害，按照百分比的多少来减少进献的食物。
English: The statistics at the time of year-end accounting should be used as a basis. Fortunately, there are no disasters in the whole country, and the beautiful foods donated by the Imperial Palace are all prepared in their categories. If there is a disaster, the donated food should be reduced according to the percentage.

古文：东岳太师立国将军保东方三州一部二十五郡；南岳太傅前将军保南方二州一部二十五郡；西岳国师宁始将军保西方一州二部二十五郡；北岳国将卫将军保北方二州一部二十五郡；大司马保纳卿、言卿、仕卿、作卿、京尉、扶尉，兆队、右队、中部左洎前七部；大司徒保乐卿、典卿、宗卿、秩卿、翼尉、光尉、左队、前队、中部、右部，有五郡；大司空保予卿、虞卿、共卿、工卿、师尉、列尉、祈队、后队、中部洎后十郡；及六司，六卿，皆随所属之公保其灾害，亦以十率多少而损其禄。
现代文：东岳太师和立国将军跟东方三州一部二十五郡挂起钩来；南岳太傅和前将军跟南方二省一部二十五郡挂起钩来；西岳国师和宁始将军跟西方一州二部二十五郡挂起钩来；北岳国将和卫将军跟北方二州一部二十五郡挂起钩来；大司马和纳卿、言卿、仕卿、作卿跟京尉、扶尉、兆队、右队、中部和左部到前部共十郡挂起钩来；大司徒和乐卿、典卿、宗卿、秩卿、翼尉、光尉、左队、前队、中部和右部共五郡挂起钩来；大司空和予卿、虞卿、共卿、工卿、师尉、列尉、祈队、后队、中部到后部共十郡挂起钩来；以及六司和六卿，都随着他们所隶属的大臣跟有关地区的灾害挂起钩来，也按照百分比的多少来减少俸禄。
English: Dongyue Taishi and General Liguo are linked to a 25-county section of the three eastern prefectures; Nanyue Taifu and the former general are linked to a 25-county section of two southern provinces; Xiyue Guo Shi and General Ningshi are linked to a 25-county section of one western prefecture; Beiguo is linked to General Wei to a 25-county section of two northern prefectures; Daishi Ma and Na Sir, Tong Sir, Shih Sir, and Zu Sir are linked to Keifu, Fu Fu Fu, Zhaotai, Zu Zu Zu, and a total of ten counties from the center and left to the front; Daishi

古文：郎、从官、中都官吏食禄都内之委者，以太官膳羞备损而为节。
现代文：从京城仓库的储积粮裹面领取俸禄的郎官、侍从官和京城官吏，根据太官进献的美好食物的齐备或减少作为尺度。
English: The vassals, attendants, and officials of the capital, who received their salaries from the stored grain and flour of the capital warehouse, were measured according to the completeness or reduction of the fine food offered by the eunuchs.

古文：诸侯、辟、任、附城、群吏亦各保其灾害。
现代文：诸侯、辟爵、任爵、附城和各种办事人员也各跟有关地区的灾害挂起钩来。
English: Princes, barons, knights, towns and all kinds of clerks are also linked to the disasters in the relevant areas.

古文：几上下同心，劝进农业，安元元焉。 
现代文：希望君臣上下同心同德，鼓励促进农业生产，安抚善良的老百姓。 
English: It is hoped that the monarchs and ministers will act in the same spirit, encourage the promotion of agricultural production, and appease the good-hearted people.

古文：莽之制度烦碎如此，课计不可理，吏终不得禄，各因官职为奸，受取赇赂以自共给。
现代文：王莽的制度烦碎得像这个样子，核算全国的会计报表不好办，官吏终究领不到俸禄，各自利用自己的职权干坏事，靠收受贿赂来供给自己的需要。
English: Wang Mang's system is as cumbersome and broken as this. It is difficult to calculate the national accounting report, and the officials ultimately do not receive salaries. They each use their authority to do bad things and rely on accepting bribes to supply their own needs.

古文：是月戊辰，长平馆西岸崩，邕泾水不流，毁而北行。
现代文：这个月戊辰日，长平馆西岸坍塌，把泾河阻塞不通，冲决堤坝向北流去。
English: This month, on the day of Pentecost, the west bank of the Changping Pavilion collapsed, blocking the Li River and causing it to break through the dam and flow north.

古文：遣大司空王邑行视，还奏状，群臣上寿，以为《河图》所谓 以土填水 ，匈奴灭亡之祥也。
现代文：派遣大司空王邑去巡视，回来报告了情况，大臣们向王莽祝贺，认为造就是《河图》所说的 用土去镇服水 ，是匈奴灭亡的好兆头。
English: The ministers congratulated Wang Mang, believing that the construction was what the "river map" described as using soil to carry water, and was a good omen for the destruction of the Xiongnu.

古文：乃遣并州牧宋弘、游击都尉任萌等将兵击匈奴，至边止屯。
现代文：于是派遣并州牧宋弘和游击都尉任萌等人统率军队进击匈奴，到达边境驻扎下来。
English: As a result, Song Hong, the governor of the annexed prefecture, and Ren Meng, the guerrilla captain, were dispatched to lead the army to attack the Xiongnu, arriving at the border and stationed there.

古文：七月辛酉，霸城门灾，民间所谓青门也。
现代文：七月辛酉曰，霸城门发生了火灾，这里就是民间所说的青门。
English: In July, Xin Wei said that there was a fire at the castle gate, and this is what people call the Qingmen.

古文：戊子晦，日有食之。
现代文：本月戊子最后一天，出现了日食。
English: On the last day of this month, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：大赦天下，复令公卿、大夫、诸侯、二千石举四行各一人。
现代文：宣布全国大赦。又命令公卿大夫、诸侯、二千石级官吏推举德行、政事、言语、文学四科杰出者各一人。
English: He declared a national amnesty, and ordered court nobles, doctors, princes, and officials of 2,000 koku to nominate one person each who excelled in the four subjects of morality, politics, language, and literature.

古文：大司马陈茂以日食免，武建伯严尤为大司马。
现代文：大司马陈茂因为出现了日食被免职，武建伯严尤担任大司马。
English: Chief Secretary Ma Chenmao was relieved of his duties because of the solar eclipse, and Wu Jianbo Yan served as chief secretary.

古文：十月戊辰，王路朱鸟门鸣，昼夜不绝，崔发等曰： 虞帝辟四门，通四聪。
现代文：十月戊辰日，王路朱鸟门发出响声，白天晚上都没有停止，崔发等人说道： 虞帝打开四座门，让自己能够远听四方。
English: In October, on the day of Pentecost, the Wanglu Zhucidong made a loud noise, which did not stop during the day and night. Cui Fa and others said: Emperor Yu opened four doors so that he could listen to the four directions.

古文：门鸣者，明当修先圣之礼，招四方之士也。 
现代文：朱乌门叫，表明新朝应当修明古代圣王的礼制，招引四方的贤士。 
English: Zhu Wumen called out, indicating that the new dynasty should clarify the ritual system of the ancient holy kings and attract the sages of the four directions.

古文：于是令群臣皆贺，所举四行从朱鸟门入而对策焉。
现代文：于是让大臣们都来祝贺，所推举的四科杰出者从朱乌门进入宫殿回答皇帝的策问。
English: So let the ministers all come to congratulate, and the outstanding four disciplines selected enter the palace from Zhu Wumen to answer the emperor's questions.

古文：平蛮将军冯茂击句町，士卒疾疫，死者什六七，赋敛民财什取五，益州虚耗而不克，征还下狱死。
现代文：平蛮将军冯茂攻打句町，士兵害了瘟疫，死亡的有十分之六七，征收人民财物，十分之中拿走五分，弄得益州郡民穷财尽，而战争没有取得胜利，王莽把他调回来关进监狱，死在狱中。
English: The barbaric general Feng Mao attacked Dahu Town. The soldiers caused a plague, and 67 out of every 10 died. They confiscated the people's property and took away 5 out of every 10. They made the people of Yizhou County run out of money, and the war did not achieve victory. Wang Mang transferred him back to prison and died in prison.

古文：更遣宁始将军廉丹与庸部牧史熊击句町，颇斩首，有胜。
现代文：再派宁始将军廉丹和庸部牧史熊攻打句町，杀死了一些敌人，取得了一定的胜利。
English: He then sent Ningshi General Liantan and Yongbu Makishi Xiong to attack Kuju Town, killed some enemies, and won a certain victory.

古文：莽征丹、熊，丹、熊愿益调度，必克乃还。
现代文：王莽调廉丹和史熊，廉丹和史熊希望增加军队和物资，一定彻底打败敌人才回来。
English: Wang Mang transferred Lian Dan and Shi Xiong. Lian Dan and Shi Xiong hoped to increase the number of troops and materials, and they must defeat the enemy completely before returning.

古文：复大赋敛，就都大尹冯英不肯给，上言 自越巂遂久仇牛、同亭邪豆之属反畔以来，积且十年，郡县距击不已。
现代文：又大肆搜刮，选昼眯大尹逦茎不肯给，上报告说 自从越鹤郡遂久县的仇牛和同亭郡的邪豆这些部族反叛以来，前后差不多十年了，郡县地方军民进行抗击没有停止过。
English: The report said that it had been almost ten years since the tribes of Qiu Niu in Suiji County and Zhao Zou in Tongting County rebelled, and the local military and civilians in the county had not stopped fighting back.

古文：续用冯茂，苟施一切之政。
现代文：接着任用冯茂，勉强推行不顾后果的政策。
English: He then appointed Feng Mao and reluctantly carried out the policy regardless of the consequences.

古文：僰道以南，山险高深，茂多驱众远居，费以亿计，吏士离毒气死者什七。
现代文：焚道县以南地区，山势险峻深邃，冯茂尽量把人民赶到远地居住，用费要用亿来计算，军官士兵遭受毒气死亡的达到十分之七。
English: In the area south of Qinduo County, where the mountains are steep and deep, Feng Mao tried his best to drive the people to live far away. The cost was calculated in hundreds of millions of yuan, and seven out of ten officers and soldiers were killed by poison gas.

古文：今丹、熊惧于自诡期会，调发诸郡兵、谷，复訾民取其十四，空破梁州，功终不遂。
现代文：现在廉丹和史熊对于自己保证的规定期限不能完成任务感到害怕，调用各郡的士兵和粮食，又搜刮人民财物，拿走了他们的十分之四，弄得梁州地区民穷财尽，却始终不能取胜。
English: Now Lian Dan and Shi Xiong were afraid that they would not be able to complete the task within the time limit they had promised. They called in soldiers and grain from all counties, and also raided the people's property, took away four-tenths of their money, and made the people of Liangzhou District run out of money, but they still could not win.

古文：宜罢兵屯田，明设购赏。 
现代文：应当停止战斗，派军队统守并开垦耕种田地，明令规定设置封赏，奖励那些抗击有功的军民。 
English: The fighting should be stopped, the army should be sent to guard and cultivate the fields, and a reward should be explicitly set up to reward those soldiers and civilians who have distinguished themselves in the resistance.

古文：莽怒，免英官。
现代文：王莽发火了，免掉了冯英的官职。
English: Wang Mang lost his temper and removed Feng Ying from his post.

古文：后颇觉寤，曰： 英亦未可厚非。 
现代文：后来有所觉悟，说道： 冯英也不便深加责怪。 
English: Later, with some awareness, he said, "It is not convenient for Feng Ying to be deeply blamed.

古文：复以英为长沙连率。
现代文：又任命冯英作长沙郡连率。
English: He also appointed Feng Ying as the leader of Changsha County.

古文：翟义党王孙庆捕得，莽使太医、尚方与巧屠共刳剥之，量度五藏，以竹筵导其脉，知所终始，云可以治病。
现代文：翟义的党羽王孙庆捉到了，王莽让太医、药剂师和高明的屠手一道解剖他，测量五脏，用小竹枝贯通他的脉管，弄清它的来龙去脉，说明可以用来治疗疾病。
English: Wang Mang asked the eunuch, apothecary and skilled butcher to dissect him, measure his five viscera, and use a small bamboo branch to pierce his artery to find out the ins and outs of it, explaining that it could be used to treat diseases.

古文：是岁，遣大使五威将王骏、西域都护李崇将戊己校尉出西域，诸国皆郊迎贡献焉。
现代文：这一年，派遣特使五威将王坠和酉球都护奎崇率领戊己校尉出使西域，各国都到郊外迎接并进献财物。
English: In this year, the special envoy Wu Wei dispatched Wang Kuan and the governor of Yunnan Province, Guizong, led by the captain Wu Ji, to the western region. All countries went to the suburbs to welcome and donate goods.

古文：诸国前杀都护但钦，骏欲袭之，命佐帅何封、戊己校尉郭钦别将。
现代文：各国以前杀死了酉域都护但趑，王壁想要袭击他们，命令副帅包过和戊己校尉皇邀率领部队单独行动。
English: Each country had previously killed the 域都護丹, Wang Bi wanted to attack them, and ordered Vice-Marshal Pao and Captain Wu Ji to lead the troops to act alone.

古文：焉耆诈降，伏兵击骏等，旨死。
现代文：焉耆国谎称投降，埋伏军队袭击王骏等人，都死了。
English: Yan's country falsely claimed to have surrendered, and the ambush troops attacked Wang Yao and others, all of whom died.

古文：钦、封后到，袭击老弱，从车师还入塞。
现代文：郭钦和何封来迟，袭击了他们的老弱残余，取道皇面厘回转进入边界。
English: Guo Qin and He Feng arrived late, attacked their old and weak remnants, and entered the border through the imperial road.

古文：莽拜钦为填外将军，封劋胡子。何封为集胡男。
现代文：玉莽授任郭麸作镇外将军，赐封型蛆王，赐封但过为集胡男。
English: Yuhang appointed Guo Jun as the general outside the town, gave him the title of the king of the Han Dynasty, and gave him the title of the man of the Hu Dynasty.

古文：西域自此绝。
现代文：从此与西域各国断绝丁关系。
English: Since then, it has severed diplomatic relations with Western countries.

