古文：罗亨信侯琎杨宁王来孙原贞朱鉴杨信民张骥马谨程信白圭张瓒孔镛邓廷瓒王轼刘丙罗亨信，字用实，东莞人。
现代文：罗亨信，字用实，东莞人。
English: Luo Hengxin, the characters are real, Dongguan people.

古文：永乐二年进士。
现代文：考中永乐二年进士。
English: Yongle died 22 years later.

古文：改庶吉士，授工科给事中。
现代文：改庶吉士，授予工科给事中。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Kishi, and the award of engineering was pending.

古文：出视浙江水灾，奏蠲三县租。
现代文：出京视察浙江水灾，上奏免除三个县的租税。
English: He went to Beijing to inspect the floods in Zhejiang, and was exempted from paying taxes in three counties.

古文：进吏科右给事中，坐累谪交阯为吏。
现代文：晋升为吏科右给事中，因受牵连获罪被贬谪到交趾为小吏。
English: In the promotion to the right of the official, he was demoted to a minor official due to being implicated in a crime.

古文：居九年，仁宗嗣位，始召入为御史。
现代文：过了九年，仁宗即位，纔召入朝中为御史。
English: Nine years later, Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, and Shun was summoned to the imperial court to serve as imperial historian.

古文：核通州仓储，巡按畿内，清军山西，皆有声。
现代文：查核通州仓库，巡察京畿，在山西治军，都有声誉。
English: Inspection of the Tongzhou warehouse, inspection of Gyeonggi, and administration of troops in Shanxi all have a good reputation.

古文：宣德中，有荐其堪方面者。
现代文：宣德年间，有人推荐他堪任一方长官。
English: During the Xuande era, some people recommended him to be a competent party chief.

古文：命食按察佥事俸，待迁。
现代文：皇上命他享受按察愈事的俸禄，等待升迁。
English: The emperor ordered him to enjoy the salary according to the investigation and investigation, and to wait for promotion.

古文：英宗即位之三月，擢右佥都御史，练兵平凉、西宁。
现代文：英宗即位后的第三个月，提升焉右愈都御史，在乎凉、西宁操练兵马。
English: In the third month after Emperor Yingzong's ascension to the throne, the promotion of Yan Yu to the position of Imperial Historian of the Capital, Liang Liang and Xining began to train soldiers and horses.

古文：正统二年，蒋贵讨阿台、朵儿只伯，亨信参其军务。
现代文：正统二年，蒋贵征讨阿台和朵儿只伯，罗亨信参预军务。
English: In the second year of orthodoxy, Chiang Kai-shek conscripted Atai and Doer Chubo, and Luo Hengxin participated in the pre-military affairs.

古文：至鱼儿海，贵等以刍饷不继，留十日引还。
现代文：到鱼儿海，蒋贵等人因粮饷不继，居留十日率军返回。
English: When they reached the Fisherman's Sea, Jiang Gui and the others stayed there for ten days and returned with the army.

古文：亨信让之曰： 公等受国厚恩，敢临敌退缩耶？
现代文：罗亨信责备他们说： 你们接受朝廷厚恩，敢临阵退缩吗？
English: Luo Hengxin reproached them, saying, "You accept the favor of the imperial court, do you dare to retreat?

古文：死法孰与死敌？ 
现代文：死于法度哪赶得上和敌人战死？ 
English: How can dying in battle be the same as dying in battle?

古文：贵不从。
现代文：蒋贵不听从。
English: Jiang Gui did not listen.

古文：亨信上章言贵逗遛状。
现代文：罗亨信上奏章说蒋贵逗留的状况。
English: Luo Heng's letter mentioned the status of Jiang Gui's stay.

古文：帝以其章示监督尚书王骥等。
现代文：皇帝把他的奏章给监督尚书王骥等人看。
English: The emperor showed his music to the overseer, Shang Shu Wang Jun, and others.

古文：明年进兵，大破之。
现代文：第二年进兵，大破敌军。
English: He entered the army the following year and defeated the enemy.

古文：亨信以参赞功，进秩一等。
现代文：罗亨信凭借参赞功劳，进级一等。
English: Luo Hengxin was promoted to the first grade by virtue of his achievements as counselor.

古文：父丧归葬。
现代文：父亲去世后回家送葬。
English: After his father's death, he came home for the funeral.

古文：还朝，改命巡抚宣府、大同。
现代文：返回朝廷，改任焉宣府、大同巡抚。
English: He returned to the Imperial Court and was reassigned to the Imperial Proclamation Office and the Governor of Datong.

古文：参将石亨请简大同民三之一为军，亨信奏止之。
现代文：参将石亨请求选择大同三分之一的百姓为兵，罗亨信上奏制止。
English: General Shi Heng requested that a third of Datong's citizens be chosen as soldiers. Luo Heng sent a letter to stop this.

古文：十年进右副都御史，巡抚如故。
现代文：正统十年，晋升为右副都御史，巡抚如故。
English: After ten years as an official, he was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, and remained the governor.

古文：时遣官度二镇军田，一军八十亩外，悉征税五升。
现代文：当时皇上派遣官员测量两镇军田，一军八十亩以外，都征税五升。
English: At that time, the emperor dispatched officials to survey the military fields of the two towns, and they all levied a tax of five liters except for the eighty mu army.

古文：亨信言： 文皇帝时，诏边军尽力垦田，毋征税，陛下复申命之。今奈何忽为此举？
现代文：罗亨信说： 文皇帝时，诏令边防军队尽力垦田，不征税，陛下又重申这条命令，今天为何忽然采取这一举措呢？
English: Luo Hengxin said: When Emperor Wen, he ordered the frontier troops to do their best to plow the fields and not to collect taxes, and His Majesty reiterated this order. Why did he suddenly take this measure today?

古文：塞上诸军，防边劳苦，无他生业，惟事田作。
现代文：塞上诸军，防卫边疆劳苦，没有其它生计，惟有从事田耕。
English: They were forced to defend the frontier with the help of the army. They had no other livelihood but farming.

古文：每岁自冬徂春，迎送瓦剌使臣，三月始得就田，七月又复刈草，八月以后，修治关塞，计一岁中曾无休暇。
现代文：每年自冬到第二年春，迎送瓦刺使臣，三月纔开始耕种，七月又再次割草，八月以后，修治关塞，一年中几乎没有闲暇的时间。
English: Every year, from winter to spring of the following year, there is little leisure time in the year to welcome the tile-throwing envoys, to start farming in March, to cut grass again in July, and to repair gates after August.

古文：况边地硗瘠，霜早收薄，若更征税，则民不复畊，必致窜逸。
现代文：况且边塞土地贫瘠，霜露早降，收入微薄，如果再征税，那么人民不会再耕种，必然会导致逃逸。
English: Moreover, the frontier land is barren, the frost and dew fall early, and the income is meager. If the tax is imposed again, then the people will no longer farm, which will inevitably lead to flight.

古文：计臣但务积粟，不知人心不固，虽有粟，将谁与守？ 
现代文：谋臣只知务求积粮，不知人心不稳固，即使有粮，将和谁一起来防守？ 
English: The advisers only know to accumulate grain, not knowing that the people's hearts are not stable. Even if there is grain, who will they come to defend with?

古文：帝纳其言而止。
现代文：皇帝采纳他的话，停止了这种做法。
English: Dinah was speechless.

古文：初，亨信尝奏言： 也先专候衅端，以图入寇。
现代文：当初，罗亨信曾上奏说： 也先专等时机，以图入侵。
English: At the beginning, Luo Hengxin once said in a report: We should also wait for the right time to invade.

古文：宜预于直北要害，增置城卫为备。
现代文：应事先在正北要塞，增置城卫来防备。
English: It should be prepared in advance in the north fortress, with additional guards.

古文：不然，恐贻大患。 
现代文：不然，恐怕贻留大患。 
English: Otherwise, I'm afraid we'll be stuck here.

古文：兵部议，寝不行。
现代文：兵部议论，废置不用。
English: The Ministry of the Armed Forces is discussing whether to scrap it.

古文：及土木之变，人情汹惧。有议弃宣府城者，官吏军民纷然争出。
现代文：等到土木之变，人心惶恐不安，有建议放弃宣府城的，官吏军民纷争而出。
English: By the time of the Civil Engineering Reforms, the people were in a state of panic and anxiety. There was a proposal to abandon the city of Xuanfu, and officials, soldiers, and citizens were at loggerheads.

古文：亨信仗剑坐城下，令曰： 出城者斩！ 
现代文：罗亨信持剑坐在城下，下令说： 出城的杀。 
English: Luo Hengxin sat at the foot of the city holding a sword and gave the order: "Leave the city and be killed."

古文：又誓诸将为朝廷死守，人心始定。
现代文：又与诸将发誓焉朝廷死守，人心纔安定下来。
English: He also swore with all the generals to defend the imperial court to the death, and the hearts of the people settled down.

古文：也先挟上皇至城南，传命启门。
现代文：也先挟持上皇到城南，传令开门。
English: He also took the emperor to the south of the city and ordered him to open the door.

古文：亨信登城语曰： 奉命守城，不敢擅启。 
现代文：罗亨信登城告诉他们说： 奉命守城，不敢擅自开启。 
English: Luo Heng Xin went to the city and told them: I have been ordered to guard the city, and I dare not open it without permission.

古文：也先逡巡引去。
现代文：也先徘徊而去。
English: They also wandered away first.

古文：赤城、雕鹗、怀来、永宁、保安诸守将弃城遁，并按其罪。
现代文：赤城、鹏鹦、怀来、永宁、保安诸守将弃城逃跑，一并追究他们的罪责。
English: The governors of Akagi, Pengpai, Huailai, Yongning, and Baoan will abandon the city and flee, and all of them will be held accountable.

古文：当是时，车驾既北，寇骑日薄城下，关门左右皆战场。
现代文：那时候，皇帝被俘，敌骑兵日日逼近城下，关门左右都是战场。
English: At that time, the emperor was captured, the enemy cavalry was approaching the city every day, and it was a battlefield around the gate.

古文：亨信与总兵杨洪以孤城当其冲，外御强寇，内屏京师。
现代文：罗亨信和总兵杨洪以孤域首当其冲，外御强敌，内保京城。
English: Luo Hengxin and the general Yang Hong were the first to bear the brunt of isolation, the external enemy, and the internal security of Beijing.

古文：洪既入卫，又与朱谦共守，劳绩甚著。
现代文：杨洪入京守卫后，又与朱谦共守，功绩很卓著。
English: After Yang Hong entered the capital to guard it, he guarded it together with Zhu Qian. Their achievements are outstanding.

古文：着兜鍪处，颠发尽秃。
现代文：戴头盔之处，头发全秃光。
English: He was wearing a helmet and his hair was completely bald.

古文：景帝即位，进左副都御史。
现代文：景帝即位，晋升为左副都御史。
English: Emperor Jing ascended to the throne and was promoted to Left Vice-Governor of the Capital.

古文：明年，年七十有四矣，乞致仕。
现代文：第二年，已经七十四岁了，请求辞官。
English: The following year, at the age of 74, he asked to retire.

古文：许之。
现代文：答应了他。
English: The customs officer allowed him to pass through.

古文：归八年，卒于家。
现代文：回去八年后，死于家中。
English: Eight years after his return, he died at home.

古文：侯琎。字廷玉。泽州人。
现代文：侯璀，字廷玉，泽州人。
English: Hou Yu, also known as Ting Yu, is a native of Zezhou.

古文：少慷慨有志节。
现代文：少年时慷慨有志气。
English: He was generous and ambitious as a boy.

古文：登宣德二年进士，授行人。
现代文：考中宣德二年进士，授予行人。
English: In the middle of the exam, Xuan De entered the second year and was awarded a pedestrian.

古文：乌撒、乌蒙土官以争地相仇杀，诏遣琎及同官章聪谕解之，正其疆理而还。
现代文：乌撒、鱼董土官因争地盘相互残杀，诏令侯珑及同僚章聪去开导劝解他们，划定他们的疆域而还。
English: Usa and Udong, local officials, killed each other because of a dispute over land, and ordered Hou Yi and his colleague Zhang Cong to enlighten and persuade them, delineate their territory and return.

古文：副侍郎章敞使交阯，关门卑，前驱伛而入，琎叱曰： 此狗窦耳，奈何辱天使！ 
现代文：副侍郎章敞出使交肚，关门低矮，前导人员弯腰而入，侯璀叱责说： 这是狗洞，为何侮辱天使？ 
English: The deputy chamberlain Zhang opened the bellies of the envoys, closed the door low, the leading personnel bent down and entered, Hou Yi scolded: This is a dog hole, why insult an angel?

古文：交人为毁关，乃入。
现代文：交人为他们毁坏关门，纔进入。
English: They were ordered to destroy and close the door and not to enter.

古文：及归，馈遗无所受。
现代文：等到离开，锁赠的物品一点也不接受。
English: Wait until you leave, and don't accept any items that have been locked away.

古文：迁兵部主事。
现代文：升迁兵部主事。
English: He was soon transferred to be the head of the military department.

古文：正统初，从尚书柴车等出铁门关御阿台有功，进郎中。
现代文：正统初年，跟从尚书柴车等人出军铁门关抵御阿台有功，晋升为郎中。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, he went to the Iron Gates with the followers of Shangshu Chaijie and others to defend against the Atai, and was promoted to the rank of roju.

古文：从王骥征麓川，至金齿。
现代文：跟从王骥征讨麓川，到金齿。
English: From Wang Xizheng to the Fulong River, to Jintao.

古文：骥自统大军击思任发，而遣琎援大侯州。
现代文：王骥自率大军攻击思任发，而派侯璀增援大侯州。
English: Wang Hui led his army to attack Shirenfa, and sent Hou Hui to reinforce Dahuozhou.

古文：贼众三万至，督都指挥马让、卢钺击走之。
现代文：敌众三万至，他督率都指挥马让、卢钹击跑敌人。
English: With the enemy numbering as many as 30,000, he and his superintendent commanded Ma Zhan and Lu Yao to drive away the enemy.

古文：遂由高黎贡山兼程夜行，会大军，压其巢。
现代文：于是由高黎贡山兼程夜行，会合大军，逼近他们的巢穴。
English: So they travelled by night from Mount Gaoligong, gathering a large army and approaching their lair.

古文：麓川平，拜礼部右侍郎，参赞云南军务，诏与杨宁二年更代。
现代文：麓川平定，授侯璀礼部右侍郎，参赞云南军务，诏令与杨宁二年替换一次。
English: Luchuan Pingding, the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department of the Imperial Household Agency, the Counsellor of Yunnan Military Affairs, was replaced by Yang Ning once every two years.

古文：骥再征麓川。琎以功迁左。
现代文：王骥第二次征讨麓川，侯璀因功升迁为左侍郎。
English: Wang Yao led the second expedition to conquer the Luchuan River, and Hou Yao was promoted to Left Attendant for his service.

古文：九年代还。
现代文：九年，被代替而回。
English: Nine years later, he was replaced and returned.

古文：母忧，起复，寻调兵部。
现代文：服母丧，起复原官，不久调任兵部。
English: After his mother's funeral, he was reinstated and soon transferred to the military department.

古文：十一年复代宁镇云南。
现代文：十一年，又代替杨宁镇守云南。
English: In the eleventh year, it replaced Yangning Town to guard Yunnan.

古文：思机发窜孟养，骥复南征。
现代文：思机发窜到孟养，王骥再次南征。
English: When the opportunity came to Meng Yao, Wang Yao once again marched south.

古文：琎与都督张軏分兵进抵金沙江，破之鬼哭山。玺书褒赉。
现代文：侯璀与都督张軏分兵进抵金沙江，在鬼哭山击破他们。
English: Hou Yi and the governor Zhang Ye arrived at the Jinsha River and defeated them at the Devil's Cry Mountain.

古文：景泰初，贵州苗韦同烈叛，围新添、平越、清平、兴隆诸卫。
现代文：皇帝下诏书褒奖。量泰初年，贵州苗人韦同烈叛乱，围困新添、平越、清平、兴隆诸卫。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiaotai, the Miao people of Guizhou and the Wei people rebelled and besieged the cities of Xintian, Pingyue, Qingping and Xinglong.

古文：命琎总督贵州军务讨之。
现代文：诏令侯璀总督贵州军务征讨。
English: He ordered the governor of Guizhou, Hou Yi, to investigate military affairs.

古文：时副总兵田礼巳解新添、平越围，琎遂遣兵攻败都卢、水西诸贼，贵州道始通。
现代文：当时副总兵田礼已经解除新添、平越之围，侯璀于是派兵击败都卢、水西诸贼，贵州道路纔通。
English: At that time, Vice-Commander-in-Chief Hyoda Li had already lifted the siege of Xintian and Pingyue, so Hou Yi sent troops to defeat the bandits in Dulu and Shuixi, and the roads in Guizhou were opened.

古文：又调云南兵，由乌撒会师，开毕节诸路，檄普安土兵援安南卫，而自率师攻紫塘、弥勒等十余寨。
现代文：又调云南兵，由乌撒会师，打通毕节诸路，传檄令普安土兵增援安南卫，而自己率军队攻打紫塘、弥勒等十几个敌军营寨。
English: He also transferred Yunnan soldiers from the U.S.S.A. division to open the Bijie Road, and ordered the Pu'an soldiers to reinforce Annanwei, while he led the army to attack more than a dozen enemy camps such as Zhitang and Maile.

古文：会贼复围平越，回师击退之。
现代文：恰巧贼再次围困平越，侯璀回军击退了他们。
English: It so happened that the bandits besieged Pingyue again, and the Houyi army repulsed them.

古文：遂分哨七盘坡、羊肠河、杨老堡，解清平围，东至重安江，与骥兵会。
现代文：于是分别巡视七盘坡、羊肠河、杨老堡，解清平围，束至重安江，与王骥会师。
English: As a result, they separately inspected Qipan slope, Yangsi River and Yanglaobao, cleared and leveled the area, bundled to the Chong'an River, and met with Wang Yao.

古文：兴隆抵镇远道皆通。
现代文：兴隆至镇远的道路都打通。
English: The roads from Xinglong to the town are all open.

古文：捷闻，进兵部尚书。
现代文：捷报传到朝廷，晋升侯璀为兵部尚书。
English: News of the victory reached the imperial court, and Hou Yi was promoted to the military.

古文：进克赏改苗，擒其渠王阿同等三十四人。
现代文：进军攻克赏改苗，擒获其首领王阿同等三十四人。
English: Thirty-four people, including their leader, Wang Ah, were captured in the campaign to conquer and subjugate Bao Kaimiao.

古文：别贼阿赵伪称赵王，率众掠清平，琎复讨擒之。
现代文：别贼阿趟伪称赵王，率众掠夺清平，侯璀又征讨擒获他。
English: Another thief, Ah Wai, falsely claimed to be King Zhao, led the crowd to plunder Qingping, and Hou Yi recruited and captured him.

古文：水西苗阿忽等六族皆自乞归化，诏琎随方处置。
现代文：水西苗阿忽等六族都乞求归顺，诏令侯璀依情形处置。
English: Six ethnic groups, including the West Miao and the West Miao, all begged for submission, and the emperor ordered the magistrate to deal with them according to the situation.

古文：景泰元年八月以劳瘁卒于普定，年五十三。
现代文：景泰元年八月因劳累在普定去世，终年五十三岁。
English: Jing Tai died of exhaustion in Puding in August, at the age of fifty-three.

古文：赐祭葬，荫其子锦衣卫世袭千户。
现代文：皇上赐予祭葬，封荫其子为锦衣卫世袭千产。
English: The emperor gave him a ceremonial burial, and sealed his son's name as the heir of the thousand-year reign of Emperor Jinbei.

古文：杨宁，字彦谧，歙人。
现代文：杨宁，字彦谧，歙人。
English: Yang Ning, Aza Hikone, Hayato.

古文：宣德五年进士。
现代文：考中宣德五年进士。
English: Xuande five years, junior high school graduate.

古文：授刑部主事。
现代文：授予刑部主事。
English: He is now in charge of the criminal justice department.

古文：机警多才能，负时誉。
现代文：为人机警多才干，为时人所称誉。
English: He was praised by contemporaries for his versatility as a policeman.

古文：正统初，从尚书魏源巡视宣、大。
现代文：正统初年，跟从尚书魏源巡视宣、大。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, he followed Shangshu Wei Yuan's inspection of Xuan and Da.

古文：四年与都督吴亮征麓川。
现代文：四年，与都督昊亮征讨麓川。
English: In four years, he and the governor Hao Liang went to conquer the Luh River.

古文：贼款军门约降，宁曰： 兵未加而先降，诱我也，宜严兵待之。 
现代文：敌人到军门约请投降，杨宁说： 兵未发而先降，是诱惑我，应当部署军队严阵等待他们。 
English: When the enemy came to the gate of the army to ask for surrender, Yang Ning said, "It is a temptation for me to make the soldiers surrender before they are sent. The army should be deployed in a tight formation to wait for them."

古文：不听，令宁督运金齿。
现代文：昊亮不听，命令杨宁督运于金齿。
English: Hao Liang did not listen and ordered Yang Ning to be transferred to Jintao.

古文：已而贼果大至，官兵败绩。
现代文：不久敌人果然大举进犯，官兵大败。
English: Soon after, the enemy launched a large-scale attack, and the officers and soldiers were soundly defeated.

古文：诸将获罪，宁擢郎中。
现代文：诸将获罪，杨宁提升为郎中。
English: The generals were found guilty, and Yang Ning was promoted to vice-commander.

古文：复从王骥至腾冲破贼，宁与太仆少卿李蕡督战，并有功。
现代文：又跟从王骥到腾冲破敌，杨宁与太仆少卿李黄督战，一并有功。
English: He also followed Wang Qian to Teng to break through the enemy, Yang Ning and the servant Li Huangdu fought, and both contributed.

古文：师还，宁超拜刑部右侍郎。
现代文：军队回朝，杨宁被越级授予刑部右侍郎。
English: When the army returned to the imperial court, Yang Ning was awarded the title of Right Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：遭母忧，夺情。
现代文：遭遇母丧，丧期未满诏令除服任官。
English: After his mother's death, he was relieved of his duties by imperial edict before the period of mourning was over.

古文：九年代侯琎参赞云南军务。
现代文：九年，代替侯珐参赞云南军务。
English: Nine years later, he became Yunnan Military Affairs Counsellor in place of Hou Yi.

古文：时麓川甫平，宁以腾冲地要害，与都督沐昂筑城置卫，设戍兵控诸蛮。
现代文：当时麓川刚刚平定，鲢因剩冲地处要害，与都督沐昂筑城设卫，设置戍兵控制谙蛮。
English: At that time, the Luchuan River had just been pacified, and because the remaining areas were in a critical situation, he and the governor Muang built a city and set up guards, and set up soldiers to control the barbarians.

古文：边方遂定。
现代文：边塞纔安定下来。
English: The border fence has been stabilized.

古文：居二年，召还。
现代文：过了二年，被召回京。
English: Two years later, he was recalled to Kyoto.

古文：闽、浙盗起，命宁镇江西。
现代文：闽、浙盗贼兴起，皇上命杨宁镇守江西。
English: , Zhejiang thieves rise up, the emperor orders Yang Ning to guard Jiangxi.

古文：贼至，辄击败之。
现代文：敌人一来就击败他们。
English: Defeat the enemy as soon as they appear.

古文：暇则询民疾苦，境内向服。
现代文：闲暇时就询问人民疾苦，辖区内人民归向臣服。
English: In his spare time, he would inquire about the hardships of the people, and the people in his jurisdiction became submissive.

古文：景泰初，召拜礼部尚书，偕胡濙理部事。
现代文：景泰初年，召回朝廷授礼部尚书，和胡淡管理部事。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai, Shang Shu of the Imperial Decoration Department and Hu Tan of the Management Department were recalled.

古文：迤北可汗遣使入贡，宁言： 宜留使数日，宴劳赐予，视也先使倍厚。
现代文：迤北可汗派使者入朝进贡，塑皇说： 应留使者数日，设宴慰劳并赏赐，对待也先的使者加倍丰厚。
English: The Northern Qin Khan sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor, and Shouwang said: "You should keep the envoy for a few days, give him a banquet to console and reward him, and treat the first envoy twice as richly."

古文：彼性多猜，二人必内构，边患可缓。 
现代文：对方生性多疑，二人一定不和，边患可以得到缓解。 
English: The other party is naturally suspicious, the two must not get along, and the border problems can be alleviated.

古文：帝务诚信，不许。
现代文：皇帝务求诚实守信，不许。
English: Emperors should be honest and trustworthy.

古文：其冬，以足疾调南刑部。
现代文：这年冬，因脚病调往南刑部。
English: This winter, he was transferred to the Southern Criminal Division due to a foot ailment.

古文：七年为御史庄升所劾，遣核未报。
现代文：七年，被御史庄升所弹劾，派人查核没有回报。
English: Seven years later, he was impeached by the Imperial Historian Zhuang Sheng, and there was no reward for sending someone to investigate.

古文：宁力诋言官，都察院再劾宁胁制言路。
现代文：杨宁竭力诋毁谏官，都察院再次弹劾杨宁挟制进言之路。
English: Yang Ning tried his best to defame the eunuch, and the Duka Academy once again impeached Yang Ning, blocking his path to the presidency.

古文：诏免其罪，录状示之。
现代文：皇上下诏赦免他的罪遇，誊录状子给他看。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict pardoning him of his crime, and the transcript of the edict was shown to him.

古文：英宗复辟，命致仕。
现代文：英宗复位，命他辞官。
English: Emperor Yingzong was restored to the throne, and he was ordered to resign.

古文：逾年卒。
现代文：一年后去世。
English: A year later, Ying Xuan passed away.

古文：宁有才而善交权贵。
现代文：杨宁有才能而善于结交权贵。
English: Yang Ning is talented and good at making friends with the powerful.

古文：尝自叙前后战功，乞世荫。
现代文：普自叔前后战功，乞求世代封荫。
English: Pu Ziqun's war exploits begged for generations to come.

古文：子堣方一岁，遂得新安卫副千户。
现代文：他的儿子杨埚纔一岁，就获得新安卫副千户之职。
English: His one-year-old son, Yang Jie, was appointed as the new deputy of the Ministry of Public Security.

古文：王来，字原之，慈溪人。
现代文：王来，字原之，慈溪人。
English: Wang Lai, Aza Yuan Zi, Cixi people.

古文：宣德二年以会试乙榜授新建教谕。
现代文：宣德二年，以会试乙榜授予新建教谕。
English: In the second year of Xuande, the newly-built edict was awarded the second place in the examination.

古文：宁王府以诸生充乐舞，来请易以道士。
现代文：宁王府用诸生充当乐舞，王来请求用道士代替。
English: Ning Wangfu used sentient beings as music and dance, and Wang Lai requested that Taoists be used instead.

古文：诸王府设乐舞生始此。
现代文：诸王府设乐舞生由此开始。
English: This was the beginning of the music and dance troupe of the royal court.

古文：六年，以荐擢御史，出按苏、松、常、镇四府。
现代文：六年，因人推荐提升焉御史，出朝巡按苏、松、常、镇四府。
English: In the sixth year, he was promoted due to his recommendation, and went on a tour to four prefectures including Su, Matsu, Chang and Zhen.

古文：命偕巡抚周忱考察属吏，敕有 请自上裁 语。
现代文：皇上命他和巡抚周忱一起考察属吏，敕令中有 请自上裁 的话。
English: The emperor ordered him and the governor Zhou Zhen to inspect the subordinate officials together, and there was a request from the higher court in the imperial edict.

古文：来言： 贼民吏，去之惟恐不速，必请而后行，民困多矣。 
现代文：王来说： 害民之吏，除去他们惟恐不迅速，如果一定要先请示然后纔行动，人民困苦就会很厉害了。 
English: The king said: If the officials who harm the people are not removed quickly, if they must first ask for instructions and then take action, the people will suffer great hardships.

古文：帝为改敕赐之。
现代文：皇帝因此改变敕令赐给他。
English: As a result, the emperor changed the imperial edict and gave it to him.

古文：中官陈武以太后命使江南，横甚，来数抑之。
现代文：宦官陈武凭太后命令出使江南，很骄横，王来屡次抑制他。
English: The eunuch Chen Wu ordered by the Empress Dowager to be sent to the south of the Yangtze River. He was very arrogant, and Wang Lai repeatedly restrained him.

古文：武还，诉于帝。
现代文：陈武回京，向皇帝诉说。
English: Chen Wu returned to Beijing and complained to the emperor.

古文：帝问都御史顾佐： 巡按谁也？ 
现代文：皇帝问都御史顾佐： 巡按是谁？ 
English: The emperor asked the governor of the capital, Gu Zuo: Who is the inspector?

古文：佐以来对。
现代文：顾佐回答是王来。
English: Guza answered that it was Wang Lai.

古文：帝叹息称其贤，曰 识之 。
现代文：皇帝叹息称他贤良，说： 知道他。 
English: The emperor sighed and called him a wise man, saying, "I know him.

古文：及报命，奖谕甚至。
现代文：等到王来回来复命，奖赏告谕很多。
English: When the king comes back to fulfill his promise, there will be many rewards.

古文：英宗即位，以杨士奇荐，擢山西左参政。
现代文：英宗即位，因杨士奇推荐，提升为山西左参政。
English: Yingzong ascended to the throne, and was promoted to the Shanxi Left Party due to Yang Shichi's recommendation.

古文：言： 流民所在成家。
现代文：说： 流民在当地成家。
English: He said: "Migrants have started families in the area.

古文：及招还故土，每以失产复逃去。
现代文：等招回故土，每每因破产又逃去。
English: After being called back to their homeland, they all fled again due to bankruptcy.

古文：乞请随在附籍便。 
现代文：乞请随地依附户籍方便行事。 
English: Please do not rely on your household registration for convenience.

古文：又言： 郡县官不以农业为务，致民多游惰，催征辄致已命。
现代文：又说： 郡县官吏不以农业为本，致使人民大多游荡懒惰，催征赋税总是招致过分的命令。
English: He also said: County and county officials are not based on agriculture, resulting in the majority of people wandering and being lazy. Urging the collection of taxes always leads to excessive orders.

古文：朝廷悯其失业，下诏蠲除，而田日荒闲，租税无出，累及良民。
现代文：朝廷怜悯他们失业，下诏免除，而土地日益荒芜闲置，租税无处出，累及良民。
English: The imperial court took pity on their unemployment and issued an edict exempting them, but the land became increasingly barren and idle, and taxes were nowhere to be found, which affected the good people.

古文：宜择守长贤者，以课农为职。
现代文：应选择贤良的守令，以督促务农为职责。
English: A virtuous guardian should be chosen to supervise the agricultural work.

古文：其荒田，令附近之家通力合作，供租之外，听其均分，原主复业则还之。
现代文：那些荒地，令附近的人家通力合作，交租之外，听任他们平均分配，原主恢复常业就还给他。
English: Those wastelands, to the full cooperation of the nearby people, in addition to paying rent, let them be evenly distributed, and the original owner will be returned to him when he resumes his regular business.

古文：蚕桑可裨本业者，听其规画。
现代文：凡是种桑养蚕可以补益农业的，听凭他规划。
English: If mulberry cultivation and silkworm rearing can supplement agriculture, it is up to him to plan.

古文：仍令提学风宪官督之，庶人知务本。 
现代文：仍旧命令提学御史官监督，希望老百姓知道务农的重要性。 
English: He still ordered the supervision of historians to be raised, and hoped that the people would know the importance of farming.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：来居官廉，练达政事。
现代文：至来居官廉洁，熟练通达政事。
English: To date, he has been a clean official and is well-versed in government affairs.

古文：侍郎于谦抚山西，亟称其才，可置近侍。
现代文：侍郎于谦巡抚山西，多次称赞他的才能，可在皇帝身边任官。
English: Yu Qian, the governor of Shanxi Province, praised his talent many times, and he could be appointed to the emperor's side.

古文：而来执法严，疾恶尤甚，以公事杖死县令不职者十人。
现代文：而王来执法严格，痛恨邪恶尤其厉害，因公事杖死不称职的县令十人。
English: However, Wang Lai enforced the law strictly and hated evil in particular. Ten incompetent county magistrates died in the line of duty.

古文：逮下狱，当徒。
现代文：被逮捕下狱判处受徒刑。
English: He was arrested, jailed and sentenced to prison.

古文：遇赦，以原官调补广东。
现代文：遇到赦免，以原职调补广东。
English: When he was pardoned, he was transferred to Guangdong in his original position.

古文：来自此始折节为和平，而政亦修举。
现代文：王来从此开始改变平素志行宽容待人，而政事也处理得当。
English: From then on, Wang Lai began to change his way of life, to be tolerant of others, and to handle political affairs properly.

古文：正统十三年迁河南左布政使。
现代文：正统十三年，升迁为河甫左布政使。
English: In the thirteenth year of orthodoxy, he was promoted to the post of political envoy of He Fu Zuo Bu.

古文：明年改左副都御史，巡抚河南及湖广襄阳诸府。
现代文：第二年，改任左副都御史，巡抚河南及湖广、襄阳诸府。
English: In the following year, he was appointed as the left vice-governor of the capital, and the governor of Henan, Guangxi and Yangyang provinces.

古文：也先逼京师，来督兵勤王。
现代文：也先逼近京城，王来率兵援救朝廷危难。
English: They also approached the capital first, and Wang Lai led the soldiers to rescue the imperial court from danger.

古文：渡河，闻寇退，乃引还。
现代文：渡过黄河，听说敌寇撤退，纔引军回去。
English: After crossing the Yellow River, he heard that the enemy pirates had retreated, and he led his troops back.

古文：景泰元年，贵州苗叛。
现代文：景泰元年，贵州苗人叛乱。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai, the Miao people of Guizhou revolted.

古文：总督湖广、贵州军务侯琎卒于军，进来右都御史代之。
现代文：总督湖广、贵州军务的侯璀在军中去世，晋升王来为右都御史代替他。
English: Governor Hukang and Guizhou Military Affairs Hou Yi died in the army, and Wang Lai was promoted to replace him as the right capital governor.

古文：与保定伯梁珤，都督毛胜、方瑛会兵进讨。
现代文：与保定伯梁瑶，都督毛胜、方瑛会师进讨。
English: With Baoding Bo Liangyao, Governor Mao Sheng, and Fang Ying Association.

古文：至靖州，贼掠长沙、宝庆、武冈。
现代文：到靖州，贼掠夺长沙、宝庆、武冈。
English: To Jingzhou, the thieves plundered Changsha, Baoqing, and Wugang.

古文：来等分道邀击，俘斩三千余人，贼遁去。
现代文：王来等分路出擎，俘虏斩杀三千余人，贼逃去。
English: Wang Lai and the others went out of the fort, the captives slaughtered more than three thousand people, and the thieves fled.

古文：已，复出掠，官军连战皆捷。
现代文：后来，贼又出来掠夺，官军连战都取胜。
English: Later, the thieves came out to plunder again, and the government army even won the battle.

古文：贼魁韦同烈据兴隆，劫平越、清平诸卫，来与方瑛击败之。
现代文：贼魁首韦同烈据守兴隆，抢劫平越、清平诸卫，王来与方瑛击败他们。
English: Wei Tongren, the leader of the bandits, defended Xinglong, robbed Pingyue and Qingping, and Wang Lai and Fang Ying defeated them.

古文：贼退保香炉山，山陡绝。
现代文：贼败退死保香炉山，山十分陡峭。
English: Thieves retreat to the safety of Mount Incense Burner, which is very steep.

古文：胜、瑛与都督陈友三道进，来与珤大军继之。
现代文：毛胜、方瑛与都督陈友三路进军，王来与梁瑶率大军继后。
English: Mao Sheng, Fang Ying and the governor Chen You marched in three directions, followed by Wang Lai and Liang Qi leading a large army.

古文：先后破三百余寨，会师香炉山下。
现代文：先后攻破三百余寨，在香炉山下会师。
English: They successively broke through more than three hundred villages and joined forces under the Incense Burner Mountain.

古文：发炮轰崖石。声动地。
现代文：发炮轰击崖石，声音动地。
English: The sound of the cannon exploding on the cliffside was deafening.

古文：贼惧，缚同烈并贼将五十八人降。
现代文：贼恐惧，捆绑韦同烈并贼将五十八人来投降。
English: The thieves were afraid, tied up Wei Tongren and forced the fifty-eight people to surrender.

古文：余悉解散。
现代文：其余的都解散。
English: The rest disbanded.

古文：遂移军清平，且檄四川兵共剿都匀、草塘诸贼。
现代文：于是移军清平，并且传檄令四川兵共剿都匀、草塘诸贼。
English: As a result, the troops were transferred to Qingping, and the imperial edict ordered the Sichuan soldiers to unite and fight against the bandits in Caotang.

古文：贼望风具牛酒迎降。贼平，班师。
现代文：贼望风准备牛酒而迎候投降贼被平定，班师回朝。
English: The bandits awaited the wind to prepare the cow wine and welcomed the surrender. The bandits were subdued, and the team returned to the imperial court.

古文：诏留来、珤镇抚。
现代文：诏令王来、梁瑶留下镇抚。
English: The emperor ordered Wang Lai and Liang Ye to stay behind in Zhenfu.

古文：寻命来兼巡抚贵州。
现代文：不久命王来兼巡抚贵州。
English: Wang Lai, the governor of Guizhou, died soon after.

古文：奏言： 近因黔、楚用兵，暂行鬻爵之例。
现代文：王来奏称： 近因黔、楚用兵，暂行买官之例。
English: Wang Laixiao said: Recently, as a result of the coup, Chu used soldiers, and temporarily bought officials.

古文：今寇贼稍宁，惟平越、都匀等四卫乏饷。
现代文：如今贼情稍微平定，只有平越、都匀四卫缺饷。
English: Nowadays, the situation of banditry has calmed down a little, and only Pingyue and Duyun four guards are lacking.

古文：宜召商中盐，罢纳米例。 
现代文：应召商以粮换盐引，免除交纳米例。 
English: At the request of the merchant, the grain was exchanged for salt, and the nano sample was exempted from payment.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从他。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：三年十月召还，加兼大理寺卿。
现代文：景泰三年十月被召回京，加官兼大理寺卿。
English: In October of the third year, Jing Tai was called back to Beijing, promoted to an official and became the Lord of Dali Temple.

古文：珤以来功大，乞加旌异。
现代文：梁瑶以王来功大，请求皇上给他褒奖。
English: Liang Jie praised Wang Lai's great achievements and asked the emperor to give him a commendation.

古文：都给事中苏霖驳之，乃止。
现代文：都给事中苏霖反驳，纔止。
English: All of these were refuted by Su Lin, and the case was dismissed.

古文：来还在道，以贵州苗复反，敕回师进讨。
现代文：王来还在路上，因贵州苗人再次反叛，敕令他回师进讨。
English: Wang Lai was still on the road, but because Miao people in Guizhou rebelled again, he was ordered to return to his division for further discussion.

古文：明年，事平。
现代文：第二年，事平。
English: The following year, the matter was settled.

古文：召为南京工部尚书。
现代文：召为南京工部尚书。
English: He was appointed as a member of the Nanjing Engineering Department.

古文：英宗复辟，六尚书悉罢。
现代文：英宗复位，六位尚书都被罢免。
English: Yingzong was restored to the throne, and the six Shangshu were all dismissed.

古文：来归。
现代文：王来回家。
English: The king has come home.

古文：成化六年卒于家。
现代文：成化六年在家中去世。
English: Chenghua died at home six years ago.

古文：孙原贞，名瑀，以字行，德兴人。
现代文：孙原贞，名璃，以字行于世，德兴人。
English: Sun Yat-sen, a famous glassblower, was a virtuous man.

古文：永乐十三年进士。
现代文：考中永乐十三年进士。
English: Yongle, a 13-year-old junior high school student, passed the entrance examination.

古文：授礼部主事，历郎中。
现代文：授予礼部主事，历任郎中。
English: Awarded to the head of the ceremonial department, successively to the junior high school students.

古文：英宗初，用荐擢河南右参政。
现代文：英宗初年，因被推荐提升为河南右参政。
English: In the first year of Yingzong, because he was recommended, he was promoted to Henan right-wing political participation.

古文：居官清慎，有吏才。正统八年，大臣会荐，迁浙江左布政使。
现代文：居官清廉谨慎，有当官的才能巫统八年，大臣会同推荐选任，迁升为浙江左布政使。
English: In the eighth year of UMNO, he was promoted to the post of the political envoy of Zhejiang Zuo Bu upon the recommendation of the minister.

古文：久之，盗大起闽、浙间，赦而再叛。
现代文：很久以后，盗贼大起于闽、浙之间，赦免后再次反叛。
English: After a long time, the thieves rose up in the regions of Yunnan and Zhejiang, and rebelled again after being pardoned.

古文：景帝即位，发兵讨之。
现代文：景帝即位，发兵征讨。
English: Emperor Jing ascended to the throne and sent troops to collect taxes.

古文：原贞尝策贼必叛，上方略，请为备。
现代文：孙原贞曾猜度贼必叛，条陈谋略，请求为此做好准备。
English: Sun Yuanzhen once guessed that the thief must rebel, and asked to prepare for this.

古文：至是即命原贞参议军事，深入擒其魁。
现代文：到这时就命孙原贞参议军事，深入擒获其魁首。
English: At this time, he ordered Sun Yuanzhen to lead a military force to capture the ringleader.

古文：而温州余贼犹未灭，命都指挥李信为都督佥事，调军讨之。
现代文：而温州余贼还没消灭，命都指挥李信为都督愈辜，调军征讨。
English: However, the remaining bandits in Wenzhou had not yet been eliminated, and Li Xin, the commander of the capital, was more than justified in appointing him as the governor.

古文：遂拜原贞兵部左侍郎，参信军务，镇守浙江。
现代文：于是授予孙原贞兵部左侍郎，参议李信军务，镇守浙江。
English: Therefore, Sun Yuanzheng was awarded the left attendant of the military department, the councillor Li Xin of military affairs, and the town guard of Zhejiang.

古文：丁母忧，当去，副都御史轩輗请留之。
现代文：遭逢母亲丧事，应当离职，副都御史轩挽请求留下他。
English: After his mother's death, he should have resigned, but Vice-Governor Shi Xuan pleaded with him to stay.

古文：报可。
现代文：皇上回复可以。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：景泰元年，原贞进兵捣贼巢。
现代文：景泰元年，孙原贞进兵捣毁贼巢。
English: In the first year of King Taejo's reign, Sunwon Jeong marched into the army and destroyed the thieves' nest.

古文：俘斩贼首陶得二等，招抚三千六百余人，追还被掠男女。
现代文：俘虏斩杀贼首陶得三等，招降三千六百余人，追还被掠去的男女。
English: The captives who cut off and killed the heads of the thieves won the third prize, recruited more than 3,600 people, and chased back the abducted men and women.

古文：捷闻，玺书奖励。
现代文：捷报闻于朝廷，皇上玺书奖励。
English: The news of the victory was reported to the imperial court, and the emperor issued a reward.

古文：请奔丧。
现代文：请求回去奔丧。
English: The request to go back was met with dismay.

古文：逾月，还镇。
现代文：过了一个月，返回镇守。
English: After a month, he returned to the town.

古文：复分兵剿平余寇。
现代文：又分兵扫平余寇。
English: Another detachment of soldiers swept away the remaining robbers.

古文：奏析瑞安地增置泰顺，析丽水、青田二县地置云和、宣平、景宁四邑，建官置戍，盗患遂息。论功，进秩一等。
现代文：孙原贞上奏请求划分瑞安土地增置泰顺，划分丽水、青田两县土地设置云和、宣平、景宁四个县，设置官吏和安置戍守，盗患于是得到平息，评定功劳，进级一等。
English: Sun Yuanzhen made a petition to divide the land of Rui'an, add Taishun, divide the land of Lishui and Aota, set up four counties of Yunhe, Xuanping and Jining, set up officials and resettled officials. The theft was thus quelled, assessed for merit, and promoted to the first grade.

古文：浙官田赋重，右布政使杨瓒请均于民田轻额者。
现代文：浙江官田赋税沉重，右布政使杨瓒请求将赋税平均分摊于征收赋税数目轻的民田。
English: The government-owned fields in Zhejiang are heavily taxed, and the right-wing political leader Yang Hui requested that the tax be equally distributed to the private fields, which are lightly taxed.

古文：诏原贞督之，田赋以平。
现代文：皇上诏令孙原贞监督，田赋因此均平。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Sun Yuanzhen to supervise, and as a result, the rice fields were leveled.

古文：三年请褒赠御贼死事武臣。
现代文：正统三年，请求褒赠御贼死事武臣。
English: After three years of orthodoxy, a request for a reward for the death of a thief came from a samurai.

古文：指挥同知脱纲、王瑛，都指挥佥事沈辚、崔源，皆得赠恤。
现代文：指挥同知脱纲、王瑛，都指挥食事沈辚、崔源都得到赠恤。
English: Conductors Tongzhi Deguang and Wang Ying both conducted the meal, while Shen Yao and Cui Yuan both received a free ticket.

古文：六月进兵部尚书，镇守如故。
现代文：六月晋升为兵部尚书，镇守如故。
English: In June, he was promoted to Hyobu Shosho, and remained as the town guard.

古文：未几，命考察福建庶官，因留镇焉。
现代文：不久，皇上命他孝察福建众官，于是留下镇守。
English: Soon, the emperor ordered him to be filial to the officials of Fujian, so he remained the town guard.

古文：福州、建宁二府，旧有银冶，因寇乱罢。
现代文：福州、建宁二府，以前有冶炼矿银，因盗寇扰乱停止。
English: Two prefectures, Fuzhou and Jianning, used to have smelting of ore and silver, but stopped due to the disturbance caused by thieves.

古文：朝议复开，原贞执不可，乃寝。
现代文：朝廷议论再开，孙原贞坚持认为不可，于是停止。
English: The imperial court resumed the discussion, but Sun Yuanzhen insisted that it was impossible, so it was stopped.

古文：五年冬，疏言：四方屯军，率以营缮、转输诸役妨耕作。
现代文：五年冬，孙原贞上疏道：四方屯军，大体因营缮、转输等事妨碍耕作。
English: In the winter of the fifth year, Sun Yuan Zhen went to the ditch: the four-square camp was moved, which generally hindered farming due to camp renovation, transfer and other matters.

古文：宜简精锐实伍，余悉归之农。
现代文：应当挑选精锐充实队伍，其余的都让他们归于农耕。
English: The elite should be selected to enrich the team, and the rest should be allowed to return to farming.

古文：苟增万人屯，即岁省支仓粮十二万石，且积余粮六万石，兵食岂有不足哉。
现代文：如果增加一万人屯田，那么一年就会节省支出仓粮十二万石，并且积储多余粮食六万石，军队吃饭难道会不足吗？
English: If we increase the number of soldiers in the field by 10,000, we will save 120,000 koku of grain in storage and store 60,000 koku of surplus grain in a year. Will there be a shortage of food for the army?

古文：今岁漕数百万石，道路费不赀。
现代文：如今一年漕运粮食几百万石，在路上的费用不可估量。
English: Today, millions of koku of grain are transported by rowing boat every year, and the cost on the road is incalculable.

古文：如浙江粮军兑运米，石加耗米七斗。民自运米，石加八斗。其余计水程远近加耗。
现代文：比如浙江军粮兑换运米，一石耗米七斗，人民自己来运，一石加耗八斗，其余计算水路远近加耗。
English: For example, for the exchange of rice for military grain in Zhejiang Province, one kilo of rice consumes seven dowels, the people themselves transport it, one kilo consumes eight dowels, and the rest is calculated by the waterway.

古文：是田不加多，而赋敛实倍，欲民无困，不可得也。
现代文：这样田地不会增多，而赋敛实际上加倍了，想让人民不穷困，是不可能的事。
English: In this way, the number of fields will not increase, but the austerity will actually double. It is impossible for the people not to be impoverished.

古文：况今太仓无十数年之积，脱遇水旱，其何以济！
现代文：况且如今太仓中没有十几年的积储，如万一遇到水、旱灾害，如何来救济？
English: Moreover, there are no more than ten years of accumulated reserves in Taicang today. In case of water and drought disasters, how can we provide relief?

古文：宜量入为出，汰冗食浮费。
现代文：应该量入为出，裁减吃公饭的官吏和不必要的开支。
English: We should live within our means and cut down on bureaucrats who eat public meals and unnecessary expenses.

古文：俟仓储既裕，渐减岁漕数，而民困可苏也。
现代文：等到仓储丰足，渐渐减少一年漕运的数目，则民困可以解除。
English: As long as there are enough warehouses and the number of shipments per year is gradually reduced, the people's poverty can be relieved.

古文：臣昔官河南，稽诸逃民籍凡二十余万户，悉转徙南阳、唐、邓、襄、樊间。
现代文：臣以前在河南做官，考察众逃亡百姓的户籍共二十余万，臣都把他们转移到南阳、唐、邓、襄、樊之间。
English: The minister had previously worked as an official in Henan and had examined the household registrations of more than 200,000 people who had fled. The minister had transferred them to Nanyang, Tang, Deng, Xiang and Handan.

古文：群聚谋生，安保其不为盗？
现代文：群居谋生，可安保他们不做强盗。
English: They live in groups to make a living, but to make sure they don't become robbers.

古文：宜及今年丰，遣近臣循行，督有司籍为编户，给田业，课农桑，立社学、乡约、义仓，使敦本务业。
现代文：应趁今年丰收，派亲近的大臣照此实行，督促主管官吏登记为户籍，给他们田产，督促农桑，建立社学、乡约、义仓，使他们注重根本致力于农桑。
English: They should take advantage of this year's bumper harvest, send their close ministers to implement the plan, urge the officials in charge to register as household registration, give them farm produce, urge farmers to plant mulberry trees, establish social studies, township contracts, and charity warehouses, and make them pay attention to the fundamental commitment to farmers.

古文：生计既定，徐议赋役，庶无他日患。
现代文：人民生活安定了，慢慢商议赋税徭役，或许可以免除以后的祸患。
English: When people's lives are stable, they will slowly discuss the role of the tax collector, and may be able to avoid future disasters.

古文：时不能尽用。后刘千斤之乱，果如原贞所料。
现代文：当时役能完全采纳，后来刘千斤之乱，果然如孙原贞所料。
English: At that time, the role could be fully adopted, and later the Liu Jianjin Rebellion, as expected by Sun Yuanzhen.

古文：已，复镇浙江。英宗复位，罢归。
现代文：后来，孙原贞又镇守浙江，英宗恢复帝位，被罢职回家。
English: Later, Sun Yuanzhen also guarded Zhejiang, Yingzong restored the imperial throne, and was dismissed to return home.

古文：成化十年卒，年八十七。
现代文：成化十年去世，终年八十七岁。
English: Chenghua died ten years later, aged eighty-seven.

古文：原贞所至有劳绩，在浙江尤著名。
现代文：原贞所至有劳绩，在浙江尤为著名。
English: The original chastity center is especially famous in Zhejiang for its achievements.

古文：孙需，字孚吉，成化八年进士。
现代文：孙需，字孚吉，成化八年考中进士。
English: Sun Zao, also known as Fu Ji, became a junior high school student after passing the eighth-year entrance examination.

古文：为常州府推官，疑狱立剖，擢南京御史。
现代文：任常州府推官，疑难案件立刻剖析明白，提升为南京御史。
English: Appointed as the Changzhou prefectural governor, difficult cases were immediately analyzed and understood, and promoted to Nanjing imperial historian.

古文：劾僧继晓，忤旨，予杖，出为四川副使。
现代文：弹劾僧人继晓，违背旨意，给予杖刑，出京任四川副使。
English: The monk was impeached one after another, and was given a cane sentence for violating the will, and was sent to Beijing as the deputy envoy of Sichuan.

古文：弘治中，累官右副都御史，巡抚河南。
现代文：弘治年问，积功升官为右副都御史，巡抚河南。
English: According to the chronology of Hongzhi's life, he was promoted to the post of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital and Governor of Henan Province.

古文：岁凶，募民筑汴河堤，堤成而饥者亦济。
现代文：这年灾荒，招募民夫筑造汴河堤，堤坝建成挨饿的人也得到救济。
English: In this year of disaster and famine, people were recruited to build a dike on the Wei River, and the people who were starving after the dike was built also received relief.

古文：镇守中官刘瑯贪横。
现代文：镇守宦官刘琅贪婪横暴。
English: The town guard eunuch Liu Ye is greedy and violent.

古文：奸民赴瑯讼者，需以法论之遣戍。
现代文：奸民到刘琅那里去诉讼的，孙需依法律定罪，发遣他们戍守边地。
English: If the traitors go to Liu Bei to sue, Sun Ying will convict them according to the law and send them to guard the border.

古文：瑯为跪请，执不听，瑯恨次骨。
现代文：刘琅为此向他下跪请求，孙需坚决不听，刘琅恨之入骨。
English: Liu Ye knelt down and begged him to do so, but Sun Ye resolutely refused to listen, and Liu Ye hated him to his bones.

古文：大臣子横于乡，需抑之。
现代文：大臣的儿子横行乡里，孙需抑制他。
English: The minister's son is running amok in the countryside, and Sun needs to rein him in.

古文：瑯与谋，改需抚陕西。
现代文：刘琅和他谋划，改任孙需巡抚陕西。
English: Liu Bei and Sun Yat-sen plotted to replace him as the governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：寻改抚郧阳，安辑流民，占籍者九万余户。
现代文：不久改抚鄙阳，安顿流民，登记户口几万余户。
English: Soon, more than tens of thousands of households were registered and resettled.

古文：正德元年召为南京兵部右侍郎。
现代文：正德元年召为南京兵部右侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Zhengde era, he was appointed as the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Military Department.

古文：四年就拜礼部尚书。
现代文：四年，就地授予礼部尚书。
English: Four years later, he was awarded the Ministry of Ceremonies' Medal of Honor on the spot.

古文：未两月，刘瑾恶之，追论抚河南时事，罚米输边。廷推需刑部尚书，中旨令致仕。
现代文：不到两个月，刘瑾憎恶他，追究他巡抚河南时的事情，处罚交粮食运输到边塞，在朝廷上推举孙需任刑部尚书，宫中直接降旨令他辞官回家。
English: In less than two months, Liu Bei detested him, investigated his activities when he was the governor of Henan Province, punished him to pay for grain transportation to the border fortress, nominated Sun to be the secretary of the criminal department in the imperial court, and the palace directly ordered him to resign and return home.

古文：瑾诛，起南京工部尚书，就改刑部，再改吏部。
现代文：刘谨被杀，起用他任南京工部尚书，就地改任刑部，再改任吏部。
English: When Liu Zheng was killed, he was appointed as the head of the Nanjing Engineering Department, changed to the Criminal Law Department, and then to the Criminal Records Department.

古文：十三年乞休去。
现代文：十三年，乞求退休离职。
English: Thirteen years, begging to retire.

古文：嘉靖初卒，谥清简。
现代文：嘉靖初年去世，谧号清简。
English: Jiajing died in the first year, and his posthumous name was Qingjian.

古文：张宪，字廷式，与需同里，同举进士，相代为尚书。
现代文：张宪，字廷式，与孙需同乡，同时中进士，相互替代为尚书。
English: Zhang Xian, Zhi Ting style, a fellow villager of Sun Ye, and a junior high school student at the same time, replaced each other as Shang Shu.

古文：尝为浙江右布政使，后以工部右侍郎督易州山厂，公帑无毫发私。
现代文：曾任浙江右布政使，后来以工部右侍郎督管易州山厂，公家钱财没有丝毫侵吞。
English: He once served as the political envoy of Zhejiang Province, and later as the right-hand man of the Ministry of Industry to supervise the Yizhou Mountain Factory. He did not embezzle public money in the slightest.

古文：历南京礼部尚书。
现代文：历任南京礼部尚书。
English: Successive heads of Nanjing's etiquette department have read the book.

古文：刘瑾勒致仕。
现代文：刘瑾强迫他辞官。
English: Liu Bei forced him to resign.

古文：瑾诛，起工部。
现代文：刘瑾被杀，起任工部，去世。
English: Liu Wei was killed, took up the post of the Ministry of Works, and died.

古文：卒。朱鉴，字用明，晋江人。
现代文：朱鉴，字用明，晋江人。
English: Zhu Jian, Zha Yiming, Jinjiang people.

古文：童时刲股疗父疾。
现代文：童年时割大腿肉治疗父亲的疾病。
English: When he was a child, he cut thigh meat to treat his father's illness.

古文：举乡试，授蒲圻教谕。
现代文：乡试中举，授予蒲圻教论。
English: He won the junior high school examination of the township examination, and was awarded the title of "Pu Yao Doctrine."

古文：宣德二年，与庐陵知县孔文英等四十三人以顾佐荐，召于各道观政三月，遂擢御史。
现代文：宣德二年，与庐陵知县孔文英等四十三人，因颅佐推荐，召集起来，派往各道考察政治三个月，于是提升为御史。
English: In the second year of Xuande's reign, he and forty-three others, including Kong Wenying of Fuling County, were called together on the recommendation of the cranial aide and sent to various provinces to study politics for three months. As a result, he was promoted to imperial historian.

古文：巡按湖广，谕降梅花峒贼萧启宁等。
现代文：巡按湖广，晓谕招降梅花峒贼寇萧启宁等人。
English: He patrolled the lake and ordered the surrender of the traitor Xiao Qining and others.

古文：请复旧制，同副使、佥事按行所部，问民疾苦。
现代文：请求恢复以前的制度，同副使、愈事巡行所管辖的地区，问民疾苦。
English: He asked for the restoration of the previous system, and asked the people of the areas under the jurisdiction of the deputy envoys and the military parade about their hardships.

古文：湖湘俗，男女婚嫁多逾三十。
现代文：湖湘习俗，男女婚嫁大多超过三十岁。
English: According to Hunan customs, most men and women marry after the age of thirty.

古文：鉴申明礼制，其俗遂变。
现代文：朱鉴申明礼制，他们的习俗于是改变。
English: Zhu Jian affirmed the etiquette, and their customs changed accordingly.

古文：三载代归。
现代文：三年后被代替回朝。
English: Three years later, he was replaced and returned to the North.

古文：正统五年复按广东。
现代文：至统五年，又巡按广东。
English: In the fifth year after unification, he went on a tour of Guangdong.

古文：奏设钦州守备都指挥。
现代文：上奏请求设置钦州守备都指挥。
English: The opening request is to set up a Qinzhou garrison commander.

古文：奉命录囚，多所平反，招抚逋叛甚众。
现代文：奉命甄别囚犯，很多得以平反，招抚逃犯很多人。
English: He was ordered to screen prisoners, many of whom were rehabilitated, and to coax many fugitives.

古文：还朝，请天下按察司增佥事一人，专理屯田，遂为定制。
现代文：回朝，请求天下按察司增设愈事一人，专管屯田，于是成为固定的制度。
English: Returning to the imperial court, he requested the world to set up an additional person in charge of military affairs, specifically in charge of the military cantonment, and thus it became a fixed system.

古文：七年，用荐擢山西左参政。
现代文：七年，被推荐提升为山西左参政。
English: In seven years, he was recommended to be promoted to the Shanxi Left Party.

古文：奏减平阳采薪供边夫役。
现代文：奏请减少平阳砍柴以供应边防的夫役。
English: Please reduce the number of people cutting firewood to supply the border guards.

古文：景帝监国，进布政使。
现代文：景帝监国，晋升为布政使。
English: Emperor Jing oversaw the country and was promoted to the post of cloth envoy.

古文：寻擢右副都御史，巡抚其地。
现代文：不久擢升为右副都御史，巡抚其辖区。
English: He was soon promoted to Right Vice-Governor of the Capital and Governor of its jurisdiction.

古文：上言： 也先奸诡百端，杀掠无已。
现代文：进言： 也先奸诡百端，杀掠不止。
English: Suggestion: They also have a lot of tricks up their sleeves and kill and plunder.

古文：复假和亲，遣使觇伺。
现代文：又藉和亲，遣使者窥伺。
English: And by sending his envoys to spy out the land.

古文：以送驾为名，觊得开关延接。
现代文：以送驾为名，企图能够开关接待。
English: In the name of driving, trying to be able to switch reception.

古文：稍示抗拒，彼即有辞。
现代文：稍微表示抗拒，他就有借口。
English: If he shows the slightest resistance, he has an excuse.

古文：其谋既深，我虑宜远。
现代文：他的谋略既已深，我们的打算也应长远。
English: Since his strategy is profound, our plans should also be long-term.

古文：宜暂罢中贵监军之制，假总兵以生杀权，使志无所挠，计有所施。
现代文：应暂时废除中贵监军的制度，给总兵以生杀之权，使他们心志不被阻挠，计有所施。
English: The system of middle- and high-ranking supervisors should be temporarily abolished, and the general soldiers should be given the right to live and die, so that their aspirations will not be obstructed and their plans will be implemented.

古文：整散兵，募勇士，重悬赏格。鼓劝义旅，征勤王兵，数道并进，戮力复仇。庶大驾可还，敌兵自退。
现代文：整顿散漫的士兵，招募勇士，重悬赏赐，鼓励义军，征发勤王兵，数路并进，尽力报仇，或许人驾可还，敌兵自退。
English: Rectify the scattered soldiers, recruit warriors, re-offer rewards, encourage the rebel army, recruit and dispatch loyal soldiers, advance in several directions, try to take revenge, and perhaps drive back, and the enemy soldiers retreat.

古文：曩者江南寇发，皆以诛王振为名。
现代文：以前江南寇贼发动叛乱，都以诛王振为名。
English: In the past, bandits in the south of the Yangtze River launched rebellions in the name of Wang Zhen.

古文：夫事归朝廷则治，归宦官则乱。
现代文：大概事情归于朝廷就会安定，归于宦官则乱。
English: Presumably, if things are left to the imperial court, they will be stable, but if they are left to the eunuchs, they will be chaotic.

古文：昔高皇帝与群臣议事，必屏去左右，恐泄事机。
现代文：以前高皇帝与群臣议事，必摒去左右，恐怕泄露机密。
English: In the past, when Emperor Gao and his courtiers had a discussion, they had to go to the right or to the left, for fear of revealing secrets.

古文：乞杜权幸之门，凡军国重事，属任大臣，必当有济。 
现代文：乞求皇上堵塞奸佞之人受宠的门路，凡是军国重要之事，委托任用大臣，必当有益。 
English: To implore the emperor to block the way for the favour of the treacherous scoundrel, and to entrust the appointment of ministers in all matters of military importance, is bound to be beneficial.

古文：景帝嘉纳之。
现代文：景帝嘉赏并且采纳了他的建议。
English: Emperor Jing appreciated and adopted his suggestion.

古文：时瓦剌窥塞下，鉴日夜为守御计。
现代文：当时瓦剌窥伺塞下，朱鉴日夜为守御谋划。
English: At that time, under the watchful eyes of Varangian spies, Zhu Jian plotted day and night to protect the emperor.

古文：景泰元年，敌数万骑攻雁门，都指挥李端击却之。
现代文：景泰元年，敌数万骑兵攻打雁门，都指挥李端击退他们。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Taejo, tens of thousands of enemy cavalry attacked the Wild Goose Gate, and Li Duan commanded them to repel them.

古文：寻犯河曲及义井堡，杀二指挥，围忻、代诸州，石亨等不能御。长驱抵太原城北，山西大震。
现代文：不久侵犯河曲及义井堡，杀害两个指挥，围困忻、代诸州，石亨等不能抵御，长驱直入太原城北，山西大为震恐。
English: Soon after, they invaded Hequ and Yijing Fort, killed two commanders, besieged Shao, Zhaozhou, Shiheng, etc. could not resist, and drove straight into the north of Taiyuan City. Shanxi was greatly shocked.

古文：命鉴移镇雁门，而别遣都督佥事王良镇太原。
现代文：皇上命朱鉴移兵镇守雁门，而另派都督愈事王良镇守太原。
English: The emperor ordered Zhu Jian to transfer the garrison of the town to guard the Wild Goose Gate, while he also sent the governor to guard the town of Wang Liang to guard Taiyuan.

古文：援兵渐集，敌亦餍，乃引去。
现代文：援兵逐渐聚集，敌人也疲倦，就引军而去。
English: Reinforcements gradually gathered, and the enemy, tired, withdrew.

古文：时山西仍遘兵荒，鉴外饬戎备，内抚灾民，劳瘁备至。
现代文：当时山西仍遇兵荒，朱鉴外整饬军备，内安抚灾民，享苦劳累备至。
English: At that time, Shanxi was still suffering from a military famine. Zhu Jian rectified the armaments outside, pacified the victims inside, and enjoyed the hard work and exhaustion.

古文：二年十月，镇守山西都御史罗通召还。命鉴兼领其事。
现代文：二年十月，镇守山西都御史罗通被召回京，命朱鉴兼管其职事。
English: In October of the second year, the town warden of the Shanxi capital, Shilotong, was recalled to Beijing, and Zhu Jian was appointed to concurrently manage his duties.

古文：明年诏遣大臣行天下，黜陟有司。
现代文：第二年，下韶遣大臣巡行天下，贬黜和提升主管官吏。
English: In the second year, the lower ranking ministers were sent on a tour of the country to demote and promote the officials in charge.

古文：礼部侍郎邹干至山西，多所论劾。
现代文：礼部侍郎邹干到山西，官吏多被弹劾。
English: The etiquette department attendant Yan Gan went to Shanxi, and many officials were impeached.

古文：鉴请召干还，干因极论鉴徇护，帝是干言。
现代文：朱鉴请求召邹干回京，邹干因此竭力弹劾朱鉴徇私包庇，皇帝认可邹干的话。
English: Zhu Jian requested to call Xuan Gan back to Beijing. Xuan Gan therefore tried his best to impeach Zhu Jian for shielding him. The emperor approved of Xuan Gan's words.

古文：其年十月召鉴佐院事。
现代文：这年十月，召朱鉴辅佐院事。
English: In October of the same year, Zhu Jian was summoned to serve as a vice-councilor.

古文：至京，致仕去。
现代文：到京城，辞官离去。
English: He went to the capital and resigned.

古文：初，景帝易储，鉴贻大学士陈循书，言不可。
现代文：当初，景帝改变储君，朱鉴给大学士陈循写信，说不可行。
English: At first, Emperor Jing changed the crown prince, and Zhu Jian wrote a letter to the scholar Chen Xun, saying that it was not feasible.

古文：且曰： 陛下于上皇，当避位以全大义。 
现代文：并且说： 陛下对于上皇，应当让位来保全大义。 
English: He also said, "Your Majesty should step aside for the Retired Emperor in order to preserve justice."

古文：循大骇。
现代文：陈循大惊。
English: Chen Xun was shocked.

古文：英宗复位，鉴诣阙上表贺。
现代文：英宗复位，朱鉴赴朝堂上表祝贺。
English: Yingzong was reinstated, and Zhu Jian went to the front of the hall to congratulate him.

古文：帝曰： 鉴老疾，何妄来？
现代文：皇帝说： 朱鉴又老又病，为何随便来？
English: The emperor said: Zhu Jian is old and sick, why come casually?

古文：其速令还。 
现代文：你还是赶快回去吧。 
English: You'd better hurry back.

古文：家居二十余年卒。
现代文：在家住了二十几年去世。
English: He lived at home for twenty years and then died.

古文：杨信民，名诚，以字行，浙江新昌人。
现代文：杨信民，名诚，以字行于世，浙江新昌人。
English: Yang Xinmin, famous for his sincerity, is a famous writer in Xinchang, Zhejiang Province.

古文：乡举入国学。
现代文：乡试中举进入国学。
English: He entered Chinese studies in the middle of the township examination.

古文：宣德时，除工科给事中。
现代文：宣德时，授予工科给事中。
English: At the time of the proclamation of the People's Republic of China, the award of engineering was in progress.

古文：母忧归。
现代文：母亲去世回家。
English: Later, he went home for his mother's funeral.

古文：营葬土石必躬舁数百步，曰： 吾葬吾母而专役他人，吾不安也。 
现代文：办丧事用的土石一定亲自抬几百步，说： 我埋葬我的母亲，如果专门找别人来干，我心中不安。 
English: A funeral director must personally carry the earth and stone several hundred paces, saying, "I am burying my mother, and I am not at ease if I have to specifically find someone else to do it.

古文：服阕，改刑科。
现代文：守丧期满，改任刑科。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was reassigned to the Criminal Division.

古文：正统中，清军江西，还奏民隐五事，多议行。
现代文：正统年间，在江西治理军队，回京上奏人民的苦难五件事，大多决议推行。
English: During the years of orthodoxy, the five things of governing the army in Jiangxi and returning to Beijing to play the suffering of the people were carried out, and most of the resolutions were implemented.

古文：寻以王直荐，擢广东左参议。
现代文：不久因王直推荐，提升为广东左参议。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of Guangdong's left-wing councillor on the recommendation of Wang Zhi.

古文：清操绝俗，尝行田野，访利弊为更置。
现代文：高尚的节操非同一般，曾经在田野上行走，询访利弊进行变更。
English: Noble and rigorous, he used to walk in the fields, inquire about the pros and cons, and make changes.

古文：性刚负气，按察使郭智不法，信民劾之下狱。
现代文：习性刚强不屈，按察使郭智不守法，杨信民弹劾他，使他进监狱。
English: He had a strong and unyielding character. According to the investigation, Guo Zhi did not abide by the law. Yang Xinmin impeached him and sent him to prison.

古文：黄翰代智，信民复发其奸。
现代文：黄翰代替郭智，杨信民又揭发他的奸情。
English: Huang Han replaced Guo Zhi, and Yang Xinmin exposed his adultery.

古文：已，又劾佥事韦广，广遂讦信民，因与翰俱被逮。
现代文：以后，又弹劾食事韦广，韦广于是揭发杨信民，因此与黄翰一起被逮捕。
English: Later, Wei Guang, a diner, was also impeached. Wei Guang then exposed Yang Xinmin, and was arrested together with Huang Han.

古文：军民哗然，诣阙下乞留信民。
现代文：军民哗然，到京城直接请求皇上留下杨信民。
English: The military and the people were in an uproar, and they went to the capital to directly ask the emperor to let Yang Xinmin stay.

古文：诏复信民官，而翰、广鞫实，除名。
现代文：诏令恢复杨信民官职，而审判黄翰、韦广犯罪属实，被除去官名。
English: The edict reinstated Yang Xinmin as an official, while the trial of Huang Han and Wei Guang was true and they were stripped of their official titles.

古文：景帝监国，于谦荐之，命守备白羊口。
现代文：景帝监管国事，于谦推荐杨信民，命他守备白羊口。
English: Emperor Jing oversaw state affairs. Yu Qian recommended Yang Xinmin and ordered him to guard Baiyakou.

古文：会广东贼黄萧养围广州急，岭南人乞信民，乃以为右佥都御史巡抚其地。
现代文：恰巧广东贼黄萧养围困广州紧急，岭南人求救于杨信民，于是授予他右愈都御史巡抚其地。
English: It happened that the Guangdong thief Huang Xiao Yang besieged Guangzhou in an emergency, and the Lingnan people appealed to Yang Xinmin for help, so he was awarded the right to be the historical inspector of the capital.

古文：士民闻而相庆曰： 杨公来矣。 
现代文：军民听说后相互庆祝说： 杨公来了。 
English: After hearing the news, the military and civilians congratulated each other and said: Yang Gong has come.

古文：时广州被围久，将士战辄败，禁民出入，樵采绝。而乡民避贼来者拒不纳，多为贼所害，民益愁苦归贼。
现代文：当时广州被围很久，将士作战总是失败，禁止人民出入，砍柴被断绝，并且避贼而来的乡民一律不让他们进来，大多被贼所杀，人民更加愁苦而归附贼入。
English: At that time, Guangzhou was besieged for a long time, the soldiers always failed in battle, the people were banned from entering and leaving, the cutting of firewood was cut off, and the villagers who came to avoid the thieves were not allowed to enter, most of them were killed by the thieves, and the people were even more miserable and joined the thieves.

古文：信民至，开城门，发仓廪，刻木锲给民，得出入。贼见木锲曰： 此杨公所给也 ，不敢伤。
现代文：杨信民来后，打开城门，分发仓粮，刻木锲发给人民，得以进出，贼见木锲，说： 这是杨公所给。 不敢伤害。
English: After Yang Xinmin came, he opened the city gate, distributed grain from the storehouse, and carved wooden planks to give to the people, so that they could enter and exit. Thieves saw the wooden planks and said, "This was given by Yang Gong. Don't dare to hurt it."

古文：避贼者悉收保，民若更生。
现代文：避贼的人都收留保藏它，人民好像得到新生。
English: The people who avoided the thieves took it in and preserved it, and the people seem to have been reborn.

古文：信民益厉甲兵，多方招抚，降者日至。
现代文：杨信民加紧操练士兵，多方招抚，投降的人一天天到来。
English: Yang Xinmin stepped up the training of soldiers, pandered in many ways, and the people who surrendered came day by day.

古文：乃使使持檄入贼营，谕以恩信。
现代文：于是派使者拿着檄文来到贼营，告之以恩信。
English: So he sent an envoy with the letter to the bandits' camp, telling them of his gratitude.

古文：萧养曰： 得杨公一言，死不恨。 
现代文：黄萧养说： 得到杨公一句话，死而无恨。 
English: Huang Xiao Yang said, "If I can get a word from Yang Gong, I will die without hatred."

古文：克日请见。
现代文：约定日期请求相见。
English: Request a meeting on the agreed date.

古文：信民单车诣之，隔濠与语。
现代文：杨信民单车来赴约，隔着护城河和他说话。
English: Yang Xinmin rode his bicycle to the appointment and talked to him across the moat.

古文：贼党望见，欢曰： 果杨公也！ 
现代文：贼党望见，高声欢呼说： 果然是杨公。 
English: Seeing this, the thieves cheered loudly and said, "It is indeed Yang Gong."

古文：争罗拜，有泣下者。
现代文：争相下拜，有哭泣流泪的。
English: They bowed down in front of each other, and some of them cried.

古文：贼以大鱼献，信民受之不疑。
现代文：贼用大鱼进献，杨信民毫不怀疑地接受了。
English: The thief used a big fish as an offering, which Yang Xinmin accepted without hesitation.

古文：萧养且降，而都督董兴大军至。贼忽中变。
现代文：黄萧养将要投降，而都督董兴大军到来，贼忽然变卦。
English: Huang Xiao Yang is about to surrender, but when the governor Dong Xing's army arrives, the thief suddenly changes his mind.

古文：夜有大星陨城外，七日而信民暴疾卒。
现代文：晚上有大星坠落在城外，七天后杨信民突然发病去世。
English: In the evening, a large star fell outside the city, and seven days later, Yang Xinmin suddenly fell ill and died.

古文：时景泰元年三月乙卯也。
现代文：当时是景泰元年三月乙卯日。
English: At that time, it was the first day of March in the first year of King Taejo.

古文：军民聚哭，城中皆缟素。
现代文：军民聚在一起痛哭，城中都穿着白色的丧服。
English: Soldiers and civilians gathered together to weep, and everyone in the city wore white mourning clothes.

古文：贼闻之，亦泣曰： 杨公死，吾属无归路矣。 
现代文：贼寇听说这件事也哭道： 杨公死了，我们这些人没有退路了。 
English: When the bandit heard about this, he also cried: "Yang Gong is dead, we have no way out.

古文：未几，兴平贼，所过村聚多杀掠。
现代文：不久，董兴扫平贼寇，所过村落多遭受杀掠。
English: Soon after, Dong Xing swept up the bandits, and most of the villages he passed through were pillaged.

古文：民仰天号曰： 杨公在，岂使吾曹至是！ 
现代文：人民仰天号哭说： 如果杨公在世，怎么能使我们到这地步！ 
English: The people cried out to the heavens: "If Yang Gong is still alive, how could he have brought us to this point!"

古文：讣闻，赐葬祭，录其子玖为国子生。
现代文：讣告传到朝廷，皇上赐予送葬的祭品，录用其子杨玖为国子生。
English: The obituary was reported to the imperial court, and the emperor gave him a funeral offering and appointed his son Yang Xuan as the son of the state.

古文：广东民赴京请建祠，许之。
现代文：广东人民赴京城请求给杨信民建祠堂，皇上答应了。
English: The people of Guangdong went to Beijing to request that an ancestral hall be built for Yang Xinmin, and the emperor agreed.

古文：成化中，赐谥恭惠。
现代文：成化年问，赐谧号为恭惠。
English: Chenghua New Year's greetings, the bestowal name is Gonghui.

古文：久之，从选人卢从愿请，命有司岁以其忌日祭焉。
现代文：很久以后，听从选人卢从愿的请求，命令主管部门每年在杨信民忌日那天祭祀。
English: A long time later, heeding the request of Lu Zongru, the chief selector, he ordered the competent department to hold a ritual every year on the day of Yang Xinmin's death.

古文：张骥，字仲德，安化人。
现代文：张骥，字仲德，安化人。
English: Zhang Xuan, Zi Zhongde, Anhua people.

古文：永乐中举于乡，入国学。
现代文：永乐年间乡试中举，进入国学。
English: In Yongle's year, he passed the junior high school entrance examination and entered the national school.

古文：宣德初授御史。
现代文：宣德初年授予御史。
English: In the first year of Xuande, he was awarded the title of Imperial Historian.

古文：出按江西，虑囚福建，有仁廉声。
现代文：出任江西按察使，在福建审问囚犯，有仁义廉洁的名声。
English: He served as inspector-general of Jiangxi Province and interrogated prisoners in Fujian Province. He had a reputation for benevolence, righteousness and integrity.

古文：正统八年，吏部尚书王直等应诏，博举廷臣公廉有学行者，骥与焉。
现代文：正统八年，吏部尚书王直等接诏，广泛推举廷臣中公正廉洁有学识的人，张骥在其中。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Zhengzong, the officials, including Shangshu Wang, received the imperial edict and widely selected the just, honest and learned courtiers, including Zhang Ye.

古文：迁大理右寺丞，巡抚山东。
现代文：升迁为大理右寺丞，巡抚山东。
English: He was promoted to Dali Uji no jo, the governor of Shandong Province.

古文：先是，济南设抚民官，专抚流民。后反为民扰，骥奏罢之。
现代文：先前，济南设有抚民官，专门安抚流民，后来反而成为人民的困扰，张骥上奏撤除它。
English: Previously, Jinan had a people's relief officer, specifically to pacify the displaced people, but later it became a problem for the people, and Zhang Xuan took the initiative to remove it.

古文：俗遇旱，辄伐新葬冢墓，残其肢体，以为旱所由致，名曰 打旱骨〈木舂〉 ，以骥言禁绝。
现代文：当地风俗遇上干旱，就发掘刚埋葬的坟墓，摧残死尸的肢体，认为干旱是死尸导致，称之为 打旱骨椿 ，因为张骥劝说而禁绝。
English: When there is a drought, the local custom is to dig up the freshly buried graves and destroy the limbs of the dead bodies, believing that the drought is caused by the dead bodies. It is called beating the dry bones. It was banned because of Zhang Ye's persuasion.

古文：还朝，进右少卿。
现代文：回京，晋升为右少卿。
English: He returned to Kyoto and was promoted to Ushokyo.

古文：已，命巡视济宁至淮、扬饥民。
现代文：不久，皇上命他巡视济宁到淮、扬的饥民。
English: Soon, the emperor ordered him to inspect the starving people from Jining to Huai and Yang.

古文：骥立法捕蝗，停不急务，蠲逋发廪，民赖以济。
现代文：张骥制定法令捕捉蝗虫，停办不紧急的事务，免除拖欠的赋税，开仓放粮，人民依赖此得以赈济。
English: Zhang Ye issued decrees to catch locusts, suspend non-urgent affairs, exempt tax arrears, open warehouses to release grain, and the people relied on this to save money.

古文：十三年冬，巡抚浙江。
现代文：十三年冬，张骥巡抚浙江。
English: In the winter of the 13th year, Zhang Ye became the governor of Zhejiang.

古文：初，庆元人叶宗留与丽水陈鉴胡聚众盗福建宝丰诸银矿，已而群盗自相杀，遂为乱。
现代文：开始，庆元人叶宗留与丽水人陈鉴胡，聚众盗窃福建宝丰诸银矿，不久群盗自相残杀，于是发生动乱。
English: In the beginning, Ye Zongrui of Qingyuan and Chen Jianhu of Lishui gathered a crowd to steal the silver mines of Fujian Baofeng, and soon the group of thieves killed each other, causing turmoil.

古文：九年七月，福建参议竺渊往捕，被执死。
现代文：九年七月，福建参议竺渊去拘捕，被拘执而死。
English: In July of the ninth year, Fujian councillor Gongyuan went to arrest and was detained and died.

古文：宗留僣称王。
现代文：叶宗留僭越稻王。
English: Ye Zongru, the king of rice in Yue.

古文：时福建邓茂七亦聚众反，势甚张。
现代文：这时福建邓茂七也聚众谋反，势力很强大。
English: At this time, Deng Shouqi of Fujian also gathered a large number of people to rebel, and the forces were very strong.

古文：宗留、鉴胡附之，流剽浙江、江西、福建境上。
现代文：叶宗留、鉴胡依附他，流动抢劫浙江？江西、福建境内。
English: Ye Zongrui and Jianhu followed him and robbed people in Zhejiang, Jiangxi and Fujian.

古文：参议耿定，佥事王晟及都督佥事陈荣，指挥刘真，都指挥吴刚、龚礼，永丰知县邓颙，前后败殁。
现代文：参议耿定，余事王晟及都督余事陈荣，指挥刘真，都指挥昊刚、龚礼，永丰知县邓颐，相继失败而死。
English: Councillor Geng Ding, councillor Wang Hui and governor Chen Rong, commander Liu Zhen, both commanders Haogang and Hailei, and Yongfeng County's Deng Hui, died in succession of defeat.

古文：遂昌贼苏牙、俞伯通剽兰溪，又与相应，远近震动。
现代文：遂昌贼苏牙、俞伯通劫掠兰溪；又与邓茂七相互呼应，远近震动。
English: Suichang thief Su Zha and Zibo Tong robbed Lanxi; they also echoed each other with Deng Shouqi, vibrating far and near.

古文：骥至，遣金华知府石瑁击斩牙等，抚定其余党。
现代文：张骥来到，派金华知府石瑁出击，斩杀苏牙等人，招抚安定其余党羽。
English: Zhang Ye arrived and sent Jinhua Governor Shi Ye to attack, killing Su Ya and others, and appeasing and stabilizing the remaining party members.

古文：而鉴胡方以争忿杀宗留，专其众，自称大王，国号太平，建元泰定。伪署将帅，围处州，分掠武义、松阳、龙泉、永康、义乌、东阳、浦江诸县。
现代文：而陈鉴胡正因争吵杀死叶宗留，合并他的部下，自称大王，国号太平，建元泰定，僭越任命将帅，包围处州，分剔掠夺武义、松阳、龙泉、永康、义乌、束阳、浦江诸县。
English: But Chen Jian Hu Zheng killed Ye Zonglu because of a quarrel, merged his subordinates, called himself the great king, the country was named Taiping, Jianyuan was named Taiding, and Ying Yue was appointed general, surrounded the provinces, and plundered Wuyi, Songyang, Longquan, Yongkang, Yiwu, Sokyang, and Pujiang counties.

古文：未几，茂七死，鉴胡势孤。
现代文：不久，邓茂七死去，陈鉴胡势力孤弱。
English: Soon after, Deng Shoushi died, and Chen Jianhu's power was weakened.

古文：骥命丽水丞丁宁率老人王世昌等赍榜入贼巢招之，鉴胡遂偕其党出降。
现代文：张骥命丽水丞丁宁率老人王世昌等拿着榜文到贼巢招降他们，陈鉴胡于是带领他的部下出来投降。
English: Zhang Rongmei, Lishui Rongcheng, Ding Ning and the old man Wang Shichang took the letter to the thief's nest to recruit them, Chen Jianhu then led his men out to surrender.

古文：惟陶得二不就抚，杀使者，入山为乱如故。
现代文：只有陶得二不受招抚，杀使者，入山为乱如故。
English: Only Tao Er Er was not coaxed, killed the messenger, and went into the mountains to cause chaos as before.

古文：时十四年四月也。
现代文：这时是十四年四月。
English: This was in April 1914.

古文：骥既招降鉴胡，而别贼苏记养等掠金华，亦为官军所获，贼势乃益衰。
现代文：张骥已经招降陈鉴胡，而另外的贼寇苏记养等掠夺金华也被官军擒获，贼势于是更加衰弱。
English: Zhang Qian had already recruited Chen Jianhu, while other thieves such as Su Qianyang who plundered Jinhua were also captured by the government army, and the thieves' power was further weakened.

古文：其秋，景帝嗣位，召骥还，卒于道。
现代文：这年秋，景帝即位，召张骥回京，在路上去世。
English: In the autumn of that year, Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, summoned Zhang Ye back to Beijing, and died on the way.

古文：骥所至，咸有建树，山东、两浙民久而思之。
现代文：张骥所到之处，都有建树，山东、两浙人民长久地想念他。
English: Wherever Zhang Ye went, there were trees. The people of Shandong and Zhejiang have long missed him.

古文：鉴胡至京，帝宥不诛。
现代文：陈鉴胡到京城，皇帝宽恕而没有杀他。
English: When Chen Jianhu arrived in Beijing, the emperor forgave him and did not kill him.

古文：更遇赦，释充留守卫军。
现代文：又遇赦免，被释放充留守卫军。
English: He was also pardoned and released to serve as a guard.

古文：也先入犯，鉴胡乘间亡，被获，伏诛。
现代文：也先侵犯，陈鉴胡乘机逃跑，被抓获，伏法被杀。
English: Chen Jianhu took advantage of the opportunity to escape, was caught, and was killed.

古文：竺渊，奉化人。
现代文：竺渊，奉化人。
English: Gongyuan, Fenghua people.

古文：耿定，和州人。
现代文：耿定，和州人。
English: Geng Ding, and the people of Hezhou.

古文：王晟郓城人。
现代文：王晟，郦城人。
English: Wang Yao, a resident of Lucheng.

古文：邓颙，乐昌人。
现代文：邓颐，乐昌人。
English: Deng Wei, the founder of Lechang.

古文：俱进士。
现代文：都是进士。
English: They are all new recruits.

古文：颙兵溃被执，不屈死。
现代文：邓颐兵溃被拘执，不屈而死。
English: Deng Rongrui was arrested, but he refused to give in and died.

古文：诏为营葬。
现代文：皇上下诏为他办丧事。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to hold a funeral for him.

古文：渊等赠官，录一子。
现代文：竺渊等人都赠予官职，录用一子为官。
English: Shanyuan and others were all given official positions, and one son was appointed as an official.

古文：马谨，字守礼，新乐人。
现代文：马谨，字守礼，新乐人。
English: Ma Zhen, Zhi Shouli, Xin Rongren.

古文：宣德二年进士。
现代文：宣德二年中进士。
English: Xuan De has been promoted to middle school in the past two years.

古文：事父母孝，遭丧，亲负土以葬。
现代文：事奉父母很孝顺，遇到办丧事，亲自担土埋葬。
English: He was very dutiful to his parents, and when he had to arrange a funeral, he personally carried the soil for the burial.

古文：正统中，以御史按浙江。
现代文：正统年问，以御史官按察浙江。
English: The official year is asked, with the historian inspecting Zhejiang.

古文：时修备倭海船，征材于严、衢诸郡。
现代文：当时修造抵御倭寇的海船，在严、衢诸县征收木材。
English: At that time, seagoing ships were built to resist the Japanese invaders, and timber was collected in Yan and Shanzhu counties.

古文：谨恐军士藉势肆斩伐，请禁饬之，报可。
现代文：马谨担心士兵藉势大肆砍伐，请求皇上禁止，回报可以。
English: The horse was afraid that the soldiers would use their power to cut down the trees, so he asked the emperor to ban it. He could return the favor.

古文：所至，贪猾屏迹。
现代文：所到之处，贪婪奸猾之人销声匿迹。
English: Greedy and treacherous people are disappearing everywhere.

古文：疏振台、处、宁、绍四府饥。
现代文：上疏救济台、虐、宁、绍四府饥民。
English: Hungry people in the four prefectures of Shangxo relief station, Maso, Ning and Shao.

古文：吏部验封郎中缺人久，帝令推择。
现代文：吏部验封郎中缺人很长时间了，皇帝命推举选择。
English: It had been a long time since there had been a vacancy in the position of inspector-general of the Imperial Household Agency, so the Emperor had to make a choice.

古文：会谨九载满，尚书郭琎荐谨廉直，遂用之。
现代文：恰巧马谨九年任满，尚书郭璀推荐马谨廉洁正直，于是任用他。
English: Coincidentally, when Ma Jian's nine-year term of office came to an end, Shangshu Guoqi recommended that Ma Jian be clean and honest, and then appointed him.

古文：十年荐擢湖广右布政使。
现代文：十年，被推荐提升为湖广右布政使。
English: Ten years later, he was recommended to be promoted to the post of political envoy of Hubei Province.

古文：正统末，湖南叛苗掠靖州。
现代文：正统末年，湖南叛乱的苗人掠夺靖州。
English: At the end of the orthodox era, the Miao people of the Hunan Rebellion plundered Jingzhou.

古文：命谨同御史侯爵抚谕，参将张善率兵继之。
现代文：皇上命马谨同御史侯爵去安抚晓谕。参将张善率兵继后。
English: The Emperor Myoma and the Marquis Goshi went to pacify the oracle, followed by the general Zhang Zhen and his soldiers.

古文：谨等至，招数千人复业，其出掠者击败之。
现代文：马谨等来到，招降敷千人，恢复常业，那些出来掠夺的就击败他们。
English: Ma Zheng waited for them to come, recruited a thousand soldiers, resumed regular business, and those who came out to plunder defeated them.

古文：寻与善破淇溪诸寨。
现代文：不久与张善攻破淇溪诸寨。
English: Soon, he and Zhang Shan broke through the Jixi village.

古文：景泰初，复与善大破腊婆诸洞。
现代文：景泰初年，又与张善大破腊婆诸洞。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai, he broke up with Zhang Zhen again.

古文：已，同参将李震击破青龙渡、马杨山诸贼，追奔至鸡心岭，先后斩首千四百有奇。
现代文：不久同参将李震击败青龙渡、马杨山诸贼，追击到鸡心岭，先后斩首一千四百有余。
English: Soon after, he and Li Zhen defeated the bandits of Qinglongdu and Mayangshan, pursued them to Jishinling, and beheaded more than fourteen hundred of them.

古文：师还，靖州贼复出掠，捣其巢，斩获如前。
现代文：回师，靖州贼又出来抢劫，马谨率军捣毁其巢穴，斩获如前。
English: Returning to the division, the Jingzhou thieves came out to rob again, and Ma Zheng led the army to destroy their lair, and made the same gains as before.

古文：武冈、城溪诸贼结广西蛮，据青肺山，复与震攻破之。
现代文：武冈、城溪诸贼勾结广西蛮夷，占据青肺山，马谨又与李震攻破它。
English: Wookang and Chengxi bandits colluded with Guangxi barbarians to occupy Qinglian Mountain, and Ma Jian and Li Zhen broke it.

古文：获贼杨光拳等五百六十人，斩首倍之。
现代文：俘获贼杨光拳等五百六十人，斩首加倍。
English: Five hundred and sixty people, including the thief Yang Guangquan, were captured, and the number of beheadings doubled.

古文：扶城诸寨，闻风款附。
现代文：扶城诸堡，闻风投诚依附。
English: Bucheng Fortified Towns, Feng Fengcheng Fortresses.

古文：谨出入行间三岁，冲冒锋镝，与诸将同，而运筹转饷功尤多。
现代文：马谨出入军中三年，冲锋陷阵，和诸将一样，而谋划运输粮饷功劳特别大。
English: Ma Mian was in and out of the army for three years, charging into battle, just like all the generals, and he did a particularly great job of planning the transportation of grain and straw.

古文：转左布政使。
现代文：转任左布政使。
English: He was transferred to the post of Zuo Bu political envoy.

古文：录功，进秩一等。
现代文：记录功劳，进级一等。
English: Record achievements, promoted to the first-class official level.

古文：六年五月，迁右副都御史，仍支二品俸。
现代文：六年五月，升迁为右副都御史，仍支二品俸禄。
English: In May of the sixth year, he was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, still receiving a second-class salary.

古文：巡抚河南，抚流民三万一千余户。
现代文：巡视河南，安抚流民三万一千余户。
English: He inspected Henan and pacified more than 31,000 displaced households.

古文：天顺初，废巡抚官，谨亦罢归，久之卒。
现代文：天顺初年，废除巡抚官，马谨也被罢官回家，很久以后去世。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, the procuratorate was abolished. Ma Jian was also dismissed and returned home. He died a long time later.

古文：谨性廉介，杨士奇尝称为 冰霜铁石 。
现代文：马谨性情清廉耿直，杨士奇曾经称赞他 冰霜铁石 。
English: Ma is honest and upright, and Yang Shichi once praised him as a "stone of ice and frost."

古文：程信，字彦实，其先休宁人。洪武中戍河间，因家焉。
现代文：程信，字彦实，他的祖先是休宁人，洪武年间戍守河问，就在那里安家。
English: His ancestor was a Xuning man. During the Hongwu era, he stayed in Heping and made his home there.

古文：信举正统七年进士，授吏科给事中。
现代文：程信考中正统七年进士，授予吏科给事中。
English: Cheng Xin passed the middle school entrance examination in seven years and was awarded the title of official.

古文：景帝即位，荐起薛瑄等三人。
现代文：景帝即位，程信推荐起用薛坛等三人。
English: Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, and Cheng Xin recommended that Xue Tan and three others be used.

古文：也先犯京师，信督军守西城，上言五事。
现代文：也先侵犯京城，程信督率军队守卫西城，上书言五事。
English: He also invaded the capital city first, and Cheng Xin Guo led the army to guard the west city, and made five proclamations.

古文：都督孙镗击也先失利，欲入城，信不纳，督军从城上发箭炮助之。
现代文：都督孙镗攻击也先失利，想进城，程信不让进，率军从城头上射箭放炮帮助他。
English: The governor Sun Yat-sen's attack also failed at first. When he wanted to enter the city, Cheng Xin would not let him in. He led his army to shoot arrows and fire cannons from the top of the city to help him.

古文：镗战益力，也先遂却。
现代文：孙镗越战越勇，也先于是退却。
English: Sun Yat-sen fought more and more bravely, but he also retreated first.

古文：景泰元年请振畿辅饥民，复河间学官、生徒因用兵罢遣者，皆报可。
现代文：景泰元年，请求赈济京城附近的饥民，恢复河间学官、生徒因用兵罢免遣送的人，皇上都批覆可以。
English: In the first year of King Taejo's reign, he asked the emperor to provide relief to the starving people near the capital, and to reinstate those who had been dismissed and deported by the Kawama school officials and students due to the use of soldiers.

古文：进左给事中。
现代文：晋升为左给事中。
English: Promoted to the left to the middle of things.

古文：以天变上中兴固本十事。
现代文：因天象变异上书中兴固本十件事。
English: Because of the celestial phenomenon variation, there are ten things in the book.

古文：其言敬天，则请帝敦孝友之实以答天心。
现代文：他说敬天，就希望皇帝注重孝友之实以答谢天意。
English: When he said that he respected Heaven, he hoped that the emperor would pay attention to filial piety in order to thank Heaven.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：皇帝很嘉赏地采纳了。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：明年二月出为山东右参政，督饷辽东。
现代文：第二年二月，出任山东右参政，监督往辽东运输军粮。
English: In February of the following year, he became a member of the Shandong Right Political Party and oversaw the transportation of military grain to Liaodong.

古文：巡抚寇深奏盗粮一石以上者死，又置新斛视旧加大，属信钩考。
现代文：巡抚寇深上奏，盗粮一石以上的处死，又设置新粮斛，比旧斛加大，送给程信测算考核。
English: The procurator, Guo Sheng, issued a proclamation that anyone who stole more than one stone of grain would be put to death. He also set up a new grain basket, larger than the old one, and sent it to Cheng Xin for measurement and assessment.

古文：信立碎之，曰： 奈何纳人于死！ 
现代文：程信立即打碎它，说： 为什么置人于死地？ 
English: Cheng Xin immediately broke it and said, "Why put people to death?

古文：深由是不悦信。
现代文：宪深由此不喜欢程信。
English: As a result, Kenshin dislikes Chengxin.

古文：寻以忧去，服阕，起四川参政。
现代文：不久因居丧离去。服丧期满，起用任四川参政。
English: He soon left due to his bereavement. At the end of the period of mourning, he was appointed to participate in politics in Sichuan.

古文：理松潘饷，偕侍郎罗绮破黑虎诸寨。
现代文：管理拴荡军粮，偕同侍郎罗绮击破黑虎诸寨。
English: He was in charge of the army's rations, and together with his attendant, Luo Gan, he broke through the Black Tiger's encampment.

古文：天顺元年，信入贺。
现代文：天顺元年，程信入京朝贺。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, Chengxin came to Beijing for morning greetings.

古文：时方录景泰间进言者，特擢信太仆卿。
现代文：当时皇上正录用景泰年间进言的人，特别提升程信为太仆卿。
English: At that time, the emperor was recruiting Jing Tai's advisers, and specially promoted Cheng Xin to the position of the servant of the emperor.

古文：京卫马旧多耗，信定期征之。
现代文：京城卫门里的马以前被过分消耗，程信定期征用。
English: The horses in Jingcheng Gate used to be excessively consumed, and Chengxin was regularly requisitioned.

古文：三营大将石亨、孙镗、曹钦并以 夺门 功有宠，庇诸武臣，为言太仆苛急，请改隶兵部。
现代文：三营大将石亨、孙镗、曹钦都因 夺门 之功有宠，包庇众武臣，为他们说太仆为人苛刻而急切，请求皇上更改使之隶属兵部。
English: The three battalion generals, Shi Heng, Sun Yat, and Cao Qin, were all favored for their achievements in capturing the gate, and they protected all the warriors. They said that they were too harsh and eager, and asked the emperor to change them to the military department.

古文：信言： 高皇帝令太仆马数，勿使人知。
现代文：程信说： 高皇帝命令太仆清点马匹的数量，不要让人知道。
English: Cheng Xin said: Emperor Gao ordered the servants to count the number of horses, and not to let anyone know.

古文：若隶兵部，马登耗，太仆不得闻。
现代文：如果隶属兵部，马匹增减，太仆不能知道。
English: If you belong to the military department, you can't tell if the number of horses has increased or decreased.

古文：脱有警，马不给，谁任其咎？ 
现代文：万一有警报，马匹不充足，谁承担责任？ 
English: If there's an alert and there aren't enough horses, who's responsible?

古文：帝是之，乃隶太仆如故。
现代文：皇帝认为对，于是和以前一样隶属太仆。
English: The emperor thought it was right, so he was subordinate to the eunuch as before.

古文：明年，改左佥都御史，巡抚辽东。
现代文：第二年，改任左食都御史，巡视辽东。
English: The following year, he was reassigned to the post of Zuo Jie Du Mi Shi, inspecting Liaodong.

古文：都指挥夏霖恣不法，佥事胡鼎发其四十罪，信以闻，下霖锦衣狱。
现代文：都指挥夏霖骄恣不守法，食事胡鼎揭发他四十条罪状，程信把它传达给朝廷，把夏霖关到锦衣狱。
English: They all ordered Xia Lin to be arrogant and not to abide by the law. Hu Ding revealed his forty-count indictment, Cheng Xin conveyed it to the imperial court, and put Xia Lin in Jin clothing prison.

古文：门达言信不当代奏，帝责令陈状。
现代文：门达说程信不应代替上奏，皇帝责令他述说罪状。
English: Menda said that Chengxin should not take the place of inscriptions, and the emperor ordered him to recite the charges.

古文：时寇深方掌都察院，修前郤，劾信。
现代文：当时寇深正掌管都察院，报复前面的隙怨，弹劾程信。
English: At that time, Guo Sheng was in charge of the Duka, and he retaliated against the previous grudge and impeached Cheng Xin.

古文：征下诏狱，降南京太仆少卿。
现代文：追究其罪，被关进钦犯监狱，降官为南京太仆少卿。
English: After being investigated for his crime, he was put into the Qin prison and demoted to the position of Nanjing Taigu Shaoqing.

古文：五年召为刑部右侍郎。
现代文：天顺五年召为刑部右侍郎。
English: In Tenshun 5th year, he was appointed as the right hand man of the criminal department.

古文：母忧归。
现代文：因母丧回家。
English: Later, he went home for his mother's funeral.

古文：成化元年起兵部，寻转左。
现代文：成化元年，起任兵部，不久转左。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he was appointed to the military department, and soon turned to the left.

古文：四川戎县山都掌蛮数叛，陷合江等九县。
现代文：四川戎县山都掌蛮人屡次叛乱，攻陷合江等九个县。
English: The mountain barbarians in Ebisu County, Sichuan repeatedly rebelled and invaded nine counties including Hejiang.

古文：廷议发大军讨之。
现代文：朝廷决议发大军征讨。
English: The imperial court decided to send a large army to investigate.

古文：以襄城伯李瑾充总兵官，太监刘恒为监督，进信尚书，提督军务。
现代文：以襄城伯李瑾充任总兵官，太监刘恒为监督，晋升程信为尚书提督军务。
English: With Xiangcheng's brother-in-law Li Yucheng as the chief military officer, eunuch Liu Heng as the supervisor, and Chengxin promoted to the post of admiral of military affairs.

古文：至永宁，分道进。
现代文：到永宁，分路进军。
English: To Yongning, branching off to march.

古文：都督芮成由戎县；巡抚贵州都御史陈宜、参将吴经由芒部；都指挥崔旻由普市冰脑；南宁伯毛荣由李子关；巡抚四川都御史汪浩、参将宰用由渡船铺；左右游击将军罗秉忠、穆义由金鹅池；而信与瑾居中节制。
现代文：都督芮成经由戎县，巡抚贵州都御史陈宜、参将昊经经由芒部，都指挥崔曼经由普市冰脑，南宁伯毛荣经由李子关，巡抚四川都御史汪浩、参将宰用经由渡船铺，左右游击将军罗秉忠、穆义经由金鹅池，而程信与李瑾居中调度。
English: The governor of Guizhou, Rongcheng, went through Eunjeong County, the governor of Guizhou, Guo Shi, went through Chen Yi, and the general staff, Hao, went through Mangbu, the commanding officer, Cui Man, went through Pu City, Bingnian, the governor of Nanning, Bomo Rong, went through Riziguan, the governor of Sichuan, Guo Shi, Wang Hao, and the general staff, Zhai Ying, went through the ferry, and the left and right guerrilla generals, Luo Bingzhong and Mu Yi, went through the Golden Goose Pond, while Chengxin and Li Ying

古文：转战六日，破龙背、豹尾诸寨七百五十余。
现代文：转战六天，攻破龙背、豹尾诸寨七百五十多座。
English: After six days of fighting, more than seven hundred and fifty villages in Longbei and Leopard's Tail were defeated.

古文：明年至大坝，焚寨千四百五十。
现代文：第二年到大坝，焚烧敌寨一千四百五十座。
English: The second year, they went to the dam and burned 1,450 enemy camps.

古文：前后斩首四千五百有奇，俘获无算。
现代文：前后斩首四千五百多，俘获无数。
English: More than four and a half thousand were beheaded, and countless others were captured.

古文：按诸九姓不奉化者迁泸州卫，于渡船铺增置关堡。
现代文：查办诸九姓不驯化的迁徙到泸州卫，在渡船锈增置关垒。
English: Investigate the migration of non-domesticated people with nine surnames to Zhangzhouwei, and install additional barriers at the ferry.

古文：改大坝为太平川长官司，分山都掌地，设官建治控制之。
现代文：改大坝为太平川长官司，划分山都掌土地，设置官员建立治所以控制它。
English: Change the dam to the Taiping River Chief Magistrate, divide the land under the control of the mountain capital, and set up officials to establish a jurisdiction to control it.

古文：帝降玺书嘉劳。
现代文：皇帝颁发玺书嘉奖慰劳。
English: The emperor issued a letter of commendation and consolation.

古文：录功，进兼大理寺卿，与白圭同莅兵部。
现代文：记功，进升兼任大理寺卿，与白圭共同管理兵部。
English: In recognition of his service, he was promoted to concurrently serve as the chancellor of Dali Temple, and jointly managed the military department with Bai Gui.

古文：言官劾信上首功不实。
现代文：谏官弹劾程信上报首功不实。
English: The eunuch's impeachment letter falsely reported the prime minister's achievements.

古文：信四疏乞休，不许。
现代文：程信四次上疏乞求退休，皇上不许。
English: Chengxin begged for retirement four times, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：信欲有为，而阻于圭，不自得，数称疾。
现代文：程信想有所作为，但被白圭阻碍，不自由，几次称病。
English: Cheng Xin wanted to make a difference, but was hindered by Bai Gui, was not free, and called in sick several times.

古文：六年春旱，应诏言兵事宜更张者四，兵弊宜申理者五。
现代文：六年春天干旱，程信应诏言军事应改革的四条意见，军队弊病应治理的五条意见。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of drought, Chengxin issued four opinions on the military reform and five opinions on the treatment of the army's ills.

古文：大略言：延绥、两广岁遭劫掠，宜择大臣总制；四方流民多聚荆、襄，宜早区画；京军操练无法，功次升赏未当。
现代文：大体说：延绥、两广每年遭劫掠，应选派大臣总制；四方流民多聚于荆、襄，应早做安排；京军操练没有章法，功劳大小升赏不当。
English: In general, they said: Yancheng and Liangguang were plundered every year, so a general system of ministers should be selected; the refugees from the four directions mostly gathered in Jing and Xiang, so arrangements should have been made earlier; there was no regulation for the Beijing army's exercises, and the size of the award was inappropriate.

古文：语多侵圭。
现代文：话多暗中指斥白圭。
English: He talks a lot and secretly rebukes Shirakei.

古文：圭奏寝之。
现代文：白圭奏请废止。
English: Please abolish the shirakei-so.

古文：改南京兵部，参赞机务。
现代文：改任南京兵部，参议军务。
English: He was reassigned to the Nanjing Military Department and became a military councilor.

古文：明年致仕，逾年卒。
现代文：第二年退休，一年后去世。
English: He retired the following year and died a year later.

古文：赠太子少保，谥襄毅。
现代文：赠太子少保，谧号襄毅。
English: He was presented with the title of Prince Junior Protector, and given the posthumous name of Xiang Yi.

古文：信有才力，识大体。
现代文：程信有才能，识大体。
English: Cheng Xin has talent and general knowledge.

古文：征南蛮时，制许便宜从事。
现代文：征讨南蛮时，皇帝命令准许他见机行事。
English: During the conquest of South Manchuria, the emperor ordered that he be allowed to act as he saw fit.

古文：迄班师，未尝擅赏、戮一人。
现代文：迄止到班师回朝，不曾擅自奖赏杀戮一人。
English: Until now, when the team returned to the North, they had never arbitrarily rewarded the killing of one person.

古文：曰： 刑赏，人主大柄也，不得已而假之人。
现代文：说： 刑赏，是君主的大权，不得已而授予别人。
English: He said: "Punitive damages are the prerogative of the sovereign, granted to others as a last resort.

古文：幸而事集，辄自专，非人臣所宜。 
现代文：幸而事成，总是自己专断，不是人臣所适宜的。 
English: Fortunately, he always makes decisions on his own, which is not appropriate for a courtier.

古文：在南京，守备臣欲预钱谷讼狱事，信曰： 守备重臣，所以谨非常也。
现代文：在南京，守备大臣想干预钱粮的管理和诉讼案件，程信说： 守备重臣，是用来防备意外事件的。
English: In Nanjing, when the Minister of Defense wanted to intervene in the management and litigation of Qian Rong, Cheng Xin said: "The Minister of Defense is used to prevent accidents.

古文：若此，乃有司职耳。 
现代文：像这样，是主管官吏的职责。 
English: As such, it is the duty of the officer-in-charge.

古文：论者韪之。
现代文：评论者赞赏他。
English: Reviewers praised him.

古文：子敏政，见《文苑传》。
现代文：儿子程敏政，见《文苑传》。
English: For his son, Cheng Minzheng, see "Wen Yuan Biography."

古文：白圭，字宗玉，南宫人。
现代文：白圭，字宗玉，南宫人。
English: Bai Gui, Zi Zongyu, Nan Gongren.

古文：正统七年进士。
现代文：考中正统七年进士。
English: He has been a member of the Orthodox Church for seven years.

古文：除御史，监朱勇军，讨兀良哈有功。
现代文：授官御史，监朱勇军，讨伐兀良哈有功。
English: He was awarded the title of Imperial Historian, was in charge of the Zhuyong Army, and fought against the Qiliang Dynasty.

古文：巡按山西，辨疑狱百余。
现代文：巡视山西，查清疑难案件一百余例。
English: inspected Shanxi and clarified more than 100 difficult cases.

古文：从车驾北征，陷土木。
现代文：跟从皇上北征，陷于土木。
English: Following the Emperor's Northern Expedition, he became involved in civil engineering.

古文：脱还，景帝命往泽州募兵。
现代文：脱身回朝，景帝命他到泽州招兵。
English: After escaping back to the morning, Emperor Jing ordered him to recruit soldiers in Zezhou.

古文：寻迁陕西按察副使，擢浙江右布政使。
现代文：不久升迁为陕西按察副使，提升浙江右布政使。
English: He was soon promoted to deputy envoy to Shaanxi Province and political envoy to Zhejiang Province.

古文：福建贼郑怀冒流剽处州，协诸将平之。
现代文：福建贼郑怀冒流动抢劫处州，良圭协同诸将扫平了他。
English: Zheng Huai, a Fujian thief, took the risk of mobile robbery in Zhouzhou, and Liang Gui, in cooperation with other generals, wiped him out.

古文：天顺二年，贵州东苗干把猪等僣号，攻劫都匀诸处。
现代文：玉顺二年，贵州柬苗干把猎等冒用帝王称号，攻击劫掠都匀诸处。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Yushun, the Khmer Miao of Guizhou falsely used the title of emperor, such as hunting, and attacked and plundered everywhere.

古文：诏进右副都御史，赞南和侯方瑛军往讨。
现代文：皇上下诏晋升白圭任右副都御史，辅佐南和侯方瑛军前往征讨。
English: Emperor Shang Shangzhao promoted Bai Gui to the post of right vice-governor of the capital, assisted by Nang and Hou Fang Yingjun to go to the conquest.

古文：圭以谷种诸夷为东苗羽翼，先剿破百四十七寨。
现代文：白圭认为谷种诸夷是束苗羽翼，先剿破其一百四十七座营垒。
English: Bai Gui thought that the grain seeds and all the barbarians were the wings of the bunch of seedlings, and he broke through the 147 camps first.

古文：遂会兵青崖，复破四百七十余寨，乘胜攻六美山。
现代文：于是会师于青崖，又击破四百七十余寨，乘胜攻六美山。
English: As a result, he joined forces with Qingyao, broke through more than 470 villages, and took advantage of the victory to attack Liubishan.

古文：干把猪就擒，诸苗震詟。
现代文：于把猎被擒住，诸苗震惊。
English: Zhu Miao was shocked when he was caught hunting.

古文：湖广灾，就命圭巡抚。
现代文：湖广发生灾害，就命白圭去巡抚。
English: In the event of a disaster in Hukang, Bai Gui was ordered to act as governor.

古文：四年召为兵部右侍郎。
现代文：四年，召焉兵部右侍郎。
English: In the fourth year, he was called to be the right hand man of the military.

古文：明年，孛来寇庄浪。
现代文：第二年，孛来侵犯庄浪。
English: In the second year, it invaded Zhuanglang.

古文：圭与都御史王竑赞都督冯宗军务，分兵巡边。
现代文：白圭与都御史王站参议都督冯宗军务，分兵巡守囚边。
English: Bai Gui and the capital's governor, Wang Shishi, stood with the councillor, the military governor Feng Zong, and the detachment of soldiers patrolled the prisoner's side.

古文：圭败之固原州。
现代文：白圭败敌于固原州。
English: Bai Gui lost to Gouyuan County.

古文：七年进工部尚书。
现代文：七年，晋升工部尚书。
English: Seven years later, he was promoted to the Ministry of Industry.

古文：成化元年，荆、襄贼刘千斤等作乱。
现代文：成化元年，剂、襄贼刘千斤等作乱。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, the agent and the thief Liu Jianjin made a mess.

古文：敕抚宁伯朱永为总兵官，都督喜信、鲍政为左右参将，中官唐慎、林贵奉监之，而以圭提督军务，发京军及诸道兵会讨。
现代文：朝廷下令抚宁伯朱永为总兵官，都督喜信、鲍政为左右参将，宦官唐慎、林贵奉监军，而用白圭提督军务，发京城军队及诸道兵会讨。
English: The imperial court ordered that Zhu Yong of Fuxing was the chief military officer, the governor of the capital Xixin and Bao Zheng were the left and right adjutants, the eunuchs Tang Shen and Lin Gui served as supervisors of the army, and Bai Gui was the admiral of military affairs, and the army of the capital city and the soldiers of various provinces were discussed.

古文：千斤，名通，河南西华人。
现代文：刘千斤，名通，河南西华人。
English: Liu Qianjin, well-known, from West China, Henan Province.

古文：县门石狻猊重千斤，通只手举之，因以为号。
现代文：县衙门口的石狮子重千斤，刘通用一只手举起，以此为号。
English: The stone lion at the entrance to the county government building weighs a thousand pounds, and Liu GM raised one hand, using it as a call sign.

古文：正统中，流民聚荆、襄间，通窜入为妖言，潜谋倡乱。
现代文：正统年间，流民聚集在荆、襄之间，刘通窜入妖言惑众，阴谋作乱。
English: During the years of orthodoxy, the exiles gathered between Jing and Xiang, and Liu Tongyao entered into witchcraft to mislead the public and conspire to create turmoil.

古文：石龙者，号石和尚，聚众剽掠。通与共起兵，伪称汉王，建元德胜，流民从者四万人。
现代文：石龙这个人，号石和尚，聚众抢掠，刘通和他共同起兵，伪称汉王，建元德胜，附从的流民有四万人。
English: Shi Long this person, the trumpet stone monk, gathered crowds to loot, Liu Tong and him jointly raised an army, falsely called Han Wang, Jianyuan Desheng, and there were 40,000 followers of the exiles.

古文：圭等至南漳，贼迎战，败之，乘胜逼其巢。
现代文：白圭等人来到南漳，贼迎战，白圭击败他们，乘胜逼近其巢穴。
English: Bai Gui and others came to Nanlu, the thieves met the battle, Bai Gui defeated them and approached their lair.

古文：通奔寿阳，谋走陕西。
现代文：刘通奔向寿阳，打算向陕西逃跑。
English: Liu Tong ran to Shouyang, intending to flee to Shaanxi.

古文：圭遣兵扼其道，通乃退保大市，与苗龙合。
现代文：白圭派兵扼守住他的去路，刘通就退保大市，与苗龙会合。
English: Bai Gui sent soldiers to guard his path, and Liu Tong withdrew from the city and met with Miao Long.

古文：官军又破之雁坪，斩通子聪及其党苗虎等。
现代文：官军又在雁坪击破他们，斩杀刘通的儿子刘聪及其党羽苗虎等人。
English: The government army defeated them again in Yanping and killed Liu Tong's son Liu Cong and his followers including Miao Hu.

古文：贼退保后岩山，据险下木石如雨。
现代文：贼退保后岩山，据险落木石如雨。
English: After the thief's release from bail, the rock mountain, according to the danger, fell like rain.

古文：诸军四面攻，圭往来督战，士皆蚁附登。
现代文：诸军四面围攻，白圭往来督战，士兵都像蚂蚁一样攀附登城。
English: The armies besieged on all sides, Bai Gui supervised the battle, and the soldiers clung to the city like ants.

古文：贼大败。擒通及其众三千五百余人，获贼子女万一千有奇，焚其庐舍，夷险阻而还。
现代文：贼大败，擒获刘通及其部众三干五百余人，俘获贼子女一万一千有余，焚烧其庐舍，夷平险阻的地方而还。
English: The thieves were soundly defeated, and more than 500 people, including Liu Tong and his three subordinates, were captured. More than 11,000 of the thieves' children were captured, and their homes were burned and dangerous areas were razed.

古文：石龙与其党刘长子等逸去，转掠四川，连陷巫山、大昌。
现代文：石龙与其党羽刘长子等人逃去，辗转掠夺四川，连陷巫山、大昌。
English: Shi Long and his followers, including Liu Changsi, fled and went on to plunder Sichuan, taking Wushan and Dachang.

古文：圭等分兵蹙之，长子缚龙以降，余寇悉平。
现代文：白圭等分兵追逼，刘长子捆绑着石龙来投降，余寇都被扫平。
English: Bai Gui and other soldiers chased them down, Liu's eldest son tied a stone dragon to surrender, and the remaining robbers were swept away.

古文：录功，加圭太子少保，增俸一级。
现代文：记功，加授白圭为太子少保，增俸禄一级。
English: For his meritorious service, Bai Gui was awarded the title of Prince's Junior Bodyguard, and his salary was increased by one level.

古文：遭父忧，葬毕，视事。
现代文：遭受父丧，葬后，办公。
English: After the death of his father, he lost his job.

古文：三年改兵部尚书，兼督十二团营。
现代文：三年，改任兵部尚书，兼督十二座团营。
English: Three years later, he was reassigned to the military department of Shangshu, and also served as the governor of 12 regiments.

古文：六年，阿罗出等驻牧河套，陕西数被寇。
现代文：六年，阿罗山等居留在河套放牧，陕西屡次被侵犯。
English: In the past six years, Aro Mountain and other residents stayed in Hetao for grazing, and Shaanxi Province was repeatedly invaded.

古文：圭言镇巡官偷肆宜治。延绥巡抚王锐、镇守太监秦刚、总兵官房能俱获罪去。
现代文：白圭说镇巡官苟且恣肆应惩处，延绥巡抚王锐、镇守太监秦刚、总兵官房能都获罪离去。
English: Bai Gui said that the town's inspector should be punished. Yancheng's inspector Wang Rui, the town's eunuch Qin Gang, and the chief military officer Fang Neng were all punished and left.

古文：圭乃议大举搜河套，发京兵及他镇兵十万屯延绥。而以输饷责河南、山西、陕西民，不给，则预征明年赋。于是内地骚然。
现代文：白圭就建议大举搜索河套，调发京军及其它镇兵十万屯居在延绥，而以运输军粮督促河南、山西、陕西人民，不能供应，就提前征收第二年的赋税，于是内地动荡。
English: Bai Gui proposed a large-scale search of Hetao, dispatched 100,000 soldiers from the Beijing Army and other town soldiers to live in Yan'an, and urged the people of Henan, Shanxi and Shaanxi to transport military grain. If they could not supply it, they would collect the second year's tax in advance, causing turmoil in the mainland.

古文：而前后所遣三大将朱永、赵辅、刘聚，皆畏怯不任战，卒以无功。
现代文：而前后所派遣的三位大将朱永、趟辅、刘聚，都畏惧不敢出战，终于无功。
English: However, the three generals Zhu Yong, Wuchu, and Liu Ju, who were sent before and after, were afraid to go to war, and finally did nothing.

古文：十年卒官，年五十六。
现代文：十年，在任期内去世，终年五十六崴。
English: Ten years later, he died during his term of office, and retired at the age of fifty-six.

古文：赠少傅，谥恭敏。
现代文：被赠予少傅，谧号恭敏。
English: He was given the posthumous title of Shao Fu (少傅) and the nickname Gong Min (恭敏).

古文：圭性简重，公退即闭阁卧，请谒皆不得通。
现代文：白圭性情庄严持重，他回家就关闭阁楼睡觉，别人请求拜见都不通报。
English: Bai Gui's disposition is solemn and serious. When he comes home, he closes the attic to sleep, and does not inform others when they ask to see him.

古文：在贵州时，有愤中官虐而欲刺之者，误入圭所。
现代文：在贵州时，有愤恨宦官肆虐而想刺杀他的人，误入白圭房间。
English: While in Guizhou, a man who was enraged at the eunuch and wanted to assassinate him entered Baigui's room by mistake.

古文：圭拥衾问之，其人惊曰： 乃吾公耶？ 
现代文：白圭围着衾被问他，那个人惊间： 是主公吗？ 
English: Bai Gui was asked about him, surrounded by egrets. The man was surprised: Is it the lord?

古文：即自刎，不殊，仆于地。
现代文：立即自刎，没有死，仆倒在地。
English: He immediately hanged himself. He did not die, but fell to the ground.

古文：圭呼烛起视，傅以善药，遣之。人服其量。
现代文：白圭呼叫点上蜡烛站起查看，用良药敷其伤口，让他走，人们佩服他的气量。
English: Bai Gui called for a candle to be placed on the spot, stood up to inspect, applied good medicine to his wound, and let him go. People admired his stamina.

古文：次子钺，字秉德。
现代文：次子白铁，字秉德。
English: The second son, Bai Tie, was called Bing De.

古文：进士及第，授编修。
现代文：进士及第，被授予编修官。
English: and was awarded the title of editor-in-chief.

古文：累官太子少保，礼部尚书。
现代文：积功升任太子少保，礼部尚书。
English: He was promoted to the position of the Prince's Junior Bodyguard for his achievements, and received a certificate from the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：习典故，以词翰称。
现代文：熟习典故，以诗文辞章著称于世。
English: He is familiar with allusions and is famous for his poetic diction.

古文：卒，赠太子太保，谥文裕。
现代文：死，赠太子太保，谧号文裕。
English: After his death, he was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo and the posthumous name of Munyu.

古文：张瓒，字宗器，孝感人。
现代文：张瓒，字宗器，孝感人。
English: Zhang Xuan, Zhaozong ware, the filial piety is touching.

古文：正统十三年进士。
现代文：考中正统十三年进士。
English: He was promoted to junior high school teacher in the 13th year of the orthodox examination.

古文：授工部主事，迁郎中，历知太原、宁波二府，有善政。
现代文：授予工部主事，升迁焉郎中，历任太原、宁波知府，有良好的政绩。
English: He was awarded the title of the head of the engineering department, and was promoted to vice-governor. He has served as governor of Taiyuan and Ningbo prefectures and has a good political record.

古文：成化初，市舶中官福住贪恣，瓒禁戢其下。
现代文：成化初年，市舶宦官福住贪婪恣肆，张瓒禁止他的部下。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, the city's shipping official, Fukuzumi, was greedy and arbitrary, and Zhang Ye forbade his subordinates from doing so.

古文：住诬瓒于朝，瓒遂列住罪。
现代文：福住向朝廷诬告张瓒，张瓒于是罗列福住的罪状。
English: Fukuzumi falsely accused Zhang Ye to the imperial court, and Zhang Ye then listed the charges against Fukuzumi.

古文：住被责，其党多抵法。
现代文：福住被责罚，他的党羽大多伏法。
English: Fukuzumi was punished, and most of his followers surrendered to the law.

古文：大臣会荐，迁广东参政，转浙江左布政使。
现代文：大臣相会举荐，迁升张瓒为广东参政，转任浙江左布政使。
English: On the recommendation of the Council of Ministers, Zhang Jun was promoted to participate in politics in Guangdong and transferred to the post of Zhejiang Zuo Bu political envoy.

古文：十年冬，以右副都御史巡抚四川。
现代文：十年冬，以右副都御史巡视四川。
English: In the winter of the tenth year, he toured Sichuan as the right vice-governor.

古文：播州致仕宣慰杨辉言，所属夭坝干、湾溪诸寨及重安长官司为生苗窃据，请王师进讨。
现代文：播州退休的宣慰杨辉说，所属天坝干、湾溪诸寨及重安长官司被没有驯顺的苗人窃据，请求官军进讨。
English: Yang Hui, a retired consoler from Banzhou, said that the Tianba Gang, Wanxi Zhuzhai and Chong'an Chief Magistracy he belonged to were stolen by unruly Miao people, and he asked the government army to investigate.

古文：诏瓒谕还侵地，不服则征之。
现代文：皇上诏令张瓒告谕归还被侵占的土地，不服从就讨伐他。
English: The emperor's edict ordered Zhang Xuan to return the occupied land, and if he did not obey, he would be put to death.

古文：瓒率兵讨定，请设安宁宣抚司，即授辉子友为宣抚以镇。
现代文：张瓒率兵讨伐平定，请求设安宁宣抚司。就授予杨辉的儿子杨友为宣抚镇守。
English: Zhang Xuan led the troops to fight and pacify, and requested the establishment of a pacification department. Yang Hui's son, Yang You, was awarded the post of town guard.

古文：诏可，赐敕奖劳。
现代文：皇上下诏许可，赐敕令奖赏慰劳。
English: With the Emperor's permission, the Emperor's edict was issued to reward the labor.

古文：以母老乞归，母已卒。
现代文：以母亲年老乞求回家，回家后他的母亲已经去世。
English: He begged his elderly mother to come home, but when he got home, his mother had died.

古文：会松、茂番寇边，诏起复视事。
现代文：恰巧松、茂番寇侵犯边防，诏令再次起用办公。
English: Chakotamatsu and Moban invaded the border, and the imperial edict was reissued.

古文：先是，佥事林璧言： 松茂曩为大镇。
现代文：在这之前，愈事林璧说： 松茂以前是大镇。
English: Prior to this, Yu Shih Lin Bi said: "Matsushige used to be a big town.

古文：都御史寇深、侍郎罗绮尝假便宜，专制其地，故有功。
现代文：都御史寇深、侍郎罗绮曾凭借特权，控制这个地方，所以有功。
English: Shikoshin, the governor of the capital, and his attendant, Roh Yao, once controlled this place by virtue of their privileges, so they have merit.

古文：今惟设两参将，以副使居中调度。
现代文：如今只设两个参将，以副使居中调度。
English: Today, there are only two attendants, with the deputy attendant in the middle.

古文：事权轻，临敌禀令制府，千里请战，谋泄机缓，未有能获利者。
现代文：权力小，临战禀告请示制府，千里请战，谋略泄露，时机延缓，没有能够获胜的。
English: The power is small, the pre-war obituary notice asks the government for instructions, the thousand miles ask for war, the strategy is leaked, the time is delayed, and there is no one who can win.

古文：宜别置重臣弹压，或即命瓒兼领，专其责成。 
现代文：应另外设重臣控制，或就是命张瓒兼任，专门委任他负责。 
English: It is necessary to set up another senior minister control, or it is necessary to appoint Zhang Xuan to be in charge.

古文：十二年七月命瓒兼督松茂、安绵、建昌军务。
现代文：十二年七月，命张瓒兼督松茂、安绵、建昌军务。
English: In July of the 12th year, Zhang Xuan was appointed concurrently as the military governor of Songmao, Anmian, and Jianchang.

古文：瓒至军，审度形势，改大坝旧设副使于安绵，而令副总兵尧彧军松潘，参将孙暠军威、叠，为夹攻计。
现代文：张瓒到军中，审察测度形势，改变大坝设副使于安绵的旧制，而令副总兵尧或驻军松潘，参将孙嵩驻军威、迭，焉夹攻作准备。
English: Zhang Qian went to the army to examine the measurement situation and change the old system of setting up a deputy envoy to the dam in Anmian, and ordered the deputy commander-in-chief or the garrison Song Pan and the commander of the garrison Sun Song to prepare for the attack.

古文：乘间修河西旧路，作浮梁，治月城。避偏桥栈道，军获安行，转饷无阻。
现代文：乘间隙修整河西旧路，建浮桥，治理月城，避开偏桥栈道，军队得以安全通行，运粮无阻。
English: Taking advantage of the gap, the old road west of the river was repaired, the floating bridge was built, the moon city was governed, and the footpath of the bridge was avoided. The army was able to pass safely, and the transportation of grain was unhindered.

古文：十四年六月攻白草坝、西坡、禅定数大寨，斩获亡算。
现代文：十四年六月，攻击白草坝、西坡、禅定几个大寨，斩首俘获无数。
English: In June of the 14th year, they attacked several large villages in Bai Cao Dam, Xi Po, and Zhengding, beheading and capturing countless people.

古文：徇茂州、叠溪，所过降附。
现代文：招抚茂州、迭溪，所遇之处投降归附。
English: They were invited to Maozhou and Diexi, and surrendered wherever they were encountered.

古文：抵曲山三寨，攻破之，再讨平白草坝余寇。
现代文：抵达曲山三寨，攻破了它。又讨平白草坝残余敌寇。
English: Arrived at Qushan Sanzhai, broke through it, and leveled the remnants of Bai Cao Dam.

古文：先后破灭五十二寨，贼魁撒哈等皆歼。
现代文：先后攻破消灭五十二座寨子，贼魁撒哈等都被歼灭。
English: Fifty-two fortresses were broken and destroyed, and the bandit leader Saha and others were annihilated.

古文：他一百五寨悉献马纳款，诸番尽平。
现代文：其它一百零五座营寨都献马交钱，诸番贼全被扫平。
English: The other 105 encampments all offered horses for payment, and all the bandits were wiped out.

古文：留兵戍要害，增置墩堡，乃班师。
现代文：张瓒留兵戍守要害之处，增置城堡，纔班师回朝。
English: Zhang Ye left soldiers to guard the key points, added a castle, and sent his division back to the imperial court.

古文：帝嘉其功，征拜户部左侍郎，辞归终制。
现代文：皇帝嘉奖他的战功，授予张瓒户部左侍郎，辞官回家服丧。
English: The emperor commended him for his war service and awarded Zhang Xuan the title of Zuozhirang of the household department. The official went home to mourn.

古文：十五年起左副都御史，总督漕运，兼巡抚江北诸府。
现代文：十五年，起任左副都御史，总督漕运，兼巡抚江北诸府。
English: Fifteen years later, he was appointed Left Vice-Governor of Miyoshi, Governor of Zaoyun, and Governor of the Northern Provinces of the Yangtze River.

古文：十八年，岁大祲，疏请振济。
现代文：十八年，遭受大饥荒，张瓒上疏请求赈济。
English: In the 18th year, suffering from a great famine, Zhang Xuan Shangsu asked for help.

古文：发银五万两，复敕瓒移淮安仓粮分振，而瓒已卒。
现代文：发银五万两，又敕令张瓒转运淮安仓粮分发赈济，而张瓒已经去世。
English: He issued 50,000 taels of silver and ordered Zhang Ye to transfer grain from the Huai'an warehouse to distribute the grain to the poor, but Zhang Ye passed away.

古文：瓒功名著西蜀。
现代文：张瓒功名闻于西蜀。
English: Zhang Ye's exploits are well known in West Shu.

古文：其后抚蜀者如谢士元辈，虽有名，不及瓒。
现代文：他之后巡抚蜀的如谢士元等人，虽有名望，却赶不上张瓒。
English: His successors, such as Xie Shiyuan, the governor of Shu, although famous, could not keep up with Zhang Ye.

古文：惟夭坝干之役，或言杨辉溺爱庶长子友，欲官之，诈言生苗为乱，瓒信而兴师，其功不无矫饰云。
现代文：只有夭坝干之役，有人说杨辉溺爱庶长子杨友，打算让他做官，谎言没有驯服的苗人作乱，张瓒信以为真而发兵征讨，其功不免矫饰。
English: Yang Hui is said to have doted on his eldest son, Yang You, and planned to make him an official. Miao people, who have not been tamed by lies, caused turmoil. Zhang Yuxin thought it was true and sent soldiers to collect money. His achievements are not without embellishment.

古文：谢士元，字仲仁，长乐人。
现代文：谢士元，字仲仁，长乐人。
English: Xie Shiyuan, Zha Zhongren, Changle Musician.

古文：景泰五年进士。
现代文：考中景泰五年进士。
English: Jing Tai was promoted to sergeant five years later.

古文：授户部主事。
现代文：授予户部主事。
English: Assigned to be in charge of the Household Department.

古文：督通州仓，陈四弊，屡与监仓宦官忤。
现代文：督管通州粮仓，陈述四条弊端，屡次与监仓宦官发生矛盾。
English: Supervised the Tongzhou granary, stated four drawbacks, and repeatedly had conflicts with the overseer.

古文：天顺七年擢建昌知府。
现代文：天顺七年。提升为建昌知府。
English: In the seventh year of Tenshun, it was promoted to Jianchang Prefecture.

古文：地多盗，为军将所庇。
现代文：地方多盗贼，为军将所庇护。
English: The place is full of thieves, sheltered by generals.

古文：士元以他事持军将，奸发辄得。
现代文：谢士元以他事挟制军将，奸情暴露就都擒住。
English: Xie Shiyuan used him to blackmail the general, and when the affair was exposed, everyone was stunned.

古文：民怀券讼田宅，士元叱曰： 伪也，券今式，而所讼乃二十年事。 
现代文：有平民拿着证券诉讼田宅，谢士元叱责他说： 这是欺诈，券是现在的样式，而所讼的是二 年前的事。 
English: A commoner came to Tianzhu with a securities lawsuit, and Xie Shiyuan scolded him, saying, "This is a fraud. The securities are in their current form, but the case is from two years ago."

古文：民惊服，讼为衰止。
现代文：百姓惊服，诉讼衰减停止。
English: The people were surprised and convinced, and the decline of lawsuits stopped.

古文：考满，进从三品俸，治府事如故，以忧去。
现代文：任满，进升从三品俸禄，治理府事如故，因亲丧离去。
English: At the end of his term of office, he was promoted from the third grade of salary, governing the prefecture as before, and left due to personal bereavement.

古文：服阕，起知广信。
现代文：服丧期满，起用任广信知府。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed as Guangxin governor.

古文：永丰有银矿，处州民盗发之，聚数千人。
现代文：永盥有银矿，处州老百姓私自盗掘它，聚集几千人。
English: There is a silver mine in Yongkang. The people of Zhenzhou secretly dug it and gathered several thousand people.

古文：将士惮其骁彍，不敢剿。
现代文：将士惧其勇猛粗犷，不敢剿除。
English: The generals were afraid of his bravery and brutality and did not dare to eliminate him.

古文：士元勒兵趋之，贼遮刺士元，伤左股。
现代文：谢士元率兵前去，贼拦截刺杀谢士元，伤左腿。
English: Xie Shiyuan led his soldiers forward. The thief intercepted and stabbed Xie Shiyuan to death, injuring his left leg.

古文：裹创力战，获其魁，塞矿穴而还。
现代文：谢士元包扎好伤口拼死作战，俘获其魁首，堵塞矿口而还。
English: Xie Shiyuan bandaged the wound and fought to the death, captured its leader, blocked the mine entrance and returned.

古文：入觐，改永平。
现代文：入京觐见皇上，改任水平知府。
English: Entered Beijing and met the emperor, and was appointed as a horizontal prefect.

古文：遭丧不赴。
现代文：遭受丧事没去上任。
English: He did not take up his post because of the tragedy.

古文：服阕，擢四川右参政，进右布政使。
现代文：服丧期满，提升为四川右参政，晋升为右布政使。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was promoted to Sichuan right-wing politician and promoted to right-wing political envoy.

古文：弘治元年就擢右副都御史，巡抚其地。
现代文：弘治元年，就地提升为右副都御史，巡枧其地。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was promoted on the spot to the right vice-governor of the capital, and began to patrol the area.

古文：土番大小姓者，将煽乱，士元托行边，驰诣其地。
现代文：土番大小娃将要煽动作乱，谢士元假托巡边，奔驰到他们那地方。
English: The earthworker and the little girl are going to stir up a ruckus. Xie Shiyuan pretends to patrol and drives to their place.

古文：贼恐，罗拜道左，徐慰遣之。
现代文：贼惊恐，分散拜伏在道旁，徐徐安慰遣返他们。
English: The thieves panicked, scattered and prostrated themselves on the roadside, and were slowly comforted and repatriated.

古文：岁大祲，流民趋就食。
现代文：收成不好，流民被迫外出谋生。
English: Poor harvests have forced displaced people to go out and earn a living.

古文：士元振恤有方，全活者数万。
现代文：谢士元赈济抚恤有方，保全活下来的人数万。
English: Xie Shiyuan's generous provision of pensions saved tens of thousands of lives.

古文：明年，坐事下狱。
现代文：第二年，因事获罪入狱。
English: The following year, he was convicted and sent to prison.

古文：事白，遂致仕。
现代文：事情真相大白，就退休了。
English: When the truth came out, he retired.

古文：孔镛，字韶文，长洲人。
现代文：孔锈，字韶文，长洲人。
English: Kong Zi, Zi Zi Wen, Changzhou people.

古文：景泰五年进士。
现代文：考中景泰五年进士。
English: Jing Tai was promoted to sergeant five years later.

古文：知都昌县，分户九等以定役，设仓水次，便收敛，民甚赖之。
现代文：任都昌知县。分户口为九等来决定劳役，在水边建立粮仓，便于收赋税，人民裉信赖他。
English: He was in charge of Changchi County. The household registration was divided into nine grades to determine the labor service, and a granary was built on the water's edge to facilitate the collection of taxes. The people trusted him.

古文：以弟铭尚宁府郡主，改知连山。
现代文：因弟孔铭娶宁府郡主，改任连山知县。
English: Due to his younger brother Kong Ming marrying the lord of Ningfu County, he was reassigned to Lianshan County.

古文：瑶、僮出没邻境，县民悉窜。
现代文：瑶、僮出没于邻境，县中老百姓都逃窜了。
English: Dragonflies and dragonflies have appeared in the neighborhood, and the people in the county have all fled.

古文：镛往招之，民惊走。
现代文：孔锈前往招抚，老百姓被惊跑了。
English: Kong Rust went to appease, and the common people were scared away.

古文：镛炊饭民舍，留钱偿其直以去。
现代文：孔锈在民舍里面烧火做饭，留下钱偿还其价值而离开。
English: Kong Rust lit a fire in the house to cook, left the money to repay its value and left.

古文：民乃渐知亲镛，相率还。
现代文：老百姓纔渐渐了解亲近孔锈，相继而回。
English: The common people gradually came to understand the closeness of the borehole rust, and returned one after another.

古文：镛慰劳振恤，俾复故业，教以战守。道路渐通，县治遂复。
现代文：孔锈慰劳赈恤，使他们恢复常业，教他们作战守备，道路渐通，县政于是恢复清明安定。
English: Kong Rust consoled them for their hard work, allowed them to resume their regular jobs, taught them to be prepared for battle, and gradually opened the roads. As a result, the county government was restored to clarity and stability.

古文：都御史叶盛征广西，以镛从。
现代文：都御史叶盛征讨广西，让孔锈随从。
English: The Metropolitan Historian Ye Sheng enlisted Guangxi, leaving Kong Rust to follow.

古文：诸将妄杀者，镛辄力争，所全活甚众。
现代文：将中妄自杀戮的，孔锈总是极力劝说，保全性命的人很多。
English: For those who commit suicide, Kong Rust always tries his best to persuade them, and there are many people who save their lives.

古文：成化元年，用叶盛等荐，擢高州试知府。
现代文：成化元年，因叶盛等荐举，提升为高州试知府。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, due to the recommendation of Ye Sheng and others, it was promoted to Gaozhou Experimental Prefecture.

古文：前知府刘海以瑶警，闭城门自护。
现代文：前知府刘海因瑶民的警情，关闭城门自救。
English: Liu Hai, the former governor of the city, closed the city gate to save himself because of the police harassment of the people.

古文：乡民避瑶至者辄不纳，还为瑶所戕。
现代文：乡民躲避瑶来的都不接纳，回去被瑶所杀。
English: The villagers did not accept the escapees, and were killed by the badgers when they returned.

古文：又疑民阴附贼，辄戮之。
现代文：又怀疑老百姓暗地裹依附贼，就杀死他们。
English: Suspecting that the common people secretly supported the thieves, they killed them.

古文：贼缘是激众怒，为内应，城遂陷。
现代文：贼趁此激起众人愤怒，做为内应，城池于是陷落。
English: The thief took advantage of this to arouse the anger of the people, and as a result, the castle fell.

古文：镛至，开门纳来者，流亡日归。
现代文：孔锈到后，打开城门接纳来者，流亡在外的老百姓逐渐回来。
English: After Kong Rust arrived, he opened the city gate to welcome the newcomers, and the people who had been in exile gradually returned.

古文：城不能容，别筑城东北居之。
现代文：城中不能容纳，在东北面另外建筑城池让他们居住。
English: They could not be accommodated in the city, so another city was built in the northeast for them to live in.

古文：附郭多暴骸，民以疫死，复为义冢瘗焉。
现代文：靠近城池有很多暴露在外的骨骸，老百姓因瘟疫而死，孔锈又修建义冢埋葬他们。
English: Near the city, there are many exposed skeletons. People died of the plague, and Kongrust built a moat to bury them.

古文：时贼屯境内者凡十余部，而其魁冯晓屯化州，邓公长屯茅峒，屡招不就。
现代文：当时屯居在高州境内的贼共十余部，而其魁首冯晓屯居在化州，邓公长屯居在茅峒，屡次招抚而不降。
English: At that time, there were more than ten groups of thieves living in Gaozhou, and their leader, Feng Xiao, lived in Huazhou, while Deng Gongchang lived in Mao'an. They were repeatedly courted but did not back down.

古文：镛一日单骑从二人直抵茅峒。
现代文：孔锈一天单骑只带两人跟从直抵茅峒。
English: One day, Kong Rust rode alone with only two people and rode straight to the thatch.

古文：峒去城十里许，道遇贼徒，令还告曰： 我新太守也。 
现代文：峒距城十数里，路上遇到贼徒，让他们回去报告说： 我是新来的太守。 
English: He was more than ten miles away from the city when he met the thieves on the road. He asked them to go back and report: "I am the newly arrived governor.

古文：公长骤闻新守至，亟呼其党擐甲迎。
现代文：公长突然听说新太守来，急呼其党羽穿着镗甲迎接。
English: When the prince suddenly heard that the new empress dowager was coming, he urgently called on his party members to wear armor to welcome her.

古文：及见镛坦易无驺从，气大沮。
现代文：等到看见孑锈坦然而来没有随从，神色十分沮丧。
English: When he saw that there was no attendant, he looked very depressed.

古文：镛徐下马，入坐庭中，公长率其徒驰甲罗拜。
现代文：孔锈缓缓下马，入坐庭中，公长率其党徒解甲罗列而拜。
English: Kong Rust slowly dismounted and sat down in the courtyard. The prince and his party members dismounted and lined up to bow.

古文：镛谕曰： 汝曹故良民，迫冻馁耳。前守欲兵汝，吾今奉命为汝父母。
现代文：孔锈晓谕他们说： 你们本是良民，迫于挨冻受饿罢了，前任太守打算加兵于你们，我今奉命做你们的父母。
English: Kong Rust said to them, "You are good people who are forced to suffer from cold and hunger. The previous governor planned to add soldiers to your army. I am now ordered to be your parent.

古文：汝，我子也。
现代文：你们，是我的儿子。
English: You are my sons.

古文：信我，则送我归，赉汝粟帛。
现代文：信任我，就送我回去，送给你们粮食布帛。
English: Send me back, if you have faith in me, and I will send you a basket of grain.

古文：不信，则杀我，即大军至，无遗种矣。 
现代文：不信任我，就杀了我，太军很快来到，没有活下来的人了。 
English: If they don't trust me, they'll kill me. The Imperial Army will arrive soon, and there will be no survivors.

古文：公长犹豫，其党皆感悟泣下。
现代文：公长犹豫，其党徒都为之感悟而流出眼泪。
English: The prince hesitated, and his party members were moved to tears.

古文：镛曰： 馁矣，当食我。 
现代文：孔锈说： 我饿了，应给我饭吃。 
English: Kong Rust said: I'm hungry, you should give me something to eat.

古文：公长为跪上酒馔。
现代文：公长跪着为他献上酒菜。
English: The prince knelt down to offer him food and drink.

古文：既食，曰： 日且暮，当止宿。 
现代文：吃完后，说： 天要黑了，应留下住宿。 
English: After eating, he said, "It's getting dark, you should stay at home."

古文：夜解衣酣寝。
现代文：晚上脱下衣服酣睡。
English: At night, I take off my clothes and fall asleep.

古文：贼相顾骇服。
现代文：贼相视惊服。
English: The thieves look at each other in surprise.

古文：再宿而返。
现代文：住宿了两晚上而回。
English: Stayed for two nights and back.

古文：见道旁裸而悬树上者累累，询之，皆诸生也，命尽释之。
现代文：看见路旁裸体悬挂在树上的人很多，孔锈询问他们，都是诸生，命令全释放他们，公长派几十骑护送孔锈回去。
English: Seeing many naked people hanging from trees by the side of the road, Kong Rust questioned them, all of whom were sentient beings, and ordered them all to be released. The prince sent dozens of horsemen to escort Kong Rust back.

古文：公长遣数十骑拥还，城中人望见，皆大惊，谓知府被执，来绐降也，尽登陴。镛止骑城外，独与羸卒入，取谷帛，使载归。
现代文：城中人望见，都大惊，说知府被抓，是来骗我们投降的，都登上城墙。孔锈在城外下马，只与羸弱的士卒入城，取粮食布帛，让他们装载而回。
English: When the people in the city saw this, they were all shocked. They said that the governor had been arrested and that he had come to trick us into surrendering, and they all climbed onto the city wall. Kong Rust dismounted outside the city and entered the city with only the weakest soldiers, took the grain sacks, and had them loaded and returned.

古文：公长益感激，遂焚其巢，率党数千人来降。
现代文：公长更加感激，就烧毁其巢穴，率党徒数千人来降。
English: The prince was even more grateful, so he burned down his lair and led thousands of party members to come down.

古文：公长既降，诸贼次第纳款，惟晓恃险不服。
现代文：公长已降，诸贼陆续交纳钱财，只有冯晓凭藉险阻不服。
English: The prince has stepped down, the thieves have successively paid their money, and only Feng Xiao Rong refuses to accept the danger.

古文：镛选壮士二百人，乘夜抵化州。
现代文：孔锈挑选壮士二百人，乘夜抵达化州。
English: Kong Rust selected two hundred able-bodied men to travel by night to Huazhou.

古文：晓仓皇走匿，获其妻子以归，抚恤甚厚，晓亦以五百人降。
现代文：冯晓仓皇逃跑藏匿，俘获其妻儿而回，孔锈对他们抚恤很丰厚，冯晓也以五百人来降。
English: Feng Xiao Cang Wang ran away and hid, captured his wife and children and returned. Kong Rust treated them very generously, and Feng Xiao also came down with five hundred people.

古文：已，与佥事陶鲁败贼廖婆保。
现代文：后与愈事陶鲁败贼廖婆保。
English: Liao Baobao, who was defeated by Tao Lu after the battle.

古文：他贼先后来犯，多败去。
现代文：其它的贼先后来侵犯，多战败而去。
English: Other thieves invaded first and later, but were mostly defeated and left.

古文：境内大定。
现代文：辖区内安定。
English: The area under its jurisdiction is stable.

古文：上官交荐，擢按察副使，分巡高、雷二府。
现代文：上司共同举荐，提升为按察副使分别巡枧高、雷二府。
English: He was jointly recommended by his superiors and promoted to deputy inspector and deputy envoy respectively for Jueyuan Gao and Lei Erfu.

古文：益招剧贼染定、侯大六、邓辛酉等，给田产，分处内地为官，备他盗。
现代文：又招降大盗梁定、侯大六、邓辛酉等人，给他们田产，分别到内地为官，防备其它的盗贼。
English: Liang Ding, Hou Dairu, Deng Xingyao and others were also invited to give up their estates and go to the inland to serve as officials to guard against other thieves.

古文：广西贼犯信宜、岑溪，皆击败之。
现代文：广西贼侵犯信宜、岑溪，都击败了他们。
English: The Guangxi bandits invaded Xinyi and Lixi and defeated them.

古文：治绩闻，赐诰命旌异。
现代文：治理的政绩闻于朝廷，皇上赐诰命褒奖。
English: The government's achievements in governance were known to the imperial court, and the emperor gave the emperor a lifetime achievement award.

古文：遭丧，服除，改广西。
现代文：遇丧事，服丧期满，改任广西。
English: In the event of a death, after the period of mourning, he was reassigned to Guangxi.

古文：瑶、僮闻镛至，悉远循。
现代文：瑶、僮听说孔锈来，都逮远地逃跑了。
English: When the toad and the toad heard that the hole was rusty, they all ran away.

古文：十四年，兵部上其功，赉银币，寻进按察使。
现代文：十四年，兵部上奏他的功劳，赐给银币，不久晋升为按察使。
English: Fourteen years later, he was given a silver medal for his services and was soon promoted to the rank of inspector.

古文：荔浦贼来寇，总督朱英以兵属镛，击平之，进食二品禄。
现代文：荔浦贼来侵犯，总督朱英把军队托付给孔锈，孔锈击败扫平了他们，进级享受二品俸禄。
English: When the Lippu bandits invaded, Governor Zhu Ying entrusted the army to Kong Rust. Kong Rust defeated and leveled them, and was promoted to enjoy the second-class salary.

古文：已，迁左布政使。
现代文：后来迁升左布政使。
English: Later, he was promoted to Zuo Bu's political envoy.

古文：旋以右副都御史巡抚贵州。
现代文：不久以右副都御史巡视贵州。
English: Soon after, he toured Guizhou as Vice Governor of the Capital.

古文：清平部苗阿溪者，桀骜多智。
现代文：清平部苗人阿溪，桀惊多智慧，他的养子阿赖特别有力气，横行于诸部中。
English: Axi, a young man from Qingping, is surprisingly wise, and his adopted son, Alai, is particularly powerful and runs rampant among the various departments.

古文：其养子阿赖尤有力，横行诸部中，守臣皆纳溪赂，骄不可制。镛行部至清平，询得溪所昵者二人。
现代文：守御大臣都收受阿溪的贿赂，骄横不可制服。孔锈行部到清平，询问得知阿溪所亲近的两人。
English: The Minister of Defense accepted bribes from Axi, and his arrogance could not be subdued. Kong Rusty went to Qingping to inquire about the two people who were close to Axi.

古文：遂以计擒溪，磔之，并讨平鸡背苗，郡蛮震慑。
现代文：于是用计擒住阿溪，肢解了他，并讨平鸡背苗，郡中蛮人震慑。
English: So he used a trick to pin down Ah Xie, dismembered him, and flattened the chicken back seedlings, shocking the barbarians in the county.

古文：镛居官廉。
现代文：孔锈居官廉洁。
English: Kong Rust is an incorruptible official.

古文：历仕三十余年，皆在边陲，触瘴成疾。
现代文：任职三十余年，都在边陲，接触瘴气成病。
English: He has been in office for more than 30 years, and all of them have been in the border areas, and have been exposed to radon gas.

古文：乞骸骨，不许。
现代文：乞求退休，皇上不许。
English: The emperor does not allow anyone to beg for retirement.

古文：弘治二年召为工部右侍郎，道卒，年六十三。
现代文：弘治二年召为工部右侍郎，在路上去世，终年六十三岁。
English: In the second year of his reign, Koji was appointed as the right hand man of the Ministry of Works. He died on the way, at the age of 63.

古文：平乐李时敏者，为信宜知县。
现代文：平乐人李时敏，是信宜知县。
English: Li Shimin, a popular singer, is from Xinyi County.

古文：尝与镛共平瑶乱，有功，迁知化州。
现代文：曾与孔锈一起平瑶乱有功，迁升化州知府。
English: He was promoted to the post of prefectural governor together with Kong Rust.

古文：粤人以孔李并称。
现代文：粤人把孔、李并称。
English: Cantonese people call Kong and Li together.

古文：邓廷瓒，字宗器，巴陵人。
现代文：邓廷瓒，字宗器，巴陵入。
English: Deng Tingyao, Zi Zongqi, Baling Rong.

古文：景泰五年进士。
现代文：考中景泰五年进士。
English: Jing Tai was promoted to sergeant five years later.

古文：知淳安县，有惠政。
现代文：任淳安知县，有善政。
English: Ren Junanchi County, there is good governance.

古文：丁母忧，服除，迁太仆寺丞。
现代文：遭逢母亲丧事，服丧期满，迁升为太仆寺丞。
English: After his mother's death, he was promoted to Daju-ji-jo when his mourning period was over.

古文：贵州新设程番府，地在万山中，蛮僚杂居，吏部难其人，特擢廷瓒为知府。
现代文：贵州新设程番府，地方在万山中，蛮僚杂居，吏部难于人选，特提升邓廷瓒为知府。
English: Chengfan prefecture was newly established in Guizhou. The place is in the middle of the mountains, and there are many people living there, so it is difficult to choose the officials. Deng Tingyao was specially promoted to the prefecture.

古文：至则悉心规画，城郭、衢巷、学校、坛庙、廨舍，以次兴建。
现代文：到任后就悉心规划，城郭、衢巷、学校、坛庙、廨舍，依次兴建。
English: After he took office, he carefully planned and built the castle, the alley, the school, the temple, and the residence one after another.

古文：榜谕诸僚受约束。
现代文：张榜晓谕诸僚接受约束。
English: Zhang Pang ordered his colleagues to accept the restriction.

古文：政平令和。巡抚陈俨上其治行。
现代文：政平令和，巡抚陈俨向皇上陈述他的政绩。
English: The political peace was concluded, and the governor Chen Xi reported his political achievements to the emperor.

古文：帝令久任。
现代文：皇帝令他久任。
English: The emperor gave him a long tenure.

古文：九载秩满，始迁山东左参政，寻进右布政使。
现代文：九年任职期满，纔迁任山东左参政，不久晋升为右布政使。
English: At the end of his nine-year term of office, he was transferred to Shandong to participate in politics on the left, and was soon promoted to the post of political envoy on the right.

古文：弘治二年以右副都御史巡抚贵州。
现代文：弘治二年，以右副都御史巡枧贵州。
English: In the second year of the Hongzhi era, he went on a tour of Guizhou as the right vice-governor.

古文：廷瓒自令至守，淹常调者逾三十年。
现代文：邓廷瓒从县令到郡守，长时间没有按常规调动超过三十年。
English: Deng Tingyao has not been transferred from county magistrate to county governor for more than 30 years.

古文：至是去知府止三岁，遂得开府。
现代文：到这时距任知府祇有三年，便获得开府要职。
English: By this time, he was only three years away from becoming prefect, and he was given the important post of opening the prefectural government.

古文：以生母忧归。
现代文：因生母去世回家服丧。
English: He went home to mourn the death of his birth mother.

古文：服阕，还原任。
现代文：服丧期满，恢复原职。
English: After the period of mourning is over, they will resume their original duties.

古文：都匀苗乜富架、长脚等作乱，敕廷瓒提督军务，同湖广总兵官顾溥、贵州总兵官王通等讨之。
现代文：都匀苗人乜富架、长脚等作乱，皇上敕令廷瓒提督军务，同湖广总兵官顾溥、贵州总兵官王通等征讨。
English: Miao people, rich people, and long-legged people all made trouble, and the emperor ordered the admiral of the imperial court to do military affairs, and the general military officer of Hougang, Gu Yao, and the general military officer of Guizhou, Wang Tong, to investigate.

古文：副使吴倬遣熟苗诈降富架，诱令入寇，伏兵擒其父子。
现代文：副使昊倬派驯服的苗人假装投降乜富架，引诱他们来进犯，设伏兵擒获乜富架父子。
English: The deputy envoy Hao Jun sent the tame Miao people to pretend to surrender to Yu Fugai, lured them to attack, and set up an ambush to capture the father and son of Yu Fugai.

古文：官军乘胜连破百余寨，生系长脚以归，群蛮震慑。
现代文：官军乘胜连破百余寨，生擒长脚而归，群蛮震恐慑服。
English: The official army took advantage of the victory to break more than a hundred villages, and the survivors returned home with long legs, wearing shock and awe clothing.

古文：廷瓒言： 都匀；清平旧设二卫、九长官司，其人皆世禄，自用其法，恣虐，激变苗民，乱四十余年。
现代文：邓廷瓒说： 都匀、清平旧设二卫、九长官司，那些人都世代享有爵禄，各自使用他们的治理方法，为人骄恣暴虐，激起苗民变乱，社会动荡四十余年。
English: Deng Tingyao said: Duyun, Qingping, the two guards and the nine magistrates were established in the old days. Those people have enjoyed peerage for generations, each using their governance methods, being arrogant and tyrannical, provoking Miao people to revolt and social turmoil for more than forty years.

古文：今元凶就除，非大更张不可。
现代文：如今元凶被除，非进行大的变更不可。
English: Now that the culprit has been removed, big changes are needed.

古文：请改为府县，设流官与土官兼治，庶可久安。 
现代文：希望改为府县，设置流官与土官共同治理，也许可以长治久安。 
English: It is hoped that it will be changed to prefectures and counties, and that officials and local officials will be set up to govern jointly, which may lead to long-term peace and stability.

古文：因上善后十一事，帝悉从之。
现代文：就条上善后的十一件事情，皇帝全听从了。
English: As for the eleven things on the list of aftercare, the emperor obeyed all of them.

古文：遂设府一，曰都匀，州二，曰独山、麻哈；县一，曰清平。
现代文：于是设府一个，为都匀；州二个，为独山、麻哈；县一个，为清平。
English: As a result, one prefecture was established, for Toei; two prefectures, for Dokuzan and Maha; and one county, for Qingping.

古文：苗患自此渐戢。
现代文：苗患从此渐除。
English: The affected seedlings have since been gradually removed.

古文：论功，进右都御史。
现代文：评定功劳，晋升为右都御史。
English: On the basis of merit, Wang Yue was promoted to the post of the Right Metropolitan Historian.

古文：八年召掌南京都察院事。
现代文：弘治八年，召掌南京都察院事务。
English: In 1868, he was appointed to be in charge of the affairs of the Southern Kyoto Inquisition.

古文：甫数月，命提督两广军务兼巡抚。
现代文：刚刚几个月，命令提督两广军务兼任巡抚。
English: Just a few months ago, he ordered the admiral of the two broad military affairs to concurrently serve as the governor.

古文：越二年，进左。
现代文：二年后，晋升左都御史。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to Sadogimi.

古文：廷瓒治尚简易，于吏事但总大纲，结群蛮以恩信，不轻用兵，而兵出必成功。
现代文：邓廷瓒治政崇尚简易，对于官府事务只总领大的方面，以恩信交结群蛮，不轻易用兵，而出兵一定成功。
English: Deng Tingjun advocated simplicity in governing. For government affairs, only the general should be in charge. He would not easily use soldiers, and the dispatch of soldiers would certainly be successful.

古文：郁林、云垆、大桂诸蛮及四会饥民作乱，以次讨平，两广遂无事。
现代文：郁林、云鲈、大桂诸蛮及四会饥民作乱。邓廷瓒依次讨平，两广于是无事。
English: The barbarians of Yulin, Yunnan, and Guangxi and the hungry people of the Four Associations rioted. Deng Tingyao tried to pacify them in turn, but nothing happened.

古文：十三年复召掌南院。
现代文：十三年，又召掌南院。
English: Thirteen years later, he was also called to be the head of the Southern Court.

古文：未行，卒。
现代文：没有动身，去世。
English: He did not set off and died.

古文：赠太子少保，谥襄敏。
现代文：赠予太子少保，谧号襄敏。
English: It was given to the prince's younger bodyguard, surnamed Xiangmin.

古文：廷瓒有雅量，待人不疑，时多称其长者。
现代文：邓廷瓒有儒雅的度量，待人不怀疑，当时人们多称他为长者。
English: Deng Tingyao had a refined discretion and treated people without suspicion. At that time, people mostly called him an elder.

古文：至所设施，动中机宜。
现代文：至于其所筹划，凡行动都切合时宜。
English: As far as his plans are concerned, any action is timely.

古文：其在贵州平苗功为尤伟云。
现代文：他在贵州平苗之功尤焉卓著。
English: He has made outstanding contributions to Pingmiao in Guizhou.

古文：王轼，字用敬，公安人。
现代文：玉轼，字用敬，公安人。
English: Tamakazura, respectfully, is a public security officer.

古文：天顺八年进士。
现代文：天顺八年中进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in Tianshun eight years ago.

古文：授大理右评事，迁右寺正。
现代文：授予大理右评事，迁升为右寺正。
English: He was awarded the title of Dali Right Reviewer and promoted to Right Temple Chief.

古文：录囚四川，平反百余人，擢四川副使。
现代文：在四川甄别囚犯，平反一百余人，提升为四川副使。
English: In Sichuan, he screened prisoners, rehabilitated more than a hundred people, and was promoted to Sichuan deputy envoy.

古文：岁凶，请官银十万两为籴费。
现代文：收成不好，请求拨官银十万两做为救济的费用。
English: The harvest was not good, and it was requested that 100,000 taels of official silver be allocated as relief costs.

古文：以按嘉定同知盛崇仁赃罪，被讦下吏。
现代文：因审查嘉定同知盛崇仁贪脏罪，被诬陷治罪。
English: He was framed and sentenced for the crime of corruption committed by Jiading Tongzhi Sheng and Chongren.

古文：事白，还职，改陕西。
现代文：事情真相大白，被恢复原职，改任陕西。
English: When the truth of the matter came to light, he was reinstated and reassigned to Shaanxi.

古文：弘治初，擢四川按察使。
现代文：弘治初年，提升为四川按察使。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, he was promoted to the post of Sichuan deputy inspector.

古文：三年迁南京右佥都御史，提督操江。
现代文：三年，迁升南京右食都御史，任提督操江。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to the position of Nanjing Right Food Capital Imperial Historian, and was appointed Admiral of Guojiang.

古文：八年进右副都御史，总理南京粮储，旋命巡抚贵州。
现代文：八年，晋升右副都御史，总管南京粮储，不久被命令巡枧贵州。
English: In the eighth year, he was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, the head of the Nanjing Grain Reserve, and was soon ordered to patrol Guizhou.

古文：明年入为大理卿，诏与刑部裁定条例颁天下。
现代文：第二年调入京任大理卿，奉诏与刑部裁定条例颁布天下。
English: In the second year, he was transferred to Beijing as the Dai Liqing, and the edict and the regulations of the Ministry of Justice were promulgated to the world.

古文：十三年拜南京户部尚书。
现代文：十三年，拜授南京户部尚书。
English: Thirteen years later, he was awarded the title of "Nanjing Houbu Shangshu."

古文：寻命兼左副都御史，督贵州军务，讨普安贼妇米鲁。
现代文：不久被命兼任左副都御史，督率贵州军务，征讨普安贼妇米鲁。
English: Soon, he was also appointed as the left vice-governor of the capital, in charge of Guizhou's military affairs, and the recruitment of Miru, the Pu'an thief.

古文：时镇守中官杨友、总兵官曹恺、巡抚钱钺共发兵讨鲁，大败于阿马坡。
现代文：当时镇守宦官杨友、总兵官曹恺、巡抚钱铁共同发兵讨伐米鲁，大败于阿马坡。
English: At that time, the town guard eunuch Yang You, the general officer Cao Wei, and the governor Qian Tie jointly sent troops to fight against Miru, and were defeated in Ama Po.

古文：都指挥吴远被执，普安几陷。
现代文：都指挥昊速被俘，普安几乎失陷。
English: Both commanders were quickly captured, and Pu'an almost fell.

古文：友等请济师，乃以命轼。
现代文：杨友等请求朝廷增派军队，因此就任命王轼。
English: Yang You and others petitioned the imperial court to send more troops, so Wang Xi was appointed.

古文：轼未至，而友等遣人招贼。
现代文：王轼还没到达，而杨友等派人招降贼寇。
English: Wang Yao had not yet arrived, but Yang You and others sent someone to invite the bandits to surrender.

古文：贼扬言欲降，益拥众攻围普安、安南卫城，断盘江道，势愈炽。
现代文：贼扬言要投降，更聚众加紧攻击围困普安、安南卫城，阻断盘江道路，贼势越加旺盛。
English: The bandits threatened to surrender, and gathered more people to step up their attacks, besieging the Pu'an and Annan Acropolis, and blocking the Panjiang Road. The bandits became more and more powerful.

古文：又乘间劫执友。
现代文：又乘间隙劫持杨友。
English: They also took advantage of the gap to kidnap Yang You.

古文：右布政使闾钲，按察使刘福，都指挥李宗武、郭仁、史韬、李雄、吴达等死焉。
现代文：右布政使阎钮，按察使刘福，都指挥李宗武、郭仁、史韬、李雄、昊达等战死。
English: Yan Niu, the political commissar on the right, and Liu Fu, the inspector on the left, both commanded Li Zongwu, Guo Ren, Shi Xi, Li Xiong, Hao Da, and died in battle.

古文：轼至，以便宜调广西、湖广、云南、四川官军、土兵八万人，合贵州兵，分八道进，使致仕都督王通将一军。
现代文：至轼来到，根据形势调动广西、湖广、云南、四川官军、土兵八万人，会合贵州兵，分八路进军，使退休的都督王通率一路军。
English: According to the situation, 80,000 soldiers from Guangxi, Hunan, Yunnan and Sichuan were mobilized to join the Guizhou soldiers and march in eight directions, with the retired governor Wang Tong leading the army.

古文：十五年正月，参将赵晟破六坠寨。
现代文：十五年正月，参将趟晟攻破六坠寨。
English: In the first month of the fifteenth year, the participants broke through the six fallen villages.

古文：贼遁，过盘江。
现代文：贼逃循，渡过盘江。
English: The thief fled and crossed the Pan River.

古文：都指挥张泰等渡江追击，指挥刘怀等遂进解安南卫围，而恺、通及都指挥李政亦各破贼寨。
现代文：都指挥张泰等渡江追击，指挥刘怀等便进军解安南卫之围，而曹恺、王通及都指挥李政也各自攻破贼寨。
English: Zhang Tai, the commander of the capital, and others pursued across the river, Liu Huai, the commander of the capital, and others marched into the encirclement of Annan Wei, while Cao Pi, Wang Tong, and Li Zheng, the commander of the capital, also broke through the thieves' camp.

古文：贼还攻平夷卫及大河、扼勒诸堡，都御史陈金以云南兵御之。
现代文：贼回军攻打平夷卫及大河、扼勒诸堡，都御史陈金用云南兵抵御。
English: The Kuomintang attacked Pingyiwei and Taihe, and captured the fortresses. The governor of the capital, Chen Jin, used Yunnan soldiers to resist.

古文：贼遁归马尾笼寨。官军聚攻益急，土官凤英等格杀米鲁，余党遂平。
现代文：贼逃回马尾笼寨，官军聚集攻打更加激烈，土官凤英等击杀米鲁，余党于是被扫平。
English: The thieves fled back to the Horse Tail Cage, the government army gathered to attack more fiercely, the local official Feng Ying and others killed Miru, and the rest of the party was then wiped out.

古文：用兵凡五月，破贼寨千余，斩首四千八百有奇，俘获一千二百。
现代文：用兵共五个月，破贼寨一千多座，斩首四干八百有余，俘获一千二百人。
English: The soldiers were deployed for a total of five months, breaking up more than a thousand bandit camps, beheading more than 4,800 people, and capturing 1,200 people.

古文：捷闻，帝大喜，嘉劳。
现代文：捷报闻于朝廷，皇帝大喜，嘉奖慰劳。
English: The news of the victory was reported to the imperial court, and the emperor was overjoyed and offered rewards and consolation.

古文：召还京，赐赉有加，录功，加太子少保。
现代文：应召回京，赏赐赠送有加，记功，加授太子少保。
English: Should be recalled to Beijing, rewards and presents will be given to him, and he will be awarded the title of Crown Prince Junior Protector.

古文：已，改南京兵部，参赞机务。
现代文：后来，改任南京兵部，参议军务。
English: Later, he was transferred to the Nanjing Military Department to advise on military affairs.

古文：连乞致仕，不允。
现代文：连续请求退休，皇上不许。
English: Successive requests to retire are not permitted by the Emperor.

古文：武宗立，遇疾复请。
现代文：武宗即位，遇病又一次请求。
English: Emperor Takemune ascends to the throne. In case of illness, Emperor Go-Shirakawa makes another request.

古文：诏加太子太保。赐敕乘传归。
现代文：皇上诏令加授太子太保，赐命乘坐传车归家。
English: The Emperor's edict conferred the title of Crown Prince and ordered him to return home by carriage.

古文：卒，赠太保，谥襄简。
现代文：去世后，赠予太保，谧号襄简。
English: After his death, he was given the posthumous title of Tai Bao and the nickname "Xiang Jian."

古文：刘丙，字文焕，南雄知府实孙也。
现代文：刘丙，字文焕，是南雄知府刘实的孙子。
English: Liu He, also known as Wen Huan, is the grandson of Liu Si, the governor of Nanxiong.

古文：成化末，登进士。
现代文：成化末年，考中进士。
English: In the last year of his life, he passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：选庶吉士，改御史，巡按云南。
现代文：被选为庶吉士，改任御史，巡抚云南。
English: He was elected as the second-in-line to the throne, and was appointed as the governor of Yunnan Province.

古文：云南诸司吏，旧不得给由，父满子代，丙请如例考入官。
现代文：云南诸司官吏，以前不用任命，父亲任满儿子代替，刘丙请求遵循条例考核做官。
English: Previously, officials in Yunnan did not need to be appointed, and the father was appointed in place of the son. Liu He requested to follow the regulations to be appointed.

古文：流戍佥发，必经兵部，多淹延致死。丙请属之抚、按。
现代文：被流放戍边的罪人签发，一定要经过兵部，很多人长久拖延致死，刘丙请求把这事交付给巡抚、巡按。
English: The criminals who were exiled to Lijiang had to go through the military department to be issued, and many people were delayed for a long time until they died. Liu He requested that this matter be submitted to the governor and the inspector.

古文：土官无后者，请录其弟侄，勿令妻妾冒冠服。
现代文：土官中没有后代的，请求录用其弟侄，不要令其妻妾冒领冠服。
English: If there is no descendant of the land officer, request that his brother or nephew be hired, and do not let his wife or concubine wear the crown.

古文：俱著为例。
现代文：都着成条例。
English: It's all in the dress code.

古文：后督两淮盐课，中官请引二万为织造费，部议许之，丙执不可，得减四之三。
现代文：后来督管两淮盐税，宦官请求抽取二万两做为织造费用，部议许可，刘丙坚持不同意，得以减少四分之三。
English: Later, the eunuch, who was in charge of the salt tax, requested that 20,000 taels be deducted as weaving expenses. The ministry approved the request, but Liu Hien insisted on disagreeing, and was able to reduce it by three-quarters.

古文：历福建、四川副使，俱督学校，三迁四川左布政使。
现代文：屋任福建、四川副使，都提督学校，三次迁升四川左布政使。
English: Ya served as vice-envoy to Fujian and Sichuan, and was promoted to vice-envoy to Sichuan three times.

古文：正德六年以右副都御史巡抚湖广。
现代文：正德六年，以右副都御史巡视湖广。
English: In the sixth year of Zhengde's reign, he went on a tour of Hunan Province as the right vice-governor of the capital.

古文：所部镇溪千户所、筸子坪长官司与贵州铜仁，四川酉阳、梅桐诸土司，犬牙相错。
现代文：所管辖的镇溪干户所、箪子坪长官司与贵州铜仁，四川酉阳、梅桐诸土司，犬牙交错。
English: The administrative offices of Zhenxi, Shanziping and Guizhou Tongren, as well as those of Shenyang and Meidong in Sichuan, are intertwined.

古文：弘治中，错溪苗龙麻阳与铜仁苗龙童保聚众攻剽，土官李〈木舂〉等实纵之，而筸子百夫长龙真与通谋。
现代文：弘治年间，错溪苗龙麻阳与铜仁苗龙童保聚众抢掠，土官李椿等实际上纵容他们，而筚子百夫长龙真和他们串通。
English: During the Hongzhi era, the wrong stream Miao Long Mayang and Tongren Miao Long Tong Bao gathered crowds to loot, the local official Li Tsubaki actually connived with them, and the mule centurion Long Zhen colluded with them.

古文：后遂四出劫掠，远近骚然，先后守臣莫能制。
现代文：后来就四面出去劫掠，远近骚动，前后守臣没有人能够控制。
English: Later, they went out in all directions to loot and pillage, causing turmoil near and far, and no one was able to control them.

古文：丙将讨之，贼入连山深箐，为拒守计。
现代文：刘丙将要征讨，贼进入连山深竹林，做据守的打算。
English: Liu He is going to collect taxes, and the thief enters the deep bamboo forest in the mountains, intending to stay there.

古文：丙率师破其数寨。
现代文：刘丙率兵攻破其好几个寨子。
English: Liu He led his troops to break through several stockades.

古文：贼走据天生崖及六龙山。
现代文：贼逃走据守天生崖及六龙山。
English: Thieves fled to Tianzheng Cliff and Liulong Mountain.

古文：贵州巡抚沈林兵继至，连攻破之。
现代文：贵州巡抚沈林兵陆续到达，接连攻破它们。
English: Guizhou governor Shen Lin's soldiers arrived one after another and broke through them one after another.

古文：前后擒童保等二百人，斩首八百九十余级。
现代文：前后擒获童保等二百人，斩首八百九十余级。
English: Around 200 people, including Tong Bao, were arrested, and more than 890 people were beheaded.

古文：都指挥潘勋又破镇、筸诸寨，擒麻阳等百六十人，斩首级如前，余贼远遁。
现代文：都指挥潘勋又攻破镇、筚诸寨，擒获麻阳等一百六十人，斩首级数量如前，其余的盗贼远远地逃遁。
English: Pan Xun, the commander of both armies, broke through the town and villages, and captured 160 people including Ma Yang. The number of beheadings was the same as before, and the rest of the thieves fled far away.

古文：玺书奖励。
现代文：皇上下玺书奖励。
English: Awarded by the Emperor's imperial edict.

古文：丙操履清介，敢任事。
现代文：刘丙操守清廉耿直，敢于承担责任。
English: Liu He is honest and upright, and dares to take responsibility.

古文：所至严明，法令修举。
现代文：所到之处纪律严明，法令复兴。
English: Everywhere there is strict discipline and the revival of law and order.

古文：迁工部右侍郎，采木入山。
现代文：迁升工部右侍郎，进山伐木。
English: He was promoted to the right-hand man of the engineering department and went into the mountains to cut trees.

古文：越二载，犯风痹得疾，卒。
现代文：两年后，遭受风湿得病，去世。
English: Two years later, suffering from rheumatism, he died.

古文：诏赠尚书，谥恭襄。
现代文：皇上下诏追赠尚书，谧号恭襄。
English: His posthumous posthumous imperial edict granted him the posthumous title of Shangshu, and the posthumous title of Gongxiang.

古文：赞曰：英、景间，瓦剌逼西陲，边圉孔棘；而黄萧养、叶宗留之徒劫掠岭南、浙、闽境上。
现代文：赞曰：英宗、景帝年间，瓦剌逼犯西陲，边境危急，而黄萧养、叶宗留之徒又劫掠岭南、浙、闽境内。
English: Zang Zong said: During the reigns of Ying Zong and Jing Di, Waju was forced to invade Xidi, and the border was in danger, while Huang Xiao Yao and Ye Zong's retainers plundered the territory of Lingnan, Zhejiang and Handan.

古文：其后荆、襄流民啸聚，则以刘通、石龙为之魁。
现代文：其后剂、襄流民呼啸而聚，就以刘通、石龙做为他们的魁首。
English: After that, Liu Tong and Shilong became the leaders of the crowd.

古文：他若都匀、松、茂、黔、楚诸苗、瑶叛者数起。
现代文：其它如都匀、松、茂、黔、楚诸苗、瑶，叛乱的有好几起。
English: Others, such as Duyun, Song, Mao, Zou, Chu, Zhu, Miao, Zou, there are several cases of rebellion.

古文：罗亨信、侯琎诸人，保固封圻，诛虓禁乱，讨则有功，抚则信著，宣力封疆，无忝厥任矣。
现代文：罗亨信、侯璀诸人，保卫巩固疆土，诛杀凶猛的敌人禁止作乱，征讨则有功招抚则诚恳有信，尽力于保卫国家疆土，没有辱没其官职。
English: Luo Hengxin, Hou Yi and all the others, defending and consolidating the territory, fighting and killing the ferocious enemy, forbidding disorder, soliciting and persuading, making efforts to defend the national territory, did not dishonor their official duties.

古文：孔镛以知府服叛瑶，其才力有过人者。
现代文：孔锈以知府官使反叛的瑶人服从，他的才智能力有过人之处。
English: Kong Rust used his position as a prefectural official to subdue the rebellious Han people. His intelligence and ability were beyond compare.

古文：韩愈言柳中丞行事适机宜，风采可畏爱。
现代文：韩愈称柳中丞做事合于时宜，风采可让人敬畏爱戴。
English: Han Yu said that Liu Zhongzheng did things in a timely manner, and his style could make people respect and love him.

古文：不如是，恶能以有为哉。
现代文：不这样，怎么能有所作为呢？
English: Otherwise, how can we make a difference?

