古文：李吉甫李绅白乐天轩辕先生李元韦卿材
现代文：李吉甫李绅白乐天轩辕先生李元韦卿材
English: Li Jifu, Li Sheng, Bai Le, Tian Xuan, Mr. Li Yuanwei,

古文：李吉甫
现代文：李吉甫
English: Li Jifu

古文：李太师吉甫，在淮南，州境广疫。
现代文：李吉甫太师，在淮南的时候，所辖州的境内，疫病流行。
English: When Li Jifu was in Huainan, there was an epidemic in the territory of the state under his jurisdiction.

古文：李公不饮酒，不听乐。
现代文：李太师不喝酒，不听音乐。
English: Li Taishi does not drink alcohol and does not listen to music.

古文：会有制使至，不得已而张筵，忧惨见色。
现代文：碰上有制使到来，迫不得已摆设酒宴，但脸色忧虑凄惨。
English: When the emperor arrived, he was forced to hold a banquet, but he looked worried and miserable.

古文：醼合，谓诸客曰： 弊境疾厉，亡殁相踵，诸贤杰有何术可以见救？ 
现代文：宴会的人全到齐了，李太师对各位客人说： 我们这个贫困的地方，疫病流行得很厉害，死亡的人一个接着一个。各位贤人异士，有什么法术，可以相救？ 
English: The guests for the banquet had all arrived, and Master Li said to the guests, "In this impoverished place of ours, the epidemic is very severe, and people are dying one after another. Wise men and women, what magic can save us?

古文：下坐有一秀才起应曰： 某近离楚州，有王炼师，自云从太白山来，济拔江淮疾病，休粮服气，神骨甚清。
现代文：下边坐位上有一个秀才起身答应说： 我最近离开楚州，那里有一个王炼师，他说自己是从太白山来的，帮助江淮拔掉清除疾病。他不吃粮食，服食日月精华，一身神仙气质非常明晰。
English: On the seat below, a talented person stood up and promised: "I recently left Chuzhou, where there is a Wang Refiner. He said that he came from Taibai Mountain to help Jianghuai remove diseases. He does not eat grain, he eats the essence of the sun and moon, and his divine temperament is very clear.

古文：得力者已众。 
现代文：现在得益的人已经很多了。 
English: A lot of people are benefiting now.

古文：李公大喜，延于上座，复问之。
现代文：李太师听了很高兴，把秀才邀请到上边坐位。
English: Li Taishi was very pleased to hear this, and invited the talented person to sit on the upper side.

古文：便令作书，并手札。遣人马往迎。
现代文：又仔细地向他询问情况，之后就让秀才写封书信，加上自己的亲笔信，派遣人马前去迎接。
English: He also carefully asked him about the situation, after which he asked Xiucai to write a letter, add his own handwritten letter, and send someone to meet him.

古文：旬日至，馆于州宅，称弟子以祈之。
现代文：过了十天，王炼师就来到了，住在州的驿馆里。李太师自称弟子，向他祈求。
English: After ten days, Refiner Wang arrived and lived in the state's Yingguan. Master Li claimed to be his disciple and prayed to him.

古文：王生曰： 相公但令于市内多聚龟壳大镬巨瓯，病者悉集，无虑不瘥。 
现代文：王炼师说： 相公只让人在街市里面多聚集龟壳、大锅、大盆。病人都集中来，就不用忧虑病不好。 
English: Refiner Wang said, "The guru only allows people to gather tortoise shells, cauldrons, and large pots in the market. If all the sick people come together, there is no need to worry about getting sick.

古文：李公遽遣备之。
现代文：李太师急忙派人准备。
English: Li Taishi hurriedly sent someone to prepare.

古文：既得，王生往，令浓煎。重者恣饮之，轻者稍减，既汗皆愈。
现代文：准备完后，王炼师亲自前去，让浓煎，病重的人，尽量喝；病状轻的人，稍减少一些。喝了之后出汗，就都痊愈了。
English: After the preparations were completed, Refiner Wang personally went to the hot spring and had those who were seriously ill drink as much as possible, and those who were mildly ill drink a little less. After drinking and sweating, they were all healed.

古文：李公喜，既与之金帛，不受。
现代文：李太师高兴，就给王炼师金帛，王炼师不接受。
English: Li Taishi was pleased and gave the gold ingot to Refiner Wang. Refiner Wang did not accept it.

古文：不食，寡言。
现代文：王炼师不吃东西，也很少说话。
English: Refiner Wang doesn't eat and rarely speaks.

古文：唯从事故山南节师相国王公起，王坐见，必坐笑以语，若旧相识。
现代文：只有从奉事原来的山南节师相国王公开始，王公坐着会见，他必然陪坐说笑，像旧相识一样亲热。
English: Only from the beginning of serving the original Shannan Festival teacher Wang Gong, Wang Gong sat to meet, he must sit and laugh, like an old acquaintance.

古文：李公因令王公邀至宅宿，问其所欲，一言便行。
现代文：李太师让王公邀请他到家里住，问他想要什么，一句就行。
English: Li Taishi asked Wang Gong to invite him to live at home, and asked him what he wanted, just one sentence.

古文：深夜从容曰： 判官有仙骨，学道必白日上升。
现代文：深夜王炼师从容地说： 判官有仙骨，学习道术必定会白天上升成仙，怎么样？ 
English: The Midnight King Refiner calmly said, "Judges have immortal bones. Learning Daoism will surely rise to immortality during the day. How about that?"

古文：如何？ 
现代文：王公不说话。
English: What do you think should be done?

古文：王公无言。良久曰： 此是尘俗态萦缚耳，若住人世，官职无不得者。 
现代文：过了好长时间王炼师说： 这是尘世俗态缠绕束缚的罢了。如果住在人世，官职没有不能得到的。 
English: After a long time, Refiner Wang said, "This is just the mundane state entangled in bondage. If you live in the world, there is no post you can't get.

古文：王公请以兄事之。
现代文：王公请求凭兄长的身份侍奉他。
English: Wang Gong asked him to serve him as his elder brother.

古文：又曰： 本师为在白鹿，与判官亦当家。
现代文：王炼师又说： 本师志在白鹿深谷，和判官也应当是一家。
English: Refiner Wang also said, "This school is in the White Deer Deep Valley, and the judge should also be a family.

古文：能与某同往一候谒否？ 
现代文：能和我同去一次问候拜见吗？
English: Can you come with me for a meet and greet?

古文：意复持疑。曰： 仙公何名？ 
现代文：王公的意思又持怀疑说： 仙公叫什么名字？ 
English: Wang Gong's meaning also doubted and said: What is the name of Xian Gong?

古文：曰： 师不敢言？ 
现代文：王炼师说： 不敢说名字。 
English: Refiner Wang said, "I don't dare to say his name."

古文：索笔书鹤字。
现代文：求取毛笔写了一个 鹤 字。
English: He asked for a brush and wrote a crane.

古文：王生从此不知所诣。
现代文：从此不知王炼师到什么地方去了。
English: Since then, I don't know where Refiner Wang has gone.

古文：王公果富贵。
现代文：王公果然富贵。
English: Wang Gong is indeed rich.

古文：李绅
现代文：李绅
English: Li Sheng

古文：故淮海节度使李绅，少时与二友同止华阴西山舍。
现代文：原来的淮海节度使李绅。年轻的时候，和二个朋友一起居住在华阴西山的客舍里。
English: The original Huaihai Festival made Li Sheng. When he was young, he lived with two friends in a guest house in Huayin Xishan.

古文：一夕，林叟有赛神者来邀，适有头痃之疾，不往，二友赴焉。
现代文：一天晚上，林叟有祭祀神灵的人来邀请。李绅恰好得了病，没有去。
English: One evening, someone from Linyi came to invite people to offer sacrifices to the gods. Li Sheng happened to be ill and did not go.

古文：夜分雷雨甚，绅入止深室，忽闻堂前有人祈恳之声，徐起窥帘，乃见一老叟，眉须皓然，坐东床上，青童一人，执香炉，拱立于后。
现代文：他的两个朋友应邀到那里去了，半夜的时候，雷鸣电闪，雨下得非常大，李绅就搬进里面的屋子栖息。忽然听见前面正屋有人发出恳求的声音，李绅慢慢起来，从帘的空隙往外看，却看见一个老头儿，眉毛胡须雪白，坐在东面鹅床上，一个青衣童子，手里拿着香炉，拱手立在老头儿后面。
English: His two friends were invited to go there, and at midnight, with thunder and lightning, and it rained very hard, Li Sheng moved into a room to roost. Suddenly, he heard someone in the front of the main house make a pleading voice. Li Sheng slowly got up and looked out from the gap in the curtain, but saw an old man with snow-white eyebrows and beard sitting on a goose bed in the east, and a boy in a blue suit, holding a censer, standing behind the old man.

古文：绅讶之，心知其异人也，具衫履出拜之。
现代文：李绅很惊奇，心里明白他是个异人。就穿好了衣服和鞋，出来拜见他。
English: Li Sheng was very surprised and knew in his heart that he was a stranger. He put on his clothes and shoes and went out to meet him.

古文：父曰： 年小识我乎？ 
现代文：那个老人说： 年轻人，认识我吗？ 
English: The old man said, "Young man, do you know me?

古文：曰： 小子未尝拜睹。 
现代文：李绅说： 小子未曾拜见过。 
English: Li Sheng said, "I have never seen him before.

古文：老父曰： 我是唐若山也。亦闻吾名乎？ 
现代文：老人说： 我是唐若山，你可曾听过我的名字？ 
English: The old man said, "I am Tang Ruoshan. Have you ever heard my name?

古文：曰： 尝于仙籍见之。 
现代文：李绅说： 曾经在神仙的名册中见过你的名字。 
English: Li Sheng said, "I once saw your name in the roster of immortals.

古文：老父曰： 吾处北海久矣，今夕南海群仙会罗浮山，将往焉。
现代文：老人说： 我在北海居住很长时间了，今天晚上，南海的群仙在罗浮山集会，我将要到那里去。
English: The old man said, "I have been living in the North Sea for a long time. Tonight, the immortals of the South Sea will gather at Mt.

古文：及此，遇华山龙斗，散雨满空。
现代文：走到这里，遇到华山的龙争斗，散了满天的雨。
English: When I came here, I encountered the dragon fight of Huashan, and it rained all over the sky.

古文：吾服药者，不欲令沾服，故憩此耳。子非李绅乎？ 对曰： 某姓李，不名绅。 
现代文：我是个吃药的人，不想让雨水浸湿了衣服，所以在这休息休息。你不是李绅吗？ 李绅说： 我姓李，但不叫绅。 
English: I'm a person who takes medicine, and I don't want my clothes to get wet from the rain, so I'm taking a break here. Aren't you Li Sheng? Li Sheng said: My surname is Li, but I'm not called Sheng.

古文：叟曰。 子合名绅，字公垂，在籍矣。
现代文：老人说： 你应当名叫绅，表字公垂。已经在名册上了。
English: The old man said, "Your name should be "gentleman" and "gentleman" should be written in capital letters. You are already on the list."

古文：能随我一游罗浮乎？ 
现代文：能跟随我到罗浮山去一游吗？ 
English: Can you come with me on a trip to Mount Lofty?

古文：绅曰： 平生之愿也。 
现代文：李绅说： 这是我平生的愿望。 
English: Li Sheng said: This is my lifelong wish.

古文：老父喜。
现代文：老人很高兴。
English: The old man was delighted.

古文：有顷，风雨霁，青童告可行。
现代文：过了一会儿，风雨停止了，青衣童子告诉老人可以走了。
English: After a while, the wind and rain stopped, and the boy in blue told the old man he could go.

古文：叟乃袖出一简，若笏形，纵拽之，长丈余，横拽之，阔数尺，缘卷底坳，宛若舟形，父登居其前，令绅居其中，青童坐其后。
现代文：往长拽它，长一丈多；往宽拽它，宽有几尺。卷起边缘，底部下洼，好像船的形状。老人上去坐在它的前面，让李绅坐在当中，青衣童子坐在它的后面。
English: He pulled it long, and it grew a lot; he pulled it wide, and it grew a few feet wide. The edges were rolled up, and the bottom was sunken, like the shape of a boat. The old man went up and sat in front of it, and asked Li Sheng to sit in the middle, and the boy in blue to sit behind it.

古文：叟戒绅曰： 速闭目，慎勿偷视。 
现代文：老人告诫李绅说： 快闭上眼睛，千万不要偷看。 
English: The old man warned Li Sheng: "Close your eyes, don't peek.

古文：绅则闭目，但觉风涛汹涌，似泛江海，逡巡舟止。
现代文：李绅就闭上眼睛，只觉得风声呼啸，波涛汹涌澎湃，好像江海泛滥一样。
English: Li Sheng closed his eyes, only to feel the wind howling and the waves surging, as if the river was overflowing.

古文：叟曰： 开视可也。 
现代文：不一会儿，船停止了。老人说： 可以睁开眼睛看了。 
English: After a while, the boat stopped. The old man said, "I can open my eyes and see."

古文：已在一山前，楼殿参差，蔼若天外，箫管之声，寥亮云中。端雅士十余人，喜迎叟，指绅曰： 何人也？ 叟曰： 李绅耳。 
现代文：李绅一看，已经在一座山前了，这里楼殿参差不齐，但错落有致。云气异常，好像天外，箫管的声音，响彻高远的云中，有十几个端庄文雅的男子，高兴地迎接老人。指着李绅说： 这位是什么人？ 老人说： 是李绅。 
English: At the sight of Li Sheng, he was already standing in front of a mountain. The buildings here were jagged and uneven, but there was a sense of disjointedness. The air was unusually cloudy, as if from outer space, and there was the sound of a flute. In the distant clouds, there were more than a dozen dignified and elegant men, happily greeting the old man. They pointed at Li Sheng and said, "Who is this man?" The old man said, "It's Li Sheng."

古文：群士曰： 异哉！
现代文：众男子说： 奇怪啊！
English: The men said: "How strange!

古文：公垂果能来。
现代文：公垂果然能来。
English: The public can indeed come.

古文：人世凡浊，苦海非浅，自非名系仙录，何路得来？ 
现代文：人世上凡俗污浊，苦海不浅，假如不是名列仙家行列里面，什么路能来。 
English: The human world is filthy, and the sea of bitterness is not shallow. If you are not among the ranks of the immortals, what path can you take?

古文：叟令绅遍拜之。群士曰： 子能我从乎？ 
现代文：老人让李绅逐个拜见他们，众男子说： 你能跟随我们吗？ 
English: The old man asked Li Sheng to visit them one by one. The men said, "Can you follow us?"

古文：绅曰： 绅未立家，不获辞。恐若黄初平贻忧于兄弟。 
现代文：李绅说： 绅没有建立家室，不用告别，但恐怕像黄初平那样遗留下忧虑给他的兄弟。 
English: Li Sheng said: Sheng did not establish a family, so there is no need to say goodbye, but I am afraid that he will leave worries to his brother like Huang Huping.

古文：未言间，群士已知： 子念归，不当入此居也。
现代文：说话期间，众男子已经知道了他的心意。
English: As he spoke, the men already knew what he meant.

古文：子虽仙录有名，而俗尘尚重，此生犹沉幻界耳。
现代文：对李绅说： 你想回去，不应当进入这里居住，你虽然在仙录上有名字，但凡俗尘心还重，这一生还要陷入幻界，美名崇官，表面都能得到它。
English: He said to Li Sheng: "If you want to go back, you should not come to live here. Although you have a name in the fairy tale, your heart is still heavy with the mundane. In this lifetime, you will still fall into the realm of illusion.

古文：美名崇官，外皆得之，守正修静，来生既冠，遂居此矣。
现代文：要操守正直，善于安静，来生弱冠，就居住在这了，努力吧！ 
English: If you want to be honest, good at being quiet, and have a weak crown in the next life, then you should live here. Work hard!

古文：勉之勉之！ 绅复遍拜叟归。
现代文：李绅又逐个拜谢了众男子和老人，准备回归。
English: Lishen thanked the men and the old man one by one and prepared to return.

古文：辞讫，遂合目。有一物若驴状。近身乘之。又觉走于风涛之上。
现代文：告辞完，就合上眼睛，有一物，形状像驴，靠近他的身边，李绅骑上它，又觉得像走在风中和波涛上。
English: After saying goodbye, he closed his eyes. There was an object, shaped like a donkey, close to his side. Li Sheng rode it and felt like he was walking in the wind and on the waves.

古文：顷之，闷甚思见。其才开目，以堕地而失所乘者。
现代文：一会儿，感到很闷，想看一看，他的眼睛才开，已经掉到了地上，因而失掉了所骑的东西。
English: After a moment, bored and wanting to see, his eyes open and he has fallen to the ground, losing his mount.

古文：仰视星汉，近五更矣，似在华山北。徐行数里，逢旅舍，乃罗浮店也。
现代文：李绅仰视星辰，接近五更天了，好像是在华山北面，慢慢地走了几里，遇到一个旅馆，是罗浮店。
English: Li Sheng looked up at the stars, it was getting close to five more days, it seemed to be in the north of Huashan, slowly walked a few miles, encountered a hotel, it was Luo Fu Store.

古文：去所止二十余里。
现代文：离他居住的地方还有二十多里。
English: It's more than 20 miles from where he lives.

古文：缓步而归。
现代文：迈着缓慢的步子往回走。
English: He walked back with a slow step.

古文：明日，二友与仆夫方奔访觅之，相逢大喜。
现代文：第二天，他的两个朋友和仆夫正在奔走寻找他，相逢很高兴。
English: The next day, two of his friends and servants were running around looking for him and were delighted to find him.

古文：问所往。
现代文：朋友问他到什么地方去了。
English: A friend asked him where he had gone.

古文：诈云： 夜独居，偶为妖狐所惑，随造其居，将曙，悟而归耳。 
现代文：他欺骗他们说： 夜里独居，偶然被妖狐迷惑，跟随他到他的居所去，快要天亮了，醒悟过来，就回来了。 
English: He lied to them, saying, I was alone at night, and by chance I was deceived by a fox, and I followed him to his house, and when it was almost dawn, I came to my senses and returned.

古文：自是改名绅，字公垂。果登甲科翰苑，历任郡守，兼将相之重。
现代文：从这以后改名绅，表字公垂，果然荣登甲科翰苑，历任郡守，兼将相的重任。
English: From then on, he changed his name to Shentai, his official title to Gangtai, and he was indeed promoted to Jia Ke Han Yuan, and successively served as county governor, as well as holding the important position of grand marshal.

古文：白乐天
现代文：白乐天
English: Bai Letian

古文：唐会昌元年，李师稷中丞为浙东观察使。
现代文：唐会昌元年。李师稷中丞做浙东观察使。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Li Shizhen Zhongzheng was appointed as the Eastern Zhejiang Observer.

古文：有商客遭风飘荡，不知所止。
现代文：有一商客在海上遇到暴风，船随风飘荡，不知道会停在哪里。
English: A merchant was at sea in a storm. The ship was drifting with the wind, and he didn't know where it would stop.

古文：月余，至一大山。瑞云奇花，白鹤异树，尽非人间所睹。山侧有人迎问曰： 安得至此？ 
现代文：一个多月后，到了一座大山，那里的瑞云奇花，白鹤异树，都不是在人间所能看到的，山旁边有人迎着问他说： 你怎么能够到这？ 
English: More than a month later, when he reached a large mountain, where the rare cloud flowers and white cranes could not be seen on earth, someone on the side of the mountain greeted him and asked, "How did you get here?"

古文：具言之。
现代文：商客把经过全说了。
English: The merchant told the whole story.

古文：令维舟上岸。云： 须谒天师。 
现代文：山里人让商客拴住船上岸，还说需要谒见天师。
English: The mountain people told the merchants to stay on the boat, saying that they needed to see the heavenly teacher.

古文：遂引至一处，若大寺观，通一道入。
现代文：于是引导商客到一个地方，好像是一个大寺观。通过一条道进去。
English: He then led the merchants to a place that looked like a large temple, and led them through a passageway.

古文：道士须眉悉白。
现代文：里面的大殿上坐着一个导师，道士的胡须眉毛全白了。
English: Inside, a teacher sits in the main hall. The Taoist's whiskers and eyebrows are completely white.

古文：侍卫数十。
现代文：侍卫有几十人。
English: There are dozens of bodyguards.

古文：坐大殿上，与语曰： 汝中国人，兹地有缘方得一到，此蓬莱山也。
现代文：道士和商客说话，他说： 你是中国人，这地方和你有缘才能够到此一游，这里是蓬莱山。
English: When the Taoist priest spoke to the merchant, he said, "You are Chinese, and it is because of your fate that you are able to visit this place. This is Penglai Mountain.

古文：既至，莫要看否？ 
现代文：既然到这里来，要不要看一看？ 
English: Since you're here, would you like to take a look?

古文：遣左右引于宫内游观。
现代文：道士派遣左右引导商客在宫内游览参观。
English: Taoist monks were dispatched to guide the merchants on a tour of the palace.

古文：玉台翠树，光彩夺目，院宇数十，皆有名号。
现代文：这里玉台翠树，光彩夺目。里面院宇几十处，每处都有名字。
English: There are dozens of courtyards, each with a name.

古文：至一院，扃锁甚严，因窥之。众花满庭，堂有裀褥，焚香阶下。
现代文：来到一座院，门户锁的很严，就从缝隙往里看，庭院长满各种花草，正屋里有垫子和褥子，台阶下焚着香。
English: When I came to a courtyard, the gate was locked very tightly, so I looked in through a crack. The courtyard was full of all kinds of flowers and plants, there were cushions and rakes in the main room, and incense was burning under the steps.

古文：客问之。
现代文：商客问这是什么地方。
English: The shopkeeper asked what the place was.

古文：答曰： 此是白乐天院，乐天在中国未来耳。 
现代文：回答说： 这是白乐天院。白乐天在中国没有来。 
English: He replied, "This is Bai Letian Temple. Bai Letian did not come from China.

古文：乃潜记之，遂别之归。
现代文：于是秘密记下，便告别回归。
English: So he secretly wrote it down, then said goodbye and returned.

古文：旬日至越，具白廉使。李公尽录以报白公。
现代文：过了十天到越，商客把所见所闻都告诉给观察使，李公全都记录下来，把它报给白公。
English: Ten days after arriving in Vietnam, the merchant told the observer everything he had seen and heard. Li Gong recorded everything and reported it to Bai Gong.

古文：先是，白公平生唯修上坐业，及览李公所报，乃自为诗二首，以记其事及答李浙东云： 近有人从海上回，海山深处见楼台。
现代文：先前，白公平生只学习佛学，等到看了李所报的事，就自己作诗二首，来记那些事和答浙东观察使李师稷。诗的意思是： 最近有人从海上回来，在海中的山上深处看见楼台。
English: Previously, Bai Jianzhong had only studied Buddhism. When he read what Li had reported, he composed two poems of his own to remember those things and to answer the question of Li Shizhen, who was observing from the east of Zhejiang Province. The meaning of the poem is: Recently, someone came back from the sea and saw the tower deep in the mountains in the middle of the sea.

古文：中有仙笼开一室，皆言此待乐天来。 
现代文：其中有神仙屋宇开了一室，都说这是等待白乐天来。 
English: One of them, Shenshen House, has opened a room, and they all say that this is waiting for Bai Le Tian to come.

古文：又曰： 吾学空门不学仙，恐君此语是虚传。
现代文：又一诗云： 我从来只学佛教不学仙，恐怕你记的这些话是虚传。
English: Another poem cloud: I have never studied only Buddhism and not immortality, I'm afraid these words you remember are false.

古文：海山不是吾归处，归即应归兠率天。 
现代文：海中仙山不是我的归处，归就应归弥勒佛的居所兜率天。 
English: Immortal Mountain in the sea is not my home. I should return to the abode of Maitreya Buddha.

古文：然白公脱屣烟埃，投弃轩冕，与夫昧昧者固不同也，安知非谪仙哉！
现代文：然而白公对尘世无所顾恋，抛弃轩车冕服有所不惜，和那些愚昧的人根本不同，怎么知道他不是贬谪的神仙呢？
English: However, Bai Gong cares nothing for the world and is willing to give up his crown. He is fundamentally different from those ignorant people. How do you know that he is not a demeaning immortal?

古文：轩辕先生
现代文：轩辕先生
English: Mr. Xuan Xuan

古文：罗浮先生轩辕集，年过数百，颜色不衰。
现代文：罗浮先生轩辕集，已经几百岁了，但容貌并不衰老。
English: Mr. Luo Fu is resplendent. He is already several hundred years old, but his appearance is not aging.

古文：立于床前，则发垂至地；坐于暗室，则目光可长数尺。
现代文：立在床前，头发就下垂到地。坐在昏暗的房屋里，目光就可以射出几尺。
English: Standing in front of the bed, the hair falls to the ground. Sitting in a dark house, the eyes can shoot out a few feet.

古文：每采药于深岩峻谷，则有毒龙猛虎护卫。
现代文：他经常在深山峻岭中采药，总有毒龙猛虎护卫他。
English: He often went deep into the mountains to collect medicines. He was always protected by poisonous dragons and tigers.

古文：或民家具斋饭邀之，虽一日百处，无不分体而至。
现代文：有时老百姓家准备斋饭邀请他，虽然一天有百处之多，但是，他都用分身法分别前往，没有不到的。
English: Sometimes he is invited to the homes of ordinary people who are preparing a meal. Although there are as many as a hundred places a day, he uses the method of divination to go to each of them, and there is no shortage of them.

古文：若与人饮，即袖出一壶，才容三二升，纵宾客满座，而倾之弥日不竭。
现代文：如果给别人喝酒，就从袖子中取出一个小壶。好像才能容纳二、三升酒。然而，即使宾客满座，用它来倒酒，会整天不竭，只要倒就有。
English: If you're giving someone a drink, take out a small jug from your sleeve. It seems to be able to hold two or three liters of wine. However, even if the guests are full, they will use it to pour wine all day long, as long as they have it.

古文：或人命饮，则百斗不醉。
现代文：有时让他喝酒，就是喝一百斗也不会醉。
English: Sometimes he lets him drink alcohol, but even if he drinks a hundred bucks, he won't get drunk.

古文：夜则垂发于盆中，其酒沥沥而出，曲药之香，辄无减耗。
现代文：夜里就把头发下垂在盆中，那些酒就顺着头发滴进盆里，曲药的香味，总是一毫不减。
English: At night, she would let her hair hang down in the basin, and the wine would drip into the basin along with her hair. The aroma of the concoction never diminished.

古文：与猎人同群，有非朋游者，俄而见十数，仪貌无所间别。
现代文：有时和猎人聚集在一起，其中有的游览者不是朋友。一会儿看见有十几个人，仪表容貌没有什么区别。
English: Sometimes they gather together with hunters, some of whom are not friends of the tourists. In a moment, I see more than a dozen people, and there is no difference in appearance.

古文：或飞朱篆于空中，则可届千里，病者以布巾拭之，无不应手而愈。
现代文：有时扔朱箓在空中飞，就可以飞到千里之外。用布巾擦拭病人，没有不应手就好的。
English: Sometimes, if you throw a cinnamon stick in the air, you can fly thousands of miles away. If you wipe a patient with a cloth, there is no need to use your hands.

古文：唐宣宗召入内廷，遇之甚厚。
现代文：唐宣宗召见轩辕先生，把他请进宫内，给他的待遇很优厚。
English: Tang Xuanzong summoned Mr. Xuanqi, invited him into the palace, and treated him very well.

古文：因问曰： 长生之道可致乎？ 
现代文：唐宣宗问他说： 长生的道术可以得到吗？ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong asked him: Is it possible to obtain the Taoism of longevity?

古文：集曰： 辍声色，去滋味，哀乐如一，德施无偏，自然与天地合德，日月齐明，致尧舜禹汤之道；而长生久视之术，何足难哉！ 
现代文：轩辕集说： 废止歌舞和女色，去掉食物的滋味，对待哀和乐像一件事，施舍恩惠不偏不倚，自然和天地会合恩德，日月齐明，到达尧、舜、禹、汤的治道。长生不老的方法，算得上什么难呢？ 
English: Xuan Zhi Ji said: Abolish song and dance and womanhood, remove the taste of food, treat sorrow and joy as one thing, give favors impartially, naturally and heaven and earth meet with grace, the sun and the moon are aligned, and reach the path of yin, yang, yu and tang. What is the method of immortality?

古文：又问先生道孰愈于张果。
现代文：唐宣宗又问轩辕先生的道术与张果老相比，谁能胜过谁。
English: Tang Xuanzong also asked Mr. Xuanqian about the comparison between his and Zhang Guolou's Taoism, and who could outperform whom.

古文：曰： 臣不知其他，但少于果耳。 
现代文：轩辕先生说： 我不知道其他人，只知道我比张果老少。 
English: Mr. Xuanzang said: I don't know about other people, I only know that I am younger than Zhang Guo.

古文：及退，上遣嫔御取金盆覆白鹊以尝之。
现代文：等轩辕先生退出去以后，皇上就派嫔御拿来金盆遮盖白鹊来试轩辕先生。
English: After Mr. Xuanqian retired, the emperor sent the Empress Dowager to bring a pot of gold to cover the egret to test Mr. Xuanqian.

古文：而集方休于所舍，忽谓其中贵人曰： 皇帝安能更令老夫射覆乎？ 
现代文：当时轩辕集正在他住的地方休息，忽然对那里的太监说： 皇帝怎么能再让老夫射覆呢？ 
English: At that time, Xuan Zhiqi was resting at his place of residence, and suddenly said to the eunuch there: How can the emperor let the old man overthrow it?

古文：中贵皆不谕其言。
现代文：那些太监不明白他的话是什么意思。
English: The eunuchs did not understand what he meant.

古文：于时宣宗召令速至。
现代文：在这时唐宣宗下诏让轩辕集快去。
English: At this time, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict that Xuanzang should leave immediately.

古文：而才及玉阶，谓曰： 盆下白鹊，宜早放之。 
现代文：轩辕集才到玉阶就对宣宗说： 盆下白鹊，应该早放它。 
English: Xuanzong said to Xuan Zong when they arrived at the Jade Staircase: "The egret under the basin should be released early.

古文：宣宗笑曰： 先生早已知矣！ 
现代文：唐宣宗笑着说： 先生早已知道了。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong said with a smile: Teacher already knew.

古文：座于御榻前。
现代文：轩辕集坐在皇帝的床前。
English: Xuanzang sat in front of the emperor's bed.

古文：宣宗命宫中人传汤茶。
现代文：唐宣宗命令宫中人进茶水。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty ordered people in the palace to drink tea.

古文：有笑集貌古布素者，而缜发朱唇，年始二八，须臾变成老妪，鸡皮鲐背，鬓发如丝，于宣宗前涕泗交下。
现代文：有宫中人笑话轩辕集容貌古怪，衣着朴素。转眼之间头发稠黑，红嘴唇，年龄十六七的宫中人就变成老年妇女，皮肤粗糙。像鸡皮一样，驼背，鬓发稀疏，在唐宣宗面前涕泪交流。
English: In a blink of an eye, with thick black hair and red lips, the sixteen-seven-year-old concubine turned into an old woman with rough skin. Like chicken skin, hunched back, thinning hair, she shed tears in front of Tang Xuan Zong.

古文：宣宗知宫人之过，遂令谢先生，而貌复故。
现代文：唐宣宗知道这是宫中人的过错，于是让她拜求轩辕先生，她的面貌又像原来一样了。
English: Tang Xuan Zong knew that this was the fault of the people in the palace, so he asked her to pray to Mr. Xuan Qi, and her face became like it was before.

古文：宣宗因话京师无豆寇荔枝花。俄顷二花皆连叶，各近百数，鲜明芳洁，如才折下，更尝赐柑子。
现代文：唐宣宗顺便说京师没有豆寇荔枝花，一会儿，这两种花都连接着叶子，花各近百朵，新鲜芬芳像才折下来的一样。又赏赐柑子。
English: By the way, Tang Xuanzong said that Beijing did not have bean curd litchi flowers. For a while, both flowers were connected with leaves, with nearly a hundred flowers each, and the fresh fragrance was like it had just been folded down. He also rewarded mandarin oranges.

古文：曰： 臣山下者，有味逾于此。 
现代文：轩辕先生对唐宣宗说： 我山下的，香味超过这个。 
English: Mr. Xuan Qi said to Tang Xuan Zong: The fragrance under my mountain exceeds this.

古文：宣宗曰： 朕无得矣。 
现代文：唐宣宗说： 我没有得到呀！ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong said: I didn't get it!

古文：集遂取御前碧玉瓯，以宝盘覆之。俄而彻盘，即柑子至矣，芬馥满殿，其状甚大。
现代文：轩辕集于是取来皇帝面前的碧玉瓯，用宝盘盖上它，一会儿，撤去宝盘，马上柑子到了，香气芬芳，充满大殿，柑子的个头儿很大。
English: Xuan Zhi Ji then took the jasper jar in front of the emperor, covered it with a treasure plate, and after a while, removed the treasure plate, immediately the mandarin oranges arrived, fragrant and fragrant, filling the hall, and the size of the mandarin oranges was very large.

古文：宣宗食之，叹其甘美无匹。
现代文：唐宣宗吃它，赞叹它甘甜味美，没有能比得上它的。
English: Tang Xuan Zong ate it and praised its sweetness and deliciousness. Nothing could compare to it.

古文：更问曰： 朕得几年作天子？ 
现代文：唐宣宗又问他说： 我能作几年天子？ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong also asked him: "How many years can I be the son of Heaven?"

古文：即把笔书曰： 四十年。 
现代文：轩辕先生就拿过笔写： 四十年。 
English: Mr. Xuanqi took a pen and wrote: "Forty years."

古文：但十字跳脚。
现代文：但十字跳脚。
English: But the cross hops.

古文：宣宗笑曰： 朕安敢望四十年乎？ 
现代文：唐宣宗笑着说： 我怎么敢奢望四十年呢？ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong said with a smile: How dare I hope for forty years?

古文：及晏驾，乃十四改。
现代文：等到唐宣宗晏驾，是十四年。
English: It has been 14 years since Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty passed away.

古文：年也。初辞归山。自长安至江陵，于布囊中，探金钱以施贫者，约数十万。中使从之，莫知其故。忽然亡其所在，使臣惶恐不自安。
现代文：轩辕先生最初告辞归山，从长安到江陵，在布囊中拿出金钱，用它布施贫困的人，约有几十万钱，护送他的宦官跟随着他，不知道是什么原因，忽然，轩辕先生在他住的客舍丢失了，使臣惶恐不能自安。
English: Mr. Xuanqian initially said goodbye and returned to the mountains. From Chang'an to Jiangling, he took out money in a cloth bag and used it to distribute to the poor, about hundreds of thousands of money. The eunuch who escorted him followed him. I don't know what the reason was. Suddenly, Mr. Xuanqian was lost in the guest house where he lived. The envoy was terrified and couldn't calm down.

古文：后数日，南海奏先生归罗浮山矣。
现代文：过了几天，南海奏报轩辕先生返回罗浮山了。
English: A few days later, Mr. Xuan Wei of the South China Morning Post returned to Luofu Mountain.

古文：李元
现代文：李元
English: Li Yuan

古文：李元谏议，尝隐于嵩山茅舍。
现代文：谏议大夫李元。曾经隐居在嵩山的茅舍。
English: Dr. Li Yuan, once lived in seclusion in a thatched cottage in Songshan.

古文：冬寒，当户炽火。有老人戴大帽子，直入炙脚，良久问李公曰： 颇能同去否？
现代文：因为冬天寒冷，对着门生起旺火，有一个老人戴着大帽子，直接走进来烤脚，过了很长时间，老人问李元说： 能够和我一起离开这里吗？
English: Because of the cold winter, there was a raging fire in front of the door. An old man wearing a big hat walked straight in and roasted his feet. After a long time, the old man asked Li Yuan, "Can you leave here with me?"

古文：知君有志。 
现代文：我知道你有志向。 
English: I know you have aspirations.

古文：因自言： 某秦时阉人，避祸得道。 
现代文：于是老人自己介绍说： 我是秦时的宦官，因为避祸获得了道术。 
English: Then the old man introduced himself: "I am a eunuch of the Qin Dynasty, because I have acquired the Taoism to avoid misfortune.

古文：乃去帽，须髯伟甚，曰： 此皆山中所长也。 
现代文：于是摘去帽子，须髯飘洒，很雄伟。老人又说： 这些须髯都是在山中长出来的。 
English: So he took off his cap, and the whiskers were flowing, very majestic. The old man said, "These whiskers all grew up in the mountains."

古文：李公思之良久，乃答曰： 家事未了，更数日得否？ 
现代文：李元想了很久，这才回答说： 我的家事还没了，再过几天可以吗？ 
English: Li Yuan thought for a long time before he answered: My household chores are over, can I have a few more days?

古文：老人揭然而起曰： 公意如此！ 
现代文：老人揭然而起说： 原来你的意思是这样！ 
English: The old man uncovered his face and said: So that's what you meant!

古文：遂出门径去。
现代文：于是出门一直走了。
English: So I went out and kept walking.

古文：李公牵衣媿谢，不可暂止，明日寻访，悉无其迹。
现代文：李元牵着老人的衣服羞愧地再三道歉，但也无法让老人停下来。第二天，李元去寻找老人，没有一点他的踪迹。
English: Li Yuan took hold of the old man's clothes and shamefully apologized repeatedly, but he could not make the old man stop. The next day, Li Yuan went to look for the old man, and there was no trace of him.

古文：韦卿材
现代文：韦卿材
English: Weijing wood

古文：卢元公奉道。
现代文：卢元公信奉道术。
English: Lu Yuan Gongxin practised Taoism.

古文：暇日与宾友话言，必及神仙之事，云，某有表弟韦卿材，大和中，选授江淮县宰，赴任出京日，亲朋相送，离灞浐时，已曛暮矣。
现代文：空闲的日子和朋友谈论，必定涉及有关神仙的事情。
English: When you talk to your friends in your free time, it's bound to be about the supernatural.

古文：行一二十里外，觉道路渐异，非常日经过之处。
现代文：他说，我有一个表弟，叫韦卿材。大和年间，经选择合格，授官江淮县的县令，赴任出京那天，亲戚朋友都来相送。
English: He said, "I have a cousin named Wei Qingzai. During the Yamato era, after being selected and qualified, he was awarded the post of county magistrate of Jianghuai County. On the day of his appointment to Beijing, relatives and friends came to see him off.

古文：既望其中，有灯烛荧煌之状，林木葱倩，似非人间。
现代文：离开灞水浐河的时候，已经日落黄昏了。走了一二十里以外，觉得道路逐渐异常，不是往常经过的地方，再向前望，有灯光闪耀，林木青翠茂盛，不似人间。
English: When I left Surabaya and Surabaya River, it was already sunset and dusk. After walking for ten or twenty miles, I felt that the road was gradually abnormal, not a place I usually passed through. Then I looked forward, there were lights shining, the trees were lush and green, unlike the human world.

古文：顷之，有谒于马前者，如州县候吏，问韦曰： 自何至此？
现代文：不久，有一个人在马前拜见。像州、县里担任侦察任务的官吏。他问韦卿材说： 从什么地方到这里？
English: Not long after, a man came to meet him in front of the horse. He was an official on a reconnaissance mission from the prefecture or county. He asked Wei Qingzai, "Where did you come from?"

古文：此非俗世。 
现代文：这不是俗世。 
English: It's not mundane.

古文：俄倾，复有一人至，谓前谒者曰： 既至矣，则须速报上公。 
现代文：不一会儿，又有一个人来到，对先前那个拜见的人说： 既然到这了，就需要快报告给上公。 
English: After a while, another person came and said to the person who had visited him earlier, "Now that you are here, you need to quickly report to the Shogun."

古文：韦问曰： 上公何品秩也？ 
现代文：韦卿材问他们道： 上公是什么品级呀？ 
English: Wei Qingzai asked them: What is Shangguo's rank?

古文：吏亦不对，却走而去。
现代文：官吏也不回答，退了几步转身跑着离去了。
English: The official did not answer, but retreated a few steps, turned around and ran away.

古文：逡巡，遽声连呼曰： 上公届？ 
现代文：不一会儿，大声连续呼喊说： 上公到！ 
English: After a while, they shouted loudly and continuously: "Go to the court!"

古文：韦下马，趋走入门。则峻宇雕墙，重廊复阁，侍卫严肃，拟于王侯。
现代文：韦卿材下了马，小步跑着进了门，里面却是高大的房屋，刻画的墙壁，一层一层的楼阁，曲径回廊侍卫森严肃穆，极似王侯。
English: Wei Qingyu dismounted from his horse and ran into the door at a small pace. Inside, it was a tall building, with carved walls, floor-to-floor pavilions, and a curved corridor. The guards were very serious and looked very much like princes.

古文：见一人年可四十岁，平上帻，衣素服，遥谓韦曰： 上阶。 
现代文：看见一个人，年龄约有四十岁，头上戴着平常的头巾，身上穿着朴素的衣服。在远处对韦卿材说： 上到台阶上来。 
English: He saw a man of about forty years old, wearing an ordinary turban on his head and plain clothes on his body. He said to Wei Qingzai in the distance: Come up the steps.

古文：韦拜而上。
现代文：韦卿材叩拜而上。
English: Wei Qingzai bowed and climbed up.

古文：命坐，慰劳久之，亦无肴酒汤果之设。
现代文：命令他坐下，慰劳了很长时间，也没有佳肴、美酒、茶水、果品之类的设置。
English: He was ordered to sit down and comforted for a long time. There was no set meal, wine, tea, or fruit.

古文：徐谓韦曰： 某因世乱，百家相乣，窜避于此，众推为长，强谓上公。
现代文：上公慢慢地对韦卿材说：我因为世道混乱，许多人家或家族，聚集起来躲避在这里，众人推举我为长，执意叫我 上公 。
English: Shangguan slowly said to Wei Qingzai, "Because of the chaos in the world, many families have gathered here to take refuge. Many people have chosen me as their leader and insist on calling me Shangguan.

古文：尔来数百年，亦无号令约束，但任之自然而已。
现代文：这几百年来，也没号令约束，仅仅是任其自然罢了。
English: Over the past few hundred years, there have been no orders or restrictions, it has just been left to its own devices.

古文：公得至此，尘俗之幸也。
现代文：公能够到这，是我们这尘俗之地的荣幸，这里不可久留。
English: It's an honor for a commoner to be here, in this mundane place of ours. We can't stay here for long.

古文：不可久留，当宜速去。 命取绢十疋赠之。
现代文：公应当快点离开。上公命令手下人拿来十匹绢赠送给韦卿材。
English: Shangguan ordered his subordinates to bring ten yakitori to present to Wei Qingzai.

古文：韦出门上马，却寻旧路，回望亦无所见矣。
现代文：韦卿材出门上马，去寻找旧路。回过头来看，再也看不到所见的一切了。
English: Wei Qingzai went out on horseback to look for the old road. Looking back, he could no longer see everything he had seen.

古文：半夜胧月，信足而行，至明，则已在官路，逆旅暂歇。
现代文：半夜，月光不明，韦卿材只能让马随便走。到天明，就已经在大路上了。在旅馆中暂时休息。
English: In the middle of the night, the moonlight is unclear, Wei Qingzai can only let the horse walk casually. By dawn, it is already on the highway. Take a break in the hotel.

古文：询之于人，且无能知者。
现代文：向别人询问昨天所见的事，没有能够知道的人。
English: Ask anyone what they saw yesterday and there is no one who can tell you.

古文：取绢视之，光白可鉴。
现代文：取出绢来看，光亮洁白，可以照影。
English: Take out the eyelid and look at it. It is bright and white and can be photographed.

古文：韦遂裹却入京，诣亲友，具述其事，因以绢分亲爱。
现代文：韦卿材于是包裹着绢暂且入京，到亲友家去，一五一十地述说了他遇到的那件事。顺便把绢分别赠给自己亲近喜爱的人。
English: Wei Qingzai then wrapped the cocoon and temporarily entered Beijing, went to relatives and friends, and described the incident he encountered in detail. By the way, he gave the cocoon to his close and beloved people.

古文：韦云： 约其处，乃在骊山蓝田之间，盖地仙也。 
现代文：韦卿材说，约莫那个地方，是在骊山蓝田之间，大概是地仙吧！
English: Wei Qingzai said, about that place, is between the Lushan Lantian, probably is the Earth Immortal!

