古文：南夷君长以十数，夜郎最大。其西，靡莫之属以十数，滇最大。自滇以北，君长以十数，邛都最大。
现代文：南夷的君长，以十计算，夜郎最大；它的西面，靡莫这一类以十计算，滇最大；从滇往北，首领以十计算，邛都最大。
English: Counting by ten, the ruler of Nanyi has the largest yelow; its west side, counting by ten, has the largest yakitori; from north to south, counting by ten, the leader has the largest yakitori.

古文：此皆椎结，耕田，有邑聚。
现代文：这些国的人都结着椎形的发髻，耕种田地，有自己的小城镇和村落。
English: The people of these countries wear their hair in a topknot, cultivate their fields, and have their own small towns and villages.

古文：其外，西自桐师以东，北至叶榆，名为巂、昆明、编发，随畜移徙，亡常处，亡君长，地方可数千里。
现代文：此外，西从桐师往东，北到叶榆，名叫仑、昆明，都结发为辫，随着放牧的牲畜四处迁徙，没有固定的居地，也没有君长，活动范围大约有好几千里。
English: In addition, from the west to the east of Tongshi, and from the north to Yecheng, known as Lun and Kunming, all of them are tame. They migrate around with the grazing livestock. There is no fixed place of residence, and there is no ruler. The range of activities is about several thousand miles.

古文：自巂以东北，君长以十数，徙、莋都最大。
现代文：从嵩往东北，君长以十计算，徙和榨都最大。
English: From Song to the northeast, the king's length is calculated as ten, and the migration and squeezing are the largest.

古文：自莋以东北，君长以十数，冉駹最大。
现代文：从榨都往东北，君长以十计算，冉骁最大。
English: From the capital to the northeast, the king is counted as ten, and the king is the largest.

古文：其俗，或土著，或移徙。
现代文：那裹的习俗，有的定居，有的迁徙。
English: Some of these customs have to do with settlement, others with migration.

古文：在蜀之西。自駹以东北，君长以十数，白马最大，皆氐类也。
现代文：在蜀郡以西，从冉骥往东北君长以十计算，白马最大，这裹都是氐族。
English: In the west of Shu County, from Rancheng to the northeast, there are ten kings and queens, with Baima being the largest. They are all from the Yao ethnic group.

古文：此皆巴、蜀西南外蛮夷也。
现代文：以上这些，都是巴郡、蜀郡西南部以外的蛮夷。
English: All of the above are barbarians outside of Ba County and the southwestern part of Shu County.

古文：始楚威王时，使将军庄蹻将兵循江上，略巴、黔中以西。
现代文：当初，楚威王派遣将军庄蹯带领军队沿长江而上，夺取了巴郡和黔中郡以西的地区。
English: When he was the king of Chuwei, he sent the general Zhuang Zang to lead the army along the Yangtze River and conquered the areas west of Ba County, Shu County and Luzhong County.

古文：庄蹻者，楚庄王苗裔也。
现代文：庄蹯是楚庄王的后代。庄踞到达滇池。
English: Zhuang Zhai is a descendant of King Zhuang of Chu. Zhuang Zhai arrived in Dianchi.

古文：蹻至滇池，方三百里，旁平地肥饶数千里，以兵威定属楚。
现代文：滇池方圆三百里，池旁是平地，肥沃富饶，方圆几千里。庄踽依恃军队的威势平定了这一带，使它归属楚国。
English: Dianchi Lake has a radius of 300 miles, and the flat land next to the lake is fertile and rich, with a radius of several thousand miles. Zhuang Zhai and Yan Yan's army's might pacified this area and made it belong to Chu.

古文：欲归报，会秦击夺楚巴、黔中郡，道塞不通，因乃以其众王滇，变服，从其俗以长之。
现代文：庄娇打算回楚国报告，却碰上秦国进攻楚国，夺取了楚国的巴郡和黔中郡，道路被阻塞，回不去，于是就依靠他的军队在滇称王。庄娇改变自己的服饰，顺从那裹的习俗，以便于统治那裹的夷人。
English: Zhuang Jiao planned to report back to the State of Chu, but when the State of Qin attacked the State of Chu and captured the counties of Ba and Luzhong in the State of Chu, the roads were blocked and he could not return, so he relied on his army to claim the throne. Zhuang Jiao changed his clothing and obeyed the customs of that country in order to rule the barbarians of that country.

古文：秦时尝破，略通五尺道，诸此国颇置吏焉。
现代文：秦朝时，曾经攻占了这一带，大略开通了五尺道，给这裹的一些国家设置了官吏。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, this area was once conquered, the Five-Foot Road was roughly opened, and officials were set up for some countries in this area.

古文：十余岁，秦灭。
现代文：过了十余年，秦朝就灭亡了。
English: After more than ten years, the Qin Dynasty fell.

古文：及汉兴，皆弃此国而关蜀故徼。
现代文：到汉朝兴起，全部舍弃了这些国家而以蜀地原来的边界为关塞。
English: By the rise of the Han Dynasty, all of these countries were abandoned and the original borders of Shu were used as a barrier.

古文：巴、蜀民或窃出商贾，取其莋马、僰僮、旄牛，以此巴、蜀殷富。
现代文：巴郡、蜀郡的百姓，有的暗中出关在这一带作买卖，换取榨都的马、焚族的奴婢和牦牛，巴郡、蜀郡因此兴旺富庶起来。
English: Some people from Ba County and Shu County secretly went out to trade in this area, in exchange for horses from the capital, slaves and yaks from the Qin people. As a result, Ba County and Shu County became prosperous.

古文：建元六年，大行王恢击东粤，东粤杀王郢以报。
现代文：汉武帝建元六年，大行令王恢进攻束粤，束粤人杀死东粤王郢后告诉王恢。
English: In the sixth year of the founding of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Hanwu ordered Wang Hui to attack Eastern Guangdong. After the Eastern Guangdong people killed the Eastern Guangdong people, the Eastern Guangdong people told Wang Hui to leave.

古文：恢因兵威使番阳令唐蒙风晓南粤。
现代文：王恢乘藉军威让番阳令唐蒙将汉王朝出师的意图委婉地告知南粤。
English: Wang Hui took advantage of his military might to have Panyang order Tang Meng to inform Nan Yue of the Han Dynasty's intention to become a teacher.

古文：南粤食蒙蜀枸酱，蒙问所从来，曰： 道西北牂柯江，江广数里，出番禺城下。 
现代文：南粤人用蜀地的枸酱款待唐蒙，唐蒙询问枸酱的来历。回答说： 由西北的胖柯江运来。烊柯江宽好几里，流经番禺城下。 
English: Southern Guangdong people treated Tang Meng with dipping sauce from Shu, and Tang Meng inquired about the origin of the dipping sauce. He replied, "It was transported from the Fatty Ke River in the northwest. The Fatty Ke River is several miles wide and flows under Panyu City.

古文：蒙归至长安，问蜀贾人，独蜀出枸酱，多持窃出市夜郎。
现代文：唐蒙回到长安，又询问蜀地的商人，才知道衹有蜀地出产枸酱，许多蜀人偷偷拿出去卖给夜郎。
English: Tang Meng returned to Chang'an and inquired about the merchants in Shu. Only then did he know that Shu produced dipping sauce. Many Shu people secretly took it out and sold it to Yelang.

古文：夜郎者，临牂柯江，江广百余步，足以行船。南粤以财物役属夜郎，西至桐师，然亦不能臣使也。
现代文：夜郎靠近胖柯江，江宽百余步，可行船，南粤人用财物使夜郎归附，南粤的影响，西面直达桐师，但是，还是不能够像对待臣属那样使唤夜郎。
English: Yelang is close to the Fatty Ke River, the river is more than a hundred paces wide, it is a feasible ship, the Southern Guangdong people use their wealth to make Yelang attached, the influence of the Southern Guangdong, the west is as far as Tongshi, but it is still not able to use Yelang as a subject.

古文：蒙乃上书说上曰： 南粤王黄屋左纛，地东西万余里，名为外臣，实一州主。
现代文：唐蒙于是上书漠武帝说： 南粤王乘黄屋饰左纛，占据的地盘东西一万多里，名义上是属国藩臣，实际上是一州之主。
English: Tang Meng then wrote to Emperor Wu, saying: The King of Southern Yue occupies more than ten thousand miles of territory from east to west. He is nominally a vassal of the state, but is actually the lord of a state.

古文：今以长沙、豫章往，水道多绝，难行。
现代文：如今由长沙国、豫章郡前去征讨，水路大多断绝，难以通航。
English: Nowadays, if you go from Changsha and Yuzhang County, the waterways are mostly blocked, making it difficult to travel.

古文：窃闻夜郎所有精兵可得十万，浮船牂柯，出不意，此制粤一奇也。
现代文：我听说夜郎的精兵可能有十万，乘船沿烊柯江而下，出其不意，这是制服南粤的一条奇计。
English: I heard that there might be 100,000 of Yelang's elite soldiers, taking a boat down the Shinko River, and taking everyone by surprise. This was a trick to subdue Southern Guangdong.

古文：诚以汉之强，巴、蜀之饶，通夜郎道，为置吏，甚易。 
现代文：如果凭藉汉朝的强盛和巴、蜀二郡的富庶，开通去夜郎的道路，为那些地方设置官吏，将会很容易。 
English: If the prosperity of the Han Dynasty and the affluence of Ba and Shu counties can be used to open the road to Yelang, it will be easy to set up officials for those places.

古文：上许之。
现代文：皇上同意了唐蒙的建议。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：乃拜蒙以郎中将，将千人，食重万余人，从巴苻关入，遂见夜郎侯多同。
现代文：于是委任唐蒙为郎中将，率领一千兵士和携带粮食、辎重的役夫万余人。从巴苻关进入夜郎，随即拜见了夜郎侯多同。
English: So he appointed Tang Meng as his lieutenant general, leading a thousand soldiers and more than ten thousand laborers carrying grain and heavy loads. He entered Yelang from Bachenguan, and immediately met Yelang Hou Datong.

古文：厚赐，谕以威德，约为置吏，使其子为令。
现代文：唐蒙重重地赏赐了多同，同时将利害关系告诉了他，并与多同约定给夜郎委派官吏，让多同的儿子担任类似县令的官职。
English: Tang Meng seriously rewarded Datong, and at the same time told him about the interests, and agreed with Datong to appoint officials to Yelang, and let Datong's son hold an official position similar to the county magistrate.

古文：夜郎旁小邑皆贪汉缯帛，以为汉道险，终不能有也，乃且听蒙约。
现代文：夜郎附近的小国都贪图汉朝的丝绸，又认为汉朝来这裹的道路艰险，终究不能占有他们，于是暂且接受了多同与唐蒙的盟约。
English: The people in the small towns around Yelang coveted the Han Dynasty's silk cloth. They thought that the Han Dynasty's road to Yelang was a dangerous one. After all, they could not occupy themselves, so they temporarily accepted the Tang and Mongolian covenant.

古文：还报，乃以为犍为郡。
现代文：唐蒙回奏朝廷，朝廷就把夜郎和这些小国的所在地作为犍为郡。
English: Tang Meng returned to the capital to report to the emperor, and the emperor changed the name of Yelang to Shibei County.

古文：发巴、蜀卒治道，自僰道指牂柯江。
现代文：汉王朝征调巴郡、蜀郡的步兵修筑道路，从焚道修到烊柯江。
English: The Han Dynasty conscripted foot soldiers from Ba County and Shu County to build roads, from the Bonfire Road to the Shike River.

古文：蜀人司马相如亦言西夷邛、莋可置郡。
现代文：蜀郡人司马相如也上书说西夷的邛都、榨都地区可以设郡。
English: Sima Xiangru, a resident of Shu County, also submitted a letter saying that Xiyi's Shidu and Zhudu regions could set up counties.

古文：使相如以郎中将往谕，皆如南夷，为置一都尉，十余县，属蜀。
现代文：于是汉武帝让司马相如也以郎中将的身份前往西夷地区，将朝廷的意图告诉西夷人。其情形和南夷一样，朝廷给那裹委派了一个郡都尉，设置了十多个县，划归蜀郡管理。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwu asked Sima Xiangru to go to the Xiyi region as a vice-admiral and tell the Xiyi people about the intentions of the imperial court. In the same situation as the Southern Yi, the imperial court appointed a county captain to Nabu, set up more than ten counties, and transferred them to the administration of Shu County.

古文：当是时，巴、蜀西郡通西南夷道，载转相饷。
现代文：这时，巴、蜀、广漠、汉中四郡修筑通往西南夷地区的道路，修路所需的粮饷运输艰难。
English: At this time, the four counties of Ba, Shu, Guangmiao and Hanzhong were building a road to the southwest Yi region, and the transportation of grain and straw needed for road construction was difficult.

古文：数岁，道不通，士罢饿餧，离暑湿，死者甚众。西南夷又数反，发兵兴击，耗费亡功。
现代文：经过几年，道路没修通。修路的士卒由于疲乏饥饿，遭受暑气潮湿，死了很多，西南夷又多次发生叛乱，调兵攻打叛乱者，却耗费财力而不见功效。
English: After a few years, the road was not completed. The soldiers who built the road died a lot due to fatigue and hunger, suffered from hot and humid weather, and there were many rebellions in Southwest Yi. Troops were mobilized to attack the rebels, but they spent a lot of money and had no effect.

古文：上患之，使公孙弘往视问焉。
现代文：这些情况使皇上很忧虑，于是派公孙弘到那些地方去察看了解。
English: The emperor was worried about this and sent Gongsun Hong to personally observe and inquire.

古文：还报，言其不便。
现代文：公孙弘回来汇报，说在那裹置县设官没什么好处。
English: Gongsun Hong came back to report that there was no benefit in setting up an office in that county.

古文：及弘为御史大夫，时方筑朔方，据河逐胡，弘等因言西南夷为害，可且罢，专力事匈奴。
现代文：到公孙弘担任御史大夫时，朝廷正修筑朔方郡城，凭据黄河逐斥匈奴。公孙弘等人趁机陈述通西南夷所带来的损害，认为可以暂时停止通西南夷，以便集中精力对付匈奴。
English: When Gongsunhong served as the imperial historian, the imperial court was in the process of building the county seat of Chuzuo Fang County, based on the evidence of the Yellow River expelling the Xiongnu. Gongsunhong and others took the opportunity to state the damage caused by the invasion of the Xiongnu, and believed that the invasion of the Xiongnu could be temporarily suspended in order to concentrate on dealing with the Xiongnu.

古文：上许之，罢西夷，独置南夷两县一都尉，稍令犍为自保就。
现代文：皇上同意这些建议，撤销了在西夷地区设置的官吏，祇在南夷地区设置两县、一都尉，让犍为郡自保并逐渐完善其郡县建制。
English: The emperor agreed to these suggestions, revoked the officials set up in the Xi'i region, and only set up two counties and one captain in the Nan'i region, allowing the county to protect itself and gradually improve its county system.

古文：及元狩元年，博望侯张骞言使大夏时，见蜀布、邛竹杖，问所从来，曰： 从东南身毒国，可数千里，得蜀贾人市。 
现代文：到元狩元年，博望侯张骞谈到，他出使大夏时，看到蜀地出产的捆布和邛山出产的竹杖，向人家打听是从哪裹来的，回答说： 从东南方的身毒国来的，身毒国离这裹大约有好几千里，从那儿的蜀地商人手中买的。 
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhang Ye, the lord of Bohangwang, said that when he was on an expedition in the summer, he saw a bundle of cloth produced in Shu and a bamboo cane produced in Shaoshan. He asked where the cloth came from, and replied: "It came from the poisonous country in the southeast. The poisonous country is about several thousand miles away from this cloth. I bought it from a Shu merchant there."

古文：或闻邛西可二千里有身毒国。
现代文：他又听人说邛山西面大约二千里的地方有身毒国。
English: Some people have heard that there is a poisonous country about two thousand miles west of the Badlands.

古文：骞因盛言大夏在汉西南，慕中国，患匈奴隔其道，诚通蜀，身毒国道便近，又亡害。
现代文：张骞趁机宣称大夏就在汉朝西南方，它羡慕中国，苦于匈奴阻隔它与汉朝交往的通道，如果能开通蜀地的道路，身毒国与汉朝交往取道就近便，于汉朝有利无害。
English: Zhang Ye took the opportunity to claim that Bactria was in the south-west of the Han Dynasty. It envied China and suffered from the Huns blocking the channel of communication between it and the Han Dynasty. If the road to Shu could be opened, it would be convenient for the poisoned country to communicate with the Han Dynasty, which would be beneficial and harmless to the Han Dynasty.

古文：于是天子乃令王然子、柏始昌、吕越人等十余辈间出西南夷，指求身毒国。
现代文：于是，皇上就命令王然于、柏始昌、吕越人等十多人，寻求小路，从西南夷地区出发，去寻找身毒国。
English: Therefore, the emperor ordered more than ten people, including Wang Ranyu, Bai Shichang, and people from Lv Yue, to find a path and set out from the southwest Yi region to find the poisoned country.

古文：至滇，滇王当羌乃留为求道。
现代文：他们到了滇国，为滇王当羌所挽留，当羌派人往西面为他们寻找道路。
English: When they arrived in the kingdom of Shao, they were detained by the king of Shao, Dang Shao, who sent people to the west to find a way for them.

古文：四岁余，皆闭昆明，莫能通。
现代文：经过四年多，探路的人全被昆明夷所阻拦，没有一个人能通过。
English: After more than four years, all the explorers were blocked by Kunming Yi, and no one could pass.

古文：滇王与汉使言： 汉孰与我大？ 
现代文：滇王询问汉朝使者说： 汉朝与我们滇国相比哪个大？ 
English: The king asked the emissary of the Han Dynasty: Compared to our country, how big is the Han Dynasty?

古文：及夜郎侯亦然，各自以一州王，不知汉广大。
现代文：汉朝使者到了夜郎，夜郎侯也是这样问。这些王侯都自以为是一州之王，一点不知道汉朝疆域的广大。
English: Han dynasty emissaries came to Yelang, and Yelang princes asked the same question. These princes thought they were kings of a single state, completely unaware of the vast territory of the Han dynasty.

古文：使者还，因盛言滇大国，足事亲附。
现代文：使者回来后，就极力宣称滇是那裹的大国，完全可以招致它亲附。
English: The emissaries of the Han Dynasty returned to Beijing, whereupon they tried their best to make the case that Yunnan was a great power, and that it was worthwhile for them to be close to and attached to the Han Dynasty.

古文：天子注意焉。
现代文：天子也就注意留心这件事了。
English: Emperor Han Wu took notice of this.

古文：及至南粤反，上使驰义侯因犍为发南夷兵。且兰君恐远行，旁国虏其老弱，乃与其众反，杀使者及犍为太守。
现代文：到南粤叛乱，皇上就命令驰义侯通过犍为郡征发南夷的军队，且兰的首领担心自己的军队应征远去，附近的国家乘机掠抢本国年老体弱的人，于是就和他的部众发动叛乱，杀死汉王朝的使者和犍为郡太守。
English: When there was a rebellion in Southern Guangdong, the emperor ordered the prince of Qi Yi to recruit and dispatch the army of Southern Yi through the county of Yunnan. The leader of Lan was worried that his army would be conscripted to go far away, and the nearby countries would take the opportunity to plunder the elderly and infirm people of their own countries. Therefore, he and his subordinates launched a rebellion and killed the envoy of the Han Dynasty and the county governor of Yunnan.

古文：汉乃发巴、蜀罪人当击南粤者八校尉击之。
现代文：汉王朝就调遣本来应当进攻南粤的巴郡、蜀郡的罪犯和八校尉所部出击且兰。
English: The Han Dynasty dispatched the criminals from Ba County and Shu County, who were supposed to attack Southern Guangdong, and the eight lieutenants to attack Kailan.

古文：会越已破，汉八校尉不下，中郎将郭昌、卫广引兵还，行诛隔滇道者且兰，斩首数万，遂平南夷为牂柯郡。
现代文：恰好赶上南越已被击败，汉朝的八校尉就没有按原部署沿烊柯江而下，中郎将郭昌、卫广率领所部返回，乘行军之便惩罚了隔绝汉朝通往滇国道路的且兰，杀人好几万，接着就平定南夷，以其地作为烊柯郡。
English: Just in time to catch up with South Vietnam has been defeated, the Han Dynasty's eight lieutenants did not follow the original deployment down the Tu Ke River, the middle brother will Guo Chang, Wei Guang led the headquarters to return, took the opportunity to march to punish the Han Dynasty to cut off the road to Quy Lan, killing tens of thousands, and then settled Nanyi, its land as Tu Ke County.

古文：夜郎侯始倚南粤，南粤已灭，还诛反者，夜郎遂入朝，上以为夜郎王。
现代文：夜郎侯当初依仗南粤，南粤灭亡后，汉王朝的军队返回时叉惩罚了反叛的国家，夜郎侯就入京朝见皇上，皇上便封他为夜郎王。
English: Yelanghou initially relied on Southern Guangdong. After the fall of Southern Guangdong, when the Han Dynasty's army returned to punish the rebellious country, Yelanghou went to Beijing to see the emperor, and the emperor made him the king of Yelanghou.

古文：南粤破后，及汉诛且兰、邛君，并杀莋侯，冉駹皆震恐，请臣置吏，以邛都为粤巂郡，作都为沈黎郡，冉駹为文山郡，广汉西白马为武都郡。
现代文：南粤灭亡后，到汉朝诛杀且兰和邛都君，并杀掉了榨都侯，冉骁夷的首领都震惊恐慌，请求臣属汉朝并让汉朝委派官吏。于是，汉朝把邛都夷住地作为粤仑郡，榨都夷住地作为沈黎郡，冉骁夷住地作为文山郡，广汉郡西面的白马夷住地作为武都郡。
English: After the demise of Southern Guangdong, the Han Dynasty went to fight and kill Kailan and Zhidu Jun, and killed Zhidu Hou. The leaders of Ran Ziyi were shocked and panicked, and asked to be subordinate to the Han Dynasty and let the Han Dynasty appoint officials. Therefore, the Han Dynasty regarded the land of Zhidu Yi as Guangdong Lun County, the land of Zhidu Yi as Shen Li County, the land of Ran Ziyi as Wenshan County, and the land of Baima Yi in the west of Guanghan County as Wudu County.

古文：使王然于以粤破及诛南夷兵威风谕滇王入朝。
现代文：皇上命令王然于以灭亡东粤及征服南夷的这种军事形势劝诱滇王入朝。
English: The emperor ordered Wang Ran to use the military situation of the destruction of Eastern Guangdong and the conquest of the Southern Yi to entice Wang into the imperial court.

古文：滇王者，其众数万人，其旁东北劳深、靡莫皆同姓相杖，未肯听。
现代文：滇王有几万部众，它的东北方有劳深、靡莫，他们与滇都是同姓，相互依仗，不听从有关滇王入朝的劝导。
English: Shao Wang has tens of thousands of subordinates. In the northeastern part of the province, there are Laojin and Miao. They all have the same surname as Shao, rely on each other, and do not listen to the persuasion about Shao Wang's entry into the imperial court.

古文：劳、莫数侵犯使者吏卒。
现代文：劳深、靡莫多次触犯汉朝的使者、官吏、士卒。
English: Emissaries, officials and courtiers of the Han Dynasty repeatedly violated the laws.

古文：元封二年，天子发巴、蜀兵击灭劳深、靡莫，以兵临滇。
现代文：元封二年，天子征调巴郡、蜀郡的军队攻灭了劳深、靡莫。兵临滇国。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, the army of Ba County and Shu County, led by the son of heaven, defeated the army of Lucheng and Miao.

古文：滇王始首善，以故弗诛。
现代文：由于当初滇王本来与汉王朝友好，所以汉王朝就没有诛杀他。
English: Shao Wang had good intentions towards the Han Dynasty from the beginning, so he was not killed.

古文：滇王离西夷，滇举国降，请置吏入朝，于是以为益州郡，赐滇王王印，复长其民。
现代文：滇王与西夷脱离关系，举国降服汉王朝，请求汉王朝委派官吏，并入京朝见皇上。于是汉王朝把那裹作为益州郡，赐给滇王王印，让他依旧统治他的民众。
English: Shao Wang broke off relations with the Xiyi, the whole country surrendered to the Han Dynasty, asked the Han Dynasty to appoint officials, and joined the Beijing Dynasty to see the Emperor. Therefore, the Han Dynasty took Naba as Yizhou County and gave Shao Wang Wangyin to let him still rule his people.

古文：西南夷君长以百数，独夜郎、滇受王印。
现代文：西南夷的首领数以百计，惟独夜郎和滇的首领承受了王印。
English: There are hundreds of kings and queens in Xiannanyi, but only the kings and queens of Yelang and Handan accepted the royal seal.

古文：滇，小邑也，最宠焉。
现代文：滇是个小国，最受汉朝宠爱。
English: Handan is a small country, the most favored by the Han Dynasty.

古文：后二十三岁，孝昭始元元年，益州廉头、姑缯民反，杀长吏。
现代文：这以后二十三年，也就是汉昭帝始元元年，益州廉头、姑缯民众反叛，杀了长吏。
English: Twenty-three years later, in the first year of Emperor Han Zhao's reign, the people of Yizhou and Guqin rebelled and killed the officials.

古文：牂柯、谈指、同并等二十四邑，凡三万余人皆反。
现代文：胖柯、谈指、同并等二十四国共三万多人也都起来反叛。
English: Fat Ko, Tanding, and more than thirty thousand people from twenty-four countries also rebelled.

古文：遣水衡都尉发蜀郡、犍为奔命万余人击牂柯，大破之。
现代文：汉朝派遣水衡都尉征调蜀郡、犍为郡急速奔赴前方的士卒一万多人进击群柯，彻底击败反叛者。
English: The Han Dynasty dispatched Captain Shui Heng to recruit and transfer Shu County, and more than 10,000 soldiers and officers rushed to the front to attack Qun Ke, completely defeating the rebels.

古文：后三岁，姑缯、叶榆复反，遣水衡都尉吕辟胡将郡兵击之。
现代文：过了三年，姑缯、叶榆再次反叛，汉朝派遣水衡都尉吕辟胡率领郡兵攻打反叛者。
English: Three years later, Gu Yao and Ye Ye rebelled again, and the Han Dynasty dispatched Captain Lu Bi Hu to lead the county soldiers to attack the rebels.

古文：辟胡不进，蛮夷遂杀益州太守，乘胜与辟胡战，士战及溺死者四千余人。
现代文：吕辟胡军尚未行进到叶榆、姑缯，蛮夷就杀了益州太守，并乘胜与吕辟胡作战，汉朝的士兵战死和溺死的有四千多人。
English: The troops of Lv Bihou had not yet marched to Ye Kun and Gu Kun, when the barbarians killed the governor of Yizhou and fought against Lv Bihou, taking advantage of the victory. More than four thousand soldiers of the Han Dynasty were killed in battle or drowned.

古文：明年，复遣军正王平与大鸿胪田广明等并进，大破益州，斩首捕虏五万余级，获畜产十余万。
现代文：第二年，再派遣军正王平与大鸿胪田广明等一同进攻，彻底击败益州的反叛者，俘、杀五万多人，俘获牲畜十余万头。
English: The next year, Zheng Wangping sent his army to attack together with the great giant Shantian Guangming and others, completely defeated the rebels in Yizhou, captured and killed more than 50,000 people, and captured more than 100,000 heads of livestock.

古文：上曰： 钅句町侯亡波率其邑君长人民击反者，斩首捕虏有功，其立亡波为钅句町王。
现代文：皇上说： 钩町侯亡波率领他所统辖的小国首领、民众攻打反叛者，俘、杀有功，立亡波为绚町王。
English: The emperor said: Hou Ruibo of Hook Town led the leaders and people of the small country under his jurisdiction to attack the rebels, captured and killed them, and established Ruibo as the king of Hua Town.

古文：大鸿胪广明赐爵关内侯，食邑三百户。 
现代文：赏赐大鸿胪田广明以关内侯的爵位，食邑三百户。 
English: He bestowed the title of Marquis of Guanai on the great magnate, Shantian Guangming, and granted him 300 households of food villages.

古文：后间岁，武都氐人反，遣执金吾马適建、龙额侯韩增与大鸿胪广明将兵击之。
现代文：过了一年，武都郡氐族反叛。朝廷派遣执金吾马适建、龙额侯韩增与大鸿胪田广明率军进击反叛者。
English: A year later, the Yi people of Wudu County rebelled, and the imperial court dispatched the regents Wu Ma Shijian, Long Yuhou Han Zeng, and Taihong Putian Guangming to lead an army to attack the rebels.

古文：至城帝河平中，夜郎王兴与钅句町王禹、漏卧侯俞更举兵相攻。
现代文：到汉成帝河平年问，夜郎王兴与钩町王禹、漏卧侯俞又举兵互相攻伐。
English: In the He Pingnian year of Emperor Han Zheng, Wang Xing, the night watchman, Wang Yu of Hook Town, and Liao Jia Houyi again raised an army to attack each other.

古文：牂柯太守请发兵诛兴等，议者以为道远不可击，乃遣太中大夫蜀郡张匡持节和解。
现代文：烊柯太守请求讨伐夜郎王兴等人。商讨调兵的人认为道路遥远不可出击，于是朝廷派遣太中大夫蜀郡人张匡持节和解蛮夷王侯的矛盾。
English: The people who discussed the transfer of troops thought that the road was too far away to attack, so the imperial court sent the Tai Zhong Daifu, Shu County's Zhang Kuang Jixi, to resolve the conflict between the barbarian princes.

古文：兴等不从命，刻木象汉吏，立道旁射之。
现代文：夜郎王兴等不听从汉朝官吏的命令，雕刻像汉朝官吏的木人，立在路边射击。
English: Yelang Wangxing and others disobeyed the orders of the Han officials, carved wooden figures resembling Han officials, stood on the roadside and fired.

古文：杜钦说大将军王凤曰： 太中大夫匡使和解蛮夷王侯，王侯受诏，已复相攻，轻易汉使，不惮国威，其效可见。
现代文：杜钦对大将军王凤说： 太中大夫张匡出使和解蛮夷王侯的纠纷，王侯接受了汉王朝的韶令，却又进一步互相攻杀，轻视汉朝使者，不畏惧国威，由此可见和解的效果。
English: Duchin said to the great general Wang Feng: The Taizhong doctor Zhang Kuang sent an envoy to settle the dispute between the barbarian princes. The princes accepted the edict of the Han Dynasty, but further attacked and killed each other, despised the Han Dynasty emissaries, and were not afraid of national prestige. This shows the effect of reconciliation.

古文：恐议者选耎，复守和解，太守察动静有变，乃以闻。
现代文：担心商议出兵的人嚅弱，再坚持和解，而太守观察蛮夷的动静，发生了变故才向上报告。
English: Fearing that those who negotiated the dispatch of troops were weak, they insisted on reconciliation, while the Empress Dowager observed the movements of the barbarians, and only reported to the emperor when there was a change.

古文：如此，则复旷一时，王侯得收猎其众，申固其谋，党助众多，各不胜忿，必相殄灭。
现代文：像这样，就会再耽误几个月，蛮夷王侯就能够收拾整顿自己的部众，顽固不化地坚持自己的谋略，他们党徒众多，又都愤怒至极，一定会互相杀伐消灭。
English: In this way, there will be a few more months of delay, and the barbarian princes will be able to tidy up and rectify their subordinates, stubbornly adhere to their own strategy, their party members are numerous, and they are all extremely angry, and they will certainly kill and destroy each other.

古文：自知罪成，狂犯守尉，远臧温暑毒草之地，虽有孙、吴将，贲、育士，若入水火，往必焦设，知勇亡所施。
现代文：自己知道已经构成罪过，就会陡起狂悖之心而杀太守、都尉。远行深入暑热潮湿、毒草丛生之地，虽然有像孙武、吴起一样的将帅，孟贲、夏育一样的勇士，也等于投入水火之中，前往必定会被烧焦、淹没，智谋勇气都无法施展。
English: If you know that you have committed a crime, you will suddenly have a rebellious heart and kill the governor and the captain. If you travel far and deep into the hot, humid, weed-infested land, although there are generals like Sun Wu and Wu Qi, and warriors like Meng Xuan and Xia Yu, it is also equivalent to being thrown into the fire and water. If you go there, you will certainly be scorched and drowned, and you will not be able to exercise your wisdom and courage.

古文：屯田守之，费不可胜量。
现代文：屯田防守他们，费用又太大。
English: The cost of defending them in Tonden was too great.

古文：宜因其罪恶未成，未疑汉家加诛，阴敕旁郡守尉练士马，大司农豫调谷积要害处，选任职太守往，以秋凉时入，诛其王侯尤不轨者。
现代文：应趁他们的罪行尚未形成，还不怀疑汉王朝要加以讨伐的时候，暗中诏令附近的郡太守、都尉选择兵士、战马，大司农预先调拨粮食运往关键之处，挑选称职的太守前往，在秋凉之际进入那裹，诛杀王侯中最不守法的。
English: They should take advantage of the time when their crimes have not yet formed and there is no doubt that the Han Dynasty wants to fight them, secretly issue an edict to the nearby county governor and captain to select soldiers and war horses, the chief farmer to allocate grain to the key places in advance, select a competent governor to go, and enter there in the cool of autumn, the most lawless of the princes.

古文：即以为不毛之地，亡用之民，圣王不以劳中国，宜罢郡，放弃其民，绝其王侯勿复通。
现代文：如果认为圣贤的君王不以不毛之地、无用之民来劳累中国，就应当撤销那裹郡的建制，放弃那裹的人民，断绝与那裹王侯的关系，不再和他们来往。
English: If it is believed that the wise and saintly emperors will not burden China with barren land and useless people, it is necessary to revoke the establishment of the county of Nabu, abandon the people of Nabu, sever the relationship with the princes of Nabu, and no longer deal with them.

古文：如以先帝所立累世之功不可堕坏，亦宜因其萌牙，早断绝之，及已成形然后战师，则万姓被害。 
现代文：假如因为先帝所创立的累世功绩不能毁坏，也应当趁祸患萌芽时加以铲除，等到祸患已经酿成，然后才出师攻战，就会有亿万人受害。 
English: If the past achievements created by the previous emperor cannot be destroyed, we should also take advantage of the evil to eradicate it when it germinates. If we wait until the evil has been brewed and then go to war, there will be hundreds of millions of victims.

古文：大将军凤于是荐金城司马陈立为牂柯太守。
现代文：大将军王凤在这时推荐金城司马陈立为样柯郡太守。
English: At this time, the great general Wang Feng recommended Jincheng Sima Chen Li as a model Ke County governor.

古文：立者，临邛人，前为连然长，不韦令，蛮夷畏这。
现代文：陈立，是临邛人，以前曾任连然县县长、不韦县县令，蛮夷畏惧他。
English: Chen Li, a Linyi native, had previously served as the county governor of Lianran County and the county magistrate of Buwei County. The barbarians feared him.

古文：及至牂柯，谕告夜郎王兴，兴不从命，立请诛之。
现代文：等陈立到达群柯，就将朝廷的意图告诉夜郎王兴，兴不服从命令。陈立请求讨伐他。
English: When Chen Li arrived at Qun Ke, he told the Yelang Wang Xing about the intention of the imperial court. Xing disobeyed the order. Chen Li requested to fight him.

古文：未报，乃从吏数十人出行县，至兴国且同亭，召兴。兴将数千人往至亭，从邑君数十人入见立。
现代文：还没得到批覆，陈立就随同几十个官吏到下面县裹去，到了夜郎国的且同亭，召见夜郎王兴，夜郎王兴带领几千人前去，到达且同亭，夜郎王兴就与邑君几十人进去见陈立。
English: Before receiving the approval, Chen Li went with dozens of officials to the following counties. When he arrived in the country of Yelang, he went to the same pavilion and summoned Yelang Wang Xing. Yelang Wang Xing led several thousand people to the same pavilion. When he arrived, Yelang Wang Xing and dozens of villagers went in to see Chen Li.

古文：立数责，因断头。
现代文：陈立谴责、数落他们，并趁机杀掉夜郎王。
English: Chen Li reprimanded and scolded them, and took the opportunity to kill Yelang Wang.

古文：邑君曰： 将军诛亡状，为民除害，愿出晓士众。 
现代文：随从夜郎王的邑君们说： 将军诛杀了不守法的无礼之人，为民除害，希望把夜郎王兴的头拿出去示众。 
English: The town lords who followed Yelang Wangxing said: "The general killed the impolite person who did not abide by the law and removed the harm for the people, hoping to take the head of Yelang Wangxing out to show the public."

古文：以兴头示之，皆释兵降。
现代文：以夜郎王兴的头示众，夜郎王的部众都放下武器投降。
English: With Yelang Wangxing's head to show the crowd, Yelang Wangxing's subordinates all laid down their weapons and surrendered.

古文：钅句町王禹、漏卧侯俞震恐，入粟千斛，牛、羊劳吏士。
现代文：钩町王禹、漏卧侯俞惊恐万状，于是交纳了一千斛粟和一些牛羊犒劳汉朝的官兵。
English: Wang Yu and Liao Jiao of Hook Town were terrified, so they handed over a thousand poppies and some cattle and sheep to the officials and soldiers of the Han Dynasty.

古文：立还归郡，兴妻父翁指与兴子邪务收余兵，迫胁旁二十二邑反。
现代文：陈立返回胖柯郡，夜郎王兴的岳父翁指和他的儿子邪务就收拾残余兵士，胁迫附近二十二邑反叛。
English: Chen Li returned to Fatty Ke County, and Wang Xing's father-in-law, Weng Jing, and his son, Zhabu, gathered the remaining soldiers and coerced twenty-two nearby villages to rebel.

古文：至冬，立奏募诸夷与都尉长史分将攻翁指等。
现代文：到冬天，陈立奏请招募众夷，与都尉、长史分路率军攻打翁指等。
English: In the winter, Chen Lizo asked to recruit the general public to fight against Weng Shigu with the army led by the captain and Chang Shi.

古文：翁指据厄为垒，立使奇兵绝其饷道，纵反间以诱其众。
现代文：翁指凭藉险峻的地形为堡垒，陈立用奇兵截断翁指运输粮饷的道路，派出反问者诱惑翁指的部众。
English: Weng pointed to the steep terrain as a fortress, Chen Li cut off the road of Weng's grain transport with a special soldier, and sent a questioner to tempt Weng's subordinates.

古文：都尉万年曰： 兵久不决，费不可共。 
现代文：都尉万年说： 军队长期不决战，费用供给跟不上。 
English: The captain said, "The army has been in a long-term indecisive war, and the cost supply cannot keep up.

古文：引兵独进，败走，趋立营。
现代文：于是就单独率军进攻。进攻失败，就逃跑到陈立的军营。
English: So he led his army to attack alone. When the attack failed, he fled to Chen Li's camp.

古文：立怒，叱戏下令格之。
现代文：陈立愤怒，在主将大旗之下训斥万年，命令他抵御敌人。
English: Chen Li was furious and scolded him under the banner of the commander-in-chief, ordering him to resist the enemy.

古文：都尉复还战，立引兵救之。
现代文：都尉万年返回再战，陈立率军援救他。
English: The captain never returned to fight again, and Chen Li led the army to rescue him.

古文：时天大旱，立攻绝其水道。
现代文：这时天大旱，陈立进攻断绝其水道。
English: At this time, there was a severe drought, and Chen Li launched an attack to cut off its water supply.

古文：蛮夷共斩翁指，持首出降。
现代文：于是蛮夷一起斩杀了翁指，拿着翁指的头出来投降。
English: So the barbarians killed Weng Finger together and took the head of Weng Finger to surrender.

古文：立已平定西夷，征诣京师。
现代文：陈立已经平定西夷，皇上征召前往京城。
English: Chen Li had already subdued Xiyi, and the emperor summoned him to the capital.

古文：会巴郡有盗贼，复以立为巴郡太守，秩中二千石居，赐爵左庶长。
现代文：赶上巴郡有盗贼，再以陈立为巴郡太守，以中二千石居官位，朝廷赏赐他以左庶长的爵位。
English: There was a thief who caught up with Ba County, and then Chen Li Rong became the governor of Ba County, holding an official position with 2,000 kilos, and the court rewarded him with the title of left deputy mayor.

古文：徙为天水太守，劝民农桑为天下最，赐金四十斤。入为左曹卫将军、护军都尉，卒官。
现代文：后来又调他任天水郡太守，他鼓励百姓致力农桑，是天下最突出的，朝廷奖赏他黄金四十斤，入朝任左曹卫将军、护军都尉，卒于任上。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Tianshui County. He encouraged the people to devote themselves to farming mulberry, which is the most prominent in the world. The court rewarded him with forty kilos of gold. He entered the court as General Zuo Wei and Captain of the Guard, and died in office.

古文：王莽篡位，改汉制，贬钅句町王以为侯。
现代文：王莽篡夺皇位，改变汉朝的制度，贬钩町王为钩町侯。
English: Wang Mang usurped the imperial throne, changed the system of the Han Dynasty, and demoted the King of Hook Town to the Prince of Hook Town.

古文：王邯怨恨，牂柯大尹周钦诈杀邯。
现代文：钩町王邯怨恨，烊柯郡大尹周钦以欺诈的手段杀了邯。
English: Wang Yao of Hook Town was resentful, and Yin Zhouqin, the governor of Shijiazhuang County, killed him by fraudulent means.

古文：邯弟承攻杀钦，州郡击之，不能服。
现代文：邯弟承就攻杀周钦，州郡出兵反击钩町夷，不能制服他们。
English: His younger brother succeeded in attacking and killing Zhou Qin, and the county sent troops to counterattack Hook Town, but they could not subdue them.

古文：三边蛮夷愁扰尽反，复杀益州大尹程隆。
现代文：三边蛮夷忧虑侵扰，都起兵反叛，又杀益州郡大尹程隆。
English: Concerned about the intrusion of barbarians from the three sides, they all rebelled and killed Yin Chenglong, the governor of Yizhou County.

古文：莽遣平蛮将军冯茂发巴、蜀、犍为吏士，赋敛取足于民，以击益州。
现代文：王莽派遣平蛮将军冯茂调动巴郡、蜀郡、犍为郡的官吏、兵士。从老百姓那裹征收足够的赋税，以便进击益州蛮夷。
English: Wang Mang dispatched the barbarian general Feng Mao to mobilize the officials and soldiers of Ba County, Shu County and Suwei County, and collect enough taxes from the common people in order to attack the barbarians in Yizhou.

古文：出入三年，疾疫死者什七，巴、蜀骚动。
现代文：出征三年，因疾病瘟疫死的人占十分之七，巴郡、蜀郡因此骚动不安。
English: Three years into the campaign, seven out of ten people have died of disease and plague. As a result, Ba County and Shu County are in turmoil.

古文：莽征茂还，诛之。
现代文：王莽召回冯茂诛杀了他。
English: Wang Mang recalled Feng Maojun to kill him.

古文：更遣宁始将军廉丹与庸部牧史熊大发天水、陇西骑士，广汉、巴、蜀、犍为吏民十万人，转输者合二十万人，击之。
现代文：改派宁始将军廉丹舆庸部牧史熊，大力调动天水、陇西郡的骑兵和广漠、巴、蜀、犍为郡的官吏、百姓十万人，加上转运军需的人总共二十万，进击反叛者。
English: He re-assigned Ningshi General Liantan and Publicity and Propaganda Department Makishi Xiong, and vigorously mobilized the cavalry of Tianshui and Shaanxi Counties, and the officials and people of Guangmiao, Ba, Shu and Zou Counties, a total of 100,000 people, plus a total of 200,000 people transporting military supplies, to attack the rebels.

古文：始至，颇斩首数千，其后军粮前后不相及，士卒饥疫，三岁余死者数万。
现代文：刚到时，斩杀了好几千人。到后来，军粮运输跟不上，兵士饥饿染疾，三年多死了几万人。
English: When they first arrived, they killed several thousand people. Later, the transportation of military food could not keep up, soldiers were starving and contracting diseases, and tens of thousands of people died in more than three years.

古文：而粤巂蛮夷任贵亦杀太守枚根，自立为邛谷王。
现代文：而且粤隽郡蛮夷任贵还杀了太守枚根，自立为邛谷王。
English: Moreover, the barbarian Ren Gui of Guangdong and Yunnan also killed the Emperor Hizen and became the King of Shibuya.

古文：会莽败汉兴，诛贵，复旧号云。
现代文：赶上王莽失败，汉光武中兴，就诛杀了任贵，恢复原有的称号。
English: When Wang Mang failed to catch up with Han Guangwu and Zhongxing, he killed Ren Gui and restored the original title.

古文：南粤王赵佗，真定人也。
现代文：南粤王赵佗，真定县人。
English: King of Southern Guangdong, Zhao Wei, a native of Zhending County.

古文：秦并天下，略定扬粤，置桂林、南海、象郡，以適徙民与粤杂处。
现代文：秦统一天下后，又平定了扬粤，设置了桂林郡、南海郡和象郡，把被罚罪的百姓迁徙到那裹，与粤人杂居。
English: One day after the Qin Dynasty fell, Yang Yue was pacified and Guilin County, Nanhai County and Xiang County were set up, and the people who were punished were moved there to live with the Cantonese.

古文：十三岁，至二世时，南海尉任嚣病且死，召龙川令赵佗语曰： 闻陈胜等作乱，豪桀叛秦相立，南海辟远，恐盗兵侵此。
现代文：过了十三年，到秦二世时，南海郡尉任嚣得病将死，召来龙县县令趟佗，对他说： 我听说陈胜等起兵作乱，豪杰叛秦，相立为王。南海郡处于偏远之地，恐怕盗贼军队会攻占这里。
English: Thirteen years later, during the reign of Qin II, Nanhai County Lieutenant Ren Han fell ill and was on the verge of death. He summoned the county magistrate of Long County and said to him, "I heard that Chen Sheng and others started a riot, and a great hero rebelled against Qin and became king. Nanhai County is in a remote place, and I am afraid that the robber army will occupy it."

古文：吾欲兴兵绝新道，自备侍诸侯变，会疾甚。
现代文：我想发兵截断新道，进行自卫，并观察诸侯的动向，不巧病重。
English: I wanted to send troops to cut off the new road, to defend myself, and to observe the movement of the princes. Unfortunately, I was seriously ill.

古文：且番禺负山险阻，南北东西数千里，颇有中国人相辅，此亦一州之主，可为国。
现代文：番禺地区背靠山岭，地势险要，方圆几千里，又有很多中原人辅助，也可成一州之主，能够立国。
English: The Panyu area is backed by mountains, the terrain is precarious, the radius is several thousand miles, and there are many Central Plains people to assist. It can also become the master of a state and can establish a country.

古文：郡中长吏亡足与谋者，故召公告之。 
现代文：郡中官吏当中没有值得我与之谋事的人，所以把您请来，告诉您我的想法。 
English: There's no one on the county staff I'd rather work with, so I'm bringing you in to tell you what I think.

古文：即被佗书，行南海尉事。
现代文：当即把有关文书颁发给趟佗，让他代行南海郡尉之职。
English: Ren Ren immediately issued an appointment document to Zhao Wei, allowing him to act on behalf of Nanhai County.

古文：嚣死，佗即移檄告横浦、阳山、湟溪关曰： 盗兵且至，急绝道聚兵自守。 
现代文：任嚣死后，趟佗立即发布檄文，通知横浦、阳山、湟溪关等地说： 盗贼的军队就要打过来了，请马上断绝通道，聚兵自守！ 
English: After the death of Ren Ren, Wuchuan immediately issued a warning, notifying Yokoura, Yangshan, Shixiguan, etc., saying: The thief's army is about to come, please immediately cut off the channel, gather soldiers to defend themselves!

古文：因稍以法诛秦所置吏，以其党为守假。
现代文：于是利用法律手段逐渐诛杀秦朝所置的官吏，而任用自己的亲信代行其职。
English: Therefore, he used legal means to gradually kill the officials appointed by the Qin Dynasty, and appointed his cronies to act on his behalf.

古文：秦已灭，佗即击并桂林、象郡，自立为南粤武王。
现代文：秦朝灭亡后，趟佗便进攻吞并了桂林郡、象郡，自立为南粤武王。
English: After the demise of the Qin Dynasty, Wanzhou attacked and annexed Guilin County and Xiang County, and established itself as the King of Southern Guangdong.

古文：高帝已定天下，为中国劳苦，故释佗不诛。
现代文：汉高祖平定天下之后，由于中原连年战乱，百姓劳苦，所以放过了赵佗，不予诛讨。
English: After Emperor Gaozu had pacified the world, the Central Plains was at war for years on end, and the people were working hard. Therefore, Zhao Yao was spared and was not discussed.

古文：十一年，遣陆贾立佗为南粤王，与部符通使，使和辑百粤，毋为南边害，与长沙接境。
现代文：高祖十一年，汉朝派陆买追立赵佗为南粤王，与他剖符通使，让他协调安辑百粤，不要在南部边境为患。南粤与汉朝长沙国接境。
English: In the eleventh year of Gaozu, the Han Dynasty sent Lu Mai to chase and set up Zhao Xuan as the king of Nan Yue, and sent a message to him, asking him to coordinate An Ji Ba Yue, so as not to cause trouble at the southern border. Nan Yue was the border with the Han Dynasty Changsha State.

古文：高后时，有司请禁粤关市铁器。
现代文：高后时，有关部门的官吏奏请禁止南粤国在关市上购买铁器。
English: After high school, the officials of the relevant departments requested the ban on the purchase of ironware by Southern Guangdong in Guan City.

古文：佗曰： 高皇帝立我，通使物，今高后听谗臣，别异蛮夷，隔绝器物，此必长沙王计，欲倚中国，击灭南海并王之，自为功也。 
现代文：趟佗说： 高皇帝立我为南粤王，双方互通使节、物品，现在高后听信谗臣之言，视蛮夷为异类，断绝器物的流通，造一定是长沙王的计策，他想凭仗汉朝，消灭南粤、吞掉南海郡而一并统治，自谋功利。 
English: Wuchuan said: Emperor Gao appointed me as the king of Southern Guangdong, and both sides exchanged envoys and goods. Now Gao Hou listened to the words of his vassals, regarded barbarians as outliers, and cut off the circulation of goods. This must be the strategy of the King of Changsha. He wanted to use the Han Dynasty to destroy Southern Guangdong and swallow Nanhai County to rule together and seek his own benefit.

古文：于是佗乃自尊号为南武帝，发兵攻长沙边，败数县焉。
现代文：于是，赵佗便自加尊号为南粤武帝，发兵攻打长沙国的边境地区，打败了好几个县。
English: As a result, Zhao Wei, who called himself Emperor Wu of Southern Guangdong, sent troops to attack the border areas of Changsha and defeated several counties.

古文：高后遣将军隆虑侯灶击之，会暑湿，士卒大疫，兵不能逾领。
现代文：高后派将军隆虑侯周灶前往还击，正赶上酷暑阴雨的天气，士兵中很多人染上瘟疫，军队不能越过山岭。
English: Gao Po sent his general, Long Xian Hou, to Zhou Zhao to return fire. He was catching up with the hot and rainy weather. Many soldiers were infected with the plague, and the army could not cross the mountains.

古文：岁余，高后崩，即罢兵。
现代文：过了一年多，高后去世，汉朝便停止军事行动。
English: More than a year later, Gao Hou passed away, and the Han Dynasty stopped military operations.

古文：佗因此以兵威财物赂遗闽粤、西瓯骆，伇属焉。
现代文：趟佗趁机对闽粤、西瓯骆进行武力威胁和财物贿赂，从而役使他们，并使他们归属南粤。
English: Wuchang took advantage of the opportunity to threaten and bribe Suiyuan and Xiluo with force and property, thus making them useful and making them belong to Nanyuan.

古文：东西万余里。
现代文：这样，南粤国东西达万余里。
English: In this way, southern Guangdong is more than a thousand miles from east to west.

古文：乃乘黄屋左纛，称制，与中国侔。
现代文：趟佗于是乘坐黄屋左纛，自称皇帝，与汉朝天子相抗衡。
English: Zhao Wei actually took Huangya Zuoqi's car and issued orders as an emperor, which was equal to the status of the Han Dynasty.

古文：文帝元年，初镇抚天下，使告诸侯四夷从代来即位意，谕盛德焉。
现代文：汉文帝元年，皇帝刚开始统治天下，派出使者遍告诸侯和四夷君长自己从代国入朝即皇帝位之后的打算，使大家知道皇上的圣德。
English: In the first year of Emperor Hanwen, when the emperor had just begun to rule the world, he sent an envoy to inform the princes and the four emperors of his plans after entering the country as the emperor, so that everyone knew the holiness of the emperor.

古文：乃为佗亲冢在真定置守邑，岁时奉祀。
现代文：于是，为在真定的赵佗父母的坟墓设置守墓的民居，按时供奉祭祀。
English: As a result, a tomb-guarding house was set up at the grave of Zhao Yao's parents in Zhending, and sacrifices were offered on time.

古文：召其从昆弟，尊官厚赐宠之。
现代文：召请赵佗的堂兄弟，封官加赏以笼络他们。
English: Summon Zhao Yao's cousins, reward them with a high-ranking official to entice them.

古文：召丞相平举可使粤者，平言陆贾先帝时使粤。
现代文：又下诏命令丞相陈平举荐可以出使南粤的人，陈平说陆贾在高皇帝时曾经出使过南粤。
English: He also ordered the prime minister Chen Ping to recommend people who could be sent to Southern Guangdong. Chen Ping said that Lu Jia had been sent to Southern Guangdong when he was Emperor Gao.

古文：上召贾为太中大夫，谒者一人为副使，赐佗书曰： 皇帝谨问南粤王，甚苦心劳意。
现代文：文帝召请陆贾，任命他为太中大夫，又任命一个谒者作为副使，文帝给赵佗的信上说： 皇帝恭敬地问候南粤王以最诚挚的心情。
English: Emperor Wen summoned Lu Jia, appointed him as the Grand Physician, and appointed a deaf-mute as the deputy envoy. Emperor Wen's letter to Zhao Wei said: The emperor respectfully greets the King of Southern Guangdong with the most sincere heart.

古文：朕，高皇帝侧室之子，弃外奉北藩于代，道里辽远，壅蔽朴愚，未尝致书。
现代文：我不是高皇帝的嫡子，被派到外地，治理北边的代国，由于路途遥远和我本人的孤僻愚陋，因此不曾与南粤互通使节。
English: I am not the legitimate son of Emperor Gao. I was sent to a foreign country to govern the northern representative country. Due to the long distance and my own isolation and stupidity, I did not exchange envoys with Southern Guangdong.

古文：高皇帝弃群臣，孝惠皇帝即世，高后自临事，不幸有疾，日进不衰，以故悖暴乎治。
现代文：高皇帝去世，离开了群臣，孝惠皇帝即位，高后亲掌朝政，不幸患病，病情日益严重，因此政治苛暴，不合常轨。
English: Emperor Gao passed away and left his retainers, Emperor Xiaohui ascended to the throne, and Emperor Gao personally took over the government. Unfortunately, he fell ill and his condition became increasingly serious. As a result, his politics were harsh and out of the ordinary.

古文：诸吕为变故乱法，不能独制，乃取它姓子为孝惠皇帝嗣。
现代文：吕氏作乱，故意破坏法纪，他们不能独自进行统治，就把别人的孩子当做孝惠皇帝的继承人，实行傀儡政治。
English: The Lv clan caused turmoil and deliberately destroyed law and order. Unable to rule alone, they treated other people's children as the heirs of Emperor Xiaohui and implemented a puppet government.

古文：赖宗庙之灵，功臣之力，诛之已毕。
现代文：依靠宗庙神灵的保佑和功臣们的努力，现在吕氏已被诛灭。
English: Relying on the blessing of the gods of the ancestral temple and the efforts of the heroes, the Lv clan has now been annihilated.

古文：朕以王侯吏不释之故，不得不立，今即位。
现代文：我一再辞让帝位，群臣不允许，因此我不得不立为皇帝，现在已经即位。
English: I have repeatedly abdicated the imperial throne, but the ministers did not allow it, so I had to become emperor, and now I have ascended the throne.

古文：乃者闻王遗将军隆虑侯书，求亲昆弟，请罢长沙两将军。
现代文：从前我听说您给将军隆虑侯周灶写信，请求寻找您在真定的兄弟，并撤回在长沙国的两位将军。
English: I once heard that you wrote to General Long Xian Hou Zhou Zhao, asking him to find your brother in Zhending and withdraw the two generals in Changsha.

古文：朕以王书罢将军博阳侯，亲昆弟在真定者，已遣人存问，修治先人冢。
现代文：我已按照您信中的要求，撤回将军博阳侯陈濞，您在真定的兄弟，我也已派人抚慰，并修缮了您先人的坟墓。
English: In accordance with the request in your letter, I have withdrawn General Boyang Hou Chen Qi, your brother in Zhending, and I have also sent people to comfort and repair the graves of your ancestors.

古文：前日闻王发兵于边，为寇灾不止。
现代文：以前我听说您发兵攻打边境，不断制造祸患。
English: I had heard that you had sent troops to attack the border and constantly caused trouble.

古文：当其时，长沙苦之，南郡尤甚，虽王之国，庸独利乎！
现代文：那时长沙国遭了殃，南郡受害更重，即使您的南粤国，就惟独能得到好处吗？
English: At that time, Changsha Province suffered a disaster, Nan County suffered more, even if your South Guangdong Province, can it only benefit?

古文：必多杀士卒，伤良将吏，寡人之妻，孤人之子，独人父母，得一亡十，朕不忍为也。
现代文：一定要牺牲大批士兵，伤害优良的将领和官吏，使百姓妻子失去丈夫，儿子失去父亲，父母失去儿子，得一亡十，这是我所不忍心做的。
English: A large number of soldiers must be sacrificed, good generals and officials must be injured, the people's wives must lose their husbands, their sons must lose their fathers, their parents must lose their sons, and one must lose ten. This is what I cannot bear to do.

古文：朕欲定地犬牙相入者，以问吏，吏曰 高皇帝所以介长沙土也 ，朕不得擅变焉。
现代文：我想把汉与南粤边境犬牙交错的地方划归南粤，以此询问有关官吏，官吏说 造个边界线是高皇帝用以划定长沙国土地的 ，因此我不能擅自变更。
English: I would like to ask the relevant officials to assign the place where the Han and Southern Guangdong borders intersect to Southern Guangdong. The officials said that Emperor Gao used to create a border line to delineate the land of Changsha, so I can't change it without authorization.

古文：吏曰： 得王之地不足以为大，得王之财不足以为富，服领以南，王自治之。 
现代文：官吏说： 得南粤王的土地不足以使汉朝广大，得南粤王的财物不足以使汉朝富裕，服领以南，由南粤王统治。 
English: The officials said: the land of the Southern Yue King is not enough to make the Han Dynasty broad, and the property of the Southern Yue King is not enough to make the Han Dynasty rich.

古文：虽然，王之号为帝。两帝并立，亡一乘之使以通其道，是争也；争而不让，仁者不为也。
现代文：尽管如此，您号称皇帝，两帝并立，您竟然没有派出一辆通使的车，这是互相争位；相争而不谦让，有仁德的人是不这样做的。
English: In spite of this, you claim to be the emperor, the two emperors stand side by side, and you have not even sent a courier car. This is jockeying for position; competing but not conceding. People with benevolence do not do this.

古文：愿与王分弃前患，终今以来，通使如故。
现代文：我希望与您共弃前嫌，从今以后直到永远，双方像原来一样互通使者。
English: I hope that we can put the past behind us, and from now on and forever, the two sides will exchange envoys as before.

古文：故使贾驰谕告王朕意，王亦受之，毋为寇灾矣。
现代文：所以我派陆买乘车快速去向您表明我的想法，希望您接受我的意见，不要再制造边患。
English: That's why I sent Lu Bei by car to quickly show you my thoughts. I hope you will accept my opinion and stop creating problems.

古文：上褚五十衣，中褚三十衣，下褚二十衣，遗王。愿王听乐娱忧，存问邻国。 
现代文：现将厚绵衣五十件，中绵衣三十件，薄绵衣二十件，赠送给您，希望您多欣赏乐舞以求欢娱，解除忧愁，并抚慰闽粤和瓯骆等邻国。 
English: We are now presenting you with 50 pieces of thick cotton clothing, 30 pieces of medium cotton clothing and 20 pieces of thin cotton clothing. We hope that you will enjoy the music and dance more in order to entertain, relieve sadness, and comfort neighboring countries such as Guangdong and Hunan.

古文：陆贾至，南粤王恐，乃顿首谢，愿奉明诏，长为藩臣，奉贡职。
现代文：陆贾到达南粤，南粤王十分惊恐，于是叩头谢罪，愿意遵奉汉天子的命令，永远做汉朝的藩臣，履行贡纳之职。
English: When Lu Jia arrived in Southern Guangdong, the King of Southern Guangdong was very alarmed, so he bowed down and repented, and was willing to obey the order of the Son of Heaven of Han Dynasty, to be the vassal of the Han Dynasty forever, and to perform the duty of tribute.

古文：于是下令国中曰： 吾闻两雄不俱立，两贤不并世。
现代文：同时下令国中，说： 我听说两雄不俱立，两贤不并世。
English: At the same time, he gave an order to the junior high school students, saying, "I heard that two great men cannot stand side by side, and two great men cannot live side by side.

古文：汉皇帝贤天子。
现代文：汉朝皇帝是贤明的天子。
English: The emperor of the Han Dynasty was a wise son of heaven.

古文：自今以来，去帝制黄屋左纛。 
现代文：从今以后，南粤国废除帝号和黄屋左纛。 
English: From now on, Southern Guangdong will abolish the imperial title and Huangya Zuoqi.

古文：因为书称： 蛮夷大长老夫臣佗昧死再拜上书皇帝陛下：老夫故粤吏也，高皇帝幸赐臣佗玺，以为南粤王，使为外臣，时内贡职。
现代文：又给汉文帝写信说： 蛮夷大长、老夫臣佗昧死再拜上书皇帝陛下：我是过去粤地的官吏，高皇帝幸而赐给我玺印，策立我为南粤王，使我做为国外之臣，按时贡纳尽职。
English: He also wrote a letter to Emperor Hanwen, saying: "I am an official of Guangdong in the past. Emperor Gao was fortunate enough to give me the imperial seal, making me the king of Southern Guangdong, making me a foreign vassal, and paying me on time.

古文：孝惠皇帝即位，义不忍绝，所以赐老夫者厚甚。
现代文：孝惠皇帝即位，以仁义之心不忍摒弃我，对我的赏赐非常优厚。
English: Emperor Xiao Hui ascended to the throne. With a heart of benevolence and righteousness, he could not bear to abandon me. He rewarded me very generously.

古文：高后自临用事，近细士，信谗臣，别异蛮夷，出令曰： 毋予蛮夷外粤金铁田器；马、牛、羊即予，予牡，毋与牝。 
现代文：高后亲理国政后，接近小人，听信谗臣之言，视蛮夷为异类，发布命令说： 不给蛮夷之南粤国铁器等金属农具；如果给马、牛、羊，则衹给雄的，不给雌的。 
English: After high school, after taking charge of state affairs, he approached villains, listened to the words of vassals, regarded barbarians as outliers, and issued an order saying: Do not give metal agricultural tools such as South Guangdong ironware to barbarians; if you give horses, cattle, and sheep, then give the male to the male, not to the female.

古文：老夫处辟，马、羊、羊齿已长，自以祭祀不修，有死罪，使内史藩、中尉高、御史平凡三辈上书谢过，皆不反。又风闻老夫父母坟墓已坏削，兄弟宗族已诛论。
现代文：我住在偏僻之地，马、牛、羊都已经老了，自知不进行祭祀活动有死罪，所以派内史藩、中尉高和御史平先后三次上书谢过，都无回音，又听传言说我父母的坟墓已被破坏，兄弟宗族也已被定罪诛杀。
English: I live in a remote area, my horses, cattle and sheep are all old, and I know that it is a capital offence not to carry out sacrificial activities, so I have written three times to Peineshi clan, Lieutenant Gao and Goshiping to thank them, but there has been no response. I have also heard rumours that the graves of my parents have been destroyed, and that my brothers and relatives have been convicted and killed.

古文：吏相与议曰： 今内不得振于汉。外亡以自高异。 故更号为帝，自帝其国，非敢有害于天下也。
现代文：官吏们互相议论说： 现在您在内地不能兴起于汉朝，在外面也没有什么表明自己高，所以我改称号为皇帝，但衹在南粤国内称帝，不敢加害于天下。
English: The officials discussed with each other and said: Now you cannot rise from the Han Dynasty in the inland, and there is nothing to show that you are high outside, so I changed the title to emperor, but I called myself emperor in southern Guangdong and did not dare to harm the world.

古文：高皇后闻之大怒，削去南粤之籍，使使不通。
现代文：高皇后听说我改称皇帝，非常气愤，开除南粤于藩臣名籍，断绝了双方使者的往来。
English: When Empress Gao heard that I had changed my name to Emperor, she was very angry, expelled Nan Yue from the title of vassal of the domain, and cut off the contacts between the ambassadors of both sides.

古文：老夫窃疑长沙王谗臣，故敢发兵以伐其边。
现代文：我私下怀疑长沙王进了谗言，所以敢发兵攻打长沙国的边境。
English: I privately suspected that the King of Changsha was lying, so I dared to send troops to attack the border of Changsha.

古文：且南方卑湿，蛮夷中西有西瓯，其众半羸，南面称王；东有闽粤，其众数千人，亦称王；西北有长沙，其半蛮夷，亦称王。
现代文：况且南方低下潮湿，蛮夷当中西边有西瓯，那裹的人半裸露着身体，竟然南面称王；东边的闽粤才有几千人，也号称为王；西北面的长沙国有一半人是蛮夷，也称王。
English: Moreover, the south is low and humid. Among the barbarians, there is Xidi in the west. The people there are half-naked, and they are called kings in the south. There are only a few thousand people in Guangdong in the east, and they are also called kings. Half of the people in Changsha in the northwest are barbarians, and they are also called kings.

古文：老夫故敢妄窃帝号，聊以自娱。
现代文：所以我敢狂妄地窃取帝号，聊以自乐。
English: That's why I dare to arrogantly steal the emperor's number and talk about it for my own amusement.

古文：老夫身定百邑之地，东西南北数千万里，带甲百万有余，然北面而臣事汉，何也？
现代文：我亲自平定了百邑之地，方圆几千里上万里，镘甲之士百万有余，可是我为什么对汉称臣呢？
English: I myself have leveled the land of a hundred towns, thousands of miles in circumference, and more than a million men in armor, but why do I praise Han?

古文：不敢背先人之故。
现代文：因为我不敢违背我的先人。
English: Because I dare not go against my ancestors.

古文：老夫处粤四十九年，于今抱孙焉。
现代文：我在粤地已有四十九年，现在已经抱上孙子了。
English: I have been in Guangdong for forty-nine years, and now I have a grandchild.

古文：然夙兴夜寐，寝不安席，食不甘味，目不视靡曼之色，耳不听钟鼓之音者，以不得事汉也。
现代文：然而我早起晚卧，觉睡不好，饭吃不香，目不敢视华丽之色，耳不敢听钟鼓之音，这一切都是因为不能臣事汉朝造成的。
English: However, I wake up early and go to bed late, my sleep is not good, my meal is not fragrant, my eyes do not dare to see the gorgeous colors, and my ears do not dare to listen to the sound of the bell and drum. All of this is caused by not being able to be a subject of the Han Dynasty.

古文：今陛下幸哀怜，复故号，通使汉如故，老夫死骨不腐，改号不敢为帝矣！
现代文：现在天子幸而可怜我，恢复我原来的王号，使我像原来一样与汉朝通使，我死也瞑目了，从今改号，再也不敢称帝了！
English: Now, fortunately, the Son of Heaven has taken pity on me, restored my original title of king, and made me an envoy to the Han Dynasty as I was before. I am at peace with my death. From now on, I will change my title, and I will no longer dare to call myself emperor!

古文：谨北面因使者献白璧一双，翠鸟千，犀角十，紫贝五百，桂蠹一器，生翠四十双，孔雀二双。
现代文：恭敬地以臣礼通过使者献上白璧一对，翠鸟千只，犀角十个，紫贝五百枚，桂蠹一瓶，翡翠四十对，孔雀两对。
English: He respectfully presented a pair of white pearls, a thousand kingfishers, ten rhinoceros horns, five hundred purple mussels, a bottle of cinnamon, forty pairs of emeralds, and two pairs of peacocks.

古文：昧死再拜，以闻皇帝陛下。 
现代文：昧死再拜，向皇帝陛下表明自己的心意。 
English: He dared to die again to show His Majesty the Emperor his true feelings.

古文：陆贾还报，文帝大说。
现代文：陆贾回来报告，文帝非常高兴。
English: Lu Jia came back to report that Wen Di was very happy.

古文：遂至孝景时，称臣遣使入朝请。
现代文：直到孝景帝时，趟佗称臣，派使者按时朝拜天子。
English: Until the time of Emperor Xiaojing, Watanabe was known as a courtier and sent emissaries to worship the Son of Heaven on time.

古文：然其居国，窃如故号；其使天子，称王朝命如诸侯。
现代文：然而南粤王在其国内窃用皇帝名号如故；衹是使者朝拜天子时称王，像一般诸侯王一样接受天子之命。
English: However, the king of Southern Guangdong continued to use the emperor's name in his own country; he was the messenger who called himself the king when he worshipped the Son of Heaven, and he accepted the Son of Heaven's order like other princes.

古文：至武帝建元四年，佗孙胡为南粤王。
现代文：到汉武帝建元四年，趟佗的孙子赵胡立为南粤王。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, Zhao Huli, the grandson of Emperor Wu, became the king of Southern Guangdong.

古文：立三年，闽粤王郢兴兵南击边邑。
现代文：第三年，闽粤王郢兴兵攻打南粤边境的城邑。
English: In the third year, the soldiers of the king of Guangdong, Jixing, attacked the towns on the southern Guangdong border.

古文：粤使人上书曰： 两粤俱为藩臣，毋擅兴兵相攻击。
现代文：南粤王派人向汉朝上书说： 南粤和闽粤都是天子的藩臣，不能擅自发兵互相攻击。
English: The king of Southern Guangdong sent a letter to the Han Dynasty saying: Southern Guangdong and Southern Guangdong are both vassals of the Son of Heaven, and they should not attack each other without authorization.

古文：今东粤擅兴兵侵臣，臣不敢兴兵，唯天子诏之。 
现代文：现在束粤擅自兴兵进攻南粤，我不敢发兵，请天子下诏指示。 
English: Now that the Bund of Guangdong is attacking the Southern Guangdong without authorization, I do not dare to send troops. I ask the Almighty to issue an edict.

古文：于是天子多南粤义，守职约，为兴师，遣两将军往讨闽粤。
现代文：于是武帝赞许南粤忠义，恪守臣职，不违约制，为之发兵，派遣两名将军前往讨伐闽粤。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu praised Nan Yue's loyalty, his strict adherence to his duties as a vassal, and his non-violation of the treaty system, for which he sent troops and dispatched two generals to fight against Nan Yue.

古文：兵未逾领，闽粤王弟馀善杀郢以降，于是罢兵。
现代文：汉朝军队还没越过山岭，闽粤王弟余善便杀死郢，投降汉朝，于是两将军罢兵。
English: Before the Han Dynasty's army had crossed the mountains, Yu Yue's younger brother, Yu Sheng, killed Yan and surrendered to the Han Dynasty. The two generals then went on strike.

古文：天子使严助往谕意，南粤王胡顿首曰： 天子乃兴兵诛闽粤，死亡以报德！ 
现代文：汉武帝派严助去向南粤王说明朝廷的旨意，南粤王赵胡叩头说： 天子竟能为臣发兵诛讨闽粤，臣虽死也无法报答天子的恩德！ 
English: Emperor Hanwu sent Yan Jian to explain the will of the imperial court to the King of Southern Guangdong. The King of Southern Guangdong, Zhao Hu, kowtowed and said, "How can the Son of Heaven send soldiers to subjugate Southern Guangdong? Even if the vassal dies, he cannot repay the kindness of the Son of Heaven!"

古文：遣太子婴齐入宿卫。
现代文：派太子趟婴齐入朝宿卫。
English: Zhao Hu sent all the princes and princesses to the imperial court to act as guards.

古文：谓助曰： 国新被寇，使者行矣。胡方日夜装入见天子。 
现代文：趟胡对严助说： 南粤国新遭寇击，贵使者请先行一步，我正日夜整装，准备入朝拜见天子。 
English: Wai Hu said to Yan Sui: Southern Guangdong has been newly attacked by bandits. Your emissary, please take the first step. I am preparing day and night to enter heaven and worship the Son of God.

古文：助去后，其大臣谏胡曰： 汉兴兵诛郢，亦行以惊动南粤。
现代文：严助走后，南粤国的大臣劝谏赵胡说： 汉朝发兵诛讨闽粤，也藉此威吓南粤。
English: After Yan's departure, the minister of Southern Guangdong persuaded Zhao Zhao Hu to say: The Han Dynasty sent troops to discuss Southern Guangdong, and also used this to intimidate Southern Guangdong.

古文：且先王言事天子期毋失礼，要之不可以怵好语入见。
现代文：况且先王说过，事奉天子祇求不失臣礼，重要的是不能被汉朝使者的好话迷惑而入朝拜见天子。
English: Moreover, the former king said that it is important not to be confused by the good words of the Han Dynasty envoy and enter the court to worship the Son of Heaven.

古文：入见则不得复归，亡国之势也。 
现代文：入朝拜见天子，就不能再回来了，这是亡国的情势啊。 
English: If you go to see the emperor, you can't come back. This is the situation of a ruined country.

古文：于是胡称病，竟不入见。
现代文：于是赵胡假称有病，最终没有入朝拜见天子。
English: As a result, Zhao Hu pretended to be ill and ultimately did not enter the imperial court to worship the emperor.

古文：后十余岁，胡实病甚，太子婴齐请归。
现代文：过了十多年，趟胡确实得了重病，太子趟婴齐请求归国。
English: After more than ten years, Wabi-Woo did indeed fall seriously ill, and Prince Wabi-Woo requested to return to the country.

古文：胡薨，谥曰文王。
现代文：趟胡死后，加谧号为文王。
English: After Wu Hu's death, his posthumous name was King Wen.

古文：婴齐嗣立，即臧其先武帝、文帝玺。
现代文：赵婴齐继立为南粤王，就把其先人僭称武帝、文帝的玺印收藏起来。
English: After Zhao Yingqi became the king of Southern Guangdong, he collected the seals of his ancestors, known as Emperor Wu and Emperor Wen.

古文：婴齐在长安时，取邯郸摎氏女，生子兴。
现代文：趟婴齐在长安时，娶邯郸掺姓女子为妻，生下儿子趟兴。
English: When Watanechi was in Chang'an, he married a woman with a mixed surname and gave birth to a son, Watan Hing.

古文：及即位，上书请立摎氏女为后，兴为嗣。
现代文：等到他即位后，就上书汉朝，请立穋姓女子为王后，赵兴为王位继承人。
English: After he ascended the throne, he sent a letter to the Han Dynasty, asking them to make a woman with the surname of Yan the queen and Zhao Xing the heir to the throne.

古文：汉数使使者风谕，婴齐犹尚乐擅杀生自恣，惧入见，要以用汉法，比内诸侯，固称病，遂不入见。遣子次公入宿卫。
现代文：汉朝多次派使者委婉地劝说趟婴齐入朝拜见天子，但他仍然喜欢独揽生杀之权，为所欲为，害怕入朝拜见天子后，会像内地的诸侯那样，受到汉朝法律的约束，因此坚持推说自己有病。一直不肯入朝拜见天子，衹是派自己的儿子赵次公入朝宿卫。
English: The Han Dynasty repeatedly sent emissaries to gently persuade Wanzhong to go to the imperial court to worship the emperor, but he still liked to monopolize the power of life and death and do whatever he wanted. He was afraid that after he went to the imperial court to worship the emperor, he would be bound by the laws of the Han Dynasty like the princes of the inland, so he insisted on saying that he was ill. He had always refused to go to the imperial court to worship the emperor, but he sent his son Zhao Zigong to the imperial court to defend the emperor.

古文：婴齐薨，谥曰明王。
现代文：赵婴齐去世后，加谧号为明王。
English: After the death of Zhao Yingqi, his posthumous name was changed to Ming Wang.

古文：太子兴嗣立，其母为太后。
现代文：太子赵兴即位，他的母亲穋氏为太后。
English: Prince Zhao Xing ascended the throne, and his mother, Zou Shi, became empress dowager.

古文：太后自未为婴齐妻时，曾与霸陵人安国少季通。
现代文：僇太后在未做趟婴齐的妻子以前，曾经与霸陵县的安国少季私通。
English: Empress Dowager Zou, before she became the wife of Zhiqi, once had an illicit affair with An Guo Shoshu of Baling County.

古文：及婴齐薨后，元鼎四年，汉使安国少季谕王、王太后入朝，令辩士谏大夫终军等宣其辞，勇士魏臣等辅其决，卫尉路博德将兵屯桂阳，待使者。
现代文：赵婴齐死后，元鼎四年，汉朝派安国少季前往劝说南粤王和王太后入朝拜见天子，又派辩士、谏大夫终军等同往陈述其辞，勇士魏臣等辅助决策，卫尉路博德率兵屯驻桂阳郡等待使者。
English: After the death of Zhao Yingqi, in the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Han Dynasty sent the young An Guo Ji to persuade the King of Southern Guangdong and the Empress Dowager to go to the court to worship the heavenly son, and also sent the debater, the final army of Dr. Zou to present his speech, the warrior Wei Chen and other auxiliary decision-making, and the guard lieutenant Lu Bode and his soldiers stationed in Guiyang County to wait for the messenger.

古文：王年少，太后中国人，安国少季往，复与私通，国人颇知之，多不附太后。
现代文：南粤王赵兴年少，穋太后是中原人，安国少季这次出使，又与太后私通，南粤国人颇知其事，多不依附太后。
English: The king of Southern Guangdong, Zhao Xing, was young, and the empress dowager was a native of the Central Plains. The young An Guo, who was sent on this mission, also had a private affair with the empress dowager. The people of Southern Guangdong were quite aware of the matter, and mostly did not cling to the empress dowager.

古文：太后恐乱起，亦欲倚汉威，劝王及幸臣求内属。
现代文：太后恐怕发生变乱，也想凭藉汉朝的威力，劝说南粤王和宠幸大臣请求内属汉朝。
English: The empress dowager feared that there would be turmoil, and she also wanted to use the power of the Han Dynasty to persuade the King of Southern Guangdong and the Minister of Favors to request to belong to the Han Dynasty.

古文：即因使者上书，请比内诸侯，三岁一朝，除边关。
现代文：于是通过使者上书，请求比照内地诸侯，三年入朝拜见天子一次，除去边境关防。
English: Therefore, he sent a letter to the emperor through an emissary, requesting that he meet with the emperor once every three years in the morning, in accordance with the emperors of the inland provinces, and that the border barriers be removed.

古文：于是天子许之，赐其丞相吕嘉银印，及内史、中尉、太傅印，余得自置。
现代文：当时天子批准了这一请求，赐给南粤丞相吕嘉银印，以及内史、中尉、太傅印，其余官职南粤可自己选置，汉朝不赐给印绶。
English: At that time, the heavenly son approved this request, and gave the silver seal to the minister of Southern Yue Lujia, as well as the seal of Inner History, Lieutenant, and Taifu. The remaining official posts of Southern Yue could be chosen by themselves, and the Han Dynasty would not give the seal.

古文：除其故黥、劓刑，用汉法。
现代文：废除南粤国原来的黥、劓等肉刑，改用汉朝的法律。
English: The original Southern Guangdong laws of flogging and whipping were abolished and replaced with the laws of the Han Dynasty.

古文：诸使者皆留填抚之。
现代文：汉朝的使者留下来镇抚南粤。
English: The emissaries of the Han Dynasty stayed behind to pacify Southern Guangdong.

古文：王、王太后饬治行装重资，为入朝具。
现代文：南粤王和王太后整治行装和贵重礼物，为入朝做准备。
English: The King of Southern Guangdong and the Empress Dowager are arranging their outfits and precious gifts in preparation for their entry into the imperial court.

古文：相吕嘉年长矣，相三王，宗族官贵为长吏七十余人，男尽尚王女，女尽嫁王子弟宗室，及苍梧秦王有连。
现代文：丞相吕嘉年纪很大了，他先后担任三代国王的丞相，宗族当中有七十多人身居要职，吕家男子都娶王女为妻，女子尽嫁王室子弟，又与苍梧秦王连姻。
English: The prime minister, Lü Jia, is very old. He has served as the prime minister for three generations of kings. More than 70 members of his family hold important positions. All the men of the Lü family have married princesses, and all the women have married royal sons and daughters, and have also been married to King Cang Wu of Qin.

古文：其居国中甚重，粤人信之，多为耳目者，得众心愈于王。
现代文：吕嘉在南粤国中权力很大，粤人信赖他，多为其耳目，比南粤王更得人心。
English: Lujia wields great power in southern Guangdong. The people of Guangdong trust him, and he is more popular than the king of southern Guangdong because he is their eyes and ears.

古文：王之上书，数谏止王，王不听。
现代文：南粤王上书汉朝，吕嘉多加劝阻，但王不听从。
English: The king of Southern Guangdong wrote to the Han Dynasty, and Lujia did much to dissuade him, but the king did not listen.

古文：有畔心，数称病不见汉使者。
现代文：吕嘉于是有反叛之心，屡次托辞有病不见汉朝使者。
English: He conceived the idea of betraying the King of South Vietnam and repeatedly begged to be excused from meeting the emissaries of the Han Dynasty.

古文：使者注意嘉，势未能诛。
现代文：使者们都注视着吕嘉，但当时形势不便杀他。
English: The envoys were watching Lujia, but it was not convenient to kill him at that time.

古文：王、王太后亦恐嘉等先事发，欲介使者权，谋诛嘉等。
现代文：南粤王和王太后也害怕吕嘉等人先发难，想通过汉朝使者的权威，谋杀吕嘉等人。
English: The King of Southern Guangdong and the Empress Dowager were also afraid that Lü Jia and others would attack first, and wanted to murder Lü Jia and others through the authority of the Han Dynasty envoy.

古文：置酒请使者，大臣皆侍坐饮。
现代文：于是设酒宴邀请汉朝使者，南粤大臣都奉陪坐饮。
English: As a result, a wine banquet was held to invite the envoys of the Han Dynasty, and the ministers of Southern Guangdong were all invited to drink.

古文：嘉弟为将，将卒居宫外。
现代文：吕嘉的弟弟为将军，率领军队在宫外守候。
English: Lujia's younger brother became a general and waited outside the palace with his soldiers.

古文：酒行，太后谓嘉： 南粤内属，国之利，而相君苦不便者，何也？ 
现代文：依次斟过了酒，太后对吕嘉说： 南粤内属汉朝，是对国有利的，而丞相您嫌其不利，是什么原因呢？ 
English: After weighing the wine in turn, the empress dowager said to Lü Jia: The Han Dynasty in Southern Guangdong is beneficial to the country, but you, the prime minister, do not like it. What is the reason for this?

古文：以激怒使者。
现代文：想以此激怒汉朝使者。
English: The empress dowager wanted to provoke the envoys of the Han Dynasty.

古文：使者狐疑相杖，遂不敢发。
现代文：使者犹豫不决，互相观望始终没敢动手。
English: The envoys hesitated, looked at each other and never dared to act.

古文：嘉见耳目非是，即趋出。
现代文：吕嘉发现宴席上气氛不同往常，当即起身出去。
English: Lu Jia found that the atmosphere at the banquet was different from usual, and immediately got up and left.

古文：太后怒，欲鏦嘉以矛，王止太后。
现代文：太后大怒，想用矛刺杀吕嘉，被南粤王阻止。
English: The empress dowager became angry and wanted to hit Lujia Rong with a spear. Wang prevented the empress dowager from doing so.

古文：嘉遂出，介弟兵就舍，称病，不肯见王及使者。乃阴谋作乱。
现代文：于是吕嘉出来，在他弟弟所带军队的保护下回到自己府中，声称有病，不肯会见王及汉使者，于是阴谋作乱。
English: So Lü Jia came out and returned to his palace under the protection of the army led by his brother. He claimed to be ill and refused to meet with the king and the Han envoy, and thus plotted to start a riot.

古文：王素亡意诛嘉，嘉知之，以故数月不发。
现代文：南粤王一向无意诛杀吕嘉，吕嘉也知道这一点，所以过了好几个月也没发难。
English: Nan Yue Wang had never intended to kill Lujia, and Lujia knew this, so after several months, he did not attack.

古文：太后独欲诛嘉等，力又不能。
现代文：衹有太后想杀掉吕嘉，又无力办成。
English: The empress dowager wanted to kill Lu Jia, but was powerless to do so.

古文：天子闻之，罪使者怯亡决。
现代文：汉武帝听到此事，怪罪使者怯懦不能决断。
English: When Emperor Han Wu heard about this, he accused the messenger of cowardice and could not make a decision.

古文：又以为王、王太后已附汉，独吕嘉为乱，不足以兴兵，欲使庄参以二千人往。
现代文：又认为南粤王和王太后已经依附汉朝，衹有吕嘉作乱，不值得发兵，打算派庄参带二千人前往应付。
English: He also thought that the King of Southern Guangdong and the Queen Mother had already attached themselves to the Han Dynasty, and that it was not worth sending troops because Lujia had caused a disturbance. He planned to send Zhuang Zhan and two thousand people to deal with the situation.

古文：参曰： 以好往，数人足；以武往，二千人亡足以为也。 
现代文：庄参说： 如果抱着友好的目的去，有几个人就够了；如果为了打仗而去，二千人是办不成什么事的。 
English: Zhuang Zhan said: If you go with a friendly purpose, a few people will be enough; if you go for war, two thousand people can't do anything.

古文：辞不可，天子罢参兵。
现代文：认为不可行而推辞，汉武帝便不叫庄参前去。
English: He thought it was not feasible and declined, so Emperor Hanwu did not ask Zhuang Zang to go.

古文：郏壮士故济北相韩千秋奋曰： 以区区粤，又有王应，独相吕嘉为害，愿得勇士三百人，必斩嘉以报。 
现代文：郏县壮士、原济北国相韩千秋奋然说： 以区区南粤，又有南粤王为内应，衹有吕嘉为乱，我愿得到三百名勇士，必斩吕嘉回报。 
English: Han Qianqiu, the strongman of Jixian County and the former minister of North Jibei Province, said enthusiastically: "With South Jibei District and King of South Jibei District as the internal response, and with Lujia as the chaos, I am willing to get three hundred warriors, and I will definitely slaughter Lujia in return.

古文：于是天子遣千秋与王太后弟摎乐将二千人往。
现代文：于是汉武帝派韩千秋和南粤王太后的弟弟穋乐带二千人前往南粤。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwu sent Han Qianqiu, the younger brother of the Queen Mother of Southern Guangdong, to Southern Guangdong with 2,000 people.

古文：入粤境，吕嘉乃遂反，下令国中曰： 王年少。太后中国人，又与使者乱，专欲内属，尽持先王宝入献天子以自媚，多从人，行至长安，虏卖以为僮。
现代文：汉朝军队开入南粤境内后，吕嘉终于发动叛乱，下令南粤国中说： 国王年少，太后是中原人，又与汉朝使者私通，一心想要内属汉朝，把先王的所有宝器都奉献给汉朝天子以自作谄媚，还多带随从人员，到长安后，全都掠卖为奴。
English: After the Han Dynasty troops entered the territory of Southern Guangdong, Lü Jia finally launched a rebellion and ordered Southern Guangdong to say: The king is young, the empress dowager is from the Central Plains, and she also fornicates with the Han Dynasty emissary. She is determined to belong to the Han Dynasty, dedicating all the treasures of the former king to the Son of Heaven of the Han Dynasty to flatter herself, and bringing many attendants. After Chang'an, they were all plundered and sold as slaves.

古文：取自脱一时利，亡顾赵氏社稷为万世虑之意。 
现代文：太后为自己一时之利，却不顾赵氏社稷和为子孙万代作长远打算。 
English: The empress dowager made long-term plans for her own short-term gain, regardless of the Zhao clan's social influence and for the sake of her children and grandchildren.

古文：乃与其弟将卒攻杀太后、王，尽杀汉使者。
现代文：吕嘉于是和他弟弟带兵杀死太后、王，又杀死所有汉朝使者。
English: Lu Jia and his brother then led an army to kill the empress dowager, the king, and all the emissaries of the Han Dynasty.

古文：遣人告苍梧秦王及其诸郡县，立明王长男粤妻子术阳侯建德为王。
现代文：派人通知苍梧秦王及其诸郡县，立明王婴齐长男、粤妻所生之子术阳侯赵建德为王。
English: A messenger was sent to inform the King of Qin and his provinces and counties that the eldest son of King Li Ming, the infant Qi, and the son of his Cantonese wife, Shuyang Hou, Zhao Jiande, was the king.

古文：而韩千秋兵之入也，破数小邑。
现代文：韩千秋等所带军队进入南粤境后，攻下几个小城。
English: After the troops led by Han Qianqiu and others entered southern Guangdong, they captured several small cities.

古文：其后粤直开道给食，未至番禺四十里，粤以兵击千秋等，灭之。
现代文：以后南粤干脆让开道路，为他们提供饮食，当他们到达距番禺大约四十里的地方时，南粤便发兵攻打韩千秋的军队，把他们歼灭了。
English: Later, Nan Yue simply gave way and provided them with food. When they reached a place about forty miles from Panyu, Nan Yue sent troops to attack Han Qianqiu's army and annihilated them.

古文：使人函封汉使节置塞上，好为谩辞谢罪，发兵守要害处。
现代文：吕嘉派人把汉朝使者的符节用匣子封装好，放到边塞上，又假装友好地讲了一些骗人的话表示谢罪，同时发兵驻守要害之地。
English: Lujia sent someone to encapsulate the Han Dynasty envoy's rune with a box and put it on the border plug. He also pretended to be friendly and said some deceptive words to express his gratitude. At the same time, he sent troops to guard the crucial place.

古文：于是天子曰： 韩千秋虽亡成功，亦军锋之冠。封其子延年为成安侯。
现代文：于是武帝说： 韩千秋虽然没有成功，也是军锋之冠，封他的儿子韩延年为成安侯。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wu said: Although Han Qianqiu did not succeed, he was also the crown of the military front, and his son Han Yanren was named the Prince of Cheng'an.

古文：摎乐，其姊为王太后，首愿属汉，封其子广德为龙侯。 
现代文：穋乐，他的姐姐是南粤王太后，首先愿意归属汉朝，封掺乐的儿子穋广德为乐侯。 
English: Gong Le, whose sister was the Dowager Queen of Southern Guangdong, was the first to want to belong to the Han Dynasty, and her son, Gong Guangde, was given the title of prince.

古文：乃赦天下，曰： 天子微弱，诸侯力政，讥臣不讨贼。
现代文：接着颁布特赦韶书说： 天子微弱，诸侯互相争战，《春秋》讽刺人臣不为君讨伐反贼。
English: Then, a special amnesty was issued, saying: The divine son is weak, the princes fight each other, and "Spring and Autumn" satirizes the vassals who do not fight for you against the thieves.

古文：吕嘉、建德等反，自立晏如，令粤人及江淮以南楼船十万师往讨之。 
现代文：吕嘉、趟建德等反叛，心安理得地自立自封，现命令粤人和长江、淮河以南的楼船水师十万人前往讨伐他们。 
English: Lujia, Wai Jiande and other rebels, peace of mind to become self-appointed, now ordered the Cantonese and the Yangtze River, south of the Huaihe River, 100,000 sailors to go to fight them.

古文：元鼎五年秋，卫尉路博德为伏波将军，出桂阳，下湟水；主爵都尉杨仆为楼船将军，出豫章，下横浦；故归义粤侯二人为戈船、下濑将军，出零陵，或下离水，或抵苍梧；使驰义侯因巴、蜀罪人，发夜郎兵，下牂柯江；咸会番禺。
现代文：元鼎五年秋天，卫尉路博德为伏波将军，从桂阳郡出发，下湟水；主爵都尉杨仆为楼船将军，从豫章郡出发，下横浦；原归顺汉朝被封为侯的两名南粤人分别为戈船、下濑将军，从零陵郡出发，一下离水，一抵苍梧；派驰义侯利用巴郡、蜀郡被赦罪人，调发夜郎军队，下烊柯江：各路兵马都到番禺会师。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Guard Lieutenant Lu Bode was the general of Fubo, starting from Guiyang County and going to Xiangshui; Lord Lieutenant Yang Minion was the general of Lou Ship, starting from Yuzhang County and going to Yangpu; The two Southern Guangdong people who originally returned to Shun Han Dynasty and were appointed as marquesses were respectively Gosen and Xiangyu generals, starting from Jiling County, leaving the water and arriving in Cangwu; Pai Chi Yihong used Ba County and Shu County to be pardoned, and sent the nightingale army, and Xiang Kejiang: All soldiers and horses

古文：六年冬，楼船将军将精卒先陷寻陿，破石门，得粤船粟，因推而前，挫粤锋，以粤数万人待伏波将军。
现代文：元鼎六年冬天，楼船将军杨仆率精兵首先攻下寻陋，击破石门，获得南粤的船只和粮食，乘胜向前推进，挫败了南粤的先头部队，以数万名粤人组成的军队，等待伏波将军路博德前来会师。
English: In the winter of the 6th year of the reign of the Yuan Dynasty, the general of the Lou Ship, Yang Bu, and his elite soldiers were the first to capture the locusts, break through the stone gate, obtain the ships and grain of Southern Guangdong, and push forward with the victory. They defeated the leading troops of Southern Guangdong, an army composed of tens of thousands of Cantonese, waiting for the general of Fubao, Lu Baode, to come to join the division.

古文：伏波将军将罪人，道远后期，与楼船会乃有千余人，遂俱进。
现代文：伏波将军统领被赦的罪人，因路途遥远而误了军期，与楼船将军会师的才一千多人，于是一起进军。
English: General Fubo led the pardoned criminals, who missed the military period because of the long journey. There were only more than a thousand people who joined the division with General Loufeng, so they marched together.

古文：楼船居前，至番禺，建德、嘉皆城守。
现代文：楼船将军在前头，到达番禺城时，趟建德和吕嘉都在守卫此城。
English: General Loufeng was in the front, and when he arrived at Panyu City, both Jiande and Lujia were guarding the city.

古文：楼船自择便处，居东南面，伏波居西北面。
现代文：楼船将军自择有利地形，驻扎在城的东南面，伏波将军驻扎在城的西北面。
English: General Rousen chose the favorable terrain and was stationed in the southeast of the city, while General Fubo was stationed in the northwest of the city.

古文：会暮，楼船攻败粤人，纵火烧城。
现代文：正巧到了晚上，楼船将军打败了南粤的军队，放火烧城。
English: It just so happened that in the evening, General Loufeng defeated the army of Southern Guangdong and set fire to the city.

古文：粤素闻伏波，莫，不知其兵多少。
现代文：南粤人久闻伏波将军的威名，因天黑也不知他带了多少兵。
English: Southern Guangdong people have long known the prestige of General Fubo. Due to the darkness, they do not know how many soldiers he brought with him.

古文：伏波乃为营，遣使招降者，赐印绶，复纵令相招。
现代文：伏波将军便安置军营，派使者招降南粤人，投降的赐给印绶，再把他们放回，让他们招降其他南粤将士。
English: General Fubo then set up a military camp, sent an envoy to invite the surrender of the Southern Guangdong people, gave the surrendering soldiers to the Emperor, and then sent them back to invite the surrender of other Southern Guangdong soldiers.

古文：楼船力攻烧敌，反驱而入伏波营中。
现代文：楼船将军奋力攻烧敌军，反而把他们驱赶到伏波将军营中。
English: General Loufeng attacked vigorously, burned the enemy, but drove the ruffians into the camp of General Fubo to surrender.

古文：迟旦，城中皆降伏波。
现代文：到第二天黎明，城中吏民都投降了伏波将军。
English: By dawn of the next day, all the officials and people in the city had surrendered to General Fubo.

古文：吕嘉、建德以夜与其属数百人亡入海。
现代文：吕嘉、趟建德及其随从几百人趁夜色逃到海上。
English: Lujia, Wai Jiande and their entourage of several hundred people took advantage of the darkness to escape to the sea.

古文：伏波又问降者，知嘉所之，遣人追。
现代文：伏波将军查问投降的人，知道吕嘉等人逃到了什么地方，派人去追。
English: General Fubo interrogated those who had surrendered, knew where Lü Jia and the others had fled to, and sent someone to chase them.

古文：故其校司马苏弘得建德，为海常侯；粤郎都稽得嘉，为临蔡侯。
现代文：原校尉、司马苏弘抓获了赵建德，而因功被策封为海常侯；南粤郎官都稽活捉了吕嘉，因功被策封为临蔡侯。
English: The former school captain, Sima Suhong, captured Zhao Jiande, and was awarded the title of Hai Chang Hou for his service; the Southern Yue Langguan all captured Lujia alive, and was awarded the title of Lin Cai Hou for his service.

古文：苍梧王赵光与粤王同姓，闻汉兵至，降，为随桃侯。
现代文：苍梧王赵光与南粤王同姓，听说汉朝军队来了，便投降了汉朝，因而被封为随桃侯。
English: Cangwu King Zhao Guang had the same surname as the Southern Guangdong King. When he heard that the Han Dynasty army was coming, he surrendered to the Han Dynasty, and was thus named Sui Taohu.

古文：及粤揭阳令史定降汉，为安道侯。
现代文：南粤揭阳县县令史定投降汉朝，被封为安道侯。
English: In southern Guangdong, Jieyang County Governor Shi Ding surrendered to the Han Dynasty and was given the title of Ando Marquis.

古文：粤将毕取以军降，为月尞侯。
现代文：南粤将军毕取率部投降，被封为膝侯。
English: The Southern Guangdong general surrendered and was made a knight.

古文：粤桂林监居翁谕告瓯骆四十余万口降，为湘城侯。
现代文：南粤桂林郡监居翁，劝说瓯骆四十多万人投降，被封为湘城侯。
English: He was the overseer of Guilin County, Southern Guangdong Province. He persuaded more than 400,000 people to surrender and was named the Marquis of Hunan.

古文：戈船、下濑将军兵及驰义侯所发夜郎兵未下，南粤已平。
现代文：戈船、下濑将军的军队和驰义侯所调发夜郎的军队还没有南下，南粤已经平定了。
English: Gosen, the army of General Shimotsuki, and the army of Fatenro, dispatched by the Prince of Chigi, have not yet gone south, and Nan Yue has already been leveled.

古文：遂以其地为儋耳、珠崖、南海、苍梧、郁林、合浦、交阯、九真、日南九郡。
现代文：于是汉朝就在那裹设置了儋耳、珠崖、南海、苍梧、郁林、合浦、交趾、九真、曰南九个郡。
English: As a result, the Han Dynasty set up nine counties in the area, including Kunlun, Zhuyao, Nanhai, Cangwu, Yulin, Hepu, Jiaozi, Jiuzhen and Nan.

古文：伏波将军益封。
现代文：伏波将军路博德增加封邑。
English: Fu Bo's general Lu Bode increased the fiefs.

古文：楼船将军以推锋陷坚为将梁侯。
现代文：楼船将军杨仆以其能冲锋陷阵、勇于攻坚而被封为将梁侯。
English: The general of the houseboat, Yang Bu, was awarded the title of General Liang Hou for his ability to charge into battle and courage to attack strongholds.

古文：自尉佗王凡五世，九十三岁而亡。
现代文：从南海郡尉赵佗立南粤王开始，共历五代、九十三年，南粤国灭亡了。
English: Beginning with the Nankai County lieutenant Zhao Ying as the king of Southern Guangdong, a total of five generations passed away, and in 93, Southern Guangdong perished.

古文：闽粤王无诸及粤东海王摇，其先皆粤王勾践之后也，姓驺氏。
现代文：闽粤王无诸和粤束海王摇，他们的先人都是粤王勾践的后代，姓骝。
English: 粤王无诸 and粤束海王摇, their ancestors are descendants of 粤王勾践, surnamed.

古文：秦并天下，废为君长，以其地为闽中郡。
现代文：秦统一天下后，把他们废为君长，把他们的地盘划为闽中郡。
English: One day after the Qin Dynasty was unified, they were abolished as monarchs, and their territory was divided into Yuzhong County.

古文：及诸侯畔秦，无诸、摇率粤归番阳令吴芮，所谓番君者也，从诸侯灭秦。
现代文：待到诸侯背叛秦朝，无诸和摇率领粤人投靠了番阳县县令吴芮，就是所谓的番君，跟随诸侯推翻了秦朝的统治。
English: When the princes rebelled against the Qin Dynasty, Wu Zhuhe led the Cantonese people to support Wu Gan, the governor of Panyang County, the so-called guardian prince, and followed the princes to overthrow the rule of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：当是时，项羽主命，不王也，以故不佐楚。
现代文：当时，项羽把持号令诸侯之权，不立无诸和摇为王，所以他们也不归附项羽。
English: At that time, Xiang Yu controlled the power of the lords, and did not set up any princes or princes as kings, so they did not belong to Xiang Yu.

古文：汉击项籍，无诸、摇帅粤人佐汉。
现代文：汉攻项羽，无诸和摇率领粤人帮助汉。
English: When Han attacked Xiang Yu, Muzhu He led the Cantonese to help Han.

古文：汉五年，复立无诸为闽粤王，王闽中故地，都冶。
现代文：汉高祖五年，重新立无诸为闽粤王，统辖原闽中郡故地，建都于冶。
English: In the fifth year of Henkel's founding, he re-established Muzhu as the king of Yunnan and Guangdong, and governed the former Yunnan County. The capital was built in Ye.

古文：孝惠三年，举高帝时粤功，曰闽君摇功多，其民便附，乃立摇为东海王，都东瓯，世号曰东瓯王。
现代文：孝惠帝三年，列举汉高祖刘邦时粤人的功劳，认为闽君摇功劳很大，其民众乐于依附，于是立摇为东海王，建都于束瓯，人们称摇为束瓯玉。
English: In the third year of Emperor Xiao Hui's reign, he enumerated the achievements of the Cantonese people during the reign of Liu Bang, the founder of the Han Dynasty, and believed that the merits of the Shou Dynasty were great, and that its people were willing to adhere to it. Therefore, the Shou Dynasty was established as the king of the East Sea, with its capital in Sokcho. People called the Shou Dynasty the Shou Dynasty.

古文：后数世，孝景三年，吴王濞反，欲从闽粤，闽粤未肯行，独东瓯从。
现代文：此后过了若干代，到孝景帝三年，吴王刘濞发动叛乱，想联合闽粤，闽粤不肯，祇有东瓯追随吴国。
English: Several generations later, in the third year of the reign of Emperor Xiaojing, the king of Wu, Liu Bei, launched a rebellion and wanted to unite with Shandong and Guangdong, but Shandong and Guangdong refused, and only Dongbei followed Wu.

古文：及吴破，东瓯受汉购，杀吴王丹徒，以故得不诛。
现代文：吴国被击败后，东瓯接受了汉朝的收买，在丹徒杀死吴王刘濞，以功赎罪，因此东瓯没有受到汉朝的诛伐。
English: After the defeat of the State of Wu, Donglu accepted the bribe of the Han Dynasty and killed the King of Wu, Liu Bei, in Dantu to atone for his sins. Therefore, Donglu was not defeated by the Han Dynasty.

古文：吴王子驹亡走闽粤，怨东瓯杀其父，常劝闽粤击东瓯。
现代文：吴王刘濞的儿子刘驹逃亡到闽粤，怨恨束瓯杀死他的父亲，经常怂恿闽粤攻打东瓯。
English: Liu Bei, the son of Liu Bei, the king of Wu, fled to Shandong. He resented Shandong for killing his father, and often attacked Shandong.

古文：建元三年，闽粤发兵围东瓯，东瓯使人告急天子。
现代文：建元三年，闽粤发兵围攻束瓯，束瓯派人向天子告急。
English: In the third year of the first year of the Jianyuan era, the troops of Shandong and Guangdong besieged Sokcho, and Sokcho sent people to the emperor to complain.

古文：天子问太尉田蚡，蚡对曰： 粤人相攻击，固其常，不足以烦中国往救也。 
现代文：汉武帝向太尉田蚣征求意见，田蚣回答说： 粤人互相攻击，这本来是常事，不值得烦劳汉朝前往救助。 
English: Emperor Hanwu asked for advice from Lieutenant Tian Qi, who replied, "Cantonese attack each other, which is a common occurrence, and it is not worth the trouble to go to Han Dynasty for help.

古文：中大夫严助诘蚡，言当救。天子遣助发会稽郡兵浮海救之，语具在《助传》。
现代文：中大夫严助反驳田蚣，认为应当救助，汉武帝派严助调发会稽郡的军队从海上救助束瓯，详细情况见《严助传》。
English: Zhongdafu Yan Jiao refuted Tian Jiao and believed that it should be rescued. Emperor Hanwu sent Yan Jiao to dispatch the troops of Jian County to rescue Sok Jiao from the sea. For details, see "Yan Jiao Biography."

古文：汉兵未至，闽粤引兵去。
现代文：汉朝军队还没到达束瓯，闽粤已经撤兵。
English: The Han Dynasty troops had not yet arrived in Sokcho, and the troops from Shandong and Guangdong had already withdrawn.

古文：东粤请举国徙中国，乃悉与众处江、淮之间。
现代文：束瓯请求举国迁往内地，得到允许，于是束瓯尽迁其众，住在江淮之间。
English: Sokcho requested the whole country to move to the mainland, and was granted permission, so Sokcho moved all his people and lived between the Yangtze and the Huai.

古文：六年，闽粤击南粤，南粤守天子约，不敢擅发兵，而以闻。
现代文：建元六年，闽粤进攻南粤，南粤遵守天子的约束，不敢擅自发兵，而把情况上报给汉朝廷。
English: In the sixth year of Jianyuan, Shandong Province attacked Southern Guangdong Province. Southern Guangdong Province abided by the constraints of Heaven and did not dare to send troops without authorization, but reported the situation to the Han Dynasty.

古文：上遣大行王恢出豫章，大司农韩安国出会稽，皆为将军。
现代文：武帝派大行王恢从豫章出发，大司农韩安国从会稽出发，二人都担任将军。
English: Emperor Wu sent Da Xing Wang Wei to start from Yuzhang, and the chief farmer Han An Guo to start from Hui Fei, both of whom served as generals.

古文：兵未逾领，闽粤王郢发兵距险。
现代文：汉朝军队还没越山岭，闽粤王郢已发兵占据了险要之处进行抵御。
English: The Han Dynasty's army had not yet crossed the mountains, but the Yue and Yue kings had already sent troops to occupy the critical places to resist.

古文：其弟馀善与宗族谋曰： 王以擅发兵，不请，故天子兵来诛。
现代文：郢的弟弟余善与宗族商量说： 闽粤王郢因为擅自发兵，不请示天子，所以天子派兵来诛伐。
English: Yao's younger brother, Yu Shan, consulted with the clan and said, "Since Yao Guang Wang Yao sent troops without permission, he did not ask the Heavenly Son, so the Heavenly Son sent troops to fight.

古文：汉兵众强，即幸胜之，后来益多，灭国乃止。
现代文：汉朝军队人多势众，即使我们侥幸取胜，后面来的会更多，直到把闽粤国消灭才会停止。
English: The Han Dynasty's army is overwhelming. Even if we win by chance, there will be more to come later, and it will not stop until we eliminate Guangdong.

古文：今杀王以谢天子，天子罢兵，固国完。
现代文：现在把王杀死以向天子谢罪，如果天子罢兵，固然保全了闽粤一国。
English: Now kill the king to thank the Son of Heaven for the sin. If the Son of Heaven withdraws from the army, it is certain that the whole of Guangdong will be saved.

古文：不听乃力战，不胜即亡入海。 
现代文：如果天子不允许，我们就全力抗战，失败了就逃到海上。 大家都说： 好！ 
English: If God does not allow it, we will fight back with all our strength, and if we fail, we will flee to the sea. Everyone said: Good!

古文：皆曰： 善。 即鏦杀王，使使奉其头致大行。
现代文：当即用矛把王刺死，派使者把他的头送到大行王恢那裹。
English: He immediately stabbed the king to death with a spear, and sent an envoy to bring his head to King Daizhong for burial.

古文：大行曰： 所为来者，诛王。
现代文：大行说： 我们来的目的，就是诛杀闽粤王。
English: Da Xing said: The purpose of our visit is to fight and kill the king of Guangdong.

古文：王头至，不战而殒，利莫大焉。 
现代文：闽粤王的头已经送来，未经交战就达到了目的，没有比这更有利的了。 
English: The head of the king of Yunnan and Guangdong has already been sent, and the goal has been achieved without a battle. There is nothing more advantageous than this.

古文：乃以便宜案兵告大司农军，而使使奉王头驰报天子。
现代文：于是趁势停止军事行动，并通知大司农韩安国的军队，同时派使者持闽粤王的头颅飞奔禀报汉武帝。
English: Therefore, he took advantage of the situation to stop the military operations, and notified the army of the chief farmer of Hanan, and at the same time sent an envoy to report to Emperor Hanwu with the head of the king of Guangdong.

古文：诏罢两将军兵，曰： 郢等首恶，独无诸孙繇君丑不与谋。 
现代文：武帝下诏书命令两将军罢兵，说： 闽粤王郢首先作恶，惟独无诸的孙子繇君丑没有参与其事。 
English: Emperor Wu issued an edict ordering the two generals to disengage, saying: "The first to commit evil was the King of Guangdong, but his grandson, the King of Wu, did not take part in the matter.

古文：乃使郎中将立丑为粤繇王，奉闽粤祭祀。
现代文：于是派郎中将前往立丑为粤繇王，供奉闽粤祖先的祭祀。
English: As a result, Lieutenant General Pairo went to Lixiu to become the king of the Cantonese, to offer sacrifices to the ancestors of the Cantonese.

古文：馀善以杀郢，威行国中，民多属，窃自立为王，繇王不能制。
现代文：余善因为杀郢而在闽粤国中很有威信，百姓多依附于他，他就暗中自立为王，繇王丑控制不了局势。
English: Yu Shan gained a lot of prestige in Yunnan and Guangdong because of his killing of the dragonfly. Many people depended on him, and he secretly established himself as king. However, the dragonfly king could not control the situation.

古文：上闻之，为馀善不足复兴师，曰： 馀善首诛郢，师得不劳。 
现代文：汉武帝听说此事，觉得不值得因为余善而再度发兵，就说： 余善首先带头杀郢，使军队免于战斗厮杀之劳。 
English: When Emperor Hanwu heard about this, he felt that it was not worth sending troops again because of Yu Shan, so he said: Yu Shan first took the lead in killing the dragonfly, so that the army would be spared the trouble of fighting and killing.

古文：因立馀善为东粤王，与繇王并处。
现代文：于是立余善为束粤王，与繇王丑并立而处。
English: As a result, Yu Sheng was made the king of Guangdong, and he stood side by side with Shao Wang Qiu.

古文：至元鼎五年，南粤反，馀善上书请以卒八千从楼船击吕嘉等。
现代文：到元鼎五年时，南粤反叛汉朝，余善上书天子，请求允许他带领八千士兵随楼船将军杨仆攻打南粤相吕嘉等。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, when Southern Guangdong rebelled against the Han Dynasty, Yu Shan wrote to the emperor, requesting permission to lead eight thousand soldiers to attack Southern Guangdong's Lujia, along with the general Yang Bu.

古文：兵至揭阳，以海风波为解，不行，持两端，阴使南粤。
现代文：束粤军队到达揭阳后，就以海上风浪大为由，停止前进，首鼠两端，持观望态度，暗中派人舆南粤联系。
English: After the Guangdong troops arrived in Jieyang, they stopped advancing on the grounds that there was a big storm at sea. Both sides kept a wait-and-see attitude and secretly sent people to contact the Southern Guangdong.

古文：及汉破番禺，楼船将军仆上书愿请引兵击东粤。
现代文：等到汉朝军队攻破番禺城之后，楼船将军杨仆就上书漠武帝，表示愿意率军讨伐东粤。
English: After the Han Dynasty army broke through Panyu City, the general of the fleet, Yang Bu, sent a letter to Emperor Mo, expressing his willingness to lead the army to fight against Dongyue.

古文：上以士卒劳倦，不许。罢兵，令诸校留屯豫章梅领待命。
现代文：武帝认为士卒很劳累，没有答应杨仆的请求，命令罢兵，留下各营兵马，屯骈：在豫章梅领待命。
English: Emperor Wu thought that the soldiers were very tired, and did not agree to Yang Mudu's request. He ordered to disband the army, leaving the soldiers and horses of each battalion behind.

古文：明年秋，馀善闻楼船请诛之，汉兵留境，且往，乃遂发兵距汉道，号将军驺力等为 吞汉将军 ，入白沙、武林、梅领，杀汉三校尉。
现代文：第二年秋天，余善听说楼船将军杨仆请求讨伐他，汉朝军队就驻扎在边境地区，将要进攻束粤，于是发兵扼守汉朝军队前进的道路，给将军鞠力等加号为 吞漠将军 ，派他们进攻白沙、武林、梅领，杀死汉朝的三个校尉。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Yu Shan heard that the Han Dynasty troops stationed in the border area were about to attack Shuguang, so he sent troops to block the path of the Han Dynasty troops. He gave the generals, including Qi Li, the additional title of "Tongmo General" and sent them to attack Baisha, Wulin, and Meiliang, killing three Han Dynasty lieutenants.

古文：是时，汉使大司农张成、故山州侯齿将屯，不敢击，却就便处，皆坐畏懦诛。
现代文：当时，汉朝所派遣的大司农张成、原山州侯齿就带兵屯驻在那裹，却不敢出兵迎击，反而退却到安全的地方，二人都以怯懦畏敌之罪被处死。
English: At that time, Zhang Cheng, the chief of the farmers dispatched by the Han Dynasty, and Yuan Shanzhou Houzhen, stationed there with soldiers, but they did not dare to attack, but retreated to a safe place. Both of them were executed for the crime of cowardice and fear of the enemy.

古文：馀善刻 武帝 玺自立，诈其民，为妄言。
现代文：余善白刻了有 武帝 字样的玺印，自立为帝，欺骗他的国人，散布狂妄自大的言论。
English: Yu Zhen engraved Emperor Wu's seal and set himself up as emperor, deceiving his people and spreading absurd rumors.

古文：上遣横海将军韩说出句章，浮海从东方往；楼船将军仆出武林，中尉王温舒出梅领，粤侯为戈船、下濑将军出如邪、白沙，元封元年冬、咸入东粤。
现代文：漠武帝派横海将军韩说从句章出兵，渡海从东方进攻；楼船将军杨仆从武林出兵，中尉王温舒从梅领出兵，以归降汉朝后被封侯的粤人严、甲分别为戈船、下濑将军从如邪、白沙出兵。元封元年冬，各路兵马都攻入束粤。
English: Emperor Mengwu sent General Han of the South Sea to attack from the east; General Yang Bu of the East Sea to attack from the west; Lieutenant Wang Wenshu of the North Sea to attack from the west; General Yan of the South Sea to attack from the east; Lieutenant Wang Wenshu of the North Sea to attack from the west; Lieutenant Wang Wenshu of the North Sea to attack from the east; Lieutenant Wang Wenshu of the North Sea to attack from the west; Lieutenant Wang Wenshu of the North Sea to attack from the east; Lieutenant Wang Wenshu of the North Sea to attack from the west; Lieutenant Wang Wenshu of the North Sea to attack from the east;

古文：东粤素发兵距险，使徇北将军守武林，败楼船军数校尉，杀长史。
现代文：束粤原来已发兵扼守险要之地，派徇北将军守卫武林，打败了楼船将军的好几个校尉，杀死一些官吏。
English: Sok Yue had originally sent troops to defend the critical area, sent the general of the north to guard the martial arts, defeated several lieutenants of the general of the ship, and killed some officials.

古文：楼船军卒钱唐榬终古斩徇北将军，为语皃侯。
现代文：楼船将军的士兵钱唐人榱终古斩杀徇北将军，被封为语儿侯。
English: The general's soldier, Qian Tangren, finally killed the general and was awarded the title of "Language Hero."

古文：自兵未往。
现代文：楼船将军自己没有率军前往武林。
English: His own troops did not go to Wulin.

古文：故粤衍侯吴阳前在汉，汉使归谕馀善，不听。
现代文：原粤衍侯吴阳此前在汉朝，汉朝派他回去劝说余善，余善不听。
English: Wu Yang, the former governor of Guangdong, was previously in the Han Dynasty. The Han Dynasty sent him back to persuade Yu Shan, but Yu Shan did not listen.

古文：及横海军至，阳以其邑七百人反，攻粤军于汉阳。
现代文：等到横海将军韩说率军到达束粤时，吴阳便带领他封邑中的七百人反叛余善，进攻在汉阳城的束粤军队。
English: When the troops led by Henghai General Han Said arrived in Sokou, Wu Yang led the seven hundred people in his fiefdom to rebel against Yu Shan and attack the Sokou troops in Hanyang City.

古文：及故粤建成侯敖与繇王居股谋，俱杀馀善，以其众降横海军。
现代文：又有原束粤建成侯敖与繇王居股策划，一起杀了余善，带着他的部众向横海将军投降。
English: There was also a plot by Hou Xuan and Wang Jiu of Yuan Zou Yue to kill Yu Zhen together and surrender to General Henghai with his subordinates.

古文：封居股为东成侯，万户；封敖为开陵侯；封阳为卯石侯，横海将军说为按道侯，横海校尉福为缭嫈侯。
现代文：因而汉朝策封居股为柬成侯，食邑一万户；策封敖为开陵侯；策封吴阳为卯石侯，策封横海将军韩说为按道侯，横海校尉刘福为缭萤侯。
English: Therefore, during the Han Dynasty, Zhefeng Jiuquan was Kam Cheng Hou, and there were ten thousand households in Jiuquan; Zhefeng Jiuquan was Kai Ling Hou; Zhefeng Wu Yang was U Shi Hou; Zhefeng Henghai General Han Said was Bao Dao Hou; and Henghai Lieutenant Liu Fu was Zhe Guang Hou.

古文：福者，城阳王子，故为海常侯，坐法失爵，从军亡功，以宗室故侯。
现代文：刘福是城阳共王刘喜的儿子，原来被封为海常侯，因犯法而被夺爵，他从军也没立什么功，衹因为是皇家宗族成员，所以被封为侯。
English: Liu Fu is the son of Liu Xi, the King of Chengyang. He was originally named the Marquis of Haichang, but was stripped of his title for breaking the law. He did not do much in the military, but because he was a member of the royal family, he was named Marquis.

古文：及东粤将多军，汉兵至，弃军降，封为无锡侯。
现代文：还有东粤将军多军，汉朝军队攻进来的时候弃军投降，被策封为无锡侯。
English: There was also a large army of East Guangdong generals, who abandoned their army and surrendered when the Han Dynasty army invaded, and were crowned as Wuxi lords.

古文：故瓯骆将左黄同斩西于王，封为下鄜侯。
现代文：原瓯骆将军左黄同斩杀西于王，被策封为下鄘侯。
English: Zuo Huang, the former general of Qilu, killed Xi Yu Wang and was crowned as the next warlord.

古文：于是天子曰 东粤狭多阻，闽粤悍，数反复 ，诏军吏皆将其民徙处江、淮之间。
现代文：这时，汉武帝说： 束粤之地狭窄而多险阻，闽粤强悍，反覆无常。 下令军吏尽把粤人迁徙到江淮之间。
English: At this time, Emperor Hanwu said: "The land of the Yangtze and Yangtze is narrow and dangerous, the Yangtze and Yangtze is strong and capricious, and the military officials are ordered to migrate the Yangtze and Yangtze people to the area between the Yangtze and Huai Rivers.

古文：东粤地遂虚。
现代文：束粤之地于是空无人迹。
English: As a result, the land of Sokyo was left empty.

古文：朝鲜王满，燕人。
现代文：朝鲜王满，是燕人。
English: North Korea's Wang Man is a Swallow.

古文：自始燕时，尝略属真番、朝鲜，为置吏筑障。
现代文：当初的担国，就曾攻夺真蚤、翘盘，使之臣服，并在那裹设置官吏，修筑防御堡垒。
English: In the beginning, the country that was in charge of the country conquered the real flea, the warp, and subjugated it, and set up officials there and built defensive fortresses.

古文：秦灭燕，属辽东外徼。
现代文：台灭游迩后，皇瞪则成为辽塞垫的外缘属地。
English: Later, Qin State eliminated Yan State, and Korea became a border country outside Liaodong County.

古文：汉兴，为远难守，复修辽东故塞，至浿水为界，属燕。
现代文：龃建立后，因为皇瞪地远难守，便重修丫辽东郡原有的边塞城堡，东到湏水为界，沮水以西属于汉朝的燕国。
English: After the establishment of Liaoning, because it was difficult to defend the emperor's territory, the original border fortress castle in Liaodong County was rebuilt. The east is bounded by Lishui, and the west of Lishui belongs to the Yan country of the Han Dynasty.

古文：燕王卢绾反，入匈奴，满亡命，聚党千余人，椎结蛮夷服而东走出塞，渡浿水，居秦故空地上下障，稍伇属真番、朝鲜蛮夷及故燕、齐亡在者王之，都王险。
现代文：燕王卢绾背叛汉朝，逃入匈奴，卫满也逃亡，聚集了一千多名部众，梳着椎髻，穿着蛮夷的衣服，向东逃过边塞，渡过泪水，住在原秦朝空虚之地的上下城堡中，逐渐役使、统治真番、朝鲜的蛮夷部落和从原来的燕、齐两国逃亡到那裹的人，在他们当中称王，建都于王险城。
English: Yan King Lu Xun betrayed the Han Dynasty and fled to the Xiongnu, and Wei Man also fled. He gathered more than a thousand followers, combed his hair with a comb, wore barbarian clothes, fled eastward across the border fortress, passed through tears, lived in the castles up and down the empty land of the original Qin Dynasty, gradually served and ruled Zhenfan, the barbarian tribes of North Korea, and the people who fled from the original Yan and Qi countries to that land, among whom he became king, and built the capital in Wangan City.

古文：会孝惠、高后天下初定，辽东太守即约满为外臣，保塞外蛮夷，毋使盗边；蛮夷君长欲入见天子，勿得禁止。
现代文：孝惠帝、高后时，天下刚刚平定，辽东郡太守就约定卫满作为外臣，管理塞外的蛮夷部落，不让他们骚扰边境地区；蛮夷君长有要入朝拜见天子的，不要进行阻挠。
English: When Emperor Xiao Hui and Empress Gao were in high school, the country had just been pacified. The governor of Liaodong County agreed to appoint Wei Man as a foreign minister to manage barbarian tribes outside of Tibet and prevent them from harassing the border areas. If a barbarian prince wanted to enter the imperial court to worship the emperor, he should not be obstructed.

古文：以闻，上许之，以故满得以兵威财物侵降其旁小邑，真番、临屯皆来服属，方数千里。
现代文：太守把这个约定上报给天子，天子表示同意，因此卫满能利用武力和财物去侵占、降服周围的蛮夷小国，真番、临屯都来归服，方圆几千里都受卫满控制。
English: The daimyo reported this agreement to the heavenly son, and the heavenly son agreed, so Wei Man was able to use force and wealth to invade and subjugate the surrounding barbarian small countries. Zhenban and Lintun all came to submit, and several thousand miles were controlled by Wei Man.

古文：传子至孙右渠，所诱汉亡人滋多，又未尝入见；真番旁众国欲上书见天子，又雍阏弗通。
现代文：卫满死后，王位经由儿子而传到孙子卫右渠手中，朝鲜所招诱的汉朝流民益增多，朝鲜王又未曾入朝拜见过天子；真番、辰国的君长要上书参见天子，又受朝鲜的阻挠，不予放行。
English: After the death of Wei Man, the throne passed through his son and into the hands of his grandson Wei Yu Qu, the Han Dynasty flow of people attracted by North Korea increased, and the king of North Korea never entered the imperial court to see the heavenly son; Zhenban, the ruler of the country of Chen, had to submit a letter to see the heavenly son, and was obstructed by North Korea and would not be released.

古文：元封二年，汉使涉何谯谕右渠，终不肯奉诏。
现代文：元封二年，汉朝派涉何责让、晓谕右渠，右渠始终不肯接受天子的诏令。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Han Dynasty sent a delegation to reprimand and inform the Right Canal, but the Right Canal ultimately refused to accept the Han Dynasty's edict.

古文：何去至界，临浿水，使驭刺杀送何者朝鲜裨王长，即渡水，驰入塞，遂归报天子曰 杀朝鲜将 。
现代文：涉何离开朝鲜，走到边界，来到湏水岸边时，命令车夫刺杀护送自己的朝鲜小王长，然后立即渡过滇水，驰车跑入塞内，于是回朝报告汉武帝说 我杀了朝鲜的一位将军 。
English: When he left Korea, walked to the border, and arrived at the shore of Surabaya, he ordered the driver to assassinate the North Korean Xiao Wangchang, who was escorting him, and then immediately crossed Surabaya, drove into Seine, and then returned to the North to report to Emperor Hanwu that I killed a North Korean general.

古文：上为其名美，弗诘，拜何为辽东东部都尉。
现代文：武帝认为涉何有杀敌之美名，不予责难，任命涉何为辽东郡东部都尉。
English: Emperor Wu believed that Wan Ho had a good reputation for killing enemies and would not be reproached, and appointed Wan Ho as the eastern captain of Liaodong County.

古文：朝鲜怨何，发兵袭攻，杀何。
现代文：朝鲜怨恨涉何，发兵袭击，杀死了涉何。
English: North Korea resented what was involved, sent troops to attack, and killed what was involved.

古文：天子募罪人击朝鲜。
现代文：武帝募集在押的罪犯，赦其罪，让他们攻打朝鲜。
English: The emperor of the Han Dynasty ordered the recruitment of pardoned prisoners to attack North Korea.

古文：其秋，遣楼船将军杨仆从齐浮勃海，兵五万，左将军荀彘出辽东，诛右渠。
现代文：造一年秋天，汉朝派楼船将军杨仆带五万士卒，从齐郡治出发，横渡勃海，左将军荀彘从辽东出兵，共同讨伐卫右渠。
English: In the autumn of the same year, the Han Dynasty dispatched the general Yang Mudu with fifty thousand soldiers to cross the Bohai Sea from Qi County, and the left general Zou sent troops from Liaodong to jointly defend the right canal.

古文：右渠发兵距险。左将军卒多率辽东士兵先纵，败散。
现代文：右渠派军队扼险要之地，左将军手下一个叫多的士卒正带领辽东兵打头阵，兵败溃散。
English: The army of the right canal sent troops to the critical place, the left general's subordinate called many soldiers were leading the Liaodong soldiers to take the lead, and the soldiers were defeated and dispersed.

古文：多还走，坐法斩。
现代文：多转身逃跑，被依军法斩首。
English: Many of them turned and ran away, and were beheaded in accordance with military law.

古文：楼船将齐兵七千人先至王险。
现代文：楼船将军率领齐兵七千人先到王险城。
English: General Loufeng led seven thousand soldiers to Wang Riancheng first.

古文：右渠城守，窥知楼船军少，即出击楼船，楼船军败走。
现代文：右渠指挥守城，探知楼船将军兵少，就出城攻打楼船将军的部队，楼船将军的部队大败而逃。
English: The commander of the right canal defended the city, and when he detected that the general's soldiers were few, he went out of the city to attack the general's troops. The general's troops were defeated and fled.

古文：将军仆失其众，遁山中十余日，稍求收散卒，复聚。
现代文：将军杨仆失去了部众，逃到山中，遇了十多天，渐渐寻找、收拢逃散的兵众，重新聚集起来。
English: General Yang Mudu lost his subordinates and fled to the mountains. It took him more than ten days to gradually find and gather the scattered soldiers and regroup.

古文：左将军击朝鲜浿水西军，未能破。
现代文：左将军攻打湏水以西的朝鲜军队，不能取胜。
English: General Zuo attacked the Korean army west of Surabaya, but could not win.

古文：天子为两将未有利，乃使卫山因兵威往谕右渠。
现代文：因为两将军作战不利，汉武帝就派卫山藉着兵威去朝鲜劝右渠投降。
English: Since the two generals failed to achieve a military victory, the Son of Heaven sent Wei Shan to take advantage of their military prowess and go to the right channel.

古文：右渠见使者，顿首谢： 愿降，恐将诈杀臣；今见信节，请服降。 
现代文：右渠见到汉朝使者，叩头谢罪，说： 我愿意归降，恐怕那两位将军用欺骗的手段杀害我；现在看到真正的符节，请允许我归降。 
English: Zuogu saw the Han Dynasty envoy, bowed down and said, "I am willing to surrender. I am afraid that the two generals will kill me by deception. Now that I have seen the true symbols, please allow me to surrender."

古文：遣太子入谢，献马五千匹，及馈军粮。
现代文：派太子入朝谢罪，奉献五千匹马，并向在朝鲜的汉军赠送军粮。
English: Right away, he sent the crown prince to the Han Dynasty to express his gratitude, presented five thousand horses, and gave military rations to the Han troops in Korea.

古文：人众万余持兵，方度浿水，使者及左将军疑其为变，谓太子已服降，宜令人毋持兵，太子亦疑使者左将军诈之，遂不度浿水，复引归。
现代文：朝鲜派一万士兵手持兵器护送太子，正要渡过泪水，使者卫山和左将军荀彘怀疑朝鲜军队要作乱，就说： 太子既然已经归降，就应该命令前来护送的兵众不要携带兵器。 太子也怀疑使者和左将军设诈杀他，便不渡识水，又率兵众返回了。
English: North Korea sent ten thousand soldiers armed with weapons to escort the prince, and just as they were about to shed tears, the envoy, Wei Shan, and General Zuo, suspecting that the North Korean army was about to start a riot, said, "Since the prince has surrendered, he should order the soldiers who came to escort him not to carry weapons."

古文：山报，天子诛山。
现代文：卫山回来向天子汇报，天子杀掉了卫山。
English: Wei Shan returned to report to Tian Zi, and Tian Zi killed Wei Shan.

古文：左将军破浿水上军乃前至城下，围其西北。
现代文：左将军荀彘打败了守卫在狈水的朝鲜军队，向前进军，开到王险城下，包围城的西北面。
English: General Zuo Yao defeated the Korean army guarding Surabaya and drove the advancing army to the northwest of the besieged city of Wanghuan.

古文：楼船亦往会，居城南。
现代文：楼船将军也前往会师，驻扎在城的南面。
English: General Lohuan also went to join the division and stationed troops in the south of the city.

古文：右渠遂坚城守，数月未能下。
现代文：右渠于是坚守城池，一连几个月汉朝军队没能攻克王险城。
English: The right-hand canal then held on to the castle, and for several months the Han Dynasty army was unable to conquer Wang Yuancheng.

古文：左将军素侍中，幸，将燕，代卒，悍，乘胜，军多骄。
现代文：左将军荀彘原来是侍中，得到皇帝的宠幸，他率领的燕、代士兵非常强悍，又刚刚取得滇水之战的胜利，军中许多将士骄傲轻敌。
English: General Zuo Yao was originally a chamberlain, and was favored by the emperor. The Yan and Dai soldiers he led were very strong, and had just won the Battle of Surabaya. Many soldiers in the army were proud and despised the enemy.

古文：楼船将齐卒，入海已多败亡，其先与右渠战，困辱亡卒，卒皆恐，将心惭，其围右渠，常持和节。
现代文：楼船将军杨仆所率领的齐兵，渡海时已有很多人逃亡，他又先与右渠交战，遭到惨败，又损失了不少士卒，兵众恐惧畏敌，将领心中惭愧，因此他围攻右渠，常抱着讲和的目的。
English: When crossing the sea, many people had already fled, and he first fought with the right canal, suffered a crushing defeat, and lost many soldiers. The soldiers were afraid of the enemy, and the general was ashamed. Therefore, he besieged the right canal, always with the aim of making peace.

古文：左将军急击之，朝鲜大臣乃阴间使人私约降楼船，往来言，尚未肯决。
现代文：左将军猛攻王险城，朝鲜大臣就暗中派人私自约定向楼船将军投降，往来传话，还没最后决定。
English: General Zuo tried his best to attack the enemy city. North Korea's minister secretly contacted General Lou Ship about the search plane and discussed North Korea's surrender. The two sides have been in talks, but no decision has been made.

古文：左将军数与楼船期战，楼船欲就其约，不会。
现代文：左将军多次与楼船将军约定攻城的时间，而楼船将军则想尽快实现他与朝鲜大臣约定的事情，因此总是不与左将军会师。
English: General Zuo had repeatedly agreed with General Lousen on the time of the siege of the city, but General Lousen wanted to fulfill his agreement with the North Korean minister as soon as possible, so he always did not join the division with General Zuo.

古文：左将军亦使人求间隙降下朝鲜，不肯，心附楼船。以故两将不相得。
现代文：左将军也派人寻找机会使朝鲜降服，但朝鲜大臣不肯向左将军投降，而愿意归附楼船将军，因此杨、荀两将军不能协调相处。
English: General Zuo also sent someone to look for an opportunity to make North Korea surrender, but the North Korean minister refused to surrender to General Zuo, but was willing to be attached to General Loufeng, so the two generals Yang and Nie could not coordinate with each other.

古文：左将军心意楼船前有失军罪，今与朝鲜和善而又不降，疑其有反计，未敢发。
现代文：左将军怀疑楼船将军先有丢失军队之罪，现在与朝鲜方面交好而朝鲜又不投降，可能有背叛汉朝的阴谋，衹是还没付诸行动。
English: General Zuo suspected that General Loufeng was first guilty of losing troops, and now he was making friends with the North Korean side, but the North Korean side did not surrender, there may be a plot to betray the Han Dynasty, but it has not yet been put into action.

古文：天子曰： 将率不能前，乃使卫山谕降右渠，不能颛决，与左将军相误，卒沮约。
现代文：汉武帝说： 将帅不能破敌进军，我才派卫山前去规劝右渠投降，卫山不能专断，而与左将军一起把事情搞糟，最终破坏了右渠归降之约。
English: Emperor Hanwu said, "Since the commander-in-chief could not defeat the enemy and march into the army, I sent Wei Shan forward to persuade the right canal to surrender. Wei Shan could not arbitrarily, but together with the left general, he made a mess of things and finally broke the treaty of the right canal's surrender."

古文：今两将围城又乖异，以故久不决。 
现代文：现在两位将军围攻王险城，又不能同心协力，因此很长时间还没有把问题解决。 
English: Now two generals are besieging Wang Yuancheng, but they can't work together, so the problem hasn't been solved for a long time.

古文：使故济南太守公孙遂往正之，有便宜得以从事。
现代文：于是派原济南郡太守公孙遂前往纠正两将军之误，可根据情况灵活行事。
English: As a result, he sent the former governor of Jinan County, Gongsun, to correct the mistakes of the two generals, and could act flexibly according to the situation.

古文：遂至，左将军曰： 朝鲜当下久矣，不下者，楼船数期不会。 
现代文：公孙遂到了朝鲜，左将军荀彘说： 朝鲜早就该攻下来了，攻不下来的原因在于楼船将军屡次不按期会师。 
English: When Gongsun finally arrived in North Korea, General Zuo said, "North Korea should have been conquered a long time ago. The reason why it could not be conquered is because General Loufeng repeatedly failed to meet the division according to schedule.

古文：具以素所意告遂曰： 今如此不取，恐为大害，非独楼船，又且与朝鲜共灭吾军。 
现代文：并把自己一直怀疑楼船将军要谋反的想法详细讲给公孙遂听，还说： 现在情况这样严重，不把他抓起来，恐怕会成为大害，楼船将军不衹是要反叛汉朝，他还将与朝鲜联合共同消灭我们的军队。 
English: He also told Gongsun Sui in detail about the idea that he had always suspected that General Loufeng was plotting a rebellion, and said: The situation is so serious now that if we don't arrest him, I'm afraid it will be a great harm. General Loufeng is planning to rebel against the Han Dynasty, and he will also jointly destroy our army with North Korea.

古文：遂亦以为然，而以节召楼船将军入左将军军计事，即令左将军戏下执缚楼船将军，并其军。
现代文：公孙遂也认为是这样，便以 商议军事 为名，用符节把楼船将军请到左将军的营帐中，随即命令左将军的部下把他抓了起来，把他的军队合并到左将军手下。
English: Gongsun also thought so, and in the name of military consultation, he invited General Loufeng to General Zuo's camp, and then ordered General Zuo's subordinates to arrest him and merge his army under General Zuo.

古文：以报，天子诛遂。
现代文：公孙遂将此事上报给汉武帝，武帝杀了公孙遂。
English: Gongsun then reported the matter to Emperor Wu of Han, and Emperor Wu killed Gongsun.

古文：左将军已并两军，即急击朝鲜。
现代文：左将军已并统两军后，立即猛攻朝鲜军队。
English: General Zuo combined the armies of the two sides and tried his best to attack Korea.

古文：朝鲜相路人、相韩陶、尼溪相参、将军王唊相与谋曰： 始欲降楼船，楼船今执，独左将军并将，战益急，恐不能与，王又不肯降。 
现代文：朝鲜相路人、韩陶、尼溪相参、将军王峡互相商量说： 原来我们要向楼船将军投降，现在楼船将军已被抓起来，衹有左将军并统两军，战斗更加激烈，我们恐怕不是他的对手，而我们的王又不肯投降。 
English: The North Korean passers-by, Han Tao, Ni Xi Shangsan, and General Wang Qiao consulted with each other and said: Originally, we were going to surrender to General Loupen. Now, General Loupen has been arrested. With General Zuo and the unification of the two armies, the battle is more intense. I am afraid that we are not his opponent, but our king refused to surrender.

古文：陶、唊、路人皆亡降汉。
现代文：于是韩陶、王映、路人都逃到汉朝军营裹投降。
English: As a result, Han Tao, Wang Ying, and passers-by all fled to the Han Dynasty military camp and surrendered.

古文：路人道死。
现代文：路人死在半路上。
English: A passer-by died on the road.

古文：元封三年夏，尼溪相参乃使人杀朝鲜王右渠来降。
现代文：元封三年夏天，尼溪相参便派人刺杀朝鲜王右渠，来到汉营投降。
English: In the summer of the third year of the Yuan dynasty, Nixi Shangsang sent someone to assassinate the Korean king, Wang You, and came to Han Camp to surrender.

古文：王险城未下，故右渠之大臣成已又反，复攻吏。
现代文：王险城还未攻下，原来右渠的大臣成已又造起反来，并攻打不服从的官吏。
English: Wang Riancheng had not yet been conquered, but Cheng, the minister of the right canal, had already rebelled and attacked the disobedient officials.

古文：左将军使右渠子长、降相路人子最，告谕其民，诛成已。故遂定朝鲜为真番、临屯、乐浪、玄菟四郡。
现代文：左将军萄彘派右渠的儿子卫长、归降汉朝的朝鲜相路人的儿子路最，前去晓谕朝鲜的百姓，杀死了成已，因而终于平定了朝鲜，在那裹设置了真番、临屯、乐浪、玄菟四个郡。
English: General Zuo sent Wei Chang, the son of Zuo Qu, and Lu Shan, the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the

古文：封参为澅清侯，陶为秋苴侯，唊为平州侯，长为几侯。
现代文：汉朝以功策封参为溘清侯，韩陶为秋苴侯，王峡为平州侯，卫长为几侯。
English: In the Han Dynasty, Gongze Fuzhan was the prince of Qin, Han Tao was the prince of Qi, Wangxia was the prince of Pingzhou, and Wei Chang was the prince of Qi.

古文：最以父死颇有功，为沮阳侯。
现代文：路最因为其父路人在降汉途中死，很有功劳，被封为沮阳侯。
English: Lu most of all because his father Lu died on the way to the fall of the Han Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Despyang Hou.

古文：左将军征至，坐争功相嫉乖计，弃市。
现代文：左将军荀彘被召回朝廷，以争功妒能、违反军事计划之罪，被斩首示众。
English: General Zuo Yao was recalled to the imperial court, where he was beheaded for the crime of competing for glory and violating the military plan.

古文：楼船将军亦坐兵至列口当待左将军，擅先纵，失亡多，当诛，赎为庶人。
现代文：楼船将军杨仆也以率军到达列之后应该等待左将军，而他擅自抢先进攻，损失严重之罪，被判死刑，他出钱赎罪，免死而为平民。
English: The general of the houseboat, Yang Pupu, was also supposed to wait for General Zuo after arriving in the ranks with his army, but he was sentenced to death for the crime of taking the lead in the attack without authorization and causing serious losses. He paid money to atone for his sins and was spared death and became a civilian.

古文：赞曰：楚、粤之先，历世有土。
现代文：赞曰：楚、粤的先人，世代都有封土。
English: Zang said: The ancestors of Chu and Guangdong had fiefs for generations.

古文：及周之衰，楚地方五千里，而勾践亦以粤伯。
现代文：到旦塑衰落时，楚国之地方圆五千里，而包贱也以粤国称霸诸侯。
English: At the time of the decline of Shu, the area of Chu was five thousand miles in circumference, and Baotian also dominated the provinces with Guangdong.

古文：秦灭诸侯，唯楚尚有滇王。
现代文：秦吞灭诸侯，惟独楚国还保留着一个这王。
English: Qin swallowed up the lords, but only the state of Chu still retains one of these kings.

古文：汉诛西南夷，独滇复宠。
现代文：汉朝诛伐西南夷，衹有鲷再度得到恩宠。
English: The Han Dynasty subjugated the southwestern barbarians, and Yan Youjun was once again favored.

古文：及东粤灭国迁众，繇王居股等犹为万户侯。
现代文：待到塞粤旦灭亡迁徙，逼延昼盘等仍被封为万户侯。
English: Until the death and migration of the Sai Yue Dan, the forced extension of the daytime disk, etc. were still sealed as million households.

古文：三方之开，皆自好事之臣。
现代文：三方之开拓，都是由好事之臣发起的。
English: The development of the three sides was initiated by the ministers of good deeds.

古文：故西南夷发于唐蒙、司马相如，两粤起严助、朱买臣，朝鲜由涉何。
现代文：所以开拓西南夷始于唐蒙、司马相如的鼓吹，开拓两粤起于严助、朱买臣的倡议，开拓朝鲜由于涉何的引发。
English: Therefore, the development of Southwest Yiwu began with the advocacy of Tang Meng and Sima Xiangru, the development of the two Guangdong provinces began with the initiative of Yan Su and Zhu Mai Sheng, and the development of North Korea was triggered by what was involved.

古文：遭世富盛，动能成功，然已勤矣。
现代文：正值国富兵强之时，所以每次行动都能取得成功，然而也付出了相当大的代价。
English: It was a time when the country was rich and the army was strong, so every operation could be successful, but it also paid a considerable price.

古文：追观太宗填抚尉佗，岂古所谓 招携以礼，怀远以德 者哉！
现代文：回顾太宗汉文帝抚慰赵佗之事，岂不如同古人所说的 以礼招集有二心的人，以德招徕恃险远的人 的圣王之举吗！
English: Looking back on Emperor Taizong of Han and Emperor Wen's soothing and comforting of Zhao Zhen, wouldn't it be better to do as the ancients said, to use courtesy to recruit those with double-mindedness, and to use virtue to lure those who are far away?

