古文：陶安，字主敬，当涂人。
现代文：陶安，字主敬，当涂人。
English: Tao'an, the word of the Lord, should be painted.

古文：少敏悟，博涉经史，尤长于《易》。
现代文：少年时就敏悟，广泛涉猎经史，尤其见长于《易经》。
English: When he was a boy, he was keenly aware of and extensively dabbled in the history of scripture, especially in the I Ching.

古文：元至正初，举江浙乡试，授明道书院山长，避乱家居。
现代文：元至正初年，江浙乡试中举，授予明道书院山长，躲避战乱于家乡。
English: In the first year of the Yuan to Zheng dynasties, Jiangsu and Zhejiang Township held a junior high school entrance examination, and awarded him the title of Mountain Leader of Mingdao Academy. He escaped the war in his hometown.

古文：太祖取太平，安与耆儒李习率父老出迎。
现代文：太祖占领太平，陶安和耆儒李习率父老出城迎接。
English: Taizu occupied Taiping, and Tao An and Zhaoju Li Xi led their father out of the city to meet him.

古文：太祖召与语。
现代文：太祖召他问话。
English: His great-grandfather called him in for questioning.

古文：安进曰： 海内鼎沸，豪杰并争，然其意在子女玉帛，非有拨乱、救民、安天下心。
现代文：陶安进言说： 海内鼎沸，豪杰并争，然而他们的用意在于子女玉帛，没有拨乱反正、救民于水火、安定天下的心意。
English: Tao An said, "The sea is boiling and heroes are competing. However, their intention lies in their children, the Jade Emperor, and they have no intention to stir up trouble, save the people from fire and water, and stabilize the world.

古文：明公渡江，神武不杀，人心悦服，应天顺人。以行吊伐，天下不足平也。 
现代文：明公渡江，神武而不妄杀人，人心悦服，应天顺人，以行吊伐，天下何愁不平定。 
English: Ming Gong waded into the river. He was very brave and did not kill anyone. He was liked by the people. He obeyed the will of the heavens and the will of the people.

古文：太祖问曰： 吾欲取金陵，何如？ 
现代文：太祖问道： 我将攻取金陵，怎么样？ 
English: The great-grandfather asked, "What if I capture Jinling?"

古文：安曰： 金陵，古帝王都。取而有之，抚形胜以临四方，何向不克？ 
现代文：陶安说： 金陵是古帝王之都，攻而取之，抚形胜以临四方，为何不攻打呢？ 
English: Tao An said: Jinling is the capital of the ancient emperors. Why not attack it?

古文：太祖曰： 善。 
现代文：太祖说： 好。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "All right.

古文：留参幕府，授左司员外郎，以习为太平知府。
现代文：把他留在幕府，授予左司员外郎，任命李习为太平知府。
English: He was kept in the shogunate, given to Gairo, the left secretary, and Li Xi was appointed to the Taiping Prefecture.

古文：习字伯羽，年八十余矣，卒于官。
现代文：李习，字伯羽，年已八十有余，死在官位上。
English: Li Xi, nicknamed Bo Yu, was over 80 years old and died in office.

古文：安从克集庆，进郎中。
现代文：陶安从太祖攻克集庆，晋升为郎中。
English: Tao An conquered Jieqing from the great ancestor and was promoted to the middle son.

古文：及聘刘基、宋濂、章溢、叶琛至，太祖问安： 四人者何如？ 
现代文：太祖聘任了刘基、宋濂、章溢、叶琛以后，太祖问陶安： 他们四人怎么样？ 
English: After the great-grandfather had appointed Liu Ji, Song Qi, Zhang Hui and Ye Qian, the great-grandfather asked Tao An: How are the four of them?

古文：对曰： 臣谋略不如基，学问不如濂，治民之才不如溢、琛。 
现代文：回答说 ：我的谋略不如刘基，学问不如宋濂，治民之才不如章溢、叶琛。 
English: He replied: My strategy is not as good as Liu Ji, my knowledge is not as good as Song Xi, and my ability to govern the people is not as good as Zhang Yue and Ye Gang.

古文：太祖多其能让。
现代文：太祖对他的谦让十分赞赏。
English: His great-grandfather was full of praise for his forbearance.

古文：黄州初下，思得重臣镇之，无逾安者，遂命知黄州。
现代文：黄州刚刚平定，考虑任用重臣镇守，没有比陶安更合适的，于是任命他为黄州知州。
English: Huangzhou had just been pacified, and there was no one more suitable than Tao An to be appointed as the chief retainer of the town, so he was appointed as the chief retainer of Huangzhou.

古文：宽租省徭，民以乐业。
现代文：他放宽租子，节省徭役，百姓安居乐业。
English: He relaxed the rent, saved the labor, and the people lived and worked in peace.

古文：坐事谪知桐城，移知饶州。
现代文：后因犯罪被贬至桐城，又移至饶州。
English: Later, he was demoted to Tongcheng for a crime, and then moved to Raozhou.

古文：陈友定兵攻城，安召吏民谕以顺逆，婴城固守。
现代文：陈友定的部队攻城，陶安召集官民以顺逆晓谕，因而城得以固守。
English: Chen Youding's troops besieged the city, and Tao An called on officials and citizens to obey orders, so the city was able to hold out.

古文：援兵至，败去。
现代文：援兵到来，敌人败去。
English: Reinforcements arrive, the enemy is defeated.

古文：诸将欲尽戮民之从寇者，安不可。
现代文：诸将准备杀尽从寇之民，陶安认为不妥，太祖赐诗褒奖赞扬他。
English: The generals were preparing to kill all the people who followed the Mongol invaders. Tao An thought this was not right, and the great-grandfather gave him a poem award to praise him.

古文：太祖赐诗褒美，州民建生祠事之。吴元年，初置翰林院，首召安为学士。
现代文：饶州的百姓建生祠侍奉他。吴元年，开始设置翰林院，首先就召陶安为学士。
English: The people of Raozhou built an ancestral shrine to serve him. In the first year of the Wu Dynasty, the Hanlin Academy was set up, and Tao An was first called to be a bachelor.

古文：时征诸儒议礼，命安为总裁官。
现代文：当时征召诸儒商议礼仪，任命陶安为总裁官。
English: At that time, Confucian scholars were called in to discuss etiquette, and Tao An was appointed president.

古文：寻与李善长、刘基、周祯、滕毅、钱用壬等删定律令。
现代文：不久，和李善长、刘基、周祯、滕毅、钱用壬等人删定律令。
English: Soon, he and Li Shanchang, Liu Qi, Zhou Qi, Teng Yi, Qian Yiren and others issued the order to abolish the law.

古文：洪武元年，命知制诰兼修国史。
现代文：洪武元年，任命为知制诰兼修国史。
English: In the first year of Hongwu's reign, he was appointed as a magistrate and a national historian.

古文：帝尝御东阁，与安及章溢等论前代兴亡本末。
现代文：太祖曾亲临东阁，与陶安、章溢等人讨论前代兴亡始末。
English: The great-grandfather once visited Donggak to discuss the rise and fall of the previous generation with Tao An, Zhang Yiyi and others.

古文：安言丧乱之源，由于骄侈。
现代文：陶安说丧乱的根源是由于骄侈。
English: Tao An said that the root cause of the disaster was due to arrogance.

古文：帝曰： 居高位者易骄，处佚乐者易侈。
现代文：太祖说 ：居高位者容易骄，处佚乐者容易侈。
English: The great-grandfather said: Those who hold high positions are prone to arrogance, and those who play music are prone to extravagance.

古文：骄则善言不入，而过不闻；侈则善道不立，而行不顾。
现代文：骄则对善言听不进，对过错不闻不问。侈则善道不立，而行为毫不顾忌。
English: Arrogance is not listening to good words, not listening to mistakes, and not asking questions. Extravagance is not standing on a good path, but acting without scruples.

古文：如此者，未有不亡。
现代文：如此这般，哪有不灭亡的。
English: Like this, there is nothing that will not perish.

古文：卿言甚当。 
现代文：你说得十分恰当。 
English: You make a very good point.

古文：又论学术。
现代文：又讨论学术。
English: There is also a discussion of academics.

古文：安曰： 道不明，邪说害之也。 
现代文：陶安说： 道不明，是由于邪说干扰。 
English: Tao An said: The way is unclear, due to the interference of heresy.

古文：帝曰： 邪说害道，犹美味之悦口，美色之眩目。
现代文：太祖说 ：邪说干扰正道，就如美味悦口，美色眩目。
English: The great-grandfather said, "When evil sayings interfere with the right path, it is just like delicious food and dazzling beauty.

古文：邪说不去，则正道不兴，天下何从治？ 
现代文：邪说不排除，则正道就难以兴起，天下怎么能大治？ 
English: If you don't eliminate heresies, it will be difficult for the righteous path to emerge. How can the world be governed?

古文：安顿首曰： 陛下所言，可谓深探其本矣。 
现代文：陶安点头说： 陛下所说的，可以说是探讨了事物的根本了。 
English: Tao An nodded and said: What Your Majesty said can be said to have explored the root of things.

古文：安事帝十余岁，视诸儒最旧。
现代文：陶安侍候太祖十多年，在诸儒中和太祖的感情最深。
English: Tao An waited for his grandfather for more than ten years. Among the Confucianists, he had the deepest feelings for his grandfather.

古文：及官侍从，宠愈渥。
现代文：到了担任官吏侍从，越发受到恩宠。
English: When he came to serve as an attendant to officials, he was increasingly favored.

古文：御制门帖子赐之曰： 国朝谋略无双士，翰苑文章第一家。 
现代文：赐给御制门帖子，说： 国朝谋略无双士，翰苑文章第一家。 
English: He gave a post to the Imperial Household Agency, saying: There is no match for the strategy of the country and the dynasty, and Han Yuan is the first to write about it.

古文：时人荣之。
现代文：当时人们认为十分荣耀。
English: At that time, everyone was proud of him.

古文：御史或言安隐过。
现代文：御史中有人说陶安隐瞒了过错。
English: Some historians say that Tao An concealed his wrongdoing.

古文：帝诘曰： 安宁有此，且若何从知？ 
现代文：太祖反问道 ：陶安难道有此事，你从哪里得知的？ 
English: The great-grandfather asked: Did Tao An really know about this? Where did you learn about it?

古文：曰： 闻之道路。 
现代文：回答说： 外面都这样说。 
English: He answered, "That's what everyone says.

古文：帝大怒，立黜之。
现代文：太祖大怒，立即罢黜了他。
English: The great-grandfather was furious and immediately dismissed him.

古文：洪武元年四月，江西行省参政阙，帝以命安，谕之曰： 朕渡江，卿首谒军门，敷陈王道。
现代文：洪武元年四月，江西行省参政空缺，太祖任命了陶安，谕之曰 ：我渡江，你首先谒见于军门，陈述王道。
English: In April of the first year of Hongwu, there was a vacancy in the political participation of Jiangxi Province, and Tao An was appointed by the great-grandfather. The decree said: I crossed the river, you first met at the military gate to present the royal way.

古文：及参幕府，裨益良多。
现代文：到幕府参议，使我受益颇多。
English: I benefited a lot from being a shogunate councilor.

古文：继入翰林，益闻谠论。
现代文：继而入翰林院，越发多地听到你正直的议论。
English: Then I entered the Hanlin Academy and heard more and more of your honest discussions.

古文：江西上游地，抚绥莫如卿。 
现代文：江西上游地，没有比你去镇抚更合适的。 
English: In the upper reaches of Jiangxi Province, there is no better place to visit than Zhenfu.

古文：安辞。帝不许。
现代文：陶安推辞，太祖不许。
English: Tao An refused, but Taizu did not allow it.

古文：至任，政绩益著。
现代文：到任后，政绩卓著。
English: After taking office, his political achievements were outstanding.

古文：其年九月卒于官。
现代文：当年九月死于官位上。
English: He died in office in September of that year.

古文：疾剧，草上时务十二事。
现代文：病情加重时，还草拟了时务十二事上奏。
English: When his condition worsened, he also drafted a 12-item report on current affairs.

古文：帝亲为文以祭，追封姑孰郡公。
现代文：太祖亲自写文祭奠，追封为姑孰郡公。
English: The great-grandfather personally wrote a poem to commemorate the occasion and was posthumously awarded the title of Gushan County Grand Duke.

古文：子晟，洪武中为浙江按察使，以贪贿诛。
现代文：儿子陶晟，洪武中为浙江按察使，因贪污贿赂而被杀。
English: Tao Jun's son, Hong Wuzhong, was the inspector general of Zhejiang Province. He was killed for corruption and bribery.

古文：其兄昱亦坐死。发家属四十余人为军，后死亡且尽。
现代文：他的哥哥陶昱也受牵连而死，发配家属四十余人为军。后差不多都死亡了，有关部门又到陶晟家勾补。
English: His brother Tao Jun was also implicated and died, and more than forty family members were dispatched as soldiers. Later, almost all of them died, and the relevant departments went to Tao Jun's home to make up for it.

古文：所司复至晟家勾补，安继妻陈诣阙诉，帝念安功，除其籍。
现代文：陶安的继妻陈氏上宫廷上诉，太祖念及陶安的功绩，只免除了他的官籍。
English: Tao An's step-wife, Chen, appealed to the court, but the great-grandfather only exempted Tao An from official registration in memory of Tao An's achievements.

古文：初，安之裁定诸礼也，广德钱用壬亦多所论建。
现代文：最初，陶安裁定的诸礼仪中，广德钱用壬也多有建议。
English: At the beginning, among the etiquettes decided by Tao An, there were also many suggestions for the use of money by Guang De.

古文：用壬，字成夫。元南榜进士第一，授翰林编修。
现代文：钱用壬，字成夫，元南榜进士第一，授予翰林编修。
English: Qian Yiren, Zi Chengfu, Yuan Nan Pang Jin Shi first, awarded to Hanlin editing.

古文：出使张士诚，留之，授以官。
现代文：出使张士诚，被留下，授予官职。
English: Zhang Shicheng was sent out, but he stayed behind and was given an official post.

古文：大军下淮、扬，来归。
现代文：大军攻下淮、扬，前来归附。
English: A large army captured Huai and Yang and came to annex it.

古文：累官御史台经历，预定律令。
现代文：累官御史台经历，预定律令。
English: Experiences as a member of the Imperial Historian's Office, prefectural ordinance.

古文：寻与陶安等博议郊庙、社稷诸仪。
现代文：不久与陶安等人博议郊庙、社稷诸仪。
English: Soon he and Tao An and others were discussing suburban temples, shrines and other rituals.

古文：其议释奠、耤田，皆援据经文及汉、魏以来故事以定其制。诏报可，语详《礼志》。
现代文：他们议释奠、謖田，都援引经文及汉、魏以来的典故，以制定其制，诏令报可，详见《礼志》。
English: They discussed the interpretation of the memorial service and the field of prostration, all citing scriptures and allusions from the Han and Wei dynasties to establish their system, and the imperial edict was issued, for details, see the "Li Zhi."

古文：洪武元年分建六部官，拜用壬礼部尚书。
现代文：洪武元年分建六部官，任命用壬为礼部尚书。
English: In the first year of Hongwu's reign, six departments were established, with Ren as the head of the ceremonial department.

古文：凡礼仪、祭祀、宴享、贡举诸政，皆专属礼官。
现代文：凡社仪、祭祀、宴享、贡举诸政，都专门归属礼官。
English: All social rites, rituals, banquets, tributes, and politics belong exclusively to the etiquette officer.

古文：又诏与儒臣议定乘舆以下冠服诸式。
现代文：又诏令与儒臣议定乘舆以下冠服诸式。
English: In addition, the imperial edict and the Confucian scholars agreed to adopt the following forms of crown and service.

古文：时儒生多习古义，而用壬考证尤详确，然其后诸典礼亦多有更定云。
现代文：当时儒生多使用古时的礼仪，而用壬考证尤为详细准确，然后诸典礼多有更定。
English: At that time, Confucianism mostly used the ancient etiquette, and the use of Jinko cards was particularly detailed and accurate, and then the ceremonies were mostly changed.

古文：其年十二月，请告归。
现代文：当年十二月，请求辞官归乡。
English: In December of that year, he asked to return home.

古文：詹同，字同文，初名书，婺源人。
现代文：詹同，字同文，初名叫书，婺源人。
English: Zhan Tong, Zha Tong Wen, originally named Shu, is a descendant of Xuan Yuan.

古文：幼颖异，学士虞集见之曰： 才子也。 
现代文：幼年聪颖，学士虞集见到他说： 是个才子。 
English: At an early age, he was clever, and when he saw him, he said, "He's a genius."

古文：以其弟槃女妻之。
现代文：把他弟弟虞的女儿嫁给了他。
English: married off his brother Yu's daughter to him.

古文：至正中，举茂才异等，除郴州学正。
现代文：至正年间，举荐茂才，任命为郴州学正。
English: During the Zheng He years, he was recommended by Maocai and appointed as the Zheng He of Zhangzhou.

古文：遇乱，家黄州，仕陈友谅为翰林学士承旨。
现代文：正遇战乱，家居黄州，侍奉陈友谅担任翰林学士。
English: During the war, he lived in Huangzhou and served Chen Youzhen as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：太祖下武昌，召为国子博士，赐名同。
现代文：太祖攻下武昌，召他为国子博士，赐名叫同。
English: The great-grandfather conquered Wuchang, called him the son of the country doctor, and gave him the same name.

古文：时功臣子弟教习内府，诸博士治一经，不尽通贯。
现代文：当时功臣子弟在内府教习，诸博士讲授一经，不能完全贯通。
English: At that time, the meritorious scholar's son was teaching in Nefu, and it was impossible for him to fully understand the teachings once they were taught by the doctors.

古文：同学识淹博，讲《易》、《春秋》最善。
现代文：詹同学识渊博，《易》、《春秋》讲得最好。
English: Zhan's classmates are very knowledgeable. "Easy" and "Spring and Autumn" are the best.

古文：应教为文，才思泉涌，一时莫与并。
现代文：应教为文，才思泉涌，一时无人可与他比。
English: He only thought of Quanchuang when he was asked to write, and no one could compare with him at the time.

古文：迁考功郎中，直起居注。
现代文：晋升为考功郎中，负责起居注。
English: He was promoted to a meritorious junior high school student, and was in charge of the living quarters.

古文：会议袷禘礼，同议当，遂用之。
现代文：举行舉礼，詹同建议恰当，于是被采纳。
English: Zhan Tong suggested that it was appropriate to hold a salute, so it was adopted.

古文：洪武元年，与侍御史文原吉、起居注魏观等循行天下，访求贤才。
现代文：洪武元年，与侍御史文原吉、起居注魏观等人巡行天下，访求贤才。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he made a tour of the country with his attendant, Shi Wenyuanji, and his chief adviser, Wei Guan, in search of talents.

古文：还，进翰林直学士，迁侍读学士。
现代文：回来后晋升为翰林直学士，升为侍读学士。
English: After returning, he was promoted to Hanlin direct bachelor and attendant bachelor.

古文：帝御下峻，御史中丞刘基曰： 古者公卿有罪，盘水加剑，诣请室自裁，所以励廉耻，存国体也。 
现代文：太祖亲临下峻，御史中丞刘基说： 古时公卿犯罪，盘水加剑，送往住处让他们自杀，以此来激励廉耻，这叫存国体。 
English: The great-great-grandfather personally came down the stairs, and Liu Ji, the chief historian, said: In ancient times, court nobles committed crimes, mixed water with swords, and sent them to their residences to commit suicide, in order to encourage shamelessness. This is called preserving the national body.

古文：同时侍侧，遂取《戴记》及贾谊疏以进，复剀切言之。
现代文：詹同当时侍奉在太祖身旁，于是拿《戴记》和贾谊疏进献皇上，再次切中要害。
English: At that time, Zhan Tong was serving at the side of the great-grandfather, so he took "Di Ji" and Jia Yi Zuo to present to the emperor, once again getting to the heart of the matter.

古文：帝尝与侍臣言：声色之害甚于鸩毒，创业之君，为子孙所承式，尤不可不谨。
现代文：太祖曾对侍臣说 ：声色之害比鸩毒还厉害，创业之君要为子孙做出榜样，所以尤其不能不谨慎。 
English: The great-grandfather once said to his vassal: the harm of gossip is worse than the poison, the prince of entrepreneurship must set an example for his descendants, so he must be especially cautious.

古文：同因举成汤不迩声色，垂裕后昆以对。
现代文：詹同列举了成汤不近声色，所以垂留风范于后世。
English: Zhan Tong enumerated the characteristics of Cheng Tang, which are not close to the tone color, so the style will remain in the future.

古文：其因事纳忠如此。
现代文：詹同就是如此纳忠言的。
English: That's why Zhan Tong is so loyal.

古文：四年进吏部尚书。
现代文：四年，晋升为吏部尚书。
English: Four years later, he was promoted to the post of secretary.

古文：六年兼学士承旨，与学士乐韶凤定释奠先师乐章。
现代文：六年，兼任学士承旨，与学士乐韶凤制定解释祭奠先师的乐章。
English: In the sixth year, he also served as the bachelor's successor, and worked with the bachelor, Le Yifeng, to formulate a musical composition to explain and pay tribute to the predecessor.

古文：又以渡江以来，征讨平定之迹，礼乐治道之详，虽有纪载，尚未成书，请编《日历》。
现代文：又因为渡江以来，征讨平定之迹，礼乐治道之详，虽有记载，但尚未成书，请求编写《日历》。
English: In addition, since the crossing of the river, the traces of the conquest and pacification, and the details of the etiquette and music have been recorded, but have not yet been written, requesting the preparation of the "Calendar."

古文：帝从之，命同与宋濂为总裁官，吴伯宗等为纂修官。
现代文：太祖同意了，任命詹同和宋濂为总裁官，吴伯宗等人为纂修官。
English: The great-grandfather agreed, and appointed Zhan Tong and Song Xi as president, and Wu Bozong and others as officials.

古文：七年五月书成，自起兵临濠至洪武六年，共一百卷。
现代文：七年五月书写成了，从起兵临濠始，至洪武六年止，共计一百卷。
English: In May of the seventh year, the book was written, from the beginning of the uprising to the sixth year of Hongwu, a total of one hundred volumes.

古文：同等又言：《日历》秘天府，人不得见。请仿唐《贞观政要》，分辑圣政，宣示天下。
现代文：詹同等人又说，《日历》秘藏于天府，不能给人看，请求仿照唐朝《贞观政要》，分辑圣政，宣示天下。
English: Zhan's peers also said that the "Calendar" was hidden in the Heavenly Palace and could not be shown to people, and requested that it be announced to the world, following the example of the Tang Dynasty's "Zhenguan Zhengyao," a compendium of sacred politics.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：太祖同意了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：乃分四十类，凡五卷，名曰《皇明宝训》。
现代文：于是把书分成四十类，五卷，名为《皇明宝训》。
English: Therefore, the book was divided into forty categories, five volumes, and named "Imperial Ming Treasure."

古文：嗣后凡有政迹，史官日记录之，随类增入焉。
现代文：以后凡有政绩，史官记录，按类别增补进此书。
English: In the future, all records of political achievements and historians will be added to this book according to categories.

古文：是年赐敕致仕，语极褒美。
现代文：当年赐敕退休，语言极为褒美。
English: When he retired that year, the language was extremely rewarding.

古文：未行，帝复命与濂议大祀分献礼。
现代文：没有多久，太祖又命他与宋濂议论大祀分献礼。
English: Not long after, the great-grandfather ordered him to discuss the distribution of offerings with Song Tao.

古文：久之，起承旨，卒。
现代文：过了一段时间，他起任承旨。去世。
English: Some time later, he took up the post of successor and passed away.

古文：同从孙希原，为中书舍人，善大书。
现代文：詹同因文章得到太祖赏识，他应制占对，靡勿敏赡。
English: Zhan Tong was appreciated by his great-grandfather for his article. He should be responsible, not sensitive.

古文：宫殿城门题额，往往皆希原笔也。
现代文：太祖曾说文章要明白易懂，要精通要领，表达时务，不要浮躁浅薄。
English: Grandfather once said that articles should be clear and easy to understand, should be proficient in essentials, express current affairs, and should not be impetuous and shallow.

古文：朱升，字允升，休宁人。元末举乡荐，为池州学正，讲授有法。
现代文：詹同的所作所为多按照旨意而为，而操行尤为耿介，所以到老还眷注不衰。朱升，字允升，休宁人。元末举乡荐，担任池州学正，讲授有法。
English: Zhan Tong's actions were mostly in accordance with his will, and his actions were especially Geng Shu, so he still attracted attention. Zhu Sheng, Zha Yun Sheng, was from Xuning. At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, he was recommended by his hometown and served as Chizhou Senior Lecturer, lecturing on the Law.

古文：蕲、黄盗起，弃官隐石门。
现代文：蕲、黄盗起，弃官隐居石门。
English: He and Huang Pi resigned from their posts and went into seclusion at Shimen.

古文：数避兵逋窜，卒未尝一日废学。
现代文：多次逃避兵乱，四处流窜，但没有一天荒废学业。
English: He had to flee the war many times and wandered all over, but he never wasted a day of his studies.

古文：太祖下徽州，以邓愈荐，召问时务。
现代文：太祖攻下徽州，因邓愈推荐，召他询问时务。
English: The great-grandfather conquered Huizhou and, on the recommendation of Deng Yu, summoned him to inquire about current affairs.

古文：对曰： 高筑墙，广积粮，缓称王。 
现代文：他回答说 ：高筑墙，广积粮，缓称王。 
English: He answered, "Build high walls, store up grain, and be slow to become king."

古文：太祖善之。
现代文：太祖颇为赞赏。
English: The great-grandfather thinks he is right.

古文：吴元年，授侍讲学士，知制诰，同修国史。
现代文：吴元年授予侍讲学士、知制诰、同修国史。
English: In the first year of the Wu Dynasty, he was awarded the title of "Bachelor of Attendant Lecturer," "Master of Intellectual Property" and "Master of National History."

古文：以年老，特免朝谒。
现代文：因他年老，特免除朝拜之礼。
English: Because of his old age, he was exempted from the morning worship.

古文：洪武元年进翰林学士，定宗庙时享斋戒之礼。
现代文：洪武元年晋升为翰林学士，制定宗庙时享斋戒之礼仪。
English: In the first year of Hongwu's reign, he was promoted to Hanlin Scholar, and established the etiquette of fasting when visiting the ancestral temple.

古文：寻命与诸儒修《女诫》，采古贤后妃事可法者编上之。
现代文：不久，命他与诸儒编修《女诫》，把古代贤良的后妃可以效法的一些事迹编入此书。
English: Soon, he was ordered to compile the "Feminine Precepts" with other Confucian scholars, compiling into this book some of the deeds that the virtuous empresses of ancient times could emulate.

古文：大封功臣，制词多升撰，时称典核。
现代文：大封功臣，制词大多是朱升撰写，当时称为典核。
English: Zhu Sheng wrote most of the lyrics, which was known as the core of the text at the time.

古文：逾年，请老归，卒年七十二。
现代文：过了一年，请求告老还乡，去世时七十二岁。
English: After a year, he asked to return to his hometown, and died at the age of seventy-two.

古文：升自幼力学，至老不倦。
现代文：朱升从小勤奋学习，到了老年也不厌倦。
English: Zhu Sheng studied diligently from childhood and did not get tired of it in his old age.

古文：尤邃经学。
现代文：尤其精通经学。
English: He is particularly proficient in the study of economics.

古文：所作诸经旁注，辞约义精。
现代文：他所作的诸经旁注，言辞简约，意义精辟。
English: His commentaries on the sutras are concise and pithy.

古文：学者称枫林先生。
现代文：学者称他为枫林先生。
English: Scholars call him Mr. Fenglin.

古文：子同官礼部侍郎，坐事死。
现代文：他的儿子朱同担任礼部侍郎，犯罪而死。
English: His son, Zhu Tong, who served as a etiquette attendant, committed a crime and died.

古文：崔亮，字宗明，藁城人。
现代文：崔亮，字宗明，藁城人。
English: Cui Liang, Zi Zongming, both from Shicheng.

古文：元浙江行省掾。
现代文：元浙江行省掾。
English: Former Zhejiang Province.

古文：明师至旧馆，亮降，授中书省礼曹主事。
现代文：明朝军队到达旧馆，崔亮投降，授予中书省礼曹主事。
English: In the morning, the army arrived at the old hall, Cui Liang surrendered, and was awarded the title of Censer of the People's Republic of China.

古文：迁济南知府。
现代文：晋升为济南知府。
English: It was promoted to Jinan Prefecture.

古文：以母忧归。
现代文：因母亲忧虑而归。
English: He returned home because of his mother's death.

古文：洪武元年冬，礼部尚书钱用壬请告去，起亮代之。
现代文：洪武元年冬，礼部尚书钱用壬请求辞职，起用崔亮取代。
English: In the winter of the first year of Hongwu, Shang Shuxuxian of the Ministry of Ceremonies requested to resign and was replaced by Cui Liang.

古文：初，亮居礼曹时，即位、大祀诸礼皆其所条画，丞相善长上之朝，由是知名。
现代文：最初，崔亮居礼曹时，即位、大祀诸礼都由他条划，丞相李善长将他举荐给朝廷，因此知名。
English: In the beginning, when Choe Ryong was a lay prelate, he organized the enthronement ceremony, the grand ritual and all other ceremonies. The prime minister, Ri Son Chung, recommended him to the imperial court, which is how he became famous.

古文：及为尚书，一切礼制用壬先所议行者，亮皆援引故实，以定其议。
现代文：到他担任尚书后，钱用壬制订实行的一切礼制，崔亮都授引了典故，以制定其议。
English: After he assumed the post of Shangshu, Qian used Ren to formulate and implement all the etiquette, and Cui Liang quoted allusions to formulate his suggestions.

古文：考证详确，逾于用壬。
现代文：考证详细准确，超过了用壬。
English: The research is detailed and accurate, surpassing the use of rhymes.

古文：二年，议上仁祖陵曰 英陵 ，复请行祭告礼。
现代文：二年，商议仁祖陵为英陵，又请求行祭告礼。
English: In the second year, it was discussed that the ancestral mausoleum of Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche should become the imperial mausoleum, and it was also requested that a memorial service be held.

古文：太常博士孙吾与以汉、唐未有行者，驳之。
现代文：太常博士孙吾与因汉、唐没有执行此礼，而加以驳斥。
English: Dr. Sun Wu and Dr. Tai Chang refuted this, saying that the Han and Tang dynasties did not perform this ritual.

古文：亮曰： 汉光武加先陵曰 昌 ，宋太祖亦加高祖陵曰 钦 ，曾祖陵曰 康 ，祖陵曰 定 ，考陵曰 安 ，盖创业之君尊其祖考，则亦尊崇其陵。
现代文：崔亮说： 汉光武帝加封先陵名为昌，宋太祖也加封高祖陵名为钦，曾祖陵为康，祖陵名为定，父亲的陵名为安，创业君主都尊崇他们的祖先，也尊崇他们的陵墓。
English: Cui Liang said: Emperor Guangwu of Han Dynasty sealed the tomb of his ancestors with the name of Chang, Emperor Taizu of Song Dynasty sealed the tomb of his ancestors with the name of Qin, the tomb of his ancestors with the name of Kang, the tomb of his ancestors with the name of Ding, and the tomb of his father with the name of An. The founding monarchs all revered their ancestors and also revered their tombs.

古文：既尊其陵，自应祭告，礼固缘人情而起者也。 
现代文：既然尊崇他们的陵墓，则自然应该祭告。礼是因为人情而来的。 
English: Since their mausoleums are revered, it is only natural that they should be venerated.

古文：廷议是亮。
现代文：朝廷议论崔亮是对的。
English: The court is right to criticize Cui Liang.

古文：顷之，亮言： 《礼运》曰 礼行于郊，则百神受职。 
现代文：不久，崔亮说： 《礼运》上说： 礼行于郊，则百神受职。 
English: Soon after, Cui Liang said, "In "Rite of Spring," it is said that if the ceremony is held in the suburbs, then a hundred gods will be appointed.

古文：今宜增天下神祗坛于圜丘之东，方泽之西。 
现代文：现应增设天下神癨坛于圜丘之东，方泽之西。 
English: Now it is time to add the World God's Altar in the east of Mengqiu and the west of Fangze.

古文：又言： 《郊特牲》 器用陶匏 ，《周礼疏》 外祀用瓦 。今祭祀用瓷，与古意合。
现代文：又说： 《郊特牲》上说 器用陶匏 ，《周礼疏》上说 外祀用瓦 ，现祭祀用瓷，与古代的说法相符。
English: He also said: "The Suburbs and Special Offerings" said that pottery was used for utensils, "The Zhou Li Zuo" said that tiles were used for foreign worship, and now porcelain is used for sacrifices, which is consistent with ancient sayings.

古文：而槃盂之属，与古尚异，宜皆易以瓷，惟笾用竹。 
现代文：而盂之属，与古代不同，应更换为瓷器，唯独笾使用竹器。 
English: However, unlike in ancient times, earthenware should be replaced with porcelain, except that bamboo utensils should be used for earthenware.

古文：又请大祀前七日，陪祀官诣中书受誓戒，戒辞如唐礼。
现代文：又请求大祀前七日，陪祭官都到中书受誓戒，戒辞依照唐代礼节。
English: He also requested that on the seventh day before the grand ritual, the officiating officials all go to the Chinese book to take an oath, and the oath should be in accordance with the Tang Dynasty etiquette.

古文：又依《周礼》定五祀及四时荐新、稞礼、圭瓒、郁鬯之制。并言旗纛月朔望致祭，烦而渎，宜止，行于当祭之月。
现代文：又依据《周礼》制定了五祀及四时荐新、裸礼、圭瓒、郁鬯之制，并说旗纛每月朔望致祭，繁琐而轻漫，应只于当祭之月举行。
English: In addition, based on the "Weekly Rituals," the system of five rites and four times recommended new rites, naked rites, good wishes, and tulips was established, and it was said that the flag-raising ceremony every month was complicated and frivolous, and should only be held in the month of the festival.

古文：皆允行。
现代文：都批准执行。
English: All are allowed to go into effect.

古文：帝尝谓亮： 先贤有言： 见其生不忍见其死，闻其声不忍食其肉。 
现代文：太祖曾对崔亮说 ：先贤有这种说法 见其生不忍见其死，闻其声不忍食其肉 。
English: The great-grandfather once said to Cui Lianglu: The sages had this saying: "If you see his life, you cannot bear to see his death; if you hear his voice, you cannot bear to eat his flesh."

古文：今祭祀省牲于神坛甚迩，心殊未安。 
现代文：现祭祀把牲畜放在神坛附近，心里不安。 
English: Now the sacrificial rites place the livestock near the altar, and I feel uneasy.

古文：亮乃奏考古省牲之仪，远神坛二百步。
现代文：亮于是考据省牲之礼，远离神坛二百步。
English: Liang then studied the records of the provincial sacrificial rites and walked two hundred paces away from the shrine.

古文：帝大喜。
现代文：太祖大喜。
English: Emperor Liangwu was overjoyed.

古文：帝虑郊社诸祭，坛而不屋，或骤雨沾服。
现代文：太祖忧虑郊社诸祭，坛没有屋檐遮盖，有时突然下雨会淋湿衣服。
English: The great-grandfather worried about the festivals in the suburbs, the altar was not covered by the eaves, and sometimes a sudden rain would drench his clothes.

古文：亮引宋祥符九年南郊遇雨，于太尉厅望祭，及元《经世大典》坛垣内外建屋避风雨故事，奏之。
现代文：崔亮引用宋祥符九年南郊遇雨，在太尉厅望祭，元《经世大典》上说坛垣内外兴建房屋用以避风雨的典故，上奏。
English: Cui Liang quoted Song Xiangfu's anecdote that in the ninth year of the Southern Suburbs being hit by rain, a memorial service was held in the captain's hall, and that in the original "Great Book of History" it was said that a house was built inside and outside the altar to shelter from the wind and rain.

古文：遂诏：建殿于坛南，遇雨则望祭。
现代文：于是诏令兴建殿于坛南，遇雨则望祭。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered the construction of the hall in the south of the altar, and in the event of rain, the festival was postponed.

古文：而灵星诸祠亦皆因亮言建坛屋焉。
现代文：而灵星诸祠也因崔亮所说而兴建了坛屋。
English: And the spiritual star shrines also built the altar house because of what Cui Liang said.

古文：时仁祖已配南北郊，而郊祀礼成后，复诣太庙恭谢。
现代文：当时仁祖已配祭南北郊，而郊祀礼兴起在后，又到太庙恭谢。
English: At that time, Ninshu had already held festivals in the southern and northern suburbs, and after the rise of the suburban worship ceremony, he went to the Imperial Temple to pay his respects.

古文：亮言宜罢，惟先祭三日，诣太庙以配享告。
现代文：崔亮说应予取消，惟先祭三日，到太庙以配享告。
English: Cui Liang said that it should be canceled, but on the third day of the first day of the festival, he went to the temple to share the announcement.

古文：诏可。
现代文：诏令认可。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：帝以日中有黑子，疑祭天不顺所致，欲增郊坛从祀之神。
现代文：太祖认为太阳中有黑子，怀疑是祭天不顺所导致的，想增郊坛从祀之神。
English: The great-grandfather thought that there was a sunspot in the sun, suspected that it was caused by the unsuitability of the festival, and wanted to increase the number of gods worshiped in the suburb.

古文：亮执奏：汉、唐烦渎，不宜取法。乃止。
现代文：崔亮上奏汉、唐代祀仪繁琐、轻漫，不宜效法，于是停止。
English: Cui Liang began to play the Han Dynasty and Tang Dynasty rituals, which were cumbersome and frivolous, and not suitable for imitation, so he stopped.

古文：帝一日问亮曰： 朕郊祀天地，拜位正中，而百官朝参则班列东西，何也？ 
现代文：太祖有一天问崔亮说： 我郊祀天地，拜位在正中，而百官朝参则班列东西，这是为什么？ 
English: One day, the great-grandfather asked Cui Liang, "Why is it that I worship heaven and earth in the suburbs, and worship in the middle of the country, while officials from all over the country line up to worship in the morning?

古文：亮对曰： 天子祭天，升自午陛，北向，答阳之义也；祭社，升自子陛，南向，答阴之义也。
现代文：崔亮回答说： 天子祭天，升自午陛，面向北，是答阳之义。祭社，升自子陛，面向南，是答阴之义。
English: Cui Liang replied, "The divine son's offering to the heavens, rising from the Emperor Wu, facing north, is the righteousness of answering the yang. The divine son's offering to the gods, rising from the Emperor Wu, facing south, is the righteousness of answering the yin.

古文：若群臣朝参，当避君上之尊，故升降皆由卯陛，朝班分列东西，以避驰道，其义不同。 
现代文：如群臣朝参，就应当回避君上之尊，故升降皆由卯陛，朝班分列东西，以避开驰道，这意义就不同了。 
English: If a group of courtiers were to go to the Imperial Court, they would have to avoid the presence of the Emperor, so it was up to the Emperor to decide whether to go or not, and the courtiers would have to arrange their belongings in order to avoid the parade route. This has a different meaning.

古文：亮仓卒占对，必傅经义，多此类。
现代文：崔亮仓促回答，也引经据典，不厌其烦。
English: Cui Liang hastily answered, and also quoted scriptures, not tired of it.

古文：自郊庙祭祀外，朝贺山呼、百司笺奏、上下冠服、殿上坐墩诸仪及大射军礼，皆亮所酌定。
现代文：自郊庙祭祀外，朝贺山呼、百司笺奏、上下冠服、殿上坐墩诸仪及大射军礼，都由崔亮酌定。
English: In addition to the sacrificial rites of the suburban temples, the morning greeting of the mountains, the music of the hundred priests, the upper and lower crowned robes, the rituals of the palace and the grand military salute were all determined by Cui Liang.

古文：仲质为人厚重笃实，博通经史，文体典确，常当帝意焉。
现代文：唯独大祀帝亲省牲，中祀、小祀之牲当遣官代，皇上命令亲祭者皆亲省。又请求依照唐制，命令郡国奏祥瑞。太祖认为差异关系甚大，命令有关部门用驿站传闻，与崔亮共同商议。
English: However, the emperor ordered that only the emperor's closest relatives should be sent to the capital, while the middle-ranking and lesser-ranked relatives should be sent to the capital. He also requested that the county and province should be ordered to perform Xiangrui according to the Tang system. The great-great-grandfather thought that the difference was too great, and ordered the relevant departments to use the rumor of the station to discuss with Cui Liang.

古文：陶凯，字中立，临海人。
现代文：三年九月死于官位上。陶凯，字中立，临海人。
English: He died in September of the third year in office. Tao Kai, the word neutral, Linhai people.

古文：领至正乡荐，除永丰教谕，不就。
现代文：受至正乡荐，任命为永丰教谕，没有上任。
English: He was recommended by Zhengxiang and appointed by Yongfeng, but did not take up the post.

古文：洪武初，以荐征入，同修《元史》。
现代文：洪武初年，因推荐而被召入宫，参予编修《元史》。
English: In the first year of Hongwu's reign, he was called to the palace on recommendation and participated in the compilation of the Yuan History.

古文：书成，授翰林应奉，教习大本堂，授楚王经。
现代文：书成以后，授予翰林应奉，教习于大本堂，教授楚王经书。
English: After the book was completed, it was awarded to Hanlin Yingbo, who taught in the main hall and taught the King of Chu Sutra.

古文：三年七月与崔亮并为礼部尚书，各有敷奏。
现代文：三年七月与崔亮同为礼部尚书，各有陈奏。
English: In July of the third year, he and Cui Liang were both members of the Ceremonial Department, each with their own role.

古文：军礼及品官坟茔之制，凯议也。
现代文：军礼及品官坟茔之制，都由陶凯制订。
English: The military etiquette and the system of honoring officials with tombs were both established by Tao Kai.

古文：其年，亮卒。凯独任，定科举式。
现代文：当年，崔亮去世，陶凯独任礼部尚书，制定科举模式。
English: That year, Cui Liang passed away, and Tao Kai was solely in charge of the etiquette department to formulate the examination model.

古文：明年会试，以凯充主考官，取吴伯宗等百二十人程文进御，凯序其首简，遂为定例。
现代文：第二年会试，任命陶凯为主考官，把吴伯宗等一百二十人的呈文送给皇上看，并在他们文章前作序，于是成为定例。
English: In the second year of the examination, Tao Kai was appointed as the chief examiner, and sent the submission of 120 people such as Wu Bozong to the emperor for review, and made a preface to their article, so it became a regular case.

古文：帝尝谕凯曰： 事死如事生，朕养已不逮，宜尽追远之道。 
现代文：太祖曾告诉陶凯 ：事奉死者就如事奉生者，我的修养已不能到达此地步，宜尽追怀远之道。 
English: The great-grandfather once told Tao Kai: "Serving the dead is like serving the living. My cultivation can no longer reach this level. It is appropriate to pursue the distant path."

古文：凯以太庙已有常祀，乃请于乾清宫左别建奉先殿，以奉神御。
现代文：陶凯认为太庙已有常祀了，于是请求于乾清宫左，另建奉先殿同以供奉神御。
English: Tao Kai thought that the imperial temple had already been enshrined, so he requested that a separate hall be built on the left of the Qianqing Palace to worship the gods.

古文：明奉先殿之制自此始。
现代文：明代的奉先殿制度从此开始。
English: This was the beginning of the hosendo system in the Ming Dynasty.

古文：五年，凯言： 汉、唐、宋时皆有会要，纪载时政。
现代文：五年，陶凯说： 汉、唐、宋时都有会要，记载时政。
English: In the fifth year, Tao Kai said: Han, Tang and Song dynasties all had meetings to record current affairs.

古文：今起居注虽设，其诸司所领谕旨及奏事簿籍，宜依会要，编类为书，庶可以垂法后世。
现代文：现虽设立了起居注，诸司所领谕旨及奏事簿籍，应依照会要，编类为书，就可以垂法后世。
English: Although there is now a register of the living and working of the members, the books of decrees and reports issued by the leaders should be classified into books in accordance with the will of the association, so that they can be handed down to future generations.

古文：下台省府者，宜各置铜柜藏之，以备稽考，俾无遗阙。 
现代文：下台省府者，适宜设置铜柜收藏，以备查考，使其没有遗漏。 
English: For those who leave the provincial government, it is appropriate to set up a collection of copper cabinets to prepare for inspection, so that there are no omissions.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从了他。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：明年二月，出为湖广参政。
现代文：第二年二月出任湖广参政。
English: In February of the following year, Hukang became involved in politics.

古文：致仕。
现代文：辞官退休。
English: Retired.

古文：八年起为国子祭酒。
现代文：八年担任国子祭酒。
English: It has been serving as the national children's festival sake for eight years.

古文：明年改晋王府左相。
现代文：第二年改任为晋王府左相。
English: The following year, he was reappointed as the Left Minister of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：凯博学，工诗文。
现代文：陶凯博学多才，擅长诗文。
English: Tao Kai is a versatile scholar, good at poetry and prose.

古文：帝尝厌前代乐章多谀辞，或未雅驯，命凯与詹同更撰，甚称旨。
现代文：太祖曾厌恶前代乐章多奉谀之辞，有的未雅驯，命令陶凯和詹同进行修改，他们奉旨而行。
English: The great-grandfather had disliked the previous generation's music, which was full of pompous words, and some were not elegant, and ordered Tao Kai and Zhan Tong to revise it. They did as they were told.

古文：长至侍斋宫，言：宜有篇什以纪庆成。
现代文：长时间在斋宫侍奉，说宜有篇什以纪庆成。
English: Having served at the temple for a long time, he said that it would be appropriate to have an article to celebrate his achievements.

古文：遂命凯首唱，诸臣俱和，而宋濂为之序。
现代文：于是命令陶凯首唱，诸臣俱和，宋濂写序言。
English: So he ordered Tao Kai to sing the first song, all his subjects to join in, and Song Tao to write the preamble.

古文：其后扈行陪祀，有所献，帝辄称善。
现代文：后扈行陪祀，有所献，常常得到太祖称赞。
English: After the funeral, he accompanied the worship and made offerings, which was often praised by the great-grandfather.

古文：一时诏令、封册、歌颂、碑志多出其手云。
现代文：一时间，诏令、封册、歌颂、碑志多出于其手。
English: For a while, imperial edicts, enclosures, hymns, and epitaphs were mostly written by his hand.

古文：凯尝自号 耐久道人 。
现代文：陶凯曾自称为耐久道人。
English: Tao Kai once described himself as a man of endurance.

古文：帝闻而恶之。
现代文：太祖听说后十分厌恶。
English: The great-grandfather was disgusted when he heard about it.

古文：坐在礼部时朝使往高丽主客曹误用符验，论死。
现代文：在礼部时，朝使前往高丽，因主客曹误用验符而定罪，被处以死刑。
English: During the ceremonial part, the imperial envoy to Korea was sentenced to death after being convicted of misusing a verification mark.

古文：曾鲁，字得之，新淦人。
现代文：曾鲁，字得之，新淦人。
English: Zeng Lu, also known as Dezhi, was a native of Xinjiang.

古文：年七岁，能暗诵《五经》，一字不遗。
现代文：年仅七岁时，就能默诵《五经》，一字不漏。
English: When he was only seven years old, he could recite the Five Classics word for word.

古文：稍长，博通古今。
现代文：稍稍长大后，博古通今。
English: After growing up a little, Bogut is now a star.

古文：凡数千年国体、人才，制度沿革，无不能言者。
现代文：大凡数千年国体人才，制度沿革，他没有不知道的。
English: Thousands of years of national sports talent, system history, he did not know.

古文：以文学闻于时。
现代文：以文学才华闻名于当时。
English: He was famous for his literary talent at the time.

古文：元至正中，鲁帅里中豪，集少壮保乡曲。
现代文：元至正年间，曾鲁率领里中豪杰，聚集少壮保卫乡里。
English: During the Yuan to Zheng years, Zeng Lu led the local heroes and gathered the young and strong to defend the township.

古文：数具牛酒，为开陈顺逆。
现代文：准备牛和酒，开陈顺逆。
English: Prepare the beef and wine, and start the Chen Shun Zhe.

古文：众皆遵约束，无敢为非义者。
现代文：众人都遵守约束，没人做不道义的事。
English: Everyone abided by the rules, and no one did anything immoral.

古文：人号其里曰 君子乡 。
现代文：人们称他居住的乡里为君子乡。
English: People call the township where he lives "Junzi Township."

古文：洪武初，修《元史》，召鲁为总裁官。
现代文：洪武初年，编修《元史》，征召曾鲁为总裁官。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he edited "Yuan Shi" and recruited Zeng Lu as the president.

古文：史成，赐金帛，以鲁居首。
现代文：史书完成后，赐给金银玉帛，曾鲁居于首位。
English: After the completion of the history book, Zeng Lu was given the gold, silver and jade scepter, ranking first.

古文：乞还山，会编类礼书，复留之。
现代文：请求还山，又遇上编修礼书，再一次被留用。
English: The request was turned down, and the editor of the correction letter was encountered, and it was retained once again.

古文：时议礼者蜂起。
现代文：当时议礼者蜂拥而起。
English: That's when the hecklers swarmed in.

古文：鲁众中扬言曰： 某礼宜据某说则是，从某说则非。 
现代文：曾鲁对众人说 ：某礼应根据某说则是对的，而随从某说就不对。 
English: Zeng Lu said to the crowd: It is right that a certain ritual should be based on a certain saying, but it is not right to follow a certain saying.

古文：有辨诘者，必历举传记以告。
现代文：如有辩论反驳的，他就一定要列举传记与对方讲明。
English: If there is a debate to refute, he must list biographies and clarify with the other party.

古文：寻授礼部主事。
现代文：不久，授予礼部主事。
English: Soon, he was given the position of the head of the ceremonial department.

古文：开平王常遇春薨，高丽遣使来祭。
现代文：开平王常遇春去世，高丽派使者前来祭奠。
English: When King Kaiping died in the spring, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：鲁索其文视之，外袭金龙黄帕，文不署洪武年号。
现代文：曾鲁要来祭文阅看，外面包着金龙黄帕，祭文不署洪武年号。
English: Zeng Lu wanted to come to read the sacrificial text. He was wrapped in a golden dragon yellow scarf, and the sacrificial text did not include the Hongwu year name.

古文：鲁让曰： 龙帕误耳，纳贡称藩而不奉正朔，于义何居？ 
现代文：曾鲁责备道 ：用龙帕是错误的，纳贡称藩而又不尊奉正朔，于义何居？ 
English: Zeng Lu reprimanded: It is wrong to use the long pa, the tribute is called the domain and does not respect the honor of Zheng Shuo, where does the righteousness come from?

古文：使者谢过，即令易去。
现代文：使者谢过，即命令更换。
English: The messenger thanked him and ordered a replacement.

古文：安南陈叔明篡立，惧讨，遣使入贡以觇朝廷意。
现代文：安南陈叔明篡位，害怕明廷派兵征讨，就派使者纳贡来探听朝廷的意向。
English: Annan Chen Shuming usurped the throne and, fearing that the Ming court would send soldiers to collect tribute, sent an envoy to inquire about the intentions of the imperial court.

古文：主客曹已受其表，鲁取副封视之，白尚书诘使者曰： 前王日熞，今何骤更名？ 
现代文：主客曹已接受了其表，曾鲁拿来副封看了一下，陈述于尚书，诘问使者说： 前王日火坚，现为何突然更名了呢？ 
English: The main guest Cao had already accepted his watch. Zeng Lun took a look at the second seal, read the statement in Shangshu, and asked the messenger: "The former King was fiery, why did he suddenly change his name?"

古文：使者不敢讳，具言其实。
现代文：使者不敢隐瞒，从实说来。
English: The messenger dared not conceal the fact.

古文：帝曰： 岛夷乃狡犭会如此耶！ 
现代文：太祖说 ：岛夷就是如此狡狯啊！ 
English: The great-grandfather said, "Shima Ishi is just so cunning!"

古文：却其贡。
现代文：推却了贡品。
English: He turned down the tribute.

古文：由是器重鲁。
现代文：于是更加器重曾鲁。
English: As a result, Zeng Lu became even more important.

古文：五年二月，帝问丞相： 鲁何官？
现代文：五年二月，太祖问丞相： 曾鲁担任什么官职？ 
English: In February of the fifth year, the great ancestor asked the prime minister: What official position did Zeng Lu hold?

古文：对曰： 主事耳。 
现代文：回答说 ：主事。 
English: He replied: "Let's get on with it."

古文：即日超六阶，拜中顺大夫、礼部侍郎。
现代文：即日破格提升六个官阶，任命为中顺大夫、礼部侍郎。
English: On the same day, he was promoted to an unprecedented six ranks, and was appointed as Dr. Naka Shun and Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：鲁以 顺 字犯其父讳，辞，就朝请下阶。
现代文：曾鲁因顺字犯了他父亲的讳而推辞，到朝廷请求降低官阶。
English: Zeng Lu refused to resign because he broke his father's vow, and went to the imperial court to request a reduction in his official rank.

古文：吏部持典制，不之许。
现代文：吏部持典制，不允许。
English: It is not allowed to leave the office.

古文：戍将捕获倭人，帝命归之。
现代文：戍将捕获倭人，太祖命令遣送。
English: will capture the Japanese, the great-grandfather ordered to be deported.

古文：儒臣草诏，上阅鲁稿大悦，曰： 顷陶凯文已起人意，鲁复如此，文运其昌乎！ 
现代文：儒臣草拟诏书，太祖看到曾鲁的诏书十分高兴地说 ：不久前陶凯的文章已符合我的心意了，曾鲁又如此，文运将昌盛了！ 
English: Confucian scholars drafted the edict, and when the great-grandfather saw Zeng Lu's edict, he was very happy to say: Not long ago, Tao Kai's article was in line with my heart, and so was Zeng Lu, the literary movement will flourish!

古文：未几，命主京畿乡试。
现代文：不久，命他主持京畿乡试。
English: Soon, he was ordered to preside over the Gyeonggi Rural Trial.

古文：甘露降钟山，群臣以诗赋献，帝独褒鲁。
现代文：甘露降临钟山，群臣用诗赋敬献，太祖唯独褒奖曾鲁。
English: When the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar

古文：守令造门不得见。
现代文：当年十二月因病回乡，中途去世。
English: In December of that year, he returned to his hometown due to illness and passed away.

古文：久之，卒。
现代文：淳安徐尊生曾说 ：南京有博学之士二人，以笔为舌者是宋景濂，以舌为笔的是曾得之。 
English: After a long time, Wang Yao died of illness.

古文：衡事别载。任昂，字伯颙，河阴人。
现代文：曾鲁写文章不留底稿，他的学生有时有所辑录，但也没有编辑成书。任昂，字伯，河阴人。
English: Zeng Lu wrote articles without leaving a draft, and his students sometimes compiled, but did not edit into a book. Ren Ang, Zhe Bo, He Yin Ren.

古文：元末举进士，除知宁晋县，不赴。
现代文：元末中进士，任命为宁晋知县，没有到任。
English: At the end of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed to Ningjin County, but did not take up the post.

古文：洪武初，荐起为襄垣训导，擢御史。
现代文：洪武初年，举荐为襄垣训导，担任御史。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he was recommended as a Xiangyuan instructor and served as an imperial historian.

古文：十五年拜礼部尚书。
现代文：十五年任命为礼部尚书。
English: Fifteen years later, he was appointed to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：帝加意太学，罢祭酒李敬、吴颙，命昂增定监规八条。
现代文：太祖注重太学，罢免了祭酒李敬、吴，命令任昂增定监规八条。
English: The great-grandfather paid attention to learning, dismissed the sacrificial wine Li Jing and Wu, and ordered Ren Ang to increase the number of regulations to eight.

古文：遂以曹国公李文忠、大学士宋讷兼领国子监事。
现代文：于是，任命曹国公李文忠、大学士宋讷兼领国子监事。
English: As a result, Li Wenzhong, Cao Guogong, and Song Ne, a university scholar, were appointed as supervisors.

古文：会司谏关贤上言： 迩来郡邑所司非人，师道不立，岁选士多缺；甚至俊秀生员，点充承差，乖朝廷育贤意。 
现代文：会司谏关贤上言 ：近来郡邑所司非人，师道没有建立，每年选拔的文士大多缺乏，甚至连俊秀生员，也点充承差，违背了朝廷育贤的本意。 
English: The president of the association, Guan Guanxian, said in his speech, "Recently, the president of the county seat is not a person, the teacher's path has not been established, most of the scribes selected each year are lacking, and even the talented students are not enough, which violates the intention of the imperial court to educate the virtuous."

古文：昂乃奏定天下：岁贡士从翰林院考试，以为殿最。
现代文：任昂上奏决定了天下岁贡士从翰林院考试，作为殿最。
English: Ren Angu's ascension to the post determined that the world's most senior gongshi would pass the examination of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：明年，命科举与荐举并行。
现代文：第二年，命科举和荐举并行。
English: In the second year, the life science examination and recommendation examination will be held concurrently.

古文：昂条上科场成式，视前加详，取士制始定。
现代文：任昂制定了科场程式，比以前更加详细，取士制度从此制定。
English: Renang formulated the science field program, more detailed than before, and the tax collection system has been formulated since then.

古文：广东都指挥狄崇、王臻以妾为继室，乞封。
现代文：广东都指挥狄崇、王臻以妾为继室，请求册封。
English: Di Chong and Wang Zhen, both commanders of Guangdong, took their concubines as their second wives and requested to be canonized.

古文：下廷议，昂持不可，从之。
现代文：朝廷商议此事，任昂认为不可。得到赞同。
English: The Imperial Court deliberated on this matter, and Ren Ang thought it was impossible. It was approved.

古文：遂命昂及翰林院定嫡妾封赠例，因诏偕吏部定文官封赠例十一，荫叙例五，颁示中外。
现代文：于是命任昂及翰林院制定嫡妾封赠的惯例，依照诏令偕同吏部制定文官封赠惯例十一个，荫叙惯例五个，颁布于中外。
English: Therefore, he ordered the court to establish the practice of bestowing concubines and concubines, and in accordance with the imperial edict, he and the Ministry of Civil Affairs established the eleventh and fifth practices of bestowing civil servants and imperial concubines, and promulgated them in China and abroad.

古文：寻请更定冕服之制。及朝参坐次。
现代文：不久请求更改制定冕服之制，以及朝参坐次。
English: It was not long before requests were made for changes to be made to the system of coronation robes, as well as the seating order.

古文：又奏毁天下淫祠，正祀典称号： 蜀祀秦守李冰，附以汉守文翁、宋守张咏；密县祀太傅卓茂；钧州祀丞相黄霸；彭泽祀丞相狄仁杰，皆遗爱在民。
现代文：又奏请摧毁天下淫祠，正祀命名典雅的名号。上奏说 ：蜀人祭祀秦太守李冰，附以汉守文翁、宋守张咏，密县祭祀太傅卓茂，钧州祭祀丞相黄霸，彭泽祭祀丞相狄仁杰，都遗爱在民间。
English: The first sonata said, "The people of Shu worship the Qin Emperor Li Bing, followed by the Han Emperor Wen Weng, the Song Emperor Zhang Ye, the people of My County worship the Emperor Zhuo Mao, the people of Zhangzhou worship the Emperor Huang Ba, and the people of Pengze worship the Emperor Di Ren Jie. All of these are loved by the people."

古文：李龙迁祀于隆州，谢夷甫祀于福州，皆为民捍患。
现代文：李龙迁祭祀于隆州，谢夷甫祭祀于福州，都因为他们为民抵御外患。
English: Li Longqin was enshrined in Longzhou, and Xie Yifu was enshrined in Fuzhou, all because they fought for the people against foreign invaders.

古文：吴丞相陆逊以劳定国，宜祀于吴，以子抗、从子凯配。
现代文：吴丞相陆逊以战功定国，应祭祀于吴，儿子陆抗、从子陆凯也一并配祭。
English: Lu Xun, the prime minister of the State of Wu, whose military exploits helped to establish the state, should be enshrined in Wu. His son, Lu An, and his son-in-law, Lu Kai, should also be enshrined together.

古文：元总管李黼立祀江州，元帅余阙立庙安庆，皆以死勤事。
现代文：元总管李黼立祀于江州，元帅余阙立庙于安庆，都因死勤事。
English: The former general manager Li Yili was enshrined in Jiangzhou, and the marshal Yu Yili was enshrined in Anqing, both of them died in service.

古文：从阙守皖，全家殉义者，有万户李宗可，宜配享阙庙。 
现代文：跟从余阙镇守皖，全家殉义者，有万户李宗可，应配享余阙的庙。 
English: There are tens of thousands of Li Zongke families who have followed Yuqi Town to guard Yuqi, and whose entire families have been martyred. They should be entitled to enjoy Yuqi's temple.

古文：皆报可。
现代文：这些奏请都得到批准。
English: All replied in the affirmative.

古文：明年命以乡饮酒礼颁天下，复令制大成乐器，分颁学宫。
现代文：第二年命令制定乡饮酒令，并颁行天下，又令制定大成乐器，分别颁行于学宫。
English: In the second year, the order was issued to formulate the township drinking order, which was issued to the whole country, and the order to formulate the Dacheng musical instrument, which was issued to the school palace.

古文：是时，以八事考课外吏，及次第云南功赏，事不隶礼部，帝皆令昂主其议。
现代文：当时，以八事考核外吏，并排列平定云南之功行赏，事情不归属礼部的，太祖都令任昂主持其议。
English: At that time, foreign officials were evaluated on the basis of eight things, and they were ranked in order to reward the achievements of Yunnan. The things did not belong to the ceremonial department, and the great-grandfather ordered Renang to preside over the discussion.

古文：寻予告归。
现代文：不久，请求还乡。
English: Soon, the request to return home came.

古文：李原名，字资善，安州人。
现代文：李原名，字资善，安州人。
English: Li's original name, the character资善, is from Anzhou.

古文：洪武十五年，以通经儒士举为御史。
现代文：洪武十五年，以通经儒士身份举荐为御史。
English: In the fifteenth year of Hongwu's reign, he was recommended by the emperor as a Confucian scholar.

古文：二十年使平缅归，言： 思伦发怀诈窥伺，宜严边备。
现代文：二十年出使平缅归，说： 思伦发狡诈，窥伺我国，应加强边防。
English: Twenty years later, the envoy Ping Ming returned, saying: Siren is cunning, spying on our country, we should strengthen border defense.

古文：靖江王以大理印行令旨，非法，为远人所轻。 
现代文：靖江王用大理印行令旨，这是非法的，被远人所轻视。 
English: The king of the Jingjiang River used Dali printing to issue orders, which was illegal and despised by outsiders.

古文：称旨，擢礼部尚书。
现代文：受命担任礼部尚书。
English: He was assigned to be the head of the etiquette department.

古文：安南岁贡方物，帝念其劳民，原名以帝意谕之，令三年一贡，自是为定制。
现代文：安南每年进贡方物，太祖念此有所劳民，李原名把太祖的意思转达他们，命令三年进贡一次，从此成为定制。
English: Annan paid tribute every year. Li Yuanmen conveyed the meaning of the great-grandfather to them and ordered that the tribute be paid once every three years. Since then, it has become a custom.

古文：又以帝命行养老之政，申明府州县岁贡多寡之数，定官民巾服之式，皆著为令。
现代文：又因太祖施行养老之政，申明府州县每年进贡多少的数量，制定官民巾服之式样，都写入诏令中。
English: In addition, because the great-grandfather implemented the old-age pension policy, the amount of annual tribute in prefectures and counties was affirmed, and the style of official and private towel clothing was formulated, all of which were written into the edict.

古文：初，以答禄与权言，建历代帝王庙。至是原名请以风后、力牧等三十六人侑享。
现代文：最初，因答禄与权陈上言，建立了历代帝王庙，至此，李原名请求以风后、力牧等三十六人侑享。
English: At first, the temple of the emperors of all ages was established due to the request of Luo and Quan Chen. At this point, Li Yuanmei requested thirty-six people such as Feng Hou and Li Mu to enjoy it.

古文：帝去赵普、安章、阿术而增陈平、冯异、潘美、木华黎，余悉如原名奏。
现代文：太祖撤消了赵普、安童、阿述，增加了陈平、冯异、潘美、木华黎，其余的就全部采纳了李原名的奏请。
English: The great-grandfather revoked Zhao Pu, Andong, and Assur, and added Chen Ping, Feng Ying, Pan Mei, and Mu Huali. The rest all adopted Li's original name.

古文：鲁王薨，定丧服之制。
现代文：鲁王去世，制定丧服之制。
English: After the death of King Lu, a mourning dress code was established.

古文：进士王希曾请丧出母，原名谓非礼，宜禁。
现代文：进士王希曾请求丧礼规格高于他母亲，李原名说这是非礼，应禁止。
English: Wang Xi had requested a higher standard of funeral than his mother's, which Li Yuanmena said was improper and should be banned.

古文：凡郊祀、宗庙、社稷、岳渎诸制，先后儒臣论定，时有详略，帝悉令原名更正之。
现代文：凡郊祀、宗庙、社稷、岳渎诸制，先由儒臣论定，时有详略，太祖命李原名全部予以更正。
English: In all the systems of suburb worship, ancestral temple, shrine, and yakuza, it was first decided by the Confucian scholars, sometimes in detail, and the original name of Li was corrected by the great-grandfather's order.

古文：诸礼臣惟原名在任久。
现代文：诸礼臣唯独李原名在任最久。
English: Of all the courtiers, only Li Yuanming remained in office the longest.

古文：二十三年以老致仕。
现代文：二十三年，因年老辞去官职。
English: He retired from the civil service in 1993 due to old age.

古文：乐韶凤，字舜仪，全椒人。
现代文：乐韶凤，字舜仪，全椒人。
English: Le Yao Feng, Zi Yao Yi, Quanzhangren.

古文：博学能文章。
现代文：博学擅长文章。
English: Erudite is good at writing.

古文：谒太祖于和阳，从渡江，参军事。
现代文：于和阳谒见太祖，从太祖渡江，参与军事。
English: Yu Heyangjun met the great-grandfather, from the great-grandfather to cross the river, to participate in the military.

古文：洪武三年，授起居注，数迁。
现代文：洪武三年，授予起居注，多次得以晋升。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, he was awarded the living note and was promoted many times.

古文：六年拜兵部尚书，与中书省、御史台、都督府定教练军士法。
现代文：六年任命为兵部尚书，与中书省、御史台、都督府制定教练军士的法则。
English: Six years later, he was appointed as a military instructor, and together with the Chinese Ministry of Education, the Imperial History Museum, and the prefectural government, he worked out the rules for training military officers.

古文：改侍讲学士，与承旨詹同正释奠先师乐章，编集《大明日历》。
现代文：改任侍讲学士。与承旨詹同修正解释祭奠先师的乐章，编集成《大明日历》。
English: He was reappointed as an assistant lecturer. Together with Zhengzhi Zhan, he revised and interpreted the music of the previous teacher and compiled it into the "Daxue Calendar."

古文：七年，帝以祭礼驾还，应用乐舞前导，命韶凤等撰词。因撰《神降祥》、《神贶惠》、《酣酒》、《色荒》、《禽荒》诸曲以进，凡三十九章，曰《回銮乐歌》，皆寓规谏。
现代文：七年太祖因祭祀驾还，应用乐舞开道，命韶凤等人撰写乐词，因此撰写了《神降祥》、《神贶惠》、《酣酒》、《色荒》、《禽荒》等曲目进献，大凡三十九章，名为《回銮乐歌》，皆寓规谏。
English: In the seventh year of Taizu's reign, as a result of the sacrifice, he used music and dance to open the way, and ordered Feng Feng and others to write music lyrics. As a result, he wrote "God's Descent," "God's Favor," "Drinking Wine," "Color Famine," "Poultry Famine" and other pieces of music. There are thirty-nine chapters, called "Return Song," all of which are imitative.

古文：礼部具《乐舞图》以上，命太常肄习之。
现代文：礼部在乐歌上绘上《乐舞图》，命太常练习。
English: The etiquette department drew a "music and dance map" on the song, and practiced very often.

古文：明年，帝以旧韵出江左，多失正，命与廷臣参考中原雅音正之。
现代文：第二年，太祖因旧韵出自江左，大多已失真，命他与廷臣参考中原雅意予以修正。
English: In the second year, the great-grandfather, because of the old rhyme from Jiangzuo, most of which had been distorted, ordered him and the courtiers to revise it by referring to the Central Plains elegance.

古文：书成，名《洪武正韵》。
现代文：书写成后，命名为《洪武正韵》。
English: After the book was written, it was named "Hongwu Zhengyi."

古文：又命孝陵寝朔望祭祀及登坛脱舄诸礼议，皆详稽故实。
现代文：又命考据陵寝朔望祭祀及登坛脱舄诸礼仪，都考据得十分详实，也全部被采纳。
English: He also ordered the examination of the records of the mortuary ritual and the rituals of ascending the altar and removing the coffin. The records were very detailed and were all adopted.

古文：寻病免。未几，复起为祭酒。
现代文：不久免职，后又起用为祭酒。
English: He was soon relieved of his duties, but was later reinstated to serve as a sacrificial wine.

古文：奉诏定皇太子与诸王往复书劄礼，考据精详，屡被褒答。
现代文：奉诏制定皇太子与诸王往复书信的礼节，考据得十分精确详细，多次得到褒奖。
English: He issued an edict to establish the etiquette of correspondence between the crown prince and the kings. The examination report was very accurate and detailed, and it was praised many times.

古文：十三年致仕归，以寿终。
现代文：十三年辞官归乡，寿终正寝。
English: Returning to his hometown after 13 years as a bureaucrat, he died in his sleep.

