古文：起旃蒙作噩十一月，尽柔兆阉茂三月，不满一年。
现代文：起旃蒙作噩十一月，尽柔兆阉茂三月，不满一年。
English: November is the beginning of winter, and March is the beginning of spring, less than a year.

古文：庄宗光圣神闵孝皇帝下同光三年十一月，丙申，蜀主至成都，百官及后宫迎于七里亭。
现代文：后唐庄宗同光三年十一月，丙申，前蜀主回到成都，朝廷百官和宫中妃嫔们到七里亭迎接。
English: In November of the third year of the reign of Emperor Zongguang of the Later Tang Dynasty, Bishen, the former Shushi, returned to Chengdu. Hundreds of officials from the imperial court and concubines from the court came to Qili Pavilion to welcome him.

古文：蜀主入妃嫔中作回鹘队入宫。
现代文：前蜀主走到妃嫔的中间效仿回纥人排的队回到宫中。
English: The former emperor walked to the middle of the concubines to follow the queue back to the palace.

古文：丁酉，出见群臣于文明殿，泣下沾襟，君臣相视，竟无一言以救国患。
现代文：丁酉，前蜀主在文明殿会见大臣，泪水沾湿了衣襟，君臣相视，竟没有一个人说一句解救国难的话。
English: Ding Xi, the former Lord of Shu met with the minister in the Hall of Civilization, tears wet his collar, the monarch and the minister looked at each other, but no one said a word to save the country.

古文：戊戌，李绍琛至利州，修桔柏浮梁。
现代文：戊戌，李绍琛到达利州，修好了桔柏的浮桥。
English: In Wuyi, Li Shaoqi arrived in Lishu and repaired the floating bridge of orange and cypress.

古文：昭武节度使林思谔先弃城奔阆州，遣使请降。
现代文：昭武节度使林思谔在此以前己经弃城逃到阆州，现在又派遣使者来请求投降。
English: Zhaowu Jiedu made Lin Shizhen, who had previously abandoned the city and fled to Zhangzhou, send an envoy to request surrender.

古文：甲辰，魏王继岌至剑州，蜀武信节度使兼中书令王宗寿以遂、合、渝、泸、昌五州降。
现代文：甲辰，魏王李继岌到了剑州，前蜀国的武信节度使兼中书令王宗寿率遂、合、渝、泸、昌五州投降。
English: At the time of Jia Chen, the Wei king, Li Ji, arrived in Jianzhou, and the former Shu king, Wuxin, sent an envoy and ordered Wang Zongshou to surrender the five states of Sui, He, Yu, Yan and Chang.

古文：王宗弼至成都，登大玄门，严兵自卫。
现代文：王宗弼到成都后，登上了大玄门，严兵自卫。
English: After Wang Zonglu arrived in Chengdu, he climbed onto the front gate, and the soldiers defended themselves.

古文：蜀主及太后自往劳之，宗弼骄慢无复臣礼。
现代文：前蜀主和太后亲自去慰劳他，王宗弼很傲慢，没有向前蜀主回拜臣下之礼。
English: The former emperor and empress dowager went to console him in person. Wang Zongyao was very arrogant and did not return the former emperor's obeisance.

古文：乙巳，劫迁蜀主及太后後宫诸王于西宫，收其玺绶，使亲吏于义兴门邀取内库金帛，悉归其家。
现代文：乙巳，王宗弼劫持前蜀主、太后以及后宫诸王，把他们迁至西宫，没收了他们的玺印，同时让前蜀主的亲信官吏在义兴门领取内库的金帛，全部让他们回家。
English: At this time, Wang Zongya kidnapped the former Shushi, the empress dowager and the kings of the harem, moved them to the West Palace, confiscated their seals, and at the same time let the close officials of the former Shushi receive the gold ingots of the inner treasury at the Yixing Gate, and let them all go home.

古文：其子承涓杖剑入宫，取蜀主宠姬数人以归。
现代文：王宗弼的儿子王承涓持剑进入宫中，领着几个前蜀主宠爱的姬妾回到家中。
English: Wang Zongyao's son, Wang Chengyao, entered the palace with a sword and led several concubines, former favorites of the emperor, back home.

古文：丙午，宗弼自称权西川兵马留后。
现代文：丙午，王宗弼自称代理西川兵马留后。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Wang Zongya, who claimed to be the representative of the Nishikawa soldiers and horses, left.

古文：李绍琛进至绵州，仓库民居已为蜀兵所燔，又断绵江浮梁，水深，无舟楫可渡，绍琛谓李严曰： 吾悬军深入，利在速战。
现代文：李绍琛进至绵州，那里的仓库民居己被前蜀兵所烧毁，绵江浮桥也被前蜀兵切断，由于水深，又没有舟船，李绍琛对李严说： 我们孤军深入敌境，只有速战才对我们有利。
English: Li Shaoqi went to Mianzhou, where the warehouses and residences had already been burned by the former Shu soldiers. The Mianjiang floating bridge had also been cut off by the former Shu soldiers. Due to the depth of the water, there was no boat. Li Shaoqi said to Li Yan: Our lone army has penetrated deep into the enemy territory. Only a quick war will be beneficial to us.

古文：乘蜀人破胆之时，但得百骑过鹿头关，彼且迎降不暇；若俟修缮桥梁，必留数日，或教王衍坚闭近关，折吾兵势，倘延旬浃，则胜负未可知矣。 
现代文：乘蜀军心惊胆战时，只需要一百个骑兵速过鹿头关，他们连出来投降的时间都没有。如果等修好桥再进攻，一定要在这里住几天，或许有人教王衍坚固地封锁鹿头关，挫我军士气，倘若延缓十天，那么胜负就难以预测了。 
English: During the war, only a hundred cavalrymen were needed to speed past Shuto Pass, and they did not even have time to surrender. If you wait for the bridge to be repaired before attacking, you must stay here for a few days. Perhaps someone will teach Wang Yan to firmly block Shuto Pass and demoralize our army. If you delay ten days, then the outcome will be difficult to predict.

古文：乃与严乘马浮渡江，从兵得济者仅千人，溺死者亦千馀人，遂入鹿关头；丁未，进据汉州；居三日，后军始至。
现代文：于是就和李严骑马渡江，跟从他们的士卒渡过去的仅有一千人，被淹死的也有一千余人，接着他们攻进鹿头关。丁未，占据了汉州，在那里住了三天，后面的部队才到达。
English: So he and Li Yan rode across the river on horseback. Only a thousand people followed their soldiers across, and more than a thousand people were drowned. Then they invaded Shuto Pass. Ding Wei occupied Hanzhou and stayed there for three days before the troops behind arrived.

古文：王宗弼遣使以币马牛酒劳军，且以蜀主书遗李严曰： 公来吾即降。 
现代文：王宗弼派遣使者拿着钱财、马牛、洒肉去尉劳后唐军，并把前蜀主的信送给李严，信中说： 你来了我就投降。 
English: Wang Zongyu sent an envoy with money, horses, oxen, and spiced meat to the Tang army, and sent a letter from the former Shu lord to Li Yan, saying: "I will surrender when you come."

古文：或谓严： 公首建伐蜀之策，蜀人怨公深入骨髓，不可往。 
现代文：有人对李严说： 你首先提出讨伐蜀国的策略，蜀国人对你恨之入骨，你千万不可。 ！
English: Someone said to Li Yan: You first proposed the strategy of fighting against Shu, Shu people hate you to the bone, you must not do it.!

古文：严不从，欣然驰入成都，抚谕吏民，告以大军继至，蜀君臣后宫皆恸哭。
现代文：李严没有听从这个人的意见，仍高高兴兴地直奔成都。他到了成都，安抚慰恤那里官吏和百姓，告诉他们大军将相继到来。前蜀国的君臣以及后宫妻妾们听后都痛器流涕。
English: Li Yan did not listen to this man's advice, but still happily went straight to Chengdu. He arrived in Chengdu, comforted the officials and people there, and told them that a large army would arrive one after another. The former monarchs and ministers of Shu and the wives and concubines of the harem were all in tears.

古文：蜀主引严见太后，以母妻为托。
现代文：前蜀主领着李严去见太后，把他的母亲和妻子托附给他。
English: The former Shu master took Li Yan to see the empress dowager and entrusted his mother and wife to him.

古文：宗弼犹乘城为守备，严悉命撤去楼橹。
现代文：王宗弼仍然坚守在城上，李严命令他撤除所有的高台。
English: Wang Zongyao still insisted on staying on the castle, and Li Yan ordered him to remove all the high platforms.

古文：己酉，魏王继岌至绵州，蜀主命翰林学士李昊草降表，又命中书待郎、同平章事王锴草降书，遣兵部侍郎欧阳彬奉之以迎继岌及郭崇韬。
现代文：己酉，魏王李继岌到达绵州，前蜀主命令翰林学士李昊起草降表，又命令中书侍郎、同平章事王锴起草降书，派遣兵部侍郎欧阳彬拿着这些表章、书信迎接李继岌和郭崇韬。
English: When Ji Yan, Wei King, and Li Jizhe arrived in Mianzhou, the former Shu master ordered Hanlin Scholar Li Hao to draft a letter of surrender. He also ordered the secretary of the Central Committee, Tongping Zhang, and Wang Jizhe to draft a letter of surrender, and sent the secretary of the Military Department, Ouyang Bin, to greet Li Jizhe and Guo Chongyi with these seals and letters.

古文：王宗弼称蜀君臣久欲归命，而内枢密使宋光嗣、景润澄、宣徽使李周辂、欧阳晃荧惑蜀主；皆斩之，函首送继岌。
现代文：王宗弼说前蜀国的君主大臣们早就相归服于后唐，而内枢密使宋光嗣、景润澄、宣徽使李周辂、欧阳晃迷惑前蜀主。他已把这些人斩杀，将他们的头装起来送交李继岌。
English: Wang Zonglu said that the monarchs and ministers of the former Shu State had long ago surrendered to the Later Tang, and that the Inner Privy Council envoys Song Guangzhi, Jing Runcheng, and Xuan Hui had made Li Zhou and Ouyang Ao confuse the former Shu ruler. He had killed these people, mounted their heads, and sent them to Li Jizhe.

古文：又责文思殿大学士、礼部尚书、成都尹韩昭佞谀，枭于金马坊门。
现代文：又对文思殿大学士、礼部尚书、成都尹韩昭的奸巧谄谀进行了谴责，并将他在金马坊门处以极刑。
English: He also condemned the treachery of the scholars of Wensi Dian University, Shang Shu of the Ministry of Rites, and Chengdu Yin Han Zhao, and sentenced him to capital punishment at Jinmafangmen.

古文：内外马步都指挥使兼中书令徐延琼、果州团练使潘在迎、嘉州刺史顾在珣及诸贵戚皆惶恐，倾其家金帛妓妾以赂宗弼，仅得免死。
现代文：内外马步都指挥使兼中书令徐延琼、果州团练使潘在迎、嘉州刺史顾在以及皇宫贵戚们都惶恐不安，用家里的全部金帛妓妾来贿赂王宗弼，这样才得以免死。
English: Xu Yanqiong, the commanding envoy and Clerk of the Privy Council, Pan Zhaoying, the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the Clerk of the

古文：凡素所不快者，宗弼皆杀之。
现代文：凡是王宗弼平素不喜欢的人，都把他们杀了。
English: Wang Zonglu killed everyone he didn't like.

古文：辛亥，继岌至德阳。
现代文：辛亥，李继岌到达德阳。
English: In Xinhai, Li Jizhe arrived in Deyang.

古文：宗弼遣使奉笺；称已迁蜀主于西第，安抚军城，以俟王师。
现代文：王宗弼派遣使者送去书信，说已经把前蜀主迁到他西边的住宅里，安抚了城中的军队，以等待大王军队的到来。
English: Wang Zongqi sent an envoy to deliver a letter, saying that he had moved the former Shu master to his western residence, pacified the army in the city, and awaited the arrival of the great king's army.

古文：又使其子承班以蜀主后宫及珍玩赂继岌及郭崇韬，求西川节度使，继岌曰： 此皆我家物，奚以献为！ 
现代文：又派他的儿子王承班用前蜀主妻妾及珍贵玩物来贿赂李继岌和郭崇韬，请求能任用他为西川节度使。李继岌说： 这些都是我家的东西，怎么用这些东西作为贡献呢？ 
English: He also sent his son Wang Chengban to bribe Li Jizhe and Guo Chongyi with the former Shu master's wife, concubine and precious playthings, requesting that he be appointed as the envoy of the West River Festival. Li Jizhe said: These are my family's things, how can I use these things as a contribution?

古文：留其物而遣之。
现代文：把他送来的东西留下而把来人送走了。
English: He left the things he had brought with him and sent the visitors away.

古文：李绍琛留汉州八日以俟都统，甲寅，继岌至汉州，王宗弼迎谒；乙卯，至成都。
现代文：李绍琛在汉州住了八天等待李继岌的到来，甲寅，李继岌到达汉州，王宗弼迎拜李继岌。乙卯，李继岌到达成都。
English: Li Shaoqi lived in Hanzhou for eight days waiting for the arrival of Li Jizhe. In Jiajing, Li Jizhe arrived in Hanzhou. Wang Zongqi greeted Li Jizhe. In Wu, Li Jizhe arrived in Chengdu.

古文：丙辰，李严引蜀主及百官仪卫出降于升迁桥，蜀主白衣、衔璧、牵羊，草绳萦首，百官衰绖、徒跣、舆榇，号哭俟命。
现代文：丙辰，李严领着前蜀主以及百官、仪仗和卫士在升迁桥投降。前蜀主穿着白衣服，口里含着玉璧，手里牵着羊，用草绳攀绕着头。百官们身穿丧服，光着脚，用车子拉着空棺，他们都大声号哭着等待李继岌的命令。
English: In the morning, Li Yan led the former Shushi and hundreds of officials, honor guards and guards to surrender at the Promotion Bridge. The former Shushi was dressed in white, with a gem in his mouth, holding a sheep in his hand and climbing around his head with a grass rope. The officials were dressed in mourning clothes, barefoot, and pulling an empty coffin with a car. They were all crying loudly and waiting for Li Jixia's order.

古文：继岌受璧，崇韬解缚，焚榇，承制释罪；君臣东北向拜谢。
现代文：李继岌接受了前蜀主的玉璧，郭崇韬解开了前蜀主脖子上的草绳，并把那些空棺都烧掉，按照后唐帝的旨意，免除他们的罪过，并释放了他们。前蜀国君臣都向着东北面拜谢了后唐帝。
English: Li Jizhe accepted the jade gem of the former Shu ruler, Guo Chongzhen untied the straw rope around the neck of the former Shu ruler, and burned those empty coffins, according to the will of the Emperor of Tang, absolved them of their sins, and released them. The former Shu monarchs and ministers all bowed to the northeast to thank the Emperor of Tang.

古文：丁巳，大军入成都。
现代文：丁巳，后唐军进入成都。
English: Soon after, the post-Tang army entered Chengdu.

古文：崇韬禁军士侵掠，市不改肆。
现代文：郭崇韬禁止士卒进行抢掠，街市上照常贸易往来。
English: Guo Chongzhen forbade the soldiers to carry out looting, and trade continued as usual on the street market.

古文：自出师至克蜀，凡七十日。
现代文：从后唐出兵到攻克前蜀国，共用了七十天。
English: It took seventy days for the troops sent from the Later Tang to conquer the Former Shu.

古文：得节度十，州六十四，县二百四十九，兵三万，铠仗、钱粮、金银、缯锦共以千万计。
现代文：取得十个节度使、六十四个州、二百四十九个县，俘获三万十卒，铠仗、钱粮、金银、缯帛等数以千万计。
English: They captured ten Chinese envoys, sixty-four prefectures, and two hundred forty-nine counties, and captured thirty thousand soldiers, as well as tens of millions of war booty, money, grain, silver, and gold.

古文：高季兴闻蜀亡，方食，失匕箸，曰： 是老夫之过也。 
现代文：高季兴听说前蜀国已被消灭，他正在吃饭，跌落了勺子和筷子，他说： 这是老夫我的过错啊！ 
English: Gao Jixing heard that the former Shu State had been eliminated. He was eating and dropped his spoon and chopsticks. He said, "It's my husband's fault!"

古文：梁震曰： 不足忧也。
现代文：梁震说： 不必担忧。
English: Liang Zhen said: Don't worry.

古文：唐主得蜀益骄，亡无日矣，安知其不为吾福！ 
现代文：唐主得到蜀国以后就会更加骄傲，不过多久就会灭亡，哪里能知道他不是为我们谋福呢？ 
English: Tang Lord will be more proud after obtaining Shu, but how long will he perish, how can we know that he is not seeking our welfare?

古文：楚王殷闻蜀亡，上表称： 臣已营衡麓之间为菟裘之地，愿上印绶以保馀龄。 
现代文：楚王马殷听说前蜀国被消灭，向后唐帝上表说： 我已经把衡麓地区治理成我告老退隐的地方，希望交出印绶来保全我的有生之年。 
English: When King Ma Yin of Chu heard that the former Shu Kingdom had been destroyed, he wrote to the Tang Emperor: "I have governed the Hengluo region as a place for me to retire to, and I hope to hand over the seal money to preserve my life.

古文：上优诏慰谕之。
现代文：后唐帝下了一道嘉将诏书安慰了他一番。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Gaozong issued an imperial edict to comfort him.

古文：平蜀之功，李绍琛为多，位在董璋上。
现代文：平定前蜀国的功劳，李绍琛最多，爵位也在董璋之上。
English: For his contribution to the pacification of the former Shu Kingdom, Li Shaoqi received the most honors, and his peerage was also higher than that of Dong Qi.

古文：而璋素与郭崇韬善，崇韬数召璋与议军事。
现代文：但是董璋平素和郭崇韬很好，因此郭崇韬经常召来董璋一起商议军事。
English: However, Dong Xuan and Guo Chongxuan got along very well, so Guo Chongxuan often called Dong Xuan together to discuss military affairs.

古文：绍琛心不平，谓璋曰： 吾有平蜀之功，公等朴樕相从，反呫嗫于郭公之门，谋相倾害。
现代文：李绍琛心中不平，就对董璋说： 我有平定蜀国的功劳，你们是平庸的随从人员，反倒在郭公之门窃窃私语，相互谋划排挤陷害别人。
English: Uneasy in his heart, Li Shaoqi said to Dong Quan: I have the merit of pacifying Shu. You are mediocre attendants, but you whisper behind Guo Gong's door and plot against each other.

古文：吾为都将，独不能以军法斩公邪！ 
现代文：我身为都将，难道不能以军法把你杀掉吗？ 
English: As a general, can't I use military law to kill you?

古文：璋诉于崇韬。
现代文：董璋把这些话告诉了郭崇韬。
English: Dong Hao told Guo Chongyao these words.

古文：十二月，崇韬表璋为东川节度使，解其军职。
现代文：十二月，郭崇韬上表后唐帝任命董璋为东川节度使，解除了他的军职。
English: In December, after Guo Chongyi's resignation, Emperor Tang appointed Dong Qi as Dongchuan's envoy and relieved him of his military duties.

古文：绍琛愈怒，曰： 吾冒白刃，陵险阻，定两川，璋乃坐有之邪！ 
现代文：李绍琛对此更加愤怒，说： 我冒着生命危险，翻越险阻，平定了东川、西川，董璋却坐享其成了！ 
English: Li Shaoqi was even more angry about this, saying: I risked my life, overcame obstacles, and leveled the East River and West River, but Dong Rong enjoyed it!

古文：乃见崇韬言： 东川重地，任尚书有文武才。宜表为帅。 
现代文：于是就找到郭崇韬说： 东川是个重要的地方，尚书任圜文武双才，应当上表皇上任他为帅。 
English: So he found Guo Chongyi and said, "Dongchuan is an important place. Shang Shuren is a man of letters and martial arts, and he should be crowned emperor.

古文：崇韬怒曰： 绍琛反邪，何敢违吾节度！ 
现代文：郭崇韬听后很生气地说： 李绍琛想造反吗？怎么敢违犯我的指挥。 
English: After listening, Guo Chongyao said angrily: "Does Li Shaoqi want to rebel? How dare he violate my command?"

古文：绍琛惧而退。
现代文：李绍琛感到害怕而退了回去。
English: Li Shaoqi felt scared and retreated.

古文：初，帝遣宦者李从袭等从魏王继岌伐蜀；继岌虽为都统，军中制置补署一出郭崇韬，崇韬终日决事，将吏宾客趋走盈庭，而都统府惟大将晨谒外，牙门索然，从袭等固耻之。
现代文：当初，后唐帝派遣宦官李从袭等跟从魏王李继岌前往讨伐前蜀。李继岌虽然身为都统，但军中的经营谋划、委任官职等全部由郭崇韬掌管，郭崇韬整天处理事务，将吏宾客们你来我往，门庭若市，而都统住的地方只有大将早晨来谒拜，牙门里冷冷清清，李从袭等感到羞辱。
English: At the beginning, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty sent the eunuch Li Conghai and his follower, the Wei King Li Jide, to fight against the former Shu. Although Li Jide was a general, Guo Chongyao was in charge of the business planning and the appointment of officers in the army. Guo Chongyao handled affairs all day long. The guests of the generals came and went, and the audience was large. However, in the place where the generals lived, only the general came to pay homage in the morning. The room was cold and empty, and Li Conghai and others felt humiliated.

古文：及破蜀，蜀之贵臣大将争以宝货、妓乐遗崇韬及其子廷诲，魏王所得，不过匹马、束帛、唾壶、麈柄而已，从袭等益不平。
现代文：攻破前蜀国后，前蜀国的贵臣将领们争着给郭崇韬和他的儿子郭廷诲送宝物、妓艺，而魏王李继岌所得到的，只不过是一些马匹、束帛、唾壶、柄等而已，李从袭等更加愤愤不平了。
English: After defeating the former Shu State, the noble generals of the former Shu State vied with each other to give treasures and prostitutes to Guo Chongzhen and his son Guo Tingyun, while the Wei King Li Jizhe only got some horses, sacks, spittoons, handles, etc. Li Congyi was even more indignant.

古文：王宗弼之自为西川留后也，赂崇韬求为节度使，崇韬阳许之。既而久未得，乃帅蜀人列状见继岌，请留崇韬镇蜀。
现代文：王宗弼自己当西川留后时，贿赂郭崇韬请求做西川节度使，郭崇韬表面上答应，但过了很久王宗弼还没有得到这个官，于是就带着蜀人来见李继岌，列举了很多理由，请求留下郭崇韬镇守蜀地。
English: Wang Zonglu himself, when he stayed behind in Xichuan, bribed Guo Chonglu to ask him to be Xichuan's festival envoy. Guo Chonglu ostensibly agreed, but after a long time, Wang Zonglu still did not get this post, so he brought Shu people to see Li Jizhe, listing many reasons, and asked Guo Chonglu to stay to guard Shu.

古文：从袭等因谓继岌曰： 郭公父子专横，今又使蜀人请己为帅，其志难测，王不可不为备。 
现代文：李从袭等因此对李继岌说： 郭公父子十分专横，现在又让蜀人为自己请求统帅，他的志向难以猜透，大王对他不可没有防备。 
English: Li Conghai and others therefore said to Li Jidaxi: Guo Gong and his son are very domineering, and now they let Shu people request a commander for themselves. His ambition is difficult to fathom, and the king must not be unprepared for him.

古文：继岌谓崇韬曰： 主上倚侍中如山岳，不可离庙堂，岂肯弃元臣于蛮夷之域乎！
现代文：李继岌对郭崇韬说： 主上依靠你如靠大山，不可让你离开庙堂，难道肯把元老丢弃在这蛮夷地区吗？
English: Li Jizhe said to Guo Chongtao, "The Lord relies on you as on a great mountain, and He will not allow you to leave the temple. Would He really abandon the patriarch in this barbaric region?

古文：且此非余之所敢知也，请诸人诣阙自陈。 
现代文：再说这些不是我所敢知道的，请诸位到朝迁里自己去陈说吧！ 
English: Besides, I don't dare to know these things, so please go to the relocation center and tell them yourself!

古文：由是继岌与崇韬互相疑。
现代文：从此李继岌和郭崇韬之间就相互产生了猜疑。
English: Since then, Li Jizhe and Guo Chongyao have been suspicious of each other.

古文：会宋光葆自梓州来，诉王宗弼诬杀宋光嗣等。
现代文：这时正好宋光葆从梓州来到，他诉说王宗弼诬杀宋光嗣等的情况。
English: At this time, Song Guangyao arrived from Zizhou, and he told Wang Zongyao about the false killing of Song Guangzhi.

古文：又，崇韬征犒军钱数万缗于宗弼，宗弼靳之，士卒怨怒，夜，纵火喧噪。
现代文：又赶上郭崇韬向王宗弼征收数万缗钱想用来慰劳军队，但王宗弼吝惜不肯给，士卒们非常愤怒，晚上，在王宗弼的住处放火喧闹。
English: Guo Chongxuan also caught up with Wang Zongxuan to collect tens of thousands of baht of money to be used to comfort the army, but Wang Zongxuan grudgingly refused to give it. The soldiers were very angry and set fire to Wang Zongxuan's residence in the evening.

古文：崇韬欲诛宗弼以自明，己巳，白继岌收宗弼及王宗勋、王宗渥，皆数其不忠之罪，族诛之，籍没其家。
现代文：郭崇韬想杀了王宗弼来表明自己清白，己巳，郭崇韬告诉李继岌，把王宗弼、王宗、王宗渥抓起来，遣责他们的不忠之罪，然后就把他们以及他们的家属全部斩杀，并没收了他们的家产。
English: Guo Chongyao wanted to kill Wang Zongyao to prove his innocence, so Guo Chongyao told Li Jizhe to arrest Wang Zongyao, Wang Zong, and Wang Zongwu, charge them with the crime of disloyalty, and then kill them and their families and confiscate their family property.

古文：蜀人争食宗弼之肉。
现代文：王宗弼被杀之后，前蜀人争抢着吃王宗弼的肉。
English: After Wang Zongyao was killed, the former Shu people scrambled to eat Wang Zongyao's flesh.

古文：辛未，闽忠懿王审知卒，子延翰自称威武留后。
现代文：辛未，闽国忠懿王王审知去世，他的儿子王延翰自称威武留后。
English: Not long after, Wang Xizhi, the loyal ruler of the State of Shandong, died, and his son Wang Yanhan claimed to be the successor of Wang Wu.

古文：汀州民陈本聚众三万围汀州，延翰遣右军都监柳邕等将兵二万讨之。
现代文：汀州百姓陈本纠集三万多人包围了汀州，王延翰派遣右军都监柳邕等率领二万士卒前去讨伐。
English: Chen Ben, a citizen of Tingzhou, gathered more than 30,000 people to encircle Tingzhou, and Wang Yanhan dispatched the Right Army, led by the procurator of the capital, Liu Xuan, and other 20,000 soldiers to fight.

古文：癸酉，王承休、王宗汭至成都，魏王继岌诘之曰： 居大镇，拥强兵，何以不拒战？ 
现代文：癸酉，王承休、王宗到达成都，魏王李继岌责问说： 你们驻守大镇，拥有强兵，为什么不抵抗？ 
English: When Wang Chengxiu and Wang Zong arrived in Chengdu, the Wei king Li Jizhong scolded them, saying, "You are stationed in a big town and have strong soldiers, why don't you resist?

古文：对曰： 畏大王神武。 
现代文：回答道： 害怕大王的神明威武。 
English: He answered, "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom."

古文：曰： 然则何不降？ 
现代文：李继岌问： 那么为什么不投降？ 
English: Li Jizhe asked: Then why not surrender?

古文：对曰： 王师不入境。 
现代文：答道： 大王的军队没有进入境内。 
English: He replied: The army of the great king did not enter the country.

古文：曰： 所俱入羌者几人？ 
现代文：李继岌问： 你们进入羌地共有多少人？ 
English: Li Jizhe asked: How many people did you enter Fengtian in total?

古文：对曰： 万二千人。 
现代文：答曰： 一万两千人。 
English: And he said, Twelve thousand.

古文：曰： 今归者几人？ 对曰： 二千人。 
现代文：李继岌又问： 现在回来的有多少人？ 他们回答说： 二千人。 
English: Li Jizhe asked again: How many people have come back now? They answered: Two thousand.

古文：曰： 可以偿万人之死矣。 
现代文：李继岌最后说： 现在是报答死去的一万人的时候了。 
English: Li Jizhe finally said: Now is the time to repay the 10,000 people who died.

古文：皆斩之，并其子。
现代文：于是就把王承休等人以及他们的儿子全部杀死。
English: So he killed Wang Chengxiu and the others, as well as all their sons.

古文：丙子，以知北都留守事孟知祥为西川节度使、同平章事，促召赴洛阳。
现代文：丙子，任命知北都留守事孟知祥为西川节度使、同平章事，并催促他去洛阳。
English: Bing Zi appointed Meng Zhixiang, who had stayed behind in Zhibei, as the Nishikawa festival envoy and Tongping official, and urged him to go to Luoyang.

古文：帝议选北都留守，枢密承旨段徊等恶鄴都留守张宪，不欲其在朝廷，皆曰： 北都非张宪不可。
现代文：后唐帝和人商议推选一个北都留守，枢密承旨段徊等讨厌邺都留守张宪，不想让他回朝廷，于是段徊等说： 北都留守非张宪不可。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Tang and others discussed the selection of a ruler who would remain in the north, and some people, such as the privy councilor Duan Wang, hated the idea of Zhang Xian remaining in the north and did not want him to return to the imperial court. Therefore, Duan Wang and others said: Zhang Xian must remain in the north.

古文：宪虽有宰相器，今国家新得中原，宰相在天子目前，事有得失，可以改更，比之此都独系一方安危，不为重也。 
现代文：张宪虽然有做宰相的才能，但是现在国家刚刚得到中原地区，宰相天天在天子眼前，万一事情有所得失，可以更改，和北都独挡一面的安危来比，宰相不是什么重要职务。 
English: Although Zhang Xian has the talent to be the prime minister, but now the country has just won the Central Plains region, the prime minister is in front of God every day, in case things have gains and losses, they can be changed. Compared with the safety and security of the North, the prime minister is not an important position.

古文：乃徙宪为太原尹，知北都留守事。
现代文：于是调张宪出任太原尹，主持北都留守事务。
English: As a result, Zhang Xian was transferred to the post of Taiyuan Yin, presiding over the affairs of the North.

古文：以户部尚书王正言为兴唐尹，知鄴都留守事。
现代文：任命户部尚书王正言为兴唐尹，主持邺都留守事务。
English: He appointed the head of the household, Shangshu Wang Zhengyan, as Xing Tang Yin, and presided over the affairs left behind in the capital.

古文：正言昏耄，帝以武德使史彦琼为鄴都监军。
现代文：王正言年老糊涂，因些后唐帝任命武德使史彦琼为邺都监军。
English: Wang Zhengyan was old and confused, so the Tang Emperor later appointed Wu De's envoy Shi Yan Qiong as the military governor of the capital.

古文：彦琼，本伶人也，有宠于帝。
现代文：史彦琼本来是个艺人，在后唐帝面前很受宠。
English: Shi Yanqiong was originally an entertainer and was very favored by the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty.

古文：魏、博等六州军旅金谷之政皆决于彦琼，威福自恣，陵忽将佐，自正言以下皆谄事之。
现代文：魏、博等六州军旅的钱粮大政都由史彦琼来决定，他作威作福，恣情放纵，侵侮将佐，自王正言以下的人，都巴结侍奉他。
English: Wei, Bo and other six-state military brigade's money and grain policy were all decided by Shi Yanqiong. He was arrogant, self-indulgent, and insulted generals. People from Wang Zhengyan on down were all eager to serve him.

古文：初，帝得魏州银枪效节都近八千人，以为亲军，皆恿悍无敌。
现代文：当初，后唐帝得到魏州禁卫军近八千人，把他们当作自己的亲信部队，这些人作战十分勇敢，天下无敌。
English: At first, Emperor Wu of the Tang Dynasty received nearly eight thousand people from the Weizhou Imperial Guard and regarded them as his trusted troops. These people fought very bravely and were invincible in the world.

古文：夹河之战，实赖其用，屡立殊功，常许以灭梁之日大加赏赉。
现代文：在黄河两岸作战时，确实全靠他们，他们曾多次建立大功，后唐帝经常答应等到消灭了梁国，大加赏赐。
English: When fighting on both sides of the Yellow River, it was really all up to them. They had repeatedly achieved great feats. Later, the Tang Dynasty often promised to wait until Liang Province was eliminated to reward them greatly.

古文：既而河南平，虽赏赉非一，而士卒恃功，骄恣无厌，更成怨望。
现代文：在平定了河南以后，虽然赏赐不止一次，但士卒们依仗有功，骄傲放纵，贪得无厌，对唐帝心怀不满。
English: After they had pacified Henan, although they were rewarded more than once, the soldiers relied on their merits, indulged in pride, were insatiably greedy, and were dissatisfied with the Tang Emperor.

古文：是岁大饥多流亡，租赋不充，道路涂潦，漕辇艰涩，东都仓廪空竭，无以给军士。
现代文：这一年，庄稼收成不好，老百姓离乡背井，收上来的粮租赋税很不充足，道路上到处是积水，水陆两路都不畅通，东都的粮仓已空，没有东西可供给士卒。
English: This year, the harvest of crops was not good, the people left their hometowns, the grain rent tax collected was very insufficient, the roads were full of standing water, the water and land routes were not smooth, the grain silos in Dongdu were empty, and there was nothing to give to the peasants.

古文：租唐使孔谦日于上东门外望诸州漕运，至者随以给之。
现代文：租庸使孔谦每天在上东门外望诸州从水上运来的粮食，只要一到，随时就发给他们。
English: Every day, outside the Upper East Gate, the ten yong made Kong Qian look at the grain that was transported from the states by water. As soon as it arrived, he would give it to them at any time.

古文：军士乏食，有雇妻鬻子者，老弱采蔬于野，百十为群，往往馁死，流言怨嗟，而帝游畋不息。
现代文：士卒们由于缺乏粮食，有人嫁妻卖子；年老和体弱的人们在野外挖采野菜来充饥，有的十几人为一群，有的百来人为一群，这些人往往被饿死在外，人们经常慨叹愤恨，后唐帝却在外面不停地游玩打猎。
English: Due to the shortage of grain, some people married and sold their children; the elderly and infirm people dug vegetables in the field to satisfy their hunger, some a dozen people in a group, and some a hundred people in a group. These people often starved to death outside. People often sighed with indignation, but after Tang Dynasty, they kept playing and hunting outside.

古文：己卯，猎于白沙，皇后，皇子、后宫毕从。
现代文：己卯，后唐帝在白沙打猎，皇后、皇子以及后宫妃妾们都跟随着他。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Wu went hunting in the White Sands. The empress, the prince, and the concubines of the imperial court all followed him.

古文：庚辰，宿伊阙；辛巳，宿潭泊；壬午，宿龛涧；癸未，还宫。
现代文：庚辰，住在伊阙。辛巳，住在潭泊。壬午，住在龛涧。癸未，回到宫内。
English: Geng Chen, lived in Yili. Xin Si, lived in Tanpo. Ren Wu, lived in Handan. Handan Wei, returned to the palace.

古文：时大雪，吏座有僵仆于道路者。
现代文：当时正下大雪，官吏士卒有人冻僵跌倒在道路上。
English: It was snowing heavily at the time, and some officials and officials froze to death and fell on the road.

古文：伊、汝间饥尤甚，卫兵所过，责其供饷，不得，则坏其什器，撤其室庐以为薪，甚于寇盗，县吏皆窜匿山谷。
现代文：伊、汝之间饥荒尤其严重，禁卫所经过的地方，都要当地百姓供给粮饷，如果得不到，就破坏他们的日常用具，把他们的房屋拆掉当柴，比盗贼敌人都厉害，甚至县里的官吏们都逃到山谷之间躲藏起来。
English: The famine was particularly severe between Yi and Ru. Wherever the guards passed, they had to supply the local people with grain and straw. If they couldn't get it, they would destroy their daily utensils and tear down their houses to use as firewood. They were worse than their enemy thieves. Even the officials in the county fled and hid in the valleys.

古文：有白龙见于汉宫；汉主改元白龙，更名曰龚。
现代文：有人在南汉宫里看见白龙。于是南汉主就改年号为 白龙 ，自己也改名叫龚。
English: Someone saw a white dragon in the Southern Han Palace, so the Southern Han lord changed his name to Bai Long, and he also changed his name to Gong.

古文：长和骠信郑旻遣其布燮郑昭淳求婚于汉，汉主以女增城公主妻之。
现代文：长和骠信郑是派遣他的布燮郑昭淳向南汉求婚，南汉主把他的女儿增城公主嫁给了他。
English: Changhe Yuxin Zheng sent his cloth merchant Zheng Zhaochun to South Han to propose marriage, and the South Han lord married his daughter Zengcheng Princess to him.

古文：长和即唐之南诏也。
现代文：长和就是唐朝时的南诏国。
English: Changhe was Nanzhao Province during the Tang Dynasty.

古文：成德节度使李嗣源入朝。
现代文：后唐成德节度使李嗣源回到朝中。
English: After Tang Zhengde's festival, Li Sigen returned to the court.

古文：闰月，己丑朔，孟知祥至洛阳，帝宠待甚厚。
现代文：闰十二月，己丑朔，孟知祥到达洛阳，后唐帝对待他十分优厚。
English: In December, Meng Zhixiang arrived in Luoyang, and Emperor Tang treated him very generously.

古文：帝以军储不足，谋于群臣，豆卢革以下皆莫知为计。
现代文：因为军队的储备不充足，后唐帝与大臣商议，豆卢革以下的大臣们都想不出办法。
English: Because the reserves of the army were not sufficient, Emperor Hou Tang consulted with the ministers, and the ministers below Zhu Ruge were unable to come up with a solution.

古文：吏部尚书李琪上疏，以为： 古者量入以为出，计农而发兵，故虽有水旱之灾而无匮乏之忧。
现代文：吏部尚书李琪上疏，认为： 古时候是根据收入的多少来决定支出的多少，根据农时的忙闲来发动战争，所以即使发生了水旱灾害，也不会出现缺乏粮草的忧虑。
English: Shangshu Liqi Shangzhu, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, believes that: In ancient times, the amount of expenditure was decided according to the amount of income, and wars were waged according to the busy time of farmers. Therefore, even if there were floods and droughts, there would be no worries about the lack of grain and grass.

古文：近代税农以养兵，未有农富给而兵不足，农捐瘠而兵丰饱者也。
现代文：近来是靠农民的税赋来供养军队，不可能有农民富足而军队供需不足，或是农民因饥饿而死，而士卒却丰衣足食的。
English: In recent times, the army has been supported by the taxes of the peasants. It is impossible for the peasants to be rich and the army to have insufficient supply and demand, or for the peasants to die of hunger while the soldiers are well-fed.

古文：今纵未能蠲省租税，苟除折纳、纽配之法，农亦可以小休矣。 
现代文：现在即使不能减少农民的租税，如果能够免除折纳和纽配的交租方法，农民也可以稍微得到休整。 
English: Now, even if farmers' taxes cannot be reduced, if they can be exempted from the rent payment methods of discount and new allocation, farmers can get a little rest.

古文：帝即敕有司如琪所言，然竟不能行。
现代文：后唐帝马上按照李琪所讲的，敕令主管吏官吏照办，然而终究没能执行。
English: Later, Emperor Tang immediately followed Li Qi's advice and ordered the officials in charge to do the same. However, they ultimately failed to carry it out.

古文：丁酉，诏蜀朝所署官四品以上降授有差，五品以下才地无取者悉纵归田里；其先降及有功者，委崇韬随事奖任。
现代文：丁酉，后唐帝下诏，凡前蜀的官员在四品以上者按不同情况降职安排，凡在五品以下而又没有什么才能可取者一律放回家乡。率先投降的和有功劳的人，委托郭崇韬按照具体情况来奖励和委任。
English: According to the edict issued by Emperor Dingwu after the Tang Dynasty, all officials of the former Shu who were above the fourth grade were demoted according to different circumstances, and those who were below the fifth grade and had no talent were all sent back to their hometowns. Guo Chongyi was entrusted to reward and appoint those who were the first to surrender and those who had merits according to specific circumstances.

古文：又赐王衍诏，略曰： 固当袭土而封，必不薄人于险。
现代文：后唐帝又赐诏王衍，大概意思说： 本来应当割出一块地来封给你，而且一定不会少于别人。
English: Later, Emperor Tang also gave the imperial edict to Wang Yan, saying roughly: Originally, a piece of land should have been cut out for you to seal, and it must not be less than others.

古文：三辰在上，一言不欺。 
现代文：日、月、星三辰在上，一句话也不欺骗你。 
English: The sun, the moon, and the three stars are above, and they will not deceive you with a single word.

古文：庚子，彰武、保大节度使兼史书令高万兴卒，以其子保大留后允韬为彰武留后。
现代文：庚子，彰武、保大节度使兼中书令高万兴云世。任命他的儿子保大留后高允韬为彰武留后。
English: Geng Zi, and Gao Wan Xing, the secretary of Shouwu and Baoda Festivals and also the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, were appointed. Gao Yun Xi, after appointing his son Baoda to stay, became the secretary of Shouwu.

古文：帝以军储不充，欲如汴州，谏官上言： 不如节俭以足用，自古无就食天子。
现代文：因为军队储备不足，后唐帝打算到汴州。谏官上书说： 不如节俭一些来满足军队的需要，自古以来就没有天子到处找吃饭地方的。
English: Because the army reserves were insufficient, Emperor Wu of Tang planned to go to Zhangzhou. The eunuch wrote a letter saying: It is better to be frugal to meet the needs of the army. Since ancient times, there has never been a god looking for a place to eat everywhere.

古文：今杨氏未灭，不宜示以虚实。 
现代文：现在杨氏还没有消灭，不应把我们的虚实暴露给他们。 
English: Now that the Yang clan has not been eliminated, we should not expose our falsehood to them.

古文：乃止。辛亥，立皇弟存美为邕王，存霸为永王，存礼为薛王，存渥为申王，存又为睦王，存确为通王，存纪为雅王。
现代文：后唐帝便打消了去汴州的行动。辛亥，立皇弟李存美为邕王，李存霸为永王，李存礼为薛王，李存渥为申王，李存为睦王，李存确为通王，李存纪为雅王。
English: Later, Emperor Tang cancelled his plan to go to Bozhou. At the end of the 19th century, Li Cunmei, the younger brother of Emperor Xinghai, was appointed as the king of Zhao, Li Cunba as the king of Yong, Li Cunli as the king of Xue, Li Cunwu as the king of Shen, Li Cun as the king of Mutu, Li Cunji as the king of Tong, and Li Cunji as the king of Ya.

古文：郭崇韬素疾宦官，尝密谓魏王继岌曰： 大王他日得天下，騬马亦不可乘，况任宦官！
现代文：郭崇韬平素就嫉恨宦官，曾暗中对魏王李继岌说： 大王他日得到天下，骟了的马都不能骑，更何况任用宦官！
English: Guo Chongyao always envied eunuchs. He once secretly said to the Wei king Li Jizhe: When the great king gains the world, he cannot ride a lame horse, let alone appoint eunuchs!

古文：宜尽去之，专用士人。 
现代文：应当把他们全部辞去，专门起用士人。 
English: They should all resign and be appointed as full-time bureaucrats.

古文：吕知柔窃听，闻之，由是宦官皆切齿。
现代文：吕知柔正好在外面偷听到郭崇韬的话，宦官们因此对郭崇韬都恨得咬牙切齿。
English: Lu Zhirong happened to overhear Guo Chongyao's words outside, and the eunuchs hated Guo Chongyao with all their teeth.

古文：时成都虽下，而蜀中盗贼群起，布满山林。
现代文：当时成都虽然被攻取，但蜀中盗贼四起，布满山林。
English: At that time, although Chengdu was captured, the thieves in Shuzhong were in full swing, covering the mountains and forests.

古文：崇韬恐大军既去，更为后患，命任圜、张筠分道招讨，以是淹留未还。帝遣宦者向延嗣促之，崇韬不出郊迎，及见，礼节又倨，延嗣怒。
现代文：郭崇韬提心大军撤离，成为后患，命令任圜、张筠分路去招抚讨伐他们，郭崇韬于是停留下来没有回洛阳，唐帝派宦官向延嗣催促，郭崇韬没有到郊外去迎接，见了向延嗣后，礼节又十分傲慢，向延嗣十分生气。
English: Guo Chongzhen was worried about the withdrawal of the army and became a hindrance. He ordered Ren Rong and Zhang Rong to go separate ways to entice and fight them. Guo Chongzhen then stopped and did not return to Luoyang. The Tang Emperor sent eunuchs to urge Yan Zi. Guo Chongzhen did not go to the suburbs to meet Yan Zi. After meeting Yan Zi, he was very arrogant and angry with Yan Zi.

古文：李从袭谓延嗣曰： 魏王，太子也；主上万福，而郭公专权如是。
现代文：李从袭对向延嗣说： 魏王是太子，主上多福，而郭公如此独裁，郭廷诲和他的同党们经常往来，每天和军队中勇敢的将领们、蜀地的豪杰们喝酒胡混，指天画地、胡吹乱捧。
English: Li Congyi said to Yan Zi: Wei Wang was a prince, and Guo Gong was so dictatorial. Guo Tingyao and his fellow party members often met with the brave generals of the army and the heroes of Shu every day. They drank and joked with each other, and flattered and flattered each other.

古文：郭廷诲拥徒出入，日与军中饶将、蜀土豪杰狎饮，指天画地，近闻白其父请表己为蜀帅；又言 蜀地富饶，大人宜善自为谋。 今诸军将校皆郭氏之党，王寄身于虎狼之口，一委有变，吾属不知委骨何地矣。 因相向垂涕。
现代文：近来又听说他让父亲郭崇韬上表请求为蜀帅，又说 蜀地非常富饶，大人应当为自己妥善地谋划一番 。现在诸军将领都是郭氏的同党，大王寄身在虎狼之口，一旦有变，我们都不知道自己的骨头丢在什么地方啊！ 
English: Recently, I also heard that he asked his father, Guo Chongzhen, to make a request to be the commander of Shu, and that Shu is very rich, and adults should properly plan for themselves. Now the generals of all armies are Guo's comrades-in-arms, and the great king is in the mouth of the tiger and the wolf. Once there is a change, we do not know where to throw our bones!

古文：延嗣归，具以语刘后。
现代文：于是面对面地痛哭流涕。
English: She burst into tears face-to-face.

古文：后泣诉于帝，请早救继岌之死。前此帝闻蜀人请崇韬为帅，已不平，至是闻延嗣之言，不能无疑。
现代文：向延嗣回到洛阳之后，把这些情况全部告诉了刘后，刘后边哭边告诉给后唐帝，并请求及早挽救李继岌，使他免于一死。在此以前，后唐帝听到蜀人请求郭崇韬做他们的统帅，心中已经愤愤不平，这时又听到向延嗣的这番话，不能不表示怀疑。
English: After Xiang Yanzi returned to Luoyang, he told Liu Hou about all these circumstances, and Liu Hou told Emperor Wu of the Tang Dynasty while crying, and asked for Li Jizhe to be rescued as soon as possible, so that he would not die. Before this, Emperor Wu of the Tang Dynasty had heard the Shu people ask Guo Chongyi to be their commander, and he was already angry in his heart. At this time, when he heard Xiang Yanzi's words, he could not help but express doubt.

古文：帝阅蜀府库之籍，曰： 人言蜀中珍货无算，何如是之微也？ 
现代文：后唐帝查看前蜀府库的帐簿时，说： 人们都说蜀中的珍宝无法计算，为什么帐簿上这么少呢？ 
English: When the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty inspected the account books of the former Shu government treasury, he said: People say that the treasures in Shu cannot be counted, so why are there so few gems in the account books?

古文：延嗣曰： 臣闻蜀破，其珍货皆入于崇韬父子，崇韬有金万两，银四十万两，钱百万缗，名马千匹，他物称是，廷诲所取，复在其外；故县官所得不多耳。 
现代文：向延嗣说： 我听说蜀国被攻破以后，珍宝都到了郭崇韬父子的手中，郭崇韬有黄金一万两，白银四十万两，钱百万串，名贵的马一千匹，其他的东西与此相当。至于郭廷诲所拿到的还在这些之外。所以朝廷所得到的并不很多。 
English: Xiang Yanji said, "I heard that after Shu was conquered, all the precious treasures fell into the hands of Guo Chongyi and his son. Guo Chongyi had ten thousand taels of gold, four hundred thousand taels of silver, a million strings of money, a thousand valuable horses, and other things equivalent to this. As for what Guo Tingyi got, it was more than this. Therefore, what the imperial court got was not much.

古文：帝遂怒形于色。
现代文：于是后唐帝脸上流露出愤怒的表情。
English: As a result, an angry expression appeared on the face of Emperor Hou Tang.

古文：及孟知祥将行，帝语之曰： 闻郭崇韬有异志，卿到，为朕诛之。 
现代文：等到孟知祥将要出发到成都时，后唐帝对他说： 听说郭崇韬有异心，你到了那里，帮我把他杀掉。 
English: When Meng Zhixiang was about to leave for Chengdu, Emperor Hou said to him, "I have heard that Guo Chongyao is of a different persuasion. When you get there, help me kill him."

古文：知祥曰： 崇韬，国之勋旧，不宜有此。
现代文：孟知祥说： 郭崇韬是国家的有功之臣，不应这样处理。
English: Meng Zhixiang said: Guo Chongyao is a meritorious subject of the state, and should not be treated like this.

古文：俟臣至蜀察之，苟无他志则遣还。 帝许之。
现代文：等我到了蜀地观察他一段，如果没有异心就送他回来。 后唐帝答应了。
English: When I arrived in Shu, I observed him for a while, and if there was no objection, I would send him back. Emperor Wu of Tang agreed.

古文：壬子，知祥发洛阳。
现代文：壬子，孟知祥从洛阳出发。
English: Meng Zhixiang left Luoyang for Jinsi.

古文：帝寻复遣衣甲库使马彦珪驰诣成都观崇韬去就，如奉诏班师则已，若有迁延跋扈之状，则与继岌图之。
现代文：不久，后唐帝又派衣甲库使马彦迅速赶到成都观察郭崇韬到底愿不愿离开那里。如果能按照后唐帝的命令班师回朝则已，如果拖延时间或表现出飞扬跋扈的样子，就和李继岌一起把他杀掉。
English: Not long after, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty also sent a clothing and armor depot to make Ma Yan quickly rush to Chengdu to observe whether Guo Chongyao was willing to leave there. If he could return to the imperial court in accordance with the order of the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty, if he delayed the time or showed a flighty appearance, he would be killed together with Li Jizhe.

古文：彦珪见皇后，说之曰： 臣见向延嗣言蜀中事势忧在朝夕，今上当断不断，夫成败之机，间不容发，安能缓急禀命于三千里外乎！ 
现代文：马彦见到皇后，劝她说： 我看如果象向延嗣所说蜀中形势，忧患就在朝夕，现在皇上当断不断，成败的时机，间不容发，怎么能够在三千里之外不顾缓急请示呢？ 
English: Ma Yan saw the empress and persuaded her: I think that if the situation in Shuzhong is as Yan Zi said, and the sorrow is in the morning and evening, now the emperor is constantly on the alert, and the opportunity for success or failure is imminent, how can I ask for instructions three thousand miles away regardless of the urgency?

古文：皇后复言于帝，帝曰： 传闻之言，未知虚实，岂可遽尔果决？ 
现代文：皇后又把这些告诉了后唐帝，后唐帝说： 道听途说的话，不能判断是真是假，怎么可以仓促作出决定呢？ 
English: The empress also told this to Emperor Gaotang. Emperor Gaotang said, "It is impossible to judge whether a rumor is true or false. How can you make a hasty decision?

古文：皇后不得请，退，自为教与继岌，令杀崇韬。
现代文：皇后的请求未得允准，只好退出。她自己给李继岌写了个告谕，命领他杀死郭崇韬。
English: The request of the empress was not approved, so she had to withdraw. She herself wrote a notice to Li Jizhe, ordering him to kill Guo Chongyao.

古文：知祥行至石壕，彦珪夜叩门宣诏，促知祥赴镇，知祥窃叹曰： 乱将作矣！ 
现代文：孟知祥到达石，马彦黑夜敲开他的门宣布了后唐帝的命令，催他赶住成都，孟知祥私下叹息地说： 乱子将要发生了。 
English: When Meng Zhixiang arrived in Shishi, Ma Yan knocked on his door in the dark and announced the order of the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty, urging him to catch up with Chengdu. Meng Zhixiang privately sighed and said: Chaos is about to happen.

古文：乃昼夜兼行。
现代文：于是他日夜兼程，赶赴成都。
English: So he traveled day and night to get to Chengdu.

古文：初，楚王殷既得湖南，不征商旅，由是四方商旅辐氵奏。
现代文：当初，楚王马殷得到湖南时，不征收商人的税，因此四面八方的商人都聚集在这里。
English: At first, when King Ma Yin of Chu conquered Hunan, he did not levy taxes on merchants, so merchants from all over the world gathered here.

古文：湖南地多铅铁，殷用军都判官高郁策，铸铅铁为钱，商旅出境，无所用之，皆易他货而去，故能以境内所馀之物易天下百货，国以富饶。
现代文：湖南盛产铅、铁，马殷采纳了军都判官高郁的策略，把铅和铁铸造成当地使用的货币，商人一离开楚境，这些货币就没有什么用处了，所以他们就用钱买成其他东西带走，这样就能够用境内所剩余的东西换成天下的各种货物，楚国因此富裕起来了。
English: Hunan is rich in lead and iron. Ma Yin adopted the strategy of the military dictator Gaozu, casting lead and iron into the local currency. As soon as the merchants left Chu, these currencies would be useless, so they used the money to buy other things to take away. In this way, they could use the remaining things in the country to exchange for various goods around the world. As a result, the country of Chu became rich.

古文：湖南民不事桑蚕，郁命民输税者皆以帛代钱，未几，民间机杼大盛。
现代文：湖南的百姓们不从事桑蚕业，高郁就命令交税的人们以绢帛来代替钱，不久，民间的织布业大大盛行起来。
English: The people of Hunan did not engage in the mulberry silkworm industry, and Gao Yu ordered the people who paid taxes to use straw instead of money. Soon, the folk weaving industry became very popular.

古文：吴越王镠遣使者沈瑫致书，以受玉册，封吴越国王告于吴。
现代文：吴越王钱派遣使者沈给吴国送来一封信，把接受玉册、被封为吴越国王的事告诉了吴国。
English: King Qian of Wuyue sent an envoy, Shen, to send a letter to the State of Wu, telling the State of Wu about the acceptance of the Jade Scroll and the crowning of Qian as the King of Wuyue.

古文：吴人以其国名与己同，不受书，遣瑫还。
现代文：吴国人认为他的国名和自己国家的名字相同，拒不接受吴越王的信，把沈送了回去。
English: The people of Wu believed that the name of his country was the same as the name of their own country. They refused to accept the letter from King Wu Yue and sent Shen back.

古文：仍戒境上无得通吴越使者及商旅。
现代文：并且告诫边境不得让吴越国的使者和商人通过。
English: He also warned that the border should not allow messengers and merchants from Wuyue to pass.

古文：明宗圣德和武钦孝皇帝上之上庄宗光圣神闵孝皇帝下天成元年春，正月，庚申，魏王继岌遣李继严、李严部送王衍及其宗族百官数千人诣洛阳。
现代文：后唐明宗天成元年春季，正月，庚申，魏王李继岌派遣李继、李严带领人马把王衍及其家族、百官数千人送到洛阳。
English: After the Tang and Ming Dynasties, in the spring of the first month of the 1st year of Tiancheng, the Wei King Li Jie sent Li Jie and Li Yan to lead thousands of Wang Yan, his family and hundreds of officials to Luoyang.

古文：河中节度使、尚书令李继麟自恃与帝故旧，且有功，帝待之厚，苦诸伶宦求丐无厌，遂拒不与。
现代文：河中节度使、尚书令李继麟依仗自己和后唐帝是老朋友，而且有战功，后唐帝给他的待遇也很丰厚，但苦于那些伶人宦官经常向他求乞而且贪得无厌，于是就拒绝不给。
English: Li Jilin was an old friend of Emperor Go-Tang, and had distinguished himself in battle. Emperor Go-Tang treated him very generously, but he suffered from the fact that those eunuchs often begged him and were insatiably greedy, so he refused to give them anything.

古文：大军之征蜀也，继麟阅兵，遣其子令德将之以从。
现代文：大军征伐前蜀时，李继麟检阅部队，派他的儿子李令德率领部队跟随着他。
English: When the great army invaded the former Shu, Li Jilin reviewed the troops and sent his son Li Lingde to lead the troops to follow him.

古文：景进与宦官谮之曰： 继麟闻大军起，以为讨己，故惊惧，阅兵自卫。 
现代文：景进和宦官们诬陷他说： 李继麟听说大军将要出发，他认为是来讨伐自己，所以他感到惊巩害怕，并检阅他的部队准备自卫。 
English: Jingjin and the eunuchs framed him: Li Jilin heard that a large army was about to set out, he thought it was to fight against him, so he was shocked and scared, and reviewed his troops to prepare for self-defense.

古文：又曰： 崇韬所以敢倔强于蜀者，与河中阴谋，内外相应故也。 
现代文：又说： 郭崇韬之报以敢在蜀中直傲不屈于人，是他和河中有阴谋，内外相应的缘故。 
English: He also said: Guo Chongzhen's reward for daring to stand up to others in Shuzhong is that he and He have a conspiracy, which is a corresponding reason both at home and abroad.

古文：继麟闻之惧，欲身入朝以自明，其所亲止之，继麟曰： 郭侍中功高于我。
现代文：李继麟听到这些话后感到害怕，打算亲自到朝廷里讲个明白，他的亲信们阻止了他。李继麟说 郭崇韬功劳比我高。
English: After hearing these words, Li Jilin felt scared and planned to go to the imperial court in person to make it clear. His close friends stopped him. Li Jilin said that Guo Chongkun's merit was higher than mine.

古文：今事势将危，吾得见主上，面陈至诚，则谗人获罪矣。 
现代文：现在的势态很危急，我得去见皇上，当面说清我对他的忠诚，这样，那些说别人坏
English: The situation is very critical now. I have to go to the emperor and declare my loyalty to him in person, so that those who say others are bad

古文：癸亥，继麟入朝。魏王继岌将发成都，令任圜权知留事，以俟孟知祥。
现代文：魏王李继岌将从成都出发，命令任圜暂管留下的事情，等待孟知祥的到来。
English: Wei King Li Jizhe will leave from Chengdu and order Ren Zheng to temporarily manage the matters left behind and wait for Meng Zhixiang's arrival.

古文：诸军部署已定，是日，马彦珪至，以皇后教示继岌，继岌曰： 大军垂发，彼无衅端，安可为此负心事！
现代文：各路军队已部署好，就在这一天里，马彦来到成都，把皇后的告谕拿给李继岌看，李继岌说： 大军将要出发，郭崇韬也没有什么迹象，怎么可以做这种对不起人的事呢？
English: All the armies had been well-deployed. On this very day, Ma Yan came to Chengdu and showed Li Jizhe the queen's proclamation. Li Jizhe said, "The great army is about to set out, and there is no sign of Guo Chongyao. How could he do such a despicable thing?"

古文：公辈勿复言。
现代文：你们不能再说这种话了。
English: Don't you ever say that again.

古文：且主上无敕，独以皇后教杀招讨使，可乎？ 
现代文：况且皇上也没有命令，仅凭皇后的告谕就把招讨使杀死，这样做可以吗？ 
English: Moreover, the emperor did not give an order, and only by virtue of the queen's proclamation did he kill the summoner. Is this acceptable?

古文：李从袭等泣曰： 既有此迹，万一崇韬闻之，中涂为变，益不可救矣。 
现代文：李从袭等哭着说： 既然有了这种迹象，万一郭崇韬听说以后，中途发生了变化，那就更不可以挽救了。 
English: Li Conghai waited and wept, saying, "Now that there is such a sign, if there is a change in the middle of the road after Guo Chongyao hears about it, then it is even more impossible to save.

古文：相与巧陈利害，继岌不得已从之。
现代文：于是李从袭等一起花言巧语地向李继岌陈说利害，李继岌不得已只好听从了他们的意见。
English: As a result, Li Conghai and others made a speech to Li Jizhe about the stakes, and Li Jizhe had no choice but to listen to their opinions.

古文：甲子旦，从袭以继岌之命召崇韬计事，继岌登楼避之。
现代文：甲子晨，李从袭以李继岌的命令召见郭崇韬议事，李继岌上楼躲避。
English: In the early morning, Li Congkai summoned Guo Chongyao to a meeting with the order of Li Jizhe. Li Jizhe went upstairs to avoid the meeting.

古文：崇韬方升阶，继岌从者李环挝碎其首，并杀其子廷诲、廷信。
现代文：郭崇韬刚要上台级，跟随李继岌的李环击碎了他的头，并杀死了他的儿子郭廷海、郭廷信。
English: Guo Chongyao was just about to go on stage when Li Huan, who was following Li Jizhe, smashed his head and killed his sons Guo Tinghai and Guo Tingxin.

古文：外人犹未之知。
现代文：外面的人还不知道这件事。
English: People outside don't know about it yet.

古文：都统推官饶阳李崧谓继岌曰： 今行军三千里外，初无敕旨，擅杀大将，大王奈何行此危事！
现代文：都统推官滏阳李崧对李继岌说： 现在部队将要出发在三千里之外，一开始就没有皇上的命令而擅自杀死大将，大王怎么可以做出这种危险的事情！
English: The prefectural governor of Tongyang, Li Yan, said to Li Jizhe, "Now that the troops are about to set out three thousand miles away, the general killed himself without the emperor's order. How could the great king do such a dangerous thing!

古文：独不能忍之至洛阳邪？ 
现代文：难道不能忍一忍到洛阳再说吗？ 
English: Can't you just wait until you get to Luoyang?

古文：继岌曰： 公言是也，悔之无及。 
现代文：李继岌说： 你说得很对，但后悔也来不及了。 
English: Li Jizhe said: You are right, but it is too late to regret.

古文：崧乃召书吏数人，登楼去梯，矫为敕书，用蜡印宣之，军中粗定。
现代文：于是李崧召集了好几个书吏来，登上楼，然后把梯子撤去，假造一个皇帝的命令，又用蜡摹刻了个印盖上，才对外宣谕，这样军中才稍稍安定下来。
English: Therefore, Li Qiye called several librarians to come and ascend the building, and then removed the ladder, forged an emperor's order, and engraved a seal on it with wax, and then proclaimed it to the outside world, so that the army settled down a little.

古文：崇韬左右皆窜匿，独掌书记滏阳张厉诣魏王府恸哭久之。
现代文：而郭崇韬的左右亲信们都逃跑躲藏起来，只有掌书记滏阳人张砺到魏王府痛哭了很长时间。
English: While Guo Chongzhen's right and left cronies all ran away and hid, only Zhang Xi, the chief secretary of Guoyang, went to Wei Wangfu and cried for a long time.

古文：继岌命任圜代崇韬总军政。
现代文：李继岌任命任圜代替郭崇韬总管军政。
English: Li Jizhe appointed Ren Qi to replace Guo Chongyi as the general manager of the military and political affairs.

古文：魏王通谒李廷安献蜀乐工二百馀人，有严旭者，王衍用为蓬州刺史，帝问曰： 汝何以得刺史？ 
现代文：魏王通知李廷安献上前蜀国的乐工二百余人，其中有个叫严旭的，王衍用他为蓬州刺史。后唐帝问他说： 你是怎么才当上刺史的？ 
English: The Wei king told Li Ting'an to present more than two hundred musicians from the former Shu kingdom, including one named Yan Xu, whom Wang Yan used as the Pengzhou scribe. Later, the Tang emperor asked him: How did you become a scribe?

古文：对曰： 以歌。 
现代文：严旭回答说： 我用唱歌。 
English: Yan Xu replied: I use singing.

古文：帝使歌而善之，许复故任。
现代文：后唐帝让他唱歌，认为他唱得好，答应恢复他过去的职务。
English: Later, Emperor Tang asked him to sing, thought he sang well, and promised to restore his former position.

古文：戊辰，孟知祥至成都。
现代文：戊辰，孟知祥到达成都。
English: Wuchen, Meng Zhixiang reached the capital.

古文：时新杀郭崇韬，人情未安，知祥慰抚吏民，犒赐将卒，去留帖然。
现代文：当时刚刚杀死郭崇韬，人心还没有安定下来，孟知祥安抚官民，慰劳赏赐将士，无论他们愿意留下还是离开这里，都顺从其意愿。
English: At that time, Guo Chongtao had just been killed, and people's hearts had not yet settled down. Meng Zhixiang appeased the officials and the people, and rewarded the soldiers for their hard work. Whether they wanted to stay or leave, they all obeyed his wishes.

古文：闽人破陈本，斩之。
现代文：闽人打败陈本，并斩杀了他。
English: The eunuchs defeated Chen Ben and killed him.

古文：契丹主击女真及勃海，恐唐乘虚袭之，戊寅，遣梅老鞋里来修好。
现代文：契丹主向女真和勃海国发起进攻，但又害怕后唐兵乘虚而入。戊寅，派遣梅老鞋里来后唐互通友好。
English: The Khitan lord launched an attack on Jurchen and Bohai states, but he was afraid that the later Tang soldiers would take advantage of the situation.

古文：马彦珪还洛阳，乃下诏暴郭崇韬之罪，并杀其子廷说、廷让、廷议，于是朝野骇惋，群议纷然，帝使宦者潜察之。
现代文：马彦回到洛阳，后唐帝下诏公布郭崇韬的罪行，并杀其子郭廷说、郭廷让、郭廷议，朝廷内外惊骇惋惜，议论纷纷，后唐帝派宦官们偷偷地去察看情况。
English: After Ma Yan returned to Luoyang, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty issued an edict announcing Guo Chongzhen's crime and killing his son Guo Ting, saying, Guo Ting let, Guo Ting discuss. Both inside and outside the court were shocked and saddened, and there were many discussions. The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty sent eunuchs to secretly inspect the situation.

古文：保大节度使睦王存乂，崇韬之婿也；宦官欲尽去崇韬之党，言 存乂对诸将攘臂垂泣，为崇韬称冤，言辞怨望。 
现代文：保大节度使睦王李存是郭崇韬的女婿。宦官们想全部清除郭崇韬的同党，说： 李存对着诸位将领捋衣出臂，痛哭流涕，为郭崇韬申冤，他的言辞对朝廷很不满。 
English: The eunuchs wanted to completely purge Guo Chongyi's fellow party members, saying: "Li Cun took up arms against the generals, wept bitterly, and pleaded for Guo Chongyi. His words were very dissatisfying to the imperial court."

古文：庚辰，幽存乂于第，寻杀之。
现代文：庚辰，把李存拘禁在他的住宅里，不久就把他杀掉了。
English: Geng Chen detained Li Cunxu in his home and soon killed him.

古文：景进言： 河中人有告变，言李继麟与郭崇韬谋反；崇韬死，又与存乂连谋。 
现代文：景进说： 河中有人来告说，李继麟和郭崇韬阴谋反叛。郭崇韬死了之后，又和李存联合谋划。 
English: Jingjin said: Someone in the river came to report that Li Jilin and Guo Chongyao were plotting to rebel. After Guo Chongyao died, he and Li Cun jointly plotted.

古文：宦官因共劝帝速除之，帝乃徙继麟为义成节度使，是夜，遣蕃汉马步使硃守殷以兵围其第，驱继麟出徽安门外杀之，复其姓名曰硃友谦。
现代文：因此宦官们一起劝说后唐帝尽快把他们清除掉，于是后唐帝调李继麟任义成节度使，当天夜里，又派遣蕃汉马步使朱守殷用兵包围了李继麟的住宅，逼迫李继麟走出徽安门外面，把他杀掉，恢复他原来的姓名朱友谦。
English: Therefore, the eunuchs together persuaded the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty to eliminate them as soon as possible. Therefore, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty appointed Li Jilin as the envoy of the festival, and in the evening of the same day, he also sent Zhu Hanma Bu to Zhu Shouyin to surround Li Jilin's residence with soldiers, force Li Jilin to go outside Hui'an Gate, kill him, and restore his original name Zhu Youqian.

古文：友谦二子，令德为武信节度使，令锡为忠武节度使；诏魏王继岌诛令德于遂州，郑州刺史王思同诛令锡于许州，河阳节度使李绍奇诛其家人于河中。
现代文：朱友谦有两个儿子，朱令德为武信节度使。朱令锡为忠武节度使。后唐帝下诏让魏王李继岌在遂州杀掉朱令德，让郑州刺史王思同在许州杀掉朱令锡，让河阳节度使李绍奇在河中把他的家人杀掉。
English: Zhu Youqian had two sons, Zhu Lingde was the regent of Wu Xin, and Zhu Lingxi was the regent of Zhongwu. Later, the Tang Emperor issued an edict to the Wei King Li Jide to kill Zhu Lingde in Suizhou, to the Zhengzhou ruler Wang Si to kill Zhu Lingxi in Huzhou, and to the Kheyang ruler Li Shaoqi to kill his family in the river.

古文：绍奇至其家，友谦妻张氏帅家人二百馀口见绍奇曰： 硃氏宗族当死，愿无滥及平人。 
现代文：李绍奇来到朱友谦的家，朱友谦的妻子张氏带领二百余口家人来见李绍奇，她说： 朱氏宗族该死，但希望不要错误地把平民也杀掉。 
English: Li Shaoqi came to Zhu Youqian's home. Zhu Youqian's wife Zhang Ren led more than two hundred family members to see Li Shaoqi. She said: The Zhu clan deserves to die, but I hope they don't kill civilians by mistake.

古文：乃别其婢仆百人，以其族百口就刑。
现代文：于是把她家的一百多名奴仆分出来，另外一百多口族人就走上了刑场。
English: So he bade farewell to a hundred of his male and female slaves and servants, and led a hundred of his kinsmen to be put to death.

古文：张氏又取铁券以示绍奇曰： 此皇帝去年所赐也，我妇人，不识书，不知其何等语也。 
现代文：张氏又拿出后唐帝颁赐给朱友谦的世代可享受特殊待遇的铁契来给李绍奇看，并对李绍奇说： 这是皇上去年赏赐的，我是个妇道人家，不认识字，不知道这上面写的是什么。 
English: Mr. Zhang also took out the iron deed of special treatment granted to Zhu Youqian's generation by the Emperor of Tang Dynasty to show to Li Shaoqi, and said to Li Shaoqi: This was awarded by the Emperor last year, I am a woman, I do not know the characters, I do not know what is written on it.

古文：绍奇亦为之惭。
现代文：李绍奇为之感到惭愧。
English: Li Shaoqi felt ashamed of it.

古文：友谦旧将吏武等七人，时为刺史，皆坐族诛。
现代文：朱友谦的旧将史武等七人，当时都是刺史官，也都作为同族而被杀掉。
English: Zhu Youqian's old general Shi Wu and seven others, all of whom were assassinated at that time, were also killed as compatriots.

古文：时洛中诸军饥窘，妄为谣言，伶官采之以闻于帝，故郭崇韬、硃友谦皆及于祸。
现代文：当时洛中各军饥饿困迫，编造了些谣言，伶官们收集起来告诉后唐帝，所以朱友谦、郭崇韬都因此遭祸。
English: At that time, all the armies in Luochuang were starving and distressed, and some rumors were fabricated. The eunuchs gathered together to tell the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty, so Zhu Youqian and Guo Chongyao suffered from this.

古文：成都节度使兼中书令李嗣源亦为谣言所属，帝遣硃守殷察之；守殷私谓嗣源曰： 令公勋业振主，宜自图归籓以远祸。 
现代文：成德节度使兼中书令李嗣源也属于被谣言中伤的一类人物，后唐帝派遣朱守殷去侦察他。朱守殷私下对李嗣源说： 你的功业，威振皇帝，应该自己安排一个归宿，离开是非之地。 
English: Li Siyuan, the Chengde Festival envoy and the Chinese calligrapher, also belonged to a group of people who were slandered by rumors. Later, Emperor Tang sent Zhu Shouyin to investigate him. Zhu Shouyin said to Li Siyuan in private: Your work, Emperor Wei Zhen, should arrange a home for yourself and leave the land of right and wrong.

古文：嗣源曰： 吾心不负天地，祸福之来，无所可避，皆委之于命耳。 
现代文：李嗣源说： 我的良心没有对不起天地的，不管是祸是福，都没有什么可躲避的，全靠命运的安排了。 
English: Li Siyuan said: My conscience has not offended heaven and earth. Whether it is misfortune or good fortune, there is nothing to avoid, it all depends on the arrangement of fate.

古文：时伶宦用事，勋旧人不自保，嗣源危殆者数四，赖宣徽使李绍宏左右营护，以是得全。
现代文：当时是伶人宦官掌权，有功劳的故旧都不能自保，李嗣源已有多次处于危险地位，全靠宣徽使李绍宏及其左右的保护营救才得以保全。
English: At that time, eunuchs were in power, and those who had meritorious deeds could not protect themselves. Li Shiyuan had been in a dangerous position many times, and it was only thanks to the proclamation of the emblem that Li Shaohong and those around him could be protected and rescued.

古文：魏王继岌留马步都指挥使陈留李仁罕、马军都指挥使东光潘仁嗣、左厢都指挥使赵廷隐、右厢都指挥使浚仪张业、牙内指挥使文水武漳、骁锐指挥使平恩李廷厚戍成都。
现代文：魏王李继岌留下马步都指挥使陈留人李仁罕、马军都指挥使东光人潘仁嗣、左厢都指挥使赵廷隐、右厢都指挥使浚仪人张业、牙内指挥使文水人武漳、骁锐指挥使平恩人李延厚戍守在成都。
English: Wei King Li Jie left the horse-drawn carriage and commanded the Chen resident Li Renhan, the horse-drawn carriage and commanded the Dongguang resident Pan Renzhi, the left compartment and commanded the Zhao Tingyin, the right compartment and commanded the Dongyi resident Zhang Ye, the Gannai commander and commanded the Wenshui resident Wu Xuan, and the Zhai Rui commander and commanded the Ping'en resident Li Yanhou to stay in Chengdu.

古文：甲申，继岌发成都，命李绍琛帅万二千人为后军，行止常差中军一舍。
现代文：甲申，李继岌从成都出发，命令李绍琛率领一万两千人为他的后援部队，在路上行进或休息时，经常和中军相距三十里远。
English: In Jiaxing, Li Jizhe set out from Chengdu and ordered Li Shaoqin to lead 12,000 men as his backup force. When marching or resting on the road, the Chinese army was often 30 miles away.

古文：二月，己丑朔，以宣徽南院使李绍宏为枢密使。
现代文：二月，己丑朔，任命宣徽南院使李绍宏为枢密使。
English: In February, Li Shaohong, the envoy of the Southern Court of Xuanhui, was appointed as the envoy.

古文：魏博指挥使杨仁晸，将所部兵戍瓦桥，逾年代归，至贝州，以鄴都空虚，恐兵至为变，敕留屯贝州。
现代文：魏博指挥使杨仁率领他所属的部队戍守在瓦桥，一年以后换他回来，走到贝州，后唐帝认为邺都很空虚，怕他的部队回来后发生变化，于是下令让他们驻守在贝州。
English: Commander Wei Bo ordered Yang Ren to lead his troops to stay in Tujing on the Shingle Bridge. A year later, he replaced him and returned to Bechu. Later, Emperor Tang thought that all the castles were empty, fearing that his troops would change after returning, so he ordered them to stay in Bechu.

古文：时天下莫知郭崇韬之罪，民间讹言云： 崇韬杀继岌，自王于蜀，故族其家。 
现代文：当时天下的还不知道郭崇韬的罪行，民间传讹说： 离崇韬杀死了李继岌，在蜀自己称了王，所以才把他的全家杀掉。 
English: At that time, the world did not know about Guo Chongyao's crimes. According to the folk legend: Li Chongyao killed Li Jizhe, while Shu proclaimed himself king, so he killed his entire family.

古文：硃友谦子建徽为澶州刺史，帝密敕鄴都监军史彦琼杀之。
现代文：朱友谦的儿子朱建徽是澶州刺史，后唐帝秘密命令邺都监军史彦琼去杀死了他。
English: Zhu Jianhui, the son of Zhu Youqian, was the governor of Zhangzhou. Later, Emperor Tang secretly ordered the military governor of Zhangzhou, Shi Yanqiong, to kill him.

古文：门者白留守王正言曰： 史武德夜半驰马出城，不言何往。 
现代文：看守城门的人对留守王正言说： 史彦琼半夜骑着马出了城，没有说他向哪里去。 
English: The person guarding the city gate said to Wang Zhengyan, who was left behind: Shi Yanqiong rode out of the city in the middle of the night without saying where he was going.

古文：又讹言云： 皇后以继岌之死归咎于帝，已弑帝矣，故急召彦琼计事。 
现代文：又有人传讹说： 皇后把李继岌的死归咎于唐帝，已经把唐帝杀死了，所以火急召见史彦琼去商量事情。 
English: Another rumor said: The empress blamed the death of Li Jizhe on the Tang Emperor and had already killed the Tang Emperor, so she urgently summoned Shi Yanqiong to discuss the matter.

古文：人情愈骇。
现代文：人们感到更加惊骇。
English: People were even more horrified.

古文：杨仁晸部兵皇甫晖与其徒夜博不胜，因人情不安，遂作乱，劫仁晸曰： 主上所以有天下者，吾魏军力也；魏军甲不去体，马不解鞍者十馀年，今天下已定，天子不念旧劳，更加猜忌。
现代文：杨仁的部下皇甫晖和他的朋友夜里赌博没能赢，因为人心不安，于是乘机作乱。他威胁杨仁说： 主上所以能够占有天下，全靠我们魏军的力量。魏军将士不曾脱去铠甲、战马不曾解下马鞍已经有十多年了，现在天下已经平定，天子不但不想我们过去的功劳，反而更加猜忌我们。
English: Yang Ren's subordinate, Emperor Fuxi, and his friend failed to win the night's gambling, because people were uneasy, so they took the opportunity to make trouble. He threatened Yang Ren, saying: "The main reason why we can occupy the world is entirely due to the strength of our Wei army. It has been more than ten years since the Wei soldiers took off their armor and the horses took off their saddles. Now the world has been pacified. God not only does not want our past achievements, but is even more suspicious of us.

古文：远戍逾年，方喜代归，去家咫尺，不使相见。
现代文：我们在边远的地方戍守了一年多，刚刚高兴地把我们换回来，离家已经很近，却不让和家人相见。
English: We have been stranded in a faraway place for more than a year. They have just happily replaced us, and we are already very close to home, but they won't let us see our families.

古文：今闻皇后弑逆，京师已乱，将士愿与公俱归，仍表闻朝廷。
现代文：现在听说皇后已经杀了皇帝，京师大乱，将士们希望和你一起回去，并且请求你上表朝廷。
English: Now I hear that the empress has killed the emperor and that there is a great disturbance in Beijing. The generals want to go back with you and ask you to present yourself to the imperial court.

古文：若天子万福，兴兵致讨，以吾魏博兵力足以拒之，安知不更为富贵之资乎？ 
现代文：如果天子有福没死，兴兵讨伐我们，凭我们魏博的兵力足以抵御他们，怎么能知道这不是重新获得富贵的机会呢？ 
English: If the son of heaven is lucky enough not to die, and the army is raised to fight us, with our Wei Bo's strength enough to resist them, how can we know that this is not an opportunity to regain wealth?

古文：仁晸不从，晖杀之；又劫小校，不从，又杀之。
现代文：杨仁不从，于是皇甫晖杀了杨仁。皇甫晖又威胁一个小校官，小校官也不从，皇甫晖又把小校官杀死。
English: Yang Ren did not comply, so Wang Fuxi killed Yang Ren. Wang Fuxi also threatened a minor school official, the minor school official did not comply, and Wang Fuxi killed the minor school official.

古文：效节指挥使赵在礼闻乱，衣不及带，逾垣而走，晖追及，曳其足而下之，示以二首，在礼惧而从之。
现代文：效节指挥使赵在礼听说已叛乱，衣带还没来得及系就翻墙逃跑，皇甫晖追上，拉住他的脚把他从墙上拖下来，把杀死的两个人头给他看，赵在礼害怕就顺从了。
English: The commanding officer told Zhao Zaili that he had rebelled, and before he could tie his laces, he ran away over the wall. The emperor caught up with him, grabbed his feet, dragged him down from the wall, and showed him the heads of the two people he had killed. Zhao Zaili was afraid and obeyed.

古文：乱兵遂奉以为帅，焚掠贝州。
现代文：于是叛乱的军队就奉赵在礼为统帅，焚烧抢掠了贝州。
English: As a result, the rebel army made Feng Zhao the commander-in-chief and burned and looted Beizhou.

古文：晖，魏州人；在礼，涿州人也。
现代文：皇甫晖是魏州人。赵在礼是涿州人。
English: Wang Fuxiong is from Weizhou, and Zhao Zaili is from Zhangzhou.

古文：诘旦，晖等拥在礼南趣临清、永济、馆陶，所过剽掠。
现代文：第二天早晨，皇甫晖等保护着赵在礼向南直奔临清、永济、馆陶，他们所经过的地方都被抢劫一空。
English: The next morning, the empress Dowager and others protected Zhao Zili as they headed south to Linqing, Yongji, and Guantao. All the places they passed were looted.

古文：壬辰晚，有自贝州来告军乱将犯鄴都者，都巡检使孙鐸等亟诣史彦琼，请授甲乘城为备。
现代文：壬辰的晚上，有人从贝州来报告说乱军将侵犯邺都，都巡检使孙铎等急忙到了史彦琼那里，请求授予武器登城防备。
English: In the evening of the 9th day of the 9th month, someone came from Beizhou to report that the rebel army would invade Shidu, and the inspection of Shidu made Sun Yao and others rush to Shi Yanqiong to request the granting of weapons to defend the city.

古文：彦琼疑鐸等有异志，曰： 告者云今日贼至临清，计程须六日晚方至，为备未晚。 
现代文：史彦琼怀疑孙铎等有其他想法，说： 报告的人说乱贼今天到了临清，按照里程计算，六日晚才能到这里，到时再做防备也不晚。 
English: Shi Yanqiong suspected that Sun Qian and others had other ideas, saying: The person who reported said that the bandits arrived in Linqing today. According to the mileage, they can only get here six days later. It is not too late to prepare.

古文：孙鐸曰： 贼既作乱，必乘吾未备，昼夜倍道，安肯计程而行！
现代文：孙铎说： 乱贼既然已反叛，一定乘我们没有防备的时候日夜兼程，怎么肯按里数来走呢？
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "Since the bandits have rebelled, they must have taken advantage of our unpreparedness to travel day and night. How can they travel by the mile?

古文：请仆射帅众乘城，鐸募劲兵千人伏于王莽河逆击之，贼既势挫，必当离散，然后可扑讨也。
现代文：请仆射率领大家登上城墙，孙铎我招募一千精壮兵士埋伏在王莽河畔来袭击他们，贼势被我们挫败，一定会逃散，然后可以全面讨伐他们。
English: Ask the archer to lead everyone onto the city wall. Sun Yat-sen and I will recruit a thousand strong soldiers to lie in ambush on the banks of the Wang Mang River to attack them. If we defeat the bandits, they will surely flee and then we can fight them in an all-out war.

古文：必俟其至城下，万一有奸人为内应，则事危矣。 
现代文：如果一定要等他们来到城下才作防备，万一有内奸和他们相呼应，那就危险了。 
English: If we had to wait for them to come to the outskirts of the city before taking precautions, it would be dangerous in the unlikely event that there was a mole who agreed with them.

古文：彦琼曰： 但严兵守城，何必逆战！ 
现代文：史彦琼说： 只需用严兵守城，何必出去迎战？ 
English: Shi Yanqiong said: It is only necessary to defend the city with strict soldiers, why go out to fight?

古文：是夜，贼前锋攻北门，弓弩乱发。
现代文：当天晚上，乱兵的前锋攻打邺城北门，弓弩乱发。
English: In the evening of the same day, the forwards of the disorderly soldiers attacked the north gate of the city, and the bows and arrows were scattered.

古文：时彦琼将部兵宿北门楼，闻贼呼声，即时掠溃。
现代文：当时史彦琼所率部属在北门楼上，听到乱兵的呼喊声，当时就被吓散了。
English: At that time, Shi Yanqiong and his subordinates were on the north gate building. They heard the shouts of the rioting soldiers and were scared away.

古文：彦琼单骑奔洛阳。
现代文：史彦琼单人匹马逃奔到洛阳。
English: Shi Yanqiong fled to Luoyang alone.

古文：癸巳，贼入鄴都，孙鐸等拒战不胜，亡去。
现代文：癸巳，乱兵进入邺都，孙铎等人奋力抵御，不能取胜，于是都逃跑了。
English: Suddenly, the ruffians entered the capital, and Sun Yat-sen and others fought hard to resist, but could not win, so they all fled.

古文：赵在礼据宫城，署皇甫晖及军校赵进为马步都指挥使，纵兵大掠。
现代文：赵在礼占据了宫城，安排皇甫晖和军校赵进为马步都指挥使，放纵士卒大肆抢掠。
English: Zhao Zaili occupied Miyagi, and arranged for the Emperor Fuxi and the military school Zhao Jin to act as commanders, and indulged the soldiers to plunder.

古文：进，定州人也。
现代文：赵进是定州人。
English: Zhao Jin is from Dingzhou.

古文：王正言方据按召吏草奏，无至者，正言怒，其家人曰： 贼已入城，杀掠于市，吏皆逃散，公尚谁呼！ 
现代文：王正言正伏案准备召集官吏来起草奏书，没有人来，王正言很生气，家人对他说： 乱贼已经进入城内，在街市上又杀又抢，官吏们都逃散了，您还叫谁呢？ 
English: Wang Zhengyan was preparing to convene officials to draft a report, but no one came. Wang Zhengyan was very angry. His family members said to him: The bandits have entered the city, killing and robbing in the streets. The officials have fled. Who else would you call?

古文：正言惊曰： 吾初不知也。 
现代文：王正言惊讶地说： 我从来不知道这个情况。 
English: Wang Zhengyan said in surprise, "I never knew about this.

古文：又索马，不能得，乃帅僚佐步出门谒在礼，再拜请罪。
现代文：他要人备马，没有得到。于是就带领他左右的官吏走出府门拜见赵在礼，拜了又拜，向赵在礼请罪。
English: He asked for someone to prepare a horse, but did not get it. So he led the officials around him out of the gate to see Zhao Zailai, and prayed and prayed, and pleaded guilty to Zhao Zailai.

古文：在礼亦拜，曰： 士座思归耳，尚书重德，勿自卑屈。 
现代文：赵在礼也回拜了他们，说： 只是士卒们想回家，尚书重德，不要自己卑躬屈膝！ 
English: Zhao Zaili also bowed to them in return, saying, "It's just that the soldiers want to go home, and they are very conscientious, so don't grovel!

古文：慰谕遣之。
现代文：安慰了他们一番就把他们送走了。
English: He comforted them and sent them on their way.

古文：众推在礼为魏博留后，具奏其状。
现代文：大家都推举赵在礼为魏博留后，把他的情况上奏给后唐帝。
English: Everyone recommended that Zhao Zili stay in Weibo and report his situation to the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty.

古文：北京留守张宪家在鄴都，在礼厚抚之，遣使以书诱宪，宪不发封，斩其使以闻。
现代文：北京留守张宪的家在邺都，赵在礼用丰厚的礼物抚慰了他的家属，然后派遣使者送给来引诱张宪，张宪连信都没拆就把使者杀了，然后向朝廷报告。
English: Zhang Xian, who had remained in Beijing, had his home in Shudu. Zhao Zailai comforted his family with rich gifts, and then sent an envoy to seduce Zhang Xian. Zhang Xian killed the envoy without even opening the letter, and then reported to the imperial court.

古文：甲午，以景进为银青光禄大夫、检校右散骑常侍兼御吏大夫、上柱国。
现代文：甲午，任命景进为银青光禄大夫、检校右散骑常侍兼御史大夫、上柱国。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Jingjin was appointed as the silver Qingguanglu doctor, the school inspection right horseback riding attendant and goshi doctor, and the top pillar of the country.

古文：丙申，史彦琼至洛阳。
现代文：丙申，史彦琼到达洛阳。
English: Bishen, Shi Yanqiong arrive in Luoyang.

古文：帝问可为大将者于枢密使李绍宏，绍宏复请用李绍钦，帝许之，令条上方略。
现代文：后唐帝问枢密使李绍宏谁可以任为大将，李绍宏再次请求起用李绍钦，后唐帝答应了他的请求，并命令李绍钦逐条送上他的计谋策略。
English: Later, Emperor Tang asked the confidential envoy Li Shaohong who could be appointed as the general. Li Shaohong again requested the appointment of Li Shaoqin. Later, Emperor Tang agreed to his request and ordered Li Shaoqin to send his strategy step by step.

古文：绍钦所请偏裨，皆梁旧将，己所善者，帝疑之而止。
现代文：李绍钦所请求使用的将佐们，都是后梁的旧将领，也是他所喜欢的人，后唐帝对此很怀疑，于是此事就作罢了。
English: The generals and lieutenants that Li Shaoqin requested to use were all old generals of Hou Liang, and they were also people he liked. Emperor Hou Tang was very suspicious of this, so the matter was dropped.

古文：皇后曰： 此小事，不足烦大将，绍荣可办也。 
现代文：皇后说： 这是一件小事，不必麻烦大将，李绍荣就可以办到。 
English: The empress said, "This is a small matter, you don't need to trouble the general, Li Shaorong can do it."

古文：帝乃命归德节度使李绍荣将骑三千诣鄴都招抚，亦征诸道兵，备其不服。
现代文：于是后唐帝命令归德节度使李绍荣率领三千骑兵到邺都抚慰赵在礼等，使他们归顺朝廷，同时征集各路部队，以防备他们不服招抚。
English: As a result, Emperor Tang ordered Li Shaorong to lead three thousand cavalrymen to Shudu to appease Zhao in the ceremony, so that they would submit to the court, and at the same time to recruit troops from all directions in case they did not accept the invitation.

古文：郭崇韬之死也，李绍琛谓董璋曰： 公复欲呫嗫谁门乎？ 
现代文：郭崇韬被杀时，李绍琛曾经对董璋说： 你又准备到谁家门上去窃窃私语呢？ 
English: When Guo Chongyao was killed, Li Shaoqi once said to Dong Yao: Whose door are you going to go to and whisper?

古文：璋惧，谢罪。
现代文：董璋很害怕，认罪道歉。
English: Dong Hao was very scared and confessed and apologized.

古文：魏王继岌军还至武连，遇敕使，谕以硃友谦已伏诛，令董璋将兵之遂州诛硃令德。
现代文：魏王李继岌的军队回到武连，遇到皇帝的使者，把朱友谦已经被杀死的情况告诉了李继岌，同时传令董璋率领部队到遂州去诛杀朱令德。
English: Wei King Li Jide's army returned to Wulian, met the emperor's envoy, told Li Jide that Zhu Youqian had been killed, and ordered Dong Jun to lead the troops to Suizhou to kill Zhu Lingde.

古文：时绍琛将后军魏城，闻之，以帝不委己杀令德而委璋，大惊。
现代文：当时李绍琛率领的后援部队在魏城，听到这个情况后，认为后唐帝不委派自己去杀朱令德而委派董璋，感到非常惊讶。
English: At that time, the supporting force led by Li Shaoqi was in Weicheng, and after hearing this situation, he was very surprised that the later Tang Emperor did not appoint himself to kill Zhu Lingde, but appointed Dong Qi.

古文：俄而璋过绍琛军，不谒。
现代文：不一会儿，董璋经过李绍琛的军队，没有拜见。
English: Soon after, Dong Xuan passed by Li Shaoqin's army, but did not visit him.

古文：绍琛怒，乘酒谓诸将曰： 国家南取大梁，西定巴、蜀，皆郭公之谋而吾之战功也；至于去逆效顺，与国家掎角以破梁，则硃公也。
现代文：李绍琛非常生气，借酒对诸位将领说： 皇上南面夺取大梁，西面平定巴、蜀，都是郭崇韬的计谋，我的战功。至于背叛梁国，归顺皇上，并和皇上一起牵制夹击敌人，最后攻破梁国，这些是朱公的功劳。
English: Li Shaoqi was very angry and borrowed wine to say to the generals: Guo Chongyi's stratagem to capture Daliang in the south and to pacify Dingba and Shu in the west were my war exploits. As for betraying Liangguo, surrendering to the emperor, restraining and pinching the enemy together with the emperor, and finally defeating Liangguo, these were the merits of Zhu Gong.

古文：今硃、郭皆无罪族灭，归朝之后，行及我矣。
现代文：现在朱、郭二人都被无罪灭族，回到朝廷，就轮到我了。
English: Now that Zhu and Guo have both been executed without charge and returned to the imperial court, it's my turn.

古文：冤哉，天乎！
现代文：冤枉啊！天啊！
English: Wronged! Oh my God!

古文：奈何！ 
现代文：怎么办呢？ 
English: What to do?

古文：绍琛所将多河中兵，河中将焦武等同号哭于军门曰： 西平王何罪，阖门屠脍！
现代文：李绍琛所率部队大部分是河中士卒，河中将焦武等在军门口放声痛哭，并说： 西平王朱友谦有什么罪过，满门被诛杀！
English: Most of the troops led by Li Shaoqin were officers of the River Division. Lieutenant General Jiao Wu and others burst into tears at the gate of the army and said: "What is the sin of Xiping King Zhu Youqian, the whole gate was killed!"

古文：我属归则与史武等同诛，决不复东矣。 
现代文：我们回去就和史武等一样会被诛杀，决不会再回东方来。 
English: If we go back, we will be killed just like Shibu and others, and we will never come back to the East.

古文：是日，魏王继岌至泥溪，绍琛至剑州遣人白继岌云： 河中将士号哭不止，欲为乱。 
现代文：这一天，魏王李继岌到达泥溪，李绍琛到剑州派人告诉李继岌说： 河中的将士不停地号哭，他们想叛乱。 
English: On this day, Li Jizhe, the king of Wei, arrived at Mud Creek. Li Shaoqin sent someone to Jianzhou to tell Li Jizhe that: The soldiers in the river kept crying, they wanted to rebel.

古文：丁酉，绍琛自剑州拥兵西还，自称西川节度、三川制置等使，移檄成都，称奉诏代孟知祥，招谕蜀人，三日间众至五万。
现代文：丁酉，李绍琛从剑州率兵回到西边，自称西川节度、三川制置等使，并向成都发出檄文，声称已奉诏代替孟知祥，并招告蜀中百姓，三天之内来了五万人。
English: Ding Xuan, Li Shaoqi returned to the west from Jianzhou with an army, claiming to be the envoy of the West River Festival and the Three Rivers Establishment, and sent a letter to Chengdu, claiming to have replaced Meng Zhixiang with an imperial edict, and invited the people of Shuzhong, and 50,000 people came within three days.

古文：戊戌，李继严至凤翔，监军使柴重厚不以符印与之，促令诣阙。
现代文：戊戌，李继到达凤翔，监军使柴重厚没有把符信交给李继，只是催促他赶快到皇帝那里去。
English: When Li Ji arrived in Fengxiang, the supervising military commander Chai Chonghou did not hand over the letter to Li Ji, but urged him to hurry to the emperor.

古文：己亥，魏王继岌至利州，李绍琛遣人断桔柏津。
现代文：己亥，魏王李继岌到达利州，李绍琛派人拆了桔柏津的浮桥。
English: In the Heian period, the Wei king, Li Jizhe, arrived in Lishu, and Li Shaoqi sent people to demolish the pontoon bridge in Jibeijin.

古文：继岌闻之，以任圜为副招讨使，将步骑七千，与都指挥使梁汉颙、监军李延安追讨之。
现代文：李继岌听说以后，任命任圜为副招讨使，率领七千名步兵骑兵，和都指挥使梁汉、监军李延安追击讨伐他。
English: After Li Jizhe heard of this, he appointed Ren Zheng as the deputy recruiting envoy, led seven thousand infantry and cavalry, and commanded the envoy Liang Han and the supervisor of the army Li Yan'an to pursue and fight him.

古文：庚子，邢州左右步直兵赵太等四百人据城自称安国留后；诏东北面招讨副使李绍真讨之。
现代文：庚子，邢州左右步直兵赵太等四百人占据了邢州城，自称是安国留后。后唐帝下诏东北面招讨副使李绍真，让他讨伐赵太。
English: Geng Zi, Zhangzhou left and right foot soldiers Zhao Tai and other four hundred people occupied Zhangzhou City, claiming to be after staying in An Guo. Later, Emperor Tang issued an edict to the northeast to recruit Vice Envoy Li Shaozhen and let him fight Zhao Tai.

古文：辛丑，任圜先令别将何建崇击剑门关，下之。
现代文：辛丑，任圜首先命令别将何建崇攻下了剑门关。
English: Annoyed, Ren Rong first ordered that He Jian Chong should not be captured at Jianmen Pass.

古文：李绍荣至鄴都，攻其南门，遣人以敕招谕之，赵在礼以羊酒犒师，拜于城上曰： 将士思家擅归，相公诚善为敷奏，得免于死，敢不自新！ 
现代文：李绍荣到达邺都，攻打邺都南门，并派人以皇帝的诏书宣谕赵在礼等。赵在礼用羊和酒来慰劳士卒，在城上拜他们说： 将士们思念家人擅自回来，李相公如果能真诚善意地陈奏皇上，能够免除我们死罪，我们敢不悔过自新！ 
English: Li Shao Rong arrived at Shidu, attacked the south gate of Shidu, and sent someone to proclaim Zhao at the ceremony with the emperor's edict. Zhao used sheep and wine to comfort the laborers at the ceremony, and worshiped them on the city: The soldiers miss their families and return without permission. If Li Xianggong can sincerely and kindly play the emperor, he can absolve us of the death penalty. We dare not repent and reform!

古文：遂以敕遍谕军士。
现代文：于是把后唐帝的命令告诉了全军将士。
English: So he told the order of the Emperor of Tang Dynasty to the whole army.

古文：史彦琼戟手大骂曰： 群死贼，城破万段！ 
现代文：史彦琼指手画脚地大骂说： 你们这些死贼，攻破城以后把你们身砍万段！ 
English: Shi Yanqiong gave a scathing speech, saying, "You thieves, after you break through the city, I will cut you into a million pieces!"

古文：皇甫晖胃其众曰： 观史武德之言，上不赦我矣。 
现代文：皇甫晖对大家说： 从史彦琼的话来看，皇帝是不会饶恕我们的。 
English: "From the words of Shi Yanqiong, the emperor will not forgive us," the empress said to everyone.

古文：因聚噪，掠敕书，手坏之，守陴拒战，绍荣攻之不利，以状闻，帝怒曰： 克城之日，勿遣噍类！ 
现代文：因此聚众彭噪，抢过皇帝的诏书撕碎，坚守在城上的女墙边抵抗后唐军。李绍荣攻城不利，把这些情况报告了后唐帝，后唐帝听了非常生气地说： 攻下城的那一天，一个活人也不能留下。 
English: Li Shao Rong reported the situation to the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty, who was very angry and said, "On the day the city was conquered, not a single person was allowed to remain alive."

古文：大发诸军讨之。
现代文：于是调集各路军队讨伐。
English: As a result, various armies were mobilized for a crusade.

古文：壬寅，绍荣退屯澶州。
现代文：壬寅，李绍荣撤退驻扎在澶州。
English: Ren Yin and Li Shaorong retreated and were stationed in Ganzhou.

古文：甲辰夜，从马直军士王温等五人杀军使，谋作乱，擒斩之。
现代文：甲辰夜晚，从马直军士王温等五人杀死了军使，阴谋作乱，后来把他们抓住杀了。
English: In the early hours of the night, five people, including Sergeant Wang Wen from Ma Zhiang, killed the envoy, plotted to create a disturbance, and later caught and killed them.

古文：从马直指挥使郭从谦，本优人也，优名郭门高。帝与梁相拒于得胜，募勇士挑战，从谦应募，俘斩而还，由是益有宠。
现代文：从马直指挥使郭从谦，本来是个唱戏的，艺名叫郭门高，后唐帝与后梁军相持在德胜的时候，召募勇士来挑逗后梁军出战，郭从谦应召，俘获斩杀了后梁军士卒而还，因而后唐帝对他更加宠爱。
English: Guo Congxian, originally a singer, was commanded by Ma Zhi, and his stage name was Guo Mengao. When the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty and the Later Liang Army were at loggerheads, he summoned warriors to provoke the Later Liang Army into battle. Guo Congxian answered the call, captured and killed the Later Liang Sergeant, and then returned, so the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty was more fond of him.

古文：帝选诸军骁勇者为亲军，分置四指挥，号从马直，从谦自军使积功至指挥使。
现代文：后唐帝选择勇敢善战的人作为他的亲信部队，分别设置了四个指挥，号称从马直，郭从谦因战功累累，从军使一直升到指挥使。
English: Later, Emperor Tang selected brave and good fighters as his trusted troops, and set up four commanders respectively. They were known as Zong Ma Zhi, Guo Zong Qian, and were promoted from military envoy to commanding envoy.

古文：郭崇韬方用事，从谦以叔父事之，睦王存乂以从谦为假子。
现代文：当初郭崇韬刚掌权时，离从谦把他当作叔父来侍奉他，睦王李存把郭从谦当作养子。
English: When Guo Chongzhen first came to power, Li Congxian treated him as an uncle to serve him, and King Mu Li Cun treated Guo Congxian as an adopted son.

古文：及崇韬、存乂得罪，从谦数以私财飨从马直诸校，对之流涕，言崇韬之冤。
现代文：郭崇韬、李存获罪以后，郭从谦曾多次用自己的钱财来犒赏从马直的各军校，对着他们痛哭流涕，说郭崇韬死得冤枉。
English: After Guo Chongzhen and Li Cunxu were convicted, Guo Congqian repeatedly used his own money and resources to reward military schools from Ma Zhiang, and wept bitterly at them, saying that Guo Chongzhen died unjustly.

古文：及王温作乱，帝戏之曰： 汝既负我附崇韬、存乂，又教王温反，欲何为也？ 
现代文：等到王温作乱时，后唐帝开玩笑地对他说： 你辜负了我而站在郭崇韬、李存一边，又教王温造反，你打算干什么呢？ 
English: When Wang Wen started to make trouble, Emperor Hou Tang said to him jokingly, "You have failed me and stood on the side of Guo Chongzhen and Li Cun, and taught Wang Wen to rebel. What are you going to do?

古文：从谦益惧。
现代文：郭从谦更加害怕。
English: Guo Congxian was even more afraid.

古文：既退，阴谓诸校曰： 主上以王温之故，俟鄴都平定，尽坑若曹。
现代文：退朝后对各位军校说： 主上因王温作乱，等邺都平定以后，要全部把你们坑杀。
English: After withdrawing from the imperial court, he said to the military academies: "The Lord, because of Wang Wen's disturbance, will kill all of you after the rebellion is put down.

古文：家之所有宜尽市酒肉，勿为久计也。 
现代文：家中所有的财产应当全部买成酒肉，不要作长远打算了。 
English: All the property in the family should be bought in wine and meat, do not make long-term plans.

古文：由是亲军皆不自安。
现代文：因此，后唐帝的亲军士卒们都感到心里不安。
English: Therefore, after the Tang Dynasty, the pro-army officers felt uneasy in their hearts.

古文：乙巳，王衍至长安，有诏止之。
现代文：己巳，王衍到了长安，后唐帝命令他停留在那里。
English: After Wang Yan arrived in Chang'an, Emperor Wu ordered him to stay there.

古文：先是，帝诸弟虽领节度使，皆留京师，但食其俸。
现代文：在此之前，后唐帝的各位兄弟虽然任节度使，但都留在京师，只依靠他们的俸禄生活。
English: Prior to this, although all the brothers of the late Tang Dynasty were appointed as imperial envoys, they all stayed in Beijing and relied only on their salaries.

古文：戊申，始命护国节度使永王存霸至河中。
现代文：戊申，开始命令护国节度使永王李存霸到河中。
English: Wushin, began to order the protection of the country so that the Yong Wang Li Cunha into the river.

古文：丁未，李绍荣以诸道兵再攻鄴都。
现代文：丁未，李绍荣用各道的士卒再次攻打邺都。
English: Ding Wei, Li Shao Rong once again attacked Shidu with soldiers from various provinces.

古文：庚戌，裨将杨重霸帅众数百登城，后无继者，重霸等皆死。
现代文：庚戌，副将杨重霸率领数百名士卒登上了邺都城，因为没有后援，杨重霸等都战死。
English: Geng Yao, vice-commander Yang Chongba led hundreds of soldiers onto the capital city, because there was no backup, Yang Chongba and others all died in battle.

古文：贼知不赦，坚守无降意。
现代文：乱兵知道罪不可赦，因此一直坚守战斗，没有一点投降的意思。
English: The ruffian knew that his crime was unforgivable, so he kept fighting, with no intention of surrendering.

古文：朝廷患之，日发中使促魏王继岌东还。
现代文：朝廷对这件事十分忧虑，每天都派使者催促魏王回来。
English: The imperial court was very worried about this and sent emissaries every day to urge the Wei king to return.

古文：继岌以中军精兵皆从任圜讨李绍琛，留利州待之，未得还。
现代文：李继岌让中军精锐的部队都跟随任圜讨伐李绍琛去了，他留在利州等待他们，所以未能东回。
English: Li Jizhong allowed the elite troops of the Chinese army to follow Ren Zheng to fight against Li Shaoqi. He stayed in Lizhou to wait for them, so he could not return to the east.

古文：李绍荣讨赵在礼久无功，赵太据邢州未下。
现代文：李绍荣讨伐赵在礼长时间没有战功，赵太占据了邢州，李绍荣也未能攻下。
English: Li Shaorong fought against Zhao Zili for a long time without any military merit. Zhao Tai occupied Zhangzhou, and Li Shaorong failed to capture Lvzhou.

古文：沧州军乱，小校王景戡讨定之，因自为留后；河朔州县告乱者相继。
现代文：沧州的军队发生动乱，小校王景戡率军讨伐平定了沧州，自称留后。河朔地区的州县接连不断地有人来报告发生动乱。
English: The army of Cangzhou was in turmoil. Wang Jingyao, a schoolboy, led an army to fight and pacify Cangzhou, claiming to stay behind. People in states and counties in the Hexuo region kept coming to report the turmoil.

古文：帝欲自征鄴都，宰相、枢密使皆言京师根本，车驾不可轻动，帝曰： 诸将无可使者。 
现代文：后唐帝打算亲自率军去讨伐邺都，宰相、枢密使都说京师是国家的根本，皇帝的车驾不能轻易出动，后唐帝说： 诸位将领中没有人可以派出去了。 
English: The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty planned to personally lead an army to fight against the Yidu. The prime minister and the confidential envoy all said that the Beijing division was the foundation of the country, and the emperor's chariot could not be easily dispatched. The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty said: None of you generals can be sent out.

古文：皆曰： 李嗣源最为勋旧。 
现代文：大家都说： 李嗣源是最有功劳的旧将。 
English: Everyone said: Li Siyuan is the most meritorious veteran.

古文：帝心忌嗣源，曰： 吾惜嗣源，欲留宿卫。 
现代文：后唐帝心中忌恨李嗣源，于是说： 我爱惜嗣源，想留他在宫中担任警卫。 
English: Emperor Hou Tang hated Li Siyuan in his heart, so he said: I love and cherish Siyuan, I want to keep him as a guard in the palace.

古文：皆曰： 他人无可者。 
现代文：大家又说： 别人就都不行了。 
English: Everyone also said: no one else can do it.

古文：忠武节度使张全义亦言： 河朔多事，久则患深，宜令总管进讨；若倚绍荣辈，未见成功之期。 
现代文：忠武节度使张全义也说： 河朔事多，时间长了就会变成大的忧患，应当让李总管去讨伐。如果依靠李绍荣等人，恐怕看不到他们成功的日期。 
English: Zhang Quanyi, a loyal military commander, also said: There are too many things in the river, and if the time is long, it will become a big trouble. It is necessary to let Li Shougang go to fight. If you rely on Li Shaorong and others, I am afraid you will not see the date of their success.

古文：李绍宏亦屡言之，帝以内外所荐，久乃许之，甲寅，命嗣源将亲军讨鄴都。
现代文：李绍宏也曾多次说这件事，后唐帝因为内外都推荐李嗣源，所以，甲寅就命令李嗣源率领皇帝的亲军前去讨伐邺都。
English: Li Shaohong also mentioned this matter many times. Later, Emperor Tang recommended Li Shiyuan both at home and abroad. Therefore, Jia Yin ordered Li Shiyuan to lead the emperor's pro-army to fight against Xidu.

古文：延州言绥、银军乱，剽州城。
现代文：延州方面报告，绥、银地区的军队叛乱，并抢劫了州城。
English: The Yanzhou side reported that the troops in the Zou and Yin regions rebelled and looted the state capital.

古文：董璋将兵二万屯绵州，会任圜讨李绍琛。
现代文：董璋率领二万士卒驻扎在绵州，正遇上任圜讨伐李绍琛。
English: Dong Xuan led twenty thousand soldiers stationed in Mianzhou to fight against Li Shaoqi when he took office.

古文：帝遣中使崔延琛至成都，遇绍琛军，绍之曰： 吾奉诏召孟郎，公若缓兵，自当得蜀。 
现代文：后唐帝派遣中使崔延琛到成都，遇上了李绍琛的军队，欺骗他们说： 我奉皇帝命令来见孟知祥，你如果能延缓一下，自然能得到蜀地。 
English: After the Tang Dynasty dispatched Cui Yanxuan to Chengdu, he met Li Shaoqin's army and deceived them by saying, "I have come to see Meng Zhixiang by order of the emperor. If you can delay a little, you will naturally be able to get Shu."

古文：既至成都，劝孟知祥为战守备。
现代文：他到了成都，劝孟知祥作好战斗准备。
English: When he arrived in Chengdu, he advised Meng Zhixiang to prepare for battle.

古文：知祥浚壕树栅，遣马步都指挥使李仁罕将四万人，骁锐指挥使李延厚将二千人讨绍琛。
现代文：孟知祥挖战壕，树栅垒，并派马步都指挥使李仁罕率领四万人、骁锐指挥使李延厚率领二千人去讨伐李绍琛。
English: Meng Zhixiang dug trenches and tree fences, and sent Ma Bodu to command Li Renhan to lead forty thousand people and Zhai Rui to command Li Yanhou to lead two thousand people to fight against Li Shaoqi.

古文：延厚集其众询之曰： 有少壮勇锐，欲立功求富贵者东！衰疾畏懦，厌行陈者西！ 
现代文：李延厚召集大家说： 有年轻体壮勇敢善战而又想立功求得富贵的人站在东边，年老有病、害怕而且厌倦行军打仗的人站在西边。 
English: Li Yanhou called everyone together and said: Those who are young, strong, brave and good at fighting and who want to make merit and get rich stand on the east side, and those who are old, sick, afraid and tired of marching and fighting stand on the west side.

古文：得选兵七百人以行。
现代文：最后率领选出的七百士卒出发。
English: Finally, he led the selected seven hundred soldiers to set out.

古文：是日，任圜军追及绍琛于汉州，绍琛出兵逆战；招讨掌书记张厉请伏精兵于后，以赢兵诱之，圜从之，使董璋以东川赢兵先战而却。
现代文：这天，任圜的军队在汉州追到李绍琛，李绍琛出兵迎战。招讨掌书记张砺请求把精锐部队埋伏在后面，用体弱的士卒去引诱他们，任圜听从了他的意见，并让董璋用东川的弱兵先去作战，然后再退却。
English: On this day, Ren Xuan's army chased Li Shaoqin in Hanzhou, and Li Shaoqin sent troops to meet the battle. Zhang Qian, the secretary in charge of recruiting, requested that the elite troops be ambushed behind, and weak soldiers be used to lure them. Ren Xuan listened to his opinion, and let Dong Qian use weak soldiers from the East River to fight first, and then retreat.

古文：绍琛轻圜书生，又见其兵赢，极力追之，伏兵发，大破之，斩首数千级。
现代文：李绍琛轻视任圜是个书生，又见他的兵弱，就奋力追击。伏兵出动，把李绍琛的军队打得大败，斩杀了好几千人。
English: Li Shaoqi despised Ren Zheng as a scholar, and saw that his army was weak, so he pursued it vigorously. Ambushed, Li Shaoqi's army was defeated, and several thousand people were killed.

古文：自是绍琛入汉州，闭城不出。
现代文：从此李绍琛进入汉州，闭城不敢出来。
English: From then on, Li Shaoqi entered Hanzhou and dared not leave the closed city.

古文：三月，丁已朔，李绍真奏克刑州，擒赵太等。
现代文：三月，丁巳朔，李绍真奏告后唐帝攻破了邢州，抓获赵太等。
English: In March, after the report of Ding Si Shuo and Li Shaozhen, the Tang Emperor broke through Zhangzhou and captured Zhao Tai and others.

古文：庚申，绍真引兵至鄴都，营于城西北，以太等徇于鄴都城下而杀之。
现代文：庚申，李绍真率兵到达邺都，在城西北安下营寨，把赵太等在邺都城下示众杀死。
English: Goshun, Li Shaozhen and his soldiers arrived at Shidu, camped in the northwest of the city, and killed Zhao Tai and others at the foot of Shidu.

古文：辛酉，以威武节度副使王廷翰为威武节度使。
现代文：辛酉，任命威武节度副使王延翰为威武节度使。
English: Xinhua appointed Wang Yanhan, deputy envoy of the Weiwu Jiedu, as the Weiwu Jiedu envoy.

古文：壬戌，李嗣源至鄴都，营于城西南；甲子，嗣源下令军中，诘旦攻城。
现代文：壬戌，李嗣源到达邺都，在城西南安下营寨。甲子，李嗣源下达命令，明晨攻打邺都城。
English: When Li Siyuan arrived in Shidu, he camped in the southwestern part of the city. In the morning, Li Siyuan issued an order to attack Shidu.

古文：是夜，从马直军士张破败作乱，帅众大噪，杀都将，焚营舍。
现代文：这天夜里，从马直军士张破败叛乱，带领好多人大声喧闹，杀死都将，焚烧营寨。
English: On this night, Zhang, a sergeant from Ma Zhiang, crushed the rebellion, leading many people to make loud noises, kill everyone, and burn the camp.

古文：诘旦，乱兵逼中军，嗣源帅亲军拒战，不能敌，乱兵益炽。
现代文：第二天早晨，叛乱的士卒逼近中军，李嗣源率领随身护卫部队抵抗，抵挡不住，乱兵的气势更加猖狂。
English: The next morning, the rebellious soldiers approached the Chinese army, and Li Siyuan led the escort troops to resist. They could not resist, and the momentum of the rioters became even more rampant.

古文：嗣源叱而问之曰： 尔曹欲何为？ 
现代文：李嗣源声斥问他们说： 你们想干什么？ 
English: Li Sigeng scolded them, "What do you want to do?

古文：对曰： 将士从主上十年，百战以得天下。
现代文：乱兵回答说： 将士们跟随主上已有十年，经过百战夺得了天下。
English: The ruffian replied: The soldiers have been following the Lord for ten years, and after a hundred battles they have conquered the whole world.

古文：今主上弃恩任威，贝州戍卒思归，主上不赦，云 克城之后，当尽坑魏博之军 ；近从马直数卒喧竞，遽欲尽诛其众。
现代文：现在主上忘恩负义，欺凌士卒，驻守在贝州的士卒只是想回家，主上不能饶恕他们，还说 攻下城以后，应当把魏博的军队全部坑杀 。近来从直少数士卒争逐喧闹，便想很快把这些士卒杀掉。
English: Now the Lord is ungrateful, bullying the soldiers, the soldiers stationed in Bozhou just want to go home, the Lord can not forgive them, and said that after the capture of the city, they should kill all the Wei Bo's army. Recently, they have been competing noisily with a few soldiers, and they want to kill these soldiers quickly.

古文：我辈初无叛心，但畏死耳。今众议欲与城中合势击退诸道之军，请主上帝河南，令公帝河北，为军民之主。 
现代文：现在大家商量想和城里的人联合起来，击退各路军队，请主人在河南称帝，您李嗣源在河北称帝，成为这里军民的主上。 
English: Now we all want to discuss and unite with the people in the city to repel the armies of all directions, ask the master to proclaim the emperor in Henan, and you, Li Siyuan, to proclaim the emperor in Hebei and become the master of the military and the people here.

古文：嗣源泣谕之，不从。
现代文：李嗣源边哭边把皇帝的命令告诉他们，没人听从。
English: Li Siyuan cried and told them the emperor's order, but no one obeyed.

古文：嗣源曰： 尔不用吾言，任尔所为，我自归京师。 
现代文：李嗣源说： 你们不听我的话，任你们随便干，我自回京师。 
English: Li Sigen said: You don't listen to me, let you do whatever you want, I'll go back to Beijing.

古文：乱兵拔白刃环之，曰： 此辈虎狼也，不识尊卑，令公去欲何之！ 
现代文：叛乱的士兵们拔出刀剑把他围起来，并说： 这些人都是虎狼之辈，不管尊卑，你离开这里准备去哪里呢？ 
English: The rebel soldiers drew their swords and encircled him, saying: "These people are all from the generation of tigers and wolves, no matter how high or low they are, where are you going to go from here?

古文：因拥嗣源及李绍真等入城，城中不受外兵，皇甫晖逆击张破败，斩之，外兵皆溃。
现代文：于是簇拥着李嗣源和李绍真等进城，结果城里的人不让外面的兵进去，皇甫晖迎战张破败，张破败被击杀，城外的兵被打败。
English: As a result, Li Siyuan and Li Shaozhen entered the city. As a result, the people in the city did not allow the soldiers outside to enter. The emperor's courtiers were defeated by Zhang Rui, Zhang Rui was killed, and the soldiers outside the city were defeated.

古文：赵在礼帅诸校迎拜嗣源，泣谢曰： 将士辈负令公，敢不惟命是听！ 
现代文：赵在礼率领各位校官迎接拜见了李嗣源，边哭边谢罪说： 将士们对不起您，敢不唯命是从！ 
English: Zhao led the school officials in welcoming Li Siyuan, and while crying, he said: "Soldiers, I'm sorry for you, I dared to follow orders!

古文：嗣源诡说在礼曰： 凡举大事，须藉兵力，今外兵流散无所归，我为公出收之。 
现代文：李嗣源假意对赵在礼说： 凡是要做大的事情，必须借助兵力，现在城外的士卒被打散后无处可归，我为你出去收集他们。 
English: Li Siyuan pretended to say to Zhao Zaili, "In order to do great things, you must use military force. Now the soldiers outside the city have been scattered and have nowhere to return. I will go out to collect them for you."

古文：在礼乃听嗣源、绍真俱出城，宿魏县，散兵稍有至者。
现代文：赵在礼同意李嗣源和李绍真一起出城，他们住在魏县，被击散的士卒有一些又回来。
English: Zhao Zaili agreed to let Li Siyuan and Li Shaozhen leave the city together. They lived in Wei County. Some of the soldiers who were dispersed came back.

古文：汉州无城堑，树木为栅。
现代文：汉州城没有防御用的壕沟，只是树立起一些木头作为栅垒。
English: There are no defensive trenches in Hanzhou City, but some trees have been erected as fences.

古文：乙丑，任圜进攻其栅，纵火焚之，李绍琛引兵出战于金雁桥，兵败，与十馀骑奔绵竹，追擒之。
现代文：乙丑，任圜进攻这些栅垒，并放火烧掉，李绍琛率兵出来在金雁桥迎战任圜，李绍琛被打败，他和十余个骑兵逃奔到绵竹，任圜乘胜追击，抓获李绍琛。
English: Second Ugly, Ren Rong attacked these fences and set fire to them, Li Shao Rong led his troops to meet Ren Rong at the Golden Goose Bridge, Li Shao Rong was defeated, he and more than ten cavalrymen fled to Mianzhu, Ren Rong successfully pursued and captured Li Shao Rong.

古文：孟知祥自至汉州犒军，与任圜、董璋置酒高会，引李绍琛槛车至座中，知祥自酌大卮饮之，谓曰： 公已拥节旄，又有平蜀之功，何患不富贵，而求入此槛车邪！ 
现代文：孟知祥亲自到汉州慰劳军队，他和任圜、董璋大摆宴席，把李绍琛的槛车拉到宴席的座位中间，孟知祥用大杯子自酌自饮，对李绍琛说： 你已经拿着皇上给你的符节，又有平定蜀国的功劳，为什么还忧患你富贵不了，而寻求坐这种槛车呢？ 
English: Meng Zhixiang himself went to the Hanzhou comfort labor army. He, Ren Zheng and Dong Zheng held a grand banquet and pulled Li Shaoqi's carriage to the middle of the banquet seats. Meng Zhixiang used a large cup to drink and said to Li Shaoqi: You have already taken the symbols given to you by the emperor and have the merit of pacifying Shu. Why are you still worried that you can't be rich and seek to ride this carriage?

古文：绍琛曰： 郭侍中佐命功第一，兵不血刃取两川，一旦无罪族诛；如绍琛辈安保首领！
现代文：李绍琛说： 侍中郭崇韬辅佐皇帝功劳第一，没有经过战争而夺取东川、西川，突然无罪被灭族，象我李绍琛怎么能保全自己的脑袋呢？
English: Li Shaoqi said: Guo Chongyi, a chamberlain and aide to the emperor, had the greatest merit. He captured the East River and the West River without going through a war. Suddenly, he was killed without any guilt. How could Li Shaoqi save his own head like me?

古文：以此不敢归朝耳。 
现代文：因此不敢回到朝廷。 
English: Therefore, he did not dare to return to the imperial court.

古文：魏王继岌既获绍琛，乃引兵倍道而东。
现代文：魏王李继岌已经知道抓获了李绍琛，于是率兵日夜兼程向东进军。
English: The Wei king, Li Jizhe, already knew that Li Shaoqi had been captured, so he marched eastward with his soldiers day and night.

古文：孟知祥获陕虢都指挥使汝阴李肇、河中都指挥使千乘侯弘实，以肇为牙内马步都指挥使，弘实副之。
现代文：孟知祥抓获了陕虢都指挥使汝阴人李肇、河中都指挥使千乘人侯弘实，然后任李肇为牙内马步都指挥使，侯弘实为牙内马步都指挥副使。
English: Meng Zhixiang captured Li Zhao, the commander of the Shaanxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, and Hou Hongsheng, the commander of the Sichuan Zhuang Autonomous Region, and then appointed Li Zhao as the commander of the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region and Hou Hongsheng as the deputy commander of the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region.

古文：蜀中群盗犹未息，知祥择廉吏使治州县，蠲除横赋，安集流散，下宽大之令，与民更始。
现代文：蜀中的盗贼还未平息，于是孟知祥选择廉洁官吏治理各州县，免除了那些依仗权势随便增加的赋税，安置召集流散人员，颁布一些大的政策，让百姓重新安居乐业。
English: The thieves in Shu had not yet been subdued, so Meng Zhixiang first chose incorruptible officials to govern the states and counties, exempted those who relied on power to arbitrarily increase taxes, resettled and convened scattered personnel, and promulgated some major policies to let the people live and work in peace again.

古文：遣左厢都指挥使赵廷隐、右厢都指挥使张业将兵分讨群盗，悉诛之。
现代文：同时又派遣左厢都指挥使赵廷隐、右厢都指挥使张业率分别去讨伐盗贼，最后全部消灭。
English: At the same time, the left compartment commander sent Zhao Tingyin and the right compartment commander sent Zhang Ye to fight the thieves separately, and finally they were all eliminated.

古文：李嗣源之为乱兵所逼也，李绍荣有众万人，营于城南，嗣源遣牙将张虔钊、高行周等七人相继召之，欲与共诛乱者。
现代文：李嗣源被乱兵逼迫的时候，李绍荣有一万士卒驻扎在邺都城南，李嗣源派遣牙将张虔钊、高行周等七人相继通知他，想和他联合起来消灭乱兵。
English: When Li Siyuan was being persecuted by the rebels, Li Shaorong had ten thousand soldiers stationed in the south of Shidu. Li Siyuan sent seven people including Zhang Qianqian, Gao Xingwu and other generals to inform him one after another that they wanted to unite with him to eliminate the rebels.

古文：绍荣疑嗣源之诈，留使者，闭壁不应。
现代文：李绍荣怀疑李嗣源有诈，于是把使者扣留下来，关起军营大门拒不响应。
English: Li Shaorong suspected that Li Shiyuan was deceitful, so he detained the envoy and closed the gate of the military camp and refused to respond.

古文：及嗣源入鄴都，遂引兵去。
现代文：等到李嗣源进入邺都，他率兵离开这里。
English: After Li Siyuan entered Shidu, he led his troops out of the city.

古文：嗣源在魏县，众不满百，又无兵仗；李绍真所将镇兵五千，闻嗣源得出，相帅归之，由是嗣兵稍振。
现代文：李嗣源在魏县时，士卒不到一百人，又没有武器。李绍真所率领的镇州五千士卒，听说李嗣源出来，一起归附了他，因此李嗣源的军队渐渐振兴起来。
English: When Li Siyuan was in Wei County, he had less than a hundred soldiers and no weapons. The 5,000 soldiers in Zhenzhou led by Li Shaozhen heard that Li Siyuan had come out and joined him, so Li Siyuan's army gradually revived.

古文：嗣源泣谓诸将曰： 吾明日当归籓，上章待罪，听主上所裁。 
现代文：李嗣源边哭边对诸将说： 我明天就回藩镇去，上奏皇上请求治罪，听从皇上的裁决。 
English: Li Sigen, weeping, said to the generals: I will go back to the town tomorrow, appeal to the emperor for punishment, and obey the emperor's ruling.

古文：李绍真及中门使安重诲曰： 此策非宜。
现代文：李绍真和中门使安重诲说： 这种策略不大适当。
English: Li Shaozhen and Zhongmen Envoy An Chong said: This strategy is not appropriate.

古文：公为元帅，不幸为凶人所劫；李绍荣不战而退，归朝必以公藉口。
现代文：您身为元帅，不幸被乱兵劫持。李绍荣不战而退，回到朝廷后一定会以您为借口。
English: As a marshal, you were unfortunately kidnapped by rioting soldiers. Li Shaorong retreated without a fight, and after returning to the imperial court, he will certainly use you as an excuse.

古文：公若归籓，则为据地邀君，适足以实谗慝之言耳。
现代文：如果您回到藩镇，那就是占据地盘来胁迫君主，正足以证实那些谗言了。
English: If you return to the domain, it is to occupy the site to coerce the monarch, just enough to confirm those criticisms.

古文：不若星行诣阙，面见天子，庶可自明。 
现代文：不如日夜兼程回到朝廷，面见天子，这样方可不讲自明。 
English: It would be better to travel back to the imperial court day and night and meet the Son of Heaven. This would be self-evident.

古文：嗣源曰： 善！ 
现代文：李嗣源说： 很好！ 
English: Li Sigen said: Very good!

古文：丁卯，自魏县南趣相州，遇马坊使康福，得马数千匹，始能成军。
现代文：丁卯，从魏县出发向南直奔相州，遇到了马坊使康福，得到了几千匹马，才组成军队。
English: Dingwu, starting from Wei County and heading south straight to Xiangzhou, encountered the equestrian messenger Kangfu and obtained several thousand horses before forming an army.

古文：福，蔚州人也。
现代文：康福是蔚州人。
English: Kangfu is from Ulsan.

古文：平卢节度使符习将本军攻鄴都，闻李嗣源军溃，引兵归。
现代文：平卢节度使符习率军攻打邺都，听说李嗣源的军队被打败，就率兵回去了。
English: The Pinglu Festival ordered Fu Xi to lead the army to attack the capital, and when he heard that Li Siyuan's army had been defeated, he led the army back.

古文：至淄州，监军使杨希望遣兵逆击之，习惧，复引兵而西。
现代文：到了淄州，监军使杨希望派兵迎面攻打他们，符习害怕，又率军向西进。
English: When they arrived in Zhangzhou, the supervisors asked Yang Xing to send troops to attack them head-on, but he was afraid and led his army westward.

古文：青州指挥使王公俨攻希望，杀之，因据其城。
现代文：青州指挥使王公俨向杨希望进攻，并杀死了他，因此占据其城。
English: The commander of Qingzhou ordered Wang Gongyao to attack Yang Hope and kill him, thus occupying his city.

古文：时近侍为诸道监军者，皆恃恩与节度使争权，及鄴都军变，所在多杀之。
现代文：当时后唐帝左右和宦官任诸道监军的人们，都依仗后唐帝的恩宠和节度使们争权，等到邺都的军队发生叛变时，凡仍在任监军的宦官多数被杀死。
English: At that time, the people around and around the late Tang Emperor and the eunuchs who were appointed as supervisors of the armies of various provinces all relied on the grace and restraint of the late Tang Emperor to make them compete for power. When the army of Xindu rebelled, most of the eunuchs who were still in office as supervisors of the army were killed.

古文：安义监军杨继源谋杀节度使孔勍，勍先诱而杀之。
现代文：安义监军杨继源阴谋杀害节度使孔，结果孔先引诱而后就杀死了他。
English: Yang Jiyuan, a military inspector of Anyi, conspired with Kong to kill him. As a result, Kong first lured Kong and then killed him.

古文：武宁监军以李绍真从李嗣源，谋杀其元从，据城拒之；权知留后淳于晏帅诸将先杀之。
现代文：武宁监军认为李绍真跟随着李嗣源，阴谋杀害原来跟从李绍真的将士，占据彭城来抗拒李绍真。权知留后淳于晏率领诸位将领先杀了监军。
English: The supervisors of the Wu-Ning army thought that Li Shao Zhen followed Li Shiyuan, and conspired to kill the soldiers who originally followed Li Shao Zhen, and occupied Pengcheng to resist Li Shao Zhen. After Guanzhi stayed, Jun Yuxuan led the generals to kill the supervisors.

古文：晏，登州人也。
现代文：淳于晏是登州人。
English: Atsushi Yuzaki is a native of Denshu.

古文：戊辰，以军食不足，敕河南尹豫借夏秋税；民不聊生。
现代文：戊辰，因军粮不足，后唐帝下令河南尹先预借夏秋赋税，结果民不聊生。
English: Due to the shortage of military rations, Emperor Wu of the Later Tang Dynasty ordered Yin of Henan Province to borrow summer and autumn taxes in advance. As a result, the people did not have enough to eat.

古文：忠武节度使、尚书令齐王张全义闻李嗣源入鄴都，忧惧不食，辛未，卒于洛阳。
现代文：忠武节度使、尚书令齐王张全义听说李嗣源进入邺都，又忧愁又害怕，连饭都吃不下去。辛未，在洛阳去世。
English: Zhang Quanyi, the envoy of the Zhongwu Festival and the king of Qi, heard that Li Siyuan had entered the capital, and he was so sad and afraid that he could not even eat. Xin Wei died in Luoyang.

古文：租庸使以仓储不足，颇朘刻军粮，军士流言益甚。
现代文：租庸使因仓库储备不足，极力压缩削减军粮，军士的流言就更加厉害。
English: Due to the shortage of warehouse reserves, the rent-a-mob tried their best to compress and reduce the military food, and the rumor of the sergeant was even worse.

古文：宰相惧，帅百官上表言： 今租庸已竭，内库有馀，诸军室家不能相保，傥不赈救，惧有离心。
现代文：宰相感到害怕，就带领百官上奏后唐帝说： 现在收上来的租税已经用完，内库还有剩余，各军的家室都不能相保，如果不赶快赈救，怕有离心。
English: The prime minister was afraid, so he led a hundred officials to report to Emperor Tang and said: Now the taxes collected have been used up, there is still money left in the treasury, and the families of all the soldiers can't be insured. If we don't rescue them quickly, I'm afraid there will be a centrifuge.

古文：俟过凶年，其财复集。 
现代文：等到过了灾年，钱财又会收集上来。 
English: When the disaster year is over, the money will be collected again.

古文：上即欲从之，刘后曰： 吾夫妇君临万国，虽藉武功，亦由天命。
现代文：后唐帝打算听从他们的意见，刘皇后说： 我们夫妇以君主身份面临万国，虽然借助了武力的功劳，也是由天命安排。
English: After Emperor Tang intended to listen to their advice, Empress Liu said: My husband and I face all nations as monarchs, and although we have made use of the merits of the armed forces, it was also arranged by fate.

古文：命既在天，人如我何！ 
现代文：命运既然由天掌握，人们能把我们怎么样？ 
English: Since our life is in heaven, what can others do to us?

古文：宰相又于便殿论之，后属耳于屏风后，须臾，出妆具及三银盆、皇幼子三人于外曰： 人言宫中蓄积多，四方贡献随以给赐，所馀止此耳，请鬻以赡军！ 
现代文：宰相又在帝王休息的殿堂里议论这件事，皇后把耳朵贴在屏风的后面偷听，不一会儿，她把梳妆用具、三个银盆以及皇帝三个幼小的儿子抱到外面说： 人们都说宫中的积蓄多，但四面八方来的贡献随时都赏赐下去，所剩下的只有这些了，请把这些东西卖掉来赡养军队。 
English: The chancellor discussed the matter again in the hall where the emperor was resting. The empress put her ear behind the screen to eavesdrop. After a while, she took her dressing gown, three silver basins and the emperor's three young sons outside and said: People say that the palace has a lot of savings, but contributions from all directions are rewarded at any time. All that is left is this. Please sell these things to support the army.

古文：宰相惶惧而退。李绍荣自鄴都退保卫州，奏李嗣源已叛，与贼合。
现代文：宰相听后十分害怕地退出宫李绍荣从邺都退到卫州坚守，上奏后唐帝说李嗣源己经叛变，与乱兵合秋。
English: After listening to the prime minister, he was very afraid to leave the palace. Li Shaorong retreated from Shidu to defend Weizhou. After the report, the Tang Emperor said that Li Siyuan had already rebelled and joined the rebels.

古文：嗣源遣使上章自理，一日数辈。
现代文：李嗣源派出使者给后唐帝送自己解释的奏章，一天之内就有好几个人来送。
English: Li Siyuan sent an envoy to the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty to deliver his own interpretation of the musical score. Within a day, several people came to deliver it.

古文：嗣源长子从审为金枪指挥使，帝谓从审曰： 吾深知尔父忠厚，尔往谕朕意，勿使自疑。 
现代文：李嗣源的长子李从审为金枪指挥使，后唐帝对李从审说： 我深知你父亲的忠厚，你回去告诉他我的意思，不要使他自疑。 
English: Li Congxuan, the eldest son of Li Sigen, became the commander of the Golden Gun. Later, Emperor Tang said to Li Congxuan, "I am well aware of your father's loyalty. Go back and tell him what I mean, and don't make him doubt himself."

古文：从审至卫州，绍荣囚，欲杀之。
现代文：李从审到了卫州，李绍荣把他抓了起来，想杀掉他。
English: From the trial to Weizhou, Li Shaorong caught him and wanted to kill him.

古文：从审曰： 公等既不亮吾父，吾亦不能至父所，请复还宿卫。 
现代文：李从审说： 你们既不相信我的父亲，我又不回到我父亲的住地，那么请求再把我放还禁卫军去。 
English: Li Congjin said, "Since you don't believe my father and I won't return to my father's residence, then please release me back to the Imperial Guard."

古文：乃释之。
现代文：于是李绍荣才放了他。
English: As a result, the brother was released.

古文：帝怜从审，赐名继璟，待之如子。
现代文：后唐帝很怜爱李从审，赐给他名字叫继，待他就像待儿子一样。
English: Later, Emperor Tang took pity on Li Congzhu and gave him the name Cui, treating him like a son.

古文：是后嗣源所奏，皆为绍荣所遏，不得通，嗣源由是疑惧。
现代文：此后李嗣源的所有奏书，都被李绍荣拦挡，不得通达。李嗣源也因此而疑惧。
English: After that, all of Li Sigen's reports were blocked by Li Shaorong and could not be accessed. Li Sigen was also suspicious.

古文：石敬瑭曰： 夫事成于果决而败于犹豫，安有上将与叛卒入贼城，而他日得保无恙乎！
现代文：石敬瑭说： 什么事情都是由于果断而取得成功，犹豫而招致失败，哪里有上将和叛进入贼城而他日又安然无恙呢？
English: Shi Jingyao said: What kind of things are decisive and successful, hesitation and failure, where is the general and the traitor entering the thief city and the other day is safe and sound?

古文：大梁，天下之要会也，愿假三百骑先往取之；若幸而得之，公宜引大军亟进，如此始可自全。 
现代文：大梁是天下的要害地方，我希望借三百骑兵先夺取大梁。如果侥幸攻取了大梁，您就率领大军赶快前进，只有这样才可保全自己。 
English: The beam is the most important place in the world, and I hope to take the beam first with three hundred cavalry. If you are lucky enough to capture the beam, you will lead the army to advance quickly. Only in this way can you protect yourself.

古文：突骑都指挥使康义诚曰： 主上无道，军民怨怒，公从众则生，守节必死。 
现代文：突骑指挥使康义诚说： 主上没有德政，军民们又怨恨又愤怒，您要顺从大家就会活下来，如果坚守节操就会死去。 
English: The commanding officer of the cavalry said to Kang Yicheng: There is no virtue in the Lord, the soldiers and the people are resentful and angry. If you obey everyone, you will survive, but if you stick to the discipline, you will die.

古文：嗣源乃令安重诲移檄会兵。义诚，代北胡人也。
现代文：于是李嗣源下令安重诲发出檄文集中部队，康义诚是代北的胡人。
English: As a result, Li Siyuan ordered An Chongyuan to issue an imperial edict to concentrate the troops. Kang Yicheng was the representative of the northern Hu people.

古文：时齐州防御使李绍虔、泰宁节度使李绍钦、贝州刺史李绍英屯瓦桥，北京右厢马军都指挥使安审通屯奉化军，嗣源皆遣使召之。
现代文：当时齐州防御使李绍虔、泰宁节度使李绍钦、贝州刺史李绍英驻扎在瓦桥，北京右厢马军都指挥使安审通驻扎在奉化军，李嗣源都派遣使者去召集他们。
English: At that time, the defense of Chizhou made Li Shaoqian, the festival of Taining made Li Shaoqin, and the history of Beizhou made Li Shaoying stationed in Wabiao. The commander of the right flank of the Beijing Army stationed An Ji Tong in the Fenghua Army. Li Siyuan sent envoys to summon them.

古文：绍英，瑕丘人，本姓房，名知温；审通，金全之侄也。
现代文：李绍英是瑕丘人，本姓房，名知温。安审通是安金全的侄儿。
English: Li Shaoying was from Kejiu, his family name was Fang, and he was known as Zhiwen. An Xitong was the nephew of An Jinquan.

古文：嗣源家在真定，虞候将王建立先杀其监军，由是获全。
现代文：李嗣源的家属住在真定，虞假将王建立先杀了监军，因此李嗣源的家属才得以保全。
English: The family members of Li Sigen lived in Zhending. The fake warlord Wang Jian first killed the supervising army, so the family members of Li Sigen could be saved.

古文：建立，辽州人也。
现代文：王建立是辽州人。
English: Wang Jianli is from Liaozhou.

古文：李从珂自横水将所部兵由盂县趣镇州，与王建立军合，倍道从嗣源。
现代文：李从珂从横水率部队从盂县直奔镇州，与王建立的军队会合，日夜兼程地奔赴李嗣源。
English: Li Zongke led his troops across the water from Jixian County straight to Zhenzhou, met with the army established by Wang, and rushed to Li Siyuan day and night.

古文：嗣源以李绍荣在卫州，谋自白皋济河，分三百骑使石敬瑭将之前驱，李从珂为殿，于是军势大盛。
现代文：李嗣源因为李绍荣在卫州，所以谋划从白皋渡过黄河，分出三百名骑兵让石敬塘率领作为前头部队，李从珂跟在军队的最后面，于是军势大盛。
English: Because Li Shaorong was in Weizhou, Li Siyuan planned to cross the Yellow River from Paektu. He assigned three hundred cavalrymen to be led by Shi Jingtang as the vanguard, while Li Congke followed at the rear of the army. As a result, the army prospered.

古文：嗣源从子从璋自镇州引军而南，过邢州，邢人奉为留后。
现代文：李嗣源的侄儿李从璋从镇州率领部队向南进军，经过邢州时，邢州人推崇他为邢州留后。
English: Li Siyuan's nephew, Li Conglu, led troops from Zhenzhou to march south. When he passed through Ganzhou, the people of Ganzhou praised him for staying in Ganzhou.

古文：癸酉，诏怀远指挥使白从晖将骑兵扼河阳桥，帝乃出金帛给赐诸军，枢密宣徽使及供奉内使景进等皆献金帛以助给赐。
现代文：癸酉，后唐帝下诏让怀远指挥使白从晖率领骑兵扼守河阳桥，于是拿出一些金帛赏赐给各路军队，枢密宣徽使以及供奉内使景进等都出一些金帛来帮助后唐帝赏赐军队。
English: Later, Emperor Tang issued an edict to let Huaiyuan command Bai Congkun to lead the cavalry to guard the Heyang Bridge, so he took out some gold ingots to reward the various armies, and the Privy Seal Messenger and the Offering Inner Messenger Jingjin all came up with some gold ingots to help Emperor Tang reward the army.

古文：军士负物而诟曰： 吾妻子已殍死，得此何为！ 
现代文：军队士卒们背着东西骂道： 我们的妻子己经饿死，拿上这些东西有什么用呢？ 
English: The soldiers, carrying things on their backs, scolded: Our wives have starved to death, so what is the use of carrying these things?

古文：甲戌，李绍荣自卫州至洛阳，帝如鹞店劳之。
现代文：甲戌，李绍荣从卫州到达洛阳，后唐帝到鹞店去慰劳他。
English: Armor-plated, Li Shaorong arrived in Luoyang from Weizhou, after which Emperor Tang went to Shantian to console him.

古文：绍荣曰： 鄴都乱兵已遣其党翟建白据博州，欲济河袭晖、汴，愿陛下幸关东招抚之。 
现代文：李绍荣说： 邺都的叛乱士卒己经派出他们的同伙翟建白占据了博州，打算渡过黄河来袭击郓、汴，希望陛下巡幸关东来招抚他们。 
English: Li Shaorong said, "The rebels in Shidu have sent their accomplices, Zhai Jianbai, to occupy Bozhou, intending to cross the Yellow River to attack Zhai and Zhai, and hope that His Majesty will visit Guandong to appease them.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：后唐帝听从了他的意见。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：景进等言于帝曰： 魏王未至，康延孝初平，西南犹未安；王衍族党不少，闻车驾东征，恐其为变，不若除之。 
现代文：景进等对后唐帝说： 魏王还没有到来，康延孝刚刚平定，西南方面还不很安定。王衍的同党不少，如果他们听说您东征，恐怕会发生变化，不如消灭他们。 
English: Jingjin and others said to the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty: King Wei has not yet arrived, Kang Yanxiao has just been pacified, and the southwest is not very stable. There are quite a few of Wang Yan's comrades-in-arms. If they hear about your eastward march, I'm afraid things will change. It's better to eliminate them.

古文：帝乃遣中使向延嗣赍敕往诛之，敕曰： 王衍一行，并从杀戳。 
现代文：后唐帝派遣中使向延嗣拿着后唐帝的命令去诛杀他。后唐帝的命令说： 王衍一行，一并杀死。 
English: The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty sent an envoy to Yan Zi with an order from the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty to fight and kill him. The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty's order said, "Kill Wang Yan and his entourage together."

古文：已印画，枢密使张居翰覆视，就殿柱揩去 行 字，改为 家 字，由是蜀百官及衍仆役获免者千馀人。
现代文：己经盖上了后唐帝的印记和画了押，枢密使张居翰复看时，就在殿堂的柱子上勾去 行 字，改为 家 字，因此蜀国的百官以及王衍的仆役们就有一千多人免于一死。
English: After the seal of the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty was stamped and sealed, when the confidential envoy Zhang Juhan reviewed it, he ticked the line letter on the pillar of the hall of fame and changed it to the family letter. As a result, more than a thousand officials of Shu and Wang Yan's servants were spared from death.

古文：延嗣至长安，尽杀衍宗族于秦川驿。
现代文：向延嗣到达长安，在秦川驿把王衍的家族全部诛杀。
English: Xiang Yanji arrived in Chang'an and killed Wang Yan's entire family in Qinchuan.

古文：衍母徐氏且死，呼曰： 吾儿以一国迎降，不免族诛，信义俱弃，吾知汝行亦受祸矣！ 
现代文：王衍的母亲徐氏将要被杀时，大声说： 我的儿子以一个国家迎降还免不了诛灭全家，你们背信弃义，我知道你们也要遭受这种灾难。 
English: When Wang Yan's mother, Ms. Xu, was about to be killed, she said loudly: "My son's surrender to a country cannot but lead to the annihilation of the whole family. You have betrayed the truth. I know that you will also suffer this kind of disaster."

古文：乙亥，帝发洛阳；丁丑，次汜水；戊寅，遣李绍荣将骑兵循河而东。
现代文：乙亥，后唐帝从洛阳出发。丁丑，到达水。戊寅，派遣李绍荣率骑兵沿着黄河向东进军。
English: Yi Hai, the late Tang Emperor, set out from Luoyang. Ding Gou, reached the water. Wu Yin, dispatched Li Shaorong and his cavalry to march east along the Yellow River.

古文：李嗣源亲党从帝者多亡去；或劝李继璟宜早自脱，继璟终无行意。
现代文：李嗣源的亲信同伙中追随后唐帝的人大多逃跑了。有人劝说李继应当及早逃，李继却始终没有逃离的意思。
English: Among the close associates of Li Sigen, most of those who chased after the Tang Emperor fled. Some people persuaded Li Jiyuan to flee as soon as possible, but Li Jiyuan still had no intention of fleeing.

古文：帝屡遣继璟诣嗣源，继璟固辞，愿死于帝前以明赤诚。
现代文：后唐帝曾多次派遣李继到李嗣源那里去，李继坚决不去，希望死在后唐帝的面前来表明自己的忠诚。
English: Later Tang emperors sent Li Jiyuan to Li Jiyuan several times, but Li Jiyuan resolutely refused to go, hoping to die in front of the Emperor to show his loyalty.

古文：帝闻嗣源在黎阳，强遣继璟渡河召之，道遇李绍荣，绍荣杀之。
现代文：后唐帝听说李嗣源在阳，硬派遣李继渡过黄河召他，李继在路上遇到李绍荣，李绍荣把他杀死了。
English: After the Tang Emperor heard that Li Shiyuan was in Yang, he sent Li Ji across the Yellow River to summon him. Li Ji met Li Shaorong on the road, and Li Shaorong killed him.

古文：吴越王镠有疾，如衣锦军，命镇海、镇东节度使留后传瓘监国。
现代文：吴越王钱有病，他到衣锦军那里，命令镇海、镇东节度使留后钱傅监国。
English: King Qian of Wuyue was ill, so he went to the Yi Jin army and ordered Zhenhai and Zhendong Jiedu to make Qian Fu stay behind to supervise the country.

古文：吴徐温遣使来问疾，左右劝镠勿见，镠曰： 温阴狡，此名问疾，实使之觇我也。 
现代文：吴国的徐温派遣使者来问侯，钱的左右大臣都劝他不要见吴国使者，钱说： 徐温阴险狡猾，这回名义上是来问侯我，而实际上是来窥控我。 
English: Xu Wen of the State of Wu sent an envoy to inquire about Hou, and the ministers on both sides of Qian advised him not to see the envoy of the State of Wu. Qian said: Xu Wen is insidious and cunning, this time he nominally came to inquire about Hou, but in fact he came to spy on me.

古文：强出见之。
现代文：于是他振作起来出接见吴国使者。
English: So he braced himself and went out to meet the emissary of the State of Wu.

古文：温果聚兵欲袭吴越，闻镠疾瘳而止。
现代文：徐温果然集中兵力准备袭击吴越，听说钱愈，就停止了行动。
English: Xu Wen concentrated his forces and prepared to attack Wu Yue. When he heard that the money was running out, he stopped the operation.

古文：镠寻还钱塘。
现代文：钱不久自临安东还钱塘。
English: Qian soon returned to Qiantang from Andong.

古文：吴以右仆射、同平章事徐知诰为待中，右仆射严可求兼门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：吴国任命左仆射、同平章事徐知诰为侍中，右仆射严可求兼任下侍郎、同平章事。
English: The State of Wu appointed Xu Zhisheng, the left-hand servant of Sha and Tongping Zhangji, as a chamberlain, and the right-hand servant of Sha Yan could be asked to also serve as a lower chamberlain and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：庚辰，帝发汜水。
现代文：庚辰，后唐帝从水出发。
English: Geng Chen, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty, started from the water.

古文：辛已，李嗣源至白皋，遇山东上供绢数船，取以赏军。
现代文：辛巳，李嗣源到达白皋，遇到好几船来自山东上供的绢帛，于是拿这些东西赏给了军队。
English: Soon after, Li Siyuan arrived in Baekje and encountered several ships of straw from Shandong, so he rewarded the army with these things.

古文：安重诲从者争舟，行营马步使陶斩以徇，由是军中肃然。
现代文：跟随安重诲的人争抢船上的东西，行营马步使陶把他们当众斩杀，因此军中才整肃起来。
English: Those who followed An Chongyuan scrambled for the things on the ship, and marched at a gallop to make Tao slaughter them in public, so the army began to clean up.

古文：，许州人也。
现代文：陶是许州人。
English: Tao is from Xuzhou.

古文：嗣源济河，至滑洲，遣人招符习，习与嗣源会于胙城，安审通亦引兵来会。
现代文：李嗣源渡过黄河，到达滑州，派人召见符习，符习和李嗣源在胙城相会，安审通也率部队来这里相会。
English: After Li Siyuan crossed the Yellow River and arrived in Slanting, he sent someone to summon Fu Xi. Fu Xi and Li Siyuan met in Handan, and An Zhi Tong also led the troops to meet here.

古文：知汴州孔循遣使奉表西迎帝，亦遣使北输密款于嗣源，曰： 先至者得之。 
现代文：汴州知州孔循派遣使者拿着送给后唐帝的表书在西面迎接后唐帝的到来，同时也派遣使者和北方偷偷送信给李嗣源，说： 谁先到谁将得到汴州。 
English: Bozhou Chizhou Kongxun sent an envoy to the west to welcome the arrival of the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty with a watch given to the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty. At the same time, he also sent an envoy to the north to secretly send a message to Li Siyuan, saying: Whoever arrives first will get Bozhou.

古文：先是，帝遣骑将满城西方鄴守汴州；石敬瑭使裨将李琼以劲兵突入封丘门，敬瑭踵其后，自西门入，遂据其城，西方鄴请降。
现代文：在此以前，后唐帝派遣骑将满城人西方邺镇守汴州。石敬瑭派副将李琼带劲兵突然攻入封丘门，石敬瑭跟在他们的后面从西门进入，占据了汴州城，西方邺请求投降。
English: Prior to this, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty dispatched the cavalry general Mancheng to defend Zhangzhou from the west. Shi Jingtao sent the vice-general Li Qiong with strong soldiers to suddenly break into the Fengqiu Gate, Shi Jingtao followed behind them from the west gate, occupied Zhangzhou City, and requested the surrender from the west.

古文：敬瑭使人趣嗣源；壬午，嗣源入大梁。
现代文：石敬瑭派人去报告李嗣源。壬午，李嗣源进入大梁。
English: Shi Jingyao sent someone to report to Li Siyuan. In the morning, Li Siyuan entered the girder.

古文：是日，帝至荥泽东，命龙骧指挥使姚彦温将三千骑为前军，曰： 汝曹汴人也，吾入汝境，不欲使它军前驱，恐扰汝室家。 
现代文：这一天，后唐帝到达荥泽的东西，命令龙骧指挥使姚彦温率领三千骑兵为前锋，并说： 你闪都是汴梁人，我进入你们的境内，不想让其他部队作为前锋，唯恐打扰你们的境内，不想让其他部队作为前锋，唯恐打扰你们的家室。 
English: On this day, after Emperor Tang arrived in Heze, he ordered the commander of the Long March to make Yao Yanwen lead three thousand cavalry as the vanguard, and said: You are all the people of He Liang, I enter your territory, I don't want other troops as the vanguard, lest I disturb your territory, I don't want other troops as the vanguard, lest I disturb your home.

古文：厚赐而遣之。
现代文：赏赐了丰厚的礼物就派他们走了。
English: He sent them away with a generous gift.

古文：彦温即以其众叛归嗣源，谓嗣源曰： 京师危迫，主上为元行钦所惑，事势已离，不可复事矣。 
现代文：姚彦温马上率领这部分士卒背叛后唐帝而归服了李嗣源，他对李嗣源说： 京师危险紧迫，主上被赐名李绍荣的元行钦所迷惑，大势己，不可再侍奉皇上了。 
English: Yao Yanwen immediately led this part of the officers and men to betray the Tang Emperor and surrender to Li Shiyuan. He said to Li Shiyuan: "The Beijing division is in imminent danger. The master has been confused by Yuan Xingqin, who was given the name Li Shaorong. He is very powerful and can no longer serve the emperor."

古文：嗣源曰： 汝自不忠，何言之悖也！ 
现代文：李嗣源说： 你没有忠心，说的话何等悖乱！ 
English: Li Siyuan said, "You are not loyal. What a disorderly thing to say!"

古文：即夺其兵。
现代文：于是马上夺取了他的部队。
English: They immediately overran his forces.

古文：指挥使潘环守王村寨，有刍粟数万，帝遣骑视之，环亦奔大梁。
现代文：指挥使潘环驻守在王村寨，有粮草好几万，后唐帝派骑兵去察看，潘环也逃奔到大梁。
English: The commander stationed Pan Huan in Wang Cunzhai, with tens of thousands of grain and grass. Later, the Tang Emperor sent cavalry to inspect, and Pan Huan also fled to Dalian.

古文：帝至万胜镇，闻嗣源已据大梁，诸军离叛，神色沮丧，登高叹曰： 吾不济矣！ 
现代文：后唐帝到达万胜镇，听说李嗣源己经占据了大梁城，诸军离叛，神色沮丧，他登上高处叹息地说： 我不能成功了。 
English: After the Tang Emperor arrived in Wansheng Town, he heard that Li Siyuan had already occupied Dalian City, the armies had defected, and he looked depressed. He ascended to a high place and said with a sigh: I can't succeed.

古文：即命旋师，是夜复至汜水。
现代文：于是马上命令回师。
English: So the division was ordered back immediately.

古文：帝之出关也，扈从兵二万五千，及还，已失万馀人，乃留秦州都指挥使张唐以步骑三千守关。
现代文：后唐帝出关时，随从的部队有二万五千人，等到回师的时侯，己失去一万余人，于是他留下秦州都指挥使张唐率领三千骑兵步兵把守关口。
English: Later, when Emperor Tang left the pass, he was accompanied by twenty-five thousand troops. By the time he returned to his division, he had lost more than ten thousand people. Therefore, he left the command of Qinzhou to Zhang Tang, who led three thousand cavalry and infantry to guard the pass.

古文：癸未，帝还过罂子谷，道狭，每遇卫士执兵仗者，辄以善言抚之曰： 适报魏王又进西川金银五十万，到京当尽给尔曹。 
现代文：癸未，后唐帝路过子谷，道路狭窄，每逢遇到拿着兵器仪仗的卫士，他就用友好爱惜的话安抚他们说： 刚才有人报告说魏王又进贡西川的金银五十两，等到了京师全部分给父们。 
English: Soon after, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty passed through Zidang, the road was narrow, and whenever he met the guards holding weapons of honor, he would appease them with words of friendship and love: Just now, someone reported that the Wei King had also brought in fifty-two tons of gold and silver from Gongxi River, and when he arrived in Beijing, he would give the entire amount to the fathers.

古文：对曰： 陛下赐已晚矣，人亦不感圣恩！ 
现代文：士卒们回答说： 陛下的赏赐己经晚了，人们也不会感谢圣恩了。 
English: The magistrates replied: Your Majesty's reward is long overdue, and the people will not thank you for your grace.

古文：帝流涕而已。
现代文：后唐帝只是哭泣而己。
English: Zhuangzong had to shed tears.

古文：又索袍带赐从官，内库使张容哥称颁给已尽，卫士叱容哥曰： 致吾君失社稷，皆此阉竖辈也。 
现代文：后唐帝又寻找袍带赏赐给跟从他的官吏们。内库使张容哥说颁赐的东西己经用完了，卫士们骂张容歌说： 使国君失了江山，都是你们这些阉竖们干的。 
English: Later, the Tang Emperor also looked for robes and belts to reward the officials who followed him. The treasury told Zhang Rongge that the gifts had been used up, and the guards scolded Zhang Rongge, saying: "It was all you scoundrels who caused the sovereign to lose the country.

古文：抽刀逐之；或救之，获免。
现代文：于是拔出刀来追逐他。刚好有人救了他，才免于一死。
English: So he pulled out his knife and chased him. Someone just happened to save him from certain death.

古文：容哥谓同类曰： 皇后吝财致此，今乃归咎于吾辈；事若不测，吾辈万段，吾不忍待也！ 
现代文：张容哥对他的同伙们说： 皇后吝啬财物到了如此地步，现在却归咎于我们。如果发生意外的事情，我们将会碎尸万段，我不能忍心等待那一天的到来。 
English: Zhang Rongge said to his comrades, "The Empress has been so stingy with her wealth, but now she blames us. If something unexpected happens, we will be torn to pieces. I can't wait for that day to come."

古文：因赴河死。
现代文：因此，他跳进黄河淹死了。
English: So he jumped into the Yellow River and drowned.

古文：甲申，帝至石桥西，置酒悲涕，谓李绍荣等诸将曰： 卿辈事吾以来，急难富贵靡不同之；今致吾至此，皆无一策以相救乎！ 
现代文：甲申，后唐帝到达石桥的西面，摆开酒宴，悲痛地对李绍荣等诸位将领说： 你们侍奉我以来，急难同当，富贵同享，今天使我到了如此地步，都没有一个计策能救我？ 
English: After Emperor Tang reached the west side of the stone bridge, he held a wine banquet and said sadly to Li Shaorong and other generals: Since you have been serving me, you have shared the hardships and riches, and today I have reached such a stage that no strategy can save me?

古文：诸将百馀人，皆截发置地，誓以死报，因相与号泣。是日晚，入洛城。
现代文：一百多们将领都割断头发放在地上，誓死以报答后唐帝，于是一起放声大哭。当天晚上，进入洛城。
English: More than a hundred generals all cut their hair and laid it on the ground, swore to die to repay the Tang Emperor, and then cried loudly together. That evening, they entered Los Angeles.

古文：李嗣源命石敬瑭将前军趣汜水收抚散兵，嗣源继之；李绍虔、李绍英引兵来会。
现代文：李嗣源命令石敬瑭率领前锋部队到水收集安抚那些逃散的士卒，李嗣源在后面跟着他们。李绍虔、李绍英率领部队也来相会。
English: Li Sigen ordered Shi Jingyao to lead the forward troops to collect water and pacify those soldiers who had fled. Li Sigen followed them. Li Shaoqian and Li Shaoying led the troops to meet.

古文：丙戌，宰相、枢密使共奉： 魏王西军将至，车驾宜且控扼汜水，收抚散兵以俟之。 
现代文：丙戌，宰相、枢密使一起上奏后唐帝说： 魏王率领西面的部队即将到来，陛下的车驾应当暂且控制扼守住水，收集安抚逃散的士卒来等待魏王。 
English: After the proclamation of the proclamation, the prime minister and the confidential envoy together, Tang Di said: Wei Wang is about to lead the troops in the west, and His Majesty's chariot should temporarily control and hold back the water, and gather the pacified and dispersed soldiers to wait for Wei Wang.

古文：帝从之，自出上东门阅骑兵，戒以诘旦东行。
现代文：后唐帝听从了他们的建议，并亲自到上东门外检阅了骑兵，告诫他们明天早晨向东进军。
English: Emperor Hou Tang heeded their advice and personally inspected the cavalry outside the Upper East Gate, warning them to march east tomorrow morning.

