古文：天地玄黄，宇宙洪荒。
现代文：世界刚刚形成的时候，天是青黑色的，大地是黄色的；世间万物都处于混沌蒙昧中。
English: When the world was just formed, the sky was blue-black, the earth was yellow; everything in the world was in chaos and obscurity.

古文：日月盈昃，辰宿列张。
现代文：太阳升起又落下，月亮圆了又缺；星辰布满在无边的太空中。
English: The sun rises and sets, the moon is round and absent; the stars fill the boundless space.

古文：寒来暑往，秋收冬藏。
现代文：寒暑循环变换，四季交替；秋天是收割的季节，冬天则忙着将粮食储藏起来。
English: The cycle of hot and cold changes, the four seasons alternate; autumn is the season of harvest, and winter is busy storing grain.

古文：闰余成岁，律吕调阳。云腾致雨，露结为霜。
现代文：积累数年的闰余并成一个月，放在闰年里；古人还用六律六吕来确定一年当中的二十四节气。水蒸气向上升腾遇冷就形成雨；露水碰上寒夜，很快就凝结为霜。
English: The accumulated surplus of leap years is combined into one month and placed in a leap year; the ancients also used the six laws of nature to determine the twenty-four solar terms in a year. Water vapor rises and forms rain when it is cold; when dew hits a cold night, it quickly condenses into frost.

古文：金生丽水，玉出昆冈。
现代文：黄金产自金沙江底，玉石出自昆仑山岗。
English: Gold comes from the bottom of the Jinsha River, while jade comes from the Kunlun Mountains.

古文：剑号巨阙，珠称夜光。
现代文：所有宝剑中最有名的宝剑叫 巨阙 ，最贵重的明珠叫 夜光 。
English: The most famous sword among all the swords is the Colossus, and the most precious pearl is the Nightglow.

古文：果珍李柰，菜重芥姜。
现代文：所有水果中，最珍贵的是李子和柰子，所有蔬菜中最重要的是芥和姜。
English: The most precious of all fruits are plums and hazelnuts, and the most important of all vegetables are mustard and ginger.

古文：海咸河淡，鳞潜羽翔。
现代文：海水咸，河水淡；鱼儿在水中潜游，鸟儿翱翔于天空。
English: The sea water is salty, the river water is light; fish swim in the water, and birds fly in the sky.

古文：龙师火帝，鸟官人皇。
现代文：龙师、火帝、鸟官、人皇，这都是上古时代的帝皇官员。
English: Dragons, fire emperors, bird officials, and human emperors were all imperial officials in ancient times.

古文：始制文字，乃服衣裳。
现代文：人们先创造了文字，然后才开始穿衣裳。
English: People created writing first, and only then began to wear clothes.

古文：推位让国，有虞陶唐。
现代文：唐尧、虞舜英明无私，主动把君位禅让给功臣贤人。
English: Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan were wise and selfless, and voluntarily gave up the throne of Zen to meritorious and wise men.

古文：吊民伐罪，周发殷汤。
现代文：安抚黎民百姓，讨伐罪孽深重的暴君，是周武王姬发和商君成汤。
English: To appease the people of Li and to fight against the sinful tyrant, Zhou Wu Wang Jifa and the merchant became a soup.

古文：坐朝问道，垂拱平章。爱育黎首，臣伏戎羌。
现代文：贤君身坐朝廷，向大臣们询问治理国家的道理，垂衣拱手，毫不费力就能使天下太平，功绩彰著。
English: The wise men sat in the imperial court, asked the ministers about the principles of governing the country, and gave up. They could make the world peaceful without any effort, and their achievements were outstanding.

古文：遐迩一体，率宾归王。
现代文：这些君王爱抚、体恤老百姓，使得四方各族人都归附向往。
English: These kings caressed and sympathized with the common people, making people of all ethnic groups in the four directions yearn for them.

古文：鸣凤在竹，白驹食场。
现代文：凤凰在竹林中欢快地鸣唱，小白马在草场上悠闲自在地吃草。
English: The phoenix sings happily in the bamboo forest, and the little white horse grazes leisurely in the meadow.

古文：化被草木，赖及万方。
现代文：贤明的君王的教化，泽被大自然的一草一木，恩泽遍及天下百姓。
English: The enlightenment of the wise king, the blessing of nature, and the blessing of the people all over the world.

古文：盖此身发，四大五常。恭惟鞠养，岂敢毁伤。
现代文：人的身体是由地、水、火、风四种基本物质构成的，一言一动都要符合 即仁、义、礼、智、信 。恭蒙父母亲生养爱护，怎么能够轻易地去损害它、毁坏它呢。
English: The human body is composed of four basic substances: earth, water, fire, and wind. Every word and action must be consistent with these four elements: benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom, and faith. How can we damage and destroy it so easily when we have been nurtured and loved by our parents?

古文：女慕贞洁，男效才良。
现代文：女子要仰慕那些持身严谨的贞妇洁女，男子要效仿那些才德兼备的贤人。
English: Women should admire those chaste and chaste women who are self-disciplined, and men should emulate those sages who are both talented and virtuous.

古文：知过必改，得能莫忘。
现代文：知道自己有过错，一定要改正；适合自己做的事，不要放弃。
English: If you know that you are at fault, you must correct it; do not give up what suits you.

古文：罔谈彼短，靡恃己长。信使可覆，器欲难量。墨悲丝染，诗赞羔羊。
现代文：墨子为白丝染色不褪而悲泣，《诗经》里的《羔羊》篇，因赞颂羔羊能始终保持洁白如一而传颂四海。
English: Mozi mourns for the white silk dyeing not fading, and the "Lamb" chapter in the "Song of Songs" praises the four seas for praising the lamb's ability to always remain white.

古文：景行维贤，克念作圣。
现代文：高尚的德行只能在贤人那里看到；要克制私欲，努力仿效圣人。
English: Noble virtues can only be seen in a sage; restrain selfish desires and strive to emulate a sage.

古文：德建名立，形端表正。
现代文：养成了好的道德，好的名望也会树立起来；就像形体端庄，仪表也随之肃穆一样。
English: Good morals are cultivated, and a good reputation is established; just as a dignified body is accompanied by a dignified appearance.

古文：空谷传声，虚堂习听。
现代文：空旷的山谷中呼喊声传得很远，宽敞的厅堂里说话声非常清晰。
English: Shouts echoed far and wide in the empty valley, and voices spoke clearly in the spacious hall.

古文：祸因恶积，福缘善庆。
现代文：祸害是因为多次作恶积累的结果，幸福是因为常年行善得到的回报。
English: Misfortune is the result of the accumulation of many evil deeds, and happiness is the reward of doing good deeds all the year round.

古文：尺璧非宝，寸阴是竞。
现代文：一尺长的璧玉算不上宝贵，一寸短的光阴却值得珍惜。
English: A one-foot-long gemstone is not precious, but a one-inch short gemstone is worth cherishing.

古文：资父事君，曰严与敬。
现代文：供养父亲，待奉君王，要做到认真、谨慎、恭敬。
English: To provide for one's father and serve the king, one must be conscientious, prudent and respectful.

古文：孝当竭力，忠则尽命。
现代文：孝顺父母应当尽心竭力，忠于君王要不惜献出生命。
English: Filial obedience to parents should be done with all one's heart, and loyalty to the monarch should not hesitate to give one's life.

古文：临深履薄，夙兴温凊。似兰斯馨，如松之盛。
现代文：侍奉君王要如面临深渊或踩在薄冰上一样小心谨慎；侍奉父母要早起晚睡，让父母冬暖夏凉。能这样去做，德行就同兰花一样馨香，同松柏一样茂盛。
English: To serve the king, one should be as cautious as if facing the abyss or treading on thin ice; to serve one's parents, one should rise early and go to bed late, and keep one's parents warm in winter and cool in summer. If one can do this, virtue will be as fragrant as an orchid and as lush as a conifer.

古文：川流不息，渊澄取映。
现代文：还能延及子孙，像大河川流不息；影响世人，像碧潭清澄照人。
English: It can also be passed on to one's children and grandchildren, like the ceaseless flow of a great river; it can influence the world, like the clear shining of a clear lake.

古文：容止若思，言辞安定。
现代文：仪态举止要庄重，沉静安详；言语措辞要稳重，显得从容冷静。
English: The ceremony and behavior should be solemn, calm and serene; the verbal wording should be steady and appear calm and calm.

古文：笃初诚美，慎终宜令。
现代文：无论修身、求学、重视开头固然不错，认真去做，有好的结果更为重要。
English: Regardless of whether it is cultivation, study, or emphasis, it is good to start, but it is more important to do it seriously and have good results.

古文：荣业所基，籍甚无竟。
现代文：有德能孝是事业显耀的基础，这样的人声誉盛大，发展没有止境。
English: Having a virtuous filial piety is the foundation for a brilliant career. Such a person has a great reputation, and there is no end to development.

古文：学优登仕，摄职从政。
现代文：学习出色并有余力，就可走上仕途，担任一定的职务，参与国家的政事。
English: If you study well and have enough energy, you can embark on a career, hold certain positions, and participate in national politics.

古文：存以甘棠，去而益咏。
现代文：召公活着时曾在甘棠树下理政，他过世后老百姓对他更加怀念歌咏。
English: When Zhao Gong was alive, he used to govern under the neem tree. After his death, the common people missed him even more.

古文：乐殊贵贱，礼别尊卑。
现代文：选择乐曲要根据人的身份贵贱有所不同；采用礼节要按照人的地位高低有所区别。
English: The choice of music should be different according to the status of the person; the use of etiquette should be different according to the status of the person.

古文：上和下睦，夫唱妇随。
现代文：长辈和小辈要和睦相处，夫妇要一唱一随，协调和谐。
English: Elders and juniors should live in harmony, and couples should sing and follow each other in harmony.

古文：外受傅训，入奉母仪。
现代文：在外面要听从师长的教诲，在家里要遵从父母的教导。
English: In the outside world, you should listen to the teacher's instructions, and at home, you should follow your parents' instructions.

古文：诸姑伯叔，犹子比儿。
现代文：对待姑姑、伯伯、叔叔等长辈，要像是他们的亲生子女一样。
English: Treat aunts, uncles and other elders as if they were your own children.

古文：孔怀兄弟，同气连枝。
现代文：兄弟之间要互相关爱，因为同受父母血气，犹如树枝相连。
English: Brothers ought to love one another, because they are grafted together, as the branches of a tree.

古文：交友投分，切磨箴规。
现代文：结交朋友要意相投，能够在学习上互相切磋，品行上互相告勉。
English: To make friends, you should be like-minded, be able to learn from each other, and commend each other's behavior.

古文：仁慈隐恻，造次弗离。
现代文：仁义、慈爱，对人的恻隐之心，在最仓促、危急的情况下也不能拋离。
English: Benevolence, love and compassion for others cannot be abandoned in the most urgent and critical situations.

古文：节义廉退，颠沛匪亏。
现代文：气节、正义、廉洁、谦让的美德，在最穷困潦倒的时候也不可亏缺。
English: The virtues of self-discipline, justice, honesty, and humility should not be lacking even in the most desperate times.

古文：性静情逸，心动神疲。
现代文：品性沉静淡泊，情绪就安逸自在；内心浮躁好动，精神就疲惫困倦。
English: The character is calm and indifferent, the mood is comfortable and at ease; the heart is impetuous and active, and the spirit is tired and sleepy.

古文：守真志满，逐物意移。
现代文：保持纯洁的天性，就会感到满足；追求物欲享受，天性就会转移改变。
English: If you maintain a pure nature, you will feel satisfied; if you pursue material enjoyment, your nature will shift and change.

古文：坚持雅操，好爵自縻。
现代文：坚定地保持着高尚的情操，好的职位自然会为你所有。
English: Firmly maintain a noble attitude, and a good position will naturally be yours.

古文：都邑华夏，东西二京。
现代文：古代的都城华美壮观，有东京洛阳和西京长安。
English: The ancient capital city is gorgeous and spectacular, with Tokyo Luoyang and West Beijing Chang'an.

古文：背邙面洛，浮渭据泾。
现代文：洛阳北靠邙山，面临洛水；西京长安北横渭水，远据泾河。
English: Luoyang is north of Lushan, facing Luoshui; West Beijing Chang'an is north of Lushui, far away from Luhe.

古文：宫殿盘郁，楼观飞惊。
现代文：宫殿盘旋曲折，重重迭迭；楼阁高耸，凌空欲飞，让人心惊。
English: The palace twists and turns, overlapping and overlapping; the tower is soaring, the sky is soaring, it is shocking.

古文：图写禽兽，画彩仙灵。
现代文：宫殿里绘着各种飞禽走兽，还有彩绘的天仙神灵。
English: Various birds and beasts are depicted in the palace, as well as painted celestial deities.

古文：丙舍旁启，甲帐对楹。
现代文：正殿两边的配殿从侧面开启，豪华的帐幕对着高高的楹柱。
English: The vestibule on both sides of the main hall opens from the side, and the luxurious tent faces the tall pillar.

古文：肆筵设席，鼓瑟吹笙。
现代文：宫殿中大摆宴席，乐人吹笙鼓瑟，一片歌舞升平的景象。
English: Grand banquets in the palace, musicians playing the drums, a scene of song and dance.

古文：升阶纳陛，弁转疑星。
现代文：登上台阶进入殿堂的文武百官，珠帽转动，像满天的星斗。
English: The beaded hats of the hundreds of civil and military officials who ascended the steps into the hall of fame twirled like the stars in the sky.

古文：右通广内，左达承明。
现代文：右面通向用以藏书的广内殿，左面到达朝臣休息的承明殿。
English: The right side leads to the Hironai-den, which is used for the collection of books, and the left side leads to the Shomei-den, where the courtiers rest.

古文：既集坟典，亦聚群英。
现代文：这里收藏了很多的典籍名著，也集着成群的文武英才。
English: Many classic books and famous works are collected here, as well as hordes of literary and martial arts talents.

古文：杜稿钟隶，漆书壁经。府罗将相，路侠槐卿。
现代文：书殿中有杜度草书的手稿、钟繇的隶书的真迹，有从汲县魏安厘王冢中发现掘出来的漆写古书，以及汉代鲁恭王在曲阜孔庙墙壁内发现的古文经书。
English: In the library, there are manuscripts of Du Du Du's cursive handwriting, authentic traces of Zhong Xuan's inscriptions, lacquered ancient books excavated from Wei Anli Wang's tomb in Gu County, and ancient scriptures discovered by King Lu Gong of the Han Dynasty in the walls of the Qufu Confucius Temple.

古文：户封八县，家给千兵。
现代文：他们每户有八县之广的封地，配备了上千的士兵。
English: Each of them had a fiefdom eight counties wide and was equipped with thousands of soldiers.

古文：高冠陪辇，驱毂振缨。
现代文：他们戴着高大的官帽，陪着皇帝出游，驾着车马，帽带飘舞着，好不威风。
English: They wore tall official hats, accompanied the emperor on trips, drove horses and chariots, and their hatbands fluttered in the breeze.

古文：世禄侈富，车驾肥轻。
现代文：他们的子孙世代领受俸禄，奢侈豪富，出门时轻车肥马，春风得意。
English: Their children's and grandchildren's generations receive salaries, are extravagant and rich, travel light, and are proud of the spring breeze.

古文：策功茂实，勒碑刻铭。
现代文：朝廷还详尽确实地记载他们的功德，刻在碑石上流传后世。
English: The imperial court also thoroughly and accurately recorded their merits, which were engraved on stone tablets and passed down to future generations.

古文：磻溪伊尹，佐时阿衡。
现代文：周武王磻溪遇吕尚，尊他为 太公望 ；伊尹辅佐时政，商汤王封他为 阿衡 。
English: When King Zhou of Wu met Lushang of Qixi, he revered him as the great ruler; when King Yin was the assistant of the current government, the merchant Tang Wang named him Aheng of Qixi.

古文：奄宅曲阜，微旦孰营。
现代文：周成王占领了古奄国曲阜一带地面，要不是周公旦辅政哪里能成？
English: Zhou Cheng Wang occupied the ground around Qufu in ancient Ama Province. If it were not for Zhou Gongdan's assistance, where could he have succeeded?

古文：桓公匡合，济弱扶倾。
现代文：齐桓公九次会合诸侯，出兵援助势单力薄和面临危亡的诸侯小国。
English: At the 9th meeting of the princes of Qi and Kuan, the small states of the princes, which were weak and in danger of dying, sent troops to help.

古文：绮回汉惠，说感武丁。
现代文：汉惠帝做太子时靠绮里季才幸免废黜，商君武丁感梦而得贤相傅说。
English: When Emperor Han Hui was crown prince, he was only able to avoid being dethroned by relying on Gan Lijie, said the merchant Wu Ding, who was inspired by a dream to become a sage.

古文：俊乂密勿，多士寔宁。
现代文：能人治政勤勉努力，全靠许多这样的贤士，国家才富强安宁。
English: It is only through the diligent efforts of many such sages that a country can be prosperous, strong and peaceful.

古文：晋楚更霸，赵魏困横。
现代文：晋、楚两国在齐之后称霸，赵、魏两国因连横而受困于秦。
English: The two countries of Jin and Chu became dominant after Qi, and the two countries of Zhao and Wei were trapped in Qin because of Lianyou.

古文：假途灭虢，践土会盟。
现代文：晋献公向虞国借路去消灭虢国；晋文公在践土与诸侯会盟，推为盟主。
English: Jin Xian Gong asked Yu Guo to take the road to eliminate Shao Guo; Jin Wen Gong was in the process of forming an alliance with the princes, and was promoted to the leader of the alliance.

古文：何遵约法，韩弊烦刑。
现代文：萧何遵循简约刑法的精神制订九律，韩非惨死在自己所主张的严酷刑法下。
English: Xiao He formulated the Nine Laws in the spirit of a simple criminal law. Han Fei died under the severe torture law he advocated.

古文：起翦颇牧，用军最精。
现代文：秦将白起、王翦，赵将廉颇、李牧，带兵打仗最为高明。
English: Qin Shogun Baiqi, Wang Qi, Zhao Shogun Renpo, and Li Mu were the most skilled at leading soldiers into battle.

古文：宣威沙漠，驰誉丹青。
现代文：他们的声威远传到沙漠边地，美誉和肖像一起流芳后代。
English: Their reputation spread far and wide to the edge of the desert, and their fame and portraits have been passed down to future generations.

古文：九州禹迹，百郡秦并。
现代文：九州处处有留有大禹治水的足迹，全国各郡在秦并六国后归于统一。
English: There are traces of Dayu's flood control in Kyushu everywhere, and all counties in the country were unified after Qin and the Six Kingdoms.

古文：岳宗泰岱，禅主云亭。
现代文：五岳以泰山为尊，历代帝王都在云山和亭山主持禅礼。
English: Mount Tai is revered by the Five Sacred Mountains, and emperors throughout the ages have presided over Zen ceremonies at Yunshan and Tingshan.

古文：雁门紫塞，鸡田赤城。
现代文：名关有北疆雁门，要塞有万里长城，驿站有边地鸡田，奇山有天台赤城。
English: The famous pass is the North Xinjiang Wild Goose Gate, the fortress is the Great Wall of China, the railway station is the chicken field, and the strange mountain is the Akagi rooftop.

古文：昆池碣石，钜野洞庭。
现代文：赏池赴昆明滇池，观海临河北碣石，看泽去山东钜野，望湖上湖南洞庭。
English: To enjoy the pond, go to Kunming Dianchi, to see the sea, go to Hebei Dianshi, to see the lake, go to Shandong Dianji, and to look at the lake, go to Hunan Dongting.

古文：旷远绵邈，岩岫杳冥。
现代文：江河源远流长，湖海宽广无边。
English: Rivers have long origins and long flows, and lakes and seas are wide and boundless.

古文：治本于农，务兹稼穑。
现代文：名山奇谷幽深秀丽，气象万千。
English: The famous mountain valley is deep and beautiful, and the weather is perfect.

古文：俶载南亩，我艺黍稷。
现代文：治国的根本在发展农业，要努力做好播种收获这些农活。
English: The basis of governing the country is to develop agriculture, and we must strive to do a good job of sowing and harvesting these agricultural activities.

古文：税熟贡新，劝赏黜陟。
现代文：一年的农活该开始干起来了，我种上小米，又种上高梁。
English: A year's worth of farm work was about to begin. I planted millet and sorghum.

古文：孟轲敦素，史鱼秉直。
现代文：孟轲夫子崇尚纯洁，史官子鱼秉性刚直。
English: Meng Yifu's son advocated purity, and Shi Guanzi's son was a man of integrity.

古文：庶几中庸，劳谦谨敕。
现代文：做人要尽可能合乎中庸的标准，勤奋、谦逊、谨慎，懂得规劝告诫自己。
English: We should live up to the standards of moderation as much as possible, be diligent, humble, prudent, and know how to exhort and admonish ourselves.

古文：聆音察理，鉴貌辨色。
现代文：听别人说话，要仔细审察是否合理；看别人面孔，要小心辨析他的脸色。
English: When you listen to someone, you should carefully examine whether it is reasonable; when you look at someone's face, you should carefully analyze his face.

古文：贻厥嘉猷，勉其祗植。
现代文：要给人家留下正确高明的忠告或建议，勉励别人谨慎小心地处世立身。
English: You should leave correct and wise advice or suggestions for others, and encourage others to be cautious and prudent in dealing with the world.

古文：省躬讥诫，宠增抗极。
现代文：听到别人的讥讽告诫，要反省自身；备受恩宠不要得意忘形，对抗权尊。
English: If you hear someone's sarcastic admonition, you should reflect on yourself; if you are favored, don't get carried away and fight against authority.

古文：殆辱近耻，林皋幸即。
现代文：知道有危险耻辱的事快要发生，还不如归隐山林为好。
English: If you know that something dangerous and shameful is about to happen, it is better to retreat to the mountains and forests.

古文：两疏见机，解组谁逼。
现代文：汉代的疏广、疏受预见到危患的苗头就告老还乡，哪里有谁逼迫他们辞去官职？
English: In the Han Dynasty, those who were absent-minded and absent-minded when they foresaw the signs of danger returned to their hometowns. Who forced them to resign from their posts?

古文：索居闲处，沉默寂寥。
现代文：离群独居，悠闲度日，整天不用多费唇舌，清静无为岂不是好事。
English: Isn't it a good thing to live alone away from the crowd, to spend the day leisurely, not to have to talk all day long, to be quiet and do nothing.

古文：求古寻论，散虑逍遥。
现代文：想想古人的话，翻翻古人的书，消除往日的忧虑，乐得逍遥舒服。
English: Think about the words of the ancients, rummage through the books of the ancients, eliminate the worries of the past, and enjoy being comfortable.

古文：欣奏累遣，戚谢欢招。渠荷的历，园莽抽条。
现代文：轻松的事凑到一起，费力的事丢在一边，消除不尽的烦恼，得来无限的快乐。
English: Easy things come together, strenuous things are thrown aside, endless troubles are eliminated, and infinite happiness is gained.

古文：枇杷晚翠，梧桐早凋。
现代文：池里的荷花开得光彩烂灼，园中的草木刚刚抽出嫩芽。
English: The lotus flowers in the pond are in full bloom, and the plants in the garden have just sprouted.

古文：陈根委翳，落叶飘摇。
现代文：枇杷到了冬天叶子还是苍翠欲滴，梧桐刚刚交秋就早早地凋谢了。
English: When winter came, the leaves were still green and withered, and the sycamore withered early just after the turn of autumn.

古文：游鹍独运，凌摩绛霄。耽读玩市，寓目囊箱。
现代文：陈根老树枯倒伏，落叶在秋风里四处飘荡。
English: The roots of the old trees are withered, and the fallen leaves are drifting around in the autumn wind.

古文：易輶攸畏，属耳垣墙。
现代文：寒秋时节，远游的鲲鹏独自高飞，直冲布满彩霞的云霄。
English: In the cold autumn season, the outbound Kunpeng flies high alone, heading straight for the sky full of colorful haze.

古文：具膳餐饭，适口充肠。
现代文：汉代王充在街市上沉迷留恋于读书，眼睛注视的都是书袋和书箱。
English: Wang Chong of the Han Dynasty indulged in reading in the street market. His eyes were fixed on book bags and boxes.

古文：饱饫烹宰，饥厌糟糠。
现代文：说话最怕旁若无人，毫无禁忌；要留心隔着墙壁有人在贴耳偷听。
English: It is most dangerous to speak when no one is around, there are no taboos; be aware that someone is listening through the walls.

古文：亲戚故旧，老少异粮。
现代文：安排一日三餐的膳食，要适合各位的口味，能让大家吃饱。
English: Arrange meals for three meals a day, to suit everyone's tastes, so that everyone can eat enough.

古文：妾御绩纺，侍巾帷房。
现代文：饱的时候自然满足于大鱼大肉，饿的时候应当满足于粗菜淡饭。
English: When you are full, you will naturally be satisfied with big fish and meat, and when you are hungry, you should be satisfied with coarse vegetables and light meals.

古文：纨扇圆絜，银烛炜煌。
现代文：亲属、朋友会面要盛情款待，老人、小孩的食物应和自己不同。
English: Relatives and friends should be treated with hospitality when they meet, and the food of the elderly and children should be different from their own.

古文：昼眠夕寐，蓝笋象床。
现代文：小妾婢女要管理好家务，尽心恭敬地服待好主人。
English: A concubine should manage her household affairs well and serve her master respectfully.

古文：弦歌酒宴，接杯举觞。
现代文：绢制的团扇像满月一样又白又圆，银色的烛台上烛火辉煌。
English: The marinated fan is as white and round as the full moon, and the silver candlestick glows with candlelight.

古文：矫手顿足，悦豫且康。
现代文：白日小憩，晚上就寝，有青篾编成的竹席和象牙雕屏的床榻。
English: They take a nap during the day and go to bed at night. There is a bamboo seat made of bamboo shoots and a bed made of carved ivory screens.

古文：嫡后嗣续，祭祀烝尝。
现代文：奏着乐，唱着歌，摆酒开宴；接过酒杯，开怀畅饮。
English: Play music, sing songs, set up a wine banquet; take the glass, drink heartily.

古文：稽颡再拜，悚惧恐惶。笺牒简要，顾答审详。
现代文：情不自禁地手舞足蹈，真是又快乐又安康。
English: I couldn't help but dance with my hands and feet. I felt so happy and healthy.

古文：骸垢想浴，执热愿凉。
现代文：子孙继承了祖先的基业，一年四季的祭祀大礼不能疏忘。
English: Descendants have inherited the legacy of their ancestors, and the great rites of sacrifice throughout the year cannot be forgotten.

古文：驴骡犊特，骇跃超骧。
现代文：跪着磕头，拜了又拜；礼仪要周全恭敬，心情要悲痛虔诚。
English: Kneeling, bowing one's head, praying again and again; the etiquette should be thorough and respectful, and the mood should be sorrowful and pious.

古文：诛斩贼盗，捕获叛亡。
现代文：给别人写信要简明扼要，回答别人问题要详细周全。
English: Be concise when writing to others, and be detailed when answering their questions.

古文：布射僚丸，嵇琴阮啸。
现代文：身上有了污垢，就想洗澡，好比手上拿着烫的东西就希望有风把它吹凉。
English: Having dirt on one's body makes one want to take a bath, just as holding something hot in one's hand makes one want the wind to blow it cool.

古文：谓语助者，焉哉乎也。
现代文：说到古书中的语助词，那就是 焉 、 哉 、 乎 、 也 了。
English: When it comes to the auxiliary words in the ancient book, that is, 焉, 哉, 乎, 也.

