古文：伊尹申诰于王曰： 呜呼！
现代文：伊尹再次告诫王说： 哎！
English: Yi Yin once again admonished Wang, saying: "Oh!

古文：惟天无亲，克敬惟亲。民罔常怀，怀于有仁。鬼神无常享，享于克诚。
现代文：上天不偏袒任何人，能够恭敬的做事，上天就会爱护；百姓没有经常归附的君主，他们归附仁爱的君主；鬼神不会固定享受谁的祭祀，只享受诚信的人的祭祀。
English: Heaven does not favor anyone. If you can do things respectfully, Heaven will take care of you. The people do not have a monarch to whom they always belong, they belong to a benevolent monarch. Ghosts and gods do not enjoy anyone's sacrifice, but only the sacrifice of honest people.

古文：天位艰哉！
现代文：处在天子的位置是很困难的呀！
English: It is very difficult to be in the position of the Son of God!

古文：德惟治，否德乱。
现代文：任用有贤德的人，则天下大治，不用有德的人则天下大乱。
English: If one appoints a virtuous person, the world will be governed well. If one does not appoint a virtuous person, the world will be in chaos.

古文：与治同道，罔不兴；与乱同事，罔不亡。
现代文：与治世之君走相同的道路，国家就会兴盛；与乱世之军走相同的道路，国家没有不灭亡的。
English: If a country follows the same path as the prince of this world, it will prosper; if it follows the same path as the army of this world, it will perish.

古文：终始慎厥与，惟明明后。
现代文：终和始都慎择自己的同事，就是英明的君主。
English: The wise monarch is the one who chooses his colleagues carefully, both at the beginning and at the end.

古文：先王惟时懋敬厥德，克配上帝。
现代文：先王因此勉力敬修自己的德行，所以能够匹配上天。
English: As a result, the previous king made every effort to cultivate his own virtues, so that he could be a match for heaven.

古文：今王嗣有令绪，尚监兹哉。
现代文：现在我王继续享有好的基业，希望看到这一点呀！
English: Now my king continues to enjoy a good foundation, I hope to see this!

古文：若升高，必自下，若陟遐，必自迩。
现代文：如果升高，一定要从下面开始；如果行远，一定要从近处开始。
English: If you go up, you must start from the bottom; if you go far, you must start from the vicinity.

古文：无轻民事，惟艰；无安厥位，惟危。
现代文：不要轻视人民的事务，要想到它的难处；不要苟安君位，要想到它的危险。
English: Do not despise the affairs of the people, but think of their hardships; do not covet power, but think of its dangers.

古文：慎终于始。
现代文：慎终要从开头做起啊！
English: You have to start from the beginning!

古文：有言逆于汝心，必求诸道；有言逊于汝志，必求诸非道。
现代文：有些话不顺你的心意，一定要从道义来考求；有些话顺从你的心意，一定要从不道义来考求。啊！
English: Some words that do not suit your heart must be examined from the perspective of morality; some words that do suit your heart must be examined from the perspective of immorality.

古文：呜呼！弗虑胡获？
现代文：不思考，怎么会有收获？
English: Without thinking, how can there be any gain?

古文：弗为胡成？
现代文：不做事，怎么会成功？
English: How can you be successful if you don't do anything?

古文：一人元良，万邦以贞。
现代文：天子贤明，天下诸侯国都会尊敬。
English: The Son of Heaven is wise, and is respected by all the principalities in the world.

古文：君罔以辩言乱旧政，臣罔以宠利居成功，邦其永孚于休。 
现代文：君主不要使用巧辩扰乱旧政，臣下不要凭仗骄宠和利禄而安居成功。这样，国家将永久保持在美好之中。 
English: Monarchs should not use clever arguments to disrupt the old regime, and subjects should not rely on pride and prestige to live successfully. In this way, the country will always remain in good condition.

