古文：裴刘魏李吉裴炎，字子隆，绛州闻喜人。
现代文：裴炎，字子隆，是绛州闻喜人。
English: Pei Yan, also known as Zilong, was a famous person in Zhangzhou.

古文：宽厚，寡言笑，有奇节。
现代文：为人宽厚，不苟言笑，气节不同常人。
English: He is a kind and generous person, and his temperament is different from that of ordinary people.

古文：补弘文生，休澣，它生或出游，炎读书不废。
现代文：年轻时补为弘文馆门生，每遇休假日，其他学生多半都出外游玩，独裴炎依然苦读不问其他。
English: When he was young, he was a protégé of the Hongwen Academy. Whenever he had a day off, most of the other students went out to play. He still studied hard regardless of anything else.

古文：有司欲荐状，以业未就，辞不举，服勤十年，尤通《左氏春秋》。
现代文：有司见他勤奋，将要荐举他任职，而他却以自己学识尚不深博而辞谢不就。在弘文馆勤学十年，特别精通《左氏春秋》。
English: A division chief saw his diligence and was going to recommend him for a post, but he refused, saying that his knowledge was not profound enough. He studied at the Hongwen Museum for ten years and was particularly proficient in "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi."

古文：举明经及第。补濮州司仓参军，历御史、起居舍人，浸迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：后来参加明经考试得中，被委任为濮州司仓参军，历任御史、起居舍人，及黄门侍郎。
English: Later, he took part in the Ming Dynasty Examination and was appointed as the Cangzhou Custodian to join the army, successively serving as the Imperial Historian, the Resident, and the Yellow Gate Attendant.

古文：调露二年，同中书门下三品。
现代文：调露二年，官同中书门下三品。
English: After two years of refinement, it was ranked third in the official rankings.

古文：进拜侍中。
现代文：进授官侍中。
English: He was promoted to the rank of junior middle officer.

古文：高宗幸东都，留皇太子京师，以炎调护。
现代文：高宗去东都，留皇太子哲守京师，派裴炎辅护。
English: Gao Zong went to the eastern capital, leaving the crown prince Tetsu to guard the capital and sending Pei Yan to assist him.

古文：帝不豫，太子监国，诏炎与刘齐贤、郭正一於东宫平章政事，及大渐，受遗辅太子，是为中宗。
现代文：第二年，皇帝病了，命太子监国，诏令裴炎与刘齐贤、郭正一同于东宫平章政事。及至皇帝病危，受遗诏辅佐太子。太子即位，是为中宗。
English: In the second year, the emperor fell ill and ordered the crown prince to supervise the country. The imperial edict ordered Pei Yan, Liu Qixian, and Guo Zheng to govern together in the East Palace of Pingzhang. And when the emperor was critically ill, he was assisted by the imperial edict to assist the crown prince. The crown prince's accession to the throne was for Zhongzong.

古文：改中书令。
现代文：裴炎改任中书令。
English: Pei Yan was reassigned to the position of middle secretary.

古文：旧，宰相议事门下省，号政事堂，长孙无忌以司空、房玄龄以仆射、魏徵以太子太师皆知门下省事，至炎，以中书令执政事笔，故徙政事堂於中书省。
现代文：旧制，宰相议事均在门下省，称为政事堂，长孙无忌身份为司空、房玄龄身份为仆射、魏征身份为太子太师，三人都知门下省之事，到裴炎，以中书令身份执掌政事，所以将政事堂迁到中书省。
English: Under the old system, the Prime Minister's deliberations were held in the province under his control, known as the government hall. The eldest grandson of the Prime Minister was known as Siku, the eldest grandson of the Prime Minister was known as Fu Xuanling, the eldest grandson of the Prime Minister was known as Fu Sha, and the eldest son of the Prime Minister was known as Wei Zheng. All three knew the affairs of the province under his control, and he was known as Pei Yan, and he was in charge of the government affairs as the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, so the government hall was moved to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.

古文：中宗欲以后父韦玄贞为侍中及授乳媪子五品官，炎固执不从，帝怒曰： 我意让国与玄贞，岂不可？何惜侍中邪？ 
现代文：中宗想让韦后的父亲韦玄贞任侍中，还想给奶妈的儿子授五品官，裴炎坚持不可以。皇帝生气了，说： 我愿意把整个国家让给玄贞都由我的便，何惜一个侍中官？ 
English: Zhongzong wanted to make Wei's father, Wei Xuan Zhen, an attendant, and also wanted to give the son of the wet nurse a five-rank officer, but Pei Yan insisted that it was not possible. The emperor became angry and said: I am willing to give the whole country to Xuan Zhen at my convenience, what a pity for an attendant?

古文：炎惧，因与武后谋废帝。
现代文：裴炎害怕皇帝做出出格的事，于是与武后商量准备废掉皇帝。
English: Pei Yan was afraid of the emperor doing something out of the ordinary, so he discussed with Empress Wu to prepare to depose the emperor.

古文：后命炎洎刘祎之率羽林将军程务挺、张虔勖勒兵入宫，宣太后令，扶帝下殿，帝曰： 我何罪？ 
现代文：武后命裴炎、洎及刘之率领羽林将军程务挺、张虔勖等带兵入宫，宣谕太后的命令，扶皇帝下殿。皇帝说： 我有什么罪？ 
English: Wu Guo ordered Pei Yan, Zou and Liu Zi to lead Ulin generals Cheng Mu Ting, Zhang Qianqian and other soldiers into the palace, proclaim the order of the empress dowager, and support the emperor to go down to the palace. The emperor said: What is my crime?

古文：后曰： 以天下与玄贞，安得无罪？ 
现代文：太后回答说 ：你要把天下送给韦玄贞，怎能说没罪？ 
English: The empress dowager replied, "If you are going to give the whole world to Wei Xuanzhen, how can you say that she is not guilty?"

古文：乃废帝为卢陵王，更立豫王为皇帝。
现代文：中宗被废为庐陵王，另立豫王旦为皇帝。
English: Zhongzong was deposed as the king of Fuling, and Yu Wangdan was made emperor.

古文：以定策功，封永清县男。
现代文：因裴炎有定策之功，封永清县男爵。
English: Because of Pei Yan's success in making decisions, he was given the title of Baron of Yongqing County.

古文：后已持政，稍自肆，於是武承嗣请立七庙，追王其先，炎谏曰： 太后天下母，以盛德临朝，宜存至公，不容追王祖考，示自私。
现代文：那时，武承嗣请求立武氏七庙，且追封其祖先为王。裴炎进谏说 ：太后是天下之母，以圣德临朝，应该向天下显示最大的公心，不可以追赠自己的先祖为王，表现私心。
English: At that time, Wu Chengzhi requested the establishment of seven temples of the Wu clan and the crowning of his ancestors as kings. Pei Yanjin said: The empress dowager is the mother of the world, and she came to the imperial court with sacred virtue. She should show the greatest public-spiritedness to the world. She should not crown her ancestors as kings and show selfishness.

古文：且独不见吕氏事乎！ 
现代文：难道太后忘记了吕氏的败亡吗？ 
English: Had the empress dowager forgotten the defeat of the Lü clan?

古文：后曰： 吕氏之王，权属生人，今追崇先世，在亡迹异，安得同哉！ 
现代文：太后说： 吕氏称王，权力交给了活人。现在我只是追封先祖。活人死人情况不同，怎能相提并论呢？ 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "The Lv clan claimed the throne, and the power was handed over to the living. Now I am just following in the footsteps of my ancestors. The living and the dead are different, so how can they be compared?

古文：炎曰： 蔓草难图，渐不可长。 
现代文：裴炎说 ：蔓草难以根除，刚有萌芽，不可使其长大。 
English: Pei Yan said: Vines are difficult to eradicate, and once they have sprouted, they should not be allowed to grow.

古文：后不悦而罢。
现代文：武后很不高兴而暂时搁置。
English: Empress Wu was very unhappy and temporarily shelved it.

古文：承嗣又讽太后诛韩王元嘉、鲁王灵夔，以绝宗室望，刘祎之、韦仁约畏默不敢言，炎独固争，后愈衔怒。
现代文：武承嗣又暗示太后诛杀韩王元嘉、鲁王灵夔，用以断绝李家宗室的后望。刘之、韦仁约因害怕受害而不敢说话，裴炎挺身而出，坚持不可这样做的理由。
English: Wu Chengzhi also hinted that the Empress Dowager killed Han Wang Yuanjia and Lu Wang Lingyao to cut off the hopes of the Li family. Liu Zhi and Wei Renyo did not dare to speak out for fear of being harmed, and Pei Yan stood up and insisted on the reasons why this should not be done.

古文：未几，赐爵河东县侯。
现代文：武后对他越加怀恨，不久，赐河东县侯爵。
English: Empress Wu became increasingly bitter towards him, and soon gave him the title of Marquis of Hedong County.

古文：豫王虽为帝，未尝省天下事。
现代文：豫王旦虽然被拥上了帝位，但未尝了解、管理天下之事。
English: Although Yu Wangdan was enthroned as emperor, he did not fully understand and manage the affairs of the world.

古文：炎谋乘太后出游龙门，以兵执之，还政天子。
现代文：裴炎打算乘太后出游龙门的机会，用兵劫持，要她还政给天子。
English: Pei Yan planned to use the opportunity of the empress dowager's trip to Longmen to kidnap her with soldiers and force her to return power to the emperor.

古文：会久雨，太后不出而止。
现代文：正好天久雨不停，太后不去龙门了，此计作罢。
English: It just so happened that it had been raining for a long time and the Empress Dowager did not want to go to Longmen, so this plan was abandoned.

古文：徐敬业兵兴，后议讨之，炎曰： 天子年长矣，不豫政，故竖子有辞。
现代文：后来徐敬业兴兵 讨伐 
English: Later, Xu Jingye raised an army to fight.

古文：今若复子明辟，贼不讨而解。 
现代文：武后，武后商议讨伐徐敬业。裴炎说： 天子已长大成人了，不让他执政，所以小人们有借口兴兵。
English: The Empress Wu and Empress Wu discussed how to subdue Xu Jingye. Pei Yan said: The Son of Heaven has grown up and become an adult, and they won't let him govern, so the little people have an excuse to raise an army.

古文：御史崔詧曰： 炎受顾托，身总大权，闻乱不讨，乃请太后归政，此必有异图。 
现代文：现在如果太后还政皇帝，贼人不待讨伐也就自己回去了。 御史崔鮞说： 裴炎身受顾命重托，总揽大权，听说乱起而竟然不想讨伐，还请太后还政皇帝，这必定是有个人野心。 
English: Now, if the empress dowager returned the emperor, the thieves would go back without waiting for the crusade. Guo Streisand said: Pei Yan was entrusted with a heavy responsibility, and he always wanted to seize power. When he heard about the turmoil, he did not want to crusade, but he also asked the empress dowager to return the emperor. This must be a personal ambition.

古文：后乃捕炎送诏狱，遣御史大夫骞味道、御史鱼承晔参鞫之。
现代文：武后乃下令逮捕裴炎送入诏狱，派御史大夫骞味道、御史鱼承晔参与审讯。
English: Empress Wu ordered that Pei Yan be arrested and sent to the imperial prison, and sent Gushi Daifu and Gushi Yu Cheng to participate in the interrogation.

古文：凤阁侍郎胡元范曰： 炎社稷臣，有功於国，悉心事上，天下所知，臣明其不反。 
现代文：凤阁侍郎胡元范说： 裴炎是社稷大臣，有功于国，全心全意为皇上服务，这是天下所共知的。我知道他决不会谋反。 
English: Fengge waiter Hu Yuanfan said: "Pei Yanrong is the Minister of Social Affairs and Public Security, has made contributions to the country, and serves the emperor wholeheartedly, which is known to the whole world. I know that he will never rebel.

古文：纳言刘齐贤、左卫率蒋俨继辨之，后曰： 炎反有端，顾卿未知耳。 
现代文：纳言刘齐贤、左卫率蒋俨继续接办此案，太后说 ：裴炎谋反，已有苗头了，只是你们没有觉察罢了。 
English: Nagon Liu Qixian and Zuo Wei leader Chiang Kai-shek continued to take over the case. The empress dowager said, "Pei Yan is plotting a rebellion. There are already signs of it, but you are just not aware of it."

古文：元范、齐贤曰： 若炎反，臣辈亦反矣。 
现代文：胡元范、刘齐贤说： 假若裴炎所做的事是谋反，那臣等也都是谋反了。 
English: Hu Yuanfan and Liu Qixian said, "If what Pei Yan did was plotting a rebellion, then those ministers and others are also plotting a rebellion."

古文：后曰： 朕知炎反，卿辈不反。 
现代文：武后说： 我知道裴炎谋反，你等不反。 
English: Wu Hou said, "I know that Pei Yan is plotting a rebellion, why don't you rebel?"

古文：遂斩于都亭驿。
现代文：终于将裴炎在都亭驿斩首。
English: He finally beheaded Pei Yan at Du Ting Tong.

古文：炎被劾，或勉其逊辞，炎曰： 宰相下狱，理不可全。 
现代文：裴炎被控告，有人劝他说些好听话求免。裴炎说： 宰相下狱，再无生理。 
English: Pei Yan was accused, and someone advised him to say something good and obedient to be excused. Pei Yan said: The prime minister is out of prison, and there is no more physiology.

古文：卒不折节，籍其家，无儋石之赢。
现代文：终于不肯屈节。抄没他的家，发现家中没一石余粮。
English: Finally, he refused to give in. They raided his home and found that there was not a stone of surplus grain in the house.

古文：初，炎见裴行俭破突厥有功，沮薄之，乃斩降虏阿史那伏念等五十余人，议者恨其媢克，且使国家失信四夷，以为阴祸有知云。
现代文：当初，裴炎见裴行俭破突厥有功，想削减其功，斩杀了降虏阿史那伏念等五十多人。评论者恨他妒忌，且使国家对四夷失信。
English: At first, Pei Yan saw that Pei Xingnian had made a great contribution to defeating the Turks and wanted to reduce his contribution. He killed more than fifty people, including the capitulator Ashina Funei. Commentators hated and envied him, and he made the state lose trust in the Si Yi.

古文：睿宗立，赠太尉、益州大都督，谥曰忠。
现代文：睿宗立，追赠太尉、益州大都督，谥为忠。
English: Ruizong Li, posthumously promoted to the rank of captain and the grand governor of Yizhou, was a loyalist.

古文：元范者，申州义阳人。介廉有才，以炎故，流死巂州。
现代文：胡元范，申州义阳人，耿介有才，因裴炎的牵连，被流放隽州，死于该地。
English: Hu Yuanfan, a native of Shenzhou and Yiyang, and Geng Jie, a talented scholar, were exiled to Ganzhou due to the involvement of Pei Yan, and died there.

