古文：李通，字次元，南阳宛人也。
现代文：李通字次元，南阳郡宛县人。
English: Li Tongzhi, a native of Nanyang County.

古文：世以贷殖著姓。
现代文：世代以经商著名。
English: He is known to have been in business for generations.

古文：父守，身长九尺，容貌绝异，为人严毅，居家如官廷。
现代文：父亲李守，身长九尺，容貌与常人特别不同，为人严肃坚毅，居家如处官廷。
English: His father, Li Shou, is nine feet tall, his appearance is very different from that of ordinary people, he is a serious and resolute person, and his home is like a court.

古文：初事刘歆，好星历谶记，为王莽宗卿师。
现代文：开始时跟着刘歆办事，喜好天文历数和预言凶吉的图谶之学，为王莽的宗卿师。
English: At the beginning, he worked with Liu Xuan, and was fond of the astronomical calendar and the study of the oracle, and was Wang Mang's tutor.

古文：通亦为五威将军从事，出补巫丞，有能名。
现代文：李通也为五威将军从事，后来出任巫县县丞，有能干的名气。
English: Li Tong also worked for General Wu Wei, and later served as county magistrate of Wuxian County, with a reputation for ability.

古文：莽未，百姓愁怨，通素闻守说谶云 刘氏复兴，李氏为辅 ，私常怀之。
现代文：王莽末年，百姓忧愁怨恨，李通曾听见他父亲说过图谶上讲 刘氏复兴，李氏为辅 ，心里常想着这件事。
English: At the end of Wang Mang's life, the people were sad and resentful. Li Tong had heard his father say that Liu's revival, assisted by Li's, was on the map, and he often thought about it.

古文：且居家富逸，为闾里雄，以此不乐为吏，乃自免归。
现代文：因为家里很富足，是乡中第一，因此不想做官，就自动辞职回家。
English: Because his family was very wealthy and was the first in the village, he didn't want to be an official, so he resigned and went home.

古文：及下江、新市兵起，南阳骚动，通从弟轶，亦素好事，乃共计议曰： 今四方扰乱，新室且亡，汉当更兴。
现代文：后来王常的下江兵和王匡的新市兵兴起，南阳为之骚动，李通的堂弟李轶，向来也很好事，就共同商议说： 现在四方扰乱，王莽政权眼看就要垮台，汉朝当兴起。
English: Later, Wang Chang's soldiers from the Lower River and Wang Kuang's soldiers from the New Town rose up, and Nanyang was in an uproar. Li Tong's cousin Li Yao, who had always been a good person, discussed the matter together and said, "Now that the four quarters are in turmoil, Wang Mang's regime is on the verge of collapse, and the Han Dynasty should rise."

古文：南阳宗室，独刘伯升兄弟泛爱容众，可与谋大事。 通笑曰： 吾意也。 会光武避吏在宛，通闻之，即遣轶往迎光武。
现代文：南阳的刘氏宗室，只有刘伯升兄弟能泛爱并容纳群众，可以与他们共谋灭王莽兴汉朝的大事。 李通笑着说： 我的意见也是这样。 等到光武避难在宛，李通听说了就派李轶去迎接光武。
English: The Liu family in Nanyang, only Liu Boxing brothers can love and accommodate the masses, and can conspire with them to destroy Wang Mangxing Han Dynasty. Li Tong smiled and said: My opinion is also like this. When Guangwu took refuge in Wan, Li Tong heard about it and sent Li Yan to meet Guangwu.

古文：光武初以通士君子相慕也，故往答之。
现代文：光武初因李通是个士君子而相慕爱，所以前往答谢他。
English: At first, Guangwu admired Li Tong because he was a gentleman, so he went to thank him.

古文：及相见，共语移日，握手极欢。
现代文：等到见了面，两人谈了很久，握手极为欢畅。
English: When they met, the two talked for a long time and shook hands very happily.

古文：通因具言谶文事，光武初殊不意，未敢当之。
现代文：李通就讲了全部谶文的事，光武开始大出意外，说不敢当。
English: Li Tong talked about all the matters of Yuwen, and Guangwu began to have a big accident, saying that he did not dare.

古文：时守在长安，光武乃微观通曰： 即如此，当如宗卿师何？ 通曰： 已自有度矣。 因复备言其计。
现代文：这时李守在长安，光武就暗中看着李通说： 既是这样，你父亲该怎么办呢？ 李通说： 自己已经有办法了。 因此向光武详细陈述了他的计划。
English: At this time, Li Shou was in Chang'an, and Guangwu secretly looked at Li Tong and said, "Since this is the case, what should your father do?" Li Tong said, "I already have a way," so he detailed his plan to Guangwu.

古文：光武既深知通意，乃遂相约结，定谋议，期以材官都试骑士日，欲劫前队大夫及属正，因以号令大众。
现代文：光武既已深知李通意向，就与李通相约结，定谋议，计划在立秋那天趁都试骑士的机会，劫持前队大夫甄阜及属正梁丘赐，因而号令大众宣布举事。
English: Since Guangwu was already well aware of Li Tong's intention, he made an agreement with Li Tong and planned to seize the opportunity to try the knight on the day of the beginning of the autumn and kidnap the vanguard doctor Yan Fu and the subordinate Zheng Liang Qiu Ji, thus calling on the public to announce the event.

古文：乃使光武与轶归舂陵，举兵以相应。
现代文：就使光武与李轶回到舂陵，举兵相应。
English: He ordered Guangwu and Li Yan to return to Fuling and raise an army accordingly.

古文：遣从兄子季之长安，以事报守。
现代文：派堂兄的儿子李季去长安，把计划告诉李守。
English: He sent his cousin's son, Li Ji, to Chang'an to tell Li Shou about the plan.

古文：季于道病死，守密知之，欲亡归。
现代文：李季在路上病死，李守秘密知道了，想逃亡回去。
English: Li Ji died of illness on the way, Li Shou learned the secret and wanted to flee back.

古文：素与邑人黄显相善，时显为中郎将，闻之，谓守曰： 今关门禁严，君状貌非心，将以此安之？
现代文：李守素与同乡人黄显相友善，黄显这时为中郎将，听到消息，对李守说： 现在关门把守很严，你的形状相貌特别，你这样将往何处去？
English: Li Shousu and fellow villager Huang Xian were friendly with each other. Huang Xian was the middle brother at that time. When he heard the news, he said to Li Shousu: Now the door is tightly closed. Your shape and appearance are special. Where will you go?

古文：不如诣阙自归。
现代文：不如去朝廷请求自归。
English: It would be better to go to the imperial court and ask to be allowed to return.

古文：事既未然，脱可免祸。 守从其计，即上书归死，章未及报，留阙下。
现代文：事情还没有发生，只要能脱身就可免祸。 李守听了他的话，即上书请求归死，奏章没有来得及上报，留在宫中。
English: Li Shou listened to his words, that is, the request to submit a letter was to die, and the report was not submitted in time and remained in the palace.

古文：会事发觉，通得亡走，莽闻之，乃系守于狱。
现代文：这时事情被发觉，李通得以逃脱，王莽知道了，就把李守逮捕入狱。
English: At this time, the matter was discovered, and Li Tong was able to escape. When Wang Mang found out, he arrested Li Shou and put him in prison.

古文：而黄显为请曰： 守闻子无状，不敢逃亡，守义自信，归命宫阙。
现代文：黄显为李守求情说： 李守听说儿子犯了大罪，不敢逃亡回去，遵信守义，归命于你。
English: Huang Xian interceded for Li Shou, saying: Li Shou heard that his son had committed a serious crime, and did not dare to flee back, and obeyed the law, and obeyed you.

古文：臣显愿质守俱东，晓说其子。
现代文：我黄显情愿带着李守到东边去，晓谕他儿子。
English: I, Huang Xian, would like to take Li Shou to the east to tell his son.

古文：如遂悖逆，令守北向刎首，以谢大恩。 莽然其言。
现代文：如果他儿子真的要造反，我就命令李守面向北方自刎，以谢大恩。 王莽同意。
English: If his son really wanted to rebel, I would order Li Shou to face the north and prostrate himself in gratitude. Wang Mang agreed.

古文：会前队复上通起兵之状，莽怒，欲杀守，显争之，遂并被诛，及守家在长安者尽杀之。
现代文：这时前队甄阜又上书奏明李通起兵的状况，王莽怒，准备杀掉李守，黄显为他争辩，于是李守、黄显一并被杀，连同李守家在长安的人也全部被杀。
English: At this time, Zhenfu, the vanguard, also sent a letter to clarify the situation of Li Tong's raising an army. Wang Meng Rong was angry and prepared to kill Li Shou. Huang Xian argued for him. As a result, Li Shou and Huang Xian were killed, along with all the people of Li Shou's family in Chang'an.

古文：南阳亦诛通兄弟、门宗六十四人，皆焚尸宛市。
现代文：南阳方面也杀了李通的兄弟、宗族六十四人，都焚尸于宛市。
English: Nanyang also killed 64 of Li Tong's brothers and relatives, and burned their bodies in Wan.

古文：时，汉兵亦已大合。
现代文：这时汉兵也已经大举集合。
English: By this time, the Han soldiers had also gathered in large numbers.

古文：通与光武、李轶相遇棘阳，遂共破前队，杀甄阜、梁丘赐。
现代文：李通与光武、李轶相遇在棘阳，于是一起攻破前队，杀了甄阜、梁丘赐。
English: Li Tong met with Guangwu and Li Yao in Spineyang, and together they broke through the vanguard and killed Yan Fu and Liang Qiu Ji.

古文：更始立，以通为柱国大将军、辅汉侯。
现代文：更始立，以李通为柱国大将军、辅汉侯。
English: It was re-established, with Li Tong as the general of the pillar country and Fu Han Hou as the leader.

古文：从至长安，更拜为大将军，封西平王；轶为舞阴王；通从弟松为丞相。
现代文：从更始到长安，更拜为大将军，封西平王；李轶为舞阴王；李通堂弟李松为丞相。
English: From the beginning of the dynasty to Chang'an, Baibai was the grand general, the king of Xiping; Li Yao was the king of Muyin; Li Tong's cousin Li Song was the prime minister.

古文：更始使通持节还镇荆州，通因娶光武女弟伯姬，是为宁平公主。
现代文：更始使李通持节回去镇守荆州，李通因此娶光武妹妹伯姬为妻，就是宁平公主。
English: At the beginning of the year, Li Tong was sent back to the town of Jingzhou to keep the festival, so Li Tong married Guangwu's sister, Boji, who was the princess of Ningping.

古文：光武即位，征通为卫尉。
现代文：光武即位，征李通为卫尉。
English: Guangwu ascended the throne, and Li Tong was appointed as the guard lieutenant.

古文：建武二年，封固始侯，拜大司农。
现代文：建武二年，封固始侯，拜大司农。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, he was appointed as the first marquis of Fenggu, and became the chief farmer.

古文：帝每征讨四方，常令通居守京师，镇百姓，修宫室，起学宫。
现代文：光武帝每次出征讨伐四方，常令李通留守京师，镇抚百姓，修宫室，建学校。
English: Every time Emperor Guangwu went out to fight in four directions, he often ordered Li Tong to stay in Beijing, pacify the people, repair the palace, and build a school.

古文：五年春，代王梁为前将军。
现代文：五年春，代王梁为前将军。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, Wang Liang became the former general.

古文：六年夏，领破奸将军侯进、捕虏将军王霸等十营击汉中贼。
现代文：六年夏，率领破奸将军侯进、捕虏将军王霸等十营击汉中贼。
English: In the summer of the sixth year, he led ten battalions, including the traitor general Hou Jin and the captive general Wang Ba, to attack the Han Chinese thieves.

古文：公孙述遣兵赴救，通等与战于西城，破之，还，屯田顺阳。
现代文：公孙述派遣军队赴救，李通等与他们战于西城，破贼兵，回师在顺阳屯田。
English: According to Gongsun, he sent troops to the rescue, Li Tong and others fought with them in Xicheng, and the soldiers who broke the thieves returned to their division in Shunyang Tunden.

古文：时，天下略定，通思欲避荣宠，以病上书乞身。
现代文：这时天下大体平定，李通想避开荣誉宠信，以生病为由上书请求辞官回家。
English: At this time, the world was generally calm, and Li Tong wanted to avoid the honor of a favorite letter, and on the grounds of illness, he sent a letter requesting the official to return home.

古文：诏下公卿群臣议。大司徒侯霸等曰： 王莽篡汉，倾乱天下。
现代文：光武下诏命公卿群臣讨论，大司徒侯霸等说： 王莽篡汉，把天下搞乱了。
English: Guangwu issued an edict ordering the nobles and courtiers to discuss the matter, and the grand steward Houba said, "Wang Mang is a usurper and has made a mess of the world."

古文：通怀伊、吕、萧、曹之谋，建造大策，扶助神灵，辅成圣德。
现代文：李通身怀伊尹、吕尚、萧何、曹参的谋略，建立宏图大策，扶助神灵，辅佐以成圣德。
English: Li Tongtian followed the strategies of Wai Yin, Lu Shang, Xiao He and Cao San, and established a grand strategy to support the gods and assist them in becoming saints.

古文：破家为国。忘身奉主，有扶危存亡之义。
现代文：破家为国，忘身奉主，有扶危存亡的大义。
English: Breaking up the family to become a country, forgetting oneself to serve the Lord, there is a great justice to help the danger and survive.

古文：功德最高，海内所闻。
现代文：功德最高，海内都有所闻知。
English: He has the highest merit and is well-known at home and abroad.

古文：通以天下平定，谦让辞位。
现代文：李通以天下平定，谦让辞位。
English: With the world at peace, Li Tong humbly resigned.

古文：夫安不忘危，宜令通居职疗疾。
现代文：安定不能忘记危险，应令李通带职疗疾。
English: Stable cannot forget the danger, and Li Tong should be ordered to take occupational therapy.

古文：欲就诸侯，不可听。 于是诏通勉致医药，以时视事。
现代文：想返回诸侯国，不可听从。 于是诏李通治疗疾病，按时工作。
English: If he wanted to return to the vassal state, he couldn't obey, so he went to the hospital to treat his illness and work on time.

古文：其夏，引拜为大司空。
现代文：这年夏天，拜李通为大司空。
English: In the summer of that year, Bai Li Tong became the general manager of Sky.

古文：通布衣唱义，助成大业，重以宁平公主故，特见亲重。
现代文：李通以平民倡导起事，帮助成就帝业，又以宁平公主的缘故，特被亲重。
English: Li Tong took the initiative of the commoners to help the imperial cause, and because of Princess Ning Ping, he was particularly respected.

古文：然性谦恭，常欲避权势。
现代文：然而李通生性谦恭，常想避开权势。
English: However, Li Tongsheng has a humble nature and often wants to avoid power.

古文：素有消疾，自为宰相，谢病不视事，连年乞骸骨，帝每优宠之。
现代文：素有消渴症，自从当了宰相，就请病假不理政事，连年告病回乡，光武帝每每优待宠爱他。
English: Known to have a thirst-quenching disease, since he became prime minister, he has taken sick leave to ignore political affairs, returning to his hometown after years of illness. Emperor Guangwu treated him favorably.

古文：令以公位归第养疾，通复固辞。
现代文：令他以公位回家疗养，李通再次固辞。
English: He was sent home to convalesce in his official position, and Li Tong once again resigned.

古文：积二岁，乃听上大司空印绶，以特进奉朝请。
现代文：过了两年，就听从他呈上大司空印绶，特赐他以特进参与朝会。
English: Two years later, he listened to him and presented him with the grand secretary's seal of approval, granting him special access to participate in the Imperial Court Council.

古文：有司奏请封诸皇子，帝感通首创大谋，即日封通少子雄为召陵侯。
现代文：有关部门奏请封诸皇子，光武帝感激李通首倡大谋，即日封李通少子李雄为召陵侯。
English: Relevant departments made a request to seal all the princes, and Emperor Guangwu was grateful to Li Tong for the great plan. On the same day, Li Tong's younger son Li Xiong was appointed as the mausoleum lord.

古文：每幸南阳，常遣使者以太牢祠通父冢。
现代文：光武帝每到南阳，常遣使者以太牢的礼仪来祭祀李守的墓冢。
English: Whenever Emperor Guangwu came to Nanyang, he often sent emissaries to offer sacrifices to the tomb of Li Shou.

古文：十八年卒，谥曰恭侯。
现代文：李通建武十八年去世。谥号为恭侯。
English: Li Tong Jianwu died in the eighteenth year. His posthumous name was Gong Hou.

古文：帝及皇后亲临吊，送葬。
现代文：帝与皇后亲自前临吊口言，送葬。
English: The Emperor and Empress personally attended the funeral and gave a eulogy.

古文：子音嗣。音卒，子定嗣。定卒，子黄嗣。黄卒，子寿嗣。
现代文：李通死后子音嗣位，李音死后了李定嗣位，李定死后子李黄嗣位，李黄死后子李寿嗣位。
English: After the death of Li Tong, Ziyin succeeded to the throne, after the death of Li Yin, Li Ding succeeded to the throne, after the death of Li Ding, his son Li Huang succeeded to the throne, after the death of Li Huang, his son Li Shou succeeded to the throne.

古文：李轶后为朱鲔所杀。
现代文：李轶后来被朱鲔所杀。
English: Mr. Li was later killed by Mr. Zhu.

古文：更始之败，李松战死，唯通能以功名终。
现代文：更始战败时，李松也战死了。只有李通以功名终其生。
English: When he was defeated again, Li Song also died in battle. Only Li Tong lived the rest of his life with a reputation.

古文：永平中，显宗幸宛，诏诸李随安众宗室会见，并受赏赐，恩宠笃焉。
现代文：永平中，显宗到宛，诏李的后代随安众刘氏宗室一起会见，一起受到赏赐，恩宠隆重。
English: In Yongping, when Emperor Xuanzong came to Wan, the descendants of Emperor Zhao and Empress Li met with the Liu family together, and were rewarded together. The grace was grand.

古文：论曰：子曰： 富与贵是人之所欲，不以其道得之，不处也。 李通岂知夫所欲而未识以道者乎！
现代文：史官评论道：孔子说过： 富与贵是人们所想得到的，但如果不是以正当的方法得来的，就不要这种富贵。 李通难道是知道那些所欲而不识以道的人吗？
English: The historian commented, "Confucius said, 'Riches and honors are what people want, but if they are not obtained through legitimate means, they are not worth having.' Does Li Tong really know those who want what they want without knowing how to get it?

古文：夫天道性命，圣人难言之，况乃亿测微隐，猖狂无妄之福，污灭亲宗，以觖一切之功哉！
现代文：天道性命这些东西，圣人都很难言，何况是臆测的谶文，狂妄无所依据的福利，使亲宗遭到杀戮，以望获取一时之功呢！
English: It is difficult for a sage to speak of such things as the life of heaven and earth, not to mention conjectural prophecies, wild and unsubstantiated welfare, and the killing of one's relatives in the hope of gaining momentary merit!

古文：昔蒙穀负书，不徇楚难；即墨用齐，义雪燕耻。
现代文：以前蒙谷负书逃于云梦，没有殉于楚难，但后来把典章献给昭王而立了大功；燕昭王伐齐，齐国只剩下莒和即墨，但后来田单以即墨为起点，大破燕兵，终于雪了齐国之耻。
English: In the past, Meng Gu fled in a dream and did not die in the Battle of Chu, but later made a great contribution by dedicating the medal to King Zhao; when King Zhao of Yan invaded Qi, Qi was left with only Zhai and Jimo, but later, Tian Shan used Jimo as a starting point to break the Yan soldiers and finally shed the shame of Qi.

古文：彼之趣舍所立，其殆与通异乎？
现代文：这些都是不计一时之功而终成长远之计，他们做出的趋向和取舍，大概与李通不同吧？
English: These are all long-term strategies that do not count on short-term success, and the trends and choices they make are probably different from Li Tong, right?

古文：王常字颜卿，颍川舞阳人也。
现代文：王常字颜卿，颍川郡舞阳人。
English: Wang Changzha Yanqing, from Maiyang, Beichuan County.

古文：王莽未，为弟报仇，亡命江夏。
现代文：王莽末年，为弟报仇，隐其名籍逃亡江夏。
English: At the end of his life, Wang Mang took revenge for his brother and fled to Jiangxia, concealing his nationality.

古文：久之，与王凤、王匡等起兵云杜绿林中，聚众数万人，以常为偏裨，攻傍县。
现代文：后来，与王凤、王匡等起兵于云杜绿林中，聚众数万人，以王常为偏裨将佐，攻邻县。
English: Later, with Wang Feng, Wang Kuang and others, he raised an army in the Yundu Green Forest, gathered tens of thousands of people, and attacked neighboring counties with Wang Chang as a partial commander.

古文：后与成丹、张卬别入南郡蓝口，号下江兵。
现代文：后与成丹、张另入南郡兰口聚集，号称下江兵。
English: Later, he gathered with Cheng Dan and Zhang Jirong in Lancou, Nan County, and became known as the soldiers of the Lower River.

古文：王莽遣严尤、陈茂击破之。
现代文：王莽派遣严尤、陈茂将他们击破。
English: Wang Mang sent Yan Yu and Chen Mao to defeat them.

古文：常与丹、卬收散卒入蒌谿，劫略钟、龙间，众复振。
现代文：王常与成丹、张收集散卒入蒌奚谷，劫略于安州的石龙山与随州的三钟山一带，部众复兴。
English: Wang Chang, together with Cheng Dan and Zhang Zeng, went to Shibuya and looted the Shilong Mountain in Anzhou and the San Zhong Mountain area in Suzhou, reviving the club.

古文：引军与刑州牧战于上唐，大破之，遂北至宜秋。
现代文：引军与荆州牧战于上唐乡，大破荆州牧，于是北达南阳的宜秋聚。
English: The lead army and Jingzhou herdsmen fought in Shangtang Township and defeated Jingzhou herdsmen, so the north and the south gathered in the autumn.

古文：是时，汉兵与新市、平林众俱败于小长安，各欲解去。
现代文：这时，汉兵与新市、平林的部队都在小长安被打败，各部都想解散而去。
English: At this time, the Han soldiers and the troops from Xinshi and Pinglin were all defeated in Xiaochang'an, and all departments wanted to disband and leave.

古文：伯升闻下江军在宜秋，即与光武及李通俱造常壁，曰： 愿见下江一贤将，议大事。 成丹、张卬共推遣常。
现代文：伯升听说下江兵在宜秋，就与光武及李通都到王常军营，说： 愿见下江一位贤将，商议大事。 成丹、张共推派遣王常。
English: When Bo Sheng heard that the soldiers from the Lower River were in Yixiu, he, Guangwu and Li Tong all went to Wang Chang's military camp and said, "I would like to see a wise general from the Lower River to discuss important matters." Cheng Dan and Zhang both pushed to send Wang Chang.

古文：伯升见常，说以合从之利。
现代文：伯升见到王常，说明联合的好处。
English: Bo Sheng met Wang Chang and explained the benefits of the alliance.

古文：常大悟，曰： 王莽篡弑，残虐天下，百姓思汉，故豪杰并起。
现代文：王常大悟，说： 王莽篡汉弑君，凶残暴虐天下，百姓思汉，所以豪杰并起。
English: Wang Chang Daiguo said: Wang Mang usurped Han Xunjun, brutally tyrannized the world, and the people thought of Han, so heroes arose simultaneously.

古文：今刘氏复兴，即真主也。
现代文：现在刘氏复兴，就是真主。
English: Now Liu's revival is the work of God.

古文：诚思出身为用，辅成大功。 伯升曰： 如事成，岂敢独飨之哉！ 遂与常深相结而去。
现代文：我真想献身为用，辅助以成大功。 伯升说： 如果事成，我岂敢独享胜利成果哩！ 于是与王常深相结识而去。
English: I really want to devote myself to helping him achieve great feats. Bo Sheng said, "If this succeeds, how dare I enjoy the fruits of victory alone!" So he became acquainted with Wang Changshu and left.

古文：常还，具为丹、卬言之。
现代文：王常回来，把情况告知成丹、张。
English: Wang often returned to inform Chengdan and Zhang of the situation.

古文：丹、卬负其从，皆曰： 大丈夫既起，当各自为主，何故受人制乎？ 常心独归汉，乃稍晓说其将帅曰： 往者成、哀衰微无嗣，故王莽得承间篡位。
现代文：成丹、张以其兵多，都说： 大丈夫既起，当各自为主，为什么要受别人制约呢？ 王常的心独归顺于汉，就慢慢晓说其将帅说： 以前成帝、哀帝衰微没有后嗣，所以王莽得以趁机篡位。
English: Chengdan and Zhang, with their large number of soldiers, both said, "Since it's all right, if each of us is the master, why should we be restricted by others?" Wang Chang's heart only surrendered to Han, so he slowly learned that his commander said, "Before, Emperor Cheng and Emperor Xie had no heir, so Wang Mang could take the opportunity to usurp the throne.

古文：既有天下，而政令苛酷，积失百姓之心。
现代文：既有了天下，而政令苛刻残酷，日久而失去了百姓之心。
English: As long as there has been a world, and government decrees have been harsh and cruel, it has lost the hearts of the people.

古文：民之讴吟思汉，非一日也，故使吾属因此得起。
现代文：百姓的讴吟思汉，不止一日了，这样才使我们因此而起。
English: The people's chanting has been going on for more than a day, so that's why we started.

古文：夫民所怨者，天所去也；民所思者，天所与也。
现代文：那种老百姓怨恨的，天就会去掉它；老百姓思念的，天就会给予。
English: What the common people resent, Heaven will eliminate; what the common people yearn for, Heaven will give.

古文：举大事，必当下顺民心，上合天意，功乃可成。
现代文：举大事必当下顺民心，上合天意，才能够成功。
English: In order to be successful, major events must be in line with the people's heart and the will of heaven.

古文：若负强恃勇，触情恣欲，虽得天下，必复失之。
现代文：如果依仗强力勇敢，恣肆于情欲，虽得了天下，必定还要失掉。
English: If you rely on strength and courage and indulge in sensuality, even though you gain the world, you will surely lose it.

古文：以秦、项之势，尚至夷覆，况今布衣相聚草泽？
现代文：以秦皇、项羽之势，还至于倾覆夷灭，何况今天是平民相聚于草泽之中呢？
English: With the potential of Emperor Qin and Xiang Yu, as far as overthrow and annihilation is concerned, what's more, civilians are gathering in the grass today?

古文：以此行之，灭亡之道也。
现代文：这样下去，无异于自取灭亡。
English: To go on like this is tantamount to self-destruction.

古文：今南阳诸刘举宗起兵，观其来议事者，皆有深计大虑，王公之才，与之并合，必成大功，此天所以祐吾属也。 下江诸将虽屈强少识，然素敬常，乃皆谢曰： 无王将军，吾属几陷于不义。
现代文：现在南阳刘姓举族起兵，看他们来议事的，都有深谋大虑，是王公之才，与他们合并，必成大功，这是上天保我们哩！ 下江诸将虽然倔强缺少知识，然而素来尊敬王常，于是都感谢说： 没有王将军，我们这班人差点陷于不义。
English: Now the Nanyang people, surnamed Liu, have raised an army. When they come to discuss the matter, they all have deep thoughts. It is the king's talent. If we merge with them, it will be a great achievement. This is heaven's protection for us. Although the Shimoji generals are stubborn and lack knowledge, they have always respected Wang Chang. Therefore, they all thanked him and said, "Without General Wang, our group of people almost fell into injustice."

古文：愿敬受教。 即引兵与汉军及新市、平林合。
现代文：愿恭敬受教。 就引兵与汉军及新市、平林兵合在一起。
English: May you respectfully learn from me. Let's lead the troops to join the Chinese army and the soldiers from Xincheng and Pinglin.

古文：于是诸部齐心同力，锐气益壮，遂俱进，破杀甄阜、梁丘赐。
现代文：于是诸部齐心同力，锐气更加强壮，于是共进兵，攻破并斩杀甄阜、粱丘赐。
English: As a result, all the departments worked together, and the spirit was stronger, so they marched into the army together, broke through and killed Zhenfu and Qiuqiu.

古文：及诸将议立宗室，唯常与南阳士大夫同意欲立伯升，而朱鲔、张卬等不听。
现代文：等到诸将商议拥立宗室，只有王常与南阳士大夫同意拥立伯升，而朱鲔、张等不听。
English: When the generals discussed the establishment of the family, only Wang Chang and Nanyang Shidafu agreed to support the establishment of Boseung, while Zhu Xi and Zhang did not listen.

古文：及更始立，以常为廷尉、大将军，封知命侯。
现代文：等到更始即位，以王常为廷尉、大将军，封知命侯。
English: When Emperor Heizei ascended the throne, he appointed Wang Chang as a court lieutenant, grand general, and Fuchimikoto.

古文：别徇汝南、沛郡，还入昆阳，与光武共击破王寻、王邑。
现代文：另攻取汝南、沛郡，还入昆阳，与光武共同击破王寻、王邑。
English: In addition, he captured Runan and Pei County, and also entered Kunyang, and together with Guangwu defeated Wangxuan and Wangyi.

古文：更始西都长安，以常行南阳太守事，令专命诛赏，封为邓王，食八县，赐姓刘氏。
现代文：更始西都长安，以王常行南阳太守事，令他专命诛赏，封为邓王，食八县，赐姓刘氏。
English: At the beginning of the year, the western capital of Chang'an, with Wang Changxing as Nanyang Taishouji, made him a special reward, named him Deng Wang, food eight counties, and gave him the surname Liu.

古文：常性恭俭，遵法度，南方称之。
现代文：王常性恭让俭朴，遵守法度，南方都称赞他。
English: Wang Changxing is respectful, frugal, and law-abiding, and the south has praised him.

古文：更始败，建武二年夏，常将妻子诣洛阳，肉袒自归。
现代文：更始失败，建武二年夏天，王常带妻子到洛阳，裸露上身向光武谢罪。
English: In the summer of the second year of Jianwu's reign, Wang Chang took his wife to Luoyang and bared his upper body to thank Guangwu.

古文：光武见常甚欢，劳之曰： 王廷尉良苦。
现代文：光武看见王常很欢喜，慰劳他说： 王廷尉很辛苦。
English: When Guangwu saw Wang Chang, he was very happy and consoled him, saying: "Lieutenant Wang Ting has worked very hard.

古文：每念往时共更艰厄，何日忘之。
现代文：我每想过去，共历艰难困苦，何日能忘。
English: Every time I think about the past, I go through hardships and hardships, how many days can I forget.

古文：莫往莫来，岂违平生之言乎？ 常顿首谢曰： 臣蒙大命，得以鞭策托身陛下。
现代文：你久去而不来，难道要违背过去的话吗？ 王常以头叩地谢罪说： 臣蒙天命，得以执鞭托身于陛下。
English: If you have been away for a long time and do not come, do you want to go against the words of the past? The king often patted his head in thanks and said: The vassal has received the mandate of heaven and is able to hold the whip and entrust himself to His Majesty.

古文：始遇宜秋，后会昆阳，幸赖灵武，辄成断金。
现代文：始遇于宜秋，后来又会于昆阳，幸赖神灵武会，成为同心之交。
English: They first met in Yixiu, and later in Kunyang, thanks to the Shenling Martial Arts Club, they became friends.

古文：更始不量愚臣，任以南州。
现代文：更始不弃愚臣，任以廷尉代理南阳太守。
English: He did not abandon his foolish vassals, and appointed a courtier as acting Nanyang governor.

古文：赤眉之难，丧心失望，以为天下复失纲纪。
现代文：赤眉破更始，使人伤心失望，以为天下纲纪再度破坏。
English: The red-browed start of the new year has made people sad and disappointed, thinking that the world has once again destroyed discipline.

古文：闻陛下即位河北，心开目明，今得见阙庭，死于遗恨。 帝笑曰： 吾与廷尉戏耳。
现代文：听说陛下即位河北，心明眼亮，今得见于帝庭，死无遗恨了。 帝笑着说： 我与廷尉开玩笑罢了。
English: Hearing that His Majesty ascended to the throne of Hebei, his heart was bright, and now he could be seen in the imperial court, he died with no regrets. The emperor smiled and said, "I was only joking with the courtier."

古文：吾见廷尉，不忧南方矣。 乃召公卿将军以下大会，具为群臣言： 常以匹夫兴义兵，明于知天命，故更始封为知命侯。
现代文：我见到了廷尉，不忧南方了。 于是召集公卿将军以下大会，特为群臣介绍说： 王常与众人兴义兵，明于知天命，所以更始封他为知命侯。
English: When I saw the courtier, I was no longer worried about the south, so I called a general assembly of court nobles and generals to introduce him to the courtiers, saying, "Wang Chang and all the people raised a volunteer army, knowing that it was God's will, so he was given the title of prince of destiny.

古文：与吾相遇兵中，尤相厚善。 特加赏赐，拜为左曹，封山桑侯。
现代文：与我相遇在军中，尤相厚爱亲善。 特加赏赐，拜为左曹，封为山桑侯。
English: I met him in the army, and we had a particularly strong affinity for each other. He was given a special award, and was given the title of Zuo Cao and the title of Shan Sang Hou.

古文：后帝于大会中指常谓群臣曰： 此家率下江诸将辅翼汉室，心如金石，真忠臣也。 是日迁常为汉忠将军，遣南击邓奉、董，令诸将皆属焉。
现代文：后来帝在大会中指着王常对群臣说： 此家率领下江诸将辅翼汉室，心如金石，真是忠臣啊！ 这天迁王常为汉忠将军，派遣他南击邓奉、董讠斤，命令诸将都归属于他。
English: Later, in the assembly, the emperor pointed to Wang Chang and said to his ministers, "This family led the generals of the Lower River to support the Han family. Their hearts are like precious stones. What a loyal minister! On this day, Wang Chang was transferred to Han Zhong, sent him south to attack Deng Feng and Dong Shujin, and ordered all the generals to belong to him.

古文：又诏常北击河间、渔阳，平诸屯聚。
现代文：又诏令王常北击河间、渔阳，平定诸屯聚。
English: He also ordered Wang Changbei to attack Hechuan, Yuyang, and subdue all the towns.

古文：五年秋，攻拔湖陵，又与帝会任城，因从破苏茂、庞萌。
现代文：建武五年秋，攻拔湖陵，又与帝会于任城，因而从帝破苏茂、庞萌。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year of Jianwu, he attacked Huling, and met with the emperor in Rencheng, thus defeating Sumo and Pangmeng from the emperor.

古文：进攻下邳，常部当城门战，一日数合，贼反走入城，常追迫之，城上射矢雨下，帝从百余骑自城南高处望，常战力甚，驰遣中黄门诏使引还，贼遂降。
现代文：进攻下邳，王常部在城门大战，一日数合，贼逃入城中，王常追击逼迫，城上箭如雨下，帝从百余骑自城南高处观看，王常战斗很勇敢，派遣中黄门驰诏书让其引还，贼于是投降。
English: After the attack, Wang Changbai fought a big battle at the city gate, and the day was numbered. The thief fled into the city. Wang Changbai chased and persecuted him. It rained arrows on the city. The emperor watched from more than a hundred horsemen from a high place in the south of the city. Wang Changbai fought very bravely. He sent Zhonghuangmenchi Zhao to bring him back. The thief then surrendered.

古文：又别率骑都尉王霸共平沛郡贼。
现代文：又另率骑都尉王霸共平沛郡贼。
English: In addition, he led the cavalry captain Wang Ba and the county thief Pingpei.

古文：六年春，征还洛阳，令夫人迎常于舞阳，归家上冢。
现代文：建武六年春，征回洛阳，令其夫人迎王常于舞阳，归家上冢。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Jianwu, Luoyang was requisitioned, so that his wife, Yingwang, often stayed in Muyang and returned home.

古文：西屯长安，拒隗嚣。
现代文：西屯兵长安，拒隗嚣。
English: Xitunhei Chang'an, resisting the clamor.

古文：七年，使使者持玺书，即拜常为横野大将军，位次与诸将绝席。
现代文：建武七年，光武遣使者持玺书即拜王常为横野大将军，位次与诸将绝席尊显。
English: In the seventh year of the Jianwu era, the envoy sent by Guangwu with the imperial edict to worship Wang Chang was the grand general of Yokono, and his rank was higher than that of other generals.

古文：常别击破隗嚣将高峻于朝那。
现代文：王常别击破隗嚣将高峻于朝那。
English: Wang Changbei broke through the hustle and bustle and will be high and steep in the morning.

古文：嚣遣将过乌氏，常要击破之。
现代文：隗嚣遣将过乌氏县，王常邀击攻破隗嚣部。
English: Yanran sent troops to Wuji County, and Wang Chang invited them to defeat Yanran's troops.

古文：转降保塞羌诸营壁，皆平之。
现代文：又将保塞羌诸营壁降服，都平定了。
English: They also subdued the garrison and the camp walls, and everything was settled.

古文：九年，击内黄贼，破降之。
现代文：建武九年，击内黄贼，破降之。
English: In the ninth year of the Jianwu era, he defeated the Yellow Thieves and was demoted.

古文：后北屯故安，拒卢芳。
现代文：后又北屯故安，拒卢芳。
English: After that, Beitun was safe and sound, although Lu Fang left.

古文：十二年，薨于屯所，谥曰节侯。
现代文：建武十二年，在屯所去世，谥封为节侯。
English: In the twelfth year of the Jianwu era, he died in the camp, and his posthumous name was changed to Jiefu.

古文：子广嗣。
现代文：儿子王广嗣位。
English: His son Wang Guang succeeded to the throne.

古文：三十年，徙封石城侯。
现代文：建武三十年，徙封为石城侯。
English: Thirty years after the establishment of the military, he was transferred to be the lord of Shicheng.

古文：永平十四年，坐与楚事相连，国除。
现代文：永平十四年，因与楚王谋反事有牵连，封邑被废除。
English: In the 14th year of Yongping, the fiefdom was abolished because it was implicated in conspiring against the King of Chu.

古文：邓晨字伟卿，南阳新野人也。
现代文：邓晨字伟卿，南阳郡新野县人。
English: Deng Chen Zi Weiqing, a native of Nanyang County, Nino County.

古文：世吏二千石。
现代文：曾祖父、祖父均任刺史，食邑二千石。
English: His great-grandfather and grandfather were both appointed as sashimi chefs, and they made 2,000 koku of sushi.

古文：父宏，预章都尉。
现代文：父邓宏，是豫章都尉。
English: His father, Deng Hong, was Captain Yu Zhang.

古文：晨初聚光武姊元。
现代文：邓晨起初娶光武姊刘元为妻。
English: At first, Deng Chen married Liu Yuan, Guangwu's older sister.

古文：王莽末，光武尝与兄伯升及晨俱之宛，与穰人蔡少公等宴语。
现代文：王莽末，光武曾经与兄伯升及邓晨都到宛城，与穰人蔡少公等共语。
English: At the end of Wang Mang, Guangwu once went to Wancheng with his brother Bo Sheng and Deng Chen, and spoke with the eunuchs Cai Shao Gong and others.

古文：少公颇学图谶，言刘秀当为天子。
现代文：少公颇学图谶，说刘秀当为天子。
English: Shao Gong learned a lot from him and said that Liu Xiu should be the son of heaven.

古文：或曰： 是国师公刘秀乎？ 光武戏曰： 何用知非仆耶？ 坐者皆大笑，晨心独喜。
现代文：有的人说： 是国师公刘秀吗？ 光武戏答道： 怎么知道不是我呢？ 在坐的都大笑，邓晨心里独喜。
English: Some people said, "Is it Liu Xiu, the national teacher?" Guangwu Opera replied, "How do you know it's not me?" Everyone in the audience laughed, and Deng Chen was overjoyed.

古文：及光武与家属避吏新野，舍晨庐，甚相亲爱。
现代文：等到光武与家属避官于新野，住在邓晨家里，甚相亲爱。
English: By the time Mitsutake and his family had left the government to live in Shinno with Deng Chen's family, they were very close.

古文：晨因谓光武曰： 王莽悖暴，盛夏斩人，此天亡之时也。
现代文：邓晨因而对光武说： 王莽悖逆横暴，盛夏杀人，这是天亡王莽的时候了。
English: Therefore, Deng Chen said to Guangwu: Wang Mang is rebellious and violent, killing people in midsummer. This is the time for Wang Mang to die.

古文：往时会宛，独当应耶？ 光武笑不答。
现代文：以前会于宛城，当是应验这件事情吗？ 光武笑而不答。
English: Previously, it would have been in Wancheng, should this matter be fulfilled? Guangwu laughed and did not answer.

古文：及汉兵起，晨将宾客会棘阳。
现代文：等到汉兵兴起，邓晨率宾客相会于棘阳。
English: After the rise of the Han soldiers, Deng Chen led the guests to meet in Spineyang.

古文：汉兵败小长安，诸将多亡家属，光武单马遁走。遇女弟伯姬，与共骑而奔。
现代文：汉兵败于小长安，诸将多亡失了家属，光武单骑逃走，遇见妹妹伯姬，与她共骑而奔。
English: The Han soldiers were defeated at Xiaochang'an, and many generals lost their families. Guangwu rode away alone. He met his sister, Baoji, and rode away with her.

古文：前行复见元，超令上马。
现代文：往前再见姐姐刘元，叫她赶快上马。
English: Say goodbye to your sister Liu Yuan and tell her to get on the horse as soon as possible.

古文：元以手捴曰： 行矣，不能相救，无为两没也。 会追兵至，元及三女皆遇害。
现代文：刘元以手指道： 你们快走，不能救我了，不要与我同死。 刚好追兵赶到，刘元和她的三个女儿都遇害。
English: Liu Yuan waved her hand and said, "You can't save me now, don't die with me." Just as the pursuing soldiers arrived, Liu Yuan and her three daughters were all killed.

古文：汉兵退保棘阳，而新野宰乃污晨宅，焚其冢墓。
现代文：汉兵退保棘阳，而新野县宰就污秽邓晨的住宅，焚烧了邓晨先祖的冢墓。
English: Han soldiers retreated to Baoxianyang, while the governor of Nino County defiled Deng Chen's residence and burned the tombs of Deng Chen's ancestors.

古文：宗族皆恚怒，曰： 家自富足，何故随妇家人入汤镬中？ 最终无恨色。
现代文：邓氏宗族都愤怒，说： 家里本来富足，为什么要随妇家人进入汤镬中去呢？ 邓晨终无恨色。
English: Deng's family members were furious, saying, "Our family is already rich, why should we follow the woman and her family into the soup? Deng Chen finally has no hatred.

古文：更始立，以晨为偏将军。
现代文：更始即位后，以邓晨为偏将军。
English: After the enthronement of Deng Zhen, Deng Chen became the general.

古文：与光武略地颍川，俱夜出昆阳城，击破王寻、王邑。
现代文：与光武略地颍川，一起夜出昆阳城，击破王寻、王邑。
English: Together with Guangwu, they went to Kunyang City at night and defeated Wang Huan and Wang Yip.

古文：又别徇阳翟以东，至京、密，皆下之。
现代文：又另攻阳翟以东，到京县、密县，都攻下了。
English: They also attacked the area east of Yangshuo, and captured the cities of Jing County and Mi County.

古文：更始北都洛阳，以晨为常山太守。
现代文：更始北都洛阳，以邓晨为常山太守。
English: Luoyang, the northern capital, was re-established, with Deng Chen as the governor of Changshan.

古文：会王郎反，光武自蓟走信都，晨亦间行会于巨鹿下，自请从击邯郸。
现代文：恰遇王郎反叛，光武自蓟到信都，邓晨也抄小道会合于巨鹿下，邓晨自请从击邯郸。
English: When Wang Lang happened to rebel, Guangwu made his way to Xindu, and Deng Chen also followed the trail to meet him at the foot of the giant deer. Deng Chen volunteered to take part in the battle.

古文：光武曰： 伟卿以一身从我，不如以一郡为我北道主人。 乃遣晨归郡。
现代文：光武说： 你以一身跟随我，不如以一郡为我做北道主人。 于是遣邓晨回郡。
English: Guangwu said, "If you are going to follow me alone, it would be better for you to become the master of the North Road for me with one county." So he sent Deng Chen back to the county.

古文：光武追铜马、高胡群贼于冀州，晨发积射士千人，又遣委输给军不绝。
现代文：光武追铜马、高胡群贼于冀州，邓晨派出弓箭手千人，又派遣运输队为军队运粮不绝。
English: Guangwu chased the bronze horse and Gaohu bandits in Jizhou, Deng Chen sent a thousand archers, and dispatched a transport team to transport food for the army.

古文：光武即位，封晨房子侯。
现代文：光武即位，封邓晨为房子侯。
English: Guangwu ascended the throne, and Deng Chen was appointed as the prince of the house.

古文：帝又感悼姊没于乱兵，追封谥元为新野节义长公主，立庙于县西。
现代文：帝又感悼姐姐刘元死于乱兵，追谥刘元为新野节义长公主，立庙于县西。
English: The emperor also mourned the death of his sister, Liu Yuan, at the hands of the soldiers. Liu Yuan was posthumously crowned the Shinno Festival's Grand Princess, and a temple was built in the west of the county.

古文：封晨长子汎为吴房侯，以奉公主之祀。
现代文：封邓晨长子邓汛为吴房侯，以奉公主祭祀。
English: Deng Chen's eldest son, Deng Yao, was given the title of Wu Fang Hou, and was enshrined as a princess.

古文：建武三年，征晨还京师，数宴见，说故旧平生为欢。
现代文：建武三年，征召邓晨回京，多次宴会，以谈论故旧平生为欢乐。
English: In the third year of Jianwu, Deng Chen was summoned back to Beijing, and many banquets were held, with the joy of talking about the old life.

古文：晨从容谓帝曰： 仆竟办之。 帝大笑。
现代文：邓晨从容对帝说： 我竟然说对了。 帝大笑。
English: Deng Chen calmly said to the emperor: I actually said the right thing. The emperor laughed loudly.

古文：从幸章陵，拜光禄大夫，使持节监执金吾贾复等击平邵陵、新息贼。
现代文：从帝到章陵，拜为光禄大夫，派他持符节监督执金吾贾复等攻击平定邵陵、新息贼兵。
English: From the emperor to Zhangling, he was worshipped as the doctor of Guanglu, and he was sent to hold the rune festival to supervise the execution of Jinwujia and other attacks to pacify Shaoling and the new interest of the thief soldiers.

古文：四年，从幸寿春，留镇九江。
现代文：建武四年，从光武至寿春，留镇九江。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, from Guangwu to Shuchun, he stayed in Jiujiang.

古文：晨好乐郡职，由是复拜为中山太守，吏民称之，常为冀州高第。
现代文：邓晨乐于郡守职事，由此又拜他为中山郡太守，官吏百姓都称赞他。常在冀州各郡中为第一。
English: Deng Chen enjoyed his duties as county magistrate, which led to him being worshipped as the governor of Zhongshan County. Officials and commoners alike praised him. He was often ranked first among counties in Jizhou.

古文：十三年，更封南侯。
现代文：建武十三年，更封为南侯。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Kenmu era, he was given the title of Nanko.

古文：入奉朝请，复为汝南太守。
现代文：入奉朝请，再为汝南太守。
English: Please enter the imperial service, and then become the governor of Yunnan Province.

古文：十八年，行幸章陵，征晨行廷尉事。
现代文：建武十八年，光武到章陵，召邓晨行廷尉职事。
English: In the 18th year of Jianwu, Guangwu went to Zhangling and summoned Deng Chen to serve as a courtier.

古文：从至新野，置酒酣宴，赏赐数百千万，复遣归郡。
现代文：从帝到新野，置酒酣宴，赏赐数百千万，再遣他回到郡所。
English: From the emperor to Niiro, a banquet of wine, a reward of millions, and then he was sent back to the county seat.

古文：晨兴鸿郤陂数千顷田，汝土以殷，鱼稻之饶，流衍它郡。
现代文：邓晨兴修鸿谷阝陂田数千顷，汝南由此富裕，鱼稻之丰饶，带动了其他的郡。
English: Deng Chenxing built thousands of hectares of rice fields in Honggu, which made Runan rich, and the abundance of fish and rice drove other counties to rise.

古文：明年，定封西华侯，复征奉朝请。
现代文：第二年，定封为西华侯。再召还京奉朝请。
English: The following year, he was appointed as the Marquis of West China. He was called back to Beijing to serve the imperial court.

古文：二十五年卒，诏遣中谒者备公主官属礼仪，招迎新野主魂，与晨合葬于北芒。
现代文：建武二十五年去世，诏令派中谒者具备了公主官属的礼仪，招迎新野主魂，与邓晨合葬于北芒。
English: When Emperor Jianwu died in the 25th year of the Jianwu era, the followers of the Emperor's edict had the etiquette of the princess's official family, invited the main soul of Sino, and buried together with Deng Chen in Beimang.

古文：乘舆与中宫亲临丧送葬。
现代文：帝与皇后亲自临丧送葬。
English: The Emperor and Empress attended the funeral in person.

古文：谥曰惠侯。
现代文：谥封邓晨为惠侯。
English: Zifeng Dengchen was the benefactor.

古文：小子棠嗣，后徙封武当。
现代文：小子棠嗣，后徙封武当。
English: His younger son, Tang Zi, later became a military commander.

古文：棠卒，子固嗣。
现代文：棠卒，子固嗣。
English: Tang Zi, Zi Gu Zi.

古文：固卒，子国嗣。
现代文：固卒，子国嗣。
English: Gotsu, son of Kunitsugu.

古文：国卒，子福嗣，永建元年卒，无子，国除。
现代文：国卒，子福嗣，永建元年卒，无子，国除。
English: National graduate, son of Fukushi, graduate of the first year of the Yongjian era, no children, expelled from the country.

古文：来歙字君叔，南阳新野人也。
现代文：来歙子君叔，南阳新野县人。
English: Uncle Lai Zizi, from Nanyang, Shinyo County.

古文：六世祖汉，有才力，武帝世，以光禄大夫副楼船将军杨仆，击破南越、朝鲜。
现代文：父亲来仲，汉哀帝时做谏大夫，娶光武祖姑，生来歙。来歙的妹妹是汉中王刘嘉的妻子，刘嘉派人迎接来歙，于是就南下来到汉中。
English: His father, Lai Zhong, was a medical doctor in the Han Dynasty, and married Guangwu Zougu. Lai Zhong's sister was the wife of Liu Jia, the king of the Han Dynasty. Liu Jia sent someone to meet Lai Zhong, so Lai Zhong went south to the Han Dynasty.

古文：父仲，哀帝时为谏大夫，娶光武祖姑，生歙。
现代文：更始帝失败后，来歙劝刘嘉归附光武帝，于是和刘嘉一起往东到洛阳去。
English: After he failed to change the emperor, he came to Luoyang to persuade Liu Jia to return to Emperor Guangwu, so he and Liu Jia went east to Luoyang together.

古文：光武甚亲敬之，数共往来长安。汉兵起，王莽以歙刘氏外属，乃收系之，宾客共篡夺，得免。
现代文：汉兵兴起后，王莽以来歙是刘氏外家亲属，就拘禁起来，宾客们共同用武力夺取，得免。
English: After the rise of the Han soldiers, Wang Mang, who was a foreign relative of the Liu family, was detained, and the guests jointly seized him by force, and he was released.

古文：更始即位，以歙为吏，从入关。
现代文：更始即位，以来歙为官吏，跟从入关。
English: He was enthroned at the beginning of the new year, and since then he has been a government official, following the customs.

古文：数言事不用，以病去。
现代文：几次建议不被采纳，称病离去。
English: Several times his proposals were not accepted and he left, saying he was ill.

古文：歙女弟为汉中王刘嘉妻，嘉遣人迎歙，因南之汉中。
现代文：来歙的妹妹是汉中王刘嘉的妻子，刘嘉派人迎接来歙，因此南到汉中。
English: Lai Yao's sister was the wife of Liu Jia, the king of the Han Dynasty. Liu Jia sent someone to meet Lai Yao, so Nan went to the Han Dynasty.

古文：更始败，歙劝嘉归光武，遂与嘉俱东诣洛阳。
现代文：更始败，来歙劝导刘嘉归顺光武，于是与刘嘉东到洛阳。
English: Even more defeated, he came to Xing to persuade Liu Jia to return to Shun Guangwu, so he and Liu Jiadong went to Luoyang.

古文：帝见歙，大欢，即解衣为衣之，拜为太中大夫。
现代文：光武帝见到来歙，非常欢喜，立即脱下自己的衣服给来歙穿上，任命他做太中大夫。
English: Emperor Guangwu was overjoyed at the arrival of the empress, and immediately took off his own clothes to dress the empress, and appointed him as the Grand Physician.

古文：是时方以陇、蜀为忧，独谓歙曰： 今西州未附，子阳称帝，道里阻远，诸将方务关东，思西州方略，未知所任，其谋若何？ 歙因自请曰： 臣尝与隗嚣相遇长安。其入始起，以汉为名。
现代文：这时光武帝正担忧陇、蜀，来歙于是主动请命说： 我曾经和隗嚣在长安相遇。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu was worried about Zhou and Shu, so he came to Zhou and volunteered to say: I once met Zhou Han in Chang'an.

古文：今陛下圣德隆兴，臣愿得奉威命，开以丹青之信，嚣必束手自归，则述自亡之势，不足图也。 
现代文：那个人刚起兵时，以兴复汉室为名。现在陛下圣德威武，我希望能奉你的命令，用不变的诚信来开导他，隗嚣一定会束手来降，那么公孙述将成灭亡之势，不足为虑。 
English: When that man first took up arms, he did so in the name of restoring the Han dynasty. Now, Your Majesty, I hope to be able to follow your orders and enlighten him with unwavering integrity. Hubris will surely lead to defeat, so it is not enough to worry about the possibility of your grandson's downfall.

古文：帝然之。
现代文：光武帝认为他说得对。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：建武三年，歙始使隗嚣。
现代文：光武帝认为他说得对。建武三年，来歙才出使隗嚣。
English: Emperor Guangwu thought he was right. Jianwu had been in power for three years, and it was only after he came to Shandong that he sent out his envoys.

古文：五年，复持节送马援，因奉玺书于嚣。
现代文：建武五年，隗嚣派儿子隗恂跟随来歙入朝做人质。
English: In the fifth year of Jianwu's reign, Gong Han sent his son Zou to accompany him to invade the North to be a hostage.

古文：既还，复往说嚣。嚣遂遣子恂随歙入质，拜歙为中郎将。
现代文：当时山东大致平定，光武帝谋划向西收取隗嚣的部队，想与他们一起攻打蜀，又派来歙去告诉隗嚣自己的旨意。
English: At that time, Shandong had been largely pacified, and Emperor Guangwu planned to send troops to the west to receive the rebels. He wanted to fight against Shu together with them, and sent Gao to inform the rebels of his will.

古文：古者列国兵交，使在其间，所以重兵贵和而不任战也，何况承王命籍重质而犯之哉？
现代文：隗嚣的部将劝说隗嚣，摆出许多疑问，使隗嚣很长时间犹豫不决。来歙一向刚毅，于是愤怒地质问责备隗嚣说： 皇上以为您懂得善恶好歹，知晓兴衰之理，所以才亲自写信给您表明心意，您表达诚心，派儿子伯春做人质，这是君臣之间的相互信任啊。
English: The turbulent minister persuaded the turbulent minister, put forward many questions, and made the turbulent minister hesitate for a long time. Lai Xuan had always been strong-willed, so the angry minister said to the turbulent minister: The emperor thought that you knew good and evil, and knew the reason for the rise and fall, so he personally wrote to you to express his will, you expressed your sincerity, and sent his son Bo Chun as a hostage. This is mutual trust between the monarchs and ministers.

古文：君叔虽单车远使，而陛下之外兄也。
现代文：现在反而要听信奸佞小人的话，定下灭族的计划，背叛君主，连累儿子，是要违背忠贞诚信吗？决定吉凶的选择，就在今天。 
English: Now, on the contrary, we have to listen to the words of a traitorous villain, set a plan to exterminate the people, betray the monarch, and implicate his son. Is it to violate loyalty and integrity? Decide the choice of good or bad, just today.

古文：害之无损于汉，而随以族灭。昔宋执楚使，遂有析骸易子之祸。
现代文：来歙想要上前刺杀隗嚣，隗嚣起身进入内室，部署士兵，要杀来歙，来歙不慌不忙地拿着符节走到车旁上车离去。
English: Lai Yao wanted to go forward to assassinate Lai Han, Lai Han got up and entered the inner room, deployed soldiers, wanted to kill Lai Yao, Lai Yao unhurriedly walked to the car and got on the car to leave.

古文：小国犹不可辱，况于万乘之主，重以伯春之命哉！ 歙为人有信义，言行不违，及往来游说，皆可案复，西州士大夫皆信重之，多为其言，故得免而东归。
现代文：隗嚣更加恼怒，王元劝隗嚣杀死来歙。来歙为人讲信义，言行一致，以致往返游说，都可以核实，西州的士大夫都信任敬重他，许多人替他说情，所以来歙得以脱身东归至汉。
English: Yanran was even more angry. Wang Yuan advised Yanran to kill Lai Xuan. Lai Xuan was a man of integrity, and his words and deeds were consistent, so much so that he lobbied back and forth. It can be verified that the officials in West China all trusted and respected him, and many people interceded for him, so Lai Xuan was able to escape and return to Han.

古文：八年春，歙与征虏将军祭遵袭略阳，遵道病还，分遣精兵随歙，合二千余人，伐山开道，从番须、回中径至略阳，斩嚣守将金梁，因保其城。
现代文：建武八年春，来歙和征虏将军祭遵袭击略阳，祭遵在路上得病返回，祭遵分派精兵跟随来歙，总共两千多人，劈山开路，从番须、回中径直到略阳，杀了隗嚣的守将金梁，于是据守略阳城。
English: In the spring of the eighth year of the Jianwu era, Zun, a general who came to Liaoyang to conquer and conquer, attacked Liaoyang. Zun got sick on the way back, and Zun sent elite soldiers to follow Liaoyang. A total of more than two thousand people split the mountain and opened the road from Fansu and Hui Zhongdi to Liaoyang. They killed the clamoring guard Jin Liang, and then guarded Liaoyang City.

古文：嚣大惊曰： 何其神也！ 乃悉兵数万人围略阳，斩山筑堤，激水灌城。
现代文：隗嚣非常吃惊，于是率领全部士兵数万人围攻略阳，开山筑堤，蓄水灌城。
English: He was very surprised, so he led tens of thousands of soldiers to besiege Liaoyang, build a dike, and fill the city with water.

古文：歙与将士固死坚守，矢尽，乃发屋断木以为兵。
现代文：来歙和将士拼死坚守，箭用光了，就拆房子砍树木作为兵器。
English: The warriors fought to the death, and when they ran out of arrows, they tore down houses and cut down trees to use as weapons.

古文：嚣尽锐攻之，自春至秋，其士卒疲弊，帝乃大发关东兵，自将上陇，嚣众溃走，围解。
现代文：隗嚣用所有精锐部队攻城，从春天到秋天，他的士兵很疲惫。光武帝于是大举征发关东兵，亲自率兵到陇地，隗嚣部众溃败逃走，解了围。
English: Yan Han used all his elite troops to attack the city. From spring to autumn, his soldiers were very tired. Emperor Guangwu then conscripted and dispatched a large number of Guandong soldiers, and personally led the soldiers to Handan. Yan Han's troops were defeated and fled, and the siege was lifted.

古文：于是置酒高会，劳赐歙，班坐绝席，在诸将之右，赐歙妻缣千匹。
现代文：于是举行盛大庆功酒会，慰劳来歙，赐他独坐一席，在诸将之右，赐来歙妻缣千匹。
English: So they held a grand celebratory drinking party, consoled him, and gave him a seat alone, and at the right of the generals, he was given a thousand horses.

古文：诏使留屯长安，悉监护诸将。
现代文：诏令来歙留屯长安，以监护诸将领。
English: He was ordered to stay in Chang'an and act as a guardian to the generals.

古文：歙因上书曰： 公孙述以陇西、天水为藩蔽，故得延命假息。
现代文：来歙因而上书说： 公孙述以陇西、天水作为藩篱屏蔽，所以得以苟延假息。
English: Therefore, he submitted a letter saying: Gongsun said that he used Shaanxi and Tianshui as a hedge shield, so he was able to extend his vacation.

古文：今二郡平荡，则述智计穷矣。
现代文：今二郡平定震荡，公孙述的智计就穷尽了。
English: Now that the two counties have calmed down, the wit of Gongsun has been exhausted.

古文：宜益选兵马，储积资粮。
现代文：应当更选兵马，储积资粮。
English: Troops and horses should be better selected, and reserves of supplies and grain should be built up.

古文：昔赵之将帅多贾人，高帝悬之以重赏。
现代文：以前赵的将帅多是商人，高帝以重金悬赏。
English: In the past, most of Zhao's generals were merchants, and Emperor Gao rewarded them with large sums of money.

古文：今西州新破，兵人疲馑，若招以财谷，则其众可集。
现代文：今西州新破，兵卒人民疲敝饥馑，如果以金钱粮谷相招，则其众可以招集起来。
English: Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im Im

古文：臣知国家所给非一，用度不足，然有不得已也。 帝然之。
现代文：臣知国家开支很多，用度不足，然而这是不得已的。 光武帝同意。
English: The vassal knew that the state was spending too much and not enough, but it was a last resort. Emperor Guangwu agreed.

古文：于是大转粮运，诏歙率征西大将军冯异、建威大将军耿弇、虎牙大将军盖延、扬武将军马成、武威将军刘尚入天水，击破公孙述将田弇、赵匡。
现代文：于是实行了大规模的粮食积集和转运，诏令来歙率领征西大将军冯异、建威大将军耿弇、虎牙大将军盖延、扬武将军马成、武威将军刘尚入天水，击破公孙述将领田弇、赵匡。
English: As a result, large-scale grain accumulation and transshipment were carried out, and the imperial order was issued to Lai Tong to lead the Western General Feng Yin, Jian Wei General Geng Yao, Hu Yao General Gai Yan, Yang Wu General Ma Cheng, and Wu Wei General Liu Shang into Tianshui to defeat Gong Sun Suo Generals Tian Yao and Zhao Kuang.

古文：明年，攻拔落门，隗嚣支党周宗、赵恢及天水属县皆降。
现代文：第二年，攻拔落门，隗嚣友党周宗、赵恢及天水郡各属县都投降了。
English: In the second year, the attack failed, and Zhou Zong, Zhao Huai and Tianshui County all surrendered.

古文：初王莽世，羌虏多背叛，而隗嚣招怀其酋豪，遂得为用。
现代文：起初在王莽时，羌虏多背叛，而隗嚣招抚其酋长豪杰，于是为其所用。
English: At the beginning of Wang Mang's reign, he was betrayed by many of his vassals, but Yan Ren coaxed his chieftain, Gao Jie, and used him.

古文：及嚣亡后，五谿、先零诸种数为寇掠，皆营堑自守，州郡不能讨。
现代文：等到隗嚣败亡后，五奚谷、先零诸种几次进行侵掠，都建营掘壕自守，州郡讨伐不了。
English: After the defeat of the Han Han, the Wuzhidani and the First Zero all invaded and plundered several times, but they built trenches to defend themselves, and they could not fight in the state and county.

古文：歙乃大修攻具，率盖延、刘尚及太中大夫马援等进击羌于金城，大破之，斩首虏数千人，获牛羊万余头，谷数十万斛。
现代文：来歙就大修作战攻具，率盖延、刘尚及太中大夫马援等进攻羌于金城，大破羌虏，斩首数千人，获牛羊万余头，谷数十万斛。
English: He came to Jinshan to overhaul the combat equipment, led by Guiyan, Liu Shang and Taizhong Doctor Ma Yuan, and attacked Jinshan. He defeated the invaders, decapitated thousands of people, captured more than 10,000 heads of cattle and sheep, and confiscated hundreds of thousands of yams.

古文：又击破襄武贼傅栗卿等。
现代文：又击破襄武贼傅栗卿等。
English: He also defeated the bandit Fu Liqing and others.

古文：陇西虽平，而人饥，流者相望。
现代文：陇西虽平定了，但粮少人饥，百姓流离就食。
English: Although the western part of Shaanxi Province has been stabilized, there is a shortage of grain and people are starving.

古文：歙乃倾仓廪，转运诸县，以赈赡之，于是陇右遂安，而凉州流通焉。
现代文：来歙就把仓廪中的全部粮食，转运到各县，以赈济供养，于是陇西得以安定，而与凉州互为流通。
English: Laiwu then transported all the grain from the granaries to the counties to provide them with food. As a result, Shaanxi was stabilized, and the grain flowed to and from Liangzhou.

古文：十一年，歙与盖延、马成进攻公孙述将王元、环安于河池、下辨，陷之，乘胜遂进。
现代文：建武十一年，来歙与盖延、马成进攻公孙述将领王元、环安于河池、下辨，攻陷了。乘胜前进。
English: In the eleventh year of Jianwu, Laiwu, Gaiyan and Macheng attacked Gongsunshu generals Wang Yuan, Huanan, Hechi and Shedan. They were defeated and captured. They advanced with the victory.

古文：蜀人大惧，使刺客刺歙，未殊，驰召盖延。
现代文：蜀人大惧，派遣刺客刺杀来歙，未死，驰召盖延。
English: The people of Shu were so afraid that they sent assassins to kill him, but before he died, they summoned Gai Yan.

古文：延见歙，因伏悲哀，不能仰视。
现代文：盖延见到来歙，俯伏悲哀，不能仰视。
English: When Gai Yan saw the approaching dragonfly, he fell down in sorrow, unable to look up.

古文：歙叱延曰： 虎牙何敢然！
现代文：来歙叱责盖延说： 虎牙大将军怎敢这样！
English: "How dare General Houya do such a thing!

古文：今使者中刺客，无以报国，故呼巨卿，欲相属以军事，而反效儿女子涕泣乎！
现代文：现在我被刺客刺杀，不能再报效国家，所以叫你来，想嘱以军事，你反而仿效儿女子痛哭涕泣吗！
English: Now I have been assassinated by an assassin and can no longer serve my country, so I have called you here, and you want to order me to serve in the military, but instead you follow the example of a child crying bitterly!

古文：刃虽在身，不能勒兵斩公耶！ 延收泪强起，受所诫。
现代文：我虽刺刃在身，难道不能举刀杀你吗？ 盖延收泪强行起身，接受来歙告诫。
English: Even though I have a blade in my body, can't I raise my sword to kill you? Gai Yan forced himself to tears and stood up, accepting the admonition.

古文：歙自书表曰： 臣夜人定后，为何人所贼伤，中臣要害。
现代文：来歙自书写表章说： 臣在夜深人静后，不知为何人所刺伤，刺中臣的要害。
English: He wrote in his epitaph: "A minister was stabbed in the dead of night, I don't know by whom, and he was stabbed in the heart.

古文：臣不敢自惜，诚恨奉职不称，以为朝廷羞。
现代文：臣不敢自惜己身，只恨奉职没有完成，以为朝廷羞耻。
English: The vassal did not dare to spare his own life. He only hated that he had not completed his duties, thinking that the imperial court would be ashamed.

古文：夫理国以得贤为本，太中大夫段襄，骨鲠可任，愿陛下裁察。
现代文：治理国家以得贤人为根本，太中大夫段襄，正直可以任用，愿陛下裁定省察。
English: The governance of the country is based on the wisdom of the people. Dr. Duan Xiang, the First Vice-Minister of the People's Liberation Army, can honestly be appointed. I hope that His Majesty will make a thoughtful decision.

古文：又臣兄弟不肖，终恐被罪，陛下哀怜，数赐教督。 投笔抽刃而绝。
现代文：又臣的兄弟不贤明，最终恐怕会犯罪，请陛下哀怜，多赐教示督察。 
English: Also, the minister's brother is not wise and may eventually commit a crime. Please have pity on His Majesty and give more guidance to the inspector.

古文：帝闻大惊，省书揽涕，乃赐策曰： 中郎将来歙，攻战连年，平定羌、陇，忧国忘家，忠孝彰著。
现代文：写完后丢下笔抽出扎在身上的刀就死了。光武闻讯大惊，看了表章揩干眼泪，就赐策书说： 中郎将来歙，攻战连年，平定羌、陇，忧国忘家，忠孝显著，遇刺身亡，呜呼哀哉！ 
English: After he finished writing, he dropped the pen, pulled out the knife that was stuck on his body, and died. Guangwu was shocked to hear the news. He looked at the seal and wiped away his tears, and then he gave a recommendation saying: Zhonglang will be defeated, attacked for years, defeated, defeated, worried about the country and forgot his home, loyal and filial, assassinated and killed, how sad!

古文：遭命遇害，呜呼哀哉！ 使太中大夫赠歙中郎将、征羌侯印绶，谥曰节侯，谒者护丧事。丧还洛阳，乘舆缟素临吊送葬。
现代文：派太中大夫赠来歙中郎将、征羌侯印绶，谥封为节侯，派谒者护理丧事。灵柩回到洛阳，帝身着白色丧服临吊送葬。
English: The midwife sent the coffin to the emperor as a gift, and the imperial seal was sealed for the festival. Those who sent the coffin cared for the funeral. The coffin returned to Luoyang, and the emperor, dressed in white mourning clothes, attended the funeral.

古文：以歙有平羌、陇之功，故改汝南之当乡县为征羌国焉。
现代文：以来歙有平羌、陇之功，所以改汝南郡的当乡县为征羌国。
English: Since then, due to the achievements of Pingyao and Handan, Dangxiang County of Runan County was changed to be the leading county for the conquest of Handan.

古文：子褒嗣。
现代文：子来褒嗣位。
English: Children are given the title of heir.

古文：十三年，帝嘉歙忠节，复封歙弟由为宜西侯。
现代文：建武十三年，帝嘉奖来歙忠节，又封来歙弟来由为宜西侯。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jianwu, Emperor Jia was awarded the Loyalty Festival, and the younger brother of Emperor Jianwu was named the Prince of Yixi.

古文：褒子棱，尚显宗女武安公主。
现代文：来褒子来眣，匹配显宗女武安公主。
English: Lai Hongzi Lai Yao, match Hsien Zong's daughter Princess Wu'an.

古文：棱早殁，褒卒，以棱子历为嗣。
现代文：来眣早死，来褒死后，以来眣子来历嗣位。
English: After the early death of Lai Xuan and the death of Lai Bo, Lai Zi became the heir to the throne.

古文：论曰： 世称来君叔天下信士。
现代文：史官评论：世间称来君叔为天下信士。
English: Historian's comment: The world calls Lai Junzhu the world's believer.

古文：夫专使乎二国之间，岂厌诈谋哉？
现代文：他作为两国之间的专使，难道还厌诈谋吗？
English: As a special envoy between the two countries, is he not tired of scheming?

古文：而能独以信称者，良其诚心在乎使两义俱安，而己不私其功也。
现代文：而他独能以诚信著称于世，是由于他的诚心在于使两边都得其所安，而他自己却不自私谋功哩！
English: And he alone can be known in the world for his honesty, because his sincerity lies in making both sides feel at ease, while he himself does not selfishly seek credit!

