古文：《蹇》卦《艮》下《坎》上，见险而止，故诸爻皆有蹇难之辞。
现代文：《蹇》卦乃是《艮》下《坎》上，见险而止，所以各爻都有蹇难之辞。
English: ""卦" is "" under "Kan," see the danger and stop, so each  has the words of difficulty.

古文：独六二重言蹇蹇，说者以为六二与九五为正应，如臣之事君，当以身任国家之责，虽蹇之又蹇，亦匪躬以济之，此解释文义之旨也。
现代文：唯独六二爻说两次 蹇 ，解卦的人认为六二爻与九五爻为正应，如臣子侍奉君主，当亲身肩负国家重任，即使难之又难，也应当全力以赴，鞠躬尽瘁，这是解释卦辞的主旨。
English: However, in the explanation of the riddle, it is said twice that the answer to the riddle is "six two" and the answer to the riddle is "nine five." If a vassal serves the monarch, he should personally shoulder the heavy responsibility of the country. Even if it is difficult, he should do his best and do his best. This is the main meaning of the explanation of the riddle.

古文：若寻绎爻画，则有说焉，盖外卦一《坎》，诸爻所同，而自六二推之，上承九三、六四，又为《坎》体，是一卦之中已有二《坎》也，故重言之。
现代文：如果推演爻象，就有另外一种解释，外为一个《坎》卦，各爻所同，而从六二向上推，上承九三爻、六四爻，又力《坎》笋，这即是一卦之中有两个坎卦，于是说两个 奏 。
English: If we extrapolate from the above, there is another explanation. For example, there is a "can" in a "gua," and each "gua" is the same, but from the 62nd, it is pushed up to the 93rd, 64th, and "can" in a "gua." This means that there are two "can" in a "gua," so it is said that there are two "plays."

古文：《解》卦《坎》下《震》上，动而免乎险矣。
现代文：《解》卦乃《坎》下《震》上，只要动就可免于险。
English: The "solution" of the conundrum is the "quagmire" under the "shock," as long as you move, you can be free from danger.

古文：六三将出险，乃有负乘致寇之咎，岂非上承九四、六五又为《坎》乎？
现代文：六三爻表示将脱离脸境，又会有外来之 寇 袭击的凶象，此爻上承九四、六五二爻，难道不又是一个《坎》卦吗？
English: The date of June 3rd indicated that the country would be out of danger, and there would be the threat of attacks by foreign invaders. This date was followed by the dates of June 4th and June 5th. Wasn't this just another "Kan" gua?

古文：《坎》为舆为盗，既获出险而复蹈焉，宜其可丑而致戎也，是皆中爻之义云。
现代文：《坎》表示 舆 ，表示 盗 即将脱险又陷于险，在极端困难的情况下又出现新的外患也没什么奇怪，这都是中爻所表现出的含义。
English: "Kan" means "trouble" and indicates that the thief is about to get out of danger and get into danger, and it is not surprising that new external diseases appear in extremely difficult circumstances. These are all meanings shown by the Chinese character.

