古文：孟子曰： 天时不如地利，地利不如人和。
现代文：孟子说： 有利的时机和气候不如有利的地势，有利的地势不如人齐心协力。
English: Mencius said: The favorable time and climate are not as good as the favorable terrain, and the favorable terrain is not as good as people working together.

古文：三里之城，七里之郭，环而攻之而不胜。
现代文：譬如有座内城方圆三里、外城方圆七里的城邑，四面围攻都不能够攻破。
English: For example, if there is a city with an inner city radius of three miles and an outer city radius of seven miles, the siege on all sides cannot be broken.

古文：夫环而攻之，必有得天时者矣；然而不胜者，是天时不如地利也。
现代文：既然四面围攻，总有遇到好时机或好天气的时候，但还是攻不破，这说明有利的时机和气候不如有利的地势。
English: Since they besieged on all sides, there was always a good time or good weather, but they still could not break through, which shows that the favorable time and climate are not as good as the favorable terrain.

古文：城非不高也，池非不深也，兵革非不坚利也，米粟非不多也；委而去之，是地利不如人和也。
现代文：另一种情况是，城墙不是不高，护城河不是不深，守城的武器装备不是不锐利坚固，粮草也不是不充足，但是军民们还是弃城而逃了，这就说明有利的地势不如人的齐心协力。
English: Another situation is that the city wall is not too high, the moat is not too deep, the weapons and equipment used to defend the city are not too strong, and the grain and grass are not insufficient, but the soldiers and civilians still abandoned the city and fled, which shows that the favorable terrain is not as good as people's concerted efforts.

古文：故曰：域民不以封疆之界，固国不以山溪之险，威天下不以兵革之利。
现代文：所以说：老百姓不是靠封锁边境线就可以限制住的，国家不是靠险要的山河就可以保住，扬威天下也不是靠锐利地武器装备做到的。
English: Therefore, it is said that the common people cannot be restrained by sealing the border, the country cannot be kept safe by relying on dangerous mountains and rivers, and the world cannot be dominated by sharp weapons and equipment.

古文：得道者多助，失道者寡助。
现代文：拥有道义的人会得到很多援助，失去道义的人得到的援助就很少。
English: Moral people get a lot of help; immoral people get very little help.

古文：寡助之至，亲戚畔之；多助之至，天下顺之。
现代文：援助的人少到极点，连亲人也会叛离；援助的人多到极点时，天下人都会顺从他。
English: When the number of supporters is extremely small, even relatives will defect; when the number of supporters is extremely large, everyone in the world will obey him.

古文：以天下之所顺，攻亲戚之所畔；故君子有不战，战必胜矣。 
现代文：以全天下人都顺从的力量去攻打连亲人都会叛离的人，必然是不战则已，战无不胜的了。 
English: With the power of the whole world's obedience to attack those who will even betray their relatives, it is inevitable that there will be no war, and the war will be invincible.

