古文：后山陈无己著《谈丛》六卷，高简有笔力，然所载国朝事，失于不考究，多爽其实，漫析数端于此。
现代文：诗人陈师道，字无己，号后士居士，著有《谈丛》六卷，文字高超简洁有力，然而他所记载本朝的大事，失误在于不考证核实，大多不合事实，在这里可以随便分析几条。
English: The poet Chen Shidao, whose words are selfless and whose posthumous title is "Chamberlain," is the author of the six-volume "Talking about the Conglomerate." His writing is superbly concise and powerful. However, the mistakes he made in recording the important events of this dynasty were due to the fact that he did not do any research and verification. Most of his writings did not conform to the facts. Here, we can analyze a few of his articles.

古文：其一云： 吕许公恶韩、富、范三公，欲废之而不能，及西军罢，尽用三公及宋莒公、夏英公于二府，皆其仇也。
现代文：等到对西夏的战争结束，朝廷在枢密院和中书门下全都任用三公及莒国公宋库、英国公夏妹，这都是吕许公的二政敌。吕已经老了，朝廷大事还征求他的意见。
English: By the end of the war against the Western Xia, the Imperial Court had appointed all three princes, Song Gu, the Duke of Shan, and Xia Mei, the Duchess of England, to the Privy Council and the Chinese Academy of Letters. These were the two political enemies of Lü Xuchang. Lü was already old, and his opinion was still sought on important matters of the Imperial Court.

古文：吕既老，大事犹问，遂请出大臣行三边，既建议，乃数出道者院宿，范公奉使陕西，宿此院，相见云云。 
现代文：他就请求朝廷派出大臣宣抚河北、河东、陕西等边界。建议被批准后，朝廷就按次序令赴边的大臣在枢密院宿夜。范公奉派出使陕西，夜宿此院，与其他四人相见。 
English: He requested the imperial court to send a minister to mediate between the borders of Hebei, Hedong and Shaanxi. After the proposal was approved, the imperial court ordered the ministers to stay overnight at the Privy Council. Fan Gongfeng sent an envoy to Shaanxi to stay overnight at this court and meet with the other four.

古文：按吕公罢相，诏有同议大事之旨，公辞，乃庆历三年三月，至九月致仕矣。
现代文：按吕公罢相后，虽然皇上下诏令他与在位大臣同议大事，他却推辞了，那是仁宗庆历三年三月间到九月他就退休了。
English: According to Lü Gong's retirement, although the emperor ordered him to discuss major events with the reigning minister, he refused. It was between March and September of the third year of the Emperor's reign that he retired.

古文：四年七月，富、范始奉使，又三公入二府时，莒公自在外，英公拜枢密使而中辍，后二年莒方复入，安有五人同时之事？
现代文：到庆历四年七月，富、范才奉派为宣抚使。再说三公进入东西二府掌政时，莒公自在外地，英公虽曾授枢密使却中止未成，两年后才重新进入西府，哪里有五个人同时在二府之事呢？
English: In July of the 4th year of the Heian period, Fu and Fan Cai were appointed as imperial messengers. Moreover, when the three princes entered the two eastern and western prefectures to take control of the government, Yan Gong was out of the country, and Ying Gong, although he had been awarded the title of imperial envoy, was unable to do so, and only re-entered the western prefecture two years later. How could there be five people in the two prefectures at the same time?

古文：其二云： 杜正献、丁文简为河东宣抚，任布之子上书历诋执政，至云至于臣父，亦出遭逢，谓其非德选也。
现代文：第二条是： 杜衍、丁度任河东宣抚使时，任布的儿子上书朝廷一一诋毁历届执政大臣，甚至说至于臣父，也是出于机遇被朝廷重用，意思是说连他父亲也不是靠德才被选拔上去的。
English: The second article is: Duyan, when he was just appointed as the chief envoy of the Henan-Dong Province, Renbu's son sent a letter to the imperial court to slander the successive ruling ministers. He even said that as far as the minister's father was concerned, he was reused by the imperial court out of opportunity, meaning that even his father was not selected by virtue.

古文：杜戏丁曰： 贤郎亦要牢笼。 
现代文：听到这件事，杜对丁开玩笑说： 你对令郎也要好好笼络。 
English: Hearing this, Du jokingly said to Ding: You should also be good at coaxing your son-in-law.

古文：丁深衔之。
现代文：丁就特别恨他。
English: Ding especially hated him.

古文：其后二公同在政府，苏子美进奏事作，杜避嫌不预，丁论以深文，子美坐废为民，杜亦罢去。
现代文：以后杜、丁二公同在朝廷执政，杜衍的女婿苏舜钦当时任集贤殿校理、监进奏院。他遭人诬陷的事件发生后，杜为避开嫌疑，不参预此事的处理，丁却尽量苛刻地引用法律条文，给苏定罪。结果，子美因此罢官为民，杜也因此罢官。
English: Later, the two princes Du and Ding ruled together in the imperial court. Du Yan's son-in-law, Su Suqin, was then the proctor of the Palace of Scholars and the inspector of the Conservatory. After the incident in which he was framed, Du tried to avoid suspicion and did not participate in the handling of the matter, but Ding tried his best to cite legal provisions to convict Su. As a result, Zimei was dismissed as a commoner, and Du was also dismissed.

古文：一言之谑，贻祸如此。 
现代文：一句玩笑，留下这么大的灾祸。
English: A joke, leaving such a big disaster.

古文：按杜公以执政使河东时，丁以学士为副。庆历四年十一月进奏狱起，杜在相位，五年正月罢，至五月，丁公方从翰林参知政事，安有深文论子美之说？
现代文：按杜公以执政大臣身份为河东宣抚使时，丁以学士身份为副使；庆历四年十一月进奏院事件兴起大狱，杜尚在相位上，到庆历五年正月罢官，直到五月，丁公才从翰林学士提拔为参知政事，执掌大权，哪能有深文论子美一说？
English: According to Du Gong, when he was appointed as the ruling minister as the envoy of Hedong, Ding was appointed as the vice envoy as a bachelor; in November of the 4th year of the Qing Dynasty, the Jinsoin Incident broke out, and Duchang was dismissed from his post in the first month of the 5th year of the Qing Dynasty. It was not until May that Ding was promoted from the Hanlin Bachelor to the political affairs of the prefectural governor and held great power. How can there be a profound discussion about beauty?

古文：且杜公重厚，当无以人父子为谑之理，丁公长者也，肯追仇一言陷贤士大夫哉？
现代文：再说杜公为人稳重、敦厚应当没有拿别人父子开玩笑之理。丁公也是位长者，哪肯为一句话记仇来陷害朝廷中的正人贤臣呢？
English: Moreover, Du Gong is a stable and dignified person, and he should not make fun of other people's father and son. Ding Gong is also an elder, who would take revenge for a word to frame the righteous and wise men in the court?

古文：其三云： 张乖崖自成都召为参知政事，既至而脑疽作，求补外，乃知杭州而疾愈。
现代文：第三条是： 张泳自成都被召回朝中任参知政事到京都后脑疮发病。他就要求到外地做官，于是在做杭州的长官时病好了。
English: The third article is as follows: Zhang Yong Zicheng was recalled to Kyoto after suffering from a brain tumor. He asked to be sent abroad to work as an official, so he recovered from his illness when he became the governor of Hangzhou.

古文：上使中人往伺之，言且将召也。
现代文：皇上派宫中内侍去探访他，还说将要召他回京。
English: The emperor sent a court chamberlain to visit him, and also said that he would call him back to Kyoto.

古文：丁晋公以白金赂使者，还言如故，乃不召。 
现代文：晋国公丁谓用白金贿赂这个使者，使者回到宫中，对皇上谎说张脑疮如故，皇上就不召他了。 
English: Jin Guo Gongding is said to have bribed the messenger with platinum. The messenger returned to the palace and lied to the emperor that he had a brain tumor. The emperor did not call him.

古文：按张两知成都，其初还朝为户部使、中丞，始知杭州。
现代文：按张两次做成都长官，第一次回朝任户部使、中垂后，才做杭州长官。
English: According to Zhang, he was made the governor of Chengdu twice, the first time he was appointed as the household envoy, and after the mid-fall, he became the governor of Hangzhou.

古文：是时，丁方在侍从；其后自蜀知癉州，丁为三司使，岂有如前所书之事？
现代文：这时，丁正担任侍从；以后，张从四川调任异州长官时，丁正任三司使，岂能发生前面所记述的那种事？
English: At that time, Ding was serving as an attendant; later, when Zhang was transferred from Sichuan to be a vice governor, Ding was serving as the third secretary. Could the kind of thing described above happen?

古文：其四云： 乖崖在陈，闻晋公逐莱公，知祸必及己，乃延三大户与之博，出彩骰子胜其一坐，乃买田宅为归计以自污，晋公闻之，亦不害也。 
现代文：第四条是说： 张乖崖在陈州为官时，听说晋国公丁谓将莱国公寇准从朝廷中排挤出去，知道灾祸肯定要波及自己，于是就将当地三个殷实大户召来一起赌搏，他用彩散子一具赢了在座所有钓人以后，便用底的钱买房置地，作为归老林下的打算，实际上是以这件不光彩的事给自己抹灰。丁晋公听说这件字，也就不害他了。 
English: The fourth article says: When Zhang Guiliak was an official in Chenzhou, he heard that Ding, the prince of Jin, had ousted the prince of Lai from the imperial court. Knowing that the calamity would surely affect him, he invited three wealthy local families to a gambling game. After he won all the anglers present with a saishanzi, he used the money from the bottom to buy a house and land as a plan to return to the old forest. In fact, he used this disgraceful thing to plaster himself with ashes. Ding Jin heard this word, and it did not harm him.

古文：按张公以祥符六年知陈州，八年卒，后五年当天禧四年，寇公方罢相，旋坐贬，岂有所谓乖崖自污之事？
现代文：按张公在真宗大中祥符六年任陈州今河南省淮阳市长官，祥符八年去世。五年后正当真宗天禧四年，寇公才罢相，立即因事被贬，岂能有所谓乖崖自污之事？
English: According to Zhang Gong, he served as the mayor of Chenzhou, now Huaiyang, Henan Province, for six years in the middle of the Shennong University, and died in the eighth year of the Shennong. Five years later, just before the fourth anniversary of the Shennong, Kou Gongcai resigned and was immediately demoted because of the matter. Can there be a so-called evil cliff self-pollution?

古文：兹四者所系不细，乃诞漫如此。
现代文：这四条所关系的事情不小，却荒诞随意到这种地步。
English: These four related matters are not minor, but they are absurdly arbitrary to such an extent.

古文：盖前辈不家藏国史，好事者肆意饰说为美听，疑若可信，故误人纪述。
现代文：原因在于前辈们不可能家藏国家修的正史喜欢多事的人便任意添油加醋编成故事，使人当成可信的真事、所以给记述的人造成失误。
English: The reason is that it is impossible for the predecessors to preserve the true history of the country, and people who like many things will arbitrarily add oil and vinegar to make up stories, making people believe that they are true, thus causing mistakes to the person who is writing.

古文：后山之书，必传于后世，惧诒千载之惑，予是以辨之。
现代文：后山的书，必定会流传后世，恐怕这种记述会留下千载的疑惑，我因此作了辨别。
English: I am afraid that this kind of description will leave a thousand-year-old doubt, so I made a distinction.

