古文：武元衡，字伯苍，河南缑氏人。
现代文：武元衡字伯苍，河南缑氏人。
English: Wuyuan Heng, also known as Bo Cang, was a member of the Min clan in Henan Province.

古文：曾祖载德，天后从父弟，官至湖州刺史。
现代文：曾祖武载德，是天后堂弟，官至湖州刺史。
English: Zeng Zu Wu Zai De, is the cousin of the Queen of Heaven, official to the Huzhou stabbing history.

古文：祖平一，善属文，终考功员外郎、修文馆学士，事在《逸人传》。
现代文：祖父武平一，善作文，死时官至考功员外郎、修文馆学士，事迹载于《逸人传》。
English: His grandfather, Wu Pingyi, was good at composition, and when he died, he was the second son of a government official, a gong examiner, and a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism. His deeds are recorded in "The Biography of Wu Pingyi."

古文：父就，殿中侍御史，以元衡贵，追赠吏部侍郎。
现代文：父武就，为殿中侍御史，因武元衡权位显贵，追赠吏部侍郎。
English: His father, Takeru, was a courtier in the palace, and was posthumously awarded the position of chamberlain of the officials because of Takeru's high rank.

古文：元衡进士登第，累辟使府，至监察御史。
现代文：武元衡应举进士登第，屡次被使府征召，官至监察御史。
English: Takemotohei was recommended for promotion to courtier, was repeatedly called up by the government, and rose to the position of inspector of imperial history.

古文：后为华原县令。
现代文：后为华原县令。
English: Later, he became the Warahara County magistrate.

古文：时畿辅有镇军督将恃恩矜功者，多挠吏民。元衡苦之，乃称病去官。
现代文：当时京畿的镇军督将有人倚凭朝廷恩宠或仗恃功劳，经常侵扰官吏和百姓，武元衡颇感苦恼，便称病辞官。
English: At that time, the town military governor of Gyeonggi Province, who relied on the grace of the imperial court or the merits of the war, often harassed officials and the people. Wu Yuanheng was very distressed and called him a sick officer.

古文：放情事外，沉浮宴咏者久之。
现代文：好长时间，他都纵情政事之外，沉溺宴饮歌咏之中。
English: For a long time, he indulged in indulgence outside of politics, indulging in feasting and singing.

古文：德宗知其才，召授比部员外郎。
现代文：德宗闻知他的才干，召授比部员外郎。
English: De Zong was aware of his talent and summoned Geiro, a member of the correspondence club.

古文：一岁，迁左司郎中。
现代文：一年后，调任左司郎中。
English: A year later, he was transferred to Sasiro Junior High School.

古文：时以详整称重。
现代文：人们因其行事周全而称赞他。
English: He was praised for his efficiency.

古文：贞元二十年，迁御史中丞。
现代文：贞元二十年，调任御史中丞。
English: In the 20th year of Sadamoto, he was transferred to Goshi chujo.

古文：尝因延英对罢，德宗目送之，指示左右曰： 元衡真宰相器也。 
现代文：曾经在延英殿应对完毕后，德宗以目相送，指着他对左右侍臣说： 元衡真正是宰相的材料啊。 
English: Once, after he had finished his speech at Yan Ying Dian, Desong waved goodbye, pointing to his right and left attendants and saying, "Motohira is truly prime ministerial material."

古文：顺宗即位，以病不亲政事。
现代文：顺宗即位，因病不能亲理政事。
English: Junsong ascended the throne, but due to illness, he was unable to personally manage government affairs.

古文：王叔文等使其党以权利诱元衡，元衡拒之。
现代文：王叔文等派党徒用权力引诱武元衡，遭到武元衡拒绝。
English: Wang Shouwen and others sent party members to use their power to lure Wu Yuanhe, but Wu Yuanhe refused.

古文：时奉德宗山陵，元衡为仪仗使。
现代文：时逢护送德宗遗体葬于山陵，武元衡为仪仗使。
English: When escorting the body of Emperor Dezong to be buried in a mountain mausoleum, Wu Yuanheng was the ceremonial envoy.

古文：监察御史刘禹锡，叔文之党也，求充仪仗判官。
现代文：监察御史刘禹锡，属王叔文一党，请求充当仪仗判官，武元衡不允许。
English: Liu Yuxi, a member of Wang Shouwen's faction, requested to act as a judge of honor, but Wu Yuanhe was not allowed.

古文：元衡不与，其党滋不悦。数日，罢元衡为右庶子。
现代文：他们一伙越发不高兴。数日后，贬武元衡为右庶子。
English: The group became increasingly unhappy. A few days later, Wu Yuanheng was relegated to the position of second son.

古文：宪宗即位，始册为皇太子，元衡赞引，因识之。及登极，复拜御史中丞。
现代文：宪宗即位，当初册封为皇太子时，武元衡为赞引，所以宪宗认识他，及至登极，又拜武元衡为御史中丞。
English: When Emperor Gensong ascended to the throne and was first enthroned as crown prince, Emperor Gensong knew Takemoto Hirai as Zhanqin, so Emperor Gensong knew him, and when Emperor Gensong ascended to the throne, he also worshiped Takemoto Hirai as Goshi Chujo.

古文：持平无私，纲条悉举，人甚称重。
现代文：他为官公正无私，严守纲纪律条，人们很敬重他。
English: He is a fair and selfless official, strictly abides by the rules of discipline, and people respect him very much.

古文：寻迁户部侍郎。
现代文：不久升户部侍郎。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of chamberlain of the household.

古文：元和二年正月，拜门下侍郎、平章事，赐金紫，兼判户部事。
现代文：元和二年正月，拜门下侍郎、平章事，赐紫服金鱼袋，兼判户部事。
English: In the first month of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year

古文：上为太子时，知其进退守正，及是用为宰相，甚礼信之。
现代文：皇上为太子时，了解他为人处事坚守正道，至此用为宰相，对他很是尊重和信任。
English: When the Emperor was the Crown Prince, I understood that he was a person who adhered to the right path, so I used him as the Prime Minister. I respect and trust him very much.

古文：初，浙西节度李锜请入觐，乃拜为右仆射，令入朝。既而又称疾，请至岁暮。
现代文：当初，浙西节度使李钅奇请求入朝晋见，于是授为右仆射，命他入朝，既而李钅奇又称病，请求延期到年底。
English: At first, the Western Zhejiang Festival made Li Rongqi request to enter the court of Jin, so he was awarded the right to shoot and ordered him to enter the court. However, Li Rongqi also said that he was ill, and the request was postponed to the end of the year.

古文：上问宰臣，郑絪请如锜奏。元衡曰： 不可。
现代文：皇上问宰臣意见，郑纟因请求按李钅奇奏请处理，武元衡说： 不可。
English: The Emperor asked the opinion of the Vice-Minister, Zheng Jun, who requested that the matter be handled according to the Li Yongqi play, and Wu Yuanheng said: No.

古文：且锜自请入朝，诏既许之，即又称疾，是可否在锜。
现代文：李钅奇自己请求入朝，诏令已准许他，马上又称病，这就是说行或不行都是李钅奇说了算。
English: Li Rongqi himself requested to enter the imperial court, the imperial edict had granted him permission, and he immediately claimed to be ill, which meant that Li Rongqi had the final say on whether or not to do so.

古文：今陛下新临大宝，天下属耳目，若使奸臣得遂其私，则威令从兹去矣。 
现代文：现在陛下新登宝座，天下人侧耳拭目以待，若使奸臣得以顺遂其私欲，那么圣命威严从此消失了。 
English: Now that His Majesty has newly ascended to the throne, the whole world is listening and waiting. If the treacherous vassal is allowed to fulfill his selfish desires, then the sanctity of life and dignity will have disappeared.

古文：上以为然，遽追之。锜果计穷而反。
现代文：皇上认为言之有理，立即追令李钅奇入朝，李钅奇终于计穷而返。
English: The emperor thought that his words were reasonable, and immediately ordered Li Rongqi to enter the imperial court. Li Rongqi finally managed to return.

古文：先是，高崇文平蜀，因授以节度使。
现代文：在此之前，高崇文平定蜀乱，因而被授以节度使。
English: Prior to this, Gao Chongwen had quelled the Shu Rebellion, and was thus awarded the title of Grand Marshal.

古文：崇文理军有法，而不知州县之政。
现代文：高崇文治军有方，却不懂州县政务。
English: They highly esteem the literati and the military, but they don't understand state and county government affairs.

古文：上难其代者，乃以元衡代崇文，拜检校吏部尚书，兼门下侍郎、平章事，充剑南西川节度使。
现代文：皇上认为难有替代者，于是派武元衡去替代高崇文，拜武元衡检校吏部尚书，兼门下侍郎、平章事，充任剑南西川节度使。
English: The emperor thought it would be difficult to find a replacement, so he sent Motohira Takemitsu to replace Gao Chongwen, and Motohira Takemitsu to check the school officials, and also to serve as a subordinate attendant and secretary, and to serve as an envoy to the Jianan West River Festival.

古文：将行，上御安福门以临慰之。
现代文：将行之时，皇上驾幸安福门亲临慰问。
English: When he was about to leave, the Emperor came to visit and offer his condolences in person at the Anpu Gate.

古文：高崇文既发成都，尽载其军资、金帛、帟幕、伎乐、工巧以行。
现代文：高崇文离开成都时，将军用物资、金银财帛、娈幕、歌伎乐工、工艺精品尽数装车运走。
English: When Gao Chongwen left Chengdu, military supplies, gold, silver, money, screen, Kabuki music, and fine arts were loaded onto the vehicle as much as possible.

古文：元衡至，则庶事节约，务以便人。
现代文：武元衡到任后，凡事节约，办事务必任用行家里手。
English: After taking office, Wu Yuanheng was frugal in everything, and experts were always appointed to handle affairs.

古文：比三年，公私稍济。
现代文：三年之后，无论公家或私人都稍许宽裕一些。
English: Three years later, both the public and private sectors are a little more generous.

古文：抚蛮夷，约束明具，不辄生事。
现代文：他安抚蛮夷，又以明文相约束，使其不致时常生事。
English: He pacified the barbarians and restrained them with clear laws so that they would not constantly cause trouble.

古文：重慎端谨，虽淡于接物，而开府极一时之选。
现代文：武元衡为人沉稳端直，行事慎重谨严，虽淡于待人接物，但开府治事，却是当时最佳人选。
English: Wu Yuanheng was a calm and upright person, acting prudently and rigorously. Although he was not a people pleaser, he was the best person to run the government at that time.

古文：八年，征还。
现代文：元和八年，征召还朝。
English: In the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was called up again.

古文：至骆谷，重拜门下侍郎、平章事。
现代文：行至骆谷，诏令重拜门下侍郎、平章事。
English: He went to Luogu and ordered to pay homage to his servant, Taira no Shoshoji.

古文：时李吉甫、李绛情不相叶，各以事理曲直于上前。
现代文：当时李吉甫、李绛感情不和，各自在皇上面前诉说事理曲直。
English: At that time, Li Jifu and Li Xi did not get along emotionally, and each of them told the truth in front of the emperor.

古文：元衡居中，无所违附，上称为长者。
现代文：武元衡处在中间，对谁也不表示反对或赞同，皇上称赞他是长者。
English: Wu Yuanheng is in the middle. He does not oppose or agree with anyone. The emperor praised him as an elder.

古文：及吉甫卒，上方讨淮、蔡，悉以机务委之。
现代文：及至李吉甫死去，皇上正征讨淮、蔡，便将朝廷机要事务都委托武元衡处理。
English: When Li Jifu died, Emperor Zhengzheng summoned Huai and Cai, and entrusted all the important affairs of the imperial court to Wu Yuanhe.

古文：时王承宗遣使奏事，请赦吴元济。
现代文：这时王承宗派使者上奏，请求赦免吴元济。
English: At this time, the emissary of the Wangcheng sect made a request to pardon Wu Yuanji.

古文：请事于宰相，辞礼悖慢，元衡叱之。
现代文：使者向宰相请示，言辞倨傲无礼，遭到武元衡的呵叱。
English: The envoy asked the prime minister for instructions, his words were arrogant and rude, and he was scolded by Wu Yuanhe.

古文：承宗因飞章诋元衡，咎怨颇结。
现代文：王承宗因此迅疾奏章诋毁武元衡，彼此深结仇怨。
English: As a result, Wang Chengzong was quick to denigrate Wu Yuanhei and they developed a deep grudge against each other.

古文：元衡宅在静安里，十年六月三日，将朝，出里东门，有暗中叱使灭烛者，导骑诃之，贼射之，中肩。
现代文：武元衡宅第在静安里，元和九年六月三日，正欲上朝，出了静安里东门，忽有人暗中呵叱令熄灭蜡烛，他叱骂贼人，贼人用箭射中他的肩膀。
English: Wu Yuan Heng's first residence was in Jing'an. On June 3rd, Yuanhe 9, when he was about to leave for the morning, he went out of the east gate of Jing'an. Suddenly, someone secretly scolded him to extinguish the candle. He scolded the thief, and the thief shot him in the shoulder with an arrow.

古文：又有匿树阴突出者，以棓击元衡左股。
现代文：又有隐匿之贼从树荫下冲出，以棒击武元衡左股。
English: There was also a hidden thief who rushed out from under the shade of the tree and hit Wu Yuanheng's left groin with a stick.

古文：其徒驭已为贼所格奔逸，贼乃持元衡马，东南行十余步害之，批其颅骨怀去。
现代文：武元衡的侍从已被杀散奔逃，贼人便拉着武元衡的坐骑，往东南行十余步将他杀害，砍下头颅放入怀中而去。
English: Takemotohei's attendants had already been killed and fled. The thieves then took Takemotohei's horse and rode southeast for more than ten steps to kill him, cut off his head, put it in their arms and left.

古文：及众呼偕至，持火照之，见元衡已踣于血中，即元衡宅东北隅墙之外。
现代文：及至众人齐声呼喊而至，只见武元衡已倒在血泊之中，正当武元衡宅第东北墙隅外。
English: When the crowd came shouting in unison, they saw that Takemoto Heng had fallen in a pool of blood, just outside the northeast corner of Takemoto Heng's house.

古文：时夜漏未尽，陌上多朝骑及行人，铺卒连呼十余里，皆云贼杀宰相，声达朝堂，百官恟恟，未知死者谁也。
现代文：此时天色未明，街道上有许多骑马的朝官及行人，巡逻兵卒连声呼喊十余里，都说是盗贼杀了宰相，喊声直达朝堂。百官议论纷纷，不知死者是谁。
English: At this time, it was dark, and there were many courtiers and pedestrians on horseback in the streets. The patrolling soldiers shouted for more than ten miles in unison, saying that a thief had killed the prime minister, and the shouts reached the Imperial Palace. Hundreds of officials argued with each other, not knowing who the dead man was.

古文：须臾，元衡马走至，遇人始辨之。
现代文：一会儿，武元衡的坐骑跑到，遇见的人辨认了出来。
English: After a while, Take Motohira's horse arrived and recognized the person he met.

古文：既明，仗至紫宸门，有司以元衡遇害闻。上震惊，却朝而坐延英，召见宰相。
现代文：死者已弄清楚，皇上驾临紫宸门，主管官员将武元衡遇害之事奏报皇上，皇上震惊，退朝而坐延英殿，召见宰相。
English: The deceased had been ascertained, the Emperor arrived at Shishimen Gate, the responsible officials reported the murder of Takemoto Hirai to the Emperor, the Emperor was shocked, withdrew from the court and sat in the Nobuhide Hall, summoning the Prime Minister.

古文：惋恸者久之，为之再不食。
现代文：皇上久久地凄伤悲痛，两餐不食。
English: The emperor was so sad and grieved for a long time that he did not eat for two meals.

古文：册赠司徒，赠赙布帛五百匹、粟四百硕，辍朝五日，谥曰忠愍。
现代文：册封武元衡为司徒，赠丧葬用布帛五百匹、粟四百石，停止坐朝五日，定谥号为 忠愍 。
English: Wu Yuanheng was registered as a scholar, and was presented with 500 pieces of funeral cloth and 400 stones. He stopped sitting for five days, and his posthumous name was "Zhongyao."

古文：元衡工五言诗，好事者传之，往往被于管弦。
现代文：武元衡善做五言诗，被好事者传诵，而且往往配上乐谱歌唱。
English: Wu Yuanheng is good at writing five-character poems, which are recited by good-natured people, and are often accompanied by musical scores.

古文：初，八年，元衡自蜀再辅政，时太白犯上相，历执法。
现代文：当初，元和八年，武元衡自蜀中归来再辅朝政，此时天像太白犯相星，又经罚星。
English: At the beginning, in the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Wu Yuanheng returned from Shuzhong and assisted the imperial government. At this time, the sky was too white to be a star, and it was punished by a star.

古文：占者言： 今之三相皆不利，始轻末重。 
现代文：占者说： 现今三位宰相皆不利，始轻末重。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The three current prime ministers are all unfavorable, from beginning to end.

古文：月余，李绛以足疾免。
现代文：过了月余，李绛因足疾而免职。
English: A month later, Li Yao was relieved of his duties due to a foot ailment.

古文：明年十月，李吉甫以暴疾卒。
现代文：次年十月，李吉甫暴病身亡。
English: In October of the following year, Li Jifu fell violently ill and died.

古文：至是，元衡为盗所害，年五十八。
现代文：至此，武元衡被盗贼杀害，年五十八。
English: At this point, Wu Yuanheng was killed by a thief, aged fifty-eight.

古文：始元衡与吉甫齐年，又同日为宰相。
现代文：起初是武元衡与李吉甫同年，又同日为宰相。
English: At first, it was Wu Yuanhei who became the prime minister in the same year and on the same day as Li Jifu.

古文：及出镇，分领扬、益。
现代文：及至出京镇守，二人分领扬、益两州。
English: As far as going out to guard the capital, the two of them led Yang and Yi through the two provinces.

古文：及吉甫再入，元衡亦还。
现代文：等到李吉甫再度入朝，武元衡也回到朝中。
English: By the time Li Jifu returned to the imperial court, Wu Yuanhei had also returned to the imperial court.

古文：吉甫先一年以元衡生月卒，元衡后一年以吉甫生月卒。
现代文：李吉甫先一年在武元衡出生之月死去，武元衡后一年在李吉甫出生之月遇害。
English: Li Jifu died the previous year in the birth month of Wu Yuanhei, and Wu Yuanhei was killed the following year in the birth month of Li Jifu.

古文：吉凶之数，若符会焉。
现代文：吉凶之命数，正如符卦所示。
English: The number of lucky and unlucky lives, as shown in the characters.

古文：先是，长安谣曰 打麦麦打三三三 ，既而旋其袖曰 舞了也 。
现代文：先是长安谣谚道： 打麦麦打三三三 ，接着旋舞长袖说 舞了也 。
English: First, there is the Chang'an folk saying: "Dab mui mui dab san san san san," followed by the long-sleeved dance saying "Dance, dance."

古文：会食瓜阁下，蝇集于上，儒衡以扇挥之曰： 适从何处来，而遽集于此？ 同僚失色，儒衡意气自若。
现代文：解悟者称： 打麦 ，指打麦时节； 麦打 ，指暗中突出； 三三三 ，指六月初三； 舞了也 ，指武元衡之死。自此京师大恐，城门加添卫兵，细察出入之人，查寻可疑者。
English: The enlightened person said: "Dahmae" refers to the "Dahmae" season; "Dahmae" refers to the "prominent" time; "Three Three Three" refers to the third day of the first month of June; "Dance" also refers to the death of Wuyuan Heng. Since then, Beijing has been terrified, and guards have been added to the city gate to carefully inspect people entering and leaving, and to search for suspicious persons.

古文：迁礼部侍郎。长庆四年卒，年五十六。
现代文：那些身材魁伟、服饰异常、口吐燕赵之音者，多被扣押审讯。
English: Those with large stature, abnormal clothing, and those who spit out the sound of swallowing were mostly detained for interrogation.

古文：郑余庆，字居业，荥阳人。
现代文：武元衡之堂弟名武儒衡。郑余庆字居业，荥阳人。
English: Wu Yuanheng's cousin was named Wu Rongheng. Zheng Yuqing, surnamed Zuye, was from Shenyang.

古文：祖长裕，官至国子司业，终颍川太守。
现代文：祖父郑长裕，官至国子司业，死时为颍川太守。
English: His grandfather, Zheng Changyu, was a high-ranking official in the Imperial Household Agency, and at the time of his death he was the governor of Beichuan.

古文：长裕弟少微，为中书舍人、刑部侍郎。
现代文：郑长裕之弟郑少微，为中书舍人、刑部侍郎。
English: Zheng Shaowei, the younger brother of Zheng Changyu, was a junior high school teacher and the head of the criminal investigation department.

古文：兄弟有名于当时。
现代文：兄弟俩当时均有名。
English: Both brothers were famous at the time.

古文：父慈，与元德秀友善，官至太子舍人。
现代文：父郑慈，与元德秀相友善，官至太子舍人。
English: His father, Zheng Ci, was on friendly terms with Yuan Dexiu and did not want to give up his position as crown prince.

古文：余庆少勤学，善属文。
现代文：郑余庆少时勤于学习，善做文章。
English: When he was young, Zheng Yuqing was diligent in studying and good at writing essays.

古文：大历中举进士。
现代文：大历年间应举进士。
English: In the year of the great calendar, it is necessary to raise a new generation of scholars.

古文：建中末，山南节度使严震辟为从事，累官殿中侍御史，丁父忧罢。
现代文：建中末，山南节度使严震召他为从事，后屡次擢升官至殿中侍御史，因父丧而停职。
English: At the end of the middle school, the Shannan Festival caused a severe shock and called him to work, after which he was repeatedly promoted to the position of palace attendant, but was suspended due to his father's death.

古文：贞元初入朝，历左司、兵部员外郎，库部郎中。
现代文：贞元年间入朝，历任左司、兵部员外郎、库部郎中。
English: He entered the imperial court during the reign of Sadamoto, and successively held the positions of Sasaji, Hyobusho (Minister of War), Wairo, and Kurabe no roju.

古文：八年，选为翰林学士。
现代文：贞元八年选为翰林学士。
English: In the eighth year of the Zhengyuan era, he was selected as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：十三年六月，迁工部侍郎，知吏部选事。
现代文：贞元十三年六月，调任工部侍郎，知吏部选事。
English: In June of the thirteenth year of Sadamoto, he was transferred to the post of chamberlain of the work department and the post of secretary of the intellectual department.

古文：时有玄法寺僧法凑为寺众所，万年县尉卢伯达断还俗，后又复为僧，伯达上表论之。
现代文：当时有一玄法寺僧法凑被寺内众僧投诉，万年县尉卢伯达断其还俗，后法凑又复为僧，卢伯达上表论说此事。
English: At that time, there was a complaint against a monk of the Xuanfa Temple, Faqin, by all the monks in the temple. Lu Boda, the county's lieutenant, ordered him to return to secular life. Later, Faqin was reinstated as a monk, and Lu Boda discussed the matter at the table.

古文：诏中丞宇文邈、刑部侍郎张彧、大理卿郑云逵等三司，与功德使判官诸葛述同按鞫。
现代文：诏命中丞宇文邈、刑部侍郎张、大理卿郑云逵等三司长官与功德使判官诸葛述共同审理。
English: The imperial edict ordered the three department chiefs, including Chujo Uwenshu, the head of the criminal investigation department, Zhang, and the minister of justice, Zheng Yunyao, to be tried together with the magistrate Zhuge Su.

古文：时议述胥吏，不合与宪臣等同入省按事。
现代文：一时朝臣议论说诸葛述不过办事小吏，不应与大臣等同入省理事。
English: At one point, the courtier argued that Zhuge Zhou was just a clerk and should not be equated with the minister as a provincial director.

古文：余庆上疏论列，当时翕然称重。
现代文：郑余庆上疏辩说，得到人们一致称赞敬重。
English: Zheng Yuqing said that he received unanimous praise and respect.

古文：十四年，拜中书侍郎、平章事。
现代文：贞元十四年，拜中书侍郎、平章事。
English: In the 14th year of Sadamoto, he became the attendant of the middle school secretary, Taira Shoji.

古文：余庆通究《六经》深旨，奏对之际，多以古义傅之。
现代文：郑余庆通晓《六经》之深弘意旨，当廷奏对之时，常借古代经义帮助说理。
English: Zheng Yuqing was well aware of the profound significance of the "Six Classics" and often used the ancient classics to help explain the meaning when the court was right.

古文：与度支使于素善，每奏事余庆皆议可之。
现代文：与度支使于丕页素来相好，于丕页每奏事郑余庆皆表赞同。
English: He has always been on good terms with Du, and Zheng Yuqing has always agreed with him on every issue.

古文：未几，以罪贬。
现代文：没多久，于丕页因罪遭贬。
English: It didn't take long before Yu was reprimanded for his crime.

古文：时又岁旱人饥，德宗与宰臣议，将赈给禁卫六军。
现代文：时值岁旱人饥，德宗与宰臣商议，将赈济禁卫六军。
English: At the time of drought and famine, Dezong discussed with his aide-de-camp that he would help defend the Six Armies.

古文：事未行，为中书吏所泄，余庆贬郴州司马，凡六载。
现代文：事未施行，被中书省官吏泄露，郑余庆因此贬为郴州司马。在郴州共六年。
English: The matter was not enforced and was leaked by officials of the Chinese Book Ministry, and Zheng Yuqing was therefore demoted to the position of Zhangzhou Sima. He stayed in Zhangzhou for a total of six years.

古文：顺宗登极，征拜尚书左丞。
现代文：顺宗登极，召郑余庆入朝拜尚书左丞。
English: Shunzong ascended to the throne and summoned Zheng Yuqing to the imperial court.

古文：宪宗嗣位之月，又擢守本官、平章事。
现代文：宪宗嗣位那个月，郑余庆又擢升守本官平章事。
English: That month, Zheng Yuqing was promoted to the position of governor of Pingzhang again.

古文：未几，属夏州将杨惠琳阻命，宰臣等论奏，多议兵事。
现代文：不久，遇夏州守将杨惠琳阻挠朝命，宰臣等上奏议论，多主张动兵。
English: Soon after, Yang Huilin, the governor of Hsia Prefecture, thwarted the imperial order, and the vice-ministers and others sent a report to discuss the matter, most of whom advocated mobilizing troops.

古文：余庆复以古义上言，夏州军士皆仰给县官，又有 介马万蹄 之语。
现代文：郑余庆又据古代经义上奏说，夏州军士皆仰赖圣上养育，又有 介马万蹄 之语。
English: Zheng Yuqing also said that according to the ancient sutra Yi Shangsoo, the sergeants of Xiazhou all rely on the education of the saint, and there is also the language of the horse.

古文：时议以余庆虽好古博雅而未适时。
现代文：舆论认为郑余庆虽博雅好古但不合时宜。
English: Public opinion believes that although Zheng Yuqing is an ancient scholar, he is out of time.

古文：有主书滑涣，久司中书簿籍，与内官典枢密刘光琦情通。
现代文：有主书滑涣，长期主管中书省文书档案，与宦官典枢密刘光琦私情颇好。
English: He had a good personal relationship with Liu Guangyao, the chief scribe and long-term supervisor of the Central and Provincial Documents Archive.

古文：宰相议事，与光琦异同者，令涣达意，未尝不遂所欲。
现代文：宰相议事，凡与刘光琦意见不同的，只要让滑涣转达意思，没有不能达到目的的。
English: In the Prime Minister's deliberation, if there are any opinions that are different from Liu Guangyao's, as long as they are conveyed by Slippery Toad, there is nothing that cannot achieve the goal.

古文：宰相杜佑、郑絪皆姑息之。议者云佑私呼为滑八，四方书币赀货，充集其门，弟泳官至刺史。
现代文：宰相杜佑、郑纟因都姑息他，人们谈论说杜佑私下称呼滑涣为滑八，四方书信财礼，聚集到滑涣门下，其弟滑泳官至刺史。
English: Prime Minister Du You and Zheng Qi both tolerated him, and people talked about how Du You privately called him "Skid Eight," and the four parties gathered under the door of Skid Eight, and his younger brother, Skid Swimmer, became history.

古文：及余庆再入中书，与同僚集议。涣指陈是非，余庆怒其僭，叱之。
现代文：及至郑余庆再入中书省，与同僚会集议事，滑涣指着郑余庆陈说是非，郑余庆恼怒他僭越身份，叱责他。
English: When Zheng Yuqing re-entered the Ministry of Education and Culture, he and his colleagues gathered to discuss the matter. He pointed at Zheng Yuqing Chen and told him what was right and wrong. Zheng Yuqing was angry that he had overstepped his position and reprimanded him.

古文：寻而余庆罢相，为太子宾客。
现代文：不久郑余庆即被罢相，贬为太子宾客。
English: Soon after, Zheng Yuqing was dismissed from his post and relegated to being a guest of the crown prince.

古文：其年八月，涣赃污发，赐死。
现代文：那年八月，滑涣贪赃之罪被揭发，赐死。
English: In August of that year, he was found guilty of embezzlement and sentenced to death.

古文：上浸闻余庆叱涣事，甚重之，乃改为国子祭酒，寻拜河南尹。
现代文：皇上逐渐听说郑余庆叱责滑涣之事，很敬重他，便改授他国子祭酒。不久拜河南尹。
English: The emperor gradually heard about Zheng Yuqing's reprimand of Zhuge Liang, and he respected him very much, so he changed the award to his son-in-law. He soon paid homage to Henan Yin.

古文：三年，检校兵部尚书，兼东都留守。
现代文：元和三年，任检校兵部尚书，兼东都留守。
English: In the third year of the Yuan and Heian dynasties, he was appointed as inspector of the school's military department.

古文：六年四月，正拜兵部尚书。
现代文：元和六年，正式拜兵部尚书。
English: In the sixth year of the Yuan and Wu Dynasties, it was officially renamed the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：余庆再为相，罢免皆非大过，尤以清俭为时所称。
现代文：郑余庆两度为相，被罢免均非因有大过，尤以清廉节俭为时人所称道。
English: Zheng Yuqing twice served as premier. He was removed from office not because of any wrongdoing, but because he was known for his integrity and frugality.

古文：洎中外践更，郁为耆德，朝廷得失，言成准的。
现代文：至于朝内外勤勉司职，更是德高望重，评议朝政得失，其言成为准则。
English: As for the duty of studying the internal and external affairs of the dynasty, it is highly respected, and the evaluation of the gains and losses of the dynasty's politics has become the norm.

古文：时京兆尹元义方、户部侍郎判度支卢坦，皆以勋官前任至三品，据令合立门戟，各请戟立于其第。
现代文：当时，京兆尹元义方、户部侍郎判度支卢坦，都因授勋官之前职位至三品，据律令应立门戟，所以各自申请立门戟于宅第。
English: At that time, Jing Zhao, Yin Yuan Yifang, and Hubei Chamberlain Han Du, were all promoted to Sanpin due to their previous positions as awarding officers. According to the regulation, they should set up a gate, so they each applied to set up a gate at their homes.

古文：时义方以加上柱国、坦以前任宣州观察使请戟。
现代文：此时元义方正以加授上柱国、卢坦正以先前任宣州观察使请立门戟。
English: At this time, the Yuanyi side was moving forward with the additional award of the pillar country, and Lutan was moving forward with the previous appointment of the Xuanzhou observation.

古文：近代立戟者，率有银青阶，而义方只据勋官，有司不详覆而给之，议者非之，台司将劾而未果。
现代文：近代立戟之臣，都有银印青绶之官阶，而元义方只凭勋官名号，主管官署不详加复查即予批准，人们议论都认为不对。
English: In modern times, all the ministers who were appointed by the emperor had the official rank of silver seal young eunuch, but the Yuan Yifang only relied on the name of the officer, and the competent authority approved it without detailed review, and people thought it was wrong.

古文：会余庆自东都来，发论大以为不可。
现代文：恰值郑余庆从东都来，发议论认为绝不可以。
English: Just as Zheng Yuqing came from Dongdu, he thought it was absolutely impossible to make a speech.

古文：由是，台司移牒诘礼部，左司郎中陆则、礼部员外崔备皆罚俸，夺元、卢之门戟。
现代文：于是，台司发下文书责问礼部，左司郎中陆则、礼部员外郎崔备皆罚俸，撤除元、卢的门戟。
English: As a result, the master of ceremonies issued a document to reprimand the etiquette department, and the left-hand man, Zhong Lu, and the member of the etiquette department, Wai Lang Cui Bei, were all fined, and the locks on the doors of Yuan and Lu were removed.

古文：余庆受诏撰《惠昭太子哀册》，其辞甚工。
现代文：郑余庆奉诏撰写《惠昭太子哀册》，文辞甚精巧。
English: Zheng Yuqing wrote "The Book of Lamentations of Prince Huizhao" according to the imperial edict. The wording is very exquisite.

古文：有医工崔环，自淮南小将为黄州司马。
现代文：有医工崔环，从淮南小将升为黄州司马。
English: There is a medical worker Cui Huan, who was promoted from Huainan Junior to Huangzhou Sima.

古文：敕至南省，余庆执之封还，以为诸道散将无故授正员五品官，是开侥幸之路，且无阙可供。
现代文：敕令下至尚书省，郑余庆扣下封还，认为诸道散将无故授以正员五品官，是开侥幸之路，而且并无缺职可供。
English: When Zheng Yuqing returned the imperial edict to Shangshu Province, he thought that it was a fluke that Zhuodoshan would be awarded the official five-star rank without any reason, and that there was no shortage of posts available.

古文：言或过理，由是稍忤时权，改太子少傅，兼判太常卿事。
现代文：言辞有些过分，因此触犯当权者，改派为太子少傅，兼判太常卿事。
English: The rhetoric was a bit excessive, so those who offended the authorities were reassigned to the position of prince junior tutor and concurrently sentenced to the position of grand secretary.

古文：初德宗自山南还宫，关辅有怀光、吐蕃之虞，都下惊忧，遂诏太常集乐去大鼓。
现代文：当初德宗自山南还宫，畿辅边关有李怀光、吐蕃叛乱之忧，京都惶恐，于是诏令太常寺集乐取消大鼓。
English: At first, Emperor Dezong returned to Kyoto from Shannan, and there were fears of rebellions by Li Huaguang and Tubo on the Kii-Fu border, which caused panic in Kyoto, so the Emperor issued an edict to cancel the large drums at the Taizho-ji Temple concert.

古文：至是，余庆始奏复用大鼓。
现代文：至此，郑余庆才奏请复用大鼓。
English: At this point, Zheng Yuqing only played the multi-purpose drum.

古文：九年，拜检校右仆射，兼兴元尹，充山南西道节度观察使，三岁受代。
现代文：元和九年，郑余庆官拜检校右仆射，兼兴元尹，充任山南西道节度观察使，三年均受代理官职。
English: In the ninth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zheng Yuqing, the official visiting the inspection school, sent his right-hand man, and concurrently, Xingyuan Yin, to serve as the observer of the festival in the west of Shannan Province. They were both appointed as acting officials for three years.

古文：十二年，除太子少师。
现代文：元和十二年，授太子少师。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was given the title of crown prince and became a junior teacher.

古文：寻以年及悬车，请致仕，诏不许。
现代文：不久以年已七旬请求退休，诏令不许。
English: He soon asked to retire at the age of seventy, but was not allowed to do so.

古文：时累有恩赦叙阶，及天子亲谒郊庙，行事官等皆得以恩授三品五品，不复计考，其使府宾吏，又以军功借赐命服而后入拜者十八九。
现代文：当时屡屡有仰赖皇上恩赦授予官阶的事，及至天子亲临郊庙谒拜，行事官员等皆得倚圣恩授三品五品，不再进行考核，那些使府的幕僚属吏，又十有八九靠了军功借机赐命服而后入朝拜官。
English: At that time, there were many cases of relying on the emperor's pardon to grant official ranks, and when the emperor himself came to the suburban temple to worship, the acting officials all had to rely on the holy grace of three grades and five grades, and no longer conducted the assessment. Those envoys' staff members were officials, and in nine cases out of ten, they took advantage of the military performance to be given the opportunity to serve and then enter the court.

古文：由是，在朝衣绿者甚少，郎官谏官有被紫垂金者。
现代文：因此，在朝官员著绿衣者很少，郎官谏官也有著紫服垂金鱼袋的。
English: As a result, there are very few officials wearing green in the DPRK, and even eunuchs of officials wear purple and carry goldfish bags.

古文：又丞郎中谢洎郎官出使，多赐章服，以示加恩。于是宠章尤滥，当时不以服章为贵，遂诏余庆详格令，立制条，奏以闻。
现代文：又丞、郎入朝谢恩及郎官出使，朝廷多半赐予章服，以示加恩，于是显示恩宠之章服满朝皆见，一时不以著章服为尊贵，便诏令郑余庆详拟条令订立制度，逐条奏报。
English: In addition, most of the emissaries sent by the imperial court to express their gratitude to the emperor, the emperor's son-in-law, the emperor's son-in-law, and the emperor's son-in-law were presented with ceremonial uniforms by the imperial court to show their gratitude. As a result, the graceful ceremonial uniforms were seen all over the imperial court. For a time, it was not considered honorable to wear ceremonial uniforms, but the imperial edict ordered Zheng Yuqing to draw up detailed regulations to establish a system and report them one by one.

古文：十三年，拜尚书左仆射。
现代文：元和十三年，拜尚书左仆射。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan and Wu Dynasties, Bai Shangshu was shot in the left forearm.

古文：自兵兴以来，处左右端揆之位者多非其人，及余庆以名臣居之，人情美洽。
现代文：自兴兵以来，处于皇上左右出谋划策之位者多不称职，及至郑余庆以名臣之风范执政，民情趋于美善和睦。
English: Since Xingbing, most of those who were in the position of making plans and suggestions around the emperor were incompetent, and until Zheng Yuqing ruled in the style of a famous minister, the people's mood tended to be good and harmonious.

古文：宪宗以余庆谙练典章，朝廷礼乐制度有乖故事，专委余庆参酌施行，遂用为详定使。
现代文：宪宗因郑余庆谙熟典章，朝廷礼乐制度有不合先例的，全权交付郑余庆参酌施行，于是任用他为详定使。
English: Because of Zheng Yuqing's familiarity with the ceremony, the Imperial Court's ceremonial music system was unprecedented, the Constitutional Court gave Zheng Yuqing full powers to participate in the implementation, and appointed him as a detailed envoy.

古文：余庆复奏刑部侍郎韩愈、礼部侍郎李程为副使，左司郎中崔郾、吏部郎中陈珮、刑部员外郎杨嗣复、礼部员外郎庾敬休，并充详定判官。
现代文：郑余庆又奏请刑部侍郎韩愈、礼部侍郎李程为副使，左司郎中崔郾、吏部郎中陈、刑部员外郎杨嗣复、礼部员外郎庾敬休一同充任详定判官。
English: Zheng Yuqing also requested the attendant of the criminal department, Han Yu, and the attendant of the ceremonial department, Li Cheng, to be deputy envoys, and the left-hand sergeant, Zhong Cui Wei, the attendant of the criminal department, Zhong Chen, the attendant of the criminal department, Yang Zifu, and the attendant of the ceremonial department, Yu Jingyu, to serve as detailed judges.

古文：朝廷仪制、吉凶五礼，咸有损益焉。
现代文：朝廷仪制、吉凶五礼，都有所增减。
English: The Imperial Ceremonial System and the Five Rites of Good Fortune and Bad Fortune have both increased and decreased.

古文：改凤翔尹、凤翔陇节度使。
现代文：后郑余庆改任凤翔尹、凤翔陇节度使。
English: Later, Zheng Yuqing was reappointed as Feng Xiangyin and Feng Xiangjun's deputy.

古文：十四年，兼太子少师、检校司空，封荥阳郡公，兼判国子祭酒事。
现代文：元和十四年，兼太子少师、检校司空，封荥阳郡公，兼判国子祭酒事。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was also appointed as the prince's junior teacher, the school inspector, the governor of Shenyang County, and the judge of the National Children's Festival.

古文：以太学荒毁日久，生徒不振，奏率文官俸给修两京国子监。
现代文：因太学荒毁日久，生员欠缺，郑余庆奏请用文官俸禄修缮两京国子监。
English: Due to the long-term devastation of the university and the shortage of students, Zheng Yuqingso asked the civil servant to use his salary to repair the two Beijing State Children's Supervisors.

古文：及穆宗登极，以师傅之旧，进位检校司徒，优礼甚至。
现代文：及至穆宗登极，凭着师傅的旧情，擢升检校司徒，礼遇甚优。
English: And up to Mu Zong's ascension to the top, with the old feelings of the master, he was promoted to the school inspector, and the courtesy was very good.

古文：元和十五年十一月卒，诏曰： 故金紫光禄大夫、检校司徒、兼太子少师、上柱国、荥阳郡开国公、食邑二千户郑余庆，始以衣冠礼乐，行于山东，余力文章，遂成志学。
现代文：元和十五年十一月去世，诏令说： 故金紫光禄大夫、检校司徒、兼太子少师、上柱国、荥阳郡开国公、食邑二千户郑余庆，始以衣冠礼乐之识，闻名于山东，尽力习作文章，终成矢志之学。
English: Yuanhe passed away in November of the fifteenth year, and the imperial edict said: The late Zheng Yuqing, a doctor of Jin Ziguanglu, a school inspector, a young teacher of the crown prince, the founding father of Shangzhuang Province and Poyang County, and a diner of two thousand households, began with the knowledge of clothing and ceremonial music, was famous in Shandong, tried his best to study and write articles, and finally achieved his goal.

古文：出入清近，盈五十年。
现代文：出朝入朝清廉近人，资历长达五十年。
English: He was a close relative of Qing Lian who was in and out of the imperial court for 50 years.

古文：再秉台衡，屡分戎律。
现代文：两度执掌大政，屡次分担军务。
English: Twice he held the reins of power, and many times he shared in military affairs.

古文：凡所要职，无不践更。
现代文：凡所任职，无不竭力尽心。
English: No matter where you work, you have to do your best.

古文：贵而能贫，卑以自牧。
现代文：贵而能以贫贱处之，卑以自强不息。
English: Precious and able to take advantage of the poor, humble and self-reliant.

古文：謇谔闻于台阁，柔睦化于闺门。
现代文：正直坦率享誉于朝廷，柔顺和睦脱化于闺门。
English: Honesty and frankness enjoyed a reputation in the imperial court, while meekness and conciliation were frowned upon.

古文：受命有考父之恭，待士比公孙之广。
现代文：受命有颍考父之恭谨，待士如公孙弘之宽宏。
English: He was commanded to be as courteous as his father and as generous as his grandson.

古文：焚书逸礼，尽可口传；古史旧章，如因心匠。
现代文：焚书逸礼，皆可口传；古史旧章，如出匠心。
English: Book-burning etiquette can be passed down orally; old chapters of ancient history, such as out of ingenuity.

古文：朕方咨禀，庶罔昏逾。
现代文：朕赖禀奏咨问，绝无昏聩逾礼。
English: I'm not afraid to ask questions, and I'm not afraid to overstep.

古文：神将祝予，痛悼何及！
现代文：神将断我贤臣，朕心无比伤痛。
English: God will cut off my virtuous vassal, and my heart aches beyond compare.

古文：乞言既阻，赗礼宜优，可赠太保。 
现代文：既已不能聆听其言，助丧之赐宜优，可赠太保官职。 
English: Since it is no longer possible to listen to his words, the gift of helping the bereaved is commendable, and he can be given the post of Tai Po official.

古文：时年七十五，谥曰贞。
现代文：时年七十五，谥号为 贞 。
English: She was seventy-five at the time, and her nickname was Zhen.

古文：余庆砥名砺行，不失儒者之道；清俭率素，终始不渝。
现代文：郑余庆建树美名、磨砺品行，不失儒者风范，清廉节俭坦率素朴，始终不变。
English: Zheng Yuqing has built up a good reputation, honed his character, maintained a Confucian demeanor, is honest, frugal, straightforward and simple, and has remained unchanged.

古文：四朝居将相之任，出入垂五十年，禄赐所得，分给亲党，其家颇类寒素。
现代文：四朝处将相之位，朝内外为官长达五十年，所获俸禄及赐赏，总是分给亲族，自己家境却近于贫寒。
English: He held the position of shogun for four dynasties, and was in and out of the imperial court for up to fifty years. The salary and rewards he received were always distributed to his relatives, but his own family was close to poverty.

古文：自至德已来，方镇除授，必遣中使领旌节就第宣赐，皆厚以金帛遣之。
现代文：自至德以来，朝廷任命方镇守官，必派太监带着旌旗节旄到宅第宣赐，受命者皆送丰厚的钱财给太监。
English: Since the time of Zhi De, the imperial court has appointed Fang Zhen wardens, and eunuchs must be sent to the homestead with the banner to proclaim the gift. Those who receive the order send rich money to the eunuchs.

古文：求媚者唯恐其数不广，故王人一来，有获钱数百万者。
现代文：热衷献媚者惟恐所送数额不大，所以宣旨太监来一次，有获钱数百万的。
English: Enthusiastic flatterers fear that the amount sent is not large, so once the eunuch comes, there are millions of money.

古文：余庆每受方任，天子必诫其使曰： 余庆家贫，不得妄有求取。 
现代文：郑余庆每受方镇之任，天子必告诫宣旨宫使说： 郑余庆家贫，不得妄有求取。 
English: Whenever Zheng Yuqing was assigned to Fangzhen, the emperor would admonish the imperial envoy saying: Zheng Yuqing's family is poor, and he must not be greedy.

古文：专欲振起儒教，后生谒见者，率以经学讽之。而周其所急，理家理身，极其俭薄。
现代文：郑余庆一心想振兴儒学，对前来谒见的后生一概以经学训导，而能周济他人急难，理家理身，极其俭薄。
English: Zheng Yuqing was determined to revitalize Confucianism, and for the future generations who came to see him, he was always guided by learning, but he was able to help others in an emergency, and he was extremely frugal.

古文：及修官政，则喜开广。
现代文：至于办理公务，则喜欢广开用度。
English: As for handling official business, they like to use it extensively.

古文：镇岐下一岁，戎事可观。
现代文：镇守凤翔一年，所办军务可观。
English: Fengxiang, the town watchman, has been in charge of military affairs for one year.

古文：又创立儒宫以来，学者虽行己可学，而往往近于沽激，故当时议者不全德许之。
现代文：又创立儒宫，以招徕学者。虽然郑余庆力求使自己的行为成为表率，却往往近于矫情求誉，所以当时舆论并不全都赞扬他。
English: He also founded a Confucian palace to attract scholars. Although Zheng Yuqing tried to make his behavior exemplary, he was often close to arrogance and reputation, so the public opinion did not all praise him at that time.

古文：上以家素清贫，不办丧事，宜令所司特给一月俸料，以充赙赠，用示哀荣。
现代文：皇上因他家境素来清贫，不办丧事，宣旨主管官署特别发给相当一月俸禄的物资作为助丧之赠，以示褒奖。
English: As the emperor's family had always been poor and did not hold a funeral, the competent authority issued a special award of one month's salary as a gift to help with the funeral.

古文：有文集、表疏、碑志、诗赋共五十卷行于世。
现代文：郑余庆有文集、表疏、碑志、诗赋共五十卷，刊行于世。
English: Zheng Yuqing has a total of fifty volumes of anthologies, epigraphs, epitaphs, and poems, which have been published in the world.

古文：兄承庆，官不显。
现代文：兄郑承庆，官职不高。
English: His elder brother, Zheng Chengqing, does not hold a high official position.

古文：弟膺甫，官至主客员外郎中、楚怀郑三州刺史。
现代文：弟郑膺甫，官至主客员外郎中、楚怀郑三州刺史。
English: His younger brother, Zheng Yifu, was a high-ranking official and the chief guest, and his younger brother, Chu Huai, was the governor of Zheng Sanzhou.

古文：次弟具瞻、羽客、时然，皆官至县令宾佐。
现代文：次弟郑具瞻、郑羽客、郑时然，皆官至县令宾佐。
English: His younger brothers, Zheng Guzhan, Zheng Yake, and Zheng Shiran, all rose to the rank of county deputy.

古文：余庆子瀚。
现代文：郑余庆之子名遆。
English: Zheng Yuqing's son, Meituan.

