古文：作《奸臣传》。蔡确字持正，泉州晋江人，父徙陈。
现代文：蔡确，字持正，泉州晋江人，他的父亲时搬到陈州。
English: Cai Ji, surnamed Mochizheng, is from Jinjiang, Quanzhou. His father moved to Chenzhou.

古文：确有智数，尚气，不谨细行。
现代文：蔡确有智慧，崇尚气节，不拘小节。
English: Cai indeed has wisdom, advocating the spirit of the season, regardless of the season.

古文：第进士，调邠州司理参军，以贿闻。转运使薛向行部，欲按治，见其仪观秀伟，召与语，奇之，更加延誉。韩绛宣抚陕西，见所制乐语，以为材，荐于弟开封尹维，辟管干右厢公事，维去而确至。旧制当庭参，确不肯，后尹刘庠责之，确曰： 唐藩镇自置掾属，故有是礼。今辇毂下比肩事主，虽故事不可用。 遂乞解职。
现代文：韩绛为陕西宣抚使，看到他写的乐语，认为他是人才，就推荐给他的弟弟开封尹韩维，让蔡确任管干右厢公事，韩维离开后蔡确才到任。按规定属吏应在公庭谒见长官，蔡确不肯，接任的开封尹刘庠责问他，蔡确说： 唐代藩镇自设僚属，才有这个礼节；现在我们都侍奉皇上，是同僚，即使是旧的规定也可不用。 就请求解除官职。
English: Han Wei was the Shaanxi envoy, and when he saw the music he wrote and thought he was a talented person, he recommended his brother, Kaifeng Yin Han Wei, and asked Cai Jizhen to be in charge of the right-hand compartment. Cai Jizhen only took office after Han Wei left. According to regulations, officials should meet with officials in public courts. Cai Jizhen did not agree, and the successor, Kaifeng Yin Liu Xi, asked him to ask. Cai Jizhen said: In the Tang Dynasty, it was only polite for towns to have their own subordinates; now we all serve the emperor, we are colleagues, even if the old regulations

古文：王安石荐确，徙为三班主簿。
现代文：王安石推荐蔡确，蔡确转为三班主簿。
English: Wang Anshi recommended Cai Jizhen, and Cai Jizhen was transferred to the third class.

古文：用邓绾荐，为监察御史里行。
现代文：由于邓绾的荐举，他任监察御史里行。
English: As a result of Deng Yu's recommendation, he was appointed as an inspector of the imperial history.

古文：王韶开熙河，多贷公钱，秦帅郭逵劾其罪，诏使杜纯鞫治得实。
现代文：王韶在熙河兴治边事，借了很多公钱，秦帅郭逵弹劾他，皇上诏命让杜纯审察核实。
English: Wang Hui borrowed a lot of public money while he was busy with the affairs of Heihe, Qin general Guo Wei impeached him, and the emperor ordered Du Chun to investigate and verify.

古文：安石却其牍，更遣确，确希意直韶，逵、纯获谴。
现代文：王安石不接受杜纯的调查报告，重派蔡确审核，蔡确迎合王安石的意旨替王韶开脱，郭逵、杜纯都受到责问。
English: Wang Anshi did not accept Du Chun's investigation report, reassigned Cai Jizhi to review it, Cai Jizhi pandered to Wang Anshi's intention to absolve Wang Yao, and Guo Yao and Du Chun were both questioned.

古文：确善观人主意，与时上下，知神宗已厌安石，因安石乘马入宣德门与卫士竞，即疏其过以贾直。
现代文：蔡确善于观察君主的意图，当时，他知道神宗已讨厌王安石，就王安石乘马进入宣德门同卫士比赛这件事，蔡确立即上书论奏王安石的过错来谋求恩宠。
English: Cai Zhengyi was good at observing the monarch's intentions. At that time, he knew that Shenzong already disliked Wang Anshi. Regarding the matter of Wang Anshi riding into Xuande Gate to compete with the guards, Cai Zhengyi immediately wrote a book on Wang Anshi's fault to seek favor.

古文：加直集贤院，迁御史知杂事。
现代文：蔡确被加官为直集贤院，升为御史知杂事。
English: Cai Zhengyi was promoted to the position of Zhiji Xianyin, and was promoted to the position of Goshi Zhizhi Miscellaneous.

古文：范子渊浚河之役，知制诰熊本按行以为非是，为子渊所讼，确劾本附文彦博，黜之，代为知制诰、知谏院兼判司农寺。
现代文：范子渊疏导黄河工程，知制诰熊本巡视后认为不对，被范子渊所诉讼，蔡确弹劾熊本附会文彦博，熊本被罢官，蔡确代替他任知制诰、知谏院兼判司农寺。
English: Fan Ziyuan oversaw the Yellow River Project. After inspecting Kumamoto, he thought it was wrong. He was sued by Fan Ziyuan. Cai Zhengyi impeached Fumihiko Kumamoto, and Kumamoto was dismissed. Cai Zhengyi replaced him as chief abbot, abbot of Chishakuin, and abbot of Nongji.

古文：三司使沈括谒宰相吴充论免役法，确言括为近臣，见朝廷法令未便，不公言之而私语执政，意王安石既去，新法可摇耳。
现代文：三司使沈括拜见宰相吴充谈论免役法，蔡确说沈括为朝廷大臣，见朝廷法令有不当之处，不公开讲而对执政私下谈论，是认为王安石已离开朝廷，新法可以动摇。
English: The Third Division sent Shen Kuo to meet with Prime Minister Wu Chun to discuss the exemption law. Cai Ji said that Shen Kuo was a minister of the imperial court and saw that the imperial decree was improper. He did not speak publicly, but privately discussed the ruling. He thought that Wang Anshi had left the imperial court, and the new law could be shaken.

古文：括坐黜知宣州。
现代文：沈括因此获罪被贬为宣州知州。
English: As a result, Shen Kuo was found guilty and demoted to Xuanzhou Zhizhou.

古文：开封鞫相州民讼，事连判官陈安民，安民令其甥文及甫求援于充之子安持，及甫，充婿也。
现代文：开封审理相州百姓的诉讼，事情牵连到判官陈安民，陈安民让他外甥文及甫向吴充的儿子吴安持求援，文及甫，是吴充的女婿。
English: The case involved the judge Chen Anmin. Chen Anmin asked his nephews, Wen and Fu, to seek help from Wu Anzhi, Wu Chun's son. Wen and Fu are Wu Chun's sons-in-law.

古文：确言事关大臣，非开封可了，遂移御史台。
现代文：蔡确说事关大臣，不是开封府可以了结的，于是就转到御史台。
English: Cai Zhengyi said that the matter concerned the minister and could not be settled by the Kaifeng government, so he transferred to the Imperial History Channel.

古文：时狱起皇城，卒事多不仇。
现代文：这时官司出现在皇城，判定的事情多不与事实相应。
English: At this time, lawsuits appeared in the Imperial City, and many of the things decided did not correspond to the facts.

古文：中丞邓润甫，御史上官均按之，与府狱同。
现代文：中丞邓润甫、御史上官均考察后，和开封府的官司一样。
English: After the inspection of the court officials of the Middle Councilor Deng Runfu and the Grand Historian, it was the same as the court proceedings of the Kaifeng government.

古文：王珪奏遣确诣台参治，确锻炼为狱，润甫、均不能制，密奏确惨掠诸囚。
现代文：王王圭奏请派蔡确到御史台参与办案，蔡确罗织罪名定案，邓润甫、上官均不能控制，就秘密奏论蔡确残酷掠夺囚犯。
English: Wang Wang Guisuo requested that Cai Jizhi be sent to the State Administration of History to participate in the handling of the case, Cai Jizhi was convicted of the crime, and Deng Runfu and the superior officers could not control it, and secretly reported that Cai Jizhi cruelly plundered prisoners.

古文：确伺知之，即劾二人庇有罪，且诈使吏为使者虑问，囚称冤，辄苦辱之。
现代文：蔡确探知后，就弹劾邓润甫、上官均包庇罪犯，并假装派官吏为使臣去讯察记录囚犯的罪状，囚犯称冤，就折磨他。
English: After Cai Jizhen found out, he impeached Deng Runfu and his superiors for shielding the criminal, and pretended to send officials as envoys to investigate and record the prisoner's charges. When the prisoner complained, he tortured him.

古文：帝颇疑其滥，连遣谏官及内侍审直，皆怖畏，言不冤，由是润甫、均皆罢，而确得中丞，犹领司农，凡常平、免役法皆成其手。
现代文：皇上也怀疑他滥用刑，连续派谏官和内侍审查，罪犯都害怕，说不冤，于是邓润甫、上官均都被罢官，而蔡确担任中丞，还负责司农寺，凡是常平、免役法都成于他手。
English: The emperor also suspected him of abusing punishment, and sent eunuchs and courtiers to examine him continuously. The criminals were afraid and said it was not their fault. Therefore, Deng Runfu and the superior officers were all dismissed, while Cai Ji served as the middle-ranking officer and was also in charge of the Sino-Temple. He was responsible for all the laws of Changping and exemption from military service.

古文：太学生虞蕃讼学官，确深探其狱，连引朝士，自翰林学士许将以下皆逮捕械系，令狱卒与同寝处，饮食旋溷共为一室，设大盆于前，凡羹饭饼胾举投其中，以杓混搅，分饲之如犬豕。
现代文：太学生虞蕃诉讼学官，蔡确十分明白这个案子，他牵连进许多朝官，从翰林学士许将以下都被逮捕，让狱卒使他们睡在一起，吃饭和上厕所都在一个屋，在前面放一个大盆，把粥饭饼肉扔在里面，用勺搅拌，就像分给狗和猪似的分给他们吃。
English: Cai Zhengyi, a scholar of law and litigation, was well aware of the case. He had implicated many imperial officials, from Hanlin to General Xu, and they were all arrested. The jailers made them sleep together, eat and go to the toilet in the same room, put a large basin in front of them, threw the porridge and rice cake meat inside, and stirred it with a spoon. It was like giving them the same food as dogs and pigs.

古文：久系不问，幸而得问，无一事不承。
现代文：逮捕很久也不审问，有幸受审，又没有一件事不被迫承认的。
English: They are not interrogated for a long time after being arrested, they have the privilege of being tried, and there is nothing that they are not forced to admit.

古文：遂劾参知政事元绛有所属请，绛出知亳州；确代其位。
现代文：他于是就弹劾参知政事元绛受囚犯的请托，元绛被贬出朝任亳州知州，蔡确取代了他的位置。
English: He then impeached the co-governor and political advisor, Yuan Qi, at the request of the prisoners. Yuan Qi was removed from his position as governor of Zhangzhou and replaced by Cai Ji.

古文：确自知制诰为御史中丞、参知政事，皆以起狱夺人位而居之，士大夫交口咄骂，而确自以为得计也。
现代文：蔡确由知制诰为御史中丞、参知政事，都是靠兴起狱讼夺别人的位置而当上的，士大夫交口唾骂，而蔡确还自鸣得意。
English: Cai Zhengyi was promoted from the position of secretary to the position of vice-chairman of history and vice-chairman of government affairs, both of which were won by taking advantage of the rise of prison lawsuits to seize other people's positions. The scholar-bureaucrats exchanged insults, but Cai Zhengyi was still smug.

古文：吴充数为帝言新法不便，欲稍去其甚者，确曰： 曹参与萧何有隙，至代为相，一遵何约束。
现代文：吴充多次对皇上讲新法没好处，想稍微废除那些过分的条法。蔡确说 ：曹参和萧何有矛盾，到他为丞相时，仍遵循萧何的主张。
English: Wu Chong repeatedly told the emperor that the new law was not beneficial, and he wanted to slightly abolish those excessive laws. Cai Ji said: Cao San and Xiao He had a contradiction, and when he became prime minister, he still followed Xiao He's opinion.

古文：今陛下所自建立，岂容一人挟怨而坏之。 法遂不变。
现代文：现在新法是陛下所建立的，怎能允许一个人怀怨而破坏它。 新法仍旧不改变。
English: Now that the new law has been established by His Majesty, how can one be allowed to undermine it by harbouring grudges? The new law remains unchanged.

古文：元丰五年，拜尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
现代文：元丰五年，蔡确被任命为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
English: In the fifth year of Yuanfeng, Cai Jizhen was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man and the junior secretary.

古文：时富弼在西京，上言蔡确小人，不宜大用。
现代文：当时富弼在西京，对皇上说蔡确奸邪不应重用。
English: At that time, Fuxi was in West Beijing, and he told the emperor that Cai Jizhe evil should not be reused.

古文：确既相，属兴罗织之狱，缙绅士大夫重足而立矣。
现代文：蔡确任宰相后，多次兴起罗织别人罪名的案件，官僚士大夫十分害怕不敢稍有举动。
English: After Cai Jizhen was appointed as prime minister, there were many cases of fabricating the crimes of others. The bureaucrats were very afraid and did not dare to take any action.

古文：初议官制，盖仿《唐六典》，事无大小，并中书取旨，门下审覆，尚书受而行之，三省分班奏事，柄归中书。
现代文：起初议论官制，大致仿照《唐六典》，不论事情大小，都由中书省取旨，门下省审核，尚书省执行，三省分班奏事，权归中书省。
English: At first, the official system was discussed, roughly modeled on the "Tang Six Classics," regardless of the size of the matter, it was decided by the Ministry of Education and Culture, reviewed by the subordinate provinces, implemented by the Ministry of Education and Culture, reported to the three provinces in different shifts, and the power belonged to the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：确说王珪曰： 公久在相位，必得中书令。 珪信不疑。
现代文：蔡确对王王圭说： 您任宰相时间这么长，一定能得到中书令的官职。 王王圭深信不疑。
English: Cai Zhengyi said to Wang Wanggui: You have been appointed as the prime minister for such a long time, you will surely get the official post of the Central Government. Wang Wanggui is convinced.

古文：确乃言于帝曰： 三省长官位高，不须置令，但令左右仆射分兼两省侍郎足矣。 帝以为然。
现代文：蔡确又对皇上说 ：三省长官位置太高，不用设令，只让尚书左右仆射分别兼任中书、门下两省侍郎就可以了。 
English: Cai Zhengyi also said to the emperor: the position of the three provincial governors is too high, there is no need to set an order, just let Shangshu and his right and left flunkies concurrently serve as the middle secretary and the two provincial attendants respectively.

古文：故确名为次相，实颛大政，珪以左仆射兼门下，拱手而已。
现代文：皇上应允。所以蔡确名义上是副相，实际专权，王王圭以左仆射兼门下侍郎，只能拱手听命而已。
English: The emperor agreed. Therefore, Cai Jizhen was nominally a vice-minister, but actually had exclusive power, while Wang Wang Gui was a left-hand servant and a footman, and could only do as he was told.

古文：帝虽以次叙相珪、确，然不加礼重，屡因微失罚金，每罚辄门谢。
现代文：皇上虽按次序以王王圭、蔡确为宰相，但对他们不太尊重，多次因为小过失对他们罚金，每次受罚就去宫门谢罪。
English: Although the emperor appointed Wang Wang Gui and Cai Ji as prime ministers in order, he did not respect them very much. He fined them many times for minor offenses, and each time he went to the palace gate to apologize.

古文：宰相罚金门谢，前此未有，人皆耻之。
现代文：宰相受罚金去宫门谢罪，是前所未有的，人们都认为这事可耻。
English: It is unprecedented for a prime minister to be fined for going to the palace gate to apologize, and people think it is shameful.

古文：哲宗立，转左仆射。
现代文：哲宗即位后，蔡确转为左仆射。
English: After the enthronement of Tetsuzong, Cai Jicheng turned into a left-handed archer.

古文：韩缜入相中书，用其两侄为列卿，确风御史中丞黄履劾缜。
现代文：韩缜为宰相掌管中书，用他的两个侄子为列卿，蔡确暗示御史中丞黄履弹劾韩缜。
English: Han Xuan was the prime minister in charge of the Chinese book, with his two nephews as lords. Cai Ji hinted at the impeachment of Han Xuan.

古文：始诏三省，凡取旨事及台谏官章疏，并执政同进拟，不专属中书。
现代文：皇上才向三省下诏，凡是取旨的事和台谏官的章疏，都要由执政同时上奏拟定，不专归中书掌管。
English: It was the emperor who first issued the edict to the three provinces. All matters concerning the issuance of the edict and the appointment of the eunuchs of Taiwan should be drafted by the government at the same time, and should not be under the control of the Chinese government.

古文：盖确畏失权，又复改制也。
现代文：这是蔡确害怕失去权力，又重改官制。
English: This is because Cai Jizhi is afraid of losing power and changing the official system again.

古文：为永裕山陵使，灵驾发引之夕，不宿于次，在道又不扈从，还，又不丐去。
现代文：蔡确任永裕山陵使，灵车出发的晚上，他不在外住宿，在路上又不侍从，回来后，又不辞去山陵使的职务。
English: Cai Zhengyi was appointed as the Yongyu Mountain Relics Envoy. On the evening of the departure of the hearse, he did not stay outside, did not serve on the road, and did not resign from the position of the Mountain Relics Envoy after returning.

古文：御史刘挚、王岩叟连击之，言确有十当去： 在熙宁、元丰时，冤狱苛政，首尾预其间。及至今日，稍语于人曰： 当时确岂敢言。
现代文：御史刘挚、王岩叟接连攻击他，说蔡确有十条应该罢去的理由 ：在熙宁、元丰时期，蔡确由始至终都参与了当时制造的冤案和苛政；到如今才稍微对人说： 蔡确当时哪敢说什么！ 
English: Historians Liu Zhen and Wang Yanyu successively attacked him, saying that Cai Zhen had ten reasons to be dismissed: in the Xining and Yuanfeng periods, Cai Zhen was involved in the injustice and tyranny created at that time from beginning to end; until now, he only slightly said to people: Cai Zhen did not dare to say anything at that time!

古文：此其意欲固窃名位，反归曲于先帝也 。
现代文：他的意图是想巩固自己的地位，反把过错归于先帝了。 
English: His intention was to consolidate his position, but he put the blame on the former emperor.

古文：司马光、吕公著进用，蠲除烦苛，确言皆己所建白，公论益不容，太皇太后犹不忍即退斥。
现代文：司马光、吕公著被任用后，免去烦重、苛虐的条法，蔡确说都是他自己建议的，更不被公论所容，太皇太后仍不忍心立即罢斥他。
English: After Sima Guang and Lu Gongjun were appointed, they were exempted from the cumbersome and harsh regulations. Cai Jizhen said that he had suggested it himself, and it was not tolerated by the public. The Empress Dowager still did not have the heart to immediately expel him.

古文：元祐元年闰二月，始罢为观文殿学士、知陈州。
现代文：元元年闰二月，蔡确才被罢为观文殿学士、陈州知州。
English: In leap February of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Cai Jizhen was appointed as a scholar of the Academy of Confucius and Chen Zhou Zhizhou.

古文：明年，坐弟硕事夺职，徙安州，又徙邓。
现代文：第二年，因他弟弟蔡硕的事被削夺官职，转到安州，又转到邓州。
English: The next year, because of his brother Cai Shuo's affair, he was stripped of his official position, transferred to Anzhou, and then transferred to Dengzhou.

古文：初，神宗疾革，王珪议建储事，确与同列皆在侧，知状。
现代文：当初，神宗病重，王王圭商议立皇太子的事，蔡确和同僚们都在旁边，知道情况。
English: At the beginning, Shenzong was seriously ill, Wang Wanggui was discussing the matter of appointing a crown prince, Cai Ji and his colleagues were nearby and knew the situation.

古文：确自见得罪于世，阴与章惇、邢恕等合志邪谋，谓珪实怀异意，赖己拥护，故不得逞。
现代文：蔡确见自己已得罪世人，就暗中同章、邢恕等合谋，说王王圭心怀异志，全靠他蔡确的拥戴保护，王王圭的阴谋才没得逞。
English: When Cai Jizhen saw that he had offended the world, he secretly conspired with Zhang, Zou Shun and others, saying that Wang Wang Gui harbored a different ideology, and it was entirely due to his support and protection of Cai Jizhen that Wang Wang Gui's plot did not succeed.

古文：确奉使陵下，韩缜白发其端，事浸籍籍。
现代文：蔡确任山陵使时，韩缜告发他，但事情被逐渐地纷扰。
English: When Cai Zhengyi was appointed as the envoy to the mausoleum, Han Zheng denounced him, but the matter was gradually disturbed.

古文：既失势，愈怨望，恕又益为往来造言，识者以为忧，未有以发也。
现代文：蔡确失势后，更加怨恨，邢恕又替他往来造谣，有见识的人忧虑，没有弹劾他。
English: After Cai Zhengyi lost power, he became even more resentful, and Zou Zhengyi spread rumors on his behalf. People with insight were worried and did not impeach him.

古文：确在安陆，尝游车盖亭，赋诗十章，知汉阳军吴处厚上之，以为皆涉讥讪，其用郝处俊上元间谏高宗欲传位天后事，以斥东朝，语尤切害。
现代文：蔡确在安陆，曾游览车盖亭，并赋诗十章，汉阳知军吴处厚上奏，认为这些诗都涉及到对朝政的毁谤，认为蔡确用郝处俊在上元年间劝谏唐高宗想传位给武则天的事，来指斥太皇太后，吴处厚的话十分切中要害。
English: Cai Zhengyi, who was in Anlu, visited Chegei Pavilion and composed ten chapters of poems, which were read aloud by Wu Zhenhou, a Hanyang scholar-soldier. He believed that these poems were all related to the slander of the imperial government. Cai Zhengyi believed that Cai Zhengyi used the words of Wu Zhengyi, who advised Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty to pass the throne to Emperor Wuzetian in the year of the last century, to rebuke the Empress Dowager. Wu Zhengyi's words were very to the point.

古文：于是左谏议大夫梁焘、右谏议大夫范祖禹、左司谏吴安诗、右司谏王岩叟、右正言刘安世，进上章乞正确罪。
现代文：于是左谏议大夫梁焘、右谏议大夫范祖禹、左司谏吴安诗、右司谏王岩叟、右正言刘安世，接连上奏请求治蔡确的罪。
English: As a result, the left councilor, Liang Jun, the right councilor, Fan Zuyu, the left secretary, Wu Anshi, the right secretary, Wang Yanzhong, and the right speaker, Liu Anshi, successively petitioned to punish Cai Jicheng's crime.

古文：诏确具析，确自辩甚悉。
现代文：皇上下诏让蔡确自己解释，蔡确替自己申辩的十分完备。
English: The Emperor issued the edict to let Cai Zhengyi explain herself, and Cai Zhengyi's defense of herself was very complete.

古文：安世等又言确罪状著明，何待具析，此乃大臣委曲为之地耳。
现代文：刘安世等又说蔡确的罪状显明，不用申辩，这是大臣在包庇他。
English: Liu Anshi and others also said that Cai Jizhen's guilt was obvious, and there was no need to plead. This was the minister covering up for him.

古文：遂贬光禄卿、分司南京，再责英州别驾、新州安置。
现代文：于是就贬蔡确为光禄卿，分管南京，再贬为英州别驾，新州安置。
English: As a result, Cai Zhengyi was demoted to Guangluqing, in charge of Nanjing, and then to Yingzhou Biejie, and relocated to Xinzhou.

古文：宰相范纯仁、左丞王存坐廉前出语救确，御史李常、盛陶、翟恩、赵挺之、王彭年坐不举劾，中书舍人彭汝大力礰坐封还词命，皆罢去。
现代文：宰相范纯仁、左丞王存因在太皇太后面前替蔡确讲情，御史李常、盛陶、翟恩、赵挺之、王彭年因不弹劾蔡确，中书舍人彭汝砺因封驳对蔡确处理的诏旨，他们都获罪被罢官。
English: Prime Minister Fan Chunren and Zuo Wang Cun were punished by being removed from office for pleading on behalf of Cai Jie in front of the great empress dowager; ministers Li Chang, Shengtao, Zou En, Zhao Tingzhi, and Wang Pengnian were punished for not impeaching Cai Jie; and Chinese scholar Peng Ruchen was punished for rejecting the imperial edict to deal with Cai Jie.

古文：确后卒于贬所。
现代文：蔡确后来在贬所去世。
English: Cai Zhengyi later died at a hospice.

古文：绍圣元年，冯京卒，哲宗临奠。
现代文：绍圣元年，冯京去世，哲宗去祭奠。
English: In the first year of Shaosheng, Feng Jing died, and Zhe Zong went to pay his respects.

古文：确子渭，京婿也，于丧次中阑诉。
现代文：蔡确的儿子蔡渭，是冯京的女婿，在丧礼中向哲宗诉冤。
English: Cai Zhen, the son of Cai Zhen, the son-in-law of Feng Jing, complained to Zhezong at the funeral.

古文：明日，诏复正议大夫。
现代文：第二天，哲宗下诏恢复蔡确为正议大夫。
English: The next day, Zhezong issued an edict reinstating Cai Jizhen as the chief doctor.

古文：二年，赠太师，谥曰忠怀，遣中使护其葬，又赐第京师。
现代文：绍圣二年，赠蔡确官职为太师，谥号 忠怀 ，派中使保护他的坟墓，又在京城赏给他宅第。
English: In the second year of Shaosheng, Cai Jizhen was given the official post of Grand Master, the nickname "Loyal," sent a middle-ranking official to protect his grave, and awarded him a mansion in Beijing.

古文：崇宁初，配飨哲宗庙庭。
现代文：崇宁初年，蔡确在哲宗庙一同受到祭祀。
English: In the first year of Chongning, Cai Jizhen was worshipped at the Zhezong Temple.

古文：蔡京请徽宗书 元丰受遗定策殊勋宰相蔡确之墓 赐其家。
现代文：蔡京请徽宗写 元丰受遗定策殊勋宰相蔡确之墓 赏赐给他家。
English: Cai Jing asked Huizong to write that Yuan Feng received the tomb of the Prime Minister Cai Jizhen's tomb and give it to his family.

古文：京与太宰郑居中不相能，居中以忧去，京惧其复用，而居中，王珪婿也。
现代文：蔡京和太宰郑居中不合，郑居中因遭家丧而离职，蔡京怕他被重新起用，郑居中是王王圭的女婿。
English: Cai Jing and Dazai Zheng Juzhong do not get along. Zheng Juzhong left his post due to a family bereavement. Cai Jing is afraid that he will be reappointed. Zheng Juzhong is Wang Wanggui's son-in-law.

古文：时渭更名懋，京使之重理前事，以沮居中，遂追封确清源郡王，御制其文，立石墓前。
现代文：当时蔡渭改名为蔡懋，蔡京让他重管先前的政事，来阻止郑居中，于是追封蔡确为清源郡王，皇上亲自书写他的碑文，立在墓前。
English: At that time, Cai Zhen changed his name to Cai Zhen, Cai Jing let him take charge of the previous political affairs to prevent Zheng from staying in the middle, so Cai Zhen was named the king of Qingyuan County. The emperor personally wrote his inscription and stood in front of the tomb.

古文：擢懋同知枢密院事，次子庄为从官，弟硕，赠待制，诸女超进封爵，诸婿皆得官，贵震当世。
现代文：蔡懋被升为同知枢密院事，蔡确的二儿子蔡庄为从官，蔡确的弟弟蔡硕，被赠为待制，他的女儿都被超升封爵，众女婿都当了官，贵宠震动当世。
English: Cai Zhe was promoted to Tongzhi Privy Councillor, Cai Zhuang, the second son of Cai Zhen, was promoted to subordinate officer, Cai Shuo, the younger brother of Cai Zhen, was given to the government-in-waiting, his daughters were all super-promoted and knighted, and his sons-in-law were all promoted to official positions.

古文：高宗即位，下诏暴群奸之罪，贬确武泰军节度副使，窜懋英州，凡所与滥恩，一切削夺，天下快之。
现代文：高宗即位后，下诏列举群奸的罪状，贬蔡确为武泰军节度副使，把蔡懋流放到英州，把给蔡确的一切恩惠全部削夺，天下称快。
English: After Gao Zong ascended to the throne, he issued the following edict, listing the charges of gang rape, demoting Cai Jie as the vice-envoy of the Thai army, exiling Cai Jun to Yingzhou, and cutting off all the favors given to Cai Jie, which was praised by the whole world.

古文：吴处厚者，邵武人，登进士第。
现代文：吴处厚，邵武人，考中进士。
English: Wu Duankou, Shao Wujin, the middle school entrance examination winner.

古文：仁宗屡丧皇嗣，处厚上言： 臣尝读《史记》，考赵氏废兴本末，当屠岸贾之难，程婴、公孙杵臼尽死以全赵孤。
现代文：仁宗屡次丧失皇子，吴处厚上奏说： 臣曾读《史记》，考察赵氏的兴废本末，在屠岸贾之难时，程婴、公孙杵臼都以死来保全赵氏孤儿；宋有天下后，不见对他二人忠义的表彰，应该访察他们的墓地，建成他们的祠堂。 
English: Emperor Nianzong repeatedly lost his sons, Wu Duan Hou said: "I have read the "Histories" and studied the rise and fall of the Zhao clan. In the time of the Tu Guan Jia disaster, Cheng Ying and Gong Sun Jiusu both died to protect the orphans of the Zhao clan. After the Song Dynasty, there was no recognition of their loyalty to the two of them. We should visit their cemetery and build their ancestral hall.

古文：宋有天下，二人忠义未见褒表，宜访其墓域，建为其祠。 帝览其疏矍然，即以处厚为将作丞，访得两墓于绛，封侯立庙。始，蔡确尝从处厚学赋，及作相，处厚通笺乞怜，确无汲引意。
现代文：皇上看了他的奏疏很惊惶，立即任命吴处厚为将作丞，访得二人的墓在绛州，对他二人封侯立庙。先前，蔡确曾跟吴处厚学习做赋，等他任宰相后，吴处厚写信向他请求怜悯，蔡确无意提拔他。
English: The emperor was very alarmed when he read his report, and immediately appointed Wu Chuanhou as the next chancellor. He visited the graves of the two in Zhangzhou, and the two of them were made princes and priests. Previously, Cai Zhengyi had studied with Wu Chuanhou, and after he was appointed prime minister, Wu Chuanhou wrote to him to ask for mercy. Cai Zhengyi had no intention of promoting him.

古文：王珪用为大理丞。
现代文：王王圭任用吴处厚为大理丞。
English: Wang Wang Gui appointed Wu Shuang Hou as the grand secretary.

古文：王安礼、舒亶相攻，事下大理，处厚知安礼与珪善，论亶用官烛为自盗。
现代文：王安礼、舒互相攻击，此事由大理寺审理，吴处厚知道王安礼和王王圭交结，就论奏舒用公家的灯烛进行盗窃。
English: Wang Anli and Shu attacked each other, and the matter was heard by Dali Temple. Wu Duanhou knew that Wang Anli and Wang Wang Gui had crossed paths, and he used public candles to steal them.

古文：确密遣达意救亶，处厚不从，确怒欲逐之，未果。
现代文：蔡确偷着派人向吴处厚表示要救助舒，吴处厚没答应，蔡确恼怒想赶走吴处厚，没成功。
English: Cai Zhengyi secretly sent someone to Wu Chuanhou to say that he wanted to rescue Shu, but Wu Chuanhou did not agree. Cai Zhengyi was angry and wanted to drive Wu Chuanhou away, but did not succeed.

古文：珪请除处厚馆职，确又沮之。
现代文：王王圭请求授予吴处厚官职，蔡确又阻挠。
English: Wang Wanggui requested that Wu Shuanhou be given an official post, but Cai Jizhen again blocked the request.

古文：珪为永裕山陵使，辟掌笺奏。
现代文：王王圭为永裕山陵使，用吴处厚掌管疏奏。
English: Wang Wang Gui was Yongyu's envoy to the mausoleum, and Wu Shukou was in charge of the orchestra.

古文：确代使，出知通利军，又徙知汉阳，处厚不悦。
现代文：蔡确代王王圭为山陵使后，赶走吴处厚，让他任通利军知军，又转为汉阳知军，吴处厚不满意。
English: After Cai Zhengyi replaced Wang Wanggui as the envoy to the mountains and marshes, he drove Wu Duanhou away and appointed him as the military governor of Tongli, and then he was transferred to the military governor of Hanyang. Wu Duanhou was not satisfied.

古文：元祐中，确知安州，郡有静江卒当戍汉阳，确固不遣，处厚怒曰： 尔在庙堂时数陷我，今比郡作守，犹尔邪？ 会得确《车盖亭诗》，引郝甑山事，乃笺释上之，云： 郝处俊封甑山公，会高宗欲逊位武后，处俊谏止，今乃以比太皇太后。
现代文：元中期，蔡确为安州知州，安州有静江兵卒应该戍守汉阳，蔡确坚决不调遣，吴处厚愤怒地说： 你在朝廷时多次陷害我，现在在邻郡做守臣，还这样吗？ 正巧吴处厚得到蔡确的《车盖亭诗》，诗中引用郝甑山的事，于是就抄好并加以注释上奏给皇上说 ：郝处俊被封为甑山公，恰巧高宗想传位给武后，郝处俊劝谏才作罢，现在蔡确是用这事来影射太皇太后。
English: In the middle of the Yuan Dynasty, Cai Zhengyu was the chizhou of Anzhou, and there were soldiers from Jingjiang in Anzhou who were supposed to guard Hanyang. Cai Zhengyu resolutely refused to dispatch them. Wu Zhengyu angrily said, "You set me up many times when you were in the imperial court, and now you are a guard in a neighboring county. Is this still the case? It just so happens that Wu Zhengyu obtained Cai Zhengyi's "Carriage Gates Poem," which quoted the story of Lushan, so he copied it down and annotated it and sent it to the emperor

古文：且用沧海扬尘事，此盖时运之大变，尤非佳语。
现代文：并用沧海扬尘事，这大概是说时运大变，更不是好话。
English: And using the sea of vicissitudes to raise the dust, this is probably to say that the fortune of the times has changed, and it is not a good word.

古文：讥谤切害，非所宜言。 确遂南窜。
现代文：诽谤朝政，都是不该说的。 蔡确于是被流放到南方。
English: Slandering the imperial government is something that should not be said, and Tsai was indeed exiled to the south.

古文：擢处厚知卫州，然士大夫由此畏恶之，未几卒。
现代文：吴处厚被提升为卫州知州，然而士大夫从此害怕并厌恶他，不久他去世。
English: Wu Shuanhou was promoted to Wei Zhou Zhizhou, but the scholar-officials feared and loathed him from then on, and he died soon after.

古文：绍圣间，追贬歙州别驾。
现代文：绍圣年间，吴处厚被追贬为歙州别驾。
English: During the reign of King Shoshen, Wu Chuanhou was relegated to the second highest rank in Zhangzhou.

古文：邢恕字和叔，郑州阳武人。
现代文：吕惠卿，字吉甫，泉州晋江人。
English: Lyu Huiqing, also known as Ji Fu, was from Jinjiang, Quanzhou.

古文：博贯经籍，能文章，喜功名，论古今成败事，有战国纵横气习。从程颢学，因出入司马光、吕公著门。
现代文：其父吕王寿通晓吏事，做漳浦县令。漳浦县处在深山老林中，百姓苦于瘴雾蛇虎之害，吕王寿教百姓火烧草木变为耕地，瘴雾蛇虎之害渐渐被平息。吕王寿任宜州通判，侬智高入寇，转运使召吕王寿与他合兵，有人劝吕王寿不执行，他没听。
English: His father, Lv Wang Shou, was a well-versed official, serving as the magistrate of Minoura County. Minoura County is located deep in the mountains and old forests, and the people suffered from the harm of the fog of snakes and tigers. Lv Wang Shou taught the people to burn grass and trees to turn it into farmland, and the harm of the fog of snakes and tigers was gradually quelled. Lv Wang Shou was appointed as the Yizhou magistrate, Nong Zhi Gao entered the bandits, and the transport was sent to call Lv Wang Shou to join him. Some people advised Lv Wang Shou not to

古文：登进士第，补永安主簿。
现代文：率二千人跟在贼兵后前往会兵，与敌交战，俘获贼兵首领多人。
English: He led two thousand people to join the army after the bandits, fought with the enemy, and captured many bandit leaders.

古文：公著荐于朝，得崇文院校书。
现代文：任开封府司录，审讯权臣史志聪役使卫兵伐木事，官吏多为他开脱，吕王寿追究到底，史志聪被贬官。
English: He was appointed as the registrar of Kaifeng Prefecture, and he was interrogated by the powerful minister Shi Zhicong for his role in ordering the guards to cut down trees. The officials mostly exonerated him. Lu Wangshou investigated to the end, and Shi Zhicong was demoted.

古文：王安石亦爱之，因宾客谕意，使养晦以待用，恕不能从，而对其子雱语新法不便。
现代文：吕王寿死时官为光禄卿。
English: When Lyu Wangshou died, his official title was Guangluqing.

古文：安石怒，谏官亦言新进士未历官而即处馆阁，开奔竞路，出知延陵县。
现代文：吕惠卿出身进士，做真州推官。任期满后入京，与王安石相见，讲论经义，意见多相同，于是结为友人。
English: Lyu Huicheng was born into a scholarly family and served as a magistrate of Zhenzhou. After completing his term of office, he moved to Beijing, where he met Wang Anshi, who lectured on the meaning of the sutras and shared many of the same opinions. The two became friends.

古文：县废不复调，浮湛陕、洛间者七年，复为校书。
现代文：熙宁初，王安石为执政，吕惠卿正在编校集贤殿书籍，王安石对皇上说： 吕惠卿的贤能，岂只今人，即使是前世大儒也不是轻易能胜过他的。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, when Wang Anshi was in power and Lü Huiqing was compiling a collection of scholarly books, Wang Anshi said to the emperor: "Lu Huiqing's ability to be a scholar is so unique that even a great scholar in a previous life cannot easily surpass him.

古文：吴充用为馆阁校勘，历史馆检讨、著作佐郎。
现代文：学习先王之道而能使用的，只有吕惠卿。 
English: Only Lü Huiqing could learn the way of the previous king and use it.

古文：蔡确代充相，尽逐充所用人，恕深居惧及。
现代文：等到设制置三司条例司，用吕惠卿为检详文字，无论事情大小都和他商议，凡是变法各事项的奏章都出自他的手笔。
English: Wait until the establishment of the Third Division of the Department of Regulations, use Lü Huiqing as the detailed text, and consult with him no matter how big or small the matter is, and all the transcripts of the various matters of changing the law will come from his handwriting.

古文：神宗见其《送文彦博诗》，称于确，乃进职方员外郎。
现代文：他被提升为太子中允、崇政殿说书、集贤校理，判司农寺。司马光上谏说 ：吕惠卿邪佞不是良士，使王安石在中外受诽谤，都是他干的。
English: He was promoted to the position of the Prince's Vice-Councilor, the Speaker of the Supreme Court, the Collector of Scholars, and the Judge of the Agricultural Temple. Sima Guangjia said: Lyu Huiqing was not a good man, and he was the one who caused Wang Anshi to be slandered both at home and abroad.

古文：帝有复用光、公著意，确以恕于两人为门下客，亟结纳之。
现代文：王安石有才德但很固执，不谙世务，吕惠卿为他出谋划策，而王安石极力推行，所以天下人认为他俩都是奸邪。
English: Wang Anshi had talent but was very stubborn and did not care about worldly affairs. Lu Huiqing made suggestions for him, and Wang Anshi tried his best to implement them. Therefore, people around the world thought that they were both evil.

古文：恕亦深自附托，乃为确画策，稍收召名士，于政事微有更革，自是相与如素交。
现代文：近来又不按资序提拔官员，人心不服。 皇上说： 吕惠卿进对明辨，也像优秀人才。 
English: Lately, officials have not been promoted according to the order of seniority, and the people are not satisfied. The emperor said: Lyu Huiqing's ability to make clear distinctions is also like an outstanding talent.

古文：帝不豫，恕与确成谋，密语宣仁后之侄公绘、公纪曰： 家有白桃著华，道书言可疗上疾。 邀与归视之。
现代文：司马光说： 吕惠卿确有文才，很聪明，但用心不正，希望陛下慢慢考察他。江充、李训若无才能，如何能动摇人主？ 
English: Sima Guang said: Lü Huixing is indeed a man of letters, very clever, but his intentions are not right. I hope that His Majesty will examine him slowly. If Jiang Chong and Li Xun have no talent, how can they shake people's faith?

古文：至则执其手曰： 蔡丞相令布腹心，上疾不可讳，延安冲幼，宜早有定论，雍、曹皆贤王也。 公绘惊曰： 此何言？
现代文：皇上沉默。司马光又送书信给王安石说 ：献媚的人，对您现今确实有符合心意的快感，一旦失势，他们必将出卖您而自己往上爬。 
English: The emperor was silent. Sima Guang also sent a letter to Wang Anshi, saying: "The flatterers really have the pleasure of meeting your heart's desire now. Once they lose power, they will surely betray you and climb up themselves."

古文：君欲祸吾家邪！ 急趋出。
现代文：王安石不高兴。
English: Wang Anshi is not happy.

古文：恕计不行，则反宣言太后属意雍王，与王珪表里。
现代文：恰好吕惠卿为父守孝期满，召为天章阁侍讲，同修起居注，升为知制诰，判国子监，与王蚞一起修《三经新义》。
English: Just as his father's term of filial piety was about to expire, Lu Huiqing was summoned to Tianzhanggakou as an attendant and lecturer, and began to live and study with the same practitioner. He was promoted to the position of a scholar, and was sentenced to be the state's son inspector. Together with Wang Xi, he studied the "Three Classics of the New Testament."

古文：导确约珪入问疾，阳钩致珪语，使知开封府蔡京伏剑士于外，须珪小持异则执而诛之。
现代文：又为知谏院、翰林学士。王安石请求离任，吕惠卿让他的亲信变换姓名，每天都上书挽留他。王安石力荐吕惠卿为参知政事，吕惠卿怕王安石离开后，新法动摇，做书下发给各监司、郡守，让他们陈述利害。
English: Wang Anshi requested to leave his post, and Lord Lyu Hui asked his close confidant to change his name and write to him every day to keep him. Wang Anshi strongly recommended Lord Lyu Hui to be a member of the Council of Elders. Lord Lyu Hui was afraid that the new law would be shaken after Wang Anshi left, so he wrote a letter and sent it to all supervisors and county governors, asking them to state their interests.

古文：既而珪言上自有子，定议立延安。
现代文：又从容请皇上下诏，表明始终不因官吏违法而废除新法。因此，王安石新法得到更坚决地推行。
English: He also calmly asked the emperor to issue an imperial edict, stating that the new law would never be abolished because of officials' violations of the law. Therefore, Wang Anshi's new law was implemented more resolutely.

古文：恕益无所施，犹自谓有定策功，传播其语。
现代文：讨论废罢制科，冯京争辩才没实行。他的弟吕升卿无专门系统的学问，被召为侍讲。
English: His brother, Lü Shengqing, who did not have a special system of learning, was called to be an assistant lecturer.

古文：哲宗立，迁右司员外郎、起居舍人。
现代文：又采用弟弟吕和卿计谋，制定五等丁产簿，让百姓自陈实情，尺椽寸土，都被检括，甚至鸡猪也不漏掉。
English: He also used his younger brother Lyu Heqing's strategy to formulate the fifth class Ding production book, so that the people could tell the truth, and even the chickens and pigs would not be omitted.

古文：又为公绘具奏，乞尊崇朱太妃，为高氏异日计。
现代文：隐瞒者许人告发，用被告者财产的三分之一充赏，百姓不胜其困。
English: Those who conceal the truth are allowed to sue, and are rewarded with one-third of the defendant's assets. The people are in dire straits.

古文：后诘之曰： 汝素不识字，谁为之者？ 公绘不得隐，以恕对，且上其稿。
现代文：又靠保甲正长给散青苗钱，让保甲内的人一起前往官府认领，不得遗漏一人，致使上下骚动。
English: They also relied on the guarantor to give money to the scattered young seedlings, so that the people in the guarantor would go to the government together to claim it, one person must not be left out, resulting in uproar.

古文：时恕方召试中书，遂黜知随州，改汝、襄、河阳。
现代文：郑侠上书说吕惠卿结党为奸，堵塞言路，吕惠卿怒，又恨冯京不与自己一心，王安石弟弟王安国讨厌吕惠卿奸猾谄媚，当面污辱他。
English: Zheng Xiang wrote in his letter that Lü Hui was a traitor who formed a party and blocked his path. Lü Hui was angry and hated Feng Jing for not being loyal to him. Wang Anshi's younger brother, Wang Anguo, hated Lü Hui's treachery and flattery and insulted him to his face.

古文：恕久斥外，蓄怒愤，间道谒确于邓，绪成前恶，绐司马光子康手书，持以取信。
现代文：于是吕惠卿乘势陷害他们三人，使他们都获罪。王安石因王安国的缘故，开始与吕惠卿有矛盾。
English: As a result, Lord Lü Hui took advantage of the situation to frame the three of them, and they were all convicted. Wang Anshi began to have conflicts with Lord Lü Hui because of Wang An Guo.

古文：会确得罪，恕亦责监永州酒。
现代文：吕惠卿背叛王安石后，凡可害王氏的事无所不为。
English: After Lü Hui betrayed Wang Anshi, he did everything he could to harm the Wang clan.

古文：绍圣初，擢宝文阁待制、知青州。
现代文：韩绛为宰相不能控制他，请求再用王安石。
English: Han Zheng, as the prime minister, could not control him and asked to use Wang Anshi again.

古文：章惇、蔡卞得政，将甘心元祐诸人，引恕自助，召为刑部侍郎，再迁吏部尚书兼侍读，改御史中丞。
现代文：王安石赴任，仍与他共事。御史蔡承禧论吕惠卿罪恶，邓绾又说他的兄弟强借秀州富民钱买田，他被派任陈州知州。后来，他以资政殿学士的身份知延州。起初，陕西沿边汉蕃兵各自为军，每有战役就用蕃军为先锋，而汉兵守城，等待时机才出战。
English: Wang Anshi took office and still worked with him. The historian Cai Chengxi talked about the sins of Lü Hui, and Deng Yu also said that his brother borrowed money from the rich people of Xiu Zhou to buy land. He was assigned to Chenzhou and Zhizhou. Later, he was assigned to Yanzhou as a scholar of the Imperial Palace. At first, the Han soldiers along the border of Shaanxi were each an army, and whenever there was a battle, the Han soldiers were used as the vanguard, while the Han soldiers defended the city and waited for the opportunity to go to war.

古文：恕既处风宪，遂诬宣仁后有废立谋，引司马光言北齐娄后宣训事，訹高遵裕之子士京追讼其父在日，王珪令其兄士充来谋立雍王，遵裕非之。又教蔡懋上文及甫私牍为廋词，历诋梁焘、刘挚，云阴图不轨，且加司马光、吕公著以凶悖名。惇使蔡京置狱于同文馆，组织万端，将悉陷诸人于族罪，既而无所得，乃已。
现代文：吕惠卿开始把他们合而为一，先搜罗补充守兵并从中选人作战，随屯置将，把这些逐条写好上报，边人及议者多数认为不行。陕西路都监高永亨，是老将，极力争辩，吕惠卿上奏指斥他。蕃部屈全乜将要入侵，吕惠卿认为近世帅臣大多养威持重，就率禁军巡边。大军在京师东郊出发，奔绥德，到达无定河，经过十八天返回。不久，吕惠卿母丧，诏令在他的本俸以外特给钱五万缗，吕惠卿又请求增加一万五千缗，御史弹劾他。他将到扬州取俸禄，皇上说： 吕惠卿固然贪婪，但他曾为执政，治他的罪有伤体面，姑且责其不义也可。 
English: Sir Lyu Hui began to combine them into one. He first collected additional guards and selected men to fight from them. He then stationed generals, and wrote these down in a report. The majority of people on the sidelines and members of parliament thought that it was not possible. Gao Yongheng, the Shaanxi Road Supervisor, was a veteran, and argued strenuously, and Sir Lyu Hui rebuked him in a speech. Xibe Qu Qu Quanzhang was about to invade. Sir Lyu Hui thought that most of the handsome ministers of modern times were dignified, and led the forbidden army on a patrol. The great army set off in the eastern suburbs of Beijing,

古文：恕内怀猜猾，而外持正论。
现代文：只削去错给的俸禄，惠卿还自辩。御史又论他正服丧，不应有言论，下诏不必责问。
English: He only cut the salary that was wrongly given, and Huiqing also defended himself. Gu Shi also said that he was in mourning, and there should be no speech, and there was no need to ask questions.

古文：尝于经筵读宝训，至仁宗谕辅臣，以为人君当修举政事，则日月薄食、星文变见为不足虑。
现代文：元丰五年，加官为大学士、知太原府。
English: In the fifth year of Genpo era, he was promoted to Daigakuin Shoshi (College Scholar) and moved to Chitahara Prefecture.

古文：恕言仁宗之旨虽合于荀卿书，然自古帝王孰肯自谓不修政事者，如此则天变遂废矣。
现代文：入拜皇上，仍让他镇守延。吕惠卿说 ：陕西之师，不仅不能进攻，亦不能防守，主要看形势如何了。 皇上说： 如惠卿言，就是说陕西可以放弃，怎能委他守边？ 
English: Entering into the emperor's worship, he still let him keep the town. Lü Hui Yuan said: Shaanxi's division, not only can not attack, but also can not defend, mainly depends on the situation. The emperor said: If Hui said, that is, Shaanxi can give up, how can he be entrusted to guard the border?

古文：帝嘉纳之，数登对。
现代文：列举他浅薄暴躁欺蒙之罪，斥退他知单州。
English: Enumerate his sins of shallow petulance and deception, and expel him from the state.

古文：惇恐其大用，切忌之。
现代文：第二年又知太原。哲宗即位，告诫守边官员勿侵扰外界。
English: The following year, Tetsuzo ascended the throne of Taiyuan and warned border officials not to disturb the outside world.

古文：恕亦揣帝稍薄惇，屡白其短，竟为惇所陷，出知汝州。
现代文：吕惠卿派步、骑二万人在聚星泊袭击夏人，斩首六百级，于是夏人入侵延。吕惠卿见正直者纷纷回到朝廷，知道不能被人容忍，恳求去外地。
English: Emperor Lyu Hui sent 20,000 men marching and riding on horseback to attack the Xia people at Xingbo, beheading 600 of them, whereupon the Xia people invaded Yan. Emperor Lyu Hui saw the honest people returning to the imperial court one after another, knew that they could not be tolerated, and implored them to go to other places.

古文：于是右司谏苏辙条奏其奸曰： 惠卿怀张汤之辨诈，有卢杞之奸邪，诡变多端，敢行非度。王安石强佷傲诞，于吏事宜无所知，惠卿指擿教导，以济其恶。
现代文：于是右司谏苏辙上奏弹劾他说 ：吕惠卿怀张汤之狡诈，有卢杞之奸邪，诡计多端，敢违法度。王安石固执乖戾，傲慢虚妄，对吏事一无所知；吕惠卿指导教唆，以助其恶。
English: Therefore, the Right Secretary, Liusu, raised an impeachment against him, saying: "Lu Hui has the cunning of Zhang Tang, the treachery of Lu Xun, the cunning of many tricks, and dares to break the law. Wang Anshi is stubborn, arrogant, and knows nothing about public affairs; Lu Hui guides and instigates to help his evil."

古文：又兴起大狱，欲株连蔓引，涂污公卿。
现代文：又兴起大狱，想株连蔓引，玷污公卿。
English: The great inferno has arisen again, trying to entrap and defile the nobles.

古文：赖先帝仁圣，每事裁抑，不然，安常守道之士无噍类矣。
现代文：仰仗先帝仁圣，每事亲自处理。不然，安常守道的人士就没活路了。
English: Rely on the former Emperor Rensen, and handle everything personally. Otherwise, those who keep the path of peace will have no way to live.

古文：安石于惠卿有卵翼之恩，父师之义。
现代文：王安石对于吕惠卿有卵翼之恩，父师之义。
English: Wang Anshi has been a great blessing and mentor to Lü Huiqing.

古文：方其求进则胶固为一，及势力相轧，化为敌仇，发其私书，不遗余力。
现代文：当他求进身时与王安石胶固为一，及有势力，又互相倾轧，成为仇人，看他的私书，都不遗余力地攻击王安石。
English: When he asked for a promotion, he and Wang Anshi became one, and they were powerful and quarreled with each other, becoming enemies. Looking at his private letters, they spared no effort to attack Wang Anshi.

古文：犬彘之所不为，而惠卿为之。
现代文：狗猪都不为的，吕惠卿为之。
English: Dogs and pigs can't do it, but Lü Huixing can.

古文：昔吕布事丁原则杀丁原，事董卓则杀董卓；刘牢之事王恭则反王恭，事司马元显则反元显，故曹操、桓玄终畏而诛之。
现代文：从前，吕布奉事丁原则杀丁原，奉事董卓则杀董卓；刘牢之奉事王恭则反王恭，奉事司马元显则反元显：故而曹操、桓玄始终怕他们并杀了他们。
English: In the past, Lü Bu served Ding Zheng to kill Ding Yuan, served Dong Zhuo to kill Dong Zhuo; Liu Bei served Wang Gong to oppose Wang Gong, and served Sima Yuan Xian to oppose Yuan Xian: therefore, Cao Cao and Huan Xuan always feared them and killed them.

古文：如惠卿之恶，纵未正典刑，犹当投畀四裔，以御魑魅。 中丞刘挚数其五罪，以为大恶。
现代文：像吕惠卿这样的罪恶，纵然未正典刑，仍应放逐到偏远地区，以御魑魅。 中丞刘挚列举他五条罪状，以为大恶。
English: A crime such as Lü Huixing, even if it is not a formal punishment, should still be banished to a remote area to attract the attention of the emperor.

古文：乃贬为光禄卿、分司南京。
现代文：于是贬他为光禄卿，管南京。
English: As a result, he was demoted to Kōroku-kyō, in charge of Nanking.

古文：再责建宁军节度副使、建州安置。
现代文：再责为建宁军节度副使，建州安置。
English: He was then assigned to be the deputy envoy of the Jianning Army and stationed in Jianzhou.

古文：中书舍人苏轼当制，备载其罪于训词，天下传讼称快焉。
现代文：中书舍人苏轼草拟制书，他的罪状备载其中，天下人传颂称快。
English: Chinese calligrapher Su Yingcao planned to make a book, and his crimes were recorded in it. People all over the world praised him.

古文：绍圣中，复资政殿学士、知大名府，加观文殿学士、知延州。
现代文：绍圣中，复官为资政殿学士、知大名府，加观文殿学士、知延州。
English: In Shaosheng Middle School, he was reinstated as a Scholar of Shisei Hall, Meifu of Chida University, a Scholar of Jikan Hall, and a Scholar of Chiyangzhou.

古文：夏人复入寇，将以全师围延安，惠卿修米脂诸砦以备。
现代文：夏人又入寇，将以全军包围延安，吕惠卿修米脂诸寨备敌。
English: Xia Ren invaded again and encircled Yan'an with his entire army. Lü Huiqing repaired the rice fields to prepare for the enemy.

古文：寇至，欲攻则城不可近，欲掠则野无所得，欲战则诸将按兵不动，欲南则惧腹背受敌，留二日即拔栅去，遂陷金明。
现代文：敌至，想进攻则无法靠近城寨，想抢掠则一无所得，想开战则诸将按兵不动，想南下则怕腹背受敌，停了两天就拔营而去，趁机攻陷金明。
English: When the enemy came, if they wanted to attack, they couldn't get close to the castle, if they wanted to loot, they wouldn't get anything, if they wanted to go to war, they wouldn't move, and if they wanted to go south, they were afraid of being attacked from behind. After two days, they left the camp and took the opportunity to attack Jinming.

古文：惠卿求诣阙，不许。
现代文：吕惠卿请求还朝，不许。
English: Lyu Huixing requested to return to the court, but was not allowed to.

古文：以筑威戎、威羌城，加银青光禄大夫，拜保宁、武胜两军节度使。
现代文：因修筑威戎、威羌城，升为银青光禄大夫，拜为保宁、武胜两军节度使。
English: Due to the construction of Weirong and Weihai City, he was promoted to the Silver Qingguanglu Doctor, and became the festival envoy of the two armies of Boryeong and Busheng.

古文：徽宗立，易节镇南。
现代文：徽宗即位，调其节度镇南。
English: Huizong ascended to the throne, and moved his festival to the south of the town.

古文：因曾布有宿憾，徙为杭州，而用范纯粹帅延，治其上功罔冒事，夺节度。
现代文：因曾布与他有宿怨，迁到杭州为官，而用范纯粹守卫延州，追究他假冒边功事，被夺去节度之职。
English: Because Zengbu had a long-standing grudge with him, moved to Hangzhou as an official, and used Fan to purely guard Yanzhou, he was investigated for faking side work, and was deprived of the post of festival.

古文：布去位，复武昌节度使、知大名。
现代文：曾布罢相，他复为武昌节度使，知大名。
English: Zeng Bu resigned as minister of foreign affairs, and he was reinstated as Wuchang's envoy to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：数岁，又以上表引喻失当，还为银青光禄大夫，令致仕。
现代文：几年后，又因上表引用比喻失当，降官为银青光禄大夫，令其辞官。
English: A few years later, he was demoted to the rank of silver Qingguanglu doctor due to improperly quoting the above table. He was dismissed from his post.

古文：崇宁五年，起为观文殿学士、知杭州。
现代文：崇宁五年，起用他为观文殿学士、知杭州。
English: In the fifth year of Chongning, he was appointed as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, known as Hangzhou.

古文：坐其子渊闻妖人张怀素言不告，渊配沙门岛，惠卿责祁州团练副使，安置宣州，再移庐州。
现代文：因其子吕渊听到妖人张怀素的话不揭发而获罪，吕渊发配沙门岛，吕惠卿责为祁州团练副使，宣州安置，又转到庐州。
English: Because his son Lyu Yuan heard the words of the sorcerer Zhang Huai Su and did not expose him, he was found guilty. Lyu Yuan was sent to Shamen Island, and Lyu Huiqing was assigned as the deputy envoy of the Bozhou Rehearsal Team, placed in Xuanzhou, and transferred to Bozhou.

古文：复观文殿学士，为醴泉观使，致仕。
现代文：恢复为观文殿学士，任醴泉观使，退休。
English: He was reinstated as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, appointed as a disciple of Confucius, and retired.

古文：卒，赠开府仪同三司。
现代文：死后，赠官为开府仪同三司。
English: After his death, he was bestowed with the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi.

古文：始，惠卿逢合安石，骤致执政，安石去位，遂极力排之，至发其私书于上。
现代文：起初，吕惠卿迎合王安石，很快升为执政，王安石罢相，他又极力排挤王安石，甚而亲自上书诋毁王安石。
English: At first, Lu Huixing pandered to Wang Anshi, and soon rose to power. When Wang Anshi resigned, he tried his best to oust Wang Anshi, and even personally wrote a letter to slander Wang Anshi.

古文：安石退处金陵，往往写 福建子 三字，盖深悔为惠卿所误也。
现代文：王安石退处金陵，往往写 福建子 三字，是他十分后悔被吕惠卿所害。
English: When Wang Anshi retreated to Jinling, he often wrote "Fu Jian Zi" (福建子) three times. He deeply regretted being victimized by Lü Huixing.

古文：虽章惇、曾布、蔡京当国，咸畏恶其人，不敢引入朝。
现代文：章、曾布、蔡京当国，都害怕、讨厌他，不敢召他入朝。
English: When Zhang, Zengbu and Caijing were in power, they all feared and hated him and did not dare to invite him to the imperial court.

古文：以是转徙外服，讫于死云。
现代文：因此，他一直在朝外辗转为官，直到死去。
English: As a result, he remained outside the government until his death.

古文：章惇字子厚，建州浦城人，父俞徙苏州。
现代文：章惇，字子厚，建州浦城人，父亲章俞时迁到苏州。
English: Zhang Qian, a native of Pucheng, Jianzhou, moved to Suzhou with his father, Zhang Qian.

古文：起家至职方郎中，致仕，用惇贵，累官银青光禄大夫，年八十九卒。
现代文：章俞官至职方郎中，辞官，因章惇的显贵，历官银青光禄大夫，八十九岁时去世。
English: He died at the age of eighty-nine. He was a member of the Zhangye cadre, a junior member of the Ziyigang cadre, a member of the Ji'an cadre, and, because of Zhangye's prominence, a member of the Yinqingguanglu cadre.

古文：惇豪俊，博学善文。
现代文：章惇豪爽俊秀，博学善文。
English: Zhang Ye Gao Shuang Junxiu, erudite and good at writing.

古文：进士登名，耻出侄衡下，委敕而出。
现代文：回来后，神色不变，苏轼抚着他的背说 ：你他日必能杀人。 章惇问 ：为什么？ 
English: When he came back, his expression remained unchanged. Su Qian stroked his back and said, "You will be able to kill people one day." Zhang Ye asked, "Why?"

古文：再举甲科，调商洛令。
现代文：苏轼说 ：能自己判决生命的，就能杀人。 
English: Su Shi said: If you can judge life for yourself, you can kill.

古文：与苏轼游南山，抵仙游潭，潭下临绝壁万仞，横木其上，惇揖轼书壁，轼惧不敢书。惇平步过之，垂索挽树，摄衣而下，以漆墨濡笔大书石壁曰： 苏轼、章惇来。 既还，神彩不动，轼拊其背曰： 君他日必能杀人。 惇曰： 何也？ 轼曰： 能自判命者，能杀人也。 惇大笑。
现代文：章惇大笑。
English: Zhang Ye laughed loudly.

古文：召试馆职，王陶劾罢之。
现代文：章惇被召用为馆职，遭王陶弹劾被罢去。
English: Zhang Ye was appointed to the post of librarian, but was impeached and dismissed by Wang Tao.

古文：熙宁初，王安石秉政，悦其才，用为编修三司条例官，加集贤校理、中书检正。
现代文：熙宁初年，王安石掌权，喜欢章惇的才能，用他为编修三司条例官，加官为集贤校理、中书检正。
English: In the first year of Xining, Wang Anshi came to power. He liked Zhang Ye's talent and used him as the editor of the three departments of regulations, and the additional officials were the collection of scholars, the proofreader, and the Chinese book inspector.

古文：时经制南、北江群蛮，命为湖南、北察访使。
现代文：当时宋正经制南、北江蛮族，任命他为湖南、北察访使。
English: At that time, the Song Dynasty was trying to subdue the barbarians in the South and the North River, and appointed him as the inspector of Hunan and the North.

古文：提点刑狱赵鼎言，峡州群蛮苦其酋剥刻，谋内附，辰州布衣张翘亦言南、北江群蛮归化朝廷，遂以事属惇。
现代文：提点刑狱赵鼎说，峡州群蛮苦于他们酋长的刻剥，谋求归附，辰州平民张翘也说南、北江群蛮归顺朝廷，宋廷就把这事交给章惇。
English: Zhao Ding, who mentioned the point of imprisonment, said that the Qiaozhou group suffered greatly from the chopping of their chiefs and sought to return. Zhang Gao, a civilian from Chenzhou, also said that the Nan and Beijiang groups were forced to submit to the imperial court. Song Ting handed this matter over to Zhang Ye.

古文：惇募流人李资、张竑等往招之，资、竑淫于夷妇，为酋所杀，遂致攻讨，由是两江扇动。
现代文：章惇召募被流放的人李资、张惇等去招抚群蛮，李资、张惇奸淫蛮族妇女，被他们的酋长杀死，于是宋发兵攻讨，因此两江骚动。
English: Zhang Ye recruited Li Zi and Zhang Ye, who had been exiled, to appease the barbarians. Li Zi and Zhang Ye raped a barbarian woman and were killed by their chief. So Song sent soldiers to attack them, and the two rivers were in an uproar.

古文：神宗疑其扰命，安石戒惇勿轻动，惇竟以三路兵平懿、洽、鼎州。
现代文：神宗怀疑章惇违背命令，王安石告诫章惇不要轻举妄动，章惇竟用三路兵平定懿、洽、鼎三州。
English: Shenzong suspected Zhang Ye of disobeying orders. Wang Anshi cautioned Zhang Ye not to act rashly. Zhang Ye actually used three-way soldiers to subdue the Three Provinces.

古文：以蛮方据潭之梅山，遂乘势而南。
现代文：因蛮人占据潭州的梅山，章惇就乘势南下。
English: As the barbarians occupied Meishan in Tanzhou, Zhang Ye took advantage of the situation and went south.

古文：转运副使蔡烨言是役不可亟成，神宗以为然，专委于烨，安石主惇，争之不已。
现代文：转运副使蔡烨说这件事不能马上成功，神宗也同意，把这事专门委托给蔡烨，王安石支持章惇，双方争论不止。
English: The vice-envoy of transshipment, Cai Qi, said that the matter could not be immediately successful, and Shenzong also agreed, entrusting this matter to Cai Qi. Wang Anshi supported Zhang Qi, and the two sides argued more and more.

古文：既而烨得蛮地，安石恨烨沮惇，乃薄其赏，进惇修起居注，以是兵久不决。
现代文：不久蔡烨得到蛮人的地盘，王安石恨蔡烨阻挠章惇，就给他薄赏，提升章惇修起居注，从此宋在南方久不能撤军。
English: Soon after, Cai Xuan obtained the barbarian's territory. Wang Anshi hated Cai Xuan for obstructing Zhang Xuan, so he gave him a paltry reward and promoted Zhang Xuan to repair the settlement. Since then, Song has not been able to withdraw troops in the south for a long time.

古文：召惇还，擢知制诰、直学士院、判军器监。
现代文：宋廷召回章惇，提升他为知制诰、直学士院、判军器监。
English: Song Ting recalled Zhang Ye and promoted him to be the chief of the intellectual system, the direct academy, and the inspector of military equipment.

古文：三司火，神宗御楼观之，惇部役兵奔救，过楼下，神宗问知为惇，明日命为三司使。
现代文：三司着火，神宗在御楼观看，章惇部署役兵赶去救火，经过楼下，神宗问后知道是章惇，第二天就任命他为三司使。
English: The Three Departments were on fire, and Shinso watched from the main building. Zhang Ye sent soldiers to put out the fire. After passing downstairs, Shinso asked and learned that it was Zhang Ye. The next day, he appointed him as the Third Division's envoy.

古文：吕惠卿去位，邓绾论惇同恶，出知湖州，徙杭州。
现代文：吕惠卿被罢，邓绾论奏章惇与他一样有恶，章惇被贬出朝任湖州知州，转为杭州知州。
English: Lyu Huixing was ousted, Deng Xiao's polemic against Zhang Ye was just as evil as his, and Zhang Ye was ousted from the imperial post of Huzhou-Chizhou and transferred to Hangzhou-Chizhou.

古文：入为翰林学士。
现代文：章惇入朝任翰林学士。
English: Zhang Ye entered the imperial court as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：元丰三年，拜参知政事。
现代文：元丰三年，章惇被任命为参知政事。
English: In the third year of Yuanfeng, Zhang Ye was appointed to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：朱服为御史，惇密使客达意于服，为服所白。
现代文：朱服为御史，章惇暗中派门客同朱服沟通，被朱服告发。
English: Zhu Rongfu was the imperial historian, Zhang Ye secretly sent a messenger to communicate with Zhu Rongfu, and was denounced by Zhu Rongfu.

古文：惇父冒占民沈立田，立遮诉惇，惇系之开封。
现代文：章惇的父亲强占百姓沈立的土地，沈立拦住章惇并向他诉说，被章惇抓到开封。
English: Zhang Xi's father occupied the land of Shen Li, a commoner. Shen Li stopped Zhang Xi and told him that Zhang Xi had caught him in Kaifeng.

古文：坐二罪，罢知蔡州，又历陈、定二州。
现代文：章惇因以上二件事获罪，被贬为蔡州知州，又历任陈、定二州知州。
English: Zhang Rong was found guilty of the above two things and was reduced to Cai Zhou Zhizhou, and successively Chen and Ding Zhou Zhizhou.

古文：五年，召拜门下侍郎。
现代文：元丰五年，章惇被召入朝任门下侍郎。
English: In the fifth year of the Genpo era, Zhang Ye was called to the imperial court to serve as a footman.

古文：丰稷奏曰： 官府肇新而惇首用，非稽古建官意。 稷坐左迁。
现代文：丰稷上奏说 ：官府刚开始刷新就首先任用章惇，这不是研习古事、设置官府的意思。 丰稷获罪降职。
English: Feng Rong said in his report: The government first appointed Zhang Rong as soon as the government began to be renewed, this is not the meaning of studying ancient things and setting up the government. Feng Rong was convicted and demoted.

古文：谏官赵彦若又疏惇无行，不报。
现代文：谏官赵彦若又奏论章惇没有德行，皇上没答复。
English: If the eunuch Zhao Yan also wrote that Zhang Ye was not virtuous, the emperor did not reply.

古文：哲宗即位，知枢密院事。
现代文：哲宗即位，章惇为知枢密院事。
English: Tetsuzo ascended to the throne, and Zhang Ye was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：宣仁后听政，惇与蔡确矫唱定策功。
现代文：宣仁后掌政，章惇和蔡确诈称有定策功。
English: After Xuanren took over the government, Zhang Ye and Cai Jizhen fraudulently claimed that they had made a decisive contribution.

古文：确罢，惇不自安，乃驳司马光所更役法，累数千言。
现代文：蔡确被罢，章惇不安，就驳斥司马光所改的役法，达数千言。
English: When Cai Jizhen was ousted and Zhang Ye was uneasy, he refuted Sima Guang's reformed method of service, amounting to thousands of words.

古文：其略曰： 如保甲、保马一日不罢，有一日害。
现代文：大略说： 保甲、保马法一日不罢去，有一日的危害。
English: To put it in a nutshell: If you don't give up your armor and horse protection, you will be in harm's way one day.

古文：若役法则熙宁之初遽改免役，后遂有弊。
现代文：役法在熙宁初年就改为免役，后来才有弊端；现在又恢复为差役，应该全面讨论，然后施行，不该马上改变，留下后悔。 
English: In the first year of Xining, the service law was changed to exemption from service, but later there were drawbacks; now it has been restored to duty service, it should be fully discussed and then implemented, it should not be changed immediately, leaving regret.

古文：今复为差役，当议论尽善，然后行之，不宜遽改，以贻后悔。 吕公著曰： 惇所论固有可取，然专意求胜，不顾朝廷大体。 光议既行，暴愤恚争辨帘前，其语甚悖。
现代文：吕公著说 ：章惇说的固然有可取之处，但他专在求胜，不顾朝廷大体。 
English: Lv Gong wrote: Although what Zhang Ye said had some merits, he was only looking for victory and disregarded the imperial court as a whole.

古文：宣仁后怒，刘挚、苏辙、王觌、朱光庭、王岩叟、孙升交章击之，黜知汝州。
现代文：司马光的建议施行后，章惇愤恨地在太后面前争辩，他的话十分不恭敬。宣仁后大怒，刘挚、苏辙、王觌、朱光庭、王岩叟、孙升接连攻击他，他被贬出朝任汝州知州。
English: After the implementation of Sima Guang's suggestion, Zhang Ye angrily argued in front of the Empress Dowager Yu, his words were very disrespectful. After Xuan Ren was furious, Liu Zhi, Su Rugu, Wang Hui, Zhu Guangting, Wang Yanyu, and Sun Sheng attacked him one after another, and he was expelled from the imperial appointment of Ruzhou Zhizhou.

古文：七八年间，数为言者弹治。
现代文：在七八年内，他多次被言官弹劾。
English: In seven or eight years, he was repeatedly impeached by the speaker.

古文：哲宗亲政，有复熙宁、元丰之意，首起惇为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，于是专以 绍述 为国是，凡元祐所革一切复之。
现代文：哲宗亲政后，有恢复熙宁、元丰时各法的意图，首先任用章惇为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，于是章惇专以 绍述 为国事，凡是元惇所改的全都恢复。
English: After the direct rule of Zhezong, he had the intention to restore the laws of Xining and Yuanfeng. First, he appointed Zhang Xi as the left-hand servant of Shang Shu and the servant of his disciple, so Zhang Xi exclusively used Shaoshu as a state affair, and all the changes made by Yuan Xi were restored.

古文：引蔡卞、林希、黄履、来之邵、张商英、周秩、翟思、上官均居要地，任言责，协谋朋奸，报复仇怨，小大之臣，无一得免，死者祸及其孥。
现代文：引用蔡卞、林希、黄履、来之邵、张商英、周秩、翟思、上官均居要职、任言官，他们朋比奸邪、报复仇怨，大小官僚，无一幸免，死去的殃及妻、子。
English: Citing Cai Qi, Lin Xi, Huang Li, Lai Zhi Shao, Zhang Shangying, Zhou Ritchi, Shuxi, the superior officers all hold important positions and are appointed by the speaker, they are friends and foes, revenge vendettas, large and small bureaucrats, none of them are spared, and the dead affect their wives and children.

古文：甚至诋宣仁后，谓元祐之初，老奸擅国。
现代文：甚至诋毁宣仁后，说元惇初年是老奸擅国。
English: Even after denigrating Xuanren, he said that Yuan Xi was a traitor in the first year.

古文：又请发司马光、吕公著冢，斫其棺。
现代文：又请求掘司马光、吕公著的坟，砍他们的棺材。
English: He also requested that the graves of Sima Guang and Lv Gong be dug up and their coffins be chopped.

古文：哲宗不听，惇意不惬，请编类元祐诸臣章疏，识者知祸之未弭也。
现代文：哲宗没答应，章惇不满，请求编辑、分类元惇时大臣们的章疏，有见识的人知道祸患没消除。
English: Zhezong did not agree, Zhang Rong was dissatisfied and requested the editors and classifiers of the ministers at the time of Zhang Rong's resignation. People with insight know that the scourge has not been eliminated.

古文：遂治刘安世、范祖禹谏禁中雇乳媪事，又以文及甫诬语书导蔡渭，使告刘挚、梁焘有逆谋，起同文馆狱，命蔡京、安惇、蹇序辰穷治，欲覆诸人家。
现代文：于是就处治刘安世、范祖禹劝谏宫中雇乳母的事，又用文及甫陷害别人的文书引导蔡渭，让蔡渭告发刘挚、梁焘有反谋，兴起同文馆案，命令蔡京、安、蹇序辰穷究到底，想使那些人家破人亡。
English: So he dealt with the matter of Liu Anshi and Fan Zuyu's persuasion to hire a nanny in the palace, and used the letter and the document that had just framed others to guide Cai Qi, let Cai Qi denounce Liu Zhi and Liang Qi for having a counter-plot, instigate the case of the same library, and order Cai Jing, An, and Xizhuchen to investigate to the end, trying to make those people die.

古文：又议遣吕升卿、董必察访岭南，将尽杀流人。
现代文：又建议派吕升卿、董必去岭南访察，将把被流放的人全杀死。
English: He also suggested sending Lv Shengqing and Dong Bi to visit Lingnan, and they would kill all the exiled people.

古文：哲宗曰： 朕遵祖宗遗制，未尝杀戮大臣，其释勿治。 然重得罪者千余人，或至三四谪徙，天下冤之。
现代文：哲宗说 ：朕遵循祖宗遗制，不曾杀戮大臣，释放他们不要治罪。 但是重新得罪的有十多人，有的被三四次贬谪迁移，天下人都认为他们冤枉。
English: Tetsuzo said, "I have followed the tradition of my ancestors and have never killed a minister, so I release them and do not punish them. However, there are more than ten people who have sinned again, and some have been deported three or four times, and the whole world believes that they were wronged.

古文：惇用邢恕为御史中丞，恕以北齐娄太后宫名宣训，尝废孙少主立子常山王演，托司马光语范祖禹曰： 方今主少国疑，宣训事犹可虑。 又诱高士京上书，言父遵裕临死屏左右谓士京曰： 神宗弥留之际，王珪遣高士充来问曰： 不知皇太后欲立谁？ 
现代文：章惇用邢恕为御史中丞，邢恕用北齐娄太后宫名叫宣训，曾废她的孙子少主而立儿子常山王高演的事，假托司马光对范祖禹说： 如今主少国疑，北齐宣训事仍可忧虑。 又引诱高士充上书，说他父亲高遵裕临死时屏退左右对高士充说 ：神宗弥留之际，王王圭派高士充来问： 不知皇太后想立谁为帝？ 
English: Zhang Ye used Gao Xun as his secretary, and Gao Xun used the name of the Northern Qi Empress Dowager's harem as Xuanxun, and once told Fan Zuyu about the matter of her grandson Wang Gao, who had been dethroned by his younger brother and had been succeeded by his son Changshan Wang Gao: "Nowadays, there is little doubt about the emperor, and we can still worry about the Northern Qi Empress Dowager. " He also lured Gao Shi into writing a letter, saying that when his father Gao Zunyu was about to die, Wang Wang Gui sent Gao Shi to ask: "I don't know who

古文：我叱士充去之。 皆欲诬宣仁后，以此实之。
现代文：我斥责高士充离开。 这都是想诬陷宣仁后，用这些来证实。
English: I reprimanded Gao Shicheng for leaving. This was all to frame Xuanren and then use this to prove it.

古文：惇遂追贬司马光、王珪，赠遵裕奉国军留后。
现代文：章惇就追贬司马光、王王圭，赠高遵裕为奉国军留后。
English: Zhang Ye chased away Sima Guang and Wang Wang Gui, and gave Gao Zunyu to serve the national army.

古文：结中官郝随为助，欲追废宣仁后，自皇太后、太妃皆力争之。
现代文：章惇勾结宦官郝随，让他帮助自己，想追废宣仁后，皇太后、太妃都极力同他争辩。
English: Zhang Ye colluded with the eunuchs and let him help himself. After he wanted to abolish Xuanren, the empress dowager and the empress dowager argued with him.

古文：哲宗感悟，焚其奏，随觇知之，密语惇与蔡卞。
现代文：哲宗感悟，烧了他的奏疏，被郝随侦知，秘密告诉章惇和蔡卞。
English: Tetsuzong was so impressed that he burned his recital notes. He was caught by the detectives and told the secret to Zhang Ye and Cai Ye.

古文：明日惇、卞再言，哲宗怒曰： 卿等不欲朕入英宗庙乎？ 惇、卞乃已。
现代文：第二天章惇、蔡卞又上奏，哲宗生气地说 ：你们不想让我进英宗庙吗？ 章惇、蔡卞才作罢。
English: The next day, Zhang Ye and Cai Ye played again, and Zhezong said angrily, "Don't you want me to enter the Yingzong Temple? Let Zhang Ye and Cai Ye do it."

古文：惇又以皇后孟氏，元祐中宣仁后所立，迎合郝随，劝哲宗起掖庭秘狱，托以左道，废居瑶华宫。
现代文：章惇又以孟皇后是元中期宣仁后所立的，迎合郝随，劝哲宗在后宫兴起狱案，假托邪门旁道，废掉孟后，让她居住瑶华宫。
English: Zhang Ye also said that Empress Meng was established in the mid-19th century after the death of Emperor Xuanren. He pandered to his followers and persuaded Zhezong to instigate a prison case in the harem, falsely supported the evil gate, abolished Empress Meng, and let her live in the Summer Palace.

古文：其后哲宗颇悔，乃叹曰： 章惇坏我名节。 惇又结刘友端相表里，请建刘贤妃于中宫。
现代文：后来哲宗十分后悔，叹道： 章惇坏了我的名节。 章惇又与刘友端结成表里，请求立刘贤妃为皇后。
English: Later, Zhezong was very regretful and lamented: Zhang Ye ruined my name day. Zhang Ye and Liu Youdu formed a table and asked Liu Xianfei to be the empress.

古文：初，神宗用王安石之言，开熙、河，谋灵、夏，师行十余年不息。
现代文：当初，神宗采纳王安石的建议，开边熙河，谋取灵、夏二州，十多年兴兵不止。
English: At first, Shenzong adopted Wang Anshi's suggestion to open up the border, seek inspiration, summer two states, and have more than ten years of soldiers.

古文：迨闻永乐之败，神宗当宁恸哭，循致不豫，故元祐宰辅推本其意，专务怀柔外国。
现代文：等到听说永乐之败，神宗当廷恸哭，随后得病，所以元大臣推测他的本意，就是专门致力于怀柔外国。
English: When he heard of Yongle's defeat, Shenzong cried in front of the court and then fell ill, so the former minister speculated that his intention was to devote himself exclusively to Huairou foreign countries.

古文：西夏请故地，以非要害城砦还之。
现代文：西夏请求还故地，宋国把那些不重要的城寨还给他们。
English: Xixia asked for the return of the land, and Song returned the unimportant walled city to them.

古文：惇以为蹙国弃地，罪其帅臣，遂用浅攻挠耕之说，肆开边隙，绝夏人岁赐，进筑汝遮等城，陕西诸道兴役五十余所，败军覆将，复弃青唐，死伤不可计。
现代文：章惇认为缩国弃地，罪在帅臣，于是采用骚扰敌人阻挠他们耕种的说法，擅开边隙，不给夏人岁赐，进占汝遮等城，陕西各路有五十多个地方开战，宋损兵折将，又丢弃青唐，死伤无数。
English: Zhang Xuan thought that the country was shrinking and abandoning the land, and the crime was in the courtier, so he used the argument of harassing the enemy to obstruct their farming, arbitrarily opening the border, not giving the summer people the gift of life, entering and occupying cities such as Ruzha, more than fifty places in Shaanxi went to war, Song lost soldiers, and abandoned the Qing and Tang Dynasties, with countless deaths and injuries.

古文：知天下怨己，欲塞其议，请诏中外察民妄语者论如律。
现代文：章惇知道天下人怨恨自己，想堵塞天下人的议论，请皇上下诏在各地探察百姓有妄言者按律论罪。
English: Zhang Ye knew that the people around the world resented him and wanted to block the discussion of the people around the world. He asked the emperor to issue an edict to investigate the people in various places and to discuss the crime according to the law.

古文：优立赏逻，告讦之风浸盛。
现代文：他还立下赏格，告密之风日益兴盛。
English: He also set up a reward system, and the trend of whistleblowing is increasingly flourishing.

古文：民有被酒狂讹者，诏贷其死，惇竟论杀之。
现代文：有个酒醉胡说的人，皇上下诏免去死罪，章惇竟按律杀死了他。
English: There was a man who was drunk and talking nonsense, but the emperor issued an edict exempting him from the death penalty, but Zhang Ye killed him in accordance with the law.

古文：用刑愈峻，然不能遏也。
现代文：章惇用刑更加苛峻，但不能阻止人们的议论。
English: Zhang Ye's sentence is harsher, but it won't stop people from talking.

古文：哲宗崩，皇太后议所立，惇厉声曰： 以礼律言之，母弟简王当立。 皇太后曰： 老身无子，诸王皆是神宗庶子。 惇复曰： 以长则申王当立。 皇太后曰： 申王病，不可立。 惇尚欲言，知枢密院事曾布叱之曰： 章惇，听太后处分。 皇太后决策立端王，是为徽宗，迁惇特进，封申国公。
现代文：哲宗去世，皇太后商议立皇上的事，章惇厉声说： 按礼律而言，应立哲宗的同母弟简王。 皇太后说： 我没儿子，各王都是神宗的庶子。 章惇又说 ：按年纪应立申王。 皇太后说： 申王有病，不能立。 章惇还想说话，知枢密院事曾布呵斥他说： 章惇，听太后安排。 皇太后决定立端王，就是徽宗。章惇升为特进，被封为申国公。
English: After the death of Tetsuzo, the empress dowager discussed the matter of establishing the emperor, and Zhang Ye said in a strong voice, "According to the etiquette, Tetsuzo's younger brother by the same mother, King Jian, should be established." The empress dowager said, "I don't have a son, and all kings are the illegitimate sons of Shinshu." Zhang Ye also said, "According to the age, King Shin should be established." The empress dowager said, "King Shin is ill and cannot be established." Zhang Ye still wanted to speak, but Zengbu, who knew the Privy Council,

古文：为山陵使，灵轝陷泽中，逾宿而行。
现代文：章惇为山陵使，灵车陷在泥水坑中，过了一宿才走出来。
English: The hearse got stuck in a muddy puddle and took a night to get out.

古文：言者劾其不恭，罢知越州，寻贬武昌军节度副使、潭州安置。
现代文：言官弹劾他不恭，他被罢职，任越州知州，不久被贬为武昌军节度副使，潭州安置。
English: The speech officer impeached him for being disrespectful. He was dismissed from his post and appointed to Yuezhou Zhizhou. Soon, he was demoted to the vice-envoy of the Wuchang Army for the Festival, and was resettled in Tanzhou.

古文：右正言任伯雨论其欲追废宣仁后，又贬雷州司户参军。
现代文：右正言任伯雨弹劾他想追废宣仁后，他又被贬为雷州司户参军。
English: After the impeachment of Ren Bo Yu, a right-wing righteous person, who wanted to pursue and abolish Xuanren, he was relegated to the position of Leizhou steward and joined the army.

古文：初，苏辙谪雷州，不许占官舍，遂僦民屋，惇又以为强夺民居，下州追民究治，以僦券甚明，乃已。
现代文：当初，苏辙被贬到雷州，不许他占官舍，他就租百姓的房子，章惇又认为是强夺民居，让州官追究处治，因租约很明白，才停止。
English: At first, Su Rong was relegated to Leizhou. He was not allowed to occupy the official residence, so he rented a people's house. Zhang Ye also thought that it was a forced seizure of people's homes, and let the state officials investigate and deal with it. Because the lease was very clear, he only stopped.

古文：至是，惇问舍于是民，民曰： 前苏公来，为章丞相几破我家，今不可也。 徙睦州，卒。
现代文：此时，章惇也想租用这个百姓的房子，这个人说： 先前苏公来住这儿，因为章丞相我差点破家，现在不能出租了。 章惇被转到睦州，去世。
English: At this time, Zhang Ye also wanted to rent this people's house, and this person said: Previously, Su Gong came to live here, because I almost broke the house, now I can't rent it.Zhang Ye was transferred to Mutsu Province and died.

古文：惇敏识加人数等，穷凶稔恶，不肯以官爵私所亲，四子连登科，独季子援尝为校书郎，余皆随牒东铨仕州县，讫无显者。
现代文：章惇的才识超人，穷凶极恶，不肯把官爵给自己的亲信，他的四个儿子接连考中进士，只有四儿子章援曾任校书郎，其余的都随着进士名册被选任为州县官，始终没有显贵的。
English: Zhang Rong's talent was superhuman, he was extremely vicious, and he refused to give the title to his cronies. His four sons were successively promoted to middle school exam candidates. Only four of his sons, Zhang Yuan, had been school scribes. The rest were elected as state and county officials according to the promotion roster, and they were never distinguished.

古文：妻张氏甚贤，惇之入相也，张病且死，属之曰： 君作相，幸勿报怨。 既祥，惇语陈瓘曰： 悼亡不堪，奈何？ 瓘曰： 与其悲伤无益，曷若念其临绝之言。 惇无以对。
现代文：章惇的妻子张氏很贤慧，章惇任宰相时，张氏病重将死，嘱咐他说 ：你做宰相，千万别做报复的事。 祭祀完张氏，丧期满后，章惇对陈馞说： 不能忍受丧妻的痛苦，怎么办？ 陈馞说： 与其悲伤无益，不如记住她临死前的话。 章惇无以回答。
English: Zhang Ye's wife, Zhang, was very wise. When Zhang Ye was appointed prime minister, Zhang Ye was gravely ill and about to die, and he instructed him, "As prime minister, you must not take revenge." After Zhang Ye's funeral, Zhang Ye said to Chen Ye, "I can't bear the pain of losing my wife, what should I do?" Chen Ye said, "Instead of being sad and useless, it's better to remember what she said before she died." Zhang Ye couldn't answer.

古文：政和中，追赠观文殿大学士。
现代文：政和中期，追赠章惇为观文殿大学士。
English: In the middle of the Meiji and Taisho eras, he was posthumously awarded the title of Kanmonden University Scholar.

古文：绍兴五年，高宗阅任伯雨章疏，手诏曰： 惇诋诬宣仁后，欲追废为庶人，赖哲宗不从其请，使其言施用，岂不上累泰陵？
现代文：绍兴五年，高宗看任伯雨的奏疏，下手诏说： 章惇诋毁宣仁后，想追废她为平民，全赖哲宗不答应他的请求，假使他的话施行，能不累及泰陵吗？
English: In the fifth year of Shaoxing, Gao Zong saw Ren Boyu's slanderous speech, and issued an edict saying: After Zhang Ye slandered Xuan Ren, he wanted to revoke her as a commoner, relying entirely on Zhe Zong's refusal to accept his request. If his words are implemented, can they not affect Tai Ling?

古文：贬昭化军节度副使，子孙不得仕于朝。 诏下，海内称快，独其家犹为《辨诬论》，见者哂之。
现代文：贬章惇为昭化军节度副使，子孙不许在朝中为官。 诏书颁布后，举国称快，只有他家还做了《辩诬论》，被见到的人讥笑。
English: After the imperial edict was issued, the whole country applauded, but his family was the only one to publish "The Argument Against Falsehood," which was ridiculed by those who saw it.

古文：曾布字子宣，南丰人。
现代文：曾布，字子宣，南丰人。
English: Zengbu, Zhizi Xuan, Nanfeng Ren.

古文：年十三而孤，学于兄巩，同登第，调宣州司户参军、怀仁令。
现代文：十三岁丧父，跟他哥哥曾巩学习，同时考中进士，调为宣州司户参军、怀仁县令。
English: He lost his father at the age of thirteen, studied with his brother Zeng Gong, and at the same time passed the junior high school entrance examination, and was transferred to join the army as the head of the Xuanzhou family, and became the governor of Huairin County.

古文：熙宁二年，徙开封，以韩维、王安石荐，上书言为政之本有二，曰厉风俗、择人才。
现代文：熙宁二年，转到开封为官，因为韩维、王安石的推荐，曾布上书讲了两条为政的根本，就是：厉风俗，择人才。
English: In the second year of Xining, he was transferred to Kaifeng as an official, because of the recommendation of Han Wei and Wang Anshi. He once wrote a book about the two fundamentals of politics, that is: strong customs, selection of talents.

古文：其要有八，曰劝农桑、理财赋、兴学校、审选举、责吏课、叙宗室、修武备、制远人。
现代文：有八个要点，就是：劝农桑，理财赋，兴学校，审选举，责吏课，叙宗室，修武备，制远人。
English: There are eight main points, namely: persuading farmers and mulberry growers, financial management, building schools, reviewing elections, disciplining officials, classifying the family, improving military preparedness, and controlling distant people.

古文：大率皆安石指也。
现代文：大致都是王安石提倡的。
English: Almost all of them were advocated by Wang Anshi.

古文：神宗召见，论建合意，授太子中允、崇政殿说书，加集贤校理，判司农寺，检正中书五房。
现代文：神宗召见曾布，因他的建议合神宗意，被授予太子中允、崇政殿说书的官职，加官为集贤校理、判司农寺、检正中书五房。
English: Shenzong summoned Zengbu, and because his suggestion was in line with Shenzong's intention, he was awarded the official posts of the Prince's Vice-Commander and the Secretary of the Supreme Council of State. He was also appointed as the Collector of Scholars, the Judge of the Agricultural Temple, and the Inspector of the Five Departments of the Middle School.

古文：凡三日，五受敕告。
现代文：总共三天，曾布就五次得到皇上的慰谕、诫约。
English: For a total of three days, Zeng Bu received five consolations and commandments from the emperor.

古文：与吕惠卿共创青苗、助役、保甲、农田之法，一时故臣及朝士多争之。
现代文：曾布和吕惠卿共同创建青苗、助役、保甲、农田法，当时的老臣和朝官多数反对。
English: Zeng Bu and Lü Hui jointly created the Laws of the Young and Young, Assistant Servants, Protection of Armor, and Farmland, which were opposed by most of the old ministers and imperial officials at the time.

古文：布疏言： 陛下以不世出之资，登延硕学远识之臣，思大有为于天下，而大臣玩令，倡之于上，小臣横议，和之于下。
现代文：曾布上疏说 ：陛下凭着自己的雄才大略，引进博学有远见卓识的大臣，想在天下大有作为，但大臣玩弄法令，在上面带头反对，小臣议论纷纷，在下面附和。
English: Zeng Bu said: His majesty, relying on his great talent, introduced a learned and far-sighted minister and wanted to make a great contribution to the world, but the minister played with the law and led the opposition on the top, and the ministers discussed and agreed on the bottom.

古文：人人窥伺间隙，巧言丑诋，以哗众罔上。
现代文：人人都窥伺间隙，巧言毁谤，以使众人喧闹，皇上受欺骗。
English: Everyone is spying on the gap, cleverly slandering, so that the people are noisy and the emperor is deceived.

古文：是劝沮之术未明，而威福之用未果也。
现代文：这是皇上勉励和阻止臣下的策略不明，用赏罚驾驭臣下的办法没实现。
English: This is because the emperor's strategy of encouraging and stopping his subjects is unclear, and the method of using rewards and punishments to control his subjects has not been realized.

古文：陛下诚推赤心以待遇君子而厉其气，奋威断以屏斥小人而消其萌，使四方晓然皆知主不可抗，法不可侮，则何为而不可，何欲而不成哉？ 布欲坚神宗意，使专任安石以威胁众，使毋敢言。
现代文：陛下用诚心对待君子勉励他们，用威刑斥退小人并消除他们，使天下都明确知道皇上不可违抗，法令不可轻慢，那么什么作为不能实现，什么想法不能成功呢？ 曾布想坚定神宗的变法决心，让神宗专任王安石来威胁众人，让众人不敢说什么。
English: His majesty treated the nobles with sincerity and encouraged them, repelled the villains with intimidation and eliminated them, so that the whole world clearly knew that the emperor could not be disobeyed, and the decrees could not be despised, so what actions could not be realized, and what ideas could not succeed? Zeng Bu wanted to strengthen the determination of Shenzong to change the law, and let Wang Anshi, who was dedicated to Shenzong, threaten everyone, so that everyone would not dare to say anything.

古文：故骤见拔用，遂修起居注、知制诰，为翰林学士兼三司使。
现代文：所以曾布马上被提拔重用，担任修起居注、知制诰、翰林学士兼三司使。
English: Therefore, Zengbu was immediately promoted and reused, and served as a construction starting and living note, intellectual system, Hanlin bachelor and three divisional envoy.

古文：韩琦上疏极论新法之害，神宗颇悟，布遂为安石条析而驳之，持之愈固。
现代文：韩琦上疏透彻地论述了新法的危害，神宗醒悟，曾布就替王安石逐条分析新法并反驳韩琦，更加坚持新法。
English: Han Zheng thoroughly discussed the harm of the new law, and Shen Zong was enlightened. Zeng Bu analyzed the new law for Wang Anshi and refuted Han Zheng, insisting on the new law.

古文：七年，大旱，诏求直言，布论判官吕嘉问市易掊克之虐，大概以为： 天下之财匮乏，良由货不流通；货不流通，由商贾不行；商贾不行，由兼并之家巧为摧抑。
现代文：熙宁七年，大旱，皇上下诏征求直言，曾布论奏判官吕嘉问在执行市易法时用苛捐重税剥削人民，曾布认为： 国家财用匮乏，是因为货物不流通；货物不流通，是因为商贾不流动；商贾不流动，是因为兼并之家想方设法阻碍他们。
English: In the seventh year of Xining, the drought, the emperor's edict to solicit candid opinions, Zeng Bu's essay on the question of the judge Lujia exploiting the people with heavy taxes and heavy taxes in the implementation of the Municipal Exchange Law, Zeng Bu believed: The lack of national financial use is due to the non-circulation of goods; the non-circulation of goods is due to the non-circulation of merchants; the non-circulation of merchants is due to the fact that the annexation family is trying to hinder them.

古文：故设市易于京师以售四方之货，常低仰其价，使高于兼并之家而低于倍蓰之直，官不失二分之息，则商贾自然无滞矣。
现代文：所以在京城设市易务买卖各地的货物，常使物价高低起伏，但要使价钱高于兼并之家而低于货物一倍或五倍的价值，官家也不失得到二分息钱，那么商贾自然就流动了。
English: Therefore, the establishment of an exchange market in Beijing to buy and sell goods from all over the country often makes the price fluctuate. However, if the price is higher than that of the merger house but lower than the value of the goods doubled or quintupled, and the government does not lose two cents of interest, then the business will naturally flow.

古文：今嘉问乃差官于四方买物货，禁客旅无得先交易，以息多寡为诛赏殿最，故官吏、牙驵惟恐裒之不尽而息之不夥，则是官自为兼并，殊非市易本意也。 事下两制议，惠卿以为沮新法，安石怒，布遂去位。
现代文：如今吕嘉问竟派官吏到各地买货物，严禁商人先交易，以收息多少作为赏罚和政绩高下等级的标准，所以官吏、牙人唯恐货物不被搜罗光和息钱不多，这是官府自己成为兼并势力，不是市易法的本意。 皇上把这事交给两制议论，吕惠卿认为曾布阻挠新法，王安石生气，曾布就被罢官。
English: Nowadays, Emperor Lyu Jiaxuan actually sent officials to various regions to buy goods. Merchants were strictly prohibited from trading first, and the amount of interest received was used as the standard of reward and punishment and the level of political performance. Therefore, officials and courtiers were afraid that goods would not be collected and interest money would not be enough. This was the intention of the government itself to become a merger force, not the market exchange law. The emperor left this matter to the two-system discussion. Lu Huiqing believed that Zengbu obstructed the new law, Wang Anshi was angry, and Zengbu was dismissed.

古文：惠卿参大政，置狱举劾，黜布知饶州，徙潭州。
现代文：吕惠卿参与大政，设置诉案，发动弹劾之事，曾布被贬为饶州知州，转到潭州。
English: Lv Huixing participated in the grand politics, set up a lawsuit, and launched an impeachment. Zengbu was relegated to Raozhou Zhizhou and transferred to Tanzhou.

古文：复集贤院学士、知广州。
现代文：恢复曾布集贤院学士之职，为广州知州。
English: He was reinstated as a scholar of the Zengbujian Academy, and was named Guangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：元丰初，以龙图阁待制知桂州，进直学士、知秦州，改历陈、蔡、庆州。
现代文：元丰初年，曾布以龙图阁待制的身份为桂州知州，进升为直学士、秦州知州，历任陈、蔡、庆州知州。
English: In the first year of Yuanfeng, Zengbu was promoted to Guizhou Chizhou with the status of Longtu Ge's trainee, promoted to direct bachelor, Qinzhou Chizhou, and successively Chen, Cai, and Gyeongju Chizhou.

古文：元丰末，复翰林学士，迁户部尚书。
现代文：元丰末年，恢复翰林学士的官职，升为户部尚书。
English: In the last years of Yuan Feng, he resumed the official post of Hanlin Scholar and was promoted to the household department of Shangshu.

古文：司马光为政，谕令增捐役法，布辞曰： 免役一事，法令纤悉皆出己手，若令遽自改易，义不可为。 元祐初，以龙图阁学士知太原府，历真定、河阳及青、瀛二州。
现代文：司马光掌权后，让曾布改变役法，曾布推辞说 ：免役法的法令条文都出于我的手，如果让我马上改变，从道义上讲也不能做。 元初年，曾布以龙图阁学士的身份为太原知府，又历任真定、河阳知府和青、瀛知州。
English: After Sima Guang took power, he asked Zengbu to change the service law, but Zengbu declined, saying, "The provisions of the law on exemption from military service were all made by me, and if I were to change them immediately, it would be morally impossible." In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zengbu served as a Longtukou scholar in Taiyuan Prefecture, and he also served in Jinding, Heyang Prefecture, and Qing and Shichizhou.

古文：绍圣初，徙江宁，过京，留为翰林学士，迁承旨兼侍读，拜同知枢密院，进知院事。
现代文：绍圣初年，曾布调任江宁，路过京城时，被留在京城任翰林学士，升为承旨兼侍读，被任命为同知枢密院，升为知枢密院事。
English: In the first year of Shaosheng, Zeng Bu was transferred to Jiangning, and when passing through the capital, he was left in the capital as a scholar of Hanlin, promoted to the position of attendant and attendant, was appointed to the Tongzhi Privy Council, and was promoted to the Privy Council.

古文：初，章惇为相，布草制极其称美，冀惇引为同省执政，惇忌之，止荐居枢府，故稍不相能。
现代文：当初，章为宰相，曾布草拟制书时对他极其赞美，希望章任用他为执政，章顾忌他，只推荐他在枢密院任职，所以他们渐渐地不和睦。
English: At first, Zhang was the prime minister, and Zeng Bu praised him very highly when he was drafting the book, hoping that Zhang would appoint him to govern, but Zhang avoided him and only recommended him to serve in the Privy Council, so they gradually did not get along.

古文：布赞惇 绍述 甚力，请甄赏元祐臣庶论更役法不便者，以劝敢言。
现代文：曾布极力支持章的 绍述 之说，请求鉴别和赏赐元时论说改变役法不利的臣僚百姓，以此勉励那些敢于讲话的人。
English: Shao Shuang, who had vigorously supported Zhang, said that he requested the identification and reward of the ministers and people who were unfavorable to the change of the service law in the Yuan Dynasty, so as to encourage those who dared to speak.

古文：惇遂兴大狱，陷正人，流贬镌废，略无虚日，布多阴挤之。
现代文：于是章兴起大诉案，陷害正人君子，官吏被流放、贬职、降级，废罢的几乎天天都有，曾布多是在暗中陷害他们。
English: As a result, a major lawsuit arose, framing honest people and gentlemen. Officials were exiled, demoted, downgraded, and dismissed almost every day. Zengbudo was secretly framing them.

古文：掖庭诏狱成，付执政蔽罪，法官谓厌魅事未成，不当处极典。
现代文：宫中奉诏令查出一桩案件，皇上让执政判罪，执法官认为他们祈祷鬼神和诅咒别人的事没成，不应处以极刑。
English: A case was found out in the palace by imperial edict. The emperor had the regent sentence them. The magistrate thought that they had not succeeded in praying to ghosts and gods and cursing others, and should not be sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：布曰： 驴媚蛇雾，是未成否？ 众皆瞿然，于是死者三人。
现代文：曾布说： 他们带着驴驹媚，使自己增加媚力，又出现蛇雾，这是没成吗？ 众人都十分惊悸，于是就处死了三人。
English: Zengbu said, "They took a donkey to make themselves more attractive, and they made themselves more attractive, and there was a snake mist, is this not done? Everyone was very shocked, so they killed three people."

古文：惇以士心不附，诡情饰过，荐引名士彭汝砺、陈瓘、张庭坚等，乞正所夺司马光、吕公著赠谥，勿毁墓仆碑，布以为无益之事。
现代文：章因士大夫不附会他，就隐瞒真情，文饰过错，荐引名士彭汝砺、陈馞、黄庭坚等，请求恢复被削夺的司马光、吕公著的赠谥，不要毁墓砸碑，曾布认为这事无益。
English: Because Zhang Shidafu did not attend the meeting with him, he concealed the truth, made mistakes in literature and decoration, recommended the famous writers Peng Rucheng, Chen Qi, Huang Tingjian, etc., requested the restoration of the stolen gifts of Sima Guang and Lu Gongzhu, and did not destroy the tomb and smash the monument. Zengbu considered this to be unhelpful.

古文：又奏： 人主操柄，不可倒持，今自丞弼以至言者，知畏宰相，不知畏陛下。
现代文：曾布又上奏说： 人主操纵权柄，不可倒持，如今从丞弼到言官，只知道怕宰相，不知道怕陛下。
English: Zeng Bu also said in his report, "Man masters the manipulation of power and must not hold it back. Nowadays, from the prime minister to the speaker, they only know to be afraid of the prime minister, and do not know to be afraid of His Majesty.

古文：臣如不言，孰敢言者？ 其意盖欲倾惇而未能。
现代文：臣如果不说，谁敢说？ 他的用意是想排挤章但没成功。
English: If the minister does not say, who dares to say? His intention was to oust the chapter but did not succeed.

古文：会哲宗崩，皇太后召宰执问谁可立，惇有异议，布叱惇使从皇太后命。
现代文：恰好哲宗去世，皇太后召宰执问谁可立为皇帝，章有异议，曾布大声呵斥章让他听从皇太后的安排。
English: Just as Zhezong died, the empress dowager summoned Zhaoren to ask who could be made emperor. Zhang disagreed, and Zengbu loudly rebuked Zhang to let him follow the empress dowager's arrangement.

古文：徽宗立，惇得罪罢，遣中使召蔡京钅巢院，拜韩忠彦左仆射。
现代文：徽宗即位后，章获罪被罢，皇上派中使召蔡京入锁院，任命韩忠彦为左仆射。
English: After Emperor Huizong's accession to the throne, Zhang was found guilty and dismissed. The emperor sent an envoy to summon Cai Jing to the prison, and appointed Han Tadahiko as his left-hand man.

古文：京欲探徽宗意，徐请曰： 麻词未审合作专任一相，或作分命两相之意。 徽宗曰： 专任一相。 京出，宣言曰： 子宣不复相矣。 已而复召曾肇草制，拜布右仆射，其制曰： 东西分台，左右建辅。 忠彦虽居上，然柔懦，事多决于布，布犹不能容。
现代文：蔡京想探知徽宗的意图，慢慢地请示 ：不知诏书写成专任一个宰相，还是分别任命两个宰相？ 徽宗说 ：专任一个宰相。 蔡京出来后，宣称： 子宣不再是宰相了。 不久皇上又召曾肇草制，任命曾布为右仆射，制书说： 东西分台，左右建辅。 韩忠彦虽然地位在上，但他柔懦，事情多由曾布决定，曾布仍不能容他为相。
English: Cai Jing wanted to find out Huizong's intentions, and slowly asked: "I don't know if the edict is written as a full-time prime minister, or if two prime ministers are appointed separately?" Huizong said: "A full-time prime minister." After Cai Jing came out, he declared: "Xuan Zeng is no longer the prime minister." Soon after, the emperor also summoned Zeng Zhaozhong, appointed Zeng Bu as his right-hand man, and wrote: "East-West division, left-right construction assistance." Although Han Tadahiko was in a higher position, he was timid, things were mostly decided by Zeng Bu,

古文：时议以元祐、绍圣均为有失，欲以大公至正消释朋党，明年，乃改元建中靖国，邪正杂用，忠彦遂罢去。
现代文：当时人们认为元、绍圣时的政事都有过失，想用大公至正解除朋党，第二年，就改元建中靖国，奸邪的人和正直的人并用，韩忠彦被罢去。
English: At that time, people thought that the political affairs of Yuan and Shao Sheng had faults, and they wanted to use the Grand Duke to dissolve the party, and the next year, they changed Yuan to build the Middle Yasukuni, and used both the traitors and the honest people, and Han Tadahiko was dismissed.

古文：布独当国，渐进 绍述 之说。
现代文：曾布独自掌权，渐渐地献上 绍述 之说。
English: Zengbu took power alone and gradually introduced the "Shaoshu" saying.

古文：明年，又改元崇宁，召蔡京为左丞，京与布异。
现代文：第二年，又改元崇宁，召用蔡京为左丞，蔡京和曾布不和。
English: In the second year, the name was changed to Chongning, and Cai Jing was appointed as the left-hand man. Cai Jing and Zeng Bu did not get along.

古文：会布拟陈佑甫为户部侍郎，京奏曰： 爵禄者，陛下之爵禄，奈何使宰相私其亲？ 布婿陈迪，佑甫子也。
现代文：恰好曾布想让陈佑甫为户部侍郎，蔡京上奏说： 爵禄，是陛下的爵禄，怎么能让宰相私自授予他的亲信呢？ 曾布的女婿陈迪，是陈佑甫的儿子。
English: It so happened that Zeng Bu wanted Chen Youfu to be the head of the household, and Cai Jing said: "The peerage is your majesty's peerage, how can the prime minister give it to his close friend? Zeng Bu's son-in-law, Chen Di, is the son of Chen Youfu.

古文：布忿然争辨，久之，声色稍厉。
现代文：曾布愤然争辩，时间一长，声色都稍稍严厉了。
English: Zeng Bu argued angrily. As time went on, his tone became a little harsher.

古文：温益叱布曰： 曾布，上前安得失礼？ 徽宗不悦而罢。
现代文：温益呵斥曾布说： 曾布，在皇上面前怎能失礼？ 徽宗不高兴地退朝。
English: Wen Yi yelled at Zeng Bu, saying, "Zeng Bu, how can you be so rude in front of the emperor? Huizong left the imperial court in displeasure.

古文：御史遂攻之，罢为观文殿大学士、知润州。
现代文：御史就攻击他。他被罢为观文殿大学士、润州知州。
English: He was ousted as a member of the faculty at the University of Literature and Art, and from the position of Runshu Chishu.

古文：京积憾未已，加布以赃贿，令开封吕嘉问逮捕其诸子，锻炼讯鞫，诱左证使自诬而贷其罪。
现代文：蔡京对曾布积怨不已，给曾布加上贪污受贿的罪名，下令开封府的吕嘉问逮捕曾布的儿子们，罗织罪名进行审讯，又诱惑无罪的佐证使被迫认罪并免去他的罪。
English: Cai Jing was bitterly resentful of Zeng Bu, adding the charges of corruption and bribery to Zeng Bu, ordering Lv Jiaqian, the governor of Kaifeng, to arrest Zeng Bu's sons, fabricating charges for interrogation, and enticing evidence of innocence to force Zeng Bu to confess and absolve him of his crime.

古文：布落职，提举太清宫、太平州居住。
现代文：曾布被罢相，为提举太清宫，在太平州居住。
English: Zengbu was dismissed as a minister, and he lived in Taiping in order to promote the Taiqing Palace.

古文：又降司农卿、分司南京。
现代文：曾布又被降为司农卿，分管南京。
English: Zengbu was also demoted to Secretary of Agriculture, in charge of Nanjing.

古文：又以尝荐学官赵谂而谂叛，责散官、衡州安置。
现代文：又因他曾推荐过学官赵谂但赵谂反叛，被降为散官，衡州安置。
English: In addition, because he had recommended the scholar Zhao Yao, but Zhao Yao rebelled, he was reduced to a non-commissioned officer and resettled in Hengzhou.

古文：又以弃湟州，责贺州别驾，又责廉州司户。
现代文：又因他丢弃湟州，被降为贺州别驾，又降为廉州司户。
English: Also, because he abandoned Zhangzhou, he was demoted to Hezhou Beiji, and then to Lianzhou Sihou.

古文：凡四年，乃徙舒州，复太中大夫、提举崇福宫。
现代文：一共四年，于是被转到舒州，恢复太中大夫的官职，提举崇福宫。
English: For a total of four years, he was transferred to Shuzhou, restored to the official post of Tai Zhong Daifu, and promoted to Chongfu Palace.

古文：大观元年，卒于润州，年七十二。
现代文：大观元年，曾布在润州去世，终年七十二岁。
English: In the first year of the Taikan era, Zengbu died in Runzhou, at the age of seventy-two.

古文：后赠观文殿大学士，谥曰文肃。
现代文：后来被赠为观文殿大学士，谥号 文肃 。
English: Later, he was awarded a bachelor's degree from the University of Kunming, and was given the nickname Bunsu.

