古文：韩愈裴度张惟清王璠柳光李福熊博王敬之王承检
现代文：韩愈裴度张惟清王璠柳光李福熊博王敬之王承检
English: Han Yu Pei Du Zhang Wei Qing Wang Xing Liu Guang Li Fu Xiong Bo Wang Jing Shi Wang Jian Jian

古文：韩愈
现代文：韩愈
English: Han Yu

古文：泉州之南有山焉，其山峻起壁立，下有潭水，深不可测，周十余亩。
现代文：泉州之南有座大山，山势峻拔如壁耸立。山下有一个水潭，深不可测，面积有十几亩地那么大。
English: In the south of Quanzhou, there is a large mountain. The mountain is as steep as a wall. Under the mountain, there is a pool, unfathomable, with an area of more than ten mu.

古文：中有蛟螭，尝为人患，人有误近或马牛就而饮者，辄为吞食。
现代文：潭中有条蛟龙，曾为人患。人不小心走近或牛马到潭边饮水，常常被它吃掉。
English: There is a dragon in the pond, which was once a human infestation. If a person accidentally approached or a horse or cow came to the edge of the pond to drink water, they were often eaten by it.

古文：泉人苦之有年矣。
现代文：泉州人受它的害已有多年了。
English: People in Quanzhou have suffered from it for many years.

古文：由是近山居者，咸挈引妻子，徙去他郡，以逃其患。
现代文：因此靠近山边居住的人，都领着妻子儿女，迁往他乡，以逃避其祸患。
English: As a result, people who lived near the mountains took their wives and children and moved to other towns to escape the disaster.

古文：元和五年，一夕，闻山南有雷震暴兴，震数百里，若山崩之状，一郡惊惧。
现代文：唐元和五年，有一天晚上，人们听到山南有雷声大作，声震数百里之远，如山崩一样。
English: In the fifth year of the Tang and Yuan Dynasties, one night, people heard thunder in Shannan, hundreds of miles away, like a landslide.

古文：里人洎牛马鸡犬，俱失声仆地，流汗被体，屋瓦交击，木树颠拔。
现代文：全郡百姓都很惊惧，乡里的人以至牛马鸡犬，全都失声趴在地上，汗流全身。房屋上的瓦相互撞击，树木摇晃并连根拔倒。
English: People across the county were terrified. Villagers, as well as cows, horses, chickens and dogs, all fell to the ground, sweating profusely. Roof tiles on houses collided with each other, trees shook and uprooted.

古文：自戌及子，雷电方息。
现代文：从戌时一直到子时，雷电才停息。
English: From dusk until dusk, the lightning only stops.

古文：明旦往视之，其山摧堕石壁数百仞殆尽，俱填其潭，水溢流，注满四野。
现代文：第二天早晨人们去察看，只见那大山被摧塌，数百丈的峭壁全部化为平地，山石全都填进了深潭。潭水四溢，注满周围的源野。
English: The next morning, people went to investigate, only to see that the mountain had been destroyed, the hundreds-high cliffs had all been flattened, and the rocks had all been filled into a deep pool. The pool was overflowing, filling the surrounding fields.

古文：蛟螭之血，遍若玄黄。
现代文：到处都是蛟龙那赤黑的血。在石壁上，却凿出了十九个字。
English: The dragon's red and black blood was everywhere, but on the stone wall, nineteen words were chiseled out.

古文：而石壁之上，有凿成文字一十九言，字势甚古，郡中士庶无能知者。
现代文：字的形状很古奥，郡中有学问的人也没有能认识的。从此百姓再也没有受害的了。
English: The shape of the characters is very ancient, and no educated person in the county can recognize it. Since then, the people have not suffered any more.

古文：自是居人无复患矣。
现代文：恐惧没有了，迁往外地的人也都回来了。
English: The fear is gone, and people who moved away have come back.

古文：惧者既息，迁者亦归。结屋架庐，接比其地。
现代文：于是他们又重新造房架屋，一家挨一家地住了下来。
English: So they rebuilt the lean-to and lived in it, family by family.

古文：郡守因之名其地为石铭里，盖因字为铭，且识其异也。
现代文：郡守据此把此地命名为石铭里。这是因为那字是铭，也是为了记载这里发生的奇异。
English: The governor of the county named the place "Shimotsu-ri" because the word "Shimotsu" means "inscription" and also to record the strange things that happened there.

古文：后有客于泉者，能传其字，持至东洛。
现代文：后来有个人到泉州来，能传递这些字，就把字抄下来带到东京洛阳。
English: Later, a person came to Quanzhou and was able to pass on these words, so he copied them down and took them to Luoyang, Tokyo.

古文：时故吏部侍郎韩愈自尚书郎为何南令，见而识之。
现代文：当时原吏部侍郎韩愈已由尚书改任河南令，他看见这些字都可以识别。
English: At that time, Han Yu, the former chamberlain of the cadre department, had been transferred from Shangshu to Henanling, and he could recognize these characters when he saw them.

古文：其文曰： 诏示黑水之鲤鱼，天公卑杀牛人，壬癸神书急急。 
现代文：那文字是说： 诏示黑水之鲤鱼，天公卑杀牛人，壬癸神书急急。 
English: The inscription reads: "The eel in the black water, the cow-killer in the sky, and the urgent call in the book of the gods."

古文：然则详究其义，似上帝责蛟螭之词，令戮其害也。
现代文：然而详细探究其义，似乎是天帝斥责蛟龙之词，下令要戮杀这一祸害。
English: However, a detailed exploration of its meaning seems to be the word of the heavenly emperor rebuking the dragon, ordering to kill this scourge.

古文：其字则蝌蚪篆书，故泉人无有识者矣。
现代文：那些字是蝌蚪篆书，所以泉州人没有能认识它的。
English: Those characters were written in cursive, so people in Quanzhou couldn't recognize them.

古文：裴度
现代文：裴度
English: Pei Du

古文：元和元年，秋九月，淮西帅吴少诚死，子元济拒命。
现代文：唐宪宗元和元年九月，淮西节度使吴少诚死去，其子吴元济叛变。
English: In September of the first year of the Zongyuan and the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the Huaixi Festival caused Wu Shaocheng to die, and his son Wu Yuanji rebelled.

古文：诏邻淮西焉，以兵四攻之，凡数年不克。
现代文：皇帝下令邻近淮西的各路将领，帅兵从四方围攻他。然而围了好几年也没有攻克。
English: The emperor ordered generals from all directions near Huaxi, and the soldiers besieged him from four directions. However, the siege did not break through for several years.

古文：十三年，召丞相晋国公裴度将而击焉。
现代文：元和十三年，又命丞相晋国公裴度率兵去歼灭他。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he also ordered the prime minister, Jin Guo Gong Pei Du, to lead an army to exterminate him.

古文：度既至，因命封人深池濠，且发其地。有得一石者，上有雕出文字为铭，封人持以献度。
现代文：裴度来到淮西，便命令封人深挖水沟。在挖地时，有人得到一块石头，上面刻有文字为铭。封人把石献给裴度。
English: When Pei Du came to Huaxi, he ordered the sealers to dig a deep trench. While digging, someone got a stone with an inscription on it. The sealers dedicated the stone to Pei Du.

古文：文曰： 井底一竿竹，竹色深绿绿。
现代文：那铭文写道： 井底一竿竹，竹色深绿绿。
English: The inscription reads: "At the bottom of the well is a stalk of bamboo, bamboo color dark green green."

古文：鸡未肥，酒未熟，障车儿郎且须缩。 
现代文：鸡未肥，酒未熟，障车儿郎且须缩。 
English: The chicken is not fat, the wine is not ripe, the carts are too long and need to be shrunk.

古文：度得之，以示从事，令辩其义焉，咸不能究。
现代文：裴度得到这块石头后，便拿给部下们观看，并叫他们辨别那文字的意思，结果都不能明白。
English: When Pei Du obtained the stone, he showed it to his subordinates and asked them to discern the meaning of the writing, but they could not understand it.

古文：度方念之，俄有一卒，自行间跃而贺曰： 吴元济逆天子命，纵狂兵为反谋。
现代文：裴度刚刚在揣度，很快有一名兵卒，从队伍中跳起来祝贺道： 吴元济逆天子之命，指使狂兵谋反。
English: Pei Du was just finishing his speech, when a soldier quickly jumped up from the ranks to congratulate him, saying, "Wu Yuanji has defied God's order and ordered his mad soldiers to rebel.

古文：赖天子威圣，与丞相德合。今日逆竖成擒矣，敢贺丞相功。 
现代文：仰仗天子的圣威，与丞相的贤德相合，今天这个叛逆就要被擒获了。应当庆贺丞相的功劳！ 
English: Relying on the divine will of the Son of Heaven, in harmony with the virtue of the prime minister, today this rebellion is about to be captured. The merit of the prime minister should be celebrated!

古文：度惊讯之，对曰： 封人得石铭，是其兆也。
现代文：裴度很惊讶地询问他，他说： 封人得石铭，这是个吉兆。
English: Pei Du was very surprised and asked him about it. He said, "It's a good omen to have a stone inscription.

古文：且 井底一竿竹，竹色深绿绿 者。
现代文：且看 井底一竿竹，竹色深绿绿 是说吴少诚原不过是队伍中的一名小卒，后来拥有了十万兵，成为一方统帅。
English: And look, a stick of bamboo at the bottom of the well, the bamboo color is dark green-green It is said that Wu Shaocheng was just a pawn in the team, and later he had 100,000 soldiers and became the commander of one side.

古文：言吴少诚由行间一卒，遂拥十万兵，为一方帅，且喻其荣也。 鸡未肥 者，言无肉也。夫以 肥 去 肉 ，为 己 字也。 酒未熟 者，言无水也。以 酒 去 水 ，为 酉 字。 障车儿郎 ，谓兵革之士也。 且缩 者，谓宜退守其所也。
现代文：这是喻说他的荣耀。 鸡未肥 ，是说没有肉。如果把 肥 字去掉肉。就成了 己 字。 酒未熟 ，是说没有水。如果把 酒 字去掉 水 ，就变成了 酉 字。 障车儿郎 ，是说兵革之士， 且须缩 ，是说应该退守于自己的驻地。
English: This is a metaphor for his glory. 雞未肥, means without meat. If you remove the word 肥 from meat, it becomes 己. 酒未熟, means without water. If you remove the word 酒 from water, it becomes. 障车兒郎, means warrior, and must shrink, means that you should retreat to your own base.

古文：推是言之，则 己 酉日当克也。
现代文：推论这些话的意思，是己酉日才可攻克淮西。
English: The implication of these words is that the West of Huai can only be conquered on the third day.

古文：苟未及期，则可俟矣。 
现代文：假如未到时间，则可以等待。 
English: If you are not on time, you can wait.

古文：度喜，顾左右曰： 卒辨者也。 叹而异之。
现代文：裴度听后大喜，对左右道： 这士兵是一个很有辨析能力的人，令人感叹惊异啊！ 
English: After listening to him, Pei Du was overjoyed and said to both sides: This soldier is a person with great discernment, it's amazing!

古文：是岁冬十月，相国李诉将兵入淮西，生得元济，尽诸反者。
现代文：这年冬季十月，相国李诉率兵攻入淮西，活擒吴元济，尽除反叛者。
English: In the winter of October of the same year, Li Sui led his troops to invade Huaixi and killed Wu Yuanji, eliminating the rebels.

古文：度因校其日，果己酉焉。
现代文：裴度于是与铭文核对日期，果然是己酉日。
English: Baidu then checked the date with the inscription, and it turned out to be the day of the self-immolation.

古文：于是度益奇卒之辨，擢为裨将。
现代文：于是裴度越发惊叹那位士兵的辨析之材，便提拔他为副将。
English: As a result, Pei Du was more and more amazed by the soldier's ability to discern, so he promoted him to vice-general.

古文：张惟清
现代文：张惟清
English: Zhang Weixing

古文：黑山之阴，有李卫公庙。
现代文：在黑山的北面，有座李卫公庙。
English: In the north of Montenegro, there is a Li Weigong Temple.

古文：宝历中，张惟清都护单于。
现代文：唐敬宗宝历年年间，张惟清奉命都护匈奴。
English: Over the years of Tang Jing Zongbao, Zhang Weiqing was ordered to protect the Xiongnu.

古文：其从事卢立尝梦一人，颀长黑衣，告立曰： 吾居于卫公庙且久矣，子幸迁我于军城中。 
现代文：他的从事卢立曾经梦见一个人，颀长的身体，穿着黑色的衣服。他告诉卢立说： 我在卫公庙居住的时间很长了，希望你能把我迁到军城中。 
English: Lu Li, who worked for him, once dreamed of a man with a long, thin body and wearing black clothes. He told Lu Li, "I have been living in the Wei Gong Temple for a long time. I hope you can move me to the military city."

古文：已而遂去。
现代文：说完就离去了。
English: After saying this, he left.

古文：及晓，立不谕，即入白于惟清曰： 卫公于国有大勋。今庙宇隳残，飘濡且甚，愿新其土木之制。 
现代文：天亮后，卢立并没说这件事，就进内对张惟清说： 卫公对国家有很大的贡献，如今庙宇残破，不避风雨，并越来越严重，希望能重新修建一下。 
English: After dawn, Lu Li did not say anything about this matter, but went inside and said to Zhang Weiqing: Weigong has made great contributions to the country. Now the temple is in ruins, it cannot escape the wind and rain, and it is getting more and more serious. I hope it can be rebuilt.

古文：惟清喜而可其语。
现代文：张惟清一听很高兴并同意了他的请求。
English: Zhang Weiqing was very pleased and agreed to his request.

古文：先是单于府以惟清有美化，状其政绩。请护军骆忠表闻于上。有诏，命中书舍人高公釴文事其，刻于碑。
现代文：在此之前，匈奴单于府因张惟清有美好的德行，已为他写好了政绩，并请护军骆忠上表告知皇上，皇上曾下诏，命中书舍人高公釴著文表彰他的事迹，并要刻到碑上。
English: Prior to this, the Xiongnu had already written down Zhang Weiqing's good deeds for him, and asked the escort, Luo Zhong, to inform the emperor that the emperor had issued an edict, ordering the scribe Gao Gongjun to write a text to commend his deeds and to engrave it on the monument.

古文：诏既至而未有碑石，惟清方命使采石于云中郡，未还。
现代文：诏书已经到了而还没有碑石，张惟清不久前刚命人去云中郡采石，至今还未回来。
English: The imperial edict has arrived, but there is still no monument. Not long ago, Zhang Weiqing ordered people to go to Yunzhong County to quarry stone, but they have not returned yet.

古文：及修卫公庙，铲其西，得一石，方而长，其下有刻出 张 字，历然可辨。
现代文：可是在修卫公庙时，铲西侧的土而得到一石，长方形，石的下方还刻出一个 张 字，清晰可见。
English: However, during the repair of the Wei Gong Temple, a stone, rectangular in shape, was obtained by shoveling the soil on the west side. A Zhang character was also carved below the stone, which can be clearly seen.

古文：工人持以献惟清，惟清喜曰： 天赐吾之碑石。 
现代文：做工的人把它献给张惟清，张惟清大喜道， 这是天赐我碑石啊！ 
English: The workers dedicated it to Zhang Weixing, and Zhang Weixing was overjoyed. This is a monument given to me by Heaven!

古文：即召从事视之，立且惊且异。因起贺而白前梦。
现代文：随即叫从事来观看，卢立看后又惊讶又奇怪，因而起身向张惟清祝贺并说了从前做梦一事。
English: Lu Li was surprised and puzzled, so he got up and congratulated Zhang Weiqing and told him about his dream.

古文：于是以石为碑，刻高公之文焉。
现代文：于是就用这块石做石碑，在上面刻上高公的文字。
English: So he used this stone to make a stone monument, and engraved the words of Gaogong on it.

古文：王璠
现代文：王璠
English: Wang Yao

古文：太和中，王璠廉问丹阳。
现代文：唐文宗大和年间，王璠管辖丹阳。
English: During the Tang and Wenzong Dynasties, Danyang was ruled by Wang Xi.

古文：因沟其城，既凿深数尺，得一石。铭文曰： 山有石，石有玉。玉有瑕，即休也。 
现代文：当时在城外挖掘护城河，当开掘数尺深的时候，得到一块石碑，上面有铭文说： 山有石，石有玉，玉有瑕，即休也。 
English: At that time, a moat was being dug outside the city, and when the excavation was several feet deep, a stone tablet was obtained, on which there was an inscription saying: Mountains have stones, stones have jade, jade has flaws, that is, rest.

古文：工人得之，具以事告白献于璠。
现代文：做工的人得到后，就把石碑献给王璠，并把挖出石碑前后的情形都告诉了他。
English: After the workers got it, they presented the stone tablet to Wang Yao, and told him the situation before and after the stone tablet was dug out.

古文：详其义，久而不能解，即命僚左辨之，皆无能析其理者。
现代文：王璠想要了解文字的含义，但看了很长的时间也解不开。于是就命他的僚属们来解释，可是谁都不能解释出其中的道理。
English: Wang Yao wanted to understand the meaning of the text, but after looking at it for a long time, he couldn't figure it out. So he ordered his colleagues to explain, but no one could explain the reason.

古文：数日，有一吏请谒璠之吏，且密谓曰： 吾闻王公得石铭，今有辨者乎？ 
现代文：数日后，有一位老者来求见王璠下属的一个官吏，并秘密地问他道： 我听说王公得到了石铭，如今有能解释出它的人吗？ 
English: A few days later, an old man came to see an official under Wang Xuan and secretly asked him: I heard that Wang Xuan got the stone inscription, is there anyone who can explain it now?

古文：吏曰： 公方念之，其义为何如。君岂即能究耶！ 
现代文：那官吏说： 王公正在琢磨，那意思是什么，难道你能探究出来吗？ 
English: The official said: Wang Gong is pondering, what does that mean, can you figure it out?

古文：叟曰： 是不祥也。夫 山有石，石有玉，玉有瑕。 即休也。 皆叙王公之世也。
现代文：老者说： 是不祥之兆啊！ 山有石，石有玉，玉有瑕，即休也， 都是叙述王公的家世的。
English: The old man said, "It's an ominous sign! Mountains have stones, stones have jade, jade has flaws, that is to say, it's all a description of Wang Gong's family history.

古文：且公之先曰崟，崟生礎，以文而观， 是山有石 也。
现代文：王公的祖父叫崟，崟生礎，从文字上看，这是 山有石 。
English: Wanggong's grandfather was called Zou, the founder of the foundation. Literally speaking, this is a mountain with stones.

古文：礎生璠。是 石有玉 也。
现代文：礎生璠，这是 石生玉 。
English: The foundation is made of stone, and this is stone jade.

古文：璠之子曰瑕休 。是 玉有瑕即休 。
现代文：璠的儿子叫瑕休，这便是玉有瑕即休。
English: The son of a dragonfly is called a blemish, which is a blemish.

古文：休者绝之兆，推是而辨，其绝绪乎？ 
现代文：而休是绝的征兆。推究一下来辨折，他是要断绝世系了！ 
English: But rest is a sign of death. By inference, he wants to break the lineage!

古文：吏谢之，叟言竟而去。
现代文：官吏道谢了他，那老者说完便走了。
English: The official thanked him, and the old man left.

古文：至大和九年冬，璠卒夷其宗，果符叟之解也。
现代文：到大和九年冬，王璠死而全宗族被斩杀。果然符合老者的解释。
English: In the winter of the ninth year of the Yamato era, Wang Yao died and the entire clan was slaughtered. This was certainly in line with the old man's explanation.

古文：柳光
现代文：柳光
English: Liu Guang

古文：太和中，有柳光者，尝南游。
现代文：太和年间，有个叫柳光的人，曾经南游。
English: During the Taiwa era, there was a man named Liu Guang who once traveled south.

古文：因行山道，会日晚，误入山崦中，松引盘曲。
现代文：因为在山道中前行，天色已晚，误入到山中，松树枝杈屈曲盘旋。
English: Because I was traveling in the middle of the mountain road, it was late in the day, I wandered into the mountains, and the pine branches twisted and circled.

古文：行数里，至一石室，云水环拥，清泉交贯。
现代文：走了几里地后，来到一个石屋内。石屋的周围云水环抱，清清的泉流纵横交错。
English: After walking for several miles, I came to a stone house. Surrounding the stone house were clouds and water, criss-crossed by clear spring streams.

古文：室有茵榻，若人居者。前对霞翠，固非人境。
现代文：屋内有草榻，好象是有人在这里居住，榻前映着灿烂的晚霞和青翠的松柏，好像是仙境一样。
English: There is a grass bed inside the house, as if someone lived here. In front of the bed, the brilliant sunset and the green pine and cypress trees are reflected, as if it were a fairyland.

古文：光因临流凝伫，忽见一缶，合于地。
现代文：柳光于是临溪伫立凝视，忽然看到一个缶，放在地上。
English: Liu Guang then stood staring at Linxi and suddenly saw a can lying on the ground.

古文：光即趋之，其缶下有泉，周不尽尺，其水清激。
现代文：柳光急忙走过去，那缶的下面有泉水，周长不足一尺。泉中的水非常清澈。
English: Liu Guang hurried over. There was spring water underneath the can, with a circumference of less than one foot. The water in the spring was very clear.

古文：举卮以饮，若甘醴，尽十余卮而已醉甚，遂偃于榻，及晓方寤。
现代文：拿起杯子舀泉水喝，泉水好像甘甜的美酒。喝了十多杯后已大醉，于是躺在床榻上睡着了，到第二天天亮的时候才睡醒。
English: He picked up a glass of spring water and drank it. The spring water tasted like sweet wine. After drinking more than ten glasses, he was very drunk, so he fell asleep on the bed and did not wake up until dawn the next day.

古文：因祝石壁，有雕刻文字极多，遂写其字，置於袖。
现代文：醒后四下观望，看到石壁上刻有许多字，柳光就抄录下那些字，放在袖中。
English: After waking up, he looked around and saw that there were many words engraved on the stone wall. Liu Guang copied those words and put them in his sleeve.

古文：词曰： 武之在卯，尧王八季。
现代文：刻字是： 武之在卯，尧王八季。
English: The engraving reads: Takeshi in u, Shiori in hachi.

古文：我弃其寝，我去其扆。
现代文：我弃其寝，我去其扆。
English: I don't go to sleep, I go to sleep.

古文：深深然，高高然，人不吾知，又不吾谓。
现代文：深深然，高高然，人不吾知，又不吾谓。
English: Profound, sublime, beyond human comprehension and beyond description.

古文：由今之后，二百余祀，焰焰其光，和和其始。
现代文：由今之后，二百余祀，焰焰其光，和和其始。
English: From now on, more than 200 temples will shine brightly and harmoniously.

古文：东方有兔，小首元尾，经过吾道，来至吾里。
现代文：东方有兔，小首元尾，经过吾道，来至吾里。
English: There are rabbits in the east, small heads and tails, passing through our road, coming to our village.

古文：饮吾泉以醉，登吾榻而寐。
现代文：饮吾泉以醉，登吾榻而寐。
English: Drink my spring to get drunk, sleep in my bed.

古文：刻乎其壁，奥乎其义，人谁辨，其东平子。 
现代文：刻乎其壁，奥乎其义。人谁辨，其东平子。 
English: Carved into its walls, profound in its meaning. No matter who you are, it's all the same.

古文：光先阅，阅而异之，遂行。
现代文：柳光先是看，越看越觉得有些奇怪，就走了。
English: Liu Guang looked at it at first, and the more he looked at it, the more he thought it was strange, so he left.

古文：出径数十步，回望其室，尽亡见矣。
现代文：走出那条小路。回头再看那个石屋，已经踪影全无。
English: I walked out of the path. When I looked back at the stone house, there was no trace of it.

古文：光究之不得。
现代文：柳光想探究文义，但是没有结果。
English: Liu Guang wanted to investigate the meaning of the sentence, but to no avail.

古文：有吕生者，视而解之，未几告曰： 吾尽详矣，此乃得道者语也。
现代文：有个叫吕生的人，看到柳光带回的文字后，对他说： 我完全明了这里面的意思，这是得道人的话。
English: A man named Lv Sheng, after seeing the writing brought back by Liu Guang, said to him: I fully understand the meaning of this, this is a wise saying.

古文：夫唐氏之初，建号武德。
现代文：那上面写的是：唐氏初年，建号为武德。
English: On it was written: "In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, it was named Wu De."

古文：武之二年，其岁己卯，则武之在卯，其义见矣，盖武德二年也。 尧王 者，谓高祖之号神尧，曰 八季 者，亦二年也。 我弃其寝，我去扆 者，言其去，盖绝去之时，乃武德二年也。 深深然，高高然。
现代文：武德二年那年是己卯年，那么 武之在卯， 这里的含义就清楚了，那就是武德二年。 尧王 说的是高祖的号 神尧 。 八季 指的也是二年。 我弃其寝，我去扆 ，说的是离去，就是离去的时间是武德二年。 深深然，高高然。
English: The year of the second year of Wudhu is the year of Jiwu, so Wu is in Wu, the meaning here is clear, that is, the second year of Wudhu. The king said that it was the name of Gao Zu, Shennun. The eight seasons also refer to two years. I abandoned his bed, I went to the bed, I said that I was leaving, that is, the time of leaving was the second year of Wudhu. Deeply profound, lofty.

古文：人不吾知，人不吾谓 者，言其隐而人不知也。 由今之后，二百余祀 者，言君者来也。
现代文：人不吾知，人不吾谓 ，说的是他隐居而外人不知。 由今之后，二百余祀 这句，说的是您来了。
English: People do not know me, people do not know me, it means that he is secluded and outsiders do not know. From now on, more than two hundred worship this sentence, it means that you have come.

古文：且唐氏之初，今果二百余矣。 焰焰其光，和和其始 者， 焰焰其光 ，谓岁在丁未也，焰者火，岂非南方之丙丁之谓乎？
现代文：那么从唐初到现在果然二百多年了。 焰焰其光，和和共始 之句， 焰焰其光 是说在丁未年， 焰 就是 火 的意思。
English: So it has been more than 200 years since the beginning of the Tang Dynasty.  Flammen Flammen其光,和和共始 Sentence,  Flammen Flammen其光 means in the year of Ting Wei,  Flammen is the meaning of fire.

古文：未亦火之位也； 和和其始 。谓今天子建号曰太和其始。盖元年也。 东方有兔，小首元尾 者，叙君之名氏。
现代文：这难道不是南方的丙丁吗？ 未 也是火之位。 和和其始 是说今天子建年号叫太和是从这开始的，那就是元年。 东方有兔，小道元尾 说的是您的姓名。
English: Isn't this the southern part of Ping Ding? It is also the place of fire. And and its beginning is to say that today's founding year is called Taihe and it started from here, that is, the first year. There is a rabbit in the east, the small road at the end of the road is your name.

古文：是光也。 经吾道，来吾里。 
现代文：东方甲乙是 木 ， 兔 是 卯 ，卯附在木上，就是个 柳 字。
English: Dongfang A and B are wood, hare is rabbit, and rabbit attached to a tree is a willow character.

古文：言君之来也。 饮吾泉以醉，登吾榻而寐。 言君之止也。 刻乎其壁，奥乎其义。 
现代文：小首元尾，是 光 字。 经吾道，来吾里 说的是你来了。 饮吾泉以醉，登吾榻而寐 ，说的是您的逗留驻足。 刻乎其壁，奥乎其义。
English: Small head, large tail, is the light character. Through our way, come to our village, it says that you have come. Drink our spring to get drunk, stay at our place and sleep, it says that you stay. Carved into its wall, mysterious.

古文：谁人以辨，其东平子。 谓其义奥而隐，独吾能辨之。东平吾之邑也，即又信矣。
现代文：谁人来辨，其东平子 ，说的是那当中的意义深奥而又隐晦，唯独我能辨别解释它，东平是我家住的地名，这就又让人相信了吧。
English: No one can tell the difference, but Dongpingzi is said to have a deep and obscure meaning, but I can tell the difference and explain it. Dongping is the name of the place where I live, which makes people believe it.

古文：如是而辨，果得道者之遗记也。 李福
现代文：象这样来释解，才符合得道的人的遗记。 李福
English: An explanation like this is only consistent with the memoirs of a person who attained the Way.

古文：洛京北邙太清观钟楼，唐咸通年中，忽然摧塌。
现代文：洛京北邙山太清观有个钟楼，唐咸通年间，突然倒塌。
English: There is a bell tower in the Taiching outlook of Beilushan, Beijing, which suddenly collapsed during the reign of Tang Xian Tong.

古文：有屋檩一条，其中空虚，每撑动触动转，内敲磕有声。
现代文：有一条屋檩，中间是空的。每当用手拍打、触动或转动，里面就有敲磕的声响传出来。
English: There is an eaves, the middle of which is empty, and every time you clap your hands, touch it or turn it, you can hear the sound of hammering inside.

古文：人遂相传，来竞观之。
现代文：人们相互传说，都竞相来看。
English: People gossip about each other, all competing to see what's going on.

古文：道士李威仪不欲聚人，乃令破之，于其间得一黑漆板，上有陷金之字。
现代文：道士李威仪不愿意让许多人聚拢而来，就让人劈开它。在中间得到一个黑漆板，板上有阴文金字。
English: The Taoist priest Li Wei Yi did not want many people to gather there, so he had someone split it open. In the middle, they found a black lacquer plate with gold characters in yin and yang.

古文：曰： 山水谁无言，元年遇福重修。 
现代文：金字是： 山水谁无言，元年遇福重修。 
English: The golden words are: "Whoever is speechless in the mountains and rivers, will be blessed and restored in the first year of the new year."

古文：道士赍呈洛中诸官，皆不能详文。
现代文：道士把它拿给洛中的各官员看，都不能明了它的意思。
English: When the Taoist priest showed it to various officials in Luochu, none of them could understand its meaning.

古文：李福相公罢镇西川归洛，见此隐文，反复详读数四，遂谓观主曰： 但请度工鸠徒，当以俸余之金，独立完葺也。
现代文：这时，李福相公不镇守西川回归洛阳。看见这个隐文，反复细读多次后，就对观主说： 只管请些木工、瓦工之类的人，我要用我俸禄中的余钱，来独力完成修葺的任务。
English: At this time, Li Fuxiang did not dare to guard the West River and returned to Luoyang. Seeing this hidden text, after repeatedly reading it carefully, he said to the viewer: Just invite some carpenters, bricklayers and the like, I will use the extra money in my salary to complete the repair task on my own.

古文：百年之前，智者勒其志，已冥合今日。
现代文：在百年前，有智慧的人，刻下的志文、现在已经应合在今天。
English: A hundred years ago, a wise man carved a message that is still relevant today.

古文：安得不重兴观宇乎！ 
现代文：怎么能不重新振兴观宇呢？ 
English: How can we fail to revitalize Guanyu?

古文：洎观成，或请其由。
现代文：到观修好，有人问李福为什么要出钱修观。
English: After the viewing, someone asked Li Fu why he wanted to pay for the viewing.

古文：福曰：  山水谁无言 者，今上御名也。 元年遇福 者，改元之初作镇，获俸而回，福其不修，复待何人者哉！ 
现代文：李福说：  山水谁无言 这句说的是现在天子的名字。 元年遇福 ，说的是改元之初作镇，获俸禄而归洛阳。李福我不修这观，还等什么人修呢？ 
English: Li Fu said, "Who is speechless about the landscape? This sentence is about the name of the current heavenly son. "Fluke in the first year of the year" refers to the first town built in the year of the reformation, and he received a salary and returned to Luoyang. Li Fu, if I don't cultivate this view, what kind of person will cultivate it?

古文：熊博
现代文：熊博
English: Xiongbo

古文：熊博者，本建安津吏。
现代文：熊博是管理建安津的官吏。
English: Xiong Bo is a government official in charge of Jian'anjin.

古文：岸崩，得一古冢。
现代文：有一天河岸塌陷，露出一座古墓。
English: One day, the riverbank collapsed, revealing an ancient tomb.

古文：藤蔓缠其棺，旁有石铭云： 欲陷不陷被藤缚，欲落不落被沙阁。
现代文：只见藤蔓缠绕着棺木，旁边有块石头刻铭文说： 欲陷不陷被藤缚，欲落不落被沙阁。
English: I saw vines wrapped around the coffin, and next to it was a stone with an inscription that said: "If you want to fall, don't fall into the vines. If you want to fall, don't fall into the sand."

古文：五百年后遇熊博。 
现代文：五百年后遇熊博。 
English: Five hundred years later, he met Xiong Bo.

古文：博时贫老，僧为率钱葬之。
现代文：熊博当时很贫困。是由僧人集钱替他安葬了古棺。
English: At the time, Kumbo was very poor. Monks collected money to bury him in an old coffin.

古文：博后至建州刺史。
现代文：熊博后来官至建州刺史。
English: Xiong Bo later became the official to establish the history of Jianzhou.

古文：王敬之
现代文：王敬之
English: Wang Jingzhi

古文：故邺都之西北门，曰芳林乡。
现代文：原邺都的西北门外，有个叫芳林乡的地方。
English: Outside the northwest gate of the former capital, there is a place called Fanglin Township.

古文：齐村民王敬之，编户中尤贫者，常以樵苏为业。
现代文：有个平民百姓王敬之，在所有在册的平民中，是最为贫困的。他常常靠打柴割草为业。
English: Wang Jingzhi, a commoner, is the poorest of all the commoners on the register. He often makes a living by chopping wood and cutting grass.

古文：丙午岁秋九月，因掘一株铜雀台下，其地歘然小陷。随而锸之，三尺许，得一苍石，大如盆。
现代文：丙午年九月间，因在铜雀台下挖一棵树，地面突然下陷，于是就往下挖，挖到三尺多深时，发现一块青石，其大小如盆。
English: In September of the year C, because of digging a tree under the Copper Sparrow, the ground suddenly sank, so he dug down, and when he dug more than three feet deep, he found a bluestone, the size of which was like a pot.

古文：遂力索之，石忽破为二。
现代文：于是就用力往出抠，结果石头忽然破裂为两半，简直像裂开的果核一般。
English: So he tried to pry it loose, but the stone suddenly broke in two, just like a cracked nut.

古文：若摧殻然。中有苍石匣，长尺有咫，厚三寸，广四寸。敬之骇，内诸畚中以归。
现代文：里面有一个青石匣，长一尺多，厚三寸，宽四寸。王敬之很惊惧，把匣放到竹筐中拿回去。
English: Inside was a bluestone box, more than a foot long, three inches thick and four inches wide. Wang Jingzhi was very surprised and put the box in a bamboo basket to take it back.

古文：洁之以水，则温润昭烂，真奇宝也。
现代文：用水洗干净后，那石匣光滑璀璨，真是奇世之宝。
English: After being washed clean with water, the stone box is smooth and shiny, truly a wonder of the world.

古文：四旁及背引起龙骧凤翥及花葩之状，雕镂奇诡，殆非人工。
现代文：四面及背上均有盘龙雕凤和花葩图形，雕刻得十分奇特，决非人工所致。
English: On all four sides and on the back there are dragon, phoenix and flower patterns, carved very strangely, by no means artificially caused.

古文：徐启之，中有白玉板，上刻大篆六行。
现代文：慢慢地把它打开，里边有块白玉板，上面用大篆刻了六行字。
English: He slowly opened it. Inside, there was a white jade plate with six lines of characters engraved on it with a large hammer.

古文：文曰： 上土巴灰除虚除，伊尹东北八九余，秦赵多应分五玉，白丝竹木子世世居。
现代文：那铭文写道： 上土巴灰除虚除，伊尹东北八九余，秦赵多应分五玉，白丝竹木子世世居。
English: The inscription reads: Shangtouba ash removal, Yi Yin Northeast more than eighty-nine, Qin Zhao should be divided into five pieces, white silk, bamboo and wood have lived here for generations.

古文：但看六六百中外，世主留难如国如。 
现代文：但看六六百中外，世主留难如国如。 
English: However, looking at the world's six hundred and sixty countries, it is difficult for the world's leader to remain as a country.

古文：于是敬之持以献魏帅乐彦真，彦真赍以束帛，而蠲其地征焉。
现代文：于是王敬之拿着它献给了魏帅乐彦真。乐彦真赏给他帛五匹，并免除了他的租税等。
English: So Wang Jingzhi took it and presented it to the Wei general, Le Yan Zhen. Le Yan Zhen rewarded him with five donkeys and exempted him from taxes.

古文：亦无能洞达其隐词者。
现代文：后来也没有人能洞察通晓那些隐词的。
English: No one has ever been able to decipher the hidden words.

古文：噫，当曹氏石氏高氏之代，斯则邺之王气休运所钟，于是诸贤众矣。
现代文：唉，当年曹氏石氏高氏各个朝代，全都是凭借邺都的王气所钟爱，因此圣贤出的很多。
English: Alas, all the dynasties of the Cao, Shishi and Gao dynasties of that year were all loved by virtue of the kingliness of the capital, so there were many sages.

古文：焉知不有阴睹后代，总括风云，幅裂山河之事，而瘗玉以谶之。
现代文：谁知道它不荫庇后代呢？总括风云变幻、江山易代之事，都可以用埋在地的玉石来预言。
English: Who knows if it will not overshadow future generations? All the vicissitudes and vicissitudes of history can be prophesied by the cobbles buried in the ground.

古文：今石既出，其事将兆矣。
现代文：如今石头已出，那些事将要得到应验了。
English: Now that the stone has been rolled away, those things will be fulfilled.

古文：王承检
现代文：王承检
English: Wang Chengguan

古文：王蜀秦州节度使王承检，筑防蕃城。
现代文：王氏前蜀秦州节度使王承检，筑防蕃的城池。
English: Wang's former Shu Qin State festival made Wang undertake inspection and build a fortified castle.

古文：至上邽山下，获瓦棺，内无尸，唯有一片舌，肉色红润，坚如铁石。
现代文：修筑到邽山下时，挖到一口瓦棺。棺内没有尸首，只有一片舌头。舌头的肉色红润，坚硬如铁石。
English: When they reached the foot of Lushan Mountain, they dug up a clay coffin. There was no corpse in the coffin, only a piece of tongue. The flesh of the tongue was red and hard as iron.

古文：其舌上只有一髑髅，中有一古钱，有二蝇，振然飞去。片石刻篆字曰： 大隋开皇二年，渭州刺史游崇妻夫人王氏，年二十五，嫁于崇，三年而娠。恶其妊娠，遂卒。
现代文：有二只苍蝇，从里面振翅飞走。有片石上刻着篆字说： 大隋开皇二年，渭州刺史张崇妻夫人王氏，年二十五岁时，嫁于张崇。三年后而怀孕，因妊娠恶阻，不久就死了。
English: There are two flies flying away from inside. There is a stone with an inscription saying: In the second year of the Sui Dynasty, the wife of Zhang Chong, Wang Shi, married Zhang Chong when she was 25 years old. She became pregnant three years later and died soon after due to complications of pregnancy.

古文：铭曰： 车道之北，邽山之阳，深深葬玉，郁郁埋香。
现代文：铭文说： 车道之北，邽山之阳，深深葬玉，郁郁埋香。
English: The inscription says: The north of the driveway, the sun of Lushan Mountain, deeply buried jade, richly buried incense.

古文：刻斯贞石，焕乎遗芳。
现代文：刻斯贞石，焕乎遗芳。
English: Kes Zhengshi, radiant with the memory of the deceased.

古文：地变陵谷，崄列城隍。
现代文：地变陵岩，崄列城隍。
English: Cataclysmic rock formations, a line of battlements.

古文：乾德丙年，坏者合郎。 
现代文：乾德丙年，坏者合郎。 
English: In the year of Qian Dezhi, the bad guy became the good guy.

古文：是岁伪乾德六年，丙子岁也。
现代文：这年正好是前蜀后主乾德六年，丙子年。
English: This year is exactly the sixth year of the former Shu Emperor Qian De, the year of the son of Cun.

古文：言 坏者合郎 ，即王承检小字也。
现代文：铭文中说的坏基人的 合郎 ，就是王承检的小名。
English: The epitaph says that he was the brother-in-law of the bad founder, which was Wang Chengguan's nickname.

