古文：窦固出击匈奴，以班超为假司马，将兵别击伊吾，战于蒲类海，多斩首虏而还。
现代文：原文东汉窦固远征匈奴时，曾命班超为代理司马，同时另率一支部队攻打伊吾国，与匈奴军大战于蒲类海，战绩辉煌。
English: When the Eastern Han Dynasty's Dou Gu led an expedition against the Xiongnu, he ordered Ban Chao to act as acting Sima, and at the same time led another army to attack Igu Province, and fought a great battle with the Xiongnu army in the Putuo Sea, achieving brilliant results.

古文：固以为能，遣与从事郭恂俱使西域。
现代文：当时窦固很赏识班超的才干，就派他与郭恂出使西域。
English: At that time, Dou Gu was very appreciative of Ban Chao's talent, and sent him and Guo Yao to the western region.

古文：超到鄯善，鄯善王广奉超，礼敬甚备，后忽更疏懈。
现代文：当班超初到鄯善时，鄯善王广很热情地欢迎他，礼数很周到，但是不多久态度突然变得很冷淡。
English: When the first-year students arrived at Shanshan, Shanshan Wang Guang welcomed him very warmly, and the etiquette was very thoughtful, but soon the attitude suddenly became very cold.

古文：超谓其官属曰： 宁觉广礼意薄乎？
现代文：班超就对部下说： 你们不觉得鄯善王广对我们变得很冷谈了吗？
English: The head of the class said to his subordinates: Don't you think that Gong Shan Wang Guang has become very cold to us?

古文：此必有北虏使来，狐疑未知所从故也。
现代文：一定是因为有匈奴使者来到的缘故，使得鄯善王打不定主意要依附哪一方。
English: It must have been due to the arrival of the Huns' envoy that made the benevolent king undecided as to which side to side with.

古文：明者睹未萌，况已著耶？ 乃召侍胡，诈之曰： 匈奴使来数日，今安在？ 
现代文：一个善于观察事物的人，在事故未发生前就能感觉到；如今事态如此明显，我岂有看不出来的道理？ 于是，班超招来鄯善的侍卫官，若无其事地问： 匈奴使者已经来好几天了，不知道他们现在在何处？ 
English: An observant person would have been able to sense the accident before it happened; now that the situation is so obvious, is there any reason why I can't see it? So, the superintendent summoned the courteous bodyguard and asked innocently: The Hun envoys have been here for several days, and I don't know where they are now?

古文：侍胡惶恐，具服其状。
现代文：侍卫官听了吓一跳，只好一一据实回答。
English: The bodyguard was startled and had to answer truthfully.

古文：超乃闭侍胡，悉会其吏士三十六人，与共饮，酒酣，因激怒之曰： 卿曹与我俱在西域，欲立大功以求富贵，今虏使到数日，而王广礼敬即废，如令鄯善收吾属送匈奴，骸骨长为豺狼食矣，为之奈何？ 
现代文：班超支开侍卫官后，立即召集所有部属共三十六人一起商议，他们一边饮酒一边交换意见，当大家半醉时，班超突然慷慨激昂地说： 诸位跟我一同来到西域，目的是为朝廷建立功业并求个人富贵。现在匈奴使者才到几天，鄯善王广对我们的态度就如此冷淡，如果鄯善王把我们逮捕后交给匈奴，那我们的骨骸岂不是将变成豺狼的食物吗？诸位对这事有何高见？ 
English: After Banchao dispatched his bodyguards, he immediately called together all thirty-six subordinates to discuss. They exchanged opinions while drinking. When everyone was half-drunk, Banchao suddenly said impassionedly: "You have come to the Western Regions with me, with the aim of establishing a career for the court and seeking personal wealth. Now the Hun envoy has only been here for a few days, and the Hun King's attitude towards us is so cold. If the Hun King arrests us and hands us over to the Hun, won't our bones become food for the jackals? What is your high opinion of this matter?

古文：官属皆曰： 今危亡之地，死生从司马。 
现代文：随员一听，立即一致表示： 如今我们身陷险地，是生是死全听从司马的指挥。 
English: On hearing this, the attendants immediately said in unison, "Now we are in a dangerous situation. Whether we live or die, we must all follow Sima's command."

古文：超曰： 不入虎穴，焉得虎子!
现代文：这时班超起身说： 常言道： 不入虎穴，焉得虎子! 
English: At this time, the class superintendent stood up and said: As the saying goes: If you don't go into the tiger's den, you won't get the tiger cub!

古文：当今之计，独有因夜以火攻虏，使彼不知我多少，必大震怖，可殄尽也!
现代文：为今之计，只有在半夜用火攻匈奴使者，让他们摸不清我们有多少人，再趁他们心生恐惧时一举将其歼灭。
English: For now, we can only attack the Hun envoys with fire in the middle of the night, so that they can't figure out how many of us there are, and then take advantage of their fear to annihilate them in one fell swoop.

古文：灭此虏，则鄯善破胆，功成事立矣! 
现代文：只要除去匈奴使者，鄯善王就会被吓住，那么其他的事就容易办了。 
English: As long as the messenger of the Xiongnu is eliminated, the benevolent king will be intimidated, and then other things will be easy to do.

古文：众不应有宜曰： 当与从事议之。 
现代文：然而却有随员表示要跟郭恂商量再做决定。班超听了，很生气地说： 成败的命运就在今晚决定。
English: However, a member of the entourage said that they wanted to discuss with Guo Yao before making a decision. Banchao listened and said angrily: The fate of success or failure will be decided tonight.

古文：超怒曰： 吉凶决于今日，从事文俗吏，闻此必恐而谋泄，死无所名，非壮士也。 众曰： 善。 
现代文：郭恂是文官，万一他听了计划后由于害怕而泄露机密，反而坏了大事。人死不留名，就不算英雄好汉! 众人说： 好! 
English: Guo Wei is a civil servant. If he were to divulge a secret out of fear after hearing the plan, he would ruin a great event. If you die without leaving a name, you are not a hero! Everyone said, "Good!"

古文：初夜，遂将吏士往奔虏营。
现代文：于是，班超在午夜时分，率所有随从一起杀进匈奴使者的营地。
English: As a result, at midnight, Banchao led all his followers into the camp of the Hun envoy.

古文：会天大风，超令十人持鼓，藏虏舍后，约曰： 见火然后鸣鼓大呼。 
现代文：正巧这时刮起大风，班超派十余人手持战鼓躲在营地后面，约定说： 见到火光就击鼓高声叫喊。 
English: It just so happened that a strong wind was blowing at that time. The superintendent sent more than ten people to hide behind the camp with war drums in their hands. They agreed to say: "If we see fire, we will beat the drums and shout loudly."

古文：余人悉持弩，夹门而伏。
现代文：其余人则各拿弓箭，埋伏在营地大门两侧。
English: The rest, each with a bow and arrow, lay in ambush on either side of the camp gate.

古文：超乃顺风纵火，前后鼓噪。
现代文：部署完毕，班超乘着风势放火，指挥鼓兵击鼓。
English: After the deployment was completed, the squad leader took advantage of the wind to set fire to the grove and directed the drummers to beat the drums.

古文：虏众惊乱，超手格杀三人，吏兵斩其使及从士三十余级，余众百许人，悉烧死。
现代文：匈奴使者听到鼓声，再看到熊熊火光，都惊慌失措，纷纷夺门外逃，班超亲手杀死三人，其他随员射杀三十余人，其余一百多人则全被大火烧死。
English: The Hun emissaries panicked when they heard the sound of the drums and saw the blazing flames, and they all ran out of the door. Ban Chao killed three people with his own hands, the other attendants shot more than thirty people, and the remaining more than one hundred people were all burned to death.

古文：明日乃还告郭恂，恂大惊，既而色动，超知其意，举手曰： 掾虽不行，班超何心独擅之乎？ 
现代文：天亮后，班超把夜袭匈奴营地的事告诉郭恂，起先郭恂大为惊讶，继而有些失望，班超看出了郭恂的心意，便举起手说： 你虽没有参加昨夜的战役，但我班超又岂会独居其功呢？ 
English: After dawn, the squad leader told Guo Yu about the night attack on the Hun camp. At first, Guo Yu was very surprised, and then a little disappointed. The squad leader saw Guo Yu's intention, and raised his hand and said: Although you did not participate in last night's battle, will my squad leader get all the credit?

古文：恂乃悦，超于是召鄯善王广，以虏使首示之。
现代文：郭恂听了，顿时面露喜色。于是班超又求见鄯善王广，并把匈奴使者的头颅拿给他看。
English: Hearing this, Guo Jie suddenly showed a happy expression on his face. Therefore, Ban Chao also asked to see Gong Shan Wang Guang and showed him the head of the Xiongnu envoy.

古文：一国震怖，超晓告抚慰，遂纳子为质，还奏于窦固。
现代文：消息传出后，鄯善国举国为之震惊，这时班超极力安抚鄯善王，终于说动他以王子为质与中国修好，于是班超凯旋而回向窦固报告。
English: After the news came out, the whole country was shocked. At this time, Ban Chao tried his best to appease King Gong Son, and finally persuaded him to make peace with China as a prince, so Ban Chao returned triumphantly to report to Dou Gu.

古文：固大喜，具上超功效，并求更选使使西域。
现代文：窦固非常高兴，详奏班超的功绩，并恳请朝廷另派使者前往西域。
English: Dou Gu was very pleased, recounted the exploits of Banchao in detail, and implored the court to send another envoy to the western region.

古文：帝壮超节，诏固曰： 吏如班超，何故不遣而更选乎？今以超为军司马，令遂前功。 
现代文：明帝对班超的胆识极表嘉许，于是诏令窦固： 像班超这样的人才，理应任命其为正式的出使西域使者，为什么还要奏请朝廷另派他人呢？现在就任命班超为行军司马，让他接着立功。 
English: Emperor Ming highly appreciated Ban Chao's courage, and issued a decree to Dou Gu: A talented person like Ban Chao should have been appointed as the official envoy to the Western Regions, so why did you ask the court to send someone else? Now appoint Ban Chao as the marshal, and let him continue to make contributions.

古文：超复受使，因欲益其兵，超曰： 愿将本所从三十余人足矣。如有不虞，多益为累。 
现代文：因此班超再次出任出使西域使者。窦固本想增强班超手下的兵力，班超却说： 我只要带领以前的三十多人就足够了，因为万一发生什么事情，人多反而会带来麻烦。 
English: As a result, Banchao was once again sent as an envoy to the Western Regions. Dou Gu originally wanted to strengthen the troops under Banchao, but Banchao said: I only need to lead the previous thirty people, because if something happens, more people will bring trouble.

古文：是时于阗王广德新攻破莎车，遂雄张南道，而匈奴遣使监护其国。
现代文：当时于阗王广德刚刚攻占莎车国，在西域南道称雄，而匈奴却派使者来，准备保护莎车。
English: At that time, King Guangde of Yunnan had just conquered Yarkand and was victorious in the south of the Western Regions, but the Xiongnu sent an envoy to protect Yarkand.

古文：超既西，先至于阗，广德礼意甚疏，且其俗信巫，巫言神怒： 何故欲向汉？
现代文：班超到达西域后，首先来到于阗。
English: After the superintendent arrived in the western region, he first came to Yucheng.

古文：汉使有马呙马，急求取以祠我。 
现代文：不料于阗王广德对他们态度很是冷淡。于阗风俗笃信巫术，有位巫师说： 天神正在发怒，为什么我们要听命汉使？
English: Unexpectedly, King Guangde of Qin had a very cold attitude towards them. Since Qin customs strongly believed in witchcraft, a sorcerer said: The angels are angry, why should we obey the orders of the Han envoys?

古文：广德乃遣使就超请马，超密知其状，报许之，而令巫自来取马。
现代文：汉使有匹乌嘴马，你们赶紧要汉使把马献出来祭神。 于阗王广德立刻派人向班超要马，班超早已明白对方意图，就答应了他，并让巫师亲自来取马。
English: The envoys of the Han Dynasty had a horse with a horse's mouth, and you urgently asked the envoys of the Han Dynasty to offer the horse as a sacrifice to the gods. King Guande immediately sent someone to ask Ban Chao for a horse. Ban Chao had already understood the other side's intention, so he agreed, and asked the sorcerer to come and fetch the horse in person.

古文：有顷，巫至，超即斩其首以送广德。因辞让之。
现代文：不多时，巫师果然亲自过来，班超却命人将巫师的头砍下送回给于阗王广德，并严辞责备他。
English: Not infrequently, the sorcerer did indeed come in person, but Ban Chao ordered someone to cut off the sorcerer's head and send it back to King Guande, and severely reprimanded him.

古文：广德素闻超在鄯善诛灭虏使，大惶恐，即攻杀匈奴使而降超。
现代文：于阗王早就听说班超在鄯善国杀死匈奴使者的事，如今又亲眼目睹其胆识，内心非常害怕，就主动派兵围杀匈奴使者，并向班超请降。
English: The king of Yunnan had long heard that Ban Chao had killed the Hun envoy in Yunnan, but now that he had witnessed his audacity, he was very afraid. He took the initiative to send troops to surround and kill the Hun envoy, and asked Ban Chao to surrender.

古文：超重赐其王以下，因镇抚焉。
现代文：班超为了安抚于阗君臣，赏赐他们许多礼物。
English: In order to appease Yu Jun's vassals, Ban Chao rewarded them with many gifts.

古文：必如班定远，方是满腹皆兵，浑身是胆。
现代文：一位像班超这样的大将，才称得上是真正的胸有成竹，浑身是胆。
English: Only a great general like Banchao can be said to have a true heart and guts.

古文：赵子龙、姜伯约不足道也。
现代文：至于三国时代的赵云、姜维这类人物比起班超来实在是差远了。
English: As for Zhao Yun and Jiang Wei in the Three Kingdoms era, they are far from being superlative.

古文：辽东管家庄，长男子不在舍，建州虏至，驱其妻子去。
现代文：辽东管家庄的庄主，一次外出时，建州贼趁机袭击并且掳走了他的妻子。
English: The owner of the Butler's Manor in Liaodong Province, Jiangzhou thief took the opportunity to attack and kidnap his wife when he was out.

古文：三数日，壮者归，室皆空矣，无以为生。
现代文：三四天后庄主回家一看，家中不但财物被洗劫一空，连妻子也没了。
English: Three or four days later, the landlord came home to find that not only had his belongings been ransacked, but his wife was also gone.

古文：欲佣工于人，弗售。
现代文：为了生活不得已便想到外乡替人帮佣，却没有人雇他。
English: In order to make ends meet, he thought of finding a foreign maid, but no one would hire him.

古文：乃谋入虏地伺之，见其妻出汲，密约夜以薪积舍户外焚之，并积薪以焚其屋角。火发，贼惊觉。
现代文：于是他便悄悄来到贼人的营地外等待机会，正巧碰上到井边汲水的妻子，两人约定在屋外堆积柴薪，半夜他在屋外放火，妻子则趁乱逃跑。
English: So he crept outside the thief's camp to wait for an opportunity. He just happened to meet his wife, who was drawing water from the well. The two agreed to pile up firewood outside. In the middle of the night, he set a fire outside, and his wife took advantage of the chaos to escape.

古文：裸体起出户，壮者射之，贼皆死。挈其妻子，取贼所有归。
现代文：到了半夜他点火烧屋，火势很快就蔓延开来，贼人惊慌失措，有些贼人甚至裸着身子逃命，这时他就堵在营门口将贼人一一射杀。直到贼人全部死光，他才带领妻子及贼人所虏获的财物一起回家。
English: In the middle of the night he set fire to the house, the fire quickly spread, the thieves panicked, some thieves even fled naked, at this time he blocked the gate of the camp and shot the thieves one by one. Until the thieves were all dead, he led his wife and the property captured by the thieves home together.

古文：是后他贼惮之，不敢过其庄云。
现代文：消息传出后，其他贼人闻之丧胆，再也不敢打劫管家庄。
English: After the news came out, other thieves were so discouraged that they no longer dared to rob the housekeeper's village.

古文：此壮者胆勇，一时何减班定远，使室家无恙；或佣工而售，亦且安然不图矣。
现代文：这位庄主的胆识与机智，和班超相比可说是毫不逊色。假使这位庄主家园未遭洗劫，或者为别人打工而有人雇了他，他就会因环境安逸而不想另有作为。
English: The daring and wit of this landlord is no less than that of Banchao. If the landlord's home is not ransacked, or if someone hires him to work for someone else, he will not want to do anything else because of the comfortable environment.

古文：人急计生，信夫!
现代文：看了管庄主的故事，我不能不相信人在危难中就会生出急智。
English: After reading the story of Mr. Guan, I can't help but believe that people can be quick-witted in a crisis.

