古文：孝武皇帝者，孝景中子也。母曰王太后。
现代文：孝武皇帝是孝景帝的中子，他的母亲是王太后。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was the son of Emperor Xiaojing, and his mother was the Empress Dowager.

古文：孝景四年，以皇子为胶东王。
现代文：孝景四年，武帝以皇子得身份受封为胶东王。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaoqing, Emperor Wu was crowned as the King of Jiaodong with the status of a prince.

古文：孝景七年，栗太子废为临江王，以胶东王为太子。
现代文：孝景七年，栗太子被废为临江王，胶东王被立为太子。
English: In the seventh year of Xiao Jing, Prince Chestnut was abolished as the King of Linjiang, and King Jiaodong was established as the Prince.

古文：孝景十六年崩，太子即位，为孝武皇帝。
现代文：孝景帝在位十六年崩逝，太子即位，就是孝武帝。
English: Emperor Xiaojing died 16 years into his reign, and the crown prince ascended to the throne. This was Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：孝武皇帝初即位，尤敬鬼神之祀。
现代文：孝武帝即位之初，尤其注重对鬼神的祭祀。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, special emphasis was placed on the worship of ghosts and gods.

古文：元年，汉兴已六十余岁矣，天下乂安，荐绅之属皆望天子封禅改正度也。
现代文：建元元年，汉朝已经建立六十余年，天下太平无事，官员们都希望天子举行封禅大典并改定新的岁首和服色制度。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Han Dynasty had been established for more than sixty years, and the world was peaceful. The officials all hoped that the emperor would hold a grand ceremony for the enthronement of the emperor and revise the new system of the year's beginning and the color of clothing.

古文：而上乡儒术，招贤良。赵绾、王臧等以文学为公卿，欲议古立明堂城南，以朝诸侯。草巡狩封禅改历服色事未就。
现代文：而皇上也十分崇信儒家的学术，招纳有才学的人，赵绾、王臧等人就以有学问而被封为公卿，他们想效法古代建议天子在城南建立宣明政教的明堂，并作为诸侯朝见天子的地方，他们草拟的巡狩、封禅、改革历法服色的计划还没完成。
English: However, the emperor also highly revered Confucian scholarship and recruited talented people. Zhao Zi, Wang Zi and others were appointed as court nobles because they were learned. They wanted to follow the ancient advice to Tianzi to establish the Ming Hall of Xuanming Political Education in the south of the city, and as a place for the princes to see Tianzi, the plans they had drawn up for hunting, sealing Zen, and reforming the calendar and law were not yet complete.

古文：会窦太后治黄老言，不好儒术，使人微得赵绾等奸利事，召案绾、臧，绾、臧自杀，诸所兴为者皆废。
现代文：遇上窦太后喜好黄帝及老子的学说，不喜欢儒家的学术，派人暗中伺察得赵绾等人的非法谋利的事迹，召赵绾、王臧来追究案情，赵绾、王臧自杀，他们提议的兴办的许多举措都被废除。
English: The Dowager Dowager Dou liked the teachings of the Yellow Emperor and Laozi, but disliked the Confucianism. She sent people to secretly investigate the illegal profit-making activities of Zhao Wei and others, summoned Zhao Wei and Wang Wei to investigate the case, and Zhao Wei and Wang Wei committed suicide. Many of the measures they proposed to initiate were abolished.

古文：后六年，窦太后崩。
现代文：六年后，窦太后去世。
English: Six years later, Empress Dowager Dou passed away.

古文：其明年，上征文学之士公孙弘等。
现代文：第二年，皇帝征召了学识渊博之士公孙弘等人。
English: The following year, the emperor conscripted the learned scholar Gongsun Hong and others.

古文：明年，上初至雍，郊见五畤。
现代文：第二年，皇上初次来到雍县，在五畤进行了郊祭。
English: In the second year, the emperor came to Yong County for the first time and held a suburb festival in Wuyi.

古文：后常三岁一郊。
现代文：以后经常隔三年举行一次郊祭。
English: Since then, a suburb festival has been held every three years.

古文：是时上求神君，舍之上林中蹄氏观。
现代文：当时皇上请到一个神君，将她供奉在上林苑中的蹄氏观。
English: At that time, the emperor invited a god to offer her to the Hoofed Ujikan in the Upper Forest Garden.

古文：神君者，长陵女子，以子死悲哀，故见神于先后宛若。
现代文：这个神君其实是长陵的一个女子，因儿子死了悲哀而死，死后显现神灵于她的妯娌宛若身上。
English: This deity is actually a woman from Nagamine, who died of grief because her son died. After her death, the deity appeared on her body like a cocoon.

古文：宛若祠之其室，民多往祠。
现代文：宛若就在自己的家里供奉她，后来很多人去祭祀。
English: If he offered it at home, more people would come to his house to offer sacrifices.

古文：平原君往祠，其后子孙以尊显。
现代文：皇帝的外祖母平原君也去祭祀国，此后她的子孙因此作了显赫的大官。
English: The emperor's maternal grandmother, Heibara no kimi, also went to offer sacrifices to the state, and her descendants later became prominent officials as a result.

古文：及武帝即位，则厚礼置祠之内中，闻其言，不见其人云。
现代文：武帝即位后，就用厚礼将她延请至宫中立祠供奉。可是只听到她说话的声音，却看不到她的人。
English: After Emperor Wu ascended the throne, he invited her to the Palace Neutrality Shrine with great ceremony. However, people only heard her voice, but could not see her.

古文：是时而李少君亦以祠灶、谷道、却老方见上，上尊之。
现代文：当时李少君因懂得祠灶致福，辟谷不火食，导引神气和长生不老之术谒见皇上，皇上非常尊敬他。
English: At that time, Li Shaojun met the emperor because he knew how to bless the ancestral hearth, how to prevent the valley from being consumed by fire, and how to guide the spirit and the art of immortality. The emperor respected him very much.

古文：少君者，故深泽侯入以主方。
现代文：李少君是已故深泽侯推荐来管理方术之事的。
English: Li Shaojun was recommended by the late Fukasawa Maro to manage Fangzhu.

古文：匿其年及所生长，常自谓七十，能使物，却老。
现代文：他隐瞒自己真实的年龄和出生的地方，常说自己年纪七十，能驱使鬼物，使人长生不老。
English: He hides his real age and place of birth, often saying that he is seventy years old, can drive away ghosts, and make people live forever.

古文：其游以方遍诸侯。
现代文：他到各处游历，靠着方术广交诸侯。
English: He used his magic to make enemies everywhere.

古文：无妻子。
现代文：他没有妻儿。
English: No wife, no children.

古文：人闻其能使物及不死，更馈遗之，常余金钱帛衣食。
现代文：人们听说他能驱使鬼物，还能使人长生不老，争相赠送物品给他，因此他有很多的金钱、丝织品、衣服和食物。
English: People heard that he could drive away evil spirits and that he could make people live forever, and they rushed to give him gifts, so he had a lot of money, silk, clothes, and food.

古文：人皆以为不治产业而饶给，又不知其何所人，愈信，争事之。
现代文：人人都以为他不治理产业而富裕，又不知他是什么地方人，就更加相信他，争相侍奉他。
English: Everyone thinks that he is rich because he does not manage the industry, but they do not know what kind of local people he is, so they believe in him more and compete to serve him.

古文：少君资好方，善为巧发奇中。
现代文：李少君凭借着善于方术，擅于巧妙地猜度隐盖的事物，说中人的一些隐私。
English: Shao Jun was born with a talent for magic and was good at performing feats of skill.

古文：尝从武安侯饮，坐中有年九十余老人，少君乃言与其大父游射处，老人为儿时从其大父行，识其处，一坐尽惊。
现代文：他曾随和武安侯田蚡宴饮。同座中有一位九十多岁的老人，李少君于是说自己和老人的祖父游览射箭的地方，老人在小时候曾跟在祖父身边，认得那个地方，这使满座宾客都很惊讶。
English: He had been drinking at a banquet with Wu'an Houtian. There was a ninety-plus-year-old man at the table. Li Shaojun then said that he and the old man's grandfather visited an archery place. The old man had been with his grandfather when he was a child and recognized the place, which surprised all the guests.

古文：少君见上，上有故铜器，问少君。
现代文：有一次，李少君见到皇上，皇帝藏有一件旧铜器，问少君。
English: Once, when Li Shaojun met the emperor, the emperor had a piece of old copperware in his possession, Li Shaojun asked.

古文：少君曰： 此器齐桓公十年陈于柏寝。 
现代文：少君说： 这件铜器曾经在齐桓公十年时陈列在柏寝台。 
English: Shogun said: This bronze ware was once displayed on the cypress bed at the age of ten.

古文：已而案其刻，果齐桓公器。
现代文：随即察看铜器上所刻的字，果然是齐桓公时代的器物。
English: He immediately inspected the words engraved on the bronze ware, and it was indeed a ware from the era of King Qi Kuan.

古文：一宫尽骇，以少君为神，数百岁人也。
现代文：整个宫中的人都非常惊讶，以为少君是神，是有几百岁的人。
English: The people in the entire palace were very surprised, thinking that the young prince was a god and that he was several hundred years old.

古文：少君言于上曰： 祠灶则致物，致物而丹沙可化为黄金，黄金成以为饮食器则益寿，益寿而海中蓬莱仙者可见，见之以封禅则不死，黄帝是也。
现代文：少君对皇上说： 祀灶就可以招来神灵，就能使丹砂变成黄金，黄金炼成后，用来制造饮食器具，使用这种器具既可以延年益寿，长寿了就可以见到海中蓬莱山上的仙人，见到仙人后举行封禅大典，就能长生不老，黄帝就是这样的。
English: The young prince said to the emperor, "Worshipping the hearth can attract the gods, can turn the sand into gold, and after the gold is refined, it can be used to make eating utensils. The use of such utensils can prolong life, and if you live a long life, you can see the immortals on the Penglai Mountain in the middle of the sea. If you see the immortals, you can hold a grand Zen ceremony, and you can live forever. This is what the Yellow Emperor is like.

古文：臣尝游海上，见安期生，食臣枣，大如瓜。
现代文：我曾游历海上，见到安期生，他拿了枣子给我吃，像瓜那样大。
English: I once travelled by sea and saw An Ji Sheng. He brought me a jujube, as big as a melon, to eat.

古文：安期生仙者，通蓬莱中，合则见人，不合则隐。 
现代文：安期生是仙人，能来往蓬莱山中，他只见跟他的道术相合的人，不合的人就隐匿不见。 
English: Immortals are born in an auspicious time, and they go back and forth in the Penglai Mountains. When they meet, they see each other, but when they don't, they don't.

古文：于是天子始亲祠灶，而遣方士入海求蓬莱安期生之属，而事化丹沙诸药齐为黄金矣。
现代文：于是天子亲自祭祀灶神，并派遣方士到东海访求蓬莱山及安期生那样的仙人，并做化丹砂等药剂为黄金的事。
English: As a result, the heavenly son himself offered sacrifices to the god of the hearth, and sent magicians to the East Sea to visit the immortals such as Penglai Mountain and Anji Sheng, and to make gold from chemicals such as red sand.

古文：居久之，李少君病死。
现代文：过了很久，李少君患病死去。
English: After a long time, Li Shaojun died of illness.

古文：天子以为化去不死也，而使黄锤史宽舒受其方。求蓬莱安期生莫能得，而海上燕齐怪迂之方士多相效，更言神事矣。
现代文：天子以为他是变化飞升而不是死去，便叫东莱郡属吏宽舒继承学习少君的方术，寻求蓬莱山及安期生，未能觅得，而沿海一带燕国和齐国怪诞迂阔的方士们争相效仿，相继地上书谈论神仙的事。
English: The heavenly son thought that he was changing and soaring rather than dying, so he asked the Donglai County official, Quan Shu, to inherit the young prince's method of learning, to seek Penglai Mountain and a safe life, but he could not find it. Meanwhile, the eccentric and eccentric magicians in the coastal areas of Yan and Qi countries tried to follow suit, and successively wrote about the immortal.

古文：亳人薄诱忌奏祠泰一方，曰： 天神贵者泰一，泰一佐曰五帝。
现代文：毫县人薄诱忌上奏祭祀泰一神的方法，说： 天神中最尊贵的就是泰一神，泰一的辅佐神是五帝。
English: The people of Miao County, who are not familiar with the method of offering sacrifices to Taiyi God, said: The most precious of the gods is Taiyi God, and Taiyi's auxiliary gods are the Five Gods.

古文：古者天子以春秋祭泰一东南郊，用太牢具，七日，为坛开八通之鬼道。 
现代文：古时天子春、秋二季在东南郊祭泰一神，用牛、羊、猪三牲全备的太牢祭祀七天，并在祭坛的八方设置代鬼神行走的信道。 
English: In ancient times, the god Taizong was worshipped in the southeastern suburbs in the spring and autumn, with a seven-day sacrifice using cattle, sheep, and pigs, and a channel was set up in each of the eight directions of the altar for ghosts to walk through.

古文：于是天子令太祝立其祠长安东南郊，常奉祠如忌方。
现代文：于是天子令太祝在长安东南郊建立他说的这种祠坛，常常依照薄诱忌的方法祭祀。
English: As a result, Taizong ordered Taizhou to build this kind of shrine in the southeastern suburbs of Chang'an, and it was often used to offer sacrifices according to the method of Bo Yui.

古文：其后人有上书，言 古者天子三年一用太牢具祠神三一：天一，地一，泰一 。
现代文：后来有人上书，说 古时天子每三年用太牢祭三一之神：天一神、地一神、泰一神 。
English: Later, someone wrote a letter saying that in ancient times, the Son of Heaven used to hold a temple festival every three years for the trinity of gods: one god for heaven, one god for earth, and one god for Thailand.

古文：天子许之，令太祝领祠之忌泰一坛上，如其方。
现代文：天子允许了，命太祝依照这种方法领祀于谬忌奏建的泰一坛上。
English: The Son of Heaven allowed it, and I wish my life to be enshrined in accordance with this method on the Thai altar built by Mu Yixiao.

古文：后人复有上书，言 古者天子常以春秋解祠，祠黄帝用一枭破镜；冥羊用羊；祠马行用一青牡ǔ马；泰一、皋山山君、地长用牛；武夷君用干鱼；阴阳使者以一牛 。
现代文：后来又有人上书，说 古时天子常在春、秋二季举行除灾求福的祭祀，祭祀黄帝用一枭及一破镜；祭冥羊神用羊；祭马行神用一青牡马：祭泰一、皋山山君及地长神用牛；祭武夷君用于鱼；祭阴阳使者用一牛 。
English: Later, someone else wrote, saying that in ancient times, the Son of Heaven often held sacrificial rites in the spring and autumn to eliminate disasters and seek blessings. The sacrificial rites for the Yellow Emperor used a scepter and a broken mirror; the sacrificial lamb for the god of the dead was a sheep; the sacrificial horse for the god of the dead was a blue stallion; the sacrificial animals for the god of the dead were a cow; the sacrificial animal for the god of the dead was a fish; the sacrificial animal for the god of the dead was a cow; and the sacrificial animal for the god of the dead was a messenger of yin and yang.

古文：令祠官领之如其方，而祠于忌泰一坛旁。
现代文：天子命令祠官依照这个方法领祭，在谬忌奏建的泰一坛旁边祭祀。
English: The Son of Heaven ordered the priest of the ancestral shrine to receive the offering in accordance with this method, and to offer the sacrifice next to the Taiyi altar built by Murei So.

古文：其后，天子苑有白鹿，以其皮为币，以发瑞应，造白金焉。
现代文：后来，天子的宫苑中养有白鹿，有人说以其皮制作皮币，可以引发祥瑞感应，就又铸造白金币。
English: Later, a white deer was raised in the palace of the son of heaven, and some people said that using its skin to make leather coins could trigger auspiciousness, so platinum coins were minted.

古文：其明年，郊雍，获一角兽，若麃然。有司曰： 陛下肃祗郊祀，上帝报享，锡一角兽，盖麟云。 
现代文：到了第二年，天子在雍县举行郊祭，捕获了一头独角兽，像麃的样子，主管官员说： 陛下恭敬地举行郊祀，上天回报您的供奉，就赐与一独角兽给您，这应该就是麒麟！ 
English: In the second year, Tianzi held a suburb festival in Yong County and captured a unicorn, resembling a dragonfly. The responsible official said: "Your Majesty, you respectfully held a suburb festival. In return for your offering, Heaven has given you a unicorn. This must be the unicorn!

古文：于是以荐五畤，畤加一牛以燎。
现代文：于是把它进献五畤，每畤添加了一头牛，予以焚烧，以报答天赐。
English: So he offered it for five talents, and for each talent he added a bull, which he burned in order to repay the gift of heaven.

古文：赐诸侯白金，以风符应合于天地。
现代文：为此，赐给诸侯白金，示意这吉祥的先兆应合于天地之意。
English: For this reason, platinum was given to the lords, indicating that this auspicious omen should be in accordance with the will of heaven and earth.

古文：于是济北王以为天子且封禅，乃上书献泰山及其旁邑。天子受之，更以他县偿之。
现代文：由此济北王以为天子将要举行封禅大典，就上书献泰山及旁边的县邑，天子接受了，另外赐给他其他县邑作为补偿。
English: As a result, King Jibei thought that the emperor was about to hold a grand ceremony of enthronement, so he sent a letter offering Mount Tai and the surrounding counties and towns. The emperor accepted and gave him other counties and towns as compensation.

古文：常山王有罪，迁，天子封其弟于真定，以续先王祀，而以常山为郡。
现代文：常山王有罪被废黜，迁于房陵，皇帝就封他的弟弟为真定王，以延续对其祖先的祭祀，并把常山设置为郡。
English: King Changshan was dethroned and moved to Fangling, and the emperor crowned his brother as King Zhending to continue the worship of his ancestors, and set up Changshan as a county.

古文：然后五岳皆在天子之郡。
现代文：此后，五岳就都在天子直接管辖的郡内了。
English: Since then, the five mountains have all been in the county directly under the jurisdiction of the emperor.

古文：其明年，齐人少翁以鬼神方见上。上有所幸王夫人，夫人卒，少翁以方术盖夜致王夫人及灶鬼之貌云，天子自帷中望见焉。
现代文：第二年，齐人少翁凭借通鬼神的方术觐见皇上，皇上最宠爱的王夫人死了，少翁用方术在夜间招来王夫人及灶神的形貌，天子从帷帐中看见了王夫人。
English: In the second year, Qi Ren Shao Weng met the emperor with the help of the sorcerer's spell. The emperor's favorite wife Wang died. Shao Weng used the sorcerer's spell to summon the image of the queen and the god of the hearth at night. Tian Zi saw the queen from the curtain.

古文：于是乃拜少翁为文成将军，赏赐甚多，以客礼礼之。
现代文：于是授予少翁为文成将军，赏赐了很多东西给他，并用接待宾客的礼节接待他。
English: So he awarded him the title of General Wencheng, gave him many things, and received him with the etiquette of receiving guests.

古文：文成言曰： 上即欲与神通，宫室被服不象神，神物不至。 
现代文：文成将军说： 皇上如果想要与神交往，宫室、被服等生活用品和神用的不一样，神灵就不会降临。 
English: General Wencheng said: "If the emperor wants to communicate with the gods, the palace, clothing and other daily necessities are not the same as the gods, and the gods will not come.

古文：乃作画云气车，及各以胜日驾车辟恶鬼。又作甘泉宫，中为台室，画天、地、泰一诸神，而置祭具以致天神。
现代文：于是制造了画有云气的车子，在不同的日子驾驶不同颜色的车子驱除恶鬼，又兴建甘泉宫，宫室中间是台室，画着天一、地一、泰一等众多神灵，摆置祭器用具以招来天神。
English: As a result, a chariot painted with clouds was made, and chariots of different colors were driven on different days to drive away evil spirits. In addition, the Ganquan Palace was built, with a throne room in the middle of the palace, depicting numerous gods such as Tianyi, Diyi, and Taiyi, and sacrificial tools were placed to attract the gods.

古文：居岁余，其方益衰，神不至。
现代文：又过了一年多，少翁的方术越来越不灵验，神仙一直没有到来。
English: More than a year later, Shao Weng's sorcery became more and more ineffective, and the Immortal never came.

古文：乃为帛书以饭牛，详弗知也，言此牛腹中有奇。杀而视之，得书，书言甚怪，天子疑之。有识其手书，问之人，果伪书。于是诛文成将军而隐之。
现代文：文成将军就写了一些字在一块帛上，让牛吃掉，并装作自己毫不知情，对别人说这头牛腹中有怪异，杀牛观看，取得帛书，书上所说甚为怪诞，天子怀疑，又从字体认出执笔书写的人，考问此人，果然是伪书，于是诛杀文成将军，并将这件事隐瞒了下来。
English: General Wencheng wrote some words on a piece of straw, let the cow eat it, and pretended that he did not know anything, said to others that there was something strange in the belly of this cow, killed the cow to watch, obtained a fake book, what was said in the book was very strange, the heavens suspected, and recognized the person who wrote the pen from the font, questioned this person, it was indeed a fake book, so he killed General Wencheng and concealed the matter.

古文：其后则又作柏梁、铜柱、承露仙人掌之属矣。
现代文：在此之后又营建柏梁台、铜柱及承露仙人掌等。
English: After that, the construction of the wooden beam platform, copper pillar and Chenglu cactus and so on.

古文：文成死明年，天子病鼎湖甚，巫医无所不致，不愈。
现代文：文成死后第二年，天子在鼎湖宫病得很严重，巫医各种方药无所不用，都无法治愈他的病。
English: In the second year after Wencheng's death, Tianzi fell seriously ill in Dinghu Palace. Witches and doctors tried their best to treat him, but he never got better.

古文：游水发根乃言曰： 上郡有巫，病而鬼下之。 
现代文：有个叫游水发根的人上书说： 上郡有一个巫师，病中鬼神就附在了他身上。 
English: A man named Yu Shui Fagan wrote: There is a sorcerer in Shang County, and when he was ill, ghosts and spirits attached themselves to him.

古文：上召置祠之甘泉。
现代文：皇上把他召来，安置在甘泉宫。
English: The emperor summoned him and placed him in Ganquan Palace.

古文：及病，使人问神君。
现代文：等巫师生病的时候，就派人问神君。
English: When a sorcerer falls ill, they send someone to ask the god.

古文：神君言曰： 天子毋忧病。病少愈，强与我会甘泉。 
现代文：神君说： 天子不用忧虑病情，等病好了一些，请您振作精神和我在甘泉相会。 
English: Shinkun said, "Son of heaven, don't worry about your illness, wait until you feel better. Please cheer up and meet me at Ganquan."

古文：于是病愈，遂幸甘泉，病良已。
现代文：于是天子的病好了很多，亲自去甘泉宫祭祀，病就完全好了。
English: As a result, the illness of the heavenly son improved a lot, and he personally went to Gansu Palace to offer sacrifices, and his illness was completely cured.

古文：大赦天下，置寿宫神君。
现代文：天子大赦天下，安置神君于寿宫。
English: The Son of Heaven pardoned the whole world and placed the God-Emperor in the Palace of Life.

古文：神君最贵者太一，其佐曰大禁、司命之属，皆从之。
现代文：神君中最尊贵的是泰一，辅佐叫大禁、司命等，都跟随着他。
English: The most honorable of the priests was Tai I, and his assistants, Da Zhen and Si Mimi, followed him.

古文：非可得见，闻其音，与人言等。
现代文：这些神君的样子是看不见的，但能听到他们的声音，和人的声音一样。
English: These deities cannot be seen, but their voices can be heard, just like human voices.

古文：时去时来，来则风肃然也。
现代文：有时去有时来，来的时候就有飒飒的风声。
English: Sometimes they go, sometimes they come, and when they come, there is a rumor about them.

古文：居室帷中，时昼言，然常以夜。
现代文：神君们居住在室内帐帷中，有时白天讲话，但常常是在晚上。
English: The deities reside in the interior of the tabernacle, sometimes speaking during the day, but more often at night.

古文：天子祓，然后入。
现代文：天子举行了除灾去邪的仪式，然后进入室中。
English: They only enter the temple after they have been exorcised.

古文：因巫为主人，关饮食。
现代文：天子把巫师当为主人，让他关照神君的饮食。
English: Witches are the masters of the temple, taking care of and receiving food from the deities.

古文：所欲者言行下。
现代文：神君所想要的东西说出来后，就交与下面办理。
English: After the deity has said what it wants, it will be passed on to the next level.

古文：又置寿宫、北宫，张羽旗，设供具，以礼神君。
现代文：又建寿宫、北宫，张挂羽旗，陈设供神用具，以尊贵的礼节厚接神君。
English: He also built the North Palace of Shugu, where feather flags were hung, and offerings were set up to pay respect to the god.

古文：神君所言，上使人受书其言，命之曰 画法 。
现代文：神君所说的话，皇上命人纪录下来，命名为 画法 。
English: The emperor had people write down what the god-king said, and this was called "painting."

古文：其所语，世俗之所知也，毋绝殊者，而天子独喜。
现代文：但神君所说的话，都是世俗人知晓的，没有什么特殊的地方，而天子却独自喜欢。
English: However, the words spoken by God are all known by worldly people, there is nothing special about them, but the Son of God alone likes them.

古文：其事秘，世莫知也。
现代文：这些事都很隐秘，不为世人所知。
English: These things are very secret, not known to the world.

古文：其后三年，有司言元宜以天瑞命，不宜以一二数。
现代文：三年后，主管官员建议应该用上天所降的祥瑞来命名年号，不应用一二来计数。
English: Three years later, the official in charge suggested that the year number should be named after the auspicious auspiciousness of heaven, and should not be counted by one or two.

古文：一元曰建元，二元以长星曰元光，三元以郊得一角兽曰元狩云。
现代文：第一个纪元年称为建元，第二个季元年因有长星流光的天瑞，称为元光，第三个纪元因在郊祭时捕获了独角兽，称为元狩。
English: The first epoch year is called Jianyuan, the second quaternary epoch year is called Yuanguang due to the celestial luck of the long star streamer, and the third epoch is called Yuanhan due to the unicorn captured at the suburb festival.

古文：其明年冬，天子郊雍，议曰： 今上帝朕亲郊，而后土毋祀，则礼不答也。 
现代文：第二年冬天，天子到雍县郊祭，与群臣商议说： 现在我亲自郊祭上天，但还未祭拜地神后土，这与礼数不合。 
English: In the winter of the second year, the heavenly son went to the suburban festival in Yong County and discussed with the courtiers, saying, "Now I am personally performing the suburban festival to ascend to heaven, but I have not yet offered worship to the earth god Houtu, which is not in accordance with the number of rites.

古文：有司与太史公、祠官宽舒等议： 天地牲角茧栗。
现代文：主管官员与太史令司马谈、祠官宽舒等议论说： 祭天地的小牛，它的角要像蚕茧、栗子那样的小。
English: The official in charge discussed with Tai Shi Ling Sima and the ancestral priest Kuan Shu, saying: The calf to be sacrificed to heaven and earth should have a horn as small as a silkworm cocoon or a chestnut.

古文：今陛下亲祀后土，后土宜于泽中圜丘为五坛，坛一黄犊太牢具，已祠尽瘗，而从祠衣上黄。 
现代文：现在陛下亲祭后土，后土应在泽中圆形的高地上建五个坛，每个祭坛要用一头小黄牛为大牢进行祭祀，祭祀完后，祭品全部都要埋掉，陪祭的人也要穿黄色的衣服。 
English: Now, His Majesty should build five altars on the circular plateau in the middle of the lake. Each altar should use a small yellow cow to perform a sacrifice for the dungeon. After the sacrifice, all the offerings should be buried, and the people accompanying the sacrifice should also wear yellow clothes.

古文：于是天子遂东，始立后土祠汾阴脽上，如宽舒等议。上亲望拜，如上帝礼。
现代文：于是天子驾车东行，依照宽舒等人议定的办法，在汾阴高丘上立后土祠，皇帝亲自望后土而拜，与祭祀上天的礼仪一样。
English: As a result, the heavenly son drove east and, in accordance with the method agreed upon by Kanshu and others, set up a back soil shrine on the high hill of Suyin. The emperor himself looked at the back soil and worshiped it, just like the ritual of sacrificing to the heavens.

古文：礼毕，天子遂至荥阳而还。
现代文：祭祀完毕后，天子就到荥阳，然后返回长安。
English: After the end of the ritual, the heavenly son returned to Kyoto via Shinya.

古文：过雒阳，下诏曰： 三代邈绝，远矣难存。其以三十里地封周后为周子南君，以奉先王祀焉。 
现代文：经过雒阳的时候，下诏书说： 夏、商、周三个朝代距现在已经很久远了，太过遥远的后代也难以存留，以三十里的地区封给周的后代为周子南君，以祭祀周先王。
English: When passing through Shenyang, the next imperial edict said: The three dynasties of Xia, Shang and Zhou are now very far apart, and it is difficult for descendants who are too far away to survive. The descendants of Zhou were given a thirty-mile area as Zhou Zi Nanjun, and Zhou Xian Wang was worshiped.

古文：是岁，天子始巡郡县，侵寻于泰山矣。
现代文：这年，天子开始巡视各郡县，逐渐扩展到泰山。
English: In this year, Tianzi began to inspect all counties and counties, gradually expanding to Mount Tai.

古文：其春，乐成侯上书言栾大。
现代文：这年的春天，乐成侯上书举荐栾大。
English: In the spring of that year, Emperor Lecheng marched to the capital to present his great deeds.

古文：栾大，胶东宫人，故尝与文成将军同师，已而为胶东王尚方。而乐成侯姊为康王后，毋子。
现代文：栾大是胶东王刘寄宫里的宫人，原先和文成将军在同一个师傅那学艺，后来就成为主管胶东王方药的官员，当时乐成侯的姐姐是康王的王后，没有儿子。
English: Xingda was a courtier in the Liuye Palace of King Jiaodong. Originally, he studied with the same master as General Wencheng. Later, he became the official in charge of King Jiaodong's prescription. At that time, Prince Lecheng's sister was the queen of King Kang and had no son.

古文：康王死，他姬子立为王。
现代文：康王去世后，别的姬妾的儿子被立为嗣王。
English: After the death of King Kang, the sons of other concubines succeeded to the throne.

古文：而康后有淫行，与王不相中，相危以法。
现代文：康后有淫乱的行为，和新王不和，互相用法律来危害对方。
English: Queen Kang had an adulterous lifestyle and could not get along with the new king, and they openly fought with each other.

古文：康后闻文成已死，而欲自媚于上，乃遣栾大因乐成侯求见言方。
现代文：康后听说文成将军已死，自己想讨好皇上，便派栾大靠着乐成侯的关系求见皇上谈论方术。
English: When Kang Hou heard that General Wencheng had died, she wanted to please the emperor, so she sent Jie Da to see the emperor to talk about Fongshu, relying on the relationship with Le Cheng Hou.

古文：天子既诛文成，后悔恨其早死，惜其方不尽。
现代文：天子自从杀了文成侯，也后悔这么早就让他死了，他的方术没有完全传下来。
English: After killing Wen Cheng Hou, Tian Zi also regretted that he had let him die so early, and his method was not fully passed down.

古文：及见栾大，大悦。
现代文：等到看见栾大时，皇帝大为高兴。
English: The emperor was overjoyed when he saw Zhai Da.

古文：大为人长美，言多方略，而敢为大言，处之不疑。
现代文：栾大身材高大，相貌英俊，说话周到而有策略，又敢说大话，神色自若。
English: Zou Da is tall and handsome. He speaks thoughtfully and strategically, and dares to say big words. He looks confident.

古文：大言曰： 臣尝往来海中，见安期、羡门之属。
现代文：他说： 我曾往来于海中，看见安期生及羡门等仙人。
English: He said, "I have been to and fro in the sea, and have seen cormorants such as Anji Sheng and Enmen.

古文：顾以为臣贱，不信臣。
现代文：但他们都以为我地位低，并不相信我。
English: But they all thought I was inferior and didn't believe me.

古文：又以为康王诸侯耳，不足予方。
现代文：又认为康王仅仅是个诸侯，不值得给予方术。
English: He also thought that King Kang was just a vassal and was not worthy to be given the title.

古文：臣数言康王，康王又不用臣。
现代文：我曾数次向康王进言，可是康王并不肯任用我。
English: The vassal had told King Kang several times that King Kang did not accept the vassal's words.

古文：臣之师曰： 黄金可成，而河决可塞，不死之药可得，仙人可致也。 
现代文：我的老师曾说： 黄金可以炼成，河堤溃决也能堵住，不死的药可以得到，仙人也能招来。 
English: The disciple's master said: Gold can be refined, the mouth of a river can be blocked, the elixir of life can be obtained, and a genie can be summoned.

古文：臣恐效文成，则方士皆掩口，恶敢言方哉！ 
现代文：我只是怕得到像文成那样的结局。那么所有方式都会闭口不言了，怎么敢说方术呢！ 
English: I'm just afraid of ending up like Wencheng. Then all the methods will be silenced, how dare I speak of Fangshu!

古文：上曰： 文成食马肝死耳。
现代文：皇帝说： 文成是吃了马肝而死的。
English: The emperor said, "Wencheng died from eating horse liver. I didn't kill him.

古文：子诚能修其方，我何爱乎！ 
现代文：你如真能研究出神仙的方术，我有什么可以吝惜的呢！ 
English: If you can truly study the ways of the gods, what can I begrudge you?

古文：大曰： 臣师非有求人，人者求之。
现代文：栾大说： 我老师并不是有求于人，而是人去求他。
English: Zou Da said, "The minister's master does not need people, but people need him."

古文：陛下必欲致之，则贵其使者，令有亲属，以客礼待之，勿卑，使各佩其信印，乃可使通言于神人。
现代文：陛下一定要请他来的话，就要让使者有尊贵的身份，使他有亲眷，用宾客的礼对待，不要鄙视，让各人佩戴他的印信，这样才能使之和神人交谈。
English: If His Majesty must invite him, he must give the envoy a dignified status, make him have relatives, treat him with the courtesy of a guest, not despise him, and let everyone wear his seal, so that he can talk to the godman.

古文：神人尚肯邪不邪。
现代文：神人尚有肯来或不肯来的可能。
English: Even so, whether a godman comes or not is still in the balance.

古文：致尊其使，然后可致也。 
现代文：让使者尊贵起来，这样才可以请来神人。 
English: In short, to respect and venerate the messenger who seeks to visit the godman, and only then is it possible to invite the godman to come.

古文：于是上使先验小方，斗旗，旗自相触击。
现代文：于是皇帝叫他试验小方术，他表演了斗棋，让这些棋子自己互相碰击起来。
English: So the emperor asked him to try his hand at checkers. He played a game of draughts, letting the pieces hit each other on their own.

古文：是时上方忧河决，而黄金不就，乃拜大为五利将军。
现代文：当时，皇上正为黄河决堤的事情有幸，而黄金又未炼成，就拜栾大为五利将军。
English: At that time, the emperor was worried about the river's outflow, and the gold refining was not successful, so he made Zou Da the general of Wuli.

古文：居月余，得四金印，佩天士将军、地士将军、大通将军、天道将军印。
现代文：过了一个多月，栾大就得了四个金印，佩戴天士将军、地士将军、大通将军、天道将军印。
English: After more than a month, Handan University won four gold seals, wearing the Tianshi General, the Groundsman General, the Datong General, and the Tiandao General.

古文：制诏御史： 昔禹疏九江，决四渎。
现代文：皇上给御史下诏书说： 从前禹疏浚九江，开通长江、黄河、淮河、济水四渎。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to Goshi, saying, "In the past, Dayu was able to divert the Jiujiang River, and he was able to break through four defilements.

古文：间者河溢皋陆，堤繇不息。
现代文：近来黄河泛滥，从水边高地淹到广阔的平原，修堤的劳役不能停息。
English: The Yellow River has been overflowing recently, flooding from the waterside highlands to the vast plains, and the work of repairing the dike cannot be stopped.

古文：朕临天下二十有八年，天若遗朕士而大通焉。
现代文：我统治天下二十八年，上天倘若要赐我贤才之士，应该就是栾大这样能通天意的人。
English: In my 28th year on the throne, if the heavenly committee sends a scholar to assist me, I will be one of them.

古文：《干》称 蜚龙 ， 鸿渐于般 ，意庶几与焉。
现代文：《易经·乾卦》说的 飞龙 ，是说君主居于王位； 鸿渐于般 ，是说渐渐地达到磐石似的安定。
English: The "I Ching" and "Kenga" say that the dragon is flying, which means that the monarch is on the throne; the dragon is gradually becoming stable, which means gradually reaching rock-like stability.

古文：其以二千户封地士将军大为乐通侯。 
现代文：这意思和我得到五利是差不多相似的。为此将二千户之地封给地士将军栾大，为乐通侯。 
English: Let's see if you can handle it, with two thousand households of tax fiefs, the generals and generals are very happy.

古文：赐列侯甲第，僮千人，乘舆斥车马帷帐器物以充其家。
现代文：赐予栾大甲等第宅，僮仆千人，并把天子所坐的车子，不用的车马、帷帐、器具充满了他的家。
English: He gave him a great house and a thousand servants, and filled his house with chariots and horses, with curtains and furniture that he did not need.

古文：又以卫长公主妻之，赍金万斤，更名其邑曰当利公主。
现代文：又将女儿卫长公主嫁给他，送黄金万金，将她的封号改为当利公主。
English: He also married his daughter, Princess Wei Chang Zhou, to him, gave her a million in gold, and changed her title to Princess Tang Li.

古文：天子亲如五利之第，使者存问所给，连属于道。
现代文：天子还亲自到五利将军的府第。派去慰问和询问他所需物品的使者，络绎不绝于道路。
English: Tenshi also went to General Wori's residence in person. Envoys sent to offer condolences and inquire about the items he needed were incessantly on the road.

古文：自大主将相以下，皆置酒其家，献遗之。
现代文：从皇帝姑母和将相以下的人，都在家中置酒款待，献赠礼物。
English: The eldest princess, the commander and his subordinates all celebrated at his house with wine and dedicated items.

古文：于是天子又刻玉印曰 天道将军 ，使使衣羽衣，夜立白茅上，五利将军亦衣羽衣，立白茅上受印，以示弗臣也。
现代文：于是天子又刻 天道将军 的玉印，派使者穿羽衣，夜晚站在白茅上，五利将军也穿羽衣，站在白茅上来接受此玉印，表示他不是臣子。
English: As a result, the heavenly son engraved the seal of General Tendo and sent an emissary to wear a feathered coat and stand on a white thatch at night. General Gori also wore a feathered coat and stood on a white thatch to receive this seal, indicating that he was not a vassal.

古文：而佩 天道 者，且为天子道天神也。
现代文：而所以佩戴 天道将军 印，意思是将要为天子引导天神。
English: Wearing the seal of the Tendo Shogun, however, is merely for the sake of guiding the gods with the heavenly son.

古文：于是五利常夜祠其家，欲以下神。
现代文：于是五利常在家中夜晚祭祀，想使神仙下临。
English: As a result, Goryo often held nightly sacrifices at home, hoping to make the gods come down.

古文：神未至而百鬼集矣，然颇能使之。
现代文：神仙未到，百鬼却来聚集。他颇能驱使这些聚集来的百鬼。
English: God has not come, but all kinds of demons have gathered. However, the Five Virtues can drive the demons away.

古文：其后治装行，东入海，求其师云。
现代文：以后他就整治行装，往东入海，寻求他的师傅去了。
English: After that, he packed his things and went east to the sea to look for his master.

古文：大见数月，佩六印，贵振天下，而海上燕齐之间，莫不扼捥而自言有禁方，能神仙矣。
现代文：栾大见皇上不过几个月，就佩戴了六枚印，高贵的地位，尊贵足以震动天下，使得沿海燕、齐之间的方士都兴奋起来，说自己有秘方，能够招来神仙。
English: In just a few months, Emperor Xiaodai wore six seals, a noble status and dignity that was enough to shake the world, making the coastal Yan and Qi Fang people excited, saying that they had a secret recipe and could attract immortals.

古文：其夏六月中，汾阴巫锦为民祠魏脽后土营旁，见地如钩状，掊视得鼎。
现代文：这年夏天六月中，汾阴有个叫锦的巫师，在魏脽后土祭坛界址旁边为民家祭祠，看见地上隆起形状像弯钩一样，就扒开土地来看，结果得到了一只鼎。
English: In the middle of June of this summer, there was a sorcerer named Jin Rong in Jinyin. It was a folk sacrificial shrine next to the site of the soil altar at the end of the Wei Dynasty. When he saw the bump on the ground shaped like a hook, he scraped the ground to see, and the result was a tripod.

古文：鼎大异于众鼎，文镂毋款识。怪之，言吏。
现代文：这个鼎比普通的鼎大得多，上面雕刻有花纹，但没有文字，巫师觉得奇怪，就将这件事报告官吏。
English: The trinket was much larger than a normal trinket, and it was engraved with patterns but no writing. The sorcerer thought it was strange and reported it to the officials.

古文：吏告河东太守胜，胜以闻。
现代文：官吏又把这件事报告给了河东太守胜，胜就将此事上奏于天子。
English: The officials reported the victory to the governor of Hedong Province, and the victory was reported to the imperial court.

古文：天子使使验问巫锦得鼎无奸诈，乃以礼祠，迎鼎至甘泉，从行，上荐之。
现代文：天子派遣使者调查巫师锦所得的鼎，没有发现虚假诡诈，于是按照礼仪祭祀，就把鼎迎接到甘泉宫，百官从行，皇上准备将它献给天帝。
English: The Son of Heaven sent an emissary to investigate the treasure obtained by the sorcerer Jin, and found nothing false or deceitful. So, in accordance with the ritual sacrifice, he welcomed the treasure to Ganquan Palace. Hundreds of officials followed the procession, and the emperor prepared to offer it to the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：至中山，晏温，有黄云盖焉。
现代文：到中山的时候，天气晴热，有黄云覆盖在上方。
English: By the time I got to Zhongshan, the weather was sunny and hot, with yellow clouds covering the sky above.

古文：有麃过，上自射之，因以祭云。
现代文：这时有一头麃经过，皇上亲自射获，就用它来祭祀。
English: A mule just happened to be passing by, and the emperor shot it to death and used it to make a sacrificial offering.

古文：至长安，公卿大夫皆议请尊宝鼎。
现代文：回到长安时，公卿大夫纷纷议论请求尊奉宝鼎。
English: After arriving in Chang'an, the court nobles and doctors all discussed and requested to honor Baoding.

古文：天子曰： 间者河溢，岁数不登，故巡祭后土，祈为百姓育谷。
现代文：天子说： 近来黄河泛滥，已有好几年谷物收成不好，所以我才出巡前往各郡县祭祀后土，为百姓祈求丰收。
English: Tianzi said: Recently, the Yellow River has been flooded, and the grain harvest has been poor for several years. Therefore, I just went on a tour to the counties to pray for a good harvest.

古文：今年丰庑未有报，鼎曷为出哉？ 
现代文：今年丰收了，却尚未举行祭祀酬拜地神，鼎为什么出现呢？ 
English: This year's harvest has been bountiful, but there has yet to be a ritual to pay homage to the god of the earth. Why is this happening?

古文：有司皆曰： 闻昔大帝兴神鼎一，一者一统，天地万物所系终也。
现代文：主管官员都说： 听说从前太帝制造了一个神鼎，一表示一统，意思是天地万物归终于一。
English: The officials in charge all said: I heard that once upon a time, the great emperor made a deity. One represents unity, which means that all things in heaven and earth are finally one.

古文：黄帝作宝鼎三，象天地人也。
现代文：黄帝一共造了三个宝鼎，象征天、地、人。
English: The Yellow Emperor made a total of three Baoding, symbolizing heaven, earth and man.

古文：禹收九牧之金，铸九鼎，皆尝鬺烹上帝鬼神。
现代文：大禹收集九州的铜，铸成了九个鼎，这些鼎都曾经烹饪牲牢而祭祀上天。
English: Dayu collected copper from Kyushu and cast nine tripods. These tripods were once used to cook and sacrifice cows to the heavens.

古文：遭圣则兴，迁于夏商。周德衰，宋之社亡，鼎乃沦伏而不见。
现代文：每逢遇到圣主鼎才出现，以后鼎迁于夏、商，周德衰，宋社稷亡后，鼎就埋没隐藏而不见了。
English: Whenever he met the saint, Ding would appear. Later, Ding moved to Xia, Shang, Zhou, and De, and after the death of the Song Dynasty, Ding was buried and disappeared.

古文：《颂》云： 自堂徂基，自羊徂牛；鼐鼎及鼒，不虞不骜，胡考之休。 
现代文：《周颂》所谓 察看自堂上到门墙的祭器有否洗濯，检查自羊到牛的祭牲是否肥壮，审视大鼎和小鼎里外是否洁净，不喧哗，不傲慢，虔敬地祭祀，就能得到福禄和长寿 。
English: In the "Song of Zhou," the so-called "inspecting whether the sacrificial vessels from the hall to the door wall have been washed, checking whether the sacrificial animals from the sheep to the cattle are fat, inspecting whether the large and small deities are clean inside and outside, not noisy, not arrogant, and worshiping devoutly, can get the blessing and long life.

古文：今鼎至甘泉，光润龙变，承休无疆。
现代文：现在鼎到了甘泉，光辉和润，有如飞龙变幻，承受的吉祥会无穷无尽。
English: Now, Ding has arrived at Ganquan Palace, look at its glossy color. It changes like a god, and the court will be blessed with boundless happiness.

古文：合兹中山，有黄白云降盖，若兽为符，路弓乘矢，集获坛下，报祠大飨。
现代文：这与在中山时出现的黄白祥云相合，车盖上空的黄白云气，形如兽，实为祥瑞，又大弓四箭射中潏兽，都集中在祭坛下，为报谢天恩陈列丰盛的祭品。
English: This coincides with the yellow-and-white auspicious clouds that appear in the middle of the mountain. The yellow-and-white cloud above the lid of the chariot, shaped like an animal, is actually auspicious, and the four arrows shot by the big bow are concentrated under the altar. In order to thank God, the rich offerings are displayed.

古文：惟受命而帝者心知其意而合德焉。鼎宜见于祖祢，藏于帝廷，以合明应。 
现代文：只有受命统治天下的帝王，才能心知天意，所做的事情合于上天的德行，这个鼎应进献于宗庙的祖先，藏于甘泉天帝的宫廷，以符合明显的瑞应。 
English: Only emperors who have been ordered to rule the world can know the will of heaven and do things that are in line with the virtues of heaven. This ring should be dedicated to the ancestors of the ancestral temple and hidden in the court of Emperor Ganquan to meet the obvious demand.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：天子下诏说： 可以。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：入海求蓬莱者，言蓬莱不远，而不能至者，殆不见其气。上乃遣望气佐候其气云。
现代文：前往海上寻求蓬莱的人，都说蓬莱不远，而不能到达的原因，大概是因不曾看见仙山上的云气，于是皇帝派擅长望气的官员协助观察云气出现。
English: People who went to the sea to search for Penglai all said that Penglai was not far away, but the reason why they could not reach it was probably because they had not seen the clouds on the Fairy Mountain, so the emperor sent officials who were good at hoping to help observe the clouds appear.

古文：其秋，上幸雍，且郊。
现代文：这年秋天，皇上来到雍县，准备举行郊祭。
English: In the autumn of that year, the emperor came to Yongcheng and was going to perform the suburb worship of the Five Emperors.

古文：或曰： 五帝，泰一之佐也，宜立泰一而上亲郊之。 
现代文：有人说 五帝不过是泰一的辅佐，应该立泰一祠，由皇上亲自进行郊祭 。
English: Some people said that the Five Emperors were merely the assistants of Emperor Taichi, and that an ancestral shrine of Emperor Taichi should be built, and that the Emperor himself should conduct the Suburban Festival.

古文：上疑未定。
现代文：皇上迟疑不决。
English: The Emperor hesitated.

古文：齐人公孙卿曰： 今年得宝鼎，其冬辛巳朔旦冬至，与黄帝时等。 
现代文：齐人公孙卿说： 今年获得宝鼎，今年冬天的辛巳日正好是朔日初一，这和黄帝得宝鼎的时间相同。 
English: Qi Ronggong Sunqing said, "This year, I got Baoding, and the winter solstice day in early November is the winter solstice festival, which is exactly the same as the time of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：卿有札书曰： 黄帝得宝鼎宛朐，问于鬼臾区。
现代文：公孙卿藏有的一本木简书上说： 黄帝在宛朐得到宝鼎，并询问鬼臾区。
English: A jingle book in the possession of King Gongsun said: The Yellow Emperor received Baoding in Wanlu and inquired about the ghost town.

古文：区对曰： 帝得宝鼎神䇲，是岁己酉朔旦冬至，得天之纪，终而复始。 
现代文：区回答说： 黄帝得宝鼎神策，是在己西年初一早晨冬至，得到天象来纪元，它是周而复始、不断循环的。 
English: The district replied: The Yellow Emperor obtained the Baoding Divine Plan on the morning of the winter solstice on the first day of the year in the west, and obtained the celestial phenomenon in the era. It is cyclical and continuous.

古文：于是黄帝迎日推䇲，后率二十岁得朔旦冬至，凡二十推，三百八十年。黄帝仙登于天。 
现代文：于是黄帝计算未来的日子，用算策推算朔望，从那以后大概每二十年得初一早晨冬至，他一共做了二十次推算，共计三百八十年，黄帝成仙升天。 
English: So the Yellow Emperor calculated the days of the future and used calculation strategies to calculate the new moon. Since then, the first morning of the winter solstice has occurred approximately every 20 years. He made a total of 20 calculations, for a total of 380 years. The Yellow Emperor became immortal and ascended to heaven.

古文：卿因所忠欲奏之。所忠视其书不经，疑其妄书，谢曰： 宝鼎事已决矣，尚何以为！ 
现代文：公孙卿想通过所忠的关系上奏皇上，但所忠看他的书荒诞不经，怀疑是他胡乱写成的，婉言谢绝说： 关于宝鼎的事，早已解决了，还上书能有什么用呢？ 
English: Gongsunqing wanted to report the matter to the emperor through Zhodong. Zhodong thought his book was absurd and doubted that it was a fake book that he had fabricated. He thanked the emperor and said, "The matter of Baoding has already been settled, what else can be done?"

古文：卿因嬖人奏之。上大说，召问卿。
现代文：公孙卿又托皇上的宠爱小臣奏上，皇上大为喜悦，召见公孙卿询问。
English: Gongsunqing also asked the emperor's favorite vassal to play, and the emperor was very pleased and summoned Gongsunqing to inquire.

古文：对曰： 受此书申功，申功已死。 
现代文：公孙卿回答说： 我从申功那里得到此书，他已经死了。 
English: Gongsun replied, "I got this book from Shen Gong, and he is dead.

古文：上曰： 申功何人也？ 
现代文：皇上问： 申功是什么人？ 
English: The emperor asked, "Who is Shen Gong?"

古文：卿曰： 申功，齐人也。与安期生通，受黄帝言，无书，独有此鼎书。
现代文：公孙卿说： 申功是齐地人，和安期生有往来，并接受了黄帝的教诲，这没有记载，只有这个鼎有记载。
English: Gongsunqing said, "There is no record of Shen Gong, who was from Qi and had contact with the An Dynasty, receiving the teachings of the Yellow Emperor. Only this has been recorded.

古文：曰 汉兴复当黄帝之时。
现代文：上面说： 汉朝兴起，又相当于黄帝得鼎之际。
English: It said: The rise of the Han Dynasty is equivalent to the rise of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：汉之圣者在高祖之孙且曾孙也。
现代文：汉代的圣君应在高祖的孙子或曾孙。
English: The saint of the Han Dynasty should be the grandson or great-grandson of Gao Zu.

古文：宝鼎出而与神通，封禅。
现代文：宝鼎出现就能和神人交往，要举行封禅。
English: After the appearance of Baoding, it will be able to collude with the gods and conduct a concurrent sealing ceremony.

古文：封禅七十二王，唯黄帝得上泰山封 。
现代文：以前封禅的有七十二王，只有黄帝能上泰山封禅。 
English: Since ancient times, a total of seventy-two emperors have performed the sealing ceremony. Only the Yellow Emperor was able to ascend to the top of Mount Tai to perform the sealing ceremony.

古文：申功曰： 汉主亦当上封，上封则能仙登天矣。
现代文：申功说：汉皇帝也应上泰山封禅，上去封禅就能成仙升天。
English: Shen Gong said, "The Han Emperor should also go to Mount Tai to be sealed in Zen. If he goes to Mount Tai to be sealed in Zen, he will be able to become an immortal and ascend to heaven."

古文：黄帝时万诸侯，而神灵之封居七千。
现代文：黄帝时有一万诸侯，神灵得封的占七千。
English: At the time of the Yellow Emperor, there were tens of thousands of princes, of whom seven thousand were enshrined as deities.

古文：天下名山八，而三在蛮夷，五在中国。
现代文：天下名山有八座，而三座在蛮夷境内，五座在中国。
English: There are eight famous mountains in the world, three of which are in the barbarian territory, and five are in China.

古文：中国华山、首山、太室、泰山、东莱，此五山黄帝之所常游，与神会。
现代文：中原地区的五座是华山、首山、太室、泰山和东莱山，都是黄帝时常游息和神仙相会的地方。
English: In China, there are Huashan, Shoushan, Taishou, Taishan and Donglaishan. These five are the places where the Yellow Emperor often visited and met with the gods.

古文：黄帝且战且学仙。
现代文：黄帝一面作战一面学神仙的道术。
English: The Yellow Emperor learned the Taoism of the immortals while fighting.

古文：患百姓非其道，乃断斩非鬼神者。
现代文：恐怕百姓反对他的神仙之道，所以坚决斩杀反对鬼神的人。
English: I am afraid that the people oppose his way of immortality, so he resolutely kills those who oppose ghosts and gods.

古文：百余岁然后得与神通。
现代文：一百多岁后，才得与神仙相通。
English: It took more than a hundred years before he was able to communicate with the gods.

古文：黄帝郊雍上帝，宿三月。
现代文：黄帝到雍县郊祀上天，住了三个月。
English: The Yellow Emperor lived on the outskirts of Yongcheng for three months.

古文：鬼臾区号大鸿，死葬雍，故鸿冢是也。
现代文：鬼臾区号大鸿，死后葬在雍县，所以鸿家就是他的墓。
English: Da Hong was buried in Yongcheng after his death, which is why this place was named after him.

古文：其后黄帝接万灵明廷。
现代文：以后黄帝在明廷迎接上万的神灵。
English: Later, the Yellow Emperor welcomed tens of thousands of deities at the Ming court.

古文：明廷者，甘泉也。
现代文：明廷就是现在的甘泉。
English: Mingting is now Ganquan.

古文：所谓寒门者，谷口也。
现代文：寒门就是现在的谷口。
English: The place where the Yellow Emperor ascended to heaven is the cold gate, which is today's Taniguchi.

古文：黄帝采首山铜，铸鼎于荆山下。
现代文：黄帝开采首山的铜，在荆山下铸鼎。
English: The Yellow Emperor mined the copper of the first mountain, and cast the tripod under the Jing Mountain.

古文：鼎既成，有龙垂胡髯下迎黄帝。
现代文：鼎铸成后，有垂着须髯的龙从天上下来迎接黄帝。
English: After the casting, a dragon with drooping whiskers came down from the sky to meet the Yellow Emperor.

古文：黄帝上骑，群臣后宫从上龙七十余人，龙乃上去。
现代文：黄帝骑上后，群臣和后宫后妃跟着骑上龙的有七十余人，龙即飞上天去。
English: After the Yellow Emperor rode up, a group of courtiers and the queen of the harem followed, with more than seventy people riding the dragon. The dragon then flew up into the sky.

古文：余小臣不得上，乃悉持龙髯，龙髯拔，堕黄帝之弓。
现代文：其余的小臣不能上，都抓着龙须不放，龙须被拔落，黄帝的弓也掉下来。
English: The rest of the ministers could not go up, they all clutched the dragon's whiskers and did not let go. The dragon's whiskers were pulled off, and the bow of the Yellow Emperor fell down.

古文：百姓仰望黄帝既上天，乃抱其弓与龙胡髯号。故后世因名其处曰鼎湖，其弓曰乌号。  
现代文：百姓们仰望着黄帝已经上天，就抱着弓和龙须号陶大哭，所以后世把那个地方叫做鼎湖，那张弓叫乌号。  
English: The people looked up and saw that the Yellow Emperor had ascended to heaven, and they hugged their bows and dragon's whiskers and cried loudly, so later generations called that place Dinghu, and that bow was called Wu.

古文：于是天子曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：于是天子说： 唉！
English: Then the Son of Heaven said: Alas!

古文：吾诚得如黄帝，吾视去妻子如脱躧耳。 
现代文：如果我能像黄帝那样，我看离开妻子像脱鞋一样容易。 
English: If I could be like the Yellow Emperor, I think leaving my wife would be as easy as taking off my shoes.

古文：乃拜卿为郎，东使候神于太室。
现代文：就任命公孙卿为郎官，派他向东前往太室山迎候神仙。
English: He appointed Gongsunqing as his vassal and sent him to the east to meet the god on Mount Temuro.

古文：上遂郊雍，至陇西，西登空桐，幸甘泉。
现代文：皇上接着去雍县郊祀上天，到了陇西，再西行登上崆峒山，然后回到了甘泉。
English: The emperor then went to the outskirts of Yong County to worship the heavens, to Shaanxi, then westward to Mount Lushan, and then returned to Ganquan.

古文：令祠官宽舒等具泰一祠坛，坛放薄忌泰一坛，坛三垓。
现代文：命祠官宽舒等筹建泰一祠坛，祭坛仿照薄忌所说的泰一坛的形式，一共分为三层。
English: Kuang Shu, the official in charge of the mortuary shrine, and others are preparing to build the Taiyi ancestral altar. The altar is modeled after the form of the Taiyi altar mentioned by Bo Bo, and is divided into three layers.

古文：五帝坛环居其下，各如其方，黄帝西南，除八通鬼道。
现代文：五帝的祭坛都环列在泰一坛的下面，各自依照它们所属方位，黄帝在西南方，修筑了八条鬼神通道。
English: The first floor is the Great Altar. The Altar of the Five Emperors is surrounded by the Lower Altar of the Great Altar. The five emperors are located in the same direction as the main altar. Only the Yellow Emperor, which is located in the main central direction, is located in the southwest. After removing the eight ghost roads in this direction, the altar of the Yellow Emperor is erected.

古文：泰一所用，如雍一畤物，而加醴枣脯之属，杀一牦牛以为俎豆牢具。而五帝独有俎豆醴进。其下四方地，为餟食群神从者及北斗云。
现代文：泰一坛所用的祭品，和雍县的祭祀并无二至，再加甜酒、枣子、干肉一类的东西，杀一头牦牛，作为俎豆牢具礼器中盛着的祭品，而五帝只有用俎豆盛着进献的祭品和甜酒，五帝坛下的四面，连续祭礼随从的群神和北斗。
English: The offerings used in the Taiyuan Altar are no different from the offerings in the Yongxian Altar. In addition to sweet wine, dates, dried meat and other things, a yakitori was killed to serve as the offering contained in the pea-shaped vase, while the Five Emperors only used peas to hold the offerings and sweet wine. On all four sides of the Five Emperors Altar, there are the gods and the Big Dipper that follow the continuous rituals.

古文：已祠，胙余皆燎之。
现代文：祭祀结束，剩余的供祭祀用的祭品全部被烧掉。
English: Once the ritual is over, all the remaining sacrificial items are burned.

古文：其牛色白，鹿居其中，彘在鹿中，水而洎之。
现代文：祭祀用的牛是白色的，祭祀的时候要把鹿放在牛的肚中，猪又放在鹿的肚中，然后浸泡在水里。
English: The cattle are white, and the slaughtered deer is stuffed into the cow's abdominal cavity, and then the pig is stuffed into the deer's abdominal cavity, and both are placed in the kettle and boiled with water.

古文：祭日以牛，祭月以羊彘特。
现代文：祭日神要用一头牛，祭月神要用一只羊或一头猪。
English: The bulls used for the festival sacrifices and the pigs used for the moon sacrifices are both male.

古文：泰一祝宰则衣紫及绣，五帝各如其色，日赤，月白。
现代文：祭祀泰一神的司祭官员穿紫衣和绣花的衣服，祭祀五帝的祝官的礼服颜色要严格遵照五帝所属的颜色，祭日神要穿赤色衣，祭月神要穿白色衣。
English: The priests and officials who offer sacrifices to the god Taiyi should wear purple and embroidered clothes, the celebrants who offer sacrifices to the five emperors should wear gowns in strict accordance with the colors of the five emperors, the god of the festival should wear red clothes, and the god of the festival should wear white clothes.

古文：十一月辛巳朔旦冬至，昧爽，天子始郊拜泰一。
现代文：十一月辛巳朔日早晨冬至，黎明时分，天子就开始郊祭泰一神。
English: In the early morning of November, the winter solstice, at dawn, Tianzi began the suburb festival of Taiyi.

古文：朝朝日，夕夕月，则揖；而见泰一如雍礼。
现代文：早晨祭日神，夜晚祭月神，行拱手礼；而祭拜泰一神则遵照雍县的郊祀礼。
English: In the morning, the sun god is worshipped, and in the evening, the moon god is worshipped, with a bowing hand salute; while the worship of the god Tai follows the suburban ritual of Yong County.

古文：其赞飨曰： 天始以宝鼎神䇲授皇帝，朔而又朔，终而复始。皇帝敬拜见焉。 
现代文：祭祀的祝词说： 上天开始将宝鼎和神策授与皇帝，一个月接着一个月，终而复始，皇帝就在这里恭敬地拜见。 
English: The ritual greeting said: "Since the heavens began to bestow the Baoding and Shenshe on the emperor, month after month, and again and again, the emperor pays a respectful visit here.

古文：而衣上黄。
现代文：祭祀用的礼服是黄色的。
English: Yellow is the color of choice for formal wear.

古文：其祠列火满坛，坛旁烹炊具。
现代文：祭祠时火炬排列满坛，坛旁摆放着烹炊用具。
English: At the shrine, torches are lined up around the altar, and cooking utensils are placed next to the altar.

古文：有司云： 祠上有光焉。 
现代文：主管官员说 祠坛上有光芒出现 。
English: The official in charge said that a light appeared on the altar.

古文：公卿言： 皇帝始郊见泰一云阳，有司奉瑄玉嘉牲荐飨。
现代文：公卿们说 皇帝开始在云阳宫郊祀祭拜泰一，主管官员捧上六寸的大壁，献上肥壮的牛，供众神享用。
English: The nobles said that the emperor began to worship Taiyi on the outskirts of the Yunyang Palace, and the officials in charge held up a six-inch wall and presented fat cattle for the gods to enjoy.

古文：是夜有美光，及昼，黄气上属天。 
现代文：那天夜晚出现了美丽的光彩，到了白天，有黄色的云气上升，与天空连成一片 。
English: That night there was a beautiful glow, and during the day, yellow clouds rose and merged with the sky.

古文：太史公、祠官宽舒等曰： 神灵之休，祐福兆祥，宜因此地光域立泰畤坛以明应。
现代文：太史公、祠官宽舒等说： 神灵显示的美丽的光彩，是保佑多福的吉兆，应该在这光彩照耀的区域内建立泰畤坛，作为天降祥瑞的明显应验。
English: Tai Shi Gong, ancestral priest Kuan Shu and others said: The beautiful brilliance shown by the gods is a good omen of blessing and blessing, and the Thai gong altar should be built in the area where the brilliance shines, as an obvious fulfillment of the heavenly blessing.

古文：令太祝领，秋及腊间祠，三岁天子一郊见。 
现代文：命令太祝掌管秋天和腊月间祭祀。天子每三年郊祭一次。 
English: Taizhong was ordered to preside over the autumn and lunar festivals. Tianzi held a suburb festival once every three years.

古文：其秋，为伐南越，告祷泰一，以牡荆画幡日月北斗登龙，以象天一三星，为泰一锋，名曰 灵旗 。
现代文：这年秋天，为了征伐南越，向泰一神祷告，用牡荆做旗柄，在长条形的旗子上画日月北斗和腾空而起的龙，象征天一三星，为祭祀泰一神的前导旗帜，称之为 灵旗 。
English: In the autumn of that year, in order to conquer South Vietnam, he prayed to the god of Taiyi and used a bauhinia as a flagpole. He painted the sun, moon, and the Big Dipper and a dragon rising into the sky on a long striped flag, symbolizing the three stars in the heavens. It was a leading flag for the worship of the god of Taiyi, and was called the "Spiritual Flag."

古文：为兵祷，则太史奉以指所伐国。
现代文：为兵事而祷告时，太史手捧灵旗指向所要征伐国家的方向。
English: When sending out soldiers to pray, the imperial official holds the spiritual flag in his hand and points to the country that was attacked.

古文：而五利将军使不敢入海，之泰山祠。上使人微随验，实无所见。
现代文：五利将军虽是使者却不敢入海求仙，只是去往泰山祭祀，皇上派人暗中尾随检察，发现它实际上什么也没见到。
English: Although he was an emissary, General Goryo did not dare to go to the sea to seek immortality, but only went to Mount Tai for a ritual. The emperor sent someone to secretly follow the inspection and found that it actually saw nothing.

古文：五利妄言见其师，其方尽，多不雠。
现代文：五利将军谎称见到他的老师，实际上他的方术已穷尽，多数不能应验。
English: General Goryeo falsely claimed to have seen his teacher, but in reality he had exhausted all his methods and most of them could not be fulfilled.

古文：上乃诛五利。
现代文：皇上于是杀了五利。
English: The emperor then killed Goryo.

古文：其冬，公孙卿候神河南，见仙人迹缑氏城上，有物若雉，往来城上。
现代文：这年冬天，公孙卿在河南恭候神灵，说在缑氏城上看到仙人的脚印，有一种像野鸡的动物，在城上走来走去。
English: This winter, Gongsun Xie waited for the gods in Henan, saying that he saw the footprints of a fairy on the city of Xing, and that there was an animal like a pheasant walking around the city.

古文：天子亲幸缑氏城视迹。
现代文：天子亲自到缑氏城察看脚印。
English: Tianzi himself went to the city of Yao to see the footprints of the immortals.

古文：问卿： 得毋效文成、五利乎？ 
现代文：问公孙卿： 你该不会仿效文成、五利欺骗我吧？ 
English: Gongsun Xie asked: Are you following the example of Wencheng and Wuli?

古文：卿曰： 仙者非有求人主，人主求之。
现代文：公孙卿说： 仙人不是有求于人主，而是人主有求于他。
English: Gongsunqing said: Immortals do not have to seek the Lord, but the Lord has to seek him.

古文：其道非少宽假，神不来。
现代文：求仙人之道如果不稍微放宽延长些时日，神仙是不会来的。
English: Therefore, there must be a grace period for this, otherwise God will not come.

古文：言神事，事如迂诞，积以岁乃可致。 
现代文：说起求神这种事，好像很迂阔荒诞，但也只有积年累月才可请来神仙。 
English: When it comes to asking God for something, it seems to be very far-fetched and absurd, but it is only possible to invite the gods after many years.

古文：于是郡国各除道，缮治宫观名山神祠所，以望幸矣。
现代文：于是各郡国都修筑街道，修建宫观和名山上的神祠，期望天子驾临。
English: As a result, every county and country built streets, constructed palaces and shrines on famous mountains, expecting the heavenly son to come.

古文：其年，既灭南越，上有嬖臣李延年以好音见。
现代文：这年，已经灭了南越，皇上的宠臣李延年因为擅长音乐得以觐见皇帝。
English: In this year, South Vietnam had already been extinguished, and the emperor's favorite, Li Yan Nian, was able to meet the emperor because he was good at music.

古文：上善之，下公卿议，曰： 民间祠尚有鼓舞之乐，今郊祠而无乐，岂称乎？ 
现代文：皇上很赞赏，让公卿大臣讨论，说： 民间祭祀尚且有鼓舞音乐，现在郊祀却没有乐章，难道这样合适吗？ 
English: The Emperor was very appreciative, and let the noblemen and ministers discuss it, saying: Folk rituals still have inspirational music, but now suburban rituals have no music, is this appropriate?

古文：公卿曰： 古者祀天地皆有乐，而神祇可得而礼。 
现代文：公卿们说： 古时祭祀天地都有乐章，这样才能以礼祭祀神灵。 
English: The court nobles said, "In ancient times, there were musical pieces for both heaven and earth, so that the gods could be worshipped with rites.

古文：或曰： 泰帝使素女鼓五十弦瑟，悲，帝禁不止，故破其瑟为二十五弦。 
现代文：又有人说： 泰帝使素女弹奏有五十根弦的瑟，音调悲切，泰帝让她停下，但她却无法自止，所以破开她的瑟为二十五弦。 
English: Someone else said: Tai Di asked a maiden to play a fifty-stringed harp with a sad tone. Tai Di asked her to stop, but she couldn't stop herself, so she broke her harp into twenty-five strings.

古文：于是塞南越，祷祠泰一、后土，始用乐舞，益召歌儿，作二十五弦及箜篌瑟自此起。
现代文：于是为讨伐南越的胜利而举行赛祭，祷告祭祀泰一、后土，开始使用音乐和歌舞，又增招歌童，制作二十五弦的瑟及箜篌瑟就是从这时候开始的。
English: As a result, a competition was held to celebrate the victory of the South Vietnam campaign, prayers and sacrifices were offered to the gods of Tai I and Hou Tu, the use of music and song and dance began, more singers were recruited, and the production of twenty-five-stringed so and gongs began at this time.

古文：其来年冬，上议曰： 古者先振兵泽旅，然后封禅。 
现代文：第二年冬天，皇上提议说： 古时候的帝王先用兵犒赏军队，然后举行封禅。 
English: In the winter of the following year, the vassal gave the following advice: In the old days, the first thing to do was to send troops to liberate the country, concentrate on agriculture, and then perform the sealing ceremony.

古文：乃遂北巡朔方，勒兵十余万，还祭黄帝冢桥山，泽兵须如。
现代文：于是皇帝北出巡视朔方，统率十余万士卒，回来时在桥山祭黄帝陵，在须如时以酒食犒赏军队。
English: Therefore, the emperor went to the north to inspect the Shuo side, leading more than ten thousand soldiers. When he returned, he celebrated the Yellow Emperor's Mausoleum in Qiaoshan, and rewarded the troops with wine and food at the right time.

古文：上曰： 吾闻黄帝不死，今有冢，何也？ 
现代文：皇上问： 我听说黄帝没有死，可是现在却有他的陵墓，这是为什么呢？ 
English: The emperor said: I have heard that the Yellow Emperor is not dead, but now there is a Yellow Emperor, what is the reason?

古文：或对曰： 黄帝已仙上天，群臣葬其衣冠。 
现代文：有人回答说： 黄帝己成仙上天，他的臣子们把他的衣服帽子葬在了这里。 
English: Someone replied: After the Yellow Emperor became immortal, he soared into the sky. His courtiers buried his crown, and thus the Yellow Emperor's casket was found.

古文：即至甘泉，为且用事泰山，先类祠泰一。
现代文：皇帝到了甘泉，为了将在泰山举行封禅，先将这一特别事件祭告泰一神。
English: When the emperor arrived at Ganquan, in order to hold the sealing ceremony on Mount Tai, he first announced this special event to the god Tai.

古文：自得宝鼎，上与公卿诸生议封禅。
现代文：自从得了宝鼎，皇上就和公卿、儒生讨论封禅的事。
English: Since receiving the treasure, the emperor has been discussing the matter of the imperial seal with court nobles and scholars.

古文：封禅用希旷绝，莫知其仪礼，而群儒采封禅《尚书》《周官》《王制》之望祀射牛事。
现代文：封禅典礼由于很久没有举行了，几近失传，没有人知道它的礼仪，儒生们就采取《尚书》、《周官》、《王制》等书上所记载的望祭、射牛的事情作为封禅的仪式。
English: As the ceremony of the enthronement of a Zen monk had not been held for a long time, and was almost lost, and no one knew its etiquette, the Confucians adopted as the ceremony of the enthronement of a Zen monk the things of the memorial service and the shooting of the bull, which were recorded in books such as "Shang Shu," "Zhou Guan" and "King System."

古文：齐人丁公年九十余，曰： 封者，合不死之名也。秦皇帝不得上封。陛下必欲上，稍上即无风雨，遂上封矣。 
现代文：齐人丁公九十多岁了，对皇上说： 封，应该是长生不死的意思，秦皇帝不能在泰山封祀，陛下一定要上去，先缓慢地上去，如果没有风雨，就可以上去封祀了。 
English: Qijin Ding Gong, who was more than ninety years old, said to the emperor: "Closed, it should be the meaning of eternal life. Emperor Qin cannot be enshrined on Mount Tai. Your Majesty must go up, first slowly on the ground. If there is no wind or rain, you can go up and be enshrined."

古文：上于是乃令诸儒习射牛，草封禅仪。
现代文：皇上于是命令儒生们练习射牛，草拟封禅的仪式。
English: The emperor then ordered the Confucian students to practice shooting a bull and draw up a ceremony for sealing Zen.

古文：数年，至且行。
现代文：几年后，到了将要举行封禅典礼的时候。
English: A few years later, the day finally arrived when he was to be ordained.

古文：天子既闻公孙卿及方士之言，黄帝以上封禅，皆致怪物与神通，欲放黄帝以尝接神仙人蓬莱士，高世比德于九皇，而颇采儒术以文之。
现代文：天子既已听了公孙卿和方士的话，黄帝以上的封禅，都会引来一些能与神仙相通的怪异之像，所以想仿效黄帝接见神仙人蓬莱方士之法，让自己的德行高于世俗，与九皇相媲美，又采用儒家的说法来文饰外表。
English: Since Heavenly Son had already listened to the words of Gongsunqing and the magi, the enthronement of the Yellow Emperor and above would attract some strange images that could communicate with the gods, so he wanted to emulate the method of the Yellow Emperor's meeting with the mythical man Penglai, so that his virtue was higher than the world, comparable to the Nine Emperors, and he used the Confucian saying to decorate his appearance.

古文：群儒既以不能辩明封禅事，又牵拘于《诗》《书》古文而不敢骋。
现代文：儒生们既不能明辨封禅之事，又牵扯拘泥于《诗》《书》古文的记载而不敢自由发挥。
English: Confucianism students are not able to clearly distinguish the matter of sealing Zen, and they are also entangled in the records of "poetry" and "books" of ancient texts and dare not play freely.

古文：上为封祠器示群儒，群儒或曰 不与古同 ，徐偃又曰 太常诸生行礼不如鲁善 ，周霸属图封事，于是上绌偃、霸，尽罢诸儒弗用。
现代文：皇上把封禅用的器物给儒生们看，儒生们有的说 这和古代不同 ，徐偃也说 太常诸生所行的利益不如鲁人好 ，周霸会集儒生计划封禅的事情，皇帝便贬退了徐偃、周霸，罢黜了这些儒生，全都不予任用。
English: The emperor showed the Confucians the utensils used for the sealing ceremony. Some of the Confucians said that this was different from the ancient times, and Xu Bei also said that the interests of all beings were not as good as the Lu people. Zhou Ba gathered the Confucians to plan the sealing ceremony. The emperor then belittled Xu Bei and Zhou Ba, dismissed these Confucians, and all of them were not appointed.

古文：三月，遂东幸缑氏，礼登中岳太室。从官在山下闻若有言 万岁 云。
现代文：三月，皇上东行到缑氏县，依礼登上嵩山太室山举行祭祀，随行的官员在山下听到好像有人呼喊 万岁 的声音。
English: In March, the emperor traveled east to Shanshi County, where he ceremoniously climbed Mount Taimuro to hold a religious service. The accompanying officials heard what sounded like someone shouting "hurrah!" at the foot of the mountain.

古文：问上，上不言；问下，下不言。
现代文：询问山上的人，山上的人不说；问山下的人，山下的人也不说。
English: If you ask the emperor, the emperor will not answer; if you ask a subordinate, the subordinate will not say a word.

古文：于是以三百户封太室奉祠，命曰崇高邑。
现代文：皇帝就以三百户封给太室作为供奉祭祠之用，将其命名为崇高邑。
English: The emperor gave three hundred fiefs to Taishu as an offering to the shrine, and named it Sublime Town.

古文：东上泰山，山之草木叶未生，乃令人上石立之泰山颠。
现代文：接着东行登上泰山，山中的草木还没有长出叶子，就派人把石碑运上山，立在泰山的顶峰。
English: Then he went eastward to Mount Tai. The plants in the mountain had not yet sprouted leaves, so he sent someone to carry the stone tablet up the mountain to stand on the peak of Mount Tai.

古文：上遂东巡海上，行礼祠八神。
现代文：皇上接着东巡海上，依礼祭祀天主、地主、兵主、阴主、阳主、月主、日主和四时主八神。
English: The emperor then went on a cruise to the east and came to the sea, where he performed a ritual to worship the eight gods.

古文：齐人之上疏言神怪奇方者以万数，然无验者。
现代文：齐人上疏谈论神怪奇方的人数以万计，可是都没有效验。
English: Tens of thousands of people have written in to talk about supernatural phenomena and strange methods, but none of them have been confirmed.

古文：乃益发船，令言海中神山者数千人求蓬莱神人。
现代文：因此皇帝又增派船只，命令谈说海中神仙的几千人都去求访蓬莱仙人。
English: As a result, more ships were dispatched to let the thousands of people who were talking about the sacred mountain in the sea go to sea to search for the sacred person of Penglai Mountain.

古文：公孙卿持节常先行候名山，至东莱，言夜见一人，长数丈，就之则不见，见其迹甚大，类禽兽云。
现代文：公孙卿拿着使者符节，曾先去名山等候神仙，到了东莱，说在夜间看见一个人，身长数丈，等靠近后就不见了，只看到他脚印特别大，像禽兽的脚印。
English: Taking the messenger Fu Jie, Gongsun first went to the famous mountain to wait for the immortal, and arrived in Donglai. He said that at night he saw a man, several feet tall, and when he got closer, he disappeared. He only saw his footprints, which were very large, like the footprints of an animal.

古文：群臣有言见一老父牵狗，言 吾欲见巨公 ，已忽不见。
现代文：大臣中有人说看见一个牵着狗的老人，说 我要见天子 ，然后又不见了。
English: Some of the courtiers also said that they saw an old man leading a dog and said, "I want to see my lord," and then suddenly disappeared.

古文：上既见大迹，未信，及群臣有言老父，则大以为仙人也。
现代文：皇帝听说有人看见了大脚印，不相信，等到大臣中有人说到老人时，则又深信是仙人。
English: When the emperor heard that someone had seen the big footprints, he didn't believe it, but when one of his ministers mentioned the old man, he was convinced that it was a fairy.

古文：宿留海上，与方士传车及间使求仙人以千数。
现代文：因此，皇帝逗留在海滨，拨给方士们驿车，又派遣数以千计的使者访求仙人。
English: As a result, the emperor stayed on the seashore, assigned carriages to the magicians, and sent thousands of emissaries to visit the hermit.

古文：四月，还至奉高。上念诸儒及方士言封禅人人殊，不经，难施行。
现代文：四月，皇帝回到奉高，皇帝考虑儒生和方士议论的封禅，各人的说法不同，都不符合常理，难以施行。
English: In April, the emperor returned to Fenggao. The emperor considered the discussion between Confucianism and the founders of Confucianism. Each person's argument was different, did not conform to common sense, and was difficult to implement.

古文：天子至梁父，礼祠地主。
现代文：天子又去到梁父山，依礼祭祀地神。
English: When the heavenly son arrived at Mt. Liangzhi, he made a ritual offering to the landlord.

古文：乙卯，令侍中儒者皮弁荐绅，射牛行事。
现代文：乙卯那天，命令任侍中的儒生头戴白鹿皮帽，穿上插笏的官服，举行射牛仪式。
English: On the second day of the month, the attendants and Confucianists wore grand ceremonial dress: the head wore a leather flap, the crotch was inserted, and the etiquette of shooting a bull was performed.

古文：封泰山下东方，如郊祠泰一之礼。
现代文：在泰山下的东方设坛祭天，和郊祀泰一的礼仪相同。
English: It is the same etiquette to set up an altar in the east at the foot of Mount Tai and to worship Tai I.

古文：封广丈二尺，高九尺，其下则有玉牒书，书秘。
现代文：祭天用的祭坛宽一丈二尺，高九尺，祭坛下面放着封禅文书，书的内容是秘密的。
English: The altar used for the festival is two feet wide and nine feet high. Beneath the altar is a sealed Zen document, the contents of which are secret.

古文：礼毕，天子独与侍中奉车子侯上泰山，亦有封。
现代文：行礼完毕，天子单独带了侍中奉车都尉霍子侯上泰山，也举行了一番祭天仪式。
English: After the ceremony was over, Tianzi took his aide-de-camp Lieutenant Huo Zi Hou alone to Mount Tai, where they also held a ceremony to worship the heavens.

古文：其事皆禁。
现代文：这些事都禁止外传。
English: All of this is off-limits.

古文：明日，下阴道。
现代文：第二天从山北的道路下来。
English: The next day, I went down the mountain via my vagina.

古文：丙辰，禅泰山下址东北肃然山，如祭后土礼。
现代文：丙辰日，在泰山脚下东北角的肃然山举行了祭地仪式，和祭祀后土的礼仪相同。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th lunar month, a ceremony was held at Mount Sooranzan in the northeast corner at the foot of Mount Tai, with the same etiquette as after the ritual.

古文：天子皆亲拜见，衣上黄而尽用乐焉。
现代文：这些封禅仪式，天子都亲自拜祭，身穿黄色祭服，并且都用音乐伴奏。
English: At the closing ceremony and the Zen festival, the heavenly son himself performs the ceremony. The dress is still yellow, and it is all accompanied by music.

古文：江淮间一茅三嵴为神藉。五色土益杂封。
现代文：用江淮一带出产的有三条脊骨的茅草作为神灵的荐席，用象征五方的五色泥土填满祭坛。
English: The three-spine thatched grass produced in the Huai River area was used as the god's seat of recommendation, and the altar was filled with five-colored soil symbolizing the five directions.

古文：纵远方奇兽蜚禽及白雉诸物，颇以加祠。
现代文：放出远方进贡的奇兽飞禽和白色野鸡等物，祭仪格外庄严隆重。
English: Strange beasts, birds and white pheasants, which bring tribute from far away, are released, and the ceremony is particularly solemn and grand.

古文：兕旄牛犀象之属弗用。
现代文：兕牛、族牛、犀、象之类都不使用。
English: Snails, cattle, rhinoceroses, elephants and the like are not used.

古文：皆至泰山然后去。
现代文：皇帝一行都是先来到泰山，之后再离开的。
English: The emperor and his entourage came to Mount Tai first, and then left.

古文：封禅祠，其夜若有光，昼有白云起封中。
现代文：封禅祭祀的地方，夜晚都似乎有亮光出现，白天有白云从祭坛中升起。
English: In places where the Fuzen ritual is held, bright lights seem to appear at night, and white clouds rise from the altar during the day.

古文：天子从封禅还，坐明堂，群臣更上寿。于是制诏御史： 朕以眇眇之身承至尊，兢兢焉惧弗任。
现代文：天子从封禅之处回来，坐在明堂上，群臣相继祝颂，于是皇帝下诏给御史说： 我以卑微之体继承了至高无上的权位，兢兢业业，深恐不能胜任。
English: When the Son of Heaven returned from the place where he had been to meditate, he sat in the main hall, and the courtiers began to sing his praises one after the other. So the emperor issued an edict to the Emperor, saying, "I have inherited the supreme power with a humble body, I have been diligent in my work, and I am deeply afraid that I will not be able to fulfill my duties.

古文：维德菲薄，不明于礼乐。
现代文：我德行浅薄，不懂得礼乐。
English: Because virtue is meager, the music of the rite is unknown.

古文：脩祀泰一，若有象景光，屑如有望，依依震于怪物，欲止不敢，遂登封泰山。
现代文：祭祀泰一神以后，天空似乎出现了祥瑞之光，我好像看到了什么，被这奇异的景象所震惊，想停止祭祀而又不敢，所以登上泰山祭天。
English: After the worship of the god Tai, the sky seemed to have a radiance of auspiciousness. I seemed to see something and was shocked by this strange sight. I wanted to stop the worship but did not dare, so I climbed Mount Tai to worship the god.

古文：至于梁父，而后禅肃然。
现代文：到了梁父山，然后于肃然山祭地。
English: They went to Liangchishan Mountain and then to the Sooranshan Festival Grounds.

古文：自新，嘉与士大夫更始。赐民百户牛一酒十石，加年八十孤寡布帛二匹。
现代文：从此修德自新，希望与土大夫共同有个新的开始，赐给庶民每百户人家牛一头、酒十石，八十岁以上的老人和孤儿寡妇加赐布帛二匹。
English: From now on, he hopes to have a new beginning together with the local doctors. He will give the common people one cow for every hundred households, ten kilos of wine, and two cloth donkeys to the elderly over 80 years old, orphans and widows.

古文：复博、奉高、蛇丘、历城，毋出今年租税。
现代文：免除博县、奉高、蛇丘、历城四个地方的徭役，不缴纳当年的租税。
English: He was exempted from paying taxes in four places, including Bo County, Fenggao, Shekou and Licheng, and did not pay taxes for the year.

古文：其赦天下，如乙卯赦令。
现代文：大赦天下，和乙卯年的赦令一样。
English: A general amnesty for the whole country, just like the amnesty decree in the second year of Yu.

古文：行所过毋有复作。
现代文：凡我经过的地方，免除监外执行的劳役。
English: There must be no more copyists.

古文：事在二年前，皆勿听治。 
现代文：两年以前犯罪的，都不要再审讯治罪。 
English: Any misdemeanours committed two years ago are no longer punishable.

古文：又下诏曰： 古者天子五载一巡狩，用事泰山，诸侯有朝宿地。其令诸侯各治邸泰山下。 
现代文：又下诏说： 古时天子每隔五年巡狩一次，到泰山祭祀，来朝拜的诸侯都有各自的住所，命令诸侯各自在泰山下修建官邸。 
English: The imperial edict also said: In ancient times, the Son of Heaven went on a hunting tour every five years. He went to Mount Tai to offer sacrifices, and the princes who came to worship had their own residences. The princes were ordered to build official residences under Mount Tai.

古文：天子既已封禅泰山，无风雨菑，而方士更言蓬莱诸神山若将可得，于是上欣然庶几遇之，乃复东至海上望，冀遇蓬莱焉。
现代文：天子既然已经在泰山封禅，没有遇上风雨灾害，方土们又说蓬莱各神山似乎也将找到了，皇上很高兴，认为自己也许能遇到神仙，于是又东行到海边眺望，希望看到蓬莱仙岛。
English: Since the heavenly son had already been meditating at Mount Tai and had not encountered any wind or rain disasters, the local people also said that all the sacred mountains in Penglai seemed to be found. The emperor was very happy, thinking that he might be able to meet the gods, so he went east to look out to the sea, hoping to see the Penglai Fairy Island.

古文：奉车子侯暴病，一日死。
现代文：这时奉车都尉霍子侯突然患病，当日就去世了。
English: Feng Che Huo Zi Hou suddenly fell ill and died one day later.

古文：上乃遂去，并海上，北至碣石，巡自辽西，历北边至九原。
现代文：皇上这才离去，沿着海岸，向北到达碣石，之后从辽西巡视，经过北方边境，到了九原。
English: Only then did the emperor leave. He went up the coast, traveling north to Shanshi. He started his inspection from the west of Liao and traveled through the northern border fortress to arrive in Jiuhara County.

古文：五月，返至甘泉。
现代文：五月，皇帝回到了甘泉宫。
English: In May, the emperor returned to Ganquan Palace.

古文：有司言宝鼎出为元鼎，以今年为元封元年。
现代文：主管官员提议将宝鼎出现那年定为元鼎，由于今年举行了封禅大典，年号就定为 元封 ，以今年为元封元年。
English: The official in charge said that the year of Baoding's appearance was set as the founding year, and the year of this year's seal should be the founding year.

古文：其秋，有星茀于东井。
现代文：这年秋天，有颗光芒四射的星出现在东井。
English: In the autumn of that year, a comet appeared in Tsuru-juku.

古文：后十余日，有星茀于三能。
现代文：过了十几天，又有颗光芒四射的星出现在三台宿天区。
English: A dozen days later, another radiant star appeared in the Sunda Pleiades.

古文：望气王朔言： 候独见其星出如瓠，食顷复入焉。 
现代文：望气的官员王朔说： 我观察天象的时候，只看到此星出现时像葫芦一样，一顿饭的工夫就又隐没了。 
English: Wang Shuo, a hopeful official, said: "When I observed the celestial elephant, I only saw that this star appeared like a gourd, and the time for a meal disappeared.

古文：有司言曰： 陛下建汉家封禅，天其报德星云。 
现代文：主管官员说： 陛下建立了汉朝的封禅礼制，上天出现德星作为对您的报答。 
English: The official in charge said: Your Majesty has established the Han Dynasty's Fuzhen Rite system, and a virtuous star has appeared in the heavens as your reward.

古文：其来年冬，郊雍五帝，还，拜祝祠泰一。
现代文：第二年冬天，皇帝前往雍县郊祀五帝，回来时，以拜谢祝祷的仪式祭祀泰一神。
English: In the winter of the following year, the emperor went to the outskirts of Yong County to worship the Five Emperors. When he returned, he offered a ritual of thanksgiving and blessing to the god Tai.

古文：赞飨曰： 德星昭衍，厥维休祥。
现代文：祝词说： 德星光芒四射，预示美好吉祥。
English: The praising official recited, "The virtue star is bright, which is auspicious.

古文：寿星仍出，渊耀光明。
现代文：寿星一再出现，显示天下安宁，灿烂光明。
English: Another birthday star appears, shining brightly.

古文：信星昭见，皇帝敬拜泰祝之飨。 
现代文：信星明白显示了国运长久，皇帝恭敬地拜谢祝祷，请享用进献的祭品。 
English: The faith star clearly shows that the national fortune is long, the emperor respectfully thanks and prays, please enjoy the sacrificial offerings.

古文：其春，公孙卿言见神人东莱山，若云 见天子 。
现代文：这年春天，公孙卿说在曾在东莱山看到仙人，那位仙人好像说 要见天子 。
English: This spring, Gongsunqing said that he had seen a fairy in Donglaishan. The fairy seemed to say that she wanted to see the Son of Heaven.

古文：天子于是幸缑氏城，拜卿为中大夫。
现代文：于是天子来到缑氏城，任命公孙卿为中大夫。
English: As a result, the heavenly son came to Shanshi City and appointed Gongsunqing as the middle doctor.

古文：遂至东莱，宿留之数日，毋所见，见大人迹。
现代文：随后来到东莱，停留了好几条，什么也没看见，只看到了大的脚印。
English: He then went to Donglai, where he stayed for several hours and saw nothing but large footprints.

古文：复遣方士求神怪采芝药以千数。
现代文：皇帝又派遣数以千计的方士访求神怪，采集灵芝药草。
English: In addition, more than a thousand people were dispatched to search for immortals and extract reishi mushrooms.

古文：是岁旱。于是天子既出毋名，乃祷万里沙，过祠泰山。
现代文：这年干旱，皇帝再无出巡的合理理由，便在万里沙祷祀，经过泰山时进行了祭祀。
English: In this year of drought, the emperor did not have a reasonable reason to go on a tour, so he prayed in Wanli Sha and performed a sacrifice when passing through Mount Tai.

古文：还至瓠子，自临塞决河，留二日，沉祠而去。
现代文：回去时，到瓠子口，亲自去部署堵塞黄河的决口，逗留了两天，沉下祭品祭祀河神，然后才离开。
English: When he went back, he went to Jiazigou and personally deployed a raft to block the mouth of the Yellow River. He stayed for two days, sinking offerings to worship the river god, and then left.

古文：使二卿将卒塞决河，河徙二渠，复禹之故迹焉。
现代文：皇帝派两个将军率兵堵塞河道的决口，使河水迁徒，从另外两条河道流过，恢复了大禹治水时河道的原貌。
English: The emperor sent two generals and soldiers to block the mouth of the river, so that the river water migrated and flowed through the other two rivers, restoring the original appearance of the river during Dayu's flood control.

古文：是时既灭南越，越人勇之乃言 越人俗信鬼，而其祠皆见鬼，数有效。
现代文：当时已灭南越，越人勇之对皇帝说 越人有信鬼的风俗，并且每次祭祀时都能见到鬼，往往有效验。
English: At that time, South Vietnam had already been destroyed, and Yue Ren Yongzhi told the emperor that the Yue people had the custom of believing in ghosts, and they could see ghosts every time they made a sacrifice.

古文：昔东瓯王敬鬼，寿至百六十岁。
现代文：从前东瓯王敬鬼，寿高一百六十岁。
English: Once upon a time, the king of the Eastern Song Dynasty revered ghosts. He lived to be 160 years old.

古文：后世谩怠，故衰秏 。
现代文：后世子孙对鬼怠慢了，所以衰败下来 。
English: The descendants of later generations neglected the ghosts, so they fell into decay.

古文：乃令越巫立越祝祠，安台无坛，亦祠天神上帝百鬼，而以鸡卜。
现代文：于是皇帝命令越巫建立越式祠庙，只有祭台，没有祭坛，用来祭祀天神、上帝、百鬼，用鸡骨卜问吉凶。
English: As a result, she ordered Yue Wu to build Yue Zhu Temple, which had a platform but no altar, and also worshiped the Heavenly Emperor and hundreds of ghosts, and used the chicken to pray for good luck.

古文：上信之，越祠鸡卜始用焉。
现代文：因为皇帝相信这些，所以越祠和鸡卜从哪个时候逐渐开始流行起来。
English: Because the emperor believed in these things, the yue ancestral hall and the cockerel gradually became popular.

古文：公孙卿曰： 仙人可见，而上往常遽，以故不见。
现代文：公孙卿说： 仙人可以见到，只是皇上每次求访都很匆忙，因此见不到仙人。
English: Gongsun Ching said: The hermit could have been seen, but the emperor's movements were so rapid and hurried that he could not be seen.

古文：今陛下可为观，如缑氏城，置脯枣，神人宜可致。
现代文：现在陛下可修建楼观，像缑氏城那样，供设肉脯、枣子，应该就能请来仙人。
English: Now His Majesty can build a view of the building, like that of Shou's castle, provide meat and dates, and should be able to invite a hermit.

古文：且仙人好楼居。 
现代文：而且仙人都喜欢住在阁楼上。 
English: And the hermit likes to live upstairs.

古文：于是上令长安则作蜚廉桂观，甘泉则作益延寿观，使卿持节设具而候神人。
现代文：于是皇上命令在长安建造蜚廉观和桂观，在甘泉宫建造益延寿观，派公孙卿手持符节，陈设供品，迎接仙人。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered the construction of the Jia Lian Guan and Gui Guan in Chang'an, and the Yiyan Shou Guan in Ganquan Palace, and sent Gongsunqing to hold the festival, display the offerings, and welcome the immortals.

古文：乃作通天台，置祠具其下，将招来神仙之属。
现代文：然后又建造通天台，把祭祀用的器具放置台下，准备招来仙人。
English: Then, a roof was built, and the sacrificial tools were placed under the stage, ready to be used to summon the immortals.

古文：于是甘泉更置前殿，始广诸宫室。
现代文：这时又在甘泉宫修建了前殿，开始扩建许多宫室。
English: At this time, the vestibule was built in Ganquan Palace, and the expansion of many palace rooms began.

古文：夏，有芝生殿防内中。
现代文：夏天，有芝草生在斋房中。
English: In the summer, grass sprouts in the dining hall.

古文：天子为塞河，兴通天台，若有光云，乃下诏曰： 甘泉防生芝九茎，赦天下，毋有复作。 
现代文：天子由于黄河决口被堵住，兴建了通天台，天上似有神光的瑞应，于是下诏说： 甘泉宫中生出九茎灵芝，大赦天下，免除监外服徒刑的劳役。 
English: Since the mouth of the Yellow River was blocked, the heavenly son built a roof, and the sky seemed to have a divine light, so he issued an edict saying: Nine stalks of reishi mushroom were born in Ganquan Palace, the world was amnestied, and labor service outside prison was exempted.

古文：其明年，伐朝鲜。
现代文：第二年，征伐朝鲜。
English: The following year, he sent troops to invade North Korea.

古文：夏，旱。
现代文：夏天干旱。
English: Summer, drought.

古文：公孙卿曰： 黄帝时封则天旱，干封三年。 
现代文：公孙卿说： 黄帝时举行封祀，就有天旱，为了使封祀坛的土干燥，旱了三年。 
English: Gongsunqing said: When the Yellow Emperor held the sealing ceremony, there was a drought. In order to make the soil of the sealing altar dry, it was dried for three years.

古文：上乃下诏曰： 天旱，意干封乎？
现代文：皇上于是下诏说： 天旱，意思是天要使封祀坛的土乾燥吧？
English: The emperor then issued an edict saying, "The sky is dry, which means that the sky is going to dry the soil of the sealing altar, right?

古文：其令天下尊祠灵星焉。 
现代文：为此，命令天下的百姓隆重地祭祀灵星。 
English: All the people of the world are hereby commanded to venerate and worship the spirit star.

古文：其明年，上郊雍，通回中道，巡之。
现代文：又过了一年，皇上到雍县郊祭，在通过回中的道路时，去那里进行了巡视。
English: Next year, the emperor will hold a festival on the outskirts of Yongcheng, open the road to Huizhong, and go there to inspect.

古文：春，至鸣泽，从西河归。
现代文：春天，到达鸣泽，然后从西河返回。
English: In the spring, I arrived in Narusawa after returning from Saikawa Prefecture.

古文：其明年冬，上巡南郡，至江陵而东。登礼潜之天柱山，号曰南岳。
现代文：来年冬季，皇上巡视南郡，到江陵而东行，登上潜县的天柱山，依礼祭祀，称这座山为南岳。
English: In the winter of the following year, the emperor made an inspection tour of Nanshun, and after reaching Gangneung, he went east and climbed Tianzhu Mountain in Qianxian County. According to the ritual, he called this mountain Nangue.

古文：浮江，自寻阳出枞阳，过彭蠡，祀其名山川。
现代文：顺江而行，从寻阳出发，到达枞阳，经过彭蠡，沿江祭祀了这些地方的名山大川。
English: They sailed along the river, starting from Huan Yang and arriving at Poyang, passing through Penghu, and along the river they offered sacrifices to the famous mountains and rivers of these places.

古文：北至琅邪，并海上。
现代文：往北到达琅邪，然后沿海北上。
English: To travel further north to Xujiahui, take the sea route.

古文：四月中，至奉高脩封焉。
现代文：四月中旬，到达奉高县，举行封禅大典。
English: In mid-April, they repaired the fenced land on Mount Tai in Fenggao County.

古文：初，天子封泰山，泰山东北址古时有明堂处，处险不敞。
现代文：当初，皇帝在泰山举行封禅大典，泰山脚下的东北方有古时的明堂遗址，所处位置险峭而不开阔。
English: At the beginning, the emperor held a grand ceremony for the enthronement of Zen in Mount Tai. In the northeast at the foot of Mount Tai, there is an ancient Myeongdong site, located in a precarious but not open position.

古文：上欲治明堂奉高旁，未晓其制度。
现代文：皇上想在奉高县附近修建明堂，却不知道明堂的制度。
English: The emperor wanted to build another Myeongdong next to Bonggao-eup, but he did not know what it should look like.

古文：济南人公玊带上黄帝时《明堂图》。
现代文：济南人公玊带献上黄帝时的明堂图。
English: A map of the Ming Dynasty from the time of the Yellow Emperor, presented by the people of Jinan.

古文：《明堂图》中有一殿，四面无壁，以茅盖，通水，圜宫垣为复道，上有楼，从西南入，命曰昆仑，天子从之入，以拜祠上帝焉。
现代文：明堂图中有一殿，四面没有墙壁，用茅草盖顶，四周有水沟相同，环绕宫墙的是复道，上有楼，从西南进入殿堂，被称作昆仑道，天子从这里进入，拜祭上天。
English: In the Ming Hall, there is a hall with no walls on four sides, with a thatched roof, surrounded by the same ditch. Surrounding the palace wall is a multi-lane road, with an upper floor, entering the hall from the southwest, known as the Kunlun Road. The heavenly son enters from here and worships the heavens.

古文：于是上令奉高作明堂汶上，如带图。
现代文：于是皇上命令奉高县依照公玊带的图佯，在汶上修建明堂。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered Bonggao County to build Myeongdong on the hill according to the official map.

古文：及五年脩封，则祠泰一、五帝于明堂上坐，令高皇帝祠坐对之。
现代文：到元封五年举行封祀，就在明堂的上座祭祀泰一、五帝，高皇帝的灵位设在对面。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the enthronement ceremony was held, and the enthronement ceremony of the first and fifth emperors was held in the Ming Hall, and the spiritual position of Emperor Gao was located on the opposite side.

古文：祠后土于下房，以二十太牢。天子从昆仑道入，始拜明堂如郊礼。礼毕，燎堂下。
现代文：用二十头牛祀后土于下房。天子从昆仑道进去，开始按照郊祀的礼仪在明堂拜祭。祭礼完毕，在堂下焚祭余的牲肉。
English: Twenty oxen were used to enshrine Hou Tu in the lower room. The heavenly son entered from Kunlun Road and began to worship in the main hall according to the etiquette of suburban worship. After the ceremony, the remaining animal meat was burned under the hall.

古文：而上又上泰山，有秘祠其颠。
现代文：之后，皇上又登上泰山，在山顶举行秘密祭祀。
English: Later, the emperor ascended Mount Tai again to hold a secret ritual at the top of the mountain.

古文：而泰山下祠五帝，各如其方，黄帝并赤帝，而有司侍祠焉。
现代文：在泰山脚下祭祀五帝，都依照他们各自的方位，只有黄帝和赤帝是在一起，由主管官员随行祭祀。
English: In contrast, the five emperors were sacrificed at the foot of Mount Tai, each according to his or her position. Only the Yellow Emperor and the Red Emperor were sacrificed together, and the officials in charge assisted the attendants during the festival.

古文：泰山上举火，下悉应之。
现代文：在泰山上燃火，山下也都燃火相应。
English: If there is a fire on Mount Tai, there will be a corresponding fire below the mountain.

古文：其后二岁，十一月甲子朔旦冬至，推历者以本统。
现代文：又过了两年，正是十一月甲子朔日，早晨与冬至相交，推算历数的人以这一天作为新历法的起点。
English: After another two years, it was the first day of November, the morning of which coincided with the winter solstice, and people who calculated the calendar used this day as the starting point for the new calendar.

古文：天子亲至泰山，以十一月甲子朔旦冬至日祠上帝明堂，每脩封禅。
现代文：天子亲自到泰山，在十一月甲子朔旦冬至那天，去到明堂祭祀上天，不举行封禅。
English: The Son of Heaven himself went to Mount Tai, and on the day of the winter solstice in November, he went to Myeongdong to offer sacrifices to the heavens, and did not hold a memorial service.

古文：其赞飨曰： 天增授皇帝泰元神策，周而复始。
现代文：祝辞说： 上天增授皇帝泰元神策，周而复始。
English: The congratulatory message said: Heaven has bestowed the Emperor with the divine policy of Taiyuan.

古文：皇帝敬拜泰一。 
现代文：皇帝恭敬地拜谢泰一。 
English: The emperor respectfully bowed to Hsieh.

古文：东至海上，考入海及方士求神者，莫验，然益遣，冀遇之。
现代文：皇上又东行来到海边，考察前往海上求仙的人和方士，没有结果，然而还是派遣了更多的人前往，希望能遇到神仙。
English: Then he went to the sea to the east and asked the magicians and other seafarers who were visiting the immortals. He did not see any effect. However, instead of stopping these activities, he increased the number of personnel, hoping to meet the immortals.

古文：十一月乙酉，柏梁灾。
现代文：十一月乙酉，柏梁台发生火灾。
English: In November, a fire broke out in the Bai Liang Palace.

古文：十二月甲午朔，上亲禅高里，祠后土。
现代文：十二月甲午初一，皇上亲临高里山禅祀，祭祀后土。
English: On the first day of the first day of the first month of December, the emperor himself went to the Goli Zen Festival to offer sacrifices.

古文：临渤海，将以望祠蓬莱之属，冀至殊庭焉。
现代文：有去到渤海，想以望祀遥祭蓬莱那样的仙山，希望能够前往仙人所在的异域。
English: I've been to the Bohai Sea, and I want to visit the fairy mountains like the remote festival Penglai, and I hope to be able to go to the exotic place where the fairies are.

古文：上还，以柏梁灾故，朝受计甘泉。
现代文：皇上回到京城后，因为柏梁台遭火灾被烧毁，就在甘泉宫上朝，接受郡国的会计簿册。
English: When the Emperor returned to Kyoto, due to the fire that occurred in the Palace of the Oak Leaves, he changed his schedule to meet with the county councillors at Gansu Palace in the morning, and accepted the cheque presented by them.

古文：公孙卿曰： 黄帝就青灵台，十二日烧，黄帝乃治明庭。
现代文：公孙卿说： 黄帝建成青灵台，十二天被烧，黄帝又建造明庭。
English: Gongsunqing said: The Yellow Emperor built the Qinglingdai, which was burned for twelve days. The Yellow Emperor also built the Mingyuan.

古文：明庭，甘泉也。 
现代文：明庭就是现在的甘泉宫。 
English: The Ming Court is now the Gansu Palace.

古文：方士多言古帝王有都甘泉者。
现代文：方士多说古时帝王有建都甘泉的。
English: Most scholars say that in ancient times, emperors built their capitals in Ganquan.

古文：其后天子又朝诸侯甘泉，甘泉作诸侯邸。
现代文：此后天子又在甘泉宫上朝接见诸侯，在甘泉宫建造诸侯官邸。
English: After that, the emperor received the princes in the morning at the Gansu Palace, and built the official residence of the princes at the Gansu Palace.

古文：勇之乃曰： 越俗有火灾，复起屋必以大，用胜服之。 
现代文：勇之又说： 越人有这样的习俗，火灾后再建的房屋一定要比烧毁前的大，用来制服灾殃。 
English: Yuanzhi said, "The custom in Yuezi is that after a fire, the newly built house must be bigger than the original one, so that it can be used as a shelter and outdo the original house to avoid disasters.

古文：于是作建章宫，度为千门万户。
现代文：于是就建造建章宫，设计千门万户，前殿高度超过未央宫。
English: As a result, Jianzhang Palace was built, thousands of doors were designed, and the height of the vestibule exceeded that of Weiyang Palace.

古文：前殿度高未央，其东则凤阙，高二十余丈。
现代文：东面是凤阙，高二十多丈。
English: To the east is Fengyao, a 20-plus-meter-tall pine tree.

古文：其西则唐中，数十里虎圈。
现代文：西面是唐中苑，周围数十里的虎圈。
English: To the west is the middle of the Tang Dynasty, with a radius of dozens of miles forming a tiger's den.

古文：其北治大池，渐台高二十余丈，名曰泰液池，中有蓬莱、方丈、瀛洲、壶梁，象海中神山龟鱼之属。
现代文：北面挖了一个大水池，池中的渐台高二十余丈，池名叫泰液池，池中有蓬莱、方丈、瀛洲、壶梁，类似海中的神山、龟、鱼之类的石刻。
English: A large pool was dug on the north side. The gradient in the pool is more than 20 meters high. The pool is called Taijiquan Pool. There are stone carvings of Penglai, Hojo, Shuzhou, and Jialiang in the pool, which are similar to the sacred mountains, turtles, and fish in the sea.

古文：其南有玉堂、璧门、大鸟之属。
现代文：南面有玉堂、壁门和神鸟之类的雕像。
English: To the south, there are buildings such as the Gyokudo and the Bi Gate, as well as a large bird sculpture.

古文：乃立神明台、井干楼，度五十余丈，辇道相属焉。
现代文：还建立神明台、井幹楼，全都高五十余丈，楼阁间连接着车道。
English: They also built Shinmeidai and Jingkanro, all of which are more than 50 meters high, with a driveway connecting the lofts.

古文：夏，汉改历，以正月为岁首，而色上黄，官名更印章以五字，因为太初元年。
现代文：夏天，汉朝改革历法，以夏历的正月为一年的开始，颜色尚黄，官名印章更改为五个字，因而就把年号改为太初元年。
English: In the summer, the Han Dynasty reformed the calendar, taking the first month of the summer calendar as the beginning of the year, the color was still yellow, and the official name seal was changed to five words, so the year number was changed to the first year of the year.

古文：是岁，西伐大宛。
现代文：这一年，西伐大宛。
English: That year, troops were dispatched to the west to fight against Dawan.

古文：蝗大起。
现代文：发生了大规模的蝗灾。
English: Locusts are everywhere.

古文：丁夫人、雒阳虞初等以方祠诅匈奴、大宛焉。
现代文：丁夫人和雒阳虞初等人用方术祭祀，在祭祀时乞请鬼神加祸于匈奴和大宛。
English: Mrs. Ding, Shanyang Yuchu and others used prayer to curse the Xiongnu and Dawan.

古文：其明年，有司言雍五畤无牢熟具，芬芳不备。
现代文：第二年，主管官员说，雍县五畤祭祀时没有使用煮熟的牲畜等祭品，也没有出现芬芳的香味。
English: In the second year, the official in charge said that no cooked livestock or other sacrificial items were used during the Yongxian Five Auspicious Animal Sacrifices, and no fragrant fragrance appeared.

古文：乃命祠官进畤犊牢具，五色食所胜，而以木禺马代驹焉。
现代文：皇上便命令祠官将熟牛犊进献五畤，五帝食所用颜色的祭品，用木偶马代替小马充当祭品。
English: The emperor then ordered the ancestral hall official to offer the cooked beef brisket to the five emperors, and replace the pony with a puppet horse as a sacrifice.

古文：独五帝用驹，行亲郊用驹。
现代文：只有祭祀五帝时用小马，天子亲自郊祀用小马。
English: Only the pony is used when the Five Emperors are worshipped, and the pony is used when the Son of Heaven is worshipped in the suburbs.

古文：及诸名山川用驹者，悉以木禺马代。
现代文：祭祀名山大川用小马的，也全部用木偶马代替。
English: All the famous mountains and rivers of the sacrificial rites are useful, and they are all replaced by puppet horses.

古文：行过，乃用驹。
现代文：天子出巡经过时祭祀，才用小马。
English: When the heavenly son travels and passes by the place of worship, he uses a real scepter.

古文：他礼如故。
现代文：其他的礼节和原来一样。
English: The number of other courtesies remains unchanged.

古文：其明年，东巡海上，考神仙之属，未有验者。
现代文：又过了一年，皇上东行，巡视海滨，考查有关神仙一类的事，没有应验的。
English: In the second year, the eastbound inspection came to the sea, and the words of the inspectors about the immortals and the like were not valid.

古文：方士有言 黄帝时为五城十二楼，以候神人于执期，命曰迎年 。
现代文：有的方士说 黄帝时建造五城十二楼，目的就是在执期等候仙人，称为 迎年 。
English: Some sages said that when the Yellow Emperor built the 12th floor of the Five Cities, the purpose was to wait for the hermit during the performance period, known as the New Year.

古文：上许作之如方，名曰明年。
现代文：皇帝允许依照他所说的样子去兴建，称为明年。
English: The emperor gave his permission for the construction to go ahead as he had said, saying that it would take place the following year.

古文：上亲礼祠上帝，衣上黄焉。
现代文：皇上还穿上黄色衣服，亲自依礼祭祀上天。
English: The emperor also put on yellow clothes and personally went up to heaven according to the ritual.

古文：公玊带曰： 黄帝时虽封泰山，然风后、封钜、岐伯令黄帝封东泰山，禅凡山合符，然后不死焉。 
现代文：公玊带说： 黄帝时虽在泰山举行封禅大典，但风后、封巨、岐伯要求黄帝在东泰山封祀，在凡山辟场祭地，以与符瑞相合，然后才能长生不死。 
English: He said: Although the Yellow Emperor held a grand ceremony to enshrine Zen in Mount Tai, the Empress Dowager, the Grand Empress Dowager, and the Grand Empress Dowager requested that the Yellow Emperor be enshrined in East Mount Tai, and that a place of worship be set up on Mount Fanzhan to coincide with the Fu Rui, so that he could live forever.

古文：天子既令设祠具，至东泰山，东泰山卑小，不称其声，乃令祠官礼之，而不封禅焉。
现代文：天子便命令准备祭祀用具，来到东泰山，看到东泰山矮小，与它的声名不相称，就命祠官依礼祭祀，不举行封禅大典。
English: The heavenly son then ordered the preparation of sacrificial equipment, came to the East Taishan, and saw that the East Taishan was small and was not commensurate with its reputation, so he ordered the ancestral hall official to perform the ritual sacrifice and not hold the Fuzen Grand Ceremony.

古文：其后令带奉祠候神物。
现代文：以后命令公玊带在那里供奉祭祀，等候神灵。
English: Later, he ordered the imperial eunuchs to offer sacrifices there and wait for the gods to appear.

古文：夏，遂还泰山，修五年之礼如前，而加禅祠石闾。
现代文：夏天，皇上便回到泰山，举行五年一次的封禅典礼，礼节和原来的一样，还增加了在石闾山祭地的礼仪。
English: In the summer, the emperor returned to Mount Tai to hold the five-yearly enthronement ceremony. The etiquette was the same as before, with the addition of the etiquette at the Ishizuchiyama shrine.

古文：石闾者，在泰山下址南方，方士多言此仙人之闾也，故上亲禅焉。
现代文：石闾山在泰山脚下的南面，方士中有很多人说这是是仙人居住的地方，所以皇上亲自禅祀。
English: Mount Ishizuchi is in the south at the foot of Mount Tai, and many of the priests said that this was the place where the immortals lived, so the emperor personally went there to meditate.

古文：其后五年，复至泰山脩封，还过祭常山。
现代文：之后五年，皇帝又到泰山封禅，回来途中还祭祀了常山。
English: Five years later, the emperor went to Mount Tai again for a retreat. On his way back, he also made a sacrifice to Mount Chang.

古文：今天子所兴祠，泰一、后土，三年亲郊祠，建汉家封禅，五年一脩封。
现代文：当今天子所兴建的神祠，泰一、后土，每三年天子亲自郊祀一次，所建立的汉家封禅制度，每五年举行一次。
English: The shrines built by the current emperor, Tai I and Hou Tu, are personally worshipped by the emperor in the suburbs once every three years, and the Han Dynasty Fuzan system established by the emperor is held once every five years.

古文：薄忌泰一及三一、冥羊、马行、赤星，五，宽舒之祠官以岁时致礼。
现代文：薄诱忌还奏请修建了泰一和三一、冥羊、马行、赤星五座神祠，由祠官宽舒按规定的时间举行祭祀典礼。
English: Bo Yuqi also built the five shrines of Tai I and San I, Hiyang, Ma Xing, and Chuxing, and the sacrificial ceremony was held by the ancestral hall official Kanshu according to the specified time.

古文：凡六祠，皆太祝领之。
现代文：这五祠和泰一、后土祠合起来共六祠，都由太祝管理。
English: These five ancestral halls, together with Tai I and Hou Tu ancestral halls, make a total of six ancestral halls, all of which are managed by Tai Zhu.

古文：至如八神诸神，明年、凡山他名祠，行过则祀，去则已。
现代文：至于像八神等神和明年、凡山等其他著名山川的神祠，天子经过时就祭祀，离去后就停止。
English: As for the shrines of gods such as the Eight Gods and other famous mountains and rivers such as the Next Year and the Van Mountains, they will offer sacrifices when the heavenly son passes by, and will stop after he leaves.

古文：方士所兴祠，各自主，其人终则已，祠官弗主。他祠皆如其故。
现代文：方士们所兴建的神祀，各自主持祭祀，本人死了就停止，祠官不再掌管祭祀，其他神祠都按照最初的规定办理。
English: The deities and shrines built by the founders each presided over their own rituals. When the founder died, the rituals stopped, the shrine officials were no longer in charge of the rituals, and the other shrines were all handled according to the original regulations.

古文：今上封禅，其后十二岁而还，遍于五岳、四渎矣。
现代文：当今皇上封禅，此后十二年再来回顾，会祭遍了五岳、四渎。
English: Today, the emperor is enthroned, and twelve years later, looking back, the festival has spread to the five mountains and four provinces.

古文：而方士之候祠神人，入海求蓬莱，终无有验。
现代文：而方士等候和祭祀神仙，入海访求蓬莱，始终没有结果。
English: However, there was no effect for the priests who greeted and offered sacrifices to the godman, or for the sea of people seeking Mount Penglai.

古文：而公孙卿之候神者，犹以大人迹为解，无其效。
现代文：而公孙卿这些等候仙人的方士，还以巨人脚印来当借口，却没有效果。
English: However, the magicians, who were waiting for the hermit, also used the giant's footprints as an excuse, but to no avail.

古文：天子益怠厌方士之怪迂语矣，然终羁縻弗绝，冀遇其真。
现代文：天子日益厌倦方士的奇异迂阔的谈论，然而始终笼络他们，期望遇到真正的仙人。
English: Tenzin grew tired of the sorcerer's bizarre ramblings, but continued to woo them, hoping to meet a real hermit.

古文：自此之后，方士言祠神者弥众，然其效可睹矣。
现代文：从那以后，方士谈论祭祀神仙的更多了，可是效果如何，是可以看到的。
English: Since then, the priests have been talking more about offering sacrifices to the gods, but you can see the results.

古文：太史公曰：余从巡祭天地诸神名山川而封禅焉。
现代文：太史公说：我跟随皇上出巡、祭祀天地诸神和著名山川，参加了封禅。
English: Taishi said, "I have followed the Son of Heaven to inspect and worship the gods of heaven and earth and the famous mountains and rivers, and I have also participated in the pre-feudal Zen ceremony.

古文：入寿宫侍祠神语，究观方士祠官之言，于是退而论次自古以来用事于鬼神者，具见其表里。后有君子，得以览焉。
现代文：我进入寿宫侍祠听到祭神的祝祠，观察研究方士、祠官的言论，于是坐下来按照时间顺序叙述自古以来从事祭祀鬼神的事情，具体地揭示它的表面现象和内在的实际情况，后来有见识的人，应该能从这里看到当时的情形。
English: I entered the ancestral hall of the Summer Palace, heard the celebration of the deities, observed the remarks of the scholars and officials of the ancestral hall, and then sat down to describe in chronological order the things that have been engaged in the worship of ghosts and gods since ancient times, specifically revealing its appearance and internal reality. Later, people with insight should be able to see the situation at that time from here.

古文：至若俎豆圭币之详，献酬之礼，则有司存焉。
现代文：至于俎豆珪玉币帛的详细情形，献祭酬神的礼仪，在主管官员那里都有具体的规定。
English: As for the details of the pea and jade money bowl, the etiquette of offering sacrifices to the gods, there are specific regulations from the competent officials.

