古文：周舍徐勉周舍，字升逸，汝南安城人，晋左光禄大夫抃之八世孙也。父颙，齐中书侍郎，有名于时。
现代文：周舍字升逸，汝南安成人，是晋朝左光禄大夫周颤的八世孙。父亲周颐，任齐朝中书侍郎，在当时有名声。
English: Zhou Xie Zi Shengyi, the adult of Ru Nan'an, was the eighth-generation grandson of Zhou Tiao, the doctor of Zuo Guanglu in the Jin Dynasty. His father, Zhou Qi, was appointed as the junior secretary of Qi Dynasty, and was famous at that time.

古文：舍幼聪颍，颙异之，临卒谓曰： 汝不患不富贵，但当持之以道德。 
现代文：周舍幼年聪明，周颐认为他很奇特，临终时对他说： 你不担心不能富贵，衹是应该秉持道德。 
English: Zhou Xie was very clever when he was young. Zhou Ye thought he was very special. On his deathbed, he said to him, "Don't worry about not being rich. You should uphold morality."

古文：既长，博学多通，尤精义理，善诵书，背文讽说，音韵清辩。
现代文：长大后，博学多通，格外精通义理，善于朗读书籍，背诵文章立论辩说，音调清晰有辩才。
English: After growing up, he was well-versed in many subjects, especially in logic. He was good at reading books aloud, reciting articles and making arguments. His tone was clear and he was a good debater.

古文：起家齐太学博士，迁后军行参军。
现代文：出仕为齐朝太学博士，调任后军行参军。
English: He served as a doctor of science in the Qi Dynasty, and after being transferred, he joined the army.

古文：建武中，魏人吴包南归，有儒学，尚书仆射江祏招包讲。舍造坐，累折包，辞理遒逸，由是名为口辩。
现代文：建武年间，魏国人吴包归附南方，有儒学修养，尚书仆射江柘招吴包讲授，周舍造访就座，多次折服吴包，文理刚健飘逸，因此有辩才之名。
English: During the Jianwu period, Wu Bao, a native of the State of Wei, was annexed to the south. He was educated in Confucianism. Shang Shufu Shajiang recruited Wu Bao to give lectures. Zhou Xie visited and sat down with Wu Bao several times. He was literate, strong, and agile. Therefore, he was known for his ability to debate.

古文：王亮为丹阳尹，闻而悦之，辟为主簿，政事多委焉。
现代文：王亮担任丹阳尹，听说后喜欢他，征用为主簿，政事多托付给他。
English: Wang Liang served as Danyang Yin, liked him after hearing about him, requisitioned him as the main book, and entrusted him with most of the government affairs.

古文：迁太常丞。
现代文：调任太常丞。
English: He was transferred to the post of Taijo-jo.

古文：梁台建，为奉常丞。
现代文：梁朝台阁建立，担任奉常丞。
English: Liang Chao-tai-kaku was established, and he served as Bong Jang-seo.

古文：高祖即位，博求异能之士。吏部尚书范云与颙素善，重舍才器，言之于高祖，召拜尚书祠部郎。
现代文：高祖登位，广泛求取有特殊才能的人，吏部尚书范云和周颐一向友好，重视周舍的才华，报告给高祖，征召周撞任命为尚书祠部郎。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne, and people with special talents were widely sought after. Shangshu Fanyun and Zhou Qi, the officials, have always been friendly and attach great importance to Zhou She's talent. They reported to Gao Zu and conscripted Zhou Qian to be appointed as Shangshu's minister.

古文：时天下草创，礼仪损益，多自舍出。
现代文：当时国家草创，礼仪的增减，多出自周舍。
English: At that time, the national initiative, the increase and decrease of etiquette, mostly came from Zhou Xie.

古文：寻为后军记室参军、秣陵令。
现代文：不久担任后军记室参军、秣陵令。
English: Soon after, he joined the military and served as the commander of the Military Records Office.

古文：入为中书通事舍人，累迁太子洗马，散骑常侍，中书侍郎，鸿胪卿。
现代文：入朝为中书通事舍人，屡经升迁任太子洗马，散骑常侍，中书侍郎，鸿膻卿。
English: He entered the imperial court as a Chinese calligrapher, and was repeatedly promoted to the post of prince's horse-washing attendant, horseback riding attendant, Chinese calligrapher's attendant, and Hongyu's attendant.

古文：时王亮得罪归家，故人莫有至者，舍独敦恩旧，及卒，身营殡葬，时人称之。
现代文：当时王亮犯罪回家，朋友没有到访的，周舍独自看重旧日恩惠，到王亮去世，亲自为他料理出殡安葬，当时人称赞他。
English: At that time, Wang Liang returned home after committing a crime, and his friends did not visit him. Zhou She alone valued the old favors. When Wang Liang died, he personally prepared a funeral and burial for him. People praised him at that time.

古文：迁尚书吏部郎，太子右卫率，右卫将军，虽居职屡徙，而常留省内，罕得休下。国史诏诰，仪体法律，军旅谋谟，皆兼掌之。
现代文：调任尚书吏部郎，太子右卫率，右卫将军，虽然担任的职务屡次变更，但经常留在官署内，很少能休息回家，国史韶诰，礼仪法律，军事谋略，都由他兼管。
English: He was transferred to the position of Shang Shuliariburo, the Prince's Right Guard Leader, and the Right Guard General. Although the positions he held changed many times, he often stayed in the government office, rarely being able to take a break and go home. He was also in charge of national history, etiquette laws, and military strategy.

古文：日夜侍上，预机密，二十余年未尝离左右。
现代文：夜侍奉皇帝，参预机密事务，二十多年不曾离开左右。
English: Served the emperor at night, participated in confidential affairs, and did not leave the palace for more than 20 years.

古文：舍素辩给，与人泛论谈谑，终日不绝口，而竟无一言漏泄机事，众尤叹服之。
现代文：周舍素来能言善辩，和别人谈论开玩笑，整天不住口，而竟没有一句话泄漏机密，众人格外赞叹佩服他。
English: Zhou Xie has always been able to speak eloquently, talk and joke with others, and keep his mouth shut all day, but he has not leaked a single word of secrets. Everyone admires and admires him.

古文：性俭素，衣服器用，居处床席，如布衣之贫者。
现代文：性格节俭朴素，衣服器物，住处的床席，如同百姓中的贫困者。
English: His character is frugal and simple, his clothes and utensils, and the bed in his dwelling are like those of the poor among the common people.

古文：每入官府，虽广厦华堂，闺阁重邃，舍居之则尘埃满积。
现代文：每次进宫府，即使是高大华丽的建筑，内房层层，周舍居住后就积满了灰尘。
English: Every time you enter the palace, even if it is a tall and magnificent building, the inner rooms are piled up, and the surrounding houses are filled with dust after living.

古文：以荻为鄣，坏亦不营。
现代文：用荻草做遮挡物，坏了也不置办。
English: Use eucalyptus to make a screen. If it's broken, it doesn't matter.

古文：为右卫，母忧去职，起为明威将军、右骁骑将军。
现代文：担任右卫，因母亲去世离职，复出担任明威将军、右骁骑将军。
English: He served as the right guard, left the post due to his mother's death, and returned to serve as the Mingwei general and the right cavalry general.

古文：服阕，除侍中，领步兵校尉，未拜，仍迁员外散骑常侍、太子左卫率。
现代文：服丧期满，授任侍中，兼步兵校尉，没有就职，又调任员外散骑常侍、太子左卫率。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed as a chamberlain and an infantry lieutenant, but he did not take office, and he was transferred to the rank of non-commissioned officer, cavalryman, and prince's left guard.

古文：顷之，加散骑常侍、本州大中正，迁太子詹事。
现代文：不久，加授散骑常侍、本州大中正，调任太子詹事。
English: Not long after, he was promoted to the position of Prince Zhanji.

古文：普通五年，南津获武陵太守白涡书，许遗舍面钱百万，津司以闻。
现代文：普通七年，南津截获武陵太守白涡的信件，许诺送给周舍面钱一百万，渡口主管官员报告上去。
English: In the past seven years, Nanzin intercepted a letter from Wuling Taishu Baiyuru, promising to give Zhou Shimen money of one million, and the ferry official reported it.

古文：虽书自外入，犹为有司所奏，舍坐免。
现代文：虽然信件是从外面送进的，周舍还是被有关官员所举奏，周舍获罪免官。
English: Although the letter was sent from outside, Zhou She was still cited by the relevant officials, and Zhou She was convicted and removed from office.

古文：迁右骁骑将军，知太子詹事。
现代文：调任右骁骑将军，执掌太子詹事事务。
English: He was transferred to the post of General of the Right Armored Cavalry and was in charge of Prince Zhan's affairs.

古文：以其年卒，时年五十六。
现代文：在这年去世，终年五十六岁。
English: He died that year, aged fifty-six.

古文：上临哭，哀恸左右。
现代文：皇帝前往吊唁，哀伤感动左右。
English: The emperor went to pay his condolences and was deeply moved.

古文：诏曰： 太子詹事、豫州大中正舍，奄至殒丧，恻怆于怀。
现代文：诏令说： 太子詹事、豫州大中正周舍，忽然去世，心中悲伤。
English: The imperial edict said: Prince Zhan Zhi, Zheng Zhou Xie of the Middle School of Yuzhou University, died suddenly, and his heart was sad.

古文：其学思坚明，志行开敏，劬劳机要，多历岁年，才用未穷，弥可嗟恸。
现代文：他学问坚实思虑明晰，志向开阔行为敏捷，为机要事务辛劳，经历多年，才能没用尽，很为慨叹悲恸。
English: His learning is solid, his thoughts are clear, his ambition is broad, his behavior is quick, he works hard for important matters, he has experienced many years, his talent has not been exhausted, he is very sad.

古文：宜隆追远，以旌善人。
现代文：应尊崇追念的礼仪，来表彰好人。
English: The etiquette of remembrance should be respected, and good people should be commended.

古文：可赠侍中、护军将军，鼓吹一部，给东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭，丧事随由资给。
现代文：可追赠侍中、护军将军，鼓吹一部，赐给棺材，公服一套，衣服一套，丧事依据情况供给。
English: It is possible to follow up with a gift of a chamberlain, a general of the escort, a piece of propaganda, a coffin, a set of official uniform, a set of clothes, and funeral supplies according to the situation.

古文：谥曰简子。 
现代文：谧号为简王。 
English: His nickname is Jane Wang.

古文：明年，又诏曰： 故侍中、护军将军简子舍，义该玄儒，博穷文史，奉亲能孝，事君尽忠，历掌机密，清贞自居。
现代文：次年，又下诏说： 已故侍中、护军将军个王周捡，义理贯通儒道，广博穷尽文史，侍奉亲人能孝顺，侍奉君主能尽忠，多年掌管机密，以清廉忠贞要求自己。
English: The following year, the following edict was issued: The late Wang Zhouqi, a courtier and military escort general, was a scholar of Confucianism, with a broad knowledge of literature and history. He was able to serve his relatives with filial piety, and the monarch with loyalty. He was in charge of secrets for many years, and required himself to be honest and loyal.

古文：食不重味，身靡兼衣。
现代文：饮食没有多余的味道，身上没有多余的衣服。
English: There is no superfluous taste in food, and there is no superfluous clothing on the body.

古文：终亡之日，内无妻妾，外无田宅，两儿单贫，有过古烈。
现代文：去世的时候，内没有妻妾，外没有田地住宅，两个儿子孤单贫困，超过古代名人。
English: At the time of his death, he had no wife or concubine, no field residence outside, and his two sons were alone and poor, surpassing ancient celebrities.

古文：往者，南司白涡之劾，恐外议谓朕有私，致此黜免，追愧若人一介之善。
现代文：往日，南司关于白涡的弹劾，恐怕外间议论我有私心，以致有废黜免职的诏命，追思有愧于逭人耿直的善行。
English: In the past, Nanshi's impeachment of Bai Youru, I am afraid that the outside world would talk about my selfishness, so that there would be an imperial edict to depose and remove me from office, and I would think about the good deeds that were worthy of Geng Zhi.

古文：外可量加褒异，以旌善人。 
现代文：外府可酌情加以褒奖，来表彰好人。 
English: The prefectural government may, at its discretion, award prizes to commend good people.

古文：二子：弘义，弘信。
现代文：周舍有两个儿子：名叫弘义、弘信。
English: Zhou She has two sons: their names are Hong Yi and Hong Xin.

古文：徐勉，字修仁，东海郯人也。
现代文：徐勉字修仁，是东海郯人题人。
English: Xu Tsun Zi Shujin is the inscribed person of the East China Sea.

古文：祖长宗，宋高祖霸府行参军。
现代文：祖父长宗，担任宋高祖担藩王府邸的行参军。
English: His grandfather, Chojong, served as Song Gao's ancestor and marched to join the army at the residence of the king of the Han Dynasty.

古文：父融，南昌相。
现代文：父亲徐融，担任南昌相。
English: His father, Xu Rong, served as the Minister of Nanchang.

古文：勉幼孤贫，早励清节。
现代文：徐勉幼年孤单贫困，很早磨砺清高的节操。
English: Xu Yan was lonely and poor when he was young, and he had to cultivate a high self-discipline at an early age.

古文：年六岁，时属霖雨，家人祈霁，率尔为文，见称耆宿。
现代文：六岁时，遇到大雨，家人祈求天晴，徐勉随手写出祝文，受到老辈的称道。
English: At the age of six, when he encountered heavy rain and his family prayed for a fine day, Xu Mian wrote a congratulatory letter by hand, which was praised by the elders.

古文：及长，笃志好学。
现代文：等到长大，立志好学。
English: When I grow up, I want to be a good student.

古文：起家国子生。
现代文：起家为国子生。
English: He started his family as a native son.

古文：太尉文宪公王俭时为祭酒，每称勉有宰辅之量。
现代文：太尉文宪公王俭当时任祭酒，经常称赞徐勉有宰辅的气量。
English: Captain Wang Jian, who was in charge of the sacrificial wine at that time, often praised Xu Mian for having the energy of a deputy.

古文：射策举高第，补西阳王国侍郎。
现代文：考试列在上等，任西阳王国侍郎。
English: He passed the examination and was promoted to the first grade, and was appointed as a chamberlain of Xiyang Kingdom.

古文：寻迁太学博士，镇军参军，尚书殿中郎，以公事免。
现代文：不久调任太学博士，镇军参军，尚书殿中郎，因公事免职。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of Taigaku hakase, the town army joined the army, and he was removed from his post for official business.

古文：又除中兵郎、领军长史。
现代文：又授任中兵郎、领军长史。
English: He was also awarded the positions of Chubeiro (Junior Sergeant) and Choshi (Leader).

古文：琅邪王元长才名甚盛，尝欲与勉相识，每托人召之。
现代文：琅邪人王元长的文才名声很高，曾想和徐勉相识，经常托人召他。
English: The literary talent of the wicked Wang Yuanzhong had a high reputation. He had wanted to get to know Xu Mian, and often asked people to call him.

古文：勉谓人曰： 王郎名高望促，难可轻醿衣裾。 
现代文：徐勉说： 王郎名望高而急升，很难轻易裂开衣襟。 
English: Xu said: Wang Lang's reputation is high and soaring, it is difficult to easily tear open the collar.

古文：俄而元长及祸，时人莫不服其机鉴。
现代文：不久元长遇祸，当时人无不佩服徐勉机警的洞察力。
English: Not long after, Yuanchang was involved in an accident. At the time, everyone admired Xu Mian's astute insight.

古文：初与长沙宣武王游，高祖深器赏之。
现代文：起初和长沙宣武王交游，高祖很器重赏识他。
English: At the beginning, Gaozu had a friendship with King Xuanwu of Changsha, and Gaozu was very appreciative of him.

古文：及义兵至京邑，勉于新林谒见，高祖甚加恩礼，使管书记。
现代文：等起义军队到达京城，徐勉在新林拜见，高祖特别加以恩待礼敬，派他掌管文书记绿。
English: When the insurgent army arrived in Beijing, Xu went to Xinlin to meet Gao Zu. Gao treated him with special courtesy and sent him to be in charge of the clerical records.

古文：高祖践阼，拜中书侍郎，迁建威将军、后军谘议参军、本邑中正、尚书左丞。
现代文：高祖登位，徐勉被任命为中书侍郎，调任建威将军、后军谘议参军、本州中正、尚书左丞。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne, and Xu Mian was appointed as the attendant of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, transferred to the General of the Jian Wei, after the army was consulted to join the army, the General Secretary of the Honshu and the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, and the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee.

古文：自掌枢宪，多所纠举，时论以为称职。
现代文：自从掌管执法大权，纠察举劾很多，当时舆论认为他称职。
English: Since he took charge of law enforcement, there have been many pickets and complaints, and the public opinion at that time believed that he was competent.

古文：天监二年，除给事黄门侍郎、尚书吏部郎，参掌大选。
现代文：天监二年，授任给事黄门侍郎、尚书吏部郎，参与掌管重要官员的选拔。
English: In the second year of Tianjing, he was appointed as the attendant of Huangmen and the secretary of Shangshu, and participated in the selection of important officials.

古文：迁侍中。
现代文：调任侍中。
English: Transferred to the position of Samurai Junior High School.

古文：时王师北伐，候驿填委。
现代文：当时朝廷军队向北征伐，等候传送的文书堆积。
English: At that time, the imperial army was marching north, waiting for the documents to be delivered.

古文：勉参掌军书，劬劳夙夜，动经数旬，乃一还宅。
现代文：徐勉参与掌管军事文书，日夜辛劳，动不动经过几十天，才回一次家。
English: Xu Mian participated in the management of military documents, worked hard day and night, and only returned home after tens of days.

古文：每还，群犬惊吠。
现代文：每次返回，以致家中群狗惊异狂叫。
English: Each time he returned, the family's dogs howled in surprise.

古文：勉叹曰： 吾忧国忘家，乃至于此。
现代文：徐勉叹息说： 我忧心邦国忘记家庭，竟到了逭一步。
English: Xu Yan sighed and said, "I'm worried that the state has forgotten the family, and it's come to this.

古文：若吾亡后，亦是传中一事。 
现代文：如果我死后，也是传记中的一件事。 
English: If I die, it's also a matter of biography.

古文：六年，除给事中、五兵尚书，迁吏部尚书。
现代文：六年，授任给事中、五兵尚书，调任吏部尚书。
English: In the sixth year, he was assigned to the middle-ranking officials and five soldiers, and transferred to the personnel department.

古文：勉居选官，彝伦有序，既闲尺牍，兼善辞令，虽文案填积，坐客充满，应对如流，手不停笔。
现代文：徐勉处于选拔官员的部门，井然有序，既熟悉书信，又擅长辞令，虽然文案堆积，坐客满屋，应对如流水，手中还不停笔。
English: Xu Mian is in the department of selecting officials. He is well-organized, familiar with letters, and good at rhetoric. Although the copy is piled up, the house is full of guests, and the response is like running water, he still keeps writing in his hands.

古文：又该综百氏，皆为避讳。
现代文：又贯通百家姓氏，都能为之避用名讳。
English: They also go through hundreds of surnames, so they can avoid using nicknames.

古文：常与门入夜集，客有虞皓求詹事五官，勉正色答云： 今夕止可谈风月，不宜及公事。 
现代文：时常和门入夜晚集会，有个叫虞嵩的宾客谋求詹事五官，徐勉严肃地说： 今晚衹可谈论清风明月，不应涉及公事。 
English: They often gather at night with the door, and there is a guest named Yu Song who is looking for five officials. Xu Mian said seriously: Tonight, you can talk about the clear wind and the bright moon, and you should not involve business.

古文：故时人咸服其无私。
现代文：所以当时人都佩服他没有私心。
English: So at the time, people admired him for not being selfish.

古文：除散骑常侍，领游击将军，未拜，改领太子右卫率。
现代文：授任散骑常侍，兼游击将军，未到任，改兼太子右卫率。
English: He was appointed as a straggler's equerry and a guerrilla general, but before he took office, he was also appointed as the prince's right guard.

古文：迁左卫将军，领太子中庶子，侍东宫。
现代文：调任左卫将军，兼太子中庶子，在东宫侍奉。
English: He was transferred to the position of General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, and was also an illegitimate son of the middle son of the Crown Prince, serving in the East Palace.

古文：昭明太子尚幼，敕知宫事。
现代文：昭明太子还幼小，命令徐勉执掌宫内事务。
English: Prince Zhaoming was still a child when he ordered Xu Mian to take charge of the palace affairs.

古文：太子礼之甚重，每事询谋。
现代文：太子尊敬他十分尽心，每件事都询问商议。
English: The crown prince respects him very much and consults him on everything.

古文：尝于殿内讲《孝经》，临川靖惠王、尚书令沈约备二傅，勉与国子祭酒张充为执经，王莹、张稷、柳憕、王暕为侍讲。
现代文：曾经在殿内讲授《孝经》，临川靖惠王、尚书令沈约任太傅少傅，徐勉和国子祭酒张充担任执经授业的任务，王莹、张稷、柳恺、王昧担任侍讲。
English: He once lectured on the "Filial Piety Sutra" in the hall, with Linchuan Jinghui Wang and Shangshu Ling Shen Yoyo serving as taifu and shoofu, Xu Tsun and Guozhishu Zhangchong serving as the task of teaching the sutra, and Wang Ying, Zhang Zhe, Liu Zhe and Wang Mai serving as assistant lecturers.

古文：时选极亲贤，妙尽时誉，勉陈让数四。
现代文：当时人选极为亲密贤明，受尽当时美好称誉，徐勉再三陈述推让。
English: At that time, the candidate was extremely close and wise, and received all the praise at that time. Xu Mian repeatedly made statements and pushed for concessions.

古文：又与沈约书，求换侍讲，诏不许，然后就焉。
现代文：又给沈约写信，请求换为侍讲，诏令不准许，然后就任。
English: He also wrote a letter to Shen Yotong, requesting to be changed to an assistant speaker, which was not allowed by the imperial edict, and then took office.

古文：转太子詹事，领云骑将军，寻加散骑常侍，迁尚书右仆射，詹事如故。
现代文：改任太子詹事，兼云骑将军，不久加授散骑常侍，升尚书右仆射，詹事照旧。
English: He was reappointed as Prince Zhan Zhi, concurrently General of the Cloud Cavalry, and was soon given the title of General of the Horse Cavalry, and promoted to the position of the Right Footman of the Horse Cavalry. Zhan Zhi remained the same.

古文：又改授侍中，频表解宫职，优诏不许。
现代文：又改授侍中，频繁上奏表请求解除宫职，韶书好言相答不准许。
English: He was also reclassified as a chamberlain, frequently petitioned to be relieved of his palace duties, and was not allowed to reciprocate with kind words.

古文：时人间丧事，多不遵礼，朝终夕殡，相尚以速。
现代文：当时民间丧事，多不遵循礼仪，早晨去世晚上出殡，以急速相推崇。
English: At that time, folk funerals mostly did not follow the etiquette, and the deceased was buried in the morning and the funeral was held in the evening, which was highly respected.

古文：勉上疏曰： 《礼记问丧》云： 三日而后敛者，以俟其生也。三日而不生，亦不生矣。 
现代文：徐勉上奏疏说： 《礼记。问丧》说： 三天之后才入殓，是等待死者的复生；三天还不复生，也就不能复生了。 
English: Xu Yan said, "The Book of Rites and Funerals" says, "To enter the coffin after three days is to wait for the resurrection of the dead; if the dead are not resurrected after three days, they cannot be resurrected."

古文：自顷以来，不遵斯制。
现代文：近段时间以来，不遵循这个制度。
English: In recent times, this system has not been followed.

古文：送终之礼，殡以期日，润屋豪家，乃或半晷，衣衾棺椁，以速为荣，亲戚徒隶，各念休反。
现代文：送终的礼仪，在当日出殡，豪富家庭，有的竟然衹半天，衣被棺椁，以急速为荣耀，亲戚和奴仆，各自惦记休息返回。
English: The last rites, the funeral on the same day, the wealthy families, some of them even walking for half a day, the coffin was covered with clothes, with speed as glory, relatives and servants, each thinking about rest and return.

古文：故属纩才毕，灰钉已具，忘狐鼠之顾步，愧燕雀之徊翔。
现代文：所以死者刚要落气，石灰钉子已经准备好，忘记狐狸老鼠回头而走的顾念，有愧燕雀徘徊飞翔的眷恋。
English: Therefore, the deceased was just about to lose heart, the lime nail was ready, the thought of forgetting the fox and the mouse turned back, and the lingering attachment of the sparrow wandering and flying.

古文：伤情灭理，莫此为大。
现代文：伤情害理，没有比遣更大的了。
English: Injury is irrational, and there is nothing more irrational than injury.

古文：且人子承衾之时，志懑心绝，丧事所资，悉关他手，爱憎深浅，事实难原。
现代文：而且儿子承受覆盖尸体的单被时，心中烦闷沉痛，丧事所需要的，全出自他人之手，爱憎的深浅，事情实在难以原谅。
English: Moreover, when his son received the sheet covering the corpse, his heart was sad and heavy. Everything that was needed for the funeral came from someone else's hands. The depth of love and hate, it was really hard to forgive.

古文：如觇视或爽，存没违滥，使万有其一，怨酷已多。岂若缓其告敛之晨，申其望生之冀。
现代文：如果观察偶尔有差误，存亡相违背，假如一万人中有一人，怨恨残酷已很多，哪裹比得上延缓入殓的时间，表明希望复生的愿望。
English: If the observation is occasionally faulty, if there is a discrepancy between life and death, if there is one person out of ten thousand, there is already a lot of cruel resentment, which is comparable to delaying the time of death, indicating the desire to be reborn.

古文：请自今士庶，宜悉依古，三日大敛。
现代文：请求从现在起无论士家庶族，应该都依照古代制度，三天后大殓。
English: The request is that from now on, no matter whether it is a commoner or a commoner, it should be in accordance with the ancient system, and the grand banquet will be held three days later.

古文：如有不奉，加以纠绳。 
现代文：如有不奉行的，加以纠举制裁。 
English: If they fail to do so, they will be subject to disciplinary sanctions.

古文：诏可其奏。
现代文：诏书同意徐勉的奏疏。
English: The imperial edict agreed to Xu's request.

古文：寻授宣惠将军，置佐史，侍中、仆射如故。
现代文：不久授任宣惠将军，设置辅佐的属吏，侍中、仆射职位照旧。
English: Soon after, he was given the title of General Xuan Hui, and subordinate officials were appointed as assistants, while the positions of chamberlain and aide-de-camp remained the same.

古文：又除尚书仆射、中卫将军。
现代文：又授任尚书仆射、中卫将军。
English: He was also awarded the title of Shangshu minion, and Zhongwei general.

古文：勉以旧恩，越升重位，尽心奉上，知无不为。
现代文：徐勉因旧恩情，超升高位，尽心侍奉皇帝。知道的事情没有不做的。
English: Because of the old favor, Xu Mian was promoted to a higher position and served the emperor wholeheartedly. There was nothing he did not know.

古文：爰自小选，迄于此职，常参掌衡石，甚得士心。
现代文：起自于小职务，直到这个职位，经常参与掌管人才选拔，很得士人的心。
English: Starting from a small position, until this position, he often participated in the selection of talents in charge, and won the hearts of scholars.

古文：禁省中事，未尝漏泄。
现代文：宫廷官署中的事，从不曾泄露过。
English: The situation within the palace administration has never been revealed.

古文：每有表奏，辄焚藁草。
现代文：每次有表章奏上，就焚毁草稿。
English: Every time there was a new chapter, they burned the draft.

古文：博通经史，多识前载。
现代文：博通经书史籍，记得很多前代事情。
English: He is well-versed in books and history, and remembers many things from the previous generation.

古文：朝仪国典，婚冠吉凶，勉皆预图议。
现代文：朝廷礼仪国家法典，结婚加冠等吉凶礼节，徐勉都参与商议。
English: The national code of court etiquette, the auspicious and inauspicious etiquette such as marriage and crowning, Xu Mian participated in the deliberation.

古文：普通六年，上修五礼表曰：
现代文：普通六年，呈上修订五礼的奏表说：
English: Six years later, he submitted a report on the revision of the Five Rites and said:

古文：臣闻 立天之道，曰阴与阳；立人之道，曰仁与义。 
现代文：臣下听说 确立天的道理，有阴和阳两方面；确立人的道理，有仁和义两方面 。
English: Subordinates heard that the principle of establishing heaven has two aspects of yin and yang; the principle of establishing people has two aspects of benevolence and righteousness.

古文：故称 导之以德，齐之以礼 。
现代文：所以说 用道德加以引导，用礼仪加以统一 。
English: Therefore, it is said to be guided by morality and unified by etiquette.

古文：夫礼所以安上治民，弘风训俗，经国家，利后嗣者也。
现代文：礼仪是用来安定君主统御民众，光大风尚训导习俗，治理国家，利于后继者的。
English: The etiquette is used to stabilize the monarch to rule the people, to teach the customs, to govern the country, and to benefit the successors.

古文：唐虞三代，咸必由之。
现代文：卢亮卢爱三伐，都一定经由礼仪而治国。
English: Lu Liang, Lu Ai and the Three Dynasties all ruled the country through etiquette.

古文：在乎有周，宪章尤备，因殷革夏，损益可知。
现代文：在直周一代，典章尤为完备，因循殷礼改革夏制，盛衰可得而知。
English: In the generation of Zhizhou, the ceremony is particularly complete, and the rise and fall of the summer system can be known by following the Yinli reform.

古文：虽复经礼三百，曲礼三千，经文三百，威仪三千，其大归有五，即宗伯所掌典礼：吉为上，凶次之，宾次之，军次之，嘉为下也。
现代文：虽然大礼三百条，小礼三千条，经文三百篇，威仪三千款，大的归宿有五个方面，就是宗伯所掌管的礼仪：吉礼在首次，其次是凶礼，再次是宾礼，复次是军礼，嘉礼在最后。
English: Although there are three hundred major rites, three thousand minor rites, three hundred scriptures, and three thousand dignified rites, there are five aspects of the great destination, which is the etiquette presided over by Zongbo: the auspicious rite in the first time, followed by the evil rite, followed by the guest rite, followed by the military rite, and the honorable rite at the end.

古文：故祠祭不以礼，则不齐不庄；丧纪不以礼，则背死忘生者众；宾客不以礼，则朝觐失其仪；军旅不以礼，则致乱于师律；冠婚不以礼，则男女失其时。
现代文：所以祭祀不用礼仪，就不整齐不庄重；丧事不用礼仪，就使违背死者意愿忘记生者义务的人多；接待宾客不用礼仪，就使朝见失去标准；军队行动不用礼仪，就扰乱了军律；加冠成婚不用礼仪，就使男女结合延误时间。
English: Therefore, sacrifices without etiquette are disorderly and undignified; funerals without etiquette make many people forget the obligations of the living against the wishes of the dead; receiving guests without etiquette makes the imperial court lose its standard; military operations without etiquette disturb the military code; adding a crown and getting married without etiquette delays the union of men and women.

古文：为国修身，于斯攸急。
现代文：治理国家修养自身，这是急迫的事。
English: It is an urgent matter to govern national self-cultivation.

古文：洎周室大坏，王道既衰，官守斯文，日失其序。礼乐征伐，出自诸侯，《小雅》尽废，旧章缺矣。
现代文：自从且室崩壤，治道衰落，官府守护条文，逐日失去次序，礼乐征伐，出自于诸侯，《小雅》全部废弃，旧篇章阙失。
English: Since the collapse of the imperial court, the decline of the judicial system, the government's guardianship regulations, the order has been lost day by day, and the ritual music has come from the princes, Xiao Ya has all been abandoned, and the old chapter has been lost.

古文：是以韩宣适鲁，知周公之德；叔侯在晋，辨郊劳之仪。
现代文：所以垄宣前往叠厘，知道；哩公的德行；赵堡在置厘，分辨郊外慰劳的礼仪。
English: Therefore, Rong Xuan went to Lianli to know; Li Gong's moral conduct; Zhao Burg in Jiaoli to distinguish the etiquette of suburban comfort.

古文：战国从横，政教愈泯；暴秦灭学，扫地无余。
现代文：战国合纵连衡，政治教化更加泯减；残暴的秦国毁灭学术，被扫除没有遗留。
English: The Warring States period was followed by a series of ups and downs, and political indoctrination was further curtailed. The brutal Qin State's destruction of learning was swept away, leaving nothing behind.

古文：汉氏郁兴，日不暇给，犹命叔孙于外野，方知帝王之为贵。
现代文：汉氏兴起，成天没有一点空闲，还命令叔孙通在野外演习，才知道帝王的宝贵。
English: With the rise of the Han dynasty, there was never a moment's idleness. He also ordered his uncle and grandson to practice in the open air, only to realize how precious the emperor was.

古文：末叶纷纶，递有兴毁，或以武功锐志，或好黄老之言，礼义之式，于焉中止。
现代文：末年纷乱，接连有毁弃，有的以武功为坚定的志向，有的喜好黄帝、老王的言论，礼义的法式，在逭时中止了。
English: At the end of the year, there was turmoil, successive destruction and abandonment, some with martial arts as a firm aspiration, some with a preference for the speech of the Yellow Emperor and Lao Wang, and the French style of etiquette, which was suspended at dusk.

古文：及东京曹褒，南宫制述，集其散略，百有余篇，虽写以尺简，而终阙平奏。
现代文：等到塞莲时的笪壶，在壶宣撰述，收集失散缺略文字，有一百多篇，虽然书写在竹简上，而最终没有呈送上奏。
English: Waiting for Celine's gong jug, in the jug Xuan wrote, collected lost and missing words, there are more than a hundred, although written on bamboo slips, but ultimately did not present the upbeat.

古文：其后兵革相寻，异端互起，章句既沦，俎豆斯辍。
现代文：随后战事不断，不同见解互相出现，章句遣失后，礼仪就中止了。
English: Subsequently, the war continued, different opinions appeared, and after the loss of the chapter and sentence, the etiquette was suspended.

古文：方领矩步之容，事灭于旌鼓；兰台石室之文，用尽于帷盖。
现代文：方领矩步的仪容，因战事而消失；兰台石室的文书，因帐幔遮盖而用尽。
English: The grandeur of the square-headed rectangular steps has disappeared due to the war; the documents of the stone lantern room have been exhausted due to the curtains.

古文：至乎晋初，爰定新礼，荀抃制之于前，挚虞删之于末。
现代文：到了晋初，于是确定新礼仪，荀颤在前面制定，挚卢在其后删订。
English: At the beginning of the Jin Dynasty, a new etiquette was established, with 颤 (shudder) being written in the front, and  Herzlich Lu (sincerity) being written in the back.

古文：既而中原丧乱，罕有所遗；江左草创，因循而已。
现代文：不久中原遇死丧祸乱，很少有余留的；塞置初创，因循旧礼而已。
English: Not long after, Zhongyuan was hit by death and disaster, and there was very little left; it was just a matter of following the old rituals.

古文：厘革之风，是则未暇。
现代文：改革的风气，逭时没有空闲。
English: In the spirit of reform, there is no idle time.

古文：伏惟陛下睿明启运，先天改物，拨乱惟武，经世以文。
现代文：陛下通达明智开启国运，先于上天改变万物，用武力治理乱世，用文教治理社会。
English: His Majesty Tongda wisely started the national movement, changing everything before heaven, using force to govern the chaotic world, and using literature and education to govern society.

古文：作乐在乎功成，制礼弘于业定。
现代文：创作音乐在功劳成就后，制定礼仪光大基业的奠定。
English: The creation of music after the achievement of merit, the establishment of etiquette, and the laying of a great foundation.

古文：光启二学，皇枝等于贵游；辟兹五馆，草莱升以好爵。
现代文：建立二学，皇室成员同于无官职的王公贵族；设置五馆，民众可以升上高等爵位。
English: The establishment of two schools, the members of the royal family are the same as the princes and nobles who do not have official positions; the establishment of five museums, the people can rise to higher ranks.

古文：爰自受命，迄于告成，盛德形容备矣，天下能事毕矣。
现代文：自从受命，直到向上天报告成功，盛大的德行形象具备了，天下能做的事完成了。
English: From the time of receiving the order to the time of reporting the success to heaven, a grand image of virtue has been established, and what can be done by the world has been accomplished.

古文：明明穆穆，无德而称焉。
现代文：英明端庄，没有德行而能称述。
English: Wise and dignified, but no virtue to speak of.

古文：至若玄符灵贶之祥，浮溟机山之赆，固亦日书左史，副在司存，今可得而略也。
现代文：至于暗相感应的祥瑞，跋山涉水的贡钠，本也是每日记载在左史，副本在主管部门保存，现在可得以省略。
English: As for Xiang Rui of the dark phase induction and Gong Na of the mountain wading, this is also recorded daily in the left history, the copy is kept in the competent department, and can now be omitted.

古文：是以命彼群才，搜甘泉之法；延兹硕学，阐曲台之仪。
现代文：所以命令那些多才之人，搜罗甘泉的法令；延聘逭些博学之士，阐述曲台的礼仪。
English: Therefore, order those who have many talents to collect the edicts of Ganquan; hire three learned men to explain the etiquette of the music stand.

古文：淄上淹中之儒，连踪继轨；负笈怀铅之彦，匪旦伊夕。
现代文：淄上淹中的儒生，前后相继；背笈求学的美士，不分早晨舆晚上。
English: The Confucian students in the upper and middle eaves, one after another; the beauties studying in the lower eaves, in the morning and in the evening.

古文：谅以化穆三雍，人从五典，秩宗之教，勃焉以兴。
现代文：谅必教化在三雍整肃，人人顺从五教，主祭官员的教化，勃然兴起。
English: In the rectification of Sanyong, everyone obeyed the Five Precepts, and the enlightenment of the chief priests and officials suddenly arose.

古文：伏寻所定五礼，起齐永明三年，太子步兵校尉伏曼容表求制一代礼乐，于时参议置新旧学士十人，止修五礼，谘禀卫将军丹阳尹王俭，学士亦分住郡中，制作历年，犹未克就。
现代文：探究所制定的五礼，起自于齐朝永明三年，太子步兵校尉伏曼容上奏表请求制定一代的礼乐制度，这时参与商议设置了新旧学士十人，祇修订五礼，向卫将军丹阳尹王俭咨询禀告，学士也分别住在郡中，制定了几年，还没完成。
English: The study of the Five Rites was initiated in the third year of the reign of Emperor Yongming of the Qi Dynasty. The prince's son, the infantry lieutenant Fu Man Rong, submitted a petition to establish a generation of ritual music system. At that time, ten new and old bachelors were involved in the discussion. Only the revision of the Five Rites and the obituary notice to the guard general Danyang Yin Wang Qian were consulted. The bachelors also lived separately in the county. It has been developed for several years and has not yet been completed.

古文：及文宪薨殂，遗文散逸，后又以事付国子祭酒何胤，经涉九载，犹复未毕。
现代文：等到文宪公逝世，遣文散佚，后来又把事情交付给国子祭酒何胤，经历九年，又没完成。
English: After the death of King Wenxian, the document was sent to the emperor for publication, and later the matter was handed over to the son of the state, He Tan, and after nine years, it was still not completed.

古文：建武四年，胤还东山，齐明帝敕委尚书令徐孝嗣。
现代文：建武四年，何胤回到束山，齐明帝下令委托给尚书令徐孝嗣。
English: In the fourth year of the Jianwu era, He Yin returned to Sokshan, and Emperor Qiming ordered that he be entrusted to Shang Shuling Xu Xiaozhi.

古文：旧事本末，随在南第。
现代文：旧稿的主体和枝节，都随他放在南府。
English: The main body and branches of the old manuscript were placed in Nanfu with him.

古文：永元中，孝嗣于此遇祸，又多零落。
现代文：永元年间，孝嗣在遣裹遇祸，原文又大多失落。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongzheng, Emperor Xiaozhe was besieged by disaster, and most of the original texts were lost.

古文：当时鸠敛所余，权付尚书左丞蔡仲熊、骁骑将军何佟之，共掌其事。
现代文：当时收集的剩余文字，权且交付给了尚书左丞蔡仲态、骁骑将军何佟之，共同掌管这件事。
English: The rights to the remaining texts collected at that time were handed over to Shangshu Zuoxiao Cai Zhong Jiao and He Xizhi, and they jointly took charge of the matter.

古文：时修礼局住在国子学中门外，东昏之代，频有军火，其所散失，又逾太半。
现代文：当时修礼局住在国子学中门外，束昏侯时，接连有战事火灾，所散失的，又超过大半。
English: At that time, the Reverence Bureau lived outside the gate of Guozi Middle School. When everyone was in a daze, there were successive war fires, and more than half of what was scattered was lost.

古文：天监元年，佟之启审省置之宜，敕使外详。
现代文：天监元年，佟之启奏审定删除舆设置的事宜，下令外府详细讨论。
English: In the first year of Tianjun, the opening speech of Zou Zhou approved the deletion of the public opinion setting, and ordered the foreign government to discuss it in detail.

古文：时尚书参详，以天地初革，庶务权舆，宜俟隆平，徐议删撰。欲且省礼局，并还尚书仪曹。
现代文：当时尚书参与议论，以为天下刚换代，各种事务才起头，应等到太平时，慢慢商议删订礼仪的事，想暂且省除修礼局，一并还于尚书仪曹。
English: At that time, Shangshu participated in the discussion, thinking that the world had just changed generations, and various affairs had just begun. It was necessary to wait until the time of peace to slowly discuss the matter of deleting the etiquette. They wanted to temporarily abolish the Bureau of Etiquette, and at the same time retain the etiquette of Shangshu.

古文：诏旨云： 礼坏乐缺，故国异家殊，实宜以时修定，以为永准。
现代文：韶书旨意说： 礼壤乐缺，因而各国不同各家有别，实应及时修正审定，作为永久的准则。
English: The imperial edict said: "Rituals are scarce, and therefore countries are different from each other, and they should be amended and approved in a timely manner as a permanent norm.

古文：但顷之修撰，以情取人，不以学进；其掌知者，以贵总一，不以稽古，所以历年不就，有名无实。
现代文：不过近来的修撰，凭情感录用人，不是因学问而提拔；所掌管的人，以尊贵总领属员，不是因为稽考古礼，所以多年不能完成，有名而无实。
English: However, in the recent revision, the person who was hired by emotion was not promoted by learning; the person who was in charge, the honorable general subordinate member, was not because of the inspection ceremony, so it could not be completed for many years, famous but insubstantial.

古文：此既经国所先，外可议其人，人定，便即撰次。 
现代文：遣既是治理国家的急务，外府可商议人选，人选决定，就立即编撰。 
English: Since the appointment is an urgent task of governing the country, the foreign ministry can discuss the candidate, and once the candidate is decided, it will be compiled immediately.

古文：于是尚书仆射沈约等参议，请五礼各置旧学士一人，人各自举学士二人，相助抄撰。
现代文：于是尚书仆射沈约等人参与商议，请求五礼各设置旧日学士一人，每人各自推举学士二人，协助抄录修撰。
English: As a result, Shang Shufu, Jia Sheng, and others took part in the discussion, requesting the Five Rites to each set up a former day bachelor, and each nominate two bachelors to assist in transcribing and editing.

古文：其中有疑者，依前汉石渠、后汉白虎，随源以闻，请旨断决。
现代文：其中有疑惑的，依照前漠的石渠阁、后漠的白虎观，依据本源上奏，请求圣旨裁决。
English: Among them, those who have doubts, according to the view of the stone canal in the former desert and the white tiger in the latter desert, should appeal to the source and request the ruling of the Holy Will.

古文：乃以旧学士右军记室参军明山宾掌吉礼，中军骑兵参军严植之掌凶礼，中军田曹行参军兼太常丞贺蒨掌宾礼，征虏记室参军陆琏掌军礼，右军参军司马裴掌嘉礼，尚书左丞何佟之总参其事。
现代文：于是任用旧日学士右军记室参军明山宾掌管吉檀，中军骑兵参军严植之掌管凶礼，中军田曹行参军兼太常丞贺场掌管宾礼，征虏记室参军陆琏掌管军礼，右军参军司马装掌管嘉礼，尚书左丞何佟之总管遣些事。
English: As a result, the former Japanese scholars were appointed as follows: Ming Shan Bin, a member of the Right Division of the Military Record Office, presided over the auspicious ceremony; Yan Zi, a member of the cavalry of the Central Army, presided over the evil ceremony; Tian Cao Xing, a member of the Central Army, presided over the auspicious ceremony; Lu Hao, a member of the Conscription Record Office, presided over the military ceremony; Sima So, a member of the Right Division of the Military Record Office, presided over the auspicious ceremony; and Shang Shuzo Zu Rong, a member of the Left Division of the Military Record Office, presided over

古文：佟之亡后，以镇北谘议参军伏芃代之。
现代文：佟之去世后，任命镇北谘议参军伏佢代替他。
English: After the death of Zhenbei, he appointed Zhenbei Advisory to join the army Fuxi to replace him.

古文：后又以芃代严植之掌凶礼。
现代文：后来又委任伏佢代替严植之掌管凶礼。
English: Later, Fuxi was appointed to replace Yan Zhi as the head of the evil cult.

古文：芃寻迁官，以《五经》博士缪昭掌凶礼。
现代文：伏佢不久调任官职，委任《五经》博士缪昭掌管凶礼。
English: Fuxiong was soon transferred to an official position and appointed "Five Classics" doctor Miao Zhao to be in charge of the ceremony.

古文：复以礼仪深广，记载残缺，宜须博论，共尽其致，更使镇军将军丹阳尹沈约、太常卿张充及臣三人同参厥务。
现代文：又因为礼仪深邃广博，记载残缺，必须广泛讨论，共同详尽意致，另委派镇军将军丹阳尹沈约、太常卿张充以及臣下三人共同参与这一事务。
English: In addition, because the etiquette is profound and extensive, and the records are incomplete, it is necessary to extensively discuss and jointly elaborate the intention. In addition, the town army general Danyang Yin Shenyo, the Tai Changqing Zhang Chong and the three subordinates were jointly appointed to participate in this matter.

古文：臣又奉别敕，总知其事。
现代文：臣下又另外接到命令，总管逭件事。
English: The vassal received another order to take charge of the matter.

古文：末又使中书侍郎周舍、庾于陵二人复豫参知。
现代文：后来又指派中书侍郎周舍、庾于陵二人参与掌管。
English: Later, the chancellors Zhou She and Zou Yuling were also appointed to participate in the management.

古文：若有疑义，所掌学士当职先立议，通谘五礼旧学士及参知，各言同异，条牒启闻，决之制旨。
现代文：如有疑惑的义理，所掌管的学士应当首先发表意见，遍询五礼旧学士以及掌管者，各自谈论不同意见，写成奏文启奏，由圣旨决断。
English: If there is any doubt about the doctrine, the responsible scholar should first express his or her opinion, go through the five rites of the former scholar and the person in charge, discuss the different opinions, write a preamble, and let the will decide.

古文：疑事既多，岁时又积，制旨裁断，其数不少。莫不网罗经诰，玉振金声，义贯幽微，理入神契。前儒所不释，后学所未闻。
现代文：疑惑的事情多，岁月积累，圣旨决断，数额不少，无不网罗经文，集众人之大成，意义贯穿精微，道理深入神妙，为前朝学者所没解释，后代学人所没听说遇。
English: There are many doubtful things, the accumulation of years, the determination of the holy will, the amount is quite a lot, all of which involve scriptures, the culmination of all people, the meaning is penetrating and subtle, the reason is profound and wonderful, which was not explained by scholars in the previous dynasty, and was not heard by future generations of scholars.

古文：凡诸奏决，皆载篇首，具列圣旨，为不刊之则。
现代文：所有上奏裁决，都记载在篇首，列出圣旨，为不可改变的准则。
English: All appeal rulings are recorded at the top of the article, listing the Holy Will as an unchangeable standard.

古文：洪规盛范，冠绝百王；茂实英声，方垂千载。
现代文：宏大的规范，高于百代帝王；丰富的内容、卓越的名声，将流传千年。
English: Magnificent standards, higher than a hundred emperors; rich content, excellent reputation, will be passed down for thousands of years.

古文：宁孝宣之能拟，岂孝章之足云。
现代文：哪裹是孝宣帝所能比拟，孝章帝足以并论的呢?
English: How can Emperor Xiaoxuan be compared to Emperor Xiaozhang?

古文：五礼之职，事有繁简，及其列毕，不得同时。
现代文：五礼的职掌，事情有繁简之别，到修撰完毕，不能同在一时。
English: The duties of the five etiquettes are complicated and complicated, and they cannot be done at the same time until they have been completed.

古文：《嘉礼仪注》以天监六年五月七日上尚书，合十有二秩，一百一十六卷，五百三十六条；《宾礼仪注》以天监六年五月二十日上尚书，合十有七秩，一百三十三卷，五百四十五条；《军礼仪注》以天监九年十月二十九日上尚书，合十有八秩，一百八十九卷，二百四十条；《吉礼仪注》以天监十一年十一月十日上尚书，合二十有六秩，二百二十四卷，一千五条；《凶礼仪注》以天监十一年十一月十七日上尚书，合四十有七秩，五百一十四卷，五千六百九十三条：大凡一百二十秩，一千一百七十六卷，八千一十九条。
现代文：《嘉礼仪注》在天监六年五月七日上交尚书，共十二函，一百一十六卷，五百三十六条；宾礼仪注》在天监六年五月二十日上交尚书，共十七函，一百三十三卷，五百四十五条；《军礼仪注》在天监九年十月二十九日上交尚书，共十八函，一百八十九卷，二百四十条；《吉礼仪注》在天监十一年十一月十日上交尚书，共二十六函，二百二十四卷，一千零五条；《凶礼仪注》在天监十一年十一月十七日上交尚书，共四十七函，五百一十四卷，五千六百九十三条：总计一百二十函，一千一百七十六卷，八千零一十九条。
English: "Jiali Yi Shu" was submitted to Tianjing on May 7, 2006, with a total of 12 letters, 116 volumes, and 536 articles; "Bingli Yi Shu" was submitted to Tianjing on May 20, 2006, with a total of 17 letters, 133 volumes, and 545 articles; "Wangli Yi Shu" was submitted to Tianjing on October 29, 2009, with a total of 18 letters, 189 volumes, and 240 articles; "Jie Li Yi Shu" was submitted to Tianjing on November 10, 2011, with a total of 26 letters, 224 volumes, and 105 articles; "Xie Li Yi Shu" was submitted to Tianjing on November 11, 2011, with a total of 26 letters, 224 volumes,

古文：又列副秘阁及《五经》典书各一通，缮写校定，以普通五年二月始获洗毕。
现代文：又陈列副本在秘阁和《五经》典书处各一套，缮写并校定，在普通五年二月才收笔完成。
English: A set of copies were also displayed at the Secret Cabinet and the "Five Classics" reference library. They were corrected and calibrated, and the collection was completed in February of the ordinary year.

古文：窃以撰正履礼，历代罕就，皇明在运，厥功克成。
现代文：私下以为撰作礼仪，历代很少能完成，皇朝国运明朗，办事用功才完成。
English: Privately, I thought that the writing of etiquette was the best, the previous generations could rarely complete it, the imperial dynasty and the national movement were clear, and the work was completed with hard work.

古文：周代三千，举其盈数；今之八千，随事附益。
现代文：周代三千条，是列举盈满数额；现在的八千条，是依事情而附益。
English: Zhou Dynasty's three thousand articles are enumerated surplus amounts; the current eight thousand articles are incidental gains.

古文：质文相变，故其数兼倍，犹如八卦之爻，因而重之，错综成六十四也。
现代文：内容形式相变化，数额就成倍了，犹如八卦的爻符，随之重叠，错综而成六十四卦。
English: As the form of the content changes, the amount doubles, just like the eight signs of the Eight Trigrams, and then overlaps, intricately forming the Sixty-Four Trigrams.

古文：昔文武二王，所以纲纪周室，君临天下，公旦修之，以致太平龙凤之瑞。
现代文：从前文武二王，之所以治理周室，统治天下，是周公修撰礼仪，而招致太平龙凤的祥瑞。
English: Once upon a time, the reason why King Wenwu II ruled the Zhou Dynasty and ruled the world was that Zhou Gongshu compiled the etiquette, which led to the auspiciousness of Taiping Longfeng.

古文：自斯厥后，甫备兹日。
现代文：从那时之后，到现在才完备。
English: Since then, it has only been completed.

古文：孔子曰： 其有继周，虽百世可知。 
现代文：孑子说： 如有继承周室者，即使一百代也可推知。 
English: Zou Zi said: If there is a successor to Zhou Shulong, even a hundred generations can be inferred.

古文：岂所谓齐功比美者欤！
现代文：哪裹是说功勋相等可以比美呢!
English: How can it be said that equal merit can be compared to beauty!

古文：臣以庸识，谬司其任，淹留历稔，允当斯责；兼勒成之初，未遑表上，实由才轻务广，思力不周，永言惭惕，无忘寤寐。
现代文：臣下以平庸的学识，掌管逭一职事，延续多年，承当这一责任；在修成之初，没来得及上表呈进，实在是由于才能低而事务多，思虑不周到，说起来惭愧畏惧，日夜不能忘记。
English: With mediocre knowledge, a vassal takes charge of a post, continues for many years, and takes on this responsibility; at the beginning of the construction, he did not have time to present the above table, it is really due to low talent and many affairs, inconsiderate, ashamed and afraid to say, day and night can not forget.

古文：自今春舆驾将亲六师，搜寻军礼，阅其条章，靡不该备。
现代文：自今年春季皇上将亲自统领六军，搜寻军礼，阅览条章，没有不详尽的。
English: Since the spring of this year, the emperor has personally led the six armies, searched for military salutes, and read the articles, which are not exhaustive.

古文：所谓郁郁文哉，焕乎洋溢，信可以悬诸日月，颁之天下者矣。
现代文：真所谓文采盛美，焕然盈满，实在可以悬挂于日月，颁布到天下。
English: Truly, the so-called literary beauty, radiantly full, can really be hung in the sun and moon, promulgated to the world.

古文：愚心喜抃，弥思陈述；兼前后联官，一时皆逝，臣虽幸存，耄已将及，虑皇世大典，遂阙腾奏，不任下情，辄具载撰修始末，并职掌人、所成卷秩、条目之数，谨拜表以闻。
现代文：愚臣的心中欢喜，追思陈述；加之前后一同任职者，一时之间都去世了，臣下虽然幸存，高龄已及，考虑到皇朝大典，竟然没有上奏，不能满足臣下心愿，于是详细记载撰修始末，以及任职人员、所修成的卷帙、条目数额，恭谨上奏报告。
English: The foolish vassal rejoiced in his heart and reflected on the report. In addition, those who held the post before and after him passed away in an instant. Although the vassal survived, he was too old. Considering the imperial ceremony, there was no report, which could not satisfy the vassal's wish. Therefore, he recorded in detail the beginning and end of the writing, as well as the person in charge, the volume and the amount of items completed, and respectfully submitted the report.

古文：诏曰： 经礼大备，政典载弘，今诏有司，案以行事也。 
现代文：韶令说： 礼经大为完备，政典记载全面，现韶令有关官员，可依据行事。 
English: The edict said: "The sutras are very complete, the records of the Constitution are comprehensive, and the relevant officials can act in accordance with the current edict.

古文：又诏曰： 勉表如此。
现代文：又韶令说： 徐勉的奏表如此。
English: He also said, "This is how Xu's report card looks like."

古文：因革允厘，宪章孔备，功成业定，于是乎在。
现代文：因循舆变革完成，典章制度周全，功勋建成事业奠定，就在这襄。
English: It is here that the transformation of public opinion has been completed, the award system is complete, and the achievements have been established.

古文：可以光被八表，施诸百代，俾万世之下，知斯文在斯。
现代文：可以光彩照耀八方，施行百代，使万代以后，知道礼乐制度在逭裹。
English: It can shine brightly in all directions, and be practiced for hundreds of generations, so that after thousands of generations, it will be known that the ritual music system is wrapped in a cocoon.

古文：主者其按以遵行，勿有失坠。 
现代文：主管者依此遵行，不要有所失落。 
English: The person in charge should follow this and not lose anything.

古文：寻加中书令，给亲信二十人。
现代文：不久加授徐勉为中书令，赐给亲信二十人。
English: Soon after, Xu Mian was awarded the title of General Secretary of the Communist Party of China, which was given to 20 of his close associates.

古文：勉以疾自陈，求解内任。诏不许，乃令停下省，三日一朝，有事遣主书论决。
现代文：徐勉因患病自己陈述要求，请求解除宫内职务，诏令不准许，于是命令住在下省，三天朝见一次，有事派遣主书商讨决断。
English: Because of his illness, Xu Mian submitted his own request and requested to be relieved of his duties in the imperial court. The imperial edict did not allow it, so he was ordered to live in the lower province, meet once every three days in the morning, and dispatch the main book negotiator to discuss and make a decision.

古文：脚疾转剧，久阙朝觐，固陈求解，诏乃赉假，须疾差还省。
现代文：后来脚病加重，长久没有朝见，执意请求解除职位，诏书于是赐给假期，等病痊愈后回到官署。
English: Later, his foot ailment worsened, he did not see the emperor for a long time, and he insisted on requesting to be relieved of his post. The imperial edict then granted him a leave of absence, and he returned to the government office after recovering from his illness.

古文：勉虽居显位，不营产业，家无蓄积，俸禄分赡亲族之穷乏者。
现代文：徐勉虽然处于显要职位，不经营田产，家中没有蓄积，俸禄分别救济亲属中的贫困者。
English: Although he is in a prominent position, Xu Mian does not run a farm, there is no accumulation in his family, and his salary is used to help the poor among his relatives.

古文：门人故旧或从容致言。
现代文：门人朋友有的随口说起逭件事。
English: Some of my friends casually talk about it.

古文：勉乃答曰： 人遗子孙以财，我遗之以清白。
现代文：徐勉于是回答说： 别人把财产留给子孙，我把清白留给子孙。
English: Xu replied, "Other people leave their property to their descendants, but I leave my innocence to my descendants.

古文：子孙才也，则自致辎軿；如其不才，终为他有。 
现代文：子孙有才能，就能自己得到辎车耕车；如果没有才能，财物终将为他人所有。 
English: If their children and grandchildren are talented, they will be able to get their own ploughs and harvesters; if they are not talented, their property will eventually be owned by others.

古文：尝为书诫其子崧曰：
现代文：曾经写信告诫儿子徐崧说：
English: He once wrote a letter to his son, Xu Xi, saying:

古文：吾家世清廉，故常居贫素，至于产业之事，所未尝言，非直不经营而已。
现代文：我家世代清廉，所以经常以清贫朴素自守，至于家产的事，没有说到过，不仅仅是不经营而已。
English: My family has been clean and honest for generations, so we have always protected ourselves with poverty and simplicity. As for the family property, it has not been mentioned, not only is it not managed.

古文：薄躬遭逢，遂至今日，尊官厚禄，可谓备之。
现代文：减损自己的经历，直到现在，高官厚禄，可以说是充溢了。
English: To detract from his own experience, up until now, the high-ranking official's generous salary can be said to be overflowing.

古文：每念叨窃若斯，岂由才致，仰藉先代风范及以福庆，故臻此耳。
现代文：每当私下思念到这些，哪是由才能所招致，是上凭先代风范延及福禄喜庆，所以达到遣一步而已。
English: Whenever I think about these things in private, which are brought about by talent, it is the continuation of the previous generation's style and happiness, so it is only a step forward.

古文：古人所谓 以清白遗子孙，不亦厚乎！ 
现代文：古人说过 把清白留给子孙，不也是很丰厚吗 。
English: The ancients said that leaving innocence to one's descendants is also very rich.

古文：又云： 遗子黄金满惣，不如一经。 
现代文：又说： 留给子孙黄金满筐，不如一部经书。 
English: He also said: "Leaving a basket full of gold to one's descendants is not as good as leaving a book of scripture."

古文：详求此言，信非徒语。
现代文：详尽探求这些话，的确不是空话。
English: To explore these words in detail is indeed not an empty phrase.

古文：吾虽不敏，实有本志，庶得遵奉斯义，不敢坠失。
现代文：我虽然不聪明，实在有这个心意，希望能够遵循这个义理，不敢失去。
English: Although I am not smart, I really have this intention and hope to be able to follow this principle and dare not lose it.

古文：所以显贵以来，将三十载，门人故旧，亟荐便宜，或使创辟田园，或劝兴立邸店，又欲舳舻运致，亦令货殖聚敛。
现代文：所以显要尊贵以来，将近三十年，门人朋友，极力陈说该做的事，有的让开垦田地，有的劝建立房舍客店，又想用船只运输，也能使我经商聚财。
English: For this reason, for nearly thirty years, my friends and relatives have been trying to tell me what I should do. Some have suggested that I open up my fields, others have advised me to build a guest house, and I want to use ships for transportation. This will also enable me to do business and accumulate wealth.

古文：若此众事，皆距而不纳。
现代文：像这些事，都拒绝而不采纳。
English: Like all these things, it is better to refuse than to accept.

古文：非谓拔葵去织，且欲省息纷纭。
现代文：不仅是不舆民争利，而且想平息纷纭的建议。
English: Not only is it not in the public interest, but it is also intended to quell divisive suggestions.

古文：中年聊于东田间营小园者，非在播艺，以要利入，正欲穿池种树，少寄情赏。
现代文：后来姑且在束田间经营小园圃，不在于播种，以邀取利益收入，衹是想挖池种树，稍微寄托情怀用以观赏。
English: Later, he operated small gardens among the bunch of fields, not because he wanted to sow seeds to earn profit, but because he wanted to dig a pond to plant trees and use it to watch with a little affection.

古文：又以郊际闲旷，终可为宅，傥获悬车致事，实欲歌哭于斯。
现代文：又因郊外空地宽阔，终可建房舍，倘若得以退休离职，实想在那裹欢歌哀哭。
English: And because of the wide open spaces in the suburbs, houses can finally be built. If I were able to retire, I would really like to wrap myself in songs and weep there.

古文：慧日、十住等，既应营婚，又须住止，吾清明门宅，无相容处。
现代文：慧日、十住等人，已应该办理婚事，又需住房，我清明门的住处，没有容纳的地方。
English: Huirong, Shizhu and others should have been married, and they need housing. I have no place to accommodate them.

古文：所以尔者，亦复有以；前割西边施宣武寺，既失西厢，不复方幅，意亦谓此逆旅舍耳，何事须华？
现代文：之所以如此，也是有原因的。先前割取西边施舍给宣武寺，失去西边厢房后，不再扩建，心中也想这是客居住宅，何必要奢华?
English: There is a reason for this. Previously, the west wing of the temple was donated to the temple, and after losing the west wing, it was no longer expanded. In my mind, I also thought that this was a guest house, so why the need for luxury?

古文：常恨时人谓是我宅。
现代文：时常遗憾当时人以为是我的住宅。
English: I often regret that people thought it was my house at the time.

古文：古往今来，豪富继踵，高门甲第，连闼洞房，宛其死矣，定是谁室？
现代文：古往今来，富豪人家不断，高门大族的宅第，接连的夹室内房，到他死后，到底是谁的住处?
English: From ancient times to the present, wealthy people have been moving in and out of the mansions of high-ranking aristocrats, one room after another, until his death, who's residence was it?

古文：但不能不为培塿之山，聚石移果，杂以花卉，以娱休沐，用托性灵。
现代文：衹是不能不造小山丘，聚石头移果树，杂种花卉，来在休息时娱乐，以寄托性情。
English: Dragonflies can't help but build small hills, gather stones, move fruit trees, and hybrid flowers to entertain themselves at rest and to sustain their temperament.

古文：随便架立，不在广大，惟功德处，小以为好。
现代文：随意堆积，不在于高大宽广，衹是念佛的地方，以小为好。
English: It doesn't matter how tall or wide it is, as long as it's a place to chant Buddha's name, it's better to keep it small.

古文：所以内中逼促，无复房宇。
现代文：所以裹面狭小，不再有房子。
English: So it's cramped, there's no more houses.

古文：近营东边儿孙二宅，乃藉十住南还之资，其中所须，犹为不少，既牵挽不至，又不可中涂而辍，郊间之园，遂不办保，货与韦黯，乃获百金，成就两宅，已消其半。
现代文：近来营造束边儿孙两套房舍，是凭藉十住从南方返回的资金，其中所需要的，还有不少，既然运输不能到达，又不能中途停止，郊外的园圃，便不能置立，卖给韦黯，才获得一百两黄金，建成二套房舍，已用去一大半。
English: Recently, the construction of the two-apartment house for the children and grandchildren of the bunch of neighbors was based on the funds returned from the south by the ten residents. Among them, there were many more needed. Since the transportation could not reach and could not stop halfway, the suburban garden could not be set up. It was sold to Wei Qian to obtain one hundred and two gold, and more than half of it was used to build the two-apartment house.

古文：寻园价所得，何以至此？
现代文：推寻园圃出卖所得，为什么到这么高?
English: Inferring the income from the sale of the garden, why is it so high?

古文：由吾经始历年，粗已成立，桃李茂密，桐竹成阴，塍陌交通，渠畎相属，华楼迥榭，颇有临眺之美；孤峰丛薄，不无纠纷之兴。
现代文：是因为我经营多年，已粗略建成，桃李茂密，桐竹成阴，田埂交错，沟渠相连。华丽的楼房高远的台榭，很有登临眺望的美观；独耸的山峰草木丛生，不是没有重叠交结的兴致。
English: It is because I have been in business for many years, it has been roughly built, the peach and plum trees are lush, the paulownia and bamboo are in shade, the fields are interlaced, and the ditches are connected. The magnificent buildings are high and far away, very beautiful to look at; the towering peaks are overgrown with plants and trees, not without the interest of overlapping and interlacing.

古文：渎中并饶菰蒋，湖里殊富芰莲。
现代文：沟中茭白富饶，湖裹菱角莲花很多。
English: The ditch is rich in egrets, and there are a lot of lotus flowers around the lake.

古文：虽云人外，城阙密迩，韦生欲之，亦雅有情趣。
现代文：虽说人迹少到，离城很近，韦生想到那裹，也很有情趣。
English: Although there are few traces of people, it is very close to the city, and it is also very interesting for Wesson to think about it.

古文：追述此事，非有吝心，盖是笔势所至耳。
现代文：追述造件事，不是有吝惜的心思，当是笔势所到而已。
English: To retell the creation of a thing is not to have a parsimonious mind, but to be the result of the stroke of a pen.

古文：忆谢灵运《山家诗》云： 中为天地物，今成鄙夫有。 
现代文：回忆谢灵运《山家诗》说： 其中为天地之物，今日为鄙夫所有。 
English: Recalling Xie Lingyun's "Mountain Home Poem," he said: "Among them are the things of heaven and earth. Today, they are owned by the common people.

古文：吾此园有之二十载矣，今为天地物，物之与我，相校几何哉！
现代文：我这个园圃享有它二十年了，现在成为天地之物，物和我，相比较有多少呢!
English: This garden of mine has enjoyed it for twenty years, and now it has become a thing of heaven and earth. How many things are there compared to me!

古文：此吾所余，今以分汝，营小田舍，亲累既多，理亦须此。
现代文：这是我所余下的，现在分给你，经营小田舍，亲人既多，道理也必须如此。
English: This is what is left of me, now given to you, to run a small farmhouse. Since I have many relatives, it must be so.

古文：且释氏之教，以财物谓之外命；儒典亦称 何以聚人曰财 。
现代文：而且佛家的教导，把财物称为身外之物；儒家经典也称 如何聚集人为财 。
English: Moreover, Buddhist teachings refer to wealth as something outside the body; Confucian classics also refer to how to gather people's wealth.

古文：况汝曹常情，安得忘此。
现代文：况且你们平常的心情，怎么能忘记逭些。
English: Besides, how can you forget your usual mood?

古文：闻汝所买姑孰田地，甚为舄卤，弥复何安。
现代文：听说你所买姑塾的田地，十分贫瘠，更有什么安心的。
English: I heard that the field you bought for your aunt's school is very barren, what's more reassuring.

古文：所以如此，非物竞故也。
现代文：之所以如此，是不同别人竞争的缘故。
English: The reason for this is the competition between different people.

古文：虽事异寝丘，聊可仿佛。
现代文：虽然事情不同于寝丘，大致也相仿佛。
English: Although things are different from the sleeping hills, they are roughly the same.

古文：孔子曰： 居家理治，可移于官。 
现代文：孔子说： 把家庭治理好，治道可移用到官府。 
English: Confucius said: If you manage your family well, you can transfer the management to the government.

古文：既已营之，宜使成立。
现代文：既然已经营造，应该使之完成。
English: Now that it has been created, it should be completed.

古文：进退两亡，更贻耻笑。
现代文：进退两难，更留下耻笑。
English: The dilemma is even more humiliating.

古文：若有所收获，汝可自分赡内外大小，宜令得所，非吾所知，又复应沾之诸女耳。
现代文：如果有所收获，你可以自己分别救济内外大小，应使各得其所，逭不是我所能知道的了，另外还应施及几个女儿。
English: If there is something to be gained, you can make your own reliefs according to the size of the inside and outside, each should be put in its place, which is not something I can know. In addition, several daughters should be treated.

古文：汝既居长，故有此及。
现代文：你处于长子之位，所以说到这些。
English: You're in the position of the eldest son, so to speak.

古文：凡为人长，殊复不易，当使中外谐缉，人无间言，先物后己，然后可贵。
现代文：凡做别人的兄长，很不容易，应使内外和谐，别人没有闲话，先人而后己，然后才可贵。
English: It is not easy to be someone's elder brother. It is necessary to create harmony both inside and outside. Do not gossip about others. Be yourself first, and then you will be valuable.

古文：老生云： 后其身而身先。 
现代文：老生说： 位居别人身后而又身在前列。 
English: The old man said, "Being behind others but being in the front."

古文：若能尔者，更招巨利。
现代文：如果能这样，更会招来大利。
English: If we can do this, it will bring Italy even more.

古文：汝当自勖，见贤思齐，不宜忽略以弃日也。
现代文：你应自己努力，见到贤人想到和他相等，不要忽略修养而废弃时间。
English: You should make your own efforts. When you see a wise man, you should try to be equal to him. Don't neglect cultivation and waste time.

古文：非徒弃日，乃是弃身，身名美恶，岂不大哉！
现代文：不仅废弃时间，而且废弃自身，身名的美恶，难道不重大吗!
English: Isn't it important not only to waste time, but also to waste oneself, the merits and demerits of one's name!

古文：可不慎欤？
现代文：能不慎重吗?
English: Can you be careless?

古文：今之所敕，略言此意。正谓为家已来，不事资产，既立墅舍，以乖旧业，陈其始末，无愧怀抱。
现代文：今日的教导，略微说到这个意思，衹是讲成家以来，不从事家产的增值，建立别墅房舍后，违背旧日家业，陈述始末，心中无愧。
English: Today's teaching, slightly speaking of this meaning, is that since the founding of the family, it is not engaged in the appreciation of the family property, and after the establishment of the villa building, it is against the old family business, and it is stated from beginning to end.

古文：兼吾年时朽暮，心力稍殚，牵课奉公，略不克举，其中余暇，裁可自休。
现代文：加之我年岁已老，心力渐渐耗尽，心中挂念奉行公事，已显得不能完成，其中剩余的空闲，才可自己休息。
English: In addition, I am old, my strength is gradually exhausted, my heart is worried about doing business, it has become impossible to complete, and the remaining free time can only be rested by myself.

古文：或复冬日之阳，夏日之阴，良辰美景，文案间隙，负杖蹑履，逍遥陋馆，临池观鱼，披林听鸟，浊酒一杯，弹琴一曲，求数刻之暂乐，庶居常以待终，不宜复劳家间细务。
现代文：或者是冬天的阳光下，或者足夏天的荫凉中，良辰美景，处理文案的间隙，拿着拐杖拖着草鞋，在简陋的馆舍逍遥，到池边看鱼，拨开林子听鸟叫，浑浊的酒一杯，弹一首曲子，求得几刻的短暂娱乐，希望守常不变而等待生命终结，不应再操劳家中小事。
English: Either under the winter sun, or in the shade of the summer, a good time, a beautiful view, a gap in the processing of documents, holding a cane and dragging a straw shoe, walking in a simple pavilion, going to the pool to watch fish, clearing the forest to listen to birds, a cloudy glass of wine, playing a tune, seeking a few moments of short-term entertainment, hoping to remain unchanged and waiting for the end of life, should no longer bother with minor household chores.

古文：汝交关既定，此书又行，凡所资须，付给如别。
现代文：你交接已经确定，这封信又发出，凡所需要的，将另外交付。
English: Your transfer has been confirmed, this letter has been reissued, and whatever is needed will be delivered separately.

古文：自兹以后，吾不复言及田事，汝亦勿复与吾言之。
现代文：从此以后，我不再说到田产的事，你也不要再对我说起。
English: From now on, I won't talk about farming, and you shouldn't talk to me about it either.

古文：假使尧水汤旱，吾岂知如何；若其满庾盈箱，尔之幸遇。
现代文：假使尧遭水灾汤遭旱灾，我哪裹知道怎么办；如果谷物堆满粮仓，那是你的幸运际遇。
English: If there is a flood or a drought, I don't know what to do; if the granary is full of grain, you are lucky.

古文：如斯之事，并无俟令吾知也。
现代文：如此之类的事，都不必让我知道。
English: You don't have to let me know about things like that.

古文：《记》云： 夫孝者，善继人之志，善述人之事。 
现代文：《礼记》说： 所谓孝，是善于继承先人的志向，善于完成先人的事业。 
English: "Li Ji" said: The so-called filial piety is good at inheriting the aspirations of the ancestors, and good at completing the undertakings of the ancestors.

古文：今且望汝全吾此志，则无所恨矣。
现代文：现在希望你成全我这个志向，就没有遗憾了。
English: Now I hope that you will fulfill this ambition of mine, and there will be no regrets.

古文：勉第二子悱卒，痛悼甚至，不欲久废王务，乃为《答客喻》。
现代文：徐勉第二个儿子徐悱去世，徐勉悲动万分，不想长久荒废政务，就撰写《答客喻》。
English: After the death of Xu Yan, the second son of Xu Ren, Xu Ren was deeply moved by the tragedy. He didn't want to waste government affairs for a long time, so he wrote "Answering Customers."

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：其文辞说：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：普通五年春二月丁丑，余第二息晋安内史悱丧之问至焉，举家伤悼，心情若陨。
现代文：普通五年春二月丁丑，我第二个儿子晋安内史徐悱去世的消息传来，全家伤心哀悼，心情如坠落深渊。
English: When the news of the death of my second son, Jin Anneshi Xu Jun, came in the spring and February of Ding Jiu, the whole family grieved and mourned, feeling like falling into the abyss.

古文：二宫并降中使，以相慰勖，亲游宾客，毕来吊问，辄恸哭失声，悲不自已，所谓父子天性，不知涕之所从来也。
现代文：二宫都派出使者，来加以慰问，亲戚朋友，都来吊唁问候，我动辄失声痛哭，悲伤不能自已，是人们所说的父子天然禀性，不知眼泪是从哪襄出来的。
English: Both imperial families sent emissaries to offer condolences, and relatives and friends came to offer condolences and greetings. I often lost my voice and wept bitterly, unable to control my grief. This is what people call the natural resilience of a father and son. I don't know where the tears came from.

古文：于是门人虑其肆情所钟，容致委顿，乃敛衽而进曰： 仆闻古往今来，理运之常数；春荣秋落，气象之定期。
现代文：遣时门人担心我尽情所致，容貌疲乏困顿，就提起衣襟而进言说： 我听说古往今来，是社会演化的正常运敷；春天繁荣秋天凋落，是气候的不变期限。
English: The time keeper, worried that I was enjoying myself too much and that my face looked tired and haggard, raised his shirt collar and said: I have heard that from ancient times to the present, it is a normal process of social evolution; spring prosperity and autumn decline are the unchanging period of the climate.

古文：人居其间，譬诸逆旅，生寄死归，著于通论，是以深识之士，悠尔忘怀。
现代文：人居住在其中，好比旅客，在世为借住死后为归家，逭话着绿在通达的议论中，所以有深入见解的人，悠然忘记生存。
English: People live in it, like travelers, living for the sake of living and dying for the sake of returning home, chatting about greenery in the middle of a comprehensive discussion, so people with in-depth views, leisurely forget to survive.

古文：东门归无之旨，见称往哲；西河丧明之过，取诮友朋。
现代文：束门归之于无的宗旨，受到前代哲人的称赞；西河损坏眼睛的过失，受到朋友的讥讽。
English: The ancient philosophers praised the aim of making the cords useless; the fault of the West River damaging the eyes was ridiculed by friends.

古文：足下受遇于朝，任居端右，忧深责重，休戚是均，宜其遗情下流，止哀加饭，上存奉国，俯示隆家。
现代文：足下在朝廷受到知遇，地位处在尚书省之首，忧患深而责任重，同皇上休戚与共，应该放下情感，停止哀伤增加饭食，上存尊奉国家之心，下示兴隆家族之意。
English: At the foot of the court, he was well received, his position was at the head of Shangshu Province, he was deeply worried and had heavy responsibilities, he was in solidarity with the emperor, he should put down his emotions, stop his sorrow and increase his meals, respect and serve the heart of the country, and show the intention of the Xinglong family.

古文：岂可纵此无益，同之儿女，伤神损识，或亏生务。
现代文：岂可放纵这没有益处的哀伤，和小孩子相同，损伤精神见识，甚至亏损百姓事务?
English: Is it permissible to indulge in this useless sorrow, which is like that of a child, which damages the spirit and knowledge, and even causes losses to the people's affairs?

古文：门下窃议，咸为君侯不取也。 
现代文：门下私下议论，都为君侯感到不足取。 
English: Privately, the princes felt inadequate.

古文：余雪泣而答曰： 彭殇之达义，延吴之雅言，亦常闻之矣；顾所以未能弭意者，请陈其说。
现代文：我含泪哭泣而回答说： 彭祖关于死的通达义理，延吴的雅正之言，也曾经听到了；之所以没有消除生死之念，请让我陈述想法。
English: With tears in my eyes, I replied, "I have also heard Peng Zu's teachings on the virtue of death, and Yan Wu's words of righteousness, but I have not eliminated the thought of life and death. Please allow me to explain my thoughts."

古文：夫植树阶庭，钦柯叶之茂；为山累仞，惜覆篑之功。
现代文：在庭院植树，欣喜枝叶的繁茂；堆积山丘到若干丈，爱惜积小成大的功夫。
English: Planting trees in the courtyard, rejoicing in the flourishing of branches and leaves; piling up hills to a certain height, cherishing the effort of building small into large.

古文：故秀而不实，尼父为之叹息；析彼歧路，杨子所以留连。
现代文：所以吐穗开花而不结实，尼父为之叹息；辨析那分歧的道路，杨子因此而徘徊。
English: Therefore, the spike blossoms but is not strong, and the father-in-law sighs for it; discerning the divergent path, the poplar wanders because of it.

古文：事有可深，圣贤靡抑。
现代文：事情有可深入一层的，圣贤不能抑止。
English: Things can go deeper, sages can't stop it.

古文：今吾所悲，亦以悱始逾立岁，孝悌之至，自幼而长，文章之美，得之天然，好学不倦，居无尘杂，多所著述，盈帙满笥，淡然得失之际，不见喜愠之容。
现代文：现在我所悲伤的，也是因为涂悱刚过三十岁，孝顺友爱之极，从小到大，文章的美好，得之于天然性情，好学不倦，住处没有灰尘杂物，著述很多，装满书箱，在有得失的时候显得淡然，喜怒不行于色。
English: Now I am sad, also because Tu Youyou is just over thirty years old, filial piety and friendliness are extremely high, from childhood to adulthood, the beauty of the article is due to natural temperament, eager to learn and tireless, there is no dust and debris in the residence, there are many writings, filled with bookcases, when there are gains and losses, it appears indifferent, and emotions cannot be exaggerated.

古文：及翰飞东朝，参伍盛列，其所游往，皆一时才俊，赋诗颂咏，终日忘疲。
现代文：等到在束宫任职，同事成列，他所交往的，都是当时英才，赋诗咏颂，整忘记疲劳。
English: When he took up his post at Sokgong, his colleagues were lined up in a row. The people he interacted with were all talented at the time, composed poems, and completely forgot their fatigue.

古文：每从容谓吾以遭逢时来，位隆任要，当应推贤下士，先物后身，然后可以报恩明主，克保元吉。
现代文：经常随口说我遇上时运，地位高责任重，应当推举贤明尊敬士人，先人而后己，然后可以报答英明君主的恩情，保全大吉大利。
English: He often said casually that I was in a fortunate situation, with a high position and heavy responsibilities, and that I should promote wise and respected scholars, the first to follow, and then I could repay the kindness of the wise monarch and preserve great fortune.

古文：俾余二纪之中，忝窃若是，幸无大过者，繄此子之助焉。
现代文：使我二十多年中，愧居如此要职，有幸而无大过失的，实是这个儿子的协助。
English: It was really the help of this son that enabled me, for more than twenty years, to live up to such an important position, and to be fortunate enough not to make any major mistakes.

古文：自出闽区，政存清静，冀其旋反，少慰衰暮，言念今日，眇然长往。
现代文：自从外出到闽山地区，政事保持清明宽简，希望他返回，稍微慰藉我逭老人，然而现在，已远远离去。
English: Since he went out to the Lushan area, the government affairs have remained clear and concise. I hope he will return, to comfort my old man a little, but now, he is far away.

古文：加以阖棺千里之外，未知归骨之期，虽复无情之伦，庸讵不痛于昔！
现代文：加上在千里之外盖上棺材，不知骨骸归来的期，即使是无情的人，在往日怎么能不痛心!
English: In addition to covering the coffin thousands of miles away, not knowing when the skeleton would return, even a heartless person could not help but feel sad in the old days!

古文：夷甫孩抱中物，尚尽恸以待宾；安仁未及七旬，犹殷勤于词赋。
现代文：王夷甫还在幼年，尚且尽哀来接待宾客；潘安仁未到七十岁，还情意恳切撰写词赋。
English: Wang Yifu was still in his infancy, and he still made every effort to receive guests; Pan Anren was not yet seventy years old, and he also earnestly wrote poems.

古文：况夫名立宦成，半途而废者，亦焉可已已哉。
现代文：何况名声建立已入仕途，半途而中止，也怎能心中平静呢。
English: Besides, how can one have peace of mind when one's reputation has been built up and is on its way to completion, only to be interrupted halfway through?

古文：求其此怀，可谓苗实之义。
现代文：推求遣一心怀，可以说是禾苗舆结实的意思。
English: Pushing and pulling with one heart, can be said to be the meaning of the seedling.

古文：诸贤既贻格言，喻以大理，即日辍哀，命驾修职事焉。 
现代文：各位贤人既赠送可作准则的话，用大道理加以开导，就在今日停止哀伤，命令驾车去履行职责。 
English: All of you wise men and women, who have given us words that can be used as a guideline and enlightened us with great principles, should stop mourning today and order us to drive to perform our duties.

古文：中大通三年，又以疾自陈，移授特进、右光禄大夫、侍中、中卫将军，置佐史，余如故。
现代文：中大通三年，又因疾病自己陈述要求，改授特进、右光禄大夫、侍中、中卫将军，设置辅助的属吏，其余照旧。
English: In the third year of junior high and high school, due to the disease of self-reporting requirements, the special promotion, the doctor of Uguanglu, the attendant, and the general of the middle guard were awarded, the auxiliary subordinate officers were set up, and the rest were as before.

古文：增亲信四十人。
现代文：增加亲信四十人。
English: Add forty cronies.

古文：两宫参问，冠盖结辙；服膳医药，皆资天府。
现代文：两宫慰问，官员车辆相接；饮食医药，都由宫廷府库供给。
English: The condolences of the two palaces, the officials' vehicles are connected, and the food and medicine are all supplied by the palace treasury.

古文：有敕每欲临幸，勉以拜伏有亏，频启停出，诏许之，遂停舆驾。
现代文：皇帝每次下令想要前去，徐勉因不能完成叩拜伏地的大礼，频繁启奏要皇帝停止出宫，诏令准许，于是皇帝停留在宫中。
English: Every time the emperor gave an order to go forward, Xu Mian, unable to complete the grand ritual of prostrating to the emperor, frequently asked the emperor to stop leaving the palace. The imperial edict allowed it, so the emperor stayed in the palace.

古文：大同元年，卒，时年七十。
现代文：大同元年，徐勉去世，这年七十岁。
English: In the first year of Datong, Xu Min passed away at the age of 70.

古文：高祖闻而流涕，即日车驾临殡，乃诏赠特进、右光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，余并如故。
现代文：高祖听说后流下眼泪，当天坐车前往停殡处，于是下韶追赠特进、右光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，其余的都照旧。
English: After hearing this, Gaozu shed tears and drove to the mortuary the same day. He then presented the special allowance, the doctor of Uguanglu, the Kaifu ceremony and the three divisions, and the rest were as before.

古文：给东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭。
现代文：赐给棺材，礼服一套，衣服一套。
English: Give her a coffin, a gown, a dress.

古文：赠钱二十万，布百匹。
现代文：赠送钱二十万文，布一百匹。
English: Two hundred thousand yuan in cash and one hundred pieces of cloth were given as gifts.

古文：皇太子亦举哀朝堂。
现代文：皇太子也在朝堂举办丧事。
English: The Crown Prince also presided over the funeral at the Imperial Palace.

古文：谥曰简肃公。
现代文：谧号为简肃公。
English: His nickname was Jian Su Gong.

古文：勉善属文，勤著述，虽当机务，下笔不休。
现代文：徐勉善于写文章，勤于著述，虽然处于机要职位，笔耕不停止。
English: Xu Mian is good at writing articles and diligent in writing. Although he is in an important position, he does not stop writing.

古文：尝以起居注烦杂，乃加删撰为《别起居注》六百卷；《左丞弹事》五卷；在选曹，撰《选品》五卷；齐时，撰《太庙祝文》二卷；以孔释二教殊途同归，撰《会林》五十卷。
现代文：曾经因起居注繁杂，就加以删改撰写成《流别起居注》六百卷；《左丞弹事》五卷；在选拔官吏的部门，撰写《选品》五卷；在齐朝时，撰写《太庙祝文》二卷；因孔释二教通过不同途径达到一个目的，撰写《会林》五十卷。
English: In the past, due to the complexity of the commentary, it was edited and rewritten into 600 volumes of "Farewell Commentary"; five volumes of "Left-Handed Music"; five volumes of "Selected Works" in the department of selecting officials; two volumes of "Congratulatory Letter to the Great Temple" during the Qi Dynasty; and fifty volumes of "Meeting Forest" due to the different ways of achieving the same goal through the teachings of Kong Xiyi.

古文：凡所著前后二集四十五卷，又为《妇人集》十卷，皆行于世。
现代文：凡所著述前后共二集四十五卷，又撰写《妇人集》十卷，都流行于世间。
English: All the works he wrote before and after, a total of two sets of forty-five volumes, and he also wrote the "Women's Collection" ten volumes, are popular in the world.

古文：大同三年，故佐史尚书左丞刘览等诣阙陈勉行状，请刊石纪德，即降诏许立碑于墓云。
现代文：大同三年，从前的佐史尚书左丞刘览等人前往朝廷陈述徐勉品行业绩，请求刻碑记载功德，当即降韶准许在墓地立碑。
English: In the third year of Datong, Liu Shan, the former Sashi Shangshu Zuoxing, and others went to the imperial court to present the achievements of Xu Mianpin, request a monument to record the merits, and immediately lowered the shackles to allow the monument to be erected in the cemetery.

古文：悱字敬业，幼聪敏，能属文。
现代文：徐悱字敬业，自幼聪明，能写文章。
English: Xu Yanzi is dedicated to his work, has been smart since childhood, and can write articles.

古文：起家著作佐郎，转太子舍人，掌书记之任。
现代文：出仕为著作佐郎，改任太子舍人，掌管文书记录的职责。
English: He was assigned to the position of Shoseki-saro, and later to the position of Taishi-soreito, in charge of document records.

古文：累迁洗马、中舍人，犹管书记。
现代文：屡经升迁任洗马、中舍人，仍然掌管文书记录。
English: He has been repeatedly promoted to the posts of Saima and Zhongshe, and is still in charge of document records.

古文：出入宫坊者历稔，以足疾出为湘东王友，迁晋安内史。
现代文：出入太子的宫署多年，因脚病外出任鳄塞王友，调任晋安内史。
English: He was in and out of the prince's palace for many years. Due to a foot ailment, he had to leave his post as the Crocodile King's Friend and was transferred to the position of Jinan's Internal Historian.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：徐勉少而厉志忘食，发愤修身，慎言行，择交游；加运属兴王，依光日月，故能明经术以绾青紫，出闾阎而取卿相。
现代文：陈吏部尚书逃塞说：徐勉年轻时磨砺志向忘记饮食，发愤修养身心，言行谨慎，择友而交；加上遇到君王兴起的时运，依凭日月的光辉，所以能因懂得经学而得高位，出入宫廷而任卿相。
English: Chen Libu Shang Shuxu Xuejie said: When Xu Mian was young, he sharpened his ambition to forget food and drink, cultivated his mind and body with anger, was prudent in words and deeds, and chose friends to make friends with. In addition, when he encountered the rise of kings, he relied on the brilliance of the sun and the moon, so he was able to obtain a high position due to his knowledge of the scriptures, and enter and leave the court and serve as a noble minister.

古文：及居重任，竭诚事主，动师古始，依则先王，提衡端轨，物无异议，为梁宗臣，盛矣。
现代文：等到处于重大职位，竭尽诚心侍奉君主，行动师法古人，依照先代帝王准则，执掌朝廷法度，人们没有异议，是梁朝人所宗仰的大臣，声誉盛大啊。
English: When he was placed in an important position, he served the monarch wholeheartedly, and acted as a teacher of the law of the ancients. In accordance with the code of the previous emperor, he presided over the imperial law, and people had no objection. He was a minister admired by the Liang Dynasty people, and his reputation was great.

