古文：黄帝问于伯高曰：余愿闻六腑传谷者，肠胃之大小长短，受谷之多少，奈何？
现代文：黄帝问伯高道：我想要了解六腑如何输送谷物以及肠、胃的大小长短，能够容纳多少谷物，这些情况到底是怎么样呢？
English: Huang Di asked Baogao Dao: I want to know how the six-toed toad transports grain, as well as the size and length of the intestine and stomach, and how much grain it can hold. What is the situation?

古文：伯高曰：请尽言之，谷所从出入浅深远近长短之度：唇至齿长九分，口广二寸半。
现代文：伯高说：请让我详细地解说。谷物在人体中从入口到排出体外所经历的深浅、远近、长短过程是：从嘴唇到牙齿的长度是九分，嘴宽是二寸半。
English: "Please allow me to explain in detail. The depth, proximity, and length of the process that cereal undergoes in the human body from the entrance to the discharge is: from the lips to the teeth, the length is nine points, and the mouth width is two and a half inches.

古文：齿以后至会厌，深三寸半，大容五合。
现代文：从牙齿后到喉咙上的会厌，三寸半深，这部分大到能容纳五合食物。
English: The epiglottis, from the back of the teeth to the throat, is three and a half inches deep, which is large enough to hold five portions of food.

古文：舌重十两，长七寸，广二寸半。咽门重十两，广一寸半，至胃长一尺六寸。
现代文：舌头重十两，长七寸，宽二寸半，咽门重十两，宽一寸半，从咽门至胃的长度是：一尺六寸。
English: The tongue weighs twelve ounces, is seven inches long and two and a half inches wide, the pharynx weighs twelve ounces and is one and a half inches wide, and the length from the pharynx to the stomach is one and a half feet.

古文：胃纡曲屈，伸之，长二尺六寸，大一尺五寸，径五寸，大容三斗五升。
现代文：胃折皱屈曲在一起，如果伸展开，长二尺六寸，周长一尺五寸，直径五寸，胃大到可容谷物三斗五升。
English: The stomach folds and flexes together. If stretched out, it is two feet and six inches long, with a circumference of one foot and five inches and a diameter of five inches. The stomach is large enough to hold three quarts of grain.

古文：小肠后附脊，左环回周迭积，其注于回肠者，外附于脐上，回运环十六曲，大二寸半，径八分分之少半，长三丈二尺。
现代文：小肠后面附着脊柱，从左向右回环叠积，内与回肠相通相连，外附于脐上方，总共回环叠绕十六个弯曲，小肠周长二寸半，直径八又三分之一分，长三丈二尺。
English: At the back of the small intestine, there is a spinal column. From left to right, there is a stack of gyres. The internal gyres are connected to the ileum. The external gyres are attached above the umbilicus. There are a total of sixteen curves around the gyrus. The small intestine has a circumference of two and a half inches, a diameter of eight and one-third minutes, and a length of three feet and two feet.

古文：回肠当脐，左环回周叶积而下，回运还反十六曲，大四寸，径一寸寸之少半，长二丈一尺。
现代文：大肠从正当脐的部位向左回环，四周迭积而下，回环反复十六个弯曲，大肠周长四寸，直径一又三分之一寸，长二丈一尺。
English: The large intestine goes from the place of the right intestine to the left gyrus, accumulates around and around, the gyrus repeatedly bends sixteen times, the large intestine has a circumference of four inches, a diameter of one and a third inches, and a length of two feet one foot.

古文：广肠传脊，以受回肠，左环叶脊，上下辟，大八寸，径二寸寸之大半，长二尺八寸。
现代文：直肠附着脊柱，承受回肠排出的糟粕，向左回环迭积，上下略有偏斜，直肠周长八寸，直径二又三分之二寸，长二尺八寸。
English: The rectum is attached to the spinal column and bears the waste discharged by the ileum. It is overlapped with the left gyrus and is slightly inclined up and down. The rectum has a circumference of eight inches, a diameter of two and two-thirds inches, and a length of two feet eight inches.

古文：肠胃所入至所出，长六丈四寸四分，回曲环反，三十二曲也。
现代文：总计食物入嘴经胃肠到排出体外为止的长度是六丈四寸五分，其中回环弯曲是三十二曲。
English: The total length of food entering the mouth through the gastrointestinal tract until it is expelled from the body is six feet four inches and five minutes, of which the ring bending is thirty-two bends.

