古文：起旃蒙大渊献，尽柔兆困敦，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。
English: From start to finish, a total of two years.

古文：敬皇帝绍泰元年
现代文：梁敬帝绍泰元年
English: Emperor Liang Jing of Shao Tai in the first year of the reign

古文：春，正月，壬午朔，邵陵太守刘棻将兵援江陵，至三百里滩，部曲宋文彻杀之，帅其众还据邵陵。
现代文：春季正月，壬午朔，邵陵太守刘带兵救援江陵，走到三百里滩，部曲宋文彻杀了他，把他的部众带回邵陵据守。
English: In the first month of spring, at noon, Liu, the governor of Shaoling, led soldiers to rescue Jiangling and walked to the Three Hundred Mile Beach. Song Wenche killed him and brought his subordinates back to Shaoling.

古文：梁王詧即皇帝位于江陵，改元大定；追尊昭明太子为昭明皇帝，庙号高宗，妃蔡氏为昭德皇后；尊其母龚氏为皇太后，立妻王氏为皇后，子岿为皇太子。
现代文：梁王萧在江陵即皇帝位，改年号为大定，追尊昭明太子萧统为昭明皇帝，庙号为高宗，昭明太子的妃子蔡氏被追尊为昭德皇后，尊母亲龚氏为皇太后，立妻子王氏为皇后，儿子萧岿为皇太子。
English: Liang Wang Xiao was enthroned as emperor in Jiangling, and his era name was changed to Dading. He was posthumously honored as Emperor Zhao Ming by Prince Xiao Tong, and his temple name was Gao Zong. Prince Zhao Ming's daughter-in-law, Cai, was posthumously honored as Empress Zhao De, his mother, Zou, was honored as Empress Dowager, his wife, Wang, was honored as Empress, and his son, Xiao Yu, was honored as Crown Prince.

古文：赏刑制度并同王者，唯上疏于魏则称臣，奉其正朔。
现代文：在赏赐刑罚制度方面，都和称王称帝的体制一样，只有在向西魏上疏的时候自称臣，用西魏的历法。
English: As far as the penal system is concerned, it is the same as the system of proclaiming the king as the emperor, except that when it is time to ascend to the Western Wei Dynasty, it claims to be a vassal and uses the Western Wei calendar.

古文：至于官爵其下，亦依梁氏之旧，其勋级则兼用柱国等名。
现代文：至于官制爵位等的颁发，也还依照梁朝的旧制，而给有功之臣定的功勋等级，则兼用西魏设置的柱国等名目。
English: As for the awarding of official titles, it was still based on the old system of the Liang Dynasty, and the ranks of merit given to meritorious retainers also used the names of pillar states set up in the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：以咨议参军蔡大宝为侍中、尚书令，参掌选事；外兵参军太原王操为五兵尚书。
现代文：任命谘议参军蔡大宝为侍中、尚书令，参与掌管选拔官员的事情；任命外兵参军太原人王操为五兵尚书。
English: Appointed Cai Dabao, who was an advisory member of the army, as an attendant, and Shang Shuling, and participated in the selection of officials; appointed Wang Cao, a foreign soldier who joined the army in Taiyuan, as the five soldiers of Shang Shuling.

古文：大宝严整有智谋，雅达政事，文辞赡速，后梁主推心任之，以为谋主，比之诸葛孔明；操亦亚之。
现代文：蔡大宝为人严谨整饬有智谋，一向娴熟精通于政事，作文措辞丰沛敏捷，后梁主萧推心置腹地信任他，以他为出谋划策的主角，把他比为诸葛孔明，王操的地位仅次于他。
English: Cai Dabao is a rigorous, neat and resourceful person. He has always been skillful and proficient in politics. The wording of his composition is rich and agile. Master Liang Xiao put his heart and soul into trusting him. He is the protagonist of his strategy. He is compared to Zhuge Kongming, and the status of Wang Cao is second only to him.

古文：追赠邵陵王纶太宰，谥曰壮武；河东王誉丞相，谥曰武桓。
现代文：追赠邵陵王萧纶为太宰，谥号为壮武；河东王萧誉为丞相，谥号为武桓。
English: As a posthumous gift, King of Shaoling, Xiao Yao, became Dazai, and his posthumous name was Zhuangwu; King of Hedong, Xiaoyu, became chancellor, and his posthumous name was Wu Kan.

古文：以莫勇为武州刺史，魏永寿为巴州刺史。
现代文：又任命莫勇为武州刺史，魏永寿为巴州刺史。
English: He also appointed Mo Yong as Wuzhou chief historian and Wei Yongshu as Bazhou chief historian.

古文：湘州刺史王琳将兵自小桂北下，至蒸城，闻江陵已陷，为世祖发哀，三军缟素，遣别将侯平帅舟师攻后梁。
现代文：湖州刺史王琳带兵从小桂北下，抵达蒸城，听到江陵已经陷落的消息，便为梁元帝萧绎发丧，三军都穿白衣丧服，并派别将侯平率领一支水军去攻打后梁。
English: Wang Lin, the military commander of Huzhou, led his troops from Xiao Gui to the north and arrived at the city of Steam. Hearing the news that Jiangling had fallen, he mourned the death of Emperor Liang Yuan. The three armies all wore white mourning clothes, and dispatched General Hou Ping to lead a navy to attack Houliang.

古文：琳屯兵长沙，传檄州郡，为进取之计。
现代文：王琳自己屯兵于长沙，向各州郡发布文告，作进取天下的打算。
English: Wang Lin himself stationed troops in Changsha and issued a proclamation to all prefectures and counties, intending to conquer the world.

古文：长沙王韶及上游诸将皆推琳为盟主。
现代文：长沙王萧韶和上游诸将都推举王琳为盟主。
English: The king of Changsha, Xiao Wei, and the generals of the upper reaches all elected Wang Lin as their leader.

古文：齐主使清河王岳将兵攻魏安州，以救江陵。
现代文：北齐国主高洋派清河王高岳带兵攻打西魏的安州，以此举救援江陵。
English: Gaoyang, the ruler of Northern Qi, sent Qinghe King Gao Yue to lead an army to attack Anzhou in Western Wei, in order to rescue Jiangling.

古文：岳至义阳，江陵陷，因进军临江，郢州刺史陆法和及仪同三司宋莅举州降之；长史江夏太守王珉不从，杀之。
现代文：高岳进抵义阳，江陵已经陷落，于是挺进到长江边，郢州刺史陆法和与仪同三司宋献出州郡投降，长史江夏太守王珉不顺从，被杀。
English: Gao Yue entered Yiyang, Jiangling had fallen, so he advanced to the edge of the Yangtze River, Zhangzhou stabbed Shi Lu Fa and surrendered to the Third Division of the Song Dynasty along with Yi, and Changshi Jiang Xia Taishu Wang Yao disobeyed and was killed.

古文：甲午，齐召岳还，使仪同三司清都慕容俨戍郢州。
现代文：甲午，北齐命令高岳回去，派仪同三司清都人慕容俨守卫郢州。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, Northern Qi ordered Gao Yue to go back and sent Yi with the three Qingdu people Murong to guard Zhangzhou.

古文：王僧辩遣江州刺史侯瑱攻郢州，任约、徐世谱、宜丰侯循皆引兵会之。
现代文：王僧辩派江州刺史侯去攻打郢州，任约、徐世谱、宜丰侯萧循等都带兵去会合。
English: Wang Sangye sent Jiangzhou Zhi Shihou to attack Zhangzhou, and Ren Guo, Xu Shifu, Yifeng Hou Xiao Cun and others all led troops to the meeting.

古文：辛丑，齐立贞阳侯渊明为梁主，使其上党王涣将兵送之，徐陵、湛海珍等皆听从渊明归。
现代文：辛丑，北齐立贞阳侯萧渊明为梁朝的新主，并派上党王高涣带兵送他回南方，徐陵、湛海珍等都听从萧渊明一块回去。
English: Sin ugly, North Qilian Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming was the new master of the Liang Dynasty, and sent the party king Gao Wei to lead the soldiers to send him back to the south, Xu Ling, Zhan Haizhen, etc. all obeyed Xiao Yuanming to go back together.

古文：二月，癸丑，晋安王至自寻阳，入居朝堂，即梁王位，时年十三。
现代文：二月癸丑，晋安王萧方智从寻阳来到建康，进入朝堂居住，登上梁王的位置，当时年仅十三岁。
English: At the end of February, the king of Jinan, Xiao Fangzhi, came to Jiankang from Huanyang, entered the imperial court to live, and ascended to the position of Liang Wang. At that time, he was only thirteen years old.

古文：以太尉王僧辩为中书监、录尚书、骠骑大将军、都督中外诸军事，加陈霸先征西大将军，以南豫州刺史侯瑱为江州刺史，湘州刺史萧循为太尉，广州刺史萧勃为司徒，镇东将军张彪为郢州刺史。
现代文：他任命太尉王僧辩为中书监、录尚书、骠骑大将军、都督中外诸军事，加封陈霸先为征西大将军，任命南豫州刺史侯为江州刺史，湘州刺史萧循为太尉，广州刺史萧勃为司徒，镇东将军张彪为郢州刺史。
English: He appointed the captain Wang Sangyan as the supervisor of the Chinese book, the record of the Chinese book, the general of the cavalry, and the military governor of China and other countries. He also appointed Chen Baxian as the general of the Western Expedition, the governor of South Yu Province as the governor of Jiangsu Province, the governor of Hunan Province as the lieutenant, the governor of Guangzhou Province as the officer, and the general of Zhendong Province as the governor of Zhangzhou Province.

古文：齐主先使殿中尚书邢子才驰传诣建康，与王僧辩书，以为： 嗣主冲藐，未堪负荷。
现代文：北齐国主高洋在送贞阳侯萧渊明回南方前，先派殿中尚书邢子才飞快地沿驿道去建康，给王僧辩送去一封信。信中认为： 你们立的嗣位的君主年龄幼小，不能承担治国的重任。
English: Before sending Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming back to the south, the ruler of Northern Qi, Gao Yang, first sent Shang Shuzhongzi from the palace to quickly go to Jiankang along the Shun Road and send a letter to Wang Sangye. The letter said: The monarch you have set up as heir to the throne is young and cannot bear the heavy responsibility of governing the country.

古文：彼贞阳侯，梁武犹子，长沙之胤，以年以望，堪保金陵，故置为梁王，纳于彼国。
现代文：而那个贞阳侯，是梁武帝的侄子，长沙王萧懿的后代，就他的年龄资望而言，却可以保障金陵不失，所以我把他立为梁朝的主子，送他回南方就国。
English: But that Prince Zhengyang, the nephew of Emperor Liangwu and the descendant of Changsha King Xiao Yao, could protect Jinling in terms of his age and prestige, so I made him the master of the Liang Dynasty and sent him back to the south to his country.

古文：卿宜部分舟舻，迎接今主，并心一力，善建良图。 
现代文：你应该安排舟舰，去迎接现在的主子，和他同心协力，好好地筹建美好的未来。 
English: You should arrange the boat to meet the current master, and work with him to build a better future.

古文：乙卯，贞阳侯渊明亦与僧辩书求迎。
现代文：乙卯，贞阳侯萧渊明也写信给王僧辩要求来迎接他。
English: In addition, Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming also wrote to Wang Sangye requesting him to come to meet him.

古文：僧辩复书曰： 嗣主体自宸极，受于文祖。
现代文：王僧辩回信对他说： 当今的嗣主的血统来自皇帝，又受命于祖先。
English: Wang Sangye replied to him in a letter: The blood of today's heir comes from the emperor and is ordered by the ancestors.

古文：明公倘能入朝，同奖王室，伊、吕之任，佥曰仰归；意在主盟，不敢闻命。 
现代文：他是合法的嗣主。您如果能到朝廷来当官，一起匡扶王室，那么伊尹、吕望的使命，大家都会说应该归于您了。
English: He is the legitimate heir. If you can come to the imperial court to serve as an official and support the royal family together, then everyone will say that the mission of Yi Yin and Lü Wang should belong to you.

古文：甲子，齐以陆法和为都督荆、雍等十州诸军事、太尉、大都督、西南道大行台，又以宋莅为郢州刺史，莅弟簉为湘州刺史。
现代文：如果您回朝廷来是想当主子，那么我不能听从这样的命令。 甲子，北齐任命陆法和为都督荆州、雅州等十州诸军事，太尉，大都督，西南道大行台。又派宋莅当郢州刺史，宋莅的弟弟宋为湘州刺史。
English: If you come back to the imperial court with the intention of becoming the master, then I cannot obey such an order. Jia Zi, Northern Qi, appointed Lu Fa as the military governor of ten states, including Jingzhou and Yashu, as well as the captain, the grand governor, and the governor of Southwest Province, and also sent Song Xi as the governor of Zhangzhou, and Song Xi's younger brother Song as the governor of Hunan.

古文：甲戌，上党王涣克谯郡。
现代文：甲戌，上党王高涣攻克谯郡。
English: Gao Yu, the king of the Shang Dynasty, invaded Keju County.

古文：己卯，渊明又与僧辩书，僧辩不从。
现代文：乙卯，萧渊明又给王僧辩写信去求迎，王僧辩不答应。
English: Second, Xiao Yuanming also wrote to Wang Sangyan to welcome him, but Wang Sangyan did not agree.

古文：魏以右仆射申徽为襄州刺史。
现代文：西魏任命右仆射申徽为襄州刺史。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty appointed his right-hand man, Jia Shenhui, as the chief historian of Xiangzhou.

古文：侯平攻后梁巴、武二州，故刘棻主帅赵朗杀宋文彻，以邵陵归于王琳。
现代文：侯平攻打后梁巴州、武州，已故刘的主帅赵朗杀了宋文彻，献出邵陵投归王琳。
English: After Hou Ping attacked Liangbazhou and Wuzhou, the late Liu's commander Zhao Lang killed Song Wencher and sacrificed Shaoling to Wang Lin.

古文：三月，贞阳侯渊明至东关，散骑常侍裴之横御之。
现代文：三月，贞阳侯萧渊明到了东关，散骑常侍裴之横带兵防御他。
English: In March, Zhengyang marquis Xiao Yuanming arrived in Dongguan. He rode alongside his equerry Pei Zheng and led soldiers to defend him.

古文：齐军司尉瑾、仪同三司萧轨南侵皎城，晋州刺史萧惠以州降之。
现代文：北齐军司尉瑾、仪同三司萧轨向南侵犯皖城，晋州刺史萧惠献出州郡投降了。
English: The Northern Qi Army's Lieutenant Zou, Yi, and the Third Division's Xiao Lu went south to invade Handan City, and the Jin State's Scribe Xiao Hui surrendered the county.

古文：齐改晋熙为江州，以尉瑾为刺史。
现代文：北齐把晋熙改名为江州，任命尉谨当刺史。
English: Northern Qi changed the name of Jinxi to Jiangzhou, and appointed the lieutenant to be the chief historian.

古文：丙戌，齐克东关，斩裴之横，俘数千人；王僧辩大惧，出屯姑孰，谋纳渊明。
现代文：丙戌，北齐攻克东关，杀了裴之横，俘虏了几千人。王僧辩大惊失色，带兵出城屯驻于姑孰，准备接受萧渊明。
English: North Qi conquered Dongguan, killed Pei Zhiyang, and captured several thousand people. Wang Sangyan was shocked and disgraced, and he took his soldiers out of the city to settle in Guzhen, preparing to receive Xiao Yuanming.

古文：丙申，齐主还鄴，封世宗二子孝珩为广宁王，延宗为安德王。
现代文：丙申，北齐国主高洋回到邺城，封文襄帝的两个儿子高孝珩为广宁王，高延宗为安德王。
English: Bishen, the ruler of Northern Qi, Gaoyang, returned to Lucheng, and the two sons of Emperor Xiangdi, Gao Xiaojun, became the king of Guangning, and Gao Yanzong became the king of Ande.

古文：孙易闻江陵陷，弃广州还，曲江侯勃复据有之。
现代文：孙所说江陵陷落，扔下广州回来了，曲江侯萧勃又占据了广州。
English: According to Sun, Jiangling fell, Guangzhou was thrown down and came back, Qujiang Hou Xiao Bo occupied Guangzhou again.

古文：魏太师泰遣王克、沈烱等还江南。
现代文：西魏太师宇文泰派王克、沈炯等人回江南。
English: Western Wei Grand Master Wu Wentai sent Wang Ke, Shen Yao and others back to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：泰得庾季才，厚遇之，令参掌太史。
现代文：宇文泰得了庚季才，给他优厚的待遇，让他参与掌管太史的工作。
English: Wu Wentai got Geng Jicai, gave him generous treatment, and let him participate in the work of controlling Tai Shi.

古文：季才散私财，购亲旧之为奴婢者。
现代文：庚季才拿出自己的私财，为亲朋故旧沦为奴婢的人赎身。
English: It was only then that Geng Ji took out his own money to redeem himself for his relatives and friends who had been reduced to slavery.

古文：泰问： 何能如是？ 
现代文：宇文泰问： 你怎么能这样仗义疏财？ 
English: Umentai asked: How can you squander wealth in such a way?

古文：对曰： 仆闻克国礼贤，言之道也。
现代文：庾季才回答他说： 我听说攻克一个国家，但对那个国家的贤人要予以礼遇，自古以来都是这样做的。
English: I have heard of conquering a country, but the wise men of that country should be treated with courtesy, and this has been done since ancient times.

古文：今郢都覆没，其君信有罪矣，搢绅何咎，皆为皁隶！
现代文：现在郢都覆灭了，他们的君主确实有罪，但他手下的官绅士大夫有什么罪呢，竟然都沦为奴隶！
English: Now they are all destroyed, their monarch is indeed guilty, but what is the guilt of the officials, gentry and doctors under his command, who have all fallen into slavery!

古文：鄙人羁旅，不敢献言，诚切哀之，故私购之耳。 
现代文：我是羁留在这儿的外人，不敢向您进言，但心里私下为他们的命运感到哀怜，所以才用私财为他们赎身。 
English: I am a foreigner detained here, I dare not say anything to you, but in my heart I feel sorry for their fate, so I used my own money to redeem myself for them.

古文：泰乃悟，曰： 吾之过也！
现代文：宇文泰听了才省悟过来，说： 这都是我的过错呀！
English: After listening to this, Yu Wentai came to his senses and said, "It's all my fault!

古文：微君，遂失天下之望！ 
现代文：要不是你提醒，这就要失去天下人的心了！ 
English: If you hadn't warned us, we would have lost the hearts of the whole world!

古文：因出令，免梁俘为奴婢者数千口。
现代文：于是发布命令，免去梁朝的俘虏当奴婢的惩罚，一下子使几千人得到自由。
English: Therefore, an order was issued to exempt the prisoners of the Liang Dynasty from the punishment of being slaves, and several thousand people were freed at once.

古文：夏，四月，庚申，齐主如晋阳。
现代文：夏季，四月，庚申，北齐国主高洋到了晋阳。
English: In the summer, in April, Goshun, the ruler of North Qi, Gao Yang, arrived in Jinyang.

古文：五月，庚辰，侯平等擒莫勇、魏永寿。
现代文：五月，庚辰，侯平等抓住了莫勇、魏永寿。
English: In May, Geng Chen and Hou Pingliang captured Mo Yong and Wei Yong Shou.

古文：江陵之陷也，永嘉王庄生七年矣，尼法慕匿之，王琳迎庄，送之建康。
现代文：当江陵陷落的时候，永嘉王萧庄正好七岁，尼姑法慕把他藏起来收养着，王琳派人去把他接出来，送到了建康。
English: When Jiangling fell, Yongjia Wang Xiaozhuang was just seven years old. The nuns hid him and adopted him. Wang Lin sent someone to take him out and sent him to Jiankang.

古文：庚寅，齐主还鄴。
现代文：庚寅，北齐国主高洋回到了邺城。
English: Gao Yin, the ruler of Northern Qi, and Gao Yang returned to Lucheng.

古文：王僧辩遣使奉启于贞阳侯渊明，定君臣之礼，又遣别使奉表于齐，以子显及显母刘氏、弟子世珍为质于渊明，遣左民尚书周弘正至历阳奉迎，因求以晋安王为皇太子；渊明许之。
现代文：王僧辩派使者向贞阳侯萧渊明上表，确定君臣之礼。又派另一使者到北齐去上表，派儿子王显和王显的母亲刘氏、弟弟的儿子王世珍到萧渊明那儿去当人质。又派左民尚书周弘正到历阳去奉迎萧渊明，并要求确立晋安王萧方智为皇太子，萧渊明答应了。
English: Wang Sangye sent an envoy to Zhengyang lord Xiao Yuanming to meet him and confirm the gift. He also sent another envoy to Beiqi to meet him, and sent his son Wang Xian, Wang Xian's mother Liu, and his brother's son Wang Shizhen to meet Xiao Yuanming as hostages. He also sent the leftist scholar Zhou Hongzhen to Liyang to meet Xiao Yuanming, and asked to establish the Jinan king Xiao Fangzhi as the crown prince. Xiao Yuanming agreed.

古文：渊明求度卫士三千，僧辩虑其为变，止受散卒千人。
现代文：萧渊明要求自己的三千名卫士跟着去，王僧辩怕这么多卫士会生出变乱来，因此只接受了一千名冗散的士兵。
English: Xiao Yuanming asked his three thousand guards to follow him, but Wang Xiang argued that he was afraid that so many guards would create turmoil, so he only accepted one thousand scattered soldiers.

古文：庚子，遣龙舟法驾迎之。
现代文：庚子，王僧辩派龙船，备法驾去迎接萧渊明。
English: Geng Zi, the king's disciple, sent a dragon boat to prepare to drive to meet Xiao Yuanming.

古文：渊明与齐上党王涣盟于江北，辛丑，自采石济江。
现代文：萧渊明和北齐上党王高涣在长江北边盟誓，辛丑，才从采石渡过长江。
English: Xiao Yuanming and Gao Qi, the party king of Northern Qi, swore an oath on the north side of the Yangtze River. It was only through quarrying that they crossed the Yangtze River.

古文：于是梁舆南渡，齐师北返。
现代文：于是梁朝的车辆南渡，北齐的军队返回北方。
English: As a result, the vehicles of the Liang Dynasty went to the south, and the troops of the Northern Qi returned to the north.

古文：僧辩疑齐，拥楫中流，不敢就西岸。
现代文：王僧辩对北齐军队心存疑惧，把船停在长江中流，不敢靠近西岸。
English: Wang Sangyan was suspicious of the Northern Qi army, so he stopped the ship in the middle of the Yangtze River and did not dare to approach the west coast.

古文：齐侍中裴英起卫送渊明，与僧辩会于江宁。
现代文：北齐侍中裴英起护送萧渊明南渡，和王僧辩在江宁会面。
English: Pei Ying, one of the attendants of the Northern Qi Dynasty, escorted Xiao Yuanming to the south, and met with Wang Sangyan in Jiangning.

古文：癸卯，渊明入建康，望硃雀门而哭，道逆者以哭对。
现代文：癸卯，萧渊明进入建康，看到朱雀门痛哭失声，去迎接他的群臣也痛哭。
English: Meanwhile, when Xiao Yuanming entered Jiankang, he lost his voice in tears when he saw the gate of Suzak, and the courtiers who went to meet him also cried bitterly.

古文：丙午，即皇帝位，改元天成，以晋安王为皇太子，王僧辩为大司马，陈霸先为侍中。
现代文：丙午，萧渊明即皇帝位，改换年号为天成，立晋安王萧方智为皇太子，任命王僧辩为大司马，陈霸先为侍中。
English: In the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month, Xiao Yuanming became the emperor, the year name was changed to Tiancheng, the king of Jinan, Xiao Fangzhi, was appointed as the crown prince, Wang Sangye was appointed as the grand steward, and Chen Baxian was appointed as the chamberlain.

古文：六月，庚戌朔，齐发民一百八十万筑长城，自幽州夏口西至恒州九百馀里，命定州刺史赵郡王睿将兵监之。
现代文：六月，庚戌朔，北齐征发民工一百八十万人修筑长城，从幽州夏口向西延伸到恒州，共九百多里长，朝廷任命定州刺史赵郡王高睿带兵去监督工程进展。
English: In June, Geng Biao Shuo, Northern Qi conscripted and dispatched 1.8 million migrant workers to build the Great Wall, extending westward from Yuzhou Xiakou to Hengzhou, with a total length of more than 900 miles. The imperial court appointed the Dingzhou ruler Zhao Gu Wang Gaorui to supervise the progress of the project.

古文：睿，琛之子也。
现代文：高睿是高琛的儿子。
English: Gao Rui is Gao Yao's son.

古文：齐慕容俨始入郢州，而侯瑱等奄至城下，俨随方备御，瑱等不能克；乘间出击瑱等军，大破之。
现代文：北齐慕容俨刚进入郢州时，侯等人就突然出现在城下，慕容俨按照自己确定的方略进行防备抵御，侯等无法攻克。慕容俨又乘着空隙主动出击侯等人的军队，把他们打得大败。
English: When the Northern Qi Murong Army had just entered Zhangzhou, Hou and others suddenly appeared at the foot of the city. Murong Army prepared and resisted in accordance with the strategy determined by itself, and Hou and others could not be defeated. Murong Army also took advantage of the gap to actively attack the army of Hou and others, and defeated them.

古文：城中食尽，煮草木根叶及靴皮带角食之，与士卒分甘共苦，坚守半岁，人无异志。
现代文：后来城里粮食吃光了，守城军民只好煮草木的棍、叶和靴子的皮、衣带的角等来充饥。慕容俨和士卒同甘共苦，坚守了半年，人们没有动摇、离散的想法。
English: Later, when the city ran out of food, the defenders had to boil sticks of grass and trees, leaves, the leather of boots, the corners of belts, etc. to satisfy their hunger. Muronglu and the soldiers persevered together for half a year, and the people did not waver and thought of dispersing.

古文：贞阳侯渊明立，乃命瑱等解围，瑱还镇豫章。
现代文：贞阳侯萧渊明即位之后，便命令侯等人撤去对郢州的围困，侯便回去镇守豫章。
English: After Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming ascended to the throne, he ordered Hou and others to withdraw the siege on Zhangzhou, and Hou went back to the town of Yuanzhang.

古文：齐人以城在江外难守，因割以还梁。
现代文：北齐方面因为郢州城在长江以南，难以防守，就把它割让给了梁朝。
English: The Northern Qi side ceded Zhangzhou City to the Liang Dynasty because it was south of the Yangtze River and difficult to defend.

古文：俨归，望齐主，悲不自胜。
现代文：慕容俨归国后，望着北齐国主高洋，悲伤得不能自抑。
English: After returning to China, Murong Yao looked at the ruler of North Qi, Gao Yang, and was so sad that he could not control himself.

古文：齐主呼前，执其手，脱帽看发，叹息久之。
现代文：北齐国主叫他走近前来，拉着他的手，脱下他的帽看他的头发，叹息了很久。
English: The North Qi sovereign told him to come closer, took his hand, took off his cap to look at his hair, and sighed for a long time.

古文：吴兴太守杜龛，王僧辩之婿也。
现代文：吴兴太守杜龛是王僧辩的女婿。
English: Wu Xing Daju Du Wei is the son-in-law of Wang Sofen.

古文：僧辩以吴兴为震州，用龛为刺史，又以其弟侍中僧愔为豫章太守。
现代文：王僧辩把吴兴改为震州，任命杜龛为刺史，又任命自己的弟弟侍中王僧为豫章太守。
English: Wang Sangyan changed Wu Xing to Zhenzhou, appointed Du Xi as the chief historian, and appointed his younger brother Wang Sangyan as the governor of Yuzhang.

古文：壬子，齐主以梁国称籓，诏凡梁民悉遣南还。
现代文：壬子，齐主高洋因为梁国自称藩属，依附于北齐，所以下诏凡是梁朝的百姓都遣送回南方。
English: Because Liang Province claimed to belong to the Han Dynasty and was attached to Northern Qi, the people of Liang Dynasty were sent back to the south.

古文：丁卯，齐主如晋阳；壬申，自将击柔然。
现代文：丁卯，北齐国主高洋到晋阳。壬申，亲自带兵去打柔然。
English: Dingwu, the ruler of Northern Qi, Gaoyang, went to Jinyang. Jinshin, personally led the troops to fight Zhuoran.

古文：秋，七月，己卯，至白道，留辎重，帅轻骑五千追柔然，壬午，及之于怀朔镇。
现代文：秋季，七月，己卯，到达白道，留下军用物资，率领轻装骑兵五千人去追击柔然，壬午，在怀朔镇追上了柔然。
English: In the autumn, in July, Ji Wu arrived in Baidoa, left military supplies, and led five thousand light cavalry to pursue Juran. At noon, he caught up with Juran in Waisaku Town.

古文：齐主亲犯矢石，频战，大破之。至于沃野，获其酋长，及生口二万馀，牛羊数十万。
现代文：高洋亲自冒着飞箭飞石，频繁地投入战斗，终于把柔然打得大败，一直追到沃野这地方，捉获了柔然的酋长，还抓了二万多人口，数十万头牛羊。
English: Gao Yang himself braved flying arrows and stones, frequently engaged in battle, and finally defeated Zhu Ran to a large extent. He chased Zhu Ran all the way to this place, captured Zhu Ran's chief, and also captured more than twenty thousand people and hundreds of thousands of cattle and sheep.

古文：壬辰，还晋阳。
现代文：壬申，才回到晋阳。
English: On the 14th, he returned to Jinyang.

古文：八月，辛巳，王琳自蒸城还长沙。
现代文：八月，辛巳，王琳从蒸城回到长沙。
English: In August, Wang Lin returned to Changsha from Steaming City.

古文：齐主还鄴，以佛、道二教不同，欲去其一，集二家学者论难于前，遂敕道士皆剃发为沙门；有不从者，杀四人，乃奉命。于是齐境皆无道士。
现代文：北齐国主高洋回到邺城，他因为佛、道二教教义教规都不同，便想除去一个，就把两教中的学者集中在一起，让他们在自己面前互相辩难，于是就敕令道士都剃掉头发当和尚。有人不服从，杀了四人，才都奉行了这道命令，于是北齐境内就没有道士了。
English: When the ruler of Northern Qi, Gao Yang, returned to Lucheng, he wanted to get rid of one person because the doctrines and rules of Buddhism and Taoism were different, so he gathered the scholars of the two religions together and let them argue with each other in front of him. So he ordered the Taoists to shave their hair and become monks. When someone disobeyed and killed four people, they all followed this order, so there were no Taoists in Northern Qi.

古文：初，王僧辩与陈霸先共灭侯景，情好甚笃，僧辩为子頠娶霸先女，会僧辩有母丧，未成昏。
现代文：当初，王僧辩和陈霸先共同消灭了侯景，两人感情很是深固。王僧辩为儿子王迎娶陈霸先的女儿，正赶上王僧辩母亲去世，所以没有成婚。
English: At first, Wang Sangye and Chen Baxian jointly eliminated Houjing, and their feelings were very deep. Wang Sangye married Chen Baxian's daughter for his son, Wang Ying, just as Wang Sangye's mother died, so they did not get married.

古文：僧辩居石头城，霸先在京口，僧辩推心待之，頠兄顗屡谏，不听。
现代文：王僧辩居住在石头城，陈霸先在京口，王僧辩推心置腹地对待陈霸先，王的哥哥王多次劝他要有所提防，王僧辩不听。
English: Wang Sangye lived in Stone Town, Chen Baxian lived in Jingkou. Wang Sangye treated Chen Baxian sincerely. Wang's brother Wang repeatedly advised him to be careful, but Wang Sangye did not listen.

古文：及僧辩纳贞阳侯渊明，霸先遣使苦争之，往返数四，僧辩不从。
现代文：等到王增辩迎纳贞阳侯萧渊明为帝时，陈霸先派使者苦苦劝阻，争辩不休，使者为此往返了几趟，王僧辩不听。
English: When Wang Zengyan welcomed Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming as emperor, Chen Baxian sent an envoy to dissuade him and argue with him. The envoy went back and forth several times, but Wang Zengyan did not listen.

古文：霸先切叹，谓所亲曰： 武帝子孙甚多，唯孝元能复仇雪耻，其子何罪，而忽废之！
现代文：陈霸先私下叹息，对他的亲信说： 武帝的子孙很多，只有孝元帝能平定侯景之乱，为祖宗报仇雪耻。他的儿子有什么罪，突然就废了他！
English: Chen Baxian privately sighed and said to his cronies: There are many descendants of Emperor Wu, only Emperor Xiaoyuan can quell the Houjing Rebellion and avenge his ancestors. What is his son guilty of, he was suddenly abolished!

古文：吾与王公并处托孤之地，而王公一旦改图，外依戎狄，援立非次，其志欲何所为乎！ 
现代文：我和王公僧辩共同处于先帝托孤的重臣的地位，而王公僧辩现在一下子改变主意，对外依附戎狄之邦，不按次序立天子，他到底想干什么呢？ 
English: Wang Gongsangye and I are both in the position of the senior vassals of the former emperor, and Wang Gongsangye now suddenly changes his mind, adheres to the outside world, and does not set up the heavenly son in order. What does he want to do?

古文：乃密具袍数千领及锦彩金银为赏赐之具。
现代文：于是秘密准备战袍几千领和锦采金银等等作为赏赐部下的物品，准备起事。
English: As a result, they secretly prepared several thousand battle robes, gold and silver jewelry, and other items as rewards for their subordinates, in preparation for the uprising.

古文：会有告齐师大举至寿春将入寇者，僧辩遣记室江旰告霸先，使为之备。
现代文：正好这时有人来报告，北齐军队进行大调动，已经到达了寿春，将要向南进犯。王僧辩派记室江旰通知陈霸先，让他有所戒备。
English: Just at this time, someone came to report that the North Qi army had carried out a large-scale mobilization, had reached Shouchun, and was about to attack the south. Wang Sangye sent a memo to Jiang Chen to inform Chen Baxian to be on the alert.

古文：霸先因是留旰于京口，举兵袭僧辩。
现代文：陈霸先借这个机会把江旰扣留在京口，举兵袭击王僧辩。
English: Chen Hao first took this opportunity to keep Jiang Xizhong in Beijing and raised an army to attack Wang Sangye.

古文：九月，壬寅，召部将侯安都、周文育及安陆徐度、钱塘杜稜谋之。
现代文：九月，壬寅，陈霸先召集部将侯安都、周文育以及安陆人徐度、钱塘人杜棱一起密谋策划。
English: In September, Renzhin, Chen Baxian called together generals Hou Andu and Zhou Wenyu, as well as Anlu's Xu Du and Qiantang's Du Ren, to conspire and plan.

古文：稜以为难，霸先惧其谋泄，以手巾绞稜，闷绝于地，因闭于别室。部分将士，分赐金帛，以弟子著作郎昙朗镇京口，知留府事，使徐度、侯安都帅水军趋石头，霸先帅马步自江乘罗落会之。
现代文：杜棱认为这事很难进行，陈霸先害怕秘密泄漏，用手巾绞住杜棱，使他闷绝在地上，然后把他关在另一间屋子里，接着就部署将士，分赐金银布帛，命令自己弟弟的儿子著作郎陈昙朗留下来镇守京口，掌管州府政事，又派徐度、侯安都率领水军直逼石头，陈霸先自己率领骑兵、步兵从江乘、罗落这条路线去与之会合。
English: Du Ren thought it would be difficult to carry out. Chen Baizhen was afraid of the secret leaking. He hanged Du Ren with a handkerchief to suffocate him on the ground, and then locked him in another room. He then deployed soldiers, distributed gold and silver cloth, ordered his brother's son, the writer and poet Chen Yulang, to stay behind to guard Jingkou and take charge of the political affairs of the prefecture. He also sent Xu Du and Hou Andu to lead the navy to directly attack the stone. Chen Baizhen himself led the cavalry and infantry to meet them from the riverside and Luo Luo.

古文：是夜，皆发，召杜稜与同行。
现代文：当天夜里，各路兵马都出发了，并带着杜棱随军同行。
English: In the evening of the same day, all the soldiers and horses set out, and they accompanied the army with Du Ren.

古文：知其谋者，唯安都等四将，外人皆以为江旰征兵御齐，不之怪也。
现代文：知道这次进军的真正目的的人，只有侯安都等四个将领，外人都以为是江旰来征调军队抵抗北齐的进犯，对军队的出动一点也不感到奇怪。
English: People who knew the real purpose of this march were only four generals, including Hou Andu. Outsiders thought that it was Jiang Chen who recruited and mobilized the army to resist the attack of Beiqi, and they were not at all surprised by the army's departure.

古文：甲辰，安都引舟舰将趣石头，霸先控马未进，安都大惧，追霸先骂曰： 今日作贼，事势已成，生死须决，在后欲何所望！
现代文：甲辰，侯安都指挥舟舰将奔袭石头，陈霸先有意勒马不进。侯安都以为陈霸先临事犹豫，心中大惊，就追上陈霸先大骂： 今天我们造反，事到临头，已经无法挽回了，是生是死必须作出决断，你迟疑不进，留在后头，存的什么念头！
English: Both Jia Chen and Hou An commanded the boat to attack the stone, but Chen Ba first deliberately slowed down and did not advance. Hou An thought that Chen Ba first hesitated and was shocked, so he caught up with Chen Ba first and shouted: Today we are rebelling, the matter is imminent, it has been irrevocable, whether it is life or death must make a decision, you hesitate to advance, stay behind, what thoughts exist!

古文：若败，俱死，后期得免斫头邪？ 
现代文：如果失败，咱们都得死，留在后头就能免去砍头吗？ 
English: If we fail, we all have to die. Can we stay behind and not be beheaded?

古文：霸先曰： 安都嗔我！ 
现代文：陈霸先一听心中暗自高兴，说： 侯安都在怪我不下决心、生我的气呢！ 
English: After listening, Chen Baxian secretly felt happy and said, "Hou An is blaming me for not making up my mind and is angry with me!

古文：乃进。
现代文：于是带兵前进。
English: So he led his soldiers forward.

古文：安都至石头城北，弃舟登岸。
现代文：侯安都到了石头城的北边，扔下船上了岸。
English: Hou Andu arrived at the north side of Stone Town, threw off the boat and went ashore.

古文：石头城北接冈阜，不甚危峻。安都被甲带长刀，军人捧之，投于女垣内，众随而入，进及僧辩卧室。
现代文：石头城北边和山冈高坡相连，城墙不太高峻，侯安都披着盔甲，手握长刀，让手下军人把他抬起来扔到城墙上，众人随着他蜂拥而入，一直进到王僧辩卧室。
English: The north side of the stone city is connected to the high slope of the mountain range. The city wall is not very high. Hou An was wearing armor and holding a long knife. He asked his soldiers to lift him up and throw him onto the city wall. People swarmed in with him, all the way to Wang Sangye's bedroom.

古文：霸先兵亦自南门入。
现代文：陈霸先的队伍也从南门攻入了。
English: Chen Baxian's team also broke in through the south gate.

古文：僧辩方视事，外白有兵，俄而兵自内出。僧辩遽走，遇子頠，与俱出阁，帅左右数十人苦战于厅事前，力不敌，走登南门楼，拜请求哀。
现代文：王僧辩正在处理军政事务，外面有人说士兵袭击，过一会儿士兵从里头冒了出来，王僧辩急忙逃跑，遇到儿子王，和他一起冲出门外，率身边几十人在议事厅前面苦战，力竭不敌，跑到南门楼上，向进逼过来的陈霸先拜请乞求哀怜。
English: Wang Sangye was dealing with military and political affairs. Someone outside said that soldiers were attacking. After a while, soldiers emerged from inside. Wang Sangye hurriedly ran away, met his son Wang, rushed out of the door with him, led dozens of people around him to fight hard in front of the meeting hall, exhausted themselves, ran to the south gate building, and begged Chen Ba, who was approaching, for mercy.

古文：霸先欲纵火焚之，僧辩与頠俱下就执。
现代文：陈霸先要放火烧南门楼，王僧辩和王都下楼就擒。
English: Chen Ba first set fire to the South Gate Building, and Wang Sangyan and Wang Du went downstairs to sleep.

古文：霸先曰： 我有何辜，公欲与齐师赐讨？ 
现代文：陈霸先质问说： 我有什么过错，你要和北齐军队一起讨伐我？ 
English: Su Ling said first: What is my sin, do you want to fight me with the Qi army?

古文：且曰： 何意全无备？ 
现代文：而且还问： 北齐军队来犯，你全无戒备，是什么意思？ 
English: And he also asked: What do you mean by saying that you are completely unprepared for the invasion of the North Qi army?

古文：僧辩曰： 委公北门，何谓无备？ 
现代文：王僧辩有点莫名其妙，回答说： 派你守京口，扼据建康北门，怎么说我对北齐军队没有戎备？ 
English: The monk argued: entrusting you to guard the north gate, how can you say there is no defense?

古文：是夜，霸先缢杀僧辩父子。
现代文：当天夜里，陈霸先把王僧辩父子两人绞杀了。
English: In the evening of the same day, Chen Baxi strangled Wang Sangye and his two sons.

古文：既而竟无齐兵，亦非霸先之谲也。
现代文：后来，竟没有发现北齐军队的影子，看来，这也并不是陈霸先玩弄诡计。
English: Later, the shadow of the North Qi army was not found at all. It seems that this is not a trick played by Chen Baxi.

古文：前青州刺史新安程灵洗帅所领救僧辩，力战于石头西门，军败。
现代文：前青州刺史新安人程灵洗率领所部将士来救王僧辩，在石头西门奋力苦战，终于兵败。
English: Cheng Lingchi, a former member of the Xin'an people of Qingzhou, led the soldiers of the headquarters to rescue Wang Sangwei, fought hard in the Stone West Gate, and finally lost the battle.

古文：霸先遣使招谕，久之乃降。
现代文：陈霸先派使者去招谕他，过了很久，他才投降了。
English: Chen Baxi first sent an envoy to summon him, and it was a long time before he surrendered.

古文：霸先义之，以为兰陵太守，使助防京口。
现代文：陈霸先被程灵洗的义气深深感动，任命他为兰陵太守，让他协助防守京口。
English: Chen Baxian was deeply moved by Cheng Ling Zai's loyalty and appointed him as the governor of Lanling to assist in the defense of the capital.

古文：乙巳，霸先为檄布告中外，列僧辩罪状，且曰： 资斧所指，唯王僧辩父子兄弟，其馀亲党，一无所问。 
现代文：乙巳，陈霸先发布檄文，通告中外，举列王僧辩的罪过，说明为什么要讨伐他。檄文中还说： 我所要讨伐的，只是王僧辩父子兄弟，至于其他王氏亲戚党羽，一概不加问罪。 
English: At this time, Chen Baxi first issued an imperial edict, announcing to both China and foreign countries, listing Wang Sangye's crimes and explaining why he should be fought. The imperial edict also said: What I want to fight is only Wang Sangye's father and son, as for other Wang relatives and party members, there is no question of guilt.

古文：丙午，贞阳侯渊明逊位，出就邸，百僚上晋安王表，劝进。
现代文：丙午，贞阳侯萧渊明退位，搬出官廷回自己的官邸。百官上表给晋安王萧方智，劝他登基。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, Zhenyang marquis Xiao Yuanming abdicated and moved out of the court to return to his official residence. Hundreds of officials went to the king of Jinan, Xiao Fangzhi, to persuade him to ascend to the throne.

古文：冬，十月，己酉，晋安王即皇帝位，大赦，改元，中外文武赐位一等。
现代文：冬季，十月，己酉，晋安王萧方智即皇帝位，大赦天下，改换年号为绍泰，对朝廷内外文武百官都赏赐一级官位。
English: In the winter, October, Jiwu, King of Jinan, Xiao Fangzhi, that is, the emperor, amnestied the world, changed the year to Shao Tai, and awarded the first-class official rank to all the civil and military officials inside and outside the court.

古文：以贞阳侯渊明为司徒，封建安公。
现代文：任命贞阳侯萧渊明为司徒，封为建安公。
English: Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming was appointed as a disciple and given the title of Jian'an Gong.

古文：告齐云： 僧辩阴图篡逆，故诛之。 
现代文：派人通报北齐，说： 王僧辩阴谋篡位造反，所以杀了他。 
English: He sent someone to inform Beiqi, saying, "Wang Sangyan is suspected of plotting to usurp the throne and rebel, so kill him."

古文：仍请称臣于齐，永为籓国。
现代文：仍然请求向北齐称臣，永远当北齐的附属国。
English: It still requests to be a vassal to the Northern Qi and to be a subordinate state of the Northern Qi forever.

古文：齐遣行台司马恭与梁人盟于历阳。
现代文：北齐派行台司马恭和梁朝人在历阳订立了盟约。
English: The Northern Qi dispatched the Taiji Ma Gong and the Liang Dynasty people made a covenant in Liyang.

古文：辛亥，齐主如晋阳。
现代文：辛亥，北齐国主高洋到了晋阳。
English: In Xinhai, the ruler of Northern Qi, Gao Yang, arrived in Jinyang.

古文：壬子，加陈霸先尚书令、都督中外诸军事、车骑将军、扬、南徐二州刺史。
现代文：壬子，梁朝加封陈霸先为尚书令，都督中外诸军事，车骑将军，扬、南徐二州刺史。
English: Jin Zi, Liang Dynasty and Qifeng, Chen Baizhen as Shang Shuling, local governors and generals, Yang and Nan Xu as the two states.

古文：癸丑，以宜丰侯循为太保，建安公渊明为太傅，曲江侯勃为太尉，王琳为车骑将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：癸丑，任命宜丰侯萧循为太保，建安公萧渊明为太傅，曲江侯萧勃为太尉，王琳为车骑将军，开府仪同三司。
English: He appointed Yi Feng Hou Xiao Cun as Taibo, Jian An Gong Xiao Yuanming as Taifu, Qujiang Hou Xiao Bo as Taifu, Wang Lin as Chariot and Cavalry General, and Kaifu Yi as Sanzhi.

古文：戊午，尊帝所生夏贵妃为皇太后，立妃王氏为皇后。
现代文：戊午，梁朝尊奉皇帝萧方智的生母夏贵妃为皇太后，立妃子王氏为皇后。
English: In the afternoon, the Liang Dynasty honored Xia Guifei, the birth mother of Emperor Xia Fangzhi, as the empress dowager, and established the Prince Wang clan as the empress.

古文：杜龛恃王僧辩之势，素不礼于陈霸先。
现代文：杜龛依恃王僧辩的权势，一向对陈霸先很不礼貌。
English: Cuckoo has always been very rude to Chen Baxian, relying on the power of the king of the cuckoo's monastic arguments.

古文：在吴兴，每以法绳其宗族，霸先深怨之。
现代文：在吴兴，他常常对陈霸先宗族中的人绳之以法，陈霸先因此对他深怀怨恨。
English: In Wuxing, he often brought people from Chen Baxian's clan to justice, and Chen Baxian held a deep grudge against him.

古文：及将图僧辩，密使兄子茜还长城，立栅以备龛。
现代文：待到陈霸先要算计王僧辩的时候，便秘密地派他的侄子陈潜回长城县，修筑营栅以防备杜龛。
English: When it came to the time when Chen Ba first wanted to calculate Wang Sangye, he secretly sent his nephew Chen Qian back to the Great Wall County to build a camp fence to prevent the cuckoo.

古文：僧辩死，龛据吴兴拒霸先，义兴太守韦载以郡应之。
现代文：王僧辩死后，杜龛占据吴兴抗拒陈霸先，义兴太守韦载带他郡中的部队起来响应。
English: After the death of Wang Sangyan, Du Qian occupied Wu Xing to resist Chen Baxian, and Yixing's eunuch Wei Zeng took his troops in the county to respond.

古文：吴郡太守王僧智，僧辩之弟也，亦据城守。
现代文：吴郡太守王僧智是王僧辩的弟弟，也据城固守以作抗拒。
English: Wang Sozhi, the governor of Wuxi County, was the younger brother of Wang Sofen, and he also held fast to the city to resist.

古文：陈茜至长城，收兵才数百人，杜龛遣其将杜泰将精兵五千奄至，将士相视失色。
现代文：陈到长城县后，召集的士兵才有几百人，杜龛派他的部将杜泰带精兵五千人突然到来，陈的将士们面面相觑，大惊失色。
English: After Chen arrived in Great Wall County, only a few hundred soldiers had been summoned. Du Xi sent his general Du Tai with five thousand elite soldiers to suddenly arrive. Chen's soldiers looked at each other, shocked.

古文：茜言笑自若，部分益明，众心乃定。
现代文：陈却谈笑自若，部署分派军队，越发清楚明确，于是众人才心神安定下来。
English: Chen, however, talked and joked freely, and the deployment of the assigned troops became clearer and clearer, so that everyone's minds were calmed down.

古文：泰日夜苦攻数旬，不克而退。
现代文：杜泰昼夜苦攻，持续了几十天，打不下来就退走了。
English: Du Tai fought hard day and night, lasting for dozens of days. When he couldn't beat them, he retreated.

古文：霸先使周文育攻义兴，义兴属县卒皆霸先旧兵，善用弩，韦载收得数十人，系以长锁，命所亲监之，使射文育军，约曰： 十发不两中者死。 
现代文：陈霸先派周文育去攻打义兴，义兴所属各县的士卒都是陈霸先的旧部，善于使用弩箭，韦载找出了几十人，用长长的锁链把他们系在一起，派亲信监督他们用箭射周文育的军队，并规定 谁如果十箭中不能射中两箭，就处死。 
English: Chen Baxian sent Zhou Wenyu to attack Yixing. The soldiers in each county of Yixing belonged to Chen Baxian's old unit and were good at using crossbows and arrows. Wei Zang found dozens of them, tied them together with long chains, and sent cronies to supervise them to shoot Zhou Wenyu's army with arrows, and stipulated that anyone who could not shoot two arrows out of ten would be executed.

古文：故每发辄毙一人，文育军稍却。
现代文：所以每发箭出去就射死一个人，周文育的军队这才稍稍退却了。
English: So every time an arrow went out, a person was shot dead, and Zhou Benyu's army only retreated a little.

古文：载因于城外据水立栅，相持数旬。
现代文：韦载乘势在城外靠水边建立营栅，和周文育相持了几十天。
English: Wei Zai took the opportunity to build a camp gate outside the city by the water's edge, and stayed with Zhou Wenyu for dozens of days.

古文：杜龛遣其从弟北叟将兵拒战，北叟败，归于义兴。
现代文：杜龛派他的堂弟杜北叟带兵抗战，杜北叟兵败，回到义兴。
English: Du Yuxuan sent his cousin Du Beiye to lead soldiers to resist the war. Du Beiye was defeated and returned to Yixing.

古文：霸先闻文育军不利，辛未，自表东讨，留高州刺史侯安都、石州刺史杜稜宿卫台省。
现代文：陈霸先听到周文育进攻受挫的消息，辛未，宣布自己亲自带兵东伐，留下高州刺史侯安都、石州刺史杜棱守卫台省。
English: Chen Hao first heard the news that Zhou Wenyu's attack had been thwarted, and Xin Wei announced that he would personally lead the Eastern Expedition, leaving Gaozhou's Zhishi Hou Andu and Shizhou's Zhishi Du Ren to guard Taiwan Province.

古文：甲戌，军至义兴，丙子，拔其水栅。
现代文：甲戌，陈霸先军队抵达义兴，丙子，拔除了韦载修筑的水栅。
English: Kuching, Chen Baxian's army arrived in Yixing, Bing Zi, pulled out the water gate built by Wei Jia.

古文：谯、秦二州刺史徐嗣徽从弟嗣先，僧辩之甥也。
现代文：谯、秦二州的刺史徐嗣徽的堂弟徐嗣先是王僧辩的外甥。
English: Xu Zi, the cousin of Xu Zihui, the great-grandson of Qin Erzhou, was the nephew of Wang Sanbo.

古文：僧辩死，嗣先亡就嗣徽，嗣徽以州入于齐。
现代文：王僧辩死后，徐嗣先逃亡到徐嗣徽处，徐嗣徽干脆献上谯秦二州，投靠了北齐。
English: After Wang Sangyan's death, Xu Zi fled to Xu Zi Hui's place first. Xu Zi Hui simply presented the two states of Qin and Qin to Wang Sangyan and took refuge in Northern Qi.

古文：及陈霸先东讨义兴，嗣徽密结南豫州刺史任约，将精兵五千乘虚袭建康，是日，入据石头，游骑至阙下。
现代文：待到陈霸先东讨义兴时，徐嗣徽秘密联合南豫州刺史任约，带精兵五千人乘虚偷袭建康。这一天，终于袭击占领了石头，冲在前面的游骑已到了台城宫阙之下。
English: While waiting for Chen Baxian to go to the East to discuss Yixing, Xu Shihui secretly joined forces with Nan Yu Zhou to assassinate Ren Zhao, and took five thousand elite soldiers to secretly attack Jiankang. On this day, the attack finally occupied the stone, and the rangers who rushed in front had reached the palace of Taicheng.

古文：侯安都闭门藏旗帜，示之以弱，令城中曰： 登陴窥贼者斩！ 
现代文：侯安都关上大门，藏起旗帜，有意以此表示自己怯弱，同时告诫城中士兵： 凡登高窥探贼兵者一律处斩。 
English: Hou An closed the gate and hid the flag, purposely showing his weakness by doing so. At the same time, he warned the soldiers in the city: Anyone who climbs high to spy on the thief soldiers will be executed.

古文：及夕，嗣徽等收兵还石头。
现代文：到天黑，徐嗣徽等人收兵回石头。
English: By nightfall, Xu Shihui and the others had gathered their troops and returned to the stone.

古文：安都夜为战备，将旦，嗣徽等又至，安都帅甲士三百开东、西掖门出战，大破之，嗣徽等奔还石头，不敢复逼台城。
现代文：侯安都夜里作了充分的战斗准备，天快亮时，徐嗣徽等人又来进攻，侯安都率领甲士三百人打开东、西侧门出城迎战，大败敌军，徐嗣徽等人奔逃回石头，再也不敢逼近台城了。
English: Hou Andu made full preparations for battle in the night. When it was almost dawn, Xu Shihui and others attacked again. Hou Andu led 300 knights to open the east and west gates to leave the city to fight, and defeated the enemy army. Xu Shihui and others fled back to the stone, and no longer dared to approach Taicheng.

古文：陈霸先遣韦载族弟翙赍书谕载，丁丑，载及杜北叟皆降，霸先厚抚之，以翙监义兴郡，引载置左右，与之谋议。
现代文：陈霸先派韦载的族弟韦携带书信去说服韦载投降。
English: Chen Baxian sent Wei Zai's brother Wei to carry letters to persuade Wei Zai to surrender.

古文：霸先卷甲还建康，使周文育讨杜龛，救长城。
现代文：丁丑，韦载和杜北叟都投降了。陈霸先对待他们很优厚，极力安抚他们，让韦监管义兴郡，把韦载安置在自己身边，视为亲信，有事让他参与谋议。
English: Ding Gou, Wei Zai and Du Beijuan all surrendered. Chen Baizhen treated them very generously, tried his best to appease them, let Wei supervise Yixing County, placed Wei Zai around him, regarded him as a close confidant, and let him participate in deliberation.

古文：将军黄他攻王僧智于吴郡，不克，霸先使宁远将军裴忌助之。
现代文：陈霸先平定义兴后，就收兵回建康，派周文育去讨伐杜龛，救援长城县。将军黄他在吴郡攻打王僧智，打不下来，陈霸先派宁远将军裴忌去帮助他。
English: After Chen Paxian defined Xing, he withdrew his troops back to Jiankang and sent Zhou Wenyu to fight the cuckoo and rescue the Great Wall County. General Huang attacked Wang Sangzhi in Wuxi County and could not defeat him. Chen Paxian sent Ningyuan General Pei Yi to help him.

古文：忌选所部精兵轻行倍道，自钱塘直趣吴郡，夜，至城下，鼓噪薄之。
现代文：裴忌挑选部属中的精兵轻装倍速前进，从钱塘直奔吴郡。夜里，抵达城下，大声鼓噪着逼进城墙。
English: Pei Boi selected the elite soldiers from his subordinates, loaded them lightly, and advanced at double speed from Qiantang straight to Wuxi County. At night, when they arrived at the foot of the city, they forced their way into the city wall with a loud noise.

古文：僧智以为大军至，轻舟奔吴兴。
现代文：王僧智以为大部队来了，急忙乘着小船逃到吴兴去了。
English: Wang Sangzhi thought that a large force was coming, so he hurriedly fled to Wuxing in a small boat.

古文：忌入据吴郡，因以忌为太守。
现代文：裴忌攻占了吴郡，陈霸先任命裴忌为吴郡太守。
English: Pei Boi conquered Wu County, and Chen Baxian appointed Pei Boi as the governor of Wu County.

古文：十一月，己卯，齐遣兵五千度江据姑孰，以应徐嗣徽、任约。
现代文：十一月，己卯，北齐派兵五千渡过长江占据姑孰，以策应徐嗣徽、任约。
English: In November, Northern Qi sent five thousand soldiers across the Yangtze River to occupy Guzheng, in response to Xu Shihui's appointment.

古文：陈霸先使合州刺史徐度立栅于冶城。
现代文：陈霸先派合州刺史徐度在冶城修筑栅栏。
English: Chen Baxian sent Hezhou Jishi to slowly build a fence in Yecheng.

古文：庚辰，齐又遣安州刺史翟子崇、楚州刺史刘士荣、淮州刺史柳达摩将兵万人于胡墅度米三万石、马千匹入石头。
现代文：庚寅，北齐又派安州刺史翟子崇、楚州刺史刘士荣、淮州刺史柳达摩带兵一万在胡墅运米三万石、马一千匹到石头城。
English: In addition to Geng Yin, Northern Qi also sent Anzhou Zhang Shi, Zizi Chong, Chuzhou Zhang Shi, Liu Shirong, and Huai Zhou Zhang Shi, Liu Damo, to transport 10,000 soldiers, 30,000 koku of rice, and 1,000 horses to Stone Town.

古文：霸先问计于韦载。载曰： 齐师若分兵先据三吴之路，略地东境，则时事去矣。
现代文：陈霸先向韦载征询对策，韦载说： 齐军如果分兵先占据通往三吴的道路，然后在我们东边的边境攻城占地，那么时局就完了。
English: Chen Ba first asked Wei Jie for countermeasures. Wei Jie said: "If the Qi army first occupies the road leading to Sam Wu, and then attacks the city on our eastern border, then the situation will be over.

古文：今可急于淮南因侯景故垒筑城，以通东道转输，分兵绝彼之粮运，使进无所资，则齐将之首旬日可致。 
现代文：现在齐军没有这样做，我们可以赶快在淮南一带沿着侯景过去留下的旧垒修筑新城堡，以便打通东边的运输道路。同时分出一支军队去断绝他们运粮的道路，这样，齐将的首领十天之内就得送来了。 
English: Now that the Qi army has not done so, we can quickly build a new castle in the Huainan area along the old fortifications left by Hou Jing in the past, so as to open the transportation road in the east. At the same time, an army is detached to cut off their grain transportation road, so that the leader of Qi will be sent within ten days.

古文：霸先从之。
现代文：陈霸先听从了他的计策。
English: Chen Baxian followed his advice.

古文：癸未，使侯安都夜袭胡墅，烧齐船千馀艘；仁威将军周铁虎断齐运输，擒其北徐州刺史张领州；仍遣韦载于大航筑侯景故垒，使杜稜守之。
现代文：癸未，陈霸先派侯安都夜袭胡墅，烧掉了北齐一千多艘兵船；仁威将军周铁虎切断了北齐运输补给的道路，抓住了他们的北徐州刺史张领州；仍然让韦载在大航修筑侯景的故垒，让杜棱去守卫。
English: Not long ago, Chen Paxian sent Hou Andu to attack Hu's villa at night and burned more than a thousand warships in North Qi; General Zhou Tiehu cut off the road of transportation and supply in North Qi and seized their North Xuzhou and Zhang Lianzhou; still let Wei Zai build the ancient fortress of Hou Jing in Dahuang and let Du Ren guard it.

古文：齐人于仓门、水南立二栅，与梁兵相拒。
现代文：北齐军队在仓门和秦淮河之南修建了两座营栅，与梁兵对抗。
English: The Northern Qi army built two camp fences in Cangmen and south of the Qin Huai River to confront Liang soldiers.

古文：壬辰，齐大都督萧轨将兵屯江北。
现代文：壬辰，北齐大都督萧轨带兵屯驻在长江北岸。
English: In Imjin, the great governor of North Qi, Xiao Liao, stationed troops on the north bank of the Yangtze River.

古文：初，齐平秦王归彦幼孤，高祖令清河昭武王岳养之，岳情礼甚薄，归彦心衔之。
现代文：当初，北齐平秦王高归彦幼小时成了孤儿，高祖高欢命令清河昭武王高岳抚养他。高岳对高归彦寡情薄礼，所以高归彦心里恨他。
English: At first, North Qiping Qin King Gao Guihang became an orphan when he was young, and Gao Zu Gao Huan ordered Qinghe Shouwang Gao Yue to raise him. Gao Yue was unkind to Gao Guihang, so Gao Guihang hated him in his heart.

古文：及显祖即位，归彦为领军大将军，大被宠遇，岳谓其德己，更倚赖之。
现代文：待到文宣帝高洋即位，高归彦当了领军大将军，很受宠爱。高岳认为高归彦会感激自己的抚育之恩，所以对他更是倚赖。
English: By the time Emperor Gaoyang ascended to the throne, Gao Guihong had become the leading general and was greatly loved. Gao Yue believed that Gao Guihong would be grateful for his upbringing, so he relied on him even more.

古文：岳屡将兵立功，有威名，而性豪侈，好酒色，起第于城南，厅事后开巷。
现代文：高岳多次带兵立功，威名赫赫，而又性格豪放奢侈，喜欢醇酒女色，在城南修建了大宅第，并在办公视事的大厅后头开了一条巷子。
English: Gao Yue repeatedly led soldiers to victory. He was famous, yet he had a lavish and extravagant personality. He liked wine and women. He built a large mansion in the south of the city, and opened an alley behind the hall of the office for supervising affairs.

古文：归彦谮之于帝曰： 清河僭拟宫禁，制为永巷，但无阙耳。 
现代文：高归彦在文宣帝那儿进谗言，说： 清河昭武王高岳私自模拟宫禁的建筑式样，修了一条永巷，只是没有修阙门罢了。 
English: Gao Guihang made a speech to Emperor Wenzhong, saying: Gao Yue, the king of the Shouwu Emperor of the Qing Dynasty, built a Yongxiang Road by himself, imitating the architectural style of the Imperial Palace, but he did not repair the gate.

古文：帝由是恶之。
现代文：文宣帝从此厌恶高岳。
English: Emperor Wenxuan detested Gao Yue from then on.

古文：帝纳倡妇薛氏于后宫，岳先尝因其姊迎之至第。
现代文：文宣帝把娼妇薛氏接进后宫，高岳早先曾托薛氏的姐姐把薛氏接到家里。
English: Emperor Wenxuan took the prostitute Xue into his harem, and Gao Yue had earlier asked Xue's sister to take her into his home.

古文：帝夜游于薛氏家，其姊为父乞司徒。
现代文：有一天夜里，文宣帝到薛氏的家里去，薛氏的姐姐替她父亲要求赐给司徒的官位。
English: One night, Emperor Wenxuan went to Mr. Xue's home. Mr. Xue's sister asked for her father's official position to be given to the scholar.

古文：帝大怒，悬其姊，锯杀之。
现代文：文宣帝勃然大怒，就把薛氏姐姐吊起来，用锯子锯成了两段。
English: Emperor Wenxuan flew into a rage, hung up Xue's sister and sawed her into two pieces with a saw.

古文：让岳以奸，岳不服，帝益怒，乙亥，使归彦鸩岳。
现代文：文宣帝责备高岳奸淫薛氏，高岳不服气，文宣帝更加生气了，乙亥，派高归彦去毒死高岳。
English: Emperor Wenzhong accused Gao Yue of adultery with the Xue clan. Gao Yue was not convinced. Emperor Wenzhong became even more angry and sent Gao Guihong to poison Gao Yue.

古文：岳自诉无罪，归彦曰： 饮之则家全。 
现代文：高岳申诉自己没有罪，高归彦说： 你把这毒酒喝下去了，全家就可以保全。 
English: Gao Yue pleaded that he was not guilty. Gao Guihong said: "If you drink this poisoned wine, your whole family will be safe."

古文：饮之而卒，葬赠如礼。
现代文：高岳只好把毒酒喝了，他死之后，朝廷按礼仪加以埋葬。
English: Gao Yue had no choice but to drink the poisoned wine. After his death, the imperial court buried him according to etiquette.

古文：薛嫔有宠于帝，久之，帝忽思其与岳通，无故斩首，藏之于怀，出东山宴饮。
现代文：薛嫔很得文宣帝宠爱，很久之后，文宣帝忽然想起她曾和高岳通奸，无缘无故就将她斩首，然后把她的头藏在怀里，到东山去宴饮作乐。
English: Xue Qi was very much favored by Emperor Wenzhong. After a long time, Emperor Wenzhong suddenly remembered that she had committed adultery with Gao Yue. He beheaded her for no reason, then hid her head in his arms and went to Dongshan to feast and make music.

古文：劝酬始合，忽探出其首，投于柈上，支解其尸，弄其髀为琵琶，一座大惊。
现代文：大家正在互相劝酒应酬，文宣帝忽然用手探怀，拿出薛氏的头扔到桌上，又把她的尸体支解开，将她的髀骨充作琵琶弹弄，举座见状大惊。
English: Everyone was trying to persuade each other to have a drink, when Emperor Wenzhong suddenly reached out with his hand, took out Xue's head and threw it on the table. He then dismembered her body and used her shinbone as a lute. Everyone was shocked.

古文：帝方收取，对之流涕曰： 佳人难再得！ 
现代文：文宣帝这才把薛氏的头和髀骨收起来，对着它们流下泪来，说： 佳人难再得！ 
English: It was only then that Emperor Wenxuan took away Xue's head and cheekbones, shed tears over them, and said, "Beauty is hard to get again!

古文：载尸以出，被发步哭而随之。
现代文：他让人用车把薛氏尸体运出去，自己披散头发，边走边哭地跟着。
English: They had someone carry Xue Yao's body out of the car, and she tousled her hair and followed behind the car on foot, crying as she walked.

古文：甲辰，徐嗣徽等攻冶城栅，陈霸先将精甲自西明门出击之，嗣徽等大败，留柳达摩等守城，自往采石迎齐援。
现代文：甲辰，徐嗣徽等进攻冶城的营栅，陈霸先率领精兵从西明门出来迎击，徐嗣徽等人大败，留下柳达摩等人守城，自己去采石迎接北齐援兵。
English: Ji Chen, Xu Shihui and others attacked the camp gate of Yecheng. Chen Ba first led the elite soldiers to come out from the Ximing Gate to meet the attack. Xu Shihui and others were defeated, leaving Liu Dama and others to defend the city. He went to quarry stone to meet the Beiqi reinforcements.

古文：以郢州刺史宜丰侯循为太保，广州刺史曲江侯勃为司空，并征入侍。
现代文：梁朝任命郢州刺史宜丰侯萧循为太保，广州刺史曲江侯萧勃为司空，把他们二人一起征召入朝侍奉皇帝。
English: The Liang Dynasty appointed Xiao Xun, the Prince of Yifeng, the Prince of Zhangzhou, as Taibo, and Xiao Bo, the Prince of Qujiang, the Prince of Guangzhou, as Sikuo, and both of them were conscripted into the service of the emperor.

古文：循受太保而辞不入。
现代文：萧循接受了太保之职，但借故推辞不入朝。
English: Xiao Xun accepted the position of Tai Bao, but declined to join the imperial court.

古文：勃方谋举兵，遂不受命。
现代文：萧勃正密谋起兵造反，于是不接受任命。
English: Xiao Bo was plotting a mutiny, so he did not accept the appointment.

古文：镇南将军王琳侵魏，魏大将军豆卢宁御之。
现代文：镇南将军王琳入侵西魏，西魏大将军豆卢宁带兵抵御他。
English: Zhenan general Wang Lin invaded Western Wei, and Western Wei general Dou Luning led troops to resist him.

古文：十二月，癸丑，侯安都袭秦郡，破徐嗣徽栅，俘数百人。
现代文：十二月，癸丑，侯安都袭击秦郡，攻破徐嗣徽的营栅，俘获了好几百人。
English: In December, Gongushi and Hou'an both attacked Qin County, broke through the camp gate of Xu Shihui, and captured several hundred people.

古文：收其家，得其琵琶及鹰，遣使送之曰： 昨至弟处得此，今以相还。 
现代文：又抄了他的家产，搜得他用的琵琶和养的鹰，派人送给徐嗣徽，并说： 昨天到老弟家里得到这点东西，现在特地送去还你。 
English: He also copied his family's property, found the lute he used and the eagle he kept, and sent someone to give it to Xu Shihui, saying: I got this thing at my brother's house yesterday, and now I'm sending it back to you.

古文：嗣徽大惧。
现代文：徐嗣徽看到东西，大惊失色。
English: Xu Shihui was stunned when he saw something.

古文：丙辰，陈霸先对冶城立航，悉渡众军，攻其水南二栅。
现代文：丙辰，陈霸先在冶城对面的水上把船只连在一起建了一座浮桥，指挥众军全部渡过去，攻击修在南边的两座营栅。
English: Bing Chen and Chen Ba first built a pontoon bridge on the water across from Yecheng by linking the ships together, and then commanded all the troops to cross over and attack the two camp gates built on the south side.

古文：柳达摩等渡淮置陈，霸先督兵疾战，纵火烧栅，齐兵大败，争舟相挤，溺死者以千数，呼声震天地，尽收其船舰。
现代文：柳达摩等渡过秦淮河摆开阵势，陈霸先督率战士猛烈进攻，并放火烧栅栏，北齐军队大败，争着上船逃跑，互相拥挤，掉入水中淹死的有上千人，哭喊声震天动地，北齐军队的船舰全部被缴获。
English: Liu Damo and others crossed the Qinhuai River and set up a position. Chen Ba, the forerunner, led the soldiers in a fierce attack and set fire to the fence. The Northern Qi army was defeated. They fought to get on the boat and escape. They crowded each other. More than a thousand people drowned in the water. The cries were earth-shattering. All the ships of the Northern Qi army were captured.

古文：是日，嗣徽与任约引齐兵水步万馀人还据石头，霸先遣兵诣江宁，据险要。
现代文：当天，徐嗣徽和任约带领北齐水师步兵一万多人退回去据守石头，陈霸先派兵来到江宁，占据了险要之地。
English: On the same day, Xu Shihui and Ren Guo led more than ten thousand infantrymen of the North Qi Naval Division to retreat back to the stone fortress. Chen Baxi sent soldiers to Jiangning and occupied the critical position.

古文：嗣徽等水步不敢进。
现代文：徐嗣徽等人的水师步兵都不敢前进，停顿在江宁浦的入江之处。
English: The marines and infantry of Xu Shihui and others did not dare to advance and halted at the entrance to the river in Jiangningpu.

古文：顿江宁浦口，霸先遣侯安都将水军袭破之，嗣徽等单舸脱走，尽收其军资器械。
现代文：陈霸先派侯安都带水军去袭击打败了他们，徐嗣徽等人乘上单人小船逃走，他们的辎重、武器全部被缴获。
English: Chen Baxian sent Hou Andu and his naval forces to attack and defeat them. Xu Shihui and others fled on a single-person boat, and all of their baggage and weapons were captured.

古文：己未，霸先四面攻石头，城中无水，升水直绢一匹。
现代文：己未，陈霸先从四面包围攻打石头，城中没有水喝，一升水昂贵到值一匹绢。
English: Not long ago, Chen Ba first besieged and attacked the stone from four loaves, there was no water to drink in the city, and one liter of water was expensive enough to be worth a donkey.

古文：庚申，达摩遣使请和于霸先，且求质子。
现代文：庚申，柳达摩派使者向陈霸先求和，而且请求以儿子为人质。
English: According to Goshun, Liu Damo sent an envoy to Chen Ba to first sue for peace and request that his son be taken as a hostage.

古文：时建康虚弱，粮运不继，朝臣皆欲与齐和，请以霸先从子昙朗为质。
现代文：当时建康实力虚弱，粮草运输跟不上，朝廷中的大臣都想与北齐讲和，纷纷请求用陈霸先的侄子陈昙朗为人质。
English: At that time, Jiankang's strength was weak, grain and grass transportation could not keep up, and the ministers in the imperial court all wanted to make peace with the North Qi, and they asked to use Chen Yulang, the nephew of Chen Baxian, as a hostage.

古文：霸先曰： 今在位诸贤欲息肩于齐，若违众议，谓孤爱昙朗，不恤国家，今决遣昙朗，弃之寇庭。
现代文：陈霸先说： 现在在朝廷中的各位贤人都想和北齐讲和以获得休息，如果我违反众人的意见，大家会说我偏爱陈昙朗，不顾念国家利益。现在我决定派陈昙朗去，就算把他扔在敌寇的庭院里吧！
English: Chen Baxian said, "Nowadays, all the wise men in the imperial court want to make peace with the Northern Qi in order to get some rest. If I violate the opinions of many people, everyone will say that I prefer Chen Yulang, regardless of national interests. Now I have decided to send Chen Yulang, even if he is thrown into the courtyard of the enemy!

古文：齐人无信，谓我微弱，必当背盟。
现代文：北齐人一向不守信用，我答应讲和，他们会认为我们势微力弱好欺负，肯定会背弃盟约再来进犯。
English: The Northern Qi people have always been untrustworthy. If I promised to make peace, they would think that we are weak and easy to bully, and would definitely renege on the treaty and attack again.

古文：齐寇若来，诸君须为孤力斗也！ 
现代文：北齐强盗如果再来进犯，那时你们可得为我拼死战斗呀！ 
English: If the Beiqi bandits attack again, then you will have to fight to the death for me!

古文：乃以昙朗及永嘉王庄、丹杨尹王冲之子珉为质，与齐人盟于城外，将士咨其南北。
现代文：于是就把陈昙朗和永嘉王萧庄、丹杨府尹王冲的儿子王珉作人质，与北齐人在城外订立了和约，允许追随北齐的将士按自己的意愿选择归居南方或北方。
English: Therefore, he took Chen Yulang and Yongjia Wang Xiaozhuang and Danyangfu Yin Wangchong's son Wang Yao as hostages, and concluded a peace treaty with the Northern Qi people outside the city, allowing the soldiers who followed the Northern Qi to choose to return to the south or north according to their own wishes.

古文：辛酉，霸先陈兵石头南门，送齐人归北，徐嗣徽、任约皆奔齐。
现代文：辛酉，陈霸先在石头南门摆列兵阵，送北齐军队北归。徐嗣徽、任约都投奔了北齐。
English: Xin Xuan and Chen Ba first set up a line of soldiers at the stone south gate and sent the North Qi army to return to the north. Xu Shihui and Ren Yoru all went to the North Qi.

古文：收齐马仗船米，不可胜计。
现代文：这一仗，缴获北齐军马、器械、舟船、大米，不可胜数。
English: In this battle, the number of horses, equipment, boats, and rice captured by the Northern Qi army is immeasurable.

古文：齐主诛柳达摩。
现代文：北齐国主高洋杀了败将柳达摩。
English: The ruler of Northern Qi, Gao Yang, killed the defeated general, Liu Damo.

古文：壬戌，齐和州长史乌丸远自南州奔还历阳。
现代文：壬戍，北齐和州长史乌丸远从南州奔逃回到历阳。
English: Rinchen, Qi and Governor Shi Wumaru rushed back to Liyang from Nanzhou.

古文：江宁令陈嗣、黄门侍郎曹朗据姑孰反，霸先命侯安都等讨平之。
现代文：江宁县令陈嗣、黄门侍郎黄朗占据姑孰谋反，陈霸先派侯安都等人出兵讨伐，平定了他们。
English: Jiangning County ordered Chen Zi and Huang Men's steward Huang Lang to occupy Gushan and plot a rebellion. Chen Baxian sent troops led by Hou Andu and others to fight against the rebels and pacified them.

古文：霸先恐陈昙朗亡窜，自帅步骑至京口迎之。
现代文：陈霸先担心陈昙朗逃跑流窜到别处去，便亲自率领步、骑兵到京口去迎接他。
English: Chen Baxian was worried that Chen Yulang would run away and go elsewhere, so he personally led the cavalry to Beijing to meet him.

古文：交州刺史刘元偃帅其属数千人归王琳。
现代文：交州刺史刘元偃率领部属几千人去投奔王琳。
English: Several thousand people, led by Liu Yuanqi, the chief historian of Jiaozhou, rushed to Wang Lin.

古文：魏以侍中李远为尚书左仆射。
现代文：西魏任命侍中李远为尚书左仆射。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty appointed Li Yuan, a chamberlain, as Shang Shushi's right-hand man.

古文：魏益州刺史宇文贵使谯淹从子子嗣诱说淹，以为大将军，淹不从，斩子嗣。
现代文：西魏益州刺史宇文贵派谯淹的侄子谯子嗣去向谯淹诱降，说是要让谯淹当大将军，谯淹不答应，杀了谯子嗣。
English: The Western Wei ruler of Yizhou, Yu Wengui, sent Yu's nephew, Yu's son, Yu's nephew, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's son, Yu's

古文：贵怒，攻之，淹自东遂宁徙屯垫江。
现代文：宇文贵勃然大怒，派兵去攻打，谯淹从东遂宁移师屯驻垫江。
English: Yu Wengui flew into a rage, sent troops to attack, and moved his army from Suining in the east to Jiejiang.

古文：初，晋安民陈羽，世为闽中豪姓，其子宝应多权诈，郡中畏服。
现代文：当初，晋安地区的平民陈羽，世世代代为闽中豪门。他的儿子陈宝应颇善权变，为人奸诈，郡中的人都怕他，服从他。
English: At the beginning, Chen Yu, a commoner from Jin'an, had been a member of the Shizhong family for generations. His son Chen Bao Ying was quite good at power changes and was a treacherous person. People in the county were afraid of him and obeyed him.

古文：侯景之乱，晋安太守宾化侯云以郡让羽，羽老，但治郡事，令宝应典兵。
现代文：侯景之乱时，晋安太守宾化侯云把郡守之职让给陈羽。陈羽年老，只管郡里的政事，让陈宝应分管军事。
English: At the time of the Houjing Disturbance, Jin'an's deputy governor, Houyun, gave up the post of county governor to Chen Yu. Chen Yu was old and was only in charge of the county's political affairs, leaving Chen Bao in charge of military affairs.

古文：时东境荒馑，而晋安独丰衍。
现代文：当时东边闹饥荒，而晋安一带却丰收有余粮。
English: At that time, there was a famine in the east, but the Jinan area had a bumper harvest with surplus grain.

古文：宝应数自海道出，寇抄临安、永嘉、会稽，或载米粟与之贸易，由是能致富强。
现代文：陈宝应多次从海路出兵，到临安、永嘉、会稽一带抢劫虏掠。有时也运些米粟和这些地区进行贸易，因此就有条件富强起来。
English: Chen Baoying repeatedly sent troops from the sea to Lin'an, Yongjia, and Huiqi to loot and plunder. Sometimes he also transported some rice paddies to trade with these areas, so he had the conditions to become rich and strong.

古文：侯景平，世祖因以羽为晋安太守。
现代文：侯景之乱平定后，梁元帝鉴于这种情况，就任命陈羽为晋安太守。
English: After the suppression of the Houjing Rebellion, Emperor Liang Yuan, in view of this situation, appointed Chen Yu as the governor of Jinan.

古文：及陈霸先辅政，羽求传郡于宝应，霸先许之。
现代文：待到陈霸先辅佐梁朝时，陈羽要求把太守职位传给陈宝应，陈霸先答应了。
English: When Chen Baxian became the first assistant to Liang Dynasty, Chen Yu asked to pass the position of governor-general to Chen Baoying. Chen Baxian agreed.

古文：是岁，魏宇文泰讽淮安王育上表请如古制降爵为公，于是宗室诸王皆降为公。
现代文：这一年，西魏宇文泰暗示淮安王元育上表给朝廷，要求按照古制，把自己的爵位降为公，他这一带头，于是宗室诸王都降爵为公。
English: In that year, Western Wei's Yu Wentai hinted that Huai'an's Wang Yuanyu should present a petition to the imperial court, requesting that his title be downgraded to the rank of prince in accordance with the ancient system. He took the lead in this, and the royal families were all downgraded to the rank of prince.

古文：突厥木杆可汗击柔然主邓叔子，灭之，叔子收其馀烬奔魏。
现代文：突厥木杆可汗袭击柔然邓叔子，把他的部队消灭了。邓叔子收拾剩余的兵力财物投奔西魏。
English: The Turkic pole khan attacked Zhuoran Deng Shuzi and wiped out his troops. Deng Shuzi packed up his remaining troops and belongings and fled to West Wei.

古文：木杆西破嚈哒，东走契丹，北并契骨，威服塞外诸国。
现代文：木杆可汗向西打败哒，向东赶跑了契丹，向北吞并了契骨，其威力慑服了塞外各国。
English: The Wooden Pole Khan defeated the Mongols in the west, chased away the Khitans in the east, and annexed the Cheka in the north. Its power overcame all foreign countries.

古文：其地东自辽海，西至西海，长万里，南自沙漠以北五六千里皆属焉。
现代文：于是，他的疆土东边从辽海开始，西边延伸到西海，长达万里；南边从沙漠以北五六千里都归属于他。
English: As a result, the eastern side of his territory began from the Liao Sea, the western side extended to the West Sea, up to ten thousand miles; the southern side from the desert north of five or six thousand miles all belong to him.

古文：木杆恃其强，请尽诛邓叔子等于魏，使者相继于道。
现代文：木杆依恃他实力强大，要求西魏必须把邓叔子等人全部杀掉，派往西魏的使者在路上前后相继。
English: He was powerful and demanded that the Western Wei Dynasty must kill all of Deng Shuzi and others. Envoys sent to the Western Wei Dynasty were successively killed on the road.

古文：太师泰收叔子以下三千馀人付其使者，尽杀之于青门外。
现代文：太师宇文泰只好把邓叔子以下三千多人抓起来交给木杆可汗的使者，在青门外把他们全部杀了。
English: Daishi Uwentai had no choice but to arrest more than three thousand people, including Deng Shuzi, hand them over to the Khan's emissaries, and killed them all outside Qingmen.

古文：初，魏太师泰以汉、魏官繁，命苏绰及尚书令卢辩依《周礼》更定六官。
现代文：当初，西魏太师宇文泰因为汉朝、魏朝官职繁多，便命令苏绰和尚书令卢辩依照《周礼》重新确定了六官的职称。
English: At first, the Western Wei Grand Master U Wentai ordered Su Cao and the priest Lu Fen to re-determine the titles of the six officials in accordance with the "Weekly Ritual" because the Han Dynasty and the Wei Dynasty had many officials.

古文：敬皇帝太平元年
现代文：太平元年
English: Taiping Year 1

古文：春，正月，丁丑，魏初建六官，以宇文泰为太师、大冢宰，柱国李弼为太傅、大司徒，赵贵为太保、大宗伯，独孤信为大司马，于谨为大司寇，侯莫陈崇为大司空。
现代文：春季正月，丁丑，西魏开始建立实行文官之制，任命宇文泰为太师、大冢宰，柱国李弼为太傅、大司徒，赵贵为太保、大宗伯，独孤信为大司马，于谨为大司寇，侯莫陈崇为大司空。
English: In the first month of spring, Dingwuxi, the Western Wei Dynasty began to establish and implement the civil service system, appointing Wu Wentai as the grand master and grand secretary, Zhu Guo Li as the grand master and grand secretary, Zhao Gui as the grand master and grand secretary, Du Guoxin as the grand master, Yu Ji as the grand master, and Hou Mo Chen Chong as the grand master.

古文：自馀百官，皆仿《周礼》。
现代文：其余百官的设置任命，都模仿《周礼》。
English: The appointment of the remaining hundred officials is modeled on the "Weekly Ritual."

古文：戊寅，大赦，其与任约、徐嗣徽同谋者，一无所问。
现代文：戊寅，梁朝大赦天下。凡是与任约、徐嗣徽同谋的人，一概不予追究。
English: Wu Yin and Liang Chao amnestied the whole country. Anyone who conspired with Ren Yu and Xu Shihui would not be investigated.

古文：癸未，陈霸先使从事中郎江旰说徐嗣徽使南归，嗣徽执旰送齐。
现代文：癸未，陈霸先派从事中郎江旰去劝说徐嗣徽，让他回南方来。徐嗣徽把江旰抓起来送到了北齐。
English: Soon after, Chen Baxian sent his trusted lieutenant Jiang Qi to persuade Xu Shihui to let him return to the south. Xu Shihui arrested Jiang Qi and sent him to North Qi.

古文：陈茜、周文育合军攻杜龛于吴兴。
现代文：陈、周文育把军队合并在一起在吴兴攻打杜龛。
English: Chen and Zhou Wenyu joined forces to attack Cuckoo in Wuxing.

古文：龛勇而无谋，嗜酒常醉，其将杜泰阴与茜等通。
现代文：杜龛其人有勇而无谋，又爱喝酒，一天到晚总是醉醺醺的，他的部将杜泰暗地里和陈等挂上了钩。
English: Du Xun, who was brave and reckless, loved to drink, and was always drunk all day long. His subordinate Du Tai secretly hooked up with Chen and others.

古文：龛与茜等战，败，泰因说龛使降，龛然之。
现代文：杜龛同陈等人交战失败，杜泰便劝说杜龛投降，杜龛答应了。
English: Du Wei failed in the battle with Chen and others, Du Tai persuaded Du Wei to surrender, and Du Wei agreed.

古文：其妻王氏曰： 霸先仇隙如此，何可求和！ 
现代文：但是，他的妻子王氏说： 陈霸先和我们王家结仇结得这么深，怎么可以向他求和！ 
English: However, his wife Wang said, "Chen Baxian has such a deep grudge against our royal family, how can we sue him for peace!"

古文：因出私财赏募，复击茜等，大破之。
现代文：于是拿出私财赏赐招募战士，再一次向陈发动进攻，把陈打得大败。
English: So he took out his private money to reward and recruit soldiers, launched an attack on Chen once again, and defeated Chen.

古文：既而杜泰降于茜，龛尚醉未觉，茜遣人负出，于项王寺前斩之。
现代文：不久崐杜泰投降了陈，而杜龛还酒醉没醒，陈派人把他背出来，在项王寺前把他斩首了。
English: Soon after, Du Tai surrendered to Chen, but Du Yao was too drunk to wake up. Chen sent someone to carry him out and beheaded him in front of Xiangwang Temple.

古文：王僧智与其弟豫章太守僧愔俱奔齐。
现代文：王僧智和他的弟弟豫章太守王僧都投奔北齐。
English: Wang Zengzhi and his younger brother, Prince Yuzhang, both went to Beiqi.

古文：东扬州刺史张彪素为王僧辩所厚，不附霸先。
现代文：东扬州刺史张彪一向被王僧辩所宠爱看重，所以不肯归附陈霸先。
English: Zhang Biao, the statesman of East Yangzhou, had always been favored and valued by Wang Sangye, so he did not want to be attached to Chen Baxian.

古文：二月，庚戌，陈茜、周文育轻兵袭会稽，彪兵败，走入若邪山中，茜遣其将吴兴章昭远追斩之。
现代文：二月，庚戌，陈、周文育派轻装士兵奔袭会稽，张彪兵败，逃入若邪山中。陈派他的部将吴兴人章昭达追上并斩了他。
English: In February, the light-armed soldiers of the Geng Li, Chen and Zhou Wenyu faction raided Cuiqi. Zhang Biao was defeated and fled into the Waka Yai Mountains. Chen sent his troops to catch up with Wu Xingren Zhang Zhaoda and beheaded him.

古文：东阳太守留异馈茜粮食，霸先以异为缙州刺史。
现代文：东阳太守留异送粮食给陈，陈霸先任命留异为缙州刺史。
English: The governor of Dongyang, Ruiyi, sent grain to Chen, and Chen Baxian appointed Ruiyi as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：江州刺史侯瑱本事王僧辩，亦拥兵据豫章及江州，不附霸先。
现代文：江州刺史侯原来侍奉王僧辩，所以也拥兵占据豫章和江州，不归附陈霸先。
English: Jishihou of Jiangzhou originally served Wang Sofen, so he also supported the soldiers to occupy Yuzhang and Jiangzhou, and did not belong to Chen Baxian.

古文：霸先以周文育为南豫州刺史，使将兵击湓城，庚申，又遣侯安都、周铁虎将舟师立栅于梁山，以备江州。
现代文：陈霸先任命周文育为南豫州刺史，派他带兵去打湓城。庚申，又派侯安都、周铁虎率领水军在梁山一带建立营栅，以防备江州。
English: Chen Baxi first appointed Zhou Wenyu as the governor of South Henan Province and sent him with soldiers to besiege the city. Goshun also sent Hou Andu and Zhou Tiehu to lead the navy to build a camp gate in the area of Liangshan to prevent Jiangzhou.

古文：癸亥，徐嗣徽、任约袭采石，执戍主明州刺史张怀钧送于齐。
现代文：癸亥，徐嗣徽、任约袭击采石，抓获采石守将明州刺史张怀钧，送他到了北齐。
English: Yan Hai, Xu Zhihui, and Ren You attacked the quarry, captured the quarry keeper, Zhang Huaiyao, and sent him to Beiqi.

古文：后梁主击侯平于公安，平与长沙王韶引兵还长沙。
现代文：后梁国主萧在公安袭击侯平，侯平和长沙王萧韶带兵回长沙。
English: Later, the ruler of Liang Province, Xiao, attacked Houping in the public security. Houping and the king of Changsha, Xiao Wei, led the soldiers back to Changsha.

古文：王琳遣平镇巴州。
现代文：王琳派侯平去镇守巴州。
English: Wang Lin sent Hou Ping to guard Bazhou.

古文：三月，壬午，诏杂用古今钱。
现代文：三月，壬午，梁朝下诏，允许古今钱币混合使用。
English: In March, at noon, the Liang Dynasty issued an edict allowing the mixed use of ancient and modern coins.

古文：戊戌，齐遣仪同三司萧轨、库狄伏连、尧难宗、东方老等与任约、徐嗣徽合兵十万入寇，出栅口，向梁山。
现代文：戊戌，北齐派仪同三司萧轨、库狄伏连、尧难宗、东方老等人与任约、徐嗣徽联合成大军十万人南下进犯，军队从栅口出发，直指梁山。
English: The Northern Qi faction, together with the Third Division of Xiao Lu, Ku Di Fu Lian, Gong Nan Zong, the Eastern Elders, Ren Jiao and Xu Zi Hui, united to form a large army of 100,000 people to invade the south. The army set out from the gate and headed straight for Liangshan.

古文：陈霸先帐内荡主黄丛逆击，破之，齐师退保芜湖。
现代文：陈霸先军帐内的一位善于突击冲锋的主将黄丛率兵迎击，打败了北齐军队，北齐军队只好退保芜湖。
English: Huang Cong, a commander in Chen Baxian's army who was good at assault and charge, led the troops to meet the attack and defeated the North Qi army. The North Qi army had to retreat to protect Lugu Lake.

古文：霸先遣定州刺史沈泰等就侯安都，共据梁山以御之。
现代文：陈霸先派定州刺史沈泰等人归侯安都指挥，据守梁山以抵抗北齐军队。
English: Chen Baxian sent Dingzhou assassin Shen Tai and others under the command of Hou Andu to defend Liangshan against the North Qi army.

古文：周文育攻湓城，未克，召之还。
现代文：周文育带兵攻打湓城，没有攻克，被召回来。
English: Zhou Wenyu led troops to attack Handan, but failed to conquer the city and was recalled.

古文：夏，四月，丁巳，霸先如梁山巡抚诸军。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁巳，陈霸先到梁山去巡视安抚各路兵马。
English: In the summer, in April, Ding Si and Chen Ba first went to Liangshan to inspect and pacify the soldiers and horses.

古文：乙丑，齐仪同三司娄睿讨鲁阳蛮，破之。
现代文：乙丑，北齐仪同三司娄讨伐鲁阳蛮，打败了他们。
English: Second Ugly, North Qi Yi and the three brothers fought against Lu Yang Man and defeated them.

古文：侯安都轻兵袭齐行台司马恭于历阳，大破之，俘获万计。
现代文：侯安都率领轻装士兵在历阳袭击北齐行台司马恭，把司马恭打得大败，俘虏了上万人。
English: Hou Andu led light-armed soldiers in Liyang to attack the North Qi Gang Tai Sima Qiong, defeated Sima Qiong and captured tens of thousands of people.

古文：魏太师泰尚孝武妹冯翊公主，生略阳公觉；姚夫人生宁都公毓。
现代文：西魏太师宇文泰娶了孝武帝的妹妹冯翊公主，生下儿子略阳公宇文觉，姚夫人则生了宁都公宇文毓。
English: Western Wei Grand Master U Wentai married Emperor Xiaowu's sister, Princess Feng Ye, and had a son, Liao Yang Gong U Wentai, while Lady Yao gave birth to Ningdu Gong U Wentai.

古文：毓于诸子最长，娶大司马独孤信女。
现代文：宁都公宇文毓在几个儿子中最年长，娶了大司马独孤信的女儿。
English: Ningdu Gongwu Wenjuan was the oldest of several sons, and married the daughter of the eldest son, Ma Duxuanxin.

古文：泰将立嗣，谓公卿曰： 孤欲立子以嫡，恐大司马有疑，如何？ 
现代文：宇文泰准备确立继承人，对公卿大臣说： 我想立嫡出的儿子为世子，担心大司马对此有疑心，该怎么办好呢？ 
English: As he prepared to establish a successor, Uwentai said to the Kugyo-daijin: "I want to make my legitimate son the heir, but I'm worried that Daisima may have doubts about this. What should I do?

古文：众默然，未有言者。
现代文：众大臣默然不作声。
English: The ministers were silent.

古文：尚书左仆射李远曰： 夫立子以嫡不以长，略阳公为世子，公何所疑！
现代文：尚书左仆射李远说： 从来立世子都是看是否嫡出，不看是否年长，把略阳公宇文觉立为世子，您有什么可疑虑的呢？
English: Shangshu's left-hand man, Sha Liyuan, said, "Since the time immemorial, a successor has been chosen according to whether he is a legitimate child or not, not according to whether he is old or not. You have chosen Liao Yang Gong Yu Wen Jie as the successor. Do you have any doubts?

古文：若以信为嫌，请先斩之。 
现代文：如果怕独孤信有意见，为此有顾虑，那么可以先把他斩了！ 
English: If you are afraid of being alone, if you have doubts, if you have concerns about this, then you can cut him first!

古文：遂拔刀而起。
现代文：于是就拔出刀要行动。
English: So he pulled out his knife to take action.

古文：泰亦起，曰： 何至于是！ 
现代文：宇文泰忙站起来阻止说： 何至于要这样做！ 
English: Wu Wentai quickly stood up to stop him and said, "Why do you want to do this?

古文：信又自陈解，远乃止。
现代文：独孤信也赶快自我陈述辩解，表示并无异议，李远这才停止行动。
English: Duoluxin also quickly defended himself, saying that he had no objection, and Li Yuan stopped the action.

古文：于是群公并从远议。
现代文：于是大臣们都听从了李远的建议。
English: As a result, everyone agreed with Li Yuan's opinion.

古文：远出外，拜谢信曰： 临大事不得不尔！ 
现代文：退朝后，李远走出宫廷外，拜谢独孤信说： 面临国家大事不得不这样，请谅解。 
English: After the abdication, Li Yuan walked out of the palace and said: "Please understand that I have to do this in the face of national events.

古文：信亦谢远曰： 今日赖公决此大议。 
现代文：独孤信也感谢李远说： 今天崐亏得您才把这件大事决定下来。 
English: Du Guoxin also thanked Li Yuan and said, "I'm glad you decided to do this big thing today.

古文：遂立觉为世子。
现代文：于是就立略阳公宇文觉为世子。
English: As a result, he decided to make Yang Gong Yu Wen Jue his heir.

古文：太师泰北巡。
现代文：西魏太师宇文泰到北边巡视。
English: Western Wei Grand Master Wu Wentai went to the north side of the mountain to inspect.

古文：五月，齐人召建安公渊明，诈许退师，陈霸先具舟送之。
现代文：五月，北齐人召见建安公萧渊明，假装要答应退兵。陈霸先准备船只要送萧渊明去。
English: In May, the North Qi people summoned Jianan Gong Xiao Yuanming, pretending to agree to retire. Chen Ba first prepared a ship to send Xiao Yuanming.

古文：癸未，渊明疽发背卒。
现代文：癸未，萧渊明背上痈疽发作死去。
English: Shortly after, Xiao Yuanming died of a gangrene attack on his back.

古文：甲申，齐兵发芜湖，庚寅，入丹杨县，丙申，至秣稜故治。
现代文：甲申，北齐军队从芜湖出发，庚寅，进入丹杨县，丙申，到达秣棱旧治所。
English: Jiaxing, the North Qi army departed from Wuhu, Gengyin, entered Danyang County, Bishen, and arrived at the former detention center of Zhenren.

古文：陈霸先遣周文育屯方山，徐度顿马牧，杜稜顿大航南以御之。
现代文：陈霸先派周文育屯驻于方山，徐度驻守马牧，杜棱驻守大航南端，以防御北齐兵。
English: Chen Baxi first sent Zhou Wenyu Tuen to be stationed in Fangshan, gradually stationed in Ma Mu, and Du Ren stationed in the southern end of Dahang to defend the North Qi soldiers.

古文：齐汉阳敬怀王洽卒。
现代文：北齐汉阳敬怀王高洽去世。
English: Northern Qi Hanyang King Gaochao passed away.

古文：辛丑，齐人跨淮，立桥栅渡兵，夜至方山。徐嗣徽等列舰于青墩，至于七矶，以断周文育归路。
现代文：辛丑，北齐军队跨秦淮河修筑桥梁渡兵，夜里到达方山，徐嗣徽等人把军舰摆在青墩一带，一直摆到七矶，用以切断周文育的退路。
English: Sin ugly, North Qi army across the Qin Huaihe River to build a bridge to ferry soldiers, at night to reach Fangshan, Xu Shihui and others put the warship in the area of Qingcheng, all the way to Qiji, to cut off the escape route of Zhou Wenyu.

古文：文育鼓噪而发，嗣徽等不能制；至旦，反攻嗣徽。
现代文：周文育指挥士兵大声豉噪，大举进军，徐嗣徽等人没能抵挡得住。到天亮时分，周文育反攻徐嗣徽。
English: Zhou Wenyu commanded soldiers to make loud noises and march in large numbers, and Xu Shihui and others were unable to resist. At dawn, Zhou Wenyu counterattacked Xu Shihui.

古文：嗣徽骁将鲍砰独以小舰殿军，文育乘单舴艋与战，跳入舰中，斩砰，仍牵其舰而还。
现代文：徐嗣徽手下的骁勇的将领鲍坪单独用小舰当后卫，周文育乘坐一条小快船与他近战，纵身跳入小舰中，一刀斩了鲍坪；还把这条小舰拉了回来。
English: The courageous general Bao Ping, under the command of Xu Shihui, used a small ship as a single guard. Zhou Wenyu took a small fast boat to fight with him, jumped into the small ship, and cut Bao Ping with a knife; he also pulled the small ship back.

古文：嗣徽众大骇，因留船芜湖，自丹杨步上。
现代文：徐嗣徽的部众一看吓得要命，于是把船留在芜湖，从丹杨步行上岸。
English: At first sight, Xu Shihui's subordinates were scared to death, so they left the boat in Lugu Lake and walked ashore from Danyang.

古文：陈霸先追侯安都、徐度皆还。
现代文：陈霸先把侯安都、徐度追回来以抗击北齐军队。
English: Chen Badu first drove Hou Andu and gradually recovered to fight against the North Qi army.

古文：癸卯，齐兵自方山进及倪塘，游骑至台，建康震骇。帝总禁兵出顿长乐寺，内外纂严。
现代文：癸卯，北齐军队从方山挺进到倪塘，游动的前哨骑兵在宫城下出现，建康城受到震惊，人心惶惶，梁敬帝带着宫廷卫队出宫驻入长乐寺，内外戒严。
English: Suddenly, the Northern Qi army advanced from Fangshan to Niitan. The roving advance guard cavalry appeared under the palace. Jiankang City was shocked and panicked. Emperor Liang Jing took the palace guards out of the palace and stationed them in Changle Temple. Martial law was imposed inside and outside the palace.

古文：霸先拒嗣徽等于白城，适与周文育会。
现代文：陈霸先在白城抗御徐嗣徽等人，正好与周文育的军队会合。
English: Chen Baxi first resisted Xu Shihui and others in Baicheng, just in time to meet with Zhou Wenyu's army.

古文：将战，风急，霸先曰： 兵不逆风。 
现代文：将要与北齐兵交战时，风刮得很急，陈霸先说： 军队最好不要逆风而进。 
English: When he was about to engage the Beiqi soldiers, the wind was blowing very fast. Chen Baizhen said, "The army had better not go against the wind.

古文：文育曰： 事急矣，何用古法！ 
现代文：周文育说： 军情紧急，何必拘泥于古法！ 
English: Zhou Wenyu said: The military situation is urgent, why stick to the ancient law!

古文：抽槊上马先进，众军从之，风亦寻转，杀伤数百人。
现代文：说着便抽出一把槊跃身上马冲向前去。过一会风向也转了，周文育猛冲，杀伤了好几百人。
English: As he spoke, he pulled out a pair of hoops and the horse rushed forward. After a while, the wind direction also turned, and Zhou Wenyu stormed, killing several hundred people.

古文：侯安都与嗣徽等战于耕坛南，安都帅十二骑突其陈，破之，生擒齐仪同三司乞伏无劳。
现代文：侯安都与徐嗣徽在耕坛南边会战。侯安都率领十二个骑兵冲破徐嗣徽的阵地，把他们打败，活捉了北齐仪同三司乞伏无劳。
English: Hou Andu and Xu Shihui fought on the south side of the cultivating field. Hou Andu led twelve cavalrymen to break through Xu Shihui's position, defeated them, and captured Bei Qiyi and Sanji alive.

古文：霸先潜撤精卒三千配沈泰渡江，袭齐行台赵彦深于瓜步，获舰百馀艘，粟万斛。
现代文：陈霸先秘密地撤下三千精锐士兵配合沈泰渡过长江，在瓜步袭击北齐行台赵彦深，缴获战船一百余艘，粮食一万斛。
English: Chen Baxian secretly withdrew three thousand elite soldiers to cross the Yangtze River with the cooperation of Shen Tai, and attacked Zhao Yanshen of North Qigangdai at the melon pace, capturing more than one hundred warships and ten thousand baht of grain.

古文：六月，甲辰，齐兵潜至钟山，侯安都与齐将王敬宝战于龙尾，军主张纂战死。
现代文：六月，甲辰，北齐军队偷偷来到钟山，侯安都与北齐将领王敬宝在龙尾交战，军中首领张纂在战斗中阵亡。
English: In June, Jia Chen, the Northern Qi army secretly came to Zhongshan, Hou Andu and the Northern Qi general Wang Jingbao fought in Longwei, and the army leader Zhang Guo died in the battle.

古文：丁未，齐师至幕府山，霸先遣别将钱明将水军出江乘，邀击齐人粮运，尽获其船米。
现代文：丁未，北齐军队抵达幕府山，陈霸先派别将钱明率领水军兵发江乘，截击北齐军队的粮食运输船队，把他们的船队装运的大米全部缴获。
English: Ding Wei, the Northern Qi army arrived at the Shogunate Hill, Chen Baxian dispatched Qian Ming to lead the naval soldiers to the Fata River, intercepted the grain transport fleet of the Northern Qi army, and seized all the rice shipped by their fleet.

古文：齐军乏食，杀马驴食之。
现代文：这一来，北齐军队没有粮食吃，只好杀战马、驴子充饥。
English: As a result, the Northern Qi army had no food to eat, so they had to kill horses and donkeys to satisfy their hunger.

古文：庚戌，齐军逾钟山，霸先与众军分顿乐游苑东及覆舟山北，断其冲要。
现代文：庚戌，北齐军队翻越钟山，陈霸先与众军分头驻扎在乐游苑东边和覆舟山北边，切断北齐军队的交通要道。
English: After the Northern Qi army overran Zhongshan, Chen Baxian and his army were stationed separately on the east side of Le Youyuan and on the north side of Zhoushan, cutting off the important transportation routes of the Northern Qi army.

古文：壬子，齐军至玄武湖西北，将据北郊坛，众军自覆舟东移顿坛北，与齐人相对。
现代文：壬子，北齐军队到达玄武湖西北，准备占据北边的郊祀高坛。众军从覆舟向东移动，驻扎在坛北，与北齐军队相对摆开阵势。
English: The Northern Qi army reached the northwest of Lake Xuanwu and prepared to occupy the high altar of the suburb on the north side. The army moved from the boat to the east, stationed in the north of the altar, and set up a position opposite the Northern Qi army.

古文：会连日大雨，平地水丈馀，齐军昼夜坐立泥中，足指皆烂，悬鬲以爨，而台中及潮沟北路燥，梁军每得番易。
现代文：当时正赶上连日下大雨，平地雨水积有一丈多深，北齐将士白天黑夜或坐或立全都泡在泥水中，脚指头都烂了，做饭得把锅悬挂起来才行，但是皇城和潮沟的北路一带却还干燥，梁朝军队总是能换班作战。
English: At that time, it was catching up with the continuous heavy rain, and the rainwater on the plain was very deep. The Beiqi soldiers were all soaked in muddy water during the day and night, whether they were sitting or standing. Their toes were rotten, and they had to hang up the pot to cook. However, the area around the imperial city and the north road of the tidal ditch was still dry, and the Liang Dynasty army could always fight in shifts.

古文：时四方壅隔，粮运不至，建康户口流散，征求无所。
现代文：当时四方通往都城的道路都堵塞隔断了，粮食也运不进来，建康一带人民东流西散，无法征收粮赋。
English: At that time, the roads leading to the capital city in all directions were blocked and cut off, and grain could not be transported in. People in the Jiankang area were scattered to the east and west, unable to collect grain.

古文：甲寅，少霁，霸先将战，调市人得麦饭，分给军士，士皆饥疲。
现代文：甲寅，天才稍稍放晴，陈霸先准备开战，向商人征调了一些麦子，做成麦饭分给军中士兵，士兵们都已经又饿又疲劳了。
English: A Yin, genius slightly cleared, Chen Ba first prepared to go to war, requisitioned some wheat from merchants, made wheat rice and distributed it to soldiers in the army. The soldiers were already hungry and tired.

古文：会陈茜馈米三千斛、鸭千头，霸先命炊米煮鸭，人人以荷叶裹饭，婫以鸭肉数脔。乙卯，未明，蓐食，比晓，霸先帅麾下出莫府山。
现代文：正好这时陈送来大米三千斛，鸭子一千只。陈霸先下令蒸米饭煮鸭子，士兵们个个用荷叶包米饭，饭上盖上几片鸭肉，乙卯，天还没亮，士兵们都坐在草席上用饭，等到天一亮，陈霸先就率领下属将士兵发幕府山出发。
English: Just at that time, Chen sent three thousand stalks of rice and a thousand ducks. Chen Baxi ordered steamed rice to cook the ducks. The soldiers individually wrapped the rice with lotus leaves and covered the rice with a few pieces of duck meat. However, it was not yet dawn, and the soldiers were all sitting on straw mats to eat. When it was dawn, Chen Baxi led his subordinates to send the soldiers to the Shogunate Hill.

古文：侯安都谓其部将萧摩诃曰： 卿骁勇有名，千闻不如一见。 
现代文：侯安都对他的部将萧摩诃说： 你一向英勇善战，远近闻名，这回可是千闻不如一见，就看你的了。 
English: Hou Andu said to his subordinate Xiao Mazu: You have always been brave and good at fighting, and you are well-known far and wide. This time, however, hearing is not as good as seeing, so it's up to you.

古文：摩诃对曰： 今日令公见之。 
现代文：萧摩诃回答说： 今天就让您看看！ 
English: Capricorn replied: Today, let Ming Gong have a look.

古文：及战，安都坠马，齐人围之，摩诃单骑大呼，直冲齐军，齐军披靡，安都乃免。
现代文：等到交战时，侯安都不慎从马上摔下来了，北齐将士围了上来，萧摩诃单枪匹马，大呼猛进，直向北齐军士冲来，北齐士兵纷纷避开，侯安都这才保住了生命。
English: At the time of the engagement, Hou An accidentally fell off his horse. The North Qi surrounded the soldiers and came up. Xiao Maqian single-handedly, roared forward, rushed straight to the North Qi sergeant, the North Qi soldiers avoided one after another, and Hou Andu saved his life.

古文：霸先与吴明彻、沈泰等众军首尾齐举，纵兵大战，安都自白下引兵横出其后，齐师大溃，斩获数千人，相蹂籍而死者不可胜计。生擒徐嗣徽及其弟嗣宗，斩之以徇，追奔至于临沂。
现代文：陈霸先与吴明彻、沈泰等众军头尾一齐冲锋，指挥将士全面出击，猛打猛冲，侯安都又从白下带领一支军队切断了北齐军的后路，北齐军队大败，被杀被俘的有几千人，互相蹂踏而死的人不可胜计，徐嗣徽和他弟弟徐嗣宗被活捉后杀头示众。
English: Chen Baxian and Wu Mingche, Shen Tai and other troops charged head to tail. The commanding officers launched an all-out attack and fought fiercely. Hou Andu led an army from Baixia to cut off the Northern Qi army's back route. The Northern Qi army was defeated. Several thousand people were killed and captured. The number of people who died from trampling each other was incalculable. Xu Shihui and his brother Xu Shizong were captured alive and then killed.

古文：其江乘、摄山、钟山等诸军相次克捷，虏萧轨、东方老、王敬宝等将帅凡四十六人。
现代文：梁军追杀败逃的北齐兵，一直追到临沂。梁朝在江乘、摄山、钟山等地的军队也相继获胜，俘虏了北齐萧轨、东方老、王敬宝等将帅共四十六人。
English: Liang's army chased and killed the defeated North Qi soldiers and pursued them all the way to Linyi. Liang's army also won successively in Jiangren, Zhaoshan, Zhongshan and other places, and captured a total of forty-six generals such as North Qi Xiaorong, Dongfanglao and Wang Jingbao.

古文：其军士得窜至江者，缚荻筏以济，中江而溺，流尸至京口，翳水弥岸；唯任约、王僧愔得免。
现代文：北齐士兵有逃窜到长江边的，用芦苇扎成筏子想渡江，但到江中心苇筏就被水冲散，士兵也纷纷落入水中，尸体随江水流到京口一带，浮尸复盖了水面，堆满了江岸。只有任约、王僧两个人生还。
English: North Qi soldiers fled to the Yangtze River, using reeds to tie into rafts to cross the river, but when they reached the center of the river, the rafts were washed away by the water, and the soldiers also fell into the water. The bodies followed the river water to the Kyoguchi area. The floating corpses covered the water and piled up on the riverbank. Only Ren Yotai and Wang Xiang survived.

古文：丁巳，众军出南州，烧齐舟舰。
现代文：丁巳，梁朝众军从南州出发，烧掉了北齐的战船。
English: Soon after, Liang's army set out from Nanzhou and burned Beiqi's warships.

古文：戊午，大赦。
现代文：戊午，梁朝大赦天下。
English: On the 15th, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：己未，解严。
现代文：己未，解除戒严。
English: On the 23rd, martial law was lifted.

古文：军士以赏俘贸酒，一人裁得一醉。
现代文：军士们用赏赐所得的战俘去换酒喝，一名战俘只能买得够一次大醉的酒。
English: The sergeants used the bounty money to buy booze for the prisoners. One prisoner could only buy enough booze to get drunk once.

古文：庚申，斩齐将萧轨等，齐人闻之，亦杀陈昙朗。
现代文：庚申，把被俘的北齐将领萧轨等人全杀了，北齐方面闻讯，也杀了陈昙朗作为报复。
English: Goshun killed all the captured Northern Qi generals such as Xiaorou, and the Northern Qi side also killed Chen Yulang as revenge.

古文：霸先启解南徐州以授侯安都。
现代文：陈霸先奏请解除南徐州刺史让给侯安都。
English: Chen Ba first, please release Nan Xuzhou stabbing history to Hou Andu.

古文：侯平频破后梁军，以王琳兵威不接，更不受指麾；琳遣将讨之。
现代文：侯平多次打败后梁的军队，自以为有功，又认为王琳的兵威已经难以为继了，所以更加不受指挥了。于是王琳派将领去讨伐他。
English: Hou Ping defeated Hou Liang's army many times, and thought that he had made a great achievement. He also thought that Wang Lin's military power was unsustainable, so he was even more out of control. So Wang Lin sent generals to fight him.

古文：平杀巴州助防吕旬，收其众，奔江州，侯瑱与之结为兄弟。
现代文：侯平杀了巴州协助防守的将领吕旬，把吕旬的部众收归自己指挥，投奔到了江州，侯和他结成了兄弟。
English: Hou Ping killed the general Lü Shun, who was assisting in the defense of Pazhou, gathered Lü Shun's subordinates under his command, and fled to Jiangzhou. Hou and he became brothers.

古文：琳军势益衰，乙丑，遣使奉表诣齐，并献驯象。
现代文：王琳的军队势力越来越显得衰落，乙丑，派使节带着表示归顺的表章去到北齐，并献上驯服了的大象。
English: Wang Lin's military power increasingly appeared to be on the wane. Second Ugly sent an envoy to Beiqi with a surrender sign and presented a tamed elephant.

古文：江陵之陷也，琳妻蔡氏、世子毅皆没于魏，琳又献款于魏以求妻子；亦称臣于梁。
现代文：当初江陵陷落于西魏时，王琳的妻子蔡氏、世子王毅都落入西魏人手中，所以王琳又讨好西魏以求得妻子、儿子的释放。
English: When Jiangling fell to the Western Wei Dynasty, Wang Lin's wife Cai and his son Wang Yi both fell into the hands of the Western Wei Dynasty, so Wang Lin also courted the Western Wei Dynasty to obtain the release of his wife and son.

古文：齐发丁匠三十馀万，修广三台宫殿。
现代文：同时也向梁朝称臣。北齐动用民工匠人三十多万扩修三台宫殿。
English: At the same time, the Northern Qi used more than 300,000 craftsmen to expand the three palaces.

古文：齐显祖之初立也，留心政术，务存简靖，坦于任使，人得尽力。
现代文：北齐在文宣帝高洋刚刚立国的时候，很注意研究为政之术，一切政务，力求简便稳定，有所任命，也是坦诚待人，臣子们也得以尽其所能为国服务。
English: When Emperor Gaoyang of the Northern Qi Dynasty was just founded by Emperor Wenzhong, he paid great attention to studying the art of government, all government affairs, striving for simplicity and stability, appointing people, and treating people frankly. The courtiers were also able to serve the country to the best of their ability.

古文：又能以法驭下，或有违犯，不容勋戚，内外莫不肃然。
现代文：又能用法律为准绳来驾驭部下，如果有谁犯了法，即使无勋贵戚也绝不宽容，所以朝廷内外秩序井然。
English: He was also able to use the law as a yardstick to control his subordinates. If anyone broke the law, he would not tolerate it, even if they were nobles, so there was order inside and outside the court.

古文：至于军国机策，独决怀抱；每临行阵，亲当矢石，所向有功。
现代文：至于军事机要、国家大政方针，则由文宣帝自己拿出决断。文宣帝每次亲临战阵，总是亲自冒着箭石纷飞的危险，所到之处都立功绩。
English: As for the military strategy and the major national policies, the decisions were made by Emperor Wenzhong himself. Every time Emperor Wenzhong personally came to the battlefield, he always personally risked the danger of flying arrows and stones, and made achievements everywhere he went.

古文：数年之后，渐以功业自矜，遂嗜酒淫泆，肆行狂暴；或身自歌舞，尽日通宵；或散发胡服，杂衣锦彩；或袒露形体，涂傅粉黛；或乘牛、驴、橐驼、白象，不施鞍勒；或令崔季舒、刘桃枝负之而行，担胡鼓拍之；勋戚之第，朝夕临幸，游行市里，街坐巷宿；或盛夏日中暴身，或隆冬去衣驰走；从者不堪，帝居之自若。
现代文：几年以后，文宣帝渐渐以为建立了大功业，就骄傲自满起来，于是就贪杯纵酒，淫逸无度，滥行狂暴之事。
English: A few years later, Emperor Wenzhong gradually thought that he had established a great cause, and he became proud and complacent. Therefore, he drank too much, indulged in debauchery, and indulged in violence.

古文：三台构木高二十七丈，两栋相距二百馀尺，工匠危怯，皆系绳自防，帝登脊疾走，殊无怖畏；时复雅舞，折旋中节，傍人见者莫不寒心。
现代文：但文宣帝爬上三台的梁脊快步小跑，竟然一点也不害怕。跑着跑着还不时来点雅致的舞蹈动作，又折身子又打旋，居然符合节奏，旁边看的人吓得汗毛直竖，没有不寒心的。
English: However, Emperor Wenxuan climbed the beam ridge of the three platforms and trotted at a fast pace, and he was not afraid at all. As he ran, he also occasionally performed some elegant dance moves, twisting and turning his body, which actually matched the rhythm. People watching nearby were so scared that their hair stood on end, and they did not feel chilled.

古文：尝于道上问妇人曰： 天子何如？ 
现代文：有一次，文宣帝在路上问一个妇女说： 咱们的天子怎么样呢？ 
English: Once, on the road, Emperor Wenxuan asked a woman, "How is our heavenly son?

古文：曰： 颠颠痴痴，何成天子！ 
现代文：这妇女不知他就是天子，说： 他成天疯疯颠颠，呆呆痴痴，哪有什么天子样！ 
English: The woman did not know that he was the Son of God, and said, "He is mad all day long. What kind of son of God is he?

古文：帝杀之。
现代文：文宣帝把她杀了。
English: Emperor Wenxuan killed her.

古文：娄太后以帝酒狂，举杖击之曰： 如此父生如此儿！ 
现代文：娄太后有一次因为文宣帝发酒疯，举起拐杖打他，说： 这样英雄的父亲竟生出这样混帐的儿子！ 
English: On one occasion, the Empress Dowager, because Emperor Wenzhong had gone mad with drink, lifted up her cane and beat him, saying: "How could the father of such a hero give birth to such a bastard son!

古文：帝曰： 即当嫁此老母与胡。 
现代文：文宣帝竟然说： 看来得把这老太太嫁给胡人了。 
English: Emperor Wenzhong actually said, "It looks like this old lady will have to marry Hu Ren."

古文：太后大怒，遂不言笑。
现代文：娄太后勃然大怒，从此再也不说话，脸上也没有了笑容。
English: The Empress Dowager flew into a rage and never spoke again, nor did she smile.

古文：帝欲太后笑，自匍匐以身举床，坠太后于地，颇有所伤。
现代文：文宣帝想让娄太后笑，自己爬到了床底下去，用身子把床抬起来，把坐在床上的太后摔了下来，使太后受了伤。
English: In order to make the Empress Dowager laugh, Emperor Wenxuan crawled under the bed, lifted the bed with his body, and knocked down the Empress Dowager who was sitting on the bed, injuring her.

古文：既醒，大惭恨，使积柴炽火，欲入其中。
现代文：酒醒之后，高洋大感羞惭悔恨，让人堆起柴堆点燃，自己想跳进去烧死。
English: After sobering up, Gao Yangda felt ashamed and remorseful, let people pile up piles of firewood to ignite, and wanted to jump in and burn himself to death.

古文：太后惊惧，亲自持挽，强为之笑，曰： 向汝醉耳！ 
现代文：娄太后大吃一惊，害怕极了，赶忙亲自过来又抱又拉，勉强笑着说： 刚才是你喝醉了，我不当真。 
English: The empress dowager was taken aback and extremely frightened. She hurried to come over in person, hugged and pulled her, and said with a forced smile, "You were drunk just now, I wasn't serious."

古文：帝乃设地席，命平秦王归彦执杖，口自责数，脱背就罚，谓归彦曰： 杖不出血，当斩汝。 
现代文：文宣帝于是让人铺上地席，命令平秦王高归彦亲自执刑杖，自己口里列数着自己的罪过，脱开衣服露出背部接受杖刑。文宣帝对高归彦说： 你用力打，打不出血来，我就杀了你。 
English: Emperor Wenzhong then had a seat laid on the floor and ordered the King of Pingqin, Gao Guihang, to personally carry out the caning. He counted his sins in his mouth, took off his clothes and exposed his back to receive the caning. Emperor Wenzhong said to Gao Guihang: "If you can't draw blood, I'll kill you."

古文：太后前自抱之，帝流涕苦请，乃笞脚五十，然后衣冠拜谢，悲不自胜。
现代文：娄太后上前自己抱着他不让打，文宣帝痛哭流涕，最后还是在脚上打了五十下，然后穿上衣服，戴上帽子向娄太后拜谢宽恕之恩，一付悲不自胜的样子。
English: The empress dowager stepped forward and hugged him to stop him from beating her, and Emperor Wenzhong shed tears. Finally, he beat her fifty times on the foot, and then put on clothes and a hat to thank the empress dowager for her forgiveness, with a sad and helpless look.

古文：因是戒酒，一旬，又复如初。
现代文：因为这一番酒后失言伤害太后的事，文宣帝下决心戒酒。但刚十天，又嗜酒如命，和原来一样。
English: Because of this drunken slip of the tongue that hurt the empress dowager, Emperor Wenzhong made up his mind to give up drinking. However, just ten days later, he was as drunk as hell, just as he had been before.

古文：帝幸李后家，以鸣镝射后母崔氏，骂曰： 吾醉时尚不识太后，老婢何事！ 
现代文：文宣帝去李后的家，用带响声的箭射李后的母亲崔氏，边射边大骂，说： 我醉酒的时候连太后都不认识，你这老奴才算个什么！ 
English: Emperor Wenxuan went to Li Qiang's home and shot Li Qiang's mother, Cui, with a loud arrow. While shooting, he cursed and said, "When I was drunk, I didn't even know the empress dowager. What kind of old slave are you!"

古文：马鞭乱击一百有馀。
现代文：还挥动马鞭，一口气打了一百多下。
English: He also swung a horsewhip and struck more than a hundred blows in one go.

古文：虽以杨愔为宰相，使进厕筹，以马鞭鞭其背，流血浃袍。
现代文：文宣帝虽然任命杨为丞相，但常轻侮他，让他在自己大便时往厕所递送拭秽的篾片。又用马鞭打他背部，血流下来都湿透了衣袍。
English: Although Emperor Wenzhong appointed Yang as chancellor, he often belittled him, made him pass a piece of filth-wiping cloth to the toilet when he was defecating, and whipped him on the back with a horse, soaking his robe with blood.

古文：尝欲以小刀嫠其腹，崔季舒托俳言曰： 老小公子恶戏。 
现代文：又曾想用小刀子在他小腹上划痕，崔季舒一看不是事，就假托说笑话： 这是老公子和小公子恶作剧呢！ 
English: He also wanted to scratch his lower abdomen with a small knife. When Cui Jishu saw that it was not a problem, he pretended to tell a joke: This is a prank between the old man and the little boy!

古文：因掣刀去之。
现代文：乘势把文宣帝手里的刀子拔出来拿开了。
English: Taking advantage of the situation, he pulled out the knife from Emperor Wenxuan's hand and took it away.

古文：又置愔于棺中，载以轜车。
现代文：又有一次，文宣帝把杨放在棺材中，用丧车运着，演习大出殡。
English: On another occasion, Emperor Wenzhong placed Yang in a coffin and transported him in a funeral carriage.

古文：又尝持槊走马，以拟左丞相斛律金之胸者三，金立不动，乃赐帛千段。
现代文：还有一次，曾手持一把槊在马上奔驰，三次用槊作向左丞相斛律金胸口刺去的动作，斛律金站着不动崐，文宣帝夸他勇敢，赏赐他一千段帛。
English: On another occasion, he once galloped on a horse with a scepter in his hand, and three times used the scepter to make a stabbing motion in the chest of the Left Chancellery's Minister of the Left, Li Rujin. Li Rujin stood still, and Emperor Wenzhong praised him for his bravery and rewarded him with a thousand dan.

古文：高氏妇女不问亲疏，多与之乱，或以赐左右，又多方苦辱之。
现代文：高氏家族中的妇女，也不管亲疏远近，文宣帝都胡乱和她们发生性关系，还把其中的一些赐给身边亲信，但又想尽方法折腾侮辱人家。
English: The women in Gao's family, regardless of whether they were close or distant relatives, Emperor Wenxuan had sexual relations with them indiscriminately, and also gave some of them to close relatives, but he also tried his best to insult others.

古文：彭城王浟太妃尔硃氏，魏敬宗之后也，帝欲蒸之，不从；手刃杀之。
现代文：彭城王高的太妃尔朱氏，是魏敬宗的皇后，文宣帝想奸淫她，她不服从，便亲手用刀杀死。
English: Pengcheng Wanggao's great-grandmother, Zhu, was the empress of Wei Jingzong. Emperor Wenzhong wanted to have sex with her, but she disobeyed and he killed her with a sword.

古文：故魏乐安王元昂，李后之姊婿也，其妻有色，帝数幸之，欲纳为昭仪。
现代文：过去的东魏乐安王元昂，是李后的姐夫，他妻子长得漂亮，文宣帝多次占有她，想把她纳入宫中当昭仪。
English: In the past, the East Wei Le'an King Yuan'ang was the brother-in-law of Empress Li. His wife was beautiful, and Emperor Wenzhong occupied her many times and wanted to include her in the imperial court as Zhaoyi.

古文：召昂，令伏，以鸣镝射之百馀下，凝血垂将一石，竟至于死。
现代文：文宣帝把元昂召来，命令他趴下，用响箭射了他一百多箭，凝结的血块几乎有一石之多，就这样活活被射死了。
English: Emperor Wenzhong summoned Yuan Ang, ordered him to lie down, and shot him more than a hundred arrows with a ringing arrow. The blood clot was almost as much as a stone, so he was shot dead alive.

古文：后啼不食，乞让位于姊，太后又以为言，帝乃止。
现代文：李后为此啼哭终日不进食，要求把皇后位置让给姐姐，娄太后又在旁说了话，文宣帝才没有这样做。
English: For this reason, Empress Dowager Li wept and did not eat all day, demanding that the position of empress be given to her sister. Empress Dowager Zhao also said something, but Emperor Wenzhong did not do so.

古文：又尝于众中召都督韩哲，无罪，斩之。
现代文：北齐文宣帝还曾经在大庭广众之中召见都督韩哲，也没什么罪就把他斩首。
English: Emperor Xuan of Northern Qi once summoned the governor Han Zhe in the midst of a large audience, and beheaded him without any guilt.

古文：作大镬、长锯、坐刂、碓之属，陈之于庭。每醉，辄手杀人，以为戏乐。
现代文：还派人制造大铁锅、长锯子、大铡刀、大石碓之类刑具，摆在宫庭里，每次喝醉了酒，就动手杀人，以此当作游戏取乐。
English: They also sent people to make large iron pots, long saws, large scythes, large stone pestles and other instruments of torture, which were placed in the palace courtyard. Every time they got drunk, they would start killing people as a game for fun.

古文：所杀者多令支解，或焚之于火，或投之于水。
现代文：被他杀掉的人大多下令肢解，有的扔到火里去烧，有的扔到水里去。
English: Most of the people he killed were ordered to be dismembered, some thrown into the fire to burn, some thrown into the water.

古文：杨愔乃简鄴下死囚，置之仗内，谓之供御囚，帝欲杀人，辄执以应命。三月不杀，则宥之。
现代文：杨只好选了一些邺城的死罪囚犯，作为仪仗人员，叫做 供御囚 ，文宣帝一想杀人，就抓出来应命，如果三个月没被杀掉，就得到宽大处理。
English: Yang had no choice but to select a number of death-row prisoners from Lucheng as guards of honor, known as "supplying prisoners." Whenever Emperor Wenzhong wanted to kill someone, he would be caught out and ordered to do so. If he was not killed within three months, he would be treated leniently.

古文：开府参军裴谓之上书极谏，帝谓杨愔曰： 此愚人，何敢如是！ 
现代文：开府参军裴谓之上书极力谏阻文宣帝随意杀人的狂暴行为，文宣帝对杨说： 这是个蠢人，他怎么敢这样做！ 
English: According to Pei, who went to the capital to join the army, he tried his best to dissuade Emperor Wenzhong from the violent act of killing people at will. Emperor Wenzhong said to Yang, "This is a stupid man, how dare he do this!"

古文：对曰： 彼欲陛下杀之，以成名于后世耳。 
现代文：杨回答说： 他大概是想让陛下您杀了他，这样他好在后世成名吧！ 
English: Yang replied, "He probably wants you, Your Majesty, to kill him so that he can become famous in the afterlife!"

古文：帝曰： 小人，我且不杀，尔焉得名！ 
现代文：文宣帝说： 小人！我权且不杀，看你怎么出名！ 
English: Emperor Wenzhong said, "You villain! I have the power and I don't kill, let's see how you become famous!"

古文：帝与左右饮，曰： 乐哉！ 
现代文：文宣帝和身边亲信饮酒作乐，得意忘形地说： 真快乐呀！ 
English: Emperor Wenxuan and his entourage of cronies were drinking and making merry, and said triumphantly, "I'm so happy!"

古文：都督王纮曰： 有大乐，亦有大苦。
现代文：都督王在旁说： 有大快乐，也会有大痛苦。 
English: Beside him, the governor-general said: "There will be great joy, but there will also be great pain.

古文：帝曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：文宣帝问道： 这话怎么说？ 
English: Hao Di asked: Why did you say that?

古文：对曰： 长夜之饮，不寤国亡身陨，所谓大苦！ 
现代文：王回答说： 老是作长夜之饮，酩酊大醉，没等醒过来已经国亡身死，这就是我所说的大痛苦！ 
English: The king replied, "Always drinking late into the night, getting very drunk, and dying before I wake up. That is what I call great suffering!"

古文：帝缚纮，欲斩之，思其有救世宗之功，乃舍之。
现代文：文宣帝一听生了气，命人把王捆起来，要把他处斩，但想起他过去有救文襄帝生命的功劳，于是又放了他。
English: Upon hearing this, Emperor Wenzhong became angry and ordered that Wang be tied up and beheaded, but he remembered that he had saved Emperor Wenzhong's life in the past, so he released him.

古文：帝游宴东山，以关、陇未平，投杯震怒，召魏收于前，立为诏书，宣示远近，将事西行。
现代文：文宣帝去东山游玩欢宴，因为想起关、陇一带尚未平定，便把杯子往地上一摔，大发雷霆，马上把魏收叫到跟前，让他站着写下诏书，向远近四方宣告自己将要向西方采取军事行动。
English: Emperor Wenxuan went to Dongshan to enjoy a banquet, because he remembered that the areas of Guan and Handan had not yet been pacified, he threw the cup to the ground and flew into a rage. He immediately called Wei to his side, asked him to stand and write an edict, and announced to the far and near quarters that he was going to take military action against the West.

古文：魏人震恐，常为度陇之计。
现代文：西魏人闻讯感到震动惊恐，于是经常也在筹划防止齐军越过陇地的办法。
English: The Western Wei people were shocked and frightened when they heard the news, so they often planned ways to prevent the Qi army from crossing the ploughed land.

古文：然实未行。
现代文：但实际上文宣帝这一计划并没有实行。
English: However, in reality, Emperor Wenzhong did not implement this plan.

古文：一日，泣谓群臣曰： 黑獭不受我命，奈何？ 
现代文：有一天，文宣帝流着泪对群臣说： 黑獭不接受我的命令，怎么办呢？ 
English: One day, Emperor Wenxuan said to his courtiers with tears streaming down his face: "Hei Yao does not accept my order, what should I do?

古文：都督刘桃枝曰： 臣得三千骑，请就长安擒之以来。 
现代文：都督刘桃枝回答说： 给我三千骑兵，我就到长安去把他擒拿归来。 
English: Governor Liu Taoji replied: "Give me three thousand cavalry, and I will go to Chang'an to capture him and bring him back."

古文：帝壮之，赐帛千匹。
现代文：文宣帝听了，便称赞他的勇气，赐给他一千匹帛。
English: Emperor Wenxuan listened to him, praised his courage, and gave him a thousand donkeys.

古文：赵道德进曰： 东西两国，强弱力均，彼可擒之以来，此亦可擒之以往。
现代文：赵道德走上前说： 魏和齐是西方和东方并立的两个邻国，国势国力强弱是相均等的。你可以把那边的人擒拿归来，对方也可以把你这边的人擒拿过去。
English: Zhao Daode stepped forward and said: Wei and Qi are two neighboring countries that stand side by side in the West and the East, and their national power is equal. You can take back the people from the other side, and the other side can also take the people from your side.

古文：桃枝妄言应诛，陛下奈何滥赏！ 
现代文：刘桃枝口吐狂言，虚妄欺君，应该处死，陛下怎么向崐他滥施奖赏？ 
English: Liu Taozhi's mouth spews wild talk, deceit and deception, and he should be put to death. How can His Majesty reward him so extravagantly?

古文：帝曰： 道德言是。 
现代文：文宣帝听了，说： 道德说得对。 
English: Emperor Wenxuan listened and said, "Morality is right.

古文：回绢赐之。
现代文：收回给刘桃枝的绢帛赐给刘道德。
English: Withdraw the gong given to Liu Tao Zhi and give it to Liu Daode.

古文：帝乘马欲下峻岸入于漳，道德揽辔回之。
现代文：有一次，文宣帝骑着马欲从很高的陡岸跳到漳河里去，赵道德用力拉着马缰绳把他拽回来。
English: On one occasion, Emperor Wenxuan was riding his horse and wanted to jump from a high cliff into the Li River. Zhao Daode pulled the reins of the horse and pulled him back.

古文：帝怒，将斩之。
现代文：文宣帝勃然大怒，要把赵道德处斩。
English: Emperor Wenxuan flew into a rage and wanted to behead Zhao Daode.

古文：道德曰： 臣死不恨！当于地下启先帝：论此儿酣酗颠狂，不可教训！ 
现代文：赵道德说： 我为此而死心中没有什么怨恨，到了地下，我要向先帝启奏，把他这个儿子拼命酗酒，疯颠狂乱，不可教训的种种行为告诉他。 
English: Zhao Daode said: I have no resentment in my heart for this. When I go underground, I want to appeal to the former emperor and tell him that his son is desperately drunk, crazy, and cannot be taught various behaviors.

古文：帝默然而止。
现代文：文宣帝听了沉默良久，就不杀赵道德了。
English: Jing Di was silent and had to put the matter down.

古文：它日，帝谓道德曰： 我饮酒过，须痛杖我。 
现代文：这以后有一天，文宣帝对赵道德说： 我喝酒喝得过份了，必须狠狠打我一顿。 
English: One day after this, Emperor Wenxuan said to Zhao Daode: I drink too much alcohol, I must be beaten severely.

古文：道德抶之，帝走。
现代文：赵道德真的动手打他，文宣帝跑开了。
English: Zhao Daode really started to hit him, and Wen Xuandi ran away.

古文：道德逐之曰： 何物人，为此举止！ 
现代文：赵道德追着文宣帝，边追边喊： 你是个什么人，竟做出这种不成体统的举动！ 
English: Zhao Daode chased after Wen Xuan Di, shouting as he chased: "What kind of person are you to make such an unseemly move!

古文：典御丞李集面谏，比帝于桀、纣。
现代文：典御史李集当面进谏，甚至把文宣帝比拟为夏桀、商纣。
English: The Grand Historian Li Ji entered the court in person, and even compared Emperor Wenxuan to Xia Yao and Shang Yao.

古文：帝令缚置流中，沉没久之，复令引出，谓曰： 吾何如桀、纣？ 
现代文：文宣帝下令把他捆起来放到流水中去，让他没入水里很久，再下令把他拽出水面，问他说： 你说，我比夏桀、商纣怎样？ 
English: Emperor Wenzhong ordered that he be tied up and thrown into the flowing water, so that he did not stay in the water for a long time. He then ordered that he be pulled out of the water and asked him, "Tell me, how am I different from Xia Yao and Shang Yao?"

古文：集曰： 向来弥不及矣！ 
现代文：李集回答说： 看来你还比不上他们呢！ 
English: Li Ji replied: It seems that you are not as good as them!

古文：帝又令沉之，引出，更问，如此数四，集对如初。
现代文：文宣帝又下令把他没入水里，拽出来又问，这样折腾了多次，李集的回答一点也没变。
English: Emperor Wenzhong also ordered him to be submerged in the water, pulled him out and asked him again. After many times of tossing and turning, Li Xi's answer did not change at all.

古文：帝大笑曰： 天下有如此痴人，方知龙逄、比干未是俊物！ 
现代文：文宣帝哈哈大笑说： 天下竟然有这样呆痴的家伙，我这才知道龙逄、比干还不算出色人物呢！ 
English: Emperor Wenxuan laughed loudly and said, "There is such a stupid guy in the world, I just know that Longyu and Bi Gan are not outstanding people!"

古文：遂释之。
现代文：于是释放了他。
English: As a result, Wang Hanzhang was captured and presented to the emperor.

古文：顷之，又被引入见，似有所谏，帝令将出要斩。
现代文：过了一会儿，李集又被拉着进来见文宣帝，他似乎又想有所进谏，文宣帝下令带出去腰斩。
English: After a while, Li Ji was dragged in to see Emperor Wenzhong again. He seemed to want to make some progress, and Emperor Wenzhong ordered him to be taken out and beheaded.

古文：其或斩或赦，莫能测焉。
现代文：文宣帝喜怒无常，想要杀人还是想要赦免，没有人能猜想得到。
English: When he dealt with people, either killing or releasing, no one could guess.

古文：内外憯憯，各怀怨毒。
现代文：在文宣帝这种淫威下，宫廷内外，大家都敢怒不敢言，心怀怨恨。
English: Under the tyranny of Emperor Wenxuan, both inside and outside the court, everyone dared to be angry and hold grudges.

古文：而素能默识强记，加以严断，群下战栗，不敢为非。
现代文：但文宣帝对事物一向能够暗暗熟识，牢牢记忆，然后加以严格的裁决判断，所以群臣在他面前惶恐战栗，不敢为非作歹。
English: However, Emperor Wenxuan had always been able to secretly familiarize himself with things, firmly remember them, and then make strict rulings and judgments, so the courtiers trembled with fear in front of him and dared not do anything wrong.

古文：又能委政杨愔，愔总摄机衡，百度修敕，故时人皆言主昏于上，政清于下。
现代文：文宣帝又能把政事委托给杨，杨善于统一掌握国家枢机的运行，使各个方面的政事都得到修整，所以当时的人都说文宣帝在上头昏头昏脑，但下面的政事却还算清明有序的。
English: Emperor Wenzhong was able to entrust the political affairs to Yang, Yang was good at unified control of the operation of the national cardinal, so that all aspects of political affairs were rectified, so people at that time said that Emperor Wenzhong was dizzy on the top, but the following political affairs were still clear and orderly.

古文：愔风表鉴裁，为朝野所重，少历屯厄，及得志，有一餐之惠者必重报之，虽先尝欲杀己者亦不问；典选二十馀年，以奖拔贤才为己任。
现代文：杨颇有风度，仪表整饬，善于鉴识裁断，被朝野各方面人士所看重。他年轻时多次经历困顿灾厄，到了发迹得志之后，凡是他处逆境时对他有施予一餐恩惠的，他也都重重地回报人家。至于早先想杀他的人，他却不再计较。他掌管国家选拔人才的大权达二十多年之久，一向以奖励、提拔人才为己任。
English: Yang is quite personable, well-groomed, good at discerning and judging, and is valued by people from all walks of life. When he was young, he experienced many hardships and disasters. After he became successful, he always returned the favor to anyone who gave him a meal when he was in adversity. As for those who wanted to kill him earlier, he no longer cares. He has been in charge of the country's selection of talents for more than 20 years, and has always been responsible for rewarding and promoting talents.

古文：性复强记，一见皆不忘其姓名，选人鲁漫汉自言猥贱独不见识，愔曰： 卿前在元子思坊，乘短尾牝驴，见我不下，以方麹障面，我何为不识卿！ 漫汉惊服。
现代文：他记性特别好，只要和他见了一面的人，他就记住了人家的姓名，再也不会忘记。有一个候选的人叫鲁漫汉，自己说因为身份低贱，杨不曾认识他。杨提醒他说： 你从前在元子思坊任职，骑着一只短尾巴母驴，在路上遇到我也不下来，用一块黄帕遮住面，假装没看见就走过去，我怎么不认识你鲁漫汉呢！ 
English: He has a particularly good memory. As long as he has met someone, he will remember their name and will never forget it again. There is a candidate called Lu Manhan. He said that because of his lowly status, Yang did not know him. Yang reminded him: You used to work at Yuan Zi Si Fang, riding a short-tailed donkey. When you met me on the road, you did not come down, covered your face with a yellow scarf, and walked past pretending not to see. How could I not know you, Lu Manhan!

古文：秋，七月，甲戌，前天门太守樊毅袭武陵，杀武州刺史衡阳王护；王琳使司马潘忠击之，执毅以归。
现代文：鲁漫汉一听大吃一惊，心中叹服。秋季七月，甲戌，前天门太守樊毅袭击武陵，杀死了武州刺史衡阳王萧护，王琳派司马潘忠去攻打樊毅，抓住了樊毅胜利归来。
English: Lu Manhan was taken aback and sighed in his heart. In the autumn of July, Jia Jia, the day before yesterday's gate, attacked Wuling and killed Wuzhou's scribe Hengyang Wang Xiaogu. Wang Lin sent Sima Panzhong to attack Wuling and captured Wuling's victorious return.

古文：护，畅之孙也。
现代文：萧护是萧畅的孙子。
English: Xiao You is the grandson of Xiao Chang.

古文：丙子，以陈霸先为中书监、司徒、扬州刺史，进爵长城公，馀如故。
现代文：丙子，梁朝任命陈霸先为中书监、司徒、扬州刺史，加进长城公这一爵位，其他官职、封号保持原样。
English: Chen Baxi was appointed by the Liang Dynasty to be the chief librarian of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the governor of Shitou, and the governor of Yangzhou. He was also given the title of Great Wall Prince. Other official positions and titles remained unchanged.

古文：初，余孝顷为豫章太守，侯瑱镇豫章，孝顷于新吴县别立城栅，与瑱相拒。
现代文：当初，余孝顷当豫章太守，侯镇守豫章，余孝顷在新吴县另外建立崐了城堡栅栏，与侯相对抗。
English: At the beginning, Yu Xiaohe was the grand marshal of Dang Yuzhang, and Hou Zhen was the marshal of Yuzhang. Yu Xiaohe also built a castle fence in Xinwu County to oppose Hou.

古文：瑱使其从弟奫守豫章，悉众攻孝顷，久不克，筑长围守之。
现代文：侯派他的堂弟侯守卫豫章，自己把全部军队开上去攻打余孝顷，打了很久也没打下，就修筑了一条长长的包围圈把新吴县城看守起来。
English: Hou sent his cousin, Hou Shouwei Yuanzhang, to lead his entire army to attack Yu Xiaoha. After fighting for a long time and failing to defeat him, he built a long encirclement to guard Xinwu County.

古文：癸酉，侯平发兵攻奫，大掠豫章，焚之，奔于建康。
现代文：癸酉，侯平出动军队去攻打侯，城陷之后，对豫章城进行了一次大洗劫，放火烧了城，然后投奔了建康。
English: At that time, Hou Ping dispatched an army to attack Hou, and after the fall of the city, he carried out a large-scale looting of Yuzhang City, set fire to the city, and then rushed to Jiankang.

古文：瑱众溃，奔湓城，依其将焦僧度。
现代文：侯的部众溃不成军，逃奔到湓城去依靠他的部将焦僧度。
English: Hou's subordinates failed to form an army, and fled to Lucheng to rely on his subordinate, Jiao Zongru.

古文：僧度劝之奔齐，会霸先使记室济阳蔡景历南上，说瑱令降，瑱乃诣阙归罪，霸先为之诛侯平。
现代文：焦僧度劝他干脆投奔北齐，这时正好陈霸先派记室济阳人蔡景历从南方北上来劝说侯，让他投降梁朝，这样侯就投降了，亲自到建康朝廷来伏罪，陈霸先为了安抚他，把背叛他先来归降的侯平杀了。
English: Jiao Zongdu advised him to flee to Northern Qi. At that time, Chen Baxi sent his secretary, Jiyang man Cai Jingli, from the south to the north to persuade Hou to surrender to the Liang Dynasty. As a result, Hou surrendered and personally went to the Jiankang Dynasty to commit a crime. In order to appease him, Chen Baxi killed Hou Ping, who betrayed him and surrendered first.

古文：丁亥，以瑱为司空。
现代文：丁亥，任命侯为司空。
English: Dinghai, appointed Hou as Sikuo.

古文：南昌民熊昙朗，世为郡著姓。
现代文：南昌城里的居民熊昙朗，世世代代都是郡里有名的大姓。
English: Xiong Ronglang, a resident of Nanchang City, has been a famous surname in the county for generations.

古文：昙朗有勇力，侯景之乱，聚众据丰城为栅，世祖以为巴山太守。
现代文：熊昙朗颇有勇气力量，当年侯景作乱的时候，他聚集徒众据守丰城，修了栅栏，梁元帝任命他为巴山太守。
English: Xiong Yulang was a man of great courage and strength. When the Houjing Rebellion broke out, he gathered followers to defend Fengcheng, built a fence, and Emperor Liang Yuan appointed him the governor of Bashan.

古文：江陵陷，昙朗兵力浸强，侵掠邻县。
现代文：江陵沦陷时，熊昙朗兵力渐渐强大起来，开始侵犯掠夺邻近的县份。
English: When Gangneung fell, Xiong Yaolang's forces gradually became stronger and began to invade and plunder neighboring counties.

古文：侯瑱在豫章，昙朗外示服从而阴图之，及瑱败走，昙朗获其马仗。
现代文：侯镇守豫章，熊昙朗外表上表示服从而暗地里偷偷谋划要算计他。
English: Hou Zhen Shou Yuzhang, Xiong Yulang outwardly expressed his submission and secretly plotted to outwit him.

古文：己亥，齐大赦。
现代文：待到侯兵败逃跑时，熊昙朗夺去了他的战马和兵器。
English: When Hou was defeated and fled, Xiong Yulang took away his horses and weapons.

古文：魏太师泰遣安州长史钳耳康买使于王琳，琳遣长史席豁报之，且请归世祖及愍怀太子之柩；泰许之。
现代文：己亥，北齐大赦天下。西魏太师宇文泰派安州长史钳耳康买为使者去王琳那儿出使，王琳派长史席豁到西魏回访，而且恳求西魏把梁元帝萧绎和愍怀太子萧元良的灵柩送回南方。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty Grand Master U Wentai sent the governor of An, Shi Yuerkang, as an envoy to Wang Lin, and Wang Lin sent the chief historian to pay a return visit to the Western Wei Dynasty, and implored the Western Wei Dynasty to send the coffins of Emperor Liang Yuan, Xiao Yuanyuan, and Prince Xiao Yuanliang back to the south.

古文：八月，己酉，鄱阳王循卒于江夏，弟丰城侯泰监郢州事。
现代文：宇文泰答应了这一恳求。八月，己酉，鄱阳王萧循在江夏去世，他弟弟丰城侯萧泰管理郢州的政事。
English: Yu Wentai agreed to this request. In August, King Jizong of Jinyang died in Jiangxia, and his younger brother Fengcheng Hou Xiaotai managed the political affairs of Jizhou.

古文：王琳使兗州刺史吴藏攻江夏，不克而死。
现代文：王琳派兖州刺史吴藏攻打江夏，兵败身死。
English: Wang Lin sent Zhang Zhou's general Wu Zang to attack Jiangxia, but the soldiers were defeated and killed.

古文：魏太师泰北渡河。
现代文：西魏太师宇文泰北渡黄河。
English: Western Wei Grand Master Wu Wentai traveled north to the Yellow River.

古文：魏以王琳为大将军、长沙郡公。
现代文：西魏封王琳为大将军、长沙郡公。
English: In the Western Wei Dynasty, Wang Lin was awarded the title of general and became the ruler of Changsha County.

古文：魏江州刺史陆腾讨陵州叛獠，獠因山为城，攻之难拔。
现代文：西魏江州刺史陆腾出兵讨伐陵州进行叛乱的獠人，獠人依山修建城堡，极为险峻，很难攻克。
English: In the Western Wei Dynasty, Jiangzhou sent troops to fight against the rebels of Lingzhou. The rebels built a castle on the mountain, which was extremely precipitous and difficult to conquer.

古文：腾乃陈伎乐于城下一面，獠弃兵，携妻子临城观之，腾潜师三面俱上，斩首万五千级，遂平之。
现代文：陆腾想了一计，把歌伎舞乐队在城下的一面摆开进行表演，獠人一看，扔下兵器，带着妻子儿女登上城墙观看，陆腾的伏兵从另外三面冲上城去，一口气斩下一万五千首级，于是就平定了獠人的叛乱。
English: Lu Teng thought of a plan. He set up a kabuki dance band on the lower side of the city to perform. When the Jurchens saw it, they threw down their weapons and climbed onto the city wall with their wives and children to watch. Lu Teng's ambushers rushed up to the city from the other three sides and cut off 15,000 heads in one breath, thus quelling the Jurchen rebellion.

古文：腾，俟之玄孙也。
现代文：陆腾是陆俟的玄孙。
English: Lu Teng is the great-great-grandson of Lu Yao.

古文：庚申，齐主将西巡，百官辞于紫陌，帝使槊骑围之，曰： 我举鞭，即杀之。 
现代文：庚申，北齐文宣帝将要到西边去巡视，文武百官在紫陌为文宣帝送行，文宣帝派手执长矛的骑兵把他们包围起来，对骑兵们说： 我一举鞭示意，你们就杀了他们。 
English: Goshun, Emperor Wenzhong of Northern Qi is about to go on a tour to the west. Hundreds of military and civilian officials are escorting Emperor Wenzhong in Zhimo. Emperor Wenzhong sent horsemen with spears to surround them and said to the horsemen: "If I give the signal with a whip, you will kill them."

古文：日晏，帝醉不能起。
现代文：太阳快下山了，文宣帝喝得醉醺醺地起不了床。
English: The sun was about to set, and Emperor Wenxuan was too drunk to get out of bed.

古文：黄门郎是连子畅曰： 陛下如此，群臣不胜恐怖。 
现代文：黄门郎是连子畅乘机说： 陛下你这样做，百官群臣害怕得受不了。 
English: Huangmenlang took advantage of the opportunity to say: Your Majesty, if you do this, the hundreds of officials and ministers will be too scared to resist.

古文：帝曰： 大怖邪？
现代文：文宣帝说： 他们很害怕吗？
English: Wen Xuan Di said: Are they very scared?

古文：若然，勿杀。 
现代文：如果是这样，那就别杀他们算了！ 
English: If that's the case, then don't kill them!

古文：遂如晋阳。
现代文：于是就出发到晋阳去。
English: So they set out for Jinyang.

古文：九月，壬寅，改元，大赦。以陈霸先为丞相、录尚书事、镇卫大将军、扬州牧、义兴公。
现代文：九月，壬寅，梁朝改换年号，为太平元年，实行大赦，任命陈霸先为丞相、录尚书事、镇卫大将军、扬州牧、义兴公。
English: In September, the Jinyin and Liang Dynasties changed the year name to the first year of the Taiping era, implemented an amnesty, and appointed Chen Baxian as the prime minister, Luo Shang Shuji, Zhenwei Da Gen., Yangzhou Maki, and Yixing Gong.

古文：以吏部尚书王通为右仆射。
现代文：任命吏部尚书王通为右仆射。
English: He appointed Shang Shu Wang Tong as his right-hand man.

古文：突厥木杆可汗假道于凉州以袭吐谷浑，魏太师泰使凉州刺史史宁帅骑随之，至番禾，吐谷浑觉之，奔南山。
现代文：突厥木杆可汗借路从凉州袭击吐谷浑，西魏太师宇文泰派凉州刺史史宁率领骑兵跟他一起行动。军队到达番禾，吐谷浑发觉了，逃往南山。
English: The Turkic pole khan took a detour from Liangzhou to attack Tuyuhun. The Western Wei Grand Master Yu Wentai sent the Liangzhou pole knight Shishuning to lead the cavalry to act with him. The army arrived at Panhe. When Tuyuhun found out, he fled to Nanshan.

古文：木杆将分兵追之，宁曰： 树敦、贺真二城，吐谷浑之巢穴也。拔其本根，馀众自散。 
现代文：木杆可汗准备分兵去追击他，史宁建议说： 树敦、贺真两城，是吐谷浑的巢穴，拔掉他的这个老根，其他的部众也就自己溃散了。 
English: Muxu Khan was preparing a detachment of soldiers to pursue him, and Shining suggested, "The two cities of Shudong and Hezhen are the lairs of Tu Guhun. Pull out this old root of his, and the other followers will also disperse on their own.

古文：木杆从之。
现代文：木杆可汗采纳了这个建议。
English: Khan accepted the suggestion.

古文：木杆从北道趣贺真，宁从南道趣树敦。
现代文：商议的结果是：木杆可汗率兵从北边的通道直取贺真，史宁从南边的通道直取树敦。
English: The result of the deliberation was: Muxu Khan and his soldiers took He Zhen directly from the northern passage, and Shining took Shudong directly from the southern passage.

古文：吐谷浑可汗夸吕在贺真，使其征南王将数千人守树敦。
现代文：吐谷浑可汗自己驻扎在贺真，派他的征南王带几千人去防守树敦。
English: The Khan himself was stationed in Hezhen and sent his conqueror of the south with several thousand men to defend Shudong.

古文：木杆破贺真，获夸吕妻子；宁破树敦，虏征南王，还，与木杆会于青海，木杆叹宁勇决，赠遗甚厚。
现代文：木杆可汗攻克了贺真，抓获了夸吕的妻子、儿子；史宁攻克了树敦，俘虏了征南王。得胜回师时，史宁与木杆可汗会师于青海。木杆可汗叹服史宁勇猛有决断，对他有很丰厚的馈赠。
English: Muxu Khan defeated He Zhen and captured Kwalu's wife and son; Shining defeated Shudong and captured the Southern Conquest King. When the victory was won, Shining and Muxu Khan met in Qinghai. Muxu Khan admired Shining's courage and determination, and gave him a very rich gift.

古文：甲子，王琳以舟师袭江夏；冬，十月，壬申，丰城侯泰以州降之。
现代文：甲子，王琳派水军袭击江夏。冬季，十月，壬申，丰城侯萧泰献出州城向他投降。
English: In the winter, in October, in Jinshin, the lord of Fengcheng, Xiao Tai, surrendered the state capital to him.

古文：齐发山东寡妇二千六百人以配军，有夫而滥夺者什二三。
现代文：北齐征发山东寡妇二千六百人配婚给军人。其中有丈夫而被当寡妇硬给抢走的占十分之二三。
English: Beiqi conscripted and sent 2,600 widows from Shandong to marry soldiers. Among them, 23 out of 10 were widows whose husbands were forcibly taken away.

古文：魏安定文公宇文泰还至牵屯山而病，驿召中山公护。
现代文：西魏安定文公宇文泰回到牵屯山就病倒了。派驿马传令召见中山公宇文护。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty stabilized Wengong Yu Wentei fell ill when he returned to Tutun Mountain. A messenger was sent to summon Zhongshan Wengong Yu Wenguo.

古文：护至泾州，见泰，泰谓护曰： 吾诸子皆幼，外寇方强，天下之事，属之于汝，宜努力以成吾志。 
现代文：宇文护赶到泾州，拜见宇文泰。宇文泰对宇文护说： 我几个儿子都年幼，外面的敌寇都很强大，天下大事就全委托你了。你要努力以成就我的平生志愿。 
English: Uwentai said to Uwentai: My sons are all young, the enemies outside are all powerful, and the world's affairs are all entrusted to you. You must work hard to fulfill my lifelong wish.

古文：乙亥，卒于云阳。
现代文：乙亥，在云阳去世。
English: Yi Hai, passed away in Yunyang.

古文：护还长安，发丧。
现代文：宇文护回到长安，才公布消息，给宇文泰发丧。
English: It was only after Uwentai's guardian returned to Chang'an that the news was made public, causing Uwentai's death.

古文：泰能驾御英豪，得其力用，性好质素，不尚虚饰，明达政事，崇儒好古，凡所施设，皆依仿三代而为之。
现代文：宇文泰生时能够驾驭英俊豪杰，得到他们的努力效劳，他喜好质朴，不追求虚假文饰，处理政事明识练达，尊崇儒家，仰慕远古，举凡施政的一切措施，都依照模仿夏、商、周三代的古制来制定。
English: When he was young, he was able to control the handsome heroes and get their hard work. He likes simplicity, does not pursue false literature and ornaments, handles political affairs wisely and skillfully, respects Confucianism, admires the ancients, and all measures of governance are formulated according to the ancient system of imitating the Xia, Shang and San dynasties.

古文：丙子，世子觉嗣位，为太师、柱国、大冢宰，出镇同州，时年十五。
现代文：丙子，世子宇文觉继位，任命为太师、柱国、太冢宰，并镇守同州。这时年仅十五。
English: His son and heir, Uwen Jue, succeeded to the throne, and was appointed Grand Master, Column State, Grand Treasurer, and Town Marshal of Tongzhou. He was only fifteen years old at the time.

古文：中山公护，名位素卑，虽为泰所属，而群公各图执政，莫肯服从。
现代文：中山公宇文护，名望地位一向比较低，虽然被宇文泰所倚重，但各位王公大臣都想执政，谁也不肯服从他。
English: Zhongshan Gongwu Wenkuo, the prestige status has always been relatively low. Although he was trusted by Wu Wentai, all the princes and ministers wanted to govern, and no one was willing to obey him.

古文：护问计于大司寇于谨，谨曰： 谨早蒙先公非常之知，恩深骨肉，今日之事，必以死争之。
现代文：宇文护向大司寇于谨请教对策，于谨说： 我于谨早就蒙受先安定公非同一般的知遇之恩，这恩情深于骨肉之情。今天的国家大事，我一定以生命去争取成功。
English: Yu Wenyou asked the grand secretary of the Kuomintang for advice on how to deal with the situation, and Yu said: I have long been blessed with the extraordinary knowledge and experience of the first stable government, which is deeper than the feelings of flesh and blood. Today's national event, I will definitely fight for success with my life.

古文：若对众定策，公必不得让。 
现代文：如果面对各位王公大臣商讨确定国策，您一定不要退让。 
English: If you set a grand plan for the officials, you must not be modest.

古文：明日，群公会议，谨曰： 昔帝室倾危，非安定公无复今日。
现代文：第二天，各位王公聚集在一起议论国家大事，于谨说： 过去孝武帝受到高欢协迫，魏国帝室陷于倾覆的危险之中，要不是安定公迎纳并辅佐了他，国家就没有今天这种局面了。
English: The next day, all the princes gathered together to discuss national affairs, and I would like to say: In the past, Emperor Xiaowu was forced by Gao Huan Xie, and the imperial house of Wei was in danger of being overthrown. If it were not for Prince Anding welcoming and assisting him, the country would not be in this situation today.

古文：今公一旦违世，嗣子虽幼，中山公亲其兄子，兼受顾托，军国之事，理须归之。 
现代文：现在安定公突然去世，嗣位的世子虽然幼小，但中山公会把他哥哥的儿子看得很亲，又接受了安定公临危时的顾命之托，军国大事，按理应该归他统一掌握。 
English: Now that Prince Andō passed away suddenly, although the heir to the throne is young, the Nakayama guild regards his brother's son as very close, and has accepted the entrustment of the care of Prince Andō's life when he is in danger. Military and national affairs should logically be under his unified control.

古文：辞色抗厉，众皆悚动。
现代文：于谨讲这番话，声音高亢，神色严厉，众臣都感到惊竦震动。
English: When Yu Zhen spoke, his voice was hoarse, and everyone's heart was filled with fear.

古文：护曰： 此乃家事，护虽庸昧，何敢有辞！ 
现代文：宇文护接着说： 辅政之事，也是我们的家事。我虽然平庸愚昧，但又怎么敢推辞呢？ 
English: Umengo went on to say, "Affiliate government affairs are also our family affairs. Although I am mediocre and ignorant, how dare I refuse?

古文：谨素与泰等夷，护常拜之，至是，谨起而言曰： 公若统理军国，谨等皆有所依。 
现代文：于谨平时一向处于与宇文泰一样的地位，宇文护常常向他跪拜，到了这时，于谨立起身来对宇文护说： 您要是出面统一管理军国大事，我们这些人就都有所依靠了。 
English: Yu Zhengyi had always been in the same position as Wu Wentai in peacetime, and Wu Wenguo often bowed to him. At this time, Yu Zhengyi stood up and said to Wu Wenguo: If you come forward to uniformly manage military affairs, all of us will have something to rely on.

古文：遂再拜。
现代文：于是向他跪拜了两次。
English: As a result, he began to worship Uwen.

古文：群公迫于谨，亦再拜，于是众议始定。
现代文：各位王公大臣迫于于谨的严厉，也跟着跪拜了两次，于是大家的议论才统一起来。
English: The princes and ministers bowed twice, compelled by the severity of the honor, and then everyone's discussion was unified.

古文：护纲纪内外，抚循文武，人心遂安。
现代文：宇文护整顿内外，安抚文武大臣，人心才就此安定了。
English: It was only after Umunno rectified matters both at home and abroad and appeased the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology that the people's hearts were thus stabilized.

古文：十一月，辛丑，丰城侯泰奔齐，齐以为永州刺史。
现代文：十一月，辛丑，丰城侯萧泰投奔北齐，北齐任命他为永州刺史。
English: In November, Xinxiu, Fengcheng marquis Xiao Tai went to the Northern Qi, and the Northern Qi appointed him as the leader of Yongzhou.

古文：诏征王琳为司空，琳辞不至，留其将潘纯陀监郢州，身还长沙。
现代文：并下诏征召王琳为司空，王琳推辞不去，留下他的部将潘纯陀监守郢州，自己回长沙去了。
English: Wang Lin refused to go, leaving his subordinate Pan Chunda to guard Zhangzhou, and went back to Changsha.

古文：魏人归其妻子。
现代文：西魏把他的妻子儿子送回了。
English: Xi Wei sent his wife and son back home.

古文：壬子，齐主诏以 魏末豪杰纠合乡部，因缘请托，各立州郡，离大合小，公私烦费，丁口减于畴日，守令倍于昔时，且要荒向化，旧多浮伪，百室之邑，遽立州名，三户之民，空张郡目，循名督实，事归焉有。 
现代文：壬子，北齐文宣帝下诏，认为： 魏朝末年各方的豪杰纠合地方武装，乘着有利的形势和机缘，向有势力的人请求依托，各自建立州郡，有的把大的州郡分离，有的把小的州郡合并，弄得公家和私人都事烦财费，人口比过去大为减少，太守、县令之类的官员比昔日多了一倍，而且边远地区忽而归顺忽而离心，过去有很多是浮名虚报，一百户人家的集镇，匆促中就立起一个州的名号；三户老百姓，也要凭空设立一个郡的名目。
English: Ren Zi, the Northern Qi, issued a decree to Emperor Xuan of Wenzhou, saying: At the end of the Wei Dynasty, the great heroes of all sides entangled the local armed forces, took advantage of the favorable situation and opportunities, asked the influential people for support, and established counties and counties respectively. Some separated the large counties and counties, and some merged the small counties and counties, making both the public and private sectors suffer and spend money. The population was greatly reduced compared to the past. The number of officials such as governors-general and county magistrates doubled compared to the past. Moreover, the remote areas were gradually subordinated and centrifuged. In the past, many were

古文：于是并省三州、一百五十三郡、五百八十九县、三镇、二十六戍。
现代文：如果按照这些州郡的名去考察它们的实际情况，往往会发现这些州郡实在是子虚乌有的幻影。 于是决定实行州郡合并，把三个州撤消，还撤去一百五十三个郡。
English: If you examine the actual situation of these states and counties according to their names, you will often find that these states and counties are really illusory illusions. Therefore, it was decided to implement the merger of states and counties, to cancel three states, and to remove one hundred and fifty-three counties.

古文：诏分江州四郡置高州。以明威将军黄法为刺史，镇巴山。
现代文：北齐下诏划分江西四郡为一个州，即高州，任命明威将军黄法氍为刺史，镇守巴山。
English: The Northern Qi issued an edict dividing the four counties of Jiangxi into one province, that is, Gaozhou, and appointed Mingwei General Huang Fazhao as the chief historian and the town guard of Bashan.

古文：十二月，壬申，以曲江侯勃为太保。
现代文：十二月，壬申，北齐任命曲江侯高勃为太保。
English: In December, Jinshin, North Qi appointed Qujiang marquis Gao Bo as Taibo.

古文：甲申，魏葬安定文公。
现代文：甲申，西魏安葬了安定文公。
English: In Jiaxing, the Western Wei Dynasty buried Andingwengong.

古文：丁亥，以岐阳之地封世子觉为周公。
现代文：丁亥，把岐阳之地分封给世子宇文觉，并封他为周公。
English: Dinghai assigned the land of Qiyang to his heir, Uwen Jue, and made him Zhou Gong.

古文：初，侯景之乱，临川民周续起兵郡中，始兴王毅以郡让之而去。
现代文：当初，侯景作乱的时候，临川人周续在郡中起兵夺权，始兴王萧毅把郡让给他，自己跑了。
English: At the beginning, when Hou Jing made a disturbance, the people of Linchuan continuously raised an army to seize power in the county. Shi Xing Wang Xiao Yi ceded the county to him and ran away.

古文：续部将皆郡中豪族，多骄横，续裁制之，诸将皆怨，相与杀之。
现代文：周续部将都是郡中豪门大族，大都很骄傲横蛮，周续对他们实行制裁，诸将都生怨心，互相串通，杀了周续。
English: Zhou and Zhou's successors were all powerful families in the county. Most of them were proud and arrogant. Zhou and Zhou imposed sanctions on them. All the generals were resentful, colluded with each other, and killed Zhou and Zhou.

古文：续宗人迪，勇冠军中，众推为主。
现代文：周续宗族中有个叫周迪的，他的勇力在军队中号称冠军，被众人推举为主将。
English: There was a man named Zhou Di in Zhou's family. His bravery was known as a champion in the army, and he was chosen by everyone as the main general.

古文：迪素寒微，恐郡人不服，以同郡周敷族望高显，折节交之，敷亦事迪甚谨。
现代文：周迪过去出身寒微，担心郡中人不服从治理，因为同郡人周敷的家族声望高而显赫，就很谦恭地去与他交为朋友，争取他的协助。
English: Zhou Di used to be from a humble background, worried that people in the county would not obey the governance, because the family of Zhou Shiki, a fellow county resident, was prestigious and prominent, he very humbly made friends with him and sought his assistance.

古文：迪据上塘，敷据故郡，朝廷以迪为衡州刺史，领临川内史。
现代文：周敷对周迪也尽心服事，很是恭谨。周迪据守上塘，周敷据守郡治原来的所在地。梁朝任命周迪为衡州刺史，兼任临川内史。
English: Zhou Shiki also served Zhou Di wholeheartedly, and was very respectful. Zhou Di was in charge of Shangtang, and Zhou Shiki was in charge of the original location of the county seat. The Liang Dynasty appointed Zhou Di as the chief historian of Hengzhou, and he also served as the chief historian of Linchuan.

古文：时民遭侯景之乱，皆弃农业，群聚为盗，唯迪所部独务农桑，各有赢储，政教严明，征敛必至，馀郡乏绝者皆仰以取给。
现代文：当时人民遭受侯景之乱的祸害，都扔下了耕作务农之业，群聚在一起当强盗，只有周迪所管理的地区还有人民在经营农业、养蚕业，各家各户还有些粮食布帛的盈余积蓄，政法教令很是严明，政府下令征收分派的赋税都能收到，因此别的郡凡是粮食布帛发生困难短缺都靠周迪治理的地区来取得补给。
English: At that time, the people suffered the scourge of the Houjing Disturbance. They all abandoned cultivation and farming, and gathered together to be robbers. Only in the areas managed by Zhou Di did people still engage in agriculture and sericulture. Each household still had some surplus savings of grain cloth. The political and legal edicts were very clear, and the taxes distributed by the government could be received. Therefore, other counties relied on the areas managed by Zhou Di to obtain supplies when there was a shortage of grain cloth.

古文：迪性质朴，不事威仪，居常徒跣，虽外列兵卫，内有女伎，挼绳破篾，傍若无人，讷于言语而襟怀信实，临川人皆附之。
现代文：周迪天性质朴，不经意于表面上的威严仪表，平素居家常常光着脚，虽然外面排列着卫兵，屋里有歌舞伎女，但他从容地搓绳子，破竹蔑，旁若无人。他不善于高谈阔论但襟怀诚实质朴，临川人都依附于他。
English: Zhou Di's nature is simple, he does not care about the appearance of majestic appearance, he often lives barefoot at home. Although there are guards outside and Kabuki actresses inside, he calmly pulls the rope, breaks the bamboo, and there is no one around. He is not good at lofty talk, but he is sincere and simple. Linchuan people are attached to him.

古文：齐自西河总秦戍筑长城，东至于海，前后所筑三千馀里，率十里一戍，其要害置州镇，凡二十五所。
现代文：北齐从西河总秦戍一带开始修筑长城，向东一直延伸到大海边，前前后后修筑的长城东西总共有三千多里长，大抵十里就设立一个戍卫点，凡是军事上的险要之地就建立州镇，总共有二十五处。
English: Northern Qi began to build the Great Wall from the area of Qin'an, the head of the West River, and extended eastward to the edge of the sea. The total length of the Great Wall built before, after and to the east was more than three thousand miles long. A defense point was set up at most ten miles, and a prefectural town was established in any militarily critical place, with a total of twenty-five places.

古文：魏宇文护以周公幼弱，欲早使正位以定人心。
现代文：西称宇文护因为周公宇文觉幼小力弱，想早一点儿让他就正位以安定崐人心，庚子，通过西魏恭帝下诏书的形式，把西魏政权禅让给周公。
English: Because Zhou Gong Uwen Jue was too young and weak, the West called him Uwen Guo, and wanted to have him enthroned sooner to stabilize and inspire the people. Geng Zi, through the form of the edict issued by Emperor Gong of the Western Wei Dynasty, ceded the Western Wei regime to Zhou Gong.

古文：庚子，以魏恭帝诏禅位于周，使大宗伯赵贵持节奉册，济北公迪致皇帝玺绂；恭帝出居大司马府。
现代文：派大宗伯赵贵手持节杖，捧着就位的表册，济北公宇文迪献上皇帝的玉玺和印绶。西魏恭帝从内廷搬出，住在大司马的府第。
English: The Grand Patriarch Bozhong Zhao Gui, holding a scepter in his hand and holding a register of the enthronement ceremony, sent the Jeibei Gongwu Wendi to present the emperor's jade and seal. Emperor Wei Gong moved out of the Inner Court and lived in the residence of the Great Simas.

