古文：柳开，字仲涂，大名人。
现代文：柳开字仲涂，大名人。
English: Liu Kai Zi Zhong Tuo, a great celebrity.

古文：父承翰，乾德初监察御史。
现代文：他的父亲柳承翰，在宋太祖乾德初年任监察御史。
English: His father, Liu Chenghan, served as inspector of imperial history in the first year of Emperor Qiande of the Song Dynasty.

古文：开幼颖异，有胆勇。
现代文：柳开年幼时就聪明颖异，有胆略和勇气。
English: When Liu Kai was young, he was brilliant, daring and courageous.

古文：周显德末，侍父任南乐，夜与家人立庭中，有盗入室，众恐不敢动，开裁十三，亟取剑逐之，盗逾垣出，开挥刃断二足指。
现代文：后周显德末年，他父亲在南京做官，一天夜里，柳开与家人立庭中，有盗贼入屋偷盗，大家都害怕得不敢动，柳开当时刚十三岁，立刻一个人取剑去追赶强盗，盗贼爬墙出来，柳开挥剑砍他，斩断他的两个脚趾头。
English: In the later years of Zhou Xiande's life, his father was an official in Nanjing. One night, when Liu Kai and his family were standing in the court, a thief broke into the house to steal. Everyone was too scared to move. Liu Kai was just 13 years old at the time. He immediately took a sword to chase the robber. The thief climbed out of the wall, and Liu Kai swung the sword at him and cut off two of his toes.

古文：既就学，喜讨论经义。
现代文：既上学读书，柳开喜欢讨论经书的义理。
English: Since he started to study at school, Liu Kai likes to discuss the meaning of scriptures.

古文：五代文格浅弱，慕韩愈、柳宗元为文，因名肩愈，字绍先。
现代文：五代时文章风格浅薄柔弱，柳开仰慕韩愈、柳宗元做的文章，因给自己取名肩愈，字绍先。
English: At the time of the fifth generation, the style of the article was shallow and weak. Liu Kai admired the articles written by Han Yu and Liu Zongyuan. Because he gave himself the name "Shoulder to Shoulder," his writing was ahead of the times.

古文：既而改名字，以为能开圣道之涂也。
现代文：不久之后又改名开，以为能辟圣道的途径。
English: Soon after, he changed his name and opened a new one, thinking he could open a path to the holy path.

古文：著书自号东郊野夫，又号补亡先生，作二传以见意。
现代文：他自号东郊野夫，又号补亡先生，并写了这样的两篇传奇表现自己的志向。
English: He called himself "Eastern Suburban Nomad" and "Mr. Succession" and wrote two such legends to show his ambition.

古文：尚气自任，不顾小节，所交皆一时豪隽。
现代文：他崇尚气节自由豪放，不拘小节，所交结的朋友都是当时的豪俊。
English: He advocated the spirit of free and unrestrained, no matter how small, and the friends he made were the heroes of the time.

古文：范杲好古学，尤重开文，世称为 柳、范 。
现代文：范杲喜好古学，尤看重柳开的文章，当时称为 柳、范 。
English: Fan Rong liked ancient studies, especially the articles written by Liu Kai Rong, who was known as Liu and Fan at that time.

古文：王祐知大名，开以文贽大蒙赏激。
现代文：王佑知大名，柳开以文章作为初次的见面礼，大受王佑的赏识和激励。
English: Wang Yu knew the daimyo, and Liu Kai used the article as the first meeting gift, which was greatly appreciated and encouraged by Wang Yu.

古文：杨昭俭、卢多逊并加延奖。
现代文：杨昭俭、卢多逊都对他加以引进和赞赏。
English: Yang Zhaojian and Ludoson both introduced and appreciated him.

古文：开宝六年举进士，补宋州司寇参军，以治狱称职，迁本州录事参军。
现代文：宋太祖开宝元年他考中进士，补宋州司寇参军，因治理刑狱能够胜任，调本州录事参军。
English: In the first year of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Taizu passed the junior high school entrance examination and joined the army to supplement the Song State Scouts, and because he was competent in administering prisons, he transferred to the home state to join the army.

古文：太平兴国中，擢右赞善大夫。
现代文：宋太宗太平兴国中，擢升赞善大夫。
English: Song Taizong Taiping rejuvenated the country, and was promoted to Zanzan Doctor.

古文：会征太原，督楚、泗八州运粮。
现代文：适逢太宗征太原，柳开负责督办楚、泗八州的粮运。
English: At the time of Emperor Taizong's conquest of Taiyuan, Liu Kai was in charge of supervising the grain transportation in the eight prefectures of Chu and Shandong.

古文：选知常州，迁殿中丞，徙润州，拜监察御史。
现代文：后选拔知常州，调任殿中丞，又转知润州，拜监察御史。
English: After that, he was selected for Zhichangzhou and transferred to the position of the Vice-Commander of the Palace Guards. He was also transferred to Zhirongzhou and became the inspector of the imperial history.

古文：召还，知贝州，转殿中侍御史。
现代文：奉诏还朝，又知贝州，转任殿中侍御史。
English: After the imperial edict, he was transferred to the position of palace attendant to the Emperor, also known as Bei Zhou.

古文：雍熙二年，坐与监军忿争，贬上蔡令。
现代文：太宗雍熙二年，犯与监军忿争罪，贬为上蔡令。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Yongxi Dynasty, he committed the crime of angering the supervisors and was demoted to Shang Cai Ling.

古文：会大举北征，开部送军粮，将至涿州，有契丹酋长领万骑与米信战，相持不解，俄遣使绐言求降，开谓信曰： 兵法云： 无约而请和，谋也。
现代文：碰到宋军大举北征，柳开率领部下送军粮，将要到涿州，有一契丹族酋长率领一万骑兵与宋将米信交战，双方相持不下。不久，契丹酋长派人来谎说请求投降。柳开对米信说 ：兵法说 ：没有相约而请求和好，必有阴谋。 
English: When the Northern Expedition of the Song Army was in full swing, Liu Kai led his subordinates to send military rations, and was about to go to Zhangzhou, a Khitan chieftain led ten thousand cavalry to fight with Song general Yixin, and the two sides could not stand each other. Soon, the Khitan chieftain sent someone to lie about asking for surrender. Liu Kai said to Yixin: Military law says: If there is no mutual agreement and there is a request for reconciliation, there must be a conspiracy.

古文：彼将有谋，急攻之必胜。 信迟疑不决。
现代文：他们将有阴谋，我们现在赶快进攻一定会取得胜利。 米信听了他的话迟疑犹豫不决。
English: They will have a plot, we must attack quickly now, we will surely win. Yixin hesitated and hesitated when he heard his words.

古文：逾二日，贼复引兵挑战，后侦知果以矢尽，俟取于幽州也。
现代文：过了两天，敌人再又引兵挑战，后派侦察员探听到，敌人果然是由于箭用完了，要等到幽州去取箭，因此才用这个计谋。
English: Two days later, the enemy once again sent scouts to challenge, and later sent scouts to find out that the enemy had indeed run out of arrows, and had to wait until Yuzhou to get the arrows, so they used this strategy.

古文：师还，诣阙上书，愿从边军效死，太宗怜之，复授殿中侍御史。
现代文：北征大军回来后，柳开到朝中上书，表示愿意参加边防的军队为国家效死，宋太宗怜爱他，再授予他殿中侍御史。
English: After the return of the Northern Expeditionary Force, Liu Kai wrote a letter to the Imperial Court, expressing his willingness to join the border defense army and die for the country. Song Taizong pitied him and awarded him the title of Imperial Historian.

古文：雍熙中，使河北，因抗疏曰： 臣受非常恩，未有以报，年裁四十，胆力方壮。
现代文：太宗雍熙中，他出使河北，因上疏请求说 ：臣受陛下非常深厚的恩德，没有什么可以报答，我现年才四十，胆量和精力都正壮。
English: In the middle of the reign of Emperor Yongxi, he sent an envoy to Hebei to plead with the Shang Dynasty, saying: "Your majesty, I have been greatly blessed by your majesty, and there is nothing I can do to repay you. I am only forty years old, and my courage and energy are still strong.

古文：今契丹未灭，愿陛下赐臣步骑数千，任以河北用兵之地，必能出生入死，为陛下复幽、蓟，虽身没战场，臣之愿也。 上以五代战争以来，自节镇至刺史皆用武臣，多不晓政事，人受其弊。
现代文：今天契丹没有消灭，希望陛下赐给臣步骑数千人，委任臣担任河北这个用兵的地方的长官，臣一定能够出生入死，为陛下收复幽、蓟，即使因此战殁沙场，也是臣所心甘的。 太宗以为自五代战争以来，从节度使到州刺史都用的是武官，这些人都不知道政事，人民受到了这种弊端的伤害。
English: Today, the Khitan have not been eradicated, and I hope that His Majesty will give thousands of courtiers to ride on horseback, and appoint courtiers to serve as commanders in Hebei, a place where soldiers are used. Courtiers will certainly be able to live and die, and recover their majesty. Even if they have to fight in the battlefield, it is what courtiers want. Taizong thought that since the Five Generations War, military officers have been used from the Festival of Dynasties to the State Council. These people do not know about politics, and the people have been harmed by this drawback.

古文：欲兼用文士，乃以侍御史郑宣、户部员外郎赵载、司门员外郎刘墀并为如京使，左拾遗刘庆为西京作坊使，开为崇仪使、知宁边军。
现代文：因此想兼用文人，于是以侍御史郑宣、户部员外郎赵载、司门员外郎刘墀为如京使，左拾遗刘庆为西京作坊使，柳开为崇仪使、知宁边军。
English: Therefore, he wanted to be a writer at the same time, so he chose Zheng Xuan (侍御史), Zhao Zai (户部员外郎赵载) and Liu Yao (司門员外郎刘) as the Beijing envoys, Zuo Zhui Liu Qing (左拾遺刘庆) as the West Beijing workshop envoy, and Liu Kai (柳开) as the Chongyi envoy and the Chining Frontier Army.

古文：徙全州。
现代文：后柳开转徙全州。
English: After Liu Kai, it migrated to Jeonju.

古文：全西溪洞有粟氏，聚族五百余人，常钞劫民口粮畜，开为作衣带巾帽，选牙吏勇辩者得三辈，使入，谕之曰： 尔能归我，即有厚赏，给田为屋处之；不然，发兵深入，灭尔类矣。 粟氏惧，留二吏为质，率其酋四人与一吏偕来。
现代文：全州西面的溪洞有一个粟氏家族，聚族五百多人，经常抄掠人口、粮食和牲畜。柳开为他们做衣服、带子和帽子，又挑选手下官吏武勇和善言辞的三个人，派他们到粟氏家族告诉他们说： 你们能够归附政府，就可以得到厚赏，给田和修建房屋来安置你们，不然的话，政府就发兵深入你们村，把你们全部消灭。 粟氏家族非常害怕，就留下两个官吏做人质，粟氏的首领亲自率领四个酋长与另外一个官吏一起来见柳开。
English: In Xidong, west of Quanzhou, there was a family of more than five hundred members of the Ao clan. They often plundered people, grain, and livestock. Liu Kai made clothes, belts, and hats for them. He also selected three officials who were brave and eloquent, and sent them to the Ao family to tell them: "If you can join the government, you can get a large reward, and the government will give you land and build houses to settle you. Otherwise, the government will send troops deep into your village and destroy you all." The Ao family was very afraid, and left two officials as hostages. The head of the Ao clan personally led four chiefs

古文：开厚其犒赐，吏民争以鼓吹饮之。
现代文：柳开给他们优厚的赏赐，官吏和老百姓都争着以鼓乐欢迎他们，并款待他们以酒食。
English: Liu Kai gave them a generous reward, officials and ordinary people welcomed them with drums and music, and entertained them with food and drink.

古文：居数日遣还，如期携老幼悉至。
现代文：柳开把他们留着住了几日才送他们回去。到时候，他们就按期把全族男女老幼都带了来。
English: Liu Kai kept them for a few days before sending them back. At that time, they brought the whole family, men, women and children, as scheduled.

古文：开即赋其居业，作《时鉴》一篇，刻石戒之。
现代文：柳开就为他们安排好田地和居室，并做《时鉴》一篇，刻在石碑上以惩戒他们。
English: Liu Kai arranged a field and a room for them, and made a "Time Book" and engraved it on a stone tablet to discipline them.

古文：遣其酋入朝，授本州上佐。
现代文：又派他们的首领入朝，委任他为本州的上佐。
English: He also sent their leader to the imperial court and appointed him as the commander-in-chief of Honshu.

古文：赐开钱三十万。
现代文：柳开也因处理这件事情有功，皇帝赏给他钱三十万。
English: Liu Kai was also credited with handling this matter, and the emperor rewarded him with 300,000 yuan.

古文：淳化初，移知桂州。
现代文：太宗淳化初年，柳开调知桂州。
English: In the first year of Taizong Junhua's reign, Liu Kai transferred to Guizhou.

古文：初，开在全州，有卒讼开，开即杖背黥面送阙下。
现代文：起先，柳开在全州时，有士卒状告柳开，柳开把士卒杖背和黥面然后遣送朝廷。
English: At first, when Liu Kai was in Quanzhou, a soldier complained to Liu Kai, and Liu Kai took the soldier's cane back and cheek and then sent it to the imperial court.

古文：有司言卒罪不及徒，召开下御史狱劾系，削二官，黜为复州团练副使，移滁州。
现代文：朝中司法官认为这个士卒的罪过达不到判处徒刑，因此柳开被召回朝廷，而且被劾下御史狱系囚，并削去两种官职。后罢黜为复州的团练副使，又移滁州。
English: The judicial officer of the Central Court of the DPRK believed that the crime of this soldier was not enough to be sentenced to imprisonment, so Liu Kai was recalled to the imperial court, and he was impeached as a prisoner of Goshi prison system, and removed from two official positions. Later, he was dismissed as a group training deputy envoy of Fuzhou, and moved to Ganzhou.

古文：复旧官，知环州。
现代文：不久，恢复旧官，知环州。
English: Soon, the old officials were reinstated, and Zhihong County was reestablished.

古文：三年，移邠州。
现代文：在环州三年，又调知州。
English: After three years in Huanzhou, he was transferred to Zhizhou.

古文：时调民辇送趋环、庆，己再运，民皆荡析产业，转运使复督后运，民数千人入州署号诉。
现代文：这时正值调发州的老百姓用车运送军粮到环、庆二州，已经一再运送，老百姓皆倾家荡产。可是转运使还督促老百姓继续运送，老百姓几千人跑到州衙门哭诉。
English: At this time, it was time to transfer the people of Fuzhou to transport military grain by car to Huan and Qing two states, which had been repeatedly transported, and the people had lost their homes and income. However, the transfer agent also urged the people to continue to transport, and several thousand people ran to the state gate to cry.

古文：开贻书转运使曰： 开近离环州，知刍粮之数不增，大兵可支四年，今蚕农方作，再运半发，老幼疲弊，畜乘困竭，奈何又苦之？
现代文：柳开当时便投书给转运使说 ：柳开最近才离开环州，知道那里的草料和粮食就是数量不增加，也可以支持大军四年。现在养蚕和农作刚刚开始，一再运送军粮有一半人被征发，男女老幼都感到很疲惫，牲畜和车辆也感到困乏和枯竭，为什么还要害苦他们呢？
English: At that time, Liu Kai sent a letter to the transshipment envoy, saying: Liu Kai only recently left Huanzhou, knowing that the amount of grass and grain there would not increase, and it could support the army for four years. Now, silkworm breeding and farming have just begun, and half of the people who have repeatedly transported military grain have been conscripted. Both men and women feel very tired, and livestock and vehicles also feel tired and exhausted. Why should they suffer?

古文：不罢，开即驰诣阙下，白于上前矣。 卒罢之。
现代文：如果你不停止，我柳开就要快马加鞭，赶到京城，向皇帝劾奏这件事情。 
English: If you don't stop, I, Liu Kai, will quickly whip my horse and rush to the capital to complain to the emperor about this matter.

古文：又知曹、邢二州。
现代文：转运使见信后心里有些寒，终于下令停止了运输。
English: After seeing the letter, the transporter felt a little cold and finally ordered the transport to be stopped.

古文：真宗即位，加如京使，归朝，命知代州。上言曰：
现代文：后柳开又担任过曹、邢二州的知州。真宗即位后，柳开加授如京使，回到了朝廷，后又命知代州，他上疏说：
English: Later, Liu Kai also served as Cao and Jian of the two states of Chizhou. After Zhenzong ascended the throne, Liu Kai was appointed as a Beijing envoy and returned to the imperial court. Later, he was ordered to Chizhou. He said:

古文：国家创业将四十年，陛下绍二圣之祚，精求至治。
现代文： 我们国家创立将近四十年，陛下继承前面两个圣君的皇位，诚心地想把国家治理得非常好。
English: Almost forty years after the founding of our country, His Majesty succeeded to the throne of the two previous saints and sincerely wanted to govern the country very well.

古文：若守旧规，斯未尽善。能立新法，乃显神机。
现代文：但是如果只墨守旧的规章制度，这就不可能达到尽善；只有能建立新的章法，才能显现出神妙的机能。
English: But if we only stick to the old rules and regulations, it is impossible to achieve perfection; only if we can establish new rules and regulations can we show wonderful performance.

古文：臣以益州稍静，望陛下选贤能以镇之，必须望重有威，即群小畏服。
现代文： 臣以为益州现在稍为平静，希望陛下能够选择贤能的人去那里镇守，这个人必须望重有威，使群小能够畏服。
English: The vassal thought that Yizhou is a little calm now, and hoped that His Majesty could choose a capable person to go there to guard the town. This person must be respected and respected, so that the small group can be intimidated.

古文：又西鄙今虽归明，他日未可必保，苟有翻覆，须得人制御，若以契丹比议，为患更深。
现代文：另外西面的党项虽然已经归附，但是以后未必可以保证不反叛，假如一旦有反复，须得有人能够制御，如果我们把党项和契丹相提并论，那就为害会更深。
English: In addition, although the party in the west has been annexed, it may not be possible to guarantee that it will not rebel in the future. If there is a recurrence, someone must be able to control it. If we compare the party with the Khitan, then the harm will be deeper.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么？
English: Why is that?

古文：契丹则君臣久定，蕃、汉久分，纵萌南顾之心，亦须自有思虑。
现代文：因为我们和契丹君臣之分久定，蕃、汉的界限也久分，它纵然产生南面侵略的野心，也必须有自己的思考和顾虑。
English: Because the boundary between us and the Khitan monarchs and subjects has long been settled, and the boundary between Han and Han has also long been divided, even if it has the ambition to invade the south, it must also have its own thoughts and concerns.

古文：西鄙积恨未泯，贪心不悛，其下猖狂，竟谋凶恶，侵渔未必知足，姑息未能感恩，望常预备之。
现代文：党项就有些不一样，它对我们的积恨并未消除，贪心一直不止，其下面都很猖狂，兢谋不轨和极其凶恶，他们对侵犯和渔利未必知道满足，对我们的姑息迁就也未必能够感恩，希望国家能够经常对他们防备。
English: As for the Party, it is somewhat different. It has not eliminated its hatred for us. Its greed has never stopped. Its underlings are rampant, unscrupulous and extremely vicious. They may not be satisfied with encroachment and usury, and may not be able to be grateful for our appeasement. I hope that the country can always be prepared for them.

古文：以良将守其要害，以厚赐足其贪婪，以抚慰来其情，以宽假息其念。
现代文：具体的方法是以精兵良将守其要害，以优厚的赏赐满足他们的贪婪，以慰劳安抚培养他们的感情，以宽大容忍平息他们的恶念。
English: The specific method is to keep the elite soldiers and generals at bay, satisfy their greed with generous rewards, appease and cultivate their feelings with consolation, and pacify their evil thoughts with lenient tolerance.

古文：多命人使西入甘、凉，厚结其心，为我声援，如有动静，使其掩袭，令彼有后顾之忧，乃可制其轻动。
现代文：同时，多令人出使西部，进入甘、凉地区，想办法厚结那里人民的心，使他们为我们声援，一旦有动静，使他们从后掩袭，令党项有后顾之忧，这样才可以制止其轻举妄动。
English: At the same time, many people were sent to the western part of the country, into the cool and cold regions, to find ways to strengthen the hearts of the people there, to make them support us, and once there is movement, to make them cover up, so that the party has worries, so that they can stop their reckless moves.

古文：今甲兵虽众，不及太祖之时人人练习，谋臣猛将则又县殊，是以比年西北屡遭侵扰，养育则月费甚广，征战则军捷未闻。
现代文：今天我们的军队人数虽然很多，可是不及太祖时期人人经常训练，而谋臣猛将跟那时相比则更加悬殊，由于这个原因，所以近年以来西北地区边境屡次遭到侵扰，把军队就这样养起来吧，每月耗费的费用非常大，征战吧又从来没有听到过捷报。
English: Today, although the number of our troops is large, it is not as large as in the time of our great-grandfathers, when everyone regularly trained, and there is a greater disparity in the number of strategists compared to that time. For this reason, the northwest border has been repeatedly invaded in recent years. Let the army be raised in this way, the monthly cost is very large, and there has never been any good news about the war.

古文：诚愿训练禁戢，使如往日行伍必求于勇敢，指顾无纵于后先，失律者悉诛，获功者必赏。偏裨主将，不威严者去之。
现代文：我真诚地希望对我们的军队进行严格的训练和加强纪律，使他们一如往日，行伍必须要求勇敢，指顾之间不能放纵他们的先后，无视纪律的一律要杀，有功的一律要奖赏，偏裨主将有不威严的坚决去掉。
English: I sincerely hope that we will carry out strict training and strengthen discipline for our troops, so that they will, as in the past, be brave when marching, not indulge in their succession between commands, kill all who ignore discipline, reward all who are meritorious, and resolutely eliminate those who are not dignified.

古文：听断之暇，亲临殿庭，更召貔虎，使其击刺驰骤，以彰神武之盛。
现代文：陛下在听政和决断事情的空闲，也应该亲临训练的殿廷视察，并召军中健儿，让他们比试，使他们击刺驰射，以光辉神武的盛德。
English: His Majesty, in his leisure time of listening to politics and deciding on matters, should also personally visit the palace to inspect the training, and summon the military cadets, let them compete, let them stab and shoot, with the glory of the martial arts.

古文：臣又以宰相、枢密，朝廷大臣，委之必无疑，用之必至当。铨总僚属，评品职官，内则主管百司，外则分治四海。
现代文： 臣又以为宰相、枢密使，都是朝廷的大臣，皇帝委任他们一定不要怀疑，使用他们必须至为妥当，让他们统率僚属，评定职官，对内则主管文武百官，对外则协助皇帝分治四海。
English: The vassal also thought that the prime minister and the privy councilor were the most important ministers of the imperial court. The emperor must not doubt to appoint them, and it must be appropriate to use them. Let them command their subordinates, evaluate officials, be in charge of hundreds of civil and military officials at home, and help the emperor to divide and rule the four seas abroad.

古文：今京朝官则别置审官，供奉、殿直则别立三班，刑部不令详断，别立审刑，宣徽一司全同散地。大臣不获亲信，小臣乃谓至公。
现代文：今天我们的京朝官却别置审官，供奉、殿直则另立三班，刑部不会详断刑狱，而别设审刑的官，宣徽一司完全和散职一样，大臣得不到亲信，小臣却认为他们最公正。
English: Today, however, our imperial officials in Beijing do not have an adjudicator. Instead, there are three separate groups for the heads of the Imperial Household Agency and the Imperial Household Agency. The Ministry of Justice does not carry out the detailed punishment of prisoners, and there is no adjudicator. The Department of the Imperial Seal is completely the same as the Department of the Imperial Household Agency. Ministers do not get close confidants, but ministers think they are the most fair.

古文：至如银台一司，旧属枢密，近年改制，职掌甚多，加倍置人，事则依旧，别无利害，虚有变更。
现代文：至于像银台一个司，过去隶属于枢密院，近年来改制，他的职责很多，加倍地增加人，可是事情却依然和过去一样，别无什么利害关系，空自进行一场变更。
English: As for a department like the Bank of the United States, formerly attached to the Privy Council, which has been reorganized in recent years, its duties are many, the number of people has doubled, but things are still the same as in the past, there is no other interest, and it is empty to make a change.

古文：臣欲望停审官、三班，复委中书、枢密、宣徽院，银台司复归枢密，审刑院复归刑部，去其繁细，省其头目。
现代文：臣希望陛下停止审官和三班，把它们的职权仍交还给中书、枢密和宣徽院，银台司也仍归还给枢密院，审判院也恢复到刑部，这样做的目的，是去掉繁杂琐细，减省机构。
English: The minister hoped that His Majesty would suspend the adjudicators and the three squads, and still return their powers to the Chinese Academy of Letters, the Privy Council and the State Council, return the Bank of Taiwan to the Privy Council, and restore the Court of Justice to the Criminal Division. The purpose of doing so was to remove the complexities and reduce the institutions.

古文：又京府大都，万方轨则，望仍旧贯，选委亲贤。
现代文： 臣又以为京都是大都会，是全国的模范准则，希望仍按照过去的惯例，挑选委任亲信和贤能的人。
English: The minister also thought that Beijing was a metropolis and a model for the whole country, and hoped that the appointment of trusted and capable people would still be selected in accordance with past practices.

古文：今皇族宗子悉多成长，但令优逸，无以试材，宜委之外藩，择文武忠直之士，为左右赞弼之任。
现代文：今天皇族的宗子多数已经长大成人，只令他们优越安逸，没有办法试用他们的才能，应该委任他们出守外面的藩镇，选择一些有文武才能和忠贞正直之士，作为他们的左右手担任参赞辅佐的任务。
English: Today, most of the sons of the imperial family have grown up to be adults, which only makes them superior and comfortable. There is no way to test their talents. They should be appointed to guard the outer towns of the domain, and select some people with literary and military talents and loyalty and honesty as their right and left hands to serve as advisers and assistants.

古文：又天下州县官吏不均，或冗长至多，或岁年久阙。
现代文： 臣又以为天下州县的官吏很不平均，有的州县的官吏猛烈增长，人数众多，而有的州县的官吏却经年久缺。
English: The minister also thought that the number of officials in various prefectures was very uneven. In some prefectures, the number of officials had increased dramatically, while in others, there had been a shortage of officials for many years.

古文：欲望县四千户已上选朝官知，三千户已上选京官知。
现代文：希望陛下令四千户以上的县选朝官担任知县，三千户以上的县选京官担任知县。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will order more than 4,000 counties to elect officials to serve as prefectural governors, and more than 3,000 counties to elect officials to serve as prefectural governors.

古文：省去主簿，令县尉兼领其事。
现代文：省去县里的主簿，由县尉兼管他的事。
English: The chief book of the county will be omitted, and the county lieutenant will also be in charge of it.

古文：自余通判、监军、巡检、监临使臣并酌量省减，免虚费于利禄，仍均济于职官。
现代文：其余通判、监军、巡检、监临使臣都可酌量省减。这样，可以免去大量浪费的利禄，对其他职官也有好处。
English: The remaining judges, supervisors, inspectors, and supervising envoys can all be reduced as appropriate. In this way, a large amount of wasted riroku can be avoided, which is also good for other officials.

古文：又人情贪竞，时态轻浮，虽骨肉之至亲，临势利而多变。同僚之内，多或不和，伺隙则致于倾危，患难则全无相救，仁义之风荡然不复。欲望有颁告谕，各使改更，庶厚化原，永敦政本。
现代文： 臣又以为现在人情贪鄙，时态轻浮，虽至亲的骨肉，碰到权势和利益也都发生变化，同僚里面，多数不和，一有机会就互相倾轧，碰到患难，则完全没有人相救，过去仁义之风完全荡然无存，希望陛下能够明确颁布谕告，使各能够改变，这样，庶几敦厚风化的本原，使政本永远厚实。
English: The vassal also thought that nowadays people are greedy, the time is frivolous, and although the flesh and blood of relatives, when they encounter power and interests, they also change. Among colleagues, most of them do not get along, and they quarrel with each other at every opportunity. When they encounter difficulties, there is absolutely no one to save them. The spirit of benevolence and righteousness in the past has completely disappeared. I hope that His Majesty can clearly issue an edict so that everyone can change. In this way, the origin of the etiquette will be changed, so that the political principle will always be solid.

古文：恭惟太祖神武，太宗圣文，光掩百王，威加万国，无贤不用，无事不知。
现代文： 窃认为太祖神武无敌，太宗文德圣明，他们光掩百王，威加万国，没有贤才不用，没有事情不知。
English: They thought that the great ancestors were invincible and the great patriarchs were holy. They covered a hundred kings and ruled over all nations. They did not need any talents and did not know anything.

古文：望陛下开豁圣怀，如天如海，可断即断，合行即行，爱惜忠直之臣，体察奸谀之党。
现代文：希望陛下开阔豁达圣怀，像天一样广阔，像海一样深邃，遇到事情该决断的坚决决断，应该施行的立即施行，爱惜忠贞正直的臣子，体察奸佞谄谀的党羽。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will be open-minded and broad-minded, as broad as the sky, as deep as the sea, resolute in making decisions when things need to be decided, and implement them immediately when they should be implemented, cherish loyal and honest courtiers, and be aware of treacherous party members.

古文：臣久尘著位，寝荷恩宠，辞狂理拙，唯圣明恕之！
现代文：臣久居禄位，深蒙恩宠，这次上疏可能辞意狂妄道理笨拙，希望皇帝圣明能够加以原谅！ 
English: As a long-serving vassal, deeply favored by grace, this time Shangzo may be arrogant and clumsy, and I hope Emperor Shengming can forgive him!

古文：开至州，葺城垒战具，诸将多沮议不协。
现代文：柳开到代州后，立即修葺城堡和战斗工具，但是众将官多加以阻挠不与他合作。
English: After Liu Kai arrived in Daizhou, he immediately repaired the castle and battle tools, but the generals mostly obstructed him and did not cooperate with him.

古文：开谓其从子曰： 吾观昂宿有光，云多从北来犯境上，寇将至矣。
现代文：柳开对他的从事说 ：我看到昴宿有光，天上的云都从北面来侵犯我们的境界，这些象征，说明敌人将要来了。
English: Liu Kai said to his occupation: I saw that there is light in Poyang, and the clouds in the sky are invading our borders from the north. These symbols indicate that the enemy is coming.

古文：吾闻师克在和，今诸将怨我，一旦寇至，必危我矣。 即求换郡，徙忻州刺史。
现代文：我听说战争的胜利决定于上下的团结，现在众将官都怨我，一旦敌人来了，他们必定会首先谋害我。 于是他便向朝廷要求换郡，被调任为忻州刺史。
English: I heard that the victory of the war was decided by the unity of the upper and lower ranks, and now all the generals are angry with me, and once the enemy comes, they will certainly kill me first. So he asked the court to change the county and was transferred to Zhangzhou Zhishi.

古文：及契丹犯边，开上书，又请车驾观兵河朔。
现代文：等到契丹侵犯边境，柳开就向皇帝上书，请求皇帝御驾亲自观兵河朔。
English: When the Khitan invaded the border, Liu Kai sent a letter to the emperor, requesting the emperor to personally visit the soldiers in Heshaku.

古文：四年，徙沧州，道病首疡卒，年五十四。
现代文：他在忻州四年后，又调迁沧州。在赴任路上头上部生疮竟至逝世，年五十四。
English: After four years in Zhangzhou, he was transferred to Cangzhou. On the way to his new post, he developed a head wound and died at the age of 54.

古文：录其子涉为三班奉职。
现代文：他死后，朝廷录用他的儿子柳涉到三班供职。
English: After his death, the imperial court hired his son, Liu Wanzhou, to work three shifts.

古文：开善射，喜弈棋。
现代文：柳开擅长射箭，喜欢下棋。
English: Liu Kai is good at archery and likes to play chess.

古文：有集十五卷。
现代文：他著有书十五卷。
English: He is the author of fifteen books.

古文：作《家戒》千余言，刻石以训诸子。
现代文：写《家戒》千余言，并刻在石上以教育他的几个儿子。
English: He wrote more than a thousand words of "Family Precepts" and engraved them on stone to educate his sons.

古文：性倜傥重义。
现代文：他性格倜傥义气。
English: He is a very loyal person.

古文：在大名，尝过酒肆饮，有士人在旁，辞貌稍异，开询其名，则至自京师，以贫不克葬其亲，闻王祐笃义，将丐之。
现代文：在大名时，他曾到酒肆去饮酒，有一士人坐在他的旁边，言辞相貌都有些与众不同，他问其姓名，此人回答说 ：我来自京师，由于贫困不能葬双亲，听到说大名知州王佑这个人很讲义气，将去求他。 
English: When he was a daimyo, he went to a bar to drink. A man sat next to him. His words and appearance were somewhat unusual. He asked his name. The man replied, "I am from Beijing. Due to poverty, I cannot bury my parents. I heard that the daimyo, Chizhou Wang You, is a very loyal person. I will go to ask him."

古文：问所费，曰： 二十万足矣。 开即罄所有，得白金百余两，益钱数万遣之。
现代文：柳开问他需要多少费用，士人回答说 ：二十万足够了。 柳开就倾自己所有，得白金百多两，又凑钱数万送给他。
English: Liu Kai asked him how much he needed to pay, and the scholar replied, "Two hundred thousand is enough." Liu Kai gave everything he had, got more than a hundred taels of platinum, and collected tens of thousands of money to give to him.

古文：开兄肩吾，至御史。
现代文：柳开的哥哥叫肩吾，官做到御史。
English: Liu Kai's older brother was called Shoulder Me, and he became a government official.

古文：肩吾三子，湜、灏、沆并进士第，灏秘书丞。
现代文：肩吾有三个儿子，柳氵是、柳灏、柳沆都进士及第，柳灏任秘书丞。
English: I have three sons, Ryuhyun, Ryuhyun, Ryuhyun, Ryuhyun, Ryuhyun, Ryuhyun, Ryuhyun, Ryuhyun, and Ryuhyun.

