古文：凡战，定爵位，著功罪，收游士，申教诏，询厥众，求厥技，方虑极物，变嫌推疑，养力索巧，因心之动。
现代文：凡是作战，先要确定军中各级官职爵位，宣布赏罚制度，收用各方游士，颁发军队教令，征询大众的意见，搜罗有技术的人才，多方考虑，弄清各种情况的根源，分辨和推究疑难问题，积蓄力量，寻求巧计，根据民心所向而采取行动。
English: Whenever there is a battle, it is necessary to first determine the ranks of officials at all levels in the military, announce the reward and punishment system, recruit wanderers from all sides, issue military orders, solicit opinions from the public, collect skilled personnel, consider various aspects, clarify the root causes of various situations, distinguish and investigate difficult problems, accumulate strength, seek clever strategies, and act according to the people's will.

古文：凡战，固众，相利，治乱，进止服正，成耻，约法，省罚，小罪乃杀，小罪胜，大罪因。
现代文：作战必须：巩固军心，明辨利害，治理纷乱，进止有节，服膺正义，激发廉耻，简约法令，少用刑罚，小罪就要制止，犯小罪的如果得逞，犯大罪的也就跟着来了。
English: The battle must: consolidate the military spirit, distinguish between interests, control chaos, advance and stop, obey justice, inspire integrity, simplify laws and regulations, use less punishment, stop minor crimes, and if those who commit minor crimes succeed, those who commit major crimes will follow.

古文：顺天、阜财、怿众、利地、右兵，是谓五虑。
现代文：顺应天时，广集资财，悦服人心，利用地形，重视运用兵器，这是作战必须考虑的五件事情。
English: Complying with the weather, widely collecting funds, pleasing the people, utilizing the terrain, and attaching importance to the use of weapons, these are the five things that must be considered in combat.

古文：顺天奉时，阜财因敌。
现代文：顺应天时，就是要利用天候季节，因时制宜地行事。
English: To adapt to the weather is to take advantage of the weather season and act in a timely manner.

古文：怪众勉若。利地，守隘险阻。
现代文：广集资财，就是要利用敌人物资以增强我之实力。
English: To amass wealth is to use the enemy's wealth to strengthen oneself.

古文：右兵，弓矢御、殳矛守、戈戟助。
现代文：悦服人心，就是要顺应大众意志以勉励士卒杀敌。利用地形，就是要控制隘路、险要、阻绝等地形。
English: To win the hearts and minds of the people is to comply with the will of the public to encourage soldiers to kill the enemy. The use of terrain is to control the narrow road, dangerous, blocking terrain and so on.

古文：凡五兵五当，长以卫短，短以救长。
现代文：重视运用兵器，就是战斗中要用弓矢掩护、殳矛抵御、戈戟辅助。
English: Emphasis on the use of weapons, that is, in battle, it is necessary to use bows and arrows to cover, spears to resist, and crossbows to assist.

古文：迭战则久，皆战则强。见物与侔，是谓两之。
现代文：这五种兵器有五种用途，长兵器用以掩护短兵器，短兵器用以补救长兵器的不足。 五种兵器 轮番出战可以持久，全部出战就能形成强大力量。
English: These five kinds of weapons have five uses, the long weapon is used to cover the short weapon, and the short weapon is used to remedy the shortage of the long weapon.The five kinds of weapons can take turns to fight for a long time, and all of them can form a strong force.

古文：主固勉若，视敌而举。
现代文：发现敌人的新兵器，就应该仿效制造，才能与敌保持力量平衡。
English: If you discover a new weapon of the enemy, you should imitate it in order to maintain a balance of power with the enemy.

古文：将心，心也，众心，心也。
现代文：主将既要善于勉励士卒，巩固军心，又要仔细观察敌情变化，采取相应的行动。
English: The commander-in-chief should not only be good at encouraging his soldiers and consolidating the military spirit, but also carefully observe the changes in the enemy situation and take corresponding actions.

古文：马、牛、车、兵、佚饱，力也。
现代文：将帅的意志和士卒的意志必须统一，马、牛、兵喂饱，休息好，车辆、兵器要妥善保养，这样，才有战斗力量。
English: The will of the commander and the will of the soldiers must be unified. Horses, cattle, and soldiers should be well fed and rested, and vehicles and weapons should be properly maintained. Only in this way can there be combat power.

古文：教惟豫，战惟节。
现代文：训练重在平时，作战重在指挥。
English: The emphasis in training is on peacetime, and the emphasis in combat is on command.

古文：将军，身也，卒，支也，伍，指姆也。
现代文：将帅好比人的躯干，卒好比人的四肢，伍好比人的手指，必须像它们一样地协调一致，才能指挥运用自如。
English: The commander-in-chief is like a human torso, the pawns are like human limbs, and the troops are like human fingers, and they must be coordinated like them in order to command and use them freely.

古文：凡战，智也。斗，勇也。陈，巧也。
现代文：作战指挥要用智谋，战斗行动要靠勇敢，军队布阵要巧妙灵活。
English: The operational commander should use wisdom, the combat action should rely on bravery, and the army should be cleverly and flexibly deployed.

古文：用其所欲，行其所能，废其不欲不能。
现代文：要力求实现自己的意图，但也要量力而行，不要去做违反自己意图和力所不及的事。对于敌人则相反，要使他去做他所不愿做或不能做的事。
English: Strive to achieve your own intentions, but also do what you can, do not do things that are contrary to your intentions and beyond your power. For the enemy, on the contrary, make him do what he does not want to do or cannot do.

古文：于敌反是。凡战，有天，有财，有善。
现代文：凡是作战，应该有天，有财，有善。
English: Whenever there is a war, there should be heaven, wealth, and goodness.

古文：时日不迁，龟胜微行，是谓有天。
现代文：遇着好时机不要错过，占卜有了胜利的征兆就机密行动，这就叫 有天 。
English: Don't miss out on a good opportunity. When fortune-telling shows signs of success, take secret action. This is called having a day.

古文：众有有，因生美，是谓有财。
现代文：民众富足，国力充沛，这就叫 有财 。
English: When the people are rich and the country is strong, that is called wealth.

古文：人习陈利，极物以豫，是调有善。
现代文：士卒训练有素，阵法熟练，物资器材预有准备，这就叫 有善 。
English: The soldiers are well-trained, the formation is skillful, and the materials and equipment are prepared in advance. This is called "being good."

古文：人勉及任，是谓乐人。
现代文：人人都能尽力去完成战斗任务，这就叫 乐人 。
English: Everyone can do their best to complete the combat mission, which is called "fun people."

古文：大军以固，多力以烦，堪物简治，见物应卒，是谓行豫。
现代文：军队强大而阵势巩固，兵员充实而战法熟练，选拔各种人才去管理各项事务，洞察各种情况以应付突然事变，这就是预有准备。
English: A strong and consolidated army, a well-trained and well-equipped army, a selection of talents to manage various affairs, and an insight into various situations to cope with sudden events, this is pre-preparedness.

古文：轻车轻徒，弓矢固御，是谓大军。
现代文：兵车轻快，步兵精锐，弓箭足以固守，这就是强大的军队。
English: Swift chariots, elite infantry, and bows and arrows strong enough to defend themselves: this is a powerful army.

古文：密静多内力，是谓固陈。
现代文：兵力集中，军心镇定，士气旺盛，这就是巩固的阵势。
English: Concentrated forces, calm military spirit, and strong morale, this is a consolidated position.

古文：因是进退，是谓多力。
现代文：凭借这样的阵势而又进退合宜，这就是增强了战斗力。
English: By virtue of such a posture and advancing and retreating appropriately, this is to enhance the combat effectiveness.

古文：上暇人数，是谓烦陈。
现代文：主将从容不迫，部队操练纯熟，这就是训练有素。
English: The Lord is slow to anger, and his troops are well-trained.

古文：然有以职，是谓堪物。
现代文：各项事物，都有人负责，这就叫事事有人管。
English: Someone is responsible for everything, which means that someone is in charge of everything.

古文：因是辨物，是谓简治。
现代文：人人胜任职务而能分清事物的轻重缓急，这就是用人得当。
English: Everyone is competent in their duties and can distinguish the priorities of things. This is the right way to employ people.

古文：称众，因地，因敌令陈；攻战守，进退止，前后序，车徒因，是谓战参。
现代文：衡量我军兵力，适应地形条件和敌人情况而确定我军阵形；掌握攻、战、守的变化，前进、后退或停止的时机，注意前后的顺序以及战车与步兵的协同，这些都是临战应该考虑的事情。
English: Measuring the strength of our army, determining the formation of our army by adapting to the topographical conditions and the enemy's situation; mastering the changes in attack, battle and defense, the time to advance, retreat or stop, paying attention to the order of the front and rear, and the coordination of chariots and infantry, these are all things that should be considered in the event of war.

古文：不服、不信、不和、怠、疑、厌、慑、枝、拄、诎、顿、肆、崩、缓，是渭战患。
现代文：对上级不服从、不信任、彼此不和睦、怠忽职守、互相猜疑、厌恶作战、畏惧敌人、军心涣散、互相责难、委屈难伸、疲劳困顿、肆无忌惮、分崩离析、纪律废弛、这些都是作战的祸患。
English: Disobedience to superiors, distrust, discord with each other, neglect of duties, mutual suspicion, aversion to fighting, fear of the enemy, lack of morale, mutual reproach, grievances, fatigue, unscrupulousness, disintegration, and lax discipline are the scourges of war.

古文：骄傲，慑慑，吟旷，虞惧，事悔，是谓毁折。
现代文：骄傲已极，畏惧太甚，士卒呻吟吵闹，军心忧虑惶恐，朝令夕改，这会导致军队的覆灭。
English: Too much pride, too much fear, soldiers moaning and clamoring, soldiers anxious and fearful, orders changing from morning to night, this will lead to the downfall of the army.

古文：大小，坚柔，参伍，众寡，凡两，是谓战权。
现代文：声势宜大宜小，战法用刚用柔，编组用参用伍，兵力用多用少，都必须从利害两个方面加以考虑，这是作战的权变。
English: The situation should be large or small, the tactics should be strong or weak, the formations should be in the same ranks, and the forces should be more or less, all of which must be considered from the two aspects of interests. This is the change of power in combat.

古文：凡战，间远，观迩，因时，因财，发信，恶疑。
现代文：一般作战，侦察敌情远处用间谍，近处用观察。用兵作战要抓住时机，适应财力。军队内部要崇尚诚信，切戒猜疑。
English: In general operations, reconnaissance of the enemy situation should be carried out by spies at a distance and by observation at close range. In troop operations, it is necessary to seize the opportunity and adapt to financial resources. Within the army, it is necessary to advocate honesty and strictly refrain from suspicion.

古文：作兵义，作事时，使人惠，见敌静，见乱暇，见危难无忘其众。
现代文：兴兵要合乎正义，做事要抓住时机，用人要施恩惠，遇敌必须沉着，遇着混乱必须从容，遇着危险和艰难不要忘掉部队。
English: To raise an army is to be just, to do things is to seize the opportunity, to employ people is to do favors, to meet the enemy is to be calm, to meet chaos is to be calm, to meet danger and hardship is not to forget the troops.

古文：居国惠以信以信，在军广以武，刃上果以敏。
现代文：治国要施恩惠讲信用，治军要宽厚要威严，临阵要果断要敏捷。
English: To govern the country, it is necessary to show favor and trustworthiness, to govern the army, it is necessary to be generous and dignified, and to be decisive and agile in the front line.

古文：居国和，在军法，刃上察。
现代文：治国要上下和睦，治军兵法令严明，临阵要明察情况。
English: The country should be governed harmoniously from top to bottom, the laws governing the military should be strict, and the situation should be inspected at the front line.

古文：居国见好，在军见方，刃上见信。
现代文：这样，治国就能为人民所爱戴，治军就能为士卒所敬重，临阵就能为全军所信赖。
English: In this way, governing the country can be loved by the people, governing the army can be respected by the soldiers, and leading the army can be trusted by the whole army.

古文：凡陈，行惟疏，战惟密，兵惟杂，人教厚，静乃治。
现代文：一般布阵，军队的行列既要求疏散以便使用兵器；又要求密集以便于战斗。
English: Generally arrayed, the ranks of the army require both evacuation for the use of weapons and density for combat.

古文：威利章，相守义，则人勉。
现代文：兵器要多种多样配合使用，士卒要训练有素，要沉着镇静，阵形才能保持严整。
English: Weapons should be used in a variety of ways, soldiers should be well-trained, calm and composed, and the formation should be well-ordered.

古文：虑多成则人服。
现代文：威令鲜明准确，上下遵守信义，就能人人奋勉。
English: If the command is clear and accurate, and everyone abides by the principle of good faith, everyone will be able to work hard.

古文：时中服厥次治。
现代文：谋划屡次成功就能使人信服。
English: A plan that succeeds time and time again is convincing.

古文：物既章，目乃明。
现代文：人人心悦诚服，事情就能依次办好。旗帜鲜明，部队才看得清楚。
English: If everyone is happy and sincere, things can be done well in turn. The flag is clear, and the troops can see it clearly.

古文：虑既定，心乃强。
现代文：作战计谋既经确定，决心就应坚定。
English: Once the operational strategy has been determined, the determination should be firm.

古文：进退无疑见敌无谋，听诛。
现代文：对那些进退不定，遇敌无谋的人，应予以惩罚。
English: Those who are indecisive and helpless in the face of the enemy should be punished.

古文：无诳其名，无变其旗。
现代文：临阵的时候，不要随意乱用金鼓，不要轻易改变旗号，以免引起错觉和迷乱。
English: When on the verge of battle, do not arbitrarily abuse the golden drum, do not easily change the banner, so as not to cause illusion and confusion.

古文：凡事善则长，因古则行。
现代文：凡是好的事情就能保特长久，按照古法办事就能顺利推行。
English: All good things can be preserved for a long time, and can be successfully implemented in accordance with the ancient law.

古文：誓作章，入乃强，灭历祥。
现代文：战斗誓词鲜明有力，士气就会旺盛，就能消灭一切敌人。
English: The battle oath is clear and powerful, morale will be strong, and all enemies can be eliminated.

古文：灭厉之道：一曰义。
现代文：消灭敌人的方法：一是用道义。
English: The way to annihilate the enemy: the first is to use morality.

古文：被之以信，临之以强，成基一天下之形，人莫不就，是谓兼用其人。
现代文：就是以诚信感召敌人，以威力慑服敌人，造成统一天下的形势，使人人心悦诚服，这就能争取敌国的人为我所用。
English: It is to inspire the enemy with good faith, to deter and subdue the enemy with power, to create a unified situation, and to make everyone happy and sincere. This will be able to win the people of the enemy country for my use.

古文：一曰权。
现代文：二是用权谋。
English: The second is to use power to plot.

古文：成其溢，夺其好，我自其外，使自其内。
现代文：就是设法助长敌人的骄横，夺取敌人的要害，用兵力从外部向它进攻；用间谍从内部策应。
English: is to try to encourage the enemy's arrogance, seize the enemy's key, attack it with troops from the outside, and respond with spies from the inside.

古文：一曰人，二曰正，三曰辞，四曰巧，五曰火，六曰水，七曰兵，是谓七政。
现代文：一是广罗人才，二是严肃法纪，三是注重宣传，四是讲求技巧，五是善用火攻，六是习于水战，七是改善兵器，这是七种军国大政。
English: The first is a wide range of talents, the second is a serious legal discipline, the third is to pay attention to propaganda, the fourth is to pay attention to skills, the fifth is to make good use of fire, the sixth is to learn from water warfare, and the seventh is to improve weapons. These are seven kinds of military and national policies.

古文：荣、利、耻、死，是谓四守。
现代文：荣誉、利禄、耻辱、刑罚，这是四种令人遵守法纪的手段。
English: Honor, reward, shame, and punishment are the four means of enforcing law and order.

古文：容色积威，不过改意。
现代文：和颜悦色地讲道理或严厉地予以管教，都不过是为了使人改恶从善。
English: To reason kindly, or to discipline severely, is but to reform.

古文：凡此道也。
现代文：所有这些都是治军的方法。
English: All of these are ways of running an army.

古文：唯仁有亲。
现代文：只有仁爱，才能使人亲近。
English: Only benevolence can bring people closer.

古文：有仁无信，反败厥身。
现代文：但是只讲仁爱而不讲信义，反会使自己遭到失败。
English: But to speak only of benevolence, and not of faith, is self-defeating.

古文：人人，正正，辞辞，火火。
现代文：用人要知人善任，正人必先正己，言辞必须严正，火攻必须用得适宜。
English: The employer must know the person well, the honest person must first be honest, the words must be strict, and the fire attack must be appropriate.

古文：凡战之道：既作其气，因发其政。
现代文：一般作战的原则：已经鼓舞了士气，接着就要颁布纪律。
English: The principle of general operations: morale has been boosted, then discipline is to be issued.

古文：假之以色，道之以辞。
现代文：对待士卒要和颜悦色，教导士卒要言辞恳切。
English: Treating teachers should be friendly, and teaching teachers should be sincere.

古文：因惧而戒，因欲而事，蹈敌制地，以职命之，是谓战法。
现代文：利用他们畏惧的心理而告诫他们，利用他们的欲望而使用他们，进入敌境就要控制有利地形，并按将士的职位分派他们任务，这就是战法。
English: Using their fears to warn them, using their desires to use them, entering the enemy's territory to control the favorable terrain, and assigning them tasks according to the position of the soldiers, this is the way of war.

古文：凡人之形；由众之求，试以名行，必善行之。
现代文：凡是要求人们执行的规章制度，都应来源于大众的要求。在试行中检验其是否名副其实、卓有成效。
English: Any rules and regulations that people are required to implement should come from the demands of the public. In the trial, check whether it is worthy of the name and effective.

古文：若行不行，身以将之。
现代文：并力求妥善地、彻底地予以执行。
English: and strive to implement it properly and thoroughly.

古文：若行而行，因使勿忘，三乃成章，人生之宜，谓之法。
现代文：如果有可以做到而没有做到的，将帅就要亲自带头去做。如果一切都做到了，进而要求部队牢记这些准则，经过多次反复执行，就形成了规章制度，这些符合人们要求的规章制度，就叫做 法 。
English: If there is something that can be done but has not been done, the commander-in-chief should personally take the lead in doing it. If everything has been done, then the troops are required to keep these guidelines in mind. After repeated implementation, rules and regulations are formed. These rules and regulations that meet people's requirements are called laws.

古文：凡治乱之道，一曰仁，二曰信，三曰直，四曰一，五曰义，六曰变，七曰专。
现代文：治乱的方法，一是仁爱，二是信用，三是正立，四是统一，五是道义，六是权变，七是集中指挥。
English: The methods of controlling chaos are, first, benevolence, second, trust, third, uprightness, fourth, unity, fifth, morality, sixth, power shift, and seventh, centralized command.

古文：立法，一曰受，二曰法，三曰立，四曰疾，五曰御其服，六曰等其色，七曰百官宜无淫服。
现代文：建立法制，一要使人能接受。二要法令严明，三要有法必依，四要雷厉风行，五要规定各级服制，六要用颜色区别等级，七要使官吏按规定着装，不得混乱。
English: To establish a legal system, it is necessary, firstly, to make it acceptable to the people, secondly, to have strict laws and regulations, thirdly, to have laws that must be obeyed, fourthly, to have vigorous customs, fifthly, to stipulate the dress code at all levels, sixthly, to use color to distinguish levels, and seventhly, to have officials dress according to regulations, so that there is no confusion.

古文：凡军，使法在己曰专。
现代文：治军，执行法令完全由将帅做主的叫做 专 。
English: An army under the command of a general is called a "special" army.

古文：与下畏法曰法。
现代文：上下都一致遵守的才能叫做 法 。
English: The ability to be consistent from top to bottom is called dharma.

古文：军无小听，战无小利，日成，行微曰道。
现代文：军队要听从统一的指挥号令而不要听信非正式的传说。作战时不要贪图小利，计划要能计日成功，行动要求隐秘莫测，这才是治军之道。
English: The army should obey the unified command order and not listen to the unofficial legend. Don't seek small profits when fighting, the plan should be able to count on success, and the action requirements should be secret and unpredictable. This is the way to govern the army.

