古文：◎河渠三
现代文：河渠三
English: Canal Three

古文：○运河上
现代文：运河上
English: on the canal

古文：明成祖肇建北京，转漕东南，水陆兼輓，仍元人之旧，参用海运。
现代文：明成祖时开始建都北京，从东南转运粮饷，水路陆路同时运输，依照元人的旧例，同时采用海运。
English: When the founder of the Ming Dynasty, Cheng Zu, began to build the capital of Beijing, grain was transported from the southeast, and it was transported by land and water at the same time. According to the old example of the founder, it was also transported by sea.

古文：逮会通河开，海陆并罢。
现代文：等到会通河开通，海运陆运一起停止。
English: Wait until the opening of the Huitong River, and the sea and land transportation will stop at the same time.

古文：南极江口，北尽大通桥，运道三千馀里。
现代文：南边到达长汪口，北边到达大通桥，漕运河道三千余里。
English: The south side reaches Changwangkou, the north side reaches Datong Bridge, and there are more than three thousand miles of canal road.

古文：综而计之，自昌平神山泉诸水，汇贯都城，过大通桥，东至通州入白河者，大通河也。
现代文：综合考察，从昌平神山泉诸河水流出，汇合贯穿都城，经过大通桥，往东到达通州流入白河的，是大通河。
English: Comprehensive investigation, from the Changping Shenshan Spring, the rivers flow out, the confluence runs through the capital city, passes through the Datong Bridge, and flows eastward to Tongzhou into the White River, which is the Datong River.

古文：自通州而南至直沽，会卫河入海者，白河也。
现代文：从通州向南到达直沽，汇合卫河流入大海的，是白河。
English: It is the Shirakawa River that flows from Tongzhou to the south to reach Dajiaocheng, where it joins the Wei River and flows into the sea.

古文：自临清而北至直沽，会白河入海者，卫水也。
现代文：从临清向北到达直沽，汇合白河流入大海的，是卫水。
English: From Linqing to the north to reach Dajiaozuo, the confluence of the White River into the sea is the Weishui.

古文：自汶上南旺分流，北经张秋至临清，会卫河，南至济宁天井闸，会泗、沂、洸三水者，汶水也。
现代文：从汶上南旺分流，向北经过张秋到达临清，汇合卫河，向南到达济宁天井闸，汇合泗、沂、洸三水的，是汶水。
English: It branches off from Wen Shang Nanwang, flows north through Zhang Qiu to Linqing, merges with Weihe River, and south to Jining Ceiling Lock. The confluence of Yunnan, Fujian and Fujian rivers is Wen Shui.

古文：自济宁出天井闸，与汶合流，至南阳新河，旧出茶城，会黄、沁后出夏镇，循泇河达直口，入黄济运者，泗、洸、小沂河及山东泉水也。
现代文：从济宁出天井闸，与汶水合流，到达南阳新河，原出于茶城，汇合黄、沁之后到夏镇，沿着洳河到达直口，流入黄河补益运河的，是泗、洸、小沂河及山东泉水。
English: From Jining, it flows out of the ceiling gate, merges with the Wenshui, and reaches the Nanyang New River. Originally from Cha Cheng, it merges with the Huang and Lu, and then goes to Xia Zhen. It reaches the direct outlet along the Lu River, and flows into the Yellow River Supplementary Canal. It is the Lu, Lu, Xiao Lu River and Shandong spring water.

古文：自茶城秦沟，南历徐、吕，浮邳，会大沂河，至清河县入淮后，从直河口抵清口者，黄河水也。
现代文：从茶城秦沟，向南经过徐、旦，流入邳，汇合大沂河，到达清河县流入淮河之后，从直河口直达清口的，是黄河水。
English: It is the Yellow River water that flows from Qinqou, Chasheng, southward through Xu and Dan, flows into Kunming, merges with the Dalang River, reaches Qinghe County and flows into the Huai River, and then flows from the direct estuary to the clear estuary.

古文：自清口而南，至於瓜、仪者，淮、扬诸湖水也。
现代文：从清口向南，到达瓜、仪的，是淮、扬诸湖水。
English: From Qingkou to the south, it is the Huai and Yang lakes that reach Guagua and Yi.

古文：过此则长江矣。
现代文：过了这里就是长江了。
English: After here is the Yangtze River.

古文：长江以南，则松、苏、浙江运道也。
现代文：长江以南，就是松、苏、浙江运道。
English: South of the Yangtze River, it is the Song, Su and Zhejiang transportation routes.

古文：淮、扬至京口以南之河，通谓之转运河，而由瓜、仪达淮安者，又谓之南河，由黄河达丰、沛曰中河，由山东达天津曰北河，由天津达张家湾曰通济河，而总名曰漕河。
现代文：淮、扬到京口以南的河道，全都叫做转运河，而从瓜、仪直达淮安的，又叫做南河，从黄河直达丰、沛的叫做中河，从山东直达天津的叫做北河，从天津直达张家湾的叫做通济河，而总名叫做漕河。
English: The rivers from Huaihe and Yang to the south of Jingkou are all called turning canals, while those from Gua and Yi directly to Huai'an are also called Nanhe, those from the Yellow River directly to Feng and Pei are called Zhonghe, those from Shandong directly to Tianjin are called Beihe, and those from Tianjin directly to Zhangjiagang are called Tongjihe, and the overall name is Caohe.

古文：其逾京师而东若蓟州，西北若昌平，皆尝有河通，转漕饷军。
现代文：其越过京城向东的如蓟州，西北的如昌平，都曾经有河道通行，转运漕粮供给军队。
English: It crossed the capital city to the east, such as Zhangzhou, and to the northwest, such as Changping. Both of them once had river traffic, transporting grain to supply the army.

古文：漕河之别，曰白漕、卫漕、闸漕、河漕、湖漕、江漕、浙漕。
现代文：漕河下面分别有名，叫做白漕、卫漕、闸漕、河漕、湖漕、江漕、浙漕。
English: The lower parts of the Caohe are separately famous, called Bai Cao, Wei Cao, Gate Cao, River Cao, Lake Cao, River Cao, and Zhejiang Cao.

古文：因地为号，流俗所通称也。
现代文：因地为号，是流俗的通称。
English: Named after the place, it is a popular nickname.

古文：淮、扬诸水所汇，徐、兖河流所经，疏瀹决排，繄人力是系，故闸、河、湖於转漕尤急。
现代文：淮、扬诸水所汇合，徐、兖河流所经过，疏通开决排除，只有依赖于人力，所以闸、河、湖对于转运漕粮尤其迫切。
English: The confluence of the Huai and Yang rivers, and the passage of the Xu and Qian rivers, the dredging and the elimination of the dredging are only dependent on manpower, so the sluice, river and lake are particularly urgent for the transfer of grain.

古文：闸漕者，即会通河。
现代文：闸漕，就是会通河。
English: A sluice is a channel through which a river flows.

古文：北至临清，与卫河会，南出茶城口，与黄河会，资汶、洸、泗水及山东泉源。
现代文：向北到达临清，与卫河汇合，向南出茶城口，与黄河汇合，积蓄汶、洸、泗水及山东泉源。
English: To the north, it reaches Linqing and merges with Weihe River, and to the south, it goes out of Cha Chengkou and merges with Yellow River, accumulating Wen, Yunnan and Shandong springs.

古文：泉源之派有五。
现代文：泉源的支流有五条。
English: The spring has five tributaries.

古文：曰分水者，汶水派也，泉百四十有五。
现代文：叫做分水的一支，是汶水支流，其泉一百四十五处。
English: One branch, called the watershed, is a tributary of the Wen Shui, with 145 springs.

古文：曰天井者，济河派也，泉九十有六。
现代文：叫做天井的一支，是济河支流，其泉九十六处。
English: The one called the Ceiling is a tributary of the Jie River and has 96 springs.

古文：曰鲁桥者，泗河派也，泉二十有六。
现代文：叫做鲁桥的一支，是泗河支流，其泉二十六处。
English: One branch, called Luqiao, is a tributary of the Li River, with 26 springs.

古文：曰沙河者，新河派也，二十有八。
现代文：叫做沙河的一支，是新河支流，其泉二十八处。
English: A branch called the Sand River, a tributary of the Xinhe River, has 28 springs.

古文：曰邳州者，沂河派也，泉十有六。
现代文：叫做邳州的一支，是沂河支流，其泉十六处。
English: One is called Luzhou, a tributary of the Luzhou River, with 16 springs.

古文：诸泉所汇为湖，其浸十五。
现代文：诸泉水汇合成为大湖，其湖泽有十五处。
English: Springs converge to form a large lake, of which there are fifteen lakes.

古文：曰南旺，东西二湖，周百五十馀里，运渠贯其中。
现代文：南旺湖，有东西二湖，周围一百五十余里，漕运之道贯穿其中。
English: Nanwang Lake has two lakes, east and west, with a circumference of more than 150 miles, and the rowing route runs through it.

古文：北曰马蹋，南曰蜀山，曰苏鲁。
现代文：北面的叫做马蹋，南面的叫做蜀山，叫做苏鲁。
English: The north side is called Malang, the south side is called Shushan, called Sulu.

古文：又南曰马场。
现代文：再南面的叫做马场。
English: Further south is the Horse Farm.

古文：又南八十里曰南阳，亦曰独山，周七十馀里。
现代文：再南面八十里的叫做南阳，也叫做独山，周围七十余里。
English: Eighty miles further south is called Nanyang, also known as Doksan, with a circumference of more than seventy miles.

古文：北曰安山，周八十三里。
现代文：北面的叫做安山，周围八十三里。
English: The one to the north is called Ansan, with a circumference of 83 li.

古文：南曰大、小昭阳，大湖袤十八里，小湖杀三之一，周八十馀里。
现代文：南面的叫做大小昭阳，大湖南此长十八里，小湖南北长减少三分之一，周围八十余里。
English: The southern part of the lake is called Shoyang. The southern part of the big lake is 18 miles long, and the northern and southern parts of the small lake are reduced by one third, with a circumference of more than 80 miles.

古文：由马家桥留城闸而南，曰武家，曰赤山，曰微山，曰吕孟，曰张王诸湖，连注八十里，引薛河由地浜沟出，会於赤龙潭，并趋茶城。
现代文：从马家桥留城闸向南，叫做武家，叫做赤山，叫做微山，叫做吕孟，叫做张王等湖，连续灌注八十里，引导薛河从地浜沟流出，汇合于赤龙潭，一起直奔茶城。
English: From Majiaqiao to the south of the city gate, it is called Wujiaqiao, it is called Aksan, it is called Weishan, it is called Lvmeng, it is called Zhangwang and other lakes, it is continuously perfused for eighty miles, and it guides the Xuehe River to flow out of the beach ditch, converge at the Red Dragon Pool, and go straight to the tea city.

古文：自南旺分水北至临清三百里，地降九十尺，为闸二十有一；南至镇口三百九十里，地降百十有六尺，为闸二十有七。
现代文：从南旺分流向北到临清三百里，地面降低九十尺，建立闸门二十一座；向南到镇口三百九十里，地面降低一百一十六尺，建立闸门二十七座。
English: From Nanwang diversion to the north to Linqing three hundred miles, the ground was lowered by ninety feet, and twenty-one gates were built; to the south to the township three hundred and ninety miles, the ground was lowered by one hundred and sixteen feet, and twenty-seven gates were built.

古文：其外又有积水、进水、减水、平水之闸五十有四。
现代文：其外又有积水、进水、减水、平水的闸门五十四座。
English: In addition, there are 54 gates for standing water, inflowing water, decreasing water and flat water.

古文：又为坝二十有一，所以防运河之泄，佐闸以为用者也。
现代文：又建立堤坝二十一座，用来防止运河的泄漏，辅助闸门成为有用的设施。
English: In addition, twenty-one dikes were built to prevent leakage of the canal, and auxiliary gates became useful facilities.

古文：其后开泇河二百六十里，为闸十一，为坝四。
现代文：其后开通洳河二百六十里，建立闸门十一座，建立堤坝四座。
English: Since then, 260 miles of the Li River have been opened, 11 locks have been built, and 4 dams have been built.

古文：运舟不出镇口，与黄河会於董沟。
现代文：漕运的船只不出镇口，与黄河汇合于董沟。
English: Rowing boats do not leave the town and join the Yellow River at Donggou.

古文：河漕者，即黄河。
现代文：河漕，就是黄河。
English: The river is the Yellow River.

古文：上自茶城与会通河会，下至清口与淮河会。
现代文：上从茶城与会通河汇合，下到清口与淮河汇合。
English: The upper reaches of the river converge with the Tonghe River, and the lower reaches of the river converge with the Huai River.

古文：其道有三：中路曰浊河，北路曰银河，南路曰符离河。
现代文：其河道有三条：中路叫做浊河，北路叫做银河，南路叫做符离河。
English: There are three river courses: the middle course is called the Luo River, the north course is called the Milky Way, and the south course is called the Fuyang River.

古文：南近陵，北近运，惟中路去陵远，於运有济。
现代文：南路靠近皇陵，北路靠近运河，只有中路距离皇陵较远，对于运河有补益。
English: The south road is close to the imperial mausoleum, the north road is close to the canal, and only the middle road is far from the imperial mausoleum, which is beneficial to the canal.

古文：而河流迁徙不常，上流苦溃，下流苦淤。
现代文：然而，黄河流向改道不定，上游苦于溃决，下游苦于淤塞。
English: However, the Yellow River's diversion is uncertain, with the upstream suffering from flooding and the downstream suffering from silting.

古文：运道自南而北，出清口，经桃、宿，溯二洪，入镇口，陟险五百馀里。
现代文：漕运河道从南向北，出清口，经过桃、宿，上溯徐、旦二洪，进入镇口，陟历艰险五百余里。
English: Cao Canal Road from south to north, out of the Qingkou, through the peach, lodging, up the Xu, Tang Erhong, into the town, after more than 500 miles of hardships.

古文：自二洪以上，河与漕不相涉也。
现代文：从徐、吕二洪以上，黄河与漕河不相交汇。
English: The Yellow River and Caohe River do not intersect above Xu and Lv Erhong.

古文：至泇河开而二洪避，董沟辟而直河淤，运道之资河者二百六十里而止，董沟以上，河又无病於漕也。
现代文：等到洳河开通而回避二洪，董沟开通而直河淤塞，漕运之道利用黄河二百六十里而停止，董沟以上，黄河又没有什么地方妨碍漕运之道。
English: Wait until the Min River opens and avoids the Erhong River, the Donggou opens and the Zhihe River is silted up, and the rowing route using the 260-mile Yellow River stops. Above the Donggou, the Yellow River has no place to obstruct the rowing route.

古文：湖漕者，由淮安抵扬州三百七十里，地卑积水，汇为泽国。
现代文：湖漕，从淮安直达扬州三百七十里，地低而积水，汇合为湖泽。
English: The lake, stretching 370 miles from Huai'an to Yangzhou, is low-lying and filled with water, merging into a lake.

古文：山阳则有管家、射阳，宝应则有白马、汜光，高邮则有石臼、甓社、武安、邵伯诸湖。
现代文：山阳则有管家、射阳，童尘则有白马、泛光，高邮则有石臼、甓社、武安、邵伯等湖。
English: Sanyang has butler, shooting sun, Tongcheng has white horse, floodlight, Gaoyou has stone mill, Shisha, Wu'an, Shao Bo and other lakes.

古文：仰受上流之水，傍接诸山之源，巨浸连亘，由五塘以达於江。
现代文：向上承受上游的水，旁边连接诸山的水源，大湖连绵不断，从五塘到达长江。
English: The upstream water is borne upwards, the water source connecting the mountains next to it, and the large lakes are continuous, reaching the Yangtze River from Wutang.

古文：虑淮东侵，筑高家堰拒其上流，筑王简、张福二堤御其分泄。
现代文：担心淮水向东侵犯，修筑高家堰抵挡其上游，修筑王简、张福二堤防止其分泄。
English: Worried about the eastward encroachment of the Huai Shui, Gaojia Weir was built to resist its upstream, and Wang Jian and Zhang Fu Dike were built to prevent its leakage.

古文：虑淮侵而漕败，开淮安永济、高邮康济、宝应弘济三月河以通舟。
现代文：担心淮水侵犯而漕河毁坏，便开通淮安永济、高邮康济、宝壅塾堕三条半月形河道以通舟船。
English: Fearing that the Caohe River would be destroyed due to the encroachment of the Huai Shui River, three half-moon-shaped river channels were opened, namely the Huai'an Yongji, the Gaopu Kangji, and the Baodi Juku.

古文：至扬子湾东，则分二道：一由仪真通江口，以漕上江湖广、江西；一由瓜洲通西江嘴，以漕下江两浙。
现代文：到达扬子湾柬，就分为二道：一条从仪真通往长江口，以漕运上江湖广、江西之粮；一条从瓜洲通往西江嘴，以漕运下江两浙之粮。
English: When arriving at the Yangtze Bay, it is divided into two routes: one from Yizhen to the mouth of the Yangtze River, to transport grain from the upper provinces and regions and the west of the Yangtze River by rowing; one from Guazhou to the mouth of the West River, to transport grain from the two Zhejiang provinces by rowing.

古文：本非河道，专取诸湖之水，故曰湖漕。
现代文：本来不是河道，专取众湖之水，所似叫做湖漕。
English: Originally, it was not a river, but it was used to collect water from the lakes, so it was called a lake basin.

古文：太祖初起大军北伐，开蹋场口、耐牢坡，通漕以饷梁、晋。
现代文：太祖刚开始调动大军北伐，开通蹋场口、耐牢坡，使漕运之道畅通以供给梁、晋的军粮。
English: Taizu had just begun to mobilize a large army for the Northern Expedition, opening the mouth of the Yangtze River and the Jianye slope, and making the rowing route smooth to supply Liang and Jin with military grain.

古文：定都应天，运道通利：江西、湖广之粟，浮江直下；浙西、吴中之粟，由转运河；凤、泗之粟，浮淮；河南、山东之粟，下黄河。
现代文：定都于应天，运输之道畅通便利：江西、湖广的粮食，舟运沿长江直下；浙西、昊中的粮食，从转运河运出；凤、泗的粮食，舟运从淮水运出；河南、山东的粮食，下经黄河运出。
English: The capital will be in Yingtian, and the transportation route will be smooth and convenient: the grain of Jiangxi and Hukang will be transported by boat along the Yangtze River; the grain of West Zhejiang and Haozhong will be transported by canal; the grain of Feng and Handan will be transported by boat from Huai Shui; the grain of Henan and Shandong will be transported by the Yellow River.

古文：尝由开封运粟，溯河达渭，以给陕西，用海运以饷辽卒，有事於西北者甚鲜。
现代文：曾经从开封运粮，逆黄河而上到达渭河，以供给陕西的军粮，利用海运以供给辽地军粮，在西北用兵行动很少。
English: In the past, grain was transported from Kaifeng up the Yellow River to the Min River to supply military grain to Shaanxi, and military grain to Liaodong was supplied by sea. There were few military operations in Northwest China.

古文：淮、扬之间，筑高邮湖堤二十馀里，开宝应倚湖直渠四十里，筑堤护之。
现代文：淮、扬之间，修筑高邮湖堤防二十余里，开通宝应倚湖直渠四十里，修筑堤防护卫它。
English: Between Huai and Yang, the embankment of Gaoyou Lake was built for more than 20 miles, the direct canal of Baoying Lake was opened for 40 miles, and the embankment was built to protect it.

古文：他小修筑，无大利害也。
现代文：其它小的修筑，没有大的利与害。
English: Other small construction projects have no major benefits or harms.

古文：永乐四年，成祖命平江伯陈瑄督转运，一仍由海，而一则浮淮入河，至阳武，陆挽百七十里抵卫辉，浮於卫，所谓陆海兼运者也。
现代文：永乐四年，成祖命令平江伯陈逭监督转运，一方面仍然从海上转运，而另一方面则舟运从淮河然后进入黄河，到达阳武，陆路运输一百七十里直达卫辉，又在卫舟运，造就是所说的陆上海上同时运输。
English: In the fourth year of Yongle, Cheng Zu ordered Pingjiang Bo Chen Qi to supervise the transshipment. On the one hand, it was still transshipped from the sea, while on the other hand, it was transported by boat from the Huaihe River and then into the Yellow River, reaching Yangwu, transported by land for 170 miles straight to Weihui, and then transported simultaneously on the land and sea.

古文：海运多险，陆挽亦艰。
现代文：海上运输有很多危险，陆上运输也很艰难。
English: Sea transport has many dangers, and land transport is also difficult.

古文：九年二月乃用济宁州同知潘叔正言，命尚书宋礼、侍郎金纯、都督周长浚会通河。
现代文：永乐九年二月，还是采用济宁州同知潘叔正的计策，命令尚书宋礼、侍郎金纯、都督周长疏通会通河。
English: In February of the ninth year of Yongle, he still used the strategy of Jining State's confidant, Pan Shuzheng, and ordered Shangshu Songli, his attendant, Jin Chun, and the governor, Zhou Chang, to pass through the river.

古文：会通河者，元转漕故道也，元末已废不用。
现代文：会通河，是元朝转漕运粮的故道。元朝末年，已经废弃不用。
English: The Huitong River was the old way of transporting grain by boat in the Yuan Dynasty. By the end of the Yuan Dynasty, it had been abandoned.

古文：洪武二十四年，河决原武，漫安山湖而东，会通尽淤，至是复之。
现代文：洪武二十四年，黄河在原武决堤，漫过安山湖而向东流，会通河完全淤塞，到这时又进行疏通。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Hongwu, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Yuanwu and flowed eastward across Ansan Lake. The river was completely silted up and then dredged.

古文：由济宁至临清三百八十五里，引汶、泗入其中。
现代文：从济宁到临清三百八十五里，引导汶、泗之水流入其中。
English: From Jining to Linqing, there are three hundred and eighty-five miles, guiding the water of Wen and Lu to flow into it.

古文：泗出泗水陪尾山，四泉并发，西流至兖州城东，合於沂。
现代文：泗出于泗水陪尾山，四条泉水一起流出，向西流到兖州城束，汇合沂。
English: The four springs flow out of the water of Lake Biwa and Mount Biwa together, and flow westward to the city of Bozhou, where they meet.

古文：汶河有二：小汶河出新泰宫山下；大汶河出泰安仙台岭南，又出莱芜原山阴及寨子村。俱至静丰镇合流，饶徂徕山阳，而小汶河来会。
现代文：汶河有二条。小汶河出于新泰宫山下。大汶河出于泰安仙台岭南，又出于莱芜原山北面及寨子村，全都到静丰镇合流，环绕徂徕山南，而小汶河流来汇合。
English: There are two Wen Rivers. The Xiaowen River flows from the foot of Xintai Palace Mountain. The Daowen River flows from the south of Tai'an Sendai Ridge, and from the north of Laiwu Yuan Mountain and Zaizi Village. They all flow together to Jingfeng Town, encircling the south of Lushan Mountain, while the Xiaowen River flows to the confluence.

古文：经宁阳北堈城，西南流百馀里，至汶上。
现代文：经过窒坠北垌城，往西南流一百余里，到达汶上。
English: After passing through Beiluncheng, it flows southwest for more than a hundred miles and reaches Wenzhou.

古文：其支流曰洸河，出堈城西南，流三十里，会宁阳诸泉，经济宁东，与泗合。
现代文：其支流叫做洸河，在垌城西南，流三十里，汇合宁阳诸泉水，经过济宁束，与泅水汇合。
English: Its tributary is called the Lijiang River. It flows for 30 miles in the southwest of Licheng, merging with the springs of Ningyang, passing through the Jining Bunch, and merging with the Lishui.

古文：元初，毕辅国始於堈城左汶水阴作斗门，导汶入洸。
现代文：元朝初年，毕辅国开始在垌城左边汶水北建造斗状闸门，引导汶水流入洸河。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Biyu Province began to build a bucket-shaped gate on the left side of Lucheng, north of Wenshui, to guide the flow of Wenshui into the Lucheng River.

古文：至元中，又分流北入济，由寿张至临清，通漳、御入海。
现代文：至元年间，又分流往北流入济水，从寿张到梳清，经过漳、御流入大海。
English: During the first year of the 21st century, the stream was diverted to the north and flowed into the Jishui River, from Shuzhang to Soqing, and then flowed into the sea through the Yunnan and Sichuan Provinces.

古文：南旺者，南北之脊也。
现代文：南旺，被称做南北水分流的水脊。
English: Nanwang, known as the ridge of the north-south water flow.

古文：自左而南，距济宁九十里，合沂、泗以济；自右而北，距临清三百馀里，无他水，独赖汶。
现代文：从左向南，距离滂宁九十里，合沂、泗以增加水流；从右向北，距离临清三百余里，没有其它水流，只依赖汶水。
English: From the left to the south, it is ninety miles away from Huning, with the confluence of Huning and Huning to increase the water flow; from the right to the north, it is more than three hundred miles away from Linqing, there is no other water flow, and it only relies on Wen Shui.

古文：礼用汶上老人白英策，筑坝东平之戴村，遏汶使无入洸，而尽出南旺，南北置闸三十八。
现代文：宋礼采用汶上老人白英的计策，在柬平的戴村筑坝，阻止汶水使不流入洸河，而全部到南旺，南北建置闸门三十八座。
English: Song Li used the strategy of Bai Ying, an old man from Wenchuan, to build a dam in Dai village in Kamping, to prevent the Wenchuan water from flowing into the Wei River, but all to Nanwang, and built thirty-eight gates from north to south.

古文：又开新河，自汶上袁家口左徙五十里至寿张之沙湾，以接旧河。
现代文：又开凿新河，从汶上袁家口左改道五十里到寿张的沙湾，以连接旧河。
English: In addition, a new river was dug, and it was rerouted fifty miles from Wen Shang Yuanjiakou to Shou Zhang's Sha Wan to connect the old river.

古文：其秋，礼还，又请疏东平东境沙河淤沙三里，筑堰障之，合马常泊之流入会通济运。
现代文：这年秋天，宋礼回京，又请求疏通束平束边沙河的淤沙三里，筑拦河堰保护它，汇合马常泊的水流进入会通河以济助漕运。
English: In the autumn of that year, Song Li returned to Beijing, and requested that the silt of the Shu-Ping-Shu Border Sand River be cleared for three miles, that a barrage be built to protect it, and that the water flow from the confluence of Ma Changbo into the Heitong River be eased to aid rowing.

古文：又於汶上、东平、济宁、沛县并湖地设水柜、陡门。
现代文：又在汶上、东平、济宁、沛县同湖地设立水柜、陡门。
English: In addition, water cabinets and steep gates have been set up in the same lakes in Wenshang, Dongping, Jining and Pei counties.

古文：在漕河西者曰水柜，东者曰陡门，柜以蓄泉，门以泄涨。
现代文：在漕河西边的叫做水柜，东边的叫做陡门，水柜用来蓄积泉水，陡门在涨水时用来排泄。
English: The west side of the Caohe River is called the water cabinet, and the east side is called the steep gate. The water cabinet is used to store spring water, and the steep gate is used for excretion when the water rises.

古文：纯复浚贾鲁河故道，引黄水至塌场口会汶，经徐、吕入淮。
现代文：金纯又疏通贾鲁河故道，引黄河水到塌场口汇合汶水，经过徐、吕流入淮河。
English: Jinren also dredged the old path of the Jialu River, and led the Yellow River water to the mouth of the landslide site to merge with the Wen River, and flowed into the Huai River through Xu and Lv.

古文：运道以定。
现代文：漕运道路得以固定。
English: The rowing course has been stabilised.

古文：其后宣宗时，尝发军民十二万，浚济宁以北自长沟至枣林闸百二十里，置闸诸浅，浚湖塘以引山泉。
现代文：这以后，宣宗时，曾经征调军民十二万，疏通济宁以北从长沟到枣林闸一百二十里，建立闸门于各浅水之处，疏通湖塘以引山泉。
English: After that, when Emperor Xuanzong was in power, he conscripted and mobilized 120,000 soldiers and civilians, built a 120-mile canal north of Jining from Changgou to Zaoling sluice gate, built sluice gates at various shallow water points, and dredged lakes and ponds to divert mountain springs.

古文：正统时，浚滕、沛淤河，又於济宁、胜三州县疏泉置闸，易金口堰土坝为石，蓄水以资会通。
现代文：正统时，疏通滕、沛淤塞河道，又在济宁、滕三州县疏通泉水建立闸门，改金口堰土坝为石坝，蓄水用来供给会通河。
English: In the orthodox time, the dredging of Teng and Pei silted up the river, and the sluice gates were built in the dredging of spring water in Jining and Teng Sanzhou counties, and the Jingu weir earth dam was changed to a stone dam, and the water storage was used to supply the river.

古文：景帝时，增置济宁抵临清减水闸。
现代文：景帝时，增建济宁到临清减水闸门。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jing, the Jining to Linqing sluice gate was added.

古文：天顺时，拓临清旧闸，移五十丈。
现代文：天顺时，扩充临清旧闸，移动五十丈。
English: When the weather is fine, the old gate will be expanded and moved 50 meters.

古文：宪宗时，筑汶上、济宁决堤百馀里，增南旺上、下及安山三闸。
现代文：宪宗时，修筑汶上、济宁溃决之堤一百余里，增建南旺上、下及安山三闸门。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianzong, more than 100 miles of dykes were built to break the dykes in Wenzhou and Jining, and three sluice gates were added in Nanwang, Shimo and Ansan.

古文：命工部侍郎杜谦勘治汶、泗、洸诸泉。
现代文：命令工部侍郎杜谦勘测治理汶、泗、洸诸泉水。
English: He ordered Du Qian, the attendant of the engineering department, to survey and control the spring water of Wen, Yao and Qian.

古文：武宗时，增置汶上袁家口及寺前铺石闸，浚南旺淤八十里，而闸漕之治详。
现代文：武宗时，增建汶上袁家口到寺前铺石闸门，疏通南旺淤塞河道八十里，闸漕的治理周备。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wuzong, a stone sluice gate was built from Wenchang Yuanjiakou to the front of the temple, and 80 miles of the Namwang silted river were cleared. The sluice was well maintained.

古文：惟河决则挟漕而去，为大害。
现代文：只有黄河溃决就挟制漕河而去，成为大害。
English: Only when the Yellow River bursts its banks will the damming of the Caohe go ahead, causing great harm.

古文：陈瑄之督运也，於湖广、江西造平底浅般三千艘。
现代文：陈瑄监督漕运，在湖广、江西造平底浅船三千艘。
English: Chen Qi supervised the transportation of rowing boats and built 3,000 flat-bottomed shallow boats in Huguang and Jiangxi.

古文：二省及江、浙之米皆由江以入，至淮安新城，盘五坝过淮。
现代文：二省及江、浙的米都经由长江用船运入，到了淮安新城，盘绕五坝遇淮。
English: The rice from the two provinces, as well as Jiangsu and Zhejiang, was transported by boat via the Yangtze River and arrived in Huai'an New Town, winding around the Five Dams.

古文：仁、义二坝在东门外东北，礼、智、信三坝在西门外西北，皆自城南引水抵坝口，其外即淮河。
现代文：仁、义二坝在东门外的东北，礼、智、信三坝在西门外的西北，都是从城南引水到坝口，它的外面就是淮河。
English: The Ren and Yiyi Dams are located in the northeast outside the East Gate, and the Li, Zhi and Xin Dams are located in the northwest outside the West Gate. They all draw water from the south of the city to the dam mouth, and the Huaihe River is outside of them.

古文：清江浦者，直淮城西，永乐二年尝一修闸。
现代文：清江浦，正对淮安城西，永乐二年，曾经全部修建有闸门。
English: Qingjiangpu, just west of Huai'an City, Yongle two years, once all built with gates.

古文：其口淤塞，则漕船由二坝，官民商船由三坝入淮，輓输甚劳苦。
现代文：其河口淤塞，则漕运之船经由二坝，官民商船经由三坝进入淮河，运输非常劳苦。
English: Due to the silting up of its estuary, rowing boats enter the Huai River through the second dam, and government and private merchant ships enter the Huai River through the third dam. Transportation is very laborious.

古文：瑄访之故老，言： 淮城西管家湖西北，距淮河鸭陈口仅二十里，与清江口相值，宜凿为河，引湖水通漕，宋乔维岳所开沙河旧渠也。 
现代文：陈管询咨老年人，说： 淮安城西管家湖西北，距离淮河鸭陈口只有二十里，与清江口相遇，应当开凿成为河道，引湖水通漕河，是宋乔维岳所开通的沙河旧渠。 
English: Chen Guanzhi, a senior citizen, said: West of Huai'an City, northwest of Butler Lake, is only 20 miles away from the mouth of the Huai Duck Chen, and meets the mouth of the Qing River. It should be excavated to become a river channel, and channel the lake water to the Caohe River. It is the old channel of the Shahe River opened by Song Qiao Weiyue.

古文：瑄乃凿清江浦，导水由管家湖入鸭陈口达淮。
现代文：陈管股是开通清江浦，引导河水从管家湖流入鸭陈口到达淮河。
English: Chen Guanzhang is to open the Qingjiangpu and guide the river water from the Butler Lake to flow into the Duck Chen Mouth and reach the Huai River.

古文：十三年五月，工成。
现代文：十三年五月，工程完成。
English: On May 13, the project was completed.

古文：缘西湖筑堤亘十里以引舟。
现代文：沿着西湖筑堤绵廷十里用来引导舟船。
English: along the West Lake to build a dike of ten miles to guide the boat.

古文：淮口置四闸，曰移风、清江、福兴、新庄。
现代文：淮口建置四座闸门，叫做移风、清江、福兴、新庄。
English: Huaikou has built four gates, named Fengfeng, Qingjiang, Fuxing and Xinzhuang.

古文：以时启闭，严其禁。
现代文：按时开关，严格其禁令。
English: Switch on time, strictly enforce its ban.

古文：并浚仪真、瓜洲河以通江湖，凿吕梁、百步二洪石以平水势，开泰州白塔河以达大江。
现代文：并且疏通仪真、瓜洲河道以接通江湖之水，开凿吕梁、百步二洪的大石以平缓水势，开通泰州白塔河以到达大江。
English: And dredge the Yizhen and Guazhou river channels to connect the water of rivers and lakes, excavate the Luliang and Baibo Erhong large stones to smooth the water potential, and open the Taizhou Baita River to reach the big river.

古文：筑高邮河堤，堤内凿渠四十里。
现代文：修筑高邮河堤，在堤内开凿河渠四十里。
English: Build the Gaoyou River embankment and excavate a forty-mile canal inside the embankment.

古文：久之，复置吕梁石闸，并筑宝应、汜光、白马诸湖堤，堤皆置涵洞，互相灌注。
现代文：随后，又建置吕梁石闸门，并且修筑宝应、迢光、白马各湖堤，堤都设置涵洞，互相灌注。
English: Subsequently, Luliang stone sluice gate was built, and the embankments of Baoying, Shuguang and Baima lakes were built. The embankments were all set up with culverts and poured into each other.

古文：是时淮上、徐州、济宁、临清、德州皆建仓转输。
现代文：适时，淮上、徐州、济宁、临清、德州都修建粮仓储粮转运。
English: At the right time, Huai Shang, Xuzhou, Jining, Linqing and Dezhou all built grain warehouses to store and transport grain.

古文：滨河置舍五百六十八所，舍置浅夫。
现代文：靠近河边修建房舍五百六十八所，安置引船过浅滩的人夫。
English: And he built five hundred and sixty-eight houses by the river for the men who had to guide the boats across the river.

古文：水涩舟胶，俾之导行。
现代文：河道险阻舟船搁浅，使之导船行驶。
English: The danger of the river prevented the boat from running aground, causing the pilot boat to move.

古文：增置浅船三千馀艘。
现代文：增置浅水船三千多艘。
English: More than 3,000 shallow-water vessels will be added.

古文：设徐、沛、沽头、金沟、山东、谷亭、鲁桥等闸。
现代文：建置徐、沛、沽头、金沟、山东、谷亭、鲁桥等闸门。
English: Xu, Pei, Shantou, Jinzhou, Shandong, Guiting, Luqiao and other gates have been built.

古文：自是漕运直达通州，而海陆运俱废。
现代文：从此以后，漕运直达通州，而海上陆上运道全都废弃。
English: From then on, paddle transport reached Tongzhou directly, and all land transport routes by sea were abandoned.

古文：宣德六年用御史白圭言，浚金龙口，引河水达徐州以便漕。
现代文：宣德六年，采用御史白圭的建言，疏通金龙口，引黄河之水到达徐州以便利于漕运。
English: In the sixth year of Xuande, he adopted the suggestion of Gu Shi Bai Gui to dredge Jinlongkou and bring the water of the Yellow River to Xuzhou in order to facilitate rowing.

古文：末年至英宗初再浚，并及凤池口水，徐、吕二洪，西小河，而会通安流，自永、宣至正统间凡数十载。
现代文：从宣德末年到英宗初年，再次疏通，并到达凤池口河水，徐、旦二洪，西小河，从而会通河安然流行，从永乐、宣德到正统年间一共数十年。
English: From the end of Xuande to the first year of Yingzong, it was dredged again, and reached the Fengchikou River, Xu, Tan Erhong, West Xiaohe, so that the Huitong River was safe and popular, from Yongle, Xuande to orthodoxy for a total of decades.

古文：至十三年，河决荥阳，东冲张秋，溃沙湾，运道始坏。
现代文：到正统十三年，黄河在荣阳决堤，往东直冲张秋，在沙湾溃决，运道开始毁坏。
English: In the 13th year of orthodoxy, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Rongyang, rushed eastward to Zhangqiu, and broke through in Shawan, and the transport channel began to be destroyed.

古文：命廷臣塞之。
现代文：命朝廷大臣堵塞其决口。
English: He ordered the Minister of the Imperial Court to block their escape.

古文：景泰三年五月，堤工乃完。
现代文：景泰三年五月，筑堤工程纔完工。
English: In May of the third year of Jing Tai, the embankment construction project was completed.

古文：未匝月而北马头复决，掣漕流以东。
现代文：未满一月，而北马头又溃决，牵制漕河束流。
English: Less than a month, and the North Horsehead broke through again, holding back the Caohe bundle flow.

古文：清河训导唐学成言： 河决沙湾，临清告涸。
现代文：清河训导唐学成说： 黄河在沙湾决堤，临清宣告干涸。
English: Tang Xucheng, the Qing River's tutor, said: "The Yellow River broke through the dike in Shawan and was declared to be dry.

古文：地卑堤薄，黄河势急，故甫完堤而复决也。
现代文：地势低下河堤单薄，黄河水势急速，所以刚完工的堤岸又溃决了。
English: Due to the low-lying terrain, the river levee is thin and the Yellow River's water potential is rapid, so the just-completed embankment was breached again.

古文：临清至沙湾十二闸，有水之日，其势甚陡。
现代文：临清到沙湾十二座闸门，有水的日子，其水势很陡。
English: Lianqing to Shawan twelve gates, when there is water, its water potential is very steep.

古文：请於临清以南浚月河通舟，直抵沙湾，不复由闸，则水势缓而漕运通矣。 
现代文：请在临清以南疏通半月形河道使舟船畅通，直达沙湾，不再经由闸门，那么，水势就会减缓而漕运畅通。 
English: Please clear the crescent-shaped channel south of Linqing to make the boat smooth, straight to Shawan, no longer through the gate, then the water will slow down and the paddling will be smooth.

古文：帝即命学成与山东巡抚洪英相度。
现代文：皇帝就命令唐学成与山东巡抚洪英察看测量。
English: The emperor ordered Tang Xucheng and Shandong governor Hong Ying to inspect and measure.

古文：工部侍郎赵荣则言： 沙湾抵张秋岸薄，故数决。
现代文：工部侍郎赵荣则说： 沙湾到张秋的堤岸单薄，所以数次溃决。
English: Zhao Rong, an attendant of the engineering department, said: The embankment from Shawan to Zhangqiu is thin, so it has been breached several times.

古文：请於决处置减水石坝，使东入盐河，则运河之水可蓄。
现代文：请在决口处修建碱水石坝，使水往东流入盐河，那么运河的水就可以积蓄。
English: Please build a lye dam at the breach, so that the water flows east into the salt river, then the water of the canal can be saved.

古文：然后厚堤岸，填决口，庶无后患。 
现代文：然后加宽堤岸，填塞决口，差不多没有后患。
English: Then they widened the embankment and filled in the breach, with almost no after-effects.

古文：明年四月，决口方毕工，而减水坝及南分水墩先败，已，复尽冲墩岸桥梁，决北马头，掣漕水入盐河，运舟悉阻。
现代文：第二年四月，填塞决口工程刚完工，而减水坝及南分水墩首先被毁坏，随后，又全部冲坏墩岸和桥梁，在北马头决堤，牵制漕河水流入盐河，漕运船只全都受阻。
English: In April of the following year, the project to fill the breach had just been completed, but the dam and the south diversion dam were first destroyed, and then all the banks and bridges were washed away, and the dike broke in Beima Tou, diverting the river water into the Salt River, and all the rowing boats were blocked.

古文：教谕彭埙请立闸以制水势，开河以分上流。
现代文：教谕彭顼请求建立闸门来控制水势，开通河道来分流上游的水。
English: Emperor Peng Rong ordered that a sluice gate be built to control the water level and a channel be opened to divert the water upstream.

古文：御史练纲上其策。
现代文：御史练纲上奏治理的办法。
English: A method of governance that is based on the principle of historical training.

古文：诏下尚书石璞。
现代文：诏令下到尚书石璞。
English: The imperial edict came down to Shoshu Shizhen.

古文：璞乃凿河三里，以避决口，上下与运河通。
现代文：石璞于是开凿河道三里，以避开决口，上下与运河相通。
English: Therefore, Shijiazhuang dug a three-mile river channel to avoid the breach and connect the upper and lower parts with the canal.

古文：是岁，漕舟不前者，命漕运总兵官徐恭姑输东昌、济宁仓。
现代文：这年，漕运船只不能前行的，命令漕运总兵官徐恭暂且转运到束昌、济宁粮仓。
English: This year, when the rowing boats could not go forward, the chief officer of rowing boats, Xu Gong, ordered that they should be temporarily transported to Sokchang and Jining grain silos.

古文：及明年，运河胶浅如故。
现代文：等到第二年，运河中的舟船照旧搁浅。
English: By the following year, boats in the canal were still stranded.

古文：恭与都御史王竑言： 漕舟蚁聚临清上下，请亟敕都御史徐有贞筑塞沙湾决河。 
现代文：徐恭与都御史王兹说： 漕运船只像蚂蚁一样聚积在临清上下，请赶快敕令都御史徐有贞堵塞沙湾溃决的黄河决口。 
English: Xu Qiong said to Wang Zi, the governor of the capital: The rowing boats are piling up like ants around Linqing. Please quickly order the governor of the capital, Xu Youzhen, to block the mouth of the Yellow River at the end of Shawan.

古文：有贞不可，而献上三策，请置水闸，开分水河，挑运河。
现代文：徐有贞认为不能这样，而献上治河的三条计策，请建立水闸，开通分水河，挖深运河。
English: Xu Youzhen thought that this could not be the case, and presented three strategies for river management. Please build sluice gates, open rivers for diversion, and dig deep canals.

古文：六年三月，诏群臣集议方略。
现代文：景泰六年三月，皇帝诏令群臣集中商议治河办法。
English: In March of the sixth year of King Taejo's reign, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering his courtiers to discuss the management of the river.

古文：工部尚书江渊等请用官军五万以浚运。
现代文：工部尚书江渊等请求调用官军五万用以疏通运河。
English: Shangshu Jiangyuan of the Ministry of Works and others requested that 50,000 government troops be called in to clear the canal.

古文：有贞恐役军费重，请复陈瑄旧制，置捞浅夫，用沿河州县民，免其役。
现代文：徐有贞担心役使官军耗费加大，请恢复陈逭旧制，设立捞浅河工，征用沿河州县民工，免去其劳役。
English: Xu Yuzhen worried that the service would increase the cost of the government army. Please restore the old system, set up a shallow river work, requisition the migrant workers along Hezhou County, and exempt them from labor service.

古文：五月，浚漕工竣。
现代文：五月，疏通漕运河道工程竣工。
English: In May, the canal dredging project was completed.

古文：七月，沙湾决口工亦竣，会通复安。
现代文：七月，填塞沙湾决口工程也竣工，会通恢复安定。
English: In July, the project to fill in the breach of the Sai Sha Bay was also completed, restoring stability to the causeway.

古文：都御史陈泰一浚淮、扬漕河，筑口置坝。
现代文：都御史陈泰逐一疏通淮、扬漕河，堵塞决口建立堤坝。
English: Chen Tai, the governor of the capital, dredged the Huai and Yangcao Rivers one by one, blocked the outcrops and built a dam.

古文：黄河尝灌新庄闸至清江浦三十馀里，淤浅阻漕，稍稍浚治，即复其旧。
现代文：黄河曾经灌注新庄闸到清江浦三十余里，淤塞水浅阻碍漕运，稍稍得到疏通治理，立即恢复其旧。
English: The Yellow River used to flow from Xinzhuang sluice to Qingjiangpu for more than 30 miles, and the shallow silting hindered the transportation of water. After a little dredging, it was immediately restored to its former state.

古文：英宗初，命官督漕，分济宁南北为二，侍郎郑辰治其南，副都御史贾谅治其北。
现代文：英宗初年，命官吏督治漕运，在济宁分成南北二段，侍郎郑辰治理南面，副都御史贾谅治理北面。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yingzong, Jining was divided into two sections, north and south, with the magistrate Zheng Chen in charge of the south and the vice-governor Jia Rong in charge of the north.

古文：成化七年，又因廷议，分漕河沛县以南、德州以北及山东为三道，各委曹郎及监司专理，且请简风力大臣总理其事。
现代文：成化七年，又根据廷臣的商议，划分漕河在沛县以南、德州以北及山东为三道，各委派曹郎及监司专门管理，并且请求选拔有气概和魄力的大臣总理其事。
English: In the seventh year of Chenghua, according to the discussion of the courtiers, Caohe was divided into three provinces: south of Pei County, north of Dezhou and Shandong. Each commission assigned Cao Lang and supervisors to special management, and requested the selection of a bold and courageous minister prime minister.

古文：始命侍郎王恕为总河。
现代文：开始命侍郎王恕为总理河道之职。
English: The position of Prime Minister He Tao was assumed by His Majesty's Servant Wang Shou.

古文：二十一年敕工部侍郎杜谦浚运道，自通州至淮、扬，会山东、河南抚按相度经理。
现代文：二十一年，敕令工部侍郎杜谦疏通运道，从通州到淮、扬，会同山东、河南巡抚巡按察看测量治理。
English: In the 21st year, Du Qian, the Minister of the Ministry of Industry, was ordered to clear the thoroughfare from Tongzhou to Huai and Yang, together with the inspectors from Shandong and Henan.

古文：弘治二年，河复决张秋，冲会通河，命户部侍郎白昂相治。
现代文：弘治二年，黄河又在张秋决堤，直冲会通河，命户部侍郎白昂察看治理。
English: In the second year of Hongzhi, the Yellow River broke through the dike again in Zhangqiu, and the direct rush would lead to the river. Bai Ang, a waiter of the household department, was ordered to inspect the governance.

古文：昂奏金龙口决口已淤，河并为一大支，由祥符合沁下徐州而去。
现代文：白昂上奏金龙口决口已经淤塞，黄河合为一大支流，经由祥符汇合沁水下流到徐州而去。
English: Bai'an upstream and Jinlongkou estuary have been silted up, and the Yellow River has merged into a large tributary, flowing downstream to Xuzhou through the confluence of Xiangfu and Surabaya.

古文：其间河道浅隘，宜於所经七县，筑堤岸以卫张秋。
现代文：其间河道浅而狭窄，应当在所经由的七县，修筑堤岸来护卫张秋。
English: In the meantime, the river is shallow and narrow, and a dike should be built to protect Zhangqiu in the seven counties it passes through.

古文：下工部议，从其请。
现代文：下交到工部商议，依从他的奏请。
English: Submit it to the Ministry of Industry for discussion, and comply with his request.

古文：昂又以漕船经高邮甓社湖多溺，请於堤东开複河西四十里以通舟。
现代文：白昂又根据漕船经过高邮甓社湖多陷入险境，请在堤东开通复河四十里来通行船只。
English: According to the rowing boat passing Gaoposhe Lake, Bai'an has mostly fallen into a dangerous situation. Please open 40 miles of the Fuhe River in the east of the embankment to allow ships to pass.

古文：越四年，河复决数道入运河，坏张秋东堤，夺汶水入海，漕流绝。
现代文：过了四年，黄河又决堤数道流入运河，毁壤张秋束堤，直夺汶水流入大海，漕河断流。
English: Four years later, the Yellow River broke several dikes and flowed into the canal, destroying the Zhangqiu dike, and the water flowed directly into the sea, and the Caohe River was cut off.

古文：时工部侍郎陈政总理河道，集夫十五万，治未效而卒。
现代文：这时工都侍郎陈政总管河道，调集民工十五万，治理还没有见功效就死了。
English: At this time, Chen Zheng, the general manager of the river channel, mobilized 150,000 migrant workers, and the governance did not see any effect and died.

古文：六年春，副都御史刘大夏奉敕往治决河。
现代文：弘治六年春，副都御史刘大夏奉敕命前往治理溃决的黄河。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of the Hongzhi era, Liu Daxia, vice-governor of the capital, was ordered to go to the Yellow River.

古文：夏半，漕舟鳞集，乃先自决口西岸凿月河以通漕。
现代文：五月，漕船如鱼鳞般聚集，于是首先从决口的西岸开挖月河来通行漕运。
English: In May, rowing boats gathered like fish scales, so the first thing to do was to dig up the Yuehe River from the west bank of the breach to allow rowing traffic.

古文：经营二年，张秋决口就塞，复筑黄陵冈上流。
现代文：经营了二年，张秋决口被堵塞，又在黄陵冈上游筑堤。
English: After two years of operation, the Zhangqiu culvert was blocked and a dike was built upstream of Huangling Hill.

古文：於是河复南下，运道无阻。
现代文：于是黄河又往南流，运道无阻碍。
English: As a result, the Yellow River flowed south again, and there was no obstruction to its flow path.

古文：乃改张秋曰安平镇，建庙赐额曰显惠神祠，命大学士王鏊纪其事，勒於石。
现代文：然后改张秋为安平镇，建庙赐横额为显惠神祠，命大学士王鏊记载这件事，镑刻于石。
English: Then, Zhangqiu was changed to Anping Town, a temple was built and a banner was given for the Xianhui Shrine, and it was ordered by the great scholar Wang Xi to record the matter, and the banner was engraved on the stone.

古文：而白昂所开高邮複河亦成，赐名康济，其西岸以石甃之。
现代文：而白昂所开挖的高邮复河也完成，赐名为康济，它的西岸用石头修治。
English: The Gaoyou Fuhe River excavated by Bai'an was also completed and given the name Kangji, and its west bank was repaired with stone.

古文：又甃高邮堤，自杭家闸至张家镇凡三十里。
现代文：又修治高邮堤，从杭家闸到张家镇共三十里。
English: In addition, the high post dam was repaired, and a total of 30 miles was built from Hangjiazao to Zhangjiazhen.

古文：高邮堤者，洪武时所筑也。
现代文：高邮堤，是洪武年问所修筑。
English: Gaoying Embankment, built by the Hongwu Enquiry Office.

古文：陈瑄因旧增筑，延及宝应，土人相沿谓之老堤。
现代文：陈珪依照旧堤增筑而成，延续到宝应，本地人相沿称之为老堤。
English: Chenluo was built according to the old embankment and extended to Baoying. Locals call it the old embankment.

古文：正统三年易土以石。
现代文：正统三年，改土堤为石堤。
English: After three years of orthodoxy, the earthen dike was changed to a stone dike.

古文：成化时，遣官筑重堤於高邮、邵伯、宝应、白马四湖老堤之东。
现代文：成化年间，派遣官吏修筑复堤于高邮、邵伯、寅应、白马四湖老堤之束。
English: During the Chenghua era, officials were dispatched to build a complex dike in Gaoyou, Shao Bo, Yin Ying, and the old dike of the Baima Four Lakes.

古文：而王恕为总河，修淮安以南诸决堤，且浚淮、扬漕河。
现代文：而王恕为总管治河之官，修筑淮安以南各处演决之堤，并且疏通淮、扬漕河。
English: And Wang Shou was the chief river official, building levees everywhere south of Huai'an, and dredging the Huai and Yangcao rivers.

古文：重湖壖民盗决溉田之罚，造闸〈石达〉以储湖水。
现代文：加重湖边百姓私开水道灌溉田地的惩罚，建立闸硅来蓄积湖水。
English: Increase the punishment for people on the lake for illegally opening waterways to irrigate fields, and build sluice gates to accumulate lake water.

古文：及大夏塞张秋，而昂又开康济，漕河上下无大患者二十馀年。
现代文：等到刘大夏堵塞了张秋，而白昂又开通了康济，漕河上下无大害有二十余年。
English: Wait until Liu Daxia blocked Zhangqiu, and Bai'an opened Kangji, Caohe has been harmless for more than 20 years.

古文：十六年，巡抚徐源言： 济宁地最高，必引上源洸水以济，其口在堈城石濑之上。
现代文：弘治十六年，巡抚徐源说： 济宁地势最高，一定要导引上源洸水来补济，其河口在垌城石濑之上。
English: In the 16th year of Hongzhi, the inspector Xu Yuan said: Jining has the highest terrain, it is necessary to guide the source of water to replenish, and its estuary is above the stone pier of Lucheng.

古文：元时治闸作堰，使水尽入南旺，分济南北运。
现代文：元朝时期，建造闸门修筑拦水堰，迫使河水全都流入南旺，分别补济南北运河。
English: During the Yuan Dynasty, a sluice gate was built to build a weir, forcing all the river water to flow into Nanwang and replenish the North-South Canal.

古文：成化间，易土以石。
现代文：成化年问，改土堰为石堰。
English: The earth weir was changed to a stone weir.

古文：夫土堰之利，水小则遏以入洮，水大则闭闸以防沙壅，听其漫堰西流。
现代文：土堰的好处是，水小的时候就阻止其水使流入洸河，水大的时候就关闭闸门以防止泥沙壅塞，任凭其漫遇土堰向西流。
English: The advantage of the earthen dam is that when the water is small, it will prevent its water from flowing into the Wei River, and when the water is large, it will close the gate to prevent the sediment from clogging, and let it flow westward.

古文：自石堰成，水遂横溢，石堰既坏，民田亦冲。
现代文：自从石堰修成，河水就泛滥，石堰既毁坏，民田也被水冲。
English: Since the stone weir was built, the river has flooded. The stone weir has been destroyed, and people's fields have been washed away.

古文：洸河沙塞，虽有闸门，压不能启。
现代文：洸河被泥沙淤塞，虽有闸门，被压住不能打开。
English: The Li River is silted up with mud and sand. Although there is a sluice gate, it cannot be opened.

古文：乞毁石复土，疏洸口壅塞以至济宁，而筑堈城迤西春城口子决岸。 
现代文：请求撤除石堰再修成土堰，疏通洸河口的淤塞达到济宁，修筑垌城以西春城口子溃决的河岸。 
English: It is requested to remove the stone weir and rebuild it into an earthen weir, clear the blockage at the mouth of the Min River to reach Jining, and build the riverbank at the mouth of the Spring City west of Min City.

古文：帝命侍郎李遂往勘，言： 堈城石堰，一可遏淤沙，不为南旺湖之害，一可杀水势，不虑戴村坝之冲，不宜毁。
现代文：皇帝命令侍郎李铲前去勘测，说： 垌城的石堰，一能阻止淤沙，不给南旺湖带来灾害，一能减缓水势，不必担心戴村坝被水冲击，不应该撤除。
English: The emperor ordered Li Shuo, a chamberlain, to investigate and said, "The stone weir in Lucheng can prevent silting and bring no disaster to Nanwang Lake, and can slow down the water level. There is no need to worry about the Daicun Dam being hit by water. It should not be removed."

古文：近堰积沙，宜浚。
现代文：靠近石堰的积沙，应当疏浚。
English: Sand deposits near rock weirs should be dredged.

古文：堈城稍东有元时旧闸，引洸水入济宁，下接徐、吕漕河。
现代文：垌城稍东有元朝时期的旧关门，导引洸水流入济宁，下接徐、吕漕河。
English: Slightly east of Lucheng, there is an old gate from the Yuan Dynasty, guiding the Lushui River to flow into Jining, and the Xu and Lu Cao Rivers to flow downstream.

古文：东平州戴村，则汶水入海故道也。
现代文：东平州戴村，则是汶水流入大海的故遒。
English: Dai Village, Dongping Prefecture, is where the water of the Wen River used to flow into the sea.

古文：自永乐初，横筑一坝，遏汶入南旺湖，漕河始通。
现代文：从永乐初年开始，横筑一坝，阻止汶水流入南旺湖，漕河开始畅通。
English: From the first year of Yongle, a dam was built horizontally to prevent the water from flowing into Nanwang Lake, and the Caohe River began to flow smoothly.

古文：今自分水龙王庙至天井闸九十里，水高三丈有奇，若洸河更浚而深，则汶流尽向济宁而南，临清河道必涸。
现代文：今从分水龙王庙到天井闸九十里，水高三丈多，假若洸河越挖越深，那么，汶水就会全部流向济宁而往南流，临清河道必然会干枯。
English: Now, it is ninety miles from the Dragon King Temple to the ceiling gate, and the water is more than three feet high. If the Yunnan River is dug deeper and deeper, then all the water will flow south to Jining, and the Linqing River will inevitably dry up.

古文：洸口不可浚。
现代文：洸河口不能疏通。
English: The estuary of the Min River cannot be dredged.

古文：堈城口至柳泉九十里，无关运道，可弗事。
现代文：垌城口到柳泉九十里，不关涉运道，可以不治理。
English: It is ninety miles from the city gate to Liuquan, and it is not related to the transportation road, so it can be left unregulated.

古文：柳泉至济宁，汶、泗诸水会流处，宜疏者二十馀里。
现代文：柳泉到济宁，是汶、泗各水汇合之处，应当疏通的地方有二十余里。
English: From Liuquan to Jining, there are more than 20 miles between the confluence of the Wen and Fen rivers, which should be dredged.

古文：春城口，外障汶水，内防民田，堤卑岸薄，宜与戴村坝并修筑。 
现代文：春城口，外要阻挡汶水流入，内要防止民田被冲，堤岸低而薄，应当与戴村坝一起修筑。 
English: Chuncheng mouth, outside to block the inflow of muddy water, inside to prevent people's fields from being washed away, the embankment is low and thin, it should be built together with the Dai village dam.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：正德四年十月，河决沛县飞云桥，入运。
现代文：正德四年十月，黄河在沛县飞云桥决堤，流入运河。
English: In October of the fourth year of Zhengde, the Yellow River broke through the dike of Feiyun Bridge in Pei County and flowed into the canal.

古文：寻塞。
现代文：不久淤塞。
English: It soon silted up.

古文：世宗之初，河数坏漕。
现代文：世宗初年，黄河多次毁坏漕河。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, the Yellow River repeatedly destroyed Caohe.

古文：嘉靖六年，光禄少卿黄绾论泉源之利，言： 漕河泉源皆发山东南旺、马场、樊村、安山诸湖。
现代文：嘉靖六年，光禄少卿黄绾分析泉源之利，说： 漕河泉源都发端于山东南旺、马场、樊村、安山各湖。
English: In the sixth year of Jiajing, Guanglu Shaoqing Huang Qi analyzed the benefits of springs and said: Caohe spring sources all originate in the lakes of Nanwang, Bajang, Dangcun and Ansan in Shandong.

古文：泉水所钟，亟宜修浚，且引他泉并蓄，则漕不竭。
现代文：泉水所集聚之处，应当赶快挖深，并且引导其它泉水一起积蓄，那么，漕河就不会枯竭。
English: The place where the spring water gathers should be quickly dug deep, and other springs should be guided to accumulate together, so that the Caohe River will not be depleted.

古文：南旺、马场堤外孙村地洼，若潴为湖，改作漕道，尤可免济宁高原浅涩之苦。 
现代文：南旺、马场堤外孙村地势低下，假若蓄积成湖，改作漕运之道，尤其可以免除济宁高原水浅阻碍舟船的困苦。 
English: Nanwang and Suncun outside the Horse Farm dike are low-lying. If they accumulate into a lake and are converted into a paddling path, they can, in particular, relieve the Jining Plateau of the hardships of shallow water hindering boats.

古文：帝命总河侍郎章拯议。
现代文：皇帝命总河侍郎章拯计议。
English: Emperor's commanding officer, the river steward, Rōzō, makes a rescue plan.

古文：而拯以黄水入运，运船阻沛上，方为御史吴仲所劾。
现代文：然而，章拯以黄河之水流入运河，漕运船只被阻于沛上，正被御史昊仲所弹劾。
English: However, Zhang Zheng used the Yellow River water to flow into the canal, and the rowing boat was blocked from entering the canal. He is being impeached by Gishi Haozhong.

古文：拯言： 河塞难遽通，惟金沟口迤北新冲一渠可令运船由此入昭阳湖，出沙河板桥。
现代文：章拯说： 河道淤塞难以快速疏通，只有金沟口往北新冲成的一道水渠，可使漕运船只由此进入昭阳湖，到沙河板桥。
English: Zhang Zheng said: It is difficult to clear the silted river quickly. Only a newly-made canal at the mouth of Jingou to the north can enable the rowing boats to enter Zhaoyang Lake and reach the Shahe Banqiao.

古文：其先阻浅者，则西历鸡冢寺，出庙道北口通行。
现代文：其首先受阻搁浅的船只，就往西经过鸡冢寺，到庙道北口而畅通运行。 
English: The stranded boats, which were the first to be blocked, ran westward past the Rooster Temple to the north exit of the temple road and ran smoothly.

古文：下部并议，未决。
现代文：下交到工部一起商议，没有议定。
English: It was submitted to the Ministry of Industry and Trade for discussion, but no agreement was reached.

古文：给事中张嵩言： 昭阳湖地庳，河势高，引河灌湖，必致弥漫，使湖道复阻。
现代文：给事中张嵩说： 昭阳湖地势低下，河道地势高，引河灌注于湖，必然导致湖水溢满而外流，使湖道又受阻碍。
English: In his report, Zhang Song said: The terrain of Shoyang Lake is low, and the terrain of the river channel is high. The inflow of the river into the lake will inevitably lead to the overflow of the lake and the outflow, and the lake channel will be obstructed.

古文：请罢拯，别推大臣。 
现代文：请求罢免章拯，另外推选大臣来治理。 
English: The petition calls for the dismissal of Zhang Zheng and the election of a new minister to govern.

古文：部议如嵩言。
现代文：工部商定依照张嵩的主张办。
English: The Ministry of Works agreed to carry out the work according to Zhang Song's proposal.

古文：拯再疏自劾，乞罢，不许。
现代文：章拯再次上奏自我弹劾，请求罢免。没有得到许可。
English: Zhang Zheng again appealed for self-impeachment and requested to be removed from office. He did not receive permission.

古文：卒引运船道湖中。
现代文：最终引导漕运船只取道湖中。
English: Finally, guide the rowing boat into the lake.

古文：其冬，诏拯还京别叙，而命择大臣督理。
现代文：这年冬，诏令章拯回到京城另外任官，又命挑选大臣去监督治河之事。
English: In the winter of that year, Emperor Zhao sent Zhang Zheng back to Beijing to take up another post, and ordered him to select a minister to oversee river management.

古文：诸大臣多进治河议。
现代文：各位大臣多进献治河的主张。
English: The ministers all supported the idea of dedicating more resources to river management.

古文：詹事霍韬谓： 前议役山东、河南丁夫数万，疏浚淤沙以通运。
现代文：詹事霍韬说： 从前主张役使山东、河南民工数万，疏通淤沙以便畅通漕运。
English: Zhan Zhihuo said: In the past, tens of thousands of migrant workers from Shandong and Henan were employed to clear the silt to facilitate smooth transportation.

古文：然沙随水下，旋浚旋淤。
现代文：然而，沙随水而下，一边疏通一边淤塞。
English: However, the sand flows down with the water, clearing the blockage as it goes.

古文：今运舟由昭阳湖入鸡鸣台至沙河，迂回不过百里。
现代文：今漕运之船由昭阳湖进入鸡呜台到沙河，迂回不过一百里。
English: Now the rowing boat travels from Zhaoyang Lake into Qiuwutai to the Shahe River, a detour of only a hundred miles.

古文：若沿湖筑堤，浚为小河，河口为闸，以待蓄泄，水溢可避风涛，水涸易为疏浚。三月而土堤成，一年而石堤成，用力少，取效速。
现代文：假若沿湖筑堤，疏浚成为小河，河口建立闸门，以供积蓄和排泄，河水泛溢时可避免波涛汹涌，河水干枯时容易进行疏浚三个月就把土堤筑成，一年就把石堤修成，用的人力少，获取效益快。
English: If a dike is built along the lake, the dredge will become a small river, and a sluice gate will be built at the mouth of the river to provide storage and discharge. When the river overflows, rough waves can be avoided, and when the river dries up, it is easy to dredge. The earthen dike will be built in three months, and the stone dike will be built in one year. Less manpower is used, and the benefits are obtained quickly.

古文：黄河愈溢，运道愈利，较之役丁夫以浚淤土，劳逸大不侔也。 
现代文：黄河越泛溢，运道越便利，比起用役使民工来疏通淤土，劳逸大不相同。 
English: The more the Yellow River overflows, the more convenient the transportation route. Compared with the use of migrant workers to dredge the silt, the work and rest are very different.

古文：尚书李承勋谓： 於昭阳湖左别开一河，引诸泉为运道，自留城沙河为尤便。 
现代文：尚书李承勋说： 在昭阳湖左另开通一条河道，引各泉水供给运道，从留城沙河起变得更加便利。 
English: Li Chengxun said: It is more convenient to start from Lucheng Shahe after opening a river channel on the left side of Shoyang Lake to supply water from various springs.

古文：与都御史胡世宁议合。
现代文：与都御史胡世宁的主张相同。
English: This is the same view as that of Metropolitan Historian Hu Shimin.

古文：七年正月，总河都御史盛应期奏如世宁策，请於昭阳湖东凿新河，自汪家口南出留城口，长百四十里，刻期六月毕工。
现代文：嘉靖七年正月，总河都御史盛应期所奏如同盟世宁的办法，请求在昭阳湖束开凿新河，从汪家口南到留城口，长一百四十里，限期六个月完工。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the Grand Historian of the Grand Duchy of China, Sheng, in response to the proposal of the League of Nations, requested that a new river be dug in Zhaoyang Lake, from the south of Wangjiakou to the city gate, a length of one hundred and forty miles, with a deadline of six months to complete.

古文：工未半，而应期罢去，役遂已。
现代文：工程未到一半，而盛应期被罢免离去，这项工程便停止。
English: The project was less than halfway finished when Sheng Yingjie was removed from his post and the project was halted.

古文：其后三十年，朱衡始循其遗迹，浚而成之。
现代文：这以后三十年，朱衡纔沿着其遗留的痕迹，疏浚而成新河。
English: Thirty years later, Zhu Hengyao dredged a new river along the remaining traces.

古文：是年冬，总河侍郎潘希会加筑济、沛间东西两堤，以拒黄河。
现代文：这年冬，总河侍郎潘希曾增筑济、沛之间东西两堤，用来抵御黄河之水。
English: In the winter of that year, Pan Xi, the steward of the Yellow River, increased the construction of two dikes between the east and west to resist the water of the Yellow River.

古文：十九年七月，河决野鸡冈，二洪涸。
现代文：嘉靖十九年七月，黄河在野鸡冈决堤，徐、吕二洪干涸。
English: In July of the 19th year of Jiajing, the Yellow River broke through the dike at Pheasant Hill, and the rivers Xu and Lü Erhong dried up.

古文：督理河漕侍郎王以旂请浚山东诸泉以济运，且筑长堤聚水，如闸河制。
现代文：督理河漕侍郎王以旃请求疏通山东各条河水来补济运道，并且修筑长堤积蓄河水，如同闸河形制。
English: The governor of the river, Wang Jiulong, made a request to dredge all the rivers in Shandong to supplement the transportation route, and to build a long dike to accumulate river water, like a sluice-shaped system.

古文：遂清旧泉百七十八，开新泉三十一。
现代文：于是，清理出旧水源一百七十八处，开挖新水源三十一处。
English: As a result, 178 old water sources were cleaned up and 31 new water sources were excavated.

古文：以旂复奏四事。
现代文：王以旃又上奏四件事情。
English: Wang Yixuan recited four more things.

古文：一请以诸泉分隶守土官兼理其事，毋使堙塞。
现代文：一是请把各水源隶属于当地地方官员兼管其事，不要使它堵塞。
English: First, please subordinate each water source to local officials and do not block it.

古文：一请於境山镇、徐、吕二洪之下，各建石闸，蓄水数尺以行舟，旁留月河以泄暴汛；筑四木闸於武家沟、小河口、石城、匙头湾，而置方船於沙坊等浅，以备捞浚。
现代文：二是请在境山镇、徐、旦二洪的下游，各建立石闸门，积蓄河水数尺深以便行船，旁边保留一条半月形河道以排泄突然到来的洪水；在武家沟、小河口、石城、匙头湾修筑四座木闸门，又设置并船在沙坊等浅水处，以准备捞浅疏通河道。
English: Second, please build stone sluice gates in the downstream areas of Jingshan Town, Xu and Tan Erhong to accumulate river water several feet deep for navigation, and keep a half-moon-shaped river channel next to it to drain the sudden flood; build four wooden sluice gates in Bujiagou, Xiaohekou, Shicheng and Shitou Bay, and set up boats in shallow water such as Shafang to prepare for dredging the river channel.

古文：一言漕河两岸有南旺、安山、马场、昭阳四湖，名为水柜，所以汇诸泉济漕河也。
现代文：三是说漕河两岸有南旺、安山、马场、昭阳四湖，名叫水柜，可以用来汇合各泉水以便补济漕河。
English: The third is that there are four lakes on both sides of the Caohe River, namely, Nanwang, Ansan, Horse Farm and Zhaoyang, which are called water cabinets and can be used to bring together the springs to replenish the Caohe River.

古文：豪强侵占，蓄水不多，而昭阳一湖淤成高地，大非国初设湖初意。
现代文：豪强侵占，蓄水不多，而昭阳一湖淤塞成为高地，完全不是建国初期设湖的本意。
English: It was not the original intention to build a lake in the early days of the founding of the People's Republic of China.

古文：宜委官清理，添置闸、坝、斗门，培筑堤岸，多开沟渠，浚深河底，以复四柜。
现代文：应当委派官员进行清理，增设闸、坝、斗门，培筑堤岸，多开沟渠，挖深河底，以恢复四水柜。
English: Officials should be appointed to clean up, add gates, dams, and sluice gates, build embankments, open more ditches, and dig deep river bottoms to restore the four water cabinets.

古文：一言黄河南徙，旧闸口俱塞，惟孙继一口独存。
现代文：四是说黄河改道向南，旧闸口全都淤塞，只有孙继一口单独存在。
English: The fourth is that the Yellow River has been diverted to the south, the old gates are all blocked, and only Sun Jizhe exists alone.

古文：导河出徐州小浮桥，下徐、吕二洪，此济运之大者。
现代文：导引黄河到徐州小浮桥，向下流到徐、吕二洪，这是补济运道的最大水源。
English: Guiding the Yellow River to Xuzhou Small Floating Bridge, flowing down to Xu and Lv Erhong, which is the largest source of water in the supply and transport channel.

古文：请於孙继口多开一沟，及时疏瀹，庶二洪得济。
现代文：请在孙继口多开一沟，及时疏导，希望二洪之水可以得到补济。
English: Please open one more ditch at Sunjikou and guide it in time. I hope that the water of Erhong can be replenished.

古文：帝可其奏，而以管泉专责之部曹。
现代文：皇帝同意他的奏请，而将管泉事务专门责令部曹承担。
English: The emperor agreed to his request, and specifically ordered Buzo to take charge of the management of the spring.

古文：徐、吕二洪者，河漕咽喉也。
现代文：徐州、吕梁二洪，是河漕的咽喉要道。
English: Xuzhou, Luliang Erhong, is the throat of the river.

古文：自陈瑄凿石疏渠，正统初，复浚洪西小河。
现代文：自从陈管凿石疏渠开始，正绕初年，又疏通洪西小河。
English: In the first year since Chen Guan began digging the stone channel, he also dredged the Hongxi River.

古文：漕运参将汤节又以洪迅败舟，於上流筑堰，逼水归月河，河南建闸以蓄水势。
现代文：漕运参将汤节又根据洪中水流迅急毁坏船只，在上游修筑拦水坝，迫使河水回到月河，河的南面建立闸门以积蓄水势。
English: According to the rapid flow of water in the middle of the flood, the rowing participants of the Tang Festival destroyed the boats, built dams upstream, forced the river water back to the Yue River, and built gates on the south side of the river to accumulate water potential.

古文：成化四年，管河主簿郭升以大石筑两堤，锢以铁锭，凿外洪败船恶石三百，而平筑里洪堤岸，又甃石岸东西四百馀丈。
现代文：成化四年，管河主簿郭升用大石修筑两堤，并用铁锭使其坚固，开凿外洪容易导致船只毁坏的有害大石三百处，又平筑裹洪堤岸，又在岸东西砌石四百余丈。
English: In the four years since its completion, Guosheng, the main channel of the river, has built two levees with large stones and made them strong with shovels, excavated three hundred harmful large stones that could easily lead to the destruction of ships in the outflow, leveled the flood embankment, and built more than four hundred masonry stones on both sides of the bank.

古文：十六年增甃吕梁洪石堤、石坝二百馀丈，以资牵挽。
现代文：十六年，增砌吕梁洪石堤、石坝二百余丈，以帮助牵拉船只。
English: In the 16th year, Luliangong stone dike and stone dam of more than 200 meters in height were built to help pull ships.

古文：及是建闸，行者益便之。
现代文：到这时建闸，行驶的船只更加感到便利。
English: At this time, the gate was built, and it was more convenient for ships to travel.

古文：四十四年七月，河大决沛县，漫昭阳湖，由沙河至二洪，浩渺无际，运道淤塞百馀里。
现代文：嘉靖四十四年七月，黄河在沛县大决堤，漫入昭阳湖，经由沙河到二洪，水势浩渺，无边无际，运道淤塞一百余里。
English: In July of the 44th year of Jiajing, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Pei County, flowing into Zhaoyang Lake, passing through the Sand River to Erhong. The water potential was immense, boundless, and the transport channel was blocked for more than 100 miles.

古文：督理河漕尚书朱衡循览盛应期所凿新河遗迹，请开南阳、留城上下。
现代文：督理河漕尚书朱衡巡枧盛应期所开凿新河遗迹，请求开通南阳、留城上下。
English: The superintendent of the river, Zhu Heng, inspected the remains of the new river excavated by Sheng Sheng, and requested that it be opened to Nanyang and remain up and down the city.

古文：总河都御史潘季驯不可。
现代文：总河都御史潘季驯没有允许。
English: It was not allowed for the general to be tamed by Pan Ji.

古文：衡言： 是河直秦沟，有所束隘。
现代文：朱衡说： 这河直通秦沟，有所约束而狭窄。
English: Zhu Heng said: This river flows directly into the Qin ditch, which is constrained and narrow.

古文：伏秋黄水盛，昭阳受之，不为壑也。 
现代文：夏秋黄河水势大，昭阳容纳它，不会成为沟壑。 
English: In summer and autumn, the water potential of the Yellow River is great. Soyang accommodates it, and it will not become a gully.

古文：乃决计开浚，身自督工，重惩不用命者。
现代文：于是决定开通疏浚，亲自督促施工，严惩不奉行命令的人。
English: As a result, it was decided to start dredging, personally supervise the construction, and severely punish those who did not follow the order.

古文：给事中郑钦劾衡故兴难成之役，虐民幸功。
现代文：给事中郑钦弹劾朱衡故意兴起难以成功的工程，虐害百姓希图侥幸成功。
English: In the case of Zheng Qin's impeachment of Zhu Heng, a project that was difficult to succeed deliberately arose, abusing the people and hoping to succeed by chance.

古文：朝廷遣官勘新旧河孰利。
现代文：朝廷派遣官吏勘测新旧河道哪个有利。
English: The imperial court dispatched officials to survey which of the old and new waterways was more advantageous.

古文：给事中何起鸣勘河还，言： 旧河难复有五，而新河之难成者亦有三。
现代文：给事中何起鸣勘测河道后回来说： 旧河道难以恢复的地方有五处，而新河道难以成功的地方也有三处。
English: When asked how many accidents occurred in the course of surveying the river, he replied: There are five places where it is difficult to restore the old river, and there are three places where it is difficult for the new river to succeed.

古文：顾新河多旧堤高阜，黄水难侵，睃而通之，运道必利。
现代文：只是新河道多有旧堤高山，黄河水很难进入，疏浚而使其畅通，运道一定有利。
English: However, most of the new river channels have old dikes and high mountains, and the Yellow River water is difficult to enter. Dredging will make it flow smoothly, and the transport channel will be advantageous.

古文：所谓三难者，一以夏村迤北地高，恐难接水，然地势高低，大约不过二丈，一视水平加深，何患水浅。
现代文：所说的三个难以成功的地方，一是夏村往北地势高，恐怕很难接通河水，然而地势高低之差，大约不超过二丈，一旦水位增高，担心什么河水浅少呢？
English: As for the three places that are difficult to succeed, the first is that Xia village is high to the north, and I am afraid it is difficult to connect the river water. However, the difference between the height of the land and the height of the land is not more than two feet. Once the water level rises, what is the concern about the shallowness of the river?

古文：一以三河口积沙深厚，水势湍急，不无阻塞，然建坝拦截，岁一挑浚之，何患沙壅。
现代文：二是三河口淤积泥沙深厚，水流湍急，不会没有阻塞，然而建坝拦截，每年进行一次疏浚，担心什么泥沙壅塞呢？
English: Second, the siltation of the Sanhe estuary is deep, the water flow is rapid, and there will be no blockage. However, a dam is built to intercept, and dredging is carried out once a year. What is the concern about the silt blockage?

古文：一以马家桥筑堤，微山取土不便，又恐水口投埽，势必不坚，然使委任得人，培筑高厚，无必不可措力之理。
现代文：三是在马家桥修筑堤岸，到微山取土不方便，又担心在水口投入拦水的埽，坝基必然不坚固，然而，假若委任得到适当的人，筑堤加高加厚，没有一定不能用力量来治理的道理。
English: The third is to build a dike in Majiaqiao. It is inconvenient to take soil from a hill, and there is also a fear of putting a damper at the water outlet. The dam foundation is necessarily not strong. However, if the appropriate person is appointed to build the dike higher and thicker, there is no reason why it cannot be managed by force.

古文：开新河便。 
现代文：开通新河有利。 
English: It is advantageous to open a new river.

古文：下廷臣集议，言新河已有次第，不可止。
现代文：下交朝廷大臣会合商议，说新河已经有了规模，不能停止。
English: He submitted it to the Imperial Ministers' Meeting for deliberation, saying that the Xinhe River had already reached a certain scale and could not be stopped.

古文：况百中桥至留城白洋浅，出境山，疏浚补筑，亦不全弃旧河，群议俱合。
现代文：况且百中桥到留城白洋浅，到境山，进行疏浚补筑，也不全部废弃旧河，众多大臣意见相同。
English: Moreover, not all of the bridges in the Hundred Middle Bridge, from Lucheng to Baiyanganao, and from Lucheng to Jingshan, will be dredged and repaired, nor will the old river be completely abandoned. Many ministers share the same opinion.

古文：帝意乃决。
现代文：皇帝纔决定下来。
English: The emperor decided to come down.

古文：时大雨，黄水骤发，决马家桥，坏新筑东西二堤。
现代文：这时天降大雨，黄河水突然上涨，在马家桥决堤，毁坏新筑东西二堤。
English: At this time, heavy rain fell, and the Yellow River water suddenly rose, breaking the dike at Majia Bridge and destroying the newly built east and west dikes.

古文：给事中王元春、御史黄襄皆劾衡欺误，起鸣亦变其说。
现代文：给事中王元春、御史黄襄都弹劾朱衡欺许误事，何起鸣也改变自己的说法。
English: In this matter, Wang Yuanchun and Gu Shi Huang Xiang both impeached Zhu Heng for deceiving and misleading, and they also changed their statements.

古文：会衡奏新旧河百九十四里俱已流通，漕船至南阳出口无滞。
现代文：恰逢朱衡上奏新旧河一百九十四里全部已经疏通，漕运船只到南阳出口无阻碍。
English: Coinciding with Zhu Heng's ascension to the throne, all 194 miles of the old and new rivers have been dredged, and there is no obstacle to the export of rowboats to Nanyang.

古文：诏留衡与季驯详议开上源、筑长堤之便。
现代文：诏令留下朱衡与潘季驯详细商议开通上游、修筑长堤的有利之处。
English: The edict left Zhu Heng and Pan Jitong to discuss in detail the advantages of opening upstream and building a long dike.

古文：隆庆元年正月，衡请罢上源议，惟开广秦沟，坚筑南长堤。
现代文：隆庆元年正月，朱衡请求取消疏通上游的主张，只疏浚加宽秦沟，牢固地修筑南边长堤。
English: In the first month of the first year of Longqing, Zhu Heng requested the cancellation of the upstream dredging proposal, only dredging and widening the Qin ditch, and firmly building the south side of the long embankment.

古文：五月，新河成，西去旧河三十里。
现代文：五月，新河修成，西边距旧河三十里。
English: In May, the new river was completed, and the west side was 30 miles away from the old river.

古文：旧河自留城以北，经谢沟、下沽头、中沽头、金沟四闸，过沛县，又经庙道口、湖陵城、孟阳、八里湾、谷亭五闸，而至南阳闸。
现代文：旧河从留城以北，经过谢沟、下沽头、中沽头、金沟四闸，过沛县，又经庙道口、湖陵城、孟阳、八里湾、谷亭五闸，然后到南阳闸。
English: From the north of Lucheng, the old river passes through the four gates of Xiegou, Shimo Shantou, Zhongshantou and Jingou, passes through Peixian County, and passes through the five gates of Miao Daokou, Huling City, Mengyang, Bali Bay and Gu Ting, and then to Nanyang Gate.

古文：新河自留城而北，经马家桥、西柳庄、满家桥、夏镇、杨庄、硃梅、利建七闸，至南阳闸合旧河，凡百四十里有奇。
现代文：新河从留城向北，经过马家桥、西柳庄、满家桥、夏镇、杨庄、朱梅、利建七闸，到达南阳闸汇合旧河，总共一百四十里有余。
English: The Xinhe River flows from the city of Liucheng to the north, passing through Majia Bridge, Xiliuzhuang, Manjia Bridge, Xia Town, Yangzhuang, Zhumei, and Lijian Seven Gates, and reaches the Nanyang Gate, where it meets the Old River. In total, there are more than 140 locks.

古文：又引鲇鱼诸泉及薛河、沙河注其中，而设坝於三河之口，筑马家桥堤，遏黄水入秦沟，运道乃大通。
现代文：又导引鲇鱼各泉水及薛河、沙河注入其中，然后在三条河的河口修筑拦水坝，修筑马家桥堤岸，阻遏黄河水使其流入秦沟，运道于是很畅通。
English: He also guided the eels to flow into the springs of the Xue River and the Sand River, and then built dams at the estuaries of the three rivers, built the embankment of the Majia Bridge, and blocked the Yellow River water from flowing into the Qin Canal, so the transportation route was very smooth.

古文：未几，鲇鱼口山水暴决，没漕艘。
现代文：不久，鲇鱼口被山水突然冲决，沉没漕运船只。
English: Not long after, the Herring Estuary was suddenly washed away by the mountain torrent, sinking a rowing boat.

古文：帝从衡请，自东邵开支河三道以分泄之，又开支河於东邵之上，历东沧桥以达百中桥，凿豸里沟诸处为渠，使水入赤山湖，由之以归吕孟湖，下境山而去。
现代文：皇帝依从朱衡的奏请，从束邵开通支河三条用来分泄其水，又在柬邵的上游开通支河，经过束沧桥然后到达百中桥，凿穿豸裹沟各处为沟渠，使水流入赤山湖，从这里又回到吕孟湖，往下流到境山而离去。
English: In accordance with Zhu Heng's request, the emperor opened three tributaries from Shaoqiao to distribute its water. He also opened a tributary in the upper reaches of Shaoqiao, passed through Shaoqiao and then reached Baizhong Bridge. He cut through the ditch everywhere to make a ditch, so that the water flowed into Chishan Lake. From here it returned to Lvmeng Lake and flowed down to Jingshan and left.

古文：衡召入为工部尚书，都御史翁大立代，上言： 漕河资泉水，而地形东高西下，非湖潴之则涸，故漕河以东皆有柜；非湖泄之则溃，故漕河以西皆有壑。
现代文：朱衡被召入朝廷任工部尚书，都御史翁大立代理他的职位，上奏说： 漕河利用泉水，然而地形东高西低，没有湖蓄积它就会干涸，所以漕河以束都有水柜；没有湖排泄水就会演决，所以漕河以西都有深壑。
English: Zhu Heng was called to the imperial court to serve as the secretary of the Ministry of Works, and the governor of the capital, Shi Wengdali, acted as his representative. He said: The Caohe River uses spring water, but the terrain is low in the east and west. If there is no lake to accumulate it, it will dry up. Therefore, there are water cabinets in every bundle of the Caohe River; if there is no lake to drain the water, it will be drained, so there are deep valleys west of the Caohe River.

古文：黄流逆奔，则以昭阳湖为散漫之区；山水东突，则以南阳湖为潴蓄之地。
现代文：黄河水逆流奔泻，就把昭阳湖作为河水漫流的地区；大水往东奔突，就把南阳湖作为蓄积河水的地方。
English: As the Yellow River water flows against the current, Zhaoyang Lake is regarded as the area where the river water flows freely; as the water rushes eastward, Nanyang Lake is regarded as the place where the river water accumulates.

古文：宜由回回墓开通以达鸿沟，令谷亭、湖陵之水皆入昭阳湖，即浚鸿沟废渠，引昭阳湖水沿渠东出留城。
现代文：应当从回回墓开通以到达鸿沟，让谷亭、湖陵的水都流入昭阳湖，立即疏通鸿沟废渠，引昭阳湖水沿着沟渠往东到留城。
English: It is necessary to open the passage from the tomb of Hui Hui to reach the chasm, let the water from Gu Ting and Huling flow into Zhaoyang Lake, immediately dredge the waste canal of the chasm, and lead the water of Zhaoyang Lake along the ditch to the east to Lucheng.

古文：其湖地退滩者，又可得田数千顷。 
现代文：湖水退后所形成的沙滩，又可获得土地敷千顷。 
English: The sandy beach formed by the receding water of the lake can also obtain thousands of hectares of land.

古文：大立又言： 薛河水湍悍，今尽注赤山湖，入微山湖以达吕孟湖，此尚书衡成绩也。
现代文：翁大立又说： 薛河水流湍急汹涌，今完全灌注于赤山湖，流入微山湖然后到达吕孟湖，这就是尚书朱衡的成绩。
English: Weng Dali also said: The Xuehe River has a rapid and turbulent flow, and is now completely perfused in the Akashan Lake, flowing into the Weishan Lake and then reaching the Lvmen Lake. This is the achievement of Shangshu Zhuheng.

古文：惟吕孟之南为邵家岭，黄流填淤，地形高仰，秋水时至，翕纳者小，浸淫平野，夺民田之利。
现代文：祇是吕孟之南有邵家岭，黄河水夹带泥沙淤积，地形高仰，秋水按季节到来的时候，容纳的水很少，淹没平旷的田野，夺去百姓土地之利。
English: Just south of Lvmeng is Shaujialing. The Yellow River is silted up with silt, and the terrain is high. When the autumn rains come in season, there is very little water, flooding the flat fields and depriving the people of their land.

古文：微山之西为马家桥，比草创一堤以开运道，土未及坚而时为积水所撼，以寻丈之址，二流夹攻，虑有倾圮。
现代文：微山湖的西面是马家桥，近来新修一堤来开通运道，泥土还没有达到坚实而这时被积水所动摇，以八尺或一丈的堤基，二水夹攻，担心有垮塌的危险。
English: On the west side of Weishan Lake is the Majia Bridge. Recently, a new embankment was built to open the passageway. The soil had not yet reached solidity and was shaken by the accumulated water. The foundation of the embankment, which is eight feet or one meter high, was caught between the two waters, and it was feared that there was a risk of collapse.

古文：宜凿邵家岭，令水由地浜沟出境山以入漕河，则湖地可耕，河堤不溃。
现代文：应当疏通邵家岭，让水经由地浜沟到境山然后流入漕河，那磨湖地就可以耕种，河堤不会演决。
English: Shaojialing should be dredged, and the water should be allowed to flow through the ditch to the mountains and then into the Caohe River. The lake can be cultivated, and the river dike will not be breached.

古文：更於马家桥建减水闸，视旱涝为启闭，乃通漕长策也。 
现代文：另在马家桥建立碱水闸，根据旱滂情况开启或关闭，这纔是畅通漕运的长久之计。 
English: In addition, an alkali sluice will be built in Majiaqiao, which will be opened or closed according to the drought and flood situation. This sluice is a long-term solution for smooth transportation.

古文：并从之。
现代文：全都依从他的主张。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：三年七月，河决沛县，茶城淤塞，粮艘二千馀皆阻邳州。
现代文：隆庆三年七月，黄河在沛县决堤，茶城淤塞，粮船二千余只全在邳州被阻。
English: In July of the third year of Longqing, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Pei County, the tea city was silted up, and more than two thousand grain ships were blocked in Luzhou.

古文：大立言： 臣按行徐州，循子房山，过梁山，至境山，入地浜沟，直趋马家桥，上下八十里间，可别开一河以漕。 
现代文：翁大立说： 臣巡行徐州，沿着子房山，经过梁山，到达境山，进入地浜沟，直奔马家桥，上下八十里之间，可以另外开通一条河道作为漕运。 
English: Weng Dali said: The minister will march through Xuzhou, along the Zifang Mountain, through the Liang Mountain, reach the Jingshan Mountain, enter the beach ditch, go straight to the Majia Bridge, and between the upper and lower eighty miles, another river can be opened as a rowing transport.

古文：即所谓泇河也。
现代文：就是所说的洳河。
English: That is the so-called Lugu River.

古文：请集廷议，上即命行之。
现代文：请集中朝廷大臣议论。皇上于是命令施行。
English: Please concentrate the discussion among the ministers of the Imperial Court. The Emperor then issued an order to implement it.

古文：未几，黄落漕通，前议遂寝。
现代文：不久，黄河水下降漕运畅通，先前的主张全部停止。
English: Soon, the Yellow River water-descending cisterns were running smoothly, and all previous claims were stopped.

古文：时淮水涨溢，自清河至淮安城西淤三十馀里，决礼、信二坝出海，宝应湖堤多坏。
现代文：这时淮水泛滥，从清河到淮安城西淤塞三十余里，冲决礼、信二坝到达大海，宝应湖堤岸多被毁坏。
English: At this time, the Huai River flooded, silting up for more than 30 miles from the Qing River to the west of Huai'an City, and the breakwater and Xin Er Dam reached the sea. The embankment of Baoying Lake was mostly destroyed.

古文：山东诸水从直河出邳州。
现代文：山东各水从直河流出到邳州。
English: All the water in Shandong flows from Zhijiang River to Ganzhou.

古文：大立以闻。
现代文：翁大立上报朝廷。
English: Weng Da stood up and reported to the imperial court.

古文：其冬，自淮安板闸至清河西湖嘴开浚垂成，而里口复塞。
现代文：这年冬，从淮安板闸到清河西湖嘴疏通河道快要完成，而里口又淤塞。
English: This winter, the dredging of the river channel from the Huai'an sluice gate to the west end of the Qinghe Lake is almost complete, but the inner mouth is blocked.

古文：督漕侍郎赵孔昭言： 清江一带黄河五十里，宜筑堰以防河溢；淮河高良涧一带七十馀里，宜筑堰以防淮涨。 
现代文：督漕侍郎赵孔昭说： 清江一带黄河五十里，应当修筑堤堰来防止河水泛溢；淮河高良涧一带七十余里，应当修筑堤堰来防止淮水上涨。 
English: Zhao Kongzhao, the overseer of the oarsmen, said: For 50 miles of the Yellow River around the Qingjiang River, we should build a dike to prevent the river from overflowing; for more than 70 miles around the Gaoliangyu of the Huai River, we should build a dike to prevent the rise of the Huai River.

古文：帝令亟浚里口，与大立商筑堰事宜，并议海口筑塞及宝应月河二事。
现代文：皇帝命令赶快疏通里口，与翁大立商议修筑堤堰的事情，并且商讨疏通海口堵塞及开通宝应半月形河道二事。
English: The emperor ordered to clear the estuary as soon as possible, and discussed the construction of the dike with Weng Dali, and discussed the unblocking of the estuary blockage and the opening of the Baoying crescent-shaped channel.

古文：四年六月，淮河及鸿沟境山疏浚工竣。
现代文：隆庆四年六月，淮河及鸿沟境山疏浚工程竣工。
English: In June of the fourth year of Longqing, the dredging project of the Huaihe River and the Boundary Mountains of the Great Divide was completed.

古文：大立方奏闻，诸水忽骤溢，决仲家浅，与黄河合，茶城复淤。
现代文：翁大立正上奏报告，各条河水突然泛滥，在仲家浅决堤，与黄河汇合，茶城又淤塞。
English: Weng Dalit was delivering a report. All the rivers suddenly flooded, breaking through the shallow dike in Zhongjia, merging with the Yellow River, and silting up in Cha Cheng.

古文：未几，自泰山庙至七里沟，淮河淤十馀里，其水从朱家沟旁出，至清河县河南镇以合於黄河。
现代文：不久，从泰山庙到七里沟，淮河淤塞十余里，其水从朱家沟旁流出，到清河县河南镇又汇合于黄河。
English: Soon, the Huai River was silted up for more than ten miles from Taishan Temple to Shili ditch, and its water flowed out from the side of Zhujiagou and joined the Yellow River in Henan Town, Qinghe County.

古文：大立请开新庄闸以通回船，兼浚古睢河，泄二洪水，且分河自鱼沟下草湾，保南北运道。
现代文：翁大立请求开通新庄闸来通行返回的船只，同时疏通古睢河，排泄二洪之水，并且分支河从鱼沟下到草湾，保护南北运道。
English: Weng Dali requested that the Xinzhuang Lock be opened for the passage of returning ships, and the Guji River be dredged to drain the water of the Erhong River, and the branch river from the fish ditch to the grass bay to protect the north-south transportation route.

古文：帝命新任总河都御史潘季驯区画。
现代文：皇帝命令新任总河都御史潘季驯规划。
English: The emperor ordered the newly appointed commander-in-chief of the capital of Sichuan Province, Pan Ji, to tame the plan.

古文：顷之，河大决邳州，睢宁运道淤百馀里。
现代文：不久，黄河在邳州大决堤，睢宁漕运水道淤塞一百余里。
English: Soon, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Zhangzhou, and the Huning Canal was blocked for more than a hundred miles.

古文：大立请开泇口、萧县二河。
现代文：翁大立请求开通洳口、萧县二河。
English: Weng Dali requested the opening of Hukou and Erhe in Xiao County.

古文：会季驯筑塞诸决，河水归正流，漕船获通。
现代文：适逢潘季驯堵塞各处决口，黄河水归入正流，漕运之船又获得畅通。
English: At the right time, Pan Ji Rui blocked all the sluice gates, the Yellow River water was classified as the main stream, and the rowing boat was smooth again.

古文：大立、孔昭皆以迟误漕粮削籍，开泇之议不果行。
现代文：翁大立、趟孔昭都因延误了漕运粮食而被除去官籍，开通洳口的主张最后没有施行。
English: Weng Dairi and Wai Kong Zhao were both stripped of their official status for delaying the transportation of grain by rowing, and their proposal to open the gate was ultimately not implemented.

古文：五年四月，河复决邳州王家口，自双沟而下，南北决口十馀，损漕船运军千计，没粮四十万馀石，而匙头湾以下八十里皆淤。
现代文：隆庆五年四月，黄河又在邳州王家口决堤，从双沟以下，南北决口十余处，损失漕船运粮军人数以千讦，吞没漕粮四十万余石，而匙头湾以下八十里全被淤塞。
English: In April of the fifth year of Longqing, the Yellow River broke through the dike at Wangjiakou, Luzhou. From Shuanggou and below, there were more than ten breaches from north to south. The number of rowing boats carrying grain was lost by thousands of cormorants, and the rowing grain was swallowed up by more than 400,000 stones. And the 80 miles below Shao Tou Bay were completely blocked.

古文：於是胶、莱海运之议纷起。
现代文：于是，胶、莱海运的主张纷纷而起。
English: As a result, the idea of transporting rubber and rubber products by sea arose one after another.

古文：会季驯奏邳河功成。帝以漕运迟，遣给事中雒遵往勘。
现代文：正值潘季驯奏请治理邳河工程完成，皇帝以漕运缓慢，派遣给事中雒遵前往勘测。
English: At the time of Pan Ji's invitation to govern the Minhe River, the project was completed, and the emperor dispatched Shizhong to survey the situation by slow rowing.

古文：总漕陈炌及季驯俱罢官。
现代文：总漕陈蚧及潘季驯都被罢免官职。
English: General Cao Chen Rong and Pan Jitai were both removed from their posts.

古文：六年，从雒遵言，修筑茶城至清河长堤五百五十里，三里一铺，铺十夫，设官画地而守。又接筑茶城至开封两岸堤。
现代文：隆庆六年，依从雒遵的计策，修筑茶城到清河长堤五百五十里，每三里设立一个铺，每个铺安排十个民工，设置官员划分地区而守护又接着修筑茶城到开封两岸河堤。
English: In the sixth year of the Longqing, in accordance with the strategy of Gong Zun, the tea city was built up to the Qinghe long embankment of 550 miles, with a shop set up every three miles, ten migrant workers arranged for each shop, officials set up to divide the area and guard it, and then the tea city was built up to the Kaifeng river embankment.

古文：从朱衡言，缮丰、沛大黄堤。
现代文：依从朱衡的计策，修缮丰、沛大黄堤。
English: According to Zhu Heng's strategy, the repair of Feng and Pei Dahuang dykes has been completed.

古文：衡又言： 漕河起仪真讫张家湾二千八百馀里，河势凡四段，各不相同。
现代文：朱衡又说： 漕河起于仪真到达张家湾二千八百余里，河势共分四段，各段都不相同。
English: Zhu Heng also said: Caohe starts from Yizhen and reaches Zhangjiawan for more than 2,800 miles. The river is divided into four sections, and each section is different.

古文：清江浦以南，临清以北，皆远隔黄河，不烦用力。
现代文：清江浦以南，临清以北，都远离黄河，不需多用力。
English: The south of Qingjiangpu and the north of Linqing are both far away from the Yellow River, so you don't need to work hard.

古文：惟茶城至临清，则闸诸泉为河，与黄相近。
现代文：只有茶城到临清，则是拦截各水成为河，与黄河靠近。
English: Only the tea city to Linqing is to intercept each water to become a river, and is close to the Yellow River.

古文：清河至茶城，则黄河即运河也。
现代文：清河到茶城，黄河也即运河。
English: From Qinghe to Cha Cheng, the Yellow River is also a canal.

古文：茶城以北，当防黄河之决而入；茶城以南，当防黄河之决而出。
现代文：茶城以北，应当防备黄河决口而流入；茶城以南，应当防备黄河决口而流出。
English: To the north of the tea city, it is necessary to prevent the Yellow River from breaking and flowing in; to the south of the tea city, it is necessary to prevent the Yellow River from breaking and flowing out.

古文：防黄河即所以保运河，故自茶城至邳、迁，高筑两堤，宿迁至清河，尽塞缺口，盖以防黄水之出，则正河必淤，昨岁徐、邳之患是也。
现代文：防备黄河就是保护运河的手段，所以从茶城到邳、迁，应高筑两岸河堤，宿迁到清河，应全部堵塞决口，用来防备黄河水的流出，那么，正河就一定会淤塞，去年徐、邳的祸患就在这里。
English: The protection of the Yellow River is a means of protecting the canal. Therefore, from Chaecheng to Jiuquan and Qianqian, the embankments on both sides of the river should be built high, and from Suqian to Qinghe, the outfalls should all be blocked to prevent the outflow of Yellow River water. Then, the Zhenghe River will certainly be silted up. This is where the disaster of Xu and Qianqian occurred last year.

古文：自茶城秦沟口至丰、沛、曹、单，创筑增筑以接缕水旧堤，盖以防黄水之入，则正河必决，往年曹、沛之患是也。
现代文：从茶城秦沟口到丰、沛、曹、单，新筑和增筑堤岸来连接缕水旧堤，用来防备黄河水的流入，那么，正河就一定会决口，往年曹、沛的祸患就在这里。
English: From the mouth of Qin ditch in Cha Cheng to Feng, Pei, Cao and Shan, new and additional embankments will be built to connect the old embankment with the old embankment to prevent the inflow of Yellow River water. Then, the Zhenghe River will surely break through, and the scourge of Cao and Pei in previous years will be here.

古文：二处告竣，故河深水束，无旁决中溃之虞。
现代文：两处工程宣告竣工，所以河床加深水受约束，没有从旁边决口和中间溃塌的忧虑。
English: Two projects have been declared completed, so the riverbed is constrained by the deepening of the water, and there is no concern about the rupture from the side and the collapse in the middle.

古文：氵市县之窑子头至秦沟口，应筑堤七十里，接古北堤。
现代文：沛县的窖子头到秦沟口，应当修筑河堤七十里，连接古北堤。
English: It is necessary to build a river embankment for 70 miles from Zhaozitou in Peixian to Qinkou, and connect it to the ancient north embankment.

古文：徐、邳之间，堤逼河身，宜於新堤外别筑遥堤。 
现代文：徐、邳之间，堤岸逼近河床，应当在新堤之外另外修筑遥堤。 
English: If the embankment is close to the riverbed between Xu and Lu, a distant embankment should be built in addition to the new embankment.

古文：诏如其议，以命总河侍郎万恭。
现代文：诏令依从他的主张，以此命令总河侍郎万恭执行。
English: The imperial edict obeyed his suggestion and ordered the general river attendant, Banqong, to carry it out.

古文：万历元年，恭言： 祖宗时造浅船近万，非不知满载省舟之便，以闸河流浅，故不敢过四百石也。
现代文：万历元年，万恭说： 祖宗时造浅水船将近一万只，不是不知道满载节省船只的便利，因为闸河水流浅，所以不敢超过四百石。
English: In the first year of Wanli, Wanyong said, "Our ancestors built nearly ten thousand shallow-water boats. It is not that they did not know the convenience of saving boats when they were fully loaded. Because the water flow of the Zhahe River is shallow, they did not dare to exceed four hundred kilos.

古文：其制底平、仓浅，底平则入水不深，仓浅则负载不满。
现代文：其形制船底平坦、船仓低浅，底平坦那么入水就不深，仓低浅那么负载就不满。
English: The shape of the bottom of the ship is flat, and the hold is shallow. If the bottom is flat, the water will not be deep, and if the hold is shallow, the load will not be satisfied.

古文：又限浅船用水不得过六拏，伸大指与食指相距为一拏，六拏不过三尺许，明受水浅也。
现代文：又限制浅水船吃水不能超过六孥，伸直大指与食指相距为一孥，六孥不过三尺左右，明显的吃水很浅。
English: In addition, the draft of shallow-draft vessels is limited to no more than six fathoms. The distance between the extended thumb and index finger is one fathom, and six fathoms is only about three feet. The apparent draft is very shallow.

古文：今不务遵行，而竞雇船搭运。
现代文：今不专力遵照执行，却争着雇船搭运。
English: Now, instead of focusing on compliance, they are scrambling to hire ships.

古文：雇船有三害，搭运有五害，皆病河道。
现代文：雇船有三个害处，搭运有五个害处，仝都对河道有害。
English: There are three harms in hiring boats, five harms in transporting them, and the rafts are all harmful to the river.

古文：请悉遵旧制。 
现代文：请求完全遵照旧有的规定。 
English: The request is in full compliance with the previous regulations.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：恭又请复淮南平水诸闸，上言： 高、宝诸湖周遭数百里，西受天长七十馀河，徒恃百里长堤，若障之使无疏泄，是溃堤也。
现代文：万恭又请求修复淮水之南平水各闸门，上奏说： 高、宝各湖周围数百里，西边容纳天长七十余河水，仅仅依赖百里长堤，假若阻挡它使不能疏通排泄，这是让堤溃决。
English: Wanyong also requested that the gates of the South Pingshui of Huai Shui be repaired. The report said: There are hundreds of miles around the lakes of Gao and Bao, and the west side accommodates more than seventy rivers. It only relies on the hundred-mile long dike. If it is blocked and cannot be drained, it is to let the dike break.

古文：以故祖宗之法，偏置数十小闸於长堤之间，又为令曰： 但许深湖，不许高堤 ，故设浅船浅夫取湖之淤以厚堤。
现代文：因此祖宗的办法是，普遍地建立数十个小闸门在长堤之间，又制定命令说 祇许挖深湖地，不许增高堤岸 ，所以设立浅水船和捞浅役夫来捞取湖中的淤泥用来加厚堤岸。
English: Therefore, the ancestor's approach was to generally build dozens of small gates between the long dikes, and to formulate an order saying that only deep lake areas were allowed to be dug, and the embankment was not allowed to be raised. Therefore, shallow-water vessels and shallow-water fishermen were set up to extract silt from the lake to be used to thicken the embankment.

古文：夫闸多则水易落而堤坚，浚勤则湖愈深而堤厚，意至深远也。
现代文：闸门多那么水就容易退落因而堤岸坚固，疏浚勤那么湖就越深而堤岸越厚，考虑得十分深远。
English: The more locks, the easier it is for the water to recede and the stronger the embankment will be. The more dredging, the deeper the lake and the thicker the embankment. This is a very far-reaching consideration.

古文：比年畏修闸之劳，每坏一闸即堙一闸，岁月既久，诸闸尽堙，而长堤为死障矣。
现代文：近年害怕修闸的辛劳，每坏一闸就堵塞一闸，时间已经很久，各闸全部堵塞，而长堤成为死的堤障了。
English: In recent years, fearing the hard work of repairing locks, every broken lock is blocked. It has been a long time, all locks are blocked, and the long embankment has become a dead embankment.

古文：畏浚浅之苦，每湖浅一尺则加堤一尺，岁月既久，湖水捧起，而高、宝为盂城矣。
现代文：害怕疏浚的辛苦，每湖水浅一尺就加高堤岸一尺，时间已经很久，湖水捧垫而起，因而高、宝成为水盂一样的城了。
English: Afraid of the hard work of dredging, every foot of shallow water in the lake has raised the embankment by one foot. It has been a long time, and the lake has risen up, so Gao Bao has become a city like a leech.

古文：且湖漕勿堤与无漕同，湖堤勿闸与无堤同。
现代文：况且湖漕不要堤岸就与没有湖漕一样，湖堤不要闸门就与没有湖堤一样。
English: Moreover, a lake without a bank is the same as a lake without a bank, and a lake without a dam is the same as a lake without a dam.

古文：陈瑄大置减水闸数十，湖水溢则泻以利堤，水落则闭以利漕，最为完计。
现代文：陈管大量建立减水闸数十处，湖水满了就排泄使利于湖堤，湖水退落就关闭使利于湖漕，是最为完备的计策。
English: Chen Guan has built dozens of sluice gates in large quantities. When the lake is full, it is drained to benefit the lake dike, and when the lake recedes, it is closed to benefit the lake. This is the most complete strategy.

古文：积久而减水故迹不可复得，湖且沉堤。
现代文：积蓄时间长然后削减湖水的痕迹不能再得到，湖水将好像使堤的高度降低。
English: If the accumulation time is long and then the lake water can no longer be reduced, the lake water will seem to lower the height of the dike.

古文：请复建平水闸，闸欲密，密则水疏，无涨懑患；闸欲狭，狭则势缓，无啮决虞。 
现代文：请求再建平水闸，闸要密，闸密那么湖水就可疏导，没有涨漫之患；闸要窄，闸窄那么水势就平缓，没有溃决之忧。 
English: Request to rebuild the sluice gate, the gate should be dense, the gate should be dense so that the lake water can be diverted, and there is no danger of flooding; the gate should be narrow, the gate should be narrow so that the water potential is smooth, and there is no fear of breaking.

古文：尚书衡覆奏如其请。
现代文：尚书朱衡覆奏依照他的请求。
English: Shangshu Zhu Heng replayed in accordance with his request.

古文：於是仪直、江都、高邮、宝应、山阳设闸二十三，浚浅凡五十一处，各设捞浅船二，浅夫十。
现代文：于是在仪真、江都、高邮、宝应、山阳设立闸门二十三处，疏浚淤浅共五十一处，各设立捞浅船二只，捞浅役夫十人。
English: As a result, 23 sluice gates were set up in Yizhen, Jiangdu, Gaoyou, Baoying and Sanyang, and a total of 51 places were dredged, with two dredging boats and ten dredge operators set up.

古文：恭又言： 清江浦河六十里，陈瑄浚至天妃祠东，注於黄河。
现代文：万恭又说： 清江浦河六十里，陈管疏通到天妃祠束，灌注于黄河。
English: Vangong also said: Sixty miles of the Qingjiang Puhe River, Chen Guanzhong dredged to Tianfei Ancestral Shrine, and poured into the Yellow River.

古文：运艘出天妃口入黄穿清特半饷耳。
现代文：运输船只出天妃口进入黄河通过清江浦，仅仅半天时间。
English: It takes only half a day for a transport ship to go from Tianfeigou into the Yellow River through Qingjiangpu.

古文：后黄涨，逆注入口，清遂多淤。
现代文：后来黄河水上涨，逆流注入其口，清江浦于是多处淤塞。
English: Later, the Yellow River water rose, and the backwash flowed into its mouth. As a result, Qingjiangpu was silted up in many places.

古文：议者不制天妃口而遽塞之，令淮水勿与黄值。
现代文：谋议的人不控制天妃口而仓猝堵塞它，使淮河水不与黄河水相遇。
English: The planners did not control the mouth of the Tianfei River, but suddenly blocked it, so that the water of the Huai River did not meet the water of the Yellow River.

古文：开新河以接淮河，曰 接清流勿接浊流，可不淤也 。
现代文：开挖新河来接通淮河，叫做 接通清水不接通浊水，可以不被淤塞了 。
English: Digging a new river to connect the Huai River is called connecting clear water without connecting salty water, and it can be unblocked.

古文：不知黄河非安流之水，伏秋盛发，则西拥淮流数十里，并灌新开河。
现代文：不知道黄河不是平稳流动之水，夏秋多发生洪水，就向西推送淮水数十里，并且灌注于新开通的河。
English: Not knowing that the Yellow River is not a smooth-flowing water and that floods often occur in summer and autumn, they pushed the floodwater dozens of miles to the west and poured it into the newly opened river.

古文：彼天妃口，一黄水之淤耳。
现代文：那个天妃口，只是黄河水的一处淤塞而已。
English: That Tianfeigou is just a blockage in the Yellow River.

古文：今淮、黄会於新闸开河口，是二淤也。
现代文：今淮水、黄河汇合于新开通的河口，这是二河的淤塞了。
English: Now the Huai River and the Yellow River are converging at the newly opened estuary, which is the silting up of the two rivers.

古文：防一淤，生二淤，又生淮、黄交会之浅。
现代文：防止一河的淤塞，发生二河的淤塞，又发生淮水、黄河汇合的淤浅。
English: prevent the silting up of the first river, the silting up of the second river, and the silting up of the Huai River and the confluence of the Yellow River.

古文：岁役丁夫千百，浚治方毕，水过复合。
现代文：每年役使民工千百人，疏浚治理刚刚完成，水过之后又合拢。
English: Every year, thousands of migrant workers are employed. The dredging treatment has just been completed, and it will be closed again after the water passes.

古文：又使运艘迂八里浅滞而始达於清河，孰与出天妃口者之便且利？
现代文：又迫使运输船只迂回八里浅滩滞流，然后纔到达清诃，与出于天妃口的方便又有利相比怎么样？
English: How does it compare with the convenience and advantage of sailing out of Tianfeikou, forcing the transport ships to go around the eight-mile shoal to get out of the stagnant current, and then sailing to Qingdao?

古文：请建天妃闸，俾漕船直达清河。
现代文：请求建立天妃闸，使漕运船只直接到达清河。
English: It was requested to build the Tianfei Lock to enable rowing vessels to reach Qinghe directly.

古文：运尽而黄水盛发，则闭闸绝黄，水落则启天妃闸以利商船。
现代文：运完然后黄河水大涨，就关闭闸门断绝黄河水，水退落就打开天妃闸以利于商船。
English: After transportation, when the Yellow River water rises sharply, the gate will be closed to cut off the Yellow River water, and when the water recedes, the Tianfei Gate will be opened to benefit the merchant ship.

古文：新河口勿浚可也。 。
现代文：新开河口不进行疏浚也可以了。 
English: It is now possible to open a new estuary without dredging.

古文：乃建天妃庙口石闸。
现代文：于是建立天妃庙口石闸门。
English: As a result, the stone sluice gate at the entrance to the Temple of Heaven was built.

古文：恭又言： 由黄河入闸河为茶城，出临清板闸七百馀里，旧有七十二浅。
现代文：万恭又说： 从黄河流入闸河为茶城，到临清板闸七百余里，原先有七十二处浅滩。
English: Wang Gong also said: From the Yellow River into the Gate River for the tea city, to the Linqing Gate, there are more than seven hundred miles, and originally there were seventy-two shoals.

古文：自创开新河，汶流平衍，地势高下不甚相悬，七十浅悉为通渠。
现代文：自从开通新河，汶水平坦宽广，地势高低相差不是很大，七十处浅滩全部变成畅通的水道。
English: Since the opening of the Xinshe River, the level of the Wen River is flat and wide, the difference in elevation is not very large, and all 70 shoals have become smooth waterways.

古文：惟茶、黄交会间，运盛之时，正值黄河水落之候，高下不相接，是以有茶城黄家闸之浅，连年患之。
现代文：只有茶城、黄家闸汇合之间，运河水大的时候，正好遇上黄河水退落的时节，高低不相连接，因此有茶城黄家闸的淤浅，连续多年发生灾害。
English: Only between the confluence of Cha Cheng and Huangjiagate, when the canal water is high, it just happens to be the time when the Yellow River water recedes. The high and low are not connected, so there is silting of Cha Cheng and Huangjiagate, and disasters have occurred for many years.

古文：祖宗时，尝建境山闸，自新河水平，闸没泥淖且丈馀。其闸上距黄家闸二十里，下接茶城十里，因故基累石为之，可留黄家闸外二十里之上流，接茶城内十里之下流，且挟二十里水势，冲十里之狭流，蔑不胜矣。 
现代文：祖宗时，曾经建立境山闸，自从新河之水平坦，闸门陷入泥淖将近一丈多其闸上距黄家闸二十里，下接茶城十里，因原先的基址用石头垒成，可以截留黄家闸外二十里的上游水，连接茶城内十里的下游水，并且挟制二十里水势，直冲十里的急流，没有不胜遇的了。 
English: At the time of the ancestors, the Jingshan sluice was built. Since the level of the Xinhe River was flat, the sluice gate fell into the mud for nearly a height. The upper gate was twenty miles from the Huangjia sluice, and the lower gate was ten miles from the tea city. Because the original foundation was made of stone, it could intercept the upstream water of twenty miles outside the Huangjia sluice, connect the downstream water of ten miles inside the tea city, and control the water potential of twenty miles, and rush straight into the ten-mile rapids. There is no bad luck.

古文：乃复境山旧闸。
现代文：于是恢复境山旧闸。
English: As a result, the old gate was restored.

古文：恭建三议，尚书衡覆行之，为运道永利。
现代文：万恭提出三条建议，尚书朱衡回复可以施行，成为运道永久之利。
English: Wang Gong put forward three suggestions, which can be implemented by the reply of Shangshu Zhu Heng, and become a permanent benefit.

古文：而是时，茶城岁淤，恭方报正河安流，回空船速出。
现代文：然而这时，茶城年年淤塞，万恭刚刚上报正河水流平稳，返空船能快速驶出。
English: However, at this time, Chaecheng was silted up year after year, and Vangong had just reported that the water flow of the Zhenghe River was stable, and the empty boat could sail out quickly.

古文：给事中朱南雍以回空多阻，劾恭隐蔽溺职。
现代文：给事中朱南雍认为返空时多受阻，弹劾万恭隐瞒失职。
English: In the middle of the matter, Zhu Nanyong thought that the return flight was more hindered, and impeached Vangong for concealing dereliction of duty.

古文：帝切责恭，罢去。
现代文：皇帝严厉斥责万恭，罢官离去。
English: The emperor severely reprimanded Wan Gong and dismissed him from his post.

古文：三年二月，总河都御史傅希挚请开泇河以避黄险，不果行。
现代文：万历三年二月，总河都御史傅希挚请求开通洳河来避开黄河的险阻，结果没有施行。
English: In February of the 3rd year of Wanli, the governor of the capital of the whole river, Fu Xi, earnestly requested the opening of the Fenhe River to avoid the danger of the Yellow River, but the result was not implemented.

古文：希挚又请浚梁山以下，与茶城互用，淤旧则通新而挑旧，淤新则通旧而挑新，筑坝断流，常通其一以备不虞。
现代文：傅希挚又请求疏通梁山以下，与茶城相互利用，旧河淤塞就通行于新河而挖通旧河，新河淤塞就通行于旧河而挖通新河，修筑水坝截断水流，经常使其中一河畅通以防备不必要的忧患。
English: Fu Xizhong also requested that the area below Liangshan be dredged for mutual use with Cha Cheng, that the silt of the old river be passed through the new river and the old river be dredged, that the silt of the new river be passed through the old river and the new river be dredged, that dams be built to cut off the water flow, and that one of the rivers be kept free to prevent unnecessary worries.

古文：诏从所请。
现代文：诏令依从他的这些请求。
English: The edict complied with his requests.

古文：工未成，而河决崔镇，淮决高家堰，高邮湖决清水潭、丁志等口，淮城几没。
现代文：工程还没有完成，而黄河在崔镇决堤，淮河在高家堰决堤，高邮湖在清水潭、丁志等河口决堤，淮城几乎被淹没。
English: The project has not yet been completed, but the Yellow River has broken through the dike in Cui Town, the Huai River has broken through the dike in Gaojia Weir, and Gaoyou Lake has broken through the dike in the estuaries of Qingshui Lake, Dingzhi, and so on. Huai City is almost submerged.

古文：知府邵元哲开菊花潭，以泄淮安、高、宝三城之水，东方刍米少通。
现代文：知府邵元哲开通菊花潭，用来排泄淮安、壶、寅三城之水，东方的粮食运输稍稍畅通。
English: Shao Yuanzhe, the prefectural governor, opened the Chrysanthemum Pool, which was used to drain the water from the three cities of Huai'an, Jiu and Yin. The transportation of grain from the east was slightly smoother.

古文：明年春，督漕侍郎张翀以筑清水潭堤工钜不克就，欲令粮船暂由圈子田以行。
现代文：第二年春天，督漕侍郎张舯认为修筑清水潭河堤工程浩大不能成功，想要让粮船暂时从圈子田运行。
English: In the spring of the following year, the overseer and steward Zhang Jie thought that the construction of the huge Qingshui Lake embankment project could not be successful, and wanted to let the grain ship temporarily run from the circle field.

古文：巡按御史陈功不可。
现代文：巡按御史陈功不同意。
English: Chen Gong, the inspecting magistrate, disagreed.

古文：河漕侍郎吴桂芳言： 高邮湖老堤，陈瑄所建。
现代文：河漕侍郎昊桂芳说： 高鄄湖老堤岸，是陈管所修建。
English: Hao Guifang, a river boatman, said: The old embankment of Gaolu Lake was built by Chen Guanzhang.

古文：后白昂开月河，距湖数里，中为土堤，东为石堤，首尾建闸，名为康济河。
现代文：以后白昂开通月河，距湖数里，中间修土堤，束边修石堤，首尾建闸门，命名为康济河。
English: Later, Bai'an opened the Yue River, a few miles from the lake, repaired the earth embankment in the middle, repaired the stone embankment at the edge of the bund, built the gate at the end, and named it Kangji River.

古文：其中堤之西，老堤之东，民田数万亩，所谓圈子田也。
现代文：它的中堤的西边，老堤的束边，有民田敷万亩，这就是所说的圈子田。
English: On the west side of its middle embankment, on the edge of the old embankment, there are thousands of acres of people's fields. This is the so-called circle field.

古文：河湖相去太远，老堤缺坏不修，遂至水入圈田，又成一湖。
现代文：河与湖相距太远，老堤毁坏之处没有修筑，于是导致河水流入圈田，又成为一湖。
English: The distance between the river and the lake is too far, and the place where the old dike was destroyed has not been rebuilt. As a result, the river water flows into the field and becomes a lake.

古文：而中堤溃坏，东堤独受数百里湖涛，清水潭之决，势所必至。
现代文：而中堤溃决，束堤独自承受数百里湖水的冲击，清水潭的溃决，形势是必然的。
English: However, the situation is inevitable that the middle dike will collapse, the bund dike will bear the impact of hundreds of miles of lake water on its own, and the clear water pool will collapse.

古文：宜遵弘治间王恕之议，就老堤为月河，但修东西二堤，费省而工易举。 
现代文：应当遵照弘治年间王恕的主张，顺着老堤修成月河，只修筑东西二堤，费用节省而工程容易成功。 
English: According to Wang Shu's suggestion during the Hongzhi era, it should be built along the old dike into the Moon River, and only two dikes should be built in the east and west, which will save costs and make the project easy to succeed.

古文：帝命如所请行之。
现代文：皇帝命令依照奏请的办法去治理。
English: The emperor ordered that it should be governed according to the method of petition.

古文：是年，元哲修筑淮安长堤，又疏盐城石〈石达〉口下流入海。
现代文：这年，邵元哲修筑淮安长堤，又疏通盐城石磋口下游让水流入大海。
English: In this year, Shao Yuan Zhe built the Huai'an Long Embankment, and dredged the downstream of Yancheng Shek Liankou to allow water to flow into the sea.

古文：五年二月，高邮石堤将成，桂芳请傍老堤十数丈开挑月河。
现代文：五年二月，高邮石堤将要修成，昊桂芳请求在靠近老堤十多丈的地方开挖一条月河。
English: In February of the fifth year, Gaoyou stone embankment was about to be built, and Hao Guifang requested to excavate a moon river near the old embankment.

古文：因言： 白昂康济月河去老堤太远，人心狃月河之安，忘老堤外捍之力。
现代文：于是说： 白昂康济月河距离老堤太远，人心习惯于月河的安全，忘记老堤在外捍卫的力量。
English: So he said: Baiang Kangji Yuehe is too far away from the old dike, people are accustomed to the safety of Yuehe, and forget the power of the old dike to defend outside.

古文：年复一年，不加省视，老、中二堤俱坏，而东堤不能独存。
现代文：一年又一年，不加以察看，老、中二堤都毁坏，因而柬堤不能单独存在。
English: Year after year, without being inspected, the old and middle dikes are destroyed, so that the Cambodian dike cannot exist alone.

古文：今河与老堤近，则易於管摄。 
现代文：现在河与老堤靠近，则容易被管辖。 
English: Now that the river is close to the old embankment, it is easy to control.

古文：御史陈世宝论江北河道，请於宝应湖堤补石堤以固其外，而於石堤之东复筑一堤，以通月河，漕舟行其中。
现代文：御史陈世宜述说到大江之北的河道，请求在寅应湖堤补筑石堤用来使其外堤牢固，又在石堤的束边再修筑一堤，用来接通月河，漕运船只运行其中。
English: Historian Chen Shiyi described the river to the north of the big river, and requested that a stone dike be built in Yinling Lake to strengthen its outer dike, and that another dike be built on the edge of the stone dike to connect it to the Moon River, in which rowing boats run.

古文：并议行。
现代文：一起议定施行。
English: They agreed to implement it together.

古文：其冬，高邮湖土石二堤、新开漕河南北二闸及老堤加石、增护堤木城各工竣事。
现代文：这年冬，高邮湖土石二堤、新开漕河南北二闸门及老堤加石、增加护堤木城各工程竣工。
English: In the winter of that year, the construction of the two earth and stone embankments of Gaoyou Lake, the two sluice gates of the north and south of the newly opened Caohe River, the old embankment with stone, and the addition of the wooden berm were completed.

古文：桂芳又与元哲增筑山阳长堤，自板闸至黄浦亘七十里，闭通济闸不用，而建兴文闸，且修新庄诸闸，筑清江浦南堤，创板闸漕堤，南北与新旧堤接。
现代文：吴桂芳又与邵元哲增筑山阳长堤，从板闸到黄浦绵延七十里，关闭通济闸不用，而建兴文闸，并且修建新庄各闸门，修筑清江浦南堤，首创板闸漕堤，南北与新旧堤连接。
English: Wu Guifang and Shao Yuanzhe also built the Shanyang Long Embankment, stretching seventy miles from Shanzhao to Huangpu, closed the Tongji Embankment without using it, and built the Xingwen Embankment, and built the gates of Xinzhuang, built the South Embankment of Qingjiang Pudong, and created the Shanzhao Embankment, connecting the north and south with the old and new embankments.

古文：板闸即故移风闸也。
现代文：板闸就是原来的移风闸。
English: The gate is the original wind gate.

古文：堤、闸并修，淮、扬漕道渐固。
现代文：堤岸、闸门一起修筑，淮、扬漕运之道渐渐安定。
English: The embankment and the sluice gate were built together, and the Huai and Yang river transport routes gradually stabilized.

古文：六年，总理河漕都御史潘季驯筑高家堰，及清江浦柳浦湾以东加筑礼、智二坝，修宝应、黄清等八浅堤，高、宝减水闸四，又拆新庄闸而改建通济闸於甘罗城南。
现代文：万历六年，总理河漕都御史潘季驯修筑高家堰，又在清江浦柳浦湾以束加筑礼、智二坝，修筑宝应、黄浦等八处浅堤，高、宝减水闸四处，又拆除新庄闸然后改建通济闸于甘罗城南。
English: Over the past six years, Prime Minister He Zuo, accompanied by Prime Minister Spang Ji, has repaired and built the Gaojia Weir, and in the Puryu Bay of Qingjiang Province, he used bundles to build the Li and Zhili Dams, built eight shallow dikes such as Baoying and Huangpu, and four high and low water gates, and dismantled the Xinzhuang Gate and then rebuilt the Tongji Gate in the south of Ganluo City.

古文：明初运粮，自瓜、仪至淮安谓之里河，自五坝转黄河谓之外河，不相通。
现代文：明朝初年逗粮，自瓜、仪到淮安称之为里河，从五坝转到黄河称之为外河，互不相通。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, grain was brought from Gua and Yi to Huai'an, which was called the Li River, and from Wuba to the Yellow River, which was called the Wai River. They were not connected to each other.

古文：及开清江浦，设闸天妃口，春夏之交重运毕，即闭以拒黄。
现代文：等到开通清江浦，在天妃口设置闸门，春夏之交重要的漕运完毕，就关闭闸门来抵挡黄水流入。
English: Wait until the Qingjiangpu is opened, the sluice gate is set up at the Tianfeigou, and the important row transport at the turn of spring and summer is completed, then close the sluice gate to resist the inflow of yellow water.

古文：岁久法驰，闸不封而黄水入。
现代文：时间一久其法松弛，闸门不封闭因而黄河水流入。
English: After a long time, its method slackened, the gate was not closed and the Yellow River water flowed in.

古文：嘉靖末，塞天妃口，於浦南三里沟开新河，设通济闸以就淮水。
现代文：嘉靖末年，培塞天妃口，在浦南三里遂开通新河，建立通济闸使水归于淮水。
English: In the last years of the Jiajing Dynasty, Baise Tianfeigou opened a new river in Sanli, Punan, and built a sluice gate to return the water to Huai Shui.

古文：已又从万恭言，复天妃闸。
现代文：随后，又依从莴恭的计策，恢复天妃闸。
English: Subsequently, he also followed Gong Gong's strategy to restore Tianfei Gate.

古文：未几又从御史刘光国言，增筑通济，自仲夏至季秋，隔日一放回空漕船。
现代文：不久，又依从御史刘光国的计策，增筑通济闸门，从仲夏到秋季，每隔一天开放一次返空的漕船。
English: Soon, in accordance with the strategy of the imperial historian Liu Guangguo, the Tongji sluice gate was added, and from midsummer to autumn, the empty rowing boats were opened every other day.

古文：既而启闭不时，淤塞日甚，开朱家口引清水灌之，仅通舟。
现代文：随后，开关不按时，淤塞一天天加重，开通朱家口引清水灌注其中，祗能通行船只。
English: Subsequently, the switch is not on time, the blockage is getting worse day by day, the opening of Zhujiakou leads to the injection of clear water, which is able to pass ships.

古文：至是改建甘罗城南，专向淮水，使河不得直射。
现代文：到适时改建甘罗城南，专门流向淮水，使黄河之水不能直接奔流。
English: At the right time, the southern part of Ganluo was rebuilt to flow exclusively to Huai Shui, so that the water of the Yellow River could not flow directly.

古文：十年，督漕尚书凌云翼以运船由清江浦出口多艰险，乃自浦西开永济河四十五里，起城南窑湾，历龙江闸，至杨家涧出武家墩，折而东，合通济闸出口。
现代文：万历十年，督漕尚书凌云翼认为漕运船只经由清江浦出口多有艰险，于是，从浦西开通永济河四十五里，起于城南窖湾，经过龙江闸，到达杨家涧出武家墩，转而往东，汇合通济闸出口。
English: After ten years of hard work, the captain of the rowing boat, Shangshu Lingyunyi, thought that it would be difficult and dangerous for the rowing boat to go through the Qingjiang Ura exit. Therefore, he opened the Yongji River for forty-five miles from Puxi, starting from Chengnan Cellar Bay, passing through the Longjiang Gate, reaching Yangjiayu out of Bujiayu, and turning east to meet the exit of Tongjiayu.

古文：更置闸三，以备清江浦之险。
现代文：又建立闸门三处，用来防备清江浦的艰险。
English: In addition, three sluice gates were built to guard against the dangers of the Qingjiang River.

古文：是时漕河就治，淮、扬免水灾者十馀年。
现代文：这时，漕河早已得到治理，淮、扬一带避免水灾十多年。
English: At this time, the Caohe River had already been regulated, and the Huai and Yang regions had avoided floods for more than ten years.

古文：初，黄河之害漕也，自金龙口而东，则会通以淤。迨塞沙湾、张秋闸，漕以安，则徐、氵市间数被其害。
现代文：原先，黄河危害漕河，从金龙口往东，会通因此淤塞，等到堵塞沙湾、张秋闸河，漕河又得到安宁，而徐、沛之间多次受到它的侵害。
English: Originally, the Yellow River harmed the Caohe River, and from Jinlongkou to the east, the meeting was blocked. When the Sha Wan and Zhang Qiuzao Rivers were blocked, the Caohe River was once again tranquil, but it was repeatedly violated between Xu and Pei.

古文：至崔镇高堰之决，黄、淮交涨而害漕，乃在淮、扬间，湖溃则败漕。
现代文：到崔镇高堰的溃决，黄、淮同时泛滥而危害漕河，于是在淮、扬之间，湖堤一溃就危害漕河。
English: When the high weir in Cui Town was breached, the Huang and Huai rivers flooded at the same time and harmed the Cao River. Then, between the Huai and Yang rivers, the dam broke and harmed the Cao River.

古文：季驯以高堰障洪泽，俾堰东四湖勿受淮侵，漕始无败。
现代文：潘季驯用高堰保护洪泽，使堰东四湖不受淮水侵害，漕运纔不再受到阻碍。
English: Pan Ji tamed the high weir to protect Hongze, so that the four lakes east of the weir were not affected by the Huai River, and the paddling raft was no longer hindered.

古文：而河漕诸臣惧湖害，日夜常惴惴。
现代文：然而，治理河漕诸臣害怕湖水侵害，白天晚上常常惴惴不安。
English: However, the officials in charge of river management are afraid of the lake's encroachment, and they are often uneasy during the day and at night.

古文：十三年从总漕都御史李世达议，开宝应月河。
现代文：十三年，依从总漕都御史李世达的主张，开通宝应月河。
English: In the thirteenth year, in accordance with the proposition of Li Shida, the general overseer of the capital, Baoying Yuehe was opened.

古文：宝应汜光湖，诸湖中最湍险者也，广百二十馀里。
现代文：宝应泛光湖，是各湖之中水流最湍急危险的一个，宽一百二十余里。
English: Baoying Floodlight Lake is one of the lakes with the most rapid and dangerous water flow, with a width of more than 120 miles.

古文：槐角楼当其中，形曲如箕，瓦店翼其南，秤钩湾翼其北。
现代文：槐角楼在其中，其形弯曲如簸箕，瓦店如翅在其南，秤钩湾如翅在其北。
English: In the middle is the Shijiazhuang Building, its shape is curved like a dragonfly, the Tile Shop is like a wing in the south, and the Weigh Hook Bay is like a wing in the north.

古文：西风鼓浪，往往覆舟。
现代文：西风掀起波浪，经常吹翻船只。
English: The westerly winds whip up waves, often overturning boats.

古文：陈瑄筑堤湖东，蓄水为运道。
现代文：陈管在湖束筑堤，积蓄水流成为运道。
English: Chen Guan built a dike in the lake, and the accumulated water flow became a transport channel.

古文：上有所受，下无所宣，遂决为八浅，汇为六潭，兴、盐诸场皆没。
现代文：上有水流进来，下无地方宣泄，于是，溃决成为八处浅池，汇合成为六处深潭，兴；盐各场都被淹没。
English: Water flowed in from above, and there was no place to drain it from below. As a result, the rupture became eight shallow pools, the confluence became six deep pools, and all the salt fields were flooded.

古文：而淮水又从周家桥漫入，溺人民，害漕运。
现代文：并且淮水又从周家桥漫入，淹死百姓，危害漕运。
English: Moreover, floodwaters flowed in from the Zhoujia Bridge, drowning people and endangering transportation.

古文：武宗末年，郎中杨最请开月河，部覆不从。
现代文：武宗末年，郎中杨最请求开通月河，工部复议不听从。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Wuzong, his son-in-law Yang most requested the opening of the Yuehe River, but the engineering department did not listen to the reconsideration.

古文：嘉靖中，工部郎中陈毓贤、户部员外范韶、御史闻人诠、运粮千户李显皆以为言，议行未果。
现代文：嘉靖年间，工部郎中陈毓贤、户部员外范韶、御史闻人诠、运粮千户李显都以此进言，议定施行没有结果。
English: During the Jiajing period, Chen Shuxian, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, and the members of the Ministry of Household Affairs, Gao Fanluo, Gu Xianren, and Li Xian of the Thousand-Household Grain Transporting Department, all made suggestions based on this, and the implementation of the agreement was fruitless.

古文：至是，工部郎中许应逵建议，世达用其言以奏，乃决行之。
现代文：到这时，工部郎中许应逵建议，李世达采纳他的建议上奏朝廷，于是决定进行治理。
English: At this time, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, Xu Yingyao, suggested that Li Shida adopt his suggestion to appeal to the imperial court, so he decided to govern.

古文：浚河千七百馀丈，置石闸三，减水闸二，筑堤九千馀丈，石堤三之一，子堤五千馀丈。
现代文：疏通河道一千七百余丈，建立石闸门三处，减水闸二处，修筑堤岸九千余丈，其中百堤三分之一，子堤五千余丈。
English: The dredging of the river is more than 1,700 meters long, the construction of three stone gates and two sluice gates, and the construction of the embankment is more than 9,000 meters long, including one-third of the 100-meter embankment and 5,000-meter embankment.

古文：工成，赐名弘济。
现代文：工程竣工，赐名弘济。
English: The project was completed, and the company was given a good name.

古文：寻改石闸为平水闸。
现代文：不久又改石闸为平水闸。
English: Soon after, the stone lock was changed to a flat lock.

古文：应逵又筑高邮护城堤。
现代文：许应逵又修筑高邮护城堤。
English: Xu Yingtao also built a high post wall to protect the city.

古文：其后，弘济南北闸，夏秋淮涨，吞吐不及，舟多覆者。
现代文：这以后，弘济的南北河闸，夏秋之季淮水上涨，吞吐不及时，舟船多翻沉。
English: After this, the north-south river locks of Hongji, the summer and autumn seasons, the water rises, the throughput is not timely, and the boat is often overturned.

古文：神宗季年，督漕侍郎陈荐於南北各开月河以杀河怒，而溜始平。
现代文：神宗末年，督漕侍郎陈荐在南北各开通月河一道来碱缓河水的汹涌，而急流纔平缓下来。
English: In the last years of the Shinshu sect, the overseer and steward Chen recommended the opening of the Moon River in the north and south to alleviate the turbulent water of the river, and the rapids were calmed down.

古文：十五年，督漕侍郎杨一魁请修高家堰以保上流，砌范家口以制旁决，疏草湾以杀河势，修礼坝以保新城。
现代文：万历十五年，督漕侍郎杨一魁请求修筑高家堰来保护上游，砌筑范家口堤来控制从旁溃决，疏通草湾来减缓水势，修筑礼坝来保护新城。
English: In the fifteenth year of Wanli, Yang Yikui, the steward of the oarsmen, requested the construction of the Gaojia Weir to protect the upstream, the construction of the Fanjiakou Embankment to control the lateral breach, the dredging of the grass bay to slow down the water, and the construction of the dam to protect the new city.

古文：诏如其议。
现代文：诏令依从他的请求。
English: The edict complied with his request.

古文：一魁又改建古洪闸。
现代文：杨一魁又改建古洪闸。
English: Yang Yikui also rebuilt the ancient Hongzhao.

古文：先是，汶、泗之水由茶城会黄河。
现代文：在此之前，汶、泅之水经由茶城汇合黄河。
English: Prior to this, the waters of the Wen and Fen rivers flowed through the tea city to join the Yellow River.

古文：隆庆间，浊流倒灌，稽阻运船，郎中陈瑛移黄河口於茶城东八里，建古洪、内华二闸，漕河从古洪出口。
现代文：隆庆年间，浊水倒灌，阻碍滞留漕运船只，郎中陈瑛迁移黄河口于茶城东八里，建立古洪、内华二闸门，漕河从古洪出口。
English: During the Longqing period, Lushui reversed irrigation, hindering the detention of rowing vessels, and his brother-in-law Chen Ying moved the mouth of the Yellow River to eight miles east of Cha Cheng, established Guhong and Nevada two gates, and exported the rowing river from Guhong.

古文：后黄水发，淤益甚。
现代文：后来黄河水上涨，淤塞更加严重。
English: Later, the Yellow River water rose and the silting became more serious.

古文：一魁既改古洪，帝又从给事中常居敬言，令增筑镇口闸於古洪外，距河仅八十丈，吐纳益易，粮运利之。
现代文：杨一魁改建古洪之后，皇帝又依从给事中常居敬的计策，命令在古洪外增筑镇口闸，距黄河只有八十丈，流进泄出更加容易，粮食运输便利。
English: After Yang Yikai rebuilt Guhong, the emperor also followed the strategy of always respecting others, and ordered to build more gates outside Guhong. The distance from the Yellow River is only eighty meters, and it is easier to flow in and out, and grain transportation is convenient.

古文：工部尚书石星议季驯、居敬条上善后事宜，请分地责成：接筑塔山缕堤，清江浦草坝，创筑宝应西堤，石砌邵伯湖堤，疏浚里河淤浅，当在淮、扬兴举；察复南旺、马踏、蜀山、马场四湖，建筑坎河滚水坝，加建通济、永通二闸，察复安山湖地，当在山东兴举。
现代文：工部尚书石星建议潘季驯、常居敬备文上奏善后事宜，请划分地区负责完成：接着修筑塔山缕堤和清江浦草坝，新修宝应西堤，用石砌筑邵伯湖堤，疏通裹河淤塞，应当在淮、扬地区兴工完成；考察恢复南旺、马踏、蜀山、马场四湖，建筑险岸河段滚水坝，加建通济、永通二河闸，考察恢复安山湖地区，应当在山东兴工完成。
English: Shangshu Shixing of the Ministry of Industry and Trade suggested that Pan Jitai and Changzhu Jingbai should be responsible for the follow-up matters mentioned in the article, and asked to divide the regions to be responsible for the completion: next, the construction of the Tashanshan wedge dike and the Qingjiang Pucao Dam, the new construction of the Baoying West Dike, the construction of the Shabo Lake dike with stone, and the dredging of the Waihe River should be completed in the Huai and Yang regions; the investigation of the restoration of the Nanwang, MaTao, Shushan and MaFang four lakes, the construction of

古文：帝从其议。
现代文：皇帝依从他的建议。
English: The emperor followed his advice.

古文：未几，众工皆成。
现代文：不久，各项工程完工。
English: Soon, the various projects were completed.

古文：十九年，季驯言： 宿迁以南，地形西洼，请开缕堤放水。
现代文：万历十九年，潘季驯说： 宿迁以南，地形向西低凹，请求打开缕堤排放河水。
English: In the 19th year of Wanli, Pan Ji Tame said: Suqian south, low-lying terrain to the west, request to open the dike to discharge river water.

古文：沙随水入，地随沙高，庶水患消而费可省。 
现代文：泥沙随水流入，地面随沙而增高，差不多水患清除而费用又可节省。 
English: The sediment flows in with the water, the ground rises with the sand, the flood is almost eliminated and the cost can be saved.

古文：又请易高家堰土堤为石，筑满家闸西拦河坝，使汶、泗尽归新河。
现代文：又请求改高家堰土堤为石堤，修筑满家闸西的拦河坝，使汶、泗之水完全回到新河。
English: He also requested that the earthen dike of Gaojia Weir be changed to a stone dike, and that a barrage dam be built to the west of Mianjia sluice, so that the water of Wen and Lu would be completely returned to the New River.

古文：设减水闸於李家口，以泄沛县积水。
现代文：设置减水闸于李家口，用来排泄沛县积水。
English: A sluice gate was set up at Lijiakou to drain the accumulated water in Peixian.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十月，淮湖大涨，江都淳家湾石堤、邵伯南坝、高邮中堤、朱家墩、清水潭皆决。
现代文：十月，淮水大涨，江都淳家湾石堤、邵伯南坝、高邮中堤、朱家墩、清水潭全都溃决。
English: In October, the Huai River rose sharply, and all the dikes in the Yangtze River, including the Shijianwan Dike, Shao Bannan Dike, Gaoyou Middle Dike, Zhujiayuan Dike, and Qingshuitan Dike, were breached.

古文：郎中黄日谨筑塞仅竣，而山阳堤亦决。
现代文：郎中黄曰谨堵塞刚刚竣工，而山阳河堤又溃决，
English: Brother-in-law Huang said that the dam had just been completed, and the Sanyang River embankment was breached again.

古文：二十一年五月，恒雨。
现代文：万历二十一年五月，常常下雨。
English: In May of the 21st year of Wanli, it often rained.

古文：漕河泛溢，溃济宁及淮河诸堤岸。
现代文：漕河泛滥，济宁及淮河各堤岸演决。
English: Caohe River floods, Jining and Huaihe River levees are breached.

古文：总河尚书舒应龙议：筑堽城坝，遏汶水之南，开马踏湖月河口，导汶水之北。
现代文：总河尚书舒应龙建议：修筑堤城坝，阻止汶水往南，开通马踏湖月河口，导引汶水往北流。
English: Shangshu Shu Yinglong, the general of the river, suggested: to build a dike dam, to prevent the southward flow of the Wen River, to open the mouth of the Ma Tau Lake and Moon River, and to guide the northward flow of the Wen River.

古文：开通济闸，放月河土坝以杀汹涌之势。
现代文：开启通济闸，开放月河土坝来减缓汹涌的水势。
English: Open the Tongji sluice gate, open the Yuehe earth dam to slow down the surging water.

古文：从其奏。
现代文：依从他的奏谪。
English: Follow his lead.

古文：数年之间，会通上下无阻，而黄、淮并涨，高堰及高邮堤数决害漕。
现代文：数年之间，会通上下没有阻碍，而黄河、淮河之水一起上涨，高堰及高邮堤岸多次溃决危害漕河。
English: For several years, there was no obstacle to the upstream and downstream of the canal, but the water of the Yellow River and the Huai River rose together, and the high weir and the Gaoyou embankment broke down many times, harming the Cao River.

古文：应龙卒罢去。
现代文：舒应龙终究遭罢免而离去。
English: Shu Yinglong was eventually dismissed and left.

古文：建议者纷纷，未有所定。
现代文：建议的人纷纷而起，没有最后议定。
English: Proposals have been made, but no final agreement has been reached.

古文：杨一魁代应龙为总河尚书，力主分黄导淮。
现代文：杨一魁代替舒应龙为总河尚书，竭力主张分流黄河导引淮河。
English: Yang Yikui, instead of Shu Yinglong, wrote a book on the total river, and advocated the diversion of the Yellow River to guide the Huaihe River.

古文：治逾年，工将竣，又请决湖水以疏漕渠，言： 高、宝诸湖本沃壤也，自淮、黄逆壅，遂成昏垫。
现代文：治理了一年多，工程将近竣工，又请求决开湖水来疏通漕渠，说： 高、宝各湖本是一片沃土，自从淮河、黄河逆流壅塞，于是变成低洼之地。
English: After more than a year of management, with the project nearing completion, he also requested that the lake water be released to clear the channel, saying: The Gao and Baoji lakes were originally a fertile land, but since the Huaihe River and the Yellow River flowed against them, they became low-lying areas.

古文：今入江入海之路即浚，宜开治泾河、子婴沟、金湾河诸闸及瓜、仪二闸，大放湖水，就湖疏渠，与高、宝月河相接。
现代文：现在入江入海的水路已经疏通，应当开挖治理泾河、子婴沟、金湾河各河闸及瓜、仪二河闸，大量排放湖水，顺湖疏通渠道，与高、宝月河相互连接。
English: Now that the waterway into the river and into the sea has been cleared, it is necessary to excavate and control the locks of the Min River, the Ziyinggou, and the Jinwan River, as well as the locks of the Gua River and the Yi River, discharge a large amount of lake water, clear channels along the lake, and connect with the Gao River and the Baoyue River.

古文：既避运道风波之险，而水涸成田，给民耕种，渐议起科，可充河费。 
现代文：既避开运道风浪的危险，而湖水干涸变成良田，给予百姓耕种，慢慢地议定征收赋税，可以充作治河费用。 
English: Since the danger of wind and waves in the transportation route was avoided, and the lake water dried up and turned into good fields, the people were given farming, and it was slowly agreed to collect taxes, which could be used as river management costs.

古文：命如议行。
现代文：命令依照他的主张进行治理。
English: order to govern as he pleases.

古文：时下流既疏，淮水渐帖，而河方决黄堌口。
现代文：这时，下游已经疏通，淮水逐渐安定，然而，黄河在黄垌口决堤。
English: At this time, the downstream has been dredged, and the Huai River has gradually stabilized. However, the Yellow River broke through the dike at the mouth of the Huangpi River.

古文：督漕都御史褚鈇恐泄太多，徐、邳淤阻，力请塞之。
现代文：督漕都御史褚鈇担心排泄的湖水太多，造成徐、邳淤塞，竭力请求堵塞湖口。
English: The superintendent of the capital city, Shi Yan, worried that there was too much water draining out of the lake, causing the dams to clog, tried his best to block the mouth of the lake.

古文：一魁持不可，浚两河口至小浮桥故道以通漕。
现代文：杨一魁坚持不同意，疏通两河口到小浮桥故道来通行漕运。
English: Yang Yikai insisted on disagreeing, and dredged the two estuaries to the small pontoon bridge to allow the passage of rowing transport.

古文：然河大势南徙，二洪漕屡涸，复大挑黄堌下之李吉口，挽黄以济之，非久辄淤。
现代文：然而，黄河总的趋势向南改道，二洪漕道多次干涸，又大量挖通黄蝈下游的李吉口，挽回黄河来补济它，不久就被淤塞。
English: However, the general trend of the Yellow River was diverted to the south, the Erhong Canal dried up many times, and a large number of dredges were dug through the Li Jikou in the lower reaches of the Yellow River, and the Yellow River was restored to replenish it. It was soon silted up.

古文：一魁入掌部事。
现代文：杨一魁进京掌管工部事务。
English: Yang Yikui came to Beijing to be in charge of the engineering department.

古文：二十六年，刘东星继之，守一魁旧议，李吉口淤益高。
现代文：二十六年，刘东星继承他的职位，严守杨一魁原来的主张，李吉口淤塞更高。
English: In twenty-six years, Liu Dongxing inherited his position, strictly adhering to Yang Yikui's original proposal, and Li Jikou's obstruction was higher.

古文：岁冬月，即其地开一小河，春夏引水入徐州，如是者三年，大抵至秋即淤。
现代文：每年冬月，就在其地开挖一条小河，春夏引水流入徐州，像这样进行了三年，大都到秋天就淤塞。
English: Every winter and summer, a small river is dug in the area, and the water is diverted into Xuzhou in spring and summer. It has been carried out like this for three years, and most of them are silted up by autumn.

古文：乃复开赵家圈以接黄，开泇河以济运。
现代文：于是又开通赵家圈来连接黄河，开通洳河来补济运河。
English: As a result, the Zhaojia Circle was opened to connect the Yellow River, and the Fenhe River was opened to supplement the canal.

古文：赵家圈旋淤，泇河未复，而东星卒。
现代文：趟家圈不久又淤塞，洳河没有恢复，而刘柬星去世。
English: The wagon circle was soon silted up again, the Wei River did not recover, and Liu Kamxing died.

古文：於是凤阳巡抚都御史李三才建议自镇口闸至磨儿庄仿闸河制，三十里一闸，凡建六闸於河中，节宣汶、济之水，聊以通漕。
现代文：于是，凤阳巡抚都御史李三才建议从镇口闸到磨儿庄仿效闸河的形制，每三十里建立一处闸门，在河中一共建立六处闸门，控制和宣泄汶、济的河水，依赖它来通行漕运。
English: As a result, Li Sancai, the Fengyang governor of the capital, suggested that from the town gate to the mill village, the gate should follow the shape of the river, and a gate should be built every 30 miles, and a total of six gates should be built in the river to control and drain the muddy and dirty river water, and rely on it to pass and transport.

古文：漕舟至京，不复能如期矣。
现代文：漕运船只到京城，再也不能够按期到达。
English: Rowing boats to the capital will no longer be able to arrive on time.

古文：东星在事，开邵伯月河，长十八里，阔十八丈有奇，以避湖险。
现代文：刘东星在任时，开通邵伯月河，长十八里，宽十八丈有余，用来避免湖水的危害。
English: When Liu Dongxing was in office, he opened the Shabo Yue River, which is eighteen miles long and more than eighteen feet wide, to avoid the harm of lake water.

古文：又开界首月河，长千八百馀丈。
现代文：又开通界首月河，长一千八百余丈。
English: It also opened up the Shougetsu River, which is more than 1,800 meters long.

古文：各建金门石闸二，漕舟利焉。
现代文：各建金门石闸二处，漕运船只获得便利。
English: Each side built two stone gates at the Golden Gate, making it convenient for rowing vessels to pass through.

古文：三十二年，总河侍郎李化龙始大开泇河，自直河至李家港二百六十馀里，尽避黄河之险。
现代文：三十二年，总河侍郎李化龙开始大开洳河，从直河到李家港二百六十余里，完全避开了黄河的危睑。
English: In the 32nd year, the general river steward Li Hualong began to open the Yunnan River, from Zhihe to Lijia Gang, more than two hundred and sixty miles, completely avoiding the peril of the Yellow River.

古文：化龙忧去，总河侍郎曹时聘终其事，疏叙泇河之功，言： 舒应龙创开韩家庄以泄湖水，而路始通。
现代文：李化龙因服丧而离去，总河侍郎曹时聘完成这项工程，上疏按功赏赐治理洳河的功劳，说： 舒应龙新开通韩家庄来排泄湖水，而水道开始畅通。
English: Li Hualong left due to mourning, and the general river waiter Cao Shihai completed this project, and the Shang Dynasty rewarded the merit of controlling the Wei River according to merit, saying: Shu Yulong newly opened the Hanjia Village to drain the lake water, and the waterway began to flow smoothly.

古文：刘东星大开良城、侯家庄以试行运，而路渐广。
现代文：刘柬星大开良城、侯家庄来试着通行运输，而水道逐渐宽广。
English: Liu Kam Xing opened up Daceliangcheng and Houjiazhuang to try to pass transportation, and the waterway gradually widened.

古文：李化龙上开李家港，凿都水石，下开直河口，挑田家庄，殚力经营，行运过半，而路始开，故臣得接踵告竣。 
现代文：李化龙上开李家港，凿开都水石，下开直河口，挖通田家庄，尽力治理，通行运输超过半数，而水道纔开通，所以臣能在他们之后宣告竣工。 
English: Li Huadong opened the Lijia Port, chiseled the Du Shui Shek, and opened the straight estuary, dug through the Tianjia Zhuang, tried his best to control, and more than half of the traffic and transportation passed through, and the waterway was opened, so the minister could announce the completion after them.

古文：因条上善后六事，运道由此大通。
现代文：于是备文上奏善后六件事，运道从此十分畅通。
English: As a result, six matters were resolved in writing, and the operation has been smooth ever since.

古文：其后每年三月开泇河坝，由直河口进，九月开召公坝入黄河，粮艘及官民船悉以为准。
现代文：这以后，每年三月打开洳河坝，从直河口进入，九月打开召公坝流入黄河，粮船及官船民船全都以此为准。
English: Since then, every March, the dam on the Min River has been opened to allow barges to enter from the mouth of the Zhihe River, and in September, the dam has been opened to allow barges to flow into the Yellow River. Grain barges and government vessels are all subject to this.

古文：四十四年，巡漕御史朱堦请修复泉湖，言： 宋礼筑坝戴村，夺二汶入海之路，灌以成河，复导洙、泗、洸、沂诸水以佐之。
现代文：万历四十四年，巡漕御史朱阶请求修复泉湖，说： 宋礼在戴村筑坝，夺去二汶入海的水路，灌注而成河，又导引洙、泗、洸、沂各河水来辅助它。
English: In the forty-fourth year of the Wanli calendar, the cruiser goshi Zhu Qi requested the restoration of the spring lake, saying: Song Li built a dam in Dai village, took away the waterway into the sea in two years, poured it into the river, and guided the water from the rivers of Yunnan, Fujian, Fujian and Fujian to assist it.

古文：汶虽率众流出全力以奉漕，然行远而竭，已自难支。
现代文：汶水虽然汇合众水使出全部力量来供给漕河，然而经历水程速而水枯竭，最终难以维持。
English: Although the Wenshui Water Diversion Project used all its power to supply the Caohe River, it quickly ran out of water and was eventually difficult to maintain.

古文：至南旺，又分其四以南迎淮，六以北赴卫，力分益薄。
现代文：到达南旺，又分流它的十分之四使往南迎接淮水，十分之六使往北到达卫水，力量分散更加单薄。
English: Reaching Nanwang, four-tenths of it was diverted to the south to meet Huai Shui, and six-tenths to the north to reach Weishui. The distribution of power was even thinner.

古文：况此水夏秋则涨，冬春而涸，无雨即夏秋亦涸。
现代文：况且此水一到夏秋就上涨，一到冬春就干涸，没有雨水即使夏秋也会干涸。
English: Moreover, this water rises in summer and autumn, dries up in winter and spring, and dries up even in summer and autumn without rain.

古文：礼逆虑其不可恃，乃於沿河昭阳、南旺、马踏、蜀山、安山诸湖设立斗门，名曰水柜。
现代文：宋礼料到它不能依赖，就在沿河昭阳、南旺、马踏、蜀山、安山各湖建立斗门，名叫水柜。
English: When Song Li suspected that he could not rely on it, he built sluice gates along the rivers of Zhaoyang, Nanwang, Ma Tau, Shushan and Ansan lakes, called water cabinets.

古文：漕河水涨，则潴其溢出者於湖，水消则决而注之漕。
现代文：漕河水涨，就在湖中蓄积其流出的水，水退就打开闸门让水灌入漕河。
English: When the water of the Caohe rises, the water flowing out of it accumulates in the lake. When the water recedes, the gate is opened to let the water pour into the Caohe.

古文：积泄有法，盗决有罪，故旱涝恃以无恐。
现代文：积蓄排泄有规定，非法打开有罪，所以依赖它旱滂可以不担忧。
English: There are regulations on the excretion of savings, and it is a crime to open illegally, so you can rely on it without worrying.

古文：及岁久禁驰，湖浅可耕，多为势豪所占，昭阳一湖已作藩田。
现代文：等到时间久了禁令松弛，湖水变浅可以耕种，多数被有权势的人所霸占，昭阳一湖已经用作藩王的田地。
English: After waiting for a long time, the ban was relaxed, the lake became shallow enough to be cultivated, and most of them were occupied by powerful people. Lake Shoyang has been used as a field for the king of the domain.

古文：比来山东半年不雨，泉欲断流，按图而索水柜，茫无知者。
现代文：近来山东半年没有下雨，河水将要断流，按照线索去寻求水柜，就会茫然不知在什么地方。
English: Recently, there has been no rain in Shandong for half a year, and the river will be cut off. If you follow the clues to find the water tank, you will be at a loss to know where it is.

古文：乞敕河臣清核，亟筑堤坝斗门以广蓄储。 
现代文：请求诏令河臣清理核查，赶快修筑堤坝斗门来扩大积蓄水流。 
English: Requesting the emperor to order the river to be cleaned up and inspected, and to quickly build a dam dam to expand the accumulated water flow.

古文：帝从其请。
现代文：皇帝依从他的奏请。
English: The emperor acceded to his request.

古文：方议浚泉湖，而河决徐州狼矢沟，由蛤鳗诸湖入泇河，出直口，运船迎溜艰险。
现代文：正在商议疏通泉湖，而黄河在徐州狼矢沟决堤，经由蛤鳗各湖流入洳河，到直口，运输船只面临急流艰险。
English: The dredging of the Quan Lake is under discussion, while the Yellow River has broken through the dike in Xuzhou's Luoyagou, flowing into the Fenhe River through the Fenhu Lake, and the transport vessels are facing the danger of rapids at the direct entrance.

古文：督漕侍郎陈荐开武河等口，泄水平溜。
现代文：督漕侍郎陈荐开通武河等河口，排泄河水平缓水流。
English: The overseer and steward Chen recommended opening the estuary of the Wu River and other rivers, and discharging the river's horizontal slow water flow.

古文：后二年，决口长淤沙，河始复故道。
现代文：后二年，决口增长淤积泥沙，黄河纔恢复故道。
English: In the last two years, siltation and sedimentation have increased at the mouth of the river, and the Yellow River has resumed its former course.

古文：总河侍郎王佐加筑月坝以障之。至泰昌元年冬，佐言： 诸湖水柜已复，安山湖且复五十五里，诚可利漕。
现代文：总河侍郎王佐加筑月坝来保到泰昌元年冬，王佐说： 各湖水柜已经修复，安山湖又恢复五十五里，确实能够便利于漕逗。
English: In the winter of Taichang in the first year of the year, Wang Zuo, the general river steward, built a moon dam to protect the lake. Wang Zuo said: The water cabinets of each lake have been repaired, and the Anshan Lake has been restored to fifty-five miles, which is really convenient for rowing.

古文：请以水柜之废兴为河官殿最。 
现代文：请求把水柜的废弃与兴建作为考核政绩优劣的标准。 
English: Request that the abandonment and construction of the water tank be used as a standard for assessing the merits of government performance.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：天启元年，淮、黄涨溢，决里河王公祠，淮安知府宋统殷、山阳知县练国事力塞之。
现代文：天启元年，淮河、黄河泛滥，里河王公祠决堤，淮安知府宋统殷、山阳知县练国事合力堵塞决口。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, the Huaihe River and the Yellow River flooded, the Wang Gongsi Temple of the Lihe River broke through the dike, and Song Tongyin of Huai'an Prefecture and Shanyang County jointly blocked the breach.

古文：三年秋，外河复决数口，寻塞。
现代文：三年秋，外河又溃决数口，不久被堵塞。
English: In the autumn of the third year, several mouths of the outer river were breached again, and were soon blocked.

古文：是年冬，浚永济新河。
现代文：这年冬，疏通永济新河。
English: This winter, the Yongji New River was dredged.

古文：自凌云翼开是河，未几而闭。
现代文：自从凌云翼开通此河，不久就被壅塞。
English: Ever since Ling Yunyi opened the river, it was soon blocked.

古文：总河都御史刘士忠尝开坝以济运，已复塞。
现代文：总河都御史刘士忠曾经打开水坝来拯济运道，随后又被堵塞。
English: Liu Shizhong, the Grand Historian of the River Capital, once opened a dam to save the transportation route, but it was later blocked.

古文：而淮安正河三十年未浚。
现代文：而淮安正河三十年没有疏浚。
English: However, the Huai'an Zhenghe River has not been dredged for 30 years.

古文：故议先挑新河，通运船回空，乃浚正河，自许家闸至惠济祠长千四百馀丈，复建通济月河小闸，运船皆由正河，新河复闭。
现代文：所以主张先挖新河，通行返空的漕运船只，纔疏通正河，从许家闸到惠济祠长一千四百余丈，又建立通济月河小闸门，运输船只全都经由正河，新河又被壅塞。
English: Therefore, they advocated digging a new river first, allowing the passage of empty rowing boats, and dredging the Zhenghe River, which is more than 1,400 meters long from the Xujiagate to Huizhi Ancestral Hall, and building a small sluice gate for the Tongji Yuehe River. The transport ships all passed through the Zhenghe River, and the new river was blocked.

古文：时王家集、磨儿庄湍溜日甚，漕储参政朱国盛谋改浚一河以为漕计，令同知宋士中自泇口迤东抵宿迁陈沟口，复溯骆马湖，上至马颊河，往回相度。
现代文：这时王家集、磨儿庄湍急水流一天天汹涌，漕储参政朱国盛提出另外疏通一河作为漕运的打算，令同知宋士中从洳口往东到达宿迁陈沟口，又逆流而到骆马湖，上到马颊河，往返测量。
English: At this time, the rapids of Wangjiaqiu and Muerzhuang were raging day by day. Zhu Guosheng, a reservoir and politician, proposed another plan to dredge a river as a rowing transport, so that the Song Dynasty scholars would travel from the estuary to the east to the Suqian Chengoukou, and then go against the current to the Luoma Lake and up to the Ma'an River for round-trip measurement.

古文：乃议开马家洲，且疏马颊河口淤塞，上接泇流，下避刘口之险，又疏三汊河流沙十三里，开滔庄河百馀丈，浚深小河二十里，开王能庄二十里，以通骆马湖口，筑塞张家等沟数十道，束水归漕。
现代文：于是主张开通马家洲，并且疏通马颊河口的淤塞，上接洳口水流，下避刘口水险，又疏通三汊河淤沙十三里，开通滔庄河一百多丈，挖深小河二十里，开通王能庄二十里，以贯通骆马湖口，堵塞张家等水沟数十道，约束水流回到漕河。
English: Therefore, they advocated the opening of Majiazhou, and the unblocking of the silting of the mouth of the Majian River, the upstream of the Hukou water flow, and the downstream of the Liukou water risk, and the unblocking of the sand of the Sanlu River for thirteen miles, the opening of the Touzhuang River for more than one hundred meters, the digging of the deep creek for twenty miles, the opening of the Wang Nengzhuang for twenty miles, and the passage through the mouth of the Luoma Lake, the blocking of dozens of canals such as Zhangjia, and the restriction of water flow back to the Caohe

古文：计河五十七里，名通济新河。
现代文：总计河道五十七里，取名通济新河。
English: The total length of the river is 57 li, and it is called the Tongji New River.

古文：五年四月，工成，运道从新河，无刘口、磨儿庄诸险之患。
现代文：五年四月，工程竣工，运道经由新河，无刘口、尘儿庄各险阻的忧虑。
English: In April 2005, the project was completed, and the transportation route passed through Xinhe, without the worries of Liukou and Danzhuang.

古文：明年，总河侍郎李从心开陈沟地十里，以竟前工。
现代文：第二年，总河侍郎李从心开通陈沟土地十里，来完成前面的工程。
English: In the second year, the general manager of the river, Li, opened ten miles of Chengou land from his heart to complete the previous project.

古文：崇祯二年，淮安苏家嘴、新沟大坝并决，没山、盐、高、泰民田。
现代文：崇祯二年，淮安苏家嘴、新沟大坝一起溃决，淹没山、盐、高、泰百姓的土地。
English: In the second year of Chongzhen, the Huai'an Sujiazu and Xingou Dams broke through together, flooding the land of the mountain, salt, high and Thai people.

古文：五年，又决建义北坝。
现代文：五年，又在建义北坝溃决。
English: Five years later, the Jianyi North Dam was breached again.

古文：总河尚书朱光祚浚骆马湖，避河险十三处，名顺济河。
现代文：总河尚书朱光祚疏通骆马湖，避开河道险阻十三处，名为顺济河。
English: The Shunji River, named after the famous writer Zhu Guangya, flows through Luoma Lake, avoiding 13 dangerous obstacles along the way.

古文：六年，良城至徐塘淤为平陆，漕运愆期，夺光祚官，刘荣嗣继之。
现代文：六年，良城到徐塘淤塞成为平地，漕运超过到达期限，免去朱光祚官职，刘荣嗣接任其职。
English: In the sixth year, Liangcheng to Xutang silted up and became flat land, and the rowing transport exceeded the arrival deadline. Zhu Guangyao was relieved of his post, and Liu Rongzi took over his post.

古文：八年，骆马湖淤阻，荣嗣开河徐、宿，引注黄水，被劾，得重罪。
现代文：八年，骆马湖被淤塞，刘荣嗣在徐、宿开通河道，导引黄河水入注，遭到弹劾，受到严厉的惩罚。
English: Eight years ago, Luoma Lake was silted up, and Liu Rongzi was impeached and severely punished for opening the river channel in Xu and Shuku and guiding the Yellow River water injection.

古文：侍郎周鼎继之，乃专力于泇河，浚麦河支河，筑王母山前后坝、胜阳山东堤、马蹄厓十字河拦水壩，挑良城闸抵徐塘口六千馀丈。
现代文：侍郎周鼎继承他的职位，便专门用力于洳河，疏通麦河支河，修筑王母山前后堤坝和胜阳山东堤以及马蹄匡十字河拦水坝，挖通良城闸到徐塘口六千多丈。
English: Zhou Ding, the chamberlain, inherited his position, and devoted his efforts to dredging the Li River, dredging the tributary of the Mai River, building dikes in front and behind the Wangmu Mountain and the east bank of the Shengyang Mountain, as well as damming the Horseshoe Kuang Cross River, and digging through the Liangcheng Gate to the mouth of the Xutang River, which is more than six thousand meters high.

古文：九年夏，泇河复通，由宿迁陈沟口合大河。
现代文：九年复，洳河又畅通，经由宿迁陈沟口汇合于大河。
English: Nine years later, the Li River is flowing smoothly again, and merges with the Big River through the Chenkou Pass.

古文：鼎又修高家堰及新沟漾田营堤，增筑天妃闸石工，去南旺湖彭口沙礓，浚刘吕庄至黄林庄百六十里。
现代文：周鼎又修筑高家堰及新沟漾田营堤防，增筑天妃闸石闸工程，除去南旺湖彭口沙石，疏通刘吕庄到黄林庄一百六十里。
English: Zhou Ding also built the Gaojia Weir and the New Gully Fengtianying Embankment, added the Tianfei Gate stone gate project, removed the sand and stone of Pengkou in Nanwang Lake, and dredged 160 miles from Liu Luzhuang to Huanglinzhuang.

古文：而是时黄、淮涨溢日甚，倒灌害漕。
现代文：然而这时，黄河、淮河泛滥一天天加重，倒流危害漕河。
English: However, at this time, the flooding of the Yellow River and the Huai River is getting worse day by day, and the reverse flow is harming the Caohe River.

古文：鼎在事五年，卒以运阻削职。
现代文：周鼎在职治河五年，最终因运道阻塞被削除官职。
English: Zhou Ding was in charge of the river for five years, and was eventually removed from office due to the obstruction of the transport channel.

古文：继之者侍郎张国维，甫莅任，即以漕涸被责。
现代文：继承他的是侍郎张国维，刚刚到达任所，就因漕河干涸遭到责罚。
English: He was succeeded by his servant Zhang Guowei, who had just arrived at his post when he was punished for drying up the Caohe River.

古文：十四年，国维言： 济宁运道自枣林闸溯师家庄、仲家浅二闸，岁患淤浅，每引泗河由鲁桥入运以济之。
现代文：崇祯十四年，张国维说： 济宁运道从枣林闸逆流于师家庄、仲家浅二河闸，每年都担心淤塞，每年都导引泗河经由鲁桥流入运河来补济它。
English: In the 14th year of Chongzhen, Zhang Guowei said: The Jining Yangtze River flows from the Zao Lin Lock to the Shijiazhuang and Zhongjia Asan Erhe Locks. Every year, it is worried about silting up. Every year, it guides the Minhe River to flow into the canal through the Lu Bridge to supplement it.

古文：伏秋水长，足资利涉。
现代文：夏秋河水上涨，可以供给顺利渡河。
English: As the Xiaqiu River water rises, it can provide a smooth river crossing.

古文：而挟沙注河，水退沙积，利害参半。
现代文：然而夹带泥沙注于河中，河水退后泥沙淤积，利与害各占一半。
English: However, the entrained sediment is poured into the river, and after the river recedes, the sediment is silted up, and the benefit and harm each account for half.

古文：旁自白马河汇邹县诸泉，与泗合流而出鲁桥，力弱不能敌泗，河身半淤，不为漕用。
现代文：旁边从白马河汇合邹县各泉水，与泗水合流而出于鲁桥，水力弱小不能抵挡泗水，河床半数淤塞，不能作为漕运之用。
English: Next to it, the spring water from various springs in Handan County converges with that from the Baima River, and flows out of Luqiao after merging with the Handan River. The water power is too weak to resist the Handan River, and half of the riverbed is silted up, so it cannot be used for paddling.

古文：然其上源宽处正与仲家浅闸相对，导令由此入运，较鲁桥高下悬殊，且易细流为洪流，又减沙渗之患，而济仲家浅及师庄、枣林，有三便。 
现代文：然而，其上游较宽的地方正好与仲家浅闸相对，疏通让它从这里流入运河，比起鲁桥好坏的差别很大，并且改小水为大水，又减少泥沙渗入的害处，从而补救了仲家浅及师庄、枣林三闸，获得三个便利。 
English: However, the wider upstream part of it is just opposite to the Zhongjia Shallow Lock, and the dredging allows it to flow into the canal from here, which is very different from the Lu Bridge, and the small water is changed to large water, and the harm of mud and sand infiltration is reduced, thus remedying the three locks of Zhongjia Shallow, Shizhuang and Zao Lin, and obtaining three conveniences.

古文：又言： 南旺水本地脊，惟藉泰安、新泰、莱芜、宁阳、汶上、东平、平阴、肥城八州县泉源，由汶入运，故运河得通。
现代文：又说： 南旺水本来地势高，祇有凭借泰安、新泰、莱芜、宁阳、汶上、东平、平阴、肥城八州县的泉水，经由汶水流入运河，所以运河能够畅通。
English: He also said: Nanwang Water is naturally of high potential. Only by virtue of the spring water of Tai'an, Xintai, Laiwu, Ningyang, Wenzhou, Dongping, Pingyin, and Hecheng Yazhou counties, the water of Wenzhou flows into the canal through the water of Wenzhou, so the canal can flow smoothly.

古文：今东平、平阴、肥城淤沙中断，请亟浚之。 
现代文：现在东圣、壬阴、肥城泉水因淤沙而中断，请求赶快疏通它。 
English: Now, the Dongsheng, Jinyin and Feicheng springs have been interrupted due to silting, and it is requested that they be quickly dredged.

古文：复上疏运六策：一复安山湖水柜以济北闸，一改挑沧浪河从万年仓出口以利四闸，一展浚汶河、陶河上源以济邳派，一改道沂河出徐塘口以并利邳、宿，其二即开三州县淤沙及改挑白马湖也。
现代文：又上奏疏通运河的六个办法：一是恢复安山湖水柜来补济北闸，二是改挖沧浪河从万年仓出口以便利四闸，三是扩展疏通汶河、陶河上源来补济邳州支流，四是改道沂河出于徐塘口使一起便利于邳、宿二州，另外二个办法就是清除三州县淤沙以及改挖白马湖。
English: He also mentioned six methods of dredging the canal: one is to restore the water tank of Ansan Lake to make up the north gate of Jizhou, the second is to change the excavation of the Canglang River from the warehouse outlet to facilitate the four gates, the third is to expand the dredging of the upper source of the Wenhe and Tao River to make up the tributary of Jizhou, the fourth is to reroute the Jizhou River from the mouth of the Xutang River to make it convenient for rafting and lodging in the two states, and the other two methods are to remove the silt in the three counties and change the excavation of Baima

古文：皆命酌行。
现代文：都命令斟酌施行。
English: All orders will be implemented with discretion.

古文：国维又浚淮、扬漕河三百馀里。
现代文：张国维又疏通淮、扬漕河三百余里。
English: Zhang Guowei also dredged more than 300 miles of the Huai and Yangcao Rivers.

古文：当是时，河臣竭力补苴，南河稍宁，北河数浅阻。
现代文：在这时，河臣竭力弥补，南河逐渐安宁，北河多处淤阻。
English: At this time, he tried his best to make up for it. The South River gradually calmed down, while the North River was silted up in many places.

古文：而河南守臣壅黄河以灌贼。
现代文：然而，河南守臣堵塞黄河用来淹没贼寇。
English: However, Henan Shoucheng blocked the Yellow River to drown the bandits.

古文：河大决开封，下流日淤，河事益坏，未几而明亡矣。
现代文：黄河大面积在开封决堤，下游一天天淤塞，治河的事宜更加败坏，不久明朝就灭亡了。
English: A large area of the Yellow River broke through the dike in Kaifeng, and the downstream was silted up day by day. The affairs of river management became even more corrupt, and it soon perished in the morning.

