古文：黄帝问于岐伯曰：余闻刺有五节，奈何？
现代文：黄帝向岐伯问道：我听说刺法有五节之分，具体内容是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di asked Qibo: I heard that the stabbing method is divided into five sections, what is the specific content?

古文：岐伯曰：固有五节，一曰振埃，二曰发矇，三曰去爪，四曰彻衣，五曰解惑。
现代文：岐伯说：刺法理论中确有五节的说法，它实质上指针刺的五种方法：第一种叫做振埃，第二种叫做发矇，第三种叫做去爪，第四种叫做彻衣，第五种叫做解惑。
English: Qibo said: There is indeed a five-section theory in the theory of pricking, which essentially refers to five methods of needle pricking: the first is called vibrating, the second is called hairpin, the third is called declawing, the fourth is called stripping, and the fifth is called solving.

古文：黄帝曰：夫子言五节，余未知其意。
现代文：黄帝说：先生所谈到的这五节的方法，我还不知道它的含义是什么。
English: Huang Di said, "I still don't know what the meaning of the five-sentence method is that you mentioned.

古文：岐伯曰：振埃者，刺外经，去阳病也；发矇者，刺腑俞，去腑病也；去爪者，刺关节支络也；彻衣者，尽刺诸阳之奇俞也；解惑者，尽知调阴阳，补泻有余不足，相倾移也。
现代文：岐伯说：针刺中振埃的方法是指针刺浅表的经脉，用以治疗阳病；发矇的方法，是指针刺六腑的腧穴，治疗腑病；去爪的方法，是指刺关节的支络；彻衣的方法，是指遍刺六腑之别络；解惑的方法，是指根据阴阳的变化机理，而补不足、泻有余，使偏颇的阴阳归于平衡，达到治愈疾病的目的。
English: Qibo said: the method of vibration in acupuncture is to use the needle to prick the superficial meridians to treat the yang disease; the method of hair removal is to use the needle to prick the acupoints of the six gills to treat the hernia; the method of removing the claws is to use the supporting network of the acupoints; the method of removing the clothes is to use the different network of the six gills; the method of solving the puzzle is to use the change mechanism of yin and yang to compensate for the deficiency and excess of laxity, so that the unbalanced yin and yang are balanced to achieve the purpose of curing the disease

古文：黄帝曰：刺节言振埃，夫子乃言刺外经，去阳病，余不知其所谓也。
现代文：黄帝说：刺法五节中的振埃方法，先生说是针刺浅表的经脉治疗阳病，我仍不明白其中的道理是什么，我想尽快地知道。
English: Huang Di said, "The vibrating method in the five sections of the pricking method is the best. My teacher said that it is a superficial pricking of the meridians to treat yang disease. I still don't understand what the reason is. I want to know as soon as possible."

古文：愿卒闻之。岐伯曰：振埃者，阳气大逆，上满于胸中，愤瞋肩息，大气逆上，喘喝坐伏，病恶埃烟，饲不得息。
现代文：岐伯说：振埃方法，具体说是治疗阳气暴逆于上，充满胸中，胸部胀满，呼吸时张口抬肩等病症的，或胸中之气上逆，以致发生气喘喝喝有声，或坐或伏而难以仰卧，并且害怕埃尘和烟雾，一遇烟尘则病势加重，使得喉咙噎塞而有窒息感。
English: Qi Bo said: the vibration method, specifically the treatment of yang qi storm against the top, is full of chest, chest is swollen, breathing when the mouth is open and shoulders are raised and other diseases, or the breath in the chest is upside down, resulting in asthma, drinking and drinking noisily, or sitting or lying down and it is difficult to lie on the back, and is afraid of dust and smoke. In the case of smoke, the disease is aggravated, causing the throat to be blocked and there is a feeling of suffocation.

古文：请言振埃，尚疾于振埃。黄帝曰：善。
现代文：这种方法之所以称为振埃，是因为治疗这种病收效极快，立竿见影，甚至比振落尘埃还要迅速。黄帝说：讲得好。
English: The reason why this method is called shaking dust is because the treatment of this disease is extremely fast, with immediate results, even faster than shaking dust. Huang Di said: Well said.

古文：取之何如？
现代文：怎样取穴位治疗呢？
English: How to take the treatment of acupoints?

古文：岐伯曰：取之天容。
现代文：岐伯说：取手太阳小肠经的天容穴。
English: Qi Bo said, "Take the hand of the sun's small intestine through the hole of the face.

古文：黄帝曰：其咳上气，穷拙胸痛者，取之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：若有咳逆上气，屈曲蜷缩着而胸部疼痛，这种情况取什么穴位呢？
English: Huang Di said: If there is a cough against the wind, bending and curling and chest pain, what is the situation?

古文：岐伯曰：取之廉泉。
现代文：岐伯说：取任脉的廉泉穴。
English: Qi Bo said, "It's not a good idea to take over the line of succession.

古文：黄帝曰：取之有数乎？
现代文：黄帝说：取这两个穴位时，用针有一定法则吗？
English: Huang Di said: When taking these two points, is there a certain rule for using the needle?

古文：岐伯曰：取天容者，无过一里。取廉泉者，血变而止。
现代文：岐伯说：取天容穴时，针刺不要超过一寸；取廉泉穴时，看到病人面部血色改变时即当止针。
English: Qi Bo said: When taking the Tian Rong hole, the needle should not exceed one inch; when taking the Lian Quan hole, stop the needle when you see the patient's face change color.

古文：帝曰：善哉。
现代文：黄帝说：讲得好。
English: Huang Di said, "That was well said."

古文：黄帝曰：刺节言发矇，余不得其意。
现代文：黄帝说：刺法五节中所讲的发矇方法，我还没弄懂其含义是什么。
English: Huang Di said, "I still don't understand the meaning of the hairpin method mentioned in the fifth section of the hairpin method.

古文：夫发矇者，耳无所闻，目无所见，夫子乃言刺腑俞，去腑病，何输使然？愿闻其故。
现代文：本来发矇的针法，是治疗耳朵听不见，眼睛看不清的病变的。先生却说针刺六腑的腧穴，治疗腑病，那到底哪个腧穴能治好这耳目病，我想知道其中的道理。
English: Originally, acupuncture was used to treat diseases in which the ears could not hear and the eyes could not see clearly. However, the doctor said that acupuncture could cure deafness, so I wanted to know which acupuncture point could cure this deafness.

古文：岐伯曰：妙乎哉问也。
现代文：岐伯说：你问得太好了。
English: Qibo said, "That's a very good question.

古文：此刺之大约，针之极也，神明之类也，口说书卷，犹不能及也。
现代文：这是针刺中最绝妙的地方，它简直达到了登峰造极的地步，其中的奥妙必须心领神会，单凭平时口里说的和书本里记载的，还不能道出它出神入化的玄机。
English: This is the most wonderful place in acupuncture. It has almost reached the pinnacle of perfection. The mystery of it must be comprehended by the mind. It is not possible to reveal the secret of its inspiration just by what is said in everyday life and recorded in books.

古文：请言发矇耳，尚疾于发矇也。黄帝曰：善。
现代文：我所说的发矇方法，其奏效之迅捷，比睁开眼睛还要快。黄帝说：太好了。
English: The hair braiding method I mentioned works very quickly, faster than opening your eyes. Huang Di said: That's great.

古文：愿卒闻之。
现代文：我想尽快知道这方面的内容。
English: Please tell us in detail.

古文：岐伯曰：刺此者，必于日中，刺其听宫，中其眸子，声闻于耳，此其输也。黄帝曰：善。
现代文：岐伯说，针刺耳无所闻、目无所见的病，必须在中午的时候，针刺手太阳小肠经的听宫穴，通过手法使针刺感应到瞳子，而且要使耳内能听到作响的声音，这就是治疗本病的主要腧穴。黄帝说：好。
English: Qi Bo said that in order to cure the deafness and blindness caused by acupuncture, it is necessary that the acupuncturist should perform acupuncture on the auditory cavity of the solar small intestine at noon. The acupuncturist should induce the acupuncture to the pupil through the technique, and the sound should be heard in the ear. This is the main anus for the treatment of this disease. Huang Di said, "Good."

古文：何谓声闻于耳？
现代文：怎样才能使耳内能听到声音呢？
English: How can sound be heard in the inner ear?

古文：岐伯曰：刺邪，以手坚按其两鼻窍而疾偃，其声必应于针也。
现代文：岐伯说：针刺听宫穴的同时，让患者用手紧按两个鼻孔，而且赶快仰卧，这样，耳内一定会有声音应针而响。
English: Qi Bo said: While listening to the sound of the acupoint, let the patient press the two nostrils tightly with his hand, and quickly lie on his back. In this way, there will definitely be a sound in the ear.

古文：黄帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：太妙了。
English: Huang Di said, "That was well said."

古文：此所谓：弗见为之，而无目视，见而取之，神明相得者也。
现代文：这就是所说的：没有看见去做什么，也没用眼睛注视着它，针刺的效果却明显出现，实在是得心应手出神入化了。
English: That's what it says: without seeing what to do, without using your eyes to watch it, the effect of the needling is clearly visible, it's really easy to get carried away.

古文：黄帝曰：刺节言去爪，夫子乃言刺关节支络，愿卒闻之。
现代文：黄帝说：刺法五节中所说的去爪方法，先生说是指刺关节支络，我想尽快知道其中的道理。
English: Huang Di said: The nail removal method mentioned in the fifth section of the piercing method, the teacher said, is the piercing joint support, I want to know the reason as soon as possible.

古文：岐伯曰：腰脊者，身之大关节也；肢胫者，人之管以趋翔也；茎垂者，身中之机，阴精之候，津液之道也。
现代文：岐伯说：腰脊是身体内较大的关节；下肢是人体行走的枢要，也是站立时的支柱；阴茎是人身的紧要部件，是阴精的守候者，也是津液输出的通道。
English: Qi Bo said: the lumbar spine is the largest joint in the body; the lower limbs are the key to human walking, and also the pillar when standing; the penis is an important part of the human body, is the guardian of the phallus, and is also the channel for the output of sexual fluid.

古文：故饮食不节，喜怒不时，津液内溢，乃下留于睪，血道不通，日大不休，俛仰不便，趋翔不能。
现代文：所以，如果饮食没有节制，喜怒无常，就会使津液内溢，下而流入睾丸之中，由于水道不通，阴囊日益胀大不止，以致俯仰不便，行走困难。
English: Therefore, if the diet is unrestrained and temperamental, it will cause the saliva to overflow and flow down into the testicles. Since the water supply is not available, the scrotum will become larger and larger, making it difficult to lift and difficult to walk.

古文：此病荣然有水，不上不下，铍石所取。
现代文：这种病是阴囊内水液积满，不能上通下泄的结果，当用铍针、砭石泻除积水。
English: This disease is the result of the accumulation of fluid in the scrotum, which can not be drained. It is necessary to remove the accumulated water with a hypodermic needle and cassia stone.

古文：形不可匿，常不得蔽，故命曰去爪。
现代文：阴囊肿大之形不能藏匿，下衣也难以将它遮盖，所以把去除这种病的治法叫做去爪。
English: The large size of the scrotum cannot be hidden, and it is difficult for underwear to cover it, so the treatment for removing this disease is called declawing.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：你讲得很好。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：黄帝曰：刺节言彻衣，夫子乃言尽刺诸阳之奇俞，未有常处也。
现代文：黄帝说：刺法五节中所说的彻衣方法，先生说是遍刺六腑之别络，没有固定的部位，我想立即知道其中的道理。
English: Huang Di said, "The method of piercing clothes mentioned in the fifth section of the piercing method, the teacher said that it is a different network of six stings, there is no fixed part, I want to know the reason immediately.

古文：愿卒闻之。岐伯曰：是阳气有余，而阴气不足，阴气不足则内热，阳气有余则外热，内热相搏，热于怀炭，外畏绵帛近，不可近身，又不可近席。
现代文：岐伯说：彻衣方法，适用于阳气有余而阴气不足的病，阴气不足会产生内热，阳气有余又会发生外热，内热、外热相互搏结，则内感比怀抱炭火还要热，而于外则只想袒露身体，不愿穿衣盖被，甚至因怕热而身体不欲沾席。
English: Qi Bo said: the method of stripping clothes is suitable for diseases where there is too much yang and not enough yin. Insufficient yin generates internal heat, and excess yang generates external heat. Internal heat and external heat fight with each other. The internal feeling is even hotter than holding a charcoal fire, while the outside only wants to expose the body, does not want to wear a clothes cover, and even does not want to sit because of fear of heat.

古文：腠理闭塞，则汗不出，舌焦、唇槁、腊干、嗌燥，饮食不让美恶。
现代文：由于腠理闭塞，不得汗出，热邪不能外散，以至于舌干、口唇干裂、肌肉枯槁、咽喉干燥，饮食好坏也不辨其味。
English: Due to the obstruction of the palate, it is not possible to sweat, and the heat can not be dissipated, so that the tongue is dry, the lips are cracked, the muscles are withered, the throat is dry, and the diet is good or bad.

古文：黄帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：讲得好。
English: Huang Di said, "That was well said."

古文：取之奈何？
现代文：那么怎样治疗呢？
English: How is it treated?

古文：岐伯曰：取之于其天府、大杼三痏，又刺中膂，以去其热，补足手太阴，以去其汗，热去汗稀，疾于彻衣。
现代文：岐伯说：首先针刺手太阴肺经的天府穴和足太阳膀胱经的大杼穴各三次，再刺足太阳膀胱经的中膂俞穴，以去除其热，然后补手太阴肺经和足太阴脾经的腧穴，使病人出汗，待热退汗液减少时，病就痊愈了，其去热的疗效比脱衣都快。
English: Qi Bo said: First, the Tianfu hole and the large anus of the foot sun bladder were needled three times each, and then the middle anus of the foot sun bladder was pricked to remove the heat, and then the anus of the hand sun lung and the foot sun spleen were patched to make the patient sweat. When the heat and perspiration were reduced, the disease was cured, and the heat removal was faster than stripping.

古文：黄帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：你讲得很好。
English: Huang Di said, "That was well said."

古文：黄帝曰：刺节言解惑，夫子乃言尽知调阴阳，补泻有余不足，相倾移也，惑何以解之？
现代文：黄帝说：刺法五节中所说的解惑方法，先生说要全部知道调和阴阳和运用补泻的道理，使人体内阴阳虚实相互变化移易，以达到平衡，那么在错综复杂的病情中怎样辨清阴阳虚实的迷惑而予以正确的治疗呢？
English: Huang Di said: The method of solving the puzzle mentioned in the fifth section of the stabbing method, the teacher said that it is necessary to know all the principles of harmonizing yin and yang and using the principle of compensatory relaxation, so that the yin and yang in the human body can change and shift each other to achieve balance. Then, in the complicated condition, how to distinguish the confusion of yin and yang and give the correct treatment?

古文：岐伯曰：大风在身，血脉偏虚，虚者不足，实者有余，轻重不得，倾侧宛伏，不知东西，不知南北，乍上乍下，乍反乍复，颠倒无常，甚于迷惑。
现代文：岐伯说：人得了中风一类的病，血气必有偏虚之处，虚者是指正气不足，实者是指邪气有余，这样身体就感到肢体轻重不相称，身体倾斜反侧，仆伏欲倒，严重时可导致神志昏乱，意识模糊，不能辨别东西南北，症状出现忽上忽下反复多变，颠倒无常，所以它比单纯的神志迷惑还要病情严重。
English: Qi Bo said: When a person has a disease such as a stroke, there must be a deficiency in the blood qi. The deficiency refers to the lack of righteous qi, and the actuality refers to the excess of evil qi. In this way, the body feels that the weight of the limbs is not commensurate, the body is tilted to the opposite side, and the body wants to fall down. In severe cases, it can lead to mental confusion, blurred consciousness, and cannot distinguish between east and west, north and south. The symptoms appear suddenly and repeatedly, and they are unstable. Therefore, it is a more serious condition than simple mental confusion.

古文：岐伯曰：泻其有余，补其不足，阴阳平复，用针若此，疾于解惑。
现代文：岐伯说：不管症候多么复杂，必须泻其邪气的有余，补其正气的不足，使之达到阴阳平衡，这样用针是治其根本，奏效迅速，比单纯解除神志迷惑要快捷。
English: Qibo said: No matter how complex the symptoms are, it is necessary to relieve the excess of evil spirits, make up for the deficiency of righteous spirits, and make it reach the balance of yin and yang. In this way, the needle is used to treat the root, the effect is rapid, and it is faster than simply removing the confusion of the mind.

古文：黄帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：讲得好。
English: Huang Di said, "That was well said."

古文：请藏之灵兰之室，不敢妄出也。
现代文：我一定把这些理论知识著之于书册，秘藏在灵兰之室，很好地保存起来，决不敢轻易泄露出去。
English: I will definitely write down these theoretical knowledge in a book, hide it in Ling Lan's room, keep it well, and never dare to easily leak it out.

古文：黄帝曰：余闻刺有五邪，何谓五邪？
现代文：黄帝说：我听说有针刺治疗五邪的方法，什么叫做五邪？
English: Huang Di said: I heard that there is a method of acupuncture to treat the five evils. What are the five evils?

古文：岐伯曰：病有持痈者，有容大者，有狭小者，有热者，有寒者，是谓五邪。
现代文：岐伯说：病有痈肿的，有属实的，有属虚的，有属热的，有属寒的，这就叫做五邪。
English: Qibo said, "There are five kinds of diseases: those that are swollen, those that are true, those that are false, those that are hot, and those that are cold. These are called the five evils.

古文：黄帝曰：刺五邪奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：五邪致病怎样针刺治疗呢？
English: Huang Di said: How does acupuncture treat the five evil pathogens?

古文：岐伯曰：凡刺五邪之方，不过五章，瘅热消灭，肿聚散亡，寒痹益温，小者益阳，大者必去，请道其方。
现代文：岐伯说：针刺治疗五邪的方法，不过五条，瘅热的病症应该消灭热邪，痈肿积聚的病应该使它消散，寒痹的病应该益气温通，虚邪的病应该益其阳气，实邪的病应该排除邪气。
English: Qi Bo said: Acupuncture is a method of treating the five evils, but there are five methods. The feverish disease should eliminate the heat evil, the bloated disease should dissipate it, the cold disease should improve the temperature, the false evil disease should benefit its yang, and the true evil disease should eliminate the evil.

古文：凡刺痈邪，无迎陇，易俗移性，不得脓，脆道更行，去其乡，不安处所，乃散亡。
现代文：让我具体讲讲刺五邪的方法。凡是针刺痈邪，不可迎着痈邪的隆盛之势使用泻法，应耐心地加以调治，这样痈邪就会不化脓，还应改换不同的方法进行针刺，使邪毒不在固定的部位留聚，这样，病邪就会渐行消散。
English: Let me specifically talk about the method of pricking the five evils. For those who need to prick the evil, they should not use the laxative method in the face of the prosperity of the evil, they should be patiently adjusted, so that the evil will not dissolve, and they should also change the different methods of needling, so that the evil poison does not stay in a fixed place, so that the disease will gradually dissipate.

古文：诸阴阳过痈者，取之其输泻之。
现代文：所以不论是阳经还是阴经，只要是经过痈肿所生的部位，就可以取本经的腧穴来泻其毒邪。
English: Therefore, regardless of whether it is a yang jing or a yin jing, as long as it is a part born through an abscess, you can take the anus of this jing to relieve its poison.

古文：凡刺大邪，日以小，泄夺其有余，乃益虚。
现代文：凡针刺实邪，务求使实邪日益减小，泻其有余，就可起到补益其虚而使虚实渐趋平和的作用。
English: Where the needle pricks the real evil, in order to make the real evil decrease day by day and reduce it to a surplus, it can play a role of supplementing its falsity and making the falsity and reality gradually become peaceful.

古文：剽其通，针其邪，肌肉亲视之，毋有反其真。
现代文：在病邪往来的通路上攻击它，针刺病邪使它离去，使肌肉相附；待到邪气除尽，真气返还，就停止针刺。
English: Attack it on the path where the evil spirits come and go. Pinch the evil spirits to make them go away and attach the muscles. Wait until the evil spirits are eliminated and the true spirits are returned, then stop the pinching.

古文：刺诸阳分肉间。
现代文：因实邪多在三阳，故宜针刺诸阳经分肉间的穴位。
English: Because the real evil is mostly in Sanyang, it is advisable to prick the points between the points of the meridians of Zhuyang.

古文：凡刺小邪，日以大，补其不足，乃无害。
现代文：凡针刺虚邪，是使正气日渐充实，补其不足，虚邪就不至构成危害。
English: Where needles prick the false and the evil, it is to make the righteous spirit more and more abundant, to make up for its deficiency, and the false and the evil will not constitute a harm.

古文：视其所在，迎之界，远近尽至，其不得外侵而行之，乃自费。刺分肉间。
现代文：观察虚的所在，在气行的来路上迎接它，使远近经气尽至而不外泄；但补不可太过，补得过分则损正气。所以，针刺虚邪的方法，宜针刺分肉间的穴位。
English: Observe the location of the deficiency and meet it on the way of the qi, so that it can be exhausted from far and near without leaking out. However, it should not be overcompensated, and if it is overcompensated, it will damage the righteous qi. Therefore, the method of pinching the deficiency should be pinching the point between the points.

古文：凡刺热邪，越而苍，出游不归，乃无病。
现代文：凡针刺热邪，应使热邪发散而转凉，热邪散出不再回返，病就消除了。
English: Whenever a needle pricks a fever, the fever should be dissipated and cooled. Once the fever is dissipated, it will not return, and the disease will be eliminated.

古文：为开通，辟门户，使邪得出，病乃已。
现代文：所以在针刺时要用疏泄的手法，为邪气疏通道路，开辟门户，使热邪得以排出，病即痊愈。
English: Therefore, when performing acupuncture, it is necessary to use the method of distraction to clear the path and open the portal for the evil qi, so that the hot evil can be discharged and the disease can be cured.

古文：凡刺寒邪，日以温，徐往徐来，致其神；门户已闭，气不分，虚实得调，其气存也。
现代文：凡针刺寒邪，要使体气渐转温和，要用徐来徐往的手法除去寒邪，招来神气；出针时要密闭针孔，使真气不得分散、逸出，虚实得以平调，真气就可固密内存了。
English: Whenever a needle pricks a cold evil, it is necessary to gradually soften the body's qi, and it is necessary to remove the cold evil with the method of slowly and gradually, and to attract the spirit; when the needle is released, the needle hole should be sealed so that the true qi can not be dispersed and escaped, and the false and real qi can be leveled, and the true qi can be firmly stored.

古文：黄帝曰：官针奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：刺五邪，应当各选用什么针具比较合适呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "There are five evils of thorns. What kind of needle should be chosen for each of them?

古文：岐伯曰：刺痈者，用铍针；刺大者，用锋针；刺小者，用员利针；刺热者，用纔针；刺寒者，用毫针也。
现代文：岐伯说，刺痈邪当用有刃而锋利的铍针；刺实邪当用锋针；刺虚邪当用员利针；刺热邪当用鑱针；刺寒邪当用毫针。
English: According to Qibo, a sharp-edged stylus should be used for pricking; a sharp-edged stylus should be used for pricking; a sharp-edged stylus should be used for pricking; a sharp-edged stylus should be used for pricking; a sharp-edged stylus should be used for pricking; a sharp-edged stylus should be used for pricking; a sharp-edged stylus should be used for pricking; a sharp-edged stylus should be used for pricking; a sharp-edged stylus should be used for pricking; a sharp-edged stylus should be used for pricking.

古文：请言解论。
现代文：让我再谈谈解结的理论。
English: Let me return to the theory of disentanglement.

古文：与天地相应，与四时相副，人参天地，故可为解。
现代文：人身与天地相应，与四时相合。人既然与天地相参并，所以人的疾病是可以比拟、参照天地自然现象加以解释的。
English: The human body corresponds to heaven and earth, and coincides with the four times. Since man and heaven and earth are the same, human diseases can be compared and explained by reference to the natural phenomena of heaven and earth.

古文：下有渐洳，上生苇蒲，此所以知形气之多少也。
现代文：地有低湿的沼泽，上面生长蒲草、芦苇，观察蒲苇的茂盛与否，可知其浸湿的程度，积水的多少；同样，观察人形体的强弱，可知血气的盛衰。
English: There is a low-moisture swamp on the ground, with reeds and reeds growing on it. Observing the luxuriance of the reeds, you can know the degree of wetness and the amount of accumulated water; similarly, observing the strength of the human body, you can know the rise and fall of blood gas.

古文：阴阳者，寒暑也，热则滋雨而在上，根茎少汁。人气在外，皮肤缓，腠理开，血气减，汗大泄，皮淖泽。
现代文：阴阳变化与寒暑交替相应，赤日炎炎在上，草木的根茎就缺乏水分；人体阳气在于浅表，则皮肤弛缓，腠理张开，血气衰减，汗液大泄，皮肤淖湿。
English: Yin and yang changes correspond to the alternation of cold and heat. If the red sun is hot, the roots of plants will lack water. If the yang of the human body is shallow, the skin will be relaxed, the pores will open, the blood gas will decay, sweat will leak out, and the skin will be moist.

古文：寒则地冻水冰，人气在中，皮肤致，腠理闭，汗不出，血气强，肉坚涩。
现代文：天气寒冷，则地冻结，水成冰；人体阳气沉伏于内，则皮肤密致，腠理闭合，汗液不出，血气凝滞，肌肉坚涩。
English: When the weather is cold, the ground freezes and the water turns into ice; when the yang of the human body is submerged, the skin is dense, the pores and skin are closed, sweat does not come out, the blood is stagnant, and the muscles are stiff.

古文：当是之时，善行水者不能往冰，善穿地者不能击冻，善用针者亦不能取四厥。
现代文：在这样的时候，善于舟行水上的人，也无法在冰上行船；善于凿地的人，也难以凿穿冻结的土地。
English: At this time, people who are good at sailing on the water cannot sail on the ice; people who are good at digging can hardly dig through the frozen land.

古文：血脉凝结坚搏，不往来者，亦未可即柔。故行水者必待天温，冰释冻解，而水可行，地可穿也。
现代文：同样，当患者处在十分寒冷的环境之中的时候，善于用针的人，也不能治除其四肢厥冷之症，血脉凝结，坚实沉滞不能往来畅行的，也难以立时就可使它变得柔和畅通。所以，善舟楫的人，一定要等到天气变暖、坚冰融化之后，才可以在水上行船；解冻之后，地才易于凿穿。
English: Similarly, when the patient is in a very cold environment, people who are good at using needles cannot cure the coldness of the extremities, blood clotting, solid stagnation cannot travel smoothly, and it is difficult to make it soft and smooth immediately. Therefore, people who are good at sailing must wait until the weather warms up and the hard ice melts before they can travel on the water; after thawing, the ground is easy to drill through.

古文：人脉犹是也。治厥者，必先熨调和其经，掌与腋，肘与脚，项与脊，以调之。火气已通，血脉乃行。然后视其病，脉淖泽者，刺而平之；坚紧者，破而散之，气下乃止。
现代文：人的血脉也是这样，治疗厥逆时，一定要先用熨法调和经脉，在手掌与腋下，肘部与脚部，颈项与脊背等处加以熨治，使经脉调柔，温热之气已通，血脉遂即畅行，然后视病如何，对症施治：脉濡湿润滑的，就针刺使它恢复正常；脉坚紧的，就针刺而使实邪破散，待厥逆之气下行，就停止针刺。
English: The same is true of human blood vessels. When treating retrograde vasospasm, it is necessary to first use the ironing method to adjust the meridians. The palms and underarms, the elbows and feet, the neck and the back of the spine, etc. should be ironed to soften the meridians. The warm and hot air has passed through, and the blood vessels are then smooth. Then, depending on the disease, the symptoms should be treated: if the pulse is wet and lubricated, it should be pricked to restore it to normal; if the pulse is tight, it should be pricked to disperse the real evil, and if the retrograde vasospasm is

古文：此所谓以解结者也。
现代文：这就是解结的方法。
English: This is how the knot is untied.

古文：用针之类，在于调气，气积于胃，以通营卫，各行其道。
现代文：采用针刺治病，主要在于调节气机，人气来源于水谷，水谷之气首先积蓄于胃中，化生的营气和卫气内外交通，并各自在各自的道路运行全身。
English: The use of acupuncture in the treatment of diseases is mainly to adjust the qi machine. The popularity comes from the water valley. The water valley qi is first stored in the stomach, and the living qi and the health qi are used for internal and external transportation, and they run all over the body on their own roads.

古文：宗气留于海，其下者注于气街，其上者走于息道。
现代文：宗气留积于胸中而为气之海，其下行的灌注于气冲穴处，其上行的走向呼吸之道。
English: The zong qi accumulates in the chest and rises as a sea of qi. Its downward flow perfuses at the qi-punching point, and its upward flow moves toward the respiratory tract.

古文：故厥在于足，宗气不下，脉中之血，凝而留止，弗之火调，弗能取之。
现代文：所以，当足部发生厥冷之症，是由于宗气不能循经下行，致使脉中血液凝滞留止，如不先用温熨法温通调和血脉，就不能取穴刺治。
English: Therefore, when hypothermia occurs in the foot, it is due to the fact that the qi cannot travel down the meridian, causing blood clotting in the pulse. If you do not first use the warm ironing method to adjust the blood flow, you can not take a puncture.

古文：用针者，必先察其经络之实虚，切而循之，按而弹之，视其应动者，乃后取之而下之。
现代文：用针治疗疾病，一定先要诊察患者经络的虚实，用切、循、按、弹等诊候方法，诊视脉气的应动情况，而后取适当穴位刺治，以去除其病。
English: In the treatment of diseases with needles, it is necessary to first examine the patient's meridians, and use the cutting, following, pressing, and bouncing methods to diagnose the response of the pulse, and then take the appropriate puncture to remove the disease.

古文：六经调者，谓之不病，虽病，谓之自已也。
现代文：如果手足太阴、手足少阴，手足阳明六经的脉气和调，就说明身体无病，即使有些小病，也可不治自愈。
English: If the hands and feet are too yin, the hands and feet are too yang, and the hands and feet are too yin, and the pulse and qi of the hands and feet are harmonious, it means that there is no disease in the body. Even if there are some minor diseases, they can be cured.

古文：一经上实下虚而不通者，此必有横络盛加于大经，令之不通，视而泻之。
现代文：如果某一经脉上实下虚而不通畅，这一定是横络受邪，并且邪气势盛，因而影响到正经，使它不能通畅。
English: If there is something false and not smooth on a certain meridian, it must be a cross-linked evil, and the evil is powerful, thus affecting the positive meridian and making it not smooth.

古文：此所谓解结也。上寒下热，先刺其项太阳，久留之。
现代文：遇到这种情况，应将病邪所在部位诊察明白，然后用泻法刺治。这就是所说的解结方法。人体上部有寒象而下部发热的，应当首先取足太阳膀胱经在项部周围的穴位，并作较长时间的留针。
English: In this case, the site of the disease should be diagnosed and understood, and then treated with a laxative. This is the so-called untangling method. If the upper part of the human body is cold and the lower part is hot, the first step should be to take the solar bladder through the points around the neck, and make a long-lasting needle.

古文：已刺则熨项与肩胛，令热下合乃止，此所谓推而上之者也。
现代文：针刺以后，还要温熨项部及肩胛部，这样可以驱逐上部的寒邪，使热气上下融合，方可止针。这就是所谓 推而上之 的针法。
English: After needling, it is also necessary to warm up the neckline and shoulders, so that the coldness of the upper part can be expelled and the hot air can be fused up and down before the needle can be stopped. This is the so-called push-up needle method.

古文：上热下寒，视其虚脉而陷之于经络者取之，气下乃止，此所谓引而下之者也。
现代文：如人体上部发热而下部发冷的，要诊察是哪一条经脉脉气不足并影响、伤损了其他经络，然后取适当穴位刺治，待到阳气下行，便停止针刺。这就是所谓 引而下之 的针法。
English: If the upper part of the human body is hot and the lower part is cold, it is necessary to examine which meridian is deficient and affects or injures other meridians, and then take the appropriate point to prick, wait until the yang goes down, and then stop the needling. This is the so-called lead-down needle method.

古文：大热遍身，狂而妄见、妄闻、妄言，视足阳明及大络取之，虚者补之，血而实者泻之。
现代文：遍身高热，神情狂躁不安，并有幻视，幻听，胡言乱语表现的，要察看足阳明胃经的正经、络脉的虚实情况，而后取穴针刺。
English: For those who are feverish all over the body, have a manic and restless look, and have hallucinations, hallucinations, and gibberish, it is necessary to look at the true and false conditions of the foot and sun, the stomach and rectum, and the veins, and then take a pinprick.

古文：因其偃卧，居其头前，以两手四指挟按颈动脉，久持之，卷而切推，下至缺盆中，而复止如前，热去乃止，此所谓推而散之者也。
现代文：虚的用补法，有血瘀而属实的就用泻法，同时让病人仰卧，医者在病人头前，用两手的拇指和食指，挟持按揉患者两侧颈动脉部，作较长时间挟按后，再屈指切按推揉，由上而下推至缺盆穴，如此重复多次，待到热去才停止。这就是所谓 推而散之 的方法。
English: The doctor uses the thumb and forefinger of both hands to hold and rub the carotid artery on both sides of the patient in front of the patient's head. After holding and rubbing for a long time, the little finger is cut and pushed and rubbed from top to bottom to the pelvic cavity. This is repeated many times until the heat goes away. This is the so-called "push and spread" method.

古文：黄帝曰：有一脉生数十病者，或痛、或痈、或热、或寒、或痒、或痹、或不仁，变化无穷，其故何也？
现代文：黄帝说：有一条经脉受邪而发生几十种病症的，或痛、或痈、或热、或寒、或痒、或痹、或麻木不仁，证候表现千变万化，这是什么原因呢？
English: Huang Di said, "If there is one meridian that is affected by evil and has dozens of diseases, or pain, or cramps, or heat, or cold, or itching, or palsy, or insensitivity, and the symptoms are ever-changing, what is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：此皆邪气之所生也。
现代文：岐伯说：这都是由各种不同的邪气伤害而发生的。
English: Qi Bo said, "This is all caused by various evil spirits.

古文：黄帝曰：余闻气者，有真气，有正气，有邪气。何谓真气？
现代文：黄帝说：我听说有真气，有正气，有邪气等不同的名称。
English: Huang Di said, "I have heard that there are different names such as true qi, righteous qi, and evil qi.

古文：岐伯曰：真气者，所受于天，与谷气并而充身也。
现代文：那么什么叫真气呢？
English: So what is true anger?

古文：正气者，正风也，从一方来，非实风，又非虚风也。邪气者，虚风之贼伤人也，其中人也深，不能自去。
现代文：岐伯说：真气是先天的真元之气，与饮食所化之谷气合并而充养着身体；正气，这里指的是正风，正风从合于四时八节的方向而来，不是过于剧烈的实风，也不是与时令不合的虚风；邪气就是伤害人体的虚风。
English: Qi Bo said: True qi is the innate true qi, which is combined with the grain qi transformed by diet to nourish the body; positive qi, here refers to the positive wind, the positive wind comes from the direction that coincides with the four o'clock, not the too violent real wind, nor the false wind that does not match the season; evil qi is the false wind that harms the human body.

古文：正风者，其中人也浅，合而自去，其气来柔弱，不能胜真气，故自去。
现代文：虚风侵袭了人身，会深入体内，不能自行消散；正风着于人身，只进入浅表，与体内真气相遇后就会自行消散，这是因为正风之气来势柔而不猛，不能战胜真气，所以会自行散去。
English: The false wind invades the human body, penetrates deep into the body, and cannot dissipate on its own; the positive wind hits the human body, only enters the surface, and will dissipate on its own after encountering the true qi in the body. This is because the positive wind is soft and not fierce, and cannot defeat the true qi, so it will dissipate on its own.

古文：虚邪之中人也，洒淅动形，起毫毛而发腠理。其入深，内搏于骨，则为骨痹；搏于筋，则为筋挛；搏于脉中，则为血闭不通，则为痈；搏于肉，与卫气相搏，阳胜者则为热，阴胜者则为寒，寒则真气去，去则虚，虚则寒；搏于皮肤之间，其气外发腠理，开毫毛，摇气往来，行则为痒，留而不去则痹，卫气不行则为不仁。
现代文：四时八节的虚风邪气侵袭于人体，人就会感到寒意而瑟瑟战栗，毫毛竖起，腠理开张，虚邪深入向内，伤害至骨，就形成为骨痹；虚邪伤害至筋，就造成筋挛；损伤于脉，就造成血痹，血液淤滞不通，就形成痈；虚邪伤害于肌肉，与卫气相搏击，阳邪偏胜就形成热症，阴邪偏胜就形成寒症；真气为寒邪所迫而离去，真气离去则造成阳虚，阳气既虚则寒邪伤害皮肤，邪气向外发散，就会使腠理张开，毫毛摇动，邪气往来而行，就会发痒；邪气滞留不去，就形成痹症；卫气不能流通畅行，就形成麻木不仁之症。
English: At 4:08, the false wind of evil spirits invades the human body. People will feel cold and shiver. Hair will stand up, and the body will be open. The false evil spirits will penetrate deep into the body, and if they hurt the bones, they will form bone palsy. If the false evil spirits hurt the sinews, they will cause muscle cramps. If they hurt the veins, they will cause blood cramps, and if the blood is stagnant, they will form pus. The false evil spirits will hurt the muscles, and they will fight with the holy gas. If the masculine evil spirits win, they will form fever, and if the feminine evil spirits win, they will form

古文：虚邪偏容于身半，其入深，内居荣卫，荣卫稍衰，则真气去，邪气独留，发为偏枯。
现代文：虚邪偏中、留止于人体的一侧，如邪气深入，内犯荣卫，使荣卫渐渐衰弱，则真气离去，邪气独留，就会形成为半身不遂症。
English: The false evil is in the middle and stays on one side of the human body. If the evil spirit is deep-rooted and gradually weakens Rongwei, then the true spirit will leave and the evil spirit will be left alone, and it will form hemiplegia.

古文：其邪气浅者，脉偏痛。
现代文：如果邪气侵入得轻浅，就造成半身偏痛。
English: If the evil spirit invades lightly, it will cause hemiplegia.

古文：虚邪之入于身也深，寒与热相搏，久留而内着，寒胜其热，则骨疼肉枯；热胜其寒，则烂肉腐肌为脓，内伤骨，内伤骨为骨蚀；有所疾前筋，筋屈不得伸，邪气居其间而不反，发为筋溜；有所结，气归之，卫气留之，不得反，津液久留，合而为肠溜，久者数岁乃成，以手按之柔；已有所结，气归之，津液留之，邪气中之，凝结日以易甚，连以聚居，为昔瘤，以手按之坚；有所结，深中骨，气因于骨，骨与气并，日以益大，则为骨疽；有所结，中于肉，宗气归之，邪留而不去，有热则化而为脓，无热则为肉疽。
现代文：虚邪侵入而至于人体的深处，寒邪与热邪相搏击，长时滞留于内而不去，如果寒胜过热，就会骨骼疼痛，肌肉枯萎；如果热胜过寒，就会使肌肉腐烂化脓，以致内伤于骨，内伤于骨就形成为骨蚀；如邪气伤于筋，筋就屈缩不能伸展，邪气如久居不去，就会形成为筋瘤；如果病邪有所结聚，人体内的气也会归往结聚之处，以致卫气滞留其处而不能返还流通，使津液久留于肠胃之间，集结而形成为肠瘤，这种病时间长的须数年才可形成，用手按压，瘤是柔软的；病邪有所结聚，人体内的气趋往结聚之处，致使津液留滞，邪气中伤，凝结一天比一天严重，接连不断地积聚，就会形成为像干肉一般的瘤，用手按压，是坚硬的；病邪有所结聚，深入而伤及骨，邪气附着于骨，骨与邪气并合，一天比一天增大，就形成为骨瘤；病邪有所结聚，伤害到肌肉，宗气趋往结聚之处，而病邪留滞不去，如有内热，肌肉就会化而为脓，如无热，就会形成为肉瘤。
English: As for the depths of the human body, cold evil and heat evil invade and fight each other. If cold prevails over heat, it will stay in the body for a long time and not go away. If cold prevails over heat, the bones will ache and the muscles will wither. If heat prevails over cold, the muscles will rot and degenerate, resulting in internal injury to the bones. Internal injury to the bones will form bone erosion. If evil gas injures the muscles, the muscles will contract and cannot stretch. If evil gas does not stay for a long time, it will form a myoma. If there is an accumulation of diseases, the gas in the human body will also return to the

古文：凡此数气者，其发无常处，而有常名也。
现代文：上述这几种邪气，其发作没有一定部位，但引发的疾病都有一定的名称。
English: The above-mentioned evil spirits do not have a specific place where they attack, but the diseases they cause all have specific names.

