古文：袁继咸金声丘祖德沈犹龙陈子龙侯峒曾杨文骢陈潜夫沈廷扬林汝翥郑为虹袁继咸，字季通，宜春人。
现代文：袁继咸，字季通，宜春人。
English: Yuan Jixian, also known as Ji Tong, was from Yichun.

古文：天启五年进士。
现代文：天启五年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the fifth year of the Apocalypse.

古文：授行人。
现代文：初任行人。
English: Awarded to pedestrians.

古文：崇祯三年冬，擢御史，监临会试，坐纵怀挟举子，谪南京行人司副，迁主客员外郎。
现代文：崇祯三年冬天，升任御史，参加会试监考，因听任与试的举人挟带，被贬为南京行人司副，后来升为主客员外郎。
English: In the winter of the third year of Chongzhen, he was promoted to the position of imperial historian, and he participated in the examination of the examination committee. Because he was distracted by the appointment and examination, he was demoted to the deputy of the Nanjing Pedestrian Division, and later he was promoted to the main guest attendant.

古文：七年春，擢山西提学佥事。
现代文：七年春天，升任山西提学佥事。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, he was promoted to the post of Shanxi Tinghua Anecdote.

古文：未行，总理户、工二部中官张彝宪有朝觐官赍册之奏。
现代文：尚未赴任，总理户、工二部的官员张彝宪进呈了一份关于朝觐官员登记注册的奏章。
English: Before taking office, Zhang Yixian, an official of the Prime Minister's Office and the Second Ministry of Industry and Commerce, submitted a report on the registration of officials at the hajj.

古文：继咸疏论之，谓： 此令行，上自藩臬，下至守令，莫不次第参谒，屏息低眉，跪拜于中官之座，率天下为无耻事，大不便。 
现代文：继咸上书评论说 ：假如这个命令得到推行，那么上自藩王，下到县令就会依次来请托，低声下气地跪拜在宦官的座前。这样引诱天下人来干这无耻的事，真是太不好了。 
English: Following Haman's petition, he commented: "If this order is carried out, then everyone from the king of the domain to the county magistrate will come to ask for permission in turn, and kneel in front of the eunuch's seat in a low voice. It is really not good to lure the world to do this shameless thing.

古文：彝宪大恚，与继咸互讦奏。
现代文：彝宪大为恼火，就上书和继咸相互攻击。
English: Enraged, Yan Xian and Jixian attacked each other in a letter.

古文：帝不听，乃孑身赴任。
现代文：崇祯皇帝不听劝阻，继咸就独自一人上任去了。
English: Emperor Chongzhen did not listen to the dissuasion, and he took office alone.

古文：久之，巡抚吴甡荐其廉能。
现代文：过了好长时间，巡抚吴生生推荐说继咸廉洁奉公，精明强干。
English: After a long time, the inspector Wu Sheng Sheng recommended that the successor be honest, honest and hardworking.

古文：而巡按御史张孙振以请属不应，疏诬继咸脏私事。
现代文：可是巡按御史孙振因为向继咸请托，继咸不答应，就上书诬蔑他收取贿赂，舞弊徇私。
English: However, the inspector-general, Sun Zhen, because he asked Ji Xian for a favor and Ji Xian did not agree, wrote a letter slandering him for taking bribes, fraud and favoritism.

古文：帝怒，逮继咸，责甡回奏。
现代文：崇祯皇帝恼了，逮捕了继咸，责令吴生生回话上来。
English: Emperor Chongzhen was annoyed, arrested Ji Xian and ordered Wu Sheng Sheng to reply.

古文：甡贤继咸，斥孙振。
现代文：吴生生称赞继咸，驳斥了孙振的诬告。
English: Wu Shengsheng praised Jixian and refuted Sun Zhen's false accusation.

古文：诸生随至都，伏阙诉冤，继咸亦列上孙振请属状及其赃贿数事。
现代文：山西的生员们也跟到京师，跪在宫门外诉冤，继咸又上书陈诉了孙振向他请托的事实以及他收受贿赂的几件事。
English: The students from Shanxi also followed the Beijing division and knelt outside the palace gate to complain about their grievances. They also wrote a letter to complain about the fact that Sun Zhen asked him for a favor and several things about him accepting bribes.

古文：诏逮孙振，坐谪戍；继咸得复官。
现代文：崇祯皇帝下诏逮捕了孙振，判处他贬官充军，继咸得以恢复原职。
English: Emperor Chongzhen issued an edict arresting Sun Zhen, sentencing him to demotion and conscription, and Jixian was able to resume his former position.

古文：十年，除湖广参议，分守武昌。
现代文：十年，朝廷任命继咸为湖广参议，分守武昌。
English: Ten years later, the imperial court appointed Jixian as the councillor of Hukang and the governor of Wuchang.

古文：以兵捣江贼巢兴国、大冶山中，擒贼首吕瘦子，降其党十余人。
现代文：他带兵在兴国、大冶一带的山中捣毁了长江流域的贼巢，活捉了贼寇首领吕瘦子，降服了他的部下一千多人。
English: He led the soldiers to destroy the thieves' nests in the Yangtze River basin in the mountains around Xingguo and Daye, captured the leader of the bandits, Lyu Leanzi, alive, and subdued more than a thousand of his subordinates.

古文：诏兼佥事，分巡武昌、黄州。
现代文：朝廷又任命他兼任佥事，分巡武昌、黄州。
English: The imperial court also appointed him to concurrently serve as an anecdote, divided into patrols in Wuchang and Huangzhou.

古文：击退贼老回回、革里眼等七大部黄陂、黄安，筑黄冈城六千余丈。
现代文：他又在黄陂、黄安打退了贼将老回回、革里眼等七大部兵力的进攻，为黄冈城修筑了六千多丈长的城墙。
English: He also repulsed the attacks of seven large armies such as the Thieves' Generals Lao Hui Hui and Gu Li Yan in Huangpi and Huang'an, and built more than six thousand long walls for Huanggang City.

古文：十二年，移淮阳，忤中官杨显名，奏镌二秩调用。
现代文：十二年，继咸调到淮阳，因为触犯了宦官杨显名，被奏准贬官两级，调离使用。
English: In the 12th year, he was transferred to Huaiyang following Haman, because he violated the eunuch Yang Xianmei, he was demoted two levels and transferred from use.

古文：督师杨嗣昌以其知兵，引参军事。
现代文：督师杨嗣昌因为继咸懂得军事，就把他调到身边当军事参谋。
English: Supervisor Yang Shichang, because Jixian knew military affairs, transferred him to his side as a military staff officer.

古文：明年四月擢右佥都御史，抚治郧阳。
现代文：第二年四月，朝廷提升他为右佥都御史，抚治郧阳。
English: In April of the following year, the Imperial Court promoted him to the position of Ujitsuto Imperial Historian to govern Fuzhi and Shinyang.

古文：未一年，襄阳陷，被逮，戍贵州。
现代文：不到一年时间，襄阳被打下，继咸遭到逮捕，充军贵州。
English: In less than a year, Xiangyang was defeated, Jixian was arrested, and Guizhou was occupied.

古文：十五年，廷臣交荐，起故官，总理河北屯政。
现代文：十五年，朝臣交相举荐他，继咸得以恢复原任，总理河北的屯田事务。
English: Fifteen years later, a courtier friend recommended him, and he was able to resume his original position as the prime minister of Hebei Tunden Affairs.

古文：未赴，贼逼江西。廷议设重臣总督江西、湖广、应天、安庆军务，驻九江。
现代文：尚未赴任，贼兵逼近江西，朝廷决定设置一位重臣总督江西、湖广、应天、安庆军务，驻兵九江。
English: He had not yet taken up his post when the bandits approached Jiangxi Province. The imperial court decided to appoint a senior vassal as the military governor of Jiangxi Province, Hunan Province, Yingtian Province and Anqing Province, and stationed troops in Jiujiang Province.

古文：擢继咸兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史以行。
现代文：于是提升继咸为兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，奉命出征。
English: As a result, Jixian was promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the military department and the right-hand man of the capital, and was ordered to go to war.

古文：贼已陷武昌，左良玉拥兵东下。
现代文：当时贼兵已经打下武昌，左良玉率兵东下。
English: At that time, the bandits had already defeated Wuchang, and Zuo Liangyu led his soldiers eastward.

古文：继咸遇良玉于芜湖，激以忠义。良玉即还，恢复武昌。
现代文：继咸在芜湖碰上良玉，用忠君报国的道理鼓舞了他，良玉就回师恢复了武昌。
English: After Xian met Liangyu in Wuhu, Liangyu encouraged him with the principle of loyalty to the country, and Liangyu returned to Wuchang.

古文：廷议吕大器来代，继咸仍督屯政。
现代文：朝廷决定让吕大器来接任总督，让继咸仍旧去管理屯田事务。
English: The imperial court decided to let Lü Dati take over as governor and let Jixian still manage the affairs of the military cantonment.

古文：大器、良玉不协，长沙、袁州俱陷，仍推继咸代之。
现代文：大器、良玉之间不和，长江、袁州一下子都沦陷了，朝廷又推出继咸替换了大器。
English: There was discord between the big and the good, the Yangtze River and Yuanzhou both fell at once, and the imperial court replaced the big with the small.

古文：甫抵镇而京师陷。
现代文：继咸才到达九江，京师就失守了。
English: After Haman, it reached Jiujiang, and the capital division was lost.

古文：福王立南都，颁诏武昌，良玉不拜诏。
现代文：福王在南京即位后，向武昌颁下诏书，良玉不愿拜领。
English: After King Fu ascended the throne in Nanjing, he issued an imperial edict to Wuchang, but Liangyu refused to accept it.

古文：继咸致书言伦序正，良玉乃拜受诏。
现代文：继咸写信过去说福王辈份、排行该当皇帝，良玉才拜领了。
English: Following Xian Xian's letter, he wrote in the past that Fu Wang should be the emperor for generations and ranks, and Liangyu only accepted the position.

古文：继咸入朝，高杰新封兴平伯。
现代文：继咸入朝时，高杰刚刚被封为兴平伯。
English: Following Haman's accession to the throne, Gao Jie had just been given the title of Xingping Bo.

古文：继咸曰： 封爵以劝有功。
现代文：继咸说： 封爵是用来奖赏有功的人的。
English: Ji Xian said, "The knighthood is used to reward meritorious people.

古文：无功而封，有功者不劝。
现代文：无功而封，有功的人就得不到激励。
English: People with no achievements are locked up, while those with achievements are not encouraged.

古文：跋扈而封，跋扈愈多。 
现代文：骄横的人受了封，往后骄横的人会更多。 
English: Arrogant people were punished, and there will be more arrogant people in the future.

古文：王曰： 事已行，奈何？ 
现代文：福王说： 事情已经办了，又该怎样？ 
English: Fu Wang said, "The matter has already been settled, so what should we do?

古文：继咸曰： 马士英引杰渡江，宜令往辑。 
现代文：继咸说 ：马士英拉高杰渡江而来，应该让他前往安抚高杰。 
English: Followed by Xian said: Ma Shi Yingla Gao Jie came across the river, he should be allowed to go to appease Gao Jie.

古文：王曰： 彼不欲往，辅臣史可法愿往。 
现代文：福王说： 他不想去，辅臣史可法愿意去。 
English: Fu Wang said: He doesn't want to go, but his vassal Shi Kofa is willing to go.

古文：继咸曰： 陛下嗣位，固以恩泽收人心，尤宜以纪纲肃众志。
现代文：继咸说 ：陛下刚即位，固然应当用恩惠笼络人心，但尤其应当用法纪来安定人心。
English: Jixian said, "Your Majesty has just ascended the throne. Of course, you should win people's hearts with grace, but you should especially use the legal code to stabilize people's hearts.

古文：乞振精神，申法纪。
现代文：希望陛下振作精神，严明法纪。
English: I hope His Majesty will keep up his spirits and maintain strict discipline.

古文：冬春间，淮上未必无事。
现代文：冬春之际，淮河一带未必没有战事。
English: On the occasion of winter and spring, there may not be no war in the Huaihe area.

古文：臣虽驽，愿奉六龙为澶渊之举。 
现代文：我虽然笨拙，但愿意陪陛下前往成就澶渊战役那样的成功。 
English: Although I am clumsy, I am willing to accompany His Majesty to achieve the same success as the Battle of the Plains of Abraham.

古文：王有难色。
现代文：福王面有难色。
English: Fu Wang looked puzzled.

古文：因诣榻前密奏曰： 左良玉虽无异图，然所部多降将，非孝子顺孙。
现代文：于是继咸走近福王的座前轻声低语说 ：左良玉本人虽然没有二心，但他的部下有很多降将，这些人恐怕不是孝子贤孙。
English: So Ji Xian approached the throne of King Fu and said in a low whisper, "Although Zuo Liangyu himself has no double-mindedness, his subordinates have a lot of surrendering generals. I'm afraid these people are not filial sons and wise grandsons.

古文：陛下初登大宝，人心危疑，意外不可不虑，臣当星驰回镇。 
现代文：陛下刚刚登上皇位，人心危疑，不可不防备意外，我应该星夜赶回我的兵营才是。 
English: Your Majesty has just ascended the throne, the hearts of the people are in danger, we must be prepared for an accident, I should rush back to my barracks at night.

古文：许之。
现代文：福王答应了他。
English: The customs officer allowed him to pass through.

古文：因赴阁责可法不当封杰，士英嗛之。
现代文：继咸又赶到内阁批评史可法不应当封高杰为伯，士英对他怀恨在心。
English: After Haman, Shi Ying rushed to the cabinet to criticize Shi Kefa that Gao Jie should not be made an honorary citizen. Shi Ying held a grudge against him.

古文：俄陈致治守邦大计，引宋高宗用黄潜善、汪伯彦事，语复侵士英。
现代文：不久继咸又上书陈述守卫国家，实现太平的大政方针，其中援引宋高宗任用黄潜善、汪伯彦的事，又影射了士英。
English: Soon after Xian, he also submitted a written statement on the great political principle of safeguarding the country and achieving peace, in which he quoted Song Gaozong's appointment of Huang Xuanzen and Wang Bohian, and also insinuated Shi Ying.

古文：会湖广巡按御史黄澍劾奏士英十大罪，士英拟旨逮治。
现代文：正好湖广巡按御史黄澍弹劾士英的十大罪行，士英起草诏书，要把他逮捕治罪。
English: Just as the Hukang inspection team impeached Shi Ying for the ten major crimes according to the magistrate Huang Qi, Shi Ying drafted an edict to arrest and punish him.

古文：澍与良玉谋，阴讽将士大哗，欲下南京索饷，保救澍。
现代文：黄澍就和良玉商量，暗中鼓动将士大吵大闹，要到南京去领取军饷，保护黄澍。
English: Huang Qi consulted with Liang Yu and secretly incited the soldiers to make a big fuss, to go to Nanjing to receive military pay and protect Huang Qi.

古文：继咸为留江漕十万石、饷十三万金给之，且代澍申理，以良玉依仗澍为言。
现代文：继咸替他们截留了长江上运送的粮食十万石，饷银十三万两，拨给了他们，又上书代黄澍申辩，用良玉倚仗黄澍为理由请放回黄澍。
English: Following Ham, he intercepted 100,000 koku of grain and 130,000 taels of silver transported on the Yangtze River for them, and allocated them to them. He also submitted a petition on behalf of Huang Qi, pleading that Huang Qi should be released on the grounds that he was a good person.

古文：士英不得已，免逮澍。
现代文：士英迫不得已，就没有逮捕黄澍。
English: As a last resort, Shi Ying did not arrest Huang Qi.

古文：继咸既与士英隙，所奏悉停寝。
现代文：继咸和士英发生矛盾以后，他给朝廷的奏请都被挡回不用。
English: Following the conflict between Haman and Shih Ying, all of his requests to the imperial court were turned down.

古文：明年正月，继咸言： 元朔者，人臣拜手称觞之日，陛下尝胆卧薪之时。
现代文：第二年正月，继咸上书说： 元旦节，是人臣应该磕头在地，举杯庆贺的日子，也是陛下应当痛定思痛，卧薪尝胆的时候。
English: In the first month of the second year, following Haman's letter, he said, "New Year's Day is a day when courtiers should bow their heads to the ground and raise a glass to celebrate, and it is also a time when His Majesty should painstakingly set aside his thoughts and lie down to rest.

古文：念大耻未雪，宜以周宣之未央问夜为可法，以晚近长夜之饮、角之戏为可戒。
现代文：而今大耻未雪，陛下应该认为周宣王那种天不明就询问时间想要做事的精神是值得学习的，认为后世君主那种通宵滥饮、角抵游戏的行为是应当戒绝的。
English: But now, before the snow falls, His Majesty should think that the spirit of Zhou Xuanwu, who asked the time when he wanted to do something, is worth learning, and that the behavior of future monarchs, such as all-night drinking and gambling, should be abandoned.

古文：省土木之功，节浮淫之费。
现代文：当前应当停减土木工程，节俭不必要的开支。
English: At present, civil engineering projects should be stopped and reduced, and unnecessary expenditure should be saved.

古文：戒谕臣工，后私斗而急公仇。
现代文：劝告大臣停止私斗，以国仇为重。
English: He advised the minister to stop selfish fighting and focus on national enmity.

古文：臣每叹三十年来，徒以三案葛藤血战不已。
现代文：我经常感慨三十年来朝廷仅仅因为 三案 就没完没了地纠扯、血斗。
English: I often lament that over the past thirty years, the Imperial Court has been endlessly entangled in bloodshed just because of the three cases.

古文：若《要典》一书，已经先帝焚毁，何必复理其说。
现代文：像《要典》那本书，先帝在世时就已经把它烧毁，现在又何必去理会他呢？
English: Like the book "The Essentials," the former emperor had already burned it when he was alive, so why should we pay any attention to him now?

古文：书苟未进，宜寝之；即已进，宜毁之。
现代文：假如这本书还没有呈进，应该停止进览；就是已经呈进，也应当烧毁了。
English: If the book has not yet been presented, the exhibition should be stopped; even if it has been presented, it should be burned.

古文：至王者代兴，从古亦多异同。
现代文：至于皇帝即位一事，自古以来有不少不同说法。
English: As for the emperor's accession to the throne, there have been many different opinions since ancient times.

古文：平、勃迎立汉文，不闻穷治朱虚之过；房、杜决策秦邸，不闻力究魏征之非。
现代文：陈平、周勃迎立汉文帝以后，没听说要狠整朱虚的过错；房玄龄、杜如晦决定辅立秦王，也没听说要极力把魏征给治罪。
English: After Chen Ping and Zhou Bo ushered in the Han Emperor, it was not heard that the mistakes of Zhu Xi should be severely rectified; Fang Xuanling and Du Rugao decided to support the Qin King, and it was not heard that Wei should be conscripted for crime.

古文：固其君豁达大度，亦其大臣公忠善谋，翊赞其美。
现代文：这固然是因为这两位君主宽宏大量，也是因为有这么些大臣奉公、忠诚，善于谋画，帮助成就了君上的美德。
English: This was certainly due to the magnanimity of the two monarchs, but also to the fact that there were so many ministers who were devoted, loyal, good at planning, and helped to achieve the virtues of the prince.

古文：请再下宽大之诏，解圜扉疑入之囚，断草野株连之案。 
现代文：我请求陛下再一次发布对过去有异议的大臣宽大处理的诏书，释放监狱中被判处的囚犯，停止过问下边受到株连的案犯！ 
English: I ask His Majesty to once again issue an edict of clemency for ministers who had objections in the past, to release prisoners sentenced to prison, and to stop interrogating criminals who are under investigation!

古文：王降旨俞其言。
现代文：福王颁下诏书同意了他的意见。
English: King Fu agreed with his opinion and issued an imperial edict.

古文：群小皆不喜继咸，汰其军饷六万，军中有怨言，继咸疏争不得。
现代文：朝廷里那帮小人都不喜欢继咸，把他的军饷给减了六万，部队中有人发怨言，继咸上书争论也没用。
English: The small group of people in the imperial court did not like Ji Xian and reduced his pay by sixty thousand yuan. Some people in the army complained, and it was useless to argue about Ji Xian's letter.

古文：又以江上兵寡，郑鸿逵战舰不还，议更造，檄九江佥事叶士彦于江流截买材木。
现代文：又因为长江上驻兵太少，郑鸿逵的战舰不见回来，继咸决定再造新船，传令九江佥事叶士彦在江面上截买木材。
English: In addition, because there were too few soldiers stationed on the Yangtze River, Zheng Hongtao's warships did not come back, Sui Han decided to build new ships, and ordered Jiujiang Anji Ye Shihang to buy wood on the river.

古文：士彦家芜湖，与诸商昵，封还其檄。
现代文：士彦家在芜湖，跟当地商人很熟悉，就封还了他的命令。
English: Shihiko's family was in Wuhu and was familiar with the local merchant, so they returned his order.

古文：继咸以令不行，疏劾士彦。
现代文：继咸因为他的命令没能执行下去，就上书弹劾士彦。
English: Gohan, because his order could not be carried out, sent a letter to impeach Shihiko.

古文：士彦同年御史黄耳鼎亦劾继咸，言继咸有心腹将校劝左良玉立他宗，良玉不从云。
现代文：士彦的同年、御史黄耳鼎也上书弹劾继咸，说他手下的心腹将校劝良玉另立别的藩王做皇帝，良玉不听。
English: In the same year as Shihiko, the Grand Historian Huang Erding also wrote a letter to impeach Jixian, saying that his subordinate officers advised Liang Yu to set up another king as emperor, but Liang Yu did not listen.

古文：良玉尝不拜监国诏，闻之益疑惧，上疏明与继咸无隙，耳鼎受指使而言，《要典》宜再焚。
现代文：良玉曾经不愿意拜领福王的监国诏书，听说耳鼎的上书后更加担心被怀疑，就上书说明他跟继咸没有什么矛盾，耳鼎是受人指使才那样说的，《要典》一书应当再次予以烧毁。
English: Liang Yu had once been reluctant to accept King Fu's imperial edict, but after hearing that Erding had submitted the edict, he was even more worried about being suspected. He submitted the edict to show that there was no contradiction between him and Xi Xian. Erding had been instructed to say that, and the "Important Documents" should be burned again.

古文：江东人乃由是交口言继咸、良玉倡和，胁制朝廷矣。
现代文：江东人于是就七嘴八舌地说继咸、良玉一唱一和，要挟朝廷了。
English: The people of eastern Jiangsu then began to talk about the succession of Xian and Liangyu, threatening the imperial court.

古文：会都下又有伪太子之事，良玉争不得，遂与士英辈有隙。
现代文：正好南京又发生了假太子一事，良玉上书争议没用，就和士英等人发生了矛盾。
English: It just so happened that a fake crown prince happened in Nanjing. The dispute over the issue of the imperial edict was useless, and conflicts arose with Shi Ying and others.

古文：继咸疏言： 太子真伪，非臣所能悬揣。
现代文：继咸上书说： 太子的真假，不是我在这里可以凭空揣测的。
English: Following Haman's letter, he said: "The truth or falsehood of the prince is not something I can speculate about here.

古文：真则望行良玉言，伪则不妨从容审处，多召东宫旧臣辨识，以解中外之疑。 
现代文：如果是真的，就请朝廷按良玉的意见办；如果是假的，不妨从容审察、处置，多找一些在东宫任过职的大臣来辨认，以便使朝廷内外的臣民解除心头的疑云。 
English: If it is true, please ask the imperial court to act according to Ryotam's opinion; if it is false, you may wish to investigate and deal with it calmly, and find more ministers who have served in the East Palace to identify, so that the subjects inside and outside the imperial court can remove the cloud of doubt in their hearts.

古文：疏未达，良玉已反。
现代文：他的奏疏没到南京，良玉就起兵造起反来。
English: His play did not get to Nanjing, and Liangyu started a rebellion.

古文：初，继咸闻李自成兵败南下，命部将郝效忠、陈麟、邓林奇守九江，自统副将汪硕画、李士元等援袁州，防贼由岳州、长沙入江西境。
现代文：当初，继咸听说李自成兵败南下，就命令部将郝效忠、陈麟、邓林奇驻守九江，自己打算率领副将汪硕画、李士元等去支援袁州，以防闯贼由岳州、长沙进入江西境内。
English: At first, after Haman heard that Li Zicheng's soldiers had been defeated and had gone south, he ordered his subordinate generals Zou Loyalty, Chen Lin, and Deng Linqi to be stationed in Jiujiang. He planned to lead his vice generals Wang Shoga and Li Shiyuan to support Yuanzhou, in order to prevent intruders from entering Jiangxi territory from Yuezhou and Changsha.

古文：既已登舟，闻良玉反，复还九江。
现代文：已经上船出发，听说良玉反叛，又回到九江。
English: He had already boarded the ship and set off, when he heard that Liangyu rebelled and returned to Jiujiang.

古文：良玉舟在北岸，贻书继咸，愿握手一别，为皇太子死。
现代文：良玉的船停在长江北岸，写信给继咸说，希望能和他握手告别，去为皇太子效死。
English: Liang Yu's boat stopped on the north bank of the Yangtze River, and he wrote to Ji Xian, saying that he hoped to shake hands with him and say goodbye, and go to die for the crown prince.

古文：九江士民泣请继咸往，纾一方难。
现代文：九江的士绅、百姓都流着泪请继咸过去一下，消除这一带可能会发生的战乱。
English: The gentry and common people of Jiujiang all shed tears and asked Xiamen to follow suit and eliminate the war that might occur in this area.

古文：继咸会良玉于舟中，良玉语及太子下狱事，大哭。
现代文：继咸到船上见到良玉，良玉说到太子被打入监狱一事就大哭不停。
English: After Xian came to the ship to see Liangyu, Liangyu said that when the prince was sent to prison, he cried non-stop.

古文：次日，舟移南岸，良玉袖出皇太子密谕，劫诸将盟。
现代文：第二天，船移到南岸来，良玉从袖中取出皇太子的秘密指示，劫持九江的将领们和他结盟。
English: The next day, the ship moved to the south bank, and Liang Yu took the secret instructions of the crown prince from his sleeve, and the captors of the Jiujiang generals allied with him.

古文：继咸正色曰： 密谕何从来？
现代文：继咸脸色严肃地问道 ：太子的秘密指示是从哪里搞到的？
English: After a salty look, he asked seriously: Where did you get the prince's secret instructions?

古文：先帝旧德不可忘，今上新恩亦不可负，密谕何从来？ 
现代文：先帝过去的恩德不能忘，现在新皇上的恩德也不可辜负了啊！太子的秘密指示是从哪里搞来的呢？ 
English: The past kindness of the former emperor cannot be forgotten, and now the kindness of the new emperor cannot be lived up to! Where did the prince's secret instructions come from?

古文：良玉色变，良久乃曰： 吾约不破城，改檄为疏，驻军侯旨。 
现代文：良玉脸色变了，过很长时间才说： 我说准不攻打南京，把檄文改为奏疏，在都城外驻军，听候圣旨不就是了？ 
English: Liang Yu's face changed, and it took him a long time to say: "I said I would definitely not attack Nanjing, I changed the imperial edict to the imperial edict, I stationed troops outside the capital, and I obeyed the imperial edict, isn't that right?

古文：继咸归，集诸将于城楼而洒泣曰： 兵谏非正。
现代文：继咸回城后，把各位将官召集到城楼上挥泪说道： 兵谏是不对的。
English: After Haman returned to the city, he called all the generals to the castle tower to shed tears and said, "It is not right for the soldiers to march.

古文：晋阳之甲，《春秋》恶之，可同乱乎？ 
现代文：晋阳的战甲示威，《春秋》对它表示厌恶。
English: Jinyang's armored demonstration, "Spring and Autumn" expressed disgust at it.

古文：遂约与俱拒守。
现代文：我们能和他一起作乱吗？ 
English: Can we riot with him?

古文：而效忠及部将张世勋等则已出与良玉合兵，入城杀掠。
现代文：接着就和大家商定一同守城，拒击左军。可是效忠和部将张世勋等人却已经出动和良玉联合兵力了，又进入城里来杀人抢劫。
English: He then agreed with everyone to defend the city together and resist the attack of the left army. However, loyal and subordinate commander Zhang Shixun and others had already dispatched a joint force with Liangyu, and entered the city to kill and rob.

古文：继咸闻之，欲自尽。黄澍入署拜泣曰： 宁南无异图。
现代文：继咸听说后想自尽，黄澍来到他的官署哭拜着说 ：宁南并无二心。
English: After hearing that Xian wanted to commit suicide, Huang Qi came to his government office to cry and said: Ningnan has no second thoughts.

古文：公以死激成之，大事去矣。 
现代文：先生如果以死刺激他生出野心来，那么大事就不是算完了吗？ 
English: Sir, if death incites him to ambition, then isn't the matter settled?

古文：副将李士春亦密白继咸隐忍，至前途，王文成之事可图也。
现代文：副将李士春也秘密地告诉继咸说暂时忍耐，等左军过去到了前头，像王文成公擒拿宸濠那样的事业袁公您也能成就呢。
English: Vice-commander Li Shichun also secretly told Ji Xian to be patient for the time being, and wait for the Left Army to come to the front, so that Yuan Gong could achieve the same success as Wang Wencheng.

古文：继咸以为然，遂出责良玉。
现代文：继咸认为他说得对，就出城去批评良玉。
English: Ji Xian thought he was right, so he went out of the city to criticize Liangyu.

古文：良玉已疾笃，夜望见城中火起，大哭曰： 予负临侯！ 
现代文：良玉已经病重了，晚上看到九江城中大火烧起来，大哭着说道： 我对不起临侯呢！ 
English: Liang Yu was already seriously ill. In the evening, when she saw the fire in Jiujiang City, she burst into tears and said, "I'm so sorry, Lin Hou!

古文：临侯，继咸别号也。呕血数升，遂死。
现代文：一一一临侯是继咸的别号一一一吐出几升血，就死掉了。
English: Linyi Linhou is the other name of Jixian. She vomited several liters of blood and died.

古文：其子梦庚秘不发丧，诸将推为帅，移舟东。
现代文：他的儿子秘不发丧，将领们推他当了总帅，驾船向东走了。
English: His son did not lose heart, and the generals promoted him to the position of commander-in-chief, and he sailed east.

古文：中朝皆疑继咸、良玉同反。
现代文：朝廷都怀疑继咸和良玉一起反了。
English: The imperial court suspected that Sui Xian and Liangyu had turned against each other.

古文：而南都时已破，诸镇多纳款。
现代文：不过当时南京已被大清兵打下，各大兵镇大多都投降了。
English: However, at that time, Nanjing had already been defeated by the Qing soldiers, and most of the major military towns had surrendered.

古文：继咸劝梦庚旋师，不听。
现代文：继咸劝说梦庚回师，梦庚不听。
English: After Xian persuaded Meng Geng to return to his teacher, Meng Geng did not listen.

古文：遣人语林奇、硕画、士元毋为不忠事，林奇、硕画、士元避皖湖中，遣人阴逆继咸。
现代文：继咸派人回来告诉林奇、硕画、士元不要干背叛国家的事，当时林奇、硕画、士元躲避在安徽的湖泊中，他们竟派人暗中阻拦继咸回来。
English: Jixian sent someone back to tell Lynch, Shuo Gao and Shiyuan not to betray the country. At that time, Lynch, Shuo Gao and Shiyuan were hiding in the lakes of Anhui, but they actually sent someone to secretly prevent Jixian from returning.

古文：继咸已为效忠绐赴其军。
现代文：继咸受了效忠的骗去到他的部队里。
English: Gohan was tricked into joining his army by a loyalist.

古文：明年四月，左梦庚陷安庆，亮被执。梦庚北行，挟亮与俱，乘间赴河死。
现代文：部队即将回到湖口时，梦庚、效忠向大清投降了，于是把继咸带到北边去，软禁在内务府的大院中。
English: When the troops were about to return to Hukou, Meng Geng surrendered his allegiance to the Qing Dynasty, so he took Ji Xian to the north and put him under house arrest in the compound of the Ministry of the Interior.

古文：金声字正希，休宁人。
现代文：到第二年三月，继咸最终不肯屈服，就把他杀了。金声，字正希，休宁人。
English: By March of the following year, Ji Xian finally refused to give in, and killed him. Jin Sheng, Zheng Xi, and Xuning Ren.

古文：好学，工举子业，名倾一时。
现代文：年轻时好学，擅长科场文字，名倾一时。
English: When he was young, he was eager to learn and good at science writing. He was famous for a while.

古文：崇祯元年成进士，授庶吉士。
现代文：崇祯元年考中进士，初任庶吉士。
English: He was promoted to junior high school student in the first year of the National Examination for Junior High School Students, and was appointed to junior high school student for the first time.

古文：明年十一月，大清兵逼都城，声慷慨乞面陈急务，帝即召对平台。
现代文：第二年十一月，大清部队兵逼都城，金声意气慷慨地请求向庄烈帝当面谈当前的急务，庄烈帝就在平台召见了他。
English: In November of the following year, when the soldiers of the Great Qing Army besieged the capital, Jin Sheng generously asked Zhuang Rongdi to talk to him face-to-face about the current urgent matters. Zhuang Rongdi summoned him on the platform.

古文：退具疏言： 臣书生素矢忠义，遭遇圣明，日夜为陛下忧念天下事。
现代文：金声回来后上书说 ：我虽然是读书人，但一向决心坚定地想忠义报国。得到圣明天子您的提拔以后，我日夜替陛下忧心地思索国家大事。
English: After Jin Sheng returned, he wrote: "Although I am a reader, I have always been determined to serve the country loyally. After receiving your promotion, I have been anxiously thinking about national affairs on behalf of His Majesty day and night.

古文：今兵逼京畿，不得不急为君父用。
现代文：现在敌人兵逼京都，我不能不急切地为君父效力。
English: Now that the enemy soldiers are forcing their way into Kyoto, I cannot but eagerly work for your father.

古文：夫通州、昌平，都城左右翼，宜戍以重兵。而天津漕艘所聚，尤宜亟防。
现代文：通州、昌平是都城的左右翼，应该用重兵防守，而天津是漕运船只的聚集地，尤其应当紧急防卫。
English: Tongzhou and Changping are the left and right wings of the capital city, and should be defended by heavy troops, while Tianjin is a gathering place for rowing ships, and should be defended in an emergency.

古文：今天下草泽之雄，欲效用国家者不少，在破格用之耳。
现代文：现在天下的江湖好汉想报效国家的人不少，全靠陛下破格任用。
English: Nowadays, there are many charlatans in the world who want to serve the country, and they all rely on His Majesty's unprecedented appointment.

古文：臣所知申甫有将才。
现代文：我所认识的一个叫申甫的人就有将才。
English: A man I know named Shen Fu had a talent for generalship.

古文：臣愿仗圣天子威灵，与练敢战士，为国家捍强敌，惟陛下立赐裁许。 
现代文：我希望借着圣天子的威灵，和他一起训练敢战兵士，为国家抵御强敌。希望陛下马上给予批准！ 
English: I hope that through the blessing of the Holy Son of God, I will be able to work with him to train soldiers who are willing to fight and defend the country against strong enemies. I hope that His Majesty will grant approval immediately!

古文：申甫者，僧也，好谈兵，方私制战车火器。
现代文：申甫是一个和尚，喜欢谈军事，当时正在私制战车火器。
English: Shen Fu was a monk who liked to talk about the military, and at that time he was making private chariots and firearms.

古文：帝纳声言，取其车入览，授都司佥书。
现代文：庄烈帝采纳金声的意见，把他造的车拿进来观看，封他为都司佥书。
English: Zhuang Rongdei accepted Jin Sheng's suggestion, brought in the car he had made for inspection, and made him the prefect of the capital.

古文：即日召见，奏对称旨，超擢副总兵，敕募新军，便宜从事。
现代文：当天又召见他，申甫回答问题合于皇上的心意，庄烈帝破格提拔他为副总兵，命令他招募新军，便宜行事。
English: On the same day, he was summoned again. Shen Fu's answer to the question was in line with the emperor's intention. The solemn emperor promoted him to deputy general and ordered him to recruit new troops and act cheaply.

古文：改声御史，参其军。
现代文：改金声为御史，给他的军队当参谋。
English: He changed his name to Kinsei, and became a staff officer for his army.

古文：甫仓猝募数千人，皆市井游手，所需军装戎器又不时给。
现代文：申甫仓猝之间招募了几千人，都是一些城镇中游手好闲的青年人，所需的军装、兵器又不能及时得到。
English: Shen Fu suddenly recruited several thousand people, all of whom were idle young people in some towns, and the required uniforms and weapons could not be obtained in time.

古文：而是时大清兵在郊圻久，势当速战，急出营柳林。
现代文：可是当时大清部队在城郊已经很长时间了，形势逼迫他立即参战，于是申甫紧急出兵驻扎在柳林。
English: However, at that time, the Qing Dynasty troops had been on the outskirts of the city for a long time, and the situation forced him to immediately join the war, so Shen Fu urgently dispatched troops and stationed them in Liulin.

古文：总理满桂节制诸军，甫不肯为下。
现代文：总理满桂负责统领各路兵马，申甫不肯给他当下手。
English: Prime Minister Man Gui was in charge of leading the troops and horses, but Shen Fu refused to give him the reins.

古文：桂卒掠民间，甫军捕之，桂辄索去。
现代文：满桂的士兵在民间抢劫，申甫的士兵抓了他们，满桂总是要了回去。
English: Mangui's soldiers robbed civilians, Shenfu's soldiers caught them, and Mangui always wanted to go back.

古文：声以两军不和闻，帝即命声调护。
现代文：金声把两军不和的事报告上去，庄烈帝就让金声负责协调。
English: Jin Sheng reported the discord between the two armies, and Emperor Zhuang allowed Jin Sheng to be in charge of coordination.

古文：亡何，桂殁，甫连败于柳林、大井，乃结车营卢沟桥。
现代文：不久满桂阵亡，申甫接连在柳林、大井吃了败仗，于是在卢沟桥扎下车营。
English: Soon after, Man Gui was killed in battle, and Shen Fu was defeated successively in Liulin and Oi, so he set up camp at Lugou Bridge.

古文：大清兵绕出其后，御车者惶惧不能转，歼戮殆尽，甫亦阵亡。
现代文：大清部队绕到他后边出击，驾车的士兵慌乱中不能启动车子，被差不多消灭完了，申甫自己也阵亡了。
English: The Great Qing Army attacked around him, and the soldiers who were driving couldn't start the car in the panic. They were almost wiped out, and Shen Fu himself was killed.

古文：声痛伤之，言甫受事日浅，直前冲锋，遗骸矢刃殆遍，非喋血力战不至此。
现代文：金声对他的死感到痛心，上书说申甫任职时间短，勇往直前地冲锋陷阵，所以败亡了。他的尸首上差不多满是刀箭创伤，如果不是喋血死战就不会死得这么惨。
English: Jin Sheng was saddened by his death, and wrote in his letter that Shen Fu's term of office was short, and he was defeated because he boldly charged into battle. His corpse was almost full of knife and arrow wounds, and if he had not fought to the death, he would not have died so miserably.

古文：帝亦伤之，命予恤典。
现代文：庄烈帝对他的死也感到悲伤，命令给他举行抚恤典礼。
English: Emperor Zhuang was also saddened by his death and ordered a pension ceremony to be held for him.

古文：声耻无功，请率参将董大胜兵七百人，甫遗将古壁兵百人，及豪杰义从数百人，练成一旅，为刘之纶奇兵，收桑榆之效，不许。
现代文：金声耻于没立下什么战功，请求让自己率领参将董大胜的七百人，申甫余下的将领古壁的一百士兵及地方上的豪杰率领的义军几百人，把他们训练成一支队伍，给刘之纶充当奇兵，做最后的搏击，以立战功，庄烈帝不答应。
English: Jin Sheng, ashamed of not having made any war achievements, asked to lead the seven hundred people who participated in the great victory of Dong, the remaining one hundred soldiers of the ancient wall led by the general Shen Fu, and several hundred rebels led by local heroes, to train them into a team, to act as a miracle soldier for Liu Zhixuan, to make the final fight, and to make war achievements. Zhuang Rongdi did not agree.

古文：俄以清核军需告竣，奏缴关防，请按律定罪，再疏请罢斥，皆不许。
现代文：不久因为清理军需事毕，缴回封印，请依法给违法者定罪，又两次上书请罢免自己，都没有得到允许。
English: Soon after, because of the completion of the clearing of the quartermaster, the seal was returned, please convict the violator according to law, and twice petitioned to remove himself, but was not allowed.

古文：东江自毛文龙被杀，兵力弱，势孤。
现代文：东江自从毛文龙被杀以后兵力虚弱，孤立无援。
English: Since Mao Wenlong was killed, Dongjiang has been weak and isolated.

古文：声因东宫册立，自请颁诏朝鲜，俾联络东江，张海外形势。
现代文：金声因为册立太子一事自请去朝鲜颁发诏书，使它跟东江联系上来，扩大海外的声势。
English: Kim Son invited himself to North Korea to issue an imperial edict for the enthronement of the crown prince, bringing it into contact with the East River and expanding its influence overseas.

古文：帝虽嘉其意，亦不果用。
现代文：庄烈帝虽然称赞他的意见，最后也没有听用。
English: Although Emperor Zhuang praised his opinion, he did not listen to it in the end.

古文：寻上疏言： 陛下晓夜焦劳，日亲天下之事，实未尝日习天下之人。
现代文：不久金声上书说： 陛下从早到晚劳累，天天处理国家事务，事实上不曾天天接近天下的人才。
English: Soon after, Jin Sheng wrote: Your Majesty is tired from morning to night, dealing with national affairs every day, in fact, you have never been close to the world's talent every day.

古文：必使天下才不才，及才长短，一一程量不爽，方可斟酌位置。
现代文：治理国家务必要使天下人有才或无才，及才能的大小一一得到准确衡量，才可对人才加以斟酌安排。
English: It is imperative for the governance of the country to make sure that the people of the country have talent or no talent, and that the size of the talent can be accurately measured, so that the talent can be carefully arranged.

古文：往者，陛下数召对群臣，问无所得，鲜当圣心，遂厌薄之。
现代文：过去陛下经常召见群臣，因为问话没收获，很少能让您满意，所以就厌倦了。
English: In the past, His Majesty often summoned his courtiers, but he got tired of them because their questions were fruitless and rarely satisfied him.

古文：臣愚妄谓陛下泰交尚未殷，顾问尚未数，不得谓召对无益也。
现代文：我愚蠢地认为陛下对下来往还不够勤，咨访还不够多，不能说召人问话没什么用。
English: I foolishly thought that His Majesty was not diligent enough in dealing with the past and present, and that there were not enough visits, so I could not say that it was useless to call people to ask questions.

古文：愿自今间日御文华，令京卿、翰林、台谏及中行、评博等官，轮番入直，博咨广询。
现代文：希望从今以后陛下隔天到文华殿中，命令京官、翰林、台谏及中行、评博等官轮流进去值勤，广泛地进行问讯。
English: It is hoped that from now on, His Majesty will go to Wenhua Middle School the next day and order officials from Beijing, Hanlin, Taiwan, the People's Bank of China and the State Administration for Cultural Heritage to take turns to go in and conduct extensive inquiries.

古文：而内外有职业者，亦得不时进见。
现代文：朝廷内外有一官半职的人员也允许他们不时进见。
English: Part-time officials inside and outside the Imperial Court also allow them to visit from time to time.

古文：政事得失，军民利病，庙堂举错，边塞情形，皆与臣工考究于燕闲之间。
现代文：举凡政事的得失，军民的利病，朝廷的措施，边塞的情形，都在茶余饭后的时间里和群臣百官一道仔细讲求。
English: The advantages and disadvantages of all political affairs, the advantages and disadvantages of the military and the people, the measures of the imperial court, and the situation of the border fortifications were all carefully discussed with hundreds of officials in the time after tea and dinner.

古文：岁月既久，品量毕呈。
现代文：天长日久，各种人的人品都会显现出来。
English: With the passage of time, the character of all kinds of people will emerge.

古文：诸臣才不才，及才长短，岂得逃圣鉴。 
现代文：大臣们有才无才及其才能大小，怎么能逃出您的眼力呢？ 
English: How can you fail to notice that ministers are talented or not, and how great their talent is?

古文：帝未及报，声再疏恳言之，终不用，遂屡疏乞归。
现代文：庄烈帝还没来得及回话，金声又一次上书恳请，最后没被采纳。
English: Zhuang Rongdi did not have time to reply, Jin Sheng once again sent a letter to implore, and finally was not accepted.

古文：后大学士徐光启荐声同修历书，辞不就。
现代文：金声于是屡次上书请求弃官回乡去了。后来大学士徐光启推荐金声和自己一起撰写历书，他推辞不受。
English: Jin Sheng then repeatedly wrote to request that he resign and go back to his hometown. Later, university scholar Xu Guangqi recommended Jin Sheng to write a calendar book with him, and he did not accept the rejection.

古文：以御史召，亦不赴。
现代文：召他当御史，也不赴任。
English: Invite him to be your historian, and he won't go.

古文：八年春，起山东佥事，复两疏力辞。
现代文：八年春季朝廷起用他做山东佥事，他又两次上书极力推辞。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, the imperial court began to use him to do Shandong anecdotes, and he twice sent a letter to strongly reject it.

古文：乡郡多盗，声团练义勇，为捍御。
现代文：当地很多盗贼，金声召集训练义勇队加以防卫。
English: There are a lot of thieves in the area, and Jin Sheng called for the training of volunteers to defend it.

古文：十六年，风阳总督马士英遣使者李章玉征贵州兵讨贼，迂道掠江西，为乐平吏民所拒击。比抵徽州境，吏民以为贼，率众破走之。
现代文：十六年，凤阳总督马士英派使者李章玉征调贵州部队过来讨贼，绕道抢劫江西，被乐平的军民抗击，等到达徽州，当地官吏百姓认为是贼兵，率队把他们打跑了。
English: Sixteen years ago, Fengyang Governor Ma Shih-ying sent an envoy, Li Zhang Yuzheng, to dispatch Guizhou troops to come and rob the bandits. They took a detour to rob Jiangxi, and were resisted by the soldiers and civilians of Leping. When they reached Huizhou, the local officials and people thought they were bandits, and led the team to beat them away.

古文：章玉讳激变，谓声及徽州推官吴翔风主使。
现代文：章玉隐瞒自己激发事变的事实，说是金声和徽州推官吴翔凤主使的。
English: Zhang Yu concealed the fact that he had instigated the incident, saying that it was instigated by Jin Sheng and Huizhou governor Wu Xiangfeng.

古文：士英以闻，声两疏陈辨。
现代文：士英报告给朝廷后，金声两次上书辩解。
English: After Shi Ying's report to the imperial court, Jin Sheng twice sent a letter of apology.

古文：帝察其无罪，不问。
现代文：庄烈帝察觉他没有罪，就不问了。
English: Zhuo Ledei realized that he was not guilty, so he did not ask.

古文：其年冬，廷臣交荐，即命召用，促入都陛见，未赴而京师陷。
现代文：这年冬天，朝廷纷纷推荐金声，庄烈帝就命令召用他，催促他进京觐见，他尚未动身京师就失陷了。
English: This winter, the imperial court recommended Jin Sheng one after another, and Emperor Zhuang ordered to summon him and urge him to go to Beijing for an audience. He had not yet set off for Beijing when he was captured.

古文：福王立于南京，超擢声左佥都御史，声坚不起。
现代文：福王在南京即位后，破格提拔金声为左佥都御史，金声坚决不出任。
English: After King Fu ascended to the throne in Nanjing, he promoted Jin Sheng to the position of Zuoying Metropolitan Historian, and Jin Sheng resolutely refused to take up the post.

古文：大清兵破南京，列郡望风迎降。
现代文：大清部队打下南京后，各府都望风迎降。
English: After the Qing Dynasty troops defeated Nanjing, all prefectures were looking forward to the downfall.

古文：声纠集士民保绩溪、黄山，分兵扼六岭。
现代文：金声纠集士绅、百姓保卫绩溪、黄山，分派兵力扼守六座山头。
English: Jin Sheng rallied the gentry and commoners to defend Jixi Creek and Huangshan Mountain, and dispatched troops to guard the six mountains.

古文：宁国丘祖德、徽州温璜、贵池吴应箕等多应之。
现代文：宁国的丘祖德、徽州的温璜、贵池的吴应箕等很多人响应他。
English: Many people responded to him, such as Qiu Zude from Ningguo, Wen Qi from Huizhou, and Wu Yingqi from Guiqi.

古文：乃遣使通表唐王，授声右都御史兼兵部右侍郎，总督诸道军。
现代文：金声于是派使节去向唐王进表，唐王加封他为右都御史兼兵部右侍郎，让他总领各地的军队。
English: Jin Sheng then sent an envoy to Tang Wang to present the watch, and Tang Wang appointed him as the Right Metropolitan Historian and the Right Attendant of the Military Department, allowing him to lead the army in various regions.

古文：拔旌德、宁国诸县。
现代文：他先后打下旌德、宁国等县城。
English: He successively won the county seat of Shunde, Ningguo and other counties.

古文：九月下旬，徽故御史黄澍降于大清，王师间道袭破之。
现代文：本月下旬，徽州的原任御史黄澍向大清投降了，本朝官军从小路进兵，突然袭击，打败了金声。
English: At the end of this month, the former governor of Huizhou, Huang Qi, surrendered to the Qing Dynasty. The government army marched in from the back roads and made a surprise attack, defeating Jin Sheng.

古文：声被执至江宁，语门人江天一曰： 子有老母，不可死。 
现代文：金声被捉住后带到江宁来，他对门人江天一说： 你还有老母亲，不能死。 
English: After being caught, Jin Sheng was brought to Jiangning. He said to his protégé, Jiang Tianyi, "You still have your old mother, you can't die.

古文：授中书舍人。工文章，兼精书法。
现代文：天一回答说： 我跟着先生起兵，能不跟着您为正义而牺牲吗！ 
English: Tianyi replied, "I followed my master into the army. Can I not follow you to sacrifice myself for justice?"

古文：简，字坤能。
现代文：于是两人一道死掉了。
English: So they both died together.

古文：举于乡，官罗源知县。
现代文：唐王追赠金声为礼部尚书，谥文毅。天一是歙县的县学生员。
English: Tang Wang posthumously bestowed the Golden Voice to Shang Shu of the Ministry of Rites, and Zou Wenyi. Tianyi was a member of the county students in Zou County.

古文：陈子龙，字卧子，松江华亭人。
现代文：陈子龙，字卧子，松江华亭人。
English: Chen Zilong, the son of a concubine, is from Huating, Songjiang.

古文：生有异才，工举子业，兼治诗赋古文，取法魏、晋，骈体尤精妙。
现代文：他天赋过人，擅长写科举文章，兼写作诗赋、古文，他取法于魏、晋时代的文章，所写的骈体文尤其精妙。
English: He was gifted beyond all others. He was good at writing academic papers, as well as poems and ancient texts. He drew on texts from the Wei and Jin dynasties, and his prose style was particularly exquisite.

古文：崇祯十年进士。选绍兴推官。
现代文：崇祯十年考中进士后，被选用为绍兴推官。
English: After he was admitted to the junior high school of the 10th grade, he was selected as the Shaoxing magistrate.

古文：东阳诸生许都者，副使达道孙也。
现代文：东阳的一个童生叫许都，是副使许达道的孙子。
English: A child from Dongyang named Xu Du is the grandson of the deputy envoy Xu Dadao.

古文：家富，任侠好施，阴以兵法部勒宾客子弟，思得一当。
现代文：他家里富有，侠义自负，喜欢施舍，暗地里用兵法约束家里的宾客子弟，希望有机会施展一回。
English: His family is rich, chivalrous and conceited, likes to give alms, and secretly uses military methods to restrain the children of guests at home, hoping to have the opportunity to perform once.

古文：子龙尝荐诸上官，不用，东阳令以私憾之。
现代文：子龙曾经把他向自己的上官推荐过，没能得到任用。东阳县令因为私事记恨许都。
English: Zilong once recommended him to his superior officer, but he was not appointed. The Dongyang County government hated Xu Du because of his private affairs.

古文：适义乌奸人假中贵名招兵事发，都葬母山中，会者万人。
现代文：正好义乌有坏人借宦官的名义招兵被查获，许都在山里埋葬自己的母亲，聚集在一起的有万人之多。
English: In Yiwu, a bad man was caught recruiting soldiers under the guise of a eunuch. Many of them buried their mothers in the mountains, and as many as ten thousand people gathered together.

古文：或告监司王雄曰： 都反矣。 
现代文：有人告诉监司王雄说 ：许都造反了。 
English: Someone told Supervisor Wang Xiong that: Xu Du rebelled.

古文：雄遽遣使收捕，都遂反。
现代文：王雄一听说就派人前往捉拿，许都于是真的就反了。
English: As soon as Wang Xiong heard about it, he sent someone to capture it. As a result, Xu Du really turned against him.

古文：旬日间聚众数万，连陷东阳、义乌、浦江，遂逼郡城，既而引去。
现代文：不到十天时间就聚结了几万人，接连打下东阳、义乌、浦江，接着开向郡城，后来撤退了。
English: In less than ten days, tens of thousands of people gathered and successively attacked Dongyang, Yiwu, and Pujiang, and then drove to Guzheng, and then retreated.

古文：巡抚董象恒坐事逮，代者未至，巡按御史左光先以抚标兵，命子龙为监军讨之，稍有俘获。
现代文：当时巡抚董象恒因事被朝廷逮捕，接替他的人还没到，巡按御史左光先用巡抚的名义打出军旗，让子龙担任监军前往讨伐，略有俘获。
English: At that time, the governor, Dong Xiangheng, was arrested by the imperial court because of the incident, and his successor had not yet arrived. The inspector, Gu Shi Zuoguang, first used the name of the governor to make a military flag, and let Zilong serve as the supervisor of the army to go to the crusade, and was slightly captured.

古文：而游击蒋若来破其犯郡之兵，都乃率余卒三千保南砦。
现代文：游击蒋若来打败了许都进犯郡城的队伍，许都于是率领剩下的三千士兵退守南砦。
English: The guerrilla, Chiang Ronglai, defeated Xu Du's attack on the county seat, and Xu Du then led the remaining three thousand soldiers to retreat to the south fort.

古文：雄欲抚贼，语子龙曰： 贼聚粮据险，官军不能仰攻，非旷日不克。
现代文：王雄想招安许都，就对子龙说： 贼寇收集粮草，占据着险要地势，官军不好仰攻，短时间打不下来。
English: Wang Xiong wanted to recruit Anxiu Du, so he said to Zilong: The bandits are collecting grain and grass, occupying a dangerous position. The government army is not good at attacking from behind, and cannot be defeated in a short time.

古文：我兵万人，止五日粮，奈何？ 
现代文：可是我们有一万兵力，只有五天的粮食，怎么办呢？ 
English: But what are we to do with ten thousand soldiers and only five days' food?

古文：子龙曰： 都，旧识也，请往察之。 
现代文：子龙说 ：许都是我的老相识，请让我过去察看一下他的情况吧！ 
English: Zilong said, "Maybe they are my old acquaintances, please let me go over and check on him!"

古文：乃单骑入都营，责数其罪，谕令归降，待以不死。
现代文：于是一个人骑马进入许都的营寨，数落了他的罪过，劝说他归降，答应不杀他。
English: So a man rode into Xu Du's camp, counted off his sins, persuaded him to surrender, and promised not to kill him.

古文：遂挟都见雄。
现代文：然后带着许都来见王雄。
English: Then he brought Xu Du to see Wang Xiong.

古文：复挟都走山中，散遣其众，而以二百人降。
现代文：又带着他回到山里，疏散了他的兵力，然后带两百人过来投降。
English: They took him back to the mountains, evacuated his troops, and then brought two hundred men to surrender.

古文：光先与东阳令善，竟斩都等六十余人于江浒。
现代文：光先和东阳县令友好，最后还是把许都等六十多人在江边斩掉了。
English: At first, he was friendly with Dongyang County, but in the end, he cut off more than sixty people, including Xu Du, on the river.

古文：子龙争，不能得。
现代文：子龙和他争执，没用。
English: It is useless for Zi Long to argue with him.

古文：以定乱功，擢兵科给事中。
现代文：因为平定叛乱的功劳，朝廷升用子龙为兵科给事中。
English: Because of its contribution to the suppression of the rebellion, the imperial court promoted Zilong to the rank of military science.

古文：命甫下而京师陷，乃事福王于南京。
现代文：任命刚传下，京师就失陷了，子龙于是到南京去，在福王手下供职。
English: As soon as the appointment was handed down, the Beijing division fell, and Zilong went to Nanjing to serve under Fu Wang.

古文：其年六月，言防江之策莫过水师，海舟议不可缓，请专委兵部主事何刚训练，从之。
现代文：这年六月，子龙上书说防守长江的办法最好用水师，修造海船的主张不能往后拖，请专门委派兵部主事何刚训练水师，福王听从了他。
English: In June of that year, Zilong wrote a letter saying that the best way to defend the Yangtze River was with sailors, and that the idea of building ships could not be delayed. He asked He Gang, the head of the military department, to send a special committee to train sailors. Fu Wang listened to him.

古文：太仆少卿马绍愉奉使陛见，语及陈新甲主款事。
现代文：太仆少卿马绍愉接受使命时觐见福王，说到以前陈新甲主张和议一事。
English: When he received his mission, Ma Shao Yu, the servant of the Young Master, met with Fu Wang and told him about Chen Xinjia's previous proposal and discussion.

古文：王曰： 如此，新甲当恤。 
现代文：福王说： 这么说来，新甲应当给以抚恤。 
English: Fu Wang said: So, Xin Jia should be given a pension.

古文：廷臣无应者，独少詹事陈盟曰可。
现代文：朝臣没人应和，只有少詹事陈盟说可以。
English: None of the courtiers wanted to be reconciled, only Chen Meng, who was not a gentleman, said it was okay.

古文：因命予恤，且追罪尝劾新甲者。
现代文：于是福王命令对新甲给予抚恤，并且追究过去弹劾新甲的人的罪行。
English: As a result, King Fu ordered that Xin Jia be given a pension and that those who had impeached Xin Jia in the past be investigated for their crimes.

古文：廷臣惩刘孔昭殿上相争事，不敢言。
现代文：朝臣们有鉴于刘孔昭在殿上争执受到处罚的事，不敢说话。
English: The courtiers did not dare to speak in view of the fact that Liu Kongzhao was punished for a dispute in the palace.

古文：子龙与同官李清交章力谏，事获已。
现代文：子龙和同事李清先后上书极力谏阻，事情才算结束了。
English: Zi Long and his colleague Li Qing successively submitted a letter to strongly oppose it, and the matter was over.

古文：未几，列上防守要策，请召还故尚书郑三俊，都御史易应昌、房可壮、孙晋，并可之。
现代文：不久，子龙又上书陈述防守要略，请召回原尚书郑三俊，都御史易应昌、房可壮、孙晋，福王都同意了。
English: Not long after, Zilong also submitted a letter stating the defense strategy, please recall the original Shangshu Zheng Sanjun, Du Gu Shi Yingchang, Fang Ke Zhuang, Sun Jin, and Fu Wang all agreed.

古文：又言： 中使四出搜巷。凡有女之家，黄纸贴额，持之而去，闾井骚然。
现代文：又说 ：现在宫廷派出的使者在大街小巷里四处搜寻，凡是有女儿的人家，就在门头上贴张黄纸，把人给带走，弄得家家户户不得安宁。
English: He also said, "Nowadays, emissaries sent by the court are searching the streets and alleys, and wherever there is a family with a daughter, they put up yellow paper on the door, take people away, and make every household restless.

古文：明旨未经有司，中使私自搜采，甚非法纪。 
现代文：颁发的圣旨不经过有关部门，让宦官私自搜寻，很不合乎法纪。 
English: It is against the law to issue a decree without going through the relevant departments and to have eunuchs search for it on their own.

古文：乃命禁讹传诳惑者。
现代文：福王于是禁止误传谣言和拐骗人口的坏人。
English: As a result, Fu Wang banned the bad people who spread false rumors and kidnap people.

古文：子龙又言： 中兴之主，莫不身先士卒，故能光复旧物。
现代文：子龙又说 ：中兴的皇帝，无不是身先士卒，所以才能光复失去的国家。
English: Zilong also said: The emperor of ZTE is nothing but the vanguard, so he can recover the lost country.

古文：今入国门再旬矣，人情泄沓，无异升平。清歌漏舟之中，痛饮焚屋之内，臣不知其所终。
现代文：现在我到南京二十天来，看到人心松懈，无异于太平年代，譬如有人在漏船上清歌曼舞，在焚屋之内痛饮酒浆，我不知道这样下去会弄成什么样子。
English: Now that I have been in Nanjing for twenty days, I see that people's hearts are slackening, which is no different from the Taiping era. For example, someone is singing and dancing on a leaking boat, and drinking alcohol in a burning house. I don't know what will happen if this continues.

古文：其始皆起于姑息一二武臣，以至凡百政令皆因循遵养，臣甚为之寒心也。 亦不听。
现代文：这样的事情，开始时都是朝廷姑息那么一两个武臣，至于一切政令都顺着养尊处优的方式因循下来了，我对此实在感到寒心。 福王也不听。
English: At the beginning, such things were tolerated by the imperial court with the connivance of one or two vassals, but as far as all government decrees have been followed in accordance with the way of maintaining dignity, I really feel cold.

古文：明年二月乞终养去。
现代文：第二年二月他请求回乡，给老人养老送终去了。
English: In February of the following year, he asked to return to his hometown to see the old man off.

古文：子龙与同邑夏允彝皆负重名，允彝死，子龙念祖母年九十，不忍割，遁为僧。
现代文：子龙和同乡夏允彝都有很大的名气，允彝死后，子龙念及祖母在世，已九十岁了，不忍心丢下不管，就出家为僧去了。
English: Zilong and his fellow villager Xia Yunyao both had great fame. After Yunyao's death, Zilong remembered that his grandmother was still alive and was already ninety years old. He couldn't bear to leave her behind, so he became a monk.

古文：寻以受鲁王部院职衔，结太湖兵，欲举事。
现代文：不久因为接受鲁王给他的部院官衔，所以联系太湖的义军，打算起事。
English: Soon after, he contacted the Taihu rebels because he had accepted the title of minister given to him by King Lu, and planned to rise up.

古文：事露被获，乘间投水死。
现代文：事情泄漏出去，被抓获，借机投水自杀了。
English: The affair leaked out, he was caught, and he took the opportunity to commit suicide by drowning.

古文：夏允彝，字彝仲。
现代文：夏允彝，字彝仲。
English: Xia Yunqi, Zhaojun Zhong.

古文：弱冠举于乡，好古博学，工属文。
现代文：刚刚成人就乡试中举。他热爱古典，学问博大，文章写得很精美。
English: He has just passed the junior high school entrance examination for adults. He loves the classics, has a broad knowledge, and writes very beautifully.

古文：是时东林讲席盛，苏州高才生张溥、杨廷枢等慕之，结文会名复社。
现代文：当时东林书院的讲座很热闹，苏州的高才生张溥、杨廷枢等人敬慕东林，就组建了一个文会，取名叫复社。
English: At that time, the lectures at Donglin College were very lively. Suzhou's talented students, such as Zhang Xuan and Yang Tingzhu, admired Donglin and formed a literary society, named the Reunification Society.

古文：允彝与同邑陈子龙、徐孚远、王光承等亦结几社相应和。
现代文：允彝和同乡陈子龙、徐孚远、王光承等人也组建一个几社和他们相互呼应。
English: Yun Rong and his fellow townsmen Chen Zilong, Xu Fuyuan, Wang Guangcheng and others also set up a few companies and they echoed each other.

古文：崇祯十年，与子龙同成进士，授长乐知县，善决疑狱。
现代文：崇祯十年，允彝和子龙一同考中进士，他被任命做长乐知县。
English: In the 10th year of his reign, he was appointed as the county magistrate of Changle County.

古文：他郡邑不能决者，上官多下长乐。
现代文：他善于断定疑难案件，别的郡县有什么不能判定的案件，上级部门就交到长乐来。
English: He is good at adjudicating difficult cases. If there are any cases that cannot be adjudicated in other counties, the higher-level departments will submit them to Changle.

古文：居五年，邑大治。
现代文：他当了五年知县，长乐的政治很稳定。
English: He has been a prefectural governor for five years, and politics in Changle is very stable.

古文：吏部尚书郑三俊举天下廉能知县七人，以允彝为首。
现代文：吏部尚书郑三俊推荐全国七大廉洁、精干的知县时，就把允彝放在第一位。
English: When Zheng Sanjun, the secretary of the Personnel Department, recommended the seven most honest and capable counties in the country, he put Yuncheng in the first place.

古文：帝召见，大臣方岳贡等力称其贤，将特擢。
现代文：崇祯皇帝召见了他，大臣方岳贡等人极力称赞他的好处，打算特别提升他。
English: Emperor Chongzhen summoned him, and Minister Fang Yuegong and others praised his merits and planned to promote him.

古文：会丁母忧，未及用。
现代文：恰好这时他因母亲去世，守丧归家，没来得及任命。
English: It was just at this time that his mother died and he returned home to mourn, before he could be appointed.

古文：北都变闻，允彝走谒尚书史可法，与谋兴复。
现代文：北京失陷的消息传来后，允彝前往拜访史可法，和他商量怎样复兴明朝。
English: After the news of the fall of Beijing came, Yun Li went to visit Shikofa to discuss with him how to revive the Ming Dynasty.

古文：闻福王立，乃还。
现代文：听说福王即位，才回去了。
English: When he heard that King Fook ascended to the throne, he went back.

古文：其年五月擢吏部考功司主事。
现代文：当年五月福王提拔他当吏部考功司主事，他上书要求守完三年丧，没有上任。
English: In May of that year, King Fu promoted him to be the head of the Personnel Department's examination for meritorious service. He sent a letter requesting to complete the three-year mourning period, but did not take up the post.

古文：疏请终制，不赴。御史徐复阳希要人旨，劾允彝及其同官文德翼居丧授职为非制，以两人皆东林也。
现代文：御史徐复阳迎合权要人物的心思，上书弹劾允彝及其同事文德翼在守丧期间接受官职，违犯礼制，是因为他们两个都是东林党人。
English: Gu Shi, Xu Fuyang pandered to the thoughts of important figures, and sent a letter to impeach Yun Yong and his colleague Wen Deyi for accepting official positions during the mourning period, violating the etiquette, because they were both Donglin Party members.

古文：两人实未尝赴官，无可罪。吏部尚书张捷遽议贬秩调用。
现代文：因为他们两个都没有过来上任，无法办他们的罪，就决定把吏部尚书张捷予以贬官调用了。
English: Because neither of them came to take office and could not deal with their crimes, it was decided to demote Shangshu Zhangjie from the personnel department.

古文：未几，南都失，彷徨山泽间，欲有所为。
现代文：不久，南京也沦陷了，允彝在江湖中徘徊，想有所作为。
English: Soon, Nanjing also fell, and Yun Li wandered through the provinces, trying to make a difference.

古文：闻友人侯峒曾、黄淳耀、徐氵幵等皆死，乃以八月中赋绝命词，自投深渊以死。
现代文：后来听说友人侯峒曾、黄淳耀、徐等都死了。就在八月里写下绝命词，自己跳入深渊中死了。
English: Later, he heard that his friends Hou Yucheng, Huang Chunyao, Xu and others had all died. In August, he wrote down his last words and jumped into the abyss to his death.

古文：允彝死后二年，子完淳、兄之旭并以陈子龙狱词连及，亦死。
现代文：允彝死后两年，他的儿子完淳和他的哥哥之旭都因为陈子龙的官司牵扯到他们，也被处死了。
English: Two years after Unhyun's death, his son, Kanjun, and his brother, Zhuxu, were also executed because they were implicated in Chen Zilong's lawsuit.

