古文：晋武帝采汉魏之制，置贵嫔、夫人、贵人，是爲三夫人，位视三公；淑妃、淑媛、淑仪、修华、修容、修仪、婕妤、容华、充华，是爲九嫔，位视九卿；其馀有美人、才人、中才人，爵视千石以下。
现代文：六宫的名位称号，以往历史上各代都不同。晋武帝采用汉魏时候的建制，设置了贵嫔、夫人、贵人，这称为三夫人，职位相当于三公；淑妃、淑媛、淑仪、修华、修容、修仪、婕妤、容华、充华，这称为九嫔，职位相当于九卿；另外还有美人、才人、中才人，爵位相当于千石以下。
English: The names and titles of the six palaces were different for each generation in the past history. Emperor Jinwu adopted the system of the Han and Wei dynasties, and set up noblemen, ladies, and noblemen, which were called the three ladies, and the positions were equivalent to the three kings; Shufei, Shuyuan, Shuyi, Shuhua, Shujong, Shujong, Shujong, Shujong, Shujong, Shujong, Shujong, Shujong, Shujong, Shujong, Shujong, Shujong, Shujong, Shujong, Shujong, Shujong, Shujong, Shujong

古文：宋武帝省二才人，其馀仍用晋制。
现代文：宋武帝省去了二才人，其余仍用晋朝建制。
English: Emperor Song Wudi omitted two talented people, and the rest still used the Jin Dynasty system.

古文：案贵嫔，魏文帝所制。
现代文：案贵嫔，是魏文帝设置的。
English: It was established by Emperor Weiwen.

古文：夫人，魏武初建魏国所制。
现代文：夫人，是魏武帝初建魏国时设置的。
English: Madam, it was set up by Emperor Wu of Wei at the beginning of the founding of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：贵人，汉光武所制。
现代文：贵人，是汉光武帝设置的。
English: Your Excellency, it was Emperor Guangwu of Han who set this up.

古文：淑妃，魏明帝所制。
现代文：淑妃，是魏明帝设置的。
English: Shufei was set up by Emperor Wei Ming.

古文：淑媛，魏文帝所制。
现代文：淑媛，是魏文帝设置的。
English: Shu Yuan was set up by Emperor Wei.

古文：淑仪、修华，晋武帝所制。
现代文：淑仪、修华，是晋武帝设置的。
English: Shu Yi and Shu Hua were set up by Emperor Jinwu.

古文：修容，魏文帝所制。
现代文：修容，是魏文帝设置的。
English: It was Emperor Wei who set up the system of face-lifting.

古文：修仪，魏明帝所制。
现代文：修仪，是魏明帝设置的。
English: It was Wei Mingdi who set up the ritual.

古文：婕妤、容华，前汉旧号。
现代文：婕妤、容华，是前汉的旧名号。
English: Zou and Yonghua are the old names of the former Han Dynasty.

古文：充华，晋武帝所制。
现代文：充华，是晋武帝设置的。
English: It was set up by Emperor Jinwu.

古文：美人，汉光武所制。
现代文：美人，是汉光武帝设置的。
English: Beauty was set up by Emperor Han Guangwu.

古文：及孝武孝建三年，省夫人；置贵妃，位比相国，进贵嫔比丞相，贵人比三司,以爲三夫人,又置昭仪、昭容、昭华，以代修华、修仪、修容。
现代文：到了宋孝武帝孝建三年，省去了夫人，设置了贵妃，职位相当于相国，提升贵嫔相当于丞相，贵人相当于三司，以她们为三夫人。又设置了昭仪、昭容、昭华，以代替修华、修仪、修容。
English: In the third year of Emperor Xiaojian of Song Xiaowu, he omitted the wife and set up a noble consort, the position is equivalent to the sister country, the promotion of the noble consort is equivalent to the prime minister, and the noble person is equivalent to the three departments, and they are the three wives. He also set up Zhaoyi, Zhaoyong, and Zhaohua to replace Xiuhua, Xiuyi, and Xiufang.

古文：又置中才人、充衣，以爲散位。
现代文：又设置了中才人、充衣，做为闲散职位。
English: In addition, a middle-ranking person and a person in charge of clothing were set up as idle positions.

古文：案昭仪，汉元帝所制。
现代文：案昭仪，是汉元帝的创制。
English: It was created by Emperor Han Yuan.

古文：昭容，孝武所制。
现代文：昭容，是孝武帝的创制。
English: Zhaorong was created by Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：昭华，魏明帝所制。
现代文：昭华，是魏明帝的创制。
English: Zhaohua was created by Emperor Ming of Wei.

古文：中才人，晋武帝所制。
现代文：中才人，是晋武帝的创制。
English: Zhongcai Ren is a creation of Emperor Jinwu.

古文：充衣，前汉旧制。
现代文：充衣，是前汉的旧建制。
English: Filling clothes is an old system of the former Han Dynasty.

古文：及明帝泰始二年，省淑妃、昭华、中才人、充衣，复置修华、修仪、修容、才人、良人；三年，又省贵人，置贵姬，以备三夫人之数；又置昭华，增淑容、承徽、列荣；以淑媛、淑仪、淑容、昭华、昭仪、昭容、修华、修仪、修容爲九嫔；婕妤、容华、充华、承徽、列荣：凡五职，亚九嫔；美人、才人、良人三职爲散役。
现代文：到了宋明帝泰始二年，省去了淑妃、昭华、中才人、充衣，重新设置了修华、修仪、修容、才人、良人。三年，又省去了贵人，设置了贵姬，以具备三夫人的数字；又设置了昭华，增加了淑容、承徽、列荣，以淑媛、淑仪、淑容、昭华、昭仪、昭容、修华、修仪、修容为九嫔；婕妤、容华、充华、承徽、列荣：共五个职位，亚于九嫔；美人、才人、良人三个职位为闲散官职。
English: In the first two years of the reign of Emperor Taizong of Song and Ming Dynasties, Shufei, Zhao Hua, Zhongcai Ren, and Zongyi were omitted, and Shuhua, Shui Yi, Shujing, Cai Ren, and Liang Rong were newly set up. In the third year, Guijin was also omitted, and Guiji was set up to have the number of three wives; Zhao Hua was also set up, and Shu Rong, Cheng Hui, and Liang Rong were added, with Shu Yuan, Shu Yi, Shu Rong, Zhao Hua, Zhao Yi, Zhao Rong, Shui Hua, Sh

古文：其后，帝留心后房，拟百官，备置内职焉。
现代文：在这以后，明帝留心后庭的建制，仿照朝中百官，完备地建立起内宫职位。
English: After this, Emperor Ming paid attention to the organization of the inner court and, following the example of hundreds of officials in the dynasty, established the position of the inner court.

古文：及齐高帝建元元年，有司奏置贵嫔、夫人、贵人爲三夫人，修华、修仪、修容、淑妃、淑媛、淑仪、婕妤、容华、充华爲九嫔，美人、中才人、才人爲散职。
现代文：到了齐高帝建元元年，经过有关部门奏请设置了贵嫔、夫人、贵人为三夫人，修华、修仪、修容、淑妃、淑媛、淑仪、婕妤、容华、充华为九嫔，美人、中才人、才人为闲散职位。
English: In the first year of the founding of the Qigong Emperor, after the relevant departments made a report, they set up the noblewoman, the lady, and the noblewoman as the three ladies, and the beauty, the ceremony, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the beauty, the

古文：三年，太子宫置三内职：良娣比开国侯，保林比五等侯，才人比驸马都尉。
现代文：建元三年，太子宫设置了三种内部职位：良娣相当于开国侯，保林相当于五等侯，才人相当于驸马都尉。
English: In the third year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the imperial court set up three kinds of internal positions: Liang Kun is equivalent to the founding prince, Bao Lin is equivalent to the fifth prince, and Cai Ren is equivalent to the captain of the imperial horse.

古文：及永明元年，有司奏贵妃、淑妃并加金章紫绶；佩于寘玉；淑妃旧拟九棘，以淑爲温恭之称，妃爲亚后之名，进同贵妃，以比三司；夫人之号，不殊蕃国；降淑媛以比九卿。
现代文：到了永明元年，有关部门奏请给贵妃、淑妃都加赐金章紫绶，佩带于阗玉；淑妃旧时仿照九卿，以淑为温恭的代称，妃为亚后的名号，升格等同贵妃，相当于三司；夫人的称号，和各藩国没有区别；对淑媛降格使它相当于九卿。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, the relevant departments requested that both Guifei and Shufei be given the gold and purple pennants and wear them with the jade. In the old days, Shufei was modeled on the Nine Lords, with Shu as the representative of the gentleness, and Fei as the name of the Queen of Asia. The promotion was the same as that of Guifei, equivalent to the three divisions; the title of the lady was no different from that of the feudal states; the downgrading of Shufei made it equivalent to the Nine Lords.

古文：七年，复置昭容，位在九嫔焉。
现代文：永明七年，重新设置昭容，其职位包括在九嫔之中。
English: In the seventh year of Yongming, Zhaoyong was re-established, and its position was included in Jiuzhaigou.

古文：梁武拨乱反正，深鉴奢逸，配德早终，长秋旷位。
现代文：梁武帝拨乱反正，深以奢侈淫逸为鉴诫，德郗皇后早死，职位长年空缺。
English: Emperor Liangwu dealt with the turmoil in an orderly manner, deeply admonishing extravagance and lasciviousness, Empress Deyu died early, and the post remained vacant for many years.

古文：定令制贵妃、贵嫔、贵姬爲三夫人；淑媛、淑仪、淑容、昭华、昭仪、昭容、修华、修仪、修容爲九嫔；婕妤、容华、充华、承徽、列荣爲五职；美人、才人、良人爲三职。
现代文：确立制度规定贵妃、贵嫔、贵姬为三夫人；淑媛、淑仪、淑容、昭华、昭仪、昭容、修华、修仪、修容为九嫔；婕妤、容华、充华、承徽、列容为五职；美人、才人、良人为三职。
English: The establishment of the system stipulates that Guifei, Guijie and Guiji are the three wives; Shu Yuan, Shu Yi, Shu Rong, Zhao Hua, Zhao Yi, Zhao Rong, Xiu Hua, Xiu Yi and Xiu Rong are the nine concubines; Zou, Rong Hua, Zong Hua, Zong Hua, Zheng Hui and Lirong are the five positions; and Bijin, Zai Ren and Liang Rong are the three positions.

古文：东宫置良娣、保林爲二职。
现代文：东宫设置良娣、保林为二职。
English: In the East Palace, Ryoma and Paulin were appointed to the second post.

古文：及简文、元帝出自储蕃，或迫在拘絷，或逼于寇乱；且妃并先殂，更不建椒阃。
现代文：到了简文帝、元帝由藩王而为太子登帝位，有的被拘禁限制自由，有的被匪寇乱臣逼迫；而且妃子都较早去世，不再注重内宫建制。
English: By the time Emperor Jianwen and Emperor Yuan were enthroned as princes instead of lords, some of them had been detained and their freedom restricted, while others had been persecuted by bandits and ruffians; moreover, their concubines had all died earlier, and they no longer paid attention to the inner palace system.

古文：陈武光膺天历，以朴素自居，故后宫员位，其数多阙。
现代文：陈武帝顺天承运，以朴素自持，所以后宫的员位，其数量有许多空缺。
English: Emperor Qianwu carried out transportation with simplicity, so there were many vacancies in the number of members of the harem.

古文：文帝天嘉之后，诏宫职备员。
现代文：文帝天嘉以后，诏令补充宫中职位。
English: After Emperor Wen and Emperor Tianjia, posts in the imperial court were supplemented by imperial decree.

古文：元嘉元年，降爲营阳王妃，又爲南丰王太妃。
现代文：他的设置，无改于梁朝的旧制。把它们编入条令，作为后世的法规。
English: His system was the same as the old system of the Liang Dynasty, and he codified them into regulations to serve as laws for future generations.

古文：十六年薨。文元袁皇后讳齐嬀，陈郡阳夏人，左光禄大夫湛之庶女也。
现代文：然而文帝禀性恭谨俭朴，而嫔妃的职位并不完备。宣帝、后主，没有什么改动。现在一总汇辑，而专立了本篇列传。文元袁皇后名叫齐妫，陈郡阳夏人，是左光禄大夫袁湛的妾所生的女儿。
English: However, Emperor Wen's nature was respectful, prudent and frugal, and the position of Empress Dowager was not complete. Emperor Xuan and his empress did not change anything. Now it is a summary, but this article is dedicated to the biography. Empress Wen Yuan Yuan's name is Qi Qi, Chen Gu Yang Xia Ren, is the daughter of the concubine of Dr. Zuo Guanglu Yuan Zhan.

古文：母本卑贱，后年至六岁方见举。
现代文：她的母亲本来很卑贱，后来年龄到了六岁才被收养。
English: Her mother was a lowly woman who was adopted at the age of six.

古文：后适文帝，初拜宜都王妃，生子劭、东阳献公主英娥。
现代文：后来嫁给了宋文帝，起初封为宜都王妃，生了儿子刘劭、东阳献公主英娥。
English: Later, she married Emperor Songwen, and was initially given the title of Princess Yidu. She gave birth to her son Liu Xuan and Dongyang Xian Princess Ying'e.

古文：上待后恩礼甚笃，袁氏贫薄，后每就上求钱帛以赡之。
现代文：皇上待皇后恩情礼节十分厚重，袁家贫穷，皇后常常向皇上求些钱帛供养他们。
English: The emperor treated the empress with great courtesy. The Yuan family was poor, and the empress often asked the emperor for money to support them.

古文：上性俭，所得不过五三万、五三十匹。
现代文：皇上性格俭朴，所给的不过三五万、三五十疋。
English: The Emperor was of a frugal nature and only gave 350,000 to 350,000 baht.

古文：后潘淑妃有宠，爱倾后宫，咸言所求无不得。
现代文：后来潘淑妃得宠，宠爱压倒后宫，都说她要什么没有得不到的。
English: Later, when Pan Shu Fei was favored, and the favor overwhelmed the harem, they all said that there was nothing she could not get.

古文：后闻之，未知信否，乃因潘求三十万钱与家，以观上意，宿昔便得。
现代文：皇后听说了，不知道是否真实，便通过潘妃替家里人要三十万钱，以观察皇上的心意，一夜就得到了。
English: When the empress heard about it, she didn't know if it was true, so she asked for 300,000 yuan for her family members through Pan Fei to observe the emperor's thoughts, and she got it overnight.

古文：因此恚恨称疾，不复见上，遂愤恚成疾。
现代文：她因此愤恨，声称有病，不再见皇上，于是又真的愤恨成病。
English: As a result, she became resentful, claimed to be ill, and stopped seeing the Emperor. As a result, her resentment turned into an illness.

古文：元嘉十七年疾笃，上执手流涕，问所欲言。
现代文：元嘉十七年病危，皇上握着她的手流着眼泪，问她还有什么话想说。
English: In the seventeenth year of Yuan Jia's illness, the emperor held her hand in tears and asked her what else she wanted to say.

古文：后视上良久，乃引被覆面，崩于显阳殿。
现代文：皇后看了皇上很久，然后拉过被子盖上了自己的脸，死在显阳殿。
English: The empress looked at the emperor for a long time, then pulled the quilt over and covered her own face, and died in the Hall of the Rising Sun.

古文：上甚悼痛之，诏前永嘉太守顔延之爲哀策，文甚丽。及奏，上自益 抚存悼亡，感今怀昔 八字以致意焉。
现代文：皇上十分悲痛，诏令前永嘉太守颜延之写哀策，文辞十分华丽，皇上自己加了 抚存悼亡，感今怀昔 八个字来表达情意。
English: The emperor was very sad, and the imperial edict was written by the former Yongjia Taishou Yan Yan Yan. The wording was very gorgeous, and the emperor himself added eight words to express his feelings, "to cherish, to mourn, to feel the present and the past."

古文：有司奏諡宣皇后，诏諡曰元。
现代文：有关部门上奏谥为宣皇后，诏令谥为元。
English: Relevant departments reported the imperial edict to Empress Xuan, and the imperial edict was issued.

古文：初，后生劭，自详视之，使驰白帝： 此儿形貌异常，必破国亡家，不可举。 
现代文：起初，皇后生了刘劭，自己仔细地看了一番，派人驰马去告诉文帝： 这个儿子形貌异常，必然会破国亡家，不可抚养。 
English: At first, the empress gave birth to Liu Ye, and after carefully examining him, she sent someone on horseback to tell Emperor Wen: This son is abnormally shaped, will inevitably ruin the country and the family, and cannot be raised.

古文：便欲杀之。
现代文：便想把他杀死。
English: He wanted to kill him.

古文：文帝狼狈至后殿户外，手掇幔禁之乃止。
现代文：文帝狼狈地跑到后殿的门外，用手拉着布幔禁止她，她才停下了。
English: In dismay, Emperor Wen ran to the outside of the gate of the antechamber and forbade her to leave with a cloth in her hand, and she only stopped.

古文：后亡后，常有小小灵应。
现代文：袁皇后死后，常常有小小的灵应。
English: After the death of Empress Yuan, there are often small spiritual responses.

古文：明帝所生沈美人尝以非罪见责，应赐死，从后昔所住徽音殿前度。
现代文：明帝的生母沈美人曾经无罪而受到责罚，要赐她自杀，当时从袁皇后原来所住的徽音殿前经过。
English: Emperor Ming's birth mother, Shen Mei Ren, who was once found not guilty and punished to be allowed to commit suicide, was passing in front of the Huiyin Hall, where Empress Yuan used to live.

古文：此殿有五间，自后崩后常闭。
现代文：这座殿有五间，自从皇后死后常常关闭着。
English: The palace, which has five rooms, has often been closed since the Queen's death.

古文：美人至殿前流涕大言曰： 今日无罪就死，先后若有灵当知之。 
现代文：沈美人到了殿前流着泪大声喊道： 现在没有罪却要被处死，皇后如果有灵，应当知道。 
English: When Shen Meijin arrived at the front of the hall, she cried out in tears: Now there is no crime, but she will be put to death. If the empress has a soul, she should know.

古文：殿户应声豁然开，职掌者遽白文帝，惊往视之，美人乃得释。
现代文：殿门应声豁然敞开，负责人立即告诉了文帝，文帝惊讶地前往观看，美人才得到了释放。
English: The gate of the palace suddenly opened, the person in charge immediately told Emperor Wen, Emperor Wen went to watch in surprise, and the beautiful talent was released.

古文：大明五年，孝武乃诏追后之所生外祖亲王夫人爲豫章郡新淦平乐乡君，又诏赵、萧、臧光禄、袁敬公、平乐乡君墓，先未给茔户，各给蛮户三以供洒扫。
现代文：大明五年，孝武帝诏令追赠生养袁皇后的外祖母王夫人为豫章郡新淦平乐乡君，又诏令指示，赵、萧、臧光禄、袁敬公、平乐乡君墓，先前没有配给守墓的茔户，现在分别配给蛮人三户负责洒扫。
English: In the fifth year of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowu issued an imperial edict to posthumously bestow the title of Xinyi Pingle Xiangjun of Yuanzhang County to the maternal grandmother of Queen Yuan. The imperial edict also instructed that the tombs of Zhao, Xiao, Yu Guanglu, Yuan Jinggong, and Pingle Xiangjun, which had not previously been allocated to the tomb guardians, were now allocated to three barbarian households to be responsible for sweeping.

古文：后公湛之自有传。
现代文：袁皇后的父亲袁湛之自己另有传记。
English: The father of Empress Yuan, Yuan Zhan, has his own biography.

古文：潘淑妃者，本以貌进，始未见赏。
现代文：潘淑妃，本来是由于容貌晋升上来的，开始并没有受到赏识。
English: Ms. Pan, who had been promoted for her looks, was not appreciated at first.

古文：帝好乘羊车经诸房，淑妃每庄饰褰帷以候，并密令左右以咸水洒地。
现代文：文帝喜欢乘着羊车经过各个后宫的房门，潘淑妃常常很端庄地打扮起来撩起帷帐等候着，并且秘密地让身边的人用咸水洒地。
English: Emperor Wen liked to ride a sheep cart through the doors of the various harems, and Princess Pan Shu often dressed up very demurely and waited with the curtains up, and secretly let the people around her sprinkle the ground with salt water.

古文：帝每至户，羊辄舐地不去。
现代文：文帝每次到了门前，羊就一直舔地而不离开。
English: Every time Wen Di arrived in front of the door, the sheep kept licking the ground and did not leave.

古文：帝曰： 羊乃爲汝徘徊，况于人乎。 
现代文：文帝说： 连羊也要为你徘徊，何况人呢！ 
English: Emperor Wen said: Even sheep will wander for you, let alone people!

古文：于此爱倾后宫。
现代文：从此以后对她的宠爱压倒后宫。
English: From then on, her affections overwhelmed the harem.

古文：孝武昭路太后讳惠男，丹阳建康人也。
现代文：孝武昭路太后名叫惠男，丹阳建康人。
English: Xiaowu Zhaolu's empress dowager was named Hui'an, and her husband was Danyang Jiankang.

古文：以色貌选入后宫，生孝武帝，拜爲淑媛。
现代文：以颜色和容貌选入后宫，生了孝武帝，封为淑媛。
English: She was selected into the harem based on her color and appearance, gave birth to Emperor Xiaowu, and was given the title of Shuhei.

古文：及年长，无宠，常随孝武出蕃。
现代文：后来年长了，不被宠爱，常常随着孝武帝外出藩国。
English: Later, when he grew older and was no longer loved, he often went out of the domain with Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：孝武即位，有司奏奉尊号曰太后，宫曰崇宪。
现代文：孝武帝即位，有关部门奏请给她上尊号称为太后，她的宫殿名为崇惠。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu ascended the throne, the relevant departments requested that she be given the honorific title of empress dowager, and her palace was named Chonghui.

古文：太后居显阳殿，上于闺房之内礼敬甚寡，有所御幸，或留止太后房内，故人间咸有丑声。
现代文：太后住在显阳殿，皇上在闺房以内的礼教很差，和嫔妃同居，有时就留住在太后的房内，所以在社会上颇有丑闻。
English: The empress dowager lived in the Hall of the Rising Sun, and the emperor's etiquette within the boudoir was very poor. He lived with his concubine and sometimes stayed in the empress dowager's room, so there was quite a scandal in society.

古文：宫掖事秘，亦莫能辨也。
现代文：然而宫掖中的事很秘密，也无法辨别清楚。
English: However, the situation in the Imperial Palace is very secretive and cannot be clearly discerned.

古文：孝建二年，追赠太后父兴之散骑常侍，兴之妻余杭县广昌乡君。
现代文：孝建二年，追赠太后的父亲路兴之为散骑常侍，路兴之的妻子为余杭县广昌乡君。
English: In the second year of Xiao Jian, the father of the empress dowager, Lu Xingzhi, was posthumously presented with a free-riding equerry. Lu Xingzhi's wife was a peasant from Guangchang Township, Yuhang County.

古文：大明四年，太后弟子抚军参军琼之上表自陈。
现代文：大明四年，太后弟弟的儿子抚军参军路琼之上表自我介绍。
English: In the fourth year of the Ming Dynasty, Fuzun, the son of the Empress Dowager's younger brother, joined the army and introduced himself to Lu Qiong.

古文：有司承旨，奏赠琼之父道庆给事中，琼之及弟休之、茂之并居显职。
现代文：有关部门秉承旨意，奏表赠路琼之的父亲路道庆为给事中。路琼之的弟弟休之、茂之都居显要职位。
English: In accordance with the will of the relevant departments, the report form was presented to Lu Qiong's father, Lu Daoqing. Lu Qiong's younger brothers, Huizhi and Maozhi, both hold prominent positions.

古文：太后颇豫政事，赐与琼之等财物，家累千金，居处器服与帝子相侔。
现代文：太后常常干预政事，赐给琼之等财物。家中积聚了千金，住处器物服饰和皇帝的儿子水平相当。
English: The empress dowager often intervened in political affairs, bestowing on Qiong Zhi and other possessions. Thousands of gold were accumulated in the family, and the residences, utensils, and clothing were at the same level as the emperor's son.

古文：大明五年，太后随上巡南豫州，妃主以下并从。
现代文：大明五年，太后随皇上巡视南豫州，妃子公主以下全都随从。
English: In the fifth year of the Ming Dynasty, the empress dowager accompanied the emperor on a tour of southern Yuzhou, and all the princesses followed.

古文：废帝立，号太皇太后。
现代文：废帝登基，号称太皇太后。
English: The deposed emperor ascended to the throne and was known as the great empress dowager.

古文：明帝践阼，号崇宪太后。
现代文：明帝即位，号称崇宪太后。
English: Emperor Ming ascended the throne and was known as Empress Dowager Chongxian.

古文：初，明帝少失所生，爲太后所摄养，抚爱甚笃。
现代文：起初，明帝年少的时候就失去了生母，为太后所代养，极为抚爱。
English: At first, Emperor Ming lost his birth mother when he was young, and he was raised by the empress dowager, who was extremely fond of him.

古文：及即位，供奉礼仪，不异旧日。
现代文：等到他即了皇位，供奉的礼仪，和过去没有两样。
English: When he ascends the throne, the etiquette of offering sacrifices will be the same as in the past.

古文：有司奏宜别居外宫，诏欲亲奉晨昏，尽欢闺禁，不如所奏。
现代文：有关部门上奏提出应该另外住在外宫，下诏说想要亲自每天孝敬，在闺房中尽情欢乐，和表中所上奏的不同。
English: The relevant departments suggested that they should live separately in the outer palace, and the next edict said that they wanted to personally show filial piety every day and enjoy themselves in the boudoir, which was different from the one in the table.

古文：及闻义嘉难作，太后心幸之，延上饮酒，置毒以进。
现代文：等到听说刘义嘉事件发生，太后心里很庆幸，邀请皇上饮酒，在酒中放了毒呈给皇上。
English: When she heard about the Liu Yijia incident, the empress dowager was very happy, invited the emperor to drink, and put poison in the wine to present to the emperor.

古文：侍者引上衣，上寤，起以其卮上寿。
现代文：侍者暗中拉拉皇上的衣服，皇上领悟了，起身用那个杯子给太后祝寿。
English: The waiter secretly tugged at the emperor's clothes. The emperor realized this and got up to wish the empress dowager a happy birthday with the cup.

古文：是日太后崩，秘之，丧事如礼。
现代文：当天太后去世，作了保密，丧事按正常礼仪办理。
English: The death of the empress dowager that day was kept confidential, and the funeral was handled according to normal etiquette.

古文：迁殡东宫，题曰崇宪宫。
现代文：迁到东宫停殡，题名崇宪宫。
English: The funeral was moved to the East Palace and the funeral was called the Chong Xian Palace.

古文：又诏述太后恩慈，特齐衰三月，以申追远。
现代文：又下诏追述太后的恩情慈悲，特地服较重的丧服一一一齐衰三个月，以表示追念不忘。
English: He also recounted the grace and mercy of the empress dowager, and specially wore heavy mourning clothes for three months to show that he would not forget.

古文：諡曰昭皇太后，葬孝武陵东南，号曰修宁陵。
现代文：谥号为昭路太后，葬在孝武帝陵的东南，称为修宁陵。
English: Her posthumous name was Empress Dowager Zhaolu, and she was buried in the southeast of Emperor Xiaowu's mausoleum, known as Shuning Mausoleum.

古文：先是，晋安王子勋未平，巫者谓宜开昭太后陵，毁去梓宫以厌胜。
现代文：在此以前，晋安王刘子勋没有平定，巫师说应该开造昭太后陵，毁掉棺材以便以诅咒制胜。
English: Prior to this, Liu Zixun, the King of Jin'an, was not pacified, and the sorcerer said that the tomb of the Empress Dowager Zhao should be built and the coffin destroyed in order to win with a curse.

古文：修复仓卒，不得如礼。
现代文：由于修复得仓促，没有能够合乎礼制。
English: Due to the hasty restoration, it has not been able to comply with etiquette.

古文：上性忌，虑将来致灾，泰始四年夏，诏有司曰： 崇宪昭太后修甯陵地，大明之世，久所考卜。
现代文：皇上性格多忌讳，担心将来会带来灾害，泰始四年夏天诏令有关部门说： 崇宪昭太后修宁陵所在的地方，大明年代，久已进行了考察占卜。
English: In the summer of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, the emperor, who had a taboo-breaking personality and was worried about bringing disasters in the future, issued a decree to the relevant departments saying: The place where Empress Dowager Chongxian Shuning's mausoleum is located has been investigated and divined for a long time since the Ming Dynasty.

古文：前岁遭诸蕃之难，礼从权宜，未暇营改，而茔隧之所，山原卑陋，可式遵旧典，以礼改创。 
现代文：前年遭到了诸藩国的灾难，礼仪依从了暂时的方便，没有来得及改建，而坟茔所在地，山野低陋，可以遵照过去的典章，依照礼仪来改建。 
English: The previous year was plagued by the disasters of the feudal states, the etiquette followed the temporary convenience and did not have time to be rebuilt, and the location of the graves, the mountains and lowlands, can be rebuilt according to the etiquette in accordance with the past rules.

古文：有司奏请 修甯陵玄宫补葺毁坏，权施油殿，暂出梓宫，事毕即窆 。
现代文：有关部门奏请 修宁陵的坟墓要修补毁坏的地方，用油布帐幕临时张设一个殿堂，暂时把棺材抬出来，事情做完再马上葬埋。 
English: The relevant departments requested that the damaged area of the tomb of the Mausoleum of the Great Peace should be repaired, a hall should be temporarily set up with an oilcloth tent, the coffin should be temporarily carried out, and then buried immediately after the work is done.

古文：诏可。
现代文：诏令许可了。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：废帝景和中，又追赠兴之侍中、金紫光禄大夫，諡曰孝侯。
现代文：废帝景和年间，又追赠路兴之为侍中、金紫光禄大夫，谥号为孝侯。
English: During the reign of the deposed Emperor Jingwu, Lu Xing was posthumously awarded the titles of chamberlain and doctor of the Jin Zi Guanglu, and his posthumous name was Xiao Hou.

古文：道庆光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，諡曰敬侯。
现代文：路道庆为光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，谥号为孝侯。
English: Lu Daoqing was a doctor of Guanglu, Kaifu Yi and Sanji, and his posthumous name was Xiaohou.

古文：父偃别有传。
现代文：路道庆的女儿为皇后，以路休之为侍中。
English: The daughter of Lu Daoqing is the empress, and Lu Xiu is the chamberlain.

古文：殷淑仪，南郡王义宣女也。
现代文：殷淑仪，是南郡王刘义宣的女儿。
English: Yin Shu Yi is the daughter of Liu Yixuan, the king of Nan County.

古文：丽色巧笑。
现代文：容色美丽，笑靥妖娆。
English: She has a beautiful face and a charming smile.

古文：义宣败后，帝密取之，宠冠后宫。
现代文：刘义宣失败以后，孝武帝秘密地把她娶来，宠爱冠于后宫。
English: After Liu Yixuan's defeat, Emperor Xiaowu secretly married her and favored her in his harem.

古文：假姓殷氏，左右宣泄者多死，故当时莫知所出。
现代文：借姓殷氏，身边泄密的人许多都被杀死，所以当时没有人知道她的来历。
English: She used the surname Yin, and many people around her who leaked information were killed, so no one knew her background at the time.

古文：及薨，帝常思见之，遂爲通替棺，欲见辄引替睹尸，如此积日，形色不异。
现代文：她死了以后，孝武帝常常思念想见到她，于是便做了一个通屉棺，想见她就拉开棺屉看看她的尸体，就这样过了许多日子，而她的形态颜色并不改变。
English: After her death, Emperor Xiaowu often longed to see her, so he made a coffin with a drawer. If he wanted to see her, he would open the drawer and look at her corpse. Many days passed like this, but her shape and color did not change.

古文：追赠贵妃，諡曰宣。
现代文：追赠她为贵妃，谥号为宣。
English: She was posthumously awarded the title of noble consort, and her posthumous name was Zeng.

古文：及葬，给轀輬车、虎贲、班剑。
现代文：到埋葬的时候，赠给鍂车京车、武士、仪仗。
English: At the time of burial, he was given a carriage, a samurai, and a ceremonial sword.

古文：銮辂九旒、黄屋左纛、前后部羽葆、鼓吹，上自于南掖门临，过丧车，悲不自胜，左右莫不掩泣。上痛爱不已，精神罔罔，颇废政事。
现代文：銮车饰有九个玉串，黄屋左边插着大旗，前后部羽葆、乐队，皇上亲自驾临南掖门，丧车经过时，十分悲哀，不能自控，身边的人无不暗暗落泪，皇上悲痛、爱怜不止，精神恍惚，严重废弃了政事。
English: The funeral car was decorated with nine jade strings, a large flag was stuck on the left side of the yellow house, feathers at the front and rear, and a band. The emperor himself drove to the South Gate. When the funeral car passed, he was very sad and could not control himself. People around him were all in tears. The emperor was sad and pitiful, and his spirit was in a trance. He seriously abandoned political affairs.

古文：每寝，先于灵床酌奠酒饮之，既而恸哭不能自反。
现代文：每天睡觉，首先在床前斟上一杯祭奠的酒喝下，然后痛哭不能停下。
English: Every day, before going to bed, she pours a cup of libation and drinks it, and then cannot stop crying.

古文：又讽有司奏曰： 据春秋，仲子非鲁惠西元嫡，尚得考别宫。
现代文：他又启发有关部门上奏说： 据《春秋》记载，仲子不是鲁惠公的原配正妻，尚且得以建成独自的宫庙。
English: He also inspired the relevant departments to report: According to the "Spring and Autumn" records, Nakako was not the original wife of Prince Lu Hui, but she was able to build her own palace temple.

古文：今贵妃盖天秩之崇班，理应创新。 
现代文：现在贵妃乃是在国家官员中的高位，理应建造新庙。 
English: Now that Guifei is a high-ranking state official, it is only natural that a new temple should be built.

古文：乃立别庙于都下。
现代文：于是便在京城为她建立了单独的庙宇。
English: As a result, a separate temple was built for her in Kyoto.

古文：时有巫者能见鬼，说帝言贵妃可致。
现代文：当时有个巫师能见到鬼，对孝武帝说可以看到贵妃。
English: At that time, there was a sorcerer who could see ghosts and told Emperor Xiaowu that he could see Guifei.

古文：帝大喜，令召之。
现代文：孝武帝非常高兴，就命令他召见贵妃。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was very pleased and ordered him to summon Guifei.

古文：有少顷，果于帷中见形如平生。
现代文：过了一会，果然在帷帐中见到贵妃形态如同平时活着的时候一样。
English: After a while, I saw the shape of Guifei in the curtain, just like when I was alive.

古文：瑀兄子衍性躁动，位黄门郎，拜竟，求司徒司马；得司马，复求太子右率；拜一二日，复求侍中。
现代文：孝武帝想和她说话，却默然不作声。正要拉她的手，忽然便不见了，孝武帝越发哽咽遗憾，于是写了一篇《李夫人赋》来寄托自己的思念。
English: Emperor Xiaowu wanted to talk to her, but he remained silent. He was about to take her hand, but she suddenly disappeared. Emperor Xiaowu felt more and more regret, so he wrote a "Lady Li Fu" to express his thoughts.

古文：旬日之间，求进无已。不得侍中，以怨詈赐死。
现代文：谢庄作了一篇哀悼的策文上奏，孝武帝躺在床上读着，翻身起来流着眼泪说： 不料当今又出现这样的奇才。 京城中纷纷传写，纸墨由此而价格变贵。
English: Xie Zhuang wrote a condolence essay, and Emperor Xiaowu read it while lying in bed. He rolled over and said with tears streaming down his face, "Unfortunately, such a prodigy has appeared again today. Biographies are being written one after another in Beijing, and the price of paper and ink has become expensive as a result.

古文：明恭王皇后讳贞风，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：有的人说，贵妃是殷琰家的人进了刘义宣的家，刘义宣失败后又进了宫中。明恭王皇后名叫贞风，琅笽临沂人。
English: Some people said that Guifei was a member of the Yin and Yang family who entered Liu Yixuan's home, and after Liu Yixuan's failure, she entered the palace. The queen of King Mingyong was named Zhenfeng, and she was a member of the Yin and Yang family.

古文：初拜淮阳王妃，明帝改封，又爲湘东王妃。
现代文：起初封为淮阳王妃，明帝改换封号，又被封为湘东王妃。
English: At first, she was given the title of Huaiyang Princess, but the Ming Emperor changed the title and she was given the title of Xiangdong Princess.

古文：生晋陵长公主伯姒、建安长公主伯媛。
现代文：生了晋陵长公主伯姒、建安长公主伯媛。
English: She gave birth to Jinling's eldest princess, Haku, and Jianan's eldest princess, Haku.

古文：明帝即位，立爲皇后。
现代文：明帝即位，立为皇后。
English: Emperor Ming ascended the throne and she became empress.

古文：上尝宫内大集，而裸妇人观之，以爲欢笑。
现代文：皇上曾经在宫内举办大型宴会，而让妇女裸体，进行观赏，尽情欢笑。
English: The emperor once held a large banquet in the palace, and let the women be naked, watch and laugh heartily.

古文：后以扇鄣面，独无所言。
现代文：王皇后用扇子遮住脸，独自没有言语。
English: Wang Qiong covered her face with a fan and sang alone without words.

古文：帝怒曰： 外舍家寒乞，今共作笑乐，何独不视。 
现代文：明帝发怒说： 外戚家里贫寒，现在共同来作笑乐，为什么你却独独不看？ 
English: Emperor Ming said angrily, "My relative's family is poor, so we all come together to have fun. Why don't you watch alone?

古文：后曰： 爲乐之事，其方自多；岂有姑姊妹集聚，而裸妇人形体,以此爲乐。
现代文：皇后说： 为乐的事，方式自有多种，哪有姑婆姊妹聚在一起，而让妇女裸露形体，以此为乐的？
English: The Empress said, "There are many ways to have fun. How many great-aunts and sisters get together and make fun of naked women?

古文：外舍爲欢适，与此不同。 
现代文：外戚家一起欢乐，和这不同。 
English: It's different when you're having fun with your relatives.

古文：帝大怒，令后起。
现代文：明帝非常生气，命令皇后起来。
English: Emperor Ming was very angry and ordered the empress to get up.

古文：后兄扬州刺史景文以此事语从舅陈郡谢绰曰： 后在家爲儜弱妇人，不知今段遂能刚正如此。 
现代文：皇后的哥哥扬州刺史王景文把这件事说给堂舅陈郡的谢绰说： 皇后在家的时候是个软弱的女子，不知道现在如此刚正。 
English: Wang Jingwen, the queen's brother from Yangzhou, told this to his cousin Xie Qiao from Chen County, saying, "When the queen was at home, she was a weak woman. I don't know why she is so upright now.

古文：废帝即位，尊爲皇太后，宫曰弘训。
现代文：废帝即位，尊她为皇太后，她的宫殿名叫弘训宫。
English: When the former emperor ascended the throne, she was revered as the empress dowager, and her palace was called Hongxun Palace.

古文：废帝失德，太后每加勖譬，始犹见顺，后狂慝稍甚。
现代文：废帝缺少德行，太后常常进行启发鼓励，开始还较顺从，后来狂放邪恶日渐厉害。
English: The deposed emperor lacked virtue, and the empress dowager often inspired and encouraged him. At first, he was more submissive, but later he became increasingly evil.

古文：太后尝赐帝玉柄毛扇，帝嫌毛扇不华，因此欲加酖害，令太医煮药。
现代文：太后曾赠给废帝一把玉柄的毛扇，废帝嫌毛扇不够华丽，因此想对皇后加以毒害，就命令太医煮药。
English: The empress dowager once presented the emperor with a jade-handled fan. The emperor did not like the fan because it was not gorgeous enough. Therefore, he wanted to poison the empress, so he ordered the imperial physician to prepare the medicine.

古文：左右止之曰： 若行此事，官便作孝子，岂得出入狡狯。 
现代文：身边的人制止他说： 如果做了这事，陛下就要充当孝子，哪里还能出去进来地嬉戏。 
English: The people around him stopped him and said, "If you do this, Your Majesty will have to act as a filial son, and you can still go out and play wherever you want."

古文：帝曰： 汝语大有理。 
现代文：废帝说： 你的话很有道理。 
English: Emperor Waste said: Your words make a lot of sense.

古文：乃止。
现代文：才停止了。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：顺帝即位，齐高帝执权，宗室刘晃、刘绰、卜伯兴等有异志，太后颇与相关。
现代文：顺帝即位，齐高帝掌权，宗族中的刘晃、刘绰、卜伯兴等人有异图，太后与他们很有关系。
English: Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, Emperor Qi Gao took power, and Liu Huan, Liu Cao, Bu Bo Xing and others in the clan had different plans, and the empress dowager had a lot to do with them.

古文：顺帝禅位，太后与帝逊于东邸，因迁居丹阳宫，拜汝阴王太妃。
现代文：顺帝禅让了皇位，太后与顺帝退住到东面的府邸。由此迁入丹阳宫，封为汝阴王太妃。
English: Emperor Shunde abdicated the throne, and the empress dowager and Emperor Shunde retired to a mansion to the east, where they moved into the Danyang Palace and were given the title of Ruyin Wang Taifei.

古文：顺帝殂于丹阳，更立第都下。
现代文：顺帝在丹阳去世，改立府第在京城中。
English: Emperor Shun died in Danyang, and the new capital was established in the middle of the capital.

古文：并生平所嗜也。
现代文：建元元年，在府中逝世，追加谥号，用宋朝的礼仪进行埋葬。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, he died in the middle of the prefecture, and was buried with the etiquette of the Song Dynasty.

古文：高昭刘皇后讳智容，广陵人也。
现代文：皇后的父亲王僧朗，另外有传记。高昭刘皇后名叫智容，广陵人。
English: The queen's father, Wang Monk Lang, also has a biography. Queen Gao Zhao Liu was named Zhirong and was from Guangling.

古文：祖玄之，父寿之，并员外郎。
现代文：祖父刘玄之，父亲刘寿之，都是员外郎。
English: His grandfather, Liu Xuanzhi, and his father, Liu Shouzhi, were both foreign diplomats.

古文：后母桓氏，梦吞玉胜生后，时有紫光满室，以告寿之。
现代文：皇后的母亲桓氏，梦见吞下了玉首饰而生下皇后，当时有紫光充满房间，就告诉了刘寿之。
English: The queen's mother, Huan, dreamed of swallowing the jade jewelry and giving birth to an empress. At that time, a purple light filled the room, so she told Liu Shou.

古文：寿之曰： 恨非是男。 
现代文：刘寿之说： 遗憾的是不是个男孩。 
English: Liu Shouzhi said: "Unfortunately, it's not a boy.

古文：桓笑曰： 虽女亦足兴家矣。 
现代文：桓氏笑着说： 即使是女孩也足以兴家了。 
English: Mr. Kan smiled and said, "Even a girl is enough to raise a family."

古文：后寝卧，见有羽盖荫其上，家人试察之，常见其上掩蔼如有云气。
现代文：皇后躺着睡觉，看见有羽饰的华盖罩在她的身体上面，家里的人试着观察她，常常见到她上空飘飘然如同有一片云气。
English: The queen lay sleeping, with a feathered canopy over her body, and the household tried to observe her, often seeing her floating in the air like a cloud.

古文：年十七，裴方明爲子求婚，酬许已定，后梦见先有迎车至，犹如常家迎法，后不肯去；次有迎至，龙旗豹尾，有异于常，后喜而从之。
现代文：她十七岁时，裴方明为儿子向她求婚，酬答许配已经说定，刘皇后梦见先有迎婚的车辆到来，如同是平常人家的迎娶方法，刘皇后不肯前去；然后又有一家迎亲的来到，龙旗豹尾，和通常的完全不同，皇后很高兴地跟着走了。
English: When she was 17 years old, Pei Fangming proposed to her for her son's marriage, and the reward for the promised match had already been determined. Empress Liu dreamed that a wedding car arrived first, as is the usual way for people to get married, and Empress Liu refused to go; then another family came to welcome the relatives, the dragon flag and the leopard tail, completely different from the usual, and the empress was happy to follow.

古文：既而与裴氏不成婚，竟嫔于上。
现代文：随后就与裴家没有成婚，结果嫁给了皇上。
English: Subsequently, she did not marry Pei Jia, but ended up marrying the emperor.

古文：严整有轨度，造次必依礼法。
现代文：刘皇后严整而有规程和法度，行为一定要依照礼法。
English: Empress Liu has strict rules and regulations, and her behavior must be in accordance with etiquette.

古文：生太子及豫章王嶷。
现代文：生了太子和豫章王萧嶷。
English: Prince Yuzhang Wang Xiaohui was born.

古文：太子初在孕，后尝归宁，遇家奉祠，尔日阴晦失晓，举家狼狈共营祭食。
现代文：太子起初在母腹中的时候，刘皇后曾经回娘家探亲，遇到家中正在祭祀，那天天阴昏暗不明，全家忙碌地一齐准备祭品。
English: When the prince was still in his mother's womb, Empress Liu once went back to her daughter's home to visit relatives. She encountered a religious service taking place in the house. It was a dark and stormy day, and the whole family was busy preparing offerings.

古文：后助炒胡麻，始复内薪，未及索火，火便自然。
现代文：刘皇后帮助炒胡麻，刚刚放进去柴草，还没有来得及找火，火便自己燃着了。
English: Empress Liu helped stir-fry the sesame seeds. She had just put in the firewood, but before she could find a fire, the fire ignited on its own.

古文：宋泰豫元年殂，归葬宣帝墓侧，则泰安陵也。
现代文：宋朝的泰豫元年去世，送回故乡，埋葬在宣帝坟墓的旁边，就是泰安陵。
English: Tai Yu of the Song Dynasty died in the first year of the year, was sent back to his hometown, and was buried next to the tomb of Emperor Xuan, which is the Tai An Mausoleum.

古文：门生王清与墓工始下锸，有白兔跳起，寻之不得。
现代文：仆役王清和挖墓的工人刚刚下锹，有一只白兔跳来，再却找不到了。
English: Wang Qing, the servant, and the grave digger had just finished digging when a white rabbit jumped out and they couldn't find it again.

古文：及坟成，兔还栖其上。
现代文：等墓修成，白兔又回来栖息在上面。
English: When the tomb was repaired, the white rabbit came back to perch on it.

古文：升明二年，赠竟陵公国夫人。
现代文：升明二年，赠为竟陵公国夫人。
English: Two years after ascending the throne, she was given the title of Lady of the Principality of Goryeong.

古文：三年，赠齐国妃印绶。
现代文：三年，赠给齐国妃的印鉴。
English: Three years later, the seal was presented to Empress Dowager Qi.

古文：郁林王何妃讳婧英，庐江灊人，抚军将军戢女也。
现代文：齐朝建元元年，追加尊贵谥号为昭皇后。二年，赠封皇后的父亲刘寿之为金紫光禄大夫，母亲桓氏为上虞都乡君。郁林王何妃名叫婧英，庐江飅县人，是伏军将军何戢的女儿。
English: In the first year of the first year of the Qi Dynasty, the additional honorific title was the Empress Zhao. In the second year, the father of the queen, Liu Shou, was awarded the title of the Golden Purple Glitter Doctor, and the mother, Huan, was the Shangyu Township. The Queen of Yulin, Hefei, was named Yu Ying, a native of Yuxian County in the Minjiang River, and was the daughter of the general of the Fuxi Army, He Yao.

古文：初将纳爲南郡王妃，文惠太子嫌戢无男，门孤，不欲与昏。
现代文：起初将要嫁为南郡王妃，文惠太子嫌何戢没有儿子，门庭孤独，不想和他家结成婚姻。
English: At first, she was going to marry the Princess of Nam County, but Prince Wen Hui did not want to marry into his family because he did not have a son and was lonely.

古文：王俭以南郡王妃，便爲将来外戚，唯须高胄，不须强门。
现代文：王俭认为南郡王妃，便是将来的外戚，只需要是高族，不一定是强门。
English: Wang Jian believes that the princess of Nan County is the future relative, but only if she is a high-caste, not necessarily a strong gate.

古文：今何氏荫华族弱，实允外戚之义。
现代文：现在何氏门荫华贵而宗族孤弱，实在正合外戚的条件。
English: Now that the Ho clan is rich and powerful, but the clan is weak, it really meets the conditions of a maternal relative.

古文：永明三年，乃成昏。
现代文：永明三年，就成婚了。
English: Three years later, Yongming got married.

古文：妃禀性淫乱，南郡王所与无赖人游，妃择其美者，皆与交欢。
现代文：何妃禀性淫乱，那些南郡王和他们一起游玩的无赖之辈，何妃挑选其中漂亮的，都分别和他们交欢。
English: How many concubines and fornicators, those ruffians with whom the king of the southern county played, and how many beautiful women did the concubine choose to have sex with separately?

古文：南郡王侍书人马澄年少色美，甚爲妃悦，常与斗腕较力，南郡王以爲欢笑。
现代文：南郡王的侍书人马澄年少貌美，很被何妃所喜欢，常常和他斗腕较力，南郡王把这当成是欢笑。
English: Nan Gu Wang's secretary, Ma Cheng, was young and beautiful. He was very popular with He Fei and often fought with him. Nan Gu Wang took this as a joke.

古文：澄者本剡县寒人，尝于南岸逼略人家女，爲秣陵县所录，南郡王语县散遣之。
现代文：马澄本是剡县的贫寒百姓，曾经在河的南岸逼夺民家的姑娘，被秣陵县官府拘留，南郡王告诉县里把他释放了。
English: Ma Cheng was originally a poor citizen of Handan County. He once forced a girl to rob a private house on the south bank of the river. He was detained by the Fuling County government. Nan Guowang told the county that he had been released.

古文：澄又逼求姨女爲妾，姨不与，澄诣建康令沈徽孚讼之。
现代文：马澄又逼着要娶他姨妈的女儿为妾，他姨妈不答应，马澄便到建康县令沈徽孚那里去告她。
English: Ma Cheng also forced him to marry his aunt's daughter as a concubine. His aunt did not agree, so Ma Cheng went to Jiankang County Governor Shen Huifu to sue her.

古文：徽孚曰： 姨女可爲妇，不可爲妾。 
现代文：沈徽孚说： 姨妈的女儿可以为妻，不可以为妾。 
English: Shen Huifu said: An aunt's daughter can be a wife, but not a concubine.

古文：澄曰： 仆父爲给事中，门户既成,姨家犹是寒贱，政可爲妾耳。 
现代文：马澄说： 我的父亲做给事中，门户已经尊贵，而姨妈家仍然寒贱，正可以做妾的。 
English: Ma Cheng said, "When my father was in the middle of doing something, the gate was already honored, but my aunt's family was still lowly and could just be a concubine.

古文：徽孚诃而遣之。
现代文：沈徽孚大声呵斥而把他赶走了。
English: Shen Huifu shouted loudly and drove him away.

古文：十一年，爲皇太孙妃。
现代文：永明十一年，何氏做了皇太孙妃。
English: In the eleventh year of the Ming Dynasty, He became the granddaughter of the emperor.

古文：又有女巫子杨瑉之，亦有美貌，妃尤爱悦之，与同寝处，如伉俪。
现代文：又有一个女巫的儿子叫杨珉之，也有美貌，何妃尤其喜爱他，和他一块同居共处，如同伉俪。
English: There was also a witch's son called Yang Xizhi, who was also good-looking. He was especially loved by Hefei, and they lived together with him like a pair of doves.

古文：及太孙即帝位，爲皇后，封后嫡母刘爲高昌县都乡君，所生母宋爲余杭广昌乡君。
现代文：等到皇太孙继承了帝位，她做了皇后，封皇后的嫡母刘氏为高昌县都乡君，生母宋氏为余杭广昌县君。
English: When the great-grandson of the emperor succeeded to the throne, she became the empress. The legitimate mother of the empress, Liu, was the ruler of Duxiang in Gaochang County, and her biological mother, Song, was the ruler of Guangchang County in Yuhang.

古文：后将拜，镜在床无因堕地。
现代文：皇后将要拜谢，镜子在床前没缘由地坠落在地上。
English: The Queen is about to say grace, the mirror falls to the floor for no apparent reason in front of the bed.

古文：其冬，与太后同日谒太庙。
现代文：那年冬天，和太后同一天去到太庙参拜。
English: That winter, on the same day as the empress dowager, I went to the Imperial Temple to worship.

古文：杨瑉之爲帝所幸，常居中侍。
现代文：杨珉之被皇帝所宠幸，常常住在宫中侍奉。
English: Yang Xizhi was favored by the emperor and often lived in the palace to serve.

古文：明帝爲辅，与王晏、徐孝嗣、王广之并面请，不听。
现代文：明帝为辅政大臣，和王晏、徐孝嗣、王广之共同当面请求把他除去，废帝不听。
English: Emperor Ming was the Vice-Minister of State, and together with Wang Xi, Xu Xiaozhi, and Wang Guang, they made a face-to-face request to remove him, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：又令萧谌、坦之固请，皇后与帝同席坐，流涕覆面，谓坦之曰： 杨郎好年少，无罪过，何可枉杀。 
现代文：又让萧谌、萧坦之坚持请求，皇后和废帝同席坐着，泪流满面，对萧坦之说： 杨郎是个好少年，没有罪过，怎么能够冤枉地杀死他？ 
English: The empress and the deposed emperor sat at the same table, with tears streaming down their faces, and said to Xiao Tanzhi: Yang Lang is a good boy, he has committed no crime, how could you unjustly kill him?

古文：坦之耳语于帝曰： 此事别有一意，不可令人闻。 
现代文：萧坦之对废帝耳语说： 这件事另有一层意思，不能让别人知道。 
English: Xiao Tan Zhi whispered to the former emperor: This matter has another meaning, and I can't let others know.

古文：帝谓皇后爲阿奴，曰 阿奴暂去 。
现代文：废帝称皇后为阿奴，说： 阿奴暂且离开一会。 
English: The deposed emperor called the empress "Anu" and said, "Anu, please leave for a while.

古文：坦之乃曰： 外间并云杨瑉之与皇后有异情,彰闻遐迩。 
现代文：萧坦之才说： 外面都说杨珉之与皇后有特殊隐情，远近闻名。 
English: Xiao Tianzhicai said: It is said that Yang Xizhong and the empress have a special secret relationship, which is known far and wide.

古文：帝不得已，乃爲敕。
现代文：废帝不得已，才下了命令。
English: The deposed emperor had no choice but to give the order.

古文：坦之驰报明帝，即令建康行刑，而果有敕原之，而瑉之已死。
现代文：萧坦之驰马报告了明帝，让建康方面马上行刑，随后果然有敕令宽大赦免，而杨珉之已经死掉。
English: Xiao Tan Zhi Ma reported to the Ming Emperor, so that Jiankang immediately executed him, and then there was indeed a royal order of clemency and pardon, but Yang Xizhi was already dead.

古文：明帝即位，追尊敬皇后。
现代文：皇后不仅淫乱，而且又与废帝溺爱猥亵，所以废帝放纵她。
English: The empress not only fornicated, but also indulged in indecency with the emperor, so the emperor indulged her.

古文：赠父通直郎景猷爲金紫光禄大夫，母王氏平阳乡君。明帝崩，改葬，祔于兴安陵。
现代文：又迎接皇后的亲戚入宫，曾经赏赐每人一百几十万，在武帝的曜灵殿安置皇后的家属。废帝被废黜，皇后也被贬为王妃。
English: He also welcomed the relatives of the empress into the palace, once rewarded each of them with one hundred thousand crowns, and placed the family members of the empress in Emperor Wu's Yoriting Hall. The deposed emperor was dethroned, and the empress was also reduced to a princess.

古文：东昏褚皇后讳令璩，河南阳翟人，太常澄之女也。
现代文：东昏褚皇后名叫令璩，河南阳翟人，是太常褚澄的女儿。
English: The empress of Dongmingyuan was named Lingyuan, and was from Yangyuan, Henan Province. She was the daughter of Taichang Yucheng.

古文：建武二年，纳爲皇太子妃而无宠。
现代文：建武二年，纳为皇太子妃，却不被宠爱。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, Na became the crown princess, but she was not favored.

古文：帝谓左右曰： 若得如山阴主无恨矣。 
现代文：废帝对身边的人说： 如果得到像山阴公主那样的姑娘，就没有遗憾了。 
English: The emperor said to the people around him, "If I get a girl like Princess San'in, I won't have any regrets."

古文：山阴主，明帝长女也，后遂与之爲乱。
现代文：山阴公主，是明帝的长女，后来便和她淫乱。
English: Princess Sanin, the eldest daughter of Emperor Ming, later had an affair with her.

古文：明年，妃谒敬后庙。
现代文：第二年，太子妃去参拜敬后庙。
English: The following year, the Crown Princess went to pay her respects at the Jinghou Temple.

古文：东昏即位，爲皇后。
现代文：东昏即皇帝位，褚妃为皇后。
English: Dongguan is the emperor, and Gongfei is the empress.

古文：帝宠潘妃，后不被遇，黄淑仪生太子诵而卒，东昏废，后及诵并爲庶人。
现代文：皇帝宠爱潘妃，皇后不被重视，黄淑仪生了太子萧诵就死了，东昏侯被废黜，皇后和萧诵都废为平民。
English: The emperor favored Panfei, but the empress was not valued. When Huang Shuxi gave birth to the prince, Xiao Qiao, she died. Dong Wouhou was deposed, and both the empress and Xiao Qiao became commoners.

