古文：昭阳为楚伐魏，覆军杀将得八城，移兵而攻齐。
现代文：楚国大将昭阳率楚军攻打魏国，击杀魏将，大破其军，占领了八座城池，又移师攻打齐国。
English: Chu general Zhao Yang led the Chu army to attack Wei, killed the Wei general, defeated his army, occupied eight cities, and moved his division to attack Qi.

古文：陈轸为齐王使，见昭阳，再拜贺战胜，起而问： 楚之法，覆军杀将，其官爵何也? 
现代文：陈轸充任齐王使者去见昭阳，再拜之后祝贺楚军的胜利，然后站起来问昭阳： 按照楚国的制度，灭敌杀将能封什么官爵禄位？ 
English: Chen Yucheng was appointed as the envoy of the king of Qi to see Zhao Yang. After bowing again, he congratulated the victory of the Chu army, and then stood up and asked Zhao Yang: According to the system of the State of Chu, killing the enemy will be able to seal what official title?

古文：昭阳曰： 官为上柱国，爵为上执珪。 
现代文：昭阳答道： 官至上柱国，爵为上执? 。
English: Akiyama replied, "Officials are the most important pillar of the country, and peerages are the highest honor."

古文：陈轸曰： 异贵于此者何也? 
现代文：陈轸接着又问： 比这更尊贵的还有什么？ 
English: Chen Yao then asked: What is more noble than this?

古文：曰： 唯令尹耳。 
现代文：昭阳说： 那只有令尹了。 
English: Shoyang said, "Only Ling Yin can do that."

古文：陈轸曰： 令尹贵矣!
现代文：陈轸就说： 令尹的确是最显贵的官职，但楚王却不可能设两个令尹！
English: Chen Yao said: Lingyin is indeed the most prestigious official post, but King Chu could not possibly have two Lingyin!

古文：王非置两令尹也，臣窃为公譬可也。楚有祠者，赐其舍人卮酒。舍人相谓曰： 数人饮之不足，一人饮之有余。请画地为蛇，先成者饮酒。 
现代文：我愿意替将军打个比方。楚国有个贵族祭过祖先，把一壶酒赐给门客。门客相顾商议： 这酒，几个人喝不够，一个人享用却有余，让我们各在地上画一条蛇，先画成的请饮此酒。 
English: I would like to use an analogy for generals. A nobleman in the state of Chu sacrificed his ancestors and gave a pot of wine to his guests. The guests discussed among themselves: This wine is not enough for several people to drink, but it is enough for one person to enjoy. Let's each draw a snake on the ground, and drink the wine that is drawn first.

古文：一人蛇先成，引酒且饮之，乃左手持卮，右手画蛇，曰： 吾能为之足。 
现代文：有个门客率先完成，取过酒杯准备先喝，就左手持杯，右手又在地上画了起来，并说： 我还可以为蛇添上足呢。 
English: A doorman finished first, took the wine glass and prepared to drink first. He held the glass in his left hand and drew on the ground with his right hand, saying, "I can still add a foot to the snake."

古文：未成，一人之蛇成，夺其卮曰： 蛇固无足，子安能为之足。 
现代文：蛇足尚未画完，另一门客的蛇也画好了，于是夺过他手中的酒杯，说 蛇本无脚，你怎能给它硬添上脚呢？ 
English: He had not yet finished drawing the snake's feet, and another guest's snake was also finished, so he took the wine glass from him and said, "Snakes don't have feet, so how can you give it feet?"

古文：遂饮其酒。
现代文：便喝了那酒。
English: Then he drank the wine.

古文：为蛇足者，终亡其酒。
现代文：而画蛇脚的最终没有喝到酒。
English: In the end, the artist did not get to drink the wine.

古文：今君相楚而攻魏，破军杀将得八城，不弱兵，欲攻齐，齐畏公甚，公以是为名居足矣，官之上非可重也。
现代文：如今将军辅佐楚王攻打魏国，破军杀将，夺其八城，兵锋不减之际，又移师向齐，齐人震恐，凭这些，将军足以立身扬名了，而在官位上是不可能再有什么加封的。
English: Nowadays, the general assisted King Chu in attacking Wei, defeating the army and killing the general, capturing its eight cities, and when the front did not decrease, he moved his division to Qi, Qi people were shocked. With these, the general is enough to stand up and make a name for himself, and it is impossible to add anything to his official position.

古文：战无不胜而不知止者，身且死，爵且后归，犹为蛇足也。 
现代文：如果战无不胜却不懂得适可而止，只会招致杀身之祸，该得的官爵将不为将军所有，正如画蛇添足一样！ 
English: If a general is invincible but does not know when to stop, it will only lead to the disaster of killing himself. The general will not get the rank and title he deserves, just like a snake!

古文：昭阳以为然，解军而去。
现代文：昭阳认为他的话有道理，就撤兵回国了。
English: Akiyama thought his words were reasonable, so he withdrew his troops and returned home.

