古文：十六日见明而炊，既饭犹久候而后明，盖以月光为晓也。
现代文：十六日见天空有光亮就起来做饭，但饭后还等了好久天才亮，这是因为误把月光当成了晓色。
English: On the sixteenth day of the month, when he saw the sky was bright, he got up to cook, but he waited for a long time after the meal until it was light. This was because he mistakenly thought the moonlight was twilight.

古文：十里至路口铺，泥泞异常，过此路复平燥可行。
现代文：走十里到路口铺，路上异常泥泞。过了此地路又平坦干燥而好走。
English: After walking ten miles to the road junction, the road was unusually muddy. After this, the road was flat, dry and easy to walk on.

古文：十里，渡湘江，已在衡南关之外。
现代文：又走十里，渡过湘江，便已经到达衡州府城南关外。
English: After walking another ten miles and crossing the Xiangjiang River, they have reached the outskirts of Chengnan Pass in Hengzhou Prefecture.

古文：入柴埠门，抵金寓，则主人已出，而静闻宿花药未归。
现代文：进入柴埠门，抵达金祥甫的寓所，却是主人已经外出，而静闻住宿在花药寺中没有回来。
English: Entering Chaiwu Gate and arriving at Jin Xiangfu's apartment, it turned out that the owner had already left, and Jingwen did not return from her stay at Huayu Temple.

古文：乃濯足偃息，旁问静闻所候内府助金，并刘明宇物，俱一无可望，盖内府以病，而刘以静闻懈弛也。
现代文：予是洗了脚躺下休息，从旁打听到静闻等侯的内府救助银两，以及刘明宇答应代借的钱物，都无可指望，大概内府主管是因为生病而推托，而刘明宇处是因为静闻敦促不力。
English: He washed his feet, lay down and rested. He could not hope to get the two silver coins from the Inner Prefectural Government and the money and goods that Liu Mingyu had promised to lend. The head of the Inner Prefectural Government was probably sick and had to postpone the meeting, while Liu Mingyu was not able to attend because of Liu Mingyu's illness.

古文：既暮，静闻乃归，欣欣以听经为得意，而竟忘留日之久。
现代文：傍晚，静闻才回来，他一副欣喜快乐的神态，把听人讲解佛经视为称心如意的事情，而竟然忘记了停留的时日已经很长。
English: In the evening, he came back after quietly listening to the sermon. He was so happy and joyful that he considered listening to the Buddhist sutras to be a gratifying thing, and he even forgot that he had stayed for a long time.

古文：且知刘与俱在讲堂，暮且他往，与静闻期明午当至讲所，不遑á闲暇归也。
现代文：并且得知刘明宇与他都在讲堂听人讲经，刘明宇傍晚将要到别处去，和静闻约好明日中午到讲经处所相会，今晚无闲暇回家。
English: He also learned that Liu Mingyu and he were both listening to a sermon in the lecture hall. Liu Mingyu was going to go somewhere else in the evening, and he had made an appointment with Jingwen to meet him at the lecture hall at noon tomorrow. There was no time to go home tonight.

古文：乃怅怅卧。
现代文：于是我怅怅然躺卧下。
English: So I just lay down.

古文：十七日托金祥甫再恳内司，为静闻请命而已。
现代文：十七日托金祥甫再次恳求内司给予救助，这不过是为静闻请命而已。
English: On the seventeenth day, Tong Jinxiangfu once again implored the Internal Affairs Division to provide assistance. This was nothing more than a plea for his life.

古文：与静闻同出西安门，欲候刘也。入委巷偏僻小巷中，南转二里，至千佛庵。
现代文：与静闻一同走出西安门，进到偏僻小巷中，折往南走两里，到达千佛庵。
English: Together with Jingwen, they walked out of the Xi'an Gate, entered a remote alley, turned south and walked two miles to reach the Thousand-Buddha Monastery.

古文：庵在花药之后，倚冈临池，小而颇幽，有云南法师自如，升高座讲《法华》。
现代文：此庵在花药寺的后面，背靠山冈，前临水池，虽小但较幽静，有个叫自如的云南法师，登上高高的讲坛讲解《法华经》。
English: This hermitage at the back of the Flower and Medicine Temple, with its back to the hill and its front to the pond, is small but quiet. There is a Yunnan monk, who is known to be easy-going, who stands on a high pulpit and explains the "Law and Gospel."

古文：时雨花缤纷，余随众听讲。
现代文：当时落花如雨，缤纷多彩，我随众人一起听法师讲经。
English: At that time, the falling flowers were like rain, colorful and colorful, I followed the crowd to listen to the mage's sermon.

古文：遂饭于庵，而刘明宇竟复不至。
现代文：听完后便在庵中吃饭，而刘明宇竟然又未到。
English: After listening, they had dinner in the hermitage, but Liu Mingyu did not come.

古文：因从庵后晤西域僧，并衡山毗卢洞大师普观，亦以听讲至者。
现代文：于是从庵后去会晤了西域的一个僧人以及衡山毗卢洞的大师普观污他们也是因为听讲解佛经而来的。
English: So I went from the hermitage to meet a monk from the western region, as well as the master of Hengshan Bilu Cave, who also came to listen to the explanation of Buddhist scriptures.

古文：下午返金寓，时余已定广右广西舟，期十八行。
现代文：下午返回金祥甫的寓所，当时我已经约定好到广西的船，定在十八日走。
English: In the afternoon, I returned to Jin Xiangfu's apartment. At that time, I had already arranged a boat to Guangxi, which was scheduled to leave on the 18th.

古文：是晚，祥甫兄弟与史休明、陆端甫饯余于西关肆中。
现代文：这天晚间，金祥甫兄弟两人和史休明、陆端甫在城西关一家店中为我饯行。
English: That evening, two of Kim Xiangfu's brothers, Shi Xiuming and Lu Dangfu, came to visit me at a store in Seongseongwan.

古文：入更返寓，以静闻久留而不亟于从事，不免征色发声焉。
现代文：入更时返回寓所，因静闻久留此处而不赶紧办理有关事务，我不免对他怒形于色，高声嚷叫起来。
English: When I returned to the apartment after the curfew and did not rush to deal with the relevant matters because Jing Huan stayed here for a long time, I could not help but be angry with him and shouted loudly.

古文：十八日舟人以同伴未至，改期二十早发。
现代文：十八日船夫因为同伴未到，改期到二十日早晨出发。
English: On the 18th, the boatman had to postpone the departure until the morning of the 20th because his companions had not arrived.

古文：余亦以未晤刘明宇，姑为迟迟。
现代文：我也因为没有与刘明宇见着面，决定姑且缓走两天。
English: Because I didn't meet Liu Mingyu face to face, I also decided to postpone my trip for two days.

古文：及晤刘，其意犹欲余再待如前也。
现代文：等见到刘明宇，他的意思是仍想要我再像以前一样继续等待。
English: When I saw Liu Mingyu, he said that he still wanted me to continue waiting like before.

古文：迨下午，适祥甫僮驰至寓，呼余曰： 王内府已括诸助，数共十二金，已期一顿应付，不烦零支也。 
现代文：到下午，正好金祥甫的仆人急匆匆奔到寓所，大声对我说： 王内府已经汇总了众人的救助银两，数额共十二两，已经说好一次支付，不再烦劳零支。 
English: In the afternoon, it just so happened that Jin Xiangfu's servant hurried to the apartment and said to me in a loud voice, "Wang Nefu has already collected everyone's relief money, amounting to twelve taels, and has agreed to pay it once, so don't bother with the zero-sum payment.

古文：余直以故事往事视之，姑令静闻明晨往促而已。
现代文：我只是将这与以往的事情作同样的看待，姑且叫静闻明天清晨前去催促。
English: I'm just going to treat this the same as I have in the past, and tell Jing Huan to hurry up and come tomorrow morning.

古文：十九日早过刘明宇，彼心虽急，而物仍莫措，惟以再待恳予，予不听也。
现代文：十九日清早去探访刘明宇，他的心情虽然急，但钱物仍没有筹办到，只有恳求我再等待，我却不听。
English: On the morning of the 19th, I went to visit Liu Mingyu. Although he was anxious, he still hadn't prepared the money and goods. He only begged me to wait, but I didn't listen.

古文：急索所留借券，彼犹欲望下午焉。
现代文：我急忙索回留下的借券，而他还想指望我等到下午。
English: I was in a hurry to get back the coupons I had left, and he wanted me to wait until the afternoon.

古文：促静闻往候王，而静闻泄泄，王已出游海会、梅田等庵，因促静闻往就见之，而余与祥甫赴花药竺震上人之招。
现代文：催促静闻到王内府处等候他的救助银两，但静闻懈怠而行动迟缓。王内府已经外出到海会、梅田等庵游耍去了，于是催静闻前去见他，而我和金祥甫去赴花药寺竺震上人的邀约。
English: He urged Jing Huan to go to Wang Neifu's office to wait for his rescue silver two, but Jing Huan was slack and slow to act. Wang Neifu had already gone out to the seaside, Umeda and other hermitages to play, so he urged Jing Huan to go to see him, and I and Jin Xiangfu went to Huayu Temple to accept the invitation of the Shogun.

古文：先是，竺震与静闻游，候余至，以香秫程资馈，余受秫而返资。
现代文：这之前，竺震与静闻交游孙等我返回衡州府城时，他赠给了我一些香林和旅途费用，我接受了香林而把钱退还了他。
English: Prior to this, when I returned to the capital city of Hengzhou, he gave me some incense and travel expenses. I accepted the incense and returned the money to him.

古文：竺震匍匐再三，期一往顾。
现代文：竺震伏在地上再三恳求，希望我到他住地去一次。
English: Shivering and prostrate on the ground, he repeatedly implored me to go to his place of residence.

古文：初余以十八发，固辞之。
现代文：开初我定十八日出发，所以再三推辞了。
English: At the beginning, I decided to leave on the 18th, so I kept postponing it.

古文：至是改期，乃往。
现代文：现改了出发时期，于是便前往他那里。
English: Now the departure time has been changed, so they went to his place.

古文：先过千佛庵听讲毕，随竺震于花药，饭于小阁，以待静闻，憩啖甚久，薄暮入城。
现代文：先经过千佛庵听完讲经，才随竺震到了花药寺，在一个小阁楼上吃饭，等待静闻，边休息边吃，过了许久，到傍晚时进入城中。
English: After listening to a sermon at the Thousand-Buddha Ancestral Hall, I went to the Flower and Medicine Temple. I ate in a small attic, waited quietly, rested while eating, and after a long time, I entered the city in the evening.

古文：竺震以相送至寓，以昨所返资果固掷而去。
现代文：竺震送我回寓所，将昨天我退回给他的钱连同一些果子坚决丢下而后离去。
English: Xing Zhen took me back to his apartment, firmly threw away the money I returned to him yesterday, along with some fruit, and then left.

古文：既昏，则静闻同祥甫赍王所助游资来，共十四金。
现代文：天黑后，静闻和金祥甫带着王内府资助的旅游费用到来，一共十四两。
English: After dark, Jing Wen and Jin Xiangfu arrived with the travel expenses funded by the Wang Nai Prefecture, a total of 14 taels.

古文：王承奉为内司之首，向以赍奉入都，而其侄王桐以仪卫典仗，代任叔事。
现代文：王承奉是内司首领，以前曾因为他带着进献物品进都，他侄子王桐便以仪卫典仗的职位，代理叔叔的事。
English: Wang Chengfeng is the head of the department of internal affairs. In the past, because he came to the capital with offerings, his nephew Wang Tong took the position of ceremonial guard, acting for his uncle.

古文：虽施者二十四人，皆其门下，而物皆王代应以给。
现代文：虽然施舍钱物的有二十四个人，都是他的门下，但钱物都是王承奉答应代为给予的。
English: Although there were twenty-four people who gave alms, all of whom were under his tutelage, the money and goods were all given on the king's behalf.

古文：先是，余过索刘借券，彼以措物出，竟不归焉。
现代文：先我曾前去刘明宇处索回借券，他因为外出筹办物品，竟然没有回家。
English: Earlier, I went to Liu Mingyu's office to ask for the return of the ticket, but he didn't come home because he was out preparing items.

古文：二十日黎明，舟人促下舟甚急。
现代文：二十日，黎明时，船夫便很急迫地催我们上船。
English: On the 20th, at dawn, the boatman was very anxious to get us on board.

古文：时静闻、祥甫往谢王并各施者，而余再往刘明宇处，刘竟未还。
现代文：当时静闻和金祥甫前去拜谢王内府以及各位施舍者去了，而我再次到刘明宇处，对明宇竟然没有回来。
English: At that time, Jingwen and Jin Xiangfu went to visit Wang Nefu and all the donors, and I went to Liu Mingyu again, but Liu Mingyu did not come back.

古文：竺震仍入城来送，且以冻米晾干后的熟糯米馈余，见余昨所嗜也。余乃冒雨登舟。久之，静闻同祥甫追至南关外，遂与祥甫挥手别，舟即解维。
现代文：竺震仍旧进城来送我，并且馈赠我一些冻米，因为他昨天见我喜欢吃这东西，我这才冒雨登上船，许久后，静闻和金祥甫追到南关外，于是与金祥甫挥手告别，然后船便解开缆绳出发了。
English: Zou Zhen still came to the city to see me off, and gave me some frozen rice as a gift, because he saw yesterday that I liked to eat this thing. I then braved the rain to board the ship. After a long time, Jing Huan and Jin Xiangfu chased outside Nanguan, and then waved goodbye to Jin Xiangfu, and then the ship untied the cable and set off.

古文：三十里，泊于东阳渡，犹下午也。
现代文：行三十里，停泊在东阳渡，这时才下午。
English: It was only the afternoon when they had travelled thirty miles and anchored at Dongyangdu.

古文：是日阴雨霏霏，江涨浑浊，湘流又作一观。
现代文：这天阴雨霏霏，江水上涨而浑浊，湘江水流又呈现为另外一种景象。
English: It was a cloudy and rainy day, the river water was rising and turbid, and the water flow of the Xiangjiang River presented another kind of scene.

古文：而夹岸鱼厢鳞次，盖上至白坊，下过衡山，其厢以数千计，皆承流取子，以鱼苗贷四方者。
现代文：江两岸的鱼厢像鱼鳞一样地排列着，大约上游到白坊，下游过了衡山县城，排列在江岸的鱼厢以数千计，它们都是用来承接水流捞取鱼子，然后养成鱼苗卖给四方买主的。
English: The fish cages on both sides of the river are lined up like fish scales, about upstream to Baifang, downstream past Hengshan County. There are thousands of fish cages lined up on the riverbank. They are all used to undertake the current to catch fish eggs, and then grow into fish fry to sell to buyers in all directions.

古文：每厢摧银一两，为桂藩供用焉。
现代文：每个鱼厢征收一两银子，作为桂王藩府供用。
English: One or two silver coins were levied for each fish box, which was used as a cucumber for the Gui Wang government.

古文：二十一日三十里，过新塘站。
现代文：二十一日行三十里，经过新塘站。
English: On the 21st, the train travelled 30 miles, passing through Shintang Station.

古文：又二十里，将抵松柏，忽有人亟呼岸上，而咽不成声，则明宇所使追余者也。
现代文：又行二十里，快要抵达松柏时，忽然听到岸上有人急急地呼喊着，喉头硬咽而不成声，这是刘明宇派来追赶我的人。
English: After another twenty miles, when I was about to reach the pine and cypress, I suddenly heard someone on the shore shouting urgently, his throat tightening and unable to speak. This was the person sent by Liu Mingyu to chase me.

古文：言明宇初肩舆来追，以身重舆迟，乃跣而驰，而令舆夫之捷足者前驱要余，刘即后至矣。
现代文：他说刘明宇开初乘着轿子来追我，因为体重大轿子走得迟，便光着脚步行追了来，而又叫轿夫中走得快的人赶往前来拦截住我，刘明宇随后就赶到。
English: He said that Liu Mingyu first came to chase me in a sedan. Because the heavy sedan was late, he chased me on foot with bare feet. He also told the fast-moving people in the sedan to rush forward to stop me. Liu Mingyu then arrived.

古文：欲听其匍匐来晤于松柏，心觉不安，乃与静闻登涯逆之，冀一握手别，便可仍至松柏登舟也。
现代文：本想听任他竭力追赶到松柏来与我会面，但心中觉得不安，于是和静闻登岸去迎他，希望握手告别后，便回到松柏登船前行。
English: Originally, I wanted to let him try his best to catch up with me at Pinehurst, but I felt uneasy in my heart, so I went ashore with Jingwen to meet him, hoping to shake hands and say goodbye, and then returned to Pinehurst to board the ship.

古文：既登涯，追者言来时刘与期从江东岸行，乃渡而滨江行，十里至香炉山，天色已暮，而刘不至。
现代文：登岸后，追来的人说来时刘叽宇。和他约好从江东岸走，于是渡过江到东岸顺江边走，走十里到达香炉山，天色已晚，但刘明宇没有来到。
English: After getting ashore, the pursuer said that Liu Mingyu was coming. He agreed to walk from the east bank of the river, so he crossed the river to the east bank and walked along the river, walking ten miles to reach the incense mountain. It was too late, but Liu Mingyu did not come.

古文：已遇一人，知其已暂憩新塘站，而香炉山下虎声咆哮，未暮而去来屏迹，居者一两家，俱以木支扉矣。
现代文：随后遇到一人，得知他已经暂时在新塘站停下休息了。香炉山下虎声咆哮，天未黑就不见往来行人的踪迹，居住在此处的一两户人家，都用木杠支顶着门。
English: Then he met a person and learned that he had temporarily stopped at Xintang Station to rest. The tiger roared under the incense burner mountain, and there was no trace of pedestrians before dark. The one or two households living here all supported their doors with wooden bars.

古文：乃登山顶，宿于茅庵，卧无具，栉无梳，乃和衣而卧。
现代文：于是登到山顶，宿在一间茅屋中，要睡觉而没有床铺，想梳头而无梳子，于是和衣躺下。
English: So he climbed to the top of the mountain, stayed in a hut, wanted to sleep but there was no bed, wanted to comb his hair but there was no comb, so he lay down in his kimono.

古文：二十二日夜半雨声大作，达旦不休，乃谋饭于庵妪而行。
现代文：二十二日半夜雨声大作，到天亮未停止，于是向屋中妇人谋食后就走了。
English: In the middle of the night on the 22nd, it rained heavily and did not stop until dawn, so he went to get food from the woman in the house and then left.

古文：始五里，由山陇中行，虽枝雨之沾衣，无泥泞之妨足。
现代文：开头的五里，从山陇中走，虽然树枝上的雨水打湿了衣服，但路上无泥浆妨碍脚下。
English: At the beginning of the five-mile walk from the foothills, although the rainwater on the branches of the trees had wet my clothes, there was no mud on the road to get in the way.

古文：后五里，行田塍间，时方插秧，加岸壅水，泞滑殊甚。
现代文：往后的五里，行走在田坎上，当时正在插秧，田都加高了埂子阻塞水流，所以路上非常粘滑。
English: Five miles further on, walking on the ridge of a field, the ploughs were being put in at the time, and the fields had raised the ploughs to block the water flow, so the road was very slippery.

古文：共十里至新塘站，烟雨满江来，问刘明宇，已渡江溯流去矣。
现代文：共走十里到达新塘站，这时烟雾般的檬潦细雨满江而来，打听刘明宇，他却已经渡过江溯流离去了。
English: They walked a total of ten miles to reach Xintang Station. At that time, a smog-like drizzle came across the river to inquire about Liu Mingyu, but he had already crossed the river and left.

古文：遂亦问津西渡，始溯江岸行四里，至昔时遇难处，焚舟已不见，从涯上人家问刘踪迹，皆云无之。又西一里，出大路口，得居人一家，再三询之，仍无前过者。
现代文：子是便也打听到渡日，向西渡过江。才溯泪顷江岸行走四里，就到了以前遇难的地方，那只被焚毁的船已经不见，到水边人家中探问刘明宇的踪迹，都说没有见着，又往西走一里 到达大路口，见到一户人家，再三询伺，仍说没有在我们前面过去的人。
English: It was only after walking four miles along the riverbank with tears in my eyes that I arrived at the place where I was once shipwrecked. The burned boat was no longer there. When I went to inquire about Liu Mingyu's whereabouts at people's homes along the water's edge, they all said that they had not seen him. I walked another mile to the west until I reached a major intersection, where I saw a family. I asked them again and again, but they still said that no one had passed in front of us.

古文：时刘无盖，而雨甚大，意刘必未能前。
现代文：当时刘明宇没有带雨伞，而雨下得很大，我心想他肯定没有走到前面。
English: At that time, Liu Mingyu did not bring an umbrella, and it was raining heavily. I thought to myself that he definitely did not go to the front.

古文：余与静闻乃暂憩其家，且谋饭于妪，而令人从大道，仍还觅于渡头。
现代文：于是我和静闻暂且停歇在那户人家中，并向家中妇人谋食，而另外叫人从大路仍旧回到渡头去找寻。
English: So I and Jing Huan stopped at that family's house for a while, and got food from the woman of the family, while others were sent from the highway back to Wadu to look for it.

古文：既而其妪以饭出，冷甚。
现代文：旋即那妇人端出饭，但冰冷得很。
English: Immediately the woman brought out food, but it was very cold.

古文：时衣湿体寒，见其家有酒，冀得热飞大白一种酒杯以敌之。
现代文：当时我衣服潮湿身体寒冷，见她家有酒，希望得一小杯温热的酒抵御寒气。
English: At that time, my clothes were damp and my body was cold. Seeing that her family had wine, I hoped to get a small glass of warm wine to resist the cold.

古文：及以酒至，仍不热，乃火酒也。
现代文：等把酒端来，仍然不热，是火酒。
English: When the wine was brought, it was still lukewarm. It was fire wine.

古文：余为浮两瓯，俱留以待追者。
现代文：我满满斟了两贩放着，都是留着等去追刘明宇的人回来喝的。
English: I kept two vendors fully stocked, waiting for those who went to chase Liu Mingyu to come back and drink.

古文：久之，追者至，知刘既渡，即附舟上松柏，且拟更蹑予白坊驿，非速行不及。
现代文：许久后，去追寻的人回来了，得知刘明宇渡过江后，就搭乘船只上松柏去了，并且打算再追踪我到白坊释。
English: After a long time, the person who went to look for me came back. When he learned that Liu Mingyu had crossed the river, he took a boat to Songpao and planned to follow me to Baifang.

古文：乃持盖匍匐，路俱滑塍，屡仆屡起，因令追者先趋松柏要留刘，而余同静闻更相跌，更相诟也。
现代文：不快速行走就来不及在松柏遇上刘明宇了，于是我打着雨伞，竭力往前赶，道路尽是粘滑的田埂，屡屡跌倒又屡屡爬起，因而让追赶的人先疾行到松柏截留住刘明宇，而我和静闻一路上更相跌倒，更相责骂。
English: If I didn't walk fast, I wouldn't have time to meet Liu Mingyu in the pine trees. So I carried an umbrella and tried my best to drive forward. The road was full of slippery rice fields. I fell and got up again and again. So I let the person who was chasing me run to the pine trees to intercept Liu Mingyu, while Jingwen and I fell and scolded each other all the way.

古文：十五里过新桥，桥下乃湘江之支流，从松柏之北分流内地，至香炉对峰仍入于江者。
现代文：走十五里跨过新桥，桥下的水是湘江的支流，它从松柏的北面分流往内地，到香炉山对面的山峰下仍旧汇到湘江中。
English: After walking fifteen miles across the new bridge, the water under the bridge is a tributary of the Xiangjiang River. It branches from the north side of the pine and cypress trees to the inland, and still flows into the Xiangjiang River under the peaks opposite the Incense Burner Mountain.

古文：过桥五里，西逾一岭，又五里，出山坞，则追者同随刘之夫携茶迎余，知刘已相待松柏肆中矣。
现代文：过桥后走五里，往西越过二座山岭，又走五里，出了山坞，便遇到去追赶刘明宇的人和跟随刘明宇一起走的人携带着茶来迎接我们，于是得知刘明宇已经在松柏的一家店中等候着我们了。
English: After crossing the bridge, we walked five miles, crossed two mountains to the west, walked another five miles, and left the dock. We met the person who chased Liu Mingyu and the person who walked with Liu Mingyu to meet us with tea. We learned that Liu Mingyu was already waiting for us in a shop in Songpi.

古文：既见，悲喜交并，亟治餐命酒。
现代文：我们相见后，悲喜交加，赶忙备了餐叫了酒一同饮用。
English: After we met, we were sad and happy at the same time. We hastily prepared a meal and ordered wine to drink together.

古文：刘意犹欲挽予，候所贷物，予固辞之。
现代文：刘明宇的意下还想挽留我，等候他为我借的物品，我再三辞谢。
English: Liu Mingyu still wanted to keep me, waiting for the items he borrowed for me. I thanked him again and again.

古文：时予所附广右舟今晨从此地开去，计穷日之力，当止于常宁河口，明日当止于归阳。
现代文：当时我搭乘的那只到广西的船今天早晨从此地开去，估计尽力全天航行，应当停泊在常宁县河户，明日则应当停在归阳。
English: The ship that I took to Guangxi at that time left here this morning, and it is estimated that it will sail all day as much as possible. It should berth at Hebo, Changning County, and tomorrow it should stop at Guiyang.

古文：从松柏至归阳，陆路止水路之半，竟日可达，而路泞难行，欲从白坊觅骑，非清晨不可得；乃遍觅渔舟，为夜抵白坊计。
现代文：从松柏到归阳，陆路只有水路的一半，走一整夭可以到达，但路途泥泞难行；想从白坊异找一匹马骑着走，却又非清晨而不可觅到；于是到处寻找打渔的船只，作连夜赶到白坊释的打算。
English: From Songpao to Guiyang, the land route is only half of the water route, and it can be reached by walking for a whole day, but the road is muddy and difficult to walk; if you want to find a horse to ride from Baifang, you can't find it until the early morning; so you look for fishing boats everywhere and plan to get to Baifang overnight.

古文：明宇转从肆中借钱百文，厚酬舟人，且欲同至白坊，而舟小不能容，及分手已昏黑矣。
现代文：刘明宇从店中转借一百文钱，厚酬了船夫，并具想一起到白坊骚，但船只小不能容纳侄分手时天已经昏黑了。
English: Liu Mingyu borrowed a hundred yuan from the store, paid the boatman generously, and imagined going to Baifangsao together. However, the boat was too small to accommodate his nephew, and it was already dark when they parted.

古文：二鼓，雨止月出，已抵白坊，有驿。
现代文：两更时分，雨停了，月亮挂上天空，这时已经抵达白坊骚，那里有个骚站。
English: Two hours later, the rain stopped and the moon hung in the sky. By this time, they had arrived at Baifang Sohu, where there is a Sohu station.

古文：余念再夜行三十里可及舟，更许厚酬，令其即行，而舟人欲返守鱼厢，强之不前，余乃坚卧其中。
现代文：我心想再莲夜走三十里就可以赶上所乘的船，便又向船夫许诺给他优厚的报酬，叫他立即往前航行，而那船夫想返回去看守鱼厢，虽强求而不愿再行，我却坚决地躺在船中不下船。
English: I thought to myself that if I walked another thirty miles, I could catch up with the boat I was on. I promised the boatman a generous reward and told him to sail forward immediately. The boatman wanted to return to watch the fish box. Although I begged him not to go any further, I resolutely lay down in the boat and did not get off.

古文：舟人言： 适有二舟泊下流，颇似昨所过松柏官舫。 
现代文：船夫说： 正巧有两条船停泊在下游处，很像昨天从松柏开过去的官船。 
English: The boatman said: It just so happens that there are two boats anchored downstream, much like the government ship that sailed past from Songpao yesterday.

古文：其舟乃广右送李道尊至湘潭者，一为送官兴收典史徐姓者所乘，一即余所附者。第予舟人不敢呼问，余令其刺舟往视之，曰： 中夜何敢近官舫！ 予心以为妄，姑漫呼顾行，三呼而得应声，始知犹待余于此也。
现代文：只是我所在渔船的船夫不敢呼叫询问，我叫他撑船过去看看，他说： 半夜中怎敢靠近官船！  我心中以为他说的这些是虚妄的，姑且随意呼叫了顾行几声，却不想叫三声便听到回声，这才知道船还停在此处等候我。
English: However, the boatman of the fishing boat I was on did not dare to call out for an inquiry. I told him to pull the boat over and take a look, and he said: "How dare you get close to an official ship in the middle of the night! In my heart, I thought that what he said was nonsense, even though I called out several times, I did not want to call out three times and then hear the echo, only then did I know that the boat was still parked here waiting for me.

古文：乃刺舟过舫，而喜可知矣。
现代文：于是叫船夫把渔船撑向前，我们过到所乘的船上，心中的喜悦可想而知了。
English: So he asked the boatman to push the fishing boat forward, and we crossed to the boat we were on, and the joy in our hearts could be imagined.

古文：二十三日昧爽，浓雾迷江，舟曲北行。
现代文：二十三日。拂晓，浓雾弥漫江上，船折往北航行。
English: On the 23rd, at dawn, a thick fog filled the river, and the ship turned north.

古文：二十里，过大鱼塘，见两舟之被劫者，哭声甚哀，舟中杀一人，伤一人垂死。
现代文：行二十里，经过大鱼塘，见两只船被抢劫，被抢劫者的哭声非常哀伤，船中被杀一人，伤着的一人濒临死亡。
English: After traveling twenty miles and passing through a large fish pond, he saw two boats being robbed. The cries of the robbed were very sad. One person was killed on the boat, and the injured person was on the verge of death.

古文：于是，余同行两舫人反谢予曰： 昨不候君而前，亦当至此。至此祸其能免耶！ 
现代文：于是，与我同行的两条船上的人反过来向我道谢，说： 昨天若不等候先生您而往前走，也应当是到达此地二而到此地灾祸岂能避免！ 
English: Then the men in the two boats with me thanked me in turn and said: "If we had not waited for you, sir, and gone ahead yesterday, we would have had to come here twice, and the disaster could not have been avoided!"

古文：始舟子以候予故，为众所诟，至是亦德色焉。
现代文：开初，船夫因为等我的缘故，被众人斥骂，到现在也显现出自以为有恩德于别人的神色来。
English: At the beginning of the trip, the boatman was scolded by everyone because he was waiting for me. Even now, he has a look of someone who thinks he is being kind to others.

古文：上午雾收日丽，下午蒸汗如雨。
现代文：上午雾气散尽日光灿烂，下午太阳烤得人汗如雨下。
English: In the morning, the fog dissipated and the sun shone brightly. In the afternoon, the sun made people sweat profusely.

古文：行共六十里，泊于河洲驿。
现代文：这天行程共六十里，停泊在河洲驿
English: This day's journey was a total of sixty miles, anchored in Hezhou

古文：二十四日昧爽行，已去衡入永矣。
现代文：二十四日拂晓开船，这时已经离开衡州府进入永州府境了。
English: The ship set sail at dawn on the 24th, by which time it had left Hengzhou and entered the territory of Yongzhou.

古文：三十里过大铺，稍折而西行；又十里，折而北行；午热如炙，五里，复转西向焉。自大铺来，江左右复有山，如连冈接阜。
现代文：三十里后过了大铺，稍微折向西行；又行十里，折往北去；中午时热得如火烤，行五里，又折向西氰自大铺以来，江左右又都有山，如连冈接阜。
English: After thirty miles, they passed the Great Pagoda and turned slightly westward; after another ten miles, they turned northward; at noon, when it was hot as fire, they went five miles and turned westward. Since the Great Pagoda, there have been mountains on both sides of the river, such as Liangang and Jifu.

古文：江曲而左，直抵左山，而右为旋坡；江曲而右，且抵右山，而左为回陇，若更相交代者然。
现代文：择流折往左边，直抵左面的山，那么右边就是盘旋的山坡；江流湾向右边，直抵右面的山，那么左边就是曲绕的山陇，如更相交替着的一样。
English: If you turn the stream to the left and go straight to the mountain on the left, then the right is a circling hillside; if you turn the river to the right and go straight to the mountain on the right, then the left is a winding mountain ridge, as if they were alternating.

古文：又二十五里，泊于归阳驿之下河口。
现代文：又行二十五里，停泊在归阳驿的下河口。
English: Another twenty-five miles, anchored in the lower estuary of the Guiyang Canal.

古文：是日共行六十里，竟日皓日如烁，亦不多见也。
现代文：这天共行了六十里。一整天烈日将大地烘烤得如同熔炼金属的炉子一般，这也是不多见的。
English: We covered sixty miles that day, and it is not often that the sun bakes the earth for a whole day like a furnace for melting metal.

古文：二十五日晓日莹然，放舟五里，雨忽至。
现代文：二十五日晓日明丽，但行了五里，雨忽然下起来。
English: At dawn on the 25th, the sun was shining brightly, but five miles into the journey, it suddenly started to rain.

古文：又南三十五里，为河背塘，又西十里，过两山隘口。
现代文：又往南行三十五里，为河背塘，再往西行十里，经过两山间的隘口。
English: Another thirty-five miles to the south, to Hachibei-tang, and another ten miles to the west, through the pass between the two mountains.

古文：又十里，是为白水，有巡司。复远峰四辟，一市中横，为一邑之大聚落云。
现代文：又行十里，为白水，设有巡检司：此地又是远处少峰环绕四周，中问禅着丫个集市；为昙中的一个大村落。
English: Another ten miles away is Baishui, with a police station: this place is also surrounded by small peaks in the distance, with a bazaar in the middle; it is a large village in Handan.

古文：是日共行六十里，晚而后霁，泊于小河口。
现代文：这天共行了六十里，天晚后又晴开，我们的船停泊在小河口。
English: On this day, we traveled a total of sixty miles. It became clear again after nightfall, and our boat anchored at the mouth of a small river.

古文：小河南自山峒来，北入于湘江，小舟溯流入，可两日程，皆祁阳属也。
现代文：小河从南面山桐中流来，往北汇入湘江，小船溯流而入，大约为两天的路程，所经都是祁阳县的辖境。
English: The small river flows from the middle of the southern Mt. Tong, flows north into the Hunan River, and the boat follows the current. It is about a two-day journey, all of which passes through the jurisdiction of Fenyang County.

古文：山峒不一，所出靛、锡、桫木最广，白水市肆，俱倚此为命，不依湘江也。
现代文：山炯不只一个，出产的物品以靛、锡、桫木为最丰富，白水的集市店铺都是依赖这些作为命脉，而不靠湘江中的出产。
English: There is more than one hawthorn, and the goods produced are most abundant in camphor, tin, and camphor wood. The market stores in Baishui rely on these as their lifeblood, rather than on production in the Hunan River.

古文：既泊，上觅戴明凡家，谢其解衣救难之患，而明凡往永不值。
现代文：停泊后，我上岸找到戴明凡家，感谢他在我遇难时解衣相助的恩德，但明凡到永州府城去了，没有遇上。
English: After anchoring, I went ashore to find Deming Fan's family and thanked him for helping me when I was in distress, but he went to the capital of Yongzhou and did not meet me.

古文：二十六日舟人登市神福祀神，祝福，早餐后行。
现代文：二十六日船夫登岸到集市上祀神祝福，早餐后开船。
English: On the 26th, the boatmen went ashore to the market to worship and bless the gods. After breakfast, they set sail.

古文：连过山隘，共三十里，上观音滩。
现代文：接连经过几个山隘，共行三十里，上了观音滩。
English: We went through several mountain passes in succession, covering a total of thirty miles, and reached Guanyin Beach.

古文：风雨大至，舟人泊而享馂ù祭神所剩食物，遂止不行。
现代文：这时风猛刮而雨大下起来，船夫停下船品偿祀神剩下的食物，于是不再往前走。
English: At this time, the wind was blowing hard and it was raining heavily. The boatman stopped the boat to compensate the god for the remaining food, so he did not go any further.

古文：深夜雨止风息，潇潇江上，殊可怀也。
现代文：到深夜雨停了风不再刮，那风雨辛加的江上景象特别令人怀恋。
English: By late evening, the rain had stopped and the wind was no longer blowing. The scene on the river of the wind and rain was particularly nostalgic.

