古文：天道尚左，日月西移；地道尚右，水道东流。人道尚中，耳目役心。
现代文：上天的规律以左为上，所以日月向西移动；大地的规律是以右为上，所以河川向东流动；人事的规律是以中正为上，所以耳目受心役使。
English: The laws of heaven are left-up, so the sun and moon move westward; the laws of the earth are right-up, so rivers flow eastward; the laws of human affairs are right-up, so the eyes and ears are guided by the heart.

古文：心有四佐，不和曰废。地有五行，不通曰恶。天有四时，不时曰凶。
现代文：心内有肝、肺、脾、肾四佐，四佐不和叫废；地上有木、火、土、金、水五行，五行不相生胜叫恶；上天有春、夏、秋、冬四季，季节不合叫凶。
English: There are four organs in the heart: liver, lung, spleen and kidney. If any of the four organs are out of harmony, it is called waste. There are five elements on the earth: wood, fire, earth, gold and water. If any of the five elements are out of harmony, it is called evil. Heaven has four seasons: spring, summer, autumn and winter. If any of the four seasons are out of harmony, it is called bad.

古文：天道曰祥，地道曰义，人道曰礼。
现代文：上天的规律是象，大地的规律是宜，人事的规律是礼。
English: The laws of heaven are like elephants, the laws of the earth are appropriate, and the laws of human affairs are etiquette.

古文：知祥则寿，知义则立，知礼则行。
现代文：知天象则长寿，知义则立身，知礼仪则事行。
English: Knowledge of celestial phenomena leads to a long life, knowledge of righteousness leads to a good standing, and knowledge of etiquette leads to good deeds.

古文：礼义顺祥曰吉。
现代文：礼、义顺应天象叫专。
English: Reverence, righteousness, and obedience are in accordance with the call of the celestial elephant.

古文：吉礼左还，顺天以利本。武礼右还，顺地以利兵。将居中军，顺人以利阵。
现代文：吉礼从左向右旋转，顺应天道以利国本；武礼从右向左旋转，顺应大地以利于用兵；将帅居中军，顺应人事以利于布阵。
English: The auspicious rites rotate from left to right, conforming to the heavenly way to benefit the country; the martial rites rotate from right to left, conforming to the earth to benefit the soldiers; the general is in the middle of the army, conforming to the personnel to benefit the formation.

古文：人有中，曰参，无中曰两，两争曰弱，参和曰强。
现代文：人体有中的叫三，无中的叫两。两相争故力弱，三相和故力强。
English: In the human body, the middle of something is called three, and the middle of nothing is called two. The two phases are weak, and the three phases are strong.

古文：男生而成三，女生而成两。
现代文：男人生来就成三，女人生来就成两。
English: Men are born in threes, women in twos.

古文：五以成室，室成以生民，民生以度。
现代文：三二为五就成家室，家室成就生人，人生下来就有定数。
English: Thirty-two to five is a family, a family is a lifetime, and a lifetime is a fixed number.

古文：左右手各握五，左右足各履五，曰四枝，元首曰末。
现代文：左右手各握五，左右足各踩五，叫四肢。头叫做末。
English: The right and left hands each hold five, the left and right feet each step on five, called the limbs. The head is called the tail.

古文：五五二十五，曰元卒。
现代文：五五二十五个兵叫一元卒。
English: Fifty-five and twenty-five soldiers make one soldier.

古文：一卒居前曰开，一卒居后曰敦。
现代文：一元卒居前的阵式叫开，一元卒居后的阵式叫敦。
English: The formation in front of the one-dollar pawn is called open, and the formation behind the one-dollar pawn is called down.

古文：左右一卒曰闾，四卒成卫曰伯。
现代文：左右各一元卒的阵式叫闾，四元卒成围的阵式叫伯。
English: The formation of one pawn on each side is called a pawn, and the formation of four pawns is called a pawn.

古文：三伯一长曰佐，三佐一长曰右。三右一长曰正，三正一长曰卿。三卿一长曰辟。
现代文：每三伯立一长叫佐，每三佐立一长叫右，每三右立一长叫正，每三正立一长叫卿，三卿立一长叫辟。
English: For every three pillars, one long is called Zu, for every three pillars, one long is called Zuo, for every three right pillars, one long is called Zheng, for every three right pillars, one long is called Jian, for every three right pillars, one long is called Bei.

古文：辟必明，卿必仁，正必知，右必和，伯必勤，卒必力。
现代文：人君一定要英明，卿一定要仁慈，正一定要聪慧，右一定要严肃，佐一定要平和，伯一定要勤劳，士卒一定要尽力。
English: A gentleman must be wise, a gentleman must be kind, a just man must be intelligent, a just man must be serious, a statesman must be peaceful, a stateswoman must be diligent, and a statesman must do his best.

古文：辟不明，无以虑官；卿不仁，无以集众；伯不勤，无以行令；卒不力，无以承训。
现代文：入君不英明，就不能选用下级官吏；卿不仁慈，就不能聚集众人；正不聪慧，就不能口口口口；右不严肃，就不能口口口口；佐不平和，就不能口口口口；伯不勤劳，就不能执行命令；卒不尽力，就不能接受训导。
English: If the prince is not wise, he cannot choose the lower-ranking officials; if the lord is not kind, he cannot gather the people; if he is not wise, he cannot speak; if he is not serious, he cannot speak; if he is not peaceful, he cannot speak; if he is not diligent, he cannot execute orders; if he is not diligent, he cannot receive training.

古文：均卒力，貌而无比，不则不顺。均伯勤，劳而无携，携则不和。均佐肃静而无留，留则无成。均右和恭而无羞，羞则不兴。
现代文：士卒尽力等同而无背违，背违则不顺从；伯勤劳等同心，离心则不和睦；佐温和一贯而不怠慢，怠慢则没有成功；右严肃一致而不辱人，辱人则人不奋发。
English: The officials try their best to be equal without being disloyal, and if they are disloyal, they do not obey; if they are diligent, they are of the same mind, and if they are not of the same mind, they are not harmonious; if they are moderate and consistent, they are not negligent, and if they are negligent, they are not successful; if they are serious and consistent, they do not humiliate others, and if they humiliate others, they do not work hard.

古文：辟必文圣如度。元忠尚让，亲均惠下，集固介德。
现代文：君王必有文德，神圣如法度，高度诚信而崇尚谦让，待人一致而惠爱下人，就能安集固守大德。
English: A monarch must be virtuous, sacred as the rule of law, highly honest while advocating modesty, treat others with unity while favoring subordinates, and be able to firmly adhere to great virtue.

古文：危言不干德，曰正。正及神人曰极世，世能极曰帝。
现代文：厉言而不伤德叫正，正兼及神和人叫极，世世代代能极叫帝。
English: Strict speech that does not hurt virtue is called righteous, and righteous speech that does not offend God and man is called extreme, and it can be called divine from generation to generation.

