古文：敌以东方来，迎之东坛，坛高八尺，堂密八；年八十者八人，主祭；青旗、青神长八尺者八，弩八，八发而止；将服必青，其牲以鸡。
现代文：译文敌人从东方来，就在东方的祭坛上迎祭神灵，坛高八尺，宽深也各八尺；由八个年龄八十岁的人主持祭青旗的仪式，安排八尺高的八位东方神，八个弓箭手，每个弓箭手射出八支箭；将领的服装必是青色，用鸡作祭品。
English: Translation: When the enemy comes from the east, he greets the deities on the eastern altar. The altar is eight feet high and eight feet wide and deep. Eight people of eighty years of age preside over the ceremony of sacrificing the blue flag. They arrange eight oriental gods eight feet high, eight archers, and each archer shoots eight arrows. The general's clothing must be blue, and chicken is used as a sacrifice.

古文：敌以南方来，迎之南坛，坛高七尺，堂密七；年七十者七人，主祭；赤旗、赤神长七尺者七，弩七，七发而止；将服必赤，其牲以狗。
现代文：敌人从南方来，就在南方的祭坛上迎祀神灵，坛高七尺，宽深也各六尺；安排七个年龄七十的人主持祭赤旗的仪式；准备七尺高的南方赤神七尊，弓箭手七个，每人发射七支箭；将领的军服一定要赤色，用狗作祭品。
English: When the enemy came from the south, they greeted the deities on the altar in the south. The altar was seven feet high and six feet wide and deep. They arranged for seven people in their seventies to preside over the red flag ceremony. They prepared seven seven-foot-tall statues of the Southern Red God and seven archers, each of whom fired seven arrows. The generals' uniforms had to be red, and dogs were used as sacrifices.

古文：敌以西方来，迎之西坛，坛高九尺，堂密九；年九十者九人，主祭；白旗、素神长九尺者九，弩九，九发而止；将服必白，其牲以羊。
现代文：敌人从西方来，就在西边的祭坛迎祭神坛高九尺，宽深也各为九尺；九个年龄九十岁的人主持祭白旗的仪式；九尺高的西方白神九尊，九个弓箭手每人发射九支箭；将领的军服一定要白色的，用羊作祭品。
English: If the enemy comes from the west, the altar on the west will welcome him. The altar is nine feet high and nine feet wide and deep. Nine people over the age of ninety preside over the ceremony of sacrificing a white flag. There are nine statues of the Western White God, each nine feet tall. Nine archers fire nine arrows each. The military uniforms of the generals must be white, and sheep are used as sacrifices.

古文：敌以北方来，迎之北坛，坛高六尺，堂密六；年六十者六人，主祭；墨旗、黑神长六尺者六，弩六，六发而止；将服必黑，其牲以彘。
现代文：敌人从北方来，就在北方的祭坛上迎祭神灵，祭坛高六尺，宽深各为六尺；由六位年龄六十岁的人主持祭黑旗的仪式；高六尺的北方黑神六尊，六个弓箭手每人各发六支箭；将领的军服一律黑色，用猪作祭品。
English: When the enemy comes from the north, he greets the sacrificial deities on the north altar. The altar is six feet high, six feet wide and six feet deep. Six people over the age of sixty preside over the ceremony of sacrificing the black flag. There are six statues of the six-foot-tall northern black god, and six archers fire six arrows each. The military uniforms of the generals are all black, and pigs are used as sacrifices.

古文：从外宅诸名大祠，灵巫或祷焉，给祷牲。
现代文：从外面所有有名的大祠堂起，灵验的巫师有的在那里祈祷神灵，要供给他们祭品。
English: Out of all the great and famous shrines, some of the wisest wizards pray to the gods and offer sacrifices to them.

古文：凡望气，有大将气，有小将气，有往气，有来气，有败气，能得明此者可知成败、吉凶。
现代文：凡占望气，有大将气，有小将气，有往气，来气、败气等种类区别，能懂得这些 气 别内容的人可预知成功、失败，吉利和凶险。
English: Anyone who can understand the differences between the types of qi, such as the qi of hope, the qi of a great general, the qi of a small general, the qi of the past, the qi of the future, and the qi of defeat, can predict success, failure, good luck, and danger.

古文：举巫、医、卜有所长，具药，宫之，善为舍。
现代文：找出所有有专长的巫师、医师和占卜的人，根据他们的特长，配备有关药物，供给住房，妥善安排宿住。
English: Identify all qualified wizards, doctors and diviners, and according to their specialities, equip them with relevant drugs, provide housing, and properly arrange accommodation.

古文：巫必近公社，必敬神之。
现代文：巫师住的地方一定要靠近祭土地神的地方，一定要将其作为神灵来敬重。
English: The place where the sorcerer lives must be close to the place where the land god is worshipped, and it must be revered as a deity.

古文：巫、卜以请守，守独智巫、卜望气之请而已。其出入为流言，惊骇恐吏民，谨微察之，断罪不赦。
现代文：巫师和卜师将实情报告给守将，只能让守城主将知道其占望的结果，不要让其他人知道；如果巫师卜师出入制造传播流言，弄得官民惊恐不安，要谨慎地暗中侦察，处罚这些传言的巫师卜师，罪不容赦。
English: Wizards and sorcerers will report the truth to the keepers, only let the keepers know the results of their expectations, do not let others know; if sorcerers and sorcerers go in and out to create and spread rumors, causing officials and the public to be alarmed and uneasy, it is necessary to discreetly investigate and punish the sorcerers and sorcerers who spread these rumors, the crime is unforgivable.

古文：牧贤大夫及有方技者若工，弟之。
现代文：将贤大夫和有专长的种种技师集中起来，给予相应的第等。
English: The wise doctors and all kinds of technicians with expertise will be concentrated and given the corresponding rank.

古文：举屠、酤者置厨给事，弟之。
现代文：挑选屠夫，酿酒人安排到厨房供职，也要给予职务等级。
English: Butchers are selected, brewers are assigned to work in the kitchen, and job grades are given.

古文：凡守城之法，县师受事，出葆，循沟防，筑荐通涂，修城，百官共财，百工即事，司马视城修卒伍。
现代文：一般守城的法规，县师负责视察堡垒，巡视河沟城防，阻塞敌人的道路，修缮城墙。所有大小官吏要供应战争所需的粮饷钱款，一切有手艺的人都要各施所长。
English: According to the regulations for the general defense of the city, the county division is responsible for inspecting the fortress, inspecting the ditch city defense, blocking the enemy's road, and repairing the city wall. All officials of all sizes must supply the grain and money needed for the war, and all craftsmen must do their best.

古文：设守门，二人掌右阉，二人掌左阉，四人掌闭，百甲坐之。
现代文：司马根据城防情况布派兵士守门，二人掌管城门右边门扇，二人掌左边门扇，四人共同掌管开关城门的职责，百名兵士带甲坐守城门。
English: Sima assigned soldiers to guard the gate according to the situation of the city defense. Two of them were in charge of the right door of the city gate, two of them were in charge of the left door, four of them were jointly in charge of the duties of opening and closing the city gate, and one hundred soldiers with armor guarded the city gate.

古文：城上步一甲、一戟，其赞三人。
现代文：城墙上每一步派一个带甲的兵士，一个握戟的兵士，另加三个帮手。
English: At each step on the wall, he sent an armored soldier, a soldier with a halberd, and three helpers.

古文：五步有五长，十步有什长，百步有百长，旁有大率，中有大将，皆有司吏卒长。
现代文：每五步派备一个伍长，每十步安排一名什长，百步委任一名佰长。在城的四面，分别派有一个大帅；城的中央有大将指挥。
English: A corporal is assigned every five paces, a sergeant major is assigned every ten paces, and a sergeant major is assigned every hundred paces. On the four sides of the city, there is a grand marshal; in the center of the city, there is a grand marshal.

古文：城上当阶，有司守之。
现代文：这样逐级都有首领和各自的职责。
English: In this way, there are leaders and their respective responsibilities at each level.

古文：移中中处，泽急而奏之。
现代文：在上城墙的阶梯处，派专职官兵把守。
English: At the steps of the upper city wall, full-time officers and soldiers were sent to guard.

古文：士皆有职。城之外，矢之所遝，坏其墙，无以为客菌。
现代文：将文书簿籍转移到合适的地方，选取紧急重要的部分上报。
English: Transfer the paperwork book to a suitable place, and select the urgent and important parts to report.

古文：三十里之内，薪蒸、水皆入内。狗、彘、豚、鸡食其肉，敛其骸以为醢，腹病者以起。
现代文：军士也都有各自的职守。在城外箭能射到的地方，要把墙统统推倒，以免被敌人利用来作为防御工事。三十里以内，所有柴草树木一律运进城内。狗，猪，鸡，吃掉肉，将其骨头收集起来制成酱，肠胃有病的可以用它治病。
English: The sergeants also have their own duties. Outside the city, where arrows can be shot, all the walls should be knocked down, so as not to be used by the enemy as fortifications. Within thirty miles, all firewood trees are transported into the city. Dogs, pigs, chickens, eat meat, collect their bones to make sauce, and those with gastrointestinal diseases can use it to cure diseases.

古文：城之内，薪蒸庐室，矢之所遝，皆为之涂菌。令命昏纬狗纂马，■纬。
现代文：在城内，凡是城外箭能射到的地方，一切柴草堆和房屋都要抹上一层泥。黄昏之后，命令城内人拴住狗，套住马，务必拴套牢实。
English: In the city, wherever an arrow can be shot from outside the city, all piles of firewood and houses must be covered with a layer of mud. After dusk, people in the city are ordered to tie their dogs and horses. Be sure to tie them firmly.

古文：静夜闻鼓声而噪，所以阉客之气也，所以固民之意也，故时噪则民不疾矣。
现代文：夜深人静之时一听到鼓声就一齐呐喊，用来压制敌人的气焰，同时也可以稳定自己的民心，不致使老百姓惊扰不安了。
English: In the dead of night, as soon as they hear the drums, they shout together, which is used to suppress the enemy's arrogance, but also to stabilize their own people's hearts, so as not to disturb the people.

古文：祝、史乃告于四望、山川、社稷，先于戎，乃退。
现代文：太祝和太史官在战前要祭告四周的山川和宗庙，然后才退出。
English: Before the war, the Tai Zhu and the Tai Shih Guan had to preach to the surrounding mountains, rivers and ancestral temples before withdrawing.

古文：公素服誓于太庙，曰： 其人为不道，不修义详，唯乃是王，曰： 予必怀亡尔社稷，灭尔百姓。 
现代文：诸侯穿着白祭服在太庙誓师。誓词说： 某人干不合道义的事情，不修仁义，唯力是尚，还声言 我一定要灭掉你的国家，消灭你的百姓万民 。
English: Princes and lords, dressed in white ceremonial robes, took an oath at the Great Temple. The oath said: "If someone does things that are immoral, does not practice benevolence and righteousness, and claims to be virtuous, I will definitely destroy your country and exterminate all your people."

古文：二参子尚夜自厦，以勤寡人，和心比力兼左右，各死而守。 
现代文：我的几位大臣尚自我勉励，勤力辅助我，率领左右部下齐心协力，誓死保守国土。 
English: Several of my ministers are still exerting themselves, diligently assisting me, and leading their subordinates to work together to preserve the country.

古文：既誓，公乃退食。
现代文：誓师结束，诸侯才退下用餐。
English: The oath ceremony is over, and the lords have just retired for dinner.

古文：舍于中太庙之右，祝、史舍于社。
现代文：他临时要住在中太庙的右边房舍中，太祝和太史临时住在社庙。
English: He will temporarily live in the building on the right side of the Middle Taimiao, while Taizhong and Taishi will temporarily live in the Shemiao.

古文：百官具御，乃斗，鼓于门，右置旗，左置旌于隅练名。射参发，告胜，五兵咸备，乃下，出挨，升望我郊。
现代文：其它百官各奉其职，于是上庙，在庙门击鼓，门的右边插上旗，左边插上旌，门的左右角布置铭识，兵士们发射三箭，祈祷胜利，各军兵都一应齐备。仪式结束后下太庙，出外等候登上城门台观望城郊情景。
English: The other hundred officials each performed their duties, so they went to the temple, played drums at the temple gate, planted a flag on the right side of the gate, planted a crossbow on the left side, placed memorials on the left and right corners of the gate, the soldiers fired three arrows, prayed for victory, and all the soldiers were ready. After the ceremony, they went down to the temple and waited outside to go up to the city gate to watch the suburbs.

古文：乃命鼓，俄升，役司马射自门右，蓬矢射之，茅参发，弓弩继之；校自门左，先以挥，木石继之。
现代文：接着命令击鼓，一会儿登上门台，役司马从门的右边向天地四方发射用蓬蒿制成的箭，拿矛的兵士则用矛向空中刺三下，接着弓箭手向空发射；军校从门的左边先进行一种叫 挥 的制胜巫术，然后木头擂石齐下。
English: He then gave the order to beat the drums, and after a while he climbed onto the gate platform, and from the right side of the gate, the steed fired arrows made of pompons to the four corners of the world. The soldier with the spear stabbed three times into the air with the spear, and then the archer fired into the air. From the left side of the gate, the military school first performed a kind of so-called victory magic, and then the wood and stone came down.

古文：祝、史、宗人告社，覆之以甑。
现代文：太祝、太史，礼官向社庙祭告，然后把祭品用作饭的陶器甑盖起来。
English: Too congratulatory, too historical, the etiquette officer announced to the shrine and temple, and then covered up the pottery bowl that was used as a meal.

