古文：献公田，见翟柤之氛，归寝不寐。
现代文：晋献公打猎时，看见翟柤国上空弥漫着凶气，回来后睡不好觉。
English: When Jin Xian Gong was hunting, he saw that the sky over Shandong Province was filled with evil, and he couldn't sleep well after returning.

古文：郤叔虎朝，公语之。
现代文：郤叔虎上朝时，献公告诉他这件事。
English: When Uncle Zhai Hu ascended to the throne, Xian Gong told him about this.

古文：对曰： 床笫之不安邪？
现代文：郤叔虎问： 是因为床铺不安适呢？
English: Uncle Zou asked: Is it because the bed is uncomfortable?

古文：抑骊姬之不存侧邪？ 
现代文：还是因为骊姬不在身旁呢？ 
English: Or is it because she's not around?

古文：公辞焉。
现代文：献公没作回答。
English: Dedication did not reply.

古文：出遇士，曰： 今夕君寝不寐，必为翟柤也。
现代文：郤叔虎退朝出来遇见士，说： 今晚国君睡不好觉，一定是为翟柤国。
English: Xing Shuguo came out of retirement to meet Shi Yao and said, "Tonight, Guo Jun is not sleeping well, it must be because of Xing Guo.

古文：夫翟柤之君，好专利而不忌，其臣竞谄以求媚，其进者壅塞，其退者拒违。
现代文：那翟柤国的国君喜欢独占利益而且毫不顾忌，他的臣下争相拍马屁以求讨好他。那些升官的都是堵塞国君视听的小人，那些遭到排斥的都是进逆耳之言的忠臣。
English: The sovereign of that country likes to monopolize profits and has no scruples. His vassals vie for flattery in order to please him. Those who are promoted are the villains who block the sovereign's audio-visual, and those who are rejected are the loyalists who say things that go against the grain.

古文：其上贪以忍，其下偷以幸，有纵君而无谏臣，有冒上而无忠下。
现代文：这国君贪婪而不义，臣下则苟且以求侥幸，有放纵的国君而没有直言极谏的臣子，有贪婪的上层而没有忠心耿耿的下属。
English: The prince is greedy and unjust, the vassals are greedy for luck, there is an indulgent prince but no outspoken vassal, there is a greedy upper class but no loyal subordinate.

古文：君臣上下各餍其私，以纵其回，民各有心而无所据依。
现代文：君臣上下各自满足一己的私欲，放纵他们的邪恶，民众各有自己的想法而无所以靠。
English: Princes and courtiers satisfy their own selfish desires and indulge their evil, and the people have their own ideas and have nothing to rely on.

古文：以是处国，不亦难乎！
现代文：像这样治国，不也很困难吗？
English: Isn't it difficult to govern a country like this?

古文：君若伐之，可克也。
现代文：晋君如要征伐它，准能成功。
English: If Jinjun wants to conquer it, he is sure to succeed.

古文：吾不言，子必言之。 
现代文：这些话我不说，你一定要向晋君说。 
English: I won't say these things, but you must say them to Jin.

古文：士以告，公悦，乃伐翟柤。
现代文：士把这事告诉了献公，献公很高兴，于是出兵征伐翟柤国。
English: Shi Yan told this to Duan Gong, Duan Gong was very happy, so he sent troops to conquer Duan.

古文：郤叔虎将乘城，其徒曰： 弃政而役，非其任也。 
现代文：郤叔虎准备登上城墙杀敌，他的部下说： 丢下政务去作战，这不是你的职责啊。 
English: When Uncle Zhai prepared to climb the city wall to kill the enemy, his subordinates said, "Leave the government affairs and go to battle. This is not your duty."

古文：郤叔虎曰： 既无老谋，而又无壮事，何以事君？ 
现代文：郤叔虎答道： 我既没有谋略，又不去出力，凭什么事奉国君呢？ 
English: Uncle Zou replied, "I neither have a strategy nor do I exert myself, so why should I serve the sovereign?"

古文：被羽先升，遂克之。
现代文：于是披着鸟羽率先爬上城墙，打败了翟柤国。
English: As a result, he took the lead in climbing up the city wall, wearing bird feathers, and defeated Min Guo.

