古文：献书秦王曰： 昔窃闻大王之谋出事于梁，谋恐不出于计矣，愿大王之熟计之也。
现代文：有人上书给秦昭王说： 我听说大王谋划出兵魏国，这个计划恐怕不妥当，希望大王慎重考虑一下。
English: Someone sent a letter to Qin Zhao Wang saying: I heard that the great king planned to send troops to Wei. I am afraid that this plan is not appropriate. I hope the great king will carefully consider it.

古文：梁者，山东之要也。
现代文：魏国犹如山东六国的腰部。
English: The state of Wei is like the waist of the six states of Shandong.

古文：有虵于此，击其尾，其首救；击其首，其尾救；击其中身，首尾皆救。
现代文：譬如这里有一条蛇，你打它的尾，它的头就会来救护；你打它的头，它的尾巴就会来救护；打击它的腰部，首尾都会来救护。
English: For example, there is a snake here. If you hit its tail, its head will come to the rescue; if you hit its head, its tail will come to the rescue; if you hit its waist, its head and tail will come to the rescue.

古文：今梁王，天下之中身也。
现代文：现在的魏国就好比是天下诸侯的腰身。
English: The present state of Wei is like the waist of all the princes in the world.

古文：秦攻梁者，是示天下要断山东之脊也，是山东首尾皆救中身之时也。
现代文：秦国要攻打魏国，就是向天下人显示要腰斩山东六国的脊梁，这显然也将造成山东六国 首尾皆救腰身 的局面。
English: If Qin wanted to attack Wei, it would show the world that it wanted to cut off the backbone of the Six Kingdoms of Shandong. Obviously, this would also create a situation in which the Six Kingdoms of Shandong would all save their own necks.

古文：山东见亡必恐，恐必大合，山东尚强，臣见秦之必大忧可立而待也。臣窃为大王计，不如南出。
现代文：山东六国必定害怕被消灭，只要一害怕，必定广泛联合在一起。六国的力量还很强大，我看秦国一定很快就要遭受巨大的忧患了。我私下替大王考虑，不如向南方出兵。
English: The six kingdoms of Shandong must be afraid of being wiped out, and as long as they are afraid, they must unite widely. The power of the six countries is still very strong, and I think that Qin will soon suffer great sorrow. I privately consider for the great king, it is better to send troops to the south.

古文：事于南方，其兵弱，天下必能救，地可广大，国可富，兵可强，主可尊。
现代文：矛头对准楚国，楚国兵力弱，诸侯必定不能相救。这样，秦国的领土就可以扩大，国家能够富足，兵力会加强，君王也能受到天下人的尊崇。
English: The spearhead is aimed at the State of Chu, the military strength of the State of Chu is weak, and the princes must not be able to save themselves. In this way, the territory of the State of Qin can be expanded, the country can be enriched, the military strength will be strengthened, and the monarch can also be respected by the people of the world.

古文：王不闻汤之伐桀乎?
现代文：大王听说过商汤讨伐夏桀的事吗?
English: Did the great king ever hear of Shang Tang's campaign to destroy Xia Yong?

古文：试之弱密须氏以为武教，得密须氏而汤之服桀矣。
现代文：他先对弱小的密须国用兵，以此训练和整顿自己的军事力量，等攻下密须国以后，商汤认为可以征服夏桀了。
English: He first used troops against the weak state of Misu to train and reorganize his military forces. After conquering Misu, Shang Tang thought that he could conquer Xia Yao.

古文：今秦国与山东为雠，不先以弱为武教，兵必大挫，国必大忧。 
现代文：现在秦国与山东六国为敌，如果不以弱国来训练战斗力量，那么军队必将遭受严重挫伤，国家必定面临更大的忧患。 
English: At present, Qin and the six Shandong provinces are enemies. If the weak countries are not used to train the combat forces, then the army will surely suffer serious setbacks, and the country will certainly face greater troubles.

古文：秦果南攻兰田、鄢、郢。
现代文：秦兵果然取道兰田，攻打楚国鄢、郢二城。
English: The Qin soldiers successfully took the Lantian Road and attacked the two cities of Chu Guo and Shu.

