古文：陈俊卿，字应求，兴化人。
现代文：陈俊卿字应求，兴化人。
English: Chen Junqing's name is in demand, and he is a reformer.

古文：幼庄重，不妄言笑。
现代文：幼年时严肃持重，不苟言笑。
English: When he was a child, he was serious and never smiled.

古文：父死，执丧如成人。
现代文：其父亲死时，他像成年人一样主办丧事。
English: When his father died, he handled the funeral like an adult.

古文：绍兴八年，登进士第，授泉州观察推官。
现代文：绍兴八年，陈俊卿考中进士，被授予泉州观察推官之职。
English: In the eighth year of Shaoxing, Chen Junqing passed the junior high school entrance examination and was awarded the post of Quanzhou observation officer.

古文：服勤职业，同僚宴集，恒谢不往。
现代文：他任职期间，兢兢业业，同僚们召集宴会，他总是婉言谢绝。
English: During his tenure, conscientious, colleagues convened a banquet, he always politely declined.

古文：一日，郡中失火，守汪藻走视之，诸掾属方饮某所，俊卿舆卒亦假之行，于是例以后至被诘，俊卿唯唯摧谢。
现代文：一天，郡中失火，郡守汪藻前来巡视，各级官吏正在某个地方饮酒作乐，陈俊卿把自己的轿夫借给别人，于是他自己像以往一样由于迟到而被诘问，陈俊卿只有深表歉意。
English: One day, there was a fire in the county, the county governor Wang Cao came to inspect, officials at all levels were drinking and having fun somewhere, Chen Junqing lent his sedan to others, so he himself was interrogated as usual for being late, Chen Junqing only deeply apologized.

古文：已而知其实，问故，俊卿曰： 某不能止同僚之行，又资其仆，安得为无过。
现代文：不久人们知道实情，问其原因，他说 ：我不能阻止同僚们的行为，又借给他们仆人，怎么能说没有过错。
English: People soon found out the truth and asked why. He said: "I can't stop my colleagues from doing what they're doing. I lent them my servants. How can I say I'm not at fault?"

古文：时公方盛怒，其忍幸自解，重人之罪乎？ 藻叹服，以为不可及。
现代文：当时汪公正在气头上，他能容忍我为自己开脱，而加重别人的罪过吗？ 汪藻很佩服陈俊卿，认为自己比不上他。
English: At that time, Wang Gong was angry. Could he tolerate me justifying myself and aggravating the sins of others? Wang Cao admired Chen Junqing very much and thought that he was no match for him.

古文：秩满，秦桧当国，察其不附已，以为南外睦宗院教授。
现代文：陈俊卿任职期满，正遇秦桧当权，秦桧看他不依附自己，派他任南外睦宗院教授。
English: When Chen Junqing's term of office expired, he was confronted with Qin Hui in power. Seeing that he was not dependent on him, Qin Hui sent him to serve as a professor at the Southern Gaimu Academy.

古文：寻添通判南剑州，未上而桧死，乃以校书郎召。
现代文：不久陈俊卿被加职南剑州通判，未上任秦桧就死了，于是陈俊卿以校书郎之职被召回。
English: Soon after, Chen Junqing was promoted to the post of South Jianzhou magistrate, but he died before taking up the post of Qin Hui, so Chen Junqing was recalled to the post of school librarian.

古文：孝宗时为普安郡王，高宗命择端厚静重者辅导之，除著作佐郎兼王府教授。
现代文：孝宗当时为普安郡王，高宗命令选择敦厚、稳重的人辅助他，陈俊卿被拜官为著作郎兼王府教授。
English: At that time, Xiaozong was the king of Pu'an County, Gaozong ordered to choose a strong and stable person to assist him, and Chen Junqing was appointed as a scholar and professor of the royal court.

古文：讲经辄寓规戒，正色特立。
现代文：陈俊卿讲经，严肃地站立着。
English: Chen Junqing stands solemnly as he delivers a sermon.

古文：王好鞠戏，因诵韩愈谏张建封书以讽，王敬纳之。
现代文：郡王喜欢蹴鞠游戏，陈俊卿就朗读韩愈劝谏张建封的信劝谏他，郡王恭敬地听取了他的劝告。
English: The county king liked the game of kemari. Chen Junqing read aloud Han Yu's letter of advice to Zhang Jianfeng and advised him. The county king respectfully listened to his advice.

古文：累迁监察御史、殿中侍御史。
现代文：陈俊卿历迁监察御史、殿中侍御史。
English: The history of Chen Junqing's supervision of the relocation and the history of his attendance in the palace.

古文：首言： 人主以兼听为美，必本至公；人臣以不欺为忠，必达大体。
现代文：首次上奏他就说： 君主以兼听为美德，必然从根本上处事公正；人臣以不欺骗君主为忠诚，必然对大事通达。
English: The first time he played it, he said: "A monarch with the virtue of being able to listen to both sides of an argument is bound to be fundamentally fair; a courtier with the virtue of not deceiving the monarch is bound to be well-versed in important matters."

古文：御下之道，恩威并施，抑骄将，作士气，则纪纲正而号令行矣。 遂劾韩仲通本以狱事附桧，冤陷无辜，桧党尽逐而仲通独全；刘宝总戎京口，恣掊克，且拒命不分戍；二人遂抵罪。
现代文：驾驭下属的办法，应该是恩威并施，抑制骄将，振作士气，那么纲纪端正而号令得以通行。 于是陈俊卿弹劾韩仲通本来以狱事附会秦桧，冤陷无辜，秦桧的私党已全部被逐出，而韩仲通单单被保留；刘宝总领京口，任意殴打、克扣士兵，并抗拒命令不分兵戍防。这二个人于是各当其罪。
English: Therefore, Chen Junqing impeached Han Zhongtong, who had originally been sentenced to prison by Qin Hui, and was found innocent. Qin Hui's private party had all been expelled, but Han Zhongtong alone was retained; Liu Bao, the commander of Beijing, arbitrarily beat and maltreated soldiers, and resisted orders to split the army. These two people were then blamed for their own crimes.

古文：汤思退专政，俊卿曰： 冬日无云而雷，宰相上不当天心，下不厌人望。 诏罢思退。
现代文：汤思退专权，陈俊卿说： 冬天没云而雷鸣，这是指责宰相上不合天意，下不满足人们的愿望。 皇上诏令罢免汤思退。
English: Chen Junqing said: "In winter, there is no cloud but thunder, which is to accuse the prime minister of not conforming to God's will and not satisfying people's wishes.

古文：时灾异数见，金人侵轶之势已形。
现代文：当时灾祸的异象多次显现，金人入侵之势态已很明显。
English: At that time, the vision of the calamity appeared many times, and the trend of the invasion of the Jin people was already obvious.

古文：俊卿乃疏言： 张浚忠荩，白首不渝，窃闻谗言其阴有异志。
现代文：陈俊卿于是上疏说 ：张浚忠心耿耿，到老都不会改变，我听说有谗言讲他心存异心。
English: Chen Junqing then said to Shang Zuo: Zhang Jun is very loyal and will not change until he is old. I have heard that there are rumors that he has other intentions.

古文：夫浚之得人心、伏士论，为其忠义有素。
现代文：张浚之所以得人心，为舆论所推崇，是因为他一向忠诚、正义。
English: The reason why Zhang Jun is popular and respected by the public is because he has always been loyal and just.

古文：反是，则人将去之，谁复与为变乎？ 疏入，未报，因请对，力言之，上始悟。
现代文：相反，如果人们将他赶走，谁又能应付变乱呢？ 陈俊卿的奏疏呈上后，未得到回音，于是请求进宫对话，对皇上竭力劝说，皇上开始醒悟。
English: On the contrary, if people drive him away, who can cope with the turmoil? After Chen Junqing's report was submitted, he did not receive a reply, so he requested to enter the palace for dialogue and tried his best to persuade the emperor. The emperor began to wake up.

古文：数月，以浚守建康。
现代文：几个月后，皇上派张浚守卫建康。
English: A few months later, the emperor sent Zhang Jun to guard Jiankang.

古文：又言： 内侍张去为阴沮用兵，且陈避敌计，摇成算，请按军法。 上曰： 卿可谓仁者之勇。 除权兵部侍郎。
现代文：陈俊卿又说： 内侍张去为暗中阻止出兵，并陈述躲避敌人的计谋，动摇已定下的计划，请按军法论处。 皇上对陈俊卿说 ：你可以说是仁者中的勇敢者。 陈俊卿被任命为兵部侍郎。
English: Chen Junqing also said, "In order to secretly prevent the dispatch of troops, and to present a strategy to evade the enemy, and to shake up the plan that has been set, please be dealt with according to military law." The emperor said to Chen Junqing, "You can say that you are a brave man among the benevolent." Chen Junqing was appointed as a military servant.

古文：金主亮渡淮，俊卿受诏整浙西水军，李宝因之遂有胶西之捷。
现代文：金主完颜亮渡过淮河，陈俊卿受命整顿浙西水军，李宝凭借水军的力量因而夺得了胶西之捷。
English: The gold master crossed the Huaihe River with flying colors, Chen Junqing was ordered to rectify the Western Zhejiang Navy, and Li Bao won the Jiaoxi Victory by virtue of the strength of the navy.

古文：亮死，诏俊卿治淮东堡砦屯田，所过安辑流亡。
现代文：完颜亮死后，皇上诏令陈俊卿治理淮东堡砦的屯田，并对所过之处的流民加以安抚。
English: After the death of Guan Yanliang, the emperor ordered Chen Junqing to govern the military camps of Huai Dong Fort and to pacify the displaced people wherever he passed.

古文：金主褒新立，申旧好，廷臣多附和议。
现代文：金主完颜褒刚即位，重申过去与宋的友好，廷臣多附会和议之意见。
English: After the emperor ascended to the throne, he reiterated the past friendship with Song, and the courtiers mostly supported the opinions of the meeting.

古文：俊卿奏： 和戎本非得已，若以得故疆为实利，得之未必能守，是亦虚文而已。
现代文：陈俊卿上奏说： 和议，本来是不得已之事，如果以得到过去的疆土为实利，那么得到了未必能守住，这也只是一纸虚文而已。
English: Chen Junqing said in his report: The peace proposal was originally a matter of last resort. If the past territory was obtained as a tangible benefit, then it may not be possible to keep it, which is just a piece of paper.

古文：今不若先正名，名正则国威强，岁币可损。 因陈选将练兵、屯田减租之策，择文臣有胆略者为参佐，俾察军政、习戎务以储将材。
现代文：今天不如先端正名份，名份正那么国家威强，岁币可以减少。 陈俊卿于是陈述选将练兵、屯田减租的策略，建议选择文臣中有胆略的人为参佐，让他们考察军政，学习军事业务以储备将才。
English: Today, it is not as important to have the right name at the top, as the name is just as important as the country's prestige, and the number of years can be reduced. Chen Junqing then presented the strategy of selecting generals to train soldiers and reduce the rent of military cantonments, and suggested that some of the courtiers should be selected as senators, so that they could examine military affairs and learn military business to reserve generals.

古文：孝宗受禅，言： 为国之要有三：用人、赏功、罚罪，所以行之者至公而已，愿留圣意。 迁中书舍人。
现代文：孝宗即位，陈俊卿上书说： 治国的要领有三方面：用人、赏功、罚罪，这些方面之所以能推行下去就在于公正而已，希望陛下留意。 陈俊卿被升为中书舍人。
English: When Emperor Xiaozong ascended the throne, Chen Junqing wrote a letter saying, "There are three aspects to governing the country: employing people, rewarding merits, and punishing crimes. These aspects can only be implemented through fairness. I hope that Your Majesty will pay attention to this." Chen Junqing was promoted to the position of the second secretary.

古文：时孝宗志在兴复，方以阃外事属张浚。
现代文：当时孝宗立志振兴、恢复国土，正把天下大事交付张浚。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaozong was determined to revitalize and restore the country, and was entrusting the world's major events to Zhang Jun.

古文：以俊卿忠义，沈靖有谋，以本职充江、淮宣抚判官兼权建康府事。
现代文：因为陈俊卿忠诚正直，沉稳有谋，皇上派他以本职充当江、淮宣抚判官兼管建康府事。
English: Because Chen Junqing was loyal and honest, steady and resourceful, the emperor sent him to serve as the judge of Jiang and Huai's proclamation and to manage the affairs of Jiankang.

古文：奏曰： 吴璘得孤军深入，敌悉众拒战，久不决，危道也。
现代文：陈俊卿上奏说 ：吴王孤军深入，敌人全军抵御，以致久久不能攻下，这是危险的策略。
English: Chen Junqing said in his report: It is a dangerous strategy for the Wu Wang Lone Army to go deep and the enemy's entire army to resist, so that it cannot be attacked for a long time.

古文：两淮事势已急，盍分遣舟师直捣山东，彼必还师自救，而璘得乘胜定关中。
现代文：两淮形势已很危急，应分别派遣水师直捣山东，金人必然回师自救，而吴王可以乘胜夺下关中。
English: The situation of the two Huai is already very critical. Sailors should be dispatched separately to directly attack Shandong. The Jin people will inevitably return to the teacher for self-rescue, and the King of Wu can take advantage of the victory to seize the lower Guanzhong.

古文：我及其未至，溃其腹心，此不世之功也。 会主和议方坚，诏璘班师，亦召俊卿。
现代文：我军等他们未到，击溃其腹心力量，这是非凡的功劳呀。 正遇主和议的呼声很高，皇上诏令吴王班师回朝，也召陈俊卿。
English: Our army waited for them to arrive and defeated their vassal forces, which is an extraordinary achievement. At the time of the encounter, the calls for reconciliation were high, and the emperor ordered Wu Wangbanshi to return to the imperial court, and also summoned Chen Junqing.

古文：奏陈十事：定规模，振纪纲，励风俗，明赏罚，重名器，遵祖宗之法，蠲无名之赋。
现代文：陈俊卿奏陈十件事：制定规划，振兴纲纪，劝勉风俗，严明赏罚，重视名份，遵从祖宗之法，蠲免无名之赋。
English: Chen Junqing recited Chen's ten things: formulate plans, revitalize disciplines, encourage customs, strictly reward and punish, attach importance to names, follow the law of the ancestors, and exempt nameless gifts.

古文：隆兴初元，建都督府，俊卿除礼部侍郎参赞军事。
现代文：隆兴元年，建立都督府，陈俊卿被拜官为礼部侍郎参赞军事。
English: In the first year of the Longxing era, when the prefectural government was established, Chen Junqing was promoted to the position of the attendant of the ceremonial department and the military counselor.

古文：张浚初谋大举北伐，俊卿以为未可。
现代文：张浚当初计划大举北伐，陈俊卿认为不可行。
English: Zhang Jun originally planned a large-scale northern expedition, but Chen Junqing thought it was not feasible.

古文：会谍报敌聚粮边地，诸将以为秋必至，宜先其未动举兵，浚乃请于朝出师。
现代文：正遇谍报说敌人聚粮于边境，各位将领以为敌军冬天一定进军，应在敌人行动前发兵，张浚于是向朝廷请求出师。
English: Being informed by spies that the enemy was gathering grain at the border, the generals thought that the enemy would certainly march in the winter and should send troops before the enemy's action, so Zhang Jun requested the imperial court to form a division.

古文：已而邵宏渊果以兵溃，俊卿退保扬州。
现代文：不久邵宏渊果然兵败，陈俊卿退守扬州。
English: Soon after, Shao Hongyuan was defeated and Chen Junqing retreated to Yangzhou.

古文：主和议者幸其败，横议摇之。
现代文：主和议者庆幸他们的失败，主战派的意志被动摇了。
English: The Lord's and the Speaker's congratulated themselves on their defeat, and the will of the pro-war faction was shaken.

古文：浚上疏待罪，俊卿亦乞从坐，诏贬两秩。
现代文：张浚上疏等待定罪，陈俊卿也乞求跟随受罪，皇上诏令他们降职二级。
English: Zhang Jun Shang Su was waiting to be convicted, Chen Junqing also begged to be punished, and the emperor ordered them to be demoted to the second level.

古文：谏臣尹穑附思退，议罢浚都督，改宣抚使治扬州。
现代文：谏臣尹穑附会汤思退，说应罢除张浚的都督之职，改为宣抚使管理扬州。
English: His vassal, Yin Qi, withdrew from the Tang Sihui Association, saying that Zhang Jun should be removed from the post of governor-general, and Yangzhou should be administered by the imperial envoy instead.

古文：俊卿奏： 浚果不可用，别属贤将；若欲责其后效，降官示罚，古法也。
现代文：陈俊卿上奏说： 张浚果真不可以用，那么则应另选贤将。如果想责令他以后建立成就，就请降他的官级以示惩罚，这是过去的法律。
English: Chen Junqing said in his report: If Zhang Junhua is really useless, then another great general should be selected. If you want to order him to build achievements in the future, please lower his official rank to show punishment. This is the law of the past.

古文：今削都督重权，置扬州死地，如有奏请，台谏沮之，人情解体，尚何后效之图？
现代文：今天削去他的都督重权，置于扬州死地，如果他请求拜见皇上，台谏官加以阻拦，张浚所有的人情都失去了，还有什么后效可图？
English: If he asks to see the emperor, and the eunuchs of Taiwan try to stop him, and Zhang Jun loses all human feelings, what effect can be expected?

古文：议者但知恶浚而欲杀之，不复为宗社计。
现代文：提出这个建议的人只知道厌恶张浚而想杀掉他，不是为恢复国家大业考虑。
English: The person who made this suggestion only knew that he hated Zhang Jun and wanted to kill him, not for the sake of restoring the national cause.

古文：愿下诏戒中外协济，使浚自效。 疏再上，上悟，即命浚都督，且召为相，卒为思退、穑所挤，遣视师江、淮。
现代文：希望陛下下诏警告内外将领协调一致，使张浚自建成效。 陈俊卿再次上疏，皇上醒悟，就令张浚为都督，又召为宰相，最终被汤思退、尹穑所排挤，被派往江、淮视察军队。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will issue an imperial edict to warn the generals at home and abroad to coordinate and make Zhang Jun's self-construction effective. Chen Junqing once again ascended the throne, and the emperor woke up, so he made Zhang Jun the governor of the capital, and also called him to be the prime minister. Finally, he was ousted by Tang Siyu and Yin Xi, and was sent to Jiang and Huai to inspect the army.

古文：俊卿累章请罪，以宝文阁待制知泉州，请祠，提举太平兴国宫。
现代文：陈俊卿多次上书请罪，皇上任命他以宝文阁待制之职任泉州知州，陈俊卿请求任祠禄官闲居，于是被令提举太平兴国宫。
English: Chen Junqing repeatedly petitioned for impeachment. The emperor appointed him to Quanzhou Zhizhou with the post of Baowen Pavilion. Chen Junqing requested to be appointed as an official of the ancestral hall, so he was ordered to be promoted to Taiping Xingguo Palace.

古文：思退既窜，太学诸生伏阙下乞召俊卿。
现代文：汤思退已经逃跑，太学生们伏在宫殿下请求皇上召回陈俊卿。
English: Townsend has fled, and the students are huddled under the palace, pleading with the emperor to recall Chen Junqing.

古文：乾道元年，入对，上劳抚之，因极论朋党之弊。
现代文：乾道元年，陈俊卿进宫回答皇上的提问，皇上慰劳并安抚他，陈俊卿于是极力阐述朋党的弊端。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Chen Junqing went to the palace to answer the emperor's questions. The emperor consoled and pacified him. Chen Junqing then tried his best to explain the drawbacks of the crony party.

古文：除吏部侍郎、同修国史。
现代文：陈俊卿拜官吏部侍郎、同修国史。
English: Chen Junqing served as an attendant to government officials and studied national history.

古文：论人才当以气节为主，气节者，小有过当容之；邪佞者，甚有才当察之。
现代文：他论述人才应当以气节为重，有气节的人，即使有小过也应当宽容他；奸邪的人，很有才能也应当加以警惕。
English: He argued that talented people should attach great importance to temperament, and those with temperament should tolerate him even if he has minor faults; those who are treacherous should be wary even if they are very talented.

古文：钱端礼起戚里为参政，窥相位甚急，馆阁之士上疏斥之。
现代文：钱端礼起用同乡亲戚为参政，很急切地想夺取相位，馆阁之士上疏指责他。
English: Qian Duanli began to use relatives from his hometown to participate in politics. He was eager to grab the limelight, and the members of the cabinet criticized him.

古文：端礼遣客密告俊卿，己即相，当引共政。
现代文：钱端礼派门客私下告诉陈俊卿，自己任宰相，一定引荐他共同执政。
English: Qian Duanli sent a disciple to tell Chen Junqing in private that he would appoint himself as prime minister and would definitely recommend him to jointly govern.

古文：深拒不听。
现代文：陈俊卿坚决拒绝不肯听命。
English: Chen Junqing resolutely refused to obey.

古文：翌日，进读《宝训》，适及外戚，因言： 本朝家法，外戚不预政，有深意，陛下宜谨守。 上首肯，端礼憾之。
现代文：第二天，陈俊卿进宫给皇上读《宝训》，正涉及到外戚的内容，于是就说 ：本朝家法，外戚不参预朝政，意义深远，陛下应严格遵守。 皇上点头称是，钱端礼深感遗憾。
English: The next day, Chen Junqing entered the palace to read "The Sermon on the Mount" to the emperor, which was related to the content of the maternal relative, so he said: This is the family law of the dynasty, and the fact that the maternal relative does not participate in pre-dynastic politics is of far-reaching significance, and His Majesty should strictly abide by it.

古文：知建康府。
现代文：陈俊卿为建康府知府。
English: Chen Junqing is the next governor of Jiankang Prefecture.

古文：逾年，授吏部尚书。
现代文：过了一年，被授予吏部尚书。
English: A year later, he was awarded the title of Senior Official of the Ministry of Public Security.

古文：时上未能屏鞠戏，将游猎白石。
现代文：当时皇上未能去除蹴鞠游戏，将要游猎白石。
English: At that time, the emperor could not get rid of the game of kemari, and he wanted to go hunting for white pebbles.

古文：俊卿引汉桓灵、唐敬穆及司马相如之言力以为戒。
现代文：陈俊卿引用汉桓帝、灵帝、唐敬宗、穆宗以及司马相如的话极力劝皇上引为借鉴。
English: Chen Junqing quoted the words of Emperor Han, Emperor Ling, Emperor Tang, Emperor Mu, and Emperor Sima to urge the emperor to use them as a reference.

古文：上喜曰： 备见忠谠，朕决意用卿矣。
现代文：皇上高兴地说 ：我完全看到了你的忠诚、正直，我决意重用你。
English: The emperor said happily, "I have fully seen your loyalty and honesty, and I am determined to make good use of you."

古文：朕在藩邸，知卿为忠臣。 后卿拜谢。
现代文：我在藩邸时，就知道你是忠臣。 陈俊卿拜谢皇上。
English: I knew you were a loyal subject when I was at the residence of the domain. Chen Junqing, please thank the emperor.

古文：受诏馆金使，遂拜同知枢密院事。
现代文：陈俊卿受命为金使馆伴，于是拜官同知枢密院事。
English: Chen Junqing was ordered to be Kim's companion at the embassy, so he became an official of the Privy Council.

古文：时曾觌、龙大渊怙旧恩，窃威福，士大夫颇出其门。
现代文：当时曾觌、龙大渊恃旧恩宠，窃取威福，士大夫多出自他的门下。
English: At that time, Zeng Yao and Long Dayuan took advantage of the old grace to steal Weifu, and most of the scholars were from his school.

古文：及俊卿馆伴，大渊副之，公见外，不交一语，大渊纳谒，亦谢不接。
现代文：等到陈俊卿为馆伴使时，龙大渊为副职，陈俊卿在外面见到他，不与他说一句话，龙大渊呈上名片请求接见，陈俊卿也谢绝不见。
English: When Chen Junqing was the ambassador, Long Dayuan was the deputy. Chen Junqing saw him outside and did not say a word to him. Long Dayuan presented his business card to request an interview. Chen Junqing also declined to meet.

古文：洪迈白俊卿： 人言郑闻除右史，某当除某官，信乎？ 诘所从，迈以渊、觌告。
现代文：洪迈告诉陈俊卿 ：有人说郑闻拜官右史，某人当拜某官，可信吗？ 陈俊卿追问消息从何而来，洪迈答从龙大渊、曾觌处。
English: Hongmai told Chen Junqing: Is it credible for someone to say that Zheng Wen worshiped a certain official? Chen Junqing asked where the news came from, Hongmai replied from Long Dayuan and Zenglu.

古文：具以迈语质于上，上曰： 朕曷尝谋及此辈，必窃听得之。 有旨出渊、觌，中外称快。
现代文：陈俊卿把洪迈的话质问于皇上，皇上说： 我怎么会曾想到用这些人，一定是私下听到的消息。 皇上下旨让龙大渊、曾觌离朝，全国内外称快。
English: Chen Junqing questioned the emperor about Hongmai's words, and the emperor said, "How could I have ever thought of using these people, it must have been something I heard in private." The emperor's order to let Long Dayuan and Zeng Yao leave the country was hailed at home and abroad.

古文：金移文边吏，取前所俘。
现代文：金送信给边境的官吏，要求索取以前所俘之人。
English: The money was sent to officials at the border to request the return of a previously captured person.

古文：俊卿请报以 誓书云：俘虏叛亡是两事，俘虏发已多，叛亡不应遣。
现代文：陈俊卿请求回报誓书说： 俘虏、叛亡是两回事，俘虏遣返已经很多了，叛亡的人不应该遣回。
English: Chen Junqing asked for the return of the oath, saying: "Capture and defection are two different things. Many prisoners have been repatriated, and those who have defected should not be sent back.

古文：且本朝两淮民，上国俘虏亡虑数万，本朝未尝以为言，恐坏和议，使两境民不安。
现代文：况且本朝两淮的百姓，为金国所俘虏的约数万人，本朝未曾因此而说什么，恐怕破坏两国的和议，使两国边境的百姓不得安宁。
English: Moreover, the DPRK has never said anything about the tens of thousands of citizens of the two Koreas who have been taken prisoner by the Kim regime, which is likely to undermine the peace talks between the two countries and disturb the peace of the people on the border between the two countries.

古文：或至交兵，则屈直胜负有在矣。 
现代文：或许交战，那么曲直胜负就明显了。 
English: Perhaps there will be a battle, and then the outcome will be clear.

古文：镇江军帅戚方刻削军士，俊卿奏： 内臣中有主方者，当并惩之。 即诏罢方，以内侍陈瑶、李宗回付大理究脏状。
现代文：镇江军统帅戚方剖剥军士，陈俊卿上奏说 ：内臣中有主管戚方的官吏应一同惩罚。 于是皇上诏令罢免戚方，把内侍陈瑶、李宗回交给大理寺调查他们贪赃的材料。
English: Chen Junqing, commander-in-chief of the Zhenjiang Army, dismembered a soldier's relative, and Chen Junqing made a report saying, "Among the vassals, the officials in charge of the relative should be punished together." Therefore, the emperor ordered the removal of the relative, and handed the chamberlains Chen Jun and Li Zong back to Dali Temple to investigate their corruption.

古文：十一月，当郊而雷，上内出手诏，戒饬大臣，叶颙、魏杞坐罢。
现代文：十一月，应当进行郊祀而天上雷鸣，皇上亲自写诏书，警告大臣，叶禺页、魏杞被定罪罢职。
English: In November, when a suburban religious service was due to be held and the sky thundered, the emperor personally wrote an edict to warn the minister, and Ye Xizhe and Wei Xuan were convicted and dismissed.

古文：俊卿参知政事。
现代文：陈俊卿为参知政事。
English: Chen Junqing is a member of the Council of State.

古文：时四明献银矿，将召冶工即禁中锻之。
现代文：当时四明献上银矿，将要召冶工在禁中锻造。
English: At that time, Shimei offered a silver mine, and metallurgists would be called to forge it under the ban.

古文：俊卿奏： 不务帝王之大，而屑屑有司之细，恐为有识所窥。 从官梁克家、莫济俱求补外，俊卿奏： 二人皆贤，其去可惜。 于是劾奏洪迈奸险谗佞，不宜在左右，罢之。
现代文：陈俊卿上奏说 ：皇上不去做帝王大事，而管有关部门的小事，恐怕被有识之人小瞧。 侍从梁克家、莫济一起请求补为朝外官，陈俊卿奏道： 这二人都是贤才，离朝很可惜。 于是他弹劾洪迈奸险狡诈，不适合在皇上身边，洪迈于是被罢免了。
English: Chen Junqing said in his report: The emperor does not do the emperor's big things, but manages the small things of the relevant departments, and I am afraid that he will be overlooked by people with insight. Liang Ke's servant and Moji together requested to be supplemented as the foreign minister of the DPRK, Chen Junqing said: These two are geniuses, and it is a pity to leave the DPRK. So he impeached Hong Mai for treachery and cunning, not suitable to be around the emperor, and Hong Mai was dismissed.

古文：减福建钞盐，罢江西和籴、广西折米盐钱，蠲诸道宿逋金谷钱帛以巨万计，于是政事稍归中书矣。
现代文：皇上下令减去福建钞盐，罢免江西和籴、广西折米盐钱，免去诸道过去欠下的金谷钱帛数以万计，于是政事稍稍集中于中书了。
English: The emperors ordered to subtract Fujian banknotes and salt, to recall Jiangxi, Hebei and Guangxi folded rice salt money, and to get rid of tens of thousands of Jingu coins and ingots owed by various provinces in the past. As a result, political affairs were slightly concentrated in Zhongshu.

古文：龙大渊死，上怜曾觌，欲召之。
现代文：龙大渊死后，皇上可怜曾觌，想召他回朝。
English: After the death of Long Dayuan, the emperor felt sorry for Zeng Yao and wanted to call him back to the imperial court.

古文：俊卿曰： 自出此两人，中外莫不称颂。
现代文：陈俊卿说 ：自从赶这二人出朝廷后，内外百姓没有不称快的。
English: Chen Junqing said: Since these two were driven out of the imperial court, the people at home and abroad have not been dissatisfied.

古文：今复召，必大失天下望。
现代文：今天又召回曾觌，必然使天下人大失所望。
English: Today, Zeng Yao has been recalled, which is bound to disappoint everyone in the world.

古文：臣请先罢。 遂不召。
现代文：我请求先将我罢职。 
English: I'll ask to be relieved of my duties first.

古文：殿前指挥使王琪被旨按视两淮城壁还，荐和州教授刘甄夫，得召。
现代文：皇上于是不召曾觌回朝。殿前指挥使王琪受命前往巡视两淮城壁回朝后，推荐和州教授刘甄夫，刘甄夫得以被皇上召见。
English: Therefore, the emperor did not invite Zeng to return to the imperial court. Wang Qi, the commander of the front of the palace, was ordered to inspect the two Huai walls. After returning to the imperial court, Liu Zhenfu, a professor of Hezhou, was recommended. Liu Zhenfu was able to be summoned by the emperor.

古文：俊卿言： 琪荐兵将官乃其职，教官有才，何预琪事。 会扬州奏琪传旨增筑城已讫事，俊卿请于上，未尝有是命。
现代文：陈俊卿说 ：王琪推荐士兵将官是他的职责，教官是否有才能，干王琪什么事。 正遇扬州上奏说王琪传旨增筑之城已竣工，陈俊卿以此事请问于皇上，皇上说他未曾下过这个命令。
English: Chen Junqing said, "It is Wang Qi's duty to recommend soldiers to generals, whether the instructors are talented or not, and what Wang Qi will do." Just as Yangzhou Shangxuo reported that Wang Qi's order to build an additional city had been completed, Chen Junqing asked the emperor about this, and the emperor said that he had never issued this order.

古文：俊卿曰： 若诈传上旨，非小故。 奏言： 人主万几，岂能尽防闲，所恃者纪纲、号令、赏罚耳。
现代文：陈俊卿说： 如果诈传圣旨，这不是小的过错。 又奏道： 君主日理万机，怎能完全防范得到一切事情，只能凭借纲纪、号令、赏罚。
English: Chen Junqing said, "If you fraudulently transmit the sacred will, this is not a small mistake." He also said, "The sovereign has the power to do everything, how can you completely prevent everything, you can only rely on rules, orders, rewards and punishments."

古文：不诛琪，何所不为。 琪削秩罢官。
现代文：不杀王琪，以后臣下将没什么事做不出来。 王琪被降级罢官。
English: If you don't kill Wang Qi, your vassals won't be able to do anything in the future. Wang Qi was demoted and dismissed.

古文：先是，禁中密旨直下诸军，宰相多不预闻，内官张方事觉，俊卿奏： 自今百司承御笔处分事，须奏审方行。 从之。
现代文：开始，禁中密旨直下各军，宰相多不清楚，内侍张方之事暴露后，陈俊卿上奏说 ：从今以后各个部门根据御笔亲令处理事情，必须奏审才能实行。 
English: At the beginning, it was not clear how much of the secret order to ban the Chinese Communist Party went directly to the military and how much went to the prime minister. After the affair of the chambermaid Zhang Fang was exposed, Chen Junqing reported: From now on, all departments will deal with matters according to the written order, and must report to the court before they can be implemented.

古文：既而以内诸司不乐，收前命。
现代文：皇上采纳了他的意见。不久因为宫内各部门不满，皇上收回以前的命令。
English: The emperor adopted his opinion. Soon, because of the dissatisfaction of various departments within the palace, the emperor withdrew the previous order.

古文：俊卿言： 张方、王琪事，圣断已明，忽谕臣曰： 禁中取一饮一食，必待申审，岂不留滞。
现代文：陈俊卿说： 张方、王琪之事，圣上的决定已清楚，忽然又告诉大臣说 ：禁中取一点喝的一点吃的，也必须等待申请、审批，岂不是停滞不前。 
English: Chen Junqing said: In the case of Zhang Fang and Wang Qi, the decision of the Holy Father was already clear, but suddenly he told the minister: "To take a little drink and a little food from the ban, you must also wait for the application and approval. Isn't it stagnant?

古文：臣所虑者，命令之大，如三衙发兵，户部取财，岂为宫禁细微事。
现代文：我所考虑的事是大的命令，如三衙发兵，户部取财物，怎能是宫中细小的事情。
English: The matter I am considering is a big order, such as the sending of troops to the three provinces and the taking of property by the head of the household. How can it be a small matter in the palace?

古文：臣等备数，出内陛下命令耳。
现代文：我们只是充数的，裁断之事最终要出自宫内陛下的命令。
English: We are just a number, and the final decision will come from His Majesty's orders.

古文：凡奏审欲取决陛下，非臣欲专之，且非新条，申旧制耳。
现代文：凡是奏审要取决于陛下，不是我想专权，且并非新的条款，只是重申旧的制度。
English: It is not my prerogative to dictate to His Majesty what should be submitted for review, and it is not a new clause, but a restatement of the old system.

古文：已行复收，中外惶惑，恐小人以疑似激圣怒。 上曰： 朕岂以小人言疑卿等耶？ 
现代文：现在已经下令实行了又收回成命，内外惶惑，恐怕小人会怀疑我们因此而激起了圣上的怒意。 皇上说 ：我怎会因为小人的话而怀疑你们呢？ 
English: Now that the order has been carried out and the order withdrawn, there is confusion both inside and outside, and I am afraid that the villains will suspect that we have aroused the wrath of the saint.The emperor said: How can I suspect you because of the words of a villain?

古文：同知枢密院事刘珙进对，争辨激切，忤旨，既退，手诏除珙端明殿学士，奉外祠。
现代文：同知枢密院事刘珙进宫回答皇上的提问，与皇上争辩十分激烈，违背了旨令，刘珙退出宫廷后，皇上亲书诏令除去刘珙端明殿学士之职，派他去外地主管一祠观。
English: Liu Xuan, a well-known Privy Councillor, entered the palace to answer the emperor's question, and argued with the emperor very fiercely, violating the order. After Liu Xuan withdrew from the palace, the emperor's personal decree removed Liu Xuan from the post of academician of the Duanming Palace and sent him to be in charge of an ancestral hall outside the country.

古文：俊卿即藏去，密具奏： 前日奏札，臣实草定，以为有罪，臣当先罢。
现代文：陈俊卿立即把诏书藏起来不宣，私下上奏皇上说： 前天的奏札，我确实是草草写成，如果有罪，我应当先被罢免。
English: Chen Junqing immediately hid the edict and privately appealed to the emperor, saying, "I did indeed scribble the edict the day before yesterday. If I am guilty, I should be dismissed first."

古文：珙之除命，未敢奉诏。
现代文：刘珙的去职之旨令，我未敢奉命发出。
English: I didn't dare to issue the order for Liu Wei's dismissal.

古文：陛下即位以来，纳谏诤，体大臣，皆盛德事。
现代文：陛下即位以来，纳谏言，依靠大臣，都是扬德之事。
English: Since His Majesty's accession to the throne, accepting advice and relying on ministers are all matters for Yang De.

古文：今珙以小事获罪，臣恐自此大臣皆阿顺持禄，非国家福。 上色悔久之，命珙帅江西。
现代文：今天刘珙因为小事获罪，我担心从此大臣都阿谀奉承地拿俸禄，这不是国家的福气。 皇上脸上久久呈现悔恨之色，令刘珙统帅江西。
English: Today, Liu Bei was found guilty of a minor offense, and I'm worried that from now on, all ministers will flatter him and take his salary, which is not a blessing for the country. The emperor's face has been showing the color of remorse for a long time, making Liu Bei the commander of Jiangxi.

古文：俊卿退自劾，上手札留之，且曰： 卿虽百请，朕必不从。 
现代文：陈俊卿退朝后自我弹劾，皇上亲自写书挽留他，并说： 你即使一百次请求，我也决不会依从。 
English: After Chen Junqing retired from the imperial court, he impeached himself. The emperor himself wrote a letter to retain him, and said: Even if you ask a hundred times, I will never comply.

古文：四年十月，制授尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
现代文：乾道四年十月，陈俊卿被任命为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
English: In October of the 4th year of the Heian period, Chen Junqing was appointed as the right-hand man of Shang Shu and the right-hand man and the right-hand man and the right-hand man and the right-hand man and the left-hand man and the left-hand man of Shang Shu.

古文：俊卿以用人为己任，所除吏皆一时选，奖廉退，抑奔竞。
现代文：陈俊卿以用人为己任，所授官之人都是一个时期的杰出人才，他奖励廉洁、谦让之人，抑制一心往上爬的人。
English: Chen Junqing took it upon himself to employ people. The people he appointed were all outstanding talents of the time. He rewarded those who were honest and humble, and restrained those who were bent on climbing the ranks.

古文：或才可用，资历浅，密荐于上，未尝语人。
现代文：有的人才能可用，但资历浅，陈俊卿就私下推荐给皇上，未曾对他人说。
English: Some people can be used, but their qualifications are shallow. Chen Junqing privately recommended them to the emperor and never told others.

古文：每接朝士及牧守自远至，必问以时政得失，人才贤否。
现代文：每次在朝廷接待士人和从远方来的牧守时，一定询问他们对时政得失、人才贤否的意见。
English: Every time when the imperial court received scholars and shepherds who came from far away, they always asked their opinions on the merits and demerits of the current government and the merits and demerits of the talents.

古文：虞允文宣抚四川，俊卿荐其才堪相。
现代文：虞允文任四川宣抚使，陈俊卿推荐他有才能可以为相。
English: Yu Yunwen was appointed as the Sichuan envoy, and Chen Junqing recommended that he had the talent to be the crown prince.

古文：五年正月，上召允文为枢密使，至则以为右相，俊卿为左相。
现代文：乾道五年正月，皇上召虞允文为枢密使，虞允文到朝廷后，皇上就封他为右相，陈俊卿为左相。
English: In the first month of the 5th year of the Heian period, the emperor summoned Yu Yunwen as a confidential envoy. After Yu Yunwen arrived at the imperial court, the emperor appointed him as the right minister and Chen Junqing as the left minister.

古文：允文建议遣使金以陵寝为请，俊卿面陈，复手疏以为未可。
现代文：虞允文建议派使者前往金朝请求金归还我陵墓寝庙，陈俊卿当着皇上的面陈述了自己的意见，又亲自写疏呈上，认为此举不可行。
English: Yu Yunwen proposed to send an envoy to the Kim dynasty to request the return of the money to my mausoleum. Chen Junqing stated his opinion in front of the emperor and personally wrote a note saying that this was not feasible.

古文：上御孤矢，弦激致目眚，六月始御便殿。
现代文：皇上使用弓箭，箭弦击中眼睛导致长眼膜，六月开始到便殿休养。
English: The emperor used a bow and arrow, and the string of the arrow hit his eye, resulting in a long eyelid. In June, he began to take a rest in the lavatory.

古文：俊卿疏曰： 陛下经月不御外朝，口语籍籍，皆辅相无状，不能先事开陈，亏损圣德。
现代文：陈俊卿说： 陛下几个月不亲临外朝，外面流言蜚语不断，都是辅相无德无能，不能事先询问，有损于圣德。
English: Chen Junqing said: His Majesty's absence from the outside world for several months, and the continuous gossip outside, are complementary, unethical and incompetent, and cannot be inquired in advance, which is detrimental to sanctity.

古文：陛下忧勤恭俭，清静寡欲，前代英主所不能免者皆屏绝，顾于骑射之末犹未能忘。
现代文：陛下忧患勤俭，清心寡欲，前代英主所不能免去的陋习全都去除，看来只有骑射最终还未能忘怀。
English: His Majesty is concerned about diligence and thrift, cleanness and abstinence, and all the bad habits that the previous British masters could not avoid have been removed. It seems that only horse shooting has not been forgotten in the end.

古文：臣知非乐此，志图恢复，故俯而从事，以阅武备，激士气耳。
现代文：我知道皇上并非乐于此种游戏，而是立志图谋恢复国土，所以埋头干事，检阅武装力量及储备，激励士气。
English: I knew that the Emperor was not pleased with this game, but was determined to restore the country, so I buried my head, reviewed the armed forces and reserves, and encouraged morale.

古文：愿陛下任智谋，明赏罚，恢信义，则英声义烈，不越尊俎，固已震慑敌人于万里之远，岂待区区骑射于百步间哉。
现代文：陛下任用有智谋的人，分清赏罚，恢复信义，那么皇上的英名义烈，即使不能超过尊祖，也够震慑万里之远的敌人了，难道还限于区区百步间骑射。
English: If His Majesty appoints people with wisdom, distinguishes rewards and punishments, and restores loyalty, then the emperor's heroic reputation, even if it cannot exceed that of his ancestors, will be enough to deter enemies thousands of miles away. Is it still limited to riding and shooting at a hundred paces?

古文：陛下一身，宗社生灵之休戚系焉，愿以今日之事，永为后戒。 
现代文：陛下的身体，与宗族社稷百姓休戚相关，希望把今天的事，作为以后永远的借鉴。 
English: His Majesty's body is closely related to the clan, society and people, and I hope that today's event will be used as a reference for the future.

古文：曾觌官满当代，俊卿预请处以浙东总管。
现代文：曾觌任职期满当轮换一个职位，陈俊卿打算请求让他任浙东总管。
English: When Zeng Jun's term of office expires, Chen Junqing intends to request that he be appointed as the East Zhejiang Governor.

古文：上曰： 觌意似不欲为此官。 俊卿曰： 前此陛下去二人，公论甚惬。
现代文：皇上说 ：曾觌的意思似乎不想做这个官。 陈俊卿说： 在这之前陛下赶走了龙大渊、曾觌二人，大家议论起都很高兴。
English: The emperor said, "It seems that Zeng Yao does not want to be this official." Chen Junqing said, "Before this, His Majesty drove away Long Dayuan and Zeng Yao, and everyone was very happy to start the discussion."

古文：愿捐私恩，伸公议。 觌怏怏而去。
现代文：希望陛下去除个人的私情，伸张正义。 曾觌不高兴地走了。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will remove personal personal feelings and uphold justice. Zeng Yao left unhappily.

古文：枢密承旨张说为亲戚求官，惮俊卿不敢言，会在告，请于允文，得之。
现代文：枢密承旨张说为亲戚求一官职，害怕陈俊卿而不敢开口，恰巧陈俊卿休假，于是他请求于虞允文，得到一官职。
English: Zhang said that he was afraid of Chen Junqing and did not dare to open his mouth. It happened that Chen Junqing was on vacation, so he asked Yu Yunwen to get an official post.

古文：俊卿闻敕已出，语吏留之。
现代文：陈俊卿听说敕令已经要发出，吩咐官吏把它扣留下来。
English: When Chen Junqing heard that the edict was about to be issued, he ordered the officials to hold it back.

古文：说皇恐来谢，允文亦愧，犹为之请，俊卿竟不与，说深憾之。
现代文：张说惶恐谢罪。虞允文也面有愧色，但还是为张说的亲戚请求一职位，陈俊卿始终不答应，张说深感遗憾。
English: Zhang said that he was scared and felt guilty. Yu Yunwen was also ashamed, but he still asked for a position for Zhang's relative. Chen Junqing never agreed, and Zhang said that he was deeply sorry.

古文：吏部尚书汪应辰与允文议事不合，求去，俊卿数奏应辰刚毅正直，可为执政。
现代文：吏部尚书汪应辰与虞允文议事时意见不合，请求离朝，陈俊卿多次奏说汪应辰刚强正直，可为执政。
English: When Wang Yingchen and Yu Yunwen disagreed during the deliberation, they requested to leave the court. Chen Junqing repeatedly said that Wang Yingchen was strong and honest and could govern.

古文：上初然之，后竟出应辰守平江。
现代文：皇上当初认为是这样，后来最终派汪应辰为平江郡守。
English: The emperor initially thought so, but eventually sent Wang Yingchen as the governor of Pingjiang County.

古文：自是上意向允文，而俊卿亦数求去。
现代文：从此皇上偏向虞允文，陈俊卿也多次请求离朝。
English: From then on, the emperor favored Yu Yunwen, and Chen Junqing also repeatedly requested to leave the imperial court.

古文：明年，允文复申陵寝之议，上手札谕俊卿，俊卿奏： 陛下痛念祖宗，思复故疆，臣虽疲驽，岂不知激昂仰赞圣谟，然于大事欲计其万全，俟一二年间，吾之事力稍充乃可，不敢迎合意指误国事。 即杜门请去，以观文殿大学士帅福州。
现代文：第二年，虞允文又重申派使去金请求金归还陵墓寝庙之事，皇上亲自写札告诉陈俊卿，陈俊卿奏道： 陛下十分思念祖宗，想恢复故有的疆域，我虽然是一匹疲惫的劣马，难道不知道热情赞扬圣上的计划，然而对于大事要考虑的万无一失，等一二年后，国家的力量稍强大些才可行，不敢为了迎合圣意而误国事。 陈俊卿于是闭门不出请求离朝，皇上让他以观文殿大学士之职统帅福州。
English: In the second year, Yu Yunwen also reiterated the matter of sending an envoy to Jin to request Jin to return the mausoleum to the temple. The emperor personally wrote a note to Chen Junqing, and Chen Junqing said: His Majesty is very nostalgic for his ancestors and wants to restore the former territory. Although I am a tired horse, I do not know how to enthusiastically praise the Holy Father's plan. However, for major events to be considered, it is necessary to wait a year or two until the country's strength is slightly stronger. Do not dare to make a mistake in order to meet the sacred will of the state. Chen Junqing then closed the door and did not ask to leave

古文：陛辞，犹劝上远佞亲贤，修政攘敌，泛使未可轻遣。
现代文：陈俊卿与陛下告别时，仍劝皇上远奸邪亲贤才，修明朝政，抵御外敌，泛使不可轻易派遣。
English: When Chen Junqing was bidding farewell to His Majesty, he still advised the Emperor not to dispatch envoys lightly, but to stay away from evil relatives and sages, reform the imperial government, and resist foreign enemies.

古文：既去，允文卒遣使，终不得要领。
现代文：陈俊卿已经离朝，虞允文最终还是派遣了使者出使金国，最后不得要领。
English: Chen Junqing had already left the DPRK, but Yu Yunwen finally sent an envoy to the DPRK. In the end, there was no way out.

古文：曾觌亦召还，建节钺，跻保傅，而士大夫莫敢言。
现代文：曾觌也被召回朝廷，皇上为他树立节钺，让他登上保傅之位，而士大夫没有敢说一句的。
English: Zeng Yao was also called back to the imperial court. The emperor set up a festival for him and let him ascend to the position of tutor, but the scholar did not dare to say a word.

古文：俊卿至福州，政尚宽厚，严于治盗，海道晏清，以功进秩。
现代文：陈俊卿到福州后，政策上崇尚宽厚，严格地打击盗贼，海上航道平坦畅通，陈俊卿因此有功被进级。
English: After Chen Junqing came to Fuzhou, he advocated a lenient policy, strictly cracked down on thieves, and smoothed the sea route. Therefore, Chen Junqing was promoted.

古文：转运判官陈岘建议改行钞盐法，俊卿移书宰执，极言福建盐法与淮、浙异，遂不果行。
现代文：转运判官陈岘建议在福州改行钞盐法，陈俊卿写信给宰执，极力说福建盐法与淮、浙二地不同，于是钞盐法最终未在福建施行。
English: Transshipment adjudicator Chen Wei suggested that the banknote salt law be changed in Fuzhou. Chen Junqing wrote to the superintendent, insisting that the Fujian salt law was different from Huaihai and Zhejiang, so the banknote salt law was ultimately not implemented in Fujian.

古文：明年，请祠，提举洞霄宫。
现代文：第二年，陈俊卿请求管理祠观，皇上让他提举洞霄宫。
English: In the second year, Chen Junqing requested the management of the ancestral hall, and the emperor asked him to raise the Dongxiao Palace.

古文：归第，弊屋数楹，怡然不介意。
现代文：陈俊卿回到家，看见破旧的房子只有几根柱子尚存，他仍怡然自得，毫不介意。
English: When Chen Junqing returned home and saw that the dilapidated house only had a few pillars left, he was still pleased with himself and did not mind.

古文：淳熙二年，再命知福州。累章告归，除特进，起判建康府兼江东安抚。
现代文：淳熙二年，皇上再次令陈俊卿为福州知州，皇上授予他特进之官，任命他为建康通判兼江东安抚使。
English: In the second year of Chunxi, the emperor once again made Chen Junqing the Fuzhou Chizhou, the emperor awarded him the special promotion officer, and appointed him as the Jiankang Tongzhan and the East River Pacification Envoy.

古文：召对垂拱殿，命坐赐茶，因从容言曰： 将帅当由公选，臣闻诸将多以贿得。
现代文：皇上召陈俊卿到垂拱殿问话，令他坐下并赐给茶，陈俊卿于是从容地说： 将帅应当由高级官员选拔，我听说诸将多以贿赂得官。
English: The emperor summoned Chen Junqing to the Hanging Arch for questioning, made him sit down and gave him tea. Chen Junqing then calmly said: Generals should be selected by high-ranking officials. I heard that generals often bribe their way into office.

古文：曾觌、王抃招权纳贿，进人皆以中批行之。
现代文：曾觌、王扌卞揽权受贿，选用人都按御批行之。
English: Zeng Yao and Wang Yao accepted bribes to obtain power, and all the appointees acted in accordance with your approval.

古文：脏吏已经结勘，而内批改正，将何所劝惩？ 上曰： 卿言甚当。 朝辞，奏曰： 去国十年，见都城谷贱人安，惟士大夫风俗大变。 上曰： 何也？ 俊卿曰： 向士大夫奔觌、抃之门，十缠一二，尚畏人知，今则公然趋附已七八，不复顾忌矣。人材进退由私门，大非朝廷美事。 上曰： 抃则不敢。觌虽时或有请，朕多抑之，自今不复从矣。 俊卿曰： 此曹声势既长，侍从、台谏多出其门，毋敢为陛下言，臣恐坏朝廷纪纲，废有司法度，败天下风俗，累陛下圣德。 命二府饮饯浙江亭。
现代文：陈俊卿说： 这些人声势已经增长，侍从、台谏之职多出自他们门下，不对陛下说实话，我担心会有损朝廷纲纪，废坏有关部门的法度，败坏天下风俗，连累陛下的德行。 
English: Chen Junqing said, "The influence of these people has grown, and most of the posts of attendants and eunuchs have come from their ranks. If they do not tell the truth to Your Majesty, I am worried that they will undermine the discipline of the imperial court, destroy the laws and regulations of relevant departments, corrupt the customs of the world, and tarnish Your Majesty's virtue.

古文：俊卿去建康十五年，父老喜其再来。
现代文：皇上命令二府在浙江亭为陈俊卿设宴饯行。陈俊卿离开建康十五年，父老乡亲们高兴他又回来。
English: The emperor ordered the two prefectures to hold a banquet for Chen Junqing in Zhejiang Pavilion. Chen Junqing left Jiankang for 15 years, and his father and fellow villagers were happy to see him return.

古文：为政宽简，罢无名之赋。
现代文：陈俊卿为政宽简，罢除无名之赋。
English: Chen Junqing is a political loose cannon, dismissed from a nameless position.

古文：时御前多行 白札 ，用左右私人持送，俊卿奏非便，上手札奖谕。
现代文：当时朝中多通行 白札 ，派亲近人送往，陈俊卿上奏说不好，皇上亲自写札子对他予以奖励。
English: At that time, there were a lot of white cards in circulation between North Korea and China, and close relatives were sent to Chen Junqing. Chen Junqing did not perform well, and the emperor personally wrote a card to reward him.

古文：除少保，判建康府如故。
现代文：陈俊卿拜官少保像过去一样任建康府通判。
English: As in the past, Chen Junqing, a minor official, was appointed as the judge of Jiankang Prefecture.

古文：八年上章告老，以少师、魏国公致仕。
现代文：淳熙八年，陈俊卿上书要求告老，以少师、魏国公之职退休。
English: In the eighth year of the King's reign, Chen Junqing sent a letter to the emperor, asking him to retire as a young teacher and Wei Guogong.

古文：十三年十一月薨，年七十四。
现代文：淳熙十三年十一月死去，终年七十四岁。
English: Aung Hee died in November, 133, at the age of 74.

古文：方属疾，手书示诸子云： 遗表止谢圣恩，勿祈恩泽及功德，勿请谥树碑。 上闻嗟悼，辍视朝，赠太保，命本路转运司给葬事，赐谥正献。
现代文：陈俊卿刚生病时，亲自写文给诸子说： 遗书只是感谢圣恩，不要祈求皇上的恩泽及功德，不要请求谥号树碑。 皇上听说后感伤不已，停止上朝，赠陈俊卿太保之职，令建康路转运司安排葬事，赐予谥号 正献 。
English: When Chen Junqing had just fallen ill, he personally wrote a letter to his sons, saying: The suicide note is just to thank the grace, do not pray for the emperor's grace and merits, do not ask for the 號 tree monument. After hearing this, the emperor was so sad that he stopped going to the emperor, gave Chen Junqing the position of grand tutor, ordered the Jiankang Road Transportation Division to arrange the funeral, and gave the 號 as a gift.

古文：俊卿孝友忠敬，得于天资，清严好礼，终日无惰容。
现代文：陈俊卿对朋友顺从、忠诚、尊敬，这是出自他的天性，他又清静，严肃好礼，终日没有疲倦的神情。
English: Chen Junqing is obedient, loyal, and respectful to his friends, which comes from his nature. He is quiet, serious, polite, and never looks tired.

古文：平居恂恂若不能言，而在朝廷正色危论，分别邪正，斥权势无顾避。
现代文：平时小心谨慎好像不会讲话，而在朝廷则严肃地发表危险的言论，辨明邪正，斥责有权势的人，毫不避讳。
English: In ordinary times, the cautious and cautious do not seem to be able to speak, but in the court, they earnestly make dangerous remarks, identify the evil and the righteous, and rebuke the powerful, without shying away.

古文：凡所奏请，关治乱安危之大者。
现代文：凡所奏请的，都是有关治乱安危的大事。
English: All requests are related to major matters concerning the management of chaos and safety.

古文：雅善汪应辰、李焘，尤敬朱熹，屡尝论荐。
现代文：陈俊卿与汪应辰、李焘十分友好，尤其敬重朱熹，曾多次上书推荐。
English: Chen Junqing is very friendly with Wang Yingchen and Li Jie, and especially respects Zhu Jie. He has been recommended by letter many times.

古文：其薨也，熹不远千里往哭之，又状其行。
现代文：他死后，朱熹不远千里赶来哭他，又记载他的行为。
English: After his death, Zhu Xi came thousands of miles to mourn him and record his deeds.

古文：有集二十卷。
现代文：陈俊卿著有文集二十卷。
English: There are 20 volumes in the series.

古文：子五人，宓有志于学，终承奉郎，朱熹为铭其墓。
现代文：陈俊卿有子五个，陈宓有志于做学问，终官为承奉郎，朱熹为他写了墓志铭。
English: Chen Junqing had five sons. Chen Yao was interested in learning and eventually became a servant. Zhu Yao wrote an epitaph for him.

古文：宓自有传。
现代文：陈宓另外有传。
English: Chen Yao is also said to have sung.

古文：虞允文，字彬甫，隆州仁寿人。
现代文：虞允文字彬甫，隆州仁寿人。
English: Yu Yun characters Bin Fu, Longzhou Ren Shou people.

古文：父祺，登政和进士第，仕至太常博士、潼川路转运判官。
现代文：他的父亲虞祺，考中北宋政和年间进士，官至太常博士、潼川路转运判官。
English: His father, Yu Ying, was a student of the Northern Song Dynasty, and was promoted to an officer, a doctor, and a transportation judge on the Minchuan Road.

古文：允文六岁诵《九经》，七岁能属文。
现代文：虞允文六岁时即能背诵《九经》，七岁时即能诗善文。
English: At the age of six, Yu Yunwen was able to recite the "Nine Classics," and at the age of seven, he was able to write poetry.

古文：以父任入官。
现代文：因为父亲的缘故入选做官。
English: Elected to office because of his father.

古文：丁母忧，哀毁骨立。
现代文：母亲因病不幸逝世后，虞允文因过度悲伤而身体极度虚弱。
English: After the unfortunate death of his mother due to illness, Yu Yunwen was extremely weak due to excessive sadness.

古文：既葬，朝夕哭墓侧，墓有枯桑，两乌来巢。
现代文：安葬母亲后，他整日在母亲墓旁哭泣，墓地旁边有一棵枯死的桑树，有两只鸟儿飞来搭巢。
English: After burying his mother, he cried all day at his mother's grave. There was a dead mulberry tree next to the cemetery, and two birds flew in to build a nest.

古文：念父之鳏且疾，七年不调，跬步不忍离左右。
现代文：考虑到父亲一人鳏居且身体有病，虞允文七年没有调迁官职，不忍心离开他的父亲半步。
English: Considering that his father is a widower and has a physical illness, Yu Yunwen has not been transferred to an official position for seven years and cannot bear to leave his father.

古文：父死，绍兴二十三年始登进士第，通判彭州，权知黎州、渠州。
现代文：父亲逝世后，绍兴二十三年，才考中进士，授官彭州通判，后又暂且代理黎州、渠州知州。
English: After his father's death, in the 23rd year of Shaoxing, he passed the junior high school entrance examination and was awarded the title of Pengzhou magistrate. Later, he temporarily represented Lizhou and Quzhou Zhizhou.

古文：秦桧当国，蜀士多屏弃。
现代文：秦桧独揽朝政大权后，四川的有识之士大多受到排挤压制。
English: After Qin Hui seized political power, most of the intellectuals in Sichuan were ousted and suppressed.

古文：桧死，高宗欲收用之，中书舍人赵达首荐允文，召对，谓人君必畏天，必安民，必法祖宗。
现代文：秦桧死后，高宗打算广招蜀中名士，中书舍人赵逵首先推荐了虞允文，皇上召他进宫对话，他说，作为一国之君，首先必须敬畏上天，必须安抚天下百姓，必须效法祖先的各种法令制度。
English: After the death of Qin Hui, Gao Zong planned to recruit a wide range of famous people from Shu. Zhao Hui, a scholar of Chinese literature, first recommended Yu Yunwen, and the emperor invited him to enter the palace for a dialogue. He said that as the ruler of a country, he must first fear heaven, must appease the people of the world, and must follow the various laws and regulations of his ancestors.

古文：又论士风之弊，以文章进必抑其轻浮，以言语进必黜其巧伪，以政事进必去其苛刻，庶可任重致远。
现代文：又谈到士人风气的弊端，凭文章被提拔的一定要抑制其轻浮举止；凭言谈被提拔的一定要去除其投机、欺瞒的劣行；凭治政被提拔的一定要屏弃其苛刻的行为，这样才可以放心地对他们委以重任。
English: He also talked about the drawbacks of the scholar-man ethos. Those who are promoted on the basis of writing must restrain their frivolous behavior; those who are promoted on the basis of speaking must eliminate their speculation and deception; those who are promoted on the basis of governance must abandon their harsh behavior, so that they can be entrusted with important tasks with confidence.

古文：且极论四川财赋科纳之弊。
现代文：虞允文还对四川地区财赋科纳之弊端进行了认真论述。
English: Yu Yunwen also seriously discussed the drawbacks of the Sichuan region's financial conundrum.

古文：上嘉纳之。
现代文：高宗高兴地接受了他的建议。
English: The Emperor approved and adopted his opinion.

古文：除秘书丞，累迁礼部郎官。
现代文：虞允文官拜秘书郎，不久又升任礼部郎官。
English: Civil servant Yu Yun served as secretary, and was soon promoted to the position of secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：金主亮修汴，已有南侵意。
现代文：金主完颜亮开始修整汴京，呈现出南侵的意图。
English: After the completion of the painting, the donor began to renovate Beijing, showing the intention of invading the south.

古文：王纶还，言敌恭顺和好。
现代文：王伦从金朝返回后，报告说金人态度恭敬友好，没有丝毫战争迹象。
English: After returning from the Kim dynasty, Wang Lun reported that the attitude of the Kim people was respectful and friendly, and there was not the slightest sign of war.

古文：汤思退再拜贺，置边备不问。
现代文：汤思退再次去金国朝拜祝贺，对边境备战仍不闻不问。
English: Townsend retreated to visit and congratulate Kim Jong-il again, and still paid no attention to the preparations for war on the border.

古文：及金使施宜生颇泄敌情，张焘密奏之。
现代文：等到金朝使者施宜生稍微泄露了一点金军加紧备战的消息后，张焘秘密地将这些情况奏知了高宗。
English: After Shi Yisheng, the emissary of the Kim dynasty, slightly leaked the news that the Kim army was stepping up preparations for war, Zhang Ye secretly reported these circumstances to Gao Zong.

古文：亮又隐画工图临安湖山以归。
现代文：完颜亮又悄悄地请画师画出临安城区的湖山等景观带回金国。
English: After finishing the painting, he quietly asked the painter to draw the lakes and mountains in Lin'an to take back to Jin Guo.

古文：亮赋诗，情益露。允文上疏言： 金必败盟，兵出有五道，愿诏大臣豫思备御。 时三十年正月也。
现代文：完颜亮写诗言志，在诗中他准备大举进攻南侵的意图更加明白地表露出来。虞允文上奏疏说 ：金人一定会撕毁盟约，其伐兵有五条道路，希望陛下下诏令大臣们加强备战，做好防御准备。 当时正是绍兴三十年正月。
English: In the poem, his intention of preparing a large-scale attack on the southern invasion was more clearly revealed. Yu Yun said in his poem: The Jin people will certainly tear up the covenant, and there are five ways to cut down their soldiers. I hope that His Majesty will issue a decree ordering the ministers to strengthen their preparations for war and prepare for defense. At that time, it was the first month of the 30th year of Shaoxing.

古文：十月，借工部尚书充贺正使，与馆伴宾射，一发破的，众惊异之。
现代文：十月，虞允文假借为工部尚书充任使金的贺正使，他与金馆伴一起射箭，一箭击中目标，众人都感到很惊讶。
English: In October, Yu Yunwen pretended to be He Zhengyi, an envoy of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce. He shot arrows with a companion from the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, and one arrow hit the target. Everyone was very surprised.

古文：允文见运粮造舟者多，辞归，亮曰： 我将看花洛阳。 允文还，奏所见及亮语，申言淮、海之备。
现代文：虞允文看到金人大量运输粮草，建造战舰，便向金主告辞回去，完颜亮说 ：我准备去洛阳观赏牡丹花。 虞允文回来后，将自己在金国见到的备战情况及完颜亮的言行立即上奏告知皇上，再次强调必须加强淮、海两地的防御力量。
English: When Yu Yunwen saw that the Jin people were transporting a large amount of grain and grass and building warships, he said goodbye to the Jin master and went back, saying, "I am preparing to go to Luoyang to watch the peony flowers."After Yu Yunwen returned, he immediately reported to the emperor the preparation for war that he had seen in Jin and the words and deeds of Guan Yanliang, once again emphasizing the need to strengthen the defense forces of Huai and Hai.

古文：除中书舍人、直学士院。
现代文：虞允文被任命为中书舍人、直学士院。
English: Yu Yunwen was appointed as a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：三衙管军以宦寺充承受，允文言： 自古人主大权，不移于奸臣，则落于近幸。
现代文：三衙管军让宦官担任承受之职，虞允文说 ：自古以来国家的大权，不是被奸臣篡夺，便是为皇上的亲信把持。
English: After the three magistrate generals let the eunuch assume the position, Yu Yunwen said: Since ancient times, the power of the state has not been usurped by treacherous vassals, but has been held by the emperor's close confidants.

古文：秦桧盗权十有八年，桧死，权归陛下。
现代文：秦桧独揽大权达十八年之久，秦桧死后，权力才重归陛下。
English: Qin Hui monopolized power for eighteen years. After Qin Hui's death, power returned to His Majesty.

古文：迩来三衙交结中官，宣和、明受厥鉴未远。 上大悟，立罢之。
现代文：近来三衙皆与宦官互相勾结，宣和、明受的教训离现在时间并不远。 
English: In recent times, all three branches of government have been in collusion with the eunuchs. The time is not far off when peace will be declared and lessons will be learned.

古文：金使王全、高景山来贺生辰，口传亮悖慢语，欲得淮南地，索将相大臣议事。
现代文：宋高宗很快醒悟，立即罢免了他们的职务。金主完颜亮派王全、高景山来南宋祝贺高宗的生日，带来了完颜亮的口信，态度傲慢，出言不逊，想占有淮南之地，指令与哪个宰相大臣议事。
English: Song Gaozong soon came to his senses and immediately dismissed them from their posts. The rich man sent Wang Quan and Gao Jingshan to the Southern Song Dynasty to congratulate Gaozong on his birthday, bringing a message that was full of color, arrogant attitude, insolent speech, wanted to occupy the land of Huainan, and ordered to discuss with which prime minister.

古文：于是召三衙大将赵密等议举兵，侍从、台谏集议。
现代文：高宗于是召集三衙的大将赵密等人商量起兵，侍从、台谏也参予讨论。
English: Gao Zong then summoned the general Zhao Mi and others of the Three Emperors to discuss raising an army, and the attendants and the eunuchs also participated in the discussion.

古文：宰臣陈康伯传上旨： 今日更不问和与守，直问战当如何。 遣成闵为京、湖制置使，将禁卫五万御襄、汉上流。
现代文：宰相陈康伯传达了高宗的旨意 ：今天不再谈论和议和防守之事，只讨论若宋金开战应如何办。 高宗任命成闵为京、湖制置使，率领五万禁卫军士兵加强防御襄樊、汉江上游一带。
English: Prime Minister Chen Kangbo conveyed Gao Zong's intention: Today, we will no longer talk about peace talks and defense, but only discuss what should be done if Song and Kim start a war. Gao Zong appointed Chengyu as the capital and lake defense commander, and led fifty thousand soldiers of the Imperial Guard to strengthen the defense of Xiangyu and the upper reaches of the Han River.

古文：允文曰： 兵来不除道，敌为虚声以分我兵，成其出淮奸谋尔。 不听，卒遣闵。
现代文：虞允文指出 ：敌人准备进攻但没选好线路和进攻点，这是金军故意散布虚假的消息以分散我们的兵力，使他们进攻江淮地区的阴谋能够得逞。 朝廷没有听从虞允文的意见，最终派遣成闵出征。
English: Yu Yunwen pointed out: the enemy is preparing to attack but has not chosen a good line and point of attack, this is the gold army deliberately spreading false news to disperse our troops, so that their plot to attack the Jianghuai region can succeed. The court did not listen to Yu Yunwen's opinion, and finally sent Chengye to fight.

古文：七月，金主亮徙汴，允文复语康伯： 闵军约程在江、池，宜令到池者驻池，到江者驻江。
现代文：七月，金主完颜亮及政府全部迁往汴京。虞允文再次对陈康伯说 ：成闵军队现在大约行进在江州、池州之间，应该命令到达池州的军队驻扎在池州，到达江州的军队驻扎在江州。
English: In July, the emperor and the entire government moved to Beijing. Yu Yunwen once again said to Chen Kangbo: Chengyi's army is now roughly marching between Jiangzhou and Chizhou. The army that has reached Chizhou should be ordered to be stationed in Chizhou, and the army that has reached Jiangzhou should be stationed in Jiangzhou.

古文：若敌兵出上流，则荆湖之军捍于前，江、池之军援于后；若出淮西，则池之军出巢县，江州军出无为，可为淮西援，是一军而两用之。 康伯然其说，而闵军竟屯武昌。
现代文：假如金军从长江上游发动进攻，那么驻守在荆湖的军队就能够在前方抵御敌兵，江、池二州的驻军就能够从后方增援；假如敌军从淮西进行南侵，那么驻扎池州的军队就能够从巢县发动反攻，驻扎江州的军队就能够从无为发动反攻，这样就可以一军两用，一举两得。 陈康伯虽认为他说得很有道理，但成闵却将军队驻守在武昌。
English: If the Chinese army launched an attack from the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, then the army stationed in Jinghu would be able to resist the enemy soldiers in front, and the garrisons in the two states of Jiang and Chi would be able to reinforce from the rear; if the enemy army invaded the south from Huaxi, then the army stationed in Chizhou would be able to launch a counter-offensive from Chaoxian, and the army stationed in Jiangzhou would be able to launch a counter-offensive from idleness, so that one army could be used for two purposes and achieve two results at one stroke. Although Chen Kangbo thought that he was very reasonable, he stationed the army

古文：九月，金主命李通为大都督，造浮梁于淮水上。
现代文：九月，金主完颜亮任命李通为大都督，在淮水上游建造浮桥。
English: In September, the financial master, Guan Yanliang, appointed Li Tong as the grand governor to build a pontoon bridge in the upper reaches of Huai Shui.

古文：金主自将，兵号百万，毡帐相望，钲鼓之声不绝。
现代文：完颜亮亲自统率，号称雄兵百万，毡制帐篷一座连着一座，征鼓声不绝于耳。
English: Led by Guan Yanliang himself, he is known as the hero of a million soldiers, the maroon tents are one after another, and the sound of drums is incessant.

古文：十月，自涡口渡淮。
现代文：十月，金军从涡口渡过淮河。
English: In October, the Golden Army crossed the Huai River from the Vortex.

古文：先是，刘锜措置淮东，王权措置淮西。
现代文：战争爆发前，刘钅奇负责淮东的防务，王权负责淮西地区防务。
English: Before the outbreak of the war, Liu Bingqi was in charge of the defense of East Huai, and Wang Quan was in charge of the defense of West Huai.

古文：至是，权首弃庐州，锜亦回扬州，中外震恐。
现代文：战争爆发后，王权首先放弃庐州南逃，刘钅奇也向扬州退兵，朝廷上下一片惊恐。
English: After the war broke out, the royal power first abandoned Zhangzhou to flee south, and Liu Beiqi also retreated to Yangzhou. The imperial court was shocked.

古文：上欲航海，陈康伯力赞亲征。
现代文：高宗又想逃往海上躲避金军，陈康伯竭力劝说高宗亲征。
English: Gao Zong also wanted to escape to the sea to evade the Chinese army. Chen Kangbo tried his best to persuade Gao Zong to go in person.

古文：是月戊午，枢臣叶义问督江、淮军，允文参谋军事。
现代文：本月二十五日，高宗任命知枢密院事叶义问督视江淮军事，中书舍人虞允文参谋军事。
English: On the 25th day of this month, Gao Zong appointed Jiang Huai as the military inspector of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, and Yu Yunwen as the military staff officer of the People's Republic of China.

古文：权又自和州遁归，锜回镇江，尽失两淮矣。
现代文：王权又从和州逃回，刘钅奇率军退回镇江，两淮地区大片土地全部沦陷。
English: Wang Quan fled back from Hezhou, Liu Bingqi led the army back to Zhenjiang, and large tracts of land in the two Huai regions all fell.

古文：十一月壬申，金主率大军临采石，而别以兵争瓜洲。
现代文：十一月九日，完颜亮率大军到达采石附近，同时派遣另一支金军进攻瓜洲。
English: On the 9th of November, after the army reached the vicinity of the quarry, another army was sent to attack Guazhou.

古文：朝命成闵代锜、李显忠代权，锜、权皆召。
现代文：宋高宗命令成闵替代刘钅奇，李显忠替代王权指挥对金作战。
English: Song Gaozong ordered Cheng Rong to replace Liu Bingqi, and Li Xianzhong to replace Wang Quan to command the war against Jin.

古文：义问被旨，命允文往芜湖趣显忠交权军，且犒师采石，时权军犹在采石。
现代文：刘钅奇、王权被召回罢官。叶义问传达高宗旨意，命令虞允文前往芜湖催促李显忠交出王权的军队，并犒赏驻扎采石的宋军，当时王权的军队还驻在采石。
English: Liu Bingqi and Wang Quan were recalled and dismissed. Ye Yichen conveyed the high purpose and ordered Yu Yunwen to go to Wuhu to urge Li Xianzhong to surrender Wang Quan's army, and reward the Song army stationed in the quarry. At that time, Wang Quan's army was still stationed in the quarry.

古文：丙子，允文至采石，权已去，显忠未来，敌骑充斥。
现代文：十三日，虞允文到达采石时，王权已经离去，新帅李显忠还没有到任，敌人的骑兵已到达长江北岸，形势十分危急。
English: On the 13th, when Yu Yunwen arrived at the quarry, Wang Quan had already left, the new commander Li Xianzhong had not yet arrived, and the enemy cavalry had reached the north bank of the Yangtze River. The situation was very critical.

古文：我师三五星散，解鞍束甲坐道旁，皆权败兵也。
现代文：宋军已没有统帅，将士们三五成群，卸除武装零星地坐在路旁，都是王权手下的败兵。
English: The Song army no longer had a commander-in-chief. The soldiers were in groups of three or five, unarmed and sitting sporadically by the roadside. They were all defeated soldiers under Wang Quan's command.

古文：允文谓坐待显忠则误国事，遂立招诸将，勉以忠义，曰： 金帛、告命皆在此，待有功。 众曰： 今既有主，请死战。 或曰： 公受命犒师，不受命督战，他人坏之，公任其咎乎？ 允文叱之曰： 危及社稷，吾将安避？ 
现代文：虞允文考虑到坐以等待李显忠到来必将贻误国家大事，毅然招来诸将，勉励他们为国尽忠尽义，说 ：金钱和高宗的命令都在这里，等立功以后给你们论功行赏。 众将士回答： 现在既然有了统帅，我们愿意与金人决一死战。 有人问 ：你是受命前来犒劳部队的，并没有受命督战，如有人告发你，你难道会任凭他们责难吗？ 虞允文斥责他说 ：现在是国家存亡的关键时刻，我怎么能逃避不管呢？ 
English: Considering that waiting for Lee Hsien Loong's arrival would delay the country's important events, Yu Yun Man resolutely summoned the generals and encouraged them to be loyal to the country, saying, "The money and high-ranking orders are all here, and you will be rewarded for your service after you have rendered meritorious service." The generals replied, "Now that we have a commander-in-chief, we are willing to fight the Kim people to the death." Someone asked, "You were ordered to come to reward the troops, but you were not ordered to supervise the war. If someone reported you, would you let them reprimand you?" Yu Yun Man scolded him,

古文：至江滨，见江北已筑高台，对植绛旗二、绣旗二，中建黄屋，亮踞坐其下。
现代文：虞允文率部到达江边时，看到长江以北已修筑高台，高台两边相对树起了两部绛色旗帜，两面五彩旗帜，当中建有一间黄色房屋，完颜亮倨傲地坐在当中。
English: When Yu Yunwen and his party arrived at the river, they saw that a plateau had been built to the north of the Yangtze River. On both sides of the plateau, two scarlet flags and two multicolored flags were erected, and a yellow house was built in the middle, and it sat proudly in the middle.

古文：谍者言，前一日刑白黑马祭天，与众盟，以明日济江，晨炊玉麟堂，先济者予黄金一两。
现代文：有奸细前来报告，前一天金军杀死白马、黑马以祭上天，与众将士约定，第二天渡过长江，早晨在玉麟堂开饭，首先渡过长江的重奖黄金一两。
English: Some spies came to report that the day before, the Golden Army had killed a white horse and a black horse and offered them to the heavens. They made an agreement with the soldiers that they would cross the Yangtze River the next day. In the morning, they would have dinner at Yulin Hall, and the first to cross the Yangtze River would win one or two gold medals.

古文：时敌兵实四十万，马倍之，宋军才一万八千。
现代文：当时金实有士兵四十万，骑兵也超过宋军一倍，宋军总共才有士兵一万八千人。
English: At that time, the Jin Dynasty had 400,000 soldiers and twice as many cavalry as the Song Dynasty. The Song Dynasty only had 18,000 soldiers in total.

古文：允文乃命诸将列大阵不动，分戈船为五，其二并东西岸而行，其一驻中流，藏精兵待战，其二藏小港，备不测。
现代文：虞允文因此命令宋军将士排成大阵按兵不动，将五艘藏有兵器的战船分为几部分，二艘沿长江东西两岸并列航行，一艘驻扎长江中流，隐蔽好精兵良将枕戈待战，另二艘藏在小港中，以备不测。
English: Therefore, Yu Yunwen ordered the Song soldiers to line up in a large formation and remain motionless, and divided the five warships with weapons into several parts. Two ships sailed side by side along the east and west banks of the Yangtze River, one was stationed in the middle of the Yangtze River, hidden so that the elite soldiers would be ready for battle, and the other two were hidden in small ports to prepare for any eventuality.

古文：部分甫毕，敌已大呼，亮操小红旗麾数百艘绝江而来，瞬息，抵南岸者七十艘，直薄宋军，军小却。
现代文：虞允文将布置完毕时，敌军已经大声叫喊起来，完颜亮亲自摇着小红旗指挥数百艘战船横渡长江而来，眨眼之间，金军抵达长江南岸的船就达到七十艘，径直冲向为数不多力量单薄的宋军，宋军向后稍稍退却了一些。
English: By the time Yu Yunwen had finished arranging his troops, the enemy army had already shouted loudly. Guan Yanliang personally waved a small red flag and commanded hundreds of warships to cross the Yangtze River. In the blink of an eye, the Chinese army reached seventy ships on the south bank of the Yangtze River and rushed straight to the Song army, which had only a few and weak forces. The Song army retreated a little.

古文：允文入阵中，抚时俊之背曰： 汝胆略闻四方，立阵后则儿女子尔。 俊即挥双刀出，士殊死战。
现代文：虞允文冲入阵中，抚摸着时俊的背部勉励他说 ：你以胆识过人闻名四方，站立在你身后的是你的兄弟姐妹和儿女啊。 时俊立即挥舞双刀冲出军阵奋勇杀敌，将士们不怕牺牲，杀向敌军，与金军展开殊死搏斗。
English: Yu Yunwen rushed into the battle, stroked Shi Jun's back and encouraged him, saying: "You are famous for your courage in all directions, standing behind you are your brothers and sisters and children. Shi Jun immediately waved his two swords and rushed out of the battle to bravely kill the enemy, the soldiers were not afraid of sacrifice, killed the enemy army, and launched a desperate fight with the Golden Army.

古文：中流官军亦以海鳅船冲敌，舟皆平沉，敌半死半战，日暮未退。
现代文：在长江中游宋军用海鳅船冲击金军船队，许多船只被撞沉没，金军大败，死伤过半，但太阳下山时金军还未退却。
English: In the middle reaches of the Yangtze River, Song Dynasty warships rammed the Chinese fleet with seagulls. Many ships were rammed and sunk, and the Chinese army suffered a crushing defeat, with more than half of its soldiers killed or wounded. However, the Chinese army had not yet retreated when the sun went down.

古文：会有溃军自光州至，允文授以旗鼓，从山后转出，敌疑援兵至，始遁。
现代文：正巧溃逃的一支士兵从光州到达采石，虞允文指挥旗鼓手从山后转出来敲击战鼓，金军怀疑有宋军援兵到达，吓得立即逃跑了。
English: A group of soldiers who had just escaped from Gwangju arrived at the quarry, and Yu Yunwen, the leader of the drummers, came out from behind the mountain to beat the war drums. The Golden Army suspected that reinforcements from the Song Army had arrived, and immediately fled in fear.

古文：又命劲弓尾击追射，大败之，僵尸凡四千余，杀万户二人，俘千户五人及生女真五百余人。
现代文：虞允文又命令弓箭手从后面追赶袭击他们，大败这支溃逃的金兵，杀死金兵四千多人，杀死万户长二人，俘虏千户长五人，活捉女真士兵五百多人。
English: Yu Yunwen also ordered the archers to chase and attack them from behind, and they defeated the fleeing gold soldiers, killed more than 4,000 gold soldiers, killed two heads of households, captured five heads of households, and captured more than 500 female soldiers alive.

古文：敌兵不死于江者，亮悉敲杀之，怒其不出江也。
现代文：那些在江中未被杀死的金兵，完颜亮对他们不出江作战极为愤怒，将他们全部击杀。
English: Those golden soldiers who were not killed in the river were very angry with them for not going out to fight, and killed them all.

古文：以捷闻，犒将士，谓之曰： 敌今败，明必复来。 夜半，部分诸将，分海舟缒上流，别遣兵截杨林口。
现代文：虞允文把捷报报告了皇上，并犒赏三军将士，对他们说： 敌军今天大败而归，明天一定会来复仇。 半夜时分，虞允文命令部分将士，乘海船逆流而上，另外派遣部分水军主动进攻长江北岸的杨林渡口。
English: Yu Yunwen reported the news of victory to the emperor, and rewarded the three soldiers, saying to them: The enemy army has suffered a great defeat today, and will surely come back for revenge tomorrow.At midnight, Yu Yunwen ordered some of the soldiers to go upstream by ship, and sent some sailors to take the initiative to attack the Yanglin Ferry Port on the north bank of the Yangtze River.

古文：丁丑，果至，因夹击之，复大战，焚其舟三百，始遁去，再以捷闻。
现代文：十四日，金军果然来犯，因宋军已有准备，水陆前后夹击敌军，两军再次展开激烈战斗，宋军焚敌船三百艘，金军被打得大败而逃，虞允文再次向皇上上报捷报。
English: On the 14th, the Chinese army did indeed come to attack, because the Song army had made preparations, and clamped down on the enemy army on land and sea. The two armies once again launched a fierce battle. The Song army burned three hundred enemy ships, the Chinese army was defeated and fled, and Yu Yunwen once again reported to the emperor.

古文：既而敌遣伪诏来谕王权，似有宿约。
现代文：完颜亮又派遣使者假传诏令以告知王权，给宋军造成他们早有宿约的假象。
English: Yan Liang also sent an emissary to falsely transmit the imperial edict to inform the royal power, giving the Song Army the illusion that they already had a long-term contract.

古文：允文曰： 此反间也。 仍复书言： 权已置典宪，新将李世辅也，愿一战以决雌雄。 亮得书大怒，遂焚龙凤车，斩梁汉臣及造舟者二人，乃趋瓜洲。
现代文：虞允文说 ：这是敌军的反间计。 于是就写信答复说： 王权已被绳之以法，宋军新的将领将是李世辅，我们愿意在战场上与你们一决雌雄。 完颜亮看到回信后大为恼怒，立即焚烧了他自乘的龙凤车，杀死了梁汉臣和另外两位为金军造船的人，然后率军冲向瓜洲。
English: Yu Yunwen said, "This is a counter-plot of the enemy army." So he wrote a letter in reply saying, "The royal power has been brought to justice, the new general of the Song Army will be Li Shiyu, we are willing to fight you on the battlefield." After Yan Liang saw the reply to the letter, he was very angry, immediately burned his dragon and phoenix car, killed Liang Hanchen and two other people who built ships for the Jin Army, and then led the army to Guazhou.

古文：汉臣，教亮济江者也。
现代文：梁汉臣，是曾向完颜亮献计渡过长江的人。
English: Liang Hancheng is a person who once crossed the Yangtze River to complete Yan Liang's plan.

古文：显忠至自芜湖，允文语之曰： 敌入扬州，必与瓜洲兵合，京口无备，我当往，公能分兵相助乎？ 显忠分李捧军万六千往京口，叶义问亦命杨存中将所部来会。
现代文：李显忠到达芜湖后，虞允文对他说： 敌军进入扬州，必然与瓜洲完颜亮所部合兵一处，京口地区没有防备，我应该去京口设防，希望将军能够分部分兵力帮助京口防卫。 李显忠派遣李捧率军一万六千人奔赴京口，叶义问也命令杨存中率部众来京口会合。
English: After Lee Hsien Chung arrived at Wuhu, Yu Yung Man said to him, "When the enemy army enters Yangzhou, it will inevitably join forces with the troops of Gua Chau, and there is no defense in the Beijing-Kowloon area. I should go to Beijing-Kowloon to set up a defense, and I hope that the general can help defend Beijing-Kowloon with a partial force. Lee Hsien Chung dispatched 16,000 soldiers led by Li Tuo to Beijing-Kowloon, and Ye Yiwu also ordered the troops led by Yang Cunzhong to come to Beijing-Kowloon for a meeting.

古文：允文还建康，即上疏言： 敌败于采石，将徼幸于瓜洲。
现代文：虞允文回到建康，立即上奏疏说 ：金军在采石遭到惨重失败，必然寄希望于在瓜洲侥幸获胜。
English: When Yu Yunwen returned to Jiankang, he immediately reported that the Golden Army had suffered a heavy defeat in quarrying, and he must have hoped for a fluke victory in Guazhou.

古文：今我精兵聚京口，持重待之，可一战而胜。
现代文：现在我们精兵良将聚集京口，严阵以待，就能够一战而胜。
English: Now, our elite soldiers will gather in Kyoguchi, waiting in line, and we will be able to win the battle.

古文：乞少缓六飞之发。 
现代文：请求陛下不要将宋军主力调往别处。 
English: Please ask Your Majesty not to transfer the main force of the Song Army to another place.

古文：甲申，至京口。
现代文：二十一日，虞允文到达京口。
English: On the 21st, Yu Yunwen arrived in Beijing.

古文：敌屯重兵滁河，造三闸储水，深数尺，塞瓜洲口。
现代文：金朝重兵驻扎在滁河，建造了三个大闸用以储水，有数尺之深，塞在瓜洲口。
English: Heavy military forces of the Kim dynasty were stationed in the Min River, and three large locks were built to store water, several feet deep, at the mouth of the Guazhou River.

古文：时杨存中、成闵、邵宏渊诸军皆聚京口，不下二十万，惟海鳅船不满百，戈船半之。
现代文：此时杨存中、成闵、邵宏渊几支军队都聚集在京口，总数不下二十万人，只有海鳅船数目一百只不到，战船数目仅五十余艘。
English: At this time, several armies including Yang Cunzhong, Cheng Quan, and Shao Hongyuan were gathered in Jingkou, with a total of no less than 200,000 people, only the number of seagull ships was less than 100, and the number of warships was only more than 50.

古文：允文谓遇风则使战船，无风则使战舰，数少恐不足用。
现代文：虞允文建议遇风就使用战船，遇无风日就使用战舰出击，由于战舰数量不多恐怕不够使用。
English: Yu Yunwen suggested using warships when the wind blows, and using warships to attack when there is no wind. Since the number of warships is small, I am afraid that it is not enough to use.

古文：遂聚材治铁，改修马船为战舰，且借之平江，命张深守滁河口，扼大江之冲，以苗定驻下蜀为援。
现代文：于是到处搜集材料冶炼钢铁，将修马船改造成为战舰，并从平江借来了一些战船，命令张深守卫滁河入口，扼住长江的咽喉，命令苗定驻守下蜀作为后援。
English: Therefore, he collected materials from everywhere to smelt steel, transformed the horse-drawn carriage into a warship, and borrowed some warships from the Pingjiang River. He ordered Zhang Sheng to guard the entrance of the Minhe River and hold the throat of the Yangtze River, and ordered Miao Ding to garrison Shimo Shu as backup.

古文：庚寅，亮至瓜洲，允文与存中临江按试，命战士踏车船中流上下，三周金山，回转如飞，敌持满以待，相顾骇愕。
现代文：二十七日，完颜亮到达瓜洲，虞允文与杨存中到江边视察备战情况，命令宋军将士驾驶车船在长江中流来回开动，绕金山转了三圈，其船回转速度如飞，金军张弓搭箭严阵以待，互相注视，非常惊恐害怕。
English: On the 27th, after arriving in Guazhou, Yu Yunwen and Yang Cunzhong went to the riverside to inspect the preparation for war, and ordered the Song soldiers to drive the car boat back and forth in the middle of the Yangtze River, and circled around the Jinshan three times. The speed of the boat's rotation was so fast that the Golden Army was waiting with bows and arrows, watching each other, very frightened.

古文：亮笑曰： 纸船耳。 一将跪奏：南军有备，未可轻，愿驻扬州，徐图进取。
现代文：完颜亮笑着说 ：不过是一些纸船罢了。 一员战将跪下启奏 ：宋军已做好充分准备，千万不能轻敌，恳请陛下退回扬州，以后慢慢考虑进攻宋军的计划。 
English: After a bright smile, he said, "It's just some paper boats." A member of the war will kneel down for the opening song: The Song Army has made full preparations, and must not take the enemy lightly. I implore His Majesty to return to Yangzhou, and then slowly consider the plan to attack the Song Army.

古文：亮怒，欲斩之，哀谢良久，杖之五十。
现代文：完颜亮大怒，准备杀死他这个将领，该将谢罪哀求良久，最后决定鞭打他五十次。
English: He flew into a rage and prepared to kill the general. The general begged for forgiveness for a long time and finally decided to whip him fifty times.

古文：乙未，亮为其下所杀。
现代文：十一月二十七日，完颜亮被他的部下杀死。
English: On November 27th, Guan Yanliang was killed by his subordinates.

古文：初，亮在瓜洲，闻李宝由海道入胶西，成闵诸军方顺流而下，亮愈怒。
现代文：当初，完颜亮驻兵瓜洲时，得知宋将李宝正由海道进入胶西，成闵率领各路军马正顺流而下，完颜亮更加气愤。
English: At first, when Guan Yanliang was stationed in Heiguazhou, he was even more angry when he learned that Song general Li Bao was entering Jiaoxi by the sea, and Cheng Liang was leading the army down the river.

古文：还扬州，召诸将约三日济江，否则尽杀之。诸将谋曰： 进有渰杀之祸，退有敲杀之忧，奈何？ 有万戴者曰： 杀郎主，与南宋通和归乡则生矣。 众曰： 诺。 亮有紫茸细军，不临阵，恒以自卫，众患之，有萧遮巴者绐之曰： 淮东子女玉帛皆聚海陵。 且嗾使往，细军去而亮死。
现代文：完颜亮有一队身穿紫色兽毛服装的士兵，从不临阵打仗，整日跟随保卫完颜亮，众人对他们很恐惧，有一名叫萧遮巴的人欺骗卫兵说： 淮东的美玉、金银、玉帛都集中放在海陵。 
English: At the end of the festival, there was a group of soldiers dressed in purple animal-hair costumes. They never went to battle, but spent the whole day guarding the end of the festival. People were very afraid of them. A man named Xiao Zhaba deceived the guards and said, "The gems, gold, silver, and jade of Huadong are all concentrated in Hailing."

古文：丙申，敌人退屯三十里，遣使议和。
现代文：故意怂恿他们去海陵寻宝，卫兵们中计被骗离开后，完颜亮被杀死。十二月三日，金军后退三十里驻营，并派遣使者要求议和。
English: After the guards were tricked into leaving, they were brutally killed. On December 3, the Golden Army retreated thirty miles to camp, and sent an envoy to request peace talks.

古文：己亥，奏闻。
现代文：六日，虞允文上奏疏报告战斗情况。
English: On the 6th, Yu Yun sent a report on the situation of the battle.

古文：召入对，上慰藉嘉叹，谓陈俊卿曰： 虞允文公忠出天性，朕之裴度也。 诏免扈从，往两淮措置。允文至镇江，奏收两淮三策，不报。
现代文：高宗请他入宫面谈，皇上慰问、奖励他并感叹良久，对陈俊卿说 ：虞允文天性忠诚厚道，是我的裴度啊。 诏令免去他护驾侍从身份，改赴两淮地区主持对金作战事宜，虞允文到达镇江后，上奏疏阐明收复两淮地区的三条计策，却没有回音。
English: Gao Zong invited him to the palace for an interview, the emperor consoled and rewarded him and lamented for a long time, saying to Chen Junqing: Yu Yunwen is naturally loyal and virtuous, it is my duty. The imperial decree removed his escort servant status and went to the Lianghuai region to preside over the war against Kim. After Yu Yunwen arrived in Zhenjiang, he made a report to the shoemaker to clarify the three strategies for recovering the Lianghuai region, but there was no response.

古文：明年正月，上至建康。
现代文：第二年正月，高宗到达建康。
English: In the first month of the second year, Gaozong arrived in Jiankang.

古文：寻议回銮，诏以杨存中充江淮、荆襄路宣抚使，允文副之。
现代文：不久商议移驾回朝，下诏任命主和派杨存中担任江淮荆襄路宣抚使，另以虞允文为副使。
English: Soon after, they discussed moving back to the North, and issued a decree appointing Yang Cunzhong as the chief envoy to the Jianghuai and Jingyang Roads, and Yu Yunwen as the deputy envoy.

古文：给、舍缴存中除命，于是允文充川陕宣谕使。
现代文：主战派官员大失所望，对任命杨存中意见很大，高宗于是改任虞允文为川陕宣谕使。
English: The officials of the main war faction were greatly disappointed and had strong opinions about the appointment of Yang Cunzhong, so Gao Zong was reassigned to Yu Yunwen as the envoy of Chuanshan.

古文：陛辞，言： 金亮既诛，新主初立，彼国方乱，天相我恢复也。
现代文：虞允文向皇上辞行，说： 金国完颜亮已被诛杀，新主完颜褒即位时间不长，金国国内形势一片混乱，这是上天帮助我们恢复失地的大好时机。
English: Yu Yunwen tendered his resignation to the emperor, saying: The glory of the Kim dynasty has been destroyed, the new ruler will not be enthroned for a long time, and the domestic situation of the Kim dynasty is in chaos. This is a great opportunity for heaven to help us recover the lost ground.

古文：和则海内气沮，战则海内气伸。 上以为然。
现代文：与金和议就会打击朝野上下抗金义士的抗战热情，继续抗金就会振奋朝野上下的抗金士气。 
English: Negotiating a peace treaty with Kim will dampen the anti-war enthusiasm of anti-Kim loyalists up and down the country, and continuing to resist Kim will boost anti-Kim morale up and down the country.

古文：允文至蜀，与大将吴璘议经略中原，璘进取凤翔，复巩州。
现代文：高宗认为他说得很有道理。虞允文到达四川后，与大将吴王共商赶走金军恢复中原大计，吴王攻取凤翔，收复巩州。
English: Gao Zong thought his words were very reasonable. After Yu Yunwen arrived in Sichuan, he negotiated with the general Wu Wang to drive away the gold army and restore the Central Plains, and Wu Wang captured Fengxiang and recovered Gongzhou.

古文：金治兵争陕西新复州郡，蜀士欲弃之，允文持不可。
现代文：金人增派大批援军争夺吴王收复的大片土地，四川士人打算放弃这些州郡，虞允文坚持不能放弃。
English: The Jin people sent a large number of reinforcements to compete for the large tracts of land recovered by King Wu. The Sichuan people planned to give up these states and counties, but Yu Yunwen insisted that they could not give them up.

古文：孝宗受禅，朝臣有言西事者，谓官军进讨，东不可过宝鸡，北不可过德顺，且欲用忠义人守新复州郡，官军退守蜀口。
现代文：孝宗即位后，朝中大臣有谈论西部战事的，认为宋军讨伐金人，东部不能超过宝鸡，北部不能超过德顺，并打算任用忠义之士守卫新收复的州郡，官军退守四川。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong, the ministers of the DPRK and China talked about the war in the west, and believed that the Song Army could not surpass the Baoji in the east and the Deshun in the north, and intended to appoint loyal soldiers to guard the newly recovered prefectures and counties, and the government army retreated to Sichuan.

古文：允文争之不得，吴璘遂归河池，盖用参知政事史浩议，欲尽弃陕西，台谏袁季、任古附和其说。
现代文：虞允文据理力争，没有取得结果，吴王于是退兵河池，以上建议都是参知政事史浩提出的，正是他打算放弃陕西，台谏袁季、任古也附和他的意见。
English: The above proposals were all put forward by Sangchong Zhengji Shihao. It was he who planned to give up Shaanxi, and Taibei Yuanji and Rengu also supported his opinion.

古文：允文再上疏，大略言： 恢复莫先于陕西，陕西五路新复州县又系于德顺之存亡，一旦弃之，则窥蜀之路愈多，西和、阶、成，利害至重。 前后凡十五疏，且移书陈康伯，康伯牵于同列，不能回也。
现代文：虞允文再上奏疏，大概内容是： 恢复国土没有比首先恢复陕西更重要的了，陕西同新近收复州县的安危与德顺之存亡息息相关，德顺一旦放弃，进攻四川的路线就增加许多，西河州、阶州、成州，其地理位置事关重大。 虞允文先后上奏疏十五次，又写信给陈康伯，陈康伯虽与他同属主战派，却也没有回天之力。
English: There is nothing more important for the restoration of the country than the restoration of Shaanxi first. Shaanxi is closely related to the safety and security of the newly recovered Fuzhou County and the survival of Deshun. Once Deshun gives up, the route of the attack on Sichuan will increase a lot. The geographical location of West Hezhou, Chaozhou and Chengzhou is of great importance. Yu Yunwen successively wrote to Fuzhou fifteen times, and also wrote to Chen Kangbo. Although Chen Kangbo belonged to the same main war faction as him, he did not have the power to return to heaven.

古文：上将召允文问陕西事，执政忌其来，以显谟阁直学士知夔州，寻又命奏事。
现代文：孝宗准备召请虞允文询问陕西方面的战况，参知政事史浩等人不愿意让他来，于是虞允文以显谟阁学士身份任夔州知州，不久皇上又命他上疏奏事。
English: Xiaozong was preparing to invite Yu Yunwen to inquire about the war situation in Shaanxi, but people such as Sanzhi, Zhengji and Shihao were not willing to let him come. Therefore, Yu Yunwen was appointed as a scholar of the Xian Mokou Cabinet, and soon the emperor ordered him to report on the situation.

古文：隆兴元年入对，史浩既素主弃地，及拜相，亟行之，且亲为诏，有曰： 弃鸡肋之无多，免锒心之未已。 允文入对言： 今日有八可战。 上问及弃地，允文以笏画地，陈其利害。
现代文：隆兴元年，虞允文入宫回答皇上的提问，史浩一向主张弃地求和，等到升为右相后，立即实现他的主和政策，还亲自为孝宗拟定诏书，其中有这样的词句 ：丢弃鸡肋一类没有多大意味的东西，可以消除金人的贪婪之心。 虞允文入宫上奏说 ：现在有八条理由说明我们可以继续对金作战。 孝宗问到弃地问题时，虞允文用朝见时所执的手板在地上画，力陈丧失土地的利害。
English: In the first year of the Longxing, Yu Yunwen entered the palace to answer the emperor's question. Shi Hao had always advocated abandoning the land and seeking peace. After he was promoted to the right phase, he immediately realized his master and policy. He also personally drafted an edict for Xiaozong, which included the following words: Discarding things that do not have much meaning, such as chicken ribs, can eliminate the greed of the Jin people. Yu Yunwen entered the palace and said in his report: There are now eight reasons why we can continue to fight against Jin. When Xiaozong asked about the issue of abandoning the land, Yu Yunwen used the tablet he held at the

古文：上曰： 此史浩误朕。 以敷文阁待制知太平州，寻除兵部尚书、湖北京西宣抚使，改制置使。
现代文：宋孝宗说： 这是史浩使我受害。 虞允文又以敷文阁待制身份任太平州知州，不久又升任兵部尚书、湖北京西宣抚使，又改任制置使。
English: Song Xiaozong said: It was Shi Hao who victimized me. Yu Yunwen was appointed to Taiping Zhizhou with the status of Shibunkaku, and soon he was promoted to the position of Hyobushuangshu, Hubei West Xuanfu Envoy, and then he was reappointed as the envoy.

古文：时朝廷遣卢仲贤使金议和，汤思退又欲弃唐、邓、海、泗，手诏谓唐、邓非险要，可置度外，允文五上疏力争。
现代文：当时南宋朝廷派遣卢仲贤出使金国商谈和议条件，宰相汤思退又打算放弃唐、邓、海、泗四州，孝宗亲自拟旨以唐、邓二州不是战略要地为由，下令可能考虑放弃，虞允文五次上奏疏据理力争。
English: At that time, the Southern Song Dynasty court sent Lu Zhongxian to negotiate the terms of peace with China. The Prime Minister Tang Siyi also planned to give up the four states of Tang, Deng, Hai, and Min. Xiaozong personally drafted an order on the grounds that the two states of Tang and Deng were not strategically important, and ordered that they might consider giving up. Yu Yunwen submitted five times to argue for reasons.

古文：思退怒，即奏曰： 此皆以利害不切于己，大言误国，以邀美名。
现代文：汤思退大怒，于是上奏说： 这都是因为和议的利害关系与虞允文没有太大影响，故他大谈误国，以此博取主战派的美名。
English: This was all because the interests of the peace talks and Yu Yunwen did not have much influence, so he talked a lot about the wrong country, in order to gain the reputation of the main war faction.

古文：宗社大事，岂同戏剧。 上意遂定。
现代文：事关国家安危的大事，岂能像演戏一样。 孝宗决定向主和派屈服。
English: When it comes to a matter of national security, how can it be like a play? Xiaozong decided to submit to the Lord and the faction.

古文：思退阳请召允文，实欲去之也。
现代文：汤思退表面上请求皇上召用虞允文，实际上是想去之而后快。
English: On the face of it, Tang Sidi asked the emperor to summon Yu Yunwen, but in fact he wanted to do so.

古文：允文上印，犹以四州不可弃为请，乞致仕。
现代文：虞允文交上官印，仍然请求不要割让四州领土，请求辞职退休。
English: Yu Yunwen handed in the official seal, still requested not to cede the territory of the four states, and requested to resign and retire.

古文：诏以显谟阁学士知平江府。
现代文：宋孝宗下诏令虞允文以显谟阁学士身份任平江府知州。
English: Under the edict of Emperor Song Xiaozong, Yu Yunwen was appointed to Chizhou of Pingjiang Province as an academician of the Mokou Academy.

古文：思退竟决和议，割唐、邓。
现代文：汤思退最终决定与金议和，将唐、邓二州割让金国。
English: Tong Siyu finally decided to make peace with Jin, and ceded Tang and Deng Erzhou to Jin.

古文：二年，金兵复至，思退贬，上悔不用允文言。
现代文：隆兴二年，金兵再次入侵南宋，孝宗将汤思退等人罢官，后悔没有听从虞允文的建议。
English: In the second year of the Longxing, the Jin soldiers invaded the Southern Song again, and Xiaozong dismissed Tang Siyi and others, regretting that he did not listen to Yu Yunwen's suggestion.

古文：陈俊卿亦荐允文堪大用，除端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事。
现代文：陈俊卿也举荐虞允文，认为他可堪重任，升任端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事。
English: Chen Junqing also recommended Yu Yunwen, believing that he could handle the heavy responsibility, and he was promoted to the post of Duanming Palace scholar and the same-signed Privy Councillor.

古文：乾道元年，拜参知政事兼知枢密院事。
现代文：乾道元年，虞允文任参知政事兼知枢密院事。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Yu Yunwen was appointed as a member of the Council of State and Privy Councillor.

古文：是秋，金遣完颜仲有所议，偃蹇不敬，允文请斩之，廷有异论，不果。
现代文：这年秋天，金国派遣使者完颜仲前来谈判，金使傲慢无理，目中无人，虞允文请求杀死完颜仲，因朝臣中有不同意见而没有行动。
English: In the autumn of that year, Kim sent an envoy to negotiate with Kuan Yin Zhong. Kim was arrogant and unreasonable, and had no one in his eyes. Yu Yunwen requested that Kuan Yin Zhong be killed, but there was no action because there were different opinions among the courtiers.

古文：会钱端礼受李宏玉带，事连允文，为御史章服所论，罢政，奉祠西归。
现代文：正碰上钱端礼接受李宏玉带一事曝光，这件事牵连了虞允文，被御史章服攻讦而定罪，罢去官职，西归故乡主管宫观。
English: Just as Qian Duanli was exposed for accepting Li Hongyu's bribe, this incident implicated Yu Yunwen, who was convicted by the Imperial Historian, dismissed from his official position, and returned to his hometown as the head of Gongguan.

古文：三年二月，召至阙，除知枢密院事兼参知政事。
现代文：乾道三年二月，又召回朝廷，再次担任知枢密院事兼参知政事。
English: In February of the third year of the Heian period, he was recalled to the Imperial Court and once again assumed the post of Privy Councilor and Councilor of State.

古文：吴璘卒，议择代，上谕允文曰： 吴璘既卒，汪应辰恐不习军事，无以易卿。
现代文：吴王逝世后，朝廷讨论由谁接任他的职务，皇上对虞允文说： 吴王已经去世，汪应辰恐怕不熟悉军事，这个重任只能交给你了。
English: After the death of King Wu, the imperial court discussed who would take over his duties. The emperor said to Yu Yunwen: King Wu has passed away, and Wang Yingchen is probably not familiar with military affairs. This important task can only be given to you.

古文：凡事不宜效张浚迂阔，军前事，卿一一亲临之。 即拜资政殿大学士、四川宣抚使，寻诏依旧知枢密院事。
现代文：以后凡事不要效法张浚的迂腐固执，军中各种事情，你应该一一亲临观察指导。 皇上立即任命他为资政殿大学士、四川宣抚使，不久又下诏令虞允文继续担任知枢密院事。
English: In the future, don't follow Zhang Jun's pedantry and stubbornness in everything, you should personally observe and guide all kinds of things in the army. The emperor immediately appointed him as the Vice-President of the Imperial Household, the Sichuan Messenger, and soon issued a decree to Yu Yunwen to continue to serve as the Privy Council.

古文：归蜀一月，召至阙，不数月复使蜀。
现代文：虞允文回到四川仅一个月，又被召到朝廷，几个月后又去四川。
English: Just one month after returning to Sichuan, Yu Yunwen was summoned to the imperial court, and a few months later he went to Sichuan again.

古文：太上赐御书《圣主得贤臣颂》，上又为之制跋，陛辞，复以所御双履及甲胄赐焉。
现代文：太上皇宋高宗赏赐虞允文御书《圣主得贤臣颂》，孝宗亲自写跋，虞允文向皇上辞行，孝宗又将自己的一双鞋和甲胄赏赐给他。
English: Empress Dowager Song Gao Zong presented Yu Yunwen with a copy of the book "Holy Lord's Sermon on the Wise Men," which was personally written by Xiaozong. Yu Yunwen tendered his resignation to the emperor, and Xiaozong also presented him with a pair of shoes and armor.

古文：过郢，奏筑黄鹰山城。
现代文：虞允文经过郢州时，上奏疏建议修筑黄鹰山城。
English: While Yu Yunwen was passing through Zhangzhou, Shang Song Soo suggested building Huangying Mountain City.

古文：过襄阳，奏修府城。
现代文：经过襄阳时，上奏疏建议修筑府城。
English: When passing through Yangyang, Shang Song So suggested building a prefectural capital.

古文：八月至汉中，又往沔阳。
现代文：八月到达汉中，又前往沔阳。
English: In August, he arrived at Hanzhong Middle School and then went to Shenyang.

古文：九月，至益昌。
现代文：九月抵达益昌。
English: He arrived in Yichang in September.

古文：先被手诏戒九事，洎至蜀，悉奉而行，尤以军政为急。
现代文：离开朝廷前孝宗下手诏要求他重视九件事，一路颠簸到达四川后，虞允文全部按皇上的指示行动，尤其将军政要事放在首位。
English: Before leaving the imperial court, Emperor Xiaozong issued an edict asking him to pay attention to nine things. After arriving in Sichuan, Yu Yunwen acted in accordance with the emperor's instructions, especially putting military and political affairs first.

古文：又奏阅实诸军，第其壮怯为三，上备战，中下备辎重，老者少者不预。
现代文：又上奏疏报告检阅了各支部队实力后，准备按照士兵们体力强壮虚弱的次序将他们分为三部分，上等兵用以作战，中下等兵用以准备军用器械、粮草、服装等行军物质，老弱病残士兵一律辞退。
English: After reviewing the strength of each troop, the report was prepared to divide the soldiers into three parts according to the order of their physical strength and weakness. The upper class soldiers were used to fight, the middle and lower class soldiers were used to prepare military equipment, grain and grass, clothing and other marching materials, and the old, weak and sick soldiers were all dismissed.

古文：汰兵凡万人，减缗钱四百万。
现代文：此次行动共裁减士兵一万人，为国家节约军费开支四百万。
English: This action reduced the number of soldiers by a total of ten thousand, saving the country four million in military spending.

古文：汰去兵有劳绩者，置员阙处之。
现代文：对于被裁减的士兵中一些立有战功、做出了成绩的人，将他们安置在空缺位子上。
English: For some of the reduced soldiers who have distinguished themselves in battle and made achievements, they will be placed in vacant positions.

古文：兴、洋义士，民兵也，绍兴初以七万计，大散之战，将不授甲，驱之先官军，死亡略尽。
现代文：兴州、洋州地区的抗金义士，都是一些民兵组织，绍兴初年大约有七万余人，大散关战役中，统帅不发给他们盔甲，却让他们在官军前面冲锋，使他们几乎全军覆灭。
English: The gold resisters in the Xingzhou and Yangzhou regions were all militia organizations. In the first year of Shaoxing, there were about 70,000 people. During the Great Sankuan Campaign, the commander did not give them armor, but let them charge in front of the official army, causing almost the entire army to be destroyed.

古文：命利帅晁公武核实，得二万三千九百余人。
现代文：虞允文命令利州元帅晁公武经过仔细查对后，共得士兵二万三千九百余人。
English: After a careful investigation, Yu Yunwen ordered Lizhou Marshal Zou Gongwu to raise a total of more than 23,900 soldiers.

古文：又得陕西弓箭手法，参绍兴制为一书，俾将吏守之。
现代文：又得到陕西地区先进的弓箭制造及使用技术，参照绍兴时技术编成一本书，让将士们随身携带。
English: They also obtained advanced bow and arrow manufacturing and use technology in Shaanxi, and compiled a book with reference to Shaoxing technology, so that soldiers can carry it with them.

古文：以马政付张松，奏依旧制分茶马为川、秦司。
现代文：虞允文又将马政交给张松，奏请依历代旧制将茶马分为川、秦司。
English: Yu Yunwen also handed over Ma Zheng to Zhang Song, and asked him to divide the tea horses into Chuan and Qin according to the old system.

古文：初在枢府，萧遮巴以刷军中人为言，允文尝奏谕三衙抚存之。
现代文：当初虞允文在枢密院任职时，萧遮巴曾提议清理军中士兵，虞允文曾奏请三衙把被清除的士兵加以安抚、收编。
English: At the beginning, when Yu Yunwen was serving in the Privy Council, Xiao Zhaba had proposed to clean up the soldiers in the army, and Yu Yunwen had requested the three emperors to pacify and integrate the cleared soldiers.

古文：至是，金、洋、兴元归正人二万，遮道诉系缧之苦，允文分给官田，俾咸振业。
现代文：到此时，金州、洋州、兴元州从金朝归顺者二万人，他们拦在路上诉说被拘捕、囚禁的痛苦，虞允文将官田分给他们，使他们得以重振家业。
English: By this time, there were 20,000 people in Jinzhou, Yangzhou and Xingyuanzhou who had converted from the Kim dynasty. They stopped on the road to complain about the pain of being arrested and imprisoned. Yu Yunwen allocated official fields to them so that they could revive their family business.

古文：欲结敌将姜挺、白沂，遵御札募巩人王嗣祖结外蕃以图金人，又得蕃僧六彪者偕往，竟无成说。
现代文：虞允文打算结交敌将姜挺、白沂，并按照朝廷的指令招募巩人王嗣祖，打算与边境少数民族通好以共同对付金人，又得到蕃僧六彪等与他一同前往，可惜最后没有签订协议。
English: Yu Yunwen planned to make friends with the enemy generals Jiang Ting and Bai Xuan, and in accordance with the instructions of the imperial court, recruited the Gong people Wang Shizu, planned to make friends with the border ethnic minorities to jointly deal with the Jin people, and got the monk Liubiao and others to go with him, but unfortunately no agreement was signed in the end.

古文：时邛、蜀十四郡告饥，荒政凡六十五事，剑倅献羡钱五万，却之。
现代文：当时邛、蜀十四州皆发生饥荒，向朝廷报告庄稼欠收的奏疏有六十五件，剑州将节余钱帛五万捐献灾区，朝廷没有接受。
English: At that time, famine occurred in the 14 states of Min and Shu. Sixty-five cases of late harvest were reported to the imperial court. The imperial court did not accept the donation of 50,000 yuan from Jianzhou to the disaster area.

古文：五年八月，拜右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
现代文：乾道五年八月，虞允文被任命为右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
English: In August of the 5th year of the Emperor's reign, Yu Yunwen was appointed as the right-hand man of the Emperor, and the second-ranked official and confidential envoy of the Emperor.

古文：允文多荐知名士，如洪适、汪应辰。
现代文：虞允文多次推荐知名人士，如洪适、汪应辰。
English: Yu Yunwen repeatedly recommended famous people, such as Hong Shi and Wang Yingchen.

古文：及为相，籍人才为三等，有所见闻即记之，号《材馆录》。
现代文：等到升任宰相后，将各种人才分为三等编入名册，并将所见所闻记录下来，编书为《材馆录》。
English: After he was promoted to prime minister, he divided all kinds of talents into three classes and compiled them into a roster, recorded what he saw and heard, and compiled the book as "Material Library."

古文：凡所举，上皆收用，如胡铨、周必大、王十朋、赵汝愚、晁公武、李焘其尤章明者也。
现代文：虞允文所推荐的所有人才，宋孝宗皆全部收用，例如胡铨、周必大、王十朋、赵汝愚、晁公武、李焘是他们当中特别优秀杰出的代表。
English: All the talents recommended by Yu Yunwen were all used by Song Xiaozong. For example, Hu Wei, Zhou Bida, Wang Shifeng, Zhao Ruwu, Zou Gongwu, and Li Xuan are particularly outstanding representatives.

古文：上以兵冗财匮为忧，允文与陈俊卿议革三衙杂役，汰冗籍，三军无怨言。
现代文：孝宗对兵员冗多、财政匮乏感到很忧虑，虞允文与陈俊卿商议革除三衙的各种名目繁多的杂役，裁减军队中多余的闲散人员，三军对此没有怨言。
English: Xiaozong was very worried about the excessive number of soldiers and the lack of finances. Yu Yunwen and Chen Junqing discussed the reform of the army by eliminating all kinds of miscellaneous servants with a wide range of names and reducing the number of idle personnel in the army. The three armies did not complain about this.

古文：六年，陈俊卿以奏留龚茂良忤上意，上震怒甚，俊卿待命浙江亭，两日不报。
现代文：乾道六年，陈俊卿因奏请留下龚茂良违逆了皇上的旨意，皇上极为愤怒，陈俊卿在浙江亭等待命令，两天都没有得到答复。
English: After six years on the dry road, Chen Junqing was asked to stay behind in order to play the shengmaoliang, which violated the emperor's will. The emperor was extremely angry. Chen Junqing waited for orders in Zhejiang Pavilion, and did not receive an answer for two days.

古文：允文请对，极论体貌之道，叠拜榻前，遂命判福州。
现代文：虞允文请求面见孝宗，竭力阐述君臣之间应以礼相待的道理，多次去御榻前拜见皇上，孝宗于是任命陈俊卿为福州通判。
English: Yu Yunwen requested to meet with Xiaozong, tried his best to explain the principle that the emperor and his ministers should treat each other with courtesy, and visited the emperor several times before the imperial bed. Xiaozong then appointed Chen Junqing as the Fuzhou magistrate.

古文：诏以范成大为祈请使，为陵寝故。
现代文：宋孝宗诏令范成大为祈请使，为了徽、钦二帝的宫寝陵墓的缘故。
English: Emperor Song Xiaozong issued an edict ordering Fan Chengda to be a messenger of prayer, for the sake of the imperial crest and the imperial mausoleum of Emperor Qin.

古文：金不从，且谍报欲以三十万骑奉迁陵寝来归，中外汹汹，荆、襄将帅皆请增戍。
现代文：金人不同意移交给宋朝，并报告准备以三十万骑兵护送徽、钦二帝的宫寝陵墓归宋，朝野上下议论纷纷，一片惊恐，荆、襄二州统帅都请求增加兵力戍卫。
English: The goldsmith did not agree to be handed over to the Song Dynasty, and reported that he was preparing to escort the imperial crest and the imperial mausoleum of Emperor Qin II to the Song Dynasty with 300,000 cavalrymen. There was a lot of discussion both inside and outside the court, and everyone was alarmed. The generals of Jing and Xiang Erzhou both requested an increase in the number of troops to guard the tomb.

古文：允文谓： 金方惩亮，决不轻动，不过以虚声撼我耳。 遂奏止之。
现代文：虞允文对他们说 ：金人刚杀死完颜亮不久，决不会轻举妄动，他们不过是故意虚张声势，吓唬吓唬我们而已。 于是奏请停止增兵。
English: Yu Yunwen said to them, "The Jin people have just finished killing and the color has not been bright for a long time, they will never act rashly, they are just deliberately bluffing, scaring and scaring us." So please stop the troop increase.

古文：朝论纷然，允文屹不动，敌卒无他。
现代文：朝野舆论一片哗然，虞允文坚持己见决不动摇，以后金军果然没有入侵南下的行动。
English: Public opinion at home and abroad was in an uproar. Yu Yunwen insisted that he would never waver in his opinion, and the Chinese army did not invade the south after that.

古文：自庄文太子毙，储位未定。
现代文：自从庄文太子死后，王储一直未定。
English: Since the death of Prince Zhuangwen, the crown prince has been undecided.

古文：允文上疏，且屡恳陈。
现代文：虞允文屡次上奏疏，言词恳切希望早立太子，以安定天下。
English: Yu Yunwen repeatedly appealed to the emperor, saying that he earnestly hoped for the early enthronement of a crown prince in order to stabilize the country.

古文：七年正月，上两宫尊号，议始定，下诏皇第三子恭王惇立为皇太子，皇子恺以雄武、保宁军节度使判宁国府。
现代文：乾道七年正月，孝宗封两宫尊号，立太子之议终于决定，下诏将第三子恭王赵忄享立为皇太子，另一皇子赵恺以雄武、保宁军节度使身份通判宁国府。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of the Heian period, it was finally decided that the third son of King Gyeongjo, Prince Cho Hyun, would become the crown prince, and the other son, Prince Cho Hyun, would be appointed as the governor of the Ninggoku-fu by virtue of his military prowess and military prowess of the Boryeong army.

古文：皇太子寻尹临安。
现代文：皇太子不久就任临安尹。
English: The crown prince soon assumed the post of Lin An Yin.

古文：侍卫马军司牧地旧在临安，允文谓地狭不利刍牧，请令就牧镇江，缓急用骑过江便。
现代文：侍卫马军司牧马的地方过去一直设在临安，虞允文认为此地地势狭窄，不利于放牧，请求下令将牧地改为镇江，遇有紧急情况时骑马过江比较便利。
English: In the past, the place of the horse guards and the horse herdsmen was located in Lin'an. Yu Yunwen thought that the land was narrow and not conducive to grazing, and requested that the pasture be changed to Zhenjiang. In case of emergency, it is more convenient to cross the river by horse.

古文：三军有怨语，其后言者以此为言。
现代文：三军将士对此颇有怨言，以后议事者以此指责虞允文。
English: The three generals complained a lot about this, and later the deliberators accused Yu Yunwen of this.

古文：胡铨以台评去，允文奏留之经筵。
现代文：胡铨因任台谏官评议国事过多的缘故被去职，虞允文奏请将他留在经筵。
English: Hu Rong was removed from his post due to the fact that he was appointed as a Taiwanese eunuch to comment on too many state affairs. Yu Yun Wensong asked him to stay in Jing'an.

古文：铨荐朱熹，上问允文识熹否？
现代文：胡铨向朝廷举荐朱熹，孝宗询问虞允文是否认识朱熹？
English: Hu Yao recommended Zhu Xi to the imperial court, while Xiaozong asked Yu Yunwen whether he knew Zhu Xi.

古文：允文谓熹不在程颐下，遂召熹，熹不至。
现代文：虞允文回答朱熹的才华不在程颐之下，于是朝廷召朱熹入京，朱熹没有来。
English: Yu Yunwen replied that Zhu Xi's talent was not inferior to Cheng Yao, so the court summoned Zhu Xi to Beijing, but Zhu Xi did not come.

古文：检鼓院以六条抑上书人，允文力言不可，从之。
现代文：检鼓院以六条规则限制压抑上书言事的人，虞允文上书力陈不能这样做，皇上听从了他的意见。
English: The Guanqin Academy has six rules to restrict and suppress those who engage in writing and speech, and the Emperor listened to Yu Yunwen's opinion that he could not do so.

古文：会庆节，金使乌林答天锡入见，金主婿也，骄倨甚，固请上降榻问金主起居，上不许，天锡跪不起，侍臣错愕失措。
现代文：恰逢孝宗生日，金国使者乌林答天锡前来拜见，此人是金主完颜褒的女婿，态度恶劣，狂妄自大，坚持要求孝宗降低身份询问完颜褒的日常生活，向金主请安，孝宗不肯答应，乌林答天锡就跪地不起，周围的侍从惊慌失措，无以应对。
English: Coinciding with the birthday of Emperor Xiaozong, the emissary of the State of Jin, Wulin Taotianxi, came to see him. This man was the son-in-law of Emperor Qianbo. He had a bad attitude and was arrogant. He insisted that Emperor Xiaozong should lower his status and inquire about Emperor Qianbo's daily life. He asked Emperor Qianbo for peace. Emperor Xiaozong refused to agree, Emperor Wulin Taotianxi fell to his knees, and the attendants around him were panicked and unable to respond.

古文：允文请大驾还禁中，且谕之曰： 大驾既兴，难再御殿，使人来且随班上寿。 金使惭而退。
现代文：虞允文请孝宗立即起驾回宫，然后告诉乌林答天锡说 ：大宋皇帝既然已经起驾回宫，就不会再回此殿了，金使就随大臣们一起上朝祝寿吧。 乌林答天锡因羞惭而退出朝殿。
English: Yu Yunwen asked Xiaozong to drive back to the palace immediately, and then told Ulin Taotianxi that since the Emperor of the Great Song Dynasty had already returned to the palace, he would not return to this hall again, and the envoy should go to the palace with the ministers to celebrate his birthday. Ulin Taotianxi withdrew from the palace because of shame.

古文：上以仆射名不正，改为左、右丞相。
现代文：宋孝宗认为仆射的名称不太合适，将其改为左、右丞相。
English: Song Xiaozong thought that the name "Pukesha" was not appropriate and changed it to "Left and Right Ministers."

古文：八年二月，授允文特进、左丞相兼枢密使，梁克家为右丞相。
现代文：乾道八年二月，任命虞允文为特进、左丞相兼枢密使，梁克家担任右丞相。
English: In February of the 8th year of the Heian period, Yu Yunwen was appointed as the special envoy, the minister of the left and the confidential envoy, and Liang Kejia was appointed as the minister of the right.

古文：允文尝举克家自代，上不许。
现代文：虞允文曾经举荐梁克家代替自己，皇上没有同意。
English: The Emperor did not agree to Yu Yunwen's suggestion that the Liangke family should replace him.

古文：是月，以病乞解机政，又荐克家靖重有宰相器，至是始同相，手诏付允文曰： 朕方欲武臣为枢密，曹勋如何？ 允文谓勋人品卑凡，不可用。
现代文：这个月，虞允文又以病要求解除自己的重要职务，又称赞梁克家老成持重有宰相的气度，到这时，梁克家开始与虞允文一同为相。孝宗又下手诏问虞允文 ：我准备提拔一名武将任枢密使，你认为曹勋如何？ 虞允文说曹勋人品卑劣，气量狭小，无特殊才能，不可任用此人。
English: This month, Yu Yunwen also requested to be relieved of his important duties due to illness, and praised the Liang Ke family for their long-term success in maintaining the dignity of the prime minister. At this time, the Liang Ke family began to act together with Yu Yunwen. Xiaozong also asked Yu Yunwen: I am preparing to promote a military commander to be a confidential envoy, what do you think of Cao Xun? Yu Yunwen said that Cao Xun's character was despicable, his temperament was narrow, he had no special talent, and he could not be appointed.

古文：既而以张说签书枢密院事，右正言王希吕与台官交劾之。
现代文：不久，皇上任命张说任签书枢密院事，右正言王希吕与台谏官交相弹劾张说。
English: Soon after, the emperor appointed Zhang Xian to be the Privy Councillor in charge of signing documents, and Wang Xiliu, the Right Upright, impeached Zhang Xian for communicating with a Taiwanese eunuch.

古文：上怒希吕甚，手诏 与远恶监当。 允文缴回，上益怒。
现代文：孝宗对王希吕非常厌恶，手诏将王希吕发配到险恶的边远地区。虞允文扣留了手诏，皇上愈加愤怒。
English: Emperor Xiaozong was very disgusted with Wang Xiliu, and dispatched him to a remote and dangerous area. The emperor became even more angry when Gu Yunwen detained Wang Xiliu.

古文：梁克家曰： 希吕论张说，台纲也，左相救希吕，国体也。 上怒稍解，卒薄希吕之罚。
现代文：梁克家说 ：王希吕评论张说，是台谏官的责任，虞允文救王希吕，是为了国家的大体着想。 孝宗怒气逐渐消去，最终减轻了对王希吕的惩罚。
English: Liang Kejia said: Wang Xiliu commented on Zhang that it was the responsibility of the Taiwan eunuch, and Yu Yunwen saved Wang Xiliu for the sake of the country as a whole. Xiaozong's anger gradually dissipated, and finally reduced the punishment for Wang Xiliu.

古文：四月，御史萧之敏劾允文，允文上章待罪。
现代文：四月，御史萧之敏上书弹劾虞允文，虞允文上奏章等待定罪。
English: In April, the magistrate Xiao Zhimin sent a letter to impeach Yu Yunwen, and Yu Yunwen sent a letter to await conviction.

古文：上过德寿宫，太上曰： 采石之功，之敏在何许？
现代文：皇上去德寿宫拜见高宗，太上皇说： 采石大捷时，萧之敏在哪里？
English: When the emperor went to Deoksugung Palace to meet Gao Zong, the emperor said, "Where is Xiao Zhimin when the quarry is booming?"

古文：毋听其去。 上为出之敏，且书扇制诗以留之。
现代文：不要听从他的意见，将萧之敏罢官赶走。 孝宗因这件事准备罢黜萧之敏，并在折扇上题诗以挽留虞允文。
English: Don't listen to his advice and oust Xiao Zhimin from his post. Because of this incident, Xiaozong prepared to oust Xiao Zhimin and inscribed a poem on the folding fan to retain Yu Yunwen.

古文：允文言之敏端方，请召归以辟言路。
现代文：虞允文认为萧之敏品行端正，请求皇上将其召回宫中以广开言路。
English: Yu Yunwen thought that Xiao Zhimin's behavior was proper and asked the emperor to call him back to the palace to open the way.

古文：上谓其言宽厚，命曾怀书之《时政记》。
现代文：孝宗深感他为人宽厚善良，命曾怀将这件事记载在《时政记》里。
English: Xiaozong deeply felt that he was a generous and kind person, and he had planned to record this event in the "Chronicle of Political Affairs."

古文：上命选谏官，允文以李彦颍、林光朝、王质对，三人皆鲠亮，又以文学推重于时，故荐之，久不报。
现代文：宋孝宗诏令选拔谏官，虞允文推荐了李彦颖、林光朝和王质三人，他们三人皆为人耿直、光明磊落，并以文学才能著称于当时，因此虞允文荐举他们，很长时间却没有答复。
English: Song Xiaozong issued an imperial edict to select eunuchs, and Yu Yunwen recommended Li Yanying, Lin Guangchao, and the three royal hostages. All three of them were upright and honest, and were famous for their literary talent at the time. Therefore, Yu Yunwen recommended them, but there was no reply for a long time.

古文：曾觌荐一人，赐第，擢谏议大夫。
现代文：曾觌也推荐一人，立即赐进士，提拔为谏议大夫。
English: Zeng Yao also recommended one person, who was immediately promoted to a doctor and promoted to a doctor.

古文：允文、克家争之，不从。
现代文：虞允文、梁克家据理力争，皇上不肯听从。
English: The Emperor refused to listen to the arguments of Yu Yunwen and the Liangke family.

古文：允文力求去，授少保、武安军节度使、四川宣抚使，进封雍国公。
现代文：虞允文请求离职，被授予少保、武安军节度使、四川宣抚使，并加封为雍国公。
English: At the request of Yu Yunwen, he resigned from his post, and was awarded the title of Minor Protector, Military Governor of the Wu'an Army, Sichuan Proclamation Envoy, and the additional title of Yongguogong.

古文：陛辞，上谕以进取之方，期以某日会河南。
现代文：向孝宗辞行，孝宗告诉他进取的方法，并期待着有一天与他会师于河南。
English: He said goodbye to Takamune, who told him how to be aggressive, and looked forward to studying with him in Henan one day.

古文：允文言： 异时戒内外不相应。 上曰： 若西师出而朕迟回，即朕负卿；若朕已动而卿迟回，即卿负朕。 上御正衙，酌酒赋诗以遣之，且赐家庙祭器。
现代文：虞允文说 ：将来要防备内外不能遥相呼应。 皇上回答： 假如蜀军出征而我们迟迟不率军队出发，就是我有负于你；假如我率军出征而你迟迟未能响应，就是你有负于我。 孝宗亲自来到正宫，敬酒赋诗，以隆重的仪式欢送他，并赐给他宗庙祭器。
English: Gu Yunwen said, "In the future, we must be prepared for the fact that there will not be a distant echo from both inside and outside." The emperor replied, "If the Shu army goes to war and we delay in leading the army, I will be responsible for you; if I lead the army to war and you delay in responding, you will be responsible for me." Xiaozong himself came to the main palace, toasted and composed poems, sent him off with a grand ceremony, and gave him the ancestral temple altar.

古文：九年至蜀。
现代文：乾道九年，虞允文到达四川。
English: After nine years on the dry road, Yu Yunwen arrived in Sichuan.

古文：大军月给米一石五斗，不足赡其家，允文捐宣司钱三十万易米，计口增给。
现代文：当时驻川官军每月仅发给一石五斗米，无法赡养家人，虞允文捐献宣抚司三十万钱用以换米，按官兵家中人口数目增加供给。
English: At that time, the government troops stationed in Sichuan were only given one stone and five do of rice per month, unable to support their families. Yu Yunwen donated 300,000 yuan to the Publicity Department to exchange for rice, increasing the supply according to the number of people in the officers' and soldiers' families.

古文：立户马七条，括民马，奏选良家子以储战用。
现代文：虞允文订立七条民户养马以供军用的规则，从民间搜求大批良马，奏请皇上同意后挑选大批青壮年进行训练，作为战争储备力量。
English: Yu Yunwen established seven rules for private households to raise horses for military use, searched for a large number of good horses from the people, and requested the consent of the emperor to select a large number of young adults for training as a war reserve force.

古文：初，北界有寇邻者，拥众数万在商、虢间，允文秉政日纳款，迨至蜀，复遣人致书允文，不报，羁縻之而已。
现代文：当初，北部边界有一名叫寇邻的人，有部众数万人，活动在商州、虢州一带，虞允文主持朝政后他按时向南宋政府交纳赋税，等到虞允文到达四川后，再次派人致书虞允文，虞允文没有立即答复他们，仅仅打算拖延羁縻他们。
English: At the beginning, there was a man named Kou Niang on the northern border, who had tens of thousands of followers and was active in the areas of Shangzhou and Zhangzhou. After Yu Yunwen presided over the imperial government, he paid taxes to the Southern Song government on time. When Yu Yunwen arrived in Sichuan, he sent another letter to Yu Yunwen. Yu Yunwen did not immediately reply to them, but only intended to delay their detention.

古文：既而邻谋觉，金密遣人捕之。
现代文：时间不长，寇邻的密谋被金人发觉，金人秘密派人将他逮捕。
English: Not long after, Kou's neighbor's plot was discovered by Jinren, who secretly sent someone to arrest him.

古文：叶衡奏闻，允文上疏自辨，因请纳禄，不报。
现代文：叶衡上奏疏向孝宗报告了这件事，虞允文上奏为自己辩解，并请求去职，只领俸禄，没有得到答复。
English: Ye Heng reported the matter to Xiaozong, and Yu Yun wrote a letter to defend himself, and asked to leave his post and receive only a salary, but received no reply.

古文：上尝谓允文曰： 丙午之耻，当与丞相共雪之。 又曰： 朕惟功业不如唐太宗，富庶不如汉文、景。 故允文许上以恢复。
现代文：孝宗曾经对虞允文说： 靖康之耻，我将与丞相共同雪洗。 又说 ：我只有功业不如唐太宗，富庶不如汉文帝、汉景帝。 因此虞允文向皇上许诺共同恢复中原，以图统一大业。
English: Xiaozong once said to Yu Yunwen: "Shame of Jingkang, I will wash the snow away together with the prime minister." He also said: "I only have less achievements than Tang Taizong, and I am not as rich as Han Wen Emperor and Han Jing Emperor." Therefore, Yu Yunwen promised the emperor to jointly restore the Central Plains in order to unify the great cause.

古文：使蜀一岁，无进兵期，上赐密诏趣之，允文言军需未备，上不乐。
现代文：虞允文到达四川一年后，仍没有确定进兵日期。宋孝宗赐密诏催促他，虞允文回答军需还没有准备完毕，皇上很不高兴。
English: A year after Yu Yunwen arrived in Sichuan, he still had not set a date for entering the army. Emperor Song Xiaozong gave him a secret edict to urge him, and Yu Yunwen replied that the military supplies were not yet ready. The emperor was very unhappy.

古文：淳熙元年薨。
现代文：淳熙元年，虞允文去世。
English: In the first year of Aung Hee, Yu Yunwen passed away.

古文：后四年，上幸白石大阅，见军皆少壮，谓辅臣曰： 虞允文行沙汰之效也。 寻诏赠太傅，赐谥忠肃。
现代文：四年后，孝宗到白石举行阅兵大典，看到士兵都年轻力壮，很有战斗力，对手下大臣说 ：这都是虞允文实行优胜劣汰，对士兵进行裁减淘汰的结果。 不久下诏追赠虞允文太傅，赐谥 忠肃 。
English: Four years later, when Xiaozong held a grand military parade in Shiroishi and saw that the soldiers were all young, strong and capable of fighting, the minister said to his opponent: "This is all the result of Yu Yunwen's implementation of the survival of the fittest and the reduction and elimination of soldiers.

古文：允文姿雄伟，长六尺四寸，慷慨磊落有大志，而言动有则度，人望而知为任重之器。
现代文：虞允文身材高大，相貌雄伟，身高六尺四寸，为人慷慨，光明磊落，胸怀大志，一言一行都很有分寸，一看便知是可以委以重任的人才。
English: Yu Yunwen is a tall man with a majestic appearance. He is six feet four inches tall, generous, honest, and ambitious. His every word and deed is well measured. You can tell at a glance that he is a talented person who can be entrusted with important tasks.

古文：早以文学致身台阁，晚际时艰，出入将相垂二十年，孜孜忠勤无二焉。
现代文：他早年曾以文学才能效力于台阁，晚年时时政日益艰难，前后出任将相近二十年，孜孜不倦，忠诚勤恳，任劳任怨，没有任何怨言。
English: In his early years, he used his literary talent to serve in the cabinet. In his later years, the political situation became increasingly difficult. He served for nearly 20 years, tirelessly, loyally and diligently, with no complaints.

古文：尝注《唐书》、《五代史》，藏于家。
现代文：他曾经为《唐书》、《五代史》做注释，收藏在他家中。
English: He once annotated "The Book of Tang" and "The History of Five Dynasties" and kept them in his home.

古文：有诗文十卷，《经筵春秋讲义》三卷，《奏议》二十二卷，《内外志》十五卷，行于世。
现代文：著有诗文十卷，《经筵春秋讲义》三卷，《奏议》二十二卷，《内外志》十五卷，皆流传于后世。
English: He was the author of ten volumes of poetry, three volumes of "The Spring and Autumn Lectures on the Classics," twenty-two volumes of "Recommendations," and fifteen volumes of "Domestic and Foreign Affairs," all of which have been passed down to future generations.

古文：子三人：公亮、公著、杭孙。
现代文：虞允文有子三人：公亮、公著、杭孙。
English: Yu Yunwen has three children: Gong Liang, Gong Zhu and Hang Sun.

古文：孙八人，皆好修，唯刚简最知名，嘉定中，召不至，终利路提点刑狱。
现代文：孙八人，都爱好学习、研究，其中只有刚简最为知名，嘉定中叶，帝屡召不至，官终利路提点刑狱。
English: The eight grandsons were all fond of study and research. Among them, only Gangzhan was the most famous. In the middle of Jiading, the emperor could not be summoned repeatedly, and the official finally recommended imprisonment.

