古文：晋阳之围，张谈曰： 先主为重器也，为国家之难也，盍姑无爱宝于诸侯乎？ 
现代文：晋阳被围之前，张谈说： 先主置办各种贵重的礼器，就是为了解救国家危难的，何不姑且不要吝惜财宝，向诸侯求援呢？ 
English: Before Jinyang was besieged, Zhang Dan said, "Our forefathers purchased all kinds of valuable ceremonial objects in order to save the country from peril. Why not spare no expense and ask the princes for help?

古文：襄子曰： 吾无使也。 
现代文：襄子说： 我没有合适的使者。 
English: Xiangzi said, "I don't have a suitable messenger."

古文：张谈曰： 地也可。 
现代文：张谈说： 地可以做使者。 
English: Zhang Dan said: The earth can be a messenger.

古文：襄子曰： 吾不幸有疾，不夷于先子，不德而贿。
现代文：襄子说： 不幸的是我德行有缺，比不上我的先人，没有德行却想贿赂诸侯来求援。
English: Xiangzi said, "Unfortunately, I am not as virtuous as my ancestors, and I want to bribe the princes for help.

古文：夫地也求饮吾欲，是养吾疾而干吾禄也。
现代文：地这个人只晓得满足我的欲望，这是助长我的过失而求取我的俸禄啊。
English: This man only knows how to satisfy my desires, which is to encourage my faults and seek my reward.

古文：吾不与皆斃。 
现代文：我不能与他一起败亡。 
English: I can't go down with him.

古文：襄子出，曰： 吾何走乎？ 
现代文：襄子准备出走，说： 我到何处去呢？ 
English: When Xiangzi was about to leave, he said, "Where should I go?

古文：从者曰： 长子近，且城厚完。 
现代文：侍从说： 长子距离近，而且城墙厚实完整。 
English: The attendant said, "The eldest son is close by, and the city wall is thick and complete.

古文：襄子曰： 民罢力以完之，又斃死以守之，其谁与我？ 
现代文：襄子说： 民众精疲力竭修筑了它，再要他们卖命守卫它，谁还肯与我同心协力呢？ 
English: Xiangzi said, "The people worked so hard to build it, and now I want them to work even harder to protect it. Who will work with me?"

古文：从者曰： 邯郸之仓库实。 
现代文：侍从说： 邯郸的仓库很充实。 
English: The waiter said, "Ma's storehouse is very full.

古文：襄子曰： 浚民之膏泽以实之，又因而杀之，其谁与我？
现代文：襄子说： 那是榨取了民脂民膏才充实起来的，现在又要使他们的性命受到伤害，谁还肯帮我出力呢？
English: Xiangzi said: It was enriched by squeezing the people's fat and butter, and now it is going to hurt their lives. Who will help me?

古文：其晋阳乎！
现代文：还是到晋阳吧！
English: Let's go to Jinyang!

古文：先主之所属也，尹铎之所宽也，民必和矣。 
现代文：那是先主赵简子嘱咐过的地方，尹铎待那里的百姓又宽厚，人民必定能同心同德。 
English: That is the place that the forefather Zhao Jianzi had ordered, and the people there were treated generously by Yin Xi. The people must be able to act with one heart and one mind.

古文：乃走晋阳，晋师围而灌之，沈灶产蛙，民无叛意。
现代文：于是便投奔晋阳。晋军包围了晋阳，又决水灌城，民家的炉灶都淹没在水中，生出了虾蟆，然而人民却毫无背叛的意思。
English: So they rushed to Jinyang. The Jin army encircled Jinyang and flooded the city, the stoves of the people's homes were submerged in water, and shrimps were born, but the people had no intention of betraying.

