古文：成王在丰，欲宅洛邑，使召公先相宅，作《召诰》。
现代文：周成王在丰，打算居住到洛邑，便派召公先去视察可居住之地，史官据此作《召诰》。
English: Zhou Cheng Wang was in Feng and planned to live in Luoyang, so he sent a summoning official to inspect the habitable land first, and the historian wrote "The Summoning" based on this.

古文：惟二月既望，越六日乙未，王朝步自周，则至于丰。
现代文：二月十六日以后，到第六天乙未日，成王早晨从镐京出发，到了丰邑。
English: After February 16th, on the 6th day of the 2nd day of the 2nd month, Chengwang left Beijing in the morning and arrived in Fengyi.

古文：惟太保先周公相宅，越若来三月，惟丙午朏。
现代文：太保召公在周公之前抵达之前到达洛地视察营建的地址。到了三月初三，新月初现光辉。
English: Tai Bao summoned Zhou Gong to visit the construction site in Luodi before Zhou Gong's arrival. By the third day of March, the new moon was bright.

古文：越三日戊申，太保朝至于洛，卜宅。
现代文：又过了三日到戊申这天，周公早晨到达了洛地，对选好的地址进行了占卜。
English: Three days later, on the day of Wushen, Zhou Gong arrived in Luodi in the morning and divined the selected address.

古文：厥既得卜，则经营。
现代文：得了吉兆，就开始规划起来。
English: When you get a good omen, you start planning.

古文：越三日庚戌，太保乃以庶殷攻位于洛汭。越五日甲寅，位成。
现代文：又过了三天到庚戌这天，太保便率领众多殷民，在洛水与黄河汇合的地方测定新邑的位置。又过了五日到了甲寅这天，基地就建成了。
English: Three days later, on the day of Geng Zi, Taibo led a large number of Yin people to measure the location of the new town at the confluence of Luoshui and the Yellow River. Five days later, on the day of Jiayin, the base was completed.

古文：若翼日乙卯，周公朝至于洛，则达观于新邑营。
现代文：到了第二天的乙卯日，周公早晨到达洛地，就全面视察新邑的区域。
English: On the second day, the second day of the second month, Zhou Gong arrived in Luodi in the morning and comprehensively inspected the Xinyi area.

古文：越三日丁巳，用牲于郊，牛二。
现代文：到第三天丁巳，在南郊杀了两头牛，用牲祭祀上天。
English: On the third day of Ding Si, he killed two cows in the southern suburb and sacrificed them to the heavens.

古文：越翼日戊午，乃社于新邑，牛一，羊一，豕一。
现代文：到第二天戊午，又在新邑举行祭地的典礼，用了一头牛、一头羊和一头猪。
English: By noon of the next day, the ceremony of the sacred place was held again in Xinwu, using a cow, a sheep and a pig.

古文：越七日甲子，周公乃朝用书命庶殷侯甸男邦伯。
现代文：到第七天甲子，周公就在早晨用诰书命令殷民以及侯、甸、男各国诸侯营建洛邑。
English: On the seventh day of the month of Jiazi, in the morning, Zhou Gong ordered the Yin people, as well as the princes, dynasties, and lords to build Luoyang.

古文：厥既命殷庶，庶殷丕作。
现代文：下达完命令后，殷民就大规模的开始动工。
English: After issuing the order, Yin Min started large-scale construction.

古文：太保乃以庶邦冢君出取币，乃复入锡周公。
现代文：太保于是同各邦国的诸侯取出了币帛，再入内进献给周公。
English: So Taibo, together with the lords of the various states, took out the coins and presented them to Zhou.

古文：曰： 拜手稽首，旅王若公诰告庶殷越自乃御事：呜呼！
现代文：周公说： 请接受我们的礼拜，向大王禀告，我已经把周公您的告诫转达给众多殷人和那些治事诸臣。啊！
English: Zhou Gong said: "Please accept our worship and tell the great king that I have conveyed Zhou Gong's admonition to many nobles and those who govern. Ah!

古文：皇天上帝，改厥元子兹大国殷之命。惟王受命，无疆惟休，亦无疆惟恤。
现代文：上天改变了殷国的大命，让他们不能再继续统治天下。王接受了任命，美好无穷无尽，忧患也无穷无尽。哎！
English: Heaven has changed the great destiny of Yin, so that they can no longer continue to rule the world. The king accepted the appointment, the beauty is endless, and the sorrow is endless. Alas!

古文：呜呼！
现代文：怎么能够不谨慎啊？ 
English: Alas!

古文：曷其奈何弗敬？天既遐终大邦殷之命，兹殷多先哲王在天，越厥后王后民，兹服厥命。
现代文：上天结束了殷国的大命，殷国许多圣明的先王也都认命，因此殷商后来的君王和臣民，才能够享受着天命。
English: Heaven ended the great destiny of the Yin Kingdom, and many holy kings of the Yin Kingdom also accepted their destiny. Therefore, the kings and subjects of the Yin merchants were able to enjoy the heavenly destiny.

古文：厥终，智藏瘝在。
现代文：到了纣王的末年，明智的人隐藏了，普通人都离开家做苦役。
English: In the waning years of the Warlord's reign, the wise men went into hiding, and the common people left their homes to do hard labor.

古文：夫知保抱携持厥妇子，以哀吁天，徂厥亡，出执。
现代文：人们只知护着、抱着、牵着、扶着他们的妻子儿女，悲切地呼告上天，诅咒纣王，希望殷国赶快灭亡，能够早日脱离困境。啊！
English: People only know how to protect, hold, lead, and support their wives and children, mournfully crying out to the heavens, cursing the king of Yao, and hoping that the kingdom of Yin would soon perish so that they could get out of the predicament as soon as possible. Ah!

古文：呜呼！天亦哀于四方民，其眷命用懋。
现代文：上天也哀怜四方的老百姓，它眷顾百姓的命运因此更改殷命。
English: Heaven also pities the common people of the four directions. It takes care of the fate of the people and thus changes their lives.

古文：王其疾敬德！
现代文：大王要赶快认真施行德政呀！
English: The great king should quickly and earnestly implement the moral government!

古文：相古先民有夏，天迪从子保，面稽天若；今时既坠厥命。
现代文：观察古时候的夏朝百姓，上天让知道天道的人来教导他们顺从慈保，努力考求天意，现在还是丧失了王命。
English: Observing the people of the Xia Dynasty in ancient times, Heaven asked those who knew the heavenly way to teach them to obey the benevolence and strive to seek the will of Heaven, but they still lost the king's life.

古文：今相有殷，天迪格保，面稽天若；今时既坠厥命。
现代文：现在在观察殷人，上天教导他们要爱护百姓，他们努力也考求天意，现在也已经丧失了王命。
English: Now they are observing the people, heaven teaches them to love the people, they are trying to seek the will of heaven, and now they have lost the king's life.

古文：今冲子嗣，则无遗寿耇，曰其稽我古人之德，矧曰其有能稽谋自天？
现代文：如今年幼的成万继承了王位，没有可靠地老人辅助，考求我们古代先王的德政，何况说有能考求无意的人呢？啊！
English: If tens of thousands of young people have succeeded to the throne this year, without the reliable assistance of the elderly, to seek the moral government of our ancient ancestors, what is more, are there people who can seek without intention? Ah!

古文：呜呼！有王虽小，元子哉。
现代文：王虽然年幼，却是国家的天子！
English: Although the king is young, he is the godson of the country!

古文：其丕能諴于小民。
现代文：要特别能够和悦老百姓。
English: In particular, it is necessary to be able to please the people.

古文：今休：王不敢后，用顾畏于民碞；王来绍上帝，自服于土中。旦曰： 其作大邑，其自时配皇天，毖祀于上下，其自时中乂；王厥有成命治民。 
现代文：现在可喜的是：王不敢迟缓营建洛邑，对殷民的艰难险阻常常顾念和畏惧；王来卜问上天，打算亲自在洛邑治理他们。 姬旦对我说： 要营建洛邑，要从这里以始祖后稷配天，谨慎祭祀天地，要从这个中心地方统治天下；王已经有定命治理人民了。 
English: Now the good news is that the king does not dare to delay the construction of Luoyang, and is always concerned and afraid of the hardships and obstacles of the Yin people; the king asked the heavens and planned to personally govern them in Luoyang. Hidan said to me: To build Luoyang, we must match the heavens with the ancestors from here, carefully sacrifice heaven and earth, and rule the world from this central place; the king has been destined to govern the people.

古文：今休。王先服殷御事，比介于我有周御事，节性惟日其迈。
现代文：现在可喜的是：王重视使用殷商旧臣，让他们顺从我们并亲近我们周王朝的治事官员，使他们和睦的感情一天天地增长。
English: What is gratifying now is that the king attaches great importance to the use of the Yin merchants' old vassals, so that they obey us and are close to our administrative officials of the Zhou Dynasty, so that their harmonious feelings grow day by day.

古文：王敬作所，不可不敬德。
现代文：成王也应恭敬谨慎，以身作则，不可不敬重德行。 
English: Chengwang should also be respectful and prudent, lead by example, and must not be disrespectful.

古文：我不可不监于有夏，亦不可不监于有殷。
现代文：我们不可以不以夏朝为鉴，也不可以不以殷国为鉴。
English: We cannot but take the Xia Dynasty as a model, and we cannot but take Yin Province as a model.

古文：我不敢知曰，有夏服天命，惟有历年；我不敢知曰，不其延。
现代文：我不敢知晓说，夏接受天命有长久时间；我也不敢知晓说，夏的国运能够经历长久。
English: I don't dare to know that Xia has a long time to accept the fate of heaven; I also don't dare to know that Xia's national movement can go through a long time.

古文：惟不敬厥德，乃早坠厥命。
现代文：我只知道他们不重视行德，才过早失去了他们的福命。
English: I only know that they did not pay attention to virtue, and they lost their good fortune prematurely.

古文：我不敢知曰，有殷受天命，惟有历年；我不敢知曰，不其延。
现代文：我不敢知晓说，殷接受天命有长久时间；我也不敢知晓说，殷的国运不会延长。
English: I don't dare to say that Yin's acceptance of the Mandate of Heaven will last for a long time; I also don't dare to say that Yin's national fortune will not be prolonged.

古文：惟不敬厥德，乃早坠厥命。
现代文：我只知道他们不重视行德，才过早失去了他们的福命。
English: I only know that they did not pay attention to virtue, and they lost their good fortune prematurely.

古文：今王嗣受厥命，我亦惟兹二国命，嗣若功。
现代文：现今大王继承了治理天下的大命，我们也该思考这两个国家的命运，继承他们的功业。
English: Now that the great king has inherited the great destiny of governing the world, we should also think about the fate of these two countries and inherit their achievements.

古文：王乃初服。
现代文：王是刚刚处理国家政事。啊！
English: The king has just dealt with national politics.

古文：呜呼！若生子，罔不在厥初生，自贻哲命。
现代文：好像教养小孩一样，没有不在开初教养时，就亲自传给他明哲的教导的。
English: It is like bringing up a child: there is no one who does not, in the beginning of his education, personally pass on to him the teachings of the sages.

古文：今天其命哲，命吉凶，命历年；知今我初服，宅新邑。
现代文：现今上天该给予明哲，给予吉祥，给予永年；因为上天知道我王初理国事时，就住到新邑来了。
English: Now is the time for heaven to bestow wisdom, good fortune, and long life; for heaven knows that when my king first came to rule, he came to live in Sin-eup.

古文：肆惟王其疾敬德？
现代文：现在王该加快认真推行德政！
English: Now the king should speed up the serious implementation of the German policy!

古文：王其德之用，祈天永命。
现代文：王该用德政，向上天祈求长久的福命。
English: The king should use virtue politics and pray to heaven for a long life.

古文：其惟王勿以小民淫用非彝，亦敢殄戮用乂民，若有功。
现代文：愿王不要与老百姓一般肆行非法的事，也不要用杀戮的方式来治理老百姓，如此才会有功绩。
English: May the king not do illegal things with the people in general, nor use killing to govern the people, so that there will be merit.

古文：其惟王位在德元，小民乃惟刑用于天下，越王显。
现代文：愿王立于德臣之首，让老百姓效法施行于天下，发扬王的美德。
English: May the king stand at the head of his virtuous subjects, and may the common people follow his example and spread his virtues throughout the world.

古文：上下勤恤，其曰我受天命，丕若有夏历年，式勿替有殷历年。欲王以小民受天永命。 
现代文：君臣上下勤劳忧虑，也许可以说，我们接受的大命会象夏代那样久远，不止殷代那样久远，愿君王和臣民共同接受好上天的永久大命。 
English: We may say that the long life we accept will be as long as that of the Xia dynasty, not as long as that of the Yin dynasty. May the king and his subjects accept God's eternal great life together.

古文：拜手稽首，曰： 予小臣敢以王之仇民百君子越友民，保受王威命明德。
现代文：召公跪拜叩头说： 我这小臣和殷的臣民以及友好的臣民，会安然接受王的威严命令，宣扬王的大德。
English: The summoner kneeled, bowed and said, "My vassal and loyal subjects and friendly subjects will safely accept the king's solemn order and proclaim the king's great virtue.

古文：王末有成命，王亦显。
现代文：王也终于决定营建洛邑，王的大德便因此更加光显了。
English: The king also finally decided to build Luoyang, and the king's great virtue became even more prominent.

古文：我非敢勤，惟恭奉币，用供王能祈天永命。 
现代文：我不敢慰劳王，只想恭敬奉上币帛，以供王去好好祈求上天的永久福命。 
English: I didn't dare to comfort the king, I just wanted to respectfully present him with a coin so that he could pray for eternal life in heaven.

