古文：戊午，余同兄雷门、白夫，以八月十八日至九江。易小舟，沿江南入龙开河，二十里，泊李裁缝堰。
现代文：戊午八月十八日我同族兄雷门、白夫到九江。换乘小船，沿长江向南航行，进入龙开河，行驶二十里水路，在李裁缝堰停泊。
English: On the afternoon of August 18th, my fellow brothers Lei Men and Bai Fu went to Jiujiang. They took a boat and sailed south along the Yangtze River, entered the Longkai River, traveled twenty miles of waterway, and anchored at the Li Tailor Weir.

古文：登陆，五里，过西林寺，至东林寺。
现代文：登上陆地，走五里路，经过西林寺，到达东林寺。
English: Once on land, walk five miles, pass Xilin Temple, and arrive at Donglin Temple.

古文：寺当庐山之阴，南面庐山，北倚东林山。
现代文：东林寺正对庐山的北面，南方面对庐山，北边倚靠着东林山。
English: Donglin Temple faces Lushan to the north, Lushan to the south, and Donglin Mountain to the north.

古文：山不甚高，为庐之外廊。
现代文：东林山不很高，是庐山的外廓。
English: Donglin Mountain is not very high, it is the outline of Lushan Mountain.

古文：中有大溪，自东而西，驿路界其间，为九江之建昌孔道。
现代文：山中有条大溪，从东向西流，中间有释路作为分界，是九江到建昌的要道。
English: There is a large stream in the mountains, flowing from east to west, with a diversion in the middle as a demarcation, which is the main road from Jiujiang to Jianchang.

古文：寺前临溪，入门为虎溪桥，规模甚大，正殿夷毁，右为三笑堂。
现代文：东林寺前门面临溪水，进门是虎溪桥，规模很大，正殿已经毁坏，夷为平地，右边是三笑堂。
English: The front gate of Donglin Temple faces the stream, the entrance is the Tiger Creek Bridge, which is very large. The main hall has been destroyed and razed to the ground, and the three laughing halls are on the right.

古文：十九日出寺，循山麓西南行。
现代文：十九日走出东林寺，顺山麓向西南方行走。
English: On the 19th, I walked out of Donglin Temple and walked southwest along the foot of the mountain.

古文：五里，越广济桥，始舍官道，沿溪东向行。
现代文：走五里路，跨越广济桥，开始舍弃官道，沿溪岸向东走。
English: Take the five-mile road, cross the Guangji Bridge, begin to abandon the official road, and walk east along the riverbank.

古文：又二里，溪回山合，雾色霏霏如雨。
现代文：又走二里路，溪流迂回，山峦四合，雾色浓厚有如霏霏小雨。
English: Another two-mile walk, the stream detour, the mountains four-in-one, the fog is thick like a drizzle.

古文：一人立溪口，问之，由此东上为天池大道，南转登石门，为天池寺之侧径。
现代文：有一人站立溪口边，问他路，得知由这里向东上山为天池大路，向南转登上石门，是天池寺侧面的小路。
English: One person stood at the mouth of the stream and asked him the way. He learned that from here, the road up the mountain to the east is the Tianchi Road, and turning south to the Stone Gate is a path on the side of the Tianchi Temple.

古文：余稔知石门之奇，路险莫能上，遂倩请、雇其人为导，约二兄径至天池相待。
现代文：我很熟知石门风景的奇异，路很险要没法攀爬上去，于是请那人做我的向导，相约二位兄长自己到天池寺等待。
English: I was very familiar with the strangeness of the scenery of Shimen, the road was almost impossible to climb up, so I asked the man to be my guide, and the two brothers agreed to wait for me at Tianchi Temple.

古文：遂南渡小溪二重，过报国寺，从碧条香蔼绿树香雾中攀陟五里，仰见浓雾中双石屼立，即石门也。
现代文：于是向南渡过两条小溪，经过报国寺，从青绿色的石条阶上，在芬芳的云气中攀登了五里路，仰望浓雾中有一对石峰高耸兀立，那就是石门了。
English: So he crossed two small streams to the south, passed Hokkoku-ji Temple, climbed five miles on the turquoise stone steps in the fragrant clouds, and looked up at a pair of towering stone peaks in the thick fog, that is, the stone gate.

古文：一路由石隙而入，复有二石峰对峙。
现代文：一路上由石岩缝隙中进入，又有两座石峰相对着屹立。
English: Along the way, you enter through a stone crevice, and two stone peaks stand opposite each other.

古文：路宛转峰罅，下瞰绝涧诸峰，在铁船峰旁，俱从涧底矗耸直上，离立咫尺，争雄竞秀，而层烟叠翠，澄映四外。
现代文：路在石峰缝隙中宛转曲折，往下俯瞰陡峻的山涧旁的那些山峰，在铁船峰旁的，都从山涧底高耸屹立，直上云天，并立的山峰距离不过咫尺，争雄竞秀，而层层云烟在重叠的翠峰间缭绕，澄映于四面山峦之外。
English: The road twists and turns in the crevices of the stone peaks, overlooking the peaks next to the steep mountains. The peaks next to the iron ship peak are all towering from the bottom of the mountains, straight up to the cloud sky. The parallel peaks are only a few feet away, competing for the best, while the layers of clouds twirl around the overlapping green peaks, shining brightly beyond the mountains on all sides.

古文：其下喷雪奔雷。腾空震荡，耳目为之狂喜。
现代文：山峰下汹涌的涧水，浪如喷雪，声如奔雷，腾空起伏，震荡山谷，人的耳、目因为这些景色而狂喜过望。
English: The turbulent rushing water under the peaks, the waves like snow spray, the sound like thunder, the ups and downs of the sky, the shaking valleys, the human ears and eyes are overjoyed with these scenery.

古文：门内对峰倚壁，都结层楼危阙。
现代文：石门内对立的双峰倚靠着岩壁，都构筑有层楼高屋。
English: The opposing twin peaks inside the stone gate lean against the rock wall, both of which are made up of high-rise buildings.

古文：徽人邹昌明、毕贯之新建精庐书斋，僧容成焚修其间。
现代文：徽州人邹昌明、毕贯之新修建了精庐，僧人容成在其中焚香修斋酸。
English: Huizhou people Zou Changming and Bi Gangzhi newly built the incense burner, in which the monk Rongcheng burned incense and sulphuric acid.

古文：从庵后小径，复出石门一重，俱从石崖上，上攀下蹑，磴穷则挽藤，藤绝置木梯以上。
现代文：从庵后的小路，又走过一道石门。都是在石崖上上下攀踏，石瞪穷尽则手挽藤条攀援，完全没有藤条的地方则安置木梯登上去。
English: From the path behind the hermitage, I walked through a stone gate. I climbed up and down on the stone cliff. When I ran out of stone, I climbed up with a rattan cane, and where there was no rattan cane, I climbed up with a wooden ladder.

古文：如是二里，至狮子岩。
现代文：这样走了二里路，到达狮子岩。
English: After walking two miles, we arrived at Lion Rock.

古文：岩下有静室。
现代文：狮子岩下修建有静室。
English: A quiet room has been built under the Lion Rock.

古文：越岭，路颇平。
现代文：翻越山岭，路很平坦。
English: Over the mountains, the road is very flat.

古文：再上里许，得大道，即自郡城南来者。
现代文：再往上走一里多路，找到了大道，就是从郡城南面来的那条。
English: A mile or so further up, I found the main road, the one coming from the south of the county town.

古文：历级而登，殿已当前，以雾故不辨。
现代文：经过石阶而向上走，一座大殿已在眼前，因为雾浓的缘故，从远处辨认不清。
English: Walking up the stone steps, a large hall is already in front of you, because of the thick fog, it is not recognizable from a distance.

古文：逼之走近它，而朱楹彩栋，则天池寺也，盖毁而新建者。
现代文：逼近它看，只见红的柱子、彩漆的栋梁，这就是天池寺了，大概是毁坏后新建盖起来的。
English: If you look closer, you will see red pillars and painted beams. This is Tenchi-ji Temple, which was probably rebuilt after it was destroyed.

古文：由右庑ǔ廊屋侧登聚仙亭，亭前一崖突出，下临无地，曰文殊台。
现代文：从右边的廊房侧面登上聚仙亭，亭前面有一山崖向外突出来，面向下看，见不到地，叫作文殊台。
English: From the side of the corridor on the right, climb up to the Juxian Pavilion. In front of the pavilion, there is a mountain cliff protruding outward. If you look down, you can't see the ground. It's called the Composition Grandstand.

古文：出寺，由大道左登披霞亭。
现代文：走出天池寺，从大路左面登上披霞亭。
English: Walk out of Tenchi-ji Temple and take the main road on the left to climb up to Phi Khao Pavilion.

古文：亭侧岐路东上山脊，行三里。由此再东二里，为大林寺；由此北折而西，曰白鹿升仙台；北折而东，曰佛手岩。
现代文：由披霞亭侧面的岔路向东爬上山脊，行走三里路，由这里向东再走二里路，就是大林寺；由这里折向北面往西，叫作白鹿升仙台；折向北面再往东，叫作佛手岩。
English: Climb the ridge eastward from the fork in the road on the side of Phi Khao Pavilion, walk three miles, then walk two miles eastward from here, that is, Dalin Temple; from here, turn north to west, and it is called Bai Luksheng Sendai; turn north to east, and it is called Buddha's Hand Rock.

古文：升仙台三面壁立，四旁多乔松，高帝御制周颠仙庙碑在其顶，石亭覆之，制甚古指制作工艺和格式都很古雅考究。
现代文：白鹿升仙台三面岩壁直立，四旁有很多高大的松树，高皇帝御制的《周颠仙庙碑》在山岩顶上，有石亭覆盖它，形制很古朴。
English: On three sides of the rock wall of Shirokusen Sendai, there are many tall pine trees on all sides. The "Monument of Zhou Bixian Temple" made by Emperor Gao is on the top of the mountain rock. A stone pavilion covers it, and the shape is very simple.

古文：佛手岩穹然轩峙，深可五六丈，岩靖石岐横出，故称 佛手 。
现代文：佛手岩弯隆而高高地屹立着，深有五六丈，岩前端的岩石横岔向前伸出，所以称之为 佛手岩 。
English: The rock of the Buddha's hand is steep and stands high, with a depth of five or six meters. The rock at the front of the rock protrudes sideways, so it is called the Buddha's hand rock.

古文：循岩侧庵右行，崖石两层，突出深坞，上平下仄狭窄，访仙台遗址也。
现代文：顺着佛手岩侧面的庵向右走，山崖的岩石有两层从深坞中突出来，上层平坦，下层逼仄，是访仙台遗址。
English: Walk to the right along the hermitage on the side of the Buddha's hand rock. The rock of the cliff has two layers protruding from the deep dock. The upper layer is flat and the lower layer is narrow. This is the Sendai site.

古文：台后石上书 竹林寺 三字。竹林为匡庐即庐山幻境，可望不可即；台前风雨中，时时闻钟梵声佛寺敲钟和诵经之音，故以此当之，时方云雾迷漫，即坞中景亦如海上三山即蓬莱、方丈、瀛洲三神山，何论竹林？
现代文：台后面的岩石上写着 竹林寺 三个字，竹林寺是庐山中的梦幻境地，可望而不可即；台前面，每当风雨之中，时时会听见佛寺的敲钟声、敬佛诵经声，所以因此而当作访仙合。当时刚好云雾迷漫，即使是山坞中的景色，也像海上蓬莱、方丈、流洲三座神山一样，又何必再论说竹林寺呢？
English: On the rock behind the stage, the words "Chikurin-ji Temple" are written. Chikurin-ji Temple is a dreamlike place in the mountains of Shaoshan, which can be seen from far away; in front of the stage, whenever there is a storm, you can always hear the ringing bells of the Buddhist temple and the chanting of Buddhist sutras, so it is considered to be a visit to the immortals. At that time, the clouds were foggy, and even the scenery in the dock was like the three sacred mountains of the sea, Penglai, Hojo, and Liuzhou. Why should we talk about Chikurin-ji Temple?

古文：还出佛手岩，由大路东抵大林寺。
现代文：返回来走出佛手岩，从大路往东走，抵达大林寺。
English: After returning, walk out of the Buddha's hand rock, walk east from the main road, and arrive at the Dalin Temple.

古文：寺四面峰环，前抱一溪。
现代文：大林寺四面山峰环卫，寺前面有一条溪水环抱。
English: The four sides of Dalin Temple are surrounded by mountains, and there is a stream in front of the temple.

古文：溪上树大三人围，非桧非杉，枝头着子累累，传为宝树，来自西域，向原来有二株，为风雨拔去其一矣。
现代文：溪岸上有棵大树，树粗有三人围，不像是桧也不像是杉树，枝头结满了累累果实。传说这是宝树，来自西域，原来有两棵，其中一棵已被暴风雨拔倒毁去了。
English: There is a large tree on the bank of the stream. The tree is thick and surrounded by three people. It does not look like a maple or a cedar, and its branches are full of fruits. Legend has it that this is a treasure tree from the western region. Originally, there were two trees, but one of them was uprooted and destroyed by the storm.

古文：二十日晨雾尽收。
现代文：二二十日清晨，雾气完全收敛起来。
English: In the early morning of the 20th, the fog completely disappeared.

古文：出天池，趋文殊台。
现代文：走出天池寺，奔向文殊台。
English: I walked out of Tenchi-ji Temple and ran to Monju-dai.

古文：四壁万仞，俯视铁船峰，正可飞舄ì神仙来去。
现代文：四面的岩壁高达万协，从上俯看铁船峰，好像一只飞属，正好可供神仙来去乘坐。
English: The rock walls on all four sides are as high as 10,000 kyats. Looking down from the top, the iron ship peak looks like a flying creature, just right for the gods to come and go.

古文：山北诸山，伏如聚螘ǐ蚁之本字。
现代文：山的北面的各座山峦，低矮得就像聚集一处的蚂蚁。
English: The ridges on the northern side of the mountain are so low that they look like ants huddled together.

古文：匡湖洋洋山麓鄱阳湖在山下一片汪洋，长江带之，远及天际。
现代文：匡湖边洋洋数十里山麓，与长江仅有一衣带的距离，而江水却远流到天际。
English: The Yangtze River is only a belt's length away from the foothills of Kuanghu Lake, while the water of the river reaches far into the sky.

古文：因再为石门游，三里，度昨所过险处，至则容成方持贝叶佛经出迎，喜甚，导余历览诸峰。
现代文：因此第二次作石门之游，走三里路，越过昨天所经过的险要地方，到的时候僧人容成正拿着佛经出来迎接，很高兴，引导我一一游览各山峰。
English: Therefore, I made my second trip to Shimen, walked three miles, and passed the dangerous place I passed yesterday. When I arrived, the monk Rongcheng was holding a Buddhist scripture and came out to meet me. I was very happy and guided me to visit each mountain peak.

古文：上至神龙宫右，折而下，入神龙宫。
现代文：上行到神龙宫右边，转身向下走，进入神龙宫。
English: Go up to the right side of the Dragon Palace, turn around and go down to enter the Dragon Palace.

古文：奔涧鸣雷，松竹荫映，山峡中奥寂境也。
现代文：奔流的山涧水声有如雷鸣，松树竹林相互荫映，这是山峡之中奥秘而寂静的境域。
English: The sound of the rushing mountain stream is like thunder, and the pine trees and bamboo forests reflect each other. This is a mysterious and quiet area in the canyon.

古文：循旧路抵天池下，从岐径东南行十里，升降于层峰幽涧；无径不竹，无阴不松，则金竹坪也。
现代文：沿着旧路抵达天池寺下，从岔路向东南方行走十里路，在层叠的山峰、幽深的山涧之间登上爬下；没有哪条路上没有竹林，没有哪处北坡没有松树，这就是金竹坪了。
English: Arriving at Tianchi Temple along the old road, walking ten miles from the Kushiro Road to the southeast, climbing up and down between the cascading peaks and deep ridges; there is no road without a bamboo forest, no place on the north slope without pine trees, this is the Golden Bamboo Plain.

古文：诸峰隐护，幽倍天池，旷则逊之。
现代文：各山峰隐隐相护，幽深比天池寺多一倍，而宽旷却稍逊于天池寺。
English: The peaks are hidden from each other, the depth is twice as deep as that of Tianchi Temple, but the width is slightly less than that of Tianchi Temple.

古文：复南三里，登莲花峰侧，雾复大作。
现代文：又向南走三里路，登上莲花峰侧面，雾气再次大作。
English: I walked another three miles to the south and climbed up the side of the Lotus Peak. The fog was once again thick.

古文：是峰为天池案山，在金竹坪则左翼也。峰顶丛石嶙峋，雾隙中时作窥人态，以雾不及登。
现代文：莲花峰是天池寺的界山，对金竹坪说则是左翼了，峰顶上嶙峋的岩石丛，在雾气的空隙中不时地作出窥视人的神态。因雾迷漫，不能登上峰顶。
English: Lotus Peak is the boundary mountain of Tianchi Temple, but for Jinzhuping, it is the left wing. The rocky cliffs at the top of the peak look like peeping people from time to time in the fog. Due to the fog, it is not possible to climb to the top.

古文：越岭东向二里，至仰天坪，因谋尽汉阳之胜。
现代文：越过山岭向东走二里路，到达仰天坪，因而计划游览尽汉阳峰的所有风景名胜。
English: After crossing the mountains, I walked eastward for two miles to reach Yangtianping. Therefore, I planned to visit all the scenic spots of Hanyang Peak.

古文：汉阳为庐山最高顶，此坪则为僧庐之最高者。
现代文：汉阳峰是庐山的最高顶，这仰天坪则是僧人庐舍的最高之处。
English: Hanyang Peak is the highest peak of Lushan Mountain, and this Yangtianping is the highest point of the monk's hermitage.

古文：坪之阴北，水俱北流从九江；其阳南，水俱南下属南康。
现代文：仰天坪的北面，溪水都向北流，从属于九江府；仰天坪的南面，溪水都向南方下淌，归属于南康府。
English: On the north side of Yang Tianping, the streams all flow northward and belong to Jiujiang Prefecture; on the south side of Yang Tianping, the streams all flow southward and belong to Nankang Prefecture.

古文：余疑坪去汉阳当不远，僧言中隔桃花峰，尚有十里遥。
现代文：我怀疑仰天坪离汉阳峰应当不会很远，僧人说中间隔着桃花峰，尚有十里路之遥。
English: I suspect that Yang Tianping is not very far from Hanyang Peak. Monks say that there is a ten-mile road between them and Peach Blossom Peak.

古文：出寺，雾渐解。
现代文：走出寺门，雾渐渐散开。
English: Stepping out of the temple gate, the fog gradually dispersed.

古文：从山坞西南行，循桃花峰东转，过晒谷石，越岭南下，复上则汉阳峰也。
现代文：从山坞的西南面走，顺着桃花峰向东转，经过晒谷石，越过山岭向南下去，再往上走就是汉阳峰了。
English: Walk from the southwest side of the dock, follow the Peach Blossom Peak to the east, pass the Hanzhong Valley Stone, go south over the mountains, and then go up to the Hanyang Peak.

古文：先是遇一僧，谓峰顶无可托宿，宜投慧灯僧舍，因指以路。
现代文：先是遇到一位僧人，说是汉阳峰顶没有可以托宿之处，最宜投宿慧灯和尚的僧舍，并因此指点道路。
English: First, he met a monk who said that there was no place to stay at the top of Hanyang Peak, and that it would be best to stay at the monastery of Huiguang Monk, and so he pointed out the way.

古文：未至峰顶二里，落照盈山，遂如僧言，东向越岭，转而西南，即汉阳峰之阳也。
现代文：未到峰顶二里路时，落日光辉映照满山，于是照僧人所说的，向东越过山岭，转而向西南，就是汉阳峰的南面了。
English: Before reaching the peak of Erli Road, the setting sun shines all over the mountain, so as the monks said, go east over the mountains and turn to the southwest, which is the south of Hanyang Peak.

古文：一径循山，重嶂幽寂，非复人世。
现代文：一条小径顺山延伸，层峦叠嶂，幽深寂静，仿佛不再是人世间。
English: A path stretches down the mountain, layers upon layers, deep silence, as if it were no longer the human world.

古文：里许，蓊然竹丛中得一龛，有僧短发覆额，破衲僧衣赤足者，即慧灯也，方挑水磨腐。
现代文：走一里多路，在茂盛的竹丛中找到一间供有佛像的小屋，有位和尚短头发覆盖前额，穿着破烂僧衣，打赤脚，这就是慧灯和尚，正在挑水磨豆腐。
English: After walking for more than a mile, we found a hut with a Buddha statue in the lush bamboo thicket. There was a monk with short hair covering his forehead, wearing a tattered monk's robe and barefoot. This was Huiguang Monk, who was carrying water to grind tofu.

古文：竹内僧三四人，衣履揖客，皆慕灯远来者。
现代文：竹丛中还有和尚三四人，身着整洁的衣鞋揖让待客，他们都是慕名慧灯从远处来的。
English: There are also three or four monks in the bamboo thicket, dressed in neat clothes and shoes, waiting for guests. They all came from afar to worship Hui Lan.

古文：复有赤脚短发僧从崖间下，问之，乃云南鸡足山僧。
现代文：又有赤脚、短发和尚从山崖间走下来，问他，原来是云南鸡足山的和尚。
English: There was also a barefoot, short-haired monk who came down from between the cliffs and asked him if he was originally a monk from Jiu Jiao Mountain in Yunnan.

古文：灯有徒，结茅于内，其僧历悬崖访之，方返耳。
现代文：慧灯有徒弟，构筑茅屋在山里，那位和尚走过悬崖去拜访他，方才返回来。
English: Hui Lan had an apprentice who was building a thatched hut in the mountains. The monk walked across the cliff to visit him, and only then did he return.

古文：余即拉一僧为导，攀援半里，至其所。
现代文：我就拉着一位和尚作为向导，攀援半里路，到慧灯徒弟的住所。
English: I took a monk as a guide and climbed half a mile to the home of Hui Lan's apprentice.

古文：石壁峭削，悬梯以度，一茅如慧灯龛。僧本山下民家，亦以慕灯居此。
现代文：石壁陡峭笔削，架悬梯度过去，一间茅屋就像慧灯和尚的那间小屋，这和尚本来是山下的百姓人家，也是因为仰慕慧灯而居住这里的。
English: The stone walls are steeply chiseled, the overhanging gradient has passed, and a thatched cottage is like the hut of the Hui Lan monk, who was originally a commoner's house at the bottom of the mountain and also lived here because he admired Hui Lan.

古文：至是而上仰汉阳，下俯绝壁，与世夐ò远隔矣。
现代文：到了这里，向上仰望汉阳峰，往下俯瞰悬崖绝壁，真是与人世远远隔离了。
English: Arriving here, looking up at the Hanyang Peak and looking down at the cliff cliff, it is really far away from the world.

古文：暝色已合，归宿灯龛。
现代文：夜色已经合拢，返归慧灯的小屋歇宿。
English: Night has closed in, and we return to Hui Lan's hut for a rest.

古文：灯煮腐相饷，前指路僧亦至。
现代文：慧灯和尚煮好豆腐相款待，先前指点道路的和尚也到了。
English: Hui Lan Monk cooked tofu for the couple to enjoy, and the monk who had previously shown them the way also arrived.

古文：灯半一腐，必自己出，必遍及其徒。
现代文：慧灯和尚半个月磨一次豆腐，必定由自己亲自做出来，必定款待遍他所有的徒弟。
English: Huitan Monk grinds tofu once every half month. He must have made it himself, and he must have entertained all of his disciples.

古文：徒亦自至，来僧其一也。
现代文：他的徒弟也自己来吃，来的和尚即其中的一位。
English: His apprentice also came to eat by himself, and the monk who came was one of them.

古文：二十一日别灯，从龛后小径直跻汉阳峰。
现代文：二十一日告别慧灯和尚，从小屋后的小路直接攀登汉阳峰。
English: On the 21st, he bid farewell to Hui Lan Monk and climbed Hanyang Peak directly from the path behind the hut.

古文：攀茅拉棘，二里，至峰顶。
现代文：攀援茅草、手拉荆棘地向上攀登二里路，到达汉阳峰顶。
English: Climbing with the help of thatch and hand-pulled thorns, they climbed up the two-mile path to reach the top of Hanyang Peak.

古文：南瞰鄱湖，水天浩荡。
现代文：从南鸟瞰都阳湖，浩荡的湖水仿佛与天相连。
English: A bird's-eye view of Duyang Lake from the south, the vast lake water seems to be connected to the sky.

古文：东瞻湖口，西盼建昌，诸山历历，无不俯首失恃指眼见之山都比汉阳峰低，因而无法与之抗衡。惟北面之桃花峰，铮铮比肩，然昂霄逼汉，此其最矣。
现代文：东面远望湖口县，西面遥看建昌，各座山历历在目，没有哪一座不像失去了倚仗一样低头服输。只有北面的夕七花峰，是诸山中铮铮者可与汉阳峰并肩，然而它昂首耸立逼近霄汉，这是它最美的地方了。
English: In the east, you can see Hukou County in the distance, and in the west, you can see Jianchang in the distance. All the mountains are clearly visible, and none of them bow their heads as if they have lost their foothold. Only the evening seven-petalled peak in the north can stand side by side with the Hanyang peak. However, it stands tall and approaches Xiaohan, which is its most beautiful place.

古文：下山二里，循旧路，向五老峰。
现代文：下山走了二里路，沿着旧路，向五老峰前进。
English: I walked two miles down the mountain, along the old road, towards the Five Old Peaks.

古文：汉阳、五老，俱匡庐南面之山，如两角相向，而犁头尖界于中，退于后，故两峰相望甚近。
现代文：汉阳峰、五老峰，都是庐山南面的山，有如两支角相对，而犁头尖则介于两者中间，退到后面，所以两座山峰相望很近。
English: Hanyang Peak and Wulao Peak are both mountains on the south side of Mount Lushan. They are like two opposite horns, while Shantou Peak is between the two and retreats to the back, so the two peaks are very close to each other.

古文：而路必仍至金竹坪，绕犁头尖后，出其左胁，北转始达五老峰，自汉阳计之，且三十里。
现代文：路都必须仍旧到金竹坪，绕过犁头尖后面，从它的左侧出来，向北转，才能到达五老峰，从汉阳开始计算路程，已有三十里。
English: The road must still go to Jinzhuping, go around the back of Shantou cusp, come out from its left side and turn north to reach Wulaofeng, and start calculating the distance from Hanyang, which is already thirty miles.

古文：余始至岭角，望峰顶坦夷，莫详五老面目。
现代文：我刚到岭角，遥望峰顶很平坦，不详悉五老峰的面目。
English: I have just arrived in Lingcang. The peak of Distant Lookout is very flat. I don't know the face of Wulao Peak in detail.

古文：及至峰顶，风高水绝，寂无居者。
现代文：等到到达峰顶，只见风很猛烈，没有流水，空寂而无人居住。
English: When we reached the top, the wind was very strong, there was no running water, and it was empty and uninhabited.

古文：因遍历五老峰，始知是山之阴，一冈连属；阳则山从绝顶平剖，列为五枝，凭空下坠者万仞，外无重冈叠嶂之蔽，际目视野甚宽。
现代文：因游历遍五老峰，才知道这山的北面，一冈相互连属，山的南面，则是从山绝顶平剖，分成五支，从空中下坠万初，非常高险，其外没有重冈叠嶂的遮蔽，视野非常宽广。
English: Because I have traveled all over the Five Old Peaks, I know that the north side of this mountain is a crane, one hill is connected to each other, and the south side of the mountain is a flat section from the peak of the mountain, divided into five branches, falling from the air, very high risk, and there is no cover from the stack of heavy hills, and the field of vision is very broad.

古文：然彼此相望，则五峰排列自掩，一览不能兼收；惟登一峰，则两旁无底。
现代文：然而五座山峰排列一线，自己互相遮掩，一望不能兼收五峰；只能登上一峰，而峰两旁似乎无底！
English: However, the five peaks are arranged in a line, covering each other, and you can't see the five peaks at a glance; you can only climb one peak, and there seems to be no bottom on either side of the peak!

古文：峰峰各奇不少稍让，真雄旷之极观也！
现代文：座座山峰各有奇险景观，相互不稍逊色，真是雄伟宽扩的最高景观！
English: The peaks of Zaoza Mountain each have their own adventure landscape, which is not inferior to each other. It is truly a majestic and expansive highest landscape!

古文：仍下二里，至岭角。
现代文：仍然下山，二里路后到达岭角。
English: I still went down the mountain, and after two miles, I arrived at Lingjiao.

古文：北行山坞中，里许，入方广寺，为五老新刹。
现代文：向北走，在山坞中行进，约一里路后，进入方广寺，是五老峰新建的佛寺。
English: Walk north, travel through the dockyard, and after about one mile, enter Fangguang Temple, a newly built Buddhist temple in Wulaofeng.

古文：僧知觉甚稔熟悉三叠之胜，言道路极艰，促余速行。
现代文：知觉和尚非常熟悉三叠泉瀑布胜景，说是道路极其艰难，摧促我快走。
English: The perception monk is very familiar with the beauty of the Sanjiequan Waterfall, and said that the road is extremely difficult, urging me to walk fast.

古文：北行一里，路穷，渡涧。
现代文：向北行走一里路，道路已穷尽，渡过涧水。
English: Walk north for one mile, the road is exhausted, cross the water.

古文：随涧东西行，鸣流下注乱石，两山夹之，丛竹修枝，郁葱上下，时时仰见飞石，突缀其间，转入转佳。
现代文：随涧岸向东西方向走，哗哗流淌的阿水下注于乱石之中，两边有山夹峙，丛竹及长树枝，上上下下葱葱郁郁；时时仰望见露出的岩石如在绿色中飞动；点缀在山间；越进入，胜景越美好。
English: Walking along the east-west coast, the gurgling water is poured into the rocks. On both sides, there are mountains, bamboo and long branches, and lush greenery. Looking up and down, you can see the exposed rocks flying in the green. They are dotted among the mountains. The more you enter, the more beautiful the scenery.

古文：既而涧旁路亦穷，从涧中乱石行，圆者滑足，尖者刺履。
现代文：接着，涧岸旁的路也穷尽了，只好从涧中的乱石中往前行走，圆的石头滑脚，尖的石头刺破鞋子。
English: Next, the path along the bank of the river was exhausted, and we had to walk forward through the jumble of rocks in the creek. Round rocks were slippery, and sharp rocks punctured our shoes.

古文：如是三里，得绿水潭。
现代文：就这样往前走了三里，找到绿水潭。
English: In this way, he walked for three miles and found a green pond.

古文：一泓深碧，怒流倾泻之上，流者喷雪，停者毓黛毓同 育 ，生出之意，整句意为驻留下来的水积蓄起来，则变成深青色。又里许，为大绿水潭。
现代文：一乱很深的碧水，其上有汹涌澎湃的涧流倾泻而下，奔流的水有如喷雪，溅起阵阵雪白的水花；停留于潭中的水，是深青色的。又走过一里多路，就是大绿水潭。
English: A deep turmoil of turquoise water, with turbulent turbulent currents pouring down on it. The rushing water is like spraying snow, splashing bursts of snow-white water; the water that stays in the pool is deep blue. And after walking more than a mile, it is a big green pool.

古文：水势至此将堕，大倍之，怒亦益甚。
现代文：流水的态势，至此将要下坠，流量比前大一倍，汹涌澎湃也益加厉害。
English: At this point, the current of the water is about to drop, the flow is twice as large as before, and the surging is getting worse.

古文：潭有峭壁乱耸，回互逼立，下瞰无底，但闻轰雷倒峡之声，心怖目眩，泉不知从何坠去也。
现代文：潭前的峭壁无规则的耸立，回环着相互逼近峙立。往下鸟瞰，似乎无底，只听到轰雷般似乎要震倒峡谷的响声，心里恐惧，眼光昏花，不知道泉水从什么地方坠去。
English: The cliffs in front of the pool rise irregularly, circling each other and approaching each other. Looking down from a bird's eye view, there seems to be no bottom, only to hear the thunderous sound that seems to shake the canyon, fear in my heart, dizziness, I don't know where the spring water falls from.

古文：于是涧中路亦穷，乃西向登峰。
现代文：到这里，涧中的路也穷尽了，于是向西面攀登山峰。
English: At this point, the path in the middle of the ridge was exhausted, so he climbed the mountain to the west.

古文：峰前石台鹊起，四瞰层壁，阴森逼侧。
现代文：峰前石台依势崛起，俯看四周层层崖壁，显得阴森而狭窄。
English: The stone platform in front of the peak rises in accordance with the trend. Looking down at the surrounding cliff walls, it appears gloomy and narrow.

古文：泉为所蔽，不得见，必至对面峭壁间，方能全收其胜。
现代文：泉水为崖石所掩蔽，无法看见，一定要到对面的峭壁之间，方能够全部看清其胜景。
English: The spring is hidden by the cliffs, so you can't see it. You have to get between the cliffs on the opposite side to be able to see it all.

古文：乃循山冈，从北东转。
现代文：于是沿着山冈，从北向东转。
English: So I followed the hills from north to east.

古文：二里，出对崖，下瞰，则一级、二级、三级之泉，始依次悉见。
现代文：二里路后，走到对面峭壁上，往下俯视，则第一级、第二级、第三级的流泉情景，才依次全部看清楚。
English: After two miles, walk to the opposite cliff and look down, you will see the first-level, second-level, and third-level flowing spring scenes, and then see them all clearly.

古文：其坞中一壁，有洞如门者二，僧辄指为竹林寺门云。
现代文：那山坞中一崖壁上，有像门大小的洞二个，知觉和尚就指着它说是竹林寺的大门。
English: On a cliff wall in the dockyard, there are two holes the size of a door, and the sentient monk points to it and says that it is the gate of the Bamboo Forest Temple.

古文：顷之，北风自湖口吹上，寒生粟起，急返旧路，至绿水潭。
现代文：过了一会儿，北风从湖口吹上来，寒冷使人战粟起来，急忙返归旧路，到达绿水塘。
English: After a while, the north wind blew up from the mouth of the lake, the cold made people wary, and they hurriedly returned to the old road and reached the green pond.

古文：详观之，上有洞翕然敛缩的样子下坠。
现代文：详细地观察绿水潭，看见上面有洞敛缩着往下坠。
English: Observing the green pool in detail, he saw a hole above it, shrinking and sinking.

古文：僧引入其中，曰： 此亦竹林寺三门之一。 
现代文：知觉和尚引导我进入其中，说： 这也是竹林寺三门之一。 
English: "This is also one of the three gates of the Bamboo Forest Temple," said the Awareness Monk, leading me into it.

古文：然洞本石罅夹起，内横通如 十 字，南北通明，西入似无底止。
现代文：然而洞本来是石缝隙相夹而起，其内横通有如 十 字，南北通明透亮，往西进入好像没有底似的。
English: However, the cave was originally a rock crevice. Inside, the horizontal passage is like a ten-character, the north-south passage is clear and bright, and the entrance to the west seems to have no bottom.

古文：出，溯溪而行，抵方广，已昏黑。
现代文：出洞，沿溪岸而行，抵达方广寺时，天已昏黑。
English: We left the cave and walked along the riverbank. When we arrived at Fangguang Temple, it was already dark.

古文：二十二日出寺，南渡溪，抵犁头尖之阳。
现代文：二十二日走出方广寺，从南面渡过溪水，抵达犁头尖的南面。
English: On the 22nd, I walked out of Fangguang Temple, crossed the stream from the south, and arrived at the south side of Shantou cusp.

古文：东转下山，十里，至楞伽院侧。
现代文：向东转下山，走十里路，到达楞伽院侧面。
English: Turn east down the mountain, walk ten miles, and arrive at the side of Hakka Academy.

古文：遥望山左胁，一瀑从空飞坠，环映青紫，夭矫屈曲滉漾水势大而飞溅，亦一雄观。
现代文：遥望山左侧半腰，一瀑布从空飞坠而下，环映出四周的青青紫紫，混漾中显出一种屈曲的气势，也是一雄丽景观。
English: Half-way down the left side of Yavang Mountain, a waterfall cascades down from the sky. The ring reflects the surrounding blue-green-purple-violet. In the haze, there is a curving momentum, and it is also a magnificent landscape.

古文：五里，过栖贤寺，山势至此始就平。以急于三峡涧，未之入。
现代文：走五里路，经过栖贤寺，山势至此开始趋向平缓；因为急于三峡涧的游览，未进入栖贤寺。
English: After walking five miles and passing through Jixian Temple, the mountain began to level off; because I was in a hurry to visit the Three Gorges, I did not enter Jixian Temple.

古文：里许，至三峡涧。
现代文：一里路多，到达三峡涧。
English: It's a long way to the Three Gorges.

古文：涧石夹立成峡，怒流冲激而来，为峡所束，回奔倒涌，轰振山谷。
现代文：涧由石壁夹立形成峡口，汹涌的水流冲激而来，为峡口所约束，奔腾回旋，汹涌激荡，轰鸣声震荡山谷。
English: The gorge is formed by the stone wall, and the turbulent water flow is stimulated and constrained by the gorge. The valley is whirling, turbulent, and roaring.

古文：桥悬两岩石上，俯瞰深峡中，进珠戛玉形如珠溅，声如击玉。
现代文：一桥悬架两边的岩石上，在桥上俯视深峡中，激荡的流水有如珍珠溅射，声有如敲击玉响。
English: On the rocks on both sides of the suspension bridge, on the bridge overlooking the deep gorge, the agitated flowing water is like pearl sputtering, and the sound is like tapping jade.

古文：过桥，从岐路东向，越岭趋白鹿洞。
现代文：过桥后，从岔路向东，翻越山岭奔向白鹿洞。
English: After crossing the bridge, head east from Kushiro Road and run over the mountains to Shiraka-do Cave.

古文：路皆出五老峰之阳，山田高下，点错民居。
现代文：道路都出现在五老峰的南面，山田高下不一，民居错落散布。
English: The roads all appear on the south side of the Wulao Peak, the elevation of Yamada is uneven, and the residences are scattered.

古文：横历坡陀不平的山坡，仰望排嶂者三里，直入峰下，为白鹤观。
现代文：横行经过的路很不平坦，仰望层峦叠嶂的地方还有三里。直接进入山峰之下，是白鹤观。
English: The road is very uneven, and it is still three miles to look up at the place where the layers are stacked. Directly under the mountain peak is the White Crane View.

古文：又东北行三里，抵白鹿洞唐代江州刺史李渤曾在此读书，并随身养一白鹿，因此得名，亦五老峰前一山坞也。
现代文：又向东北方向行走三里，抵达白鹿洞，这里也是五老峰前的一处山坞。环山的溪流有如带子，高大的松树错落山间。
English: I walked another three miles to the northeast and arrived at Baisha Cave, which is also a dock in front of Wulao Peak. The streams around the mountain are like a ribbon, and tall pine trees are scattered among the mountains.

古文：环山带溪，乔松错落。出洞，由大道行，为开先道。
现代文：走出白鹿洞；由大道上走，这是通往开先寺的道路。
English: Go out of the White Deer Cave; walk along the main road, which is the road leading to Kaisen-ji Temple.

古文：盖庐山形势，犁头尖居中而少逊，栖贤寺实中处焉；五老左突，下即白鹿洞；右峙者，则鹤鸣峰也，开先寺当其前。
现代文：大概庐山的形势，犁头尖处于中间而稍稍偏一些，栖贤寺实际上正处于中间地区，五老峰向左突出，其下即是白鹿洞；右边峙立的，则是鹤鸣峰了，开先寺正当其前。
English: Probably the situation of Lushan Mountain, Shantou tip is in the middle and slightly off to the side, Jixian Temple is actually in the middle area, Wulao Peak protrudes to the left, and below it is the White Deer Cave; standing on the right is the Crane Peak, and Kaisen Temple is right in front of it.

古文：于是西向循山，横过白鹿、栖贤之大道，十五里，经万松寺，陟一岭而下，山寺巍然南向者，则开先寺也。
现代文：于是向西面，沿着山，横穿过通往白鹿洞、栖贤寺的大道，走十五里，经过万松寺，登上一岭而后下山，巍然南向的那座山寺，就是开先寺了。
English: So I headed west, along the mountain, across the main road leading to Baisha Cave and Jixian Temple, walked fifteen miles, passed Wansong Temple, climbed up a ridge and then down the mountain, and the mountain temple that was heading south was Kaisen Temple.

古文：从殿后登楼眺瀑，一缕垂垂，尚在五里外，半为山树所翳ì遮掩，倾泻之势，不及楞伽道中所见。
现代文：从大殿后面登楼远眺瀑布，一缕垂垂向下的水帘，还在五里路之外，一半为山树所遮蔽，倾泻而下的态势，不及楞伽道中所看见的壮丽。
English: From the back of the main hall, I climbed the tower to see the waterfall in the distance. A curtain of water was hanging down. It was still five miles away, half obscured by mountain trees. The situation of the waterfall cascading down was not as magnificent as the one I saw on Shunga Road.

古文：惟双剑崭崭众峰间，有芙蓉插天之态；香炉一峰，直山头圆阜耳。
现代文：只有双剑峰在众峰中间显得特别高峻，有芙蓉插天的态势；香炉峰那一座山峰，挺直而山头形成圆形的土山丘。
English: Among all the peaks, only the Shuangjian Peak appears to be particularly high, with a situation of hibiscus interspersed with the sky; the peak of the Incense Burner Peak is straight and the mountain head forms a round earthen hill.

古文：从楼侧西下壑，涧流铿然泻出峡石，即瀑布下流也。
现代文：从楼侧向西面走下山沟，涧溪流水铿然地泻出峡石口，此即是瀑布的下流。
English: Walking down the ravine from the side of the building to the west, the water of the stream rushes out of the mouth of the gorge, which is the downstream of the waterfall.

古文：瀑布至此，反隐不复见，而峡水汇为龙潭，澄映心目。
现代文：到这里，瀑布反而隐蔽不复能看见，而峡石口的流水汇聚为龙潭，澄澈得能映出人的心境和眼睛。
English: Here, the waterfall is hidden from view, while the flowing water at the mouth of the gorge converges into a dragon pool, so clear that it reflects people's moods and eyes.

古文：坐石久之，四山暝色，返宿于殿西之鹤峰堂。
现代文：坐在石头上很久时间，四山都已沉入夜色，才返回到殿西之鹤峰堂歇宿。
English: Sitting on the stone for a long time, the four mountains have sunk into the night, only to return to the West Hall of the Crane Peak Hall for a rest.

古文：二十三日由寺后侧径登山。
现代文：二十三日由开先寺后的侧边小路上登山。
English: On the 23rd, I climbed the mountain on a side road behind Kasenji Temple.

古文：越涧盘岭，宛转山半。
现代文：越过溪涧，盘旋于山岭，在山半宛转前行。
English: Crossing creeks, circling in the mountains, turning around halfway up the mountain.

古文：隔峰复见一瀑，并挂瀑布之东，即马尾泉也。
现代文：隔着山峰又看见另一瀑布，并挂在瀑布东面的，就是马尾泉了。
English: On the other side of the mountain, I saw another waterfall, and to the east of the waterfall, there was Mao Spring.

古文：五里，攀一尖峰，绝顶为文殊台。
现代文：走过五里路，攀登上一座尖山峰，其绝顶为文殊台。
English: He walked five miles and climbed a sharp mountain peak, the highest of which is Manjushri.

古文：孤峰拔起，四望无倚，顶有文殊塔。
现代文：一座孤峰拔地而起，四面无有倚靠，峰顶有文殊塔。
English: A solitary peak rises from the ground, leaning on nothing on all sides, with a Manjushri pagoda at the peak.

古文：对崖削立万仞，瀑布轰轰下坠，与台仅隔一涧，自巅至底，一目殆无不尽。
现代文：对面的崖岩削立，高达万初，瀑布发出轰轰的响声向下坠落，与文殊台仅仅相隔一涧，从崖巅到崖底，一眼几乎看不尽。
English: The cliff on the opposite side of the cliff is hewn out of the rock, as high as the sky, and the waterfall crashes down with a roaring sound. It is only a stone's throw away from Wenshu Plateau. From the top of the cliff to the bottom of the cliff, you can hardly see everything at a glance.

古文：不登此台，不悉此瀑之胜。
现代文：不登临这文殊台，就不尽知这瀑布的胜景之妙。
English: You can't fully appreciate the beauty of this waterfall without visiting the Manjushri platform.

古文：下台，循山冈西北溯溪，即瀑布上流也。
现代文：走下文殊台，沿着山冈的西北面追溯溪流，即是瀑布的上流。
English: Walk down Shizuchidai and trace the stream along the northwest face of the mountain, which is the upstream of the waterfall.

古文：一径忽入，山回谷抱，则黄岩寺据双剑峰下。
现代文：一条小路忽然伸入，山回谷抱，黄岩寺正高踞在双剑峰下。
English: A path suddenly extends into the valley, and Huangyan Temple is perched at the foot of Shuangjian Peak.

古文：越涧再上，得黄石岩。
现代文：越过溪涧再向上攀登，得以到达黄石岩。
English: Cross the creek and climb up to reach Yellowstone Rock.

古文：岩石飞突，平覆如砥。
现代文：岩石有的奇异突兀，有的平覆如磨刀石。
English: Some of the rocks are strangely jagged, while others are flat like whetstones.

古文：岩侧茅阁方丈，幽雅出尘。
现代文：岩侧的茅草阁方丈，幽雅脱离尘世。
English: The thatched-roof abbot's lodge on the side of the cliff is elegantly detached from the world.

古文：阁外修竹数竿，拂群峰而上，与山花霜叶，映配峰际。
现代文：阁外面有修竹数竿，在群峰之上轻轻摆动，与山花、秋天的霜叶，辉映相配于山峰之间。
English: On the outside of the pavilion, there are several bamboo poles, gently swinging above the peaks, matching with the mountain flowers, autumn frost leaves, and the glow between the peaks.

古文：鄱湖一点，正当窗牖。
现代文：远眺都阳湖一片，正对着窗户。
English: A distant view of Duyang Lake, directly opposite the window.

古文：纵步溪石间，观断崖夹壁之胜。
现代文：在溪洞、岩石间放开步伐游览，观赏断崖、夹壁的种种景致。
English: Take a leisurely tour among the caves and rocks, and enjoy the various scenery of cliffs and walls.

古文：仍饭开先，遂别去。
现代文：仍然在开先寺用饭，饭后告别而去。
English: He still dines at Kaisen-ji Temple, and bids farewell after the meal.

