古文：黄佐，字才伯，香山人。
现代文：黄佐，字才伯，香山人。
English: Huang Zuo, a talented calligrapher, comes from Xiangshan.

古文：祖瑜，长乐知县，以学行闻。
现代文：祖父黄瑜，曾任长乐知县，以其学问、德行闻名于世。
English: Huang Yu's grandfather, once the governor of Lezhi County, was famous for his learning and virtue.

古文：正德中，佐举乡试第一。世宗嗣位，始成进士，选庶吉士。
现代文：佐于正德年间乡试第一名，至世宗即位后才举进士，选为庶吉士。
English: He won the first place in the village test during the Zhengde era, and was selected as the second best man only after the enthronement of King Sejong.

古文：嘉靖初，授编修，陈初政要务，又请修举新政，疏皆留中。
现代文：嘉靖初授编修，陈奏世宗即位后应进行的重要政务，又建议实行新政，这些奏章均被扣留下来未进呈皇帝。
English: Jiajing was the first to compile and compile, Chen So Sejong was the important government affairs to be carried out after the enthronement, and also proposed the implementation of the New Deal. These songs were detained and not submitted to the emperor.

古文：寻省亲归，便道谒王守仁，与论知行合一之旨，数相辨难，守仁亦称其直谅。
现代文：不久，省亲回家，便道拜见王守仁，与他谈知行合一的学术理论，相互辩驳，守仁也认为佐耿直信实。
English: Soon after, Guo Jian went home and paid a visit to Wang Shouren. They talked about the academic theory of the unity of knowledge and action and argued with each other. Shouren also believed that Zuo Geng was honest and trustworthy.

古文：还朝，会出诸翰林为外僚，除江西佥事。
现代文：还朝恰逢朝廷要将诸翰林调出京，在外任职，于是佐调任江西佥事，很快又任广西督学。
English: It also coincided with the time when the imperial court wanted to transfer Zhu Hanlin out of Beijing to serve abroad, so he was transferred to Jiangxi Anji, and soon he was appointed as Guangxi Inspector.

古文：旋改督广西学校，闻母病，引疾乞休，不俟报竟去，下巡抚林富逮问。
现代文：闻母病，请求退休，不等朝廷批准就走了，朝廷将他交巡抚林富问罪。
English: He fell ill, asked to retire, and left without waiting for approval from the imperial court, which handed him over to the governor Lin Fu for questioning.

古文：富言佐诚有罪，第为亲受过，于情可原，乃令致仕。
现代文：林富认为，佐擅自离职确实有罪，但这是为亲受过，情有可原，只令退休就算了，不必判罪。
English: Lin Fu believes that Sa is indeed guilty of resigning without permission, but this is due to personal experience and can be excused. It is only a matter of retirement, and there is no need to convict.

古文：家居九年，简宫僚，命以编修兼司谏，寻进侍读，掌南京翰林院。
现代文：佐在家住了九年，又起任为宫廷官员，命为编修兼司谏。不久进升侍读，掌管南京翰林院。
English: Sa lived at home for nine years, and was appointed as an official of the court, with the title of editor and priest. He was soon promoted to attendant, and was in charge of the Nanjing Hanlin Academy.

古文：召为右谕德，擢南京国子祭酒。
现代文：后召回北京为右谕德，又升南京国子监祭酒。
English: After that, he was recalled to Beijing as a Right Reverend, and was also promoted to the Nanjing Guozijian Festival.

古文：母忧除服，起少詹事。
现代文：母亲去世，他服孝期满，起任少詹事。
English: After his mother's death, his term of filial piety expired, and he took up the post of Shozhanji.

古文：谒大学士夏言，与论河套事不合。
现代文：佐谒见大学士夏言，与他讨论河套的事，两人意见不合。
English: Sawaki met with the university judge, Natsugen, and discussed the matter of Hetao with him, but the two disagreed.

古文：会吏部缺左侍郎，所司推礼部右侍郎崔桐及佐。
现代文：这时吏部左侍郎缺任，有人推举黄佐及礼部右侍郎崔桐。
English: At this time, the left attendant of the personnel department was absent, and someone nominated Huang Sa and the right attendant of the ceremony department, Cui Tong.

古文：给事中徐霈、御史艾朴言： 桐与左侍郎许成名竞进，至相诟詈；而佐及同官王用宾亦争觊望，惟恐或先之，宜皆止勿用。 
现代文：给事中徐霈、御史艾朴都认为 ：桐与左侍郎许成名竞争该职位，以至于相互辱骂；而佐与同官王用宾也争想谋此职位，唯恐对方占先；最好都不任用。 
English: In the matter, both Xu Xi and Mishi Ai Pu believed that: Tong and Zuo Xi Rong were competing for the position, so much so that they were insulting each other; while Sa and fellow official Wang Yibin were also vying for this position, lest the other side take the lead; it was best not to appoint either of them.

古文：言从中主之，遂皆赐罢。
现代文：夏言做堆积出决定：都不任用。
English: Xia Yan made a pile of decisions: none of them were appointed.

古文：佐学以程、朱为宗，惟理气之说，独持一论。
现代文：佐的学问是以程朱理学为指导思想，但关于理气之说，独持一论。
English: Sa's learning is guided by the philosophy of Cheng Zhu, but he has his own views on the philosophy of reason.

古文：平生譔述至二百六十余卷。
现代文：平生著述有二百六十余卷。
English: He wrote more than 260 volumes in his lifetime.

古文：执政知其能文，用为制敕房中书，供事内阁，加官至参议。
现代文：其《乐典》一书，自称透露了自然界之奥秘。终年七十七岁。
English: He was seventy-seven years old when he published his book "Music" in which he claimed to reveal the secrets of the natural world.

古文：柯维骐，字奇纯，莆田人。
现代文：穆宗诏赠礼部右侍郎，谥文裕。柯维骐，字奇纯，莆田人。
English: Mu Zong Zhao gave the gift of the right hand man of the gift department, 文裕.柯维,字奇純,田人.

古文：高祖潜，翰林学士。父英，徽州知府。
现代文：高祖柯潜为翰林学士，父柯英为徽州知府。
English: His great-great-grandfather Ke Qian was a scholar of Hanlin, and his father Ke Ying was the governor of Huizhou.

古文：维骐举嘉靖二年进士，授南京户部主事，未赴，辄引疾归。
现代文：维骐于嘉靖二年进士及第，授南京户部主事，未赴任就因病回归故里。
English: Wei Wei entered the second year of Jiajing and the third year, and was assigned to the head of the Nanjing Household Department. He returned to his hometown due to illness before taking office.

古文：张孚敬用事，创新制，京朝官病满三年者，概罢免，维骐亦在罢中。
现代文：张孚敬执政，创立新制，规定京中朝官病假满三年者，一律罢免，维骐也在被罢免之列。
English: Zhang Fujing came to power and created a new system, stipulating that all officials of the Beijing and Beijing Dynasties who have been on sick leave for three years will be dismissed. Wei Jun is also among those who have been dismissed.

古文：自是谢宾客，专心读书。
现代文：从此以后，他谢绝宾客，专心读书。
English: From then on, he refused to entertain guests and concentrated on his studies.

古文：久之，门人日进，先后四百余人，维骐引掖靡倦。
现代文：年深日久，门人日多，先后达四百余人，维骐孜孜不倦引导扶持他们。
English: Over the years, the number of disciples has increased day by day, reaching more than four hundred people in succession, and Wei Wei has tirelessly guided and supported them.

古文：慨近世学者乐径易而惮积累，窃二氏之说以文其固陋也，作左右二铭，训学者务实。
现代文：近世学者乐于走捷径，怕多下功夫读书积累知识，甚至剽劫程朱学说，维骐对此顽固陋习十分不满，做左右二铭，教训学生要务实。
English: Modern scholars are willing to take shortcuts, afraid to put more effort into reading and accumulating knowledge, and even abusing Zhu's theory. Wei Wei is very dissatisfied with this stubborn bad habit, doing the right and the left, and teaching students to be pragmatic.

古文：褒贬去取，义例严整，阅二十年而始成，名之曰《宋史新编》。
现代文：《宋史》、《辽史》、《金史》原三书，维骐将三书合为一书，以《宋史》为主，《辽史》、《金史》为附篇，但仍把辽、金二朝皇帝列为本纪，名曰《宋史新编》。
English: "Song History," "Liao History" and "Jin History" were originally three books. Wei Zheng combined the three books into one book, with "Song History" as the main part, "Liao History" and "Jin History" as appendices, but still listed the Liao and Jin emperors as the main part, called "Song History New Edition."

古文：又著《史记考要》、《续莆阳文献志》，及所作诗文集并行于世。
现代文：此书褒贬取舍，义例严整，历二十年而成。又著《史记考要》、《续莆阳文献志》，与其诗文集并行于世。
English: This book was written over a period of twenty years, with strict rules of interpretation. He also authored "Historical Summary" and "Continuation of the History of Shenyang Literature," which were published alongside his poetry collection.

古文：所司以维骐年高，但授承德郎致仕。
现代文：维骐自登进士以后五十年内，不曾做过一天官。
English: In the 50 years since Wei Wei was promoted to the highest rank, he has never served as an official for a single day.

古文：卒年七十有八。孙茂竹，海阳知县。
现代文：其间经过倭寇之乱，家园被毁，家境更加贫寒，但他始终不妄取一物一钱。无什么嗜好，只好读书。
English: During this time, after the Wokou Rebellion, his home was destroyed and his family was even more impoverished, but he never took one thing and one money. He didn't have any hobbies and had to study.

古文：茂竹子昶，副都御史，巡抚山西。
现代文：虽抚按监司常常举荐他也未出来做官。隆庆初年，廷臣又举荐，因他年事已高，只授承德郎而令退休，终年七十八岁。
English: In the first year of the Longqing Emperor's reign, courtiers recommended that he retire because of his advanced age, and he was only given the title of Cheng Delang, and lived to the age of 78.

古文：王慎中，字道思，晋江人。
现代文：王慎中，字道思，晋江人。
English: Wang Shenzhong, also known as Dao Si, is from Jinjiang.

古文：四岁能诵诗，十八举嘉靖五年进士，授户部主事，寻改礼部祠祭司。
现代文：四岁即能诵诗，十八岁中嘉靖五年进士，授户部主事，不久改任礼部祠祭司。
English: At the age of four, he was able to recite poetry. At the age of eighteen, he was promoted to a priest in the fifth year of the Jiajing era. He was the head of the Household Division and soon became the priest of the Ceremonial Division.

古文：时四方名士唐顺之、陈束、李开先、赵时春、任瀚、熊过、屠应埈、华察、陆铨、江以达、曾忭辈，咸在部曹。慎中与之讲习，学大进。
现代文：当时四方名士如唐顺之、陈束、李开先、赵时春、任翰、熊过、屠应翪、华察、陆铨、江以达、曾汴等都在户部供职，慎中同他们讨论学问，学识大有进步。
English: At that time, famous figures from the four quarters, such as Tang Shunzhi, Chen Zuok, Li Kaisen, Zhao Shichun, Ren Han, Xiong Guo, Tu Yingtao, Huacha, Lu Yao, Jiang Yida, and Zeng Yao, all worked in the household department. Shen Zhong discussed learning with them and made great progress in learning.

古文：十二年，诏简部郎为翰林，众首拟慎中。
现代文：嘉靖十二年，朝廷令选拔各部郎官为翰林，众人首推慎中。
English: In the twelfth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the imperial order selected the officials of each department to be Hanlin, and everyone was the first to be selected.

古文：大学士张孚敬欲一见，辞不赴，乃稍移吏部，为考功员外郎，进验封郎中。
现代文：大学士张孚敬想召见慎中，他推辞不去。随后调为吏部考功员外郎，又晋升为郎中。
English: Zhang Fujing, a college graduate, wanted to be summoned to see Shen Zhong, but he refused to go. Subsequently, he was transferred to the cadre department, and was promoted to a junior clerk.

古文：忌者谗之孚敬，因覆议真人张衍庆请封疏，谪常州通判。
现代文：忌妒他的人向孚敬说慎中的坏话，又因再次上疏反对真人张衍庆请封的奏疏，从而被贬为常州通判。
English: Those who envied him spoke ill of Zhenzhong to Fu Jing, and because he once again opposed the petition of the real person, Zhang Yanqing, he was relegated to Changzhou.

古文：稍迁户部主事、礼部员外郎，并在南京。久之，擢山东提学佥事，改江西参议，进河南参政。
现代文：稍后，历任南京户部主事、礼部员外郎，很久以后升山东提学佥事，又改任江西参议，晋升河南参政。
English: Later, Wairo, who had been the head of the household department and the member of the ritual department in Nanjing, was promoted to the east of the mountain to learn the anecdotes, and he was also appointed as the Jiangxi counselor and promoted to Henan to participate in politics.

古文：侍郎王杲奉命振荒，以其事委慎中，还朝，荐慎中可重用。
现代文：侍郎王杲奉命赈荒，他将赈荒事委托慎中，回朝后，王杲荐慎中，朝廷重用。
English: Attendant Wang Xi was ordered to reclaim the wasteland. He entrusted the reclaiming of the wasteland to Shenzhong. After returning to the imperial court, Wang Xi recommended Shenzhong to the imperial court.

古文：会二十年大计，吏部注慎中不及。
现代文：逢嘉靖二十年考核地方官员，吏部认为慎中不合格。
English: In Feng Jiajing's 20 years of assessing local officials, the cadre department considered him to be unqualified.

古文：而大学士夏言先尝为礼部尚书，慎中其属吏也，与相忤，遂内批不谨，落其职。
现代文：大学士夏言曾为礼部尚书时，慎中是他的下属，二人意见不合，乘此考核之时，指责慎中办事不谨严，削夺其官职。
English: When Xia Yan, a university scholar, was a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Shen Zhong was his subordinate, the two disagreed. When taking advantage of this assessment, he accused Shen Zhong of being careless and strict, and deprived him of his official position.

古文：慎中为文，初主秦、汉，谓东京下无可取。
现代文：慎中为文，最先主张效法秦和西汉，认为东汉以后无可取。
English: Prudently, he was the first to advocate the emulation of the Qin and Western Han dynasties, and believed that the Eastern Han dynasty was no longer desirable.

古文：已悟欧、曾作文之法，乃尽焚旧作，一意师仿，尤得力于曾巩。
现代文：后来懂得了欧阳修、曾巩的做文之法，于是把他以前的作品全部烧毁，一心一意效法欧、曾，尤其是曾巩。
English: Later, he understood Ouyang Xiu and Zeng Gong's way of writing, so he burned all his previous works and devoted himself to emulating Ou, Zeng, and especially Zeng Gong.

古文：顺之初不服，久亦变而从之。
现代文：唐顺之开始不服，久而久之也同意慎中的意见。
English: Tang Shunzhi was not satisfied at first, but gradually agreed with Shenzhong's opinion.

古文：壮年废弃，益肆力古文，演迤详赡，卓然成家，与顺之齐名，天下称之曰王、唐，又曰晋江、毗陵。
现代文：壮年时被罢官，更加致力于古文，加以充分发展，自成一家，与顺之齐名，天下人称之为王、唐，又称晋江、毗陵。
English: He was dismissed from his post when he was in his prime. He devoted himself more to ancient literature and developed it to the full, and became a family of his own. He and Shun share the same name. People around the world call them Wang and Tang, and they are also known as Jinjiang and Viling.

古文：家居，问业者踵至。
现代文：慎中落职居家中，来向他求学的接踵而至。
English: He is a prudent middle-aged man who works at home, and many people come to him to study.

古文：年五十一而终。
现代文：年五十一岁而终。
English: He died at the age of 51.

古文：高叔嗣，字子业，祥符人。年十六，作《申情赋》几万言，见者惊异。
现代文：李攀龙、王世贞这些后起之秀极力贬低他，却始终不能超过他，而攀龙本来是慎中提学山东时提拔的人才。慎中初号 遵岩居士 ，后号 南江 。高叔嗣，字子业，祥符人。十六岁做《申情赋》近万言，凡读过这篇赋的人莫不惊奇。
English: Li Panglong and Wang Shizhen, these rising stars, tried their best to belittle him, but they could never surpass him, while Panglong was originally a talent promoted by Shen Zhongti when he studied in Shandong. In Shen Zhongti, his first name was Zunyan Koji, and his last name was Nanjiang. Gao Shushi, Zizi industry, Xiang Fu people. At the age of 16, he made "Shen Jie Fu" with nearly 10,000 words, which is surprising to anyone who has read this Fu.

古文：十八举于乡，第嘉靖二年进士。授工部主事，改吏部。历稽勋郎中。
现代文：十八岁乡试中举，嘉靖二年进士，授工部主事，后改吏部主事，又任稽勋郎中。
English: At the age of eighteen, he passed the junior high school entrance examination, and in the second year of Jiajing, he was promoted to a scholar, assigned to be the head of the department of engineering, and later became the head of the department of personnel, and was also appointed as a junior member of the honor guard.

古文：出为山西左参政，断疑狱十二事，人称为神。
现代文：出任山西左参政，审明冤案十二件，人称为神。
English: He took office as a left-wing politician in Shanxi Province, adjudicated twelve cases of injustice, and was known as a god.

古文：迁湖广按察使，卒官，年三十有七。
现代文：调湖广按察使，年三十七岁而终。
English: He was appointed inspector general of Hubei Province and died at the age of thirty-seven.

古文：叔嗣少受知邑人李梦阳，及官吏部，与三原马理、武城王道同署，以文艺相磨切。
现代文：叔嗣年少时就为本县李梦阳所赏识，后在吏部做官又与三原马理、武城王道同署办公，相互磋切文艺。
English: When he was young, he was admired by Li Mengyang of this county. Later, he worked as an official in the personnel department and worked with Mihara Mari and Wucheng Wangdao, learning from each other in literature and art.

古文：其为诗，清新婉约，虽为梦阳所知，不宗其说。
现代文：叔嗣的诗清新娓婉，虽为梦阳所赏识，但并不同意他所持见解。
English: Although Mengyang appreciated his uncle's fresh and elegant poetry, he did not agree with his views.

古文：陈束序其《苏门集》，谓有应物之冲澹，兼曲江之沈雄，体王、孟之清适，具高、岑之悲壮。
现代文：陈束为其诗《苏门集》做序，说叔嗣的诗 有应物之冲澹，兼曲江之雄浑，体会了王、孟之清适，具有高、岑之悲壮 。
English: Chen Zuc prefaced his poem "Sumon Collection" by saying that his uncle's poem has the rush of the subject, the vigor of the river, the clarity of the king and men, and the loftiness and solemnity of the dragon.

古文：王世贞则曰： 子业诗，如高山鼓琴，沈思忽往，木叶尽脱，石气自青；又如卫洗马言愁，憔瘁婉笃，令人心折。 
现代文：王世贞说： 子业的诗，如在高山鼓琴，沉思倏忽的往事，这时树木叶落，晴空万里；又如卫洗马言愁，憔悴不堪，令人心碎。 
English: Wang Shizhen said, "Ziku's poems are like playing the tambourine in the high mountains, meditating on the fleeting past, when the leaves fall from the trees and the sky is clear; and like Wei Qingma's sorrowful words, unbearable and heartbreaking.

古文：而蔡汝楠至推为本朝第一云。
现代文：而蔡汝楠则认为叔嗣的诗为本朝第一。
English: Cai Runan, on the other hand, believed that his uncle's poem was the first in the dynasty.

古文：兄仲嗣，官知府，亦有才名。汝楠，字子木。
现代文：蔡汝南，字子木。
English: Cai Runan, character tree.

古文：儿时随父南京，听祭酒湛若水讲学，辄有解悟。
现代文：幼年随父至南京听国子监祭酒湛若水讲学，立即有所领悟。
English: When he was a child, he followed his father to Nanjing to listen to the lecture of Guozin Guanzhangzai Jintan Wakamizu, and immediately understood something.

古文：年十八，成嘉靖十一年进士，授行人。
现代文：十岁中嘉靖十一年进士，授行人。
English: At the age of ten, Jiajing was promoted to a scholar in the eleventh year.

古文：从王慎中、唐顺之及叔嗣辈学为诗。
现代文：向王慎中、唐顺之及高叔嗣学诗。
English: Xiang Wang Shenzhong, Tang Shunzhi and Gao Shushi studied poetry.

古文：寻进刑部员外郎，徙南京刑部。
现代文：不久，进升刑部员外郎，后调南京刑部员外郎。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of a member of the Criminal Investigation Department, and later transferred to the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：善皇甫涍兄弟，尚书顾璘引为忘年友。
现代文：与皇甫孝兄弟友善，与尚书顾瞞为忘年交。
English: He was friendly with the brothers of Emperor Fuchaka, and had a long-lasting friendship with Shoshu Kushiro.

古文：廷议改归德州为府，擢汝楠知其府事。
现代文：朝廷决定改归德州为府，升汝南为知府。
English: The imperial court decided to change the capital to Dezhou, and to promote Yunan as the prefectural capital.

古文：以母忧归，聚诸生石鼓书院，与说经。
现代文：因母亲去世归家守孝。在家乡召集诸生于石鼓书院，为他们讲经。
English: Due to the death of his mother, he returned home to be a filial son. In his hometown, he gathered all those who were born in the Stone Drum Academy and gave a sermon to them.

古文：治民有惠政，既去，士民祠祀之。
现代文：他在归德行惠民之政，故他走后士民立祠纪念他。
English: After returning to Germany, he pursued a policy of benefiting the people, so after he left, the people set up an ancestral shrine to commemorate him.

古文：历官江西左、右布政使，擢右副都御史，巡抚河南。
现代文：后历任江西左、右布政使，升右副都御史，巡抚河南。
English: Later, he successively served as the political envoy of Jiangxi Province, and was promoted to vice-governor of the capital and governor of Henan Province.

古文：召为兵部右侍郎，从诸大僚祝釐西宫，世宗望见其貌寝，改南京工部右侍郎，未几卒。
现代文：召回朝任兵部右侍郎，随诸大臣求福西宫时，世宗见其貌不扬，改为南京工部右侍郎，不久去世。
English: When he was recalled to the imperial court to serve as the right hand man of the military department, following the request of the ministers to Fuxi Palace, Shesong saw his appearance as unimpressive and changed it to the right hand man of the Nanjing Engineering Department. He died soon after.

古文：汝楠始好为诗，有重名。
现代文：汝南早年好诗，且有名气。
English: In his early years, Runan was a good poet and was famous.

古文：中年好经学，及官江西，与邹守一、罗洪先游，学益进，然诗由此不工去。
现代文：中年好经学，在江西为官时，与邹守一、罗洪先交游，学问更有长进，然其诗从此不工。
English: In middle age, he was good at studying the classics. When he was an official in Jiangxi Province, he traveled with Zou Shouyi and Luo Hongxian, and his knowledge improved. However, his poems have not been written since then.

古文：陈束，字约之，鄞人。
现代文：陈束，字约之，鄞县人。
English: Chen Zhou, also known as Chen Zhou, was a native of Jixian County.

古文：生而聪慧绝伦，好读古书。
现代文：天生聪慧绝伦，好读古书。
English: Naturally brilliant, good at reading old books.

古文：会稽侍郎董玘官翰林时，闻束才，召视之。
现代文：会稽侍郎董王己当翰林时，闻束有才华，召来会见。
English: When the steward of the association, Mr. Dong Wang, was in Hanlin, he was called by the talented Mr. Wenzhou to meet him.

古文：东垂髫而前，试词赋立就，遂字以女，携至京，文誉益起。
现代文：陈束仍以儿童装束去见，考他词赋，挥笔成章。董王己非常赏识，把女儿许配给他，并带他去京城，束的名声更大。
English: Chen Sok, still dressed as a child, went to see him, tested his wit, and wrote a letter. Dong Wang was very appreciative and gave him his daughter to marry, and took him to Beijing. Sok's reputation is even greater.

古文：嘉靖八年廷对，世宗亲擢罗洪先、程文德、杨名为一甲，而置唐顺之及束、任瀚于二甲，皆手批其卷。
现代文：嘉靖八年廷试，世宗亲自升罗洪先、程文德、杨名为一甲，而将唐顺之及陈束、任瀚列于二甲，皆亲手批阅试卷。
English: In the eighth year of Jiajing's imperial examination, Shizong personally ranked Luo Hongxian, Cheng Wende, and Yang as A, and ranked Tang Shunzhi, Chen Zucu, and Ren Han as B. They all read the examination papers with their own hands.

古文：无何，考庶吉士，得胡经等二十人，以束及顺之、瀚曾奉御批，列经等首。
现代文：不久，考庶吉士，取胡经等二十人，因束及顺之、瀚曾奉御批，列经为第一名。
English: Soon, twenty people, including those who took the Koseki Kishi and the Ho-kyo, were listed as the first place in the sutras, with the approval of the Emperor.

古文：座主张璁、霍韬以前此馆选悉改他曹，引嫌，亦议改，乃寝前令，束授礼部主事。时有 嘉靖八才子 之称，谓束及王慎中、唐顺之、赵时春、熊过、任瀚、李开先、吕高也。
现代文：束授礼部主事。当时有 嘉靖八才子 之称，所谓八才子是指陈束、王慎中、唐顺之、赵时春、熊过、任瀚、李开先、吕高等。
English: At that time, there was a saying that Jiajing had eight talented sons. The so-called eight talented sons referred to Chen Zoku, Wang Shanzhong, Tang Shunzhi, Zhao Shichun, Xiong Guo, Ren Han, Li Kaisen, and Lv Gao.

古文：四郊改建，都御史汪鋐请徙近郊居民坟墓，束疏谏，不报。
现代文：京城四郊改建，都御史汪钅宏奏请将近郊居民坟墓迁走，束上疏谏阻，奏疏被扣留未进呈皇帝。
English: The four suburbs of Beijing were being rebuilt, and the governor of the capital, Wang Binghong, requested that the graves of the residents of the nearby suburbs be moved away, which was resisted by Soso. Soso was detained before he could be presented to the emperor.

古文：迁员外郎，改编修。
现代文：调任员外郎，后改为编修。
English: He was transferred to the position of editor-in-chief, later changed to editor-in-chief.

古文：束出璁、韬门，不肯亲附。
现代文：束参加进士考试时，张璁、霍韬为主考官，束为璁、韬的门生，但不肯依附他们。
English: When Zou took the entrance examination, Zhang Qian and Huo Qian were the main examiners. Zou was Zou's and Zou's protégé, but he did not want to be attached to them.

古文：岁时上寿，望门投刺，辄驰马过之。
现代文：每年按时给两位老师祝寿，但只是到家门口投递名片，随即驰马而过，不停留。
English: Every year, I wish the two teachers a happy birthday on time, but I only drop off my business card at their doorstep, and then ride past without stopping.

古文：为所恶，出为湖广佥事。
现代文：因此为璁、韬所厌恶，调出京师赴湖广任佥事。
English: Therefore, it was repugnant to Zou and Zou, and they transferred the Beijing division to go to Lake Guangren.

古文：分巡辰、沅，治有声。
现代文：他在湖广巡视辰州、沅州，治绩闻名。
English: He toured Chenzhou and Ganzhou in Hubei Province, and is famous for his achievements.

古文：稍迁福建参议，改河南提学副使。
现代文：迁福建参议，又改任河南提学副使。
English: He was transferred to Fujian as a councilor, and was also appointed as the deputy envoy of Henan to promote education.

古文：束故有呕血疾，会科试期近，试八郡之士，三月而毕，疾增剧，竟不起，年才三十有三。
现代文：束原有吐血病，正逢科举考试时期，他主考了八郡的士子，历时三月，使病情加重，不幸逝世，年仅三十三岁。
English: He was suffering from hyperemesis gravidarum. At the time of the imperial examinations, he presided over the examination of the eight counties, which lasted for three months. As a result, his condition worsened, and he died at the age of only thirty-three.

古文：妻董，亦能诗，束卒未几亦卒，束竟无后。
现代文：其妻董氏也能做诗，束去世不久也亡故，束无后裔。
English: His wife, Ms. Dong, who could also write poetry, died not long after, leaving no descendants.

古文：当嘉靖初，称诗者多宗何、李，束与顺之辈厌而矫之。束早世，且藁多散逸，今所传《后冈集》，仅十之一二云。
现代文：嘉靖初，论诗者多推崇何、李，而束与唐顺之等不同意这种观点，加以纠正，束早逝，其手稿多散失，今所传《后冈集》仅全部著作的十分之一二。
English: At the beginning of the Jiajing period, the polemicists mostly praised He and Li, but Zou and Tang Shun disagreed with this view, and corrected it. Zou died early, and many of his manuscripts were lost. The "Hougang Collection" that is now passed down is only two-tenths of all his works.

古文：任瀚，字少海，南充人。
现代文：任瀚，字少海，南充人。
English: Renhan, Zhaoshao Hai, Nanchong Ren.

古文：嘉靖八年进士。改庶吉士，未上，授吏部主事。
现代文：嘉靖八年进士，改庶吉士，授吏部主事。
English: In the eighth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, he was promoted to the rank of scholar, and became the head of the Department of Scholarship.

古文：屡迁考功郎中。
现代文：多次调任考功郎中。
English: He was transferred several times as a meritorious student.

古文：十八年，简宫僚，改左春坊左司直兼翰林院检讨。
现代文：嘉靖十八年任宫中官员，后改左春坊左司直兼翰林院检讨。
English: In the 18th year of Jiajing, he served as an official in the palace, and later became Zuo Chunbo, Zuo Si Nao, and Hanlin Academy.

古文：明年，拜疏引疾，出郭戒行，疏再上，不报，复自引还。
现代文：十九年上疏托病辞官。
English: Nineteen-year-old nursery school dropout becomes a doctor.

古文：给事中周来劾瀚举动任情，蔑视官守。
现代文：未经允许自行返家。给事中周来劾瀚的随意行动，是蔑视官长。
English: He returned home on his own without permission. The arbitrary action of impeaching Han in the middle of the matter is contempt for officials.

古文：帝令自陈，瀚语侵掌詹事霍韬。帝怒，勒为民。
现代文：皇帝让他自陈过错，瀚在自陈中语言侵犯詹事霍韬，帝大怒，勒令为民。
English: The emperor told him that he had made a mistake in his speech, that he had used language that infringed upon the rights and interests of the people. The emperor was furious and ordered him to resign.

古文：久之，遇赦，复官致仕。
现代文：不久遇赦，恢复官职但令隐退。
English: After a long time, Wang Shizhong was pardoned and resumed his official duties, after which he resigned and retired.

古文：终世宗朝，中外屡荐，不复用。
现代文：在整个世宗朝时期，虽朝廷内外多次举荐，但始终未予起用。
English: During the entire period of the Sejong Dynasty, although it was repeatedly recommended both inside and outside the Imperial Court, it was never used.

古文：神宗嗣位，四川巡抚刘思洁、曾省吾先后疏荐，优旨报闻而已。
现代文：神宗即位后，四川巡抚刘思洁、曾省吾先后上书荐举，也只是奏报皇帝而已，并不起用。
English: After Emperor Shenzong ascended to the throne, the Sichuan governor Liu Sijie and Zeng Shouwu successively submitted letters of recommendation, but they were only reported to the emperor and were not used.

古文：瀚少怀用世志，百家二氏之书，罔不搜讨。
现代文：任瀚自年少时就怀有经邦济世之志，故百家之书无不收集研讨。
English: Since he was young, Ren Han harbored the aspiration of benefiting the world through Buddhism, so he collected and discussed hundreds of books.

古文：被废，益反求《六经》，阐明圣学。
现代文：罢官后，更着力研究《六经》，阐明圣学。
English: After his dismissal, he put more effort into studying the "Six Classics" and elucidating the sacred teachings.

古文：晚又潜心于《易》，深有所得。
现代文：晚年又潜心于《易》，深有心得。
English: In his later years, he devoted himself to "Yi" and learned a lot from it.

古文：田汝成，字叔禾，钱塘人。
现代文：其文章也高雅，高寿九十三岁而终。田汝成，字叔禾，钱塘人。
English: His essays were also elegant, and he died at the ripe old age of 93. Tian Rucheng, also known as Shuhe, was from Qiantang.

古文：嘉靖五年进士。授南京刑部主事，寻召改礼部。
现代文：嘉靖五年进士，授南京刑部主事，不久，召回京改任礼部主事。
English: In the fifth year of the Jiajing Emperor, he was appointed as the head of the Nanjing Criminal Law Department. Soon after, he was recalled to Beijing and appointed as the head of the Ceremonial Department.

古文：十年十二月上言： 陛下以青宫久虚，祈天建醮，复普放生之仁，凡羁蹄钅杀羽禁在上林者，咸获纵释。
现代文：十年十二月上书道 ：陛下因太子未立，祈天打醮，又普遍放生，凡囚于上林的飞禽走兽一律释放归山。
English: In December of the tenth year, he wrote: "Since the crown prince has not yet ascended to the throne, His Majesty prayed to the heavens for a hibernation, and generally released all the birds and beasts that were imprisoned in the forest, releasing them all to return to the mountain.

古文：顾使囹圄之徒久缠徽纆，衣冠之侣流窜穷荒，父子长离，魂魄永丧，此独非陛下之赤子乎！
现代文：那些关在监狱和绳捆索绑的人，那些被流放在僻野穷荒的士绅，他们父子长期分离，魂魄永丧，难道不是陛下的赤子？
English: Are not His Majesty's babes those who are in prison and in irons, and those gentlemen who are exiled in the wilderness and poverty, whose fathers and sons are long separated, and whose souls are lost for ever?

古文：望大广皇仁，悉加宽宥。 
现代文：望皇帝推广仁爱之心，对他们都加宽宥。 
English: I hope the emperor will promote the spirit of benevolence and extend pardon to all of them.

古文：忤旨，切责，停俸二月。
现代文：这个奏章违背皇帝旨意，受到斥责，停止汝成的俸禄两月。
English: This piece of music was against the emperor's will, and he was reprimanded and his salary was suspended for two months.

古文：屡迁祠祭郎中，广东佥事，谪知滁州。
现代文：其后调祠祭郎中、广东佥事，贬为滁州知州。
English: After that, it was moved to the middle of the ancestral hall festival and the Guangdong Anecdote, and was relegated to the top of Zhangzhou Chizhou.

古文：复擢贵州佥事，改广西右参议，分守右江。
现代文：复升为贵州佥事，改任广西右参议，分守右江。
English: He was promoted to Guizhou Anecdote, and was reappointed as Guangxi Right Counselor, and was assigned to guard the Ujiang River.

古文：龙州土酋赵楷、凭祥州土酋李寰皆弑主自立，与副使翁万达密讨诛之。
现代文：在广西期间，龙州土酋赵楷、凭祥州土酋李寰，各杀知府而自立。汝成与副使翁万达进行讨伐，诛杀此二人。
English: During his time in Guangxi, Longzhou's local chieftain Zhao Kai and Xiangzhou's local chieftain Li Yao each killed a prefect and became independent. Rucheng and his deputy, Ong Wanda, went on a crusade to kill these two men.

古文：努滩贼侯公丁为乱，断藤峡群贼与相应。
现代文：努滩贼侯公丁叛乱，断藤峡群贼与他呼应。
English: Nurtan bandit Hou Gongding rebelled, and the broken ridge bandits echoed him.

古文：汝成复偕万达设策诱擒公丁，而进兵讨峡贼，大破之，又与万达建善后七事，一方遂靖，有银币之赐。
现代文：汝成又同万达设计诱擒公丁，进兵断藤峡，大破贼兵。又与万达建议善后七事，使一方平靖。调福建提学副使。
English: Rucheng also worked with Wanda to design the lure of Gongding, march into the trenches, cut off the ridge, and smash the thief soldiers. He also proposed seven things with Wanda to improve the aftermath, so that one side would be pacified. He was transferred to the deputy envoy of Fujian Jianqi University.

古文：迁福建提学副使。岁当大比，预定诸生甲乙。比榜发，一如所定。
现代文：这年进行科举考试，他料定甲乙榜中榜的生员会是哪些人，榜发后果如他所料。
English: This year, when the national science examination was held, he predicted which students would be in the middle of the A and B lists, and the results were as he expected.

古文：汝成博学工古文，尤善叙述。
现代文：汝成博学多闻，工于古文，尤善于叙述。
English: Rucheng is well-read and learned, works in ancient literature, and is particularly good at narration.

古文：历官西南，谙晓先朝遗事，撰《炎徼纪闻》。
现代文：在西南为官，熟知先朝遗事，因撰《炎徼纪闻》。
English: He was an official in the southwest and was familiar with the relics of the previous dynasty. He became famous for compiling "The Chronicle of the Great Fire."

古文：皇甫涍，字子安，长洲人。
现代文：归田里之后，留恋于湖山景色，游尽浙西各地名胜，因撰《西湖游览志》。
English: After returning to the field, he fell in love with the scenery of the lake and the mountains, and traveled to all the places of interest in western Zhejiang to write "West Lake Travel Diary."

古文：父录，弘治九年进士。任重庆知府。
现代文：皇甫录为弘治九年进士，曾任重庆知府。
English: He entered the priesthood in the ninth year of the Hongzhi era and served as the governor of Chongqing.

古文：生四子，冲、涍、汸、濂。冲、汸同登嘉靖七年乡荐，明年，汸第进士。又三年，涍第进士。
现代文：氵中、汸二人于嘉靖七年由州县推荐参加会试，第二年禤中进士。又过三年，涍也中进士及第。
English: In the seventh year of Jiajing, two students from the middle school and the high school were recommended by the county to participate in the examination, and the second year they were promoted to the junior high school. Three years later, they were promoted to the junior high school and the first.

古文：又十三年，濂亦第进士。
现代文：再过十三年，濂也中进士。
English: Thirteen years later, Zou also became a junior high school graduate.

古文：而冲尚为举子。
现代文：只有尚为举子。
English: Only Shang was able to raise a child.

古文：兄弟并好学工诗，称 皇甫四杰 。
现代文：兄弟都好学，工于诗，人称 皇甫四杰 。
English: The brothers are both eager to learn and good at poetry. They are known as the four emperors.

古文：冲，字子浚，善骑射，好谈兵。
现代文：沖字子浚，善骑射，好谈兵法。
English: He is good at punching, riding and shooting, and is good at talking about military tactics.

古文：遇南北内讧，譔《几策》、《兵统》、《枕戈杂言》三书，凡数十万言。
现代文：当时遇南北内讧，因撰写《几策》、《兵统》、《枕戈杂言》三书，共数十万言。
English: At that time, he encountered internal strife between the north and the south, because he wrote "Several Policies," "Military Standard," and "Pillow Talk Miscellany," a total of hundreds of thousands of words.

古文：涍，初授工部主事，改礼部。
现代文：涍字子安，初授工部主事，后改任礼部主事。
English: Zou Zi'an, the first head of the Engineering Department, later became the head of the Ceremonial Department.

古文：历仪制员外郎，主客郎中。
现代文：又历任仪制员外郎、主客郎中。
English: In addition, he has served as an assistant master of ceremonies and a chief guest master of ceremonies.

古文：在仪制时，夏言为尚书，连疏请建储，皆涍起草，故言深知涍才。
现代文：在任仪制员外郎时，夏言为尚书，连接上疏请立太子，都是由涍起草的，故夏言深知涍的才能。
English: When Natsugen was appointed as the secretary of the ceremony, Natsugen was the chief scrivener, and in connection with the appointment of the crown prince, they were all drafted by Zou, so Natsugen was well aware of Zou's talent.

古文：比简宫僚，遂用为春坊司直兼翰林检讨。
现代文：选拔宫官，以涍为春坊司直兼翰林检讨。
English: the selection of palace officials, with Zou as the spring official and Hanlin as the review.

古文：言者论涍改官有私，谪广平通判，量移南京刑部主事，进员外郎，迁浙江佥事。
现代文：谏官劾奏涍改任官有隐情，于是贬为广平通判，遇赦而调任南京刑部主事，升员外郎，又改为浙江佥事。
English: The eunuch's impeachment and transfer to another official had hidden reasons, so he was demoted to Guangping's general judgment, and if he was pardoned, he was transferred to the head of the Nanjing Criminal Department, promoted to the position of foreign minister, and changed to Zhejiang Anji.

古文：大计京官，以南曹事论罢，邑邑发病卒。
现代文：在考核京官中，涍被罢官，郁郁不乐而病卒。
English: In the assessment of Beijing officials, Zhai was dismissed, depressed and ill.

古文：涍沈静寡与，自负高俊，稍不当意，终日相对无一言。
现代文：涍禀性沉静，少与人往来，以高雅俊秀自负，稍有不如意便缄口不言。
English: He is reserved and quiet, rarely interacts with others, is proud of his high elegance and good looks, and keeps his mouth shut if he is not happy.

古文：居官砥廉隅，然颇操切，多忤物，故数被谗谤云。汸，字子循，七岁能诗。
现代文：做官注意品德的修养，然操之过急，得罪许多人，故多次遭人毁谤。汸字子循，七岁能诗。
English: As an official, he paid attention to the cultivation of moral character, but he was too hasty and offended many people, so he was repeatedly slandered.

古文：官工部主事，名动公卿，沾沾自喜，用是贬秩为黄州推官。
现代文：曾任工部主事，名闻公卿，沾沾自喜，却因此而贬为黄州推官。
English: He was once the head of the Ministry of Industry, famous for his self-satisfaction, but because of this, he was demoted to Huangzhou magistrate.

古文：屡迁南京稽勋郎中，再贬开州同知，量移处州府同知。擢云南佥事，以计典论黜。
现代文：一度升为南京稽勋郎中，再次贬为开州同知。遇赦而调为处州同知，升云南佥事，又被罢官。
English: He was once promoted to Nanjing Jianhongro, and again demoted to Kaizhou Tongzhi. When he was pardoned, he was transferred to Zhanzhou Tongzhi, promoted to Yunnan Anji, and then dismissed.

古文：汸和易，近声色，好狎游。
现代文：汸平易近人，好声色游乐。
English: He is easy-going and approachable, with a cheerful and cheerful demeanor.

古文：于兄弟中最老寿，年八十乃卒。
现代文：在兄弟中他年寿最长，享年八十岁。
English: He lived the longest of his brothers, dying at the age of eighty.

古文：濂，字子约，初授工部主事，母丧除，起故官，典惜薪厂。
现代文：濂字子约，初授工部主事，因母丧辞官。服丧期满，起任原官，管理惜薪厂。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed as the original official to manage the salary-saving factory.

古文：贾人伪增数罔利，濂按其罪。
现代文：某商人虚报货物从中图利，濂查出，治其罪。
English: A certain merchant falsely reported the goods in order to make profit from it, but was found out and punished for his crime.

古文：贾人女为尚书文明妾，明召濂切责之。濂抗言曰： 公掌邦政，纵奸人干纪，又欲夺郎官法守邪？ 
现代文：该商人之女为尚书文明之妾，明把濂召去斥责，濂与他抗争说： 公掌管了国家政权，放纵奸人违法乱纪，难道还要取消郎官执法的职守吗？ 
English: The merchant's daughter, who was the concubine of Shangshu Civilization, clearly summoned Zang to reprimand him, and Zang protested against him, saying, "Since the state power is publicly controlled, and traitors are allowed to break the law and discipline, is it necessary to cancel the duty of the vassal to enforce the law?

古文：明为敛容谢。
现代文：明肃然起敬，向他赔罪。
English: Ming was awestruck and apologized to him.

古文：大计，谪河南布政司理问，终兴化同知。
现代文：在考核京官时，濂被贬为汉南布政司理问，最后任兴化同知，逝于任上。
English: In the assessment of Beijing officials, Zou was relegated to Hannan Bu, Secretary of State, and finally Ren Xinghua, died in office.

古文：而献翼为太学生，名日益高，年老矣，狂甚，为雠家所杀。茅坤，字顺甫，归安人。
现代文：濂兄弟与黄鲁曾、黄省曾为表兄弟，文章风格也相似。后来，同乡张凤翼、张燕翼、张献翼也都以才华闻名。吴人说： 前有四皇，后有三张。 茅坤，字顺甫，归安人。
English: The Zou brothers were cousins of Huang Ruzeng and Huang Zhou, and their writing styles were similar. Later, fellow townsmen Zhang Fengyi, Zhang Yanyi, and Zhang Xianyi were also famous for their talents. Wu people said: There were four emperors before, and three emperors after. Mao Kun, Zi Shunfu, and Gui An people.

古文：嘉靖十七年进士。历知青阳、丹徒二县。
现代文：嘉靖十七年进士，历任青阳、丹徒二县知县。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 17th year of Jiajing, and successively served in Qingyang and Dantou.

古文：母忧，服阕，迁礼部主事，移吏部稽勋司，坐累，谪广平通判。
现代文：母亲去世，他辞官归家，服丧期满，升礼部主事，后调吏部稽勋司，因犯过失而贬为广平通判。
English: After his mother's death, he resigned from his post and returned home. At the end of the mourning period, he was promoted to the head of the ceremonial department, and later to the inspector of the official department. Due to his negligence, he was reduced to Guangping Tongzhan.

古文：屡迁广西兵备佥事，辖府江道。
现代文：后又升广西兵备佥事，管辖府江道。
English: Later, it was elevated to the Guangxi Military Preparedness Agency, with jurisdiction over Fujiang Province.

古文：坤雅好谈兵。瑶贼据鬼子诸砦，杀阳朔令。
现代文：坤好谈论兵法，广西瑶民占据鬼子寨等地，杀阳朔县令。
English: Kun Hao talked about military tactics, the people of Guangxi occupied the Devil's Village and other places, and killed the Yangshuo County Governor.

古文：朝议大征，总督应槚以问坤。坤曰： 大征非兵十万不可，饷称之，今猝不能集，而贼已据险为备。
现代文：朝廷决定派兵征讨，总督应木贾征询茅坤的意见，坤认为： 大军征讨非兵十万不可，需相应的军饷，而今不能立即办齐这多，且贼早已有所防备。
English: The imperial court decided to send troops for conscription, and the governor asked Mujia for Mao Kun's opinion. Kun believed that: It is impossible to conscript a large army unless it has 100,000 soldiers, and the corresponding military pay is needed. However, it is not possible to do this immediately, and the thieves have already been prepared.

古文：计莫若雕剿。条入歼其魁，他部必袭，谋自全，此便计也。 
现代文：莫若谨慎进剿，迅速攻入山寨，歼灭其首领，其余必被镇慑。用此计万无一失。 
English: If you advance cautiously, quickly break into the village, annihilate its leader, the rest will be deterred. This is a foolproof strategy.

古文：槚善之，悉以兵事委坤。
现代文：木贾认为很好，把用兵事都委托于坤。
English: Mujia thought it was a good idea and entrusted all military affairs to Kun.

古文：连破十七砦，晋秩二等。民立祠祀之。
现代文：坤连破十七寨，因功晋升二级，百姓为他建祠纪念。
English: Kun Lian broke the seventeenth village, was promoted to the second level for his merits, and the people built a memorial for him.

古文：迁大名兵备副使，总督杨博叹为奇才，特荐于朝。
现代文：坤调任大名兵备副使，总督杨博称赞他是奇才，特举荐于朝廷。
English: Kun was transferred to the post of deputy envoy of the Daimyo, and Governor Yang Bo praised him as a genius and recommended him to the imperial court.

古文：为忌者所中，追论其先任贪污状，落职归。
现代文：但为忌妒的人所中伤，追究其以前任职中贪污的罪状，被削职归家。
English: But he was slandered by envious people, investigated for corruption in his previous position, dismissed and returned home.

古文：时倭事方急，胡宗宪延之幕中，与筹兵事，奏请为福建副使。
现代文：此时，倭寇正骚扰东南沿海，胡宗宪召请他入其幕府，筹划军事，又奏请任他为福建副使。
English: At this time, the Japanese invaders were harassing the southeastern coast. Hu Zongxian invited him to join his shogunate to plan military operations, and also asked him to serve as deputy envoy to Fujian.

古文：吏部持之，乃已。
现代文：由于吏部挟制而未委任。
English: He was not appointed due to a bureaucratic squabble.

古文：家人横于里，为巡按庞尚鹏所劾，遂褫冠带。
现代文：坤家人横行于乡里，为巡按庞尚鹏所弹劾，坤被革去官职。
English: Kun's family members were running rampant in the countryside. As a result of the impeachment by the procurator Pang Shangpeng, Kun was removed from his official position.

古文：坤既废，用心计治生，家大起。
现代文：坤罢官后，全心经营家业，成为豪富。
English: After Kun was removed from office, he devoted himself to running the family business and became a wealthy man.

古文：年九十，卒于万历二十九年。
现代文：逝世于万历二十九年，终年九十岁。
English: He passed away in the 29th year of Wanli, at the age of 90.

古文：坤善古文，最心折唐顺之。
现代文：坤善写古文，最佩服唐顺之。
English: Kun is good at writing ancient texts, and he admires Tang Shun the most.

古文：顺之喜唐、宋诸大家文，所著文编，唐、宋人自韩、柳、欧、三苏、曾、王八家外，无所取，故坤选《八大家文钞》。
现代文：顺之爱好唐、宋诸大家的文章，所编文选，只收编韩愈、柳宗元、欧阳修、苏洵、苏轼、苏辙、曾巩、王安石这八大家的文章。
English: The selected articles compiled by Shunzhi, who loved Tang Dynasty and Song Dynasty, only included the articles of Han Yu, Liu Zongyuan, Ouyang Xiu, Su Shi, Su Wei, Su Gu, Zeng Gong and Wang Anshi.

古文：其书盛行海内，乡里小生无不知茅鹿门者。
现代文：故坤也仿效唐顺之而编《八大家文钞》，该书盛行于国内，乡里小生无不知茅鹿门。
English: So Kun also followed the example of Tang Shun and compiled "Eight People's Banknotes." The book is popular in China, and all the children in the village know the Kaya Gate.

古文：年十六，作乐府商调，少年争歌之。
现代文：鹿门是坤的别号。谢榛，字茂秦，临清人，独眼。十六岁做乐府商调，少年们争着歌唱。
English: Lu Men is Kun's alias. Xie Yao, Mao Qin, Lin Qing, one-eyed. At the age of sixteen, he was a music promoter, and the boys competed in singing.

古文：已，折节读书，刻意为歌诗。
现代文：随后立志读书，刻意于诗歌。
English: Subsequently, he decided to study, deliberately focusing on poetry.

古文：西游彰德，为赵康王所宾礼。
现代文：西游彰德时，受到康王的盛情款待。
English: When Zhang De traveled west, he was treated with great hospitality by King Kang.

古文：入京师，脱卢柟于狱。
现代文：到京师，从狱中救出卢柟。
English: He went to Beijing to rescue Lu Yao from prison.

古文：李攀龙、王世贞辈结诗社，榛为长，攀龙次之。
现代文：李攀龙、王世贞等人组织诗社，榛为首座，攀龙居于次位。
English: Li Panglong, Wang Shizhen and others organized a poetry society, with Zou as the first and Panglong as the second.

古文：及攀龙名大炽，榛与论生平，颇相镌责，攀龙遂贻书绝交。世贞辈右攀龙，力相排挤，削其名于七子之列。
现代文：后攀龙名声很大，与榛不和，二人绝交。世贞等人偏袒攀龙，极力排斥谢榛，将他从 七子 中排除。
English: Later, the dragon-climbing had a great reputation, and there was no friendship between the two. Shizhen and others favored the dragon-climbing, and tried their best to exclude Xie Yao and exclude him from the seven sons.

古文：然榛游道日广，秦、晋诸王争延致，大河南北皆称谢榛先生。
现代文：榛游历地广，秦、晋诸王都聘请他去，大河南北皆称 谢榛先生 。
English: He traveled widely, and the Qin and Jin dynasties all hired him to go. He was known as Mr. Xie Rong in the north and south of the Great River.

古文：赵康王卒，榛乃归。
现代文：赵康王去世后，榛便回归故乡。
English: After the death of Zhao Kangwang, Zou returned to his hometown.

古文：万历元年冬，复游彰德，王曾孙穆王亦宾礼之。
现代文：万历元年冬，榛又游历至彰德，赵康王曾孙穆王也以礼相待。
English: In the winter of the first year of the Wanli era, Yao traveled to Zhangde again, and Zhao Kangwang's great-grandson Mu Wang also treated him with courtesy.

古文：酒阑乐止，命所爱贾姬独奏琵琶，则榛所制竹枝词也。
现代文：有次宴会，酒喝得有了醉意，音乐也停奏了，穆王命其爱妾贾姬独弹琵琶，弹唱的是榛做的《竹枝词》。
English: There was a banquet, the wine was drunk with intoxication, the music also stopped, Mu Wang ordered his beloved concubine Jia Ji to play the lute alone, playing and singing "Bamboo Branch Lyrics" made of bamboo shoots.

古文：榛方倾听，王命姬出拜，光华射人，藉地而坐，竟十章。
现代文：榛正侧耳细听，王命姬出堂相见，光华射人，就地而坐，弹了十章。
English: Zou was listening attentively with his ear to the side. Wang Mingshi came out of the hall, saw Guanghua, sat on the spot, and played ten chapters.

古文：榛曰： 此山人里言耳，请更制，以备房中之奏。 
现代文：榛曰： 这只是山乡民歌，我另做以备房中弹唱。 
English: Zou said, "It's just a folk song from the mountains. I'll prepare a melody and sing it in the living room."

古文：诘朝上新词十四阕，姬悉按而谱之。
现代文：次日清晨，创新词十四阕，贾姬谱曲。
English: In the early morning of the next day, Jia Ji composed 14 innovative words.

古文：明年元旦，便殿奏伎，酒止送客，即盛礼而归姬于榛。
现代文：第二年元旦在便殿演奏，酒宴散，送客归，穆王将姬送与榛。
English: On the New Year's Day of the second year, the performance was held in the hall, the wine banquet was dispersed, the guests were sent home, and King Mu sent his concubine away.

古文：榛游燕、赵间，至大名，客请赋寿诗百章，成八十余首，投笔而逝。
现代文：榛游于燕赵之间，至大名，有人请他写祝寿诗百章，他写了八十余首，尚未写完就溘然逝世。
English: He wandered between Yan Zhao and Daimyo. Someone asked him to write a hundred poems to celebrate his birthday. He wrote more than eighty poems, but died before he could finish.

古文：当七子结社之始，尚论有唐诸家，各有所重。榛曰： 取李、杜十四家最胜者，熟读之以会神气，歌咏之以求声调，玩味之以裒精华。
现代文：当 七子 组成诗社之初，在讨论唐代各家时，各人有所推崇，榛认为 ：取李白、杜甫等十四家最佳作品熟读，领会其神韵，歌唱中求其声调，玩味其中之精华。
English: When the seven sons formed a poetry society at the beginning, when discussing the Tang Dynasty poets, each of them was respected, and Zou thought: take the best fourteen works such as Li Bai and Du Fu, master their charm, seek their tone in singing, and enjoy the essence of them.

古文：得经三要，则浩乎浑沦，不必塑谪仙而画少陵也。 
现代文：得此三条要领，则浩浩荡荡浑然一体，不必专去摹仿李白和杜甫了。 
English: With these three essentials, the vast vast vastness is a seamless whole, and there is no need to imitate Li Bai and Du Fu.

古文：诸人心师其言，厥后虽合力摈榛，其称诗指要，实自榛发也。
现代文：大家内心信服榛的这一见解，后来虽合力排斥谢榛，但认为论诗的宗旨，实从谢榛开始。
English: Everyone was convinced in their hearts of Xie's opinion, and although they later joined forces to exclude Xie Xie, they believed that the purpose of poetry actually began with Xie Xie.

古文：卢柟，字少楩，浚县人。
现代文：卢柟，字少木便，浚县人。
English: Lu Yao, Shao Mu Ben, and Zhenxian.

古文：家素封，输赀为国学生。
现代文：家财豪富，用钱买为国子学的生员。
English: Wealthy families use their money to buy students who are native-born.

古文：博闻强记，落笔数千言。
现代文：他博闻强记，下笔千言。
English: He has a wealth of experience, and can write a thousand words.

古文：为人跅驰，好使酒骂座。常为具召邑令，日晏不至，柟大怒，彻席灭炬而卧。令至，柟已大醉，不具宾主礼。
现代文：为人放纵不羁，好使酒性骂人，常备酒肴请县令来饮，来晚了就大骂，撤席灭灯而卧，县令到时，他已大醉，不行宾主之礼。
English: For people to indulge without restraint, so that they can use alcohol to abuse people, they always have alcohol and food ready to invite the county magistrate to drink, and if he comes late, he will swear loudly, withdraw from the table, extinguish the lamp and lie down. When the county magistrate arrives, he is already very drunk, and cannot do the host's bidding.

古文：会柟役夫被榜，他日墙压死，令即捕柟，论死，系狱，破其家。
现代文：柟雇的民夫被打，过几天又被倒墙压死，官府即捕柟下狱，判以死刑，家庭败落。
English: The hired laborer was beaten, and a few days later he was crushed to death by a collapsing wall. The government immediately arrested him, jailed him, sentenced him to death, and his family was ruined.

古文：里中儿为狱卒，恨柟，笞之数百，谋以土囊压杀之，为他卒救解。
现代文：同乡有个年青人为狱卒，平时恨柟，乘此时打了柟数百棍，还想用土囊把他压死，幸为另一狱卒解救。
English: A fellow villager, a young man, who was a jailer, usually hated badgers. He took advantage of this time to beat the badger with hundreds of sticks, and also tried to crush him to death with a sack. Fortunately, he was rescued by another jailer.

古文：柟居狱中，益读所携书，作《幽鞫》、《放招》二赋，词旨沈郁。
现代文：柟在狱中更加用心阅读所带书籍，做《幽鞫》、《放招》二赋，词意忧郁深沉。
English: In prison, Zou read the books he brought with him more attentively. He wrote two works, "Hidden" and "Let Go," with deep melancholy.

古文：柟出，走谒榛。
现代文：谢榛到了京师，拜见诸达官贵人，为卢柟申冤。
English: When Xie Jun arrived in Beijing, he met with dignitaries and officials to seek justice for Lu Xun.

古文：榛方客赵康王所，王立召见柟，礼为上宾。
现代文：柟出狱后去拜谢谢榛。这时榛正在赵康王那里作客，康王立即召见卢柟，待为上宾。
English: After being released from prison, Lu Yao went to pay his respects and thank Lu Yao. At that time, Lu Yao was a guest of Zhao Kangwang, who immediately summoned Lu Yao to be his chief guest.

古文：诸宗人以王故争客柟，柟酒酣骂座如故。
现代文：同族人因康王的缘故也请柟去做客，柟喝醉了，仍旧乱骂同席的人。
English: Because of King Kang, his compatriots also invited him to be a guest. He was drunk and still cursed the people at the table.

古文：及光祖为南京礼部郎，柟往访之，遍游吴会无所遇，还益落魄嗜酒，病三日卒。
现代文：柟在狱中时，是谢榛委托浚县县令平湖人睦光祖为他平反出狱的，后光祖调任南京礼部郎，冉去拜访他，走遍了吴会也没见着。还家后更加贫困潦倒，以酒消愁，病了三天就去世了。
English: When Xie Yu was in prison, it was Xie Yu who entrusted the county leader of the county of Pinghu, Mugu Guangzu, to rehabilitate him and release him from prison. Later, Guangzu was transferred to the Nanjing Ministry of Ceremonies. Ran went to visit him, but he didn't see him after walking all over the Wu Association. After returning home, he was even more impoverished and depressed, and used alcohol to dispel his sorrow. He died after three days of illness.

古文：柟骚赋最为王世贞所称，诗亦豪放如其为人。
现代文：柟的赋最为王世贞所称赞，其诗如同其为人一样，豪放不羁。
English: It is Wang Shizhen's Fu that Wang Shizhen admires the most. His poetry is as bold and uninhibited as he is.

古文：李攀龙，字于鳞，历城人。
现代文：李攀龙，字于鳞，自号沧溟，历城人。
English: Li Panglong, the character in the scale, the self-named Cangzhou, the history of the city.

古文：九岁而孤，家贫，自奋于学。
现代文：九岁死了父亲，家贫，奋力自学。
English: His father died when he was nine, the family was poor, and he struggled to educate himself.

古文：稍长为诸生，与友人许邦才、殷士儋学为诗歌。
现代文：长大为生员，与友人许邦才、殷士儋学诗歌。
English: He grew up as a student and studied poetry with his friends Xu Bangcai and Yin Shixuan.

古文：已，益厌训诂学，日读古书，里人共目为狂生。
现代文：其后，更不喜欢训诂学，勤读古书，同乡人认为他是个狂生。
English: After that, he disliked the training of cadres and diligently read ancient books, and his fellow villagers thought he was a madman.

古文：举嘉靖二十三年进士，授刑部主事。
现代文：嘉靖二十三年进士，授刑部主事。
English: Jiajing, a graduate of 23 years, is now in charge of the Sentencing Department.

古文：历员外郎、郎中，稍迁顺德知府，有善政。上官交荐，擢陕西提学副使。
现代文：后历任刑部员外郎、郎中、顺德知府。上级官员都举荐他，提升为陕西提学副使。
English: Afterward, he was recommended by higher-ranking officials to be promoted to Shaanxi Vice Minister of Education.

古文：乡人殷学为巡抚，檄令属文，攀龙怫然曰： 文可檄致邪？ 
现代文：同乡殷学为巡抚，令他写文章，攀龙生气说： 文章是下令就能写出来的吗？ 
English: Fellow townsman Yin Xue was the governor, and asked him to write an article. Panglong said angrily, "Can an article be written with an order?

古文：拒不应。
现代文：拒不应命。
English: He refused to die.

古文：会其地数震，攀龙心悸，念母思归，遂谢病。
现代文：关中地震，攀龙患心脏病，又思念母亲，请假回家去了。
English: Due to the earthquake in Guanzhong, Panglong suffered from a heart attack, missed his mother, and took a leave of absence to return home.

古文：故事，外官谢病不再起，吏部重其才，用何景明便，特予告归。
现代文：按旧例，外官因病归家者，不再起用。吏部重其才能，援何景明之例，特准予告假。
English: According to the old practice, foreign officials who return home due to illness will no longer be employed. The Ministry of Public Administration attaches great importance to their talents, and in the case of He Jingming, special permission for advance leave.

古文：归田将十年，隆庆改元，荐起浙江副使，改参政，擢河南按察使。
现代文：从此准予告假的，可再起用。攀龙归家后，建造 白雪楼 ，名声日高，宾客临门，一概不见，就是大官来也不例外，因此有人说他傲慢。
English: From then on, he was allowed to use his leave again. After he returned home, he built the White Snow Tower, and his reputation grew. He did not see any guests at his gate, even dignitaries, so some people said he was arrogant.

古文：攀龙至是摧亢为和，宾客亦稍稍进。
现代文：但攀龙与故友殷士儋、许邦才二人仍往来不断。
English: However, Panglong still kept in touch with his old friends Yin Shijun and Xu Bangcai.

古文：无何，奔母丧归，哀毁得疾，疾少间，一日心痛卒。
现代文：攀龙归家将近十年，于隆庆元年被荐举起任浙江副使，后改参政，又升为河南按察使。不久，因母丧回家，哀痛过度，心脏病突发而死。
English: It took nearly ten years for Panglong to return home. In the first year of the Longqing Festival, he was recommended to be promoted to the post of vice-envoy of Zhejiang Province. Later, he changed to politics and was promoted to the post of inspector-general of Henan Province. Soon after, he went home due to his mother's death, was overwhelmed with grief, and died of a sudden heart attack.

古文：攀龙之始官刑曹也，与濮州李先芳、临清谢榛、孝丰吴维岳辈倡诗社。
现代文：攀龙开始在刑部为官，与濮州李先芳、临清谢榛、孝丰吴维岳等创立诗社。
English: Panglong began to work as an official in the criminal justice department, and founded a poetry society with Zhangzhou Li Xianfang, Lin Qing Xiejun, Xiaofeng Wu Weiyue and others.

古文：王世贞初释褐，先芳引入社，遂与攀龙定交。
现代文：王世贞初为官，先芳便介绍他入社，从此便与攀龙结交。
English: When Wang Shizhen first became an official, Xianfang introduced him to the company, and from then on he became friends with Panglong.

古文：明年，先芳出为外吏。
现代文：第二年，先芳出京为外官。
English: In the following year, Senhō left Kyoto to become foreign minister.

古文：又二年，宗臣、梁有誉入，是为五子。
现代文：又二年，宗臣、梁有誉也加入诗社，成为 五子 。
English: Two years later, his father-in-law, Liang You Rong, also joined the poetry society, becoming the fifth son.

古文：未几，徐中行、吴国伦亦至，乃改称七子。
现代文：不久，徐中行、吴国伦也加入，是为 七子 。
English: Soon, Xu Zhongxing and Wu Guolun also joined, for the seven sons.

古文：诸人多少年，才高气锐，互相标榜，视当世无人，七才子之名播天下。
现代文：这些人年少，才高气锐，互相标榜，认为当世除他们之外别无诗人，七才子名扬于天下。
English: These people are young, talented, high-spirited, and promote each other, believing that there is no other poet in the world except them, and the seven talents are famous all over the world.

古文：摈先芳、维岳不与，已而榛亦被摈，攀龙遂为之魁。
现代文：他们之间并不团结，先排斥先芳、维岳，后又排斥谢榛，攀龙成了首领。
English: There was no unity between them. First, Fang and Wei Yue were ostracized. Later, Xie Yao was also ostracized, and Pang Long became the leader.

古文：其持论谓文自西京，诗自天宝而下，俱无足观，于本朝独推李梦阳。
现代文：攀龙认为，文章自西汉以后，诗自唐天宝以后，都无可观，而本朝只有李梦阳一人。
English: Panglong believed that the articles since the Western Han Dynasty and the poems since Tang Tianbao were unremarkable, and only Li Mengyang was the leader of this dynasty.

古文：诸子翕然和之，非是，则诋为宋学。
现代文：其他人都同声附和，凡是不同意他们看法的人，都诋毁为 宋学 ，即宋元明时期的理学。
English: All the others echoed in unison, and anyone who disagreed with their opinion was slandered as Song learning, that is, the science of Song and Yuan Ming period.

古文：攀龙才思劲鸷，名最高，独心重世贞，天下亦并称王、李。又与李梦阳、何景明并称何、李、王、李。
现代文：攀龙才思敏捷，名气最高，内心只佩服王世贞，天下人也将王、李并称；又与李梦阳、何景明并称何、李、王、李。
English: Wang Shizhen was famous for his ability to climb a dragon and his quick wit. He was admired only by Wang Shizhen. People around the world called him Wang and Li together. He was also called He, Li, Wang and Li together with Li Mengyang and He Jingming.

古文：归田后声名籍甚，求名之士，不东走太仓，则西走兴国。
现代文：攀龙的诗以声调取胜，所做乐府只不过是把古乐府改几个字作为己作而已；其文则诘屈聱牙，以致人们不能把文章读完。
English: Panglong's poem is a triumph of tone. What Lefu did was merely to change a few words of Gu Lefu's poem and claim it as his own; his text was so crooked that people couldn't finish reading the article.

古文：万历时，世贞既没，国伦犹无恙，在七子中最为老寿。王世贞，字元美，太仓人，右都御史忬子也。
现代文：吹捧攀龙的人，把他捧为一代宗师，其文也有许多受到当世人挑剔指责的地方。王世贞，字元美，太仓人。右都御史王忬之子。
English: Those who praise the dragon climber, praise him as a generation of guru, and there are many places in his writings that are criticized by the contemporary world. Wang Shizhen, Zhiyuanmei, Taicang people. The son of the Right Metropolitan Wang Xi.

古文：生有异禀，书过目，终身不忘。年十九，举嘉靖二十六年进士。授刑部主事。
现代文：世贞禀性聪明，读书过目不忘，嘉靖二十六年年方十九岁便中进士，授刑部主事。
English: Seizhen is bright and clever, and she never forgets what she has read. At the age of nineteen, in the twenty-sixth year of Jiajing, she entered the junior high school and became the head of the criminal punishment department.

古文：世贞好为诗古文，官京师，入王宗沐、李先芳、吴维岳等诗社，又与李攀龙、宗臣、梁有誉、徐中行、吴国伦辈相倡和，绍述何、李，名日益盛。
现代文：爱好诗文，在京师为官时，参加了王宗沐、李先芳、吴维岳等人的诗社，与李攀龙、宗臣、梁有誉、徐中行、吴国伦等以诗文唱和，名声日高。
English: He was fond of poetry, and when he was an official in Beijing, he participated in the poetry society of Wang Zongmu, Li Xianfang, Wu Weiyue and others, and sang poetry with Li Panglong, Zonchen, Liang Youyuan, Xu Zhongxing, Wu Guolun and others, and his reputation was growing day by day.

古文：屡迁员外郎、郎中。
现代文：在刑部任职，升为员外郎、郎中。
English: He served in the Penal Department and rose to the rank of outside retainer and junior retainer.

古文：奸人阎姓者犯法，匿锦衣都督陆炳家，世贞搜得之。炳介严嵩以请，不许。
现代文：有奸人犯法，逃匿于锦衣卫都督陆炳家中，被世贞搜出，炳仗严嵩之势去说情，世贞不肯徇情枉法。
English: There was a traitor who broke the law and fled to the home of the Grand Duke of Jin and Wei, Lu Xun. He was found out by Shizhen, who was in a strong position to intercede, but Shizhen refused to do so.

古文：杨继盛下吏，时进汤药。其妻讼夫冤，为代草。
现代文：杨继盛被诬告下狱，世贞为他送汤送药，代其妻子写状申冤。
English: Yang Jisheng was falsely accused and sent to prison. Shizhen sent him soup and medicine and wrote a complaint on behalf of his wife.

古文：既死，复棺殓之。
现代文：继盛冤死，又给他安葬。
English: Following Sheng's wrongful death, he was given a proper burial.

古文：隆庆元年八月，兄弟伏阙讼父冤，言为嵩所害，大学士徐阶左右之，复忬官。
现代文：严嵩恨世贞入骨，贬为青州兵备副使，又罗织罪名害死他父亲王忄予。世贞与弟世懋哀痛欲绝，守孝三年。隆庆元年八月，兄弟二人上朝为父申冤，在大学士徐阶的帮助下，得以昭雪，恢复了王忄予的官职爵位。
English: Yan Song hated Shizhen to the bone, demoted him to the vice-envoy of Qingzhou Military Preparedness, and accused him of killing his father, Wang Shiyu. Shizhen and his brother Shiyu were heartbroken, and kept their filial piety for three years. In August of the first year of the Longqing Dynasty, the two brothers went to the court to redress their father's grievances, and with the help of the university scholar Xu Ji, they were able to clear the snow and restore Wang Shiyu's official rank.

古文：世贞意不欲出，会诏求直言，疏陈法祖宗、正殿名、庆恩义、宽禁例、修典章、推德意、昭爵赏、练兵实八事，以应诏。
现代文：父亲昭雪之后，世贞本不欲再出来做官，但恰逢圣上下诏征求直言，于是疏陈八事以应诏，即 法祖宗，正殿名，广恩义，宽禁例，修典章，推德意，昭爵赏，练兵实 。
English: After the death of her father Zhao Xue, Shizhen originally did not want to become an official again, but coincided with the imperial edict to solicit candid opinions, so she omitted eight things in response to the imperial edict, namely, Fazouzong, the name of the main hall, Guang En Yi, the wide prohibition, the revision of the ordinance, the promotion of the German spirit, the award of the title of Zhao Jie, and the practice of military strength.

古文：张居正枋国，以世贞同年生，有意引之，世贞不甚亲附。所部荆州地震，引京房占，谓臣道太盛，坤维不宁，用以讽居正。居正妇弟辱江陵令，世贞论奏不少贷。居正积不能堪，会迁南京大理卿，为给事中杨节所劾，即取旨罢之。后起应天府尹，复被劾罢。
现代文：其后历任浙江右参政、山西按察使、广西右布政使、太仆寺卿等职。万历二年任郧阳右副都御史。江陵人张居正为宰相，权势极大。荆州发生地震，世贞引西汉人京房的卜辞说，地震是因为臣权过重，致使大地不安，借此以规劝张居正，因遭居正忌克，调他任南京大理寺卿，为给事中杨节弹劾而罢官，后起用任应天府尹，又被劾而罢。
English: After that, he successively held the positions of Zhejiang right-hand politician, Shanxi deputy inspector, Guangxi right-hand political envoy, and chief priest of the temple. He served as the right-hand vice-governor of Shiyang for two years. Zhang Jizheng of Jiangling was the prime minister, with great power. When an earthquake occurred in Jingzhou, Shizhen said that the earthquake was due to excessive vassal power, which caused the earth to be uneasy, and used this to persuade Zhang Jizheng. Because he was scolded by Jizheng, he was transferred to be the chief priest of Nanjing Dali Temple. He resigned because he was impeached

古文：比擢南京刑部尚书，御史黄仁荣言世贞先被劾，不当计俸，据故事力争。
现代文：直到张居正死后，世贞才起用为南京刑部右侍郎，但称病不赴任。许久以后，因其好友王锡爵执政，才出任南京兵部右侍郎，后升为南京刑部尚书。按制度，官阶应为正三品，但御史黄仁荣说他曾多次被弹劾，不应享正三品爵位。
English: It was not until after the death of Zhang Jizheng that Shizhen was appointed as the right hand man of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department, but he said that he was ill and would not take up the post. After a long time, because his friend Wang Xizhe was in power, he was appointed as the right hand man of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department, and later promoted to the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department. According to the system, the official rank should be Senior Third Rank, but Goshi Huang Ren Rong said that he had been impeached many times and should not enjoy the Senior Third Rank.

古文：世贞乃三疏移疾归。二十一年卒于家。
现代文：世贞再三称病辞官，于万历二十一年病卒。
English: Seizhen repeatedly called himself a "sick man" and died of illness in the 21st year of Wanli.

古文：世贞始与李攀龙狎主文盟，攀龙殁，独操柄二十年。才最高，地望最显，声华意气笼盖海内。
现代文：世贞与李攀龙交替为文坛盟主，攀龙死后，世贞独主文坛二十年，其才最高，地位最显赫，名扬四海。
English: Shizhen and Li Panglong alternated as the leader of the literary world. After the death of Panglong, Shizhen was the sole leader of the literary world for twenty years. He was the best, the most prominent, and famous all over the world.

古文：一时士大夫及山人、词客、衲子、羽流，莫不奔走门下。片言褒赏，声价骤起。
现代文：当时士大夫、山人、骚人墨客、和尚、道士纷纷出入于门下，凡受他片言只语赞誉过的人，其名声立即提高。
English: At that time, scholars and magistrates, mountain people, poets, monks, and Taoists came and went at his door, and anyone who had been praised by him in a few words, his reputation immediately increased.

古文：其持论，文必西汉，诗必盛唐，大历以后书勿读，而藻饰太甚。
现代文：他认为文章效法西汉，诗歌则须以盛唐为楷模，唐大历以后的书，太重于词藻，不要去读。
English: He believed that articles should follow the example of Western Han Dynasty, poems should follow the example of the Tang Dynasty, and books after the Tang Dynasty should not be read as they are too heavy on words.

古文：晚年，攻者渐起，世贞顾渐造平淡。
现代文：晚年，批评他的人渐多，拜访他的人渐少。
English: In his later years, more and more people criticized him, and fewer and fewer people visited him.

古文：病亟时，刘凤往视，见其手苏子瞻集，讽玩不置也。
现代文：病重期间，刘凤去望他，见他还在玩味苏子瞻的著作。
English: During his serious illness, Liu Feng went to visit him and saw that he was still playing with Su Zizhen's works.

古文：世贞自号凤洲，又号弇州山人。其所与游者，大抵见其集中，各为标目。曰前五子者，攀龙、中行、有誉、国伦、臣也。后五子则南昌余曰德、蒲圻魏裳、歙汪道昆、铜梁张佳胤、新蔡张九一也。广五子则昆山俞允文、浚卢柟、濮州李先芳、孝丰吴维岳、顺德欧大任也。续五子则阳曲王道行、东明石星、从化黎民表、南昌朱多火煃、常熟赵用贤也。末五子则京山李维桢、鄞屠隆、南乐魏允中、兰溪胡应麟，而用贤复与焉。
现代文：世贞自号凤洲，又号州山人，与他相交往来的人，大抵可见于其文集之中，把他们分类列名：前五子有李攀龙、徐中行、梁有誉、吴国伦、宗臣；后五子是南昌余日德、蒲圻魏裳、歙县汪道昆、铜梁张佳胤、新蔡张九一；广五子有昆山俞允文、浚县卢木冉、濮州李先芳、孝丰吴维岳、顺德欧犬任；续五子是阳曲王道行、东明石星、从化黎民表、南昌朱多火奎、常熟赵用贤；末五子是京山李维桢、鄞县屠隆、南乐魏允中、兰奚谷胡应麟、赵用贤。
English: The first five sons were Li Panglong, Xu Zhongxing, Liang Youyuan, Wu Guolun, and Zongcheng; the next five sons were Nanchang Yu Rijide, Po Yu Wei Xiang, Wu County Wang Daokun, Tong Liang Zhang Jiayin, Xin Cai Zhang Jiuyi; the fifth son was Kunshan Yu Yunwen, Jun County Lu Mu Ran, Zhangzhou Li Xianfang, Xiaofeng Wu Weiyue, Shunde Ou Injun; the next five sons were Yang Qu Wang Daokong, Dongming Shi Xing, Zonghua Li Min Meter, Nanchang

古文：世贞力推引之，以为胜己，攀龙、道昆辈因称为 少美 。
现代文：这种分类，多是出于他自己的好恶。胡应麟，自幼能做诗，万历四年参加乡试，屡试不中。其后隐居山中，编著书四万余卷。曾以诗访王世贞，世贞大为赞赏，使他更加自负。
English: This classification is mostly due to his own likes and dislikes. Hu Yinglin has been able to write poetry since he was a child. He took part in the village test for four years and repeatedly failed the test. After that, he secluded himself in the mountains and compiled more than 40,000 volumes of books. He once visited Wang Shizhen with a poem, which was greatly appreciated by Shizhen, making him more conceited.

古文：世贞子士骐，字冏伯，举乡试第一，登万历十七年进士，终吏部员外郎，亦能文。
现代文：所著《诗薮》二十卷，大抵是以王世贞的《危言》为蓝本而加以铺陈而成。他说诗家中之王世贞，如同集大成之孔子。
English: The 20 volumes of "Poems" are mostly based on Wang Shizhen's "Dangerous Words" as a model. He said that Wang Shizhen, a poet, is like a complete Confucius.

古文：归有光，字熙甫，昆山人。
现代文：其阿谀奉承到如此程度。归有光，字熙甫，昆山人。
English: His flattery to such an extent. Gui Youguang, Zi Xifu, Kunshan people.

古文：九岁能属文，弱冠尽通《五经》、《三史》诸书，师事同邑魏校。
现代文：九岁就能写文章，二十岁尽通《五经》、《三史》，拜同乡魏校为师。
English: At the age of nine, he was able to write articles, and at the age of twenty, he mastered the "Five Classics" and "Three Histories," learning from his hometown Wei School.

古文：嘉靖十九年举乡试，八上春官不第。
现代文：嘉靖十九年乡试中举之后，八次赴京参加礼部会试，均不及第。
English: After the 19th year of Jiajing's township exam, he went to Beijing eight times to participate in the ceremony club exam, but all of them were less than the first.

古文：徙居嘉定安亭江上，读书谈道。学徒常数百人，称为震川先生。
现代文：后迁居嘉定安亭江，读书讲学，门徒常有数百人，称他为 震川先生 。
English: He later moved to Antingjiang, Jiading, where he studied and lectured. He often had hundreds of disciples, who called him Mr. Zhenchuan.

古文：四十四年始成进士，授长兴知县。
现代文：嘉靖四十四年中进士，授长兴知县。
English: At the age of forty-four, Jiajing entered the priesthood and was given the post of prefect of Xingchi County.

古文：隆庆四年，大学士高拱、赵贞吉雅知有光，引为南京太仆丞，留掌内阁制敕房，修《世宗实录》，卒官。
现代文：后调任顺德通判，专管马政。隆庆四年，大学士高拱、赵贞吉知有光有才，推荐为南京太仆丞，掌管内阁制敕房，参预修纂《世宗实录》，在任上病逝。
English: In the fourth year of Longqing, the university scholar Gao Gong and Zhao Zhengyi, who were both talented, were recommended as the Nanjing Taifu Rong, in charge of the Cabinet Office, and participated in the preliminary revision of the "Sejong Record," and died of illness while in office.

古文：举万历十九年乡试，再被放，即屏居江村，与无锡高攀龙最善。
现代文：有光善写秦汉文，喜读《太史公书》，领会其精神、哲理。汉时王世贞为文坛赫赫有名的盟主，有光却极力批评他，认为他是个华而不实的大庸人。
English: He was good at writing Qin and Chinese literature, enjoyed reading "The Book of the Great History," and understood its spirit and philosophy. During the Han Dynasty, Wang Shizhen was a famous leader in the literary world, but he strongly criticized him, considering him to be a pompous mediocrity.

古文：其殁也，巡按御史祁彪佳请于朝，赠翰林待诏。有光制举义，湛深经术，卓然成大家。后德清胡友信与齐名，世并称归、胡。
现代文：世贞起初十分不满，后来折服，称赞有光承继了韩愈、欧阳修的风格，推崇备至。有光对经学深有造诣，与德清胡友信齐名，世人并称 归胡 。
English: At first, Shizhen was very dissatisfied, but later she was satisfied, praising Arimitsu for inheriting the style of Han Yu and Ouyang Xiu, and highly respected him. Arimitsu was highly accomplished in the study of the classics, and was as famous as Deqing Hu Youxin, and the world also called him "Go back to Hu."

古文：友信，字成之，隆庆二年进士。授顺德知县。
现代文：胡友信，字诚之，浙江德清人。隆庆二年进士，授顺德知县。
English: Hu Youxin, also known as Cheng Zhi, was born in Deqing, Zhejiang Province. He became a scholar in the second year of Longqing, and was awarded the honor of Shun Deji County.

古文：岁赋率奸胥揽输，稍以所入啖长吏，谓之月钱。友信与民约，岁为三限，多寡皆自输，不取赢，闾里无妄费，而公赋以充。
现代文：该县每年赋税都由奸吏承输，他们将其所得利益分一点给上级长官，谓之 月钱 ，胡友信上任后，与百姓约定，每年赋税分三次交纳，而每次多寡由自己决定，官府不多取，闾里无另外赋税，公赋也不短少。
English: After Hu Youxin took office, he agreed with the people that the tax should be paid three times a year, and the amount of each time should be decided by themselves. The government should not take too much, there should be no other tax, and the public should not be short of money.

古文：海寇窃发，官军往讨，民间驿骚。
现代文：海寇兴起，官军前往征讨，百姓受到骚扰。
English: Sea pirates were on the rise, the government army went to collect, and the people were harassed.

古文：部内乌洲、大洲，贼所巢穴，诸恶少为贼耳目。
现代文：境内的乌洲、大洲等地是海寇的巢穴，一些无业少年充当海寇耳目。
English: Wuzhou, Dazhou and other places in the territory are the nests of sea robbers, and some unemployed boys act as the eyes and ears of sea robbers.

古文：友信悉勾得之，捕诛其魁，余党解散。
现代文：友信捕杀其头目，其余四散。
English: Tomonobu captured and killed its leader, and the rest scattered.

古文：乡立四应社，一乡有警，三乡鼓而援之，不援者罪同贼，贼不敢发。
现代文：各乡建立 四应社 ，一乡有警，其他三乡鸣鼓声援，不援者与寇同罪，从此寇不敢犯。
English: Each township established four response companies, one township had police, the other three townships beat drums in solidarity, and those who did not help were guilty of the same crime as the bandits. From then on, the bandits did not dare to commit crimes.

古文：岁大凶，民饥死无敢为恶者。
现代文：就是大灾之年，百姓饿死也不敢为非作歹。
English: Even in the year of the great disaster, the people starved to death and did not dare to do anything wrong.

古文：初，友信虑民轻法，涖以严，后令行禁止，更为宽大，或旬日不笞一人。
现代文：起初，友信担心百姓不重视刑罚，偏于严。以后令行禁止，则逐渐宽松，有时十余天不惩处一人。
English: At first, Yushin was concerned that the people did not attach importance to the punishment, preferring to be strict. Later, the ban was gradually relaxed, and sometimes one person was not punished for more than ten days.

古文：其治县如家，弊修堕举，学校城池，咸为更新。
现代文：治县如治家，毁坏的地方加以修理，被废止的加以复兴，学校、城池都加以更新。
English: To govern a county is to govern a family. Destroyed places should be repaired, abolished places should be revived, and schools and cities should be renewed.

古文：督课邑子弟，教化兴起。
现代文：同时，督促并考核本县子弟的学习，大兴教化。
English: At the same time, supervise and evaluate the learning of children in this county, and promote education.

古文：卒官，士民立祠奉祀。
现代文：去世后，顺德士民立祠祭祀，表示怀念。
English: After his death, the Shunde Shi Min Liang Ancestral Hall was dedicated to his memory.

古文：友信博通经史，学有根柢。明代举子业最擅名者，前则王鏊、唐顺之，后则震川、思泉。
现代文：友信博通经史，学有根基，明代举子中最出名的，前有王鏊、唐顺之，后有归有光、思泉。
English: Tomonobu was well-versed in the history of the sutras, and his learning was well-founded. He was the most famous disciple in the Ming Dynasty, preceded by Wang Xi and Tang Shun, and followed by Gui Youguang and Si Quan.

古文：思泉，友信别号也。
现代文：思泉即友信的别号。
English: Sisen is an alias of Yushin.

