古文：唐太宗购兰亭序汉王元昌欧阳询欧阳通虞世南褚遂良薛稷高正臣
现代文：唐太宗购兰亭序汉王元昌欧阳询欧阳通虞世南褚遂良薛稷高正臣
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty bought Lan Ting, the Han Dynasty Wang Yuanchang inquired about Ouyang, Ouyang inquired about Ouyang, and Ouyang inquired about Ouyang, and Ouyang inquired about Ouyang, and Ouyang inquired about Ouyang, Ouyang inquired about Ouyang, Ouyang inquired about Ouyang

古文：王绍宗郑广文李阳冰张旭僧怀素
现代文：王绍宗郑广文李阳冰张旭僧怀素
English: Wang Shao Zong, Zheng Guangwen, Li Yangbing, Zhang Xu, Wai Su

古文：唐太宗
现代文：唐太宗
English: Tang Taizong

古文：唐太宗贞观十四年，自真草书屏风，以示群臣。
现代文：唐太宗李世民贞观十四年，自己用真草书写一套屏风，给群臣看。
English: In the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty, Li Shimin Zhenguan, he wrote a set of screens in real cursive and showed them to the courtiers.

古文：笔力遒劲，为一时之绝。
现代文：这套屏风的书法笔力遒劲有力。堪称当时最好的真草书法了。
English: The calligraphy of this set of screens is vigorous and powerful. It can be said to be the best calligraphy at that time.

古文：尝谓朝臣曰：书学小道，初非急务。
现代文：唐太宗曾对手下的大臣说：书法是小小的学问，初学时且忌急于求成。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang once said to his subordinate ministers: "Calligraphy is a small learning, and when you first learn it, you should not be in a hurry to achieve it.

古文：时或留心，犹胜弃日。
现代文：天天都坚持用心学习练笔，尤其胜过三天打鱼两天晒网。
English: It is better to study hard and practice writing every day, especially when compared to fishing for three days and drying nets for two days.

古文：凡诸艺业，未有学而不得者也，病在心力懈怠，不能专精耳。
现代文：世上各行各艺，没有你用心去学习它而一点收获也得不到的，问题出在你不能全力以赴地去精心研究求索它。
English: There are all kinds of arts in the world, but you can't get any harvest without studying it with all your heart. The problem is that you can't go all out to carefully study and search for it.

古文：又云：吾临古人之书，殊不学其形势，惟在骨力。
现代文：唐太宗又说：我临摹古人的书法字帖，并不特意去效仿每个字的形体结构，而将功夫用在摸透它的笔力风骨上面。
English: Tang Taizong also said: I copied the calligraphy of the ancients, and did not specifically imitate the shape structure of each character, but put effort into understanding its penmanship style.

古文：及得骨力，而形势自生耳。
现代文：笔力风骨你吃透了，形体结构自然而然地就把握了。
English: Once you have mastered the skill of writing, you will naturally grasp the structure of the body.

古文：尝召三品已上，赐宴于玄武门。
现代文：唐太宗经常召集三品以上的臣属们，聚宴在玄武门。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang would often gather his vassals with three or more court ranks for a banquet at the Xuanwu Gate.

古文：帝操笔作飞白书，众臣乘酒，就太宗手中相竞。
现代文：太宗亲自执笔作飞白草书，诸位大臣们借着酒兴，都纷纷从太宗手中拿过笔来，相比着挥毫书写。
English: Emperor Taizong personally penned the Flying White Cursive, and the ministers all took the pens from Emperor Taizong's hands, comparing the writing style.

古文：散骑常侍刘洎，登御床引手，然后得之。
现代文：散骑常侍刘洎，爬上皇帝休息的床上从太宗手中将笔夺过来。
English: Liu Ye, the equerry, climbed onto the bed where the emperor was resting and snatched the pen from Taizong's hand.

古文：其不得者，咸称洎登床，罪当死，请付法。太宗笑曰：昔闻婕妤辞辇，今见常侍登床。
现代文：唐太宗笑着说：诸位爱卿不要这么讲！过去曾经听说过汉时有个叫班婕妤的宫庭女官，她甘愿退居东宫而不去陪伴君王。今天，我朝出了个登上龙床，从君王手中抢笔书写的刘洎刘常侍！
English: Tang Taizong said with a smile: My Lords, don't talk like that! In the past, I had heard of a court lady in the Han Dynasty named Banzhu, who was willing to retire to the East Palace rather than accompany the monarch. Today, I went out in the morning to board the dragon bed and snatch the writing pen from the monarch's hand.

古文：购兰亭序
现代文：购兰亭序
English: Shang Lan Ting Zhou

古文：王羲之《兰亭序》。僧智永弟子辨才，尝于寝房伏梁上，凿为暗槛，以贮《兰亭》。
现代文：唐朝贞观年间，江南越州有一老僧叫辨才，是前朝著名书法家智永禅师的守门弟子。智永禅师临死前，将他珍藏一世的先祖王羲之的著名书法真迹《兰亭序》传给辨才。
English: During the Zhenguan period of the Tang Dynasty, there was an old monk named Biancai in Yuezhou, South of the Yangtze River. He was a gatekeeper disciple of the famous calligrapher Chiyong Zenshi before the Tang Dynasty. Before his death, Chiyong Zenshi passed on to Biancai the famous calligraphy masterpiece "Lanting Sequence" from his treasured first-generation ancestor Wang Xizhi.

古文：保惜贵重于师在日。贞观中，太宗以听政之暇，锐志玩书。
现代文：辨才和尚得到这一无价墨宝后，怕将它失落了，于是在自己卧室的伏梁上凿一暗穴，密秘地将《兰亭序》藏在里面，就象师父在时那样珍重保护它。
English: After obtaining this priceless ink treasure, Bentsai Monk was afraid of losing it, so he dug a hole in the beam of his bedroom and secretly hid the "Lanting Sequence" inside, protecting it as preciously as Master did.

古文：临羲之真草书帖，构募备尽，唯未得《兰亭》。
现代文：贞观年间，唐太宗在处理国家政务之余的闲暇时间里，专心致志地研究书法。凡是能收集到的王羲之的真草书帖，他都设法弄到了，供他临摹、观赏。
English: During the Zhenguan period, Tang Taizong devoted himself to studying calligraphy in his spare time when he wasn't dealing with state affairs. He managed to get all of Wang Xizhi's authentic calligraphy books that he could collect, so that he could copy and enjoy them.

古文：寻讨此书，知在辨才之所。
现代文：唯有《兰亭序》没有得到手。
English: Only "Lanting Sequence" did not get the go-ahead.

古文：乃敕追师入内道场供养，恩赉优洽。
现代文：经过多方探询、寻找，得知这份名帖现在江南越州高僧辨才手中。
English: After many inquiries and searches, it was learned that this famous postcard is now in the hands of a high priest in Yuezhou, Jiangnan Province.

古文：数日后，因言次，乃问及《兰亭》，方便善诱，无所不至。辨才确称往日侍奉先师，实常获见，自师没后，荐经丧乱，坠失不知所在。
现代文：于是派人带着他亲手写的敕书去江南越中召请辨才进京，在宫内为他设置诵经修行的道场来供养他。太宗皇帝给予他特殊的礼遇，除了日常用度优厚外，还赏赐给他许多贵重物品。几天以后，一次谈到书法时，问辨才和尚知不知道《兰亭序》的下落。虽经多方劝诱，辨才只是说他在侍奉师父智永惮师过世后，几经丧乱，不知道遗失到哪里去了。
English: The Emperor Taizong gave him special treatment. In addition to his daily use, he also rewarded him with many valuable items. A few days later, when talking about calligraphy, Qianzai and Shang Zhi did not know the whereabouts of the "Lanting Sequence." Although after much persuasion, Qianzai only said that after the death of his servant master Zhi Yong Shu, he had suffered several disasters and did not know where he had lost it.

古文：既而不获，遂放归越中。
现代文：既然没有从辨才口中得到什么结果，于是又让他回到越中。
English: Since no results were obtained from the interrogation, he was sent back to Yuezhong Middle School.

古文：后更推究，不离辨才之处。
现代文：后来，进一步探究推断，认为《兰亭序》还是在辨才手中。
English: Later, further investigation deduced that "Lanting Sequence" was still in the hands of Deng Cai.

古文：又敕追辨才入内，重问《兰亭》。
现代文：于是又敕命辨才进京入宫，重新追问他《兰亭序》的下落。
English: As a result, he had to fight tooth and nail to get into the capital and the palace, and he was once again asked about the whereabouts of "The Orchid Pavilion."

古文：如此者三度，竟靳固不出。
现代文：反复三次，辨才和尚都拒不承认在他手中。
English: Repeatedly three times, both the scholar and the monk refused to admit that it was in his hands.

古文：上谓侍臣曰：右军之书，朕所偏宝。
现代文：唐太宗对左右的侍臣说：王羲之的书法，是我偏爱的至宝。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty said to the courtiers around him, "Wang Xizhi's calligraphy is my favorite treasure.

古文：就中逸少之迹，莫如《兰亭》。
现代文：但是他遗留下来的全部书帖中，没有象《兰亭序》这样好的。
English: But of all the books he left behind, none is as good as "The Orchid Pavilion."

古文：求见此书，劳于寤寐。
现代文：为了得到它让我一观，使得我经常睡不着觉吃不下去饭。
English: In order to get it, let me take a look, which makes me often can't sleep and can't eat.

古文：此僧耆年，又无所用。
现代文：这个辨才和尚年事已高，这本《兰亭序》真迹留在他手中也没有什么大用处。
English: The scholar-monk was already very old, and this copy of the "Lanting Prologue" would not be of much use in his hands.

古文：若得一智略之士，设谋计取之必获。
现代文：如果能得到一位足智多谋的人，想出一个计谋智取，必能从辨才和尚手中将它弄出来。
English: If you can get a resourceful person to come up with a cunning plan, you will surely be able to get it out of the hands of the monks.

古文：尚书左仆射房玄龄曰：臣闻监察御史萧翼者，梁元帝之曾孙。今贯魏州莘县，负才艺，多权谋，可充此使，必当见获。
现代文：尚书左仆射房玄龄说：我听说监察御史萧翼，是前朝梁元帝的曾孙，现在居位在魏州萃县，有才艺、多谋略，可以担任这个差使。
English: Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Shifang Xuanling, said: I heard that the inspector, Shi Xiao Ying, is the great-grandson of the former Emperor Liang Yuan. He is now living in Wei Prefecture. He is talented and resourceful, and can serve as this envoy.

古文：太宗遂召见，翼奏曰：若作公使，义无得理。臣请私行诣彼，须得二王杂帖三数通。
现代文：太宗采纳了萧翼的这个办法，并按照他提出的条件，给了他几份王羲之父子的杂帖随身带着。
English: Emperor Taizong adopted this method of Xiao Ying and, according to the conditions he proposed, gave him several copies of Wang Xi's father and son's miscellaneous posts to carry with him.

古文：太宗依给。翼遂改冠微服，至洛潭。随商人船，下至越州。
现代文：萧翼于是脱去官服、冠带，改穿便服出京南下至洛潭，搭乘一位商人的货船直下越州。
English: Xiao Ying then took off his official uniform, crown and sash, changed into civilian clothes and went out of Beijing south to Luotan, and took a merchant's cargo ship straight to Yuezhou.

古文：又衣黄衫，极宽长潦倒，得山东书生之体。
现代文：到了越州后，萧翼又换上一领宽大的黄衫，作随意无拘束状，象是一位远从山东来的书生，傍晚时走进永欣寺院。
English: After arriving in Yuezhou, Xiao Ying changed into a wide-necked yellow shirt, making a casual unrestrained, like a student from Shandong, who walked into the Yongxin Temple in the evening.

古文：日暮入寺，巡廊以观壁画。遇辨才院，止于门前。
现代文：他假作观赏寺院廊房上的壁画，似乎很随意地走进辨才和尚居住的庭院，在房门前站下。
English: He pretended to admire the murals on the corridor of the temple, and casually walked into the courtyard where the monks lived, and stood in front of the door.

古文：辨才遥见翼，乃问曰：何处檀越。
现代文：辨才和尚远远看见萧翼走来，问道：施主，你是从哪里来的？
English: Banzai Monk saw Xiao Ying coming from far away and asked, "Master, where did you come from?"

古文：翼就前礼拜云：弟子是北人，将少许蚕种来卖。
现代文：萧翼走上前去拜见，说：弟子是北方人，带来少许蚕种来卖。
English: Xiao Ying walked up to meet him and said, "My disciple is from the north and has brought some silkworm seeds to sell.

古文：历寺纵观，幸遇禅师。
现代文：遇到寺庙都看看，在这里遇到方丈真是三生有幸。
English: If you come across a temple, take a look. Meeting an abbot here is truly a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.

古文：寒温既毕，语议便合。
现代文：一番寒暄过后，二人觉得言谈很投缘。
English: After the initial awkwardness, the two found the conversation to be very congenial.

古文：因延入房内，即共围棋抚琴，投壶握槊，谈说文史，竟甚相得。
现代文：辨才将萧翼请到禅房中就坐，一起奕棋弹琴，或玩投壶、握槊一类的赌博游戏，玩得很是高兴。
English: He invited Xiao Yulun to sit in the meditation room, and they played chess and piano together, or played gambling games such as throwing pots and holding shovels. They were very happy to play.

古文：乃曰：白头如新，倾盖如旧。
现代文：待到谈文论史，更是意趣相投。
English: When it comes to the history of literary theory, they are even more like-minded.

古文：今后无形迹也。
现代文：辨才说道：你我初次相识，就这样相投，真应了两句古诗：不投缘的，两人在一起谈到头发白，还象是刚刚认识；若投缘，途中相遇两驾车并靠在一块儿聊几句，如同相知多年。今后，你我的形踪都无定处，说不上还能不能再相遇。
English: Dian Cai said: You and I met for the first time, and that's how we fell in love. It really corresponds to two ancient poems: If you don't fall in love, the two of you will talk about gray hair together, as if you just met; if you do, you will meet two cars on the way and lean together to talk a few words, as if you've known each other for years. In the future, you and I will have no place to go, and it's impossible to say whether we can meet again.

古文：便留夜宿，设缸面药酒果等。
现代文：今晚，先生就宿在我这禅房中吧。于是让伙房里的小和尚送来缸面、药酒、瓜果等。
English: Tonight, I'd like you to stay in my Zen room, so I'll ask the little monk in the guest room to bring me crock pot noodles, medicinal wine, melon fruit, and so on.

古文：江东云缸面，犹河北称瓮头，谓初熟酒也。
现代文：江东人所说的缸面，如同河北人说的瓮头，就是刚刚酿出来的新酒。
English: Cylinder noodles, as they are called in eastern Jiangsu, and steamed buns, as they are called in northern Hebei, are just-brewed new wine.

古文：酣乐之后，请宾赋诗。
现代文：两人对坐饮酒，酒助谈兴，好不畅快！
English: The two of them are sitting drinking, the wine helps the conversation, it's great fun!

古文：辨才探得来字韵，其诗曰：初酝一缸开，新知万里来。
现代文：酒喝到酣畅时，两人即席抓签吟诗，辨才抓得一签是来字韻，吟得一诗：启开刚刚酿得的一缸酒，来招待远从万里来的新朋友。
English: When the wine was well drunk, the two people immediately signed and chanted a poem. The only difference is that they signed a rhyme and chanted a poem: open a bottle of wine that has just been brewed to invite new friends from thousands of miles away.

古文：披云同落寞，步月共徘徊。
现代文：我们都如行云野鹤一样的山野之人，有着相同的冷落与寂寞。
English: We are all like the cranes of the mountains, with the same coldness and loneliness.

古文：夜久孤琴思，风长旅雁哀。非君有密术，谁照不燃灰。
现代文：然而今晚人们可以同在月光下吟诗咏物、徘徊赏月。夜深了，听着孤独的琴声更容易惹起你的万千思绪；长风吹来，羁旅在外的孤雁仰天发生悲哀的长鸣。
English: However, tonight, people can chant poems and songs under the moonlight, wander around and enjoy the moon. It is late at night, listening to the lonely music is more likely to arouse your thousands of thoughts; the long wind blows, and the lonely geese that are traveling outside sing mournfully.

古文：萧翼探得招字韵，诗曰：邂逅款良宵，殷勤荷胜招。
现代文：不是君子你有什么密秘的法术，谁还愿意顾看我这个行将入木的老僧人呢？
English: You're not a gentleman. What secret magic do you have? Who would want to look after me, an old monk who's about to die?

古文：弥天俄若旧，初地岂成遥。酒蚁倾还泛，心猨躁似调。
现代文：萧翼抓得的是招字签，也吟得一诗：我们偶然相逢在这千载古寺里共度这美景良宵，你摆下这么丰盛的酒宴将我款待。
English: What Xiao Ying got was a signboard, and also a poem: We met by chance in this thousand-year-old temple to spend this beautiful night together. You set up such a sumptuous banquet to entertain me.

古文：谁怜失群翼，长苦业风飘。妍蚩略同，彼此讽咏，恨相知之晚。通宵尽欢，明日乃去。
现代文：他们二人互相吟咏唱合，恨相识太晚，一直玩乐到第二天早晨，萧翼才离开永欣寺。
English: The two of them sang and chanted with each other, hated that they met too late, and continued to have fun until the next morning, when Xiao Ying left Yongxin Temple.

古文：辨才云：檀越闲即更来。
现代文：离去时，辨才和尚说：施主得闲就请过来坐坐。
English: When leaving, the monk said, "If you have time, please come and sit down.

古文：翼乃载酒赴之。
现代文：于是，萧翼第二天就带着酒又来到寺院里。
English: As a result, Xiao Ying came to the temple again the next day with wine.

古文：兴后作诗，如此者数四。
现代文：两个人还是饮酒吟诗，极尽玩乐的兴致。
English: The two of them are still drinking, chanting, and having fun to the fullest.

古文：诗酒为务，其俗混然。
现代文：这样往来多次，用诗酒为由头，萧翼已经跟辨才和尚混得很熟了。
English: After many such exchanges, on the basis of poetry and wine, Xiao Ying has become very familiar with the monks.

古文：经旬朔，翼示师梁元帝自书《职贡图》，师嗟赏不已。
现代文：说话间，距他来时已有十多天了。一天，萧翼带来梁元帝自书《职贡图》给辨才和尚看。辨才看后赞赏不已。
English: One day, Xiao Ying brought Emperor Liang Yuan's book "Job Tribute Chart" to show the monk. The monk was full of appreciation after reading it.

古文：因谈论翰墨，翼曰：弟子先传二王楷书法，弟子自幼来耽玩，今亦数帖自随。辨才欣然曰：明日来，可把此看。
现代文：由此谈论到书法的话题上来。萧翼说：弟子先祖传下来王羲之父子的楷书字帖，我从幼年就临摹练习。现在随身带着几帖，大师不嫌弃，我拿来给你看看。
English: From this, the topic of calligraphy came up. Xiao Ying said: Disciple ancestors passed down Wang Yao's father and son's block letters, I have been copying and practicing since I was a child. Now I carry a few letters with me, the master does not disdain, I'll show you.

古文：翼依期而往，出其书以示辨才。
现代文：辨才高兴地说：明天来时，可将它们带来给老僧看看。第二天，萧翼果然将字帖带来给辨才看。
English: Bencai said happily: "When you come tomorrow, you can bring them to see the old monk." The next day, Xiao Ying did indeed bring the writings to Bencai.

古文：辨才熟详之曰：是即是矣，然未佳善也。
现代文：辨才和尚很谙熟地说：确实是王羲之父子的书法真迹。然而不是最佳的上品。
English: Bencai Monk said very skillfully: It is indeed the true calligraphy of Wang Yao's father and son. However, it is not the best quality.

古文：贫道有一真迹，颇是殊常。
现代文：贫僧有一真迹，很不寻常啊。
English: The poor monk has a real mark, it's very unusual.

古文：翼曰：何帖？
现代文：萧翼故作不知地问：什么帖？
English: Xiao Ying pretended to ask unknowingly: What post?

古文：才曰：《兰亭》。
现代文：辨才和尚回答说：《兰亭序》。
English: Bencai replied: "The Lan Ting Zhou."

古文：翼笑曰：数经乱离，真迹岂在，必是响榻伪作耳。
现代文：萧翼笑着说：几经离乱，《兰亭序》真迹怎么还能够存在呢？必是拓本伪造的吧。
English: Xiao Ying smiled and said, "After several years of turmoil, how can the original copy of "Lanting Sequence" still exist? It must be a fake rubbed copy."

古文：辨才曰：禅师在日保惜，临亡之时，亲付于吾。
现代文：辨才和尚说：智永禅师在世时非常珍惜地收藏它，临死前亲自托付给我。
English: Bencai Monk said, "Zen Master Chiyonaga treasured it when he was alive and entrusted it to me before his death.

古文：付受有绪，那得参差。
现代文：交与接都有头绪，怎么会出现差错呢？
English: Both the handover and the connection have a clue, how can there be a mistake?

古文：可明日来看。
现代文：待明天来时，我拿给你看。
English: I'll show it to you when I come in tomorrow.

古文：及翼到，师自于屋梁上槛内出之。
现代文：第二天，萧翼来到永欣寺后，辨才大师从屋梁上的暗穴内将《兰亭序》书帖取出来，给他看。
English: The next day, after Xiao Ying came to Yongxin Temple, Master Bencai took out the booklet of "The Orchid Pavilion" from the dark hole on the roof beam and showed it to him.

古文：翼见讫。故驳瑕指颣曰：果是响榻书也。
现代文：萧翼看罢，故意挑出指点所谓的毛病说：果然是拓书伪品啊！
English: Xiao Ying looked at it and deliberately pointed out the so-called problems and said, "It's a fake book!"

古文：纷竞不定。
现代文：二人纷争不定，各说各理，各持己见。
English: The two are at loggerheads, each with their own opinions.

古文：自示翼之后，更不复安于伏梁上。
现代文：辨才大师自从将《兰亭序》拿给萧翼看后，便不再将它放回梁上暗穴中。
English: Since the master of discernment showed "Lanting Sequence" to Xiao Ying, he no longer put it back in the hole on the beam.

古文：并萧翼二王诸帖，并借留置于几案之间。
现代文：而是将《兰亭序》和萧翼拿来的二王字帖，一块儿放在书案上。
English: Instead, he put "The Orchid Pavilion Prelude" and Xiao Ying's copy of "The Two Kings" together on the bookcase.

古文：辨才时年八十余，每日于窗下临学数遍，其老而笃好也如此。
现代文：这时的辨才大师已经八十多岁的高龄了，每天还临窗将这些字帖或临摹或把玩，不下数遍，可见他老而好学啊！
English: At this time, the master of discerning talent was already more than eighty years old. Every day, he would stand by the window and read or copy or play with these words, no less than several times. You can see that he is old and eager to learn!

古文：自是翼往还既数，童第等无复猜疑。
现代文：萧翼也因来寺院的次数多了，辨才的童仆和徒弟们等也不把他当外人看。
English: Xiao Ying also came to the temple more often, so the servants and apprentices of the talent scouts did not see him as an outsider.

古文：后辨才出赴邑汜桥南严迁家斋，翼遂私来房前。
现代文：后来有一天，辨才大师进城里去为汜桥南严迁作家斋法事。
English: Later, one day, the master of discernment went to the city to perform the ritual of fasting for the writer Nan Yanjun of Qiaoqiao.

古文：谓童子曰：翼遗却帛子在床上。
现代文：萧翼看机会到了，走近辨才大师的禅房前，对童仆说：我昨天将一块手帕遗落在大师床上。
English: Seeing his chance, Xiao Ying approached the Zen room of Master Bencai and said to the servant boy, "I left a handkerchief on Master Bencai's bed yesterday.

古文：童子即为开门。
现代文：童仆即开门让他进去。
English: The boy servant immediately opened the door and let him in.

古文：翼遂于案上，取得《兰亭》及御府二王书帖，便赴永安驿。
现代文：萧翼于是从书案上取走《兰亭序》和他拿来的二王杂帖，走出寺院后直接去永安驿馆。
English: Xiao Ying then took the "Lanting Preface" and the miscellany of the two kings he brought from the book case, and went directly to the Yongan Hall after leaving the temple.

古文：告驿长陵诉曰：我是御史，奉敕来此。
现代文：告诉陵诉驿长说：我是朝廷的御史，奉皇上敕命来到这里，现在皇帝亲手书写的敕令在此。
English: "I am the Imperial Historian of the Imperial Court. I have come here on the Emperor's command. Now, here is the imperial edict written by the Emperor's hand.

古文：今有墨敕，可报汝都督知。都督齐善行闻之，驰来拜谒。
现代文：你立即告诉都督府善行得知，让他立即骑马来拜见本御史。
English: You should immediately tell the governor's office that you have learned of his good deed, and have him immediately come to see the prince on horseback.

古文：萧翼因宣示敕旨，具告所由。
现代文：说完，将太宗手书敕令拿出给驿长看，并将具体事由也告诉了他。
English: Having said that, he took out Taizong's handwritten imperial edict and showed it to Zou Chang, and also told him the specific reason.

古文：善行走使人召辨才，辨才仍在严迁家未还寺。
现代文：都督府善行得知这一事情后，立即派人召告辨才大师来见御史。都督府的官差到永欣寺去召见辨才大师时，大师尚在城里严家做家斋法事未有回来。
English: After the governor's office learned of the incident, it immediately sent someone to summon the guru to see him. When the official sent by the governor's office went to Yongxin Temple to summon the guru, the guru had not yet returned from a family ritual at the Yan family home in the city.

古文：遽见追乎，不知所以。
现代文：官差一直追至严家。辨才大师见官差追到严家来召见他，不知发生了什么大事。
English: The official came all the way to Yan's house. When the master of discernment saw the official come to Yan's house to summon him, he didn't know what had happened.

古文：又遣云，侍御须见。
现代文：又听说御史专门要见他，更不知为了什么。
English: I also heard that you specifically wanted to see him, and I don't know why.

古文：及师来见御史，乃是房中萧生也。
现代文：待他匆忙返来赶到驿馆去拜见御史，见这位御史乃是这些天跟他在一起盘桓的萧翼，越发不明白了，如坠云雾中。
English: Waiting for him to return in a hurry, he rushed to the Yingguan to visit the historian. Seeing that the historian was Xiao Ying, who had been hovering with him these days, he became more and more confused, as if he had fallen into a cloud.

古文：萧翼报云：奉敕遣来取《兰亭》，《兰亭》今已得矣，故唤师来别。辨才闻语而便绝倒，良久始苏。
现代文：待萧翼报说他是特奉敕命来江南取《兰亭序》的，现在《兰亭序》已经拿到手，特地召唤他来告别时，辨才大师听到这里昏厥倒地，许久才苏醒过来。
English: When Xiao Yibai reported that he had been specially ordered to come to the south of the Yangtze River to pick up "Lanting Sequence," and now "Lanting Sequence" had been picked up, he was specially summoned to say goodbye. When the master of discernment heard this, he fainted and fell to the ground, and it took him a long time to wake up.

古文：翼便驰驿南发，至都奏御，太宗大悦。
现代文：萧翼辞别驿馆，返回京都，上奏太宗。
English: Xiao Ying bids farewell to Gongguan and returns to Kyoto to perform Taizong.

古文：以玄龄举得其人，赏锦琜千段；擢拜翼为员外郎，加五品，赐银瓶一、金缕瓶一、马脑碗一、并实以珠。
现代文：太宗皇帝得到《兰亭序》后非常高兴。因为房玄龄荐人得力，赏赐锦彩千段。萧翼智取《兰亭序》有功，太宗皇帝提升他为员外郎，加五品，并赏赐给他银瓶、金缕瓶、玛瑙碗各一只和珍珠等。
English: Emperor Taizong was very pleased to receive the "Lan Ting Xiu." Because Fang Xuanling's recommenders were competent, they were rewarded with a thousand points. Xiao Ying had the merit of cleverly obtaining the "Lan Ting Xiu." Emperor Taizong promoted him as a member of the Foreigners, adding five points, and rewarded him with a silver bottle, a gold bottle, an agate bowl and a pearl.

古文：内厩良马两匹，兼宝装鞍辔。宅庄各一区。
现代文：又赐给他宫内御马两匹，并配有用珠宝装饰的鞍辔，宅院与庄园各一座。
English: He was also given two imperial horses, with saddles adorned with valuable jewels, one for each house and manor.

古文：太宗初怒老僧之秘吝，俄以其年耄，不忍加刑。数月后，仍赐物三千段，谷三千石，便敕越州支给。
现代文：唐太宗初时还生气辨才大师将《兰亭序》秘藏起来不奉献给他这位当朝天子，稍稍平息一会后又考虑到辨才年事已高，不忍心再加刑在他身上，又过了几个月，太宗皇帝又赐给辨才大师锦帛等物三千段，谷三千石，下敕书让越州都督府衙代为支付。
English: At the beginning of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Taizong was angry that Master Bian Cai had kept the "Lan Ting Zhuang" secret and did not dedicate it to him, the son of the emperor. After a while, he calmed down a little and considered that Master Bian Cai was too old and could not bear to impose further punishment on him. A few months later, Emperor Taizong gave Master Bian Cai 3,000 pieces of brocade and 3,000 koku, and asked the governor of Yuezhou to pay for it.

古文：辨才不敢将入己用，乃造三层宝塔。
现代文：辨才大师得到这些赏赐后，不敢将它们归为己有。将这此赐物兑换成钱，用这些钱造了一座三层宝塔。
English: After receiving these gifts, Master Baizai did not dare to keep them for himself. He converted the gifts into money and used the money to build a three-story pagoda.

古文：塔甚精丽，至今犹存。
现代文：塔造得特别精丽，直到现在还在。
English: The tower was built with great skill and still stands today.

古文：老僧因惊悸患重，不能强饭，唯歠粥，岁余乃卒。
现代文：他本人因为受刺激身患重病，不能吃硬饭，只能喝粥，过了一年多就去世了。
English: He himself became seriously ill as a result of the stimulation, unable to eat solid food and only able to drink porridge. He died more than a year later.

古文：帝命供奉榻书人赵模、韩道政、冯承素、诸葛真等四人，各榻数本，以赐皇太子诸王近臣。
现代文：得到《兰亭序》后，太宗皇帝命令侍奉在宫内的拓书人赵模、韩道政、冯承素、诸葛真等四人，各拓数本，赏赐给皇太子及诸位王子和近臣。
English: After receiving the "Lanting Prologue," Emperor Taizong ordered four scholars, including Zhao Mo, Han Daozheng, Feng Chengsu, and Zhu Gezhen, to serve in the palace, and each of them opened several copies, which were given to the crown prince and other princes and courtiers.

古文：贞观二十三年，圣躬不豫，幸玉华宫含风殿。
现代文：贞观二十三年，太宗皇帝身体不适，病卧在玉华宫含风殿。
English: In the 23rd year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong was unwell and lay ill in the Hall of Winds of the Jade Palace.

古文：临崩，谓高宗曰：吾欲从汝求一物，汝诚孝也，岂能违吾心耶，汝意何如？
现代文：临去世前，对太子李治说：我想向你要一件东西，你诚心尽孝怎么能违背我的心愿呢，你的意思怎么样？
English: Before his death, he said to the Crown Prince Li Zhi: "I want to ask you for one thing. How can your sincere filial piety go against my heart's desire? What do you mean?

古文：高宗哽咽流涕，引耳而听受制命。
现代文：太子李治泪流满面，哽咽着说不出话来，俯身伸耳听太宗皇帝的要求。
English: With tears streaming down his face and choking on his words, Prince Li Zhi bent down to listen to Emperor Taizong's request.

古文：太宗曰：吾所欲得兰亭，可与我将去。
现代文：太宗皇帝说：我想要得到的东西就是《兰亭序》啊，你能让我将它带去吗！
English: Emperor Taizong said, "What I want to get is the Orchid Pavilion Prelude, can you let me take it with me?"

古文：后随仙驾入玄宫矣。
现代文：太宗皇帝去世。
English: Emperor Taizong passed away.

古文：今赵模等所榻在者，一本尚直钱数万也。
现代文：太子李治继位为高宗，遵从太宗死前遗愿，将《兰亭序》真本随葬在太宗皇帝的墓中。到今天，赵模等人拓的《兰亭序》一本尚值钱数万啊！
English: Prince Li Zhi succeeded to the throne as Gao Zong, and in accordance with the last wishes of Emperor Taizong before his death, the original copy of "Lanting Sequence" was buried in the tomb of Emperor Taizong. To this day, a copy of "Lanting Sequence" excavated by Zhao Mo and others is still worth tens of thousands of dollars!

古文：又一说王羲之尝书《兰亭会序》。隋末，广州好事僧得之。
现代文：又一说：王羲之曾书过《兰亭会序》，隋末，广州一位好事的僧人得到了它。
English: Another said: "Wang Xizhi once wrote "Lan Ting Xie Xue," and at the end of the Sui Dynasty, a good monk in Guangzhou obtained it.

古文：僧有三宝，宝而持之。
现代文：这个僧人有三样宝物，非常珍惜的收藏着。
English: The monk has three treasures in his treasured collection.

古文：一曰右军《兰亭》书，二曰神龟，三曰如意。
现代文：一是王羲之手书《兰亭会序》，二是铜制神龟，三是铁制如意。
English: The first is the handwritten book "Lan Ting Congregation" by Wang Xuan, the second is the bronze turtle, and the third is the iron crane.

古文：太宗特工书，闻右军兰亭真迹，求之得其他本，若第一本，知在广州僧，而难以力取。
现代文：唐太宗非常爱好书法，听到那有王羲之的书法真迹，就设法弄到手里。王羲之别的书法真迹，太宗皇帝都得到了。唯独这份《兰亭会序》，听说在广州这个好事僧人手中，而难以力取。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang was very fond of calligraphy, and when he heard about the authentic calligraphy of Wang Xizhe, he tried to get his hands on it. The Emperor Taizong got all of Wang Xizhe's other authentic calligraphy. However, this "Lanting Proceedings" is said to be in the hands of a monk in Guangzhou, which is a good thing, but difficult to obtain.

古文：故令人诈僧，果得其书。
现代文：于是，他派去一个人，用欺骗的手段，从这位僧人手里弄到了《兰亭会序》。
English: Therefore, he sent someone to obtain the "Lan Ting Congregation Order" from the monk by deception.

古文：僧曰：第一宝亡矣，其余何爱。
现代文：僧人失去《兰亭会序》后说：第一宝物没有了，其余的宝物还有什么会值得可爱收藏的呢？
English: After losing the "Lan Ting Congregation," the monk said, "The first treasure is gone. What other treasures would be worth lovingly collecting?"

古文：乃以如意击石，折而弃之；又投龟一足伤，自是不能行矣。
现代文：于是用如意击石，打断了扔了；又将铜龟的一只脚摔坏了，从此不能行走。
English: So he hit the stone as he liked, broke it and threw it; he also broke one of the turtle's feet, and from then on he couldn't walk.

古文：汉王元昌
现代文：汉王元昌
English: Han Wang Yuanchang

古文：唐汉王元昌，神尧之子，善行书。
现代文：唐汉王元昌，神尧的儿子，擅长书写行书。
English: King Yuanchang of Tang and Han, the son of a god, was good at writing.

古文：诸王仲季并有能名，韩王、曹王，亦其亚也。
现代文：诸位王中的二、三王并列都有能书法的名声。韩王、曹王都次于他。
English: Two or three of the kings have the reputation of being able to write. King Han and King Cao are next to him.

古文：曹则妙于飞白，韩则工于草行。
现代文：曹王能书飞白，韩王工书草书、行书。
English: Cao Wang can write fluently, while Han Wang can write cursive and calligraphy.

古文：魏王、鲁王，亦韩王之伦也。
现代文：魏王、鲁王也就韩王之流啊。
English: The kings of Wei and Lu also belonged to the Han dynasty.

古文：欧阳询
现代文：欧阳询
English: Ouyang Enquiry

古文：唐欧阳询字信本，博览今古，官至银青光禄大夫率更令。
现代文：唐欧阳询，字信本，博览古今群书，官至银青光禄大夫率更令。
English: Tang Ouyang inquiry, word letter book, exposition of ancient and modern books, official to silver Qingguanglu doctor rate higher.

古文：书则八体尽能，笔力劲险。
现代文：对于书法，他能书八体，笔力遒劲奇险。
English: As far as calligraphy is concerned, he can write eight syllables, and his penmanship is amazing.

古文：高丽爱其书，遣使请焉。
现代文：高句丽国特别喜爱他的书法，派使臣请他去。
English: Goguryeo was particularly fond of his calligraphy and sent an envoy to invite him.

古文：神尧叹曰：不意询之书名，远播夷狄。
现代文：神尧感叹地说：没想到欧阳询的书法名声远传夷狄等少数民族。
English: "I didn't expect Ouyang Enquirer's reputation for calligraphy to spread far and wide to ethnic minorities such as the Yidi," said Shen Yao with a sigh.

古文：真观十五年卒，年八十五。
现代文：欧阳询死于贞观十五年，享年八十五岁。
English: Ouyang En died at the age of eighty-five, fifteen years after Zhenguan.

古文：询飞白、隶、行、草入妙，大篆、章草入能。
现代文：欧阳询的书法，飞白、隶书、行书、草书达到绝妙的境界，大篆、章草入能。
English: Ouyang En's calligraphy, Fei Bai, Bi Shu, Xing Shu, and Cao Shu have reached a wonderful state, and Daxu and Zhang Cao have entered the world.

古文：又率更尝出行，见古碑索靖所书。驻马观之，良久而去。
现代文：又欧阳询一次外出，看到一座古碑，碑文是前朝著名书法家索靖书写的，他停下马观看欣赏好长时间才离去。
English: Ouyang Zhen also went out once and saw an ancient monument. The inscription was written by the famous calligrapher Suo Jing in the previous dynasty. He stopped his horse to watch and admire it for a long time before leaving.

古文：数步，复下马伫立。
现代文：行了几步，又下马立在碑前观赏。
English: After walking a few steps, he dismounted and stood in front of the monument to watch.

古文：疲则布毯坐观，因宿其傍，三日而后去。
现代文：疲劳了将毯子铺在地上坐在上面观赏把玩。到晚上就睡在古碑的旁边，三天后才离去。
English: Tired, he spread a blanket on the ground and sat on it to watch and play. In the evening, he slept next to the ancient monument, and only left three days later.

古文：今开通元宝钱，武德四年铸，其文乃欧阳率更书也。
现代文：现今通用的开元通宝铜钱，是高祖武德四年铸造的，开元通宝这四个字就是欧阳询书写的啊。
English: Today's universal Kaigen Tongpo copper money was minted by Gao Zuwude for four years. The four characters of Kaigen Tongpo were written by Ouyang Xun.

古文：欧阳通
现代文：欧阳通
English: Ouyang Street

古文：唐欧阳通，询子。
现代文：唐欧阳通，是欧阳询的儿子，擅长书法。
English: Tang Ouyang Tong, the son of Ouyang Zhen, was good at calligraphy.

古文：善书，瘦怯于父。
现代文：他的字体比他父亲清瘦，他常常自我夸耀自己能书。
English: His handwriting is cleaner and thinner than his father's, and he often boasts that he can read.

古文：常自矜能书，必以象牙犀角为笔管；狸毛为心；覆以秋兔毫；松烟为墨，末以麝香；纸必须坚薄白滑者乃书之，盖自重其书。
现代文：欧阳通书写用的笔，一定是用象牙、犀角做笔管，狸子毛做笔芯，外面覆围上秋兔毫。他用的墨是用松烟为主料，掺入麝香沫。他用的纸必须是坚薄白滑的，否则不书。以示他对自己书法的重视。
English: Ouyang Tong's writing pen must be made of ivory and rhinoceros horn for the barrel, camel hair for the core, and the outside is covered with autumn rabbit hair. The ink he uses is made of pine smoke as the main material, mixed with musk foam. The paper he uses must be thin and smooth, otherwise he will not write. To show his importance to his calligraphy.

古文：薛纯陀亦效欧草，伤于肥钝，亦通之亚也。
现代文：薛纯陀也仿效欧草，却失之于肥钝，只是位居欧阳通的第二位。
English: Xue Chunda also imitated Ou Cao, but lost it in fatness and dullness, but ranked second in Ou Yang Tong.

古文：虞世南
现代文：虞世南
English: Yu Shennan

古文：虞世南字伯施，会稽人也，仕隋为秘书郎。
现代文：虞世南，字伯施，会稽人，在隋朝，官任秘书郎。
English: Yu Shennan, also known as Bo Shi, was the auditor of the association, and in the Sui Dynasty, he was the official secretary.

古文：炀帝知其才，嫉其鲠直，一为七品十余年。
现代文：隋炀帝知道他有才能，又嫉恨他的为人耿直，在七品官的位置上一干就是十多年。
English: Emperor Sui Xuan knew that he had talent, but he also envied his person Geng Zhi. He had been in the position of the seventh grade official for more than ten years.

古文：仕唐至秘书监。
现代文：到了唐朝，虞世南官至秘书监。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Yu Shennan rose from an official to a secretarial supervisor.

古文：文皇曰：世南一人，遂兼五绝。
现代文：隋文帝曾说过：虞世南一个人身兼五绝。
English: Sui Emperor Wen once said: "Yu Shennan is a man of five characteristics.

古文：一曰博学，二曰德行，三曰书翰，四曰词藻，五曰忠直。
现代文：一是博学，二是有德行，三是擅长书写，四是赋有词藻，五是忠直耿介。
English: One is erudite, the second is virtuous, the third is good at writing, the fourth is endowed with words, and the fifth is loyal.

古文：有一于此，足谓名臣，而世南兼之。
现代文：这五个长处有一个长处在身，就可以称得上名臣，然而虞世南都具备啊！
English: These five strengths have one strength in the body, it can be called a famous minister, but Yu Shennan all have it!

古文：行草之际，尤所偏工。
现代文：虞世南的书法，行书、草书，尤其是他最擅长的。
English: Yu Shennan's calligraphy, calligraphy, cursive, especially his best.

古文：本师于释智永，及其暮齿，加以遒逸。
现代文：虞世南师法于佛门僧人智永。待到晚年，注入遒劲，俊逸的风骨。
English: Yu Shennan was a teacher of the Dharma to the Buddhist monk Zhiyong. He stayed until late in life, infusing vigor and a graceful demeanor.

古文：卒年八十九。伯施隶草行入妙。
现代文：虞世南享年八十九岁，他的隶书、草书、行书、都达到了绝妙的境界。
English: At the age of eighty-nine, Yu Shennan's writing, cursive, and penmanship had all reached an extraordinary level.

古文：褚遂良
现代文：褚遂良
English: Zou Suiliang

古文：褚遂良，河南人。父亮，太常卿。
现代文：褚遂良，河南人，父亲叫褚亮，官任太常卿。
English: Zou Suiliang, a native of Henan Province, whose father was named Zou Liang, was appointed to the post of grand secretary.

古文：遂良官至仆射，善书。
现代文：褚遂良官至仆射，擅长书法。
English: He was a good officer and a good marksman. He was good at calligraphy.

古文：少则伏膺虞监，长则师祖右军，真书甚得其媚趣。
现代文：他少年时师从虞世南研习书法，长大成人后又师法王羲之。褚遂良的真书颇得王羲之的清秀媚逸的风格。
English: When he was a boy, he studied calligraphy under the tutelage of Yu Shennan. When he became an adult, he studied under the tutelage of Fa Wang Xizhi. Sui Liang's calligraphy is quite similar to Wang Xizhi's beautiful and graceful style.

古文：显庆中卒，年六十四。
现代文：褚遂良唐高宗显庆年间去世，享年六十四岁。
English: Xu Suiliang Tang Gao Zongxianqing passed away at the age of sixty-four.

古文：遂良隶行入妙，亦尝师受史陵。
现代文：褚遂良隶书、行书达到绝妙的境界。
English: Successfully good handwriting and handwriting have reached a wonderful state.

古文：然史亦有古直，伤于疏瘦也。
现代文：他曾将自己的书法传授给史陵。然而史陵的书法太古直，失之于疏瘦。
English: He once taught his own calligraphy to Shiling. However, Shiling's calligraphy is too old-fashioned and straight, and it is too thin.

古文：又遂良问虞监曰：某书何如永师？
现代文：又一次，褚遂良问虞世南：我的书法跟智永禅师比较谁的更好些？
English: Once again, Zou Suiliang asked Yu Shiminang: "Compared to Zen Master Zhiyong, whose calligraphy is better?

古文：曰：吾闻彼一字直五万，官岂得若此者？
现代文：虞世南说：我听说智永禅师的书法一字值五万钱，你的字能卖到这个价吗？
English: Yu Shennan said, "I heard that the calligraphy of Zen Master Chiyong is worth 50,000 yuan per word. Can your calligraphy be sold for this price?

古文：曰：何如欧阳询。
现代文：褚遂良又问：跟欧阳询比较又怎么样呢？
English: Zou Suiliang also asked: How does it compare to Ouyang Enquiry?

古文：虞曰：闻询不择纸笔，皆能如志，官岂得若此？
现代文：虞世南说：我听说欧阳询不挑选纸笔。不论用什么样的纸和笔，都能随心所欲地书写。
English: Yu Shennan said, "I heard that Ouyang Enquirer does not choose the paper and pen. No matter what kind of paper and pen you use, you can write whatever you want.

古文：褚曰：既然，某何更留意于此。
现代文：你能做到这样吗？褚遂良说：既然如此，我为什么偏要讲求对笔、纸的选择呢。
English: Can you do this? Zou Suiliang said, "Since this is the case, why do I have to emphasize the choice of pen and paper?"

古文：虞曰：若使手和笔调，遇合作者，亦深可贵尚。
现代文：虞世南说：要使手、笔相协调，互相配合，这是最难能可贵的啊！
English: Yu Shennan said, "To coordinate the hand and the pen, to cooperate with each other, this is the most precious thing!

古文：褚喜而退。
现代文：褚遂良高高兴兴地告辞了。
English: Zou Suiliang said goodbye cheerfully.

古文：薛稷
现代文：薛稷
English: Xue Ying

古文：薛稷，河南人，官至太子少保。
现代文：薛稷，河南人，官至太子少保，书法学习褚遂良体。
English: Xue Yao, from Henan Province, was a high-ranking official and a minor prince. He was a good student of calligraphy.

古文：书学褚，尤尚绮丽媚好。
现代文：尤其喜爱将字写得绮丽媚好。
English: In particular, she likes to write words beautifully.

古文：肤肉得师之半矣，可渭河南公之高足。
现代文：褚遂良书法的形体，他学得一半，可称褚遂良的好弟子，他的书法很为当时的人珍视崇尚。
English: He learned only half of the form of Suiliang's calligraphy, and can be called a good disciple of Suiliang. His calligraphy was highly valued and revered by the people of that time.

古文：甚为时所珍尚，稷隶行入能。
现代文：又薛稷的外祖父魏征家中，藏书很多。
English: In addition, Xue Yao's grandfather, Wei Zheng, had a large collection of books.

古文：又稷外祖魏征家，富图籍，多有虞褚旧迹。锐精模效，笔态遒丽。当时无及之者。
现代文：其中收藏有许多虞世南、褚遂良书法的早期作品。薛稷锐意精心临摹仿效。他效仿虞、褚而书写的字，遒劲中显露出俊丽之气，当时诸多仿效虞、褚二人书法的人都达不到他这种造诣。
English: Among them, there are many early works of the calligraphy of Yu Shennan and Zou Suiliang in the collection. Xue Xuan carefully copied the calligraphy. He imitated the characters written by Yu and Zou, and showed a beautiful spirit in his calligraphy. At that time, many people who imitated the calligraphy of Yu and Zou did not reach his level of accomplishment.

古文：又善画，博采古迹，埒于秘书。
现代文：薛稷还擅长绘画，他博采古人留下的作品、手迹，又从秘书中汲取有益的东西。
English: Xue Yao is also good at painting. He collects works and manuscripts left by the ancients, and draws useful things from secretaries.

古文：高正臣
现代文：高正臣
English: Gao Zhengxin

古文：高正臣，广平人，官至卫尉卿。
现代文：高正臣，广平人，官至卫尉卿。
English: Gao Zhengcheng, Guang Pingren, and Guanzhixing were the highest-ranking officials.

古文：习右军之法，睿宗爱其书。
现代文：高正臣学习的是王羲之的手法，唐睿宗喜爱他的书法。
English: Gao Zhengchen studied Wang Xizhi's style, and Tang Ruizong loved his calligraphy.

古文：张怀素之先，与高有旧，朝士就高乞书，或凭书之。
现代文：张怀素的先人与高正臣家有交往，朝中的官员们，有的通过张怀素向高正臣索要他的书法，有的直接向高索要。
English: Zhang Huai Su's ancestors had dealings with Gao Zheng Chen's family. Some officials in the imperial court requested his calligraphy from Gao Zheng Chen through Zhang Huai Su, and some directly from Gao Zheng Chen.

古文：高常为人书十五纸，张乃戏换其五纸，又令示高。
现代文：高经常为向他索要墨迹的人书十五纸，张从中替换了五纸，之后又拿给高看。
English: Gao often wrote 15 pieces of paper for people who asked him for ink. Gao replaced five pieces of paper with one piece of paper and then showed it to Gao.

古文：再看不悟。客曰：有人换公书。
现代文：高没看出来其中有被人替换的。
English: Gao didn't notice that one of them had been replaced.

古文：高笑曰：必是张公也。
现代文：索书的这个人告诉他：有人替换了你的书法。高笑笑说：那一定是张怀素干的。
English: The person who asked for the book told him, "Someone has replaced your calligraphy." Gao Xiaolu said, "It must be Zhang Huai Su who did it."

古文：乃详观之，得其三纸。
现代文：又重新仔细审看，挑出来三纸。
English: He scrutinized it again and picked out three papers.

古文：客曰：犹有在。
现代文：索书的人说：还有。
English: The person who asked for the book said, "There's more."

古文：高又观之，竟不能辨。
现代文：高又仔细看了看，竟然再也辨认不出来了。
English: Gao took a closer look, and couldn't identify it anymore.

古文：高尝许人书一屏障，逾时未获。
现代文：高正臣曾答应为人书写一个屏障，过了约定的时间没写。
English: Gao Zhengchen had promised to write a barrier for people, but did not write it after the agreed time.

古文：其人乃出使淮南，临别，大怅惋。
现代文：这时正赶上这个人被派往淮南，临别前，对这件事非常遗憾。
English: At this time, this person was sent to Huainan just in time. Before leaving, I was very sorry about this.

古文：高曰：正臣故人在申州，正与仆书一类，公可便往求之。
现代文：高告诉他：我有位故交在申州，跟我写一样的书体。你可以就便请他为你写这个屏障。
English: Gao told him: I have an old friend in Shenzhou who writes the same typeface as me. You can just ask him to write this barrier for you.

古文：遂立申此意。
现代文：于是立即寄书给他那位故人讲明这个意思。
English: He immediately sent a letter to the deceased to make this clear.

古文：陆柬之尝为高书告身，高常嫌之，不将入秩。
现代文：陆柬之曾经亲自为高正臣书一份任职文书。高正臣非常讨厌担任官职，不去上任。
English: Lu Xizhi once personally wrote a letter of appointment for Gao Zhengcheng. Gao Zhengcheng hated to hold an official position and did not want to take up the post.

古文：后为鼠所伤，乃持示张公曰：此鼠甚解正臣意。
现代文：后来，这份任职文书让老鼠给咬坏了。高正臣就拿着被咬坏了的任职文书给张怀素看，说：这只老鼠很是了解我的心意。
English: Gao Zhengcheng then showed Zhang Huai Su the damaged document and said, "This mouse understands my heart."

古文：风调不合，一至于此。
现代文：陆、高两人的格调不同，竟然到了这种地步。
English: Lu and Gao's styles are different, and it's come to this.

古文：正臣隶行草入能。
现代文：高正臣的书法隶书、行书、草书都行。
English: Gao Zhengxian's calligraphy can be written in cursive, cursive and cursive.

古文：王绍宗
现代文：王绍宗
English: Wang Shaosong

古文：王绍宗字承烈，官至秘书少监。
现代文：王绍宗，字承烈，官至秘书少监。
English: Wang Shaozong, surnamed Cheng Rong, official and secretary of the Junior Supervisor.

古文：祖述子敬钦羡柬之。其中小真书，体象尤异。
现代文：他效仿王献之，钦慕陆柬之，书法的形体非常怪异。
English: He emulated Wang Xianzhi and admired Lu Kamto, and the form of the calligraphy is very strange.

古文：其行书及章草，次于真。
现代文：他的行书、章草，次于他的真书。
English: His calligraphy and calligraphy are second only to his real writing.

古文：常与人书云：鄙夫书翰无工者，特由水墨之积习。
现代文：王绍宗，常常对爱好书法的人说：一些鄙陋的人在书法上没有什么造诣，主要是太注重临摹、仿书造成的。
English: Wang Shaozong often said to people who like calligraphy: Some despicable people have little accomplishment in calligraphy, mainly caused by too much attention to copying and imitation.

古文：恒精心率意，虚神静思以取之。
现代文：只有下定恒心悉心尽意地去领会，杜绝一切杂念地去思索，才能有所进步。
English: Only if you are determined, persistent and diligent to understand, and eliminate all distracting thoughts to think, can you make progress.

古文：每与吴中陆大夫论及此道，明朝必不觉已进。
现代文：他每次跟吴中陆大夫谈论这些道理后，第二天一定在不知不觉中书法就已经长进了。
English: Every time he talked to Dr. Wu Zhonglu about these principles, the next day he must have grown into calligraphy unconsciously.

古文：陆后与密访知之，嗟赏不少。
现代文：陆大夫后来经过密访知道了这件事情，没少感叹赞赏王绍宗。
English: After a secret visit, Dr. Lu later learned about this matter, and he had a lot of admiration for Wang Shaosong.

古文：将余比虞七，以虞亦不临写故也，但心准目想而已。
现代文：王绍宗说：陆大夫将我和虞世南比，是因为虞世南也不临摹字帖的缘故，只是心里思到眼睛里就出现了你所思到的字形而已。
English: Wang Shaozong said: Dr. Lu compared me to Yu Shennan because Yu Shennan did not copy the characters, but when he thought about it, the glyphs you thought of appeared in his eyes.

古文：闻虞眠布被中，恒手画腹皮，与余正同也。
现代文：听说虞世南在破屋里睡觉，总是用手在肚皮上写字，我跟他一样啊。
English: I heard that Yu Shennan sleeps in a broken house and always writes on his belly with his hands. I'm just like him.

古文：承烈隶行草入能。
现代文：王绍宗隶书、行书、草书都能写。
English: Wang Shaoshong could write in cursive, calligraphy and calligraphy.

古文：郑广文
现代文：郑广文
English: Zheng Guangwen

古文：郑虔任广文博士。
现代文：郑虔官任广文博士。
English: Zheng Qian was appointed as Dr. Guangwen.

古文：学书而病无纸，知慈恩寺有柿叶数间屋，遂借僧房居止。
现代文：他学习书法而苦于没钱买纸，得知慈恩寺有柿树叶堆积了几间屋子，于是借寺内的僧房居住。
English: While studying calligraphy, he struggled with not having enough money to buy paper. When he learned that persimmon leaves had piled up in several rooms of the Cien Temple, he rented a monk's room in the temple to live in.

古文：日取红叶学书，岁久殆遍。
现代文：每天用红叶写书法，时间长了，写遍了寺中所积的柿树叶。
English: Every day, I write calligraphy with red leaves. It takes a long time, and I have written all over the persimmon leaves piled up in the temple.

古文：后自写所制诗并画，同为一卷封进。
现代文：后来自己亲笔书写自己作的诗，和画一同编成一卷，进奉给皇上。
English: Later, he wrote his own poems with his own pen and compiled them together with the paintings into one volume, which was presented to the emperor.

古文：玄宗御笔书其尾曰：郑虔三绝。
现代文：唐玄宗亲自在这卷书画的末尾写上：郑虔三绝四个字。
English: Tang Xuan Zong himself wrote at the end of this scroll of calligraphy and painting: Zheng Qian Sanju four words.

古文：李阳冰
现代文：李阳冰
English: Li Yangbing

古文：李阳冰善小篆，自言斯翁之后，且至小生，曹喜、蔡邕不足言。
现代文：李阳冰擅长小篆，自己说他是秦丞相李斯的后人，而且有志于新学后进，认为曹喜、蔡邕，不必太敬仰他们。
English: Li Yangbing is good at Xiao Yao. He said that he is the descendant of Li Si, the Prime Minister of the Qin Dynasty, and is also interested in new learning. He believes that Cao Xi and Cai Yao do not need to admire them too much.

古文：开元中，张怀瓘撰《书断》，阳冰、张旭并不载。
现代文：开元年间，张怀瓘撰写《书断》，李阳冰、张旭都没有记载在里面。
English: During the first year of the 21st century, Zhang Huaiqi wrote "Book-Breaking," but neither Li Yangbing nor Zhang Xu were recorded in it.

古文：绛州有篆字与古不同，颇为怪异。
现代文：绛州有一石碑上刻的篆字跟古篆不同，很是怪异。
English: In Zhangzhou, there is a stone monument with the word "" carved on it, which is different from the ancient "" and very strange.

古文：李阳冰见之，寝卧其下，数日不能去。
现代文：李阳冰看见后，就睡在石碑下面，好几天没有离开它。
English: After seeing it, Li Yangbing slept under the stone monument and did not leave it for several days.

古文：验其书是唐初，不载书者名姓。
现代文：终于验证碑上的书法是唐初人写的，没有署上书写人的姓名。
English: Finally, it was verified that the calligraphy on the monument was written by a person from the early Tang Dynasty, and the name of the person who wrote it was not signed.

古文：碑有碧落二字，时人谓之碧落碑。
现代文：碑上有碧落二字，当时人叫它为碧落碑。
English: On the monument there are the words "Bijiaoling" and at that time people called it the "Bijiaoling Monument."

古文：张旭
现代文：张旭
English: Zhang Xu

古文：张旭草书得笔法，后传崔邈、颜真卿。
现代文：张旭深得草书笔法，后传给了崔邈、颜真卿。
English: Zhang Xu acquired a profound knowledge of cursive writing, which was later passed on to Cui Yao and Yan Zhenqing.

古文：旭言：始吾闻公主与担夫争路，而得笔法之意；后见公孙氏舞剑器而得其神。
现代文：张旭说：开始时，我听说公主与挑夫争着走路而悟得草书笔法的意境。后来观公孙大娘舞剑而悟得草书笔法的神韻。
English: Zhang Xu said: "At the beginning, I heard that the princess and the porter struggled to walk and realized the artistic conception of cursive writing. Later, I watched the granddaughter dance the sword and realized the charm of cursive writing.

古文：饮醉辄草书，挥笔大叫。
现代文：张旭每次饮酒醉时就草书，挥笔大叫。
English: Every time Zhang Xu was drunk, he would write in cursive, wave his pen and shout.

古文：以头揾水墨中而书之，天下呼为张颠。醒后自视，以为神异，不可复得。
现代文：将头浸入墨汁中用头书写，世上人称他为张颠酒醒后看见自己用头写的字，认为它神异而不可重新得到。
English: He dipped his head into the ink and wrote with his head. People in the world called him Zhang Bing after he woke up and saw the letter he wrote with his head. He thought it was magical and could not be regained.

古文：后辈言笔札者，虞、欧、褚、薛。或有异论，至长史无间言。
现代文：后人评论书法名家，欧阳询、虞世南、褚遂臣、薛稷四人，或许有不同的意见，至于论到张旭，都没有异议。
English: Later generations commenting on the four famous calligraphers, Ouyang Zhen, Yu Shennan, Zou Suichen and Xue Qi, may have different opinions, but as far as Zhang Xu is concerned, there are no objections.

古文：又旭释褐为苏州常熟尉。
现代文：又张旭脱去短衣官任苏州常熟尉。
English: Zhang Xu also took off his short-sleeved shirt and was appointed Suzhou Changshu lieutenant.

古文：上后旬日，有老父过状，判去。
现代文：上任后十多天，来一位老人递上状纸告状。
English: More than ten days after taking office, an old man came to submit a written complaint.

古文：不数日复至。
现代文：张旭在状纸上批示判去。
English: Zhang Xu was ordered to be sentenced on the written paper.

古文：乃怒而责曰：敢以闲事，屡扰公门。
现代文：过不几天，这位老人又来了。张旭大怒责备老人说：你竟敢用闲事来屡次骚扰公堂？
English: A few days later, the old man came again. Zhang Xu angrily rebuked the old man, saying: "How dare you repeatedly harass the court with your idle talk?

古文：老父曰：某实非论事，覩少公笔迹奇妙，贵为箧笥之珍耳。
现代文：老人说：我实际上不是到你这理论事情来的。我是看到你批示状纸的字写得奇妙珍贵得可放在箧笥中收藏起来呀！
English: The old man said, "I didn't actually come here for your theory. I saw that the words on your order paper were so wonderfully precious that they could be placed in a book and collected!"

古文：长史异之，因诘其何得爱书。
现代文：张旭听后感到惊异，问老人为什么这样喜爱书法？
English: Zhang Xu was surprised after listening and asked the old man why he loved calligraphy so much.

古文：答曰：先父受书，兼有著述。
现代文：老人回答说：先父受过文化教育，还有著作遗留在世。
English: The old man replied, "My father received a cultural education, and his writings still remain.

古文：长史取视之，信天下工书者也。
现代文：张旭让他取来一看，方信老人的父亲确实是擅长书法的人。
English: Zhang Xu asked him to take a look. Fang Xin's father was really good at calligraphy.

古文：自是备得笔法之妙，冠于一时。
现代文：从此，张旭书法倍加长进，越发精妙，堪称一时之冠。
English: From then on, Zhang Xu's calligraphy became more and more refined. It was a crowning achievement.

古文：僧怀素
现代文：僧怀素
English: Monk Huai Su

古文：长沙僧怀素好草书，自言得草圣三昧。
现代文：长沙僧怀素喜爱草书，自己声称他深得草圣张旭笔法的奥妙。
English: Changsha Monk Huai always loved cursive, and he claimed that he was deeply familiar with the secret of the calligraphy of the sage Zhang Xu.

古文：弃笔堆积，埋于山下，号曰笔塚。
现代文：僧怀素学习书法用过的废笔成堆，埋在山下，称为笔塚。
English: The piles of waste pens used by monks studying calligraphy are buried under the mountain and are known as "pen mounds."

