古文：不力行，但学文。长浮华，成何人。但力行，不学文。
现代文：不能身体力行孝、悌、谨、信、泛爱众、亲仁这些道德准则，一味死读书，就会使自己陷入浮华不实的境地，这样我们怎能成为一个真正有用之人呢？
English: If we cannot practice the moral principles of filial piety, courtesy, honesty, sincerity, universal love and benevolence by our own efforts, and if we only read books, we will fall into a false and deceptive situation. So how can we become a truly useful person?

古文：任己见，昧理真。读书法，有三到。
现代文：如果我们只是一味地做事，不肯读书学习，就容易任性而为，蒙蔽真理。
English: If we just do things, and refuse to read and study, it is easy to be self-willed and blind to the truth.

古文：心眼口，信皆要。
现代文：读书的方法要注重三到，眼到、口到、心到，三者缺一不可。
English: The method of reading should pay attention to three things, the eyes, the mouth, and the heart, all of which are indispensable.

古文：方读此，勿慕彼。此未终，彼勿起。
现代文：正在读一本书的时候，不要欣羡、想看其他的书，这本书没读完，就不要去看其他的书。
English: When you are reading a book, don't admire it, don't want to read other books, and don't read other books until you finish reading this book.

古文：宽为限，紧用功。工夫到，滞塞通。
现代文：在订定读书计划的时候，不妨把读书期限定得宽松一些，实际执行时，就要加紧用功，严格执行，不可以懈怠偷懒。
English: When making a study plan, it is a good idea to set the study period loosely. In actual implementation, it is necessary to step up hard work, strictly implement, and do not slack off.

古文：心有疑，随札记。就人问，求确义。
现代文：日积月累功夫深了，原先窒碍不通，困顿疑惑之处自然而然都迎刃而解了。
English: After months and months of hard work, the original impasse was broken, and the difficulties and doubts were naturally resolved.

古文：房室清，墙壁净。几案洁，笔砚正。
现代文：读书时心里有疑问，应随时笔记，一有机会，就向良师益友请教，务必确实明白它的真义。
English: When reading, if you have any doubts, you should take notes at any time, and when you have a chance, ask your good teacher or friend for advice. Be sure to really understand its true meaning.

古文：墨磨偏，心不端。字不敬，心先病。列典籍，有定处。
现代文：书房要整理清洁，墙壁要保持干净，读书时，书桌上笔墨纸砚等文具要放置整齐，不得凌乱，触目所及皆是井井有条，才能静下心来读书。
English: The study should be tidy and clean, the walls should be kept clean, and when reading, the pens, ink pads, paper clips and other stationery on the desk should be placed neatly, not messy, and the contact points should be well-organized, so that you can calm down and read.

古文：读看毕，还原处。虽有急，卷束齐。有缺坏，就补之。
现代文：古人写字使用毛笔，写字前先要磨墨，如果心不在焉，墨就会磨偏了，写出来的字如果歪歪斜斜，就表示你浮躁不安，心定不下来。
English: The ancients used a brush to write. Before writing, the ink should be rubbed. If the mind is absent, the ink will be rubbed off. If the written word is crooked, it means that you are impetuous and restless, and your heart cannot settle down.

古文：非圣书，屏勿视。蔽聪明，坏心志。
现代文：书籍课本应分类，排列整齐，放在固定的位置，读诵完毕须归还原处。
English: Books and textbooks should be sorted, arranged neatly, placed in a fixed position, and must be returned to the original place after reading.

古文：勿自暴，勿自弃。圣与贤，可驯致。
现代文：虽有急事，也要把书本收好再离开，书本有缺损就要修补，保持完整。
English: Although there are urgent matters, you should also collect the books before leaving. If there are defects in the books, they should be repaired and kept intact.

