古文：夫道、德、仁、义、礼五者，一体也。
现代文：道、德、仁、义、礼五者，本为一体，不可分离。
English: The five elements of Tao, virtue, benevolence, righteousness and propriety are one and inseparable.

古文：道者，人之所蹈，使万物不知其所由。
现代文：道，是一种自然规律，是宇宙运动和社会平衡的准则，人人都在遵循著自然规律，自己却意识不到这一点，自然界万事万物亦是如此。
English: Tao is a law of nature, a guideline for the movement of the universe and the balance of society. Everyone is following the laws of nature, but they are not aware of it, and the same is true for everything in nature.

古文：德者，人之所得，使万物各得其所欲。
现代文：德，就是指人顺应自然的安排而各有所得，它支配万物，使万物各得其所而尽其所能。
English: Virtue means that people should conform to the arrangement of nature and each should get something. It governs all things, so that all things can get what they want and do their best.

古文：仁者，人之所亲，有慈慧恻隐之心，以遂其生存。义者，人之所宜，赏善罚恶，以立功立事。
现代文：礼，待人处世的礼仪和礼节，是文明的象征。讲究礼仪既是个人修养的体现，也是对别人的尊重。
English: Etiquette, the manners and etiquette of dealing with people, is a symbol of civilization. Paying attention to etiquette is both a reflection of personal cultivation and respect for others.

古文：礼者，人之所履，夙兴夜寐，以成人伦之序。
现代文：人人必须遵循礼的规范，兢兢业业，夙兴夜寐，按照君臣、父子、夫妻、兄弟等人伦关系所排列的顺序行事。
English: Everyone must follow the norms of etiquette, work conscientiously, sleep soundly, and act in accordance with the order of the monarch-servant, father-son, husband-wife, brother-sister and other ethical relationships.

古文：夫欲为人之本，不可无一焉。
现代文：这五个条目是做人的根本，缺一不可的。
English: These five items are fundamental to being human and are indispensable.

古文：贤人君子，明于盛衰之道，通乎成败之数，审乎治乱之势，达乎去就之理。
现代文：贤明能干的人物，品德高尚的君子，都能看清国家兴盛、衰弱、存亡的道理，通晓事业成败的规律，明白社会政治修明与纷乱的形势，懂得隐退仕进的原则。
English: A wise and capable person, a gentleman of high moral character, can clearly see the reason for the country's prosperity, weakness, and survival, understand the laws of success and failure of the cause, understand the situation of social and political reform and turmoil, and understand the principle of retreat and advance.

古文：故潜居抱道以待其时。
现代文：因此，当条件不适宜之时，都能默守正道，甘于隐伏，等待时机的到来。
English: Therefore, when the conditions are not suitable, they can keep to the right path, be willing to hide, and wait for the opportunity to come.

古文：若时至而行，则能极人臣之位；
现代文：一旦时机到来而有所行动，常能建功立业位极人臣。
English: Once the time comes to take action, it is often a very important person who can make contributions.

古文：得机而动，则能成绝代之功。
现代文：看破玄机，顺势而为则能成就绝世之功。
English: To see through the riddle, and to act in accordance with the trend, can achieve extraordinary results.

古文：如其不遇，没身而已。
现代文：假如生不逢时，只不过无闻于世而已，不会有大的损害。
English: If the birth is untimely, it will not be known to the world, and there will be no great damage.

古文：是以其道足高，而名重于后代。
现代文：也就因此，像这样的人物常能树立极为崇高的典范，名重于后世啊！
English: For this reason, figures like these are often able to set an extremely noble example, which is more important than posterity!

