古文：路铎，字宣叔，伯达子也。
现代文：路铎，字宣叔，是伯达的儿子。
English: Lu Lu, also known as Uncle Xuan, was the son of Bao Da.

古文：明昌三年，为左三部司正。
现代文：明昌三年，任左三部司正。
English: In the third year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, he served as the head of the Third Department of the Left.

古文：上书言事，召见便殿，迁右拾遣。
现代文：上书说事，皇帝在便殿召见他，任右拾遗。
English: The emperor summoned him to the emperor's residence to collect the relic.

古文：明年，卢沟河决，铎请自玄同口以下、丁村以上无修旧堤，纵使分流，以杀减水势。
现代文：第二年，卢沟河水决堤，铎提议从玄同口以下、丁村以上不修复原堤，放任让它分开流走，来减退洪水势头。
English: The following year, when the Lugou River burst its levee, Zou proposed not to repair the original levee from below Xuan Tongkou and above Ding Village, but to allow it to flow separately to reduce the flood momentum.

古文：诏工部尚书胥持国与铎同检视。
现代文：诏令工部尚书胥持国与铎同去察看。
English: He ordered the Ministry of Industry and Trade to inspect the document together with the State Council.

古文：章宗将幸景明宫，是岁民饥，不可行。
现代文：章宗将到景明宫，这年民饥，不适合去。
English: Zhang Zong will go to Jingming Palace, this year the people are hungry, it is not suitable to go.

古文：御史中丞董师中上书谏，铎与左补阙许安仁继之，赐对御阁。
现代文：御史中丞董师中上书规劝，铎与左补阙许安仁接着规劝，请到御谈话。
English: Gushizhongzheng, Dong Shi, Zhong Shangshu, exhorted, followed by  and Zuo Shu Xu Anren, exhorted, please come to talk to you.

古文：诏尚书省曰： 朕不禁暑热，欲往山后。
现代文：诏令尚书省说 ：我受不住夏日的炎热，想去山后。
English: I can't stand the summer heat, I want to go to the back of the mountain.

古文：今台谏言民间多阙食，朕初不尽知，既已知之，其忍自奉以重困民哉。 
现代文：现在台谏说民间多缺食，我开始不完全知道，既已知之，怎么忍心因自己生活享用来加重百姓的困苦呢！ 
English: Now that Taiwan's Central Government says that many people are short of food, I am beginning to not fully understand. Knowing this, how can I bear to aggravate the hardships of the people by enjoying my own life?

古文：乃罢行。
现代文：于是停止了行动。
English: Then the action stopped.

古文：尚书左丞完颜守贞每论政事，守正不移，与同列不合，罢知东平府事，台谏因而挤之。
现代文：尚书左丞完颜守贞每论政事，坚持己见，与同事不合，免为知东平府事，台谏因此排挤他。
English: Shang Shuzhu Zuorong, who always kept a low profile in politics, insisted on his own views, and disagreed with his colleagues, so that he would not interfere in the affairs of Zhidongping Prefecture. As a result, the Taiwan authorities ousted him.

古文：铎上书论守贞贤，可复用，其言太切，召对于崇政殿。
现代文：铎上书评论守贞的贤，可重用。其言太急切，召他到崇政殿回答。
English: The letter criticizing the virtue of keeping chastity can be reused. His words were too urgent, and he was called to answer at the Suisho-den.

古文：既而章宗以铎书语大臣，于是尚书左丞乌林答愿、参知政事夹谷衡、胥持国奏路铎以梁冀比右丞相，所言狂妄，不称谏职。
现代文：不久章宗把铎书告诉大臣，在这时尚书左丞乌林答愿、参知政事夹谷衡、胥持国奏路铎用梁冀比右丞相，所言太妄，当谏官不称职。
English: Soon after, Zhang Zong told the minister about the imperial edict. In this edict, Ulin, the left-hand eunuch, answered the eunuch's wish, and Liang Hebei, the right-hand eunuch, the minister of the political affairs, intervened. The edict was too presumptuous, and Liang Hebei was not qualified to be a eunuch.

古文：右丞相，夹谷清臣也。
现代文：右丞相，是夹谷清臣。
English: The minister of the right is Tsetsuya Kiyotomi.

古文：上曰： 周昌以杰、纣比汉高祖，高祖不以为忤。路铎以梁冀比丞相耳。 
现代文：皇上说 ：周昌用桀、纣和汉高祖相比，高祖不认为反上，路铎不过用梁冀比丞相罢了。 
English: The emperor said: Compared with the Han Emperor Gaozu, Zhou Chang used  and. Gaozu did not think it was better, but the way was to use Liang Ji as the prime minister.

古文：顷之，守贞入为平章政事。
现代文：不久，守贞入朝任平章政事。
English: Soon after, Morizane entered the imperial court and assumed the post of Taira no Shoji.

古文：五年，复与礼部尚书张暐、御史中丞董师中、右谏议大夫贾守谦、翰林修撰完颜撒刺谏幸景明宫，语多激切，章宗不能堪，遣近侍局直长李仁愿召凡谏北幸者诣尚书省，诏曰： 卿等谏北幸甚善，但其间颇失君臣之体耳。 
现代文：五年，铎又与礼部尚书张日韦、御史中丞董师中、右谏议大夫贾守谦、翰林修撰完颜撤剌规劝皇帝去景明宫，言辞大多急切，章宗不能忍受，派近侍局直长李仁愿召集所有规劝北上的大臣到尚书省，下诏说 ：你们规劝北去非常好，但其间颇失君臣之分罢了。 
English: In the fifth year, Zou, together with the ceremonial department Shangshu Zhang Rongwei, the imperial historian Zhongzheng Dong Shizhong, and the right eunuch deliberation doctors Jia Shouqian and Han Lin Xiu, completed the writing of Yan Jie and exhorted the emperor to go to Jingming Palace. Most of the words were eager, and Zhang Zong could not bear it. He sent the immediate chief of the personal attendant bureau, Li Ren, to convene all the ministers who advised the north to Shangshu, and said: Your advice to go north is very good, but it is quite a loss for the emperor and his subjects.

古文：是岁，郝忠愈狱起，事密，谏官不能察其详，议者颇谓事涉镐王永中，思有以宽解上意。
现代文：这年，郝忠愈官司发生，事密，谏官不能观察他的详情，议者多说事情牵涉镐王永中，想用什么来宽慰皇上的疑心。
English: In the same year, a lawsuit was filed against Gong Zhongyu. The matter was confidential, and the eunuchs could not observe his details. The councillors mostly said that the matter involved Gong Wang Yongzhong and what they wanted to use to ease the emperor's suspicions.

古文：右谏议大夫贾守谦上封事，铎继之，尤切直。
现代文：右谏议大夫贾守谦把奏书用袋封缄送上劝慰皇帝，铎跟着这样做，言词尤其急切坦率。
English: Dr. Jia Shouqian, the right-hand man of the council, sent the letter sealed in a bag to the emperor for consolation. The emperor did the same, and his words were particularly urgent and frank.

古文：上优容之，谓铎曰： 汝言诸王皆有觊心，游其门者不无横议，是何言也。
现代文：皇帝宽容他，对他说： 你说各王都有非份企图，和他们交往的人有放纵恣肆的言论，这是何言？
English: The emperor tolerated him and said to him, "What do you mean when you say that all kings have evil intentions, and that those who associate with them indulge in wanton talk?

古文：但朕不罪谏官耳。 
现代文：不过我不惩处谏官罢了。 
English: But I will not punish the eunuch.

古文：顷之，尚书省奏拟铎同知河北西路转运使事，诏再任右拾遗，谓宰相曰： 铎敢言，但识短耳。
现代文：不久，尚书省上书打算让铎担任同知河北西路转运使事，诏令再任右拾遗，对宰相说： 铎敢说，不过见识短浅罢了。
English: Not long after, the Ministry of Education and Culture sent a letter to the prime minister, saying that it planned to appoint Zou as the envoy for the transportation of Tongzhi to the west of Hebei Province, and ordered him to be reappointed as the right to collect relics. Zou said: "I dare say, but I only have a short-sighted view."

古文：朕尝诘责而气不沮。 
现代文：我曾经责备他但不丧气。 
English: I used to blame him but I didn't lose heart.

古文：铎因召对，论宰相权太重。
现代文：铎因事被召见对话，他评论说宰相权太重。
English: He was summoned for a dialogue on the matter, and he commented that the prime minister's power was too heavy.

古文：上曰： 凡事由朕，宰相安得权重。 
现代文：皇上说： 凡事由我，宰相怎么得以权重。 
English: The emperor said, "How can the prime minister weigh in when everything depends on me?"

古文：既而复奏曰： 乞陛下勿泄此言，泄则臣齑粉矣。 
现代文：不久又进言说： 请求陛下不泄此言，泄密的话我就粉身碎骨了。 
English: He soon added: "I beg you, Your Majesty, not to divulge this word. If I were to divulge it, I would shatter to pieces."

古文：上曰： 宰相安能齑粉人！ 
现代文：皇帝说： 宰相怎么能粉碎人。 
English: The emperor said, "How can the prime minister crush people?"

古文：至是，章宗并以此言告宰相，虽留再任，宰相愈衔之。
现代文：到这，章宗把前面说的话与这话一并告诉宰相，虽然留下再任，宰相更加恨他。
English: At this point, Zhang Zong told the prime minister what he had said before, and the prime minister hated him even more, even though he had been reappointed.

古文：改右补阙。
现代文：改任右补阙。
English: He was reappointed to the post of Right Assistant Vice-Premier.

古文：自完颜守贞再入相，以政事为己任，胥持国方幸，尤忌守贞，并忌铎辈。
现代文：自从完颜守贞再次为相，以政事为己任，胥持国正被宠幸，尤其忌恨守贞，并忌铎这批人。
English: Since Guan Yin and Shou Zhen took office again and took political affairs as their duty, Han Zhi Guo was favored. He especially hated Shou Zhen and shunned this group of people.

古文：铎辈虽尝为守贞论辨而不相附。
现代文：铎等虽曾为守贞申辩却不依附。
English: Although they had pleaded for the protection of chastity, they did not adhere to it.

古文：铎论边防，守贞以为掇拾唐人余论，皆不行。
现代文：铎评论边防，守贞认为是拾唐朝人说过的话，都不施行。
English: When commenting on the border defense, what Shou Zhen thought was said by the people of the Gupta Dynasty was not implemented.

古文：及守贞持镐王永中事久不决，铎等亦上言切谏，并指以为党。
现代文：等到守贞拿着镐王永中的案久不决断，铎等也进言恳切规劝，一起指责，他认为这是袒护。
English: When Shuzhen held the case of Wang Yongzhong for a long time without making a decision, Zou and others also made earnest exhortations and criticized together. He thought this was protection.

古文：上乃出守贞知济南府，凡曾荐守贞者皆黜降，谓宰臣曰： 董师中谓台省无守贞不可治，路铎、李敬义皆称举之者。
现代文：皇上于是让守贞出任知济南府，凡曾举荐守贞的官员都遭贬退降职，对宰臣说： 董师中说台省无守贞不可治，路铎、李敬义都是称赞荐举的人。
English: The emperor then appointed Shuzhen to serve as the governor of Jinan Province. All the officials who had recommended Shuzhen were demoted. He said to the vice-minister: "Tong Shi said that there is no Shuzhen in Taiwan Province, and both Lu Wei and Li Jingyi praised the person who recommended Shuzhen."

古文：然三人者后俱可用，今姑出之。 
现代文：可是这三人以后都还可用，如今姑且出外任职。 
English: However, all three will still be available in the future, even if they have to work outside the country.

古文：上复曰： 路铎敢言，甚有时名，一旦外补，人将谓朕不能容直臣。
现代文：皇帝又说 ：路铎敢说话，在现时十分有名，一旦外任，人们将说我不能容纳直臣。
English: The emperor also said: Lu Yao dares to speak, he is very famous at present, once he is out of office, people will say that I can't accommodate Naosuke.

古文：可选敢言及才识处铎右者。 
现代文：可以选敢言并且才能见识都比铎强的人。 
English: You can choose someone who is more outspoken and insightful than stubborn.

古文：参知政事马琪奏曰： 铎虽知无不言，然亦多不当理。 
现代文：参知政事马琪上奏说： 铎虽然知无不言，可是也有很多言论不合道理。 
English: Sanzhi political affairs Ma Qi said at the meeting: Although Zou knows nothing, there are also many unreasonable statements.

古文：上曰： 谏官非但取敢言，亦须间有出朕意表者，乃有裨益耳。 
现代文：皇上说 ：谏官不但要挑敢说的，也要时而有出乎我意想之外的话，这才对我有所帮助。 
English: The emperor said, "A eunuch should not only speak boldly, but also say things that are beyond my imagination from time to time. This will help me."

古文：于是，吏部尚书董师中出为陕西路转运使，铎为南京留守判官。
现代文：于是吏部尚书董师中出任陕西西路转运使，铎为南京留守判官。
English: As a result, Shang Shuzhong, one of the directors of the Personnel Department, served as the Shaanxi West Road transfer envoy, and Zou was the judge in Nanjing.

古文：户部郎中李敬义方使高丽还，即出为安化军节度副使。
现代文：户部郎中李敬义刚出使高丽回来，立即出任安化军节度副使。
English: Li Jingyi, a retainer of the Household Division, had just returned from a mission to Korea and immediately assumed the post of deputy envoy of the Anhua Army.

古文：诏曰： 卿等昨来交荐守贞公正可用，今坐所举失实耳。 
现代文：诏书说 ：你等原来一起推荐守贞公正可用，如今犯了所举失实罪罢了。 
English: The imperial edict said: You waited until you could recommend chastity and fairness together, but now you have committed the crime of misrepresentation.

古文：承安二年，召为翰林修撰，同看读陈言文字。
现代文：承安二年，召任翰林修撰，同看读报告文字。
English: In the second year of Cheng'an, Han Lin Xiu was appointed to write and read the report.

古文：上召礼部尚书张暐、大理卿麻安上及铎，问赵晏所言十事，因问董师中、张万公优劣。
现代文：皇上召礼部尚书张日韦、大理卿麻安上及铎，问赵晏所说的十事，趁着问董师中、张万公的好坏。
English: The emperor summoned the etiquette department's Shangshu Zhang Rongwei, Daliqing Ma'an Shang and Zou to ask Zhao Zou about the ten things he had said, and took the opportunity to ask the middle-ranking official, Zhang Wankong, how good or bad he was.

古文：铎奏： 师中附胥持国以进，赵枢、张复亨、张嘉贞皆出持国门下，嘉贞复趋走襄之门。持国不可复用，若再相，必乱纲纪。 
现代文：铎说： 师中依附胥持国做官，赵枢、张复享、张嘉贞都出自持国门下，嘉贞又奔走襄的门下，持国不可再用，如果再为相，必乱纲纪。 
English: Zou said, "The middle-ranking officials depend on the state to hold power, and Zhao Zu, Zhang Fucheng, and Zhang Jiazhen are all from the state to hold power, and Jiazhen is also from the state to hold power. The state to hold power cannot be used again, and if it is used again, the discipline will be disrupted."

古文：上曰： 朕岂复相此人，但迁官二阶使致仕，何为不可？ 
现代文：皇上说： 我怎么会又再拜他为相，只不过升官两级使他退休，为什么不可以呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "How could I worship him as a pharaoh again, except to promote him two levels and retire him, why not?"

古文：持国党闻之，怒愈甚。
现代文：持国的党羽听说此事，更加愤恨。
English: When the party members who hold the country heard about this, they became even more angry.

古文：改监察御史。
现代文：改任监察御史。
English: Reassigned to the post of inspector general of history.

古文：参知政事杨伯通引用乡人李浩，铎劾奏： 伯通以公器结私恩，左司郎中贾益、知除武郁承望风旨，不详检起复条例。 
现代文：参知政事杨伯通引进任用同乡人李浩，铎弹劾说： 伯通拿国家的东西谋取个人恩惠，左司郎中贾益、知除武郁料到神色意旨，没有详细地查验因故不能留任的官员起用条例。 
English: Yang Bertong, the political secretary of the party secretary, introduced and appointed Li Hao, a fellow villager, and said: Bertong took the country's things to seek personal favors, and the left sergeant, Zhong Jia Yi, did not check in detail the regulations for the appointment of officials who could not remain in office for some reason.

古文：涉妄冒，大夫张暐抑之不行。
现代文：涉及妄言冒犯，大夫张日韦抑制不办。
English: When it comes to offensive speech, Dr. Zhang Rongwei does not suppress it.

古文：上命同知大兴府事贾铉诘问。
现代文：皇上命同知大兴府事贾铉责问。
English: The emperor ordered Jia Jia to be held responsible for the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：张暐、伯通待罪于家。
现代文：张日韦、伯通在家等待惩处。
English: Zhang Rihwei and Bertong are at home awaiting punishment.

古文：贾铉奏： 近诏书诘问御史大夫张暐。
现代文：贾弦上报： 最近诏令责问御史大夫张日韦。
English: Jia Zhen reported: Recently, the imperial edict ordered to interrogate the chief historian Zhang Rongwei.

古文：暐言路铎尝禀会杨伯通私用乡人李浩。
现代文：日韦说路铎曾报告过杨伯通私用乡人李浩。
English: Sun Wei said that Lu Yao had reported Yang Bertong's private villager Li Hao.

古文：暐以为弹绌大臣，须有阿曲实迹，恐所劾不当，台纲愈坏，令再体察。
现代文：不过日韦认为检举贬退大臣，必须拿出曲意奉承的事实，否则怕所弹劾的不恰当，台省的管理更坏，叫他再察访。
English: However, Zhiwei believed that the minister who was demoted by the accusation must come up with the facts of flattery, otherwise, he would be afraid that the impeachment was inappropriate, and the management of Taiwan Province would be worse, and he would be asked to visit again.

古文：贾益言除授皆宰执公议，奏禀，不见伯通私任形迹。 
现代文：贾益说，授职都由主管官员共同商定，奏上报告，不见伯通私自任用官吏的形迹。 
English: Jia Yi said that all the appointments were jointly agreed upon by the competent officials, and a report was submitted. There was no sign of Bertone appointing officials in his own name.

古文：於是，诏责铎言事轻率，慰谕伯通治事如故。
现代文：于是下诏责备铎议论事情轻率，安慰告诉伯通像原来一样管理事务。
English: Therefore, the emperor reprimanded Zou for discussing the matter rashly, and consoled him by telling Bertone to manage the affairs as before.

古文：顷之，迁侍御史，主奏事。
现代文：不久，铎任侍御史，主管上奏事。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of courtier to the Emperor, in charge of reporting matters to the emperor.

古文：监察御史姬端修以言事下吏，使御史台令史郭公仲达意于大夫张暐及铎。
现代文：监察御史姬端因对属吏议论事情，让御史台令史郭公仲把意图转告给大夫张日韦和铎。
English: Due to the fact that the supervising magistrate, Ji Duan, discussed the matter with his subordinate officials, the magistrate ordered the magistrate, Guo Gongzhong, to convey his intention to the doctor, Zhang Rongwei.

古文：暐与铎奏事殿上，上问： 姬端修弹事尝申台官否？ 
现代文：日韦与铎在殿上说了这事。皇上问 ：姬端检举的事申报台官没有？ 
English: The Emperor asked: Did Hieda report the matter to the Taiwanese officials?

古文：对曰： 尝来面议。 
现代文：回答说： 曾来面议。 
English: He replied: "I have come to discuss it."

古文：端修款伏乃云： 只曾与侍御私议，大夫不知也。 
现代文：端招承伏罪，于是说 ：只曾经和侍御私下商议，大夫是不知道的。 
English: He confessed to the crime of lying in wait, and then said: I only had a private discussion with the waiter, but the doctor didn't know about it.

古文：既而端修杖七十收赎，公仲杖七十替罢。
现代文：不久端杖责七十收捕赎罪，公仲杖责七十停职。
English: Soon after, he was arrested and sentenced to 70 years in prison to atone for his crime, and suspended from his post.

古文：暐、铎坐奏事不实，暐追一官，铎两官，皆解职。
现代文：日韦、铎因犯议事不实罪，日韦夺走一级官职，铎追回两级，都解除职务。
English: Both Sun Wei and Zou were relieved of their duties for committing the crime of deliberation fraud. Sun Wei took away the first-level official post, while Zou recovered the second-level post.

古文：顷之，起为泰定军节度副使。
现代文：不久，起用为泰定军节度副使。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the deputy envoy of the Thai Army.

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 凡言事者，议及朕躬亦无妨，语涉宰相，间有憎嫌，何以得进？ 
现代文：上对宰臣说： 凡是议事的，评论到我头上也不要紧，如果言语涉及宰相，之间有了隔阂，用什么得以提拔？ 
English: The superior said to the prime minister, "It doesn't matter what is discussed or commented on my head. If the words involve the prime minister, and there is a rift between them, how can I be promoted?

古文：诏左司计铎资考至正五品，即除东平府治中。
现代文：诏令左司统计铎的资历认定为正五品，立即授职东平府治中。
English: It was decreed that the seniority of the Left Division of the Statistics Office was recognized as the official fifth grade, and the post of Dongping Prefecture Junior High School was immediately conferred.

古文：未几，景州阙刺史，尚书省已奏郭歧为之，诏特改铎为景州刺史，仍勿送审官院。
现代文：没多久，景州缺刺史，尚书省已上奏让郭歧担任，命令特别改任铎为景州刺史，因而不送审官院审查。
English: Not long after, Gyeongju was in need of a historian, and the Ministry of Education and Culture had been petitioning to have Guo Gui appointed to the post, ordering him to be specially appointed as the historian of Gyeongju, and therefore not sent to the Supreme People's Court for review.

古文：铎述十二训以教民。
现代文：铎讲了十二条准则用来教导百姓。
English: He gave twelve precepts to teach the people.

古文：诏曰： 路铎十二训皆劝人为善，遍谕州郡使知之。 
现代文：诏书说 ：路铎十二条准则都劝人为善，遍告各州郡让他们知道它。 
English: The edict said: "All the twelve principles of the Way are good, and they should be spread to every province and county to let them know it."

古文：迁陕西路按察副使。
现代文：升陕西路按察副使。
English: Sheng Shaanxi Road as the deputy envoy.

古文：坐以纠弹之官与京兆府治中蒲察张铁、总管判官辛孝俭、推官爱剌宴饮，夺路一官解职。
现代文：因犯了督察检举的官员和京兆府治中蒲察张铁、总管判官辛孝俭、推官爱剌设宴饮酒的罪名，夺取官位一级，解除职务。
English: For having committed the crime of drinking alcohol at a banquet hosted by the official who was reported by the inspector, and the Beijing Zhao prefectural governor Zhang Tie, the chief magistrate Xin Xiaojian, and the governor Ai Weiwei, he was stripped of his first-class official rank and relieved of his duties.

古文：泰和六年，召为翰林待制兼知登闻鼓院，累除孟州防御使。
现代文：泰和六年，召为翰林待制兼知登闻鼓院，递升孟州防御使。
English: In the sixth year of Taihe, he was called to the Hanlin standby system and the Zhidongwen Drum Academy, and was promoted to the Mengzhou defense envoy.

古文：贞祐初，城破，投沁水死。
现代文：贞初，城破，投沁水自杀。
English: At the beginning of her reign, she broke the city and committed suicide by throwing herself into the river.

古文：铎刚正，历官台谏，有直臣之风。
现代文：铎刚正，大多出任台谏官，有正直臣子的风范。
English: They were upright and most of them served as eunuchs in Taiwan and had the demeanor of honest courtiers.

古文：为文尚奇，诗篇温润精致，号《虚舟居士集》云。
现代文：做文章崇尚奇异，诗篇温润精致，称《虚舟居士集》。
English: The essays are bizarre, the poems are warm and delicate, and they are called "The Collection of Householders of the Fictitious Boat."

古文：完颜伯嘉字，辅之，北京路讹鲁古必剌猛安人。
现代文：完颜伯嘉，字辅之，北京路讹鲁古必剌猛安人。
English: After the completion of Yan Bo Jia and Zhe Zu, Beijing Lu Gu will be a fierce and vigorous person.

古文：明昌二年进士，调中都左警巡判官。
现代文：明昌二年中进士，调任中都左警巡判官。
English: He entered the middle school in the second year of Mingchang and was transferred to the left police inspector in the middle school.

古文：孝懿皇后妹晋国夫人家奴买漆不酬直，伯嘉钩致晋国用事奴数人系狱。
现代文：孝懿皇后妹晋国夫人家奴买漆不付钱，伯嘉把牵连到的晋国办事家奴数人拘押入狱。
English: The filial daughter of the empress's younger sister, the wife of Jin Guo, did not pay for the paint, and Bo Jia detained several of the Jin Guo clerks who were implicated.

古文：晋国白章宗，章宗曰： 姨酬其价，则奴释矣。 
现代文：晋国告诉章宗，章宗说： 姨付他的钱，那么家奴就释放了。 
English: Jin Guo told Zhang Zong, Zhang Zong said: Aunt paid him the money, then the family slave was released.

古文：由是豪右屏迹。
现代文：由此，强横的人避匿。
English: Therefore the violent man fleeth.

古文：改宝坻丞。
现代文：改任宝坻丞。
English: He was reassigned to the post of Baojunzheng.

古文：补尚书省令史，除太学助教、监察御史。
现代文：补任尚书省令史，又升太学助教、监察御史。
English: He was appointed as the director of the history department of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and was promoted to assistant professor and supervisor of the history department.

古文：劾奏平章政事仆散揆。
现代文：上书抨击平章政事仆散揆。
English: The petition was written in criticism of Pingzhang's political servant, Sanzhao.

古文：或曰： 与宰相有隙，奈何？ 
现代文：有人说： 与宰相发生矛盾，为什么？ 
English: Some people say: Why is there a conflict with the Prime Minister?

古文：伯嘉曰： 职分如此。 
现代文：伯嘉说 ：职责是这样。 
English: She said: "That's what duty is.

古文：迁平凉治中。累官莒州刺史。
现代文：任平凉治中，递升官为莒州刺史。
English: During Renping Liangzhi's reign, he was promoted to be the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：谳属县盗，伯嘉曰： 饥寒为盗，得钱二千，经月不使一钱云何？
现代文：审理属县抢劫犯，伯嘉说： 人说饥寒为盗，如今他抢了二千钱，过月不用一钱说明什么？
English: The trial belongs to the county robber, said Bo Jia: People say that hunger and cold are theft, now he has robbed two thousand money, and he does not have to explain a single money in the next month?

古文：此必官兵捕他盗不获，诬以准罪耳。 
现代文：此必官兵捕他盗不获，捏造罪状来定罪罢了。 
English: Therefore, the officers and soldiers could not catch him stealing, so they had to fabricate charges to convict him.

古文：诘之，果然。
现代文：责问他们，果是如此。
English: Blame them, that's what it is.

古文：诏与按察官俱推排物力，召见于香阁。
现代文：诏令与按察官一起调查编排户籍和百姓收入状况表，在香被召见。
English: He was summoned to appear in Xiang after he and the procurator investigated and compiled the household registration and people's income status table.

古文：大安中，三迁同知西京留守，权本路安抚使。
现代文：大安中，三次任同知西京留守，代理本路安抚使。
English: In the middle of the Taian era, Tongzhi stayed in West Beijing for the third time, acting as a pacifying envoy.

古文：贞祐初，迁顺义军节度使。
现代文：贞初，升任顺义军节度使。
English: At the beginning of the year, he was promoted to the position of the Shunyi Army's military governor.

古文：居父母丧，卒哭，起复震武军节度使兼宣抚副使，提控太和岭诸隘。
现代文：在家守父母丧，百日后，起用为震武军节度使兼宣抚副使，提控太和岭各险要关口。
English: At home, he attended his parents' funeral. One hundred days later, he was appointed as the military envoy and deputy envoy of the Shock Troops to take control of all the dangerous passes in Taiheiling.

古文：副统李鹏飞诬杀彰国军节度使牙改，诏伯嘉治之。
现代文：副统李鹏飞陷害杀死彰国军节度使牙改，诏令伯嘉处理这事。
English: Vice-commander Li Pengfei set up and killed Zhang Guojun's commander Jie Du, and ordered Bai Jia to deal with the matter.

古文：贞祐四年三月，伯嘉奏： 西京副统程琢智勇过人，持心忠孝，以私财募集壮士二万，复取浑源、白登，有恢复山西之志，已命驻于弘州矣。
现代文：贞四年三月，伯嘉上奏： 西京副统程琢智勇过人，持心忠孝，用私财募集壮士二万，再次夺取浑源、白登，有恢复山西的志向，已经命他驻扎在弘州了。
English: In March of the 4th year of Zhen, Bo Jia recited: The deputy leader of West Beijing, Zhuo Zhiyong, is an outstanding person, has a loyal and filial heart, uses his own money to recruit 20,000 strong men, seizes Hunyuan and Baidu again, has the ambition to restore Shanxi, and has ordered him to be stationed in Hongzhou.

古文：近者靖大中、完颜毛吉打以三千人归国，各迁节度副使。
现代文：前些日子靖大中、完颜毛吉打用三千人归附朝廷，各升为节度副使。
English: A few days ago, three thousand people from the middle school of Jing University and Mokichi Kanana were attached to the imperial court, and each was promoted to vice-minister of ceremonies.

古文：今山西已不守，琢收合余众，尽忠於国，百战不挫。
现代文：如今山西已经失守，琢聚集剩下的兵马，向国家尽忠，百战不败。
English: Now Shanxi has been lost, and Taku has gathered the remaining soldiers and horses to be loyal to the country and undefeated in a hundred battles.

古文：臣恐失机会，辄拟琢昭勇大将军，同知西京留守事，兼领一路义军，给以空名敕二十道，许择有谋略者充州县。 
现代文：我担心失去战机，就暂拟提琢为昭勇大将军，同知西京留守事，兼领一路义军，给姓名空缺的委任书十二道，许其选择有谋略的人补充州县官。 
English: I was worried about losing my fighter plane, so I tentatively proposed to be promoted to General Zhaoyong, who also stayed in West Beijing and led the rebel army all the way. I gave twelve letters of appointment with vacant names, allowing him to choose someone with a strategy to supplement the state and county officials.

古文：制可，仍赐琢姓夹谷氏。
现代文：下令许可，还赏赐琢姓夹谷氏。
English: Permission was granted, and the surname Taku Tsetsuya was also awarded.

古文：琢请曰： 前代皆赐国姓，不系他族，如蒙更赐，荣莫大焉。 
现代文：琢请求说： 前代都赏赐国姓，没有归附他族的，如蒙换赐国姓，荣耀没有大于这了。 
English: Taku pleaded, "For those who were given surnames in previous generations, but did not join other clans, there is no greater honor than being given a new surname.

古文：诏更赐完颜氏。
现代文：诏令改赐姓为完颜氏。
English: The imperial edict changed the family name to Kanen.

古文：是月，伯嘉迁元帅左监军，知太原府事，河东北路宣抚使。
现代文：这月，伯嘉升元帅左监军，知太原府事、河东北路宣抚使。
English: This month, Bo Jia was promoted to Marshal of the Left Supervision Army, Chitahara Prefectural Affairs, and He Dongbei Road Proclamation Envoy.

古文：以同知太原府斡勒合打为彰国军节度使、宣抚副使。
现代文：用同知太原府斡勒合打为彰国军节度使、宣抚副使。
English: He was appointed as the military envoy of the Shogunate and the vice-envoy of the proclamation of the emperor.

古文：六月，斡勒合打奏： 同知西京留守完颜琢恃与宣抚使伯嘉雅善，徙居代州，肆为侵掠。
现代文：六月，斡勒合打上书： 同知西京留守完颜琢仗着与宣抚使伯嘉很好，迁移到代州居住，肆意侵犯抢掠。
English: In June, the magistrate wrote in a letter: After staying in Xijing for a long time, he and the procurator thought about how to treat Bo Jia well, moved to live in Daizhou, and wantonly invaded and plundered.

古文：遥授太原治中，权坚州刺史完颜斜烈私离边面，臣白伯嘉，伯嘉不悦，遣臣护送粮运于代州。
现代文：遥授太原治中、代理坚州刺史完颜斜烈私离边界，我告诉伯嘉，伯嘉不高兴，派臣护送粮草到代州。
English: After the remote teaching of Taiyuan Zhizhong and the agent of Jianzhou Zhishi left the border, I told Bo Jia that Bo Jia was not happy and sent a minister to escort the grain and grass to Daizhou.

古文：臣请益兵，乃以羸卒数百见付，半无铠仗。
现代文：我请求增兵，就用弱兵几百交给，一半没有铠甲兵器。
English: When I asked for more troops, they gave me a few hundred weak soldiers, half of whom did not have armor.

古文：臣复为言，伯嘉怒臣，榜掠几死。
现代文：我又因为说这事，伯嘉怒臣，几乎把我拷打死。
English: I was almost tortured to death for saying this, because of Berjaya's anger.

古文：臣立功累年，颇有寸效，伯嘉挟私陵轹，无复宣抚同僚之礼。
现代文：我长年立功，很有些小成绩，伯嘉挟私仇欺压我，不再给我宣抚使同事之礼。
English: I have been doing meritorious work for many years, but I have some small achievements. Bo Jia is holding a personal grudge against me and no longer gives me the courtesy of a colleague.

古文：臣欲不言，恐他日反为所诬，无以自明。 
现代文：我要不说，担心他日反而被诬告，不能自己辩明。 
English: Needless to say, he cannot defend himself for fear of being falsely accused.

古文：上问宰臣，奏曰： 太原重镇，防秋在迩，请敕谕和解。 
现代文：皇上问宰臣，宰臣说： 太原是重镇，防秋就在近前，请下令告诉和解。 
English: The emperor asked the vice-minister, and the vice-minister said: Taiyuan is an important town, the autumn prevention is near, please order to tell the reconciliation.

古文：诏曰： 太原兵冲，若以私忿废国事，国家何赖焉！
现代文：诏书说： 太原军事要道，如果因个人私怨废弃国家大事，国家还依靠什么？
English: The edict said: Taiyuan is an important military road, if the national event is abandoned due to personal grudges, what can the country still rely on?

古文：卿等同心戮力，以分北顾之忧，无执前非，误大计也。 
现代文：你们应同心尽力，来分担来自北方的忧患，不要坚持先前非难，误了大计。 
English: You should make concerted efforts to share the sorrow from the north, do not insist on the previous criticism, and miss the plan.

古文：七月，伯嘉改知归德府事，合打改武宁军节度使。
现代文：七月伯嘉改知归德府事，合打改任武宁军节度使。
English: In July, Bo Jia was transferred to the German prefectural government, and he was appointed as the festival envoy of the Wu Ning Army.

古文：御史台奏： 宣抚副使合打诉元帅伯嘉以私忿加箠楚，令本台廉问，既得其事，遂不复穷治。
现代文：御史台奏： 宣抚副使合打上告元帅伯嘉因个人怨愤加以杖刑，命令本台察访，现既然出了这事，竟不再追究惩处。
English: Historian: The Vice-Minister of Propaganda complained to Marshal Bo Jia that he was punished with a cane because of personal resentment, and ordered this station to investigate. Now that this has happened, there is no longer any investigation into the punishment.

古文：若合打奏实，伯嘉安得无罪，伯嘉无罪，合打合坐欺罔，乞审正是非，明示黜陟。 
现代文：如果合打说的是事实，伯嘉怎么能够无罪，伯嘉无罪，合打应当犯欺骗罪，请求审查，纠正是非，明确显示官吏的升降标准。 
English: If what Hetai said is true, how can Berjaya be innocent, Berjaya is not guilty, Hetai should commit the crime of deception, request a review, correct the wrongdoing, and clearly show the promotion and demotion standards of officials.

古文：宣宗曰： 今正防秋，且已。 
现代文：宣宗说： 现在正是防秋，暂且停止追查吧。 
English: Xuanzong said: Now is the time to prevent the autumn, let's temporarily stop the investigation.

古文：初，河东行省胥鼎奏： 完颜伯嘉屡言同知西京留守兼台州刺史完颜琢，可倚之以复山西，朝廷迁官赐姓，令屯代北，扼太和岭。
现代文：当初，河东行省胥鼎进言： 完颜伯嘉屡次说同知西京留守兼台州刺史完颜琢，可倚仗他收复山西，朝廷升官赐姓，令屯代北，扼守太和岭。
English: At the beginning, Zhaoding, the governor of Hedong Province, made the following suggestion: Zhan Yan Bai Jia had repeatedly said that Zhan Yan Bai Jia, who stayed in West Beijing and lived in Taizhou, had a perfect record. He could be relied on to recover Shanxi, be promoted by the imperial court, be given a surname, be assigned to the north of Tuen Mun, and keep a tight grip on Taihe Ling.

古文：今闻诸隘悉无琢兵，盖琢挈太原之众，保五台剽掠耳。
现代文：现在听说各隘口全都没有琢兵，大概琢领着太原人，保住五台抢劫罢了。
English: Now I've heard that there are no soldiers at all at each pass, probably the Taiyuan people are leading the way, and it's just a robbery to save Wutai.

古文：如尚以伯嘉之言为可信，乞遣琢出太原，或徙之内地，分处其众，以备不测之变。 
现代文：如还认为伯嘉的话可以相信，请求派琢离开太原，或者迁移到内地，分开安置他的部下，以防备不可预测的变化。 
English: If he still thought that he could trust Bo Jia's words, he would ask Paitogu to leave Taiyuan, or move inland, and place his subordinates separately to guard against unpredictable changes.

古文：宰臣奏： 已遣官体究琢军，且令太原元帅府乌古论德升召琢使之矣。
现代文：宰臣上奏 ：已派官亲临研究琢军，并令太原元帅府乌古论德升召琢使用他了。
English: Vice-Minister's report: An officer has been dispatched to study Taku's army in person, and has ordered the Taihara Marshal's Office to use Taku.

古文：当以此意报鼎。 
现代文：应当把这个意思报告鼎。 
English: This should be made clear.

古文：无何，德升奏： 琢兵数万分屯代州诸险，拒战甚力，其众乌合，非琢不可制。 
现代文：没有多久，德升汇报： 琢兵数万人分别驻扎在代州各险要地方，抵抗打仗非常尽力，那些人没有组织，不是琢不可以控制。 
English: Not long after, Desheng reported: Tens of thousands of Taku soldiers were stationed in various critical places in Daizhou. They did their best to resist the war. Those people were not organized and could not be controlled by Taku.

古文：胥鼎复奏： 宣差提控古里甲石伦言，琢方招降人，谋复山西，盘桓于忻、代、定、襄间，恣为侵扰，无复行意。
现代文：胥鼎再奏说 ：宣差提控古里甲石伦说，琢刚招降时，说是谋划恢复山西，现逗留在忻、代、定、襄之间，恣意侵扰，没有再走的意思。
English: Gong Ding Replay: Gu Li Jia Shi Lun said that when Taku Gang was recruited, he said that he was planning to restore Shanxi, and now he is staying between Zou, Dai, Ding, and Xiang, arbitrarily intruding, and has no intention of leaving.

古文：发掘民粟，并且。戕杀无辜，虽曰不烦官廪，博易为名，实则攘劫，欺国害民无如琢者。
现代文：他们发掘民粮，残杀无辜，虽说不麻烦官府供给，不过以换取为名，实则侵夺抢劫，欺国害民没有像琢的。
English: They unearthed grain for the people and killed innocent people. Although they did not bother the government to supply it, but in the name of exchange, they actually robbed and plundered, and there was no way to cheat the country and harm the people.

古文：石伦之言如此，臣已令帅府禁止之矣。 
现代文：石伦之言如此，我已命令帅府禁止他了。 
English: According to Shi Lun's words, I have ordered the General Headquarters to ban him.

古文：宰臣奏： 所遣官自忻、代来，云不见劫掠之迹，惟如德升言便。 
现代文：宰臣奏道 ：所派官从忻、代来，说没有看见劫掠的痕迹，只有按照德升的说法办。 
English: Zaisen Sonoda: The officials sent from the Shogunate and the Tokugawa Shogunate said that they did not see any signs of looting, and that they only acted according to Desheng's words.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：伯嘉至归德，上言，乞杂犯死罪以下纳粟赎免。
现代文：伯嘉至归德，上书说，请求让犯死罪以下的罪犯交粮赎免罪行。
English: In her petition, Hoja said that she wanted to return to Germany, and requested that criminals who had committed less than capital crimes should pay bread to atone for their crimes.

古文：宰臣奏： 伯嘉前在代州尝行之，盖一时之权，不可为常法。 
现代文：宰臣上奏： 伯嘉前在代州曾施行此法，是暂时的权宜之计，不可作为常法。 
English: Zaisenjo: This law was implemented in Daizhou before Hoja, it is a temporary expedient measure and cannot be used as a regular law.

古文：遂寝。
现代文：于是停止。
English: We'll leave it at that.

古文：俄改签枢密院事。
现代文：很快改任签枢密院事。
English: He was soon appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：未阅月，改知河南府事。
现代文：不到一月，改任知河南府事。
English: Less than a month later, he was transferred to the post of the governor of the Henan Province.

古文：是时，甫经兵后，乏兵食，伯嘉令输枣栗菜根足之，皆以为便。
现代文：这时，刚经过打仗后，缺少军粮，伯嘉命令运送枣栗菜根补充，都认为便当。
English: At this time, just after the war, there was a shortage of military food, and Bo Jia ordered the delivery of jujube root supplements, which was considered convenient.

古文：兴定元年，知河中府，充宣差都提控，未几召为吏部尚书。
现代文：兴定元年，知河中府，担任宣差都提控，没多久，召任吏部尚书。
English: In the first year of Xingding, Zhihe Zhongfu, as a proclamation officer, raised the control, and not long after that, he was summoned to the cadre department.

古文：二年，改御史中丞。
现代文：二年，改任御史中丞。
English: Two years later, he was reassigned to Goshi chujo.

古文：初，贞祐四年十月，诏以兵部尚书、签枢密院事蒲察阿里不孙为右副元帅，备御潼关、陕州。
现代文：当初，贞四年十月，诏令用兵部尚书、签枢密院事蒲察阿里不孙为右副元帅，防备抵御潼关、陕州之敌。
English: At first, in October of the 4th year of Zhen, the imperial command used the military department's official document, signed by the Privy Council, to appoint Pucha Ali Fusun as the right deputy marshal to guard against the enemies of Shaoguan and Shaanxi.

古文：次渑池土濠村，兵不战而溃。
现代文：临时驻扎在渑池土濠村，兵不战而溃。
English: Temporarily stationed in the village of Tsugaike, the soldiers were routed without a fight.

古文：阿里不孙逸去，亡所佩虎符，变易姓名，匿柘城县，与其妻妹前韩州刺史合喜男妇纥石烈氏及仆婢三人僦民舍居止。
现代文：阿里不孙逃去，丢失佩带的虎符，改变姓名，躲藏在柘城县，与他的妻妹前韩州刺史合喜儿媳纥石烈氏及仆婢三人租民房居住。
English: Ali Fusun ran away, lost the tiger emblem he was wearing, changed his name, and hid in Lucheng County. He lived in a rented house with his wife and sister, his former wife, his daughter-in-law, and three servants.

古文：合喜母徒单氏闻之，捕执纥石烈，断其发，拘之佛寺中。
现代文：合喜母徒单氏听说，捉拿纥石烈，断其发，拘禁在佛寺中。
English: According to the story, Hokimomutsuchan heard that they were going to capture and cut off his hair, and that he was being detained in a Buddhist temple.

古文：阿里不孙复亡去。
现代文：阿里不孙又逃去。
English: Ali Fusun ran away again.

古文：监察御史完颜药师劾奏： 乞就诘纥石烈及仆婢，当得所在。
现代文：监察御史完颜药师揭露说 ：请求责问纥石烈及其仆婢，应当能得到他所在的地方。
English: The inspector of the imperial history, pharmacist Kanyan, revealed: "If you ask for and interrogate Zou Shi Rong and his servants, you should be able to get to where he is."

古文：其妻子见在京师，亦无容不知，请穷治。 
现代文：他的妻子儿子听说在京师，也不是不知道，请求追究到底。 
English: When his wife and son heard that he was studying in Beijing, they did not hesitate to ask for a thorough investigation.

古文：有司方系其家人，特命释之，诏曰： 阿里不孙若能自出，当免极罪。 
现代文：有司正要拘其家人，特令释放。下诏说： 阿里不孙如能自首，当免死罪。 
English: The next edict said: "If Ali Fusun surrenders himself, he will be spared the death penalty."

古文：阿里不孙乃使其子上书，请图后效。
现代文：阿里不孙就让他儿子上书，请求带职赎罪。
English: When Ali's grandson refused, he asked his son to write a letter, asking him to take on the job to atone for his sins.

古文：尚书省奏： 阿里不孙幸特赦死，当诣阙自陈，乃令其子上书，犹怀顾望。 
现代文：尚书省奏道 ：阿里不孙有幸特令免死，应当到朝廷自首，却叫他的儿子上书，还怀藏观望。 
English: Shang Shuxuan said, "Ali did not have the privilege of having his grandson spared from death, and he should have surrendered to the imperial court, but he ordered his son to write a letter, and kept him waiting.

古文：伯嘉劾之曰： 古之为将者，受命之日忘其家，临阵之日忘其身，服丧衣、凿凶门而出，以示必死。进不求名，退不避罪，惟民是保。
现代文：伯嘉抨击说： 古时做将领的，接受命令那天起忘其家，临上阵那天忘其身，穿丧衣，在北墙凿一门出发，来表示必死的决心，进不求名，退不避罪，只保护百姓。
English: "As a general in ancient times, you should forget your home the day you receive an order, forget your body the day you go into battle, put on your mourning clothes, and set out to chisel a door in the north wall to show your death-defying determination. You should not seek fame, retreat, or avoid sin, but only protect the people.

古文：阿里不孙膺国重寄，握兵数万，未阵而溃，委弃虎符，既不得援枹鼓以死敌，又不能负斧锧而请罪，逃命窜伏，猥居里巷，挟匿妇人，为此丑行。圣恩宽大，曲赦其死，自当奔走阙庭，皇恐待命。
现代文：阿里不孙受国家重托，掌握几万士兵，没有列阵就溃逃，丢弃虎符，既不能拿起鼓槌击鼓拼死抵抗，又不能肩负斧钅质请求惩处，逃命藏匿，苟且居住里巷，挟带隐藏妇女，做这种丑行，圣恩宽大，委曲地赦免他死罪，自己应当急行到朝廷，惶恐地待命。
English: Ali Fusun was entrusted by the state to command tens of thousands of soldiers, he fled without forming a line, he threw away the tiger emblem, he could neither pick up the drumstick to fight to the death, nor could he carry an axe to ask for punishment, he ran away and hid, he lived in alleys, he kidnapped and hid women, to do such a vile act, he was graciously pardoned of the death penalty, he should rush to the imperial court and stand by in fear.

古文：安坐要君，略无忌惮，迹其情罪，实不容诛。
现代文：而他安坐不动要挟君主，丝毫没有顾忌，追究他的实罪，的确可杀。
English: But he sat still and threatened the monarch, without the slightest scruple. If his real crime is investigated, he can indeed be killed.

古文：此而不惩，朝纲废矣。乞尸诸市以戒为臣之不忠者！ 
现代文：这样还不惩处，朝纲要败坏了，请求把他陈尸集市来警戒为臣不忠者！ 
English: In this way, there is no punishment, the outline of the dynasty is corrupted, and it is requested that he be sent to the cadaver market to warn those who are disloyal!

古文：宣宗曰： 中丞言是，业已赦之矣。 
现代文：宣宗说： 中丞说得对，可是已经赦免他了。 
English: Xuan Zong said: Zhong Rong is right, but he has been pardoned.

古文：阿里不孙乃除名。
现代文：阿里不孙终被除去名籍。
English: Ali Fusun was finally removed from the family register.

古文：五月，充宣差河南提控捕蝗，许决四品以下。
现代文：五月，担任宣差河南提控捕蝗，允许判决四品以下官。
English: In May, he served as an envoy to Henan to raise control and catch locusts, allowing the judgment to be made by four officials.

古文：宣宗忧旱。
现代文：宣宗忧旱。
English: Xuan Zong is worried about the drought.

古文：伯嘉奏曰： 日者君之象，阳之精，旱乃人君自用亢极之象，宰执以为冤狱所致。
现代文：伯嘉奏说 ：太阳是君主的象征，阳的精华，干旱是君主极度主观行事的象征，宰执认为是冤狱所致。
English: Bo Jiaso said: The sun is the symbol of the monarch, the essence of the yang, and drought is the symbol of the monarch's extremely subjective actions, which the chief thought was caused by unjust imprisonment.

古文：夫燮和阴阳，宰相之职，而猥归咎於有司。
现代文：调和阴阳是宰相的职责，却苟且归罪有司。
English: It is the prime minister's duty to reconcile yin and yang, but he has been blamed for everything.

古文：高琪武弁出身，固不足论，汝砺辈不知所职，其罪大矣。
现代文：高琪出身武官，本来不足评论，汝砺等人不知道职责，罪行就大了。
English: Gao Qi, a former military attaché, did not know enough to comment, and Ru Wei and others did not know their duties, which was a big crime.

古文：汉制，灾异策免三公，顾归之有司邪。
现代文：汉代制度，遇到灾异应下策免去三公，现在反而归罪有司。
English: Under the Han Dynasty system, the Three Great Kings were exempted in the event of a natural disaster, but now they are blamed.

古文：臣谓今日之旱，圣主自用，宰相谄谀，百司失职，实此之由。 
现代文：我认为今天的旱灾，实在是因为君主主观行事，宰相奉承谄媚，各官署失职的缘故。 
English: I think that today's drought is really due to the subjective actions of the monarch, the flattery of the prime minister, and the dereliction of duty of various government agencies.

古文：高琪、汝砺深怨之。
现代文：高琪、汝砺深怨他。
English: Gao Qi, Ruzhen deeply resented him.

古文：礼部郎中抹捻胡鲁剌以言事忤旨，集五品以上官显责之。
现代文：礼部郎中抹睰胡鲁剌因论事违反圣意，皇上召集五品以上官公开加以指责。
English: The Emperor summoned officials of the Fifth Rank and above to publicly reprimand the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Maggot Hululun, for speaking against the sacred will.

古文：明日，伯嘉谏曰： 自古帝王莫不欲法尧、舜而耻为桀、纣，盖尧、舜纳谏，桀、纣拒谏也。
现代文：第二天，伯嘉劝谏说： 自古帝王无不以尧、舜为榜样而耻做桀、纣，因为尧、舜接受意见，桀、纣拒绝规劝。
English: The next day, Bo Jia advised him, "Since ancient times, emperors have been ashamed to follow the example of Zhou and Zhou, because Zhou and Zhou accepted advice, while Zhou and Zhou refused to be persuaded.

古文：故曰： 纳谏者昌，拒谏者亡 。
现代文：所以说 听取意见的昌盛，拒绝规劝的灭亡 。
English: Wherefore it is said, He that hearkeneth unto counsel prospereth; but he that refuseth reproof perisheth.

古文：胡鲁剌所言是，无益于身，所言不是，无损于国。
现代文：胡鲁剌所说的对，对自己没好处，所说的不对，对国家没有损害。
English: What Huludao said was right, but not good for himself, and what he said was wrong, but not harmful to the country.

古文：陛下廷辱如此，独不欲为尧、舜乎？
现代文：陛下在朝廷上这样侮辱他，难道不想做尧、舜吗？
English: Didn't your majesty want to make a fool of him by insulting him like that in court?

古文：近日言事者语涉谤讪，有司当以重典，陛下释之。
现代文：前几天议事者说话涉及诽谤，有司用严刑判罪，皇上释放了他。
English: A few days ago, a councillor's speech involved defamation. A magistrate sentenced him to a severe punishment, and the emperor released him.

古文：与其释之以为恩，曷若置之而不问。 
现代文：与其释放他作为恩惠，不如放在一边不追究这件事。 
English: Rather than releasing him as a favour, it would have been better to leave the matter alone.

古文：宰相请修山寨以避兵，伯嘉谏曰： 建议者必曰据险可以安君父，独不见陈后主之入井乎？
现代文：宰相请求修建山寨用来避兵祸，伯嘉劝道 ：建议的人一定说据险可以使君父安全，难道没看见陈后主进入井中吗？
English: When the prime minister requested the construction of a cottage to avoid military disasters, Berjia advised: The person who suggested it must have said that the risk could make the prince safe. Didn't they see the queen mother Chen go into the well?

古文：假令入山寨可以得生，能复为国乎？
现代文：假如入山寨可以得生，能再得到国吗？
English: If you go into the cottage, can you survive, can you get the country again?

古文：人臣有忠国者，有媚君者，忠国者或拂君意，媚君者不为国谋。
现代文：人臣有忠国的，有媚君的，忠国的也许违背皇上的意思，谄媚君主的不替国家打算。
English: There are courtiers who are loyal to the country and those who flatter the prince. The loyal to the country may go against the emperor's will, but flattering the prince is not intended for the country.

古文：臣窃论之，有国可以有君，有君未必有国也。 
现代文：我私下论之，有国可以有君，有君未必有国。 
English: I privately argue that a country can have a prince, but a prince does not necessarily have a country.

古文：高琪、汝砺闻之，怒愈甚。
现代文：高琪、汝砺听说这事，怒气更大。
English: When Gao Qi and Ruxuan heard about this, they became even angrier.

古文：十二月，以御史中丞、权参知政事，元帅左监军，行尚书省、元帅府于河中，控制河东南北路便宜从事。
现代文：十二月，用御史中丞、暂代参知政事、元帅左监军的身份，行尚书省、元帅府到河中，控制河东南北路，斟酌事势，自行处理。
English: In December, with the status of the Vice-Minister of History, the Interim Vice-Governor, and the Marshal of the Left Supervision Army, he went to Shangshu Province and the Marshal's Office to control the north-south road in the middle of the river, and considered the situation and dealt with it on his own.

古文：兴定三年，伯嘉至河中，奏曰： 本路冲要，不可阙官，凡召辟者每以艰险为辞。乞凡檄召无故不至者宜令降罚，悉心干当者视所历升迁。 
现代文：兴定三年，伯嘉到河中，上奏说 ：本路是军事要冲，不可以缺官，凡是被征召的往往用艰险来推辞，请求凡是行文征召无故不到的应给予降职处罚，尽心办事掌管的看他经历升迁。 
English: In the third year of Xingding, Bo Jia went to the middle of the river and said in a speech: This road is a military key, and there must be no vacancies. Those who are conscripted often use hardships and dangers to excuse themselves, and request that those who are conscripted without reason should be given a demotion punishment, and those who are in charge should see him go through promotion.

古文：诏召不至者决杖一百，余如所请。
现代文：诏令经召不到的杖击一百，其他照所请的办。
English: The Imperial edict decreed that there would be one hundred strokes of the cane for those who could not be summoned, and the rest would be done as requested.

古文：廷议欲弃河东，其民以实陕西。
现代文：朝廷商议想放弃河东，迁移当地百姓充实陕西。
English: The imperial court wanted to abandon Hedong and relocate the local people to Shaanxi.

古文：伯嘉上书谏曰： 中原之有河东，如人之有肩背。
现代文：伯嘉上书谏道： 中原有河东，好比人有肩背。
English: Baojia Shangshu Road: The Central Plains have the eastern part of the river, which is like a person's back.

古文：古人云 不得河东不雄 ，万一失之，恐未易取也。 
现代文：古人说 不得河东不称雄 ，万一失去它，恐不容易取回。 
English: The ancients said: "Hedong should not be underestimated. If it is lost, it will not be easy to get it back."

古文：大忤宰执意。
现代文：又极大地违背了宰相的意思。
English: It also greatly violated the prime minister's intention.

古文：顷之，召还，罢为中丞。
现代文：不久，召回京城，免为中丞。
English: Soon after, he was recalled to Kyoto, but was not promoted to chujo.

古文：伯嘉入见，奏曰： 如臣驽钝，固宜召还，更须速遣大臣镇抚。 
现代文：伯嘉进朝拜见，上奏说： 像我才短力弱，本应召回，另外需要速派大臣镇守安抚。 
English: When she went to pay her respects to the emperor, she said, "As I am short-strength and weak, I should have been recalled. In addition, it is necessary to quickly dispatch a minister to pacify the town guards."

古文：宣宗深然之。
现代文：宣宗认为这很对。
English: Xuan Zong thinks this is quite right.

古文：伯嘉上疏曰： 国家兵不强，力不足以有为，财不富，赏不足以周众，独恃官爵以激劝人心。
现代文：伯嘉上疏说： 国家兵不强，力不足用来有所作为，财不富，赏不足用来周济大众，只靠官爵来激励人心。
English: Bo Jia Shangsuo said: The national army is not strong, the strength is not enough to make a difference, the wealth is not rich, the reward is not enough to help the public, and only the official nobility can inspire the people.

古文：近日以功迁官赴都求调者，有司往往驳之，冒滥者固十之，既与而复夺之，非所以劝功也。
现代文：前些天因为功劳升官到京城请求调派的，有司往往驳斥他们，假冒不实的诚然有十分之三，已经给了又夺走官爵，这样的做法不是用来激励立功的。
English: A few days ago, because of their meritorious promotion to the capital to request a transfer, there are often refute them. It is true that three-tenths of the fake ones have already given and taken away the official title. This practice is not used to encourage meritorious service.

古文：乞应军功迁官，宣敕无伪者即准用之。 
现代文：请求按军功升官，宣布命令没有假的立即允许任用他。 
English: Request a promotion based on military merit, declare the order is not bogus and immediately allow his appointment.

古文：又曰： 自兵兴以来，河北桀黠往往聚众自保，未有定属。
现代文：又说 ：从战争发动以来，河北凶悍狡猾之徒往往聚众自保，没有稳定的归属。
English: He also said: Since the war was launched, Hebei's fierce and cunning people have often gathered together to protect themselves, and there is no stable affiliation.

古文：乞赐招抚，署以职名，无为他人所先。 
现代文：请求赏赐招抚，给他们以官号，不为他人抢先这么做。 
English: Ask for a reward, give them a cuddle, give them a title, don't do it for others first.

古文：又曰： 河东、河北有能招集余民完守城寨者，乞无问其门地，皆超逾等级，授以本处见任之职。 
现代文：又说 ：河东、河北有能招集余民完守城寨的，请求不问他的门第地位，都超越原有等级，授给本处现任的官职。 
English: He also said: If there is anyone in Hedong and Hebei who can mobilize the remaining people to complete the defense of the walled city, please do not ask about his family status, they will exceed the original level and award the current official position to this office.

古文：又曰： 河中、晋安被山带河，保障关、陕，此必争之地。
现代文：又说 ：河中、晋安披山带河，保障关、陕，这是必争之地。
English: He also said: the middle of the river, Jinan, the mountainous belt of the river, the protection of Guan and Shaan, this is a must-win place.

古文：今虽残破，形势犹存，若使他人据之，因盐池之饶，聚兵积粮，则河津以南，太行以西，皆不足恃矣。 
现代文：如今虽然残破，地形高下平险之势依然存在，如果让他人占据它们，依靠盐池的富足，聚集军队积蓄粮食，那么河津以南、太行以西都不足依靠了。 
English: Today, although the ruins are in ruins, the terrain is still high and dangerous. If others occupy them, rely on the abundance of salt ponds, and gather troops to accumulate grain, then south of Kawazu and west of Taihang are not enough to rely on.

古文：四年秋，河南大水，充宣慰副使，按行京东。
现代文：四年秋，河南发大水，充当宣慰副使，巡行京东。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year, Henan Province was hit by a big flood, and he served as a vice envoy of consolation and paraded through Jingdong.

古文：奏曰： 亳州灾最甚，合免三十余万石。
现代文：上奏说： 亳州灾最重，应当免交三十余万石。
English: The report said: Bozhou suffered the heaviest damage, and should be exempted from paying more than 300,000 koku.

古文：三司止奏除十万石，民将重困，惟陛下怜之。 
现代文：三司只说去掉十万石，百姓将陷入悲惨境地，只有皇上能怜悯他们。 
English: The Three Departments only said that if they removed 100,000 stones, the people would be plunged into a miserable situation, and only the emperor could have mercy on them.

古文：诏治三司奏灾不以实罪。
现代文：诏令惩处三司不如实报告灾情的行为。
English: The edict punished the three departments for not accurately reporting the disaster situation.

古文：伯嘉行至蕲县，闻前有红袄贼，不敢至泗州。
现代文：伯嘉行至蕲县，听说前面有红袄贼，不敢到泗州。
English: When Baojia went to Lixian County, he heard that there were red bandits in front of him, so he did not dare to go to Luzhou.

古文：监察御史乌古孙奴申劾伯嘉违诏，不遍按视。
现代文：监察御史乌古孙奴申弹劾伯嘉违诏，没有全面巡视。
English: Supervisor Gu Shiwukusunnu petitioned to impeach Bo Jia for violating the edict and failing to conduct a comprehensive inspection.

古文：又曰： 伯嘉知永城县主簿蒙古讹里刺不法，沈丘令夹谷陶也受贿，匿而不发。
现代文：又说 ：伯嘉知道永城县主簿蒙古讹里剌违法，沈丘令夹谷陶也受贿，隐瞒不报。
English: He also said: Bo Jia knew that Yongcheng County's ledger was illegal, and Shen Qiu Ling Jie Gu Tao also took bribes and concealed it.

古文：前谷城县令独吉鼎术可尝受业伯嘉，伯嘉讽御史辟之。 
现代文：前谷城县令独吉鼎术可曾跟从伯嘉学习，伯嘉暗示御史征召他。 
English: Maetanecheng County's Lingering Duxijidingshu may have studied with Bo Jia, and Bo Jia hinted that he would be called up by the Emperor.

古文：诏有司鞫问，会赦免。
现代文：命令有司审问，适逢免罪。
English: A bench trial was ordered, which resulted in an acquittal.

古文：五年，起为彰化军节度使，改翰林侍讲学士。
现代文：五年，起用为彰化军节度使，改任翰林侍讲学士。
English: Five years later, he was appointed as the Changhua Military Governor and changed his title to the Hanlin Attendant Lecturer.

古文：伯嘉纯直，不能与时低昂，尝曰： 生为男子，当益国泽民，其他不可学也。 
现代文：伯嘉贤良正直，不能随波逐流，曾说： 生为男子，当益国泽民，其他不可学也。 
English: Bo Jiaxianliang was honest and could not go with the flow. He once said: "If you are born a man, you should benefit the country and the people, and you should not learn anything else."

古文：高汝砺方希宠固位，伯嘉论事辄与之忤，由是毁之者众。
现代文：高汝砺正在求宠固位，伯嘉议论事情总和他抵触，由此诽谤伯嘉的人很多。
English: Gao Rucheng is courting favor and consolidating his position, and Bo Jia always contradicts him when discussing things, so there are many people who slander Bo Jia.

古文：元光元年，坐言事过切，降遥授同知归德府事。
现代文：元光元年，因犯议事过激罪，降官遥授同知归德府事。
English: In the first year of the Genko era, due to committing the crime of excessive deliberation, he was demoted to the position of distant conferment and returned to the German prefectural government.

古文：二年三月，遥授集庆军节度使，权参知政事，行尚书省于河中，率陕西精锐与平阳公史咏共复河东。
现代文：二年三月，遥授集庆军节度使，代理参知政事，行尚书省在河中，率陕西精锐部队和平阳公史咏共同收复河东。
English: In March of the second year, he was appointed as the festival envoy of the Qing Army, acting as the chief adviser to the government, and led the elite troops of Shaanxi Province and the public history of Pingyang Province to jointly recover Hedong.

古文：顷之，伯嘉有疾。
现代文：不久，伯嘉有病。
English: Soon after, Bo Jia fell ill.

古文：六月，薨。
现代文：六月，逝世。
English: He passed away in June.

古文：伯嘉去太原后，完颜琢寓军平定石仁寨，权平定州刺史范铎以阎德用充本州提控。
现代文：伯嘉离开太原后，完颜琢军队寄住平定石仁寨，代理平定州刺史范铎用阎德用担任本州提控。
English: After Bo Jia left Taiyuan, his army stopped at Pingding Shizhenzhai, and the agent of Pingding County, Zhang Shi Fan Rongyi, took charge of the control of the county.

古文：匮土不能塞河决，有以也夫！
现代文：德用凶暴倔强，藏着奸谋，铎不能控制，曲意宽容庇护他。
English: Virtue is stubborn with ferocity, conceals treachery, cannot be controlled, and is protected by tolerance.

古文：完颜伯嘉以著功参大政，亦不能一朝而安，言之难也如是哉！
现代文：兴定元年，德用率领所管部队偷袭，杀琢及属吏程皀等百余人，于是占据石仁寨。
English: In the first year of Xingding, Denyo led the troops under his command to make a surprise attack, killing Zhuo and more than a hundred people, including the official Cheng Yao, and then occupied Shiren Village.

古文：术虎筠寿，所谓执艺事以谏者邪。
现代文：铎害怕，带着家里人逃奔太原。德用就占领平定州。
English: Shun was afraid and fled to Taiyuan with his family. Deyong occupied Pingding Prefecture.

古文：张炜，字子明，洺州永年人，本名燝，避章宗嫌名改焉。
现代文：二年十月，诏令杀死范铎。张炜，字子明，州永年人，本名火景，与章宗近音改名。
English: In October of the second year, Fan Qi was killed by the imperial edict. Zhang Qi, also known as Zi Ming, a native of Shou Yongnian, whose real name was Hu Jie, changed his name to Zhang Zong Xinyin.

古文：大定二十五年进士，调葭州军事判官，再迁中都左警巡使。
现代文：大定二十五年进士及第，调任葭州军事判官，第二次升中都左警巡使。
English: He was promoted to the rank of sergeant in his 25th year, transferred to the post of military judge in Zhangzhou, and was promoted to the second rank of middle-level left-wing police inspector.

古文：炜喜言功利，寡廉节，交通部民阎元翚，缙绅薄之。累官部员外郎。
现代文：炜好谈功利，缺少操守，交结部下的老百姓阎元踂，缙绅轻视他，递升官至户部员外郎。
English: He was good at talking about utilitarianism, lacked ethics, and mixed with the common people under him, but the gentry despised him and promoted him to the post of household department member.

古文：承安五年，天色久阴晦，平章政事张万公奏： 此由君子小人邪正不分所致，君子宜在内，小人宜在外。 
现代文：承安五年，天色长久阴晦，平章政事张万公奏道 ：这是由于君子小人邪正不分所造成的，君子应当在朝内，小人应该在外边。 
English: In the 5th year of Cheng'an, the sky was cloudy for a long time, and the political affairs of Pingzhang and Zhang Wankong were in full swing. Zhang Wankong said, "This is caused by the fact that there is no distinction between the gentleman and the villain. The gentleman should be inside the court, and the villain should be outside."

古文：章宗问： 孰为小人？ 
现代文：章宗问 ：谁为小人？ 
English: Zhang Zong asked: Who is the villain?

古文：万公对曰： 户部员外郎张炜、文绣署丞田栎、都水监丞张嘉贞虽有干才，无德而称，好奔走以取势利。
现代文：万公回答说： 户部员外郎张炜、文绣署丞田栎、都水监丞张嘉贞虽有才干，没有品行相称，喜欢各处活动来取得权势和财利。
English: Wankong replied, "Although the members of the Household Department, Wai Rong Zhang Ye, the Bureau of Engraving and Embroidery, and the Metropolitan Waterworks Supervisor, Zhang Jiazhen, are talented, they do not have commensurate morals, and they like to do activities everywhere to gain power and financial benefits.

古文：大抵论人当先德后才。 
现代文：大概评价人应当先德后才。 
English: Presumably, the evaluator should be German first.

古文：诏三人皆与外除，炜出为同知镇西军节度使事，转同知西京转运使事。
现代文：诏令三人都授外职，炜出为同知镇西军节度使事，转任同知西京转运使事。
English: According to the imperial edict, all three of them were assigned to foreign posts, and they were sent to Tongzhi Town as envoys for the Western Army Festival, and then transferred to Tongzhi Town as envoys for the transfer of the Western Capital.

古文：是时，大筑界墙，被行户工部牒主役事。
现代文：这时，广建边界城墙，他被行户工部下来的文书指定主管役事。
English: At this time, Guangjian built the border city wall, and he was designated as the supervisor by the document issued by the Department of Pedestrian Engineering.

古文：丁母忧，起复桓州刺史，奏请以盐易米事，且所言利害甚多，恐涉细碎，不敢尽上。
现代文：居母丧，起用任桓州刺史，上奏请求用盐换米事宜，且要说的问题关系重大，担心说得太细，不敢都写上。
English: His mother's death, the appointment of a Hanzhou historian, the request for salt to be exchanged for rice, and the issues to be discussed are of great importance. He is worried about being too detailed and does not dare to write them all down.

古文：诏尚书省曰： 张炜通晓人也，朕不敢缕诘，卿等详问之，毋为虚文。 
现代文：下诏尚书省说： 张炜明白人，我不敢过细追问，你们详细问他，不要做虚假文章。 
English: In the next edict, Shang Shuzhou said: Zhang Ye understands, I do not dare to ask too much, you should ask him in detail, do not make false articles.

古文：充宣差西北路军储，自言敛不及民，可以足用。
现代文：充任宣差西北路军储，自己说征收不到百姓，可以足用。
English: He is in charge of the Northwest Military Reserve, and he says that he cannot collect the money from the people, so he can use it.

古文：大抵募商贾纵其贩易，不问所从来。
现代文：大概广泛请来商人放任贩卖交易，不问来的地方。
English: Probably a place where merchants are widely invited and allowed to sell and trade without being asked.

古文：奸人往往投牒，妄指产业，疏邻保姓名，炜信之，多与之钱。已而亡去，即逮系邻保，使之代偿，一路为之疲弊。
现代文：奸人往往出示文书，乱指产业，说邻居保人的姓名，炜相信这些，大多给他们钱，不久逃走，就逮捕邻居保人，让他们代赔，一路为这疲弊。
English: The swindlers often show documents, randomly refer to the industry, say the name of the neighbor's guarantor, and believe these, most of them give them money, soon escape, arrest the neighbor's guarantor, let them pay compensation, all the way for this disadvantage.

古文：以故旧毡罽缯絮皮革折给军士，皆弃于道而去。
现代文：又用旧毡、缯絮、皮革折价给士兵，都扔在道上离去。
English: He also gave the soldiers old ploughshares, straw and leather at discounted prices, and they left on the road.

古文：岁余，改户部郎中，迁翰林直学士，俱兼规措职事。
现代文：一年以后，改任户部郎中，任翰林直学士，都兼任计划管理职事。
English: A year later, he was reappointed as a junior member of the household department and as a direct bachelor of Hanlin, both of which concurrently served as planning management positions.

古文：左丞相宗浩奏： 张炜长于恢办，比户部给钱三十万，已增息十四万矣。
现代文：左丞相宗浩上奏 ：张炜擅长理财，近来户部给钱三十万，已增息十四万了。
English: Zuojo Minister Munehiro reported: Zhang Ye is good at financial management. Recently, the household department has given 300,000 yuan, and the interest rate has increased by 140,000 yuan.

古文：请给钱通百万，今从长恢办，乞不隶省部，委臣专一提控，有应奏者，许炜专达，岁差干事官计本息具奏。 
现代文：请给流通钱百万，令从长扩展筹办，请求不要附属省部，听任专人提控，有应该汇报的，允许炜独自转达，每年派干事官计本息全部报告。 
English: Please give millions of circulation money, order the expansion of the preparation from the beginning, request not to be affiliated with the provincial department, let the special person take control, if there is something that should be reported, allow him to convey it alone, and send an officer to report all the principal and interest of the official account every year.

古文：上从其请。
现代文：皇帝听从他的请求。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong approved.

古文：泰和六年，伐宋，炜进银五千两。
现代文：泰和六年，伐宋，炜进献银五千两。
English: In the six years of the Taihe Dynasty, the Song Dynasty and the Song Dynasty, He Jin donated 5,000 taels of silver.

古文：诏曰： 汝干集资储，固其职也，毋令军士有议国家。
现代文：下诏说： 你办聚集资财储存的事，本来是职责，不让军士有议论国家的行为。
English: The next edict said: It is your duty to do the work of gathering and storing resources, and not to let the sergeants discuss the actions of the state.

古文：人之短汝，朕皆知之，惟能兴利，斯惟汝功。 
现代文：别人说你坏话，我都知道这些，能获得利，这就是你的功劳。 
English: People say bad things about you, I know all about that. If you can make a profit, that's to your credit.

古文：自西北路召还，勾计诸道仓库，除签三司事。
现代文：从西北路召回，办理结算各道的仓库，授予签三司事。
English: Recall from the Northwest Road, handle the settlement of the warehouse of each road, and grant the signing of the three departments.

古文：上问： 谁可代卿规措者？ 
现代文：皇上问 ：谁可以代替你规划筹办？ 
English: The emperor asked: Who can replace you in planning and organizing?

古文：炜举中都转运户籍判官王谦。
现代文：炜推举中都转运户籍判官王谦。
English: Wang Qian, the judge of household registration, was transferred in the election.

古文：谦至西北路，尽发炜前后散失钱物以巨万计，对狱者积年。
现代文：谦到西北路，全部揭露炜前后散失钱物用万万计算，面对讼事好几年。
English: He went to the Northwest Road and disclosed all the losses of money and goods with tens of thousands of yuan, and faced litigation for several years.

古文：大安三年，起为同签三司事。
现代文：大安三年，起用为同签三司事。
English: In the third year of Da'an, he was appointed as the co-signatory of the three departments.

古文：会河堡兵败，军士犹去张宣差刻我，欲倒戈杀之。
现代文：会河堡兵败，军士还说张宣差苛刻我们，想倒戈杀他。
English: After the defeat of Heihe Fort, the sergeant also said that Zhang Xuancha was harsh on us and wanted to kill him.

古文：累迁户部侍郎。
现代文：递升为户部侍郎。
English: He was promoted to the position of the head of the household.

古文：贞祐初。迁河北西路按察转运使。
现代文：贞初，任河北西路按察转运使。
English: At the beginning of the year, he was appointed as the transportation envoy of Hebei West Road.

古文：贞祐二年春，中都乏粮，诏同知都转运使事。
现代文：贞二年春，中都缺粮，诏任同知都转运使事。
English: In the spring of the second year of Zhen, there was a shortage of grain in Zhongdu, and Zhao Ren and Tongzhi Du were transferred to the mission.

古文：边源以兵万人护运通州积粟，军败死焉，平章政事高琪举炜代源行六部事。
现代文：边源用兵万人护运通州存粮，军败死在那里。平章政事高琪推举炜代源行六部事。
English: Bianyuan used ten thousand soldiers to escort the transportation of grain stored in Tongzhou, and the army was defeated and died there. Pingzhang Zhengji Gaoqi proposed that Xingyuan act on behalf of the six departments.

古文：以劳进官一阶，改河北东路转运使。
现代文：因劳苦加官一级，改任河北东路转运使。
English: Due to hard work, he was promoted to the first-level official, and was appointed as the transfer envoy of Hebei East Road.

古文：宣宗迁汴，佐尚书右丞胥鼎前路排顿，及修南京宫阙。
现代文：宣宗迁都到汴，辅助尚书右丞胥鼎前路安排住宿和修理南京宫阙。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong moved the capital to Handan, and assisted Shang Shuyuan in arranging accommodation and repairing the Nanjing Palace.

古文：无何，坐事降孟州防御使。
现代文：没有多久，因事犯罪降为孟州防御使。
English: Not long after, he was demoted to Mengzhou defense envoy due to a crime.

古文：三年，迁安国军节度使。
现代文：三年，升安国军节度使。
English: Three years later, he became a military attaché of the Sheng'an National Army.

古文：致仕。
现代文：退休。
English: Retired.

古文：宣宗初以炜有才，既察其无实，遂不复用。
现代文：宣宗开始以为炜有才能，已经察觉到他不诚实，就不再用。
English: Xuan Zong began to think that Zou was talented, and when he discovered that Zou was dishonest, he no longer used him.

古文：贞祐四年卒。
现代文：贞四年，去世。
English: Zhen four years, passed away.

