古文：张深，不知何许人也。
现代文：张深，不知是何地人。
English: Zhang Sheng, I don't know where he is from.

古文：明占候。自云，尝事苻坚，坚欲征晋，深劝不行，坚不从，果败。
现代文：通晓占卜之术，自称曾经侍奉苻坚，苻坚打算征讨东晋，张深劝他不要出兵，苻坚不听，果然失败。
English: Familiar with the art of divination, he claimed to have once served Yu Jian. Yu Jian planned to conquer the Eastern Jin, Zhang Sheng advised him not to send troops, Yu Jian did not listen, and failed.

古文：又仕姚兴为灵台令，姚泓灭，入赫连昌。
现代文：又仕宦姚兴为兰台令。姚泓灭亡后，落入赫连昌之手。
English: After the death of Yao Xing, it fell into the hands of He Lianchang.

古文：昌复以深及徐辩对为太史令。
现代文：赫连昌又以张深及徐辩同为太史令。
English: He Lianchang also appointed Zhang Sheng and Xu Yan Tong as Tai Shi Ling.

古文：统万平，深、辩俱见获，以深为太史令。
现代文：统万平定后，张深、徐辩都被俘，让张深做太史令。
English: After the unification was settled, Zhang Sheng and Xu Yan were both captured, and Zhang Sheng was made the Grand Historian.

古文：神二年，将讨蠕蠕，深、辩皆谓不宜行，与崔浩争于太武前。
现代文：北魏太武帝神瞏二年，准备讨伐蠕蠕国，张深、徐辩都说不应出兵，和崔浩在太武帝面前争执不下。
English: In the second year of the Northern Wei Emperor Taibu's reign of terror, Zhang Shen and Xu Yan both said that they should not send troops, and they couldn't help but argue with Cui Hao in front of Emperor Taibu.

古文：深专守常占，而不能钩深赜远，故不及浩。
现代文：张深专门依靠正常的占卜，而不能探索深奥的事理，所以比不上崔浩。
English: Zhang Sheng relied exclusively on normal divination, but could not explore esoteric matters, so he was no match for Cui Hao.

古文：后为骠骑军谋祭酒，著《观象赋》，其言星文甚备，文多不载。
现代文：后来做骠骑军谋祭酒，著有《观象赋》，文中星象天文非常详备，文字多不见记载。
English: Later, he became the commander of the imperial cavalry and authored "Observation Fu" (観象赋). The astrology and astronomy in the text are very detailed, and many of the words are not recorded.

古文：又明元时，有容城令徐路，善占候，坐系冀州狱。
现代文：又明元时，有容城县令徐路，擅长占候，受连累被关在冀州监狱。
English: In the Ming and Yuan Dynasties, Xu Lu, the governor of Rongcheng County, who was good at fortune-telling, was imprisoned in Jizhou Prison.

古文：别驾崔隆宗就禁慰问之，路曰： 昨夜驿马星流，计赦须臾应至。 
现代文：别驾崔隆宗到狱中慰问他，徐路说： 昨天夜间驿站的马匹如流星一样，估计赦免令不一会就要来到。 
English: Before driving Choe Ryong-jong to the prison to console him, Xu Lu said, "The horses at the stable were like shooting stars last night. I expect the pardon will come soon."

古文：隆宗先信之，遂遣人出城候焉，俄而赦至。
现代文：崔隆宗相信这话，于是派人出城等候，不多会赦免令来到。
English: Choe Ryongjong believed this, so he sent someone out of the city to wait. It was not long before the pardon came.

古文：又道武、明元时，太史令王亮、苏垣，太武时，破和龙得冯弘太史令闵盛，孝文时，太史赵樊生，并知天文。
现代文：又道武、明元时，太史令王亮、苏垣。太武时，攻破和龙，俘获冯弘太史令闵盛。孝文帝时，太史赵樊生，都通晓天文。
English: In the reigns of Emperor Daowu and Emperor Mingyuan, Taishi Ling Wang Liang and Emperor Sugaki were both experts in astronomy. In the reigns of Emperor Taibu and Emperor Mingyuan, Taishi Ling Wang Liang and Emperor Sugaki were both experts in astronomy. In the reigns of Emperor Daowu and Emperor Xiaowen, Taishi Ling Zhao Yansheng was an expert in astronomy.

古文：后太史令赵胜、赵翼、赵洪庆、胡世荣、胡法通等二族，世业天文。
现代文：以后太史令赵胜、赵翼、赵洪庆、胡世荣、胡法通等两个家族，世代从事天文。
English: Later, two families, including Taishi Ling Zhao Sheng, Zhao Ying, Zhao Hongqing, Hu Shirong, and Hu Fatong, were engaged in astronomy for generations.

古文：又永安中，诏以恆州人高崇祖善天文，每占吉凶有验，特除中散大夫。
现代文：又永安年间，诏令恒州人高崇祖精通天文，每次占卜吉凶都得应验，特意封为中散大夫。
English: During the Yong'an era, the Emperor decreed that the people of Hengzhou should hold Gao Chongzu in high esteem for his mastery of astronomy, and that every divination for good or evil should be fulfilled. He was specially sealed as a Zhongshan doctor.

古文：永熙中，诏通直散骑常侍孙僧化与太史胡世荣、太史令张宠、赵洪庆及中书舍人孙子良等在门下外省，校比天文书，集甘、石二家星经，及汉、魏以来二十三家经占，集五十五卷。
现代文：永熙年间，诏令通直散骑常侍孙僧化与太史胡世荣、太史令张宠、赵洪庆及中书舍人孙子良等在门下外省，校勘天文书籍，集中甘、石二家的星象经典，以及汉、魏以来二十三家占卜之术，编集为五十五卷。
English: During the Yongxi era, Sun Hui, who was a regular attendant of Sun Quan, along with the Grand Historian Hu Shirong, the Grand Historian Zhang Zha, Zhao Hongqing, and Sun Ziliang, a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, were under the tutelage of Sun Quan, and compiled 55 volumes of astronomical books, star classics of the two schools of Confucius and Shi, and 23 schools of divination since the Han and Wei dynasties.

古文：后集诸家撮要，前后所上杂占，以类相从，日月、五星、二十八宿、中外官及图，合为七十五卷。
现代文：后来又汇集各家提要，前后所用各种不同的占卜术，按类编纂，日月、五星、二十八星宿、中外官及图表，合为七十五卷。
English: Later, the compendium of all the different types of divination techniques, compiled by categories, including the sun and moon, the five stars, the 28 constellations, the Chinese and foreign officials, and charts, was compiled into seventy-five volumes.

古文：僧化，东莞人也。
现代文：僧化，是东莞人。
English: He was a monk and came from Dongguan.

古文：识星分，案文占以言灾异，时有所中。
现代文：认识星象，按文字占卜而预言灾祸奇异之事，多有言中。
English: Knowing the constellations, divining by means of the written word and predicting disasters and strange occurrences are common topics of conversation.

古文：普泰中，尔硃兆恶其多言，遂系于廷尉，免官。
现代文：普泰年间，朱兆厌恶他言多，就让廷尉把他逮捕，免去了官职。
English: During the Putai era, Zhu Zhao was disgusted by his many words, so he had him arrested by a court lieutenant and removed from office.

古文：灵远后罢道，姓荆字次德。求之，不知所在。李顺兴，京兆杜陵人也。
现代文：永熙年间，孝武帝召令僧化与中散大夫孙安都共同撰写兵法，没能完成而孝武帝进了函谷关，于是停止撰写。元象年间，死在晋阳。李顺兴，京兆杜陵人。
English: During the Yongxi period, Emperor Xiaowu summoned and ordered the monks to work together with Sun Andu, the doctor of Zhongshan, to write the law of war, but they were unable to complete it, and Emperor Xiaowu entered Hantuguan, so he stopped writing. During the Yuanxiang period, he died in Jinyang. Li Shunxing, the person of the Beijing Zhaotuling.

古文：年十余，乍愚乍智，时莫识之。
现代文：年十多岁时，忽愚忽智，当时人们都不了解他。
English: When he was more than ten years old, people did not understand him at that time.

古文：其言未来事，时有中者。
现代文：他预言未来事情，也时而相符。
English: He predicts future events, and sometimes they coincide.

古文：盛冬单布衣，跣行冰上及入洗浴，略不患寒。
现代文：隆冬季节穿着单薄布衣，光脚在冰上行走，到水中洗澡，一点也不患风寒。
English: In the middle of winter, wearing a thin cloth, walking barefoot on the ice, bathing in the water, and not suffering from wind chill at all.

古文：家尝为斋，方食，器用不周。
现代文：家中曾经设置斋饭，器具不够。
English: There used to be a yakitori set up at home, but there were not enough utensils.

古文：顺兴言： 昆明池中有大荷叶，可取盛饼食。 
现代文：李顺兴说： 昆明池中有一枝大荷花叶，可以取来放盛饼食。 
English: Li Shunxing said: There is a large lotus leaf in the Kunming pond, which can be used to put a lot of cake.

古文：其所居去池十数里，日不移影，顺兴负荷叶而归，脚犹泥，举坐惊异。
现代文：他的住处距昆明池有十多里，太阳没有移动影子，李顺兴背着荷叶回来了，脚上还有泥，满座的人都很惊奇。
English: His place of residence is more than ten miles away from Kunming Lake. The sun did not move a shadow. Li Shunxing came back with lotus leaves on his back. He still had mud on his feet. Everyone in the auditorium was surprised.

古文：后稍出城市，常冠道士冠，人有忆者，不过数日，辄至其家。
现代文：后来逐渐出入城市，常戴道士冠，有想念他的，不几天，就到他家。
English: Later, he gradually went in and out of the city, often wearing a Taoist crown. If someone missed him, they would go to his house within a few days.

古文：号为李练。
现代文：号称李练。
English: Known as Li Lian.

古文：好饮酒，但不至醉。
现代文：好喝酒，但不会喝醉。
English: Good to drink, but not to get drunk.

古文：贵贱并敬之。
现代文：富贵贫贱都很尊重他。
English: Rich and poor alike respected him.

古文：得人所施，辄散乞贫人。
现代文：得到别人的施舍，便散发给乞丐、穷人。
English: When they receive charity from others, they distribute it to beggars and the poor.

古文：萧宝夤反，召顺兴问曰： 朕王可几年？ 
现代文：萧宝夤造反，召李顺兴询问道： 我做王能有多少年？ 
English: Xiao Baozhen rebelled and summoned Li Shunxing to inquire: How many years can I be king?

古文：对曰： 为天子自有百年者，十年者，一年者，百日者，事由可知。 
现代文：李顺兴回答说 ：做天子的有百天者，有十年者，有一年者，有统治百年的。事由可以明白。 
English: Li Shunxing replied, "Those who are the sons of heaven have a hundred days, those who are ten years, those who are one year, and those who rule for a hundred years.

古文：及宝夤败，裁百日也。
现代文：到萧宝夤失败，才有百天。
English: It took 100 days for Xiao Baojun to fail.

古文：有侯终德者，宝夤之党。宝夤败后，收集反者。
现代文：有个叫侯终德的，是萧宝夤的同党，萧宝夤兵败后，他召集叛贼。
English: There was a man named Hou Shunde, who was a comrade-in-arms of Xiao Baojun. After Xiao Baojun's defeat, he summoned the traitors.

古文：顺兴称其必败，德乃棒杀顺兴，置城隍中。顷之，起活如初。
现代文：李顺兴说他一定会败，侯终德就用木棒打死李顺兴，扔在城隍庙中，过了一会儿，李顺兴又活过来像当初一样。
English: Li Shunxing said that he would definitely lose. Hou Shende then beat Li Shunxing to death with a wooden stick and threw him into the city's Yonghe Temple. After a while, Li Shunxing came back to life, just as he was in the beginning.

古文：后贺拔岳北征，顺兴与魏收书，上为毛鸿宾等九人姓名者悉放贵还。
现代文：后来贺拔岳北伐时，李顺兴给魏收写信。上面列出的毛鸿宾等九个人的姓名全部放回。
English: Later, Li Shunxing received a letter from Wei during the Northern Expedition of He Bailian. The names of the nine people listed above, including Mao Hongbin, were all put back.

古文：顺兴从后提一河东酒缸，以绳系之，于城巷牵行。俄而蒲坂降。
现代文：李顺兴跟在后面，提一个河东酒缶亢，用绳子系住，在城中街巷中拉着走，很快蒲板投降。
English: Li Shunxing followed behind, took a bottle of wine from Hedong, tied it with a rope, dragged it through the streets and alleys of the city, and soon surrendered.

古文：又无何，至太傅梁览家庭中卧，以布衫倒覆身上。
现代文：又过了不久，到太傅梁览家中躺下，用布衫倒盖在身上。
English: Not long after that, he went to the home of Grandmaster Liangzhang, lay down, and covered himself with a cloth.

古文：后览于赵崔反，通使东魏，事泄被诛，览以衣倒覆，果如顺兴之形。
现代文：后来梁览与赵崔反叛，与东魏往通使节，事情败露后被杀，梁览用衣服倒盖在身上，果然像李顺兴那个样子。
English: Later, Liang Xiang rebelled against Zhao Cui and became an envoy to the Eastern Wei Dynasty. After the affair was exposed, he was killed. Liang Xiang covered his body with his clothes upside down, and he really looked like Li Shunxing.

古文：周文尝至温泉，顺兴求乞温泉东间骊山下二亩地，周文曰： 李练用此何为？ 
现代文：周文帝曾经到温泉，李顺兴请求得到温泉东间骊山脚下的二亩地。周文帝说 ：李练用这二亩地干什么？ 
English: Zhou Wendi once went to a hot spring, and Li Shunxing asked for two mu of land at the foot of Shaoshan, east of the hot spring. Zhou Wendi said: What does Li Lian do with these two mu of land?

古文：对曰： 有用。 
现代文：回答说： 有用。 
English: He replied: "It is useful."

古文：未几，至温汤遇患，卒于其地。
现代文：没有多时，到温水中遇难，死在那个地方。
English: It didn't take long for him to get into warm water, where he died.

古文：初，大统十三年，顺兴谓周文曰： 可于沙苑北作一老君象，面向北，作笑状。 
现代文：当年，大统十三年，李顺兴对周文帝说 ：可在沙苑北边建一太上老君像，面朝北作出笑的样子。 
English: In that year, the thirteenth year of unification, Li Shunxing said to Zhou Wendi: "You can build a statue of the Grandmaster Lao Jun on the north side of Sha Yuan, facing north and smiling.

古文：周文曰： 何为？ 
现代文：周文说： 有什么用？ 
English: Zhou Wen said: What is the use of it?

古文：位东徐州刺史，赐爵安夷县公。
现代文：回答说 ：让它笑败蠕蠕国。 周文帝当时很迷惑，不理解什么意思。
English: He replied, "Let it amuse the whole country." At that time, Emperor Zhou was very confused and did not understand what it meant.

古文：卒，赠秦州刺史。信都芳，字玉琳，河间人也。
现代文：等到蠕蠕国灭亡，周文帝想起他的话，于是在老君像旁建上李顺兴的像。信都芳字玉琳，是河间人。
English: After the demise of the Qin State, Zhou Wendi remembered his words, so he built a statue of Li Shunxing next to the statue of Laojun.

古文：少明算术，兼有巧思，每精心研究，或坠坑坎。
现代文：年少时懂得算术，又有奇巧构思，每当精心钻研，有时会落入坑坎中。
English: When he was young, he knew arithmetic and had ingenious ideas. Whenever he carefully studied, he would sometimes fall into a pit.

古文：常语人云： 算历玄妙，机巧精微，我每一沈思，不闻雷霆之声也。 
现代文：常对人说： 算术历法幽深微妙，机械构造精细隐微，我每一深思，就听不到雷霆声。 
English: People often say: The arithmetic calendar is subtle and subtle, the mechanical structure is subtle and subtle, and I can't hear thunder every time I meditate.

古文：其用心如此。
现代文：他用心就是这个样子。
English: That's what he does with his heart.

古文：后为安丰王延明召入宾馆。
现代文：后来被安丰王延明召为宾客。
English: Later, he was invited as a guest by Anfeng Wang Yanming.

古文：有江南人祖恆者，先于边境被获，在延明家，旧明算历，而不为王所待。
现代文：有个江南人叫祖日恒的，以前在边境上被俘获。住在王延明家，以前通晓算术历象，但不被王延明重用。
English: There was a man from the south of the Yangtze River named Zu Rihong, who had previously been captured on the border. He lived in Wang Yanming's house and had previously been familiar with arithmetic and alphabets, but was not used much by Wang Yanming.

古文：芳谏王礼遇之。
现代文：信都芳劝说王延明对祖日恒以礼相待。
English: Xin Du Fang persuaded Wang Yanming to treat Zu Nicheng with courtesy.

古文：恆后还，留诸法授芳，由是弥复精密。
现代文：祖日恒后来回江南，把一些方法传给信都芳，因此，信都芳的方法更加精确细密。
English: Zuri Heng later returned to the south of the Yangtze River and passed on some methods to Xindu Fang. As a result, Xindu Fang's methods are more precise and detailed.

古文：延明家有群书，欲抄集《五经》算事为《五经宗》，及古今乐事为《乐书》，又聚浑天、欹器、地动、铜乌、漏刻、候风诸巧事，并图画为《器准》，并令芳算之。
现代文：王延明家有各种图书，想抄录汇集《五经》的算事为《五经宗》，以及古今乐事为《乐书》，又汇集浑天、欹器、地动、铜乌、漏刻、侯风等巧妙制作，连同图画为《器淮》，都让信都芳筹划。
English: Wang Yanming's family has a variety of books. If you want to transcribe and compile the "Five Classics," the "Five Classics" is the "Five Classics," and the ancient and modern music is the "Music Book." It also brings together the skillful production of the sky, the earthenware, the earth movement, the copper and the wax, the leaks, and the wind, together with the pictures for the "Vessels and vessels," all of which are planned by Xin Du Fang.

古文：会延明南奔，芳乃自撰注。
现代文：适逢王延明逃亡南方，信都芳都自行撰注。
English: When Wang Yanming fled to the south, Xindu Fangdu wrote his own annotation.

古文：后隐于并州乐平之东山，太守慕容保乐闻而召之，芳不得已而见焉。
现代文：后来隐居在并州乐平的东山，太守慕容保乐听说后召用他，信都芳没有办法，只好出见。
English: Later, he lived in seclusion in Dongshan, Leping, Wenzhou. When the Emperor Murong Baole heard of this, he summoned him. Xin Dufang had no choice but to appear.

古文：于是保乐弟绍宗荐之于齐神武，为馆客，授中外府田曹参军。
现代文：于是慕容保乐的弟弟绍宗把他举荐给齐神武帝，做了宾客，授职中外府田曹参军。
English: As a result, Murong Baole's younger brother Shao Zong recommended him to Emperor Qizhenwu, made him a guest, and commissioned him to join the army.

古文：芳性清俭质朴，不与物和。
现代文：信都芳性格清静俭约朴实，不与外物掺和。
English: Shintou Fang's personality is quiet, frugal and simple, and she does not mix with foreign things.

古文：绍宗给其羸马，不肯乘骑；夜遣婢侍以试之，芳忿呼殴击，不听近己。
现代文：绍宗送给他一匹瘦弱的马，他不肯骑坐；夜间派婢女试验他，信都芳愤怒呼喊殴打婢女，不让接近自己。
English: Shao Zong gave him an emaciated horse, but he refused to ride it. At night, he sent a maid to test him, and Xindu Fang shouted in anger and beat the maid to prevent her from getting close to him.

古文：狷介自守，无求于物。
现代文：洁身自好，不求助于物。
English: Clean yourself up, don't resort to things.

古文：后亦注重差、勾股，复撰《史宗》。
现代文：后来偏重差、勾股，又撰《史宗》。
English: Later, he wrote "Shizong" again.

古文：芳精专不已，又多所窥涉。
现代文：信都芳精专不止，又多方涉猎。
English: Xindu Fangjing has more than one specialty, and it is involved in hunting in many ways.

古文：丞相仓曹祖珽谓芳曰： 律管吹灰，术甚微妙，绝来既久，吾思所不至，卿试思之。 
现代文：丞相仓曹祖王廷对信都芳说： 用律管吹灰，技术很微妙，但已经很久不传于世，我思考不出来，你不妨考虑考虑。 
English: Cang Cao Zu Wang Ting, the chancellor, said to Xindufang: "The technique of blowing ash with a rhotic tube is very subtle, but it has not been passed down to the world for a long time. I can't figure it out. You might as well think about it."

古文：芳留意十数日，便报珽云： 吾得之矣，然终须河内葭莩灰。 
现代文：信都芳留意十多天，就报告祖王廷说： 我得到方法了，但最终必须用河内葭莩的灰。 
English: Xin Dufang paid attention for more than ten days, and reported to Zu Wangting: I have found a way, but in the end I must use the ashes of the Hanoi dragonfly.

古文：祖对试之，无验。
现代文：祖王廷当面试验，没有成功。
English: Zuo Wangting tried it in person, but it didn't work.

古文：后得河内灰，用术，应节便飞，余灰即不动也。
现代文：后来找到河内草灰，用这种方法，随节拍飘飞，剩余的灰就不动了。
English: Later, Hanoi grass ash was found. Using this method, the remaining ash would not move as it floated with the beat.

古文：为时所重，竟不行用，故此法遂绝。
现代文：但这种技巧不被当时人重视，竟然不流行，所以这种技巧终于绝世。
English: However, this technique was not valued by the people of the time, and it was not popular, so this technique finally died out.

古文：又著《乐书》、《遁甲经》、《四术周髀宗》。
现代文：还著有《乐书》、《遁甲经》、《四术周髀宗》。
English: He is also the author of "Music Book," "Sangka Sutra" and "Four Arts of Zhou Enzong."

古文：其序曰： 汉成帝时，学者问盖天，杨雄曰： 盖哉，未几也。 
现代文：序文说： 汉成帝时，研究学问的人问盖天，杨雄说： 盖，就是还不周全。 
English: The preface says: When Han Chengdi was at the beginning of his reign, scholars asked about covering the sky, and Yang Xiong said, "Covering the sky is not yet complete.

古文：问浑天，曰： 落下闳为之，鲜于妄人度之，耿中丞象之，几乎，莫之息矣。 
现代文：问浑天，说： 落下闳制造。鲜于妄人测量，耿中丞仿照，周全吗？没有停止啊。 
English: He asked Hun Tian and said, "Falling anchor manufacturing. Less than the measurement of a madman. Is Geng Zhong Rong's imitation perfect? It hasn't stopped."

古文：此言盖差而浑密也。
现代文：这是说盖天有偏差而浑天精密。
English: This is to say that the cover of the sky is biased and the sky is precise.

古文：盖器测影而造，用之日久，不同于祖，故云 未几也 。
现代文：盖天仪因观测日影而制造，用的时间长了，便和先前不同，所以称 不周全 。
English: The sky-covering instrument was made for observing the sun's shadow, and when it was used for a long time, it was different from the previous one, so it was called incomplete.

古文：浑器量天而作，乾坤大象，隐见难变，故云 几乎 。
现代文：浑天仪为计算天体而制造，乾坤星象，难于洞察，较少变化，所以称 周全 。
English: The armillary sphere is made for calculating celestial bodies. It is difficult to see the stars, and there is little variation, so it is called Zhou Quan.

古文：是时，太史令尹咸穷研晷盖，易古周法，雄乃见之，以为难也。
现代文：当时，太史令尹咸深入研究晷盖，更改古代周朝的方法，杨雄看到了，认为很困难。
English: At that time, Emperor Taishi ordered Yin Xian to make in-depth study of the skullcap and change the methods of the ancient Zhou Dynasty. Yang Xiong saw this and thought it was very difficult.

古文：自昔周公定影王城，至汉朝，盖器一改焉。
现代文：从过去周公在都城测定日影，到汉朝，盖天仪改变一次。
English: From Zhou Gong's measurement of the sun's shadow in the capital in the past to the Han Dynasty, the cover celestial instrument has changed once.

古文：浑天覆观，以《灵宪》为文；盖天仰观，以《周髀》为法，覆仰难殊，大归是一。
现代文：浑天仪俯观，以《灵宪》为文辞；盖天仪仰观，以《周髀》为法规。俯仰虽然不同，总体是一致的。
English: The words of "Ling Xian" are used in the case of "Hun Tian Yi" and "Zhou Xuan" in the case of "Gai Tian Yi." Although they are different, they are generally consistent.

古文：古之人制者，所表天效玄象。
现代文：古代人制造仪器，依据是天效玄象。
English: The ancients made instruments based on celestial phenomena.

古文：芳以浑算精微，术机万首，故约本为之省要，凡述二篇，合六法，名《四术周髀宗》。 
现代文：信都芳通过浑算精微，得出万条方法技巧，所以简要概括本要点，总共写成二篇，合为六法，名为《四术周髀宗》。 
English: Xindufang obtained thousands of methods and techniques through fine calculations, so she briefly summarized the main points, writing a total of two articles, combining six methods, called "Four Arts of Zhou Enzong."

古文：又上党李业兴撰新历，自以为长于赵匪攵、何承天、祖冲之三家，芳难业兴五阙。
现代文：另外上党人李业兴撰写新历法，自认为比赵匪攵、何承天、祖冲之三家的历法要好，信都芳驳难李业兴五个问题。
English: In addition, Li Ye Xing, a member of the Shang Party, wrote a new calendar, and he thought that it was better than the three calendars of Zhao Bangtao, He Chengtian, and Zu Chong, and it was difficult to refute Li Ye Xing's five questions.

古文：又私撰历书，名曰《灵宪历》，算月频大频小，食必以朔，证据甚甄明。
现代文：又私自撰写历书，名字为《灵宪历》，推算月份有大有小，日食月食必定赶在每月初一，证据很清楚。
English: I also wrote my own calendar book, called the "Spiritual Constitution Calendar," and calculated the months from large to small. The eclipse of the sun and the moon must be on the first day of each month, and the evidence is clear.

古文：绍曰： 火将然，烟先起。
现代文：经常说： 何承天也撰成这种历法，但没有做到精细。
English: It is often said: He Zheng Tian also compiled this calendar, but did not do it finely.

古文：烟上色青，故知青牛起。 既而如绍言。
现代文：《灵宪历》如果编成，一定会历经百代而不会有异议。 
English: If the "Spiritual Constitution Calendar" is compiled, it will surely go through a hundred generations without objection.

古文：吴遵世，字季绪，勃海人也。
现代文：书没有写成就下世了。吴遵世字季绪，是渤海人。
English: There is no success in the next life without writing a book. Wu Zunshi, also known as Ji Xu, is a native of Bohai.

古文：少学《易》。入恆山，忽见一老翁，授之开心符。遵世跪，水吞之，遂明占卜。
现代文：幼时学习《易经》，入恒山，忽然看见一个老头，送给他开心符，吴遵世跪在地上，用水吞下开心符，于是通晓占卜术。
English: As a child, he studied the I Ching, and when he entered Hengshan Mountain, he suddenly saw an old man who gave him a lucky charm. Wu Zunshi knelt on the ground, swallowed the lucky charm with water, and thus became familiar with divination.

古文：后出游京洛，以卜筮知名。
现代文：后来游历京洛，以卜筮而闻名。
English: Later, he traveled to Kyoto and became famous for "Bokyo."

古文：魏孝武帝之将即位，使之筮，遇《否》之《萃》，曰： 先否后喜。 
现代文：魏孝武帝准备即位时，让他占卜，碰到《否》卦中的《萃》爻，说： 开始不顺后来高兴。 
English: When Emperor Wei Xiaowu was preparing to ascend the throne, he asked him to do divination. When he came across the "Sei" character in the "No" story, he said, "I was unhappy at first, but then I became happy."

古文：帝曰： 喜在何时？ 
现代文：孝武帝说： 高兴在什么时间。 
English: Emperor Xiaowu said, "At what time should I be happy?"

古文：遵世曰： 刚决柔，则春末夏初也。 
现代文：吴遵世说： 刚排去柔，那么当在春末夏初。 
English: Wu Zunshi said, "If you want to go from stiff to soft, then you should go in late spring or early summer.

古文：又筮，遇《明夷》之《贲》，曰： 初登于天，后入于地。
现代文：又筮卜，碰到《明夷》卦中的《贲》爻，说： 开始登上天，后来入地中。
English: Miao Bu also encountered the "Dragonfly" in "Mingyi" and said, "It began to ascend into the sky, and then it descended into the earth.

古文：若能敬始慎终，不失法度，无忧入地矣。 
现代文：如果能严肃开始谨慎结束，不失去法则，就不用担心入地了。 
English: If you can start seriously and finish cautiously, without losing the law, you don't have to worry about landing.

古文：终如其言。
现代文：结果正像他说的那样。
English: It turned out just like he said.

古文：后齐文襄引为大将军府墨曹参军。
现代文：后来齐文襄引荐他做了大将军墨曹参军。
English: Later, he was recommended by Qi Wenxiang to join the army as General Mozao.

古文：从游东山，有云起，恐雨废射，戏使筮。遇《剥》，李业兴云： 坤上艮下，《剥》。
现代文：跟随皇上游东山，有云雾涌起，担心下雨会使打猎活动停止，就开玩笑地让吴遵世占卜。碰上《剥》卦，李兴业说： 坤在上艮在下，是《剥》卦。
English: Following the emperor upstream of the East Mountain, clouds and fog were rising, and fearing that rain would stop hunting activities, he jokingly asked Wu Zunshi to do divination. When encountering "stripping" gossip, Li Xingye said: "Kun is in the upper jaw and under jaw, it is "stripping" gossip."

古文：艮为山，山出云，故知有雨。 
现代文：艮是山，山起云雾。所以知道有雨。 
English: A molehill is a mountain, and a mountain produces clouds and fog. That's how we know it's raining.

古文：遵世云： 坤为地，土制水，故知无雨。 
现代文：吴遵世说 ：坤是地，土能控制水，所以知道无雨。 
English: Wu Zunshi said: Kun is the earth, the earth can control water, so it knows that there is no rain.

古文：文襄使崔暹书之云： 遵世若著，赏绢十匹；不著，罚杖十。
现代文：齐文襄让崔暹记录说： 遵世如果卜中，赏赐绢十匹；不中，罚杖打十下。
English: Qi Wenxiang asked Cui Siam to record: "If you are in the right, you will be rewarded with ten horses; if you are wrong, you will be punished with ten strokes of the cane."

古文：业兴若著，无赏；不著，罚杖十。 
现代文：李兴业如果卜中，没有赏赐；不中，罚杖打十下。 
English: If Li Xingye is in the middle, there will be no reward; if he is not in the middle, he will be punished with ten strokes of the cane.

古文：业兴曰： 同是著，何独无赏？ 
现代文：李兴业说 ：同样是卜中，为何惟独我不得赏？ 
English: Li Xingye said, "It's all the same, why can't I be the only one to win?"

古文：文襄曰： 遵世著，会我意，故赏也。 
现代文：文襄说 ：吴遵世卜中，正合我意，所以赏赐。 
English: Wen Xiang said, "Wu Zunzhibu is just what I wanted, so I gave him a reward.

古文：须臾云散，二人各受赏罚。
现代文：不一会云雾散去，两个人分别受到了赏罚。
English: Soon after the fog cleared, the two men were separately punished and rewarded.

古文：皇建中，武成以丞相在鄴下居守，自致猜疑，甚怀忧惧。
现代文：皇建年间，武成帝因丞相带兵守卫邺下，导致对丞相的猜疑。
English: During the construction of the Imperial Palace, Emperor Wu Cheng, because the prime minister led soldiers to guard the throne, led to suspicion of the prime minister.

古文：谋起兵，每宿辄令遵世筮。
现代文：内心非常忧虑恐惧，打算起兵，每晚休息时就令吴遵世卜筮。
English: He was very worried and fearful inside, he planned to raise an army, and every night when he rested, he would make Wu Zun Shibao.

古文：遵世云： 自有大庆。 
现代文：吴遵世说 ：当有大的喜庆。 
English: Wu Zunshi said: There should be a big celebration.

古文：由是不决。
现代文：因此武成不敢决定。
English: Therefore, Take Shing did not dare to make a decision.

古文：俄而赵郡王等奉太后令，以遗诏追武成。
现代文：不久赵郡王等奉太后之命，以遗诏给武成加冠冕。
English: Soon after, Zhao Gu Wang and others were ordered by the Empress Dowager to crown Wu Cheng Rong with a posthumous edict.

古文：更令筮之。
现代文：又让吴遵世卜筮。
English: He also let Wu Zun Shibun go.

古文：遵世云： 比已作十余卦，其占自然有天下之征。 
现代文：遵世说 ：近来已占卜了十多次卦。卦中当然有您享有天下的征兆。 
English: Zun Shi said, "Recently, I have divined more than ten times. Of course, there are signs that you will enjoy the world.

古文：及即位，除中书舍人，固辞老疾，授中散大夫。
现代文：武成即帝位后，任命他为中书舍人，吴遵世推称自己年老多病，改任中散大夫。
English: After Emperor Wucheng ascended to the throne, he was appointed as the curator of Chinese books. Wu Zun Shih, who claimed that he was old and sick, was appointed as the curator of Chinese classics.

古文：和士开封王，妻元氏无子，以侧室长孙为妃，令遵世筮。
现代文：和士开被加封为王，妻子元氏没有儿子，让偏房长孙氏为妃子，让吴遵世卜筮。
English: He Shikai was crowned as king, his wife Yuan did not have a son, so the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son.

古文：遵世云： 此卦偶与占同。 
现代文：遵世说 ：这种卦偶尔与占卜吻合。 
English: Zun Shih said: This kind of gossip occasionally coincides with divination.

古文：乃出其占书云： 元氏无子，长孙为妃。 
现代文：于是拿出占卜书说： 元氏没有儿子，长孙做妃子。 
English: So he took out his divination book and said: The Yuan family has no son, and the eldest grandchild is a concubine.

古文：士开喜于妙中，于是起叫而舞。
现代文：和士开很信这种巧妙的占卜，于是站起来边喊边舞。
English: Hoshikai believes in this kind of skillful divination, so she stands up, shouts and dances.

古文：遵世著《易林杂占》百余卷。
现代文：吴遵世著有《易林杂占》百余卷。
English: Wu Zunshi is the author of more than a hundred volumes of "Yilin Hazing."

古文：齐文襄之自颍川归，文宣从后。玉于傍纵观，谓人曰： 大将军不作物。 
现代文：后来预言尉迟迥叛乱。死去。皇甫玉，不知道什么地方的人，擅长给人看相。齐文襄从颍川回京，文宣跟随在后，皇甫玉在旁边放眼观看。对人说 ：大将军不耕种农作物。 
English: Later, the prophetic lieutenant delayed the rebellion. He died. Emperor Fudama, who does not know where he is, is good at giving people a look. Qi Wenzhong returned to Beijing from Shichuan, followed by Wen Xuan, and Emperor Fudama watched from the side. He said to people: The general does not cultivate crops.

古文：指文宣曰： 会道北垂鼻洟者。 
现代文：指着文宣说 ：正是路北流鼻涕的那个人。 
English: Pointing at Wen Xuan, he said, "This is the person with the runny nose on the north side of the road."

古文：及文宣即位，试玉相术，故以帛巾袜其眼，使历摸诸人。
现代文：文宣帝即位后，试验皇甫玉的相面术，特地用帛巾蒙住眼，让他逐个摸那些人。
English: After Emperor Wenxuan ascended to the throne, he tested Emperor Fuyu's facsimile technique, blindfolding him with a silk scarf so that he could touch the people one by one.

古文：至文宣曰： 此最大达官。 
现代文：摸到文宣帝时说 ：这是最大的最显要的官。 
English: Touching Emperor Wenxuan, he said, "This is the biggest and most important official."

古文：于任城王曰： 当至丞相。 
现代文：到任城王时说： 会做到丞相。 
English: When he took office, the king of the city said: I will do my best as chancellor.

古文：于常山、长广二王，并曰： 亦贵。 
现代文：到常山王、长广王时，都说： 也显贵。 
English: When visiting the King of Changshan and the King of Changguang, they all said, "He is also distinguished."

古文：至石动桶曰： 此弄痴人。 
现代文：到石动桶时说 ：这是个愚笨的傻子。 
English: When it came to moving the stone bucket, he said, "This is a stupid idiot."

古文：至二供膳曰： 正得好饮食而已。 
现代文：到两个供饭的官员说 ：正好得吃喝罢了。 
English: He said to the two officials who were serving the meal: "We just have to eat and drink."

古文：玉尝为高归彦相曰： 位极人臣，但莫反。 
现代文：皇甫玉曾经为高归彦相面说： 位极人臣，但不要谋反。 
English: The Empress Dowager Yu once said to Gao Guihang: "You are a very important vassal, but don't plot against me."

古文：归彦曰： 我何为反？ 
现代文：高归彦说 ：我为什么要谋反？ 
English: Takakibohiko said, "Why should I rebel?

古文：玉曰： 公有反骨。 
现代文：皇甫玉说 ：您长有反骨。 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "You have a backbone."

古文：孝昭赐赵郡王十死不问，王喜曰： 皇甫玉相臣，云当恶死，今复何虑？ 
现代文：孝昭恩赐赵郡王犯死罪十次而不追究，赵郡王高兴地说： 皇甫玉给我看相，说我不得善终。
English: Xiao Zhao gave Zhao Guowang the gift of committing the crime of death ten times without being investigated. Zhao Guowang said happily: "The emperor showed me the face of the emperor and said that I would not have a good end.

古文：帝以玉辄为诸王相，心不平之。玉谓其妻曰： 殿上者不过二年。 
现代文：现在还有什么可以担心的？ 皇上以皇甫玉动辄为各王侯看相的原因，心中很不安定，皇甫玉对他妻子说 ：皇帝不超过二年。 
English: What else is there to worry about now? The emperor was very insecure about the reason for the princes to look at the empress dowager's movements. The empress dowager said to his wife, "The emperor has not been emperor for more than two years."

古文：妻以告舍人斛斯洪庆妻，洪庆以启帝。
现代文：他妻子把这话告诉给舍人斛斯洪庆的妻子，洪庆又转告皇帝。
English: His wife told this to his concubine, Hong Qing's wife, who in turn told the emperor.

古文：怒曰： 向妇女小兒评论万乘主！ 
现代文：皇帝恼怒地说： 对妇女小孩评论万岁爷！ 
English: The emperor said angrily: "Long live the man who criticizes women and children!"

古文：子信，齐亡卒。
现代文：下诏召见皇甫玉。
English: The following edict summons you to see the Empress Dowager.

古文：陆法和，不知何许人也。隐于江陵百里洲，衣食居处，一与戒行沙门同。
现代文：皇甫玉每次照镜子，自称要被兵器杀死，等到被召见，对他妻子说 ：我现在去朝中，不回来，如果过了太阳正午，我可以活下来。 已经到了正午，于是斩了他。陆法和，不知道什么地方的人。隐居在江陵百里州，衣食住处，完全和恪守戒律的和尚一样。
English: Every time the Empress Dowager Yu looked in the mirror, she said that she wanted to be killed by a weapon, and when she was summoned, she said to his wife: I am now going to the center of the country and will not return, if the sun has passed noon, I can survive. It was already noon, so they beheaded him. Lu Fa, a person from I don't know where. He lived in seclusion in Baizhou, Gangneung. His food, clothing, and place of residence were exactly the same as those of a monk who abided by the precepts.

古文：耆老自幼见之，容色常定，人莫能测也。
现代文：有老年人从小就见过他，相貌没有变化，人们不能猜度其中原委。
English: There are elderly people who have seen him since he was a child, his appearance has not changed, and people can't guess who he is.

古文：或谓出自嵩高，遍游遐迩。
现代文：有人说他出自嵩高，遍游远近。
English: Some say he was born tall and travelled far and wide.

古文：既入荆州汶阳郡高要县之紫石山，无故舍所居山，俄有蛮贼文道期之乱，时人以为预见萌兆。
现代文：既已入荆州汶阳郡高安县的紫石山，又无缘无故地舍弃所居之山，不久发生蛮贼文道期的叛乱，当时人们都认为他事先预见了征兆。
English: Not only had he entered Zishi Mountain in Gao'an County, Wenyang County, Jingzhou, but he also abandoned the mountain where he lived without any reason. Soon, a rebellion occurred during the barbarian cleptocracy period. At that time, people thought that he had foreseen the signs in advance.

古文：及侯景始告降于梁，法和谓南郡硃元英曰： 贫道共檀越击侯景去。 
现代文：侯景向梁朝投降时，陆法和对南郡朱元英说： 贫道和施主一起攻击侯景去。 
English: When Houjing surrendered to the Liang Dynasty, Lu Fa said to Zhu Yuanying of Nan County: "You should attack Houjing together with your benefactor.

古文：元英曰： 侯景为国立效，师云击之何也？ 
现代文：朱元英说： 侯景为国家立了功，仙师却说要攻击他，为什么呢？ 
English: Zhu Yuanying said, "Hou Jing has made great contributions to the country, but the Immortal Master said to attack him. Why?

古文：法和曰： 正自如此。 
现代文：陆法和说： 正应这样。 
English: and the law of the land, saying, This is the way it shall be.

古文：及景度江，法和时在青溪山，元英往问曰： 景今围城，其事云何？ 
现代文：等到侯景渡江时，陆法和在青奚谷山，元英前去问他说： 侯景现在包围城池，这件事怎么办？ 
English: While waiting for Hou Jing to cross the river, Lu Fa and Yuan Ying went to ask him in the Qinglu Valley Mountain: Hou Jing is now encircling the city, what should we do about this?

古文：法和曰： 凡人取果，宜待熟时。 
现代文：陆法和说： 大凡人们摘取果子时，应该等到果子成熟的时候。 
English: Lu Fa said: When ordinary people pick the fruit, they should wait until the fruit is ripe.

古文：固问之，曰： 亦克，亦不克。 
现代文：坚决请问办法，陆法和说： 可以攻，也可以不攻。 
English: Firmly ask the way, the law of the land and say: You can attack or not attack.

古文：景遣将任约击梁湘东王于江陵，法和乃诣湘东乞征约。召诸蛮弟子八百人在江津，二日便发。
现代文：侯景派大将任约在江陵攻击梁朝的湘东王。陆法和便到湘东请求征讨任约，在江边渡口召集众蛮人弟子八百人，两天就开发了。
English: Hou Jing sent his general Ren Cao to attack the Liang Dynasty's King of Eastern Hunan in Gangneung. Lu Fa and Ben went to Eastern Hunan to request the appointment of Ren Cao, and gathered eight hundred barbarian disciples at the riverside ferry, which was developed in two days.

古文：湘东遣胡僧祐领千余人与同行。
现代文：湘东派胡僧率领千余人与陆法和同行。
English: Shandong sent more than a thousand men and women to accompany the expedition.

古文：法和登舰，大笑曰： 无量兵马。 
现代文：陆法和登上大战船，大笑着说： 不可估量的军马。 
English: the law of the land and boarded a large warship, laughed loudly and said: Inestimable war horses.

古文：江陵多神祠，人俗恆所祈祷。自法和军出，无复一验，人以为神皆从行故也。
现代文：江陵有很多神庙，当地人常去祈祷，自从陆法和军队出发后，求神没有一次应验，人们都认为是神灵跟从陆法和出征去了的缘故。
English: There are many temples in Gangneung. Local people often go there to pray. Since the departure of the army and the law of the land, there has not been a single fulfillment of their prayers to the gods. People think that this is because the gods followed the law of the land and went to war.

古文：至赤沙湖，与约相对。法和乘轻船，不介胄，沿流而下，去约军一里乃还。
现代文：到赤沙湖，与任约对阵，陆法和乘坐小船，不穿盔甲，顺流而下，距任约军队还有大约一里时才回来。
English: He went to the Red Sand Lake and fought against Ren Rong. He did not wear armor and went down the river in a small boat. He did not come back until he was about a mile away from Ren Rong's army.

古文：谓将士曰： 聊观彼龙睡不动，吾军之龙，甚自踊跃，即攻之。
现代文：对将士们说： 姑且观察敌军龙睡卧不动，我军中龙非常踊跃，立即攻打敌军。
English: He said to the soldiers: Let's observe the enemy dragons sleeping and not moving. The dragons in our army are very active and immediately attack the enemy.

古文：若得彼明日，当不损客主一人而破贼，然有恶处。 
现代文：如果等到明天，可以不损伤客人，主人一人而大破敌军，然而有坏处。 
English: If you wait until tomorrow, you can destroy the enemy army without harming the guests, the host alone, but there are disadvantages.

古文：遂纵火船，而逆风不便，法和执白羽扇麾风，风即返。
现代文：于是燃烧火船，可是逆风不便行船，陆法和手拿白羽扇扌扇风，风就回头吹。
English: So the fire ship burns, but the headwind is inconvenient for sailing, and the land law and the hand-held white-feather fan fan, the wind blows back.

古文：约众皆见梁兵步于水上，于是大溃，皆投水。
现代文：任约的军士都看见梁朝官兵在水面上行走，于是败退，都落入水中。
English: The officers and soldiers of the Liang Dynasty were seen walking on the surface of the water by all the officers and soldiers of the appointment, so they retreated and fell into the water.

古文：约逃窜不知所之，法和曰： 明日午时当得。 
现代文：任约逃窜不知去向。陆法和说 ：明天上午可以俘获他。 
English: I don't know where he went. Lufa said, "We can capture him tomorrow morning."

古文：及期而未得，人问之，法和曰： 吾前于此洲水乾时建一刹，语檀越等：此虽为刹，实是贼标。
现代文：到了预定时间但没有抓获任约，人问任约，他说： 我以前在这个洲水干时建有一佛塔，曾对施主说 ：这虽然是个佛塔实际上是贼藏身的标志。 
English: When the appointed time came but Renjo was not caught, people asked him about it. He said, "I once built a Buddhist pagoda on this island when the water was dry. I told the donor, 'Although this is a Buddhist pagoda, it is actually a sign that a thief is hiding.'

古文：今何不向标下求贼也？ 
现代文：现在为什么不到标志下找贼呢？ 
English: Now why don't you go look for the thief under the sign?

古文：如其言，果于水中见约抱刹，仰头裁出鼻，遂禽之。
现代文：按照他的话，果然见任约抱着佛塔，仰着头刚好露出鼻子，于是擒获了他。
English: According to his words, I saw Ren about to hug the pagoda, with his head tilted just enough to show his nose, so I caught him.

古文：约言： 求就师目前死。 
现代文：任约说 ：请求到仙师跟前死去。 
English: Renjo said, "Ask to die in front of the Immortal Master."

古文：法和曰： 檀越有相，必不兵死。且于王有缘，决无他虑。
现代文：陆法和说 ：施主有相，命中注定不会因战而死，况且你与湘东王有缘，不要有其他想法。
English: Lu Fa said, "The benefactor has a face, and you are destined not to die in battle. Moreover, you have a predestined relationship with the King of Shandong, so don't have any other thoughts."

古文：王于后当得檀越力耳。 
现代文：湘东王以后当得到施主协助。 
English: The king of eastern Honshu was later assisted by a benefactor.

古文：湘东果释用为郡守。
现代文：湘东王果然放了他，用他做了郡守。
English: The king of eastern Hunan did indeed release him and made him the county governor.

古文：及魏围江陵，约以兵赴救，力战焉。
现代文：到魏包围江陵时。任约带兵前去救援，尽力拼战。
English: When Wei besieged Jiangling, Ren Guo led his soldiers to the rescue and tried his best to fight.

古文：法和既平约，往进见王僧辩于巴陵，谓曰： 贫道已却侯景一臂，其更何能为？
现代文：陆法和既已平定任约，就前往巴陵进见王僧辩，对他说： 我已经断掉侯景的一条臂膀，他还能有什么作为？
English: Lu Fa, having settled the appointment, went to Baling to see Wang Sangye, and said to him: I have broken one of Hou Jing's arms, what else can he do?

古文：檀越宜即逐取。 
现代文：施主应该立刻攻取他。 
English: The donor should take him immediately.

古文：乃请还。
现代文：就请求回归。
English: Request a callback.

古文：谓湘东王曰： 侯景自然平矣，无足可虑。
现代文：对湘东王说 ：侯景自然可以平定，没有值得忧虑的。
English: He said to the king of eastern Hunan, "Houjing can be pacified naturally, there is nothing to worry about."

古文：蜀贼将至，法和请守巫峡待之。 
现代文：蜀地的贼兵将要来到，法和请求驻守巫峡等待贼兵。 
English: The bandits of Shu will come, and the law and the request will be stationed in Wuxia to wait for the bandits.

古文：乃纵诸军而往，亲运石以填江。三日，水遂不流，横之以铁锁。
现代文：于是统领各军前往，亲自运送石头来填大江，三天后，水便不流了，江面上横拦铁索。
English: So he led all the armies to the river and personally transported stones to fill the river. Three days later, the water stopped flowing, and iron cables were laid across the river.

古文：武陵王纪果遣蜀兵来度，峡口势蹙，进退不可，王琳与法和经略，一战而殄之。
现代文：武陵王纪果然派蜀兵渡江，峡口地势狭窄，进退不得，王琳与陆法和指挥作战，一战就消灭了贼军。
English: Wuling Wang Ji successfully sent Shu soldiers to cross the river. The gorge is narrow and cannot be advanced or retreated. Wang Lin fought with the law of the land and the command, and eliminated the thief army in the first battle.

古文：军次白帝，谓人曰： 诸葛孔明可谓为名将，吾自见之。
现代文：军队驻扎在白帝城，对人说： 诸葛孔明可以称为名将，我亲眼见过。
English: The army stationed in Baidicheng said to the people, "Zhuge Kongming can be called a great general. I have seen him with my own eyes."

古文：此城旁有其埋弩箭镞一斛许。 
现代文：这座城池旁有他埋伏的弓箭与箭头一斛左右。 
English: Next to the castle, there is a pile of bows and arrows that he hid.

古文：因插表令掘之，如其言。
现代文：就插上标志让军士挖掘，正像他说的那样。
English: Just put up a sign and let the sergeant dig, just like he said.

古文：又尝至襄阳城北大树下，画地方二尺，令弟子掘之。
现代文：又曾到襄阳城北的一棵大树下，画地周围二尺，让弟子挖掘。
English: He also went to a big tree in the north of Yangyang City, and let his disciples dig around two feet around the painting site.

古文：得一龟，长尺半，以杖叩之曰： 汝欲出，不能得，已数百岁。不逢我者，岂见天日乎？ 
现代文：掘得一只龟，长一尺半，以木杖敲龟说 ：你想出来，不能如愿，已经几百年了，如果不遇见我，怎么能见天日？ 
English: He dug up a tortoise, a foot and a half long, beat the tortoise with a wooden stick and said: You came up with it, but you can't fulfill your wish, it's been hundreds of years, if you don't meet me, how can you see the light of day?

古文：为授《三归》，龟乃入草。
现代文：向它传授《三归》，龟才爬入草丛。
English: The tortoise only crawled into the grass after he was taught the story of "Three Returns."

古文：初，八叠山多恶疾人，法和为采药疗之，不过三服，皆差，即求为弟子。
现代文：当初，八叠山有很多重病人，陆法和为他们采药治疗，吃药不过三剂，都痊愈了，就请求做他的弟子。
English: At first, there were many seriously ill patients in the Eight Mountains. Lu Fa took medicine and treated them. They took only three doses of medicine and were all cured. They asked to be his disciples.

古文：山中多毒虫猛兽，法和授其禁戒，不复噬蜇。
现代文：山中有不少毒虫猛兽，陆法和传授他们一些禁令戒律，人们不再被咬螫。
English: There are many venomous beasts in the mountains, the law of the land and teach them some prohibitions and commandments, people will no longer be bitten.

古文：所泊江湖，必于峰侧结表，云此处放生。渔者皆无所得。
现代文：他所停泊的江湖，一定在山峰旁边留下标志，称此处要放生，打鱼的人都会一无所获。
English: The boats he anchored always left a sign next to the peak, saying that the fish had to be released here, and that anyone who caught fish would get nothing.

古文：才或少获，辄有大风雷，船人惧而放之，风雨乃定。
现代文：有时刚稍有捕获，便大风霹雳，船夫害怕而放还后，风雨才停。
English: Sometimes there is just a slight catch, then the wind blows, the boatman is afraid and let go, and then the wind and rain stop.

古文：晚虽将兵，犹禁诸军渔捕，有窃违者，中夜猛兽必来欲噬之，或亡其船缆。
现代文：晚年统领军队，仍然禁止军士捕鱼，有私下违反禁令的，半夜猛兽一定会来吞吃他，或者偷去船缆。
English: Commanding the army in his later years, he still forbade sergeants from fishing. If someone privately violated the ban, a wild beast would certainly come to devour him in the middle of the night, or steal the boat cable.

古文：有小弟子戏截蛇头，来诣法和。
现代文：有个小弟子因游戏而弄到蛇头，来告诉陆法和。
English: A young disciple got a snake's head as a result of a game and came to tell the dharma.

古文：法和曰： 汝何意杀！ 
现代文：陆法和说 ：你出于什么目的而杀蛇？ 
English: The Buddha asked, "For what purpose did you kill the snake?"

古文：因指以示之，弟子乃见蛇头齚裤裆而不落。
现代文：于是指给他看，弟子就看见蛇头咬着胯裆而不掉下。
English: So he pointed it out to him, and the disciple saw that the head of the snake was biting the beak without falling off.

古文：法和使忏悔，为蛇作功德。
现代文：法和让他忏悔，为此蛇念佛、诵经。
English: Dharma and let him repent, for this snake chanting, chanting.

古文：又有人以牛试刀，一下而头断，来诣法和。
现代文：还有人用牛试验刀锋利与否，只用一下就将牛头砍掉，来告诉陆法和。
English: Others use oxen to test the sharpness of the blade, and cut off the bull's head with a single stroke to tell it the lay of the land.

古文：法和曰： 有一断头牛，就卿征命殊急，若不为作功德，一月内报至。 
现代文：陆法和说： 有一个断头的牛，来向你索命，很急迫，如果你不给它做佛事，一个月内报应便到。 
English: Lu Fa said, "There is a headless cow that has come to ask for your life. It is very urgent. If you don't perform the Buddhist rites for it, it will be punished within a month."

古文：其人弗信，少日果死。
现代文：这个人不相信，不几天就死了。
English: The man didn't believe it and died a few days later.

古文：法和又为人置宅图墓以避祸求福。
现代文：陆法和又替人安排宅院与墓地来避祸求福。
English: They also arranged homesteads and cemeteries for people to avoid misfortune and seek happiness.

古文：尝谓人曰： 勿系马于碓。 
现代文：曾经对人说 ：不要将马拴在石碓上。 
English: I used to tell people: don't tie your horse to a rock.

古文：其人行过乡曲，门侧有碓，因系马于其柱。
现代文：这个人路过乡村，见一户人家门前有石碓，将就马拴在石碓的柱子上。
English: The man was passing through the countryside when he saw a stone pillar in front of a house. He tied his horse to the pillar.

古文：入门中，忆法和戒，走出将解之，马已毙矣。
现代文：进了门，想起了陆法和的告诫，跑出门准备解开马，马已经倒地而死。
English: He entered the gate, remembered the precepts of the Law of the Land, and ran out of the gate to untie the horse, which had fallen to the ground and died.

古文：梁元帝以法和为都督、郢州刺史，封江乘县公。
现代文：梁元帝任用陆法和为都督、郢州刺史，封为江乘县公。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan appointed Lu Fa as the governor and Zhang Zhou as the chief historian, and Jiang Rongxian as the county magistrate.

古文：法和不称臣，其启文硃印名上，自称居士，后称司徒。
现代文：法和不自称为臣，他的上奏文书与朱红印章的名字上，都自称为居士，后来称为司徒。
English: He did not call himself a vassal, but he called himself a layman, and later called himself a monk, on his imperial rescript and the name of the red seal.

古文：梁元帝谓其仆射王褒曰： 我未尝有意用陆为三公，而自称，何也？ 
现代文：梁元帝对他的仆射王褒说 ：我不曾想让陆法和做三公，而他自称三公，什么原因呢？ 
English: Emperor Liang Yuan praised his vassal Shaowang and said, "I never wanted Lu Fa and I to be the three princes, but he calls himself the three princes. What is the reason?"

古文：褒曰： 彼既以道术自命，容是先知。 
现代文：王褒回答说 ：他既然以道术自负，想是他有预感。 
English: Wang Bo replied: Since he is conceited about Taoism, I think he has a premonition.

古文：梁元帝以法和功业稍重，遂就加司徒，都督、刺史如故。
现代文：梁元帝认为法和的功业较大，于是就加封他为司徒，都督、刺史，与以前一样。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan believed that Fa's merits were greater, so he added him as a scholar, governor, and historian, just as before.

古文：部曲数千人，通呼为弟子。
现代文：部众几千人，一律称为弟子。
English: There were several thousand followers, all of whom were called disciples.

古文：唯以道术为化，不以法狱加人。
现代文：只是以道术感化人，而不以刑法牢狱施加于人。
English: It is just to inspire people with Daoism, and not to impose criminal prison on people.

古文：又列肆之所，不立市丞，牧佐之法，无人领受。
现代文：另外集市所在，不设市丞一职，管理辅佐的法规，没有人接受。
English: In addition, no one accepted the regulations on the location of the bazaar, which does not set up the position of the mayor, and the management assistant.

古文：但以空槛龠在道间，上开一孔以受钱。贾客店人，随货多少，计其估限，自委槛中。
现代文：只把空栅栏的钥匙放在路中，上面开一个小口来接受钱，商人店家，按照货物多少，估计一下价值，自己把钱放进栅栏内。
English: Just put the key to the empty fence in the middle of the road, open a small opening on it to accept the money, merchants, according to the amount of goods, estimate the value, and put the money into the fence themselves.

古文：所掌之司，夕方开取，条其孔目，输之于库。
现代文：掌管栅栏的人，到晚上才打开栅栏，整理好数目，送到府库中。
English: The person in charge of the fence only opens the fence in the evening, sorts out the number and sends it to the treasury.

古文：又法和平常言若不出口，时有所论，则雄辩无敌，然犹带蛮音。
现代文：此外陆法和平常好像不轻易说话，偶尔有议就雄辩滔滔，找不到对手，然而还带有蛮音。
English: In addition, Lu Fa and ordinary people do not seem to speak easily. Occasionally, when there is a discussion, they are eloquent and eloquent. They cannot find an opponent, but they still have a rude sound.

古文：善为攻战具。
现代文：善于制造攻战的器械。
English: They are good at making offensive weapons.

古文：在江夏，大聚兵舰，欲袭襄阳而入武关，梁元帝使止之。
现代文：在江夏，聚集很多兵舰，准备袭击襄阳而进入武关，梁元帝派人阻止他。
English: In Jiangxia, many warships gathered and prepared to attack Xiangyang and entered Wuguan. Emperor Liang Yuan sent people to stop him.

古文：法和曰： 法和是求佛之人，尚不希释梵天王坐处，岂规王位？
现代文：陆法和说 ：陆法和是奉行佛教的人，尚不希望得到佛家的天王之位，怎么会图谋国家王位？
English: Lufa said, "Lufa is a Buddhist. He does not want to be the king of the Buddhists. How can he want to be the king of the country?"

古文：但于空王佛所与主上有香火因缘，见主上应有报至，故救援耳。
现代文：只是由于空王佛和皇上有香火缘分，见皇上应该有报应来到，才援救罢了。
English: It was only because of the incense connection between King Buddha and the emperor that the emperor needed to be rescued.

古文：今既被疑，是业定不可改也。 
现代文：如今既然被猜疑，这种事情一定不可改变。 
English: Now that he is under suspicion, this feat will definitely not be accomplished.

古文：于是设供食，具大饣追薄饼。
现代文：于是设置供品，准备大饣追薄饼。
English: So they set up an offering, preparing a large cake to follow the pancake.

古文：及魏举兵，法和自郢入汉口，将赴江陵，梁元帝使人逆之曰： 此自能破贼，师但镇郢州，不须动也。 
现代文：到魏朝发兵时，陆法和从郢都进入汉水口，准备进军江陵，梁元帝派人拦住他说 ：这一次我一定能打败贼兵，你的军队只需镇守郢州，不必行动。 
English: When the armies of the Wei Dynasty and the Qing Dynasty were dispatched, Lu Fa and Zou Yi both entered the Han River estuary and prepared to march into the Yangtze River. Emperor Liang Yuan sent someone to stop him and said, "This time, I will surely defeat the bandits. Your army only needs to guard Yanzhou and does not need to act."

古文：法和乃还州，垩其城门，著粗白布衫，裤布邪巾，大绳束腰，坐苇席，终日乃脱之。
现代文：陆法和于是返回郢州，用白色土灰粉刷城门，身穿粗布白色衣衫，裤子上缝上歪斜的头巾，大绳扎住腰，坐在苇席上，过了一整天才脱下。
English: Lu Fa then returned to Zhangzhou, whitewashed the city gate with white soil ash, wore a coarse white shirt, sewed a crooked headscarf on his trousers, tied a large rope around his waist, sat at a banquet, and took it off after a whole day.

古文：及闻梁元败灭，复取前凶服著之，哭泣受吊。
现代文：等到听说梁元帝败亡，又拿出先前的凶邪衣服穿上，哭着去吊慰。
English: When he heard that Emperor Liang Yuan had been defeated, he took out his previous evil clothes, put them on, and went to offer condolences while crying.

古文：梁人入魏，果见饣追饼焉。
现代文：有梁朝人进入魏地，果然看到大饣追薄饼。
English: When the Liang Dynasty entered Wei, they saw the giant centipede chasing the pancake.

古文：法和始于百里洲造寿王寺。既架佛殿，更截梁柱，曰： 后四十许年，佛法当遭雷雹，此寺幽僻，可以免难。 
现代文：陆法和开始在百里洲建造寿王寺，已经架起了佛殿，又截掉房梁和柱子，说 ：以后四十年左右，佛殿法像要遭到雷击和冰雹，这所佛寺幽远偏僻，可以免去劫难。 
English: Lu Fa began to build Shouwang Temple in Baizhou. He had already erected the Buddha hall, and cut off the beams and pillars, saying, "In the next forty years or so, the Buddha hall statues will be struck by lightning and hail. This Buddhist temple is remote and isolated, and can be spared from disaster."

古文：及魏平荆州，宫室焚烬，总管欲发取寿王佛殿，嫌其材短，乃停。
现代文：魏朝平定荆州后，宫室焚烧成灰烬，总管想发兵攻取寿王佛殿，因嫌殿中木材短小，才停止。
English: After the Wei Dynasty conquered Jingzhou, the palace was burned to ashes. The general wanted to send troops to capture the Shouwang Buddha Hall, but stopped because the wood in the hall was too short.

古文：后周氏灭佛法，此寺隔在陈境，故不及难。
现代文：后来周氏禁止佛法，这所寺院远隔在陈朝境内，所以没有遭到劫难。
English: Later, Zhou banned Buddhism, and this temple was far away in the territory of the Chen Dynasty, so it was not attacked.

古文：天保六年春，清河王岳进军临江，法和举州入齐。
现代文：北齐文宣帝天保六年春天，清河王岳进军到达江边，陆法和带领全州人到了齐朝。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Xuan of the Northern Qi Dynasty in Tianbo, King Yue of the Qing Dynasty marched to the riverside, and Lu Fa led the people of the whole state to the Qi Dynasty.

古文：文宣以法和为大都督、十州诸军事、太尉公、西南大都督、五州诸军事、荆州刺史，安湘郡公宋莅为郢州刺史，官爵如故。
现代文：文宣帝让陆法和做了大都督、十州诸军事，太尉公、西南道大行台，大都督、五州诸军事、荆州刺史、安湘郡公宋莅做了郢州刺史，官职和爵位和过去一样。
English: Emperor Wenxuan made Lu Fa the grand governor, the ten states the military governor, the lieutenant governor, the southwestern province the grand governor, the five states the military governor, Jingzhou the military governor, Anxiang County the military governor, Song Tao the military governor of Zhangzhou, and the official posts and titles were the same as in the past.

古文：莅弟簉为散骑常侍、仪同三司、湘州刺史、义兴县公。
现代文：宋莅的弟弟宋为散骑常侍、仪同三司、湘州刺史、义兴县公。
English: Song Yao's younger brother, Song, was a cavalryman, the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, the governor of Hunan Province, and the governor of Yixing County.

古文：梁将侯瑱来逼江夏，齐军弃城而退，法和与宋莅兄弟入朝。
现代文：梁朝将领侯王真带兵进逼江夏。齐朝军队弃城退逃。陆法和和宋莅兄弟俩来到朝廷。
English: Wang Zhen, the general of Liang Dynasty, led his troops to force Jiangxia. The army of Qi Dynasty abandoned the city and fled. The brothers Lufa and Song Tao came to the imperial court.

古文：文宣闻其有奇术，虚心相见之。备三公卤簿，于城南十二里供帐以待之。
现代文：文宣帝听说他有奇妙法术，诚心要见见他，准备了三公的仪仗队，在城南十二里处设帐篷等候他。
English: Emperor Wenxuan heard that he had wonderful magic and sincerely wanted to meet him. He prepared a guard of honour for the three princes and set up a tent twelve miles south of the city to wait for him.

古文：法和遥见鄴城，下马禹步。
现代文：陆法和远远望见邺城，下马跛足而行。
English: With the land straight ahead and Lucheng in the distance, they dismounted and walked.

古文：辛术谓曰： 公既万里归诚，主上虚心相待，何作此术？ 
现代文：辛术对他说 ：您既然不远万里投城齐朝，皇上诚心等候，你为何要作这种样子？ 
English: Xin Shu said to him, "Since you are not far away from the capital, and the emperor is sincerely waiting for you, why do you want to look like this?"

古文：法和手持香炉，步从路车至于馆。
现代文：陆法和手持香炉，步行跟着路上的车子来到宾馆。
English: On foot and with incense burner in hand, they followed the car on the road to the hotel.

古文：明日引见，给通宪油络网车，仗身百人。
现代文：第二天引见皇上，赏给他带有车幔的油漆网车、卫士一百名。
English: The next day, he was introduced to the emperor and given a painted net cart with a rickshaw and a hundred guards.

古文：诣阙通名，不称官爵，不称臣，但云荆山居士。
现代文：到朝廷通名。不称呼官职爵位，不称臣子，只称荆山居士。
English: He was a common name at the Imperial Court. He was not called by his official rank or title, nor was he called a vassal, but only a Jingshan layman.

古文：文宣宴法和及其徒属于昭阳殿，赐法和钱百万、物万段、甲第一区、田一百顷、奴婢二百人，生资什物称是；宋莅千段；其余仪同、刺史以下各有差。
现代文：文宣帝在昭阳殿宴请陆法和与他的随从，赏赐陆法和银钱百万，物品万段，上等住宅一所、土地一百顷、奴婢二百人，生活资用物品一套；赏赐宋莅物品千段；其余仪同、刺史以下官员各有不同。
English: Emperor Wenxuan invited Lu Fa and his entourage to a banquet at the Zhoyang Palace, and rewarded Lu Fa and his entourage with one million silver coins, ten thousand pieces of goods, one first-class residence, one hundred hectares of land, two hundred slaves and maidservants, and one set of daily necessities; rewarded Song Tao with one thousand pieces of goods; the rest of the officials were different.

古文：法和所得奴婢，尽免之，曰： 各随缘去。 
现代文：陆法和赏赐得到的奴婢，全部释放，说 ：各人去找自己的缘分。 
English: He released all the slaves and maidservants who had been given land and gifts, saying, "Each of you must find his own destiny."

古文：钱帛散施，一日便尽。
现代文：钱和布帛分给他人，一天就完了。
English: Give money and cloth to others, and the day is done.

古文：以官所赐宅营佛寺，自居一房，与凡人无异。
现代文：用皇上赏赐的宅院建造佛寺，自己只住一间房子，与普通人没有两样。
English: He built a Buddhist temple in a mansion given to him by the emperor, and he only lived in one room, just like an ordinary person.

古文：三年间再为太尉，世犹谓之居士。
现代文：三年内又做了太尉，世人仍称他为居士。
English: Within three years, he was promoted to the rank of captain, and the world still calls him a layman.

古文：无疾，而告弟子死期。至时，烧香礼佛，坐绳床而终。
现代文：没有得病却告诉弟子们他的死期，到那天，烧香拜佛，坐在绳床上死去。
English: He did not get sick, but he told his disciples the date of his death. On that day, he burned incense, worshipped Buddha, and sat on a rope bed to die.

古文：浴讫将殓，尸小缩止三尺许。
现代文：洗完将要入殓，尸身缩小到三尺左右。
English: After washing, it will be placed in a coffin, and the body will be reduced to about three feet.

古文：文宣令开棺而视之，空棺而已。
现代文：文宣帝让人开棺而看，空棺一口而已。
English: Emperor Wenxuan let people open the coffin and look at it. It was just an empty coffin.

古文：法和书其所居屋壁而涂之，及剥落，有文曰： 十年天子为尚可，百日天子急如火，周年天子递代坐。 
现代文：陆法和在他居住的房屋墙壁上写字，然后涂刷墙壁，等到泥墙剥落，有文字写道 ：十年天子还算可以，百年天子心急如火，周年天子轮流而坐。 
English: Lufa wrote on the walls of the house he lived in, and then painted the walls, and when the mud walls peeled off, there was a text that read: Ten years old is still okay, a hundred years old is anxious, and a hundred years old takes turns to sit.

古文：又曰： 一母生三天，两天共五年。 
现代文：又写道： 一个母亲生三，两天共有五年时间。 
English: He also wrote: A mother gives birth to three children in two days, for a total of five years.

古文：说者以为娄太后生三天子，自孝昭即位至武成传位后主，共五年焉。
现代文：解释的人认为娄太后生了三个天子，从昭帝高演即位到武成帝高湛传位给后主高纬，总共五年时间。
English: The person who explained it believed that Empress Dowager Zhou gave birth to three heavenly sons, and it took a total of five years from the enthronement of Zhao Emperor Gao Yuan to the enthronement of Emperor Wucheng Gao Zhan to his successor Gao Wei.

古文：天和中，遂著诗，预论周隋废兴及皇家受命，并有徵验。
现代文：陆法和在荆州、郢州时，有一个年轻的女子，年龄大约二十多岁，自称越姥，身披法事衣服，不肯出嫁，常随陆法和东奔西走，有时与陆法和私下相好，有十多年。
English: When Lu Fa was in Jingzhou and Zhangzhou, there was a young woman, in her twenties, who called herself Yue Bao. She wore ceremonial clothes and refused to get married. She often followed Lu Fa and went everywhere, and sometimes had a personal friendship with Lu Fa for more than ten years.

古文：尤不信释教，尝上疏极论之。
现代文：现在被遗弃，另与他人淫乱。
English: Now abandoned, she fornicates with others.

古文：庾季才，字叔弈，新野人也。
现代文：官吏考察验证，全部属实。越姥因此改嫁，生有几个孩子。庾秀才字叔弈，新野人。
English: The investigation and verification by government officials proved that everything was true. Therefore, Grandmother Yue remarried and had several children. She was a great talent and a new wild man.

古文：八世祖滔，随晋元帝过江，官至散骑常侍，封遂昌侯，因家于南郡江陵县。
现代文：八世祖庾滔，随晋元帝过江，官至散骑常侍，封为遂昌侯，于是在南郡江陵县安家。
English: The eighth generation, Zu Yingtou, crossed the Yangtze River with Emperor Jin Yuan, served as a cavalry officer, and was given the title of Suichang, so he settled in Nan County, Jiangling County.

古文：祖诜，《南史》有传。
现代文：祖父庾诜，《南史》中有传记。
English: There is a biography of Grandpa Zou in "Southern History."

古文：父曼倩，光禄卿。
现代文：父亲庾曼倩，为光禄卿。
English: His father, 曼, was a member of the Guanglu clan.

古文：季才幼颖悟，八岁诵《尚书》，十二通《易》，好占玄象，居丧以孝闻。
现代文：庾季才幼时聪慧出人，八岁诵读《尚书》，十二岁通晓《易》，喜欢推算天象，居丧期间以孝顺而闻名。
English: At the age of eight, she read "Shang Shu" and at the age of twelve, she was fluent in "Yi." She liked to calculate the constellations and was known for her filial piety during the mourning period.

古文：梁湘东王绎引授外兵参军。
现代文：梁朝湘东王萧绎召引他授职外兵参军。
English: In the Liang Dynasty, King Xiaoyan of Eastern Hunan Province called him to join the army as a foreign soldier.

古文：西台建，累迁中书郎，领太史，封宣昌县伯。
现代文：中书省设置后，连续升任为中书郎。兼任太史，封为宜昌县伯。
English: After the establishment of the Ministry of Chinese Literature, he was successively promoted to the position of Chushiro, concurrently serving as Taishi, and was given the title of Yichang County Mayor.

古文：季才固辞太史，梁元帝曰： 汉司马迁历世居掌，魏高堂隆犹领此职，卿何惮焉！ 
现代文：庾季才坚决辞去太史，梁元帝说 ：汉代司马迁几代为太史，魏朝高堂隆尚且兼任这种职务，你为何害怕呢？ 
English: It was only at the end of the third year that he resolutely resigned from the position of the Grand Historian. Emperor Liang Yuan said, "In the Han Dynasty, Sima Qian was the Grand Historian for several generations. In the Wei Dynasty, Gaodong Long also held this position. Why are you afraid?

古文：帝亦颇明星历，谓曰： 朕犹虑祸起萧墙。 
现代文：元帝也比较通晓星象历法，对他说： 我也担心祸起萧墙。 
English: Emperor Yuan was also relatively familiar with the astrological calendar, and said to him: I am also worried about the calamity of Xiaowan.

古文：季才曰： 秦将入郢，陛下宜留重臣，作镇荆陕，还都以避其患。 
现代文：庾季才说 ：秦将领进入郢都，陛下应该留下大臣，镇守荆陕一带。回京都以躲避灾难。 
English: Xing Jicai said, "The Qin generals have entered the capital, and His Majesty should leave his ministers to guard the area around Wenshan and return to Kyoto to avoid disaster."

古文：帝初然之，后与吏部尚书宗懔等议，乃止。
现代文：皇帝开始听从，后来与吏部尚书宗懔等人商议，便停止了。
English: The emperor began to obey, and later, after discussion with the officials, including Shang Shuzong and others, he stopped.

古文：俄而江陵覆灭。
现代文：很快江陵覆亡。
English: Gangneung soon fell.

古文：周文帝一见，深加优礼，令参掌太史，曰： 卿宜尽诚事孤，当以富贵相答。 
现代文：周文帝一见庾季才，对他特别优待礼遇，让他参与主管太史，说： 你要尽心诚意地奉事我。一定以富贵相报答。 
English: At the first sight of a talented young man, Emperor Zhouwen treated him with special privileges and allowed him to participate in the superintendence of imperial history, saying, "You must serve me wholeheartedly. I will surely reward you with wealth and honor."

古文：初，荆覆亡，衣冠士人，多没为贱。
现代文：当初，荆州一带覆亡时，士大夫和文士，大多沦落为卑贱之人。
English: At the beginning, when the Jingzhou area was overthrown, most of the scholars and scribes were reduced to lowly people.

古文：季才散所赐物，购求亲故。
现代文：庾季才散布皇上赏赐给他的物品，寻求亲朋旧友。
English: It was only in the third season that he began to distribute the gifts given to him by the emperor, and to seek out relatives, friends and old acquaintances.

古文：周文问： 何能若此？ 
现代文：周文帝问道： 怎么能这样做？ 
English: Zhou Wendi asked: How can you do this?

古文：季才曰： 郢都覆败，君信有罪，缙绅何咎，皆为贱隶？
现代文：庾季才说： 郢都覆灭败亡，君主实在有罪过，但缙绅有什么过错？
English: Xing Jicai said: "We have all been overthrown and defeated. The monarch is really guilty, but what is the fault of the gentry?

古文：诚窃哀之，故赎购耳。 
现代文：都变成贱隶之人，我实在私下哀怜他们，所以用财物赎回。 
English: They have all become low-class people. I really feel sorry for them in private, so I bought them back with money.

古文：周文乃悟曰： 微君，遂失天下之望。 
现代文：周文帝于是明白过来，说： 如果不是您，我会辜负天下人期望。 
English: Zhou Wendi then came clean and said: If it were not for you, I would have failed the expectations of the world.

古文：因出令，免梁浮为奴婢者数千口。
现代文：便下令，赦免梁朝被俘虏沦为奴婢的数千口人。
English: He then issued an order to pardon thousands of people who had been taken captive and reduced to slavery during the Liang Dynasty.

古文：武定二年，与王褒、庾信同补麟趾学士，累迁稍伯大夫。
现代文：周明帝武成二年，与王褒、庚信一起委任为麟趾学士，后升为稍伯大夫。
English: In the second year of Zhou Ming's reign, together with Wang Bao and Geng Xin, he was appointed as a Linzi bachelor, and later promoted to a slightly older doctor.

古文：后宇文护执政，问以天道徵祥，对曰： 顷上台有变，不利宰辅，公宜归政天子，请老私门。 
现代文：后来宇文护执政，询问天道征兆。回答说 ：突然上台突然有灾异，对辅政大臣不利，您应该把政权交还天子，请求告老还家。 
English: Later, when Uwenho was in power, he inquired about the signs of heaven. He replied: "Suddenly coming to power, there are sudden disasters, which is not good for the Vice-Minister of State. You should hand over the power to the Son of Heaven and ask to return home."

古文：护沈吟久之，曰： 吾本意如此，但辞未获免。 
现代文：宇文护沉默很久，说： 我本意也是如此，但是辞官没有得到准许。 
English: Uwen Rong was silent for a long time and said, "That's what I intended to do, but I didn't get permission from the judge."

古文：自是渐疏。
现代文：由此庾季才逐渐被疏远。
English: As a result, she gradually became estranged from him.

古文：及护夷灭，阅其书记，有假托符命，妄造异端者，皆诛。
现代文：到宇文护被诛杀，查阅记事文字，有假借伪造登基凭证，胡乱制造异端的，都被处死。
English: Those who were involved in the assassination of Wu Wenguo, the examination of records, the forgery of enthronement certificates, and the creation of heresy were all put to death.

古文：唯得季才两纸，盛言纬候，宜免政归权。
现代文：只见到庾季才的两张纸，盛称不顺应世势，应该辞政归权。
English: I only saw two pieces of paper from Xing Jicai, saying that he did not conform to the trend of the times and should resign from politics and return to power.

古文：帝谓少宗伯斛斯徵曰： 季才甚得人臣之礼。 
现代文：皇帝对少宗伯斛斯征说 ：庾季才很懂得人臣的礼节。 
English: The emperor said to Shōzō Hōjō, "It is only in the third year that one understands the etiquette of a vassal.

古文：因赐粟帛，迁太史中大夫。
现代文：于是赏赐粟帛，升迁为太史中大夫。
English: As a result, he was rewarded with a millet cake and promoted to the position of Tai Shi Junior Doctor.

古文：诏撰《灵台秘苑》，封临颍县伯。
现代文：诏令撰写《灵台秘苑》，封为临颍县伯。
English: He wrote "Lingtai Secret Garden" and was awarded the title of Linyi County magistrate.

古文：宣帝嗣位，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：宣帝继位后，加封骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: After Emperor Xuan's succession to the throne, he was awarded the title of Grand General of Cavalry and the title of Grand Master of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：及隋文帝为丞相，尝夜召问天时人事，季才曰： 天道精微，难可悉察。
现代文：隋文帝做丞相时，曾经在夜间召见他，询问天时与人事，庾季才说 ：天道精深细微，难以详察。
English: When Sui Emperor Wenxuan was the prime minister, he once summoned him at night to inquire about the time of day and personnel. It was only then that he said, "The way of heaven is so subtle that it is difficult to observe it in detail."

古文：窃以人事卜之，符兆已定，季才纵言不可，公得为箕、颍事乎？ 
现代文：私下占卜人事，上天符命与征兆已经确定，我庾季才即便不说，您能做箕、颍那样的事吗？ 
English: Privately divination personnel, God's signs and omens have been determined, we do not even have to say, can you do such a thing?

古文：帝默然久之曰： 吾今譬骑武，诚不得下矣。 
现代文：隋文帝沉默很久才说： 我现在好比骑在老虎上，实在不能够下来。 
English: Sui Wendi was silent for a long time before he said: I am now like riding on a tiger, I really can't get off.

古文：因赐以彩帛曰： 愧公此意。 
现代文：于是赏赐给他纟采帛说 ：愧对您的这番心意。 
English: So he gave him a reward and said, "I'm sorry for what I did to you.

古文：大定元年正月，季才上言： 今月戊戌平旦，青气如楼阙，见国城上。俄而变紫，逆风西行。
现代文：北周静帝大定元年正月，庾季才进言说： 这月戊戌日清晨，青气如同楼阁宫殿一般，出现在京城之上，很快变成紫色，迎风西行。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, Emperor Jing said: In the early morning of the third day of this month, the Qingqi, like a castle palace, appeared on the capital, quickly turned purple, and headed westward.

古文：《气经》云： 天不能无云而雨，皇王不能无气而立。 
现代文：《气经》上说： 上天不会无云下雨，皇帝不能无气即位。 
English: "Qi Jing" said: The sky will not rain without clouds, and the emperor cannot ascend the throne without qi.

古文：今王气已见，须即应之。
现代文：现在王气已经出现，必须立即应和。
English: Now that the king's spirit has emerged, we must immediately respond.

古文：二月，日出卯入酉，居天之正位，谓之二八之门。
现代文：二月，太阳卯时出升，酉时入山，居于一天的正位，称为二八之门。
English: In February, the sun rises at dusk and sets at dawn, staying in the positive position for one day, known as the gate of the 28th.

古文：日者人君之象，人君正位，宜用二月。其月十三日甲子，甲为六甲之始，子为十二辰之初。
现代文：太阳是君主的象征，君主即位，应该选在二月，这月的十三是甲子，甲为六甲的开始，子是十二时辰的最初。
English: The sun is the symbol of the monarch, and the enthronement of the monarch should be chosen in February. The thirteenth of this month is Jiazi, Jia is the beginning of Liujia, and Zi is the beginning of the twelfth hour.

古文：甲数九，子数又九，九为天数。
现代文：甲数是九，子数又有九，九是天数。
English: The number one is nine, the number two is nine, and the number nine is the number of days.

古文：其日即是惊蛰，阳气壮发之时。
现代文：这一天又是惊蛰，阳刚之气茁壮勃发的时侯。
English: This day is also a time of surprise, when masculinity thrives and erupts.

古文：昔周武王以二月甲子定天下，享年八百；汉高帝以二月甲午即帝位，享年四百。
现代文：过去周武王在二月份的甲子一统天下，享国八百年；汉高祖在二月份的甲午登上帝位，享国四百年。
English: In the past, King Zhouwu ascended to the throne in February of the year of the Rooster, and ruled the country for eight hundred years; Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne in February of the year of the Horse, and reigned for four hundred years.

古文：故知甲子、甲午为得天数。
现代文：由此可知甲子、甲午是得天下数字。
English: From this, it can be seen that 甲子 and 甲午 are the best numbers in the world.

古文：今月甲子，宜应天受命。 
现代文：这月的甲子，应该顺应天命。 
English: The first son of the month should be obedient to the destiny.

古文：上从之。
现代文：隋文帝按他说的办。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：开皇元年，授通直散骑常侍。
现代文：开皇元年，任职通直散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was appointed as a regular attendant.

古文：帝将迁都，夜与高颎、苏威二人定议。
现代文：隋文帝准备迁都，夜间与高赹、苏威二人商议。
English: Sui Emperor Wen was preparing to move the capital, and had a discussion with Gao Jun and Sui Wei at night.

古文：季才旦奏： 臣仰观玄象，俯察图记，龟兆允袭，必有迁都。
现代文：庾季才早晨奏呈 ：我仰观天象，俯察地理图记，龟甲裂纹重复，必将迁都。
English: 季才早上奏呈: I looked up at the sky, looked down at the geographical map, repeated the crack of the tortoise shell, and was sure to move the capital.

古文：且汉营此城，经今将八百岁，水皆咸卤，不甚宜人，愿为迁徒计。 
现代文：况且汉朝经营此城，到现在已将近八百年，水都有盐味，不太适于人们生息，希望能为迁移打算。 
English: Moreover, the Han Dynasty has been running this city for nearly eight hundred years, and the water has a salty taste, which is not very suitable for people to live in. It is hoped that plans will be made for relocation.

古文：帝愕然，谓颎等曰： 是何神也！ 
现代文：文帝很惊愕，对赹等人说 ：是何等的神灵啊！ 
English: Emperor Wen was very surprised and said to Zou and the others, "What a god!

古文：遂发诏施行。
现代文：于是下达诏书开始迁都。
English: Therefore, the imperial edict was issued and the relocation of the capital began.

古文：赐季才绢布及进爵为公。谓曰： 朕自今已后，信有天道。 
现代文：赏赐庾季才绢布并且加升爵位为公爵，对他说： 我从今天开始，才相信有天道。 
English: He rewarded him with the title of Duke and said to him, "From this day on, I believe in the heavenly way."

古文：于是令季才与其子质撰《垂象》、《地形》等志。
现代文：便命令庾季才与他的儿子庾质撰《垂象》、《地形》等志书。
English: He then ordered Xing Jicai and his son Xing Quanzhong to write "Plunging Elephant," "Topography" and other biographies.

古文：谓曰： 天道秘奥，推测多途，执见不同，不欲令外人干预此事，故令公父子共为之。 
现代文：对他说 ：天道秘密深奥，推测有多种方法，看法便会有分歧，不想让外人干预这件事，所以让您父子俩共同撰写。 
English: I told him, "The secrets of heaven are profound, there are many ways to speculate, and opinions will differ. I don't want outsiders to interfere in this matter, so let your father and son write it together."

古文：及书成奏之，赐米帛甚优。
现代文：书写好后奏呈皇上，赏赐纟采帛相当多。
English: After the writing was done, it was presented to the emperor, and he rewarded her with a considerable amount of money.

古文：九年，出为均州刺史。
现代文：开皇九年，出京做均州刺史。
English: In the ninth year of the Emperor's reign, he went to Kyoto to do the history of Junzhou.

古文：时议以季才术艺精通，有诏还委旧任。
现代文：当时朝堂议论认为庚季才艺术精通，应诏令回京委任旧职。
English: At that time, the discussion in the Imperial Court was that Geng Jicai was well versed in art and should return to Beijing to be appointed to his old post.

古文：以年老，频求去职，优旨每不许。
现代文：因年老，多次请求辞去职务，皇上下旨不答应。
English: Due to his old age, he repeatedly requested to resign from his post, but the Emperor did not agree.

古文：会张胄玄历行，及袁充言日景长，上以问季才，因言充谬。
现代文：适逢张胄玄历法使用，以及袁充说日影变长，皇上询问庾季才，便说袁充言论荒谬。
English: At the same time that Zhang Xuan's calendar was being used and Yuan Chong was saying that the sun's shadow was getting longer, the emperor asked about the new season and said that Yuan Chong's remarks were absurd.

古文：上大怒，由是免职，给半禄归第。
现代文：皇上大怒，因此被免职，享受一半俸禄回家。
English: The emperor was so angry that he dismissed him from his post and sent him home with half of his salary.

古文：所有祥异，常令人就家访焉。
现代文：国家有祥瑞或灾异，皇上常派人到他家询问。
English: The emperor often sent people to his home to inquire about the country's prosperity or misfortune.

古文：仁寿三年，卒。
现代文：仁寿三年辞世。
English: Ren Shou passed away three years later.

古文：及践位，以宾为华州刺史，子顺为开府，子华为上仪同。萧吉，字文休，梁武帝兄长沙宣武王懿之孙也。
现代文：庾季才度量宽大，学业博大，讲究信义，喜爱交游。常在吉日良辰，与琅笽人王褒、彭城人刘、河乐人裴政以及族人庾信等设立文酒之会。后有刘臻、明克让、柳等人，虽然属于后辈，也加入游宴。撰有《灵台秘苑》一百二十卷，《垂象志》一百四十二卷，《地形志》八十七卷，都流行于世。萧吉字文休，是梁武帝的兄长长沙宣武王萧懿的孙子。
English: He was a man of broad-mindedness and great learning, concerned with faith and justice, and loved to travel. He often set up a wine-drinking party on auspicious days with Wang Bo, a native of Shandong, Liu, a native of Pengcheng, Pei Zheng, a native of Hailu, and Shuxin, a native of Shandong. Later, Liu Zhen, Ming Kezhan, Liu and others, although belonging to the younger generation, also joined the banquet. He wrote 120 volumes of "The Secret Garden of Lingtai," 142 volumes of "Diagram of the Elephant," and 87 volumes of "Topography," all of which are popular in the

古文：博学多通，尤精阴阳、算术。
现代文：博学多才，尤其精通阴阳术、算术。
English: Erudite and versatile, especially proficient in yin and yang and arithmetic.

古文：江陵覆亡，归于魏，为仪同。
现代文：江陵覆亡后，归顺魏朝，官仪同。
English: After the death of Jiangling Zhai, it was returned to the Shun and Wei Dynasties, with the same official ceremony.

古文：周宣帝时，吉以朝政日乱，上书切谏，帝不纳。
现代文：周宣帝时，萧吉因朝政日益混乱，上书力谏，皇帝不接受。
English: At the time of Emperor Zhou Xuan, Xiao Jie, due to the increasing chaos in the court politics, wrote a letter to the emperor, but the emperor did not accept it.

古文：及隋受禅，进上仪同，以本官太常，考定古今阴阳书。
现代文：隋朝受禅建国后，增职上仪同，因原职为太常，安排考定古今阴阳书籍。
English: After the founding of the country, the Sui Dynasty was influenced by Zen and increased the number of posts to the same level, because the original post was too common, and arranged for the examination of ancient and modern yin and yang books.

古文：吉性孤峭，不与公卿相浮沈，又与杨素不协，由是摈落，郁郁不得志。
现代文：萧吉性格孤傲尖刻，不与公卿大臣随波逐流，又与杨素不和，因此落拓，郁闷不得志。
English: Xiao Ji's character is lonely, arrogant and acerbic. He does not go with the flow with the noble minister, and does not get along with Yang Su. Therefore, he is depressed and discouraged.

古文：见上好徵祥之说，欲乾没自进，遂矫其迹为悦媚焉。
现代文：见皇帝喜爱征祥之说，想侥幸取利自求官位，于是改变素志取媚于人。
English: Seeing that the emperor was fond of seeking glory, he wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to seek an official position, so he changed his mind and flattered others.

古文：开皇十四年，上书曰： 今年岁在甲寅，十一月朔旦，以辛酉为冬至。
现代文：开皇十四年，上书给皇上说： 今年年在甲寅日，十一月朔旦，以辛酉日为冬至。
English: In the fourteenth year of the emperor's reign, a letter was sent to the emperor saying: "This year, on the day of Jia Yin, the new moon in November, the winter solstice will begin on the day of Xin Ye.

古文：来年乙卯，正月朔旦，以庚申为元日。
现代文：第二年乙卯，正月朔旦，以庚申日为正月初一。
English: In the second year of Yiwu, the first day of the first month was the new moon, and the first day of the first month was the day of the new moon.

古文：冬至之日，即在朔旦。
现代文：冬天那天，便在朔旦。
English: On that winter's day, I was in Sokotan.

古文：《乐汁图征》云： 天元十二月朔旦冬至，圣王受享祚。 
现代文：《乐汁图徵》说： 天元十一月朔旦冬至，圣主得到赐福。 
English: "Song of Songs" says: The winter solstice in November is the beginning of the year, and the Lord is blessed.

古文：今圣主在位，居天元之首，而朔旦冬至，此庆一也。
现代文：现在圣主在位，处于天元之首，而朔旦是冬至。这是喜庆之一。
English: Now that the Lord is enthroned, He is at the top of the heavens, and the new moon is the winter solstice. This is one of the joyous celebrations.

古文：辛酉之日，即至尊本命。
现代文：辛酉那天，就是至尊天子的本命日。
English: The day of Hsinchu is the fateful day of the Supreme Son of Heaven.

古文：辛德在丙，此十一月建丙子，酉德在寅，正月建寅，为本命与月合德，而居元朔之首，此庆二也。
现代文：辛德在丙，这年十一月建有丙子。酉德在寅，正月建寅，这是本命与月相合德。而处在元朔之首，这是喜庆之二。
English: Shinde is in C, and in November of this year, there is a son of C. Shinde is in Yin, and in the first month of the year, there is a son of Yin, which is a natural fit with the phases of the moon. And being at the top of the first month of the year, this is the second reason for celebration.

古文：庚申之日，即是行年。
现代文：庚申那天，就是所历年龄。
English: On the day of Koshin, it was the age of history.

古文：乙德在庚，卯德在申，来年乙卯，是行年与岁合德，而在元旦之朝，此庆三也。
现代文：乙德在庚，卯德在甲。第二年乙卯，是年龄与岁月合德，而在元旦的早晨，这是喜庆之三。
English: The second year, the second year, is the age and the years, and on the morning of New Year's Day, this is the third of the celebrations.

古文：《阴阳书》云： 年命与岁月合德者，必有福庆。 
现代文：《阴阳书》上称： 年命与岁月合德的人，一定会有福庆。 
English: "The Book of Yin and Yang" says: Those whose life and years are in harmony will certainly have good fortune.

古文：《洪范传》云： 岁之朝，月之朝，日之朝，主王者。 
现代文：《洪范传》上说： 年之初，月之初，日之初，是为王的根本。 
English: "Hong Fan Biography" said: The beginning of the year, the beginning of the month, and the beginning of the day are the foundation of the king.

古文：经书并谓三长，应之者，延年福吉。
现代文：经书并称为三长，顺应适合于它的人，可以延年益寿福至吉利。
English: The sutra is also known as the "three longs," and those who follow it can extend their years, increase their longevity, and attain good fortune.

古文：况乃甲寅，蔀首；十一月，阳之始；朔旦冬至，是圣王上元。
现代文：况且甲寅为踚首，十一月为阳的开端；朔旦冬至，是圣王上元。
English: Moreover, the moon is the dagger, November is the beginning of the sun; the new moon, the winter solstice, is the beginning of the holy king.

古文：正月，是正阳之月，岁之首，月之先；朔旦是岁之元，月之朝，日之先，嘉辰之会。
现代文：正月是正阳月，一年的开始，月份的最初，朔旦是年之初，月之始，日之先，良辰相聚的时候。
English: New Year's Day is the first day of the month, the beginning of the year, the beginning of the month, New Year's Eve is the beginning of the year, the beginning of the month, the day before, when the good times come together.

古文：而本命为九元之先，行年为三长之首，并与岁月合德。
现代文：而本命为九元之初，行年是三长之首，都与岁月合德。
English: And the original is the beginning of nine yuan, and the line year is the first of the three long ones, all of which are in line with the times.

古文：所以《灵宝经》云： 角音龙精，其祚曰强。 
现代文：所以《灵宝经》说 ：角音乃龙体精气，享国年数位逐日强盛。
English: Therefore, the "Ling Bao Jing" says: the horn sound is the essence of the dragon body, and it will become stronger day by day in the next few years.

古文：来岁年命，纳音俱角，历之与经，如合符契。
现代文：来年年命，都为角声。与经书相参证，如符契相合。
English: Next year's New Year's resolutions are all trumpet calls. If they are in line with the scriptures, they are in line with the contract.

古文：又甲寅、乙卯，天地合也。
现代文：另外甲寅、乙卯是天地相合。
English: In addition, the Chinese characters for "甲寅" and "乙卯" are the same.

古文：甲寅之年，以辛酉冬至；来年乙卯，以甲子夏至。
现代文：甲寅年是以辛酉为冬至，第二年乙卯年，以甲子为夏至。
English: In the year of the Goat, the winter solstice is in the year of the Goat, and in the second year of the Goat, the summer solstice is in the year of the Goat.

古文：冬至阳始，郊天之日，即是至尊本命，此庆四也。
现代文：冬至阳刚开始，南郊祭天那日，就是至尊天子的本命，这是喜庆之四。
English: At the beginning of the winter solstice, the day of the Southern Suburbs Festival is the birthright of the Supreme Son of Heaven, which is the fourth of the festivities.

古文：夏至阴始，祀地之辰，即是皇后本命，此庆五也。
现代文：夏至阴始，祭祀地的时辰，就是皇后的本命，这是喜庆之五。
English: At the beginning of the summer solstice, the hour of sacrifice, is the queen's destiny, this is the fifth of the celebrations.

古文：至尊德并乾之覆育，皇后仁同地之载养，所以二仪元气，并会本辰。 
现代文：天子盛德如天之覆育万物，皇后仁惠如地之载养人民。所以二仪的元气，都相会在这个时候。 
English: Shengde, the son of heaven, like the sky, nurtures all things, and the empress Renhui, like the earth, nurtures the people. Therefore, the vitality of the two rites will meet at this time.

古文：上览之悦，赐物五百段。
现代文：皇上看后很高兴，赏赐物品五百段。
English: The emperor was very pleased after seeing it, and the reward items increased by 500 dan.

古文：房陵王时为太子，言东宫多鬼魅，鼠妖数见。
现代文：房陵王当时是太子，说东宫内有很多鬼魅，几次看到鼠妖。
English: Fangling Wang, who was the prince at the time, said that there were a lot of ghosts in the East Palace, and he saw the marmoset several times.

古文：上令吉诣东宫禳邪气。
现代文：皇上指令萧吉到东宫祈祷消除邪气。
English: The emperor ordered Xiao Jie to go to the East Palace to pray for the elimination of evil.

古文：于宣慈殿设神坐，有回风从艮地鬼门来，扫太子坐。
现代文：在宣慈殿上设神座，有回风从东北鬼门吹来，扫向太子坐处。
English: A shrine was set up on top of the Xuan Zi Hall, and a return wind blew from the Northeast Demon Gate, sweeping toward the prince's seat.

古文：吉以桃汤苇火驱逐之，风出宫门而止。
现代文：萧吉用桃汤苇火驱逐邪风，风吹出宫门就停止了。
English: Xiao Ji used peach soup bonfire to expel the evil wind, and the wind stopped blowing out of the palace gate.

古文：谢土于未地，设坛为四门，置五帝坐。
现代文：在未地堆土，设坛建有四门，设置五帝的座位。
English: At the bottom of the mound, the altar has four doors and seats for the five emperors.

古文：于时寒，有虾蟆从西南来，入人门，升赤帝坐，还从人门而出，行数步，忽然不见。
现代文：当时天气寒冷，有个蛤蟆从西南来，进入人行走的门，跳上赤帝的座位，回去时还从人行走的门出，跳几步，忽然看不到了。
English: At that time, the weather was cold. A dragonfly came from the southwest, entered the door where people were walking, jumped onto the Red Emperor's seat, and when it went back, it also came out of the door where people were walking, jumped a few steps, and suddenly disappeared.

古文：上大异之，赏赐优洽。
现代文：皇上很惊异，赏赐非常丰厚。
English: The emperor was very surprised and the reward was very rich.

古文：又上言：太子当不安位。
现代文：又上奏道： 太子坐皇位不稳。 
English: Another report said: The crown prince is not stable on the throne.

古文：时上阴欲废立，得其言，是之。
现代文：当时皇上私下想废掉太子，得到这句话，认为很正确。
English: At that time, the emperor privately wanted to abolish the crown prince, and got this sentence, which he thought was very correct.

古文：由此，每被顾问。
现代文：从此，他经常被顾视问讯。
English: Since then, he has been regularly interrogated.

古文：及献皇后崩，上令吉卜择葬所。
现代文：献皇后死后，皇上让萧吉占卜选择埋葬的地点。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Xian, the emperor asked Xiao Ji to use divination to choose the burial place.

古文：吉历筮山原，至一处，云： 卜年二千，卜世二百。 
现代文：萧吉遍筮山区高阜。到一个地方，说： 占卜二千年，占卜二百世。 
English: Xiao Jie went all over the mountainous region of Gaofu. When he came to a place, he said: "Two thousand years of divination, two hundred generations of divination."

古文：具图而奏之。
现代文：绘出图形呈奏皇上。
English: Draw a figure to represent the emperor.

古文：上曰： 吉凶由人，不在于地。
现代文：皇上说 ：吉凶在于人，不在于地。
English: The emperor said, "Good fortune lies in people, not in the land."

古文：高纬父葬，岂不卜乎？
现代文：高纬父亲埋葬时，难道没有占卜吗？
English: Wasn't there divination when Gao Yu's father was buried?

古文：国寻灭亡。
现代文：国家还是很快灭亡了。
English: Still, the country soon perished.

古文：正如我家墓田，若云不吉，朕不当为天子；若云不凶，我弟不当战没。 
现代文：正如我们家族的墓园，如果说不吉祥，我不应该做天子；如果说不凶邪，我弟弟不会在战斗中死亡。 
English: Just like our family cemetery, if it is not auspicious, I should not be a son of heaven; if it is not evil, my brother will not die in battle.

古文：然竟从吉言。
现代文：然而还是听从了萧吉的话。
English: However, he still obeyed Xiao Ji's words.

古文：表曰： 去月十六日，皇后山陵西北，鸡未鸣前，有黑云方圆五六百步，从地属天；东南又有旌旗、车马、帐幕，布满七八里，并有人往来检校，部伍甚整。
现代文：奏章说： 上月十六日，皇后山陵的西北，鸡未打鸣前，有黑云雾方圆五六百步，从地一直连到天上；东南还有旌旗、车马、帐幕，摆满七八里，同时有人来往检阅，部队相当整齐。
English: The report said: On the 16th of last month, in the northwest of the Empress's Mausoleum, before the rooster crowed, there was a black cloud and fog with a radius of five or six hundred paces, from the ground all the way to the sky; in the southeast, there were banners, chariots, and tents, covering seven or eight miles. At the same time, there were people coming and going for inspection, and the troops were quite neat.

古文：日出乃灭。
现代文：太阳出来时才消失。
English: It disappears when the sun comes out.

古文：同见者十余人。
现代文：同时看到的有十多个人。
English: I saw more than ten people at the same time.

古文：谨案《葬书》云 气王与姓相生，大吉，今黑气当冬王，与姓相生，是大吉利，子孙无疆之候也。 
现代文：谨依照《葬书》上所说的 云气之王与百官相伴出现，吉利。 现在黑气当为冬天之王，与百官相伴出现，是大吉大利。子孙无疆的征兆。 
English: In accordance with the "Funeral Book," the king of the clouds and the king of the air appear together with the hundred officials, good luck. Now the black air is the king of the winter, and it appears together with the hundred officials, which is great luck. It is a sign of children without borders.

古文：上大悦。
现代文：皇上很高兴。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was very happy.

古文：其后上将亲临发殡，吉复奏曰： 至尊本命辛酉，今岁斗魁及天冈临卯酉，谨案《阴阳书》，不得临丧。 
现代文：之后皇上准备亲临墓地殡葬。萧吉又上奏道 ：至尊天子本命为辛酉，今年斗魁与天冈靠近卯酉，依照《阴阳书》所言，不能亲去发丧。 
English: After that, the emperor prepared to attend the funeral at the cemetery. Shokichi also recited, "The Supreme Son of Heaven is naturally a Shinran. This year, the leader of the duel and Amaoka are close to Uta, and according to the "Book of Yin and Yang," they cannot go to the funeral in person."

古文：上不纳。
现代文：皇上没有听从。
English: The Emperor did not listen.

古文：退而告族人萧平仲曰： 皇太子遣宇文左率深谢余云： 公前称我当为太子，竟有验，终不忘也。
现代文：从宫中退出而告诉同族人萧平仲说 ：皇太子派宇文左率深深地感谢我说 ：您以前称我应成为太子，竟然有了验证，终生不敢忘怀。
English: He told his compatriot Xiao Pingzhong after withdrawing from the palace, "The crown prince sent Yu Wenzhu to thank me deeply, saying, 'You once said that I should become the crown prince, and it turned out to be true. I will never forget it.

古文：今卜山陵，务令我早立。我立之后，当以富贵相报。 
现代文：现在占卜山陵，务必让我早早登上皇位，我登上位后，会以富贵报答。 
English: Now I am divining the mountains and the tombs. I must ascend the throne as soon as possible. After I ascend the throne, I will be rewarded with wealth.

古文：吾记之曰： 后四载，太子御天下。 
现代文：我记下说： 四年后，太子统治天下。 
English: I wrote down: In four years, the crown prince will rule the world.

古文：今山陵气应，上又临丧，兆益见矣。
现代文：现在山陵云气应和，皇上又亲去发丧，征兆越发明显了。
English: Now that the mountains and the clouds are in harmony, and the emperor himself has gone to mourn, the signs are becoming more and more obvious.

古文：且太子得政，隋其亡乎！
现代文：况且太子执政，隋朝也要灭亡了吧！
English: Moreover, the crown prince is in power, so the Sui Dynasty will also perish!

古文：当有真人出矣。
现代文：必定会有真人出现了。
English: There's got to be a real person.

古文：吾前绐云 卜年二千 者，是三十字也； 卜世二百者 ，取世二运也。
现代文：我以前欺骗他说 ：占卜二千年的话是三十二；占卜二百世的话是占有天下二轮。 
English: I used to deceive him and say, "The prediction of two thousand years is thirty-two; the prediction of two hundred years is to occupy the whole world twice."

古文：吾言信矣，汝其志之。 
现代文：我的话可信，你要记住。 
English: I can be trusted, remember that.

古文：及炀帝嗣位，拜太府少卿，加位开府。
现代文：炀帝即位后，授官太府少卿，加职开府。
English: After Emperor Xuan ascended the throne, he was given the title of Taifu Shaoqing (太府少卿) and given the additional post of head of the prefectural government.

古文：尝行经华阴，见杨素冢上有白气属天，密言于帝。
现代文：曾经路过华阴，见杨素坟冢上有白气连天。秘密地说给皇上。
English: He once passed through Huayin and saw Yang Su's grave with white streaks on it. He told the emperor in secret.

古文：帝问其故，吉曰： 其候，素家当有兵祸，灭门之象。改葬者，庶可免乎！ 
现代文：皇帝询问原因，萧吉说： 征兆表明，杨素家会有兵祸，灭门的气象，改葬他处，或许可以免去灾祸！ 
English: When the emperor inquired about the reason, Xiao Ji said, "The signs indicate that Yang Su's family will have a military disaster, the weather will destroy the door, and they will be reburied elsewhere, perhaps they can avoid the disaster!"

古文：帝后从容谓杨玄感曰： 公宜早改葬。 
现代文：皇帝后来平静地告诉杨玄感说 ：你应早日改葬。 
English: The emperor later calmly told Yang Xuanxuan, "You should change your burial place as soon as possible."

古文：玄感亦微知其故，以为吉祥，托以辽东未灭，不遑私门之事。
现代文：玄感也稍知原因，认为吉祥，假称辽东未除，顾不上私家事务。
English: The mystic also knows a little about the reason, and thinks it is auspicious. If Liaodong is not excluded, private affairs will not be taken into account.

古文：未几而玄感以反族灭，帝弥信之。
现代文：不久杨玄感因反叛灭族，炀帝更加相信萧吉。
English: Soon, Yang Xuan sensed that because of the rebellion and extermination of the people, Emperor Xuan believed in Xiao Jie even more.

古文：后岁余卒官。
现代文：其后一年左右死在任上。
English: He died in office about a year later.

古文：著《金海》三十卷，《相经要录》一卷，《宅经》八卷，《葬经》六卷，《乐谱》二十卷，及《帝王养生方》二卷，《相手版要决》一卷，《太一立成》一卷，并行于时。
现代文：著有《金海》三十卷，《相经要录》一卷，《宅经》八卷，《葬经》六卷，《乐谱》二十卷，以及《帝王养生方》二卷，《相手版要诀》一卷，《太一立成》一卷，都流行在世。
English: He is the author of 30 volumes of "Jinhai," 1 volume of "Record of the History of Chinese Medicine," 8 volumes of "House Sutra," 6 volumes of "Funeral Sutra," 20 volumes of "Music Score," 2 volumes of "Imperial Health Prescription," 1 volume of "Counterpart Edition" and 1 volume of "Taichi Licheng," all of which are popular in the world.

古文：杨伯丑，冯翊武乡人也。
现代文：杨伯丑，冯翊武乡人。
English: Yang Boqiu, a villager of Feng Rongwu.

古文：好读《易》，隐于华山。
现代文：喜读《易经》，隐居在华山。
English: He enjoyed reading the I Ching and lived in seclusion in Huashan.

古文：隋开皇初，征入朝，见公卿不为礼，无贵贱皆汝之，人不能测也。
现代文：隋朝开皇初年，被征召入朝，见到公卿大夫不行礼节，不分贵贱都用 你 称呼，人们不能猜度。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, he was drafted into the court, and when he saw that the noble doctor was not polite, he called him by his title regardless of whether he was a noble or a commoner. People could not guess.

古文：文帝召与语，竟无所答。
现代文：文帝召见与他谈话，竟然没有回答什么。
English: Emperor Wen summoned him for a talk, but he didn't answer anything.

古文：赐衣服，至朝堂舍之而去。
现代文：赏赐给他衣服，到朝堂上抛弃后离开。
English: He was given clothes, which he threw away in the morning hall before leaving.

古文：于是被发阳狂，游行市里，形体垢秽，未尝栉沐。
现代文：于是披头散发装疯，在市场上奔走，身体肮脏，不曾梳洗过。
English: So the bearded man pretends to be mad and rushes around the market, his body dirty and unwashed.

古文：时有张永乐者，卖卜京师，伯丑每从之游。
现代文：当时有个叫张永乐的人，在京城占卜为生，杨伯丑经常跟着他游玩。
English: At that time, there was a man named Zhang Yongle who made a living from divination in Beijing, and Yang Boqiu often went with him.

古文：永乐为卦有不能决者，伯丑辄为分析爻象，寻幽入微，永乐嗟服，自以为非所及也。
现代文：张永乐算卦有不能决定的，杨伯丑就替他分析爻象，寻幽入微，张永乐叹服，自认为赶不上他。
English: Zhang Yongle couldn't decide whether to calculate or not, so Yang Bocuse analyzed the signs for him, looking for subtleties, Zhang Yongle sighed, and thought that he couldn't catch up with him.

古文：伯丑亦开肆卖卜。
现代文：杨伯丑也开张卖卜。
English: Yang Boxiu also opened a shop.

古文：有人尝失子就伯丑筮者。卦成，伯丑曰： 汝子在怀远坊南门东，道北壁上有青裙女子抱之，可往取也。 
现代文：有人曾经丢失孩子，找杨伯丑筮卜，卦算好，杨伯丑说： 你的孩子在怀远坊南门东边，路北的墙壁上有一个穿青色裙子的女子抱着，可前去领取。 
English: Someone once lost a child, looking for Yang Bo Chou. Yang Bo Chou said: Your child is on the east side of the south gate of Huaiyuanfang, and there is a woman wearing a blue skirt holding it on the wall on the north side of the road. You can go and collect it.

古文：如言，果得。
现代文：依照他的话，果然找到孩子。
English: According to his words, the child was indeed found.

古文：或有金数两，夫妻共藏之，于后失金，其夫意妻有异志，将逐之。
现代文：有一家有数两黄金，夫妻俩人共同藏放，后来金子丢失，丈夫想到妻子有别的打算，准备休掉妻子。
English: There was a family that had several tons of gold, and the husband and wife hid it together. Later, the gold was lost, and the husband thought that his wife had other plans and was preparing to divorce her.

古文：其妻称冤，以诣伯丑。
现代文：妻子觉得很冤枉，来告诉杨伯丑。
English: His wife felt very wronged and came to tell Yang Boqiu.

古文：伯丑为之筮： 金在矣。 
现代文：伯丑为她卜筮说 ：金子找到了。 
English: Bo Ushi pretended for her: The gold is found.

古文：悉呼其家人，指一人曰： 可就取。 
现代文：聚集他们全家人，对其中一人说： 可向他要。 
English: And when they had gathered all their relatives together, they said to one of them, "Go and get them for us."

古文：果得之。
现代文：果然得到金子。
English: He won the gold.

古文：又将军许知常问吉凶，伯丑曰： 汝勿东北行。必不得已，当速还。
现代文：还有将军许知常寻问吉凶，杨伯丑说： 你不要往东北去，一定不得已，要尽快返回。
English: There was also General Xu Zhizhong, who often inquired about auspicious and inauspicious events. Yang Boqiu said, "You should not go to the northeast, you must go back as soon as possible.

古文：不然者，杨素斩汝头。 
现代文：不然的话，杨素砍掉你的头。 
English: Otherwise, Yang Su will cut off your head.

古文：未几，上令知常事汉王谅。
现代文：不久，皇帝命令许知常侍奉汉王谅。
English: Soon after, the emperor ordered Xu Zhizhong to serve the Han emperor.

古文：俄而上崩，谅举兵反，知常逃归京师。
现代文：很快皇上死去，汉王谅兴兵造反，许知常逃回京城。
English: The emperor soon died, the Han king Pardon Xing rebelled, and Xu Zhizang fled back to the capital.

古文：知常先与杨素有隙，及素平并州，先访知常，将斩之，赖此获免。
现代文：许知常以前和杨素有矛盾，到杨素平定并州时，他先走访许知常、准备斩掉知常。
English: Xu Zhizhong and Yang Su had a conflict before, but when Yang Su conquered and annexed the state, he first visited Xu Zhizhong and prepared to cut off Zhizhong.

古文：又有人失马来诣伯丑卜者，时伯丑为皇太子所召，在途遇之，立为作卦。
现代文：后来幸亏伯丑斡旋，才得以赦免。还有人丢马来请求伯丑占卜的，当时杨伯丑被皇太子召见，在路上碰见这个人，随时为他算卦。
English: Later, thanks to the mediation of Bo Xiu, he was able to be pardoned. There was also a person who lost his horse to ask Bo Xiu for divination. At that time, Yang Bo Xiu was summoned by the crown prince. He met this person on the road and was always able to tell fortunes for him.

古文：卦成，曰： 我不遑为卿说，且向西市东壁门南第三店，为我买鱼作鲙，当得马矣。 
现代文：卦成后，说： 我不急于对你说，你且去西市场东壁门南边第三个店，替我买鱼作菜，就会得马了。 
English: "I'm not in a hurry to tell you, but if you go to the third store on the south side of the East Wall Gate of the West Market and buy fish for me to make a dish, you'll get a horse," he said.

古文：其人如教，须臾，有一人牵所失马而至，遂禽之。
现代文：那人按照伯丑的话去做，不多会，有一人牵着他丢失的马来到，于是擒住。
English: The man did as he was told, but not for long. A man came with his lost horse, and they halted.

古文：崖州尝献径寸珠，其使者阴易之，上心疑焉，召伯丑令筮。
现代文：崖州曾经进献直径一寸的珠，送宝的人私下更换，皇帝心中有疑，就召杨伯丑让他算卦。
English: Jiaozhou once donated a bead with a diameter of one inch. The person who sent the treasure was changed in private. When the emperor was in doubt, he summoned Yang Boqiu and asked him to calculate the divination.

古文：伯丑曰： 有物出自水中，质圆而色光，是大珠也。今为人所隐。 
现代文：伯丑说： 有东西出自水中，质地圆滑，色彩光亮，是大珠子，现在被人隐藏起来。 
English: He said: "Something comes out of the water, it's smooth, it's shiny, it's a big bead, and now it's being hidden.

古文：且言隐者姓名、容状。
现代文：详细说明隐藏人的姓名、长相。
English: A detailed explanation of the hidden person's name and appearance.

古文：上如言簿责之，果得本珠，上奇之，赐帛二十匹。
现代文：皇上按照他的话，让官吏审问，果然得到原来那颗珠。皇上惊奇他的才能，赏赐二十匹帛。
English: In accordance with his words, the emperor had the officials interrogate the nymph, and indeed obtained the original bead. The emperor was surprised at his talent and rewarded him with twenty nymphs.

古文：国子祭酒何妥尝诣之论《易》。闻妥之言，悠尔而笑曰： 何用郑玄、王弼之言乎？ 
现代文：国子祭酒何妥曾经造访他谈论《周易》，听到何妥的话，闲静地笑着说： 怎么引用郑玄、王弼的话呢？ 
English: Kuniko Matsuri no Sooru once visited him to talk about "Zhou Yi," and when he heard Sooru's words, he quietly smiled and said, "How can you quote the words of Zheng Xuan and Wang Xi?"

古文：后奉诏撰兵书十卷，名曰《金韬》，上善之。
现代文：时间长了，稍有争辩应答，所说文辞含义，都不同于先代儒家旨要，而思理玄远微妙。
English: The time is long, there is a little debate, and the meaning of the words spoken is different from the previous generation of Confucianism, and the reasoning is far from subtle.

古文：复著《阴策》二十卷，《观台飞候》六卷，《玄象要记》五卷，《律历术文》一卷，《婚姻志》三卷，《产乳志》二卷，《式经》四卷，《四时立成法》一卷，《安历志》十二卷，《归正易》十卷，并行于世。
现代文：所以议论的人都认为他是天然独得，不是一般人能赶上的。
English: That's why everyone who talks about him thinks he's a natural talent, not something the average person can catch up with.

古文：张胄玄，勃海蓚人也。
现代文：后来长寿而死。张胄玄，渤海蓚人。
English: Later, he lived a long life and died. Zhang Yixuan, a native of Bohai.

古文：博学多通，尤精术数。
现代文：博学多识，尤其精通术数。
English: Knowledgeable, especially in mathematics.

古文：冀州刺史赵煚荐之，隋文帝征授云骑尉，直太史，参议律历事。
现代文：冀州刺史赵举荐他，隋文帝征召授予他云骑尉，辅助太史，参与谋议律令历法方面的事务。
English: He was recommended by Zhao, the chief historian of Jizhou Province, and was enlisted by the Sui Emperor Wen to be a cloud cavalry officer, assisting the great historian and participating in the deliberation of matters concerning the rites and calendars.

古文：时辈多出其下，由是太史令刘晖等甚忌之。
现代文：当时学者大多出自他门下，由此太史令刘晖等非常忌恨他。
English: At that time, most of the scholars were from his school, which is why the Taishi ordered Liu Ye and others to hate him very much.

古文：然晖言多不中，胄玄所推步甚精密。
现代文：然而刘晖所言大多不应验，张胄玄推算天文历法很精微细密。
English: However, most of Liu Xuan's claims are not verifiable, and Zhang Xuanxuan's calculation of the astronomical calendar is very delicate and detailed.

古文：上异之，令杨素与术士数人，立议六十一事，皆旧法久难通者，令晖与胄玄等辩析之。
现代文：皇帝很惊异，让杨素和儒生数人，设议六十一个问题，都是过去法令很久不好解决的，命令刘晖和张胄玄等人辩论解析。
English: The emperor was very surprised. He asked Yang Su and several Confucian scholars to propose sixty-one questions, all of which were difficult to solve in the past, and ordered Liu Bei and Zhang Yuxuan to debate and analyze.

古文：晖杜口一无所答，胄玄通者五十四焉。由是擢拜员外散骑侍郎，兼太史令，赐物千段。
现代文：刘晖闭口一无所答，张胄玄能解决的有五十四个，由此提升为员外散骑侍郎，兼任太史令，赏赐物品千段。
English: Liu Bei kept his mouth shut and made no reply, but Zhang Bingyuan was able to solve fifty-four of them. As a result, he was promoted to the rank of non-commissioned cavalry officer, concurrently serving as the Grand Historian, and was awarded a thousand pieces of goods.

古文：晖及党与八人，皆斥逐之。
现代文：刘晖与党徒八人，都被斥退赶走。
English: Liu Wei and the eight party members were all driven away.

古文：改定新历，言前历差一日。
现代文：改定新历法，说以前历法错一天。
English: Revised the new calendar, saying that the previous calendar was wrong by one day.

古文：内史通事颜慜楚上言曰： 汉时落下闳改《颛顼历》，作《太初历》，云： 后当差一日，八百年当有圣者定之。 
现代文：内史通事颜鳭楚上奏皇帝说 ：汉朝时落下闳修改《颛顼历》，制定《太初历》，说 ：以后会差一天，八百年后会有圣人改定。 
English: The emperor said, "During the Han Dynasty, it fell to the emperor to revise the lunar calendar and establish the solar calendar. Later, it would be one day off, and eight hundred years later, it would be revised by a sage."

古文：计今相去七百一十年，术者举其成数，圣者之谓，其在今乎！ 
现代文：算到今天相距七百一十年。学问家举其整数，圣人的说法，应该在今天吧。 
English: Seven hundred and ten years have elapsed to the present day. Scholars cite its integral number, the saying of the sage, it should be today.

古文：上大悦，渐见亲用。
现代文：皇帝很高兴，胄玄逐渐被亲近重用。
English: The emperor was very pleased, and Jixuan was gradually used more and more.

古文：胄玄所谓历法，与古不同者三事：其一，宋祖冲之于岁周之末，创设差分，冬至渐移，不循旧轨，每四十六年，却差一度。
现代文：张胄玄制定的历法，和古代历法不同的地方有三处：其一，宋人祖冲之在每年结束的最后，使用差分，冬至逐渐变化，不沿原来的轨道，每过四十六年，相差一度。
English: There are three differences between the calendar developed by Zhang Yuxuan and the ancient calendar: First, the Song Dynasty's Ancestor's Day falls at the end of each year, the difference is used, the winter solstice gradually changes, and it does not follow the original track. Every 46 years, there is a difference of one degree.

古文：至梁虞广刂历法，嫌冲之所差太多，因以一百八十六年，冬至移一度。
现代文：到了梁朝虞广刂的历法，不满意祖冲之的历法差数太大，就以一百八十六年，冬至改变一度。
English: When it came to Liang Zhaoyu's calendar, he was not satisfied with Zu Chongzhi's calendar because the difference was too large, so he changed the winter solstice once in 1866.

古文：胄玄以此二术，年限县隔，追检古注，所失极多。
现代文：张胄玄认为这两个方法，年代相隔很久，追查古书记载，失误很多。
English: Zhang Xuanxuan believes that these two methods are separated by a long period of time, and there are many mistakes in tracing ancient records.

古文：遂折中两家，以为度法，冬至所宿，岁别渐移，八十三年，却行一度。
现代文：于是折中两家历法，做为标准，冬至星宿所在，每年慢慢转移，八十三年移动一度。
English: As a result, the two calendars were reconciled, and the winter solstice star was used as the standard, slowly shifting every year, and moving once in 83 years.

古文：则上合尧时，日永星火；次符汉历，宿起牛初。
现代文：那么上与尧时应和，太阳永对星火；下与汉历相符，星宿起于牛初。
English: Then, the upper corresponds to the solar time, and the sun always corresponds to the sidereal time; the lower corresponds to the Chinese calendar, and the sidereal time starts from the beginning of the year.

古文：明其前后，并皆密当。
现代文：对照前后，都很精当。
English: Before and after comparison, it is very accurate.

古文：其二，周马显造《丙寅元历》，有阴阳转法，加减章分，进退蚀余，乃推定日，创开此数。
现代文：其二，周代马显制定《丙寅元历》，有阴阳转变法度，增加减少章分，提前后延盈亏，如此推定日子，由他最早开创。
English: Secondly, Zhou Dynasty's Ma Xian formulated the "Bin Yin Yuan Calendar," which has the law of yin and yang transformation, increase and decrease chapter points, advance and postpone profit and loss, and estimate the date in this way, which was pioneered by him.

古文：当时术者，多不能晓。
现代文：当时的学者，很多不能通晓。
English: At that time, many scholars could not understand it.

古文：张宾因而用之，莫能考正。
现代文：张宾沿袭使用，不能考证。
English: Zhang Bin has been used for generations and cannot be verified.

古文：胄玄以为加时先后，逐气参差，就月为断，于理未可。
现代文：张胄玄认为加时于先于后，节气排列不齐，依据月份的推断，不合道理。
English: Zhang Xuanxuan believes that the extra time is earlier than later, the solar terms are arranged unevenly, and it is unreasonable to extrapolate based on the month.

古文：乃因二十四气，列其盈缩所出。
现代文：于是根据二十四节气，排列出月亮圆时和晦时的日期。
English: Therefore, according to the 24 solar terms, the dates of the full moon and the end of the month are listed.

古文：实由日行迟，则月逐日易及，令合朔加时早；日行速，则月逐日少迟，令合朔加时晚。
现代文：实在由于太阳运行慢，那么月亮容易赶上太阳，让日月相会早加时；太阳运行快，那么月亮追赶太阳稍慢，让日月相会晚加时。
English: In fact, because the sun runs slowly, then the moon is easy to catch up with the sun, so that the sun and moon will meet early; the sun runs fast, then the moon catches up with the sun a little slower, so that the sun and moon will meet late.

古文：检前代加时早晚，以为损益之率。
现代文：查检前代加时的早晚，作为增减的标准。
English: The morning and evening of the overtime of the previous generation shall be checked as the standard of increase and decrease.

古文：日行，自秋分已后至春分，其势速，计一百八十二日而行一百八十度；自春分已后至秋分，日行迟，计一百八十二日而行一百七十六度。
现代文：太阳运行，从秋分以后到春分，其态势快，总计一百八十二天而运行一百八十度；从春分以后到秋分，太阳运行缓慢，总计一百八十二天而运行一百七十六度。
English: From the autumnal equinox to the vernal equinox, the sun moves quickly, with a total of one hundred and eighty-two days and a movement of one hundred and eighty degrees; from the vernal equinox to the autumnal equinox, the sun moves slowly, with a total of one hundred eighty-two days and a movement of one hundred and seventy-six degrees.

古文：每气之下，即其率也。
现代文：每个节气之下，就是增减的标准。
English: Under each solar term, it is the standard of increase and decrease.

古文：其三，自古诸历，朔望逢交，不问内外，入限便蚀。
现代文：其三，自古以来的各个历法，初一与十五交逢，不问内外，进入界限便会发生日月蚀。
English: Third, each calendar since ancient times, when the first day of the month and the fifteenth day of the month meet, regardless of whether it is inside or outside, a solar eclipse will occur when it enters the boundary.

古文：张宾立法，创有外限，应蚀不蚀，犹未能明。
现代文：张宾订立的法则，设有外限。该蚀时不蚀，还未能显明。
English: Zhang Bin's law has an outer limit, which is not clear yet.

古文：胄玄以日行黄道，岁一周天；月行月道，二十七日有余一周天。
现代文：张胄玄认为太阳运行黄道，每年要多一全天；月亮运行月道，二十七天要多一全天。
English: Zhang Xuanxuan believed that the sun runs the ecliptic, adding one full day every year; the moon runs the lunar path, adding one full day every 27 days.

古文：月道交络黄道，每行黄道内十三日有奇而出，又行道外十三日有奇而入，终而复始。
现代文：月道与黄道交会。每运行黄道内十三天有余而出来，又运行黄道外十三天有余而进入，终而复始。
English: The lunar and ecliptic paths meet. For every thirteen days of the ecliptic, a new moon emerges, and for every thirteen days of the ecliptic, a new moon enters, and the cycle begins again.

古文：月经黄道，谓之交。
现代文：月亮经过黄道，叫做交会。
English: When the moon passes through the ecliptic, it is called a conjunction.

古文：朔望去交前后各五度以下，即为当蚀。
现代文：初一与十五距交会前后各十五度以下，就应出现日月蚀。
English: Sun and moon eclipses should occur when the first day of the month and the fifteenth day of the month are less than fifteen degrees before and after the meeting.

古文：若月行内道，则在黄道之北，蚀多有验；月行外道，在黄道之南也，虽遇正人，无由掩映，蚀多不验。
现代文：如果月亮运行内道，那么在黄道之北，亏蚀大多应验。月亮运行外道，那么在黄道之南，虽然遇到直接交会，没有什么遮掩，亏蚀也大多不应验。
English: If the moon moves through the inner path, then in the north of the ecliptic, the eclipses are mostly fulfilled. If the moon moves through the outer path, then in the south of the ecliptic, although there is a direct intersection, there is nothing to hide, and the eclipses are mostly unfulfilled.

古文：遂因前法，别立定限，随交远近，逐气求差，损益蚀分，事皆明著。
现代文：于是沿袭前代历法，另外定立定限，随着相会的远近，排列节气寻求差度，增减日蚀月蚀之分。事情都很明显。
English: As a result, the previous calendar was followed, and a fixed limit was set in addition. As the meeting got closer and closer, the solar terms were arranged to find the difference, and the number of solar eclipses and lunar eclipses was increased or decreased. Things were very obvious.

古文：其超古独异者有七事：其一，古历五星行度，皆守恆率，见伏盈缩，悉无格准。
现代文：张胄玄的历法超出古历法而又独具特色的有七个方面：其一，古代历法五星运行的度数，都恪守永恒的标准，出现藏匿或圆或缺，都没有标准。
English: Zhang Yuxuan's calendar exceeds the ancient calendar and is unique in seven aspects: First, the degrees of the five stars of the ancient calendar adhere to the eternal standard, and there is no standard for hiding or missing a circle.

古文：胄玄候之，各得真率，合见之数，与古不同。
现代文：张胄玄伺望诸星，得到了真正的标准，合计出现的次数，与古代历法不同。
English: Zhang Xuanxuan looked at the stars and got the true standard. The total number of appearances is different from the ancient calendar.

古文：其差多者，至加减三十许日。
现代文：相差多的，以至于加减三十天左右。
English: The difference is so large that it adds or subtracts about thirty days.

古文：即如荧惑，平见在雨水气，即均加二十九日；见在小雪气，则均减二十五日。
现代文：比如火星，平常出现在雨水节气，就都增加二十九天；出现在小雪节气，就都减少二十五天。
English: For example, Mars, which usually appears in the rain solstice, will increase by 29 days; when it appears in the light snow solstice, it will decrease by 25 days.

古文：加减平见，以为定见。
现代文：加减出现的天数，作为固定出现的天数。
English: Add or subtract the number of days that occur as a fixed number of days.

古文：诸星各有盈缩之数，皆如此例，但差数不同。
现代文：各星都有自己圆缺的次数，都如此例，只是差数不同。
English: Each star has its own number of gaps, for example, but the difference is different.

古文：特其积候所知，时人不能原其旨。
现代文：这仅是他多日伺望所知，当时人都不能推究原旨。
English: This is only what he has known for many days, and at that time no one could deduce the original meaning.

古文：其二，辰星旧率，一终再见，凡诸古历，皆以为然。
现代文：其二，辰星的过去标准，是十二年再出现一次，凡是过去的历法，都认为是这样。
English: Secondly, the criterion of the past for the star of the hour is that it reappears once in twelve years, and all the calendars of the past hold this to be the case.

古文：应见不见，人未能测。
现代文：该出现时不出现，人们都不解其因。
English: When it does not appear, people do not understand the reason.

古文：胄玄积候，知辰星一终之中，有时一见。
现代文：张胄玄连日伺望，得知辰星十二年之中，有时出现一次。
English: Zhang Xuanxuan waited day after day and learned that in the twelve years of the star, it sometimes appeared once.

古文：及同类感召，相随而出。
现代文：等到受同类星影响时，也会相随出现。
English: When it is affected by the same kind of star, it will also appear.

古文：即如辰星，平晨见在雨水者，应见即不见；若平晨见在启蛰者，去日十八度外，三十六度内。
现代文：比如辰星，平常早晨出现在雨水节气的，应该出现时也不出现；如果平常早晨出现在惊蛰节气的，距太阳十八度外、三十六度内。
English: For example, the hour star, which usually appears in the morning of the rain and solar terms, does not appear when it should appear; if it usually appears in the morning of the alarm solar terms, it is eighteen degrees away from the sun and within thirty-six degrees.

古文：晨有木火土金一星者，亦相随见。
现代文：早晨有木火土金中的一颗星时，也相随出现。
English: In the morning, when there is a star in the wood, fire, earth and gold, it also appears.

古文：其三，古历步术，行有定限，自见已后，依率而推，进退之期，莫知多少。
现代文：其三，古代历法观星术认为，星辰运行有固定的范围，自从出现以后，便依照标准推算，提前或后延的日期，不知多少。
English: Thirdly, the ancient calendar and astrology believed that the movement of the stars had a fixed range, and since they appeared, they were calculated according to the standard, and the date of advance or delay was unknown.

古文：胄玄积候，知五星迟速留退真数，皆与古法不同，多者差八十余日，留回所在，亦差八十余度。
现代文：张胄玄多次伺望，得知五星快慢停退的真正数目，都与古代历法不同。多的相差八十多天，停留徘徊的地方，也差八十多度。
English: Zhang Xuanxuan inquired many times and learned that the true number of the five-star fast and slow retreat is different from the ancient calendar. The difference is more than eighty days, and the place where it stays and wanders is also more than eighty degrees.

古文：即如荧惑，前疾初见在立冬初，则二百五十日行一百七十七度；定见夏至初，则一百七十日行九十二度。
现代文：比如火星， 颈部 最初出现在立冬初，那么二百五十天运行一百七十七度；固定出现在夏至初，那么一百七十天运行九十二度。
English: For example, Mars, the neck, first appears at the beginning of winter, then for two hundred and fifty days it moves one hundred and seventy-seven degrees; it appears fixed at the beginning of summer solstice, then for one hundred and seventy days it moves ninety-two degrees.

古文：追步天验，今古皆密。
现代文：对照星体运行，今古都很缜密。
English: Controlled by the movement of the stars, it has always been very meticulous.

古文：其四，古历食分，依平即用，推验多少，实数罕符。
现代文：其四，古代历法的食分，都依据平常出现的标准而使用，推算数目的多少，与实际数目很少相符。
English: Fourth, the eclipses of the ancient calendar were all used according to the usual standard, and the estimated number rarely matched the actual number.

古文：胄玄积候，知月从木火土金四星行，有向背。
现代文：张胄玄连日伺望，得知月亮跟随木火土金四星运行，有时向相反方向运行。
English: Zhang Yuyuan waited for days and learned that the moon follows the wood, fire, earth, gold and four stars, and sometimes runs in the opposite direction.

古文：月向四星即速，背之则迟。皆十五度外及循本率。
现代文：月亮跟随四星，就快；相反运行，就慢，都在十五度外才遵照原来的标准。
English: The moon follows the four stars, it is fast; on the contrary, it runs, it is slow, it is only fifteen degrees away from the original standard.

古文：遂于交分，限其多少。
现代文：于是就在交会时区分，固定其多少。
English: Therefore, at the time of the meeting, it was decided to make a distinction and fix the amount.

古文：其五，古历加时，朔望同术。
现代文：其五，古代历法的加时，初一与十五同一个方法。
English: Fifth, the addition of time of the ancient calendar, the first day and the fifteenth day of the same method.

古文：胄玄积候，知日蚀所在，随方改变，傍正高下，每处不同。
现代文：张胄玄连日伺望，得知日蚀所在处，随方位而改变，正侧高低，每个地方都不一样。
English: Zhang Yuyuan watched the eclipse day after day, and learned that the location of the eclipse changed with the direction, and the height of the front side was different in each place.

古文：交有浅深，迟速亦异，约时立差，皆会天象。
现代文：相交有深有浅，快慢不同，规定时间订立差别，都符合天象。
English: Intercourse has depth and shallowness, speed and slowness are different, and the prescribed time for conclusion is different, all of which are in line with the celestial phenomenon.

古文：其六，古历交分即为蚀数，去交十四度者，食一分；去交十三度，食二分；去交十度，食三分；每近一度，食益一分；当交即蚀既。
现代文：其六，古代历法相交之分就是日月亏蚀数，距相交十四度的，亏蚀一分；距相交十三度的，亏蚀二分；距相交十度的，亏蚀三分；每近一度，亏蚀增加一分；相交时就是全蚀。
English: Sixth, according to the ancient calendar, the point of intersection is the sun and moon eclipse loss, and the distance of intersection is fourteen degrees, the eclipse loss is one point; the distance of intersection is thirteen degrees, the eclipse loss is two points; the distance of intersection is ten degrees, the eclipse loss is three points; for every nearly one degree, the eclipse loss increases by one point; the intersection is a total eclipse.

古文：其应多少，自古诸历，未悉其原。
现代文：应验的情况有多少，自古以来的各个历法，都不知道其原本。
English: No matter how many calendars have been used since ancient times, their origin is unknown.

古文：胄玄积候，知当交之中，月掩日不能毕尽，故其蚀反少；去交五六时，月在日内，掩日便尽，故其蚀及既。
现代文：张胄玄连日伺望，得知相交之时，月亮不能完全遮掩太阳，所以亏蚀反而少；距相交五六个时辰，月亮在太阳里，完全遮掩太阳。所以亏蚀才全。
English: Zhang Yixuan waited for several days and learned that at the time of conjunction, the moon could not completely cover the sun, so the loss of erosion was small; five or six hours after conjunction, the moon was in the sun, completely covering the sun. Therefore, the loss of erosion was complete.

古文：自此以后，更远者，其蚀又少。
现代文：自这以后，再远的，亏蚀又少。
English: Since then, there has been little further erosion.

古文：交之前后，在冬至，皆尔。若近夏至，其率又差。
现代文：相交前后，在冬至都是这样，如果接近夏至，标准又不同。
English: Before and after interbreeding, this is the case during the winter solstice. If it is close to the summer solstice, the standard is different.

古文：胄玄所立蚀分，最为详密。
现代文：张胄玄订立的蚀分，最为详备缜密。
English: Zhang Yixuan's etymology is the most detailed.

古文：其七，古历二分，昼夜皆等。
现代文：其七，古代历法的二分，昼夜均等。
English: Seventh, according to the ancient calendar, the day and night are of equal length.

古文：胄玄积候，知其有差。
现代文：张胄玄连日伺望，得知有所差别。
English: Zhang Yuyuan waited for days and learned that there was a difference.

古文：春、秋二分，昼多夜漏半刻。
现代文：春、秋二分，白天比黑夜多半个漏刻。
English: At the equinoxes of spring and autumn, there is half an hour more daylight than night.

古文：皆由日行迟疾盈缩使其然也。
现代文：都是由太阳运行快慢圆缺所导致的。
English: are all caused by the sun's erratic movement.

古文：凡此，胄玄独得于心，论者服其精密。
现代文：如此等等，张胄玄独自心神领会，论者很佩服他推算的精密。
English: So on and so forth, Zhang Yuxuan alone understands the mind of God, and commentators admire the precision of his calculations.

古文：大业中，卒于官。
现代文：大业年间，死于官任上。
English: During the Taiei era, he died in office.

