古文：孙子曰：凡先处战地而待敌者佚，后处战地而趋战者劳，故善战者，致人而不致于人。
现代文：孙子说：两军交战，凡先到达战地而等待敌人的就从容、主动，后到达战地而仓促应战的就疲劳、被动。所以，善于指挥作战的人，总是能调动敌人而不被敌人所调动。
English: Sun Tzu said: When two armies engage in battle, those who arrive at the battlefield first and wait for the enemy will be calm and active, while those who arrive later and rush to the battlefield will be tired and passive. Therefore, a person who is good at commanding battles can always mobilize the enemy without being mobilized by the enemy.

古文：能使敌人自至者，利之也；能使敌人不得至者，害之也，故敌佚能劳之，饱能饥之，安能动之。
现代文：能使敌人自动进入我方预定区域，是以小利引诱的结果；能使敌人不能到达其预定地域的，是因为给敌人制造困难，设法使它别有顾忌而阻止了它的行动。
English: If we can make the enemy enter our predetermined area automatically, it is the result of tempting him with small profits; if we can make the enemy unable to reach his predetermined area, it is because we create difficulties for the enemy and try to make him have scruples and stop his actions.

古文：出其所不趋，趋其所不意。行千里而不劳者，行于无人之地也。
现代文：所以，即使敌人休整得好，也能设法使它疲劳；即使敌人粮草充足，也能设法使它饥困；即使敌军驻扎安稳，也能够使它移动。
English: Therefore, even if the enemy is well-rested, you can try to make him tired; even if the enemy is well-fed, you can try to make him hungry; even if the enemy is stationed safely, you can make him move.

古文：攻而必取者，攻其所不守也；守而必固者，守其所不攻也。
现代文：攻击时，向敌人来不及急救的地方进军；进军时，向敌人意料不到的地方挺进，定能获胜。
English: When attacking, advance to a place where the enemy is too late for first aid; when advancing, advance to a place unexpected by the enemy, and you will surely win.

古文：故善攻者，敌不知其所守；善守者，敌不知其所攻。
现代文：军队行进上千里不感到疲惫，是因为行进在没有敌人及其没有设防的地区。
English: An army marches for thousands of miles without getting tired because it is marching in an area where there is no enemy and no fortifications.

古文：微乎微乎，至于无形。神乎神乎，至于无声，故能为敌之司命。进而不可御者，冲其虚也；退而不可追者，速而不可及也。
现代文：进攻就一定会获胜，是因为攻击的是敌人疏于防守的地方；防守必然稳固，是因为防守在敌人无力进攻的地方。所以，善于进攻的，能做到使敌方不知道在哪防守；善于防守的，使敌人不知道从哪进攻，不知怎样进攻。真微妙啊！微妙得看不出一点形迹；真神秘啊！
English: The attack will surely win, because the attack is where the enemy is negligent in defense; the defense must be stable, because the defense is where the enemy is unable to attack. Therefore, those who are good at attacking can make the enemy not know where to defend; those who are good at defense, so that the enemy does not know where to attack, does not know how to attack. It's so subtle! It's so subtle that you can't see a trace; it's so mysterious!

古文：故我欲战，敌虽高垒深沟，不得不与我战者，攻其所必救也；我不欲战，虽画地而守之，敌不得与我战者，乖其所之也。
现代文：神秘到听不出一点声息。正因如此，所以才能成为敌人命运的主宰者。进攻时，敌人无法抵御，是因为冲击了敌人空虚的地方；撤退时，敌人无法追击，是因为退得非常迅速，敌人追赶不上。所以，我军若求战，敌人即使有高墙深壕可以据守，也不得不出来应战，是由于我军进攻的是敌人所必救的地方；我军若不想交战，即使画地而守，敌人也无法和我军交战，是因为我军已设法改变了敌军进攻的方向。
English: When attacking, the enemy can't defend itself because it hits an empty place; when retreating, the enemy can't pursue because it retreats very quickly and the enemy can't catch up. Therefore, if our army wants to fight, even if the enemy has high walls and deep trenches to defend themselves, they have to come out to fight, because our army attacks the place that the enemy must save; if our army doesn't want to fight, even if it defends the ground, the enemy can't fight with our army, because our army has managed to change the direction of the enemy's attack.

古文：故形人而我无形，则我专而敌分。我专为一，敌分为十，是以十攻其一也，则我众而敌寡；能以众击寡者，则吾之所与战者，约矣。
现代文：所以，使敌人暴露实力而我军能隐藏自己的行迹，我军就可以集中兵力，使敌人兵力分散；我军把兵力集中于一处，设法使敌人的兵力分散于十处，我军就能以十倍于敌的兵力打击敌人，这样就能在局部战场上造成我众而敌寡的有利态势；既然能造成以众击寡的有利态势，那么敌军也就难有作为了。
English: Therefore, so that the enemy can reveal its strength and our army can hide its movements, our army can concentrate its forces and disperse the enemy's forces; our army can concentrate its forces in one place and try to disperse the enemy's forces in ten places, and our army can strike the enemy with ten times the enemy's forces. In this way, we can create a favorable situation of being outnumbered by the enemy on a local battlefield; since it can create a favorable situation of being outnumbered by the enemy, it is difficult for the enemy to do anything.

古文：吾所与战之地不可知，不可知，则敌所备者多；敌所备者多，则吾之所与战者，寡矣。
现代文：我军所要进攻的地点事先不能让敌人知道，敌人不知道进攻的地点，它就要分散兵力处处防备；敌人防备的地方越多，兵力越分散，这样，能够与我军在特定的地点直接交战的敌军就少了。
English: We cannot let the enemy know in advance where our army is going to attack. If the enemy does not know the location of the attack, it will have to disperse its forces to prepare everywhere. The more places the enemy defends, the more dispersed its forces will be. In this way, the number of enemy troops that can directly engage our army at a specific location will be reduced.

古文：故备前则后寡，备后则前寡，备左则右寡，备右则左寡，无所不备，则无所不寡。
现代文：所以，着重防备前面，后方的兵力就薄弱；着重防备后面，前方的兵力就薄弱；着重防备左翼，右翼的兵力就薄弱；着重防备右翼，左翼的兵力就薄弱；处处防备，就处处兵力薄弱。
English: Therefore, focus on the front and the rear will be weak; focus on the rear and the front will be weak; focus on the left and the right will be weak; focus on the right and the left will be weak; focus on the front and the back will be weak; focus on the rear and the front will be weak; focus on the left and the right will be weak; focus on the right and the left will be weak; focus on the front and the back will be weak; focus on the rear and the front will be weak; focus on the left and the right will be weak; focus on the right and the left will be weak; focus on the right and the left will be weak; focus on the

古文：寡者，备人者也；众者，使人备己者也。
现代文：敌人兵力薄弱的原因，是由于处处防备，兵力分散；我方兵力所以多，是由于迫使敌人分兵防备我军的结果。
English: The reason why the enemy's forces are weak is due to the fact that they are prepared everywhere and their forces are dispersed. The reason why our forces are so large is due to the fact that we have forced the enemy to divide their forces to protect our forces.

古文：故知战之地，知战之日，则可千里而会战。
现代文：能预料同敌人交战的地点，能预料同敌人交战的时间，那么算是跋涉千里也可以同敌人交战。
English: If you can predict the place where you will engage the enemy, if you can predict the time when you will engage the enemy, then you can engage the enemy even if you have to travel thousands of miles.

古文：不知战地，不知战日，则左不能救右，右不能救左，前不能救后，后不能救前，而况远者数十里，近者数里乎？
现代文：如果不能预料交战的地点，也不能能预料交战的日期，仓促遇敌，则会致使左翼难救右翼，右翼也难救左翼；前军难救后军，后军难救前军，更何况各路军队远的相隔数十里，近的也有数里呢？
English: If the place of engagement cannot be predicted, nor can the date of engagement be predicted, and the enemy is encountered in haste, it will cause the left wing to be unable to save the right wing, and the right wing to be unable to save the left wing; the former army will be unable to save the latter army, and the latter army will be unable to save the former army, not to mention the fact that the two armies are separated by dozens of miles, and even several miles at close range.

古文：以吾度之，越人之兵虽多，亦奚益于胜败哉？
现代文：依我分析，越国兵力虽多，对于决定战争的胜败又有什么补益呢？
English: According to my analysis, although Vietnam has a large number of troops, what is the benefit of deciding the victory or defeat of the war?

古文：故曰：胜可为也。
现代文：所以说，胜利是可以争取到的。
English: So, victory is within our grasp.

古文：敌虽众，可使无斗。
现代文：敌人虽然总量多，但由于处处设防而分散，所以可以使他们失去战斗力。
English: Although the total number of enemies is large, they are dispersed due to fortifications everywhere, so they can lose their combat effectiveness.

古文：故策之而知得失之计，作之而知动静之理，形之而知死生之地，角之而知有余不足之处。故形兵之极，至于无形。
现代文：所以要认真分析判断，以求明了敌人作战计划的优劣长短；挑动敌人，以求了解他们的行动规律；示形诱敌，以求摸清其所处地形的有利与不利；进行试探性进攻，以求探明敌人兵力部署的强弱多寡。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to carefully analyze judgments in order to find out the advantages and disadvantages of the enemy's battle plan; provoke the enemy in order to understand their rules of action; show the shape to lure the enemy in order to find out the advantages and disadvantages of the terrain in which it is located; and carry out exploratory attacks in order to find out the strength and weakness of the enemy's troop deployment.

古文：无形，则深间不能窥，智者不能谋。因形而措胜于众，众不能知；人皆知我所以胜之形，而莫知吾所以制胜之形。
现代文：所以，示形诱敌的方法运用到极妙的程度，能使人们看不出一点形迹，看不出一点形迹，即使是潜伏再深的间谍也窥探不到我军的底细，即使智慧高超的敌军将领也无计可施。根据敌情采取制胜的策略，即使摆在众人面前，众人也理解不了。人们知道我克敌制胜的方法，却不知道我是怎样运用这些方法制胜的。
English: Therefore, the method of showing and luring the enemy can be used to an extremely wonderful extent, so that people can not see a trace, can not see a trace, even if the spies lurking deeper can not spy on the details of our army, even if the enemy generals are highly intelligent, they can not do anything. According to the enemy situation to adopt a winning strategy, even if it is placed in front of everyone, people can not understand. People know my methods of defeating the enemy, but they do not know how I use these methods to win.

古文：故其战胜不复，而应形于无穷。
现代文：因为每一次作战取胜所采用的战术都不是简单的重复，而是适应不同的情况，变化无穷。
English: Because the tactics used to win every battle are not simple repetitions, but adapt to different situations and change endlessly.

古文：夫兵形象水，水之形，避高而趋下，兵之形，避实而击虚。
现代文：所以说，用兵的规律像水的流动，水避开高处而向低处奔流，用兵的规律是避开敌军的主力或者防守牢固之处，而攻击其薄弱的地方。
English: Therefore, the rule of using soldiers is like the flow of water. Water avoids high places and rushes to low places. The rule of using soldiers is to avoid the main force of the enemy army or the place where the defense is strong, and attack its weak place.

古文：水因地而制流，兵因敌而制胜。
现代文：水因地势的高低而决定流向，作战则根据敌情而采用不同的制胜之策。
English: The direction of water flow is determined by the height of the terrain, and different winning strategies are adopted according to the enemy situation.

古文：故兵无常势，水无常形，能因敌变化而取胜者，谓之神。
现代文：所以，用兵作战没有固定不变的方式方法，就像水流没有固定的形态一样；能依据敌情变化而取胜的，就称得上用兵如神了。
English: Therefore, there is no fixed and unchanging way and method of fighting with soldiers, just as there is no fixed form of water flow; those who can win according to the changes in the enemy situation can be called soldiers like gods.

古文：故五行无常胜，四时无常位，日有短长，月有死生。
现代文：所以用兵的规律就像自然现象一样， 五行 相生相克，四季依次交替，白天有短有长，月亮有缺有圆，永远处于变化之中。
English: Therefore, the rule of using soldiers is just like a natural phenomenon, the five elements are interrelated, the four seasons alternate in turn, the day is short and long, the moon is short and round, and it is always in a state of change.

