古文：孝文皇帝，高祖中子也，母曰薄姬。
现代文：孝文皇帝，是汉高祖的第四子，母亲是薄姬。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was the fourth son of Emperor Gaozu, and his mother was Bo Ji.

古文：高祖十一年，诛陈豨，定代地，立为代王，都中都。
现代文：高祖十一年，诛杀陈豨，平定代地，就立他为代王，定都于中都。
English: In the eleventh year of Gaozu's reign, he killed Chen Xi and established a new capital in Zhongdu.

古文：十七年秋，高后崩，诸吕谋为乱，欲危刘氏。
现代文：代王十七年秋，吕后去世，诸吕图谋政变，想夺取刘汉政权。
English: In the autumn of the 17th year of the king's reign, Lü Guo died, and Zhu Lutu plotted a coup to seize power from Liu Han.

古文：丞相陈平、太尉周勃、朱虚侯刘章等共诛之，谋立代王。
现代文：丞相陈平、太尉周勃、朱虚侯刘章等共诛吕氏，共商迎立代王刘恒为皇帝。
English: The chancellor Chen Ping, the lieutenant Zhou Bo, the prince Zhu Xuhou Liu Zhang, and others sided with the Lv clan and jointly negotiated the enthronement of the acting king Liu Heng as emperor.

古文：语在《高后纪》、《高五王传》。
现代文：史事记入《汉书·高后纪、高五王传》中。
English: The historical events were recorded in "Hanshu, Gao Hou Ji, Gao Wu Wang Chuan."

古文：大臣遂使人迎代王。
现代文：大臣们派人迎接代王。
English: The ministers sent someone to meet the acting king.

古文：郎中令张武等议，皆曰： 汉大臣皆故高帝时将，习兵事，多谋诈，其属意非止此也，特畏高帝、吕太后威耳。
现代文：代王的郎中令张武等商议后，说： 汉朝大臣都是高帝时的一些老将，熟习军事，深谙权谋机诈，其内心并不满足于现在的地位，只是害怕高帝与吕后的威严罢了。
English: After deliberation, the deputy king's brother-in-law Zhang Wu and others said: The ministers of the Han Dynasty are all veterans of the time of Emperor Gao, familiar with military affairs, and familiar with power and deception. Their hearts are not satisfied with their current status, but they are afraid of the majesty of Emperor Gao and Empress Lv.

古文：今已诛诸吕，新喋血京师，以迎大王为名，实不可信。
现代文：现在诸吕已诛，又血溅京都，此时以迎大王入京称帝为名，实在令人难以置信。
English: Now that Zhu Lü has passed away, and blood is splattered in Kyoto, it is unbelievable that at this time the great king has entered the capital and is called the emperor.

古文：愿称疾无往，以观其变。 
现代文：希望大王以有病为由不要前往，以观察情况的变化。 
English: It is hoped that the king will not go on the grounds that he is ill, in order to observe changes in the situation.

古文：中尉宋昌进曰： 群臣之议皆非也。
现代文：中尉宋昌进言道： 他们这些议论是错误的。
English: Lieutenant Song Changjin said: The opinions of the ministers are all wrong.

古文：夫秦失其政，豪杰并起，人人自以为得之者以万数，然卒践天子位者，刘氏也，天下绝望，一矣。
现代文：秦朝朝纲紊乱，豪杰并起，想取代秦朝而得南面称帝的不下万人，但最后能君临天下的，仅刘氏一家，天下怀有非分之想的人已感绝望，这是其一。
English: The Qin Dynasty was a chaotic and chaotic period, and there were many heroes and heroines who wanted to replace the Qin Dynasty and become emperors in the south. However, only the Liu family was able to rule the world in the end. People around the world who harbored unreasonable thoughts felt despair. This was the first time.

古文：高帝王子弟，地犬牙相制，所谓盘石之宗也，天下服其强，二矣。
现代文：高皇帝封子弟为王，封地犬牙交错，这就成了磐石般的核心，天下服于刘汉的强大，这是其二。
English: Emperor Gao's fief son is the king, and the fiefs are intertwined. This has become the rock-like core, and the world is subject to the power of Liu Han. This is the second.

古文：汉兴，除秦烦苛，约法令，施德惠，人人自安，难动摇，三矣。
现代文：汉朝建立，废除了秦朝的苛敛，减省刑罚，广施德惠，人人自安，深得人心，此其三。
English: The establishment of the Han Dynasty abolished the harshness and austerity of the Qin Dynasty, reduced punishments, provided a wide range of benefits, made everyone feel safe, and won the hearts of the people.

古文：夫以吕太后之严，立诸吕为三王，擅权专制，然而太尉以一节入北军，一呼士皆袒左，为刘氏，畔诸吕，卒以灭之。
现代文：而以吕太后那样的威严，立诸吕为三王，擅权专制，然而太尉周勃持一符节进入北军，一声呼唤士卒都左袒，支持刘氏，反对诸吕，结果把吕氏消灭了。
English: However, with the majesty of Empress Dowager Lv, Zhu Lv was set up as the three kings, with arbitrary power. However, Lieutenant Zhou Bo entered the Northern Army with a trumpet and called out to the soldiers to support the Liu clan and oppose Zhu Lv. As a result, the Lv clan was eliminated.

古文：此乃天授，非人力也。
现代文：由此可见刘汉政权出于天授，不是靠少数人力可改变的。
English: This is what God has given us, not what man can do.

古文：今大臣虽欲为变，百姓弗为使，其党宁能专一邪？
现代文：如今虽然有的大臣想要发动政变，但百姓不愿听其驱使，靠他的少数党羽就能够达到目的吗？
English: Now, even if the minister wants to rebel, the people will not be driven by them. Can their followers unite with one heart and one mind?

古文：内有朱虚、东牟之亲，外畏吴、楚、淮南、琅邪、齐、代之强。
现代文：京都内有朱虚侯、东牟侯的团结，外有吴、楚、淮南、琅王牙、齐、代的强大。
English: In Kyoto, there is the unity of Zhu Xiu Hou and Dong Mou Hou, and outside there is the strength of Wu, Chu, Huainan, Qin Wang Ya, Qi and Deng.

古文：方今高帝子独淮南王与大王，大王又长，贤圣仁孝闻于天下，故大臣因天下之心而欲迎立大王，大王勿疑也。 
现代文：如今高帝之子只有淮南王与大王您，大王居长，圣贤仁孝，名播天下，所以朝中大臣顺万民之望而想迎立大王，大王就不必有所顾虑了。 
English: Nowadays, the only sons of Emperor Gao are King Huainan and the Great King You. The Great King Juchang, the Saint, the Wise and the Benevolent, are famous all over the world. Therefore, if the Minister of the Middle Kingdom wants to welcome the Great King in accordance with the wishes of all the people, the Great King does not have to worry.

古文：代王报太后，计犹豫未定。
现代文：代王禀报太后，一时也难以决策。
English: The empress dowager, the queen dowager, also found it difficult to make decisions.

古文：卜之，兆得大横。占曰： 大横庚庚，余为天王，夏启以光。 
现代文：便让人占卜，兆得大横，卜人占辞道： 大横亘亘，我为天王，夏启光宗耀祖。 
English: So let people do divination. The signs are very ominous. The diviners said in their divination: Ominous and eternal, I am the heavenly king, the glorious ancestor of the Xiaqi Guang sect.

古文：代王曰： 寡人固已为王，又何王乎？ 
现代文：代王说： 寡人本来就是王，又何必加一个王号呢？ 
English: The king's representative said, "Since you are the king, why do you need to add a title?

古文：卜人曰： 所谓天王者，乃天子也。 
现代文：卜人说： 卦中所谓的天王，就是天子啊！ 
English: The Buddha said, "The so-called Heavenly King in the sutras is the Son of Heaven!

古文：于是代王乃遣太后弟薄昭见太尉勃，勃等具言所以迎立王者。
现代文：于是代王派遣太后的弟弟薄昭见太尉周勃，周勃等详细报告了迎立代王的真意。
English: As a result, the acting king sent the younger brother of the empress dowager, Bo Zhao, to see the lieutenant Zhou Bo, and Zhou Bo and others reported in detail the true intention of welcoming the acting king.

古文：昭还报曰： 信矣，无可疑者。 
现代文：薄昭回报代王说： 是可信的，没什么可怀疑的。 
English: Bo Zhao replied on behalf of the king: It is credible, there is nothing to doubt.

古文：代王笑谓宋昌曰： 果如公言。 
现代文：代王笑对宋昌说： 果然如先生所言。 
English: On behalf of Wang Xiao, he said to Song Chang: As you said.

古文：乃令宋昌骖乘，张武等六人乘六乘传，诣长安，至高陵止，而使宋昌先之长安观变。
现代文：就派宋昌主管车驾，派张武等六人快马去长安报信。车驾到高帝陵停止前进，而派宋昌先到长安观察动静。
English: He sent Song Chang in charge to drive the car and Zhang Wu and six other people to go to Chang'an to report the news. The car drove to the tomb of Emperor Gao to stop moving, and sent Song Chang to Chang'an to observe the situation.

古文：昌至渭桥，丞相已下皆迎。
现代文：宋昌到达渭桥，丞相以下的官员都来迎接。
English: When Song Chang arrived at Qianqiao, officials from the prime minister down came to greet him.

古文：昌还报，代王乃进至渭桥。
现代文：宋昌到高陵回报代王，于是代王也进达渭桥。
English: Song Chang went to Gaoling to return the king, so the king also entered the bridge.

古文：群臣拜谒称臣，代王下拜。
现代文：群臣以臣子之礼拜见代王，代王亦谦逊回拜。
English: The group of courtiers bowed to the acting king, and the acting king humbly bowed back.

古文：太尉勃进曰： 愿请间。 
现代文：太尉周勃进言说： 请求秘密禀陈。 
English: Second Lieutenant Zhou Bo Jin said, "Ask for the secret.

古文：宋昌曰： 所言公，公言之；所言私，王者无私。 
现代文：宋昌说： 要是太尉所陈的是公事，就请当着众臣的面上奏；要是所陈的是私事，王者是无私的。 
English: Song Chang said, "If what the captain says is a public matter, please say it in front of all your subjects; if it is a private matter, the king is selfless.

古文：太尉勃乃跪上天子玺。
现代文：太尉周勃就跪着送上天子玉玺。
English: Captain Zhou Bo kneeled down and presented Tianzi with the Jade Urn.

古文：代王谢曰： 至邸而议之。 
现代文：代王辞谢说： 请到京都王宫再议。 
English: The acting king said, "Please come to the Kyoto Imperial Palace for reconsideration."

古文：闰月己酉，入代邸。
现代文：闰九月二十九日，进入代王官邸。
English: On September 29, he entered the official residence of the acting king.

古文：群臣从至，上议曰： 丞相臣平、太尉臣勃、大将军臣武、御史大夫臣苍、宗正臣郢、朱虚侯臣章、东牟侯臣兴居、典客臣揭再拜言大王足下：子弘等皆非孝惠皇帝子，不当奉宗庙。
现代文：群臣都跟着来了，呈上奏议说： 丞相臣陈平、太尉臣周勃、大将军臣柴武、御史大夫臣张苍、宗正臣刘郢、朱虚侯臣刘章、东牟侯臣刘兴居、典客臣刘揭再拜进言于大王足下：子弘等都不是孝惠帝之子，不应继承帝位。
English: The group of courtiers all followed, and submitted a report, saying: "Courtier Minister Chen Ping, Second Lieutenant Minister Zhou Bo, Senior General Minister Chai Wu, Senior Historian Minister Zhang Cang, Grand Marshal Minister Liu Wei, Grand Marshal Minister Zhu Xi, Grand Marshal Minister Liu Zhang, Grand Marshal Minister Liu Xingju, Grand Marshal Minister Liu Jie, and Grand Guest Minister Liu Jie, submit a report to the king: Zihong and others are not the sons of Emperor Xiao Hui, and should not inherit the throne.

古文：臣谨请阴安侯、顷王后、琅邪王、列侯、吏二千石议，大王高皇帝子，宜为嗣，愿大王即天子位。 
现代文：臣谨请阴安、顷王后、琅王牙王、列侯、吏二千石等相议，大王是高皇帝之子，应当继承，愿大王即天子位。 
English: The courtier respectfully asked Yin'an, the queen of He, the king of Shao, the king of Ya, the vassals, and the officials of two thousand stones to discuss. The great king is the son of Emperor Gao and should inherit. May the great king be the son of heaven.

古文：代王曰： 奉高帝宗庙，重事也。
现代文：代王说： 奉祀高帝宗庙，这是重大的事。
English: The acting king said, "It is an important matter to enshrine Emperor Gao's ancestral temple.

古文：寡人不佞，不足以称。
现代文：寡人不才，不足以担当此任。
English: No one is good enough to do the job.

古文：愿请楚王计宜者，寡人弗敢当。 
现代文：愿请高帝之弟楚王考虑合适人选，寡人实不敢当。 
English: I would like to ask the younger brother of Emperor Gao, King Chu, to consider a suitable candidate.

古文：群臣皆伏，固请。
现代文：群臣都拜伏于地，坚决请求代王同意。
English: All the courtiers prostrated themselves on the ground and firmly requested the consent of the acting king.

古文：代王西乡让者三，南乡让者再。
现代文：代王向西辞让三次，向南辞让两次。
English: The king-in-waiting humbly conceded three times when facing west, and humbly conceded twice when facing south.

古文：丞相平等皆曰： 臣伏计之，大王奉高祖宗庙最宜称，虽天下诸侯万民皆以为宜。臣等为宗庙、社稷计，不敢忽。愿大王幸听臣等。
现代文：丞相陈平等都说： 臣衷心认为，大王继承高皇帝大统最为相称，天下诸侯万民都认为是天经地义，臣等为宗庙社稷考虑，不敢怠慢，要求大王能俯顺臣等的请求。
English: Minister of Justice Chen Pingdu said: The minister sincerely believes that it is most appropriate for the great king to succeed Emperor Gao. All countries and peoples in the world believe that it is natural and right. The minister should consider the interests of the family, temple and society, and dare not neglect the request of the great king to submit to the request of the minister.

古文：臣谨奉天子玺、符再拜上。 
现代文：臣谨奉天子玉玺符节再拜呈上。 
English: I humbly present it to you on the occasion of the Day of the Jade Rooster.

古文：代王曰： 宗室、将、相、王、列侯以为莫宜寡人，寡人不敢辞。 
现代文：代王说： 既然宗室、将相、王侯认为寡人是合适的皇位继承人，寡人就不敢推辞了。 
English: The acting king said, "Since the imperial family, generals, and princes believe that no one is a suitable heir to the throne, no one dares to refuse.

古文：遂即天子位。
现代文：于是即天子位。
English: As a result, he was enthroned as the Son of Heaven.

古文：群臣以次侍。
现代文：群臣各依原职。
English: The group of retainers went their separate ways.

古文：使太仆婴、东牟侯兴居先清宫，奉天子法驾迎代邸。
现代文：派太仆灌婴、东牟侯兴居先清扫未央宫，奉天子仪仗到代王馆舍迎接。
English: Empress Dowager sent her servants, Guan Yu and Dong Mou Hou Xing Ju, to sweep the palace first, and they went to meet the new king at the palace.

古文：皇帝即日夕入未央宫。
现代文：皇帝当日晚进入未央官。
English: In the evening of the same day, the emperor entered the Miang Palace.

古文：夜拜宋昌为卫将军，领南、北军，张武为郎中令，行殿中。
现代文：当夜封宋昌为卫将军，统领南北军，张武为郎中令，巡查殿中。
English: That night, Song Chang was appointed as the general of Wei, leading the North and South armies, and Zhang Wu was the second-in-command, inspecting the palace.

古文：还坐前殿，下诏曰： 制诏丞相、太尉、御史大夫：间者诸吕用事擅权，谋为大逆，欲危刘氏宗庙，赖将、相、列侯、宗室、大臣诛之，皆伏其辜。
现代文：帝坐于前殿，下诏令说： 诏谕丞相、太尉、御史大夫：昔日诸吕专擅权柄，阴谋篡逆，想危害刘氏宗庙，赖将相、列侯、宗室、大臣将其诛灭，都各伏其罪。
English: The emperor sat in the front hall and issued an imperial edict, saying: Imperial edict to the prime minister, the second lieutenant, and the chief historian: In the past, the lords of the Lü disposed of power, plotted treason, wanted to endanger the Liu family temple, and relied on the generals, the vassals, the family members, and the ministers to destroy it. All of them were guilty of their crimes.

古文：朕初即位，其赦天下，赐民爵一级，女子百户牛、酒，酺五日。 
现代文：朕初登基，应该大赦天下，赏赐天下男子爵一级，女子每百户赐牛若干头，酒若干石。
English: When I first ascended to the throne, I should grant a general amnesty to the world, award the world's men a first-class peerage, and give every hundred households a number of cattle and a number of stones of wine.

古文：元年冬十月辛亥，皇帝见于高庙。
现代文：聚饮五日为欢。 文帝元年冬十月二日，皇帝在高祖庙接见群臣。
English: On October 2, the winter of the first year of Emperor Wen's reign, the emperor received a group of courtiers at Gaozhu Temple.

古文：遣车骑将军薄昭迎皇太后于代。
现代文：派车骑将军薄昭去代地迎皇太后到京。
English: He sent the cavalry general Bo Zhao to welcome the empress dowager to Beijing.

古文：诏曰： 前吕产自置为相国，吕禄为上将军，擅遣将军灌婴将兵击齐，欲代刘氏。
现代文：下诏说： 前时吕产自封为相国，吕禄为上将军，擅遣将军灌婴领兵击齐，企图取代刘汉。
English: The next edict said: In the past, when Lyu Sang was self-appointed as a neighboring country, and Lulu was a senior general, he arbitrarily dispatched General Guan Yu to lead the troops to a draw, in an attempt to replace Liu Han.

古文：婴留荥阳，与诸侯合谋以诛吕氏。
现代文：灌将军停兵荥阳，与诸侯合谋以诛吕氏。
English: General Kan halted his army at Shenyang and conspired with the lords to subjugate the Lu clan.

古文：吕产欲为不善，丞相平与太尉勃等谋夺产等军。
现代文：吕产欲做篡逆之，陈平丞相与周勃太尉等运谋夺取吕产所控制的北军。
English: Liusan wanted to do the opposite, and Minister Chen Ping and Lieutenant Zhou Bo plotted to seize the Northern Army controlled by Liusan.

古文：朱虚侯章首先捕斩产。
现代文：朱虚侯刘章首先捕斩吕产。
English: Zhu Xunhou and Liu Zhang first captured and beheaded Liusan.

古文：太尉勃身率襄平侯通持节承诏入北军。
现代文：太尉周勃亲率襄平侯通持节承诏入北军。
English: Captain Zhou Boqin led by Xiangping Hou Tongsheng into the Northern Army.

古文：典客揭夺吕禄印。
现代文：典客刘揭智夺吕禄相印。
English: The guest of honor, Liu Jiechi, took Lu Lu's seal.

古文：其益封太尉勃邑万户，赐金五千斤。
现代文：因此加封太尉周勃邑万户，赐金五千斤。
English: As a result, he was awarded the title of Tai Lai Zhou Bo Yu Wan Hui and 5,000 jin of gold.

古文：丞相平、将军婴邑各三千户，金二千斤。
现代文：加封丞相陈平、将军灌婴邑各三千户，赐金二千斤。
English: In addition, 3,000 households in each of Chen Ping, the Minister of War, and Guanzhong, the General, were given 2,000 jin of gold.

古文：朱虚侯章、襄平侯通邑各二千户，金千斤。
现代文：加封朱虚侯刘章、襄平侯刘通邑各二千户，金千斤。
English: In addition, 2,000 households in Zhuxu Township, Liu Zhang Township, and Yangping Township, Liu Tong Township, will each receive 1,000 kg of gold.

古文：封典客揭为信阳侯，赐金千斤。 
现代文：封典客刘揭为阳信侯，赐金千斤。 
English: The guest of the ceremony, Liu Jie, was Yang Xinhou, and was given a gold coin.

古文：十二月，立赵幽王子遂为赵王，徙琅邪王泽为燕王。
现代文：十二月，立赵幽王之子刘遂为赵王，迁调琅王牙王刘泽为燕王。
English: In December, Liu Sui, the son of Zhao Yu Wang, was named Zhao Wang, and Liu Ze, the son of Zhao Yu Wang, was named Yan Wang.

古文：吕氏所夺齐、楚地皆归之。尽除收帑相坐律令。
现代文：吕氏所夺齐、楚地都归还原主，废除秦法 一人有罪，株连全家 的律令。
English: The Lv clan's conquered lands and Chu lands were all returned to their original owners, and the Qin law was abolished. One person was guilty, but the whole family was punished.

古文：正月，有司请蚤建太子，所以尊宗庙也。
现代文：正月，有关官吏请文帝早立太子，是为了尊崇宗庙。
English: In the first month of the year, the relevant officials asked Emperor Wen to crown the prince early, in order to respect the ancestral temple.

古文：诏曰： 朕既不德，上帝神明未歆飨也，天下人民未有惬志。
现代文：文帝下诏说： 朕德行浅薄，上天神明并不情愿享受我对他们的祭祀，天下人民也认为我还不是他们理想中的皇帝。
English: Emperor Wen issued the following edict: My virtue is shallow, the heavenly deities are not willing to enjoy my sacrifice to them, and the people of the world also think that I am not yet their ideal emperor.

古文：今纵不能博求天下贤圣有德之人而嬗天下焉，而曰豫建太子，是重吾不德也。
现代文：今日不能广求天下圣贤有德之人来接替帝位，却建议要早立太子，这就使我的薄德更亏了。
English: Today, I can't appeal to all the sages and virtuous people in the world to succeed the throne, but I can suggest that a crown prince should be appointed early, which makes my lack of virtue even worse.

古文：谓天下何？
现代文：这怎么能满足天下的人对我的期待？
English: How can this meet the world's expectations of me?

古文：其安之。 
现代文：立太子事暂缓计议。 
English: Let's talk about it later.

古文：有司曰： 豫建太子，所以重宗庙、社稷，不忘天下也。 
现代文：有关官吏又上奏： 早定太子，正是以宗庙社稷为重，证明皇上时时把天下大事牢记于心的。 
English: Relevant officials also played up: Prince Hayasada, it is precisely the importance of the family temple and shrine that proves that the emperor always keeps the world's major events in mind.

古文：上曰： 楚王，季父也，春秋高，阅天下之义理多矣，明于国家之体。
现代文：皇上说： 楚王，是朕的叔父，年高德劭，具有丰富的阅历与经验，对治理国事了如指掌。
English: The emperor said: King Chu Rong is my uncle. He is old and virtuous, has a wealth of experience, and knows everything about governing the country.

古文：吴王于朕，兄也；淮南王，弟也：皆秉德以陪朕，岂为不豫哉！
现代文：吴王、淮南王与朕是兄弟。他们都是秉德以辅朕，这岂不是早已安排好了皇位继承人么！
English: King Wu and King Huainan are my brothers. They are both virtuous and help me. Isn't this the heir to the throne already arranged?

古文：诸侯王、宗室昆弟有功臣，多贤及有德义者，若举有德以陪朕之不能终，是社稷之灵，天下之福也。
现代文：各侯王宗室兄弟中有不少功臣，有不少贤德仁义之人。要是从上述贤人中推举有崇高德行的以接替朕不能胜任的帝位，这就是社稷之灵，天下之福了。
English: There are many meritorious vassals among the princes' and princes' brothers-in-law, as well as many virtuous, benevolent, and righteous people. If, from the above-mentioned virtuous people, one is chosen to succeed to the imperial throne, which I am not qualified to do, this will be the spirit of the community and the blessing of the world.

古文：今不选举焉，而曰必子，人其以朕为忘贤有德者而专于子，非所以忧天下也。朕甚不取。 
现代文：今日不去推选贤人，而说一定要立太子，人们就会认为朕忘记了贤德之人而一心要让自己的儿子继位，这不是真正的在关心天下大事，朕实不愿采纳。 
English: If we do not choose a wise man today, but say that we must establish a crown prince, people will think that we have forgotten the wise man and are only interested in having our son succeed to the throne. This is not a true concern for world affairs, and I really do not want to adopt it.

古文：有司固请曰： 古者殷、周有国，治安皆且千岁，有天下者莫长焉，用此道也。
现代文：有关官员再三请求说： 古代殷、周得天下，长治久安近千年。以往有天下的都不及殷周相传久远，就是因为殷、周都采用传位于太子之道。
English: Relevant officials have repeatedly requested that: In ancient times, Yin and Zhou ruled the world and maintained long-term stability for nearly a thousand years. In the past, nothing in the world was as long-lived as Yin and Zhou, because Yin and Zhou both adopted the way of being crowned prince.

古文：立嗣必子，所从来远矣。
现代文：立太子一定要是皇帝的儿子，历史上从来如此。
English: He must make his son his heir, which he did a long time ago.

古文：高帝始平天下，建诸侯，为帝者太祖。
现代文：高皇帝开始平定天下，建立诸侯，成为刘汉皇帝的太祖。
English: Emperor Gao began to pacify the world, establish princes, and became the great-grandfather of Emperor Liu Han.

古文：诸侯王、列侯始受国者亦皆为其国祖。
现代文：各侯王列侯开始受封国的也都成为封国的国祖。
English: All the princes and lords became the founding fathers of the feudal state when they began to receive the feudal state.

古文：子孙继嗣，世世不绝，天下之大义也。
现代文：子孙继承，世世不绝，这是天下的公理。
English: It is a universal axiom that children inherit from their parents, generation after generation.

古文：故高帝设之以抚海内。
现代文：所以高祖立太子以安定四海。
English: That's why Gao Zu set up the crown prince to bring stability to the four seas.

古文：今释宜建而更选于诸侯宗室，非高帝之志也。
现代文：今日放弃应该立子为太子的事不办，而另从诸侯宗室中去进行推选，这不是高皇帝的原意。
English: It was not Emperor Gao's original intention to give up the idea of appointing a son as crown prince today, and instead to conduct the election from among the vassal families.

古文：更议不宜。
现代文：另行推选是不合适的。
English: It is not appropriate to re-establish someone else's practice.

古文：子启最长，敦厚慈仁，请建以为太子。 
现代文：皇子启是长子，敦厚慈仁，请皇上立他为太。 
English: Prince Kai is the eldest son of Tun Hou Ci Ren, please ask the emperor to make him the mother.

古文：上乃许之。
现代文：皇上终于同意了。
English: The Emperor agreed.

古文：因赐天下民当为父后者爵一级。
现代文：因此赐天下人民应为父亲的继承人的爵一级。
English: Therefore, the people of the world should give a knighthood to the father's successor.

古文：封将军薄昭为轵侯。
现代文：封将军薄昭为轵侯。
English: General Bo Zhao was appointed as the new viceroy.

古文：三月，有司请立皇后。皇太后曰： 立太子母窦氏为皇后。 
现代文：三月，有关官吏请求立皇后，皇太后说： 立太子之母窦氏为皇后。 
English: In March, the officials concerned requested the establishment of an empress, and the empress dowager said: the mother of the crown prince Dou is the empress.

古文：诏曰： 方春和时，草木群生之物皆有以自乐，而吾百姓鳏、寡、孤、独、穷困之人或阽于死亡，而莫之省忧。为悯父母将何如？
现代文：文帝下诏说： 当春风和畅时，飞潜动植等物都有复苏之乐，而我们百姓中的鳏寡孤独穷困的人或挣扎于死亡的边缘，而得不到关怀与温暖，作为民之父母其心何安？
English: Emperor Wen said: When the spring breeze is smooth, flying, diving, moving, planting and other things all have the joy of recovery, while the widows and orphans, lonely and poor people among our people, or struggling on the edge of death, do not receive care and warmth. As the parents of the people, how is their heart?

古文：其议所以振贷之。 
现代文：应讨论如进行赈济。 
English: There should be a discussion on how to provide relief.

古文：又曰： 老者非帛不暖，非肉不饱。
现代文：诏文又说： 老人不穿棉袄不暖，不吃肉食不饱。
English: The edict also said: "The old people do not wear cotton coats, do not keep warm, do not eat meat, and do not have enough food."

古文：今岁首，不时使人存问长老，又无布帛酒肉之赐，将何以佐天下子孙孝养其亲？
现代文：当今年春初，要经常派人看望父老，如不赐一些布帛酒肉，又怎么能帮助天下的子孙孝养其亲？
English: At the beginning of this spring, we should often send people to visit our parents. If we do not give some cloth, wine and meat, how can we help the children and grandchildren of the world to cherish their relatives?

古文：今闻吏禀当受鬻者，或以陈粟，岂称养老之意哉！
现代文：曾听到有的官吏在发放养老粮时，竟给以陈粟烂米，这能说是在贯彻养老的诏令吗？
English: Have you ever heard that some government officials, when distributing old-age food, actually give stale corn and rotten rice? Can this be said to be the implementation of the old-age decree?

古文：具为令。 
现代文：现在具体制定条例。 
English: The above is a regulation.

古文：有司请令县道，年八十已上，赐米人月一石，肉二十斤，酒五斗。
现代文：有关官吏通知各县、道，年在八十以上，赐每人每月米一石，肉二十斤，酒五斗。
English: Relevant officials have notified each county and province that those who are over 80 years old will receive one stone of rice, 20 pounds of meat, and five barrels of wine per person per month.

古文：其九十已上，又赐帛人二匹，絮三斤。
现代文：年在九十以上，又增加每人帛二疋，絮三斤。
English: For those over 90 years of age, there will be an increase of 2 catties and 3 catties per person.

古文：赐物及当禀鬻米者，长吏阅视，丞若尉致。
现代文：对年过九十的老人赐物及发放养老粮时，县令要亲自督促检查，县丞或县尉要亲自送交。
English: When giving gifts and distributing old-age food to the elderly over the age of ninety, the county magistrate should personally supervise the inspection, and the county magistrate or county lieutenant should personally deliver it.

古文：不满九十，啬夫、令史致。
现代文：不满九十的，由农政官员、令史送交。
English: Those who are less than ninety years old will be sent by the agricultural officials and the historian.

古文：二千石遣都吏循行，不称者督之。
现代文：高层官员要派有德行的官吏巡回检查，对不执行诏令的要予以查处。
English: High-level officials should send virtuous officials to make inspection tours, and those who do not implement the edict should be investigated and punished.

古文：刑者及有罪耐以上，不用此令。
现代文：已被判刑及犯有将判二年以上刑罚的老人，不用此令。 
English: The order does not apply to elderly people who have already been sentenced and who have committed a crime for which they will be sentenced to more than two years.

古文：楚元王交薨。
现代文：楚元王刘交去世。
English: Chu Yuan Wang Liu Jiao passed away.

古文：四月，齐、楚地震，二十九山同日崩，大水溃出。
现代文：四月，齐、楚地震，二十九山同日崩，大水溃涌。
English: In April, the Qi and Chu earthquakes, the collapse of 29 mountains on the same day, and the torrent of water.

古文：六月，令郡国无来献。
现代文：六月，诏令郡国不向朝廷献呈财物。
English: In June, the county was ordered not to present any property to the imperial court.

古文：施惠天下，诸侯、四夷，远近欢洽。
现代文：惠政广及天下，诸侯及四夷远近都感戴皇恩。
English: Benefiting the country and the world, lords and commoners from near and far felt the grace of the emperor.

古文：乃修代来功。
现代文：于是铨叙从代到京的辅佐人员的功劳。
English: Therefore, I would like to give credit to the support staff who have been in Kyoto since my generation.

古文：诏曰： 方大臣诛诸吕迎朕，朕狐疑，皆止朕，唯中尉宋昌劝朕，朕已得保宗庙。
现代文：诏书说： 当大臣们诛讨诸吕以后迎立朕为帝时，朕心存疑虑，多劝朕不要离开代地。惟中尉宋昌劝朕要不负众望，朕才决定继承大统。
English: The imperial edict said: "When the ministers elected me as emperor after they had discussed Zhu Lü, I was doubtful, and most of them advised me not to leave the place. However, Lieutenant Song Chang advised me to live up to everyone's expectations, and I decided to succeed to the throne.

古文：以尊昌为卫将军，其封昌为壮武侯。
现代文：已经加封宋昌为大将军，现又加封宋昌为壮武侯。
English: Song Chang has been awarded the title of grand general, and now Song Chang has been awarded the title of Zhuangwu marquis.

古文：诸从朕六人，官皆至九卿。 
现代文：其余随朕至京的张武等六人，提升至九卿。 
English: The six people who came with me to the capital have all been promoted to the ninth rank.

古文：又曰： 列侯从高帝入蜀、汉者六十八人益邑各三百户，吏二千石以上从高帝颖川守尊等十人食邑六百户，淮阳守申屠嘉等十人五百户，卫尉足等十人四百户。 
现代文：诏令又说： 列从高皇帝进入蜀汉的六十八人各增封邑三百户。二千石以上的高级官吏曾经随从高皇帝的颍川守尊等十人封食邑六百户，淮阳守申屠嘉等十人封食邑五百户。卫尉足等十人封食邑四百户。 
English: The edict also said: The sixty-eight people who entered Shuhan from Emperor Gao will each receive an additional three hundred fiefs. The high-ranking officials with more than two thousand koku who followed Emperor Gao, including ten people such as Shuchuan Shuzun, will receive six hundred fiefs, ten people such as Huaiyang Shuzhen Tuo Jia, will receive five hundred fiefs, and ten people such as Wei Fu, will receive four hundred fiefs.

古文：封淮南王舅赵兼为周阳侯，齐王舅驷钧为靖郭侯，故常山丞相蔡兼为樊侯。
现代文：封淮南王舅赵兼为周阳侯，齐王舅驷钩为靖郭侯，原常山丞相蔡谦为樊侯。
English: The uncle of King Huainan, Zhao Jian, was named Zhou Yang marquis, the uncle of King Qi, Zhaohua, was named Jing Guo marquis, and the former prime minister of Changshan, Cai Qian, was named Zhou marquis.

古文：二年冬十月，丞相陈平薨。
现代文：汉文帝二年冬十月，丞相陈平去世。
English: In October of the second year of Emperor Hanwen's reign, the prime minister Chen Ping passed away.

古文：诏曰： 朕闻古者诸侯建国千余，各守其地，以时入贡，民不劳苦，上下欢欣，靡有违德。
现代文：下诏说： 朕听说古时候诸侯建国众多，各守其地，按时向朝廷进贡，百姓赋役不重，上下和睦快乐，没有违民所愿。
English: The next edict said: I have heard that in ancient times there were many princes who founded the country, each kept his own land, paid tribute to the imperial court on time, the people were not burdened with heavy duties, the upper and lower levels were harmonious and happy, and there was no violation of the wishes of the people.

古文：今列侯多居长安，邑远，吏卒给输费苦，而列侯亦无由教训其民。
现代文：当今列侯多居于长安，离封邑甚远，吏卒供给输送甚为劳苦，而列侯亦无机会去教训其封邑的人民。
English: Today, most feudal lords live in Chang'an, far away from their fiefs. It is very difficult for officials to deliver supplies, and feudal lords do not have the opportunity to teach the people of their fiefs.

古文：其令列侯之国，为吏及诏所止者，遣太子。 
现代文：现令列侯都到自己的封邑去。其中在朝为官或诏令恩准留京的，可派其太子到封邑去。 
English: He ordered the feudal lords to return to their fiefs, to take up official positions in the imperial court, and to dispatch princes to their fiefs, if there were any left after the imperial edict.

古文：十一月癸卯晦，日有食之。
现代文：十一月三十日，日偏食。
English: Partial solar eclipse on November 30.

古文：诏曰： 朕闻之，天生民，为之置君以养治之。
现代文：下诏说： 朕听说过，天生人民，天为人民置立君主以进行治理。
English: The next edict said: "I have heard that the people are born, and the heavens establish a monarch for the people to govern.

古文：人主不德，布政不均，则天示之灾以戒不治。
现代文：君主无德，施政失衡，上天就示以灾异以儆戒其治道不宜。
English: If a monarch is not virtuous and his governance is unbalanced, Heaven will show him that it is not appropriate for him to govern by warning him of calamities and disasters.

古文：乃十一月晦，日有食之，適见于天，灾孰大焉！
现代文：而十一月三十日，日偏食，这是上天见责的征兆，显示朕的过失是很多的！
English: But on November 30th, the partial solar eclipse, which is a sign of God's judgment, shows that my faults are many!

古文：朕获保宗庙，以微眇之身托于士民君王之上，天下治乱，在予一人，唯二三执政犹吾股肱也。
现代文：朕能继承大统，以卑微之身托于士民侯王之上，天下治乱，在我一人。各位大臣等于是我的股肱。
English: I am the only one who can succeed to the throne, and I entrust myself humbly to the prince of the people. I am the only one who can control the chaos in the world. The ministers are also my shareholders.

古文：朕下不能治育群生，上以累三光之明，其不德大矣。
现代文：朕下不能治育百姓，上致日月星辰的失序，朕的德行是十分缺乏的。
English: I am incapable of educating the people, I have caused the sun, moon and stars to be out of order, and my virtue is very deficient.

古文：令至，其悉思朕之过失，及知见之所不及，匄以启告朕。
现代文：各大臣接诏后，都认真检讨朕的过失，以及朕尚没有了解与考虑到的问题，祈求不吝告朕。
English: After receiving the edict, all the ministers have seriously reviewed my mistakes, as well as the problems that I have not yet understood and considered, and pray that they will not hesitate to sue me.

古文：及举贤良方正能直言极谏者，以匡朕之不逮。
现代文：还请推举贤良方正直言敢谏的人，以匡正朕的失误。
English: And I have chosen a virtuous and upright man, who is able to speak the truth, to correct my mistake.

古文：因各敕以职任，务省徭费以便民。
现代文：因此下诏令各位大臣履行职责与任务，当务之急是减省役赋以方便人民。
English: Therefore, I hereby order the ministers to perform their duties and tasks, and the most urgent task is to reduce the number of provincial governors to make it easier for the people.

古文：朕既不能远德，故憪然念外人之有非，是以设备未息。
现代文：朕既不能以德行绥服远方，还寝不安席地担心外患的发生，因而不敢放松边防的设备。
English: I can neither travel to distant places with virtue nor worry about the occurrence of foreign diseases, so I dare not relax the equipment of border defense.

古文：今纵不能罢边屯戍，又饬兵厚卫，其罢卫将军军。
现代文：今日即使不能罢免边防屯戍，也不应派重兵守卫京都。
English: Today, even if the border guards cannot be removed, heavy troops should not be sent to guard Kyoto.

古文：太仆见马遗财足，余皆以给传置。 
现代文：现大量减少京都守卫士卒的人数。太仆也要减少马匹数量，在基本保证朝廷所需后，多余的都拨给传送驿站。 
English: The number of Kyoto guards has been greatly reduced. The number of horses has also been reduced by the palace servants, and after the basic needs of the imperial court have been met, the surplus has been allocated to the courier station.

古文：春正月丁亥，诏曰： 夫农，天下之本也，其开籍田，朕亲率耕，以给宗庙粢盛。
现代文：春正月十五日，下诏说： 农业，是天下之本，应建立帝王亲自耕田地的制度，朕亲自领人耕种，以供应宗庙祭祀所需的膳食。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of spring, the following edict was issued: "Agriculture is the foundation of the world, and a system should be established in which the emperor personally cultivates the fields, and I personally lead the people in farming, in order to supply the food needed for the rituals of the ancestral temple."

古文：民谪作县官及贷种食未入、入未备者，皆赦之。 
现代文：对于百姓中犯有拖欠偿还、缴纳县署的种子与粮食之罪，或交纳不齐之罪，都予以赦免。 
English: For the people who have committed the crime of delaying repayment, paying seeds and grain to the county office, or the crime of not paying enough, they will be pardoned.

古文：三月，有司请立皇子为诸侯王。
现代文：三月，有关官吏请立皇子为诸侯王。
English: In March, officials requested that the prince be made vassal king.

古文：诏曰： 前赵幽王幽死，朕甚怜之，已立其太子遂为赵王。
现代文：诏令说： 以前赵幽王遭软禁而死，朕甚为同情，已立其太子遂为赵王。
English: The edict said: I am very sorry that Zhao Yu Wang died under house arrest, and I have appointed his son as Zhao Wang.

古文：遂弟辟强及齐悼惠王子朱虚侯章、东牟侯兴居有功，可王。 
现代文：遂弟辟疆及齐悼惠王子朱虚侯章、东牟侯兴居有功，可立为王。 
English: As a result, his younger brothers, Prince Zhu Huizhang and Prince Dongmou Xingju, who had distinguished themselves by conquering territories and were mourned together, were able to become kings.

古文：乃立辟强为河间王，章为城阳王，兴居为济北王。
现代文：于是立辟疆为河间王、刘章为城阳王、兴居为济北王。
English: As a result, Bijie was established as the king of Kawama, Liu Zhang as the king of Chengyang, and Xingju as the king of Jibei.

古文：因立皇子武为代王，参为太原王，揖为梁王。
现代文：同时立皇子武为代王、参为太原王、揖为梁王。
English: At the same time, Prince Takeshi was installed as acting king, San as King Taiyuan, and So as King Liang.

古文：五月，诏曰： 古之治天下，朝有进善之旌，诽谤之木，所以通治道而来谏者也，今法有诽谤、訞言之罪，是使众臣不敢尽情，而上无由闻过失也。
现代文：五月，下诏令说： 古代治理天下，朝廷门前设有进善言的旌旗，立有批评的柱板，是为了使上下通达而广开言路。而当今的法律有 诽谤妖言 之罪，这就使得众臣不敢做到知无不言与言无不尽，而皇上也就无法听到过失了。
English: In May, the next imperial edict said: "In ancient times, when the world was governed, the imperial court had a banner of good words and a pillar board of criticism in front of the door, in order to open up the way for people to speak. Today's law has the crime of slandering gossips, which makes the ministers dare not to know what to say and what to say, and the emperor can not hear the fault.

古文：将何以来远方之贤良？
现代文：这怎么能让远方的贤良来批评朝政？
English: How can this allow distant wise men to criticize the government?

古文：其除之。
现代文：应该废除。
English: It should be abolished.

古文：民或祝诅上，以相约而后相谩，吏以为大逆，其有他言，吏又以为诽谤。此细民之愚无知抵死，朕甚不取。
现代文：百姓有时咒诅君上，开始互相邀约而后来又互相欺诳，这种只有犯罪动机而无犯罪行动，官吏以为是大逆不道，若有其他言论，官吏又加以诽谤之罪名，这是小民的愚昧表现，由于不懂法律而触犯死罪，朕认为甚不恰当。
English: The common people sometimes curse the prince, begin to invite each other and later bully each other. This kind of criminal motive without criminal action is considered to be high treason by the officials. If there are other remarks, the officials are accused of slander. This is the stupidity of the common people. I think it is very inappropriate to commit the crime of capital punishment because of ignorance of the law.

古文：自今以来，有犯此者勿听治。 
现代文：从今以后，对这种犯罪未遂的不必受理。 
English: From now on, those who commit such crimes should not be tried and punished.

古文：九月，初与郡守为铜虎符、竹使符。
现代文：九月，开始发给郡守铜虎符、竹使符。
English: In September, county governors began to receive bronze tiger charms and bamboo messenger charms.

古文：诏曰： 农，天下之大本也，民所恃以生也，而民或不务本而事末，故生不遂。
现代文：文帝下诏说： 农业，是天下的根本，人民所赖以生存的，如果人民不认真从事根本而去流动经商，那么衣食就会缺乏。
English: Emperor Wen Zhao said: Agriculture is the foundation of the world, and the people rely on it to survive. If the people do not seriously engage in the foundation and go to the flow of business, then there will be a lack of food and clothing.

古文：朕忧其然，故今兹亲率群臣农以劝之。
现代文：朕对此十分担忧，所以今天朕亲领群臣进行农耕以进行劝勉。
English: I am very worried about this, so today I personally led the ministers to do farming to encourage them.

古文：其赐天下民今年田租之半。 
现代文：今年免除百姓应纳的田租一半作为奖励。 
English: This year, half of the land rent payable by the people will be exempted as a reward.

古文：三年冬十月丁酉晦，日有食之。十一月丁卯晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：三年冬十月三十日，日偏食。十一月三十日，日又偏食。
English: A partial solar eclipse occurred on October 30th, and another partial solar eclipse occurred on November 30th.

古文：诏曰： 前日诏遣列侯之国，辞未行。
现代文：诏说： 前时曾诏遣列侯各回封国去，推辞而未能成行。
English: The imperial edict said: Previously, the imperial edict had sent each of the feudal lords back to their fiefdoms, but they declined and were unable to go.

古文：丞相朕之所重，其为朕率列侯之国。 
现代文：丞相是朕最为倚重的，望带头作表率回到自己的封国去。 
English: I hold the chancellor in high esteem, and he should lead the vassals to the fief.

古文：遂免丞相勃，遣就国。
现代文：于是免去周勃丞相之职，遣他回到封国。
English: As a result, he relieved Zhou Boru of his post as minister and sent him back to his fiefdom.

古文：十二月，太尉颖阴侯灌婴为丞相。罢太尉官，属丞相。
现代文：十二月，封太尉颍阴侯灌婴为丞相，免去太尉职位，隶属于丞相。
English: In December, Fong Taifu Gong Yin Hou Guan Yu was appointed as chancellor, removed from the position of chancellor, and subordinated to the chancellor.

古文：夏四月，城阳王章薨。
现代文：夏四月，城阳王刘章去世。
English: In the summer of April, Liu Zhang, King of Chengyang, passed away.

古文：淮南王长杀辟阳侯审食其。
现代文：淮南王刘长杀辟阳侯审食其。
English: Liu Chang, the king of Huainan, killed and devoured Yang Hou.

古文：五月，匈奴入居北地、河南为寇。上幸甘泉，遣丞相灌婴击匈奴，匈奴去。
现代文：五月，匈奴入居北地、河南进行掳掠，皇上驾临甘泉，派丞相灌婴反击匈奴，匈奴北去。
English: In May, the Xiongnu settled in the north and Henan to carry out plundering. The emperor came to Ganquan and sent the prime minister Guan Yu to counterattack the Xiongnu, and the Xiongnu went north.

古文：发中尉材官属卫将军，军长安。
现代文：调出维持宫廷治安的材官归属于卫将军，守卫长安京都。
English: The officials brought in to maintain order in the palace belonged to the General Guards, and the Chief Guards were assigned to Kyoto.

古文：上自甘泉之高奴，因幸太原，见故群臣，皆赐之。
现代文：皇上从甘泉到高奴，接着驾临太原，接见往日代地群臣，都有赏赐。
English: The emperor went from Ganquan to Gaozu, and then came to Taiyuan to meet with the ministers of the past generations, all of which were rewarded.

古文：举功行赏，诸民里赐牛酒。复晋阳、中都民三岁租。
现代文：论功行赏，按民里赏赐牛、酒，免除晋阳、中都百姓的三年租税。
English: In terms of reward for meritorious deeds, cattle and wine will be awarded according to the population, and the people of Jinyang and Zhongdu will be exempted from three years of tax.

古文：留游太原十余日。
现代文：驻跸并游览太原十余日。
English: He will stay in Handan and visit Taiyuan for more than ten days.

古文：济北王兴居闻帝之代欲自击匈奴，乃反，发兵欲袭荥阳。
现代文：济北王兴居得知皇上到代地去了还准备御驾亲征匈奴，就乘朝中无主发动叛乱，调遣兵马打算袭击荥阳。
English: When King Xingju of northern Jibei learned that the emperor had gone to Sui and was also preparing to personally drive out the Xiongnu, he took advantage of the lack of a ruler in the north to launch a rebellion, dispatching soldiers and horses with the intention of attacking Shenyang.

古文：于是诏罢丞相兵，以棘蒲侯柴武为大将军，将四将军十万众击之。
现代文：于是下诏令罢免丞相灌婴兵权，委棘蒲侯柴武为大将军，率领四名勇将十万兵马剿击叛军。
English: As a result, a decree was issued to dismiss the chancellor, Guan Ying, and assign him the right to command the army, and he was appointed as the supreme general, leading four brave generals to defeat the rebels with 100,000 soldiers and horses.

古文：祁侯缯贺为将军，军荥阳。
现代文：祁侯缯贺为将军，增援荥阳。
English: Gong Hou and Gong He became generals and reinforced Gongyang.

古文：秋七月，上自太原至长安。诏曰： 济北王背德反上，诖误吏民，为大逆。
现代文：秋七月，皇上从太原到长安，下诏说： 济北王背叛朝廷，坑害吏民，为罪魁祸首。
English: In the autumn and July, the emperor went from Taiyuan to Chang'an, and issued the following edict: King Jibei betrayed the imperial court, undermined officials and people, and was the main culprit.

古文：济北吏民，兵未至先自定及以军、城邑降者，皆赦之，复官爵。
现代文：济北吏民在朝廷官军未到就拟作归顺朝廷以及以军队城邑降顺于官军的，一律赦罪，并仍居职。
English: The officials and people of Jibei who had intended to surrender to the imperial court before the arrival of the imperial court's official army, as well as those who had surrendered to the official army by using military towns, were all pardoned and remained in their posts.

古文：与王兴居居，去来者，亦赦之。 
现代文：与济北王兴居有联系的，也予赦免。 
English: Those who have ties with Wang Xingju of Jibei will also be pardoned.

古文：八月，虏济北王兴居，自杀。
现代文：八月，俘虏了济北王兴居，兴居自杀。
English: In August, he captured Jibei Wang Xingju and Xingju committed suicide.

古文：赦诸与兴居反者。
现代文：赦免了参与兴居谋反的人。
English: He pardoned those who took part in the rebellion.

古文：四年冬十二月，丞相灌婴薨。
现代文：文帝四年冬十二月，丞相灌婴去世。
English: In December of the winter of Emperor Wen's fourth year of reign, the emperor died in infancy.

古文：夏五月，复诸刘有属籍，家无所与。
现代文：夏五月，免除与刘汉同宗的刘氏赋役，对其家无所赐予。
English: In the summer of May, he exempted the Liu family, which was from the same clan as Liu Han, from the tax, and did not give anything to his family.

古文：赐诸侯王子邑各二千户。
现代文：赐各侯王子食邑各二千户。
English: Give every lord and prince two thousand households each.

古文：秋九月，封齐悼惠王子七人为列侯。
现代文：秋九月，封齐悼惠王子七人为列侯。
English: In autumn and September, seven princes were created as vassals of Prince Hui.

古文：绛侯周勃有罪，逮诣廷尉诏狱。
现代文：绛侯周勃有罪，逮捕后禁锢于天牢。
English: Zhou Bo Guilty, Arrested and Imprisoned in Heavenly Prison.

古文：作顾成庙。
现代文：修建规模卑狭的顾成庙。
English: construction of the small-scale Gu Cheng Temple.

古文：五月春二月，地震。
现代文：五年春二月，地震。
English: In February of the spring of the fifth year, an earthquake.

古文：夏四月，除盗铸钱令。
现代文：夏四月，废除盗铸钱令，允许私铸。
English: In the summer of April, the order to steal money was abolished, and private coinage was allowed.

古文：更造四铢钱。
现代文：重新铸制四铢钱。
English: Re-minting of the four-baht coin.

古文：六年冬十月，桃、李华。
现代文：六年冬，十月，桃李开花。
English: In the winter of the sixth year, in October, the peach and plum trees bloomed.

古文：十一月，淮南王长谋反，废迁蜀严道，死雍。
现代文：十一月，淮南王长谋反，废除王位流放于蜀严道，死于途中雍地。
English: In November, Huainan King Chang plotted a rebellion, abolished the throne, was exiled to Shuyan Road, and died on the way to Yongdi.

古文：七年冬十月，令列侯太夫人、夫人、诸侯王子及吏二千石无得擅征捕。
现代文：七年冬十月，下令对列侯太夫人、夫人、诸侯王子及吏二千石的不得擅行搜捕。
English: In the winter of October of the seventh year, it was ordered that the lady-in-waiting of the lord of the manor, the lady, the princes of the manor and the officials of two thousand koku were not allowed to search and arrest.

古文：夏四月，赦天下。
现代文：夏四月，赦天下。
English: In the summer, in April, there is a general amnesty.

古文：六月癸酉，未央宫东阙罘罳灾。
现代文：六月二日，未央宫东连阙曲阁失火。
English: On June 2, a fire broke out in the east wing of the Weiyang Palace.

古文：八年夏，封淮南厉王长子四人为列侯。
现代文：八年夏，封淮南厉王长之子四人为列侯。
English: In the summer of the eighth year, the four sons of Huainan Li Wangchang were appointed as vassals.

古文：有长星出于东方。
现代文：有长彗星出于东方。
English: There is a long comet coming from the east.

古文：九年春，大旱。
现代文：九年春，大旱。
English: In the spring of 1997, there was a severe drought.

古文：十年冬，行幸甘泉。
现代文：十年冬，巡行到甘泉。
English: Ten years of winter, parade to Ganquan.

古文：将军薄昭死。
现代文：将军薄昭去世。
English: General Bo Zhao passed away.

古文：十一年冬十一月，行幸代。
现代文：十一年冬十一月，驾临代地。
English: In November of the winter of the eleventh year, he arrived in his place.

古文：春正月，上自代还。
现代文：春正月，皇上从代回都。
English: In the first month of spring, the emperor left the capital.

古文：夏六月，梁王揖薨。
现代文：夏六月，梁王揖去世。
English: In June, Liang Wangyao passed away.

古文：匈奴寇狄道。
现代文：匈奴侵略狄道。
English: The Huns invaded Dido.

古文：十二年冬十二月，河决东郡。
现代文：十二年冬十二月，黄河在东郡溃决。
English: In the winter and December of the 12th year, the Yellow River broke through in Dongshun.

古文：春正月，赐诸侯王女邑各二千户。
现代文：春正月，赐诸侯王女汤沐邑各二千户。
English: In the first month of spring, 2,000 households in each county were given soup broth.

古文：二月，出孝惠皇帝后宫美人，令得嫁。
现代文：二月，遣散孝惠皇帝后宫宫娥，可以自行婚配。
English: In February, Emperor Xiao Hui dismissed the Empress Gong Gong E, who was allowed to marry on her own.

古文：三月，除关，无用传。
现代文：三月，废除进出关要出示证件的法令。
English: In March, the law requiring the presentation of documents at entry and exit points was abolished.

古文：诏曰： 道民之路，在于务本。
现代文：皇上下诏说： 导民的途径，在于抓住农业这个根本。
English: The imperial edict said: The way to guide the people is to grasp the essence of agriculture.

古文：朕亲率天下农，十年于今，而野不加辟。岁一不登，民有饥色，是从事焉尚寡，而吏未加务也。
现代文：朕亲自耕作以劝勉农耕，已经十年了，而田野尚得不到充分开垦，每逢年景不好，百姓就处于饥饿状态，这是因为从事农业的人尚不足，而各地官吏未能认真重视农业的缘故。
English: It has been ten years since I have personally cultivated to encourage farming, but the fields have not yet been fully reclaimed. Whenever the year is bad, the people are in a state of hunger. This is because there are not enough people engaged in agriculture, and officials around the country have failed to seriously attach importance to agriculture.

古文：吾诏书数下，岁劝民种树，而功未兴，是吏奉吾诏不勤，而劝民不明也。
现代文：我多次下诏，每年劝百姓多植树，而功效甚微，这也是地方官吏执行我的诏令不认真，对百姓的宣传动员更没有明确的措施所致。
English: I have repeatedly issued an edict to persuade the people to plant more trees every year, but it has little effect. This is also due to the fact that local officials do not seriously implement my edict, and there are no clear measures for the publicity and mobilization of the people.

古文：且吾农民甚苦，而吏莫之省，将何以劝焉？其赐农民今年租税之半。 
现代文：加之我们的农民负担苦重，而地方官吏又漠不关心，这怎能提高农民的生产积极性？为此今年免除农民应交赋税的一半。 
English: In addition, our farmers are burdened with heavy burdens, while local officials are indifferent. How can this increase farmers' motivation to produce? To this end, farmers are exempted from paying half of the taxes due this year.

古文：又曰： 孝悌，天下之大顺也；力田，为生之本也；三老，众民之师也；廉吏，民之表也。
现代文：诏书又说： 尊老爱幼，是最高尚的社会风气。
English: The edict also said: "Respecting the elderly and loving the young is the noblest social ethos.

古文：朕甚嘉此二三大夫之行。
现代文：努力耕作，是最重要的生活根本。三老，是人民的老师，廉吏，是人民的表率。
English: Cultivating hard is the most important life principle. The three old men are the people's teachers, and the corrupt officials are the people's role models.

古文：今万家之县，云无应令，岂实人情？
现代文：朕特别钦佩孝悌力田、三老与廉吏的操行。今日万家之县，却说无人可应察举之令，岂能符合事实？
English: I particularly admire the conduct of the filial piety, the three elders and the corrupt officials. Today, in every county in the country, it is said that no one can obey the order to be investigated. Can this really be true?

古文：是吏举贤之道未备也。
现代文：这反映了地方官吏举贤的措施不够得力。
English: This reflects the inadequacy of measures to promote local officials.

古文：其遣谒者劳赐三老、孝者帛，人五匹；悌者、力田二匹；廉吏二百石以上率百石者三匹。
现代文：现派专使慰问三老，人赏帛五匹，爱幼的、力田的每人赏帛二匹，廉吏二百石以上每一百石加赏三匹。
English: Now, a special envoy has been dispatched to console the three old people, and five yakitori will be awarded to each person, two yakitori will be awarded to each person who loves children and has a strong will, and three yakitori will be awarded to each corrupt official who has more than 200 koku.

古文：及问民所不便安，而以户口率置三老、孝、悌、力田常员，令各率其意以道民焉。 
现代文：为了经常了解百姓不安心或不便农业的情况，现按户口若干设置三老、孝悌力田管理人员，让他们深刻领会诏书的意义而教化百姓。 
English: In order to constantly understand the uneasiness or inconvenience of the agricultural situation of the people, the three elders and the filial piety field management personnel are now set up according to the household registration, so that they can deeply understand the meaning of the edict and educate the people.

古文：十三年春二月甲寅，诏曰： 朕亲率天下农耕以供粢盛，皇后亲桑以奉祭服，其具礼仪。 
现代文：十三年春二月十六日，下诏说： 朕亲自领人进行农耕以推动粮食生产的发展，皇后亲自进行蚕桑以供宗庙祭祀之需，并建立耕桑的礼制。 
English: On February 16th, the 13th year of the Spring, the following edict was issued: I will personally lead the people to carry out farming to promote the development of grain production, and the empress will personally carry out silkworm mulberry to provide for the needs of the ancestral temple, and establish the ceremonial system of cultivating mulberry.

古文：夏，除秘祝，语在《郊祀志》。
现代文：夏，废除秘祝之官，其事在《郊祀志》。
English: In the summer, the abolition of the secret wish officer, the matter in the "Suburban Chronicle."

古文：五月，除肉刑法，语在《刑法志》。
现代文：五月，除肉刑法，其事在《刑法志》。
English: In May, the meat-eating criminal law was abolished, and the matter was published in the Criminal Law Journal.

古文：六月，诏曰： 农，天下之本，务莫大焉。
现代文：六月，下诏说： 农业，是天下之本，应给予特别重视。
English: In June, the next emperor said: Agriculture is the foundation of the world and should be given special attention.

古文：今廑身从事，而有租税之赋，是谓本末者无以异也，其于劝农之道未备。
现代文：今日农人勤身耕作，而与商贾同出租赋，这就是本末无有差别，是不符合于奖励农耕的原则的。
English: Today, there is no difference between a farmer who works hard and a merchant who rents land. This is not in line with the principle of rewarding farmers.

古文：其除田之租税。
现代文：现免除农田租税。
English: Farmland should be exempt from taxes.

古文：赐天下孤寡布、帛、絮各有数。 
现代文：赐天下孤寡布帛、丝絮各若干。 
English: Give the world's orphans and widows some cloth and silk.

古文：十四年冬，匈奴寇边，杀北地都尉卬。
现代文：十四年冬，匈奴骚扰边境，杀北地都尉孙碽。
English: In the winter of the 14th year, the Xiongnu harassed the border and killed the northern captain Sun Qi.

古文：遣三将军军陇西、北地、上郡，中尉周舍为卫将军，郎中令张武为车骑将军，军渭北，车千乘，骑卒十万人。
现代文：皇上派三位将军镇守陇西、北地、上郡，中尉周舍为卫将军，郎中令武为车骑将军，统军于渭北，车辆千乘、骑兵十万人。
English: The emperor sent three generals to guard the towns of Shaanxi, Hebei and Shangguan. Lieutenant Zhou She was the general of the guards, and his brother-in-law Wu was the general of the cavalry. They united the army in the north of Shaanxi, with thousands of vehicles and 100,000 cavalry.

古文：上亲劳军，勒兵，申教令，赐吏卒。
现代文：皇上亲自劳军，进行检阅，申明教令，赏赐士卒。
English: The emperor personally inspected the troops, affirmed the edict, and rewarded the soldiers.

古文：自欲征匈奴，群臣谏，不听。
现代文：皇上打算亲征匈奴，群臣谏阻，不听。
English: The emperor planned to personally conscript the Huns, but his ministers resisted and would not listen.

古文：皇太后固要上，乃止。
现代文：皇太后痛切要求皇上不要亲冒矢石，皇上才罢其意。
English: The Empress Dowager earnestly asked the Emperor not to expose himself, and the Emperor finally relented.

古文：于是以东阳侯张相如为大将军，建成侯董赫、内史栾布皆为将军，击匈奴，匈奴走。
现代文：于是派东阳侯张相如为大将军，建成侯董赫、内史栾布都任将军，出击匈奴，匈奴退走。
English: Therefore, he sent the Dongyang marquis Zhang Xiangru as the general, Jiancheng marquis Donghe and Neishi Zengbu as generals, to attack the Xiongnu, and the Xiongnu withdrew.

古文：春，诏曰： 朕获执牺牲、珪币以事上帝宗庙，十四年于今。
现代文：春，下诏说： 朕能奉献牺牲圭币以祭祀上帝宗庙，至今已十四年了。
English: In the spring, the emperor said, "It has been fourteen years since I have been able to offer sacrificial coins to worship God's ancestral temple.

古文：历日弥长，以不敏不明而久抚临天下，朕甚自愧。
现代文：在位的时间很久，以无所作为之人长期君临天下，朕深感惭愧。
English: I am deeply ashamed that I have been on the throne for a long time, and that a man who did nothing has long reigned over the world.

古文：其广增诸祀坛场、珪币。
现代文：只有扩大祭祀规模与增加祭品精度以谢神祗。
English: The only way to thank the gods is to expand the scale of the sacrifice and increase the precision of the offerings.

古文：昔先王远施不求其报，望祀不祈其福，右贤左戚，先民后己，至明之极也。
现代文：昔日先王远施恩泽而不求他人报答，虔诚祭祀而不祈个人福祉，厚贤薄亲，先民后己，实为英明之极。
English: In the past, Wang Yuan did not ask others to repay him for his kindness, he did not pray for personal well-being, and he was very wise.

古文：今吾闻祠官祝釐，皆归福于朕躬，不为百姓，朕甚愧之。
现代文：现我闻祠官祝福，都希望福祉集于朕身，而不为百姓祈祷，这使朕更为愧疚。
English: Now that I have heard the blessing of the priest, I hope that the well-being will be concentrated in my body, rather than praying for the people, which makes me feel even more guilty.

古文：夫以朕之不德，而专乡独美其福，百姓不与焉，是重吾不德也。
现代文：以朕这不德之人，一心追求个人的美满幸福，而不与百姓同享，这就更为增加了我的过失。
English: To think that I, an immoral person, was single-mindedly pursuing personal happiness, rather than sharing it with the people, only increased my guilt.

古文：其令祠官致敬，无有所祈。 
现代文：现令祠官向神祗致敬，切不可为我个人祈福。 
English: The shrine officials have now been ordered to pay homage to the shrine, and they must not pray for my personal well-being.

古文：十五年春，黄龙见于成纪。
现代文：十五年春，黄龙现于成纪。
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, Huanglong is now in the adult stage.

古文：上乃下诏议郊祀。
现代文：皇上就下诏讨论郊祭事宜。
English: The emperor issued an edict to discuss the matter of the suburb festival.

古文：公孙臣明服色，新垣平设五庙，语在《郊祀志》。
现代文：公孙臣明确各类服色，新垣平设立五帝庙宇。均记在《郊祀志》中。
English: Emperor Kinzonsei specified various types of clothing, and Emperor Arakigahira established five imperial temples, all of which are recorded in the "History of Suburban Worship."

古文：夏四月，上幸雍，始郊见五帝，赦天下。修名山大川尝祀而绝者，有司以岁时致礼。
现代文：夏四月，皇上驾到雍地，进行郊祭朝拜五帝，大赦天下，恢复名山大川断绝了的祭祀，主管官员按规定的季节进行祭祀。
English: In the summer of April, the emperor drove to Yongdi to perform the suburb festival to worship the five emperors, to grant amnesty to the world, to restore the famous mountains and rivers that had been cut off, and the officials in charge carried out the sacrifice according to the specified season.

古文：九月，诏诸侯王、公卿、郡守举贤良能直言极谏者，上亲策之，傅纳以言，语在《晁错传》。
现代文：九月，下诏令各位侯王公卿郡守推举贤良能直言极谏的人，皇上亲自问策，采纳其真知灼见。其事记在《晁错传》中。
English: In September, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering all princes, dukes, and nobles to nominate virtuous, capable, outspoken people as county governors. The emperor personally asked for their advice and adopted their insights. This event is recorded in "The Tale of the Mistake."

古文：十六年夏四月，上郊祀五帝于渭阳。
现代文：十六年夏四月，皇上郊祀五帝于渭阳。
English: In April of the summer of 166, the five emperors were enshrined in the imperial suburbs of Shenyang.

古文：五月，立齐悼惠王子六人、淮南厉王子三人皆为王。
现代文：五月，立齐悼惠王子六人、淮南厉王子三人都为王。
English: In May, six princes including Prince Hui and three princes including Prince Huainanli attended the memorial service.

古文：秋九月，得玉杯，刻曰 人主延寿 。
现代文：秋九月，得玉杯，上刻 人主延寿 四字，诏令天下欢饮。
English: Autumn and September, won the Jade Cup, inscribed with the Lord's Prolonged Life, four words, the world ordered to drink.

古文：令天下大酺，明年改元。
现代文：明年改元。
English: The name will change next year.

古文：后元年冬十月，新垣平诈觉，谋反，夷三族。
现代文：文帝后元元年冬十月，新垣平因为诈欺君被发觉，谋反，三族被诛。
English: In the winter of October in the first year of the reign of Emperor Wen, Arakagidaira was found to have cheated the emperor, plotted a rebellion, and the three clans were exiled.

古文：春三月，孝惠皇后张氏薨。
现代文：春三月，孝惠皇后张氏去世。
English: In March of spring, Empress Xiao Hui Zhang passed away.

古文：诏曰： 间者数年比不登，又有水旱疾疫之灾，朕甚忧之。
现代文：下诏书： 过去几年频繁歉收，屡遭水旱疾疫之灾，朕深为忧虑。
English: The following edict: I am deeply worried about the frequent poor harvests in the past few years and the frequent floods, droughts and epidemics.

古文：愚而不明，未达其咎。
现代文：我愚而不明，尚不知其故何在。
English: I am stupid and ignorant, and I don't know why.

古文：意者朕之政有所失而行有过与？
现代文：是朕的政事有所失且行为有缺点呢？
English: Is it because I have failed in my politics and my actions are flawed?

古文：乃天道有不顺，地利或不得，人事多失和，鬼神废不享与？
现代文：还是天道有不顺，地利难以得，人事多失和，鬼神不愿享受祭祀呢？
English: Or is it that the heavenly way is not smooth, the location is difficult to obtain, the number of personnel is out of balance, and the ghosts and gods do not want to enjoy the sacrifice?

古文：何以致此？
现代文：到底是何种原因？
English: What is the real reason for this?

古文：将百官之奉养或费，无用之事或多与？
现代文：是百官的俸禄过高与劳民伤财的事办得过多吗？
English: Are the salaries of the hundred officials too high and are there too many things that are harmful to the people and the economy?

古文：何其民食之寡乏也！
现代文：为什么粮食竟如此的缺乏呀！
English: Why is there such a shortage of food?

古文：夫度田非益寡，而计民未加益，以口量地，其于古犹有余，而食之甚不足，者其咎安在？
现代文：度量耕地并未减少，统计人口增加的也不多，按人口平均占有耕地，比之于古代还要多，而粮食却极为不足，失误的根源何在？
English: Measured arable land has not decreased, and the statistical population has not increased much. According to the population, the average occupied arable land is even more than in ancient times, but grain is extremely insufficient. What is the root cause of the error?

古文：无乃百姓之从事于末以害农者蕃，为酒醪以靡谷者多，六畜之食焉者众与？
现代文：是否由于百姓弃农经商，如大量酿酒而浪费粮食，过多的饲养牲畜而消费粮食以致严重地损害了农业呢？
English: Is it because the people have abandoned agriculture and commerce, such as wasting grain by making a lot of wine, and consuming grain by raising too many livestock, which has seriously damaged agriculture?

古文：细大之义，吾未能得其中。
现代文：从小与大各方面来探计，我还未能找出症结所在。
English: From small and large aspects to explore, I have not been able to find the crux of the matter.

古文：其与丞相、列侯、吏二千石、博士议之，有可以佐百姓者，率意远思，无有所隐也。 
现代文：现愿与丞相、列侯、吏二千石及博士来集思广益，凡是能对百姓有所帮助的，无论是偶有所感与考虑成熟的，都可以言无不尽。 
English: I am now willing to brainstorm with the prime minister, vassals, officials of 2,000 koku and doctors. Anything that can help the people, whether it is occasionally felt and considered, can be said endlessly.

古文：二年夏，行幸雍棫阳宫。
现代文：二年夏，皇上巡幸雍木或阳宫。
English: In the summer of the second year, the emperor went on a tour of Yongmu or Yanggu.

古文：六月，代王参薨。
现代文：六月，代王参病故。
English: In June, Wang San died of illness.

古文：匈奴和亲。
现代文：与匈奴建立友好亲善关系。
English: to establish friendly relations with the Huns.

古文：诏曰： 朕既不明，不能远德，使方外之国或不宁息。
现代文：皇上下诏说： 朕非圣明之君，不能德服远人，致周边邻国屡行侵扰。
English: The imperial edict said: I am not a saintly prince, I can not serve the distant people, and I have repeatedly intruded into the neighboring countries.

古文：夫四荒之外不安其生，封圻之内勤劳不处，二者之咎，皆自于朕之德薄而不能达远也。
现代文：近来边境线上军民不安其生，京畿之内，征夫奔走不息，这两方面的损失，都是由于朕的薄德而不能使远方悦服所致。
English: Recently, the military and civilians on the border line are worried about their lives, and within Gyeonggi Province, conscripts are running incessantly. Both of these losses are due to my weak virtue and inability to make the distant side happy.

古文：间者累年，匈奴并暴边境，多杀吏民，边臣兵吏又不能谕其内志，以重吾不德。
现代文：过去几年，匈奴不断暴掠边境，杀害不少边疆吏民，而边防官吏，又不能向其晓谕我朝愿意与他们友好相处的意图，更加重了我无德服远的过失。
English: Over the past few years, the Huns have continuously plundered the border and killed many border officials and civilians, and the border officials, without being able to tell them of my intention to be friendly with them, have made my immoral mistake even more serious.

古文：夫久结难连兵，中外之国将何以自宁？
现代文：似此长期兵连祸结，中外之国将怎样保持自身的安宁？
English: How can the countries in and out of the Central Plains obtain peace after such a long-term military engagement and incomprehensible calamity?

古文：今朕夙兴夜寐，勤劳天下，忧苦万民，为之恻怛不安，未尝一日忘于心，故遣使者冠盖相望，结彻于道，以谕朕志于单于。
现代文：近日朕早起晚睡，为国事操劳，为万民忧苦。
English: Recently, I have been getting up early and going to bed late, working hard for national affairs, and suffering for the people.

古文：今单于反古之道，计社稷之安，便万民之利，新与朕俱弃细过，偕之大道，结兄弟之义，以全天下元元之民。
现代文：精神上的痛苦与不安，未曾忘怀过一天。所以派遣外交使节频繁来往，车辙如结，以将朕的友好意愿转告于单于王。今匈奴王恢复以往和睦相处的传统，从双方社稷的安定，两国人民的方便来考虑，愿意和朕都不咎既往，同建睦邻关系，结为兄弟之国，以满足中外人民的愿望。
English: He did not forget a single day of mental pain and anxiety. Therefore, he sent diplomatic envoys back and forth frequently to convey his friendly will to the king of Shanyu. Now, the king of Hunnu has restored the tradition of harmonious coexistence in the past, considering the stability of both societies and the convenience of the two peoples, and is willing to not blame the past, build good-neighborly relations with us, and become a brotherly country to meet the wishes of the Chinese and foreign people.

古文：和亲以定，始于今年。 
现代文：两国的友好睦邻关系已经确立，从今年开始。 
English: The friendly and good-neighborly relations between the two countries have been established, starting from this year.

古文：三年春二月，行幸代。
现代文：三年春二月，御驾临幸代地。
English: In the spring and February of the third year, he came to the place of happiness.

古文：四年夏四月丙寅晦，日有蚀之。五月，赦天下。
现代文：四年夏四月三十日，日偏食。五月，赦天下。
English: A partial solar eclipse will occur on April 30th in the summer of the fourth year. In May, the whole world will be forgiven.

古文：免官奴婢为庶人。
现代文：免除官家奴婢使为平民。
English: Civilians are exempted from being servants of officials and families.

古文：行幸雍。
现代文：巡幸雍地。
English: Touring the highlands.

古文：五年春正月，行幸陇西。
现代文：五年春正月，巡行到陇西。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of Spring, the parade went to Shaanxi.

古文：三月，行幸雍。秋七月，行幸代。
现代文：三月到雍，秋七月，行幸到代地。
English: From March to Yong, from autumn to July, from auspicious to auspicious.

古文：六年冬，匈奴三万骑入上郡，三万骑入云中。
现代文：六年冬，匈奴三万骑兵侵入上郡，三万骑兵侵入云中。
English: In the winter of the sixth year, the Huns invaded Shang County with thirty thousand cavalry, and invaded Yunchu with thirty thousand cavalry.

古文：以中大夫令免为车骑将军，屯飞狐；故楚相苏意为将军，屯句注；将军张武屯北地；河内太守周亚夫为将军，次细柳；宗正刘礼为将军，次霸上；祝兹侯徐厉为将军，次棘门，以备胡。
现代文：朝廷任中大夫令免为车骑将军驻兵于飞狐，原楚相苏意为将军驻兵句注，将军张武驻兵北地，河内太守周亚夫为将军驻兵于细柳，宗正刘礼为将军驻兵于霸上，祝皍侯徐厉国将军驻兵于棘门，以防备胡人。
English: The imperial court appointed the middle doctor to order the general stationed in the flying fox for the chariot and cavalry general, the original Chu Xiang Su meant the general stationed in the north, the general Zhang Wu stationed in the north, the Hanoi governor Zhou Yafu stationed in Xiliu for the general, the general Zong Zheng Liu Li stationed in the hegemony, and the general Xu Liguo stationed in the thorn gate to prevent the Hu people.

古文：夏四月，大旱，蝗。
现代文：夏四月，大旱，蝗灾。
English: Summer April, drought, locusts.

古文：令诸侯无人贡，弛山泽，减诸服御，损郎吏员，发仓庚以振民，民得卖爵。
现代文：诏令诸侯不得向朝廷纳贡，解除对山泽开采的禁令，减省多项公务开支，精简冗员，打开各地粮仓赈济灾民，有爵级的人可以卖爵。
English: The imperial edict ordered the lords not to pay tribute to the imperial court, lifted the ban on mining in the mountains and lakes, reduced a number of official expenses, streamlined redundant personnel, opened granaries around the country to help the victims of the disaster, and those with peerage could sell their peerage.

古文：七年夏，六月己亥，帝崩于未央宫。
现代文：七年夏六月初一日，文帝驾崩于未央宫。
English: On the first day of June in the summer of the seventh year, Emperor Wen passed away at the Miyang Palace.

古文：遗诏曰： 朕闻之：盖天下万物之萌生，靡不有死。
现代文：留下遗诏说： 朕听说：大凡天下万物从萌生以后，都要走向死亡。
English: He left a will saying, "I have heard that everything under heaven, from the time it is born, is destined to die.

古文：死者天地之理，物之自然，奚可甚哀！
现代文：死亡是天地间的常理，事物的自然规律，何必为此而恸哀！
English: Death is the common sense between heaven and earth, the natural law of things. Why should we mourn for it?

古文：当今之世，咸嘉生而恶死，厚葬以破业，重服以伤生，吾甚不取。
现代文：现今之世，都爱生而恶死，厚葬以致浪费财业，重服以致伤害民生，我极不赞同。
English: In today's world, people love life but die an evil death, people are buried in large numbers, resulting in a waste of wealth, and people's lives are harmed by wearing heavy clothing. I strongly disagree with this.

古文：且朕既不德，无以佐百姓。今崩，又使重服久临，以罹寒暑之数，哀人父子；伤长老之志，损其饮食，绝鬼神之祭祀，以重吾不德，谓天下何！
现代文：何况朕德行浅薄，未能给百姓带来福祉，在去世之后，又进行长时间的隆重的吊唁活动，使临丧者遭受在寒暑中受尽丧礼的折磨，让别人的子弟为我尽哀，就会令别人的长老感到伤神；损坏其他鬼神的祭馔来丰盛对我的祭馔，就会使其他的鬼神因之饥饿，这就更加增重了我的罪过，这叫我如何向天下交代！
English: Moreover, my virtue is shallow, and I failed to bring well-being to the people. After my death, I carried out a long and solemn condolence activity, causing the mourners to suffer the torture of undergoing the funeral rites in the cold and heat. If I let other people's children mourn for me, it would make other people's elders feel sad; if I damaged the offerings of other gods and goddesses to enrich my offerings, it would make other gods and goddesses hungry because of it. This further increased my sin, which made me how to tell the world!

古文：朕获保宗庙，以眇眇之身托于天下君王之上，二十有余年矣。
现代文：朕继承大统，以细末之身托于天下君王之上，已经二十三年了。
English: It has been twenty-three years since I succeeded to the supreme leadership and was entrusted to the emperor of the world.

古文：赖天之灵。社稷之福，方内安宁，靡有兵革。
现代文：依赖于上天的威灵、社稷的洪福，四海安宁，未有战乱。
English: Relying on the benevolence of heaven, the prosperity of society, the tranquility of the four seas, there is no war.

古文：朕既不敏，常畏过行，以羞先帝之遗德；惟年之久长，惧于不终。
现代文：朕秉性愚钝，常恐言行有过失，以玷辱先帝的煌煌帝德；而在位时间愈久，更恐不能善始善终。
English: I am stupid by nature, and I am always afraid of making mistakes in words and deeds, so as to disgrace the glorious virtue of the former emperor; and the longer I reign, the more I am afraid of not starting well and ending well.

古文：今乃幸以天年得复供养于高庙，朕之不明与嘉之，其奚哀念之有！
现代文：今日幸以自然的死亡得以供养于刘汉的祖庙之中，这实在是对我这个薄德之人最大的嘉勉，这还有什么应该哀恸的！
English: Today, I am fortunate to be able to offer my natural death in Liu Han's ancestral temple. This is really the greatest gratitude to me, a person of little virtue. What is there to mourn!

古文：其令天下吏民，令到出临三日，皆释服。
现代文：可令天下吏民，在接到志哀令后三天即停止悼念活动。
English: An order was issued to all officials and people in the country. After the order arrived, they mourned for three days, and then they all took off their mourning clothes.

古文：无禁取妇、嫁女、祠祀、饮酒、食肉。
现代文：不得禁止在国丧期间举行嫁娶、祭祀的饮酒食肉。
English: It is not allowed to prohibit drinking alcohol and eating meat during the period of national mourning.

古文：自当给丧事服临者，皆无践。绖带无过三寸。
现代文：凡必须参加葬礼的，都不要大量披麻戴孝，其头与腰的孝带宽不过三寸。
English: If you have to attend a funeral, do not wear a lot of filial piety. The filial piety of the head and waist is only three inches wide.

古文：无布车及兵器。无发民哭临宫殿中。
现代文：不要用布帛来铺盖灵车及派羽林军护灵，不要派百姓到宫殿中来哭灵。
English: Don't use cloth to cover the hearse and don't send the feathered army to protect the soul. Don't send the people to the palace to cry for the soul.

古文：殿中当临者，皆以旦夕各十五举音，礼皆罢。
现代文：朝廷中应参加葬礼的，只能在早晚与大功时可以有哭泣的哀音。礼毕就停止。
English: In the imperial court, those who should attend funerals can only weep and mourn in the morning and evening when they are performing great feats. Then the ceremony stops.

古文：非旦夕临时，禁无得擅哭临。
现代文：不是早晚与举行葬礼时，禁止擅自放声哭泣。
English: It is not morning or evening and when holding a funeral, it is forbidden to cry loudly without permission.

古文：以下，服大红十五日，小红十四日，纤七日，释服。
现代文：下棺后，服大功十五日，小功十四日，细布衣七日，三十六天以后全部释去孝服。
English: After being lowered into the coffin, they had to wear the great merit on the 15th day, the small merit on the 14th day, the fine cloth on the 7th day, and after the 36th day they were all released from the filial piety.

古文：它不在令中者，皆以此令比类从事。
现代文：其他有关事项在令中没提及的，都以此令类推。
English: All other relevant matters not mentioned in the order shall be construed by analogy with this order.

古文：布告天下，使明知朕意。
现代文：布告天下，使明知朕意。
English: Announce it to the whole world, so that people will know my will.

古文：霸陵山川因其故，无有所改。
现代文：霸陵川山按其原貌，不要另造坟陵。
English: Do not build another mausoleum, but keep the original appearance of the tomb.

古文：归夫人以下至少使。 
现代文：宫中夫人以下的都遣送归家。 
English: At least from the harem mistress on down, everyone was sent home.

古文：令中尉亚夫为车骑将军，属国悍为将屯将军，郎中令张武为复士将军，发近县卒万六千人，发内史卒万五千人，臧郭、穿、复土属将军武。
现代文：令中尉周亚夫为车骑将军，属国悍为将屯将军，郎中令张武为陵墓复土将军。征发近县士卒一万六千人，内史卒一万五千人，交给张武将军从事开挖墓井与复土回填工作。
English: He ordered Lieutenant Zhou Yafu to be the general of cavalry and cavalry, the national hero to be the general of garrison and garrison, and his brother-in-law Zhang Wu to be the general of mausoleum and land reclamation. He conscripted 16,000 soldiers and soldiers from the neighboring counties and 15,000 soldiers and soldiers from the province and handed them over to General Zhang Wu to engage in excavation of tombs and land reclamation.

古文：赐诸侯王以下至孝悌、力田金、钱、帛各有数。
现代文：赐各王侯以下至孝悌力田的人金钱帛各若干。
English: He gave a certain amount of money to everyone from the princes down to the nobles.

古文：乙巳，葬霸陵。
现代文：六月初七日，葬于霸陵。
English: On June 7th, he was buried in the Mausoleum.

古文：赞曰：孝文皇帝即位二十三年，宫室、苑囿、车骑、服御无所增益。
现代文：班固评论：孝文皇帝在位二十三年，宫殿御苑车骑服御无所增加。
English: Ban Gu's comment: Emperor Xiaowen has been on the throne for 23 years, and there has been no increase in the number of imperial chariots and horse-drawn carriages in the palace gardens.

古文：有不便，辄弛以利民。
现代文：当百姓感到不便时，常放开禁令以利百姓。
English: When the people are inconvenienced, the ban is often lifted to benefit the people.

古文：尝欲作露台，召匠计之，直百金。
现代文：他曾想造一座报时辰的露台，召工匠预算，造价需百金。
English: He once planned to build a terrace and asked a craftsman to calculate the cost, which required a hundred kilos of gold.

古文：上曰： 百金，中人十家之产也。
现代文：文帝说： 百金是中等人家十户的产业。
English: Wen Di said: Baijin is a medium-sized industry with ten households.

古文：吾奉先帝宫室，常恐羞之，何以台为！ 
现代文：我继守先帝的宫室，常恐有所玷污，何必要筑露台！ 
English: I continue to guard the former emperor's palace room, always afraid of being defiled, why build a terrace!

古文：身衣弋绨，所幸慎夫人衣不曳地，帷帐无文绣，以示敦朴，为天下先。
现代文：身穿黑色绨衣，所宠爱的慎夫人衣长不拖地，帷帐不绣花，以表示自己的敦朴，为天下的表率。
English: Wearing a black satin dress, the beloved Mrs. Shin's dress does not drag the ground, and the curtains are not embroidered, to show her modesty, as a model for the world.

古文：治霸陵，皆瓦器，不得以金、银、铜、锡为饰，因其山，不起坟。
现代文：修造霸陵陵墓，都用瓦器，不准以金银铜锡装饰，因山起陵，不另选坟。
English: The mausoleums of tyrannical rulers are all built with earthenware, and are not allowed to be decorated with gold, silver, copper, and tin. Because of the rise of mountains, no other tombs are chosen.

古文：南越尉佗自立为帝，召贵佗兄弟，以德怀之，佗遂称臣。
现代文：南越尉佗自立为帝，文帝贵封尉佗兄弟，以德义进行感召，佗又重新称臣。
English: Nanyue Yijie established himself as emperor, Emperor Wen honored Yijie's brothers, inspired them with virtue and righteousness, and Yijie once again became a courtier.

古文：与匈奴结和亲，后而背约入盗，令边备守，不发兵深入，恐烦百姓。
现代文：与匈奴结为友好，不久匈奴背约入盗，文帝只令边兵加强防守，不发兵反攻其地，恐增加百姓负担。
English: He formed a friendship with the Xiongnu, and soon the Xiongnu broke the agreement and invaded. Emperor Wen only ordered the border soldiers to strengthen the defense, but did not send troops to counterattack the land, fearing that it would increase the burden on the people.

古文：吴王诈病不朝，赐以几杖。群臣袁盎等谏说虽切，常假借纳用焉。
现代文：吴王诈称病不朝，文帝赏以几杖进行慰问，群臣袁盎等虽极力谏说不应为吴王所欺，文帝仍将几杖送给吴王使用。
English: King Wu fraudulently claimed that he was not ill, and Emperor Wen rewarded him with a few sticks to offer condolences. Although Yuan Ang and other courtiers tried their best to persuade him that he should not be deceived by King Wu, Emperor Wen still gave him a few sticks to use.

古文：张武等受赂金钱，觉，更加赏赐，以愧其心。
现代文：张武等受贿金钱，发觉后，更加赏赐，使其惭愧自省。
English: Zhang Wu and other bribe-takers were rewarded even more when they were found out, causing them to feel ashamed and self-reflect.

古文：专务以德化民，是以海内殷富，兴于礼义，断狱数百，几致刑措。呜呼，仁哉！
现代文：文帝专务以德化民，是以四海殷富，大兴礼义之风，断狱仅数百人，几乎到刑罚不用，唉，仁德之帝啊！
English: Emperor Wen specialized in transforming the people with virtue, and started with the four seas of wealth and prosperity, and the great prosperity of the wind of propriety and righteousness. Only hundreds of people were released from prison, almost without punishment, alas, the emperor of benevolence!

