古文：兵法曰： 千人而成权，万人而成武。 
现代文：兵法上说，兵力小的可用权谋取胜，兵力大的可用威力取胜。
English: According to the law of war, a small force has the right to win, while a large force has the power to win.

古文：权先加人者，敌不力交；武先加人者，敌无威接。
现代文：先敌使用权谋，敌人有力量也无法使用，先敌使用武力，敌人有力量也无法抗拒，所以用兵最好先发制人。
English: The first enemy to use force cannot be resisted, so it is best to pre-empt the enemy with force.

古文：故兵贵先，胜于此，则胜彼矣；弗胜于此，则弗胜彼矣。
现代文：善于运用这一原则。就能战胜敌人，不善于运用这一原则，就不能战胜敌人。
English: If you are good at applying this principle, you can defeat the enemy; if you are not good at applying this principle, you cannot defeat the enemy.

古文：凡我往则彼来，彼来则我往，相为胜败，此战之理然也。
现代文：我去进攻敌人，敌人必然要反击，敌人来进攻我们，我们也必然要反击。不是我战胜敌人，就是敌人战胜我，这是战争的客观规律。
English: If I attack the enemy, the enemy is bound to counterattack; if the enemy attacks us, we are bound to counterattack. Either I defeat the enemy or the enemy defeats me. This is the objective law of war.

古文：夫精诚在乎神明，战在乎道之所极。
现代文：精细周到的谋略在于明察敌我双方情况，机动权变的指挥在于灵活运用作战原则。
English: Delicate and thoughtful strategy lies in observing the situation of both the enemy and ourselves, and the command of maneuver and change lies in the flexible application of the principles of warfare.

古文：有者无之，无者有之，安所信之。先王之所传闻者，任正去诈，存其慈顺，决无留刑。
现代文：有力量装做没有力量，没有力量却装做有力量，敌人怎么能摸清我们的真实情况呢。先王之所以为后世传颂的，在于能任用正直的人，清除奸诈的人，保护善良恭顺的人。而对于那些触犯刑法的人决不留情。
English: How can the enemy find out the truth about us when we have the power to pretend we don't have the power, and when we don't have the power to pretend we do have the power? The reason why the former king is praised by future generations is that he was able to appoint honest people, remove treacherous people, and protect kind and obedient people. And he never showed mercy to those who violated the criminal law.

古文：故知道者，必先图不知止之败，恶在乎必往有功。
现代文：所以懂得战争规律的人，必先考虑一味冒进的危险，怎能指望一往无前就能胜利呢？
English: Therefore, those who understand the laws of war must first consider the danger of rushing in, how can they expect to win without moving forward?

古文：轻进而求战，敌复图止，我往而敌制胜矣。
现代文：如果轻举冒进，寻求决战，敌人又有计划地加以阻止，这样我军的进攻一定会遭到失败。
English: If we rush headlong and seek a decisive battle, and the enemy systematically prevents it, then our army's attack will certainly fail.

古文：故兵法曰： 求而从之，见而加之，主人不敢当而陵之，必丧其权。 
现代文：所以兵法上说，如果敌人求战，我就应战，或者见到敌人就去进攻，或者我军的力量本来不能阻挡敌人的进攻，而又轻率地交战，都必然会丧失战争的主动权。
English: Therefore, according to the law of war, if the enemy asks for war, I will fight, or if I see the enemy, I will attack, or if the strength of our army cannot stop the enemy's attack, but we fight rashly, we will inevitably lose the initiative of war.

古文：凡夺者无气，恐者不，败者无人，兵无道也。
现代文：军队处于被动地位就会挫伤士气，军心恐惧就不能坚守，遭受失败是由于指挥无方，这些都是用兵不得其法的原故。
English: If the army is in a passive position, its morale will be dampened, it will not be able to adhere to military fear, and it will suffer defeat due to incompetent command. These are all reasons why the use of soldiers cannot be justified.

古文：意往而不疑则从之，夺敌而无败则加之，明视而高居则威之，兵道极矣。
现代文：军队斗志昂扬而毫不犹豫，就同敌人进行决战，敌人动摇而又不敢前进，就乘机发动进攻，明瞭敌情而又居高临下，就利用威势压倒敌人。
English: The army is full of fighting spirit and does not hesitate to fight a decisive battle with the enemy. When the enemy is shaken but does not dare to advance, it will take the opportunity to launch an attack. When the enemy is clear and superior, it will use its power to overwhelm the enemy.

古文：其言无谨，偷矣；其陵犯无节，矣。
现代文：这就算是精通兵法了。军队言语不谨慎，就会泄密。作战行动无节制，就会失败。
English: This is proficiency in the art of war. If the army is not careful with its words, it will leak secrets. If its combat operations are unrestrained, it will fail.

古文：水溃雷击，三军乱矣。必安其危，去其患，以智决之。
现代文：士兵散漫急躁不受约束，就会溃乱。必须要转危为安，消除祸源，机智地进行处置。
English: If soldiers are scattered and impatient without restraint, there will be a riot. It is necessary to turn the corner, eliminate the source of the disaster, and deal with it intelligently.

古文：高之以廊庙之，重之以受命之论，锐之以逾垠之论，则敌国可不战而服。
现代文：朝延的决策要高明，将帅的选用要慎重，进入敌人国境要迅速，这就可以不经战斗而使敌国屈服了。
English: The decision-making in the morning and evening should be clever, the selection of generals should be prudent, and the entry into the enemy's border should be rapid. This can make the enemy country succumb without a fight.

