古文：或谓楚王曰： 臣闻从者欲合天下以朝大王，臣愿大王听之也。
现代文：有人对楚考烈王说； 臣下听说主张合纵的人想要联合天下诸侯来朝见大王，臣下希望大王听听我的看法。
English: Someone said to King Chukore: My vassals have heard that the proponents of unification want to unite all the princes of the world to come to the court to see the great king. My vassals hope that the great king will listen to my opinion.

古文：夫因诎为信，旧患有成，勇者义之。
现代文：在委屈的环境里伸张正义，在患难中奋进有所建树，这是勇敢者义不容辞的事。
English: It is the duty of the brave to uphold justice in an aggrieved environment, and to strive to create something in the face of adversity.

古文：摄祸为福，裁少为多，知者官之。
现代文：预见到祸患能把它转变为福事，控制少数能把它变成多数，这是聪明人管理事情的办法。
English: To foresee the calamity and turn it into a blessing, to control the few and turn them into the many, is the way of a wise man to manage affairs.

古文：夫报报之反，墨墨之化，唯大君能之。
现代文：反反复复地变化，屈伸祸福相反不已，都在无声无息地演进中，只有品德高尚的人能驾驭它。
English: It is in the process of a silent and continuous evolution, and only a person of high moral character can control it.

古文：祸与福相贯，生与亡为邻，不偏于死，不偏于生，不足以载大名。
现代文：祸与福相通，生与死为邻，不专一于致死，不专一于求生，就不能获得大的名声。
English: Misfortune and good fortune go hand in hand, and life and death are neighbors. If you are not dedicated to causing death, if you are not dedicated to survival, you will not be able to gain a great reputation.

古文：无所寇艾，不足以横世。
现代文：没有经过贼寇的侵犯，就不能无敌于天下。
English: Without the invasion of thieves and robbers, we cannot be invincible in the world.

古文：夫秦捐德绝命之日久矣，而天下不知。
现代文：秦国抛弃道德违背天命的时间很长了，可是天下人并不知道。
English: It's been a long time since Qin abandoned morality and violated the Mandate of Heaven, but the world doesn't know it.

古文：今夫横人嚂口利机，上干主心，下牟百姓，公举而私取利，是以国权轻于鸿毛，而积祸重于丘山。 
现代文：如今主张连横的人巧言利舌，向上求得君主的欢心，向下加倍谋取百姓的利益，表面为公家谋划，实际暗中私自取利，因此使得国家的政权像鸿毛一样轻，而积累的祸患像丘山一样高。 
English: Nowadays, those who advocate continuity of power speak eloquently, seek the favor of the monarch from above, and seek the interests of the people from below. On the surface, they plan for the public, but in reality, they secretly seek their own interests. As a result, the country's political power is as light as a feather, and the accumulated disasters are as high as the hills.

