古文：钱徽，字蔚章。
现代文：钱徽的字叫蔚章。
English: The Chinese character for money emblem is 蔚章.

古文：父起，附见《卢纶传》。
现代文：他父亲钱起，附在《卢纶传》里介绍。
English: His father, Qianqi, is introduced in the appendix of "Lu Xun Biography."

古文：徽中进士第，居谷城。
现代文：钱徽考中了进士，住在城。
English: Qian Hui passed the entrance examination and lives in the city.

古文：谷城令王郢善接侨士游客，以财贷馈，坐是得罪。
现代文：县令王郢喜欢结交客居和旅行的士人，送钱财给他们，因为这被判了罪。
English: Wang Yao, the county magistrate, was found guilty of having a penchant for befriending expatriates and travelling scholars and giving them money.

古文：观察使樊泽视其簿，独徽无有，乃表署掌书记。
现代文：观察使樊泽看他的账本，只有钱徽没接受，就任命他为掌书记官。
English: The observation made Heze look at his ledger, only Qian Hui did not accept, so he appointed him as the chief clerk.

古文：蔡贼方炽，泽多募武士于军。
现代文：蔡州叛贼正猖狂时，樊泽招募了很多士兵到军队里。
English: When the Caizhou rebels were on the rampage, Heze recruited many soldiers into the army.

古文：泽卒，士颇希赏，周澈主留事，重擅发军廥，不敢给。
现代文：樊泽去世了，士兵们很想得赏赐，周澈主持留守事务，不敢擅自动用库存，不敢颁赏。
English: Heze passed away, and the soldiers were eager to receive the reward. Zhou Che presided over the affairs while he was away, and did not dare to use the inventory without permission, and did not dare to award the reward.

古文：时大雨雪，士寒冻，徽先冬颁衣絮，士乃大悦。
现代文：当时下了大雪，士兵们感到寒冷，钱徽在冬天到来之前就发了冬装被絮，士兵们才很高兴了。
English: At that time, it was snowing heavily, and the soldiers felt cold. Qianhui sent out winter quilts before the winter came, and the soldiers were very happy.

古文：又辟宣歙崔衍府。
现代文：他又被召到宣歙观察使崔衍府中任职。
English: He was also summoned to Xuancheng to observe the rise of Cui Yanfu.

古文：王师讨蔡，檄遣采石兵会战，戍还，颇骄蹇。
现代文：唐军讨伐蔡州，下令征调采石的军队会合作战，出征归来，兵将们很骄横。
English: The Tang army besieged Caizhou, ordered the army of the quarry to cooperate in the war, and returned from the war. The soldiers were very arrogant.

古文：会衍病亟，徽请召池州刺史李逊署副使，逊至而衍死，一军赖以安。
现代文：遇上崔衍病重了，钱徽请求把池州刺史李逊召来任副使，李逊一到任崔衍就去世了，全军靠他得以安定。
English: When Cui Yan fell seriously ill, Qian Hui requested that Li Xun, the Chizhou general, be summoned to serve as deputy envoy. Li Xun died as soon as Cui Yan took office, and the entire army was able to rely on him for stability.

古文：入拜左补阙，以祠部员外郎为翰林学士，三迁中书舍人，加承旨。
现代文：后被调进朝廷任左补阙，又以祠部员外郎的身份任翰林学士，三次升官后任中书舍人，外加承旨职。
English: Later, he was transferred to the Imperial Court as Zuo Buyei, and was appointed as Hanlin Baccalaureate as a member of the Ancestral Hall, and was promoted three times as a member of the Central Library, in addition to his position as an imperial official.

古文：宪宗尝独召徽，从容言它学士皆高选，宜预闻机密，广参决，帝称其长者。
现代文：唐宪宗曾单独召见他，他乘空闲说其他的学士也都是高才，应预先让他们知道机密事务，广泛听取意见后决断，皇帝称赞他有长者风度。
English: Tang Xianzong had summoned him alone, and he took the opportunity to say that other scholars were also highly talented, and that they should know confidential matters in advance and make decisions after listening to a wide range of opinions. The emperor praised him for having the demeanor of an elder.

古文：是时，内积财，图复河湟，然禁无名贡献，而至者不甚却。
现代文：当时，皇帝在宫里积蓄钱财，想收复河州湟水一带，虽然答应禁止税外的进贡，但送来的却不怎么推却。
English: At that time, the emperor was accumulating money in the palace, and he wanted to recover the area around Surabaya in Hezhou. Although he promised to prohibit the payment of tribute outside of taxes, he did not push back much on the money that was sent.

古文：徽恳谏罢之。
现代文：钱徽恳切劝谏禁绝这些。
English: Qian Hui earnestly advised him not to do so.

古文：帝密戒后有献毋入右银台门，以避学士。
现代文：皇帝秘密告诫以后如有进贡不要从右银台门送进宫，来避开翰林院。
English: After the emperor's secret admonition, if there were tributes, they should not be sent into the palace from the right bank of the Yangtze River, so as to avoid Hanlin Court.

古文：梁守谦为院使，见徽批监军表语简约，叹曰： 一字不可益邪！ 
现代文：梁守谦任翰林院使，看见钱徽批复监军奏章的语句简短，叹气说： 一个字都不能加了吗！ 
English: Liang Shouqian, an envoy of Hanlin Academy, saw the short sentence of Qianhui's approval of the review and supervision of the military, and sighed: Can't you add a single word?

古文：衔之。
现代文：因此恨钱徽。
English: It's good to keep grudges in mind.

古文：以论淮西事忤旨，罢职，徙太子右庶子，出虢州刺史。
现代文：钱徽因谈论淮西的事不合皇帝的心意，被免了职，贬为太子右庶子，又调出朝廷任虢州刺史。
English: Qian Hui was dismissed from his post for talking about the affairs of Huaxi, which was not in line with the emperor's wishes. He was reduced to the position of the prince's illegitimate son, and was transferred to the imperial court to serve as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：入拜礼部侍郎。宰相段文昌以所善杨浑之、学士李绅以周汉宾并诿徽求致第籍。
现代文：后调进朝廷任礼部侍郎，宰相段文昌将要好的杨浑之、学士李绅将周汉宾都托付给他请求录取为进士。
English: Afterward, he was transferred to the imperial court to serve as a waiter of the ceremonial department. Yang Hunzhi, who was to become the prime minister Duan Wenchang, and Zhou Hanbin, who was to become the bachelor Li Sheng, entrusted him with the request to be admitted as a junior scholar.

古文：浑之者凭子也，多纳古帖秘画于文昌，皆世所宝。
现代文：杨浑之是杨冯心的儿子，送了很多有名的碑帖和画给段文昌，都是世间珍品。
English: Yang Hunzhi, the son of Yang Fengxin, sent many famous inscriptions and paintings to Duan Wenchang, all of which are world treasures.

古文：徽不能如二人请，自取杨殷士、苏巢。
现代文：钱徽不肯听从他们两人的请求，自己选中了杨殷士、苏巢。
English: Qian Hui refused to listen to the request of the two of them and chose Yang Yin Shi and Su Xue.

古文：巢者李宗闵婿，殷士者汝士之弟，皆与徽厚。
现代文：苏巢是李宗闵的女婿，杨殷士是杨汝士的弟弟，都和钱徽要好。
English: Su Xun is the son-in-law of Li Zongyao, Yang Yin Shi is the younger brother of Yang Rushi, both are better than Qian Hui.

古文：文昌怒，方帅剑南西川，入辞，即奏徽取士以私。
现代文：段文昌生气了，他当时正要去掌管剑南西川，进宫辞行，就告钱徽取进士不公正。
English: Duan Wenchang got angry. At that time, he was about to take charge of Jiannan West River, enter the palace and resign. He complained that it was unfair to take money from the emblem.

古文：访绅及元稹，时稹与宗闵有隙，因是共挤其非。
现代文：皇帝问李绅和元稹，当时元稹和李宗闵有矛盾，因此都说钱徽不好。
English: The emperor asked Li Sheng and Yuan Shao. At that time, Yuan Shao and Li Zongya had a conflict, so they both said that the money emblem was not good.

古文：有诏王起、白居易覆试，而黜者过半，遂贬江州刺史。
现代文：皇帝下诏命王起、白居易再次考试入选者，落选的有一半以上，于是贬钱徽任江州刺史。
English: The emperor issued an edict ordering Wang Qi and Bai Juyi to take the exam again. More than half of those who failed the exam were demoted, so Qian Qianhui was appointed as the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：汝士等劝徽出文昌、绅私书自直，徽曰： 苟无愧于心，安事辨证邪？ 
现代文：杨汝士等人劝钱徽拿出段文昌、李绅托他的信件来为自己辩解，钱徽说： 如果心里没有愧，哪里需要辩解和证据呢？ 
English: Yang Ruxi and others advised Qian Hui to take out Duan Wenchang, and Li Sheng asked him to write a letter to defend himself. Qian Hui said: If you are not ashamed, where is the need for justification and evidence?

古文：敕子弟焚书。
现代文：命家里人把那些信烧了。
English: The family burned the letters.

古文：初，州有盗劫贡船，捕吏取滨江恶少年二百人系讯，徽按其枉，悉纵去。
现代文：起初，江州有强盗抢劫送贡品的船，抓盗贼的官吏把江边两百名品行不好的年轻人抓起来审讯，钱徽查明了他们是冤枉的，把他们都放了。
English: At first, there were robbers in Jiangzhou who robbed the ships that sent the tribute. The officials who caught the thieves arrested and interrogated two hundred young people along the river who were of bad character. Qianhui found out that they were innocent and released them all.

古文：数日，舒州得真盗。
现代文：几天后，舒州抓到了真强盗。
English: A few days later, Shuzhou caught the real robber.

古文：州有牛田钱百万，刺史以给宴饮赠饷者，徽曰： 此农耕之备，可他用哉！ 
现代文：江州养官府牛的田地有一百万文钱的收入，前任刺史用来供应设宴送礼，钱徽说： 这是农民耕作的后备，能做其他用途吗！ 
English: The fields in Jiangzhou that raise cattle for the government have an income of one million yuan. The former governor used it to provide banquets and gifts. Qian Hui said: This is a reserve for farmers' farming. Can it be used for other purposes?

古文：命代贫民租入。
现代文：令用来充作穷苦百姓的租税。
English: used to fund the poor people's taxes.

古文：转湖州。
现代文：后调任湖州。
English: He was later transferred to Huzhou.

古文：时宣、歙旱，左丞孔戣请徙徽领宣歙，宰相以其本文辞进，不用。戣曰： 相君宜知天下事，徽江、虢之治不及知，况其它邪？ 
现代文：当时宣州、歙州天旱，尚书左丞孔癸戈请求调钱徽管宣歙，宰相认为钱徽是靠写文章升官的，没有任用他，孔癸戈说： 宰相应该知道全国的事情，连钱徽在江州、虢州的政绩都不知道，何况其他的呢？ 
English: At that time, there was a drought in Xuanzhou and Zhangzhou. Kong Rongge, the left-hand man of Shangshu, requested the transfer of Qianhui to Xuanzhou. The prime minister thought that Qianhui was promoted by writing articles, and did not appoint him. Kong Rongge said: The prime minister should know the things of the whole country. He does not even know the political achievements of Qianhui in Jiangzhou and Zhangzhou, let alone the others.

古文：还，迁工部侍郎，出为华州刺史。
现代文：钱徽后来回到了京城，升任工部侍郎，后又出京任华州刺史。
English: Qian Hui later returned to Beijing and was promoted to the position of a chamberlain of the engineering department. Later, he went to Beijing to serve as the chief historian of Huazhou.

古文：文宗立，召拜尚书左丞。
现代文：唐文宗即位，把他召来任尚书左丞。
English: When Tang Wenzong ascended to the throne, he was summoned to serve as Shang Shuzo Zuo.

古文：会宣墨麻，群臣在廷，方大寒，稍稍引避，徽素恭谨，不去位，久而仆。
现代文：遇上宣读皇帝直接颁的诏书，百官都到了朝廷，当时天气严寒，群臣渐渐躲开了，他一贯恭敬谨慎，不离开自己的位置，时间长了昏倒了。
English: When the imperial rescript issued directly by the emperor was read out, all the officials came to the imperial court. At that time, the weather was very cold, and the courtiers gradually moved away. He was always respectful and cautious, and did not leave his position. After a long time, he fainted.

古文：因上疏告老，不许。
现代文：他因此上奏因年老请求退休，没批准。
English: He therefore submitted a request to retire due to old age, which was not approved.

古文：太和初，复为华州。
现代文：大和初年，他又担任华州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Yamato era, he also served as the president of the University of Washington.

古文：俄以吏部尚书致仕。
现代文：不久在吏部尚书任上退休。
English: He soon retired from the position of secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：卒，年七十五，赠尚书右仆射。
现代文：后去世了，享年七十五岁，赠官为尚书右仆射。
English: He later passed away at the age of seventy-five, and was succeeded by his right-hand man, Shang Shuxu.

古文：徽与薛正伦、魏弘简善，二人前死，徽抚其孤至婚嫁成立。
现代文：他和薛正伦、魏弘简要好，他们两人先去世了，他抚育他们的孤儿到娶亲立业。
English: He and Xue Zhenglun and Wei Hong had a brief friendship. They both died first, and he raised their orphans until they married and established their careers.

古文：任庶子时，韩公武以赂结公卿，遗徽钱二十万，不纳。
现代文：他任右庶子时，韩公武用贿赂和朝官们结交，送给钱徽二十万文钱，他不接受。
English: When he was the second son, Han Gongwu used bribery to make friends with the imperial officials and gave Qianhui 200,000 yuan, which he did not accept.

古文：或言非当路可无让，徽曰： 取之在义不在官。 
现代文：有人说只要不是宰相可以不拒绝，他说 ：接受钱看是否合大义，不看任什么官。 
English: Someone said that as long as you are not the prime minister, you can not refuse. He said: it depends on whether it is right to accept money, not on what official.

古文：时称有公望。
现代文：当时人称赞他有正直的声望。
English: At the time, he was lauded for his reputation for honesty.

古文：子可复、方义。
现代文：他儿子是钱可复、钱方义。
English: His son is a money-making, money-spinning machine.

古文：可复死郑注时。
现代文：钱可复在消灭郑注时被处死了。
English: Qian Kefu was executed during the extermination of Zheng Zhu.

古文：方义终太子宾客。子珝，字瑞文，善文辞，宰相王抟荐知制诰，进中书舍人。
现代文：钱方义官当到太子宾客，他儿子钱王羽的字叫瑞文，善于写文章，宰相王抟推荐他任知制诰，又升任中书舍人。
English: When Qian Fang Yi Guan was a guest of the prince, his son Qian Wang Yu's character was called Rui Wen, and he was good at writing articles. The prime minister, Wang Qi, recommended him to be appointed as a scholar, and he was also promoted to the position of middle school teacher.

古文：高釴，字翘之，史失其何所人。
现代文：王抟被治罪，他被贬为抚州司马。高釴的字叫翘之，史籍上没记载他是什么地方的人。
English: Wang Yao was punished, and he was degraded to Fuzhou Sima. Gao Yao's character is called Zhao Zhi, and there is no record in the history books of what kind of person he was.

古文：与弟铢、锴俱擢进士第。
现代文：他和弟弟高铢、高锴都考中了进士。
English: He and his younger brother Gao Jun and Gao Jun both passed the entrance examination.

古文：累迁右补阙、史馆脩撰。
现代文：他多次升官后任右补阙、史馆修撰。
English: He was promoted many times, and later served as the Right Complementary Secretary and the Historian of the History Museum.

古文：元和末，以中人为和籴使，釴继疏论执。
现代文：元和末年，皇帝任命宦官为和籴使，他连续写奏章反对。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, the emperor appointed eunuchs as peace envoys, and he continuously wrote musical pieces to oppose this.

古文：转起居郎，数陈政得失，穆宗嘉之，面赐绯、鱼，召入翰林，为学士。
现代文：后调任起居郎，多次议论政事是否恰当，唐穆宗称赞他，当面赐给他绯色官服和银鱼袋，召他进翰林院任学士。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of kijiro, and he repeatedly discussed whether it was appropriate to be in politics. Tang Mu Zong praised him, gave him a navy blue official uniform and a silver fish bag in person, and called him to enter Hanlin Academy as a bachelor.

古文：张韶变兴仓卒，釴从敬宗夜驻左军。
现代文：张韶事变突然发生，他跟随唐敬宗夜晚住在左军。
English: The Zhangye Incident suddenly occurred, and he followed Tang Jingzong to live in Zuojun at night.

古文：翌日，进知制诰，拜中书舍人。
现代文：第二天，升任知制诰、中书舍人。
English: The next day, he was promoted to the position of Zhizhezheng and Zhongshushe Renren.

古文：入见帝，因劝躬听揽示忧勤，帝纳其言，赐锦彩。
现代文：他进宫去见皇帝，就劝皇帝亲自听意见、看奏章来表示忧国和勤勉，皇帝采纳了他的意见，赏给他绸缎。
English: When he went to the palace to see the emperor, he persuaded the emperor to listen to his opinion and read the score in person to show his concern for the country and diligence. The emperor accepted his opinion and awarded him silk brocade.

古文：俄罢学士。
现代文：不久，被罢免了学士职。
English: Soon after, he was removed from his post as a professor.

古文：累进吏部侍郎，人善其振职。
现代文：多次升官后任吏部侍郎，人们称赞他能发挥职能。
English: After being promoted several times, he was appointed to the position of the clerk's assistant, and people praised him for being able to perform his duties well.

古文：出为同州刺史。
现代文：以后调出朝廷任同州刺史。
English: Later, the imperial court was transferred to the same state.

古文：卒，赠兵部尚书，遗命薄葬。
现代文：后去世了，赠官兵部尚书，他留下遗言不要厚葬。
English: After he passed away, he gave the officers and men of the military department a letter, and he left his last words not to be buried.

古文：釴少孤窭，介然无党援，以致宦达。
现代文：他从小是孤儿又贫穷，正直不拉宗派，靠这当了大官。
English: He grew up as an orphan and poor, honest and non-sectarian, and became a high-ranking official thanks to this.

古文：诸弟皆检愿友爱，为搢绅景重。
现代文：他的几个弟弟都守法友爱，受到士人推崇。
English: Several of his younger brothers were all law-abiding and respected by scholars.

古文：子湜，字澄之，第进士，累官右谏议大夫。
现代文：他儿子高湜的字叫澄之，考中了进士，多次升官后任右谏议大夫。
English: His son Gao Yao's character is called Cheng Zhi. He passed the entrance examination and was promoted several times, and later became the doctor of the Right Division of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

古文：咸通末，为礼部侍郎。
现代文：咸通末年，任礼部侍郎。
English: In the last years of Hamitsu's life, he served as a chamberlain in the Ceremonial Department.

古文：时士多繇权要干请，湜不能裁，既而抵帽于地曰： 吾决以至公取之，得谴固吾分！ 
现代文：当时考生多由权贵托付，他无法兼顾，后把官帽扔到地下说： 我决定按公道录取，如果被贬官，那是命中注定！ 
English: At that time, most of the candidates were entrusted by the powerful. He couldn't do both, so he threw his official cap to the ground and said, "I decided to be admitted according to justice. If I was demoted, it was fate!"

古文：乃取公乘亿、许棠、聂夷中等。
现代文：于是录取了公乘亿、许棠、聂夷中等人。
English: As a result, middle-class people such as Gongzheng, Xu Tang and Zouyi were admitted.

古文：以兵部侍郎判度支出为昭义节度使，为下所逐，贬连州司马。
现代文：后任兵部侍郎、判度支时，出京任昭义节度使，被部下赶走，又贬任连州司马。
English: Later, he served as the attendant of the military department and the judge of the division, and went to Beijing to serve as the assistant of Akiyoshi, but was driven away by his subordinates and demoted to the post of Lianzhou Sima.

古文：以太子宾客分司东都，卒。
现代文：后任太子宾客主持洛阳分署，此后去世了。
English: Later, Prince Guest presided over the Luoyang branch, and then passed away.

古文：亿字寿仙，棠字文化，夷中字坦之，皆有名当时。
现代文：公乘亿的字叫寿仙，许棠的字叫文化，聂夷中的字叫坦之，都在当时有名气。
English: The word "Shuxian" (寿仙) in "公乘億" (公乘億), the word "文化" (文化) in "许棠" (许棠), and the word "丹之" (坦之) in "夷中" (夷中) were all famous at that time.

古文：铢，字权仲，既擢第，署太原张弘靖幕府，入迁监察御史。
现代文：高铢的字叫权仲，考中进士后，被任命为太原节度使张弘靖的幕僚，后入朝升任监察御史。
English: Gao Yao's nickname was Quanzhong. After passing the middle school entrance examination, he was appointed as a staff member of Zhang Hongjing, the Taiyuan governor, and later he was promoted to the position of inspector of imperial history.

古文：太和时，擢累给事中。
现代文：太和年间，多次升官后任给事中。
English: During the Taiwa era, he was promoted several times and then assigned to the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

古文：文宗得李训，骤拜侍讲学士，铢率谏官伏阁言训素行憸邪，不可任，必乱天下。
现代文：唐文宗赏识李训后，一下子提升为侍讲学士，高铢率领谏官在殿上跪着说李训一贯奸邪，不能任用，否则定会弄乱天下。
English: After Tang Wenzong appreciated Li Xun, he was suddenly promoted to attendant lecturer. Gao Yao led the eunuchs to kneel in the hall and said that Li Xun had always been evil and could not be appointed, otherwise he would definitely mess up the world.

古文：帝遣使者谕曰： 朕留训时时讲绎，前命不可改。 
现代文：皇帝派使者告诉他们说： 我要留李训随时讲解经义，先前的任命不能更改。 
English: The emperor sent an envoy to tell them: I want to keep Li Xun to explain the sutras at any time, and the previous appointment cannot be changed.

古文：当是时，已旱而水，彗变未息，郑注权震赫，人情危骇，既铢等弗见省，群臣失色。
现代文：当时，旱灾刚过又有水灾，彗星还没消失，郑注的权势显赫，人们都担心害怕，到高铢等劝谏没被采纳，百官都吓坏了。
English: At that time, the drought had just passed and there were floods, the comet had not yet disappeared, Zhengzhu's influence was prominent, people were worried and afraid, and the advice to Gao Yao was not adopted, and all the officials were terrified.

古文：明年，训当国，出铢为浙东观察使，历义成节度使。
现代文：第二年，李训掌权，把高铢调出朝廷任浙东观察使，后又任义成节度使。
English: In the second year, Li Xun took power and transferred Gao Wei from the imperial court to serve as the East Zhejiang observation envoy, and later as the Yicheng section envoy.

古文：大中初，迁礼部尚书判户部，徙太常卿。尝罚礼生，博士李悫愠见曰： 故事，礼院不关白太常，故卿莅职，博士不参集。
现代文：冯宿的字叫拱之，婺州东阳县人。他父亲冯子华，在父母墓边搭棚守丧时，有灵芝、白兔出现，人称他家为 行孝的冯家 。
English: Fengshu's family name is Gongzhi, and he was born in Dongyang County, Ganzhou. His father, Feng Zihua, set up a pavilion at his parents' graveside to hold a memorial service, when Ganoderma lucidum and white rabbits appeared. People called his family the Feng family of filial piety.

古文：不宜罚小史，隳旧典。 铢叹曰： 吾老不能退，乃为小儿所辱！ 
现代文：冯宿在贞元年间和弟弟冯定、叔伯弟弟冯审和冯宽一起考中了进士，徐州节度使张建封任命他为掌书记。张建封去世了，他儿子张忄音被军人胁迫主管留守事务。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan, Feng Shuk, his brother Feng Ding, and his uncles Feng Xian and Feng Guang were awarded the title of "Candidate" together. The Xuzhou Festival made Zhang Jianfeng appoint him as the secretary. Zhang Jianfeng died, and his son Zhang Yuyin was coerced by soldiers to remain in charge of affairs.

古文：卒。锴，字弱金，连中进士、宏辞科，辟河东府参谋，历吏部员外郎，迁中书舍人。
现代文：高锴的字叫弱金，接连考中了进士、博学宏辞科，被任命在河东府任参谋，后任过吏部员外郎，又升任中书舍人。
English: Gao Yao's character is called Weak Gold. He passed the entrance examination successively, and was appointed as a staff officer in Hedong Prefecture. Later, he was appointed as a member of the administrative department, and was promoted to the position of a junior high school teacher.

古文：开成元年，权知贡举。
现代文：开成元年，他代理知贡举。
English: In the first year of Kaisei, he was the agent of the tribute.

古文：文宗自以题畀有司，锴以籍上，帝语侍臣曰： 比年文章卑弱，今所上差胜于前。 
现代文：唐文宗亲自出题交给有关部门，高锴后来报上录取名单，皇帝对侍从说： 近年来科举文章格调低下无力，这次报上来的比以前强一点。 
English: Tang Wenzong personally submitted the questions to the relevant departments. Gao Yao later published the admission list. The emperor said to his attendant: In recent years, the style of the examination papers has been weak and weak. This time, the papers are a little stronger than before.

古文：郑覃曰： 陛下矫革近制，以正颓俗，而锴乃能为陛下得人。 
现代文：郑覃说： 皇上改革试题，来矫正不好的文风，高锴又能为皇上发现人才。 
English: Zheng Yao said: The emperor reformed the exam questions to correct the bad literary style, and Gao Yao was able to find talent for the emperor.

古文：帝曰： 诸镇表奏太浮华，宜责掌书记，以诫流宕。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：各藩镇送来的奏章太浮华，应责备掌书记官，来告诫放纵的人。 
English: The emperor said, "The musical scores sent by the towns of each domain are too flashy. The clerk in charge should be reprimanded to admonish those who are indulgent."

古文：李石曰： 古人因事为文，今人以文害事，惩弊抑末，诚如圣训。 
现代文：李石说： 古代人为表达运用文采，现代人为文采妨碍表达，要改变这流弊，确实应按皇上说的去做。 
English: Li Shi said: The ancients used literature for expression, but modern people use literature to hinder expression. To change this trend, we should really do what the emperor said.

古文：即以锴为礼部侍郎。
现代文：于是任命高锴为礼部侍郎。
English: As a result, Takatsuki was appointed as Reibu-zamiro.

古文：阅三岁，颇得才实。
现代文：过了三年，录取了不少真人才。
English: After three years, quite a few real talents have been admitted.

古文：始，岁取四十人，才益少，诏减十人，犹不能满。
现代文：开始每年录取四十个人，人才逐渐少了，有诏减少十人，还录不满。
English: At the beginning of the year, forty people were admitted, and the number of talents gradually decreased. There was a decree to reduce ten people, but it was still dissatisfied.

古文：迁吏部侍郎，出为鄂岳观察使。
现代文：后升任吏部侍郎，又出京任鄂岳观察使。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of an attendant of the cadre department, and he went to Beijing to serve as the observation envoy of Mt. Etu.

古文：卒，赠礼部尚书。
现代文：此后去世了，赠官为礼部尚书。
English: After that, he passed away, and the bestowal of an official title became a ceremonial post.

古文：子湘，字濬之，擢进士第，历长安令、右谏议大夫。
现代文：他儿子高湘的字叫浚之，考中了进士，当过长安县令、右谏议大夫。
English: His son Gao Xiang's character is named Jian Zhi. He passed the entrance examination and became a Chang'an County magistrate and a doctor of the Right Division of the Legislative Yuan.

古文：从兄湜与路岩亲善，而湘厚刘瞻，岩既逐瞻，贬湘高州司马。
现代文：他的叔伯哥哥高和路岩关系好，但刘高和刘瞻关系好，路岩把刘瞻赶走后，贬刘高任高州司马。
English: His uncle Gao had a good relationship with Luyan, but Liu Gao had a good relationship with Liu Zhan. After Luyan drove Liu Zhan away, he demoted Liu Gao to the post of Gaozhou Sima.

古文：僖宗初，召为太子右庶子，终江西观察使。
现代文：唐僖宗初年，他被召回任太子右庶子，最后任江西观察使。
English: In the first year of Tang Xizong, he was recalled to serve as the Prince's right son-in-law, and finally as the Jiangxi Observer.

