古文：王贻永字季长，溥之孙也。
现代文：王贻永，字季长，是王溥的孙子。
English: Wang Rongyong, surnamed Qichang, is the grandson of Wang Rong.

古文：性清慎寡言，颇通书，不好声技。
现代文：他性情清慎寡言，十分通晓书法，不追求歌舞技艺。
English: His disposition is cautious and reticent, he is well versed in calligraphy, and he does not pursue singing and dancing skills.

古文：初生十余岁时，其舅魏咸信见而奇之，曰： 后当类我。 
现代文：十几岁时，他的舅舅魏咸信见到他很惊奇，说： 他长大后将像我似的。 
English: When he was a teenager, his uncle Wei Xianxin was surprised to see him and said, "He will grow up to be like me."

古文：咸平中，尚郑国公主，授右卫将军、驸马都尉。
现代文：咸平中期，王贻永娶郑国公主，授予他右卫将军、驸马都尉。
English: In the middle of the Heian period, Wang Qianyong married Princess Zheng Guo, and he was awarded the title of General of the Right Guards and Lieutenant of the Horse Guards.

古文：从封泰山，领高州刺史，再迁右监门卫大将军、奖州团练使。
现代文：他跟随真宗去泰山封禅，任高州刺史，再升为右监门卫大将军、奖州团练使。
English: He followed Shinsong to Taishan Fuzhen, served as Gaozhou Sashishi, and then rose to the rank of General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, and Commander of the State Prize Group.

古文：求外补，得知单州。
现代文：他请求为朝外官，得以任单州知州。
English: He asked to be the foreign minister of the DPRK, and was appointed as the governor of Shan State.

古文：真宗戒之曰： 和众静治，卿所当先也。 真拜洺州团练使、徙徐州。
现代文：真宗告诫他说 ：与众和睦，清静求治，是你应该先做的。 王贻永被任命为氵名州团练使，转为徐州团练使。
English: Shenzong admonished him, "Being in harmony with the public and seeking a peaceful solution is what you should do first." Wang Bingyong was appointed as the group training envoy of Shennai State, and then became the group training envoy of Xuzhou State.

古文：河决滑州，徐大水，贻永作堤城南以御之。
现代文：黄河在滑州决口，徐州发大水，王贻永在城南筑堤防水。
English: The Yellow River has burst its banks in Luzhou, Xuzhou is flooded, and Wang Bingyong is building a dike to prevent flooding in the south of the city.

古文：改卫州团练使，进怀州防御使，知澶、定二州，徙成德军。
现代文：又改任他为卫州团练使，升为怀州防御使，任澶、定二州知州，转为成德军长官。
English: He was also reappointed as the training envoy of the Weizhou Regiment, promoted to the defense envoy of Waizhou, appointed as the commander and commander of the two states of Zhizhou, and transferred to the commander of the Chengdu German Army.

古文：会有告曹讷变者，贻永奏治之。
现代文：恰好有人告发曹谋反，王贻永奏请治曹的罪。
English: It just so happened that someone accused Cao of plotting a rebellion, and Wang Bingyong pleaded for Cao's punishment.

古文：迁耀州观察使，复知澶州。
现代文：王贻永升任耀州观察使，又为澶州知州。
English: Wang Qianyong was promoted to the post of Yaozhou observation envoy, and he was also the leader of Zhangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：历彰化、武定军节度使观察留后，拜安德军节度使。
现代文：他历任彰化、武定军节度使观察留后，被任命为安德军节度使。
English: He was appointed as the special envoy of the Andhra Pradesh Army after serving as the special envoy of the Changhua and Wuding Armies.

古文：出知天雄军，徙保宁军节度使、知郓州。
现代文：出京任天雄军知军，转为保宁军节度使、郓州知州。
English: He went to Beijing to serve as the military governor of Tianxiong Army, and later became the military governor of Boryeong Army and the military governor of Bozhou.

古文：州自咸平中徙城，而故治为通衢，介梁山，春夏多水患，贻永相度地势，为筑东西道三十余里，民便之。
现代文：郓州自咸平中期迁移城址，旧治所已为交通要道，连接梁山，春夏时水患很多，王贻永勘察地势，修东西水道三十多里，百姓便利。
English: The site of the city of Zhangzhou was moved from Hamping in the mid-19th century. The old government office has become an important transportation route, connecting Liangshan. There are many floods in spring and summer. Wang Bingyong surveyed the terrain and repaired more than 30 miles of waterways in the east and west, which is convenient for the people.

古文：复徙定州，又徙成德军。
现代文：又改为定州知州，转到成德军为长官。
English: He was also changed to Dingzhou Zhizhou and transferred to the Chengde Army as a commander.

古文：擢同知枢密院事，改副使，加宣徽南院使，进枢密院使。
现代文：王贻永被提升为同知枢密院事，改为副使，加官为宣徽南院使，升任枢密院使。
English: Wang Bingyong was promoted to Tongzhi Privy Councillor, changed to Vice-Envoy, promoted to Xuanhu South Courier, and promoted to Privy Councillor.

古文：久之，拜同中书门下平章事，遂加兼侍中。
现代文：不久，被任命为同中书门下平章事，兼任侍中。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a member of the Shumen Shimohei chapter of the same school, and also served as an attendant.

古文：徙节镇海，以疾求罢，手诏抚谕，遣上医诊视。
现代文：王贻永被派节制镇海，他因病辞官，皇上下诏慰抚他，派御医去给他看病。
English: Wang Qianyong was sent to control Zhenhai. Due to his illness, he resigned from his post. The emperor comforted him and sent his doctor to see him.

古文：帝临问，颁尚方珍药，手取糜粥食之。
现代文：皇上去看望他，赏给他皇家用的珍贵药品，亲手喂他吃粥。
English: The emperor went to visit him, gave him precious medicines for royal use, and personally fed him porridge.

古文：贻永自言宠禄过盛，愿罢枢筦，解使相还第。
现代文：王贻永自称受皇帝宠禄过盛，愿意罢去枢密使、解除使相之职还家。
English: Wang Qianyong claimed that he was favored by the emperor and was willing to dismiss the envoy, dismiss the envoy and return home.

古文：帝冀其愈也，乃听罢侍中，徙彰德节度使，同平章事、枢密使如故。
现代文：皇上希望他病愈，就罢去他的侍中之职，改任彰德节度使，仍为同平章事、枢密使。
English: The Emperor hoped that he would recover from his illness, so he dismissed him from his position as an attendant and appointed him as an envoy to the Festival of Dignity and Virtue. He was still an envoy of the same rank, a confidential envoy.

古文：疾稍间，入见，命其子道卿掖登垂拱殿。
现代文：他的病稍好点，就去拜见皇上，皇上让他的儿子王道卿搀他上垂拱殿。
English: When his illness was a little better, he went to see the emperor, who had his son, Wang Daoqing, carry him up the archway.

古文：仍赐五日一朝，遇朝参起居，许休于殿侧。
现代文：允许他五日一上朝，遇到朝参起居，他可在殿侧休息。
English: He was allowed to get up in the morning on the fifth day, and when he met the morning deity, he could rest on the side of the hall.

古文：至和初，复以疾辞，拜尚书右仆射、检校太师兼侍中、景灵宫使。
现代文：至和初年，他又因病辞官，皇上任命他为尚书右仆射、检校太师兼侍中、景灵宫使。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was removed from his post due to illness, and the emperor appointed him to be Shoshu's right-hand man, kengyo taishi (school inspector) and chamberlain, and Jingling palace envoy.

古文：卒，赠太师、中书令，谥康靖。
现代文：去世后被赠官为太师、中书令，谥号 康靖 。
English: After his death, he was bestowed with the title of Grand Master, the Order of the Chinese Epistle, and the posthumous name Kang Jing.

古文：生数岁，相者曰： 是当以姻戚贵。 少学骑射，驰冰雪间，马逸，坠崖下，众以为死，遵勖徐起，亡恙也。
现代文：当时无外戚辅政的，王贻永能疏远权势，在枢密院十五年而始终无过失，人们称他谦静。他的儿子王道卿，任西上门使。李遵勖，字公武，是李崇矩的孙子、李继昌的儿子。他几岁时，占卜的人说： 这孩子将因是皇亲国戚而富贵。 少年时学骑射，在冰雪上驰骋，马脱缰而跑，他掉到崖下，众人以为他死了，李遵勖慢慢起来，没受伤害。
English: At that time, there was no foreign relative to assist in politics. Wang Wei could always distance himself from power. He had been in the Privy Council for fifteen years and had never made a mistake. People called him modest. His son, Wang Daoqing, was appointed as the western gatekeeper. Li Zunyi, also known as Gongwu, was the grandson of Li Chongzhu and the son of Li Jichang. When he was a few years old, a fortuneteller said, "This child will be rich because he is a relative of the emperor and the country." When he was a boy, he learned to ride a horse and gallop on the ice and snow. The horse bolted

古文：及长，好为文词，举进士。
现代文：等他长大后，好做文章，被推举参加进士考试。
English: When he grew up, he was good at writing essays and was recommended to take the entrance examination.

古文：大中祥符间，召对便殿，尚万寿长公主。
现代文：大中祥符年间，他被皇上召到便殿奏对，娶万寿长公主。
English: During his junior high school years, he was summoned by the emperor to the hall to play matchmaker and marry Princess Manshōchō.

古文：初名勖，帝益 遵 字，升其行为崇矩子。
现代文：开始他叫李勖，真宗给他加上 遵 字，升他的辈份为李崇矩的儿子。
English: At first, his name was Li Xi, but Zhenzong added "zun" to his name and promoted him to be the son of Li Chongnang.

古文：授左龙武将军、驸马都尉，赐第永宁里。
现代文：授予他左龙武将军、驸马都尉，赐府第永宁里。
English: He was awarded the titles of General Zalongwu and Lieutenant Baima, and given the prefecture of Yongningli.

古文：主下嫁，而所居堂甃或瓦甓多为鸾凤状，遵勖令去；主服有龙饰，悉屏藏之，帝叹喜。
现代文：公主下嫁，但所住的房屋或井壁的砖瓦多是鸾凤的形状，李遵勖下令拆去；公主的衣服有龙的装饰，他就都藏起来。皇上很高兴。
English: The princess was married off, but the bricks and tiles of the house she lived in or the walls of the well were mostly in the shape of dragon and phoenix, and Li Zunyi ordered them to be removed; the princess's clothes were decorated with dragons, and he hid them all. The emperor was very happy.

古文：领澄州刺史，坐私主乳母，谪均州团练使，徙蔡州。
现代文：李遵勖任澄州刺史，因私主乳母被贬为均州团练使，转到蔡州。
English: Li Zunya served as a historian in Chengdu, but was demoted to a regimental drill sergeant in Gyeongju because of his mistress, and transferred to Gyeongju.

古文：逾年，起为太子左卫率府副率，复左龙武军将军，领宏州团练使，真拜康州团练使，给观察使禄。
现代文：第二年，皇上起用他为太子左卫率府副率，恢复他的左龙武军将军之职，为宏州团练使，实际为康州团练使，给他观察使的俸禄。
English: In the second year, the emperor appointed him as the deputy leader of the Prince's Left Division of the Imperial Guard, restored his position as the general of the Left Dragon Army, made him the training envoy for the Hongzhou Regiment, actually the training envoy for the Kangzhou Regiment, and gave him the salary of the observation envoy.

古文：时继昌官刺史，遵勖请班其下，许之。
现代文：当时李继昌是刺史，李遵勖请求自己的位序在他下面，皇上允许。
English: At that time, Li Jichang was the crown prince, and Li Zunyi asked to be ranked below him, which was allowed by the emperor.

古文：后继昌守泾州，暴感风眩，遵勖驰省不俟命，帝遣使令乘驿赴之。
现代文：后来李继昌为泾州守臣，暴染风眩，李遵勖不等皇上批准就赶紧去看望，皇上派使臣传令让他乘驿车前去。
English: Later, Li Jichang was the governor of Zhangzhou, and the storm was raging. Li Zunyi did not wait for the emperor's approval to visit, and the emperor sent an envoy to let him go by carriage.

古文：既还，上表自劾，帝使辅臣慰谕之。
现代文：李遵勖回来后，上表自己弹劾自己，皇上让辅臣慰抚他。
English: After Li Zunyi returned, the upper table impeached itself, and the emperor asked the aide to comfort him.

古文：迁泽州防御使，又迁宣州观察使。
现代文：李遵勖升任泽州防御使，又升为宣州观察使。
English: Li Zunyi was promoted to the post of Zhezhou defense envoy, and then to the post of Xuanzhou observation envoy.

古文：求补郡自试，出知澶州，赐宴长春殿。
现代文：他请求到地方任职，试试自己的能力。出京任澶州知州，皇上在长春殿给他赐宴。
English: He asked to be appointed to a local post to test his abilities. He went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Zhangzhou and Chizhou, and the emperor gave him a banquet at the Changchun Palace.

古文：在郡，会河水溢，将坏浮梁，遵勖督工徒，七日而堤成。
现代文：他在地方，正赶上黄河泛滥，将要毁坏桥梁，李遵勖监督工匠们，七天就修成了河堤。
English: He was in a place, just in time for the Yellow River to flood, and bridges were about to be destroyed. Li Zunyi supervised the craftsmen, and in seven days they built a river embankment.

古文：迁昭德军节度观察留后，拜宁国军节度使，徙镇国军、知许州。
现代文：他被升为昭德军节度观察留后，任命为宁国军节度使，转到镇国军，任许州知州。
English: After he was promoted to the Zhaotie Army and stayed to observe the festival, he was appointed as the Ning Army's festival envoy, transferred to the Zhenguo Army, and appointed as the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：水军多不练习而隶籍，遵勖命部校按劾，拔去十七八。
现代文：多数水军不练习但却隶属军籍，李遵勖下令进行核实，有十分之七八的水军被去除。
English: Most of the sailors do not practice but belong to the military. Li Zunyi ordered a verification, and seven or eight out of ten sailors were removed.

古文：复以疾请援唐韦嗣立故事，求山林号，诏不许。
现代文：后来他因病请求用唐代韦嗣立的例子辞职，只求一个山林的封号，皇上不许。
English: Later, due to illness, he asked to use the example of Emperor Wei of the Tang Dynasty to resign. He only asked for the name of a mountain forest to be sealed, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：初，天圣间，章献太后屏左右问曰： 人有何言？ 遵勖不答。
现代文：当初在天圣年间，章献太后屏退左右问他 ：人们有什么议论？ 李遵勖不回答。
English: At the beginning of the Tian Sheng years, Zhang Xianta stepped back from the screen and asked him: What are people talking about? Li Zunyi did not answer.

古文：太后固问之，遵勖曰： 臣无他闻，但人言天子既冠，太后宜以时还政。 太后曰： 我非恋此，但帝少，内侍多，恐未能制之也。 尝上三说五事以论时政。
现代文：太后坚持问他，李遵勖说： 臣没听到别的，只听人说天子已经成人，太后应该及时还政天子。 太后说 ：我不留恋这个，只是皇上年少，内侍又多，恐怕皇上不能控制他们。 李遵勖曾献上三说五事来议论时政。
English: The empress dowager persisted in asking him, and Li Zunyi said: "The minister heard nothing else but that the emperor has come of age, and the empress dowager should return the throne to the emperor in a timely manner." The empress dowager said: "I don't regret this, but the emperor is young and has many attendants, and I'm afraid the emperor can't control them." Li Zunyi once offered three sayings and five things to discuss current affairs.

古文：晋国夫人林氏，以太后乳母，多干预国事，太后崩，遵勖密请置之别院，出入伺察之，以厌服众论。
现代文：晋国夫人林氏，因是太后的乳母多次干预国事，太后去世后，李遵勖暗中请求皇上把她安置到别的宫中，对她的行动进行探察，来压服众人的议论。
English: After the death of the empress dowager, Li Zunya secretly asked the emperor to relocate her to another palace, to investigate her actions, and to suppress public discussion.

古文：其补助居多类此。
现代文：他对朝政的辅助大多像这样。
English: Most of his assistance to the imperial government goes like this.

古文：所居第园池冠京城。
现代文：李遵勖府中的花园、池塘是京城最好的。
English: The gardens and ponds in Li Zunyi's residence are the best in Beijing.

古文：嗜奇石，募人载送，有自千里至者。
现代文：他嗜好奇石，募人运送，有从千里之外运来的。
English: He collected curiosity stones and transported them, some from thousands of miles away.

古文：构堂引水，环以佳木，延一时名士大夫与宴乐。
现代文：在园中建堂引水，用好的树木环绕在水边，延请当时的名人与他游乐。
English: He built a hall in the garden to divert water, surrounded the water's edge with good trees, and invited celebrities of the time to play with him.

古文：师杨亿为文，亿卒，为制服。
现代文：他跟杨亿学做文章，杨亿去世，他穿丧服。
English: He made an article with Yang Yizhong, Yang Yizhong died, he wore mourning clothes.

古文：及知许州，奠亿之墓，恸哭而返。
现代文：等他任许州知州时，祭奠杨亿之墓，痛哭而回。
English: When he was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou and Zhizhou, he paid tribute to the tomb of Yang Yuanzhong and returned home in tears.

古文：又与刘筠相友善，筠卒，存恤其家。
现代文：李遵勖还同刘筠友好，刘筠去世后，他抚恤刘筠的家属。
English: Li Zunyi was also friendly with Liu Bei. After Liu Bei's death, he supported Liu Bei's family.

古文：卒，年六十五，赠开府仪同三司，谥曰忠定。
现代文：李遵勖精通佛学，临死时，他与和尚楚圆做偈颂。他去世后，被赠官为中书令，谥号 和文 。他写有《间宴集》二十卷、《外馆芳题》七卷。
English: Li Zunyi was well-versed in Buddhist studies. When he was dying, he recited a poem with the monk Chu Yuan. After his death, he was awarded the title of "Chongshuling" (中書令) and the posthumous name of "Wen." He wrote 20 volumes of "The Banquet Collection" and 7 volumes of "Fangzhi" (外馆芳题).

古文：高遵裕，字公绰，忠武军节度使琼之孙也。
现代文：他的儿子叫李端懿。高遵裕，字公绰，是忠武军节度使高琼的孙子。
English: His son was named Li Duanzhang. Gao Zunyu, nicknamed "Kongpo," was the grandson of Gao Qiong, a loyal military commander.

古文：以父任累迁供备库副使、镇戎军驻泊都监。
现代文：因父亲的恩荫历迁供备库副使、镇戎军驻泊都监。
English: Due to his father's favor, he was transferred to the post of vice-minister of supply and storage, and stationed as the inspector of the town's military.

古文：夏人寇大顺城，谅祚中矢遁。
现代文：夏人入侵大顺城，李谅祚中箭逃走。
English: Xia people invaded Dashun City, and Li Piao fled in the middle of the arrow.

古文：会英宗晏驾，遣遵裕告哀，抵宥州下宫，夏人遣王盥受命，以吉服至，遵裕切责之，遂易服。
现代文：恰好英宗去世，派高遵裕向西夏告哀，到达宥州祖庙，夏人派王盥接待，王盥穿着吉服来，高遵裕严辞谴责他，他才换去吉服。
English: It just so happened that Yingzong passed away, Gao Zunyu was sent to Western Xia to offer condolences, and arrived at the Yuzhou Ancestral Temple. The Western Xia sent Wang Hui to receive him, and Wang Hui came wearing auspicious clothing. Gao Zunyu severely reprimanded him, and only then did he change to auspicious clothing.

古文：既而具食上宫，语及大顺城事，盥曰： 剽掠辈耳。 遵裕曰： 若主寇边，扶伤而循，斯言非妄邪！ 夏人以为辱，亟遣人代对，终食不敢发口，辄忿怒曰： 王人蔑视下国，弊邑虽小，控弦十数万，亦能躬执橐鞬，与君周旋。 遵裕瞋目曰： 主上天纵神武，毋肆狂蹶，以干诛夷。 时谅祚觇于屏间，摇手使止。
现代文：不久在客馆摆上酒席，席间谈到大顺城的事，王盥说： 你们是剽掠之徒。 高遵裕说： 你们的主上侵犯我们边境，负伤而逃，你的话不太荒谬了嘛！ 夏人认为受了侮辱，立即派人应对，但来人终席没敢开口，王盥愤怒地说 ：你蔑视我们夏国，我国城池虽小，也有十多万兵马，可以同你们在战场上一试高低。 高遵裕瞪着眼睛说 ：我们主上有天赐的神武，你们别太张狂而去冒死。 当时李谅祚在屏风后偷看，摆手制止王盥。
English: Soon, a banquet was set up in the guest house, and during the meal, the matter of Dashun City was discussed. Wang Yao said: You are bandits. Gao Zunyu said: Your master violated our border, was wounded and fled. Your words are not too absurd! Xia Rong thought he had been insulted and immediately sent someone to respond, but the guests did not dare to speak at the end of the meal. Wang Yao said angrily: You despise our Xia country. Although our city is small, it has more than a hundred thousand soldiers and horses, and can test the highs and lows with you on the battlefield. Gao Zunyu stared and said: Our

古文：神宗闻而嘉之，擢知保安军。
现代文：神宗听说后赞扬高遵裕，提升他为保安军知军。
English: After hearing about it, Shenzong praised Gao Zunyu and promoted him to be the commander of the security forces.

古文：横山豪欲向化，帝使遵裕谕种谔图之。谔遂取绥州。
现代文：横山豪杰想归宋，皇上让高遵裕告诉种谔谋取他们，种谔就攻取绥州。
English: Hengshan heroes wanted to return to Song, the emperor told Gao Zunyu to find them, and Gao Zunyu conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：帅怒谔擅发兵，欲正军法，谔惧，称得密旨于遵裕，故谔被罪，遵裕亦降为乾州都监。
现代文：统帅因种谔擅自发兵而愤怒，想要对种谔处以军法，种谔恐惧，说是在高遵裕那得到的皇上密旨，因此种谔获罪，高遵裕也降为乾州都监。
English: The commander-in-chief was angry because Zonglu had sent troops without permission, and wanted to use military law against Zonglu, fearing Zonglu, saying that it was Gao Zunyu who received the imperial secret order. Therefore, Zonglu was convicted, and Gao Zunyu was also reduced to the governor of Qianzhou.

古文：迁通事舍人，主管西路羌部，驻古渭砦，分所部羌兵为三等，教为军法。
现代文：高遵裕升任通事舍人，主管西路羌部，驻在古渭寨，把他所部的羌兵分成三等，教他们学习军法。
English: Gao Zunyu was promoted to the post of general affairs officer, in charge of the West Road Division, stationed in Guzangzhai, and divided the soldiers of his division into three classes and taught them to study military law.

古文：熙宁初，朝廷用王韶复洮、陇，命为秦凤路沿边安抚，以遵裕副之。
现代文：熙宁初年，朝廷用王韶收复洮、陇二州，命令王韶为秦凤路沿边安抚，高遵裕为副安抚。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xining, the imperial court used Wang Qian to recover and recapture two states, and ordered Wang Qian to pacify the border along Qinfeng Road, and Gao Zunyu to be the deputy pacifier.

古文：寻以古渭为通远军，命知军事。
现代文：不久把古渭寨作为通远军，任命高遵裕为知军。
English: Soon after, he designated Guozhai as the Tongyuan army and Gao Zunyu as the Zhiguo army.

古文：明年，持附顺羌部图籍及绘青唐、武胜形势入献，擢引进副使、带御器械，俾归治师。
现代文：第二年，他拿着归附的羌部的图籍和绘制的青唐、武胜的地形图入朝献给皇上，他被提升为引进副使、带御器械，让他回来治军。
English: In the second year, he took the attached map of Xibe and the topographic map of Qing Tang and Wusheng drawn by Crum into the imperial court and presented it to the emperor. He was promoted to the vice-envoy of introduction and brought his equipment so that he could return to govern the army.

古文：师次庆平堡，夜行，晨至野人关，羌人旅拒，引亲兵一鼓破之。进营武胜城下，羌众逃去，遂据其城。
现代文：大军临时驻在庆平堡，晚上行军，早晨到野人关，羌人阻拒，高遵裕率亲兵一鼓作气打败敌人，在武胜城下安营，羌人逃走，就占据了武胜城。
English: The large army was temporarily stationed at Qingping Fort, marched in the evening, and went to the wild man pass in the morning, but the barbarians resisted. Gao Zunyu led his soldiers to defeat the enemy, and camped under the Wusheng City. The barbarians fled and occupied the Wusheng City.

古文：诏建为镇洮军，又命知军事。
现代文：皇上下诏以武胜城为镇洮军，由高遵裕任知军。
English: The imperial edict decreed that Busheng was to be the garrison and Gao Zunyu was to be the chieftain.

古文：寻以熙、河、洮、岷、通远为一路，进西上阁门使、荣州刺史，充总管，复知通远军。
现代文：不久，以熙、河、洮、岷、通远为一路，高遵裕升任西上门使、荣州刺史、充任总管，仍为通远军知军。
English: Soon, He, He, He, He, He, and Tongyuan became the first line, and Gao Zunyu was promoted to the west gatekeeper, Rongzhou chief historian, and chief administrator, and he was still the commander of Tongyuan Army.

古文：明年，韶欲取河州，遵裕曰： 古渭举事，先建堡砦，以渐而进，故一举拔武胜。
现代文：第二年，王韶想攻取河州，高遵裕说 ：古渭寨举事时，是先建堡寨，循序渐进，故此一举攻下武胜城。
English: In the second year, when Wang Yao wanted to capture Hezhou, Gao Zunyu said, "When Gu Ye Zhai started the campaign, he first built a fortress, and gradually advanced, so he captured Wuxing City in one fell swoop.

古文：今兵与粮未备，一旦越数舍图人之地，使彼阻要害，我军进退无所矣。 韶与李宪笑曰： 君何遽相异邪？ 檄使守临洮。
现代文：现在兵马和粮草都不齐备，一旦离开大本营很远去夺人之地，假使敌人占据要害阻击我们，我军就进退两难了。 王韶和李宪笑着说 ：你怎么这么快就变了呢？ 就派他守临洮。
English: Now, soldiers, horses, and grain and grass are in short supply. Once we leave the base camp and go far away to conquer the land, if the enemy occupies the key to block us, our army will be in a dilemma. Wang Yao and Li Xian said with a smile: How did you change so quickly? They sent him to guard Linyi.

古文：韶攻河州，果不克。
现代文：王韶攻打河州，果然没攻破。
English: Wang Hui attacked Hezhou, but failed to break through.

古文：帝善遵裕议，令专管洮、岷、叠、岩未款附者。
现代文：皇上赞同高遵裕的议论，命令他专管洮、岷、叠、岩州的没归附者。
English: The emperor agreed with Gao Zunyu's argument and ordered him to be in charge of the non-affiliated people in Yunnan, Shandong, Yunnan, and Iwashu.

古文：遵裕以俞龙珂地有盐井，遂筑盐川砦。
现代文：高遵裕因俞龙珂的地界有盐井，于是筑盐川寨。
English: Gao Zunyu built the Salt Stream Village because there was a salt well on the border of Longke County.

古文：瞎吴叱率诸羌胁青唐，欲扰边，诏遣张玉攻讨。
现代文：瞎吴叱率诸羌威胁青唐，想侵扰边境，皇上下诏派张玉攻讨。
English: The blind Wu Zhe led by Zhu Xi threatened Qing Tang and wanted to invade the border, and the emperor sent Zhang Yu to attack.

古文：遵裕曰： 青唐无罪，第为生羌所胁耳。 遣裨将与龙珂率众御之。
现代文：高遵裕说 ：青唐人没罪，只不过被生羌所胁迫罢了。 派副将和俞龙珂率众抵御瞎吴叱。
English: Gao Zunyu said, "The Qing Tang people are not guilty, but they are being coerced by the Zhiyuan." He sent his vice-general and his dragon to lead the crowd to resist the blind Wu's scolding.

古文：青唐人见龙珂泣诉，瞎吴叱知不附己，溃去。
现代文：青唐人见到俞龙珂哭诉，瞎吴叱知道青唐人不归附自己，就退去。
English: When the Qing Tang people saw Long Ke crying and complaining, the blind Wu Zhe knew that the Qing Tang people would not adhere to him, so he retreated.

古文：从韶取岷州，下之，令士众曰： 生获老幼与得级同。 全活者以数万。
现代文：高遵裕跟从王韶攻取岷州，攻下岷州后，高遵裕传令兵士说： 活捉老幼与得首级相同。 数万人得以活命。
English: Gao Zunyu followed Wang Qian in conquering Ganzhou. After conquering Ganzhou, Gao Zunyu sent a message to the soldiers saying, "Capturing the old and the young alive is the same as getting the head." Tens of thousands of people were able to survive.

古文：捷闻，加岷州刺史。
现代文：捷报传到京城，高遵裕加官为岷州刺史。
English: The news of the victory spread to Beijing, and Gao Zunyu was promoted to be the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：明年，羌乘景思立之败，围河、岷二州，道路不通者几月。
现代文：第二年，羌人乘景思立失败之机，围河、岷二州，道路几个月不通。
English: In the second year, the people of Handan took advantage of the failure of Jing Sili to encircle the river and the two states of Handan, and the road was impassable for several months.

古文：或请退保，遵裕曰： 敢议此者斩！ 岷城军缺，守者恐，遵裕登西门，命将纵击，别选精骑由南门噪而出，合击之，羌败走。
现代文：有人请求退保别处，高遵裕说： 有敢议论这些的斩首！ 岷州缺兵，守城者恐惧，高遵裕登上西门，派将纵入敌阵，又另选精骑兵从南门鼓噪而出，合击羌人，羌人败走。
English: Gao Zunyu said: "How dare you discuss these beheadings! Zhangzhou is short of soldiers, the defenders are afraid, Gao Zunyu boarded the west gate, sent the general into the enemy lines, and another selection of elite cavalrymen came out from the south gate to fight and defeat the enemy.

古文：时朝廷以岷城远难守，议弃之。
现代文：当时朝廷认为岷州城远难守，决定放弃。
English: At that time, the imperial court believed that Zhangzhou was too far away to defend, and decided to give up.

古文：诏至，贼已溃矣。
现代文：诏书到后，羌人已溃退了。
English: After the imperial edict arrived, the Xiongnu had already retreated.

古文：以功进团练使、龙神卫都指挥使、知熙州。
现代文：高遵裕因功升为团练使、龙神卫都指挥使、熙州知州。
English: Gao Zunyu was promoted to regimental drill sergeant, commander of the Yongshun Garrison, and commander of Xizhou Zhizhou.

古文：坐荐张穆之为转运使，而穆之有罪，罢知颍州，未几，徙庆州，又坐事黜知淮阳军。
现代文：因推荐张穆之为转运使，而张穆之有罪，他也获罪被罢为颍州知州。不久，转到庆州，又因事获罪，被罢为淮阳知军。
English: For recommending Zhang Muxin as a transfer envoy, and Zhang Muxin being guilty, he was also found guilty and dismissed as Zhangzhou chizhou. Soon, he was transferred to Gyeongju, and was also found guilty and dismissed as Huaiyang chijun.

古文：元丰四年，复知庆州。
现代文：元丰四年，又任庆州知州。
English: In the fourth year of Yuanfeng, he was also appointed as the leader of Gyeongju Chishu.

古文：诏与诸路讨夏国。请济师，得东兵十一将，骑不足用，以群牧马益之。
现代文：皇上诏命他和诸路一起讨伐夏国，他请求增加兵将，得到东兵十一将，马不够用，就用群牧马补充。
English: The emperor's edict ordered him and all the other emperors to fight together against Xia. He requested an increase in the number of generals, and received eleven generals from the Eastern army. Since he did not have enough horses, he supplemented them with herd horses.

古文：又令节制泾原兵，刘昌祚先至灵州，几得城，遵裕嫉之，故不用其计，遂以溃归，语在《昌祚传》。
现代文：皇上又命令他节制泾原兵，刘昌祚先到灵州，差一点得到灵州城，高遵裕嫉妒他，故意不采纳刘昌祚的计谋，结果兵败而回，此事见《刘昌祚传》。
English: The emperor also ordered him to restrain the Yuan soldiers. Liu Changyu went to Lingshou first and almost got the city of Lingshou. Gao Zunyu was jealous of him and deliberately did not adopt Liu Changyu's strategy. As a result, he was defeated and returned. The matter is described in "Liu Changyu Biography."

古文：贬郢州团练副使。
现代文：高遵裕被贬为郢州团练副使。
English: Gao Zunyu was demoted to vice-envoy of the Zhangzhou Rehearsal Team.

古文：哲宗即位，复右屯卫将军，主管中岳庙。
现代文：哲宗即位后，高遵裕被任用为右屯卫将军，主管中岳庙。
English: After the enthronement of Zhezong, Gao Zunyu was appointed as the General of the Right Tunwei and in charge of Zhongyue Temple.

古文：卒，年六十，赠永州团练使。
现代文：去世时，享年六十岁，被赠官为永州团练使。
English: At the time of his death, at the age of sixty, he was awarded the post of Yongzhou regimental drill sergeant.

古文：绍圣中，崇赠奉国军节度观察留后。
现代文：绍圣中期，推重他，赠他为奉国军节度观察留后的官职。
English: In the middle of the Shaoshan period, he promoted him and gave him an official post after he stayed to observe the National Day of the Korean People's Army.

古文：从弟遵惠。
现代文：他的堂弟叫高遵惠。
English: His cousin is named Gao Zunhui.

