古文：萧兀纳，一名挞不也，字特免，六院部人。
现代文：萧兀纳，又名挞不也，字特免，六院部人。
English: Xiao Xuan Na, also known as Zou Niuya, is a member of the Sixth Division of the Hospital.

古文：其先尝为西南面拽剌。
现代文：其先祖曾任西南面拽剌。
English: His ancestors once served as tugboats on the southwest side.

古文：兀纳魁伟简重，善骑射。
现代文：兀纳身材魁梧，庄严持重，擅长骑射。
English: Jinnah was a large man, solemn and heavy-set, and was good at riding and shooting.

古文：清宁初，兄图独以事入见，帝问族人可用者，图独以兀纳对，补祗候郎君。
现代文：清宁初，其兄图独因事入京朝见，道宗问族人中谁人可以任用，图独回答说是兀纳，皇上补兀纳为祗候郎君。
English: At the beginning of the Qing Dynasty, his brother, Tu Du, went to the imperial court in Beijing to meet the emperor. When Daozong asked who among the members of the clan could be appointed, Tu Du replied that it was the emperor, and the emperor was the emperor's son-in-law.

古文：迁近侍敞史，护卫太保。
现代文：迁任近侍敞史、护卫太保。
English: He was transferred to the posts of courtier and escort.

古文：大康初，为北院宣徽使。
现代文：大康初，任北院宣徽使。
English: At the beginning of the Taikang era, he was appointed as the chief envoy of the Northern Court.

古文：时乙辛已害太子，因言宋魏国王和鲁斡之子淳可为储嗣。群臣莫敢言，唯兀纳及夷离毕萧陶隗谏曰： 舍嫡不立，是以国与人也。 
现代文：当时乙辛已经陷害了太子，于是称宋魏国王和鲁斡之子耶律淳可以立为太子，群臣无人敢言，只有兀纳及夷离毕萧陶隗劝谏说： 放弃嫡孙不立，这是把国家给予别人。 
English: At that time, Yixin had already framed the prince, so he said that the king of Song and Wei and Ye Lu Jun, the son of Lu Yu, could be appointed as the prince. None of the courtiers dared to say anything, and only Xuan Na and Yi Li Bi Xiao Daojun persuaded him to say: "If you give up the legitimate grandson and do not appoint him, this is giving the country to others."

古文：帝犹豫不决。
现代文：皇上犹豫不决。
English: The Emperor hesitated.

古文：五年，帝出猎，乙辛请留皇孙，帝欲从之。
现代文：五年，皇上出猎，乙辛请求留下皇孙，皇上想听从。
English: In the fifth year, the emperor went hunting, and Yixin asked the emperor to leave his grandson behind. The emperor wanted to obey.

古文：兀纳奏曰： 窃闻车驾出游，将留皇孙，苟保护非人，恐有他变。
现代文：兀纳奏道 ：我私下听说皇上出游，准备留下皇孙，倘若保护者不称职，恐怕会生变故。
English: Shinnaso said, "I have heard privately that the emperor is going on a trip and is preparing to leave behind a grandchild. If the protector is not competent, I am afraid that the situation will change."

古文：果留，臣请侍左右。 
现代文：果真要留下，我请求侍从皇孙左右。 
English: If I really want to stay, I ask the attendants to surround the grandson.

古文：帝乃悟，命皇孙从行。
现代文：皇上领悟，命令皇孙从行。
English: The emperor understood and ordered his grandson to follow.

古文：由此始疑乙辛。
现代文：从此，皇上开始怀疑乙辛。
English: From then on, the emperor began to suspect Atsin.

古文：顷之，同知南院枢密使事，出乙辛、淳等。
现代文：不久，任同知南院枢密使事，出贬乙辛、耶律淳等人。
English: Soon, Tongzhi was appointed as the envoy of the Privy Council of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, and Yixin, Yerutun and others followed.

古文：帝嘉其忠，封兰陵郡王，人谓近于古社稷臣。
现代文：皇上嘉许他的忠心，封为兰陵郡王，人们说他很像古时扶持社稷的重臣。
English: The emperor commended his loyalty and made him the king of Lanling County. People said that he was very similar to the chief minister of Fuzhihe County in ancient times.

古文：授殿前都点检。
现代文：授殿前都点检。
English: There is always a spot check before the investiture.

古文：上谓王师儒、耶律固等曰： 兀纳忠纯，虽狄仁杰辅唐，屋质立穆宗，无以过也。
现代文：皇上对王师儒、耶律固等人说： 兀纳忠诚纯正，即使是狄仁杰辅佐唐室，屋质扶立穆宗，都没法超过他。
English: The emperor said to Wang Shiru, Yelugu and others: Xuan Na is loyal and pure. Even Di Ren Jie Zuo Tang's wife, the rooftop quality Fu Li Mu Zong, could not surpass him.

古文：卿等宜达燕王知之。 
现代文：我的看法你们要转达给燕王知道。 
English: You must convey my opinion to Yan Wang.

古文：自是令兀纳辅导燕王，益见优宠。
现代文：从这以后，皇上令兀纳辅导燕王，更加受到优待宠信。
English: From then on, the emperor ordered Xunna to tutor Yan Wang, and he received even more preferential treatment.

古文：大安初，诏尚越国公主，兀纳固辞。
现代文：大安初，诏令让他娶越国公主，兀纳坚决推辞。
English: At the beginning of the Taian era, the imperial edict ordered him to marry the princess of Yue, but he resolutely refused.

古文：改南院枢密使，奏请掾史宜以岁月行叙，从之。
现代文：改任南院枢密使，上奏请求对于掾史应按月升迁叙用，皇上从之。
English: He was reappointed as a privy councilor of the Southern Court, and the Emperor complied with his request to promote and classify Shinshi on a monthly basis.

古文：寿隆元年，拜北府宰相。
现代文：寿隆元年，拜为北府宰相。
English: In the first year of Shulong, Bai became the prime minister of the northern prefecture.

古文：初，天祚在潜邸，兀纳数以直言忤旨。
现代文：当初，天祚尚未即位时，兀纳多次因为直言拂逆了其心意。
English: At first, when Tensho had not yet ascended the throne, Iona repeatedly rebelled against his wishes because of his outspokenness.

古文：及嗣位，出为辽兴军节度使，守太傅。
现代文：待到即位，出贬兀纳为辽兴军节度使，守太傅。
English: When he ascended the throne, he was appointed as the special envoy of the Liao Xing Army, and the commander of the garrison.

古文：以佛殿小底王华诬兀纳借内府犀角，诏鞫之。
现代文：因佛殿小底王华诬陷兀纳借用内府犀角，诏令审讯他。
English: Wang Hua Xiaodi of the Buddha Hall was falsely accused of borrowing a rhinoceros horn from Naifu, and he was ordered to be interrogated.

古文：兀纳奏曰： 臣在先朝，诏许日取帑钱十万为私费，臣未尝妄取一钱，肯借犀角乎！ 
现代文：兀纳上奏说： 我在先朝时，诏令准予每天取用十万钱作为私下费用，我不曾胡乱取用一钱，难道会借用犀角吗？ 
English: "When I was in the last dynasty, the imperial edict allowed me to use 100,000 yuan per day as a private expense. I never used a single yuan indiscriminately. Would I borrow a rhinoceros horn?

古文：天祚愈怒，夺太傅官，降宁边州刺史，寻改临海军节度使。
现代文：天祚更加恼怒，褫夺其太傅官职，降为宁边州刺史，不久，改任临海军节度使。
English: Tianyao was even more angry. He deprived him of the position of Taifu and reduced him to the position of Yongbyon prefect. Soon, he was reassigned to the position of Linyi naval festival envoy.

古文：兀纳上书曰： 自萧海里亡入女直，彼有轻朝廷心，宜益兵以备不虞。 
现代文：兀纳上书说： 自从萧海里逃到女真，女真便有轻视朝廷之心，应该增加兵力以防不测。 
English: Xuan Na wrote: Since Xiao Hai fled to Nianzhen, Nianzhen has despised the heart of the imperial court, and it is necessary to increase the number of troops to prevent accidents.

古文：不报。
现代文：皇上没有作答。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：天庆元年，知黄龙府事，改东北路统军使，复上书曰： 臣治与女直接境，观其所为，其志非小。
现代文：天庆元年，任黄龙府知府，改东北路统军使，又上书说： 我的治所与女真接壤，观察其行为，志向不小。
English: In the first year of Tianqing, he was appointed governor of Huanglongfu and became the Northeast Road Unification Envoy. He also wrote a letter saying: My clinic is close to Nianzhen, observe his behavior, and his ambition is not small.

古文：宜先其未发，举兵图之。 
现代文：应当在他们发动之前，派兵攻打它。 
English: They should send troops to attack it before they launch.

古文：章数上，皆不听。
现代文：奏章几度呈上，皇上不听。
English: The Emperor did not listen to the score, which was presented to him several times.

古文：及金兵来侵，战于宁江州，其孙移敌蹇死之，兀纳退走入城。
现代文：及至金兵前来进犯，交战于宁江州，兀纳的孙子移敌蹇战死，兀纳退逃入城。
English: When the Jin soldiers came to attack and fought in Ningjiang Province, Xunna's grandson died in the battle, and Xunna retreated and fled to the city.

古文：留官属守御，自以三百骑渡混同江而西，城遂陷。
现代文：留下属吏防守，自己率三百骑渡混同江西行，府城便陷落了。
English: Leaving his subordinate officers to defend, he led three hundred horsemen to the west of Jiangxi Province, and the prefecture fell.

古文：后与萧敌里拒金兵于长泺，以军败免官。
现代文：后来与萧敌里在长泺拒战金兵，因兵败免官。
English: Later, he and Xiao Qili refused to accept the gold medal in the Battle of Changshu, and were dismissed from their posts due to the defeat.

古文：五年，天祚亲征，兀纳殿，复败绩。
现代文：五年，天祚亲征，兀纳殿后，又失败了。
English: Five years later, after Tianyao's personal enlistment and Xuan Na's court, it failed again.

古文：后数日乃与百官入见，授上京留守。
现代文：数日之后便与百官入宫朝见，授为上京留守。
English: A few days later, he met with hundreds of officials at the Imperial Palace and was granted permission to stay in Tokyo.

古文：六年，耶律章奴叛，来攻京城，兀纳发府库以赉士卒，谕以逆顺，完城池，以死拒战。
现代文：六年，耶律章奴叛乱，前来进攻京城，兀纳发放府库钱物赏赐士卒，晓谕他们以顺逆之理，修缮城池，拼死拒战。
English: In the sixth year, Yeluchangnu rebelled and came to attack the capital city. He collected and distributed money from the government treasury to reward the soldiers, instructing them to repair the city and resist the war.

古文：章奴无所得而去。
现代文：章奴一无所获便离开了。
English: Zhang Rong got nothing and left.

古文：以功授副元帅，寻为契丹都宫使。
现代文：因功授副元帅，不久任契丹都宫使。
English: He was awarded the rank of vice-marshal for meritorious service, and soon became an envoy to the Khitan capital.

古文：天祚以兀纳先朝重臣，有定策勋，每延问以政，兀纳对甚切。
现代文：天祚因兀纳为前朝重臣，有定策扶立之大功，每每请他来询问政事，兀纳总是恳切率直作答。
English: Tianzhu invited him every time to inquire about political affairs, because he was a senior minister of the former imperial court and had made great contributions to the establishment of a stable political system. He always answered sincerely and candidly.

古文：上虽优容，终不能用。
现代文：皇上尽管待他十分宽容，终究没能重用于他。
English: Although the Emperor treated him with great tolerance, he was ultimately unable to use him again.

古文：以疾卒，年七十。
现代文：因病去世，年七十岁。
English: He died of illness at the age of seventy.

古文：耶律俨，字若思，析津人。
现代文：耶律俨，字若思，析津府人。
English: Yeludong, a man of few words, a native of Jingjin.

古文：本姓李氏。
现代文：本姓李。
English: His real surname is Li.

古文：父仲禧，重熙中始仕。
现代文：父仲禧，重熙年间开始任官。
English: His father, Chung Hee, began to hold office during the reign of King Chung Hee.

古文：清宁初，同知南院宣徽使事。
现代文：清宁初，任同知南院宣徽使事。
English: At the beginning of the Qing Dynasty, he was appointed as the envoy for the proclamation of the emblem of the Southern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：四年，城鸭子、混同二水间，拜北院宣徽使。
现代文：四年，在鸭子、混同二水之间筑城，拜为北院宣徽使。
English: In four years, he built a city between the ducks and the two waters, and worshiped as the North Court Herald.

古文：咸雍初，坐误奏事，出为榆州刺史。
现代文：咸雍初，因误奏事情获罪，出贬为榆州刺史。
English: At the beginning of the Xian and Yong Dynasty, he was found guilty of misreporting the matter, and was demoted to the status of the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：俄诏复旧职，迁汉人行宫都部署。
现代文：不久诏令官复原职，迁为汉人行宫都部署。
English: Soon after, the imperial edict was issued reinstating the officials and relocating them to the Han People's Palace.

古文：六年，赐国姓，封韩国公，改南院枢密使。
现代文：六年，赐给国姓，封韩国公，改任南院枢密使。
English: In the sixth year, he was given the surname of the country, the title of the Korean public, and was reappointed as the Privy Councilor of the Southern Yuan.

古文：时枢臣乙辛等诬陷皇太子，诏仲禧偕乙辛鞫之，蔓引无辜，未尝雪正。
现代文：当时枢密大臣耶律乙辛等人诬陷皇太子，诏令仲禧偕同乙辛审讯，牵连许多无辜之人，未能昭雪。
English: At that time, the Minister of the Privy Council, Yerut Yitsin, and others framed the crown prince and ordered the interrogation of Zhong Xian and Yitsin, implicating many innocent people and failing to shed light.

古文：乙辛荐仲禧可任，拜广德军节度使，复为南院枢密使，卒，谥钦惠。
现代文：乙辛荐举仲禧可委以重任，拜为广德军节度使，再度担任南院枢密使，去世，谥曰钦惠。
English: It was recommended by Yixin that Zhou Zhongxi could be entrusted with an important task, and he was appointed as the envoy of the Canton German Army, and once again served as the envoy of the Southern Yuan Dynasty. He passed away, and his name was Qin Hui.

古文：俨仪观秀整，好学，有诗名，登咸雍进士第。
现代文：耶律俨仪容俊秀严整，好学，有诗名，咸雍年间中进士。
English: Yeludongyi is handsome and neat, eager to learn, has a poetic name, and was a successful junior high school student during the reign of Emperor Xianyong.

古文：守著作佐郎，补中书省令史，以勤敏称。
现代文：任守著作郎，补为中书省令史，以勤勉机敏著称。
English: He was appointed as a bookkeeper and compiler for the history of the Chinese Book Ministry, and was known for his diligence and resourcefulness.

古文：大康初，历都部署判官、将作少监。
现代文：大康初，历任都部署判官、将作少监。
English: At the beginning of the Great Prosperity, judges and junior supervisors were deployed at all levels.

古文：后两府奏事，论群臣优劣，唯称俨才俊。
现代文：后来两府奏事，论列群臣之优劣，唯独称赞耶律俨才能出众。
English: Later, the two prefectures made a report, discussing the merits and demerits of the group of ministers, but only praised Ye Luye for his outstanding ability.

古文：改少府少监，知大理正，赐紫。
现代文：改任少府少监，知大理正，赐给紫色公服。
English: He was reassigned to the post of Junior Prefectural Junior Supervisor, and given a purple official uniform.

古文：六年，迁大理少卿，奏谳详平。
现代文：六年，迁大理少卿，上报对狱案的处理意见十分公平。
English: Six years later, he was transferred to the position of junior minister of justice, and his report on the handling of the prison case was very fair.

古文：明年，升大理卿。
现代文：次年，升任大理卿。
English: The following year, he was promoted to Darichiro.

古文：丁父忧，夺服，同签部署司事。
现代文：遭逢父丧去职服丧，道宗强夺其服，任为同签部署司事。
English: In mourning for the loss of his father, Daozong forcibly took over his father's duties and was appointed as the co-signing and deployment secretary.

古文：大安初，为景州刺史。
现代文：大安初，任景州刺史。
English: At the beginning of the Taian era, he was appointed as the chief historian of Jingzhou.

古文：绳胥徒，禁豪猾，抚老恤贫，未数月，善政流播，郡人刻石颂德。
现代文：约束官府衙役，拘禁那些强横狡猾不守法之人，抚恤老人和穷人，不上数月，清明的政声已开始传播开来，郡中人为他刻石颂扬德政。
English: Restricting government officials, detaining those who are strong and cunning and do not abide by the law, and caring for the elderly and the poor. In just a few months, the clear political voice has begun to spread, and people in the county have carved stones to praise his virtuous politics.

古文：二年，改御史中丞，诏按上京滞狱，多所平反。同知宣徽院事，提点大理寺。
现代文：二年，改任御史中丞，诏令查究上京的积压案件，平反了很多冤案，任同知宣徽院事，提点大理寺。
English: In the second year, he was reassigned to the post of Imperial Historian, ordered to investigate the backlog of cases in Beijing, and rectified many cases of injustice. He was also appointed to the Xuanhui Academy, and raised the point of Dali Temple.

古文：六年冬，改山西路都转运使。
现代文：六年冬，改任山西路都转运使。
English: In the winter of the sixth year, he was reappointed as the Shanxi Road Transportation Envoy.

古文：刮剔垢弊，奏定课额，益州县俸给，事皆施行。
现代文：铲除积习弊政，上奏确定课税之定额，增加州县长官的俸禄，一应事情都办理了下来。
English: Eliminate the accumulation of bad politics, raise the tax quota, increase the salary of the prefectural governor, and everything has been handled.

古文：寿隆初，授枢密直学士。
现代文：寿隆初，授任枢密直学士。
English: At the beginning of Shulong, he was awarded the title of Privy Direct Bachelor.

古文：以母忧去官，寻召复旧职。
现代文：遭逢丁丧辞官，不久征召官复原职。
English: At Ding's funeral, he resigned from his post, and was soon reinstated as a conscription officer.

古文：宋攻夏，李乾顺遣使求和解，帝命俨如宋平之，拜参知政事。
现代文：宋人攻夏，李乾顺派使者请我国从中和解，皇上命耶律俨到宋国为他们讲和，拜为参知政事。
English: The Song people attacked Xia, and Li Qianshun sent an envoy to China to ask for reconciliation. The emperor ordered Yeludong to go to Song to make peace with them and take part in the political affairs.

古文：六年，驾幸鸳鸯泺，召至内殿，访以政事。
现代文：六年，皇上临幸鸳鸯泊，征召他到内殿，询问政事。
English: In the sixth year, Emperor Linxing summoned him to the Inner Court to inquire about political affairs.

古文：帝晚年倦勤，用人不能自择，令各掷骰子，以采胜者官之。
现代文：皇上晚年厌倦于政事之辛劳，在用人上自己无法择定时，便下令各人分别掷骰子，对点力占优者授给官职。
English: In his later years, the emperor grew tired of the drudgery of government, and when he was unable to select his own appointees, he ordered that each person roll the dice separately, and the person with the best score would be given an official post.

古文：俨尝得胜采，上曰： 上相之征也！ 
现代文：耶律俨曾经掷得胜采，皇上说： 这是首相的征兆！ 
English: Yerutong once threw a victory, the emperor said: This is a sign of the prime minister!

古文：迁知枢密院事，赐经邦佐运功臣，封越国公。
现代文：迁任知枢密院事，赐号经邦佐运功臣，封越国公。
English: He was transferred to the Privy Council, given the title of a meritorious vassal of the Satsuma Shogunate, and made the Duke of Yue.

古文：修《皇朝实录》七十卷。
现代文：修纂《皇朝实录》七十卷。
English: Seventy volumes of "Imperial Record" were revised.

古文：帝大渐，俨与北院枢密使阿思同受顾命。
现代文：皇上病危，耶律俨与北院枢密使阿思一同接受遗诏。
English: As the Emperor was critically ill, Ye Lu Jie and the Privy Counsellor of the Northern Yuan, Athi, came together to accept the last will.

古文：乾统三年，徙封秦国。
现代文：乾统三年，徙封为秦国公。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Qian, he was transferred to Qin.

古文：六年，封漆水郡王。
现代文：六年，封漆水郡王。
English: Six years later, he was crowned the king of Suishui County.

古文：天庆中，以疾，命乘小车入朝。
现代文：天庆年间，因为生病，天祚帝命他乘小车入宫朝见。
English: During the Tianqing Festival, because of illness, the Heavenly Emperor ordered him to take a small car to the palace for a morning meeting.

古文：疾甚，遣太医视之。
现代文：病重，皇上派太医前往诊视。
English: He was seriously ill, and the emperor sent the imperial physician to examine him.

古文：薨，赠尚父，谥曰忠懿。
现代文：逝世，追赠尚父，谥曰忠懿。
English: After his death, it was bequeathed to his father, 曰忠.

古文：俨素廉洁，一芥不取于人。
现代文：耶律俨一向廉洁，从不向人求取分毫。
English: Yerutong has always been honest and never asked for a penny from anyone.

古文：经籍一览成诵。
现代文：对于经书典籍，看一遍就能记诵下来。
English: As for the classics, you can memorize them after reading them once.

古文：又善伺人主意。
现代文：又善于窥察人主之心意。
English: They are also good at spying on people's intentions.

古文：妻邢氏有美色，常出入禁中，俨教之曰： 慎勿失上意。 
现代文：其妻邢氏貌美，经常出入于宫中，耶律俨叮嘱她说 ：千万不可违背了皇上的心意！ 
English: His wife, the beautiful Lady Zou, was often seen in and out of the palace, and Yeludong admonished her: "Never go against the emperor's wishes!"

古文：由是权宠益固。
现代文：因此权位和宠幸更加稳固。
English: As a result, positions of power and favors are more stable.

古文：三子：处贞，太常少卿；处廉，同知中京留守事；处能，少府少监。
现代文：有三子：处贞，为太常少卿；处廉，同知中京留守事；处能，任少府少监。
English: He had three sons: Tsuchizane, who became a minor lord; Tsuchikane, who stayed in Kyoto with his uncle; and Tsuchino, who was appointed a junior prefect.

古文：刘伸，字济时，宛平人。
现代文：刘伸，字济时，宛平人。
English: Liu Shin, Zizi Shi, Wan Pingren.

古文：少颖悟，长以辞翰闻。
现代文：少时聪慧过人，成年之后以文章著称。
English: At a young age, he was extremely intelligent, and after he became an adult, he became famous for his articles.

古文：重熙五年，登进士第，历彰武军节度使掌书记、大理正。
现代文：重熙五年，中进士，历任彰武军节度使掌书记、大理正。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Chongxi, he was promoted to the rank of middle-ranking officer, and successively served as the secretary of the commander of the Zhangwu army, and the secretary of the Dai Li Zheng.

古文：因奏狱，上适与近臣语，不顾，伸进曰： 臣闻自古帝王必重民命，愿陛下省臣之奏。 上大惊异，擢枢密都承旨，权中京副留守。
现代文：因为陈奏案件，兴宗皇上正好与近臣谈话，没有理睬，刘伸进言说： 我听说自古以来帝王必定都看重百姓的生命，希望陛下省览我的奏折。 皇上惊奇无比，将他提升为枢密都承旨，权中京副留守。
English: Because of the Chen report, Emperor Xingzong happened to have a conversation with a close vassal, but ignored him. Liu Shinjin said: I heard that since ancient times, emperors must have valued the lives of the people. I hope that His Majesty will read my report. The Emperor was so surprised that he promoted him to the Privy Council to carry out his will, and he stayed in Beijing as vice-regent.

古文：诏徙富民以实春、泰二州，伸以为不可，奏罢之。
现代文：诏令迁徙富裕民户以充实春、泰二州，刘伸认为这样不好，上奏，皇上便取消了成命。
English: The imperial edict ordered the migration of wealthy households to enrich the two states of Chun and Tai, but Liu Shin thought this was not good, so the emperor cancelled the order.

古文：迁大理少卿，人以不冤。
现代文：迁大理少卿，人们都因此不再受冤。
English: With the transfer of Dali Shaoqing, people will no longer suffer from injustice.

古文：升大理卿，改西京副留守。
现代文：升任大理卿，改任西京副留守。
English: He was promoted to the position of Darichiro, and changed to the position of Saikyo vice governor.

古文：以父忧，终制，为三司副使，加谏议大夫，提点大理寺。
现代文：因遭逢父丧，服孝满三年，任三司副使，加谏议大夫，提点大理寺。
English: Due to his father's death, he served as the Third Vice-Minister, the Second Vice-Minister, the Second Vice-Minister, the Third Vice-Minister, the Third Vice-Minister, the Third Vice-Minister, the Third Vice-Minister, the Third Vice-Minister, the Third Vice-Minister and the Third Vice-Minister.

古文：以伸明法而恕，案冤狱全活者众，徙南京副留守。
现代文：因为刘伸通晓法令且生性仁恕，审理案件过程中让许多人都得以保全性命。迁任南京副留守。
English: Because Liu Shen was familiar with the laws and regulations and was naturally compassionate, he allowed many people to save their lives during the trial of the case. He was transferred to Nanjing and stayed there.

古文：俄改崇义军节度使，政务简静，民用不扰，致乌鹊同巢之异，优诏褒之。
现代文：不久改任崇义军节度使，为政追求简明不繁苛，百姓因此不受烦劳，以致出现了乌鸦和喜鹊同巢和平共处的异象，皇上特地下诏褒奖他。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the commander of the festival of the Chongyi Army. He pursued a concise and simple policy, and the people were not bothered by it. As a result, there was a vision of crows and magpies peacefully coexisting in the same nest. The emperor praised him with a special imperial edict.

古文：改户部使，岁入羡余钱三十万缗，拜南院枢密副使。
现代文：改任户部使，每年以盈余赋税的名义向朝廷进献余钱三十万缗，拜为南院枢密副使。
English: He was reappointed as the Household Division's envoy, and contributed 300,000 baht of surplus money to the Imperial Court every year in the name of surplus taxation. He was appointed as the Privy Vice-Envoy to the Southern Yuan.

古文：道宗尝谓大臣曰： 今之忠直，耶律玦、刘伸而已！ 
现代文：道宗曾经对大臣们说 ：今世忠诚正直的大臣，只有耶律、刘伸两人而已！ 
English: Dao Zong once said to his ministers, "In this world, there are only two loyal and honest ministers: Ye Lu and Liu Shin!"

古文：宰相杨绩贺其得人。拜参知政事。
现代文：宰相杨绩祝贺皇上得人，拜刘伸为参知政事。
English: Prime Minister Yang Rong congratulated the Emperor on his accession, and congratulated Liu Sheng on his accession to the post of prime minister.

古文：上谕之曰： 卿勿惮宰相。 
现代文：皇上晓谕他说 ：你不要怕宰相！ 
English: The emperor told him, "Don't be afraid of the prime minister!

古文：时北院枢密使乙辛势焰方炽，伸奏曰： 臣于乙辛尚不畏，何宰相之畏！ 
现代文：当时北院枢密使乙辛气焰势力正盛，刘伸奏道 ：我对乙辛尚且不惧，又怕什么宰相！ 
English: At that time, the Northern Imperial Court's privy council made Yixin's enthusiasm and power flourish. Liu Shinsao said: I am not afraid of Yixin, but I am afraid of the prime minister!

古文：乙辛衔之，相与排诋，出为保静军节度使。
现代文：乙辛忌恨于他，加以排斥和诋毁，出贬刘伸为保静军节度使。
English: Yixin hated him, ostracized and slandered him, and denounced Liu Sheng as the instigator of the military's restraint.

古文：上终欲大用，加守太子太保，迁上京留守。
现代文：皇上到底还是想重用他，加为守太子太保，迁上京留守。
English: In the end, the emperor still wanted to reuse him, add him as the guardian of the crown prince, and move him to stay in Kyoto.

古文：乙辛以事徙镇雄武，复以崇义军节度使致仕。
现代文：乙辛假托事由将他移镇雄武军。又在崇义军节度使任上辞官。
English: Yixin moved him to the town of Xiongwu for a fake reason. He also resigned from his post at the festival of the Chongyi Army.

古文：适燕、蓟民饥，伸与致政赵徽、韩造日济以糜粥，所活不胜算。
现代文：适逢燕、蓟一带百姓饥荒，刘伸与辞官归家的赵徽、韩造每天以稀粥赈济他们，因此而活下来的人不可胜计。
English: When famine struck the people in the Yan and Handan regions, Liu Shin, Zhao Hui, and Han Zou, who had returned home from their posts as magistrates, fed them with gruel every day. As a result, those who survived had no choice.

古文：大安二年卒，上震悼，赙赠加等。
现代文：大安二年去世，皇上震惊哀伤，加倍地赠予助丧钱物。
English: When Emperor Taian died two years later, the emperor was shocked and saddened, and doubled the amount of money given to help with the funeral expenses.

