古文：暴显暴显，字思祖，魏郡斥邱人也。
现代文：暴显，字思祖，魏郡斥邱人。
English: Buxian, Zi Zu, Wei County, Qiu Ren.

古文：祖喟，魏琅邪太守、朔州刺史，因家边朔。
现代文：祖父暴喟，任魏琅邪太守、朔州刺史，于是定居在北方边地。
English: His grandfather, Wu Rong, served as the de facto ruler of Wei, Shuo and Shuzhou, and settled in the northern border area.

古文：父诞，魏恒州刺史、左□将军，乐安公。
现代文：父亲暴诞，任魏恒州刺史、左卫将军，封为乐安公。
English: After the violent birth of his father, he was appointed as Wei Heng Zhou Jishi and Zuo Wei general, and was given the title of Le An Gong.

古文：显幼时，见一沙门指之曰： 此郎子有好相表，大必为良将，贵极人臣。 语终失僧，莫知所去。
现代文：暴显小时候，遇见一僧人指着他说： 这孩子有一副好相貌，长大后一定会成为优秀的将军，成为异常显贵的重臣。 说完僧人即不见，不知去向。
English: When Buxian was a child, he met a monk who pointed at him and said, "This child has a good appearance, and when he grows up, he will surely become an excellent general and an extremely prominent senior vassal."

古文：显少经军旅，善于骑射，曾从魏孝庄帝出猎，一日之中手获禽兽七十三。
现代文：暴显年少时就从军，擅长骑马射箭。曾随魏孝庄帝出外打猎，一天之中亲手捉获飞禽野兽七十三只。
English: He joined the army at a young age and excelled at horseback archery. He once went hunting with Emperor Wei Xiaozhuang and personally caught 73 birds and beasts in one day.

古文：孝昌二年，除羽林监。
现代文：孝昌二年，任羽林监。
English: In the second year of Xiaochang, he was appointed as the forester.

古文：中兴元年，除襄威将军、晋州车骑府长史。
现代文：中兴元年，任襄威将军、晋州车骑府长史。
English: In the first year of the People's Republic of China, he was appointed as General Xiang Wei and Governor of Jinzhou Cavalry Prefecture.

古文：后从高祖于信都举义，授中坚将军、散骑侍郎、帐内大都督，加安东将军、银青光禄大夫，屯留县开国侯。
现代文：后来随高祖在信都起兵，被授为中坚将军、散骑侍郎、帐内大都督，加安束将军、银青光禄大夫，屯留县开国侯。
English: Later, Gao Zu followed Gao Zu to raise an army in Xindu, and was awarded the titles of General of the Core, Cavalryman of the Horse, Governor of the Capital, General of the Garrison, Doctor of the Silver and Light of the Year, and Prince of Tingliu County.

古文：天平二年，除渤海郡守。
现代文：天平二年，任渤海郡太守。
English: In the second year of the Tenpyo era, he was appointed governor of Bokkai County.

古文：元象元年，除云州大中正，兼武□将军，加镇东将军。
现代文：元象元年，任云州大中正，兼武卫将军，加镇束将军。
English: In the first year of Yuan Xiang, he was appointed as the vice-president of Yunnan University, the general of Wuwei, and the general of Zhenzoku.

古文：二年，除北徐州刺史，当州大都督。
现代文：二年，任北徐州刺史、当州大都督。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the governor of North Xuzhou and the governor of Dangzhou.

古文：从高祖与西师战于邙山，高祖令显守河桥镇，据中潬城。
现代文：追随高祖和西军在邙山大战，高祖命他防守河桥镇，在中浑城据守。
English: He followed Gao Zu and the Western Army in the Battle of Lushan Mountain. Gao Zu ordered him to defend Heqiao Town and hold out in Zhonghun City.

古文：武定二年，除征南将军、广州刺史。
现代文：武定二年，任征南将军、广州刺史。
English: In the second year of Wuding, he was appointed as the general of the Southern Expedition, and became the governor of Guangzhou.

古文：侯景反于河南，为景所攻，显率左右二十余骑突出贼营，拔难归国。
现代文：侯景在黄河以南谋反，暴显受到他的进攻。暴显率领手下二十多名骑兵突破敌营，脱离险境回到国内。
English: Hou Jing plotted a rebellion south of the Yellow River, and Burhan was attacked by him. Burhan led more than twenty cavalrymen under his command to break through the enemy camp, get out of danger and return to the country.

古文：时高岳、慕容绍宗等讨景，即配显士马，随岳等破景于涡阳。
现代文：当时高压、慕容绍宗等人正要讨伐鳄，就为他配备了军队马匹，随高岳等人在涡阳击破了侯景的人马。
English: At that time, Gaopeng, Murong Shaosong and others were about to fight the crocodile, so they equipped him with army horses, and Gao Yue and others broke Hou Jing's horse in the whirlwind.

古文：武定六年，拜太府卿。
现代文：武定六年，授为太府卿。
English: In the sixth year of Wu Ding's reign, he was awarded the title of Dafuqing.

古文：从世宗平王思政于颍川，授颍州刺史。
现代文：随世宗在颖川平定了王思政，授为续州刺史。
English: Su Shi Zong subdued Wang Shizheng in Yingchuan and was awarded the title of "Hengzhou Sashiharu."

古文：七年，转郑州刺史。
现代文：武定七年，改任郑州刺史。
English: In the seventh year of Wuding, he was transferred to the post of Zhengzhou chief historian.

古文：八年，加骠骑将军，进侯为公，通前食邑一千三百户。
现代文：八年，加骠骑将军，由侯爵晋升为公爵，连同以前的食邑共有一千三百户。
English: Eight years later, General Caldecott was promoted from marquis to duke, and together with the previous eateries, there were a total of 1,300 households.

古文：天保元年，加□大将军，刺史如故。
现代文：天保元年，加封大将军，刺史职位不变。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was promoted to the rank of grand general, but his position as chief historian remained unchanged.

古文：三年，与清河王高岳袭历阳，取之。为赃货，解郑州，大理禁止。
现代文：三年，与清河王高岳攻取历肠，缴获一批财物，非法押送到郑州，被大理寺禁止。
English: In the third year, he and King Gao Yue of Qinghe captured Lishen, seized a batch of property, illegally transported it to Zhengzhou, and was banned by Dali Temple.

古文：处断未讫，为合肥被围，遣与步汗萨、慕容俨等同攻梁北徐州。擒刺史王强。
现代文：这件事还没有处理完，由于合肥被围困，曼题受命和步越、摹查尴等人一起进攻卢凿的北徐州，擒获刺史王强。
English: This matter has not yet been dealt with. As Hefei was besieged, Mangtai was ordered to attack the northern Xuzhou of Luqi together with Bu Yue, Yan Chaoyan and others, and captured the assassin Shi Wangqiang.

古文：与梁秦州刺史严超达战于泾城，破之。
现代文：与銮羞州刺史题超崖在泌作战，打败銮军。
English: He fought against the super cliff of Shixizhou and defeated the Wei army.

古文：五年，授仪同三司。
现代文：型呈五年，授仪同三司。
English: The type is five years, and the ceremony is the same as the three divisions.

古文：其年，又与高岳南临汉水，攻下梁西楚州，获刺史许法光。
现代文：就在这一年，又同高岳在汉水以北攻占卢梁的酉楚，活捉刺史盏皇谜。
English: In the same year, he and Gao Yue captured Lu Liang in the north of Hanshui Province, capturing the crown jewel of history.

古文：于时梁将萧循与侯瑱等围慕容俨于郢州，复以显为水军大都督，从摄口入江救之。
现代文：此时銮大将芦钟和堡垩等在墨州包围了基查堡，朝廷又任命曼题为水军大都督，从逻口进入长江救援。
English: At this time, Grand Generals Lu Zhong and Bo Xun surrounded Kicha Fort in Muzhou, and the imperial court appointed Man as the grand governor of the navy to enter the Yangtze River from Logokou for rescue.

古文：师还，加开府仪同三司，赏帛五百疋。
现代文：军队班师后，加开府仪同三司，赏赐丝绸五百匹。
English: After the military class division, the Kaifu ceremony was added with three divisions, and five hundred silks were awarded.

古文：十年，食幽州范阳郡干。
现代文：天堡十年，享受塑业范阳郡的干禄。
English: Tianbao ten years, enjoy the plastic industry Fanyang County's Ganlu.

古文：干明元年，除车骑大将军。
现代文：茎塱元年，任车骑大将军。
English: In the first year of the stalk, he was appointed the general of the chariot and cavalry.

古文：皇建元年，转封乐安郡开国公。
现代文：皇建元年，改封乐安郡开国公。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jian, he was renamed as the founding prince of Le'an County.

古文：二年，除赵州刺史。
现代文：二年，任赵州刺史。
English: Two years later, he was appointed as Zhaozhou chief historian.

古文：河清元年，迁洛州刺史。
现代文：迥渣元年，改盗业刺史。
English: In the first year of 渣, it was changed to 盗业刺史.

古文：二年，复除朔州刺史，秩满归。
现代文：二年，又任塑业刺史，任期满后回到朝中。
English: Two years later, he was appointed as the chief historian of the plastics industry, and returned to the Imperial Court after his term of office expired.

古文：天统元年，加特进、骠骑大将军，封定阳王。
现代文：天统元年，加特进、骠骑大将军，封定阳王。
English: In the first year of the reign of Heaven, Gatjin, the general of the cavalry, crowned Yangwang.

古文：四年卒，年六十六。
现代文：天统四年去世，享年六十六岁
English: Tian Rong died at the age of sixty-six in the fourth year of Tian Rong

古文：皮景和，琅邪下邳人也。
现代文：皮景和，琅邪郡工邳人。
English: Hide and seek, deceive and be deceived.

古文：父庆宾，魏淮南王开府中兵参军事。
现代文：父亲卢庆昼任垫淮南王开府中兵参军事。
English: His father, Lu Qing, served as a matron for soldiers in Huainan's Wangkai Prefecture during the daytime.

古文：正光中，因使怀朔，遇世乱，因家广宁之石门县。
现代文：正光年间，皮庆宾出使怀翅，遇上世道大乱，于是把家迁到广宁郡的石盟题。
English: During the Zhengguang years, Pi Qingbin was sent out to conceive, and when the world was in turmoil, he moved his home to Shi Mengqi in Guangning County.

古文：景和少通敏，善骑射。初以亲信事高祖，后补亲信副都督。
现代文：虚垦劲小时候就聪敏，擅长骑马射箭，开始以亲信事奉直担，后来被补为亲信副都督。
English: When he was a child, he was intelligent and good at riding and archery. He began to serve as a direct burden to his relatives, and later he was appointed as a trusted vice-governor.

古文：武定二年，征步落稽。世宗疑贼有伏兵，令景和将五六骑深入一谷中，值贼百余人，便共格战，景和射数十人，莫不应弦而倒。
现代文：武定二年，征讨垄蓝彊，世塞怀疑对方有伏兵，就命量曲率领五六名骑兵深入山谷中，遇到敌兵一百多人，就和他们格斗。景和一入射死了几十人，都是应弦而倒。
English: In the second year of Wuding, in the course of the conquest of the Blue Ridge, when Shisei suspected that there was an ambush on the other side, he took the fatal measure of leading five or six horsemen deep into the valley. When he encountered more than a hundred enemy soldiers, he fought with them. Jinghe shot dozens of people at once, and they all fell to the ground.

古文：高祖尝令景和射一野豕，一箭而获之，深见嗟赏，除库直正都督。
现代文：产担曾命他射一野猪，一箭就将猪射倒，大受赞赏，被任命为库直正都督。
English: His father-in-law had ordered him to shoot a wild boar, and he shot the pig down with a single arrow. He was greatly appreciated and was appointed the governor of Ku Zhizheng.

古文：天保初，授假节、通州刺史，封永宁县开国子。
现代文：天保初年，授假节、通蛆刺史，封丞宁县开国子。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, the holiday festival, the history of Tonglu, and the founding of Ning County.

古文：后从袭库莫奚，加左右大都督。
现代文：后来随从攻打库莫奚，又加左右大都督。
English: Later, he followed the attack on Kumo, and added the left and right great governors.

古文：又从度黄龙，征契丹，定稽胡。
现代文：又随从经过董垄，征讨契且，平定擅垄。
English: He also went through Dongren, solicited contracts, and pacified Sogren.

古文：寻从讨茹茹主庵罗辰于陉北，又从平茹茹余烬。
现代文：不久参与在陉北征伐蕴苞族首领庵罗辰，并参加平定了茹茹余部。
English: Soon after, he participated in the northern conquest of Yan, the leader of the Yan people, Luo Chen, and participated in the pacification of the rest of Zhu Ru.

古文：景和趫捷，有武用，每有战功。
现代文：星塑矫健敏捷，有军事才能，因此常有战功。
English: Astroplasty is agile and agile, has military talent, and therefore often has war merit.

古文：十年，食安乐郡干。
现代文：玉惺十年，享受安乐郡干禄。
English: For ten years, she has enjoyed the Ganlu of Anle County.

古文：干明元年，除武□将军，兼给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：干明元年，任武卫将军，兼给事黄门侍郎。
English: In the first year of Ganming, he was appointed as General Wuwei, and also served as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain.

古文：肃宗作相，以本官摄大丞相府从事中郎。
现代文：肃宗为丞相，以本官职兼大丞相府从事中郎。
English: Suzong was chancellor, and he served as vice-chancellor in addition to his official duties at the chancellery.

古文：大宁元年，除仪同三司、散骑常侍、武□大将军，寻加开府。
现代文：大宁元年，任仪同三司、散骑常侍、武卫大将军，不久加开府。
English: In the first year of the Danying Dynasty, Ren Yi was appointed to the Third Division, the Knight's Cavalryman, and the General of the Imperial Guards, and he was soon promoted to the post of governor.

古文：二年，出为梁州刺史。
现代文：二年，出任梁州刺史。
English: For two years, he served as the mayor of Liangzhou.

古文：三年，突厥围逼晋阳，令景和驰驿赴京，督领后军赴□州，未到间，贼已退。
现代文：三年，突厥入围逼晋阳，朝廷命景和从驿道兼程赶回京城，率领后军开赴并州。没有到达，突厥人就已经退兵。
English: Three years later, when the Turks were besieged and forced to retreat to Jinyang, the imperial court had a change of heart and rushed back to Beijing from Shandong, leading the rearguard to annex the province. Before they arrived, the Turks had already withdrawn.

古文：仍除领左右大将军，食齐郡干，又除□省五兵尚书。
现代文：景和领左右大将军，享受齐郡干禄。又任命为并州省五兵尚书。
English: He was appointed as the general of the left and right sides of Jinghe, and enjoyed the Qi County Ganlu. He was also appointed as the provincial five soldiers of Shangshu.

古文：天统元年，迁殿中尚书。
现代文：天统元年，升任殿中尚书。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Tenjo, he was promoted to Shosho in the palace.

古文：二年，除侍中。
现代文：二年，任侍中。
English: For two years, he served as a Samurai Junior High School student.

古文：景和于武职之中，兼长吏事，又性识均平，故频有美授。
现代文：景和任武职，又兼长吏事，而且秉性公平，因此常授以美职。
English: Jing He served in the military, and was also a senior official, and he was fair-minded, so he was often awarded the beauty position.

古文：周通好之后，冠盖往来，常令景和对接，每与使人同射，百发百中，甚见推重。
现代文：北齐北周两国关系和好后，使节来往，朝廷常派他去接待。他与使者习射，常常百发百中，很受推崇。
English: After the rapprochement between North Qi, North Zhou, and the two countries, envoys came and went, and the imperial court often sent him to receive them. He practiced shooting with the envoys, often making a hundred shots, and was highly respected.

古文：武平中，诏狱多令中黄门等监治，恒令景和按覆，据理执正，由是过无枉滥。
现代文：武平年间，诉讼案件都交给中黄门督察，常令景和加以审查核实，他执法公正，从此就没有了曲解法律、滥施刑法的事。
English: During the Wuping era, all litigation cases were handed over to the Zhonghuangmen inspector, who often inspected and verified that he was enforcing the law fairly. Since then, there has been no misinterpretation of the law or abuse of criminal law.

古文：后除特进、中领军，封广汉郡开国公。
现代文：后来景和被授封为特进、中领军，封广汉郡开国公。
English: Later, Jinghe was awarded the title of "Special Advancement," "Middle Leader" and "Founder of Guanghan County."

古文：又随斛律光率□西讨，克姚襄、白亭二城，别封永宁郡开国公。
现代文：又随斛律光西征，攻克姚襄、白亭两地，封为永宁郡开国公。
English: He also went on a western expedition with Yao Liguang and conquered Yaoxiang and Baiting, and was named the founding father of Yongning County.

古文：又除领军将军。
现代文：又任领军将军。
English: He was also appointed as the leading general.

古文：又从军拔宜阳城，封开封郡开国公。
现代文：曾随军攻克宜阳城，封开封郡开国公。
English: He once followed the army to conquer Yiyang City, and became the founding father of Kaifeng County.

古文：琅邪王之杀和士开也，兵指西阙，内外惶惑，莫知所为。景和请后主出千秋门自号令。
现代文：琅邪王杀了和士开，领兵威胁皇城，内外惶恐，不知所措，景和请后主出千秋门亲自发布命令。
English: The evil king killed He Shi Kai, the leader of the army threatened the imperial city, the people inside and outside were terrified and at a loss for what to do, and King He invited the queen to personally issue an order.

古文：事平，除尚书右仆射、赵州刺史。
现代文：事情平定后，被任命为尚书右仆射、赵州刺史。
English: After the matter was settled, he was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man and Zhao Zhou's right-hand man.

古文：寻迁河南行台尚书右仆射、洛州刺史。
现代文：不久升任黄河以南行台尚书右仆射、洛州刺史。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of the south of the Yellow River, Shangshu, the right-hand man, and Luozhou, the right-hand man.

古文：陈将吴明彻寇淮南，令景和率□拒之，除领军大将军，封文城郡王，转食高阳郡干。
现代文：陈大将吴明彻入侵淮南，朝廷命景和领兵抗击，任命他为领军大将军，封文城郡王，改享高阳郡干禄。
English: Chen's general Wu Mingche invaded Huainan, and the imperial court's vision of life and the leader of the resistance, appointed him as the leader of the army, the king of Fowen City County, and enjoyed the Ganlu of Gaoyang County.

古文：军至柤口，值土人陈暄等作乱，景和平之。
现代文：军队来到租口，正遇上当地人陈暄等作乱，景和平定了他们。
English: When the army came to the tenement, they were met by local people such as Chen Yao, who started a riot. Jing Heping calmed them down.

古文：又有阳平人郑子饶，诈依佛道，设斋会，用米面不多，供赡甚广，密从地藏渐出饼饭，愚人以为神力，见信于魏、□之间。
现代文：又有阳平人郑子饶，谎称皈依佛教，设立斋会，使用的米面不多，但受供养的却很广。他先把饼食藏在地下，供养时再逐渐取出来，一些愚昧的乡民还以为是出于神人的帮助，魏、卫两州的百姓十分迷信他。
English: There was also Zheng Zirao from Yangping, who falsely claimed to have converted to Buddhism and set up a fasting society. He did not use much rice flour, but he received a lot of offerings. He first hid the food in the ground, and then gradually took it out when he offered it. Some ignorant villagers also thought that it was because of the godman's help. The people of Wei and Wei states were very superstitious about him.

古文：将为逆乱，谋泄，掩讨漏逸。
现代文：郑子饶想要叛乱，但阴谋泄露，朝廷去捉拿时他逃脱了。
English: Zheng Zirao wanted to rebel, but the plot leaked out and he escaped when the court went to arrest him.

古文：乃潜渡河，聚□数千，自号长乐王，已破乘氏县，又欲袭西兖州城。
现代文：他暗中偷渡黄河，聚集了几千人，自号长乐王，攻占了乘氏县，又计划偷袭西兖州城。
English: He secretly smuggled across the Yellow River, gathered several thousand people, called himself Changle Wang, captured Jingshi County, and planned to secretly attack West Luzhou City.

古文：景和自南兖州遣骑数百击破之，斩首二千余级，生擒子饶，送京师烹之。
现代文：景和在南兖州派遣几百名骑兵打败叛军，斩杀两千多人，活捉了郑子饶，押送到京城烹杀。
English: Jing He dispatched several hundred cavalrymen to Nanluozhou to defeat the rebels, killed more than two thousand people, captured Zheng Zirao alive, and sent him to the capital to be cooked and killed.

古文：及吴明彻围寿阳，□令景和与贺拔伏恩等赴救。
现代文：吴明彻围攻寿阳，皇上命令景和与贺拔伏恩等人领军救援。
English: Wu Mingche besieged Shouyang, and the emperor ordered Jinghe and He Bafu to lead the rescue.

古文：景和以尉破胡军始丧败，怯懦不敢进，顿兵淮口，频有□使催促，然始渡淮。
现代文：景和因为尉破胡的军队刚刚被击败而怯懦不敢进兵，屯兵在淮口，朝廷屡次派人催促，才渡过了淮河。
English: Jinghe was too cowardly to march into the army because the army led by Yi Ba Hu had just been defeated. The garrison was in Huaikou, and the imperial court repeatedly sent people to urge them to cross the Huai River.

古文：属寿阳已陷，狼狈北还，器械军资，大致遗失。
现代文：此时寿阳城已经被攻陷，只好狼狈撤回，军用物资和器械大多遗失。
English: At this time, Shouyang City had already been captured, and had to be withdrawn in disarray. Most of the military supplies and equipment were lost.

古文：陈将萧摩诃率步骑于淮北仓陵城截之，景和得整旅逆战，摩诃退归。
现代文：陈将萧摩诃率领步兵、骑兵在淮河以北的仓陵城截击齐军。景和整顿军队迎战，萧摩诃退回。
English: Chen sent Xiao Maqi to lead the infantry and cavalry to intercept the Qi army in Cangling City, north of the Huai River. Jing and Rectification Army met the battle, and Xiao Maqi retreated.

古文：是时拒吴明彻者多致倾覆，唯景和全军而还，由是获赏，除尚书令，别封西河郡开国公，赐钱二十万，酒米十车。
现代文：当时抗击吴明彻的军队大都溃不成军，衹有景和的人马没有受到损失，因而受到奖赏，任命为尚书令，另封西河郡开国公，赏钱二十万，十车美酒和大米。
English: At that time, most of the armies that fought against Wu Mingcher were crushed and could not form an army, and the men and horses with good prospects did not suffer losses, so they were rewarded, appointed as Shang Shuling, and appointed as the founding father of Xihe County, with a reward of 200,000 yuan and ten carts of fine wine and rice.

古文：时陈人声将渡淮，令景和停军西兖州，为拒守节度。
现代文：陈人声言要渡过淮河进犯，朝廷命令景和驻军西兖州部署防卫。
English: Chen Ren said that he wanted to cross the Huaihe River to attack, and the imperial court ordered Jing and the garrison in Xishuanzhou to deploy defenses.

古文：武平六年病卒，年五十五。
现代文：武平六年因病去世，时年五十五岁。
English: Wu Ping died of illness six years later at the age of fifty-five.

古文：赠侍中、使持节、都督定恒朔幽定平六州诸军事、太尉公、录尚书事、定州刺史。
现代文：追封侍中、使持节、都督定恒朔幽安平六州诸军事、太尉公、绿尚书事、定州刺史。
English: Pursuit of the title of the middle-ranked attendant, the festival of envoys, and the appointment of the governor of the capital, Hengshuo Yu'anping, are the six states of the military, the captain, the green book, and the history of Dingzhou.

古文：长子信，机悟有风神，微涉书传。
现代文：长子皮信聪明有神采风度，稍微读了些书。
English: The eldest son, Pishin, is smart, has a lively demeanor, and has read a few books.

古文：武平末，开府仪同三司、武□将军，于勋贵子弟之中，称其识鉴。
现代文：武平末年任开府仪同三司、武术将军，当时的贵族子弟，称赞他能赏识人才，辨别是非。
English: In the last years of Wuping's life, he was appointed Kaifu Yi Tong San Si and Wushu General, and was praised by the aristocrats of the time for his ability to appreciate talent and distinguish right from wrong.

古文：于□州降周军，授上开府、军正大夫。
现代文：在并州降周军，授上开府、军正大夫。
English: He was awarded the title of Kaifu and the title of Junzheng Doctor.

古文：隋开皇中，卒于洮州刺史。
现代文：隋开皇年间，死于洮州刺史任上。
English: During the reign of the Sui Dynasty, he died while serving as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：少子宿达，武平末太子斋帅，有才藻检行。
现代文：小儿子皮宿达，武平末年任太子斋宫的禁卫长，有才思操守。
English: The youngest son, Pishuda, was the head of the palace guards at the Prince's Palace in the last years of the Wu-Ping Dynasty. He had the talent to think about ethics.

古文：开皇中，通事舍人。
现代文：开皇年间任通事舍人。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong, he was appointed to the post of secretary.

古文：丁母忧，起复，将赴京，辞灵恸哭而绝，久而获苏，不能下食，三日致死。
现代文：为母亲守丧，服丧未满提前征召，赶赴京城前，辞别灵位时动哭昏迷，好久才苏醒过来，吃不下食物，三天后就去世了。
English: She held a memorial service for her mother, was called up in advance before the funeral was over, rushed to the capital, wept and fainted when she said goodbye to her spiritual position, took a long time to wake up, could not eat food, and died three days later.

古文：鲜于世荣，渔阳人也。
现代文：鲜于世荣，渔阳人。
English: Fewer than Shireong, Yuyang people.

古文：父宝业，怀朔镇将，武平初，赠仪同三司、祠部尚书、朔州刺史。
现代文：父亲鲜于实业是怀朔的镇将，武平初年，追赠仪同三司、祠部尚书、朔州刺史。
English: His father was a town marshal of Waishuo who was new to the industry. In the first year of Wuping, he received the posthumous award from the three departments, the ancestral hall, and the history of Shuozhou.

古文：世荣少而沉敏，有器干。
现代文：世荣小时候沉着聪敏，有才干。
English: When Se Rong was a child, he was calm, intelligent and talented.

古文：兴和二年，为高祖亲信副都督，稍迁平西将军、赐爵石门县子。
现代文：兴和二年，任直担亲信副都督，升任乎西将军，赐爵石门县子。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, he was appointed as the vice-governor of Shimen County, promoted to General of the West, and given a peerage.

古文：后频从显祖讨茹茹，破稽胡。
现代文：后来多次随题塑讨伐苞兹，打败盐曲。
English: Later, he repeatedly used the theme to fight against the salt, and defeated the salt.

古文：又从高岳平郢州，除持节、河州刺史，食朝歌县干。
现代文：又随高岳平定郢州，任命为持节、河州刺史，享受朝歌县干禄。
English: In addition, with Gao Yue's pacification of Bozhou, he was appointed to hold the festival, write the history of Hezhou, and enjoy the Ganlu of Chaoga County.

古文：寻为肃宗丞相府咨议参军。
现代文：不久又任卢塞丞相府谘议参军。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a member of the advisory council of the Prime Minister's Office of Lucero to join the army.

古文：皇建中，除仪同三司、武□将军。
现代文：皇建年间，任仪同三司、武卫将军。
English: During the period of imperial construction, Ren Yi was in the same position as the Third Division and General Wuwei.

古文：天统二年，加开府，又除郑州刺史。
现代文：天统二年，加授开府，又任郑州刺史。
English: In the second year of the reunification of China, he was awarded the post of prefectural governor, and was also appointed as the first governor of Zhengzhou.

古文：武平中，以平信州贼，除领军将军，转食上党郡干。
现代文：武平年间，由于平定值塑叛乱，任领军将军，享受上党郡干禄。
English: During the Wuping era, as a result of the suppression of the Shaping Rebellion, he was appointed as the leader of the army and enjoyed the Ganlu of Shangdang County.

古文：从平高思好，封义阳王。
现代文：参与平定直墨好，被封为义阳王。
English: He participated in the pacification of Zhimo and was crowned as the King of Yiyang.

古文：七年，后主幸晋阳，令世荣以本官判尚书右仆射事，贰北平王北宫留后。
现代文：武平七年，后主到置堡，命世茔以本官兼领尚书右仆射事，附属于韭平王北宫留后。
English: In the seventh year of the Wu-Ping Dynasty, the queen mother went to Jibao Castle and appointed her own official as well as the right-hand servant of Shangshu, who was attached to the Northern Palace of the King of Jibao.

古文：寻有□令与吏部尚书袁聿修在尚书省检试举人。
现代文：不久又命他同吏部尚书袁聿修在尚书省考核举荐的人才。
English: Not long after that, he and Yuan Yuxiu of the Shangshu Department of the Ministry of Civil Affairs were ordered to examine and recommend talents in Shangshu Province.

古文：为乘马至云龙门外入省北门，为宪司举奏免官。
现代文：因为从云龙门外骑马进入尚书省北门，受到御史的弹劾而罢官。
English: Because he rode a horse from outside Yunlongmen into the North Gate of Shangshu Province, he was impeached by the Emperor and removed from office.

古文：后主围平阳，除世荣领军将军。
现代文：后主围困平阳，任命世荣为领军将军。
English: After the lord besieged Pingyang, he appointed Shi Rong as the leading general.

古文：周师将入邺，除领军大将军、太子太傅，于城西拒战，败被擒，为周武所杀。
现代文：北周的军队将要攻入邺时，又被授为领军大将军、太子太傅，到城西抵抗，失利遭擒，被周武所杀。
English: When the army of Northern Zhou was about to invade Shifang, he was also awarded the title of leading general and prince. He resisted to the west of the city, but was defeated and killed by Zhou Wu.

古文：世荣虽武人无文艺，以朝危政乱，每窃叹之。
现代文：世荣虽然是员武将，没有什么文才，但见到国家危难、朝政混乱，常常私下感叹。
English: Although Seirong was a military commander and had little literary talent, he often privately lamented when he saw the national crisis and the chaos of the imperial government.

古文：见征税无厌，赐与过度，发言叹惜。
现代文：看到征收租税没有限度，赏赐过多，往往发表自己的见解表示痛惜。
English: Seeing that there is no limit to the collection of taxes and excessive rewards, they often express their opinions and express their regrets.

古文：子子贞，武平末假仪同三司。
现代文：他的儿子子贞，武干末年为假仪同三司。
English: His son Zizhen, a military man in his late twenties, is a member of the Third Division.

古文：綦连猛，字武儿，代人也。
现代文：綦连猛，字武儿，代人。
English: Zhai Lian Meng, Zha Wu Er, the representative.

古文：其先姬姓，六国末，避乱出塞，保祁连山，因以山为姓，北人语讹，故曰綦连氏。
现代文：他的祖先本来姓姬，战国末年，因为躲避战乱到塞外，在祁连山居住，就以山为姓，北方人发音不准，就变成了綦连氏。
English: His ancestor was originally surnamed Ji. At the end of the Warring States period, because he fled from the war and lived in Qilian Mountain, he took the mountain as his surname. People in the north were not sure how to pronounce it, so it became the Qilian clan.

古文：父元成，燕郡太守。
现代文：父亲綦连元成，是燕郡太守。
English: His father, Guilian Yuancheng, was the governor of Yan County.

古文：猛少有志气，便习弓马。
现代文：綦连猛年少时就有远大志向，熟习弓马。
English: When he was very young, Qilian had lofty ambitions and was familiar with the bow and arrow.

古文：永安三年，尒朱荣征为亲信。
现代文：永安三年，氽朱荣征召他作为亲信。
English: In the third year of Yongan, Gong Zhu Rong recruited him as a close confidant.

古文：至洛阳，荣被害，即从尔朱世隆出奔建州，仍从尒朱兆入洛。
现代文：到了洛阳后，氽朱荣已经被害，就跟着尔朱世隆逃到建州，随尔朱兆入洛。
English: After arriving in Luoyang, Gong Zhu Rong had already been killed, so he followed Er Zhu Shilong to flee to Jianzhou and entered Luoyang with Er Zhu Zhao.

古文：其年，又从兆讨纥豆陵步藩，补都督。
现代文：这一年，又随尔朱兆讨伐纥豆陵步藩，补授都督。
English: In the same year, he accompanied Zhu Zhao in his campaign to subjugate the Peasling domain, and was awarded the additional post of governor-general.

古文：普泰元年，加征虏将军、中散大夫。
现代文：普泰元年，加授征虏将军、中散大夫。
English: In the first year of Putai, he was awarded the title of Conscript General and Zhongshan Doctor.

古文：猛父母兄弟皆在山东，尒朱京□欲投高祖，谓猛曰： 王以尔父兄皆在山东，每怀不信，尔若不走，今夜必当杀尔，可走去。 猛以素蒙兆恩，拒而不从。
现代文：綦连猛的父母兄弟都在山东，尔朱京缠想投奔高祖，对他说： 你的父母兄弟都在山东，常常不信任你，今天晚上，你如果不逃走，一定会杀了你，可以马上逃离。 綦连猛由于平素蒙受尔朱兆的恩宠，拒不听从京缠的话。
English: Qilian Meng's parents and brothers were all in Shandong. Lzhu Jing pestered him to join Gao Zu and said to him, "Your parents and brothers are all in Shandong. They often don't trust you. Tonight, if you don't run away, they will surely kill you. You can escape immediately." Qilian Meng refused to listen to Beijing's words because he had always been favored by Lzhu Zhao.

古文：京□曰： 我今亦欲去，尔从我不？ 猛又不从。
现代文：京缠说： 现在我也想逃走，你和不和我一起跑? 他又不听。
English: Jingzang said, "Now I want to run away too, won't you run with me?" He didn't listen.

古文：京□乃举曰： 尔不从，我必刺尔。 猛乃从之。
现代文：京缠就举起槊对着他说： 你不顺从的话，我就刺死你。 綦连猛便和他一起逃跑。
English: He held up a crossbow and said to him, "If you don't obey, I will stab you to death."

古文：去城五十余里，即背京□复归尒朱。
现代文：离城走了五十多里，就背离了京缠重新回到氽朱兆部下。
English: After walking more than fifty miles from the city, they turned away from Beijing and returned to Zhu Zhao's subordinates.

古文：及兆败，乃归高祖。
现代文：直到氽朱兆战败才归服高祖。
English: He did not submit to Gaozu until he was defeated by Zhu Zhao.

古文：高祖问曰： 尒朱京□将尔投我，尔中路背去何也？ 猛乃具陈服事之理，不可贰心。
现代文：高祖问他： 氽朱京缠领着你来投奔我，你却在半路上回去了，这是什么缘故? 他详细说明了服事君主的道理，作臣子的不能怀有二心。
English: Gaozu asked him, "What is the reason why Zhu Jing entangled you and led you to come to me, but you went back halfway?" He explained in detail the principle of serving the monarch. A courtier cannot have two hearts.

古文：高祖曰： 尔莫惧，服事人法须如此。 遂补都督。
现代文：高祖说： 你不要怕，作臣子的就应该这样。 于是补任他为都督。
English: Gaozu said, "Don't be afraid, this is how you should be as a courtier," and appointed him as the new governor.

古文：步落稽等起逆，在覆釜山，使猛讨之，大捷，特被赏赉。
现代文：步落稽等人在覆釜山发动叛乱，朝廷派綦连猛去讨伐，大获全胜，特别加以赏赐。
English: The imperial court sent a large number of soldiers to fight against the rebels led by Bu Luojin and others in the vicinity of Busan. They won a great victory and were given a special reward.

古文：元象元年，从高祖向河阳，与周文帝战于邙山。
现代文：元象元年，跟随高祖到河阳，和周文帝在邙山大战。
English: In the first year of Yuan Xiang, he followed Gao Zu to Heyang, and fought with Zhou Wendi in Lushan Mountain.

古文：二年，除平东将军、中散大夫。
现代文：二年，任平束将军、中散大夫。
English: Two years later, he was appointed as General Hiratsuka and Doctor Nakasanzan.

古文：其年，又转中外府帐内都督，赏邙山之功，封广兴县开国君。
现代文：同年，又改任中外府帐内都督，因为邙山的战功，封广兴县开国君。
English: In the same year, he was reappointed as the prefectural governor of Chugai, because of Lushan's war exploits, Guangxing County was founded.

古文：五年，梁使来聘，云有武艺，求访北人，欲与相角。
现代文：元象五年，梁使者来聘问，夸说自己武艺过人，想找北方人较量。
English: In the fifth year of Yuanxiang, Liang Qian came to ask questions, boasting that he was an excellent martial artist and wanted to compete with the northerners.

古文：世宗遣猛就馆接之，双带两鞬，左右驰射。
现代文：世宗派綦连猛到馆舍去接待，各自带了两壶箭比赛骑射，而且还要通过拉强弓比试力气大小。
English: Sect followers rushed to the hall for the reception. They each brought two jars of arrows to compete in the horse archery, and they also had to test their strength by pulling a strong bow.

古文：兼共试力，挽强，梁人引弓两张，力皆三石，猛遂并取四张，迭而挽之，过度。
现代文：梁的使者可以同时拉开两张三石的强弓，綦连猛拿过四张弓放在一起，同时拉开，竟然超过了弓的限度。
English: Liang's emissary could pull apart two three-stone strong bows at the same time, and Yan Lian grabbed four bows and put them together, pulling them apart at the same time, even exceeding the limit of the bow.

古文：梁人嗟服之。
现代文：梁使赞叹不已而心悦诚服。
English: Liang Zhi admired the performance and was deeply impressed.

古文：其年，除抚军将军，别封石城县开国子，食肆州平寇县干。
现代文：这一年，任抚军将军，另封石城县开国子，享受肆州平寇县干禄。
English: In this year, he was appointed as the general of Fuzhou Army, and was also awarded the title of the founder of Shicheng County, and enjoyed the Ganlu of Wuzhou Pingko County.

古文：天保元年，除都督、东秦州刺史，别封雍州京兆郡覆城县开国男。
现代文：天保元年，任都督、束台州刺史，另封雍州京兆郡霸城县开国男。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was appointed as the governor of Taizhou Province, and was also named the founding father of Baecheng County, Yongzhou Province.

古文：从显祖讨契丹，大获户口。
现代文：跟随题担征讨契丹，俘获大量人口。
English: Following the theme, he took on the task of recruiting people to fight against the Khitan and captured a large number of people.

古文：又随斛律敦北征茹茹，敦令猛轻将百骑深入觇候。还至白道，与军相会，因此追蹑，遂大破之。
现代文：又随斛律敦北伐茹茹，斛律敦命他率领一百名骑兵深入敌方探察军情，回来时在白道和大部队会合，按着他们侦察的道路前进而大破敌军。
English: He also accompanied Pelidon to the Northern Warzhu, and Pelidon ordered him to lead a hundred cavalrymen deep into the enemy to investigate the military situation. When he returned, he met the large force at Baidoa, advanced according to their reconnaissance path and defeated the enemy army.

古文：赉帛三百段。
现代文：赏给他绸缎三百匹。
English: He was awarded three hundred silks and satins.

古文：七年，除武□将军、仪同三司。
现代文：七年，任武卫将军、仪同三司。
English: In the seventh year, he was appointed to the post of General Wuwei and the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：九年，转武□大将军。
现代文：九年，改授武卫大将军。
English: Nine years later, he was promoted to General Wuwei.

古文：干明初，加车骑大将军。
现代文：干明初，加封车骑大将军。
English: At the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, Jiafeng became the general of the cavalry.

古文：皇建元年，封石城郡开国伯，寻进爵为君。
现代文：皇建元年，封石城郡开国伯，不久升君爵。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, Fong Shicheng County founded the country, and soon rose to the rank of prince.

古文：二年，除领左右大将军，从肃宗讨奚贼，大捷，获马二千疋，牛羊三万头。
现代文：二年，任领左右大将军，随肃宗讨伐奚贼，大胜，俘获战马两千匹，牛羊三万头。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the leader of the left and right generals, followed Su Zong to fight the bandits, won a great victory, captured two thousand horses, and thirty thousand cattle and sheep.

古文：河清二年，加开府。
现代文：河清二年，加开府。
English: In the second year of Heqing, Kaifu.

古文：突厥侵逼晋阳，□猛将三百骑觇贼远近。
现代文：突厥进犯置彊，朝廷派他领三百骑兵侦察敌军远近。
English: When the Turks attacked, the imperial court sent him with three hundred cavalry to scout the enemy forces.

古文：行至城北十五里，遇贼前锋，以敌□多，遂渐退避。
现代文：走到离城北十五里，和对方的前锋部队遭遇，敌众我寡，且战且退。
English: Fifteen miles north of the city, we encountered the other side's forward troops. We were outnumbered, and we fought and retreated.

古文：贼中有一骁将，超出来□。
现代文：敌军中有一员大将，超出自己的队伍追击。
English: One of the generals in the enemy's army outran his own troops and gave chase.

古文：猛遥见之，即亦挺身独出，与其相对，俯仰之间，刺贼落马，因即斩之。
现代文：綦连猛远远地看到了，挺身而出和他单独交战，片刻之间把他刺落马下，随手杀死了他。
English: Qian Lianmeng saw him from a distance, stepped forward to fight him alone, stabbed him under the horse in an instant, and killed him.

古文：三年，别封武安县开国君，加骠骑大将军。
现代文：越卖三年，另封逮玄逊开国君，加骠骑大将军。
English: Yue sold three years, another seal arrested Xuan Xun, the founding father of the country, and promoted him to cavalry general.

古文：天统元年，迁右□大将军，乃奉世祖□，恒令在嗣主左右，兼知内外机要之事。
现代文：丢蕴元年，升右卫大将军。奉世狙的旨意，经常在太子左右，兼掌内外机要大事。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was promoted to the rank of General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards. In accordance with the will of the world, he was often at the side of the Crown Prince, and was in charge of both internal and external affairs.

古文：三年，除中领军。
现代文：三年，任中领军。
English: For three years, he led the army.

古文：四年，转领军将军，别封义宁县开国君。
现代文：四年，改领军将军，另封义宁县开国君。
English: In four years, he was promoted to general leading the army and given the additional title of Yining County's founding father.

古文：五年，除□省尚书左仆射，余如故。
现代文：五年，任差州省尚书左仆射，其他官职不变。
English: In five years, he was appointed to the position of Shangshu Zuopu Jie in Chizhou Province, and his other official positions remained unchanged.

古文：除□省尚书令、领军大将军，封山阳王。
现代文：后来任并州省尚书令、领军大将军，封山阳王。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Anhui Province, the leader of the army, and the king of Shanyang.

古文：猛自和士开死后，渐预朝政，疑议与夺，咸亦咨□。
现代文：自从和士开死后，养蛆渐渐开始参与朝政，朝中一些疑难不决的事或官员的任免赏罚，都征求他的意见。
English: Since the death of He Shikai, Yao Xuan gradually began to participate in the government of the dynasty, and he was asked for his opinion on some difficult matters or the appointment and dismissal of officials.

古文：赵彦深以猛武将之中颇疾奸佞，言议时有可采，故引知机事。
现代文：在武将当中他能够嫉恶如仇，提出的建议也时有可取之处，所以趟彦遝引荐他掌管机要。
English: Among the warlords, he was able to be envied, and the suggestions he made were sometimes commendable, so it was necessary for Hikone to recommend him to be in charge.

古文：祖珽既出彦深，以猛为赵之党与，乃除光州刺史。
现代文：童旦堑把趟童迳排挤出朝廷后，认为他是赵的党羽，就任命他为光州刺史。
English: After Tong Danzhang ousted Wanzhong Danzhang from the imperial court, he considered him to be Zhao's henchman and appointed him as the new governor of Gwangju.

古文：已发至牛兰，忽有人告和士开被害日猛亦知情，遂被追止。
现代文：他被发派走到牛兰，有人告发说和士开被杀时綦连猛也是知情人，于是朝廷下令追回。
English: He was sent to walk to Niu Lan, and someone reported that when He Shikai was killed, Yan Lian Meng was also an insider, so the court ordered him to be recovered.

古文：还，入内禁留，簿录家口。
现代文：回到京城后，被拘留在禁中，而且逮捕了他全家的人。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was detained under house arrest, and his entire family was arrested.

古文：寻见释，削王爵，止以开府赴州。
现代文：不久又被释放出来，剥夺了王爵，仅以开府的身份到光州上任。
English: He was soon released, stripped of his title, and took office in Gwangju only as the governor.

古文：在任宽惠清慎，吏民称之。
现代文：任刺史期间，对待百姓宽和仁厚，自己清廉自守，受到官吏和百姓的爱戴。
English: During his tenure, he treated the people with generosity and benevolence, kept himself clean and honest, and was loved by officials and the people.

古文：淮阴王阿那肱与猛有旧，每欲携引之，曾有□征诣阙，似欲委寄。韩长鸾等沮难，复除胶州刺史。
现代文：淮阴王阿那肱与他早就相知，常常想提携他，曾经下令征召他去京城，似乎要委以重任，但受到韩长鸾等人的阻挠刁难，改任胶州刺史。
English: King Anaxuan of Huaiyin had known him for a long time and often wanted to ally with him. He once ordered him to be conscripted to the capital, as if he were to be entrusted with a heavy task. However, he was obstructed by Han Changyu and others, and he was replaced as Jiaozhou scribe.

古文：寻征还，令在南兖防捍。
现代文：不久又召回，命他在南兖州驻防。
English: He was soon recalled and ordered to garrison in Nan'anzhou.

古文：后主平阳败还，又征赴邺，除大将军。
现代文：后主从平阳战败归来，又召他到邺，任大将军。
English: After the lord returned from the defeat in Pingyang, he called him to Shao and appointed him as the general.

古文：齐亡入周，寻卒。
现代文：齐亡后降周，不久去世。
English: After Qi's death, Zhou was demoted and died soon after.

古文：元景安，魏昭成五世孙也。
现代文：元景安，魏昭成帝的第五代子孙。
English: Yuan Jing'an, the fifth generation descendant of Emperor Wei Zhaoxing.

古文：高祖虔，魏陈留王。
现代文：高祖元虔是魏陈留王。
English: Gao Zuyuanqian is the Wei Chen Liu Wang.

古文：父永，少为奉朝请。自积射将军为元天穆荐之于尒朱荣，参立孝庄之谋，赐爵代郡公。加将军、太中大夫、二夏、幽三州行台左丞，持节招纳降户四千余家。
现代文：父亲元永，年少时为奉朝请，在任积射将军时元天穆把他推荐给尔朱荣，参预立孝庄皇帝的计谋，因而被赐爵代郡公，加将军、太中大夫、二夏、豳三州行台左丞，持节收纳投降人户四千多家。
English: His father, Yuan Yong, was invited to serve the imperial court when he was young, and when he was appointed as a general, Yuan Tianmu recommended him to Er Zhu Rong and participated in the pre-establishment of Emperor Xiaozhuang's strategy. As a result, he was given the title of deputy county magistrate, plus general, Taizhongdaifu, Erxia, Shanzhou Xingtai Zuojo, and more than 4,000 surrendered households were collected on the festival.

古文：荣又启封永朝那县子，邑三百户，持节南幽州刺史，假抚军将军。
现代文：氽朱荣又奏明皇上封他为朝那县子，食邑三百户，持节南豳州刺史，假抚军将军。
English: Zou Zhu Rong also reported that the emperor had appointed him as the son of Chaonagana County, with 300 households in the food village, the history of the Southern Luzhou, and the general of the Fufu army.

古文：天平初，高祖以为行台左丞，寻除颍州刺史，又为北扬州刺史。
现代文：天平初年，高祖任命他为行台左承，不久任颖州刺史，又任北扬州刺史。
English: In the first year of Tianping, Gao Zu appointed him as the left successor of Xingtaizhou, and soon he was appointed as the governor of Yingzhou and the governor of North Yangzhou.

古文：天保中，征拜大司农卿，迁银青光禄大夫，依例降爵为干乡男。
现代文：天保年间，征入朝中任大司农卿，升任银青光禄大夫，依照规定降为干乡男爵。
English: During the Tenpo era, he was conscripted into the court as the grand secretary of the Minister of Agriculture, promoted to the doctor of the silver Qingguanglu, and reduced to the baron of Ganxiang in accordance with the regulations.

古文：大宁二年，迁金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：大宁二年，升金紫光禄大夫。
English: In the second year of Danying, he was promoted to the position of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：景安沉敏有干局，少工骑射，善于事人。
现代文：景安沉静聪敏，有办事才干。年少时善于骑马射箭，又擅长事奉人。
English: Jing'an is quiet, intelligent, and has the ability to do things. When he was young, he was good at riding and archery, and he was also good at serving others.

古文：释褐尒朱荣大将军府长流参军，加宁远将军，又转荣大丞相府长流参军。
现代文：最初任氽朱荣大将军府长流参军，加宁远将军，又改为尔朱荣大丞相府长流参军。
English: At first, General Zou Zhu Rong joined the army as the head of the prefectural government, and General Kaninyuan joined the army as the head of the prefectural government.

古文：高祖平洛阳，领军娄昭荐补京畿都都督，父永启回代郡公授之，加前将军，太中大夫。
现代文：高祖平定洛阳后，领军娄昭推荐补授京畿都督，他的父亲元永奏明朝廷把代郡公的爵位转授给他，加前将军，太中大夫。
English: After Gaozhu had subdued Luoyang, the leader of the army, Zou Zhao, recommended him to be made the governor of Gyeonggi Province. His father, Yuan Yong So Ming, was conferred the title of acting governor of the county by the imperial court. Gaozhu was also a former general and a doctor of the imperial court.

古文：随武帝西入。
现代文：随魏武帝入西。
English: He followed Emperor Wu of Wei into the West.

古文：天平末，大军西讨，景安临阵自归，高祖嘉之，即补都督。
现代文：天平末年，齐军讨伐西部，景安在阵前归降，高祖嘉赏他，当即补授都督。
English: At the end of the Heian period, the Qi army fought in the western part of the country, and Jing'an surrendered before the battle. Gao Zu Jia praised him and immediately awarded him the post of governor.

古文：兴和中，转领亲信都督。
现代文：兴和年间，改领亲信都督。
English: During the Heungwa era, his cronies were appointed as governors-general.

古文：邙山之役，力战有功，赐爵西华县都乡男，代郡公如故。
现代文：由于在邙山战役中力战有功，赐西华县都乡男，代郡公不变。
English: For his distinguished service in the Battle of Lushan, he was awarded the title of Metropolitan of Xihua County.

古文：世宗入朝，景安随从在邺。
现代文：世宗入朝执政，景安到邺追随他。
English: King Sejong ascended to the throne, and King An succeeded him to the throne.

古文：于时江南□附，朝贡相寻，景安妙闲驰骋，雅有容则，每梁使至，恒令与斛律光、皮景和等对客骑射，见者称善。
现代文：此时江南顺附，朝贡源源不断，景安精于骑射，做事很有规矩，每有梁使者到来，常常让他和斛律光、皮景和等人与客人一起骑马射箭，对他都很赞叹。
English: At this time, the southern part of the Yangtze River followed suit, and the tributes continued to flow. Jing An was good at riding and shooting, and his work was very orderly. Every time a messenger from Liang came, he would often let him and Bao Riguang, Pi Jing and others ride horses and shoot arrows with the guests. They all admired him.

古文：世宗嗣事，启减国封分锡将士，封石保县开国子，邑三百户，加安西将军。又授通州刺史，加镇西将军，转子为伯，增邑通前六百户，余如故。
现代文：世宗即位后，他请求减少土地分赏将士，被封为石保县开国子，食邑三百户，加安西将军，又任通州刺史，加镇西将军，改子爵为伯爵，连同以前的食邑增加到六百户，其他官职依旧。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, he asked for a reduction in the land allotment to the soldiers, and was named the founder of Shibao County, with 300 households in food villages, General Gaanxi, also named Tongzhou Sashih, General Gazenxi, changed the viscount to the count, together with the former food villages increased to 600 households, other official positions remain the same.

古文：天保初，加征西将军，别封兴势县开国伯，带定襄县令，赐姓高氏。
现代文：天保初年，加授征西将军，另封兴势县开国伯，带定襄县县令，赐姓高。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was additionally awarded the title of General of the Western Expedition, and was also given the title of Grand Duke of Xingze County, the title of County Governor of Dingxiang County, and the surname Gao.

古文：三年，从破库莫奚于代川，转领左右大都督，余官并如故。
现代文：天保三年，在代川参与打败库莫奚，改为领左右大都督，其他官职依旧。
English: In the third year of the Tenpo era, he participated in the defeat of Kumo in Daikawa, and became the leader of the left and right grand governors. Other official positions remained the same.

古文：四年，从讨契丹于黄龙，领北平太守。
现代文：四年，在黄龙参与讨伐契且，领北平太守。
English: In four years, he participated in the Yellow Dragon Crusade and led the Beiping Empress Dowager.

古文：后频从驾再破茹茹，迁武□大将军，又转领左右大将军，兼七兵尚书。
现代文：后来多次追随皇帝出征，两次打败面茹军队，升任武卫大将军，又改任左右大将军，兼七兵尚书。
English: Later, he followed the emperor to go to war many times, defeated the Mengru army twice, and was promoted to General Wuwei. He was also promoted to General of the Left and Right, as well as General of the Seven Soldiers.

古文：时初筑长城，镇戍未立，突厥强盛，虑或侵边，仍诏景安与诸军缘塞以备守。
现代文：当时开始修筑长城，边防没有巩固，而变压很强大，朝廷考虑到奎题有时会侵犯边境，就命基塞和几支军队沿着边界驻守防护。
English: At that time, the construction of the Great Wall began, the border defense was not consolidated, and the pressure change was very strong. The imperial court, considering that the Kuiji sometimes violated the border, ordered Kise and several armies to guard and protect along the border.

古文：督领既多，且所部军人富于财物，遂贿货公行。
现代文：将领很多，而手下的士卒往往很富有，就造成了公开的行贿受贿。
English: There are many generals, and their subordinates are often very rich, which has led to open bribery.

古文：显祖闻之，遣使推检，同行诸人赃污狼藉，唯景安纤毫无犯。
现代文：显祖知道后，派人检查追究，许多共事的人都有大量的贪污，惟有景安丝毫没有涉及。
English: After Xianzu found out, he sent someone to investigate and investigate. Many people who worked with him had a lot of corruption, but Jing'an was not involved at all.

古文：帝深嘉叹，乃诏有司以所聚敛赃绢伍百疋赐之，以彰清节。
现代文：皇上非常赞叹，命令有关部门把收缴来的赃物五百匹绢赐给他，来表彰他清廉的品德。
English: The emperor was very impressed and ordered the relevant departments to give him the confiscated stolen goods of five hundred horses, in recognition of his incorruptible character.

古文：又转都官尚书，加仪同三司，食高平郡干，又拜仪同三司。
现代文：又改任都官尚书，加仪同三司，享受高平郡干禄，又授仪同三司。
English: He was also reappointed as the official of the capital, Shangshu, and received the award of the same rank as the three divisions. He also enjoyed the Ganlu of Gaoping County and was awarded the same rank as the three divisions.

古文：干明元年，转七兵尚书，加车骑大将军。
现代文：干明元年，改任七兵尚书，加车骑大将军。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he was reappointed as the general of the seven soldiers and the general of the cavalry.

古文：皇建元年，又兼侍中，驰驿诣邺，慰劳百司，巡省风俗。
现代文：皇建元年，又兼侍中，从驿道兼程到达邺，慰劳百官，巡视各地风土人情。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was also a chamberlain, and traveled from Shandong to Shandong, consoled hundreds of officials, and inspected the customs and customs of various regions.

古文：肃宗曾与□臣于西园燕射，文武预者二百余人。
现代文：卢塞曾经在西园和群臣饮宴射箭，参加的文武官员有二百多人。
English: Luce once shot arrows in the West Park and at a banquet for ministers, attended by more than two hundred civil and military officials.

古文：设侯去堂百四十余步，中的者赐与良马及金玉锦彩等。
现代文：在距大堂一百四十多步的地方设立一个箭靶，凡射中靶心的赏给好马和金玉绸缎。
English: An arrow target was set up a hundred and forty paces from the lobby, and good horses and gold and jade brooches were awarded for hitting the bull's-eye.

古文：有一人射中兽头，去鼻寸余。唯景安最后有一矢未发，帝令景安解之，景安徐整容仪，操弓引满，正中兽鼻。
现代文：有一入射中了兽头，离靶心的兽鼻还有一寸多，这时衹有基安还剩一枝箭没有射出去，皇上让星昼射中兽鼻。他从容地摆好姿势，把弓满满拉开，一箭正中兽鼻。
English: One shot hit the animal's head, and the animal's nose was still more than an inch away from the bull's-eye. At this time, there was still one arrow left for Kian to shoot, and the emperor let Xing Rong shoot the animal's nose. He calmly positioned himself, pulled the bow fully open, and one arrow hit the animal's nose.

古文：帝嗟赏称善，特赉马两疋，玉帛杂物又加常等。大宁元年，加开府。
现代文：皇上赞叹称好，特别加赏给他两匹马、玉器丝绸各其他应得的物品。左空元年，加开府。
English: The emperor was so impressed that he specially rewarded him with two horses, jade and silk, and other deserved items.

古文：二年，转右□将军，寻转右□大将军。
现代文：二年，改任右卫将军，不久又改为右卫大将军。
English: Two years later, he was reassigned to the post of General of the Right Division of the National Guard, and shortly thereafter to the post of Major General of the Right Division of the National Guard.

古文：天统初，判□省尚书右仆射，寻出为徐州刺史。
现代文：天统初年，判并省尚书右仆射，不久出京任徐州刺史。
English: In the first year of the reunification of China, he was awarded the provincial title of Shangshu Rongfei, and soon he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：四年，除豫州道行台仆射、豫州刺史，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：四年，任豫州道行台仆射、速州刺史，加开府仪同三司。
English: In four years, he was appointed as the director of the Yuzhou Road, the director of the Yuzhou Road, the director of the Yuzhou Road, the director of the Yuzhou Road, the director of the Yuzhou Road, the director of the Yuzhou Road, and the director of the Yuzhou Road.

古文：武平三年，进授行台尚书令，刺史如故，封历阳郡王。
现代文：武平三年，升任行台尚书令，刺史依旧，封历阳郡王。
English: In the third year of Wu Ping, he was promoted to the post of Gangtai Shang Shuling, the history is still the same, and he was crowned the king of Liyang County.

古文：景安之在边州，邻接他境，绥和边鄙，不相侵暴，人物安之。
现代文：量老在边境州郡时，舆邻国边境相连，他能够安抚边境，不互相侵掠，百姓安居乐业。
English: When he was in the border counties, the borders of the neighboring countries were connected. He was able to pacify the border, not to invade and plunder each other, and the people lived and worked in peace.

古文：又管内蛮多华少，景安被以维恩，咸得宁辑，比至武平末，招慰生蛮输租赋者数万户。
现代文：管区内蛮人多而坠人少，基叁恩威并举，所以和睦相处，到了盏垩末年，招纳的蛮人缴纳赋税的达到几万户。
English: The number of barbarians in the region is large, but the number of people who have fallen into poverty is small, and the benevolence of the government is at the same time, so they live in harmony. By the end of the year, the number of barbarians recruited to pay taxes reached tens of thousands of households.

古文：六年，征拜领军大将军。
现代文：遣垩六年，征召入朝任领军大将军。
English: He was demobilized for six years and was conscripted into the Imperial Army as a leading general.

古文：入周，以大将军、大义郡开国公率□讨稽胡，战没。
现代文：入固后，以大将军、大义郡开国公率领人马讨伐擅翅，战死。
English: After entering the fortress, he led the people and horses to fight against the enemy with the general and the founding father of Dayi County, and was killed in the battle.

古文：子仁，武平末仪同三司、武□，隋骠骑将军，卒于丹阳太守。
现代文：儿子元仁，武平末年为仪同三司、武卫，隋朝时任骠骑将军，死于丹阳太守任上。
English: The son of Yuan Ren, Wu Ping was the last year of the Yi Tong three divisions, Wu Wei, the Sui Dynasty at the time of the cavalry general, died in Danyang Taishou.

古文：初永兄祚袭爵陈留王，祚卒，子景皓嗣。
现代文：当初元永的兄长元祚继承了陈留王的爵位，元祚死后，儿子元景皓继承。
English: At first, Yuan Yong's elder brother, Yuan Jie, inherited Chen Liu Wang's title, and after Yuan Jie's death, his son, Yuan Jingjie, succeeded.

古文：天保时，诸元帝室亲近者多被诛戮。疏宗如景安之徒议欲请姓高氏，景皓云： 岂得弃本宗，逐他姓，大丈夫宁可玉碎，不能瓦全。 景安遂以此言白显祖，乃收景皓诛之，家属徙彭城。
现代文：天保年间，与皇室关系密切的大多被杀掉，关系较远的，像元景安等人想向皇上请求改姓高，景皓说： 怎么可以丢掉本姓，而随别人的姓氏呢?大丈夫宁为玉碎，不为瓦全。 景安向显祖报告了这些话，景皓被捉住杀掉，家属迁到了彭城。
English: During the Tenpo era, most of those with close ties to the imperial family were killed, while those with more distant ties, such as Yuan Jing'an and others, wanted to petition the emperor to change their surname to Gao. Jing Hui said: "How can you lose your own surname and follow someone else's surname? It's better to be broken than to be whole." Jing An reported these words to Emperor Xianzu. Jing Hui was caught and killed, and his family moved to Pengcheng.

古文：由是景安独赐姓高氏，自外听从本姓。
现代文：因此景安赐姓高，元家其他人都任凭姓了本姓。
English: Therefore, Jing'an gave him the surname Gao, while the rest of the Yuan family kept their original surnames.

古文：永弟种，子豫字景豫，美姿仪，有器干。
现代文：元永弟弟元种的儿子元豫，字景豫，长相俊美有风度，有才干。
English: The younger brother of Yuan Yong, the son of Yuan Zeng, Yuan Yu, was named Jing Yu. He was handsome, graceful and talented.

古文：永安中，羽林监。
现代文：永安年间，在羽林监。
English: During the Yongan era, he worked as a forest inspector.

古文：元颢入洛，以守河内功，赐爵永安君。
现代文：元颢进入洛阳后，因为守河内有功，赐爵永安君。
English: After the Yuan Dynasty entered Luoyang, Yongan was given a knighthood for his contribution to the defense of Hanoi.

古文：后为濮阳郡守。
现代文：后任濮阳太守。
English: He later became the governor of Shenyang.

古文：魏彭城王韶引为开府咨议参军，韶出镇定州，启为定州司马。
现代文：魏彭城王元韶引荐他为开府谘议参军，元韶镇守定州时，奏明皇上任命他为定州司马。
English: The king of Wei and Pengcheng, Yuan Shao, recommended him to join the army as an adviser to the provincial government. When Yuan Shao was in charge of Dingzhou, he was appointed as the Sima of Dingzhou by the emperor.

古文：及景安告景皓慢言，引豫言相应和。
现代文：元景安向皇上告发景皓不敬的言辞时说，元豫也曾表示响应。
English: When Yuan Jing'an reported to the emperor the disrespectful words of Jing Yong, he said that Yuan Yu had also responded.

古文：豫占云： 尔时以衣袖掩景皓口，云 。
现代文：元豫供称： 那时我用衣袖掩着景皓的嘴，说 你不要乱讲话  。
English: Yuan Yu confessed: At that time, I covered Jing Tao's mouth with my sleeve and said, "Don't speak in a disorderly manner."

古文：及问景皓，与豫所列符同，获免。
现代文：再问景皓当时的情景，果然与他所说的相符，因此得以免罪。
English: When asked again about the situation at the time, Jingyao's answer was consistent with what he had said, and he was therefore exonerated.

古文：自外同闻语者数人，皆流配远方。
现代文：其他听到景皓说话的几个人都被流放到了远方。
English: Several other people who heard Jingyao speak were exiled far away.

古文：豫卒于徐州刺史。
现代文：元豫于徐州刺史任上去世。
English: Yuan Yu died in Xuzhou during his term of office.

古文：独孤永业，字世基，本姓刘，中山人。
现代文：独孤永业，字世基，本姓刘，中山人。
English: Solo longevity, the word Shiji, the family name Liu, Zhongshan people.

古文：母改适独孤氏，永业幼孤，随母为独孤家所育养，遂从其姓焉。
现代文：母亲改嫁到独孤氏家，当时永业年纪小而丧父，也跟随着母亲被抚养长大，就随姓独孤。
English: When his mother remarried to a member of the Doko family, Yongye lost his father at a young age. He was raised by his mother and took the family name of Doko.

古文：止于军士之中，有才干，便弓马。
现代文：他生活在士兵当中，有才干，熟悉弓马。
English: He lived among soldiers, was talented, and was familiar with bows and horses.

古文：被简擢补定州六州都督，宿□晋阳。
现代文：被选拔补授为定州六州都督，守卫晋阳。
English: He was selected and awarded as the governor of six prefectures in Dingzhou, guarding Jinyang.

古文：或称其有识用者，世宗与语悦之，超授中外府外兵参军。
现代文：有人称赞他有远见，世宗与他交谈后很高兴，破格提拔他为中外府外兵参军。
English: Some people praised him for his foresight, and Shizong was very happy after talking with him. He was exceptionally promoted to join the army as a foreign soldier.

古文：天保初，除中书舍人，豫州司马。
现代文：天保初年，任中书舍人，豫州司马。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, he was appointed as the book keeper, and became the Henzhou Sima.

古文：永业解书计，善歌舞，甚为显祖所知。
现代文：永业精通文书簿计，能歌善舞，非常受显祖看重。
English: Yongye is proficient in bookkeeping, can sing and dance well, and is highly valued by Xianzu.

古文：干明初，出为河阳行台右丞，迁洛州刺史，又转左丞，刺史如故，加散骑常侍。
现代文：整塱初年，出任周墨行台右丞，升任渔泌刺史，又改任左丞，刺史依旧，加散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of the rectification, he was appointed as Zhoumo Xingdai Rong Rong, promoted to Yu Xing Zhi, and then changed to Rong Rong Zhi, still Rong Zi, plus Sanzhong Zheng.

古文：宜阳深在敌境，周人于黑涧筑城戍以断粮道，永业亦筑镇以抗之。
现代文：宜阳城已经深入敌境之内，周军在黑涧筑起城堡以切断他的粮道，永业也筑城堡和他们对抗。
English: Yiyang City had already penetrated deep into the enemy territory. The Zhou army built a castle in Heihe to cut off his food supply, and Yongye also built a castle to confront them.

古文：治边甚有威信，迁行台尚书。
现代文：他治理边地很有威信，升任行台尚书。
English: His governance of the border areas is very prestigious, and he was promoted to the position of Gangdai Shangshu.

古文：至河清三年，周人寇洛州，永业恐刺史段思文不能自固，驰入金墉助守。
现代文：到了河清三年，周军进犯洛州，永业恐怕刺史段思文不能防守。赶到金墉帮助守城。
English: In the third year of Heqing, Zhou's army invaded Lozhou, and Yongye was afraid that he would not be able to defend the city. He rushed to Jincheng to help defend the city.

古文：周人为土山地道，晓夕攻战，经三旬，大军至，寇乃退。
现代文：对方筑土山挖地道日夜不停地进攻，三十天后，大批援军到来，周军才退去。
English: The other side kept attacking day and night by digging tunnels through the mountains. Thirty days later, a large number of reinforcements arrived, and the Zhou army retreated.

古文：永业久在河南，善于招抚，归降者万计。
现代文：永业长期镇守河南，善于招纳安抚，因此归降的人数以万计。
English: Yongye has been in charge of Henan Province for a long time, and is good at recruiting and appeasing. As a result, the number of people who have returned is in the tens of thousands.

古文：选其二百人为爪牙，每先锋以寡敌□，周人惮之。
现代文：他从中精选出二百人作为自己的得力部下，每次作战都为先锋，常常以寡敌众，周人很害怕。
English: He selected two hundred people from the elite to be his best subordinates. They were the vanguard in every battle and often outnumbered the enemy. Zhou Ren was very afraid.

古文：加仪同三司，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：朝廷加授仪同三司，赏赐很丰厚。
English: The imperial court awarded him the same ceremony as the three divisions, and the reward was very rich.

古文：性鲠直，不交权势。
现代文：永业为人耿直，不和权贵结交。
English: Yongye is a straightforward person and does not make friends with the powerful.

古文：斛律光求二婢弗得，毁之于朝廷。
现代文：斛律光想向他索取两名婢女没有得到，就在朝廷上诋毁他。
English: When Peliguang did not get the two maids he wanted from him, he slandered him in court.

古文：河清末，征为太仆卿，以乞伏贵和代之，于是西境蹙弱，河洛人情骚动。
现代文：河清末年，征召为太仆卿，用乞伏贵和代替他镇守河南，从此西部边防削弱，河洛地区人心骚动。
English: At the end of the Heqing Dynasty, the imperial court transferred him to the position of the Great Servant of the Emperor, allowing him to take over his original duties. As a result, the strength of the western border became poor and weak, and the mood of the people around Helo was turbulent.

古文：武平三年，遣永业取斛律丰洛，因以为北道行台仆射、幽州刺史。
现代文：武乎三年，朝廷派他攻取了斛律丰洛的辖地，因而任命他为北道行台仆射、幽州刺史。
English: In the third year of Wuping, the imperial court sent him to replace Baolu Fongluo, and thus ordered him to go to the North and shoot the history of Yuzhou.

古文：寻征为领军将军。
现代文：不久征入任领军将军。
English: He was soon enlisted as a leading general.

古文：河洛民庶，多思永业，朝廷又以疆埸不安，除永业河阳道行台仆射、洛州刺史。
现代文：河洛地区的百姓都很想念永业，朝廷也考虑到边疆不稳固，任命他为河阳道行台仆射、洛州刺史。
English: The people in the Helo region miss Yongye very much, and the imperial court also considered the instability of the frontier and appointed him as the leader of the Heyang Road and the history of Luozhou.

古文：周武帝亲攻金墉，永业出兵御之，问曰： 是何达官，作何行动？ 周人曰： 至尊自来，主人何不出看客。 永业曰： 客行□速，是故不出。 乃通夜办马槽二千。
现代文：周武帝亲自领兵进攻金墉，永业率军抵抗，向当地人询问军情，说： 对方领兵的是什么样的大官，有什么举动? 周人回答说： 是皇上亲自领兵前来，主人何不出去看一看。 他说： 这次出兵非常匆忙，不出去。 他连夜置办了两千马槽。
English: Zhou Wudi personally led the troops to attack Jinyu, Yongye led the troops to resist, and asked the local people about the military situation, saying: What kind of dignitary is leading the troops on the other side, what kind of action? Zhou people replied: It is the emperor who personally led the troops to come, why does not the owner go out and take a look. He said: This dispatch of troops is very hurried, do not go out. He set up two thousand manger overnight.

古文：周人闻之，以为大军将至，乃解围去。
现代文：周军听说后，以为齐军的大队人马快要来了，就撤军解围而去。
English: After hearing this, the Zhou army thought that the Qi army was about to arrive, so they withdrew to break the siege.

古文：永业进位开府，封临川王。
现代文：永业升为开府，封临川王。
English: Yongye was promoted to Kaifu and given the title of King of Linchuan.

古文：有甲士三万，初闻晋州败，请出兵北讨，奏寝不报，永业慨愤。又闻□州亦陷，为周将常山公所逼，乃使其子须达告降于周。
现代文：他手下有三万士卒，初听说晋州战败的消息，就请求讨伐北周。但奏章被压下，十分愤慨，接着又听说并州也陷落了，自己又被周将常山公逼迫，就派儿子须达到北周请降。
English: He had thirty thousand soldiers under his command. When he first heard the news of the defeat of Jinzhou, he requested to fight against Northern Zhou. However, he was suppressed and was very indignant. Then he heard that Anhui Province had also fallen, and he was also persecuted by Zhou General Changshan, so he sent his son to reach Northern Zhou to ask for a surrender.

古文：周武授永业上柱国。
现代文：周武帝任命他为上柱国。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu appointed him as the head of the pillar country.

古文：宣政末，出为襄州总管。
现代文：宣政末年，出任襄州总管。
English: In the last years of the Xuan Zheng, he served as the governor of Xiangzhou.

古文：大象二年，为行军总管崔彦睦所杀。
现代文：大象二年，被行军总管崔彦睦所杀。
English: In the second year of the elephant, he was killed by the general manager of the march, Cui Yanmu.

古文：傅伏，太安人也。
现代文：傅丛，塞玄人。
English: Fu Cong, Cai Xuan Ren.

古文：父元兴，仪同、北蔚州刺史。
现代文：父亲堡五兴任仪同、韭芦业刺史。
English: The history of the gourd industry dates back to the 5th century, the same year as the founding of the Father's Castle.

古文：伏少从戎，以战功稍至开府、永桥领民大都督。
现代文：仅丛年少时就在军中，由于战功逐渐升任开府、丞摄领民大都督。
English: Only Cong was in the army when he was young, and due to his war service, he was gradually promoted to the post of governor of Kaifu and the post of governor of Minzhu.

古文：周帝前攻河阴，伏自桥夜渡，入守中潬城。
现代文：旦童进攻回坠地区，垡丛领兵从；过夜间渡回，入驻史浬城。
English: Dang Tong attacked the fallback area, from which Gong Cong led the troops; he crossed back at night and settled in Shifeng.

古文：南城陷，被围二旬不下，救兵至。
现代文：壶墟陷落后，又坚守了二十夭，变军赶到救援，厘军退走。
English: After the fall of Jujuy, they held out for another twenty years. A new army came to the rescue, and the Balinese army retreated.

古文：周师还。伏谓行台乞伏贵和曰： 贼已疲弊，愿得精骑二千追击之，可捷也。 贵和弗许。
现代文：他对行台乞伏贵和说： 敌军已经疲敝不堪，你给我两千精锐骑兵去追击，可以大获全胜。 岂和没有答应。
English: He begged for peace, saying, "The enemy's army is exhausted. If you give me two thousand elite cavalrymen to pursue them, I can win a great victory." However, the emperor did not agree.

古文：武平六年，除东雍州刺史，会周兵来逼，伏出战，□之。
现代文：娄垩六年，任塞壅业刺史，赶上固军进攻，铋出兵击退了他们。
English: Six years later, Ren Sai sent troops to repel the attack of the Gu Army.

古文：周克晋州，执获行台尉相贵，以之招伏，伏不从。
现代文：周军攻克晋州，俘虏了行台尉相贵，用他的名义招降傅伏，傅伏没有投降。
English: Zhou's army conquered Jinzhou, captured Captain Xiang Gui, and used his name to invite Fu Bu to surrender. Fu Bu did not surrender.

古文：后主亲救晋州，以伏为行台右仆射。
现代文：鲈亲自领兵救援晋州，任命他为行台右仆射。
English: Zhai personally led the troops to rescue Jinzhou and appointed him as the right-hand man of Xingtao.

古文：周军来掠，伏击走之。
现代文：迩军来进攻，被傅伏击退。
English: The Xing army attacked and was repulsed by the Fu ambush.

古文：周克□州，遣韦孝宽与其子世宽来招伏曰： □州已平，故遣公儿来报，便宜急下。 授上大将军、武乡郡开国公，即给告身，以金马□二酒钟为信。
现代文：周军攻克并州，派韦孝宽和儿子垡堂墓一起劝降，说： 并州已经被攻下，所以请你的儿子来报告，应该见机行事，赶快归降。 并说如果归顺的话，就任命傅丛马上大将军、武乡郡开国公，立即给授官文凭，并用两酒钟的金玛瑙作为凭证。
English: Zhou's army conquered Yingzhou, and sent Wei Xiaokuan and his son Xingtang tomb to persuade him to surrender, saying: Yingzhou has been conquered, so please ask your son to report, you should act at the right time and quickly surrender, and said that if you surrender, you will appoint Fu Congmao as the general, the founding father of Wuxiang County, and immediately give him a diploma, and use the gold agate of two wine clocks as a certificate.

古文：伏不受，谓孝宽曰： 事君有死无贰，此儿为臣不能竭忠，为子不能尽孝，人所疾，愿即斩之，以号令天下。 
现代文：傅伏没有接受，对童直说： 侍奉国君以死相报，不能存有二心。我儿子作臣子不能尽忠，作人子不能行孝，为人所痛恨，希望你马上杀了他，以号令天下。 
English: Fu Bu did not accept, and said to Tong Zhi: "If you serve the sovereign, you must be prepared to die for it. You cannot have two hearts. My son cannot be loyal as a vassal, and cannot show filial piety as a son of man. He is hated by the people. I hope you will kill him immediately and rule the world as your vassal."

古文：周帝自邺还至晋州，遣高阿那肱等百余人临汾召伏。
现代文：皇上自己吃了一片羊的肋骨，把骨头赐给他，说： 骨亲肉疏，所以把骨交给你。 
English: The Emperor himself ate a piece of lamb's rib, and gave him the bone, saying, "Bones are more closely related to flesh, so I am giving you the bone."

古文：伏出军隔水相见，问至尊今在何处。阿那肱曰： 已被捉获，别路入关。 伏仰天大哭，率□入城，于厅事前北面哀号良久，然后降。
现代文：于是把他领到另一处一起吃饭，让他在侍伯邑宿卫，授上仪同，对他说： 如果马上给你一个高官，恐怕归降的人会动心，努力尽忠，不愁得不到富贵。 
English: So he took him to another place to eat together, and let him serve as a night watchman in his uncle's village and give him the ceremony. He said to him, "If I immediately give you a high-ranking official, I'm afraid that the person who surrenders will be moved, try to be loyal, and not worry about getting rich and famous.

古文：周帝见之曰： 何不早下？ 伏流涕而对曰： 臣三世蒙齐家衣食，被任如此，革命不能自死，羞见天地。 周帝亲执其手曰： 为臣当若此，朕平齐国，唯见公一人。 乃自食一羊肋，以骨赐伏，曰： 骨亲肉疏，所以相付。 遂别引之与同食，令于侍伯邑宿□，授上仪同，□之曰： 若即与公高官，恐归投者心动，努力好行，无虑不富贵。 又问前救河阴得何官职。伏曰： 蒙一转，授特进，永昌郡开国公。 周帝谓后主曰： 朕前三年教习兵马，决意往取河阴，正为傅伏能守，城不可动，是以收军而退。
现代文：又问他以前救援霤当时得到什么升赏。他说： 晋升一级。授特进，封永昌郡开国公。 周帝对后主说： 我三年前教练人马，决心要攻下河阴，因为傅伏善于防守，不能攻下，所以退兵。
English: He also asked him what kind of reward he received when he was a rescuer. He said: I was promoted to the first level. I was given a special promotion, and I was given the title of the founding father of Yongchang County. Emperor Zhou said to his successor: I was a coach three years ago, and I was determined to capture Heyin, because Fu Fu was good at defense and could not be captured, so I left the army.

古文：公当时赏授何其薄也。 赐伏金酒□。
现代文：你当时的赏赐怎么这样微薄呢。 赐给堡丛金酒杯。
English: How small was thy reward then, when thou gavest the golden cup into the treasury!

古文：后以为岷州刺史，寻卒。
现代文：后来任命为岷州刺史，不久去世。
English: He was later appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou and died soon after.

古文：齐军晋州败后，兵将罕有全节者。
现代文：齐军在晋州战败后，兵将极少有能保持气节的。
English: After the defeat of the Qi army in Jinzhou, very few soldiers will be able to maintain their composure.

古文：其杀身成仁者，有仪同叱干苟生，镇南兖州，周帝破邺，赦书至，苟生自缢死。
现代文：能够杀身成仁的，有仪同叱干苟生，镇守南兖州，周帝攻破邺都后，下旨赦免齐军将领，韶书下到南兖州，苟生自缢而死。
English: Those who are able to kill themselves and become benevolent, have the ability to live a long life, guarding Nanluozhou. After Emperor Zhou conquered the capital, he issued a decree to pardon the generals of the Qi army, and sent a letter to Nanluozhou, and died a long life.

古文：又有开府、中侍中宦者田敬宣，本字鹏，蛮人也。
现代文：又有开府、中侍中太监田敬宣，本字鹏，是蛮人。
English: There was also Kaifu, the middle attendant of the middle eunuch, Tian Jingxuan, whose real name was Peng, who was a barbarian.

古文：年十四五，便好读书。既为阍寺，伺隙便周章询请，每至文林馆，气喘汗流，问书之外，不暇他语。
现代文：十四五岁，喜好读书，做了太监后，一有机会就向周围的人请教，每次来到文林馆，总是气喘吁吁汗流浃背，除了请教书的知识，不说别的闲话。
English: At the age of fourteen or fifteen, he liked to read. After he became a eunuch, he asked for advice from the people around him whenever he had the chance. Every time he came to Wenlin Museum, he was always panting and sweating. He did not talk about anything other than his knowledge of books.

古文：及视古人节义事，未尝不感激沉吟。
现代文：每当他看到古人节义的事迹，常常为此愤激沉吟。
English: Whenever he saw the righteous deeds of the ancients, he would often mutter indignantly.

古文：颜之推重其勤学，甚加开□，后遂通显。
现代文：看重他的勤学精神，很是开导奖励他，后来终于做了大官。
English: He valued his diligent spirit and rewarded him with enlightenment. Later, he finally became a high-ranking official.

古文：后主之奔青州，遣其西出，参伺动静，为周军所获。问齐主何在，绐云已去。
现代文：后主逃奔青州时，命他到西部侦察敌军动静，被周军擒获问他齐主在何地，他哄骗说已经离开了。
English: When the latter fled to Qingzhou, he was ordered to go to the west to investigate the movement of the enemy army. When he was captured by the Zhou army and asked where his master was, he lied and said that he had already left.

古文：殴捶服之，每折一支，辞色愈厉，竟断四体而卒。
现代文：周军殴打他想让他投降，但每打断他一肢，反而言辞更加激烈，脸色更加坚毅，最后竟打断四肢而死。
English: Zhou Jun beat him to make him surrender, but every time he broke one of his limbs, his words became more fierce, his face more determined, and finally he broke all four limbs and died.

古文：又有雷显和，晋州败后，为建州道行台左仆射。
现代文：还有一人叫雷显和，晋州战败后，时任建州道行台左仆射。
English: There was also a man named Lei Xianhe. After the defeat of Jinzhou, he was appointed as the commander of Jianzhou Road.

古文：周帝使其子招焉，显和禁其子而不受。闻邺城败乃降。
现代文：周帝派显和的儿子去招降，他却把儿子关起来拒不接受，后来听说邺城失陷才投降。
English: Emperor Zhou sent Xianhe's son to invite him to surrender, but he locked up his son and refused to accept. Later, he heard that the city of Handan had fallen, and he surrendered.

古文：后主失□州，使开府纥奚永安告急于突厥他□略可汗。
现代文：后主失去并州后，派开府纥奚永安向突厥他钵略可汗求救。
English: After the loss of the latter and the annexation of the prefecture, he sent the kaifu, Yongan, to seek help from the Turkic Tahrir khan.

古文：及闻齐灭，他□处永安于吐谷浑使下。
现代文：听说查灭亡的消息，继把丞数排在吐谷浑手下。
English: Hearing the news of Cha's demise, he then placed several of his subordinates under Tukuhun's command.

古文：永安抗言曰： 本国既败，永安岂惜贱命，欲闭气自绝，恐天下不知大齐有死节臣，唯乞一刀，以显示远近。 他□嘉其壮烈，赠马七十匹而归。
现代文：丞玉不顺从他的安排，说： 国家已经灭亡了，我怎么能吝惜自己的生命，想绝气自杀，又恐怕天下人不知道大齐有死节的忠臣，希望你杀了我，来昭示给远近的人们。 继很赞赏他的忠烈，送给他七十匹马让他回国
English: Zheng Yu disobeyed his arrangement and said, "The country has already perished, how can I spare my own life, I want to commit suicide, and I am afraid that the world does not know all the loyal retainers who have died, I hope you will kill me and show it to people near and far.

古文：高保宁，代人也，不知其所从来。
现代文：高保宁，代州人，不知他由何地迁来。
English: Gao Baoning, a native of Daizhou, I don't know where he moved from.

古文：武平末，为营州刺史，镇黄龙，夷夏重其威信。
现代文：武平末年，任营州刺史，镇守黄龙，夷人和汉人都很看重他的威信。
English: In the last years of Wu Ping, he was appointed as the governor of Yingzhou, the town guard of Huanglong, and the barbarians and Han people all valued his prestige.

古文：周师将至邺，幽州行台潘子晃征黄龙兵，保宁率骁锐□契丹、靺羯万余骑将赴救。
现代文：周军将要攻打到邺，幽州行台潘：塑从童垄征调军队，蝗率领精锐连同多过、麸塑骑兵一万多人去救援。
English: Zhou's army was about to attack Shao, Yuzhou marched to Taipan: Shao recruited and transferred troops from Tongluo; Locusts led the elite together with more than ten thousand of Shao's cavalry to the rescue.

古文：至北平，知子晃已发蓟，又闻邺都不守，便归营。
现代文：到了北平，知道子晃已经去了蓟州，又听说邺都已经失守，就率领人马返回营业。
English: When he arrived in Beiping, he knew that Zikang had gone to Ganzhou, and heard that Ganzhou had been lost, so he led his men back to business.

古文：周帝遣使招慰，不受□书。
现代文：且童派人来慰问招安，保宁拒不接受韶书。
English: Moreover, Tong sent someone to offer condolences and comfort, but Boryeong refused to accept the letter.

古文：范阳王绍义在突厥中，上表劝进，范阳署保宁为丞相。
现代文：范阳王高绍义逃至突厥，他上表章请范阳王继任帝位，高绍义任命他为丞相。
English: Fan Yang Wang Gao Shao Yi fled to Turkey. He asked Fan Yang Wang to succeed to the throne, and Gao Shao Yi appointed him as chancellor.

古文：及卢昌期据范阳城起兵，保宁引绍义集夷夏兵数万骑来救之。至潞河，知周将宇文神举已屠范阳，还据黄龙，竟不臣周。
现代文：卢旦趋占据莲腥城起兵，蝗引纽盏会集夷选军队几万人赶来救助，到潞河时，听说北周大将宇文神举已经屠减范阳，只好领人马退回，割据黄龙，最终也没有投降北周。
English: Lutan tended to occupy Lianfei City and raised an army. Locusts led the New Margin Society to gather tens of thousands of I Ching troops to come to the rescue. When they arrived at the Wei River, they heard that the North Zhou general Uwen Shenhu had already slaughtered Fan Yang. They had to lead the people back. According to Huanglong, they eventually did not surrender to the North Zhou.

古文：史臣曰：皮景和等爰自霸基，策名戎幕、间关夷险，迄于末运，位高任重，咸遂本诚，亦各遇其时也。
现代文：史臣曰：皮景和等人从北齐建国之初，就跻身军旅之间，历尽艰险，到灭亡前，官高权重，都能实现自己的忠诚，也算是各遇其时。
English: Shichen said: from the beginning of the founding of North Qi, Pijing and others have been among the military brigades, have experienced hardships, and before their demise, high-ranking officials can realize their loyalty, and it is also considered to be the right time.

古文：傅伏之徒，俱表忠节，不然则丹青简册安可贵乎？
现代文：像傅伏之类，都能够尽忠尽节，否则也不会名标青史了。
English: Like Fu Fu and the like, they can be loyal to the end, otherwise they will not be famous.

古文：赞曰：唯此诸将，荣名是保，不愆不忘，以斯终老。
现代文：赞曰：这些将领，保全荣誉和名声，没有过错又不忘忠君报国，凭此而终老一生。
English: Zang said, "These generals have preserved their honor and reputation, served the country without fault and without forgetting to be loyal to the king, and have thus been able to live a long life."

古文：傅子之辈，逢兹不造，未遇烈风，谁知劲草。
现代文：傅子等人，时逢不幸，未遇疾风。难知劲草。
English: Fu Zi and others, in times of misfortune, did not encounter a gale. It is difficult to know the strength of the grass.

