古文：胡充卢汾来君绰传病滕庭俊张思恭蝗冷蛇李揆
现代文：胡充卢汾来君绰传病滕庭俊张思恭蝗冷蛇李揆
English: Hu Chun, Lu Xun, Lai Jun, Zhen Ting, Jun Zhang, Sikyong, Locust, Cold Snake, Li Yao

古文：主簿虫朱牙之树蚓木师古
现代文：主簿虫朱牙之树蚓木师古
English: The main book of the Tree of the Worm's Tooth and the Tree of the Woodcarver

古文：胡充
现代文：胡充
English: Hu Zheng

古文：宋豫章胡充，元嘉五年秋夕，有大蜈蚣长二尺，落充妇与妹前，令婢挟掷。
现代文：南北朝宋国豫章人胡充，元嘉五年秋天的一个晚上，有只二尺长的大蜈蚣，落在她妻子和妹妹前边。
English: One evening in the autumn of the fifth year of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, there was a two-foot-long giant salamander that landed in front of her wife and sister.

古文：婢裁出户，忽睹一姥，衣服臭败，两目无精。
现代文：胡充便让女仆挟起来扔出去。女仆刚出门，忽然看见一个老太太，衣服又臭又破，两眼无珠。
English: The maid had just left the house when she suddenly saw an old lady, her clothes smelly and torn, her eyes beadless.

古文：到六年三月，阖门时患，死亡相继。
现代文：到元嘉六年三月，他的全家人都患上流行病，相继死去。
English: In March of the sixth year of Yuan Jia's reign, his entire family fell ill with an epidemic and died one after another.

古文：卢汾
现代文：卢汾
English: Lu Wei

古文：《妖异记》曰：夏阳卢汾字士济，幼而好学，昼夜不倦。
现代文：《妖异记》中说，夏阳人卢汾，字士济，自幼好学，昼夜不知疲倦。
English: In "The Tale of the Weird," it is said that Xia Yang people are good at reading and writing, good at learning from an early age, and tireless day and night.

古文：后魏庄帝永安二年七月二十日，将赴洛，友人宴于斋中。
现代文：后魏庄帝永安二年七月二十日，因他要去洛阳，友人便在书斋中宴请他。
English: On July 20th of the second year of Emperor Yongan of the Later Wei Zhuang Dynasty, because he was going to Luoyang, a friend invited him to a banquet in his study.

古文：夜阑月出之后，忽闻厅前槐树空中，有语笑之音，并丝竹之韵。
现代文：夜深月出之后，忽然听到厅前老槐树的空洞中，有谈笑的声音，并有乐器吹奏的曲子。
English: In the dead of night, after the moon had risen, I suddenly heard the sound of conversation and the music of musical instruments in the hollow of the old elm tree in front of the hall.

古文：数友人咸闻，讶之。
现代文：几个朋友都听到了，感到十分惊讶。
English: Several friends heard it and were very surprised.

古文：俄见女子衣青黑衣，出槐中，谓汾曰： 此地非郎君所诣，奈何相造也？ 
现代文：不一会儿看见一个身穿青黑色衣裳的女子，从槐树洞中走出来，对卢汾说： 此地不是郎君应当来的，为何要到这里来呢？ 
English: Soon after, he saw a woman in a blue and black dress emerge from the eucalyptus grotto and say to Lu Yao: "This is not where my lord should have come from, why did he come here?

古文：汾曰： 吾适宴罢，友人闻此音乐之韵，故来请见。 
现代文：卢汾道： 我刚刚参加完宴会，朋友们听到这里的音乐，因此来观看。 
English: Lu Wei: I just finished attending a banquet, and my friends heard the music here, so they came to watch.

古文：女子笑曰： 郎君真姓卢耳。 
现代文：女子笑道： 郎君真是姓卢呀！ 
English: Woman laughs: My husband's surname is really Lu!

古文：乃入穴中。
现代文：说完便进入洞中。
English: After saying this, he went into the cave.

古文：俄有微风动林，汾叹讶之，有如昏昧。
现代文：不一会儿便有微风吹动了树林，卢汾很惊讶，又觉得有些昏暗眩晕。
English: In a short time, a breeze blew through the woods. Lu Yao was surprised and felt a bit dizzy.

古文：及举目，见宫宇豁开，门户迥然。
现代文：待举目一望，只见一座宫殿在眼前豁然出现，门窗明亮深远。
English: When you look up, a palace suddenly appears in front of your eyes. The doors and windows are bright and far-reaching.

古文：有一女子衣青衣，出户谓汾曰： 娘子命郎君及诸郎相见。 
现代文：有一个穿青衣的女子，出门来对卢汾道： 娘子要与郎君和各位公子相见。 
English: A woman in a blue dress came out of the house and said to Lu Xun: "My daughter wants to meet your son-in-law and your sons.

古文：汾以三友俱入，见数十人各年二十余，立于大屋之中，其额号曰 审雨堂 。
现代文：于是卢汾和三位朋友都进了宫殿。只见里面有几十人，年龄都在二十多岁，站立在大厅。大厅的匾额上写着 审雨堂 。
English: So Lu Wei and his three friends entered the palace. There were dozens of people inside, all in their twenties, standing in the hall. On the placard of the hall was written "Court of Rain."

古文：汾与三友历阶而上，与紫衣妇人相见。
现代文：卢汾与三友人登阶而上，去与紫衣妇人相见。
English: Lu Wei and his three friends climbed up the stairs to meet the woman in purple.

古文：谓汾曰： 适会同宫诸女，歌宴之次，闻诸郎降重，不敢拒，因此请见。 
现代文：那紫衣妇人对卢汾道： 刚才正同宫中的各位女子聚会，正在歌舞饮宴之时，听说各位公子到来，不敢拒之门外，因此请来一见。 
English: The woman in purple said to Lu Wei, "Just now, I was having a gathering with all the women in the palace. At the time of the song and dance banquet, I heard that you gentlemen were coming, and I didn't dare to turn you away, so please come and see me.

古文：紫衣者乃命汾等就宴。
现代文：紫衣妇人便让请卢汾等就宴。
English: The woman in purple then invited Lu Yao and others to the banquet.

古文：后有衣白者、青黄者，皆年二十余，自堂东西阁出，约七八人，悉妖艳绝世。
现代文：后来又有着白衣的、着青黄色衣服的女子，全都二十多岁，从大厅的东西阁出来，约七八个人，一色妖艳绝色之女子。
English: Later, there was a line of white-clad, blue-and-yellow-clad women, all in their twenties, coming out of the east and west wings of the hall. There were about seven or eight of them, all stunningly beautiful women.

古文：相揖之后，欢宴未深，极有美情。忽闻大风至，审雨堂梁倾折，一时奔散。
现代文：卢汾突然醒来，只见院中的古槐，很粗的树枝被大风刮断，而且树也被连根拔倒。
English: Lu Yao suddenly woke up, only to see Gu Yao in the courtyard, very thick branches were broken by the strong wind, and the tree was uprooted.

古文：汾与三友俱走，乃醒。既见庭中古槐，风折大枝，连根而堕。因把火照所折之处，一大蚁穴，三四蝼蛄，一二蚯蚓，俱死于穴中。
现代文：于是用灯火去照古树折断的地方，只见那里有一个很大的蚂蚁洞，三四只蝼蛄，一两条蚯蚓，都已死在洞中。卢汾对三位朋友道： 奇怪呀！
English: So he used a lamp to illuminate the place where the ancient tree was broken, only to see a large ant hole there. Three or four earthworms, one or two earthworms, had all died in the hole. Lu Wei said to the three friends: It's strange!

古文：汾谓三友曰： 异哉，物皆有灵，况吾徒适与同宴，不知何缘而入。 
现代文：真是万物都有神灵。我们刚才还与她们一起欢宴的，不知是从哪里进去的？ 
English: It's true that everything has a spirit. We were just feasting with them, and I don't know where they came from.

古文：于是及晓，因伐此树，更无他异。
现代文：于是到了早晨便开始砍伐此树，但是再也没有发生什么奇怪的事。
English: So in the morning they began to cut down the tree, but nothing strange happened again.

古文：来君绰
现代文：来君绰
English: Come on, come on

古文：隋炀帝征辽，十二军尽没。
现代文：隋炀帝征伐辽国，十二支军队全被消灭，总管来护因此获罪被处死。
English: The Sui and Qian Dynasties conquered Liao Province, and all twelve armies were wiped out. As a result, the commander-in-chief was convicted and executed.

古文：总管来护坐法受戮，炀帝尽欲诛其诸子。君绰忧惧，连日与秀才罗巡、罗逖、李万进，结为奔友，共亡命至海州。
现代文：隋炀帝还要斩尽来护所有的儿子，来君绰十分担忧害怕，连日与秀才罗巡、罗逖、李万杰结为逃伴，一起向海州逃去。
English: Emperor Sui Xuan also had to do his utmost to protect all of his sons. Lai Junpo was very worried and afraid, and for several days he and the talented Luo Jun, Luo Yao, and Li Wanjie became fugitives and fled to Haizhou together.

古文：夜黑迷路，路旁有灯火，因与共顿之。
现代文：有一天夜里迷路，正巧发现路旁有灯火，便都停下来。
English: One night, he got lost and happened to find a light on the side of the road, so he stopped.

古文：扣门数下，有一苍头迎拜。
现代文：敲了几下门，有一个仆人出来迎接。
English: After a few knocks on the door, a servant came out to meet them.

古文：君绰因问，此是谁家。
现代文：来君绰便问道： 这是谁家？ 
English: Lai Junpiao asked: Whose house is this?

古文：答曰： 科斗郎君姓威，即当府秀才也。 
现代文：那仆人回答说： 无官君子姓威，是本府的秀才。 
English: The servant replied, "There is no official gentleman with the surname of Wei, he is a talented person in this government.

古文：遂启门，门又自闭。
现代文：于是开门，他们进去后门又自动关闭。
English: So he opened the door, they went in and the back door closed automatically.

古文：敲中门曰： 蜗儿今有四五个客。 
现代文：那仆人又敲一个中门叫道： 蜗儿，现在来了四五个客人。 
English: The servant knocked again at the middle door and called out, "Hush, there are four or five guests here."

古文：蜗儿耶又一苍头也。
现代文：蜗儿，是又一个仆人。
English: Oh, it's another servant.

古文：遂开门，秉烛引客，就馆客位，床榻茵褥甚备。
现代文：于是蜗儿开门，端着蜡烛给客人领路，送他们到馆舍住下，床上的被褥都很齐全。
English: So she opened the door, led the way to the guests with a candle, and sent them to live in the guesthouse, where the bedding was complete.

古文：俄有一小童持烛自中出门，曰： 六郎子出来。 
现代文：不一会儿有一个小童手持蜡烛从中门出来，说： 六郎子出来了。 
English: Soon after, a child holding a candle came out of the middle door and said, "Rokuroko has come out."

古文：君绰等降阶见主人。
现代文：来君绰等下台阶去会见这里的主人。
English: Come and wait downstairs to meet the owner.

古文：主人辞采朗然，文辩纷错，自通姓名曰： 威污蠖。 
现代文：主人谈吐爽朗，机敏善辨，自报姓名叫威污蠖。
English: The owner is a cheerful conversationalist, quick-witted and discriminating. He gave his name as Wei Zhao Jun.

古文：叙寒温讫，揖客由阼阶，坐曰： 污蠖忝以本州乡赋，得与足下同声。
现代文：相互寒暄后，便站在东阶揖让客人入堂。入坐后说：污蠖很惭愧参加了本州的乡试，因而得到和足下相同的秀才名声。
English: After exchanging greetings, he stood on the east steps of the hall to let the guests enter the hall. After sitting down, he said: "I am very ashamed to have participated in my home state's township test, and thus gained the same reputation as the talent under my feet.

古文：青霄良会，殊是忻愿。 
现代文：深夜相紧，正是我非常欣喜盼望的。 
English: A late-night clinch is exactly what I'm looking forward to.

古文：即命酒洽坐，渐至酣畅，谈谑交至，众所不能对。
现代文：于是就摆酒围坐共饮。渐渐地喝到酣畅淋漓的状态，然而他仍是谈笑风生，其他人谁也不能答对。
English: So they sit around and drink. Gradually, they drink until they are drunk, but they still talk and laugh, and no one else can answer correctly.

古文：君绰颇不能平，欲以理挫之，无计。
现代文：来君绰很不服气，想在道理上挫败他，可又没什么好办法。
English: Lai Junpiao was very unconvinced and wanted to defeat him on the grounds, but there was nothing he could do.

古文：因举觞曰： 君绰请起一令，以坐中姓名双声者，犯罚如律。 
现代文：于是举杯道： 君绰请求起一酒令，令中的字必须是坐中人的姓名，而且有两个字的声母必须相同。 
English: So he raised his glass and said, "Junpo requests a toast, and the first letter of the toast must be the name of the person sitting in the middle, and the first letters of the two words must be the same."

古文：君绰曰： 威污蠖。 
现代文：他出令道： 威污蠖。
English: He gave the order: "Deter and defile."

古文：实讥其姓。众皆抚手大笑，以为得言。
现代文：这其实是在讥讽他的姓，众人都拍手大笑，以为他说得很妙。
English: It was actually a play on his surname, and everyone clapped their hands and laughed, thinking he'd said it brilliantly.

古文：及至污蠖，改令曰： 以坐中人姓为歌声，自二字至三字。
现代文：等轮到威污蠖时，他改令道： 令间必须以坐中人的姓为歌曲和声，并且由二个字增加到三个字。 
English: When it was Mr. Wei's turn to speak, he changed the order to say, "The last name of the person sitting in the middle must be used as the harmony of the song, and the number of words must be increased from two to three."

古文：令曰： 罗李，罗来李。 
现代文：他出令道： 罗李，罗来李。 
English: He gave the order: Luo Li, Luo Lai Li.

古文：众皆惭其辩捷。
现代文：大家都因为他的敏捷善辨而感羞愧。
English: Everyone was ashamed of his quick wit.

古文：罗巡又问： 君风雅之士。足得自比云龙，何玉名之自贬耶？ 
现代文：罗巡问道： 君乃风雅之士，完全可以自比云龙，为什么起名要自贬呢？ 
English: Luo Chuan asked: You are a man of elegance, you can completely compare yourself to a dragon, why do you have to belittle yourself?

古文：污蠖曰： 仆久从宾兴，多为主司见屈，以仆后于群士，何异尺蠖于污池乎？ 
现代文：威污蠖道： 我很早就参加乡试，然而多次被主考官压制，把我排列在众人之后，这与尺蠖被压在污池中有什么两样呢？ 
English: Wei Zhaojuan said: I took part in the village test very early, but I was repeatedly suppressed by the chief examiner, and I was ranked behind everyone else. How is this different from the shakuhachi being crushed in the cesspool?

古文：巡又问： 公华宗，氏族何为不载？ 
现代文：罗巡又问： 你既是显贵宗族的后人，可是书上为什么没记载你的氏族呢？ 
English: Luo Guan also asked: Since you are the descendant of a noble family, why is there no record of your clan in the book?

古文：污蠖曰： 我本田氏，出于齐威王，亦犹桓丁之类，何足下之不学耶？ 
现代文：威污蠖道： 我本来姓田，是齐威王的后代，也就像齐桓公的后人姓桓一样，足下为何这般不学无术啊？ 
English: Wei Zhao: My original surname was Tian. I am a descendant of King Qi Wei, just like the descendants of King Qi Huan were surnamed Huan. Why are my feet so uneducated and unskilled?

古文：既而蜗儿举方丈盘至，珍羞水陆，充溢其间。君绰及仆，无不饱饫。
现代文：接着蜗儿端着一个一丈见方的盘子上来，山珍海味，摆得满满的，来君绰和仆人等，无不吃得饱胀。
English: Then the donkey came with a plate that was a foot high and a foot square. It was full of mountain and sea delicacies. The king and his servants ate until they were full.

古文：夜阁彻烛，连榻而寝。
现代文：夜间阁中撤去烛火，连床而睡。
English: At night, remove the candlelight from the gazebo and sleep with the bed.

古文：迟明叙别，恨怅俱不自胜。
现代文：第二天很晚才起来道别，大家离别之情惘怅不已。
English: The next day, I got up very late to say goodbye, and everyone was in the mood to leave.

古文：君绰等行数里，犹念污蠖。
现代文：来君绰等人已经走出去几里路了，还在思念威污蠖，于是又返回来看他。
English: Lai Junchao and the others had already walked several miles and were still thinking about Wei Zhao Yao, so they came back to see him.

古文：复来，见昨所会之处，了无人居。唯污池边有大螾，长数尺，又有癱螺丁子，皆大常有数倍。
现代文：只见昨日所宿之处，根本无人居住，只是在污水池边有一条大蚯蚓，有几尺长，还有些幼毛虫和幼田螺，也都比平常的大几倍。
English: I only saw the place where I stayed yesterday, which was completely uninhabited, except that there was a large dragonfly on the edge of the cesspool, which was several feet long, as well as some caterpillars and young snails, which were several times larger than usual.

古文：方知污蠖及二竖，皆此物也。
现代文：此时才知道原来威污蠖和两个仆人，全是此物。
English: It was only at this point that it became clear that it was this object that originally contained the defiled donkey and the two servants.

古文：遂共恶昨宵所食，各吐出青泥及污水数升。传病
现代文：于是大家都恶心起昨夜吃的东西，每个都吐出好几升污泥浊水。传病
English: As a result, everyone got nauseous and vomited several liters of sludge and salty water from what they had eaten last night.

古文：隋炀帝大业末年，洛阳人家中有传尸病，兄弟数人，相继亡殁。
现代文：隋炀帝大业末年，洛阳有户人家患上传尸病。兄弟几个，相继死去。
English: In the last years of the Sui Dynasty, a family in Luoyang suffered from post-mortem disease. Several brothers died one after another.

古文：后有一人死，气犹未绝，家人并哭。
现代文：后来又有一人要死，还没断气，家人一起痛苦起来。
English: Later, another person was about to die, still breathing, and the family began to suffer together.

古文：其弟忽见物自死人口中出，跃入其口，自此即病，岁余遂卒。
现代文：他的弟弟忽然看见有一个东西从死人的口中跳出来，跳进自己的口中。从此他就病了，过了一年多就死去。
English: His brother suddenly saw something jump out of the dead man's mouth and into his own, and he fell ill and died more than a year later.

古文：临终，谓其妻曰： 吾疾乃所见物为之害。吾气绝之后，便可开我脑喉，视有何物，欲知其根本。 
现代文：临终时，他对妻子说： 我的病就是见到的那个东西害的，我死之后，就可以割开我脑和喉，看看有什么东西，要弄清楚那东西究竟是什么。 
English: At the end of his life, he said to his wife: My illness was caused by the thing I saw. After I die, I can cut my head and throat to see what is there, to find out what that thing is.

古文：言终而死。
现代文：说罢便死了。
English: Say the word and you're dead.

古文：弟子依命开视，脑中得一物，形如鱼，而并有两头，遍体悉有肉鳞。
现代文：他的弟子依据他生前的嘱托开脑验看，结果从脑中得到一物，形状如鱼，但并排长了两个头。全身长满肉鳞。
English: His disciple, at his behest, performed an open-brain examination, and as a result, obtained from the brain an object shaped like a fish, but with two heads growing side by side. The whole body was covered with scales.

古文：弟子致钵中，跳跃不止。
现代文：弟子把它放在钵中，跳跃不止。
English: The disciple put it in a cocoon, and it kept jumping.

古文：试以诸味致中，虽不见食，悉须臾皆成水，诸毒药因皆随销化。
现代文：试探着把各种各样食物投给它，虽不见它吃，可一会儿全都化成了水。各种毒药也都能化解。
English: He tried throwing all kinds of food to it, but although it did not eat, it all turned into water in a short time. All kinds of poisons can also be dissolved.

古文：时夏中蓝熟，寺众如水次作靛青。一人往，因以小靛致钵中，此物即遽奔驰。
现代文：当时已是盛夏，蓝草成熟了。寺中的僧人们到水边去制作靛青，一个弟子也去了，他把一小块靛青放进钵中，此物便立即在钵中急速地奔跑起来。
English: It was midsummer, and the bluegrass was ripe. The monks of the temple went to the water's edge to make bitumen. A disciple also went there. He put a small piece of bitumen into the crucible, and the thing immediately began to run rapidly in the crucible.

古文：须臾间，便化为水。
现代文：过了一会儿，此物又化成水。
English: After a while, it turns back into water.

古文：传靛以疗噎。
现代文：相传靛青可以治疗噎病。
English: According to legend, indigo can cure rickets.

古文：滕庭俊
现代文：滕庭俊
English: Teng Tingjun

古文：文明元年，毗陵滕庭俊患热病积年。每发，身如火烧，数日方定。名医不能治。
现代文：唐睿宗文明元年，毗陵人滕庭俊患有热病，他得此病已多年，每次发病，身如火烧，几天之后才能安定下来，请名医也治不好。
English: In the first year of Tang Ruizong's civilization, Teng Tingjun, a resident of Viling, suffered from fever. He had been suffering from this disease for many years. Every time he fell ill, his body burned like fire. It took him a few days to settle down, and it was not possible to cure him by calling a famous doctor.

古文：后之洛调选，行至荥水西十四五里，天向暮，未达前所，遂投一道傍庄家。
现代文：后来去洛阳听候调迁，行至荥水西面十四五里地时，天色渐晚，可是还没走到前面的投宿地，于是就投到路旁的一个庄户人家。
English: Later, he went to Luoyang to wait for the transfer, and when he traveled to the west side of Surabaya, it was getting late, but he had not yet reached the previous lodging place, so he went to a farmer's house on the side of the road.

古文：主人暂出，未至。庭俊心无聊赖，因叹息曰： 为客多苦辛，日暮无主人。 
现代文：主人暂时出去还没回来，滕庭俊心中没有寄托，便叹息道： 为客多苦辛，日暮无主人。 
English: The host had temporarily left and had not yet returned, and Teng Tingjun had no trust in his heart, so he sighed: It's so hard to be a guest, there's no host at night.

古文：即有老父，鬓发疏秃，衣服亦弊，自堂西出。拜曰： 老父虽无所解，而性好文章。
现代文：随即有一老翁，鬓发已稀疏，衣服也很破旧，从堂屋的西侧走出来，施礼道： 老夫虽然对你的诗句不理解，但我向来喜欢文章。
English: Then an old man with thinning hair and shabby clothes came out from the west side of the hall and said, "Although I don't understand your poetry, I've always liked articles.

古文：适不知郎君来，止与和且耶连句次。闻郎君吟 为客多苦辛，日暮无主人 ，虽曹丕门客，子常畏人，不能过也。
现代文：刚才不知你来，只是与和且耶在那里连句，听到你吟咏 为客多苦辛，日暮无主人 ，即使是曹丕的门客子常、畏人，也比不上啊！
English: Just now, I didn't know you were coming, I was just chatting with you. Hearing you sing, "It's so hard to be a guest, there's no master at night," even if you're a guest of Cao Pi, you're so shy, it's incomparable!

古文：老父与和且耶，同作浑家门客，虽贫亦有斗酒，接郎君清话耳。 
现代文：老夫与和且耶，同为浑家的门客，虽然很穷也有斗酒，愿接你去清谈清谈。 
English: The old man and Kazuchiya, both of whom are guests of the Hun family, although they are very poor, also have a drink fight, and are willing to pick you up for a chat.

古文：庭俊甚异之，问曰： 老父住止何所？ 
现代文：滕庭俊觉得很奇怪，便问道： 老人家住在何处 ？
English: Teng Tingjun felt very strange and asked: Where does the old man live?

古文：老父怒曰： 仆忝浑家扫门之客，姓麻名来和，行一。君何不呼为麻大。 
现代文：老翁生气地道： 很惭愧，我乃浑家的扫门之客，姓麻名来和，排行第一，你何不呼我为麻大？ 
English: The old man said angrily, "I am very ashamed. I am the guest who sweeps the door of the Hun family. My last name is Asama, and I rank first. Why don't you call me Asama?"

古文：庭俊即谢不敏，与之偕行。
现代文：滕庭俊立即向老者道歉，说自己愚顿不敏，于是便随老翁同去。
English: Teng Tingjun immediately apologized to the old man, saying that he was stupid and insensitive, so he went with the old man.

古文：绕堂西隅，遇见二门，门启，华堂复阁甚奇秀。馆中有樽酒盘核，麻大揖让庭俊同坐。
现代文：绕过堂屋西角，看见二个门，门开，只见里面是华丽的堂屋、回环的廊阁十分奇异秀丽，舍中备有杯盘酒菜，麻大让请滕庭俊一起坐下。
English: Passing around the west corner of the hall, I saw two doors. When the doors opened, I saw that inside was a gorgeous hall, and the cloistered corridor was very strange and beautiful. There were cups and plates of wine and vegetables in the hall. I asked Ma Da to invite Teng Tingjun to sit down together.

古文：良久，中门又有一客出，麻大曰： 和至矣。 
现代文：过了些时，从中门又出来一个人，麻大说： 和且耶来了。 
English: After a while, another person came out from the middle gate and said, "Here comes Harmony."

古文：即降阶揖让坐。
现代文：便走下台阶揖让入座。
English: He then walked down the steps and gave up his seat.

古文：且耶谓麻大曰。适与君欲连句，君诗题成未。
现代文：和且耶对麻大说： 刚才想要和你连句，你的诗还没有作出来呀？ 
English: And Katya said to Asada: I wanted to have a couplet with you just now, but your poem hasn't been written yet?

古文：麻大乃书题目曰：《同在浑家平原门馆连句》一首，予已为四句矣。
现代文：麻大便一边写题目一边说： 《同在浑家平原门馆连句》一首，我已成四句了。 
English: While writing the title, Ma Turd said, "I have written four sentences in one poem, "Together at the Hunjia Plain Gate Pavilion."

古文：麻大诗曰： 自与浑家邻，馨香遂满身。
现代文：麻大吟咏道： 自与浑家邻，馨香遂满身。
English: Madaiginza-dori Street: Since it is adjacent to Hunka, it is filled with the fragrance of incense.

古文：无心好清静，人用去灰尘。
现代文：无心好清静，人用去灰尘。
English: People use dust remover when they don't want to be clean.

古文：仆作四句成矣。 
现代文：我作的四句已成了。 
English: The four sentences I wrote have come to fruition.

古文：且耶曰： 仆是七言，韵又不同，如何？ 
现代文：和且耶道： 我是七言，韵也不同，你看行不行？ 
English: And Katya said: I am seven words, the rhyme is also different, can you see it?

古文：麻大曰： 但自为一章，亦不恶。 
现代文：麻大道： 自成一章，也不坏么。 
English: Ma Dao: It's not bad to write your own chapter.

古文：且耶良久吟曰： 冬朝每去依烟火，春至还归养子孙。
现代文：和且耶良久才吟咏道： 冬朝每去依烟火，春至还归养子孙。
English: It took a long time for Hattori and Yera to find the right path: In the winter, they followed the fireworks, and in the spring, they brought up their children and grandchildren.

古文：曾向苻王笔端坐，尔来求食浑浑门。 
现代文：曾向苻王笔端坐，尔来求食浑家门。 
English: He once sat at the king's desk and begged for food.

古文：庭俊犹不悟，见门馆华盛，因有淹留歇为之计。诗曰： 田文称好客，凡养几多人。
现代文：滕庭俊听不明白他们的诗，见馆舍华美宽敞，便有留下歇息之意，于是吟诗道： 田文称好客，凡养几多人。
English: Teng Tingjun did not understand their poems, and when he saw the gorgeous and spacious pavilion, he had a feeling of rest, so he chanted: Tianwen said that he was a hospitable person, who raised several people.

古文：如欠冯谖在，今希厕下宾。 
现代文：如欠冯谖在，今希厕下宾。 
English: If Feng Yu is not present, Imaichi will be the guest of honor.

古文：且耶、麻大，相顾笑曰： 何得相讥？向使君在浑家门，一日当厌饫矣。 
现代文：和且耶、麻大相顾而笑道： 干什么讥笑我们，假如你在浑家，每天都会让你吃饱喝足的。 
English: And Katya and Mada looked at each other and laughed, "Why are you mocking us? If you were at Hun's house, you would have plenty to eat and drink every day."

古文：于是餐膳肴馔，引满数十巡。
现代文：于是上满各种美食佳肴，痛饮几十杯。
English: As a result, they were served a variety of gourmet delicacies and drank dozens of glasses of sake.

古文：主人至，觅庭俊不见，使人叫唤之，庭俊应曰唯。
现代文：主人回来后，找不见滕庭俊，派人去呼叫他，他答应一声： 唯！ 
English: After his master returned, he couldn't find Teng Tingjun, so he sent someone to call him. He replied, "Wai!

古文：而馆宇并麻和二人，一时不见，乃坐厕屋下，傍有大苍蝇秃扫帚而已。
现代文：然而馆舍和麻、和二人，此时都不见了，自己却坐在厕所里，旁边只有一只大苍蝇和一把秃扫帚。
English: However, the guesthouse, hemp, and two people were gone at this time, but he was sitting in the toilet, with only a big fly and a bald broom next to him.

古文：庭俊先有热疾，自此已后顿愈，更不复发矣。
现代文：滕庭俊原先患的热病，从此之后痊愈，再也没有复发。
English: Teng Tingjun was previously suffering from fever, but has since recovered and has not relapsed.

古文：张思恭
现代文：张思恭
English: Zhang Sicong

古文：唐天后中，尚食奉御张思恭进牛窟利上蚰蜒，大如箸，天后以玉合贮之。
现代文：唐朝武则天执政中期，尚食奉御张思恭向皇帝进献一条牛窟利上的蚰蜒，像筷子那么大。
English: In the middle of the reign of Emperor Wuzetian of the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Siyong, the eunuch, presented the emperor with a serpentine cow cave, as big as a chopstick.

古文：召思恭示曰： 昨窟利上有此，极是毒物。
现代文：武后用玉盒把它装起来，把张思恭叫来说： 昨天窟利上的东西，是一种剧毒之物。
English: Wu Hou put it in a jade box and called Zhang Sijian to say: What was found in the cave yesterday is a highly poisonous substance.

古文：近有鸡食乌百足虫忽死，开腹，中有蚰蜒一抄，诸虫并尽，此物不化。
现代文：近来有只鸡吃了黑色的百足之虫而突然死去，开腹一看，里面有一抄蚰蜒。别的虫子全都消化尽了，此物却不化。
English: Recently, a chicken died suddenly after eating black centipede worms. When it opened its stomach, there was a cocoon inside. All the other worms had been digested, but this one would not dissolve.

古文：朕昨日以来，意恶不能食。 
现代文：我从昨天以来，心里恶心不能吃饭。 
English: I haven't been able to eat since yesterday.

古文：思恭顿首请死，赦免之，与宰夫并流岭南。
现代文：张思恭一听便立即叩头请死，皇帝下令免死，将他与宰夫一起流放岭南。
English: Upon hearing this, Zhang Sicong immediately bowed down and begged for death. The emperor ordered that he be spared death and that he be exiled to Lingnan together with his brother-in-law.

古文：蝗
现代文：蝗
English: Locusts

古文：唐开元四年，河南北螽为灾，飞则翳日，大如指，食苗草树叶，连根并尽。
现代文：唐朝开元四年，河南的北部螽斯虫造成灾害，飞起来都能遮住太阳，大小象手指头，吃起苗草树叶，连根都吃光了。
English: In the fourth year of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the northern armyworm of Henan caused disasters. When it flies, it can cover the sun. It is as big as a finger. It eats seedlings and leaves, and even the roots are eaten up.

古文：敕差使与州县相知驱逐，采得一石者，与一石粟，一斗，粟亦如之。
现代文：皇上下令派使者通知各地州县了解情况准备驱赶，捉一石螽斯虫给一石粟米；捉一斗的，粟米也是这样给。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to inform the various prefectures and counties to understand the situation and prepare to drive away, catch a stone of aphids to give a stone of corn; catch a bucket, corn is also given in this way.

古文：掘坑埋却，埋一石则十石生，卵大如黍米，厚半寸，盖地。
现代文：挖坑埋掉，可是埋一石就又生出十石，卵的大小象黍米粒一样，卵块厚半寸，铺在地上。
English: Dig a pit and bury it, but burying one stone will produce ten stones, the size of the egg is like a glutinous rice grain, the egg mass is half an inch thick and is spread on the ground.

古文：浮休子曰： 昔文武圣皇帝时，绕京城蝗大起，帝令取而观之，对仗选一大者，祝之曰： 朕政刑乖僻，仁信未孚，当食我心，无害苗稼。 
现代文：浮休子说： 从前文武圣皇帝的时候，蝗虫围绕着京城飞快地发展扩散开来，皇上派人拿来看，对比着选了其中一只大蝗虫，对着它祷告说： 我的政治和刑罚不正常，仁爱诚信之心没有普及，应当吃我的心，不要伤害庄稼。 
English: Ukiyuko said, "From the time of the former Emperor Wenshu, locusts rapidly developed and spread around the capital. The emperor sent someone to take a look, compared and selected one of the large locusts, and prayed to it, saying, 'My politics and punishments are not normal, the heart of benevolence and honesty is not widespread, you should eat my heart and not harm the crops.'

古文：遂吞之。
现代文：就把那只蝗虫吞了下去。
English: After saying this, he swallowed the locusts whole.

古文：须臾，有乌如鹳，百万为群，拾蝗一日而尽。
现代文：不一会儿，便有象鹳鸟那么大的乌鸦飞来，一百万只是一群，用一天的时间就把蝗虫吃光了。
English: Soon, crows as big as ostriches flew in, a million of them in just one flock, and they ate up the locusts in one day.

古文：此乃精感所致。
现代文：这是皇上的精诚感动了上天而得到的结果。
English: This is the result of the emperor's devotion that moved the heavens.

古文：天若偶然，则如勿生，天若为厉，埋之滋甚。
现代文：上天如果是偶然发生的事，那就不如不让它产生；上天如果让事情造成大的伤害，你把它埋了就会滋生得更快。
English: If God allows something to happen by chance, it is better not to let it happen; if God allows something to cause great harm, it will breed faster if you bury it.

古文：当明德慎罚，以答天谴，奈何不见福修以禳灾，而欲逞杀以消祸。
现代文：应当发扬德政教化而谨慎地施行刑罚，来回答上天的警诫。为什么看不见以勤修福德来解除灾害，却想要靠杀罚来消除祸害呢？
English: In order to answer the warning of heaven, it is necessary to carry forward the principles of morality, government, education, and prudent enforcement of punishment. Why can't we see the need to diligently cultivate merits to eliminate disasters, but want to eliminate the scourge by killing and punishing?

古文：此宰相姚文崇失燮理之道矣。 
现代文：这是宰相姚文崇违背了正常的调理方法造成的。 
English: This was caused by Premier Yao Wenzhong's violation of the normal adjustment method.

古文：冷蛇
现代文：冷蛇
English: Cold Snake

古文：申王有肉疾，腹垂至骭，每出，则以白练束之。
现代文：申王得了肉多的病，肚子下垂到小腿，每次出行，就用白帛捆着肚子。
English: Shen Wang fell ill with a flesh-eating disease, and his stomach sagged down to his calves. Every time he went out, he would tie up his stomach with a pair of egrets.

古文：至暑月，鼾息不可过。
现代文：到了三伏天，喘气都困难。
English: By the third day, it was difficult to catch one's breath.

古文：玄宗诏南方取冷蛇二条赐之。
现代文：玄宗皇帝下令让南方捉了两条冷蛇赏赐给申王。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ordered Nanfang to catch two cold snakes and give them to King Shin as a reward.

古文：蛇长数尺，色白，不螫人，执之，冷如握冰。
现代文：蛇长好几尺，全身白色，不咬人，拿着它，冷得象握着冰。
English: The snake is several feet long, all white, and does not bite. Holding it is as cold as holding ice.

古文：申王腹有数约，夏月置于约中，不复觉烦暑。
现代文：申王的肚子上有几道束的痕迹，夏天把蛇缠放在束痕中，就不再觉得热得受不了。
English: Shen Wang's stomach bears the marks of several bundles. In the summer, if you wrap a snake around the bundle marks, you will no longer feel unbearably hot.

古文：李揆
现代文：李揆
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：唐李揆，乾天中，为礼部侍郎。
现代文：唐朝人李揆，乾元年间，任礼部侍郎。
English: Li Xi, a Tang Dynasty citizen, served as a chamberlain in the ceremonial department in the first year of the Qian dynasty.

古文：尝一日，昼坐于堂之前轩，忽闻堂中有声极震，若墙圮。
现代文：曾经有一天，白天坐在堂屋前面的平台上，忽然听见堂屋里传来极大的震动声，象墙倒塌了似的。
English: Once upon a time, I was sitting on the platform in front of the hall during the day, when I suddenly heard a tremendous shaking sound coming from the hall, as if a wall had collapsed.

古文：揆惊入视之，见一虾蟆，俯于地，高数尺，魅然殊状。揆且惊且异，莫穷其来。即命家童，以巨缶盖焉。
现代文：李揆吃惊地进去一看，只见一只蛤蟆，趴在地上，高好几尺，样子奇特怪诞，李揆又惊怕又奇怪，不知道它是从哪里来的，于是就让家僮用大缸盖上它。
English: Surprised, Li Yao looked inside and saw a toad, lying on the ground, several feet high, looking strangely grotesque. Li Yao was frightened and strange, and did not know where it came from, so he asked Jia Yao to cover it with a large jar.

古文：有解曰： 夫虾蟆月中之虫，亦天使也。今天使来公堂，岂非上帝以密命付公乎？ 
现代文：有个人解释说： 蛤蟆是月亮里的动物，也就是天上使者，现在天使来到你的堂屋里，是不是上天有秘密的使命交给你呀？ 
English: One person explained: Dragonflies are animals in the moon, that is, heavenly messengers. Now that an angel has come to your courtyard, does heaven have a secret mission for you?

古文：其明启而视之，已亡见矣。
现代文：第二天天亮打开缸看，已经不见了。
English: The next morning, when I opened the jar, it was gone.

古文：后数日，果拜中书侍郎平章事。
现代文：过后几天，李揆果然被提升为中书侍郎平章事。
English: A few days later, Li Yao was indeed promoted to the post of Censer Heizhang.

古文：主簿虫
现代文：主簿虫
English: The main bookworm

古文：润州金坛县，大历中，有北人为主簿，以竹筒赍蝎十余枚，置于厅事之树，后遂育至百余枚，为土气所蒸，而不能螫人。
现代文：润州的金坛县，在唐大历中期，有个北方人当主簿。他用竹筒装了十多只蝎子，放在厅堂前面的树上，后来就繁殖到一百多只，被土气熏得不能螫人了。
English: In the middle of the Tang Dynasty, there was a northerner in Jintan County, Renzhou. He put more than ten scorpions in a bamboo tube and placed them on a tree in front of the hall. Later, they multiplied to more than a hundred. They were soaked in the earth's atmosphere that they could not sting anyone.

古文：南民不识，呼为主簿虫。
现代文：南方人不认识蝎子，把它叫做主簿虫。
English: People in the south do not recognize the scorpion and call it the bookworm.

古文：朱牙之
现代文：朱牙之
English: Zhu Yazhi

古文：东阳太守朱牙之，元兴中，忽有一老公，从其妾董床下出，著黄裳衿帽。所出之坎，滑泽有泉，遂与董交好。
现代文：东阳太守朱牙之，晋元兴年间，忽然有一个老公公，从朱牙之的姓董的小妾床下出来，穿着黄色衣服，戴着结带的帽子，他出来的地洞，光滑湿润有泉水。很快便和姓董的小妾交欢要好。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jin Yuanxing, there was suddenly an old man who came out from under the bed of a concubine surnamed Dong, wearing yellow clothes and a knotted hat. The cave he came out of was smooth and moist with spring water. Soon, it was better to have sex with the concubine surnamed Dong.

古文：若有吉凶，遂以告。
现代文：如果有了吉或凶的事情，就告诉姓董的小妾。
English: If there is anything auspicious or inauspicious, you should tell your concubine, whose surname is Dong.

古文：牙之儿病疟，公曰： 此应得虎卵服之。 
现代文：朱牙之的儿子得了疟疾病，老公公说： 这个病应当弄来虎的睾丸吃下去。 
English: When Zhu Zhaozhi's son contracted malaria, his husband said, "This disease should be made to eat a tiger's testicles."

古文：持戟向山东，得虎阴，尚余暖气，使儿炙噉，疟即断。
现代文：就拿着戟到山的东面，得到了虎的生殖器，还有点暖气，让孩子烤着吃了，疟疾病就去根了。
English: He took the centipede to the eastern side of the mountain, got the tiger's genitals, and some heating, let the child roast and eat, and the malaria disease went to the root.

古文：公常使董梳头，发如野猪。
现代文：老公公常常让姓董的小妾给他梳头，头发象野猪的毛。
English: The husband often lets his concubine, surnamed Dong, comb his hair, which looks like the hair of a wild boar.

古文：牙后诸祭酒上章，于是绝迹。
现代文：朱牙之在各位尊者的后面请道士上表求神，从此才绝了踪迹。
English: Zhu Yazhi asked a Taoist priest to come up behind His Holiness and pray to God. From then on, there was no trace of him.

古文：作沸汤，试浇此坎，掘得数斛大蚁。
现代文：烧了滚开的水，试着浇这个地洞，掘出来好几斛大蚂蚁。
English: After boiling the boiling water, I tried to water the hole and dug out several large ants.

古文：不日，村人捉大刀野行，逢一丈夫，见刀，操黄金一饼，求以易刀。
现代文：有一天，村里人拿着大刀在野外行走，碰上一个男子，看见刀，就拿出一块黄金，要求用来换刀。
English: One day, a villager was walking in the open with a large knife, when he met a man. Seeing the knife, he took out a piece of gold and asked for it to be used to replace the knife.

古文：授刀，奄失其人所在，重察向金，乃是牛粪。
现代文：村人把刀卖给了他，忽然地就失去了那人的影子，重新察看刚才的黄金，竟是牛粪。
English: The villager sold the knife to him, and suddenly lost sight of the man, and re-examined the gold, which turned out to be cow dung.

古文：计此即牙家鬼。
现代文：人们猜测这个人就是朱牙之家里的那个鬼。
English: People have speculated that this person is the ghost from the Tooth Fairy's house.

古文：树蚓
现代文：树蚓
English: Tree ferns

古文：上都浑瑊宅，戟门外一小槐树，树有穴大如钱。
现代文：上都浑瑊的家里，在大门外有一棵小槐树，树上有个洞象铜钱那么大。
English: At home, where everything is murky, there is a small elm tree outside the gate. There is a hole in the tree as big as a copper coin.

古文：每夏月霁后，有蚓大如巨臂，长二尺余，白颈红斑。领蚓数百条，如索，缘树枝干。及晓，悉入穴。
现代文：每当夏天下过雨天晴后，就有大蚯蚓象一条巨大的手臂，长二尺多，脖子是白色的，有红色斑点，领着几百条蚯蚓，象绳子一样，缠在树枝和树干上，等到天亮，全都进入洞里去。
English: Every summer, after the rain has passed and the weather has cleared, there is a large armadillo like a huge arm, more than two feet long, the neck is white with red spots, leading hundreds of cocoons, like a rope, wrapped around the branches and trunks of trees, until dawn, all go into the cave.

古文：或时众惊，往往成曲。
现代文：有时人多受惊动，往往就弯曲成一团。
English: Sometimes people are so startled that they often curl up into a ball.

古文：学士张乘言，浑瑊时，堂前忽有树，从地踊出，蚯蚓遍挂其上。
现代文：学士张乘说： 浑瑊活着的时候，堂前忽然有树从地下踊出来，树上挂满了蚯蚓。
English: Zhang Rong, a bachelor, said: When Hun Rong was alive, a tree suddenly sprung up from the ground in front of the hall, and the tree was covered with dragonflies.

古文：已有出处，忘其书名目。
现代文：这件事有出处，只是忘了那书的书名。 
English: There is a source for this, I just forgot the title of the book.

古文：木师古
现代文：木师古
English: Kishiko

古文：游子木师古，贞元初，行于金陵界村落。
现代文：有个离家远游的人叫木师古，在唐朝贞元初年，有一天行走在金陵一带的村落里，天晚了，投到古庙中住宿。
English: There was a man named Muxigu who traveled far away from home. In the first year of Zhenyuan of the Tang Dynasty, one day he was walking in a village in the Jinling area. Late in the day, he went to stay in an ancient temple.

古文：日暮，投古精舍宿，见主人僧，主人僧乃送一陋室内安止。
现代文：会见了主人僧，主人僧就送他到一间简陋的屋子里安歇休息。
English: When he met the head monk, the head monk sent him to a humble room to rest.

古文：其本客厅，乃封闭不开。师古怒，遂诘责主人僧。僧曰： 诚非吝惜于此，而卑吾人于彼，俱以承前客宿于此者，未尝不大渐于斯。
现代文：那里原是有客厅的，却密闭着不打开，木师古生气了，就责备主人僧，主人僧说： 实在不是吝惜这间屋子，却使你在这里受委屈，完全是因为从前有住在这里的人，没有一个人不是在那里得了重病。
English: There used to be a living room there, but it was tightly closed and would not open. The carpenter became angry and rebuked the master monk. The master monk said, "I really do not begrudge you this room, but I have wronged you here, entirely because there used to be people living here, and not a single person did not get seriously ill there.

古文：自某到，已三十余载，殆伤三十人矣。闭止已周岁，再不敢令人止宿。 
现代文：从我到这里，已经三十多年，大约伤了三十个人了，客厅被关闭也已经一年多了，再也不敢让人住在那里。 
English: Since I arrived here, it has been more than thirty years, about thirty people have been injured, the living room has been closed for more than a year, and no one dares to live there anymore.

古文：师古不允，其词愈生猜责，僧不得已，令启户洒扫，乃实年深朽室矣。
现代文：木师古不答应，他的话越说越加猜疑责备。主人僧没办法，派人打开门洒水清扫干净，这实在是长时间没有住人的废弃屋子。
English: The master monk had no choice but to send someone to open the door, sprinkle water on it and sweep it clean. This was truly an abandoned house that had not been lived in for a long time.

古文：师古存心信，而口貌犹怒。
现代文：木师古心里已经相信了，可是口里和面色上还是生气的样子。
English: The woodcutter already believed it in his heart, but his mouth and face were still angry.

古文：及入寝，亦不免有备预之志，遂取箧中便手刀子一口，于床头席下，用壮其胆耳。
现代文：等到要睡觉时，也免不了有了预先的准备，就取出箱子里的一口挺趁手的刀，放在床头的席子下面，用来壮壮自己的胆子罢了。
English: When it's time to go to bed, it's inevitable that, having prepared in advance, he'll take out a very handy knife from the box and put it under the mat at the head of the bed, just to strengthen his courage.

古文：寝至二更，忽觉增寒，惊觉，乃漂沸风冷，如有扇焉。
现代文：睡到二更天，忽然觉得冷起来，受惊醒了，是流动的风使人觉得冷，又象是有人扇扇子。
English: After sleeping for more than two days, I suddenly felt cold and woke up with a start. It was the flowing wind that made me feel cold, and it was like someone was fanning a fan.

古文：良久，其扇复来。
现代文：过了些时，那扇子又扇了过来。
English: After a while, the fan came again.

古文：师古乃潜抽刀子于幄中，以刀子一挥，如中物，乃闻堕于床左，亦更无他。
现代文：木师古就暗暗地抽出刀子放在被窝里，用力一挥刀子，象是砍中什么东西，又听到掉在床的左边，也就再没有别的什么动静了。
English: The carpenter secretly took out a knife and put it in the bed, and waved it vigorously, as if he had hit something, and heard it fall on the left side of the bed, so there was no other movement.

古文：师古复刀子于故处，乃安寝。
现代文：木师古又把刀子放在老地方，又安静地睡了。
English: The woodcutter put the knife back in the old place and slept peacefully again.

古文：至四更已来，前扇又至。师古亦依前法，挥刀中物，又如堕于地。
现代文：到四更的时候，先前的扇子又扇起来，木师古又按照先前的做法，挥起刀子砍中了东西，又象是掉在地上。
English: When it came to the fourth time, the previous fan fanned up again, and the woodworker, in accordance with the previous practice, swung the knife and hit something, and it seemed to fall to the ground.

古文：握刀更候，了无余事。
现代文：他握着刀子再等候了一会，一点也没有什么事。
English: He waited a moment longer, knife in hand, and nothing happened.

古文：须臾天曙，寺僧及侧近人，同来扣户，师古乃朗言问之为谁，僧徒皆惊师古之犹存。
现代文：不一会就天亮了，寺里的和尚和附近的人，一起来敲门，木师古于是大声问是谁。师徒们都很惊奇木师古还活着，就询问他经过和原由，木师古把经过情形全都说了，慢慢地掸掸衣服站起来。
English: Soon it was dawn. Monks from the temple and people from the neighborhood came knocking on the door, and Mok Shigu loudly asked who it was. The teachers and students were surprised that Mok Shigu was still alive. They asked him about his past and the reason for it. Mok Shigu told them everything that had happened to him, and slowly put on his clothes and stood up.

古文：询其来由，师古具述其状，徐徐拂衣而起，诸人遂于床右，见蝙蝠二枚，皆中刀狼藉而死。每翅长一尺八寸，珠眼圆大如瓜，银色。
现代文：人们于是在床的右边，看见二只蝙蝠，全都是被刀砍得乱七八糟地死去。蝙蝠的每个翅膀长一尺八寸，眼珠又圆又大象个瓜，银白色。
English: On the right side of the bed, they saw two bats, all hacked to death with a knife, each wing a foot and eight inches long, their eyes round and elephantine, silver-white.

古文：按《神异秘经法》云，百岁蝙蝠，于人口上，服人精气，以求长生。
现代文：按照《神异秘经法》上说： 百年的蝙蝠，从人的口里，吸收人的精气，用来求得长生。
English: According to the "Wonderful Secret Scripture," a hundred-year-old bat absorbs the essence of a person from the person's mouth and uses it to seek eternal life.

古文：至三百岁，能化形为人，飞游诸天。
现代文：活到三百岁时，能变化成人形，飞行游遍三界三十二天。 
English: When he reached the age of three hundred, he was able to transform into an adult form and fly across the three realms for thirty-two days.

古文：据斯未及三百岁耳，神力犹劣，是为师古所制。
现代文：根据这一点，这两只蝙蝠还不到三百岁，神力还属劣等，所以才被木师古杀死。
English: According to this, the two bats were less than three hundred years old, and their spiritual power was still inferior, so they were killed by the woodcutter.

古文：师古因之亦知有服练术，遂入赤城山，不知所终。
现代文：木师古也因此懂得了服食练气的方法，就进入赤城山去，不知结果如何。
English: Therefore, the woodcutter also understood the method of taking food to train qi, and went into the Akagi Mountains, not knowing what the result would be.

古文：宿在古舍下者，亦足防矣。
现代文：因此，住在古庙客舍里的人，应该知道如何防范了。
English: Therefore, people who live in the guesthouse of the ancient temple should know how to prevent it.

