古文：宗世林祢衡荀巨伯管宁竹林七贤嵇康山涛王安期王敦孙伯翳湘东王绎唐霍王元轨王方翼吴少微张说柳芳杜佑李舟白居易许棠陆龟蒙颜荛
现代文：宗世林祢衡荀巨伯管宁竹林七贤嵇康山涛王安期王敦孙伯翳湘东王绎唐霍王元轨王方翼吴少微张说柳芳杜佑李舟白居易许棠陆龟蒙颜荛
English: Zong Shilin, You Hengqin, You Guanqin, You Guanqin, You Guanqin, You Guanqin, You Guanqin, You Guanqin, You Guanqin, You Guanqin, You Guanqin

古文：宗世林
现代文：宗世林
English: Souseirin district

古文：汉末，南阳宗世林与魏武同时，而薄其为人，不与交。
现代文：汉朝末年，南阳郡的宗世林跟死后被谥为魏武帝的曹操，同时在朝作官。宗世林看不上曹操的人品，不与他交往。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, Zong Shilin of Nanyang County was posthumously appointed as Cao Cao, the Wei Emperor, and at the same time served as an official in the imperial court. Zong Shilin did not like Cao Cao's character and did not associate with him.

古文：及武帝拜司空，总朝政。从容问宗曰：可以交未。
现代文：等到曹操任司空，全权总揽朝政后，很平静地问宗世林：现在我们可以结交了吧。
English: After Cao Cao was appointed as the first emperor and assumed full power to rule the country, he calmly asked Zong Shilin, "Can we make friends now?"

古文：答曰：松柏之志犹存。
现代文：宗世林回答说：我的志向象松柏一样，永远也不会改变的。
English: Soseirin replied, "My aspiration is like a pine tree, it will never change.

古文：即忤旨见疏，位不配德。
现代文：宗世林触犯了曹操，与曹操关系疏远，也没得到重用。
English: Zong Shilin offended Cao Cao, alienated relations with Cao Cao, and did not get much use.

古文：而文帝兄弟每造其门，必拜床下。其礼重如此。
现代文：但是，曹操的儿子曹丕他们每次去宗世林家，都在床前向宗世林行跪拜的大礼，曹操就是这样重视礼仪啊！
English: However, Cao Cao's son, Cao Pi, every time they went to the Sousei Lin's house, they bowed down to Sousei Lin in front of the bed. This is how Cao Cao valued etiquette!

古文：祢衡
现代文：祢衡
English: Nehei from

古文：祢衡字正平，少与孔文举作尔汝之交。
现代文：祢衡，字正平，年轻时与孔融的交往很密切，达到不分彼此的程度。
English: Youheng, the character Zhengping, was in close contact with Kong Rong when he was young, to the extent that they were indistinguishable.

古文：时衡未二十，而文举已五十余矣。
现代文：当时祢衡还不到二十岁，但是孔融已经五十多岁了。
English: At that time, Youheng was not yet twenty years old, but Kong Rong was already more than fifty years old.

古文：荀巨伯
现代文：荀巨伯
English: 大伯

古文：荀巨伯远看友人疾，值胡贼攻郡。
现代文：荀巨伯到很远的地方去看望生病的朋友，正赶上胡人进犯这座城市。
English: Uncle Zou has traveled far away to visit a sick friend, just in time for the Hu people to invade the city.

古文：友人语伯曰：吾且死矣，子可去。
现代文：友人对荀巨伯说：我就要死去了，你赶快离开这危险的地方吧。
English: My friend said to Zou Jubei, "I am about to die. You should leave this dangerous place as soon as possible."

古文：伯曰：远来视子，令有难而舍之去，岂伯行耶。
现代文：荀巨伯说：我远道而来，就是来看望你的病来的。
English: Uncle Zou said, "I have come a long way to visit you in your illness.

古文：贼既至，谓伯曰：大军至此，一郡俱空。
现代文：现在遇到危险我就扔下你走了，这是荀巨伯能做出来的事情吗？
English: Now, if there is danger, I will drop you and walk away. Is this something that the Giant Dragonfly can do?

古文：汝何人？
现代文：胡兵攻破城池，来到荀巨伯的朋友家，看见荀巨伯说：我们进到城里后，整座城的人都逃光了。你是什么人？
English: Hu's soldiers broke through the city and came to the home of a friend of Zou Jubao. When he saw Zou Jubao, he said, "After we entered the city, the entire city fled. Who are you?

古文：独止耶。
现代文：一个人留在这里。
English: I'm the only one here.

古文：伯曰：有友人疾，不忍委之，宁以己身代友人之命。
现代文：荀巨伯说：我的这位朋友身患重病，我怎么能将他一个人扔下不管呢？
English: Zou Jubei said, "This friend of mine is seriously ill. How can I leave him alone?

古文：贼闻其言，异之。
现代文：请你们不要伤害他，我愿意替我的这位朋友去死。
English: Please don't hurt him. I'm willing to die for my friend.

古文：乃相谓曰：我辈无义之人，而入有义之国。乃偃而退，一郡获全。
现代文：于是悄悄退出了这座城市。荀巨伯这种高尚的行为，拯救了全城的居民。
English: Therefore, he quietly withdrew from the city. This noble act of the Giant Grasshopper saved the residents of the whole city.

古文：管宁
现代文：管宁
English: Kauning

古文：魏管宁与华歆友善。
现代文：魏国人管宁跟华歆是好朋友。
English: Guanning, a native of the State of Wei, is a good friend of Hua Jun.

古文：尝共园中锄菜，见地有黄金一片。
现代文：一次，他们一起在园中菜地锄草，看见地里有一片黄金。
English: Once, when they were weeding the vegetable patch in the garden together, they saw a piece of gold in the ground.

古文：管挥锄不顾，与瓦石无异；管读书如故，华捉而掷之。
现代文：管宁继续挥锄锄草，连看都不看一眼，将这片黄金看作石头瓦块一样；华歆拣起黄金扔到一边去。
English: Guanning continued to wave the grass, without even looking at it, and regarded the piece of gold as if it were a stone tile; Hua Wei picked up the gold and threw it aside.

古文：又尝同席读书。
现代文：管宁和华歆，曾经在一铺席上读书。
English: Guanning and Huayuan used to study at the same table.

古文：有乘轩冕者过门，华废书出看；管割席分坐曰：子非吾友也。
现代文：一天，一位头戴高冠的达官乘车从这里经过。管宁照样在那读书，华歆却放下书跑出去看。于是，管宁在铺席上划条线，跟华歆分开坐，说：你不是我的朋友啦。
English: One day, a high-ranking official with a tall crown on his head passed by in a car. Guan Ning was still reading there, but Hua Wei put down his book and ran out to read. So, Guan Ning drew a line on the booth, sat separately from Hua Wei, and said: You are not my friend.

古文：竹林七贤
现代文：竹林七贤
English: Bamboo Grove Seven Sages

古文：陈留阮籍、谯国嵇康、河内山涛，三人年相比。
现代文：晋朝时，陈留阮籍，谯国嵇康，河内山涛，三个人年龄相同，彼此非常投合。
English: At the time of the Jin Dynasty, Chen Liu Ruan was born in Rui Province, Quang Kham was born in Quang Nam Province, and Shan Tao was born in Hanoi. The three of them were the same age, and they were very compatible with each other.

古文：预此契者，沛国刘伶、陈留阮咸、河内向秀、琅琊王戎。七人常集于竹林之下，肆意酣畅。
现代文：还有沛国刘伶，陈留阮咸，河内向秀，琅琊王戎，他们七个人常常聚会在竹林下面，尽情地饮酒狂欢，通宵达旦地清谈。
English: There are also Pei Guo Liu Ye, Chen Liu Ruan Han, Hanoi Xiang Xiu, and Xuan Wang Rong. The seven of them often gather under the bamboo grove, drink to their heart's content and talk all night long.

古文：世谓之竹林七贤。
现代文：人们称他们为竹林七贤。
English: People call them the seven sages of the bamboo grove.

古文：嵇康
现代文：嵇康
English: 康

古文：嵇康素与吕安友，每一相思，千里命驾。
现代文：嵇康一向与吕安处得非常亲密，是老朋友。
English: Yu Kang has always been very close to Lu An, and they are old friends.

古文：安来，值康不在。
现代文：每当他想念吕安时，虽然他们相距千里也去信让他来。
English: Whenever he missed Lu An, even though they were thousands of miles apart, he would write to ask him to come.

古文：兄喜出迎，安不前。
现代文：一次，吕安见信后来看嵇康，不巧嵇康外出不在家。
English: On one occasion, Lu An saw the letter and later went to see Yu Kang. Unfortunately, Yu Kang was out and not at home.

古文：题门上作凤字而去，喜不悟。康至云：凤凡鸟也。
现代文：嵇喜不理解这是什么意思，待弟弟回到家里后问哥哥。嵇康说： 凤 是凡鸟啊！
English: Xing Xi didn't understand what this meant, so he asked his brother when he got home. Xing Kang said, "The phoenix is an ordinary bird!

古文：山涛
现代文：山涛
English: Mountains and seas

古文：山涛与嵇、阮一面，契若金兰。
现代文：山涛与嵇康、阮籍只见一面，他们的友谊就已经达到了非常投合的地步。
English: Shan Tao only sees one side of Yu Kang and Ruan Ji, and their friendship has already reached the point of being very compatible.

古文：山妻韩氏觉涛与二人异于常交，问之。
现代文：山涛的妻子韩氏觉得山涛跟他们的交往跟一般人不一样，问山涛。
English: Shantao's wife, Han, felt that Shantao's interaction with them was different from that of the average person, and asked Shantao about it.

古文：涛曰：当年可以友者，唯此二人。
现代文：山涛对她说：结识的当年之内就可以成为朋友，只有嵇康与阮籍这两个人。
English: Shantao said to her, "You can become friends within the first year of getting to know each other. There are only two people, Yu Kang and Ruan Ji."

古文：妻曰：负羁之妻，亦亲观赵狐。
现代文：韩妻说：负羁的妻子，也曾亲眼观看赵狐。
English: Han Zuma said, "My wife, who is a bit of a rebel, has also watched Zhao Foo with her own eyes.

古文：意欲窥之，可乎？涛曰：可。
现代文：我想偷偷看看你的这两位朋友，可以吗？山涛说：可以。
English: I want to sneak a look at these two friends of yours, is that okay? Shantao said, "Yes."

古文：他日二人来，劝涛止之宿，具酒食。
现代文：日后，嵇康、阮籍来看望山涛。韩氏劝说山涛留他们在家中住下，并准备了酒菜供他们晚上食用。
English: A few days later, Yu Kang and Ruan Ji came to visit Shantao. Han persuaded Shantao to let them stay at his home, and prepared wine and vegetables for them to eat in the evening.

古文：妻穿墙视之，达旦忘返。
现代文：这天晚上，韩氏从墙洞里观看他们三人饮酒畅谈，一直看到第二天早晨都忘了离去。
English: That night, Mr. Han watched from a hole in the wall as the three of them drank and talked until they forgot to leave the next morning.

古文：涛入曰：二人何如？
现代文：山涛进屋里说：我的这两位朋友怎么样？
English: Shantao went into the house and said, "How are my two friends?

古文：曰：君才致不如，正当以识度耳。
现代文：韩氏说：你的才能不及他们二人。正应当很好地向他们学习啊。
English: Mr. Han said, "Your talent is not as good as the two of them. You should learn from them well."

古文：涛曰：伊辈亦以我识度为胜。
现代文：山涛说：我的这两位朋友也认为我的为人、才干，远远值得他们学习效法的。
English: Shantao said, "These two friends of mine also think that my character and talent are far more worthy of emulation.

古文：王安期
现代文：王安期
English: Wang An period

古文：晋太傅东海王越，镇许昌。
现代文：晋朝太傅王越，是东海人。
English: Wang Yue, the Taifu of the Jin Dynasty, was from the East China Sea.

古文：以王安期为记室参军，雅相知重。
现代文：他在留守许昌期间，任用王安期为记室参军，很是器重他。
English: During his stay in Xuchang, he appointed Wang Anji as a recorder to join the army, which was very important to him.

古文：敕世子毗曰：夫学之所益者浅，体之所安者深。闲习礼度，不如式瞻仪形。
现代文：王越训诫他的儿子王昆说：从书本中学习获得到的益处是浅薄的，从王安期身上你会学到在书本中学不到的许多东西。
English: Wang Yue admonished his son Wang Kun: "The benefits of learning from books are shallow. You will learn many things from Wang Anci that you can't learn from books."

古文：讽味遗言，不如亲承旨音。王参军人伦之表，汝其师之。王敦
现代文：你平常学习礼仪风度，不如亲眼观看王安期的举止形仪；你诵读玩味前人写在书上的道理，不及亲耳聆听王安期讲的那些宏论。
English: If you usually study etiquette and manners, it is better to watch Wang Anji's manners and gestures with your own eyes; if you read and play with the principles written in books by predecessors, you can't listen to those grand theories spoken by Wang Anji with your own ears.

古文：庾亮见王敦问曰：闻君有四友，何者为是。
现代文：王敦庾亮见到王敦后，问：听说你有四位挚友，都是谁呀？
English: After Wang Dunhuang met Wang Dunliang, Wang Dunhuang asked: I heard that you have four best friends, who are they?

古文：答曰：君家中郎，我家太尉、阿平，胡毋彦国。
现代文：王敦回答说：有你家的中郎，我家的太尉、阿平，还有胡人毋彦国。
English: Wang Dun replied, "There is the middle son of your family, the first lieutenant of my family, Ah Ping, and there is Hu Ren, also known as Yan Guo.

古文：我平故当最劣。
现代文：我家阿平是其中最差的一个。
English: My family, Aping, is one of the worst.

古文：庾曰：似未劣。
现代文：庾亮说：你家的阿平不一定差。
English: Hao Liang said: Your family's Aping is not necessarily bad.

古文：又问何者居其右，王曰：自有人。
现代文：你这四位朋友，谁的人品、才华最好？王敦回答说：自然有人啦！
English: Of these four friends of yours, which one has the best character and talent? Wang Dun replied: Of course, there is someone!

古文：庾曰：何者是。
现代文：庾亮问：谁呀？
English: Zhai Liang asked: Who is it?

古文：王曰：噫，左右蹑庾公知足。
现代文：王敦说：唉！我们都追随着你，以你作为立身处世的榜样啊！庾亮不问了。
English: Wang Dun said: Alas! We are all following you, using you as an example of how to live life to the full.

古文：孙伯翳
现代文：孙伯翳
English: Composed by Sun Bohai

古文：齐太原孙伯翳家贫，尝映雪读书。
现代文：南北朝时期兵人孙伯翳，是太原人，家很贫困，曾经因为买不起灯油、蜡烛而借着窗外的雪光读书。
English: Sun Bohai, a soldier during the Northern and Southern Dynasties, was from Taiyuan. His family was very poor, and he used to read by the light of the snow outside the window because he could not afford lamp oil and candles.

古文：放情物外，栖志丘壑。与王令君亮、范将军云，为莫逆之交。
现代文：孙伯翳不追求功名利禄，愿意作一位寄情于山野之间的隐士，过着隐居的生活，与王君亮、范云是莫逆之交的朋友。
English: Sun Bohai did not pursue fame and fortune, he was willing to be a hermit who lived in the mountains and lived a secluded life. He was friends with Wang Junliang and Fan Yun.

古文：王范既相二朝，欲以吏职相处。
现代文：后来，王、范二人分别都当了宰相，都曾动员过孙伯翳出来担任官职。
English: Later, Wang and Fan both became prime ministers, and both of them had mobilized Sun Boqin to take up official positions.

古文：伯翳曰：人生百年，有如风烛。
现代文：孙伯翳说：人一生活在世间不过百来年，就象是风一刮而过，又象蜡烛一会儿就燃尽了。
English: Sun Bohai said: "Once a person has lived in the world for only a hundred years or so, it is like a breeze passing by, and like a candle burning out in a moment.

古文：宜怡神养性，琴酒寄情。安能栖栖役曳若此？
现代文：因此，应该怡情养性，以抚琴、饮酒为乐事，怎么能终日承受作官为宦的辛苦呢！
English: Therefore, one should cultivate a pleasant disposition and enjoy playing the piano and drinking alcohol. How can one bear the hard work of being an official all day long?

古文：嵇康所不堪，予亦未能也。
现代文：嵇康不愿意作的事情，我也是不愿意去做啊。
English: I don't want to do what Shankang doesn't want to do.

古文：湘东王绎
现代文：湘东王绎
English: Shandong Wangyuan

古文：梁湘东王绎，博览郡书，才辨冠世。
现代文：南朝梁人王绎，是湘东人。他的才华与思辩的能力可谓是当代首屈一指的。
English: Wang Yu, a member of the Southern Dynasty Liang people, is from eastern Hunan. His talent and ability to reason are second to none in the contemporary world.

古文：不好声色，爱重名贤。
现代文：并且不好娱乐、美色，而尊重惜爱名声与品德。
English: And it is not good to entertain, beautify, but to respect and cherish reputation and character.

古文：与河东裴子野、兰陵萧子云，为布衣之交。
现代文：他与河东的裴子野，兰陵的萧子云，是不论及官场地位的明友。
English: He and Peizhino of Hedong and Xiao Ziyun of Lanling are close friends, regardless of their official positions.

古文：唐霍王元轨
现代文：唐霍王元轨
English: Tang Ho Wang Yuan Railway

古文：唐霍王元轨，高祖第十四子也。
现代文：唐朝霍王李元轨，是唐高祖李渊的第十四个儿子。
English: Li Yuanlu, King Huo of the Tang Dynasty, was the fourteenth son of Li Yuan, the progenitor of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：谦慎自守，不妄接士。
现代文：他谦虚谨慎，不轻易与士人交往。
English: He is modest and cautious, and does not mingle easily with the nobles.

古文：在徐州，与处士刘玄平为布衣交。
现代文：在徐州任职期间，与隐居在江湖间的处士刘玄平私交的关系很好。
English: During his tenure in Xuzhou, he had a good personal relationship with Liu Xuanping, an official who lived in seclusion between the provinces.

古文：或问玄平，王之所长。
现代文：有人问刘玄平：霍王有什么特别优秀的地方吗？
English: Someone asked Liu Xuanping: Is there anything particularly outstanding about Huo Wang?

古文：玄平曰：无。
现代文：刘玄平回答说：没有。
English: Liu Xuanping replied, "No."

古文：问者怪而诘之，玄平曰：夫人有短，所以见其长。
现代文：问的这个人感到奇怪进而责备刘玄平。刘玄平说：一个人有了短处与弱点，才能显露出他的优秀的那部分。
English: The person who asked felt strange and then blamed Liu Xuanping. Liu Xuanping said: A person has shortcomings and weaknesses in order to reveal his excellent part.

古文：至于霍王，无所不备，吾何以称之哉。王方翼
现代文：所以，我说不出来他究竟哪方面最优秀来。王方翼
English: So I can't really say what he's the best at.

古文：凉州长史赵持满，与长孙无忌亲。
现代文：唐朝凉州长史赵持满，是长孙无忌的亲属。
English: The governor of Liang in the Tang Dynasty, Shi Zhao Mochiman, was a relative of the eldest grandson.

古文：许敬宗既陷无忌，惧持满为己患，乃诬其同反。
现代文：礼部尚书许敬宗秉承武则天皇后的意旨，陷害长孙无忌。
English: The head of the etiquette department, Xu Jingzong, adhered to the will of the Empress Wu Zi and framed his eldest grandson.

古文：追至京拷讯。叹曰：身可杀，辞不可辱。
现代文：于是，赵持满死在狱中，尸体被扔弃在城西，他的亲属没有一个人敢去收尸。
English: As a result, Zhao Mochiman died in prison and his body was dumped in the west of the city. None of his relatives dared to collect the body.

古文：吏为代占而结奏，遂死狱中。尸于城西，亲戚莫敢收视者。王方翼叹曰：栾布之哭彭越，大义也。
现代文：王方翼感叹地说：从前，栾布为被杀害的彭越大哭，这是讲求情谊的最大的义举；周文王下令掩埋已经朽烂的骨骸，这是施行的最大的仁政。
English: Wang Fangyi sighed and said: Once upon a time, Zibo cried loudly for the murdered Peng Yuecun, which was the greatest act of kindness; Zhou Wenwang ordered to bury the decayed bones, which was the greatest benevolent policy.

古文：周文之掩朽骸，至仁也。
现代文：跟朋友断绝义气，蒙蔽主上的仁德，这样的人怎么能侍奉国君呢？
English: How can such a man serve the sovereign when he has cut off the spirit of loyalty from his friends and blinded himself to the benevolence of the Lord?

古文：绝友之义，蔽主之仁，何以事君。遂具礼葬焉。
现代文：说完后，让人去城西收殓赵持满的尸体，按照礼仪将他埋葬。
English: After that, someone was sent to the west of the city to collect Zhao Mifan's body and bury him according to etiquette.

古文：高宗义之而不问。
现代文：唐高宗认为王方翼的做法是侠义之举，听到这件事情后没有过问。
English: Tang Gaozong thought that Wang Fangyu's action was a chivalrous act, and did not ask questions after hearing about it.

古文：吴少微
现代文：吴少微
English: Wu Shaowei

古文：吴少微，东海人也。
现代文：吴少微，是东海人。
English: Wu Shaowei is from the East China Sea.

古文：少负文华，与富嘉谟友善。
现代文：少年时就很有才华文彩，与富嘉谟是好朋友。
English: He was very talented in painting and calligraphy when he was a boy, and he was a good friend of Fu Jia Mu.

古文：少微进士及第，累授晋阳太原尉，拜御史。
现代文：吴少微是进士出身，步入仕途后，连续升到晋阳太原尉，最后官为御史。
English: Wu Shaowei was born as a Jin Shi, and after entering the career, he was continuously promoted to Jinyang Taiyuan Lieutenant, and finally to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：时嘉谟疾卒，为文哭之。
现代文：遇上少年时的好朋友有病去世，他写一篇祭文哭祭亡友。
English: When he meets a boy whose good friend has died of illness, he writes a poem to mourn his lost friend.

古文：其词曰：维三月癸丑，河南富嘉谟卒，于时寝疾于洛阳北里。闻之投枕而起，泪沾乎衽席。
现代文：祭文的大意是这样的：是年三月癸丑，友人河南富嘉谟因病去世。当时我也病卧在洛阳北里家中，听到这一噩耗后，扔掉枕头坐起来，眼泪沾湿了衣襟。
English: The essence of the ritual is as follows: It was in March of the year of the Ugly Duckling that my friend Henan Fujia Mu died of illness. At that time, I was also ill at home in Beili, Luoyang. After hearing this bad news, I threw away my pillow and sat up, tears wet my shirt collar.

古文：匍匐于寝门之外，病不能起。
现代文：后来，爬到卧室的门外，想去奔丧，但身体病得实在起不来了。
English: Later, I crawled outside my bedroom door, wanting to go to the funeral, but I was too sick to get up.

古文：仰天而呼曰： 天乎天乎，予曷所朋。
现代文：我仰天大呼：天啊天啊！你怎么这样对待我的朋友？
English: I cried out, "Oh my God! How could you do this to my friend?"

古文：曷有律，曷可得而见。
现代文：你有的是什么样的规则？
English: What kind of rules do you have?

古文：抑斯文也，以存乎哀。
现代文：怎样让我再见到我的好朋友？于是写这篇祭文，用以寄托我的哀思。
English: How can I see my good friend again? So I wrote this eulogy to express my sorrow.

古文：太常少卿徐公、鄜州刺使尹公、中书徐、元二舍人、兵部张郎中说，未尝值我不叹于朝。
现代文：太常少卿徐公，鄜州刺史尹公，中书省徐、元二位舍人，兵部郎中张说，都曾见过我在朝中不叹息你的才天不得施展。
English: Too often, Shaoqing Xu Gong, Zhangzhou Zhi Shi Yin Gong, the two subordinates of the Chinese Literature Department Xu and Yuan, and the middle son of the Military Department Zhang said that they had all seen me in the court and did not sigh. Your talent can not be exercised.

古文：夫情悼之，赋诗以宠亡也。
现代文：现作诗一首，来悼念我的亡友。
English: I am writing a poem to mourn the loss of my friend.

古文：其词曰：吾友适不死，于戏社稷臣。
现代文：这首诗是这样的：我的好友富嘉谟如果不去世，他完全可以和朝廷重臣比试一下才华能力的高低。
English: The poem goes like this: If my friend, Fu Jia Mu, does not die, he will be able to test his talent and ability against the senior officials of the imperial court.

古文：直禄非造利，常怀大庇人。
现代文：他要作官不是为了拿取俸禄，而是关心天下的黎民百姓。
English: He wants to be an official not to get a salary, but to care about the Lebanese people around the world.

古文：乃无承明藉，遘此敦牂春。
现代文：无奈他还没有跻身仕途，在这太平盛世就过早地去世了。
English: Unfortunately, he had not yet made it to the top, and he died prematurely in this prosperous and peaceful age.

古文：药砺其可畏，皇穷故匪仁。
现代文：医药真是让人不信任它，连我好友的病都治不好。
English: Medicine is so mistrusted that it can't even cure my friend's illness.

古文：畴昔与夫子，孰云异天伦。
现代文：皇天啊你一点也不仁慈，早早地就让我的好友离开了人世。
English: Oh God, you are not kind at all. You let my best friend die too early.

古文：同病一相失，茫茫不重陈。
现代文：从前，我和你是好朋友，就象是亲兄弟一样。
English: Once upon a time, you and I were good friends, like brothers.

古文：子之文章在，其殆尼父新。
现代文：此时，大概你丧车上的饰物都已经没入荒野中了。
English: By this time, the decorations on your car are probably already lost in the wilderness.

古文：鼓兴干河岳，真词毒鬼神。
现代文：你是圣明皇上的贤臣至宝，就象我们这样的泱泱大国也很少有你这样的人才啊！
English: You are the sage of Emperor Shengming, the most precious treasure. Even a great country like ours rarely has a talent like you!

古文：可悲不可朽，东輤没荒榛。
现代文：这首悼词，没有人不赞美它写得真诚而富有情感。
English: No one could fail to praise this eulogy, which was written with sincerity and emotion.

古文：圣主贤为宝，吁兹大国贫。
现代文：吴少微写完这首悼词后，病越来越沉重了。
English: After Wu Shaowei wrote this eulogy, his illness became more and more serious.

古文：词人莫不叹美。既而病亟，长叹曰：生死人之大分，吾何恨焉。
现代文：他长叹一声，说：生死是人生的大限，我死了没有什么遗憾的。
English: With a long sigh, he said: "Life and death is the ultimate limit of life. I have no regrets about dying.

古文：然官职十分未作其一，乃至是耶。
现代文：但是，我所从事的事业十分还没有完成一分，这是最大的遗憾啊！
English: However, the business I am engaged in has not yet completed a single point, which is the biggest regret!

古文：慷慨而终。
现代文：吴少微慷慨陈词，说完就死去了。
English: Wu Shaowei made a generous speech, and then died.

古文：张说
现代文：张说
English: Zhang said.

古文：张说之谪岳州也，常郁郁不乐。
现代文：张说被贬职到岳州，经常郁郁不乐。
English: Zhang said that he was demoted to Yuezhou and was often depressed.

古文：时宰以说机辨才略，互相排摈。
现代文：当时的宰相姚崇因为张说擅长机辨有才干而排挤他。
English: The prime minister at the time, Yao Chong, ousted him because Zhang said he was good at identifying talent.

古文：苏颋方当大用，而张说与瑰善。
现代文：苏颋当时正受到重用，张说与苏颋的父亲苏瑰的关系非常亲密。
English: At that time, Su Yao was being heavily used as a pawn. Zhang said that the relationship with Su Yao's father, Su Gui, was very close.

古文：张因为《五君咏》，致书，封其诗以遗颋。
现代文：因此，张说写一首《五君咏》的诗，借魏晋时的阮籍、嵇康、刘伶、阮咸、向秀五位名士以自况，并写封信，连同这首诗，派使者一并送给苏颋。
English: Therefore, Zhang said that he would write a poem of "Five Princes" and borrow five famous people from the time of Wei and Jin, including Nguyen Quan, Quang Kang, Liu Hui, Nguyen Hanh and Xiang Xiu, and write a letter and send an envoy together with the poem to Su Shi.

古文：戒其使曰：候忌日，近暮送之。
现代文：告诉使者说：等候到苏瑰的忌日，快到傍晚时再送进苏府。
English: He told the messenger to wait until the day of Su Gui's death, and then bring her to Su's residence in the late afternoon.

古文：使者既至，因忌日，赍书至颋门下。
现代文：使者带张说的《五君咏》并书信来到京城后，等着到苏瑰的忌日那天将书信投送苏府。
English: After the messenger brought Zhang's "Five Sovereigns" and the letter to Beijing, he waited until the day of Su Gui's death to send the letter to Su Prefecture.

古文：会积阴累旬，近暮，吊客至，多说先公寮旧。
现代文：过了几旬，到了苏瑰的忌日这天，傍晚时使者将诗与书一块儿投递到苏府。这时，正赶上来凭吊苏瑰的宾客纷纷到来，多数都是苏颋亡父的同事或下属。
English: After some time, on the day of Su Gui's death, in the evening, the messenger delivered the poem and the book together to Su Fu. At this time, guests who had come to hang Su Gui arrived one after another, most of whom were colleagues or subordinates of Su Gui's deceased father.

古文：颋因览诗，呜咽流涕，悲不自胜。
现代文：苏颋读了张说的《五君咏》，痛哭流涕，悲伤得不能自持。
English: Su Ying read Zhang's "Five Princes and Five Sorrows" and wept bitterly, unable to contain her grief.

古文：翌日，乃上封。大陈说忠贞謇谔，有勤乎王室，亦人望所属，不宜沦滞于遐方。
现代文：第二天，立即上奏玄宗皇帝，大力陈述张说忠贞正直及对朝廷所做的贡献。并说满朝文武都希望皇上重新起用张说，不宜再让他继续滞留在边远荒僻的地方。
English: The next day, he immediately appealed to Emperor Xuanzong, vigorously stating that Zhang Xizong was loyal and honest and had made contributions to the imperial court. He also said that all the dynasties hoped that the emperor would reinstate Zhang Xizong, and that it was not appropriate for him to continue to stay in a remote and desolate place.

古文：上乃降玺书劳问，俄而迁荆州长史。
现代文：于是玄宗皇帝下诏书给张说表示慰问。过了不久，将张说调任荆州刺史。
English: As a result, Emperor Xuanzong sent an imperial edict to Zhang Xian to express his condolences. Soon after, Zhang Xian was transferred to Jingzhou.

古文：由是陆象先、韦嗣立、张廷珪、贾曾，皆以谴逐岁久，因加甄收。
现代文：这以后，陆象先、韦嗣立、张廷珪、贾曾等先后上奏皇上，都说张说被贬降的时间太长了，应该重新加以考察甄别将他调回京城中来。
English: After that, Lu Xiangxian, Wei Zili, Zhang Tingtao, Jia Zeng and others successively appealed to the emperor, saying that Zhang Xian had been demoted for too long, and that he should be re-examined and transferred back to Beijing.

古文：颋常以说，父之执友，事之甚谨。
现代文：苏颋常说是他是父亲苏瑰的挚友，自己要更加恭谨地对待他。
English: Su Yao often said that he was the best friend of his father, Su Gui, and that he should treat him more respectfully.

古文：而说重其才器，深加敬慕焉。柳芳
现代文：张说也非常看重苏颋的才干，对苏颋更加敬慕。柳芳
English: Zhang said that he also attaches great importance to Su Shi's talent, and admires Su Shi even more.

古文：柳芳与韦述友善，俱为史学。
现代文：柳芳和韦述是亲密无间的挚友，他们二人又都是搞史学的。
English: Liu Fang and Wei Shu are close friends, and both of them are engaged in history.

古文：述卒后，所著书未毕者，芳多续成之。杜佑
现代文：韦述死后，他没有写完的史书，多数都由柳芳续写完成。杜佑
English: After the death of Wei Shuxu, most of the history books he did not finish were continued and completed by Liu Fang. Du You

古文：刘禹锡言：司徒杜公佑视穆赞也，如故人子弟。
现代文：刘禹锡说：司徒杜佑将穆赞看成象自己的孩子一样。
English: Liu Yuxi said: "Stu Duyou regards Muzan as if he were his own child.

古文：佑见赞为台丞数弹劾，因事戒之曰：仆有一言，为大郎久计，他日少树敌为佳。
现代文：杜佑看到穆赞屡屡受到宰相的上告，因此告诫穆赞说：我有一句话要告诉你，从长远考虑，以后你还是要少树敌为好。
English: Du You saw that Muzan was repeatedly appealed by the Prime Minister, so he cautioned Muzan and said: I have a word to tell you, from a long-term perspective, you should make fewer enemies in the future.

古文：穆深纳之，由是少霁威也。
现代文：穆赞深深地记住了杜佑的这句话，从此以后果然收敛了威严啊。
English: Muzan deeply remembered Du You's words, and from then on, his majesty was definitely diminished.

古文：李舟
现代文：李舟
English: Li Zhou

古文：陇西李舟与齐映友善。
现代文：陇西李舟和齐瑛的交往非常密切。
English: The exchanges between Shaanxi Lizhou and Qi Ying are very close.

古文：映为将相，舟为布衣。
现代文：后来齐瑛官任宰相，李舟还是一个平民百姓。
English: Later, Qi Yingguan was appointed prime minister, and Li Zhou was still a commoner.

古文：舟致书于映，以交不以贵也。
现代文：李舟还是常常给齐瑛写信，他认为交朋友不应该因为对方地位高了就不交往了。
English: Li Zhou still often writes to Qi Ying, he believes that making friends should not be because the other party's status is high.

古文：时映左迁于夔，书曰：三十三官足下，近年以来，宰臣当国，多与故人礼绝。
现代文：齐瑛由宰相被贬职到夔州后，李舟给他去信说：三十三官阁下；近年来，你身任一国的宰相，跟很多朋友故旧断绝了往来。
English: After Prime Minister Qi Yingyu was demoted to Zhangzhou, Li Zhou sent him a letter saying: "Your Excellency, in recent years, you have been the prime minister of a country, and you have broken off contacts with many old friends.

古文：仆以礼处足下，则足下长者，仆心未忍，欲以故人处足下。
现代文：我要按正常的礼仪将您看成当朝宰相，好象亵渎了我们多年的友情，于心不忍；我想以故人朋友与您相交往，又恐世俗之人认为我巴结你。
English: In accordance with normal etiquette, I want to see you as the prime minister of the country, as if I have desecrated our friendship of many years, and I can't bear it; I want to interact with you as a friend of the deceased, and I'm afraid that secular people will think I'm fawning over you.

古文：则虑悠悠之人，以仆为谄，凡欲修书，逡巡至今。
现代文：几次想给你写信又停下来，一直犹豫到现在。
English: Several times I wanted to write to you and stopped, hesitating until now.

古文：忽承足下出守夔国，为苍生之望，不为不幸；为足下之谋，则名遂身退，斯又为难。
现代文：忽然听说阁下改任夔国，从老百姓的愿望来说，你的出任夔国不一定不是一件好事情；为阁下着想，则是功成名就之后退下来，又让你感到难办。
English: Suddenly, I heard that your Excellency was transferred to Shandong Province. From the perspective of the wishes of the common people, your appointment to Shandong Province is not necessarily a good thing; for your Excellency's sake, it is to retire after achieving success, and it makes you feel difficult to manage.

古文：仆知时者，谨以为贺。
现代文：我是很了解当今的社会的，仅写此信表示祝贺。
English: I am well aware of today's society, just write this letter to express my congratulations.

古文：但鄱阳云安，道阻且长。音尘寂蔑，永望增叹。
现代文：但是君在鄱阳云安，我们相距既遥远又有山水阻隔，两方面信讯隔绝，只好这样永远相望着叹息。
English: But you are safe and sound in Fenyang, we are both far away and separated by mountains and rivers, and the two sides are cut off from each other, so we have to look at each other forever and sigh.

古文：仆所病沉痼，方率子弟力农，与世疏矣，足下亦焉能不疏仆耶。
现代文：我久患重病，领着孩子们种田务农，与时世疏隔，阁下又怎能不跟我也生疏了呢？
English: I have been seriously ill for a long time, leading my children to farm and farming, estranged from the times, how can you not be estranged from me?

古文：足下素仆所知，其于得丧，固恬如也。
现代文：阁下的平素为人我是知道的，大概得到我去世的消息也会平静对待的。
English: I know your Excellency as a person, and he will probably receive the news of my death with equanimity.

古文：然朝臣如足下者寡矣，明主岂当不察之耶？
现代文：然而朝中向阁下这样的官员很少啊，圣明的皇上怎么不知道呢？
English: However, there are very few officials in the government like Your Excellency. How could the Emperor of Heaven not know this?

古文：唯强饭自爱，珍重珍重。
现代文：最后，只希望你努力，自己珍爱自己，望多多保重。
English: In the end, I just hope that you work hard, cherish yourself, and take good care of yourself.

古文：白居易
现代文：白居易
English: Bai Juyi

古文：白少傅居易，与元相国稹友善。以诗道著名，号元白。
现代文：太子少傅白居易，与宰相元稹非常要好，他二人都以能诗而闻名于世，人称为元白。
English: The young prince Fu Bai Juyi was very close to the prime minister, Geng Yao. Both of them were famous for their ability to write poetry, and were known as Geng Bai.

古文：其集内有《哭元相诗》云：相看掩泪俱无语，别有伤心事岂知。
现代文：白居易的诗集中有一首《哭元稹》的诗。诗的大意是这样的：相看掩泪俱无语，别有伤心事岂知。
English: In Bai Juyi's poetry collection, there is a poem called "Crying Yuan Xuan." The gist of the poem is as follows: When you look at each other, you hide your tears and are speechless. You don't know if there is anything sad.

古文：想得咸阳原上树，已抽三丈白杨枝。
现代文：想得咸阳原上树，已抽三丈白杨枝。
English: The poplar tree in Xianyangyuan has grown three times its original height.

古文：许棠
现代文：许棠
English: Xu Tong

古文：许棠久困名场。
现代文：许棠有很长时间被困在科举场上，始终未有考取功名。
English: Xu Tang has been trapped in the science education field for a long time, and has never won a merit.

古文：咸通末，马戴佐大同军幕，棠往谒之，一见如旧识。留连数月，但诗酒而已，未尝问所欲。
现代文：唐懿宗咸通末年，马戴在大同军中任幕僚，许棠去投奔他，一见如故，留他住了好几个月，每天只是谈诗饮宴，从未问过他来后有什么想法。
English: In the last years of Tang Xizong's reign, Ma Dai served as an aide-de-camp in the Datong army. Xu Tang went to join him, and the two hit it off immediately. He stayed with him for several months, only talking about poetry at the banquet every day, and never asked him what he thought after he came.

古文：忽一旦大会宾友，命使者以棠家书授之。
现代文：忽然有一天，马戴大宴宾客。席间，让使者将许棠的家书给许棠。
English: Suddenly one day, Ma Dai invited guests to a grand banquet. During the meal, he asked the messenger to give Xu Tang's family letter to Xu Tang.

古文：棠惊愕，莫如其来。
现代文：许棠异常吃惊，不知道家书是怎么捎来的。
English: Xu Tang was extremely surprised and didn't know how the family letter had come about.

古文：启缄，乃是戴潜遣一价，恤其家矣。
现代文：打开家书一看，才知道是马戴暗中派去一个使者到他家中去，资助抚恤他家人的生活啊。
English: When he opened his family records, he learned that Madai had secretly sent an emissary to his home to subsidize his family's life.

古文：陆龟蒙
现代文：陆龟蒙
English: Tortoise mong

古文：吴郡陆龟蒙字鲁望。
现代文：吴郡人陆龟蒙，字鲁望。
English: The people of Wuxi County are called Luwang.

古文：父宾虞进士甲科，浙东从事，家于苏台。
现代文：他的父亲陆宾虞进士甲科出身，在浙东任从事，家住在苏台。
English: His father, Lu Bingyu Jinshi, was born in Jike, worked in eastern Zhejiang Province, and lived in Su-Tai.

古文：龟蒙幼精六籍，长而攻文。
现代文：陆龟蒙自幼精通六经，年长后专攻写文章。
English: Tortoise Meng has been proficient in the Six Classics since he was a child, and has specialized in writing articles since he was older.

古文：与颜荛、皮日休、罗隐、吴融为益友。
现代文：他与颜荛、皮日休、罗隐，吴融是亲密的朋友。
English: He is close friends with Yan Xuan, Pi Rixu, Luo Ying and Wu Rong.

古文：性高洁，家贫，思养亲之禄。
现代文：陆龟蒙性情高洁，家中生活贫寒。
English: Tortoises have a high-spirited nature, but they live a poor life at home.

古文：与张抟为卢江、吴兴二郡倅，丞相李蔚、卢携景重之。
现代文：为了获得赡养家人的俸禄，他与张抟一块儿担任卢江、吴兴二郡长官的副手。当时的丞相李蔚、卢携景很是器重他。
English: In order to obtain a salary to support his family, he served as the deputy of Lu Jiang and Wu Xing, the two county governors, together with Zhang Xuan. The then prime ministers Li Wei and Lu Caijing were very fond of him.

古文：罗隐《寄龟蒙诗》云：龙楼李丞相，昔岁仰高文。
现代文：罗隐在寄给陆龟蒙的诗中说：龙楼李丞相，昔岁仰高文。
English: Luo Yin said in a poem sent to the tortoise Meng: Longlou Licheng, long ago Yang Gaowen.

古文：黄阁今无主，青山竟不焚。
现代文：黄阁今无主，青山竟不焚。
English: Huangge is now without an owner, but Qingshan is not on fire.

古文：盖尝有征聘之意。唐末，以左拾遗授之。
现代文：盖尝有征聘之意，诗中暗示李蔚丞相曾一度想荐举征聘陆龟蒙到门下省任职。
English: The cover has the meaning of recruitment, and the poem implies that Premier Li Weizheng once wanted to recommend the recruitment of tortoises to his subordinate provinces.

古文：诏下之日，疾终于家。
现代文：唐朝末年，朝廷授陆龟蒙为左拾遗，任命的诏书下发之日，陆龟蒙病逝在家中。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, the imperial court awarded the tortoise Meng to the left to pick up the remains. On the day the decree of appointment was issued, the tortoise Meng died of illness at home.

古文：与皮日休为诗友。
现代文：陆龟蒙，跟皮日休是诗友。
English: The tortoise and the hare are friends of poetry.

古文：颜荛
现代文：颜荛
English: Yan Xuan

古文：颜给事荛谪官，殁于湖外。
现代文：给事颜荛被贬官放逐出京城后，死在湖外任上。
English: After Yan Xuan was banished from Beijing after being demoted, he died on duty outside the lake.

古文：未间，自草墓志。
现代文：临死前，他自己撰写墓志。
English: Before his death, he wrote his own epitaph.

古文：性躁急，不能容物。
现代文：颜荛性情急躁，不能容人。
English: Yan Xun is impatient and can't tolerate others.

古文：其志词云：寓于东吴，与吴郡陆龟蒙，为诗文之交，一纪无渝。
现代文：他的墓志是这样写的：家住东吴，跟吴郡的陆龟蒙，是谈诗论文的朋友，相交一世没有改变。
English: His epitaph reads as follows: He lived in East Wu, and was friends with Lu Kame Meng from Wu County. They talked about poetry and essays, and their friendship never changed.

古文：龟蒙卒，为其就木至穴，情礼不缺。
现代文：陆龟蒙死后，我为他购置棺木，堪寻墓地。
English: After the tortoise died, I bought a coffin for him, which is a good place for a cemetery.

古文：其后即故谏议大夫高公丞之、故丞相陆公扆二君，于荛至死不变。
现代文：不论从情谊上，还是在礼仪上，都没有什么过失。在陆龟蒙之后，有已故谏议大夫高丞之，已故丞相陆扆，是我至死不改变的朋友。
English: There was no fault, either in friendship or in etiquette. After the tortoise and the turtle, there was the late Dr. Gao Zheng, the late Minister Lu Yao, who is my friend until death.

古文：其余面交，皆如携手过市。见利即解携而去，莫我知也。
现代文：其余相识的人，都如同手拉手走过市场，见到有利可图就分手了，不是我的知己。
English: The rest of the acquaintances, all of whom walked through the market as if hand in hand, broke up when they saw a profit, not my confidant.

古文：后有吏部尚书薛公贻矩、兵部侍郎于公兢、中书舍人郑公撰三君子者，予今日以前不变。不知后日见予骨肉孤幼，复如何哉。
现代文：后来还有吏部尚书薛贻矩，兵部侍郎于竟、中书舍人郑撰，是我死前不变的朋友。但是我预料不到我死之后，他们对我的家属子女又会是怎样的。
English: Later, there was also the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Xue Xuan Rui, the attendant of the military department, Yu Hao, and the teacher of the middle school, Zheng Zhan, who were my constant friends before my death. However, I did not expect what they would do to my family and children after my death.

