古文：刘敬者，齐人也。汉五年，戍陇西，过洛阳，高帝在焉。
现代文：刘敬是齐国人，汉高帝五年，他到陇西戍守边塞，路过洛阳，当时高帝正住在那里。
English: Liu Jing was a native of Qi. When Emperor Gao was five years old, he went to Shaanxi to defend the border fortress and passed through Luoyang, where Emperor Gao was living at the time.

古文：娄敬脱輓辂，衣其羊裘，见齐人虞将军曰： 臣原见上言便事。 
现代文：刘敬进城后就摘下拉车子用的那块横木，穿着羊皮袄，拜见齐国人虞将军说： 我希望见到皇帝谈谈有关国家的大事。 
English: After Liu Jing entered the city, he took down the beam used to pull the cart and, wearing a sheepskin coat, met with the general of the Qi people and said: I hope to see the emperor to talk about the important things of the country.

古文：虞将军欲与之鲜衣，娄敬曰： 臣衣帛，衣帛见；衣褐，衣褐见：终不敢易衣。 
现代文：虞将军要给他一件鲜洁的好衣服换上，刘敬说： 我穿着丝绸衣服来，就穿着丝绸衣服去拜见；穿着粗布短衣来，就穿着粗布短衣去拜见：不会改换衣服的。 
English: General Yu wanted him to change into a good, crisp dress. Liu Jing said, "If I come in a silk dress, I will wear a silk dress to pay my respects; if I come in a coarse cloth short dress, I will wear a coarse cloth short dress to pay my respects: I will not change my clothes."

古文：於是虞将军入言上。
现代文：于是虞将军进宫把刘敬的请求报告给皇帝。
English: So General Yu went to the palace to report Liu Jing's request to the emperor.

古文：上召入见，赐食。
现代文：皇帝召刘敬进宫来见，并赐给他食物。
English: The emperor summoned Liu Jing to the palace and gave him food.

古文：已而问娄敬，娄敬说曰： 陛下都洛阳，岂欲与周室比隆哉？ 
现代文：过了一会，皇帝就问刘敬要谈什么大事，刘敬便说道： 陛下建都洛阳，难道是要跟周朝比试一下兴隆吗？ 皇帝说： 是的。 
English: After a while, the emperor asked Liu Jing what major event he wanted to talk about. Liu Jing then said: Your Majesty built the capital Luoyang, do you want to compare it with the Zhou Dynasty? The emperor said: Yes.

古文：上曰： 然。 娄敬曰： 陛下取天下与周室异。周之先自后稷，尧封之邰，积德累善十有馀世。
现代文：刘敬说： 陛下取得天下跟周朝是不同的。周朝的先祖从后稷开始，尧封他于邰，积累德政善事十几代。
English: Liu Jing said: His Majesty's acquisition of the world is different from that of the Zhou Dynasty. The ancestors of the Zhou Dynasty started from Houyi, and he was enthroned in Yuyi, accumulating more than ten generations of German politics and good deeds.

古文：公刘避桀居豳。
现代文：公刘为避开夏桀的暴政而到豳居住。
English: In order to avoid Xia Yao's tyranny, he came to live in Handan.

古文：太王以狄伐故，去豳，杖马箠居岐，国人争随之。
现代文：太王因为狄族侵扰的缘故，离开豳地，驱赶着牲口住到岐山，国内的人民都争相追随他。
English: Because of the intrusion of the Di people, the great king left the land of Yunnan and drove his cattle to live in Qishan. The people in the country were all vying to follow him.

古文：及文王为西伯，断虞芮之讼，始受命，吕望、伯夷自海滨来归之。
现代文：到了周文王做了西方诸侯之长时，他曾妥善地解决了虞国和芮国的争端，从此才成了禀受天命统治天下的人，贤能之士吕望、伯夷自海边回来归附于他。
English: When King Zhou Wen became the head of the Western Princes, he had properly resolved the disputes between the State of Shu and the State of Wei. From then on, he became a man who was ruled by the Mandate of Heaven. The wise men Lu Wang and Bo Yi returned from the seaside to join him.

古文：武王伐纣，不期而会孟津之上八百诸侯，皆曰纣可伐矣，遂灭殷。
现代文：周武王讨伐殷纣时，不相约而自动到孟津会盟的八百诸侯，大家都说殷纣可以讨伐了，于是灭亡了殷商。
English: When King Zhou Wu went to fight Yin Zhao, he went to the eight hundred princes of the Mengjin League without prior agreement. Everyone said that Yin Zhao could fight, so Yin Shang was destroyed.

古文：成王即位，周公之属傅相焉，乃营成周洛邑，以此为天下之中也，诸侯四方纳贡职，道里均矣，有德则易以王，无德则易以亡。
现代文：周成王即位，周公等人辅佐他，就在洛邑营造成周城，把它作为天下的中心，四方各地的诸侯来交纳贡物赋税，路程就均等了。这样君主有德行就容易靠它称王统治天下，没德行就容易因此灭亡。
English: When Zhou Cheng Wang ascended to the throne, Zhou Gong and others supported him, and created Zhou City in Luoyang Camp, making it the center of the world. The princes from all over the country came to pay tribute and taxes, and the distance was equalized. In this way, if the monarch had virtue, it would be easy to rely on it to rule the world, and if he did not have virtue, it would be easy to perish.

古文：凡居此者，欲令周务以德致人，不欲依阻险，令後世骄奢以虐民也。
现代文：凡是建都于此的，都想要像周朝一样务必用德政来感召人民，而不想依靠险要的自然形势，让后代君主骄奢淫逸来虐待百姓。
English: All those who built their capitals here wanted to use German politics to inspire the people, just as the Zhou Dynasty did, and did not want to rely on the precarious natural situation and allow future generations of monarchs to abuse the people.

古文：及周之盛时，天下和洽，四夷乡风，慕义怀德，附离而并事天子，不屯一卒，不战一士，八夷大国之民莫不宾服，效其贡职。
现代文：在周朝鼎盛时期，天下和睦，四方各族心向洛邑，归附周朝，仰慕周君的道义，感念他的恩德，依附而且一起奉事周天子，不驻一兵防守，不用一卒出战，八方大国的百姓没有不归顺臣服的，都进献贡物和赋税。
English: In the heyday of the Zhou Dynasty, the world was at peace. People of all ethnic groups in the four directions turned their hearts to Luoyang, attached themselves to the Zhou Dynasty, admired Zhou Jun's morality, felt his benevolence, attached themselves to and served Zhou Tianzi together, did not station a single soldier for defense, did not need a single person to go to war, and the people of the eight great powers did not have to surrender, but all paid tribute and taxes.

古文：及周之衰也，分而为两，天下莫朝，周不能制也。
现代文：到了周朝衰败的时候，分为西周和东周两小国，天下没谁再来朝拜，周室已经不能控制天下。
English: By the time of the Zhou Dynasty's decline, it was divided into two small states, West Zhou and East Zhou. No one in the world came to worship again, and the Zhou Dynasty could no longer control the world.

古文：非其德薄也，而形势弱也。
现代文：不是它的恩德太少，而是形势太弱了。
English: It is not that it has too little benefit, but that the situation is too weak.

古文：今陛下起丰沛，收卒三千人，以之径往而卷蜀汉，定三秦，与项羽战荥阳，争成皋之口，大战七十，小战四十，使天下之民肝脑涂地，父子暴骨中野，不可胜数，哭泣之声未绝，伤痍者未起，而欲比隆於成康之时，臣窃以为不侔也。
现代文：如今陛下从丰邑沛县起事，招集三千士卒，带着他们直接投入战斗便席卷蜀、汉地区，平定三秦，与项羽在荥阳交战，争夺成皋之险，大战七十次，小战四十次，使天下百姓血流大地，父子枯骨曝露于荒郊之中，横尸遍野不可胜数，悲惨的哭声不绝于耳，伤病残疾的人们欲动不能，这种情况却要同周朝成王、康王的兴盛时期相比，我私下认为这是不能同日而语的。
English: Today, His Majesty rose up from Fengyupei County, called up three thousand soldiers, took them directly into battle and swept through the Shu and Han regions, pacified the Three Qin Dynasties, fought with Xiang Yu in Poyang, fought for the risk of victory, fought seventy times in big wars and forty times in small wars, made the people of the world bleed to death, exposed the dead bones of fathers and sons in the wilderness, countless corpses everywhere, miserable cries, and people with injuries and disabilities could not move. However, this situation is compared to the prosperous period of King Cheng and King Kang in the Zhou Dynasty. I privately believe that this is not the same.

古文：且夫秦地被山带河，四塞以为固，卒然有急，百万之众可具也。
现代文：再说秦地有高山被覆，黄河环绕，四面边塞可以作为坚固的防线，即使突然有了危急情况，百万之众的雄兵是可备一战的。
English: Moreover, Qin is covered with high mountains and surrounded by the Yellow River. The four-sided border fortress can serve as a solid defense line. Even if there is a sudden critical situation, the million-strong soldiers can be prepared for a battle.

古文：因秦之故，资甚美膏腴之地，此所谓天府者也。
现代文：借着秦国原来经营的底子，又以肥沃的土地为依托，这就是所说的形势险要、物产丰饶的 天府 之地啊。
English: Through the foundation of the original management of Qin, and supported by fertile land, this is the so-called precarious situation, the land of abundant products.

古文：陛下入关而都之，山东虽乱，秦之故地可全而有也。
现代文：陛下进入函谷关把都城建在那里，山东地区即使有祸乱，秦国原有的地方是可以保全并占有的。
English: His Majesty entered the Hanyu Pass and built the capital there. Even if there is calamity in Shandong, the original place of Qin can be preserved and occupied.

古文：夫与人斗，不搤其亢，拊其背，未能全其胜也。
现代文：与别人搏斗，不掐住他的咽喉，击打他的后背，是不能完全获胜的。
English: You can't win a fight with someone without grabbing him by the throat and punching him in the back.

古文：今陛下入关而都，案秦之故地，此亦搤天下之亢而拊其背也。 
现代文：如果陛下进入函谷关内建都，控制着秦国原有的地区。这也就是掐住了天下的咽喉而击打它的后背啊。 
English: If His Majesty enters and builds the capital in Hakodate, he will control the original area of Qin. This is like grabbing the world by the throat and hitting it on the back.

古文：高帝问群臣，群臣皆山东人，争言周王数百年，秦二世即亡，不如都周。
现代文：汉高帝征求大臣们的意见，大臣们都是山东地区的人，争先恐后地申辩说周朝建都在洛阳称王天下几百年，秦朝建都在关内只到二世就灭亡了，不如建都在周朝都城。
English: Emperor Han Gao solicited the opinions of his ministers, who were all from the Shandong region, and they scrambled to argue that the Zhou dynasty had been ruling Luoyang for hundreds of years, the Qin dynasty had only been in power for two years, and it would be better to build the Zhou dynasty's capital.

古文：上疑未能决。
现代文：皇帝犹疑不决。
English: The emperor hesitated.

古文：及留侯明言入关便，即日车驾西都关中。
现代文：等到留侯张良明确地阐述了入关建都的有利条件后，皇帝当日就乘车西行到关中建都。
English: After Zhang Liang, who stayed in Guanzhong, clearly explained the favorable conditions for building a capital in Guanzhong, the emperor drove west to Guanzhong on the same day to build a capital.

古文：於是上曰： 本言都秦地者娄敬， 娄 者乃 刘 也。 
现代文：当时皇帝说： 本来主张建都在秦地的是刘敬， 娄 就是 刘 啊。 
English: At that time, the emperor said: It was Liu Jing who originally advocated the construction of the capital in Qin, and  is Liu 啊.

古文：赐姓刘氏，拜为郎中，号为奉春君。
现代文：于是赐刘敬改姓刘，授给他郎中官职，称号叫奉春君。
English: As a result, Liu Jing changed his surname to Liu and gave him the official position of vice-regent, with the title of Feng Chun.

古文：汉七年，韩王信反，高帝自往击之。
现代文：汉高帝七年，韩王信造反，汉高帝亲自前往讨伐他。
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Han, Han Wangxin rebelled, and Emperor Han personally went to fight him.

古文：至晋阳，闻信与匈奴欲共击汉，上大怒，使人使匈奴。
现代文：到达晋阳时，得知韩王信与匈奴勾结要共同进攻汉朝的消息，皇帝大为震怒，就派使臣出使匈奴。
English: When he arrived in Jinyang, he learned that Han Wangxin had colluded with the Xiongnu to jointly attack the Han Dynasty. The emperor was furious and sent an envoy to the Xiongnu.

古文：匈奴匿其壮士肥牛马，但见老弱及羸畜。
现代文：匈奴把他们强壮能战的士兵和肥壮的牛马都藏了起来，只显露出年老弱小的士兵和瘦弱的牲畜。
English: The Xiongnu hid their strong, battle-ready soldiers and fat horses and oxen, revealing only frail old soldiers and emaciated livestock.

古文：使者十辈来，皆言匈奴可击。
现代文：派去的使臣十余批回来，都说匈奴可以攻击。
English: More than ten batches of envoys sent back all said that the Xiongnu could attack.

古文：上使刘敬复往使匈奴，还报曰： 两国相击，此宜夸矜见所长。
现代文：皇帝派刘敬再去出使匈奴，他回来报告说： 两国交兵，这时该炫耀显示自己的长处才是。
English: The emperor sent Liu Jing to dispatch another envoy to the Xiongnu, and he returned with a report: The two countries are at war, and this is the time to show off and display one's strengths.

古文：今臣往，徒见羸瘠老弱，此必欲见短，伏奇兵以争利。
现代文：现在我去那里，只看到瘦弱的牲畜和老弱的士兵，这必定是故意显露短处，而埋伏奇兵来争取胜利。
English: Now, when I go there, I only see emaciated cattle and old soldiers. This must be a deliberate display of weakness, and an ambush of strange soldiers to win.

古文：愚以为匈奴不可击也。 
现代文：我认为匈奴是不能攻打的。 
English: I don't think the Huns can be attacked.

古文：是时汉兵已逾句注，二十馀万兵已业行。
现代文：这时汉朝军队已经越过了句注山，二十万大军已经出征。
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty army had already crossed the Juchu Mountain, and two hundred thousand troops had been dispatched.

古文：上怒，骂刘敬曰： 齐虏！
现代文：皇帝听了刘敬的话非常恼怒，骂刘敬道： 齐国孬种！
English: When the emperor heard Liu Jing's words, he was very angry and scolded Liu Jing, saying, "Qi Guo is a bastard!

古文：以口舌得官，今乃妄言沮吾军。 
现代文：凭着口舌取得了官职，现在竟敢胡言乱语阻止我出兵。 
English: Having gained office by talking nonsense, how dare he now talk nonsense to prevent me from going to war.

古文：械系敬广武。
现代文：就用镣铐把刘敬拘禁起来押在广武县。
English: They used shackles to detain Liu Jing and held him in Guangwu County.

古文：遂往，至平城，匈奴果出奇兵围高帝白登，七日然後得解。
现代文：高帝率军前往，到了平城，匈奴果然出奇兵高帝围困在白登山上，被围困了七天后才得以解围。
English: Gao Di led the army to Pingcheng, and the Huns besieged Gao Di on the White Mountain. After seven days of siege, the Huns were able to break the siege.

古文：高帝至广武，赦敬，曰： 吾不用公言，以困平城。
现代文：高帝回到广武县，便赦免了刘敬，对刘敬说： 我不听您的意见，因而在平城遭到围困。
English: When Emperor Gao returned to Guangwu County, he pardoned Liu Jing and said to Liu Jing, "I did not listen to your advice, so I was besieged in Pingcheng."

古文：吾皆已斩前使十辈言可击者矣。 
现代文：我已经把前面那十来批出使匈奴说匈奴可以攻打的人都斩首了。 
English: I have already beheaded the first ten or so people who told the Huns that the Huns could attack.

古文：乃封敬二千户，为关内侯，号为建信侯。
现代文：于是赏赐刘敬食邑二千户，封为关内侯，称作建信侯。
English: As a result, 2,000 households in Liu Jing Cuisine Township were awarded, and Liu Jing Cuisine Township was given the title of Guanai Hou, also known as Jianxin Hou.

古文：高帝罢平城归，韩王信亡入胡。
现代文：汉高帝撤出平城返回朝廷，韩王信逃入胡地。
English: Emperor Han Gao withdrew from Pingcheng and returned to the imperial court, while Han Wangxin fled to Hudi.

古文：当是时，冒顿为单于，兵彊，控弦三十万，数苦北边。
现代文：这个时候，冒顿是匈奴单于，军队强大，勇士有三十万，屡次侵扰北部边境。
English: At this time, it was the Huns alone, with a strong army and three hundred thousand warriors, who repeatedly invaded the northern border.

古文：上患之，问刘敬。
现代文：皇帝对这种情况很忧虑，就问刘敬对策。
English: The emperor was very worried about this situation and asked Liu Jing for a solution.

古文：刘敬曰： 天下初定，士卒罢於兵，未可以武服也。
现代文：刘敬说： 汉朝天下刚刚平定，士兵疲于战争，对匈奴是不能用武力制服的。
English: Liu Jing said: The Han Dynasty had just pacified the country, and the soldiers were exhausted from the war. The Xiongnu could not be subdued by force.

古文：冒顿杀父代立，妻群母，以力为威，未可以仁义说也。
现代文：冒顿杀了他的父亲自封单于，又把他父亲的许多姬妾作自己的妻子，他凭武力树威势，是不能用仁义道德说服的。
English: He killed his father at the drop of a hat to make himself king, and took many of his father's concubines as his own wives. He used force and intimidation, and could not be convinced by benevolence and morality.

古文：独可以计久远子孙为臣耳，然恐陛下不能为。 
现代文：只能够从长计议让他的子孙后代臣服汉朝了，但是恐怕陛下不能做到。 
English: He can only make long-term plans to make his descendants submit to the Han Dynasty, but I'm afraid His Majesty can't do it.

古文：上曰： 诚可，何为不能！
现代文：皇帝说： 果真可行的话，为什么不能做！
English: The emperor said: If it is really feasible, why can't it be done!

古文：顾为柰何？ 
现代文：究竟该怎么办呢？ 
English: What is to be done?

古文：刘敬对曰： 陛下诚能以適长公主妻之，厚奉遗之，彼知汉適女送厚，蛮夷必慕以为阏氏，生子必为太子。
现代文：刘敬回答说： 陛下如果能把皇后生的大公主嫁给冒顿作妻子，给他送上丰厚的礼物，他知道是汉帝皇后生的女儿又送来丰厚的礼物，粗野的外族人必定羡慕用汉家女子做阏氏，生下的儿子必定是太子，将来接替君位。
English: Liu Jing replied: "Your Majesty, if you can marry the great princess born of the empress to the impostor as his wife and give him a rich gift, he knows that the daughter of the Empress of the Han Dynasty has also sent a rich gift. Rough-hewn foreigners must envy using a Han woman to be a prince. The son born must be a prince and will succeed to the throne in the future.

古文：代单于。
现代文：为什么要这样办？
English: Why do it this way?

古文：何者？贪汉重币。
现代文：因为匈奴贪图汉朝的丰厚财礼。
English: Because the Xiongnu coveted the rich gifts of the Han Dynasty.

古文：陛下以岁时汉所馀彼所鲜数问遗，因使辩士风谕以礼节。
现代文：陛下拿一年四季汉朝多余而匈奴少有的东西多次抚问赠送，顺便派能言善辩的的人用礼节来开导启发他。
English: Throughout the year, His Majesty often asked for and gave things that were superfluous to the Han Dynasty and rare to the Xiongnu, and sent well-spoken people to enlighten and inspire him with etiquette.

古文：冒顿在，固为子婿；死，则外孙为单于。
现代文：冒顿在位，当然是汉朝的女婿；他死了，他汉朝外孙就是君主。
English: When he was on the throne, he was, of course, the son-in-law of the Han Dynasty; when he died, his grandchild of the Han Dynasty was the monarch.

古文：岂尝闻外孙敢与大父抗礼者哉？
现代文：哪曾听说外孙子敢同外祖父分庭抗礼的呢？
English: Who ever heard of a grandchild daring to go to court against his grandfather?

古文：兵可无战以渐臣也。
现代文：军队可以不出战便使匈奴逐渐臣服了。
English: The army was able to gradually subdue the Huns without fighting.

古文：若陛下不能遣长公主，而令宗室及後宫诈称公主，彼亦知，不肯贵近，无益也。 
现代文：如果陛下不能派大公主去，而让皇族女子或是嫔妃假冒公主，他也会知道，就不肯尊敬亲近她，那样就没什么好处了。 
English: If your majesty cannot send the great princess, but lets a royal woman or a concubine pretend to be a princess, he will also know, and will not respect and approach her, and then there will be no benefit.

古文：高帝曰： 善。 
现代文：高帝听后说： 好的。 
English: After listening, Gao Di said: OK.

古文：欲遣长公主。
现代文：便要送大公主去匈奴。
English: So they had to send the great princess to the Xiongnu.

古文：吕后日夜泣，曰： 妾唯太子、一女，柰何弃之匈奴！ 
现代文：吕后得知后日夜哭泣，对皇帝说： 我只有太子和一个女儿，怎么忍心把她抛掉远嫁匈奴去！ 
English: Upon learning of this, Empress Lyu wept day and night and said to the emperor: I only have a prince and a daughter, how can I bear to throw her away to marry a Hun!

古文：上竟不能遣长公主，而取家人子名为长公主，妻单于。
现代文：皇帝终究不能派出大公主，便找了个宫女以大公主的名义，嫁给冒顿君主作妻子。
English: After all, the emperor could not send the grand princess, so he found a concubine in the name of the grand princess to marry the monarch as his wife.

古文：使刘敬往结和亲约。
现代文：同时，派遣刘敬前往与匈奴订立议和联姻盟约。
English: At the same time, Liu Jing was sent to negotiate and conclude a marriage alliance with the Huns.

古文：刘敬从匈奴来，因言 匈奴河南白羊、楼烦王，去长安近者七百里，轻骑一日一夜可以至秦中。
现代文：刘敬从匈奴回来，便称说 匈奴在河南的白羊、楼烦两个部落，距离长安最近的只有七百里，轻装骑兵一天一夜就可到达关中地区。
English: When Liu Jing returned from the Xiongnu, he said that the Xiongnu consisted of two tribes, the Baiyang and the Loudui in Henan Province, and that the closest one was only seven hundred miles away from Chang'an. Light cavalry could reach the Guanzhong area overnight.

古文：秦中新破，少民，地肥饶，可益实。
现代文：关中地区刚刚经过战争还很凋敝，人丁稀少，而土地肥沃，可以移民逐渐充实。
English: The Guanzhong area, which has just gone through the war, is still very desolate, with few people, but the land is fertile and can be gradually enriched by immigrants.

古文：夫诸侯初起时，非齐诸田，楚昭、屈、景莫能兴。
现代文：当初各地诸侯起兵发难时，若不是有齐国的田氏各族以及楚国的昭、屈、景三大宗族参加是不能兴盛起来的。
English: At the beginning of the war, when the feudal lords of various regions raised their armies, if the various clans of the Tian clan in Qi and the three major clans of the Zhao, Qu and Jing clans in Chu did not participate, they would not have been able to prosper.

古文：今陛下虽都关中，实少人。
现代文：如今陛下虽然把都城建在关中，但实际缺少人口。
English: Today, although His Majesty has built the capital in Guanzhong, there is actually a shortage of population.

古文：北近胡寇，东有六国之族，宗彊，一日有变，陛下亦未得高枕而卧也。
现代文：北边靠近匈奴敌寇，东边有六国的旧贵族，宗族势力很强，一旦有什么变故，陛下是不能高枕无忧的。
English: Close to the Huns in the north, there are the old aristocrats of the Six Kingdoms in the east, and the clan power is very strong. If anything were to happen, His Majesty would not be able to rest easy.

古文：臣原陛下徙齐诸田，楚昭、屈、景，燕、赵、韩、魏後，及豪桀名家居关中。
现代文：我希望陛下把齐国的田氏各族，楚国的昭、屈、景三大宗族，燕、赵、韩、魏等国的后裔，以及豪门名家都迁移到关中居住。
English: I hope that His Majesty will relocate the various clans of the Tian clan in Qi, the three major clans of Zhao, Qu and Jing in Chu, the descendants of Yan, Zhao, Han and Wei, as well as the rich and famous families to live in Guanzhong.

古文：无事，可以备胡；诸侯有变，亦足率以东伐。
现代文：国内平安无事，可以防备匈奴；若诸侯国发生变乱，也能率领他们东进讨伐。
English: If there is no trouble at home, he can guard against the Huns; if there is turmoil in the vassal states, he can also lead them to fight in the East.

古文：此彊本弱末之术也 。
现代文：这是加强中央权力而削弱地方势力的方略啊。 皇帝说： 好得很。 
English: This is a strategy to strengthen the central power and weaken the local power. The emperor said: Very good.

古文：上曰： 善。 乃使刘敬徙所言关中十馀万口。
现代文：于是派刘敬按照他自己提出的意见把十万多的人口迁到了关中。
English: So he sent Liu Jing to relocate more than 100,000 people to Guanzhong according to his own suggestion.

古文：叔孙通者，薛人也。
现代文：叔孙通是薛县人。
English: Uncle Sun Tong is from Xue County.

古文：秦时以文学徵，待诏博士。
现代文：秦朝时以长于文章，知识渊博被征召入宫，等待任命为博士。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, he was conscripted into the imperial court as a scholar with a wealth of knowledge, and was waiting to be appointed as a doctor.

古文：数岁，陈胜起山东，使者以闻，二世召博士诸儒生问曰： 楚戍卒攻蕲入陈，於公如何？ 
现代文：几年后，陈胜在山东起兵，使者把这个情况报告给朝廷，秦二世召来各位博士、儒生问道： 楚地戍边的士卒攻下蕲县进入陈县，对这件事各位是怎么个看法？ 
English: A few years later, Chen Sheng raised an army in Shandong, and an envoy reported the situation to the imperial court. Qin II summoned all the scholars and Confucianists and asked them: "The soldiers from the Chu region conquered Min County and entered Chen County. What is your opinion on this matter?"

古文：博士诸生三十馀人前曰： 人臣无将，将即反，罪死无赦。原陛下急发兵击之。 
现代文：博士以及儒生们三十多人走向前去说： 作臣子的不能聚众，聚众就是造反，这是死罪不能宽赦，希望陛下赶快发兵攻打他们。 
English: The doctor and more than thirty Confucian scholars stepped forward and said, "A courtier cannot gather a crowd. To gather a crowd is to rebel. This is a capital crime that cannot be pardoned. I hope His Majesty will quickly send troops to attack them."

古文：二世怒，作色。
现代文：秦二世一听就发了火，脸色顿时改了样。
English: As soon as Qin II heard this, he was enraged and his face suddenly changed.

古文：叔孙通前曰： 诸生言皆非也。
现代文：这时叔孙通走向前去说： 各位儒生的话都不对。
English: At this time, Uncle Sun Tong stepped forward and said, "All of you Confucian scholars, your words are all wrong.

古文：夫天下合为一家，毁郡县城，铄其兵，示天下不复用。
现代文：当今天下已合为一个大家，毁掉郡县城池，销熔各种兵器，向天下人昭示不再用它。
English: Today, we have united as one to destroy the county's city pool, sell all kinds of weapons, and show the world that we will no longer use it.

古文：且明主在其上，法令具於下，使人人奉职，四方辐輳，安敢有反者！
现代文：何况有贤明的君主君临天下，给下面制定了完备的法令，使人人遵法守职，四方八面都归附朝廷，哪有敢造反的！
English: What's more, a wise monarch came to the world and formulated a complete decree for the following, so that everyone would obey the law and perform their duties, and all sides would be attached to the imperial court. Who would dare to rebel!

古文：此特群盗鼠窃狗盗耳，何足置之齿牙间。郡守尉今捕论，何足忧。 
现代文：这只是一伙盗贼行窃罢了，何足挂齿。郡官们正在搜捕他们治罪论处，不值得忧患。 
English: It's just a bunch of thieves stealing, what's the big deal. The county officials are looking for them to prosecute them, it's not worth the trouble.

古文：二世喜曰： 善。 
现代文：秦二世高兴地说： 好啊。 
English: Qin II said happily: Good.

古文：尽问诸生，诸生或言反，或言盗。
现代文：又向每个儒生问了一遍，儒生们有的说是造反，有的说是盗贼。
English: He also asked each of the Confucians whether they were rebels or thieves.

古文：於是二世令御史案诸生言反者下吏，非所宜言。
现代文：于是秦二世命令监察官审查每个儒生说的话，凡说是造反的都交给官吏治罪，秦二世认为他们不该说这样的话。
English: As a result, Qin II ordered the ombudsman to examine the words of every Confucian student, and those who said they were rebels were handed over to officials to be punished. Qin II believed that they should not say such things.

古文：诸言盗者皆罢之。
现代文：那些说是盗贼的都免掉职务。
English: Those who said they were thieves were relieved of their duties.

古文：乃赐叔孙通帛二十匹，衣一袭，拜为博士。
现代文：却赐给叔孙通二十匹帛，一套服装，并授给他博士职位。
English: but gave his great-uncle 20 donkeys, a suit of clothes, and a doctorate.

古文：叔孙通已出宫，反舍，诸生曰： 先生何言之谀也？ 
现代文：叔孙通走出宫来，回到居舍，一些儒生问道： 先生说了些什么讨好话？ 
English: When Uncle Sun Tong came out of the palace and returned to his residence, some Confucian scholars asked: What kind words did the teacher say?

古文：通曰： 公不知也，我几不脱於虎口！ 
现代文：叔孙通说： 各位不知道啊，我几乎逃不出虎口！ 
English: Uncle Sun Tong said: You don't know, I can hardly escape from the tiger's mouth!

古文：乃亡去，之薛，薛已降楚矣。
现代文：于是逃离都城，到了薛县，当时薛县已经投降楚军。
English: So he fled the capital and went to Xue County, which had already surrendered to the Chu army.

古文：及项梁之薛，叔孙通从之。
现代文：等项梁到了薛县，叔孙通便投靠了他。
English: When Xiang Liang arrived in Xue County, his uncle and grandson joined him.

古文：败於定陶，从怀王。
现代文：后来项梁在定陶战死，叔孙通就跟随了楚怀王熊心。
English: Later, Xiang Liang died in a battle in Dingtao, and his uncle and grandson Tong followed Chu Huai Wang Xiong Xin.

古文：怀王为义帝，徙长沙，叔孙通留事项王。
现代文：怀王被项羽封为义帝，迁往长沙去了，叔孙通便留下奉事项羽。
English: King Huai was crowned as the Emperor of Righteousness by Xiang Yu and moved to Changsha. His uncle and grandson, Tong, stayed behind to serve Xiang Yu.

古文：汉二年，汉王从五诸侯入彭城，叔孙通降汉王。
现代文：汉高帝二年，汉王刘邦带领五个诸侯王攻进彭城，叔孙通就投降了汉王。
English: In the second year of Emperor Han Gao, the Han King Liu Bang led five princes into Pengcheng, and Sun Tsu surrendered to the Han King.

古文：汉王败而西，因竟从汉。
现代文：汉王战败西去，叔孙通也跟了去终于投靠了汉王。
English: Han Wang was defeated and went west. His uncle and grandson Tong also followed him and finally sided with Han Wang.

古文：叔孙通儒服，汉王憎之；乃变其服，服短衣，楚制，汉王喜。
现代文：叔孙通总是穿着一身儒生服装，汉王见了非常讨厌；他就换了服装，穿上短袄，而且是按楚地习俗裁制的，汉王见了很是高兴。
English: Uncle Sun Tong always wore Confucian clothing, which was very unpleasant for Han Wang to see; he changed his clothing and put on a short jacket, and it was tailored according to the customs of Chudi. Han Wang was very happy to see him.

古文：叔孙通之降汉，从儒生弟子百馀人，然通无所言进，专言诸故群盗壮士进之。
现代文：当初，叔孙通投降汉王时，跟随的儒生弟子有一百多人，可是叔孙通从来不说推荐他们的话，而专门称说推荐那些曾经聚众偷盗的勇士。
English: At first, when Uncle Sun Tong surrendered to the Han King, there were more than a hundred Confucian disciples following him, but Uncle Sun Tong never said anything to recommend them, but specifically said that he recommended those warriors who had gathered crowds to steal.

古文：弟子皆窃骂曰： 事先生数岁，幸得从降汉，今不能进臣等，专言大猾，何也？ 
现代文：儒生弟子们都暗地骂他道： 奉事先生几年，有幸能跟他投奔汉王，如今不能推荐我们，却专门称道特别奸狡的人，有什么道理？ 
English: The Confucian disciples all secretly scolded him, saying, "What is the reason for praising a particularly treacherous person who has served Master for several years and was fortunate enough to go to the Han Dynasty with him, but cannot recommend us now?

古文：叔孙通闻之，乃谓曰： 汉王方蒙矢石争天下，诸生宁能斗乎？
现代文：叔孙通听到骂他的话，就对儒生们说： 汉王正冒着利箭坚石争夺天下，各位儒生难道能搏斗吗？
English: When Uncle Sun Tong heard him being scolded, he said to the Confucianists: The Han king is braving sharp arrows and stones to compete for the world. Can you Confucians fight?

古文：故先言斩将搴旗之士。
现代文：所以我先要称道斩将夺旗能冒死撕杀的勇士。
English: That's why I'd like to commend the warriors who risked their lives to tear down the flag.

古文：诸生且待我，我不忘矣。 
现代文：各位姑且等等我，我不会忘记你们的。 
English: Everyone just wait for me, I won't forget you.

古文：汉王拜叔孙通为博士，号稷嗣君。
现代文：汉王任命叔孙通做博士，称为稷嗣君。
English: Han Wang appointed his uncle and grandson Tong to be a doctor, known as Xizongjun.

古文：汉五年，已并天下，诸侯共尊汉王为皇帝於定陶，叔孙通就其仪号。
现代文：汉高帝五年，天下已经统一，诸侯们在定陶共同尊推汉王为皇帝，叔孙通负责拟定仪式礼节。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Han Gao, the country had been unified, and the princes in Dingtao jointly revered the Han king as the emperor. Uncle Sun Tong was responsible for drafting the ceremony etiquette.

古文：高帝悉去秦苛仪法，为简易。
现代文：当时汉高帝把秦朝的那些严苛的仪礼法规全部取消，只是拟定了一些简单易行的规矩。
English: At that time, Emperor Han Gao abolished all the strict ceremonial laws and regulations of the Qin Dynasty, but only formulated some simple and easy-to-follow rules.

古文：群臣饮酒争功，醉或妄呼，拔剑击柱，高帝患之。
现代文：可是群臣在朝廷饮酒作乐争论功劳，醉了有的狂呼乱叫，甚至拔出剑来坎削庭中立柱，高帝为这事感到头疼。
English: However, the courtiers in the court were drinking and arguing about the merits. Some of them were drunk and shouting wildly. They even pulled out their swords to cut down the yard's neutral pillar. Gao Di was worried about this.

古文：叔孙通知上益厌之也，说上曰： 夫儒者难与进取，可与守成。
现代文：叔孙通知道皇帝愈来愈讨厌这类事，就劝说道： 那些儒生很难为您进攻夺取，可是能够帮您保守成果。
English: Knowing that the emperor was becoming more and more disgusted with this kind of thing, Uncle Sun Tong said persuasively: Those Confucians are difficult to attack and seize for you, but they can help you preserve the results.

古文：臣原徵鲁诸生，与臣弟子共起朝仪。 
现代文：我希望征召鲁地的一些儒生，跟我的子弟们一起制定朝廷上的仪礼。 
English: I hope to recruit some Confucian scholars from Ludi to work with my sons to establish the imperial court's etiquette.

古文：高帝曰： 得无难乎？ 
现代文：高帝说： 只怕会像过去那样的烦琐难行吧？ 
English: Gao Di said: I'm afraid it will be as tedious and difficult as in the past, right?

古文：叔孙通曰： 五帝异乐，三王不同礼。
现代文：叔孙通说： 五帝有不同的乐礼，三王有不同礼节。
English: Uncle Sun Tong said, "The five emperors have different music and the three kings have different etiquette.

古文：礼者，因时世人情为之节文者也。
现代文：礼，就是按照当时的世事人情给人们制定出节制或修饰的法则。
English: The etiquette is to formulate the rules of moderation or decoration for people according to the social conditions at that time.

古文：故夏、殷、周之礼所因损益可知者，谓不相复也。
现代文：所以从夏、殷、周三代的礼节有所沿袭、删减和增加的情况看就可以明白这一点，就是说不同朝代的礼节是不相重复的。
English: Therefore, this can be understood from the situation that the etiquette of the Xia, Yin and Third Dynasties has been inherited, deleted and increased, that is to say, the etiquette of different dynasties is not repeated.

古文：臣原颇采古礼与秦仪杂就之。 
现代文：我愿意略用古代礼节与秦朝的礼仪糅合起来制定新礼节。 
English: I am willing to use ancient etiquette and the etiquette of the Qin Dynasty to formulate a new etiquette.

古文：上曰： 可试为之，令易知，度吾所能行为之。 
现代文：皇帝说： 可以试着办一下，但要让它容易通晓，考虑我能够做得到的。 
English: The emperor said: I can try to do it, but I want to make it easy to understand and think about what I can do.

古文：於是叔孙通使徵鲁诸生三十馀人。
现代文：于是叔孙通奉命征召了鲁地儒生三十多人。
English: As a result, his uncle and grandson were ordered to conscript more than thirty Luddite Confucian students.

古文：鲁有两生不肯行，曰： 公所事者且十主，皆面谀以得亲贵。
现代文：鲁地有两个儒生不愿走，说： 您所奉事的君主将近十位了，都是靠当面阿谀奉承取得亲近、显贵的。
English: In Ludi, two Confucian scholars did not want to leave, saying, "There are nearly ten emperors you have served, all of whom have gained closeness and prominence through in-person flattery.

古文：今天下初定，死者未葬，伤者未起，又欲起礼乐。
现代文：如今天下刚刚平定，死去的还来不及埋葬，伤残的还没有康复，又要制定礼乐法规。
English: For example, today, the country has just been pacified, the dead have not yet been buried, the disabled have not yet recovered, and the rules of etiquette have yet to be formulated.

古文：礼乐所由起，积德百年而後可兴也。
现代文：从礼乐兴办的根由看，只有积累功德百年以后，才能时兴起来。
English: From the perspective of the root cause of the establishment of ceremonial music, it is only after a hundred years of accumulation of merits that it can become fashionable.

古文：吾不忍为公所为。
现代文：我们不能违心替您办这种事。
English: We can't do this for you against our will.

古文：公所为不合古，吾不行。
现代文：您办的事不合古法，我们不去。
English: What you are doing is against the ancient law. We won't go.

古文：公往矣，无汙我！ 
现代文：您去吧，不要玷辱了我们！ 
English: You go, don't disgrace us!

古文：叔孙通笑曰： 若真鄙儒也，不知时变。 
现代文：叔孙通笑着说： 你们真是鄙陋的儒生啊，一点也不懂时势的变化。 
English: Uncles and grandsons laughed and said: You are really despicable Confucianists, you don't understand the changes of the times at all.

古文：遂与所徵三十人西，及上左右为学者与其弟子百馀人为绵蕞野外。习之月馀，叔孙通曰： 上可试观。 
现代文：他便和所征召的三十人一同西行来到都城，他们和皇帝左右有学问的侍从以及叔孙通的弟子一百多人，在郊外拉起绳子表示施礼的处所，立上茅草代表位次的尊卑进行演练。演习了一个多月，叔孙通说： 皇帝可以前来视察一下。 
English: He then traveled west to the capital together with the thirty people he had summoned. They, together with the emperor's learned attendants and more than a hundred disciples of Tong's uncles and grandsons, pulled up a rope in the suburbs to show the place of bowing, and stood on the rank of the representative of thatch to conduct a drill. The drill lasted more than a month, and Tong said: The emperor can come and inspect it.

古文：上既观，使行礼，曰： 吾能为此。 
现代文：皇帝视察后，让他们向自己行礼，然后说： 我能做到这些。 
English: After the emperor's inspection, he asked them to bow to him and said, "I can do this."

古文：乃令群臣习肄，会十月。
现代文：于是命令群臣都来学习，这时正巧是十月，能进行岁首朝会的实际排练。
English: So he ordered all the ministers to come and study. It happened to be October at the time, so they could actually rehearse for the New Year's morning assembly.

古文：汉七年，长乐宫成，诸侯群臣皆朝十月。
现代文：汉高帝七年，长乐宫已经建成，各诸侯王及朝廷群臣都来朝拜皇帝参加岁首大典。
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Han Gao, the Changle Palace was completed, and all the princes and courtiers came to pay homage to the emperor and participate in the New Year's Eve ceremony.

古文：仪：先平明，谒者治礼，引以次入殿门，廷中陈车骑步卒卫宫，设兵张旗志。
现代文：仪式是：先在天刚亮时，谒者开始主持礼仪，引导着诸侯群臣、文武百官依次进入殿门，廷中排列着战车、骑兵、步兵和宫廷侍卫军士，摆设着各种兵器，树立着各式旗帜。
English: The ceremony is: first, at first light, the eunuch begins to preside over the etiquette, guiding the princes and courtiers, and the military and civilian officials to enter the palace gate in turn. The court is lined with chariots, cavalry, infantry and palace guards, and various weapons are set up and various flags are set up.

古文：传言 趋 。
现代文：谒者传呼 小步快走 。
English: The crier calls out, "Hurry up and walk."

古文：殿下郎中侠陛，陛数百人。
现代文：于是所有官员各入其位，大殿下面郎中官员站在台阶两侧，台阶上有几百人。
English: As a result, all officials took their places, and officials from the lower echelons of the palace stood on both sides of the steps. There were several hundred people on the steps.

古文：功臣列侯诸将军军吏以次陈西方，东乡；文官丞相以下陈东方，西乡。
现代文：凡是功臣、列侯、各级将军军官都按次序排列在西边，面向东；凡文职官员从丞相起依次排列在东边，面向西。
English: All meritorious vassals, vassals, generals and officers at all levels are arranged in order in the west, facing east; all civil officials from the prime minister onward are arranged in order in the east, facing west.

古文：大行设九宾，胪传。
现代文：大行令安排的九个礼宾官，从上到下地传呼。
English: The nine protocol officers, who had been arranged in advance, called out from top to bottom.

古文：於是皇帝辇出房，百官执职传警，引诸侯王以下至吏六百石以次奉贺。
现代文：于是皇帝乘坐 龙辇 从寝宫出来，百官举起旗帜传呼警备，然后引导着诸侯王以下至六百石以上的各级官员依次毕恭毕敬地向皇帝施礼道贺。
English: As a result, the emperor rode out of his bedchamber on a dragon palanquin, and all the officials raised their banners to call for vigilance, and then guided the officials at all levels from the princes and kings to those with more than six hundred koku to respectfully bow and congratulate the emperor in turn.

古文：自诸侯王以下莫不振恐肃敬。
现代文：诸侯王以下的所有官员没有一个不因这威严仪式而惊惧肃敬的。
English: There is not a single official below the rank of prince who does not stand in awe of this majestic ceremony.

古文：至礼毕，复置法酒。
现代文：等到仪式完毕，再摆设酒宴大礼。
English: Wait until the ceremony is over, and then throw a big party.

古文：诸侍坐殿上皆伏抑首，以尊卑次起上寿。
现代文：诸侯百官等坐在大殿上都敛声屏气地低着头，按照尊卑次序站起来向皇帝祝颂敬酒。
English: All the lords and officials sitting in the main hall bowed their heads with bated breath and stood up in the order of precedence to toast the emperor.

古文：觞九行，谒者言 罢酒 。
现代文：斟酒九巡，谒者宣布 宴会结束 。
English: After nine rounds of pouring, the host announces that the banquet is over.

古文：御史执法举不如仪者辄引去。
现代文：最后监察官员执行礼仪法规，找出那些不符合礼仪规定的人把他们带走。
English: Finally, inspectors enforce the rules of etiquette, find those who do not comply with the rules of etiquette and take them away.

古文：竟朝置酒，无敢讙譁失礼者。
现代文：从朝见到宴会的全部过程，没有一个敢大声说话和行动失当的人。
English: From the morning to the entire course of the banquet, no one dared to speak loudly and act inappropriately.

古文：於是高帝曰： 吾乃今日知为皇帝之贵也。 
现代文：大典之后，高帝非常得意地说： 我今天才知道当皇帝的尊贵啊。 
English: After the grand ceremony, Emperor Gao said with great pride: "I only learned today how important it is to be emperor."

古文：乃拜叔孙通为太常，赐金五百斤。
现代文：于是授给叔孙通太常的官职，赏赐黄金五百斤。
English: Therefore, he awarded Tong Taizang's official position to his uncle and grandson, and rewarded him with five hundred jin of gold.

古文：叔孙通因进曰： 诸弟子儒生随臣久矣，与臣共为仪，原陛下官之。 
现代文：叔孙通趁机进言说： 各位弟子儒生跟随我时间很久了，跟我一起制定朝廷仪礼，希望陛下授给他们官职。 
English: Uncles and grandsons took the opportunity to make a speech, saying, "All of you disciples of Confucianism have been following me for a long time, working with me to develop the imperial ceremony, and I hope that His Majesty will grant them official positions.

古文：高帝悉以为郎。
现代文：高帝让他们都做了郎官。
English: Emperor Gao made them all retainers.

古文：叔孙通出，皆以五百斤金赐诸生。
现代文：叔孙通出宫后，把五百斤黄金，都分赠给各个儒生了。
English: After Uncle Sun Tong left the palace, he distributed five hundred catties of gold to all the Confucian scholars.

古文：诸生乃皆喜曰： 叔孙生诚圣人也，知当世之要务。 
现代文：这些儒生都高兴地说： 叔孙先生真是大圣人，通晓当代的紧要事务。 
English: These Confucians are happy to say: Uncle Sun is really a great sage, knowledgeable about the pressing issues of our time.

古文：汉九年，高帝徙叔孙通为太子太傅。
现代文：汉高帝九年，高帝调叔孙通任太子太傅。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Gao of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Gao transferred his great-uncle Tong to the position of crown prince and daifu.

古文：汉十二年，高祖欲以赵王如意易太子，叔孙通谏上曰： 昔者晋献公以骊姬之故废太子，立奚齐，晋国乱者数十年，为天下笑。
现代文：汉高帝十二年，高帝打算让赵王刘如意代替太子，叔孙通向皇帝进谏规劝道： 从前，晋献公因为宠幸骊姬的缘故废掉太子申生，改立奚齐，使晋国大乱几十年，被天下人耻笑。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor Han Gao, Emperor Gao planned to let Zhao Wang Liu Ruyi replace the prince, and his uncle and grandson went to the emperor to advise him: Once upon a time, the prince of Jinxian abolished the prince Shen Sheng because of the favor of the princess, and replaced him with the prince of Qi, which caused great turmoil in Jin Province for decades and was ridiculed by the world.

古文：秦以不蚤定扶苏，令赵高得以诈立胡亥，自使灭祀，此陛下所亲见。
现代文：秦始皇因为不早早确定扶苏当太子，让赵高能够用欺诈伎俩立了胡亥，结果自取灭亡，这是陛下亲眼见到的事实。
English: Qin Shihuang, because he did not decide to make Fu Su the crown prince early enough, allowed Zhao Gao to use fraudulent tricks to set up Hu Hai. As a result, he took his own life. This is a fact that His Majesty saw with his own eyes.

古文：今太子仁孝，天下皆闻之；吕后与陛下攻苦食啖，其可背哉！
现代文：现在太子仁义忠孝，是天下人都知道的；吕后与陛下同经艰难困苦，同吃粗茶淡饭，是患难与共的夫妻怎么可以背弃她呢！
English: Now the prince's benevolence, righteousness, loyalty and filial piety are known to the whole world; Lu Hou and Her Majesty have gone through hardships and sufferings together, and have eaten coarse tea and light meals together. How can a husband and wife who share the same hardships turn their backs on her!

古文：陛下必欲废適而立少，臣原先伏诛，以颈血汙地。 
现代文：陛下一定要废掉嫡长子而扶立小儿子，我宁愿先受一死，让我的一腔鲜血染红大地。 
English: Your Majesty must abolish the eldest son and establish the youngest son. I would rather die first and let my blood stain the earth.

古文：高帝曰： 公罢矣，吾直戏耳。 
现代文：高帝说： 先生算了吧，我只不过是随便说说罢了。 
English: Gaudi said: Forget the teacher, I'm just talking about it.

古文：叔孙通曰： 太子天下本，本一摇天下振动，柰何以天下为戏！ 
现代文：叔孙通说： 太子是天下的根基，根一动摇，天下就会震动，怎么能拿天下的根基之事作为戏言来说呢？ 
English: Uncle Sun Tong said, "The crown prince is the foundation of the world. If the foundation is shaken, the world will be shaken. How can you use the foundation of the world as a joke?

古文：高帝曰： 吾听公言。 
现代文：高帝说： 我听从您的意见。 
English: Gaudi said: I listen to your opinion.

古文：及上置酒，见留侯所招客从太子入见，上乃遂无易太子志矣。
现代文：等到皇帝设置酒宴款待宾客时，看到张良招来的四位年长高士都随从太子进宫拜见，皇帝于是再没有更换太子的想法了。
English: When the emperor set up a banquet to entertain the guests, he saw that the four elderly dignitaries invited by Zhang Liang all followed the prince into the palace to visit, so the emperor no longer had the idea of replacing the prince.

古文：高帝崩，孝惠即位，乃谓叔孙生曰： 先帝园陵寝庙，群臣莫习。 
现代文：汉高帝去世，孝惠帝即位，就对叔孙先生说： 先帝陵园和宗庙的仪礼，群臣都不熟悉。 
English: When Emperor Han Gao died and Emperor Xiao Hui ascended to the throne, he said to his uncle Sun: The courtiers are not familiar with the rituals of the former emperor's mausoleum and ancestral temple.

古文：徙为太常，定宗庙仪法。
现代文：于是调任他为太常，制定宗庙的仪礼法规。
English: As a result, he was transferred to be the Grand Master, and he formulated the rules of etiquette for the ancestral temple.

古文：及稍定汉诸仪法，皆叔孙生为太常所论箸也。
现代文：此后又陆续地制定了汉朝诸多仪礼制度，这些都是叔孙通任太常时论定著录下来的。
English: After that, many ceremonial systems of the Han Dynasty were successively established, all of which were recorded by the great-uncle and great-grandson of Emperor Taizong.

古文：孝惠帝为东朝长乐宫，及间往，数跸烦人，乃作衤复道，方筑武库南。
现代文：汉孝惠帝要到东边的长乐宫去朝拜吕太后，还常有小的谒见，每次出行都要开路清道，禁止通行很是烦扰别人，于是就修建了阁道，正好建在未央宫武库的南面。
English: Emperor Han Xiao Hui wanted to go to the Changle Palace in the east to pay homage to Empress Lyu, and he often had small audiences. Every time he traveled, he had to clear the road, and the prohibition of traffic was very annoying to others, so he built a loft road, just south of the Weiyang Palace arsenal.

古文：叔孙生奏事，因请间曰： 陛下何自筑衤复道高寝，衣冠月出游高庙？
现代文：叔孙通向孝惠帝报告请示工作，趁机请求跟皇帝密谈： 陛下怎么能擅自把天桥修建在每月从高寝送衣冠出游到高庙的通道上面呢？
English: Uncles and grandsons reported to Emperor Xiao Hui to ask for instructions, and took the opportunity to request a secret talk with the emperor: How can His Majesty build a flyover without authorization on the passage from the high bed to the high temple every month?

古文：高庙，汉太祖，柰何令後世子孙乘宗庙道上行哉？ 
现代文：高帝庙是汉朝始祖的宗庙，怎么能让后代子孙凌驾于宗庙通道的上空行走呢？ 
English: The Emperor Gao Temple is the ancestral temple of the ancestors of the Han Dynasty. How can the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors?

古文：孝惠帝大惧，曰： 急坏之。 
现代文：孝惠帝听了大为惊恐，说： 赶快拆毁它。 
English: Xiao Huidi was greatly alarmed and said, "Destroy it immediately."

古文：叔孙生曰： 人主无过举。
现代文：叔孙先生说： 做君主的不能有错误的举动。
English: Uncle Sun said, "As a monarch, you can't make a wrong move.

古文：今已作，百姓皆知之，今坏此，则示有过举。
现代文：现在已经建成了，百姓全知道这件事，如果又要毁掉这座天桥，那就是显露出您有错误的举动。
English: Now that it has been built, and the people are fully aware of it, if you want to destroy the flyover again, it will show that you have made a wrong move.

古文：原陛下原庙渭北，衣冠月出游之，益广多宗庙，大孝之本也。 
现代文：希望陛下在渭水北面另立一座原样的的祠庙，把高帝衣冠在每月出游时送到那里，进一步扩大、增加宗庙，这是大孝的根本措施。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will build another original ancestral temple in the north of Surabaya, and send Emperor Gao's crown there when he travels every month, to further expand and increase the ancestral temple. This is a fundamental measure of filial piety.

古文：上乃诏有司立原庙。
现代文：皇帝就下诏令让有关官吏另立一座祠庙。
English: The emperor issued a decree to let the relevant officials build a separate ancestral temple.

古文：原庙起，以衤复道故。
现代文：这座另立的祠庙建造起来，是因为阁道的缘故。
English: This separate temple was built because of the loft road.

古文：孝惠帝曾春出游离宫，叔孙生曰： 古者有春尝果，方今樱桃孰，可献，原陛下出，因取樱桃献宗庙。 
现代文：孝惠帝曾在春天到离宫出游，叔孙先生说： 古的时候有春天给宗庙进献樱桃果的仪礼，现在正当樱桃成熟的季节，可以进献，希望陛下出游时，顺便采些樱桃来献给宗庙。 
English: Emperor Xiao Hui used to travel to the Imperial Palace in the spring. Mr. Sun Tzu said, "In ancient times, there was a ceremony of offering cherry fruits to the ancestral temple in the spring. Now, when the cherries are ripe, they can be offered. I hope that when His Majesty travels, he will pick some cherries to offer to the ancestral temple.

古文：上乃许之。
现代文：皇帝答应办这件事。
English: The Emperor agreed.

古文：诸果献由此兴。
现代文：以后进献各种果品的仪礼就是由此兴盛起来的。
English: From then on, the ritual of offering various fruits flourished.

古文：太史公曰：语曰 千金之裘，非一狐之腋也；台榭之榱，非一木之枝也；三代之际，非一士之智也 。
现代文：太史公说：有道是 价值千金的皮裘衣，不是一只狐狸的腋皮；楼台亭榭的椽子，不是一棵树上的枝条；夏、商、周三代的当时业绩，也不是一个贤士的才智 。
English: Taishigong said: There is a way to be a thousand-dollar fur coat, not a fox's mink; the lattice of the pavilion is not a branch on a tree; the performance of Xia, Shang and the three generations at that time is not a sage's wit.

古文：信哉！
现代文：确实如此呀！
English: This is indeed the case!

古文：夫高祖起微细，定海内，谋计用兵，可谓尽之矣。
现代文：高祖从低微的平民起事，平定了天下，谋划大计，用兵作战，可以说极尽能事了。
English: Gaozu rose from the ranks of lowly civilians, pacified the world, planned a grand plan, and used soldiers to fight. It can be said that he did his best.

古文：然而刘敬脱輓辂一说，建万世之安，智岂可专邪！
现代文：然而刘敬摘下拉车的横木去见皇帝一次进言，便建立了万代相传的稳固大业，才能智慧怎么能会少数人专有呀！
English: However, Liu Jing took down the crossbar of the cart and went to see the emperor for a word, and then established a stable great cause that has been passed down for generations. How can wisdom be exclusive to a few people?

古文：叔孙通希世度务，制礼进退，与时变化，卒为汉家儒宗。 大直若诎，道固委蛇 ，盖谓是乎？
现代文：叔孙通善于看风使舵，度量事务，制定礼仪法规或取或舍，能够随着时世来变化，最终成了汉代儒家的宗师。 最正直的好似弯曲，事理本来就是曲折向前的 ，大概说的就是这类事情吧？
English: Uncles and grandsons are good at watching the wind and the rudder, measuring affairs, formulating etiquette and laws or taking or giving up, and can change with the times, and eventually became the master of Han Dynasty Confucianism. The most honest is like bending, the principle of affairs is originally zigzagging forward, roughly speaking, is this kind of thing?

