古文：李璧字季章，眉之丹棱人。
现代文：李壁，字季章，眉州丹眣人。
English: Li Qibin, Zi Qizhang, Meizhou Danzhong.

古文：父焘，典国史。
现代文：他父亲李焘，为典国史。
English: His father, Li Xi, was a national historian.

古文：壁少英悟，日诵万余言，属辞精博，周必大见其文，异之曰： 此谪仙才也。 孝宗尝问焘： 卿诸子孰可用？ 焘以璧对。
现代文：李壁少年时就很颖悟杰出，每天背诵一万多字，文辞精当广博，周必大看见他的文章，惊奇地说 ：这是被贬下的仙人啊。 孝宗曾问李焘 ：你的儿子们谁可任用？ 李焘回答说李壁可用。
English: When Li Bi was a young boy, he was very bright and outstanding, reciting more than 10,000 words every day, and his vocabulary was exquisite and extensive. Zhou Bida saw his article and said in surprise, "This is a demeaned immortal." Xiaozong once asked Li Qian, "Who can your sons appoint?" Li Qian replied that Li Bi was available.

古文：以父任入官，后登进士第。
现代文：李壁因父亲的恩荫任职，后来考中进士。
English: Li Bi was appointed to the post due to his father's patronage, and later he was promoted to the middle school entrance examination.

古文：召试，为正字。
现代文：被特旨召试后，李壁为秘书正字。
English: After being summoned for a special examination, Li Qibai became the secretary.

古文：宁宗即位，徙著作佐郎兼刑部郎、权礼部侍郎兼直学士院。
现代文：宁宗即位后，李壁被转为著作佐郎兼刑部郎，权礼部侍郎兼直学士院。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Ningzong, Li Qibai was transferred to the position of "Writing Master" and "Minister of Justice," as well as "Minister of Ceremonies" and "Director of the Academy."

古文：时韩侂胄专国，建议恢复，宰相陈自强请以侂胄平章国事，遂召璧草制，同礼部尚书萧达讨论典礼，命侂胄三日一朝，序班丞相上。
现代文：当时韩胄专权，建议恢复失地，宰相陈自强请求让韩胄为平章国事，于是召李壁草拟诏书，和礼部尚书萧达讨论典礼，命令韩胄三日一上朝，地位在丞相之上。
English: At that time, Han Zheng had the exclusive power and proposed to recover the lost territory. Prime Minister Chen Ziqiang requested that Han Zheng be appointed as the Minister of State, so he called Li Bi to draft an edict, discussed the ceremony with Shang Shuda of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and ordered Han Zheng to ascend to the throne on the third day, with a status above the Prime Minister.

古文：璧受命使金，行次扬州，忠义人朱裕挟宋师袭涟水，金人愤甚，璧乞枭裕首境上，诏从其请。
现代文：李壁受命出使金国，走到扬州，忠义人朱裕借助宋军袭击涟水，金人十分气愤，李壁请求杀死朱裕，皇上下诏允许。
English: Li Bi was ordered to send an envoy to Jin and went to Yangzhou. Zhu Yu, a loyal person, attacked Surabaya with the help of the Song army. Jin was very angry. Li Bi asked to kill Zhu Yu, and the emperor allowed it.

古文：璧至燕，与金人言，披露肝胆，金人之疑顿释。
现代文：李壁到燕地后，对金人讲明情况，披肝露胆，金人对宋的疑虑顿时除去。
English: After Li Bi arrived in Yan Di, he explained the situation to Jinren, and the doubts of Jinren about Song were immediately removed.

古文：璧归，侂胄用师意方锐，璧言： 进取之机，当重发而必至，毋轻出而苟沮。 既而陈景俊使北还，赞举兵甚力，钱象祖以沮兵议忤侂胄得罪贬，璧论襄阳形势，深以腹心为忧，欲待敌先发，然后应之，侂胄意不怿，于是四川、荆、淮各建宣抚而师出矣。
现代文：李壁回来后，韩胄正专心一意用兵，李壁说： 进取的关键，应该是慎重发兵并一定要达到目的，不要轻率出兵以至随便停止。 不久，陈景俊出使金国回来，十分支持用兵，钱象祖因为阻止兴兵触怒了韩胄而获罪被贬，李壁论述襄阳形势，认为是腹心之患，想等敌人先出兵，然后我军应战，韩胄不高兴，于是在四川、荆、淮设宣抚并且出兵。
English: After Li Pi's return, Han Xizhu was concentrating on the use of troops, Li Pi said: The key to progress is to send troops carefully and must achieve the goal, do not send troops rashly and stop at random. Soon, Chen Jingjun sent an envoy to Jin Guo to return and fully supported the use of troops. Qian Xiangzu was convicted and demoted because he prevented Xing Jun from angering Han Pi. Li Pi discussed the situation in Xiangyang and considered it to be a problem for his confidants. He wanted to wait for the enemy to send troops first, and then our army would fight. Han Pi was not happy, so he announced and sent troops

古文：璧度力不能回，乃入奏： 自秦桧首倡和议，使父兄百世之仇不复开于臣子之口。今庙谋未定，士气积衰，苟非激昂，曷克丕应。
现代文：李壁估计自己无力挽回出兵的局面，就上奏说： 自从秦桧首倡和议以来，臣下不再讲父兄百世之仇。如今朝廷对国事的计谋还没定，士气颓丧，如果士气低落，是不能战胜敌人的。
English: Li Bi estimated that he was powerless to save the situation of sending troops, so he made a report saying: Since Qin Xizhou's peace proposal, his subjects no longer talk about the eternal revenge of his father and brother. Nowadays, the imperial court's strategy for state affairs has not been determined, morale is depressed, and if morale is low, it is impossible to defeat the enemy.

古文：臣愚以为宜亟贬秦桧，示天下以仇耻必复之志，则宏纲举而国论明，流俗变而人心一，君臣上下奋励振作，拯溃民于残虐，湔祖宗之宿愤。
现代文：臣私下认为应该立即贬责秦桧，向天下表明要报仇雪耻的志向，那么朝纲确立而有关国家的计谋明确，流俗改变而人心归一，君臣上下奋励振作，把陷于金国的百姓从残虐中拯救出来，洗去祖宗的宿愤。
English: Privately, the vassal thought that Qin Xuan should be immediately reprimanded and the ambition to avenge the disgrace of the Qing Dynasty should be made clear to the world. Then, when the program of the dynasty was established and the strategies of the relevant countries were clear, the customs were changed and the hearts of the people were united. The monarchs and the vassals worked hard to save the people trapped in the Golden Kingdom from the cruelty and to wash away the ancestral anger.

古文：在今日举而措之，无难矣。 疏奏，秦桧坐追王爵。
现代文：这些都在今日施行，不难啊。 他的奏书被采纳，秦桧被追削王爵。
English: All of this is being implemented today, it's not difficult, his petition has been accepted, and Qin Yu has been stripped of his title.

古文：议者谓璧不论桧之无君而但指其主和，其言虽公，特以迎合侂胄用兵之私而已。
现代文：议论的人认为李壁不论奏秦桧目无君主而只指责他主张和议，他的话虽然公道，只不过是迎合韩胄用兵的私意而已。
English: The commentators thought that Li Bi only accused him of advocating peace, regardless of the fact that he played the role of a kingless emperor. Although his words were fair, they only catered to Han Xuan's selfish intention of using soldiers.

古文：初，侂胄召叶适直学士院，草出师诏，适不从，乃以属璧，由是进权礼部尚书。
现代文：当初，韩胄召用叶适直学士院，草拟出兵诏书，叶适不答应，他就把此事托付给李壁，李壁因此升为权礼部尚书。
English: At first, Han Xuan called Ye Shizhong Academy to draft the dispatch of soldiers. Ye Shizhong did not agree, so he entrusted the matter to Li Bi. Li Bi was promoted to the authority of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：侂胄既丧师，始觉为苏师旦所误，一夕招璧饮，酒酣，及师旦事，璧微擿其过，觇侂胄意向，乃极言： 师旦怙势招权，使明公负谤，非窜谪此人，不足以谢天下。 师旦坐贬官。
现代文：韩胄兵败后，才发现自己是被苏师旦所害，一个晚上，他招李壁饮酒，正在兴头上，谈到苏师旦，李壁稍稍指出了他的过错，探得了韩胄对苏师旦的态度，于是就明确地说： 苏师旦仗势揽权，使您受到毁谤，不贬逐他，不足以谢天下。 苏师旦被贬官。
English: After Han Kuo's defeat, he only found out that he had been victimized by Su Shidan. One night, he invited Li Bi to drink alcohol and was in a good mood. When talking about Su Shidan, Li Bi pointed out his mistake a little, found out Han Kuo's attitude towards Su Shidan, and then clearly said: Su Shidan's power grab caused you to be slandered, and it is not enough to thank the world without disparaging him. Su Shidan was demoted.

古文：璧又言： 郭倬、李汝翼偾军误国之罪，宜诛之以谢淮民。 拜参知政事。
现代文：李壁又说： 郭倬、李汝翼犯有败军误国之罪，应该杀他们来向淮河流域的百姓谢罪。 
English: Li Pi also said: Guo Gan and Li Ruyi were guilty of misleading the country and should be killed to apologize to the people of the Huaihe River basin.

古文：金遣使来，微示欲和意，丘崈以闻，璧贻崈书，俾遣小使致书金帅求成，金帅报书以用兵首谋指侂胄，侂胄大恚，不复以和为意。
现代文：李壁被任命为参知政事。金国派使臣来，稍微表示想议和，丘宗山报告给朝廷，李壁给丘宗山写信，让他派一个小使臣给金兵元帅送信表示愿意议和，金兵元帅回信表示要交出用兵的首谋韩胄，才能议和，韩胄大怒，不再考虑议和。
English: Kim sent an envoy to Trong and expressed a slight desire to negotiate a peace, Yau Tsung-shan reported to the imperial court. Li Bi wrote to Yau Tsung-shan, asking him to send a small envoy to send a letter to Marshal Kim to express his willingness to negotiate a peace. Marshal Kim replied that he wanted to hand over the leader of the soldiers, Han Min, in order to negotiate a peace. Han Min was furious and would no longer consider negotiating a peace.

古文：璧言： 张浚以讨贼复仇为己任，隆兴之初，事势未集，亦权宜就和。
现代文：李壁说 ：张浚以讨贼复仇为己任，隆兴初年，因各种条件不具备，也采取权宜之计，与金国议和。
English: Li Bi said: Zhang Jun took it as his duty to seek revenge on the thieves, and in the first year of prosperity, because various conditions were not available, he also took a stopgap measure to negotiate peace with Kim Guo.

古文：苟利社稷，固难执一。 侂胄不听，以张岩代崈，璧力争，言丘崈素有人望，侂胄变色曰： 方今天下独有一丘崈邪！ 
现代文：如果对国家有利，本来也难以始终采取一个策略。 韩胄不听，用张岩代替丘宗山，李壁力争，说丘宗山一向有威望，韩胄生气地说 ：难道现在天下只有一个丘宗山吗？ 
English: If it was beneficial to the country, it would have been difficult to always adopt a strategy. Han Zong didn't listen and replaced Qiu Zongshan with Zhangyan, Li Qibing argued that Qiu Zongshan always had prestige, and Han Zong said angrily: Is there only one Qiu Zongshan in the world now?

古文：吴曦叛，据蜀称王，杨巨源、安丙诛之。
现代文：吴曦叛宋，占据蜀地称王。杨巨源、安丙杀了他。
English: Wu Xi rebelled against the Song Dynasty, occupied Shu and claimed to be king. Yang Jiuyuan and An Huan killed him.

古文：事闻，璧议须用重臣宣抚，荐制置使杨辅为宣抚使，而使安丙辅之。
现代文：事情传到朝廷，李壁建议应该用重臣为宣抚，他推荐制置使杨辅为宣抚使，让安丙辅助杨辅。
English: The matter was reported to the imperial court, and Li Bi suggested that the chief minister should be used as the messenger. He recommended that Yang Fu should be appointed as the messenger, and that An He should assist Yang Fu.

古文：丙杀杨巨源，辅恐召变，以书举刘甲自代，侂胄疑辅避事，璧曰： 孝宗闻吴璘病，亟诏汪应辰权宣抚使职事，蜀赖以安，此故事也。 于是命甲权宣抚使。
现代文：安丙杀杨巨源，杨辅恐怕有变乱，写信推举刘甲代替自己，韩胄怀疑杨辅怕事躲避，李壁说 ：孝宗听说吴瞞病了，立即下诏由汪应辰权宣抚使职事，蜀地赖以安定，这是先例。 于是任命刘甲为权宣抚使。
English: An Hien killed Yang Jiuyuan, Yang Jiu feared that there would be turmoil, wrote a letter to nominate Liu Jia to replace himself, Han Zheng suspected that Yang Jiu was afraid of evading things, Li Bi said: Xiaozong heard that Wu Jie was ill, and immediately ordered Wang Yingchen to be appointed to the post of power envoy, Shu relied on stability, which was a precedent.

古文：方信孺使北归，言金人欲缚送侂胄，故侂胄忿甚，用兵之意益急。
现代文：方信孺出使金国回来，说金人想让宋把韩胄交给金国，故此韩胄更愤恨，用兵的想法更坚定。
English: Fang Xinyao sent an envoy to return to Jin, saying that the Jin wanted Song to hand Han Xuan over to Jin. Therefore, Han Xuan was more resentful and the idea of using soldiers was firmer.

古文：璧方与共政，或劝其速去，毋与侂胄分祸，璧曰： 嘻，国病矣，我去谁适谋此？ 会礼部侍郎史弥远谋诛侂胄，以密旨告璧及钱象祖，象祖欲奏审，璧言事留恐泄，侂胄迄诛，璧兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：李壁正和他共掌政，有人劝李壁赶快辞官，不要和韩胄一起分担祸患，李壁说： 唉，国家受到危害了，我离开谁来为国家谋划？ 恰好礼部侍郎史弥远谋划杀韩胄，用密旨告诉李壁和钱象祖，钱象祖想奏明皇上，李壁说此事如果滞留恐怕会泄露出去，韩胄终于被杀，李壁兼任知枢密院事。
English: Li Bi was in power together with him. Some people advised Li Bi to resign as soon as possible and not to share the misfortune with Han Zheng. Li Bi said: Alas, the country is in danger. Who will I leave to plan for the country? It so happened that Shi Yan, the chamberlain of the ceremonial department, planned to kill Han Zheng. He told Li Bi and Qian Xiangzu with a secret message. Qian Xiangzu wanted to inform the emperor. Li Bi said that if he stayed, the matter would probably be leaked. Han Zheng was finally killed. Li Bi also served as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：御史叶时论璧反复诡谲，削三秩，谪居抚州。
现代文：御史叶时论奏李壁反复无常，李壁被降官三级，贬居到抚州。
English: Li Qibai was demoted to the third grade and banished to Fuzhou.

古文：后辅臣言诛侂胄事，璧实预闻，乃令自便。
现代文：后来辅臣说杀韩胄的事，李壁实际事先知道，于是就下令允许他自便。
English: Later, the assistant minister said that Li Bi actually knew in advance about the killing of Han Zheng, so he ordered that he be allowed to do as he pleased.

古文：复官提举洞霄宫，久之，复以御史奏削三秩，罢祠。
现代文：李壁恢复官职为提举洞霄宫，后来，又因御史上奏被降官三级，罢去提举洞霄宫的官职。
English: Li Bi resumed his official position to promote Dongxiao Palace, and later, he was demoted three levels due to his insubordination, and was removed from his official position to promote Dongxiao Palace.

古文：越四年，复除端明殿学士、知遂宁府，未至，而溃兵张福入益昌，戕王人，略阆剽果，至遂宁，璧传檄谕之，福等读檄泣下，约解甲降。
现代文：过了四年，李壁又被任命为端明殿学士、遂宁知府，还没到任，溃兵张福进入益昌，杀有功的人，剽掠阆、果，到遂宁，李壁传信慰抚张福，张福等读后流了泪，约定放下武器投降。
English: Four years later, Li Bi was also appointed as the academician of Duanming Palace and the governor of Suining Province. Before he took office, he routed Zhang Fu and entered Yichang, killed meritorious people, plundered and looted. When he arrived in Suining, Li Bi sent a letter to comfort Zhang Fu. Zhang Fu shed tears after reading the letter and agreed to lay down arms and surrender.

古文：会官军至挑贼，贼忿，尽燔其城，顾府治曰： 李公旦夕来居，此其勿毁。 璧驰书大将张威，使调嘉定黎雅砦丁、牌手来会战，威夜遣人叩门，来言曰： 贼垒坚不可破，将选死士，梯而登，以火攻之。 璧曰： 审尔，必多杀士卒，盍先断贼汲路与粮道，使不得食，即自成擒矣。 以长围法授之，威用其谋，贼遂平。
现代文：恰好官军向溃兵挑战，溃兵愤怒，把全城都烧了，他们看着府衙说： 李公早晚就来居住，这里不要毁坏。 李壁急忙给大将张威送信，让他调嘉定、黎、雅的寨丁、牌手来会战，张威夜间派人来敲门，来人说： 敌人的堡垒坚不可破，将要选勇士，登梯而上，用火攻击敌人。 李壁说： 应该慎重，这样一定会死很多士卒，何不先截断敌人的水源和粮道，使敌人无吃无喝，敌人也就自取灭亡了。 就传给来人长围法，张威用李壁的计谋平定了溃兵。
English: It just so happened that the government army challenged the routed soldiers, the routed soldiers were furious, and burned down the whole city. They looked at the government building and said, "Li Gong will come to live here sooner or later, don't destroy it." Li Bi hurriedly sent a message to General Zhang Wei, asking him to send Jia Ding, Li, Ya Zai Ding, and card players to fight. Zhang Wei sent someone to knock on the door at night, and the person said, "The enemy's fortress is impregnable, we will choose warriors, climb up the ladder, and attack the enemy with fire." Li Bi said, "We should be careful, this will

古文：璧寻引疾奉祠。
现代文：不久李壁因病任宫观职事。
English: Soon after, Li Qibai was forced to step down from his post as palace guard due to illness.

古文：嘉定十五年六月卒，进资政殿学士致仕，谥文懿。
现代文：嘉定十五年六月去世，升为资政殿学士辞官，谥号 文懿 。
English: Jiading passed away in June of the fifteenth year, and he was promoted to be the scholar-dictionary officer of the Palace of Senior Officials, and his posthumous name was Wenjun.

古文：璧嗜学如饥渴，群经百氏搜抉靡遗，于典章制度尤综练。
现代文：李壁嗜学如饥似渴，各家经典全都搜集，没有遗漏，对典章制度尤其熟悉。
English: Li Bi's thirst for learning is insatiable. He has collected all the classics of various schools, without omission, and is particularly familiar with the award system.

古文：为文隽逸，所著有《雁湖集》一百卷、《涓尘录》三卷、《中兴战功录》三卷、《中兴奏议》若干卷、内外制二十卷、《援毫录》八十卷、《临汝闲书》百五十卷。
现代文：他写的文章俊逸不凡，著有《雁湖集》一百卷、《涓尘录》三卷、《中兴战功录》三卷、《中兴奏议》若干卷、内外制二十卷、《援毫录》八十卷、《临汝闲书》一百五十卷。
English: The articles he has written are beautiful and extraordinary. He is the author of "The Wild Goose Lake Collection" one hundred volumes, "The Dust Collection" three volumes, "The ZTE War Record" three volumes, "The ZTE Report" several volumes, twenty volumes of domestic and foreign editions, "The Aid Record" eighty volumes, and "The Lingering Book" one hundred and fifty volumes.

古文：谥曰忠惠。李蘩，字清叔，崇庆晋原人。
现代文：李壁父子和他弟弟李直土都因文学知名，蜀人把他们比作三苏。李蘩，字清叔，崇庆晋原人。
English: Li Bi, his father and son, and his brother Li Zhaotu are all famous for literature, and the Shu people compare them to the three Su. Li Yao, Zhaqing Uncle, and Chongqing Jin Yuan Ren.

古文：第进士，为隆州判官，摄绵州。
现代文：考中进士后，担任隆州判官，负责绵州的政事。
English: After passing the junior high school entrance examination, he served as a judge in Longzhou and was responsible for the political affairs of Mengzhou.

古文：岁昆，出义仓谷贱粜之，而以钱贷下户，又听民以茅秸易米，作粥及褚衣，亲衣食之，活十万人。
现代文：当年出现灾荒，李蘩拿出义仓的粮食贱价卖给受灾的百姓，并把钱借贷给下户，又许老百姓用茅杆换米，做成粥和丝绵衣服，亲自送给灾民吃和穿，被救活的有十万人。
English: When there was a famine in that year, Li Wei took out the grain from the charity warehouse and sold it to the people affected by the disaster at a low price, and lent the money to the lower households. He also allowed the people to use the thatch pole to exchange rice, made porridge and silk clothes, and personally gave them to the victims to eat and wear. There were 100,000 people who were saved.

古文：明年又饥，邛蜀彭汉、成都盗贼蜂起，绵独按堵。
现代文：第二年又发生饥荒，邛、蜀、彭、汉、成都的盗贼纷纷起来作乱，只有绵州是安定的。
English: The following year, another famine occurred, and the thieves of Min, Shu, Peng, Han, and Chengdu rose up one after another to make trouble. Only Mianzhou was stable.

古文：知永康军，移利州，提点成都路刑狱兼提举常平。
现代文：李蘩为永康军知军，转到利州任职，担任提点成都路刑狱兼提举常平。
English: Li Wei was the governor of the Yongkang Army, transferred to Lizhou, and served as the head of the Chengdu Road Penal Prison and the head of Changping.

古文：岁凶，先事发廪蠲租，所活百七十万人。
现代文：灾荒年头，李蘩先打开粮仓赈济百姓，免除租赋，救活了一百七十万人。
English: In the years of disaster and famine, Li Lan first opened the granary to help the people, exempted from rent, and saved 1.7 million people.

古文：知兴元府、安抚利州东路。
现代文：李蘩为兴元府知府、利州东路安抚使。
English: Li Qian was the governor of Xingyuanfu and the pacifying envoy of Lizhou East Road.

古文：汉中久饥，剑外和籴在州者独多，蘩尝匹马行阡陌间访求民瘼，有老妪进曰： 民所以饥者，和籴病之也。 泣数行下。
现代文：汉中常年发生饥荒，剑外和籴在这个地区的特别多，李蘩曾经单人匹马去田野间访问老百姓的疾苦，有位老妇人对他说 ：老百姓所以饥饿的原因，是和籴害的呀。 她流了很多泪。
English: Famine occurs in Hanzhong all the year round, and there are a particularly large number of swordfish and cormorants in this region. Li Wei once went to the fields alone to visit the sufferings of the common people. An old woman said to him: "The reason why the common people are starving is because of the famine." She shed many tears.

古文：蘩感其言，奏免之，民大悦。
现代文：李蘩对她的话很感慨，上奏朝廷，免去了和籴，老百姓非常欢喜。
English: Li Qian was very moved by her words. She appealed to the imperial court and was exempted from the conciliation. The common people were very happy.

古文：徙仓部员外郎，总领四川赋财、军马、钱粮，升郎中。
现代文：李蘩调任为仓部员外郎，总领四川财赋、军马、钱粮，升任为郎中。
English: Li Wei was transferred to the position of warehouse clerk, general manager of Sichuan's wealth, war horses, and grain, and was promoted to the position of junior clerk.

古文：淳熙三年，廷臣上言： 四川岁籴军粮，名为和籴，实科籴也。 诏制置使范成大同蘩相度以闻，蘩奏： 诸州岁籴六十万石，若从官籴，岁约百万缗，如于经费之中斟酌损益，变科籴为官籴，贵贱眂时，不使亏毫忽之价；出纳眂量，勿务取圭撮之赢，则军不乏兴，民不加赋。 乃书 利民十一事 上之。
现代文：淳熙三年，朝中大臣上奏： 四川每年买军粮，名为和籴，实际是科籴，成了老百姓固定的负担。 皇上下诏让制置使范成大和李蘩一起计算一下上奏给朝廷，李蘩上奏说： 各州每年买粮食六十万石，如果按官府买粮的价钱算，一年大约用钱一百万缗，如果在经费中斟酌一下应减少和增加的项目，就能使科籴转变为官籴。粮食价格的贵贱要看年景，不使老百姓吃亏，粮食调出和收入要看数量，不要索取蝇头小利。这样就会军队兴盛，老百姓不增加赋税。 李蘩就写了 对百姓有利的十一件事 上奏给朝廷。
English: In the third year of Chunxi, the Minister of the DPRK and the People's Republic of China made a report: Sichuan annually buys military grain, which is called war grain, but it is actually scientific grain, which has become a fixed burden for the common people. The Emperor's edict made Fan Chengda and Li Jie jointly calculate the report to the imperial court. Li Jie's report said: Each state buys 600,000 kilos of grain every year, and if the price of grain bought by the government is calculated, about one million kilos of money is spent every year. If the items that should be reduced and increased are considered in the funds, the scientific grain can be

古文：前后凡三年，蘩上奏疏者十有三，而天子降诏难问者凡八，讫如其议。
现代文：前后共三年，李蘩上奏疏有十三次，而皇上下诏书给他提问题，让他回答有八次，最后终于同意了他的建议。
English: In total, over the past three years, Emperor Li Yong has sent thirteen envoys, and the Emperor's rescript has asked him questions and asked him to answer eight times, and finally agreed to his suggestion.

古文：民既乐与官为市，远迩欢趋，军饷坐给，而田里免科籴，始知有生之乐。
现代文：百姓很乐意同官府买卖粮食，远近的人都高兴地前来，军饷得到了保证，而老百姓免去了科籴，才知道有生存的欢乐。
English: The people were very happy to buy and sell grain with the government, people from far and near came to visit, the military pay was guaranteed, and the common people were spared the taxes, and only then did they know the joy of survival.

古文：会岁大稔，米价顿贱，父老以为三十年所无。
现代文：恰好是个大丰年，米价顿时贱下来，老百姓认为这是三十年来所没有的事。
English: It happened to be a bumper year, and the price of rice suddenly dropped. The common people thought that this was something that hadn't happened in thirty years.

古文：梁、洋间绘蘩像祠之。
现代文：梁、洋一带的百姓画李蘩的像祭祀他。
English: The people in the Liang and Yang regions painted portraits of Li Xun and offered sacrifices to him.

古文：范成大驿疏言： 关外麦熟，倍于常年，实由罢籴，民力稍纾，得以尽于农亩。 孝宗览之曰： 免和籴一年，田间和气若此，乃知民力不可重困也。 擢蘩守太府少卿。
现代文：范成大由驿站传达上疏说 ：关外麦子成熟，产量是平时的一倍，确实是因为罢去了和籴，民力稍微得到了缓解，才全力进行农业生产。 孝宗看到后说 ：免去和籴才一年，田野间就出现了这样的好景象，我也就知道了民力不能过分困乏。 朝廷提拔李蘩为太府少卿。
English: Fan Chengda said from the straw station: The wheat outside Guanzhong is ripe, and the output is twice as much as usual. It is indeed because the war was abolished and the people's power was slightly alleviated that they made every effort to carry out agricultural production. After seeing this, Xiaozong said: It has only been a year since the war was abolished, and such a good scene has appeared in the fields, and I also know that the people's power cannot be too poor. The court promoted Li Xi to the Taifu Shaoqing.

古文：范成大召见，孝宗首问： 籴事可久行否？ 成大奏： 李蘩以身任此事，臣以身保李蘩。 孝宗大悦，曰： 是大不可得李蘩也。 上意方向用，而蘩亦欲奏蠲盐酒和买之弊，以尽涤民害。
现代文：范成大被皇上召见，孝宗首先问他： 买粮食的事可以长期实行吗？ 范成大上奏说 ：李蘩亲自负责这件事，我用自己的性命担保李蘩。 孝宗十分高兴，说： 李蘩真是不可多得的人才啊。 皇上正有意任用他，而李蘩也想奏明免盐酒和买的弊病，以便把有害老百姓的事都去除。
English: Fan Chengda was summoned by the emperor to see him, and first of all, Xiaozong asked him: "Can the matter of buying grain be carried out for a long time?" Fan Chengda said, "Li Gan is personally responsible for this matter, and I guarantee Li Gan with my own life." Xiaozong was very happy, saying: "Li Gan is really a rare talent. The emperor is interested in appointing him, and Li Gan also wants to clarify the problems of salt-free wine and buying, in order to remove all the harmful things for the people."

古文：会有疾，卒。
现代文：正赶上他有病，去世。
English: Just in time for him to get sick and die.

古文：诏以蘩能官，致仕恩外特与遣表，择一人庶官，前此所未有。
现代文：皇上下诏，因为李蘩是有政绩的官员，在给他辞官恩以外特按他的遗表，在百官中选择一人代替他负责官府买粮的事，这是以前所没有的。
English: The emperor issued an edict that, since Li Qiye was an official with political achievements, in addition to giving him the honor of resigning from the post, he would choose one of the hundreds of officials to replace him in charge of buying grain for the government, which had never happened before.

古文：初，蘩宰眉山，校成都漕试，念吴氏世袭兵柄必稔蜀乱，发策云： 久假人以兵柄，未有不为患者。
现代文：当初，李蘩在眉山任职，校定成都的漕试，他考虑到吴氏世袭兵权一定会酿成四川的祸乱，就在策文中说： 长期把兵权交给别人，没有不造成祸患的。
English: At the beginning, Li Qian was working in Meishan, and he decided to test the waters in Chengdu. He took into account that the Wu family's hereditary military power would surely bring disaster to Sichuan, and said in the plan: There is no way to hand over military power to others for a long time without causing disaster.

古文：以武、宣之明，不能销大臣握兵之祸；以宪、武之烈，不能收藩镇握兵之权。
现代文：以汉武帝、汉宣帝的英明，不能除去大臣掌握兵权的祸患；以唐宪宗、唐武宗的显赫，不能收回藩镇掌握军队的大权。
English: With the wisdom of Emperor Hanwu and Emperor Han Xuan, it is not possible to remove the scourge of ministers controlling military power; with the prominence of Tang Xianzong and Tang Wuzong, it is not possible to recover the power of the provinces and towns to control the military.

古文：危刘氏、歼唐室，鲜不由此。 吴挺以为怨。
现代文：危害刘氏，消灭唐室，很少不是因为这个的。 吴挺怨恨他。
English: Threatening the Liu clan and eliminating the Tang family are rarely not because of this. Wu Ting resented him.

古文：后蘩总饷事，挺谬奏军食粗恶，孝宗以问蘩，蘩缄其样以进，挺之妄遂穷。
现代文：后来李蘩负责粮饷的事，吴挺荒谬地上奏说军粮粗劣，孝宗问李蘩这件事，李蘩把军粮的样品封好交给皇上看，吴挺理屈词穷。
English: Later, Li Qian was in charge of the matter of grain, Wu Ting absurdly said that the military grain was inferior, Xiaozong asked Li Qian about this matter, Li Qian sealed the sample of the military grain and handed it to the emperor to see, Wu Ting was poor in logic.

古文：逾三十年，吴曦竟以蜀叛，安丙既诛曦，每语人云： 吾等焦头烂额耳，孰如李公先见者乎？ 蘩讲学临政皆有源委，所著书十八种，有《桃溪集》一百卷。
现代文：三十年以后，吴曦果然在四川叛乱，安丙杀死吴曦后，常对人说： 对吴曦叛乱，我们只会焦头烂额，谁能像李公那样有先见之明呢？ 李蘩讲究学问、处理政事都有依据，他著有十八种书，有《桃溪集》一百卷。
English: Thirty years later, Wu Xi did indeed rebel in Sichuan. After An Huan killed Wu Xi, he often said to people: For Wu Xi's rebellion, we can only worry about it. Who can be as far-sighted as Li Gong? Li Hong's attention to learning and handling of political affairs are well-founded. He is the author of eighteen books, including the "Peach Stream Collection" of one hundred volumes.

