古文：冯奉世字子明，上党潞人也，徙杜陵。
现代文：冯奉世字子明，上党郡潞县人，后来迁徙到杜陵。
English: Feng Fengshi character Ziming, Shangdang County, Lixian County people, later migrated to Tuling.

古文：其先冯亭，为韩上党守。
现代文：他的祖先冯亭，是韩国上党郡郡守。
English: His ancestor, Feng Ting, was the governor of Shangdang County in South Korea.

古文：秦攻上党，绝太行道，韩不能守，冯亭乃入上党城守于赵。
现代文：秦国攻打上党，堵住了太行山中的通道，韩国守卫不住，冯亭就把上党城献给赵国并且为之防守。
English: Qin attacked Shangdang and blocked the passage in the mountains of Taihang. South Korea could not keep up the defense. Feng Ting dedicated Shangdang City to Zhao and defended it.

古文：赵封冯亭为华阳君，与赵将括距秦，战死于长平。
现代文：赵国封冯亭为华阳君，和赵国大将赵括一起抵御秦国，在长平战死。
English: Feng Ting, the vassal of Zhao, was Hua Yangjun, and Zhao Kuo, the general of Zhao, together with Zhao Kuo, resisted Qin and died in the Battle of Changping.

古文：宗族由是分散，或留潞，或在赵。
现代文：冯氏宗族从此分散各地，有的留在潞县，有的在趟地。
English: Since then, the Feng clan has been scattered all over the country, some staying in Jixian, some in Wadu.

古文：在赵者为官帅将，官帅将子为代相。
现代文：在赵地的成为官吏将军，官吏将军的儿子们又做了代国的相。
English: In Zhao, they became officials and generals, and the sons of the officials and generals also served as acting heads of state.

古文：及秦灭六国，而冯亭之后冯毋择、冯去疾、冯劫皆为秦将相焉。
现代文：到秦灭亡六国以后，而冯亭的后代冯毋择、冯去疾、冯劫都作了秦国的将相了。
English: After the fall of the Six Kingdoms to the Qin Dynasty, the descendants of Feng Ting, including Feng Bezocho, Feng Dezi and Feng Cao, became the generals of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：汉兴，文帝时冯唐显名，即代相子也。
现代文：汉朝兴起以后，文帝时候冯唐很出名，他就是代国丞相的儿子。
English: After the rise of the Han Dynasty, Feng Tang was very famous during the reign of Emperor Wen. He was the son of the acting prime minister.

古文：至武帝末，奉世以良家子选为郎。
现代文：到武帝末年，冯奉世因为是良家子弟而被选任作郎官。
English: Towards the end of Emperor Wu's life, Feng Fengshi was chosen to be his vassal because he was the son of a good family.

古文：昭帝时，以功次补武安长。
现代文：昭帝时候，按照他的功劳的大小和所排次序补任武安县的长宫。
English: At the time of Emperor Zhao, according to the size of his merit and the order of succession, he was appointed to the Naganomiya of Wu'an County.

古文：失官，年三十余矣，乃学《春秋》涉大义，读兵法明习，前将军韩增奏以为军司空令。
现代文：被免官时，年纪已有三十多岁了，才学习《春秋》，钻研其微言大义，读兵法，明晓其内容和实例，前将军韩增上报任命他做军司空令。
English: When he was dismissed from his post, he was more than 30 years old. It was only after he had studied "Spring and Autumn," studied its subtle meaning, read the laws of war, and understood its content and examples, that the former general Han Zeng reported to appoint him as the Air Force Commander.

古文：本始中，从军击匈奴。
现代文：本始年间，随军队攻打匈奴。
English: During this first year, he went with the army to attack the Huns.

古文：军罢，复为郎。
现代文：战争结束后，又做了郎官。
English: After the war, he became a steward again.

古文：先是时，汉数出使西域，多辱命不称，或贪污，为外国所苦。
现代文：在此之前，汉朝数次派遣使节出使西域，大多都辱没使命不称其职，有的贪污，有的被外国刁难侮辱。
English: Prior to this, the Han Dynasty sent envoys to the Western Regions several times. Most of them were dishonest and incompetent, some were corrupt, and some were insulted by foreign countries.

古文：是时，乌孙大有击匈奴之功，而西域诸国新辑，汉方善遇，欲以安之，选可使外国者。
现代文：这时乌孙国很强大，有攻击匈奴的功劳，同时西域诸国刚刚与汉朝和好，汉朝正准备善待他们，想趁机安抚这些国家，就挑选可以出使外国的人。
English: At this time, the Wusun Kingdom was very powerful and had the merit of attacking the Xiongnu. At the same time, the countries of the Western Regions had just made peace with the Han Dynasty. The Han Dynasty was preparing to treat them well. In order to take advantage of the opportunity to pacify these countries, they selected people who could be sent abroad.

古文：前将军增举奉世以卫候使持节送大宛诸国客。
现代文：前将军韩增推荐冯奉世以卫候的身份持使节护送大宛等国的宾客回国。
English: The former general Han Zeng recommended Feng Bongshi to escort the guests from Dawan and other countries back to China as an envoy.

古文：至伊脩城，都尉宋将言莎车与旁国共攻杀汉所置莎车王万年，并杀汉使者奚充国。
现代文：到伊脩城，都尉宋将说莎车国人和其他一些国家一起攻杀了汉朝所任命的莎车王万年，还杀了汉朝使者奚充国。
English: Arriving at Yili City, Captain Song Zheng said that the people of Yarko, together with some other countries, attacked and killed the King of Yarko appointed by the Han Dynasty, and also killed the Han Dynasty's envoy Xucheng.

古文：时，匈奴又发兵攻车师城，不能下而去。
现代文：这时匈奴又发兵攻打车师城，因为没攻下就回去了。
English: At this time, the Xiongnu also sent troops to attack the Chariot Division City, because they did not attack and went back.

古文：莎车遣使扬言北道诸国已属匈奴矣，于是攻劫南道，与歃盟畔汉，从鄯善以西皆绝不通。
现代文：莎车国派使者扬言说北道诸国已经归属匈奴了，当时就攻击劫掠南道诸国，并与他们歃血为盟背叛汉朝，从鄯善国向西都断绝了交通。
English: Yarkand sent an envoy to threaten that the countries of the North Road had already belonged to the Xiongnu. At that time, they attacked and plundered the countries of the South Road, and betrayed the Han Dynasty with their blood-stained alliance, and cut off communication from Xizang to the west.

古文：都护郑吉、校尉司马意皆在北道诸国间。
现代文：都护郑吉、校尉司马意都被困在北路诸国之间。
English: Zheng Ji, the capital guard, and Sima Yi, the captain, were both trapped between the countries on the North Road.

古文：奉世与其副严昌计，以为不亟击之则莎车日强，其势难制，必危西域。
现代文：冯奉世和他的副手严吕商议，认为如果不火速攻击，莎车国就会曰益强大，这样形势就难以控制，一定会危及整个西域。
English: Feng Fengshi and his deputy Yan Lu discussed the matter and thought that if they didn't attack immediately, Yarkand would become more and more powerful, so the situation would be difficult to control and would definitely endanger the entire western region.

古文：遂以节谕告诸国王，因发其兵，南北道合万五千人进击莎车，攻拔其城。
现代文：于是以使节通告诸位国王，从而发动了他们的军队，南北道一共一万五千人进攻莎车国，攻占了它的城池。
English: So he sent word to all the kings, and they launched their armies. A total of fifteen thousand men from the northern and southern provinces attacked the country of Yarkand and captured its cities.

古文：莎车王自杀，传其首诣长安。
现代文：莎车王自杀，就将他的首级传到长安。
English: When the king of the carts committed suicide, his head was sent to Chang'an.

古文：诸国悉平，威振西域。
现代文：诸国都平定下来，冯奉世的威名震动了西域。
English: All countries have settled down, and Feng Fengshi's prestige has shaken the western region.

古文：奉世乃罢兵以闻。
现代文：冯奉世就收兵回国，将情况上奏朝廷。
English: Feng Fengshi withdrew his troops and returned to China, reporting the situation to the imperial court.

古文：宣帝召见韩增，曰： 贺将军所举得其人。 
现代文：宣帝召见韩增，说： 祝贺将军举荐的人很称职。 
English: Xuan Di called Han Zeng and said: "Congratulations, the person recommended by the general is very competent.

古文：奉世遂西至大苑。
现代文：冯奉世就西行到了大宛国。
English: Feng Fengshi went west to the big destination country.

古文：大苑闻其斩莎车王，敬之异于它使。
现代文：大宛国听说他杀了莎车王，尊敬他超过了其他使者。
English: The great kingdom heard that he had killed the king of Yarkand and respected him more than the other emissaries.

古文：得其名马象龙而还。
现代文：得到大宛名马象龙回到长安。
English: Ma Xianglong returned to Chang'an after receiving a grand address.

古文：上甚说，下议封奉世。
现代文：皇帝很高兴，就下命令议论封赏冯奉世的事。
English: The emperor was so pleased that he gave an order to discuss the matter of awarding Feng Fengshi.

古文：丞相、将军皆曰： 《春秋》之义，大夫出疆，有可以安国家，则颛之可也。
现代文：丞相、将军都说： 《春秋》之义，大夫出使国外，如果遇到有利国家之事，可以自行其事。
English: Both the prime minister and the general said: "In the spirit of "Spring and Autumn," doctors are sent abroad, and if they encounter a favorable country, they can do their own thing.

古文：奉世功效尤著，宜加爵士之赏。 
现代文：冯奉世的功劳尤其显著，应当加封爵位赏赐土地。 
English: Feng Fengshi's merit is particularly remarkable, and he should be knighted and awarded land.

古文：少府萧望之独以奉世奉使有指，而擅矫制违命，发诸国兵，虽有功效，不可以为后法。
现代文：少府萧望之单独认为冯奉世奉旨出使有其任务，却擅自假托皇帝命令违背旨意，征发诸国兵马，虽然有功劳，但不可以用他做后人的榜样。
English: Xiaofu Xiaowangzhi alone thought that Feng Bongshih had a mission to send by order of the emperor, but he violated the emperor's order and sent soldiers and horses from various countries without authorization. Although he had merits, he could not be used as an example for future generations.

古文：即封奉世，开后奉使者利，以奉世为比，争逐发兵，要功万里之外，为国家生事于夷狄。
现代文：如果要封赏冯奉世，就开了以后出使的人的方便之门，以冯奉世做榜样，争相发动军队，邀功求赏于万里之外，在夷狄各族中为国家滋生事端。
English: If Feng Bongshi was to be rewarded, it would open the door for future emissaries to follow his example and launch armies in a race to win praise thousands of miles away, causing trouble for the country among the various ethnic groups in Yidi.

古文：渐不可长，奉世不宜受封。
现代文：此例不可开，冯奉世不应受到封赏。
English: This is an unacceptable example, and Feng Fengshi should not be rewarded.

古文：上善望之议，以奉世为光禄大夫、水衡都尉。
现代文：皇帝认为萧望之的建议好，封冯奉世为光禄大夫、水衡都尉。
English: The emperor thought that Xiao Wangzhi's suggestion was good, and appointed Feng Bongshe as the doctor of Guanglu and the captain of water balance.

古文：元帝即位，为执金吾。
现代文：元帝即位，冯奉世任执金吾。
English: Emperor Yuan ascended to the throne, and Feng Bongshi assumed the post of acting Kingu.

古文：上郡属国归义降胡万余人反去。
现代文：上郡属国归降汉朝的一万多胡人背叛而去。
English: Shang County's vassal state surrendered to the Han Dynasty, and more than ten thousand Hu people betrayed and left.

古文：初，昭帝末，西河属国胡伊酋若王亦将众数千人畔，奉世辄持节将兵追击。
现代文：当初，昭帝末年，西河郡属国胡人伊酋若王也率领数千名人众叛变，冯奉世立即持使节领军队追击他们。
English: At the beginning, in the last years of Emperor Zhao, King Yi Rong of the Hu people of Xihe County also led thousands of people to rebel, and Feng Bongshi immediately sent an envoy to lead the army to chase them.

古文：右将军典属国常惠薨，奉世代为右将军典属国，加诸吏之号。
现代文：右将军典属国常惠去世，冯奉世接替他为右将军典属国，加封了诸位官吏的名号。
English: General of the Right Wing and vassal of the State Chang Hui passed away. Feng Fengshi succeeded him as General of the Right Wing and vassal of the State, and sealed the names of all officials.

古文：数岁，为光禄勋。
现代文：几年后，做了光禄勋。
English: A few years later, he was awarded the Order of the Star.

古文：永光二年秋，陇西羌彡姐旁种反，诏召丞相韦玄成、御史大夫郑弘、大司马车骑将军王接、左将军许嘉、右将军奉世入议。
现代文：永光二年秋天，陇西郡羌族乡姐的旁支反叛，皇帝下韶召让丞相韦玄成、御史大夫郑弘、大司马车骑将军王接、左将军许嘉、右将军冯奉世入朝商议对策。
English: In the autumn of the second year of Yongguang, the local branch of the Shanxi County's Yi people rebelled, and the emperor summoned the chancellor Wei Xuancheng, the chief historian Zheng Hong, the chief chariot-riding general Wang Zhi, the left general Xu Jia, and the right general Feng Fengshi to the court to discuss countermeasures.

古文：是时，岁比不登，京师谷石二百余，边郡四百，关东五百。
现代文：当时，连年庄稼收成不好，京都谷物每石卖二百余文钱，边境郡县每石四百文钱，关东五百文钱。
English: At that time, consecutive years of poor crop harvests, Kyoto grain sold for more than 200 mon per stone, border counties for 400 mon per stone, and Kanto for 500 mon.

古文：四方饥馑，朝廷方以为忧，而遭羌变。
现代文：到处闸饥荒，朝廷正在为此忧虑，却又遇到羌族叛变。
English: Famine is everywhere, the imperial court is worried about this, but they are confronted with the rebellion of the Yi people.

古文：玄成等漠然莫有对者。
现代文：韦玄成等人沉默着没有人说话。
English: Wei Xuancheng and others were silent and no one spoke.

古文：奉世曰： 羌虏近在境内背畔，不以时诛，亡以威制远蛮。
现代文：冯奉世说： 羌族贼兵近在国境以内背叛，假如不及时诛灭，就没有办法制服远方的蛮夷。
English: Feng Fengshi said, "The Qiang thief-soldiers have betrayed us near the border. If they are not annihilated in time, there will be no way to subdue the barbarians in the distance.

古文：臣愿帅师讨之。 
现代文：我愿意率领军队讨伐他们。 
English: I'd like to lead an army against them.

古文：上问用兵之数，对曰： 臣闻善用兵者，役不再兴，粮不三载，故师不久暴而天诛亟决。
现代文：皇帝询问需要用的军队的数量，回答说： 我听说善于用兵者，不会两次用兵，不会三次运粮，所以军队不宜长时间地征战在外而顺从天意的讨伐应该速战速决。
English: The emperor inquired about the number of troops to be used, and replied: I have heard that those who are good at using soldiers will not use soldiers twice, and will not transport grain three times. Therefore, it is not appropriate for the army to fight abroad for a long time, and the crusade that obeys the will of heaven should be quick.

古文：往者数不料敌，而师至于折伤；再三发軵，则旷日烦费，威武亏矣。
现代文：过去经常不衡量敌人的情况，而军队至于损失；多次运送粮食，则时间长耗费多，军队的士气低落。
English: In the past, the situation of the enemy was often not measured, and the army as for losses; multiple shipments of grain were long and time-consuming, and the morale of the army was low.

古文：今反虏无虑三万人，法当倍用六万人。
现代文：现在反叛的贼兵大约三万人，依兵法应加倍调用六万人。
English: There are now about 30,000 rebel soldiers, and according to military law, 60,000 should be called up.

古文：然羌戎弓矛之兵耳，器不犀利，可用四万人，一月足以决。 
现代文：而羌戎是使用弓矛的军队罢了，兵器并不犀利，可以调用四万人，一个月足以解决。 
English: But the Qiong Rong is just an army using bows and spears, the weapons are not sharp, forty thousand people can be called up, and a month is enough to solve the problem.

古文：丞相、御史、两将军皆以为民方收敛时，未可多发；万人屯守之，且足。
现代文：丞相、御史、两位将军都认为百姓正在收获季节，不能多发兵；一万人驻扎防守，差不多够了。
English: The chancellor, the minister of history, and the two generals all believed that the people were in the harvest season and could not send more soldiers; ten thousand people were stationed for defense, which was almost enough.

古文：奉世曰： 不可。
现代文：冯奉世说： 不行。
English: Feng Fengshi said: No.

古文：天下被饥馑，士马羸秏，守战之备久废不简，夷狄皆有轻边吏之心，而羌首难。
现代文：国家遭受饥荒，战士、马匹瘦弱，数量也不多，战争用的装备长期废置不修，夷狄各族都有轻视边疆官吏的心思，所以羌族才会首先发难。
English: The country was suffering from famine, the soldiers and horses were thin and there were not many of them, the equipment used in the war had been abandoned for a long time, and the Yidi people of all ethnic groups despised the border officials, so the Yi people would be the first to face difficulties.

古文：今以万人分屯数外，虏见兵少，必不畏惧，战则挫兵病师，守则百姓不救。
现代文：现在以一万人分守数处，贼兵见我方军队人少，一定不会害怕，战则军队受损士气低落，守则不能救助百姓。
English: Now, with ten thousand people guarding several places, the robber soldiers will not be afraid when they see that our army is short of men. In wartime, the army is damaged and demoralized, and the code cannot help the people.

古文：如此，怯弱之形见，羌人乘利，诸种并和，相扇而起，臣恐中国之役不得止于四万，非财币所能解也。
现代文：如果这样，怯弱的形势显露出来，羌族就会趁机进攻，各少数民族一齐响应，互相煽动起兵，我恐怕汉朝要征发的兵役就不止四万了，这不是金钱所能解决的。
English: If this happens, and the situation of weakness is revealed, the Yi people will take advantage of the opportunity to attack, and all the ethnic minorities will respond in unison, inciting each other to raise an army. I am afraid that the military service that the Han Dynasty will have to conscript is no more than forty thousand. This is not something that money can solve.

古文：故少发师而旷日，与一举而疾决，利害相万也。 
现代文：所以少发军队就会旷日持久，和一战而迅速解决相比，利害差别万倍。 
English: Therefore, dispatching a small number of troops will be protracted, and compared with the quick resolution of a war, the interests are a thousand times different.

古文：固争之，不能得。
现代文：冯奉世坚持争取，不能得到更多兵马。
English: Feng Fengshi insisted on fighting, unable to get more soldiers.

古文：有诏益二千人。
现代文：又有诏令增加两千人。
English: There was also a decree to increase the number by two thousand.

古文：于是遣奉世将万二千人骑，以将屯为名。
现代文：当即派遣冯奉世率领一万二千兵马出发，打着领兵屯田的名义。
English: Feng Fengshi was immediately dispatched to lead twelve thousand soldiers and horses, under the name of the leader Tonden.

古文：典属国任立、护军都尉韩昌为偏裨，到陇西，分屯三处。
现代文：典属国任立、护军都尉韩昌为偏将副手，到陇西郡，分别屯兵三处。
English: Ren Li, the vassal of the state, and Han Chang, the captain of the garrison, were the deputy generals. They went to Shaanxi County and set up three garrisons.

古文：典属国为右军，屯白石；护军都尉为前军，屯临洮；奉世为中军，屯首阳西极上。
现代文：典属国任立为右军，屯兵白石；护军都尉韩昌为前军，屯兵临洮；冯奉世为中军，屯兵首阳县西极山上。
English: The right-wing army was led by the vassal Ren Li, and the garrison was led by Bai Shi; the vanguard army was led by the guard captain Han Chang, and the garrison was led by Linyi; the central army was led by Feng Fengshi, and the garrison was led by Shouyang County's Xi Jia Shan Shang.

古文：前军到降同阪，先遣校尉在前与羌争地利，又别遣校尉救民于广阳谷。
现代文：前军到降同阪，先派校尉在前方和羌人争夺有利地形，又另外派校尉到广阳谷营救百姓。
English: When the front army arrived at Tonghan, they first sent a captain to compete with the Yao people for favorable terrain in the front, and then sent another captain to the Guangyang Valley to rescue the people.

古文：羌虏盛多，皆为所破，杀两校尉。
现代文：羌族贼兵人数很多，官兵都被击溃，两个校尉被杀。
English: There were a large number of Qiang soldiers, and the officers and soldiers were all defeated, and two captains were killed.

古文：奉世具上地形部众多少之计，愿益三万六千人乃足以决事。
现代文：冯奉世向皇帝上报地形和需要多少部队的计划，请求增兵三万六千人才足以解决战事。
English: Feng Fengshi reported to the emperor the topography and the plan of how many troops were needed, requesting an increase of 36,000 troops to be sufficient to resolve the war.

古文：书奏，天子大为发兵六万余人，拜太常弋阳侯任千秋为奋武将军以助焉。
现代文：书信上奏，皇帝发兵六万多人，封太常弋阳侯任千秋为奋武将军前去帮助他。
English: After the letter was delivered, the emperor sent more than 60,000 soldiers to help him, including the Grand Prince of Shinyang, Chiharu, who was named General Tengwu.

古文：奉世上言： 愿得其众，不须烦大将。 
现代文：冯奉世上奏说： 希望得到大批士兵，不必烦劳大将。 
English: Feng Feng said: I hope to get a large number of soldiers, don't bother the general.

古文：因陈转输之费。
现代文：于是陈请转运的费用。
English: So Chen asked for the cost of the transfer.

古文：上于是以玺书劳奉世，且让之，曰： 皇帝问将兵右将军，甚苦暴露。
现代文：皇帝当时以玺书慰劳冯奉世，同时也责备他，说： 皇帝慰问领兵在外的右将军，征战在外，非常辛苦。
English: At that time, the emperor wrote a letter of condolence to Feng Bongshi, and at the same time reproached him, saying: The emperor consoled the right general who was away leading the troops. He was away at war and it was very hard for him.

古文：羌虏侵边境，杀吏民，甚逆天道，故遣将军帅士大夫行天诛。
现代文：羌族贼兵侵扰边境，杀害官吏百姓，很是违逆天道，所以派遣将军率领军队将领依照天意前往诛灭。
English: It is against the laws of heaven for the bandits of the Yi people to invade the border and kill officials and civilians. Therefore, the generals were sent to annihilate the bandits in accordance with the will of heaven.

古文：以将军材质之美，奋精兵，诛不轨，百下百全之道也。
现代文：以将军杰出的材质，带领精锐部队，讨伐不轨的贼寇，有百战百胜的道理。
English: With the outstanding material of the general, leading the elite troops, fighting against the rogue bandits, there is a reason for a hundred victories.

古文：今乃有畔敌之名，大为中国羞。
现代文：现在居然有临阵不敢攻战的名声，太给汉朝丢脸了。
English: Now they actually have the reputation of not daring to attack, which is too humiliating for the Han Dynasty.

古文：以昔不闲习之故邪？
现代文：是从前不熟悉军事的缘故吗？
English: Was it due to a previous lack of familiarity with the military?

古文：以恩厚未洽，信约不明也？
现代文：还是恩惠没有普及，军纪不明的缘故？
English: Or is it because the favor is not widespread and military discipline is unclear?

古文：朕甚怪之。
现代文：我非常奇怪。
English: I'm very strange.

古文：上书言羌虏依深山，多径道，不得不多分部遮要害，须得后发营士，足以决事，部署已定，势不可复置大将，闻之。
现代文：你上书说羌族贼兵凭仗深山，多小路，不得不多处分兵占据要害之地，然后必须发动驻防的士兵，才足以解决问题，军队部署已经决定，从形势上看不能再安排大将，我知道了。
English: You wrote in your letter that the Qiang thief-soldiers took advantage of the fact that the battle was deep in the mountains and there were many small roads, so they had to occupy the key areas with many detachments. Then, the soldiers stationed there had to be mobilized, which was enough to solve the problem. The deployment of the army had already been decided, and from the perspective of the situation, it was no longer possible to arrange a general, I knew.

古文：前为将军兵少，不足自守，故发近所骑，日夜诣，非为击也。
现代文：以前因为将军缺少士兵，不足防守之用，所以调遣附近的骑兵，日夜兼程地赶到，不是为了进攻。
English: In the past, because generals were short of soldiers and did not have enough for defense, they dispatched cavalry nearby, arriving day and night, not for attack.

古文：今发三辅、河东、弘农越骑、迹射、佽飞、彀者、羽林孤儿及呼速累、嗕种，方急遣。
现代文：现在征发三辅、河东、弘农越骑、迹射、攸飞、彀者、羽林孤儿和呼速弃、褥种，正在火速调遣。
English: At present, the recruitment and dispatch of Sanfu, Hedong, Hongnong, Yueqiu, Trajectory, Youfei, Zhaozhe, Yulin Orphans, and Huxiao, Zhaozhe, are being dispatched at high speed.

古文：且兵，凶器也，必有成败者，患策不豫定，料敌不审也，故复遣奋武将军。
现代文：战争，是凶险的事情，一定会有成功或失败，恐怕策略不事先商定，了解敌情不审慎，所以又派奋武将军。
English: War is a perilous business, there will be success or failure, I am afraid that the strategy is not agreed in advance, it is not prudent to understand the enemy's situation, so I sent General Tengwu.

古文：兵法曰大将军出必有偏裨，所以扬威武，参计策，将军又何疑焉？
现代文：兵法说大将军出征一定要有偏裨将领，用来耀武扬威，参谋计策，将军又有什么疑虑的？
English: The law of war says that a general who goes to war must have the advantage of generalship, which he can use to show off his military prowess, and to strategize with his staff. What doubts does the general have?

古文：夫爱吏士，得众心，举而无悔，禽敌必全，将军之职也。
现代文：爱护将士，得到军心，决定就不后悔，擒拿敌人一定要彻底，这是将军的责任。
English: It is the general's responsibility to love and care for his soldiers, to gain their loyalty, to make decisions without regret, and to capture the enemy thoroughly.

古文：若乃转输之费，则有司存，将军勿忧。
现代文：至于运输的费用，有专门的官吏负责，将军不必担心。
English: As for the cost of transportation, there are special officials in charge, so the general does not have to worry.

古文：须奋武将军兵到，合击羌虏。 
现代文：等到奋武将军的兵马到达，一起进攻羌族贼兵。 
English: Wait until the soldiers and horses of General Tengwu arrive, and attack the Qiang thief soldiers together.

古文：十月，兵毕至陇西。
现代文：十月，军队都集合到陇西郡。
English: In October, the troops all gathered in Shansi County.

古文：十一月，并进。
现代文：十一月，一齐进攻。
English: In November, attack together.

古文：羌虏大破，斩首数千级，余皆走出塞。
现代文：羌族贼兵大败，斩杀首级数千个，余下的都逃出边境。
English: The barbarian soldiers of the Yao people suffered a crushing defeat, thousands of them were killed, and the rest fled across the border.

古文：兵未决间，汉复发募士万人，拜定襄太守韩安国为建威将军。
现代文：战争未决胜负的时候，汉朝又征募士兵一万人，封定襄太守韩安国为建威将军。
English: When the outcome of the war was still undecided, the Han Dynasty recruited another ten thousand soldiers and crowned Xiang Daju Han'an Guo as General Jian Wei.

古文：未进，闻羌破，还。上曰： 羌虏破散创艾，亡逃出塞，其罢吏士，颇留屯田，备要害处。 
现代文：还未出发，听说羌族贼兵被打败了，皇帝说： 羌族贼兵被击溃受到惩罚，逃出边境，那些休战的将士，多留一些屯田守卫，防守要害之处。 
English: Before leaving, when he heard that the Yao bandits had been defeated, the emperor said: "The Yao bandits have been defeated and punished, and have fled across the border. Those soldiers who have called a truce should leave more garrisons to guard the key areas.

古文：明年二月，奉世还京师，更为左将军光禄勋如故。
现代文：第二年二月，冯奉世回到京师，改任左将军，光禄勋的职位不变。
English: In February of the following year, Feng Bongshi returned to the Beijing Division and was reassigned to General Zuo. Guang Rukun's position remained unchanged.

古文：其后录功拜爵，下诏曰： 羌虏桀黠，贼害吏民，攻陇西府寺，燔烧置亭，绝道桥，甚逆天道。
现代文：之后记功封爵，皇帝下诏说： 羌族贼兵凶残狡黠，杀害官吏百姓，进攻陇西郡官署，烧毁驿亭，断绝道路桥梁，极大地违背了天道。
English: Afterward, he was given a knighthood in recognition of his achievements, and the emperor issued a decree saying: "The barbarous and cunning Yi thief-soldiers killed government officials and civilians, attacked the Shaanxi County government office, burned down the Shaanxi Pavilion, cut off roads and bridges, and greatly violated the laws of heaven.

古文：左将军光禄勋奉世前将兵征讨，斩捕首虏八千余级，卤马、牛、羊以万数。
现代文：左将军光禄勋冯奉世前时率领军队征讨，斩首俘虏八千余人，夺取牛马羊数以万计。
English: Left General Guanglu Feng Bong led the army to conquer, behead more than eight thousand captives, and seize tens of thousands of cattle, horses and sheep.

古文：赐奉世爵关内侯，良邑五百户，黄金六十斤。 
现代文：赐冯奉世关内侯的爵位，食邑五百户，黄金六十斤。 
English: He gave Feng Feng Shixi the title of Marquis of Guanzhong, 500 households of food villages, and 60 jin of gold.

古文：裨将、校尉三十余人，皆拜。
现代文：裨将、校尉三十余人，都有赏赐。
English: More than 30 officers and lieutenants received awards.

古文：后岁余，奉世病卒。
现代文：之后一年多，冯奉世病故。
English: More than a year later, Feng Feng died of illness.

古文：居爪牙官前后十年，为折冲宿将，功名次赵充国。
现代文：他任武将官职前后有十年，为杀敌卫国的老将，功名仅次于趟充国。
English: He served as a military commander for ten years before and after his appointment. As a veteran who killed the enemy and defended the country, his achievements are second only to those of Watanobu.

古文：奋武将军任千秋者，其父宫，昭帝时以丞相征事捕斩反者左将军上官桀，封侯，宣帝时为太常，薨。
现代文：奋武将军任千秋，他的父亲任宫，昭帝时以丞相征事捕杀了反叛的左将军上官桀，封侯爵，宣帝时任太常，去世。
English: Gen. Tengwu was named Qianqiu, his father was named Gong, and when Emperor Zhao summoned and killed the rebellious Left General, he was given the title of Marquis, and when Emperor Xuan was named Taizhang, he died.

古文：千秋嗣后，复为太常。
现代文：千秋继承了爵位，又任太常。
English: Qianqiu inherited the title of nobility, and he was also appointed to the position of Taizang.

古文：成帝时，乐昌侯王商代奉世为左将军，而千秋为右将军，后亦为左将军。
现代文：成帝时，乐昌侯王商代替冯奉世任左将军，而任千秋任右将军，后来又任左将军。
English: When he became emperor, Lechang Hou Wang Shang replaced Feng Fengshi as the left general, and appointed Qianqiu as the right general, and later as the left general.

古文：子孙传国，至王莽乃绝云。
现代文：子孙世代继承爵位，直到王莽时代为止。
English: Subsequent generations inherited the title until the reign of Wang Mang.

古文：奉世死后二年，西域都护甘延寿以诛郅支单于封为列侯。
现代文：冯奉世死后两年，西域都护甘延寿因为诛杀了郅支单于被封为列侯。
English: Two years after Feng Fengshi's death, the Western Capital Protector Gan Yanshou was made a vassal lord because he had killed Zou Zhishan.

古文：时，丞相匡衡亦用延寿矫制生事，据萧望之前议，以为不当封，而议者咸美其功，上从众而侯之。
现代文：当时丞相匡衡也以甘延寿假冒诏令滋生事端为理由，根据萧望之的事例，认为不应当封侯，然而议论者都赞美甘延寿的功劳，皇帝听从众人的意见封他为侯。
English: At that time, the prime minister, Kuangheng, also believed that the fake edict of Gan Yanshou was the reason for the trouble. According to the case of Xiao Wang, he believed that he should not be put under house arrest. However, the commentators all praised the merits of Gan Yanshou. The emperor listened to the opinions of everyone and put him under house arrest.

古文：于是杜钦上疏，追讼奉世前功曰： 前莎车王杀汉使者，约诸国背畔。
现代文：当时杜钦上疏，追溯称颂冯奉世以前的功劳说： 从前莎车王杀害汉朝使者，和各国结盟背叛汉朝。
English: At that time, Duqin Shangsuo retrospectively praised Feng Bongshu's previous achievements, saying: Once upon a time, King Zache killed the Han Dynasty's envoy, allied with various countries and betrayed the Han Dynasty.

古文：左将军奉世以卫候便宜发兵诛莎车王，策定城郭，功施边境。
现代文：左将军冯奉世以卫候的身份根据便利条件发兵诛灭了莎车王，用计策安定了城市，功绩普及边境地区。
English: Left-wing General Feng Fengshi, in his capacity as a military attaché, dispatched troops according to convenient conditions to annihilate the king of Yarkand, stabilized the city with strategies, and popularized the border areas.

古文：议者以奉世奉使有指，《春秋》之义亡遂事，汉家之法有矫制，故不得侯。
现代文：议论者认为冯奉世作为使节有其使命，依《春秋》之义中说臣下不能独断专行，按汉朝的法律则有矫制之罪，所以不得封侯。
English: Commentators believe that Feng Bongshi has a mission as an envoy. According to the meaning of "Spring and Autumn," it is said that a subject cannot act arbitrarily, but according to the laws of the Han Dynasty, there is a crime of coercion, so he cannot be knighted.

古文：令匈奴郅支单于杀汉使者，亡保康居，都护延寿发城郭兵屯田吏士四万余人以诛斩之，封为列侯。
现代文：现在匈奴郅支单于杀害汉朝使者，逃亡到康居国，都护甘延寿征发城中之兵和屯田的将士四万余人来诛杀他，封为列侯。
English: Now the Xiongnu, supported solely by the murder of the Han Dynasty's envoy, has fled to the country of Kangju. To protect the capital, Gan Yanshou has summoned and dispatched more than forty thousand soldiers from the city and the surrounding areas to fight and kill him, and he has been made a vassal lord.

古文：臣愚以为比罪则郅支薄，量敌则莎车众，用师则奉世寡，计胜则奉世为功于边境安，虑败则延寿为祸于国家深。
现代文：我的愚见认为比较罪过则郅支单于比莎车轻，衡量兵力则莎车比郅支多，使用军队则冯奉世少，讲胜利的程度则冯奉世为边境安宁立下功劳，考虑失败的成分则甘延寿给国家带来的灾祸深。
English: My foolish opinion is that the comparative crime is that 支單 is lighter than 莎车, the measurement of troop strength is that 莎车 is more than 支, the use of troops is that Feng Fengshi is less, the degree of victory is that Feng Fengshi has made contributions to border peace, and the consideration of failure is that the disaster caused by Gan Yanzhou to the country is deep.

古文：其违命而擅生事同，延寿割地封，而奉世独不录。
现代文：他们违背命令擅生事端的罪过是相同的，而延寿割地封侯，冯奉世却不记封赏。
English: Their crime of violating orders and causing trouble is the same, but Feng Bongshih did not receive a reward for prolonging his life.

古文：臣闻功同赏异则劳臣疑，罪钧刑殊则百姓惑；疑生无常，惑生不知所从；亡常则节趋不立，不知所从则百姓无所措手足。
现代文：我听说功劳相同赏赐不同则会使那辛苦的大臣产生疑虑，罪过一样刑罚不同则百姓迷惑；疑虑导致变化无常，迷惑导致不知所从；变化无常则导致制度和导向不明确，不知所从则导致百姓不知如何行动。
English: I have heard that the same merit with different rewards will make the hard-working minister have doubts, the same crime with different punishments will confuse the people; doubts lead to instability, confusion leads to confusion; instability leads to unclear systems and guidance, and confusion leads to the people not knowing how to act.

古文：奉世图难忘死，信命殊俗，威功白著，为世使表，独抑厌而不扬，非圣主所以塞疑厉节之意也。
现代文：冯奉世解除危难，忘死征战，完成使命业绩非凡，威名功绩显著，是世代出使者的表率，却惟独压抑而不表扬他，这不是圣明君主杜绝疑虑鼓励节操的意思。
English: Feng Bongshi lifted the peril, fought a war to the death, accomplished his mission with extraordinary performance, and distinguished himself. He is the model of the generation of emissaries, but he is only suppressed and not praised. This is not the intention of the Holy Emperor to eliminate doubts and encourage self-discipline.

古文：愿下有司议。 
现代文：希望交给有关部门商议。 
English: It is hoped that the matter will be referred to the relevant departments for discussion.

古文：上以先帝时事，不复录。
现代文：皇帝认为这是先帝时的事，就不再采纳他的意见。
English: The emperor thought that this was a matter of the previous emperor, so he no longer accepted his opinion.

古文：奉世有子男九人，女四人。
现代文：冯奉世有儿子九人，女儿四人。
English: Feng Fengshi has nine sons and four daughters.

古文：长女媛以选充兵宫，为元帝昭仪，产中山孝王。
现代文：长女冯媛被选入皇宫，为元帝昭仪，生中山孝王。
English: The eldest daughter, Feng Yuan, was elected to the imperial palace as the former Emperor Zhaoyi, the son of Zhongshan Xiao Wang.

古文：元帝崩，媛为中山太后，随王就国。
现代文：元帝去世，冯媛成了中山太后，随中山孝王到封国。
English: After the death of Emperor Yuan, Fengyuan became the empress dowager of Zhongshan, and followed Zhongshan Xiaowang to the fief.

古文：奉世长子谭，太常举孝廉为郎，功次补天水司马。
现代文：冯奉世长子冯谭，太常举荐他孝廉作了郎官，依功劳次序补任天水司马。
English: Feng Tan, the eldest son of Feng Bong, often recommended his son Xiaolian to be the vassal, and he was appointed as Tianshui Sima according to the order of merit.

古文：奉世击西羌，谭为校尉，随父从军有功，未拜病死。
现代文：冯奉世攻击西羌，冯谭是校尉，跟随父亲从军有功，还没有封官就病死了。
English: Feng Fengshi attacked Xidi, Feng Tan was a lieutenant, he followed his father into the army and served with distinction, but he died of illness before he was promoted.

古文：谭弟野王、逡、立、参至大官。
现代文：冯谭的弟弟冯野王、冯逡、冯立、冯参都做到大官。
English: Feng Tan's younger brothers, Feng Ye Wang, Feng Ye, Feng Li, and Feng San, all became high-ranking officials.

古文：野王字君卿，受业博士，通《诗》。
现代文：冯野王字君卿，跟从博士学习，精通《诗经》。
English: Feng Nio Wang, known as King Jing, studied under a doctor and was well versed in the Book of Songs.

古文：少以父任为太子中庶子。
现代文：年轻时因为父亲做官的原因任太子中庶子。
English: When he was young, he was an illegitimate son of the crown prince because his father was an official.

古文：年十八，上书愿试守长安令。
现代文：十八岁那年，向皇帝上书希望能试任长安县令。
English: At the age of eighteen, he wrote a letter to the emperor, hoping to be appointed as the magistrate of Chang'an County.

古文：宣帝奇其志，问丞相魏相，相以为不可许。
现代文：宣帝对他的志向感到惊奇，询问丞相魏相，魏相认为不能允许。
English: Emperor Xuan was surprised by his ambition and asked the prime minister, Wei Xiang, which he thought was unacceptable.

古文：后以功次补当阳长，迁为栎阳令，徙夏阳令。
现代文：后来以功劳次序补任当阳县令，升任砾阳县令，调任夏阳县令。
English: Later, he was appointed to Dangyang County in order of merit, promoted to Shuiyang County, and transferred to Xiayang County.

古文：元帝时，迁陇西太守，以治行高，入为左冯翊。
现代文：元帝时，升任陇西郡太守，因为政绩突出，入朝任左冯翊。
English: At the time of Emperor Yuan, he was promoted to the governor of Shaanxi County, and because of his outstanding political achievements, he was appointed to the court as Zuo Fengyu.

古文：岁余，而池阳令并素行贪污，轻野王外戚年少，治行不改。
现代文：一年多，池阳县令并素来贪污，轻视冯野王是年轻的外戚，治理的劣迹不加改正。
English: For more than a year, the Chiyang County magistrate has always been corrupt, despised Feng Ye Wang as a young relative, and did not correct the bad governance.

古文：野王部督邮掾礻殳祤赵都案验，得其主守盗十金罪，收捕。
现代文：冯野王部署督邮掾投栩县人赵都立案检察，查明是当权者监守自盗十金的罪行，将他逮捕。
English: Feng Niu deployed Zhao Du, the postmaster general and a resident of Tougou County, to set up an investigation and found that the person in power was in charge of the crime of stealing ten gold coins, and arrested him.

古文：并不首吏，都格杀。
现代文：并不服从收捕，赵都格杀了他。
English: and did not comply with the arrest, Zhao Duge killed him.

古文：并家上书陈冤，事下廷尉。
现代文：并的家人上书陈述冤情，事情交给廷尉处理。
English: And the family members submitted a letter to state their grievances, and the matter was handed over to the lieutenant to deal with.

古文：都诣吏自杀以明野王，京师称其威信，迁为大鸿胪。
现代文：赵都到官吏面前自杀来证明和冯野王无关，京师的人都称赞他的威信，升迁任大鸿胪。
English: Zhao Du committed suicide in front of the officials to prove that he had nothing to do with Feng Ye Wang. The people of Beijing praised his prestige and promoted him to the position of Da Hongzhu.

古文：数年，御史大夫李延寿病卒，在位多举野王。
现代文：几年之后，御史大夫李延寿病卒，官吏多推荐冯野王继其位。
English: A few years later, the imperial historian Li Yanshou died of illness, and officials recommended Feng Niu Wang to succeed him.

古文：上使尚书选第中二千石，而野王行能第一。
现代文：皇帝派尚书挑选二千石级的官员，而冯野王的品行和能力都排在第一。
English: The emperor sent Shang Shu to select officials of 2,000 koku rank, and Feng Ye Wang's conduct and ability ranked first.

古文：上曰： 吾用野王为三公，后世必谓我私后宫亲属，以野王为比。 
现代文：皇帝说： 如果我用冯野王为三公，后世一定会以此为例说我偏向后宫妃嫔。 
English: The emperor said, "If I use Feng Ye Wang as the Three Princes, posterity will certainly use this as an example to say that I am biased towards the harem concubines."

古文：乃下诏曰： 刚强坚固，确然亡欲，大鸿胪野王是也。
现代文：就下韶说： 刚强坚毅，确实没有私欲，要数大鸿胪冯野王。
English: As for the lower jaw, he said, "I am strong and resolute. I truly have no selfish desires. I want to be a great warrior like King Feng."

古文：心辨善辞，可使四方，少府五鹿充宗是也。
现代文：能言善辩，可以出使四方，要数少府五鹿充宗。
English: If you can speak well and argue well, you can be sent to the four directions, and you should count the number of Shofu, Goka, and Mitsumune.

古文：廉洁节俭，太子少傅张谭是也。
现代文：廉洁节俭，要数太子少傅张谭。
English: To be honest and frugal, Zhang Tan, the youngest prince, should be counted among the best.

古文：其以少傅为御史大夫。 
现代文：现任命少傅张谭作御史大夫。 
English: He has now appointed Junior Master Zhang Tan as the chief historian.

古文：上繇下第而用谭，越次避嫌不用野王，以昭仪兄故也。
现代文：皇帝从下级任用张谭，越过次第，避嫌而不用冯野王，因为他是昭仪的哥哥的缘故。
English: The emperor appointed Zhang Tan from the lower ranks, bypassing the hierarchy, avoiding the objection and not using Feng Ye Wang, because he was the brother of Zhao Yi.

古文：野王乃叹曰： 人皆以女宠贵，我兄弟独以贱！ 
现代文：冯野王于是叹息说： 别人因为受皇帝宠爱的妃子而尊贵，我们兄弟却因此而卑贱！ 
English: Feng Ye Wang then sighed and said, "Others are honored because they are the emperor's favorite concubines, but our brothers are lowly because of this!

古文：野王虽不为三公，甚见器重，有名当世。
现代文：冯野王虽然没作三公，却很被器重，在当时很有名望。
English: Although Feng Ye Wang did not become the Third Prince, he was very respected and was very famous at that time.

古文：成帝立，有司奏野王王舅，不宜备九卿，以秩出为上郡太守，加赐黄金百斤。
现代文：成帝即位，有关部门上奏称冯野王是国舅，不合适备职九卿。依据品级出朝任上郡太守，另外赏赐黄金一百斤。
English: When Emperor Cheng ascended to the throne, the relevant departments reported that Feng Ye Wang was the uncle of the country and was not suitable to prepare for the post of nine nobles. According to the rank, he was appointed as the county governor, and was also awarded one hundred jin of gold.

古文：朔方刺史萧育奏封事，荐言： 野王行能高妙，内足与图身，外足以虑化。
现代文：朔方刺史萧育上奏密事，推荐说 冯野王品行能力高超杰出，在内政上足以考虑自身，在外交上足以谋略教化。
English: Shuo Fang suggested that Xiao Yu play a secret, recommending that Feng Ye Wang's moral ability is superb and outstanding, enough to consider himself in domestic affairs, and enough to strategize and educate in diplomacy.

古文：窃惜野王怀国之宝，而不得陪朝廷与朝者并。
现代文：我可惜冯野王是治理国家的栋梁，却不能辅佐朝政和朝中大臣并立。
English: I regret that Feng Ye Wang is a pillar in the governance of the country, but he cannot support the government of the DPRK and the ministers of the DPRK and China.

古文：野王前以王舅出，以贤复入，明国家乐进贤也。 
现代文：冯野王以前因为是国舅而从朝中调出，又因为贤良调入朝廷，彰明国家是乐于进用贤良的。 
English: Feng Ye Wang used to be transferred from the central government to the imperial court because he was the uncle of the king, and he was also transferred to the imperial court because he was a virtuous person. This shows that the country is willing to promote virtuous people.

古文：上自为太子时闻知野王。
现代文：皇帝自从作太子时就听说过冯野王。
English: The emperor had heard of Feng Ye Wang since he was crown prince.

古文：会其病免，复以故二千石使行河堤，因拜为琅邪太守。
现代文：正好遇上他因病免职，又以原来二千石的级别治理黄河堤岸，于是封为琅邪太守。
English: It just so happened that he was relieved of his duties due to illness, and managed the Yellow River embankment at the level of the original two thousand stones, so he was given the title of Shanyi Taishu.

古文：是时，成帝长舅阳平侯王凤为大司马大将军，辅政八九年矣，时数有灾异，京兆尹王章讥凤专权不可任用，荐野王代凤。
现代文：当时成帝的长舅阳平侯王凤任大司马大将军，辅政已经八九年了，当时数次发生灾异，京兆尹王章讥刺王凤专权不能加以任用，推荐冯野王代替王凤。
English: At that time, Emperor Chengzong's eldest uncle Yang Ping Hou Wang Feng was appointed as the grand secretary of Ma Da Gen. It had been eighty-nine years since he became a vice-governor. At that time, several disasters occurred. Jing Zhao Yin Wang Zhang ridiculed Wang Feng's exclusive right to be appointed, and recommended Feng Ye Wang to replace Wang Feng.

古文：上初纳其言，而后诛章，语在《元后传》。
现代文：皇帝开始时接纳王章的建议，后来王章被诛杀，事情记录在《元后传》中。
English: At the beginning, the emperor accepted Wang Zhang's suggestion. Later, Wang Zhang was beaten to death, and the incident was recorded in "The Tale of the Yuan Dynasty."

古文：于是野王惧不自安，遂病，满三月赐告，与妻子归杜陵就医药。
现代文：于是冯野王恐惧不安，就病倒了，病假三个月已满，又续请病假，和妻子儿女回杜陵治病。
English: As a result, Feng Ye Wang was afraid and uneasy, and fell ill. His three-month sick leave was over, and he continued to take sick leave, and he and his wife and children returned to Du Ling to treat their illnesses.

古文：大将军凤风御史中丞劾奏野王赐告养病而私自便，持虎符出界归家，奉诏不敬。
现代文：大将军王凤指使御史中丞弹劾冯野王请假养病而图自己安乐，持虎符出界回家，是领皇帝诏令而不敬重。
English: The great general Wang Feng instructed the Grand Historian Zhongzheng to impeach Feng Ye Wang for taking time off to recover from illness and seeking his own peace of mind, leaving the country with a tiger emblem and returning home. He was disrespectful of the emperor's edict.

古文：杜钦时在大将军莫府，钦素高野王父子行能，奏记于凤，为野王言曰： 窃见令曰，吏二千石告，过长安谒，不分别予赐。
现代文：杜钦当时在大将军王凤的幕府，他素来尊重冯野王父子的品行才能，给王凤呈上奏摺，替冯野王说话道： 我见诏令说，二千石级的官吏请假，经过长安拜谒，不分别予告和赐告。
English: Duchin was at that time in the shogunate of the general Wang Feng. He had always respected the moral qualities of the father and son of Feng Ye Wang. He presented Wang Feng with a report and spoke for Feng Ye Wang, saying: I saw the imperial decree saying that officials of two thousand koku class would ask for leave, and after Chang An paid homage, they would not notice and give notice separately.

古文：今有司以为予告得归，赐告不得，是一律两科，失省刑之意。
现代文：现在有关部门认为冯野王予告得以养病，赐告却不能批准，这是同一法律两种等级，失去了减轻刑罚的意义。
English: Now, the relevant departments believe that Feng Nio Wang's notice was able to recover from illness, but the notice could not be approved. These are two levels of the same law, and have lost the meaning of reducing the penalty.

古文：夫三最予告，令也；病满三月赐告，诏恩也。
现代文：政绩考核三次最突出的给予予告，这是命令；有病满三个月赐告，这是皇帝赐恩的诏令。
English: The most prominent of the three performance appraisals is the announcement, which is an order; the announcement of three months of illness, which is the emperor's decree.

古文：令告则得，诏恩不得，失轻重之差。
现代文：令告可以得到，赐恩却得不到，失去了轻重的差别。
English: The distinction between what can be commanded and what cannot be bestowed has lost its significance.

古文：又二千石病赐告得归有故事，不得去郡亡著令。
现代文：另外，二千石级官员有病赐告得以回家的有旧例，不能离开守郡也无明文规定。
English: In addition, there is an old precedent that officials of 2,000 koku rank can go home if they are ill, and there is no explicit provision that they cannot leave the county.

古文：传曰： 赏疑从予，所以广恩劝功也；罚疑从去，所以慎刑，阙难知也。 
现代文：古语说： 功绩不清楚时却给予奖赏，是为了普施恩德鼓励立功；过错不明显时应免去惩罚，为的是谨慎刑罚，不处理难于知晓的事。 
English: The ancients said: When the merits are not clear, the reward is given in order to encourage the merit of generosity; when the fault is not obvious, the punishment should be exempted in order to be cautious and not deal with things that are difficult to know.

古文：今释令与故事而假不敬之法，甚违阙疑从去之意。
现代文：现在抛开法令和旧例而依托不敬的法律，很违反阙疑从去的意思。
English: It is contrary to the spirit of the Constitution to cast aside laws and precedents and rely on the law of disrespect.

古文：即以二千石守千里之地，任兵马之重，不宜去郡，将以制刑为后法者，则野王之罪，在未制令前也。
现代文：即使以二干石级的官吏守卫彳里方圆的地域，担任军事要职，不应该离开守郡，将用刑罚为后世之法的，那么冯野王的罪遇，在于以前没有制订法令。
English: Even if officials of the second level of the hierarchy guard the area within the radius of a square kilometer, hold important military positions, should not leave the county, and will use punishment as the law of future generations, then Fengyuan Wang's crime is that there was no law before.

古文：刑赏大信，不可不慎。 
现代文：刑罚赏赐是应该很有信誉的，不可以不谨慎。 
English: Penalty awards should be credible, not imprudent.

古文：凤不听，竟免野王。
现代文：王凤不听，最终免去野王的官职。
English: Wang Feng did not listen, and finally dismissed the wild king from his official post.

古文：郡国二千石病赐告不得归家，自此始。
现代文：郡国中二千石级的官员赐告不能回家，从此开始。
English: Officials of the county's 2,000-koku junior high school announced that they could not go home, starting from here.

古文：初，野王嗣父爵为关内侯，免归。
现代文：当初，冯野王继承父亲的爵位作关内侯，免职回家。
English: At first, Feng Ye Wang inherited his father's title as Guan Nei Hou and returned home after being relieved of his duties.

古文：数年，年老，终于家。
现代文：几年之后，年老，在家中去世。
English: A few years later, in his old age, he died at home.

古文：子座嗣爵，至孙坐中山太后事绝。
现代文：儿子冯座继承爵位，到孙子因为连坐中山太后一案而被削去爵位。
English: His son Fengza inherited the title, but his grandson was stripped of his title because of the case of the concubine of the Empress Dowager Zhongshan.

古文：逡字子产，通《易》，太常察孝廉为郎，补谒者。
现代文：冯逡字子产，通《周易》。太常察举孝廉而任郎官，补任谒者。
English: He was the son of Feng Xuan, and was familiar with "Zhou Yi." He was always on the lookout for filial piety, and was appointed as a vassal. He was the best person to fill the post of vassal.

古文：建昭中，选为复土校尉。
现代文：建昭年间，选任作复土校尉。
English: During the Jian Zhao era, he was appointed as a Fudo school captain.

古文：光禄勋于永举茂材，为美阳令。
现代文：光禄勋于永举荐他为秀才，任美阳县令。
English: Kuang Luk Hun recommended Yu Yong as a great talent and appointed him as the governor of Miyang County.

古文：功次迁长乐屯卫司马，清河都尉，陇西太守。
现代文：依照功劳的次序升迁任长乐宫屯卫司马，清河郡都尉，陇西郡太守。
English: According to the order of merit, he was promoted to the post of Changle Palace Tun Wei Sima, Qinghe County Captain, and Shaanxi County Governor.

古文：治行廉平，年四十余卒。
现代文：治理政绩廉洁公正，年纪四十多岁时去世。
English: He died at the age of forty-plus, after a long and unblemished political career.

古文：为都尉时，言河堤方略，在《沟洫志》。
现代文：任都尉时，曾有关于治理黄河大堤的设想，详见本书《沟洫志》。
English: When he was a captain, he had an idea about the management of the Yellow River levee, which is detailed in the book "Gou Xizhi."

古文：立字圣卿，通《春秋》。
现代文：冯立字圣卿，精通《春秋》。
English: Feng Lizhi Shengqing, proficient in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：以父任为郎，稍迁诸曹。
现代文：因为父亲的关系任命作郎官，然后升迁作曹官。
English: Because of his father's connections, he was appointed as a steward and then promoted to sergeant.

古文：竟宁中，以王舅出为五原属国都尉。
现代文：竟宁年间，因为是国舅的关系出任五原郡属国都尉。
English: During the Qiongning era, because of his uncle-in-law relationship, he served as the provincial captain of Wuhuan County.

古文：数年，迁五原太守，徙西河、上郡。
现代文：几年以后，升迁为五原郡太守，转任西河郡、上郡太守。
English: A few years later, he was promoted to become the governor of Gohara County, and then the governor of Saikawa County and Kamigata County.

古文：立居职公廉，治行略与野王相似，而多知有恩贷，好为条教。
现代文：冯立为官公正廉洁，治理政绩和冯野王大致相同，而多有智谋待人宽厚有恩泽，喜欢制订规章条令。
English: Feng Li was a fair and incorruptible official. His governance and political achievements were roughly the same as those of Feng Ye Wang. However, he was more intelligent, generous and benevolent, and liked to formulate rules and regulations.

古文：吏民嘉美野王、立相代为太守，歌之曰： 大冯君，小冯君，兄弟继踵相因循，聪明贤知惠吏民，政如鲁、卫德化钧，周公、康叔犹二君。 
现代文：官吏百姓赞美冯野王、冯立前后作太守，歌颂他们说： 大冯君，小冯君，兄弟相为太守，聪明智慧爱吏民，政如鲁卫德化钩，周公、康叔犹二君。 
English: The officials and the people praised Feng Ye Wang and Feng Li for their success as the imperial governor, and sang praises to them, saying: Big Feng Jun, little Feng Jun, brothers are the imperial governor, clever and wise, love the officials and the people, politics is like Lu Weidong, Zhou Gong, Kang Shou and Yu Er Jun.

古文：后迁为东海太守，下湿病痹。
现代文：后来升任东海郡太守，当地地势低湿，他患了风湿病。
English: Later, he was promoted to the governor of Donghai County, where the terrain is low-humidity, and he suffered from rheumatism.

古文：天子闻之，徙立为太原太守。
现代文：天子听说遣件事，调冯立任太原太守。
English: When Tianzi heard about the transfer, he transferred Feng to the position of Taiyuan governor-general.

古文：更历五郡，所居有迹。
现代文：先后做过五个郡的太守，到之处都有政绩。
English: He has successively served as the governor of five counties, and has made achievements everywhere.

古文：年老卒官。
现代文：年老在官任上去世。
English: He died of old age in office.

古文：参字叔平，学通《尚书》。
现代文：冯参字叔平，精通《尚书》。
English: Feng Sanzhe Shuping, is proficient in "Shang Shu."

古文：少为黄门郎给事中，宿卫十余年，参为人矜严，好修容仪，进退恂恂，甚可观也。
现代文：年轻时任黄门郎给事中，作皇宫警卫十多年。冯参为人庄重严肃，喜爱修饰外表礼仪，行为谨慎诚信，很有风度。
English: When he was young, Huangmenro was in the middle of things, serving as a palace guard for more than ten years. Feng San is a solemn and serious person, likes to decorate the appearance of etiquette, acts prudently and honestly, and is very graceful.

古文：参，昭仪少弟，行又敕备，以严见惮，终不得亲近侍帷幄。
现代文：冯参是昭仪的小弟弟，行为谨慎有备，因为严肃而令人敬畏，终于不能为皇帝的近臣。
English: Feng San is the younger brother of Zhaoyi. He is cautious and cautious in his behavior. Because he is serious and awe-inspiring, he can't be the emperor's vassal.

古文：竟宁中，以王舅出补渭陵食官令。
现代文：竟宁年间，以国舅的身份出朝补任渭陵食官令。
English: During the reign of King Geuning, he came to the court as the father-in-law of the country to fill the post of food official in Fuling.

古文：以数病徙为寝中郎，有诏勿事。
现代文：因为经常有病调任寝中郎，有诏令允许他不用做事。
English: Because of frequent illness, Ren Shizhongro was transferred, and there was a decree allowing him not to have to work.

古文：阳朔中，中山王来朝，参擢为上河农都尉。
现代文：阳朔年问，中山王来朝拜，冯参被提升为上河农都尉。
English: In the Yangshuo year, the king of Zhongshan came to pay homage, and Feng San was promoted to Shanghe farmer captain.

古文：病免官，复为渭陵寝中郎。
现代文：因病免官，又任渭陵寝中郎。
English: He was relieved of his duties due to illness, and was appointed to the position of 陵寝中郎.

古文：永始中，超迁代郡太守。
现代文：永始年间，越级提升为代郡太守。
English: During the Yongshi era, he was promoted to acting county governor.

古文：以边郡道远，徙为安定太守。
现代文：因为是边境郡县道路远，调任安定郡太守。
English: Because it is a border county and the road is far away, he was transferred to the governor of Anding County.

古文：数岁，病免，复为谏大夫，使领护左冯翊都水。
现代文：几年之后，因病免职，又任谏大夫，兼任护卫左冯翊都水。
English: A few years later, he was relieved of his duties due to illness, and he was also appointed as a doctor of Feng Shui, and also served as an escort of Zuo Feng Shui.

古文：绥和中，立定陶王为皇太子，以中山王见废，故封王舅参为宜乡侯，以慰王意。
现代文：绥和年间，立定陶王为皇太子，因中山王被废，所以封国舅冯参为宜乡侯，来安抚中山王。
English: During the Sino-Japanese War, King Li Dingtao was crown prince, and because King Zhongshan was deposed, his uncle Feng San was appointed as the governor of Yixiang to appease King Zhongshan.

古文：参之国，上书愿至中山见王、太后。
现代文：冯参到封国，给皇帝上书想到中山国见中山王和太后。
English: Feng San went to Fong Province and wrote a letter to the emperor. He thought of seeing the King and Queen Mother of Zhongshan Province.

古文：行未到而王薨。
现代文：还没有到达而中山王去世。
English: Zhongshan Wang passed away before they arrived.

古文：王病时，上奏愿贬参爵以关内侯食邑留长安。
现代文：中山王在病中时，上奏称希望贬冯参的爵位，以关内侯的食邑留居长安。
English: When King Zhongshan was ill, he made a report saying that he hoped to devalue the peerage of Fengsheng and stay in Chang'an with the food of Guanai.

古文：上怜之，下诏曰： 中山孝王短命早薨，愿以舅宜乡侯参为关内侯，归家，朕甚愍之。
现代文：皇帝怜悯他，下诏说： 中山孝王短命早死，愿以国舅宜乡侯冯参封为关内侯，回家，我很怜悯他。
English: The emperor took pity on him and issued an edict saying, "Zhongshan Xiaowang's short life and early death, I would like to take the uncle of the country, Yixiang Hou Feng Sanfeng, as Guanai Hou, and go home. I have great pity on him.

古文：其还参京师，以列侯奉朝请。 
现代文：就叫冯参回京师，以列侯之位在朝中任事。 
English: He ordered Feng San to return to the capital and serve in the imperial court as a vassal.

古文：五侯皆敬惮之。
现代文：王家五侯都尊敬而畏惧他。
English: He was respected and feared by all five branches of the royal family.

古文：丞相翟方进亦甚重焉，数谓参： 物禁太甚。
现代文：丞相翟方进也很尊重他，几次对冯参说： 事情的禁忌太过分。
English: The chancellor, Gong Fangjin, also respected him, and said to Feng San several times: The taboo of the matter is too much.

古文：君侯以王舅见废，不得在公卿位，今五侯至尊贵也，与之并列，宜少诎节卑体，视有所宗。
现代文：您因为是国舅被废用，不得居于公卿之位，现在五侯的地位最为尊贵，您和他们并列，应该稍微卑屈礼节，表示有所尊重。
English: Because you are an uncle of the country, you are not allowed to occupy the position of a noble. Now the position of the five princes is the most honorable. You are on a par with them. You should be a little subservient and show some respect.

古文：而君侯盛修容貌以威严加之，此非所以下五侯而自益者也。 
现代文：然而您非常注意修饰容貌，用威严来对待他们，这不是用来表示低于五侯而对自己有益的方式。 
English: However, you take great care to groom your appearance and treat them with dignity, which is not a way to say that you are below the five vows and benefit yourself.

古文：参性好礼仪，终不改其恒操。
现代文：冯参生性讲究礼仪，始终不改其平素操行。
English: Feng Shansheng always pays attention to etiquette and never changes his behavior.

古文：顷之，哀帝即位，帝祖母傅太后用事，追怨参姊中山太后，陷以祝诅大逆之罪，语在《外戚传》。
现代文：很快，哀帝即位，他的祖母傅太后当权，追讨和冯参姐中山太后的怨恨，用咒诅大逆之罪来诬陷她，事件记录在《外戚传》。
English: Soon after, Emperor Ai ascended to the throne, and his grandmother, Empress Dowager Fu, came to power. She pursued the resentment of Empress Dowager Zhongshan and her sister, Empress Dowager Feng San, and framed her with the crime of cursing and high treason. The incident was recorded in "The Tale of the Maternal Relatives."

古文：参以同产当相坐，谒者承制召参诣廷尉，参自杀。
现代文：冯参因为和她是同母所生而应当连坐，谒者领韶命捉冯参到廷尉处审问，冯参自杀。
English: As Feng San was born of the same mother as her, they should sit together. The assassin took the life of Feng San and interrogated him at the court lieutenant's office. Feng San committed suicide.

古文：且死，仰天叹曰： 参父子兄弟皆备大位，身至封侯，今被恶名而死，姊弟不敢自惜，伤无以见先人于地下！ 
现代文：将要死的时候，仰天长叹说： 我冯参父子兄弟都位居高官封侯赐爵，现在身披恶名而死，姐弟不敢自怜；螈伤的是没有脸面见先人于地下。 
English: When he was about to die, he looked up to heaven and sighed for a long time, saying, "My father Feng San and his brothers were all high-ranking officials and were given the title of marquis. Now they are dying with a bad name. My brothers and sisters do not dare to feel sorry for themselves.

古文：死者十七人，众莫不怜之。
现代文：被处死的有十七人，众人没有不可怜他们的。
English: Seventeen people were put to death, and there was no mercy for them.

古文：宗族徙归故郡。
现代文：冯氏宗族都迁回老家了。
English: The entire Feng clan has moved back to their hometown.

古文：赞曰：《诗》称 抑抑威仪，惟德之隅。 
现代文：赞曰：《诗经》说 堂堂的威仪真周正，美德和容貌内外合一 。
English: Zhan said: "The Book of Songs says that grand dignity is truly virtuous, and virtue and appearance are both internal and external.

古文：宜乡侯参鞠躬履方，择地而行，可谓淑人君子，然卒死于非罪，不能自免，哀哉！
现代文：宜乡侯冯参鞠躬尽瘁，品行端正，言行谨慎，可以说是正人君子，然而最终死于无辜，不能脱身，哀痛呀！
English: Yixiang Hou Feng San bowed down and did his best, his conduct was upright, his words and deeds were prudent, and he could be said to be an upright gentleman. However, he eventually died an innocent man, unable to escape, how sad!

古文：谗邪交乱，贞良被害，自古而然。
现代文：谗言邪恶交相作乱，忠贞善良的人被害，自古就是这样。
English: It has been like this since ancient times, when evil mingled with good to create chaos, and good and loyal people became victims.

古文：故伯奇放流，孟子宫刑，申生雉经，屈原赴湘，《小弁》之诗作，《离骚》之辞兴。
现代文：所以伯奇被流放，寺人孟子受宫刑，申生被缢而死，屈原投湘水而死，所以才有《小弁》这样的诗与《离骚》之辞的兴起。
English: That is why Birch was exiled, the temple man Mencius was punished by the imperial court, Shen Sheng was shackled and died, and Qu Yuan was thrown into the Xiangshui River and died. That is why poems such as "Little Ben" and the words of "Leaving So" arose.

古文：经曰： 心之忧矣，涕既陨之。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 心中忧伤，泪落而下。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "When the heart is sad, tears fall down."

古文：冯参姊弟，亦云悲矣！
现代文：冯参姐弟，也可谓悲惨呀！
English: Feng San sister and brother, can also be described as tragic!

