古文：起强圉大渊献七月，尽屠维赤奋若，凡二年有奇。
现代文：起强圉大渊献七月，尽屠维赤奋若，凡二年有奇。
English: Every two years, it is strange to see the mighty cormorant, the great cormorant, rising from the abyss in July.

古文：明宗圣德和武钦孝皇帝中之上天成二年秋，七月，以归德节度使王晏球为北面副招讨使。丙寅，升夔州为宁江军，以西方鄴为节度使。
现代文：后唐明宗天成二年秋季七月，任命归德节度使王晏球为北面副招讨使。丙寅，把夔州升为宁江军，任命西方邺为节度使。
English: In the autumn of July in the second year of Emperor Tiancheng's reign, Emperor Mingzong of the Later Tang Dynasty appointed Wang Yingqiu as the deputy envoy to the north for the festival of returning to Germany, and He Yin as the envoy to the west for the festival of returning to Germany, and promoted Zhangzhou to the Ningjiang Army.

古文：癸酉，以与高季兴夔、忠、万三州为豆卢革、韦说之罪，皆赐死。
现代文：癸酉，以上年给高季兴夔、忠、万三州一事定为豆卢革、韦说的罪行，把他们赐死。
English: Therefore, the case of Gao Ji, Xingyao, Zhong, and Wan Sanzhou, which happened last year, was defined as the crime of Zhu Ruge and Wei, and they were sentenced to death.

古文：流段凝于辽州，温韬于德州，刘训于濮州。
现代文：把段凝流放到辽州，温韬流放到德州，刘训流放到濮州。
English: Send Duan Ronglu to Liaozhou, Wen Ronglu to Dezhou, Liu Xun to Ganzhou.

古文：任圜请致仕居磁州，许之。
现代文：任圜请求退休居住在磁州，后唐帝答应了他的请求。
English: Ren Zheng requested to retire and live in Zhengzhou. Later, Emperor Tang agreed to his request.

古文：八月，己卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月，己卯朔，出现日食。
English: In August, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：册礼使至长沙，楚王殷始建国，立宫殿，置百官，皆如天子，或微更其名：翰林学士曰文苑学士，知制诰曰知辞制，枢密院曰左右机要司，群下称之曰殿下，令曰教。
现代文：册礼使到达长沙，楚王马殷开始建国，他建立宫殿，设置百官，都和天子一样，有的稍变更一下名称，翰林学士叫文苑学士，知制诰叫知辞制，枢密院叫左右机要司，臣下称国王为殿下，国王下的命令称教令。
English: When the envoys arrived in Changsha, King Ma Yin of Chu began to establish the country. He built palaces and set up hundreds of officials, all of whom were the same as the heavenly sons. Some of them changed their names slightly. The scholar of Hanlin was called the scholar of Wenyuan, the scholar of knowledge was called the scholar of words, the Privy Council was called the secretary of the left and right machine, the subjects called the king His Royal Highness, and the order of the king was called the order of teaching.

古文：以姚彦章为左丞相，许德勋为右丞相，李鐸为司徒，崔颖为司空，拓跋恒为仆射，张彦瑶、张迎判机要司。
现代文：任命姚彦章为左丞相，许德勋为右丞相，李铎为司徒，崔颖为司空，拓跋恒为仆射，张彦瑶、张迎判管机要部门。
English: He appointed Yao Yanzhang as the left-hand minister, Xu Deshun as the right-hand minister, Li Jie as the secretary, Cui Ying as the secretary, Tuoba Heng as the assistant secretary, and Zhang Yanzhang and Zhang Ying as the important departments of the administrative machinery.

古文：然管内官属皆称摄，惟朗、桂节度使先除后请命。
现代文：然而管内官属都称为摄，只有朗、桂节度使是先任命后请求国王批准。
English: However, the officials and subordinates within the jurisdiction were all referred to as 摄, only Lang and Gui Jiedu were appointed first and then requested the king's approval.

古文：恒本姓元，避殷父讯改焉。
现代文：拔跋恒本姓元，为避马殷父亲讳才改为拓跋。
English: He originally went by the family name "Heng Yuan" but changed it to "Tuoba" to avoid upsetting his father.

古文：九月，帝谓安重诲曰： 从荣左右有矫宣朕旨，令勿接儒生，恐弱人志气者。
现代文：九月，后唐帝对安重诲说： 李从荣身边有人假传朕的旨意，让他不要接近儒生，恐怕削弱人的志气。
English: In September, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty said to An Chongyu, "Some people around Li Congrong have falsely transmitted my will, telling him not to get close to Confucianism, for fear of weakening people's morale.

古文：朕以从荣年少临大籓，故择名儒使辅导之，今奸人所言乃如此！ 
现代文：朕因为李从荣年轻，又管理大藩，所以给他选择了名儒来辅导他，没想到现在这些奸人们竟讲出这种话！ 
English: Because Li Congrong was young and in charge of a big clan, I chose a famous Confucian scholar to tutor him. I didn't expect these traitors to say such things!

古文：欲斩之；重诲请严戒而已。
现代文：后唐帝想把这些假传圣旨的人斩掉。安重诲请求对这些人只是严加防备而已。
English: Later, Emperor Tang wanted to cut off these people who falsely transmitted the will of God. The request for the restoration of peace and order was just a stern warning to these people.

古文：北都留守李彦超请复姓符，从之。
现代文：北都留守李彦超请求恢复他姓符，后唐帝答应了他的请求。
English: Li Yanchao, who stayed behind in the northern capital, requested that his surname be restored, and Emperor Hou Tang agreed to his request.

古文：丙寅，以枢密使孔循兼东都留守。
现代文：丙寅，任命枢密使孔循兼任东都留守。
English: Cui Ying, appointed the Privy Envoy Kong Cui and concurrently stayed in Dongdu.

古文：壬申，契丹来请修好，遣使报之。
现代文：壬申，契丹来人请求互通友好，后唐派遣使者回报契丹人。
English: In Jinshin, the Khitan came to ask for mutual friendship, and the Later Tang sent an envoy back to the Khitan.

古文：冬，十月，乙酉，帝发洛阳，将如汴州；丁亥，至荥阳。
现代文：冬季，十月，乙酉，后唐帝从洛阳出发去汴州。丁亥，到达荥阳。
English: Winter, October, Acetylene, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty set out from Luoyang to Bozhou. Dinghai, arrived in Bozhang.

古文：民间讹言帝欲自击吴，又云欲制置东方诸侯。
现代文：民间谣传后唐帝打算亲自率兵攻打吴国，又传说要制服东方诸侯。
English: According to folklore, Emperor Tang planned to personally lead an army to attack the State of Wu, and it was also rumored that he wanted to subdue the Eastern princes.

古文：宣武节度使、检校侍中硃守殷疑惧，判官高密孙晨劝守殷反，守殷遂乘城拒守。
现代文：宣武节度使、检校侍中朱守殷对此疑惧，判官高密人孙晟劝朱守殷反叛，于是朱守殷登上汴州城坚守。
English: Zhu Shouyin, the envoy of the Xuanwu Festival and the inspector of the school, was suspicious of this, and the judge Gaomi advised Zhu Shouyin to rebel, so Zhu Shouyin ascended to Zhangzhou City to stand firm.

古文：帝遣宣徽使范延光往谕之，延光曰： 不早击之，则汴城坚矣；愿得五百骑与俱。 
现代文：后唐帝派遣宣徽使范延光前去告示朱守殷，范延光说： 如不及早攻打他们，汴州就会越来越坚固。我希望率领五百骑兵一起前往。 
English: After the Tang Emperor sent Xuan Hui to send Fan Yan Guang to go to Zhu Shouyin, Fan Yan Guang said: If we do not attack them early, Zhangzhou will become more and more solid. I hope to lead five hundred cavalry to go together.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：后唐帝听从了他的建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：延光暮发，未明行二百里，抵大梁城下，与汴人战，汴人大惊。
现代文：范延光在太阳落山时出发，第二天天还没有亮就走了二百里，直抵汴州城下，和汴州的人交锋，汴州人感到非常吃惊。
English: Fan Yanguang set out when the sun was setting, and walked 200 miles before dawn the next day, straight to the city of Zhangzhou, and confronted the people of Zhangzhou. The people of Zhangzhou were very surprised.

古文：戊子，帝至京水，遣御营使石敬瑭将亲兵倍道继之。
现代文：戊子，后唐帝到达京水，派遣御营使石敬瑭率领禁卫军日夜兼程去增援范延光。
English: After Emperor Wu of Tang arrived in Jingshui, he dispatched troops to reinforce Fan Yanguang with the Imperial Guard led by Shi Jingjun.

古文：或谓安重诲曰： 失职在外之人，乘贼未破，或能为患，不如除之。 
现代文：有人对安重诲说： 那些被免除官职而在外面的人，乘乱贼还未被击败，或许能成为祸患，不如把他们消灭了。 
English: Someone said to An Chongzhen: Those who have been relieved of their official duties and are on the outside, have not yet been defeated by bandits, may become a scourge, it is better to eliminate them.

古文：重诲以为然，奏遣使赐任圜死。
现代文：安重诲认为说得对，于是上奏请求派遣使者赐任圜死。
English: An Chongyun thought that this was right, so he requested the emperor to send an envoy to have him killed.

古文：端明殿学士赵凤哭胃重诲曰： 任圜义士，安肯为逆！
现代文：端明殿学士赵凤哭着对安重诲说： 任圜是个讲道义的人，怎么肯叛逆呢？
English: Duanming palace scholar Zhao Feng cried and said to An Chongyun: Ren Hui is a moral person, how can he rebel?

古文：公滥刑如此，何以赞国！ 
现代文：你如此滥用刑法，怎么能辅佐国家。 
English: How can you help the state by abusing the criminal law like this?

古文：使者至磁州，圜聚其族酣饮，然后死，神情不挠。
现代文：前往赐任圜死的使者到达磁州，任圜把他的家族集合起来喝酒，然后死去，表情没有屈服的样子。
English: Envoys sent to have Ren Xuan killed arrive in the Magnetic State, where Ren Xuan gathers his family to drink and then dies, his expression unbowed.

古文：己丑，帝至大梁，四面进攻，吏民缒城出降者甚众。
现代文：己丑，后唐帝到汴州，四面向汴州城发起进攻，官吏和百姓从城上缒绳出来投降的人很多。
English: After Emperor Tang went to Zhangzhou and launched an attack on the city of Zhangzhou from four directions, many officials and common people came out of the city to surrender.

古文：守殷知事不济，尽杀其族，引颈命左右斩之。
现代文：朱守殷知道事情不能成功，于是把他的家族全部杀掉，又伸出脖子让左右把他杀死。
English: Zhu Shouyin knew that things could not succeed, so he killed his entire family, and stretched out his neck to let the left and right kill him.

古文：乘城者望见乘舆，相帅开门降。
现代文：登上城的人们望见了后唐帝圣驾，都争着打开城门出来投降。
English: When the people who had ascended to the city saw Emperor Go-Tang's sacred car, they all fought to open the city gate and surrender.

古文：孙晟奔吴，徐知诰客之。
现代文：孙晟逃奔到了吴国，徐知诰以客相待。
English: Sun Yat-sen fled to the State of Wu, and Xu Zhisheng treated him as a guest.

古文：戊戌，诏免三司逋负近二百万缗。
现代文：戊戌，后唐帝下诏免去三司拖欠的赋税近二百万缗。
English: Later, Emperor Tang issued an edict exempting the three companies from nearly 2 million baht in tax arrears.

古文：辛丑，吴大丞相、都督中外诸军事、诸道都统、镇海、宁国节度使兼中书令东海王徐温卒。
现代文：辛丑，吴国大丞相、都督中外诸军事、诸道都统、镇海与宁国节度使兼中书令东海王徐温去世。
English: Xin Xiu, the Minister of the Great Chancellor of the State of Wu, the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, the military governor of all the provinces, the naval governor of Zhenhai and Ning Provinces, and the envoy of the Central Government, Xu Wen, the king of the East Sea, passed away.

古文：初，温子行军司马、忠义节度使、同平章事知询以其兄知诰非徐氏子，数请代之执吴政，温曰： 汝曹皆不如也。 
现代文：当初，徐温的儿子行军司马、忠义节度使、同平章事徐知询认为他的哥哥徐知诰不是徐氏的儿子，曾多次请求代替他执掌吴国国政，徐温说： 你们都不如他。 
English: At the beginning, Xu Wen's son, Marching Sima, Loyalty Festival Envoy, Tongping Chapter Xu Zhiyuan believed that his brother, Xu Zhisheng, was not the son of the Xu clan. He had repeatedly requested to replace him in charge of the state affairs of Wu. Xu Wen said: You are not as good as him.

古文：严可求及行军副使徐玠屡劝温以知询代知诰，温以知诰孝谨，不忍也。
现代文：严可求以及行军副使徐也屡次劝说徐温让徐知询代替徐知诰，徐温认为徐知诰孝顺谨慎，不忍心让徐知询代替他。
English: Yan Keku and the deputy marching envoy Xu also repeatedly persuaded Xu Wen to let Xu Zhisheng replace Xu Zhisheng. Xu Wen thought that Xu Zhisheng was too filial and prudent, and could not bear to let Xu Zhisheng replace him.

古文：陈夫人曰： 知诰自我家贫贱时养之，奈何富贵而弃之！ 
现代文：陈夫人说： 徐知诰是在我们贫穷时就收养了的，怎么能够富贵以后就抛弃他呢？ 
English: Mrs. Chen said, "We adopted Xu Zhisheng when we were poor. How could we abandon him when we became rich?

古文：可求等言之不已。
现代文：但严可求等仍然劝不说不已。
English: However, strict demands and the like are still persuasive.

古文：温欲帅诸籓镇入朝，劝吴王称帝，将行，有疾，乃遣知询奉表劝进，因留代知诰执政。
现代文：徐温打算率领诸藩镇的官员入朝劝说吴王称帝，将要出发时突然生病，于是就派遣徐知询拿着奏表去劝吴王称帝，因而留下代替徐知诰处理政事。
English: Xu Wen planned to lead officials from various provinces and towns into the imperial court to persuade King Wu to proclaim himself emperor. When he was about to leave, he suddenly fell ill, so he sent Xu Zhisheng with a report card to persuade King Wu to proclaim himself emperor, leaving him to deal with political affairs in place of Xu Zhisheng.

古文：知诰草表欲求洪州节度使，俟旦上之，是夕，温凶问至，乃止。
现代文：徐知诰起草了奏表想请求出任洪州节度使，打算第二天早晨送上去，这天晚上，徐温的死讯传来，才没有上表。
English: Xu Zhisheng drafted a report form to request to serve as the Hongzhou Festival envoy, intending to send it the next morning. That evening, the news of Xu Wen's death came, and there was no report.

古文：知询亟归金陵。
现代文：徐知询很快回到金陵。
English: Xu Zhisen soon returned to Jinling.

古文：吴主赠温齐王，谥曰忠武。
现代文：吴主赠徐温为齐王，谥号叫忠武。
English: The Lord of Wu gave Xu Wen the title of King of Qi, and his posthumous name was Zhongwu.

古文：山南西道节度使张筠久疾，将佐请见，不许。
现代文：山南西道节度使张筠病了好长时间，将佐们请求相见，没有得到允许。
English: The Shannan West Road Festival has made Zhang Jun sick for a long time, and he has not been allowed to see his son-in-law.

古文：副使苻彦琳等疑其已死，恐左右有奸谋，请权交符印；筠怒，收彦琳及判官都指挥使下狱，诬以谋反。
现代文：副使符彦林等怀疑他已经死去，害怕张筠的左右人员有阴谋，于是请求暂交符印。张筠知道后十分生气，下令拘捕了符彦琳以及判官都指挥使等，并把他们送进监狱，以谋反来诬陷他们。
English: Vice-envoy Fu Yanlin and others suspected that he had died, fearing that Zhang Ye's right and left personnel had a conspiracy, so they requested to temporarily submit the seal. Zhang Ye was very angry after he knew, and ordered the arrest of Fu Yanlin and the judges who commanded the envoys, and sent them to prison to frame them with rebellion.

古文：诏取彦琳等诣阙，按之无状，释之；徙筠为西都留守。
现代文：后唐帝取符彦琳等上朝，经过核查后发现符彦琳没有谋反的证据，就把他释放了。调张筠为西都留守。
English: Later, Emperor Tang took Fu Yanlin to Shang Dynasty. After verification, it was found that Fu Yanlin had no evidence of plotting a rebellion, and he was released. Zhang Ye was transferred to the Western Capital.

古文：癸卯，以保义节度使石敬瑭为宣武节度使，兼侍卫亲军马步都指挥使。
现代文：癸卯，任命保义节度使石敬瑭为宣武节度使，兼任侍卫亲军马步都指挥使。
English: At the same time, he appointed Baoyi Jiedu to be the envoy of Xuanwu Jiedu, and concurrently served as the envoy of the guards and the commander of the pro-army Maabudu.

古文：十一月，庚戌，吴王即皇帝位，追尊孝武王曰武皇帝，景王曰景皇帝，宣王曰宣皇帝。
现代文：十一月，庚戌，吴王即皇帝位，追尊孝武王为武皇帝，景王为景皇帝，宣王为宣皇帝。
English: In November, Geng Zang, the king of Wu was the emperor, the king of Chongxiao and Wu was the emperor of Wu, the king of Jing was the emperor of Jing, and the king of Xuan was the emperor of Xuan.

古文：安重诲议伐吴，帝不从。
现代文：安重诲商议想讨伐吴国，后唐帝没有听从他的意见。
English: Emperor Anzong of Tang did not listen to his advice when he wanted to invade the State of Wu.

古文：甲子，吴大赦，改元乾贞。
现代文：甲子，吴国实行大赦，改年号为乾贞。
English: Jia Zi, the State of Wu implemented an amnesty and changed her name to Qian Zhen.

古文：丙子，吴主尊太妃王氏曰皇太后，以徐知询为诸道副都统、镇海宁国节度使兼侍中，加徐知诰都督中外诸军事。
现代文：丙子，吴主尊太妃王氏为皇太后。任命徐知询为诸道副都统、镇海宁国节度使兼侍中，加封徐知诰都督中外诸军事。
English: He appointed Xu Zhiyuan as deputy governor of all provinces, deputy governor of Zhenhai and Ning Provinces and attendant, and appointed Xu Zhiyuan as the military governor of all provinces.

古文：十二月，戊寅朔，孟知祥发民丁二十万修成都城。
现代文：十二月，戊寅朔，孟知祥征发二十万民丁修建成都城。
English: In December, Wu Yinshuo and Meng Zhixiang conscripted and dispatched 200,000 people to build Chengdu City.

古文：吴主立兄庐江公濛为常山王，弟鄱阳公澈为平原王，兄子南昌公珙为建安王。
现代文：吴主立其兄庐江公杨为常山王，立其弟鄱阳公杨澈为平原王，立其兄的儿子南昌公杨为建安王。
English: The Lord of Wu appointed his brother, Guojiang Yang, as the King of Changshan, his brother, Guiyang Yang, as the King of the Plain, and his brother's son, Nanchang Yang, as the King of Jian'an.

古文：初，晋阳相者周玄豹尝言帝贵不可言，帝即位，欲召诣阙。
现代文：当初，晋阳有个会相面的人叫周玄豹，他曾经说后唐帝的相貌贵不可言，后唐帝即位之后，打算把他召到朝廷里来。
English: In the beginning, there was a man in Jinyang named Zhou Xuanbaogu who would meet people. He once said that the appearance of the late Tang Emperor was precious beyond words. After he ascended the throne, he planned to call him to the imperial court.

古文：赵凤曰： 玄豹言陛下当为天子，今已验矣，无所复询。
现代文：赵凤说： 周玄豹曾经说过陛下当为天子，今天已经验证，没有必要再查询他了。
English: Zhao Feng said: Zhou Xuanbao once said that His Majesty should be the son of heaven, and today it has been verified that there is no need to inquire about him.

古文：若置之京师，则轻躁狂险之人必辐辏其门，争问吉凶。
现代文：如果把他留在京师，那些轻举妄动、性情暴躁、狂放不拘等危险人物就一定会聚集到他的门下，争相询问凶吉。
English: If he were to be left in the Beijing Division, those reckless, hot-tempered, reckless, and dangerous people would certainly gather at his door, vying to inquire about the bad luck.

古文：自古术士妄言，致人族灭者多矣，非所以靖国家也。 
现代文：自古以来那些巫祝占卜之流经常胡说八道，致使很多人全家被诛灭，这些人根本不能用来安定国家。 
English: Since ancient times, those sorcerers and fortune-tellers have often talked nonsense, resulting in the annihilation of many people's entire families, who simply cannot be used to stabilize the country.

古文：帝乃就除光禄卿致仕，厚赐金帛而已。
现代文：后唐帝任命他为光禄卿，并以此职退休，只赏给他很多金帛而已。
English: Later, Emperor Tang appointed him as Guangluqing, and retired from this position, only awarding him a lot of gold ingots.

古文：中书舍人马缟请用汉光武故事，七庙之外别立亲庙；中书门下奏请如汉孝德、孝仁皇例，称皇不称帝。
现代文：中书舍人马缟请求用汉光武时的典章制度，七庙之外另立一个亲庙。中书门下上奏请求象汉教德、教仁皇那样，称皇不称帝。
English: Ma Jun, a Chinese scholar, requested that the ceremonial system of the Han Dynasty be used, and that a family temple be built in addition to the seven temples.

古文：帝欲兼称帝，群臣乃引德明、玄元、兴圣皇帝例，皆立庙京师；帝令立于应州旧宅，自高祖考妣以下皆追谥曰皇帝、皇后，墓曰陵。
现代文：后唐帝想兼称帝，大臣们于是就引用德用、玄元、兴圣皇帝的例子，都在京师立庙。后唐帝命令在应州旧宅立庙，从高祖的父母以下都追谥为皇帝、皇后，他们的墓都称为陵。
English: Later Tang emperors wanted to be called emperor at the same time, and the ministers then cited the examples of Emperor Dezong, Emperor Xuan Yuan, and Emperor Xingsheng to establish temples in Beijing. Later Tang emperors ordered the establishment of a temple in the old house of Yingzhou, and from Gao Zu's parents on down, they were all crowned as emperor and empress, and their tombs were called mausoleums.

古文：汉主如康州。
现代文：南汉主到达康州。
English: The Southern Han Dynasty arrived in Kangzhou.

古文：是岁，蔚、代缘边粟斗不过十钱。
现代文：这一年，蔚、代沿边境的地方一斗粮食的价钱不到十钱。
English: This year, the price of a barrel of grain in places along the border between Wei and Dai was less than ten yuan.

古文：明宗圣德和武钦孝皇帝中之上天成三年春，正月，丁巳，吴主立子琏为江都王，璘为江夏王，璆为宜春王，宣帝子庐陵公玢为南阳王。
现代文：天成三年春季正月，丁巳，吴主立他的儿子杨琏为江都王，杨为江夏王，杨为宜春王，宣帝的儿子庐陵公杨玢为南阳王。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year of Tiancheng, Ding Si, the Lord of the State of Wu, appointed his son Yang Xuan as the King of Jiangdu, Yang Xuan as the King of Jiangxia, Yang Xuan as the King of Yichun, and Emperor Xuan's son Yang Xuan as the King of Nanyang.

古文：昭义节度使毛璋所为骄僭，时报赭袍，纵酒为戏，左右有谏者，剖其心而视之。
现代文：昭义节度使毛璋的所作所为骄横越轨，有时穿着天子所穿赭袍，狂饮娱乐，左右有规劝他的，他就让人剖其心察看。
English: The Shouyi Festival made Mao Yao's behavior arrogant and deviant, sometimes wearing the robe of heaven, drinking wildly and having fun. When he was admonished, he let people dissect his heart.

古文：帝闻之，征为右金吾卫上将军。
现代文：后唐帝听说此事，征调他为右金吾卫上将军。
English: After the Tang Dynasty heard about this, he was conscripted as the right King Wu Wei Shang general.

古文：契丹陷平州。
现代文：契丹人攻陷平州。
English: The Khitan invaded and occupied Pingju.

古文：二月，丁丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月，丁丑朔，出现日食。
English: In February, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：帝将如鄴都，时扈驾诸军家属甫迁大梁，又闻将如鄴都，皆不悦，詾詾有流言。
现代文：后唐帝将要到邺都，当时扈驾诸军的家属刚刚迁到大梁，听说要到邺都，都不高兴，流言议论纷纷。
English: The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty was about to go to Shidu. At that time, the families of the troops had just moved to Daliang. When they heard that they were going to Shidu, they were not happy. Rumors and discussions abounded.

古文：帝闻之，不果行。
现代文：后唐帝听说后，没有成行。
English: After the Emperor Tang heard about it, he did not go.

古文：吴自庄宗灭梁以来，使者往来不绝。
现代文：吴国自从庄宗消灭了后梁国以来，使者往来不断。
English: Since Zhuangzong of Wuxi wiped out Houliang of Liang, envoys have been in and out of Wuxi.

古文：庚辰，吴使者至，安重诲以为杨敢与朝廷抗礼，遣使窥觇，拒而不受，自是遂与吴绝。
现代文：庚辰，吴国的使者到来，安重诲以为吴王杨溥敢和朝廷抗礼，于是派出使者去暗中窥视，并拒不接受他，从此以后就和吴国断绝了关系。
English: When the envoy of the State of Wu, Geng Chen, arrived, An Chong thought that the King of Wu, Yang Xuan, dared to defy the imperial court, so he sent an envoy to spy on him secretly and refused to accept him. From then on, he broke off relations with the State of Wu.

古文：张筠至长安，守兵闭门拒之；筠单骑入朝，以为左卫上将军。
现代文：张筠到了长安，把守城门的士卒关起来不让他进去。张筠单人匹马入朝，后唐帝任命他为左卫上将军。
English: Zhang Ye arrived in Chang'an and locked up the soldiers guarding the city gate to prevent them from letting him in. Zhang Ye entered the imperial court single-handedly on horseback, after which the Tang Emperor appointed him as the left guard general.

古文：壬辰，宁江节度使西方鄴攻拔归州；未几，荆南复取之。
现代文：壬辰，宁江节度使西方邺攻下了归州。没过多久，荆南又夺了回去。
English: In Imjin and Ningjiang, the Western Wei conquered Guizhou. It didn't take long for the Southern Wei to recapture Wuxi.

古文：枢密使、同平章事孔循，性狡佞，安重诲亲信之。
现代文：枢密使、同平章事孔循性情狡猾，善于花言巧语，安重诲很亲信他。
English: The Privy Counsellor, Tong Pingzhang, was cunning, good at rhetoric, and trusted him very much.

古文：帝欲为皇子娶重诲女，循谓重诲曰： 公职居近密，不宜复与皇子为婚。 
现代文：后唐帝想为他的儿子娶安重诲的女儿为妻子，孔循对安重诲说： 您身为皇上的近臣，你们又很密切，不应再和皇子为婚姻亲戚。 
English: Later, Emperor Tang wanted to marry the daughter of Emperor Anzong to his son. Confucius said to Emperor Anzong, "As you are the emperor's close vassal, and you are very close, you should no longer be related to the prince by marriage.

古文：重诲辞之。
现代文：于是安重诲就推辞了女儿的婚事。
English: As a result, Ahn Chung-chul rejected his daughter's marriage.

古文：久之，或谓重诲曰： 循善离间人，不可置之密地。 
现代文：过一段时间，有人对安重诲说： 孔循善于挑拨离间，不可安排在与皇上密切接触的位置。 
English: After a period of time, someone said to An Chongzhen: Kong Shou is good at sowing discord, and cannot be placed in a position of close contact with the emperor.

古文：循知之，阴遣人结王德妃，求纳其女；德妃请娶循女为从厚妇，帝许之。
现代文：孔循知道这件事后，就暗暗派人去巴结王德妃，请求接纳他的女儿。王德妃请求皇帝为皇子李从厚娶孔循的女儿为妻，后唐帝答应了她的请求。
English: After Kongxu learned of this, he secretly sent someone to woo Wang Defu and ask her to accept his daughter. Wang Defu asked the emperor to marry Kongxu's daughter to the prince Li Conghou, and the Emperor agreed to her request.

古文：重诲大怒，乙未，以循同平章事，充忠武节度使兼东都留守。
现代文：安重诲听到这件事后大发雷霆。乙未，后唐帝任命孔循为同平章事、忠武节度使兼东都留守。
English: After hearing this, An Chongyuan was furious. Soon after, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty appointed Kong Xuan to be the Tongping Zhengji and the Zhongwu Jiedu Envoy and left Dongdu.

古文：重诲性强愎。
现代文：安重诲性情刚愎。
English: An Chongyong has a strong-willed nature.

古文：秦州节度使华温琪入朝，请留阙下，帝嘉之，除左骁卫上将军，月别赐钱谷。
现代文：秦州节度使华温琪入朝，请求留在朝廷，后唐帝表彰了他，任他为左骁卫上将军，每月除了俸禄外还要赏赐他些钱谷。
English: The Qin State Festival brought Hua Wenqi to the imperial court, and he requested to stay in the imperial court. Later, the Tang Emperor commended him and appointed him as the General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard. In addition to his monthly salary, he also rewarded him with some money.

古文：岁馀，帝谓重诲曰： 温琪旧人，宜择一重镇处之。 
现代文：一年多以后，后唐帝对安重诲说： 华温琪是旧交，应该选择一个重镇来安排他。 
English: More than a year later, Emperor Hou Tang said to An Chonglu: Hua Wenqi is an old friend, we should choose a major town to arrange him.

古文：重诲对以无阙。
现代文：安重诲回答说没有空缺。
English: Ahn replied that there were no vacancies.

古文：他日，帝屡言之，重诲愠曰： 臣累奏无阙，惟枢密使可代耳。 帝曰： 亦可。 
现代文：又一天，后唐帝又反复说起这件事，安重诲恼怒地说： 我曾多次上奏说没有空缺，只有枢密使可以代替。 后唐帝说： 也可以。 
English: The next day, Emperor Hou Tang repeatedly mentioned the matter, saying angrily: I have repeatedly reported that there is no vacancy, only the Privy Envoy can replace. Emperor Hou Tang said: You can also.

古文：重诲无以对。
现代文：安重诲无言以对。
English: I am speechless.

古文：温琪闻之惧，数月不出。
现代文：华温琪听说这件事后感到非常害怕，好几个月不敢出门。
English: After hearing about the incident, Hua Wenqi felt very scared and did not dare to go out for several months.

古文：重诲恶成德节度使、同平章事王建立，奏建立与王都交结，有异志。
现代文：安重诲很恨成德节度使、同平章事王建立，上奏说王建立和王都互相勾结，有叛变的意图。
English: An Chongyuan hated Chengde Festival, Tongping Zhang and Wang Jianlian very much. It was reported that Wang Jianlian and Wang Jianlian were in collusion with each other and had the intention of mutiny.

古文：建立亦奏重诲专权，求入朝面言其状，帝召之。
现代文：王建立也奏称，安重诲独揽大权，请求入朝当面向后唐帝说明情况，后唐帝就召见他。
English: Wang Jianli also made a report that An Chongyun was the sole holder of power, and requested to come to the court to explain the situation to Emperor Hou Tang. Emperor Hou Tang summoned him.

古文：既至，言重诲与宣徽使判三司张延朗结婚，相表里，弄威福。
现代文：他到了朝廷，说安重诲与宣徽使判三司张延朗结为婚姻亲戚，内外勾结，作威作福。
English: When he arrived at the imperial court, he said that the announcement of the re-establishment of peace and the proclamation of the emblem made the three judges of Zhang Yanlang marry as relatives by marriage, colluded internally and externally, and acted arrogantly.

古文：三月，辛亥，帝见重诲，气色甚怒，谓曰： 今与卿一镇自休息，以王建立代卿，张延朗亦除外官。 
现代文：三月，辛亥，后唐帝见了安重诲，满脸怒气，对他说： 现在给你一镇自己休息去，用王建立代替你，张延朗也放为外任。 
English: In March, Xinhai, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty saw An Chongyuan, his face full of anger, and said to him: Now give you a town to rest on your own, replace you with Wang Jiao, and put Zhang Yanlang as an external official.

古文：重诲曰： 臣披荆棘事陛下数十年，值陛下龙飞，承乏机密，数年间天下幸无事。
现代文：安重诲说： 臣披荆斩棘侍奉陛下数十年，正值陛下兴起，缺乏适当人选，臣任机要，几年来天下平安无事。
English: An said: "I have been serving Your Majesty for decades. At the time of Your Majesty's rise, there was a lack of suitable candidates, and I was left to my own devices. For several years, there has been peace in the world.

古文：今一旦弃之外镇，臣愿闻其罪！ 
现代文：现在把我抛弃去外，我希望听听有什么罪过。 
English: Throw me out now, I want to hear about the guilt.

古文：帝不怿而起，以语宣徽使硃弘昭，弘昭曰： 陛下平日待重诲如左右手，奈何以小忿弃之！
现代文：后唐帝很不高兴地站起来，告诉了宣徽使朱弘昭，朱弘昭说： 陛下平日待安重诲如左右手，怎么能因小的忿怒就抛弃了他呢？
English: Afterward, Emperor Tang stood up with great displeasure and told the heraldic envoy Zhu Hongzhao. Zhu Hongzhao said, "Your majesty usually waits for peace and tranquility like his right and left hand. How could you abandon him because of a small anger?"

古文：愿垂三思。 
现代文：希望陛下三思。 
English: I hope His Majesty will reconsider.

古文：帝寻召重诲慰抚之。
现代文：不久，后唐帝又召见安重诲安抚慰问。
English: Not long after, Emperor Hou Tang also summoned An Chongzheng to appease and comfort him.

古文：明日，建立辞归镇，帝曰： 卿比奏欲入分朕忧，今复去何之！ 
现代文：第二天，王建立辞别回镇，后唐帝说： 你近来上奏说，想在朝廷分担我的忧愁，今天又要到哪儿去！ 
English: The next day, Wang Jianping said goodbye and returned to the town. Emperor Hou said, "You recently said that you wanted to share my sorrow with the imperial court. Where are you going today?"

古文：会门下侍郎兼刑部尚书、同平章事郑珏请致仕；己未，以珏为左仆射致仕，癸亥，以建立为右仆射兼中书侍郎、同平章事、判三司。
现代文：正好这时门下侍郎兼刑部尚书、同平章事郑珏请求退休，己未，命郑珏为左仆射退休。癸亥，任命王建立为右仆射兼中书侍郎、同平章事、判三司。
English: It was at this time that Zheng Yao, the under-servant of the disciple and the attendant of the criminal department, requested to retire, but he did not, and ordered Zheng Yao to retire as the left-hand servant. At the same time, Wang Jian was appointed as the right-hand servant and the attendant of the criminal department, the same level as the judge, and the judge of the three departments.

古文：孟知祥屡与董璋争盐利，璋诱商旅贩东川盐入西川，知祥患之，乃于汉州置三场重征之，岁得钱七万缗，商旅不复之东川。
现代文：孟知祥曾多次和董璋争夺盐利，董璋引诱商贩们贩东川的盐入西川，孟知祥对此十分忧虑，在汉州修置了三个场地征收商人的重税，一年可以得到税钱七万缗，从此商贩们不再到东川贩盐了。
English: Meng Zhixiang had repeatedly competed with Dong Hao for salt profits. Dong Hao lured merchants to sell salt from the East River into the West River. Meng Zhixiang was very worried about this. He repaired three sites in Hanzhou to collect heavy taxes from merchants. He could get 70,000 baht of tax money a year. From then on, merchants no longer sold salt in the East River.

古文：楚王殷如岳州，遣六军使袁诠、副使王环、监军马希瞻将水军击荆南，高季兴以水军逆战。
现代文：楚王马殷到达岳州，派遣六军使袁诠、副使王环、监军马希瞻等率领水军攻打荆南，高季兴也用水军迎战。
English: King Ma Yin of Chu arrived in Yuezhou and dispatched the Six Armies with the envoy Yuan Yan, the deputy envoy Wang Huan, the overseer Ma Xizhan and others to lead the naval forces to attack Jingnan, and Gao Jixing also used the naval forces to fight.

古文：至刘郎洑，希瞻夜匿战舰数十艘于港中；诘旦，两军合战，希瞻出战舰横击之，季兴大败，俘斩以千数，进逼江陵。
现代文：到了刘郎，马希瞻乘夜间在港中偷偷藏匿下数十艘战船，第二天早晨，两军交战，马希瞻开出战船截击，大败高季兴，俘获和斩杀数以千计，然后进副江陵。
English: When he arrived at Liu Lang, Ma Xizhan secretly hid dozens of warships in the harbor at night. The next morning, the two armies fought. Ma Xizhan launched a warship interception, defeated Gao Jixing, captured and killed thousands, and then entered the Jiangling.

古文：季兴请和，归史光宪于楚。
现代文：高季兴请求讲和，并把史光宪送还楚国。
English: Gao Jixing pleaded for peace and sent Shi Guangxian back to Chu.

古文：军还，楚王殷让环不遂取荆南，环曰： 江陵在中朝及吴、蜀之间，四战之地也，宜存之以为吾扞蔽。 
现代文：楚军回去后，楚王马殷责备王环不断续前进夺取荆南，王环说： 江陵在唐以及吴、蜀之间，这里四面受敌，应当把它保存下来作为我们屏藩。 
English: After the return of the Chu army, the king of Chu, Ma Yin, reproached Wang Huan for his continuous advance to capture Jingnan. Wang Huan said: Gangneung is between Tang and Wu and Shu, here it is surrounded by enemies, it should be preserved as our Pinghan.

古文：殷说。
现代文：马殷听后很高兴。
English: Ma Yin was very happy after listening.

古文：环每战，身先士卒，与从同甘苦；常置针药于座右，战罢，索伤者于帐前，自傅治之。
现代文：王环每次作战，都身先士卒，和大家同甘共苦。他经常在座位的右侧放一些针和药物，战斗结束后，他就寻找一些受伤的士卒到营帐前，亲自给他们敷药治疗。
English: Every time Wang Huan fought, he was at the forefront of the soldiers and shared the hardships with everyone. He often put some needles and medicines on the right side of the seat. After the battle, he would look for some injured soldiers to the front of the camp and personally apply medicine to them.

古文：士卒隶环麾下者相贺曰： 吾属得死所矣。 
现代文：那些隶属王环的部下都互相称贺说： 我们得到了死后的归所。 
English: Those subordinates who belonged to Wang Huan all congratulated each other, saying, "We have found our home after death."

古文：故所向有功。
现代文：所以每次作战，都会建立功勋。
English: So every time you fight, you build up merit.

古文：楚大举水军击汉，围封州。
现代文：楚国发动所有水军向南汉发起攻击，包围了南汉的封州。
English: Chu launched all its naval forces to attack Southern Han, encircling Southern Han's Fuzhou.

古文：汉主以《周易》筮之，遇《大有》，于是大赦，改元大有；命左右街使苏章将神弩三千、战舰百艘救封州。
现代文：南汉主用《周易》来占卜这次战争，遇上 大有 卦，于是实行大赦，改年号为大有。南汉主命令左右街使苏章率领三千神射手、一百艘战船去援救封州。
English: The Southern Han ruler used "Zhou Yi" to foretell this war, and when he encountered the Great Yue, he implemented an amnesty and changed the year name to Great Yue. The Southern Han ruler ordered the left and right streets to send the Soviet chapter led by three thousand divine archers and one hundred warships to rescue Fuzhou.

古文：章至贺江，沉铁纟亘于水，两岸作巨轮挽纟亘，筑长堤以隐之，伏壮士于堤中。
现代文：苏章到达贺江，把铁链沉在水中，两岸作巨轮把铁链挽住，又修筑长堤坝把它隐藏起来，在堤坝中埋伏壮士。
English: Su Zhang arrived at the He River, sank the iron chain in the water, made a huge wheel on both sides of the river to hold the iron chain, built a long dam to hide it, and ambushed the strong men in the dam.

古文：章以轻舟逆战，阳不利，楚人逐之，入堤中；挽轮举絙，楚舰不能进退，以强弩夹水射之，楚兵大败，解围遁去。
现代文：苏章乘轻舟去迎战，假装战败，楚人追击，进入堤坝中，南汉兵把轮子上的铁链拉开，楚军的战船进退不得，然后神射手们在两岸用强弩射击楚军，楚兵大败，解除封州的包围逃跑了。
English: Su Zhang took a light boat to meet the battle, pretended to be defeated, the Chu people chased and entered the dike, the Southern Han soldiers pulled the chain on the wheel, the Chu army's warships could not retreat, and then the sharpshooters shot the Chu army on both sides of the river with strong crossbows, the Chu soldiers were defeated, the siege of the state was lifted and they fled.

古文：汉主以章为封州团练使。
现代文：南汉主任命苏章为封州团练使。
English: The Lord of Southern Han appointed Su Zhang as the envoy of the Fuzhou League.

古文：夏，四月，以鄴都留守从荣为河东节度使、北都留守，以客省使太原冯赟为副留守，夹马指挥使新平杨思权为步军都指挥使以佐之。
现代文：夏季，四月，后唐帝任命邺都留守李从荣为河东节度使、北都留守，客省使太原人冯为北都副留守，夹马指挥使新平人杨思权为步兵都指挥使辅佐李从荣。
English: In the summer, in April, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty appointed Li Congrong, who had stayed in Shidu, as the festival envoy to the east of the river, Feng, who was from Taiyuan, as the deputy envoy to the north, and Yang Siquan, who was from Xinping, as the commander of the horse, and Li Congrong, the assistant commander of the infantry, as the commander of the infantry.

古文：戊寅，以宣武节度使石敬瑭为鄴都留守、天雄节度使，加同平章事；以枢密使范延光为成德节度使。
现代文：戊寅，任命宣武节度使石敬瑭为邺都留守、天雄节度使，加同平章事。枢密使范延光为成德节度使。
English: Wu Yin, appointed the Xuanwu Festival to make Shi Jingyi stay away from the capital, and the Tianxiong Festival to make him stay away from the capital. The Privy Envoy Fan Yanguang was appointed the Chengde Festival Envoy.

古文：丙戌，以枢密使安重诲兼河南尹，以河南尹从厚为宣武节度使，仍判六军诸卫事。
现代文：丙戌，任命枢密使安重诲兼任河南尹，河南尹李从厚为宣武节度使，仍然判六军诸卫事。
English: He appointed the Privy Councilor An Chongyun as Henan Yin, and Henan Yin Li as Xuanwu Jiedu, and still awarded the Six Army Guards.

古文：吴右雄武军使苗璘、静江统军王彦章将水军万人攻楚岳州，至君山，楚王殷遣右丞相许德勋将战舰千艘御之。
现代文：吴国右雄武军使苗、静江统军王彦章率领一万水军向楚国的岳州发起进攻，到了君山，楚王马殷派遣右丞相许德勋率领一千多艘战船去抵御吴军。
English: Wang Yanzhang, the right-hand man of the armed forces of the State of Wu and the leader of the Jingjiang Unification Army, led ten thousand naval forces to launch an attack on Yuezhou in Chu. When they arrived at Junshan, King Ma Yin of Chu sent the right-hand man, Xu Dezhun, to lead more than one thousand warships to resist the Wu army.

古文：德勋曰： 吴人掩吾不备，见大军，必惧而走。 
现代文：许德勋说： 吴军想乘我们没有防备而袭击，当他看见我们大军时，一定会感到害怕而逃跑。 
English: Xu Dezhun said: The Wu army wants to take advantage of our unpreparedness and attack. When he sees our army, he will definitely feel scared and run away.

古文：乃潜军角子湖，使王环夜帅战舰三百，屯杨林浦，绝吴归路。
现代文：于是他们偷偷地驻在角子湖，派王环在黑夜里率领三百战船去断绝吴军的回路。
English: So they secretly stationed themselves at the Horn Lake and sent Wang Huan in the dark with three hundred warships to cut off the Wu army.

古文：迟明，吴人进军荆江口，将会荆南兵攻岳州，丁亥，至道人矶。
现代文：天将亮的时候，吴军进军到荆江口，准备会合荆南军队一起攻打岳州，丁亥，到达道人矶。
English: At dawn, the Wu army marched to the mouth of the Jing River, ready to join the Jing Nan army to attack Yuezhou, Dinghai, and arrive at Daojinshe.

古文：德勋命战棹都虞侯詹信以轻舟三百出吴军后，德勋以大军当其前，夹击之，吴军大败，虏璘及彦章以归。
现代文：许德勋命令战棹都虞候詹信率三百轻便船只走在吴军的后面，许德勋率领大军迎在吴军的前面，前后夹攻吴军，将吴军打得大败，俘虏了苗、王彦章，把他们带回楚国。
English: Xu Deshun ordered the warlord Zhu Yu, Zhan Xin and three hundred light vessels to walk behind the Wu army. Xu Deshun led a large army to meet the Wu army in front, attacked the Wu army back and forth, defeated the Wu army, captured Miao and Wang Yanzhang, and brought them back to Chu.

古文：初，义武节度使兼中书令王都镇易定十馀年，自除刺史以下官，租赋皆赡本军。
现代文：当初，义武节度使兼中书令王都在易定镇守了十多年，自己任命刺史以下的官吏，所交的租赋都用来供养本地军队。
English: At the beginning, both the Yiwu Festival envoy and the king of the Chinese calligraphy were stationed in Yiding Town for more than ten years. They appointed officials below the level of the scribe, and the rents they paid were used to support the local army.

古文：及安重诲用事，稍以法制裁之；帝亦以都篡父位，恶之。
现代文：等到安重诲掌权以后，渐渐按国家法规办事。后唐帝也因为王都是篡夺了他父亲的权位而憎恨他。
English: After An Chongyu came to power, he gradually began to act in accordance with national laws and regulations. Later Tang emperors also hated Wang Du for usurping his father's power.

古文：时契丹数犯塞，朝廷多屯兵于幽、易间，大将往来，都阴为之备，浸成猜阻。
现代文：当时，契丹人曾多次侵略边境，所以朝廷在幽、易之间驻扎了大量军队。对于军队将领们的行动，王都暗地里都有所防备，时间长了逐渐产生了猜疑。
English: At that time, the Khitans had repeatedly invaded the border, so the imperial court stationed a large number of troops between Yu and Yi. For the actions of the army generals, the kings secretly had something to guard against, and as time went on, suspicion gradually arose.

古文：都恐朝迁移之它镇，腹心和昭训劝都为自全之计，都乃求婚于卢龙节度使赵德钧。
现代文：王都害怕朝廷把他调到其他地方，他的心腹和昭训劝他要保全自己的办法，于是王都就向卢龙节度使赵德钧求婚。
English: Wang Du was afraid that the imperial court would transfer him to other places. His confidant and Zhaoxun advised him to preserve his own way, so Wang Du proposed to Lulong Jiedu to marry Zhao Deyao.

古文：又知成德节度使王建立与安重诲有隙，遣使结为兄弟，阴与之谋复河北故事，建立阳许而密奏之。
现代文：又知成德节度使王建立与安重诲之间有些矛盾，派遣使者去和王建立结为兄弟，同时偷偷和王建立谋划恢复河北地区原来的诸镇世袭、不给朝廷贡赋、不受朝廷征发等旧的规定。
English: He also knew that the Chengde Festival caused some contradictions between Wang Jian and An Chong, so he sent an envoy to become a brother of Wang Jian, and at the same time secretly planned with Wang Jian to restore the original hereditary towns in Hebei, not to give tribute to the court, not to be subject to the court's requisition, and other old regulations.

古文：都又以蜡书遗青、徐、潞、益、梓五帅，离间之。
现代文：王建立表面上答应了他，但又秘密把这些情况上奏后唐帝。王都又把用蜡封好的密信送给青、徐、潞、益、梓五个统帅，挑拨离间他们。
English: On the surface, Wang Jianli agreed with him, but secretly reported the situation to Emperor Tang. Wang Du also sent secret letters sealed with wax to the five generals, Qing, Xu, Zou, Yi and Zi, to sow discord among them.

古文：又遣人说北面副招讨使归德节度使王晏球，晏球不从；乃以金遗晏球帐下，使图之，不克；癸巳，晏球以都反状闻，诏宣徽使张延朗与北面诸将议讨之。
现代文：王都还派人去劝说北面副招讨使归德节度使王晏球，王晏球没有听从他。于是把金子送到王晏球营帐贿赂他，使他想办法，但没有结果，癸巳，王晏球把王都谋反的情况上奏，后唐帝下诏宣徽使张延朗和北面各位将领商议讨伐王都。
English: Wang Tuo also sent someone to persuade the vice-invitation of the north side to persuade the festival of returning to Germany to persuade Wang Yaoqiu, but Wang Yaoqiu did not listen to him. So he sent gold to Wang Yaoqiu's camp to bribe him to find a way, but there was no result. After that, Wang Yaoqiu reported the situation of Wang Tuo's rebellion, and Zhang Yanlang and the northern generals discussed the battle of Wang Tuo.

古文：戊戌，吴徙常山王濛为临川王。
现代文：戊戌，吴国调常山王杨为临川王。
English: According to Wu Guozhen, the king of Mt. Jingshan, Yang, was the king of Linchuan.

古文：庚子，诏削夺王都官爵。
现代文：庚子，后唐帝下诏罢免王都官爵。
English: Geng Zi, Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty issued an edict to remove Wang Du from the title of nobility.

古文：壬寅，以王晏球为北面讨使，权知定州行州事，以横海节度使安审通为副招讨使，以郑州防御使张虔钊为都监，发诸道兵会讨定州。
现代文：壬寅，任命王晏球为北面招讨使，暂时主持定州州事。任命横海节度使安审通为北面副招讨使，郑州防御使张虔钊为都监，调各道的军队联合起来讨伐定州。
English: Ren Yin, appointed Wang Yingqiu as the north side recruiting envoy, temporarily presided over the state affairs of Dingzhou. Appointed Henghai Jiedu to make An Ji Tong as the north side deputy recruiting envoy, Zhengzhou defense to make Zhang Qianqi as the city supervisor, and coordinated the armies of all provinces to unite to fight against Dingzhou.

古文：是日，晏球攻定州，拔其北关城。
现代文：这一天，王晏球向定州发起进攻，攻下了定州北关城。
English: On this day, Wang Yingqiu launched an attack on Dingzhou and captured Dingzhou Beiguan City.

古文：都以重赂求救于奚酋秃馁，五月，秃馁以万骑突入定州，晏球退保曲阳，都与秃馁就攻之。
现代文：王都用厚礼请求奚人首领秃馁援救。五月，秃馁率领一万骑兵突然进入定州，王晏球撤退，坚守曲阳，王都和秃馁趋进攻打。
English: In May, the vulture suddenly entered Dingzhou with ten thousand cavalry led by the vulture, Wang Xuan retreated and held on to Quyang, and Wang Du attacked and fought with the vulture.

古文：晏球与战于嘉山下，大破之。秃馁以二千骑奔还定州。
现代文：王晏球和王都、秃馁在嘉山下交战，把他们打得大败，秃馁率领两千骑兵逃奔回定州。
English: Wang Yingqiu, Wang Du and Zheng Da fought at the foot of Jiashan Mountain and defeated them. Zheng Da led two thousand cavalrymen to flee back to Dingzhou.

古文：晏球追至城门，因进攻之，得其西关城。
现代文：王晏球追击到定州城门，进一步发起进攻，夺取了西关城。
English: Wang Shuguang chased the ball to the gate of Dingzhou City, launched a further attack, and captured West Guancheng.

古文：定州城坚，不可攻，晏球增修西关城以为行府，使三州民输税供军食而守之。
现代文：定州城很坚固，很难攻下，王晏球扩建西关城，并设置行府，使定州、祁州、易州三州的百姓交纳税赋供给这里的军队，让他们在这里守阵地。
English: The city of Dingzhou was very strong and difficult to capture. Wang Bingqiu expanded the city of Xiguan and set up a government office to make the people of the three states of Dingzhou, Zhangzhou and Yizhou pay taxes to supply the troops here and let them defend their positions here.

古文：辛酉，以天雄节度副使赵敬怡为枢密使。
现代文：辛酉，后唐帝任命天雄节度使副使赵敬怡为枢密使。
English: Later, Emperor Tang appointed Tianxiong Jiedu to make deputy envoy Zhao Jingyi a confidential envoy.

古文：王晏球闻契丹发兵救定州，将大军趣望都，遣张延朗分兵退保新乐，延朗遂之真定，留赵州刺史硃建丰将兵修新乐城。
现代文：王晏球听说契丹人出兵来援救定州，乃率领大军直奔望都，并派遣张延朗分一部分兵力退守新乐。张延朗到了真定，留下赵州刺史朱建丰率领军队修筑新乐城。
English: Hearing that the Khitan people had sent troops to rescue Dingzhou, Wang Bingqiu led a large army straight to Mudu, and sent Zhang Yanlang to send a part of the troops to retreat to Xinle. Zhang Yanlang arrived in Zhending, leaving Zhu Jianfeng, the governor of Zhao, to lead the army to build Xinle City.

古文：契丹已自他道入定州，与王都夜袭新乐，破之，杀建丰。
现代文：契丹人已从别的道路进入定州，与王都在夜晚袭击新乐，攻克后杀死了朱建丰。
English: The Khitan had entered Dingzhou from another road, and both he and Wang attacked Xinle at night, and killed Zhu Jianfeng after the attack.

古文：乙丑，王晏球、张延朗会于行唐，丙寅，至曲阳。
现代文：乙丑，王晏球、张延朗在行唐会师，丙寅，到达曲阳。
English: Second Ugly, Wang Yingqiu, Zhang Yanlang are on the way to the Tang Association, and Cui Yin has arrived in Quyang.

古文：王都乘胜，悉其众与契丹五千骑合万馀人，邀晏球等于曲阳，丁卯，战于城南。
现代文：王都乘胜把自己的全部兵力和契丹五千骑兵会合成一万多人，在曲阳阻截住王晏球等，丁卯，两军在城南交战。
English: Wang Du took advantage of the victory to combine his entire force and the 5,000 cavalry of the Khitan with more than 10,000 people, intercepted Wang Yao's ball in Quyang, and the two armies fought in the south of the city.

古文：晏球集诸将校令之曰： 王都轻而骄，可一战擒也。
现代文：王晏球召集诸位将校命令他们说： 王都轻薄而又骄傲，一战就能把他抓获。
English: Wang Xuanqiu gathered all the officers and ordered them to say: Wang Du is frivolous and proud, he can be captured in one battle.

古文：今日，诸君报国之时也。
现代文：今天是诸位报效国家的时候。
English: Today is the time for you to serve your country.

古文：悉去弓矢，以短兵击之，回顾者斩！ 
现代文：都扔掉弓箭，用短兵器进攻，回头观望的斩首。 
English: They threw away their bows and arrows, attacked with short weapons, and beheaded those who looked back.

古文：于是骑兵先进，奋，楇挥剑，直冲其陈，大破之，僵尸蔽野；契丹死者过半，馀众北走；都与秃馁得数骑，仅免。
现代文：于是骑兵率先前进，舞鞭挥剑，直冲王都的阵地，把王都的军队打得大败，被击杀的尸体满山遍野。契丹人有一半被击杀，其余的都逃跑了。王都和秃馁只剩下几个骑兵保护，才免于一死。
English: So the cavalry advanced first, whipping and swinging their swords, heading straight for Wangdu's position, defeating Wangdu's army so badly that the dead bodies were scattered all over the mountains. Half of the Khitan were killed, and the rest fled. Wangdu and the vultures only had a few cavalrymen left to protect them from certain death.

古文：卢龙节度使赵德钧邀击契丹，北走者殆无孑遗。
现代文：卢龙节度使赵德钧阻击契丹人，那些逃走的人几乎没有一个不被杀死。
English: The Lulong Festival made Zhao Deyu block the Khitans, and those who escaped were almost all killed.

古文：吴遣使求和于楚，请苗璘、王彦章；楚王殷归之，使许德勋饯之。
现代文：吴国派遣使者向楚国请求和好，并请求归还苗、王彦章。楚王马殷把他们送回去，并派许德勋为他们饯行。
English: The State of Wu sent an envoy to the State of Chu to ask for peace and the return of Miao and Wang Yanzhang. The King of Chu, Ma Yin, sent them back and sent Xu Dexun to accompany them.

古文：德勋谓二人曰： 楚国虽小，旧臣宿将犹在，愿吴朝勿以措怀。
现代文：许德勋对他们二人说： 楚国虽小，旧的大臣老的将领们还都健在，希望吴国不要打什么主意。
English: Xu Deshun said to the two of them: Although Chu is a small country, the old ministers and generals are still alive. He hoped that Wu would not make any plans.

古文：必俟众驹争皁栈，然后可图也。 
现代文：一定要等到马驹争夺马厩时，然后才可以谋取。 
English: You have to wait until the foals are competing for the stables, and then you can go for it.

古文：时殷多内宠，嫡庶无别，诸子骄奢，故德勋语及之。
现代文：当时马殷有很多宠幸的宫人，嫡庶不分，他的儿子们也骄横奢侈，所以许德勋才特地讲了这番话。
English: At that time, Ma Yin had many favored courtiers, both legitimate and illegitimate, and his sons were also arrogant and extravagant, so Xu Deshun specially spoke these words.

古文：六月，辛巳，高季兴复请称籓于吴，吴进季兴爵秦王，帝诏楚王殷讨之。
现代文：六月，辛巳，高季兴又请求向吴国称臣，吴国给高季兴进爵为秦王，后唐帝诏令楚王马殷讨伐高季兴。
English: In June, Gao Jixing again requested to be made a minister of the State of Wu. The State of Wu gave Gao Jixing the title of King of Qin. Later, the Tang Emperor ordered King Ma Yin of Chu to attack Gao Jixing.

古文：殷遣许德勋将兵攻荆南，以其子希范为监军，次沙头。
现代文：马殷派许德勋率兵去攻打荆南，派他的儿子马希范为监军，驻在沙头。
English: Ma Yin sent Xu Deshun and his soldiers to attack Jingnan, and sent his son Ma Xifan to supervise the troops, stationed in Shatou.

古文：季兴从子云猛指挥使从嗣单骑造楚壁，请与希范挑战决胜，副指挥使廖匡齐出与之斗，拉杀之。
现代文：高季兴的侄子云猛指挥使高从嗣单人匹马到了楚军的营寨前，请求和马希范一决胜负，副指挥使廖匡齐出去和他交战，把他杀死了。
English: Gao Jixing's nephew Yun Meng commanded Gao Zongshi to ride alone to the camp of the Chu army and ask for a showdown with Ma Xifan. The deputy commander made Liao Kuangqi go out to fight him and killed him.

古文：季兴惧，明日，请和，德勋还。
现代文：高季兴听说之后感到很恐惧，第二天，请求和楚军和好，许德勋才率兵回去。
English: After hearing this, Gao Jixing felt very afraid. The next day, he asked for peace with the Chu army, and Xu Dexun led the soldiers back.

古文：匡齐，赣人也。
现代文：廖匡齐是赣县人，
English: Liao Kuangqi is from Handan County,

古文：王晏球知定州有备，未易急攻，硃弘昭、张虔钊宣言大将畏怯，有诏促令攻城。
现代文：王晏球知道定州有防备，不能轻易急攻，朱弘昭、张虔钊扬言王晏球胆怯害怕。后唐帝下诏催促他们进攻。
English: Wang Xuanqiu knew that Dingzhou was well-prepared and could not easily attack suddenly. Zhu Hongzhao and Zhang Qianqian threatened that Wang Xuanqiu was afraid and timid. Later, Emperor Tang issued an edict urging them to attack.

古文：晏球不得已，乙未，攻之，杀伤将士三千人。
现代文：王晏球不得已，乙未，向定州城发起进攻，结果有三千将士被杀伤。
English: As a last resort, Wang Yingqiu and B Wei launched an attack on Dingzhou City. As a result, three thousand soldiers were killed and wounded.

古文：先是，诏发西川兵戍夔州，孟知祥遣左肃边指挥使毛重威将三千人往。
现代文：在此之前，后唐帝下诏调西川的军队去戌守夔州，孟知祥派遣左肃边指挥使毛重威率领三千人前往夔州。
English: Prior to this, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty ordered the army of the West River to defend Ganzhou, and Meng Zhixiang sent the commander of the left side of Suzhou to send Mao Chongwei to lead three thousand people to Ganzhou.

古文：顷之，知祥奏 夔、忠、万三州已平，请召戍兵还，以省馈运。 
现代文：不久，孟知祥上奏说： 夔、忠、万三州已经平定，请求把戌守在夔州的士卒召回去，这样可以节省军队供给的运输。 
English: Not long after, Meng Zhixiang made a report to the emperor, saying, "We have pacified Zhang, Zhong, and Wanzhou, and we request you to recall your soldiers who are in Zhangzhou. This will save the transportation of army supplies.

古文：帝不许。
现代文：后唐帝没有答应。
English: The emperor would not allow it.

古文：知祥阴使人诱之，重威帅其众鼓噪逃归。
现代文：孟知祥偷偷派人去引诱他们，毛重威率领他的士卒喧闹着逃了回去。
English: Meng Zhixiang secretly sent someone to lure them, and Mao Shigui led his soldiers to run back noisily.

古文：帝命按其罪，知祥请而免之。
现代文：后唐帝命令将毛重威治罪，经过孟知祥的请求才赦免。
English: Later, Emperor Tang ordered that Mao Shouwei be punished, but he was pardoned after Meng Zhixiang's request.

古文：陕州行军司马王宗寿请葬故蜀主王衍，秋，七月，乙巳，赠衍顺正公，以诸侯礼葬之。
现代文：陕州行军司马王宗寿请求埋葬原来的前蜀主王衍，秋季，七月，追封王衍为顺正公，用诸侯的礼仪把他埋葬。
English: Sima Wang Zongshou of the Shaanxi Marching Army requested the burial of the original former Shu lord Wang Yan. In the autumn, in July, Wang Yan was posthumously named Shun Zheng Gong and buried with the etiquette of the princes.

古文：北面招讨使安审通卒。
现代文：北面招讨使安审通去世。
English: The invitation to the north resulted in the death of An Siu Tong.

古文：东都民有犯私麹者，留守孔循族之。
现代文：东都的百姓中有违犯法律私自造酒曲的人，东都留守孔循将其全家诛灭。
English: Among the people of Dongdu, there are people who violate the law and make their own liquor. Dongdu left Kongxu to exterminate his whole family.

古文：壬戌，契丹复遣其酋长惕隐将七千骑救定州，王晏球逆战于唐河北，大破之；甲子，追至易州，时久雨水涨，契丹为唐所俘斩及陷溺死者，不可胜数。
现代文：有人请求让百姓们私自制造酒曲，在秋季税赋中每亩增收五钱。已未，后唐帝下令同意。壬戌，契丹又派其酋长惕隐率领七千骑兵数援定州，王晏球在唐河北面迎战，把契丹人打得大败。甲子，追击到易州。当时因为长期下雨，河水上涨，契丹人被后唐军所俘获斩杀以及掉入河中淹死的不计其数。
English: There was a request to let the people make their own wine and collect an additional five yuan per mu in the autumn tax. Before long, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty issued an order to agree. At the same time, the Khitan also sent his chieftain Ti Yin to lead seven thousand cavalry to aid Dingzhou. Wang Yingqiu met the Khitan in the north of the Tang River and defeated the Khitan. He chased the Khitan to Yizhou. At that time, because of the long-term rain and rising river water, the Khitan were captured and killed by the Later Tang Army and drowned in the river.

古文：戊辰，北威武节度使王延钧为闽王。
现代文：戊辰，后唐帝任命威武节度使王延钧为闽王。
English: In the late Tang Dynasty, Emperor Wu of the State of Wu appointed Wang Yanxun as the King of Gong.

古文：契丹北走，道路泥泞，人马饥疲，入幽州境。
现代文：契丹人败走，道路泥泞，人马又饥饿又疲乏，进入了幽州境内。
English: The Khitans were defeated, the roads were muddy, the men and horses were hungry and tired, and they entered the territory of Yuzhou.

古文：八月，甲戌，赵德钧遣牙将武从谏将精骑邀击之，分兵扼险要，生擒惕隐等数百人；馀众散投村落，村民以白梃击之，其得脱归国者不过数十人。
现代文：八月，甲戌，赵德钧派遣牙将武从谏率领精锐骑兵阻击，并分别派军队把守在险要的地方，活捉了惕隐等几百人。其余的士卒都分散逃到村里，村里的百姓用棍子打他们，最后逃脱回国的不过几十个人。
English: In August, Jiajing and Zhao Deguan dispatched the commander Wu Conglu and led the elite cavalry to block the attack, and separately sent troops to guard the critical places, capturing several hundred people alive. The remaining soldiers fled to the village, the villagers beat them with sticks, and finally only a few dozen people escaped back to the country.

古文：自是契丹沮气，不敢轻犯塞。
现代文：从此以后，契丹人灰心丧气，不敢轻易来侵犯边塞。
English: Since then, the Khitans have been discouraged and do not dare to easily invade the border fortress.

古文：初，庄宗徇地河北，获小儿，畜之宫中，及长，赐姓名曰李继陶；帝即位，纵遣之。
现代文：当初，庄宗攻占河北时，得到一个小孩儿，把他养在宫中，等到他长大赐姓名叫李继陶。明宗即位后，把他放了回去。
English: At first, when Zhuangzong conquered Hebei, he got a small child and raised him in the palace. When he grew up, he gave him the name Li Jitao. After Mingzong ascended the throne, he let him go back.

古文：王都得之，使衣黄袍坐堞间，谓王晏球曰： 此庄宗皇帝子也，已即帝位。
现代文：王都得到了，让他穿上黄袍，坐在城上的矮墙中间，对王晏球说： 这是庄宗皇帝的儿子，已经即皇帝位。
English: The king received them all. He had him put on a yellow robe and sit in the middle of the low wall of the city. He said to Wang Yaoqiu: "This is the son of Emperor Zhuangzong, who has already become emperor."

古文：公受先朝厚恩，曾不念乎！ 
现代文：你蒙受先朝的厚恩，难道不怀念先朝吗？ 
English: Do you not miss the previous morning, when you were so favored by the previous morning?

古文：晏球曰： 此公作小数竟何益！
现代文：王晏球说： 你搞这些小动作有什么好处呢？
English: Wang Yuqiu said: What are the benefits of these small actions?

古文：吾今教公二策，不悉众决战，则束手出降耳，自馀无以求生也。 
现代文：我现在教给你两个办法，如果不率领全军出来决战，那么就束手投降，除此之外没有什么活路。 
English: I will now teach you two methods. If you do not lead the whole army out for a decisive battle, then you will surrender with your hands tied. There is no other way out.

古文：王建立以目不知书，请罢判三司，不许。
现代文：王建立认为自己没有多少文化，请求解除判三司的官职，后唐帝没有答应。
English: Wang Jianli thought that he didn't have much culture and asked to be relieved of the official post of the Third Division, but Emperor Wu of Tang didn't agree.

古文：乙未，吴大赦。
现代文：乙未，吴国实行大赦。
English: In the second half of the 19th century, the State of Wu implemented an amnesty.

古文：吴越王镠欲立中子传瓘为嗣，谓诸子曰： 各言汝功，吾择多者而立之。 
现代文：吴越王钱想立中子钱传为继承人，于是对他的儿子们说： 你们各自讲讲你们的功劳，然后我选择你们中功劳多的人立为继承人。 
English: King Qian of Wuyue wanted to make Zhongzi Qian his heir, so he said to his sons: "Each of you tell me about your merits, and then I will choose the one with the most merits to be your heir."

古文：传瓘兄传璹、传瓘、传璟皆推传瓘，乃奏请以两镇授传瓘。
现代文：钱传的哥哥钱传、钱传、钱传都一致推举钱传。于是上奏请求后唐帝授给钱传两个镇。
English: Qian Chuan's brother Qian Chuan, Qian Chuan, and Qian Chuan all unanimously nominated Qian Chuan. Therefore, after the request was made, Emperor Tang granted Qian Chuan two towns.

古文：闰月，丁未，诏以传瓘为镇海、镇东节度使。
现代文：闰八月，丁未，后唐帝下诏任命钱传为镇海、镇东节度使。
English: In the intercalary month of August, Ding Wei, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty issued an edict appointing Qian Chuan as the Zhenhai and Zhendong Festival envoy.

古文：戊申，赵德钧献契丹俘惕隐等，诸将皆请诛之，帝曰： 此曹皆虏中之骁将，杀之则虏绝望，不若存之以纾边患。 
现代文：戊申，赵德钧献上了契丹的俘虏惕隐等，诸位将领都请求把他们杀掉，后唐帝说： 这些人们都是契丹人中的勇敢将领，杀了他们契丹人就绝望了，不如留下他们来缓解边塞的忧患。 
English: Wushin, Zhao Dejun presented the Khitan captives Tiyin and others, and all the generals asked to kill them. Later, Emperor Tang said: These people are the brave generals of the Khitan people. If they kill them, the Khitan people will be in despair. It is better to leave them to alleviate the worries of the border fortress.

古文：乃赦惕隐等酋长五十人，置之亲卫，馀六百人悉斩之。
现代文：于是赦免了惕隐等酋长五十人，把他们安排在亲卫中，其余六百多人全部斩杀。
English: As a result, he pardoned fifty chiefs, including Tiyin, and placed them in protective custody. The remaining more than six hundred people were all killed.

古文：契丹遣梅老季素等入贡。
现代文：契丹派遣梅老季素等人向后唐入贡。
English: Khitan dispatched Mei Lao Ji Su and others to pay tribute to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：初，卢文进来降，契丹以籓汉都提举使张希崇代之为卢龙节度使，守平州，遣亲将以三百骑监之。
现代文：当初，卢文进来投降，契丹任命蕃汉都提举使张希崇代替他为卢龙节度使，驻守在平州，并派遣了亲信将领率三百骑兵去监督他。
English: At first, Lu Wen came to surrender, and the Khitan appointed Shih Hanzhong to promote Zhang Xitong to replace him as the Lulong Festival envoy, stationed in Pingzhou, and sent a trusted general to lead three hundred cavalry to supervise him.

古文：希崇本书生，为幽州牙将，没于契丹，性和易，契丹将稍亲信之，因与其部曲谋南归。
现代文：张希崇本来是个书生，任幽州牙将，后来被契丹人俘获。他的性情和气平易，契丹将领们渐渐亲近信任他，他于是和兵士们谋划南归。
English: Zhang Xizong was originally a student of calligraphy and served as the commander of Yuzhou Fang, but was later captured by the Khitan. His temperament and temperament were easy, and the Khitan generals gradually came to trust him, so he and the soldiers planned to return to the south.

古文：部曲泣曰： 归固寝食所不忘也，然虏众我寡，奈何？ 
现代文：兵士们哭着说： 回南方去当然是我们连睡觉吃饭都不会忘记的，然而敌众我寡，怎么办呢？ 
English: The soldiers cried and said: "Of course, we won't forget to sleep and eat when we go back to the south, but with so few enemies, what should we do?

古文：希崇曰： 吾诱其将杀之，兵必溃去。
现代文：张希崇说： 我引诱他们的将领然后把他们杀掉，士卒们一定会溃散逃离。
English: Zhang Xitong said: If I lure their generals and then kill them, the soldiers will surely scatter and flee.

古文：此去虏帐千馀里，比其知而征兵，吾属去远矣。 
现代文：这里离契丹人的营帐有一千多里，等到他们知道后调集军队来攻打我们，我们已经离开这里很远了。 大家都说： 很好！ 
English: It's more than a thousand miles from the Khitan camp, and by the time they found out and mobilized their army to attack us, we were already far away from here.

古文：众曰： 善！ 
现代文：于是就先挖了些陷井，又给里面放了石灰。
English: So they first dug some traps and put lime in them.

古文：乃先为阱，实以石灰，明日，召虏将饮，醉，并从者杀之，投诸阱中。
现代文：第二天，召集契丹将领来饮酒，等他们喝醉以后，连跟从他们的人都一起杀掉，把他们扔进了陷井中。
English: The next day, the Khitan generals were called to drink, and when they were drunk, they were killed together with their followers and thrown into a trap.

古文：其营在城北，亟发兵攻之，契丹众皆溃去。
现代文：他们的营寨在城北，迅速派兵去攻打，契丹兵都溃散逃跑。
English: Their camp was in the north of the city, and they quickly sent troops to attack. The Khitan soldiers scattered and fled.

古文：希崇悉举其所部二万馀口来奔，诏以为汝州刺史。
现代文：张希崇率领他的全部军队二万余人来投降，后眼帝下诏任命他为汝州刺史。
English: Zhang Xizong led his entire army of more than 20,000 men to surrender, and Emperor Houyan issued an edict appointing him as the chief historian of Ruzhou.

古文：吴王太后殂。
现代文：吴国的王太后去世。
English: The empress dowager of the State of Wu passed away.

古文：九月，辛巳，荆南败楚兵于白田，执楚岳州刺史李廷规，归于吴。
现代文：九月，辛巳，荆南军队在白田打败了楚国军队，抓获了楚国的岳州刺史李廷规，把他送到吴国。
English: In September of the same year, the Jingnan army defeated the Chu army in Baita and captured the Yuezhou vassal of Chu, Li Tingbi, and sent him to Wu.

古文：乙未，敕以温韬发诸陵，段凝反覆，令所在赐死。
现代文：乙未，后唐帝下令，因为温韬盗挖先帝的陵墓，段凝反叛，就在他们所在地赐死。
English: However, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty ordered that because Wen Xuan stole the tomb of the former emperor and rebelled, he would be put to death in their place.

古文：己亥，以武宁节度使房知温兼荆南行营招讨使，知荆南行府事；分遣中使发诸道兵赴襄阳，以讨高季兴。
现代文：乙亥，任命武宁节度使房知温兼任荆南行营招讨使、知荆南行府事。并分别派遣中使调发各道军队赶赴襄阳去讨伐高季兴。
English: Yihai appointed Wu Ning Jiedu to make Fang Zhiwen concurrently serve as the envoy to invite Jingnan to the camp and Zhi Jingnan to visit the capital, and separately dispatched the envoys to dispatch the armies of various provinces to rush to Xiangyang to fight Gao Jixing.

古文：辛丑，徙庆州防御使窦廷琬为金州刺史；冬，十月，廷琬据庆州拒命。
现代文：辛丑，调庆州防御使窦廷琬为金州刺史。冬季，十月，窦廷琬占据庆州拒绝执行调令。
English: In winter, in October, Dou Tingyu occupied Gyeongju and refused to carry out the transfer order.

古文：丙午，以横海节度使李从敏兼北面行营副招讨使。
现代文：丙午，任命横海节度使李从敏兼任北面行营副招讨使。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd, the appointment of the Henghai Festival made Li Congmin concurrently serve as the deputy recruiting envoy of the North Camp.

古文：从敏，帝之从子也。
现代文：李从敏是后唐帝的侄儿。
English: Li Congmin was the nephew of the late Tang Emperor.

古文：戊申，诏静难节度使李敬周发兵讨窦廷琬。
现代文：戊申，后唐帝下诏，命令静难节度使李敬通出兵讨伐窦廷琬。
English: According to the edict of Emperor Wu of the Later Tang Dynasty, Li Jingtong was ordered to dispatch troops to fight against Dou Tingyu.

古文：王都据定州，守备固，伺察严，诸将屡有谋翻城应官军者，皆不果。
现代文：王都占据定州，守备坚固，四周巡察很严，他部下有些将领曾多次想翻城出来响应官军，但都没有成功。
English: Wangdu occupied Dingzhou, the defenses were strong, and the patrols were very strict. Some of his subordinate generals had repeatedly tried to overrun the city in response to the official army, but they were unsuccessful.

古文：帝遣使者促王宴球攻城，晏球与使者联骑巡城，指之曰： 城高峻如此，借使主人听外兵登城，亦非梯冲所及。
现代文：后唐帝派遣使者去催促王晏球进攻，王晏球同使者一起骑着马沿定州城看了看，他指着城对使者说： 城墙修得如此高大险峻，即使城主听任外面的士兵登城，也不是云梯冲车能够办到的。
English: Later, Emperor Tang sent an emissary to urge Wang Bingqiu to attack. Wang Bingqiu rode with the emissary along the city of Dingzhou and looked at it. He pointed to the city and said to the emissary: The city wall is built so tall and precipitous that even if the city owner allowed the soldiers outside to climb the city, it would not be possible to do it with a ladder.

古文：徒多杀精兵，无损于贼，如此何为！
现代文：只是白白地死伤精锐士卒，对敌人一点也不会损伤，像这样还攻城干什么呢？
English: What is the use of attacking the city like this, when you can only kill and wound the elite soldiers in vain, and do no damage to the enemy at all?

古文：不若食三州之租，爱民养兵以俟之，彼必内溃。 
现代文：不如让三州将租税供给军队，爱民养兵耐心等待，他们一定从内部崩溃。 
English: It would be better to let the three states supply the army with taxes and love the people and wait patiently for the soldiers. They will surely collapse from within.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：后唐帝听从了他的意见。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：十一月，有司请为哀帝位庙，诏立庙于曹州。
现代文：十一月，有关部门请为唐哀帝立庙，后唐帝下诏在曹州修庙。
English: In November, the relevant departments requested that a temple be built for Emperor Tang, and later Emperor Tang issued an edict to build a temple in Caozhou.

古文：平卢节度使晋忠武公霍彦威卒。
现代文：平卢节度使晋忠武公霍彦威去世。
English: The Pinglu Festival caused the death of Jin Zhongwukong Huo Yanwei.

古文：忠州刺史王雅取归州。
现代文：忠州刺史王雅夺取归州。
English: Chungju stabbed Wang Ya and took back Chungju.

古文：庚寅，皇子从厚纳孔循女为妃，循因之得之大梁，厚结王德妃之党，乞留。
现代文：庚寅，皇子李从厚娶孔循的女儿为妃，孔循因此有机会去了大梁，他用厚礼巴结王德妃的同党，请求留在大梁。
English: In Goyang, the prince Li Conghu married Kong Cun's daughter as his wife. As a result, Kong Cun had the opportunity to go to Daliang. He used the courtesy to ask Wang Defei's fellow party members to stay in Daliang.

古文：安重诲具奏其事，力排之，礼毕，促令归镇。
现代文：安重诲把他的情况全部上奏给后唐帝，极力排斥他留在大梁，婚礼办完，就催促命令他回到自己的镇所。
English: An Chongzheng reported his entire situation to the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty, strongly rejected him to stay in Daliang, and after the wedding was over, he urged him to return to his own town.

古文：甲午，以中书侍郎、同平章事王建立同平章事，充平卢节度使。
现代文：甲午，中书侍郎、同平章事王建立以同平章事衔，出任平卢节度使。
English: In the 4th year of the 5th month of the 4th year of the 5th month of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 18th year of the 19th year of the 19

古文：丙申，上问赵凤： 帝王赐人铁券，何也？ 
现代文：丙申，后唐帝问赵凤： 帝王赏赐给人们铁券，这是为什么呢？ 
English: After the Tang Emperor asked Zhao Feng, "Why did the Emperor reward people with iron coupons?

古文：对曰： 与之立誓，令其子孙长享爵禄耳。 
现代文：赵凤回答说： 与他们立下誓言，让他们的子孙们世世代代享受爵禄。 
English: Zhao Feng replied, "Make an oath with them, and let their descendants enjoy the peerage for generations to come."

古文：上曰： 先朝受此赐者让三人，崇韬、继麟寻皆族灭，朕得脱如毫厘耳。 
现代文：后唐帝说： 先朝接受这种赐物的只有三个人，郭崇韬、李继麟不久就会家抄斩，朕只差一点点才得以脱险。 
English: Later, Emperor Tang said, "There were only three people who accepted this gift in the previous dynasty. Guo Chongzhen and Li Jilin will be beheaded soon. I was only a little bit away from being able to escape.

古文：因叹息久之。
现代文：说完后他叹息了很长时间。
English: He sighed for a long time after he finished.

古文：赵凤曰： 帝王心存大信，固不必刻之金石也。 
现代文：赵凤说： 帝王的心中存有大的信义，本来就不必刻在金石上。 
English: Zhao Feng said, "The emperor has great faith in his heart, so there is no need to engrave it on the precious stone.

古文：十二月，甲辰，李敬周奏拔庆州，族窦廷琬。
现代文：十二月，甲辰，李敬周奏报攻取了庆州，并将窦廷琬灭族。
English: In December, Jia Chen, Li Jing and Zhou Songpo captured Gyeongju and annihilated Dou Ting.

古文：荆南节度使高季兴寝疾，命其子行军司马、忠义节度使、同平章事从诲权知军府事；丙辰，季兴卒。
现代文：荆南节度使高季兴得病卧床，命令他的儿子行军司马、忠义节度使、同平章事高从诲暂管军府事。丙辰，高季兴去世。
English: Gao Jixing was bedridden with an illness brought on by the Jingnan Festival, and his son was ordered to act as marshal, loyal to the festival and temporarily in charge of military affairs. Gao Jixing passed away.

古文：吴主以从诲为荆南节度使兼侍中。
现代文：吴主任命高从诲为荆南节度使兼任侍中。
English: The Lord of Wu appointed Gao Zongyao as the Jingnan Sect's envoy and also served as a chamberlain.

古文：史馆修撰张昭远上言： 臣窃见先朝时，皇弟、皇子皆喜俳优，入则饰姬妾，出则夸仆马；习尚如此，何道能贤！
现代文：史馆修撰张昭远上书说： 我见先朝时，皇弟、皇子都喜欢乐舞\艺人，进门就给姬妾装饰打扮，出门就夸耀自己有仆人骏马。这些人的习尚如此，怎么能成为贤人呢？
English: Zhang Zhaoyuan, a researcher at the History Museum, wrote: "I saw that during the previous dynasty, the prince and the prince both liked music and dance artists, and when they entered the door, they decorated and dressed their concubines, and when they left the door, they boasted that they had servants and horses. If these people's habits are still like this, how can they become wise men?

古文：诸皇子宜精择师傅，令皇子屈身师事之，讲礼义之经，论安危之理。
现代文：诸位皇子应当精心选择好的老师，命令皇子躬身拜他们为师，而且恭恭敬敬地侍奉他们，请他们讲习礼义的经义，论述国家安危的道理。
English: Princes should carefully select good teachers, order princes to bow down to them as teachers, and respectfully serve them, ask them to teach the meaning of etiquette, and discuss the principle of national security.

古文：古者人君即位则建太子，所以明嫡庶之分，塞祸乱之源。
现代文：古代人君一即帝位就立太子，是为了明确嫡庶的区别，阻塞祸乱的根源。
English: In ancient times, the emperor was the first to establish a crown prince, in order to clarify the difference between the legitimate and illegitimate, and to block the root of the calamity.

古文：今卜嗣建储，臣未敢轻议。至于恩泽赐与之间，婚姻省侍之际，嫡庶长幼，宜有所分，示以等威，绝其侥冀。 
现代文：现在通过占卜来确定继承人，我不敢轻率地议论，至于降恩赏赐，婚姻省侍等，嫡庶长幼，应有区分，明确等级权威，杜构他们心中的侥幸的希望。 
English: Now that we use divination to determine the heirs, I don't dare to speak rashly. As for the reduction of the bounty, the marriage and the attendants, the eldest son and the eldest daughter, there should be a distinction, a clear hierarchy and authority, and the hope of luck in their hearts.

古文：帝赏叹其言而不能用。
现代文：后唐帝很赞赏他的说法，但没有能付诸实施。
English: Later Tang emperors appreciated his words, but failed to put them into practice.

古文：闽王延钧度民二万为僧，由是闽中多僧。
现代文：闽王王延钧让二万百姓离俗出家，从此以后闽中的僧人越来越多。
English: King Yeonjo allowed twenty thousand people to renounce the world and become monks. Since then, the number of monks in Yeonjo has increased.

古文：河东节度使、北都留守从荣，年少骄很，不亲政务，帝遣左右素与从荣善者往与之处，使从容讽导之。
现代文：河东节度使、北都留守李从荣，年轻骄傲，不亲自处理政务，后唐帝派遣一个平时和李从荣相处比较好的亲信去和他住在一起，让这个人心平气和地劝说和引导他。
English: Li Congrong, a young and proud man, did not personally deal with government affairs. Later, the Tang Emperor sent a close confidant who usually got along well with Li Congrong to live with him, and let this person persuade and guide him calmly.

古文：其人私谓从荣曰： 河南相公恭谨好善，亲礼端士，有老成之风；相公齿长，宜自策励，勿令声问出河南之下。 
现代文：这个人私下对李从荣说： 河南相公李从厚恭敬善良，礼贤下士，有老练成熟的风度。相公您年龄比他大，应当鞭策激励自己，不要让名誉低于河南相公。 
English: This person said to Li Congrong in private: Henan Minister Li Congrong is respectful and kind-hearted, a courteous corporal, and has a sophisticated and mature demeanor. Your father-in-law is older than him, you should encourage and motivate yourself, do not let your reputation be lower than that of Henan Minister.

古文：从荣不悦，退，告步军都指挥使杨思权曰： 朝廷之人皆推从厚而短我，我其废乎！ 
现代文：李从荣听了很不高兴，回去以后，告诉步军都指挥使杨思权说： 朝廷的人们都推崇李从厚而说我的坏话，要废掉我吗？ 
English: Li Congrong was very unhappy to hear this. After returning home, he told Yang Si Quan, commander of the infantry, to say: People at the court all respect Li Conghou, but they say bad things about me. Do they want to get rid of me?

古文：思权曰： 相公手握强兵，且有思权在，何忧？ 
现代文：杨思权说： 相公您手里掌握着强大的珍力，而且有我杨思权在，有什么忧虑的呢？ 
English: Yang Si Quan said, "Brother-in-law, you hold a powerful treasure in your hands, and with me, Yang Si Quan, what is there to worry about?

古文：因劝从荣多募部曲，缮甲兵，阴为自固之备。
现代文：因此劝说李从荣多招募士卒，修理好武器，暗中为巩固自己而做好准备。
English: Therefore, he persuaded Li Congrong to recruit soldiers, repair weapons, and secretly prepare to consolidate himself.

古文：又谓帝左右曰： 君每誉弟而抑其兄，我辈岂不能助之邪！ 
现代文：好思权又对那个皇帝的亲信说： 君主经常称誉李从厚而贬低李从荣，我们难道就不能帮助他吗？ 
English: Gao Si Quan also said to that emperor's crony: The monarch often praises Li Cong Hou and disparages Li Cong Rong, can't we help him?

古文：其人惧，以告副留守冯赟，赟密奏之。
现代文：这个人感到害怕，于是就把这些情况告诉了北都副留守冯，冯又秘密上奏给后唐帝。
English: This person felt afraid, so he told these circumstances to Feng, the deputy governor of the Northern Capital, who then secretly reported to Emperor Wu of the Later Tang Dynasty.

古文：帝召思权诣阙，以从荣故，亦弗之罪也。
现代文：后唐帝召杨思权到朝廷，因为李从荣的缘故，没有治他的罪。
English: Later, the Tang Emperor summoned Yang Si Quan to the imperial court, because Li Cong Rong was not punished for his crime.

古文：明宗圣德和武钦孝皇帝中之上天成四年春，正月，冯赟入为宣徽使，谓执政曰： 从荣刚僻而轻易，宜选重德辅之。 
现代文：天成四年春季正月，冯到朝廷任宣徽使，他对执政说： 李从荣性情刚愎而且轻举妄动，应当选择德高望重的人去辅佐他。 
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Tiancheng, Feng went to the imperial court to serve as an envoy for the proclamation of the emblem. He said to the government: Li Congrong is stubborn and reckless, and should choose a person of high moral standing to assist him.

古文：王都、秃馁欲突围走，不得出。
现代文：王都、秃馁打算突破包围逃出去，但没有能成功。
English: The king and the vulture tried to break through the encirclement and escape, but they were not successful.

古文：二月，癸丑，定州都指挥使马让能开门纳官军，都举族自焚，擒秃馁及契丹二千人。
现代文：二月，癸丑，定州都指挥使马让能打开城门让官军进去，王都的全家族人都自焚而死，抓获了秃馁以及契丹二千人。
English: In February, the commanding officers of the cities of Zhougou and Dingzhou allowed Majang to open the city gates to let the government troops in. The entire family of the capital burned themselves to death, and the vultures and two thousand Khitan were captured.

古文：辛亥，以王晏球为天平节度使，与赵德钧并加兼侍中。
现代文：辛亥，任命王晏球为天平节度使，与赵德钧一并加封兼任侍中。
English: Xinhai, appointed Wang Yingqiu as the ambassador of the balance of power, and together with Zhao Dejun, he was also appointed as an attendant.

古文：秃馁至大梁，斩于市。
现代文：秃馁被送到大梁，在街市上当众斩杀。
English: The vultures are taken to the girders and slaughtered in public at the market.

古文：枢密使赵敬怡卒。
现代文：枢密使赵敬怡去世。
English: Privy Councilor Zhao Jingyi passed away.

古文：甲子，帝发大梁。
现代文：甲子，后唐帝从大梁出发。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Gaozi set out from Daliang.

古文：丁卯，门下侍郎、同平章事崔协卒于须水。
现代文：丁卯，门下侍郎、同平章事崔协在须水去世。
English: Dingwu, a disciple of the chamberlain, Tongping Zhangji Cui Xie passed away in Susui.

古文：庚午，帝至洛阳。
现代文：庚午，后唐帝到达洛阳。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor Wu of Tang arrived in Luoyang.

古文：王宴球在定州城下，日以私财飨士，自始攻至克城未尝戮一卒。三月，辛巳，晏球入朝，帝美其功；晏球谢久烦馈运而已。
现代文：王晏球在定州城下，每天用自己的财物慰劳士卒，从开始攻城到攻下城，从来没有杀过一个士卒，三月，辛巳，王晏球到了朝廷，后唐帝称美他的功劳。王晏球只是感谢朝廷长期给他运送粮食。
English: At the foot of Dingzhou Castle, Wang Yeqiu used his wealth every day to comfort the soldiers. From the beginning of the siege to the capture of the city, he never killed a single soldier. In March, Xin Xi, Wang Yeqiu arrived at the imperial court. Later, Emperor Tang praised his service. Wang Yeqiu only thanked the imperial court for sending him grain for a long time.

古文：皇子右卫大将军从璨性刚，安重诲用事，从璨不为之屈。
现代文：皇子右卫大将军李从璨性情刚愎，安重诲掌权后，李从璨不服从他。
English: Emperor Udaisho's general, Li Conglu, was a headstrong man. After An Chonglu took power, Li Conglu disobeyed him.

古文：帝东巡，以从璨为皇城使。从璨与客宴于会节园，酒酣，戏登御榻，重诲奏请诛之；丙戌，赐从璨死。
现代文：后唐帝巡幸大梁时，任命李从璨为皇城使，李从璨和客人们在会节园大摆宴席，酒喝得高兴的时候，开玩笑地登上了御床。安重诲上奏请求诛杀李从璨。丙戌，后唐帝赐李从璨死。
English: Later, when Emperor Tang was on a grand tour, he appointed Li Conglu as the imperial envoy to the city. Li Conglu and his guests held a grand banquet in the festival garden, and when they were happy to drink wine, they jokingly climbed onto the imperial bed. An Chongyu issued a request to kill Li Conglu. For this, Emperor Tang gave Li Conglu death.

古文：横山蛮寇邵州。
现代文：横山地区的蛮族侵扰邵州。
English: Barbarians from the Hengshan region invaded Shaozhou.

古文：楚王殷命其子武安节度副使、判长沙府希声知政事，总录内外诸军事，自是国政先历希声，乃闻于殷。
现代文：楚王马殷命令他的儿子武安节度副使、判长沙府的马希声知政事，总管国内外军事，从此以后，国家大事先经过马希声，然后才报告马殷。
English: King Ma Yin of Chu ordered his son, the deputy envoy of Wu'an Jiedu and the chief judge of Shafu, Ma Xisheng, to be in charge of political affairs and in charge of domestic and foreign military affairs. From then on, national events would first go through Ma Xisheng before being reported to Ma Yin.

古文：夏，四月，庚子朔，禁铁锡钱。
现代文：夏季四月，庚子朔，禁止铁锡钱流通。
English: In the summer of April, Geng Zi Shuo, banned the circulation of iron and tin money.

古文：时湖南专用锡钱，铜钱一直锡钱百，流入中国，法不能禁。
现代文：当时湖南专用锡钱，一个铜钱值一百个锡钱，锡钱充入中原，法令难以禁止这些钱的流通。
English: At that time, Hunan had its own special tin money. One copper coin was worth a hundred tin coins. Tin money was poured into the Central Plains, and it was difficult to prohibit the circulation of this money by law.

古文：丙午，楚六军副使王环败荆南兵于石首。
现代文：丙午，楚六军副使王环在石首击败了荆南的军队。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd, the deputy envoy of the Chu Sixth Army, Wang Huan, defeated the army of Jingnan in Shishou.

古文：初令缘边置场市党项马，不令诣阙。
现代文：后唐开始命令沿边境的地方设置市场买党项马，不让他们送到洛阳。
English: Later, the Tang Dynasty began to order the localities along the border to set up markets to buy party horses, not allowing them to be sent to Luoyang.

古文：先是，党项皆诣阙，以贡马为名，国家约其直酬之，加以馆谷赐与，岁费五十馀万缗。
现代文：在此以前，党项人都把马送到洛阳，以贡名为名，国家粗粗估计，付钱给他们，再加上供给食宿，每年的耗费约五十万缗。
English: Prior to this, all party members sent horses to Luoyang in the name of tribute, and the country roughly estimated that paying them, plus providing food and accommodation, cost about 500,000 baht per year.

古文：有司苦其耗蠹，故止之。
现代文：有关部门苦于这些耗费，因此禁止他们到京城来。
English: The relevant departments are suffering from these expenses, so they are prohibited from coming to Beijing.

古文：壬子，以皇子从荣为河南尹、判六军诸卫事，从厚为河东节度使、北都留守。
现代文：壬子，任命皇子李从荣为河南尹、判六军诸卫事；任命李从厚为河东节度使、北都留守。
English: In Imzi, he appointed the prince Li Congrong as the Henan Yin, and ordered the six armies to guard; Li Conghou was appointed as the Hedong Festival envoy, and stayed in the north.

古文：契丹寇云州。
现代文：契凡侵犯云州。
English: Khitan invade Yunnan.

古文：甲寅，以端明殿学士、兵部侍郎赵凤为门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：甲寅，任命端明殿学士、兵部侍郎赵凤为门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: Jia Yin appointed Zhao Feng, a scholar of the Duanming Palace and an attendant of the military department, as a subordinate attendant and a peer.

古文：五月，乙酉，中书言： 太常改谥哀帝日昭宣光烈孝皇帝，庙号景宗。
现代文：五月，乙酉，中书上书说： 太常改谥哀帝为昭宣光烈孝皇帝，庙号为景宗。
English: In May, in the middle of the year, the book said: Too often change the name of the emperor to Zhaoxuan Guang Rongxiao Emperor, and the temple name to Jingzong.

古文：既称宗则应入太庙，在别庙则不应称宗。 
现代文：既然称宗，就应该入太庙，如在别的庙里就不应该称宗。 
English: Since it is called Zong, it should be entered into the Great Temple. If it is in another temple, it should not be called Zong.

古文：乃去庙号。
现代文：于是去掉了庙号。
English: As a result, the temple name was removed.

古文：帝将祀南郊，遣客省使李仁矩以诏谕两川，今西川献钱一百万缗，东川五十万缗；皆辞以军用不足，西川献五十万缗，东川献十万缗。
现代文：后唐帝将要去南郊祭祀，派遣客省使李仁矩用后唐帝的命令告示两川，命令西川贡献钱一百万缗，东川贡献钱五十万缗。但两川都推辞说军需不足，结果西川贡献了五十万缗，东川贡献了十万缗。
English: The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty was about to go to the southern suburbs for a religious ceremony, so he sent a guest provincial envoy, Li Ren Rong, to use the order of the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty to notify the two rivers, ordering the West River to contribute one million baht and the East River to contribute 500,000 baht. However, both rivers declined, saying that they were short of military supplies. As a result, the West River contributed 500,000 baht and the East River contributed 100,000 baht.

古文：仁矩，帝在籓镇时客将也，为安重诲所厚，恃恩骄慢。
现代文：李仁矩是后唐帝当初在藩镇时的一位将领，被安重诲器重，他依仗恩宠特别傲慢。
English: Li Ren Rong was a general during the reign of the late Tang Dynasty in the Han Dynasty. He was highly respected by An Chong, and he was especially arrogant because he was favored.

古文：至梓州，董璋置宴召之，日中不往，方拥妓酣饮。
现代文：他到梓州时，董璋置办酒宴招待他，等到中午还不来，正抱着艺妓饮酒。
English: When he arrived in Zizhou, he was invited to a banquet hosted by Dong Hao Ji, but he did not come until noon, and was drinking with a geisha.

古文：璋怒，从卒徒执兵入驿，立仁矩于阶下而诟之曰： 公但闻西川斩李客省，谓我独不能邪！ 
现代文：董璋非常生气，跟从董璋的士卒们手执武器进了驿站，让李仁矩站在台阶下面骂他说： 你只听说西川斩杀了李严，难道说我们不能杀人吗？ 
English: Dong Xuan was very angry. He followed Dong Xuan's officers, who were holding weapons in their hands, into the station. He made Li Rincang stand at the bottom of the steps and scolded him, saying, "You only heard that Xichuan killed Li Yan. Are you saying that we can't kill people?

古文：仁矩流涕拜请，仅而得免；既而厚赂仁矩以谢之。
现代文：李仁矩痛哭流涕地拜谢请罪，才得以免死。之后又用丰厚的礼物来贿赂李仁矩，让他回朝后不要讲出这件事。
English: Li Rincun was able to avoid death only after he begged for forgiveness in tears. Later, he bribed Li Rincun with a rich gift so that he would not talk about the matter when he returned to the imperial court.

古文：仁矩还，言璋不法。
现代文：李仁矩回到朝廷后，说董璋不遵守法令。
English: After Li Rincang returned to the imperial court, he said that Dong Xuan did not comply with the law.

古文：未几，帝复遣退事舍人李彦珣诣东川，入境，失小礼，璋拘其从者，彦珣奔还。
现代文：不久，后唐帝又派遣通事舍人李彦到东川。入境后，有失小礼，董璋就拘捕了跟从李彦的人，李彦逃了回去。
English: Soon after, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty sent Li Yan, a courier, to Dongchuan. After entering the country, out of courtesy, Dong Xi arrested Li Yan's followers, and Li Yan fled back.

古文：高季兴之叛也，其子从诲节谏，不听。
现代文：高季兴背叛之后，他的儿子高从诲直言规劝，高季兴不听。
English: After Gao Jixing's betrayal, his son Gao Zongyong made a direct speech to persuade Gao Jixing, but Gao Jixing did not listen.

古文：从诲既袭位，谓僚佐曰： 唐近而吴远，舍近臣远，非计也。 
现代文：高从诲继承爵位后，对他的左右僚佐们说： 唐近而吴远，舍弃唐而臣服吴，这不是好方法。 
English: After Gao Congchu inherited the title, he said to his right and left colleagues: Tang is near and Wu is far, abandoning Tang and submitting to Wu is not a good way.

古文：乃因楚王殷以谢罪于唐。
现代文：于是就通过楚王马殷向后唐谢罪。
English: So he went back to Tang Xie Sin through King Ma Yin of Chu.

古文：又遗山南东道节度使安元信书，求保奏，复修职贡。
现代文：又给山南东道节度使安元信写信，请求他上奏后唐帝，愿意重新称臣纳贡。
English: He also wrote a letter to the host of the Shannan Festival, An Yuanxin, requesting him to be willing to reclaim the tribute after the Tang Dynasty.

古文：丙申，元信以从诲书闻，帝许之。
现代文：丙申，安元信把高从诲信的内容告诉了后唐帝，后唐帝答应了他的请求。
English: According to him, An Yuanxin told Emperor Gaozong the contents of Gaozong's letter, and Emperor Gaozong agreed to his request.

古文：六月，戊申，复以鄴都为魏州，留守、皇城使并停。
现代文：六月，戊申，又将邺都恢复为魏州，留守、皇城使一并停置。
English: In June, the capital of Boushen was restored to Weizhou, and the offices of the governor and the imperial envoy were suspended.

古文：庚申，高从诲自称前荆南行军司马、归州刺史，上表求内附。
现代文：庚申，高从诲自称为前荆南行军司马、归州刺史，上表请求归附后唐。
English: Goshun, Gao Congchi self-proclaimed himself as the former Jingnan marching army Sima, Guizhou stabbing history, the above table requests the annexation of Houtang.

古文：秋，七月，甲申，以从诲为荆南节度使兼侍中。
现代文：秋季，七月，甲申，任命高从诲为荆南节度使兼侍中。
English: In autumn, in July, in Jiaxing, Gao Congyao was appointed as the Jingnan Festival envoy and attendant.

古文：己丑，罢荆南招讨使。
现代文：己丑，罢废荆南招讨使。
English: He was so ashamed of himself that he gave up his position as Jingnan's envoy.

古文：八月，吴武昌节度使兼侍中李简以疾求还江都，癸丑，卒于采石。
现代文：八月，吴国武昌节度使兼侍中李简因病请求回到江都。癸丑，李简在采石去世。
English: In August, Li Jian, Wuchang's festival envoy and chamberlain, requested to return to Jiangdu due to illness. Tragically, Li Jian died in the quarry.

古文：徐知询，简婿也，擅留简亲兵二千人于金陵，表荐简子彦忠代父镇鄂州，徐知诰以龙武统军柴再用为武昌节度使；知询怒曰： 刘崇俊，兄之亲，三世为濠州；彦忠吾妻族，独不得邪！ 
现代文：徐知询是李简的女婿，他擅自把李简的亲兵二千人留在金陵，并上表推荐李简的儿子李彦忠代替他的父亲镇守鄂州，徐知诰任命龙武统军柴再用为武昌节度使。徐知询知道以后很生气地说： 刘崇俊是哥哥的亲戚，他家三世为濠州刺史。李彦忠是我妻子的家族，难道不能任职吗？ 
English: Xu Zhisheng was the son-in-law of Li Jian. Without authorization, he left 2,000 of Li Jian's own soldiers in Jinling, and recommended Li Jian's son Li Yanzhong to replace his father as the commander of Ezhou. Xu Zhisheng appointed Longwu as the military commander of Wuchang. Xu Zhisheng later said angrily: Liu Chongjun is a relative of his brother, and the third generation of his family is the history of Zhangzhou. Li Yanzhong is my wife's family, can't he serve?

古文：初，楚王殷用都军判官高郁为谋主，国赖以富强，邻国皆疾之。
现代文：当初，楚王马殷用都军判官高郁为主要谋臣，国家依靠他富强起来，邻国都嫉妒他。
English: At first, King Ma Yin of Chu used Gao Yu, the military judge of the capital, as his main adviser. The country relied on him to become rich and strong, and the neighboring countries were jealous of him.

古文：庄宗入洛，殷贵其子希范入贡，庄宗爱其警敏，曰： 比闻马氏当为高郁所夺，今有子如此，郁安能得之！ 
现代文：庄宗进入洛阳之后，马殷派他的儿子马希范向后唐入贡。庄宗很喜欢他的敏捷，对他说： 近来听说马氏的政权要被高郁所夺取，今天有你这样的儿子，高郁怎么能夺取呢？ 
English: After Zhuangzong entered Luoyang, Ma Yin sent his son Ma Xifan to Tang to pay tribute. Zhuangzong was very fond of his agility, and said to him: Recently, I heard that Ma's regime would be seized by Gao Yu. Today, with a son like you, how can Gao Yu seize it?

古文：高季兴亦以流言间郁于殷，殷不听；乃遣使遗节度副使、知政事希声书，盛称郁功名，愿为兄弟。
现代文：高季兴也用流言在马殷那里诋毁高郁，马殷不听从，于是又派遣使者给节度副使、知政事马希声送去信，非常赞赏高郁的功劳和名誉，并希望与他结为兄弟。
English: Gao Jixing also used rumors to slander Gao Yu from Ma Yin. Ma Yin did not listen, so he sent an envoy to send a letter to Ma Xisheng, the vice-envoy of the festival and the governor, greatly appreciating Gao Yu's merits and honor, and hoping to become brothers with him.

古文：使者言于希声曰： 高公常云 马氏政事皆出高郁 ，此子孙之忧也。 
现代文：使者对马希声说： 高公高季兴经常说 马氏政事都出于高郁 ，这是子孙们的忧患啊！ 
English: The messenger said to Ma Xisheng: Gao Gong Gao Jixing often said that Ma's political affairs are all caused by arrogance, which is the sorrow of the descendants!

古文：希声信之。
现代文：马希声相信了他的话。
English: Ma Xisheng believed him.

古文：行军司马杨昭遂，希声之妻族也，谋代郁任，日谮之于希声。
现代文：行军司马杨昭遂是马希声妻子的同族人，他图谋取代高郁的职务，每天在马希声那里诬陷高郁。
English: Marching sergeant Ma Yang Zhao turned out to be a compatriot of Ma Xisheng's wife. He plotted to replace Gao Yu's position and framed Gao Yu at Ma Xisheng's place every day.

古文：希声屡言于殷，称郁奢僭，且外交邻籓，请诛之。
现代文：马希声也曾多次向他的父亲马殷说高郁奢侈越轨，而且广交外面的藩镇，请求把他希掉。
English: Ma Xisheng had also repeatedly told his father, Ma Yin, that he had gone off the rails by indulging in high living and extravagance, and he had made many friends outside the domain and town, and had asked them to get rid of him.

古文：殷曰： 成吾功业，皆郁力也；汝勿为此言！ 
现代文：马殷说： 我事业能够成功，全靠高郁的力量，你不要说这些话。 
English: Ma Yin said: I can succeed in my career, all by the power of arrogance, you don't say these words.

古文：希声固请罢其兵柄，乃左迁郁行军司马。
现代文：马希声坚决请求罢免高郁的兵权，于是高郁补降职为行军司马。
English: Ma Xisheng resolutely requested the removal of Gao Yu's military authority, so Gao Yu made up for the demotion and became the marshal.

古文：郁谓所亲曰： 亟营西山，吾将归老。
现代文：高郁对他的亲信们说： 赶快经营西山，我将要告老回乡。
English: Gao Yu said to his cronies, "Hurry up and run Xishan, I'm going back to my hometown."

古文：猘子渐大，能咋人矣。 
现代文：狗崽渐渐长大，能咬人了。 
English: Little by little, the mastiff grows up and can bite people.

古文：希声闻之，益怒，明日，矫以殷命杀郁于府舍，榜谕中外，诬郁谋叛，并诛其族党。
现代文：马希声听说以后，更加愤怒，第二天，假传马殷的命令在府舍里杀死了高郁，并张榜告示中外，诬陷说高郁要谋反，同时把高郁的全家以及他的同党全部杀死。
English: After hearing this, Ma Xisheng became even more enraged. The next day, he killed Gao Yu in the mansion on the orders of the rumored Ma Yin, and posted a notice both at home and abroad, falsely accusing Gao Yu of plotting a rebellion, and at the same time killing Gao Yu's entire family and all of his fellow party members.

古文：至暮，殷尚未知，是日，大雾，殷谓左右曰： 吾昔从孙儒渡淮，每杀不辜，多致兹异。
现代文：到了晚上，马殷还不知道这件事。这一天，天气大雾，马殷对他的左右说： 我从前跟从孙儒渡淮河时，每逢杀死那些无罪的人时，大多要出现这种怪现象。
English: In the evening, Ma Yin still did not know about this. On this day, the weather was foggy, Ma Yin said to his right and left: When I used to cross the Huaihe River with Sun Ru, whenever I killed those who were not guilty, this strange phenomenon would mostly appear.

古文：马步院岂有冤死者乎？ 
现代文：难道马步院有冤死的人吗？ 
English: Could it be that there are people who have died unjustly at the stable?

古文：明日，吏以郁死告，殷拊膺大恸曰： 吾老耄，政非己出，使我勋旧横罹冤酷！ 
现代文：第二天，官吏把高郁被杀的情况告诉了马殷，马殷抚摸着胸口非常悲痛地说： 我已经老了，政事也不是我自己说了算，致使我过去的有功之臣横遭这些冤酷。 
English: The next day, the officials told Ma Yin about Gao Yu's murder. Ma Yin touched his chest and said with great sorrow, "I am already old, and I am not in charge of the government affairs myself. As a result, my meritorious ministers in the past have suffered from these cruelties.

古文：既而顾左右曰： 吾亦何可久处此乎！ 
现代文：一会儿又回过头来对他的身边左右的人说： 我怎么可以长久地居住在这里呢？ 
English: After a while, he turned to the people around him and said, "How can I live here for a long time?"

古文：九月，上与冯道从容语及年谷屡登，四方无事。
现代文：九月，后唐帝和冯道从容地聊起近年来五谷丰登，四方无事。
English: In September, Emperor Hou Tang and Feng Dao had a leisurely chat about the abundance of grain in recent years, and nothing happened.

古文：道曰： 臣常记昔在先皇幕府，奉使中山，历井陉之险，臣忧马蹶，执辔甚谨，幸而无失；逮至平路，放辔自逸，俄至颠陨。
现代文：冯道说： 我经常记起过去在先帝的幕府任掌书记时，奉命出使中山，经过井陉险要的地方，我常担忧马被摔倒，非常小心谨慎地抓住缰绳，幸好没有失误。等到了平路时，放开缰绳让马自己去奔路。
English: Feng Dao said: I often remember that when I was the secretary of the Shogunate of the former emperor, I was ordered to send Zhongshan to pass through dangerous places. I was often worried that the horse would fall, and I was very careful to hold the reins. Fortunately, there was no mistake. When I reached the flat road, I let go of the reins and let the horse run on its own.

古文：凡为天下者亦犹是也。 
现代文：不一会儿就跌倒了。凡是治理天下的道理也和这差不多。 
English: It did not take long for it to fall, and that is pretty much the way the world is governed.

古文：上深以为然。
现代文：后唐帝深深感到他讲得很对。
English: Later, Emperor Tang deeply felt that he was right.

古文：上又问道： 今岁虽丰，百姓赡足否？ 
现代文：后唐帝又问冯道说： 今年虽然丰收了，百姓们的赡养是否充足？ 
English: Later, Emperor Tang also asked Feng Dao: Although this year's harvest is abundant, is the support of the people sufficient?

古文：道曰： 农家岁凶则死于流殍，岁丰则伤于谷贱，丰凶皆病者，惟农家为然。
现代文：冯道说： 种庄稼的人遇上灾年就饿殍满道，遇上丰年又为粮食价格便宜而发愁，无论是丰年还是灾年，都有困苦，只有庄稼人是这样呵！
English: Feng Dao said: People who grow crops are starving in a disaster year, and worry about cheap grain prices in a good year. Whether it is a good year or a disaster year, there are hardships. Only farmers are like this!

古文：臣记进士聂夷中诗云： 二月卖新丝，五月粜新谷；医得眼下疮，剜却心头肉。 
现代文：我曾记得进士聂夷中的诗中写道： 二月卖新丝，五月粜新谷；医得眼下疮，剜却心头肉。 
English: I once remembered a poem written by Jin Shi Zou Yizhong: "Sell new silk in February, plough a new valley in May; heal the wounds at the moment, but not the heart."

古文：语虽鄙俚，曲尽田家之情状。
现代文：语言虽然粗俗，但全都说出了庄稼人的甘苦。
English: Although the language was vulgar, it said everything about the hardships of the farmers.

古文：农于四人之中最为勤苦，人主不可不知也。 
现代文：农民是士、农、工、商四种人中最勤苦的，陛下不可不了解这些情况啊！ 
English: Peasants are the most industrious of the four types of people, namely, clerks, farmers, workers, and merchants. Your Majesty must understand these facts!

古文：上悦，命左右录其诗，常讽诵之。
现代文：反唐帝听了之后非常高兴，命令他身边的人把这首诗抄录下来，经常朗读背诵它。
English: The anti-Tang Emperor was very happy after listening to it and ordered the people around him to transcribe the poem and recite it often.

古文：鄜州兵戍东川者归本道，董璋擅留其壮者，选赢老归之，仍收其甲兵。
现代文：戌守东川的州军队回归本道时，董璋擅自留下其中身体强壮的人，挑选一些年老体弱的人让他们回去，同时还收了他们的武器。
English: When the state troops guarding the Dongchuan River returned to their original path, Dong Xuan left the physically strong among them, selected some old and weak people to let them go back, and also collected their weapons.

古文：癸巳，西川右都押牙孟容弟为资州税官，坐自盗抵死，观察判官冯璩、中门副使王处回为之请，孟知祥曰： 虽吾弟犯法，亦不可贷，况他人乎！ 
现代文：癸巳，西川右都押牙孟容的弟弟任资州的税赋官，犯了监守自盗的罪被判处死刑，观察判官冯、中门副使王处回为他请求免除死刑，孟知祥说： 即使是我的弟弟犯了法也不能饶恕，何况是别人呢？ 
English: Suddenly, Meng Zhixiang, the younger brother of Meng Rong, who was appointed as the tax official of Zhizhou, committed the crime of self-stealing and was sentenced to death. Observing the judge Feng and the vice-minister Wang, who asked for his death penalty to be exempted, Meng Zhixiang said: Even if my younger brother broke the law, he could not be forgiven, let alone others.

古文：吴越王镠居其国好自大，朝廷使者曲意奉之则赠遗丰厚，不然则礼遇疏薄。
现代文：吴越王钱在他的国内喜欢自夸，朝廷派去的使者违心地奉承他，他就会赠送给一批丰厚的礼物，如果不奉承他，礼遇就很低。
English: King Qian of Wuyue liked to boast in his country. If the emissaries sent by the court flattered him against his will, he would give them a number of rich gifts. If they did not flatter him, the courtesy would be very low.

古文：尝遗安重诲书，辞礼颇倨。
现代文：钱曾给安重诲一封信，语言礼节都很傲慢。
English: Qian once wrote a letter to An Chongzheng, and his language and etiquette were arrogant.

古文：帝遣供奉官乌昭遇、韩玫使吴越，昭遇与玫有隙，使还，玫奏： 昭遇见镠，称臣拜舞，谓镠为殿下，及私以国事告镠。 
现代文：后唐帝派遣供奉官乌昭遇、韩玫出使吴越国，乌昭遇和韩玫有矛盾，他们完成使命回朝，韩玫上奏说： 乌昭见到钱，称臣拜舞，称钱为殿下，并私下把国家大事告诉了钱。 
English: Later, Emperor Tang dispatched Wu Zhaoyu, a tributary official, and Han Mei, an envoy from Wu Yue Guo. Wu Zhaoyu and Han Mei had a conflict. They completed their mission and returned to the North. Han Mei reported: Wu Zhaoyu saw Qian, called him a vassal, called him a royal highness, and privately told Qian about national events.

古文：安重诲奏赐昭遇死。
现代文：安重诲奏请后唐帝赐乌昭遇死。
English: Emperor Wu Zhao of the Tang Dynasty died after the An Rong Yu Song was performed.

古文：癸巳，制镠以太师致仕，自馀官爵皆削之，凡吴越进奏官、使者、纲吏，令所在系治之。
现代文：癸巳，后唐帝下令钱以太师的身份退休，其余的官爵都被罢免，凡是吴越国的进奏官、使者、纲吏等，由所在地方官把他们抓起来治罪。
English: Soon after, Emperor Tang ordered Qian Yatong to retire as a scholar, and the rest of the officials and nobles were dismissed. All the envoys, envoys, and officials of Wuyue were arrested and punished by the local officials.

古文：镠令子传瓘等上表讼冤，皆不省。
现代文：钱命令他的儿子钱传等上表诉冤，后唐帝都不理。
English: Qian ordered his son, Qian Chuanzhong, to appeal for justice, but Emperor Tang ignored him.

古文：初，朔方节度使韩洙卒，弟澄为留后。
现代文：当初朔方节度使韩洙死后，他的弟弟韩澄被任命为留后。
English: At the beginning, after the death of Han Zheng, his brother Han Cheng was appointed to stay behind.

古文：未几，定远军使李匡宾聚党据保静镇作乱，朔方不安；冬，十月，丁酉，韩澄遣使赍绢表乞朝廷命帅。
现代文：不久，定远军使李匡宾聚众占据了保静镇发动叛乱，朔方地区很不安定。冬季，十月，丁酉，韩澄派遣使者带着绢表请求朝廷任命主将。
English: Soon after, Dingyuan's army sent Li Kuangbin to gather a crowd to occupy Baojing Town to launch a rebellion, and the Shuofang area was very unstable. In winter, in October, Ding Xi and Han Cheng sent envoys with enamel watches to request the imperial court to appoint a commander.

古文：前磁州刺史康福，善胡语，上退朝，多召入便殿，访以时事，福以胡语对；安重诲恶之，常戒之曰： 康福，汝但妄奏事，会当斩汝！ 
现代文：原来的磁州刺史康福，精通胡语，后唐帝退朝后，经常把他叫进便殿，谘询当时的一些事情，康福用胡语回答后唐帝的提问。安重诲讨厌他这样做，经常告诫说： 康福，你竟敢胡乱奏事，应该杀掉你！ 
English: Kangfu, the original ruler of the magnetic state, was fluent in the Hu language. After Emperor Tang's abdication, he would often call him into the hall to consult on current affairs. Kangfu would answer Emperor Tang's questions in the Hu language. An Chongyuan hated him for doing this and often warned him: "Kangfu, how dare you play around with things, you should be killed!"

古文：福惧，求外补。
现代文：康福听了很害怕，请求补缺放外任。
English: After listening to this, Kangfu was very scared and requested that the vacancy be filled by an outsider.

古文：重诲以灵州深入胡境，为帅者多遇害，戊戌，以福为朔方、河西节度使。
现代文：安重诲认为灵州深入胡境，在那里当统帅的人多数被杀害，戊戌，任命康福为朔方、河西节度使。
English: An Chongyuan thought that Lingzhou had gone deep into the Hu territory, where most of the people who were commanders were killed, and appointed Kangfu as the Yangshuo side and the Hexi festival envoy.

古文：福见上，涕泣辞之；上命重诲为福更他镇，重诲曰： 福自刺史无功建节，尚复何求！
现代文：康福见到后唐帝，痛哭流涕地想辞去这个职务。后唐帝命令安重诲为康福调换到其他镇去，安重诲说： 康福没有功劳，从刺史升到节度使，无功而建节钺还有什么可再求的？
English: When Kangfu saw the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty, he cried bitterly and wanted to resign from this post. The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty ordered An Chongzheng to transfer to other towns for Kangfu, and An Chongzheng said: Kangfu has no merit, from stabbing history to festival, what else can be asked for without merit?

古文：且成命已行，难以复改。 
现代文：况且命令已经下发，难以再更改。 
English: Moreover, the order has already been issued and it is difficult to change it.

古文：上不得已，谓福曰： 重诲不肯，非朕意也。 
现代文：后唐帝不得已，对康福说： 安重诲不肯更改，这并不是朕的意思。 
English: Later, Emperor Tang had no choice but to say to Kangfu: "I am not willing to change the teachings of An Chong, this is not what I meant.

古文：福辞行，上遣将军牛知柔、河中都指挥使卫审余等将兵万人卫送之。
现代文：康福告辞出发了，后唐帝派遣将军牛知柔、河中都指挥使卫审等率领一万多士卒护送他去。
English: After Kangfu's farewell speech, Emperor Tang dispatched the general Niu Zhirong, the commander of the Middle Dynasties, the commander of the Imperial Guards, and more than ten thousand soldiers to escort him.

古文：审余，徐州人也。
现代文：卫审是徐州人。
English: Wei Xuan is from Xuzhou.

古文：辛亥，割阆、果二州置保宁军，壬子，以内客省使李仁矩为节度使。
现代文：辛亥，分出阆、果二州来建置了保宁军。壬子，任命内客省使李仁矩为节度使。
English: Xinhai divided Shandong and Gansu into two states to build up the Boryeong Army. Ren Zi appointed Li Ren Rong, the governor of Neigak Province, as the military governor.

古文：先是，西川常发刍粮馈峡路，孟知祥辞以本道兵自多，难以奉它镇，诏不许，屡督之；甲寅，知祥奏称财力乏，不奉诏。
现代文：在此之前，西川经常调拨一些粮草送给峡路，孟知祥推辞说因为本道兵多，难以供奉别的藩镇，后唐帝下诏不允许不调拨，而且曾多次催促他。甲寅，孟知祥上奏说因财力不足，不执行诏令。
English: Prior to this, Saikawa often allocated some grain and grass to be sent to Kyo-ro, but Meng Chih-hsiang declined, saying that since there were many soldiers in this province, it would be difficult to donate to other towns of the domain, and that he was not allowed not to allocate, and that he had urged him many times. In other words, Meng Chih-hsiang reported that he would not implement the imperial decree due to insufficient financial resources.

古文：吴诸道副都统、镇海宁国节使兼侍中徐知询自以握兵据上流，意轻徐知诰，数与知诰争权，内相猜忌，知诰患之，内枢密使王令谋曰： 公辅政日久，挟天子以令境内，谁敢不从！
现代文：吴国诸道副都统、镇海宁国节度使兼侍中徐知询自以为手握兵权而且占据在上游，心中很轻视徐知诰，曾多次和徐知诰争权夺利，在内部互相猜忌，徐知诰很担心他。内枢密使王令谋对徐知诰说： 你辅佐皇上时间已经很长，挟天子以令境内，谁敢不服从！
English: Xu Zhisheng, the deputy governor of all the provinces of the State of Wu and the chief of the State Council of the State of Zhenhai and Ning, thought that he held the military power and occupied the upstream. In his heart, he despised Xu Zhisheng. He had competed with Xu Zhisheng for power and profit many times, and they were suspicious of each other internally. Xu Zhisheng was very worried about him. Wang Lingmo, the inner secret envoy, said to Xu Zhisheng: You have been the emperor's assistant for a long time, and you have been in charge of the territory, who would dare to disobey!

古文：知询年少，恩信未洽于人，无能为也。 
现代文：徐知询年轻，他的信义和恩德还没有润泽众人，办不了什么大事。 
English: Xu Zhiyuan is young, and his loyalty and benevolence have not yet benefited everyone, so he cannot do anything great.

古文：知询待诸弟薄，诸弟皆怨之。
现代文：徐知询对待各个弟弟也很刻薄，他的弟弟们也怨恨他。
English: Xu Zhisen also treated his younger brothers harshly, and his brothers also resented him.

古文：徐玠知知询不可辅，反持其短以附知诰。
现代文：徐知道徐知询不可辅佐，掌握着他的短处以归附徐知诰。
English: Xu knew that Xu Zhisheng could not be assisted, and grasped his shortcoming to be attached to Xu Zhisheng.

古文：吴越王镠遗知询金玉鞍勒、器皿，皆饰以龙凤；知询不以为嫌，乘用之。
现代文：吴越王钱送给徐知询用金玉制作的马鞍、马勒、器皿，都装饰上龙凤。徐知询不知道由此会引起嫌疑，竟乘用这些东西。
English: Wu Yue Wang Qian gave Xu Zhisheng a saddle, horse-drawn carriage and utensils made of gold and jade, all decorated with dragons and phoenixes. Xu Zhisheng did not know that this would arouse suspicion, but he actually used these things.

古文：知询典客周廷望说知询曰： 公诚能捐宝华以结朝中勋旧，使皆归心于公，则彼谁与处！ 
现代文：掌握礼仪事务的官吏周廷望劝徐知询说： 你如果能真心诚意把这些宝货捐献出来来交结朝中有功劳的勋旧大臣，使他们都和你同心同意，还有谁和徐知诰在一起呢？ 
English: Zhou Tingwang, an official in charge of ceremonial affairs, advised Xu Zhiyun, saying: "If you can sincerely donate these treasures to honor the distinguished former ministers in the government, so that they all agree with you, who else will be with Xu Zhiyun?

古文：知询从之，使廷望如江都谕意。
现代文：徐知询听从了他的意见。并派周廷望去江都说明他的意思。
English: Xu Zhixun listened to his opinion and sent Zhou Ting to the Yangtze River to explain his meaning.

古文：廷望与知诰亲吏周宗善，密输款于知诰，亦以知诰阴谋告知询。
现代文：周廷望和徐知诰的亲信官吏周宗很好，偷偷向徐知诰表达诚心，同时也将徐知诰的阴谋告诉了徐知询。
English: Zhou Tingwang and Zhou Zong, an official close to Xu Zhisheng, were very good friends. They secretly expressed their sincerity to Xu Zhisheng, and also told Xu Zhisheng about Xu Zhisheng's plot.

古文：知询召知诰诣金陵除父温丧，知诰称吴主之命不许，周宗谓廷望曰： 人言侍中有不臣七事，宜亟入谢！ 
现代文：徐知询叫徐知诰到金陵解除为父亲徐温治丧的丧服，徐知诰回告他说吴主下令不允许，周宗对周廷望说： 人们说侍中徐知询有七件不象臣僚办的事情，应当赶快入朝谢罪。 
English: Xu Zhisheng asked Xu Zhisheng to go to Jinling to remove the mourning clothes for the death of his father Xu Wenzhi. Xu Zhisheng replied that he was not allowed by the order of the Lord of Wu. Zhou Zong said to Zhou Tingwang: People say that the attendant Xu Zhisheng has seven things that are not like those of a vassal, and should quickly enter the imperial thanksgiving.

古文：廷望还，以告知询。
现代文：周廷望回去以后，把这些都告诉了徐知询。
English: After Zhou Ting looked back, he told all this to Xu Zhisheng.

古文：十一月，知询入朝，知诰留知询为统军，领镇海节度使，遣右雄武都指挥使柯厚征金陵兵还江都，知诰自是始专吴政。
现代文：十一月，徐知询回到朝廷，徐知诰留下徐知询做统军，兼领镇海节度使，并派遣右雄武都指挥使柯厚去征调金陵的士卒返回江都，徐知诰从此开始独揽吴国政权。
English: In November, Xu Zhisheng returned to the imperial court, and Xu Zhisheng left Xu Zhisheng to be the leader of the unified army and the envoy of the Zhenhai Festival. He also sent the right-hand man and commander of the capital to ask Ke Hou to recruit and transfer the Jinling soldiers back to Jiangdu. From then on, Xu Zhisheng began to monopolize the power of Wu.

古文：知询责知诰曰： 先王违世，兄为人子，初不临丧，可乎？ 
现代文：徐知询遣责徐知诰说： 先王离世，你是先王的儿子，一点儿也不去哭办父亲的丧事，那样可以吗？ 
English: Xu Zhisheng reprimanded Xu Zhisheng and said: The previous king passed away, you are the son of the previous king, do not go to your father's funeral crying at all, is that okay?

古文：知诰曰： 尔挺剑待我，我何敢往！
现代文：徐知诰说： 你拔出剑等待我，我怎么敢去呢？
English: Xu Zhisheng said, "You drew your sword and waited for me. How dare I go?

古文：尔为人臣，畜乘舆服御物，亦可乎！ 
现代文：你为人臣，蓄积这些天子的车驾服饰，难道也可以吗？ 
English: Is it possible for you, as a vassal, to accumulate the driving apparel of these gods?

古文：知询又以廷望所言诰知诰，知诰曰： 以尔所为告我者，亦廷望也。 
现代文：徐知诰又用周廷望的话来责问徐知诰。徐知诰说： 把你的所作所为告诉我的人也就是周廷望。 
English: Xu Zhisheng also used Zhou Tingwang's words to reproach Xu Zhisheng. Xu Zhisheng said: The person who told me what you did was Zhou Tingwang.

古文：遂斩廷望。
现代文：于是斩杀了周廷望。
English: So he killed Zhou Tingbo.

古文：壬辰，吴主加尊号曰睿圣文明光孝皇帝，大赦，改元大和。
现代文：壬辰，吴主加尊号睿圣文明光孝皇帝，全国实行大赦，改年号大和。
English: In Imjin, the Emperor Wu conferred the title of Rui Sheng, the Emperor Guangxiao, and the nation-wide amnesty was implemented, and the year was changed to Yamato.

古文：康福行至方渠，羌胡出兵邀福，福击走之；至青刚峡，遇吐蕃野利、大虫二族数千帐，皆不觉唐兵至，福遣卫审余掩击，大破之，杀获殆尽。
现代文：康福走到方渠，羌族人出兵阻截他，康福把他们打跑。到青刚峡后，遇到了吐蕃野利、大虫二族几千个营帐，他们都不知道后唐的军队已经到来，康福派遣卫审乘他们没有防备袭击，把他们打得大败，几乎全部杀尽或俘获。
English: After reaching the Qingang Gorge, he encountered several thousand camps of the Tubo and the Bigworm ethnic groups. They did not know that the post-Tang army had arrived. Kangfu sent guards to attack them unprepared and defeated them, killing or capturing almost all of them.

古文：由是威声大振，遂进至灵州，自是朔方始受代。
现代文：从此康福威望大振，前进到灵州，从此朔方才开始接受康福代替为朔州节度使。
English: Since then, the prestige of Kangfu has been greatly enhanced, and it has advanced to Lingshou. From now on, Shuo has begun to accept Kangfu as a substitute for Shuo State Festival.

古文：十二月，吴加徐知诰兼中书令，领宁国节度使。
现代文：十二月，吴国加封徐知诰兼任中书令，并领宁国节度使。
English: In December, Xu Zhisheng of Wuxi Province was appointed as the additional envoy of the Qing Dynasty, and he also served as the envoy of the Ning Dynasty.

古文：知诰召徐知询饮，以金钟酌酒赐之，曰： 愿弟寿千岁。 
现代文：徐知诰请徐知询来喝酒，用金做的酒杯酌酒给他喝，并说： 希望弟弟能活千岁。 
English: Xu Zhisheng invited Xu Zhisheng to have a drink. He gave him a drink from a gold cup and said, "I hope my brother can live for a thousand years."

古文：知询疑有毒，引他器均之，跽献知诰曰： 愿与兄各享五百岁。 
现代文：徐知询怀疑其中有毒，又拿其他杯子把酒平均分开，随着献给徐知诰，并说： 希望和兄长各享五百岁。 
English: Xu Zhisheng suspected that one of them was poisonous, and took the other cups to divide the wine evenly, along with the one dedicated to Xu Zhisheng, and said: Hope and brother each have five hundred years old.

古文：知诰变色，左右顾，不肯受，知询捧酒不退。
现代文：徐知诰脸色都变了，来回看着左右大臣，终不肯接受，但徐知询捧着酒一直不退。
English: Xu Zhisheng's face changed, he looked back and forth between the left and right ministers, and finally refused to accept, but Xu Zhisheng held the wine and did not retreat.

古文：左右莫知所为，伶人申渐高径前为诙谐语，掠二酒合饮之，怀金钟趋出，知诰密遣人以良药解之，已脑溃而卒。
现代文：左右大臣都不知徐知诰想干什么，伶人申渐高径直走到他们面前说了几句诙谐的话，就夺过两杯酒，倒在一起喝下去，然后怀揣金杯很快退出。徐知诰偷偷派人用良药去给申渐高解酒毒，但他的脑子已经溃烂而死亡。
English: Both the left and right ministers did not know what Xu Zhigao wanted to do. Shen Qiangao walked straight in front of them and said a few witty words. He grabbed two glasses of wine, downed them together, and then quickly left with a gold cup. Xu Zhigao secretly sent someone to treat Shen Qiangao's alcohol poisoning with good medicine, but his brain had festered and died.

古文：奉国节度使、知建州王廷禀称疾退居里第，请以建州授其子继雄；庚子，诏以继雄为建州刺史。
现代文：闽国奉国节度使、知建州王延禀称病辞职回家乡，请求把建州授给他的儿子王继雄。庚子，后唐帝下招任命王继雄为建州刺史。
English: Wang Yanzhong, the envoy of the National Day of the Republic of China and the founder of Jianzhou, said that he was ill and resigned to return to his hometown, requesting that Jianzhou be awarded to his son, Wang Jixiong. After the Tang Dynasty, Wang Jixiong was appointed as the founder of Jianzhou.

古文：安重诲既以李仁矩镇阆州，使与绵州刺史武虔裕皆将兵赴治。
现代文：安重诲已经安排李仁矩去镇守阆州，让他和绵州刺史武虔裕都率兵去赴任。
English: An Chongyuan had already arranged for Li Renki to go to the town of Bozhou, and let him and Mianzhou's top general, Wu Qianyu, lead the troops to the post.

古文：虔裕，帝之故吏，重诲之外兄也。
现代文：武虔裕是皇帝身边的旧吏，安重诲的异姓兄弟。
English: Wu Qianyu was an old official around the emperor, and a different brother of An Chongyu.

古文：重诲使仁矩诇董璋反状，仁矩增饰而奏之。
现代文：安重诲让李仁矩去刺探董璋谋反的情况，李仁矩添枝加叶上奏给后唐帝。
English: An Chongzheng ordered Li Renki to investigate the circumstances of Dong Xuan's rebellion, and Li Renki added a piece of advice to Emperor Wu of Tang.

古文：朝廷又使武信节度使夏鲁奇治遂州城隍，缮甲兵，益兵戍之。
现代文：朝廷又派武信节度使夏鲁奇去修治遂州的城壕，修缮武器，并增派士卒在那里戌守。
English: In addition, the imperial court sent Wu Xinzheng to instruct Xialuqi to repair the trenches in Suizhou, repair weapons, and send more soldiers to guard there.

古文：璋大惧。
现代文：董璋感到很害怕。
English: Dong Yao felt very scared.

古文：时道路传言，又将割绵、龙为节镇，孟知祥亦惧。
现代文：当时路上的人传言，又将割出绵州、龙州新置节镇，孟知祥听说后也感到害怕。
English: At that time, people on the road heard rumors that Meng Zhixiang would cut out Mengzhou and Longzhou Xinjiejiezhen. Meng Zhixiang was also afraid after hearing this.

古文：璋素与知祥有隙，未尝通问，至是，璋遣使诣成都，请为其子娶知祥女；知祥许之，谋并力以拒朝廷。
现代文：董璋平素和孟知祥有矛盾，不曾往来，到了这个时候，董璋派遣使者到成都，请求为他的儿子娶孟知祥的女儿为妻。孟知祥答应了他的请求，并商量团结起来一起抗拒朝廷。
English: At this time, Dong Xuping sent an envoy to Chengdu to request that his son marry Meng Zhixiang's daughter. Meng Zhixiang agreed to his request and discussed uniting together to resist the imperial court.

