古文：万章问曰： 孔子在陈曰： 盍归乎来！
现代文：万章问： 孔子在陈国时说： 为什么不回去呢？
English: Wan Zhang asked: Confucius said at the time of the founding of the State of Chen, "Why not go back?"

古文：吾党之士狂简，进取，不忘其初。 
现代文：我的那些学生弟子狂放不羁然而却倨傲怠慢，不断进取却不改旧貌。 
English: Those students and disciples of mine are wild and uninhibited, but they are arrogant and neglectful. They are constantly advancing, but they do not change their old appearance.

古文：孔子在陈，何思鲁之狂士？ 
现代文：孔子在陈国，怎么会思念鲁国的那些狂士呢？ 
English: How could Confucius, in the country of Chen, miss those madmen in the country of Lu?

古文：孟子曰： 孔子 不得中道而与之，必也狂獧乎！
现代文：孟子说： 孔子说过 如果得不到不偏不倚之士而与之相交，那必定是与狂放者和狷介者相交了！
English: Mencius said, "Confucius said that if you can't get an unbiased person to have fellowship with, then you must have fellowship with a madman and a meddler!"

古文：狂者进取，獧者有所不为也 。
现代文：狂放不羁者有进取精神，拘谨正直者有所不为也。  
English: Those who are wild and uninhibited have an enterprising spirit, and those who are prudent and honest are also inactive.

古文：孔子岂不欲中道哉？
现代文：孔子难道不想得到不偏不倚之士吗？
English: Doesn't Confucius want an impartial person?

古文：不可必得，故思其次也。 
现代文：因为不可以必然得到，所以只好取其次。 
English: Because you can't necessarily get it, you have to take the next best thing.

古文： 敢问何如斯可谓狂矣？ 
现代文：万章又问： 冒昧地请问什么样的人才称为狂放不羁呢？ 
English: Wanzhang also asked: what kind of talent is called wild and uninhibited?

古文：曰： 如琴张、曾皙、牧皮者，孔子之所谓狂矣。 
现代文：孟子说： 比如琴张、曾皙、牧皮这一类的人，孔子就叫他们是狂放不羁的人。 
English: Mencius said, "For example, people like Qin Zhang, Zeng Yao, and Mu Gui, Confucius called them unruly people.

古文： 何以谓之狂也？ 
现代文：万章又问： 为什么说他们狂放不羁呢？ 
English: Wanzhang also asked: Why do you say they are wild and uninhibited?

古文：曰： 其志嘐嘐然，曰 古之人，古之人 。
现代文：孟子说： 他们志向远大但口气也大，动不动就说 古代的人怎样，古代的人怎样。 
English: Mencius said, "They have lofty aspirations, but their tone is also lofty. At every turn, they talk about how ancient people were, and how ancient people are.

古文：夷考其行而不掩焉者也。
现代文：用常道考察他们的行为却发现他们的言谈与行为并不吻合。
English: But a casual examination of their actions reveals that their words and deeds do not match.

古文：狂者又不可得，欲得不屑不洁之士而与之，是獧也，是又其次也。
现代文：真正狂放不羁的行为他们又得不到，便想找到洁身自好的人而与之相交，就是拘谨正直，这比狂放不羁又差一等了。
English: They don't get the real wild behavior, so they want to find someone who is clean and self-righteous to associate with, that is, prim and proper, which is worse than wild and unruly.

古文：孔子曰： 过我门而不入我室，我不憾焉者，其惟乡原乎！
现代文：孔子说： 路过我家门口却不进我的屋，我并不感到遗憾，这些人只是满足于乡镇里的愿望！
English: Confucius said, "I don't feel sorry for people who pass by my door but don't enter my house. These people are only satisfied with the wishes of the township!"

古文：乡原，德之贼也。  
现代文：是道德的损害者。  
English: is a moral reprobate.

古文：曰： 何如斯可谓之乡原矣？ 
现代文：万章又问： 什么样的人称为是满足于乡镇里的愿望的人呢？ 
English: Wan Zhang also asked: What kind of person is called a person who is satisfied with the wishes of the township?

古文：曰： 何以是嘐嘐也？
现代文：孟子说： 什么是志向大而自满？
English: Mencius said: What is ambitious but complacent?

古文：言不顾行，行不顾言，则曰： 古之人，古之人。
现代文：就是言谈不顾及行为，行为不顾及言论，他们动不动就说： 古代的人怎样，古代的人怎样。
English: That is to say, words do not take into account deeds, deeds do not take into account words, and they say at every turn: "What about the ancients, what about the ancients?"

古文：行何为踽踽凉凉？
现代文：他们自己的行为却为什么如此孤独冷漠呢？
English: Why are their own actions so lonely and cold?

古文：生斯世也，为斯世也，善斯可矣。 
现代文：生在这个世界上，就迎合这个世道吧，好好地活着就可以了。 
English: If you are born in this world, you should cater to the ways of this world and live a good life.

古文：阉然媚于世也者，是乡原也。 
现代文：曲意逢迎献媚于世俗的人，就是只有乡镇里的愿望的人。 
English: The song's intention is to cater to those who are enamored with the mundane, that is, those who only have the desires of the township.

古文：万章曰： 一乡皆称原人焉，无所往而不为原人，孔子以为德之贼，何哉？ 
现代文：万章又问： 全乡镇里的人都称赞有愿望的人，所到之处无人不是有愿望的人，孔子却认为他们是对天地对国家发展规律的伤害，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Wan Zhang also asked: Why is it that people in all the towns and villages praise people with aspirations, and no one is not a person with aspirations wherever they go, but Confucius thinks that they are harmful to heaven and earth and the law of national development?

古文：曰： 非之无举也，刺之无刺也；同乎流俗，合乎污世；居之似忠信，行之似廉洁；众皆悦之，自以为是，而不可与入尧舜之道，故曰德之贼也。
现代文：孟子说： 这种人想否定他们却举不出什么过错，想讽刺他们却找不到理由，他们和同于市俗，融合于污浊的社会，为人似乎忠厚老实，行为似乎方正廉洁，大家都喜欢他，他也自以不错，但却进入不了尧、舜之道，所以称他们是 对天地对国家发展规律的伤害 的人。
English: Mencius said: Such people want to deny them, but they can't find any fault. They want to satirize them, but they can't find any reason. They are the same as the vulgar, integrated into the dirty society. They seem to be loyal and honest, and their behavior seems to be upright and clean. Everyone likes him. He also thinks he is good, but he can't enter the path of good and evil. So they call them people who harm heaven and earth and the law of national development.

古文：孔子曰： 恶似而非者：恶莠，恐其乱苗也；恶佞，恐其乱义也；恶利口，恐其乱信也；恶郑声，恐其乱乐也；恶紫，恐其乱朱也；恶乡原，恐其乱德也。 
现代文：孔子说： 我羞耻于似是而非的人，羞耻于莠草，害怕它们混淆了真正的禾苗；羞耻于巧言令色的人，害怕他们混淆了最佳行为方式；羞耻于尖酸刻薄巧言善辩的人，害怕他们混淆了真正的诚信；也羞耻于那郑国的音乐，害怕搅乱了真正的雅乐。我羞耻于那紫色，害怕它们抢夺了朱红色的地位。
English: Confucius said: "I am ashamed of those who are specious, ashamed of the weeds, afraid that they will confuse the true seedlings; ashamed of those who are eloquent, afraid that they will confuse the best way of behaving; ashamed of those who are sharp-tongued and eloquent, afraid that they will confuse the true integrity; also ashamed of the music of Zheng Guo, afraid of disturbing the true elegance. I am ashamed of the purple, afraid that they have robbed the status of vermilion.

古文：君子反经而已矣。
现代文：君子只要返回到治理的根本上就行了。
English: Nobles only need to return to the fundamentals of governance.

古文：经正，则庶民兴；庶民兴，斯无邪慝矣。 
现代文：治理正确了，那么百姓就会兴盛起来，百姓兴盛起来，就不会有邪恶的念头了。 
English: If the governance is correct, then the people will prosper, and when the people prosper, there will be no evil thoughts.

