古文：天子无妻，告人无匹也。
现代文：天子是独一无二的，是说没有人可以和他的地位相等。
English: The Son of God is unique, which means that no one can be equal to His status.

古文：四海之内无客礼，告无适也。
现代文：天子在四海之内的任何地方都是主人，没有人用对待客人的礼节接待他，这是说没有人可以做他的主人。
English: The Son of Heaven is the master everywhere in the four seas. No one receives him with the courtesy of a guest, which means that no one can be his master.

古文：足能行，待相者然后进；口能言，待官人然后诏。
现代文：虽然天子的脚能走路，但一定要依靠左右的扶持才向前走；虽然嘴能说话，但一定要依靠传达天子命令的官吏发布命令。
English: Although the feet of the Son of Heaven can walk, they must rely on the support of the right and left to walk forward; although the mouth can speak, it must rely on the officials who convey the orders of the Son of Heaven to issue orders.

古文：不视而见，不听而聪，不言而信，不虑而知，不动而功，告至备也。
现代文：天子不用看就看得见，不用听就能听的见，不用说话，就能见信于民，不用思考，就能知道，不用动手，就有成效，这是说天子的下属极其完备。
English: The Son of Heaven can see without seeing, can hear without listening, can see without speaking, can believe in the people without speaking, can know without thinking, and can be effective without doing anything. This means that the subordinates of the Son of Heaven are extremely complete.

古文：天子也者，埶至重，形至佚，心至愈，志无所诎，形无所劳，尊无上矣。
现代文：天子权势极其尊贵，身体极其安逸，心情极其愉快，意志没有什么屈服，身体没有什么劳累，他的尊贵是无以复加的。
English: The power of the Son of Heaven is extremely noble, the body is extremely comfortable, the mood is extremely happy, the will has nothing to give in to, the body has nothing to exhaust, and his dignity is immeasurable.

古文：诗曰： 普天之下，莫非王土；率土之滨，莫非王臣。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 整个天下，都是天子的土地；从陆地到海滨，没有不是天子的臣民的。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: The whole world is the land of the Son of Heaven; from the land to the seashore, there is no one who is not a subject of the Son of Heaven.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个意思。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：圣王在上，分义行乎下，则士大夫无流淫之行，百吏官人无怠慢之事，众庶百姓无奸怪之俗，无盗贼之罪，莫敢犯上之大禁，天下晓然皆知夫盗窃之不可以为富也，皆知夫贼害之不可以为寿也，皆知夫犯上之禁不可以为安也。由其道则人得其所好焉，不由其道则必遇其所恶焉。
现代文：圣明的帝王在上，名分，道义在民众中推行，那么士大夫就没有放肆的行为，各级官吏就不会有懈怠傲慢的事情，广大百姓就不会有邪恶怪僻的习俗，就不会偷盗的罪行，就没有人敢触犯君主禁令的。天下的人都清楚的知道：盗窃是不可能发家致富，抢劫杀人不可能获得长寿，触犯君主的禁令不可能得到安宁；遵循圣王的正道，就能得到他所喜欢的；不遵循圣王的正道，就会遭到他所厌恶的惩罚。
English: If the holy emperor is on high, and virtue and morality are promoted among the people, then the scholars will not behave impudently, the officials at all levels will not be lazy and arrogant, the broad masses of the people will not have evil and eccentric customs, there will be no crime of theft, and no one will dare to violate the monarch's ban. People all over the world know clearly: theft is impossible to make a fortune, robbery and murder are impossible to obtain longevity, and violating the monarch's ban is impossible to obtain peace; follow the righteous path of the holy king, you can get what he likes; if you do not follow the righteous path of the holy king, you will be

古文：是故刑罚綦省而威行如流，世晓然皆知夫为奸则虽隐窜逃亡之由不足以免也，故莫不服罪而请。书云： 凡人自得罪。 
现代文：这样，刑罚很简略，而君上的威力却像流水一样的通行，无处不在，人们都知道如果为非作歹，即使躲藏逃亡也不能够免受惩罚，所以没有不伏法认罪而请求惩处的。《尚书》说： 所有的罪罚都是自取的。 
English: In this way, the punishment is very simple, but the power of the prince is like flowing water, everywhere. People know that if they do something wrong, even if they hide and escape, they cannot escape punishment, so they do not confess and ask for punishment. "Shang Shu" said: All punishments are self-inflicted.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这种情况。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：故刑当罪则威，不当罪则侮；爵当贤则贵，不当贤则贱。
现代文：因此，罪罚相当就有威力，罪罚不当就会受到轻视；德才相当就会受人尊重，德才不当就会被人看不起。
English: Therefore, if the punishment is appropriate, it will be powerful, and if the punishment is improper, it will be despised; if the virtue is appropriate, it will be respected, and if the virtue is improper, it will be despised.

古文：古者刑不过罪，爵不踰德。故杀其父而臣其子，杀其兄而臣其弟。
现代文：古代刑罚不超过犯人的罪行，官爵不超过德行，所以杀了父亲而任用儿子，杀了哥哥而任用弟弟。
English: In ancient times, the punishment did not exceed the crime of the criminal, and the nobility did not exceed the virtue, so they killed the father and appointed the son, killed the brother and appointed the younger brother.

古文：刑罚不怒罪，爵赏不踰德，分然各以其诚通。
现代文：刑律的处罚不超过犯人的罪行，官爵的奖赏不超过德行，分明地各自按照实际情况来贯彻执行。
English: The punishment of the criminal law does not exceed the crime of the offender, and the reward of the peer does not exceed the virtue, and they are clearly implemented according to the actual situation.

古文：是以为善者劝，为不善者沮；刑罚綦省，而威行如流，政令致明，而化易如神。
现代文：因此做好事的人受到鼓励，干坏事的人得到指责；刑罚极少用而威力无处不在，政策法令极明确而教化四方。
English: Therefore, those who do good are encouraged, those who do bad are criticized; punishment is rarely used and power is everywhere, policies and laws are very clear and edifying.

古文：传曰： 一人有庆，兆民赖之。 
现代文：古书上说： 天子有了美好的德行，亿万人民都倚仗他。 
English: An ancient book says: The Son of Heaven has a wonderful virtue, and hundreds of millions of people rely on him.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这种情况。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：乱世则不然：刑罚怒罪，爵赏踰德，以族论罪，以世举贤。
现代文：混乱的世道就不是这样：刑罚超过罪行，官爵的奖赏超过了德行，按照宗族来论处罪行，根据世系来举用贤人。
English: This is not the way of the chaotic world: the punishment exceeds the crime, the reward of the noble exceeds the virtue, the crime is dealt with according to the clan, and the wise man is selected according to the lineage.

古文：故一人有罪，而三族皆夷，德虽如舜，不免刑均，是以族论罪也。
现代文：因此一个人有罪就诛灭父、母、妻三族，即使德行如同舜一样美好，也不免受到同样的刑罚，这是按照宗族来论处罪行。
English: Therefore, if a person is guilty of killing his father, mother, and wife, even if his virtue is as good as a donkey, he will not be spared the same punishment. This is a crime that is dealt with according to the clan.

古文：先祖当贤，后子孙必显，行虽如桀纣，列从必尊，此以世举贤也。
现代文：先祖曾经贤德，后世子孙必定显达，即使行为如同夏桀、商纣一样恶劣，地位必然尊贵，这是根据世系来举用贤人。
English: Ancestors were once virtuous, future generations of descendants will certainly be virtuous, even if the behavior is as bad as that of Xia Yao and Shang Yao, the status will inevitably be noble. This is to use sages according to the lineage.

古文：以族论罪，以世举贤，虽欲无乱，得乎哉！
现代文：按照宗族来论处罪行，根据世系来举用贤人，即使想没有祸乱，可能吗？
English: Is it possible to deal with crimes according to the clan, to appoint sages according to the lineage, even if there is no calamity?

古文：诗曰： 百川沸腾，山冢崒崩，高岸为谷，深谷为陵。
现代文：《诗经》中说： 江河沸腾，高山崩溃，高高的山崖变成山谷，深深的山谷变成山陵。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Rivers boil, mountains crumble, high cliffs turn into valleys, deep valleys turn into mountains.

古文：哀今之人，胡憯莫惩！ 
现代文：哀叹当今的执政者啊，为什么还不警醒！ 
English: Woe to you who are now, for you were not chastened.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这种情况啊。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：论法圣王，则知所贵矣；以义制事，则知所利矣。
现代文：议论效法圣王，就知道什么人是应该尊重的了；用道义来处理政事，就知道什么是有利的。
English: If we talk about following the example of the holy king, we will know who should be respected; if we use morality to deal with politics, we will know what is beneficial.

古文：论知所贵，则知所养矣；事知所利，则动知所出矣。
现代文：议论时知道所要尊重的人，就会懂得应当吸取些什么了；处理政事时知道什么是有利的，那么行动时就会懂得应该从什么地方开始了。
English: If you know whom to respect in discussion, you will know where to draw; if you know what is advantageous in politics, you will know where to begin in action.

古文：－－二者是非之本，得失之原也。
现代文：这两方面，是正确与错误的根本，是成功与失败的根源。
English: These two aspects are the foundation of right and wrong, and the source of success and failure.

古文：故成王之于周公也，无所往而不听，知所贵也。
现代文：因此周成王对于周公，没有什么地方不听从，是因为他懂得了什么人是应该尊重的。
English: Therefore, Zhou Cheng Wang did not disobey Zhou Gong at all, because he understood what kind of person should be respected.

古文：桓公之于管仲也，国事无所往而不用，知所利也。
现代文：桓公对于管仲，处理国家大事没有什么地方不任用他，是因为他懂得了什么是有利的。
English: As far as Guanzhong and the handling of national affairs are concerned, there is no reason not to appoint him, because he understands what is advantageous.

古文：吴有伍子胥而不能用，国至于亡，倍道失贤也。
现代文：吴国有伍子胥而不能任用，导致国破家亡，是背离正道而失去了贤人的缘故啊。
English: Wu's inability to appoint Wu Zixuan, which led to the ruin of the country, was the cause of deviating from the right path and losing the wise men.

古文：故尊圣者王，贵贤者霸，敬贤者存，慢贤者亡，古今一也。
现代文：因此使圣人尊贵的君主能称王天下，使贤人尊贵的君主能称霸诸侯，礼敬贤人的就存在，怠慢贤人的就灭亡，从古到今都是一样的。
English: Therefore, it has been the same from ancient times to the present for a saintly and honorable monarch to be able to rule the world, and for a wise and honorable monarch to be able to rule over princes. Those who respect the wise will exist, and those who neglect the wise will perish.

古文：故尚贤，使能，等贵贱，分亲疏，序长幼，此先王之道也。
现代文：因此崇尚贤能、使用能人，贵贱有等级，区分亲近的和疏远的，按照次序来安排年长的和年幼的，这就是先王的治国大道。
English: Therefore, he advocated virtuous and useful people, there was a rank for nobility and lowliness, he distinguished between close and distant, and arranged the elderly and the young according to the order. This was the former king's way of governing the country.

古文：故尚贤使能，则主尊下安；贵贱有等，则令行而不流；亲疏有分，则施行而不悖；长幼有序，则事业捷成而有所休。
现代文：因此崇尚贤能、使用能人，那么君主就会尊贵而臣民就会安宁；贵贱有等级，那么政令就会畅行而不停滞；亲近的和疏远的有了分别，那么恩惠就会施行而不悖事理；年长的和年幼的有了次序，那么事业就会迅速成功而有时间休息。
English: Therefore, if virtue and usefulness are respected, then the ruler will be dignified and the subjects will be peaceful; if nobility and lowliness are ranked, then the decrees will flow smoothly without stagnation; if there is a distinction between close and distant, then favors will be carried out without violating the reason; if there is an order between the elderly and the young, then the cause will be quickly successful and there will be time to rest.

古文：故仁者，仁此者也；义者，分此者也；节者，死生此者也；忠者，惇慎此者也；兼此而能之备矣；备而不矜，一自善也，谓之圣。
现代文：因此，仁，就是喜爱它们；道义，就是分清它们；节操，就是为它们生、为它们死；忠诚，就是敦厚真诚地奉行它们。囊括了这仁德、道义、节操、忠诚而全能做到，德行就完备了；完备而不炫耀，一切都自然美好，就称之为圣人。
English: Therefore, benevolence is to love them; morality is to distinguish them; self-discipline is to live for them and die for them; loyalty is to pursue them bravely and sincerely. Including this benevolence, morality, self-discipline, loyalty and doing everything, the virtue is complete; complete without showing off, everything is naturally beautiful, it is called a saint.

古文：不矜矣，夫故天下不与争能，而致善用其功。
现代文：不炫耀，所以天下的人就不会和他争能，因而他就能极好地利用人们的力量。
English: He does not show off, so people around the world will not compete with him, so he can make excellent use of people's power.

古文：有而不有也，夫故为天下贵矣。
现代文：有功劳而不自以为有功劳，因而受到天下人的尊重。
English: They have merit, but they don't think they have merit, so they are respected by people around the world.

古文：诗曰： 淑人君子，其仪不忒；其仪不忒，正是四国。 
现代文：《诗经》中说： 那善良的君子，坚持道义不变更。他的道义不变更，所以能够安抚四方国家。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: That good-hearted gentleman sticks to his morals, and his morals do not change, so he is able to appease the four countries.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这种情况。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

