古文：邓彪张禹徐防张敏胡广邓彪字智伯，南阳新野人，太傅禹之宗也。父邯，中兴初以功封鄳侯，仕至勃海太守。
现代文：◆邓彪传，邓彪字智伯，南阳新野人，太傅邓禹之同宗，父亲邓邯，中兴初期因功封为黾阝侯，官做到渤海太守。
English: ◆ Deng Biao Chuan, Deng Biao Zhi Bo, Nanyang Xinshanren, the same family as Deng Yu, the father of Deng Yao, in the early days of ZTE, he was awarded the title of prince and became the governor of the Bohai Sea.

古文：彪少励志，修孝行。
现代文：邓彪年轻时注重励志，修孝行。
English: When Deng Biao was young, he paid attention to encouragement and filial piety.

古文：父卒，让国于异母弟荆凤，显宗高其节，下诏许焉。
现代文：父亲死了，让国给异母弟荆凤，显宗认为他品节高尚，下诏同意了。
English: When his father died, he left the country to his half-brother Jing Feng. Xian Zong thought that he was of high moral character, and agreed to this.

古文：后仕州郡，辟公府，五迁桂阳太守。
现代文：邓彪后在州郡做官，升迁到公府，五迁桂阳太守。
English: After Deng Biao, he worked as an official in the prefecture and county, was promoted to the government, and became the governor of Guiyang for the fifth time.

古文：永平十七年，征入为太仆。
现代文：永平十七年，召入做太仆。
English: In the seventeenth year of Yongping, he was summoned to be a servant.

古文：数年，丧后母，辞疾乞身，诏以光禄大夫行服。服竟，拜奉车都尉，迁大司农。
现代文：数年，死了后母，因病告辞回家，诏书赐他用光禄大夫行服，服完毕，拜为奉车都尉，升为大司农。
English: A few years later, when his stepmother died and he had to return home due to illness, he was given the honor of wearing a doctor's uniform with a certificate of merit. After he had completed his service, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant in charge of wagons and promoted to the position of chief farmer.

古文：数月，代鲍昱为太尉。
现代文：数月后，代鲍昱做太尉。
English: A few months later, he became a captain in place of Bao Tong.

古文：彪在位清白，为百僚式。
现代文：邓彪在位时很清白，做百官表率。
English: When Deng Biao was in power, he was very clean and set an example for hundreds of officials.

古文：视事四年，以疾乞骸骨。
现代文：做官四年，因病请退职。
English: After four years as an official, I am resigning due to illness.

古文：元和元年，赐策罢，赠钱三十万，在所以二千石奉终其身。
现代文：元和元年，赐策罢官，赠钱三十万，以二千石的俸禄终其身。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and the first year of the year, he was given a promotion and a dismissal, 300,000 yuan in cash, and a salary of 2,000 koku for life.

古文：又诏太常四时致宗庙之胙，河南尹遣丞存问，常以八月旦奉羊、酒。
现代文：又诏太常四季致送宗庙的祭肉，河南尹派县丞存问，常以八月旦奉送羊酒等物。
English: In addition, Emperor Taizong often sent sacrificial meat to the ancestral temple in the four seasons, and there were questions about Yinpai County in Henan Province, and sheep wine and other items were often sent in August.

古文：和帝即位，以彪为太傅，录尚书事，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：和帝即位，用邓彪做太傅，录尚书事，赐爵关内侯。
English: When Emperor He ascended the throne, he made Deng Biao the Taifu, recorded his records, and gave him the title of Guan Nei Hou.

古文：永元初，窦氏专权骄纵，朝廷多有谏争，而彪在位修身而已，不能有所匡正。
现代文：永元初年，窦氏专权骄傲放纵，朝廷多有人谏争，而邓彪在位修身罢了，不能有所匡正。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, the Dou family's monopoly of power was arrogant and indulgent, and the imperial court was often contested, while Deng Biao's reign was only about self-cultivation and could not be rectified.

古文：又尝奏免御史中丞周纡，纡前失窦氏旨，故颇以此致讥，然当时宗其礼让。
现代文：又曾经上奏免去御史中丞周纡，周纡前失窦氏旨，所以有人因此讥讽他，但是当时人敬重他的礼让。
English: Also, there was a time when the Emperor Zhou Enlai was pardoned and Zhou Enlai lost his throne, so some people ridiculed him for this, but at the time, people respected his courtesy.

古文：及窦氏诛，以老病上还枢机职，诏赐养牛、酒而许焉。
现代文：等到窦氏被杀，邓彪因老病上还枢机职，诏赐养牛酒而许可了。
English: After Dou was killed, Deng Biao, who was still a cardinal due to his chronic illness, issued an edict granting permission to raise cattle and make wine.

古文：五年春，薨于位，天子新临吊临。
现代文：五年春，死在官位上，天子亲临其家吊丧。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, he died in his official position, and the heavenly son came to his house to mourn.

古文：张禹字伯达，赵国襄国人也。
现代文：◆张禹传，张禹字伯达，赵国襄国人。
English: ◆Zhang Yu Chuan, Zhang Yu Zi Bao Da, Zhao Guo Xiang Guo Ren.

古文：祖父况族姊为皇祖考夫人，数往来南顿，见光武。
现代文：祖父张况之族姊为皇祖考夫人，多次往来于南顿，见过光武帝。
English: Grandfather Zhang Jian's elder sister was the wife of Emperor Zukao. She visited Nantong many times and met Emperor Guangwu.

古文：光武为大司马，过邯郸，况为郡吏，谒见光武。
现代文：光武为大司马，过邯郸，张况做郡吏，谒见光武。
English: Guangwu was the chief steward, and Zhang Jian was the county official. Zhang Jian met Guangwu.

古文：光武大喜，曰： 乃今得我大舅乎！ 
现代文：光武大喜道 ：现在找到我大舅了！ 
English: Mitsutake Okido: Now I've found my uncle!

古文：因与俱北，到高邑，以为元氏令。
现代文：于是一起向北，到高邑，用况做元氏令。
English: So they headed north together, to Gaoyu, and used the situation to make the Yuan Dynasty order.

古文：迁涿郡太守。
现代文：升为涿郡太守。
English: He was promoted to the governor of Ye County.

古文：后为常山关长。
现代文：又做了常山关长。
English: He also became the head of the Changshan Pass.

古文：会赤眉攻关城，况战殁。
现代文：正逢赤眉军攻关城，张况打死了。
English: Just as the Red Eyebrows attacked the city, Zhang Zhou was killed.

古文：父歆，初以报仇逃亡，后仕为淮阳相，终于汲令。
现代文：父张歆，初因报仇逃亡，后来做了淮阳相，死在汲县令官位。
English: Zhang Ye's father, who initially fled in revenge, later became Huaiyang's minister of foreign affairs, and died at the rank of county magistrate.

古文：禹性笃厚节俭。
现代文：张禹性情笃厚节俭。
English: Zhang Yu is very frugal.

古文：父卒，汲吏人赙送前后数百万，悉无所受。
现代文：父亲死后，汲县吏人赙送前后达数百万，全部没有收受。
English: After his father's death, officials in Kyushu County sent and received millions of money, but none of it was accepted.

古文：又以田宅推与伯父，身自寄止。
现代文：又把田宅推让给伯父，身自寄止。
English: He also gave up the rice field to his uncle and stopped living there.

古文：永平八年，举孝廉，稍迁；建初中，拜杨州刺史。
现代文：永平八年，举为孝廉，稍升迁，建初年间，拜为杨州刺史。
English: In the eighth year of Yongping, he was promoted to Xiaolian, slightly promoted, and during the first year of construction, he became the leader of Yangzhou.

古文：当过江行部，中上人皆以江有子胥之神，难于济涉。
现代文：当他过江巡视，中土百姓都以为江有子胥之神，难于过江。
English: When he made his inspection tour across the river, the Chinese people all thought that the river had the god of the son of the dragon, and it was difficult to cross the river.

古文：禹将度，吏固请不听。
现代文：禹将渡，官吏坚决请求，张禹不听。
English: Yu Zhaodu, officials firmly requested, Zhang Yu did not listen.

古文：禹厉言曰： 子胥如有灵，知吾志在理察枉讼，岂危我哉？ 
现代文：并且厉声说： 子胥如有灵，知道我的目的在于理察冤假错案，难道还害我吗？ 
English: And he snapped, "If Zi Yan has a soul, knowing that my purpose is to investigate wrongdoings, will he still harm me?

古文：遂鼓楫而过。
现代文：于是鼓着桨过去了。
English: So he paddled on.

古文：历行郡邑，深幽之处莫不毕到，亲录囚徒，多所明举。
现代文：经过郡邑，偏僻之地没有不全部走到，亲自审录囚徒，很多情况弄明白被处理了。
English: After going through counties, remote areas, and personally interrogating prisoners, many situations have been clarified and dealt with.

古文：吏民希见使者，人怀喜悦，怨德美恶，莫不自归焉。
现代文：吏民很少见过使者，百姓心怀喜悦，怨德美恶，没有不自归了。
English: The officials and the people rarely saw the envoys, and the people were filled with joy, resentment of virtue and vice, and there was no turning back.

古文：元和二年，转兗州刺史，亦有清平称。
现代文：元和二年，转兖州刺史，也有清平的美称。
English: In the first and second years of the Yuan Dynasty, it was turned into the history of Zhangzhou, and it was also known as Qingping.

古文：三年，迁下邳相。
现代文：三年，升为下邳相。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to the lower echelon.

古文：徐县北界有蒲阳坡，傍多良田，而堙废莫修。
现代文：徐县北界有蒲阳坡，旁边多良田，而荒废没人耕种。
English: On the northern border of Xu County, there is the Puyang Slope, next to which are the Tara Fields, but no one cultivates the wasteland.

古文：禹为开水门，通引灌溉，遂成孰田数百顷。
现代文：张禹替他们打开水门，通引灌溉，于是成了熟田数百顷。
English: Zhang Yu opened the floodgates for them, leading to irrigation, which resulted in hundreds of hectares of cultivated fields.

古文：劝率吏民，假与种粮，亲自勉劳，遂大收谷实。
现代文：劝导并带领吏民，借给种子，亲自勉励劳动，便大收谷实。
English: He persuaded and led the officials and the people, lent them seeds, and personally encouraged them to work, and they began to harvest large amounts of grain.

古文：邻郡贫者归之千余户，室庐相属，其下成市。
现代文：邻郡贫困户归附千余户，房屋相连，下面成了集市。
English: More than a thousand poor households in the neighboring counties were annexed, the houses were connected, and the bottom became a bazaar.

古文：后岁至垦千余顷，民用温给。
现代文：后来每年开垦千余顷，百姓得到温饱自给。
English: Later, more than a thousand hectares were reclaimed every year, and the people became self-sufficient in food and clothing.

古文：功曹史戴闰，故太尉掾也，权动郡内。
现代文：功曹史戴闰，旧太尉掾吏，权柄倾动郡内。
English: Gong Cao Shi Dai Yue, a former lieutenant and magistrate, wields great power in the county.

古文：有小谴，禹令自致徐狱，然后正其法。
现代文：有小责备，张禹叫他自到徐狱投案，然后正其法。
English: With a little reproach, Zhang Yu told him to go to Xu Prison to report the case, and then rectify it.

古文：自长史以下，莫不震肃。
现代文：自长史以下，没有不震惊起敬。
English: From Nagashi on down, there was nothing that didn't shock and awe me.

古文：永元六年，入为大司农，拜太尉，和帝甚礼之。
现代文：永元六年，进朝廷做大司马，拜为太尉，和帝很有礼地对待他。
English: In the sixth year of the Yongyuan era, he entered the imperial court as a grand steed and was given the title of first lieutenant. Emperor He treated him very politely.

古文：十五年，南巡祠园庙，禹以太尉兼卫尉留守。
现代文：十五年，皇上南巡祠园庙，张禹以太尉兼卫尉在朝留守。
English: In the fifteenth year, the emperor went on a tour to the south to visit the ancestral gardens and temples. Zhang Yu, an officer of the Imperial Guard, stayed behind in the imperial court.

古文：闻车驾当进幸江陵，以为不宜冒险远，驿马上谏。
现代文：听说车驾将进幸江陵，张禹认为不应冒险远行，驿马上谏。
English: Heard that the car will drive into the Yangtze River Ling, Zhang Yu believes that you should not risk a long journey.

古文：诏报曰： 祠谒既讫，当南礼大江，会得君奏，临汉回舆而旋。 
现代文：诏报说 ：祠谒已完，应南边祭大江，得到君奏，到汉水回舆而归。 
English: The Imperial Gazette said: "The ancestral hall has been completed, and in response to the Nanbian Festival on the Dajiang River, you have received the Junso, and have returned to Hanshui.

古文：及行还，禹持蒙赏赐。
现代文：等到回朝之后，张禹特受赏赐。
English: After returning to the North, Zhang Yut was rewarded.

古文：延平元年，迁为太傅，录尚书事。
现代文：延平元年，张禹升为太傅，录尚书事。
English: In the first year of the Yanping era, Zhang Yusheng was promoted to Taifu, according to records.

古文：邓太后以殇帝初育，欲令重臣居禁内，乃诏禹舍宫中。给帷帐床褥，太官朝夕进食，五日一归府。
现代文：邓太后因殇帝初生，想叫重臣居在禁内，于是下诏叫禹住在宫中，给帷帐床褥，太官早晚进食，五天一次回府。
English: The Empress Dowager Deng, due to the birth of Emperor Xian, wanted to have her senior vassals live in the Forbidden City, so she issued an edict ordering Yu to live in the palace, to make the curtains and bedding, for the eunuchs to eat in the morning and evening, and to return to the capital once every five days.

古文：每朝见，特赞，与三公绝席。
现代文：每次朝见，特赞，与三公绝席。
English: Every morning meeting, special praise, with the three princes.

古文：禹上言： 方谅密静之时，不宜依常有事于苑囿。
现代文：张禹上言道 ：当凶庐密静之时，不宜照常有事于苑囿。
English: Zhang Yu Shang said: When the evil spirits are quiet, it is not appropriate to have things in the courtyard as usual.

古文：其广成、上林空地，宜用以假贫民。 
现代文：像广成、上林等空地，应暂且分给贫民。 
English: Open spaces such as Guangcheng and Shanglin should be temporarily allocated to the poor.

古文：太后从之。
现代文：太后听从了。
English: The Queen Mother complied.

古文：及安帝即位，数上疾乞身。诏遣小黄门问疾，赐牛一头，酒十斛，劝令就第。
现代文：等到安帝即位，张禹几次上奏请求退职，诏书派小黄门问疾，赐牛一头，酒十斛，劝令就第休养。
English: After Emperor An's accession to the throne, Zhang Yu repeatedly petitioned for retirement, sent Xiao Huangmen to ask about his illness, gave him a cow, ten gallons of wine, and persuaded him to take a rest.

古文：其钱布、刀剑、衣物，前后累至。
现代文：还前后送了钱布、刀剑、衣物，次数不少。
English: He also sent money, cloth, swords and clothes back and forth many times.

古文：永初元年，以定策功封安乡侯，食邑千二百户，与太尉徐防、司空尹勤同日俱封。
现代文：永初元年，张禹因定策功封为安乡侯，食邑千二百户，与太尉徐防、司空尹勤同日受封。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yongzheng era, Zhang Yu was awarded the title of Anxiang Hou, with 1,200 households in Shiyou, on the same day as Taijun Xu Fang and Siku Yinqin.

古文：其秋，以寇贼水雨策免防、勤，而禹不自安，上书乞骸骨，更拜太尉。
现代文：这年秋天，因寇贼水雨灾害策免去徐防、尹勤之职，而张禹内心不安，上书请求退职，更拜为太尉。
English: In the autumn of that year, Xu Fang and Yin Qin were relieved of their duties as a result of the disaster caused by the bandits and floods. Zhang Yu, however, was uneasy and wrote a letter requesting to be relieved of his duties. He was even promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：四年，新野君病，皇太后车驾幸其第。
现代文：四年，邓太后之母阴氏病了，皇太后车驾到达她的住处。
English: In the fourth year, the mother of Empress Dowager Deng Yin fell ill, and the Empress Dowager drove to her residence.

古文：禹与司徒夏勤、司空张敏俱上表言： 新野君不安，车驾连日宿止，臣等诚窃惶惧。
现代文：张禹与司徒夏勤、司空张敏都上表说： 新野君不安，车驾连日到她那里住宿，臣等十分害怕。
English: Zhang Yu, Szu Xiaqin, and Siku Zhang Min all said on the table: Nino-kun is uneasy, he has been driving to her place to stay for days, and his vassals are very afraid.

古文：臣闻王者动设先置，止则交戟，清道而后行，清室而后御，离宫不宿，所以重宿卫也。
现代文：臣听说王者出动必先作安排，停留则用交卓戈之士作保卫，清道而后行走，清室而后住下，离宫不宿，为了注重保卫。
English: The vassal heard that the king's departure must be arranged first, and the king's stay must be protected by the soldiers of Jojogo, and the road must be cleared before walking, the room must be cleared before staying, and the palace must not be left, in order to pay attention to protection.

古文：陛下体烝烝之至孝，亲省方药，恩情发中，久处单外，百官露止，议者所不安。
现代文：陛下一片孝心，亲省方药，恩情发自内心，久处在外，百官露止，议者感到不安。
English: His Majesty has a filial piety, he is familiar with the prescription of medicine, he is grateful from the bottom of his heart, he has been away from home for a long time, hundreds of officials have been exposed, and the speaker is uneasy.

古文：宜且还宫，上为宗庙社稷，下为万国子民。 
现代文：应暂时回宫，上为宗庙社稷、下为万国子民设想。 
English: It should be temporarily returned to the palace, with the family temple and shrine at the top and the people of all nations at the bottom.

古文：比三上，固争，乃还宫。
现代文：连续三次上奏，经过力争，才回宫。
English: It was played three times in a row, and only after a struggle did it return to the palace.

古文：后连岁灾荒，府藏空虚，禹上疏求入三岁租税，以助郡国禀假。
现代文：后来连年灾荒，府藏空虚，张禹上疏请求征求三年租税，以助郡国粮食和借贷。
English: Later, with successive years of natural disasters, the prefectural treasury was empty, and Zhang Yu Shangsu requested to collect three years of taxes to help the county with grain and loans.

古文：诏许之。
现代文：诏许可了。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict approving it.

古文：五年，以阴阳不和策免。
现代文：五年，以阴阳不和策免职。
English: Five years later, he was relieved of his duties on the basis of yin and yang discord.

古文：七年，卒于家。
现代文：七年，死在家中。
English: Seven years old, died at home.

古文：使者吊祭。
现代文：朝廷派使者吊祭。
English: The imperial court sent an emissary to perform the hanging ceremony.

古文：除小子为郎中。
现代文：除小儿子张曜为郎中。
English: In addition to his youngest son, Zhang You is his second son.

古文：长子盛嗣。
现代文：长子张盛为嗣。
English: He was succeeded by his eldest son, Zhang Sheng.

古文：徐防字谒卿，沛国铚人也。
现代文：◆徐防传，徐防字谒卿，沛国钅至人。
English: ◆ Xu Bozhong, Xu Bozhong, Pei Guozhi and others.

古文：祖父宣，为讲学大夫，以《易》教授王莽。
现代文：祖父徐宣，做过讲学大夫，用《易经》教授王莽。
English: Grandfather Xu Xuan, once a lecturer, taught Wang Mang with the I Ching.

古文：父宪，亦传宣业。
现代文：父徐宪，也传授徐宣之业。
English: His father, Xu Xian, also taught Xu Xuan's career.

古文：防少习父祖学，永平中，举孝廉，除为郎。
现代文：徐防少年时学习父亲、祖父之学，永平年间，举为孝廉，除为郎。
English: When Xu Fang was a boy, he learned from his father and grandfather. During the Yongping era, he was praised as a filial son, except for his younger brother.

古文：防体貌矜严，占对可观，显宗异之，特补尚书郎。
现代文：徐防体貌矜持严肃，占对可观，显宗认为很奇异，特补他为尚书郎。
English: Xu Bao's appearance is serious, and his proportions are impressive. Xian Zong thinks he is very strange, and he is a special supplement to Shang Shuro.

古文：职典枢机，周密畏慎，奉事二帝，未尝有过。
现代文：职务是掌管机要，周密谨慎从事，奉侍二帝，不曾有过失。
English: His duties were to be in charge of the machine, to be thorough and prudent, to serve the two emperors, and he never made a mistake.

古文：和帝时，稍迁司隶校尉，出为魏郡太守。
现代文：和帝时，升为司隶校尉，出为魏郡太守。
English: At the time of Emperor He, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant of Sili and became the governor of Wei County.

古文：永元十年，迁少府、大司农。
现代文：永元十年，升为少府、大司农。
English: In the 10th year of the Yonggen era, he was promoted to Shofu and Daisho Nongsu.

古文：防勤晓政事，所在有迹。
现代文：徐防勤晓政事，在哪个岗位都有事迹。
English: Xu Fangqin is familiar with government affairs, and has a track record in every position.

古文：十四年，拜司空。
现代文：十四年，拜为司空。
English: Fourteen years later, he is known as Sifu.

古文：防以《五经》久远，圣意难明，宜为章句，以悟后学。
现代文：徐防认为《五经》久远，圣意难得明白，应该作些章句解释，使后学学习便利些。
English: Xu Fang thought that the "Five Classics" is very old, and it is difficult to understand the sacred meaning. Some chapters should be explained to make the post-study study more convenient.

古文：上疏曰：臣闻《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《乐》，定自孔子；发明章句，始于子夏。
现代文：上疏道： 臣听说《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《乐》，定自孔子，发明章句，从子夏开始。
English: Shangxiao Road: The minister heard that "Poetry," "Book," "Rite" and "Music" were all invented by Confucius, beginning with Zixia.

古文：其后诸家分析，各有异说。
现代文：以后各家分析，各有不同的说法。
English: Subsequent analyses by various companies have come up with different explanations.

古文：汉承乱秦，经典废绝，本文略存，或无章句。
现代文：汉朝继承乱秦之后，经典已经废绝，本文略存，有的没有章句。
English: After the Han Dynasty succeeded the chaotic Qin Dynasty, the classics had been abolished. Only a few copies of this text exist, and some have no chapters or sentences.

古文：收拾缺遗，建立明经，博征儒术，开置太学。
现代文：收拾缺遗，建立明经，博征儒术，开设太学。
English: Tackle the shortcomings, establish the Ming Dynasty, promote Confucianism, and open the University of Taizhou.

古文：孔圣既远，微旨将绝，故立博士十有四家，设甲乙之科，以勉劝学者，所以示人好恶，改敝就善者也。
现代文：孔圣人已经远了，微妙的旨意将要失传了，所以立博士十又四家，设甲乙之科目，用来勉劝学者。为的是告诉人们什么是善恶，如何改正破敝成为善良之人。
English: The sage Kong is already far away, and the subtle will is about to be lost. Therefore, there are ten and four schools of thought, and subjects A and B are set up to encourage scholars. In order to tell people what is good and evil, and how to correct the defect and become a good person.

古文：伏见太学试博士弟子，皆以意说，不修家法，私相容隐，开生奸路。
现代文：臣看到太学考试博士弟子，都是用的意说，不修家法，私相容隐，开生奸路。
English: The vassal saw that the disciples of the doctoral examination of the Taixue Examination were all mean to say, did not practice the family law, concealed their private life, and opened the way for adultery.

古文：每有策试，辄兴诤讼，论议纷错，互相是非。
现代文：每有策试，就兴起诉讼，论议纷纭错杂，互相指摘是非。
English: Every time there is a plot, there are lawsuits, disputes, and pointing out the rights and wrongs to each other.

古文：孔子称 述而不作 ，又曰 吾犹及史之阙文 ，疾史有所不知而不肯阙也。
现代文：孔子说的 述而不作 ，又说 吾犹及史之阙文 恨史有所不知而不肯缺略哩。
English: Confucius said, "It is better to recite history than to make history," and "I hate to be ignorant of history and do not want to omit it."

古文：今不依章句，妄生穿凿，以遵师为非义，意说为得理，轻侮道术，浸以成俗，诚非诏书实选本意。
现代文：今不依章句，乱生穿凿附会，以为遵师是不合法的，意说为得理，轻侮道术，渐渐成了风俗，的确不是诏书实选的本意。
English: Nowadays, it has gradually become a custom not to follow the precepts and regulations, to randomly create affiliated associations, to think that it is illegal to follow the teacher, to think that the meaning is justified, and to despise the Taoism. This is certainly not the original intention of the edict.

古文：改薄从忠，三代常道，专精务本，儒学所先。
现代文：改薄从忠，这是三代的常道，专精务本，儒学所先。
English: This is the common practice of the three generations, which is to change the thin from the loyal, to concentrate on the book, and to be the first in Confucianism.

古文：臣以为博士及甲乙策试，宜从其家章句，开五十难以试之。
现代文：臣以为博士及甲乙策试，应该根据名家章句，开设五十难题，用来策试士人。
English: The minister thought that the doctor and A and B should set up fifty difficult problems according to the famous chapters and sentences to test the scholars.

古文：解释多者为上第，引文明者为高说：若不依先师，义有相伐，皆正以为非。
现代文：解释得多的擢为上等，引文明确的为高说；如果不依先师，义有自相矛盾，都算是错的。
English: If there is a lot of explanation, it is considered to be superior, and if the quotation is clear, it is said to be high; if it does not follow the predecessor, it is contradictory, and it is considered to be wrong.

古文：《五经》各取上第六人，《论语》不宜谢策。
现代文：《五经》各取上等六人，《论语》不宜射策。
English: The "Five Classics" each take up to six people, and the "Analects" are not suitable for shooting.

古文：虽所失或久，差可矫革。
现代文：即使所失已久，稍可矫正一些差错。 
English: Even if it has been lost for a long time, some mistakes can be corrected.

古文：诏书下公卿，皆从防言。
现代文：诏书下给公卿，都依从徐防的说法。
English: The imperial edict issued to the nobles all followed Xu Bao's words.

古文：十六年，拜为司徒。延平元年，迁太尉，与太傅张禹参录尚书事，数受赏赐，甚见优宠。
现代文：十六年，徐防拜为司徒，延平元年，升为太尉，与太傅张禹参录尚书事，数次得过赏赐，甚见优宠。
English: In the 16th year, Xu Baobai became a disciple, and in the first year of Yanping, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and he was recorded in the records with the great master Zhang Yu. He was awarded several times, and was highly favored.

古文：安帝即位，以定策封龙乡侯。
现代文：安帝即位，以定策封龙乡侯。
English: Emperor An ascended to the throne and decided to make Longxianghou a county seat.

古文：食邑千一百户。
现代文：食邑千一百户。
English: There are 1,100 households in the food village.

古文：其年以灾异寇贼策免，就国。
现代文：这年因灾异寇贼策免职。回到封地。
English: This year, he was relieved of his duties due to the disaster. He returned to his fiefdom.

古文：凡三公以灾异策免，始自防也。
现代文：所有三公因灾异免的，从徐防开始。
English: All the three public causes of disasters are exempted, starting from Xu Fang.

古文：防卒，子衡当嗣，让封于其弟崇。
现代文：徐防死后，儿子徐衡当嗣，让封于其弟徐崇。
English: After the death of Xu Fang, his son Xu Heng became the heir, leaving the title to his brother Xu Chong.

古文：数岁，不得已，乃出就爵云。
现代文：几年后，不得已，才出就爵。
English: A few years later, out of necessity, he was knighted.

古文：张敏字伯达，河间人也。
现代文：◆张敏传，张敏字伯达，河间莫阝人。
English: ◆Zhang Min Chuan, Zhang Min Zi Bao Da, and Kehma Mo Yan Ren.

古文：建初二年，举孝廉，四迁，五年，为尚书。
现代文：建初二年，举为孝廉，四次升迁，五年做了尚书。
English: In the second year of Jianchu, he was promoted to Xiaolian, promoted four times, and made Shangshu in five years.

古文：建初中，有人侮辱人父者，而其子杀之，肃宗贳其死刑而降宥之，自后因以为比。
现代文：建初年间，有人侮辱人家的父亲，而那人的儿子把他杀了，肃宗宽其死刑而降等处理，从此以后把这事作为例子。
English: In the first year of Jianchu, someone insulted another man's father, and that man's son killed him. Su Zong gave him a lenient death sentence, and has used this as an example ever since.

古文：是时遂定其议，以为《轻侮法》。
现代文：这时就定下来，制定了《轻侮法》。
English: At this time, they settled down and formulated the "Mild Insult Law."

古文：敏驳议曰：夫《轻侮》之法，先帝一切之恩，不有成科班之律令也。
现代文：张敏驳议道 ：《轻侮》之法，先帝一切的恩惠，没有成科班之律令。
English: Zhang Min objected: "The law of "contempt" and all the favors of the former emperor are gone, and there is no law of becoming a science class.

古文：夫死生之决，宜从上下，犹天之四时，有生有杀。
现代文：死生之判决，宜从上下，犹如天之有四时，有生有杀。
English: In the matter of life and death, the decision should be made from the top down, as if there were four o'clock in the sky, life and death.

古文：若开相容恕，著为定法者，则是故设奸萌，生长罪隙。
现代文：如果开相容恕，著为定法，这就是故意设置奸萌，生长罪过。
English: If the opening is compatible with forgiveness, and the author is the law, it is a deliberate setting up of adultery and the growth of sin.

古文：孔子曰： 民可使由之，不可使知之。 
现代文：孔子说： 民可使由之，不可使知之。 
English: Confucius said, "People can infer from it, but they cannot know it."

古文：《春秋》之义，子不报仇，非子也。
现代文：《春秋》之义，子不报仇，不是儿子。
English: The meaning of "Spring and Autumn" is that the son does not take revenge, not the son.

古文：而法令不为之减者，以相杀之路不可开故也。
现代文：而法令不替他减刑，因为相杀之路不可开的缘故。
English: However, the decree does not commute his sentence, because there is no way to kill each other.

古文：今托义者得减，妄杀者有差，使执宪之吏得设巧诈，非所以导 在丑不争 之义。
现代文：现在假托出于义愤得以减刑，乱杀人的有差别，使执法之官吏能设巧诈，不是教以 在酉鬼不争 的意思。
English: Now, there is a difference between being able to commute a sentence out of righteous indignation and indiscriminate killing, so that law enforcement officials can be cunning, but it is not the intention to teach them not to fight over ghosts.

古文：又《轻侮》之比，浸以繁滋，至有四五百科，转相顾望，弥复增甚，难以垂之万载。
现代文：又《轻侮》之比，渐渐多起来，至有四五百科，转相顾望，越来越多，难以流传万年。
English: In addition, the ratio of "light insults" is gradually increasing, up to four or five encyclopedias, and more and more people are turning to each other, which is difficult to pass on for thousands of years.

古文：臣闻师言： 救文莫如质。 
现代文：臣听得老师说 ：救文莫如质。 
English: The minister listened to the teacher and said, "There is no such thing as a quality textbook."

古文：故高帝去烦苛之法，为三章之约。
现代文：所以高帝去掉繁苛之法律，为约法三章。
English: Therefore, Emperor Gao removed the cumbersome laws and made them into three chapters.

古文：建初诏书，有改于古者，可下三公、廷尉蠲除其敝。
现代文：建初年间的诏书，有改于古代的，可以下三公、廷尉除掉其敝。 
English: The imperial rescript issued in the first year of Jian, which was modified from the ancient one, can be removed by the three princes and the courtier.

古文：议寝不省。
现代文：议论罢了不被省察。
English: It's just talk and it's not being looked at.

古文：敏复上疏曰：臣敏蒙恩，特见拔擢，愚心所不晓，迷意所不解，诚不敢苟随众议。
现代文：张敏又上疏道 ：臣敏蒙恩，特被提拔，愚心所不晓，迷意所不解，的确不敢随便附和众议。
English: Zhang Min went on to say: "Minister Min has been blessed with special promotion. The foolish do not know, the bewitched do not understand. Indeed, they dare not casually agree with the public.

古文：臣伏见孔子垂经典，皋陶造法律，原其本意，皆欲禁民为非也。
现代文：臣想见孔子垂经典，皋陶造法律，推原他们的本意，都想禁止百姓作坏事。
English: The courtiers wanted to see Confucius handing down the classics, and the eunuchs were making laws, pushing their original intention, and they all wanted to prohibit the people from doing bad things.

古文：未晓《轻侮》之法将以何禁？
现代文：不知道《轻侮》之法将用来禁止什么？
English: I don't know what the law of "contempt" will be used to prohibit.

古文：必不能使不相轻侮，而更开相杀之路，执宪之吏复容其奸枉。
现代文：必不能使人不相轻侮，而更开相杀之路，执法之吏又容其奸枉。
English: It is impossible for people not to despise each other, but to open the road to killing each other, and for law enforcement officials to tolerate their treachery.

古文：议者或曰： 平法当先论生。 
现代文：议论者有的说 ：平法当先论生。 
English: Some commentators say: the equal law should first discuss life.

古文：臣愚以为天地之性，唯人为贵，杀人者死，三代通制。
现代文：臣愚以为天地之性，只有人最宝贵，杀人者死罪，三代通制是如此。
English: Vassals foolishly believe that the nature of heaven and earth, only the most valuable people, murderers are punishable by death, the three-generation system is so.

古文：今欲趣生，反开杀路，一人不死，天下受敝。
现代文：今想趋生，反开杀路，一人犯法不死，天下受他的害。
English: Now he wants to be reborn, but he has chosen the path of killing. If one person breaks the law and does not die, the whole world will be harmed by him.

古文：记曰： 利一害百，人去城郭。 
现代文：古记说： 利一害百，人去城郭。 
English: Ancient records say: One gain is worth a hundred losses, so people go to the castle.

古文：夫春生秋杀，天道之常。
现代文：春生秋杀，天道之常规。
English: Spring is followed by autumn, which is the rule of heaven.

古文：春一物枯即为灾，秋一物华即为异。
现代文：春天一物枯死就是灾，秋天一物开花就是异。
English: If something withers and dies in spring, it's a disaster. If something blooms in autumn, it's a miracle.

古文：王者承天地，顺四时，法圣人，从经律。
现代文：王者承天地，顺四时，以圣人为法，以经律为依据。
English: The king inherits the heavens and the earth, according to the four o'clock, with the sage as the law, and the sutra as the basis.

古文：愿陛下留意下民，考寻利害，广令平议，天下幸甚。
现代文：愿陛下留意下面的百姓，考寻利害，广泛让大家评议，天下幸运得很。 
English: May His Majesty pay attention to the people below, examine their interests, and allow everyone to comment widely. The world is very fortunate.

古文：和帝从之。
现代文：和帝听从了。
English: And the emperor obeyed.

古文：九年，拜司隶校尉。
现代文：九年，张敏拜为司隶校尉。
English: In the ninth year, Zhang Minbai became the captain of Sili.

古文：视事二岁，迁汝南太守。
现代文：到职视事二年，升为汝南太守。
English: Two years after taking office, he was promoted to the position of the Governor of Yunnan Province.

古文：清约不烦，用刑平正，有理能名。
现代文：清约不繁，用刑公平正直，有理能名。
English: The contract is not complicated, the punishment is fair and honest, and it has a reasonable name.

古文：坐事免。
现代文：后因事免职。
English: He was removed from office as a result of his conviction.

古文：延平元年，拜议郎，再迁颍川太守。
现代文：延平元年，拜为议郎，再升为颍川太守。
English: In the first year of the Enpyeong era, he was promoted to pleader, and then to the governor of Shukawa Province.

古文：永初元年，征拜司空，在位奉法而已。
现代文：永初元年征召为司空，在位奉法办事而已。
English: In the first year of the Yongzheng era, he was conscripted as a steward of the sky, and he only served the law during his reign.

古文：视事三岁，以病乞身，不听。
现代文：视事三年，因病请求退职。皇上不听。
English: After three years, he asked to retire due to illness, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：六年春，行大射礼，陪位顿仆，乃策罢之。
现代文：六年春，行大射礼，陪位顿时倒下，才策免职。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, after a grand firing ceremony, the attendant suddenly fell down, only to be relieved of duty.

古文：因病笃，卒于家。
现代文：因病重，死在家中。
English: He died at home after a long illness.

古文：胡广字伯始，南郡华容人也。
现代文：◆胡广传，胡广字伯始，南郡华容人。
English: ◆Hu Guang Chuan, Hu Guang Zi Bo Shi, Nan County Hua Rong Ren.

古文：六世祖刚，清高有志节。
现代文：六世祖胡刚，清高有志节。
English: The sixth-generation ancestor Hu Gang, Qing Gao Youzhi Jie.

古文：平帝时，大司徒马宫辟之。
现代文：平帝时，大司徒马宫选拔他。
English: At the time of Emperor Ping, he was selected by the Grand Master Tu Ma Gong.

古文：值王莽居摄，刚解其衣冠，县府门而去，遂亡命交阯，隐于屠肆之间。
现代文：正逢王莽摄政时，胡刚解除衣冠，悬府门而去，于是逃亡到交阝止，隐于屠宰所之间。
English: It was at the time of Wang Mang's regency that Hu Gang took off his robe and left the palace, then fled to Jiaozuo and hid among the slaughterhouses.

古文：后莽败，乃归乡里。
现代文：后来王莽失败，才归乡里。
English: Later, Wang Mang failed and returned to his hometown.

古文：父贡，交阯都尉。
现代文：父亲胡贡，做过交阝止都尉。
English: His father, Hugong, was a captain in the Chinese Civil War.

古文：广少孤贫，亲执家苦。
现代文：胡广少时孤苦贫困，亲自做家务劳动。
English: When Hu Guang was young, he was lonely and poor, and he personally did housework.

古文：长大，随辈入郡为散吏。
现代文：长大后，随辈入郡做散吏。
English: After growing up, he followed his peers into the county to work as a clerk.

古文：太守法雄之子真，从家来省其父。
现代文：太守法雄之子法真，从家中来省其父。
English: Fa Zhen, the son of the Great Guardian Fa Xiong, came from home to visit his father.

古文：真颇知人。
现代文：法真颇知人。
English: Faxin is a close acquaintance.

古文：会岁终应举，雄敕真助其求才。
现代文：遇上岁终应举，法雄命法真帮助他选拔人才。
English: Faced with a year-end call for nominations, Hossung Myou Fa Zhen helped him select talent.

古文：雄因大会诸吏，真自于牖间密占察之，乃指广以白雄，遂察孝廉。
现代文：法雄于是大会诸吏，法真自己从窗户间观察，于是指胡广以告法雄，便察孝廉。
English: Hossong then called all the officials of the assembly, and Fazhen himself observed from the window, then he pointed at Hu Guang to sue Hossong, and then checked on Xiaolian.

古文：既到京师，试以章奏，安帝以广为天下第一。
现代文：既到京师，以章奏试之，安帝以胡广为天下第一。
English: As soon as he arrived in Beijing, he tried it out with Zhang Zeng, and An Di ranked first in the world with Hu Guang.

古文：旬月拜尚书郎，五迁尚书仆射。
现代文：旬月拜为尚书郎，五次升迁为尚书仆射。
English: He was promoted to Shang Shulang five times, and Shang Shulang five times.

古文：顺帝欲立皇后，而贵人有宠者四人，莫知所建，议欲探筹，以神定选。
现代文：顺帝想立皇后，而贵人中受宠的有四人，不知立谁为好，商议想用抽签的办法求神定选。
English: Emperor Shun wanted to appoint a queen, but there were four favorites among the nobles. They did not know who to appoint, and they wanted to use the method of drawing lots to ask God to choose.

古文：广与尚书郭虔、史敞上疏谏曰： 窃见诏书以立后事大，谦不自专，欲假之筹策，决疑灵神。
现代文：胡广与尚书郭虔、史敞上疏谏道 ：私自看到诏书认为立皇后是大事，谦让不自专定，想借抽签的办法，求神决疑。
English: Hu Guang and Shang Shuxu Guoqian and Shibang Shang Shaoqian said: I have seen the imperial edict that the establishment of the empress is a big event, I am not willing to arbitrarily decide, I would like to use the method of drawing lots, and ask God to decide.

古文：篇籍所记，祖宗典故，未尝有也。
现代文：古书所载，祖宗典故，从来没有过的。
English: Ancestral allusions contained in ancient books have never been seen before.

古文：恃神任筮，既不必当贤；就值其人，犹非德选。
现代文：靠神和巫，不一定找到贤人，就是遇到这种人，还不是以德选人。
English: If you rely on gods and witches, you will not necessarily find a wise man. Even if you encounter such a person, you are not choosing a person with virtue.

古文：夫岐嶷形于自然，伣天必有异表。
现代文：人的形貌产生于自然，譬喻在天必有异表。
English: The human form comes from nature, for example, it must have a different appearance in the sky.

古文：宜参良家，简求有德，德同以年，年钧以貌，稽之典经，断之圣虑。
现代文：应该参照良家，选择有德之人，德相同就看年龄，年龄均等就看相貌，考之于经典，断之于圣虑。
English: It is necessary to choose a virtuous person with reference to a good family. The same virtue depends on the age, and the same age depends on the appearance.

古文：政令犹汗，往而不反。
现代文：政令好比出汗，出来就不能收回。
English: A decree is like perspiration; once issued, it cannot be retracted.

古文：诏文一下，形之四方。
现代文：诏文一下达，见之于四方。
English: Once the edict was issued, it was seen in all four directions.

古文：臣职在拾遗，忧深责重，是以焦心，冒昧陈闻。 
现代文：臣的职责在于拾遗，忧深责重，因此焦心，冒昧陈述意见以上闻。 
English: A minister's duty is to collect relics, which is a heavy responsibility. Therefore, he is anxious and dares to state his opinions before he is heard.

古文：帝从之，以梁贵人良家子，定立为皇后。
现代文：帝听从了，把梁贵人这位良家女子定立为皇后。
English: The emperor obeyed and made Liang Guijin, a woman from a good family, the empress.

古文：时，尚书令左雄议改察举之制，限年四十以上，儒者试经学，文吏试章奏。
现代文：当时尚书令左雄建议改革察举的制度，限年在四十岁以上，儒者试经学，文吏试章奏。
English: At that time, Shang Shuling Zuo suggested reforming the system of inspection and examination, with the age limit being over forty years old, Confucians testing scripture study, and clerks testing chapter playing.

古文：广复与敞、虔止书驳之，曰：臣闻君以兼览博照为德，臣以献可替否为忠。
现代文：胡广又与敞、虔上书驳之道： 臣听说群王以兼览博照为德，臣子以献可否为忠。
English: Hu Guang also followed the path of openness and piety in writing: the vassal heard that the kings regarded both openness and sincerity as virtues, and the vassals were loyal to whether they could offer or not.

古文：《书》载稽疑，谋及卿士；《诗》美先人，询于刍荛。
现代文：《书经》载有考正疑事，谋及卿士的说法；《诗经》有赞美先人，咨询采樵之人的事例。
English: The "Book of Songs" contains the saying of examining the correct and doubtful matters, and seeking advice from the noblemen; the "Song of Songs" has examples of praising the ancestors and consulting the people who picked the strawberries.

古文：国有大政，必议之于前训，咨之于故老，是以虑无失策，举无过事，窃见尚书令左雄议郡举孝廉，皆限年四十以上，诸生试章句，文吏试笺奏。
现代文：国有大政，一定要考查从前的历史，询问于故旧老人，因此虑无失策，举措没有错误。我们看到尚书令左雄议郡举孝廉，都限年在四十以上，诸生试章句，文吏试片戋奏。
English: In state-owned major policies, it is necessary to examine the past history and inquire about the old people. Therefore, there are no missteps, and there are no mistakes in the measures. We see that Shang Shuling ordered the left-hand man to discuss the county to raise the filial piety, all of them are over forty years old, all of them are trying to write a sentence, and the clerks are trying to play a film.

古文：明诏既许，复令臣等得与相参。
现代文：明诏已经许可，又叫臣等相与参谋。
English: The edict had already been approved, and the vassals and staff officers were also summoned.

古文：窃惟王命之重，载在篇典，当令县于日月，固于金石，遗则百王，施之万世。
现代文：想到王命之重，载在篇典之上，应当悬于日月，固之于金石，传给百王，流传万世。
English: It comes to my mind that the weight of a king's life, which is recorded in the scriptures, should hang over the sun and moon, be set in stone, be handed down to a hundred kings, and be passed down to all generations.

古文：《诗》云： 天难谌斯，不易惟王。 
现代文：《诗经》说 ：天难谌斯，不易惟王。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says, "It is not easy to become king in the face of adversity."

古文：可不慎与！
现代文：可不谨慎吗！
English: How can you not be careful!

古文：盖选举因才，无拘定制。六奇之策，不出经学；郑、阿之政，非必章奏。
现代文：大凡选举人才，不能拘泥定制，陈平六奇之策，不是出自经学；郑国子产从政，晏子之化东阿，不是依靠章奏。
English: Great election talents cannot be rigidly customized, Chen Ping's six-figure strategy does not come from the study of economics; Zheng Guozhong's son-in-law is in politics, and the son-in-law's transformation is not dependent on chapter and verse.

古文：甘、奇显用，年乖强仕；终、贾扬声，亦在弱冠。
现代文：甘罗十二为相，子奇十八化东阿，都是年轻显能；佟军、贾谊名声显扬，也在弱冠之年。
English: Ganluo, the twelfth, and Ziqi, the eighteenth, are both young and energetic; the Han army and Jia Yi are famous, even in the year of weak crown.

古文：汉承周、秦，兼览殷、夏，祖德师经，参杂霸轨，圣主贤臣，世以致理，贡举之制，莫或回革。
现代文：汉朝继承周、秦，兼览殷、夏，祖德师经，参杂王霸之治，圣主贤臣，世以致理，贡举的制度，没有什么变革。
English: The Han Dynasty inherited the system of Zhou, Qin, Yin, Xia, Zude, Shijing, Sangzhuo, Wangbai, Shenzhu, Zhaozhari, and tribute, and there was no change.

古文：今以一臣之言，划戾旧章，便利未明，众心不。
现代文：今以一臣之言，改革旧章，好处不明显，群众不心服。
English: Now, according to a minister, the benefits of reforming the old chapter are not obvious, and the masses are not convinced.

古文：矫枉变常，政之所重，而不访台司，不谋卿士。
现代文：矫枉变常，政之所重，而不访台司，不谋于卿士。
English: It has become common practice to overcorrect, and it is important for the government not to visit the Taiji, and not to seek help from the nobles.

古文：若事下之后，议者剥异，异之则朝失其便，同之则王言已行。
现代文：如果文件发下去，议者有不同看法，不同意，那么朝廷行使起来不方便，同意，则王言已行。
English: If the document continues to be issued, and the legislators have different views and disagree, then it is inconvenient for the court to exercise, and if they agree, then the king's words have been carried out.

古文：臣愚以为可宣下百官，参其同异，然后览择胜否，详采厥衷。
现代文：臣愚认为可以宣下百官，参照其同异之处，然后择其胜否，详采其核心部分。
English: Zengwu believes that it is possible to proclaim a hundred officials, refer to their similarities and differences, and then choose their success or failure, and study their core parts in detail.

古文：敢以瞽言，冒干天禁，惟陛下纳焉。
现代文：敢以瞎说，冒犯天禁，希陛下采纳。 
English: If you dare to speak nonsense and offend Heaven, I hope His Majesty will accept it.

古文：帝不从。
现代文：皇帝不听从。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：时，陈留郡缺职，尚书史敞等荐广。
现代文：当时陈留郡缺职，尚书史敞等推荐胡广。
English: At that time, Chen Liu County was vacant, and Shang Shuxi Zhan recommended Hu Guang.

古文：曰： 臣闻德以旌贤，爵以建事， 明试以功 《典谟》所美， 五服五章 ，天秩所作，是以臣竭其忠，君丰其宠，举不失德，下忘其死。
现代文：奏道： 臣听说德以明贤，爵以建事 ，明试以功 ，《典谟》所赞美 ，五服五章 ，天秩所作，因此臣竭其忠心，君厚其宠，举动不失德，下忘其死。
English: Sonoda: The vassal heard that the virtue is to be wise, the peer is to build things, and the test is to be meritorious, which is praised in the "Diamond Book," the five services and five chapters, made by heaven. Therefore, the vassal is loyal, the prince is generous, the action is not immoral, and the death is forgotten.

古文：窃见尚书仆射胡广，体真履规，谦虚温雅，博物洽闻，探赜穷理，《六经》典奥，旧章宪式，无所不览。
现代文：私下看到尚书仆射胡广，体真履规，谦虚温雅，博物洽闻，穷究其理，《六经》典奥，旧章宪式，无所不览读。
English: Privately, I saw that Shang Shufu shot Hu Guang, he was honest and followed the rules, he was modest and gentle, he was familiar with natural history, and he was very reasonable. He read the "Six Classics," the old constitution, and read everything.

古文：柔而不犯，文而有礼，忠贞之性，忧公如家。
现代文：柔而不犯非义，文明而有礼貌，忠贞之性，忧公如家。
English: To be gentle and not to commit injustice, to be civilized and polite, to be loyal, and to be concerned about the public as a family.

古文：不矜其能，不伐其劳，翼翼周慎，行靡玷漏。
现代文：不夸其能，不伐其劳，谨慎周到，行为没有差错。
English: Do not boast, do not work hard, be cautious and thoughtful, and do not make mistakes.

古文：密勿夙夜，十有余年，心不外顾，志不苟进。
现代文：早晚努力，十有余年，心不外顾，志不苟进。
English: Work hard in the morning and evening, have more than ten years, do not look outside, and be diligent.

古文：臣等窃以为广在尚书，劬劳日久，后母年老，既蒙简照，宜试职千里，匡宁方国。
现代文：臣等认为胡广在尚书之职位，劳苦日久，后来母亲年老，既蒙简照，应试职千里，匡宁方国。
English: The courtiers thought that Hu Guang had worked hard for a long time in the position of Shangshu, and later his mother was old. Since he had received a certificate, he should try out for a job thousands of miles away, in Kuanning Fangguo.

古文：陈留近郡，今太守任缺。
现代文：陈留近郡，今太守任缺。
English: Chen Ruzhong County is now without a governor.

古文：广才略深茂，堪能拨烦，愿以参选，纪纲颓俗，使束脩守善，有所劝仰。 
现代文：胡广才略深茂，能够拔烦，愿以参选，纠正颓俗，使束修守善，有所劝仰。 
English: Hu Guangcai is a bit profound, can get rid of troubles, is willing to participate in the election, correct the vulgarity, make the discipline good, and have some persuasion.

古文：广典机事十年，出为济阴太守，以举吏不实免。
现代文：胡广掌机要十年，出为济阴太守，因举吏不实被免职。
English: Hu Guang, who had been in charge of the machine for ten years, was appointed as the governor of Jiyin and was dismissed for falsely appointing officials.

古文：复为汝南太守，入拜大司农。
现代文：又作了汝南太守，入拜大司农。
English: He also became the governor of Yunnan Province, and was promoted to the position of chief farmer.

古文：汉安元年，迁司徒。
现代文：汉安元年，升为司徒。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, he was promoted to the post of chief monk.

古文：质帝崩，代李固为太尉，录尚书事。
现代文：质帝死后，代李固作太尉，录尚书事。
English: After the death of Emperor Qiu, Li Gu became a captain on his behalf and recorded the records.

古文：以定策立桓帝，封育阳安乐乡侯。
现代文：因定策立桓帝，封为育阳安乐乡侯。
English: As a result of the decision, Emperor Kan was established, and he was given the title of Ikuyo Anle Township.

古文：以病逊位。
现代文：因病退位。
English: He abdicated due to illness.

古文：又拜司空，告老致仕。
现代文：又拜司空，告老还家。
English: He also paid homage to Siku and returned home.

古文：寻以特进征拜太常，迁太尉，以日食免。
现代文：不久以特进召拜太常，升为太尉，因日食免职。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the rank of Taijō (太尉) with a special promotion, but was relieved of his duties due to the solar eclipse.

古文：复为太常，拜太尉。
现代文：复为太常，拜太尉。
English: That's too often, Ensign Bye.

古文：延熹二年，大将军梁冀诛，广与司徒韩縯、司空孙朗坐不卫宫，皆减死一等，夺爵土，免为庶人。
现代文：延熹二年，大将军梁冀被杀，胡广与司徒韩纟寅、司空孙朗犯了不卫宫罪，都减死一等，夺爵土，免职为庶人。
English: In the second year of Yanxi, the great general Liang Ji was killed, and Hu Guang, along with the tutor Han Yuyin and the tutor Sun Lang, committed the crime of not guarding the palace. They were all reduced to the first class, deprived of peerage, and dismissed as commoners.

古文：后拜太中大夫、太常。
现代文：后拜太中大夫、太常。
English: After that, he bowed to the chief physician and then to the emperor.

古文：九年，复拜司徒。
现代文：九年又拜司徒。
English: Nine years later, he returned to St. Stephen's.

古文：灵帝立，与太傅陈蕃参录尚书事，复封故国。
现代文：灵帝即位，与太傅陈蕃参录尚书事，复封故国。
English: Emperor Lingdi ascended to the throne, and he and Grand Master Chen Xi participated in the record of the imperial rescript, and the seal of the motherland was restored.

古文：以病自乞。
现代文：因病请求退职。
English: He asked to be relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：会蕃被诛，代为太傅，总录如故。
现代文：遇上陈蕃被杀，代为太傅，总录如故。
English: When Chen Yao was killed, he took the place of Taifu, and the general record remains as it was.

古文：时年已八十，而心力克壮，继母在堂，朝夕瞻省，傍无几杖，言不称老。
现代文：这时年已八十，而心力克壮。继母在堂，早晚问安，傍无几杖，言不称老。
English: At this time, he was already eighty years old, but his mind was strong. His stepmother was in the hall, saying hello in the morning and evening, and there were few canes nearby, which was not old.

古文：及母卒，居丧尽哀，率礼无愆。
现代文：母死后，居丧尽哀，照礼不差。
English: After my mother's death, I was in deep mourning.

古文：性温柔谨素，常逊言恭色。
现代文：性格温柔谨素，常逊言恭色。
English: Her personality is gentle and modest, and she is often condescending.

古文：达练事体，明解朝章。
现代文：达练事体，明解朝章。
English: Practice makes perfect, clear thinking makes perfect.

古文：虽无謇直之风，屡有补阙之益。
现代文：虽没有謇直之风，屡有补缺之益。
English: Although there is no wind of straightening up, there is often the benefit of filling in the gaps.

古文：故京师谚曰： 万事不理问伯始，天下中庸有胡公。 
现代文：所以京师谚语说： 万事不理问伯始，天下中庸有胡公。 
English: Therefore, a saying of a scholar in Beijing says: "If you do not pay attention to everything, ask Bo Shi, there is a Hu Gong in the world."

古文：及共李固定策，大议不全，又与中常侍丁肃婚姻，以此讥毁于时。
现代文：等到与李固定策，大议不全，又与中常侍丁肃结为婚姻，因此被当时人讥毁。
English: She waited until she and Li had settled on a plan, but the grand discussion was incomplete, and she married the middle-ranking attendant Ding Su, so she was ridiculed by the people at the time.

古文：自在公台三十余年，历事六帝，礼任甚优，每逊位辞病，及免退田里，未尝满岁，辄复升时。
现代文：胡广自在公台三十余年，历侍六个皇帝，礼任甚优，每次逊位辞病，及免职退回田里，不满一年，又复升进。
English: Hu Guang has been in public service for more than 30 years. He has served six emperors in succession, and his courtesy is excellent. Every time he abdicated, he resigned and returned to the field. Less than a year later, he was promoted again.

古文：凡一履司空，再作司徒，三登太尉，又为太傅。
现代文：共一次作司空，两次作司徒，三次登太尉，又做了太傅。
English: In total, he was once a steward, twice a tutor, three times a captain, and once a superintendent.

古文：其所辟命，皆天下名士。
现代文：他所辟命，都是天下名士。
English: The lives he saved were those of famous people around the world.

古文：与故吏陈蕃、李咸并为三司。
现代文：与故吏陈蕃、李咸并为三司。
English: with the late officials Chen Zhen and Li Xian as the third division.

古文：蕃等每朝会，辄称疾避广，时人荣之。
现代文：陈蕃等每朝会，常称病避胡广，时人以为光荣。
English: Chen Xi and others attended every imperial court meeting, often saying that they avoided Hu Guang due to illness. At the time, people thought it was glorious.

古文：年八十二，熹平元年薨。
现代文：年八十二，熹平元年去世。
English: He died in 82, the first year of the Heian period.

古文：使五官中朗将持节奉策赠太傅、安乐乡侯印绶，给东园梓器，谒者护丧事，赐冢茔于原陵，谥文恭侯，拜家一人为郎中。
现代文：朝廷派五官中郎将持节奉策赠太傅、安乐乡侯印绶，给东园梓器，谒者护丧事，赐冢茔于原陵，谥为文恭侯，拜家中一人为郎中。
English: The five middle-ranking officials sent by the imperial court to hold the festival were given gifts of Taifu, Anle Township Houyin, East Garden Ziqi, the deceased was escorted to the funeral, the deceased was given to the original mausoleum, the deceased was given to Wenqing Hou, and one person from Bai's family was a middle-ranking official.

古文：故吏自公、卿、大夫、博士、议郎以下数百人，皆缞绖殡位，自终及葬。
现代文：故吏自公、卿、大夫、博士、议郎以下数百人，都是殡位，自寿终到殡葬。
English: Hundreds of deceased officials from the ranks of officials, nobles, doctors, doctors, and councillors are in the funeral procession, from the time of death to the funeral.

古文：汉兴以来，人臣之盛，未尝有也。
现代文：汉兴以来，人臣之盛，不曾有过。
English: Since Han Xing, there has never been such a flourishing of human subjects.

古文：初，杨雄依《虞箴》作《十二州二十五官箴》，其九箴亡阙，后涿郡崔骃及子瑗又临邑侯刘駼增补十六篇，广复继作四篇，文甚典美。
现代文：起初，杨雄依照《虞箴》作《十二州二十五官箴》，其中九箴遗失，后来涿郡崔马因和儿子崔瑗又临邑侯刘马余增补十六篇，胡广又继作四篇，文甚典美。
English: At first, Yang Xiong wrote "Twenty-five Official Proverbs of the Twelve Provinces" in accordance with the "Yu Proverbs," of which nine proverbs were lost. Later, Zhu County's Cui Ma Ying and his son Cui Yao and Lin County's Hou Liu Ma Yu added 16 proverbs, and Hu Guang continued to write four proverbs. The proverbs were very beautiful.

古文：乃悉撰次首目，为之解释，名曰《百官箴》，凡四十八篇。
现代文：于是全部撰目录，为它作解释，名叫《百官箴》，共四十八篇。
English: As a result, a complete catalogue was compiled and an explanation was given for it, called "The Hundred Official Sayings," a total of forty-eight articles.

古文：其余所著诗、赋、铭、颂、箴、吊及诸解诂，凡二十篇。
现代文：其余所著诗、赋、铭、颂、箴、吊及诸解诂，共二十二篇。
English: The rest are poems, fus, mottos, odes, proverbs, aphorisms, and riddles, totaling twenty-two.

古文：熹平六年，灵帝思感旧德，乃图画广及太尉黄琼于省内，诏议郎蔡邕为其颂云。
现代文：熹平六年，灵帝思感旧德，于是画胡广及太尉黄琼之像于省内，诏议郎蔡邕替它作颂。
English: In the sixth year of Heping, Ling Di thought of the old virtue, so he painted the image of Hu Guang and the lieutenant Huang Qiong in the province, and the preacher Cai Xuan made a tribute to it.

