古文：阳陵侯傅宽，以魏五大夫骑将从，为舍人，起横阳。
现代文：阳陵侯傅宽，以魏国五大夫爵位的骑将军官身份跟随沛公刘邦，曾做过家臣，起事于横阳。
English: Yangling Hou Fu Kuan, who followed Pei Gong Liu Bang as a cavalry officer with the title of Wei Five Ladies, once served as a vassal and rose up in Hengyang.

古文：从攻安阳、杠里，击赵贲军於开封，及击杨熊曲遇、阳武，斩首十二级，赐爵卿。
现代文：他随沛公进攻安阳、杠里，在开封攻打秦将赵贲的军队，以及在曲遇、阳武击溃秦将杨熊的军队，斩获敌人十二首级，沛公赐给他卿的爵位。
English: He followed Pei Gong to attack Anyang and Liuli, attacked the army of Qin general Zhao Zhen in Kaifeng, and defeated the army of Qin general Yang Xiong in Qujing and Yangwu, and won twelve heads of the enemy, and Pei Gong gave him the title of lord.

古文：从至霸上。
现代文：后随从沛公到霸上。
English: After that, he followed from Peigong to Baxing.

古文：沛公立为汉王，汉王赐宽封号共德君。
现代文：沛公立为汉王后，赐给傅宽共德君的封号。
English: Pei Gongguo was the queen of the Han Dynasty, and gave Fu Kuan the title of Comrade De Jong.

古文：从入汉中，迁为右骑将。
现代文：他随从汉王进入汉中地区，升为右骑将。
English: He followed the king of Han into the Han-Zhong region and was promoted to the right cavalry general.

古文：从定三秦，赐食邑雕阴。
现代文：不久又跟随汉王平定了三秦，汉王赐雕阴县作为他的食邑。
English: Soon after, he followed the Han King to level the Three Qin Dynasties, and the Han King gave Jiaoying County as his food town.

古文：从击项籍，待怀，赐爵通德侯。
现代文：楚汉相争时，他随着汉王进击西楚霸王项羽，奉命在怀县接应汉王，汉王赐给他通德侯的爵位。
English: When Chu and Han were fighting, he marched with the Han King to attack the Western Chuba King Xiang Yu, and was ordered to meet the Han King in Huai County. The Han King gave him the title of Tongde Marquis.

古文：从击项冠、周兰、龙且，所将卒斩骑将一人敖下，益食邑。
现代文：在随汉王打击项羽部将项冠、周兰、龙且时，他率领的士兵在敖仓山下斩获敌骑将一人，因而增加了食邑。
English: When he followed Han Wang to attack Xiang Yu's generals Xiang Guan, Zhou Lan, and Long Jie, the soldiers he led captured an enemy cavalry commander at the foot of Mount Huchang, thus increasing the food supply.

古文：属淮阴，击破齐历下军，击田解。
现代文：傅宽曾隶属于淮阴侯韩信的指挥，击败了齐国在历下的驻军，击垮了齐国守将田解。
English: Fu Kuan was once under the command of Huaiyin Hou Han Xin. He defeated the garrison of Qi under his command and defeated the commander of Qi, Tian Ge.

古文：属相国参，残博，益食邑。
现代文：后来归属相国曹参指挥，攻破齐国的博县，又增加了食邑。
English: Later, it was under the command of Guo Cao, who conquered Bo County in Qi Province and added Shuxi County.

古文：因定齐地，剖符世世勿绝，封为阳陵侯，二千六百户，除前所食。
现代文：因为平定齐地有功，汉王把表示凭证的符分成两半，交给他一半，以示信用，使他的爵位世代相传，封他为阳陵侯，食邑二千六百户，出去他以前受封的食邑。
English: Because of his contribution to the pacification of Qi, the Han king divided the certificate into two halves and gave him half of it to show his trust, so that his title would be passed down from generation to generation. He was named Yangling Hou, with 2,600 households, and went out to the food villages he had previously been named.

古文：为齐右丞相，备齐。
现代文：后担任齐国的右丞相，屯兵驻守防备田横作乱。
English: Later, he served as the chancellor of Qi, and the garrison garrisoned the garrison field and caused chaos.

古文：五岁为齐相国。
现代文：在齐国任国相五年。
English: He served as minister of state in Qi for five years.

古文：四月，击陈豨，属太尉勃，以相国代丞相哙击豨。
现代文：汉高祖十一年四月，攻打叛汉自立为代王的陈豨，归属太尉周勃指挥，以相国的身份代替汉丞相樊哙击败陈豨。
English: In April of the eleventh year of Emperor Gaozu's reign, he attacked Chen Xi, who had rebelled against the Han Dynasty and established himself as the acting king. He was under the command of Lieutenant Zhou Bo, and defeated Chen Xi in his capacity as a compatriot in place of Han Zhe.

古文：一月，徙为代相国，将屯。
现代文：第二年一月，调任代国相国，带兵驻守边郡。
English: In January of the following year, he was transferred to the post of acting governor and stationed in Shouwen County.

古文：二岁，为代丞相，将屯。
现代文：两年后，担任代国丞相，继续带兵驻守边郡。
English: Two years later, he served as acting chancellor and continued to lead troops stationed in Shouwen County.

古文：孝惠五年卒，谥为景侯。
现代文：汉惠帝五年傅宽去世，谥号为景侯。
English: Fu Kuan died in the fifth year of Emperor Han Hui, and his posthumous name was Jing Hou.

古文：子顷侯精立，二十四年卒。
现代文：儿子顷侯傅精继承爵位，儿子顷侯在位二十四年后去世。
English: His son He Hou Fu Jing succeeded to the title, and his son He Hou Rong died after twenty-four years on the throne.

古文：子共侯则立，十二年卒。
现代文：傅精的儿子共侯傅则继承爵位，在位十二年后去世。
English: Fu Jing's son, Prince Fu, inherited the title of nobility, and died after twelve years on the throne.

古文：子侯偃立，三十一年，坐与淮南王谋反，死，国除。
现代文：傅则的儿子傅偃继承爵位，三十一年，因与淮南王刘安谋反，被处死，同时废除封地。
English: Fu Zi's son, Fu Xi, succeeded to the title of nobility. In 311, he was executed for plotting against Liu An, King of Huainan, and his fief was abolished at the same time.

古文：信武侯靳歙，以中涓从，起宛朐。
现代文：信武侯靳歙，以侍从官员身份跟随沛公刘邦，他在宛朐起兵。
English: Xinwu Houyi followed Pei Gong Liu Bang as an attendant official, and he raised an army in Wanlu.

古文：攻济阳。
现代文：曾进攻济阳。
English: He once attacked Jiyang.

古文：破李由军。
现代文：击败过秦将李由的军队。
English: defeated the Qin general Li Yu's army.

古文：击秦军亳南、开封东北，斩骑千人将一人，首五十七级，捕虏七十三人，赐爵封号临平君。
现代文：又在亳县南和开封东北攻打秦军，斩杀一千骑兵的将领一人，斩获五十七首级，俘虏七十三人，受沛公所赐爵位，封号为临平君。
English: He also attacked the Qin army in the south of Yixian County and the northeast of Kaifeng, killed one general of a thousand cavalry, won fifty-seven heads, captured seventy-three people, was given a knighthood by Pei Gong, and his code name was Lin Pingjun.

古文：又战蓝田北，斩车司马二人，骑长一人，首二十八级，捕虏五十七人。
现代文：后来又在蓝田北面进行战斗，斩杀秦军车司马二人，骑兵长官一人，斩杀二十八首级，俘虏五十七人。
English: Later, they fought on the north side of Lantian, beheading two horse drivers and a cavalry commander of the Qin army, beheading twenty-eight officers and taking fifty-seven prisoners.

古文：至霸上。
现代文：又率军到达霸上。
English: He also led his army to the top of Mt.

古文：沛公立为汉王，赐歙爵建武侯，迁为骑都尉。
现代文：当时沛公立为汉王，赐封靳歙建武侯爵位，并升他为骑都尉。
English: At that time, Pei Guozhong was the king of Han, and he gave Fong Yu the title of Marquis of Jianwu, and promoted him to captain.

古文：从定三秦。
现代文：靳歙随从汉王平定了三秦。
English: Zou, a follower of Han Wang, established the Three Kingdoms.

古文：别西击章平军於陇西，破之，定陇西六县，所将卒斩车司马、候各四人，骑长十二人。
现代文：另外它带领部队挥师西进在陇西攻打秦将章平军队，大败秦军，平定了陇西六县，他所率领的士兵斩杀秦军车司马、军候各四人，骑兵长官十二人。
English: In addition, he led the troops to the west to attack the Qin general Zhang Ping's army in Shaanxi, defeated the Qin army, and leveled six counties in Shaanxi. The soldiers he led killed four of the Qin army's chariots, horses, and soldiers, and twelve cavalry officers.

古文：从东击楚，至彭城。
现代文：随后，跟着汉王东进攻打楚军，到达彭城。
English: Subsequently, they followed Han Wangdong in attacking the Chu army and reached Pengcheng.

古文：汉军败还，保雍丘，去击反者王武等。
现代文：结果汉军战败，靳歙力守雍丘，后离开雍丘去攻打叛汉的王武等人。
English: As a result, the Han army was defeated and fought hard to defend Yongqiu, and then left Yongqiu to attack Wang Wu and others who had rebelled against Han.

古文：略梁地，别将击邢说军菑南，破之，身得说都尉二人，司马、候十二人，降吏卒四千一百八十人。
现代文：夺取了梁地后，又率领部队攻打驻守菑南的楚将邢说军队，大败邢说，并亲自活捉了邢说的都尉二人，司马、军候十二人，招降了敌官兵四千一百八十人。
English: After seizing Liangdi, he also led the troops to attack the Chu army stationed in the south of Longtan, defeating Longtan, and personally captured alive the two captains of Longtan, Sima, and twelve military waiters, and recruited and surrendered 4,180 enemy officers and soldiers.

古文：破楚军荥阳东。
现代文：另外在荥阳东大败楚军。
English: In addition, the Chu army was heavily defeated in the east of Fenyang.

古文：三年，赐食邑四千二百户。
现代文：汉高祖三年，赐给靳歙食邑四千二百户。
English: In the third year of Henkel's reign, he gave 4,200 households in Hunchi-mura.

古文：别之河内，击赵将贲郝军朝歌，破之，所将卒得骑将二人，车马二百五十匹。
现代文：靳歙还曾率领部队抵达河内，攻打驻守在朝歌的赵将贲郝，大败贲郝，他率领的士兵活捉骑将二人，缴获战马二百五十匹。
English: He also led troops to Hanoi to attack Zhao Zhaojun, who was stationed in Chaoga, and was soundly defeated. The soldiers he led captured two horsemen alive and 250 horses.

古文：从攻安阳以东，至棘蒲，下七县。
现代文：他随从汉王进攻安阳以东地区，直达棘蒲，拿下七个县。
English: He followed Han Wang to attack the area east of Anyang, reaching as far as Spindle, and won seven counties.

古文：别攻破赵军，得其将司马二人，候四人，降吏卒二千四百人。
现代文：并另率兵击溃赵军，活捉赵将的司马二人，军候四人，招降赵军官兵二千四百人。
English: He also led another army to defeat Zhao's army, captured two of Zhao's generals alive, four soldiers, and recruited and demoted 2,400 Zhao officers and soldiers.

古文：从攻下邯郸。
现代文：又随从汉王攻克邯郸。
English: He also followed the Han Emperor in conquering Yunnan.

古文：别下平阳，身斩守相，所将卒斩兵守、郡守各一人，降鄴。
现代文：独自率兵拿下平阳，亲自斩杀驻平阳的赵国代理相国，他所率领的士兵斩杀带兵郡守和郡守各一人，迫使邺投降。
English: He single-handedly led the soldiers to take down Pingyang and personally killed the deputy of Zhao Guo, who was stationed in Pingyang. The soldiers he led killed the county governor and the county governor one by one, forcing Zou to surrender.

古文：从攻朝歌、邯郸，及别击破赵军，降邯郸郡六县。
现代文：这次征战，随从汉王进攻朝歌、邯郸，又另自击败赵军，迫使邯郸郡的六个县投降。
English: In this campaign, he followed the Han king to attack the Northern Song and Southern Song, and defeated the Zhao army, forcing the six counties of the Southern Song to surrender.

古文：还军敖仓，破项籍军成皋南，击绝楚饟道，起荥阳至襄邑。
现代文：率军返回敖仓后，旋即在成皋南击败项羽的军队，击毁断绝了从荥阳至襄邑的输送粮饷的通道。
English: After returning to Kamakura with his army, he immediately defeated Xiang Yu's army in the south of Chenghuan, destroying and cutting off the channel for transporting grain and straw from Luoyang to Xiangyue.

古文：破项冠军鲁下。略地东至缯、郯、下邳，南至蕲、竹邑。
现代文：在鲁城之下大败项冠军队，夺取了东至缯、郯、下邳，南至蕲、竹邑的大片土地。
English: They defeated the champion team in the Battle of Lucheng, and conquered a large area of land from the east to Yunnan, Fujian, and Hebei, and from the south to Fujian and Zhuyi.

古文：击项悍济阳下。
现代文：又在济阳城下击败项悍军队。
English: They also defeated Xiang Han's army at the foot of Jiyang Castle.

古文：还击项籍陈下，破之。
现代文：然后挥军返回在陈县城下攻击项羽部队，大败项羽。
English: The army then returned to attack Xiang Yu's troops under the city of Chen County, inflicting a heavy defeat on Xiang Yu.

古文：别定江陵，降江陵柱国、大司马以下八人，身得江陵王，生致之雒阳，因定南郡。
现代文：此外，还平定了江陵，招降了在江陵的临江王的柱国、大司马及其部下八人，亲自活捉了临江王共尉，并把他押送到雒阳，于是平定了南郡。
English: In addition, he also pacified Jiangling, recruited and demoted Zhu Guo, Da Sima and eight of his subordinates, who were in Jiangling, and personally captured Linjiang Wang's lieutenant alive and sent him to Fenyang, thus pacifying Nan County.

古文：从至陈，取楚王信，剖符世世勿绝，定食四千六百户，号信武侯。
现代文：此后随从汉王到陈县，逮捕了图谋不轨的楚王韩信，汉王把表示凭证的符分成两半，交给靳歙一半，以示信用，使他的爵位世代相传，规定食邑四千六百户，封号称信武侯。
English: After that, he followed Han Wang to Chen County and arrested Han Xin, the King of Chu, who was plotting. Han Wang divided the certificate into two halves and gave half of it to Zou to show his trust, so that his title would be passed down from generation to generation. He stipulated that there should be 4,600 households in the food village, and the title should be called Xinwu Hou.

古文：以骑都尉从击代，攻韩信平城下，还军东垣。
现代文：后来，靳歙以骑都尉的身份随从高帝攻打代王，在平城下击败代王韩信，随即率军返回东垣。
English: Later, as a cavalry captain, Zou followed Gao to attack the acting king, defeated the acting king Han Xin under Pingcheng, and then led the army back to Donggaki.

古文：有功，迁为车骑将军，并将梁、赵、齐、燕、楚车骑，别击陈豨丞相敞，破之，因降曲逆。
现代文：因为有功，提升为车骑将军，接着率领梁、赵、齐、燕、楚几个诸侯王的部队，分路进攻陈豨的丞相侯敞，把他打得大败，于是迫使曲逆城投降。
English: Because of his meritorious service, he was promoted to chariot and cavalry general, and then led the troops of Liang, Zhao, Qi, Yan, and Chu, several princes, to attack Chen Qi's prime minister, Marzang, and beat him badly, thus forcing Qu Qigong to surrender.

古文：从击黥布有功，益封定食五千三百户。
现代文：后又随高祖攻打黥布很有功劳，增加封赐规定食邑五千三百户。
English: Later, he followed Gao Zu in attacking Zibo, which was very meritorious, increasing the number of food villages by 5,300 households.

古文：凡斩首九十级，虏百三十二人；别破军十四，降城五十九，定郡、国各一，县二十三；得王、柱国各一人，二千石以下至五百石三十九人。
现代文：在几次重要战役中，靳歙共斩敌九十首级，俘虏一百三十二人；另大败敌军十四次，降伏城邑五十九座，平定郡、国各一个，县城二十三个；活捉诸侯王、柱国各一人，二千石以下至五百石的不同等级官员三十九人。
English: In several important battles, he cut off a total of 90 heads of the enemy and captured 132 people; in addition, he defeated the enemy army 14 times, surrendered 59 cities and towns, conquered one county and one country, and 23 county towns; captured one prince and one pillar country alive, and 39 officials of different levels from 2,000 koku to 500 koku.

古文：高后五年，歙卒，谥为肃侯。
现代文：高后五年，靳歙去世，谥号为肃侯。
English: Five years after graduating from high school, Hao died, and his posthumous name was Soong.

古文：子亭代侯。
现代文：他的儿子靳亭代承侯爵。
English: He is succeeded by his son, the Marquis of Suiting.

古文：二十一年，坐事国人过律，孝文後三年，夺侯，国除。
现代文：二十一年后，因驱役百姓超过了律令规定，在汉文帝后元三年，剥夺了他的爵位，同时免除了封地。
English: Twenty-one years later, he was deprived of his peerage and his fief at the same time in 3rd year of the 1st year of the reign of Emperor Hanwen for driving people to work beyond the provisions of the ritsuryo code.

古文：蒯成侯緤者，沛人也，姓周氏。
现代文：蒯成侯名緤，是沛县人，姓周。
English: He was from Peixian County and his surname was Zhou.

古文：常为高祖参乘，以舍人从起沛。
现代文：曾任高祖警卫，是以家臣的身份跟随高祖起事的。
English: He was once Gaozu's guard, and followed Gaozu as a vassal.

古文：至霸上，西入蜀、汉，还定三秦，食邑池阳。
现代文：他曾陪高祖到霸上，又西去进入蜀、汉地区，后随高帝返回平定了三秦，并受封池阳作为食邑。
English: He accompanied Gao Zu to Baxian, and went west to enter the Shu and Han regions. Later, he returned with Emperor Gao to pacify the Three Qin Dynasties, and received the seal of Chiyang as a food town.

古文：东绝甬道，从出度平阴，遇淮阴侯兵襄国，军乍利乍不利，终无离上心。
现代文：他奉命率兵向东进发切断了敌人的运输通道，随后跟着高祖出征渡过平阴渡口向东进发，在襄国与淮阴侯韩信部队会合。当时作战时而获胜时而战败，情势严峻，但周緤始终没有背离高祖的意思。
English: He was ordered to lead his troops eastward to cut off the enemy's transportation channels, and then followed Gaozu to march eastward across the Pingyin Ferry to meet the Huaiyin Hou Hanxin troops in Xiangguo. At that time, the situation was grim, with battles being won and lost, but Zhou Yu never deviated from Gaozu's intention.

古文：以緤为信武侯，食邑三千三百户。
现代文：高祖赐封他为信武侯，食邑三千三百户。
English: Gao Zu gave him the title of Xinwu Hou, with 3,300 households.

古文：高祖十二年，以緤为蒯成侯，除前所食邑。
现代文：高祖十二年，又赐封周緤为蒯成侯，同时免掉原先的食邑。
English: In the twelfth year of Gaozu's reign, he also bestowed the title of Jucheng on Zhou Qi, and at the same time exempted the original Jucheng.

古文：上欲自击陈豨，蒯成侯泣曰： 始秦攻破天下，未尝自行。今上常自行，是为无人可使者乎？ 
现代文：高祖曾经要亲自攻打陈豨，蒯成侯流着泪劝阻道： 从前秦王攻取天下，不曾亲自出征，现在您经常亲自出征，这难道是没了可派遣的人吗？ 
English: Gaozu once wanted to personally attack Chen Xi, but Zou Cheng Hou dissuaded him with tears: Formerly, when the Qin King conquered the world, he did not personally go to war. Now, you often go to war personally. Is it because there is no one to send?

古文：上以为 爱我 ，赐入殿门不趋，杀人不死。
现代文：高帝认为周緤是由衷地爱护自己，破例恩准他进入殿门不必碎步快走，杀了人不定死罪。
English: Gao Di thought that Zhou Xuan sincerely loved himself. He was exceptionally allowed to enter the palace gate without having to walk quickly. If he killed someone, it was a capital crime.

古文：至孝文五年，緤以寿终，谥为贞侯。
现代文：到汉文帝五年，周緤年老病故，谥号为贞侯。
English: Five years into the reign of Emperor Hanwen, Zhou Er died of old age and illness. His posthumous name was Zhenhou.

古文：子昌代侯，有罪，国除。
现代文：他的儿子周昌代承侯爵，后因犯罪，免除了封地。
English: His son, Zhou Chang, who succeeded him as marquis, was later relieved of his fief due to a crime.

古文：至孝景中二年，封緤子居代侯。
现代文：到了汉景帝中元二年，又封周緤的儿子周居代承侯爵。
English: In the 2nd year of the Middle Yuan Dynasty of Emperor Han Jing, Zhou Jiu, the son of Zhou Jiu, was appointed as marquis.

古文：至元鼎三年，居为太常，有罪，国除。
现代文：到了汉武帝元鼎三年，周居任太常官职，犯了罪，封地被免除。
English: In the third year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, Zhou Jiu was appointed to the post of Taizong official, he committed a crime, and his fief was exempted.

古文：太史公曰：阳陵侯傅宽、信武侯靳歙皆高爵，从高祖起山东，攻项籍，诛杀名将，破军降城以十数，未尝困辱，此亦天授也。
现代文：太史公说：阳陵侯傅宽、信武侯靳歙都获得了很高的爵位，跟随高祖从山东起兵，攻打项羽，斩杀名将，击败敌军几十次，降伏城邑数十座，而不曾遭到挫折和困厄，这也是上天赐给的啊。
English: Tai Shikong said: Yangling Hou Fu Kuan and Xinwu Hou Quan both received high ranks, followed Gao Zu from Shandong, attacked Xiang Yu, killed famous generals, defeated enemy troops dozens of times, surrendered dozens of cities and towns, and never suffered setbacks and hardships. This is also given by heaven.

古文：蒯成侯周緤操心坚正，身不见疑，上欲有所之，未尝不垂涕，此有伤心者然，可谓笃厚君子矣。
现代文：蒯成侯周緤心地坚定忠良，从不被人怀疑，高祖每有出征的行动，他不曾不流泪哭泣，这只有心里十分痛苦的人才能做到，可以说是个忠诚厚道的君子啦。
English: Han Cheng Hou Zhou was steadfastly loyal and never doubted by anyone. Whenever Gao Zu went on a campaign, he never shed tears without crying, which can only be done by a person with a very painful heart. It can be said that he was a loyal and kind gentleman.

