古文：孔子曰： 君子有三恕。有君不能事，有臣而求其使，非恕也；有亲不能孝，有子而求其报，非恕也；有兄不能敬，有弟而求其顺，非恕也。
现代文：孔子说： 君子有三恕：有国君而不能侍奉，有臣子却要役使，这不是恕；有父母却不孝敬，有孩子却要求他回报，这也不是恕；有哥哥却不尊敬，有弟弟却要求他顺从，这也不是恕。
English: Confucius said: A gentleman has three excuses: if he has a sovereign whom he cannot serve, or a vassal whom he has to serve, this is not an excuse; if he has parents whom he does not honor and respect, or a child who demands something in return, this is not an excuse; if he has a brother whom he does not respect, or a younger brother who demands obedience from him, this is not an excuse.

古文：士能明于三恕之本，则可谓端身矣。 
现代文：读书人能明了这三恕的根本意义，那他便可以使自身的行为端正。 
English: If the reader can understand the fundamental meaning of these three excuses, then he can correct his own behavior.

古文：孔子曰： 君子有三思，不可不察也。
现代文：孔子说： 君子有三种思虑，不可以不明察。
English: Confucius said: A gentleman has three kinds of thoughts, which should not be overlooked.

古文：少而不学，长无能也；老而不教，死莫之思也；有而不施，穷莫之救也。
现代文：年少时不爱学习，长大后就没有才能；年老不教导子孙，死后就没人怀念；富有时不愿施舍，穷困时就没有人救助。
English: If you don't like to study when you are young, you will have no talent when you grow up; if you don't teach your children and grandchildren when you are old, no one will miss you when you die; if you are rich, sometimes you don't want to give alms, and if you are poor, there is no one to help you.

古文：故君子少思其长则务学，老思其死则务教，有思其穷则务施。 
现代文：所以君子年少时想到长大以后的事就要努力学习，年老了就要思虑去世之后的事，就会担起教化的责任；富有时想到穷困就要致力于施舍。 
English: Therefore, when a gentleman is young, if he thinks about what will happen when he grows up, he should study hard; when he is old, he should think about what will happen after he dies, and he will take on the responsibility of education; when a rich man thinks about poverty, he should devote himself to charity.

古文：孔子观于鲁桓公之庙，有欹器焉。
现代文：孔子到鲁桓公祭祀的庙里去参观，在那里看到一件容易倾倒的器物。
English: Confucius went to visit the temple for the sacrifice of Lu Huan, where he saw an object that could be easily tipped over.

古文：夫子问于守庙者，曰： 此谓何器？ 
现代文：于是他问守庙的人： 这是什么器物啊？ 
English: So he asked the person guarding the temple: What kind of object is this?

古文：对曰： 此盖为宥坐之器。 
现代文：守庙人回答说： 这是国君放在座位右边以示警戒的欹器。 
English: The keeper of the temple replied, "This is the scepter that the sovereign placed on the right side of his seat as a warning.

古文：孔子曰： 吾闻宥坐之器，虚则欹，中则正，满则覆。
现代文：孔子说： 我听说国君放在座位右边的欹器，空虚时就倾倒，里面的水不多不少时就端正，水满时就倒下。
English: Confucius said, "I have heard that there is a bowl placed on the right side of the seat by the sovereign. When it is empty, it is tipped over, when there is a little or a lot of water in it, it is straightened, and when it is full, it falls over.

古文：明君以为至诫，故常置之于坐侧。 
现代文：贤明的国君把它作为最高警戒，所以常常把它放在座位边。 
English: Wise sovereigns regard it as the ultimate warning, so they often place it next to their seats.

古文：顾谓弟子曰： 试注水焉！ 
现代文：说完回头对弟子说： 灌进水试试。 
English: After saying this, he turned back to his disciple and said, "Try pouring water into it."

古文：乃注之。水中则正，满则覆。
现代文：弟子把水灌进欹器，水不多不少时欹器就端正，水满时就倒下。
English: The disciple poured water into the bowl. When the water was not too much or too little, the bowl was right, but when the water was full, it fell over.

古文：夫子喟然叹曰： 呜呼！夫物恶有满而不覆哉？ 
现代文：孔子感叹道： 唉，哪有东西盈满了不倒的呢！ 
English: Confucius lamented, "Alas, what is full but cannot be emptied?

古文：子路进曰： 敢问持满有道乎？ 
现代文：子路走上前去问道： 先生，请问有保持盈满，但不倾覆的方法吗？ 
English: Zi Lu stepped forward and asked, "Sir, is there any way to keep the bowl full but not overturned?"

古文：子曰： 聪明睿智，守之以愚；功被天下，守之以让；勇力振世，守之以怯；富有四海，守之以谦。
现代文：孔子说： 聪明睿智的人，用愚笨的方法来持守；功绩遍及天下的人，用谦让的方法来持守；勇力闻达于世，用怯懦的方法来持守；财富遍及四海，就用谦和的方法来持守。
English: Confucius said: Those who are clever and wise use foolish methods to hold on; those whose exploits have spread all over the world, use humble methods to hold on; those whose courage is known to the world, use cowardly methods to hold on; and those whose wealth has spread all over the world, use humble methods to hold on.

古文：此所谓损之又损之之道也。 
现代文：这便是尽力贬损自己来保持盈满的方法。 
English: It's a way of trying to devalue yourself to stay full.

古文：孔子观于东流之水。
现代文：孔子观看东流的河水。
English: Confucius watched the river flowing eastward.

古文：子贡问曰： 君子所见大水必观焉，何也？ 
现代文：子贡问孔子说： 君子每次见到大水，都要观赏，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Zigong asked Confucius, "Why is it that every time a gentleman sees a large body of water, he wants to look at it?

古文：水之德有若此，是故君子见必观焉。 
现代文：流出后又有水流入，万物变得干净新鲜，这种品性就像是教化一样。水具有这么多的美德，所以君子见到大水后要观赏。 
English: After flowing out, water flows in again, everything becomes clean and fresh, this quality is like enlightenment. Water has so many virtues, so a gentleman should watch after seeing the big water.

古文：子路见于孔子。
现代文：子路拜见孔子。
English: On the way, I met Confucius.

古文：孔子曰： 智者若何？
现代文：孔子说道： 智者是怎样的？
English: Confucius said, "What is a wise man like?

古文：仁者若何？ 
现代文：仁者又是怎样的？ 
English: What about the benevolent?

古文：子路对曰： 智者使人知己，仁者使人爱己。 
现代文：子路回答说： 智者能让别人了解自己，仁者能让别人喜爱自己。 
English: Zilu replied, "A wise man can make others understand him, and a benevolent man can make others love him.

古文：子曰： 可谓士矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 你可以算得上士人。 
English: Confucius said: You can be regarded as a high-ranking scholar.

古文：子路出，子贡入，问亦如之。
现代文：子路出去以后，子贡走进来，孔子问了他同样的问题。
English: After Zi Lu went out, Zigong came in, and Confucius asked him the same question.

古文：子贡对曰： 智者知人，仁者爱人。 
现代文：子贡回答说： 智者能了解别人，仁者能喜爱别人。 
English: Zigong replied, "A wise person can understand others, and a benevolent person can love others.

古文：子曰： 可谓士矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 你可以算得上士人。 
English: Confucius said: You can be regarded as a high-ranking scholar.

古文：子贡出，颜回入，问亦如之。
现代文：子贡出去以后，颜回走进来，孔子仍旧问他这个问题。
English: After Zigong left, Yan Hui walked in, and Confucius still asked him this question.

古文：对曰： 智者自知，仁者自爱。 
现代文：颜回回答说： 智者具有自知之明，仁者懂得爱惜自己。 
English: Yan Hui replied: A wise man has self-knowledge, and a benevolent man knows how to cherish himself.

古文：子曰： 可谓士君子矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 你可以算得上君子。 
English: Confucius said: You can be considered a gentleman.

