古文：楚王令昭雎之秦重张仪。
现代文：楚怀王派昭雎到秦国去游说，让秦国重用张仪。
English: King Chu Huai sent Zhaohui to Qin to lobby for Qin to reuse Zhangyi.

古文：未至，惠王死，武王逐张仪。楚王因收昭雎以取齐。
现代文：昭雎还没有到秦国，秦惠王就死了，秦武王驱逐了张仪，楚怀王也因此拘捕了昭雎以讨好齐国。
English: Before Zhaohui arrived in Qin, Qin Hui Wang died, Qin Wu Wang expelled Zhang Yi, and Chu Hui Wang arrested Zhaohui to please Qi.

古文：桓臧为雎谓楚王曰： 横亲之不合也，仪贵惠王而善雎也。
现代文：桓藏替昭雎对楚怀王说： 秦、韩、魏三国的联合没有成功，这是出于张仪得势予秦惠王并且和昭雎关系密切。
English: On behalf of Zhaohui, Kanso told King Chuhuai: The union of the three countries of Qin, Han, and Wei did not succeed. This was because Zhang Yi gained power for Qin Hui and had a close relationship with Zhaohui.

古文：今惠王死，武王立。仪走，公孙郝、甘茂贵。
现代文：如今惠王死了，武王即位，张仪被驱逐，公孙郝、甘茂显贵起来。
English: Now Hui Wang has died, Wu Wang has ascended the throne, Zhang Yi has been expelled, and Gongsun Yao and Ganmao have risen to prominence.

古文：甘茂善魏，公孙郝善韩。
现代文：甘茂和魏国关系密切，公孙郝和韩国关系密切。
English: Ganmao had close ties with Wei, while Gongsunjun had close ties with Korea.

古文：二人固不善雎也，必以秦合韩、魏。
现代文：这两个人原本就和昭雎关系不好，所以一定主张秦国联合韩国、魏国。
English: These two men did not have a good relationship with Zhaohui, so they must have advocated the unification of Qin with Korea and Wei.

古文：韩、魏之重仪，仪有秦而雎以楚重之。
现代文：当年，韩国、魏国重视张仪，是因为张仪掌握秦国的实权，并且昭雎又依靠楚国的力量推崇他。
English: At that time, Korea and Wei valued Zhang Yi, because Zhang Yi controlled the real power of Qin, and Zhaohui relied on the power of Chu to promote him.

古文：今仪困秦而雎收楚。韩、魏欲得秦，必善二人者。
现代文：如今张仪在秦国遭难而昭雎在楚国被拘捕，如果韩国、魏国想要得到泰国的支持，它们一定要亲近甘茂和公孙郝。
English: Now that Zhang Yi is in trouble in Qin and Zhaojun is under arrest in Chu, if South Korea and Wei want Thailand's support, they must be close to Ganmao and Gongsun Yao.

古文：将收韩、魏轻仪而伐楚，方城必危。
现代文：这两个人也将拉拢韩国、魏国轻视张仪进攻楚国，那么方城一定危险了。
English: These two men will also win over South Korea, Wei despised Zhang Yi's attack on Chu, then Fangcheng must be in danger.

古文：王不如复雎，而重仪于韩、魏。仪据楚势，挟魏重，以与秦争。
现代文：大王不如恢复昭雎的地位，而使张仪在韩国、魏国得到重用：张仪依靠楚国的势力，倚仗魏国的重用，而跟秦国争斗。
English: It would be better for the great king to restore the status of Zhaohui, so that Zhang Yi could be reused in Korea and Wei: Zhang Yi relied on the power of Chu, relied on the re-use of Wei, and fought with Qin.

古文：魏不合秦，韩亦不从，则方城无患。 
现代文：如果魏国不与秦国联合，韩国也不会顺从泰国，那么方城就没有祸患了。 
English: If Wei does not unite with Qin, and Korea does not submit to Thailand, then Fangcheng will not be plagued.

