古文：太祖孝慈高皇后马氏，宿州人。
现代文：明太祖孝慈高皇后马氏，宿州人。
English: The founder of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Xiaojigao and Empress Ma, was from Suzhou.

古文：父马公，母郑媪，早卒。
现代文：父亲马公，母亲郑媪，早年就已病逝。
English: His father, Ma Gong, and his mother, Zheng Qi, died of illness at an early age.

古文：马公素善郭子兴，遂以后托子兴。
现代文：马公素与郭子兴关系很好，于是便将马氏托付给郭子兴抚养。
English: Ma Gongsu had a good relationship with Guo Zixing, so he entrusted Ma's upbringing to Guo Zixing.

古文：马公卒，子兴育之如己女。
现代文：马公死后，郭子兴将马氏收为义女，像对待自己女儿一样养育她。
English: After Ma Gong's death, Guo Zixing adopted Ma as his goddaughter and raised her as if she were his own daughter.

古文：子兴奇太祖，以后归焉。
现代文：后来郭子兴觉得朱元璋是一个非凡之人，便将马氏许配给他。
English: Later, Guo Zixing thought that Zhu Yuanzhang was an extraordinary person, so he gave Ma Shihuang to him.

古文：后仁慈有智鉴，好书史。
现代文：马氏宽厚仁慈且颇具见识，爱读文史书籍。
English: Mr. Ma is generous, kind and insightful, and loves to read literary and historical books.

古文：太祖有劄记，辄命后掌之，仓卒未尝忘。
现代文：朱元璋每写杂记，总是让马氏收集掌管，即使在行军打仗、时间仓促之时也不曾忘记。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang always let Mr. Ma collect and manage miscellaneous notes when he wrote them, and he never forgot them even when he was marching in the war and time was short.

古文：子兴尝信谗，疑太祖。
现代文：郭子兴曾经听信谗言，疑心朱元璋。
English: Guo Zixing once listened to the advice of others and was suspicious of Zhu Yuanzhang.

古文：后善事其妻，嫌隙得释。
现代文：马氏便从中周旋，亲近郭子兴之妻张氏，使张氏从中调解，双方的猜疑和隔阂才得以消除。
English: Mr. Ma then intervened and became close to Mr. Zhang, Guo Zixing's wife, so that Mr. Zhang could mediate, and the suspicion and estrangement between the two sides could be eliminated.

古文：太祖既克太平，后率将士妻妾渡江。
现代文：朱元璋攻克太平后，马氏率将士妻妾南渡长江。
English: After Zhu Yuanzhang conquered Taiping, Ma led his wife and concubine south to the Yangtze River.

古文：及居江宁，吴、汉接境，战无虚日，亲缉甲士衣鞋佐军。
现代文：直到占据江宁，与吴、汉边境相接，前线一直战无虚日，马氏亲自带领家属为前线将士缝衣制鞋。
English: Until the occupation of Jiangning, which is adjacent to the borders of Wu and Han, the front line has been fighting tirelessly. Mr. Ma personally led his family members to sew clothing and shoes for the front-line soldiers.

古文：陈友谅寇龙湾，太祖率师御之，后尽发宫中金帛犒士。
现代文：陈友谅进犯龙湾时，朱元璋率军抵御，马氏则将宫中黄金布帛全部拿出犒劳士兵。
English: When Chen Youxuan invaded Longwan, Zhu Yuanzhang led the army to resist, and Ma took all the gold cloth from the palace to reward the soldiers.

古文：尝语太祖，定天下以不杀人为本。
现代文：她曾对朱元璋说：平定天下以不杀人为本。
English: She once said to Zhu Yuanzhang: To pacify the world, do not kill people.

古文：太祖善之。
现代文：朱元璋觉得她说得十分在理。
English: The great-grandfather thinks he is right.

古文：洪武元年正月，太祖即帝位，册为皇后。
现代文：洪武元年正月，朱元璋即皇帝位，马氏被册封为皇后。
English: In the first month of the first year of Hongwu, Zhu Yuanzhang, the emperor, was enthroned, and Ma was crowned as empress.

古文：初，后从帝军中，值岁大歉，帝又为郭氏所疑，尝乏食。
现代文：当初，朱元璋南征北战，马皇后随军四处颠簸，正值年成不好，军粮匮乏。一次，朱元璋又受到郭子兴猜疑，被监禁起来，并断绝饮食。
English: At the beginning, Zhu Yuanzhang went to the south to fight in the northern war, and Empress Ma accompanied the army everywhere. It was a bad year, and there was a shortage of military food. Once again, Zhu Yuanzhang was suspected by Guo Zixing, was imprisoned, and cut off his diet.

古文：后窃炊饼，怀以进，肉为焦。
现代文：马皇后得悉，便偷偷做了一些炊饼，揣在怀中送给太祖，胸前皮肉被烫得焦红。
English: When Empress Ma learned of this, she secretly made some cooked cakes and gave them to her great-grandfather in her arms. The meat on her chest was red hot.

古文：居常贮糗糒脯脩供帝，无所乏绝，而己不宿饱。
现代文：此后，马皇后便经常在屋里储蓄一些干糖和腌肉，使太祖不至于挨饥受饿，而她自己却常常吃不饱。
English: After that, Empress Ma often saved some dried sugar and stewed meat in the house so that her great-grandfather would not go hungry, but she herself often could not get enough to eat.

古文：及贵，帝比之 芜蒌豆粥 ， 滹沱麦饭 ，每对群臣述后贤，同于唐长孙皇后。
现代文：太祖即位后，将那些干糖腌肉比作 芜蒌豆粥 、 滹沱麦饭 ，每逢对群臣说起马皇后的贤良，总将她比作唐朝的长孙皇后。
English: After the great-grandfather ascended the throne, he compared those dried sugar stewed meat to pea porridge and buckwheat rice. Whenever he spoke about the virtuousness of Empress Ma to the courtiers, he always compared her to the eldest grandchild of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：退以语后。后曰： 妾闻夫妇相保易，君臣相保难。
现代文：即使退朝之后回到寝宫，也当面这样称赞皇后。马皇后却说： 我听说夫妇相保容易，君臣相保则很难。
English: Even when she returned to her palace after retiring from the throne, she praised the empress to her face. However, Empress Ma said, "I heard that it is easy for a husband and wife to protect each other, but it is difficult for a prince and a minister to protect each other."

古文：陛下不忘妾同贫贱，愿无忘群臣同艰难。
现代文：陛下没忘与妾共同度过的那些贫贱日子，但愿陛下也不要忘记君臣共度的艰难岁月。
English: His Majesty has not forgotten those humble days he spent with his concubine, and I hope His Majesty will not forget the difficult years he spent with his subjects.

古文：且妾何敢比长孙皇后也！ 
现代文：况且我怎敢与长孙皇后相比哩！ 
English: And how dare I compare myself to the Queen's eldest grandchild!

古文：后勤于内治，暇则讲求古训。
现代文：马皇后勤于治理内宫，闲暇之时则翻阅史书，讲解古训。
English: The logistics of the Ma Emperor are in the management of the inner palace, and in his spare time he reads history books and explains ancient teachings.

古文：告六宫，以宋多贤后，命女史录其家法，朝夕省览。
现代文：她经常告诫宫中嫔妃。因为宋朝贤后很多，便命女史抄写宋代宫中家法，朝夕阅览，以省察自己。
English: She often admonished the concubine in the palace. Because there were many wise women in the Song Dynasty, she ordered the woman to copy the family law in the Song Dynasty, read it in the morning and evening, and reflect on herself.

古文：或言宋过仁厚，后曰： 过仁厚，不愈于刻薄乎？ 
现代文：有人说宋代贤后过于仁厚，马皇后便道： 过于仁厚，难道不胜过刻薄吗？ 
English: Some people said that the Song Dynasty was too benevolent, but Empress Ma said: Isn't being too benevolent better than being mean?

古文：一日，问女史： 黄老何教也，而窦太后好之？ 
现代文：一天，马皇后问女史： 黄老之说有些什么内容，窦太后那么喜爱它？ 
English: One day, Empress Ma asked the lady: What is the content of Huang Laozhuang's saying that Empress Dowager Dou likes so much?

古文：女史曰： 清净无为为本。
现代文：女史回答： 以清静无为为本。
English: The woman replied: "To be quiet and not to do anything."

古文：若绝仁弃义，民复教慈，是其教矣。 
现代文：如果绝仁弃义，百姓仍会报以孝慈，这就是黄老之说。 
English: If absolute benevolence abandons righteousness, the people will still respond with filial piety, which is what Huang Laozhi said.

古文：后曰： 孝慈即仁义也，讵有绝仁义而为孝慈者哉？ 
现代文：马皇后听完说： 孝慈也就是仁义，难道断绝了仁义还会有孝慈吗？ 
English: After listening to her, Empress Ma said: Filial piety is also benevolence. If we cut off benevolence, will there still be filial piety?

古文：后尝诵《小学》，求帝表章焉。
现代文：马皇后曾诵读过《小学》，她请求太祖预以表章。
English: Empress Ma once recited "Elementary School," and she asked her great-grandfather to inscribe it on the seal.

古文：帝前殿决事，或震怒，后伺帝还宫，辄随事微谏。
现代文：太祖在前殿决断政事，时常大发雷霆，马皇后总是等他退朝回宫后，根据不同情况巧妙地规劝太祖。
English: The great-grandfather decided political affairs in the front hall, and often flew into a rage. Queen Ma always waited for him to return to the palace, and skillfully advised the great-grandfather according to different situations.

古文：虽帝性严，然为缓刑戮者数矣。
现代文：虽然太祖性情严厉，但由于马皇后从中劝谏，而使许多人得以减缓刑戮。
English: Although the great-grandfather had a harsh disposition, many people were able to slow down the torture due to Queen Ma's persuasion.

古文：参军郭景祥守和州，人言其子持槊欲杀父，帝将诛之。
现代文：参军郭景祥驻守和州时，有人说他的儿子持槊要杀父亲，太祖获悉后打算要处死郭景祥的儿子。
English: When Guo Jingxiang joined the army and was stationed in Hezhou, some people said that his son Mochizuki wanted to kill his father. After learning this, Taizu planned to execute Guo Jingxiang's son.

古文：后曰： 景祥止一子，人言或不实，杀之恐绝其后。 
现代文：马皇后劝说道： 郭景祥只有这么一个儿子，他人所说之事或许不真实，杀了他的儿子，恐怕就会断绝郭家的后代。 
English: Empress Ma advised: Guo Jingxiang only had one son, and what others have said may not be true. If he killed his son, I'm afraid the descendants of the Guo family would be cut off.

古文：帝廉之，果枉。
现代文：太祖命人查访此事，果然是被人冤枉的。
English: The great-grandfather ordered someone to investigate the matter, and he was indeed wronged.

古文：李文忠守严州，杨宪诬其不法，帝欲召还。
现代文：李文忠镇守严州时，杨宪诬告他有违法行为，太祖便要立即将李文忠召回治罪。
English: When Li Wenzhong was guarding Yanzhou, Yang Xian falsely accused him of illegal activities, and the great-grandfather immediately recalled Li Wenzhong for punishment.

古文：后曰： 严，敌境也，轻易将不宜。
现代文：马皇后劝阻说： 严州在敌境内，不宜轻易撤换守将。
English: Empress Ma dissuaded: Yanzhou is in the enemy's territory, it is not appropriate to easily remove and replace the general.

古文：且文忠素贤，宪言讵可信？ 
现代文：况且李文忠一向贤能，杨宪的话岂可轻信？ 
English: Moreover, Li Wenzhong has always been a virtuous man. Can Yang Xian's words be trusted?

古文：帝遂已。
现代文：太祖这才没将李文忠治罪。
English: This is why the great-grandfather did not punish Li Wenzhong.

古文：文忠后卒有功。
现代文：后来李文忠果然建立功勋。
English: Later, Li Wenzhong successfully established a meritorious achievement.

古文：学士宋濂坐孙慎罪，逮至，论死，后谏曰： 民家为子弟延师，尚以礼全终始，况天子乎？
现代文：翰林学士宋濂受其长孙宋慎牵连而获罪，被逮捕至京城，判以死刑。马皇后劝谏道： 平常百姓人家为子弟聘请老师，尚且能始终以礼相待，何况皇帝天子呢？
English: Song Xi, a scholar of Hanlin, was implicated by his eldest grandson Song Shen and was convicted, arrested to Beijing and sentenced to death. Empress Ma advised him: Ordinary people hire teachers for their children, yet they can always treat each other with courtesy, let alone the emperor's son?

古文：且濂家居，必不知情。 
现代文：而且宋濂一直住在家乡，对孙子所作所为必不知情。 
English: Moreover, Song Tao has always lived in his hometown and must have been unaware of his grandson's actions.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：这一次太祖没有听从皇后的劝告。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：会后侍帝食，不御酒肉。
现代文：事后马皇后陪太祖用餐，她不喝酒也不吃肉。
English: Afterwards, Empress Ma dined with her great-grandfather. She does not drink alcohol or eat meat.

古文：帝问故。对曰： 妾为宋先生作福事也。 
现代文：太祖便问是什么原因，皇后回答道 ：我这是在为宋先生做福事啊。 
English: The great-grandfather then asked what the reason was, to which the empress replied, "I am doing a blessing for Mr. Song."

古文：帝恻然，投箸起。明日赦濂，安置茂州。
现代文：太祖听后顿时露出伤感的神情，放下筷子站起身来，第二天便赦免了宋濂的死罪，将他安置在茂州。
English: After listening, Taizu suddenly showed a sad look, put down his chopsticks and stood up. The next day, he pardoned Song Tao's capital crime and placed him in Maozhou.

古文：吴兴富民沈秀者，助筑都城三之一，又请犒军。
现代文：吴兴有一财主名叫沈秀，他出钱修筑了都城三分之一的城墙，又请求犒劳军队。
English: There was a rich man in Wu Xing named Shen Xiu. He paid for the construction of one-third of the capital city's walls, and also asked for payment for the army.

古文：帝怒曰： 匹夫犒天子军，乱民也，宜诛。 
现代文：太祖大怒道： 匹夫竟要犒劳我天子的军队，实是一个乱世之民，应当斩首。 
English: The great-grandfather angrily said, "Pifu wants to reward my heavenly son's army. He is really a people of chaos and should be beheaded."

古文：后谏曰： 妾闻法者，诛不法也，非以诛不祥。
现代文：马皇后进谏道： 我听说所谓法律，是用来惩戒违法现象的，而不是用来消除不祥之事的。
English: Empress Ma Jinsheng said: I have heard that the so-called law is used to punish illegal phenomena, not to eliminate ominous things.

古文：民富敌国，民自不祥。
现代文：百姓富裕到可与国家相匹敌，是其自取不祥。
English: If the people are rich enough to rival the state, it is their own fault.

古文：不祥之民，天将灾之，陛下何诛焉！ 
现代文：不祥之人，上天自然会降灾于他，陛下为什么要去杀他呢？ 
English: An ominous person, heaven will naturally bring disaster to him. Why did His Majesty want to kill him?

古文：乃释秀，戍云南。
现代文：于是太祖下令释放了沈秀，将他发配云南。
English: Therefore, Emperor Taizu ordered the release of Shen Xiu and sent him to Yunnan.

古文：帝尝令重囚筑城。后曰： 赎罪罚役，国家至恩。
现代文：太祖曾经下令让重罪囚去筑城，马皇后说： 用罚劳役来赎罪，是国家对犯人的恩典。
English: The great-grandfather once ordered the felon prisoners to go and build the city. Queen Ma said: It is the grace of the state to the prisoners to use penal labor to atone for their sins.

古文：但疲囚加役，恐仍不免死亡。 
现代文：但让已经疲惫不堪的囚犯去服苦役，恐怕仍然难免死亡。 
English: But sending exhausted prisoners to hard labour is still likely to end in death.

古文：帝乃悉赦之。
现代文：太祖听后便全部赦免了这些重罪囚。
English: On hearing this, the great-grandfather pardoned all the felons.

古文：帝尝怒责宫人，后亦佯怒，令执付宫正司议罪。
现代文：有一次太祖大发脾气责罚宫女，马皇后见此情形也佯装生气，下令将宫女抓起来交给宫正司治罪。
English: Once, the great-great-grandfather lost his temper and punished his concubine. Seeing this, Empress Ma also feigned anger and ordered the concubine to be arrested and handed over to the Imperial Household Agency to be punished.

古文：帝曰： 何为？ 
现代文：太祖觉得奇怪，问她： 你为什么要这么做？ 
English: The great-grandfather felt strange and asked her: Why are you doing this?

古文：后曰： 帝王不以喜怒加刑赏。
现代文：马皇后答道 ：帝王不应该以自己的喜怒任意赏罚臣民。
English: Empress Ma replied, "The emperor should not arbitrarily reward or punish his subjects based on his own emotions.

古文：当陛下怒时，恐有畸重。
现代文：当陛下正在发怒时，对人的处罚恐怕就会失当。
English: When His Majesty is in a rage, I'm afraid the punishment of a person will be inappropriate.

古文：付宫正，则酌其平矣。
现代文：将她交给宫正司去处理，宫正司便会酌情公平地处理。
English: She will be handed over to the Imperial Household Agency to deal with, and the agency will deal with her fairly as appropriate.

古文：即陛下论人罪亦诏有司耳。 
现代文：即使陛下给人定罪也要命令有关官员议处啊。 
English: Even if His Majesty convicts someone, he has to order the relevant officials to take action.

古文：一日，问帝： 今天下民安乎？ 
现代文：一天，马皇后问太祖： 现在天下百姓都已安居乐业吗？ 
English: One day, Empress Ma asked Taizu, "Are all the people in the world living in peace and contentment now?"

古文：帝曰： 此非尔所宜问也。 
现代文：太祖说 ：这不是你应该问的事。 
English: She said, "That's not what you should be asking."

古文：后曰： 陛下天下父，妾辱天下母，子之安否，何可不问！ 
现代文：马皇后说 ：陛下是天下百姓之父，我也算是天下百姓之母，子民是否安宁，为什么我不能过问一下呢？ 
English: Empress Ma said, "Your Majesty is the father of the people of the world, and I am also the mother of the people of the world. If the people are peaceful, why can't I ask about it?"

古文：遇岁旱，辄率宫人蔬食，助祈祷；岁凶，则设麦饭野羹。
现代文：每逢干旱年月，皇后总是带领宫里的人吃素，以助祈祷上天降雨；每逢荒年，则吃粗麦饭野菜羹。
English: Whenever there is a drought, the empress always leads the people in the palace to go vegetarian to help pray for rain; whenever there is a drought, they eat coarse wheat vegetable soup.

古文：帝或告以振恤。
现代文：有时太祖不忍心，告诉她已经采取了救荒赈灾的措施。
English: Sometimes the great-grandfather could not bear it and told her that he had already taken measures to save the wilderness and mitigate the disaster.

古文：后曰： 振恤不如蓄积之先备也。 
现代文：皇后说 ：与其每次去救济灾荒，还不如平时就预先积蓄储备。 
English: The Empress said: "Instead of going to disaster relief every time, it would be better to accumulate reserves in advance."

古文：奏事官朝散，会食廷中，后命中官取饮食亲尝之。味弗甘，遂启帝曰： 人主自奉欲薄，养贤宜厚。 
现代文：有一次，朝臣在散朝之后聚集在朝廷用餐，马皇后吩咐宦官取来大臣们的饮食，自己先尝，发现食物不可口，便对太祖说： 皇上自己的日常生活可以节俭一些，但给朝中贤能之士的待遇应当丰厚。 
English: Once, when the courtiers gathered at the imperial court for a meal after the fall of the dynasty, Empress Ma ordered the eunuchs to bring the ministers' meals. She tasted the food first and found it unpalatable. She then said to her great-grandfather, "The emperor can be more frugal in his daily life, but the treatment of the wise men in the imperial court should be generous."

古文：帝为饬光禄官。
现代文：为此太祖整顿了负责饮食的光禄寺官员。
English: For this reason, Taizu reorganized the officials of Koroku-ji Temple who were in charge of food.

古文：帝幸太学还，后问生徒几何，帝曰： 数千。 
现代文：一天，太祖巡幸太学，回宫后，皇后问他太学生有多少，太祖回答说 ：有几千人。 
English: One day, the great-great-grandfather went on a tour of the Imperial Academy. After returning to the palace, the empress asked him how many students there were. The great-great-grandfather replied, "There are several thousand."

古文：后曰： 人才众矣。
现代文：皇后便说 ：真是人才济济呀。
English: The Empress said: "What a wealth of talent."

古文：诸生有廪食，妻子将何所仰给？ 
现代文：太学生们自己有官府供给食物，可他们的妻子儿女靠什么生活呢？ 
English: The students themselves are fed by the government, but what do their wives and children live on?

古文：于是立红板仓，积粮赐其家。
现代文：于是，设立了 红板仓 ，负责积储粮食赐给太学生们的家人。
English: As a result, a red warehouse was set up, responsible for storing grain to be given to the families of the students.

古文：太学生家粮自后始。
现代文：官府给太学生家属供粮的制度就是从马皇后时开始的。
English: The government's system of providing food to the families of students began with the reign of Empress Ma.

古文：诸将克元都，俘宝玉至。
现代文：将领们攻克元都城后，将搜获的传国玉玺献给太祖。
English: After the generals conquered the capital city of Yuan, they presented the seized imperial regalia to Emperor Taizu.

古文：后曰： 元有是而不能守，意者帝王自有宝欤。 
现代文：马氏说道 ：元朝有此宝物却不能保住天下，这说明帝王应当拥有真正的宝物。 
English: Mr. Ma said: The Yuan Dynasty had this treasure but could not keep it safe, which shows that the emperor should have a real treasure.

古文：帝曰： 朕知后谓得贤为宝耳。 
现代文：太祖听后说 ：我知道皇后所说真正的宝物是指得到贤能之士。 
English: After listening, the great-grandfather said, "I know that the real treasure that the queen said is to get a person of merit.

古文：后拜谢曰： 诚如陛下言。妾与陛下起贫贱，至今日，恒恐骄纵生于奢侈，危亡起于细微，故愿得贤人共理天下。 
现代文：皇后拜谢道： 如陛下所说，我与陛下同起于贫贱，直到有今天的富贵，惟恐因为奢侈而变得骄横放纵，危亡起于细微，所以希望皇上能得到贤能之士共同治理天下。 
English: Empress Bai Xie said: As your majesty said, I and your majesty have worked together in poverty until today's wealth, but I am afraid that because of luxury I will become arrogant and indulgent, and danger and death will arise from subtlety, so I hope that the emperor can get wise men to jointly govern the world.

古文：又曰：法屡更必弊，法弊则奸生；民数扰必困，民困则乱生。 
现代文：皇后又说 ：法制多变必然滋生弊端，法制滋生弊端，则势必出现奸邪小人；百姓屡遭骚扰则必然会困苦不堪，而民不聊生势必发生动乱。 
English: The Empress also said, "A changeable legal system is bound to breed evils. If the legal system breeds evils, there are bound to be villains; if the people are repeatedly harassed, there are bound to be hardships, and if the people do not enjoy life, there are bound to be riots."

古文：帝叹曰： 至言也。 
现代文：太祖不由赞叹道 ：皇后所说真是至理名言啊！ 
English: The great-grandfather couldn't help but exclaim, "What the queen said is really a wise saying!"

古文：命女史书之册。
现代文：随即命女史将这些话写进史册。
English: The woman was immediately ordered to write these words down in the history books.

古文：其规正，类如此。
现代文：皇后的规劝恰当合适，像这种情况很多。
English: The Queen's admonition was appropriate, as is often the case.

古文：帝每御膳，后皆躬自省视。
现代文：太祖每次进膳用餐，马皇后都要亲自检查察看。
English: Every time the great-grandfather dined, Queen Ma would personally inspect the food.

古文：平居服大练浣濯之衣，虽敝不忍易。
现代文：她平时穿的衣服经过多次洗涤之后，虽然已经破旧仍不忍心更换。
English: The clothes she usually wears have been washed many times, and although they are worn out, she still cannot bear to replace them.

古文：闻元世祖后煮故弓弦事，亦命取练织为衾裯，以赐高年茕独。
现代文：她听说元世祖皇后煮旧弓弦的事后，也吩咐用练织成帐被，赐给孤独垂老之人。
English: After hearing that the Queen of the First Ancestors had boiled old bowstrings, she also ordered that quilts be woven with practice and given to lonely old people.

古文：余帛颣丝，缉成衣裳，赐诸王妃公主，使知天桑艰难。
现代文：剩余的布帛和次等丝织成衣裳，赐给王妃公主们，使她们懂得种桑养蚕的艰难。
English: The remaining cloth and second-class silk were woven into clothes and given to the princesses so that they could understand the difficulties of growing mulberry and raising silkworms.

古文：妃嫔宫人被宠有子者，厚待之。
现代文：嫔妃宫女中生有子女的，马皇后都一律厚待。
English: If any of the daughters of Empress Dowager Cixi had children, Empress Ma treated them all equally well.

古文：命妇入朝，待之如家人礼。
现代文：命妇入朝拜见时，皇后待她们像家人一样。
English: The Queen treated the newlyweds like family when they arrived for their morning visit.

古文：帝欲访后族人官之，后谢曰： 爵禄私外家，非法。 
现代文：太祖想要寻访皇后的宗族亲戚封爵赏官，马皇后谢绝说： 官禄私给外戚，这是非法的。 
English: The great-grandfather wanted to search for the queen's family relatives to be knighted and rewarded, but Queen Ma refused, saying, "It is illegal for me to give my official position to my relatives."

古文：力辞而止。
现代文：此事经皇后极力推辞而作罢。
English: The matter was dropped at the Queen's insistence.

古文：然言及父母早卒，辄悲哀流涕。
现代文：然而每当提到父母早逝，皇后总是悲伤流泪。
English: However, whenever the early death of her parents was mentioned, the Queen always shed tears of sorrow.

古文：帝封马公徐王，郑媪为王夫人，修墓置庙焉。
现代文：太祖册封马公为徐王，郑媪为王夫人，并为他们重修墓地，建造庙宇。
English: In the great ancestor's record, Ma Gong was recorded as Xu Wang and Zheng Qi as Wang's wife, and the cemetery and temple were rebuilt for them.

古文：洪武十五年八月寝疾。
现代文：洪武十五年八月，马皇后染病在床，奄奄一息。
English: In August of the 15th year of Hongwu, Empress Ma fell ill in bed and died.

古文：群臣请祷祀，求良医。
现代文：群臣请求祭祀祈祷，遍求良医。
English: The courtiers asked for sacrifices and prayers, and searched everywhere for a good doctor.

古文：后谓帝曰： 死生，命也，祷祀何益！且医何能活人！
现代文：皇后对太祖说： 人之生死，是由天注定的，祭祀祈祷又会有什么效果呢，况且医生怎能将死人救活呢？
English: The empress said to the great-grandfather: People's life and death are predestined by heaven. What effect will the sacrificial prayers have? Moreover, how can doctors revive the dead?

古文：使服药不效，得毋以妾故而罪诸医乎？ 
现代文：如果我服药无效，千万不要因为我的死而怪罪医生们。 
English: If my medication doesn't work, don't blame the doctors for my death.

古文：疾亟，帝问所欲言。
现代文：皇后临终时，太祖问她还有什么话要说。
English: When the empress was on her deathbed, her great-grandfather asked her what else she had to say.

古文：曰： 愿陛下求贤纳谏，慎终如始，子孙皆贤，臣民得所而已。 
现代文：马皇后嘱咐太祖道 ：希望陛下求贤人，纳忠谏，自始至终，子孙贤能，臣民各得其所。 
English: Empress Ma instructed her great-grandfather: "I hope that Your Majesty will seek out wise men and women, be loyal to them from beginning to end, that your children and grandchildren will be able to be wise, and that your subjects will each find their place."

古文：是月丙戌崩，年五十一。
现代文：八月十日，马皇后去世，终年五十一岁。
English: On August 10, Empress Ma passed away at the age of 51.

古文：帝恸哭，遂不复立后。
现代文：太祖悲伤痛哭，从此不再重立皇后。
English: The great-grandfather wept bitterly in grief, and from then on no longer reinstated the empress.

古文：是年九月庚午葬孝陵，谥曰孝慈皇后。
现代文：当年九月二十四日葬于孝陵，谥号孝慈皇后。
English: On September 24 of that year, she was buried in the Xiaoling Mausoleum with the posthumous title of Empress Xiaoji.

古文：宫人思之，作歌曰： 我后圣慈，化行家邦。
现代文：宫中之人十分怀念马皇后，以歌寄托思念之情： 我后圣慈，化行家邦。
English: The people in the palace are very nostalgic for Empress Ma, and sent a song to express their feelings of longing: I am a saint, and I am a practitioner.

古文：抚我育我，怀德难忘。
现代文：抚我育我，怀德难忘。
English: Touch me, nurture me, and I will never forget you.

古文：怀德难忘，于万斯年。
现代文：怀德难忘，于万斯年。
English: Unforgettable in Wilder, unforgettable in Vance.

古文：毖彼下泉，悠悠苍天。 
现代文：毖彼下泉，悠悠苍天。 
English: He went down to the spring, and yo-yoed up to heaven.

古文：永乐元年上尊谥曰孝慈昭宪至仁文德承天顺圣高皇后。
现代文：永乐元年，永乐帝尊奉马皇后谥号为孝慈昭宪至仁文德承天顺圣高皇后。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Emperor Yongle honored Empress Ma with the posthumous title of the Empress Xiao Ci Zhaoxian Zhi Ren Wen De He Tian Shun Sheng Gao.

古文：四年六月，城陷，崩于火。
现代文：嘉靖十七年，明世宗又尊奉为孝慈贞化哲顺仁徽成天育圣至德高皇后。
English: In the seventeenth year of Jiajing, the Ming Sect also revered her as the Empress of filial piety, chastity, virtue, benevolence and benevolence.

古文：成祖仁孝皇后徐氏，中山王达长女也。
现代文：成祖仁孝皇后徐氏，是中山王徐达的长女。
English: Empress Xu, the progenitor of Renxiao, was the eldest daughter of King Xu of Zhongshan.

古文：幼贞静，好读书，称女诸生。
现代文：她幼年时便贞洁娴静，喜欢读书，堪称女中儒生。
English: When she was young, she was chaste and quiet, liked to read, and could be called a middle-aged Confucian.

古文：太祖闻后贤淑，召达谓曰： 朕与卿，布衣交也。古君臣相契者，率为婚姻。
现代文：太祖闻知徐氏贤淑，便将徐达召来说道： 朕与你是布衣之交，自古以来君臣相互投合的，一般都成了姻亲。
English: When the great-grandfather heard of Xu's virtuousness, he summoned Xu Dadu and said, "I am a clothed friend of yours. Since ancient times, monarchs and ministers have been attracted to each other, and they have generally become in-laws.

古文：卿有令女，其以朕子棣配焉。 
现代文：你有这么好的女儿，朕想将儿子朱棣与她相配。 
English: You have such a good daughter, I want to match my son Zhu Xi with her.

古文：达顿首谢。
现代文：徐达马上叩头拜谢。
English: Xu Da immediately bowed his head in thanks.

古文：洪武九年，册为燕王妃。高皇后深爱之。
现代文：洪武九年，徐氏被册封为燕王妃，高皇后对她十分疼爱。
English: In the ninth year of Hongwu, Xu was canonized as the Empress of Yan, and Empress Gao loved her very much.

古文：从王之藩，居孝慈高皇后丧三年，蔬食如礼。
现代文：徐氏跟随燕王前往藩地，为孝慈高皇后守丧三年，她按照礼制素食淡饭。
English: Mr. Xu followed King Yan to the territory of the domain to hold a three-year memorial service for Empress Xiao Cigao. She followed the etiquette of a vegetarian light meal.

古文：高皇后遗言可诵者，后一一举之不遗。
现代文：高皇后遗言中可以诵读的部分，徐氏都能将其一一列举不遗。
English: Xu was able to list all the parts of Empress Gao's last words that could be recited.

古文：靖难兵起，王袭大宁，李景隆乘间进围北平。
现代文：靖难兵起后，燕王率军前去袭击大宁，李景隆乘机进围北平。
English: After the Battle of Jingnan, Yan Wang led the army to attack Daning, and Li Jinglong took the opportunity to encircle Beiping.

古文：时仁宗以世子居守，凡部分备御，多禀命于后。
现代文：当时仁宗以世子的身份留守北平，凡是部署防御之事，大多受命于徐氏。
English: At that time, Renzong stayed in Peiping as the heir to the throne, and most of the defense deployment was ordered by Xu.

古文：景隆攻城急，城中兵少，后激劝将校士民妻，皆授甲登陴拒守，城卒以全。
现代文：李景隆猛烈攻城，而城中兵力缺乏，徐氏便激励将校、士兵、百姓的妻子，发给她们铠甲，让她们都登城拒守，北平城这才得以保全。
English: Li Jinglong fiercely attacked the city, and since there was a shortage of troops in the city, Mr. Xu encouraged the officers, soldiers, and wives of the common people, gave them armor, and let them all go to the city to defend themselves. This is how Peiping City was preserved.

古文：王即帝位，册为皇后。
现代文：燕王即皇帝位，册封徐氏为皇后。
English: Yan Wang is the emperor, and Xu Shi is the empress.

古文：言： 南北每年战斗，兵民疲敝，宜与休息。 
现代文：徐皇后对皇上说： 每年南北征战不止，兵民都已疲惫不堪，现在应当让他们休养生息。 
English: Empress Xu said to the emperor: Every year there are more and more wars between the north and the south, and the soldiers and people are exhausted. Now they should be allowed to rest and recuperate.

古文：又言： 当世贤才皆高皇帝所遗，陛下不宜以新旧间。 
现代文：又说 ：当今贤才都是高皇帝所留，陛下不应当以新疏旧。 
English: He also said: Today's sages are all left behind by Emperor Gao, and His Majesty should not neglect the old for the new.

古文：又言： 帝尧施仁自亲始。 
现代文：又说： 尧帝施行仁治是从自己的亲人开始的。 
English: He also said: Emperor Zou's benevolent rule began with his own relatives.

古文：帝辄嘉纳焉。
现代文：皇上对她的进言总是给予嘉奖并且采纳。
English: The emperor's advice to her was always appreciated and accepted.

古文：初，后弟增寿常以国情输之燕，为惠帝所诛，至是欲赠爵，后力言不可。
现代文：当初，皇后的弟弟徐增寿常常将国家的情报送到燕地，因此被惠帝所杀，现在皇上想追赠爵位给他，皇后极力表示不能这样做。
English: At first, the empress's brother Xu Zeng Shou often sent state intelligence to Yan Di, so he was killed by Hui Di. Now the emperor wants to give him a knighthood, but the empress said that she can't do it.

古文：帝不听，竟封定国公，命其子景昌袭，乃以告后。
现代文：皇上不听，还是封徐增寿为定国公，命其子徐景昌继承爵位，然后才告诉皇后。
English: The emperor didn't listen, so he decided to appoint Xu Zengshou as Ding Guogong, and ordered his son Xu Jingchang to inherit the title, before telling the empress.

古文：后曰： 非妾志也。 
现代文：皇后说 ：这并非妾的意愿啊。 
English: The empress said, "This is not the concubine's will."

古文：终弗谢。
现代文：终归没有表示感谢。
English: In the end, they did not express their thanks.

古文：尝言汉、赵二王性不顺，官僚宜择廷臣兼署之。
现代文：皇后曾说汉、赵二王品性不良，应当选择廷臣兼任其官属僚臣。
English: The empress once said that Han and Zhao II were of bad character and should choose courtiers to serve as their subordinates.

古文：一日，问： 陛下谁与图治者？ 
现代文：有一天，皇后问道： 陛下与什么人一起治理国家？ 
English: One day, the Queen asked: "With whom does Your Majesty govern the country?"

古文：帝曰： 六卿理政务，翰林职论思。 
现代文：皇上回答说 ：六卿管理政务，翰林的职责是研究问题、草拟文告。 
English: The emperor replied, "The six nobles manage government affairs, while Hanlin's duties are to study issues and draft proclamations.

古文：后因请悉召见其命妇，赐冠服钞币。谕曰： 妇之事夫，奚止馈食衣服而已，必有助焉。
现代文：皇后因此请求召见所有这些人的夫人，赐给她们冠服及钱币，并对她们说： 妻子侍奉丈夫，哪里只是为他准备饭菜、衣服而已，应该还有别的帮助。
English: The queen therefore requested that the wives of all these men should be summoned, that they should be given crowns and money, and that they should be told: "A wife serves her husband, not only by preparing his food and clothing, but also by helping him in other ways.

古文：朋友之言，有从有违，夫妇之言，婉顺易入。
现代文：朋友的话，可以依从，也可以违背，而夫妇之间的话，则委婉顺耳，容易听进去。
English: The words of a friend can be obeyed or disobeyed, while the words between a couple are euphemistic and easy to listen to.

古文：吾旦夕侍上，惟以生民为念，汝曹勉之。 
现代文：我朝夕侍奉皇上，惟以百姓生计为念，你们也要鼓励你们的丈夫。 
English: I serve the emperor morning and evening, but I am concerned about the livelihood of the people. You should also encourage your husbands.

古文：尝采《女宪》、《女诫》作《内训》二十篇，又类编古人嘉言善行，作《劝善书》，颁行天下。
现代文：皇后还摘录《女宪》、《女诫》，写成《内训》二十篇，又类编古人的嘉言善行，写成《劝善书》，颁行天下。
English: The empress also excerpted the "Women's Constitution" and "Women's Commandments" and wrote 20 "Instructions," and also compiled the ancient people's good words and good deeds into the "Recommendation Book" and issued it to the world.

古文：永乐五年七月，疾革，惟劝帝爱惜百姓，广求贤才，恩礼宗室，毋骄畜外家。
现代文：永乐五年七月，皇后病重，她仍不忘劝告皇上爱惜百姓，广求贤才，对宗室要以恩礼相待，不要骄养外戚。
English: In July of Yongle's fifth year, the empress was seriously ill, and she still did not forget to advise the emperor to cherish the people, seek talents, treat the ancestral family with grace, and not be proud to raise relatives.

古文：又告皇太子： 曩者北平将校妻为我荷戈城守，恨未获随皇帝北巡，一赉恤之也。 
现代文：又告诫皇太子说 ：以往北平将校之妻为我负戈守城，我很遗憾没有机会随皇帝北巡，去对她们一一加以慰劳了。 
English: He also admonished the crown prince, saying, "In the past, the wives of Peking officers came to defend the city for me. I regret that I did not have the opportunity to accompany the emperor on his northern tour and comfort them one by one.

古文：是月乙卯崩，年四十有六。
现代文：当月初四，皇后去世，年仅四十六岁。
English: On the fourth of the month, the empress died, aged only forty-six.

古文：帝悲恸，为荐大斋于灵谷、天禧二寺，听群臣致祭，光禄为具物。
现代文：皇上十分悲痛，在灵谷、天禧二寺为她举行大斋，接受群臣的祭祀，由光禄寺准备祭奠物品。
English: The Empress was so grief-stricken that large feasts were held for her at Linggu Temple and Tianxi Second Temple, where she received offerings from her courtiers, and at Guanglu Temple, where offerings were prepared.

古文：十月甲午，谥曰仁孝皇后。
现代文：十月十四日，皇上封其谥号为仁孝皇后。
English: On October 14th, the Emperor conferred on her the title of Empress Ninko.

古文：七年封贤妃，命其父永均为光禄卿。明年十月侍帝北征。
现代文：仁宗即位后，为徐皇后上尊谥号为仁孝慈懿诚明庄献配天齐圣文皇后，附祭于太庙。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Renzong, Empress Tianqi Shengwen was presented to Empress Xu with the title of "Renpiao Cixi Shengmingzhuang" (仁孝慈诚明庄) and was enshrined in the Great Temple.

古文：凯还，薨于临城，葬峄县。仁宗诚孝皇后张氏，永城人。
现代文：仁宗诚孝皇后张氏，永城人。
English: Ninsong Chengxiao, the empress of the Zhang clan, was from Yongcheng.

古文：父麒以女贵，追封彭城伯，具《外戚传》。
现代文：其父亲张麒因女儿而身贵，被追封为彭城伯，载入《外戚传》。
English: Because of his daughter, his father, Zhang Ye, was wealthy and was posthumously given the title of Pengcheng uncle, which was recorded in "The Biography of a Maternal Relative."

古文：洪武二十八年封燕世子妃。
现代文：洪武二十八年，张氏被册封为燕世子妃。
English: In the 28th year of Hongwu, the Zhang family was canonized as the Queen of the Yan Dynasty.

古文：永乐二年封皇太子妃。
现代文：永乐二年，被封为皇太子妃。
English: In the second year of Yongle, she was named crown princess.

古文：仁宗立，册为皇后。
现代文：仁宗即位，她被封为皇后。
English: When Emperor Nizong ascended to the throne, she was crowned empress.

古文：宣宗即位，尊为皇太后。
现代文：宣宗即位，她被尊为皇太后。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, she was revered as the empress dowager.

古文：英宗即位，尊为太皇太后。
现代文：英宗即位，她被尊为太皇太后。
English: When Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne, she was revered as the great empress dowager.

古文：后始为太子妃，操妇道至谨，雅得成祖及仁孝皇后欢。
现代文：张皇后开始是太子妃。她严守妇道，甚得成祖及仁孝皇后喜欢。
English: Empress Zhang started out as a princess consort. She strictly adhered to the women's way and was very much liked by Emperor Chengzhu and Empress Renxiao.

古文：太子数为汉、赵二王所间，体肥硕不能骑射。成祖恚，至减太子宫膳，濒易者屡矣，卒以后故得不废。
现代文：太子多次被汉、赵二王所离间，又因身体肥硕不能骑射，成祖为此十分生气，大减太子的宫膳，且多次要另立太子，最后都因为张皇后从中周旋的缘故才没有废掉太子。
English: The prince was separated many times by the Han and Zhao II kings, and because of his fat body, he could not ride and shoot. Cheng Zu was very angry about this, greatly reduced the prince's palace meal, and many times had to set up another prince. In the end, he did not abolish the prince because of Queen Zhang's medial rotation.

古文：及立为后，中外政事，莫不周知。
现代文：等到被立为皇后，对朝中内外政事，她莫不周知。
English: By the time she became empress, she was well-acquainted with domestic and foreign affairs.

古文：宣德初，军国大议多禀听裁决。
现代文：宣德初年，军国大事多受命于皇太后，听从她的裁决。
English: In the first year of Xuande, most of the military affairs were ordered by the Empress Dowager and obeyed her ruling.

古文：是时海内宁泰，帝入奉起居，出奉游宴，四方贡献，虽微物必先上皇太后。
现代文：当时海内安宁祥泰，宣宗对皇太后入奉起居，出奉游宴，四方有所进献，即便是微小物品，也一定要先奉送给皇太后。
English: At that time, the sea was calm and serene, and Emperor Xuanzong invited the empress dowager to live and attend a banquet. Four parties made donations, and even small items had to be given to the empress dowager first.

古文：两宫慈孝闻天下。
现代文：两宫慈孝天下皆知。
English: The two emperors are well known throughout the world.

古文：三年，太后游西苑，皇后皇妃侍，帝亲掖舆登万岁山，奉觞上寿，献诗颁德。又明年谒长、献二陵，帝亲櫜鞬骑导。
现代文：三年，皇太后出游西苑，皇后皇妃在旁侍候，宣宗也亲自扶着车陪皇太后登万岁山，并且奉酒拜寿，又过了一年后，皇太后前往长、献二陵拜谒，献诗颁德。
English: Three years later, the empress dowager traveled to Xiyuan, with the empress dowager waiting by her side. Xuan Zong also personally drove the car to accompany the empress dowager to Mount Wanying, and offered wine to celebrate her birthday. A year later, the empress dowager went to Chang and Jian Er Mausoleums to pay homage and offer poetry.

古文：至河桥，下马扶辇。
现代文：宣宗亲自配带弓箭，骑马在前引导，到达河桥时，又下马扶车。
English: Xuan Zong personally equipped with bows and arrows, riding in front to guide, arrived at the bridge, and dismounted to assist.

古文：畿民夹道拜观，陵旁老稚皆山呼拜迎。
现代文：京畿百姓都夹道拜观，陵旁老幼也欢呼拜迎。
English: The people of Gyeonggi all lined the road to pay their respects, and the old and the young also came to pay their respects next to the mausoleum.

古文：太后顾曰： 百姓戴君，以能安之耳，皇帝宜重念。 
现代文：见此情景，皇太后回过头来对宣宗说道： 百姓拥戴君主，是因为君主能使他们安居乐业，皇帝应当将此牢记在心。 
English: Seeing this, the Empress Dowager turned to Xuan Zong and said, "The people support the monarch because the monarch enables them to live and work in peace. The emperor should bear this in mind."

古文：及还，过农家，召老妇问生业，赐钞币。
现代文：在返回途中，经过农家，皇太后召来农家老妇询问一些生活及农活方面的事，并且赐与钱币。
English: On the way back, after passing a farmhouse, the empress dowager summoned an old woman from the farm to ask about some aspects of life and farm work, and gave her coins.

古文：有献蔬食酒浆者，取以赐帝，曰： 此田家味也。 
现代文：有的农家献上蔬菜酒浆等东西，皇太后便取来赐给宣宗，还说： 这是农家的口味啊。 
English: Some farmers offered vegetables, wine syrup, and other things, and the Empress Dowager took them and gave them to Emperor Xuanzong, saying, "This is the taste of a farmer."

古文：从臣英国公张辅，尚书蹇义，大学士杨士奇、杨荣、金幼孜、杨溥请见行殿。太后慰劳之，且曰： 尔等先朝旧人，勉辅嗣君。 
现代文：随行大臣英国公张辅，尚书蹇义，大学士杨士奇、杨荣、金幼孜、杨溥到行殿请求谒见，皇太后对他们加以慰劳，并说： 你们是先朝旧人，要尽力辅助嗣君。 
English: Accompanying the minister, the British official Zhang Fu, Shang Shuxun Yi, and the university scholars Yang Shiqi, Yang Rong, Jin Yuzi, and Yang Hui went to the hall to request an audience. The empress dowager consoled them, and said: You are the old people of the first dynasty, and you must do your best to assist the heir.

古文：他日，帝谓士奇曰： 皇太后谒陵还，道汝辈行事甚习。
现代文：此后的一天，宣宗对杨士奇说： 皇太后拜谒二陵回来后，说起你们的办事能力时非常熟悉。
English: One day after that, Xuan Zong said to Yang Shichong: After the Empress Dowager returned from visiting the Second Mausoleum, she spoke very familiarly about your ability to do things.

古文：言辅，武臣也，达大义。
现代文：她说，张辅虽是一名武臣，却通晓大义。
English: She said that although Zhang Fu was a military officer, he was well versed in justice.

古文：义重厚小心，第寡断。
现代文：蹇义忠厚小心，但办事优柔寡断。
English: He is loyal and careful, but he is indecisive.

古文：汝克正，言无避忤，先帝或数不乐，然终从汝，以不败事。
现代文：你呢，非常正直，说起话来直言不讳，先帝有时很不高兴，但最终还是听从你的建议，得以不做错事。
English: You, on the other hand, were very honest and outspoken. The former emperor was sometimes very unhappy, but in the end he followed your advice and managed not to do anything wrong.

古文：又有三事，时悔不从也。 
现代文：还有三件事，当时先帝后悔没有听从你的意见。 
English: There were three other things that made the former emperor regret not listening to your advice.

古文：太后遇外家严，弟升至淳谨，然不许预议国事。
现代文：皇太后对外戚很严格，其弟张升为人淳厚谨慎，但皇太后仍不许他参加商议国家大事。
English: The empress dowager was very strict with her relatives, and her brother Zhang Sheng was a prudent person, but the empress dowager still did not allow him to participate in the deliberation of national affairs.

古文：宣宗崩，英宗方九岁，宫中讹言将召立襄王矣。
现代文：宣宗驾崩时，英宗才九岁，宫中讹传将立襄王为皇帝。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong passed away, Emperor Yingzong was only nine years old, and it was rumored in the court that Emperor Xiang would be established.

古文：太后趣召诸大臣至乾清宫，指太子泣曰： 此新天子也。 
现代文：皇太后马上召集诸大臣到乾清宫，指着太子哭道： 这就是新天子啊！ 
English: The empress dowager immediately summoned the ministers to the Qianqing Palace, pointed to the prince and cried: This is the new prince!

古文：君臣呼万岁，浮言乃息。
现代文：群臣高呼万岁，流言才得以平息。
English: The courtiers shouted hooray, and the rumor was put to rest.

古文：大臣请太后垂帘听政，太后曰： 毋坏祖宗法。
现代文：大臣请求皇太后垂帘听政，太后说： 不要破坏祖宗之法。
English: The minister asked the Empress Dowager to listen to the government, and the Empress Dowager said: Do not destroy the law of the ancestors.

古文：第悉罢一切不急务。 时时勖帝向学，委任股肱，以故王振虽宠于帝，终太后世不敢专大政。
现代文：只须将一切不急的事务全部废止，时时勉励皇帝向前人学习，并委任得力的辅佐大臣就可以了。 因此，王振虽受英宗之宠，皇太后在世时却不敢独揽大权。
English: Therefore, although Wang Zhen was favored by Emperor Yingzong, the empress dowager did not dare to monopolize power while she was alive.

古文：正统七年十月崩。
现代文：正统七年十月，皇太后去世。
English: In October of the seventh year of the reign, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：当大渐，召士奇、溥入，命中官问国家尚有何大事未办者。
现代文：当她病重时，召杨士奇、杨溥入宫，命宦官询问国家还有什么大事没有办。
English: When she was seriously ill, she summoned Yang Shiqi and Yang Hui to the palace, and ordered the eunuch to inquire what other major events the country had not done.

古文：士奇举三事。一谓建庶人虽亡，当修实录。
现代文：杨士奇提出了三件事，其一，建庶人虽死，但应当编修实录。
English: Yang Shichi proposed three things. First, although Jian Shao Ren is dead, a factual record should be compiled.

古文：一谓太宗诏有收方孝孺诸臣遗书者死，宜弛其禁。
现代文：其二，太宗曾下诏凡收藏方孝孺诸臣遗书者死，这条禁令应当解除。
English: Second, Emperor Taizong had decreed that the ban should be lifted after the death of the person who had collected the posthumous letters from the sons and daughters of emperors.

古文：其三未及奏上，而太后已崩。
现代文：第三件事还未来得及上奏，皇太后就已经去世了。
English: The third event had not yet been played, and the Empress Dowager had already passed away.

古文：遗诏勉大臣佐帝惇行仁政，语甚谆笃。
现代文：皇太后遗诏勉励大臣辅助皇帝实行仁政，语气十分诚恳淳厚。
English: The tone of the empress dowager's last will and testament was very sincere and sincere, encouraging ministers to assist the emperor in implementing benevolent policies.

古文：上尊谥曰诚孝恭肃明德弘仁顺天启圣昭皇后，合葬献陵，祔太庙。
现代文：英宗为她上尊谥号为诚孝恭肃明德弘仁顺天启圣昭皇后，与仁宗合葬于献陵，附祭于太庙。
English: Emperor Yingzong honored her with the posthumous title of Empress Zhengyu Mingde Hongren Shun Tianqi Shengzhao, and she was buried together with Emperor Ninsong in the mausoleum and enshrined in the Imperial Temple.

古文：宣宗恭让皇后胡氏，名善祥，济宁人。
现代文：宣宗恭让皇后胡氏，名善祥，济宁人。
English: Emperor Xuanzong gave the Empress Hu, a Jining native, a good name.

古文：永乐十五年选为皇太孙妃。
现代文：永乐十五年，她被选为皇太孙妃。
English: In the 15th year of Yongle, she was selected as the granddaughter of the emperor.

古文：已，为皇太子妃。
现代文：不久，成为皇太子妃。
English: Soon, she became the crown princess.

古文：宣宗即位，立为皇后。
现代文：宣宗即位，她被立为皇后。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, she was made empress.

古文：时孙贵妃有宠，后未有子，又善病。
现代文：当时孙贵妃被宣宗恩宠，胡皇后没有儿子，又经常生病。
English: At that time, Sun Guifei was favored by Emperor Xuanzong. Empress Hu had no son and was often ill.

古文：三年春，帝令后上表辞位，乃退居长安宫，赐号静慈仙师，而册贵妃为后。
现代文：三年春，宣宗命皇后上表辞去皇后之位，退居长安宫，赐号静慈仙师，而册封贵妃为皇后。
English: In the spring of the third year, Empress Xuanzong formally resigned her position as empress and retired to Chang'an Palace. She was given the title Jing Ci Xian Shi (静慈仙師) and the title Guifei (贵妃) as empress.

古文：诸大臣张辅、蹇义、夏原吉、杨士奇、杨荣等不能争。
现代文：张辅、蹇义、夏原吉、杨士奇、杨荣等大臣规劝不了。
English: Zhang Fu, Zhai Yi, Xia Yuanji, Yang Shiqi, Yang Rong and other ministers could not persuade him.

古文：张太后悯后贤，常召居清宁宫。内廷朝宴，命居孙后上。孙后常怏怏。
现代文：张太后怜悯贤淑的胡皇后，常常召她住在清宁宫，内廷朝宴，让她位居孙后之上，孙后为此常常闷闷不乐。
English: Empress Dowager Zhang took pity on the virtuous Empress Hu and often invited her to live in the Qingning Palace and attend the Inner Court's imperial banquets, placing her above her granddaughter-in-law, who was often unhappy because of this.

古文：正统七年十月，太皇太后崩，后痛哭不已，逾年亦崩，用嫔御礼葬金山。
现代文：正统七年，太皇太后驾崩，胡皇后痛哭不已，一年之后也去世了，被用嫔御礼葬于金山。
English: In the seventh year after the enthronement, the great empress dowager passed away, and Empress Hu wept bitterly. She also passed away a year later, and was buried with imperial honours in Jinshan.

古文：后无过被废，天下闻而怜之。
现代文：胡皇后无过被废，天下人闻知，都同情她。
English: Queen Hu was deposed without any fault, and the whole world heard about it and sympathized with her.

古文：宣宗后亦悔。尝自解曰： 此朕少年事。 
现代文：宣宗后来也为此后悔，曾经自己解释道 ：这是朕少年时所做的事。 
English: Later, Xuan Zong also regretted this, once explaining himself: This is what I did when I was a boy.

古文：天顺六年，孙太后崩，钱皇后为英宗言： 后贤而无罪，废为仙师。
现代文：天顺六年，孙太后去世，钱皇后对英宗说 ：胡皇后贤淑而无罪，被废为仙师。
English: Six years after Tianshun, Empress Dowager Sun passed away. Empress Qian said to Emperor Yingzong: Empress Hu was virtuous and innocent, but she was dethroned as Immortal Teacher.

古文：其没也，人畏太后，殓葬皆不如礼。 
现代文：她死后，人们害怕孙太后，对她的殓葬都不成礼。 
English: After her death, people were afraid of Empress Dowager Sun, and they were not polite at her funeral.

古文：因劝复其位号。
现代文：因此劝英宗恢复她的位号。
English: Therefore, she urged Yingzong to restore her title.

古文：十三年二月崩，上尊谥曰孝贞庄懿恭靖仁慈钦天辅圣纯皇后，合葬茂陵，祔太庙。
现代文：英宗为此事询问大学士李贤，李贤回答说： 陛下此心，连天地鬼神都看得见。但愚臣认为陵寝、享殿、神主都应当像奉先殿一样，这样，百姓就会称颂陛下英明而孝顺。 七年闰七月，英宗为她上尊谥号为恭让诚顺康穆静慈章皇后，并营造陵墓，但不附祭于庙。
English: Yingzong asked the university scholar Li Xian about this, and Li Xian replied, "Your Majesty, with such a heart, can see the heavens, the earth, the ghosts and the gods. However, the foolish minister thought that the mausoleum, the hall of fame, and the god should all be the same as the ancestral hall, so that the people would praise Your Majesty for being wise and filial. In the seventh leap month of the seventh year, Yingzong gave her the honorific title of the Empress, and built a mausoleum, but it was not attached to the temple.

古文：孝穆纪太后，孝宗生母也，贺县人。
现代文：孝穆纪太后，是明孝宗的生母，贺县人。
English: Empress Dowager Xiao Mu Ji, the birth mother of Emperor Mingxiao Zong, was from He County.

古文：本蛮土官女。
现代文：原是贺县土官之女。
English: Originally, she was the daughter of a local official in He County.

古文：成化中征蛮，俘入掖庭，授女史，警敏通文字，命守内藏。
现代文：成化年间明军南征时，掳掠至京，充入后宫为女史。她十分机敏聪颖，又识文断字，受命管理内藏的事。
English: During the Ming army's southern expedition in the Chenghua era, she was captured and taken to Beijing, where she was placed in the harem as a female historian. She was very clever and intelligent, and she was also literate, and she was ordered to manage the affairs of Inner Tibet.

古文：时万贵妃专宠而妒，后宫有娠者皆治使堕。
现代文：当时万贵妃受皇帝专宠，因她自己无子，便非常嫉妒后宫嫔妃们怀孕，想方设法使其堕胎。
English: At that time, Empress Wan Guifei was the emperor's special favorite. Since she had no children of her own, she was very jealous of the pregnant harem concubines and tried every means to have them aborted.

古文：柏贤妃生悼恭太子，亦为所害。
现代文：柏贤妃生悼恭太子，被她害死。
English: Princess Pak Hyon gave birth to Prince Yeonggyong, who was killed by her.

古文：帝偶行内藏，应对称旨，悦，幸之，遂有身。
现代文：有一天，皇帝偶然来到内藏，孝穆纪太后对皇帝所问之事对答自如，皇帝很高兴，于是将她召幸，她因而怀了孕。
English: One day, the emperor happened to come to Inner Tibet, and the Empress Dowager Xiao Muji answered the emperor's questions with ease. The emperor was very pleased, so he summoned her to happiness, and she became pregnant.

古文：万贵妃知而恚甚，令婢钩治之。
现代文：万贵妃知道后恨得咬牙切齿，命宫女前去探听虚实。
English: After learning of this, Princess Mangui gritted her teeth in disgust and sent her maid of honor to investigate the truth.

古文：婢谬报曰病痞。
现代文：宫女回来误报说，她并未怀孕，而是患了一种难治的病。
English: The lady-in-waiting returned with a false report that she was not pregnant, but was suffering from an incurable disease.

古文：乃谪居安乐堂。
现代文：万贵妃仍怂恿皇帝将她贬居安乐堂。
English: Princess Mangui still refused to let the emperor relegate her to Anle Hall.

古文：久之，生孝宗，使门监张敏溺焉。
现代文：数月之后，生下孝宗，担心万贵妃暗害，孝穆纪太后便狠心将孩子交给门监张敏去溺死。
English: A few months later, after giving birth to Takamune, fearing that Princess Mangui would assassinate him, Empress Dowager Takamuki cruelly handed the child over to the doorkeeper Zhang Min to be drowned.

古文：敏惊曰： 上未有子，奈何弃之。 
现代文：张敏吃惊地说 ：皇上至今没有儿子，为什么要将皇子弄死呢？ 
English: Zhang Min said in surprise: The emperor has no son so far, why kill the prince?

古文：稍哺粉饵饴蜜，藏之他室，贵妃日伺无所得。
现代文：于是，他冒死将皇子藏入密室，用粉糕、糖浆等暗暗哺养起来，万贵妃时时监视也没能发觉。
English: As a result, he risked his life to hide the prince in a secret room and secretly fed him with powdered cakes, syrup, etc. Princess Mangui could not detect the surveillance at all times.

古文：至五六岁，未敢剪胎发。
现代文：皇子就这样长到五、六岁，仍没敢剪去胎发。
English: The prince grew up like this until he was five or six years old, and still did not dare to cut his hair.

古文：时吴后废居西内，近安乐堂，密知其事，往来哺养，帝不知也。
现代文：当时已废的吴皇后住在西内，离安乐堂很近，暗知此事，便主动前来帮忙哺育皇子。这些事情皇帝都不知道。
English: The then defunct Empress Wu lived in Shinnai, very close to the Anle Hall, and secretly knew about this, so she volunteered to come and help breastfeed the prince. The emperor did not know about these things.

古文：帝自悼恭太子薨后，久无嗣，中外皆以为忧。
现代文：明宪宗自从悼恭太子死后，一直没有子嗣，朝廷内外都为此担忧。
English: Since the death of Prince Eikyong, the Ming dynasty has been without an heir, and both inside and outside the imperial court are worried about this.

古文：成化十一年，帝召张敏栉发，照镜叹曰： 老将至而无子。 
现代文：成化十一年，宪宗命张敏为他梳头，对镜感叹道 ：我已经老了，可惜还没有儿子啊。 
English: In the eleventh year of his life, Kenzong ordered Zhang Min to comb his hair for him, exclaiming to the mirror, "I'm already old, but it's a pity I don't have a son."

古文：敏伏地曰： 死罪，万岁已有子也。 
现代文：张敏一下子跪在宪宗面前说 ：奴才该死，其实万岁您已经有儿子了。 
English: Zhang Min suddenly knelt down in front of Kenzong and said, "Slaves deserve to die. In fact, you already have a son.

古文：帝愕然，问安在。
现代文：宪宗听后愕然而立，问皇子何在。
English: Hearing this, Kenso stood up in amazement and asked the prince where he was.

古文：对曰： 奴言即死，万岁当为皇子主。 
现代文：张敏回答说 ：奴才将真情说出，恐怕性命难保，万望陛下为皇子做主。 
English: Zhang Min replied, "Only a slave can tell the truth. I'm afraid his life would be in danger. I hope His Majesty will decide for the prince."

古文：于是太监怀恩顿首曰： 敏言是。
现代文：太监怀恩跪地磕头说 ：张敏所言属实。
English: Eunuch Wai En knelt down and bowed his head and said: What Zhang Min said is true.

古文：皇子潜养西内，今已六岁矣，匿不敢闻。 
现代文：皇子被偷偷藏在西内哺养，今年已经六岁了，因怕被人暗害，此事一直不敢张扬出去。 
English: The six-year-old prince was secretly hidden in the West to be nursed. For fear of assassination, the matter has been kept quiet.

古文：帝大喜，即日幸西内，遣使往迎皇子。
现代文：皇帝听了大喜，当日就临幸西内，派太监前去迎接皇子。
English: The emperor heard of the great joy, and on the same day he went to Shinsai and sent a eunuch to meet the prince.

古文：使至，妃抱皇子泣曰： 儿去，吾不得生。
现代文：太监一到，母亲抱着皇子，眼泪潸潸地嘱咐道： 我儿前去认父，母命恐难保了。
English: As soon as the eunuch arrived, the mother took the prince in her arms and, with tears streaming down her face, ordered: "My son, go and confess to your father. My mother's life is in danger."

古文：儿见黄袍有须者，即儿父也。 
现代文：皇儿如果看见一个身穿黄袍，面留胡须的人，他就是皇儿的父亲。 
English: If the prince sees a bearded man in a yellow robe, he is the prince's father.

古文：衣以小绯袍，乘小舆，拥至阶下，发披地，走投帝怀。
现代文：皇子身穿绯色袍子，乘着小车，被拥至台阶下，皇子发长披地，走过去投入宪宗怀里。
English: The prince, dressed in an ochre robe and riding in a carriage, was embraced at the foot of the steps. His long hair fell to the floor, and he walked over and fell into Kenzong's arms.

古文：帝置之膝，抚视久之，悲喜泣下曰： 我子也，类我。 
现代文：宪宗将他置于膝上，久久抚视，悲喜交加，流着眼泪说： 此儿长得像我，确是我的儿子。 
English: Kenzong put him on his lap, stroked him for a long time, sad and happy, and said with tears: This looks like me, it's really my son.

古文：使怀恩赴内阁具道其故。群臣皆大喜。
现代文：然后命怀恩到内阁将事情原委全盘托出，群臣听后皆大欢喜。
English: Then he ordered Wai Yan to go to the cabinet and tell the whole story to the original committee. The ministers were all very happy after hearing this.

古文：明日，入贺，颁诏天下。
现代文：第二天，入朝拜贺，颁诏天下。
English: The next day, the emperor paid homage to the emperor and the imperial edict was issued.

古文：移妃居永寿宫，数召见。
现代文：宪宗将皇子生母淑妃移居永寿宫，多次召见她。
English: Emperor Gensong moved the prince's real mother, Princess Sukhee, to Yongju Palace and summoned her several times.

古文：万贵妃日夜怨泣曰： 群小绐我。 
现代文：万贵妃却日夜暗自垂泪，怨恨地说： 这群小人如此欺骗我。 
English: However, Princess Mangui secretly shed tears day and night, and said angrily, "This group of villains has deceived me so much.

古文：其年六月，妃暴薨。
现代文：那年六月，淑妃暴病死去。
English: In June of that year, Shuhei died of a violent illness.

古文：或曰贵妃致之死，或曰自缢也。
现代文：有人说是被万贵妃下毒害死的，有人说是自杀而死的。
English: Some say she was poisoned by Princess Mangui, while others say she committed suicide.

古文：谥恭恪庄僖淑妃。
现代文：淑妃死后谥号为恭恪庄僖淑妃。
English: After the death of Shuxi, her posthumous name was Gong Jia Zhuang Zhen Shuxi Rong.

古文：敏惧，亦吞金死。
现代文：张敏在淑妃死后感到很害怕，也吞金自尽了。
English: Zhang Min was so scared after the death of Shu Fei that she also swallowed money and committed suicide.

古文：敏，同安人。
现代文：张敏，同安人。
English: Zhang Min, from Tong'an.

古文：孝宗既立为皇太子，时孝肃皇太后居仁寿宫，语帝曰： 以儿付我。 太子遂居仁寿。
现代文：孝宗被立为皇太子，当时孝肃皇太后住在仁寿宫，她对宪宗说： 将皇太子交托给我吧。 
English: When Empress Dowager Xiaoshu lived in Renshou Palace, she said to Emperor Gensong, "Give the crown prince to me."

古文：一日，贵妃召太子食，孝肃谓太子曰： 儿去，无食也。 
现代文：皇太子于是就住在仁寿宫。有一天，万贵妃叫太子到她那里去吃东西，孝肃皇太后嘱咐太子说： 你去吧，但不要吃她的东西。 
English: So the crown prince stayed at Renshou Palace. One day, Princess Mangui asked the prince to go to her for a meal. Empress Dowager Xiaoshu told the prince, "You can go, but don't eat her food."

古文：太子至，贵妃赐食，曰： 已饱。 
现代文：太子到了万贵妃处，万贵妃赐给他食物，太子说 ：我已经吃饱了。 
English: When the prince arrived at Princess Mangui's place, Princess Mangui gave him food, and the prince said, "I've had enough."

古文：进羹，曰： 疑有毒。 
现代文：万贵妃又劝他吃羹汤，他便问 ：羹汤中有没有毒？ 
English: Princess Mangui also advised him to eat the soup. He then asked: "Is there poison in the soup?"

古文：贵妃大恚曰： 是儿数岁即如是，他日鱼肉我矣。 
现代文：万贵妃大怒道： 这个小孩几岁就像这样，他日长大后会陷害我的。 
English: Princess Mangui said angrily, "How old is this child like this? He will frame me when he grows up."

古文：因恚而成疾。
现代文：因怒而成疾。
English: It is a disease of anger.

古文：孝宗即位，追谥淑妃为孝穆慈慧恭恪庄僖崇天承圣纯皇后，迁葬茂陵，别祀奉慈殿。
现代文：孝宗即位后，追谥淑妃为孝穆慈慧恭恪庄僖崇天承圣纯皇后，迁葬于茂陵，另外在奉慈殿祭祀她。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong, Empress Dowager Sui Yan Sukfei was revered as a filial, compassionate, dignified, dignified, heavenly-inherited and pure empress. She was reburied in the Mausoleum, and was also enshrined in the Bongji Temple.

古文：帝悲念太后，特遣太监蔡用求太后家，得纪父贵、纪祖旺兄弟以闻。
现代文：孝宗思念太后，悲伤不已，特地派太监蔡用寻找太后家人，找到了纪父贵、纪祖旺两兄弟。
English: Xiaozong missed the empress dowager and was sad. He sent the eunuch Cai to look for the empress dowager's family and found the two brothers Ji Fuguo and Ji Zuwang.

古文：帝大喜，诏改父贵为贵，授锦衣卫指挥同知；祖旺为旺，授锦衣卫指挥佥事。赐予第宅、金帛、庄田、奴婢，不可胜计。
现代文：孝宗大喜，下诏将纪父贵改名纪贵，授以锦衣卫指挥同知之职，将纪祖旺改名纪旺，授以锦衣卫指挥佥事之职，赐予宅第、黄金布帛、田地、奴婢，不可胜数。
English: Takamune was overjoyed, and issued an edict changing the name of Ji Chigui to Ji Gui, and bestowing upon him the position of commander of the Imperial Guards, and upon Ji Zuang the position of commander of the Imperial Guards, and bestowing upon him the position of commander of the Imperial Guards, and bestowing upon him a large number of houses, gold cloth, fields, slaves, and maidservants.

古文：追赠太后父为中军都督府左都督，母为夫人。其曾祖、祖父亦如之。
现代文：追赠太后之父为中军都督府左都督，太后之母为夫人，对其曾祖、祖父也是如此。
English: The father of the dowager empress posthumously became the left-hand governor of the Chinese military governor-general's office, the mother of the dowager empress was his wife, and the same was true for her great-grandfather and grandfather.

古文：遣修太后先茔之在贺者，置守坟户，复其家。
现代文：并命人修复太后在贺县的祖先坟地，安置守坟户，免除他们的赋税徭役。
English: He also ordered the restoration of the ancestral burial ground of the Empress Dowager in He County, and the resettlement of the guardians of the cemetery, exempting them from paying taxes.

古文：先是，太后在宫中，尝自言家贺县，姓纪，幼不能知亲族也。太监郭镛闻而识之。
现代文：这以前，太后在宫中，曾经说过家在贺县，姓纪。因为年幼离家，已不记得有什么亲戚了，太监郭镛听到后，便将此事记在心里。
English: Before this, the empress dowager had said in the palace that her family was in He County, and her surname was Ji. Because she left home at a young age, she could no longer remember any relatives. When the eunuch Guo Wei heard this, he took it to heart.

古文：太监陆恺者，亦广西人，故姓李，蛮中纪、李同音，因妄称太后兄，令人访其族人诣京师。
现代文：有一名叫陆恺的太监，也是广西人，原来姓李，在贺县，纪、李两字同音，因此他妄称自己是太后的哥哥，并令人查访他的族人到京城来。
English: There was a eunuch named Lu Wei, also from Guangxi, whose original surname was Li. In He County, Ji and Li are the same, so he falsely claimed to be the brother of the empress dowager and had his relatives come to Beijing to visit him.

古文：恺女兄夫韦父成者出冒之，有司待以戚畹，名所居里曰迎恩里。
现代文：陆恺的姐夫韦父成出来冒称，有关官员便以外戚之礼待他，划给他三十亩地，将其所住地方称作迎恩里。
English: When Lu Yao's brother-in-law Wei Picheng came out and pretended to be a monk, the relevant officials treated him like a distant relative, allocated him thirty mu of land, and called the place where he lived Ying En-ri.

古文：贵、旺曰： 韦犹冒李，况我实李氏。 
现代文：纪贵、纪旺说： 姓韦的冒称姓李，何况我们确实姓李。 
English: Ji Gui and Ji Wang said: The surname Wei pretends to be surnamed Li, and what's more, our surname is indeed Li.

古文：因诈为宗系上有司，有司莫辨也。
现代文：因以诈作的宗族谱系上呈，有关官员不能辨别。
English: Due to the fraudulent family tree, the relevant officials could not distinguish between them.

古文：二人既骤贵，父成亦诣阙争辨。
现代文：他们俩骤然富贵，韦父成也到京城来进行争辩。
English: Both of them were suddenly rich, and Wei Fucheng also came to Beijing to argue.

古文：帝命郭镛按之。
现代文：孝宗命郭镛查证处理此事。
English: Xiaozong ordered Guo Qi to investigate and deal with the matter.

古文：镛逐父成，犹令驰驿归。
现代文：郭镛赶走韦父成，还命令他骑驿马赶快回去。
English: Guo Gan chased Wei Chicheng away and ordered him to ride his horse back as soon as possible.

古文：及帝使治后先茔，蛮中李姓者数辈，皆称太后家，自言于使者。使者还，奏贵、旺不实。
现代文：等到孝宗命人修复太后祖先坟墓时，贺县无数姓李的人都自称是太后家人。使者返京，向孝宗上奏说纪贵、纪旺不是太后的亲戚。
English: By the time the tomb of the empress dowager's ancestors had been restored by order of Emperor Xiaozong, countless people in He County with the surname Li had claimed to be members of the empress dowager's family. The envoy returned to Beijing and reported to Emperor Xiaozong that Ji Gui and Ji Wang were not relatives of the empress dowager.

古文：复遣给事中孙珪、御史滕祐间行连、贺间，微服入瑶、僮中访之，尽得其状，归奏。
现代文：孝宗又派给事中孙王圭、御史滕秘密行走于连县、贺县之间，在两地瑶族、壮族人中微服查访，将事情完全查清，回京上奏皇帝。
English: Xiaozong also sent Sun Wanggui and Gu Sten to secretly walk between Lian County and He County, and to make a small-scale inspection among the Yi and Zhuang people in the two places, to fully investigate the matter and return to Beijing to report to the emperor.

古文：帝谪罚镛等有差，戍贵、旺边海。
现代文：孝宗将郭镛等有关人员流放或贬职，罚纪贵、纪旺戍守边海。
English: Xiaozong exiled or demoted Guo Jun and other relevant personnel, and punished Ji Gui and Ji Wang for guarding the coastal waters.

古文：自此帝数求太后家，竟不得。
现代文：自此之后，孝宗多次寻找太后亲戚，始终没有找到。
English: Since then, Takamune has repeatedly searched for the empress dowager's relatives, but has never found them.

古文：弘治三年，礼部尚书耿裕奏曰： 粤西当大征之后，兵燹饥荒，人民奔窜，岁月悠远，踪迹难明。
现代文：弘治三年，礼部尚书耿裕上奏道 ：粤西当时正值南征之后，战火四起，饥荒成灾，百姓纷纷逃亡，加上岁月已久，人们踪迹难寻。
English: In the third year of the Hongzhi era, Geng Yu, a scholar of etiquette, recited: At that time, Western Guangdong was in the aftermath of the Southern Expedition. There were four wars, widespread famine, and people fled in droves. With the passage of time, it was difficult to find any trace of the people.

古文：昔孝慈高皇后与高皇帝同起艰难，化家为国，徐王亲高皇后父，当后之身，寻求家族，尚不克获，然后立庙宿州，春秋祭祀。
现代文：昔日孝慈高皇后与高皇帝共同度过艰难岁月，化家为国，徐王与高皇后之父关系很亲近，当时以皇后的身份，寻找家族之人，尚且没能找到，然后在宿州建造庙宇，春秋祭祀。
English: In the past, Empress Xiao Ci Gao and Emperor Gao went through difficult times together and turned their family into a country. King Xu had a very close relationship with Empress Gao's father. At that time, as empress, she searched for family members, but was unable to find them, and then built a temple in Suzhou for spring and autumn sacrifices.

古文：今纪太后幼离西粤，入侍先帝，连、贺非徐、宿中原之地，嫔宫无母后正位之年，陛下访寻虽切，安从得其实哉！
现代文：而今纪太后幼年便离开西粤，入宫侍奉先帝，连、贺两县不是处于中原之地的徐、宿，宫中也没有母后正位之年，陛下访寻之心虽切，但怎么才能找到太后真正的宗族呢？
English: Now, Empress Dowager Ji left Western Guangdong at an early age and entered the palace to serve the former emperor. Lian and He counties are not in the land of the Central Plains, and there is no empress dowager's year of enthronement in the palace. Although Her Majesty's heart is searching, how can she find the empress dowager's true family?

古文：臣愚谓可仿徐王故事，定拟太后父母封号，立祠桂林致祭。 
现代文：依愚臣之见，陛下可以仿效以前徐王的做法，确定太后父母的封号，在桂林立祠祭拜。 
English: According to the follower's opinion, His Majesty can follow the practice of Xu Wang in the past, determine the seal number of the empress dowager's parents, and set up an ancestral hall in Guilin.

古文：帝曰： 孝穆皇太后早弃朕躬，每一思念，惄焉如割。
现代文：孝宗回答说 ：孝穆皇太后很早就弃我而去，每每思念起来，心如刀割。
English: Xiaozong replied, "The Empress Dowager Xiaomu abandoned me very early, and I miss her every day. My heart is broken.

古文：初谓宗亲尚可旁求，宁受百欺，冀获一是。
现代文：我当初认为宗亲尚可到处寻找，宁受百骗，希望能找到一个真正的宗亲。
English: At first, I thought that I could still look for my relative everywhere, but I preferred to be deceived, hoping to find a true relative.

古文：卿等谓岁久无从物色，请加封立庙，以慰圣母之灵。
现代文：你们觉得年岁已久，无从着手寻找，请求加封立庙，以此来安慰圣母在天之灵。
English: You feel that you are too old to begin the search, to ask for a temple to be built in order to console Our Lady's spirit in heaven.

古文：皇祖既有故事，朕心虽不忍，又奚敢违。 
现代文：皇祖既然已经有了这样的先例，朕虽于心不忍，又哪里敢违背呢。 
English: Since the emperor's ancestors have already set such a precedent, although I can't bear it in my heart, how can I dare to violate it?

古文：于是封后父推诚宣力武臣特进光禄大夫柱国庆元伯，谥端僖，后母伯夫人，立庙桂林府，有司岁时祀。
现代文：于是，册封太后父亲为推诚宣力武臣特进光禄大夫柱国庆元伯，谥号端僖，太后之母为伯夫人，在桂林府建造庙宇，有关官员每年前去祭祀。
English: As a result, the father of the empress dowager was given the title of Dr. Kuoqing Yuanbo, and the mother of the empress dowager was given the title of Mrs. Kuoqing Yuanbo. They built a temple in Guilin Prefecture, and the relevant officials went to the sacrifice every year.

古文：大学士尹直撰哀册有云： 睹汉家尧母之门，增宋室仁宗之恸。 
现代文：大学士尹直所撰的哀册上写道 ：睹汉朝尧母之家族，增宋室仁宗之悲恸。 
English: The book of laments written by the university scholar Yin Zhi wrote: "Seeing the family of the Han Dynasty's mother, the sorrow of the Song Dynasty's Jinzong.

古文：帝燕闲念诵，辄欷歔流涕也。
现代文：孝宗闲时拿来诵读，总是流泪欷歔不已。
English: Xiaozong uses it to recite when he is at leisure, and always bursts into tears.

