古文：贾充，字公闾，平阳襄陵人也。
现代文：贾充，字公闾，是平阳襄陵人。
English: Jia Chong, also known as Gong Li, is a native of Yangling in Pingyang.

古文：父逵，魏豫州刺史、阳里亭侯。
现代文：父亲贾逵，是魏豫州刺史、阳里亭侯。
English: His father, Jia Jun, was the prince of Wei, Yuzhou, and Yangli.

古文：逵晚始生充，言后当有充闾之庆，故以为名字焉。
现代文：贾逵晚年才生下贾充，说日后当会有充满里巷的喜庆，因而以 充 、 间 作为名和字。
English: Jia Wei only gave birth to Jia Chong in his later years, saying that there would be a celebration full of alleys in the future, thus using 充, 間 as the name and character.

古文：充少孤，居丧以孝闻。
现代文：贾充少年丧父，服丧以孝闻名。
English: Jia Chong lost his father when he was a young boy. He was known for his filial piety.

古文：袭父爵为侯。
现代文：承袭父亲的侯爵。
English: He succeeded his father as marquis.

古文：拜尚书郎，典定科令，兼度支考课。
现代文：官拜尚书郎，主持勘定科令，兼度支考课。
English: His official title was Shang Shuro, and he presided over the accounts department, and also taught examinations.

古文：辩章节度，事皆施用。
现代文：辨析典章节制调度，在办事上都得以应用。
English: Unlike the chapter-based scheduling of the analects, it can be applied to administrative tasks.

古文：累迁黄门侍郎、汲郡典农中郎将。
现代文：积功迁任黄门侍郎、汲郡典农中郎将。
English: After his distinguished service, he was transferred to the post of Huangmen waiter, and then to the post of Ku County Tenyuan middle-ranking farmer.

古文：参大将军军事，从景帝讨毌丘俭、文钦于乐嘉。
现代文：参与大将军军事，跟从景帝在乐嘉讨伐母丘俭、文钦。
English: He took part in the general's military campaign, and followed Emperor Jing to fight the mother of Qiu Jian and Wen Qin in Lejia.

古文：帝疾笃，还许昌，留充监诸军事，以劳增邑三百五十户。
现代文：皇帝病重，回许昌，留下贾充监督诸军事，因为有功增加封邑三百五十户。
English: The emperor was seriously ill and returned to Xu Chang, leaving Jia Chong to supervise the military, because he had the merit of increasing the number of fiefs by 350.

古文：后为文帝大将军司马，转右长史。
现代文：后任文帝大将军司马，转任右长史。
English: He later became Sima, the general of Emperor Wen, and was transferred to the post of the Right Long History.

古文：帝新执朝权，恐方镇有异议，使充诣诸葛诞，图欲伐吴，阴察其变。
现代文：文帝刚执掌朝廷大权，恐怕四方边镇有异议，派买充到诸葛诞那裹，商量准备伐吴，暗中观察其中的变化。
English: As soon as Emperor Wen took over the power of the imperial court, I am afraid that there were objections from the towns on the four sides of the country. He sent a delegation to Zhuge to discuss the preparations for the conquest of Wu, and secretly observed the changes.

古文：充既论说时事，因谓诞曰： 天下皆愿禅代，君以为如何？ 
现代文：贾充论说了时事后，趁势对诸葛涎说： 天下都希望挥代，君以为怎么样? 
English: After Jia Chong said about the current situation, he took advantage of the situation to say to Zhuge Liang: The whole world hopes for a revolution, what do you think?

古文：诞历声曰： 卿非贾豫州子乎，世受魏恩，岂可欲以社稷输人乎！
现代文：诸葛诞严厉地说： 你不是贾豫州的儿子吗?世代蒙受魏的恩宠，怎么能想把国家交给别人呢!
English: Zhuge said sternly, "Aren't you the son of Jia Yuzhou? You have been favored by Wei for generations. How can you want to hand over the country to others?"

古文：若洛中有难，吾当死之。 
现代文：如果洛阳城内有难，我会为魏而死。 
English: If there is trouble in Luoyang, I will die for Wei.

古文：充默然。
现代文：买充默默不语。
English: The grocer sings in silence.

古文：及还，白帝曰： 诞在再扬州，威名夙著，能得人死力。
现代文：等到回京，对文帝说： 诸葛诞两度驻守扬州，威严名望一向显著，能得到别人的拼死效力。
English: When he returned to Beijing, he said to Emperor Wen, "Zhuge was stationed in Yangzhou twice. His majesty and fame have always been remarkable, and he can obtain the deadly effectiveness of others.

古文：观其规略，为反必也。
现代文：观察他的规划谋略，是必定要反叛的。
English: Watching his scheming, it's tempting to rebel.

古文：今征之，反速而事小；不征，事迟而祸大。 
现代文：假如征召他，会促使他反叛然而祸患小；如果不征，反叛会推迟然而祸患大。 
English: If he is conscripted, it will cause him to rebel, but the harm is small; if he is not conscripted, the rebellion will be delayed, but the harm is great.

古文：帝乃征诞为司空，而诞果叛。
现代文：文帝于是征召诸葛诞任司空，而诸葛诞果然反叛。
English: Emperor Wen then conscripted Zhuge Liang to serve as his subordinate, and Zhuge Liang indeed rebelled.

古文：复从征诞，充进计曰： 楚兵轻而锐，若深沟高垒以逼贼城，可不战而克也。 
现代文：买充又跟从征伐诸葛诞，献计说： 楚兵轻装但锐利，如果深挖沟高筑垒来逼近叛贼城池，可以不战而胜。 
English: Buy and follow the conquest of Zhuge, offering a plan: Chu soldiers are lightly armed but sharp, if they dig a deep ditch and build a high wall to approach the traitor's city, they can win without a fight.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：文帝听从了他。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：城陷，帝登垒以劳充。
现代文：攻破城池，文帝登上营垒慰劳贾充。
English: After breaking through the castle, Emperor Wen boarded the camp to console Laojia.

古文：帝先归洛阳，使充统后事，进爵宣阳乡侯，增邑千户。
现代文：文帝先回洛阳，派贾充统管后事。进爵为宣阳乡侯，增加封邑一千户。
English: Emperor Wen returned to Luoyang first, and sent Jia Chong to be in charge of the subsequent affairs. He was ennobled as a Xuanyang villager, and the number of fiefs increased by one thousand.

古文：迁廷尉，充雅长法理，有平反之称。
现代文：迁任廷尉，贾充很擅长法理，有纠正错案的名声。
English: Transferred to the position of court lieutenant, Jia Chong is very good at jurisprudence and has a reputation for correcting wrong cases.

古文：转中护军，高贵乡公之攻相府也，充率众距战于南阙。
现代文：转任中护军，高贵乡公攻打相府时，贾充率领众人在南阙迎战。
English: When he was transferred to the position of the middle guard, and the noble townsmen attacked Sangfu, Jia Chong led the people to fight in Nanluo.

古文：军将败，骑督成倅弟太子舍人济谓充曰： 今日之事如何？ 
现代文：军队将要战败，骑督成悴的弟弟太子舍人成济对买充说： 今天的事怎么办? 
English: When the army was about to be defeated, the younger brother of the cavalry commander Cheng Zhen, the prince Shenren Cheng Zhi, said to Maidong: "What about today's matter?

古文：充曰： 公等养汝，正拟今日，复何疑！ 
现代文：买充说： 公养了你们这些人，止是为今天，还有什么可疑虑的! 
English: The groom said: "You people have been publicly supported, even for today, so what is there to be suspicious about?

古文：济于是抽戈犯跸。
现代文：成济于是抽出戈进犯高贵乡公的车驾。
English: As a result, Chengji pulled out Go to attack the nobleman's chariot.

古文：及常道乡公即位，进封安阳乡侯，增邑千二百户，统城外诸军，加散骑常侍。
现代文：等到常道乡公即位，进封为安阳乡侯，增加封邑一千二百户，统领城外诸军，加任散骑常侍。
English: After the enthronement of Tsunemichi Sengoku, he was given the fief of Anyang Sengoku, increased the number of fiefs by 1200, commanded the troops outside the city, and was appointed as a knight errant.

古文：钟会谋反于蜀，帝假充节，以本官都督关中、陇右诸军事，西据汉中，未至而会死。
现代文：钟会在蜀谋反，文帝令贾充持节，以本官都督关中、陇右诸军事，向西占据汉中，还没到钟会就死了。
English: The Bell Association plotted a rebellion in Shu, and Emperor Wen ordered Jia to hold the festival, and with his officials, the governor of Guanzhong, and the right-wing military, occupied Hanzhong to the west, and died before reaching the Bell Association.

古文：时军国多事，朝廷机密，皆与筹之。
现代文：当时军队国家多事，朝廷的机密，贾充都参与筹划。
English: At that time, the army and the country were busy, and the secrets of the imperial court, Jia Chong were involved in the planning.

古文：帝甚信重充，与裴秀、王沈、羊祜、荀勖同受腹心之任。
现代文：文帝很是信任器重贾充，与裴秀、王沈、羊枯、荀勖一同接受心腹重任。
English: Emperor Wen was very trusting of Jia Chong, and together with Pei Xiu, Wang Shen, Yang Kui, and Zou, he accepted the important responsibility of being his confidant.

古文：帝又命充定法律。
现代文：文帝又命令贾充修订法律。
English: Emperor Wen also ordered Jia Chong to revise the law.

古文：假金章，赐甲第一区。
现代文：使用金章，赐上等宅第一所。
English: Use the gold medal, give the first place of the first-class house.

古文：五等初建，封临沂侯，为晋元勋，深见宠异，禄赐常优于群官。
现代文：五等爵位刚建立，封为临沂侯，作为晋有大功勋者，深深地被宠信和特殊对待，俸禄赏赐常优于其他官员。
English: The fifth-class peerage had just been established, and he was given the title of Linyi Marquis. As a person with great merits, he was deeply favored and treated in a special way, and his salary was often better than that of other officials.

古文：充有刀笔才，能观察上旨。
现代文：贾充有舞文弄墨的才能，能观察上方的旨意。
English: Jia Cheng has the talent of dancing and writing, and can observe the will of the above.

古文：初，文帝以景帝恢赞王业，方传位于舞阳侯攸。
现代文：当初，文帝以景帝宏大佐助王业，将要把王位传给舞阳侯司马攸。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wen assisted King Ye with the help of Emperor Jing's senior aide, and he was about to pass the throne to Prince Muyang.

古文：充称武帝宽仁，且又居长，有人君之德，宜奉社稷。
现代文：买充称颂武帝宽厚仁慈，而且又是长子，有做君王的德行，应该继承王位。
English: Maidong praised Emperor Wu for being generous and benevolent, and also for being the eldest son, who had the virtue of being a king and should inherit the throne.

古文：及文帝寝疾，武帝请问后事。
现代文：等到文帝病卧在床上，武帝询问后事。
English: When Emperor Wen was lying ill in bed, Emperor Wu inquired about the aftermath.

古文：文帝曰： 知汝者贾公闾也。 
现代文：文帝说： 了解你的是贾公闾啊。 
English: Wen Di said: It is Jia Gongyao who understands you.

古文：帝袭王位，拜充晋国卫将军、仪同三司、给事中，改封临颍侯。
现代文：武帝继承王位，拜贾充为晋国卫将军、仪同三司、给事中，改封为临颖侯。
English: Emperor Wu succeeded to the throne, and Bai Jia was appointed as the General of the Jin National Guard, the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and was given the title of Lin Ying Hou.

古文：及受禅，充以建明大命，转车骑将军、散骑常侍、尚书仆射，更封鲁郡公，母柳氏为鲁国太夫人。
现代文：等到接受挥让，贾充因为参与建立国家昌明天命，转任车骑将军、散骑常侍、尚书仆射，改封鲁郡公，母亲柳氏为鲁国太夫人。
English: After accepting the concession, Jia Chong, because of his participation in the establishment of the State of Changmei, was transferred to the post of chariot and cavalry general, horseback riding attendant, Shang Shufu, and changed his title to Lu County, and his mother Liu was Lu Guotai's wife.

古文：充所定新律既班于天下，百姓便之。
现代文：买充制定的新法律颁布以后，百姓感到便利。
English: After the promulgation of the new law formulated by Maidong, the people feel convenient.

古文：诏曰： 汉氏以来，法令严峻。
现代文：诏书说： 汉代以来，法令严峻。
English: The edict said: Since the Han Dynasty, laws and regulations have become more severe.

古文：故自元成之世，及建安、嘉平之间，咸欲辩章旧典，删革刑书。
现代文：因而从漠元帝、汉成帝时代，到建安、嘉平之间，都想分析旧的典章，删定改革刑律。
English: Therefore, from the time of Emperor Mu Yuan and Emperor Han Zheng, to the time of Emperor Jianan and Emperor Jiaping, they all wanted to analyze the old ordinances and reform the criminal law.

古文：述作体大，历年无成。
现代文：因著述规模宏大，历经多年没有成功。
English: Due to the large scale of the work, it was not successful for many years.

古文：先帝愍元元之命陷于密网，亲发德音，厘正名实。
现代文：先帝怜悯善良的百姓陷于细密的法网，亲自发出仁德的声音，整理修正名实。
English: The former emperor pitied the kind-hearted people trapped in the intricate legal net, personally issued the voice of benevolence, and sorted out and amended the names and facts.

古文：车骑将军贾充，奖明圣意，谘询善道。
现代文：车骑将军买充，辅助光大圣意，咨询善道。
English: The chariot and cavalry generals buy the charge, assist the great holy will, and consult the good way.

古文：太傅郑冲，又与司空荀顗、中书监荀勖、中军将军羊祜、中护军王业，及廷尉杜友、守河南尹杜预、散骑侍郎裴楷、颍川太守周雄、齐相郭颀、骑都尉成公绥荀煇、尚书郎柳轨等，典正其事。
现代文：太傅郑冲，又与司空荀颢、中书监荀勖、中军将军羊枯、中护军王业，及廷尉杜友、守河南尹杜预、散骑侍郎裴楷、颖!太守周雄、齐相郭颀、骑都尉成公绥荀辉、尚书郎柳轨等，主持此事。
English: Taifu Zheng Chong presided over the event, together with the Secretary of the Empress Dowager, the Superintendent of Chinese Literature, the General of the Chinese Army, Yang Gu, and the Vice-Commander of the Chinese Army, Wang Ye, as well as the Imperial Lieutenant Du You, the Governor of Henan Province, Yin Du Yuan, the Sanzhi Attendant Pei Kai, the Ying! Governor Zhou Xiong, the Governor of Qi, Guo Wei, the Cavalry Lieutenant Cheng Gong, and the Scholar Liu Rail.

古文：朕每鉴其用心，常慨然嘉之。
现代文：我每每看到他们的用心，常感慨地称赞他们。
English: Every time I see their intentions, I often praise them with emotion.

古文：今法律既成，始班天下，刑宽禁简，足以克当先旨。
现代文：如今法律已经完成，开始在天下颁布，刑罚宽松禁令简化，足以符合先旨。
English: Now that the law has been completed, it has begun to be promulgated around the world, and the ban on lenient punishment has been simplified, which is enough to meet the goal.

古文：昔萧何以定律受封，叔孙通以制仪为奉常，赐金五百斤，弟子皆为郎。
现代文：过去萧何因为修定法律受封，叔孙通因为制定仪礼任奉常，赐金五百斤，弟子都为郎官。
English: In the past, Xiao He was awarded a title for revising the law, his uncle and grandson were appointed as officials for formulating the ceremony, and were awarded five hundred jin of gold, and his disciples were all retainers.

古文：夫立功立事，古之所重。
现代文：建立功勋完成事业，是古代所看重的。
English: In ancient times, it was important to establish a meritorious career.

古文：自太傅、车骑以下，皆加禄赏。其详依故典。 
现代文：白太傅、车骑以下，都加以俸禄赏赐，详细做法依照旧有的典章。 
English: Baidaifu, chariot and cavalry and below were all rewarded with a salary, and the details were in accordance with the old regulations.

古文：于是赐充子弟一人关内侯，绢五百匹。
现代文：于是赐贾充子弟一人任关内侯，绢五百匹。
English: As a result, he gave one of Jia Chong's sons the position of Guanai governor, with 500 horses.

古文：固让，不许。
现代文：贾充坚决推辞，皇帝不许。
English: Jia Chong firmly refused, and the emperor did not allow it.

古文：后代裴秀为尚书令，常侍、车骑将军如故。
现代文：后来代替裴秀任尚书令，常侍、车骑将军的职位依旧。
English: Later, he was replaced by Pei Xiu Ren Shang Shuling, and the positions of the regular attendant and the cavalry general remained the same.

古文：寻改常侍为侍中，赐绢七百匹。
现代文：不久改常侍为侍中，赐绢七百匹。
English: He soon changed from a regular attendant to an attendant, and was given seven hundred cows.

古文：以母忧去职，诏遣黄门侍郎慰问。
现代文：因母亲丧事离职，下韶书派遣黄门侍郎慰问。
English: Due to the death of his mother, he resigned from his post and sent a letter of condolence to Huangmen Zhi Rong.

古文：又以东南有事，遣典军将军杨嚣宣谕，使六旬还内。
现代文：又因为东南方有事，派典军将军杨嚣宣读旨意，让买充六十天后回朝廷。
English: Also, because there was something going on in the southeast, he sent the army general Yang Hanlin to read out the will, and asked Maichong to return to the imperial court in sixty days.

古文：充为政，务农节用，并官省职，帝善之，又以文武异容，求罢所领兵。
现代文：充立执政，致力农业节省用度，合并官吏减省职位，皇帝称赞他。又因为文武各有特长，请求撤销他所统领的兵士。
English: The emperor praised him for strengthening the government, striving to economize on agriculture, merging government officials and reducing provincial positions, and requested that the soldiers he commanded be removed because they each had their own strengths.

古文：及羊祜等出镇，充复上表欲立勋边境，帝并不许。
现代文：等到羊祜等人出外镇守，玺室又上表想在边境立功，皇帝都不同意。
English: The emperor did not agree to wait until the Shepherds and others went out to defend the town, and the Empress wanted to make a contribution at the border.

古文：从容任职，褒贬在已，颇好进士，每有所荐达，必终始经纬之，是以士多归焉。
现代文：从容任职，褒贬在于自己，很喜欢推举人才，每逢有所荐举，必定自始至终地规划安排，因此士人很多都归附他。
English: He holds his position with ease, the praise and criticism is up to him, he likes to promote talents, and whenever there is a recommendation, he must plan the arrangements from beginning to end, so many scholars are attached to him.

古文：帝舅王恂尝毁充，而充更进恂。
现代文：皇帝的舅舅王恂曾诋毁贾充，而置立更加举进王饱。
English: The emperor's uncle, Wang Qian, once slandered Jia Chong, but later promoted Wang Tan.

古文：或有背充以要权贵者，充皆阳以素意待之。
现代文：有时有背着买立耍弄权贵的人，贾充都表面上用真情相待。
English: Sometimes there are people who play with power and wealth behind the backs of buyers, but Jia Chengdu treats them with sincerity on the surface.

古文：而充无公方之操，不能正身率下，专以谄媚取容。
现代文：然而贾充没有正直公正的操守，不能端正自身为下属作表率，专门靠谄媚取悦于人。
English: However, Jia Chong did not have an honest and fair conduct, he could not set a good example for his subordinates, and he relied exclusively on being charming to please people.

古文：侍中任恺、中书令庾纯等刚直守正，咸共疾之。
现代文：侍中任恺、中书令庾纯等人刚直坚守公正，都厌恶他。
English: He was detested by Ren Zheng, a chamberlain, and Juchun, a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters, both of whom steadfastly adhered to justice.

古文：又以充女为齐王妃，惧后益盛。
现代文：又因为买充的女儿做了齐王妃，恐怕日后势力更盛。
English: Also, because the daughter of Maizhong became Queen Qi, I am afraid that her power will increase in the future.

古文：及氐羌反叛，时帝深以为虑，恺因进说，请充镇关中。
现代文：等到氐、羌反叛，当时皇帝为此十分忧虑，继于是进言，请求派买充镇守关中。
English: At that time, the emperor was very worried about this, so he made a suggestion and requested that Maizhong Town be sent to guard the pass.

古文：乃下诏曰： 秦凉二境，比年屡败，胡虏纵暴，百姓荼毒。
现代文：于是下诏书说： 秦凉两处边境，连年屡次打败仗，胡虏放纵暴行，百姓遭难。
English: Therefore, the next imperial edict said: The two borders of Qin and Liang suffered repeated defeats year after year, the Huns indulged in violence, and the people suffered.

古文：遂使异类扇动，害及中州。
现代文：于是使得外族人受到鼓动，祸害殃及中原地区。
English: As a result, foreigners were encouraged, and the scourge spread to the Central Plains.

古文：虽复吴蜀之寇，未尝至此。
现代文：即便是吴、蜀的侵犯，也没到如此地步。
English: Even the encroachments of Wu and Shu did not reach such a level.

古文：诚由所任不足以内抚夷夏，外镇丑逆，轻用其众而不能尽其力。
现代文：实在是由于在职的官吏不足以对内安抚夷夏，对外镇慑丑类叛逆，轻率地用兵而不能充分发挥出力量。
English: In fact, it is because the officials in office are not enough to appease the barbarians at home, to deter the ugly rebels abroad, and to use troops rashly, and cannot give full play to their strength.

古文：非得腹心之重，推毂委成，大匡其弊，恐为患未已。
现代文：如果不任用心腹重臣，委以重任责求成功，彻底匡正原来的弊端，恐怕祸患会没完没了。
English: If we don't allow the chief ministers with their hearts and bellies to take the lead, entrust them with the important task of demanding success, and thoroughly rectify the original drawbacks, I'm afraid the disaster will be endless.

古文：每虑斯难，忘寝与食。
现代文：每当想到边境的灾难，就废寝忘食。
English: Every time I think about the disaster at the border, I lose sleep and forget to eat.

古文：侍中、守尚书令、车骑将军贾充，雅量弘高，达见明远，武有折冲之威，文怀经国之虑，信结人心，名震域外。
现代文：侍中、守尚书令、车骑将军买充，超俗的气量高大，见识深远，武有击退敌军的威风，文有治国的智慧，诚信能团结人心，名声威震国外。
English: Samurai, Shosho Shuryo, and chariot and cavalry generals, all of them were endowed with superior vulgarity, lofty stature, far-reaching insight, military prowess to repel enemy forces, literature and wisdom to govern the country, integrity to unite people's hearts, and fame abroad.

古文：使权统方任，绥静西夏，则吾无西顾之念，而远近获安矣。
现代文：派他担负统率一方的重任，安定西夏，那么我就没有担心西方的忧虑，而远近都得以平安了。
English: Sending him to shoulder the heavy responsibility of leading one side and stabilizing Western Xia, then I did not worry about the worries of the West, and I was able to be safe far and near.

古文：其以充为使持节、都督秦凉二州诸军事，侍中、车骑将军如故，假羽葆、鼓吹，给第一驸马。 
现代文：任命贾充为使持节、都督秦凉二州诸军事，侍中、车骑将军的职位依旧，赐给羽葆、鼓吹，给第一驸马。 
English: Jia Chong was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the governor of Qin Liang and the military of the two states, the positions of the chamberlain and the cavalry general were still the same, and he was given feathers, propaganda, and the first steed.

古文：朝之贤良欲进忠规献替者，皆幸充此举，望隆惟新之化。
现代文：朝廷中的贤良想要进忠规劝静言直谏的人，都庆幸贾充的调任，期望宏大惟新的教化。
English: The virtuous people in the imperial court who wanted to promote loyalty, discipline and exhortation, and those who wanted to keep their mouths shut, were all grateful for Jia Chong's transfer and hoped for a grand but new enlightenment.

古文：充既外出，自以为失职，深衔任恺，计无所从。
现代文：贾充既然被外放任职，自以为失职，深深怨恨任恺，又无计可施。
English: Now that Jia Chong has been delegated, he thinks he has failed in his duty, deeply resents being appointed, and has nothing to do.

古文：将之镇，百僚饯于夕阳亭，荀勖私焉。
现代文：将要赴边镇，百官在夕阳亭为他饯行，荀勖与他私下交谈。
English: He is going to the border town. Hundreds of officials will march for him at the sunset pavilion and talk to him privately.

古文：充以忧告，勖曰： 公，国之宰辅，而为一夫所制，不亦鄙乎！
现代文：贾充把自己的忧虑告诉他，荀勖说： 公，是国家的宰辅，而竟被一个人所约束，难道不太轻视人了吗!
English: Jia Chong told him of his worries, and Zou said, "Isn't it rather contemptuous for a public official, who is the chief aide of the state, to be constrained by a person?

古文：然是行也，辞之实难，独有结婚太子，不顿驾而自留矣。 
现代文：然而这次外出，推辞实在太难。惟有与太子结成婚姻，不用费事就自然可以留下了。 
English: However, this time, it was too difficult to refuse to go out. However, if she married the crown prince, she could stay out of trouble.

古文：充曰： 然。
现代文：贾充说： 是这样。
English: Jia Chong said: That's right.

古文：孰可寄怀？ 
现代文：谁可以寄托心意呢? 
English: Who can be trusted?

古文：对曰： 勖请行之。 
现代文：荀勖回答说： 请让我去说此事。 
English: And the ass said, Let me now go and tell thee.

古文：俄而侍宴，论太子婚姻事，勖因言充女才质令淑，宜配储宫。
现代文：不久荀勖侍奉宴饮，议论太子婚事，荀勖趁机说贾充的女儿才貌美好，应婚配在皇储宫中。
English: Soon after, I was serving at a banquet and discussing the prince's marriage. I took the opportunity to say that Jia Chong's daughter was beautiful and was getting married in the crown prince's palace.

古文：而杨皇后及荀顗亦并称之。
现代文：而杨皇后及荀颛也都赞同。
English: And Empress Yang and Emperor Gao also agree.

古文：帝纳其言。
现代文：皇帝采纳了荀勖的意见。
English: The emperor accepted Zou's suggestion.

古文：会京师大雪，平地二尺，军不得发。
现代文：适逢京城下大雪，平地雪深二尺，军队不能出发。
English: It coincided with a heavy snowfall in the capital, with two feet of snow on the flat ground, and the army could not set out.

古文：既而皇储当婚，遂不西行。
现代文：不久皇储该结婚，于是不再去西部。
English: The Crown Prince was soon to be married, so he no longer went to the West.

古文：诏充居本职。
现代文：下诏令贾充官居本职。
English: He issued an edict ordering Jia Chong to stay in his post.

古文：先是羊祜密启留充，及是，帝以语充。
现代文：逭以前羊祜秘密启奏留下贾充，到这时，皇帝把这告诉买充。
English: At this time, the emperor told Maicheng about this.

古文：充谢祜曰： 始知君长者。 
现代文：贾充谢羊祜说： 我这才知道您是个长者。 
English: Jia Zhenxie said to the shepherd, "This is how I know that you are an elder.

古文：时吴将孙秀降，拜为骠骑大将军。
现代文：那时吴国将领孙秀归降，拜为骠骑大将军。
English: At that time, Sun Xiu, the general of the State of Wu, led the troops to surrender, and was worshiped as the general of the cavalry.

古文：帝以充旧臣。欲改班，使车骑居骠骑之右。
现代文：皇帝因为买充是旧臣，想改变朝廷班次，让车骑的位置在骠骑之上。
English: The emperor wanted to change the court's schedule, because the groom was a former vassal, so that the carriage ride would be placed above the horse ride.

古文：充固让，见听。
现代文：贾充坚决推让，被皇上听从。
English: Jia Chong resolutely gave in and was obeyed by the emperor.

古文：寻迁司空，侍中、尚书令、领兵如故。
现代文：不久迁任司空，侍中、尚书令、领兵依旧。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of Siku, but remained a chamberlain, courtier, and military leader.

古文：会帝寝疾，充及齐王攸、荀勖参医药。
现代文：适逢皇帝卧病在床，贾充及齐王司马攸、荀勖参与医药。
English: When the emperor was ill in bed, Jia Chong, Qi Wang, Sima You and Zou were involved in medicine.

古文：及疾愈，赐绢各五百匹。
现代文：等到病愈，每人赐绢五百匹。
English: When they are well, they will each be given five hundred donkeys.

古文：初，帝疾笃，朝廷属意于攸。
现代文：起初，皇帝病重，朝廷归心于司马攸。
English: At first, the emperor was seriously ill, and the court turned to Sima You.

古文：河南尹夏侯和谓充曰： 卿二女婿，亲疏等耳，立人当立德。 
现代文：河南尹夏侯和对贾充说： 您两个女婿，亲疏相等，立人当立德。 
English: Yin Xiao of Henan Province said to Jia Chong: Your two sons-in-law are as close as they are distant.

古文：充不答。
现代文：贾充不回答。
English: Jia Chong did not answer.

古文：及是，帝闻之，徙和光禄勋，乃夺充兵权，而位遇无替。
现代文：等到皇帝病好时，听说此事，调夏侯和任光禄勋，剥夺贾充的兵权，而官位待遇没有改变。
English: When the emperor recovered from his illness, he heard about the matter, transferred Xia Hou and Ren Guang to the Order of Merit, and deprived Jia Chong of his military power, but the official treatment of Zhou did not change.

古文：寻转太尉、行太子太保、录尚书事。
现代文：不久转任太尉、代理太子太保、录尚书事。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of captain, acting as the crown prince's bodyguard, and recorded in the records.

古文：咸宁三年，日蚀于三朝，充请逊位，不许。
现代文：咸宁三年，元旦那天食，贾充请求让位，不被允许。
English: In the third year of Xianning, the New Year's Day eclipse, Jia Chong requested to give way and was not allowed.

古文：更以沛国之公丘益其封，宠幸愈甚，朝臣咸侧目焉。
现代文：另外用沛国的公丘扩大贾充的封地，更加受宠，朝廷大臣都很忌恨他。
English: In addition, he expanded Jia Chong's fief with the public hill of Pei Province, which made him even more favored. The ministers of the imperial court all detested him.

古文：河南尹王恂上言： 弘训太后入庙，合食于景皇帝，齐王攸不得行其子礼。 
现代文：河南尹王恂进言说： 弘训太后的牌位进入宗庙，配享于景皇帝，齐王司马攸不能行儿子的礼仪。 
English: Henan Yin Wangqi Jinyan said: The card rank of Empress Dowager Hongxun entered the ancestral temple and was shared with Emperor Jing. Qi King Sima You could not perform the son's etiquette.

古文：充议以为： 礼，诸侯不得祖天子，公子不得祢先君，皆谓奉统承祀，非谓不得复其父祖也。
现代文：贾充议论认为： 根据礼，诸侯不能按对祖先的礼去祭天子，公子不能按对父亲的礼去祭先君，都说的是奉承皇统祭祀祖先，不是说不能恢复父祖关系。
English: Jia Chong argued that: According to the etiquette, the lords cannot sacrifice the heavenly son according to the etiquette of the ancestors, and the nobles cannot sacrifice the forefathers according to the etiquette of the fathers. All of this is said to flatter the imperial family and sacrifice the ancestors, not to say that the paternal relationship cannot be restored.

古文：攸身宜服三年丧事，自如臣制。 
现代文：司马攸应服三年丧事，自然是按照做臣的礼制。 
English: Sima You should serve a three-year funeral, naturally in accordance with the etiquette of being a minister.

古文：有司奏： 若如充议，服子服，行臣制，未有前比。
现代文：有关官吏上奏说： 如果依照贾充的议论，服儿子的丧服，行臣的礼制，以前是没有的。
English: Relevant officials reported: According to Jia Chong's argument, there was no such thing as wearing a son's funeral attire and a minister's etiquette in the past.

古文：宜如恂表，攸丧服从诸侯之例。 
现代文：应该按照王恂的表章，司马攸的丧服按诸侯的惯例。 
English: Wang Yao's epaulettes should be followed, and Sima You's mourning clothes should be in accordance with the practice of princes.

古文：帝从充议。
现代文：皇帝依从了买充的奏议。
English: The emperor complied with the demand for payment.

古文：伐吴之役，诏充为使持节、假黄钺、大都督，总统六师，给羽葆、鼓吹、缇幢、兵万人、骑二千，置左右长史、司马、从事中郎，增参军、骑司马各十人，帐下司马二十人，大车、官骑各三十人。
现代文：伐吴的战役，诏书任命买充为使持节、假黄铁、大都督，总统六军，给羽葆、鼓吹、缇幢、兵士一万人、骑兵二千，设置左右长史、司马、从事中郎，增加参军、骑司马各十人，帐下司马二十人，大车、官骑各三十人。
English: In the Battle of Gaowu, the imperial edict appointed Maidong as the commander of the Six Armies, the commander of the Six Armies, the commander of the Six Armies, the commander of the Six Armies, the commander of the Six Armies, the commander of the Six Armies, the commander of the Six Armies, the commander of the Six Armies, the commander of the Six Armies, the commander of the Six Armies, the commander of the Six Armies, the commander of the Six Armies, the commander of the Six Armies, the commander of the Six Armies, the commander of the Six Armies, and the commander of the Six Armies.

古文：充虑大功不捷，表陈 西有昆夷之患，北有幽并之戍，天下劳扰，年谷不登，兴军致讨，惧非其时。
现代文：贾充担心不能建立大功，上表陈述： 西部有昆夷的祸患，北部有幽并的战争，天下纷劳扰乱，粮食收成不好，起兵讨伐，恐怕不是时候。
English: Jia Chong was worried that he would not be able to build a great achievement. The above table states: the west has the scourge of Kunyi, the north has a war of annexation, the world is in turmoil, the grain harvest is not good, and it is probably not the time to start a crusade.

古文：又臣老迈，非所克堪。 诏曰： 君不行，吾便自出。 
现代文：再说我年老了不能承担这一重任。 诏书说： 你不去，我就亲自去。 
English: Besides, I am too old to take on this important task. The imperial edict said: If you don't go, I will go myself.

古文：充不得已，乃受节钺，将中军，为诸军节度，以冠军将军杨济为副，南屯襄阳。
现代文：贾充不得已，这才接受节铁，统率中军，为各军节制调度，以冠军将军杨济为副手，向南到襄阳驻扎。
English: Jia Chong had no choice but to accept the iron-saving policy, take command of the Chinese army, control the dispatching for each army, and with the champion general Yang Ji as his deputy, stationed in the south of Xiangyang.

古文：吴江陵诸守皆降，充乃徙屯项。
现代文：吴国江陵几个太守都投降了，贾充就改在项驻扎。
English: Several governors of Jiangling in Wuxi Province surrendered, and Jia Chong was stationed in Xiangzhou.

古文：王浚之克武昌也，充遣使表曰： 吴未可悉定，方夏，江淮下湿，疾疫必起，宜召诸军，以为后图。
现代文：王浚攻克武昌时，买充派使者上表说： 吴国不能完全平定，现在正值夏天，江淮低下潮湿，疾病瘟疫必定流行，应该召回诸军，为日后伐吴做准备。
English: When Wang Jun attacked Wuchang, he sent an envoy to say: Wu cannot be completely pacified. It is summer, the river is low and wet, and diseases and plagues are bound to be prevalent. The armies should be recalled to prepare for the future conquest of Wu.

古文：虽腰斩张华，不足以谢天下。 
现代文：即便是腰斩张华，也不足以向天下人谢罪。 
English: Even if Zhang Hua were to be beheaded, it would not be enough to apologize to the world.

古文：华豫平吴之策，故充以为言。
现代文：张华参与了平定吴国的策谋，因而买充这么说。
English: Zhang Hua was involved in the plot to pacify the State of Wu, and so he bought into it.

古文：中书监荀勖奏，宜如充表。
现代文：中书监荀勖上奏，说应按贾充的表章办。
English: The chief inspector of the Chinese Academy of Letters said that the case should be handled according to Jia Chong's order.

古文：帝不从。
现代文：皇帝不听。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：杜预闻充有奏，驰表固争，言平在旦夕。
现代文：杜预听说贾充有奏章，急忙上表力争，说平定吴就在这两天。
English: Du Yuan heard that Jia Chong had a musical composition, and hurried to the table to argue, saying that the pacification of Wu was in these two days.

古文：使及至轘辕，而孙皓已降。
现代文：使者到了辗辕时，孙皓已经投降了。
English: By the time the envoy arrived, Sun Yat-sen had already surrendered.

古文：吴平，军罢。
现代文：吴国被平定，收兵。
English: The state of Wu was pacified and the troops were withdrawn.

古文：帝遣侍中程咸犒劳，赐充帛八千匹，增邑八千户；分封从孙暢新城亭侯，盖安阳亭侯；弟阳里亭侯混、从孙关内侯众增户邑。
现代文：皇帝派侍中程咸犒劳，赐买充帛八千匹，增加封邑八千户；分封侄孙贾畅新城亭侯，贾盖安阳亭侯；弟阳里亭侯贾混、侄孙关内侯买众增加封邑。
English: The emperor sent his attendant, Zhong Cheng Xian Qiluo, to buy eight thousand horses and increase the fiefs of eight thousand households; the nephew of Sun Jia Chang Xincheng Tinghou, Jia Gai Anyang Tinghou, the younger brother of Yang Litinghou, Jia Gong, and the nephew of Sun Guanai Hou to increase the fiefs.

古文：充本无南伐之谋，固谏不见用。
现代文：贾充本来没有南伐的谋略，全力劝谏又不被采用。
English: Jia Chong originally did not have a strategy for the Southern Expedition, and he did his best to dissuade them from using it.

古文：及师出而吴平，大惭惧，议欲请罪。
现代文：等到军队出征并且平定了吴国，十分惭愧恐惧，商议要请罪。
English: When the army went to war and pacified Wu, they were so ashamed and afraid that they had to plead guilty.

古文：帝闻充当诣阙，豫幸东堂以待之。
现代文：皇帝听说贾充要入宫，就先到束堂等他。
English: When the emperor heard that Jia Chong wanted to enter the palace, he went to the vestry to wait for him.

古文：罢节钺、僚佐，仍假鼓吹、麾幢。
现代文：免去他节钹、僚佐，仍旧假鼓吹、麾幢。
English: Even though he has been relieved of his post as party secretary and deputy secretary, he is still a false propagandist and instigator.

古文：充与群臣上告成之礼，请有司具其事。
现代文：买充和群臣献上报告事成的礼，请有关官吏准备这件事。
English: Maichong and his courtiers presented the report as a gift, and asked the relevant officials to prepare the matter.

古文：帝谦让不许。
现代文：皇帝谦让不许。
English: The emperor would not allow any concessions.

古文：及疾笃，上印绶逊位。
现代文：等到病重，上交印绶让位。
English: Wait until you are seriously ill, hand in your seal and give up your seat.

古文：帝遣侍臣谕旨问疾，殿中太医致汤药，赐床帐钱帛，自皇太子宗室躬省起居。
现代文：皇帝派侍臣宣旨探问病情，殿中太医送上汤药，赏赐床帐钱帛，皇室的人包括皇太子都亲自去问候起居。
English: The emperor sent courtiers to inquire about the illness, the court physician sent Tang medicine and rewarded the bed curtain with money, and members of the royal family, including the crown prince, personally went to greet and move in.

古文：太康三年四月薨，时年六十六。
现代文：太康三年四月去世，时年六十六岁。
English: Taikang died in April of the same year, at the age of 66.

古文：帝为之恸，使使持节、太常奉策追赠太宰，加衮冕之服、绿綟绶、御剑，赐东园秘器、朝服一具、衣一袭，大鸿胪护丧事，假节钺、前后部羽葆、鼓吹、缇麾，大路、銮路、辒辌车、帐下司马大车，椎斧文衣武贲、轻车介士。
现代文：皇帝为他悲恸，派使持节、太常奉策追赠他为太宰，加授衮冕的服饰、绿縯绶、御剑，赐棺木、朝服一套、衣一套，大鸿胪监护丧事，假节铁、前后部羽葆、鼓吹、缇麾，大路、銮路、辊鲸车、帐下司马大车，椎斧文衣武士、轻车甲士。
English: The emperor mourned for him, sent envoys to hold the festival, too often pursued a strategy to present him as Dazai, awarded crowned clothing, green coats, swords, gave coffins, a set of court uniforms, a set of clothes, a great dragon guarding the funeral, a false festival iron, front and rear feather cocoons, trumpets, cymbals, a road, a road, a whale car, a horse-drawn cart under the account, a samurai with a chisel, and a light chariot.

古文：葬礼依霍光及安平献王故事，给茔田一顷。
现代文：葬礼依照霍光及安平献王先例，给墓地一顷。
English: The funeral followed the precedent of the offerings made by Emperor Huo Guang and Emperor Anping, and the cemetery was given one hectare.

古文：与石苞等为王功配飨庙庭，谥曰武。
现代文：与石苞等人因为辅佐帝王的功勋而附祭在皇室宗庙，谧号是武。
English: Along with Ishizaki and others, he was enshrined in the Imperial Family's ancestral temple for his services in assisting the emperor. His posthumous name was Ryo.

古文：追赠充子黎民为鲁殇公。
现代文：追赠买充的儿子黎民为鲁殇公。
English: Li Min, the son of Maiming, was posthumously awarded the title of Lulong Gong.

古文：充妇广城君郭槐，性妒忌。
现代文：贾充的妻子广城君郭槐，生性妒忌。
English: Jia Chong's wife, Guangcheng Jun Guoqi, was jealous.

古文：初，黎民年三岁，乳母抱之当阁。
现代文：当初，黎民三岁，奶妈在门前抱着他。
English: At first, when Limin was three years old, his wet nurse held him in front of the door.

古文：黎民见充入，喜笑，充就而拊之。
现代文：黎民看到买充进来，高兴地笑了，贾充过去抚摸他。
English: When Limin saw Jia Chong coming in, he smiled happily. Jia Chong went over to touch him.

古文：槐望见，谓充私乳母，即鞭杀之。
现代文：郭槐看见了，说买充舆奶妈有私情，于是把奶妈鞭打致死。
English: Guo Yao saw this and said that the milkmaid had a secret love affair, so he whipped her to death.

古文：黎民恋念，发病而死。
现代文：黎民怀念奶妈，生病死了。
English: Li Min misses her wet nurse, falls ill and dies.

古文：后又生男，过期，复为乳母所抱，充以手摩其头。
现代文：后来郭槐又生下个男孩，过周岁，又被奶妈抱着，买充用手摸孩子的头。
English: Later, Guo Wei gave birth to another boy, over a year old, and was again held by the wet nurse, touching the child's head with her hands.

古文：郭疑乳母，又杀之，兒亦思慕而死。
现代文：郭氏怀疑奶妈，又杀掉了，儿子也因思念奶妈而死。
English: Mr. Guo suspected the wet nurse and killed her, and his son also died because he missed the wet nurse.

古文：充遂无胤嗣。
现代文：买充于是没有后代继嗣。
English: As a result, Kacho had no descendants to succeed him.

古文：及薨，槐辄以外孙韩谧为黎民子，奉充后。
现代文：等到贾充死后，郭槐就让外孙韩谧做黎民的儿子，继承买充。
English: After Jia Chong's death, Guo Gan let his grandson Han Zheng become the son of Li Min and inherit the family fortune.

古文：郎中令韩咸、中尉曹轸谏槐曰： 礼，大宗无后，以小宗支子后之，无异姓为后之文。
现代文：郎中令韩咸、中尉曹轸劝谏郭搜说： 根据礼制，正宗没有后代，用旁宗支系的儿子作后代，没有让异姓作后代的条文。
English: According to the etiquette, the legitimate line has no descendants, and the sons of the branch line of the collateral line are used as descendants, and there is no provision for descendants with different surnames.

古文：无令先公怀腆后土，良史书过，岂不痛心。 
现代文：不要让先公怀抱美德于地下，却使得好史官记载他的过失，那岂不令人痛心。 
English: Let not our first father-in-law keep his virtues underground, but let a good historian record his faults. Would that not be painful?

古文：槐不从。
现代文：郭槐不听从。
English: Guo Yao did not listen.

古文：咸等上书求改立嗣，事寝不报。
现代文：韩咸等人上书请求改立继承人，事情被压下来没上报。
English: Han Xian and others submitted a request to change the successor, but the matter was suppressed and not reported.

古文：槐遂表陈是充遗意。
现代文：堑搂于是上表陈述立堕箠是翼室的遗愿。
English: Therefore, the above table states that it is the last wish of the wing room.

古文：帝乃诏曰： 太宰、鲁公充，崇德立勋，勤劳佐命，背世殂陨，每用悼心。
现代文：皇帝就下韶说： 太宰、鲁公贾充，崇大德行建立功勋，勤劳辅佐天命，辞世而去，每每让我悼念。
English: The emperor then said: Dazai, Lu Gong, Jia Chong, all of them have made great contributions to the establishment of virtue, worked hard to support the mission of heaven, and passed away. Let me mourn for them.

古文：又胤子早终，世嗣未立。
现代文：再说继嗣者死得早，后人还没确立。
English: Moreover, the heir died early, and the descendants have not yet been established.

古文：古者列国无嗣，取始封支庶，以绍其统，而近代更除其国。
现代文：古代诸国没有后嗣，用始封者的旁支来继承，而近代改为取消封国。
English: In ancient times, countries did not have heirs, so they used the collateral branch of the initiator to inherit, but in modern times, the country was abolished.

古文：至于周之公旦，汉之萧何，或豫建元子，或封爵元妃，盖尊显勋庸，不同常例。
现代文：至于周朝的公旦，汉代的萧何，或者预先确定嫡长子，或给元妃封爵，都是尊重显示他们的功勋，不同于常例。
English: As for the Zhou dynasty's Guotan, the Han dynasty's Xiao He, or predetermining the legitimate eldest son, or giving the Yuanfei a knighthood, are all respect to show their merits, different from the usual.

古文：太宰素取外孙韩谧为世子黎民后。
现代文：太宰平素选取外孙韩谧作长子黎民的后代。
English: Dazai Pingsu selected his grandchild Han Min as the descendant of his eldest son, Limin.

古文：吾退而断之，外孙骨肉至近，推恩计情，合于人心。
现代文：我私下裹考虑，外孙骨肉关系极亲近，推究恩情，合于人心。
English: I privately consider that the grandchild's flesh-and-blood relationship is very close, and it is in line with people's hearts.

古文：其以谧为鲁公世孙，以嗣其国。
现代文：让韩谧作鲁公的世孙，来继承他的封国。
English: Let Han Zheng be the grandson of Lu Gong to inherit his fief.

古文：自非功如太宰，始封无后如太宰，所取必以己自出不如太宰，皆不得以为比。 
现代文：假如不是功勋与太宰相同，始封没有后代与太宰一样，所选取的后人必定是自己的意愿选出的，可能不如太宰，都不能比照此例。 
English: If the merit is not the same as that of Dazai, and if there is no descendant of Shihong the same as Dazai, the chosen descendant must be chosen by his own will, may not be as good as Dazai, and cannot follow this example.

古文：及下礼官议充谥，博士秦秀议谥曰荒，帝不纳。
现代文：等到让礼官议定贾充的谧号，博士秦秀提议谧号叫荒，皇帝不采纳。
English: After waiting for the etiquette officials to agree on Jia Chong's posthumous name, Dr. Qin Xiu proposed that the posthumous name be called Han, but the emperor did not accept it.

古文：博士段暢希旨，建议谥曰武，帝乃从之。
现代文：博士段畅迎合皇上旨意，建议谧号叫武，皇帝逭才答应。
English: Dr. Duan smoothly catered to the emperor's will and suggested that the call sign be Wu. Only then did the emperor agree.

古文：自充薨至葬，赙赐二千万。
现代文：从贾充死到下葬，助丧的赏赐达两千万。
English: From Jia Chong's death to his burial, the reward for assisting the funeral reached 20 million.

古文：惠帝即位，贾后擅权，加充庙备六佾之乐，母郭为宜城君。
现代文：惠帝即位，买后专权，加赐贾充宗庙备有六佾的乐队，母亲郭氏为宜城君。
English: Emperor Hui ascended the throne, bought exclusive rights, and gave Jia Chong Zong Temple a six-stringed band. Guo's mother was Yicheng Jun.

古文：及郭氏亡，谥曰宣，特加殊礼。
现代文：等到郭氏死后，谧号是宣，特意加用特殊的礼仪。
English: After Guo's death, his posthumous name was changed to Xuan, and a special etiquette was added.

古文：时人讥之，而莫敢言者。
现代文：当时人们讥讽此事，但没有敢说话的人。
English: At the time, people scoffed, but no one dared to speak out.

古文：初，充前妻李氏淑美有才行，生二女褒、裕，褒一名荃，裕一名浚。
现代文：当初，贾充的前妻李氏贤淑美丽有好品行，生了两个女儿贾褒、买裕，买褒别名叫荃，裕别名叫浚。
English: At first, Jia Chong's ex-wife, Li Shizhen, was beautiful and virtuous. She gave birth to two daughters, Jia Bao and Mai Yu. Mai Boo's other name was Tsuen and Yubai's other name was Jun.

古文：父丰诛，李氏坐流徙。
现代文：李氏的父亲李丰被诛，李氏获罪被流放。
English: Mr. Li's father, Li Feng, was arrested, and Mr. Li was convicted and exiled.

古文：后娶城阳太守郭配女，即广城君也。
现代文：贾充后娶城阳太守郭配的女儿，也就是广城君。
English: Jia Chong later married the daughter of the city's Yang di-Pertuan Agong, also known as Guangcheng.

古文：武帝践阼，李以大赦得还，帝特诏充置左右夫人，充母亦敕充迎李氏。
现代文：武帝登上皇位，李氏因为大赦得以回来，皇帝特地下韶让买充设置左右夫人，买充的母亲也让亘童去迎接奎旦回来。
English: Emperor Wu ascended the throne, the Li clan was able to return because of the amnesty, the emperor specially ordered Maidang to set up the left and right wives, and Maidang's mother also let Watan go to welcome Quidan back.

古文：郭槐怒，攘袂数充曰： 刊定律令，为佐命之功，我有其分。
现代文：垫搀发怒，挽起袖子敷落贾充说： 刊改修订法律条令，完成辅佐天命的功业，也有我一份。
English: "I also have a part in publishing, amending and revising laws and regulations, and completing the work of assisting the mission of heaven," said Jia Chong, who was furious and rolled up his sleeves.

古文：李那得与我并！ 
现代文：李氏哪能与我并列! 
English: How can Mr. Li be ranked with me!

古文：充乃答诏，托以谦冲，不敢当两夫人盛礼，实畏槐也。
现代文：贾充于是回答诏命，以谦让为托辞，说不敢享有两位夫人的盛礼，其实是怕郭氏。
English: Jia Chong then replied to the imperial edict, using modesty as an excuse, saying that he did not dare to enjoy the grand ceremony of the two ladies, but was actually afraid of Guo.

古文：而荃为齐王攸妃，欲令充遣郭而还其母。
现代文：而买荃做了齐王司马攸的妃子，想让买充打发走郭氏而迎回她母亲。
English: However, Buy Tsuen became the concubine of Qi Wang Simayou, and wanted Buy Cheng to send away Guo and welcome back her mother.

古文：时沛国刘含母，及帝舅羽林监王虔前妻，皆毌丘俭孙女。
现代文：当时沛国刘含的母亲，以及皇帝之舅羽林监王卢的前妻，都是旦丘俊的孙女。
English: At that time, the mother of Liu Han of Pei Province, as well as the ex-wife of the emperor's uncle, Hu Lin Guan Wang Lu, were both granddaughters of Tan Qiu Jun.

古文：此例既多，质之礼官，俱不能决。
现代文：这样的事例多了，向礼官质询，都不能决断。
English: There are many such cases, and it is impossible to make a decision without questioning the etiquette official.

古文：虽不遣后妻，多异居私通。
现代文：虽然不遣送走后妻，一般都分居两处私下往来。
English: Although they do not send away the second wife, they generally live in two separate places and communicate privately.

古文：充自以宰相为海内准则，乃为李筑室于永年里而不往来。
现代文：贾充自认为宰相是天下行为的准则，于是为李氏在永年里修建房屋而不来往。
English: Jia Chong believed that the prime minister was the standard of conduct for the world, so he built a house for the Li family in Yongnian and did not come and go.

古文：荃、浚每号泣请充，充竟不往。
现代文：买荃、买浚常常号哭请求贾充，亘查终究不去。
English: Buy tsuen, buy dredge often cry out for Jia charge, after all, the investigation will not go.

古文：会充当镇关右，公卿供帐祖道，荃、浚惧充遂去，乃排幔出于坐中，叩头流血，向充及群僚陈母应还之意。
现代文：适逢贾直该去镇守阖右，公卿设帐祭路神，贾荃、买浚怕买充就此离去，于是排出帐幔来到座中，叩头流血，向买充及众官吏陈述母亲应该回家的道理。
English: When it was time for Jia Zhi to go to the town guard, the nobles set up a tent to offer sacrifices to the road god. Jia Zhen, Buyong and Buyong were afraid that Buyong would leave, so they put out the tent and came to the seat, bowed their heads and bled, and explained to Buyong and all the officials the reason why the mother should go home.

古文：众以荃王妃，皆惊起而散。
现代文：众人因为买荃是王妃，都惊起走散。
English: Everyone was startled and dispersed because they thought she was a princess.

古文：充甚愧愕，遣黄门将宫人扶去。
现代文：买充很是惭愧惊愕，派黄门将她扶走。
English: The buyer was very ashamed and surprised, and sent Huangmen to help her out.

古文：既而郭槐女为皇太子妃，帝乃下诏断如李比皆不得还，后荃恚愤而薨。
现代文：后来整搂的女儿做了皇太子妃，皇帝这才下诏断定如同李氏这一类情况的都不能重返家中，后来贾荃愤恨而死。
English: Later, Jiaqian's daughter became the crown princess, and the emperor issued an edict to the effect that no one under such circumstances as the Li family could return home. Later, Jiaqian died of indignation.

古文：初，槐欲省李氏，充曰： 彼有才气，卿往不如不往。 
现代文：起初，郭槐想去看望李氏，买充说： 她有才气，你去还不如不去。 
English: At first, Guo Yao wanted to visit Ms. Li, and Maidong said, "She has talent, you might as well not go."

古文：及女为妃，槐乃盛威仪而去。
现代文：等到女儿做了妃子，郭槐遣才威仪盛大地出行。
English: When her daughter became a concubine, Guo sent her on a grand trip.

古文：既入户，李氏出迎，槐不觉脚屈，因遂再拜。
现代文：进门以后，李氏出来迎接，郭槐不自觉地腿发软，于是拜了两拜。
English: After entering the door, Mr. Li came out to greet him. Unconsciously, Guo Yao's legs went limp, so he bowed twice.

古文：自是充每出行，槐辄使人寻之，恐其过李也。
现代文：从此以后，每逢买充出行，郭槐就派人寻找他，怕他去探望李氏。
English: From then on, whenever he traveled, Guo Gan would send someone to look for him, fearing that he would visit Mr. Li.

古文：初，充母柳见古今重节义，竟不知充与成济事，以济不忠，数追骂之。
现代文：起初，贾充的母亲柳见古今看重节操义气，竟然不知道贾充与成济的事，认为成济不忠，屡次追着骂他。
English: At first, Jia Chong's mother, Liu Jian, who valued loyalty above all else, didn't even know about Jia Chong and Cheng Zhi, thought that Cheng Zhi was unfaithful, and repeatedly chased and scolded him.

古文：侍者闻之，无不窃笑。
现代文：侍者们听到，没有不偷偷笑的。
English: The waiters couldn't help but chuckle when they heard it.

古文：及将亡，充问所欲言，柳曰： 我教汝迎李新妇尚不肯，安问他事！ 
现代文：等到将要去世，买充问她还想说什么，翅说： 我让你去迎接奎圭遍你尚且不肯，还问别的事! 
English: When she was about to die, Meitong asked her what else she wanted to say, and Ying said, "I asked you to meet Quigui, but you still didn't want to, so you asked about other things!"

古文：遂无言。
现代文：于是不说话。
English: So don't talk.

古文：及充薨后，李氏二女乃欲令其母祔葬，贾后弗之许也。
现代文：等到贾充死后，李氏的两个女儿想让母亲拊葬，买后不答应。
English: After Jia Chong's death, Mr. Li's two daughters wanted to have their mother buried, but he wouldn't allow it.

古文：及后废，李氏乃得合葬。
现代文：等到买后被废，李氏才得以合葬。
English: It wasn't until they were scrapped after they were bought that the Lee family was able to be buried together.

古文：李氏作《女训》行于世。
现代文：李氏作《女训》流行于世。
English: Ms. Li's "Feminine Discipline" is popular in the world.

古文：谧字长深。
现代文：贾谧字长深。
English: Jia Zhang's character is long and deep.

古文：母贾午，充少女也。
现代文：母亲买午，是贾充的小女儿。
English: Her mother bought her lunch. She is Jia Chong's youngest daughter.

古文：父韩寿，字德真，南阳堵阳人，魏司徒暨曾孙。
现代文：父亲韩寿，字德真，是南阳堵阳人，魏司徒韩暨的曾孙。
English: Han Shou's father, also known as Dezhen, was a Nanyang Doyang person, the great-grandson of Wei Sitou Han Ji.

古文：美姿貌，善容止，贾充辟为司空掾。
现代文：相貌美举止好，买充征他为司空掾。
English: Good-looking and good-mannered, he was recruited as a Sikuo.

古文：充每宴宾僚，其女辄于青钅巢中窥之，见寿而悦焉。
现代文：每逢贾充宴飨宾客幕僚，他小女儿就在宫门窥视，见到韩寿而喜欢他。
English: Every time Jia Chong feasted guests and staff, his little daughter peeked at the palace gate, saw Han Shou and liked him.

古文：问其左右识此人不，有一婢说寿姓字，云是故主人。
现代文：间她的左右是否认识此人，有一个婢女说出了韩寿的姓氏和字，说是以前的主人。
English: When asked whether she knew the man, one of the maids pronounced Han Shou's surname and Chinese character, saying that he was the previous owner.

古文：女大感想，发于寤寐。
现代文：女儿十分思慕，白天晚上都心神不定。
English: My daughter is very pensive, and her mind wanders all day and night.

古文：婢后往寿家，具说女意，并言其女光丽艳逸，端美绝伦。
现代文：婢女去韩寿家，说出了买午的心意，并说这个女子艳丽过人，端庄无比。
English: The maid went to Han Shou's house and told him of her intention to buy the horse, and said that this woman was extremely beautiful and extremely dignified.

古文：寿闻而心动，便令为通殷勤。
现代文：韩寿听说后动了心，于是让婢女为他转达自己的殷勤。
English: Han Shou was touched when he heard about it, so he asked the maid to convey his attentiveness to him.

古文：婢以白女，女遂潜修音好，厚相赠结，呼寿夕入。
现代文：婢女把话传给贾午，贾午于是暗中以身相许，丰厚地赠物结交，让堕画晚上去她住处。
English: The maid passed on the message to Jia Wu. Jia Wu then secretly promised to marry her, made friends with rich gifts, and let the fallen painting go to her place in the evening.

古文：寿劲捷过人，逾垣而至，家中莫知，惟充觉其女悦暢异于常日。
现代文：堕画强劲敏捷过人，翻墙而入，家中没人知道，衹有贾充察觉到小女儿愉悦畅快舆平常不同。
English: The fallen painting was extremely strong and agile, it climbed over the wall and entered the house, no one in the family knew about it, only Jia Cheng noticed that his little daughter's joyful and happy expression was different from usual.

古文：时西域有贡奇香，一著人则经月不歇，帝甚贵之，惟以赐充及大司马陈骞。
现代文：当时西域有人进贡奇香，一旦接触人身过月香味不消退，皇帝把香看得很贵重，祇赐给了买充和大司马陈骞。
English: At that time, there were people in the western region who came into possession of strange incense, and once they came into contact with people, the scent of the moon would not subside. The emperor regarded the incense as very precious, and only gave it to Maidong and Grand Master Chen Yao.

古文：其女密盗以遗寿，充僚属与寿燕处，闻其芬馥，称之于充。
现代文：买午暗中偷出来送给韩寿，买充的幕僚与韩寿宴饮相处，闻到那种香气，到买充那裹称赞。
English: Buy lunch secretly steal out and give it to Han Shou, buy stuffing staff and Han Shou banquet get along, smell that aroma, to buy stuffing that praise.

古文：自是充意知女与寿通，而其门阁严峻，不知所由得入。
现代文：由此贾充心中知道女儿与韩寿私通，然而他家门户严紧，不知经画从哪儿得以进去。
English: As a result, Jia Sheng knew in his heart that his daughter was having an affair with Han Shou. However, the gate of his home was tight, and he didn't know where the sutra could get in.

古文：乃夜中阳惊，托言有盗，因使循墙以观其变。
现代文：于是夜晚佯装受惊，藉日有盗贼，就派人巡视院墙来观察变动。
English: So they pretended to be alarmed at night, because there were thieves in the daytime, and sent someone to inspect the courtyard wall to observe the changes.

古文：左右白曰： 无余异，惟东北角如狐狸行处。 
现代文：左右人报告说： 没有别的异常，衹有东北角似乎有狐狸走动。 
English: People on both sides reported: There are no other abnormalities, but there seems to be a fox walking around in the northeast corner.

古文：充乃考问女之左右，具以状对。
现代文：贾充于是拷问小女儿的奴婢，都把实情说了。
English: Jia Chong then tortured his little daughter's servants, and they all told the truth.

古文：充秘之，遂以女妻寿。
现代文：贾充隐瞒了此事，于是把小女儿嫁给了韩寿。
English: Jia Chong concealed the affair and married his youngest daughter to Han Shou.

古文：寿官至散骑常侍、河南尹。
现代文：韩寿官做到散骑常侍、河南尹。
English: Han Shou-guan achieves the strolling equestrian, Henan Yin.

古文：元康初卒，赠骠骑将军。
现代文：元康初年死，追赠骠骑将军。
English: Yuan Kang died the first year and was posthumously awarded the title of General of Cavalry.

古文：谧好学，有才思。
现代文：买谧好学，有才气思路。
English: Buyers are eager to learn and have talented ideas.

古文：既为充嗣，继佐命之后，又贾后专恣，谧权过人主，至乃锁系黄门侍郎，其为威福如此。
现代文：他既是贾充的后嗣，继承了佐命重臣的传代，又有贾后的专宠放纵，贾谧的权力超过国君，以至于拘囚黄门侍郎，他作威作福就是这样。
English: He was not only Jia Chong's heir, he also inherited the lineage of the senior vassals, and he was also Jia Ye's special favorite. Jia Ye's power exceeded that of the sovereign, so much so that he imprisoned Huang Men's chamberlain. This is how he used his power for his own benefit.

古文：负其骄宠，奢侈逾度，室宇崇僭，器服珍丽，歌僮舞女，选极一时。
现代文：凭着骄宠，奢侈过度，房屋高大超越礼法，器用服饰珍贵华丽，歌僮舞女，都挑选了当时最好的。
English: With pride, excessive luxury, tall buildings beyond the etiquette, precious and gorgeous costumes, and singing and dancing girls, they all chose the best at that time.

古文：开阁延宾。海内辐凑，贵游豪戚及浮竞之徙，莫不尽礼事之。
现代文：开门请客，海内人物聚集，显贵的游士豪门的亲属以及追逐名利的人，没有不极尽礼节事奉他的。
English: Doors were opened to invite guests, people from overseas gathered, and relatives of prominent wanderers and those who were chasing fame and fortune served him with the utmost courtesy.

古文：或著文章称美谧，以方贾谊。
现代文：有人写文章赞美贾谧，用他和买谊相比。
English: Some people wrote articles praising Jia Jia, comparing him to Buyei.

古文：渤海石崇欧阳建、荥阳潘岳、吴国陆机陆云、兰陵缪征、京兆杜斌挚虞、琅邪诸葛诠、弘农王粹、襄城杜育、南阳邹捷、齐国左思、清河崔基、沛国刘瑰、汝南和郁周恢、安平牵秀、颍川陈、太原郭彰、高阳许猛、彭城刘讷、中山刘舆刘琨皆傅会于谧，号曰二十四友，其余不得预焉。
现代文：渤海石崇欧阳建、荣阳潘岳、吴国陆机陆云、兰陵缪征、京兆杜斌挚虞、琅邪诸葛诠、弘农王粹、襄城杜育、南阳邹捷、齐国左思、清河崔基、沛国刘瓖、汝南和郁周恢、安平牵秀、颖川陈畛、太原郭彰、高阳许猛、彭城刘讷、中山刘舆刘琨都依附于买谧，号称二十四友，其他人不得介入其间。
English: Erhai Shi Chong Ouyang Jian, Rongyang Pan Yue, Wu Guo Lu Ji Lu Yun, Lanling Mu Zheng, Jing Zhao Du Bin Wei Yu, Xing Zhe Zhu Ge Yin, Hong Nong Wang Qi, Xiangcheng Du Yu, Nanyang Zhi Jie, Qi Guo Zuo Si, Qinghe Cui Ji, Pei Guo Liu Jie, Runan He Yu Zhou Hui, Anping Tu Xiu, Yingchuan Chen Jie, Taiyuan Guo Chang, Gaoyang Xu Meng, Pengcheng Liu Ne, Zhongshan Liu Miao Liu Jie are all attached to Baizhang,

古文：历位散骑常侍、后军将军。
现代文：历任散骑常侍、后军将军。
English: Successive samurai rangers, rear army generals.

古文：广城君薨，去职。
现代文：广城君死，离职。
English: Guangcheng died and left office.

古文：丧未终。起为秘书监，掌国史。
现代文：服丧还没完，起用他为秘书监，掌管国史。
English: Before the mourning was over, he was appointed secretary-supervisor, in charge of national history.

古文：先是，朝廷议立晋书限断，中书监荀勖谓宜以魏正始起年，著作郎王瓚欲引嘉平已下朝臣尽入晋史，于时依违未有所决。
现代文：在这以前，朝廷议论修晋史的上限，中书监荀勖认为应从魏正始起年，著作郎王瓒想把嘉平以下的朝臣都收入晋史，当时究竟依照谁的意见还没有决断。
English: Prior to this, the imperial court discussed the upper limit of the revision of Jin history, and the supervisor of Chinese books, Cang Jun, believed that it should be from the beginning of the Wei Dynasty. The author, Lang Wang Jun, wanted to include all the courtiers below Jiaping in Jin history. At that time, it was not yet decided according to whose opinion.

古文：惠帝立，更使议之。
现代文：惠帝即位，又让朝臣议论此事。
English: When Emperor Hui ascended the throne, he let the courtiers discuss the matter.

古文：谧上议，请从泰始为断。
现代文：买谧上奏议，请求以泰始年为上限。
English: At the meeting, it was proposed that the upper limit should be the first year of the Thai year.

古文：于是事下三府，司徒王戎、司空张华、领军将军王衍、侍中乐广、黄门侍郎嵇绍、国子博士谢衡皆从谧议。
现代文：于是把此事下交三府，司徒王戎、司空张华、领军将军王衍、侍中乐广、黄门侍郎嵇绍、国子博士谢衡都同意买谧的奏议。
English: As a result, the matter was submitted to the three prefectures, and Wang Rong, the governor of Shitu, Zhang Hua, the governor of Ku, Wang Yan, the leader of the army, Le Guang, the chamberlain of Huangmen, Zou Shao, the chamberlain of Huangmen, and Xie Heng, the doctor of the state, all agreed to the proposal to buy the scepter.

古文：骑都尉济北侯荀畯、侍中荀籓、黄门侍郎华混以为宜用正始开元。
现代文：骑都尉济北侯荀唆、侍中荀藩、黄门侍郎华混认为应用正始年为起点。
English: The cavalry captain of Jibei Province, Hou Shuxiao, the chamberlain of Shifang, and the Yellow Gate chamberlain, Hua Jian, believed that the application of the first year was the starting point.

古文：博士荀熙、刁协谓宜嘉平起年。
现代文：博士荀熙、刁协认为应从嘉干起年。
English: Dr. Zou Xi and Zou Xie believe that it should start from Jiagang.

古文：谧重执奏戎、华之议，事遂施行。
现代文：买谧重申王戎、张华的议论，此事于是施行。
English: The buyer reiterated the arguments of Wang Rong and Zhang Hua, and the matter was then implemented.

古文：寻转侍中。领秘书监如故。
现代文：不久转任侍中，依旧兼任秘书监。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of chamberlain, and still concurrently held the position of secretary supervisor.

古文：谧时从帝幸宣武观校猎，讽尚书于会中召谧受拜，诫左右勿使人知，于是众疑其有异志矣。
现代文：页进当时跟从皇帝去宣武观围猎，婉言劝尚书在聚会时召唤买箠接受任命，告诫左右不要使别人知道，于是众人疑心贾箠有二心。
English: At that time, Zhejin followed the emperor to go to the Xuanwu siege and hunt, and advised Shangshu to summon Baiyao to accept the appointment at the gathering, and cautioned him not to let others know, so people suspected that Jia Yao was of two minds.

古文：谧既亲贵，数入二宫，共愍怀太子游处，无屈降心。
现代文：页箠因为地位亲贵，多次进入束宫，与愍怀太子一同游乐相处，没有屈己恭敬的心。
English: Because of his status as a close relative, Shifu entered Saku Palace many times and enjoyed the company of the Crown Prince, but he did not have the heart to defer to others.

古文：常与太子弈棋争道，成都王颖在坐，正色曰： 皇太子国之储君，贾谧何得无礼！ 
现代文：常与太子下棋争道，成都王司马颖在座，神情严肃地说： 皇太子是国家的储君，贾谧怎能无礼! 
English: Chengdu Wang Sima Ying said solemnly: The crown prince is the crown prince of the country, how can Jia Wei be rude!

古文：谧惧，言之于后，遂出颖为平北将军，镇鄴。
现代文：贾谧害怕，对皇后说了此事，于是把司马颖外放任平北将军，镇守邺。
English: Jia Wei was afraid and told the empress about the matter, so he appointed Sima Ying as the general of Pingbei and the town guard.

古文：及为常侍，侍讲东宫，太子意有不悦，谧患之。
现代文：到做常侍时，在束宫讲学，太子有不高兴的意思，买谧感到担忧。
English: When it came to being a regular attendant and lecturing at Sokogu, the prince was not happy and worried.

古文：而其家数有妖异，飘风吹其朝服飞上数百丈，坠于中丞台，又蛇出其被中，夜暴雷震其室，柱陷入地，压毁床帐，谧益恐。
现代文：而他家屡次出现怪异的事，风把他的朝服吹到天上几百丈高，掉到中丞台，还有蛇跑到他的被子中，夜晚暴雷击中他的房屋，柱子陷入地下，压坏了床帐，贾谧更是恐惧。
English: But strange things repeatedly occurred in his home. The wind blew his imperial robes hundreds of feet into the sky, causing them to fall to the middle of the bed, and snakes ran into his quilt. At night, thunderstorms hit his house, the pillars fell into the ground, crushing the bedspread. Jia Wei was even more afraid.

古文：及迁侍中，专掌禁内，遂与后成谋，诬陷太子。
现代文：等到迁任侍中，专管宫禁内部，于是与皇后合谋，诬陷太子。
English: He waited until he was transferred to the position of chamberlain, in charge of the inner palace, whereupon he conspired with the empress to frame the prince.

古文：及赵王伦废后，以诏召谧于殿前，将戮之。
现代文：等到赵王司马伦废了皇后，用诏书召买谧到殿前，将要杀了他。
English: When Zhao Wang Simarun abolished the empress and summoned the emperor to the palace with an imperial edict, they were going to kill him.

古文：走入西钟下，呼曰： 阿后救我！ 
现代文：跑到西边钟下，大喊： 皇后救我! 
English: He ran to the western clock and shouted, "Queen, save me!"

古文：乃就斩之。
现代文：于是就在钟下杀了他。
English: So he killed him under the clock.

古文：韩寿少弟蔚有器望，及寿兄巩令保、弟散骑侍郎预、吴王友鉴、谧母贾午皆伏诛。
现代文：韩寿的小弟韩蔚有才能名望，与韩寿兄巩令韩保、弟散骑侍郎韩预、吴王友韩鉴、买谧的母亲买午都被杀。
English: Han Shou's younger brother, Han Wei, had talent and fame, and Han Shou's brother, Gong Ling Han Bao, his younger brother, Sanzhijirong Han Yuan, Wu Wangyou Han Jian, and his mother, Miao Bao, were all killed.

古文：初，充伐吴时，尝屯项城，军中忽失充所在。
现代文：当初，贾充讨伐吴国时，曾经在项城屯兵，军中忽然找不到买充在哪裹。
English: At first, when Jia Chong was attacking Wu, he was stationed in Xiangcheng. Suddenly, the army couldn't find where to buy Chong.

古文：充帐下都督周勤时昼寝，梦见百余人录充，引入一迳。
现代文：贾充帐下都督周勤当时在白天打盹，梦见一百多人逮捕了贾充，带入一条路。
English: At that time, Zhou Qin, the governor under Jia Chong, was napping during the day. He dreamed that more than a hundred people arrested Jia Chong and took him to a road.

古文：勤惊觉，闻失充，乃出寻索，忽睹所梦之道。
现代文：周勤受惊醒来，听说买充丢了，就出去寻找，忽然看到梦中的那条路，于是前去寻求。
English: Zhou Qin was startled when he woke up and heard that he had lost his money, so he went out to look for it. Suddenly, he saw the road in his dream, so he went to look for it.

古文：遂往求之。
现代文：果然看到买充走到一处府宅，侍卫很多。
English: I actually saw a buyer walk up to a mansion and there were a lot of guards.

古文：果见充行至一府舍，侍卫甚盛。府公南南坐，声色甚历，谓充曰： 将乱吾家事，必尔与荀勖，既惑吾子，又乱吾孙。
现代文：宅主面朝南坐着，声音面容很是严厉，对贾充说： 将要搞乱我家事的，必定是你与荀勖，既迷惑我儿子，又扰乱我孙子。
English: The owner of the house, sitting facing south, his voice and face very stern, said to Jia Chong: "It must be you and Zou who are going to mess up my housework, both confusing my son and disturbing my grandson.

古文：间使任恺黜汝而不去，又使庾纯詈汝而不改。
现代文：其间让任恺废黜你而你不离去，又让庾纯责骂你而你不改悔。
English: In the meantime, let Ren decapitate you and you will not leave, and let Zichun scold you and you will not repent.

古文：今吴寇当平，汝方表斩张华。
现代文：如今吴国将要平定，你又要上表斩张华。
English: Now that Wu is about to be pacified, you want to go to the table and cut off Zhang Hua.

古文：汝之暗戆，皆此类也。若不悛慎，当旦夕加罪。 
现代文：你的愚昧，都是这一类。如果不改悔慎行，将早晚加罪。 
English: Your foolishness is of this kind. If you do not repent and act prudently, you will be punished sooner or later.

古文：充因叩头流血，公曰： 汝所以延日月而名器如此者，是卫府之勋耳。
现代文：贾充于是叩头流血。宅主说： 你所以能活到现在而且名号器用如此，是因为有守卫我府宅的功勋。
English: Jia Chong then bowed his head and bled. The owner of the house said, "The reason why you have been able to live until now, and why you use the famous trumpet, is because you have the merit of guarding my mansion."

古文：终当使系嗣死于钟虡之间，大子毙于金酒之中，小子困于枯木之下。
现代文：最终将让你的后嗣死于钟虚之间，大女儿死于金酒之中，小女儿受困于枯木之下。
English: In the end, your heir will die between the bells, your eldest daughter will die in the wine, and your youngest daughter will be trapped under a tree.

古文：荀勖亦宜同，然其先德小浓。故在汝后，数世之外，国嗣亦替。 
现代文：荀勖也该如此，然而他先前的德行稍厚，因而在你之后，几代以后，封国的继承人也将废置。 
English: The same should be true of Xing, but his previous virtue is a little thicker, so after you, after several generations, the successor of the fief will also be abolished.

古文：言毕，命去。
现代文：话说完，命令亘查离去。
English: After the speech, Wuchang was ordered to leave.

古文：充忽然得还营，颜色憔悴，性理昏丧，经日乃复。
现代文：买宜忽然得以回营，面容憔悴，神志不清，过了一天才恢复。
English: Buyi was suddenly able to return to the camp, his face was gaunt and confused, and he did not recover until a day later.

古文：及是，谧死于钟下，贾后服金酒而死，贾午考竟用大杖。终皆如所言。
现代文：到后来，买谧死于钟下，亘后喝金酒而死，买午被大杖拷打致死，都如同所说的那样。
English: Later, Maw Maw died under the bell, and later died after drinking gin, and Maw Maw was tortured to death with a cane, all as described.

古文：赵王伦之败，朝廷追述充勋，议立其后。
现代文：赵王司马伦失败时，朝廷追述亘童的功勋，商议为他立后嗣。
English: When Zhao Wang Simarun failed, the imperial court recounted the exploits of Guan Tong and discussed to set up an heir for him.

古文：欲以充从孙散骑侍郎众为嗣，众阳狂自免。
现代文：想让贾充的侄孙散骑侍郎贾众作后嗣，贾众装疯白兔。
English: Wanting to make Jia Chong's grandnephew Zang Jia, Jia Chong's servant, the heir, Jia Chong pretends to be a mad white rabbit.

古文：以子秃后充，封鲁公，又病死。
现代文：让贾众的儿子贾秃作买充的后人，封为鲁公，又病死了。
English: Let Jia Zong's son, Jia Gao, be the successor of Maizhong, be named Lu Gong, and then die of illness.

古文：永兴中，立充从曾孙湛为鲁公，奉充后，遭乱死，国除。
现代文：永兴年问，立贾充的侄曾孙买湛为鲁公，作为贾充的后嗣，遭动乱而死，封国被取消。
English: According to Yong Xingnian, Lijia Chong's great-nephew and great-grandson Maizhan was Lu Gong. As Jia Chong's heir, he died in the turmoil, and the state seal was cancelled.

古文：泰始中，人为充等谣曰： 贾、裴、王，乱纪纲。
现代文：泰始年间，人们为贾充等人作歌认说： 贾、裴、王，扰乱纪纲。
English: During the Taizhi era, people made songs for Jia Chong and others, saying: Jia, Pei, Wang, disrupt the discipline.

古文：王、裴、贾，济天下。 
现代文：王、裴、贾，成就天下。 
English: Wang, Pei, Jia, achievements all over the world.

古文：言亡魏而成晋也。
现代文：说的是他们葬送了魏而成就了晋。
English: What they are saying is that they have buried Wei and achieved Jin.

古文：充弟混，字宫奇，笃厚自守，无殊才能。
现代文：贾充的弟弟买混字宫奇，性情忠厚自守法度，没有特殊才能。
English: Jia Chong's younger brother is a mixed-race Miyaqi, loyal and law-abiding, with no special talents.

古文：太康中，为宗正卿。
现代文：太康年间，任宗正卿。
English: During the Taikang era, he was appointed as Zongzheng.

古文：历镇军将军，领城门校尉，加侍中，封永平侯。
现代文：历任镇军将军，兼城门校尉，加任侍中，被封为永平侯。
English: Successive generals of the town's army, as well as the captain of the castle gate, were also appointed as chamberlains, and were named Yongping Hou.

古文：卒，赠中军大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：死后，追赠中军大将军、仪同三司。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Chinese People's Liberation Army and the title of Third Secretary of the Communist Party of China.

古文：充从子彝、遵并有鉴裁，俱为黄门郎。
现代文：贾充的侄儿贾彝、贾遵都有鉴别判断力，都任黄门郎。
English: Jia Chong's nephews, Jia Wei and Jia Zun, both have discerning judgment and are both Huangmen Lang.

古文：遵弟模最知名。
现代文：买遵的弟弟贾模最知名。
English: Buy Zun's younger brother, Jia Miao, is the best known.

古文：模字思范，少有志尚。
现代文：贾模字思范，年少时有志向。
English: When he was young, Jia Mo had an aspiration.

古文：颇览载籍，而沈深有智算，确然难夺。
现代文：读了不少典籍，而且深沉善于谋划，坚定不可动摇。
English: He has read a lot of classics, and he is good at planning and unshakable.

古文：深为充所信爱，每事筹之焉。
现代文：很是被买充信任喜爱，每逢有事都和他筹划。
English: He is well-liked and trusted by his customers, and they always make plans with him.

古文：充年衰疾剧，恆忧己谥传，模曰： 是非久自见，不可掩也。 
现代文：贾充年老病重，总是担忧自己的谧号与传记，买模说： 是与非日久自然分明，不会被遮掩的。 
English: Jia Chong, who is old and seriously ill, is always worried about his nickname and biography. He said: "It is clear and natural and will not be covered up."

古文：起家为邵陵令，遂历事二宫尚书吏部郎，以公事免，起为车骑司马。
现代文：接受征召离家出任邵陵令，然后历任二宫尚书吏部郎，因为公事被免官，又起用为车骑司马。
English: He accepted a call-up to leave home to serve as Shao Lingling, and then the successive second palace Shang Shuli minister, because he was removed from office, he was also used as a chariot rider.

古文：豫诛杨骏，封平阳乡侯，邑千户。
现代文：参预诛杀杨骏，被封为平阳乡侯，封邑千户。
English: He was given the title of Pingyang Township Lord, and the fief of 1,000 households in Pingyang.

古文：及楚王玮矫诏害汝南王亮、太保卫瓘，诏使模将中驺二百人救之。
现代文：等到楚王司马璋假传诏令害汝南王司马亮、太保卫罐，诏书派贾模统率中骝二百人去救他们。
English: When King Sima Qian of Chu issued a false edict to kill King Sima Liang and King Taibowei of Yunnan, the edict sent thirty-two hundred people led by King Jia Miao to rescue them.

古文：是时贾后既豫朝政，欲委信亲党，拜模散骑常侍，二日擢为侍中。
现代文：那时贾后已干预朝政，想委任亲信同党，任命买模为散骑常侍，两天后就提拔为侍中。
English: At that time, Empress Dowager Jia had already intervened in the court politics, wanted to appoint her cronies and party members, and appointed Maiming as a riding attendant, and two days later he was promoted to a chamberlain.

古文：模乃尽心匡弼，推张华、裴顗同心辅政。
现代文：贾模于是尽心匡正辅佐，推举张华、裴颠同心辅佐朝政。
English: Jia Miao then devoted himself to being an assistant to Kuang Zheng, and promoted Zhang Hua and Pei Biao to the position of assistant to the emperor.

古文：数年之中，朝野宁静，模之力也。
现代文：几年之中，朝廷内外安宁平静，这是贾模的功劳。
English: For several years, there has been peace and tranquility inside and outside the imperial court, which is the merit of Jia Miao.

古文：乃加授光禄大夫。
现代文：于是加授他为光禄大夫。
English: As a result, he was awarded the title of doctor of light.

古文：然模潜执权势，外形欲远之，每有启奏贾后事，入辄取急，或托疾以避之。
现代文：然而贾模暗中执掌权势，外表却显得远离权势，每逢有启奏贾后的事，入宫则急忙索取，或假称有病来回避。
English: However, Jia Miao secretly held the power, but outwardly appeared to be far from the power. Whenever there was an announcement about Jia Guo, Rong Guo would hastily ask for it, or pretend to be ill to avoid it.

古文：至于素有嫌忿，多所中陷，朝廷甚惮之。
现代文：对于平素有嫌隙怨恨的人，经常从中陷害，朝廷人士很怕他。
English: For people who always have grudges and resentments, they are often framed, and people in the imperial court are very afraid of him.

古文：加贪冒聚敛，富拟王公。
现代文：加上贪脏冒领聚敛，财富可以和王公相比。
English: With the addition of greed, arrogance and concentration, the wealth can be compared to that of a prince.

古文：但贾后性甚强暴，模每尽言为陈祸福，后不能从，反谓模毁己。
现代文：但贾后性情强暴，贾模经常尽力为她陈说祸福，买后不能听从，反而说买模诋毁自己。
English: However, Jia Hou had a violent temper, and Jia Miao often tried her best to tell her the good and the bad, but she couldn't listen after she bought it. Instead, she slandered herself by saying that she bought it.

古文：于是委任之情日衰，而谗间之徒遂进。
现代文：于是委托信任的心情日见淡薄，而说坏话挑拨的人就有机可乘。
English: As a result, the mood of entrustment and trust is fading, and those who say bad words and provoke others have an opportunity to take advantage of it.

古文：模不得志，忧愤成疾。
现代文：买蝗不得志，忧愤成疾。
English: People are discouraged from buying locusts, and depression and anger have become a disease.

古文：卒，追赠车骑将军、开府仪同三司，谥曰成。
现代文：死，追赠车骑将军、开府仪同三司，谧号是盛。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the titles of General of Chariot and Cavalry, Kaifu Yi and Sanji. His posthumous name was Sheng.

古文：子游字彦将嗣，历官太子侍讲、员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：儿子亘游字童膻继嗣，历任太子侍讲、员外散骑侍郎。
English: His son, Watayu (Watayu), became the successor of Tongyu, and successively served as an attendant to the Crown Prince, and as a non-official horseback riding attendant.

古文：郭彰，字叔武，太原人，贾后从舅也。
现代文：郭彰字叔武，太原人，是买后的堂舅。
English: Guo Changzhi's uncle Wu, a native of Taiyuan, is the cousin after the purchase.

古文：与贾充素相亲遇，充妻待彰若同生。
现代文：与买充一向相互亲善，买充的妻子对待郭彰如同一母所生。
English: He and Meitong have always been friendly with each other. Meitong's wife treats Guo Zhang as if they were born from the same mother.

古文：历散骑常侍、尚书、卫将军，封冠军县侯。
现代文：历任散骑常侍、尚书、卫将军，被封为冠军县侯。
English: Successive stragglers, such as Tsuneishi, Shoshu, and Wei Shogun, were crowned as champion county magistrates.

古文：及贾后专朝，彰豫参权势，物情归附，宾客盈门。
现代文：等到买后专权，郭彰参预权势，人心归附，宾客盈门。
English: Wait until the exclusive right is bought, Guo Zhang will participate in the power reserve, the hearts of the people will be attached, and the guests will come to the door.

古文：世人称为 贾郭 ，谓谧及彰也。
现代文：世人称为 贾郭 ，说的是贾谧及郭彰。
English: The world knows him as Jia Guo, but he is actually Jia Ye and Guo Zhang.

古文：卒，谥曰烈。
现代文：死，谧号是烈。
English: After his death, his fame spread.

古文：杨骏，字文长，弘农华阴人也。
现代文：杨骏字文长，是弘农华阴人。
English: Yang Xizhong is a Hongnong Hua Yin person.

古文：少以王官为高陆令，骁骑、镇军二府司马。
现代文：年轻时以王官身份任高陆令、骁骑、镇军二府司马。
English: When he was young, he served as a royal official as a high-ranking land officer, a cavalry officer, and a town marshal of the second prefecture.

古文：后以后父超居重位，自镇军将军迁车骑将军，封临晋侯。
现代文：后来以皇后之父的身份破格承担重职，从镇军将军迁升为车骑将军，被封为临晋侯。
English: Later, as the father of the empress, he took on a heavy duty, was promoted from the general of the town army to the general of the cavalry, and was named the prince of Jin.

古文：识者议之曰： 夫封建诸侯，所以籓屏王室也。
现代文：有见识的人议论说： 封建诸侯，是为了作王室的屏障。
English: People with insight argue: feudal lords were created in order to act as a barrier to the royal family.

古文：后妃，所以供粢盛，弘内教也。
现代文：后妃，是负责准备祭品，弘扬宫内教化的。
English: The empress dowager is responsible for preparing the sacrificial offerings and promoting the enlightenment of the palace.

古文：后父始封而以临晋为侯，兆于乱矣。 
现代文：皇后的父亲一开始就被封为临晋侯，这是动乱的兆头。 
English: The empress's father was made a prince of Jin from the start, which was a sign of turmoil.

古文：尚书褚、郭奕并表骏小器，不可以任社稷之重。
现代文：尚书褚碧、郭奕都上表说杨骏气量小，不能担负国家重任。
English: Shang Shuxubi and Guo Yi both said on the table that Yang Hui had a small amount of energy and could not shoulder the heavy responsibilities of the country.

古文：武帝不从。
现代文：武帝不听。
English: Emperor Wu did not listen.

古文：帝自太康以后，天下无事，不复留心万机，惟耽酒色，始宠后党，请谒公行。
现代文：皇帝自从太康以后，天下安定，不再留心国事，衹是沉湎于酒色，开始宠幸皇后的亲属，请托说情公开行事。
English: Since Emperor Taikang, the world has been stable, he no longer pays attention to state affairs, he is addicted to wine, and he has begun to favor the relatives of the queen. Please ask him to act openly.

古文：而骏及珧、济势倾天下，时人有 三杨 之号。
现代文：而杨骏及杨珧、杨济权势压倒天下，当时的人有 三杨 的说法。
English: However, the power of Yang Hui, Yang Hui, and Yang Jie was overwhelming the world, and people at that time had the saying that the three yangs were the most powerful.

古文：及帝疾笃，未有顾命，佐命功臣，皆已没矣，朝臣惶惑，计无所从。
现代文：等到皇帝病重，没有遣命之托，辅佐天命的功臣，都已经死了，朝廷大臣惶恐疑惑，不知如何才好。
English: By the time the emperor was gravely ill, there was no death warrant, and the meritorious vassals who aided the emperor's destiny had all died. The ministers of the imperial court were panicked and confused, and did not know what to do.

古文：而骏尽斥群公，亲侍左右。因辄改易公卿，树其心腹。
现代文：而杨骏完全排斥开众公卿，自己守在皇帝左右，趁机就改换公卿，树立自己的心腹。
English: However, Yang Xuan completely excluded the nobles, he kept himself around the emperor, and took the opportunity to change the nobles and establish his own confidant.

古文：会帝小间，见所用者非，乃正色谓骏曰： 何得便尔！ 
现代文：正赶上皇帝病稍好转，见到所用的人不合适，于是严肃地对杨骏说： 怎能遣么随便呢! 
English: Just in time for the Emperor's illness to get a little better, he saw that the person he was using was not suitable, so he said gravely to Yang Xuan: "How can you just send him anywhere!

古文：乃诏中书，以汝南王亮与骏夹辅王室。
现代文：于是诏令中书，让汝南王司马亮与杨骏共同辅佐王室。
English: Therefore, according to the imperial edict, King Sima Liang of Yunnan and Yang Di jointly assisted the royal family.

古文：骏恐失权宠，从中书借诏观之，得便藏匿。
现代文：杨骏恐怕失去权势宠幸，从中书那裹借诏书看，得到后就藏匿了起来。
English: Afraid of losing his power, Yang Xuan borrowed the imperial edict from the Central Government and hid it after receiving it.

古文：中书监华廙恐惧，自往索之，终不肯与。
现代文：中书监华废害怕，亲自去索取韶书，杨骏始终不肯给他。
English: The Chinese book supervisor, Hua Kuo, was afraid and went to ask for the book in person, but Yang Xuan still refused to give it to him.

古文：信宿之间，上疾遂笃，后乃奏帝以骏辅政，帝颔之。
现代文：两夜之间，皇上病情加重，皇后于是奏请让杨骏辅政，皇帝点头答应了。
English: Within two nights, the emperor's condition worsened, so the empress asked Yang Jie to become the vice-regent. The emperor nodded and agreed.

古文：便召中书监华暠、令何劭，口宣帝旨使作遗诏，曰： 昔伊望作佐，勋垂不朽；周霍拜命，名冠往代。
现代文：于是叫来中书监华虏、中书令何劭，宣称皇帝旨意让他们作遣诏，说： 过去伊尹、姜望辅佐朝政，功勋永垂不朽；周勃、霍光受命，名声在以往的朝代最大。
English: Then they called in the Censors Huaru and the Censors He Yan, and declared that it was the emperor's will for them to make the dispatch, saying: In the past, Yi Yin and Jiang Wang Fu assisted the imperial government, and their achievements are immortal; Zhou Bo and Huo Guang were ordered, and their reputation was the greatest in the past dynasties.

古文：侍中、车骑将军、行太子太保，领前将军杨骏，经德履吉，鉴识明远，毗翼二宫，忠肃茂著，宜正位上台，拟迹阿衡。
现代文：侍中、车骑将军、行太子太保，兼前将军杨骏，有美德才能，判断识别力清晰深远，辅翼束宫，忠诚恭敬之心显著，应该把他的职位端正为三公，拟同宰相。
English: As a chamberlain, cavalry general, prince's bodyguard, and former general Yang Jiechi, he has the ability of virtue, the ability of clear and far-reaching judgment, the ability of supporting the palace, and the loyalty and respect. His position should be corrected as the three princes, and he should be appointed as the prime minister.

古文：其以骏为太尉、太子太傅、假节、都督中外诸军事，侍中、录尚书、领前将军如故。
现代文：任命杨骏为太尉、太子太傅、假节、都督中外诸军事，侍中、录尚书、兼前将军的职位依旧。
English: Yang Hui was appointed as the first lieutenant, the prince of the prince, the false festival, the governor, and the military, and the positions of the attendant, the record of honor, and the former general are still the same.

古文：置参军六人、步兵三千人、骑千人，移止前卫将军珧故府。
现代文：设置参军六人、步兵三千人、骑兵千人，搬到前卫将军杨珧原来的府第。
English: Six members of the army, 3,000 infantrymen and 1,000 cavalrymen were set up and moved to the former residence of the avant-garde general Yang Hui.

古文：若止宿殿中宜有翼卫，其差左右卫三部司马各二十人、殿中都尉司马十人给骏，令得持兵仗出入。 
现代文：如果住在殿中应有侍卫，派左右卫三部司马各二十人、殿中都尉司马十人给杨骏，让他们可以持兵仗出入。 
English: If there should be a bodyguard living in the hall, send twenty bodyguards from each of the three divisions of the left and right guards, and ten bodyguards from the palace, to Yang Xuan, so that they can enter and leave with soldiers.

古文：诏成，后对暠、劭以呈帝，帝亲视而无言。
现代文：诏书写成，皇后当着华广、何劭把诏书呈交皇帝，皇帝亲自看了没有说话。
English: After the imperial edict was written, the empress presented the imperial edict to the emperor in front of Hua Guang and He Yao. The emperor personally read it and did not speak.

古文：自是二日而崩，骏遂当寄托之重，居太极殿。
现代文：这之后两天皇帝去世，杨骏于是身负皇帝重托，居于太极殿。
English: Two days after this, the emperor died, and Yang Zhe was entrusted by the emperor to live in the Taiji Hall.

古文：梓宫将殡，六宫出辞，而骏不下殿，以武贲百人自卫。
现代文：皇帝的灵柩将要出殡，六宫出门辞行，而杨骏不下宫殿，用武士百人自卫。
English: The emperor's coffin is about to be carried out of the funeral, Six Palaces is leaving the palace, and Yang Xuan can't leave the palace and defends himself with a hundred warriors.

古文：不恭之迹，自此而始。
现代文：不恭敬的迹象，从这时开始了。
English: That's when the disrespectful signs started.

古文：惠帝即位，进骏为太傅、大都督、假黄钺，录朝政，百官总己。
现代文：惠帝即位，进升杨骏为太傅、大都督、假黄铁，总领朝政，百官归他一人管。
English: Emperor Hui ascended to the throne, and promoted Yang Xuan to taifu, grand governor, and pseudo Huang Tie, the head of the imperial court. He was in charge of hundreds of officials.

古文：虑左右间己，乃以其甥段广、张劭为近侍之职。
现代文：担心左右离间自己，于是让他外甥段广、张劭担任近侍的职务。
English: Worried about alienating himself from the left and right, he let his nephews, Duan Guang and Zhang Jun, serve as his aides-de-camp.

古文：凡有诏命，帝省讫，入呈太后，然后乃出。
现代文：凡有韶书命令，皇帝看完，入呈太后，然后才发出。
English: Whenever there is an imperial edict, the emperor will read it, present it to the empress dowager, and then issue it.

古文：骏知贾后情性难制，甚畏惮之。
现代文：杨骏知道贾后性情难于控制，很是惧怕她。
English: Yang Wei knew that Jia Hou's temper was difficult to control, and he was very afraid of her.

古文：又多树亲党，皆领禁兵。
现代文：又广泛培植亲信党羽，都率领禁兵。
English: They also extensively cultivated trusted party members, all of whom led the banned soldiers.

古文：于是公室怨望，天下愤然矣。
现代文：于是宗室抱怨，天下愤愤不平。
English: As a result, the family complained and the whole world was outraged.

古文：骏弟珧、济并有俊才，数相谏止，骏不能用，因废于家。
现代文：杨骏的弟弟杨珧、杨济都有出众的才能，多次劝他不要再如此，杨骏不能采纳，因而把他们废置在家而不用。
English: Yang Hui's younger brothers, Yang Hui and Yang Jie, both had outstanding talents. He was repeatedly advised not to do so, and Yang Hui could not adopt them, so he abandoned them at home.

古文：骏暗于古义，动违旧典。
现代文：杨骏不明古义，行动违反旧典章。
English: Yang Wei does not know the ancient meaning, and his actions are in violation of the old regulations.

古文：武帝崩未逾年而改元，议者咸以为违《春秋》逾年书即位之义。
现代文：武帝死还没过一年就改元，议论的人都认为违背了《春秋》过一年再记载即位的古义。
English: Emperor Wu died less than a year before the era was changed, and commentators believed that it violated the ancient meaning of "Spring and Autumn" to record the enthronement a year later.

古文：朝廷惜于前失，令史官没之，故明年正月复改年焉。
现代文：朝廷对先前的失误感到痛惜，让史官遮掩此事，因而第二年正月又改了年号。
English: The imperial court deplored the previous mistake and had the historian cover it up, so the year was changed again in the first month of the following year.

古文：骏自知素无美望，惧不能辑和远近，乃依魏明帝即位故事，遂大开封赏，欲以悦众，为政严碎，愎谏自用，不允众心。
现代文：杨骏自知平素没有好名声，怕不能和周围的人和睦相处，于是依照魏明帝即位时的先例，大行封官赏赐，想以此取悦众人。从政严厉琐碎，刚愎自用，不能和洽众心。
English: Yang Hui knew that he did not have a good reputation and was afraid that he would not be able to live in harmony with the people around him. Therefore, in accordance with the precedent of Emperor Wei Ming's accession to the throne, he wanted to please everyone by awarding a large number of officials. He was strict and petty in politics, he was stubborn and self-serving, and he could not reconcile the hearts of the people.

古文：冯翊太守孙楚素与骏厚，说之曰： 公以外戚，居伊霍之重，握大权，辅弱主。当仰思古人至公至诚谦顺之道。
现代文：冯翊太守孙楚平素舆杨骏深交，劝他说： 公以外戚身份，位居伊尹、霍光那样的要位，把握大权，辅佐弱主，应当认真想想古人极端恭敬极端诚信谦顺的道义。
English: Feng Yu, a close friend of Sun Chuping, advised him: "As a non-official relative, occupying an important position like Yin and Huo Guang, seizing power and assisting the weak, you should seriously think about the morality of the ancients' extreme respect, extreme honesty and humility.

古文：于周则周召为宰，在汉则硃虚、东牟，未有庶姓专朝，而克终庆祚者也。
现代文：在周朝则是周公、召公做宰相，在汉朝则靠朱虚、东牟，没有外姓专权而最终能成功的。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, it was Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong who served as prime ministers, while in the Han Dynasty, it was Zhu Qiu and Dong Mu who were able to succeed in the end without the exclusive power of foreign surnames.

古文：今宗室亲重，籓王方壮，而公不与共参万机，内怀猜忌，外树私昵，祸至无日矣。 
现代文：如今宗室亲近权重，藩王正强大，而您不和他们共同参预国事，内怀猜测妒忌，外树亲信私党，用不了多久祸患就到了。 
English: Now that the family is close and influential, and the lord of the domain is powerful, if you do not participate in the affairs of state with them, harboring speculation and jealousy, and trusting others instead of yourself, it will not take long for the disaster to come.

古文：骏不能从。
现代文：杨骏不能听从。
English: Yang Xuan could not obey.

古文：弘训少府蒯钦，骏之姑子。少而相昵，直亮不回，屡以正言犯骏，珧、济为之寒心。
现代文：弘训少府蒯钦，是杨骏姑母的儿子，两人年少时就亲昵，正直信实不遮掩，屡次以严正的话冒犯杨骏，杨珧、杨济都为他寒心。
English: Hongxun Shao Fu Yuqin is the son of Yang Hui's aunt. When they were young, they were intimate, honest and faithful, and repeatedly offended Yang Hui with stern words. Yang Hui and Yang Jie were cold-hearted towards him.

古文：钦曰： 杨文长虽暗，犹知人之无罪不可妄杀，必当疏我。
现代文：蒯钦说： 杨文长虽然昏庸，还知道人没罪不能乱杀，他必定疏远我。
English: Yu Qin said: Although Yang Wenchang is dim-witted, he still knows that people are not guilty and cannot kill indiscriminately. He must alienate me.

古文：我得疏外，可以不与俱死。
现代文：我能被疏远排斥在外，可以不和他一同死。
English: I can be alienated and excluded, I can choose not to die with him.

古文：不然，倾宗覆族，其能久乎！ 
现代文：不这样，宗族倾覆，还能有多久呢! 
English: Otherwise, how much longer can the clan be overthrown!

古文：殿中中郎孟观、李肇，素不为骏所礼，阴构骏将图社稷。
现代文：殿中中郎孟观、李肇，平素不被杨骏以礼相待，暗中编造杨骏要图谋国家大权。
English: Meng Guan and Li Zhao, the middlemen in the palace, were usually not treated with courtesy by Yang Xuan, and secretly fabricated Yang Xuan to plot state power.

古文：贾后欲预政事，而惮骏未得逞其所欲，又不肯以妇道事皇太后。
现代文：贾后想要干预政务，而因为怕杨骏没能如愿，又不愿以妇道事奉皇太后。
English: Empress Jia wanted to intervene in government affairs, but because she was afraid that Yang Pi would not be able to do so, she did not want to serve the empress dowager in a feminine way.

古文：黄门董猛，始自帝之为太子即为寺人监，在东宫给事于贾后。
现代文：黄门董猛，从皇帝做太子时就任寺人监，在束宫侍奉买后。
English: Huangmen Dong Meng, from the time when the emperor was crown prince, was appointed as the temple's overseer, and served as a concubine in the Sokong Palace.

古文：后密通消息于猛，谋废太后。
现代文：买后暗中与董猛互通消息，谋划废置太后。
English: After the purchase, he secretly exchanged information with Dong Meng and planned to abolish the Empress Dowager.

古文：猛乃与肇、观潜相结托。
现代文：董猛于是与李肇、孟观相互勾结依赖。
English: Therefore, Dong Meng and Li Zhao and Meng Guan colluded and relied on each other.

古文：贾后又令肇报大司马、汝南王亮，使连兵讨骏。
现代文：贾后又命令李肇通报大司马、汝南王司马亮，让他纠集军队讨伐杨骏。
English: Jia Hou also ordered Li Zhao to inform the Grand Sima and the Southern King Sima Liang, and let him gather an army to fight against Yang Hui.

古文：亮曰： 骏之凶暴，死亡无日，不足忧也。 
现代文：司马亮说： 杨骏凶狠残暴，死亡就在眼前，不足以忧虑。 
English: Sima Liang said: Yang Huo is ferocious and cruel, death is just around the corner, it is not enough to worry.

古文：肇报楚王玮，玮然之。
现代文：奎肇通报楚王司马璋，司马璋答应了他，于是请求入朝。
English: Kwei Zhao notified King Sima Qian of Chu, Sima Qian agreed to his request, and then requested to enter the imperial court.

古文：于是求入朝，骏素惮玮，先欲召入，防其为变，因遂听之。
现代文：杨骏一向怕司马璋，先前就想召他回朝，以防他制造变故，于是就听任他入朝。
English: Yang Xuan had always been afraid of Sima Xuan. He had wanted to call him back to the imperial court to prevent him from causing trouble, so he allowed him to enter the imperial court.

古文：及玮至，观、肇乃启帝，夜作诏，中外戒严，遣使奉诏废骏，以侯就第。
现代文：等到司马璋来了，盂观、李肇就奏请皇帝，连夜作韶书，内外戒严，派使者奉诏书废置杨骏，以侯爵身份回家。
English: When Sima Yi arrived, Gongguan and Li Zhaozhu immediately petitioned the emperor, issued an imperial edict overnight, imposed martial law at home and abroad, and sent an envoy to abolish Yang Pi with an imperial edict and return home as a marquis.

古文：东安公繇率殿中四百人随其后以讨骏。
现代文：束安公司马繇率领殿中四百人跟在使者后面去讨伐杨骏。
English: The four hundred people in the hall, led by Ma Jun of Sokan Company, followed the messenger to fight against Yang Jun.

古文：段广跪而言于帝曰： 杨骏受恩先帝，竭心辅政。
现代文：段广跪在地上对皇帝说： 杨骏受先帝恩宠，尽心辅政。
English: Duan Guang knelt on the ground and said to the emperor: Yang Xuan was favored by the former emperor and devoted himself to supporting the government.

古文：且孤公无子，岂有反理？
现代文：况且没有儿子，岂有反叛的道理?
English: Besides, if you don't have a son, is there any reason to rebel?

古文：愿陛下审之。 
现代文：愿陛下仔细考虑。 
English: May His Majesty consider it carefully.

古文：帝不答。
现代文：皇帝不回答。
English: Emperor Wu did not answer.

古文：时骏居曹爽故府，在武库南，闻内有变，召众官议之。
现代文：当时杨骏住在曹爽过去的府宅，在兵器库的南侧，听说宫内有变，召集众官商议。
English: At that time, Yang Jie was living in Cao Shuang's former mansion, on the south side of the arsenal. Hearing that there was a change in the palace, he summoned all officials for discussion.

古文：太傅主簿硃振说骏曰： 今内有变，其趣可知，必是阉竖为贾后设谋，不利于公。
现代文：太傅主簿塞面劝扰坠说： 如今宫内有变，其意图是可以预知的，必定是宦官内臣为贾后设立计谋，不利于公。
English: Taifu, the chief bookkeeper, said, "Nowadays, there is a change in the palace, and its intention is predictable. It must be the eunuchs and courtiers who have set up a scheme for Empress Jia, which is not conducive to the public.

古文：宜烧云龙门以示威，索造事都首，开万春门，引东宫及外营兵，公自拥翼皇太子，入宫取奸人。
现代文：应该火烧云龙门来示威，索求制造事端人的头，打开万春门，引来东宫及外营兵马，公自己拥持护卫着皇太子，入宫捉拿奸人。
English: They should demonstrate by setting fire to the Cloud Dragon Gate, demand the head of the troublemaker, open the Spring Gate, attract the East Palace and foreign soldiers and horses, publicly support and escort the crown prince, and enter the palace to catch the traitor.

古文：殿内震惧，必斩送之，可以免难。 
现代文：宫内震惊恐惧，必定杀了奸人送来，这样可以免于灾难。 
English: Shocked and terrified, the queen sent for the assassin to save her from disaster.

古文：骏素怯懦，不决，乃曰： 魏明帝造此大功，奈何烧之！ 
现代文：扰壁一向怯懦，不能决断，就说： 魏明帝建造了这样大的工程，怎样烧呢! 
English: The disturbers have always been cowardly, unable to make a decision, they said: Wei Mingdi built such a big project, how can it be burned!

古文：侍中傅祗夜白骏，请与武茂俱入云龙门观察事势。
现代文：侍中傅祗连夜告诉扰坠，请他与亘困一同进云龙门观察事态形势。
English: The chamberlain Fu Yao told the disturber overnight and asked him to go into the Dragon Gate to observe the situation.

古文：祗因谓群僚 宫中不宜空 ，便起揖，于是皆走。
现代文：堡抵藉机对群僚说 宫中不宜没人 ，然后站起揖别，于是众人都跑散了。
English: The bailiff of the castle said to his colleagues, "No one should be in the palace," and then stood up to say goodbye, so everyone ran away.

古文：寻而殿中兵出，烧骏府，又令弩士于阁上临骏府而射之，骏兵皆不得出。
现代文：很快宫裹出兵，火烧杨骏的府宅，又命令弓箭手在阁楼上从高处向杨骏府射箭，杨骏的兵士都出不来。
English: Soon, the palace sent soldiers to burn Yang Hui's mansion, and ordered archers to shoot arrows at Yang Hui's mansion from a high place in the attic. Yang Hui's soldiers could not get out.

古文：骏逃于马厩，以戟杀之。
现代文：杨骏逃到马厩，被戟杀死。
English: Yang Hui fled to the stables and was killed by a badger.

古文：观等受贾后密旨，诛骏亲党，皆夷三族，死者数千人。
现代文：孟观等人受贾后密令，诛杀杨骏的亲族同党，都夷灭三族，死了几千人。
English: Meng Guan and others were secretly ordered by Empress Jia to kill Yang Hui's relatives and party members, annihilating all three ethnic groups and killing several thousand people.

古文：又令李肇焚骏家私书，贾后不欲令武帝顾命手诏闻于四海也。
现代文：又命令李肇焚烧杨骏家私人藏书，贾后不愿让武帝遣命手诏被外界知道。
English: He also ordered Li Zhaozhou to burn the Yang Hui family's private collection of books. Jia Guo did not want the Emperor's order to be known to the outside world.

古文：骏既诛，莫敢收者，惟太傅舍人巴西阎纂殡敛之。
现代文：杨骏被杀后，没人敢收尸，祇有太傅舍人巴西阎纂收殓埋葬了他。
English: After Yang Hui was killed, no one dared to collect his body. It was only the Taifu's subordinate, Brazi Yan Cao, who buried him.

古文：初，骏征高士孙登，遗以布被。
现代文：当初，杨骏征召高士孙登，赠他布被。
English: At first, Yang Hui conscripted Sun Deng, a high-ranking official, and gave him a cloth quilt.

古文：登截被于门，大呼曰： 斫斫刺刺！ 
现代文：孙登在门前截断布被，大声喊： 砍砍刺刺。 
English: Sun Deng cut off the quilt in front of the door and shouted loudly: "Cut the thorn."

古文：旬日托疾诈死，及是，其言果验。
现代文：十天后声称有病装死，等到事发，他的话果然应验。
English: Ten days later, he claimed to have feigned death due to illness, and when the incident occurred, his words came true.

古文：永熙中，温县有人如狂，造书曰： 光光文长，大戟为墙。
现代文：永熙年间，温县有个人如同疯子，写书说： 光光文长，大戟为墙。
English: During the Yongxi era, there was a person in Wen County who was like a madman, writing a book saying: Guang Guang Wen Chang, Daxu is a wall.

古文：毒药虽行，戟还自伤。 
现代文：毒药虽然流行，还是戟把自己伤。 
English: Although poison is possible, the baboons still self-harmed.

古文：及骏居内府，以戟为卫焉。
现代文：等到杨骏居于内府，用戟作为防卫兵器。
English: Wait until Yang Xuan lives in Neifu, and use the crossbow as a defensive weapon.

古文：永宁初，诏曰： 舅氏失道，宗族陨坠，渭阳之思，孔怀感伤。
现代文：永宁初年，韶书说： 舅氏丧失道义，宗族陨落，甥舅之情，很令人感伤。
English: In the first year of Yongning, Zou Shu said: The uncle's loss of morality, the clan's fall, and the nephew's feelings are very sad.

古文：其以亭侯杨超为奉朝请、骑都尉，以慰《蓼莪》之思焉。 
现代文：命薪亭侯杨超为奉朝请、骑都尉，以此抚慰我像《蓼莪》诗中表达出的那种情思。 
English: Yang Chao, the steward of the Meitu Pavilion, was invited to serve the emperor and ride the horse of the captain, in order to soothe the feelings I expressed in the poem "."

古文：珧字文琚，历位尚书令、卫将军。
现代文：杨珧字文琚，历任尚书令、卫将军。
English: Yang Xizhi, successively Shang Shuling and Wei Zhenzhen.

古文：素有名称，得幸于武帝，时望在骏前。
现代文：一向有名望，受到武帝宠幸，当时的名气在杨骏之上。
English: He has always been famous and was favored by Emperor Wu. At that time, his fame was higher than Yang Xuan's.

古文：以兄贵盛，知权宠不可居，自乞逊位，前后恳至，终不获许。
现代文：因为兄长地位尊贵显赫，知道权力宠幸不能长久拥有，自己乞求辞职，前后几次恳切至诚，始终得不到允许。
English: Because the elder brother's status is distinguished and prominent, he knows that the power of favor cannot be held for a long time, he begged to resign, several times earnestly and sincerely, and was never allowed.

古文：初，聘后，珧表曰： 历观古今，一族二后，未尝以全，而受覆宗之祸。
现代文：当初，聘娶皇后，杨珧上表说： 考察古今历代，一个家族出两个皇后，未曾有得以保全的，反而遭受倾覆宗族的灾祸。
English: At first, when he proposed to marry the empress, Yang Zhe said on the table: "Looking at ancient and modern times, a family has produced two queens, which has never been preserved, but has suffered the disaster of overturning the clan.

古文：乞以表事藏之宗庙，若如臣之言，得以免祸。 
现代文：请求把此表收藏于宗庙，如果如同我所说的，得以免我灾祸。 
English: Request that this watch be kept in the ancestral temple, if, as I said, I can be spared from disaster.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从了他。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：右军督赵休上书陈： 王莽五公，兄弟相代。
现代文：右军督赵休上书说： 王莽家出五公，兄弟相替代。
English: Zhao Hui, the right-wing military governor, said in a letter: Wang Mengjia's five sons were replaced by brothers.

古文：今杨氏三公，并在大位，而天变屡见，臣窃为陛下忧之。 
现代文：如今杨氏三公，都居高位，而上天屡次显现出变故，我私下裹为陛下担忧此事。 
English: Today, the three Yang princes are all in high positions, and the heavens have repeatedly shown changes. I am privately worried about this for His Majesty.

古文：由此珧益惧。固求逊位，听之，赐钱百万、绢五千匹。
现代文：因此杨珧更加恐惧，坚决要求辞退官位，皇帝依从了他，赐钱一百万、绢五千匹。
English: Therefore, Yang Hui was even more afraid and insisted on resigning from his post. The emperor obeyed him and gave him one million yuan and five thousand horses.

古文：珧初以退让称，晚乃合朋党，构出齐王攸。
现代文：杨珧起初以谦让著称，晚年才纠合朋党，陷害齐王司马攸使他出京。
English: At first, Yang Xuan was known for his modesty, but in his later years he entangled his friends and fooled Qi Wang Sima You into sending him to Beijing.

古文：中护军羊琇与北军中侯成粲谋欲因见珧而手刃之。
现代文：中护军羊诱舆北军中候成粲谋划想趁着见杨珧时亲手杀掉他。
English: The middle-ranking military escort lured the middle-ranking Northern Army officer Cheng Yao into plotting to kill Yang Yao with his own hands when he saw him.

古文：珧知而辞疾不出。讽有司奏琇，转为太仆。
现代文：杨珧得知后声称有病不出门，暗示有关官吏上书弹劾羊璘，使他转任太仆。
English: After learning of this, Yang Hui claimed that he was ill and did not go out, implying that the relevant officials had impeached Yang Hui in a letter and transferred him to the post of eunuch.

古文：自是举朝莫敢枝梧，而素论尽矣。
现代文：从此整个朝廷没人敢抗拒他，而平素对他的美誉也全没有了。
English: From then on, no one in the entire court dared to oppose him, and his reputation was completely destroyed.

古文：珧临刑称冤，云： 事在石函，可问张华。 
现代文：杨珧临刑时喊冤，说： 事情都在石匣子裹，可以去问张华。 
English: When Yang Hui was about to be sentenced, he cried out for justice, saying, "Everything is in a stone box, you can go and ask Zhang Hua.

古文：当时皆谓宜为申理，合依钟毓事例。
现代文：当时都说应该为他申明理由，以符合钟毓事件的先例。
English: At that time, it was said that the reason should be stated for him in order to comply with the precedent of the Zhongyao incident.

古文：而贾氏族党待诸杨如仇，促行刑者遂斩之。时人莫不嗟叹焉。
现代文：然而亘旦亲族对待扰家人如同仇敌，催促行刑的人于是就杀了他，当时的人没有不为此而感叹的。
English: However, Wotan's relatives treated the disturber of the family as an enemy, and the person who urged the execution then killed him. People at the time did not fail to lament this.

古文：济字文通，历位镇南、征北将军，迁太子太傅。
现代文：杨济字文通，历任镇南、征北将军，迁任太子太傅。
English: Yang Jizhi, a literary man, successively served as a general in the south of Zhen'an and in the north of Zheng'an, and was transferred to the position of the prince's daifu.

古文：济有才艺，尝从武帝校猎北芒下，与侍中王济俱著布袴褶，骑马执角弓在辇前。
现代文：杨济有才气技艺，曾经跟从武帝在北芒下围猎，和侍中王济都穿布裤夹衣，骑马拿着角弓在车驾前。
English: Yang Jie had talent and skill. He once followed Emperor Wu on a hunting expedition under the Northern Mantle. Both he and his aide-de-camp, Wang Jie, wore cloth trouser jackets and rode horses with crossbows in front of their chariots.

古文：猛兽突出，帝命王济射之，应弦而倒。
现代文：猛兽突然迹出来，武帝命令王济射杀，结果应声而倒。
English: When the ferocious beast suddenly appeared, Emperor Wu ordered Wang Jizhong to shoot it, and the result was a resounding defeat.

古文：须臾复一出，济受诏又射杀之，六军大叫称快。
现代文：一会又迹出一只，杨济接受命令又射杀了它，六军大声欢呼叫好。
English: After a while, another one appeared. Yang Jie accepted the order and shot it, and the six armies cheered loudly.

古文：帝重兵官，多授贵戚清望，济以武艺号为称职。
现代文：皇帝重视武官，多根据名望向贵戚授职，杨济因为武艺号称称职。
English: The emperor attached great importance to military attachés, and most of them were appointed to noble relatives according to their reputation. Yang Jie was reputed to be competent in martial arts.

古文：与兄珧深虑盛满，乃与诸甥李斌等共切谏。
现代文：和兄长杨珧深深担心自满，于是与外甥奎逊等人恳切劝谏。
English: He and his elder brother, Yang Mi, were deeply worried about complacency, so they earnestly persuaded him with his nephew, Kui Xun and others.

古文：骏斥出王佑为河东太守，建立皇储，皆济谋也。
现代文：握坠贬斥王佐出京任太守，建立皇储，都是杨济的谋略。
English: It was Yang Jie's strategy to dismiss Wang Zu from the capital, appoint him as the governor-general, and establish the crown prince.

古文：初，骏忌大司马汝南王亮，催使之籓。
现代文：当初，杨骏顾忌大司马汝南王司马亮，催促他去藩国。
English: At first, Yang Hui was wary of the chief secretary Ma Runan Wang Sima Liang and urged him to go to the domain.

古文：济与斌数谏止之，骏遂疏济。
现代文：杨济与李斌屡次劝谏阻止他，杨骏于是疏远了杨济。
English: Yang Jie and Li Bin repeatedly urged him to stop him, and Yang Jie alienated Yang Jie.

古文：济谓傅咸曰： 若家兄征大司马入，退身避之，门户可得免耳。
现代文：杨济对傅咸说： 如果我兄长征调大司马入京，对他谦退避让，家门可以免于难。
English: Yang Jie said to Fu Ham, "If my elder brother, the Long Marching Adjusted Major Sima, enters Beijing, and I humbly back down and make concessions to him, my family will be spared from difficulties.

古文：不尔，行当赤族。 
现代文：如不那样，定会祸及家族。 
English: If not, it will be a disaster for the family.

古文：咸曰： 但征还，共崇至公，便立太平，无为避也。
现代文：傅咸说： 衹要征大司马回京，共同弘大公正，就可以确立太平，没必要避让。
English: Fu Xian said: "If we want to conscript the grand secretary Ma to return to Beijing and jointly promote justice, we can establish peace. There is no need to make concessions.

古文：夫人臣不可有专，岂独外戚！
现代文：大臣不能专权，难道仅限于外戚吗?
English: A minister cannot have exclusive power, is it limited to relatives?

古文：今宗室疏，因外戚之亲以得安，外戚危，倚宗室之重以为援，所谓脣齿相依，计之善者。 
现代文：如今宗室内部疏远，要靠外戚的亲近才得以安宁，外戚有危难，要倚仗宗室尊贵作为后援，这就是所谓唇齿相依，计谋中的上策。 
English: Nowadays, the family is estranged from the outside world, and it is necessary to rely on the closeness of the maternal relative to achieve peace. If the maternal relative is in danger, it is necessary to rely on the noble family as a backup. This is the so-called dependence of the lips and teeth, the best strategy in the strategy.

古文：济益惧而问石崇曰： 人心云何？ 
现代文：杨挤更加害怕而去问互塞说： 人心现在怎么想? 
English: Yang Jian was even more afraid and went to ask Wu Si: What does the human heart think now?

古文：崇曰： 贤兄执政，疏外宗室，宜与四海共之。 
现代文：互塞说： 你兄长执政，疏远排斥宗室，应该与四方共同掌管朝政。 
English: Yu Xie said: Your brother is in power, alienating and excluding the family, you should work with the four parties to take charge of the government.

古文：济曰： 见兄，可及此。 
现代文：杨济说： 见到我兄长，可以提及此话。 
English: Yang Jie said: When I see my brother, I can mention this.

古文：崇见骏，及焉，骏不纳。
现代文：石崇见到杨骏，说了此话，杨骏不采纳。
English: Shi Chong saw Yang Hui and said this, but Yang Hui did not accept it.

古文：后与诸兄俱见害。
现代文：后来和几位兄弟都被害。
English: He and several of his brothers were later killed.

古文：难发之夕，东宫召济。
现代文：灾难发生的那天晚上，东宫召见杨济。
English: On the night of the disaster, the East Palace summoned Yang Jie.

古文：济谓裴楷曰： 吾将何之？ 
现代文：杨济对裴楷说： 我该去哪裹呢? 
English: Yang Jie said to Pei Kai: Where should I go?

古文：楷曰： 子为保傅，当至东宫。 
现代文：蜚护说： 你身为保傅，应当去束宫。 
English: The tutor said, "As a tutor, you should go to the palace."

古文：济好施，久典兵马，所从四百余人皆秦中壮士，射则命中，皆欲救济。
现代文：扰遭喜好施舍，长期主管军队，跟从他的四百多人都是塞地壮士，衹要射箭就能命中，都要救杨济。
English: Disturbed by his penchant for charity, he has been in charge of the army for a long time. The more than four hundred people who follow him are strong men of the village. If they want to shoot arrows, they can hit, and they all want to save Yangji.

古文：济已入宫，莫不叹恨。
现代文：垄睦已经入宫，众人没有不叹息遗憾的。
English: Monk Mutsu has entered the imperial palace, and everyone is filled with regret.

古文：史臣曰：贾充以谄谀陋质，刀笔常材，幸属昌辰，滥叨非据。
现代文：史臣曰：贾充凭着谄媚奉承的浅薄品质，舞文弄墨的平庸才能，有幸赶上昌盛的时代，力不能胜任而占据高位。
English: Shichen said: Jia Cheng, with the shallow quality of flattering flattery and the mediocre talent of dancing, is fortunate to catch up with the prosperous era, but he is not competent to occupy a high position.

古文：抽戈犯顺，曾无猜惮之心；杖钺推亡，遽有知难之请，非惟魏朝之悖逆，抑亦晋室之罪人者欤！
现代文：抽出兵戈犯上作乱，连猜忌畏惧的心思都没有；交付他军权伐吴，竟有知难而退的请求，不仅是魏的叛逆，也是晋的罪人啊!
English: It is not only a Wei traitor, but also a Jin sinner, to draw out soldiers to commit a riot, without even a thought of suspicion or fear; to give his army the power to attack Wu, and then to ask them to retreat in the face of difficulties!

古文：然犹身极宠光，任兼文武，存荷台衡之寄，没有从享之荣，可谓无德而禄，殃将及矣。
现代文：然而他享尽宠幸光耀，身兼文武要职，活着担负宰相的重任，死后有柑祭于皇室的殊荣，可以说是没有美德而享有厚禄，灾祸将要殃及了。
English: However, he enjoyed all the favors and glories, holding the important posts of literature and martial arts, living to shoulder the heavy responsibilities of the prime minister, and after his death, he had the honor of being sacrificed to the royal family. It can be said that he had no virtue and enjoyed a rich reward. Disaster will befall.

古文：逮乎贻厥，乃乞丐之徒，嗣恶稔之余基，纵奸邪之凶德。
现代文：至于他的子孙，那是乞丐一类的人，继承了恶习的根本，放纵奸邪的凶德。
English: As for his descendants, they are beggars of the same kind, inheriting the root of vice, indulging in the evil of adultery.

古文：煽兹哲妇，索彼惟家，虽及诛夷，曷云塞责。
现代文：煽动那多谋的妇人，追求那种家天下的局面，即便是被诛灭，怎能说就算是开脱罪责了呢!
English: How can it be said to be exculpatory to incite the wily woman in pursuit of that domestic situation, even if it is destroyed!

古文：昔当涂阙翦，公闾实肆其劳，典午分崩，南风亦尽其力，可谓 君以此始，必以此终 ，信乎其然矣。
现代文：过去魏的破灭，贾充实在是尽了辛劳，晋的分崩，买后也尽了气力，可以说是 你以这种方式起家，必以这种方式终结 ，这话真是不假啊!
English: In the past, Wei's collapse, Jia Chong really did his best, Jin's collapse, and after the purchase also did his best, it can be said that you started in this way and will end in this way, this is really true!

古文：杨骏阶缘宠幸，遂荷栋梁之任，敬之犹恐弗逮，骄奢淫泆，庸可免乎？
现代文：杨骏凭藉外戚身份受宠幸，于是担负栋梁重任，恭敬尚且还怕来不及，反而骄奢淫佚，难道能免于灾难吗?
English: Yang Hui was favored by virtue of his status as a relative, so he shouldered the heavy responsibility. He was respectful, but he was afraid that it was too late. Instead, he was arrogant and lewd. Could he be spared from disaster?

古文：括母以明智全身，会昆以先言获宥，文琚识同曩烈，而罚异昔人，裴夫！
现代文：趟括的母亲因明智而保全自身，钟会的兄长因有言在先而获得赦免，文琚见识与先人相同，而受到的惩罚却与先人两样，可悲啊!
English: Watanabe's mother saved herself because of her wisdom, the brother of the bell association was pardoned because he spoke first, and Wenda's insight was the same as that of his predecessors, but the punishment he received was different from that of his predecessors. How sad!

古文：赞曰：公闾便佞，心乖雅正。
现代文：赞曰：公间谄佞，心思违背正道。
English: Zang Zai said, "When you are in public, your thoughts are against the right path."

古文：邀遇时来，遂阶荣命。
现代文：遇上好时机，于是登上显赫地位。
English: He rose to prominence at the right time.

古文：乞丐承绪，凶家乱政。
现代文：乞丐继承世系，祸害家族扰乱政治。
English: The beggar inherits the lineage, the scourge of the family disturbs politics.

古文：琐琐文长，遂居栋梁。
现代文：平庸的文长，就身居要职。
English: The mediocre Minister of Education is now in an important position.

古文：据非其位，乃底灭亡。
现代文：不胜任而占据高位，最终灭亡。
English: Incompetent and occupy high positions, and eventually perish.

古文：珧虽先觉，亦罹祸殃。
现代文：杨珧虽事先觉悟，也遭祸殃。
English: Although Yang Hui was aware in advance, he also suffered a misfortune.

