古文：孛秃，亦乞列思氏，善骑射。太祖尝潜遣术儿彻丹出使，至也儿古纳河。
现代文：孛秃，亦乞列思氏，善骑射，太祖曾暗遣术儿彻丹出使，至也儿古纳河。
English: He was bald, a member of the Kyles clan, a good horseman, and his great-grandfather had secretly sent an envoy to the Guna River.

古文：孛秃知其为帝所遣，值日暮，因留止宿，杀羊以享之。
现代文：孛秃知其为太祖所遣，又见天色已晚，乃留宿使者，杀羊款待。
English: The bald eagle knew that it was sent by the great-grandfather, and also saw that it was late in the day, but it was a messenger to stay, kill sheep and entertain.

古文：术儿彻丹马疲乏，复假以良马。
现代文：术儿彻丹的马疲乏，又为他更换良马。
English: The sorcerer Chetan's horse was tired, so he replaced it with a better one.

古文：及还，孛秃待之有加。
现代文：使者回还时，孛秃予以同样款待。
English: When the messenger returned, the vultures treated him in the same way.

古文：术儿彻丹具以白帝，帝大喜，许妻以皇妹帖木伦。
现代文：术儿彻丹将此情形入告太祖，太祖大喜，以其妹帖木伦许孛秃为妻。
English: Shu'er Chetan reported this to his grandfather, who was overjoyed and married his sister, Timurun Xiuyuan.

古文：孛秃宗族乃遣也不坚歹等诣太祖，因致言曰： 臣闻威德所加，若云开见日、春风解冻，喜不自胜。 
现代文：孛秃宗族遣也不坚歹等去见太祖，致意道 ：臣闻威德所加，若云开见日，春风解冻，喜不自胜。 
English: Gao Gao's family sent him to visit his great-grandfather, saying: "As a vassal, I've heard that if the clouds open and the spring thaw comes, I'll be overjoyed.

古文：帝问： 孛秃孳畜几何？ 也不坚歹对曰： 有马三十匹，请以马之半为聘礼。 
现代文：太祖问孛秃有多少牲畜，也不坚歹回答说： 有马三十匹，请允许以半数为聘礼。 
English: The great-grandfather asked the eunuch how many animals there were, and the eunuch replied, "There are thirty horses, please allow me to take half of them as a bride price."

古文：帝怒曰： 婚姻而论财，殆若商贾矣。
现代文：太祖很不高兴地说 ：婚姻若论财，则成为买卖婚姻了。
English: "If marriage is about money, then it's a marriage of convenience," the grandfather said angrily.

古文：昔人有言，同心实难，朕方欲取天下，汝亦乞列思之民，从孛秃效忠于我可也，何以财为！ 
现代文：昔人有言，难得同心同德。朕要取天下，你亦乞列思之民，随孛秃效忠于我就是了，讲财礼干什么！ 
English: The ancients said, it is rare to have the same heart and the same virtue. I want to take over the world, you also beg the people of Lixi, follow me and be loyal to me, why talk about money!

古文：竟以皇妹妻之。
现代文：于是嫁皇妹为孛秃妻。
English: So he married the empress's younger sister as his wife.

古文：既而札赤剌歹札木哈、脱也等以兵三万入寇。
现代文：不久，札赤剌歹札木哈、脱也等以兵三万入寇。
English: Not long after, the bandits of Zakkai, such as Zakiha and Tuya, invaded with thirty thousand soldiers.

古文：孛秃闻之，遣波栾歹、磨里秃秃来告，乃与哈剌里、札剌兀、塔儿哈泥等讨脱也等，掠其辎重，降其民。
现代文：孛秃闻讯，遣波栾歹、磨里秃秃报告太祖，自己与哈剌里、札剌兀、塔儿哈泥等领兵讨伐脱也等，缴获其辎重，部民归降。
English: Gao Gao heard the news, dispatched Bao Gao and Maoli Gao to report to Taizu, and led troops including himself, Hari, Zhaqi, and Tal Hamei to fight and escape. They captured his baggage, and his subordinates surrendered.

古文：乃蛮叛，帝召孛秃以兵至，大战败之。
现代文：乃蛮叛，太祖召孛秃领兵征讨，大败乃蛮。
English: It was a brutal rebellion, the great-grandfather summoned the bald eagle to lead the soldiers to fight, and the great defeat was brutal.

古文：皇妹薨，复妻以皇女火臣别吉，而命哈儿八台之子也可忽林图带弓矢为之侍。
现代文：太祖之皇妹死，又以皇女火臣别吉嫁孛秃为妻，且命哈儿八台之子也可忽林图为孛秃侍卫。
English: After the death of his great-grandfather's younger sister, he married the princess Beji, a retainer of fire, to a bald eagle, and the son of Hattai could also be a bald eagle's bodyguard.

古文：哈儿八台曰： 吾儿岂能为人臣仆，宁死不为也！ 
现代文：哈儿八台说 ：吾儿岂能为人臣仆，宁死也不可听从。 
English: Harehattai said, "Can my son be a vassal? I would rather die than obey."

古文：帝令孛秃与之敌，哈儿八台令月列等拒战于碗图河。
现代文：太祖令孛秃称兵讨伐。哈儿八台令月列等拒战于碗图河。
English: The great-great-grandfather ordered Gong Gao to call up troops for the crusade. Harpachidai ordered Yue Li and others to refuse to fight in the Bodu River.

古文：孛秃直前擒月列，剌杀也可忽林图，哈儿八台走渡拙赤河，又擒之，尽杀其众。从太师国王木华黎略地辽东、西，以功封冠懿二州。
现代文：孛秃生擒月列，刺杀也可忽林图。哈儿八台败走，渡赤河，终被擒。孛秃随太师国王木华黎攻占辽东、辽西，因功封冠、懿二州。
English: 

古文：从征西夏，病薨。赠推忠宣力佐命功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、驸马都尉、上柱国，进封昌王，谥忠武。
现代文：又从征西夏，病逝，赠推忠宣力佐命功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、驸马都尉、上柱国，进封昌王，谥 忠武 。
English: Also from the Western Xia Conquest, he died of illness, and was awarded the title of Hero, Grand Master, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, Captain of the Horse, Upper Pillar of the State, King of Changfeng, and the title of Taimu.

古文：札忽儿臣有子二人：长月列台，娶皇子赛因主卜女哈答罕公主，生脱别台，与乃颜战，有功。
现代文：其子锁儿哈承袭爵位。锁儿哈效忠于太宗，曾与木华黎攻取嘉州，有功，娶皇子斡赤之女安秃公主为妻，生女，为宪宗皇后。
English: His son, Zhao'er Ha, inherited the title. Zhao'er Ha was loyal to Emperor Taizong, fought with Mu Huali to conquer Jiazhou, and married Princess An Zhao, the daughter of Emperor Taizong, to become the Empress of Emperor Xianzong.

古文：次忽怜。忽怜，尚宪宗女伯牙鲁罕公主。
现代文：忽怜，孛秃之曾孙，初娶宪宗之女伯牙鲁罕公主为妻。
English: Khurei, the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grand

古文：后脱黑帖木儿叛，世祖命忽怜与失列及等讨之，大战终日，脱黑帖木儿败走，帝嘉之，复令尚宪宗孙女不兰奚公主。
现代文：脱黑帖木儿叛，世祖命忽怜与失列及等征讨，大败脱黑帖木儿，世祖大加称赞，又嫁宪宗孙女不兰奚公主与忽怜为妻。
English: After defeating the blackguard Timur, the patriarch praised him greatly, and married the granddaughter of the founder of the Jurchen dynasty, the princess Brangwen, to him.

古文：宋平，封以广州。
现代文：平宋后，封忽怜于广州。
English: After the Ping and Song dynasties, it was moved to Guangzhou.

古文：乃颜、声剌哈儿叛，世祖新征，薛彻坚等与哈答罕屡战，帝召忽怜至。
现代文：乃颜、声剌哈儿叛，世祖亲征，薛辙坚等与哈答罕屡战未胜。
English: Naoyan, Xingqin Haru rebelled, Shizuo Shichisei, Xue Rujian, and others repeatedly fought with Khatakhan but failed to win.

古文：值薛彻坚等战于程火失温之地，哈答罕众甚盛，忽怜以兵二百迎敌，败之。
现代文：世祖召忽怜助战，与哈答罕等战于程火失温之地，哈答罕兵多势盛，而忽怜以二百人迎战。
English: The world's ancestors called for the help of Kuo Rien in the war, and fought with Hatahan and others in the place where the fire lost its heat. Hatahan's soldiers were more powerful, while Kuo Rien fought with two hundred people.

古文：哈答罕等走度猱河，还其巢穴。
现代文：哈答罕战败，渡柔河而逃还其老巢。
English: After the defeat of Khatakhan, he crossed the Johor River and fled back to his hometown.

古文：又逾年，复往征之，与哈答罕遇于兀剌河。
现代文：第二年，世祖命忽怜再征哈答罕，两军会战于曲列儿与塔兀儿两河之间。
English: In the second year, Shizu no Mikoto suddenly re-conquered Khatakhan, and the two armies fought between the Quleer and Tager rivers.

古文：忽怜夜率千人潜入其军，尽杀之。
现代文：哈答罕又败，率大部渡塔兀儿河遁去，其余百人逃入山谷。
English: Khatakhan was defeated again, and most of his followers fled across the Tagaer River, while the remaining hundred fled into the valley.

古文：帝赐钞五万贯、金一铤、银十铤。
现代文：忽怜率二百人徒步追杀。又次年，忽怜与哈答罕再战于兀剌河，大胜，世祖赐钞五万贯、金一铤、银十铤。
English: The following year, Kuo Rong and Khatakhan fought again at the Luhe River, and won a great victory. The founder of the dynasty gave Kuo Rong 50,000 kroner in banknotes, 1 kroner in gold, and 10 kroner in silver.

古文：忽怜薨，赠效忠保德辅运佐理功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、驸马都尉、上柱国，追封昌王，谥忠宣。
现代文：忽怜死，赠效忠保德辅运佐理功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、驸马都尉、上柱国，追封昌王，谥 忠宣 。
English: After his sudden death, he bestowed the titles of Loyal Protector of the German Auxiliary Army, Sori Meritorious Servant, Grand Master, Kaifu Rite and Three Departments, Captain of the Horse, Upper Pillar of the State, Chieftain of Changwang, and Grand Marshal of the Republic of China.

古文：后加赠宣忠协力翊卫果毅功臣、太傅、仪同三司、上柱国、驸马都尉，追封赵王。
现代文：子阿失，成宗时因于朝廷有功，袭封为昌王，先后娶成宗之女亦里哈牙公主及宪宗曾孙女买的公主为妻。
English: He lost his son, and Chengzong, due to his achievements in the imperial court, was crowned King Chang. He successively married Chengzong's daughter, Princess Riha Ya, and Princess Buy, the great-granddaughter of Emperor Gensong.

古文：公主阿剌海别吉追封皇祖姑齐国大长公主，加封赵国。
现代文：阔里吉思本汪古部人，沙陀雁门之后。其曾祖阿剌兀思剔吉忽里，随太祖平乃蛮有功，死后追封为高唐王。
English: Kuo Li Ji Si was a member of Wang Gu Bu, after Shatou Geese Gate. His great-great-grandfather, Aqun Si Qi Ji Hu Li, followed the great-great-grandfather Ping Neng, and was posthumously crowned as the King of Gaotang.

古文：子君不花，尚定宗长女叶里迷失公主。爱不花，尚世祖季女月烈公主。
现代文：祖父孛要合，征西域有功，封北平王，娶阿剌海别吉公主为妻，死后先追封高唐王、赵王，加赠宣忠协力翊卫果毅功臣、太傅、仪同三司、上柱国、驸马都尉，谥 武毅 。父爱不花，娶世祖第四女月烈公主。
English: His grandfather, Zou Youhei, was awarded the title of Beiping King for his achievements in conquering the Western Regions, and married Princess Abuhai Beji as his wife. After his death, he was first awarded the titles of King of Gaotang and King of Zhao. He was also presented with the titles of Xuanzhong Zhonghe Xiewei Guoyi Hero, Taifu, Yi Tong Sanji, Shangzhuang Guo, Baima Duifeng, and Zou Wuyi. His father did not love him, and he married the fourth daughter of his ancestors, Princess Yue Liao.

古文：中统初，总兵讨阿里不哥，败阔不花于按檀火尔欢之地。
现代文：中统初，领兵讨阿里不哥，败阔不花于按檀火尔欢之地。
English: At the beginning of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, the leader of the army, Ali, was not a brother.

古文：子阔里吉思。
现代文：中统三年，围叛将李王于济南。
English: Three years after the reunification of China, Li Wang, a rebel general, arrived in Jinan.

古文：阔里吉思，性勇毅，习武事，尤笃于儒术，筑万卷堂于私第，日与诸儒讨论经史，性理、阴阳、术数，靡不该贯。
现代文：李王平，又从征西北，败叛王之党撒里蛮于孔古烈。阔里吉思禀性勇敢，习武事，却更爱儒学，自建 万卷堂 ，每日与诸儒讨论经史，性理、阴阳、占卜，无不精通。
English: Li Wangping, also from the Northwest Expedition, defeated the rebel king's party and defeated Kong Gurye. Guang Liji was brave and courageous, practiced martial arts, but loved Confucianism more, built his own Hall of Ten Thousand Scrolls, and discussed the history of scripture, nature, yin and yang, and divination with Confucians every day. He was well versed in everything.

古文：尚忽答的迷失公主，继尚爱牙失里公主。
现代文：先娶忽答的迷失公主，既而又娶爱牙失里公主。
English: First, marry the lost princess who does not know the answer, and then marry the princess who has lost her tooth.

古文：宗王也不干叛，率精骑千余，昼夜兼行，旬日追及之。
现代文：宗王也不干反，阔里吉思率精锐骑兵千余昼夜追赶。
English: His father-in-law did not resist, and Korigis led more than a thousand elite cavalry in a day-and-night pursuit.

古文：时方暑，将战，北风大起，左右请待之，阔里吉思曰： 当暑得风，天赞我也。 
现代文：时值盛夏，将出战，北风骤起，左右劝他稍待，俟风息再出战。阔里吉思说： 暑天有此北风，这是上天助我。 
English: It was midsummer, he was about to go to war, the north wind suddenly arose, he was advised to wait a bit, and then go to war with the wind in his sails.

古文：策马赴战，骑士随之，大杀其众，也不干以数骑遁去。
现代文：乃策马赴战，众骑随后，大败敌军。也不干率数骑逃遁，阔里吉思亦身中三箭。
English: He led his horse into battle, and the cavalry followed, defeating the enemy army. He also fled on horseback several times, and three arrows were shot into his body.

古文：阔里吉思身中三矢，断其发。凯还，诏赐黄金三斤、白金千五百斤。
现代文：凯旋回朝，世祖赐黄金三斤、白金一千五百斤。
English: After the triumphant return to the dynasty, the ancestors gave him three catties of gold and fifteen hundred catties of platinum.

古文：成宗即位，封高唐王。
现代文：成宗即位，袭封他为高唐王。
English: Chengzong ascended the throne and was crowned King of the High Tang Dynasty.

古文：西北不安，请于帝，愿往平之，再三请，帝乃许。
现代文：西北不安，阔里吉思请求率兵平定。申请再三，成宗才允准。
English: The northwest was uneasy, and Korigis requested to lead an army to quell the unrest. After repeated requests, Chengzong finally agreed.

古文：及行，且誓曰： 若不平定西北，吾马首不南。 
现代文：阔里吉思临行时誓言 ：若不平定西北，吾马首决不向南。 
English: When he was about to leave, he vowed: "If I don't pacify the northwest, I will never go south."

古文：大德元年夏，遇敌于伯牙思之地，众谓当俟大军毕至，与战未晚，阔里吉思曰： 大丈夫报国，而待人耶！ 
现代文：大德元年夏，遇敌于伯牙思之地。
English: In the summer of the first year of the Great German Empire, he encountered an enemy in the land of Bogaas.

古文：即整众鼓躁以进，大败之，擒其将卒百数以献。
现代文：诸将士认为应等待大军到齐后再出战未晚。阔里吉思说： 大丈夫报国，还要等待别人吗！ 
English: The soldiers thought that it was not too late to wait for the whole army to come together before going to war. Korigis said: "It's okay to report to the country, do you have to wait for others!"

古文：诏赐世祖所服貂裘、宝鞍，及缯锦七百、介胄、戈戟、弓矢等物。
现代文：当即挥军进攻，大败敌军，擒将卒一百余人，献俘朝廷，赐世祖所服貂裘、所用宝鞍，以及绸缎、甲胄、戈戟、弓矢等。
English: He immediately attacked with his army and defeated the enemy army. More than a hundred of his generals and officers were captured and presented to the imperial court. They were given the yakitori and saddles that their ancestors had used, as well as the silk and silk brocade, armor, gongs, bows and arrows, and so on.

古文：二年秋，诸王将帅共议防边，咸曰： 敌往岁不冬出，且可休兵于境。 
现代文：大德二年秋，诸王将帅讨论边防，都说据以往经验，敌人冬不出兵，边防戍兵可枕戈休息。
English: In the autumn of the second year of the Great German Reign, the generals discussed the border defense, and all said that according to past experience, the enemy would not send troops in winter, and the border guards could rest at home.

古文：阔里吉思曰： 不然，今秋候骑来者甚少，所谓鸷鸟将击，必匿其形，备不可缓也。 
现代文：阔里吉思则认为 ，今秋敌骑来者确实甚少，但常言说 鸷鸟将击，必匿其形 ，因此边防不可松懈。 
English: Korigis, on the other hand, believes that there are indeed few enemy riders this fall, but as the saying goes, "When the ostrich attacks, it must hide its form," so the border defense must not be relaxed.

古文：敌不敢逼。
现代文：众不以为然，而阔里吉思独自严兵以待。
English: The crowd was unconvinced, and Korigis waited alone.

古文：帝尝遣其家臣阿昔思特使敌境，见于人众中，阔里吉思一见辄问两宫安否，次问嗣子何如，言未毕，左右即引其去。
现代文：是年冬，果然敌人大军进犯，阔里吉思三战三捷，乘胜追击，深入险地。但后骑未能赶到，阔里吉思坐骑被绊倒，为敌所俘。敌人千方百计诱他投降，阔里吉思宁死不屈。
English: It was the winter of the year, and sure enough, a large army of the enemy attacked, and after three battles, three victories, and a victorious pursuit, Quirighis found himself in a perilous situation. However, the rear cavalry failed to arrive, and Quirighis's mount stumbled and was captured by the enemy. The enemy did everything possible to entice him to surrender, but Quirighis preferred to die.

古文：明日，遣使者还，不复再见，竟不屈死焉。
现代文：成宗派阔里吉思家臣阿昔思为特使，入敌境去探望，阔里吉思见阿昔思，只问皇帝皇后安否，嗣子如何。最后不屈而死。
English: As a special envoy, he entered the enemy territory to pay a visit, and when he saw her, he only asked the emperor and empress whether she was safe and how the heir was doing. Finally, he died without giving in.

古文：九年，追封高唐忠献王，加赠推忠宣力崇文守正亮节保德功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国、驸马都尉，追封赵王。
现代文：大德九年，追封高唐忠献王，加赠推忠宣力崇文守正亮节保德功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国、驸马都尉，追封为赵王。
English: In the ninth year of the Great Degenerate, Gao Tang Zhong Xian Wang was posthumously awarded the title of Zhao Wang. In addition, he was awarded the title of Zhao Wang for the promotion of loyalty and propaganda, the title of Chongwen Shou Zhengliang, the title of Zhengliang, the title of Zhengliang, the title of Zhengliang, the title of Zhengliang.

古文：公主忽答的迷失追封齐国长公主，爱牙失里封齐国公主，并加封赵国。
现代文：妻忽答的迷失公主追封齐国长公主、爱牙失里公主封齐国公主，并加封赵国。
English: The lost princess, whose wife did not answer, was posthumously awarded the title of Qi Guofeng Princess, and the princess who lost her tooth was awarded the title of Qi Guofeng Princess, and was also awarded the title of Zhao Guofeng.

古文：子术安幼，诏以弟术忽难袭高唐王。
现代文：子术安年幼，诏以弟术忽难袭高唐王爵位。
English: His son Shuhan was young, and his younger brother Shuhan suddenly succeeded to the title of the King of Gaotang.

