古文：二月乙酉，公即位。
现代文：二月乙酉那天，晋悼公即位。
English: On the day of the second lunar eclipse in February, Emperor Jimmu ascended the throne.

古文：使吕宣子将下军，曰： 邲之役，吕锜佐智庄子于上军，获楚公子谷臣与连尹襄老，以免子羽。
现代文：任命吕宣子为下军元帅，说： 在邲之战中，吕锜在上军辅佐智庄子，俘获了楚国公子谷臣与连尹襄老，才使子羽免难归国。
English: He appointed Lü Xuan Zi as the field marshal of the lower army, saying: In the Battle of Jiuyue, Lü Zi assisted Shou Zi in the upper army, and captured Gu Zhen, the prince of Chu, and Lian Yin Xiang Lao, which saved Zi Yu from returning to the country.

古文：鄢之役，亲射楚王而败楚师，以定晋国而无后，其子孙不可不崇也。 
现代文：在鄢陵之战中，吕锜亲自射中了楚恭王的眼睛，打败了楚军，安定了晋国，而他的后代却没有当大官的，他的子孙不能不提拔。 
English: In the Battle of Fuling, Lv Ying personally shot the eye of King Chu Gong, defeated the Chu army, and stabilized Jin. While his descendants did not become high-ranking officials, his children and grandchildren must be promoted.

古文：使彘恭子将新军，曰： 武子之季、文子之母弟也。
现代文：任命彘恭子为新军元帅，说： 他是范武子的小儿子，范文子的同母兄弟。
English: He said: "He is the youngest son of Fan Wuzi and the half-brother of Fan Wenzi.

古文：武子宣法以定晋国，至于今是用。
现代文：范武子申明法令，安定了晋国，直到今天还在用他的法令。
English: Fan Mu Zi affirmed the decree, stabilized Jin, and is still using his decree to this day.

古文：文子勤身以定诸侯，至于今是赖。
现代文：范文子劳苦身子，平定了诸侯，直到今天还仰赖他的功劳。
English: Fan Wenzi worked hard, pacified the lords, and still relies on his merits to this day.

古文：夫二子之德，其可忘乎！ 
现代文：这两个人的功德，难道可以忘记吗？ 
English: Can the merits of these two people be forgotten?

古文：故以彘季屏其宗。
现代文：因此让彘季卫护他的宗族。
English: Therefore, let Han Jiwei protect his clan.

古文：使令狐文子佐之，曰： 昔克潞之役，秦来图败晋功，魏颗以其身却退秦师于辅氏，亲止杜回，其勋铭于景钟。
现代文：任命令狐文子为新军元帅，说： 在以前战胜潞国的战役中，秦国曾图谋打败晋国，魏颗亲自在辅氏击退了秦军，俘虏了杜回，他的功勋铭刻在景公钟上。
English: Ren ordered the fox Wen Zi to be the marshal of the new army, saying: In the previous battle to defeat Shandong, Qin had plotted to defeat Jin. Wei personally repulsed the Qin army at Fu, captured Du Wei, and his exploits were engraved on the Jinggong bell.

古文：至于今不育，其子不可不兴也。 
现代文：直到今天后代还没得到举荐，他的儿子不能不起用。 
English: To this day, his descendants have not been recommended, and his son cannot help but be used.

古文：君知士贞子之帅志博闻而宣惠于教也，使为太傅。
现代文：悼公知道士贞子专心致志，博学多闻，而且致力于教育，让他任太傅。
English: The mourning public knew that Sadako was dedicated, knowledgeable, and committed to education, and appointed him as taifu.

古文：知右行辛之能以数宣物定功也，使为元司空。
现代文：知道右行辛擅长计算，明白物理而成就功业，让他任司空。
English: Knowing that Zuo Xingxin is good at calculation, understands physics and accomplishes his work, let him be a steward.

古文：知栾纠之能御以和于政也，使为戎御。
现代文：知道栾纠善于驾车来配合军政，让他任国君战车的御者。
English: Knowing that Xuan Zang was good at driving to cooperate with the military government, he was appointed as the driver of Guojun's chariot.

古文：知荀宾之有力而不暴也，使为戎右。
现代文：知道荀宾力气大而不暴虐，让他任车右。
English: Knowing that Hao Bin was strong and not violent, he let him drive the car.

古文：栾伯请公族大夫，公曰： 荀家惇惠，荀会文敏，黡也果敢，无忌镇静，使兹四人者为之。
现代文：栾伯请求委任公族大夫，悼公说： 荀家朴实宽厚，荀会好学聪明，栾黡果敢决断，无忌沉着镇定，让这四个人当公族大夫。
English: Zou Bo requested the appointment of a public doctor, and mourned: Zou's family is simple and generous, Zou is eager to learn and clever, Zou dares to make decisions, and is calm and composed. Let these four people be public doctors.

古文：夫膏粱之性难正也，故使惇惠者教之，使文敏者导之，使果敢者谂之，使镇静者修之。
现代文：那些富家子弟生性骄横难以矫正，所以让朴实宽厚的人教育他们，让好学聪明的人辅导他们，让果敢决断的人告戒他们，让沉着镇定的人修正他们。
English: The arrogance of those rich children is difficult to correct, so let the simple and generous people educate them, let the studious and intelligent people guide them, let the resolute people warn them, and let the calm and calm people correct them.

古文：惇惠者教之，则遍而不倦；文敏者导之，则婉而入；果敢者谂之，则过不隐；镇静者修之，则壹。 
现代文：由朴实宽厚的人教育他们，就会变得虑事周全而不懈怠；由好学聪明的人辅导他们，就会变得柔顺而明事理；由果敢决断的人告戒他们，就会知道过失而不隐瞒；由沉着镇定的人修正他们，就会变得稳重专一。 
English: If they are taught by the simple and gentle, they will become thoughtful and diligent; if they are guided by the studious and intelligent, they will become gentle and reasonable; if they are admonished by the resolute, they will know their faults and not hide them; if they are corrected by the calm and steady, they will become steady and single-minded.

古文：使兹四人者为公族大夫。
现代文：于是让这四个人任公族大夫。
English: So let these four people be appointed as public doctors.

古文：公知祁奚之果而不淫也，使为元尉。
现代文：悼公知道祁奚果断而不过度，让他任中军尉。
English: Eikoh knew that he had to be decisive and not overreact, so he made him a lieutenant.

古文：知羊舌职之聪敏肃给也，使佐之。
现代文：知道羊舌职聪明敏捷，让他辅佐祁奚。
English: Knowing that the sheep's tongue is smart and agile, let him assist the donkey.

古文：知魏绛之勇而不乱也，使为元司马。
现代文：知道魏绛勇敢而不乱纪，让他任中军司马。
English: Knowing that Wei Wei was brave and not undisciplined, he appointed him as the Sima of the Chinese army.

古文：知张老之智而不诈也，使为元候。
现代文：知道张老智慧而不欺诈，让他任中军的候正。
English: Knowing Zhang Lao's wisdom and not being deceitful, he was appointed as the general of the Chinese army.

古文：知铎遏寇之恭敬而信强也，使为舆尉。
现代文：知道铎遏寇恭敬而诚实坚强，让他任上军尉。
English: Knowing that he was respectful, honest and strong, he made him a captain.

古文：知籍偃之惇帅旧职而恭给也，使为舆司马。
现代文：知道籍偃忠于职守而恭顺有礼，让他任上军司马。
English: Knowing that he was loyal to his duty and courteous, he was appointed as the military secretary.

古文：知程郑端而不淫，且好谏而不隐也，使为赞仆。
现代文：知道程郑端庄不邪，而且敢于进谏，毫不隐瞒，让他任赞仆。
English: Knowing that Cheng Zheng was a dignified and upright person, and dared to enter into politics, he made no secret of it and had him appointed as a trusted servant.

