古文：凡敌人强大，未能必取，须当卑辞厚礼，以骄其志。候其有隙可乘，一举可破。
现代文：凡是在敌人力量强大，我军没有必胜把握的情况下作战，应当用卑恭的言词和厚重的礼物，麻痹敌人使其志骄意惰；待到敌人有隙可乘之时，便发动突然袭击，一举攻破。
English: Whenever the enemy's strength is strong and our army is not sure of victory, we should use humble words and heavy gifts to paralyze the enemy's pride; when the enemy has a gap to take advantage of, we will launch a surprise attack and break through in one fell swoop.

古文：法曰： 卑而骄之。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 对于卑视我方之敌，要设法使其更加骄躁。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: As for the enemy who despises us, we should try to make him more arrogant.

古文：蜀将关羽北伐，擒魏将于禁，围曹仁于樊。
现代文：三国蜀将关羽率军北伐，活捉了魏左将军于禁，又把曹仁围困于樊城。
English: Shu of the Three Kingdoms led the army of Guan Yu in the Northern Expedition, captured General Wei Zuo alive, and besieged Cao Ren in Lucheng.

古文：吴将吕蒙在陆口称疾，诣建业，陆逊往见之，谓曰： 关羽接境，如何远下，后不堪忧也！ 
现代文：而此时镇守陆口的吴大将吕蒙声称有病回京都建业修养，陆逊前去看望他，对他说： 关羽驻地同我们边境接邻，为什么你这时却回到长江下游的建业来？你走后如果部署不当，就令人担忧啊！ 
English: At this time, General Wu Liumeng, the garrison commander of Lukou, claimed that he was ill and had returned to Kyoto to recuperate. Lu Xun went to visit him and said to him: Guan Yu's garrison is adjacent to our border, why did you return to the lower reaches of the Yangtze River to recuperate? If you are deployed improperly after you leave, it is worrying!

古文：蒙曰： 诚如来言，然我病笃。 
现代文：吕蒙说： 的确像您所说，但是我却病得很厉害。 
English: Lu Meng said, "It's true what you said, but I'm very ill."

古文：逊曰： 羽矜其功，骄气凌铄于人。又相闻病，必益无备。
现代文：陆逊接着分析说： 关羽自恃骁勇无敌，经常侵凌别人，刚立大功，更加骄傲放纵，现在一心只图北进，对我们吴国没有怀疑，他听到你生病的消息，必然更加不作防备。
English: Lu Xun went on to analyze: Guan Yu is invincible, often encroaches on others, has made great achievements, is more proud and indulgent, and now only wants to go north. He has no doubt about our Wu country. When he heard the news of your illness, he must be more unprepared.

古文：今出其不意，自可擒制。
现代文：倘若现在出其不意地袭击他，自然可以将他擒获或者打败。
English: If you attack him unexpectedly now, you can naturally capture or defeat him.

古文：若见至尊，宜好为计。 
现代文：您回京都见了主公，应该就此好生的谋划。 
English: You have returned to Kyoto to see your lord, so you should plan for a good life.

古文：蒙曰： 羽素勇猛，既难与敌，且已据荆州，恩信大布，兼始有功，胆气益坚，未易图也。 
现代文：吕蒙说： 关羽向来勇猛，既难以对付，且又久据荆州，威望和信义更加增大，加之刚刚打了胜仗，胆量气势更盛，是不容易图谋他的。 
English: Lv Meng said: Guan Yu has always been brave, both difficult to deal with and long-established in Jingzhou. His prestige and trustworthiness have further increased. In addition, he has just won a victory, and his courage and strength are more abundant. It is not easy to plot against him.

古文：蒙至都，权问： 卿病，谁可代者？ 
现代文：吕蒙回到建业，孙权问他： 您病了，谁可以接替您的职务？ 
English: When Lü Meng returned to Jianye, Sun Quan asked him: You are ill, who can take over your duties?

古文：蒙对曰： 陆逊虑思深长，才堪负重，观其规虑，终可大任。
现代文：吕蒙回答说： 陆逊谋深虑远，具有堪当重任的才能，从其对局势的分析筹划所显示出的器识来看，他最终是可以担当大任的。
English: Lv Meng replied, "Lu Xun is far-sighted and has the ability to shoulder heavy responsibilities. Judging from the ability shown by his analysis and planning of the situation, he can eventually take on heavy responsibilities.

古文：而未有远名，非羽所忌，无复是过。
现代文：而现在他还不太出名，并不为关羽所畏忌，没有比他更合适的了。
English: And he doesn't have a big name yet, he's not someone to be scared of, there's no one better.

古文：若用之，当令外自韬隐，内察形便，然后可克。 
现代文：如果任用他，应当指令他对外要隐藏自己的才能行迹，而在暗中观察形势变化，寻找有利时机，然后方可战胜关羽。 
English: If you use him, you should let him hide his true intentions on the surface, secretly observe the favorable situation, and then you can overcome the difficulties.

古文：权乃召逊，拜偏将军右都督代蒙。
现代文：孙权于是召见陆逊，任命他为偏将军右部都督，以接替吕蒙的防务。
English: Sun Quan then summoned Lu Xun and appointed him as the right-hand governor of the general to take over the defense of Liumeng.

古文：逊至陆口，书与羽曰： 前承观衅而动，以律行师，小举大克，亦何巍巍！
现代文：陆逊奉命来到陆口后，立即写信给关羽极尽恭维之辞，说： 前不久蒙您观察敌人衅隙而适时出兵北伐，按照法制治军用兵，因而以较小的举动而获得大胜，这是何等崇高伟大啊！
English: After Lu Xun was ordered to come to Lukou, he immediately wrote a letter to Guan Yu with the utmost compliments, saying: Not long ago, you observed the enemy's provocation gap and sent troops to the Northern Expedition in a timely manner, governed the soldiers in accordance with the legal system, and thus won a great victory with a small move. How sublime and great is this!

古文：敌国败绩，利在同盟，闻庆抚节，相遂席卷，共奖王纲。
现代文：敌国遭到失败，有利于我们两国同盟互助。因此，听到这一胜利消息后，我们都情不自禁地击节庆贺，盼望您乘胜前进，席卷中原，以实现我们共扶汉室的心愿。
English: The defeat of the enemy country is conducive to the alliance and mutual assistance between our two countries. Therefore, after hearing the news of this victory, we can't help but celebrate the festival. We hope that you will take advantage of the victory and sweep across the Central Plains to realize the wishes of our Han family.

古文：某不敏，受任来西，延慕光尘，思禀良规。 
现代文：我陆逊才思不敏，受命西来驻防，引颈仰慕您光照尘世的业绩，渴望接受您对我的良好教诲。 
English: I am an unimaginative man, ordered to the West to garrison, I admire your shining earthly achievements, and I long to receive your good teachings to me.

古文：又曰： 于禁等见获，遐迩欣叹，以为将军之勋足以长世，虽畴昔晋文城濮之师，淮阴拔赵之略，蔑以尚之。
现代文：又说： 于禁等人被擒，远近的人们都欢欣赞叹，认为将军的功勋足以与世长存，即使是当年晋文公城濮败楚之用兵，淮阴侯韩信攻克赵国之谋略，也都没有超过您的功绩。
English: He also said: Yu Han and others were captured, people near and far were delighted and admired, and believed that the general's exploits were enough to last forever. Even the use of soldiers to defeat Chu in Jinwen Gongcheng and the strategy of Huaiyin Hou Hanxin to conquer Zhao Guo did not exceed your exploits.

古文：闻徐晃等步骑驻旌，窥望麾葆。
现代文：听说魏将徐晃等人率步骑兵进驻樊城附近，窥探您的动静。
English: It is said that Wei stationed the infantry cavalry led by Xu Akira and others near Lucheng to spy on your movements.

古文：操猾虏也，忿不思难，恐潜增众，以逞其心。
现代文：曹操是个狡猾的敌人，他出于对您的忿恨，将不顾处境困难，而暗中增派部队，以求实现其南进的野心。
English: Cao Cao, the cunning enemy, will not think of danger because he is angry at his failure. I am afraid that he will secretly increase the number of people to fulfill his ambition.

古文：虽云师老，犹有骁悍。
现代文：他的部队虽说已经久战疲惫，但还有猛将悍卒可用。
English: Although his army has been at war for a long time, there are still some brave and good soldiers.

古文：且战捷之后，常苦轻敌，古术军胜弥警，愿将军广为方针，以全独克。
现代文：况且打了胜仗之后，往往患在骄傲轻敌。古人用兵之法是，胜仗之后更加警惕。因此，希望您能广为筹划，制定周密方略，以确保全胜不败的战绩。
English: Moreover, after winning a battle, they often suffer from pride and despise the enemy. The ancient people's way of using weapons is to be more vigilant after winning a battle. Therefore, I hope you can make extensive plans and formulate a well-thought-out strategy to ensure an unbeaten record.

古文：某书生疏迟，忝所不堪，嘉邻威德，乐自倾尽，虽未合策，犹可怀也。 
现代文：我本一介书生，粗疏迟钝，愧居自己所不堪胜任的职务，幸喜与您这位威德崇高的将军为邻，因此乐于向您尽抒愚见，虽然不能合乎您的谋策，但我的心情还是可以理解的。
English: I am a bookworm, rude and obtuse, ashamed to occupy a position for which I am not qualified. I am happy to live next to you, a noble and noble general, and therefore I am happy to express my stupid opinions to you. Although I cannot agree with your strategy, my mood is still understandable.

古文：羽览书有谦下之意，遂大安，无复所嫌。
现代文：关羽看了陆逊的信后，觉得他有谦恭敬仰和请求依托的意思，于是大为放心，对吴国不再有所疑忌了。
English: After reading Lu Xun's letter, Guan Yu felt that he meant to be humble, respectful and ask for support, so he was greatly relieved and no longer had any doubts about Wu.

古文：逊具启状，陈其可擒之要。
现代文：陆逊及时地把这些情况报告给孙权，陈述其可以擒获关羽的主要理由。
English: Lu Xun promptly reported these circumstances to Sun Quan, stating the main reason why he could capture Guan Yu.

古文：权乃潜军而上，使逊与吕蒙为前部，至，即克公安、南郡。
现代文：于是孙权秘密派兵而来，委任陆逊和吕蒙为先锋。大军一到，立刻攻克公安和南钧。
English: Therefore, Sun Quan secretly sent troops and appointed Lu Xun and Lv Meng as the vanguard. As soon as the large army arrived, they immediately attacked the Public Security Bureau and Nanlu.

