古文：公孙贺字子叔，北地义渠人也。
现代文：公孙贺，字子叔，北地郡义渠县人。
English: Gongsun He, nicknamed Uncle Zi, was from Yicheng County, Hokkien County.

古文：贺祖父昆邪，景帝时为陇西守，以将军击吴、楚有功，封平曲侯，著书十余篇。
现代文：公孙贺的祖父昆邪，汉景帝时任陇西郡太守，因为率军攻打叛乱的吴、楚等国有功，被封为平曲侯，著书十几篇。
English: Kunzong He's grandfather, Kunzong, was the governor of Shaanxi at the time of Emperor Han Jing. He was awarded the title of Pingquhou for his national service in leading the army to fight against the rebellious Wu and Chu, and he wrote more than a dozen books.

古文：贺少为骑士，从军数有功。
现代文：公孙贺年轻时当骑士，参军作战数立战功。
English: When he was young, Gongsun He was a knight. He joined the army and fought in several battles.

古文：自武帝为太子时，贺为舍人，及武帝即位，迁至太仆。
现代文：汉武帝做太子的时候，公孙贺为太子舍人，到武帝即位，提拔公孙贺为太仆。
English: When Emperor Hanwu was crown prince, his son-in-law, Sun He, passed himself off as the crown prince. When Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, he promoted his son-in-law, Sun He, to the position of eunuch.

古文：贺夫人君孺，卫皇后姊也，贺由是有宠。
现代文：公孙贺的夫人卫君孺，是卫皇后的姐姐，公孙贺因此而受宠幸。
English: Gongsun He's wife, Wei Junyao, was the sister of Empress Wei, and Gongsun He was favored because of this.

古文：元光中为轻车将军。军马邑。
现代文：武帝元光年间，任轻车将军，驻军马邑。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, he served as a general of light vehicles and garrisoned Ma'e.

古文：后四岁，出云中。
现代文：四年以后，率军出云中攻击匈奴。
English: Four years later, he led an army to attack the Xiongnu.

古文：后五岁，以车骑将军从大将军青出，有功，封南窌侯。
现代文：又遇了五年，以车骑将军的身份跟随大将军卫青出击匈奴，有功，被封为南卵侯。
English: After another five years, he followed General Wei Qing as a cavalry general to attack the Xiongnu, and was awarded the title of Nanwang.

古文：后再以左将军出定襄，无功，坐酎金，失侯。
现代文：后又以左将军身份从定襄郡出击匈奴，无功，因献酎金成色不足而获罪，失去侯爵。
English: Later, he attacked the Xiongnu from Dingxiang County as a left-wing general, but to no avail. He was found guilty of insufficient gold content in his shochu and lost his marquisate.

古文：复以浮沮将军出五原二千余里，无功。
现代文：再以浮沮将军出五原郡二千余里攻击匈奴，无功。
English: He then went out to attack the Xiongnu more than two thousand miles away in Wuhuan County, but to no avail.

古文：后八岁，遂代石庆为丞相，封葛绎侯。
现代文：八年以后，终于代替石庆任丞相，被封为葛绎侯。
English: Eight years later, he finally replaced Shi Qing as chancellor and was given the title of Ge Yihong.

古文：时朝廷多事，督责大臣。
现代文：当时朝廷多事，监督责罚大臣。
English: At that time, the imperial court was in turmoil, and ministers were often overseen and punished.

古文：自公孙弘后，丞相李蔡、严青翟、赵周三人比坐事死。
现代文：从公孙弘以后，丞相李蔡、严青翟、赵周三人连着因事获罪而死。
English: After Gongsun Hong, three ministers of justice, Li Cai, Yan Qingyao and Zhao Shuzhou, were convicted of crimes and died in quick succession.

古文：石庆虽以谨得终，然数被谴。
现代文：石庆虽然因为谨慎得享善终，但多次遭受谴责。
English: Although Shi Qing had a happy ending because of his prudence, he was condemned many times.

古文：初，贺引拜为丞相，不受印绶，顿首涕泣，曰： 臣本边鄙，以鞍马骑射为官，材诚不任宰相。 
现代文：当初公孙贺被任命为丞相时，不愿接受丞相印绶，叩头哭泣，说： 我本来是边界上的人，靠鞍马骑射的本领当了官，才能实在不能胜任宰相。 
English: At first, when Gongsun He was appointed chancellor, he did not want to accept the chancellor's seal, kowtowing and crying, saying: I was originally a person on the border, relying on the skill of riding a pommel horse and shooting to become an official, but I really can't be a competent prime minister.

古文：上与左右见贺悲哀，感动下泣，曰： 扶起丞相。 
现代文：皇上和左右大臣看见公孙贺悲哀，都触动感情流下泪来，武帝说： 扶起丞相。 
English: When Emperor Wu and the ministers around him saw Gongsun He's sorrow, they were all moved to tears. Emperor Wu said, "Support the prime minister."

古文：贺不肯起，上乃起云，贺不得已拜。
现代文：公孙贺不肯起来，皇上就起身走了，公孙贺不得已接受了任命。
English: Gongsun He refused to get up, so the emperor got up and left. Gongsun He reluctantly accepted the appointment.

古文：出，左右问其故，贺曰： 主上贤明，臣不足以称，恐负重责，从是殆矣。 
现代文：出宫后，左右大臣问公孙贺不愿当丞相的原因，公孙贺说： 皇上贤明，我当丞相不称职，害怕受重责，从此就危险了。 
English: After leaving the palace, the left and right ministers asked Gongsun He why he did not want to be prime minister. Gongsun He said: Emperor Xianming, I am not competent to be prime minister, I am afraid of heavy responsibilities, and from now on I am in danger.

古文：贺子敬声，代贺为太仆，父子并居公卿位。
现代文：公孙贺的儿子公孙敬声，代替公孙贺做了太仆，父子同居公卿之位。
English: Gongsun He's son, Gongsun Keixing, replaced Gongsun He as grand retainer, and father and son shared the position of court noble.

古文：敬声以皇后姊子，骄奢不奉法，征和中擅用北军钱千九百万，发觉，下狱。
现代文：公孙敬声仗恃自己是皇后姐姐的儿子，骄纵奢侈不守法令，武帝征和年间，擅自挪用北军的钱一千九百万，事情发现后，被逮入监狱。
English: He was the son of the empress's sister. He was arrogant, extravagant, and disobeyed the law. During Emperor Wu's reign, he embezzled 19 million yuan of the Northern Army's money without authorization. When the matter was discovered, he was arrested and imprisoned.

古文：是时，诏捕阳陵朱安世不能得，上求之急，贺自请逐捕安世以赎敬声罪。
现代文：这时皇上下诏搜捕阳陵县人朱安世还没捕获，皇上急于将其逮捕归案，公孙贺自己请求追捕朱安世来赎公孙敬声的罪。
English: At this time, the emperor issued an imperial edict to search for and arrest Zhu Anshi, a person from Yangling County, who had not yet been captured. The emperor was eager to arrest him, and Gongsun He himself requested to hunt down Zhu Anshi to atone for Gongsun Keisheng's crime.

古文：上许之。
现代文：皇上允许了公孙贺的请求。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：后果得安世。
现代文：后来，公孙贺果然抓获朱安世。
English: Later, Gongsun He finally captured Zhu Anshi.

古文：安世者，京师大侠也，闻贺欲以赎子，笑曰： 丞相祸及宗矣。
现代文：朱安世是京城的大侠客，听说公孙贺想用他为儿子赎罪，笑着说： 丞相的灾祸牵连到他的宗族了。
English: Zhu Anshi was a great knight of the capital. He heard that Gongsun He wanted to use him to atone for his son, and said with a smile: The calamity of the prime minister has affected his clan.

古文：南山之行不足受我辞，斜谷之木不足为我械。 
现代文：我正要告发丞相违法的事，诉讼的话很多，砍伐南山的竹子也写不完，用斜谷的木头做桎梏也不能束缚我，不让我告发。 
English: I was just about to denounce the illegal activities of the prime minister. There are many lawsuits to be filed. I can't even finish writing about the bamboo that was cut down from Nanshan Mountain, and I can't be restrained from denouncing the use of wood from the valley to make rafts.

古文：安世遂从狱中上书，告敬声与阳石公主私通，及使人巫祭祠诅上，且上甘泉当驰道埋偶人，祝诅有恶言。
现代文：朱安世于是从狱中上书，告发公孙敬声和阳石公主私通，以及指使巫师在祭祀时诅咒皇上，并且上甘泉宫在驰道上埋偶人，用很恶毒的语言诅咒。
English: Zhu Anshi then sent a letter from prison, denouncing the adultery between Gongsun Keishen and Yangshi Princess, as well as instructing the sorcerer to curse the emperor during the ritual, and go to Ganquan Palace to bury the dolls on the road, cursing with a very vicious language.

古文：下有司案验贺，穷治所犯，遂父子死狱中，家族。
现代文：武帝下令有关的主管部门审讯查验公孙贺，彻底追查他所犯的罪行，竟致父子二人死在狱中，全家被族灭。
English: Emperor Wu ordered the relevant authorities to interrogate and investigate Sun He and thoroughly investigate the crimes he committed. As a result, two fathers and sons died in prison, and the whole family was exterminated.

古文：巫蛊之祸起自朱安世，成于江充，遂及公主、皇后、太子，皆败。
现代文：巫蛊之祸起于朱安世，完成于江充，最终牵连到公主、皇后和太子，这些人都因事败身亡。
English: The evil of witchcraft and sorcery began in the Zhu An era, was completed in Jiangcheng, and eventually involved the princess, the queen and the prince, all of whom were defeated and died.

古文：语在《江充》、《戾园传》。
现代文：语在《江充传》、《戾园传》。
English: language in "The Legend of Jiangzong" and "The Legend of Gongyuan."

古文：刘屈氂，武帝庶兄中山靖王子也，不知其始所以进。
现代文：刘屈氂是汉武帝异母哥哥中山靖王刘胜的儿子，不清楚他开始晋升的情况。
English: Liu Quan was the son of Emperor Hanwu's half-brother, Zhongshan Jing Wang Liu Sheng, and it is unclear when he began to rise through the ranks.

古文：征和二年春，制诏御史： 故丞相贺倚旧故乘高势而为邪，兴美田以利子弟宾客，不顾元元，无益边谷，货赂上流，朕忍之久矣。
现代文：征和二年春，汉武帝下韶给御史，说： 前丞相公孙贺依仗和我的故旧关系，利用位高势重而做出邪恶的事情，增加肥沃的良田来为子弟、门客谋利，不顾广大百姓的疾苦；戍边士兵的粮食缺乏，不能想办法增加；贪图财货，致使百姓贿赂位居上流的官吏，我对他所做的这些事情已经忍耐很久了。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Zheng He era, Emperor Hanwu sent an imperial edict to Gu Shi, saying: The former prime minister Sun He relied on the old relationship between the war and me, took advantage of his high position and power to do evil things, increased fertile fields to make profits for his children and clients, regardless of the suffering of the broad masses of the people; the soldiers on the border lacked food and could not find a way to increase it; coveted wealth, causing the people to bribe officials in the upper ranks. I have been patient with him for a long time.

古文：终不自革，乃以边为援，使内郡自省作车，又令耕者自转，以困农烦扰畜者，重马伤枆，武备衰减；下吏妄赋，百姓流亡；又诈为诏书，以奸传朱安世。
现代文：但是他竟不自己悔改，还擅作主张施恩惠给边郡，想为自己寻求声援，令内地的郡县省减费用给边郡屯戍的军队制作车子，还让农民自己转运粮食送到边郡，而造成农民贫穷，牲畜疲困，又损耗马匹，使武备衰减；下面官吏随意增加赋税，导致百姓破产流亡；又假传诏令，以奸邪罪名逮捕朱安世。
English: However, he did not repent on his own. He also arrogantly advocated granting favors to Bian County, and wanted to seek solidarity for himself. He ordered the counties and provinces in the inland to reduce the cost of making cars for the troops stationed in Bian County. He also allowed the farmers to transfer grain to Bian County, which caused the farmers to be poor, the livestock to be exhausted, and the horses to be worn out, causing the military equipment to decline. The officials below arbitrarily increased taxes, leading to the people's bankruptcy and exile. He also falsely issued a decree to arrest Zhu Anshi on the charge of treason.

古文：狱已正于理。
现代文：公孙贺父子的案件已由法官做出正确处理。
English: The case of Gongsun He and his son has been correctly handled by the judge.

古文：其以涿郡太守屈氂为左丞相，分丞相长史为两府，以待天下远方之选。
现代文：任命涿郡太守刘屈牦为左丞相，把丞相长史分为两府，等待得到贤人再任命右丞相。
English: He appointed Liu Quan, the governor-general of Handan County, as his left-hand minister, and divided the minister of war into two prefectures, waiting for a wise man to be appointed as his right-hand minister.

古文：夫亲亲任贤，周、唐之道也。
现代文：亲近亲人任用贤才。是唐尧、西周的常法。
English: It is a common practice in Tang Dynasty and Western Zhou Dynasty to appoint talents close to their relatives.

古文：以澎户二千二百封左丞相为澎侯。 
现代文：将澎地的二千二百户封给左丞相刘屈牦为澎侯。 
English: He assigned 2,200 households in Pengdu to the Left Minister Liu Quyu as Penghu.

古文：其秋，戾太子为江充所谮，杀充，发兵入丞相府，屈氂挺身逃，亡其印绶。
现代文：征和二年秋天，江充进谗言，诬陷戾太子与巫蛊案有关，戾太子杀死江充，率兵攻进丞相府，刘屈牦引身逃跑，丢失左丞相官印。
English: In the autumn of the second year of the War of Succession, Jiang Chongjin made a false accusation, falsely accusing Crown Prince Yu of having something to do with the Wushan Incident. Crown Prince Yu killed Jiang Chong and led an army to storm into the Prime Minister's Office. Liu Quyao took flight and lost the official seal of the Prime Minister.

古文：是时，上避暑在甘泉宫，丞相长史乘疾置以闻。上问： 丞相何为？ 
现代文：遣时武帝正在甘泉宫避暑，丞相长史乘驿舍的快马直奔甘泉宫，将此事奏闻武帝，武帝问： 丞相在干什么？ 
English: Emperor Wu was spending the summer at Ganquan Palace at the time of the dispatch. The prime minister, Joseph Changshi, rode a fast horse straight to Ganquan Palace and reported the matter to Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu asked: What is the prime minister doing?

古文：对曰： 丞相秘之，未敢发兵。 
现代文：丞相长史回答说： 丞相正在封锁消息，没有敢发兵。 
English: The prime minister replied: "The prime minister is blocking the news and does not dare to send troops.

古文：上怒曰： 事籍籍如此，何谓秘也？
现代文：武帝气愤地说： 事情纷纷扬扬到这种地步，还说什么封锁消息呢？
English: Emperor Wu said angrily, "Things have escalated to this point. What is the news of the blockade?

古文：丞相无周公之风矣。
现代文：丞相没有周公的风范。
English: The prime minister does not have the manners of Zhou Gong.

古文：周公不诛管、蔡乎？ 
现代文：周公不是诛杀了管叔、蔡叔吗？ 
English: Didn't Zhou Gong kill Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai?

古文：乃赐丞相玺书曰： 捕斩反者，自有赏罚。
现代文：于是赐给丞相刘屈牦诏书说： 捕杀反叛者，我自然有赏赐。
English: He then issued an edict to the prime minister, Liu Quanzhang, saying: "If you capture and kill the rebels, I will naturally reward you.

古文：以牛车为橹，毋接短兵，多杀伤士众。
现代文：远远围住叛军，以牛车为盾牌，不要和叛军短兵相接，以致多杀伤士兵。
English: Encircle the rebels from a distance, using the ox-drawn cart as a shield, and do not come into contact with the rebels' short-ranged soldiers, resulting in more dead and wounded soldiers.

古文：坚闭城门，毋令反者得出。 
现代文：坚闭城门，不要让反叛者逃出城去。 
English: Close the gates and do not let the rebels leave the city.

古文：太子既诛充发兵，宣言帝在甘泉病困，疑有变，奸臣欲作乱。
现代文：太子既已杀死江充率兵反叛，于是宣称武帝在甘泉宫病重，太子发兵是怀疑京城有变，奸臣想作乱。
English: The prince had already killed the rebel soldiers led by Jiang Chong, so he declared that Emperor Wu was seriously ill in Ganquan Palace. The prince suspected that there was a change in the capital, and the treacherous vassals wanted to make trouble.

古文：上于是从甘泉来，幸城西建章宫，诏发三辅近县兵，部中二千石以下，丞相兼将。
现代文：武帝在这时从甘泉宫回长安，驾临长安城西建章宫，下诏征发京兆尹、左冯翊、右扶风三辅靠近长安各县的军队，部署中二千石以下官吏带领，左丞相刘屈牦兼任将军。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu returned to Chang'an from the Ganquan Palace, drove to the west of Chang'an City to build the Zhang Palace, and issued the following edict to recruit and dispatch the three auxiliary armies of Jing Zhaoyun, Zuo Feng Qi, and Zuo Fu Feng to the counties near Chang'an, led by the officials with less than 2,000 koku in the deployment, and concurrently appointed the left minister Liu Quqi as the general.

古文：太子亦遣使者挢制赦长安中都官囚徒，发武库兵，命少傅石德及宾客张光等分将，使长安囚如侯持节发长水及宣曲胡骑，皆以装会。
现代文：太子也派遣使者假传诏令赦免长安城中京师诸官府中的囚徒，征发看守武库的军队，命少傅石德和门客张光等人分别率领，派长安城裹的囚犯如侯持节征发长水校尉和宣曲宫的胡骑，全部携带武器装备到长安城中集合。
English: The prince also sent an envoy to issue a fake edict to pardon the prisoners in the Beijing Division of the various government offices in Chang'an City, to conscript the army guarding the arsenal, led by Fu Shide and Zhang Guang, respectively, and to send the prisoners in Chang'an City, such as Hou Jie, to conscript the Changshui lieutenant and the Hu Jie of the Xuanqiu Palace, all carrying weapons and equipment to assemble in Chang'an City.

古文：侍郎莽通使长安，因追捕如侯，告胡人曰： 节有诈，勿听也。 
现代文：侍郎莽通奉令出使长安城，因此追捕如侯，并告诉胡骑说： 调兵的节有诈，不要听如侯的。 
English: The chamberlain, Muntong, was ordered to go to Chang'an City, so he hunted down Rhou, and told Hu Jia, "The transfer of troops is a trick. Don't listen to Rhou."

古文：遂斩如侯，引骑入长安，又发辑濯士，以予大鸿胪商丘城。
现代文：于是斩杀如侯，带领胡骑进入长安，又征发用驶船士兵，交给大鸿胪商丘成率领。
English: As a result, he killed as many as he could and led the Hu riders into Chang'an. He also conscripted soldiers to sail the ships and handed them over to the great giant and merchant Yucheng.

古文：初，汉节纯赤，以太子持赤节，故更为黄旄加上以相别。
现代文：当初，汉朝调兵的符节全是红色，因为太子持有红色的符节，所以后来皇帝的调兵符节上又安有染成黄色的牦牛尾的装饰，以相区别。
English: At first, the Han Dynasty's troop-dispatching symbols were all red, because the prince held red symbols, so later the emperor's troop-dispatching symbols were decorated with dyed yellow yakitori to distinguish them.

古文：太子召监北军使者任安发北军兵，安受节已，闭军门，不肯应太子。
现代文：太子征召监北军使者任安调动北军兵，任安接受调兵符节以后，关闭北军军门不肯响应太子。
English: The prince summoned the envoy of the Northern Army, Ren An, to mobilize the soldiers of the Northern Army. After Ren An accepted the transfer of troops, he closed the military gate of the Northern Army and refused to respond to the prince.

古文：太子引兵去，驱四市人凡数万众，至长乐西阙下，逢丞相军，合战五日，死者数万人，血流入沟中。
现代文：太子只好领兵离开北军，驱使长安四市的百姓共有几万人，来到长乐宫西阙下面时，碰上了左丞相刘屈牦的军队，混战了五天，死了几万人，鲜血流进街道两旁的下水道中。
English: The crown prince had no choice but to lead his soldiers away from the Northern Army, driving tens of thousands of people from the four cities of Chang'an. When he came to the west courtyard of the Changle Palace, he encountered the army of the Left Minister Liu Quyun. They fought for five days, tens of thousands of people died, and blood flowed into the sewers on both sides of the street.

古文：丞相附兵浸多，太子军败，南奔覆盎城门，得出。
现代文：归附左丞相刘屈牦的军队逐渐增多，太子的军队失败，向南逃奔覆盎城门，逃出城去。
English: The army attached to Liu Quan, the Minister of the Left, gradually increased, and the prince's army failed and fled south to the city gate and out of the city.

古文：会夜司直田仁部闭城门，坐令太子得出，丞相欲斩仁。
现代文：造天夜晚正该丞相司直田仁带领的军队关闭看守城门，田仁因为让太子逃出城而获罪，左丞相刘屈牦要杀田仁。
English: On the night of the creation of the heavens, the army led by the prime minister Naota Jin closed the gate guarding the city. Tian Jin was convicted for letting the prince escape from the city, and the left prime minister Liu Quan wanted to kill Tian Jin.

古文：御史大夫暴胜之谓丞相曰： 司直，吏二千石，当先请，奈何擅斩之？ 
现代文：御史大夫暴胜之对刘屈牦说： 司直是二千石官，应该先请示皇上如何处置，怎么能擅自杀他呢？ 
English: Chief historian Wu Shengzhi said to Liu Quanzhang: Si Zhi is an official of 2,000 koku, he should first ask the emperor what to do, how can he commit suicide?

古文：丞相释仁。
现代文：刘屈牦就释放了田仁。
English: Liu Quanzhang released Tian Jin.

古文：上闻而大怒，下吏责问御史大夫曰： 司直纵反者，丞相斩之，法也，大夫何以擅止之？ 
现代文：武帝听到报告后非常愤怒，派官吏责问御史大夫暴胜之说： 司直田仁放跑了反叛者，丞相杀他，是依法处置，你凭什么擅自制止丞相？ 
English: After hearing the report, Emperor Wu was very angry and sent officials to interrogate Dr. Goshi, who said: "Director Naota Jin released the rebel and the prime minister killed him. This was done in accordance with the law. Why did you stop the prime minister without authorization?"

古文：胜之皇恐，自杀。
现代文：暴胜之十分惶恐，就自杀了。
English: Terrified by the sudden victory, he committed suicide.

古文：及北军使者任安，坐受太子节，怀二心，司直田仁纵太子，皆要斩。
现代文：至于北军使者任安，接受太子调兵的符节，因怀有二心而获罪，田仁放跑太子，二人都判处腰斩。
English: As for the envoy of the Northern Army, Ren An, who accepted the prince's transfer of troops, he was found guilty of harboring double-mindedness, and Tian Ren released the prince, and both were sentenced to beheading.

古文：上曰： 侍郎莽通获反将如侯，长安男子景通从通获少傅石德，可谓元功矣。
现代文：武帝说： 侍郎莽通捕获叛将如侯，长安男子景建跟随莽通捕获少傅石德，可以说是立下大功啦。
English: Emperor Wu said: The chamberlain Meng Tong captured the traitor Ru Hou, and the Chang'an man Jing Jian followed Meng Tong to capture Shao Fu Shide, which can be said to be a great achievement.

古文：大鸿胪商丘成力战获反将张光。
现代文：大鸿胪商丘成奋力拼杀，捉住叛将张光。
English: The great giant and merchant Yucheng fought hard to capture the traitor Zhang Guang.

古文：其封通为重合侯，建为德侯，成为秺侯。 
现代文：封莽通为重合侯，景建为德侯，商丘成为诧侯。 
English: Feng Mangtong became Chonghe Hou, Jing Jian became De Hou, and Shangqiu became Shenwu Hou.

古文：诸太子宾客，尝出入宫门，皆坐诛。
现代文：太子的门客，凡是曾经进出过皇宫宫门的，一律斩首。
English: All of the prince's guests who have ever entered or left the palace gates will be beheaded.

古文：其随太子发兵，以反法族。
现代文：那些追随太子发兵反叛的，按照制裁反叛者的法律规定，族灭全家。
English: Those who followed the prince and rebelled, according to the legal provisions for sanctioning rebels, were to exterminate their entire families.

古文：吏士劫略者，皆徙敦煌郡。
现代文：官吏和士兵有乘乱抢劫的，全部流放到敦煌郡。
English: Officials and soldiers who participated in the indiscriminate looting were all exiled to Dunhuang County.

古文：以太子在外，始置屯兵长安诸城门。
现代文：因为太子逃亡在外，从这时开始在长安城各城门屯驻军队。
English: Because the prince had fled abroad, troops began to be stationed at the city gates of Chang'an from this time on.

古文：后二十余日，太子得于湖。
现代文：过了二十多天，太子在湖县被抓住。
English: After more than 20 days, the prince was caught in Huzhou.

古文：语在《太子传》。
现代文：语在《太子传》。
English: The event is recorded in "Prince biographies."

古文：其明年，贰师将军李广利将兵出击匈奴，丞相为祖道，送至渭桥，与广利辞决。
现代文：第二年，贰师将军李广利率兵出击匈奴，丞相刘屈牦设宴给李广利饯行，送到渭桥，刘屈牦和李广利告别。
English: In the second year, the general Li Guangli led his soldiers to attack the Xiongnu, and the prime minister Liu Quan held a banquet for Li Guangli and sent it to Luqiao. Liu Quan and Li Guangli bid farewell.

古文：广利曰： 愿君侯早请昌邑王为太子。
现代文：李广利说： 希望君侯早些请皇上立昌邑王为太子。
English: Li Guangli said: I hope the prince will ask the emperor to make Changyi Wang the crown prince.

古文：如立为帝，君侯长何忧乎？ 
现代文：如果昌邑王被立为皇帝，您今后还担忧什么呢？ 
English: If Changyi Wang is made emperor, what are you worried about in the future?

古文：屈氂许诺。
现代文：刘屈牦答应了李广利的请求。
English: Liu Quanzhang agreed to Li Guangli's request.

古文：昌邑王者，贰师将军女弟李夫人子也。
现代文：昌邑王是李广利的妹妹李夫人生的儿子。
English: Changyi Wang is the son of Li Guangli's sister, Mrs. Li.

古文：贰师女为屈氂子妻，故共欲立焉。
现代文：李广利的女儿是刘屈牦儿子的妻子，所以李广利和刘屈牦两人都想立昌邑王为太子。
English: Li Guangli's daughter was the wife of Liu Quan's son, so both Li Guangli and Liu Quan wanted to make Changyi Wang the crown prince.

古文：是时，治巫蛊狱急，内者令郭穰告丞相夫人以丞相数有谴，使巫祠社，祝诅主上，有恶言，及与贰师共祷祠，欲令昌邑王为帝。
现代文：这时，审理巫蛊狱追查得很紧，内者令郭穣告发丞相刘屈牦的夫人因为刘屈牦多次受到皇上谴责，指使巫师在祭祀土地神时诅咒皇上，有恶毒的语言，以及刘屈牦与李广利共同祷告祭祀，想使昌邑王当皇帝。
English: At this time, the investigation of Wuxi Prison was very tight. The insider ordered Guo Qi to denounce the wife of the Prime Minister Liu Quqian because Liu Quqian was repeatedly condemned by the emperor, ordered the sorcerer to curse the emperor when sacrificing the land god, had a vicious language, and Liu Quqian and Li Guangli jointly prayed and sacrificed, and wanted to make Changyi Wang an emperor.

古文：有司奏请案验，罪至大逆不道。
现代文：主管官员将此事奏告武帝，请求审讯查验，武帝批准，办案人员将刘屈牦定罪为大逆不道。
English: The officials in charge reported the matter to Emperor Wu, requested an interrogation for verification, Emperor Wu approved, and the case handlers convicted Liu Quyao of high treason.

古文：有诏载屈氂厨车以徇，要斩东市，妻子枭首华阳街。
现代文：武帝下令把刘屈牦放在载运食品的车上游街示众，然后在长安束市腰斩，刘屈厘的妻子押赴华阳街斩首示众。
English: Emperor Wu ordered Liu QuLu to be put on a food truck and paraded through the streets, and then he was beheaded in the city of Chang'an, and Liu QuLu's wife was taken to Huayang Street to be beheaded.

古文：贰师将军妻子亦收。
现代文：李广利的妻子儿女也收捕入狱。
English: Li Guangli's wife and children were also arrested and jailed.

古文：贰师闻之，降匈奴，宗族遂灭。
现代文：李广利听到这个消息，投降了匈奴，其宗族全部被处死。
English: When Li Guangli heard the news, he surrendered to the Xiongnu, and his entire clan was executed.

古文：车千秋，本姓田氏，其先齐诸田徙长陵。
现代文：车千秋本来姓田，他的祖先是春秋时齐国的田氏，后来，田氏的一支迁居长陵县。
English: Che Qianqiu's original family name was Tian. His ancestors were the Tian clan from Qi in the Spring and Autumn Period, and later, a branch of the Tian clan moved to Wu of Changling County.

古文：千秋为高寝郎。
现代文：车千秋担任护卫汉高祖陵寝的郎官。
English: Che Qianqiu served as the guardian of the Han Gao ancestor's tomb.

古文：会卫太子为江充所谮败，久之，千秋上急变讼太子冤，曰： 子弄父兵，罪当笞；天子之子过误杀人，当何罢哉！
现代文：碰上卫太子受江充谗害而败亡，遇了很久，车千秋上呈事关重大的紧急情况的奏书，为太子辩冤，说： 儿子玩弄父亲的军队，按罪应当挨鞭子；皇上的儿子因过失而误杀了人，该判什么罪呢？
English: On the occasion of the defeat of the Prince of Wei by the Jiangcheng, which had been a long time in the making and involved a grave emergency situation, the report defended the prince, saying: "If a son plays with his father's army, he should be whipped according to the crime; if an emperor's son kills someone by mistake, what crime should he be convicted of?

古文：臣尝梦见一白头翁教臣言。 
现代文：我曾经在梦中看见一位白头发老人，告诉我该怎样定罪。 
English: I once saw a grey-haired old man in a dream, telling me how to convict someone.

古文：是时，上颇知太子惶恐无他意，乃大感寤，召见千秋。
现代文：这时，武帝已经清楚地知道太子发兵是出于惶恐，并没有反叛的意图，看了车千秋的上书，就深有感触而醒悟过来，于是召见了车千秋。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu was already well aware that the prince had sent troops out of fear and had no intention of rebelling. When he read Che Qiaqiu's letter, he was deeply moved and came to his senses, so he summoned Che Qiaqiu.

古文：至前，千秋长八尺余，体貌甚丽，武帝见而说之，谓曰： 父子之间，人所难言也，公独明其不然。
现代文：车千秋上前拜见武帝，武帝见车千秋身高八尺多，体貌俊美，很喜欢他，对他说： 父子之间的事情，别人是很难说话的，祇有您明白其实不是这样。
English: Che Qianqiu came forward to see Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu saw that Che Qianqiu was more than eight feet tall, handsome, and liked him very much. He said to him, "It is difficult for others to talk about the father-son relationship. Only you can understand that this is not the case."

古文：此高庙神灵使公教我，公当遂为吾辅佐。 
现代文：这是高庙的神灵让您来开导我，您就应当成为我的辅佐。 
English: This is the spirit of the high temple asking you to enlighten me, you should become my assistant.

古文：立拜千秋为大鸿胪。
现代文：立即下令封车千秋为大鸿胪。
English: He immediately ordered the closure of the train for the great leap forward.

古文：数月，遂代刘屈氂为丞相，封富民侯。
现代文：过了几个月，就接替刘屈牦担任了丞相，封为富民侯。
English: A few months later, he succeeded Liu Quanzhang as chancellor and was appointed as Fuminhou.

古文：千秋无他材能术学，又无伐阅功劳，特以一言寤意，旬月取宰相封侯，世未尝有也。
现代文：车千秋没有别的才能经术学问，也没有什么功绩和资历，衹不过凭一句话使武帝醒悟到太子死得冤枉，旬月之间就做宰相封侯，世上未曾有过。
English: Che Qianqiu had no other talent other than his knowledge of the arts, nor did he have any achievements or qualifications. However, with just one sentence, he made Emperor Wu realize that the death of the crown prince was unjustified, and he became the prime minister and crown prince within a month, which had never happened before in the world.

古文：反汉使者至匈奴，单于问曰： 闻汉新拜丞相，何用得之？ 
现代文：后来汉朝的使者出使匈奴，匈奴单于问他说： 听说汉朝新任命一位丞相，他因为什么得到丞相的职位呢？ 
English: Later, the emissary of the Han Dynasty sent an envoy to the Xiongnu, and the Xiongnu asked him: I heard that the Han Dynasty had newly appointed a prime minister, why did he get the position of prime minister?

古文：使者曰： 以上书言事故。 
现代文：使者回答说： 因为上书言事的缘故。 
English: The messenger answered, "Because of what was written."

古文：单于曰： 苟如是，汉置丞相，非用贤也，妄一男子上书即得之矣。 
现代文：单于说： 假如这样，汉朝设置丞相，就是不用贤才，随便一个男子上书就能得到了。 
English: Simply said: If this is the case, if the Han Dynasty sets up a chancellor, it is not necessary to be a genius, just a man can get it.

古文：使者还，道单于语。
现代文：使者回来后，向武帝汇报了单于说的话。
English: After the messenger returned, he reported to Emperor Wu what he had just said.

古文：武帝以为辱命，欲下之吏。
现代文：武帝认为这个使者有辱使命，想把他交给官吏处置。
English: Emperor Wu considered this envoy to be a disgrace to his mission and wanted to put him at the disposal of officials.

古文：良久，乃贳之。
现代文：过了好久，才释放了他。
English: It was a long time before he was released.

古文：然千秋为人敦厚有智，居位自称，逾于前后数公。
现代文：然而车千秋为人敦厚，富有智谋，在丞相的位上很称职，超过他前后的几位。
English: However, he is a strong-willed and resourceful person, and is very competent in the position of prime minister, surpassing several before and after him.

古文：初，千秋始视事，见上连年治太子狱，诛罚尤多，群下恐惧，思欲宽广上意，尉安众庶。
现代文：车千秋刚开始主持丞相工作，看到武帝连年追究太子冤死一案，被杀和受罚的人非常多，群臣百姓都提心吊胆，车千秋想宽解皇上的思想，安慰广大吏民。
English: Che Qianqiu had just begun to preside over the work of the prime minister. Seeing that Emperor Wu had been investigating the case of the unjust death of the prince for several years, there were many people who were killed and punished. The courtiers and people were worried. Che Qianqiu wanted to ease the emperor's mind and comfort the vast number of officials and people.

古文：乃与御史、中二千石共上寿颂德美，劝上施恩惠，缓刑罚，玩听音乐，养志和神，为天下自虞乐。
现代文：于是就和御史、中二千石一起给武帝祝寿，赞颂皇上的美德，劝皇上广施恩惠，减缓刑罚，欣赏音乐，怡养精神，为了天下人民而自寻娱乐欢快。
English: So, together with the imperial historian and the 2,000-koku junior high school student, he congratulated Emperor Wu on his birthday, praised the emperor's virtues, and advised the emperor to grant a wide range of favors, reduce punishments, enjoy music, nourish the spirit, and seek entertainment and happiness for the sake of the people of the world.

古文：上报曰： 朕之不德，自左丞相与贰师阴谋逆乱，巫蛊之祸流及士大夫。朕日一食者累月，乃何乐之听？
现代文：武帝答覆说： 我不施恩德，开始于左丞相刘屈牦和贰师将军李广利暗中谋逆作乱，巫蛊之祸殃及士大夫，我一天衹吃一顿饭已经好几个月了，还听什么音乐？
English: Emperor Wu replied, "I don't do favors. It all started when the Leftist Minister Liu Quyun and his mentor, General Li Guangli, secretly plotted to stir up trouble. The scourge of witchcraft and sorcery has affected Shi Daifu. I haven't eaten a meal a day for months. What music do I still listen to?

古文：痛士大夫常在心，既事不咎。
现代文：经常在心裹哀痛和太子战死的士大夫，已经过去的事情，也不便再追究了。
English: For Shidafu, who is often overwhelmed with grief over the prince's death in battle, it is no longer convenient to investigate what happened in the past.

古文：虽然，巫蛊始发，诏丞相、御史督二千石求捕，廷尉治，未闻九卿、廷尉有所鞫也。
现代文：虽然如此，巫蛊之祸刚发生时，诏令丞相、椒史督责郡守寻找收捕，廷尉审理，但也没听到九卿、廷尉查问出来什么。
English: Nevertheless, when the Wusong calamity first occurred, the emperor ordered the prime minister and the prefectural governor to search for and arrest, and the courtier tried, but he did not hear what the nine nobles and the courtier asked.

古文：曩者，江充先治甘泉宫人，转至未央椒房，以及敬声之畴、李禹之属谋人匈奴，有司无所发，令丞相亲掘兰台蛊验，所明知也。
现代文：从前，江充审讯甘泉宫的人，又转到未央宫皇后住的椒房殿，以及后来公孙敬声之辈、李禹之流阴谋勾引匈奴，有关官员也没有发现什么罪证，现在丞相亲自挖掘兰台查验巫蛊，清楚地知道有巫蛊存在。
English: In the past, Jiang Chong interrogated the people of Ganquan Palace, and then transferred to the Pepper Room where the queen of Weiyang Palace lived, and later, the descendants of Gongsun Keisui and Li Yu plotted to seduce the Xiongnu, but the relevant officials did not find any evidence of guilt. Now, the prime minister personally excavated the land platform to check for witches, and clearly knew that there were witches.

古文：毋有复言。 后岁余，武帝疾，立皇子钩弋夫人男为太子，拜大将军霍光、车骑将军金日磾、御史大夫桑弘羊及丞相千秋，并受遗诏，辅道少主。
现代文：直到现在还有巫师施行巫蛊妖术不止，邪贼侵身，远近都有巫师暗施巫蛊，我感到惭愧得很，还有什么值得祝寿的呢？敬谢你们的好意，我不端你们献的祝寿酒！请告知丞相、二千石官各回各的官舍。《尚书。周书。洪范》上说： 不要偏执，不要袒护，圣王的道坦荡无阻，不要因为这件事再上奏了。 一年多以后，武帝病重，立钩弋夫人生的皇子为太子，命大将军霍光、车骑将军金曰弹、御史大夫桑弘羊和丞相车千秋，一起接受遣诏，辅助教导幼主刘弗陵。
English: Until now, there are still wizards who continue to practice witchcraft, evil thieves invade, and wizards from far and near secretly practice witchcraft. I feel very ashamed. What else is worth congratulating? Thank you for your kindness, I do not accept your congratulatory wine! Please inform the prime minister and the 2,000-stone officials at their respective official residences. "Shangshu. Zhoushu. Hongfan" said: Do not be paranoid, do not patronize, the path of the holy king is smooth and unimpeded, do not play again because of this matter. More than a year later, Emperor Wu was seriously ill, the prince of the life of Lady Li

古文：武帝崩，昭帝初即位，未任听政，政事一决大将军光。
现代文：汉武帝驾崩，昭帝刚即位时，不能处理政事，朝政全部由大将军霍光决断。
English: When Emperor Hanwu died and Emperor Zhao ascended the throne, he was not able to deal with political affairs, and the imperial government was all decided by General Huo Guang.

古文：千秋居丞相位，谨厚有重德。
现代文：车千秋位居丞相，忠谨敦厚而有德。
English: Che Qianqiu is the prime minister, loyal and dignified and virtuous.

古文：每公卿朝会，光谓千秋曰： 始与君侯俱受先帝遗诏，今光治内，君侯治外，宜有以教督，使光毋负天下。 
现代文：每逢公卿大臣朝会，霍光就对车千秋说： 当初和您一起接受先帝遣韶，现在霍光治理内政，您治理外事，应该有什么来开导督促我，使我不要辜负了天下人民的重托。 
English: Whenever there was a meeting of court nobles and ministers, Huo Guang would say to Che Qianqiu: At the beginning, I accepted the former emperor's dispatch together with you. Now that Huo Guang is in charge of domestic affairs and you are in charge of foreign affairs, you should have something to guide and supervise me, so that I do not fail to live up to the heavy trust of the people around the world.

古文：千秋曰： 唯将军留意，即天下幸甚。 
现代文：车千秋说： 请将军多留心，就是天下极大的荣幸了。 
English: Che Qianqiu said: Please pay more attention to the general, it is the greatest honor in the world.

古文：终不肯有所言。
现代文：始终不肯对霍光专权发表异议。
English: He has always refused to voice any objection to Huo Guang's monopoly.

古文：光以此重之。
现代文：霍光因此很看重车千秋。
English: Therefore, Huo Guang attaches great importance to driving.

古文：每有吉祥嘉应，数褒赏丞相。
现代文：每次遇上吉祥嘉应出现，都褒奖赏赐丞相车千秋。
English: Whenever auspicious and auspicious occurrences occur, rewards are given to the best.

古文：讫昭帝世，国家少事，百姓稍益充实。
现代文：直到昭帝去世，国家少事，百姓逐渐富裕充实。
English: Until the death of Emperor Zhao, the country was not important, and the people gradually became rich and prosperous.

古文：始元六年，诏郡国举贤良文学士，问以民所疾苦，于是盐铁之议起焉。
现代文：始元六年，昭帝韶令郡国举荐贤良、文学之士，询问他们百姓感到痛苦的事，在造时产生了盐铁之议。
English: In the sixth year of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Zhao ordered the county to nominate virtuous and literary men and ask them about the things that the people felt painful, and the discussion of salt and iron arose at the time of construction.

古文：千秋为相十二年，薨，谥曰定侯。
现代文：车千秋做了十二年丞相，死后，谧号称为定侯。
English: Che Qianqiu served as chancellor for 12 years. After his death, his posthumous name was Dinghou.

古文：初，千秋年老，上优之，朝见，得乘小车入宫殿中，故因号曰 车丞相 。
现代文：当初，车千秋年老，皇上优待他，朝见时。准许他乘坐小车进入宫殿，所以就号称 车丞相 。
English: At first, the carriage was old, and the emperor treated him favorably, allowing him to take a carriage into the palace when he met the emperor, so he was known as the Minister of the Chariot.

古文：子顺嗣侯，官至云中太守，宣帝时以虎牙将军击匈奴，坐盗增卤获自杀，国除。
现代文：车千秋的儿子田顺继嗣为侯，官至云中郡太守，宣帝时任虎牙将军攻打匈奴，因私自增加俘虏人数冒功而获罪自杀，封国取消。
English: Che Qianqiu's son, Tian Shun, became the successor of Che Qianqiu, and rose to the position of the governor of Yunnan County. General Hu Ya, who was in charge of attacking the Xiongnu at the time of the proclamation of the emperor, was found guilty of increasing the number of captives for personal gain and committed suicide. The state seal was cancelled.

古文：桑弘羊为御史大夫八年，自以为国家兴榷管之利，伐其功，欲为子弟得官，怨望霍光，与上官桀等谋反，遂诛灭。
现代文：桑弘羊做了八年御史大夫，白认为替国家兴榷管之利，夸耀自己的功劳，想给桑家的子弟谋取官职，怨恨霍光，与上官桀等谋反，终于被处死。
English: Kuang Hongyang served as imperial historian for eight years. Bai believed that it was beneficial for the country's prosperity, boasted of his own merits, wanted to seek official positions for the sons of the Kuang family, resented Huo Guang, and plotted against the higher officials, and was finally executed.

古文：王欣，济南人也。
现代文：王欣，济南郡人。
English: Wang Xin, from Jinan County.

古文：以郡县吏积功，稍迁为被阳令。
现代文：由郡县的小吏积累功劳，逐渐升为被阳县令。
English: The minor officials of counties and counties accumulated merits and gradually rose to be the leaders of Byeongyang County.

古文：武帝末，军旅数发，郡国盗贼群起，绣衣御史暴胜之使持斧逐捕盗贼，以军兴从事，诛二千石以下。
现代文：汉武帝末年，军队经常出征，郡国盗贼群聚蜂起，绣衣御史暴胜之任直指使者持斧追捕盗贼，根据地方官征集财物上交朝廷以供军用的多寡进行处置，诛杀二千石以下不听从命令的官吏。
English: In the last years of Emperor Hanwu, the army often went to war, the county and country thieves rallied and revolted, and the Empress Dowager was ordered to send an envoy with an axe to hunt down the thieves, according to the amount of property collected by local officials and submitted to the imperial court for military use, and to kill officials who did not obey orders below two thousand koku.

古文：胜之过被阳，欲斩欣，欣已解衣伏质，仰言曰： 使君颛杀生之柄，威震郡国，令夏斩一欣，不足以增威，不如时有所宽，以明恩贷，令尽死力。 
现代文：暴胜之巡察到被阳，要斩王欣，王欣已被解开衣服，身子伏在铡刀下面的砧板上，工欣仰起头来对暴胜之说： 使君专掌生杀权柄，威震郡国，现在再杀一个王欣，不能够增加您的威风，不如根据情况有所宽缓，以显明您的恩德仁恕，让我尽死力报答您。 
English: Wang Xin's clothes had been unzipped and his body was lying on the cutting board under the scythe. Gong Xin raised his head and said to Wang Xizhe: "You have made the king hold the power of life and death. You have shaken the county. If you kill another Wang Xin now, you will not be able to increase your prestige. It is better to be lenient according to the circumstances to show your grace and mercy. Let me repay you with all my might."

古文：胜之壮其言，贳不诛，因与相结厚。
现代文：暴胜之佩服他说的话，就赦免了他没有杀，因此，暴胜之与王欣结为厚交。
English: Surpassing admiration for his words, he pardoned him and did not kill him. Therefore, Surpassing became good friends with Wang Xin.

古文：胜之使还，荐欣，征为右辅都尉，守右扶风。
现代文：胜之完成使命回京，向皇上推荐王欣，武帝征召他任右辅都尉，代理右扶风。
English: After completing his mission, Shengzhi returned to Beijing and recommended Wang Xin to the emperor. Emperor Wu called him to serve as the right auxiliary captain, acting as the right wind.

古文：上数出幸安定、北地，过扶风，宫馆驰道修治，供张办。
现代文：武帝多次出巡塞童、韭地，经过迭凰，昙丘派人把宫馆收拾得干净整洁，驰道修整平坦，供设帷帐齐全舒适。
English: Emperor Wu made many trips to patrol the Jiaotong and Fengtai, and sent people to clean and tidy the palace after passing through Dairuo and Fenqiu. The courtyards were repaired and made flat, and the curtains were set up in a complete and comfortable manner.

古文：武帝嘉之，驻车，拜欣为真，视事十余年。
现代文：武帝很高兴，嘉奖王欣，停下车，将王欣的官职转正，治事十几年。
English: Emperor Wu was very pleased, praised Wang Xin, stopped the car, transferred Wang Xin's official position to the right, and governed for more than ten years.

古文：昭帝时为御史大夫，代车千秋为丞相，封宜春侯。
现代文：昭帝时，王欣担任御史大夫，接替车千秋为丞相，被封为宜春侯。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhao, Wang Xin served as the imperial historian, succeeded Che Qiaqiu as the prime minister, and was given the title of Yichun Marquis.

古文：明年薨，谥曰敬侯。
现代文：次年死去，谧号称为敬侯。
English: He died the following year, and his posthumous name was Jinhou.

古文：子谭嗣，以列侯与谋废昌邑王立宣帝，益封三百户。
现代文：王欣的儿子王谭继承了父亲的爵位，以列侯身份参预筹划废除昌邑王、拥立宣帝，增加封邑三百户。
English: Wang Tan, the son of Wang Xin, inherited his father's title and, as a vassal, participated in the pre-planning of the abolition of the King of Changyi, the establishment of Emperor Xuan, and the increase of three hundred fiefs.

古文：薨，子咸嗣。
现代文：王谭死后，他的儿子王咸继承他的爵位。
English: After the death of Wang Tan, his son Wang Ham inherited his title.

古文：王莽妻即咸女，莽篡位，宜春氏以外戚宠。
现代文：玉差的妻子就是王盛的女儿，王差篡位后，王盛家因为是外戚而尊宠。
English: Tamasaka's wife was the daughter of Wang Sheng. After Wang Sheng usurped the throne, Wang Sheng's family favored Tamasaka because she was a relative.

古文：自訢传国至玄孙，莽败，乃绝。
现代文：从王欣开始封国传到玄孙，王莽败亡后，才断绝。
English: From Wang Xin, the practice of sealing the country was passed down to his great-great-grandson. It was only discontinued after Wang Mang's defeat and death.

古文：杨敞，华阴人也。
现代文：杨敞，华阴县人。
English: Yang Zhan, from Huayin County.

古文：给事大将军莫府，为军司马，霍光爱厚之，稍迁至大司农。
现代文：在大将军霆光幕府供职时，任军司马，很得霍光喜爱厚待，逐渐升任大司农。
English: When serving in the shogunate under the great general Tingguang, he was appointed as the military secretary. He was well-liked and well-treated by Tingguang, and was gradually promoted to the position of the chief farmer.

古文：元凤中，稻田使者燕仓知上官桀等反谋，以告敞。
现代文：瓸童五凰年间，稻田使者游董得悉上皇桀等反叛的阴谋，将此事告知杨敞。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaodong and Emperor Wuhu, the rice field messenger Yu Dong learned of the rebellion plot of the last emperor and others, and informed Yang Chang of the matter.

古文：敞素谨累事，不敢言，乃移病卧。
现代文：杨敞一向谨慎怕事，不敢上奏昭帝，就上书称病移居。
English: Yang Chang has always been cautious and afraid of things. He did not dare to appeal to Emperor Zhao, so he wrote a letter saying that he was ill and moved.

古文：以告谏大夫杜延年，延年以闻。
现代文：燕苍又把这一消息告诉了谏大夫杜延年，杜延年奏闻昭帝。
English: Yan Cang also told this news to Dr. Zou Du Yan Nian, and Du Yan Nian reported it to Emperor Zhao.

古文：苍、延年皆封，敞以九卿不辄言，故不得侯。
现代文：燕苍、杜延年都因此立功封侯，杨敞身为九卿听到谋反的消息却不及时上奏，所以没有封侯。
English: Yan Cang and Du Yan Nian were both awarded the title of lord of the manor as a result. Yang Zhan, who was one of the nine lords, heard the news of the rebellion but did not report it in time, so he was not awarded the title of lord of the manor.

古文：后迁御史大夫，代王为丞相，封安平侯。
现代文：后来，升为御史大夫，接替王欣为丞相，封安平侯。
English: Later, he was promoted to goshi taifu, succeeded Wang Xin as chancellor, and was given the title of Anping.

古文：明年，昭帝崩。
现代文：第二年，昭帝驾崩。
English: The next year, Emperor Zhao died.

古文：昌邑王征即位，淫乱，大将军光与车骑将军张安世谋欲废王更立。
现代文：昌邑王受公卿大臣征召来京即位，淫乱无道，大将军霍光与车骑将军张安世密谋，打算废黜吕邑王重立皇帝。
English: Changyi Wang was summoned by the Minister of the Kugyo to come to Beijing to ascend the throne, and there was no way out. General Huo Guang conspired with the cavalry general Zhang Anshi, intending to depose Lüyi Wang and reinstate the emperor.

古文：议既定，使大司农田延年报敞。
现代文：商议既定，让大司农田延年报知杨敞。
English: It was agreed at the consultation that Yang Zhan should be notified of the extension of the farmland year.

古文：敞惊惧，不知所言，汗出洽背，徒唯唯而已。
现代文：杨敞听了，十分惊惧，不知说什么好，汗出湿背，衹会嘴裹发出 唯唯 的声音。
English: Yang Chang listened, very alarmed, did not know what to say, sweating wet back, tongue wrapped around the mouth and uttered a "woo woo" sound.

古文：延年起至更衣，敞夫人遽从东箱谓敞曰： 此国大事，今大将军议已定，使九卿来报君侯。
现代文：田延年起身到更衣室更换衣服，杨敞的夫人急忙从束厢房出来对杨敞说： 这是国家大事，如今大将军计议已定，让大司农田延年来告诉您。
English: Tian Yanran went to the changing room to change his clothes. Yang Zhan's wife hurried out of the dressing room and said to Yang Zhan, "This is a national event. Now the general plan has been decided. Let the general manager, Yanran, tell you."

古文：君侯不疾应，与大将军同心，犹与无决，先事诛矣。 
现代文：您不赶快答应，与大将军同心协力，犹豫不决，就会先遭诛杀。 
English: If you do not quickly agree, work together with the general, and hesitate, you will be killed first.

古文：延年从更衣还，敞、夫人与延年参语许诺，请奉大将军教令，遂共废昌邑王，立宣帝。
现代文：田延年从更衣室回来，杨敞夫妇和田延年都说同意大将军的决定，请求遵奉大将军的命令，于是朝廷大臣一起废掉了昌邑王，拥立宣帝。
English: When Tian Yannian returned from the dressing room, both Yang Zhan and his wife and Tian Yannian said that they agreed with the general's decision and requested to follow the general's order, so the ministers of the court together abolished King Changyi and supported Emperor Xuan.

古文：宣帝即位月余，敞薨，谥曰敬侯。
现代文：宣帝即位一个多月，杨敞去世，谧号称为敬侯。
English: More than a month after the enthronement of Emperor Xuan, Yang Zhan passed away, and his nickname was Jinghou.

古文：子忠嗣，以敞居位定策安宗庙，益封三千五百户。
现代文：他的儿子杨忠继承爵位，因为杨敞位居丞相参预制定废昌邑王更立宣帝的大策，安定漠室宗庙有功，增加食邑三千五百户。
English: His son, Yang Zhong, inherited the title of nobility, because Yang Tianting, who was the prime minister, participated in the preparation of the grand plan to abolish Changyi Wang and establish Emperor Xuan, and contributed to the stability of the Imperial Palace and the increase of 3,500 households in Changyi.

古文：忠弟惲，字子幼，以忠任为郎，补常侍骑，惲母，司马迁女也。
现代文：杨忠的弟弟杨惲，字子幼，凭靠杨忠的官位，按照汉朝的任子制度被任命为郎官，补任常侍骑。杨惲的母亲，是司马迁的女儿。
English: Yang Zhong's younger brother, Yang Zi, a minor, was appointed as a steward in accordance with the Han Dynasty's appointment system by virtue of Yang Zhong's official position. Yang Zi's mother was the daughter of Sima Qian.

古文：惲始读外祖《太史公记》，颇为《春秋》。
现代文：杨惲最先看祖父写的《太史公记》，对《春秋》也很熟悉。
English: Yang Hao first read "Tai Shi Gong Ji" written by his grandfather, and is also familiar with "Spring and Autumn."

古文：以材能称。
现代文：因为有才能得到人们的称赞。
English: To be praised for one's talent.

古文：好交英俊诸儒，名显朝廷，擢为左曹。
现代文：他喜欢结交英俊杰出的儒生，名显朝廷，被提拔为左曹。
English: He liked to make friends with a handsome and outstanding Confucian scholar, who was famous in the imperial court and was promoted to Zuo.

古文：霍氏谋反，惲先闻知，因侍中金安上以闻，召见言状。
现代文：霍氏谋反，杨惲先听说了，通过侍中金安上禀告皇帝，于是皇帝召见杨惲，让他禀报霍氏谋反的事。
English: When Yang Jie heard about the rebellion of the Huo clan, he reported it to the emperor through the attendant Jin An. The emperor then summoned Yang Jie and asked him to report the rebellion of the Huo clan.

古文：霍氏伏诛，惲等五人皆封，惲为平通侯，迁中郎将。
现代文：霍氏家族服罪被杀，杨惲等五人因为举告有功赐封爵位，封杨惲为乎通侯，迁升中郎将。
English: The Huo family was killed after they confessed to the crime, and five people, including Yang Hui, were given peerages for their contributions to the complaint. Yang Hui was given the title of Count of Tong, and was promoted to the position of Vice Admiral.

古文：郎官故事，令郎出钱市财用，给文书，乃得出，名曰 山郎 。
现代文：郎官的旧例，是让郎宫自己出钱支付财物费用，供给文书，才得到出任加官的机会，所以又名 山郎 。
English: An old example of a vassal was that the vassal palace had to pay its own money to pay for property expenses and provide documents before it got the opportunity to serve as a vassal, so it was also known as a vassal.

古文：移病尽一日，辄偿一沐，或至岁余不得沐。
现代文：郎官请病假满一天，就要用一个休假日来抵上，有的郎官一年多得不到休假。
English: If a steward takes sick leave for a full day, he must use a vacation day to make up for it. Some stewards do not get a vacation for more than a year.

古文：其豪富郎，日出游戏，或行钱得善部。
现代文：那凿：豪门富家出身的郎官，整天出去游乐戏耍，有的拿钱行贿，就能到好部门任职。
English: That gouge: the vassal of a wealthy family goes out to play all day, and some take money and pay bribes so that they can work in a good department.

古文：货赂流行，传相放效。
现代文：贿赂风行，竞相仿效。
English: Bribery is rife, and emulation is rife.

古文：惲为中郎将，罢山郎，移长度大司农，以给财用。
现代文：杨惲担任中郎将，免除 山郎 的旧例，把郎官府衙全年的开支计划移交大司农，由大司农供给财务费用。
English: Yang Xi served as the vice-governor, dispensing with the old practice of appointing a governor, and transferred the annual expenditure plan of the vice-governor's office to the vice-governor, and the vice-governor provided financial expenses.

古文：其疾病休谒洗沐，皆以法令从事。
现代文：郎官的病假、探亲假、沐休假，都按照法令办事。
English: The official's sick leave, family visit leave, and vacation leave are all handled in accordance with the law.

古文：郎、谒者有罪过，辄奏免，荐举其高弟有行能者，至郡守、九卿。
现代文：郎、谒者中有犯了罪过的，就上奏罢免，荐举郎宫中工作优异德才兼备者加官，有的升迁到郡守、九卿。
English: If any vassal or retainer has committed a crime, he or she will be dismissed, recommended to be promoted to a higher position, and some promoted to county governors and nine nobles.

古文：郎官化之，莫不自厉，绝请谒货赂之端，令行禁止，宫殿之内翕然同声。
现代文：郎官因此受到教化，无不激励自己勤于职守，革除了求情送礼的弊端，令行禁止，宫殿里的郎官们同心协力。
English: As a result, the retainers were enlightened, and they all encouraged themselves to be diligent in their duties. The evil of asking for favors and sending gifts was eliminated, and it was forbidden to do so. The retainers in the palace worked together.

古文：由是擢为诸吏光禄勋，亲近用事。
现代文：因此皇上提拔杨惲为诸吏光禄勋，成为亲信大臣办理政事。
English: Therefore, the emperor promoted Yang Jie to the highest rank of officials and became a trusted minister to handle political affairs.

古文：初，惲受父财五百万，及身封侯，皆以分宗族。
现代文：当初，杨惲接受了父亲的钱财五百万，到他被封为平通侯，就把父亲给他的钱财全部分给同宗族的人。
English: At first, Yang Hui accepted five million yuan of his father's money and property. When he was appointed as the Prince of Pingtung, he gave all the money and property given to him by his father to people of the same clan.

古文：后母无子，财亦数百万，死皆子惲，惲尽复分后母昆弟。
现代文：他的继母没有儿子，钱财也有几百万，死后都留给了杨惲，杨惲又全分给了继母的兄弟。
English: His stepmother had no son and had millions of money. After her death, she left it all to Yang Hui, who in turn gave it all to her stepmother's brother.

古文：再受訾千余万，皆以分施。
现代文：杨惲两次共继承钱财一千多万，统统拿出来分给了别人。
English: Yang Wei inherited a total of more than 10 million yuan of money and property twice, and took it all out and distributed it to others.

古文：其轻财好义如此。
现代文：他就是这样轻财好义。
English: That's how greedy he is.

古文：惲居殿中，廉洁无私，郎官称公平。
现代文：杨惲在殿中做官，廉洁无私，郎官都称赞他公平。
English: Yang Hui worked as an official in the palace. He was honest and selfless. His vassals all praised him for his fairness.

古文：然惲伐其行治，又性刻害，好发人阴伏，同位有忤己者，必欲害之，以其能高人。由是多怨于朝廷，与太仆戴长乐相失，卒以是败。
现代文：但杨惲常夸耀自己的德行和办事能力，又生性刻薄，喜欢揭发别人的阴私，同事中有违逆自己的，必定想法加害他，仗恃自己有才能高傲凌人，因此在朝中得罪了许多人，与太仆戴长乐失和，终于因为这件事毁了自己。
English: However, Yang Xuan often boasted of his virtue and ability to do things. He was also born with a caustic nature and liked to expose the shadiness of others. When some of his colleagues disobeyed him, he must have thought of harming them. He boasted that he had the ability to be arrogant. As a result, he offended many people in the court. He fell out with his servant Dai Changle, and finally destroyed himself because of this.

古文：长乐者，宣帝在民间时与相知，及即位，拔擢亲近。
现代文：戴长乐是宣帝在民间结交的知己，到宣帝即位，擢升他为亲信大臣。
English: Dai Changle was a confidant of Emperor Xuan in civil society. When Emperor Xuan ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the position of trusted minister.

古文：长乐尝使行事肄宗庙，还谓掾史曰： 我亲面见受诏，副帝肄，秺侯御。 
现代文：戴长乐曾在演习宗庙祭祀礼仪时，代理执行天子的事务，回来后对掾史说： 我面见皇帝并接受韶令，代替皇帝演习礼仪，诧侯给我驾车。 
English: Dai Changle used to perform the affairs of the heavenly son as an agent when he was practicing the rituals of the ancestral temple. After returning, he said to Zou Shi: I met the emperor and accepted the imperial order, practiced the rituals in place of the emperor, and surprised him by giving me a ride.

古文：人有上书告长乐非所宜言，事下廷尉。
现代文：有人卜书告发戴长乐言语失当，皇上将此事交给廷尉审理。
English: Some people complained in their prayer books that Dai Changle's speech was inappropriate, and the emperor handed the matter over to the court lieutenant for trial.

古文：长乐疑惲教人告之，亦上书告惲罪。
现代文：戴长乐怀疑是杨惲教唆别人告发他，也上书举告杨惲的罪行，说：
English: Dai Changle suspected that Yang Hui instigated others to denounce him, and also wrote a letter to denounce Yang Hui's crime, saying:

古文：高昌侯车奔入北掖门，惲语富平侯张延寿曰： 闻前曾有奔车抵殿门，门关折，马死，而昭帝崩。
现代文： 高昌侯董忠驾车奔入北掖门，杨惲对富平侯张延寿说： 听说以前曾有奔驰的车撞在殿门上，门闩被撞断，马也撞死了，接着昭帝驾崩。
English: Gaochang marquess Dongzhong drove into the North Gate, and Yang Zhen said to Fuping marquess Zhang Yanshou: I heard that a Mercedes-Benz car crashed into the gate of the palace, the lintel was broken, the horse was also killed, and then Emperor Zhao died.

古文：今复如此，天时，非人力也。 左冯翊韩延寿有罪下狱，惲上书讼延寿。
现代文：现在又出现了这样的事，是天命，不是人为的，左冯翊韩延寿有罪下狱，杨惲上书为他辩冤。
English: Now this kind of thing has happened again. It was fate, not man-made. Zuo Fengyuan and Han Yanshou were convicted and sent to prison, and Yang Hui wrote a letter to defend him.

古文：郎中丘常谓惲曰： 闻君侯讼韩冯翊，当得活乎？ 
现代文：郎中丘常对杨惲说：听说您替韩冯翊申冤辩护，能救活他吗？ 
English: Brother-in-law Yau often said to Yang Hui: I heard that you defended Han Fengya, can you save him?

古文：惲曰： 事何容易！
现代文：杨惲说： 事情哪有这么容易！
English: Yang Hui said, "Things can't be that easy!"

古文：胫胫者未必全也。
现代文：正直的人不一定能保全自己。
English: An honest man may not be able to protect himself.

古文：我不能自保，真人所谓鼠不容穴衔窭数者也。 又中书谒者令宣持单于使者语，视诸将军、中朝二千石。
现代文：我尚且不能白保，正像人们所说的老鼠因为口衔比鼠洞口大的窦数而进不了洞，又有一次，中书谒者令宣把匈奴单于使者的话译成文字，拿给将军们和中朝二千石官看。
English: I still can't say for sure, just as people say that rats can't get into a hole because their mouth is bigger than the mouth of a rat hole. Once again, the Chinese scribe ordered Xuan to translate the words of the Hun into words and show them to the generals and the 2,000-koku officials of the Chinese Empire.

古文：惲曰： 冒顿单于得汉美食好物，谓之殠恶，单于不来明甚。 
现代文：杨惲说： 冒顿单于得到汉朝赏赐的美食佳物，却说是腐臭难闻的坏东西，单于不来朝见不是很明白了吗。
English: Yang Wei said, "It is very clear that if you take a chance on the delicious food given by the Han Dynasty, but it is said to be rancid and bad-smelling, you should not come to the morning meeting.

古文：惲上观西阁上画人，指桀、纣画谓乐昌侯王武曰： 天子过此，一二问其过，可以得师矣。 画人有尧、舜、禹、汤，不称而举桀、纣。
现代文：杨惲观看西合上画的人物，指着夏桀、商纣的画像对乐昌侯王武说： 天子路过这裹，多问问桀、纣犯下的过错，可以得到鉴戒，书上的人物还有尧、舜、禹、汤，杨惲不称颂，却列举桀、纣。
English: Yang Hui looked at the characters on the painting of Xi He, pointed to the images of Xia Yao and Shang Yao, and said to Lechang Hou Wang Wu: Heavenly Father passed by here, ask more questions about the mistakes made by Yao, Yao, and you can get a warning. The characters on the book also include Yao, Yao, Yu, and Tang. Yang Hui did not praise, but listed Yao, Yao.

古文：惲闻匈奴降者道单于见杀，惲曰： 得不肖君，大臣为画善计不用，自令身无处所。
现代文：杨惲听匈奴投降的人说单于被杀了，就说： 竟有这种不贤明的君主，大臣替他筹划的好计不用，却自取灭亡。
English: When Yang Xuan heard that those who surrendered to the Xiongnu were simply killed, he said, "How can there be such an unwise monarch? The minister did not need to devise a good plan for him, but took his own life.

古文：若秦时但任小臣，诛杀忠良，竟以灭亡；令亲任大臣，即至今耳。
现代文：正如秦朝衹任用奸佞小人为臣，诛杀忠良，终究因此灭亡；假使能亲近任用贤明正直的大臣，秦朝就能一直延续到现在。
English: Just as the Qin Dynasty appointed traitors and scoundrels as its vassals, killed the loyal and eventually perished as a result; if it could appoint wise and honest ministers, the Qin Dynasty could continue to this day.

古文：古与今如一丘之貉。 惲妄引亡国以诽谤当世，无人臣礼。
现代文：古代和当今的坏人如同一丘之貉，杨惲妄引亡国的事例来诽谤当今朝廷，没有人臣的礼节。
English: The villains of ancient times and those of today are like two peas in a pod. There is no such thing as court etiquette.

古文：又语长乐曰： 正月以来，天阴不雨，此《春秋》所记，夏侯君所言。
现代文：杨惲又对我戴长乐说过： 正月以来，天气久阴不雨，这种天象《春秋》记载过，夏侯胜规劝昌邑王时说过。
English: Yang Jie also said to Dai Changle: Since the first month of the year, the weather has been cloudy and rainy for a long time. This kind of celestial phenomenon has been recorded in "Spring and Autumn," and Xia Hou Sheng Jie advised Changyi Wang.

古文：行必不至河东矣。 以主上为戏语，尤悖逆绝理。
现代文：皇上必定不能再到河东后土祠祭祀了，杨惲拿皇上开玩笑，尤其大逆不道违背伦理。 
English: The emperor must not be able to go to Hedong Houtu Ancestral Hall for worship again. Yang Hui joked about the emperor, in particular, he was a traitor and violated ethics.

古文：事下廷尉。
现代文：杨惲的案件交给廷尉审讯。
English: The matter was referred to the Lieutenant of the Court.

古文：廷尉定国考问，左验明白，奏：
现代文：廷尉于定国考讯查问，有证明人佐证，查清了紧晴。
English: The imperial lieutenant made an inquiry at the national examination in Ding, and with the support of a witness, the investigation was cleared.

古文：惲不服罪，而召户将尊，欲令戒饬富平侯延寿，曰： 太仆定有死罪数事，朝暮人也。
现代文：于定国奏报皇帝说： 杨惲不认罪，反而密召户将尊，想让他去警告富平侯张延寿，说 太仆戴长乐有好几件事可以定成死罪，是早晚要被处死的人。
English: Yu Dingguo reported to the emperor, "Yang Zheng did not admit his guilt, but instead secretly summoned the head of the household, wanting him to warn the Fuping lord Zhang Yanshou, saying that the servant Dai Changle has several things that can be sentenced to death, and is a person who will be executed sooner or later.

古文：惲幸与富平侯婚姻，今独三人坐语，侯言 时不闻惲语 ，自与太仆相触也。 尊曰： 不可。 
现代文：杨惲有幸与富平侯结为姻亲，现在杨惲案子中的事衹有你们三个人在一起说过，衹要富平侯说 当时没听见杨惲说过造话 ，自然和太仆所揭发的相抵触了，户将尊说 不行 。
English: Yang Hui had the good fortune to be married to Fuping Hou. Now, in Yang Hui's case, the three of you have discussed the matter together. If you want Fuping Hou to say that he did not hear Yang Hui's fabricated words at that time, it will naturally conflict with what was revealed by the servant, and the head of the household will say no.

古文：惲怒，持大刀，曰： 蒙富平侯力，得族罪！
现代文：杨惲大怒，手持大刀，说： 如果太仆得到富平侯的帮助，按照太仆揭发的作证，我将被判处灭族的罪名！
English: Yang Xuan was furious, holding a big sword in his hand, saying: "If the Great Servant gets the help of Fuping Hou, according to the testimony revealed by the Great Servant, I will be convicted of exterminating the people!"

古文：毋泄惲语，令太仆闻之乱余事。 
现代文：不准泄露我说的话，让太仆知道了这些话，更增加我的其他罪状。
English: Don't leak what I said, let the servants know what I said, and add to my other crimes.

古文：惲幸得列九卿诸吏，宿卫近臣，上所信任，与闻政事，不竭忠爱，尽臣子义，而妄怨望，称引为訞恶言，大逆不道，请逮捕治。
现代文：杨惲侥幸位列九卿，担任诸吏光禄勋，是朝廷的侍卫近臣，为皇上所信任，参与政事，不但不竭尽忠君爱民之心，尽臣子之义，反而狂妄地发泄心中的怨恨，散布妖言恶语，大逆不道，请求逮捕治罪。 
English: By chance, Yang Jie was ranked as one of the nine nobles, served as an officer of the Order of the Star, was a close courtier of the imperial court, was trusted by the emperor, and participated in political affairs. However, he did not do his best to be loyal to the emperor and to love the people, and did his best to be a loyal subject. Instead, he arrogantly vented the resentment in his heart, spread evil words, committed high treason, and requested to be arrested and punished.

古文：上不忍加诛，有诏皆免惲、长乐为庶人。
现代文：宣帝不忍心判他死罪。下韶把杨惲、戴长乐都免为平民。
English: Emperor Xuan could not bear to sentence him to death. He pardoned Yang Xuan and Dai Changle as commoners.

古文：惲既失爵位，家居治产业，起室宅，以财自娱。
现代文：杨惲失去爵位以后，居家经营产业，兴建房宅，靠钱财自寻欢乐。
English: After Yang Hui lost his title, he ran an industry at home, built houses, and relied on money to find happiness.

古文：岁余，其友人安定太守西河孙会宗，知略士也，与惲书谏戒之，为言大臣废退，当阖门惶惧，为可怜之意，不当治产业，通宾客，有称誉。
现代文：过了一年多，他的朋友安定郡太守西河人孙会宗，是个有才智有谋略的人，写信规劝杨惲，跟他说大臣免官退居以后，应该闭门思过，诚惶诚恐，做出让人哀怜的样子，不该经营产业，交结宾客，有受人称赞的名声。
English: After more than a year, his friend Sun Huizong, the governor-general of Anding County and a man of wisdom and strategy, wrote a letter to persuade Yang Qi, telling him that after the minister was dismissed from office and retired, he should think behind closed doors, be sincere, make a pathetic appearance, should not run the industry, make friends with guests, and have a reputation praised by others.

古文：惲宰相子，少显朝廷，一朝以暗昧语言见废，内怀不服，报会宗书曰：
现代文：杨惲是宰相杨敞的儿子，年轻时就名显朝廷，一旦因为一些真假不明的言语被废黜，心中不服，给孙会宗的回信说：
English: Yang Hui was the son of the prime minister, Yang Chang. In his youth, he made a name for himself in the imperial court. Once he was deposed because of some untrue words, he was not satisfied. He wrote back to Sun Huizong:

古文：惲材朽行秽，文质无所底，幸赖先人余业得备宿卫，遭遇时变以获爵位，终非其任，卒与祸会。
现代文：我才能低下，行为卑秽，学问修养都没有什么根基，侥幸依赖父亲留下的功业，得以充数宿卫宫廷，遇上霍氏谋反，因为告发有功而获得爵位，但我毕竟不能胜任，终于遭到祸患。
English: My talent is low, my behavior is despicable, and my education has no foundation. I was lucky enough to rely on my father's legacy and was able to fill the number of palace guards. I encountered Ho's rebellion and received a knighthood because of my whistleblowing, but I am not competent after all, and finally I suffered a misfortune.

古文：足下哀其愚，蒙赐书，教督以所不及，殷勤甚厚。
现代文：足下哀怜我愚昧，承蒙来函，教导说明我没认识到的道理，情意殷切深厚。
English: At my feet, they pitied me for my ignorance. They received a letter from me, teaching me the truth that I didn't recognize, and they were deeply affectionate.

古文：然窃恨足下不深惟其终始，而猥随俗之毁誉也。
现代文：但我私下埋怨足下不深思事情的原委，而轻易相信世俗之人的诽谤。
English: But I privately grumble that I don't think deeply about the cause of things, and easily believe the slander of worldly people.

古文：言鄙陋之愚心，若逆指而文过，默而息乎，恐违孔氏 各言尔志 之义，故敢略陈其愚，唯君子察焉！
现代文：说出我鄙陋的愚蠢想法吧，像是违背了足下的意旨，而又文饰己过；沉默不语吧，又怕背离孔子 各言尔志 之义，所以才敢概略地陈述我的愚见，请您考虑。
English: Speak my vile, stupid thoughts, as if they were contrary to the will of the people, and yet exaggerated; be silent, and be afraid of departing from the meaning of Confucius's sayings. That is why I dare to outline my stupidity. Please consider it.

古文：惲家方隆盛时，乘朱轮者十人，位在列卿，爵为通侯，总领从官，与闻政事，曾不能以此时有所建明，以宣德化，又不能与群僚同心并力，陪辅朝廷之遗忘，已负窃位素餐之责久矣。
现代文：我家在显赫时，乘坐朱轮车的人有十个，位在九卿之列，爵位为列侯，统领侍从官，参预朝廷政事，而我竟不能在这时有所建树，来宣扬皇上的德行教化，又不能和群僚同心协力，辅佐朝廷拾遣补缺，受到窃取官位白混饭吃的指责已经很久了。
English: When my family was prominent, there were ten people who rode the cogwheel carriage, ranking among the nine lords, with the title of feudal lord, leading the attendants and attendants, and participating in the pre-imperial political affairs. However, I could not do anything at this time to promote the emperor's moral conduct and enlightenment, and I could not work together with my colleagues to assist the imperial court in filling the shortage, and I have been accused of stealing official positions and eating white rice for a long time.

古文：怀禄贪势，不能自退，遭遇变故，横被口语，身幽北阙，妻子满狱。
现代文：我贪图俸禄，热衷权势，不能自动引退，遭遇变故，横遭别人毁谤，被囚禁在宫殿北边的观楼中，妻子儿女都被关在监狱裹。
English: I am greedy for salary, keen on power, unable to retire automatically, have suffered misfortune, have been slandered by others, have been imprisoned in the observation tower on the north side of the palace, and my wife and children have been locked up in prison.

古文：当此之时，自以夷灭不足以塞责，岂意得全首领，复奉先人之丘墓乎？
现代文：在这个时候，自己觉得灭族也不能抵偿罪责，哪想到能保全性命，又奉祀祖先的坟墓呢？
English: At this time, they felt that exterminating the people could not compensate for their guilt. How could they think of preserving their lives and worshipping the graves of their ancestors?

古文：伏惟圣主之恩，不可胜量。
现代文：我感到圣明皇上的恩惠，真是不可计量。
English: I feel that the grace of Emperor Shengming is immeasurable.

古文：君子游道，乐以忘忧；小人全躯，说以忘罪。
现代文：君子奉行道义，乐而忘忧；小人保全性命，悦而忘罪。
English: A gentleman pursues morality, enjoys himself and forgets his worries; a villain preserves his life, enjoys himself and forgets his sins.

古文：窃自思念，过已大矣，行已亏矣，长为农夫以没世矣。
现代文：我私下想过，我的罪遇已经很大了，品行已经欠缺了，永远做个农民度过余生吧。
English: Privately, I thought that my crimes were too great and my moral conduct was lacking. I would like to be a farmer for the rest of my life.

古文：是故身率妻子，戮力耕桑，灌园治产，以给公上，不意当复用此为讥议也。
现代文：所以带领妻子儿女，努力耕稼种桑，灌溉园圃，经营产业，向朝廷纳赋交税，没想到又因此而遭到讥刺非议。
English: Therefore, he led his wife and children, worked hard to cultivate mulberry trees, irrigate gardens, manage industries, and pay taxes to the imperial court. Unexpectedly, he was ridiculed and criticized for this.

古文：夫人情所不能止者，圣人弗禁，故君父至尊亲，送其终也，有时而既。
现代文：人情不能避免的事情，连圣人也不禁止。所以，即使是最尊贵的君主、最亲近的父亲，为他们送终服丧，也有结束的时候。
English: Even saints are not forbidden to do what is humanly unavoidable, so even for the most revered monarchs and the closest of fathers, there is an end to their last rites.

古文：臣之得罪，已三年矣。
现代文：我获罪已有三年了。
English: It's been three years since I was convicted.

古文：田家作苦，岁时伏腊，亨羊炰羔，斗酒自劳。
现代文：当农夫劳作辛苦，每年伏日、腊月，煮羊肉，烹羊羔，斟酒自慰。
English: When a farmer works hard, every year he spends days and months cooking mutton, cooking lamb, pouring wine and masturbating.

古文：家本秦也，能为秦声。
现代文：我的老家本来在秦地，我会唱秦地的歌。
English: My hometown was originally in Qin, and I can sing Qin songs.

古文：妇，赵女也，雅善鼓瑟。
现代文：妻子是趟地的女子，雅善弹瑟。
English: His wife is a woman of the earth, and Yasin plays the harp.

古文：奴婢歌者数人，酒后耳热，仰天拊缶而呼乌乌。
现代文：奴婢中也有人会唱歌，酒后耳朵发热，举头望天，以手击缶，唱出乌乌的歌声。
English: There are also slaves who can sing. After drinking, their ears get hot, they look up to the sky, hit the can with their hands, and sing the song of Wu Wu.

古文：其诗曰： 田彼南山，芜秽不治，种一顷豆，落而为其。
现代文：歌辞唱道：田彼南山，芜秽不治，种一顷豆，落而为萁。
English: The lyrics sing: Tianbin Nanshan, filthy and incurable, planted a hectare of beans, fell and became a cocoon.

古文：人生行乐耳，须富贵何时！ 
现代文：人生行乐耳，须富贵何时！ 
English: Life is a merry-go-round, you have to be rich at some point!

古文：是日也，拂衣而喜，奋袖低卬，顿足起舞，诚淫荒无度，不知其不可也。
现代文：在这样的日子裹，我高兴得抖着衣服，挥动衣袖，时而低垂，时而上扬，跺脚起舞，实在是放纵无度，我不知道这样做为什么不行。
English: On a day like this, I'm happy to shake my clothes, wave my sleeves, sometimes droop, sometimes rise, stomp and dance, it's really indulgent, I don't know why I can't do it.

古文：惲幸有余禄，方籴贱贩贵，逐什一之利，此贾竖之事，污辱之处，惲亲行之。
现代文：我幸亏还有剩余的俸禄，才买贱卖贵，追求十分之一的利润。这是商人做的事，也是蒙受耻辱的事，我都亲自做了。
English: Fortunately, I still had my salary left, so I bought cheap and sold expensive, and pursued a tenth of the profit. This is what businessmen do, and it is also a shameful thing, I have done it myself.

古文：下流之人，众毁所归，不寒而栗。
现代文：地位卑下的人，是众人诋毁的对象，我一想到这些，就不寒而栗。
English: It makes me shudder to think of people of lesser status being the subject of public vilification.

古文：虽雅知惲者，犹随风而靡，尚何称誉之有！
现代文：即使是很了解我的人，也随声附和诽谤我，哪儿还会有人称赞我呢！
English: Even those who know me well, echo and slander me, where else would anyone praise me!

古文：董生不云乎？ 明明求仁义，常恐不能化民者，卿大夫意也；明明求财利，常恐困乏者，庶人之事也。 
现代文：董仲舒不是说过吗， 勤勤敏敏求取仁义，常常担心不能教化百姓，是卿大夫考虑的问题；勤勤敏敏地求取财利，常常担心生活困穷，是老百姓的事。 
English: Wasn't it Dong Zhongshu who said, diligent and sensitive pursuit of benevolence and righteousness, often worried about not being able to educate the people, is a matter for the doctor to consider; diligent and sensitive pursuit of wealth and profit, often worried about living in poverty, is a matter for the people.

古文：故 道不同，不相为谋。 
现代文：所以孔子说： 道不同，不相为谋。 
English: That is why Confucius said, "Different paths do not lead to the same goal."

古文：今子尚安得以卿大夫之制而责仆哉！
现代文：如今您怎么还能拿卿大夫的行为规范来责备我呢！
English: How can you now accuse me of breaching the code of conduct of a senior doctor!

古文：夫西河魏土，文侯所兴，有段干木、田子方之遗风，漂然皆有节概，知去就之分。
现代文：西河是战国时魏国的土地，魏文侯兴起的地方，有段干木、田子方遣留的风范，两位贤士都有高尚的节操和宽宏的度量，知道辞官与出仕的分寸。
English: The West River was the land of Wei during the Warring States period, and the place where Wei Wenhou arose. There was a dry wood section, and there was a style of sending people to stay in the field. Both sages had noble discipline and magnanimous measure, and knew the proportion between the officer and the servant.

古文：顷者，足下离旧土，临安定，安定山谷之间，昆戎旧壤，子弟贪鄙，岂习俗之移人哉？
现代文：近来，足下离开家乡西河，到达安定郡，安定郡处在山谷之间，是昆戎的旧地，那裹的人贪婪鄙薄，难道是当地习俗改变了您的品性吗？
English: Recently, I left my hometown, Xihe, and arrived in Ding'an County. Ding'an County is located between the valleys. It is the old land of Kunyong. The people there are greedy and despicable. Is it the local customs that have changed your character?

古文：于今乃睹子之志矣。方当盛汉之隆，愿勉旃，毋多谈。
现代文：到今天我才看清您的志向，正值汉朝鼎盛时期，希望您努力建立功名，不须多与我议论了。
English: To this day, I can only see your ambition clearly. It was during the heyday of the Han Dynasty. I hope you will work hard to build your reputation, so there is no need to discuss it with me.

古文：又惲兄子安平侯谭为典属国，谓惲曰： 西河太守建平杜侯前以罪过出，今征为御史大夫。
现代文：杨惲哥哥杨忠的儿子安平侯杨谭任职典属，他对杨惲说： 西河郡太守建平人杜延年，以前因罪丢官，现在被征召为御史大夫。
English: Yang Tian's brother Yang Zhong's son, Anping Hou Yang Tan, who was a subordinate, said to Yang Tian: Du Yan Nian, the governor of Xihe County, who had previously lost his position due to crime, has now been conscripted as a doctor of history.

古文：侯罪薄，又有功，且复用。 
现代文：您罪轻，又立过功，还会被重新起用的。 
English: You've done your time, you've done your time, you'll be reinstated.

古文：惲曰： 有功何益？
现代文：杨惲说： 有功有什么用？
English: Yang Hui said, "What is the use of meritorious deeds?

古文：县官不足为尽力。 
现代文：皇上不值得我为他尽力。 
English: The Emperor is not worth my best efforts.

古文：惲素与盖宽饶、韩延寿善，谭即曰： 县官实然，盖司隶、韩冯翊皆尽力吏也，俱坐事诛。 
现代文：杨惲平素与盖宽饶、韩延寿交好，杨谭随即说： 皇上的确是这样，盖司隶、韩冯翊都是为朝廷效忠尽力的官员，都因为小事被杀了。 
English: Yang Xingping was good friends with Gai Guangrao and Han Yanshou, Yang Tan immediately said: The emperor is indeed like this, Gai Sisli and Han Fengyao are officials who are loyal to the imperial court, and they were all killed because of small things.

古文：会有日食变，驺马猥佐成上书告惲 骄奢不悔过，日食之咎，此人所致。 
现代文：这时正碰上日食天变，一个管车马的下等小吏名叫成，上书举告杨惲 骄奢不悔过，日食灾祸就是他招来的 。
English: At this time, the eclipse was taking place. A petty official named Cheng, who was in charge of chariots and horses, sent a letter to Yang Xuan, accusing him of being arrogant and unrepentant. The eclipse disaster was caused by him.

古文：章下廷尉案验，得所予会宗书，宣帝见而恶之。
现代文：宣帝把这个奏章交给廷尉审讯查验，审讯中搜到杨惲写给孙会宗的信，宣帝看了很憎恶杨惮。
English: Emperor Xuan gave this record to a courtier for examination. During the examination, a letter written by Yang Jie to Sun Huizong was found. Emperor Xuan hated Yang Shuo.

古文：廷尉当惲大逆无道，要斩。
现代文：廷尉判杨惲大逆无道罪，处以腰斩。
English: The imperial lieutenant found Yang Xuan guilty of high treason and sentenced him to beheading.

古文：妻子徙酒泉郡。
现代文：他的妻子儿女流放到酒泉郡。
English: His wife and children were exiled to Jiuquan County.

古文：谭坐不谏正惲，与相应，有怨望语，免为庶人。
现代文：杨谭不劝杨惲悔过，反而与他互相应和，有怨恨言论，免去官职，贬为平民。
English: Yang Tan did not persuade Yang Xuan to repent, but instead made peace with him, had resentful speech, was relieved of his official position, and was reduced to a commoner.

古文：召拜成为郎，诸在位与惲厚善者，未央卫尉韦玄成、京兆尹张敞及孙会宗等，皆免官。
现代文：宣帝召见并任命成做郎官，那些在位为官与杨惲交情深厚的人，如未央宫卫尉韦玄成、京兆尹张敞及孙会宗等人，都被免去了官职。
English: Emperor Xuanxuan summoned and appointed Cheng Rongguan, and those who were in office and had a deep friendship with Yang Hui, such as Wei Yuancheng, the palace guard, Jing Zhaoyin, Zhang Zhangran, and Sun Huizong, were all dismissed from their official positions.

古文：蔡义，河内温人也。
现代文：蔡义，河内郡温县人。
English: Cai Yi, from Weng County, Hanoi County.

古文：以明经给事大将军莫府。
现代文：因为通晓经术供职大将军幕府。
English: Because of his knowledge of the scriptures, he served as a general in the shogunate.

古文：家贫，常步行，资礼不逮众门下，好事者相合为义买犊车，令乘之。
现代文：家裹很穷，经常步行。贫寒不能备礼，众门下中有好事的人凑钱给蔡义买了一辆牛车，让他乘坐。
English: The family was very poor and often had to walk. The poor could not afford to travel, so some good-doers in the family pooled their money to buy Cai Yi an ox cart for him to ride in.

古文：数岁，迁补覆盎城门候。
现代文：几年后，蔡义升补覆盎城门门候。
English: A few years later, Cai Yisheng succeeded in covering the door of the Uncheng Gate.

古文：久之，诏求能为《韩诗》者，征义待诏，久不进见。
现代文：过了很久，皇帝下诏寻求能精通《韩诗》的人，征召蔡义待诏，很久没能进见皇帝。
English: After a long time, the emperor issued an edict to seek people who could master "Han poetry" and summoned Cai Yi to attend the edict. He was unable to see the emperor for a long time.

古文：义上疏曰： 臣山东草莱之人，行能亡所比，容貌不及众，然而不弃人伦者，窃以闻道于先师，自托于经术也。
现代文：蔡义上疏说： 我是山东田野的平民，德行才智没有什么可以和别人相比之处，容貌也赶不上众人，但却没有抛弃人伦，是因为我私下向先师学习了道义，托身于经术。
English: Cai Yizhong said: I am a commoner in the fields of Shandong. There is nothing to compare with others in virtue, talent and wisdom. My appearance cannot keep up with the masses. However, I have not abandoned human ethics, because I privately learned morality from my mentor and devoted myself to scripture.

古文：愿赐清闲之燕，得尽精思于前。 
现代文：希望陛下赐给清静安闲之处，得以把关于经义的精细思考全部奉献出来。 
English: I hope that Your Majesty will give me a place of peace and quiet, so that I can devote all my fine thoughts on the meaning of the sutras.

古文：上召见义，说《诗》，甚说之，擢为光禄大夫给事中，进授昭帝。
现代文：皇上召见蔡义，让他讲论《诗经》，皇上听了很满意，提拔他为光禄大夫、给事中，进宫教授汉昭帝。
English: The emperor summoned Cai Yi and asked him to give a lecture on the "Song of Songs." The emperor was very satisfied with what he heard and promoted him to the position of doctor of Guanglu and professor to Emperor Han Zhao.

古文：数岁，拜为少府，迁御史大夫，代杨敝为丞相，封阳平侯。
现代文：几年后，被任命为少府，又迁升御史大夫，代替杨敞为丞相，封阳平侯。
English: A few years later, he was appointed to the position of Shōfu (Junior Prefect) and moved up to the position of Mishi no daibu (Master of History), replacing Yang Tiao as chancellor and appointing Yang Pinghou as his successor.

古文：又以定策安宗庙益封，加赐黄金二百斤。
现代文：又因为定策安宗庙增加封赏，加赐黄金二百斤。
English: In addition, because of the determined policy of the Anzong Temple, the reward was increased, and two hundred catties of gold were awarded.

古文：义为丞相时年八十余，短小无须眉，貌似老妪，行步俯偻，常两吏扶夹乃能行。
现代文：蔡义做丞相时已经八十多岁了，身材矮小，没有胡须，眉毛也脱落了，脸相好像老妇人，走路弯腰曲背，常常要两名属吏扶持才能行走。
English: When he became prime minister, Cai Yi was already in his eighties. He was short, had no beard, and his eyebrows had fallen off. His face looked like an old woman's. He walked with a stooped back, and often needed the support of two subordinate officials to walk.

古文：时大将军光秉政，议者或言光置宰相不选贤，苟用可专制者。
现代文：当时大将军霍光执政，议事者当中有人说霍光设置丞相不选择贤才，草率任用可以由他专制的人。
English: At that time, the great general Huo Guang was in power, and some of the councilors said that Huo Guang set up the prime minister not to choose talents, and hastily appointed people who could be controlled by him.

古文：光闻之，谓侍中左右及官属曰： 以为人主师当为宰相，何谓云云？
现代文：霍光听到这种议论后，对侍中、左右随从官员及属吏们说： 我认为皇帝的老师应当做宰相，怎么能说不选择贤才呢？
English: After listening to this argument, Huo Guang said to the attendants, left and right subordinate officials and subordinate officials: I think that the emperor's teacher should be the prime minister, how can I say that I do not choose a wise man?

古文：此语不可使天下闻也。 
现代文：这种议论不能让天下人听到。 
English: This kind of talk cannot be allowed to be heard by the world.

古文：义为相四岁，薨，谥曰节侯。
现代文：蔡义做了四年宰相就死了，谧号称节侯。
English: Cai Yi died after serving as prime minister for four years, and was nicknamed "Seihou."

古文：无子，国除。
现代文：他没有儿子，封国废除。
English: Without a son, the state was abolished.

古文：陈万年字幼公，沛郡相人也。
现代文：陈万年字幼公，沛郡相县人。
English: Chen Man Nian Zi Yugong, Pei Gu Xiang Xuan Ren.

古文：为郡吏，察举，至县令，迁广陵太守，以高弟入为右扶风，迁太仆。
现代文：初为沛郡属吏，经过考察受到举荐，官至县令，又迁升广陵太守，因为政绩优异入京任右扶风，又迁任太仆。
English: At first, he was a subordinate official of Pei County. After examination, he was recommended and promoted to the position of county magistrate. He was also promoted to the governor of Guangling. Because of his outstanding political performance, he was appointed to Beijing as the right wind, and was also transferred to the position of the servant.

古文：万年廉平，内行修，然善事人。赂遗外戚许、史，倾家自尽，尤事乐陵侯史高。
现代文：陈万年廉洁公平，内修德行，然而善于处事待人，赠送财物给外戚许家和史家，倾尽家中钱财，特别结交侍奉乐陵侯史高。
English: Chen Mannian was honest and fair, with a virtuous character, yet he was good at dealing with people. He gave gifts of wealth to his maternal relatives, the Xu family and the family of historians, and spent all of the family's money. In particular, he befriended and served Le Ling Hou Shigao.

古文：丞相丙吉病，中二千石上谒问疾。
现代文：丞相丙吉生病，中二千石以上官员通名探病。
English: Vice-Minister of the Army, He Jie, fell ill, and more than 2,000 middle-ranking officials were sent to investigate the illness.

古文：遣家丞出谢，谢已皆去，万年独留，昏夜乃归。
现代文：丙吉派家丞出来表示谢意，家丞表示完谢意以后，众官员都走了，衹有陈万年留下没走，直到深夜才回去。
English: He Jijie sent Iecheng out to express his gratitude. After Iecheng expressed his gratitude, all the officials left. Only Chen Wanren stayed and did not leave until late at night.

古文：及吉病甚，上自临，问以大臣行能。
现代文：到丙吉病重，皇上亲自去探望，顺便询问丙吉对朝中大臣德行才能的看法。
English: When Bongji fell seriously ill, the emperor went to visit him in person, and in passing asked Bongji's opinion of the minister's ability to be a moral person.

古文：吉荐于定国、杜延年及万年，万年竟代定国为御史大夫八岁，病卒。
现代文：丙古推荐于定国、杜延年和陈万年。陈万年最后代替于定国做了御史大夫，八年以后病逝。
English: Binggu recommended Dinggu, Du Yanling and Chen Wanling. Chen Wanling eventually replaced Dinggu as the imperial historian, and died of illness eight years later.

古文：子咸字子康，年十八，以万年任为郎。
现代文：陈万年的儿子陈咸，字子康，十八岁，凭藉陈万年的功绩，按照任子制度被任命为郎官。
English: Chen's 18-year-old son, Chen Xian, also known as Zi Kang, was appointed as his steward in accordance with the appointment system, thanks to Chen's achievements.

古文：有异材，抗直，数言事，刺讥近臣，书数十上，迁为左曹。
现代文：有特殊的才能，坦率耿直，多次议论事情，敢于讥刺皇上的亲信大臣，上书数十次，提升为左曹。
English: He had a special talent, was frank and forthright, discussed things many times, dared to ridicule the emperor's trusted ministers, submitted dozens of letters, and was promoted to Zuo.

古文：万年尝病，召咸教戒于床下，语至夜半，咸睡，头触屏风。
现代文：有一次，陈万年生病，召唤陈咸到病床边教导训诫，一直说到半夜，陈咸睡着了，头撞在屏风上。
English: Once, when Chen Wan'en was ill, he summoned Chen Xian to his bedside to teach him a lesson. They talked until midnight, when Chen Xian fell asleep and hit his head on the screen.

古文：万年大怒，欲仗之，曰： 乃公教戒汝，汝反睡，不听吾言，何也？ 
现代文：陈万年非常生气，要用杖打陈咸，说： 你父亲教训你，你反而睡着了，不听我的话，这是为什么？ 
English: Chen Wan Nian was very angry and wanted to beat Chen Xian with a cane, saying: Your father taught you, but instead you fell asleep and didn't listen to me. Why is that?

古文：咸叩头谢曰： 具晓所言，大要教咸谄也。 
现代文：陈咸叩头认错说： 我全晓得您说的道理，归根结底是教我谄媚奉承。 
English: Chen Xian kowtowed and admitted his mistake, saying, "I fully know the reason you said, in the final analysis, it is to teach me to be flattering.

古文：万年乃不复言。
现代文：陈万年于是不再说了。
English: Chen never said another word.

古文：万年死后，元帝擢咸为御史中丞，总领州郡奏事，课第诸刺史，内执法殿中，公卿以下皆敬惮之。
现代文：陈万年死后，汉元帝提拔陈咸为御史中丞，总领州郡奏事，考核刺史们政绩的优劣，内执法殿中，公卿以下官员都敬畏陈咸。
English: After the death of Chen Mannian, Emperor Han Yuan promoted Chen Xian to the position of Imperial Historian, General of the Provincial and County Reports, and assessed the merits and demerits of the political achievements of the historians. In the palace of internal law enforcement, officials below the nobility were in awe of Chen Xian.

古文：是时，中书令石显用事颛权，咸颇言显短，显等恨之。
现代文：这时中书令石显当政专权，陈咸常议论石显的短处，石显等人因此忌恨陈咸。
English: At this time, Shi Xian, who had been given the power of political dictatorship, and Chen Xian often discussed the shortcomings of Shi Xian. Therefore, Shi Xian and others hated Chen Xian.

古文：时槐里令朱云残酷杀不辜，有司举奏，未下。
现代文：当时槐里县县令朱云政令残酷误杀了无罪的人，有关官员上书举奏，天子没有下发其奏书。
English: At that time, Zhu Yun, the county magistrate of Bali County, cruelly killed an innocent person by mistake. The relevant officials submitted a report, but the emperor did not issue his report.

古文：咸素善云，云从刺候，教令上书自讼。
现代文：陈咸干素和朱云要好，朱云从陈咸处刺探事情的轻重，陈咸教朱云上书为自己辩冤。
English: Chen Xianxu and Zhu Yun are better, Zhu Yun probes the importance of the matter from Chen Xianxu, Chen Xianxu teaches Zhu Yun to write a letter to defend himself.

古文：于是石显微伺知之，白奏咸漏泄省中语，下狱掠治，减死，髡为城旦，因废。
现代文：这时石显暗中派人探知这一情况，禀奏陈咸泄露宫中秘密，关进监狱笞打审讯，减免死罪，髡为城旦，因此废黜官爵。
English: At this time, Shi Xian secretly sent someone to detect this situation, and Chen Xian was accused of leaking palace secrets, imprisoned, beaten and interrogated, commuted to death, sentenced to death, and therefore dethroned.

古文：成帝初即位，大将军王凤以咸前指言石显，有忠直节，奏请咸补长史。
现代文：汉成帝刚即位时，大将军王凤认为陈咸从前指责石显，有忠诚正直的节操，奏陈成帝请求允许陈咸补任长史。
English: When Emperor Hancheng ascended the throne, the great general Wang Feng believed that Chen Xian had accused Shi Xian in the past and had a loyal and honest discipline, so Chen Xingdi requested that Chen Xian be allowed to serve for a long time.

古文：迁冀州刺史，奉使称意，征为谏大夫。
现代文：后陈咸迁升冀州刺史，奉命办事符合皇上心意，征召任命为谏大夫。
English: Later, Chen Xian moved to Jizhou to become a historian. He was ordered to act in accordance with the emperor's wishes, and was conscripted and appointed as a doctor.

古文：复出为楚内史，北海、东郡太守。
现代文：后又出任楚国内史，北海郡太守、束郡太守。
English: Later, he also served as the governor of Chu, the governor of Beihai County, and the governor of Sok County.

古文：坐为京兆尹王章所荐，章诛，咸免官。起家复为南阳太守。
现代文：因为陈咸受京兆尹王章推荐而连坐，王章犯法被杀，陈咸免官，被征召又出任南阳郡太守。
English: Because Chen Xian was recommended by Jing Zhao Yin Wang Zhang, Wang Zhang was killed, Chen Xian was dismissed, and he was called up to serve as the governor of Nanyang County.

古文：所居以杀伐立威，豪猾吏及大姓犯法，辄论输府，以律程作司空，为他臼木杵，舂不中程，或私解脱钳釱，衣服不如法，辄加罪笞。
现代文：在所任职的地方用杀戮树立威严，豪强不守法令的官吏和世家大族犯法，就论罪押送太守府，按照法律程序安排主管行役的官员，设置地臼木杵，让罪犯拿木杵舂地臼，有不符合要求，或者私自解脱套在脖子上的铁钳和拴在脚上的铁梏，以及穿的衣服不合乎法律规定的，就加罪笞打。
English: Killings are used to establish dignity in the places where they hold office. Officials and members of powerful families who do not abide by laws and regulations and break the law are sent to the Dai Shoufu on charges, officials in charge of execution of duties are arranged in accordance with legal procedures, mortars are set up, criminals are allowed to take mortars, and if they do not meet the requirements, or if they unhook themselves from the shackles around their necks and shackles on their feet, and if they wear clothes that do not comply with the law, they will be beaten.

古文：督作剧，不胜痛，自绞死，岁数百千人，久者虫出腐烂，家不得收。
现代文：派人严格监督，劳作强度大，罪犯受不了痛楚，有的上吊自杀，一年中死的罪犯成百上千，时间长了尸体生蛆腐烂，罪犯的家属无法将尸体收葬。
English: People are sent to strictly supervise, the labor intensity is high, the criminals can't bear the pain, some hang themselves, hundreds and thousands of criminals die in a year, the bodies take a long time to rust and rot, and the families of the criminals can't bury the bodies.

古文：其治放严延年，其廉不知。
现代文：他治理政事仿效严延年，但是廉洁不如严延年。
English: He governs by following the example of Yan Yan, but he is not as clean as Yan Yan.

古文：所居调发属县所出食物以自奉养，奢侈玉食。
现代文：在所任职的地方调发属县所出产的食物用来奉养自己，生活奢侈，美食如玉。
English: In the place where they work, they are given food produced by the county to feed themselves, live in luxury, and enjoy delicious food.

古文：然操持掾史，郡中长吏皆令闭门自敛，不得逾法。
现代文：但管束掾史，命令郡中的长吏都闭门收敛自己，不能违法。
English: However, the Guanzhong history, ordered the officials in the county to close their doors and restrain themselves, can not be illegal.

古文：公移敕书曰： 即各欲求索自快，是一郡百太守也，何得然哉！ 
现代文：还公然行文约束告诫他们说： 假使各自都想寻求自己的快乐，这是一郡有一百个太守，怎么能这样呢！ 
English: He also publicly admonished them with the words of discipline: If each of them wants to seek their own happiness, how can this be, when there are a hundred governors in a county!

古文：下吏畏之，豪强执报，令行禁止，然亦以此见废。
现代文：属下的官吏都害怕他，豪强慑服，令行禁止，但他也因此被废黜。
English: His subordinate officials were afraid of him, and he was ordered not to act, but he was also deposed.

古文：咸，三公子，少显名于朝廷，而薛宣、朱博、翟方进、孔光等仕宦绝在咸后，皆以廉俭先至公卿，而咸滞于郡守。
现代文：陈咸是三公的儿子，年轻时在朝廷裹就很有名望，而薛宣、朱博、翟方进、孔光等出仕做官远在陈咸之后，可是他们都以廉洁俭朴先位至公卿，而陈咸却停滞在郡守的职位上。
English: Chen Xian is the son of the three princes, and he was very famous in the imperial court when he was young. While Xue Xuan, Zhu Bo, Gong Fangjin, Kong Guang and others served as officials far after Chen Xian, but they all became noblemen with their honesty and frugality, while Chen Xian remained in the position of county governor.

古文：时，车骑将军王音辅政，信用陈汤。
现代文：当时车骑将军王音辅佐朝政，信任重用陈汤。
English: At that time, the cavalry general Wang Ying-fu was an aide to the imperial court, and Chen Tang was highly trusted.

古文：咸数赂遗汤，予书曰： 即蒙子公力，得入帝城，死不恨。 
现代文：陈咸多次送礼贿赂陈汤，给他写信说： 假使能得到子公的帮助，得以进入京城做官，就是死了也不遗憾了。 
English: Chen Xian repeatedly sent gifts and bribes to Chen Tang, and wrote to him saying: "If I can get my son's help and enter Beijing to work as an official, I won't regret dying.

古文：后竟征入为少府。
现代文：后来终于受征召入京做了少府。
English: Later, he was finally conscripted into the capital and became a shofu.

古文：少府多宝物、属官，咸皆钩校，发其奸臧，没入辜榷财物。
现代文：少府掌管的实物很多，陈咸对属官都进行查对，发现他们私藏的宝物，就没收据为已有。
English: There are many objects under the control of the Young Prefect. Chen Xian checked all the subordinate officials and found that the treasures they had hidden were already confiscated.

古文：官属及诸中宫黄门、钩盾、掖庭官吏，举奏按论，畏咸，皆失气。
现代文：对属吏及诸中宫黄门、钩盾、掖庭官吏，都举告奏报审察定罪，这些官员都畏惧陈咸，丧失了勇气。
English: The subordinate officials, as well as the officials of the Yellow Gate, the Hook Shield and the Court of the Middle Palace, were all reported, investigated and convicted. These officials were afraid of Chen Xian and lost their courage.

古文：为少府三岁，与翟方进有隙。
现代文：陈咸当了三年少府，与翟方进感情不和。
English: Chen Xian was a minor prefect for three years, and he had a bad relationship with Zou Fangjin.

古文：方进为丞相，奏： 咸前为郡守，所在残酷，毒螫加于吏民。
现代文：翟方进是丞相，上奏皇上说： 陈咸以前做郡守，处处残酷，把像毒螫似的政治加在吏民身上。
English: Hao Fangjin was the chancellor of the imperial court, and he said to the emperor: Chen Xian used to be the county governor, and he was cruel everywhere, and he imposed politics like a drug lord on the officials and the people.

古文：主守盗，受所监。而官媚邪臣陈汤以求荐举。
现代文：监守自盗。而又公然谄媚邪臣陈汤来寻求荐举。
English: and openly courted the evil minister Chen Tang to seek a recommendation.

古文：苟得无耻，不宜处位。 
现代文：苟且求官寡廉无耻，不适合再居官位。 
English: He is shameless and unscrupulous and is not fit to hold public office again.

古文：咸坐免。
现代文：陈咸获罪被免官。
English: Chen Xian was convicted and removed from office.

古文：顷之，红阳侯立举咸方正，为光禄大夫给事中，方进复奏免之。
现代文：不久，红阳侯王立推荐陈咸端平正直。被任命为光禄大夫给事中，翟方进又奏请皇帝免掉陈咸的官职。
English: Soon after, Hongyang marquis Wang Li recommended Chen Xianduanping Zhencheng, and he was appointed as Guanglu doctor. In the middle of the matter, Yan Fangjin also petitioned the emperor to relieve Chen Xian of his official post.

古文：后数年，立有罪就国，方进奏归咸故郡，以忧死。
现代文：几年以后，王立有罪回到自己的封国，翟方进奏请皇帝把陈咸遣归故乡，陈咸忧郁而死。
English: A few years later, Wang Li guiltily returned to his vassal state, and Shen Fangjinsong asked the emperor to send Chen Xian back to his hometown. Chen Xian died of melancholy.

古文：郑弘字稚卿，泰山刚人也。
现代文：郑弘，字稚卿，泰山郡刚县人。
English: Zheng Hong, surnamed Wuchangqing, from Gang County, Taishan County.

古文：兄昌字次卿，亦好学，皆明经，通法律政事。
现代文：哥哥郑昌字次卿，也爱好学问，都通晓经术，精通法律政事。
English: His elder brother, Zheng Changzhi Jieqing, was also fond of learning. Both of them were well-versed in scriptures, law and politics.

古文：次卿为太原、涿郡太守，弘为南阳太守，皆著治迹，条教法度，为后所述。
现代文：次卿做过太原郡、涿郡太守，郑弘为南阳郡太守，二人都政绩卓著，他们施政的条文、教令、法令、制度，为后入所称述。
English: The second secretary has served as the governor of Taiyuan County and Handan County, and Zheng Hong is the governor of Nanyang County. Both of them have outstanding political achievements. The articles, edicts, laws and systems of their governance are described in the following.

古文：次卿用刑罚深，不如弘平，迁淮阳相，以高第入为右扶风，京师称之。
现代文：次卿使用刑罚严厉，不如郑弘平和。郑弘调任淮阳国相，因为政绩突出入京担任右扶风，京师中的人称赞他。
English: The vice-premier used harsher punishments than Zheng Hongping. Zheng Hongping was transferred to the post of Huaiyang Minister of State. Because of his outstanding achievements in politics, he served as a right-hand man in Beijing, and the people in the Beijing Division praised him.

古文：代韦玄成为御史大夫。
现代文：后代韦玄成为御史大夫。
English: Wei Xuan's descendants became goshi taifu.

古文：六岁，坐与京房论议免，语在《房传》。
现代文：过了六年，因与京房妄议朝政获罪免官，事在《京房传》。
English: Six years later, he was exonerated for discussing imperial politics with Kyofusa, according to "Kyofusa's Biography."

古文：赞曰：所谓盐铁议者，起始元中，征文学贤良问以治乱，皆对愿罢郡国盐铁、酒榷均输，务本抑末，毋与天下争利，然后教化可兴。
现代文：赞日：所谓盐铁政策的议论，开始于始元年间，汉昭帝下令征召文学贤良之士，询问治世和理乱的策略，都回答希望废除郡国的盐铁、酒榷、均输政策，务求农本，抑制工商末业，不要和天下百姓争利，然后教化可兴。
English: Praise: The discussion of the so-called salt and iron policy began in the first year of the 1st century. Emperor Han Zhao ordered the conscription of literary sages to inquire about the strategy of ruling the world and managing the turmoil. They all answered that they hoped to abolish the county's salt and iron policy, the liquor ban, and the uniform export policy, so as to pursue the agricultural principle, restrain the end of industry and commerce, and not compete with the people of the world for profits. Then enlightenment can be achieved.

古文：御史大夫弘羊以为此乃所以安边竟，制四夷，国家大业，不可废也。
现代文：御史大夫桑弘羊认为上述政策是用来安定边境、控制周边少数民族的，是国家的根本事业，不能废除。
English: Chief historian Kuang Hongyang believes that the above policy is used to stabilize the border and control the surrounding ethnic minorities, and is the fundamental cause of the country and cannot be abolished.

古文：当时相诘难，颇有其议文。
现代文：当时桑弘羊和文学贤良互相诘难，有很多他们论辩的文章。
English: At that time, Kuang Hongyang and literary scholars were at loggerheads with each other, and there were many articles in which they argued.

古文：至宣帝时，汝南桓宽次公治《公羊春秋》举为郎，至庐江太守丞，博通善属文，推衍盐铁之议，增广条目，极其论难，著数万言，亦欲以究治乱，成一家之法焉。
现代文：到宣帝时，汝南郡人桓宽次公，研究《公羊春秋》，荐举为郎官，后官至庐江郡太守丞，博学通达善于撰著文辞，推论衍化关于盐铁的议论，增广条目，极尽其论辩诘难，著述数万言，也想用它探究治世、理乱的道理，成一家之言。
English: At the time of Emperor Xuan, Huan Guangji, a native of Runan County, studied the "Ram Spring and Autumn" and was recommended as a vassal, and later as a vassal to the governor of Minjiang County. He was an erudite person who was good at writing literature, deducing and deriving discussions about salt and iron, expanding articles, and doing his best to argue with difficulties. He wrote tens of thousands of words, and also wanted to use it to explore the principles of ruling the world and resolving chaos, and become a family.

古文：其辞曰： 观公卿贤良文学之议， 异乎吾所闻 。闻汝南朱生言，当此之时，英俊并进，贤良茂陵唐生、文学鲁国万生之徒六十有余人咸聚阙庭，舒六艺之风，陈治平之原，知者赞其虑，仁者明其施，勇者见其断，辩者骋其辞，龂龂焉，行行焉，虽未详备，斯可略观矣。
现代文：桓宽的文辞说： 看公卿贤良文学的议论， 不同于我所听说的，听汝南朱生说，在这个时候，英杰俊才并进，如贤良茂陵人唐生、文学鲁国人万生之辈六十多人齐聚朝廷，畅谈六艺的风化，陈述治国平天下的本原，智者称美其思虑，仁者显明其措施，勇者表现其决断，辩者驰骋其文辞，争辩不休，表现出刚强的样子，议论虽未详备，也可以概略地看一看。
English: Huan Kuan's words said: Looking at the discussion of the noble and virtuous literature, it is different from what I have heard, listening to Yunan Zhusheng, at this time, more than sixty people gathered at the imperial court, such as the noble and virtuous people of the Tang Dynasty and the literati of the Lu nationality, and discussed the manners of the six arts, and stated the origin of the governance of the country. The wise person said that his thoughts were beautiful, the benevolent person showed his measures, the brave person showed his determination, and the debater galloped his words, argued incessantly, and showed a strong appearance. Although the discussion was not detailed, it

古文：中山刘子推言王道，挢当世，反诸正，彬彬然弘博君子也。
现代文：中山国人刘子推论王道，矫正当今社会的阙失，使之返回正道，他是文质彬彬的博学君子。
English: Liu Zi, a native of Zhongshan, deduced the royal road, rectified the loss of today's society, and returned it to the right path. He was an erudite gentleman with a refined literary quality.

古文：九江祝生奋史鱼之节，发愤懑，讥公卿，介然直而不挠，可谓不畏强圉矣。
现代文：九江郡人祝生发扬史鱼的节操，抒发愤懑，讥刺公卿，耿介正直不屈，可以说是不畏强暴了。
English: The people of Jiujiang County wish to carry forward the discipline of Shi Yu, express their anger, and ridicule the noblemen. Geng Jie is honest and unyielding, and can be said to be unafraid of violence.

古文：桑大夫据当世，合时变，上权利之略，虽非正当，巨儒宿学不能自解，博物通达之士也。
现代文：桑大夫依据当今社会实际，切合时势变化，崇尚争权谋利之略，虽非正法，但大儒饱学之士也不能自己寻求解说，阐明道理不出桑弘羊之论，他是博学通达之士。
English: According to the reality of today's society, Dr. Sang is in line with the changes of the times, advocating the strategy of competing for power and seeking profits. Although it is not a legitimate law, a learned person cannot seek an explanation and clarify the truth without Sang Hongyang's theory. He is a well-educated person.

古文：然摄公卿之柄，不师古始，放于末利，处非其位，行非其道，果陨其性，以及厥宗。
现代文：但他操持公卿权柄，不效法古代，放纵心思谋求工商末利，处非其位，行非其道，果然因为与上官桀谋反送掉性命，并累及他的宗族。
English: However, he wielded the power of a nobleman, did not follow the laws of ancient times, indulged in the pursuit of industrial and commercial profits, acted inappropriately, and acted inappropriately. As a result, he lost his life because he conspired with a superior officer, and his family was affected.

古文：车丞相履伊、吕之列，当轴处中，括囊不言，容身而去，彼哉！
现代文：车千秋丞相进入像伊尹、吕尚那种辅政大臣的行列，官居要职主持政事，但霍光专权时，车千秋却对政事缄口不言，谨慎得就像系住口的袋子，虽然全身而逝，但是他这种人啊，不值得称赞。
English: Che Qianqiu entered the ranks of vice-ministers like Yi Yin and Lushan, holding important positions and presiding over political affairs. However, when Huo Guang was in power, Che Qianqiu did not say a word about political affairs. He was as cautious as a bag with its mouth tied. Although he passed away, people like him are not worthy of praise.

古文：彼哉！若夫丞相、御史两府之士，不能正议以辅宰相，成同类，长同行，阿意苟合，以说其上， 斗筲之徒，何足选也！  
现代文：至于丞相、御史大夫两府中的人士，不能坚持正确的意见来辅佐宰相，对有共同利害的人，阿谀逢迎无原则地附合，以此讨好上司，这些人就像孔子说的 材器小劣之辈，不值得称说。 
English: As for the people in the two prefectures of the chancellor and the chief historian, they cannot adhere to the correct opinions to assist the prime minister, and for those who have common interests, they are unprincipledly attached to please the boss. These people are like Confucius said, inferior people, not worthy of praise.

