古文：颜氏之先，本乎邹、鲁，或分入齐，世以儒雅为业，遍在书记。
现代文：颜氏的祖先，本来是邹国、鲁国人，有一分支迁到齐国，世代从事儒雅的事业，这在书中多有记载。
English: Yan's ancestors were originally from Shan and Lu, and one branch moved to Qi, and engaged in the cause of Confucianism for generations, which is mostly recorded in the book.

古文：仲尼门徒，升堂者七十有二，颜氏居八人焉。
现代文：孔子的学生，学问已经入门的有七十二人，颜氏家族就占了八个。
English: There are seventy-two students of Confucius who have entered the study, and the Yan family accounts for eight.

古文：秦汉魏晋，下逮齐梁，未有用兵以取达者。
现代文：秦汉、魏晋，直到齐梁，颜氏家族中没有人靠带兵打仗来取得显贵的。
English: In the Qin and Han dynasties, the Wei and Jin dynasties, and up to Qi Liang, no one in the Yan family gained prominence by leading soldiers into battle.

古文：春秋世颜高、颜鸣、颜息、颜羽之徒，皆一斗夫耳。
现代文：春秋时代，颜高、颜鸣、颜息、颜羽之流，都不过是一介武夫而已。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, Yan Gao, Yan Ming, Yan Xiu, and Yan Yu were nothing more than warriors.

古文：齐有颜涿聚，赵有颜最，汉末有颜良，宋有颜延之，并处将军之任，竟以颠覆。
现代文：齐国有颜涿聚，赵国有颜最，东汉末年有颜良，东晋有颜延，都担任过将军的职务，却都因此而败亡。
English: Qizhou had the most eminent generals, Zhao had the most eminent generals, the late Eastern Han Dynasty had eminent generals, and the Eastern Jin Dynasty had eminent generals, but all of them were defeated.

古文：汉郎颜驷，自称好武，更无事迹。
现代文：西汉时侍郎的颜驷，自称喜好武功，却没有见他干什么功绩。
English: Yan Xun, a waiter in the Western Han Dynasty, claimed to be fond of martial arts, but did not see any of his exploits.

古文：颜忠以党楚王受诛，颜俊以据武威见杀，得姓已来，无清操者，唯此二人，皆罹祸败。
现代文：颜忠因党附楚王而被杀，颜俊因谋反占据武威而被诛，颜氏家族中到现在为止，节操不清白的，只有这两个人，他们都遭到祸患失败。
English: Yan Zhong was killed because his party had sided with King Chu, and Yan Jun was banished for plotting to usurp military power. Of the Yan family, only these two men have failed so far.

古文：顷世乱离，衣冠之士，虽无身手，或聚徒众，违弃素业，侥幸战功。
现代文：近世天下大乱，有些士大夫和贵族子弟，虽然没有勇力习武，却聚集众人，放弃清高儒雅的事业，想去碰运气求取战功。
English: In recent years, the world has been in turmoil. Some of the sons and grandsons of nobles and aristocrats, although they do not have the courage to learn martial arts, have gathered many people to give up the noble and refined career and want to try their luck to win military merit.

古文：吾既赢薄，你惟前代，故置心於此，子孙志之。
现代文：我身体瘦弱单薄，又想起过去时代姓颜的人好兵致祸的教训，所以仍旧把心放在读书做官上面，希望子孙后代一定要记住这一点。
English: My body is thin and frail, and I remember the lessons of the past era when people with the surname Yan were good soldiers, so I still put my heart on reading and being an official, and I hope that future generations will remember this.

古文：孔子力翘门关，不以力闻，此圣证也。
现代文：孔子的力气能推开沉重的国门，却不肯以武力闻名于世，这是圣人留下的榜样。
English: The example left by the sage is that Confucius was able to push open the heavy gates of the country, but he did not want to be known by force.

古文：吾见今世士大夫，才有气干，便倚赖之，不能被甲执兵，以卫社稷，但微行险服，逞弄拳腕，大则陷危亡，小则贻耻辱，遂无免者。
现代文：我看到今世的士大夫们，才有点气力，就作为资本，又不能披铠甲执兵器来保卫国家。只知道穿上剑客的衣服，行踪神秘，卖弄拳勇，重则身陷危亡，轻则自讨耻辱，竟没有谁能幸免这可耻的下场。
English: I saw that the officers and men of this world, who have only a little strength, are treated as capital, but cannot put on armor and carry weapons to defend the country. They only know how to put on the clothes of swordsmen, whereabouts are mysterious, show off their bravery, and in some cases they are in danger of death, in other cases they are ashamed of themselves. No one can escape this shameful fate.

古文：国之兴亡，兵之胜败，博学所至，幸讨论之。
现代文：国家的兴亡，战争的胜败这类问题，希望你们在学问渊博的时候，可以细心研究。
English: I hope that you can carefully study such issues as the rise and fall of a country and the victory and defeat of a war when you are well-versed in your studies.

古文：入帷幄之中，参庙堂之上，不能为主尽规以谋社稷，君子所耻也。
现代文：在军队中运筹帷幄，朝廷里参与议政，如果不尽力为君主出谋献策，商议国家大事，这是君子的耻辱。
English: It is the disgrace of a gentleman if he does not do his best to offer advice to the monarch and discuss national affairs while he is in the army and participates in political deliberation at the court.

古文：然而每见文士，颇读兵书，微有经略。若居承平之世，脾睨宫阃，幸灾乐祸，首为逆乱，诖误善良；如在兵革之时，构扇反覆，纵横说诱，不识存亡，强相扶戴：此皆陷身灭族之本也。
现代文：然而我常常看见一些文人，稍微读过几本兵书，兵法谋略也只知大概，如果生活在太平盛世，就蔑视宫廷，幸灾乐祸，领头犯上作乱，牵连贻害著良；如果是在兵荒马乱的时代，就勾结煽动众人反叛，无所顾忌，四处游说，拉拢诱骗，不识存亡之机，拼命相互扶植拥戴：这些都是招致杀身灭族的祸很。
English: However, I often see some literati who have read a few military books and only know a little about military strategy. If they live in a peaceful and prosperous world, they will despise the court, gloat over misfortune, take the lead in causing turmoil, implicate and harm the good; if they are in a time of war, they will collude to incite people to rebel, have no scruples, lobby everywhere, entice and deceive, do not know the chance of survival, and desperately support and support each other: these are all disasters that lead to killing and extermination.

古文：诫之哉！
现代文：要引以为戒啊！
English: Be warned!

古文：诫之哉！
现代文：要引以为戒！
English: Be warned!

古文：习五兵，便乘骑，正可称武夫尔。
现代文：熟练五种兵器，擅长骑马，这才可以称得上武夫。
English: Skilled in five kinds of weapons, good at riding a horse, this can be called a warrior.

古文：今世士大夫，但不读书，即称武夫儿，乃饭囊酒瓮也。
现代文：当今的士大夫，只要不肯读书，就称自己是武夫，实际上是酒囊饭袋罢了。
English: Today's scholar-bureaucrats, as long as they refuse to read, call themselves warriors, but in fact they are nothing more than drunkards.

