古文：始兴王叔陵字子嵩，宣帝之第二子也。
现代文：始兴王陈叔陵字子嵩，是陈宣帝陈顼的第二个儿子。
English: Shixing Wang Chen Shuling Zizong was the second son of Chen Xuan Di Chen Xi.

古文：梁承圣中，生于江陵。
现代文：梁朝承圣年间，生于江陵。
English: He was born in Gangneung during the reign of Emperor Liang.

古文：魏克江陵，宣帝迁关右，叔陵留穰城。
现代文：西魏攻破江陵，宣帝被劫往关右，叔陵留在穰城。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty conquered Jiangling, Emperor Xuan was kidnapped to Guanhu, and his uncle's tomb remained in Lucheng.

古文：宣帝之还，以后主及叔陵爲质。
现代文：宣帝后来还朝，是靠了后主陈叔宝和叔陵去作人质。
English: Later, Emperor Xuanxuan returned to the court, relying on the patron Chen Shubao and Shuling to serve as hostages.

古文：天嘉三年，随后主还朝，封康乐县侯。
现代文：陈天嘉三年，叔陵跟随后主还朝，封为康乐县侯。
English: In the third year of Chen Tianjia, Shuling, followed by the Lord, was appointed as the governor of Kangle County.

古文：叔陵少机辩，狥声名，强梁无所推屈。
现代文：叔陵从小机智善辩，只要宣示他的名声，强暴的人便不敢欺负。
English: Shuling has been witty and eloquent since childhood. As long as he proclaims his reputation, violent people will not dare to bully him.

古文：太建元年，封始兴王，奉昭烈王祀。
现代文：太建元年，受封始兴王，承续昭烈王香火。
English: In the first year of the Taijian era, he was given the title of Shixing Wang, succeeding Sholing Wang Xianghu.

古文：位都督、江州刺史，时年十六，政自己出，僚佐莫预焉。
现代文：官至都督、江州刺史，当时才十六岁，便自己掌握政令，僚属不能干预。
English: At the age of sixteen, the official and governor of Jiangzhou, Jiang Zhi Shi, took control of the government order himself, and his colleagues could not interfere.

古文：性严刻，部下慑惮。
现代文：性情严厉苛刻，部下畏惧。
English: His personality is stern and demanding, and his subordinates are afraid of him.

古文：诸公子侄及罢县令长，皆逼令事己。
现代文：诸位公卿的子侄和免职的县令长，都逼迫他们来侍奉自己。
English: Their sons and nephews, as well as the dismissed county officials, all forced them to serve themselves.

古文：豫章内史钱法成诣府进谒，即配其子季卿将领马仗。
现代文：豫章内史钱法成到府上来谒见他，随即发配他的儿子钱季卿掌管马具。
English: Qian Fa Cheng, a historian in the Henan chapter, came to the capital to see him, and immediately dispatched his son Qian Jiqing to take charge of the harness.

古文：季卿惭耻不时至，叔陵大怒，侵辱法成，法成愤怨，自缢而死。
现代文：季卿感到羞惭耻辱没有按时到，叔陵大怒，凌辱法成，法成愤恨，自缢而死。
English: Jiqing felt ashamed and humiliated for not arriving on time, Shuling was furious, insulted Fa Cheng, Fa Cheng was angry, and hanged himself to death.

古文：州县非其部内，亦征摄案之。
现代文：对于并非他属下的州县官，也进行侦察监视。
English: For state and county officials who are not his subordinates, reconnaissance and surveillance are also carried out.

古文：朝贵及下吏有乖忤者，辄诬奏其罪，陷以重辟。
现代文：朝内官员及下边官吏有得罪他的，每每捏造他们罪名奏报，用重罪陷害他们。
English: Imperial officials and lower-level officials who had offended him fabricated charges against them and framed them with serious crimes.

古文：四年，迁都督、湘州刺史。
现代文：太建四年，改任都督、湘州刺史。
English: In the fourth year of Tai Jian, he was reappointed as the governor of Hunan and the governor of Hunan Province.

古文：诸州镇闻其至，皆震恐股栗。
现代文：各州镇听说他要到，都吓得两腿发颤。
English: Towns and cities all over the state shuddered with fear when they heard he was coming.

古文：叔陵日益横，征伐夷、獠，所得皆入己，丝毫不以赏赐。
现代文：叔陵日益骄横，征伐夷、獠，缴获的东西都归自己，一点儿也不肯赏赐给别人。
English: Shuling became more and more arrogant, conquering and killing the barbarians. Everything he captured belonged to him, and he did not want to reward others at all.

古文：徵求役使，无有纪极。
现代文：征敛财物役使民力，没有个准则和极限。
English: There is no standard or limit for the collection of wealth and property and the use of people's power.

古文：夜常不卧，执烛达晓，呼召宾客，说人间细事，戏谑无所不爲。
现代文：他常夜里不睡，点上蜡烛到天亮，召来宾客陪他，谈论一些民间的琐碎隐私，开低级庸俗的玩笑，无所不为。
English: He never slept at night, lit candles until dawn, invited guests to accompany him, talked about some trivial private affairs of the people, made low-level vulgar jokes, and did everything.

古文：性不饮酒，唯多置肴胾，昼夜食噉而已。
现代文：他生性不喝酒，只是放置了许多食物，昼夜吃个不停。
English: He doesn't drink by nature, he just leaves a lot of food around and eats all day and night.

古文：自旦至中，方始寝寐。
现代文：从早晨到中午，才是他睡觉的时间。
English: From morning to noon, they only start going to bed.

古文：曹局文案，非呼不得辄白。
现代文：官署内的公文，不是他传呼不许自行报告。
English: The official document in the government office is not his call not to report on his own.

古文：笞罪者皆系狱，动数年不省视。
现代文：凡受笞罪者都关押起来，动不动就撂下几年不加处理。
English: People who commit crimes are put in prison and often not examined for several years.

古文：潇、湘以南，皆逼爲左右，廛里殆无遗者。
现代文：潇、湘以南的朝廷吏民，都被他逼为私属，家家户户几乎无人幸免。
English: Xiao and the imperial officials south of Hunan were all forced to become his personal servants, and almost no one was spared.

古文：其中脱有逃窜，辄杀其妻子。
现代文：其中有人逃避，就被杀死妻儿。
English: If any of them escape, the wife and children of the one who escaped shall be put to death.

古文：州县无敢上言，宣帝弗之知。
现代文：州县官无人敢上报，陈宣帝也不知道。
English: No state or county official dares to report it, and Chen Xuandi doesn't even know about it.

古文：九年，除都督、扬州刺史。
现代文：太建九年，被任为都督、扬州刺史。
English: In the ninth year of the Taijian era, he was appointed as the governor of Yangzhou.

古文：十年，至都，加扶，给油幢车。
现代文：十年，回到京都，赏赐给他扶掖之人，并赐油幢车。
English: Ten years later, when he came to Beijing, he gave a gift to the people who helped him, a tanker truck.

古文：叔陵居东府，事务多关涉省阁，执事之司，承意顺旨，即讽上进用之。
现代文：叔陵的治所在东府，办理事务多和中央部门打交道，这些部门的官员，顺从他旨意办事的，就给皇帝吹风提拔他。
English: Shuling's seat of government was in Dongfu, and he mostly dealt with the central government departments. The officials of these departments, who obeyed his wishes, promoted him to the emperor.

古文：微致违忤，必抵大罪，重者至殊死。
现代文：稍有违背他意思的，必定要陷以大罪，重者至于被杀。
English: Anyone who even slightly goes against his will is sure to be charged with a serious crime, and in the most serious cases, they will be killed.

古文：道路藉藉，皆言其有非常志。
现代文：社会上传说纷纭，都说他对朝廷怀有异心。
English: Legends abound in society, all saying that he harbors ill will toward the imperial court.

古文：叔陵修饰虚名，每入朝，常于车中马上，执卷读书，高声长诵，阳阳自若。
现代文：叔陵粉饰自己以图虚名，每次入朝时，常在车中或马上手捧书本，高声朗诵，神态自若。
English: Shuling whitewashed himself with fictitious names. Every time he entered the imperial court, he often held a book in the car or on horseback, recited aloud, and looked confident.

古文：归坐斋中，或自执斧斤，爲沐猴百戏。
现代文：等到回家坐在书斋里，手里常操着刀斧家什，玩各种杂技。
English: When I got home, I sat in my study, often juggling with knives and axes, and playing various acrobatics.

古文：又好游冢墓间，遇有茔表主名可知者，辄命左右发掘，取其石志、古器并骸骨肘胫，持爲翫弄，藏之府库。
现代文：又喜欢到墓地去玩，碰到墓表上的死者稍有名声，就命令手下人挖开坟墓，取出墓志铭、古器皿以及死者的骨骸，拿回去把玩，收藏到自己库房里。
English: He also likes to go to cemeteries to play, and when he encounters a dead person with a little reputation on the tombstone, he orders his subordinates to dig up the grave, take out the epitaph, ancient utensils and the bones of the deceased, take them back to play, and collect them in his own vault.

古文：人间少妻处女，微有色貌者，并即逼纳。
现代文：民间的姑娘和年轻媳妇，稍有姿色的，都被他强娶。
English: Folk girls and young daughters-in-law, with a bit of style, were forced to marry him.

古文：十一年，丁所生母彭氏忧，去职。顷之，起爲本职。
现代文：太建十一年，逢生母彭氏去世，辞去职务，不久，又恢复官职。
English: In the eleventh year of Tai Jian, his birth mother Peng died, he resigned from his post, and soon resumed his official position.

古文：晋世王公贵人，多葬梅岭，及彭氏卒，叔陵啓求梅岭葬之，乃发故太傅谢安旧墓，弃去安柩，以葬其母。
现代文：晋朝的王公贵人多葬在梅岭，彭氏死后，叔陵上书求梅岭之地安葬她；于是扒开晋朝太傅谢安的旧墓，把谢安的棺木郭扔出去，来埋葬他母亲。
English: Wang Gongnian of the Jin Dynasty was mostly buried in Meiling. After the death of Peng Shihong, her uncle wrote to the mausoleum to ask for a place to bury her in Meiling. Therefore, he dug up the old tomb of the Jin Dynasty Taifu Xie'an and threw Xie'an's coffin out to bury his mother.

古文：初丧日，僞爲哀毁，自称刺血写涅盘经。未及十旬，乃日进甘膳。
现代文：刚办丧事头几天，装得很悲痛，自称刺破手用血写了《涅般木经》，不到十天，便每天大吃大喝。
English: In the first few days after the funeral, he pretended to be very sad, claiming to have written the "Nirvana Sutra" in blood with a pierced hand. Less than ten days later, he was eating and drinking heavily every day.

古文：又私召左右妻女，与之奸合，所作尤不轨，侵淫上闻。
现代文：又偷偷召引手下人的妻女，与她们成奸，做的太过分了，慢慢被朝廷知道。
English: He also summoned the wives and daughters of those around him, and committed adultery with them. His actions were highly illegal, and the emperor gradually became aware of them.

古文：宣帝责御史中丞王政以不举奏，免政官。又黜其典签、亲事，仍加鞭捶。
现代文：陈宣帝责备御史中丞王政不举报，罢免王政官职，又罢免叔陵的典签、亲事，并加以鞭笞。
English: Emperor Chen Xuan reprimanded Wang Zheng, the Imperial Historian, for not reporting the incident, dismissed Wang Zheng from his official position, and also dismissed him from signing the tombstone of his uncle's tomb and from his family affairs, and also whipped him.

古文：宣帝素爱叔陵，不绳以法，但责让而已。
现代文：宣帝平素喜爱叔陵，不把他依法治罪，只是责备一通就算了。
English: Emperor Xuan loved his uncle's mausoleum and did not punish him according to the law. He only reprimanded him.

古文：服阕，又爲侍中、中军大将军。
现代文：丧服期满，又委任他为侍中、中军大将军。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was also appointed as an aide-de-camp and general of the Chinese army.

古文：及宣帝不豫，后主诸王并入侍疾。
现代文：等到宣帝患病，后主和诸王都入宫侍候。
English: When Emperor Xuan fell ill, the empress dowager and all the kings entered the palace to wait for him.

古文：叔陵阴有异志，命典药吏砺切药刀。
现代文：叔陵怀有异心，命典药官吏把切药刀磨快。
English: Shuling harbored heretical thoughts, and the medicine official of the prescription sharpened the knife to cut the medicine.

古文：及仓卒之际，又命左右取剑，左右不悟，乃取朝服所佩木剑以进，叔陵怒。
现代文：临入宫仓猝之际，又命手下取剑，手下人不明白他的用意，于是把朝服所佩的木剑呈上，叔陵大怒。
English: When he suddenly entered the palace, he ordered his men to take his sword. His men did not understand his intention, so he presented the wooden sword he wore with his imperial robes. Shuling was furious.

古文：及翌日小敛，后主哀顿俯伏，叔陵以锉药刀斫后主中项。太后驰来救焉，叔陵又斫太后数下。
现代文：第二天给病故的宣帝穿衣时，后主伏在地上哀号，叔陵用切药刀砍在后主的后脖子上，太后跑过来救后主，叔陵又砍了太后几下。
English: The next day, when dressing the ailing Emperor Xuan, the queen mother lay prostrate on the ground wailing. Shuling cut the queen mother's neck with a knife. The queen mother ran to save the queen mother, and Shuling cut the queen mother several times.

古文：后主乳媪乐安君吴氏时在太后侧，自后掣肘，后主因得起。
现代文：后主的乳母乐安君吴氏当时在太后身边，从后边拉住叔陵的胳膊，后主才趁机爬起来。
English: The nanny of the heir apparent, Mr. Le Anjun Wu, was at the side of the empress dowager at the time, and she took hold of the uncle's arm from behind, and the heir apparent took the opportunity to get up.

古文：叔陵仍持后主衣，后主自奋得免。
现代文：叔陵还拽着后主的衣服，后主奋力挣扎才得幸免。
English: Shuling then grabbed the empress's clothes, and the empress herself was able to escape.

古文：长沙王叔坚以手搤叔陵，夺去其刀，仍牵就柱，以其褶袖缚之，弃池水中，将杀之，问后主曰： 即尽之，爲待也？ 
现代文：长沙王陈叔坚用手抓住叔陵，夺下他的刀，把他拉到柱子跟前，用他的衣袖把他捆起来，扔进水池里，打算把他杀了。他去问后主： 是现在杀他，还是等一会儿？ 
English: Chen Shujian, the king of Changsha, grabbed his uncle's tomb with his hand, took away his sword, pulled him to the pillar, tied him up with his sleeve, and threw him into the pool, intending to kill him. He went to ask the queen mother: Should I kill him now, or wait a while?

古文：时吴媪已扶后主避贼，叔坚求后主所在，将受命。
现代文：当时吴氏已搀扶后主躲避起来，叔坚去找后主，听他的吩咐。
English: At that time, the Wu clan had already helped the late lord to hide, and Uncle Jian went to the late lord to listen to his orders.

古文：叔陵多力，因奋袖得脱，突出云龙门，驰车还东府，呼其甲士断青溪桥道。放东城囚，以充战士。
现代文：叔陵力气大，挣脱袖子，跑出云龙门，乘车回到东府城，喊他的甲士切断青溪桥通道，放出东府城的囚犯，来充任战士。
English: With great strength, Shuling tore off his sleeves, ran out of Yunlongmen, took a car back to Dongfucheng, and called on his knights to cut off the Qingxi Bridge passage and release the prisoners of Dongfucheng to serve as soldiers.

古文：又遣人往新林追所部兵马。
现代文：又派人到新林去追他部下的兵马回来。
English: He also sent people to Xinlin to chase the soldiers and horses of his subordinates.

古文：仍自被甲，着白帽，登城西门，招募百姓，散金银以赏赐。外召诸王将帅，无有应者，唯新安王伯固闻而赴之。
现代文：他自己披上盔甲，头戴白帽，登上城的西门，招募百姓，散发金银作为赏赐，到外面召集诸王将帅，无人响应，只有新安王陈伯固闻命前往。
English: He himself put on armor and a white cap, climbed the west gate of the city, recruited people, distributed gold and silver as a reward, and went outside to summon the generals. No one responded, only Xin'an King Chen Bogu went to his death.

古文：叔陵聚兵仅得千人，欲据城保守。
现代文：叔陵仅招集得兵丁千人，打算以此保守东府城。
English: Shuling only called up a few thousand soldiers, intending to use them to defend Dongfu.

古文：时衆军并缘江防守，台内空虚，叔坚白太后，使太子舍人司马申急召右卫将军萧摩诃，将兵至府西门。
现代文：当时众军都沿江防守，朝廷空虚，叔坚奏太后，使太子舍人司马申急召右卫将军萧摩诃，萧摩诃带兵来到东府西门。
English: At that time, all the armies were defending along the river, the imperial court was empty, and the uncle Jian played the empress dowager, so that the prince's concubine Sima Shen urgently summoned the right guard general Xiao Maqian, Xiao Maqian led the soldiers to the west gate of Dongfu.

古文：叔陵事急，遣记室韦谅送鼓吹与摩诃，谓曰： 事捷以公爲台鼎。 
现代文：叔陵形势危急，派记室韦谅送鼓吹给摩诃，对他说： 事情如果成功便封你为三公。 
English: Shuling was in a critical situation. He sent Wei Peng from the Records Office to preach to the Capricorn, and said to him, "If things go well, you will be crowned as the Three Princes."

古文：摩诃紿报曰： 须王心膂节将自来，方敢从命。 
现代文：摩诃骗他说： 必须大王的心腹高级将领亲自来，我才能听从命令。 
English: Capricorn lied to him and said, "I have to have the king's favorite high-ranking general come personally so that I can obey his orders."

古文：叔陵即遣戴洫、谭骐驎二人诣摩诃。
现代文：叔陵就派戴洫、谭骐马二人到摩诃处。
English: So Shuling sent two men, Daiyao and Tanmao, to Ma's place.

古文：摩诃执以送台，斩于阁道下，持其首徇东城，仍悬于朱雀门。
现代文：摩诃把他们抓起来送交朝廷，在阁道下边斩首，拿着他们的头到东城巡示，然后挂在朱雀门上。
English: Capricorn arrested them and sent them to the imperial court, beheaded them at the foot of the pavilion road, took their heads to the East City for inspection, and then hung them on the Suzaku Gate.

古文：叔陵自知不济，遂入沈其妃张氏及宠妾七人于井中。
现代文：叔陵自己知道大势已去，于是回家把他的妃子张氏和七名宠妾沉到井里。
English: Shuling himself knew that the tide had turned, so he went home and sank his concubine Zhang and seven favorite concubines into the well.

古文：叔陵有部下兵先在新林，于是率人马数百，自小航度，欲趣新林，以舟舰入北。
现代文：叔陵有自己的兵马在新林，于是就率数百人马，想从小航渡口到新林去，再乘舰船过江投奔隋朝。
English: Shuling had his own soldiers and horses in Xinlin, so he led hundreds of people to go from Xiaohang Ferry Port to Xinlin, and then took a ship across the river to the Sui Dynasty.

古文：行至白杨路，爲台军所邀。
现代文：走到白杨路，被朝廷军队截击。
English: He walked to Poplar Road and was intercepted by the imperial army.

古文：伯固见兵至，旋避入巷，叔陵拔刀追之，伯固复还。
现代文：伯固见朝廷兵到，马上躲进小巷，叔陵拔刀去追他。伯固于是又回来。
English: When Bo Gu saw the imperial soldiers arrive, he immediately hid in an alley, and his uncle drew his sword to chase him. So Bo Gu came back.

古文：叔陵部下多弃甲溃散，摩诃马容陈智深迎刺叔陵，阉竖王飞禽斫之数十下，马容陈仲华就斩首送台。
现代文：叔陵部下大都弃甲溃散。萧摩诃的马容陈智深迎面刺杀叔陵，宦官王飞禽砍了他几十下，马容陈仲华砍下他的头送交朝廷。
English: Most of Shuling's subordinates abandoned their armor and scattered. Xiao Miao's subordinate Ma Rong Chen Zhishen assassinated Shuling face-to-face, eunuch Wang Fei Yan cut him dozens of times, and Ma Rong Chen Zhonghua cut off his head and sent it to the imperial court.

古文：自寅至巳乃定。
现代文：从寅时到巳时，才平息了叛乱。
English: The upheaval was quelled from the middle of the year to the end of the year.

古文：尚书八坐奏： 请依宋世故事，流尸江中，汙潴其室；并毁其所生彭氏坟庙，还谢氏之茔。 
现代文：尚书、仆射、令等八座高官上奏道： 请依照宋代的做法，把他的尸体扔进江里，把他的住宅作为粪厕，并毁坏他生母彭氏的坟墓庙宇，重恢复谢安坟茔。 
English: Eight high-ranking officials, including Shangshu, Puxia and Ling, appealed: Please follow the practice of the Song Dynasty, throw his body into the river, use his house as a fecal toilet, and destroy the tomb temple of his birth mother, Peng, and restore Xie An's tomb.

古文：长沙王叔坚字子成，宣帝第四子也。
现代文：后主依从所奏。叔陵的几个儿子，当天一并赐死。长沙王陈叔坚字子成，是陈宣帝的第四个儿子。
English: Several sons of Uncle Ling were killed on the same day. Changsha King Chen Shujian Zicheng was the fourth son of Chen Xuandi.

古文：母本吴中酒家婢，相者言当生贵子。
现代文：他母亲原是吴郡中一位开酒店人家的婢女，会看相的人说她必当生下贵子。
English: His mother used to be the maid of a hotel owner in Wuxi County. People who know how to read faces say that she will give birth to a precious son.

古文：宣帝微时，因饮通焉，生叔坚。
现代文：宣帝地位低下的时候，因为饮酒和她私通，生下了陈叔坚。
English: When Emperor Xuancheng's status was low, Chen Shujian was born as a result of his drinking and adultery with her.

古文：及贵，召拜淑仪。
现代文：他富贵之后，召来婢女拜为淑仪。
English: After he became rich, he summoned a servant girl to worship Shu Yi.

古文：叔坚少而严整，又颇使酒，兄弟惮之。
现代文：陈叔坚最小而又厉害，会因酒而使性子，兄弟们都很害怕他。
English: Chen Shujian was the smallest and the strongest. He would drink himself into a rage, and his brothers were afraid of him.

古文：好数术，卜筮、风角、鎔金、琢玉，并究其妙。
现代文：他喜欢数术、卜筮、风角、熔金、琢玉等技艺，并且深知其中奥妙。
English: He likes mathematics, divination, wind angle, melting gold, bead-making and other skills, and is well aware of their intricacies.

古文：初封丰城侯。
现代文：起初被封为丰城侯。
English: At first, he was given the title of Lord of Fengcheng.

古文：太建元年封。
现代文：是太建元年所封。
English: It was founded in the first year of the Taiken era.

古文：累迁丹阳尹。
现代文：累迁任丹阳县尹。
English: He was successively transferred to Yin, Danyang County.

古文：初，叔坚与始兴王叔陵并招聚宾客，各争权宠，甚不平。
现代文：早先，陈叔坚和始兴王陈叔陵都招集宾客，争夺权力和寻求皇帝的宠信，各不相让。
English: At the beginning, both Shu Jian and Shi Xing Wang Shuling invited guests and competed with each other for power and favors. They were at odds with each other.

古文：每朝会卤簿，不肯爲先后，必分道而趋，左右或争道而斗，至有死者。
现代文：每当朝见时，仪仗队伍不能有先后，必定分道前行，左右随从们经常为争夺道路而发生争斗，甚至把人打死。
English: Whenever there is a morning meeting, the ceremonial procession cannot start in sequence, but must go in separate directions. The left and right followers often fight for the road, and even beat people to death.

古文：及宣帝不豫，叔坚与叔陵等并从后主侍疾。
现代文：当宣帝身体有病时，叔坚和叔陵等一同跟着陈后主在宫中侍奉宣帝的疾病。
English: When Emperor Xuan was ill, Shujian, Shuling and others followed the Empress Chen to serve Emperor Xuan in the palace.

古文：叔陵阴有异志，叔坚疑之，微伺其所爲。
现代文：叔陵私下有阴谋，叔坚很怀疑他，暗中观察他的举动。
English: Shuling has a secret plot, Shujian is very suspicious of him and secretly observes his actions.

古文：及行逆，赖叔坚以免。
现代文：当陈叔陵准备谋逆时，后主因叔坚而得以幸免。
English: When Chen Shuling was preparing to plot a rebellion, his heir was spared because of his uncle Jian.

古文：以功进骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史。
现代文：由于功绩被晋位骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史。
English: As a result of his achievements, he was promoted to General of Horse Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, and Yangzhou History.

古文：寻迁司空，将军、刺史如故。
现代文：不久又升为司空，将军、刺史职务如故。
English: Then he was reassigned to the position of Siku, the general, and Sashi as before.

古文：时后主患创，不能视事，政无大小，悉决于叔坚，权倾朝廷，后主由是疏忌之。
现代文：当时陈后主受伤，不能理事，国家政事，无论大小，都由叔坚决定，权力倾于朝廷，后主因此而对他疏远并产生疑忌。
English: At that time, Chen Houchen was injured and unable to serve as a director. State affairs, no matter how big or small, were decided by Shu Jian. Power was concentrated in the imperial court. As a result, Houchen became estranged from and suspicious of him.

古文：孔范、管斌、施文庆等，并东宫旧臣，日夕阴持其短。
现代文：孔范、管斌、施文庆等人，都是东宫的旧臣，天天在暗中寻找陈叔坚的短处。
English: Kong Fan, Guan Bin, Shi Wenqing and others, all former ministers of the East Palace, are looking for Chen Shujian's weaknesses in the dark every day.

古文：至德元年，乃诏令即本号用三司之仪，出爲江州刺史。
现代文：至德元年，便诏令陈叔坚立即以原封号用三司的礼仪，出任江州刺史。
English: In the first year of the German era, the emperor ordered Chen Shujian to immediately use the original seal number with the etiquette of the three departments to serve as the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：未发，寻以爲司空，实欲夺其权。
现代文：他还未出发，又马上任命他为司空，其实是想夺去他的实权。
English: Before he had even set off, he immediately appointed him as the first officer, in fact, he wanted to take away his real power.

古文：又阴令人造其厌魅，刻木爲偶人，衣以道士服，施机关，能拜跪，昼夜于星月下醮之，祝诅于上。
现代文：又背地里派人对他用厌胜邪术加害，他们先刻一个木头人，穿着道士服，设有机关，能够跪拜，日夜在星月下面祈祷，诅咒皇帝。
English: They first carved a wooden man, dressed in a Taoist robe, equipped with organs, able to kneel, pray day and night under the stars and moon, and curse the emperor.

古文：又令人上书告其事，案验令实。
现代文：然后另派人上奏朝廷揭发，说是陈叔坚所干的。
English: Then another person was sent to report to the imperial court to reveal that it was Chen Shujian who did it.

古文：后主召叔坚囚于西省，将黜之，令近侍宣敕数之。
现代文：他们派人去查验后报告说是真实的事情。陈后主便召来陈叔坚，将他囚禁在西省，准备废黜他，并让近侍人员宣读诏书列举他的罪过。
English: They sent someone to investigate, and the report said it was true. Queen Chen then summoned Chen Shujian and imprisoned him in the Western Province, preparing to depose him, and had his close attendants read out an edict listing his sins.

古文：叔坚自陈爲佞人所构，死日惭见叔陵。
现代文：陈叔坚自我辩护说这是奸佞之徒加害于他，并说，死后羞见陈叔陵。
English: Chen Shujian defended himself by saying that it was a traitor who harmed him, and said that he was ashamed to see Chen Shujian's tomb after his death.

古文：后主感其前功，乃赦之，免所居官，以王还第。
现代文：陈后主听后，感激他前面的功绩，便赦免了他，罢免了他的官职，以王爵回府。
English: After hearing this, Empress Chen, grateful for his previous achievements, pardoned him, dismissed him from his official post, and returned to the palace with a peerage.

古文：后位中军大将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史。
现代文：后来又任命他为中军大将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史。
English: Later, he also appointed him as the General of the Chinese Army, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Jingzhou Jishi.

古文：秩满还都。
现代文：任满后回京都。
English: At the end of his term, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：陈亡入隋，迁于瓜州。
现代文：陈朝灭亡之后他到了隋，被迁到瓜州。
English: After the fall of the Chen dynasty, he went to Sui and was moved to Guazhou.

古文：叔坚素贵，不知家人生産，至是与妃沈氏酣酒，不以耕种爲事。
现代文：陈叔坚一向是养尊处优，不懂得家人怎样生产，这时，他只是和妻子沈氏天天饮酒，不把耕种放在心上。
English: Chen Shujian has always been indulgent and does not understand how his family produces. At that time, he only drank alcohol with his wife Shen every day, and did not care about farming.

古文：大业中，爲遂宁郡守，卒。
现代文：大业年间，任遂宁郡守，死于任上。
English: During the Taiei era, he served as Suining County Governor and died in office.

