古文：起强圉协洽，尽昭阳赤奋若，凡七年。
现代文：起，止，一共七年。
English: A total of seven years.

古文：孝昭皇帝下元平元年
现代文：汉昭帝元平元年
English: Emperor Han Zhao in the first year of the Heian period

古文：春，二月，诏减口赋钱什三。
现代文：春季，二月，汉昭帝下诏书将七岁至十四岁百姓交纳的口赋减少十分之三。
English: In the spring, in February, Emperor Han Zhao issued an edict to reduce the tax paid by people aged seven to fourteen by three-tenths.

古文：夏，四月，癸来，帝崩于未央宫；无嗣。
现代文：夏季，四月癸未，汉昭帝在未央宫驾崩，没有儿子。
English: In the summer, at the end of April, Emperor Han Zhao died at the Weiyang Palace, without a son.

古文：时武帝子独有广陵王胥，大将军光与群臣议所立，咸持广陵王。
现代文：当时，汉武帝的儿子只有广陵王刘胥还在，大将军霍光与群臣商议立谁为新皇帝，大家都认为应当立广陵王。
English: At that time, only the son of Emperor Hanwu, Guangling King Liu Bei, was still alive. General Huo Guang and his ministers discussed who should be the new emperor, and everyone agreed that Guangling King should be established.

古文：王本以行失道，先帝所不用；光内不自安。
现代文：广陵王本来因行为不合礼法，汉武帝不喜欢他，所以霍光心中感到不安。
English: Originally, Guangling Wang's behavior was not in accordance with the etiquette law. Emperor Wu of Han did not like him, so Huo Guang felt uneasy in his heart.

古文：朗有上书言： 周太王废太伯立王季，文王舍伯邑考立武王，唯在所宜，虽废长立少可也。
现代文：有一位郎官上书朝廷指出： 周太王废弃年长的儿子太伯，立太伯的弟弟王季为继承人；周文王舍弃年长的儿子伯邑考，立伯邑考的弟弟周武王为继承人。
English: A courtier wrote to the imperial court: King Zhou abandoned his elder son, Taibao, and made Taibao's younger brother, Wang Ji, the heir; King Zhouwen abandoned his elder son, Bo'yuko, and made Bo'yuko's younger brother, King Zhouwu, the heir.

古文：广陵王不可以承宗嗣。 
现代文：这两个事例说明，只要适合继承皇位，即使是废长立幼也完全可以。广陵王不能继位。 
English: These two examples show that, as long as he is suitable to succeed to the throne, even if he is too young to succeed to the throne, he can do so.

古文：言合光意。
现代文：这道奏章的内容正合霍光的心意。
English: What he said coincided with Ho Guang's intention.

古文：光以其书示丞相敞等，擢郎为九江太守。
现代文：霍光将奏章拿给丞相杨敞等人观看，并提升这位郎官作了九江太守。
English: Huo Guang showed the play chapter to the prime minister Yang Jiao and others, and promoted this vassal to become the governor of Jiujiang.

古文：即日承皇后诏，遣行大鸿胪事少府乐成、宗正德、光禄大夫吉、中郎将利汉，迎昌邑王贺，乘七乘传诣长安邸。
现代文：当日，由上官皇后颁下诏书，派代理大鸿胪职务的少府乐成、宗正刘德、光禄大夫丙吉、中郎将利汉用七辆驿车将昌邑王刘贺迎接到长安的昌邑王官邸。
English: On the same day, the superior officer and the empress issued an imperial decree, and sent Shofu Lexing, Zongzheng Liu De, Guanglu Dr. Bingji, and Zhonglang Li Han, who were acting as Da Hongtao, to welcome Changyi King Liu He to Changyi King's official residence in Chang'an with seven armored cars.

古文：光又白皇后，徒右将军安世为车骑将军。
现代文：霍光又禀明皇后，调右将军张安世为车骑将军。
English: Huo Guang was also crowned Empress, and the right-wing general Zhang Anshi became the general of chariot and cavalry.

古文：贺，昌邑哀王之子也，在国素狂纵，动作无节。
现代文：刘贺为昌邑哀王刘之子，他在封国中一向狂妄放纵，所作所为毫无节制。
English: Liu He was the son of Liu, the king of Changyi. He had always been arrogant and indulgent in his fiefdom, and his actions were unrestrained.

古文：武帝之丧，贺游猎不止。
现代文：在汉武帝丧期中，刘贺依旧出外巡游狩猎不止。
English: During the period of Emperor Hanwu's death, Liu He still went on more than one hunting trip.

古文：尝游方与，不半日驰二百里。
现代文：他曾经出游方与县，不到半天时间就驰骋了二百里远。
English: He used to travel around the country and the county, covering a distance of 200 miles in less than half a day.

古文：中尉琅邪王吉上疏谏曰： 大王不好书术而乐逸游，冯式撙街，驰骋不止，口倦虖叱咤，手苦于棰辔，身劳虖车舆，朝则冒雾露，昼则被尘埃，夏则为大暑之所暴炙，冬则为风寒之所匽薄，数以耎脆之玉体犯勤劳之烦毒，非所以全寿命之宗也，又非所以进仁义之隆也。
现代文：中尉、琅邪人王吉上书劝说道： 大王不喜欢研读经书，却专爱游玩逸乐，驾驭着马车不停地驰骋，嘴因吆喝而疲倦，手因握缰挥鞭而疼痛，身体因马车颠簸而劳苦，清晨冒着露水雾气，白昼顶着风沙尘土，夏季忍受着炎炎烈日的烤晒，冬天被刺骨寒风吹得抬不起头来，大王总是以自己柔软脆弱的玉体，去承受疲劳痛苦的熬煎，这不能保全宝贵的寿命，也不能促进高尚的仁义品德。
English: Wang Ji, a lieutenant and an evil-doer, wrote a letter of persuasion and said: the great king does not like to study the scriptures, but he loves to play music. He drives the carriage non-stop. His mouth is tired from shouting, his hand is sore from holding the whip, and his body is laboring from the carriage bumps. In the morning, he braves the dew mist, in the daytime he is covered with wind and dust, in the summer he endures the scorching sun, and in the winter he is blown by the biting cold wind and cannot lift his head. The great king always uses his soft and fragile body to endure the pain of fatigue.

古文：夫广厦之下，细旃之上，明师居前，勤诵在后，上论唐、虞之际，下及殷、周之盛，考仁圣之风，习治国之道，欣欣焉发愤忘食，日新厥德，其乐岂街橛之间哉！
现代文：在宽敞的殿堂之中，细软的毛毡之上，在明师的指导下背诵、研读经书，讨论上至尧、舜之时，下至商、周之世的兴盛，考察仁义圣贤的风范，学习治国安邦的道理，欣欣然发奋忘食，使自己的品德修养每天都有新的提高，这种快乐，难道是驰骋游猎所能享受到的吗？
English: In the middle of a spacious hall, on top of a soft felt rug, reciting and studying scriptures under the guidance of a master, discussing the prosperity of the upper and lower worlds, examining the manners of benevolent and righteous sages, learning the principles of governing the country, happily forgetting to eat, and improving one's moral cultivation every day, is this the kind of happiness that can be enjoyed by galloping and hunting?

古文：休则俛仰屈伸以利形，进退步趋以实下，吸新吐故以练臧，专意积精以适神，于以养生，岂不长哉！
现代文：休息的时候，作些俯仰屈伸的动作以利于形体，用散步、小跑等运动来充实下肢；吸进新鲜空气，吐出腹中浊气以锻炼五脏；专心专意，积聚精力，以调和心神。用这样的方法进行养生，怎能不长寿呢！
English: When resting, do some bending and flexing movements to benefit the body, use walking, trotting and other sports to enrich the lower limbs; inhale fresh air, exhale the abdominal hernia to exercise the five internal organs; concentrate and accumulate energy to harmonize the mind and spirit. How can you not live longer with such a method of health care?

古文：大王诚留意如此，则心有尧、舜之志，体有乔、松之寿，美声广誉，登而上闻，则福禄其臻而社稷安矣。
现代文：大王如果留心于此道，心中就会产生尧、舜的志向，身体也能像伯乔、赤松子一般长寿，美名远扬，让朝廷闻知，大王崐就会福禄一齐得到，封国就安稳了。
English: If the great king pays attention to this way, his heart will have the aspiration to become a great king. His body will be able to live a long life like Bo Qiao and Red Pine, and his fame will spread far and wide, so that the court will hear about it. The great king will receive all the benefits, and the country will be stable.

古文：皇帝仁圣，至今思慕未怠，于宫馆、囿池、戈猎之乐未有所幸，大王宜夙夜念此以承圣意。
现代文：当今皇上仁孝圣明，至今思念先帝不已，对于修建宫殿别馆、园林池塘或享受巡游狩猎等事一件未做，大王应日夜想到这一点，以符合皇上的心意。
English: The current emperor, Emperor Ninpō, has been thinking about the former emperor for a long time and has not done a single thing to build a palace annex, a garden pond or enjoy a hunting cruise. The great king should think about this day and night in order to meet the emperor's wishes.

古文：诸侯骨肉，莫亲大王，大王于属则子也，于位则臣也，一身而二任之责加焉。
现代文：在诸侯王中，大王与皇上的血缘关系最近，论亲属关系，大王就如同是皇上的儿子，论地位，大王是皇上的臣僚，一人兼有两种身分的责任。
English: Among the princes and kings, the great king is the closest blood relative to the emperor. In terms of kinship, the great king is just like the emperor's son. In terms of status, the great king is the emperor's minister. One person has the responsibility of both positions.

古文：恩爱行义，纤介有不具者，于以上闻，非飨国之福也。 
现代文：因此，大王施恩行义，如有一点不周全，被皇上知道，都不是国家之福。 
English: Therefore, if there is any imperfection in the great king's benevolence and righteousness, the emperor knows that it is not a blessing for the country.

古文：王乃下令曰： 寡人造行不能无惰，中尉其忠，数辅吾过。 
现代文：刘贺阅读之后，下令说： 我的所作所为确有懈怠之处，中尉甚为忠诚，多次弥补我的过失。 
English: After reading it, Liu He gave the following order: There is indeed a weakness in what I did. The lieutenant is very loyal and has made up for my mistakes many times.

古文：使谒者千秋赐中尉牛肉五百斤，酒五石，脯五束。
现代文：于是命负责宾客事务的侍从千秋前去赏赐中尉王吉牛肉五百斤、酒五石、干肉五捆。
English: Therefore, the commander gave the lieutenant five hundred catties of beef, five kilos of wine, and five bundles of dried meat.

古文：其后复放纵自若。
现代文：然而，刘贺后来依然放纵如故。
English: However, Liu He later continued to indulge as before.

古文：郎中令山阳龚遂，忠厚刚毅，有大节，内谏争于王，外责傅相，引经义，陈祸福，至于涕泣，蹇蹇亡已，面刺王过。
现代文：郎中令山阳人龚遂忠厚刚毅，一向坚持原则，一方面不断规劝刘贺，一方面责备封国丞相、太傅没有尽到责任、他引经据典，陈述利害，说到声泪俱下，不断地冒犯刘贺，当面指责他的过失。
English: His second-in-command, Shanyang Ren, was loyal and strong-willed. He always adhered to principles. On the one hand, he constantly admonished Liu He. On the other hand, he reproached the Grand Chancellor and the Grand Master for not fulfilling their responsibilities. He quoted scriptures, stated his interests, and when he spoke, he was in tears. He constantly offended Liu He and accused him of wrongdoing.

古文：王至掩耳起走，曰： 郎中令善愧人！ 
现代文：刘贺甚至捂着耳朵起身离去，说道： 郎中令专门揭人短处！ 
English: Liu He even covered his ears as he got up and left, saying: "The middle-man ordered me to expose the shortcomings of others!

古文：王尝久与驺奴、宰人游戏饮食，赏赐无度，遂入见王，涕泣膝行，左右侍御皆出涕。王曰： 郎中令何为哭？ 
现代文：刘贺曾经与他的车夫和厨师在一起长时间地游戏娱乐，大吃大喝，毫无节制地赏赐他们，龚遂入宫去见刘贺，哭着用双膝走到刘贺面前，连刘贺的左右侍从也全都感动得流下眼泪。刘贺问道： 郎中令为什么哭？ 
English: Liu He used to play and entertain with his coachman and cook for a long time, eat and drink a lot, and reward them without restraint. So he went to the palace to see Liu He, cried and walked on his knees in front of Liu He. Even Liu He's left and right attendants were all moved to tears. Liu He asked: Why is the middle son crying?

古文：遂曰： 臣痛社稷危也！
现代文：龚遂说： 我为社稷的危亡而痛心！
English: He then replied: I am sad, the country is in danger!

古文：愿赐清闲，竭愚！ 
现代文：希望您赐给我一个单独的机会，我将详细陈说我的看法！ 
English: I hope you will give me a separate opportunity to present my views in detail!

古文：王辟左右。遂曰： 大王知胶西王所以为无道亡乎？ 
现代文：刘贺命左右之人全部退出，龚遂说道： 大王可知道胶西王刘端为什么会因大逆不道罪而灭亡吗？ 
English: The people around Liu He's order all withdrew, and Yan Sui said: Does the great king know why Liu Duan, the king of Jiaoxi, was killed for high treason?

古文：王曰： 不知也。 
现代文：刘贺说： 不知道。 
English: Qi Wang replied: I don't know.

古文：曰： 臣闻胶西王有谀臣侯得，王所为似于桀、纣也，得以为尧、舜也。
现代文：龚遂说： 我听说胶西王有一个专会阿谀奉承的臣子名叫侯得，胶西王的所作所为像夏桀、商纣一样暴虐，而侯得却说是像尧、舜一样贤明。
English: Zou then said: I heard that King Jiaosi had a courtier named Houde who was especially devoted to flattery. King Jiaosi's behavior was as tyrannical as that of Xiali and Shangdi, while Houde was said to be as wise as Zou and Zou.

古文：王说其谄谀，常与寝处，唯得所言，以至于是。
现代文：胶西王对侯得的阿谀谄媚非常欣赏，经常与他住在一起。正是因为胶西王只听信侯得的奸邪之言，以至于落得如此下场。
English: King Jiaosi was very appreciative of Houde's flattery and often lived with him. It was precisely because King Jiaosi only listened to Houde's treacherous words that he ended up like this.

古文：今大王亲近群小，渐渍邪恶所习，存亡之机，不可不慎也！
现代文：而今大王亲近奸佞小人，已经逐步沾染恶习，这是存亡的关键，不能不慎重对待！
English: But now that the great king is close to the villain, he has gradually become contaminated with vices. This is the key to survival, and must be treated with caution!

古文：臣请选郎通经有行义者与王起成，坐则诵《诗》、《书》，立则习礼容，宜有益。 
现代文：我请求挑选通晓经书、品行端正的郎官与大王一起生活，坐则诵读《诗经》、《尚书》，立则练习礼仪举止，对大王是会有益处的。 
English: I request that it would be beneficial for the great king to choose a vassal who is well versed in the scriptures and has a good moral character to live with the great king, to sit and recite the "Song of Songs" and "Song of Songs," and to practice etiquette and manners.

古文：王许之。
现代文：刘贺应允。
English: Zhao Wang agreed to his request.

古文：遂乃选郎中张安等十人侍王。
现代文：于是龚遂选择郎中张安等十人侍奉刘贺。
English: As a result, he selected ten people, including his son-in-law Zhang An, to wait on him.

古文：居数日，王皆逐去安等。
现代文：可是没过几天，张安等就全被刘贺赶走了。
English: However, a few days later, Liu He drove them all away.

古文：王尝见大白犬，颈以下似人，冠方山冠而无尾，以问龚遂，遂曰： 此天戒，言在侧者尽冠狗也，去之则存，不去则亡矣。 
现代文：刘贺曾经见到一只白色大狗，脖颈以下长得与人相似，头戴一顶跳舞的人戴的 方山冠 ，没有尾巴。刘贺为此事向龚遂询问，龚遂说： 这是上天的警告，说您左右的亲信之人都是戴着冠帽的狗，赶走他们就能生存，不赶走他们就会灭亡！ 
English: Liu He once saw a large white dog, which from the neck down resembled a human, with a square crown worn by a dancing man, and no tail. Liu He inquired about this with Gong Sui, and Gong Sui said: This is a warning from heaven, saying that the close friends around you are dogs wearing crowns. If you drive them away, you can survive, but if you do not drive them away, they will perish!

古文：后又闻人声曰： 熊！ 
现代文：后来，刘贺又听到一个人的声音叫喊： 熊！ 
English: Later, Liu He also heard a person's voice shouting: "Bear!

古文：视而见大熊，左右莫见，以问遂，遂曰： 熊，山野之兽，而来之宫室，王独见之，此天戒大王，恐宫室将空，危亡象也。 
现代文：刘贺一看，果然见到一只大熊，可左右侍从却谁也没看见。刘贺又向龚遂询问，龚遂说： 熊是山野中的野兽，竟来到王宫之中，又只有大王一人看到，这是上天警告大王，恐怕王宫将要空虚，是危亡的征兆！ 
English: At a glance, Liu He saw a big bear, but none of the attendants around him saw it. Liu He also asked Shuxi, and Shuxi said: "The bear is a beast in the mountains and fields, and it came to the royal palace, and only the great king saw it. This is heaven's warning to the great king. I'm afraid the royal palace will be empty, which is a sign of peril!

古文：王仰天而叹曰： 不祥何为数来！ 
现代文：刘贺仰天长叹，说道： 不祥之兆为何接连到来！ 
English: Liu He Yan Tian sighed and said: Why do the ominous signs come one after another!

古文：遂叩头曰： 臣不敢隐忠，数言危亡之戒；大王不说。
现代文：龚遂叩头说道： 忠心使我不敢隐瞒真相，所以几次提到危亡的警告，使大王感到不快。
English: Yan Sui kowtowed and said, "My loyalty makes me afraid to hide the truth, so I mentioned the warning of danger several times, which made the great king feel uncomfortable.

古文：夫国之存亡，岂在臣言哉！
现代文：然而国之存亡，又岂是我的话所能决定的！
English: However, the survival of the country depends on my words!

古文：愿王内自揆度。
现代文：希望大王自己好好想想。
English: Ask the great king to think about it himself.

古文：大王诵《诗》三百五篇，人事浃，王道备。
现代文：大王诵读《诗经》三百零五篇，其中说道，只有 人事 恰当， 王道 才能周备。
English: The great king recited the 305th chapter of the Book of Songs, in which he said that the royal road can be prepared only if the personnel is appropriate.

古文：王之所行，中《诗》一篇何等也？
现代文：大王的所作所为，与《诗经》的哪一篇相符崐合呢！
English: What part of the "Book of Songs" do the actions of the great king correspond to?

古文：大王位于诸侯王，行污于庶人，以存难，以亡易，宜深察之！ 
现代文：大王身为诸侯王，行事却比平民百姓污浊，想要生存困难，想要灭亡却是容易的，希望大王深思！ 
English: The great king is the prince of princes, but he acts dirtier than the common people. It is difficult to survive, but it is easy to perish. I hope the great king thinks deeply!

古文：后又血污王坐席，王问遂；遂叫然号曰： 宫空不久，妖祥数至。
现代文：后来，又发现在刘贺的王座上出现血污，刘贺再问龚遂，龚遂大声号叫道： 妖异之兆不断出现，王宫空虚就在眼前！
English: Later, bloodstains were also found on Liu He's throne. Liu He asked again, and Liu He cried out in a loud voice, "The ominous signs keep appearing, and the emptiness of the palace is in front of us!"

古文：血者，阴忧象也，宜畏慎自省！ 
现代文：血为阴暗中的凶险之象，大王应有所畏惧，谨慎反省！ 
English: Blood is an ominous sign in the gloom. The great king should be afraid and reflect carefully!

古文：王终不改节。
现代文：然而刘贺的品行始终不改。
English: However, Liu He's behavior never changed.

古文：及征书至，夜漏未尽一刻，以火发书。
现代文：征召刘贺继承皇位的诏书到来时，正值初夜，刘贺在火烛下打开诏书。
English: When the imperial edict summoning Liu He to succeed to the throne arrived, it was the first night, and Liu He opened the imperial edict under a candle.

古文：其日中，王发；晡时，至定陶，行百三十五里，侍从者马死相望于道。
现代文：中午，刘贺出发前往长安，黄昏时就到定陶，走了一百三十五里，沿途不断有随从人员的马匹累死。
English: At noon, Liu He set off for Chang'an. At dusk, he arrived at Dingtao and walked 135 miles. Along the way, the horses of his entourage kept dying from exhaustion.

古文：王吉奏书戒王曰： 臣闻高宗谅闇，三年不言。
现代文：王吉上书劝戒刘贺说： 我听说商高宗武丁在居丧期间，三年没有说话。
English: Wang Ji wrote a letter of admonition to Liu He, saying: I heard that Shang Gao Zongwuding did not speak for three years during his funeral.

古文：今大王以丧事征，宜日夜哭泣悲哀而已，慎毋有所发！
现代文：如今大王因丧事而受征召，应当日夜哭泣悲哀而已，千万不可发号施令！
English: Now that the great king has been summoned because of the funeral, he should only weep and mourn day and night, and must not give orders!

古文：大将军仁爱、勇智、忠信之德，天下莫不闻；事孝武皇帝二十馀年，未尝有过。
现代文：大将军仁爱、智勇、忠信的品德，天下无人不知。他侍奉孝武皇帝二十余年，从未有过过失。
English: No one in the world is unaware of the general's benevolence, wisdom, courage, and loyalty. He served Emperor Xiaowu for more than 20 years and never made a mistake.

古文：先帝弃群臣，属以天下，寄幼孤焉。
现代文：孝武皇帝抛弃群臣而离开人世时，将天下和幼弱孤儿托付给大将军。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu abandoned his retainers and passed away, he entrusted the world and the weak orphans to the general.

古文：大将军抱持幼君襁褓之中，布政施教，海内晏然，虽周公、伊尹无以加也。
现代文：大将军扶持尚在襁褓中的幼主，发布政令，教化万民，使国家得以平安无事，即使是周公、伊尹也不能超过他。
English: Even Zhou Gong and Yi Yin could not surpass him. The general supported the young lord who was still in his infancy, issued decrees, educated the people, and made the country safe and sound.

古文：今帝崩无嗣，大将军惟思可以奉宗庙者，攀援而立大王，其仁厚岂有量哉！
现代文：而今皇上去世，没有儿子，大将军思考可以继承皇位的人，最终选拔了大王，其仁义忠厚的胸怀岂有限量！
English: But now that the emperor has passed away and has no son, the general is thinking about who can succeed to the throne, and has finally chosen the great king. There is no limit to his benevolence and loyalty!

古文：臣愿大王事之，敬之，政事壹听之，大王垂拱南面而已。
现代文：我希望大王能依靠大将军，尊敬大将军，国家政事全都听从大将军的安排，大王自己则只是垂衣拱手地坐在皇帝宝座上而已。
English: I hope that the great king can rely on the great general, respect the great general, and follow the arrangements of the great general in all state affairs, while the great king himself only sits on the emperor's throne.

古文：愿留意，常以为念！ 
现代文：希望大王注意，常常想到我这番话！ 
English: I hope His Majesty will take note and think of my words often!

古文：王至济阳，求长鸣鸡，道买积竹杖。
现代文：刘贺行至济阳，派人索求长鸣鸡，并在途中购买用竹子合制而成的积竹杖。
English: Liu He went to Jiyang, sent someone to ask for Changming chicken, and on the way bought a bamboo cane made of bamboo.

古文：过弘农，使大奴善以衣车载女子。
现代文：经过弘农时，刘贺派一名叫作善的大奴用有帘幕遮闭的车运载随行的美女。
English: When passing through Hongnong, he sent a servant named Zhen to rob a woman hiding in a draped cart.

古文：至湖，使者以让相安乐。
现代文：来到湖县，朝廷派来迎接的使者以此事责备昌邑国相安乐。
English: Arriving in Huxian, the emissary of the imperial court reproached Changyi for this matter.

古文：安乐告龚遂，遂入问王，王曰： 无有。 
现代文：安乐转告龚遂，龚遂进见刘贺询问此事，刘贺说： 没有的事。 
English: Anle relayed the news to Zou Sui, who then went to see Liu He to inquire about the matter. Liu He said, "It's nothing.

古文：遂曰： 即无有，何爱一善以毁行义！
现代文：龚遂说： 如果并无此事，大王又何必为了庇护一个奴仆而破坏礼仪呢！
English: And he said, If it is not so, why is it necessary to destroy the workmanship of a good servant?

古文：请收属吏，以湔洒大王。 
现代文：请将善逮捕，交付有关官员惩处，以洗清大王的名声。 
English: I request that he be arrested and handed over to the authorities for trial, so that the great king's reputation can be cleared.

古文：即捽善属卫士长行法。
现代文：于是立即将善抓起来，交卫士长处死。
English: As a result, he was immediately arrested and handed over to the head guard for execution.

古文：王到霸上，大鸿胪郊迎，驺奉乘舆车。
现代文：刘贺抵达霸上，朝廷派大鸿胪到郊外迎接，侍奉刘贺换乘皇帝乘坐的御车。
English: When Liu He arrived in Bagan, the imperial court sent Dahongyu to the suburbs to welcome him and serve Liu He to transfer to the emperor's carriage.

古文：王使寿成御，郎中令遂参乘。
现代文：刘贺命昌邑国太仆寿成驾车，郎中令龚遂相陪。
English: Liu He ordered Changyi's grand chamberlain Shoucheng to drive the car, and his aide-de-camp Liu He accompanied him.

古文：且至广明、东都门，遂曰： 礼，奔丧望见国都哭。
现代文：即将到达广明、东都门时，龚遂说道： 按照礼仪，奔丧的人看到国都，便应痛哭。
English: When he was about to reach Guangming and Dongdu Gate, Zou Sui said: According to etiquette, mourners should cry when they see the national capital.

古文：此长安东郭门也。 
现代文：前面就是长安外郭的东门了。 
English: Zou is the outer city gate of Chang'an.

古文：王曰： 我嗌痛，不能哭。 
现代文：刘贺说： 我咽喉疼痛，不能哭。 
English: Liu He said: I have a sore throat and can't cry.

古文：至城门，遂复言，王曰： 城门与郭门等耳。 
现代文：来到城门之前，龚遂再次提醒他。刘贺说： 城门与郭门一样。 
English: Before arriving at the city gate, Zou Sui reminded him again. Liu He said: The city gate is the same as the gate.

古文：且至未央宫东阙，遂曰： 昌邑帐在是阙外驰道北，未至帐所，有南北行道，马足未至数步；大王宜下车，乡阙西面伏哭，尽哀止。 
现代文：将至未央宫东阙，龚遂说： 昌邑国吊丧的帐幕在阙外御用大道的北边，帐前有一条南北通道，马匹走不了几步，大王应当下车，朝着门阙，面向西方，伏地痛哭，极尽哀痛之情，方才停止。 
English: He was about to reach the east gate of the Weiyang Palace, when he said, "The mourning tent of the Changyi Kingdom is on the north side of the royal avenue outside the city gate. There is a north-south passage in front of the tent. The horses can't walk a few steps. The great king should get off the carriage, walk towards the gate and face the west, weep bitterly and weep bitterly, and only then stop.

古文：王曰： 诺。 
现代文：刘贺答应道： 好吧。 
English: After listening, Zhao Wang said, "Hmm.

古文：到，哭如仪。
现代文：于是步行上前，依照礼仪哭拜。
English: So he walked up to the front and bowed in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：六月，丙寅，王受皇帝玺绶，袭尊号，尊皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：六月丙寅，刘贺接受皇帝玉玺，承袭帝位，尊上官皇后为皇太后。
English: In June, Cui Yin and Liu He accepted the Emperor's Jade Scepter and succeeded to the imperial throne. Their respected superior officer, the Empress, became Empress Dowager.

古文：壬申，葬孝昭皇帝于平陵。
现代文：壬申，将汉昭帝安葬于平陵。
English: Jinshin, Han Zhao Di was buried in Pingling.

古文：昌邑王既立，淫戏无度。
现代文：昌邑王刘贺作了皇帝后，乱荒唐没有节制。
English: After Liu He, the king of Changyi, became emperor, there was no restraint.

古文：昌邑官属皆征至长安，往往超擢拜官。
现代文：原昌邑国官吏全部被征召到长安，很多人得到破格提拔。
English: All of the former Chang'an government officials were drafted to Chang'an, and many of them received unprecedented promotions.

古文：相安乐迁长乐卫尉。
现代文：昌邑国相安乐被任命为长乐卫尉。
English: Changyi Guoxiang Anle was appointed as Changle Lieutenant.

古文：龚遂见安乐，流涕谓曰： 王立为天子，日益骄溢，谏之不复听。
现代文：龚遂见到安乐，哭着对他说： 大王被立为天子之后，日益骄纵，规劝他也不再听从。
English: When she saw Anle, she wept and said to him, "Since the great king was made the son of heaven, he has become more and more arrogant. If you try to persuade him, he will no longer listen.

古文：今哀痛未尽，日与近臣饮酒作乐，斗虎豹，召皮轩车九旒，驱驰东西，所为悖道。
现代文：如今仍在居丧期间，他却每天与亲信饮酒作乐，观看虎豹搏斗，又传召悬挂着天子旌旗的虎皮轿车，坐在上面东奔西跑，所作所为违背了正道。
English: Now, still in the period of mourning, he is drinking and having fun with his cronies every day, watching tigers and leopards fight, and summoning a tiger-skin sedan flying the flag of the Son of Heaven, sitting on it and running around. What he has done is contrary to the right path.

古文：古制宽，大臣有隐退；今去不得，阳狂恐知，身死为世戮，奈何？
现代文：古代制度宽厚，大臣可以辞职隐退，如今想走走不得，想伪装疯狂，又怕被人识破，死后还要遭人唾骂，教我如何是好？
English: The ancient system is generous, the minister can resign and retire, now I can't walk around, I want to pretend to be crazy, but I'm afraid of being found out, and I want to be reviled after death, what should I do?

古文：君，陛下故相，宜极谏争。 
现代文：您是陛下原来的丞相，应当极力规劝才是。 
English: You were the emperor's minister of state in the past, you should speak out and give advice!

古文：王梦青蝇之矢积西阶东，可五六石，以屋版瓦覆之，以问遂，遂曰： 陛下之《诗》不云乎： 营营青蝇，止于籓。恺悌君子，毋信谗言。 
现代文：刘贺梦见在殿堂西阶的东侧，堆积着绿头苍蝇的粪便，约有五六石之多，上面盖着大片的屋瓦。刘贺向龚遂询问，龚遂说： 陛下所读的《诗经》中，不是有这样的话吗： 绿蝇往来落篱笆，谦谦君子不信谗。 
English: Liu He dreamed that on the east side of the west steps of the hall of fame, there was a pile of dung of the green-headed fly, about five or six stone, covered with a large piece of roof tile. Liu He asked Shuxu, and Shuxu said: In the "Song of Songs" read by His Majesty, isn't there a saying like this: The green fly comes and goes through the fence, and the humble gentleman doesn't believe it.

古文：陛下左侧谗人众多，如是青蝇恶矣。
现代文：陛下左侧奸佞之人很多，就像陛下在梦中见到的苍蝇粪便一样。
English: Around His Majesty, there are many villains, just like this fly droppings.

古文：宜进先帝大臣子孙，亲近以为左右。
现代文：因此，应该选拔先帝大臣的子孙，作为陛下身边的亲信侍从。
English: Therefore, the sons and grandsons of the former imperial ministers should be selected as close attendants around His Majesty.

古文：如不忍昌邑故人，信用谗谀，必有凶咎。
现代文：如若总是不忍抛开昌邑国的故旧，信任并重用那些进谗阿谀之人，必有祸事。
English: If you can't bear to alienate your former subordinates in Changyi and listen to their criticisms and flattery of you, a big disaster is bound to happen.

古文：愿诡祸为福，皆放逐之！
现代文：希望陛下能反祸为福，将这些人全部逐出朝廷。
English: I hope that His Majesty will turn misfortune into good fortune and expel all of these people from the Imperial Court.

古文：臣当先逐矣。 
现代文：我应当第一个走。 
English: I should be the first to go.

古文：王不听。
现代文：刘贺拒不接受龚遂的劝告。
English: Xiang Wang still did not listen.

古文：太仆丞河东张敞上书谏，曰： 孝昭皇帝早崩无嗣，大臣犹惧，选贤圣承宗庙，东迎之日，唯恐属车之行迟。
现代文：太仆丞河东人张敞上书劝说道： 孝昭皇帝早逝，没有儿子，朝中大臣忧虑惶恐，选择贤能圣明的人承继帝位，到东方迎接圣驾之时，唯恐跟随您的从车行进迟缓。
English: Zhang Zhang, a person from the east of the He River, wrote a letter of persuasion and said: Emperor Xiao Zhao died early and had no son, the ministers of the North and Central dynasties were worried and frightened, and they chose a wise and saintly person to succeed to the throne. When they went to the East to welcome the saint, they were afraid that they would be slow to follow your carriage.

古文：今天子以盛年初即位，天下莫不拭目倾耳，观化听风。
现代文：如今陛下正当盛年，初即帝位，天下人无不擦亮眼睛，侧着耳朵，盼望看到和听到陛下实施善政。
English: Now that the Son of Heaven has ascended the throne at the beginning of the year of prosperity, people all over the world have not failed to wipe their eyes, put their ears to the side, and observe the changes in customs and education.

古文：国辅大臣未褒，而昌邑小辈先迁，此过之大者也。 
现代文：然而，辅国的重臣尚未得到褒奖，而昌邑国拉车的小吏却先获得升迁，这是个大过错。 
English: However, it is a big mistake that the chief of the auxiliary country has not yet received the award, while the minor officials of the Changyi country have been promoted first.

古文：王不听。
现代文：刘贺不听。
English: Xiang Wang still did not listen.

古文：大将军光忧懑，独以问所亲故吏大司农田延年。
现代文：大将军霍光见此情景，忧愁烦恼，便单独向所亲信的旧部、大司农田延年询问对策。
English: Seeing this scene, General Huo Guang felt sad and troubled, so he separately inquired about the countermeasures from his trusted former subordinate, General Secretary Nong Tian Ennian.

古文：延年曰： 将军为国柱石，审此人不可，何不建白太后，更选贤而立之！ 
现代文：田延年说： 将军身为国家柱石，既然认为此人不行，何不禀告太后，改选贤明的人来拥立呢？ 
English: Tian Yannian said: The general is the pillar of the country. Since this person is not good, why not denounce the empress dowager and choose a wise person to support?

古文：光曰： 今欲如是，于古尝有此不？ 
现代文：霍光说： 我如今正想如此，古代曾否有人这样做过吗？ 
English: Huo Guang said: I also want to do this. I wonder if there is a precedent for this in ancient times.

古文：延年曰： 伊尹相殷，废太甲以安宗庙，后世称其忠。
现代文：田延年说： 当年伊尹在商朝为相，为了国家的安定将太甲废黜，后人因此称颂伊尹忠心为国。
English: Tian Ennian replied: When Yi Yin was the prime minister of the Yin Dynasty, he deposed Taiga to stabilize the country, and later generations praised his loyalty.

古文：将军若能行此，亦汉之伊尹也。 
现代文：如今将军若能这样做，也就成为汉朝的伊尹。 
English: If a general could do the same, he would be the Yi Yin of the Han Dynasty.

古文：光乃引延年给事中，阴与车骑将军张安世图计。
现代文：于是霍光命田延年兼任给事中，与车骑将军张安世秘密谋划废黜刘贺。
English: As a result, Huo Guang Meitian, who was concurrently appointed to the post for many years, secretly plotted with the cavalry general Zhang Anshi to depose Liu He.

古文：王出游，光禄大夫鲁国夏侯胜当乘舆前谏曰： 天久阴而不雨，臣下有谋上者。
现代文：刘贺外出巡游，光禄大夫鲁国人夏侯胜挡在车驾前劝阻道： 天气久阴不下雨，预示臣下有不利于皇上的阴谋。
English: Liu He was out on a parade, and Xia Hou Shengba, a member of the Guanglu Daifu Lu, dissuaded him before driving: The weather has been cloudy and rainy for a long time, indicating that the vassals have a plot against the emperor.

古文：陛下出，欲何之？ 
现代文：陛下出宫，要到哪里去？ 
English: Your Majesty has left the palace. Where is he going?

古文：王怒，谓胜为礻夭言，缚以属吏。
现代文：刘贺大怒，认为夏侯胜口出妖言，命将其捆绑，交官吏治罪。
English: Liu He was furious, believing that Xia Hou Sheng had uttered evil words, and ordered him to be tied up and handed over to officials for punishment.

古文：吏白霍光，光不举法。
现代文：负责处理此事的官员向霍光报告，霍光不处以刑罚。
English: The official in charge of handling the matter reported to Huo Guang, and Huo Guang did not impose a penalty.

古文：光让安世，以为泄语。
现代文：霍光以为是张安世将计划泄漏，便责问他。
English: Huo Guang thought it was Zhang Anshi who leaked the plan, so he scolded him.

古文：安世实不言；乃召问胜。胜对言： 在《鸿范传》曰： 皇之不极，厥罚常阴，时则有下人伐上者。 
现代文：但张安世实际上并未泄漏，于是召夏侯胜前来询问，夏侯胜回答说： 《鸿范传》上说： 君王有过失，上招天罚，常会使天气阴沉，此时就会有臣下谋害君上。 
English: However, Zhang Anshi did not actually leak the information, so he summoned Xia Hossheng to come and inquire. Xia Hossheng replied: "Hong Fan Biography" said: "The king made a mistake, invoked divine punishment, and often made the weather gloomy. At this time, there would be a vassal plotting to kill the prince."

古文：恶察察言，故云 臣下有谋 。 
现代文：我不敢明言，只好说是 臣下有不利于皇上的阴谋 。 
English: I dare not say it, but I have to say that there is a plot against the Emperor by his vassals.

古文：光、安世大惊，以此益重经术士。
现代文：霍光、张安世闻言大惊，因此更加重视精通经书的儒士。
English: Both Huo Guang and An Shidun were taken aback, and from then on they valued the scribes even more.

古文：侍中傅嘉数进谏，王亦缚嘉系狱。
现代文：侍中傅嘉多次劝说刘贺，刘贺也将他绑起来关进监狱。事诛矣！ 
English: The chamberlain Fu Jia repeatedly persuaded Liu He, and Liu He also tied him up and put him in prison.

古文：光、安世既定议，乃使田延年报丞相杨敞。
现代文：延年从更衣还，敞夫人与延年参语许诺， 请奉大将军教令！ 霍光、张安世计议已定，便派田延年前去报知丞相杨敞。
English: When Yan Nian came out of the changing room, his wife and Yan Nian promised to talk to each other. Please follow the general's instruction! Huo Guang and Zhang Anshi's plan had been decided, so they sent Tian Yan forward to report to Minister Yang Zhan.

古文：敞惊惧，不知所言，汗出洽背，徒唯唯而已。
现代文：杨敞闻言又惊又怕，不知该说什么好，汗流浃背，只是唯唯诺诺而已。
English: Yang Chang listened, very alarmed, did not know what to say, sweating wet back, tongue wrapped around the mouth and uttered a "woo woo" sound.

古文：延年起，至更衣，敞夫人遽从东厢谓敞曰： 此国大事，今大将军议已定，使九卿来报君侯，君侯不疾应，与大将军同心，犹与无决，先事诛矣！ 
现代文：田延年起身去换衣服，杨敞的夫人急忙从东厢房对杨敞说： 这是国家大事，如今大将军计议已定，派大司农来通知你，你不赶快答应，表示与大将军同心，却犹豫不决，就要先被诛杀了！ 
English: Tian Yan took off to change his clothes. Yang Zhan's wife hurried from the east wing and said to Yang Zhan, "This is a national event. Now, the general's decision has been made. He has sent the chief farmer to inform you. If you do not quickly agree and show that you are of the same mind as the general, but still hesitate, you will be beaten to death first!"

古文：延年从更衣还，敞夫人与延年参语许诺： 请奉大将军教令！ 
现代文：田延年换衣返回，杨敞夫人也参与谈话，表示同意霍光的计划， 一切听大将军吩咐！ 
English: Tian Yannian changed his clothes and returned. Yang Zhan's wife also participated in the conversation, expressing her agreement with Huo Guang's plan. Everything obeyed the general's orders!

古文：癸巳，光召丞相、御史、将军、列侯、中二千石、大夫、博士会议未央宫。
现代文：癸巳，霍光召集丞相、御史、将军、列侯、中二千石、大夫、博士在未央宫开会。
English: At this time, Huo Guang convened a meeting of chancellors, governors, generals, vassals, 2,000 koku junior high school students, doctors, and doctors at the Weiyang Palace.

古文：光曰： 昌邑王行昏乱，恐危社稷，如何？ 
现代文：霍光说： 昌邑王行为昏乱，恐怕会危害国家，怎么办？ 
English: Huo Guang said: King Changyi's behavior is erratic, and I'm afraid it will endanger the country. What do you think?

古文：群臣皆惊鄂失色，莫敢发言，但唯唯而已。
现代文：群臣闻言全都大惊失色，谁也不敢发言，只唯唯诺诺而已。
English: The ministers were so shocked that they did not dare to speak, but merely nodded.

古文：田延年前，离席按剑曰： 先帝属将军以幼孤，寄将军以天下，以将军忠贤，能安刘氏也。
现代文：田延年离开席位，走到群臣前面，手按剑柄说道： 先帝将幼弱弧儿托付将军，并把国家大事交与将军作主，是因为相信将军忠义贤明，能够保全刘氏的江山。
English: Tian Yannian left his seat, walked to the front of the group of courtiers, and said with his hand on the hilt of his sword: The previous emperor entrusted the young and weak archer to the general, and entrusted the national affairs to the general, because he believed that the general was loyal and wise and could preserve the country of the Liu clan.

古文：今群下鼎沸，社稷将倾；且汉之传谥常为 孝 者，以长有天下，令宗庙血食也。
现代文：如今朝廷被一群奸佞小人搞得乌烟瘴气，国家危亡；况且我大汉历代皇帝的谥号都有一个 孝 字，为的就是江山永存，使宗庙祭祀不断。
English: Today, the imperial court has been corrupted by a group of treacherous villains, and the country is in danger of perishing. Moreover, all the emperors of the Han dynasty have a "孝" character in their posthumous names, in order to perpetuate the country and make the ancestral temple worship continuous.

古文：如汉家绝祀，将军虽死，何面目见先帝于地下乎？
现代文：如果汉家祭祀断绝，将军即使死去，又有何脸面见先帝于地下呢？
English: If Han sacrificial rites are discontinued, even if the general dies, how many faces will the former emperor see in the underground?

古文：今日之议，不得旋踵，群臣后应者，臣请敛斩之！ 
现代文：今日的会议，必须立即作出决断，群臣中最后响应的，我请求用剑将他斩首！ 
English: At today's meeting, a decision must be made immediately. The last of the ministers to respond, I ask you to behead him with a sword!

古文：光谢曰： 九卿责光是也！
现代文：霍光点头认错，说道： 大司农对我的责备很对！
English: Huo Guang nodded and admitted his mistake, saying, "The chief farmer was right to blame me!

古文：天下匈匈不安，光当受难。 
现代文：国家不安宁，我应当受处罚。 
English: The world is in an uproar, and I deserve to be punished.

古文：于是议者皆叩头曰： 万姓之命，在于将军，唯大将军令！ 
现代文：于是参加会议的人都叩头说道： 万民的命运，都掌握在将军手中，一切听从大将军的命令！ 
English: So the participants of the meeting all kowtowed and said: The fate of all peoples is in the hands of the general, everything follows the general's orders!

古文：光即与群臣俱见，白太后，具陈昌邑王不可以承宗庙状。
现代文：霍光随即与群臣一同晋见太后，向太后禀告，陈述昌邑王刘贺不能承继皇位的情状。
English: Huo Guang immediately went to see the empress dowager with a group of courtiers and delivered an obituary to the empress dowager, stating that Liu He, the king of Changyi, could not succeed to the throne.

古文：皇太后乃车驾幸未央承明殿，诏诸禁门毋内昌邑群臣。
现代文：于是皇太后乘车驾前往未央宫承明殿，下诏命皇宫各门不许放昌邑国群臣入内。
English: The empress dowager then came by car to the Weiyang Chengming Palace and ordered the palace guards not to let the courtiers of the King of Changyi enter the palace.

古文：王入朝太后还，乘辇欲归温室。中黄门宦者各持门扇，王入，门闭，昌邑群臣不得入。
现代文：刘贺朝见太后之后，乘车准备返回温室殿，此时禁宫宦者已分别抓住门扇，刘贺一进去，便将门关闭，昌邑国群臣不能入内，刘贺问道： 这是干什么？ 
English: After Liu He met the empress dowager in the morning, he took a car to return to the greenhouse hall. At this time, the palace guards had separately seized the door. As soon as Liu He entered, he closed the door. The ministers of Changyi Province could not enter. Liu He asked: What is this?

古文：王曰： 何为？ 大将军跪曰： 有皇太后诏，毋内昌邑群臣！ 
现代文：大将军霍光跪地回答说： 皇太后有诏，不许昌邑国群臣入宫。 
English: General Huo Guang knelt down and replied, "The Empress Dowager has issued an edict not to allow any of Changyi's courtiers to enter the palace.

古文：王曰： 徐之，何乃惊人如是！ 
现代文：刘贺说： 慢慢吩咐就是了，为什么竟如此吓人！ 
English: Changyi Wang said, "Slow down, why do you have to be so scary!"

古文：光使尽驱出昌邑群臣，置金马门外。
现代文：霍光命人将昌邑国群臣全部驱赶到金马门之外。
English: Huo Guang sent people to expel all the vassals of King Changyi from the palace and concentrated them outside the Golden Horse Gate.

古文：车骑将军安世将羽林骑，收缚二百馀人，皆送廷尉诏狱。
现代文：车骑将军张安世率领羽林军将被赶出来的昌邑国群臣二百余人逮捕，全部押送廷尉所属的诏狱。
English: The cavalry general Zhang Anshi led the Ulin army to arrest more than two hundred of the expelled Changyi state ministers, and all of them were escorted to the imperial prison belonging to the imperial lieutenant.

古文：令故昭帝侍中中臣侍守王。
现代文：霍光命曾在汉昭帝时担任过侍中的宦官守护刘贺，并命令手下人说： 一定要严加守护！
English: He also ordered the former Emperor Zhao's attendants, the middle attendants, to watch over the King of Chang'er.

古文：光敕左右： 谨宿卫！卒有物故自裁，令我负天下，有杀主名。 
现代文：如果他突然死去或自杀，就会让我对不起天下人，背上杀主的恶名。 
English: If he died suddenly or committed suicide, it would make me look bad to the world, and the murderer's name would be on my back.

古文：王尚未自知当废，谓左右： 我故群臣从官安得罪，而大将军尽系之乎！ 
现代文：此时刘贺还不知道自己即将被废黜，问身边之人说： 我以前的群臣、从属犯了什么罪？大将军为什么将他们全部关押起来呢？ 
English: At this time, Liu He did not yet know that he was about to be deposed, and asked those around him: What crime did my former ministers and subordinates commit? Why did the general imprison them all?

古文：顷之，有太后诏召王。
现代文：不久，皇太后下诏召刘贺入见。
English: Soon after, the empress dowager issued an imperial edict summoning Liu He to appear before her.

古文：王闻召，意恐，乃曰： 我安得罪而召我哉！ 
现代文：刘贺听说太后召见，感到害怕，说道： 我犯了什么错？太后为什么召我？ 
English: When Liu He heard that the empress dowager had summoned him, he felt scared and said, "What mistake did I make? Why did the empress dowager summon me?

古文：太后被珠襦，盛服坐武帐中，侍御数百人皆持兵，期门武士陛戟陈列殿下，群臣以次上殿，召昌邑王伏前听诏。
现代文：太后身披用珠缀串而成的短衣，盛装打扮，坐在武帐之中，数百名侍卫全部手握兵器，与持戟的期门武士排列于殿下。文武群臣按照品位高低依次上殿，然后召昌邑王上前伏于地下，听候宣读诏书。
English: The empress dowager wore a short dress made of beaded strings, dressed up and sat in a military tent. Hundreds of attendants, all holding weapons, lined up in front of her royal highness, along with warriors holding scepters. The courtiers and warriors went up to the palace in order of rank, and then summoned the king of Changyi to bow down to the ground and wait for the reading of the imperial edict.

古文：光与群臣连名奏王，尚书令读奏曰： 丞相臣敞等昧死言皇太后陛下：孝昭皇帝早弃天下，遣使征昌邑王典丧，服斩衰，无悲哀之心，废礼谊，居道上不素食，使从官略女子载衣车，内所居传舍。
现代文：霍光与群臣连名奏劾昌邑王，由尚书令宣读奏章： 丞相杨敞等冒死上奏皇太后陛下：孝昭皇帝过早地抛弃天下而去，朝廷派使者征召昌邑王前来，主持丧葬之礼。而昌邑王身穿丧服，并无悲哀之心，废弃礼义，在路上不肯吃素，还派随从官员掳掠女子，用有帘幕遮蔽的车来运载，在沿途驿站陪宿。
English: Huo Guang and his courtiers jointly read out the impeachment of Chang'e Wang, and the following was read out by Shang Shuling: Emperor Xiao Zhao prematurely abandoned the world and left, and the imperial court sent an envoy to summon Chang'e Wang to come and preside over the funeral ceremony. And Chang'e Wang wore mourning clothes, had no sorrow, abandoned etiquette, refused to eat vegetarian on the road, and also sent officials to abduct and kidnap women, carrying them in a car covered with a curtain, and staying with them at stations along the way.

古文：始至谒见，立为皇太子，常私买鸡豚以食。
现代文：初到长安，谒见皇太后之后，被立为皇太子，仍经常私下派人购买鸡、猪肉食用。
English: From the moment he arrived in Beijing to see the empress dowager crowned crown prince, he often bought chicken and pigs to eat in private.

古文：受皇帝信玺、行玺大行前，就次，发玺不封。
现代文：在孝昭皇帝灵柩之前接受皇帝的印玺，回到住处，打开印玺后就不再封存。
English: Before the coffin of Emperor Xiao Zhao, he accepted the emperor's seal and returned to his residence. After opening the seal, it was no longer sealed.

古文：从官更持节引内昌邑从官、驺宰、官奴二百馀人，常与居禁闼内敖戏。
现代文：派侍从官更手持皇帝符节前去召引昌邑国的侍从官、车马官、官奴仆等二百余人，与他们一起居住在宫禁之内，肆意游戏娱乐。
English: He also sent his attendants to summon more than two hundred attendants, chariot and horse officers, and servants of officials in Changyi Province, holding the Emperor's rune festival in their hands, and they lived together with them within the palace, playing games and having fun.

古文：为书曰： 皇帝问侍中君卿：使中御府令高昌奉黄金千斤，赐君卿取十妻。 
现代文：曾经写信说： 皇帝问候侍中君卿，特派中御府令高昌携带黄金千斤，赐君卿娶十个妻子。 
English: He also wrote: "The Emperor sends his greetings to the Lord Chamberlain: He has sent the Governor of the Imperial Household, Gao Chang, to send a thousand kilos of gold and grant the Lord Chamberlain ten wives.

古文：大行在前殿，发乐府乐器，引内昌邑乐人击鼓，歌吹，作俳倡；召内泰壹、宗庙乐人，悉奏众乐。
现代文：孝昭皇帝的灵柩还停在前殿，竟搬来乐府乐器，让昌邑国善于歌舞的艺人入宫击鼓，歌唱欢弹，演戏取乐；又调来泰一祭坛和宗庙的歌舞艺人，遍奏各种乐曲。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao's coffin was still in the vestibule, but the musical instruments of the Music Palace were brought in, and the artists of Changyi who were good at singing and dancing were allowed to enter the palace to play drums, sing and play, and act to make music. In addition, the singers and dancers of the Taiyi Altar and the ancestral temple were brought in to play all kinds of music.

古文：驾法驾驱驰北宫、桂宫，弄彘，斗虎。
现代文：驾着天子车驾，在北宫、桂宫等处往来奔驰，并玩猪、斗虎。
English: He drove the celestial chariot and went back and forth between the Northern Palace, Gui Palace and other places, and played with pigs and tigers.

古文：召皇太后御小马车，使官奴骑乘，游戏掖庭中。
现代文：擅自调用皇太后乘坐的小马车，命官奴仆骑乘，在后宫中游戏。
English: He also summoned the pony car used by the empress dowager, and had the officials and servants ride in it. They had fun in the courtyard where the empress dowager lived.

古文：与孝昭皇帝宫人蒙等淫乱，诏掖庭令： 敢泄言，要斩！  
现代文：与孝昭皇帝的叫蒙的宫女等乱，还下诏给掖庭令： 有敢泄漏此事者腰斩！  
English: He also issued an edict to the imperial court: Anyone who dared to leak the matter would be beheaded!

古文：太后曰： 止！
现代文：太后说： 停下！
English: The empress dowager said: Stop!

古文：为人臣子，当悖乱如是邪！ 
现代文：作臣子的，竟会如此悖逆荒乱吗！ 
English: How can a courtier be so rebellious and wild!

古文：王离席伏。
现代文：刘贺离开席位，伏地请罪。
English: Changyi Wang left his seat and prostrated on the ground.

古文：尚书令复读曰： 取诸侯王、列侯、二千石绶及墨绶、黄绶以并佩昌邑郎官者免奴。
现代文：尚书令继续读道： 取朝廷赐予诸侯王、列侯、二千石官员的绶带及黑色、黄色绶带，赏给昌邑国郎官，及被免除奴仆身分的人佩带。
English: The imperial edict continued to read, "Take the imperial sashes and black and yellow sashes given by the imperial court to princes, vassals, and officials of 2,000 koku, and give them to the lords of Chang'e, and to those who were exempted from the status of slaves.

古文：发御府金钱、刀剑、玉器、采缯，赏赐所与游戏者。
现代文：将皇家仓库中的金钱、刀剑、玉器、彩色丝织品等赏给与其一起游戏的人。
English: He will reward those who play with him with money, swords, jade, and colorful silk goods from the royal storehouse.

古文：与从官、官奴夜饮，湛沔于酒。
现代文：与侍从官、奴仆彻夜狂饮，酒醉沉迷。
English: He drank all night with his attendants and servants and became drunk.

古文：独夜设九宾温室，延见姊夫昌邑关内侯。
现代文：在温室殿设下隆重的九宾大礼，于夜晚单独接见其姐夫昌邑关内侯。
English: On his own, he held a nine-guest party in the greenhouse at night and invited his brother-in-law, Changyi Guan Nei Hou, to come and meet him.

古文：祖宗庙祠未举，为玺书，使使者持节以三太牢祠昌邑哀王园庙，称 嗣子皇帝 。
现代文：尚未举行祭祀宗庙的大礼，就颁发正式诏书，派使者携带皇帝符节，以三牛、三羊、三猪的祭祀大礼前往祭祀其父昌邑哀王的陵庙，还自称 嗣子皇帝 。
English: Before the grand ceremony to worship the ancestral temple was held, he issued an official edict, sent an emissary to carry the emperor's symbols, and went to the mausoleum to worship his father, King Changyi, with the grand ceremony of sacrificing three cows, three sheep, and three pigs. He also claimed to be the heir emperor.

古文：受玺以来二十七日，使者旁午，持节诏诸官署征发凡一千一百二十七事。
现代文：即位以来二十七天，向四面八方派出使者，持皇帝符节，用诏令向各官署征求调发，共一千一百二十七次。
English: In the 27 days since he ascended the throne, he has sent emissaries to all corners of the globe, bearing the imperial insignia and using the imperial edict to solicit dispatches from various government agencies, a total of 1,127 times.

古文：荒淫迷惑，失帝王礼谊，乱汉制度。
现代文：荒淫昏乱，失去了帝王的礼义，败坏了大汉的制度。
English: He was wild and disorderly, lost the emperor's propriety, and destroyed the system of the Ding Han Dynasty.

古文：臣敞等数进谏，不变更，日以益甚。恐危社稷，天下不安。
现代文：杨敞等多次规劝，但并无改正，反而日益加甚，恐怕这样下去将危害国家，使天下不安。
English: Yang Zhan and others have repeatedly exhorted, but there is no correction, on the contrary, it is getting worse and worse. I am afraid that if this continues, it will harm the country and make the world uneasy.

古文：臣敞等谨与博士议，皆曰： 今陛下嗣孝昭皇帝后，行淫辟不轨。 五辟之属，莫大不孝。 
现代文：我们与博士官商议，一致认为： 当今陛下继承孝昭皇帝的帝位，行为淫邪不轨。《孝经》上说： 五刑之罪当中，以不孝之罪最大。 
English: We discussed with the doctoral officer and agreed that: Today, His Majesty has succeeded to the throne of Emperor Xiaozhao, and his behavior is immoral. "The Book of Filial Piety" says: Among the five punishable offenses, the sin of being unfilial is the greatest.

古文：周襄王不能事母，《春秋》曰： 天王出居于郑， 由不孝出之，绝之于天下也。
现代文：昔日周襄王不孝顺母亲，所以《春秋》上说他： 天王出居郑国， 因其不孝，所以出居郑国，被迫抛弃天下。
English: Once upon a time, King Zhou Xiang was not filial to his mother, so "Spring and Autumn" said that he was: Tianwang moved out of Zhengguo. Because of his filial piety, he moved out of Zhengguo and was forced to abandon the world.

古文：宗庙重于君，陛下不可以承天序，奉祖宗庙，子万姓，当废！ 
现代文：宗庙要比君王重要得多，陛下既然不能承受天命，侍奉宗庙，爱民如子，就应当废黜！ 
English: The ancestral temple is much more important than the king. Since His Majesty cannot bear the destiny, serve the ancestral temple, and love the people like a son, he should be deposed!

古文：臣请有司以一太牢具告祠高庙。 皇太后诏曰： 可。 
现代文：因此，臣请求太后命有关部门用一牛、一羊、一猪的祭祀大礼，祭告于高祖皇帝的祭庙。 皇太后下诏说： 可以。 
English: Therefore, the minister asked the empress dowager to order the relevant departments to use a cow, a sheep, and a pig as a sacrificial offering at Emperor Gaozu's temple, and the empress dowager said, "Yes."

古文：光令王起，拜受诏，王曰： 闻 天下有争臣七人，虽亡道不失天下。  
现代文：于是霍光命刘贺站起来，拜受皇太后诏书。刘贺说道： 我听说： 天子只要有七位耿直敢言的大臣在身边，既使无道，也不会失去天下。  
English: Then Liu He, the son of Huo Guang, stood up and bowed to receive the imperial edict from the empress dowager. Liu He said, "I have heard that as long as the Son of Heaven has seven forthright ministers around him, even if there is no way, he will not lose the world.

古文：光曰： 皇太后诏废，安得称天子！ 
现代文：霍光说： 皇太后已经下诏将你废黜，岂能自称天子！ 
English: Huo Guang said: The empress dowager has issued an edict to depose you, how can you call yourself the son of heaven!

古文：乃即持其手，解脱其玺组，奉上太后，扶王下殿，出金马门，群臣随送。
现代文：随即抓住刘贺的手，将他身上佩戴的玉玺绶带解下，献给皇太后，然后扶着刘贺下殿，从金马门走出皇宫，群臣跟随后崐相送。
English: So he went up and grabbed his hand, untied the seal ribbon from his body, handed it to the empress dowager, supported the king of Chang'e to leave the palace, walked out of the Golden Horse Gate, and the courtiers followed him.

古文：王西面拜曰： 愚戆，不任汉事！ 
现代文：刘贺出宫后，面向西方叩拜道： 我太愚蠢，不能担当汉家大事！ 
English: After Liu He left the palace, he kowtowed to the West and said: I am too stupid to be in charge of Han affairs!

古文：起，就乘舆副车，大将军光送至昌邑邸。
现代文：然后起身，登上御驾的副车，由大将军霍光送到长安昌邑王官邸。
English: Then he got up, boarded a second car driven by the emperor, and was driven by General Huo Guang to the Chang'an Chang'e Wang's residence.

古文：光谢曰： 王行自绝于天，臣宁负王，不敢负社稷！
现代文：霍光道歉说： 大王的行为是自绝于上天，我宁愿对不起大王，不敢对不起社稷！
English: Huo Guang apologized and said: the behavior of the great king is to deny himself to heaven, I would rather be sorry for the great king, I dare not be sorry for the society!

古文：愿王自爱，臣长不复左右。 
现代文：希望大王自爱，我不能再常侍奉于大王的左右了。 
English: I hope the great king loves himself. I can no longer serve at his beck and call.

古文：光涕泣而去。
现代文：说完洒泪而去。
English: Huo Guang left Changyi Wang in tears.

古文：群臣奏言： 古者废放之人，屏于远方，不及以政。
现代文：文武群臣上奏太后说： 古时候，被废黜之人，要放逐到远方去，使其不能再参与政事。
English: Wenwu's courtiers appealed to the empress dowager, saying, "In ancient times, those who were deposed had to be banished far away so that they could no longer participate in political affairs.

古文：请徒王贺汉中房陵县。 
现代文：请将昌邑王刘贺迁徙到汉中房陵县。 
English: Please relocate Changyi Wang Liu He to Fangling County, Hanzhong.

古文：太后诏归贺昌邑，赐汤沐邑二千户，故王家财物皆与贺；及哀王女四人，各赐汤沐邑千户；国除，为山阳郡。
现代文：太后下诏，命刘贺回昌邑居住，赐给他二千户人家作为汤沐邑，他当昌邑王时的家财也全部发还给他，其姐妹四人，各赐一千户人家作为汤沐邑；撤销昌邑国，改为山阳郡。
English: The empress dowager issued an edict, ordering Liu He to return to live in Chang'e, giving him two thousand households as Tang Mu'e, all of his household wealth when he was the king of Chang'e was also returned to him, and his four sisters were each given one thousand households as Tang Mu'e; the country of Chang'e was abolished and changed to Shanyang County.

古文：昌邑群臣坐在国时不举奏王罪过，令汉朝不闻知，又不能辅道，陷王大恶，皆下狱，诛杀二百馀人。唯中尉吉、郎中令遂以忠直数谏正，得减死，髡为城旦。
现代文：原昌邑国群臣都被指控在封国时不能举奏刘贺的罪过，使朝廷不了解真实情况，又不能加以辅佐、引导，使刘贺陷于罪恶，一律逮捕下狱，诛杀二百余人；只有中尉王吉、郎中令龚遂因忠正耿直，多次规劝刘贺，被免除死罪，剃去头发，罚以 城旦 之刑，白天守城，夜晚作苦工。
English: The former ministers of Chang'e were all accused of not being able to point out Liu He's crimes during the nationalization, so that the imperial court did not understand the true situation, nor could they assist and guide him, so that Liu He fell into crime, all of them were arrested and imprisoned, and more than 200 people were killed; only Lieutenant Wang Ji and Vice-Commander Yan Sui, because of their loyalty and integrity, repeatedly advised Liu He, was exempted from the death penalty, shaved his hair, punished with the punishment of the city, guarded the city during the day, and worked hard at night.

古文：师王式系狱当死，治事使者责问曰： 师何以无谏书？ 
现代文：刘贺的老师王式也被逮捕下狱，罪应处死，审案官员责问王式道： 你作为昌邑王的老师，为什么没有上述规劝？ 
English: Liu He's teacher, Wang Shih, was also arrested and sent to prison. He should have been sentenced to death. The investigating officer asked Wang Shih: As the teacher of Changyi Wang, why didn't you make the above-mentioned exhortation?

古文：式对曰： 臣以《诗》三百五篇朝夕授王，至于忠臣、孝子之篇，未尝不为王反复诵之也。至于危亡失道之君，未尝不流涕为王深陈之也。
现代文：王式回答说： 我每天早晚都为昌邑王讲授《诗经》三百零五篇，遇到涉及忠臣、孝子的内容，未曾不为其反复诵读、讲解；遇到关于无道之君使国家危亡的篇章，也未曾不流泪为他详细陈说。
English: Wang Shi replied, "Every morning and evening, I have been teaching King Chang'e the three hundred and fifth chapter of the Book of Songs. Whenever I come across a passage about a loyal subject or a filial son, I have never failed to recite and explain it to him repeatedly. Whenever I come across a chapter about a ruthless ruler who endangers the country, I have never explained it to him in detail without shedding tears.

古文：臣以三百五篇谏，是以无谏书。 
现代文：我是用《诗经》三百零五篇来规劝昌邑王，所以没有专门上书规劝。 
English: I used the three hundred and five poems of the Book of Songs to persuade King Changyi, so I didn't write a special book to persuade him.

古文：使者以闻，亦得减死论。
现代文：审案官员将王式这番话奏闻朝廷，所以王式也被免除死罪。
English: The case officer reported Wang Xi's words to the imperial court, so Wang Xi was also exempted from the death penalty.

古文：霍光以群臣奏事东宫，太后省政，宜知经术，白令夏侯胜用《尚书》授太后，迁胜长信少府，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：霍光因为国家大事都由群臣上奏于东宫，由太后省察决定，认为太后应通晓儒家经书，于是禀明太后，命夏侯胜为太后讲授《尚书》，并调夏侯胜担任长信少府，赐其关内侯爵位。
English: Because Huo Guang's important state affairs were all performed in the East Palace by a group of ministers, the empress dowager's inspection decided that the empress dowager should be familiar with the Confucian scriptures. Therefore, the Empress Dowager Zhenming ordered Xia Hossheng to teach the Empress Dowager "Shang Shu" and transferred Xia Hossheng to serve as Changxin Shophu and gave him the title of Guanai Marquis.

古文：初，卫太子纳鲁国史良娣，生子进，号史皇孙。
现代文：当初，卫太子刘据纳姓史的鲁国女子为良娣，生了一个儿子名叫刘进，号称史皇孙。
English: In the beginning, the daughter of Liu Xinna, the crown prince of the Wei dynasty, surnamed Shi, was a Lu woman named Liang Qi, and she gave birth to a son named Liu Jin, who was known as the grandson of Emperor Shi.

古文：皇孙纳涿郡王夫人，生子病已，号皇曾孙。
现代文：史皇孙娶涿郡女子王夫人，生一子名叫刘病已，号称皇曾孙。
English: Shi's great-grandson married Lady Wang, a woman from Min County, and had a son named Liu Yingya, who was known as the emperor's great-grandson.

古文：皇曾孙生数月，遭巫蛊事，太子三男、一女及诸妻、妾皆遇害，独皇曾孙在，亦坐收系郡邸狱。
现代文：皇曾孙生下几个月，就赶上巫蛊之祸，卫太子刘据及其三子一女连同他的诸妻妾全部被害，只剩下皇曾孙一人，也因连坐被关入大鸿胪所属的郡邸狱。
English: A few months after the birth of the emperor's great-grandson, he was overtaken by the evil of witchcraft. The prince of Wei, Liu Yan, and his three sons and one daughter, together with his wives and concubines, were all killed. Only the emperor's great-grandson was left, and he was also put into the county residence prison belonging to the great-great-grandson.

古文：故廷尉监鲁国丙吉受诏治巫蛊狱，吉心知太子无事实，重哀皇曾孙无辜，择谨厚女徒谓城胡组、淮阳郭征卿，令乳养曾孙，置闲燥处。
现代文：原廷尉监鲁国人丙吉受汉武帝诏命，负责审理巫蛊案。丙吉知道说刘据并无犯罪事实，对皇曾孙无辜受到连累深为哀怜，便选择谨慎忠厚的女囚犯渭城人胡组、淮阳人郭征卿，命她们住在宽敞干爽的地方哺养皇曾孙刘病已。
English: He Ji, a former imperial inspector from the State of Lu, was ordered by Emperor Hanwu to be in charge of the Wuyi case. He Ji knew that Liu Zi did not commit a crime and was deeply sorry for the innocent suffering of the great-grandson of the emperor, so he chose the cautious and loyal female prisoners Hu Qiu from Shicheng and Guo Zhengqing from Huaiyang and ordered them to live in a spacious and dry place to nurse the great-grandson of the emperor Liu who was already ill.

古文：吉日再省视。
现代文：丙吉每日前往探视两次。
English: He Jie visits her twice a day.

古文：巫蛊事连岁不决，武帝疾，来往长杨、五柞宫，望气者言长安狱中有天子气，于是武帝遣使者分条中都官，诏狱系者，无轻重，一切皆杀之。
现代文：巫蛊案连年不能结束。汉武帝患病，往来于长杨、五柞两宫。观望云气的方士说，长安监狱中有一股天子之气，于是汉武帝下诏命使臣分别通知京中各官府，凡各监狱在押的犯人，无论罪行轻重，一律处死。
English: Emperor Hanwu was ill and traveled between the two palaces of Changyang and Wuzhong. The magicians who were watching the clouds said that there was a divine spirit in Chang'an Prison, so Emperor Hanwu ordered the envoys to inform the central government offices in Beijing that all prisoners in each prison, regardless of the severity of the crime, would be executed.

古文：内谒者令郭穰夜到郡邸狱，吉闭门拒使者不纳，曰： 皇曾孙在。
现代文：内谒者令郭穰于夜晚来到郡邸狱传达汉武帝诏令，丙吉关闭大门，不让郭穰进去，说道： 皇曾孙在此。
English: The infighting caused Guo Gan to rush to the county seat prison overnight, but Bijie closed the gate tightly, not allowing the messenger to enter, and said: The great-grandson of the emperor is here.

古文：他人无辜死者犹不可，况亲曾孙乎！ 
现代文：其他人尚且不应无辜被杀，何况是皇上的亲曾孙呢！ 
English: Others should not be killed innocently, not to mention the emperor's own great-grandson!

古文：相守至天明，不得入。
现代文：双方僵持到天崐明，郭穰未能进去。
English: The two sides were in a standoff until dawn, and Guo Gan was unable to enter.

古文：穰还，以闻，因劾奏吉。
现代文：郭穰返回，将此事奏明汉武帝，并弹劾丙吉。
English: Guo Wei returned, reported the matter to Emperor Wu of Han, and impeached Bongji.

古文：武帝亦寤，曰： 天使之也。 
现代文：汉武帝也已醒悟，说道： 是上天让丙吉这样做的。 
English: Emperor Hanwu also came to his senses and said, "It was Heaven that made him do it."

古文：因赦天下。
现代文：于是下诏大赦天下。
English: As a result, a general amnesty was issued.

古文：郡邸狱系者，独赖吉得生。
现代文：在长安的监狱中，唯独郡邸狱的囚犯，靠丙吉得以保住了性命。
English: In the prison of Chang'an, only the prisoners of the county residence prison were able to save their lives by relying on He Jizhou.

古文：既而吉谓守丞谁如： 皇孙不当在官。 
现代文：不久，丙吉对狱官谁如说： 皇曾孙不应住在监狱之中。 
English: Soon, He Jie said to the warden, "The great-grandson of the emperor should not live in a prison."

古文：使谁如移书京兆尹，遣与胡组俱送；京兆尹不受，复还。
现代文：派谁如写信给京兆尹，将皇曾孙与胡组一起送去，因京兆尹不肯接受，又回到狱中。
English: Who would send a letter to Jing Zhaoyun to send the great-grandson of the emperor together with the Hu group, because Jing Zhaoyun refused to accept, and returned to prison.

古文：及组日满当去，皇孙思慕，吉以私钱雇组令留，与郭征卿并养，养月，乃遣组去。
现代文：等到胡组服刑期满，应当离去时，皇曾孙对她甚为依恋，于是丙吉自己出钱雇胡组留下，让她与郭征卿一起抚养皇曾孙，又过了几个月，才放胡组离去。
English: When it was time for Hu Jie to leave after serving his sentence, the great-grandson of the emperor was very attached to her, so Bingji himself paid to hire Hu Jie to stay and let her raise the great-grandson of the emperor with Guo Zhengqing. It took several months before Hu Jie was released.

古文：后少内啬夫白吉曰： 食皇孙无诏令。 
现代文：后少内啬夫禀告丙吉说： 没有得到皇上的诏令，不能供给皇曾孙饮食。 
English: Later, Shao Negi's husband complained to Bongji, saying, "Without receiving the Emperor's edict, we cannot provide food and drink for the Emperor's great-grandson."

古文：时吉得食米、肉，月月以给皇曾孙。
现代文：当时丙吉的俸禄里有米和肉，便按月供给皇曾孙。
English: At that time, Heung-Gil's salary included rice and meat, so he supplied the great-grandson of the emperor on a monthly basis.

古文：曾孙病，几不全者数焉，吉数敕保养乳母加致医药，视遇甚有恩惠。
现代文：皇曾孙患病，好几次几乎性命不保，丙吉总是督促养育皇曾孙的乳母请医喂药，对皇曾孙恩惠很深。
English: The great-grandson of the emperor fell ill and almost lost his life several times. Bongji always urged the nanny who raised the great-grandson of the emperor to seek medical treatment and give him medicine. He was very generous to the great-grandson of the emperor.

古文：吉闻史良娣有母贞君及兄恭，乃载皇曾孙以付之。
现代文：丙吉听说皇曾孙的祖母史良娣的母亲贞君和兄长史恭尚在，便用车将皇曾孙送给他们抚养。
English: Heung Gil heard that the great-grandson's grandmother, Shi Liangyao's mother, Zhenjun, and his older brother, Shi Gong, were still alive, so he sent the great-grandson to them by car to be raised.

古文：贞君年老，见孙孤，甚哀之，自养视焉。
现代文：贞君年纪已老，见女儿的孙子如此孤苦无依，极为哀怜，便亲自抚养。
English: When Zhenjun, who was already old, saw that her daughter's grandson was so lonely and helpless, she felt very sorry for him and raised him herself.

古文：后有诏掖庭养视，上属籍宗正。
现代文：后汉武帝下诏，命掖庭抚养皇曾孙，并命宗正为其登记皇族属籍。
English: Later, there was an imperial edict, sending a court official to visit the historian's great-grandson, and ordering Zongzheng to enter him into the royal genealogy.

古文：时掖庭令张贺，尝事戾太子，思顾旧恩，哀曾孙，奉养甚谨，以私钱供给，教书。
现代文：当时，担任掖庭令的张贺曾经是原太子刘据的宾客，感念太子旧恩，哀怜皇曾孙，于是小心奉养，自己出钱供给其日用，教其读书。
English: At that time, Zhang He, who served as the chief of the imperial court, was once a guest of the former prince Liu Zuo. He was moved by the prince's old favor and felt sorry for the great-grandson of the emperor, so he carefully raised him, paid for his daily expenses and taught him to read.

古文：既壮，贺欲以女孙妻之。
现代文：皇曾孙长大后，张贺想把自己的孙女嫁给他。
English: After the great-grandson of the emperor grew up, Zhang He wanted to marry his granddaughter to him.

古文：是时昭帝始冠，长八尺二寸。
现代文：此时汉昭帝刚刚举行完加冠礼，身高八尺二寸。
English: At this time, Emperor Han Zhao had just held his coronation ceremony, and his height was eight feet two inches.

古文：贺弟安世为右将军，辅政，闻贺称誉皇曾孙，欲妻以女，怒曰： 曾孙乃卫太子后也，幸得以庶人衣食县官足矣，勿复言予女事！ 
现代文：张贺的弟弟张安世以右将军的身份辅政，听哥哥称赞皇曾孙，并想把女儿嫁给他，便生气地对哥哥说： 皇曾孙为卫太子的后代，能以一个平民的身份由国家养着，已经是很侥幸的事，不要再提嫁女之事了！ 
English: Zhang He's younger brother, Zhang Anshi, rose to power as a right-wing general. Hearing his elder brother praise the great-grandson of the emperor and want to marry his daughter to him, he angrily said to his brother: The great-grandson of the emperor is a descendant of the crown prince, and being able to be raised by the state as a commoner is already a very lucky thing. Don't mention the matter of marrying a woman!

古文：于是贺止。
现代文：于是张贺作罢。
English: Therefore, Zhang Hejun had to give up.

古文：时暴室啬夫许广汉有女，贺乃置酒请广汉，酒酣，为言： 曾孙体近，下乃关内侯，可妻也。 
现代文：当时，暴室啬夫许广汉也有一个女儿，于是张贺摆下酒席，请许广汉前来赴宴。饮到兴浓时，张贺对许广汉说： 皇曾孙为皇上近亲，将来最不济也是一个关内侯，你可将女儿嫁给她。 
English: At that time, the tyrannical husband Xu Guanghan also had a daughter, so Zhang He set up a banquet and invited Xu Guanghan to come to the banquet. When drinking to Xingnong, Zhang He said to Xu Guanghan: The emperor's great-grandson is the emperor's close relative, and in the future he will be a Guanai Hou. You can marry your daughter to her.

古文：广汉许诺。
现代文：许广汉答应了。
English: Xu Guanghan agreed.

古文：明日，妪闻之，怒。
现代文：第二天，许广汉的妻子听说此事，非常生气。
English: The next day, Ping Jun's mother was very angry when she heard the news.

古文：广汉重令人为介，遂与曾孙。
现代文：但许广汉主意已定，重新请人做媒，将女儿嫁给皇曾孙。
English: However, Xu Guanghan had already made up his mind to invite a new matchmaker to marry his daughter to the emperor's great-grandson.

古文：贺以家财聘之。
现代文：张贺用自己的家财为皇曾孙备办婚事。
English: Zhang He used his own family wealth to arrange a wedding for the great-grandson of the emperor.

古文：曾孙因依倚广汉兄弟及祖母家史氏，受《诗》于东海澓中翁，高材好学；然亦喜游侠，斗鸡走狗，以是俱知闾里奸邪，吏治得失。
现代文：从此，皇曾孙以许广汉兄弟和祖母娘家史家为依靠，又跟随东海人中翁学习《诗经》。皇曾孙聪明好学，但也喜爱游侠之事，斗鸡走狗，所以对下层社会的奸邪丑恶和官吏的好坏得失了解得十分清楚。
English: From then on, the great-grandson of the emperor relied on the Xu Guanghan brothers and the family historian of his grandmother's daughter, and also studied the "Song of Songs" with the East China Sea Zhongweng. The great-grandson of the emperor was clever and eager to learn, but he also liked the things of the ranger, the fighting cock and the dog, so he understood the vices of the lower society and the merits and demerits of the officials very clearly.

古文：数上下诸陵，周遍三辅，尝困于莲勺卤中，尤乐杜、鄠之间，率常在下杜。
现代文：皇曾孙多次周游往来于各皇陵所在，足迹遍及三辅地区，有一次，曾经在莲勺县盐池一带为人所困辱。他特别喜欢杜县、县一带地区，经常住在下杜。
English: The great-grandson of the emperor has traveled to and from the imperial tombs many times, and his footprints are all over the Sanfu area. On one occasion, he was embarrassed by people in the area of Yanchi in Lianzuo County. He especially likes Du County and the area around the county, and often lives in Lower Du.

古文：时会朝请，舍长安尚冠里。
现代文：有时参加朝会，就住在长安尚冠里。
English: Sometimes he attends the imperial court meetings and lives in Chang'an Shangguanli.

古文：及昌邑王废，霍光与张安世诸大臣议所立，未定。
现代文：及至昌邑王刘贺被废黜之后，霍光与张安世及各位大臣商议重新确定皇位继承人，但一时未能决定。
English: After the dethronement of Liu He, King of Changyi, Huo Guang and Zhang Anshi and the ministers discussed the re-determination of the heir to the throne, but could not decide for a while.

古文：丙吉奏记光曰： 将军事孝武皇帝，受襁褓之属，任天下之寄。
现代文：丙吉上书霍光说： 当年将军曾侍奉孝武皇帝崐，孝武皇帝临终前，将襁褓中的孤儿和整个国家都托付给了将军。
English: He Jie wrote to Huo Guang, saying: In those days, the general had served Emperor Xiaowu. Before the Emperor Xiaowu died, he entrusted the orphans and the whole country to the general.

古文：孝昭皇帝早崩亡嗣，海内忧惧，欲亟闻嗣主。
现代文：孝昭皇帝又过早去世，没有留下后嗣，全国上下都非常忧愁恐惧，急切盼望听到新主继位。
English: Emperor Xiao Zhao also died prematurely, leaving no heir, and the whole country was very sad and fearful, eagerly looking forward to hearing the new emperor's succession.

古文：发丧之日，以大谊立后，所立非其人，复以大谊废之；天下莫不服焉。
现代文：给孝昭皇帝发丧的时候，将军以大义为其选立后嗣，后发现所立之人不当，又以大义将其废黜，天下人无不敬服。
English: When Emperor Xiaozhao was in mourning, the general chose an heir for him with great justice. Later, he found that the person he had chosen was not right, and he deposed him with great justice. People all over the world respectfully obeyed him.

古文：方今社稷、宗庙、群生之命在将军之壹举，窃伏听于众庶，察其所言诸侯、宗室在列位者，未有所闻于民间也。
现代文：如今，社稷、宗庙、百姓的命运全部系于将军的一举一动之中。我曾听百姓们议论，了解到民间对现在身为诸侯或居于高位的皇族成员，都没有好评。
English: Today, the fates of shrines, ancestral temples, and the people all depend on the general's every move. I have listened to the people's discussions and learned that the people do not have a good opinion of the members of the imperial family who are now lords or live in high positions.

古文：而遗诏所养武帝曾孙名病已在掖庭、外家者，吉前使居郡邸时，见其幼少；至今十八九矣，通经术，有美材，行安而节和。
现代文：而奉遗诏养育在掖庭及其外曾祖史家的孝武皇帝曾孙刘病已，我以前在郡邸狱时，见他年纪幼小，如今已有十八九岁了，通晓儒家经术，很有才干，举止安详，性格平和。
English: However, Emperor Xiaowu's great-grandson Liu, who was raised in Xingting and his maternal great-grandfather's family according to his last will and testament, has fallen ill. I used to see him when I was in the county residence prison. He was very young, but now he is already eighteen or nineteen years old. He is familiar with Confucianism, very talented, has a calm demeanor, and a peaceful personality.

古文：愿将军详大义，参以蓍龟岂宜，褒显先使入侍，令天下昭然知之，然后决定大策，天下幸甚！ 
现代文：希望将军对刘病已的主要方面详加考察，再参考占卜的结果，看让他承继帝位是否合适。可先让他入宫侍奉太后，以显示对他的褒扬，使天下人都知道他，然后再决定大计。若能如此，天下人就太幸运了。 
English: It is hoped that the general will examine the main aspects of Liu's illness in detail, and then refer to the results of the divination to see if it is appropriate for him to succeed to the throne. He can first let him enter the palace to serve the empress dowager to show his praise, so that the world knows him, and then decide on the overall plan. If so, the world will be too lucky.

古文：杜延年亦知曾孙德美，劝光、安世立焉。
现代文：杜延年也知道皇曾孙刘病已品德美好，劝霍光、张安世立他为皇位继承人。
English: Du Yannian also knew that the Emperor's great-grandson Liu Yi had a good moral character, and advised Huo Guang and Zhang Anshi to make him the heir to the throne.

古文：秋，七月，光坐庭中，会丞相以下议定所立，遂复与丞相敞等上奏曰： 孝武皇帝曾孙病已，年十八，师受《诗》、《论语》、《孝经》，躬行节俭，慈仁爱人，可以嗣孝昭皇帝后，奉承祖宗庙，子万姓。
现代文：秋季，七月，霍光坐在庭中，召集丞相及以下大臣共同议定皇位继承人。于是，霍光再次会同丞相杨敞等上奏皇太后说： 孝武皇帝曾孙刘病已，年十八岁，从师学习《诗经》、《论语》、《孝经》，行为节俭，仁慈爱人，可以作为孝昭皇帝的继承人，侍奉宗庙，治理天下百姓。
English: In the autumn, in July, Huo Guang sat in the courtyard and convened the prime minister and the following ministers to jointly agree on the heir to the imperial throne. Therefore, Huo Guang once again joined the prime minister Yang Zhan to listen to the empress dowager and said: Emperor Xiaowu's great-grandson Liu Yan is already eighteen years old, studying "The Book of Songs," "The Analects" and "The Book of Filial Piety" from the teacher, behaving frugally, benevolent and loving, and can be the heir of Emperor Xiaozhao, serving the ancestral temple and governing the people of the world.

古文：臣昧死以闻！ 
现代文：我等冒死奏明太后！ 
English: We'll risk our lives to summon the Empress!

古文：皇太后诏曰： 可。 
现代文：皇太后下诏： 可以。 
English: The Empress Dowager issued an edict saying, "Let it be played."

古文：光遣宗正德至曾孙家尚冠里，洗沐，赐御衣；太仆以軨猎车迎曾孙，就斋宗正府。
现代文：霍光派宗正刘德来到尚冠里刘病已家中，侍奉其洗浴，更换太后所赐御衣，由太仆用轻便车辆将刘病已迎接到宗正府进行斋戒。
English: Huoguang sent Zongzheng Liu De to Shangguanli, the home of Liu Bei, to serve him a bath, to replace the imperial robe given by the empress dowager, and to welcome Liu Bei to Zongzheng with a light vehicle by the eunuch for fasting.

古文：庚申，入未央宫，见皇太后，封为阳武侯。
现代文：庚申，刘病已进入未央宫，见皇太后，被封为阳武侯。
English: According to Goshun, Liu Zi had entered the Weiyang Palace, seen the empress dowager, and was given the title of Yangwuhou.

古文：已而群臣奏上玺绶，即皇帝位，谒高庙；尊皇太后为太皇太后。
现代文：随即，由群臣奉上皇帝玉玺、绶带，刘病已正式即皇帝位，拜谒汉高祖祭庙，尊皇太后为太皇太后。
English: Immediately afterwards, the emperor's jade bracelet and umbilical cord were presented by the courtiers. Liu Bei was officially crowned emperor, the Han Emperor Gao Zui Temple was paid homage to, and the empress dowager was named the great empress dowager.

古文：侍御史严延年劾奏 大将军光擅废立主，无人臣礼，不道。 
现代文：侍御史严延年上奏参劾大将军霍光： 擅自废立君上，不守人臣之礼，大逆不道！ 
English: The attendant history is strictly extended to the report of the impeachment of the general Ho Guang: arbitrarily abolishing the emperor, not keeping the courtesy of the vassal, and being a traitor!

古文：奏虽寝，然朝廷肃然敬惮之。
现代文：此奏章虽然没有结果，但朝廷群臣都对严延年的勇气肃然敬畏。
English: Although there was no result of this movement, the courtiers of the imperial court were awestruck by Yan Yan's courage.

古文：八月，己巳，安平敬侯杨敞薨。九月，大赦天下。
现代文：八月己巳，安平侯杨敞去世。九月，大赦天下。
English: In August, Anping Hou Yangchan passed away, and in September, he was pardoned.

古文：戊寅，蔡义为丞相。
现代文：戊寅，蔡以被任为丞相。
English: Wu Yin, Cai Yi was appointed as chancellor.

古文：初，许广汉女适皇曾孙，一岁，生子奭。
现代文：当初，许广汉的女儿嫁给皇曾孙刘病已，一年后生下一子，名叫刘。
English: At the beginning, Xu Guanghan's daughter married the emperor's great-grandson Liu Bei, and a year later gave birth to a son, named Liu.

古文：数月，曾孙立为帝，许氏为婕妤。
现代文：数月之后，刘病已即皇帝位，封许氏为。
English: A few months later, Liu Yan had already ascended to the throne, and Emperor Xu was enthroned.

古文：是时霍将军有小女与皇太后亲，公卿议更立皇后，皆心拟霍将军女，亦未有言。
现代文：此时，霍光有一小女儿，与皇太后有亲属关系，所以公卿大臣商议立皇后，心中都认为应立霍光的女儿，但也没有明说。
English: At this time, Huo Guang had a little daughter who was related to the empress dowager, so the ministers of the nobility discussed the appointment of the empress. In their hearts, they all thought that it should be Huo Guang's daughter, but they did not explicitly say so.

古文：上乃诏求微时故剑。大臣知指，白立许婕妤为皇后。
现代文：汉宣帝下诏寻找微贱时用的宝剑，大臣们懂得皇上的心意，便奏请立许为皇后。
English: Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict to look for a sword to use when he was weak. The ministers understood the emperor's intentions and asked permission to make her empress.

古文：十一月，壬子，立皇后许氏。
现代文：十一月壬子，许氏被立为皇后。
English: In November of the same year, Xu was crowned empress.

古文：霍光以后父广汉刑人，不宜君国；岁馀，乃封为昌成君。
现代文：霍光认为其父亲许广汉是受过刑的人，不宜做封国的国君。一年多以后，才封许广汉为昌成君。
English: Huo Guang believed that his father Xu Guanghan was a person who had been punished and was not suitable to be the sovereign of the country. More than a year later, Xu Guanghan was crowned as the sovereign of Changcheng.

古文：太皇太后归长乐宫。
现代文：太皇太后回到长乐宫居住。
English: The Empress Dowager returned to live in Changle Palace.

古文：长乐宫初置屯卫。
现代文：长乐宫开始驻兵守卫。
English: Changle Palace began to be guarded by soldiers.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝上之上
现代文：中宗孝宣皇帝上之上
English: Emperor Zhongzong Xiaoxuan

古文：孝昭皇帝下本始元年
现代文：汉宣帝本始元年
English: The first year of Emperor Han Xuan's reign

古文：春，诏有司论定策安宗庙功。
现代文：春季，汉宣帝诏令有关部门议定对安定宗庙有功人员的褒奖。
English: In the spring, Emperor Han Xuan decreed that the relevant departments agreed to reward the meritorious personnel of the Stable Temple.

古文：大将军光益封万七千户，与故所食凡二万户。
现代文：大将军崐霍光增加食邑一万七千户，加上以前的，共享有二万户的赋税。
English: General Zou Houguang increased the number of food villages by 17,000 households, and the tax was shared by 20,000 households.

古文：车骑将军富平侯安世以下益封者十人，封侯者五人，赐爵关内侯者八人。
现代文：车骑将军富平侯张安世以下，增加封邑户数的共十人，封为列侯的共五人，赐关内侯爵位的共八人。
English: Below the cavalry general Fuping marquis Zhang Anshi, a total of ten people increased the number of fief households, a total of five people were knighted, and a total of eight people were given the marquisate of Guanai.

古文：大将军光稽首归政，上谦让不受；诸事皆先关白光，然后奏御。
现代文：大将军霍光在朝堂上以头触地，郑重请求归政于皇上，汉宣帝谦让，不肯接受。朝中各项事务都先向霍光报告，然后上奏。
English: General Huo Guang stood with his head touching the ground in the imperial hall and solemnly requested to be transferred to the emperor. Emperor Han Xuan humbly conceded, but refused to accept. All matters between the DPRK and China were first reported to Huo Guang, and then reported.

古文：自昭帝时，光子禹及兄孙云皆为中郎将，云弟山奉车都尉、侍中、领胡、越兵，光两女婿为东、西宫卫尉，昆弟、诸婿、外孙皆奉朝请，为诸曹、大夫、骑都尉、给事中，党亲连体，根据于朝廷。
现代文：汉昭帝时，霍光的儿子霍禹和霍光兄长的孙子霍云都被任命为中郎将，霍云的弟弟霍山被任命为奉车都尉、侍中，统率由胡人、越人组成的军队，霍光的两个女婿分别担任东宫、西宫卫尉；霍光的兄弟、女婿、外孙全都参加朝会，担任诸曹、大夫、骑都尉、给事中等职。霍氏一家的亲戚骨肉结成一体，在朝廷盘根错节。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zhao, Huo Guang's son Huo Yu and Huo Guang's elder brother's grandson Huo Yun were both appointed as middle-ranking generals. Huo Guang's younger brother Huo Shan was appointed as a lieutenant of the imperial chariot and a chamberlain, leading an army composed of Hu people and Yue people. Huo Guang's two sons-in-law served as East Palace and West Palace guards respectively. Huo Guang's brother, son-in-law, and grandson all participated in the imperial court, serving as Zhu Cao, doctor, cavalry captain, and other positions. The relatives of the Huo family are united

古文：及昌邑王废，光权益重，每朝见，上虚己敛容，礼下之已甚。
现代文：昌邑王被废黜以后，霍光的权势越发加重，每次朝见，汉宣帝总是以谦虚恭敬的态度对待他，甚至有些礼遇过分。
English: After the dethronement of King Changyi, the power of Huo Guang became more and more important. Every time he met the emperor, Emperor Han Xuan always treated him with modesty and respect, and even treated him with some excessive courtesy.

古文：夏，四月，庚午，地震。
现代文：夏季，四月庚午，发生地震。
English: In the summer, in the late afternoon of April, an earthquake occurred.

古文：五月，凤皇集胶东、千乘。
现代文：五月，发现有凤凰聚集于胶东、千乘。
English: In May, the phoenixes gathered in Jiaodong and Senjiao.

古文：赦天下，勿收田租赋。
现代文：汉宣帝下诏大赦天下，免收田赋。
English: Emperor Han Xuan issued a decree to grant amnesty to the whole country, exempting Tianfu.

古文：六月，诏曰： 故皇太子在湖，未有号谥，岁时祠；其议谥，置园邑。 
现代文：六月，汉宣帝下诏说： 故皇太子葬在湖县，没有谥号，不能享受每年四季的祭祀。
English: In June, Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict saying, "The late crown prince was buried in Huxian County, and since he did not have a posthumous name, he could not enjoy the annual four-season ritual.

古文：有司奏请： 礼，为人后者，为之子也；故降其父母，不得祭，尊祖之义也。
现代文：应当为故皇太子议定谥号，建立陵园。 后有关官员奏请说： 按礼仪规定，做了某人的继承人，就成了这个人的儿子，所以不能再祭祀自己的亲生父母，这是尊敬祖先的大义。
English: It was agreed that a posthumous name should be chosen for the late crown prince and that a cemetery should be built, after which the relevant officials submitted a petition saying: According to the rules of etiquette, when you become someone's heir, you become that person's son, so you can no longer sacrifice your own parents. This is the great justice of respecting ancestors.

古文：陛下为孝昭帝后，承祖宗之祀，愚以为亲谥宜曰悼，母曰悼后；故皇太子谥曰戾，史良娣曰戾夫人。 
现代文：陛下作为孝昭皇帝的继承人，接续祖宗的香火，我认为陛下的亲生父亲应定谥号为 悼 ，亲生母亲称为 悼后 ；故皇太子定谥号为 戾 ，史良娣称为 戾夫人 。 
English: Your Majesty, as the heir of Emperor Xiaozhao and the successor of the ancestor's incense, I think that Your Majesty's biological father should set the surname as "Mourning," and the biological mother as "Mourning"; therefore, the crown prince set the surname as "," and Shi Liangyi was called "Mrs. Zou."

古文：皆改葬焉。
现代文：全部重新择地安葬。
English: All the mausoleums have been rebuilt and reburied.

古文：秋，七月，诏立燕刺王太子建为广阳王；立广陵王胥少子弘为高密王。
现代文：秋季，七月，汉宣帝下诏立燕剌王刘旦的太子刘建为广阳王，广陵王刘胥的小儿子刘弘为高密王。
English: In the autumn, in July, Liu Jian, the prince of Liu Dan, the king of Yan Xuan, was made the king of Guangyang, and Liu Hong, the youngest son of the king of Guangling, was made the king of Gaomi.

古文：初，上官桀与霍光争权，光既诛桀，遂遵武帝法度，以刑罚痛绳群下，由是俗吏皆尚严酷以为能；而河南太守丞淮阳黄霸独用宽和为名。
现代文：当初，上官桀与霍光争权，霍光诛杀上官桀之后，便遵从汉武帝时的制度，以严刑峻法控制部下官员。从此，很多世俗官吏都以用法严苛来表现自己的才能，而河南太守丞淮阳人黄霸却以为政宽和著称于世。
English: At first, Shangguan Xuan and Huo Guang fought for power, and after Huo Guangxuan killed Shangguan Xuan, he followed the system of Emperor Hanwu to control his subordinate officials with severe punishment. Since then, many secular officials have shown their talents by using harsh methods, but Huang Ba, the governor of Henan Province and a native of Huaiyang, is famous in the world as a politician.

古文：上在民间时，知百姓苦吏急也，闻霸持法平，乃召以为廷尉正；数决疑狱，庭中称平。
现代文：汉宣帝在民间时，了解百姓都为官吏的执法峻急而困苦，听说黄霸执法平和，便将其召到长安，任命为廷尉正，多次裁决疑案，朝廷群臣都认为他公平。
English: When Emperor Han Xuan was among the common people, he understood that the common people were distressed by the urgency of the officials' enforcement of the law. When he heard that Huangba's enforcement of the law was peaceful, he summoned him to Chang'an and appointed him as the imperial lieutenant. He adjudicated doubtful cases many times, and the courtiers of the imperial court all thought he was fair.

古文：孝昭皇帝下本始二年
现代文：本始二年
English: The first two years

古文：春，大司农田延年有罪自杀。
现代文：春季，大司农田延年因罪自杀。
English: In the spring, the superintendent of the farm, Ennen, committed suicide.

古文：昭帝之丧，大司农僦民车，延年诈增僦直，盗取钱三千万，为怨家所告。
现代文：为汉昭帝发丧时，大司农雇用民间车崐辆，田延年假称雇车费用增加，贪污了三千万钱，被与他有仇怨的人告发。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Zhao's funeral, Daisho Nong hired a private car. Tian Ennian falsely claimed that the cost of hiring a car had increased, and embezzled 30 million yuan. He was denounced by people who had a grudge against him.

古文：霍将军召问延年，欲为道地。
现代文：霍光召田延年来询间，本打算为他开脱。
English: Huo Guang called Yan Tian in for an interview, intending to exonerate him.

古文：延年抵曰： 无有是事！ 
现代文：可是田延年拒不承认，说： 没有此事！ 
English: But Tian Ennian refused to admit it, saying: There is no such thing!

古文：光曰： 即无事，当穷竟！ 
现代文：霍光说： 如果真的没有此事，就应当深入追究！ 
English: Huo Guang said: If there really is no such thing, it should be thoroughly investigated!

古文：御史大夫田广明谓太仆杜延年曰： 《春秋》之义，以功覆过。
现代文：御史大夫田广明对太仆杜延年说： 按照《春秋》大义，可以用功劳掩盖过失。
English: The chief historian Tian Guangming said to the eunuch Du Yannian: According to the "Spring and Autumn" maxim, you can use merit to cover up faults.

古文：当废昌邑王时，非田子宾之言，大事不成。
现代文：当初在废黜昌邑王时，若不是田延年站出来，则大事不能成功。
English: At the time of the dethronement of King Changyi, if Tian Ennian had not stood up, the great event would not have been successful.

古文：今县官出三千万自乞之，何哉？
现代文：如今就当作是他自己向朝廷乞求赐给他三千万钱，怎样呢？
English: Now suppose that he himself begs the court to give him thirty million dollars. What then?

古文：愿以愚言白大将军。 
现代文：希望将我这番话禀告大将军。 
English: I am willing to use my stupid words to persuade the general.

古文：延年言之大将军，大将军曰： 诚然，实勇士也！
现代文：杜延年把田广明的话告诉了大将军霍光，霍光说： 确实如此，田延年真是勇士。
English: Du Yanling reported these words to the general, and the general said: Of course, Du Yanling is indeed a warrior!

古文：当发大议时，震动朝廷， 光因举手自抚心曰： 使我至今病悸。
现代文：当初在决定大事时，多亏田延年挺身而出，震动朝廷。 霍光于是抬手按在自己的心口上，继续说： 当时的情景，使我至今还心有余悸。
English: At the beginning, when major events were being decided, it was thanks to Tian Ennen that he stood up and shook the imperial court. Therefore, Ho Guang put his hand on his heart and continued, "The situation at that time still haunts me to this day.

古文：谢田大夫晓大司农，通往就狱，得公议之。 
现代文：请你代我向田大夫道歉，让他明白告诉大司农田延年，到监狱去，会得到公平的裁决。 
English: He thanked Dr. Tian for defending him, but according to the imperial court's reasoning, Tian Yannian should live in prison, and the public should judge him.

古文：田大夫使人语延年。延年曰： 幸县官宽我耳，何面目入牢狱，使众人指笑我，卒徒唾吾背乎？ 
现代文：田广明派人通知田延年，田延年说道： 就算朝廷幸而宽恕我，我又有何面目进入牢狱，让众人对我指点、讥笑，让狱卒囚犯在我背后唾骂呢！ 
English: Tian Guangming sent a person to inform Tian Yannian, and Tian Yannian said: Even if the court is fortunate enough to forgive me, what kind of face will I have when I go to prison, let everyone point and laugh at me, and let the prison guards and prisoners swear behind my back!

古文：即闭阁独居斋舍，偏袒，持刀东西步。
现代文：于是一个人住在大司农官衙旁边的屋子里，紧闭房门，袒露一臂，拿着刀在屋中徘徊。
English: As a result, a man lived in the house next to Daishi Nongguanlu, closed the door tightly, bared one arm, and wandered around the house with a knife.

古文：数日，使者召延年诣廷尉。
现代文：几天后，朝廷使者前来召田延年去廷尉。
English: A few days later, an emissary came to summon Tian Yan to the court lieutenant's office to hear the case.

古文：闻鼓声，自刎死。
现代文：田延年听到开读诏书的鼓声，便自刎而死。
English: Tian Yannian heard the drumbeat of the imperial edict being read and hanged himself to death.

古文：夏，五月，诏曰： 孝武皇帝躬仁谊，励威武，功德茂盛，而庙乐未称，联甚悼焉。
现代文：夏季，五月，汉宣帝颁布诏书说： 孝武皇帝行仁义，振威武，功德极盛，但祭祀时所用的音乐却与此不相称，朕感到非常难过。
English: In the summer, in May, Emperor Xuan of Han issued an edict, saying: "Emperor Xiaowu is benevolent and mighty, and his merits are abundant, but the music used during the ritual is not commensurate with this. I feel very sad.

古文：其与列侯、二千石、博士议。 
现代文：有关官员应与列侯、二千石、博士共同议定。 
English: Therefore, I brought this matter up and discussed it with the lords, the two thousand koku, and the doctors.

古文：于是群臣大议庭中，皆曰： 宜如诏书。 
现代文：于是群臣齐集朝廷讨论此事，都说： 应按诏书的意思去做。 
English: As a result, the courtiers gathered in the imperial court to discuss the matter, and all said: It should be done according to the meaning of the imperial edict.

古文：长信少府夏侯胜独曰： 武帝虽有攘四夷、广土境之功，然多杀士众，竭民财力，奢泰无度，天下虚耗，百姓流离，物故者半，蝗虫大起，赤地数千里，或人民相食，畜积至今未复；无德泽于民，不宜为立庙乐。 
现代文：唯独长信少府夏侯胜说道： 孝武皇帝虽然有征服四夷、开疆拓土的功绩，但使得将士们大量死亡，人民财力枯竭，奢侈无度，天下虚耗，百姓流离失所，死亡过半，再加上蝗灾大起，数千里不见草木庄稼，以致民间竟出现杀人食用的惨景，积弊至今尚未消除。武帝并无恩泽于百姓，不应为其设立祭祀之乐。 
English: However, Changxin Shaufu Xia Hou Sheng said: Although Emperor Xiaowu had the achievements of conquering the Shiyi and opening up the country, he caused a large number of soldiers to die, exhausted the people's financial resources, indulged in extravagance, wasted the country, displaced the people, and more than half of them died. In addition, the locust plague broke out, and thousands of miles of grass and crops were not seen. As a result, the people suffered from the misery of killing and eating. The accumulated defects have not been eliminated to this day. Emperor Wu did not show any favor to the people, and it was not appropriate to set up a sacrificial music for them.

古文：公卿共难胜曰： 此诏书也。 胜曰： 诏书不可用也。
现代文：公卿大臣们一齐责备他说： 这是皇上的诏命。 夏侯胜说： 虽然是诏命，也不能依从。
English: The court nobles and ministers all together reproached him, saying, "This is the emperor's edict." Xia Hossheng said, "Although it is an edict, it cannot be obeyed."

古文：人臣之谊，宜直言正论，非苟阿意顺指。
现代文：人臣的大义，应当坚持原则，直言无隐，不能苟且阿谀皇上的意思。
English: As a vassal, you should speak the truth, not bend to the will of others.

古文：议已出口，虽死不悔！ 
现代文：我说出自己的观点，即便死也不会后悔！ 
English: I will express my opinion, even if I die, I will not regret it!

古文：于是丞相、御史劾奏胜非议诏书，毁先帝，不道；及丞相长史黄霸阿纵胜，不举劾；俱下狱。
现代文：因此，丞相、御史等上奏汉宣帝，弹劾夏侯胜非议诏书，诋毁先帝，大逆不道，以及丞相长史黄霸附合纵容夏侯胜，不肯举劾，于是将二人一并逮捕下狱。
English: Therefore, the prime minister and the minister of history appealed to Emperor Han Xuan, impeached Xia Hou Shengfei with an imperial edict, slandered the former emperor, and committed high treason, and the prime minister Shi Huang Bao connived and connived at Xia Hou Sheng, and refused to impeach, so they were both arrested and imprisoned.

古文：有司遂请尊孝武帝庙为世宗庙，奏《盛德》、《文始五行》之舞。
现代文：于是由主管官员出面，奏请尊孝武帝庙为世宗庙，定《盛德舞》、《文始五行之舞》为祭祀用乐。
English: As a result, the officials in charge came forward and requested that the Temple of Reverence and Filial Piety be played as the world's ancestral temple, and that "Shengde Dance" and "Dance of the Five Elements at the Beginning of the Text" be used as sacrificial music.

古文：武帝巡狩所幸郡国皆立庙，如高祖、太宗焉。
现代文：凡武帝生前出巡到过的郡、国一律建庙祭祀，与高祖皇帝、太宗皇帝一样。
English: All counties and provinces visited by Emperor Wu during his lifetime were required to build temples and hold religious services, just like Emperor Gaozu and Emperor Taizong.

古文：夏侯胜、黄霸既久系，霸欲从胜受《尚书》，胜辞以罪死。
现代文：夏侯胜、黄霸长期被关在狱中，黄霸想跟夏侯胜学习《尚书》，夏侯胜认为已经犯下死罪，学也没用，所以推辞不愿讲授。
English: Xia Hou Sheng and Huang Ba have been in prison for a long time. Huang Ba wants to study "Shang Shu" with Xia Hou Sheng. Xia Hou Sheng believes that he has committed a capital crime and learning is useless, so he refuses to teach.

古文：霸曰： 朝闻道，夕死可矣。 
现代文：黄霸说： 早晨明白了真理，即使晚上就死也无遗憾。 
English: Huangba said: I understood the truth in the morning, even if I die at night, I have no regrets.

古文：胜贤其言，遂授之。
现代文：夏侯胜赞赏他的话，便给他讲授《尚书》。
English: Xia Hou Sheng thought that he spoke very well, so he taught him to study the sutra.

古文：系再更冬，讲论不怠。
现代文：在狱中经历了两个冬天，一直不倦地讲论。
English: So another winter passed, and the discourse remained the same.

古文：初，乌孙公主死，汉复以楚王戊之孙解忧为公主，妻岑娶。
现代文：当初，嫁到乌孙的汉朝公主去世后，汉朝又封楚王刘戊的孙女刘解忧为公主，嫁给乌孙王。
English: At first, after the death of the Han Dynasty princess who married U Sun, the Han Dynasty also crowned Liu Gezhen, the granddaughter of King Chu Liu E, as a princess to marry King U Sun.

古文：岑娶胡妇子泥靡尚小，岑娶且死，以国与季父大禄子翁归靡，曰： 泥靡大，以国归之。 
现代文：乌孙王的胡人妻子所生儿子泥靡年纪还小，乌孙王临死前，将国家交给叔父大禄的儿子翁归靡，嘱咐说： 等泥靡长大成人后，你要把国家还给他。 
English: The son of King Uthman's wife, Mumtaz, was still young. Before his death, King Uthman gave the kingdom to his uncle's son, Weng Quimai. He said, "When Mumtaz grows up, you must give the kingdom back to him."

古文：翁归靡既立，号肥王，复尚楚主，生三男、两女。
现代文：翁归靡即乌孙王位之后，号称肥王，又娶汉公主刘解忧为妻，并生下三儿二女。
English: After Weng Guimai ascended to the throne of Wusun, he was known as the Fat King. He married the Han princess Liu Gezang and had three sons and two daughters.

古文：长男曰元贵靡，次曰万年，次曰大乐。
现代文：长子名叫元贵靡，次子名叫万年，三子名叫大乐。
English: The eldest son was named Yuan Guimai, the second son was named Wan Nian, and the third son was named Dare.

古文：昭帝时，公主上书言： 匈奴与车师共侵乌孙，唯天子幸救之。 
现代文：汉昭帝时，公主曾上书说： 匈奴与车师国联合进犯乌孙，盼天子救援！ 
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zhao, the princess once wrote: "The Xiongnu and the Chariot State have jointly attacked the Wusun, hoping for God's rescue!"

古文：汉养士马，议击匈奴。
现代文：于是汉朝秣马厉兵，打算进攻匈奴。
English: As a result, the Han Dynasty planned to attack the Xiongnu.

古文：会昭帝崩，上遣光禄大夫常惠使乌孙。
现代文：适逢汉昭帝去世，汉宣帝派光禄大夫常惠出使乌孙。
English: With the death of Emperor Han Zhao, Emperor Han Xuan sent Dr. Guanglu Changhui to dispatch the Emperor's grandson.

古文：乌孙公主及昆弥皆遣使上书，言： 匈奴复连发大兵，侵击乌孙。使使谓乌孙 趣持公主来！ 
现代文：汉公主及乌孙王都派遣使臣，上书汉朝说： 匈奴又接连派出大军袭击乌孙，还派使臣来对乌孙说： 速将汉朝公主交来！ 
English: Princess Han and King Wusun both sent envoys to write to the Han Dynasty, saying, "The Huns have successively sent a large army to attack Wusun. They also sent envoys to say to Wusun, 'Quickly hand over the Han Dynasty princess!

古文：欲隔绝汉。
现代文：企图断绝乌孙与汉朝的联系。
English: An attempt was made to sever the connection between U Sun and the Han Dynasty.

古文：昆弥愿发国精兵五万骑，尽力击匈奴。唯天子出兵以救公主、昆弥！ 
现代文：乌孙王愿意派出国内精锐骑兵五万，全力抗击匈奴，请求天子派兵来救公主和乌孙王。 
English: Emperor Wusong was willing to send 50,000 elite cavalry to fight the Xiongnu, and asked God to send soldiers to rescue the princess and Emperor Wusong.

古文：先是匈奴数侵汉边，汉亦欲讨之。
现代文：在此之前，匈奴曾几次侵扰汉朝边塞，汉朝也正想出兵征讨。
English: Prior to this, the Xiongnu had invaded the Han Dynasty's border fortresses several times, and the Han Dynasty was also thinking of sending out troops to fight.

古文：秋，大发兵，遣御史大夫田广明为祁连将军，四万馀骑，出西河；度辽将军范明友三万馀骑，出张掖；前将军韩增三万馀骑，出云中；后将军赵充国为蒲类将军，三万馀骑，出酒泉；云中太守田顺为虎牙将军，三万馀骑，出五原；期以出塞各二千馀里。
现代文：秋季，汉朝派遣重兵，以御史大夫田广明为祁连将军，率骑兵四万余人，从西河出塞；度辽将军范明友率骑兵三万余人，从张掖出塞；前将军韩增率骑兵三万余人，从云中出塞；后将军赵充国为蒲类将军，率骑兵三万余人，从酒泉出塞；云中太守田顺为虎牙将军，率骑兵三万余人，从五原出塞。约定诸路大军各出塞二千余里。
English: In the autumn, the Han Dynasty dispatched heavy troops, with the Imperial Historian Tian Guangming as Qilian General, leading more than forty thousand cavalrymen, from the West River; Du Liao General Fan Mingyou leading more than thirty thousand cavalrymen, from Zhangye; former General Han Zeng with more than thirty thousand cavalrymen, from Yunchu; later General Zhao Chongguo as Putuo General, leading more than thirty thousand cavalrymen, from Jiuquan; Yunchu Taishun as Tiger Teeth General, leading more than thirty thousand cavalrymen, from Wuhuan. It was agreed that the armies of all roads would each march more than two thousand miles.

古文：以常惠为校尉，持节护乌孙兵共击匈奴。
现代文：又派常惠为校尉，携带皇帝符节督乌孙军队共击匈奴。
English: He also sent Chang Hui as a lieutenant to lead the Emperor's army to attack the Xiongnu.

古文：孝昭皇帝下本始三年
现代文：本始三年
English: The first three years

古文：春，正月，癸亥，恭哀许皇后崩。
现代文：春季，正月癸亥，恭哀许皇后去世。
English: In spring, at the time of the Chinese New Year, the Queen passed away.

古文：时霍光夫人显欲贵其小女成君，道无从。
现代文：当时，霍光的夫人叫作显，想要让她的小女儿霍成君成为皇后，却无机会。
English: At that time, Huo Guang's wife, named Zuoxian, wanted to make her little daughter, Huo Chengjun, the empress, but she had no chance.

古文：会许后当娠，病，女医淳于衍者，霍氏所爱，尝入宫侍皇后疾。
现代文：正巧许皇后怀孕，身体不适，有一位平时与霍家关系密的女医生名叫淳于衍，曾入宫侍奉许皇后之病。
English: It so happened that Empress Xu was pregnant and feeling unwell. A female doctor named Jun Yuyan, who was usually close to the Huo family, came to the palace to treat Empress Xu's illness.

古文：衍夫赏为掖庭户卫，谓衍： 可过辞霍夫人，行为我求安池监。 
现代文：淳于衍的丈夫叫作赏，担任掖庭户卫，对淳于衍说道： 你可先去拜访霍夫人，向她辞行，乘机为我请求安池监一职。 
English: Chun Yuyan's husband, known as Zouguang, served as the gatekeeper of the court, and said to Chun Yuyan: You can first visit Mrs. Huo, resign from her, and take the opportunity to request the post of Anchi supervisor for me.

古文：衍如言报显，显因生心，辟左右，谓衍曰： 少夫幸报我以事，我亦欲报少夫，可乎？ 
现代文：淳于衍果然按照丈夫的话去向霍夫人请求。霍夫人于是心生一计，便屏退左右，称呼着淳于衍的表字说： 少夫有事托我，我也有事想拜托少夫，可以吗？ 
English: Chun Yu Yan did indeed follow her husband's words and went to ask Mrs. Huo. Mrs. Huo then made up her mind to do something, so she retreated around the screen, addressed Chun Yu Yan's watchword and said: Shao Fu has something to ask me, I also have something to ask Shao Fu, is that okay?

古文：衍曰： 夫人所言，何等不可者！ 
现代文：淳于衍说： 夫人吩咐，有什么事不可以呢！ 
English: Jun Yuyan said, "What your wife said is unacceptable!

古文：显曰： 将军素爱小女成君，欲奇贵之，愿以累少夫。 
现代文：霍夫人说： 霍将军一向最爱小女儿成君，希望她成为最尊贵的人，我想把此事托少夫成全。 
English: Huo Xian said, "The general has always loved his little daughter, Cheng Jun, and hoped that she would become a dignitary. He wanted to trouble the young man."

古文：衍曰： 何谓邪？ 
现代文：淳于衍说： 此话怎么讲？ 
English: Jun Yuyan said: What does this mean?

古文：显曰： 妇人免乳，大故，十死一生。
现代文：霍夫人说： 女人生孩子是一件大事，九死一生。
English: Mrs. Huo said, "It is a big event for a woman to give birth to a child.

古文：今皇后当免身，可因投毒药去也，成君即为皇后矣。
现代文：如今皇后即将临盆，可以乘机下毒药将她除去，成君就成为皇后了。
English: Now that the empress is about to die, the poison can be used to remove her, and Chengjun will become the empress.

古文：如蒙力，事成，富贵与少夫共之。 
现代文：如蒙大力相助，事成之后，当与少夫共享富贵。 
English: If you receive strong assistance, after success, you should share your wealth with your younger brother.

古文：衍曰： 药杂治，当先尝，安可？ 
现代文：淳于衍说： 皇后吃的药，都是各位医生一起决定的，还要命人事先尝过，怎么行呢？ 
English: Jun Yuyan said, "The medicine that the empress takes is decided by all the doctors together. Even if someone is ordered to taste it in advance, how can it be done?

古文：显曰： 在少夫为之耳。
现代文：霍夫人说： 这就在少夫所为了。
English: Mrs. Huo said: This is what Shao Fu wanted.

古文：将军领天下，谁敢言者！
现代文：霍将军统领天下，谁敢说话！
English: General Huo leads the world, who dares to speak out!

古文：缓急相护，但恐少夫无意耳。 
现代文：即使有什么急事，也有霍将军相护，只怕少夫不愿帮忙罢了。 
English: Even if there is something urgent, there is General Huo to protect him, but I'm afraid Shao Fu is not willing to help.

古文：衍良久曰： 愿尽力！ 
现代文：淳于衍沉吟了很久，说： 愿意尽力效劳！ 
English: Jun Yuyan chanted for a long time and said, "I'm willing to do my best!"

古文：即捣附子，赍入长定宫。
现代文：于是淳于衍将毒药附子捣碎，带入长定宫。
English: She pounded the aconite into a powder and brought it to Nagatingu.

古文：皇后免身后，衍取附子并合太医大丸以饮皇后，有顷，曰： 我头岑岑也，药中得无有毒？ 
现代文：皇后生产后，淳于衍取出附子，掺到御医为皇后开的丸药之中，让皇后服下。过了一会儿，皇后说： 我感到头昏发闷，药里莫非有毒药？ 
English: After the queen gave birth, Junyuan took out the aconite and mixed it into the pills prescribed by the doctor for the queen. After a while, the queen said, "I feel dizzy and stuffy. Is there poison in the medicine?"

古文：对曰： 无有。 
现代文：淳于衍说： 没有。 
English: Jun Yuyan replied, "No."

古文：遂加烦懑，崩。
现代文：皇后更加烦闷难受，终于死去。
English: The Empress became even more depressed and anxious, and finally died.

古文：衍出，过见显，相劳问，亦未敢重谢衍。
现代文：淳于衍出宫来见霍夫人，互相道贺慰问，但霍夫人也不敢马上重谢淳于衍。
English: Chun Yuyan left the palace to visit Hou Hsien. Hou Hsien consoled her, but did not dare to thank her.

古文：后人有上书告诸医侍疾无状者，皆收系诏狱，劾不道。
现代文：后有人上书朝廷，控告各御医对皇后没有尽心侍奉、诊治，汉宣帝命将所有为皇后诊治的御医，一律以大逆不道罪逮捕，囚禁到诏狱。
English: Later, someone sent a letter to the imperial court, complaining that the imperial physicians had not served and treated the empress diligently. Emperor Han Xuan ordered that all imperial physicians who had treated the empress should be arrested for high treason and imprisoned in the imperial prison.

古文：显恐急，即以状具语光，因曰： 既失计为之，无令吏急衍！ 
现代文：霍夫人大为惊恐，便将此事的来龙去脉全部告诉霍光，并说： 既然作出如此失策之事，只能让审案官员不要逼迫淳于衍！ 
English: Fok Hsien was afraid that the matter would be exposed, so he told Hok Kwong the whole story in its original form, and said: Since you have done this thing wrong, you should try not to let the officials force you to ask questions.

古文：光大惊，欲自发举，不忍，犹与。
现代文：霍光大惊，想自己举发此事，可又于心不忍，犹豫不决。
English: Huo Guang was taken aback. He wanted to report the matter in person but couldn't bear it. He was hesitating.

古文：会奏上，光署衍勿论。显因劝光内其女入宫。
现代文：正好主管部门向朝廷奏报有关皇后病逝一崐案的处理意见，霍光便在奏章上批示，此事与淳于衍无关，应免于追究。霍光夫人乘机劝霍光将女儿送入皇宫。
English: Just as the competent department reported to the imperial court the handling opinions of the case of the empress's death from illness, Huo Guang instructed in the report that the matter had nothing to do with Chun Yuyan and should be exempt from investigation. Mrs. Huo Guang took the opportunity to persuade Huo Guang to send her daughter to the imperial palace.

古文：戊辰，五将军发长安。
现代文：戊辰，奉命出征匈奴的五位将军从长安出发。
English: Five generals of the Xiongnu, who were ordered to go to the war, set out from Chang'an.

古文：匈奴闻汉兵大出，老弱奔走，驱畜产远遁逃，是以五将少所得。
现代文：匈奴听到汉朝派大兵前来征讨的消息后，便带着老弱，驱赶着牲畜向远方逃奔。因此，汉朝五位将领收获却不大。
English: When the Huns heard that the Han Dynasty had sent a large number of troops, the old, the sick and the weak fled in haste, drove their livestock and fled far away with their belongings, so the five generals did not have much to gain.

古文：夏，五月，军罢。
现代文：夏季，五月，汉军罢兵而还。
English: In the summer, in May, the Chinese army went on strike and fought back.

古文：度辽将军出塞千二百馀里，至蒲离候水，斩首、捕虏七百馀级；前将军出塞千二百馀里，至乌员，斩首、捕虏百馀级；蒲类将军出塞千八百馀里，西至候山，斩首、捕虏，得单于使者蒲阴王以下三百馀级。
现代文：度辽将军范明友出塞一千二百余里，到达蒲离候水，共斩杀和俘获匈奴七百余人。前将军韩增出塞一千二百余里，到达乌员，共斩杀、俘获匈奴一百余人。蒲类将军赵充国出塞一千八百余里，向西到达候山，共斩杀、俘获匈奴单于使臣蒲阴王及以下三百余人。
English: Du Liao's general Fan Mingyou traveled more than twelve hundred miles and arrived in Pu away from Huishui, killing and capturing more than seven hundred Huns in total. Former general Han Zeng traveled more than twelve hundred miles and arrived in Wumen, killing and capturing more than one hundred Huns in total. Pu's general Zhao Shingguo traveled more than eighteen hundred miles and reached Huishan in the west, killing and capturing more than three hundred Huns including the envoy Puyin Wang.

古文：闻虏已引去，皆不至期还。
现代文：以上三位将军因听说匈奴已然退走，所以不到预定目标就全都退兵而回。
English: Hearing that the Huns had fled, the generals did not return ahead of schedule.

古文：天子薄其过，宽而不罪。
现代文：汉宣帝认为他们的过失并不严重，所以从宽处理，未加处罚。
English: Emperor Han Xuan believed that their mistakes were not serious, so they were dealt with leniently and were not punished.

古文：祁连将军出塞千六百里，至鸡秩山，斩首、捕虏十九级。
现代文：祁连将军田广明出塞一千六百里，到达鸡秩山，共斩杀、俘获匈奴十九人，正好与从匈奴回来的汉朝使臣冉弘等相遇。
English: Qilian general Tian Guangming traveled 1,600 miles to reach Jizhichishan, killed and captured a total of 19 Huns, and just happened to meet the Han Dynasty envoy Ran Hong, who was returning from the Huns.

古文：逢汉使匈奴还者冉弘等，言鸡秩山西有虏众，祁连即戒弘，使言无虏，欲还兵。
现代文：冉弘等说鸡秩山以西地区有匈奴军队，但田广明却警告冉弘，让他们对别人说没有看到匈奴人的踪迹，打算退兵。
English: On the way, he met the Han Dynasty envoy Ran Hong and others returning from the Xiongnu, who said that there were a large number of Xiongnu on the west side of Jizhichishan Mountain. Tian Guangming warned Ran Hong and told him to say that there were no Xiongnu when he returned, and that he wanted to lead the troops back to the Han Dynasty.

古文：御史属公孙益寿谏，以为主可。祁连不听，遂引兵还。
现代文：御史属官吏公孙益寿劝谏田广明，认为不可退兵，田广明不听，率兵而还。
English: Gongsun Yasu, an official of the Imperial Household Agency, advised Xingtian Guangming that he should not retreat, but Tian Guangming did not listen and led his troops to retreat.

古文：虎牙将军出塞八百馀里，至丹馀吾水上，即止兵不进，斩首、捕虏千九百馀级，引兵还。
现代文：虎牙将军田顺出塞八百余里，到达丹馀吾水边，停兵不进，共斩杀、俘获匈奴一千九百余人，率兵而还。
English: The tiger-clawed general Tian Shun marched more than eight hundred miles and reached the water's edge of Danyu. He halted and did not advance, killed and captured a total of more than nineteen hundred Huns, and led his troops back.

古文：上以虎牙将军不至期，诈增卤获，而祁连知虏在前，逗遛不进，皆下吏，自杀。
现代文：汉宣帝认为田顺未到预定目标就退兵而回，还虚报战果；田广明明知敌人就在前面，却畏缩逗留，不敢前进，下令将二人治罪，二人自杀。
English: Emperor Xuan of Han believed that Tian Shun withdrew before reaching the predetermined target and returned, and also falsely reported the results of the battle; Tian Guang knew that the enemy was in front, but stayed cowering, did not dare to advance, ordered two people to be punished, and two people committed suicide.

古文：擢公孙益寿为侍御史。
现代文：汉宣帝擢升公孙益寿为侍御史。
English: The promotion of his grandson, Yoshihisa, to the position of Imperial Household Minister.

古文：乌孙昆弥自将五万骑与校尉常惠从西方入，至右谷蠡王庭，获单于父行及嫂、居次、名王、犁汙都尉、千长、骑将以下四万级，马、牛、羊、驴、橐佗七十馀万头。
现代文：乌孙王亲自率领骑兵五万，与校尉常惠一起从西方进入匈奴地区，攻至匈奴右谷蠡王王庭，俘虏单于父辈贵族及单于之嫂、公主、名王、犁污都尉、千长、骑将及以下共四万人，缴获马、牛、羊、驴、骆驼七十余万头。
English: King Wusun personally led fifty thousand cavalrymen, and together with Lieutenant Chang Hui, entered the Hunnic region from the west and attacked the Hunnic Right Valley, the King's Court, and captured forty thousand people, including the aristocrats of the fathers and the sisters-in-law, the princess, the great king, the dirty lieutenant, the thousand long, the cavalry and the following, and captured more than seven hundred thousand horses, cattle, sheep, donkeys and camels.

古文：乌孙皆自取所虏获。
现代文：乌孙国将他们俘获的人、畜等全部留下自用。
English: The Ussun Kingdom kept all the captured people, animals, etc. for their own use.

古文：上以五将皆无功，独惠奉使克获，封惠为长罗侯。
现代文：汉宣帝因所派五位将军都没有什么功劳，只有常惠出使乌孙，取得很大战果，所以封常惠为长罗侯。
English: The five generals sent by Emperor Han Xuan had no merit, only Chang Hui sent his grandson, who achieved great results in battle, so Chang Hui was given the title of Changluo.

古文：然匈奴民众伤而去者及畜产远移死亡，不可胜数。于是匈奴遂衰耗，怨乌孙。
现代文：然而，匈奴经此打击，民众伤残逃亡和在长途迁徙中死亡的牲畜不可胜数，从此国力衰耗，所以怨恨乌孙。
English: However, the Huns suffered from this blow, the people were injured and fled, and countless livestock died during the long-distance migration. From this point on, the national strength waned, so they resented the Wusun.

古文：上复遣常惠持金币还赐乌孙贵人有功者。
现代文：汉宣帝又派常惠携带黄金财物前往乌孙，赏赐有功的乌孙贵族。
English: Emperor Han Xuan also sent Chang Hui to Wusun with gold and property to reward the meritorious Wusun aristocrats.

古文：惠因奏请龟兹国尝杀校尉赖丹，未伏诛，请便道击之。
现代文：常惠因而上奏，称龟兹国曾经击杀校尉赖丹，尚未受到惩罚，请求顺路去征讨。
English: As a result, Chang Hui made a report, saying that Gui Zi Guo had once killed Captain Lai Dan, but had not yet been punished, and asked him to go along the road to investigate.

古文：帝不许。大将军霍光风惠以便宜从事。
现代文：汉宣帝不许，大将军霍光却暗示常惠可以相机行事。
English: Emperor Han Xuan did not allow it, but General Huo Guang Rong hinted that Chang Hui could act with a camera.

古文：惠与吏士五百人俱至乌孙，还，过，发西国兵二万人，令副使发龟兹东国二万人，乌孙兵七千人，从三面攻龟兹。
现代文：常惠率五百部属一起到达乌孙，回国时，征调途中经过的龟兹以西各国的军队二万人，又命副使征调龟兹以东各国军队二万人，以及乌孙国军队七千人，从三面进攻龟兹。
English: The five hundred members of the Standing Committee arrived in Wusun together, and when they returned home, they conscripted and transferred twenty thousand troops from countries to the west of Kuez, and ordered the deputy envoy to conscript and transfer twenty thousand troops from countries to the east of Kuez, and seven thousand troops from Wusun to attack Kuez from three sides.

古文：兵未合，先遣人责其王以前杀汉使状。
现代文：在三路大军对龟兹国形成包围之前，常惠先派人前往龟兹，指责先前击杀汉使之事。
English: Before the Third Route Army encircled Kuez, Chang Hui first sent someone to Kuez to accuse Han of killing him.

古文：王谢曰： 乃我先王时为贵人姑翼所误耳，我无罪。 
现代文：龟兹王道歉说： 此事是我国先王在世时，误听贵族姑翼之言而做出的错事，我没有罪。 
English: The tortoise king apologized, "It was when I was king that I was victimized by a noble aunt. I am not guilty.

古文：惠曰： 即如此，缚姑翼来，吾置王。 
现代文：常惠说： 既然如此，将姑翼捆缚送来，我就饶了你。 
English: Chang Hui said, "Even if it's like this, we still have to tie up Aunt Ying. I can let go of the king."

古文：王执姑翼诣惠，惠斩之而还。
现代文：于是，龟兹王将姑翼逮捕，送到常惠处，常惠将姑翼斩首，然后返回。
English: Turtle King then tied up Aunt Wing and took her to Chang Hui's place. After Chang Hui killed Aunt Wing, he went back.

古文：大旱。
现代文：大旱。
English: There was a severe drought.

古文：六月，己丑，阳平节侯蔡义薨。
现代文：六月己丑，阳平侯蔡义去世。
English: In June, Yangping Hou Caiyi passed away.

古文：甲辰，长信少府韦贤为丞相。
现代文：甲辰，长信少府韦贤担任丞相。
English: Jia Chen, Changxin Shofu Wei Xian served as chancellor.

古文：大司农魏相为御史大夫。
现代文：大司农魏相被任命为御史大夫。
English: The senior secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs was appointed as the chief historian.

古文：冬，匈奴单于自将数万骑击乌孙，颇得老弱。
现代文：冬季，匈奴单于亲自率领骑兵数万袭击乌孙，俘获了不少乌孙国的老弱百姓。
English: In the winter, Xiongnu Shan personally led tens of thousands of cavalry to attack Wusun and captured many old and weak people of Wusun.

古文：欲还，会天大雨雪，一日深丈馀，人民、畜产冻死，还者不能什一。
现代文：正准备退兵时，天降大雪，一天之中，积雪达一丈多厚。大雪使大批匈奴部众、牲畜冻死，活着回去的还不到十分之一。
English: When the soldiers were preparing to leave, heavy snow fell. Within a day, the snow was as thick as a mountain. The heavy snow caused a large number of Huns and livestock to freeze to death, and less than a tenth of them returned alive.

古文：于是丁令乘弱攻其北，乌桓入其东，乌孙击其西，凡三国所杀数万级，马数万匹，牛羊甚众；又重以饿死，人民死者什三，畜产什五。
现代文：于是，丁令趁匈奴力量衰弱之机攻其北部，乌桓则进其东部，乌孙攻其西部，三国共斩杀匈奴部众数万人，马数万匹和大量的牛羊，再加上饿死的，使匈奴人口减少了十分之三，牲畜损失了十分之五。
English: As a result, Ding Ling took advantage of the Hun's weakened strength to attack its north, Wu Huan went to its east, and Wusun attacked its west. The three countries killed tens of thousands of Huns, tens of thousands of horses, and a large number of cattle and sheep. In addition to starving to death, the Hun population was reduced by three-tenths, and livestock lost five-tenths.

古文：匈奴大虚弱，诸国羁属者皆瓦解，攻盗不能理。
现代文：从此，匈奴更为虚弱，原来臣服于它的西域国家全部背叛，不断对其进行攻击和骚扰，而匈奴却无可奈何。
English: From then on, the Xiongnu became even weaker. All the Western countries that had been subjugated to it betrayed it, constantly attacking and harassing it, but the Xiongnu had no choice.

古文：其后汉出三千馀骑为三道，并入匈奴，捕虏得数千人还；匈奴终不敢取当，滋欲乡和亲，而边境少事矣。
现代文：后来，汉朝派出骑兵三千余人，分三路同时攻入匈奴，俘虏数千人，然后退兵，匈奴始终无力报复，却越发迫切地想与汉朝和亲，从而使汉朝边塞的战事大为减少。
English: Later, the Han Dynasty sent more than three thousand cavalrymen to attack the Huns in three directions at the same time, captured thousands of people, and then withdrew. The Huns were always unable to retaliate, but they became more and more eager to make peace with the Han Dynasty, thus greatly reducing the fighting in the Han Dynasty frontier fortress.

古文：是岁，颍川太守赵广汉为京兆尹。
现代文：这一年，颍川太守赵广汉被任命为京兆尹。
English: In the same year, the governor of Beichuan, Zhao Guanghan, was appointed as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：颍川俗，豪桀相朋党。
现代文：颍川地区风俗，地方豪杰之人往往成帮结派。
English: According to the customs of the Luochuan area, local heroes often form gangs.

古文：广汉为缿筒，受吏民投书，使相告讦，于是更相怨咎，奸党散落，盗贼不敢发。
现代文：赵广汉设置了一个竹筒，接受官吏和百姓的举报控诉，鼓励人们彼此揭发。当地人因此相互结怨，不法帮派瓦解，盗贼不敢动作。
English: Zhao Guanghan set up a bamboo tube to receive reports and complaints from officials and ordinary people, and encouraged people to expose each other. As a result, local people complained to each other, illegal gangs collapsed, and thieves did not dare to act.

古文：匈奴降者言匈奴中皆闻广汉名，由是入为京兆尹。
现代文：据一些归降汉朝的匈奴人说，他们在匈奴时就都听说过赵广汉的名字，赵广汉因此被调入长安担任京兆尹。
English: According to some Huns who returned to the Han Dynasty, they all heard the name of Zhao Guanghan when they were Huns, and Zhao Guanghan was transferred to Chang'an to serve as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：广汉遇吏，殷勤甚备，事推功善，归之于下，行之发于至诚，吏咸愿为用，僵仆无所避。
现代文：赵广汉对待其属下官吏殷勤周到，遇有功劳或奖赏之事，总是归之于部下，他的行为是出于至诚，所以官吏都乐于受他差遣，即便赴死也不逃避。
English: Zhao Guanghan treated his subordinate officials with diligence and thoughtfulness. In the event of merit or reward, he always attributed it to his subordinates. His actions were out of sincerity, so officials were happy to be sent by him, even if they died.

古文：广汉聪明，皆知其能之所宜，尽力与否；其或负者。
现代文：赵广汉很聪明，对他手下人的能力、特长及是否尽力办事，都了解得非常清楚。
English: Zhao Guanghan is very smart, and he knows very well the abilities, strengths and whether his subordinates are doing their best.

古文：辄收捕之，无所逃；案之，罪立具，即时伏辜。
现代文：如有人蒙骗于他，立即就会被抓住，谁也别想逃脱。审讯定案，证据确凿，立时服罪，无法抵赖。
English: If anyone deceives him, he will immediately be caught, and no one should try to escape. The trial is final, the evidence is conclusive, the crime is immediately confessed, and it cannot be denied.

古文：尤善为钅句距以得事情，闾里铢两之奸皆知之。
现代文：赵广汉还特别善于了解事情的真相，市井中一些细小的不法之事他都知道。
English: Zhao Guanghan is also particularly good at understanding the truth of the matter. He knows about some small illegal things in the market.

古文：长安少年数人会穷里空舍，谋共劫人；坐语未讫，广汉使吏捕治，具服。
现代文：有几个长安少年，曾在一处偏僻的空房中商议共同抢劫，坐下话没说完，赵广汉已派官吏前来将他们逮捕治罪，一个个都招认服罪。
English: Zhao Guanghan had sent officials to arrest and prosecute several Chang'an teenagers who had once sat down to discuss a joint robbery in an empty room in the middle of nowhere. All of them pleaded guilty.

古文：其发奸扌適伏如神。
现代文：类似情形，说明赵广汉察觉奸邪之人，揭露隐秘之事有如神灵一般。
English: A similar situation shows that Zhao Guanghan, who is aware of the evil, reveals the secret things like a god.

古文：京兆政清，吏民称之不容口。
现代文：赵广汉担任京兆尹时期，长安地区政治清明，官吏百姓们赞不绝口。
English: The politics of Beijing and Shandong Province are clear, and officials and people are full of praise for him.

古文：长老传以为自汉兴，治京兆者莫能及。
现代文：老辈人认为，自汉朝建立以来，没有一个京兆尹能比得上赵广汉。
English: The older generation believes that since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, no Jing Zhaoyun can match Zhao Guanghan.

古文：孝昭皇帝下本始四年
现代文：本始四年
English: The First Four Years

古文：春，三月，乙卯，立霍光女为皇后，赦天下。
现代文：春季，三月乙卯，立霍光的女儿霍成君为皇后，大赦天下。
English: In the spring, in March, Emperor Wu appointed Huo Guang's daughter Huo Chengjun as empress, and granted her universal amnesty.

古文：初，许后起微贱，登至尊日浅，从官车服甚节俭。
现代文：当初，许皇后出身微贱，登上皇后宝座的时间不长，其侍从、车马、服饰等都非常节俭。
English: At first, Empress Xu came from a humble background and ascended to the throne only a short time ago. Her attendants, carriages, and clothing were all very frugal.

古文：及霍后立，舆驾、侍从益盛，赏赐官属以千万计，与许后时县绝矣。
现代文：及至霍成君立为皇后，车驾、侍从等日益盛大，对官属的赏赐以千万计，与许皇后时有天壤之别。
English: By the time Huo Chengjun was crowned as empress, the chauffeurs, attendants, etc. had become increasingly grand, with tens of millions of rewards given to officials and their families. This was a world of difference from the time of Queen Xu.

古文：夏，四月，壬寅，郡国四十九同日地震，或山崩，坏城郭、室屋，杀六千馀人。北海、琅邪坏祖宗庙。
现代文：夏季，四月壬寅，四十九个郡、国同一天发生地震，有的地方发生山崩，毁坏城郭、房屋，死亡六千余人，北海、琅邪两郡的太祖、太宗庙也被震坏。
English: In the summer, in April, an earthquake occurred in 49 counties and provinces on the same day. In some places, landslides occurred, destroying castles and houses, killing more than 6,000 people. The Taizu and Taizong temples in Beihai and Hefei counties were also destroyed.

古文：诏丞相、御史与列侯、中二千石傅问经学之士，有以应变，毋有所讳。
现代文：汉宣帝下诏，命丞相、御史与列侯、中二千石官员等，向精通经书的学者广泛征询应付灾异事变的办法，不要有所避讳。
English: Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict, and the prime minister, governors and vassals, and middle-ranking officials of 2,000 koku were widely consulted by scholars who were well versed in scriptures on how to deal with disasters and incidents. Don't be shy.

古文：令三辅、太常、内郡国贤举良方正各一人。
现代文：又命三辅、太常、内郡国各举荐贤良、方正之士各一人。
English: In addition, he ordered Sanfu, Taichung, and Inner County to each recommend one virtuous person and one person from Fangzheng.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：上素服，避正殿五日。
现代文：汉宣帝身穿素服，避开皇宫正殿五天。
English: Emperor Han Xuan, dressed in plain clothes, avoided the main hall of the imperial palace for five days.

古文：释夏侯胜、黄霸，以胜为谏大夫、给事中，霸为扬州刺史。
现代文：释放夏侯胜、黄霸，任命夏侯胜为谏大夫、给事中，黄霸为扬州刺史。
English: Xia Hou Sheng and Huang Ba were released, and Xia Hou Sheng was appointed as the doctor of Qi, and Huang Ba was appointed as the historian of Yangzhou.

古文：胜为人，质朴守正，简易无威仪，或时谓上为君，误相字于前；上亦以是亲信之。
现代文：夏侯胜为人正直质朴，平易近人，没有威仪，有时竟称皇帝为 君 ，或在皇帝面前直呼别人的表字，而汉宣帝却也因此而亲信他。
English: Xia Hou Sheng was an honest and simple man, approachable and without pomp. Sometimes he even called the emperor "Jun," or directly called someone else's name in front of the emperor, but Emperor Han Xuan trusted him for this reason.

古文：尝见，出道上语，上闻而让胜，胜曰： 陛下所言善，臣故扬之。
现代文：有一次，夏侯胜晋见汉宣帝，出宫后将汉宣帝讲的话说给别人，汉宣帝知道后责备夏侯胜，夏侯胜说： 陛下的话说得好，所以我才转告别人。
English: Once, after being received, Xia Hossheng went out to tell others what Emperor Xuan had said. After Emperor Xuan heard it, he reproached Xia Hossheng. Xia Hossheng replied, "Your Majesty spoke very well, so I will preach it."

古文：尧言布于天下，至今见诵。
现代文：昔日帝尧的话天下传扬，至今还被人背诵。
English: His words spread around the world and are still recited today.

古文：臣以为可传，故传耳。 
现代文：我认为陛下的话值得传扬，所以才传扬。 
English: And when I thought that these things were worthy to be published, they were published.

古文：朝廷每有大议，上知胜素直，谓曰： 先生建正言，无惩前事！ 
现代文：每当朝廷商议国家大事，汉宣帝知道夏侯胜一向直率，便对他说： 先生发表高论时，不要把以前的事放在心上。 
English: Whenever the imperial court deliberated on national affairs, Emperor Han Xuan knew that Xia Hosheng had always been forthright, and said to him: When you make a high-level speech, don't put the previous things in your heart.

古文：胜复为长信少府，后迁太子太傅。
现代文：不久，夏侯胜重新担任长信少府，后调任太子太傅。
English: Soon after, Xia Hosseng was reassigned to the position of Changxin Shofu, and later he was transferred to the position of Prince Taifu.

古文：年九十卒，太后赐钱二百万，为胜素服五日，以报师傅之恩。
现代文：夏侯胜九十岁时去世，太后特赐奠仪二百万钱，并为夏侯胜之死穿了五天素服，以报答师恩。
English: When Xia Hou Sheng died at the age of ninety, the empress dowager specially bestowed two million yuan on the funeral ceremony, and wore plain clothes for five days to repay her mentor for Xia Hou Sheng's death.

古文：儒者以为荣。
现代文：儒生们都引以为荣。
English: Confucians are proud of him.

古文：五月，凤皇集北海安丘、淳于。
现代文：五月，有凤凰聚集在北海郡的安丘、淳于二县。
English: In May, phoenixes gathered in Anqiu and Junyu in the North Sea.

古文：广川王去坐杀其师及姬妾十馀人，或销铅锡灌口中，或支解，并毒药煮之，令糜尽，废徙上庸；自杀。
现代文：广川王刘去被指控杀死自己的老师和姬妾十余人，或将熔化的铅汁、锡汁灌入口中，或被肢解，再掺上毒药烹煮，使之糜烂。汉宣帝废去刘去王爵，将其放逐到上庸。刘去自杀。
English: Liu, the king of Guangchuan, was accused of killing more than ten of his teachers and concubines, or pouring molten lead juice and tin juice into his mouth, or being dismembered, then mixed with poison and cooked to rot. Emperor Han Xuan dethroned Liu and banished him to Shangyong. Liu committed suicide.

古文：孝昭皇帝下地节元年
现代文：地节元年
English: The first year of the festival

古文：春，正月，有星孛于西方。
现代文：春季，正月，西方天空出现异星。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, a strange star appears in the western sky.

古文：楚王延寿以广陵王胥，武帝子，天下有变，必得立，阴附肋之，为其后母弟赵何齐取广陵王女为妻，因使何齐奉书遗广陵王曰： 愿长耳目，毋后人有天下！ 
现代文：楚王刘延寿认为，广陵王刘胥是汉武帝的儿子，一旦天下发生变故，肯定会被立为皇帝，于是在暗中依附、帮助广陵王，为自己王后母亲的弟弟赵何齐娶了广陵王的女儿为妻，因而派赵何齐送信给广陵王说： 希望您密切注意，争天下之事不要落到别人的后面！ 
English: Chu King Liu Yan Shou believed that Guangling King Liu Ye was the son of Emperor Hanwu, and once there was a change in the world, he would definitely be made emperor. Therefore, he secretly adhered to and helped Guangling King. Zhao Heqi, the younger brother of his queen mother, married Guangling King's daughter as his wife. Therefore, he sent Zhao Heqi to Guangling King to say: I hope you pay close attention, and do not fall behind others in the world's affairs!

古文：何齐父长年上书告之，事下有司考验，辞服。
现代文：赵何齐的父亲赵长年上书朝廷，告发了此事，汉宣帝命有关部门审讯调查，刘延寿供认服罪。
English: Zhao Heqi's father, Zhao Chang, wrote to the imperial court and reported the matter. Emperor Han Xuan ordered the relevant departments to investigate, and Liu Yanshou confessed to the crime.

古文：冬，十一月，延寿自杀。胥勿治。
现代文：冬季，十一月，刘延寿自杀，刘胥免予追究。
English: In winter, in November, Liu Yanshou committed suicide, and Liu Yao was exempted from investigation.

古文：十二月，癸亥晦，日有食之。是岁，于定国为廷尉。
现代文：十二月癸亥晦，出现日食。这一年，于定国担任廷尉。
English: At the end of December, there was a solar eclipse. This year, he served as a courtier in Dingguo.

古文：定国决疑平法，务在哀鳏寡，罪疑从轻，加审慎之心。
现代文：于定国处理疑难案件，执法公平，他一心同情鳏夫、寡妇，凡罪证不够确凿的，都从轻判决，十分审慎。
English: Yu Dingguo dealt with difficult cases and enforced the law fairly. He sympathized with widowers and widows. If the criminal evidence was not conclusive enough, he gave a light sentence and was very prudent.

古文：朝廷称之曰： 张释之为廷尉，天下无冤民。于定国为廷尉，民自以不冤。 
现代文：朝廷赞扬他说： 张释之当廷尉，天下没有蒙冤之民；于定国当廷尉，人们自己就相信不会被冤枉。 
English: The imperial court praised him saying, "When Zhang Xizhi was a courtier, there were no wronged people in the world; when Yu Dingguo was a courtier, people themselves believed that they would not be wronged.

古文：孝昭皇帝下地节二年
现代文：地节二年
English: Two years on site

古文：春，霍光病笃。车驾自临问，上为之涕泣。
现代文：春季，霍光病重，汉宣帝亲自前往探望，为他流泪。
English: In spring, when Huo Guang fell seriously ill, Emperor Han Xuan personally went to visit him and shed tears for him.

古文：光上书谢恩，愿分国邑三千户以封兄孙奉车都尉山为列侯，奉兄去病祀。
现代文：霍光上书谢恩，表示希望能在自己的封地中分出三千户，封兄长霍去病的孙子奉车都尉霍山为列侯，以祀奉霍去病的香火。
English: Huo Guang wrote a letter of thanks, expressing his hope to be able to allocate three thousand households in his fief. The grandson of the elder brother Huo, who was ill, was made a vassal of the lieutenant Huoshan as a vassal, with incense to worship Huo who was ill.

古文：即日，拜光子禹为右将军。
现代文：当日，汉宣帝任命霍光之子霍禹为右将军。
English: On the same day, Emperor Han Xuan appointed Huo Guang's son Huo Yu as the right general.

古文：三月，庚午，光薨。
现代文：三月庚午，霍光去世。
English: In the late afternoon of March, Huo Guang passed away.

古文：上及皇太后亲临光丧，中二千石治冢，赐梓宫、葬具皆如乘舆制度，谥曰宣成侯。发三河卒穿复土，置园邑三百家，长、丞奉守；下诏复其后世，畴其爵邑，世世无有所与。
现代文：汉宣帝与皇太后亲自前往霍光灵堂进行祭悼，命令中二千石官员负责霍光墓的修建事务，赏赐棺木、葬具等，都与御用规格一样；赐霍光谥号为 宣成侯 ；征调三河地区的兵卒为霍光挖掘墓穴，将棺木埋葬后，在上面筑起坟茔；拨出三百家民户侍奉墓园，设置长、丞负责守墓和祭祀事务。汉宣帝还下诏免除霍光后代子孙的赋税、徭役，让他们继承霍光的封爵、食邑，世世代代、永远不变。
English: Emperor Han Xuan and the empress dowager personally went to the Huo Guang Ling Temple to mourn. He ordered the 2,000-stone officials to be responsible for the construction of Huo Guang's tomb, awarding coffins, funerary tools, etc., all of which were the same as the royal specifications; gave Huo Guang the nickname of "Xuan Cheng Hou"; conscripted soldiers from the Sanhe region to dig a tomb for Huo Guang, buried the coffin, and built a tomb on top of it; allocated three hundred households to serve the cemetery, and set up a chief and a knight responsible for guarding the tomb and sacrificial services. Emperor Han Xuan also

古文：御史大夫魏相上封事曰： 国家新失大将军，宜显明功臣以填籓国，毋空大位，以塞争权。
现代文：御史大夫魏相向汉宣帝上了一道秘密奏章，其中说道： 国家最近丧失了大将军，应当对另外的有功大臣明示尊崇、显扬，以镇抚各诸侯封国，不要使大将军之位空缺，以免引起朝臣争权。
English: Chief Historian Wei Xiang wrote a secret musical score to Emperor Xuan of Han, in which he said: The country has recently lost the general, it should explicitly respect and promote other meritorious ministers, to pacify the feudal lords, and not to make the position of the general vacant, so as not to cause a struggle for power among the courtiers.

古文：宜以车骑将军安世为大将军，毋令领光禄勋事；以其子延寿为光禄勋。 
现代文：我认为应任命车骑将军张安世为大将军，不要再让他兼领光禄勋事务；任命张安世之子张延寿为光禄勋。 
English: I think it is necessary to appoint the cavalry general Zhang Anshi as the grand general, and no longer allow him to receive the Order of the Star. Zhang Yanshou, the son of Zhang Anshi, should be appointed as the Order of the Star.

古文：上亦欲用之。
现代文：汉宣帝也想任用张安世。
English: The emperor also wanted to use Ansei and his son.

古文：夏，四月，戊申，以安世为大司马、车骑将军，领尚书事。
现代文：夏季，四月戊申，任命张安世为大司马、车骑将军，主管尚书事务。
English: In the summer, in April, Zhang Anshi was appointed as the grand steward of horses and chariots, and was in charge of the affairs of Shangshu.

古文：凤皇集鲁，群鸟从之。
现代文：凤凰在鲁国聚集，成群的飞鸟追随。
English: The phoenixes gather in Russia, followed by flocks of birds.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：上思报大将军德，乃封光兄孙山为乐平侯，使以奉车都尉领尚书事。
现代文：汉宣帝想报答大将军霍光拥立自己作皇帝的大德，便封霍光兄长的孙子霍山为乐平侯，命他以奉车都尉的身份主管尚书事务。
English: Emperor Han Xuan wanted to reward the great general Huo Guang for his great virtue of becoming emperor, so he appointed Huo Guang's elder brother's grandson Huoshan as Leping Hou, and ordered him to be in charge of Shangshu affairs as a lieutenant of Fengche.

古文：魏相因昌成君许广汉奏封事，言： 《春秋》讥世卿，恶宋三世为大夫及鲁季孙之专权，皆危乱国家。
现代文：魏相通过昌成君许广汉向汉宣帝上了一道秘密奏章，说道： 《春秋》讥讽由贵族世代为卿的制度，厌恶春秋时宋国三代没有大夫和鲁国季孙氏专擅国政，都使国家陷于危亡混乱之中。
English: Through Changcheng Jun Xu Guanghan, Wei Xiang sent a secret musical composition to Emperor Xuan of Han, saying: "Spring and Autumn" ridicules the system of aristocrats becoming nobles, and abhors the fact that in Spring and Autumn, the three generations of the Song Dynasty did not have a doctor, and the Jisun family of the State of Lu was exclusively good at state affairs, all of which caused the country to fall into chaos.

古文：自后元以来，禄去王室，政由冢宰。
现代文：我朝自孝武皇帝后元以来，皇室不能控制各级官员的俸禄，朝政大事都由职权最高的大臣决定。
English: In the Han Dynasty since the late Yuan Dynasty, when Huo Guang was in power, the power to appoint officials began to leave the hands of the emperor, and all national affairs were decided by the ruling general.

古文：今光死，子复为右将军，兄子秉枢机，昆弟、诸婿据权势，在兵官，光夫人显及诸女皆通籍长信宫，或夜诏门出入，骄奢放纵，恐寝不制，宜有以损夺其权，破散阴谋，以固万世之基，全功臣之世。 
现代文：如今霍光虽死，他的儿子仍为右将军，侄儿掌管中枢事务，兄弟、女婿们都身居权要之职，或担任军事将领，霍光的夫人显以及几个女儿都在长信宫门录有姓名，甚至半夜也能叫开宫门出入。霍氏一门骄奢放纵，恐怕会渐渐难以控制，所以应设法削弱他们的权势，消灭他们可能会生出的阴谋，以巩固皇家的万世基业，也保全功臣的后代子孙。 
English: Today, although Huo Guang is dead, his son is still the right general, his nephew is in charge of central affairs, his brothers and sons-in-law all hold important positions of power or serve as military generals, Huo Guang's wife Xian and several daughters have their names recorded on the Changxin Palace gate, and they can even open and close the palace gate in the middle of the night. The arrogance and indulgence of the Huo family may gradually become difficult to control, so we should try to weaken their power and eliminate the plots they may produce in order to consolidate the eternal inheritance of the royal family and protect the descendants of the heroes.

古文：又故事：诸上书者皆为二封，署其一曰 副 ，领尚书者先发副封，所言不善，屏去不奏。
现代文：依照惯例，凡上书朝廷，都是一式两份，其中一份注明为副本，由主管尚书事务的人先打开副本审视，如所奏之事不妥，则不予上奏。
English: According to the usual practice, whenever a document is submitted to the Imperial Court, it is in two copies, one of which is marked as a copy. The person in charge of bookkeeping first opens the copy and examines it. If the matter is improper, it will not be submitted.

古文：相复因许伯白去副封以防壅蔽。
现代文：魏相又通过许广汉向汉宣帝建议，取消奏章副本，防止阻塞言路而蒙蔽皇上。
English: Through Xu Guanghan, Wei Xiang also proposed to Emperor Xuan of Han to cancel the copy of the musical score to prevent blocking the path of speech and blinding the emperor.

古文：帝善之，诏相给事中，皆从其议。
现代文：汉宣帝认为很对，下诏命魏相担任给事中，全部采纳了魏相的意见。
English: Emperor Han Xuan thought it was very right, and he ordered Wei Xiang to be in charge of the matter, and he adopted all of Wei Xiang's opinions.

古文：帝兴于闾阎，知民事之艰难。
现代文：汉宣帝出身于民间，了解下层人民的艰难困苦。
English: Han Xuan Di was from the common people and understood the hardships of the lower class people.

古文：霍光既薨，始亲政事，厉精为治，五日一听事。
现代文：霍光死后，汉宣帝开始亲自主持朝政，励精图治，每隔五天，就要召集群臣，听取他们对朝政事务的意见。
English: After the death of Huo Guang, Emperor Han Xuan began to personally lead the imperial government and work hard to govern. Every five days, he had to convene a group of ministers to listen to their opinions on the affairs of the imperial government.

古文：自丞相以下各奉职奏事，敷奏其言，考试功能。
现代文：自丞相以下，群臣各就自己负责的事务分别奏报，再将他们陈述的意见分别下达有关部门试行，考察、检验其功效。
English: From the prime minister on down, each group of ministers reported separately on the matters they were responsible for, and then separately issued their opinions to the relevant departments for trial, to examine and test their effectiveness.

古文：侍中、尚书功劳当迁及有异善，厚加赏赐，至于子孙，终不改易。
现代文：凡任侍中、尚书的官员有功应当升迁，或有特殊成绩，就厚加赏赐，甚至及于他们的子孙，长久不改变。
English: All officials who hold the posts of attendants and librarians should be promoted for their merits or have special achievements, and they will be rewarded generously, even for their children and grandchildren, and will not change for a long time.

古文：枢机周密，品式备备，上下相安，莫有苟且之意。
现代文：中枢机构严密，法令、制度完备，上下相安无事，没有人抱着苟且敷衍的态度办事。
English: The central organization is strict, the laws and systems are complete, there is no trouble between the upper and lower levels, and no one has a meticulous and perfunctory attitude.

古文：及拜刺史、守、相，辄亲见问，观其所由，退而考察所行以质其言，有名实不相应，必知其所必然。
现代文：至于任命州刺史、郡太守、封国丞相等高级地方官吏，汉宣帝总是亲自召见询问，观察他的抱负和打算，再考察他的行为，看是否与他当初说的一样。凡查出有言行不统一的，一定要追究其原因何在。
English: As for the appointment of high-ranking local officials such as prefectural governor, county governor, and minister of finance, Emperor Han Xuan always personally summoned them for questioning, observed their ambitions and plans, and then examined their behavior to see if it was the same as what they had originally said. If there was any discrepancy between their words and actions, they must investigate the cause.

古文：常称曰： 庶民所以安其田里而亡叹息愁恨之心者，政平讼理也。
现代文：汉宣帝常说： 老百姓之所以能安居家乡，没有叹息、怨愁，主要就在于为政公平清明，处理诉讼之事合乎情理。
English: Emperor Xuan once said: The reason why the common people can feel at ease in agricultural production and eliminate the bad feelings of worry and resentment is because politics is fair and the law can preside over justice.

古文：与我共此者，其唯良二千石乎！ 
现代文：能与我一起做到这一点的，不正是那些优秀的郡太守和封国丞相等二千石官员吗！ 
English: Couldn't it just be those excellent 2,000-koku officials such as the county governor and the minister of justice who could do this with me?

古文：以为太守，吏民之本，数变易则下不安；民知其将久，不可欺罔，乃服从其教化。
现代文：汉宣帝认为，郡太守为治理官吏和百姓的关键，如变换频繁则容易引起治下百姓的不安。百姓们知道他们的郡太守将长期留任，不可欺罔，才能服从郡太守的教化。
English: Emperor Han Xuan believed that the county magistrate was the key to governing officials and the people, and frequent changes would easily cause unease among the people under his rule. The people knew that their county magistrate would remain in office for a long time and could not be cheated, so that they could submit to the enlightenment of the county magistrate.

古文：故二千石有治理效，辄以玺书勉厉，增秩，赐金，或爵至关内侯；公卿缺，则选诸所表，以次用之。
现代文：所以，凡地方二千石官员治理地方有成效的，汉宣帝总是正式颁布诏书加以勉励，增加其官阶俸禄，赏赐黄金，甚至赐爵为关内侯，遇有公卿职位空缺，则按照他们平时所受奖励的先后、多少，依次挑选补任。
English: Therefore, whenever local officials of 2,000 koku were effective in local governance, Emperor Han Xuan always officially issued an edict to encourage them, increasing their official salary, awarding gold, and even giving a knighthood to Guanaihou. In the event of a vacancy in the post of court noble, they would be selected to fill the post in accordance with the order and amount of awards they usually received.

古文：是以汉世良吏，于是为盛，称中兴焉。
现代文：因此，汉朝的好官，是以这一时期最多，号称中兴。
English: Therefore, the good officials of the Han Dynasty were the most in this period, known as ZTE.

古文：匈奴壶衍鞮单于死，弟左贤王立为虚闾权渠单于，以右大将女为大阏氏，而黜前单于所幸颛渠阏氏。颛渠阏氏父左大且渠怨望。
现代文：匈奴壶衍单于死后，其弟左贤王即位，称为虚闾权渠单于，封右大将的女儿为大阏氏，废黜了前单于宠爱的颛渠阏氏，引起颛渠阏氏的父亲左大且渠的怨恨。
English: After the death of Xiongnu Jian Shan, his younger brother Zuoxian Wang ascended to the throne, known as the false Xiong Quan Quan Yu, and the daughter of the right general was the Daxu clan, dethroning the former Xiong Quan Yu's favorite Xiong Quan Yu clan, causing the resentment of the father of the Xiong Quan Yu clan, Zuo Daxu and Quan Yu.

古文：是时汉以匈奴不能为边寇，罢塞外诸城以休百姓。
现代文：这时，汉朝认为匈奴已无力侵扰边疆地区，将塞外各城的屯守士卒取消，使百姓休养。
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty believed that the Xiongnu were no longer able to invade the border regions, so they removed the garrisons and garrisons from the cities outside of Tibet, allowing the people to rest and recuperate.

古文：单于闻之，喜，召贵人谋，欲与汉和亲。
现代文：匈奴单于听到这一消息后，非常高兴，召集贵族商议，打算与汉朝和亲。
English: Upon hearing this news, the Huns were overjoyed and called the nobles together for consultation, intending to make peace with the Han Dynasty.

古文：左大且渠心害其事，曰： 前汉使来，兵随其后。
现代文：左大且渠想要破坏此事，便对单于说： 以前汉朝使臣前面来，大兵跟随在后。
English: Zuo Dada and Qu, who wanted to sabotage the matter, said to Shan Yu: In the past, the Han Dynasty envoys came first, and the soldiers followed.

古文：今亦效汉发兵，先使使者入。 
现代文：如今我们也效法汉朝的办法，先派使臣到汉朝，然后发兵袭击。 
English: Nowadays, we also follow the Han Dynasty's method, first sending envoys to the Han Dynasty, and then sending troops to attack.

古文：乃自请与呼卢訾王各将万骑，南旁塞猎，相逢俱入。
现代文：于是请求单于派他与呼卢訾王各率骑兵万人，南下沿汉朝边塞一带打猎，相互会合后就一齐攻入汉朝。
English: Therefore, he requested the king of Huludao to send him and ten thousand cavalrymen to hunt along the Han Dynasty's frontier fortress in the south. After meeting each other, they would jointly invade the Han Dynasty.

古文：行未到，会三骑亡降汉，言匈奴欲为寇。
现代文：但是，匈奴两路大军尚未到达汉朝边塞，恰好先有三名骑兵逃到汉朝归降，报告了匈奴的入侵阴谋。
English: Before reaching the border fortress, three Hun cavalrymen ran away and surrendered to the Han Dynasty, saying that the Huns were about to invade.

古文：于是天子诏发边骑屯要害处，使大将军军监治众等四人将五千骑，分三队，出塞各数百里，捕得虏各数十人而还。
现代文：于是汉宣帝下诏征调边疆骑兵屯守各要害地区，派大将军军监治众等四人率领五千骑兵，分三路，各出塞数百里迎击，分别擒获匈奴数十人而回。
English: As a result, Han Tianzi issued a decree to send the cavalry on the frontier fortress to be stationed in the key areas, and sent four people, including the general to supervise the army, to lead the five thousand cavalry, divided into three routes, respectively, out of the frontier fortress for several hundred miles, and dozens of captured Huns came back.

古文：时匈奴亡其三骑，不敢入，即引去。
现代文：当时匈奴见己方三名骑兵逃跑，便不敢进入汉边，于是率兵退走。
English: At that time, the Huns fled three cavalry, they did not dare to invade the border fortress, and led the army to retreat.

古文：是岁，匈奴饥，人民、畜产死者什六七，又发两屯各万骑以备汉。
现代文：这一年，匈奴发生饥荒，人民、牲畜死亡十分之六七，又征调两路骑兵各万人以防备汉朝袭击。
English: In that year, the Huns suffered a famine, and 67 out of every 10 people and livestock died. In addition, 10,000 cavalrymen from both sides were conscripted to guard against attacks from the Han Dynasty.

古文：其秋，匈奴前所得西辱居左地者，其君长以下数千人皆驱畜产行，与瓯脱战，所杀伤甚众，遂南降汉。
现代文：秋季，匈奴以前所降服，居住在匈奴东部地区的西族部落，数千人在其首领的率领下，全都驱赶着自己的牲畜迁徙，与匈奴边防军遭遇，相互交战，杀伤极多，于是向南归降汉朝。
English: In the autumn, the Western tribes that had previously been subjugated by the Huns and lived in the eastern region of the Huns, thousands of people led by their chiefs, all drove their livestock to migrate, encountered the Hun border guards, fought with each other, and there were many casualties, so they returned south to the Han Dynasty.

