古文：韩游瑰，河西灵武人。
现代文：韩游瑰，河西灵武人。
English: Han Yu-kui, and Hexi Lingwu Ren.

古文：仕本军，累历偏裨，积功至邠宁节度使。
现代文：在本军任职，历任偏裨将佐，积累军功升至宁节度使。
English: He served in our army, successively serving as a vice-commander, accumulating military merit and rising to the post of Ning Jie Du.

古文：德宗出幸奉天，卫兵未集，游瑰与庆州刺史论惟明合兵三千人赴难，自乾陵北过赴醴泉以拒泚。
现代文：德宗出京临幸奉天，侍卫军尚未聚集，韩游瑰与庆州刺史论惟明合兵三千人奔赴国难，从乾陵北面经过赴醴泉以抵拒朱氵此。
English: Emperor Dezong went to Beijing to attend the enthronement ceremony, but the bodyguards had not yet gathered. Han Yu-kui and Gyeongju's chief historian, Wo Ming, together with 3,000 soldiers, rushed to the scene of the national calamity, passing from the north of Qianling to Quanquan in order to resist Zhu Xi.

古文：会有人自京城来，言贼信宿当至，上遽令追游瑰等军伍。
现代文：适逢有人从京城来，说贼兵两宿便会来到，皇上命令立即追回韩游瑰等人的部队。
English: Whenever someone came from the capital, saying that the robber soldiers would come to both quarters, the emperor ordered the troops of Han Yu Qui and others to be immediately recovered.

古文：才入壁，泚党果至。乃出斗城下，小不利，乃退入城。
现代文：刚进入壁垒，朱氵此的军队果然来到，韩游瑰便出城在城下同贼兵接战，略有失利，便退回城中。
English: As soon as they entered the barrier, Zhu Xi's army arrived, and Han Yuqi went out of the city to fight with the thief soldiers under the city. After a slight defeat, he returned to the city.

古文：贼急夺门，游瑰与贼隔门血战，会暝方解。
现代文：贼军急忙抢夺城门，韩游瑰与贼军隔着城门血战，直到天黑才解围。
English: The thief army hurried to snatch the city gate, and Han Youqi fought a bloody battle with the thief army across the city gate, until the siege was lifted in the dark.

古文：自是贼日攻城，游瑰、惟明乘城拒守，躬当矢石，不暇寝息，赴难之功，游瑰首焉。
现代文：从此贼军每天攻城，韩游瑰、论惟明倚城据守，亲自冒着弓矢流石作战，连睡觉的时间都没有，解救国难的功劳，首先要数韩游瑰。
English: From then on, the invading army attacked the city every day. Han Yu Qui and Deng Wei clearly defended the city, personally braved the arrows and stones to fight, and did not even have time to sleep. The merit of rescuing the national calamity should first be counted to Han Yu Qui.

古文：李怀光反，从驾山南。
现代文：李怀光反叛，韩游瑰随从圣驾到山南。
English: Li Huaguang rebelled, and Han Yu Qui followed him from the Holy Land to Shannan.

古文：德宗以禁军无职局，六军特置统军一员，秩从二品，以游瑰、惟明、贾隐林等分典从驾禁兵。
现代文：德宗因禁军中无职务设置，在六军中特设统军一员，品阶为从二品，命韩游瑰、论惟明、贾隐林等分别统领随从圣驾的禁军。
English: Due to the fact that there was no post set up in the forbidden army, Dezong was a member of the special unified army in the six armies, with the rank of the second grade, and the lives of Han Yuqi, On Weiming, Jia Yinglin, etc. separately led the forbidden army that followed the holy driver.

古文：李晟移军东渭桥，与骆元光、尚可孤分扼京东要路；浑瑊与游瑰、戴休颜分典京西要路，掎角进攻。
现代文：李晟移兵至东渭桥，与骆元光、尚可孤分兵扼守京师东面的要道，浑王咸与韩游瑰、戴休颜分别统兵扼守京城西面的要道，形成犄角攻击之势。
English: Li Shun moved his troops to the East Shunqiao Bridge, and together with Luo Yuanguang and Shangke Lone Soldier guarded the main road on the east side of Beijing Division, while Hun Wangxian and Han Yougui and Dai Xiuyan separately led their troops to guard the main road on the west side of Beijing, forming the potential for a surprise attack.

古文：兴元元年，检校刑部尚书、兼御史大夫，例授 奉天定难功臣 。
现代文：兴元元年，韩游瑰被授检校刑部尚书、兼御史大夫，援例授予 奉天定难功臣 的称号。
English: In the first year of the Xingyuan era, Han Youqi was awarded the title of "Shang Shu" and "Oshi Daifu" of the Criminal Investigation Department of the inspection school, and was awarded the title of "Bong Tian Dingan Gong Su" by the court.

古文：李晟收京城，游瑰三将亦破贼于咸阳。
现代文：李晟收复京师，韩游瑰等三将也在咸阳击败贼军。
English: Li Qiye recovered the Beijing division, and Han Yu Gui and other three will also defeat the Kleptocracy in Xianyang.

古文：德宗自兴元还京，浑瑊与游瑰、休颜三将从；李晟、尚可孤、骆元光三将奉迎，论功行封，与瑊等相次，还镇邠宁。
现代文：德宗从兴元返回京师，浑王咸与韩游瑰、戴休颜等三将随从，李晟、尚可孤、骆元光三将奉迎，论功行赏，韩游瑰与浑王咸等相近，之后返回宁镇署。
English: Dezong returned from Xingyuan to Beijing Division, Hun Wang Xian and Han Yu Quan, Dai Xiuyan and other three will follow, Li Qian, Shang Ke Quan, Luo Yuan Guang and others will welcome, discuss and reward, Han Yu Quan and Hun Wang Xian and others are similar, and then return to Ning Town Department.

古文：三年，以子钦绪与妖贼李广弘同谋不轨，时游瑰镇长武城，事将发，钦绪奔于邠州；邠州将吏械送京师。
现代文：贞元三年，因其子韩钦绪与妖贼李广弘共同图谋不轨，当时韩游瑰镇守长武城，事情将要发作，韩钦绪逃往州，州将吏给他戴上刑具押送京师。
English: In the third year of Zhengyuan, because his son Han Qingsu and the thief Li Guanghong were plotting together, when Han Yuqi was guarding Changwu City, things were about to happen, Han Qingsu fled to the state, and the state officials put the torture device on him and escorted him to Beijing.

古文：游瑰以子大逆，请代归，固欲诣阙，诏不许。
现代文：韩游瑰因儿子大逆不道，请求代替儿子归案，坚决要求前往京师，皇上不许。
English: Because of his son's rebellion, Han Yu-kui requested to be put on trial in place of his son, and insisted on going to Beijing, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：游瑰锁系钦绪二子送京师，请从坐，上亦宥之。
现代文：韩游瑰便将韩钦绪的两个儿子戴上枷锁送至京师，请求以胁从治罪，皇上也宽赦了他们。
English: Han Yu Kuxi then sent Han Qingsu's two sons to the capital in chains, requesting that they be coerced into committing crimes. The emperor also pardoned them.

古文：十二月，游瑰入朝，素服待罪，入朝堂；遽命释之，劳遇如故，复令还镇。
现代文：十二月，韩游瑰入朝，身着平民服装等待治罪，进入朝堂，皇上立即命人给他松绑，和从前一样对待他，又令他返回军镇。
English: In December, Han Yu Zhui entered the imperial court, dressed in civilian clothes and awaiting punishment, and entered the imperial court. The emperor immediately ordered someone to untie him, treat him the same way as before, and order him to return to the military town.

古文：初，游瑰入觐，邠州将吏以其子谋叛，又御军无政，谓必受代，饯送之礼甚薄。
现代文：起初，韩游瑰入朝觐见，州将吏因其子谋反，本人统御军队又无政绩，以为他必定会被取代，为他送行的礼仪很简单。
English: At first, Han Yu-kui entered the imperial court to see the state generals because his son plotted a rebellion, and he himself had no political achievements in commanding the army. He thought that he would definitely be replaced, and the etiquette for his departure was simple.

古文：及游瑰见上，盛论边事，请筑丰义城以备蕃寇，上以特达，委用如初。
现代文：及至韩游瑰面见皇上，畅论戍边事宜，奏请修筑丰义城以防备吐蕃入寇，皇上认为他特别通达事理，和原来一样委用他。
English: When he visited Korea and met the emperor face-to-face, they had a good discussion about border issues and requested the construction of the Fengyi City to prevent the invasion of Tibetans. The emperor thought he was very knowledgeable about the matter and appointed him as before.

古文：及还镇，军中惧不自安。
现代文：待韩游瑰回镇，军中将吏皆恐惧不安。
English: While waiting for Han Yu to return to the town, the military generals were all afraid and uneasy.

古文：大将范希朝善将兵，名闻军中；游瑰畏其逼己，将因事诛之。
现代文：大将范希朝善于带兵，在军中闻名，韩游瑰害怕他胁迫自己，准备借故杀掉他。
English: General Fan Xichang is good at leading troops and is well-known in the army. Han Yu Qui is afraid of him coercing himself and is preparing to kill him under false pretenses.

古文：希朝惧，出奔凤翔。上素知名，召入宿卫。
现代文：范希朝恐惧，出逃至凤翔，皇上素来闻知其名声，召他入宫任值宿警卫。
English: Fan Xichang was afraid and fled to Fengxiang. The emperor had heard of his reputation and summoned him to the palace to serve as a guard on duty.

古文：及游瑰遣五百人筑丰义城，两板而溃。
现代文：及至韩游瑰派遣五百人修筑丰义城，筑了两层便垮了。
English: When Han Yuqi sent five hundred people to build Fengyi City, they built two floors and then collapsed.

古文：又宁州戍卒数百人，纵掠而叛。
现代文：义宁州守兵数百人，肆意抢掠直至叛乱。
English: Hundreds of Yining State guardsmen looted and pillaged until they rebelled.

古文：其无方略，失士心，皆此类也。
现代文：韩游瑰治军无方，失去人心，都表现为这类事。
English: This is the kind of thing that shows that Han Youji has no way to govern the army and has lost the hearts of the people.

古文：自宁州卒叛，吐蕃入寇，游瑰自率众戍宁州。
现代文：自从宁州守军叛变，吐蕃入侵，韩游瑰就亲自率兵戍守宁州。
English: Ever since the Ningzhou defenders mutinied and the Tubo invaded, Han Yu Qui personally led the troops to defend Ningzhou.

古文：四年七月，除将军张献甫代游瑰，不俟献甫至，又不告众知，乃轻骑夜出归朝。
现代文：贞元四年七月，朝廷任命将军张献甫替代韩游瑰，韩游瑰不等张献甫到达，又不告诉部下知道，便轻装骑马连夜出镇回朝。
English: In July of the 4th year of the Zhengyuan, the imperial court appointed General Zhang Xianfu to replace Han Yuqi. Han Yuqi did not wait for Zhang Xianfu to arrive, and without telling his subordinates, he rode out of town on horseback overnight.

古文：将卒素骄，闻献甫严急，因其无帅，纵兵大掠，且围监军杨明义第，请奏范希朝为帅。
现代文：他部下将士素来骄横，听说张献甫治军严明急迫，便趁着没有主帅的时机，放纵士兵大肆抢掠，并且包围了监军杨明义的住宅，要求他奏请范希朝为主帅。
English: His subordinates, who had always been arrogant, heard that Zhang Xianfu was in a hurry to lead the army, so they took advantage of the lack of a commander to allow the soldiers to loot and plunder. They also surrounded the residence of Yang Mingyi, the commander of the army, and demanded that he invite Fan Xichang to be the commander.

古文：都虞侯杨朝晟初逃难郊外，翌日闻请希朝，乃复入城，与军众曰： 所请甚惬，我来贺也。 
现代文：都虞候杨朝晟起初逃难到郊外，次日听说请求让范希朝为主帅，便返身入城，对军士们说： 你们的请求令人快意，我来恭贺啊。 
English: The next day, after hearing of the request to make Fan Xichang the head coach, he returned to the city and said to the sergeants: Your request is gratifying, let me congratulate you.

古文：叛卒稍安。
现代文：叛军这才渐渐安静下来。
English: Only then did the rebels gradually calm down.

古文：朝晟乃与诸将密谋，晨率甲兵而出，召叛卒告曰： 前请者不获，张尚书来，昨日已入邠州。
现代文：杨朝晟便与诸将密谋，清晨率领甲士出来，召集叛乱的兵士告诉他们说： 你们先前的请求未获皇上恩准，张尚书来了，昨日已进入州城。
English: Yang Zhaohui then conspired with the generals and led his armourers out in the early morning to summon the mutinous soldiers and tell them: Your previous request was not approved by the emperor. Zhang Shangshu has arrived and entered the state capital yesterday.

古文：汝等谋叛，皆当死。
现代文：你们谋反，皆当死罪。
English: If you conspire to rebel, you shall all be put to death.

古文：吾不尽杀，谁为贼首，各言之，以罪归之，余悉不问。 
现代文：我不会把你们都杀死，谁是贼首，各人说清楚，罪责由他们承担，其余的人概不追究。 
English: I'm not going to kill you all. Each of you must say who is the ringleader, and they will be held responsible. The rest of you will not be prosecuted.

古文：于众中唱二百余人，立斩之，军城方定。
现代文：在叛卒中点出两百多人，立即处斩，军队才得以安定。
English: More than two hundred people were singled out as traitors and immediately executed, and the army was able to stabilize.

古文：上闻军情欲希朝，乃授宁州刺史，为献甫邠宁之副。
现代文：皇上听说军心拥戴范希朝，便授范希朝宁州刺史，作为宁节度使张献甫的副职。
English: When the emperor heard that the military heart supported Fan Xichang, he gave Fan Xichang the deputy post of Ningzhou Sashishi, as the deputy of Zhang Xianfu, the commander of Ning Festival.

古文：游瑰至京，授右龙武统军。
现代文：韩游瑰回到京师后，被授右龙武统军。
English: After Han Yu-kui returned to Beijing, he was awarded the Right Dragon Military Unification Army.

古文：十四年卒。
现代文：贞元十四年去世。
English: She died in the 14th year of Sadamoto.

