古文：行夫掌邦国传遽之小事恶、而无礼者。
现代文：行夫负责乘轻车前往诸侯国传达小事，这是一些有关福庆或丧荒而出使传达者无须讲究礼的事。
English: The messenger is responsible for taking a light car to the principality to convey small things, which are some things about Fuqing or mourning that the messenger does not need to be polite.

古文：凡其使也，必以旌节，虽道有难，而不时必达，居于其国，则掌行人之劳辱事焉，使则介之。
现代文：凡行夫出使，必须持有旌节，即使出使途中因故而不能按时到达，也一定要把王的命令传达到。如果随大行人出使而留居在出使国，就负责听从大行人指使干一些繁杂低贱的事，大行人为使臣就为他担任介。
English: If you stay in the country of the envoy, you will be responsible for listening to the instructions of the envoy to do some complicated and lowly things. If the envoy is an envoy, the envoy will serve as his intermediary.

古文：环人掌送邦国之通宾客，以路节达诸四方。
现代文：环人负责迎送诸侯国以常事往来的宾客，发给旌节使他们能通行王畿内四方。
English: The ring bearers were responsible for welcoming the guests of the vassal states who were on a regular business trip, and they were given a scepter so that they could travel in all directions within the kingdom.

古文：舍则授馆，令聚柝，有任器，则令环之。
现代文：宾客住宿就负责安排馆舍，并命令野庐氏聚集民众击柝守卫。宾客带有器物的，就令人环绕巡视以备盗贼。
English: The guest accommodation is responsible for arranging the premises, and orders Mr. Nozaki to gather the people to beat the guards. Guests with utensils are made to patrol around in case of thieves.

古文：凡门关无几，送逆及疆。
现代文：有环人迎送的宾客凡经过门关都不检查，送客和迎客都抵达畿疆。
English: Guests who are escorted by ring bearers are not checked when they pass through the gate, and both the escorting guests and the welcoming guests have arrived in Kijiang.

古文：象胥掌蛮、夷、闽、貉、戎、狄之国使，掌傅王之言而谕说焉，以和亲之。
现代文：象胥掌管蛮、夷、闽、貉、戎、狄之国前来烧聘的使者，负责向他们传达王的话而使他们知晓，以同他们相亲和。
English: He was in charge of the emissaries who came to the kingdoms of the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians, the barbarians and the barbarians.

古文：若以时入宾，则协其礼与其辞言传之。
现代文：如果蕃国新君即位按时来朝为宾，就协调他们的礼仪，传达他们告请王的言辞，并把王的话告诉他们。
English: If the new prince of the country comes to the throne on time as a guest, he will coordinate their etiquette, convey their words of invitation to the king, and tell them the king's words.

古文：凡其出入、送逆之礼节、币帛、辞令而宾相之。
现代文：凡有关蕃君从来至离去的迎送礼节、献币帛、致辞令等，都担任摈相而协助他们行礼。
English: All of the greetings, coin offerings, speeches, etc. related to the emperors from the past to the present have served as masks to assist them in performing the salute.

古文：凡国之大丧，诏相国客之礼仪而正其位。
现代文：凡王国有大丧，告教并协助蕃国前来吊丧的使臣行丧礼，而规正他们的哭位。
English: Wherever there is a great mourning in the kingdom, the envoys who have come to inform and assist the mourning of the country will perform the funeral ceremony and regulate their crying place.

古文：凡军旅、会同，受国客币而宾礼之。
现代文：凡王国有出征、会同的事，就接受蕃国前来慰问的使臣奉进的币帛，而以礼敬待他们。
English: Whenever the kingdom had to go to war or take part in a joint venture, it would accept the money brought in by the envoys who came to the country to offer condolences, and treat them with respect.

古文：凡作事，王之大事诸侯，次事卿，次事大夫，次事上士，下事庶子。
现代文：凡使人去做某项事情，王的大事就使诸侯去做，次一等的事就使卿去做，再次一等的事就使大夫去做，再次一等的事就使士去做，小事就使庶子去做。
English: Whosoever sets a man to do a thing, let the princes do the king's business, and the nobles the second, and the doctors the first, and the ambassadors the first, and the bastards the least.

古文：掌客，掌四方宾客之牢礼、饩献、饮食之等数，与其政治。
现代文：掌客掌管招待四方宾客所当供给的牲牢、饔饩、乘禽和饮食的不同等级的不同礼数，以及有关行礼厚薄的原则。
English: The host is in charge of the number of different levels of different levels of livestock, donkeys, poultry and food that should be provided to the four guests, as well as the principles of the thickness of the salute.

古文：王合诸侯而飨礼，则具十有二牢，庶具百物备，诸侯长十有再献。
现代文：王与诸侯会同而举行飨礼，就具备十二太牢，并具备百种美昧。在飨礼上对于诸侯之长，要行十二次献酒之礼。
English: When the king and princes hold a banquet together, there are twelve deities, and they have a hundred kinds of beauty. In the banquet, for the princes, there are twelve times of offering wine.

古文：王巡守殷国，则国君膳以牲犊，令百官、百牲皆具，従者。
现代文：王巡守天下或在附近的诸侯国接见众来朝的诸侯，王所在国的国君要向王进膳而用牛犊，命令供给王的百官所用的众多的牲牢都要具备。
English: The king was on a tour of the world or in a nearby vassal state receiving all the vassals who had come to the imperial court. The sovereign of the country in which the king was to dine had to use oxen, and he had ordered that the many cattle pens used by the king's officials should be provided.

古文：三公眡上公之礼，卿眡侯伯之礼，大夫眡子男之礼，士眡诸侯之卿礼，庶子壹眡其大夫之礼。
现代文：对于王的随从官员，三公比照上公的礼来接待，卿比照侯伯的礼来接待，大夫比照子男的礼来接待，士比照诸侯之卿的礼来接待，庶子比照诸侯之大夫的礼来接待。
English: For the king's attendant officials, the three princes received them according to the courtesy of the prince, the lord received them according to the courtesy of the lord, the doctor received them according to the courtesy of the son, the scholar received them according to the courtesy of the lord, and the son-in-law received them according to the courtesy of the doctor.

古文：凡诸侯之礼：上公五积，皆饩飧牵，三问皆修，群介行人宰史皆有牢；飧五牢，食四十，簠十，豆四十，鉶四十有二，壶四十，鼎簋十有二，牲三十有六，皆陈；饔饩九牢，其死牢如飧之陈，牵四牢，米百有二十筥，醯醢百有二十瓮，车皆陈，车米眡生牢，牢十车，车秉有五籔，车禾眡死牢，牢十车，车三秅，刍薪倍禾，皆陈；乘禽，日九十双，殷膳大牢，以及归，三飨，三食，三燕，若弗酌，则以币致之；凡介行人宰史皆有飧饔饩，以其爵等为之牢礼之陈数，唯上介有禽献；夫人致礼，八壶，八豆，八笾，膳大牢，致飨大牢，食大牢；卿皆见以羔。
现代文：凡接待来朝诸侯之礼：上公。供给的飧食用五牢，还有各种美味食物四十豆，稻饭、梁饭十簋，各种菹菜和酱类四十豆，各种肉羹三十二铡，酒四十壶，盛牲肉的鼎和盛黍饭、稷饭的簋各十二，鲜牲肉三十六鼎，都加以陈列。
English: For those who are receiving guests from the princes: Shangguan. The bowls provided are for five dungeons, and there are also forty beans of various delicious foods, ten bowls of rice and longan rice, forty beans of various stews and sauces, thirty-two bowls of various meat jellies, forty jars of wine, twelve bowls of meat and twelve bowls of rice and rice, and thirty-six bowls of fresh meat. All of them are displayed.

古文：膳大牢，侯伯四积，皆眡飧牵，再问，皆修；四牢，食三十有二，簠八，豆三十有二，鉶二十有八，壶三十有二，鼎簋十有二，腥二十有七，皆陈；饔饩七牢，其死牢如鉶之陈；牵三牢，米百筥，醯醢百瓮，皆陈；米三十车，禾四十车，刍薪倍禾，皆陈；乘禽日七十双，殷膳大牢，三饔，再食，再燕。
现代文：两次问礼每次都进献有脯。供给的飧食用四牢，还有各种美味食物四十豆，稻饭、粱饭八篮，各种菹菜和酱类三十二豆，各种肉羹二十四铡，酒三十二壶，盛牲肉的鼎和盛黍饭、稷饭的簋各十二，鲜牲肉二十七鼎，都加以陈列。馈送的饔饩有七牢，其中已杀的牲牢如同飧食所供牲牢的陈列法，还有活牲三牢，米一百笛，醋酱一百瓮，都加以陈列；米三十车，禾四十车，饲草和薪柴比禾多一倍，都加以陈列。乘禽每天供给七十双。中间又馈送太牢为膳食。
English: In each of the two times of asking for gifts, offerings were made. The offerings of food were displayed in four dungeons, as well as various delicious foods: forty beans, rice and glutinous rice, eight baskets, various stews and sauces, thirty-two beans, various jars of meat, thirty-two jars of wine, twelve jars of meat, twelve jars of glutinous rice and glutinous rice, and twenty-seven jars of fresh meat. The offerings of food were displayed in seven dungeons, of which the killed animal dungeons were displayed as if they were for animal dungeons, and three live animals, one hundred flutes of rice,

古文：凡介行人宰史皆有飧饔饩，以其爵等为之礼，唯上介有禽献；夫人致礼，八壶，八豆，八笾，膳大牢，致飨大牢，卿皆见以羔，膳牲牛。
现代文：凡随从宾的介、行人、宰、史诸官，也都馈送得有飧食和饔饩，依照他们爵位的等级来决定馈送牢礼的多少，其中只有上介供应乘禽。主君夫人向宾所馈赠的礼物有：六壶，六豆，六笾，馈送的膳食与馈送的飨礼相同而不另馈送飨礼。
English: All the attendants of the guests, such as the porter, the peddler, the butler, and the historian, were also given food and drink, and the amount of the dowry was determined according to their rank. Among them, only the hostess served poultry. The gifts given by the hostess to the guests were: six pots, six beans, and six gourds. The meal given was the same as the dowry given, but the dowry was not given.

古文：子男三积，皆眡食牵，壹问，以修，食三牢，食二十有四，簠六，豆二十有四，鉶十有八，壶二十有四，鼎簋十有二，牲十有八，皆陈；饔饩五牢，其死牢如食之陈；牵二牢，米八十筥，醯醢八十瓮，皆陈；米二十车，禾三十车，刍薪倍禾，皆乘，乘禽日五十双，壹飨，壹食，壹燕；凡介行人宰史皆有食饔饩，以其爵等为之礼，唯上介有禽献；夫人致礼，六壶，六豆，六笾，膳眡致饔；亲见卿皆膳特牛。
现代文：主国的亲来见宾的卿，都要向宾馈送一头牛用作膳食。凡诸侯的卿、大夫、士来行聘礼而作为国客，就用如同他们为君做介时接待他们的礼数来接待他们。
English: When the relatives of the host country come to see the guests, they should feed the guests with a cow as a meal. If the lords, doctors, and nobles come to make a betrothal and are guests of the state, they should receive them with the same number of courtesies as they received them when they were mediating for you.

古文：凡诸侯之卿大夫士为国客，则如其介之礼以待之。凡礼宾客，国新杀礼，凶荒杀礼，札丧杀礼，祸灾杀礼，在野在外，杀礼。
现代文：凡以礼接待宾客，国家新建立礼就可以从简，有大灾荒礼从简，有大瘟疫礼从简，遭受兵寇侵犯或水火灾害礼从简，在野地、在畿外礼从简。
English: Wherever guests are received with etiquette, the country's newly established etiquette can be from Jane, there is a great disaster and famine etiquette from Jane, there is a great plague etiquette from Jane, invaded by soldiers and robbers or water and fire disaster etiquette from Jane, in the field, in the Kinki region and abroad etiquette from Jane.

古文：凡宾客死，致礼以丧用。
现代文：凡宾客在主国期间死亡，主国就馈送礼物以供丧用。
English: If a guest dies while in the host country, the host country sends a gift for the guest's funeral.

古文：宾客有丧，唯刍稍之受。
现代文：宾客进入主国后闻报有丧，就只接受主国供给的饲草和粮食。
English: After the guests enter the host country, they only accept the fodder and grain provided by the host country.

古文：遭主国之丧，不受飨食，受牲礼。
现代文：如果宾客进入主国后遭逢主国的丧事，就不接受主国的飨礼和食礼，而接受生牲肉。
English: If, after entering the host country, the guest is mourned by the host country, he will not accept the host country's funeral and meal gifts, but will accept raw meat.

古文：掌讶掌邦国之等籍以待宾客。
现代文：掌讶掌管有关诸侯国礼仪等级的簿籍，据以接待宾客。
English: The palms of the hands are in charge of the book of the etiquette of the state, according to which the guests are received.

古文：若将有国宾客至，则戒官修委积，与士逆宾于疆，为前驱而入。
现代文：如果将有诸侯国的宾客到来，就告诫有关官吏准备好粮草，与讶士一起到畿疆迎接宾客，为宾客做前导而进入国境。
English: If there will be guests from the princely states arriving, they will warn the relevant officials to prepare grain and grass, and go to Kijiang with the surprise guests to welcome the guests, and enter the border as a guide for the guests.

古文：及宿，则令聚柝。
现代文：到宾客住宿下来，就命令野庐氏聚集民众击柝守卫。
English: Once the guests had settled in, Mr. Nozaki ordered the people to gather and attack the guards.

古文：及委，则致积。
现代文：到向宾客赠送粮草时，就以王的名义赠送给宾。
English: When presenting grain and grass to the guests, it is presented to the guests in the name of the king.

古文：至于国，宾入馆，次于舍门外，待事于客。
现代文：到达国都，宾客住进馆舍，就在宾馆门外搭起帐篷，以待宾客有事时帮助处理。
English: Upon arrival in the capital, guests live in the building and set up a tent outside the hotel door to wait for guests to help them in case of emergency.

古文：及将币，为前驱，至于朝，诏其位，入复。
现代文：宾客将要上朝去向国君授玉行朝见礼，就为宾客做前导。宾客到朝，告诉他们应处的朝位，然后进去向王报告。
English: When the guests are about to go to the palace to present the Emperor with the imperial regalia and perform the morning salute, he will act as a guide for the guests. When the guests arrive in the morning, he will tell them where the throne is, and then he will go in and report to the king.

古文：及退，亦如之。
现代文：到宾客退出时，也同样做前导。
English: When the guests leave, he also leads the procession.

古文：凡宾客之治，令讶讶治之。
现代文：凡宾客有事要报告，就告诉掌讶，掌讶入朝报告而加以办理。
English: Whenever a guest has something to report, he or she should tell the hostess, who will then handle the report in the morning.

古文：凡従者出，则使人道之。
现代文：凡宾客的随从官员出入，就派人做前导。
English: Whenever a guest's entourage of officials enters or leaves, they send someone to act as a guide.

古文：及归，送亦如之。
现代文：到宾客回国时，送宾客的礼仪也同迎接时一样。
English: When guests return home, the etiquette for seeing them off is the same as that for greeting them.

古文：凡宾客，诸侯有卿讶，卿有大夫讶，大夫有士讶，士皆有讶。
现代文：凡宾客，到行朝聘礼那天，王要派讶前往宾馆迎接：是诸侯就由卿充任讶，是卿就由大夫充任讶，是大夫就由士充任讶，是士也都有讶。
English: For all guests, on the day of the wedding ceremony, the king should send a surprise to the hotel to greet them: if it is the princes, the lord will be surprised, if it is the lord, the doctor will be surprised, the doctor will be surprised, and the gentleman will be surprised.

古文：凡讶者，宾客至而往，诏相其事而掌其治令。
现代文：凡充任讶的，宾客到来就前往宾馆，告教和协助宾客行礼事，并负责处理有关事宜。
English: Anyone who is surprised by the arrival of the guests will go to the hotel, advise and assist the guests to perform the formalities, and be responsible for dealing with the relevant matters.

古文：掌交掌以节与币巡邦国之诸侯，及其万民之所聚者，道王之德意志虑，使咸知王之好恶辟行之，使和诸侯之好，达万民之说。
现代文：掌交负责持旌节和币巡视诸侯国，以及各国民众聚居的大城邑，宣扬王的德行、意图、志向和思虑，使人们了解王的好恶，王所憎恶的事就避而不做。使诸侯之间和睦友好。
English: The head of the diplomatic service is responsible for touring the principalities and the large cities where people from all over the world live, holding the imperial scepter and coins, to promote the king's virtues, intentions, aspirations and thoughts, to make people understand the king's likes and dislikes, and to avoid doing what the king hates, and to promote harmony and friendship between the princes.

古文：掌邦国之通事而结其交好，以谕九税之利，九礼之亲，九牧之维，九禁之难，九戎之威。
现代文：把民众喜欢的事告诉王或诸侯国君。负责诸侯国的朝觐、聘问等蝴夸往魄事，而缔结诸侯与王以及诸侯之间的友好。向诸侯国宣传九税制度的好处，九礼制度对于诸侯国的亲睦作用，九牧制度对诸侯国的维系作用，九禁之法的难以触犯，九戎之法的威武。
English: Tell the king or the prince of the vassal state what the people like. Be responsible for the pompous affairs of the vassal state, such as pilgrimages and interviews, and conclude the friendship between the vassals and the king and the vassals. Publicize the benefits of the nine-tax system to the vassal state, the role of the nine-ritual system for the friendship of the vassal state, the role of the nine-pastoral system for the maintenance of the vassal state, the difficulty of violating the nine-forbidden law, and the power of the nine-force law.

古文：朝大夫掌都家之国治。
现代文：朝大夫负责依照王国的政令和指示治理采邑。
English: Dr. Chao is responsible for administering the county in accordance with the kingdom's decrees and instructions.

古文：日朝以听国事故，以告其君长。
现代文：每天上朝听取有关王国的政事，以报告给本采邑的君和卿大夫。
English: Every day he went to court to hear about the affairs of state in the kingdom, and to report to the prince and the lord doctor of this province.

古文：国有政令，则令其朝大夫。
现代文：主国有专施于采邑的政令，就下达给采邑的朝大夫。
English: If the host country has a special decree for a mining town, it will be issued to the chief doctor of the mining town.

古文：凡都家之治于国者，必因其朝大夫然后听之，唯大事弗因，凡都家之治有不及者，则诛其朝大夫。
现代文：凡采邑的政事要请示王国的，一定要通过朝大夫转达，然后王朝官吏受理，只有大事可以不通过朝大夫转达，而派专使来向王国请示。
English: All matters concerning the government of the province that require instructions from the kingdom must be conveyed through the imperial doctor and then accepted by the officials of the dynasty. Only important matters may not be conveyed through the imperial doctor, but a special envoy may be sent to request instructions from the kingdom.

古文：在军旅，则诛其有司。
现代文：凡采邑的政事有拖延而不及时办理的，就惩罚朝大夫；如果在军中有类似的情况发生，就惩罚采邑的有关官吏。
English: If there is any delay in handling the political affairs of the county seat, the court doctor will be punished; if a similar situation occurs in the army, the relevant officials of the county seat will be punished.

