古文：刘宗周黄道周
现代文：刘宗周，字起东，山阴人。
English: Liu Zong Zhou, the characters from the East, Shan Yin people.

古文：刘宗周，字起东，山阴人。
现代文：他的父亲刘坡是一个童生。
English: His father, Liu Po, was a child.

古文：父坡，为诸生。母章氏妊五月而坡亡。
现代文：他的母亲章氏怀他五个月时他父亲死了。
English: His father died when his mother, Zhang, was five months pregnant with him.

古文：既生宗周，家酷贫，携之育外家。
现代文：生下宗周后，家里酷贫，章氏把他带到外祖父家里养育。
English: After Zong Zhou was born, his family was extremely poor. Mr. Zhang took him to his grandfather's house to raise him.

古文：后以宗周大父老疾，归事之，析薪汲水，持药糜。
现代文：后来因为宗周的祖父老而且生病，他回去侍候，挑水砍柴，煮药烧粥。
English: Later, because Zong Zhou's grandfather was old and sick, he went back to wait, fetch water, chop wood, cook medicine and make porridge.

古文：然体孱甚，母尝忧念之不置，遂成疾。又以贫故，忍而不治。
现代文：但是宗周身体虚弱，母亲常常忧念他，放不下心，终于生了病，又因为家里穷，忍着不治疗。
English: However, Zong Zhou's health was weak, and his mother often worried about him and couldn't let go of her heart. Finally, she got sick, and because the family was poor, she couldn't bear to treat him.

古文：万历二十九年，宗周成进士，母卒于家。
现代文：万历二十九年，宗周考中进士，他的母亲死在家里了。
English: In the 29th year of Wanli, Zong Zhou passed the middle school entrance examination, and his mother died at home.

古文：宗周奔丧，为垩室中门外，日哭泣其中。
现代文：宗周奔丧到家，在中门外搭了一间居丧的白泥屋，天天在里边哭自己的母亲。
English: Zong Zhou rushed home in mourning and built a mourning white mud house outside the middle gate, crying his mother inside every day.

古文：服阕，选行人，请养大父母。
现代文：脱下丧服后，朝廷选派他当行人，宗周请求回家赡养祖父母。
English: After taking off his mourning clothes, the imperial court selected him as a pedestrian, and Zong Zhou asked him to go home and support his grandparents.

古文：遭丧，居七年始赴补。
现代文：祖父母下世后，中间过了七年宗周才赴京候补。
English: After my grandparents passed away, it was seven years before I went to Beijing to stand in for them.

古文：母以节闻于朝。
现代文：他的母亲因为贞节扬名于朝廷。
English: His mother was famous at court for her chastity.

古文：时有昆党、宣党与东林为难。
现代文：当时朝廷里边有昆党、宣党跟东林作对。
English: At that time, there were Kunquists and Xuanists in the imperial court who opposed Donglin.

古文：宗周上言： 东林，顾宪成讲学处。
现代文：宗周上书说： 东林是顾宪成讲学的地方。
English: Zong Zhou wrote: Donglin is the place where Gu Xiancheng lectured.

古文：高攀龙、刘永澄、姜士昌、刘元珍，皆贤人。
现代文：高攀龙、刘永澄、姜士昌、刘元珍都是贤人。
English: Gao Panglong, Liu Yongcheng, Jiang Shichang, Liu Yuanzhen are all sages.

古文：于玉立、丁元荐，较然不欺其志，有国士风。
现代文：于玉立、丁元荐为人清白，心口如一，有国士的气度。
English: Yu Yu Li and Ding Yuan are innocent and sincere, with the spirit of a statesman.

古文：诸臣摘流品可也，争意见不可；攻东林可也，党昆、宣不可。 
现代文：那些大臣指摘他们的人品是可以的，争论意见的短长就不应该；攻击东林也可以，偏袒昆党、宣党就不应该了。 
English: It is acceptable for those ministers to point out their characters, but it is not acceptable to argue about the brevity of their opinions; it is acceptable to attack Donglin, but it is not acceptable to favor the Kuomintang or promote the Kuomintang.

古文：党人大哗，宗周乃请告归。
现代文：这下党人大肆吵闹，宗周只好请假回乡去了。
English: The party members made a lot of noise, and Zong Zhou had to take a leave of absence and go back to his hometown.

古文：天启元年，起仪制主事。
现代文：天启元年，朝廷起用宗周为仪制主事。
English: In the first year of the Tenkai era, the Imperial Court appointed Zong Zhou as the master of ceremonies.

古文：疏言： 魏进忠导皇上驰射戏剧，奉圣夫人出入自由。
现代文：宗周上书说： 魏进忠引导皇上搞什么骑马射箭，表演戏剧，让奉圣夫人出入自由。
English: Zong Zhou's letter said: Wei Jinzhong guided the emperor to engage in horse riding, archery, and theatrical performances, and allowed Lady Feng Sheng to come and go freely.

古文：一举逐谏臣三人，罚一人，皆出中旨，势将指鹿为马，生杀予夺，制国家大命。
现代文：一下子就赶走三名谏官，罚一名谏官，这都是从宫廷中直接传下圣旨，这样发展下去，进忠势必会指鹿为马，蒙骗皇上，对百官享有生杀予夺的权力，控制国家政权。
English: In one fell swoop, he drove away three eunuchs and punished one eunuch, all of which were decreed directly from the court. If this trend continues, Jin Zhong is bound to deceive the emperor, enjoy the power of life and death over hundreds of officials, and control the state power.

古文：今东西方用兵，奈何以天下委阉竖乎？ 
现代文：现在东西方都正用兵，皇上怎么能把天下交由宦官主宰呢？ 
English: Now that both the East and the West are using soldiers, how can the emperor hand over the world to eunuchs?

古文：进忠者魏忠贤也，大怒，停宗周俸半年。
现代文：进忠，即魏忠贤，见到这篇奏疏后大怒，扣了宗周半年官俸。
English: Jinzhong, that is, Wei Zhongxian, was furious after seeing this report, and deducted half a year's salary from Zongzhou.

古文：寻以国法未伸请戮崔文升以正弑君之罪，戮卢受以正交私之罪，戮杨镐、李如桢、李维翰、郑之范以正丧师失地之罪，戮高出、胡嘉栋、康应乾、牛维曜、刘国缙、傅国以正弃城逃溃之罪；急起李三才为兵部尚书，录用清议名贤丁元荐、李朴等，诤臣杨涟、刘重庆等，以作仗节徇义之气。
现代文：不久宗周认为国家有法不行，上书请求杀掉崔文升惩办他谋害皇上的大罪；杀掉卢受，惩办他私相勾结的罪行；杀掉杨镐、李如桢、李维翰、郑之范，惩办他们丧师失地的罪行；杀掉高出、胡嘉栋、康应乾、牛维曜、刘国缙、傅国，惩办他们弃城逃跑的罪行；赶快起用李三才为兵部尚书，选用群众公认的名贤丁元荐、李朴等，诤臣杨涟、刘重庆等，以便振奋天下英雄仗节殉义的气概。
English: Soon, Zong Zhou thought that the country could not have laws, and wrote a letter requesting to kill Cui Wensheng to punish him for the great crime of plotting to kill the emperor; kill Lu Zhu to punish him for the crime of collusion; kill Yang Qian, Li Ruxuan, Li Weihan, and Zheng Zhifan to punish them for the crime of losing their teacher and land; kill Gao Gao, Hu Jiadong, Kang Yingqian, Niu Weiyou, Liu Guojun, and Fu Guo to punish them for the crime of abandoning the city and fleeing; quickly use Li Sancai as the military department's official book,

古文：帝切责之。
现代文：熹宗严厉批评了他。
English: Emperor Taizong severely criticized him.

古文：累迁光禄丞、尚宝、太仆少卿，移疾归。
现代文：后来，宗周历任光禄丞、尚宝丞、太仆少卿，又请病假回乡去了。
English: Later, Zong Zhou successively held the posts of Guanglu Rongcheng, Shang Bao Rongcheng, and Taigu Shaoqing, and went back to his hometown on sick leave.

古文：四年，起右通政，至则忠贤逐东林且尽，宗周复固辞。
现代文：天启四年，宗周起复为右通政，到京城后看到魏忠贤差不多把东林党人赶尽了又坚决辞官不做。
English: In the fourth year of the Apocalypse, Zong Zhou was reinstated as the right-hand politician. After arriving in Beijing, he saw that Wei Zhongxian had almost driven out the Donglin party members and resolutely resigned from the post.

古文：忠贤责以矫情厌世，削其籍。
现代文：魏忠贤批评他矫揉造作，悲观厌世，就剥夺了他的官籍。
English: Wei Zhongxian criticized him for being pretentious and pessimistic, and deprived him of his official status.

古文：崇祯元年冬，召为顺天府尹。辞，不许。
现代文：崇祯元年冬季，朝廷召宗周担任顺天府尹，宗周推辞，朝廷不允许。
English: In the winter of the first year of Chongzhen, the imperial court summoned Zong Zhou to serve as Shuntianfu Yin, Zong Zhou declined, and the imperial court did not allow it.

古文：明年九月入都，上疏曰：
现代文：第二年九月宗周来到都城，上书说：
English: In September of the following year, Zong Zhou came to the capital and wrote:

古文：陛下励精求治，宵旰靡宁。
现代文： 陛下励精图治，昼夜不停地工作，这是好事。
English: It is a good thing that His Majesty is working so hard, day and night.

古文：然程效太急，不免见小利而速近功，何以致唐、虞之治？
现代文：但是急于告功，不免见小利而求速效，这样怎么会达到唐尧、虞舜那样的政治局面呢？
English: However, in their eagerness to claim credit, they inevitably see small profits and seek quick results. How can this lead to a political situation like that of Tang Xi and Yu Xi?

古文：夫今日所汲汲于近功者，非兵事乎？
现代文： 现在朝廷渴望收取速效的不是军事吗？
English: Is it not the case that the imperial court is now eager to receive quick results from the military?

古文：诚以屯守为上策，简卒节饷，修刑政而威信布之，需以岁月，未有不望风束甲者，而陛下方锐意中兴，刻期出塞。
现代文：假如真能把驻守当成上策，选派精兵，节约军饷，整顿朝廷的刑政，拿出威信给敌寇看看，不消几年，敌寇都会望风束甲了。可是陛下现在锐意中兴，命令部队刻期出塞，试图消灭敌寇。
English: If it were really possible to regard garrisoning as the best policy, to select the best soldiers, to economize on military pay, to rectify the criminal policy of the imperial court, and to show the prestige to the enemy corsairs, it would not take several years for the enemy corsairs to look forward to it. However, His Majesty is now eager to rejuvenate, and has ordered the troops to leave the fortress on schedule in an attempt to eliminate the enemy corsairs.

古文：当此三空四尽之秋，竭天下之力以奉饥军而军愈骄，聚天下之军以博一战而战无日，此计之左也。
现代文：当此国家三空四虚的关头，竭尽国家的财力供应缺饷的军队，军队就会越来越骄横；集结全国的兵力想博取一次胜利，但是想战而不能。这是谋略的失误。
English: At a time when the country is in a critical situation, the country's financial resources are exhausted to supply the army, which is short of money, and the army will become more and more arrogant; the army of the whole country wants to win a victory, but wants to fight and cannot. This is a strategic mistake.

古文：今日所规规于小利者，非国计乎？
现代文： 现在朝廷斤斤计较的小利不是国家财政吗？
English: Is it not the state finances that are now being squeezed by the small profits of the imperial court?

古文：陛下留心民瘼，恻然恫辟，而以司农告匮，一时所讲求者皆掊克聚敛之政。
现代文：陛下关心民众疾苦，把人民的困苦很当一回事，可是另一方面因为财政匮乏，一时间所讲求的都是敲剥百姓积聚钱财的事。
English: It is one thing for His Majesty to be concerned about the hardships of the people and to take the hardships of the people very seriously, but on the other hand, because of financial shortages, all he wants to do for a while is to rob the people and accumulate money.

古文：正供不足，继以杂派；科罚不足，加以火耗。
现代文：正额赋税供应不足，又摊杂派。科罚不足，又加火耗。
English: There is a shortage of supply of full-fledged taxation, but also miscellaneous apportionment. There is a shortage of discipline and punishment, but also increased fire consumption.

古文：水旱灾伤，一切不问，敲扑日峻，道路吞声，小民至卖妻鬻子以应。
现代文：天下的水旱灾荒，一切都不管不问。对农民的剥削一天天严重起来，下边的人忍气吞声，直至卖妻鬻子，应付摊派。
English: The exploitation of farmers is getting worse day by day, and the people at the bottom are swallowing their pride until they have to sell their wives and children to pay their share.

古文：有司以掊克为循良，而抚字之政绝；上官以催征为考课，而黜陟之法亡。
现代文：地方官府把搜括当成尽职，安抚百姓的政事中断了；上级部门把催征租税作为考核标准，正常的官吏升降的规定失效了。
English: The local government regarded the search and seizure as fulfilling its duties, and the political affairs to appease the people were interrupted; the higher-level departments regarded the tax collection as the assessment standard, and the normal regulations for the promotion and demotion of officials were invalid.

古文：欲求国家有府库之财，不可得已。
现代文：想靠这些使国家的府库里堆满钱财是不可能的。
English: It is impossible to fill the coffers of the state with money by these means.

古文：功利之见动，而庙堂之上日见其烦苛。
现代文： 功利之心产生后，朝廷里的事务一天比一天苛刻。
English: After the emergence of the utilitarian spirit, the affairs of the imperial court became more and more demanding day by day.

古文：事事纠之不胜纠，人人摘之不胜摘，于是名实紊而法令滋。顷者，特严赃吏之诛，自宰执以下，坐重典者十余人，而贪风未尽息，所以导之者未善也。
现代文：事事纠举就会纠不胜纠，人人指摘就会摘不胜摘，于是名与实紊乱了，法令越来越严明，近来朝廷对脏吏的惩罚特别严厉，从辅臣而下，判处重刑的有十多人，可是贪污受贿的风气并没有全部消除，因为用来引导百官的方式不妥当。
English: As a result, name and reality have become confused, and laws and regulations have become stricter and stricter. Recently, the imperial court has imposed particularly severe punishments on corrupt officials. More than a dozen people, from vassals on down, have been sentenced to heavy prison terms. However, the culture of corruption and bribery has not been completely eliminated, because the methods used to guide officials are not appropriate.

古文：贾谊曰： 礼禁未然之先，法施已然之后。 
现代文：贾谊说过： 礼用来事先防范，法令的使用在事实既成之后。 
English: Jia Yiyi said: Etiquette is used to prevent in advance, the use of laws and regulations is after the fact.

古文：诚导之以礼，将人人有士君子之行，而无狗彘之心，所谓禁之于未然也。今一切诖误及指称贿赂者，即业经昭雪，犹从吏议，深文巧诋，绝天下迁改之途，益习为顽钝无耻，矫饰外貌以欺陛下。
现代文：现在朝廷对所有受到牵连及被指为贿赂的官员即使冤情已经明了，还要交给法官议处，法官们牵强附会，深文巧诋，断绝了天下人改正错误的机会。于是这些官吏越发学得厚颜无耻，伪装出一副忠实的外表欺骗陛下。
English: Now, the Imperial Court requires all officials who have been implicated and accused of bribery, even if their grievances have already been clarified, to submit to a judge for deliberation. The judges are far-fetched and clever in writing, cutting off the opportunity for the world to correct their mistakes. Therefore, these officials have become more and more brazen, disguising a loyal appearance to deceive His Majesty.

古文：士节日隳，官邪日著，陛下亦安能一一察之。
现代文：士人的节操越来越堕落，官场的歪风越来越厉害了，陛下又怎么去一个一个地考察他？
English: The integrity of officials is becoming more and more depraved, and the crookedness of officialdom is becoming more and more severe. How can His Majesty go to inspect them one by one?

古文：且陛下所以劳心焦思于上者，以未得贤人君子用之也，而所嘉予而委任者，率奔走集事之人：以摘发为精明，以告讦为正直，以便给为才谞，又安所得贤者而用之？
现代文： 此外陛下所以一个人在上边劳心积虑，是因为没有引进贤人君子加以信用。陛下所称赞并且予以委任的，大多是些奔走钻营、惹事生非的人，把检举他人当成精明，把揭发隐私当成正直，以能言善辩作为自己的才干，这样又怎么能得到贤人加以使用呢？
English: Moreover, your majesty, the reason why you have been so diligent in this matter is that you have not brought in wise men and gentlemen to be trusted. Most of those whom your majesty has praised and appointed are those who run around and stir up trouble, who regard denouncing others as shrewd, exposing privacy as honesty, and being able to speak eloquently as their own talent. So how can you get wise men to use them?

古文：得其人矣，求之太备，或以短而废长；责之太苛，或因过而成误。
现代文：好不容易得到几个，对他们太求全责备，有时因为一点短处就舍弃了他的长处，要求太苛刻了，有时因为一点点过失就伤害了他。
English: He got a few by hook or by crook, blaming them for too much, sometimes giving up his strengths for a little weakness, being too demanding, and sometimes hurting them for a little fault.

古文：且陛下所擘画，动出诸臣意表，不免有自用之心。
现代文： 此外陛下所谋划的事务，经常出于大臣们意料之外，不免有自以为是的思想。
English: Besides, the things that His Majesty has planned are often unexpected by the ministers, and they inevitably have self-righteous thoughts.

古文：臣下救过不给，谗谄者因而间之，猜忌之端遂从此起。
现代文：臣下救过不暇，进谗言的人借此进行离间，猜忌臣下的事端于是由此兴起。
English: The vassal has saved a lot of time, and the person who insults the vassal uses this to sow discord, and the cause of the vassal's death arises from this.

古文：夫恃一人之聪明，而使臣下不得尽其忠，则耳目有时壅；凭一人之英断，而使诸大夫国人不得衷其是，则意见有时移。
现代文：皇上如果只仗着自己的聪明办事，使臣下无自己的忠心，那么皇上的耳目不免有时要壅闭的；只仗着自己的英明决断办事，使大夫、国人都不能认定自己的意见，那么皇上的意见不免有时与实际不符。
English: If the emperor acts only on the basis of his own wisdom, so that his subjects do not have his own loyalty, then the emperor's eyes and ears must sometimes be closed; if he acts only on the basis of his own wisdom and determination, so that doctors and compatriots cannot determine their own opinions, then the emperor's opinions must sometimes be inconsistent with reality.

古文：方且为内降，为留中，何以追喜起之盛乎？
现代文：刚刚还对一个大臣传旨贬处，把他的奏章压在宫中，为什么不几天又高兴地对他加以隆重起用呢？
English: Having just handed down a demerit to a minister and pressed his report in the palace, why not use him grandly for a few days?

古文：数十年来，以门户杀天下几许正人，犹蔓延不已。
现代文：几十年来，因为门户之争朝廷杀了天下多少正人君子，现在还要蔓延不已。
English: Over the past few decades, the imperial court has killed more than a few upright people in the world because of the dispute over the portals, and it will continue to spread.

古文：陛下欲折君子以平小人之气，用小人以成君子之公，前日之覆辙将复见于天下也。
现代文：陛下如果想打击君子来平息小人们的怨气，任用小人之私来彰明君子的公德的话，过去的覆辙就会再现于天下。
English: Your Majesty, if you want to fight the gentry to appease the resentment of the little people, and appoint the villain's servant to demonstrate the gentleman's public morality, the mistakes of the past will reappear in the world.

古文：陛下求治之心，操之太急。酝酿而为功利，功利不已，转为刑名；刑名不已，流为猜忌；猜忌不已，积为壅蔽。正人心之危，所潜滋暗长而不自知者。
现代文： 陛下求取太平的心操之太急，慢慢地滋生了功利之心，功利之心不止，又转而使用刑名之术；刑名之术不止，又流变为猜忌臣下；不断地猜忌臣下，就慢慢地积为壅蔽，不解下情了，这正是人心中危险的正在潜滋暗长而不自知的因素。
English: His Majesty's desire to seek peace was too hasty, and slowly bred a utilitarianism. The utilitarianism did not stop, and turned to the use of the art of punishment; the art of punishment did not stop, and flowed into suspicion of subordinates; constantly suspecting subordinates, it slowly accumulated into a cover-up, and could not be resolved. This is precisely the dangerous factor that is latent in the human heart and grows without self-awareness.

古文：诚能建中立极，默正此心，使心之所发，悉皆仁义之良，仁以育天下，义以正万民，自朝廷达于四海，莫非仁义之化，陛下已一旦跻于尧、舜矣。
现代文：陛下假如能平心静气，站在中间立场看看两头，不做声地纠正这些错误思想，使自己思想方面所表现出的都是仁义的成份，用仁爱来化育天下，用道义来纠正万民的思想行为，从朝廷扩展到四海，到处都看得到仁义教化，那么陛下可以说一日之间就成了尧、舜一样的圣人。 
English: If Your Majesty can calm down, stand in the middle and look at both sides, quietly correct these erroneous thoughts, so that all the elements of benevolence and righteousness are manifested in your thoughts, use benevolence to nurture the world, use morality to correct the thoughts and behaviors of all people, expand from the imperial court to the four seas, and see benevolence and righteousness everywhere, then Your Majesty can be said to have become a saint like a dragonfly.

古文：帝以为迂阔，然叹其忠。
现代文：庄烈帝认为这些话迂腐、阔略，不敷实用，但对他的忠诚深表赞叹。
English: Zhuo Ledei thought that these words were pedantic, broad, and not practical enough, but he was deeply impressed by his loyalty.

古文：未几，都城被兵，帝不视朝，章奏多留中不报。传旨办布囊八百，中官竞献马骡，又令百官进马。
现代文：不多久，都城受到围攻，庄烈帝没有上朝，大臣的章奏多被扣在宫中，不予答复，传一道圣旨要准备八百只布袋，宦官们争先恐后地进献骡马，又命令百官进献马匹。
English: Before long, the capital was under siege. Emperor Zhuang didn't go to the court, and most of the ministers were detained in the palace and didn't answer. A decree was issued to prepare eight hundred cloth bags. The eunuchs scrambled to present the horses, and ordered the hundred officials to present the horses.

古文：宗周曰： 是必有以迁幸动上者。 
现代文：宗周说： 这一定是有人用迁移的主张说动了皇上。 
English: Zong Zhou said: It must have been someone who persuaded the emperor with the idea of relocation.

古文：乃诣午门叩头谏曰： 国势强弱，视人心安危。
现代文：于是他来到午门叩头谏言说： 国势的强弱全看人心的安危如何。
English: So he came to the noon gate to say: The strength of the country depends entirely on the safety of the people.

古文：乞陛下出御皇极门，延见百僚，明言宗庙山陵在此，固守外无他计。 
现代文：请陛下出宫到皇极门来，召见百官，明确宣告我朝的宗庙、陵园都在这里，除固守京师而外没有别的打算。 
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to come out of the palace to the imperial gate, summon a hundred officials, and clearly declare that the ancestral temple and cemetery of my dynasty are here, and there is no other plan except to adhere to the Beijing division.

古文：俯伏待报，自晨迄暮，中官传旨乃退。
现代文：宗周趴在地上等候回答，从清晨一直趴到黄昏时分，宦官出来传过圣旨才回去。
English: Zong Zhou lay on the ground and waited for an answer. From early morning until dusk, the eunuch lay on the ground and waited until the eunuch came out and passed on the holy will.

古文：米价腾跃，请罢九门税，修贾区以处贫民，为粥以养老疾，严行保甲之法，人心稍安。
现代文：当时米价飞涨，宗周请求罢免了京师九座城门的商税，修整商业网点，安置贫民，由官府煮粥养活老人和病人，严格推行保甲法，京师的人心才稍稍安定一些。
English: At that time, the price of rice was soaring, and Zong Zhou requested that the commercial tax of the nine city gates of Beijing Division be removed, the commercial outlets be repaired, the poor be resettled, the government cook porridge to feed the elderly and the sick, and the guarantee method be strictly implemented, so that the people's hearts of Beijing Division would be slightly more stable.

古文：时枢辅诸臣多下狱者，宗周言： 国事至此，诸臣负任使，无所逃罪，陛下亦宜分任咎。
现代文：当时中央和政府的大臣很多人被关进了监狱，宗周上书说： 国事发展到这一步，这些大臣们负有责任，无法逃脱，陛下自己也应当分担些责任。
English: At that time, many ministers of the central government and the government were put in prison. Zong Zhou wrote: The national affairs have developed to this stage, these ministers bear responsibility, they cannot escape, and His Majesty himself should also share some responsibility.

古文：禹、汤罪己，兴也勃焉。
现代文：过去夏禹、商汤逢灾罪己，他们的国家就得到勃兴。
English: In the past, Xia Yu and Shang Tang suffered from disasters, and their countries prospered.

古文：曩皇上以情面疑群臣，群臣尽在疑中，日积月累，结为阴痞，识者忧之。
现代文：过去皇上老是因为一些事情而当面怀疑群臣，群臣都在怀疑之中，日积月累，结成了暗疾，有识之士为此忧心忡忡。
English: In the past, the emperor always suspected the courtiers in person because of some things, and the courtiers were in doubt, accumulated over time, formed a secret disease, and people with insight were worried about it.

古文：今日当开示诚心，为济难之本，御便殿以延见士大夫，以票拟归阁臣，以庶政归部、院，以献可替否予言官。不效，从而更置之，无坐锢以成其罪。
现代文：现在陛下应当开示诚心，把这看成解救国难的根本，经常到便殿里去召见士大夫，把起草诏令的权力交给阁臣，把各项事务交给部、院去办，把政事的议决权交给言官，如果事情办不好，再另外安排人，不要束缚大臣的手脚促成他们的罪责。
English: Now His Majesty should show his sincerity and regard this as fundamental to the salvation of the nation. He should often go to the throne room to summon the shidafu, give the power to draft the edict to the cabinet minister, give the various affairs to the ministry and the court, and give the decision-making power of political affairs to the speaker. If things are not done well, then arrange another person. Do not tie the hands of the minister and facilitate their culpability.

古文：乃者朝廷缚文吏如孤雏，而视武健士不啻骄子，渐使恩威错置。
现代文：过去朝廷把文官像小鸡一样束缚着，把军队的武将当成了骄子，逐渐地形成恩威错置的局面。
English: In the past, the imperial court shackled the civil servants like chickens, and treated the military generals as arrogant sons, gradually forming a situation of misplaced favor.

古文：文武皆不足信，乃专任一二内臣，阃以外次第委之。
现代文：后来看文武百官都不值得信任，于是专门用那么一两个太监，京城外边一步步地安排了太监。
English: Later, seeing that all civil and military officials were untrustworthy, one or two eunuchs were specially used, and eunuchs were arranged step by step outside the capital.

古文：自古未有宦官典兵不误国者。 
现代文：自古以来没有让宦官领兵而不耽误国家大事的。 
English: Since ancient times, eunuchs have not been allowed to lead soldiers without delaying national affairs.

古文：又劾马世龙、张凤翼、吴阿衡等罪，忤帝意。
现代文：又弹劾了马世龙、张凤翼、吴阿衡等人的罪状，触犯了庄烈帝的意思。
English: He also impeached Ma Shilong, Zhang Fengyi, Wu Aheng and others, violating Zhuang Rong's will.

古文：三年以疾在告，进祈天永命之说，言：
现代文：三年，宗周因病在假，曾上过一篇关于祈求上天永保国运的道理，这篇奏疏说：
English: Three years ago, when Zong Zhou was on leave due to illness, he wrote an article on the principle of praying to the heavens for eternal national prosperity. This article said:

古文：法天之大者，莫过于重民命，则刑罚宜当宜平。
现代文： 取法上天最重要的事情莫过于重视人命，因而刑罚应适当应公平。
English: According to the law, there is nothing more important than human life, so the punishment should be appropriate and fair.

古文：陛下以重典绳下，逆党有诛，封疆失事有诛。
现代文：陛下喜欢用重刑制约臣下，逆党要杀，封疆失事也要杀。
English: His majesty likes to use heavy punishment to restrict his subjects, the opposite party wants to kill, and the failure of the blockade also wants to kill.

古文：一切诖误，重者杖死，轻者谪去，朝署中半染赭衣。
现代文：一切错误，重的杖死，轻的贬出，朝署中一半人都沾了罪徒的边。
English: All mistakes, heavy sticks die, light sticks fall out, and half of the people in the Imperial Household Agency are tainted with the sin of sin.

古文：而最伤国体者，无如诏狱。
现代文：不过最伤害国体的莫过于皇家监狱了。
English: However, there is nothing more harmful to the national body than the royal prison.

古文：副都御史易应昌以平反下吏，法司必以锻炼为忠直，苍鹰乳虎接踵于天下矣。
现代文：副都御史易应昌因为平反一事被打进监狱，法司总把拷问当成忠直，所以天下到处是些苍鹰乳虎。
English: Vice-governor Shi Yi Yingchang was sent to prison for rehabilitating a criminal. The justice department always regards torture as loyalty, so there are eagles and tigers everywhere in the world.

古文：愿体上天好生之心，首除诏狱，且宽应昌，则祈天永命之一道也。
现代文：希望陛下体察上天好生之心，首先废除皇家监狱，并且宽恕易应昌。这是祈求上苍永保国运的一种办法。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will consider the benevolence of heaven and abolish the royal prison first, and then pardon Yi Yingchang. This is a way to pray for the eternal salvation of the country.

古文：法天之大者，莫过于厚民生，则赋敛宜缓宜轻。
现代文： 取法上天最重要的事情莫过于厚民生，因而赋税征收应当放宽期限，应当减轻。
English: There is nothing more important than the well-being of the people. Therefore, the time limit for tax collection should be relaxed and the tax burden should be reduced.

古文：今者宿逋见征及来岁预征，节节追呼，闾阎困敝，贪吏益大为民厉。
现代文：现在往年的拖欠要征收，还有来年的租税要预征。这样接连不断地追着收缴，乡村里贫困破产，贪吏更加成了百姓的大害。
English: Now the arrears of previous years are to be collected, and next year's taxes are to be collected in advance. In this way, the collection is continuously pursued, the poverty in the countryside is bankrupt, and the greedy officials have become even more of a great harm to the people.

古文：贵州巡按苏琰以行李被讦于监司。
现代文：贵州巡按苏琰被监司揭发运送所谓的 行李 ，就是一个例子。
English: The case of Guizhou patrolman Su Wei, who was exposed by the supervision department for transporting so-called luggage, is an example.

古文：巡方黩货，何问下吏？
现代文：抚抚贪图货财，更不必说下边的小吏了。
English: not to mention the petty officials at the bottom.

古文：吸膏吮脂之辈，接迹于天下矣。
现代文：吮吸百姓膏脂的贪官污吏，已经是遍布全国了。
English: Corrupt officials, who suck the grease of the people, have spread all over the country.

古文：愿体上天好生之心，首除新饷，并严饬官方，则祈天永命之又一道也。
现代文：希望陛下体察上天好生之心，首先免除新饷，并且严厉整顿官方人员。这是祈求上苍永保国运的又一种办法。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will consider the benevolence of heaven, first of all, exempt the new yakitori, and severely rectify the official personnel. This is another way to pray for the eternal protection of the national movement.

古文：然大君者，天之宗子；辅臣者，宗子之家相。陛下置辅，率由特简。
现代文： 但是天子是上天的宗子，辅臣是宗子的家相，陛下设置辅臣，大多由自己特别选拔。
English: However, the Son of Heaven is the Son of Heaven, and the vassals are the vassals of the Son of Heaven. His Majesty sets up vassals, most of which are specially selected by himself.

古文：亦愿体一人好生之心，毋驱除异己，构朝士以大狱，结国家朋党之祸；毋宠利居成功，导人主以富强，酿天下土崩之势。
现代文：我也希望他们体察陛下的好生之心，不要驱除异己，给朝臣制造大案，酿成国家朋党作奸的祸害；不要贪图宠利自以为成功，引导人主一味追求富国强兵，酿成国家土崩瓦解的危局。 
English: I also hope that they will reflect on His Majesty's benevolent heart, and not drive away dissidents, create a big case for courtiers, and bring about the scourge of treason by the country's friends and party members; not covet favors and consider themselves successful, and lead people to blindly pursue a rich country and strong soldiers, and bring about the dangerous situation of the country's collapse.

古文：周延儒、温体仁见疏不怿。以时方祷雨，而宗周称疾，指为偃蹇，激帝怒，拟旨诘之。
现代文：周延儒、温体仁看到奏疏不高兴了，就用当时正在求雨而宗周假称生病为由，把他指斥为傲慢，激起庄烈帝的怒火，然后起草了一篇圣旨质问他，并命令他讲一讲足兵、足饷的办法。
English: When Zhou Yan Rong and Wen Tsering saw that Song So was not happy, they accused him of arrogance on the grounds that he was praying for rain and Zhou Zong was pretending to be ill, which aroused the wrath of Emperor Zhuang, and then drafted a sacred text to question him, and ordered him to talk about the methods of foot soldiers and foot soldiers.

古文：且令陈足兵、足饷之策，宗周条画以对，延儒、体仁不能难。为京尹，政令一新，挫豪家尤力。
现代文：宗周规划好了回奏上去，延儒、体仁无法争论了。此后宗周在担任京尹时，政令一新，在打击豪强方面尤其坚定。
English: Zong Zhou planned and played it back, and there could be no argument about the extension of Confucianism and benevolence. After that, when Zong Zhou served as Beijing Yin, the government issued a new decree, which was particularly firm in cracking down on the powerful.

古文：阉人言事辄不应，或相诟谇，宗周治事自如。
现代文：宦官向他讲的事他一概不答应，有时宦官甚至还辱骂他，宗周却照原样治事，毫不妥协。
English: He did not agree to anything the eunuch told him, and sometimes the eunuch even insulted him, but Zong Zhou continued to do business as usual, without compromise.

古文：武清伯苍头殴诸生，宗周捶之，枷武清门外。
现代文：武清侯家里的仆人殴打儒生，宗周把他痛打了一顿，给他戴上木枷送到武清侯家门外。
English: A servant in the Wu Qing Hou family beat up a Confucian student. Zong Zhou gave him a severe beating, put him in a wooden shackle and sent him outside the Wu Qing Hou family home.

古文：尝出，见优人笼箧，焚之通衢。
现代文：有一次宗周外出看到戏子们携带的大竹箱，就把它在交通要道上给烧掉了。
English: Once, when Zong Zhou went out and saw a large bamboo box carried by the actors, he burned it on the main road.

古文：周恤单丁下户尤至。
现代文：他对独户、下等贫困户的优恤却极周到。
English: However, he is very thoughtful about giving preferential treatment to single-person households and lower-class poor households.

古文：居一载，谢病归，都人为罢市。
现代文：在位一年，宗周请病假还乡，京师的百姓为他罢市致意。
English: One year into his reign, Zong Zhou returned to his hometown on sick leave, and the people of Beijing went on strike to pay tribute to him.

古文：八年七月，内阁缺人，命吏部推在籍者，以孙慎行、林钎及宗周名上。
现代文：八年七月，内阁缺人，庄烈帝命令吏部推举在籍的大臣补缺，吏部把孙慎行、林轩及宗周三个人的名字报了上去。
English: In July of the eighth year, there was a shortage of people in the cabinet, and Emperor Zhuangliu ordered the administrative department to nominate a minister to fill the vacancy. The administrative department put forward the names of Sun Shengxing, Lin Xuan and Zong Zhou.

古文：诏所司敦趋，宗周固辞不许。
现代文：庄烈帝传令有关部门催促宗周入朝，宗周坚决推辞，庄烈帝不允许。
English: Zhuge Liang ordered the relevant departments to urge Zong Zhou to enter the imperial court, but Zong Zhou firmly refused and Zhuge Liang did not allow it.

古文：明年正月入都，慎行已卒，与钎入朝。
现代文：宗周在第二年正月入都，慎行当时已经死去，宗周就和林轩两个入朝。
English: Zong Zhou entered the capital in the first month of the second year. Shen Xing had already died at that time, so Zong Zhou and Lin Xuan both entered the imperial court.

古文：帝问人才、兵食及流寇猖獗状。
现代文：庄烈帝问人才、兵食及流寇猖獗的事情。
English: Emperor Zhuang asked about the rampant shortage of talent, soldiers and food, and banditry.

古文：宗周言： 陛下求治太急，用法太严，布令太烦，进退天下士太轻。
现代文：宗周说： 陛下追求太平的心思太急，用法太严，发布的政令太繁琐，对天下士人的任免太轻率。
English: Zong Zhou said: His Majesty's pursuit of peace is too hasty, the use of laws is too strict, the promulgation of decrees is too cumbersome, and the appointment and removal of officials is too imprudent.

古文：诸臣畏罪饰非，不肯尽职业，故有人而无人之用，有饷而无饷之用，有将不能治兵，有兵不能杀贼。
现代文：诸臣怕被问罪，一味掩饰过错，不肯尽心办好政事，因此有人但没有人才的用处，有饷但没有兵饷的用处，有将不能治兵，有兵不能杀贼。
English: The courtiers were afraid of being questioned about their misdeeds, so they tried to cover up their mistakes and were not willing to do their best to run the government. As a result, some people were useful but not talented, some people were useful but not brave, some people were useless but not brave, some people were useless but not brave, some people were useless but not brave, some people were useless but not brave, and some people were useless but not brave.

古文：流寇本朝廷赤子，抚之有道，则还为民。
现代文：流寇本来是朝廷的赤子，招抚的办法恰当，他们就会还乡当他们的百姓。
English: Drifters were originally the babies of the imperial court, and if they were petted in the right way, they would return to their hometowns as their own people.

古文：今急宜以收拾人心为本，收拾人心在先宽有司。
现代文：现在应该赶紧把收拾人心当成大本，收拾人心的办法首先是宽待地方官员。
English: Now it is time to make it a priority to win back the hearts and minds of the people. The first step in winning back the hearts and minds of the people is to treat local officials with leniency.

古文：参罚重则吏治坏，吏治坏则民生困，盗贼由此日繁。 
现代文：对地方官员的惩罚重，吏治就会败坏，吏治败坏民生就会困苦不堪，盗贼正是由于这个原因才越来越多。 
English: If the punishment for local officials is severe, the officials' rule will be corrupted, and if the officials' rule is corrupted, the people's livelihood will be in dire straits. It is for this reason that there are more and more thieves.

古文：帝又问兵事。宗周言： 御外以治内为本。
现代文：庄烈帝又问他兵事，宗周说： 抵御外侮以治理好国内为基础。
English: Zhuge Liang also asked him about military affairs, and Zong Zhou said: Resisting foreign insults is based on good domestic governance.

古文：内治修，远人自服，干羽舞而有苗格。
现代文：国内的政治治理好了，远方的敌寇自然会归顺。大禹为王时，朝廷干羽舞动有苗氏便被感化了。
English: Domestic political governance is good, and distant enemies will naturally submit. When Dayu was king, the Miao clan was influenced by the imperial court.

古文：愿陛下以尧、舜之心，行尧、舜之政，天下自平。 
现代文：希望陛下运用尧舜那样的心肠，推行尧舜那样的政治，这样天下自然就太平了。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will use the same heart and soul as  and implement the same politics as, so that the world will naturally become peaceful.

古文：对毕趋出。帝顾体仁迂其言，命钎辅政，宗周他用。
现代文：宗周回答完以后赶紧退了出去，庄烈帝回头对体仁讲，认为他的话迂腐，就让林轩辅政，宗周另派用场。
English: After Zong Zhou finished his answer, he hurriedly left the room. Zhuang Li Rong looked back at Tizhen and said that he thought his words were pedantic, so he asked Lin Xuan to assist the government, and Zong Zhou was sent to another place.

古文：旋授工部左侍郎。
现代文：不久宗周被授官工部左侍郎。
English: Soon after, Zong Zhou was promoted to the position of the left hand man of the engineering department.

古文：逾月，上《痛愤时艰疏》，言：
现代文：过了一个月，宗周上了一篇《痛愤时艰疏》，其中讲道：
English: A month later, Zong Zhou published an article entitled "Difficult in the Time of Anger," in which he preached:

古文：陛下锐意求治，而二帝三王治天下之道未暇讲求，施为次第犹多未得要领者。
现代文： 陛下决心坚定地追求太平，可是二帝三王治理天下的办法却没有抽出时间来讲求，政治举措的先后次序还有很多不得要领的地方。
English: His Majesty is determined to firmly pursue peace, but he has not taken the time to discuss the two emperors' and three kings' methods of governing the world. There is still a lot to be said about the order of political measures.

古文：首属意于边功，而罪督遂以五年恢复之说进，是为祸胎。
现代文：陛下首先专注于边功，因而那罪大恶极的总督就进呈五年恢复失地的说法，这成为后来失事的祸胎。
English: His Majesty was first of all preoccupied with military exploits, so the governor, who was guilty of the most heinous crimes, proposed a five-year restoration of lost territory, which later became the root cause of the disaster.

古文：己巳之役，谋国无良，朝廷始有积轻士大夫之心。
现代文：己巳年那些战役，大臣对国事的谋划不善，朝廷开始产生了轻视士大夫的心理。
English: In those battles in the year of the snake, the minister's planning of state affairs was not good, and the imperial court began to despise the doctor's psychology.

古文：自此耳目参于近侍，腹心寄于干城，治术尚刑名，政体归丛脞，天下事日坏而不可救。
现代文：从此以后让近侍充当耳目，把心腹派到了大将身边，治国的方法崇尚刑名。政体趋于繁琐，天下事一天天败坏下去以致到了不可挽救的地步。
English: From then on, close attendants were allowed to act as eyes and ears, confidants were sent to the general's side, and the method of governing the country advocated punishment. The political system tended to be cumbersome, and things in the world deteriorated day by day to the point of being irretrievable.

古文：厂卫司讥察，而告讦之风炽；诏狱及士绅，而堂廉之等夷；人人救过不给，而欺罔之习转甚；事事仰成独断，而谄谀之风日长。
现代文：东西厂和锦衣卫负责纠察，揭人隐私的风气盛行起来了，官僚士绅一经打入皇家监狱，朝廷里廉洁的操守就给磨灭了。人人救过不暇，欺君罔上的风习变得厉害了；事事取决于皇上独断，谄谀的风气就越来越得到滋长。
English: The East and West factories and the brocade guards were responsible for picketing, and the culture of revealing people's privacy became popular. As soon as bureaucrats and gentry entered the royal prison, the integrity of the imperial court was destroyed. Everyone saved a lot of time, and the tradition of cheating the emperor became fierce. Everything depended on the emperor's arbitrary decision, and the culture of cheating grew more and more.

古文：三尺法不伸于司寇，而犯者日众，诏旨杂治五刑，岁躬断狱以数千，而好生之德意泯。
现代文：法律不由刑部长官执行，犯法的人就越来越多。皇上自行颁发圣旨处理各色案件，每年亲自判几千起案件，应有的、好生的德意泯灭了。
English: Laws are not enforced by the Minister of Justice, and more and more people are breaking the law. The Emperor himself issues decrees to deal with all kinds of cases, and personally adjudicates thousands of cases every year.

古文：刀笔治丝纶而王言亵，诛求及琐屑而政体伤。
现代文：刀笔吏起草诏令，天子的话变得轻慢，对臣下琐屑的事故都要惩治，政体就受到伤害。
English: The government is harmed when the sword-wielding scribes draft the edict, the words of the emperor become frivolous, and the trivial accidents of the vassals are punished.

古文：参罚在钱谷而官愈贪，吏愈横，赋愈逋；敲扑繁而民生瘁，严刑重敛交困而盗贼日起。
现代文：对地方官吏的处罚取决于钱谷的征收，因而地方上官越来越贪婪，吏越来越横暴，田赋越欠越多。对百姓的敲剥多了，民生病苦，严刑搜刮已经都不起作用了，盗贼却一天天产生。
English: The punishment of local officials depends on the collection of Qiangu. As a result, local officials are becoming more and more greedy, officials are becoming more and more tyrannical, and the amount of farmland is getting more and more in arrears. The people are being robbed more, the people are sick and suffering, and the severe punishment of search and seizure is no longer effective, but thieves are emerging day by day.

古文：总理任而臣下之功能薄，监视遣而封疆之责任轻。
现代文：任用了总理，下边官员的作用变小了，派遣了监视，封疆大吏的责任感变淡了。
English: The prime minister has been appointed, the role of lower-level officials has become smaller, surveillance has been dispatched, and the sense of responsibility of the officials in charge of the blockade has become lighter.

古文：督、抚无权而将日懦，武弁废法而兵日骄，将懦兵骄而朝廷之威令并穷于督、抚。
现代文：总督、巡抚手中没权，武将就越发胆怯，武将不守法纪，士兵也越来越骄横，武将胆怯，士兵骄横，朝廷的威严和命令就是对总督、巡抚也不起什么作用了。
English: The viceroy and the governor have no power in their hands, the more timid the generals become, the more the generals do not abide by the law, the more arrogant the soldiers become, the more timid the generals become, the more arrogant the soldiers become, the more the imperial court's authority and orders have no effect on the viceroy and the governor.

古文：朝廷勒限平贼，而行间日杀良报功，生灵益涂炭。
现代文：朝廷限期要他们平贼，他们就天天杀害平民百姓来报功，于是天下生灵涂炭，民不聊生了。
English: The imperial court set a deadline for them to defeat the bandits, and they killed ordinary people every day to reward themselves. As a result, the whole world was plunged into chaos, and the people did not want to live.

古文：一旦天牖圣衷，撤总监之任，重守令之选，下弓旌之招，收酷吏之威，布维新之化，方与二三臣工洗心涤虑，以联泰交，而不意君臣相遇之难也。
现代文：原以为有一天老天会启发陛下，裁撤对总督的委任，重视郡守县令的人选，停止征兵买马，束缚酷吏的暴行，实施维新来教化天下，而且将会和重臣们一道洗心涤虑，开诚相交，不料君臣之间和洽相待是这样地困难。
English: Originally, I thought that one day God would inspire His Majesty to abolish the appointment of the governor, to attach importance to the selection of the county governor, to stop conscription, to restrain the brutality of cruel officials, to implement reforms to educate the world, and that He would work with the senior ministers to purify their minds and deal with each other in an open and honest manner. Unfortunately, it is so difficult for the monarchs and ministers to treat each other well.

古文：得一文震孟而以单辞报罢，使大臣失和衷之谊；得一陈子壮而以过戆坐辜，使朝宁无吁咈之风。
现代文：得到一个文震孟却因为一句话把他给罢了官，使大臣之间失去了和衷共济的情谊；得到一个陈子壮却因为他过于戆直被问了罪，从而使朝堂上敢表示不满意的风尚荡然无存。
English: He got a man named Wen Zhen Meng, but dismissed him because of a single word, which caused the ministers to lose the spirit of mutual assistance; he got a man named Chen Zi Zhuang, but because he was too straightforward, he was asked about the crime, so that the custom of daring to express dissatisfaction in the imperial court no longer existed.

古文：此关于国体人心非浅鲜者。
现代文：这些对于国体、人心的关系可不是浅显的呀！
English: These relationships between the National Sports Festival and people's hearts are far from trivial!

古文：陛下必体上天生物之心以敬天，而不徒倚风雷；必念祖宗鉴古之制以率祖，而不轻改作。
现代文： 陛下一定要体察上天生长万物的心来表示对上天的敬仰，而不要只靠刑法来制约人；一定要想到遵守祖宗借鉴古人立下的制度来表示对祖宗的顺从，而不能轻易改变祖制。
English: His Majesty must feel the heart of all things growing in nature to show his respect for the heavens, and not only rely on criminal law to restrict people; he must think of obeying the ancestors by borrowing the system established by the ancients to show his obedience to the ancestors, and cannot easily change the ancestral system.

古文：以简要出政令，以宽大养人才，以忠厚培国脉。
现代文：要以简要发号施令，以宽大培养人才，以忠厚培植国脉。
English: It is necessary to issue orders with brevity, cultivate talents with generosity, and cultivate national roots with loyalty.

古文：发政施仁，收天下泮涣之人心，而且还内廷扫除之役，正懦帅失律之诛，慎天潢改授之途。
现代文：发布政令要施行仁政，收取天下已经涣散的人心。而且要让太监回到宫廷中担任他应有的洒水扫地的劳役，惩办懦弱军将违反法令的死罪，慎重掌握宗室子弟改任别职的办法。
English: He issued a decree to implement benevolent government and win the hearts of the people who had been scattered all over the world. Moreover, he wanted to let the eunuch return to the court to serve as his due labor of sprinkling water and sweeping the ground, punish the cowardly soldiers who violated the law with the death penalty, and carefully grasp the method of transferring the heir to another post.

古文：遣廷臣赍内帑巡行郡国为招抚使，赦其无罪而流亡者。陈师险隘，坚壁清野，听其穷而自归。诛渠之外，犹可不杀一人，而毕此役，奚待于观兵哉。
现代文：然后派遣廷臣带着宫廷使用的库银巡行郡国，充当招抚使，赦免那些无罪而流亡的百姓，在险要的关隘处驻扎官兵，实行坚壁清野政策，允许造反者在走投无路的情况下返回自己的家乡，这样除贼首杀掉之外，还可以不杀一人而结束这场战争，哪里用得着兵威相加呢？ 
English: Then he sent courtiers with the treasury and silver used by the court to patrol the county, act as a placating envoy, pardon those innocent people who had fled, station officers and soldiers at critical bottlenecks, implement a strong-wall and clear-field policy, and allow rebels to return to their hometowns in a desperate situation. In this way, in addition to killing the thief, it is also possible to end the war without killing a single person. What is the use of military might?

古文：疏入，帝怒甚，谕阁臣拟严旨再四。
现代文：这篇奏疏递进去以后，庄烈帝恼火得很，指示阁臣再三起草严厉的圣旨批评宗周。
English: After this report was submitted, Emperor Zhuang was very angry and ordered his ministers to repeatedly draft a stern edict criticizing Zong Zhou.

古文：每拟上，帝辄手其疏覆阅，起行数周。
现代文：每次起草好送上来，庄烈帝都拿起他的奏疏复读，站起来走几个来回。
English: Every time the draft was ready to be sent up, Zhuang Rongdi picked up his recorder and re-read it, stood up and walked back and forth a few times.

古文：已而意解，降旨诘问，谓大臣论事宜体国度时，不当效小臣归过朝廷为名高，且奖其清直焉。
现代文：后来怒气消了，颁布圣旨质问宗周，说大臣议论国事应当体谅国家的难处，考虑当前的实际情况，不应当像小臣那样把敢于归过于朝廷当成名气大，不过还是称赞了宗周为人的清直。
English: Later, when his anger had subsided, he issued a sacred edict to question Zong Zhou, saying that a minister discussing state affairs should understand the difficulties of the country, consider the current actual situation, and should not, like a vassal, regard daring to surrender to the imperial court as a great fame. However, he still praised Zong Zhou as a man of integrity.

古文：时太仆缺马价，有诏愿捐者听，体仁及成国公朱纯臣以下皆有捐助。
现代文：当时太仆寺缺少购马的钱款，朝廷发布诏书表示有愿意捐款的收下，体仁及成国公朱纯臣往下很多人都有所捐助。
English: At that time, Taigu Temple was short of money to buy horses. The imperial court issued an edict saying that it was willing to accept donations, and many people, including Teitien and Chengguo Zhu Chunchen, made donations.

古文：又议罢明年朝觐。
现代文：朝廷又决定停办明年元旦的朝觐仪式。
English: The Imperial Court has also decided to suspend the New Year's Day pilgrimage ceremony.

古文：宗周以输赀、免觐为大辱国。帝虽不悦，心善其忠，益欲大用。
现代文：宗周认为大臣捐款、停办朝觐是国家的大耻辱，庄烈帝虽然不高兴，心里称赞他的忠诚，更加想重用他。
English: Zong Zhou thought that the minister's donation and the suspension of the pilgrimage were a great disgrace to the country. Although Emperor Zhuang was not happy, he praised his loyalty and wanted to reuse him even more.

古文：体仁患之，募山阴人许瑚疏论之，谓宗周道学有余，才谞不足。
现代文：体仁担心他受到重用，就收买山阴人许瑚上书评论宗周，说他道学有余，才干不足。
English: Tetsujin was worried that he would be overused, so he bribed Shanyin's Xu Hu to write a book criticizing Zong Zhou, saying that he had too much learning and not enough talent.

古文：帝以瑚同邑，知之宜真，遂已不用。
现代文：庄烈帝认为许瑚是宗周的同乡，对他的了解应该是真实的，就停止了重用宗周的想法。
English: Zhuang Rongdei thought that Xu Hu was a fellow villager of Zong Zhou, and the understanding of him should be true, so he stopped the idea of reusing Zong Zhou.

古文：其秋，三疏请告去。
现代文：这年秋天，宗周三次上书才得以请假回乡。
English: In the autumn of that year, it was only after he had written to the authorities three times that he was able to take leave and return to his hometown.

古文：至天津，闻都城被兵，遂留养疾。十月，事稍定，乃上疏曰：
现代文：走到天津时听说京师受到攻打，就停下来养病，十月里战事稍微平息一些，宗周就上书说：
English: When he came to Tianjin, he heard that the Beijing Division was under attack, so he stopped to recover. In October, the war calmed down a bit, and Zong Zhou wrote:

古文：己巳之变，误国者袁崇焕一人。
现代文： 己巳年的事变，误国者只是袁崇焕一个人。
English: Yuan Chonghuan was the only one who misled the country during the events of the year of the snake.

古文：小人竞修门户之怨，异己者概坐以崇焕党，日造蜚语，次第去之。
现代文：小人借此争着发泄门户之间的怨恨，把异己者都当成崇焕的同党来办罪，天天捏造流言蜚语，逐渐把这些人都排挤掉了。
English: The villains took advantage of this dispute to vent the resentment between the portals, treating the dissidents as respected party members to commit crimes, fabricating gossip every day, and gradually pushing these people out.

古文：自此小人进而君子退，中官用事而外廷浸疏。文法日繁，欺罔日甚，朝政日隳，边防日坏。
现代文：从此以后小人进用而君子退出了，宦官掌了权而朝臣越来越被疏远了，对文臣的惩罚一天天增多，欺君罔上的行径越来越厉害，朝政一天天败坏，边防的情况越来越恶劣。
English: Since then, villains have been used and gentlemen have withdrawn, eunuchs have taken power and courtiers have become more and more alienated, the punishment of courtiers has increased day by day, the act of cheating the prince has become more and more severe, the government has deteriorated day by day, and the situation of border defense has become worse and worse.

古文：今日之祸，实己巳以来酿成之也。
现代文：今日之祸，实际上是己巳年以来逐步酿成的。
English: Today's woes, in fact, have been brewing gradually since last year.

古文：且以张凤翼之溺职中枢也，而俾之专征，何以服王洽之死？
现代文： 像张凤翼那样失职于兵部的人，朝廷却让他专职负责征战，怎么能让王洽死而心服？
English: As Zhang Fengyi was derelict in his duty in the military department, the imperial court put him in charge of recruiting for the war full-time. How could Wang Zhichang be convinced?

古文：以丁魁楚等之失事于边也，而责之戴罪，何以服刘策之死？
现代文：像丁魁楚等人那样失事于边境的人，朝廷却责成他戴罪立功，怎么能让刘策死而心服？
English: Like Ding Kui Chu and others who were shipwrecked on the border, the court ordered him to take the blame, how could Liu Ce be convinced?

古文：诸镇勤王之师，争先入卫者几人，不闻以逗留蒙诘责，何以服耿如杞之死？
现代文：各兵镇过来的勤王部队，争先入卫的有几个人，却没听说哪个因为逗留不前受到指责，怎么能让耿如杞死而心服？
English: The royalist troops came from all the military towns, and there were several people who rushed to enter the guard, but they did not hear which one was blamed for not moving forward. How could Geng Ruxuan be convinced to die?

古文：今且以二州八县之生灵，结一饱飏之局，则廷臣之累累若若可幸无罪者，又何以谢韩爌、张凤翔、李邦华诸臣之或戍或去？
现代文：现在用二州八县人民的生命换来了敌人饱食而去的结局，廷臣们却一个个像无可治罪的样子，又怎么能对得起韩火广、张凤翔、李邦华等等被贬被罢的大臣呢？
English: Now, the lives of the people of the two prefectures and eight counties have been exchanged for the enemy's well-fed ending, but the courtiers are one after another as if they are not punishable, and how can they be worthy of Han Huiguang, Zhang Fengxiang, Li Banghua and other despised ministers?

古文：岂昔为异己驱除，今不难以同己相容隐乎？臣于是而知小人之祸人国无已时也。昔唐德宗谓群臣曰： 人言卢杞奸邪，朕殊不觉。 群臣对曰： 此乃杞之所以为奸邪也。 
现代文：我因此方知道小人祸人祸国是没有止境的。 过去唐德宗对群臣说道： 别人总讲卢杞奸邪，我倒很不觉得他奸邪。 群臣答道： 这正是卢杞所以是奸邪的原因。 
English: In the past, Tang Dezong said to his courtiers, "Others always say that Lu Xun is evil, but I don't think he is evil." The courtiers replied, "This is exactly why Lu Xun is evil."

古文：而御史金光辰竟以此逐，若惟恐伤中官心者，尤非所以示天下也。
现代文：我经常反复地思考这句话，觉得它是一切时代辨别奸邪的要领。所以说： 大奸类似忠诚，大佞仿佛真诚。 
English: I have often reflected on this saying and feel that it is the key to discerning treachery in all ages. Therefore, I say: "Great treachery is similar to loyalty, and great betrayal is similar to sincerity."

古文：至今日刑政之最舛者，成德，傲吏也，而以赃戍，何以肃惩贪之令？
现代文：陛下不加明察使用这样的人，就会把天下的小人都聚集起来呆在朝中，而自己还不觉得。 至于现在刑政方面最荒谬的事，如成德只是一个傲慢的小吏，朝廷却用赃罪把他充了军，怎么能严肃惩治贪污的政令呢？
English: As for the most absurd thing in the current criminal justice system, if Chengde is just an arrogant petty official, but the court has filled him with the crime of embezzlement, how can they seriously punish the corruption decree?

古文：申绍芳，十余年监司也，而以莫须有之钻刺戍，何以昭抑竞之典？
现代文：申绍芳做了十多年监司，朝廷却用莫须有的借口把他给刺配充军了，怎么能显示抑制钻营的法典呢？
English: Shen Shaofang worked as a supervisor for more than ten years, but the imperial court used a groundless excuse to conscript him into the imperial army. How can he show the code of suppressing the drill battalion?

古文：郑鄤之狱，或以诬告坐，何以示敦伦之化？
现代文：郑曼阝的案子是因为有人诬告而受到的制裁，怎么能发扬劝人守伦常的教化呢？
English: Zheng Mengyao's case is a sanction because someone was falsely accused. How can we carry forward the enlightenment of persuading people to be ethical?

古文：此数事者，皆为故辅文震孟引绳批根，即向驱除异己之故智，而廷臣无敢言。陛下亦无从知之也。
现代文：这几件事，都是因原任辅臣文震孟而引发，也还是过去驱除异己的那老一套，可是廷臣没人敢出来说话，陛下也无从得知这一切。唉！
English: These several events were all triggered by the former aide-de-camp, Wen Zhenmeng, and it is still the same old routine of driving out dissidents in the past, but no courtiers dare to speak out, and His Majesty has no way of knowing all this. Alas!

古文：呜呼，八年之间，谁秉国成，而至于是！
现代文：八年之间是谁在掌握国家政权，把事情弄成了这样！
English: Who has been in power for the last eight years and made things like this?

古文：臣不能为首揆温体仁解矣。
现代文：我无法替首辅温体仁做解释了。
English: I can't explain the first and second thermals.

古文：语曰： 谁生厉阶，至今为梗。 
现代文：古人说： 是谁栽下的祸根，至今仍作梗害人？ 
English: The ancients said, "Who planted the evil root that still haunts people today?"

古文：体仁之谓也。
现代文：我看说的就是体仁。 
English: I think what you're talking about is the core.

古文：疏奏，帝大怒，体仁又上章力诋，遂斥为民。
现代文：奏疏递上后，庄烈帝大为恼怒，体仁又上书猛烈诋毁，于是宗周被罢官为民。
English: After the report was submitted, Emperor Zhuang was very angry and Zong Zhou was dismissed from his post.

古文：十四年九月，吏部缺左侍郎，廷推不称旨。帝临朝而叹，谓大臣： 刘宗周清正敢言，可用也。 
现代文：十四年九月，吏部缺左侍郎，朝廷推荐的人不能让皇上称心如意，庄烈帝上朝后叹着气，对大臣说： 刘宗周清正敢言，可以充任。 
English: In September of the 14th year, there was a lack of a left-hand attendant in the cadre department, and the person recommended by the imperial court could not make the emperor satisfied. The Emperor solemnly sighed and said to the minister: Liu Zong Zhou Qing dared to say that he could fill the post.

古文：遂以命之。
现代文：就这样任命了他。
English: That's how he was appointed.

古文：再辞不得，乃趋朝。道中进三札：一曰明圣学以端治本，二曰躬圣学以建治要，三曰重圣学以需治化，凡数千言。
现代文：宗周两次辞谢推不掉，才上路赴朝，路上进呈了三篇答刂子：一是《明圣学以端治本》，二是《躬圣学以建治要》，三是《重圣学以需教化》，共几千字。
English: Zong Zhou could not get rid of his resignation twice, so he went on a trip to the DPRK. On the way, he submitted three essays: one was "Clarifying the Holy Science to Solve the Problem," the second was "Embracing the Holy Science to Solve the Problem," and the third was "Embracing the Holy Science to Solve the Problem," totaling several thousand words.

古文：帝优旨报之。
现代文：庄烈帝以口气婉转的诏书回答了他。
English: Zhuang Rong replied to him with a soft-spoken edict.

古文：明年八月，未至擢左都御史。
现代文：第二年八月宗周还没来，庄烈帝就提拔他为左都御史。
English: In August of the following year, before Zong Zhou arrived, Emperor Zhuang would promote him to the position of Zuo Guoshi.

古文：力辞，有诏敦趋。
现代文：宗周极力辞谢，庄烈帝传出圣旨催促他进朝。
English: Zong Zhou tried his best to decline the offer, but Emperor Zhuge Liang issued a sacred edict urging him to come to the imperial court.

古文：逾月，入见文华殿。帝问都察院职掌安在，对曰： 在正己以正百僚。
现代文：一个月后，宗周到文华殿里参见，庄烈帝问他都察院的职掌何在，宗周回答说： 在于端正自己进而端正百官。
English: A month later, Zong Zhou went to the Palace of Literature and Art. Zhuang Rongdi asked him what the duties of the Imperial Procuratorate were, to which Zong Zhou replied, "It is to straighten myself out and then straighten out the officials."

古文：必存诸中者，上可对君父，下可质天下士大夫，而后百僚则而象之。
现代文：都察院长官务必使自己心中所存的一切念头往上可以对得住君父，往下可以经得住天下士大夫的质问，然后百官才会取法、模仿他。
English: The prefect of the inspection must make all the thoughts in his heart to be able to stand up to the king and father, and to be able to withstand the questioning of the world's sheriffs, and then the officials will take the method and imitate him.

古文：大臣法，小臣廉，纪纲振肃，职掌在是，而责成巡方其首务也。
现代文：使大臣守法，小臣廉洁，朝廷的规矩严肃，都是都察院长官的职责，不过严格要求巡方是其首要的事务。
English: It is the duty of the head of the Duka to ensure that ministers abide by the law, that their subordinates are honest, and that the rules of the imperial court are serious. However, it is his primary duty to strictly enforce the inspection.

古文：巡方得人，则吏治清，民生遂。 
现代文：巡方得人，吏治就会清明，民生也就顺遂了。 
English: If the inspecting party gets people, the administration will be clear, and the people's livelihood will be smooth.

古文：帝曰： 卿力行以副朕望。 
现代文：庄烈帝说： 卿努力干，不要让我失望。 
English: Zhuang Li said: Sir, work hard, don't let me down.

古文：乃列建道揆、贞法守、崇国体、清伏奸、惩官邪、饬吏治六事以献，帝褒纳焉。
现代文：于是宗周上书分别讲了树立道德规范，端正职守法规，强化典章制度，清除暗藏奸人，惩治官吏邪行，整顿吏治六件事，庄烈帝高兴地采纳了。
English: Therefore, Zong Zhou separately mentioned in his letter the six matters of establishing ethical norms, rectifying duties and regulations, strengthening the code system, eliminating hidden traitors, punishing officials for evil deeds, and rectifying officials, which the solemn emperor happily accepted.

古文：俄劾御史喻上猷、严云京而荐袁恺、成勇，帝并从之。
现代文：不久宗周弹劾御史喻上猷、严云京并且推荐袁恺、成勇，庄烈帝都听从了他。
English: Soon after, Zong Zhou impeached Shang Pi and Yan Yunjing and recommended Yuan Pi and Cheng Yong. Emperor Zhuang listened to him.

古文：其后上猷受李自成显职，卒为世大诟。
现代文：后来上猷接受李自成的重要职务，最终受到世人的唾骂。
English: Later, he accepted an important post from Li Zicheng and was eventually reviled by the world.

古文：冬十月，京师被兵。
现代文：冬季十月里，京师受到攻打。
English: In the winter of October, the capital division was attacked again.

古文：请旌死事卢象升，而追戮误国奸臣杨嗣昌，逮跋扈悍将左良玉；防关以备反攻，防潞以备透渡，防通、津、临、德以备南下。
现代文：宗周请表彰为国死难的卢象升，并追究、诛杀误国奸臣杨嗣昌，逮捕骄横不法的大将左良玉；防守山海关以准备反攻，防守潞安府以提防敌兵偷渡，防守通州、津门、临清、德州以准备南下。
English: Zong Zhou requested that Lu Xiangsheng, who died for the country, be commended, and that Yang Shichang, a traitor to the country, be investigated and killed, and that the arrogant and illegal general Zuo Liangyu be arrested; defend Shanhaiguan to prepare for a counter-offensive, defend Bian'an to guard against enemy soldiers sneaking across the border, and defend Tongzhou, Tumen, Linqing, and Dezhou to prepare to go south.

古文：帝不能尽行。
现代文：庄烈帝没能完全听取他的意见。
English: Emperor Zhuang could not fully listen to his opinion.

古文：闰月晦日召见廷臣于中左门。
现代文：闰十二月三十日，庄烈帝在中左门召见廷臣。
English: On the 30th day of leap December, Emperor Zhuangde summoned courtiers at the middle left gate.

古文：时姜埰、熊开元以言事下诏狱，宗周约九卿共救。
现代文：当时姜土采、熊开元因为谈论国事被打入皇家监狱，宗周约请九卿一同营救他们两个。
English: At that time, Jiang Tu Cai and Xiong Kaiyuan were sent to the royal prison for talking about state affairs. Zong Zhou invited the Nine Lords to rescue them both.

古文：入朝，闻密旨置二人死。宗周愕然谓众曰： 今日当空署争，必改发刑部始已。 
现代文：入朝后听说皇上下了密旨要把他们两个置于死地，宗周大吃一惊地对大家说： 今天要全体出动，空署争取，一定要把他们改送到刑部方能罢休！ 
English: After he entered the imperial court, he heard that the emperor had issued a secret order to put the two of them to death. Zong Zhou said to everyone in great surprise, "Today, we should all go out and fight for the Air Traffic Control Department, and we must transfer them to the Criminal Investigation Department before we can stop!"

古文：及入对，御史杨若桥荐西洋人汤若望善火器，请召试。
现代文：等进去回答提问时，御史杨若桥推荐说西洋人汤若望精通火器，请求皇上加以召试。
English: When he went in to answer questions, the governor Yang Ruoqiao recommended that the Westerner Tang Ruowang be proficient in firearms and asked the emperor to summon him.

古文：宗周曰： 边臣不讲战守屯戍之法，专恃火器。
现代文：宗周说： 边臣不讲求战守、屯防的办法，专门想依靠火器。
English: Zong Zhou said: "Border guards do not talk about seeking ways to fight and defend, but only want to rely on firearms.

古文：近来陷城破邑，岂无火器而然？
现代文：近来城邑沦亡，难道是没有火器造成的吗？
English: Wasn't the recent fall of the city caused by firearms?

古文：我用之制人，人得之亦可制我，不见河间反为火器所破乎？
现代文：我们用火器制服别人时，别人得到了也可以制服我们，没看到河间是被别人用火器给打下了吗？
English: When we use firearms to subdue others, others can also subdue us, don't you see that Hema was shot down by someone else with a firearm?

古文：国家大计，以法纪为主。大帅跋扈，援师逗遛，奈何反姑息，为此纷纷无益之举耶？ 
现代文：国家大计，应当以法纪为主，大帅骄横不法，援兵逗留不前，怎么对这些反倒姑息迁就，在这里干纷纷扬扬毫无益处的事呢？ 
English: The country's grand plan should be based on law and order, the general should be arrogant and lawless, and the reinforcements should not advance. How can we tolerate these things and do useless things here?

古文：因议督、抚去留，则请先去督师范志完。且曰： 十五年来，陛下处分未当，致有今日败局。不追祸始，更弦易辙，欲以一切苟且之政，补目前罅漏，非长治之道也。 
现代文：接着讨论督师、巡抚的去留问题，宗周请先拿掉督师范志完，并且说： 十五年来，陛下处理事务不得当，导致了现在的败局，不追查祸害的起因，改弦更张，想运用一些得过且过的政治手段来弥补目前的漏洞，并不是长治久安的办法。 
English: Next, they discussed the issue of supervisors and governors leaving and staying. Zong Zhou asked them to first remove the supervisor, Fan Zhi, and said: For fifteen years, His Majesty has handled affairs improperly, which has led to the current defeat. Not investigating the cause of the disaster, changing course, and trying to use some political means to bridge the current loophole is not a way to maintain long-term stability.

古文：帝变色曰： 前不可追，善后安在？ 
现代文：庄烈帝变了脸色，问道： 过去的无法追悔了，善后措施又该怎样呢？ 
English: Zhuang Rongdi turned pale and asked: The past cannot be regretted, so what should be the aftercare measures?

古文：宗周曰： 在陛下开诚布公，公天下为好恶，合国人为用舍，进贤才，开言路，次第与天下更始。 
现代文：宗周答道： 在于陛下开诚布公，同天下人的好恶一致，听取国人的意见决定取舍，进用贤才，开通言路，逐步与天下一道再造乾坤。 
English: Zong Zhou replied: It is up to His Majesty to be open and honest, to be consistent with the likes and dislikes of the people of the world, to listen to the opinions of the people of the country, to decide on the choice, to use the talents, to open the way of speech, and to gradually recreate the world.

古文：帝曰： 目下烽火逼畿甸，且国家败坏已极，当如何？ 
现代文：庄烈帝问： 目前烽火在京郊燃烧，敌兵未退，况且国家败坏已极，应当怎么办才好？ 
English: Zhuang asked: At present, the bonfire is burning in the suburbs of Beijing, the enemy soldiers have not retreated, and the country is extremely corrupt. What should we do?

古文：宗周曰： 武备必先练兵，练兵必先选将，选将必先择贤督、抚，择贤督、抚必先吏、兵二部得人。
现代文：宗周说： 加强武备一定先要求练兵，练兵一定要首先选将，选将一定要首先选择贤能的督师、巡抚，选择贤能的督师、巡抚一定要首先吏、兵二部用人得当。
English: Zong Zhou said: To strengthen military preparedness, soldiers must first be trained. The training of soldiers must first select generals. The selection of generals must first select competent supervisors and inspectors. The selection of competent supervisors and inspectors must first employ officials and soldiers properly.

古文：宋臣曰： 文官不爱钱，武官不惜死，则天下太平。 
现代文：宋代大臣说过： 文官不爱钱，武官不惜死，天下就会太平了。 
English: A minister in the Song Dynasty said: "Civil servants do not love money, military officers do not hesitate to die, and the world will be peaceful."

古文：斯言，今日针砭也。
现代文：这句话可说是对现在的讥刺。
English: This statement can be said to be a mockery of the present.

古文：论者但论才望，不问操守；未有操守不谨，而遇事敢前，军士畏威者。
现代文：现在议论人才只看才干、名望，不问操守如何，没有操守不检点而遇事敢前、军士惧怕他的权威的道理。
English: Nowadays, people talk about talent only in terms of talent and reputation, without asking what kind of conduct it is. There is no such thing as improper conduct, but there is the principle of courage in the face of adversity, and the sergeant is afraid of his authority.

古文：若徒以议论捷给，举动恢张，称曰才望，取爵位则有余，责事功则不足，何益成败哉？ 
现代文：如果只把议论流畅、举动豁达当作才干，那么这种人为自己博取爵位、才干是有余的，要求他为国家成事立功就不行了，用这种人对于成败有什么裨益呢？ 
English: If we only regard fluent speech and open-minded behavior as talent, then such a person has enough talent to win a knighthood for himself, and it is not enough to ask him to do something for the country. What is the benefit of using such a person for success or failure?

古文：帝曰： 济变之日，先才后守。 
现代文：庄烈帝说： 国家在解救危难之际，用人不能不先看才干后看操守。 
English: Zhuang Ledei said: When the country is in a time of crisis, the employer must first look at talent and then look at conduct.

古文：宗周曰： 前人败坏，皆由贪纵使然；故以济变言，愈宜先守后才。 
现代文：宗周说： 前人国家破灭，都是因为将官贪婪、放肆才造成的，所以从解救危难的目的出发，用人更应该先看操守后看才干。 
English: Zong Zhou said: The collapse of previous countries was caused by the greed and arrogance of generals. Therefore, from the perspective of rescuing the crisis, employers should first look at conduct and then look at ability.

古文：帝曰： 大将别有才局，非徒操守可望成功。 
现代文：庄烈帝说： 大将别有才干，不是仅仅有操守就能指望他成就战功。 
English: Zhuo Ledei said: The general has other talents, and it is not only with his integrity that we can expect him to achieve military exploits.

古文：宗周曰： 他不具论，如范志完操守不谨，大将偏裨无不由贿进，所以三军解体。
现代文：宗周说： 别的且不一一说，就比如说范志完操守不检点，手下的大将偏裨无不是因为贿赂进用的，所以一经交战，三军解体。
English: Zong Zhou said, "Other than that, let's say, for example, that Fan Zhi did not behave properly, and the generals under his command were not used because of bribery, so once the war broke out, the three armies disintegrated.

古文：由此观之，操守为主。 
现代文：由此看来，看人还是要以操守为主。 
English: From this point of view, supervision should still be based on ethics.

古文：帝色解曰： 朕已知之。 
现代文：庄烈帝态度缓和了，说： 朕已经知道了。 
English: Zhuang Li Tie's attitude softened and he said, "I already know.

古文：敕宗周起。
现代文：接着让宗周站起来。
English: Then let Zong Zhou stand up.

古文：于是宗周出奏曰： 陛下方下诏求贤，姜埰、熊开元二臣遽以言得罪。
现代文：宗周于是站出来进言说： 陛下正在下诏书求贤，姜土采、熊开元二位大臣就因为说话被问罪。
English: Zong Zhou then stood up and began to speak: "Your Majesty is issuing an edict to seek virtue, and two ministers, Jiang Tuo Cai and Xiong Kaiyuan, are being questioned for speaking.

古文：国朝无言官下诏狱者，有之自二臣始。
现代文：我朝没有言官打进锦衣诏狱的事例，如果说有是从他们两个才开始的。
English: In my time, there was no case of a government official being sent to the brocade prison. If there was, it only started with the two of them.

古文：陛下度量卓越，妄如臣宗周，戆直如臣黄道周，尚蒙使过之典，二臣何不幸，不邀法外恩？ 
现代文：陛下度量卓越，妄诞的像我宗周，戆直的像大臣黄道周，尚且得到了戴罪委任的大恩，这两位臣子怎么就这么不幸运，得不到皇上的饶恕？ 
English: His majesty is of great stature. He is as delusional as I, Zong Zhou, and as upright as Minister Zheng Dao Zhou. Yet, he received the great favor of being appointed as a criminal. How could these two courtiers be so unlucky as to not receive the emperor's forgiveness?

古文：帝曰： 道周有学有守，非二臣比。 
现代文：庄烈帝说： 道周有学问有操守，跟他们不好比。 
English: Zhuang said, "Dozhou has knowledge and ethics, so it's hard to compare with them.

古文：宗周曰： 二臣诚不及道周，然朝廷待言官有体，言可用用之，不可置之。
现代文：宗周说： 他们两个实际上是不如道周，但是朝廷对待言官应当有个体统，他们的话可用就用，不可用可放到一边去。
English: Zong Zhou said: The two of them are actually not as good as Dao Zhou, but the court should treat the speaker with a certain decorum. Their words can be used as needed, and can be put aside if they are not needed.

古文：即有应得之罪，亦当付法司。
现代文：就是他们有应得的惩罚，也应当交给法司去办。
English: Even if they have deserved punishment, it should also be handed over to the legal department.

古文：今遽下诏狱，终于国体有伤。 
现代文：现在突然把他们打进锦衣狱，毕竟有害于体统。 
English: Now, all of a sudden, they've been put in a straightjacket, which, after all, is harmful to public morals.

古文：帝怒甚，曰： 法司锦衣皆刑官，何公何私？
现代文：庄烈帝恼火得很，责问道： 法司、锦衣都是刑官，何公何私？
English: Zhuang Rong was very angry and asked: "Both the Legal Division and the Supreme People's Procuratorate are law enforcement agencies. How many are you and how many are I?"

古文：且罪一二言官，何遽伤国体？
现代文：另外惩罚一两个言官，怎么就损害了国家体统？
English: In addition, how does punishing one or two spokespersons damage the national image?

古文：有如贪赃坏法，欺君罔上，皆可不问乎？ 
现代文：如果有贪赃枉法、欺君罔上的奸人，难道都可以不问吗？ 
English: If there are those who are greedy, those who abuse power, and those who are traitors, can they all be left unquestioned?

古文：宗周曰： 锦衣，膏粱子弟，何知礼义？听寺人役使。
现代文：宗周说： 锦衣官都是些膏粱子弟，哪里懂得什么礼义，只是听宦官指使。
English: Zong Zhou said: The eunuchs are all sons of eunuchs. They don't know anything about etiquette, they just follow the orders of the eunuchs.

古文：即陛下问贪赃坏法，欺君罔上，亦不可不付法司也。 
现代文：就是陛下自己要问什么人贪赃枉法、欺君罔上的罪，也不能不交给法司来办。 
English: Even if His Majesty himself wanted to ask who was guilty of corrupting the law and cheating the emperor, he could not do so without handing it over to the legal department.

古文：帝大怒曰： 如此偏党，岂堪宪职！ 
现代文：庄烈帝十分恼火地说： 这样偏袒的人哪配担任宪职！ 
English: Zhuge Liang was very angry and said, "A person who is so biased is not worthy of holding a constitutional post!"

古文：有间曰： 开元此疏，必有主使，疑即宗周。 
现代文：过一会儿又说： 开元这篇奏疏一定有人在背后主使，我怀疑就是你刘宗周。 
English: After a while, he said, "Someone must have been behind the creation of this record, and I suspect it was you, Liu Zongzhou.

古文：金光辰争之。帝叱光辰，并命议处。
现代文：金光辰争论这件事，庄烈帝怒喝了他一通，命令连带他一同讨论处分。
English: When Jin Guangchen disputed the matter, Emperor Zhuang was furious with him and ordered him to be taken along to discuss the punishment.

古文：翼日，光辰贬三秩调用，宗周革职，刑部议罪。
现代文：第二天，命令把光辰贬官三级调出朝廷，宗周剥夺职务，由刑部加以定罪。
English: The next day, Guangcheng was ordered to be demoted three levels and transferred out of the imperial court, while Zong Zhou was stripped of his post and convicted by the criminal department.

古文：阁臣持不发，捧原旨御前恳救，乃免，斥为民。
现代文：阁臣压下命令暂时不宣布，把原来的圣旨又捧回到庄烈帝面前恳求，营救宗周，才免予定罪，把他罢官为民了事。
English: The cabinet minister suppressed the order not to announce it for the time being, and took the original sacred will back to Zhuang Rong and pleaded with him to rescue Zong Zhou. Only then was he absolved of the crime of premeditation, and his dismissal became a civil matter.

古文：归二年而京师陷。
现代文：宗周回去才两年，京师就失守了。
English: It was only two years after Zong Zhou's return that the capital was lost.

古文：宗周徒步荷戈，诣杭州，责巡抚黄鸣骏发丧讨贼，鸣骏诫以镇静，宗周勃然曰： 君父变出非常，公专阃外，不思枕戈泣血，激励同仇，顾藉口镇静，作逊避计耶？ 
现代文：他徒步带着武器去到杭州，责成巡抚黄鸣骏为庄烈帝发丧，出兵讨贼。鸣骏告诫他要镇定一些，宗周勃然大怒，说： 君父死于不正常的事变，先生在地方上专门带兵，不想到枕戈待旦，泣血同悲，激励同仇，只是想借口镇定做退避的打算吗？ 
English: He went to Hangzhou on foot with weapons and ordered the governor Huang Mingtang to mourn for the solemn emperor and send troops to solicit thieves. Mingtang warned him to calm down a bit, Zong Zhou flew into a rage, saying: My father died of an abnormal event, my master is specially leading soldiers in the local area, I don't want to wait for death, cry blood and sorrow, inspire the same revenge, just want an excuse to calm down and plan to retreat?

古文：鸣骏唯唯。
现代文：鸣骏支支吾吾说不出什么。
English: I can't say anything.

古文：明日，复趣之。鸣骏曰： 发丧必待哀诏。 
现代文：第二天，宗周又催促他，鸣骏说： 发丧一定要等接到哀诏才成。 宗周说： 嗨！
English: The next day, Zong Zhou urged him again, saying, "The mourning must wait until we receive the funeral notice." Zong Zhou said, "Hi!

古文：宗周曰： 嘻，此何时也，安所得哀诏哉！ 鸣骏乃发丧。
现代文：这是什么时候，想从哪里接到哀诏呢？ 鸣骏于是在杭州为庄烈帝发丧。
English: When was this, and where would you like to receive a lamentation from? So the funeral was held for Emperor Zhuang in Hangzhou.

古文：问师期，则曰： 甲仗未具。 
现代文：宗周问出兵的日期，鸣骏却说： 武器还没有备齐。 宗周叹气说： 唉！
English: Zong Zhou asked the date of the dispatch of troops, but Mingtang said: The weapons are not yet ready. Zong Zhou sighed and said: Alas!

古文：宗周叹曰： 嗟乎，是乌足与有为哉！ 乃与故侍郎朱大典，故给事中章正宸、熊汝霖召募义旅。将发，而福王监国于南京，起宗周故官。
现代文：和这种人在一起能干什么呢？ 于是与原侍郎朱大典，原给事中章正宸、熊汝霖召募了义师，正打算出兵，福王在南京监国，把宗周起复原官。
English: What can you do with such a person? Therefore, together with the original waiter, Zhu Datian, the original courtiers, Zhang Zhengqi and Xiong Rulin, he recruited a righteous teacher and was planning to send troops. King Fu supervised the country in Nanjing and restored Zong Zhou to his former position.

古文：宗周以大仇未报，不敢受职，自称草莽孤臣，疏陈时政，言：
现代文：宗周因为国家的大仇未报，不敢接受官职，自称草莽孤臣，上书谈论时政说：
English: Zong Zhou did not dare to accept an official post because of the country's unreported great enmity, claiming to be a reckless orphan, and wrote a letter about current politics, saying:

古文：今日大计，舍讨贼复仇，无以表陛下渡江之心；非毅然决策亲征，无以作天下忠义之气。
现代文： 现在的大事除非讨贼复仇，否则就无法表白陛下渡江南下的雄心；除非毅然决策亲征，否则就没法振作天下人忠勇义愤的气概。
English: Unless the current important matter is to seek revenge from thieves, it will not be possible to express His Majesty's ambition to cross the south of the river; unless he resolutely decides to march himself, it will not be possible to invigorate the world's loyalty, courage and indignation.

古文：一曰据形胜以规进取。
现代文：具体讲来有以下几件事： 第一，占据战略要地以便图谋进取北方。
English: Specifically, there are the following things: First, occupy strategic locations in order to try to advance to the north.

古文：江左非偏安之业，请进图江北。
现代文：江南不能成为偏安之地，请进图收复江北。
English: The southern part of the Yangtze River cannot be a place of partial security. Please restore the northern part of the Yangtze River.

古文：凤阳号中都，东扼徐、淮，北控豫州，西顾荆、襄，而南去金陵不远，请以驻亲征之师。
现代文：凤阳号称中都，往东可以扼守徐州、淮州，往北可以控制河南，往西可以照顾荆州、襄阳，往南又离南京城不远，请在那里驻扎陛下亲征的部队。
English: Fengyang is known as the capital of China. To the east, it can protect Xuzhou and Huaizhou. To the north, it can control Henan. To the west, it can take care of Jingzhou and Yangyang. To the south, it is not far from Nanjing City. Please station the troops personally recruited by His Majesty there.

古文：大小铨除，暂称行在，少存臣子负罪引慝之心。
现代文：对各级官吏的任命，都暂时自称行在，以便稍稍使臣子保存自己想回避的负罪的心态。
English: For the appointment of officials at all levels, they all pretended to be in office for the time being, in order to slightly preserve the guilty mentality of the courtiers that they wanted to avoid.

古文：从此渐进，秦、晋、燕、齐必有响应而起者。
现代文：从凤阳逐步向北推进，我想陕西、山西、河北、山东一定会有响应号召而起兵勤王的人。
English: From Fengyang, we will gradually push northward. I think there will definitely be people in Shaanxi, Shanxi, Hebei, and Shandong who will respond to the call and raise an army to serve the king.

古文：一曰重藩屏以资弹压。
现代文： 第二，加强建立藩屏以便帮助镇压逆贼。
English: Second, strengthen the establishment of the Han screen to help suppress the traitors.

古文：淮、扬数百里，设两节钺，不能御乱，争先南下，致江北一块土，拱手授贼。
现代文：淮州、扬州几百里地方，过去设置了两员大将，没能平定战乱，反而争先南下，以至于把江北偌大一块土地拱手让给了贼寇。
English: In the past, two generals were set up in several hundred miles of Huaizhou and Yangzhou, but they failed to quell the war, but instead scrambled to the south, so much so that a large piece of land north of the Yangtze River was ceded to the bandits.

古文：督漕路振飞坐守淮城，久以家属浮舟远地，是倡之逃也；于是镇臣刘泽清、高杰遂有家属寄江南之说。
现代文：督漕路振飞坐守淮城，很早就用船把家属送到了远处，这简直是在提倡大家逃跑。于是镇臣刘泽清、高杰据说都把家属安顿到了江南。
English: Zhuo Lu Zhenfei, who was in charge of Huai City, sent his family members far away by boat very early, which was literally advocating everyone to flee. Therefore, the townspeople Liu Zeching and Gao Jie are said to have settled their families in the south of the river.

古文：军法临阵脱逃者斩，臣谓一抚二镇皆可斩也。
现代文：按照军法，临阵脱逃的应予斩首，我认为这么一个抚臣、两个镇臣都该斩首。
English: According to military law, those who escape on the verge of battle should be beheaded. I think that such a vassal and two vassals should be beheaded.

古文：一曰慎爵赏以肃军情。
现代文： 第三，慎重进行封爵奖赏以便严肃军心。
English: Thirdly, the awarding of knighthoods should be carried out carefully in order to promote a serious military spirit.

古文：请分别各帅封赏，孰当孰滥，轻则收侯爵，重则夺伯爵。
现代文：请朝廷分析一下各个将帅的封赏，看哪个是该封的，哪个是滥封的，属滥封的轻则可以收回侯爵，重则可以剥夺伯爵。
English: Please ask the Imperial Court to analyze the rewards of each general, to see which one is the right one and which one is abusive. If it is abusive, the marquis can be recovered, and if it is abusive, the count can be deprived.

古文：夫以左帅之恢复而封，高、刘之败逃亦封，又谁不当封者？
现代文：如果说左良玉将军是因为收复失地而得到封侯，高杰、刘泽清临阵败逃也得到封赏，那么又有哪一个不应当封赏呢？
English: If General Zuo Liangyu was awarded a fief for recovering lost territory, and Gao Jie and Liu Zeqing were also awarded a fief for defeating the enemy and escaping, then which one should not be awarded a fief?

古文：武臣既滥，文臣随之，外臣既滥，中珰随之，恐天下闻而解体也。
现代文：武臣的封赏滥了，文臣也就跟着滥，朝廷里的封赏滥了，宫廷里的宦官也就跟着滥。
English: If the rewards of the warrior-vassals are extravagant, the scholar-vassals will also be extravagant, the rewards of the imperial court will be extravagant, and the eunuchs in the court will also be extravagant.

古文：一曰核旧官以立臣纪。
现代文：我真担心天下人知道这些后就会离心离德。
English: I'm really worried that people around the world will be alienated from Germany after knowing these things.

古文：燕京既破，有受伪官而叛者，有受伪官而逃者，有在封守而逃者，有奉使命而逃者，法皆不赦。
现代文： 第四，清查原任官吏以便树立人臣的规范。北京失陷后，原任官吏中有接受伪官背叛朝廷的，有接受伪官后又逃出来的，有在任职地方逃出来的，有奉使命而逃出来的，法律对这些人应一概问罪，不能赦免。
English: After the fall of Beijing, among the former officials who betrayed the imperial court by accepting pseudo-officials, among those who accepted pseudo-officials and then escaped, among those who escaped at their place of duty, and among those who escaped on mission, the law should question all of these people, and they cannot be pardoned.

古文：亟宜分别定罪，为戒将来。
现代文：朝廷应对这些人赶快加以辨别、定罪，以便警告以后的臣子。
English: The imperial court should quickly identify and convict these people in order to warn future courtiers.

古文：至于伪命南下，徘徊顺逆之间，实繁有徒；必且倡为曲说，以惑人心，尤宜诛绝。
现代文： 至于接受伪任后南下的官吏，他们在忠顺与逆反之间徘徊不定，这样的人是大有人在，他们一定会制造一些邪说蛊惑人心，这种人尤其应当斩除净尽。 
English: As for the officials who went to the south after accepting a fake post, they wavered between loyalty and rebellion. There are many such people, and they will certainly create some evil theories to demagogue the people. Such people should be eliminated completely.

古文：又言：
现代文：又说道：
English: He also said:

古文：当贼入秦流晋，渐过畿南，远近汹汹，独大江南北晏然，而二三督抚不闻遣一骑以壮声援，贼遂得长驱犯阙。
现代文： 当贼兵进入陕西流入山西逐步打到畿南时，周围地区人心惶惶，可大江南北像太平没事的样子。那么两三个总督、巡抚在这里却没听说过他们派一兵一卒过去，以壮声援，贼兵因而得以长驱直入打下皇宫。
English: When the bandits entered Shaanxi, flowed into Shanxi, and gradually reached the south of Gyeonggi Province, the people in the surrounding areas were panicked, but the north and south of the Yangtze River seemed to be peaceful. However, two or three governors and governors did not hear of them sending a soldier to the palace to show their solidarity, and the bandits were able to drive straight into the palace.

古文：坐视君父之危亡而不救，则封疆诸臣之当诛者一。
现代文：坐视君父危亡而不救，这是封疆诸臣应予诛杀的第一条理由。
English: To watch your father die and not save him, this is the first reason why the vassals in the fiefdom should be killed.

古文：凶问已确，诸臣奋戈而起，决一战以赎前愆，自当不俟朝食。
现代文：皇上驾崩的消息已经确定无疑，诸臣假如愿意奋戈而起，决一死战，赎免前罪，就应当星夜出动。
English: The news of the Emperor's death had been confirmed beyond doubt. If the courtiers were willing to rise up, fight to the death, and atone for past sins, they should march out at dawn.

古文：方且仰声息于南中，争言固圉之策，卸兵权于阃外，首图定策之功，则封疆诸臣之当诛者又一。
现代文：可是他们却在那里仰声息于南京，争着空谈固守的策略，丢掉在地方上的兵权，抢夺辅立新君的大功，这是封疆诸臣应予诛杀的第二条理由。
English: However, there they were, shouting their mouths off in Nanjing, fighting over empty talk about the strategy of holding fast, throwing away military power in the provinces, and snatching the great achievement of supporting the new emperor. This is the second reason why the vassals in the fiefdom should be killed.

古文：新朝既立之后，谓宜不俟终日，首遣北伐之师。不然，则亟驰一介，间道北进，檄燕中父老，起塞上名王，哭九庙，厝梓宫，访诸王。
现代文：新君登基之后，本应该一天不耽搁，马上派遣北伐的军队，要不然，就应当立即派一名使节，从小路上北进，给河北父老发布檄文，召来塞上的名王，哭祭宗庙，安置先帝的灵柩，寻访诸王。
English: After the new emperor ascended to the throne, he should have dispatched the army of the Northern Expedition immediately without delay. Otherwise, he should have immediately sent an envoy to march north from the small road, issue an imperial edict to Hebei's elders, summon the famous kings on the island, cry at the ancestral temple, place the coffin of the former emperor, and visit the kings.

古文：更不然，则起闽帅郑芝龙，以海师下直沽，九边督镇合谋共奋，事或可为。
现代文：再不然，可以起用福建大将郑芝龙，用海军进克直沽，九边总督再合谋共奋，事情或许还可以成功。
English: Otherwise, we can use the Fujian general Zheng Zhilong as a leader, use the navy to advance against Zhouzhuang, and the governor of the nine sides to work together, and things may still be successful.

古文：而诸臣计不出此，则举朝谋国不忠之当诛者又一。
现代文：可是诸臣不想到这些，这是满朝文武谋国不忠，应当诛杀的第三条理由。
English: However, the courtiers did not think of these things. This was the third reason why the Manchurian Emperor Wen Wu should be killed for his disloyalty to the state.

古文：罪废诸臣，量从昭雪，自应援先帝遗诏及之，今乃概用新恩。
现代文：过去因罪被罢的大臣，朝廷酌情予以平反，本应当借先帝遗诏的名义进行，现在却一概使用新天子的名义。
English: In the past, ministers who were ousted for crimes were rehabilitated by the imperial court at its discretion. This should have been done in the name of the last emperor's will, but now they all use the name of the new emperor.

古文：诛阉定案，前后诏书鹘突，势必彪虎之类，尽从平反而后已，则举朝谋国不忠之当诛者又一。
现代文：关于诛除阉党的案子，陛下与先帝的诏书前后冲突，这样势必要把那些穷凶极恶的坏人们都平反才罢休，这是满朝文武谋国不忠，应予诛杀的第四条理由。
English: With regard to the case of eliminating the Kuomintang, His Majesty and the former emperor's edict conflicted back and forth, so it was imperative to rehabilitate those extremely evil bad people. This is the fourth reason why the Manchurian Emperor should be killed.

古文：臣谓今日问罪，当自中外诸臣不职者始。
现代文：我认为现在办罪，应当从朝廷内外不称职的诸臣开始着手。 
English: I think we should start with the incompetent courtiers both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：诏纳其言，宣付史馆，中外为悚动。
现代文：福王命令接受他的奏章，交付史馆收存，朝廷内外因此受到了震动。
English: King Fu ordered that his record be accepted and handed over to the history museum for storage, which caused a stir both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：而马士英、高杰、刘泽清恨甚，滋欲杀宗周矣。
现代文：马士英、高杰、刘泽清恨透了，更加想要杀掉宗周了。
English: Ma Shying, Gao Jie, and Liu Zeqing hated each other so much that they wanted to kill Zong Zhou even more.

古文：宗周连疏请告不得命，遂抗疏劾士英，言：
现代文：宗周接连上书请假得不到回复，就抗言上书弹劾士英说：
English: Zong Zhou repeatedly petitioned for leave of absence and received no reply. He protested against the impeachment of Shi Ying and said:

古文：陛下龙飞淮甸，天实予之。乃有扈跸微劳，入内阁，进中枢，宫衔世荫，晏然当之不疑者，非士英乎？
现代文： 陛下从淮州一带起家当天子，事实上是老天给的大命，可是有人因为随从的一点点功劳就入内阁，进中枢，接受官衔世荫，似乎可以心安理得地接受这些，这个人不就是士英吗？
English: His Majesty, who was born in the Huai Zhou area, was in fact given a great destiny by God. However, there are people who, because of a little bit of merit from their followers, enter the cabinet, enter the center, and receive the official title of the world. It seems that they can accept these things with peace of mind. Isn't this person Shi Ying?

古文：于是李沾侈言定策，挑激廷臣矣。刘孔昭以功赏不均，发愤冢臣，朝端哗然聚讼，而群阴且翩翩起矣。
现代文：从此李沾侈言辅立新君的功绩向廷臣挑战，刘孔昭认为功赏不均跟吏部长官大发怒火，朝堂上相互吵闹喧哗不已，一群小人们于是翩然而起，粉墨登场。
English: From then on, Li Zhanli challenged the courtiers on the merits of the new prince, Liu Kongzhao was angry with the ministers and officials who thought that the reward was not equal, and there was a lot of noise in the morning hall. A group of small people then rose up and entered the stage.

古文：借知兵之名，则逆党可以然灰，宽反正之路，则逃臣可以汲引，而阁部诸臣且次第言去矣。
现代文：假借懂军事的名义，逆党也可以死灰复燃了；放宽反正的门路，逃臣也可以拉来任职了，因而阁部诸臣逐渐都要申请弃官还乡去了。
English: Under the guise of understanding the military, the rebel party could also be revived; the doorway was relaxed anyway, and fugitive ministers could also be pulled to serve, so cabinet ministers gradually had to apply to resign and return to their hometowns.

古文：中朝之党论方兴，何暇图河北之贼？立国之本纪已疏，何以言匡攘之略？
现代文：朝廷里边正忙于制造党论，哪有功夫算计河北的贼寇；立国的纪纲已被破坏殆尽，怎么考虑灭敌复国的策略。
English: The imperial court is busy fabricating party theories. How much effort is there to calculate the banditry in Hebei? The curriculum for the founding of the country has been destroyed. How can we consider the strategy of destroying the enemy and restoring the country?

古文：高杰一逃将也，而奉若骄子，浸有尾大之忧。
现代文：高杰是一个逃将，可是朝廷把他奉若赤子，慢慢就有尾大不掉的忧患了。
English: Gao Jie was a deserter, but the imperial court treated him like a baby, and he gradually became a cause for concern.

古文：淮、扬失事，不难谴抚臣道臣以谢之，安得不长其桀骜，则亦恃士英卵翼也。
现代文：淮州、扬州出了事，朝廷不难考虑派抚臣道臣过去向他们道歉，可是这样怎么能不长其桀骜？说到头来他们是靠着士英的庇护才如此。
English: When things went wrong in Huai Zhou and Yang Zhou, it was not difficult for the imperial court to consider sending Fuxin Daochen to apologize to them, but how could this not cause a scandal? After all, they were protected by Shi Ying.

古文：刘、黄诸将，各有旧汛地，而置若弈棋，汹汹为连鸡之势，至分剖江北四镇以慰之，安得不启其雄心，则皆高杰一人倡之也。
现代文：刘泽清、黄得功过去都有各自的驻防区域，可是他们像下棋一样把它抛到一边去，在那里斗鸡一般气势汹汹地争夺地盘，以至于朝廷把江北分划成四个兵镇来安置他们。这样做怎会不启其雄心？说到头这件事是由高杰引发的。
English: Liu Zeching and Huang Dergong had their own garrisons in the past, but they tossed it aside like a game of chess. There, fighting cocks competed for territory with such ferocity that the imperial court divided the northern part of the river into four military towns to accommodate them. How could this not arouse their ambitions? After all, this matter was triggered by Gao Jie.

古文：书之史册，为弘光第一美政。王优诏答之，而促其速入。
现代文：京营自祖宗以来都是由勋臣来主持，兵部侍郎辅佐勋臣，陛下开国伊始，就任命了宦官卢九德，对这件事士英不能推卸他应有的责任。 福王用口气婉转的诏书回答他，同时催促他赶快入朝。
English: Since the time of his ancestors, the imperial campaign in Beijing has been presided over by courtiers. From the beginning of the founding of the country, the eunuch Lu Jiude was appointed by the Minister of Military Affairs, and he could not shirk his due responsibility for this matter. Fu Wang replied to him with a euphemistic edict, and urged him to enter the imperial court as soon as possible.

古文：士英大怒，即日具疏辞位，且扬言于朝曰： 刘公自称草莽孤臣，不书新命，明示不臣天子也。 
现代文：士英大为恼火，当天就写下奏疏要辞职，又在朝廷里扬言说： 这位刘公自称草莽孤臣，不署新天子给他的任命，明明表示他不向天子称臣嘛。 
English: Shi Ying was very angry, and on the same day he wrote a letter of resignation, and threatened in the imperial court: This Liu Gong claimed to be a reckless and lonely minister, and would not sign the appointment given to him by the new emperor, and clearly stated that he would not be a minister to the emperor.

古文：其私人朱统钅类遂劾宗周疏请移跸凤阳： 凤阳，高墙所在，欲以罪宗处皇上，而与史可法拥立潞王。
现代文：他的私党朱统翷于是弹劾宗周上书请皇上移驻凤阳： 凤阳是监狱所在地，他想把皇上当作有罪的宗室子弟安置到那里，然后与史可法一道拥立潞王。
English: His private party, Zhu Tongyao, then impeached Zong Zhou and sent a letter asking the emperor to move to Fengyang: Fengyang is the location of the prison, he wanted to place the emperor there as a guilty son of the family, and then, together with Shikofa, support the king.

古文：其兵已伏丹阳，当急备。 
现代文：他们的部队已经潜伏在丹阳了，应该紧急加以防备。 
English: Their troops are already lurking in Danyang and should be urgently guarded against.

古文：而泽清、杰日夜谋所以杀宗周者不得，乃遣客十辈往刺宗周。
现代文：另一方面泽清、高杰一天到晚策划怎样杀掉宗周，找不到办法就派了十多个刺客过去刺杀。
English: On the other hand, Ze Qing and Gao Jie spent all day planning how to kill Zong Zhou. When they couldn't find a way, they sent more than ten assassins to assassinate him.

古文：宗周时在丹阳，终日危坐，未尝有惰容，客前后至者，不敢加害而去。
现代文：宗周当时在丹阳一天到晚正襟危坐，不曾懒散过。先后过来的刺客都不敢下手就离去了。
English: At that time, Zong Zhou was sitting in Danyang all day long, never idle. The assassins who came one after another did not dare to start and left.

古文：而黄鸣骏入觐，兵抵京口，与防江兵相击斗。士英以统钅类言为信也，亦震恐。
现代文：黄鸣骏入觐，部队开到京口跟江防部队相斗杀，士英以为统翷的话是真的，也怕得要死。
English: Huang Mingtuan was captured, and the troops drove to Beijing to fight and kill the river defense troops. Shi Ying thought that the words of the commanding officer were true, and was scared to death.

古文：于是泽清疏劾： 宗周阴挠恢复，欲诛臣等，激变士心，召生灵之祸。 
现代文：于是泽清上书弹劾 宗周暗中阻挠收复失地，想杀掉我们这些人，激起将士们变心，给天下百姓带来灾殃 。
English: Therefore, Ze Qing wrote a letter to impeach Zong Zhou for secretly obstructing the recovery of the lost territory, trying to kill us, inciting the generals to change their minds, and bringing disaster to the people of the world.

古文：刘良佐亦具疏言宗周力持 三案 ，为门户主盟，倡议亲征，图晁错之自为居守，司马懿之闭城拒君。
现代文：刘良佐也写了一篇奏疏说宗周极力压制 三案 ，充当门户首领；提出要皇上亲征，企图像晁错那样自己担任留守；像司马懿那样关闭城门不让皇上进去。
English: Liu Liangzuo also wrote a report saying that Zong Zhou tried his best to suppress the three cases, acting as the leader of the portal; proposed that the emperor himself should be recruited, and that he should stay behind as if he had made a mistake; closed the gate like Sima Yi and did not allow the emperor to enter.

古文：疏未下，泽清复草一疏，署杰、良佐及黄得功名上之，言： 宗周劝上亲征，谋危君父，欲安置陛下于烽火凶危之地。
现代文：良佐的奏疏还没发布，泽清又写一篇奏疏，并署上高杰、良佐及黄得功的名字交了上去，说道： 宗周劝皇上亲征，试图谋害君父，想把陛下安排到烽火连绵凶多吉少的地方去，居心何在？
English: Before Ryosa's report was published, Ze Qing wrote another report and signed it with the names of Gao Jie, Ryosa and Huang Dergong and handed it over, saying: What was Zong Zhou's intention in persuading the emperor to personally enlist, in attempting to assassinate the emperor, and in wanting to arrange for his majesty to go to a place where bonfires are lit in succession and where there is much evil and little good?

古文：盖非宗周一人之谋，姜曰广、吴甡合谋也。曰广心雄胆大，翊戴非其本怀，故阴结死党，翦除诸忠，然后迫劫乘舆，迁之别郡。
现代文：这件事不是宗周一个人的主意，而是姜曰广、吴生生等人共同策划的，曰广为人心雄胆大，拥立陛下并非他的本心，所以暗中勾结死党，想剪除忠臣以后强迫陛下迁移到别的府城去。
English: This affair was not the idea of Zong Zhou alone, but was planned jointly by Jiang Zhiguang, Wu Shengsheng and others. They said that Guang was courageous and that it was not his original intention to support His Majesty, so they secretly colluded with the dead party and wanted to force His Majesty to move to another capital city after cutting off loyalists.

古文：如甡、宗周入都，臣等即渡江赴阙，面讦诸奸，正《春秋》讨贼之义。 
现代文：假如吴生生、宗周入都，我们就立即渡过长江，到朝廷里当面抨击这帮奸臣，实行《春秋》所讲的讨贼的大义。 
English: If Wu Shengsheng and Zong Zhou were to enter the capital, we would immediately cross the Yangtze River and go to the imperial court to criticize this group of traitors in person, and carry out the great cause of catching traitors as described in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：疏入，举朝大骇，传谕和衷集事。
现代文：他的奏疏递上后，满朝文武吓了一大跳，福王传发指示要大家团结一心，共渡时艰。
English: After his report was delivered, the Manchurian Emperor Wenwu was greatly alarmed, and the King of Good Fortune sent out instructions for everyone to unite as one and work together to get through the difficult times.

古文：宗周不得已，以七月十八日入朝。
现代文：宗周迫不得已，就在七月十八日入朝。
English: As a last resort, Zong Zhou entered the imperial court on July 18.

古文：初，泽清疏出，遣人录示杰。杰曰： 我辈武人，乃预朝事耶？ 
现代文：当初，泽清的奏疏公布后，朝廷派人抄了一份送去给高杰看，高杰说： 我们武人怎么能干预朝政呢？ 
English: At first, after the publication of Ze Qing's report, the imperial court sent a copy to Gao Jie. Gao Jie said, "How can we warriors interfere in imperial politics?

古文：得功疏辨： 臣不预闻。 
现代文：得功也上书辩解说： 我事先根本不知道。 
English: The winner also wrote a letter of apology, saying: I didn't know about it in advance.

古文：士英寝不奏。
现代文：士英却把得功的奏疏压下不往上送。
English: Shi Ying, however, did not send up the meritorious rendition under pressure.

古文：可法不平，遣使遍诘诸镇，咸云不知，遂据以入告，泽清辈由是气沮。
现代文：史可法气愤不平，派使者过去一个个质问各镇将帅，大家都说不知道。可法就把情况如实报告了福王，这下泽清等人为之沮丧。
English: Enraged, Shikofo sent envoys to question the commanders of each town one by one, and everyone said they didn't know. However, Shikofo truthfully reported the situation to Fuwang, which made Shimozawa Qing and others frustrated.

古文：士英既嫉宗周，益欲去之，而荐阮大铖知兵。有诏冠带陛见。
现代文：士英已经忌恨宗周，越来越想排挤掉他，就推荐说阮大铖懂军事，福王传令让大铖穿上官服进见。
English: Shi Ying already hated Zong Zhou and wanted to push him out more and more, so she recommended that Ruan Dajuan understand military affairs, and Fu Wang sent a message to Dajuan to wear an official uniform.

古文：未几，中旨特授兵部添注右侍郎。
现代文：不多天，从宫中传出特旨任用大铖为兵部添注右侍郎。
English: Not many days later, a special order was issued from the Imperial Court to appoint Otsuki as Hyobusenshu, the right hand man.

古文：宗周曰： 大铖进退，系江左兴亡，老臣不敢不一争之。
现代文：宗周说： 大铖的进退关系到江南的兴亡，老臣不敢不争他一回。
English: Zong Zhou said: The advance and retreat of Daju is related to the rise and fall of the south of the Yangtze River. The old minister dared not not fight him once.

古文：夫以十二万不杀敌之兵，索十二万不杀敌之饷，必穷之术耳。
现代文：皇上假如不听，我也要还乡去了。 奏疏递上去后福王不听，宗周就告老还乡，福王传下诏令允许他乘坐官方车马回乡。
English: If the emperor did not listen, I would also go back to my hometown. After the report was submitted, King Fook did not listen, and Zong Zhou announced that he would return to his hometown. King Fook issued an edict to allow him to return to his hometown in an official vehicle.

古文：不稍裁抑，惟加派横征。蓄一二苍鹰乳虎之有司，以天下徇之已矣，所谓积外衅而酿内忧也。
现代文：宗周即将动身前上书讲了五条建议：一是勤问政事，不要因为沉湎于眼前的享乐忽略了远大抱负；二是振举王法，不要因为皇上对臣下的开恩损害臣子们应守的法度；三是明定国事，不要让邪气压了正气；四是端正治术，不要把刑名摆到教化前头来；五是巩固国本，不要因为外患酿成内忧。
English: Before leaving, Zong Zhou wrote five suggestions: First, diligently inquire about politics, do not neglect the lofty ambitions because of indulging in the present enjoyment; second, elevate the king's law, do not damage the laws that the subjects should abide by because of the emperor's graciousness to the subjects; third, clearly determine the state affairs, do not let the evil spirit suppress the righteous spirit; fourth, correct the discipline, do not put the name of punishment in front of the education; fifth, consolidate the national foundation, and do not cause internal worries because of external problems.

古文：优诏报闻。
现代文：福王用语气委婉的圣旨回复说知道了。
English: Fu Wang replied with a tone of euphemism saying that he understood.

古文：明年五月，南都亡。
现代文：第二年五月，南都覆亡了。
English: In May of the following year, Nanto was overthrown.

古文：六月，潞王降，杭州亦失守。
现代文：六月，潞王投降，杭州也失守了。
English: In June, Shao Wang surrendered, and Hangzhou was also lost.

古文：宗周方食，推案恸哭，自是遂不食。
现代文：宗周正在吃饭时听到这个消息，把桌子都给推倒，失声痛哭起来，从此就开始绝食。
English: Zong Zhou was having dinner when he heard the news. He pushed the table over and burst into tears. He began his hunger strike.

古文：移居郭外，有劝以文、谢故事者。宗周曰： 北都之变，可以死，可以无死，以身在田里，尚有望于中兴也。
现代文：他移居到城郭之外后，有人用文天祥、谢安的故事劝说他，宗周说： 北都的事变发生时，我可以死，也可以不去死，因为身在乡间，还有希望看到国家中兴。
English: After he moved outside the city walls, someone used the stories of Wen Tianxiang and Xie An to persuade him. Zong Zhou said: "When the incident in the northern capital occurred, I could die or not die, because I was in the countryside and still hoped to see the country prosper.

古文：南都之变，主上自弃其社稷，尚曰可以死，可以无死，以俟继起有人也。
现代文：南都的事变发生时，是主上自己放弃了自己的江山，我还认为可以死，也可以不去死，以便等待国家后继有人。
English: When the Nanto Incident occurred, it was the Lord Himself who gave up His country. I also thought that I could die, or not die, in order to wait for someone to succeed the country.

古文：今吾越又降矣，老臣不死，尚何待乎？
现代文：现在我们浙江也投降了，老臣不死还等什么呢？
English: Now that we in Zhejiang have also surrendered, what are we waiting for if the old minister does not die?

古文：若曰身不在位，不当与城为存亡，独不当与土为存亡乎？
现代文：如果说我不在官位上，不应该与城共存亡，难道不应该与国土共存亡吗？
English: If I am not in an official position, shouldn't I coexist with the city, shouldn't I coexist with the country?

古文：酒罢，携灯出门，投柳桥下，先宗周一月死。
现代文：这也就是过去江万里自杀的道理了。 出去辞别祖墓回来，船经过西洋巷时，宗周投入水中，水浅没死成，船夫把他扶了上来。
English: This is the reason why so many people have committed suicide along the Yangtze River in the past. When they went out to bid farewell to their ancestral tombs and came back, the boat was passing through the Western Alley, and Zong Zhou fell into the water. The water was not shallow, and the boatman helped him up.

古文：乡人私谥正义先生。宗周始受业于许孚远。
现代文：宗周前后绝食二十三天，开始还喝点茶水，后来十三天里滴水不沾，像往常一样跟弟子们进行学术问答。闰六月八日，宗周绝食身亡，终年六十八岁。
English: Before and after Zong Zhou went on a hunger strike for twenty-three days, at the beginning he also drank some tea, later he did not touch water for thirteen days, as usual he conducted academic Q&A with his disciples. On June 8, Zong Zhou died of hunger strike, he was sixty-eight years old.

古文：已，入东林书院，与高攀龙辈讲习。
现代文：宗周早年从许孚远那里接受学业。后来又进入东林书院跟高攀龙等一起讲习。
English: In his early years, Zong Zhou received his education from Xu Fuyuan. Later, he entered Donglin Academy to study with Gao Panglong and others.

古文：冯从吾首善书院之会，宗周亦与焉。
现代文：冯从吾首善书院的讲会，宗周也参加过。
English: Zong Zhou also took part in a lecture given by Feng Zongzhen at Wuzhouzhen Academy.

古文：越中自王守仁后，一传为王畿，再传为周汝登、陶望龄，三传为陶奭龄，皆杂于禅。
现代文：浙江自从王守仁以后，心学一传为王畿，再传为周汝登、陶望龄，三传为陶龄，都掺杂了禅学的内容。
English: In Zhejiang Province, after Wang Shuren, the first transmission of mind study was Wang Gui, the second transmission was Zhou Ruden, Tao Wangling, and the third transmission was Tao Ling, all of which were mixed with the content of Zen study.

古文：奭龄讲学白马山，为因果说，去守仁益远。
现代文：龄在白马山讲学，提出了因果说，离王守仁的思想更远。
English: When he gave a lecture on Mount Paima, he put forward the theory of cause and effect, which was even further away from Wang Shuren's thought.

古文：宗周忧之，筑证人书院，集同志讲肄。
现代文：宗周对此很忧心，修建了一所证人书院，召集志同道合的人在一起讲习。
English: Concerned about this, Zong Zhou built a witness academy and gathered like-minded people to study together.

古文：且死，语门人曰： 学之要，诚而已，主敬其功也。
现代文：快死的时候，宗周对自己的学生说： 治学的关键在于心中的立诚，主敬是立诚的外部功用。
English: When he was about to die, Zong Zhou said to his students: The key to learning lies in the sincerity of the heart, and respect is the external function of sincerity.

古文：敬则诚，诚则天。
现代文：能主敬心中就能立诚，立诚就合乎天性了。
English: If you can respect the Lord in your heart, you can be sincere, and sincerity is in line with nature.

古文：良知之说，鲜有不流于禅者。 
现代文：良知学说很少不流入禅学。 
English: The doctrine of conscience rarely fails to find its way into Zen.

古文：宗周在官之日少，其事君，不以面从为敬。
现代文：宗周在官位上的时间不多，他侍奉君主不把表面的服从当成恭敬。
English: Zong Zhou did not have much time in office, and he served the monarch without taking the superficial obedience as deference.

古文：入朝，虽处暗室，不敢南向。
现代文：他入朝做官时，即使一个人呆在暗室里，都不敢把脸朝南坐。
English: When he became an official in the imperial court, he did not dare to sit with his face to the south, even if he was alone in a dark room.

古文：或讯大狱，会大议，对明旨，必却坐拱立移时。
现代文：无论审判大案，还是讨论大事，或者是阅读圣旨，他都要退后几步，拱手站立很久才敢进行。
English: Whether he is trying a major case, discussing an important matter, or reading the will, he has to take a few steps back and stand for a long time before he dares to proceed.

古文：或谢病，徒步家居，布袍粗饭，乐道安贫。
现代文：有时请了病假，就徒步回到家里居住，布袍粗饭，乐道安贫。
English: Sometimes, after taking sick leave, they return to their homes on foot to live, eat coarse rice in a cloth robe, and enjoy poverty-free life.

古文：闻召就道，尝不能具冠裳。
现代文：一旦接到朝廷的召唤他马上就上路，有时连衣服、帽子都不等穿齐戴好。
English: As soon as he received a summons from the court, he was on his way, sometimes not even waiting for his clothes and hat to be put on.

古文：学者称念台先生。
现代文：学者们把他称为念台先生。
English: Scholars refer to him as Mr. Nendai.

古文：子汋，字伯绳。
现代文：他的儿子叫刘氵勺，字伯绳。
English: His son's name is Liu Xizhao, also known as Bo Zuo.

古文：黄道周，字幼平，漳浦人。
现代文：黄道周，字幼平，漳浦人。
English: Zodiac week, character Yuping, Minpo people.

古文：天启二年进士。改庶吉士，授编修，为经筵展书官。
现代文：天启二年进士，改选庶吉士后，授职编修，担任经筵展书官。
English: He entered the priesthood in the second year of the Tenkai era, and after being re-elected as an associate priest, he was given the post of editor and served as a clerk of the Ministry of Finance.

古文：故事，必膝行前，道周独否，魏忠贤目摄之。未几，内艰归。
现代文：按照惯例，展书官一定要跪行到皇上面前，道周却不跪行，魏忠贤狠狠地瞪了他几眼，以示恐吓。
English: According to the usual practice, the exhibition librarian must kneel in front of the emperor, but Daozhou did not kneel. Wei Zhongxian glared at him several times to intimidate him.

古文：崇祯二年起故官，进右中允。
现代文：不久，道周为母亲守丧回家去了。崇祯二年，道周以原职起用后，升任右中允。
English: Soon, Daozhou went home to mourn for his mother. In the second year of Chongzhen, after Daozhou was appointed to his original post, he was promoted to Yu Zhongyong.

古文：三疏救故相钱龙锡，降调，龙锡得减死。
现代文：因为他多次上书营救原辅臣钱龙锡，被降职调用，龙锡得以减免了死刑。
English: Because he repeatedly wrote to rescue the former aide-de-camp Qian Longxi, who was demoted and recalled, Longxi was able to commute his death sentence.

古文：五年正月方候补，遘疾求去。濒行，上疏曰：
现代文：五年正月，道周在候补期间生了病，请求离朝还乡，临行之前上书说：
English: In the first month of the fifth year, Daozhou fell ill during the waiting period and requested to return to his hometown. Before leaving, he wrote a letter saying:

古文：臣自幼学《易》，以天道为准。上下载籍二千四百年，考其治乱，百不失一。
现代文： 我从小学习《易经》，用天道作为准绳，史书所记载的二千四百年历史，用天道来考察其治乱兴衰，百无一失。
English: I have been studying the I Ching since I was a child. I use the heavenly way as a yardstick. The history of 2400 years recorded in the history books uses the heavenly way to examine its rise and fall.

古文：陛下御极之元年，正当《师》之上九，其爻云： 大君有命，开国承家，小人勿用。 
现代文：陛下登基后第一年，正碰上《师》卦的上九爻，其爻辞说： 天子有命令说：封建诸侯和任命卿大夫，小人都不可用。 
English: The first year after His Majesty ascended to the throne, he was encountering the Upper Nine Dynasties of the "Shi" Gua, and his eulogy said: The Son of Heaven has an order to say: Feudal lords and the appointment of doctors should not be used by small people.

古文：陛下思贤才不遽得，惩小人不易绝，盖陛下有大君之实，而小人怀干命之心。
现代文：所以说陛下思念贤人不能马上得到，惩处小人不容易清除干净，这是因为陛下虽然有天子的英明，但是小人们总是怀着抵触命令的心态。
English: Therefore, it is said that His Majesty's thoughts for the wise cannot be obtained immediately, and the punishment of the villains is not easy to clean up. This is because although His Majesty has the wisdom of the Son of Heaven, the villains always have the mentality of resisting orders.

古文：臣入都以来，所见诸大臣皆无远猷，动寻苛细，治朝宁者以督责为要谈，治边疆者以姑息为上策。
现代文：我入京以来所看到的大臣们都没有什么远大策略，动辄找别人的小毛病。治理朝廷中政务的大臣把察处别人当成要事，治理边疆军事的大臣把苟且偷安看作上策。
English: The ministers I have seen since I came to Beijing do not have any grand strategy, and they are always looking for other people's minor problems. The ministers who govern the government affairs in the imperial court regard the inspection of others as an important matter, and the ministers who govern the military on the frontier regard the theft of peace as the best strategy.

古文：序仁义道德，则以为迂昧而不经；奉刀笔簿书，则以为通达而知务。
现代文：有人讲论仁义道德，就认为是迂腐、幼稚；那起草簿书的小官吏，倒被看成通达、识时务。
English: Someone who talks about benevolence, righteousness and morality is considered to be pedantic and childish; the petty official who drafts the book is considered to be well-informed and aware of current affairs.

古文：一切磨勘，则葛藤终年；一意不调，而株连四起。
现代文：一经勘察官员政绩，就弄得终年纠缠不休；下属的一点意见不合胃口，就株连四起。
English: Once a probing official's political performance has been investigated, he or she will be pestered all year round; if a subordinate's opinion is not to his or her liking, he or she will be fired.

古文：不救凌围，而谓凌城必不可筑；不理岛民，而谓岛众必不可用；兵逃于久顿，而谓乱生于无兵；饷糜于漏邑，而谓功销于无饷。
现代文：陛下想整顿朝廷纪纲，驱除外患，那帮大臣就用严刑峻法，打击百官，陛下想革弊防奸，以一警百，那帮大臣就以此借题发挥，制造矛盾，招揽权力。
English: If His Majesty wanted to rectify the imperial court's disciplinary system and drive out evils, those ministers would use severe punishments and harsh laws to crack down on a hundred officials. If His Majesty wanted to revolutionize the prevention of corruption, with one policeman for a hundred, those ministers would use this as a pretext to create conflicts and recruit power.

古文：乱视荧听，浸淫相欺，驯至极坏，不可复挽，臣窃危之。自二年以来，以察去弊，而弊愈多；以威创顽，而威滋殚。
现代文：进一步说吧，朝堂里的大臣们敢欺骗陛下的，一定不是那些战战兢兢，照章办事的士人，而是那些把持权力，百般乖巧的人；宫廷里的大臣们敢欺骗陛下的，一定不是那些推磨、切菜、管钱管账的下人，而是那些权倾宗社的显贵。
English: Furthermore, the ministers in the imperial court who dare to deceive Your Majesty are certainly not those dignitaries who tremble and act according to the rules, but those who hold power and are well-behaved in every way; the ministers in the court who dare to deceive Your Majesty are certainly not those subordinates who grind, chop vegetables, and manage money and accounts, but those dignitaries who are power-hungry.

古文：是亦反申、商以归周、孔，捐苛细以崇惇大之时矣。
现代文：请陛下明智地思索一番，参看古今的史书想一想，自古至今，绝对没有斤斤计较于俸禄多少的人可以提出远大策略来的；也没有吹毛求疵的人可以取得三皇五帝那样的政治成就的。 
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to think wisely and refer to ancient and modern history books to think about it. From ancient times to the present, there is absolutely no one who cares more about his salary than his salary can come up with a grand strategy; and no one who is a nitpicker can achieve political achievements like the three kings and five emperors.

古文：帝不怿，摘 葛藤 、 株连 数语，令具陈。
现代文：庄烈帝阅后很不高兴，摘出 纠缠 、 株连 等字眼，责令他做出具体解释。
English: Zhuang Rongdi was very unhappy after reading it. He took out the words "entanglement" and "connection" and ordered him to make a specific explanation.

古文：道周上言曰：
现代文：道周上书说：
English: In his petition, Doshu said:

古文：迩年诸臣所目营心计，无一实为朝廷者。
现代文： 近年来朝臣们所看到、想到的，没有一件事是真心为了朝廷好。
English: In recent years, nothing the courtiers have seen or thought of is sincerely for the good of the imperial court.

古文：其用人行事，不过推求报复而已。
现代文：他们选用人才，所作所为，不过是为了寻求报复。
English: They're using people, they're doing things, they're just looking for revenge.

古文：自前岁春月以后，盛谈边疆，实非为陛下边疆，乃为逆珰而翻边疆也；去岁春月以后，盛言科场，实非为陛下科场，乃为仇隙而翻科场也。
现代文：从前年春天开始，朝臣们大谈边疆的事务，事实上并不是为陛下守边疆，而是为谋逆的阉党翻边疆的案；从去年春天开始，朝臣们大谈科场的事务，事实上并不是替陛下整顿科场，而是为了报复仇怨翻科场的案。
English: Since the spring of the previous year, the courtiers have been talking a lot about the affairs of the frontier. In fact, it is not for His Majesty to guard the frontier, but for the treacherous Kuomintang to overturn the frontier. Since last spring, the courtiers have been talking a lot about the affairs of the science field. In fact, it is not for His Majesty to rectify the science field, but for revenge to overturn the science field.

古文：此非所谓 葛藤 、 株连 乎？
现代文：这难道还不是我说的 纠缠 、 株连 吗？ 
English: Isn't this what I mean by "entanglement" and "shareholding"?

古文：自古外患未弭，则大臣一心以忧外患；小人未退，则大臣一心以忧小人。
现代文：这些话都是影射大学士周延儒、温体仁的，庄烈帝更加不高兴，把他给罢官为民了。崇祯九年，因为有人推荐，朝廷召回道周，恢复了原先的官职。
English: These words were all allusions to the university scholars Zhou Yanju and Wen Tianzhen. Emperor Zhuang was even more displeased and dismissed him as a commoner. In the ninth year of Chongzhen, because of someone's recommendation, the court recalled Daozhou and restored his original official position.

古文：陛下焦劳于上，小民展转于下，而诸臣括囊其间，稍有人心，宜不至此。 
现代文：第二年闰月里，朝廷因长期干旱不雨，诏令百官反省，道周上书说： 最近朝廷内外都在斋戒，为百姓请命，可是朝廷里五天逮系了两位尚书，没听说有一个人上书请救，怎么能指望老天消除凶灾，帮陛下实现公正、光明的政治局面呢？ 
English: In the leap month of the second year, due to the long drought and no rain, the imperial edict ordered all officials to reflect, and Daozhou sent a letter saying: Recently, both inside and outside the imperial court have been fasting and pleading for the people. However, the imperial court arrested two scholars for five days, and did not hear that one person sent a letter for help. How can we expect God to eliminate the disaster and help His Majesty achieve a fair and bright political situation?

古文：又上疏曰： 陛下宽仁弘宥，有身任重寄至七八载罔效、拥权自若者。
现代文：又上书说： 陛下宽宏大度，肯于饶人，所以有身寄重任达七八年没什么功效，还依然把持大权的。
English: The petition also said: His majesty is magnanimous and is willing to spare people, so it is not effective to have a heavy responsibility for seven or eight years, and he still holds power.

古文：积渐以来，国无是非，朝无枉直，中外臣工率苟且图事，诚可痛愤。
现代文：发展到现在，国家没有是非之分，朝廷没有什么枉直之辨，里里外外的群臣百官大都得过且过地办事，这实在令人痛心疾首。
English: Up to now, there is no difference between right and wrong in the country, the imperial court does not have any pointless disputes, and most of the ministers and officials inside and outside the country have to do things in an ad hoc manner, which is really distressing.

古文：然其视听一系于上。
现代文：不过下边群臣百官的所作所为全都决定于上边。
English: However, the actions of the ministers and officials below are all determined from above.

古文：上急催科则下急贿赂；上乐锲核，则下乐巉险；上喜告讦，则下喜诬陷。
现代文：上边急于征收租税，下边就急于收贿行贿；上边喜欢苛刻地考核，下边就喜欢夸大其事；上边喜欢揭人隐私，下边就喜欢诬陷。
English: The upper side is eager to collect taxes, and the lower side is eager to accept bribes; the upper side likes to harshly assess, and the lower side likes to exaggerate; the upper side likes to expose people's privacy, and the lower side likes to frame.

古文：当此南北交讧，奈何与市井细民，申勃谿之谈，修睚眦之隙乎。 
现代文：在这南北交讧的时候，朝廷干什么要和市井里的小百姓计较那些家庭不和的传闻，结那本来不必理睬的仇怨呢？ 
English: At a time when the North and South are at loggerheads, why should the imperial court take into account the rumors of family discord with the common people in the city and settle the grudges that should not have been ignored?

古文：时体仁方招奸人构东林、复社之狱，故道周及之。
现代文：当时体仁正引用一些坏人制造东林、复社的案子，所以道周谈到这些。
English: At that time, Tetsujin was citing some bad people to make the case of Donglin and the reunion, so Daozhou talked about these.

古文：旋进右谕德，掌司经局，疏辞。因言己有三罪、四耻、七不如。
现代文：不久道周升任右谕德，掌管司经局，他上书辞让时，说自己有三罪、四耻、七不如。
English: Soon after, Dao Zhou was promoted to the post of Right Scholar, in charge of the Department of Economic Affairs. When he submitted his resignation, he said that he had three sins, four shames and seven inferiorities.

古文：三罪、四耻，以自责。七不如者，谓 品行高峻，卓绝伦表，不如刘宗周；至性奇情，无愧纯孝，不如倪元璐；湛深大虑，远见深计，不如魏呈润；犯言敢谏，清裁绝俗，不如詹尔选、吴执御；志尚高雅，博学多通，不如华亭布衣陈继儒、龙溪举人张燮；至圜土累系之臣，朴心纯行，不如李汝璨、傅朝佑；文章意气，坎坷磊落，不如钱谦益、郑鄤。 
现代文：三罪、四耻，用来自我批评，七不如是说 在品行峻洁，超出常人方面，不如刘宗周；在性情涵养，无愧纯孝方面，不如倪元路；宏观思维，远见深计方面，不如魏呈润；犯言直谏，裁决平允方面，不如詹尔选、吴执御；志尚高雅，博学多通方面，不如华亭的平民陈继儒、龙溪的举人张燮；说到监狱中因事累及被逮的大臣，那么在心性朴实，行为纯正方面，不如李汝璨、傅朝佑；在文章意气风发，仕途坎坷，光明磊落方面，不如钱谦益、郑曼阝 。
English: Three crimes, four disgraces, with self-criticism, seven, it is better to say that Liu Zongzhou is not as good as Liu Zong; Ni Yuanlu is not as good as Ni Yuan; Wei Chengrun is not as good as Wei Chengrun; Wei Chengrun is not as good as Wei Chengrun; Wei Chengrun is not as good as Wei Chengrun; Wei Chengrun is not as good as Wei Chengrun; Wei Chengrun is not as good as Wei Chengrun; Wei Chengrun is not as good as Wei Chengrun; Wei Chengrun is not as good as Wei Chengrun; Wei Chengrun is not as good as Wei Chengrun; Wei Chengrun is

古文：鄤方被杖母大诟，帝得疏骇异，责以颠倒是非。
现代文：郑曼阝当时正因为所谓的棍打母亲事受人唾骂，所以庄烈帝接到章奏大吃一惊，批评他颠倒是非。
English: At that time, Zheng Mengyao was being reviled for the so-called beating of his mother, so Emperor Zhuang was taken aback by the report and criticized him for reversing the rights and wrongs.

古文：道周疏辩，语复营护鄤。
现代文：道周又上书辩解，言辞之中又有营护郑曼阝的意思。
English: Daozhou also wrote a letter to defend himself, and his words also implied that he would protect Zheng Mengyao.

古文：帝怒，严旨切责。
现代文：庄烈帝恼了，下一道措辞严厉的诏书训斥了他一番。
English: Emperor Zhuang was annoyed and reprimanded him in a sternly worded edict.

古文：道周以文章风节高天下，严冷方刚，不谐流俗。公卿多畏而忌之，乃藉不如鄤语为口实。
现代文：道周因为文章、气节名高于天下，为人严肃、刚正，不与世俗相妥协，公卿大多害怕并且忌恨他，于是借用了不如郑曼阝这句话作为口实。
English: Most of the court nobles feared and loathed him because he was known as a man of great integrity, a serious and upright man who would not compromise with the world. Therefore, they used the phrase "not as good as Zheng Mengyao" as an excuse.

古文：其冬，择东宫讲官。
现代文：这年冬天，朝廷要选用东宫讲官。
English: This winter, the imperial court wanted to choose a lecturer for the East Palace.

古文：体仁已罢，张至发当国，摈道周不与。
现代文：体仁已经去职，张至发担任了执政，把道周排除在外，不让他参与。
English: Tetsujin has left his post, and Zhang Zhifa has taken over the government, excluding Daozhou and not allowing him to participate.

古文：其同官项煜、杨廷麟不平，上疏推让道周。
现代文：道周的同事项煜、杨廷麟认为不公正，上书推荐道周。
English: Yang Tinglin thought that the same matter of Tao Zhou was unfair, and recommended Tao Zhou in a letter.

古文：至发言： 鄤杖母，明旨煌煌，道周自谓不如，安可为元良辅导。 
现代文：至发说： 郑曼阝棍打自己的母亲，诏书中已讲得明明白白，道周自称不如郑曼阝，还怎么可以做太子的老师呢？ 
English: Zhi Fa said: Zheng Manchu beat his own mother with a stick. This has been clearly stated in the edict. Daozhou claimed to be inferior to Zheng Manchu. How could he be the prince's teacher?

古文：道周遂移疾乞休，不许。
现代文：道周于是称病求去，庄烈帝不答应。
English: Daozhou then claimed to be ill and asked to go, but Emperor Zhuang did not agree.

古文：十一年二月，帝御经筵。
现代文：十一年二月，庄烈帝一次来经筵前讲读。
English: In February of the eleventh year, Zhuang Rongdi once came to the front of the throne to give a lecture.

古文：刑部尚书郑三俊方下吏，讲官黄景昉救之，帝未许。
现代文：当时刑部尚书郑三俊刚刚入狱，讲官黄景窻营救他，庄烈帝不同意。
English: At that time, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Zheng Sanjun, had just been jailed, and the lecturer, Huang Jingyao, came to his rescue. Zhuang Ledei did not agree.

古文：而帝适追论旧讲官姚希孟尝请漕储全折以为非。道周听未审，谓帝将宽三俊念希孟也，因言： 故辅臣文震孟一生蹇直，未蒙帷盖恩。
现代文：这时庄烈帝正好追论以前讲官姚希孟曾经奏请把漕运储藏全都改为折征银两的错误，道周没听仔细，认为庄烈帝将宽释三俊并且追念希孟，于是讲道： 原任辅臣文震孟一生直而不顺，未曾得到过赠恤。
English: At this time, Emperor Zhuang did not listen carefully, thinking that Emperor Zhuang would pardon Sanjun and remember Xi Meng, so he preached: Former Vice-Minister Wen Zhen Meng had a hard life and had never received a bonus.

古文：天下士，生如三俊，殁如震孟、希孟，求其影似，未可多得。 
现代文：天下的士大夫活着的如三俊，死了的如震孟、希孟，即使求其仿佛，也不可多得。 
English: Among the world's senior officers, those who are alive are like Sanjun, and those who are dead are like Zhen Meng and Xi Meng. Even if you ask for it, you can't get more.

古文：帝以所对失实，责令回奏。
现代文：庄烈帝认为他的回答不真实，责令他再做回奏。
English: Emperor Zhuang thought that his answer was not true, and ordered him to replay it.

古文：再奏再诘，至三奏乃已。
现代文：道周再奏，庄烈帝再做质问，一直到三次进奏才算完。
English: Tao Zhou played again, Zhuang Rongdi questioned again, and it was not until the third time that the march was over.

古文：凡道周所建白，未尝得一俞旨，道周顾言不已。
现代文：道周前前后后所提出过的建议，未曾得到过一次同意的批复，但道周还是不停地进言。
English: The proposals made by Tao Zhou before and after have never received an approved reply, but Tao Zhou still keeps talking.

古文：六月，廷推阁臣。
现代文：六月，朝廷中推举阁臣。
English: In June, cabinet ministers were elected in the imperial court.

古文：道周已充日讲官，迁少詹事，得与名。
现代文：道周当时已经担任日讲官，升为少詹事，得到了提名。
English: At that time, Daozhou had already served as a Japanese lecturer, was promoted to a junior official, and was nominated.

古文：帝不用，用杨嗣昌等五人。
现代文：庄烈帝没有任用他，而选用了杨嗣昌等五个人。
English: Emperor Zhuang didn't appoint him, but chose Yang Shichang and five others.

古文：道周乃草三疏，一劾嗣昌，一劾陈新甲，一劾辽抚方一藻，同日上之。
现代文：道周于是起草了三篇奏疏，一篇弹劾嗣昌，一篇弹劾陈新甲，一篇弹劾辽东巡抚方一藻，在同一天里交了上去。
English: Daozhou then drafted three reports, one on the impeachment of Tsuchang, one on the impeachment of Chen Xinjia, and one on the impeachment of the governor of Liaodong, and submitted them on the same day.

古文：其劾嗣昌，谓：
现代文：他弹劾嗣昌说：
English: Impeaching Tsuchimasa, he said:

古文：天下无无父之子，亦无不臣之子。
现代文： 天底下不会有无父之子，也没有不臣之子。
English: For there is not a just man upon the earth, that doeth good, and sinneth not.

古文：卫开方不省其亲，管仲至比之豭狗；李定不丧继母，宋世共指为人枭。
现代文：卫国的开方不回家省亲，管仲竟把他比作猪狗。李定不为继母守丧，宋朝人都把他指为人枭。
English: Emperor Gaozong did not go home to visit his relatives, and Guanzhong actually compared him to a pig dog. Li Ding did not attend the funeral of his stepmother, and the Song Dynasty people regarded him as a scoundrel.

古文：今遂有不持两服，坐司马堂如杨嗣昌者。
现代文：现在就敢有不为父母穿孝服，端坐在政府中，像嗣昌这样的人。
English: Now we dare to have people like Tsuchimasa, who does not wear filial piety for his parents, sitting in the government.

古文：宣大督臣卢象升以父殡在途，搥心饮血，请就近推补，乃忽有并推在籍守制之旨。
现代文：宣、大总督卢象升因为父亲刚入殡而自己在仕途上，所以椎心泣血，请求就近任职，后来竟忽然间冒出一道在官位上守丧的圣旨来。
English: Because his father had just been buried and he was on his way to the funeral, Xuan and the Grand Governor Lu Xiangsheng cried and begged to be closer to the office, and then suddenly a sacred order to hold a funeral in the official position came up.

古文：夫守制者可推，则闻丧者可不去；闻丧者可不去，则为子者可不父，为臣者可不子。
现代文：守丧如果可以推脱，那么闻丧就可以不奔丧了；闻丧可以不奔丧，那么为人子者就可以不认自己的父亲，为人臣者就可以不认君父。
English: If mourning can be avoided, then mourning can be avoided; if mourning can be avoided, then a son can disown his father, and a vassal can disown his father.

古文：即使人才甚乏，奈何使不忠不孝者连苞引蘖，种其不祥以秽天下乎？
现代文：国家即使人才很缺，也不能让这种不忠不孝的人呼朋唤友，招徕同类，播下不祥的种子来玷污国家呀！
English: Even if the country is short of talent, it cannot allow such disloyal and unfilial people to call for friends, attract the same kind of people, and sow ominous seeds to tarnish the country!

古文：嗣昌在事二年，张网溢地之谈，款市乐天之说，才智亦可睹矣，更起一不祥之人，与之表里。
现代文：嗣昌在朝理事两年了，从他提出的十面张网、超占田土加租的办法和通贡、互市的乐观主张来看，他的才智到底怎样也该可以看出来了。现在他又要再起用一个不祥之人和他互为表里。
English: For the past two years, Tsuchang has been a director of the North Korean government, and his talent can be seen from the optimistic proposals he has put forward, such as the ten-sided net, the method of over-occupying land and increasing rent, and the payment of tribute and reciprocal market. Now he wants to use a sinister person as a counter-example.

古文：天下即无人，臣愿解清华，出管锁钥，何必使被棘负涂者，祓不祥以玷王化哉！
现代文：陛下用孝道治理天下，缙绅家庭一些小小的婆婆妈妈的纠纷还要依法处治，而对于居丧期间灭绝伦常的行为却认为不必禁止，我认为这样不行。 他评论新甲，说他： 没有守完丧，就走邪道，寻求关系踏上仕途。天底下即使很缺乏人才，也不应该把他派上用场。 
English: His Majesty rules the world with filial piety, and the disputes of some small mothers-in-law and mothers-in-law in the gentry families should be dealt with according to the law, but he does not think it is necessary to prohibit the behavior of extinction during the mourning period, I do not think so. He commented on the new A, saying: If you do not complete the mourning, you will go the wrong way and seek a relationship. Even if there is a shortage of talent under heaven, you should not use him.

古文：其论一藻，则力诋和议之非。
现代文：他评论一藻时，极力批评了和议的错误。
English: When he commented on the incident, he strongly criticized the mistakes of the peace talks.

古文：帝疑道周以不用怨望，而 缙绅 、 勃谿 语，欲为郑鄤脱罪，下吏部行谴。
现代文：庄烈帝怀疑道周是因为自己没被选用而抱怨， 缙绅 、 纠纷 的提法是想为郑曼阝开脱罪责，所以交由吏部对他进行贬官处分。
English: Zhuang Rongdi suspected that Daozhou was complaining because he had not been selected, and the wording of the dispute was to absolve Zheng Mengyao of guilt, so he was handed over to the cadre department for demotion.

古文：嗣昌因上言： 鄤杖母，禽兽不如。
现代文：嗣昌于是上书说： 郑曼阝棍打自己的母亲，禽兽不如。
English: Zhi Chang then wrote: Zheng Man beat his own mother with a club. Animals are not as good.

古文：今道周又不如鄤，且其意徒欲庇凶徒，饰前言之谬，立心可知。 
现代文：如今道周又自称比不上郑曼阝，况且他的意思只不过是想包庇郑曼阝那样的恶人，掩饰以前言语的差错罢了，居心可知。 
English: Now, Daozhou claims that he is not as good as Zheng Mengyao, and what's more, what he means is that he just wants to cover up for evil people like Zheng Mengyao and cover up his previous verbal mistakes.

古文：因自乞罢免，帝优旨慰之。
现代文：进而自请罢免。庄烈帝颁发一道语气婉转的诏书对嗣昌表示安慰。
English: Zhuge Liang issued a euphemistic imperial edict to express consolation to Tsuchang.

古文：七月五日，召内阁及诸大臣于平台，并及道周。
现代文：七月五日，庄烈帝在平台召见内阁及各部的大臣，并且包括道周在内。
English: On July 5th, Zhuo Ledei summoned the cabinet and the ministers of various ministries to the platform, including Daozhou.

古文：帝与诸臣语所司事，久之，问道周曰： 凡无所为而为者，谓之天理；有所为而为者，谓之人欲。
现代文：在与大臣们谈论各部门事务谈了很久以后，问道周说： 凡是个人无所图而做出来的，称为天理，有所图而做出来的，称为人欲。
English: After talking with the ministers about various departmental affairs for a long time, Zhou asked: Anything that is made by an individual without any intention is called heavenly principle, and anything that is made with an intention is called human desire.

古文：尔三疏适当廷推不用时，果无所为乎？ 
现代文：你的三篇奏疏正在廷臣推荐你后未被选用的时候递交上来，真的是无所图吗？ 
English: Your three essays were submitted when you were not selected after being recommended by courtiers. Is it really nothing?

古文：道周对曰： 臣三疏皆为国家纲常，自信无所为。 
现代文：道周回答说： 我的三篇奏疏都是为了维护国家的纲常，自信无所图。 
English: Daozhou replied: My three essays are all aimed at upholding the principles of the country, and I have no illusions about myself.

古文：帝曰： 先时何不言？ 
现代文：庄烈帝问道： 以前怎么不说？ 
English: Zhuang asked: Why didn't you say something before?

古文：对曰： 先时犹可不言，至简用后不言，更无当言之日。 
现代文：道周回答说： 以前还可以不说，到他们被选用后不说，往后就更加没有说的日子了。 
English: Daozhou replied, "Before, it was okay not to say anything, but after they were selected, they didn't say anything, and after that, they didn't say anything anymore.

古文：帝曰： 清固美德，但不可傲物遂非。且惟伯夷为圣之清，若小廉曲谨，是廉，非清也。 
现代文：庄烈帝说： 清白本来是一种美德，但不能用来炫耀自己，满足不正当的目的，况且也只有一个伯夷是圣人中清白的人，像他那样才叫作清白。
English: Zhuang said: Innocence is originally a virtue, but it cannot be used to flaunt oneself and satisfy improper purposes. Moreover, there is only one Bai who is innocent among the saints, and he is called innocent like him.

古文：时道周所对不合指，帝屡驳，道周复进曰： 惟孝弟之人始能经纶天下，发育万物。
现代文：如果仅仅对于无关紧要的事情小心谨慎，只能说是廉节，不能叫作清白。 当时道周的回答不能让庄烈帝满意，庄烈帝几次驳斥他，道周又进言道： 只有孝悌的人才能治理国家，生养万物。
English: If one is only cautious about unimportant matters, it can only be said to be a lack of integrity, and cannot be called innocence. At that time, Tao Zhou's answer could not satisfy Zhuang Rieti, Zhuang Rieti refuted him several times, and Tao Zhou said: Only filial piety can govern the country and nurture all things.

古文：不孝不弟者，根本既无，安有枝叶。 
现代文：不孝不悌的人，根本都没了，哪里还能有枝叶长出来？ 
English: Those who are not filial are completely gone. Where else can branches and leaves grow?

古文：嗣昌出奏曰： 臣不生空桑，岂不知父母？
现代文：嗣昌这时站出来说： 我又不是从桑树窟窿里钻出来的，怎么不知道孝敬自己的父母。
English: At this time, Tsuchimasa stood up and said, "I didn't crawl out of a mulberry grove, so how could I not know how to honor my parents?"

古文：顾念君为臣纲，父为子纲，君臣固在父子前。
现代文：只是想君为臣纲，父为子纲，君臣的关系本当摆在父子之前。
English: It's just that I want the king to be a vassal, the father to be a son, and the relationship between the king and the vassal to be placed before the father and son.

古文：况古为列国之君臣，可去此适彼；今则一统之君臣，无所逃于天地之间。
现代文：况且古时候是各国都有君臣，大臣可以去此而适彼；现在是一统天下一处君臣，大臣对自己君父的义务不可能逃出天地之间。
English: Moreover, in ancient times, every country had princes and ministers, and the minister could go here to suit him; now, there is only one prince and minister in the whole world, and the minister's obligation to his prince and father cannot escape from the world.

古文：且仁不遗亲，义不后君，难以偏重。
现代文：再说仁人不能抛弃父母，义士不能先己后君，这两者不能偏重其一。
English: Moreover, a benevolent person cannot abandon his parents, and a righteous person cannot put himself first and his family second. The two cannot be one and the same.

古文：臣四疏力辞，意词臣中有如刘定之、罗伦者，抗疏为臣代请，得遂臣志。
现代文：我四次上书极力推辞，还想着词臣中能有刘定之、罗伦那样的人替我抗言上书申请，让我能满足自己的心愿呢。
English: I sent in my application four times and tried my best to reject it. I also thought that there could be someone like Liu Dingzhi and Loren among the advisers who could submit an application for me, so that I could satisfy my own wishes.

古文：及抵都门，闻道周人品学术为人宗师，乃不如郑鄤。 
现代文：后来等我来到京师时，听说道周的人品、学术都是一代宗师呢，竟然自称不如郑曼阝。 
English: Later, when I came to study in Beijing, I heard that Zhou's character and scholarship were that of a great teacher, and he actually claimed to be not as good as Zheng Mengyao.

古文：帝曰： 然，朕正拟问之。 
现代文：庄烈帝说： 不错，我正打算问他呢。 
English: Zhuo Ledei said, "That's right, I was planning to ask him."

古文：乃问道周曰： 古人心无所为，今则各有所主，故孟子欲正人心，息邪说。
现代文：接着问道周说： 古人心里无所图，现在的人却各有私虑，所以孟子想纠正人心，消灭邪说。
English: Zhou then asked, "The ancients had nothing in mind, but people today all have their own concerns. Therefore, Mencius wanted to correct people's hearts and eliminate evil thoughts.

古文：古之邪说，别为一教，今则直附于圣贤经传中，系世道人心更大。
现代文：古时候的邪说是另外自成一派的，现在的邪说却干脆依附在圣贤的经传中，对世道人心的危害更大了。
English: The heresies in ancient times were of a different sect, but the current heresies are simply attached to the scriptures of saints and sages, which is even more harmful to the world and the human heart.

古文：且尔言不如郑鄤，何也？ 
现代文：我且问你，你自称不如郑曼阝，是什么歪道理？ 
English: Let me ask you, why do you say that you are not as good as Zheng Mengyao?

古文：对曰： 匡章见弃通国，孟子不失礼貌，臣言文章不如鄤。 
现代文：道周回答说： 匡章受到举国上下的遗弃，但孟子对他不失礼貌，因为他自有长处。
English: Daozhou replied: Kuanzhang was abandoned by the whole country, but Mencius was polite to him because he had his own strengths.

古文：帝曰： 章子不得于父，岂鄤杖母者比。
现代文：我说不如郑曼阝，也只是说我在文章上不如郑曼阝。 庄烈帝说： 章子得不到父亲的欢心，这跟郑曼阝棍打母亲怎么相比。
English: I said that I was not as good as Zheng Mengyao, but only that I was not as good as Zheng Mengyao in writing. Zhuang Ledei said: Zhang Zi could not get his father's favor, how does this compare with Zheng Mengyao beating his mother with a stick.

古文：尔言不如，岂非朋比？ 
现代文：你自称比不上他，难道不是和他勾结又是什么？ 
English: You say you are no match for him. Isn't that colluding with him and what else?

古文：道周曰： 众恶必察。 
现代文：道周说： 大家都讨厌一个人时，皇上务必要自己明察，不要随便附和。 
English: Daozhou said, "When everyone hates someone, the emperor must be sure to see it himself, and not just go along with it.

古文：帝曰： 陈新甲何以走邪径，托捷足？
现代文：庄烈帝又问： 新甲是怎么走邪道，寻求关系踏上仕途的？
English: Zhuo Ledei also asked: How did Xinjia take the wrong path, seeking relationships to embark on a career?

古文：且尔言软美容悦，叩首折枝者谁耶？ 
现代文：另外你所说的柔媚取悦，点头哈腰的又是哪一个？ 
English: In addition, what do you mean by soft and pleasing, which one is the nodding one?

古文：道周不能对，但曰： 人心邪则行径皆邪。 
现代文：道周回答不上来，只是说： 一个人思想不端正，那么他的一切行为都不会正确的。 
English: Daozhou could not answer, but only said, "If a person's thoughts are not correct, then all his actions will not be correct."

古文：帝曰： 丧固凶礼，岂遭凶者即凶人，尽不祥之人？ 
现代文：庄烈帝又问： 丧当然是凶礼，难道碰上凶丧的人就是凶人，都是不祥之人？ 
English: Zhuang Lie Di also asked: Of course, mourning is a violent ritual. Is it true that those who encounter violent mourning are murderers, are they all ominous people?

古文：道周曰： 古三年丧，君命不过其门。
现代文：道周说： 古时候大夫守丧三年，君王的命令根本就不会传到他家门口。
English: Daozhou said, "In ancient times, a doctor had to hold a three-year mourning period, and the king's order would never reach his doorstep.

古文：自谓凶与不祥，故军礼凿凶门而出。
现代文：他自称凶与不祥，所以举行军礼时凿开凶门走出来。
English: He called himself fierce and ominous, so when he held the military salute, he opened the gate and walked out.

古文：夺情在疆外则可，朝中则不可。 
现代文：克制孝心出来做官，在疆外还是可以的，在朝中就不行。 
English: It is still possible to be an official with restraint and filial piety outside the territory, but it is not possible in the DPRK.

古文：帝曰： 人既可用，何分内外？ 
现代文：庄烈帝问道： 人既然可用，为什么要区分内外？ 
English: Zhuo Ledei asked: Since people are disposable, why distinguish between inside and outside?

古文：道周曰： 我朝自罗伦论夺情，前后五十余人，多在边疆。
现代文：道周说： 我们明朝自从罗伦议论克制孝心以来，前后有五十多人出来做官，多在边疆。
English: Daozhou said, "Since Luo Lun talked about restraint and filial piety in the Ming Dynasty, more than fifty people have come forward to become officials, mostly in the border areas.

古文：故嗣昌在边疆则可，在中枢则不可；在中枢犹可，在政府则不可。止嗣昌一人犹可，又呼朋引类，竟成一夺情世界，益不可。 
现代文：所以嗣昌在边疆是可以的，在中央就不行了；在中央还算可以，在政府就不行了；只嗣昌一个人还可以，他又呼朋引类，简直要把朝廷搞成一个有丧不守的夺情世界了，这就更加不行了。 
English: Therefore, Tsuchimasa is acceptable in the border areas, but not in the center; he is acceptable in the center, but not in the government; only Tsuchimasa is acceptable, but he is putting others in the same category. He is almost trying to turn the imperial court into a world of love-thieves, which is even more unacceptable.

古文：帝又诘问久之。帝曰： 少正卯当时亦称闻人，心逆而险，行僻而坚，言伪而辨，顺非而泽，记丑而博，不免圣人之诛。
现代文：庄烈帝又把他盘问了好久，最后说： 少正卯当时也被称为名人，思想反动而且邪恶，行为不正而且固执，言论错误却说得头头是道，赞同错误还要予以润色，记诵一些乌七八糟的知识但是十分广博，所以难以逃脱圣人的诛戮。
English: Zhuang Liang questioned him for a long time, and finally said: Shao Zhengwu was also known as a celebrity at that time, his thoughts were reactionary and evil, his behavior was unfair and stubborn, his speech was wrong, but he spoke the truth, agreed with the mistakes and polished them, and memorized some messy knowledge, but it was very extensive, so it was difficult to escape the saint's persecution.

古文：今人多类此。 
现代文：现在很多名人也差不多是这样了。 
English: A lot of celebrities are like that now.

古文：道周曰： 少正卯心术不正，臣心正无一毫私。 
现代文：道周说： 少正卯心术不正，我心正，没有丝毫的私欲。 
English: Daozhou said: Shao Zhengwu Xinjiao is not right, my heart is right, there is no slightest selfish desire.

古文：帝怒。有间，命出候旨。
现代文：庄烈帝恼了，过了片刻，命令他出去听候圣旨。
English: Emperor Zhuang was annoyed, and after a while, ordered him to go out and await the emperor's command.

古文：道周曰： 臣今日不尽言，臣负陛下；陛下今日杀臣，陛下负臣。 
现代文：道周说： 我今天话不讲完，是我对不起陛下；陛下如果今天杀我，就是陛下对不起我了。 
English: Daozhou said, "If I do not finish my speech today, it is I who am sorry to Your Majesty; if Your Majesty kills me today, it is Your Majesty who is sorry to me."

古文：帝曰： 尔一生学问，止成佞耳！ 
现代文：庄烈帝说： 你一生的学问，就只学会了油嘴滑舌。 
English: Zhuo Ledei said: All your life's learning, you have only learned to be glib.

古文：叱之退。道周叩首起，复跪奏： 臣敢将忠佞二字剖析言之。
现代文：喝令他退出去，道周叩头后后退几步，又跪着说道： 我敢把忠诚直言和油嘴滑舌剖析一下看。
English: Shouting for him to leave, Daozhou bowed and retreated a few steps, then knelt down and said, "I dare you to dissect the words of loyalty and the glib tongue."

古文：夫人在君父前，独立敢言为佞，岂在君父前谗谄面谀为忠耶？
现代文：一个人在君父面前独立不阿、大胆说话如果叫作油嘴滑舌，难道在君父面前谗谄面谀叫作忠诚？
English: If a man who speaks boldly before his lord and father is called a smooth talker, shall a man who shouts before his lord and father be called faithful?

古文：忠佞不别，邪正淆矣，何以致治？ 
现代文：忠诚直言与油嘴滑舌不能分辨，正直与邪妄混乱不清，怎么能实现太平？ 
English: How can peace be achieved when loyalty and frankness cannot be distinguished from glibness, and honesty and wickedness are confused?

古文：帝曰： 固也，非朕漫加尔以佞。
现代文：庄烈帝说： 是呀，但也不是朕随便用油嘴滑舌来批评你。
English: Zhuang said, "Yes, but it's not like I'm being glib and criticizing you.

古文：但所问在此，所答在彼，非佞而何？ 
现代文：我提的是这个问题，你回答的是另外的事情，这还不是油嘴滑舌是什么？ 
English: I'm asking this question, you're answering something else, how is that not glib?

古文：再叱之退。顾嗣昌曰： 甚矣，人心偷薄也。
现代文：又一次喝令他退出去，然后回头看着嗣昌，感叹道： 现在人心轻薄是多么严重啊！
English: They shouted again for him to leave, and then looked back at Tsuchimasa and lamented, "How serious is the frivolity in people's hearts now!

古文：道周恣肆如此，其能无正乎？ 
现代文：道周肆无忌惮，他能不自认为正直吗？ 
English: Dao Zhou is unscrupulous. Can he not think of himself as honest?

古文：乃召文武诸臣，咸聆戒谕而退。
现代文：于是把文武群臣都召来聆听了一番教导，然后退朝了。
English: Therefore, he summoned all the civil and military ministers to listen to a series of teachings, and then retired.

古文：是时，帝忧兵事，谓可属大事者惟嗣昌，破格用之。
现代文：这个时候，庄烈帝忧心军事，认为可以托大事的只有嗣昌这么一个人，所以破格选用了他。
English: At this time, Emperor Zhuang was worried about the military and thought that only Tsuchimasa could be entrusted with major events, so he chose him in an unprecedented way.

古文：道周守经，失帝意，及奏对，又不逊。帝怒甚，欲加以重罪，惮其名高，未敢决。
现代文：道周泥守经典，违背了庄烈帝的意思，等召见他问话时，他又不退让，庄烈帝十分恼火，想对他实行严惩，害怕他名声太大，影响不好，所以没敢决定下来。
English: Tao Zhou adhered to the classics and violated Zhuang Rong's intention. When he was summoned for questioning, he did not give in. Zhuang Rong was very angry and wanted to severely punish him. He was afraid that his reputation was too great and his influence was not good, so he did not dare to make a decision.

古文：会刘同升、赵士春亦劾嗣昌，将予重谴，而部拟道周谴顾轻。
现代文：这个时候刘同升、赵士春也因为弹劾嗣昌，朝廷决定给予严惩，但吏部给予道周的贬处却很轻。
English: At this time, Liu Tongsheng and Zhao Shichun were also impeached for impeaching Tsuchang, and the imperial court decided to severely punish them, but the demotion given to Daozhou by the cadre department was very light.

古文：嗣昌惧道周轻，则论己者将无已时也，亟购人劾道周者。
现代文：嗣昌担心给道周的处分轻了，弹劾自己的人就会没完没了，所以紧急收买人弹劾道周。
English: Tsuchimasa was worried that if he gave Daozhou a lighter punishment, the impeachment of his own people would be endless, so he urgently bribed people to impeach Daozhou.

古文：有刑部主事张若麒谋改兵部，遂阿嗣昌意上疏曰： 臣闻人主之尊，尊无二上；人臣无将，将而必诛。
现代文：刑部主事张若麒打算调入兵部，就迎合嗣昌的意思上书说： 我听说人主的尊贵，尊贵到独一无二的地步；人臣不应自居尊大，自居尊大就该杀头。
English: When the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Zhang Ruoxuan, planned to transfer him to the Military Department, he pandered to Shichang's wishes and wrote: "I have heard that the nobility of a person is unique; a minister should not think of himself as noble. If he thinks of himself as noble, he should kill himself."

古文：今黄道周及其徒党造作语言，亏损圣德。举古今未有之好语尽出道周，无不可归过于君父。
现代文：现在黄道周和他的同伙捏造谣言，贬损皇上的德行，把古往今来不曾有过的好话都加在道周身上，那么一切不好的就都可以归过于君父了。
English: Now, Zodiac Zhou and his associates fabricate rumors, disparage the emperor's virtue, and put good words on Tao Zhou that have never existed before, so all bad things can be attributed to the emperor.

古文：不颁示前日召对始末，背公死党之徒，鼓煽以惑四方，私记以疑后世，掩圣天子正人心息邪说至意，大不便。 
现代文：朝廷如果不颁布前些时召大臣问话的整个经过，让天下人知道，那么背公死党的家伙们就会乱传出去，迷惑各地吏民，私自写出来让后代人犯疑，掩没圣天子纠正人心，消灭异端邪说的真实意图。这样影响就很不好。 
English: If the imperial court does not publish the entire process of summoning the minister for questioning some time ago, and let the world know, then the traitors will spread it indiscriminately, confuse officials and people around the country, privately write it out to make future generations suspicious, cover up the true intention of the Holy Son of God to correct people's hearts and eliminate heresies. Such influence is very bad.

古文：帝即传谕廷臣，毋为道周劫持相朋党，凡数百言。
现代文：庄烈帝于是就给廷臣们传了一篇指示，要大家不要接受道周的挟持，与他相互勾结，共有几百字。
English: Emperor Zhuang then sent an instruction to the courtiers, asking everyone not to accept the hostage of Daozhou and to collude with him, a total of several hundred words.

古文：贬道周六秩，为江西按察司照磨，而若麒果得兵部。
现代文：把道周贬官六级，让他去当江西按察司的照磨。若麒果然如愿，调到了兵部。
English: He demoted Daozhou to the sixth grade and let him serve as the inspector general of Jiangxi Province. Ruo Yao was transferred to the military department as he wished.

古文：久之，江西巡抚解学龙荐所部官，推奖道周备至。
现代文：很长时间以后，江西巡抚解学龙推荐自己手下的官吏，对道周称颂备至。
English: After a long period of time, the governor of Jiangxi Province, Xue Long, recommended officials under his command, praising and preparing for Daozhou.

古文：故事，但下所司，帝亦不覆阅。
现代文：按惯例，这种奏疏只交有关部门看取，庄烈帝也不再批阅。
English: According to the usual practice, only the relevant departments were allowed to see this transcript, and Emperor Zhuang would no longer approve it.

古文：而大学士魏照乘恶道周甚，则拟旨责学龙滥荐。
现代文：可是大学士魏照乘极其讨厌道周，就起草诏令批评学龙胡乱推荐。
English: However, Wei Zhaoren, a scholar at the university, hated Daozhou so much that he drafted an edict criticizing the school's reckless recommendation.

古文：帝遂发怒，立削二人籍，逮下刑部狱，责以党邪乱政，并杖八十，究党与。
现代文：庄烈帝于是发了火，立即把他俩剥夺官籍，逮进刑部的监狱里，批评他们勾结成奸，破坏政治，都打了八十大杖，追究他们的党羽。
English: Zhuang Rong then became enraged, immediately stripped them both of their official registration, arrested them in the prison of the Criminal Investigation Department, criticized them for collusion and sabotage of politics, beat them with eighty-ten canes, and investigated their party feathers.

古文：词连编修黄文焕、吏部主事陈天定、工部司务董养河、中书舍人文震亨，并系狱。
现代文：狱词中牵连到编修黄文焕、吏部主事陈天定、工部司务董养河、中书舍人文震亨，这四个人也被关进监狱。
English: The editor-in-chief Huang Wenhuan, the head of the personnel department Chen Tianding, the director of the engineering department Yaohe, and the humanities scholar Zhenheng of the middle school were implicated in the prison sentence, and these four people were also put in prison.

古文：户部主事叶廷秀、监生涂仲吉救之，亦系狱。
现代文：户部主事叶廷秀、监生涂仲吉营救他们，也被关进了监狱。
English: Ye Tingxiu, the head of the household department, and Tu Zhongji, a prison inmate, who rescued them, were also put in prison.

古文：尚书李觉斯谳轻，严旨切责，再拟谪戍烟瘴，帝犹以为失出，除觉斯名，移狱镇抚司掠治，乃还刑部狱。
现代文：尚书李觉斯量刑很轻，庄烈帝严厉批评了他，又改判为到烟瘴地面充军，庄烈帝还是认为量刑太宽，把觉斯给除了名，把道周移交镇抚司加以拷问，然后才送回刑部狱。
English: Shangshu Li Jue's sentencing was very light, Zhuang Rong criticized him severely, and changed the sentence to join the army on the ground of the smokestack. Zhuang Rong still thought that the sentencing was too broad, removed Jue's name, and transferred Daozhou to the Zhen Fusi to be interrogated, and then sent back to the prison.

古文：逾年，尚书刘泽深等言： 二人罪至永戍止矣，过此惟论死。
现代文：过了年后，尚书刘泽深等说： 学龙、道周两个人的罪判他们永久充军也就够了，再往上只有处死刑。
English: Years later, Shangshu Liu Zeshen and others said: It is enough to sentence Hulong and Daozhou to permanent military service for their crimes, and then only the death penalty can be imposed.

古文：论死非封疆则贪酷，未有以建言者。
现代文：处死刑的大臣不是因为丢失领土就是贪婪、凶狠，没有哪个人因为提意见被处死的。
English: The ministers who were put to death were not punished for losing territory, but for being greedy and cruel. No one was put to death for expressing an opinion.

古文：道周无封疆贪酷之罪，而有建言蒙戮之名，于道周得矣，非我圣主覆载之量也。
现代文：道周没有丢失领土或贪婪、凶狠的罪名，而有提意见被杀掉的名誉，如果死刑让道周碰上就不是我们的圣主所有的载天覆地的肚量了。
English: Daozhou didn't lose territory, nor was he accused of being greedy or vicious, but he had the reputation of being killed for his opinions. If Daozhou were to be sentenced to death, it would not be the end of the world for our Lord.

古文：陛下所疑者党耳，党者，见诸行事。
现代文：陛下所怀疑的只不过是帮派。但拉帮结派，表现在行动上。
English: What your majesty suspects is merely a gang, but the gang is in action.

古文：道周抗疏，只托空言，一二知交相从罢斥，乌睹所谓党，而烦朝廷大法乎？
现代文：道周抗言上书，只借文字讲空话，有那么一两个要好的朋友也都跟着罢免了，所谓的帮派在哪里，用得着动用朝廷的刑法？
English: Daozhou wrote a letter of protest, but only borrowed words to speak empty words. One or two close friends were also dismissed. Where are the so-called gangs, and is it necessary to use the imperial court's criminal law?

古文：且陛下岂有积恨道周，万一圣意转圜，而臣已论定，悔之何及。 
现代文：况且陛下怎么会积恨于道周呢？万一日后您回心转意了，可是我的死刑判决已成事实，那时后悔也没用了。 
English: Besides, how could His Majesty have pent up hatred for Daozhou? In case you change your mind one day, my death sentence has already become a reality, and there was no use in regretting it then.

古文：仍以原拟请，乃永戍广西。
现代文：所以仍旧请照原判结案。道周于是被判为永久充军广西。
English: Therefore, please still conclude the case according to the original judgment. Therefore, Daozhou was sentenced to permanent military service in Guangxi.

古文：十五年八月，道周戍已经年。
现代文：十五年八月，道周充军已有一个年头了。
English: In August of the fifteenth year, it had been one year since the arrival of the Tao Zhouchong Army.

古文：一日，帝召五辅臣入文华后殿，手一编从容问曰： 张溥、张采何如人也？ 
现代文：一天，庄烈帝召五位辅臣进入文华后殿，手拿一册书随便问道： 张溥、张采是怎么样的人？ 
English: One day, Emperor Zhuge Liang summoned five of his aides to enter the Hall of Literature, holding a book in his hand, and casually asked: "What kind of people are Zhang Xuan and Zhang Zhe?"

古文：皆对曰： 读书好学人也。 
现代文：大家都回答说： 是读书好学的人。 
English: They all answered that they were readers and eager to learn.

古文：帝曰： 张溥已死，张采小臣，科道官何亟称之？ 
现代文：庄烈帝说： 张溥已经死了，张采只是一个小官，科道官为什么热心称赞他？ 
English: Zhuo Ledei said: Zhang Ye is dead, Zhang Cai is just a minor official, why did the scientific officer enthusiastically praise him?

古文：对曰： 其胸中自有书，科道官以其用未竟而惜之。 
现代文：大家回答说： 他胸中装有不少书，科道官因为对他的使用不到头，所以惋惜他。 
English: They all replied, "He has a lot of books in his chest, and the scholar pities him because he is of little use to him."

古文：帝曰： 亦不免偏。 
现代文：庄烈帝说： 他为人也不免有些偏激。 
English: Zhuo Ledei said: He is also a bit of a radical.

古文：时延儒自以嗣昌既已前死矣，而己方再入相，欲参用公议，为道周地也，即对曰： 张溥、黄道周皆未免偏，徒以其善学，故人人惜之。 
现代文：当时延儒在嗣昌死后又一次进了内阁，要参考大家的意见为道周活动，就回答说： 张溥、黄道周都不免有些偏激，只是因为他们擅长学问，所以人人都惋惜他们。 
English: At that time, Yan Ru, who had once again entered the cabinet after the death of Tsuchang Qu, wanted to refer to everyone's opinions for the activities of the Tao Week, and replied: Zhang Ye and the Zodiac Week are inevitably somewhat extreme, but because they are good at learning, everyone pities them.

古文：帝默然。
现代文：庄烈帝没有做声。
English: The emperor was silent.

古文：德璟曰： 道周前日蒙戍，上恩宽大，独其家贫子幼，其实可悯。 
现代文：蒋德瞡说： 道周过去被判充军，皇上的恩德已很宽大了，只是他家里穷，孩子还小，实际情况让人怜悯。 
English: Jiang Deyao said: Daozhou was sentenced to military service in the past, and the emperor's kindness has been very generous, but his family is poor and his children are still small. The actual situation is pitiful.

古文：帝微笑，演曰： 其事亲亦极孝。 
现代文：庄烈帝再露微笑。陈演说： 道周这个人对父母也极孝顺。 
English: Zhuang Rongdei smiled again. Chen said, "Dao Zhou is also very filial to his parents.

古文：行甡曰： 道周学无不通，且极清苦。 
现代文：吴生生说： 道周学无不通，并且为人很清苦。 
English: Wu Shengsheng said, "There is no way to learn Taoism, and I am a very pure person.

古文：帝不答，但微笑而已。
现代文：庄烈帝不答话，只是微笑而已。
English: Zhuge Liang did not answer, but only smiled.

古文：明日传旨复故官。
现代文：第二天就传出圣旨恢复道周原来的官职。
English: The next day, the imperial edict was issued to restore Daozhou to his former official position.

古文：道周在途疏谢，称学龙、廷秀贤。
现代文：道周在路途上上书谢恩，称赞了学龙、廷秀的贤德。
English: On the way, Daozhou wrote a letter of thanks, praising the virtues of Xuelong and Tingxiu.

古文：既还，帝召见道周，道周见帝而泣： 臣不自意今复得见陛下，臣故有犬马之疾。 
现代文：回到京师后，庄烈帝召见了他，道周见到庄烈帝就流下了泪，说： 我想不到现在还能再见到陛下，只是我本来就在生病。 
English: After returning to Beijing, Zhuang Rongdi summoned him. When he saw Zhuang Rongdi, Dao Zhou shed tears and said, "I can't believe I can see Your Majesty again, but I was already ill."

古文：请假，许之。
现代文：向庄烈帝请假，得到了批准。
English: He asked Zhuo Ledei for a leave of absence, which was approved.

古文：居久之，福王监国，用道周吏部左侍郎。
现代文：过了很久，福王监国，用道周为吏部左侍郎。
English: After a long time, Fu Wang supervised the country, and used Tao Zhou as the left attendant of the cadre department.

古文：道周不欲出，马士英讽之曰： 人望在公，公不起，欲从史可法拥立潞王耶？ 
现代文：道周不想出任，马士英劝说道： 人望在你身上，你不出来，想跟着史可法拥立潞王吗？ 
English: Daozhou didn't want to take the post, Ma Shiying persuaded him, saying: People look up to you, won't you come out, do you want to follow Shih Kefa and support the King of Gong?

古文：乃不得已趋朝。陈进取九策，拜礼部尚书，协理詹事府事。
现代文：道周于是迫不得已进入朝中，交上了九篇进取北方的策论，朝廷册封他为礼部尚书，让他协理詹事府的事务。
English: As a result, Daozhou had no choice but to enter the court, handing over nine articles of policy for the advancement of the north. The court made him a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and made him an assistant manager of the affairs of Zhan.

古文：而朝政日非，大臣相继去国，识者知其将亡矣。
现代文：只是当时朝政一天天坏了下去，大臣相继离开南都，有见识的人都知道福王即将灭亡了。
English: However, at that time, the imperial government was deteriorating day by day, and ministers were leaving Nanto one after another. People with insight knew that King Fu was about to die.

古文：明年三月，遣祭告禹陵。濒行，陈进取策，时不能用。
现代文：第二年三月，福王派道周去祭告大禹陵，出发前，道周又递上一篇进取策，当时没有被采纳。
English: In March of the following year, Fu Wang sent Daozhou to the Great Mausoleum. Before leaving, Daozhou submitted another plan, which was not adopted at the time.

古文：甫竣事，南都亡，见唐王聿键于衢州，奉表劝进。王以道周为武英殿大学士。
现代文：道周刚办完事，南都亡失了，他到衢州去拜见唐王朱聿键，上表劝进，唐王让道周当武英殿大学士。
English: As soon as Tao Zhou finished his work, Nan Du lost his life. He went to Luzhou to meet the Tang King Zhu Rongji, and persuaded him to come to the table. The Tang King asked Tao Zhou to become a scholar of the Wu Ying Dynasty.

古文：道周学行高，王敬礼之特甚，赐宴。
现代文：道周的学问、品行都很高，唐王特别尊敬他，曾经赐宴给他。
English: Tao Zhou's learning and conduct were very high. Tang Wang especially respected him and once gave him a banquet.

古文：郑芝龙爵通侯，位道周上，众议抑芝龙，文武由是不和。
现代文：郑芝龙封为侯爵，位置在道周之上，大家主张压一压芝龙，文武大臣由此不和睦了。
English: Zheng Zhilong was given the title of marquis, and his position was above that of Daozhou. Everyone advocated the suppression of Zhilong, and the Minister of Culture and Martial Arts was not happy about it.

古文：一诸生上书诋道周迂，不可居相位，王知出芝龙意，下督学御史挞之。
现代文：有个学生上书攻击道周迂腐，不能担任辅臣，唐王知道是出自芝龙的意思，故意把这个学生交督学御史打了一顿。
English: There was a student who wrote a letter attacking Daozhou's pedantry and his inability to serve as an assistant minister. Tang Wang knew that it was from the meaning of Zhilong, and deliberately beat this student into submission.

古文：当是时，国势衰，政归郑氏，大帅恃恩观望，不肯一出关募兵。
现代文：在这个时候，国势已衰，朝廷大权掌握在郑氏手中，这位大帅仗着唐王的恩赐，观望不前，不愿意出关召募士兵。
English: At this time, the country was in decline, and the supreme power of the imperial court was in the hands of Zheng, who, relying on the gift of the Tang King, did not want to go out to recruit soldiers.

古文：道周请自往江西图恢复。
现代文：道周于是自请到江西去谋划收复失地。
English: Therefore, Daozhou invited himself to Jiangxi to plan the recovery of the lost territory.

古文：以七月启行，所至远近响应，得义旅九千余人，由广信出衢州。
现代文：当年七月他出发，所到之处得到周围地区的响应，募到义旅九千多人，从广信开出衢州。
English: He set out in July of that year, and received responses from the surrounding areas wherever he went. He recruited more than 9,000 volunteers to travel from Guangzhou to Zhangzhou.

古文：十二月进至婺源，遇大清兵。战败，被执至江宁，幽别室中，囚服著书。
现代文：十二月进抵婺源，遇到大清部队，战败后被俘，被带到江宁，单独关在一个房间里，穿着囚服写书。
English: In December, he entered and arrived at Luyuan, encountered the Qing Dynasty troops, was captured after the defeat, and was taken to Jiangning. He was locked up in a room alone, wearing a prison uniform and writing a book.

古文：临刑，过东华门，坐不起，曰： 此与高皇帝陵寝近，可死矣。 
现代文：将要处死他时，道周行经东华门，坐在地上不起来，说： 这里离高皇帝的陵墓比较近，可死在这里。 
English: When he was about to be executed, Daozhou walked through the East China Gate, sat on the ground and could not get up, saying: This is closer to Emperor Gao's mausoleum, you can die here.

古文：监刑者从之。
现代文：监刑的同意了他。
English: The warden agreed with him.

古文：幕下士中书赖雍、蔡绍谨，兵部主事赵士超等皆死。
现代文：道周幕下的谋士中书赖雍、蔡绍谨，兵部主事赵士超等都死了。
English: Lai Yong, Cai Shao Jian, and Zhao Shichao, the chief of the military department, all died.

古文：道周学贯古今，所至学者云集。
现代文：道周学通古今，所到之处跟他钻研的人云集而来。
English: He has been studying Taoism from ancient times to the present, and wherever he goes, people who have studied with him gather.

古文：铜山在孤岛中，有石室，道周自幼坐卧其中，故学者称为石斋先生。
现代文：铜山在一个孤岛上，山上有一座石室，道周从小坐卧其中，所以学者称他为石斋先生。
English: Tongshan is on an isolated island. There is a stone room on the mountain, where Daozhou has been sitting and sleeping since he was a child. That's why scholars call him Mr. Ishisai.

古文：精天文历数皇极诸书，所著《易象正》、《三易洞玑》及《太函经》，学者穷年不能通其说，而道周用以推验治乱。
现代文：道周精通天文、历法、数学、皇极等方面的书籍。他所著的《易象正》、《三易洞玑》及《大函经》，学者整年学习也弄不懂他的学说，而道周自己用它来推演、验证国家的治乱。
English: Daozhou was well-versed in books on astronomy, calendar, mathematics, imperial etiquette, etc. His books, "Izongzheng," "Sanyi Dongguan" and "Daibangjing," were studied by scholars for a whole year, but they could not understand his theory, and Daozhou himself used it to deduce and verify the country's governance.

古文：殁后，家人得其小册，自谓终于丙戌，年六十二，始信其能知来也。
现代文：他死后，他的家人得到他写的一本小册子，上边自己说自己死在丙戌年，终年六十二岁，大家才相信他真能预测未来。
English: After his death, his family received a pamphlet he had written, in which he said he had died in the year of the rooster, aged 62, leading everyone to believe that he really could predict the future.

