古文：江淹任昉王僧孺江淹字文通，济阳考城人也。父康之，南沙令，雅有才思。
现代文：江淹字文通，济阳考城人，父亲江康之，作过南沙县令，很有才气。
English: Jiang Dunzhi is a literary man, a native of Jiyang Kaocheng, and his father, Jiang Kangzhi, was a Nansha County magistrate. He is very talented.

古文：淹少孤贫，常慕司马长卿、梁伯鸾之爲人，不事章句之学，留情于文章。
现代文：江淹从小丧父，家境贫寒，常仰慕司马相如、梁鸿的为人，不屑于从事经学训诂，而倾心于诗赋文章。
English: Jiang Wan lost his father at a young age, and his family was poor. He often admired Sima Xiangru and Liang Hong. He did not disdain to engage in the study of the classics, but devoted himself to poetry and prose.

古文：早爲高平檀超所知，常升以上席，甚加礼焉。
现代文：早年被高平檀超赏识，常请他坐上席，厚加礼遇。
English: In his early years, he was appreciated by Gao Ping Dan Chao, who often invited him to sit in the upper seat and treated him with great courtesy.

古文：起家南徐州从事，转奉朝请。
现代文：初次作官为南徐州从事，又转任奉朝请。
English: He was first appointed to the post of South Xuzhou, and then transferred to the post of Minister of the North.

古文：宋建平王景素好士，淹随景素在南兖州。
现代文：宋朝建平王刘景素爱结纳士人，江淹在南兖州跟随景素。
English: Liu Jingsu, the king of Jianping in the Song Dynasty, loved the Naxi people, and Jiang Dun followed him to Nanluozhou.

古文：仰惟大王少垂明白，则梧丘之魂不愧于沈首，鹄亭之鬼无恨于灰骨。
现代文：广陵县令郭彦文被治罪，供词牵连到江淹，说他曾经受贿，江淹被下狱。
English: Guo Yanwen, the Guangling County magistrate, was convicted, his confession implicated Jiang Dun, saying that he had accepted bribes, and Jiang Dun was sent to prison.

古文：景素览书，即日出之。
现代文：他在狱中给刘景素上书申辩。景素见到书信，当天就把他放了出来。
English: After Jing Su read the seal of the seal, he released the river flood on the same day.

古文：寻举南徐州秀才，对策上第，再迁府主簿。
现代文：不久被举为南徐州秀才，在朝廷对策时列为上等，又改任建平王府主簿。
English: He was soon promoted to the Southern Xuzhou Scholar, listed as a superior in the imperial countermeasures, and changed to the main book of the Jianping Royal Palace.

古文：景素爲荆州，淹从之镇。
现代文：景素作荆州刺史，江淹跟随他到任所。
English: Jing Su wrote the history of Jingzhou, and Jiang Dun followed him to his post.

古文：少帝即位，多失德，景素专据上流，咸劝因此举事。
现代文：宋少帝即位，不行德政，景素占据专断长江上游，很多人都劝他就此起事。
English: When Emperor Song ascended to the throne, he did not practice good governance, and Jing Su arbitrarily occupied the upper reaches of the Yangtze River. Many people advised him to rise up.

古文：淹每从容进谏，景素不纳。
现代文：江淹却每每劝止，景素不听他的劝告。
English: The river was flooded, but Jing Su did not listen to his advice.

古文：及镇京口，淹爲镇军参军，领南东海郡丞。
现代文：等景素镇守京口，江淹作镇军参军，兼任南东海郡丞。
English: Such as Jing Su, the town guard of Jingkou, and Jiang Dun, who joined the army as a town soldier, and also served as the county magistrate of the South East China Sea.

古文：景素与腹心日夜谋议，淹知祸机将发，乃赠诗十五首以讽焉。
现代文：景素与他的心腹谋划叛乱，江淹知道祸事要到，于是向景素赠诗十五首婉言劝戒。
English: At this time, Jingsu was plotting and scheming day and night with his vassals. Knowing that disaster and turmoil were about to happen, he wrote fifteen poems and presented them to Jingsu to tease him.

古文：会东海太守陆澄丁艰，淹自谓郡丞应行郡事，景素用司马柳世隆。淹固求之，景素大怒，言于选部，黜爲建安吴兴令。
现代文：赶上东海太宗陆澄因父母丧守孝离职，江淹认为自己是郡丞理应代理太守，而景素任命了柳世隆，江淹一再要求这职位，景素大怒，上报吏部，贬江淹为建安吴兴县令。
English: When Lu Cheng, the East Sea Taizong, left his post due to the death of his parents, Jiang Duan thought that he should be the acting governor, and Jing Su appointed Liu Shilong. Jiang Duan repeatedly demanded this position. Jing Su was furious, reported to the cadre department, and demoted Jiang Duan to Jian'an Wuxing County.

古文：及齐高帝辅政，闻其才，召爲尚书驾部郎、骠骑参军事。
现代文：等齐高帝萧道成辅政，听说他有才华，召他为尚书驾部郎、骠骑参军事。
English: Emperor Gao of the Qi Dynasty, Xiao Daocheng, heard that he was talented, and called him to be his driver and cavalryman in the military.

古文：俄而荆州刺史沈攸之作乱，高帝谓淹曰： 天下纷纷若是，君谓何如？ 
现代文：不久荆州刺史沈攸之作乱，齐高帝问江淹说： 天下这样乱纷纷的，先生认为会怎么样呢？ 
English: Soon after the rebellion was launched by Jingzhou assassin Shen You, Emperor Gao said to Jiang Dun: The world is in such a mess, what do you think should be done?

古文：淹曰： 昔项强而刘弱，袁衆而曹寡，羽卒受一剑之辱，绍终爲奔北之虏，此所谓 在德不在鼎 ，公何疑哉。 
现代文：江淹回答说： 从前项羽强而刘邦弱，袁绍众而曹操寡，然而项羽最终受杀身之辱，袁绍结果成败亡之徒，这就是所谓 在仁德不在权位 ，明公有什么可疑虑的呢？ 
English: Jiang Dun replied: From before, Xiang Yu was strong and Liu Bang was weak, Yuan Shao was numerous and Cao Cao was small. However, Xiang Yu was eventually killed and humiliated, and Yuan Shao ended up becoming a loser. This is the so-called "benevolence is not in power," what dubious concerns does Ming Gong have?

古文：帝曰： 试爲我言之。 
现代文：高帝说： 请试着给我分析一下。 
English: Gao Di said: Please try to analyze it for me.

古文：淹曰： 公雄武有奇略，一胜也；宽容而仁恕，二胜也；贤能毕力，三胜也；人望所归，四胜也；奉天子而伐叛逆，五胜也。
现代文：江淹说： 明公英雄威重又有奇谋，是胜兆之一；宽容仁爱，是胜兆之二；贤臣肯为你尽力，是胜兆之三；众望所归，是胜兆之四；奉天子而伐叛逆，是胜兆之五。
English: Jiang Dun said, "Ming Gong heroes are dignified and resourceful, which is one of the signs of victory; tolerance, benevolence and love, which is the second of the signs of victory; wise men willing to do their best for you, which is the third of the signs of victory; people's hopes, which is the fourth of the signs of victory; obeying the Son of Heaven and rebelling, which is the fifth of the signs of victory.

古文：彼志锐而器小，一败也；有威无恩，二败也；士卒解体，三败也；搢绅不怀，四败也；悬兵数千里、而无同恶相济，五败也。
现代文：对方野心大而才具小，是败象之一；有威严无恩德，是败象之二；士卒人心涣散，是败象之三；官宦不归心，是败象之四；孤军出征千里之外，而没有同党相助，是败象之五。
English: If the other side has great ambition but little talent, it is one of the signs of defeat; if there is majesty but no benevolence, it is the second sign of defeat; if the soldiers' hearts are scattered, it is the third sign of defeat; if the officials do not return to their hearts, it is the fourth sign of defeat; if a lone army sets out thousands of miles away, but there is no help from the same party, it is the fifth sign of defeat.

古文：虽豺狼十万，而终爲我获焉。 
现代文：那么虽然他有十万大兵，也终究要被我们消灭。 
English: Then, although he has a hundred thousand soldiers, he will eventually be eliminated by us.

古文：帝笑曰： 君谈过矣。 
现代文：高帝笑着说： 先生说的过头了。 
English: Gao Di said with a smile: You have gone too far.

古文：桂阳之役，朝廷周章，诏檄久之未就。
现代文：桂阳王刘休范之乱，朝内恐慌，诏书檄文很长时间竟无人来写。
English: Guiyang King Liu Xuan's rebellion, panic in the imperial court, the imperial edict was not written for a long time.

古文：齐高帝引淹入中书省，先赐酒食，淹素能饮啖，食鹅炙垂尽，进酒数升讫，文诰亦办。
现代文：齐高帝引荐江淹入中书省，先赏赐酒饭，江淹平时能吃能喝，一只烤鹅快要吃光，酒也喝了好几升，吃饭的功夫，文告也写完了。
English: Emperor Qigong recommended that the Yangtze River be flooded into the province of Zhongshu, and first rewarded them with wine and rice. When the river is flooded, they can eat and drink. A roast goose was almost eaten up, and they also drank several liters of wine. It took a lot of effort to eat, and the report was also finished.

古文：相府建，补记室参军。高帝让九锡及诸章表，皆淹制也。
现代文：齐高帝晋位宰相，补他为记室参军，齐高帝辞让九锡及各种章表，都出自江淹之手。
English: Emperor Qi Gao was promoted to the rank of prime minister, he joined the army to fill the office of record, Emperor Qi Gao resigned from Jiu Xi and all kinds of chapter tables, all from the hands of Jiang Dun.

古文：齐受禅，复爲骠骑豫章王嶷记室参军。
现代文：齐受禅代宋，江淹又任骠骑将军豫章王萧嶷的记室参军。
English: Qi was accepted by the Song Dynasty of the Zen Dynasty, and Jiangran was appointed as the secretary of the cavalry general Yu Zhang Wang Xiaoqi to join the army.

古文：建元二年，始置史官，淹与司徒左长史檀超共掌其任，所爲条例，并爲王俭所驳，其言不行。
现代文：建元二年，才设置史官，江淹和司徒左长史檀超共同担任这个职务，他所订立的条例，都被王俭驳回，写成的东西也没能在世上流行。
English: It was not until the second year of the first century that a historian was set up, and Jiang Ruan and the left-wing leader of the scholars, Shi Danchao, jointly held this post. The regulations he concluded were all rejected by Wang Jian, and what was written could not be popular in the world.

古文：淹任性文雅，不以着述在怀，所撰十三篇竟无次序。
现代文：江淹纵情于诗赋，对于著书立说并不在意，所撰写的十三篇史书居然没有次序。
English: Jiang Drowning indulged in poetry and did not care about writing a book, and the thirteen history books he wrote actually had no order.

古文：又领东武令，参掌诏策。
现代文：又兼东武县令，参与掌管诏令文书。
English: He was also the magistrate of Dongwu County and participated in the administration of the imperial edict documents.

古文：后拜中书侍郎，王俭尝谓曰： 卿年三十五，已爲中书侍郎，才学如此，何忧不至尚书金紫。
现代文：后来拜中书侍郎，王俭曾对他说： 你三十五岁，已作了中书侍郎，有这样的才学，何愁作不到尚书三公。
English: Later, Wang Jian said to him, "You are thirty-five years old and have already become a junior secretary. With such talent, how can you not become a senior secretary?"

古文：所谓富贵卿自取之，但问年寿何如尔。 
现代文：这正是所谓富贵你自然能取得，只是看寿限有多少了。 
English: This is exactly the so-called wealth you can naturally acquire, but it depends on how much longevity you have.

古文：淹曰： 不悟明公见眷之重。 
现代文：江淹说： 不料明公这样看重我。 
English: Jiang Yu said, "I didn't expect the emperor to think so highly of me.

古文：永明三年，兼尚书左丞。
现代文：永明三年，江淹兼任尚书左丞。
English: In the third year of the Yongming era, Jiang Yan also served as Shang Shuzo.

古文：时襄阳人开古冢，得玉镜及竹简古书，字不可识。
现代文：当时襄阳有人挖开古墓，挖出玉镜和竹简古书，字已经不认识了。
English: At that time, someone in Yangyang dug up an ancient tomb and dug out a jade mirror and an ancient book. The characters were no longer recognizable.

古文：王僧虔善识字体，亦不能谙，直云似是科斗书。
现代文：王僧虔善于识别各种文字，却也看不明白，只是说像是蝌蚪文字。
English: Wang Monk Pious is good at recognizing all kinds of characters, but he can't see them either. He just says they look like Chinese characters.

古文：淹以科斗字推之，则周宣王之前也。简殆如新。
现代文：江淹以蝌蚪文字来推究，认为是周宣王以前的东西，而竹简几乎和新的一样。
English: According to Jiang Dun's interpretation of the script, it is believed to be from before the reign of King Zhou Xuan, while the bamboo strips are almost brand new.

古文：少帝初，兼御史中丞。
现代文：齐少帝初年，江淹兼任御史中丞。
English: In the first year of Qi Shao Di, Jiang Rong also served as Goshi Chujo.

古文：明帝作相，谓淹曰： 君昔在尚书中，非公事不妄行，在官宽猛能折衷。
现代文：齐明帝当时作丞相，对江淹说： 先生从前在尚书省，除了干公务从不轻举妄动，在任上可谓刚柔相济。
English: Emperor Qiming, who was the prime minister at the time, said to Jiang Rong: My teacher used to be in Shangshu Province. Apart from his official duties, he never made any rash moves. In his position, he could be described as both tough and gentle.

古文：今爲南司，足以振肃百僚也。 
现代文：如今作监察官，一定完全能够整顿百官啊。 
English: Now, as an inspector, I'm sure I'll be able to completely straighten out the bureaucrats.

古文：淹曰： 今日之事，可谓当官而行，更恐不足仰称明旨尔。 
现代文：江淹回答说： 如今的事，只能说在其位谋其政罢了，恐怕还不能尽如您的旨意。 
English: Jiang Tun replied, "Today's matter can only be described as seeking one's own government in one's own position. I'm afraid I can't do as you wish.

古文：于是弹中书令谢朏、司徒左长史王缋、护军长史庾弘远，并以托疾不预山陵公事。
现代文：后来弹劾中书令谢月出、司徒左长史王绩、护军长史庾弘远，都因为他们托病不参加祭先帝陵墓。
English: Later, the letter of impeachment was issued against Xie Yuexing, the head of the Left Division of the Military Region, Shi Wangpi, and the head of the Military Region, Shi Binghongyuan, all because they feigned illness to avoid attending the ceremony at the former emperor's mausoleum.

古文：又奏收前益州刺史刘悛、梁州刺史阴智伯，并赃货巨万，辄收付廷尉。
现代文：又奏请逮捕前益州刺史刘悛、梁州刺史阴智伯，都是贪赃巨万，全抓捕交付廷尉。
English: He also requested the arrest of former Yizhou magistrate Liu Zhen and Liangzhou magistrate Yin Zhibo, both of whom were extremely corrupt. All of them were arrested and handed over to court officers.

古文：临海太守沈昭略、永嘉太守庾昙隆及诸郡二千石并大县官长，多被劾，内外肃然。
现代文：临海太守沈昭略、永嘉太守庾昙隆以及各郡太守和大县县长，多被弹劾，一时朝廷内外规矩多了。
English: Linhai Daju Shen Zhaoli, Yongjia Daju Yaolong, as well as the county governors and the heads of large counties, were mostly impeached, and for a time there were more rules inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：明帝谓曰： 自宋以来，不复有严明中丞，君今日可谓近世独步。 
现代文：明帝对江淹说： 自宋代以来，再没有过严明的御史中丞，先生如今可算是近世独一无二的了。 
English: Emperor Ming said to Jiang Dun: Since the Song Dynasty, there has never been a strict imperial historian, and he is now unique in modern times.

古文：累迁秘书监，侍中，卫尉卿。
现代文：历任秘书监、侍中、卫尉卿。
English: Successive secretaries superintendent, chamberlains, sergeants.

古文：初，淹年十三时，孤贫，常采薪以养母，曾于樵所得貂蝉一具，将鬻以供养。
现代文：当初，江淹十三岁时，父丧家贫，常打柴养活母亲，曾在打柴处捡到一顶高官所戴的貂尾蝉羽冠，想把它卖了养母。
English: At the beginning, when Jiang was 13 years old, his father died and the family was poor. He often chopped wood to feed his mother. Once, he found an iris feather crown worn by a high-ranking official in a wood-chopping area and wanted to sell it to his adoptive mother.

古文：其母曰： 此故汝之休征也，汝才行若此，岂长贫贱也，可留待得侍中着之。 
现代文：他母亲说： 这是上天故意给你吉祥之兆，你这样的才干品行，怎么会长久贫贱呢，可留着等当了侍中自己戴吧。 
English: His mother said, "This is a sign of God's blessing for you. How can you be poor for so long with such talent and virtue? You can keep it and wear it when you become a waiter."

古文：至是果如母言。
现代文：到这会儿果然应了母亲的话。
English: So far, she has lived up to her mother's words.

古文：永元中，崔慧景举兵围都，衣冠悉投名刺，淹称疾不往。
现代文：永元年间，崔慧景起兵造反包围京都，官僚士绅都去送名片，江淹却称病不去。
English: During the Yongyuan era, Cui Huiqing started a military rebellion to encircle Kyoto. The bureaucrats and gentry all went to send their business cards, but Jiang Duan said that he was ill and would not go.

古文：及事平，时人服其先见。
现代文：等平定了崔慧景，人们都佩服他有先见之明。
English: He pacified Choe Hye Kyeong, and people admired his foresight.

古文：东昏末，淹以秘书监兼卫尉，又副领军王莹。
现代文：东昏侯末年，江淹以秘书监身份兼任卫尉，又作领军王莹的副手。
English: In the last years of the Eastern Zhou Dynasty, Jiang Rong also served as a guard lieutenant in the capacity of a secretary supervisor, and also served as the deputy of the leader Wang Ying.

古文：及梁武至新林，淹微服来奔，位相国右长史。
现代文：梁武帝起兵伐东昏侯到新林时，江淹换便服前去投奔，任相国右长史之职。
English: When Emperor Liangwu raised an army and marched east to Xinlin, Jiang Dun changed his casual clothes and rushed to the capital to take up the post of the right-hand man of the imperial court.

古文：天监元年，爲散骑常侍、左卫将军，封临沮县伯。
现代文：天监元年，任散骑常侍、左卫将军，封临沮县伯。
English: In the first year of Tenshu, he was appointed as a knight errant, a general of the Left Division, and was enthroned as a count of Shimo County.

古文：淹乃谓子弟曰： 吾本素宦，不求富贵，今之忝窃，遂至于此。
现代文：江淹这时对子弟们说： 我本来就是无实权的闲官，并不图富贵，如今惭愧充任官职，已达到今天的地步。
English: Jiang Dun said to his sons: I was originally an ordinary official, not pursuing fame and fortune, but now I am in a high position, so I have become rich.

古文：平生言止足之事，亦以备矣。
现代文：平生我常说的作人应该满足的事情，也都有了。
English: I've always been good at talking about contentment, and now I'm all set.

古文：人生行乐，须富贵何时。
现代文：人生随时都可行乐，何须非等到富贵之时。
English: Life can be enjoyable at any time, why wait until you are rich.

古文：吾功名既立，正欲归身草莱耳。 
现代文：我已经功成名就，只打算归隐乡里了。 
English: Now that my reputation has been established, I'm thinking of retiring to the meadows.

古文：以疾迁金紫光禄大夫，改封醴陵伯，卒。
现代文：因有病改任位高职闲的金紫光禄大夫，并改封醴陵伯，后去世。
English: Due to illness, he was reassigned to the position of high-ranking doctor Jin Zi Guanglu, and changed his title to Gongling Bo, and later died.

古文：武帝爲素服举哀，諡曰宪。
现代文：武帝为他穿白衣以示哀悼，谥为 宪 。
English: Emperor Wu dressed him in white to show his condolences, and he was enthroned.

古文：淹少以文章显，晚节才思微退，云爲宣城太守时罢归，始泊禅灵寺渚，夜梦一人自称张景阳，谓曰： 前以一匹锦相寄，今可见还。 
现代文：江淹年少时以文辞扬名，到晚年才气稍减，据他自己说是作宣城太守罢官回家时，曾停泊在禅灵寺附近的河洲边，夜里梦见一个人自称是张景阳，对他说： 从前把一匹锦寄放在你这儿，现在请还给我。 
English: When he was young, Jiang Dun was famous for his writing. In his later years, his talent waned a little. According to his own account, when he was returning home after being dismissed from his post as the city's eunuch, he was moored on the shore of a river near the Zenling Temple. At night, he dreamed of a man who claimed to be Zhang Jingyang and said to him, "I once sent you a brocade horse, now please return it to me."

古文：淹探怀中得数尺与之，此人大恚曰： 那得割截都尽。 
现代文：江淹就从怀里掏出几尺还给他，这人大怒说： 怎么能裁剩下这么一点儿！ 
English: Jiang Dun took out a few feet from his arms and gave it back to him. The man was furious and said, "How can you cut off so little!

古文：顾见丘迟谓曰： 馀此数尺既无所用，以遗君。 
现代文：回头看见丘迟说： 剩下这几尺既然没有什么用了，送给你吧。 
English: Looking back, he saw the hill behind him and said, "Since these few remaining meters are useless, I'll give them to you."

古文：自尔淹文章踬矣。
现代文：从那以后江淹的文章就一蹶不振。
English: Since then, articles on river flooding have not been very popular.

古文：又尝宿于冶亭，梦一丈夫自称郭璞，谓淹曰： 吾有笔在卿处多年，可以见还。 
现代文：又说曾在冶亭投宿，梦见一男子自称郭璞，对江淹说： 我有一枝笔在你这儿放了多年，请还给我。 
English: He also said that he had stayed in a yakitori restaurant and dreamed of a man calling himself Guo Wei, who said to Jiang Yu: "I have a pen that I have kept with you for many years. Please give it back to me."

古文：淹乃探怀中得五色笔一以授之。
现代文：江淹从怀里摸出一枝五彩笔递给了他。
English: Jiang Dun took out a multicolored pen from his arms and handed it to him.

古文：尔后爲诗绝无美句，时人谓之才尽。
现代文：以后再写诗完全写不出好句子了。当世人说他已经才尽。
English: Later, when he wrote poetry, he couldn't write a good sentence at all. People said that he had just run out of time.

古文：凡所着述，自撰爲前后集，并齐史十志，并行于世。
现代文：他所有的著作，自己编为前后集，和《齐史》十志合在一起，一同在世上流行。
English: All of his works, compiled by himself as a collection, and "Qi Shi" (Qi History) together, have been popular in the world.

古文：尝欲爲赤县经以补山海之阙，竟不成。
现代文：曾打算写《赤县经》以补《山海经》的缺失，到底没能写成。
English: He had planned to write "The Red County Classic" to make up for the lack of "The Mountain and Sea Classic," but in the end he was unable to write it.

古文：子蒍嗣。任昉字彦升，乐安博昌人也。
现代文：任窻字彦升，乐安博昌人。
English: Ren Ren Zhaozhi, Le Anbo Changren.

古文：父遥，齐中散大夫。
现代文：父亲任遥，在齐朝时作中散大夫。
English: His father was a famous doctor in Zhongshan, Qi.

古文：遥兄遐字景远，少敦学业，家行甚谨，位御史中丞、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：任遥的哥哥任遐字景远，年少时学业勤勉，在家恭敬有礼，官作到御史中丞、金紫光禄大夫。
English: Renyao's older brother, Ren Zhaozhi Jingyuan, was a diligent student when he was young, respectful and courteous at home, and worked as a government official to the rank of Mishi Chujo and Jin Ziguanglu Doctor.

古文：永明中，遐以罪将徙荒裔，遥怀名请诉，言泪交下，齐武帝闻而哀之，竟得免。
现代文：永明年间，任遐因犯罪将要发配到荒凉边地，任遥怀揣诉状谒见诉说，声泪俱下，齐武帝听了感到怜悯，任遐终竟得于幸免。
English: Forever and a year later, Ren Yao was about to be sent to a desolate place for committing a crime. With tears in his eyes, Ren Yao, who was carrying a complaint, told Emperor Qibao that he felt pity for him. In the end, Ren Yao was spared.

古文：遥妻河东裴氏，高明有德行，尝昼卧，梦有五色采旗盖四角悬铃，自天而坠，其一铃落入怀中，心悸因而有娠。
现代文：任遥妻为河东裴氏，有识有德。有一次白天躺在床上，梦见一顶插着五色彩旗的伞盖四角悬挂着铃铛，从天上掉下来，其中一个铃铛掉到她怀里，于是心里悸动而有孕。
English: Once, while lying in bed during the day, Ren Yao dreamed that an umbrella with a five-color flag and bells hanging from the four corners fell from the sky. One of the bells fell into her arms, and her heart throbbed and she became pregnant.

古文：占者曰： 必生才子。 
现代文：请人占卜说： 必定生才子。 
English: Ask a fortune-teller to say: A talented child will surely be born.

古文：及生昉，身长七尺五寸，幼而聪敏，早称神悟。
现代文：后来生任窻，身长七尺五寸，从小聪明灵透，被称赞为悟性如神。
English: Later, he was born as Ren Yao. He was seven feet and five inches tall, and he was smart and clever from a young age. He was praised for his god-like intellect.

古文：四岁诵诗数十篇，八岁能属文，自制月仪，辞义甚美。
现代文：四岁能诵诗数十篇，八岁能写文章，自己写出《月仪》，文辞内容都很美。
English: The four-year-old can recite dozens of poems, the eight-year-old can write articles, and write "Moon Ritual" by himself. The content of the words is very beautiful.

古文：褚彦回尝谓遥曰： 闻卿有令子，相爲喜之。
现代文：褚彦回曾对任遥说： 听说先生有个好儿子，真为你高兴。
English: Yan Yan Hui once said to Ren Yao: I heard that you have a good son, I'm really happy for you.

古文：所谓百不爲多，一不爲少。 
现代文：正所谓有一百不算多，有一个不算少啊。 
English: As the saying goes, one hundred is not too many, and one is not too few.

古文：由是闻声藉甚。
现代文：任窻从此名声更大。
English: From then on, Ren Xuan's reputation became even greater.

古文：年十二，从叔晷有知人之量，见而称其小名曰： 阿堆，吾家千里驹也。 
现代文：十二岁时，他叔叔任晷善于识人，见到他叫着他的小名说： 阿堆，你是我们家的千里马啊。 
English: At the age of twelve, his uncle Ren Yao was good at recognizing people. When he saw him, he called his nickname and said, "Ah Dui, you are our family's best friend."

古文：昉孝友纯至，每侍亲疾，衣不解带，言与泪并，汤药饮食必先经口。
现代文：任窻对父母兄弟非常孝敬友善，每次侍奉父母的病，夜间从没有脱衣休息过，一开口就流泪，汤药饮食都要先亲口尝一尝。
English: Ren Hao is very filial and friendly to his parents and brothers. Every time he serves his parents' illness, he has never taken a night off from stripping. As soon as he opens his mouth, he bursts into tears. He must first taste the soup medicine diet.

古文：初爲奉朝请，举兖州秀才，拜太学博士。
现代文：初次作官为奉朝请，后被荐举兖州秀才，拜太学博士。
English: For the first time, he was invited to serve as an official, and later he was recommended to be promoted as a Bozhou scholar, a doctor of the Beitai School.

古文：永明初，卫将军王俭领丹阳尹，复引爲主簿。
现代文：永明初年，卫将军王俭兼任丹阳尹，又任用他为主簿。
English: In the first year of Yongming, Wang Jian, the general of the Wei Dynasty, also served as Danyang Yin, and he was also appointed as the main bookkeeper.

古文：俭每见其文，必三复殷勤，以爲当时无辈，曰： 自傅季友以来，始复见于任子。若孔门是用，其入室升堂。 
现代文：王俭每次见到他的文章，必定向他再三表示倾心相慕之情，认为他是当世无双，说： 自傅季友以来，几十年才出了任先生，若就孔门而论，恐怕已经得其真传了。 
English: Every time Wang Jian saw his article, he must have repeatedly expressed his admiration to him, thinking that he was unparalleled in the world, saying: Since Fu Jiyu, Mr. Ren has only been out for decades. As far as Confucius is concerned, I am afraid that he has been truly passed down.

古文：于是令昉作一文，及见，曰： 正得吾腹中之欲。 
现代文：于是令任窻作一篇文章，等读过，说： 正是我心中想表达的意思。 
English: So I wrote an article, read it, and said: This is exactly what I wanted to say.

古文：乃出自作文，令昉点正，昉因定数位。
现代文：于是拿出自己所写的文章，让任窻改正，任窻于是改正数字。
English: So he took out the article he had written and asked Ren Hui to correct it. Ren Hui then corrected the figures.

古文：俭拊几叹曰： 后世谁知子定吾文！ 
现代文：王俭拍着几案感叹说： 后世谁知道是先生给我改的文章！ 
English: Wang Jian patted several cases and sighed, "In the future, who knows if it was you who changed the article for me!

古文：其见知如此。
现代文：任窻竟如此被他了解器重。
English: This is the level of understanding and appreciation of Jie Jue by Gao Zu.

古文：后爲司徒竟陵王记室参军。
现代文：后来作司徒竟陵王萧子良的记室参军。
English: Later, he even joined the army as a disciple of King Xiao Ziliang.

古文：时琅邪王融有才俊，自谓无对当时，见昉之文，怳然自失。
现代文：当时琅笽王萧融有才气，自以为天下无双，等见到任窻的文章，便恍然若失。
English: At that time, Gong Wang Xiao Rong had talent, he thought that there was no match in the world, and when he saw Ren Yao's article, he was stunned.

古文：以父丧去官，泣血三年，杖而后起。
现代文：任窻因父亲去世而离职，极度悲痛三年之后，身体虚弱地柱着拐杖才能站起来。
English: Due to the death of his father, Ren Rong left his job. After three years of extreme grief, he could only stand up weakly with a cane.

古文：齐武帝谓昉伯遐曰： 闻昉哀瘠过礼，使人忧之，非直亡卿之宝，亦时才可惜。
现代文：齐武帝对任窻伯父任遐说： 听说任窻哀痛过度超越礼节，使人担忧，如有什么意外，不光你们家丧失了宝物，也可惜了当世之才。
English: Emperor Qiwu said to Emperor Ren's uncle, Emperor Renjun: I heard that Emperor Renjun's grief is excessive and beyond etiquette, which makes people worry. If something unexpected happens, not only will your family have lost a treasure, but also a great talent.

古文：宜深相全譬。 
现代文：要好好劝劝他。 
English: Persuade him well.

古文：遐使进饮食，当时勉励，回即欧出。
现代文：任遐让他吃些东西，当时勉强咽下，回去就又吐了出来。
English: Ren Yao asked him to eat something. At that time, he could barely swallow it. When he went back, he vomited it up again.

古文：昉父遥本性重槟榔，以爲常饵，临终尝求之，剖百许口，不得好者，昉亦所嗜好，深以爲恨，遂终身不尝槟榔。
现代文：他父亲任遥吃槟榔，经常咀嚼，临死时曾要槟榔吃，但剖开百来个，没有一个好的，任窻也有此嗜好，所以深为此遗憾，于是终生不再尝槟榔。
English: His father, Ren Yao, ate betel nuts and chewed them often. When he was about to die, he wanted to eat a whole betel nut, but he cut it into hundreds of pieces, and none of them were good. Ren Yao also had this habit, so he deeply regretted it and stopped eating betel nuts for life.

古文：遭继母忧，昉先以毁瘠，每一恸绝，良久乃苏，因庐于墓侧，以终丧礼。
现代文：接着又遭逢母亲去世，任窻已经因悲痛而衰弱不堪，每当痛哭而昏厥，半天才能苏醒过来。于是在墓旁搭起草屋，住在这儿守墓以尽丧礼。
English: Then his mother passed away, and Ren Yao was already weak from grief. Whenever he cried and fainted, it took him half a day to wake up. So he built a mausoleum next to the grave and lived here to guard the grave and complete the funeral.

古文：哭泣之地，草爲不生。
现代文：他经常趴着哭泣的地方，已经不长草了。
English: Where he used to lie down and cry, the grass no longer grows.

古文：昉素强壮，腰带甚充，服阕后不复可识。
现代文：任窻平时身体强壮，腰围挺粗，这丧服期满后形容枯槁，难以辨认。
English: Ren Yao is usually strong, with a thick waistline. After the mourning period, this dress is described as withered, and it is difficult to identify.

古文：齐明帝深加器异，欲大相擢引，爲爱憎所白，乃除太子步兵校尉，掌东宫书记。
现代文：齐明帝萧鸾很器重他，准备对他大力提拔，但被不喜欢他的人说了坏话，就只是委任他作了太子步兵校尉，掌管东宫书记。
English: Emperor Qiming thought highly of him and planned to promote him vigorously. However, people who disliked him said bad things about him, so he was only appointed as the prince's infantry lieutenant and in charge of the East Palace secretary.

古文：齐明帝废郁林王，始爲侍中、中书监、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史、录尚书事，封宣城郡公，使昉具草。
现代文：萧鸾废掉废帝郁林王萧昭业，立废帝海陵王萧昭文，此后萧鸾任侍中、中书监、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史、录尚书事，封宣城郡公，让任窻为他起草就职谢恩的章表。
English: Xiao Wei abolished the former emperor Yu Lin Wang Xiao Zhaoye, and established the former emperor Hai Ling Wang Xiao Zhaowen. After that, Xiao Wei served as the attendant, the book supervisor, the cavalry general, the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony, the Yangzhou engraving history, the record of the book, and the seal of the Xuancheng County government, and let Ren Wei draft the list of thanks for his inauguration.

古文：帝恶其辞斥，甚愠，昉亦由是终建武中位不过列校。
现代文：写成后，萧鸾讨厌其中有对自己贬损的言辞，很是恼火，于是任窻在后来萧鸾称帝以后整个建武年间位置也超不过列校。
English: After it was written, Xiao Yao hated the derogatory words about himself, and was very angry. Therefore, after Xiao Yao became emperor, Ren Yao's position during the entire Jianwu period was no more than that of an enlisted man.

古文：昉尤长爲笔，颇慕傅亮才思无穷，当时王公表奏无不请焉。昉起草即成，不加点窜。
现代文：任窻尤其擅长文章，很仰慕傅亮的无穷才气，当时王公的表章奏疏都请他代笔，他下笔即成，不加修改。
English: Ren Qi is particularly good at writing, and admires Fu Liang's infinite talent. At that time, he was asked to write Wang Guo's epitaphs and speeches, and he wrote it down immediately, without modification.

古文：沈约一代辞宗，深所推挹。
现代文：沈约为一代辞宗，也对他很是推重。
English: Shen Rong is a generation of dictionaries, and it is also very important to him.

古文：永元中，纡意于梅虫儿，东昏中旨用爲中书郎。
现代文：永元年间，任窻对幸臣梅虫儿曲意奉迎，东昏侯为帝时下旨任用他为中书郎。
English: During the first year of the Yong Yuan Dynasty, Ren Zhi welcomed the music of Yukitomi Ume Mushroom, and when Dong Dou Hou became the emperor, he appointed him as the middle school teacher.

古文：谢尚书令王亮，亮曰： 卿宜谢梅，那忽谢我。 
现代文：任窻拜谢尚书令王亮，王亮说： 你应该去谢姓梅的，哪儿用谢我。 
English: Wang Liang said: You should go to Xie Mei, why thank me?

古文：昉惭而退。
现代文：任窻羞愧而退。
English: Ren Yu retreated in shame.

古文：末爲司徒右长史。
现代文：后来作司徒右长史。
English: Later, he became the chief historian of the Stuto U.

古文：梁武帝克建邺，霸府初开，以爲骠骑记室参军，专主文翰。
现代文：梁武帝平定建邺，建立梁王府之初，委任他为骠骑记室参军，专门负责起草文书。
English: At the beginning of the establishment of the Liangwang Palace, Emperor Liangwu appointed him to join the army in the cavalry records office, and was specifically responsible for drafting documents.

古文：每制书草，沈约辄求同署。
现代文：每次起草文书，沈约总要求共同署名。
English: Every time a document is drafted, Shen Yotong always asks for a joint signature.

古文：尝被急召，昉出而约在，是后文笔，约参制焉。
现代文：曾有一次被紧急召走，任窻出去了而沈约还在，以后的文书，便有沈约的参与。
English: There was a time when he was urgently called away, Ren Yao went out while Shen Yao was still there, and Shen Yao participated in subsequent documents.

古文：始梁武与昉遇竟陵王西邸，从容谓昉曰： 我登三府，当以卿爲记室。 
现代文：当初梁武帝和任窻在竟陵王西邸相遇共事，跟任窻闲聊说： 我要是作了三府重臣，就让你作我的记室。 
English: At that time, Emperor Liangwu met and worked with Ren Rong at the West residence of King Jingling. He chatted with Ren Rong and said, "If I become the chief minister of the three provinces, I will make you my secretary."

古文：昉亦戏帝曰： 我若登三事，当以卿爲骑兵。 
现代文：任窻也对他开玩笑说： 我要是作了三公，就让你当我的骑兵。 
English: Ren Yao also joked to him, "If I become the Third Prince, I'll make you my cavalry."

古文：以帝善骑也。
现代文：因为梁武帝善骑马。
English: Because Emperor Liangwu was good at riding.

古文：至是引昉符昔言焉。
现代文：到这时让任窻作记室参军以应当日之言。
English: At this time, let Ren Yao as a recorder join the army with the words of the day.

古文：昉奉笺云： 昔承清宴，属有绪言，提挈之旨，形乎善谑。
现代文：任窻给梁武帝的书信中说： 昔日太平清静之时，您曾经对我有预言，本意是对我提拔，看起来却像善意的玩笑。
English: In his letter to Emperor Liangwu, Ren Zheng said: In the past, when the world was peaceful and quiet, you once had a prophecy for me. The intention was to promote me, but it looked like a good-natured joke.

古文：岂谓多幸，斯言不渝。 
现代文：谁料我竟如此幸运，昔日之言一点没有落空。 
English: Who would have thought that I would have been so lucky and that my words from the past would have come true.

古文：盖爲此也。
现代文：就是指的这件事。
English: That's what it's about.

古文：梁台建，禅让文诰，多昉所具。
现代文：梁武帝受封梁王，及篡位时，以齐帝名义颁布的禅让文告，多由任窻写成。
English: Most of the edicts establishing the Liang and Tai, and giving way to Zen, were written by Ren Fang.

古文：奉世叔父母不异严亲，事兄嫂恭谨。
现代文：任窻侍奉叔婶与父母一样，侍奉兄嫂也恭敬谨慎。
English: Like her parents, Renju serves her aunt, and she also serves her brother and sister-in-law with respect and caution.

古文：外氏贫阙，恒营奉供养。
现代文：外祖父家贫穷，他常供给周济。
English: My maternal grandfather's family was poor, and he often gave money to the poor.

古文：禄奉所收，四方饷遗，皆班之亲戚，即日便尽。
现代文：俸禄收入，各处的馈赠，都分送给亲戚，当天就分完。
English: Salary income, gifts from all over, are distributed to relatives, and the distribution is completed on the same day.

古文：性通脱，不事仪形，喜愠未尝形于色，车服亦不鲜明。
现代文：性格豁达洒脱，不讲究仪表，喜怒从不露在脸上，车马服饰也不华丽。
English: His personality is open-minded and easy-going, he does not care about appearance, he never shows his emotions on his face, and his car and horse costumes are not flashy.

古文：武帝践阼，历给事黄门侍郎，吏部郎。
现代文：梁武帝即位后，任窻历任给事黄门侍郎、吏部郎。
English: After Emperor Liangwu ascended to the throne, Ren Ren successively held the positions of Huangmen Zhilang (黄门侍郎) and Li Bu Rong (吏部郎).

古文：出爲义兴太守。
现代文：又外出作义兴太守。
English: He also went out to perform the role of Yixing grand marshal.

古文：岁荒民散，以私奉米豆爲粥，活三千馀人。
现代文：当时荒年，人民流亡，任窻用自己私人俸禄的米豆熬成粥，救活三千多人。
English: At that time, it was a bad year, people were in exile, and Ren Rong used his private salary to boil rice beans into porridge, saving more than three thousand people.

古文：时産子者不举，昉严其制，罪同杀人。
现代文：当时因贫困有人生下孩子不养活，任窻严格限令，这与杀人同罪。
English: At that time, due to poverty, some people gave birth to children and could not feed them, and strict restrictions were imposed on the use of force, which was the same crime as homicide.

古文：孕者供其资费，济者千室。
现代文：怀孕的供给费用，受到救济的有几千户之多。
English: Several thousand households have received relief from the cost of providing for pregnancy.

古文：在郡所得公田奉秩八百余石，昉五分督一，余者悉原，儿妾食麦而已。
现代文：在郡任上所得公田俸禄八百多石，任窻只取五分之一，其余都送回存放。儿女妻妾只吃麦饭。
English: The public land stipend of more than 800 koku received as a county official, only one-fifth is taken by the official and the rest is sent back for storage. Children, wives and concubines only eat barley.

古文：友人彭城到溉、溉弟洽从昉共爲山泽游。
现代文：他的朋友彭城到溉、到溉弟弟到洽和他一起游览山泽。
English: His friend Pengcheng came to Irrigation, and his brother came to Chaozhou to visit Yamazawa with him.

古文：及被代登舟，止有绢七匹，米五石。
现代文：等下一任官员来接任，他登舟回程时，只有七匹绢、五石米的家当。
English: When the next official came to take over, he boarded the boat for the return journey with only seven mules and five kilos of household goods.

古文：至都无衣，镇军将军沈约遣裙衫迎之。
现代文：回到京都没有衣服换，镇军将军沈约派人带了裙衫去接他。
English: When he returned to Kyoto without a change of clothes, the town's military commander, Shen You, sent someone with a skirt to pick him up.

古文：重除吏部郎，参掌大选，居职不称。
现代文：重新作吏部郎，参与执掌任选官吏，干得不称职。
English: He returned to the position of secretary and participated in the appointment and selection of officials, but he was incompetent.

古文：寻转御史中丞、秘书监。
现代文：不久调任御史中丞、秘书监。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of secretary superintendent.

古文：自齐永元以来，秘阁四部，篇卷纷杂，昉手自雠校，由是篇目定焉。
现代文：自齐永元年间以来，皇宫藏书馆的四部图书篇目混乱，卷帙繁杂，任窻亲自动手校勘，从此篇目才被整理勘定。
English: Since the time of Qi Yongyuan, the contents of the four books of the secret cabinet have been complex and complicated, and it is up to the guards to proofread them in person, so the contents have been determined.

古文：出爲新安太守，在郡不事边幅，率然曳杖，徒行邑郭。
现代文：外调为新安太守，在郡为官不修边幅。随随便便柱上根拐杖，徒步走街串巷。
English: Outwardly transferred to be the new An Taishou, in the county he was a slovenly official. He casually put on crutches and walked on foot through the streets.

古文：人通辞讼者，就路决焉。爲政清省，吏人便之。
现代文：有人来告状，就大路上随地裁决，为政清静简约，官吏百姓都感到方便。
English: Some people come to sue, and judgments are made anywhere on the highway. The government is clean, quiet, and simple, which is convenient for officials and the public.

古文：卒于官，唯有桃花米二十石，无以爲敛。
现代文：任窻死在任上，家里只有桃花米二十石，没有钱财安葬。
English: Ren Xuan died in office, his family only had 20 kilos of peach blossom rice and no money to bury him.

古文：遗言不许以新安一物还都，杂木爲棺，浣衣爲敛。
现代文：留下遗言，不许家人把新安的任何一件东西带回京都。用杂木做棺材，平时的旧衣服做装殓。
English: In his last words, he did not allow his family to take any of Shinan's belongings back to Kyoto. They used scrap wood to make a coffin and old clothes to decorate it.

古文：阖境痛惜，百姓共立祠堂于城南，岁时祠之。
现代文：郡内全境悲痛，百姓们一起在城南给他立了祠堂，每年按时祭祀他。
English: The whole area of the county was saddened, and the people together built an ancestral hall for him in the south of the city, and worshiped him on time every year.

古文：武帝闻问，方食西苑绿沈瓜，投之于盘，悲不自胜。
现代文：武帝听到他的死讯时，正在吃西苑产的绿沈瓜，立时把瓜扔到盘里，悲痛难禁。
English: When Emperor Wu heard the news of his death, he was eating a green melon from Xiyuan. He immediately threw the melon onto the plate, overcome with grief.

古文：因屈指曰： 昉少时常恐不满五十，今四十九，可谓知命。 
现代文：屈指算了算说： 任窻年轻时常怕活不到五十，如今是四十九，可算是知道自己的气数啊。 
English: "When I was young, I was often afraid that I wouldn't live to see fifty, but now I'm forty-nine, so I know how much I have to live for," said one of them.

古文：即日举哀，哭之甚恸。
现代文：当天就为他举哀，哭得很悲痛。
English: On the same day, I mourned for him and cried with great sorrow.

古文：追赠太常，諡曰敬子。
现代文：追赠他为太常，谥为 敬子 。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Taizhong (太常) and the title of Keishi (敬子).

古文：昉好交结，奖进士友，不附之者亦不称述，得其延誉者多见升擢，故衣冠贵游莫不多与交好，坐上客恒有数十。
现代文：任窻喜欢结交，勉励栽培士林中朋友，对不攀附他的就不加赞誉，被他扬名的多得到提升，因此官吏和贵家子弟多爱和他拉关系，座上客人常有那么几十个。
English: Ren Hao likes to make friends, encourage the cultivation of friends in the scholarly world, and does not give praise to those who do not cling to him. He has been promoted by his fame. Therefore, officials and children of noble families love to have a relationship with him. There are often dozens of guests at the table.

古文：时人慕之，号曰任君，言如汉之三君也。
现代文：当地人仰慕他，称他为任君，意思是他好比汉代的三君。
English: Most of the people who have been praised by Renbo have been promoted. Therefore, there is no dignitary who does not compete with Renbo for friendship. There are always dozens of guests sitting at Renbo's house.

古文：在郡尤以清洁着名，百姓年八十以上者，遣户曹掾访其寒温。
现代文：作太守尤其以清廉闻名，百姓有八十岁以上的，就派户曹掾去询问他们衣食起居。
English: The empress dowager in particular was known for being incorruptible. When people were over eighty years old, she would send households to Cao Wei to inquire about their living conditions.

古文：尝欲营佛斋，调枫香二石，始入三斗，便出教长断，曰： 与夺自己，不欲贻之后人。 
现代文：曾打算张罗和尚做斋会，就征收枫香二石，刚收上来三斗，便下令停止，并且以后再不这样做，他说： 贵贱贫富都靠自己，我不打算把什么留给后人。 
English: Once, when Zhang Luo and his monks planned to hold a banquet, they collected two stones of maple syrup. As soon as they collected three buckets, he ordered them to stop, and not to do it again. He said, "The rich and the poor are on their own. I don't plan to leave anything to future generations."

古文：郡有蜜岭及杨梅，旧爲太守所采，昉以冒险多物故，即时停绝，吏人咸以百馀年未之有也。
现代文：新安郡内有蜜岭产杨梅，以前都要派人去给太守采摘，任窻因为要冒危险，死人多，当时就命令停采，官吏百姓都认为这是百余年没有过的德政。
English: In Xin'an County, there is a myrtle producing Yangmei. In the past, someone had to be sent to the governor to pick the myrtle. Because of the danger and the number of deaths, the governor ordered the mining to be stopped at that time. The officials and the people all thought that this was a German policy that had not happened for more than a hundred years.

古文：爲家诫，殷勤甚有条贯。
现代文：任窻撰有《家诫》，言辞殷切而很有条理。
English: Ren Hao wrote "Family Precepts," the words are earnest and very systematic.

古文：陈郡殷芸与建安太守到溉书曰： 哲人云亡，仪表长谢。
现代文：陈郡殷芸和建安太守到溉在悼念文章中写道： 哲人谢世，楷模长逝，借鉴安在？
English: The people at that time envied him and called him Renjun, meaning that he was like the three kings of the desert. Chen County's Yin Ying said in a letter to Jian'an's governor, Zuo Lian: "The philosopher is dead, his appearance is gone forever."

古文：元龟何寄，指南何托？ 其爲士友所推如此。
现代文：指途觅谁？ 他是如此被士林友人所推重。
English: Who is he looking for? He is so pushed by his Shilin friends.

古文：昉不事生産，至乃居无室宅。
现代文：任窻不置产业，以至于没有一所自己的房舍。
English: Ren Yao does not own any property, so he does not have a house of his own.

古文：时或讥其多乞贷，亦随复散之亲故，常自叹曰： 知我者亦以叔则，不知我者亦以叔则。 
现代文：当时有人讥笑他爱乞讨借贷，但东西一到手，马上就分送给亲朋故友，常自叹说： 知我者是叔则，不知我者也是叔则。 
English: At that time, some people mocked him for his love of begging and borrowing, but as soon as he got something, he immediately gave it to relatives, friends and old friends. He often said to himself, "If you know me, you are my uncle, but if you don't know me, you are also my uncle."

古文：既以文才见知，时人云 任笔沈诗 。
现代文：他以文才知名于世，当世人有 任笔沈诗 的说法。
English: He was famous for his literary talent, and people said that he was a "poet without a pen."

古文：昉闻甚以爲病。
现代文：任窻听到后很不满意。
English: Ren Qi was very dissatisfied after hearing this.

古文：晚节转好着诗，欲以倾沈，用事过多，属辞不得流便，自尔都下士子慕之，转爲穿凿，于是有才尽之谈矣。
现代文：晚年变得爱写诗，想盖过沈约，但因用典过多，文辞不能流畅。可从此京都中的文人却都仰慕仿效，诗风便发展得穿凿附会，因此人们对他便有 才尽 的议论了。
English: In his later years, he became fond of writing poetry and wanted to overcome his shyness, but due to the excessive use of dictionaries, his words could not flow smoothly. However, since then, writers in Kyoto have all admired his imitation, and his poetic style has developed to the point that it has become a subject of discussion, so people have a lot to say about him.

古文：博学，于书无所不见，家虽贫，聚书至万馀卷，率多异本。
现代文：任窻博学，没有什么书不曾读过，家境虽然贫寒，却藏书多至万余卷，大多是少见的异本。
English: Ren Zheng is very erudite, there is no book he has not read. Although his family is poor, he has a collection of more than 10,000 volumes, most of which are rare and different books.

古文：及卒后，武帝使学士贺纵共沈约勘其书目，官无者就其家取之。
现代文：去世以后，武帝让学士贺纵和沈约核查他的书目，官家没有的就去取他家的补上。
English: After his death, Emperor Wu asked the scholars He Zong and Shen Yao to check his bibliography, and if the officials did not have it, they would go to his house to get it.

古文：所着文章数十万言，盛行于时。
现代文：所撰写的文章有几十万字，盛行于当世。
English: The articles written have hundreds of thousands of words and are prevalent in today's world.

古文：东海王僧孺尝论之，以爲 过于董生、扬子。
现代文：东海王僧孺曾评价他，认为他 超过董仲舒、扬雄。
English: Donghai King Monk Yao once evaluated him, saying that he was better than Dong Zhongshu and Yangxiong.

古文：昉乐人之乐，忧人之忧，虚往实归，忘贫去吝，行可以厉风俗，义可以厚人伦，能使贪夫不取，懦夫有立 。
现代文：任窻以他人之乐为乐，他人之忧为忧，无所知而往，有所得而归，不计自己清贫，而无吝啬之心，其行为可以激励风俗，其品德可以淳厚人伦，能使贪夫不妄取，懦夫有所为 。
English: Let him take pleasure in the happiness of others, take pleasure in the sorrow of others, go without knowledge, have something to gain and return, not considering his own poverty, but without a stingy heart, his behavior can inspire customs, his character can be honest, can make the greedy not take, and the coward can do something.

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：对他如此看重。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：有子东里、西华、南容、北叟，并无术业，坠其家声。
现代文：任窻有儿子东里、西华、南容、北叟，都没有专长和职事，败落了他们家的声誉。
English: Ren Rong has sons Dong Li, Xi Hua, Nan Rong, and Beibei Rong, all of whom have no expertise or job, ruining their family's reputation.

古文：兄弟流离不能自振，生平旧交莫有收恤。
现代文：弟兄几个到处漂流，不能自救，任窻生平旧友没有一个肯收留救济他们。
English: Several brothers were drifting all over the place, unable to save themselves, and none of their lifelong friends was willing to take them in and help them.

古文：独立高山之顶，欢与麋鹿同群，曒曒然绝其雰浊，诚耻之也，诚畏之也。 
现代文：西华冬天还穿着粗劣单薄的衣衫，在路上碰见平原刘孝标，孝标可怜他不觉泪下，对他说： 我要为你想办法。 于是写了《广绝交论》来讽刺任窻往日的朋友。
English: In winter, Xihua was still wearing a coarse and thin shirt. On the road, he met the plain Liu Xiaobiao. Pitying Xiaobiao, he shed tears and said to him, "I want to do something for you." So he wrote "The Theory of the Great Friendship" to satirize the past friends of Ren Hui.

古文：到溉见其论，抵几于地，终身恨之。
现代文：到溉看到他的文章，气得把几案推翻在地，终身记恨刘孝标。
English: When she saw his article, she was so angry that she overturned several cases and hated Liu Xiaobian for life.

古文：昉撰杂传二百四十七卷，地记二百五十二卷，文章三十三卷。
现代文：任窻共撰有杂传二百四十七卷，《地记》二百五十二卷，文章三十三卷。
English: Ren Zheng wrote a total of 247 volumes of miscellaneous biographies, 252 volumes of "Geography" and 33 volumes of articles.

