古文：贾黯，字直孺，邓州穰人。
现代文：贾黯字直孺，邓州穰县人。
English: Jia Ying Zi Naozhu, a native of Yixian County, Dengzhou.

古文：擢进士第一，起家将作临丞、通判襄州。
现代文：提升为进士第一，开始担任将作监丞、襄州通判。
English: He was promoted to the first to be promoted, and began to serve as the inspector general and the judge of Xiangzhou.

古文：还为秘书省著作佐郎、直集贤院，迁左正言、判三司开拆司。
现代文：回京后任秘书省著作佐郎、直集贤院，升为左正言、判三司开拆司。
English: After returning to Beijing, he served as the secretary of the Ministry of Literature, Literature and Culture, and was promoted to the position of the left chief councilor and the judge of the three departments.

古文：黯自以年少遭遇，备位谏官，果于言事。
现代文：贾黯以他少年时的遭遇，担任谏官，敢于上书言事。
English: Jia Ying took advantage of what happened to him when he was a boy, served as a eunuch, and dared to write a letter.

古文：首论韩琦、富弼、范仲淹可大用。
现代文：首先论说韩琦、富弼、范仲淹可以委以大任。
English: First of all, it is argued that Han Zheng, Fu Zheng, and Fan Zhongyan can be entrusted with important tasks.

古文：杜枢覆张彦方狱，将驳正，忤执政意，执政以他罪绌枢。
现代文：杜枢复审张彦方案件，准备对原判加以驳斥和更正，冒犯了执政者的意愿，执政者用其他的罪名将杜枢贬职。
English: Du Zu re-examined Zhang Yan's case and prepared to refute and correct the original judgment, which offended the will of the ruling party. The ruling party used other charges to demote Du Zu.

古文：黯言： 枢无罪，且旨从中出，不因臣下弹奏。
现代文：贾黯说： 杜枢没有犯罪，而降职的决定由朝廷直接决定，没有臣下上奏对他进行弹劾。
English: Jia Qian said: Du Zu did not commit a crime, and the decision to demote him was directly decided by the imperial court, and no vassal appealed to impeach him.

古文：恐自此贵幸近习，言一得入，则将阴肆谗毁，害及善良，不可不察。 时言者或论事亡状，辄戒励穷诘。
现代文：恐怕从此以后权贵宠幸之人，所说一旦被执政者听信，就会暗中大肆以谗言诋毁，使善良之人遭殃，不能不对此有所察觉。 这时进谏者有的论事没有状文，就严厉警告不断地责问。
English: I am afraid that from now on, those who are favored by the powerful and the privileged, once they are believed by those in power, will secretly and wantonly slander and defame good people, and good people will suffer. It is necessary to be aware of this. At this time, those who are imprisoned have no written record of some of their arguments, and they are sternly warned and constantly questioned.

古文：黯奏： 谏官、御史，迹既疏远，未尝预闻时政，不免采于传闻，一有失言，而诘难沮辱随之，非所以开广言路。
现代文：贾黯上奏说 ：谏官、御史，既然已被朝廷疏远，不曾参预朝廷政事，不免利用一些传闻，一旦有不符之处，朝廷就对他们加以责难阻挠辱骂，这不是广开言路的办法。
English: Jia Ying Shangsoo said: Since the eunuchs and imperial historians have been alienated by the imperial court and have not participated in the pre-imperial political affairs, it is inevitable to use some rumors. Once there is a discrepancy, the imperial court will blame them, obstruct and abuse them. This is not a way to open up the way of speech.

古文：请如唐太宗用王珪、魏徵故事，每执政奏事，听谏官一人随入。 执政又患言事官旅进，论议上前不肯止。
现代文：请求像唐太宗任用王王圭、魏征进谏的办法，每到执政上奏言事，任凭谏官一人随时进入。 执政者又担心言事官共同进谏，在朝廷上议论不止。
English: They asked for a method similar to the one used by Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty to appoint Wang Wang Gui and Wei Zheng to enter the imperial court, that is, every time a speech is delivered to the government, one eunuch is allowed to enter at any time. The rulers were also worried that the speech officials would enter the imperial court together, and there was a lot of discussion in the imperial court.

古文：乃诏： 凡欲合班上殿者，皆禀中书俟旨。 黯论以为： 今得进见言事者，独谏官、御史，若然，言路将壅，陛下不得闻外事矣。请如故便。 皆弗许。
现代文：于是下诏说： 凡是要聚集一起上殿进谏者，都要禀告中书听候消息。 贾黯上奏认为 ：如今能上殿言事的人，只有谏官、御史，如果要听候中书消息，将会堵塞言路，陛下就不能知道朝外之事了，请求还是像过去一样。 
English: Therefore, the next imperial edict said: "All those who want to gather together to go to the palace and enter the palace, should report to the middle book to listen to the news." Jia Ying thought that: Nowadays, only eunuchs and imperial historians can go to the palace to speak. If you want to listen to the message of the middle book, it will block the speech path, and your majesty will not be able to know the things outside the court. The request is still the same as in the past.

古文：侬智高反，余靖知桂州，杨畋安抚广南东、西路，皆许便宜行事。
现代文：朝廷对这些提议都未允许。侬智高反叛，余靖任桂州知州，杨畋安抚广南东、西路，朝廷都答应他们全权处理。
English: The imperial court did not allow any of these proposals. Nong Zhi Gao rebelled, Yu Jing was appointed to Chizhou, Guizhou, and Yang Hui pacified the eastern and western routes of Guangdong. The imperial court agreed to deal with them with full powers.

古文：黯言： 二人临事，指踪不一，则下将无所适从。
现代文：贾黯说： 二人共同统治，指挥不一，这样下面的将领将无所适从。
English: Jia Ying said: The two of them will rule together and command differently, so the generals below will be at a loss.

古文：又靖专节制西路，若贼东向，则非靖所统，无以使众，不若并付靖经制两路。 从之。
现代文：余靖主要节制西路，如果叛军向东进犯，那么余靖就不能统辖，无法指挥众将，不如让余靖一人统辖东、西两路。 
English: Yujing mainly controlled the western route. If the rebels advanced to the east, then Yujing would not be able to control and command the generals. It would be better to let Yujing control the eastern and western routes.

古文：皇祐四年，同修起居注，徙判盐铁勾院，迁左司谏。建言天下复置义仓，下其说诸路，而论者不一，黯亦反复辨析，卒不果行。
现代文：朝廷听从了贾黯的建议。皇四年，贾黯为同修起居注，改判盐铁勾院，升任左司谏，上奏建议全国重新设置义仓，朝廷将其建议下达各地进行讨论，人们的意见不一致，贾黯也反复辩说分析，最后仍然没有实行。
English: The imperial court listened to Jia Qiao's suggestion. In the fourth year of the emperor, Jia Qiao started to live as a practitioner, changed the sentence of the Salt and Iron Forge, and was promoted to the left priest. He proposed to re-establish the charity storehouse across the country. The imperial court sent his proposal to various regions for discussion. People's opinions were inconsistent. Jia Qiao also repeatedly argued and analyzed, but in the end it was still not implemented.

古文：宰相刘沆请中外荐举陈乞，一切以诏令从事，毋用例。
现代文：宰相刘沆请求朝廷内外的各种推举奏书，都按照诏令一样，不要使用旧例。
English: Premier Liu Bei requested that all election reports, both inside and outside the imperial court, be made in accordance with the imperial edict, and that the old rules should not be used.

古文：论者以为非便，黯奏罢之。
现代文：人们认为这样不方便，贾黯上奏建议废除这一规定。
English: It was thought to be inconvenient, and Jia Yu suggested abolishing this regulation.

古文：狄青除枢密副使，黯言： 国初武臣宿将，扶建大业，平定列国，有忠勋者，不可胜数。
现代文：狄青授予枢密副使，贾黯说： 建国之初武臣旧将，辅助皇帝建立大业，消灭其他敌国，功绩卓著者，数也数不清，但从来没有军人进入帐幕的。 
English: At the beginning of the founding of the People's Republic of China, there were samurai warriors and generals who assisted the emperor in building a great cause and eliminating other enemy countries. There are countless people with outstanding achievements, but there has never been a soldier entering the tent.

古文：然未有以卒伍登帷幄者。 不报。
现代文：不予答复。
English: No reply.

古文：会灵观灾，又言： 天意所欲废，当罢营缮，赦守卫者罪，以示儆惧修省之意。 擢知制诰。
现代文：会灵观发生火灾，贾黯又说 ：上天想要废除它，应当停止各种营造修缮工程，赦免守卫者的罪行，以此来表示警惕恐惧修身反省之意。 提升为知制诰。
English: When a fire broke out at the Confucius Temple, Jia Ying also said: If heaven wants to abolish it, it should stop all kinds of construction and renovation projects, pardon the crimes of the guards, and use it to express vigilance, fear, self-cultivation and self-reflection.

古文：初，仁宗视事退，御迩英阁，召侍臣讲读，而修起居注官独先出。
现代文：仁宗初年，视事退朝，来到迩英阁，召见侍臣讲读，而修撰起居注的官员单独先出去了。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Nanzong, after the abdication of the emperor, the emperor came to Su Yingge and summoned the courtiers to give a lecture, while the officials who had written the commentary went out alone first.

古文：黯言： 君臣访对，动关政体，而史臣不得预闻，请并召侍经筵。 许之。
现代文：贾黯说： 君臣访对，关系着国家的政治，但修史的官员不能参与，请求一并召至待侍经筵。 
English: Jia Qian said: The visit of the prince and the minister is related to the politics of the country, but the officials who study history cannot participate, and they are requested to be called together to wait for the attendant.

古文：初，迩英、延义二阁，讲读官自有记注。
现代文：仁宗对此加以允许。起初，迩英、延义两阁，讲读官各有各的记注，到这时，才废除了。
English: At first, each of the two ketsu, Chungying and Yan'yi, had its own notation, but it was only at this time that it was abolished.

古文：至是，乃罢焉。直龙图阁钱延年擢天章阁待制，黯当命辞，即诋延年不才，不宜污侍从，封词目还中书，命遂寝。
现代文：直龙图阁钱延年被提升为天章阁待制，贾黯当面要钱延年辞掉，就诋毁钱延年没有才能，不应当污辱侍从，封词目还中书，朝廷就停止了任命。
English: Jia Ying immediately asked Qian Ying to resign, and denigrated Qian Ying as having no talent and should not insult the attendants. The seal was still in the middle of the book, and the imperial court stopped the appointment.

古文：判吏部流内铨。
现代文：任判吏部流内铨。
English: It is a variation of the style of the Judiciary Department.

古文：益州推官桑泽父留乡里，死三年矣。
现代文：益州推官桑泽的父亲留居乡间，已经死了三年了。
English: The father of Yizhou's chief magistrate, Sanzhe, lives in the countryside and has been dead for three years.

古文：泽为弗知者而调京师，既觉而去。
现代文：后来桑泽被不知此事的人调到京师，被人发觉后离开了京城。
English: Later, Sanze was transferred to the capital division by someone who did not know about it, and left the capital after being discovered.

古文：黯奏劾，废终身。
现代文：贾黯上奏加以弹劾，桑泽被终身废禁，不得任用。
English: Jia Ying was impeached, and Sanze was banned for life and could not be appointed.

古文：福州推官刘抃挟数术，言人祸福，多游公卿门，黯奏以为灵台郎。
现代文：福州推官刘扌卞凭借术数，预言人的祸福，常常出入公卿之门，贾黯上奏任他为灵台郎。
English: Fuzhou magistrate Liu Wei, by virtue of the number of operations, predicted people's misfortune and fortune, often entered the door of the court noble, and Jia Ying was appointed as the spiritual director.

古文：时诏两制、两省官唯公事许至中书、枢密院见执政，群臣心知其非，而嫌于自言。
现代文：这时朝廷诏令两制、两省的官员只能是公事才允许到中书、枢密院见执政者，大臣们心里都知道此规定不妥，但都不愿自己说出来。
English: At this time, the imperial court decreed that officials of the two systems and two provinces were only allowed to go to the Central Secretariat and the Privy Council to meet with the rulers for official business. The ministers knew in their hearts that this regulation was not appropriate, but they did not want to say it themselves.

古文：后黯知许州，乃言： 他官皆得见执政，而侍从近臣，反疏斥疑间如此。
现代文：后来贾黯任许州知州，才说： 其他官员都能见到执政者，但侍从近臣，反而如此疏远排斥怀疑。
English: Later, when Jia Qian was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou, he said: "Other officials can see the ruler, but the attendants are close to the vassals, but they are so alienated and suspicious.

古文：尝闻先朝用王禹偁请，百官候谒宰相，并于政事堂，枢密使亦须聚坐接见，以防请托。
现代文：曾听说先朝任用王禹翶请朝，所有官员都在政事堂拜谒宰相；枢密使也必须跟从百官一起等待接见，来防止各种贿赂。
English: I once heard that the previous government had appointed Wang Ufan to invite the prime minister, and all officials were in the government hall to pay homage to the prime minister; the envoy must also wait for the interview with hundreds of officials to prevent all kinds of bribery.

古文：令下，左正言谢泌上书，以谓非人主推赤心待大臣，大臣展四体报人主之谊。 即时追寝前诏。
现代文：诏令颁布后，左正言谢泌上书朝廷，认为这不是皇帝完全信任大臣、大臣施展才智报答皇帝的行为。 立即收回诏令废除前面颁布的那条规定。
English: After the edict was promulgated, Zuo Zhengyan wrote a letter of thanks to the imperial court, saying that this was not the emperor's act of fully trusting the minister and the minister's act of using his wisdom to repay the emperor. Immediately withdraw the edict and repeal the previously promulgated article.

古文：徙襄州，迎父之官，而父有故人在部中，遣直厅卒致问。
现代文：调往襄州，迎取父亲到官府，他的父亲有个朋友在部中，就派遣直厅卒前来致以问候。
English: He was transferred to Xiangzhou to meet his father at the government office. His father had a friend in the ministry, so he sent a messenger to say hello.

古文：黯辄笞卒，父恚，一夕归乡里。他日，疾且亟，黯内怀不自安，请徙郡及解官就养。
现代文：贾黯立即鞭打直厅卒，他的父亲十分愤怒，就在一天傍晚回归乡里，不久，得了重病，贾黯内心很不安，请求调往郡县解除官职来赡养父亲。
English: Jia Ying immediately whipped the officials. His father was very angry and returned to the village one evening. Soon, he fell seriously ill. Jia Ying was very uneasy and asked to be transferred to the county to discharge his official duties to support his father.

古文：不报，乃弃官去。
现代文：没有得到回复，就抛弃官职而去。
English: When he didn't get a reply, he resigned his post and left.

古文：而御史吴中复等劾黯辄委州印，挠朝廷法，绌知郢州。
现代文：而御史吴中复等弹劾贾黯擅自抛弃州府官印，扰乱朝廷法规，被贬为郢州知州。
English: However, Emperor Wu Zhongfu and others impeached Jia Ying for abandoning the official seal of the prefecture without authorization, disrupting the imperial court regulations, and he was relegated to the status of a prefect of Zhangzhou.

古文：未及行，父死。
现代文：还没有前去任职，父亲过世。
English: Before he could take office, his father died.

古文：服除，勾当三班院，为翰林学士。
现代文：服丧期满后，暂时掌管三班院，成为翰林学士。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, he temporarily took charge of the Third Class Hospital and became a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：唐介等坐言陈升之不当柄用，皆外补。
现代文：唐介等人由于谏言陈升之不应当独揽权柄，滥用权势，都被调离京师等候补职。
English: Tang Jie and others were removed from the Beijing Division to wait for a replacement due to their criticism that Chen Sheng should not monopolize power and abuse his power.

古文：黯奏介等敢言，请宽之。
现代文：贾黯上奏唐介等人能大胆进言，请求对他们宽大处理。
English: Jia Ying, Tang Jie and others can boldly make suggestions and request lenient treatment for them.

古文：以疾请郡，改侍读学士、知邓州。
现代文：由于疾病请调往郡县，改任侍读学士、邓州知州。
English: Due to illness, please be transferred to the county and county, and be reassigned as an attendant bachelor, Dengzhou Zhizhou.

古文：未行，疾愈，复以为翰林学士、知审官院。
现代文：没有到任，疾病已经痊愈，又任翰林学士、知审官院。
English: He did not take up the post, as he had already recovered from his illness. He was also appointed as the Hanlin Scholar and the Chihonin Academy.

古文：时官吏有以祖父嫌名，援律为请授他官。
现代文：这时官吏中有的以官名犯祖、父讳名谐音为由，援引法律请求授予其他官职。
English: At this time, some of the officials invoked the law to request the granting of other official positions on the grounds that the official name was a misnomer.

古文：黯言： 礼不讳嫌名，二名不偏讳，律： 府号、官称犯祖父名而冒荣居之，又上书若奏事犯祖庙讳，罪皆有差。
现代文：贾黯说： 礼仪不避讳谐音之名，双名不必不偏离避讳，律令： 府号、官职名称冒犯祖父之名又冒荣居之，上书奏事如果冒犯祖庙名讳，都犯有不同程度的罪。 
English: Jia Qian said: The etiquette does not avoid the name of the homonym, the double name does not have to deviate from the avoidance, the rite: the prefectural name, the official name offends the name of the grandfather and takes the honor of the residence, if the record of the record offends the name of the ancestral temple, all are guilty of different degrees of crime.

古文：又曰： 若嫌名及二名偏犯者，不坐。
现代文：又说 ：如果厌恶之名和二名不是全部冒犯的，不治罪。 
English: He also said: If the name of disgust and the two names are not all offensive, there will be no punishment.

古文：今官吏许避嫌名，则或有如此而不自言者，可坐以冒荣之律乎？
现代文：现在官吏允许避讳谐音之字，那么假如有人官名犯了祖、父名讳之谐音，难道应该以冒荣之律来治他的罪吗？
English: Now, government officials are allowed to avoid using words with homonyms, so if someone's official name is a homonym of their ancestor's or father's name, should they be punished with the law of impudence?

古文：国朝雍熙中，尝诏： 除官犯私讳者，三省御史台五品、文班四品以上，许用式奏改，余不在此制。
现代文：本朝雍熙年间，曾经发布诏令： 除授官职冒犯私讳的，只有三省御史台五品、文班四品以上，正式上奏允许改变，其他官员都不必使用此制度。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongxi, an imperial edict was issued: In addition to the official posts, only three provinces were allowed to have more than five goshi-dai and four wenban, and the official report was allowed to be changed. Other officials did not have to use this system.

古文：请约雍熙诏书，自某品而上，以礼律从事。 诏非嫌名及二名，不以品秩高下皆听避。
现代文：请按照雍熙年间的诏书，规定自某品以上才允许改变官名，按照礼仪律令办事。 朝廷于是颁布诏令，除了名的谐音以及双名，不论官职品位的高下都任凭避用。
English: Please follow the edict issued during the reign of the Yongxi Emperor, which stipulates that the official name can only be changed from a certain grade or higher, and act in accordance with the etiquette ordinance. The imperial court then issued an edict, in addition to the homonym and the double name, regardless of the level of the official grade, they are allowed to avoid using.

古文：累迁尚书左司郎中、权知开封府。
现代文：累升任尚书左司郎中，暂代主管开封府。
English: He was successively promoted to the position of junior secretary of the Left Division of the Ministry of Education, and became the interim head of Kaifeng Prefecture.

古文：两军狱囚岁瘐死者众，而吏不任其责。
现代文：两军监牢中的囚犯每年都有许多死在狱中，而狱吏不承担任何过失。
English: Many prisoners in military jails die in custody every year, and prison officials are not held responsible for any wrongdoing.

古文：黯言： 吏或怠于视囚，饥渴疾病，因以致死，请岁计死者多少而赏罚之。 府吏额七百人，以罪废复叙者，皆数外补之，黯请叙者须有阙乃补。
现代文：贾黯说 ：狱吏有的懈于巡视囚犯，囚犯饥渴疾病无法解决，致使囚犯死亡，请求对每年死在狱中的囚犯进行登记，而对狱吏进行奖赏和惩罚。 府中吏员名额为七百人，由于犯罪被罢官又依次授予官职的，都是在总额外补授的，贾黯请求朝廷对这些人授予官职必须是有空缺才能进行。
English: Jia Qiao said: some prison officers are tireless in inspecting prisoners, prisoners are unable to solve hunger and thirst diseases, resulting in the death of prisoners, and requested that prisoners who die in prison every year be registered, and that prison officers be rewarded and punished. The number of officials in the government is seven hundred, and those who were dismissed due to crimes and were awarded official positions in turn were all additionally awarded. Jia Qiao requested the court to award official positions to these people only if there is a vacancy.

古文：然所断治，或出己见，人不以为允。
现代文：但是断案，人们认为是贾黯一己之见，并不公平。
English: However, it is not fair to dismiss the case because people think that Jia Ying's opinion is his own.

古文：御史中丞王畴与其属陈经、吕诲、傅尧俞，谏官司马光、龚鼎臣、王陶，皆言黯刚愎自任，赦书下府，罪应释者反重行之。
现代文：御史中丞王畴和其朋党陈经、吕诲、傅尧俞，谏官司马光、龚鼎臣、王陶，都说贾黯固执任性，当接到朝廷颁布的赦免命令时，犯罪应当释放的罪犯他反而加罪。
English: Wang Jia and his party cronies Chen Jing, Lyu Yan, Fu Xi, eunuchs Sima Guang, Zou Dingcheng, Wang Tao, all said that Jia Yinggu was obstinate. When he received the pardon order issued by the imperial court, he instead increased the crimes of the criminals who should be released.

古文：罢为同提举在京诸司库务。
现代文：贾黯被免为同提举在京诸司库务。
English: Jia Ying was exempted from the same promotion as the treasurer in Beijing.

古文：英宗即位，迁中书舍人。
现代文：英宗即皇帝位，升为中书舍人。
English: Yingzong, that is, the emperor, was promoted to the position of Chinese scholar.

古文：受诏撰《仁宗实录》，权知审刑院，为群牧使。
现代文：接受诏令修撰《仁宗实录》，权知审刑院，任群牧使。
English: Accepted the imperial edict to compile the "Nanzong Record," and was sent to the Guanzhi Sentencing and Punishment Institute, and was appointed as a group herdsman.

古文：时封拜皇子，并除检校太傅。
现代文：这时朝廷封拜皇子，并授予皇子检校太傅。
English: At this time, the Imperial Court honored the prince and awarded him the title of "school inspector."

古文：黯言： 太师、太傅、太保，是为三师，天子之所师法。
现代文：贾黯道： 太师、太傅、太保，称作三师，是天子遵守效法的。
English: Jia Ying said: Taishi, Taifu, and Taibo, known as the three divisions, are the sons of heaven who follow the example.

古文：子为父师，于义不可，盖前世因循弗思之过。
现代文：儿子作父亲的老师，按情理来说是不可以的，前世遵循它而没有考虑它的错误。
English: For a son to be a father's teacher is not reasonable, and past lives have followed it without considering its errors.

古文：请自今皇子及宗室属卑者，皆毋兼师傅官，随其迁序，改授三公。 下两制议，请如黯奏。
现代文：请求从今天皇子以及宗室中地位低下者，都不要兼任师傅官，按照其升任官职的秩序，改授三公。 将此奏议下达到两制议论，请求按照贾黯上奏所论而办。
English: Request that today's prince, as well as those of lower status in the imperial family, should not concurrently serve as Shifu officials, and should instead be conferred the three court ranks in accordance with the order in which they were elevated to official positions.

古文：而中书亦谓： 自唐以来，亲王无兼师傅者。
现代文：但中书也说 ：从唐朝以来，亲王没有兼任师傅的。
English: But the text also says: Since the Tang Dynasty, the prince has not served as a teacher.

古文：国朝以三师、三公皆虚名，故因而授之，宜正其失。 诏可。
现代文：我朝因为三师、三公都是虚设之名，因而授予此官，恰好改正了前世的过失。 诏令允许。
English: Because the Three Divisions and the Three Princes were all made up names, I bestowed this post on him, which just happened to correct the mistakes of his previous life.

古文：迁给事中、权御史中丞。
现代文：升任给事中、权御史中丞。
English: He was promoted to genshizuchu (middle-ranking official) and gon no goshi chujo (middle-ranking official).

古文：未几，以吕诲知杂事，诲尝弹治黯，逡巡引避。
现代文：不久，任命吕诲为知杂事，吕诲曾经弹劾过贾黯，因而有所顾虑，犹豫不决，准备避任。
English: Soon, the appointment of Lv Ying as secretary-general, Lv Ying had once impeached Jia Qiao, so he was worried, hesitant, and ready to step down.

古文：黯言尝荐诲为御史，知其方正谨厚，一时公言，非有嫌怨，愿终与共事，诲乃就职。
现代文：贾黯说曾经推举吕诲任御史，了解他正直谨慎厚道，当时是为了公事，并不是有任何疑忌和怨恨，愿意长期与他共事，吕诲才就职。
English: Jia Ying said that he had once nominated Lyu Yan for the post of imperial historian, understanding his honesty, prudence and kindness. At that time, it was for official business, and he did not have any suspicion or resentment. He was willing to work with him for a long time before Lyu Yan took office.

古文：时帝初即位，王广渊、周孟阳以藩邸之旧，数召对。
现代文：英宗即位之初，王广渊、周孟阳由于是先朝旧臣，多次被英宗召见问对。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Yingzong's accession to the throne, Wang Guangyuan and Zhou Mengyang were repeatedly summoned by Emperor Yingzong for questioning because they were former ministers of the previous dynasty.

古文：黯言： 俊乂满朝，未有一被召者，独亲近一二旧人，示天下以不广。
现代文：退朝后贾黯就五件事给英宗上书：一、了解人材的才智，二、逐步培养人材，三、不要对人材求全责备，四、按条例推举人材，五、有所选择地加以任用。
English: After returning to China, Jia Qian wrote to Ying Zong about five things: First, understand the talent of human resources, second, gradually cultivate human resources, third, do not blame human resources, fourth, nominate human resources according to regulations, and fifth, selectively appoint them.

古文：请如太宗故事，召侍从馆阁之臣，以备顾问。 帝尝从容谓黯曰： 朕欲用人，少可任者。 黯对： 天下未尝乏人，顾所用如何尔。 退而上五事：一、知人之明，二、养育以渐，三、材不求备，四、以类荐举，五、择取自代。后与两制合议，请以濮王为皇伯，执政弗从，数诣中书争论。会大雨水，时黯已被疾，疏言： 简宗庙，逆天时，则水不润下。
现代文：后来与两制共同商议，请求以濮王为皇伯，宰相不依从，后来又多次到中书进行论争。
English: Later, in consultation with the two systems, he requested that the king of Qi be the imperial uncle, but the prime minister did not comply. Later, he repeatedly went to Cangshu to argue.

古文：今二三执政，知陛下为先帝后，乃阿谀容说，违背经义，建两统贰父之说，故七庙神灵震怒，天降雨水，流杀人民。 既病，求出，以翰林侍读学士知陈州。
现代文：恰遇大雨发生洪水，这时贾黯已经有病在身，上疏说： 怠慢宗庙，违背天时，则洪水会发生。如今二位执政者，知道陛下是先帝的后代，就阿谀奉迎，取悦陛下，违背经义，提出两统贰父之说，因而七庙神灵发怒，降下大雨，杀害人民。 已病，请求离开京城，以翰林侍读学士知陈州。
English: It happened that a heavy rain caused a flood. At that time, Jia Qian was already ill. Shang Shou said, "If you neglect your ancestral temple and go against the times of heaven, then a flood will occur." Today, the two rulers, knowing that Your Majesty is a descendant of the former emperor, made obeisance, pleased Your Majesty, went against the teachings of the sutras, and proposed that the two deities should be separated. As a result, the seven temple deities became angry, rained heavily, and killed the people. He was ill and asked to leave Beijing and attend the bachelor's course in Qianzhou with Hanlin.

古文：未行，卒，年四十四。
现代文：没到任，去世，终年四十四岁。
English: He died before taking office, at the age of forty-four.

古文：口占遗奏数百言，犹以濮王议为请。
现代文：口头遗奏数百言，仍请求以濮王为皇伯。
English: After reciting hundreds of words verbally, he still requested that Shao Wang be the imperial uncle.

古文：赠尚书礼部侍郎。
现代文：赠予尚书礼部侍郎。
English: It was given to Shosho, a chamberlain of the Ceremonial Department.

古文：初，黯母陈归宗，继母史在堂，后迎陈归，二母不相善，黯能安以事之。
现代文：起初，贾黯的母亲陈氏回到了娘家，继母史氏在家，后来贾黯接回陈氏，二母互相不和，贾黥却能安心侍奉她们。
English: At first, Jia Qiu's mother, Chen, returned to her daughter's home, and her stepmother, Shi, was at home. Later, Jia Qiu took Chen back. The two mothers did not get along with each other, but Jia Qiu could serve them with peace of mind.

古文：黯修洁自喜，在朝数言事，或从或否，人称其介直。
现代文：贾黯以美好纯洁自好，在朝中多次上书言事，有的被采纳有的被否定，人们称赞他耿介正直。
English: Jia Ying prided himself on his beauty and purity. He wrote many letters to the Chinese government, some of which were accepted and some were rejected. People praised him for his honesty.

古文：然卞急，初通判襄州，疑优人戏己，以人啖之。
现代文：但性情急躁，起初为襄州通判，怀疑演戏的人戏弄他，将人粪喂给戏弄他的人吃。
English: However, he is quick-tempered. At first, he was sentenced to the Xiangzhou Intermediate People's Court. People who suspected him of acting teased him and fed human feces to those who teased him.

古文：在开封，为罪人所詈，又啖以人，言者亦以是诋之。
现代文：在开封任开封府时，被罪人痛骂，贾黯又将人粪给罪人吃，上谏的人也因此而诋毁他。
English: At the time of the opening of Kaifeng Ren and Kaifeng Palace, he was scolded by the sinners, and Jia Ying also gave human excrement to the sinners to eat, and the people on the raft also slandered him for this.

