古文：杜通达邢文宗长孙无忌娄师德王瑱江融李昭德弓嗣业周兴鱼思咺索元礼张楚金崔日知苏颋李之唐王皇后杨慎矜师夜光崔尉子
现代文：杜通达邢文宗长孙无忌娄师德王瑱江融李昭德弓嗣业周兴鱼思咺索元礼张楚金崔日知苏颋李之唐王皇后杨慎矜师夜光崔尉子
English: Du Tongda, the eldest grandson of King Wenzong, the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great

古文：杜通达
现代文：杜通达
English: Dutunda

古文：唐齐州高苑人杜通达，贞观年中，县承命令送一僧向北。
现代文：唐朝时齐州有个高苑人杜通达，贞观年间，县里接到命令送一个僧人到北方去。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a Gaoyuan man named Du Tongda in Qizhou. During the Zhenguan era, the county received an order to send a monk to the north.

古文：通达见僧经箱，谓意其中是丝绢，乃与妻共计，击僧杀之。
现代文：通达见这个僧人有个箱子，他心里想一定是丝绢。就同妻子商量计策，把僧人打死。
English: When Tongda saw that the monk had a box, he thought it must be silk. So he and his wife discussed strategies and beat the monk to death.

古文：僧未死，闻诵咒三两句，遂有一蝇飞入其鼻，久闷不出。通达眼鼻遽，眉发即落，迷惑失道，精神沮丧。
现代文：僧人没死，只听他念两三句咒语。然后就有个苍蝇飞到通达的鼻子里，闷在里面很长时间也不出来，通达的眼鼻立刻就歪斜了，眼眉和头发也随着掉落。
English: The monk didn't die, I only listened to him recite two or three spells. Then a fly flew into Tonda's nose and stayed there for a long time. Tonda's eyes and nose immediately became crooked, and his eyebrows and hair also fell out.

古文：未几之间，便遇恶疾，不经一年而死。
现代文：迷迷糊糊也不知道怎么走路了，精神不振灰心失望，没过多长时间，便得了恶病，没过一年就死了。
English: In a daze, he did not know how to walk, he was discouraged and disappointed. Not long after, he fell ill and died less than a year later.

古文：临终之际，蝇遂飞出，还入妻鼻，其妻得病，岁余复卒。
现代文：临死的时候，那苍蝇就飞出来，又飞到他妻子的鼻子里，他妻子也得了病，一年多又死了。
English: When he was about to die, the fly came out and flew into his wife's nose. His wife also fell ill and died more than a year later.

古文：邢文宗
现代文：邢文宗
English: Wenzong

古文：唐河间邢文宗，家接幽燕，秉性粗险。
现代文：唐朝河间人邢文宗，家靠近幽燕，性格粗暴阴险。
English: A member of the Kawama clan of the Tang Dynasty, his family was close to Yuyan, and his character was rough and sinister.

古文：贞观年中，忽遇恶风疾，旬日之间，眉发落尽，于后就寺归忏。
现代文：贞观年中，忽然得了恶风病，十多天之内，眉毛和头发都落光了，这以后就到寺庙里忏悔。
English: In the middle of the chengguan year, he suddenly got a bad cold, and within more than ten days, his eyebrows and hair fell out. After that, he went to the temple to repent.

古文：自云：近者向幽州，路逢一客，将绢十余匹，迥泽无人，因即劫杀，此人云： 将向房州，欲买经纸。 
现代文：他自己说：近来去幽州，在路上遇到一个过客，带着十匹绢，在大泽中很远也没有人，因此抢劫杀死了那人。据那人说 要到房州去，想买经纸。 
English: He said himself: Recently I went to Yuzhou, and on the road I met a passer-by with ten mules, and there was no one very far away in Osawa, so I robbed and killed the man. According to the man, he wanted to go to Fangzhou and wanted to buy scripture paper.

古文：终不得免。
现代文：但终于没有免死。
English: But he was not spared in the end.

古文：少间，属一老僧复欲南去，遇文宗，惧事发觉，挥刀拟僧，僧叩头曰： 乞存性命，誓愿终身不言。 
现代文：过了几天，紧接着又有一个老僧还要到南边去，遇到了文宗，文宗害怕事情被人发觉，拿起刀比划着象要杀老僧的样子，僧人磕头说： 只求保我性命，发誓终身不对别人说。 
English: A few days later, another old monk, who was about to go to the south, met Wenzong. Wenzong was afraid that the matter would be discovered. He picked up a knife and made a gesture as if he wanted to kill the old monk. The monk bowed his head and said, "I only ask you to save my life. I swear that I will never tell anyone about this."

古文：文宗杀之，弃之草间。
现代文：文宗把他杀了，把尸体扔到荒草里。
English: Wenzong killed him and dumped his body in the weeds.

古文：经二十余日，行还，过僧死处，时当暑月，疑皆烂坏，试往视之，俨若生日。
现代文：经过二十多天，文宗出门归来，经过老僧死的那个地方，当时正是暑天，他怀疑早就都烂了，试着去看一下，那尸体庄重的样子象活着时候一样。
English: After more than twenty days, Wenzong went out and returned, passing the place where the old monk died. It was a hot day at the time, and he suspected that it had already rotted. Try to look at it, the solemn appearance of the corpse is the same as when he was alive.

古文：文宗因以马下策筑僧之口，口出一蝇，飞鸣清彻，直入宗鼻，久闷不出，因得大病，岁余而死。
现代文：文宗就用马鞭子杆捅那僧人的口，口里飞出一只苍蝇，飞鸣的声音很清彻，直接就飞到文宗的鼻子里，闷在鼻子里很长时间也飞不出来。因此得了大病，一年多就死了。
English: Wenzong hit the monk's mouth with a horsewhip pole, and a fly flew out of his mouth. The sound of the fly was very clear, and it flew directly into Wenzong's nose. It was stuffed in his nose for a long time and could not fly out. As a result, he fell seriously ill and died more than a year later.

古文：长孙无忌
现代文：长孙无忌
English: The eldest grandson of Mubi

古文：唐赵公长孙无忌奏别敕长流，以为永例。
现代文：唐朝时赵公长孙无忌奏请皇上，制定长期流放制，敕令以此为永久的法例。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Zhao Gong, the eldest son of Zhao Gong, asked the emperor to formulate a long-term exile system, and the imperial decree took this as a permanent law.

古文：后赵公犯事，敕长流岭南，至死不复回，此亦为法之弊。
现代文：后来赵公犯了事，下敕长期流放岭南，到死也没有回来，这也是制定法令的弊端。
English: Later, Zhao Gong committed a crime and was exiled to Lingnan for a long time, and he did not return until his death, which is also a drawback of making laws and regulations.

古文：娄师德
现代文：娄师德
English: Zou Shide

古文：娄师德以殿中充河源军使，唐永和中，破吐蕃于白羊涧，八纵七捷，优制褒美，授左骁骑郎将。
现代文：娄师德以殿中的身份任河源军使。唐永和年中，在白羊涧打败吐蕃的军队。放敌八次又七次胜利，出类拔萃被众人赞美。授官左骁骑郎将。
English: Zou Shide served as a military envoy of Heyuan in his capacity as a member of the imperial court. In the middle of the reign of Tang Yonghe, he defeated the army of Tubo in the Battle of Aries. He defeated the enemy eight times and won seven times, and was praised by everyone as outstanding. He was awarded the rank of Zuo Jiro.

古文：高宗手诏曰： 卿有文武才干，故授卿武职，勿辞也。 
现代文：高宗下了手诏说： 卿有文武才干，所以授卿武职，不要推辞呀。 
English: Gao Zong shook his hand and said, "Your Excellency has talent in literature and martial arts, so don't refuse the military post.

古文：累迁纳言。
现代文：娄师德很受重用多次升迁并采纳他的意见。
English: Gong Shide was highly respected, promoted many times, and his opinions were taken into account.

古文：临终数日，寝兴不安，无故惊曰： 抚我背者谁？ 
现代文：临死那几天，睡觉和办事都不安宁，无缘无故就吃惊地说： 拍我背的是谁？ 
English: In the days leading up to his death, he had trouble sleeping and doing things, and for no reason said in surprise, "Who patted me on the back?"

古文：侍者曰： 无所见。 
现代文：侍奉他的人说： 什么也没看见啊！ 
English: His attendants said, "He didn't see anything!"

古文：乃独言，以有所争者，曰： 我当寿八十，今追我何也？ 
现代文：于是他就自言自语，好象和谁争论什么，又说： 我的寿命应该是八十岁，现在就逼我走是什么原因？ 
English: Then he said to himself, as if he were arguing with someone about something, "I am supposed to live to be eighty years old, so why force me to go now?

古文：复自言为官误杀二人，减十年，词气若有屈伏，俄而气绝。
现代文：后来又自己说以前作官的时候误杀了二人，减寿十年。从说话的语气上看好象是屈服了。
English: Later, he said that when he was an official, he had killed two people by mistake and lost ten years of his life. From the tone of his speech, it seemed as if he had given in.

古文：以娄公之明恕，尚不免滥，为政得不慎之欤！王瑱
现代文：不一会儿就断气了。凭娄公这样明达宽恕还不免犯错误，当政的人还不应该更谨慎吗？王瑱
English: In a short time, he passed away. With such a clear-sighted and forgiving attitude from the Duke of Yan, mistakes are bound to be made. Shouldn't those in power be more cautious? Wang Yao

古文：唐冀州刺史王瑱，性酷烈。
现代文：唐朝的冀州刺史王瑱，性格酷毒暴烈。
English: The Jizhou assassin of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Yao, had a poisonous and violent personality.

古文：时有敕史至州，瑱与使语，武强县尉蔺奖曰： 日过。移就阴处。 
现代文：一天，有一个敕使到了冀州，王瑱就和敕使谈话。说了半天，武强县尉蔺奖说： 太阳晒过来了，到阴凉地方去说吧！ 
English: One day, an envoy arrived in Jizhou, and Wang Qi had a conversation with the envoy. After talking for half a day, Wuqiang County's Lieutenant Yu Award said: The sun is shining, let's go to a cool place to talk!

古文：瑱怒，令典狱扑之，项骨折而死。
现代文：王瑱就生气了，命令典狱打他，结果把蔺奖的项骨打折而死。
English: Wang Yao became angry and ordered the jailer to beat him. As a result, he broke the collarbone of the winner and died.

古文：至明日，狱典当州门限垂脚坐，门扇无故自发，打双脚胫俱折。
现代文：第二天，典狱在衙府门口把脚垂在门槛上坐着，门扇无故自己就突然关上了，打得双脚和小腿都骨折了。
English: The next day, the warden was sitting with his feet dangling over the threshold at the entrance to Yefu, when the door suddenly closed on him for no reason, breaking both his feet and his lower leg.

古文：瑱病，见奖来，起，自以酒食求之，不许。
现代文：王瑱也得了病，病中看见蔺奖来了，王瑱立刻起来，亲自拿来酒菜求他宽恕，但蔺奖不答应。
English: Wang Yao also fell ill. In the midst of his illness, he saw the award coming. Wang Yao immediately got up and personally brought wine and vegetables to ask for forgiveness, but the award did not agree.

古文：瑱恶之，回面向梁，奖在屋梁，旬日而死。
现代文：于是王瑱认为他很讨厌，就把脸转过来面向房梁，可是蔺奖又在房梁上。王瑱十多天的时间就死了。
English: So Wang Yao thought he was disgusting and turned his face around to face the beam, but the award was still on the beam. Wang Yao died after more than ten days.

古文：江融
现代文：江融
English: Jiang Rong

古文：唐左使江融，耿介正直。
现代文：唐朝的左使江融，性情正直不阿，光明磊落。
English: Tang Dynasty's Zuo Zi Jiang Rong was honest and upright.

古文：扬州徐敬业反，被罗织。
现代文：扬州徐敬业叛乱时，江融也被罗织罪名押进监狱。
English: When Yangzhou Xu Jingye rebelled, Jiang Rong was also sent to prison on trumped-up charges.

古文：酷吏周兴等枉奏杀之，斩于东都都亭驿前。
现代文：酷毒的官吏周兴在皇帝面前歪曲事实，胡乱奏报，致使江融被判死刑，在东都都亭驿馆前斩首。
English: Zhou Xing, a very poisonous official, distorted the facts in front of the emperor and misreported the news, resulting in Jiang Rong being sentenced to death and beheaded in front of the Dongdu Pavilion.

古文：融将被诛，请奏事引见，兴曰： 囚何得奏事？ 
现代文：江融将被杀的时候，请求周兴引见要到皇宫奏事。
English: When Jiang Rong was about to be killed, he asked Zhou Xing to go to the imperial palace to report the matter.

古文：融怒叱之曰： 吾无罪枉戮，死不舍汝。 
现代文：周兴说： 你是囚犯，怎么能上奏？ 江融愤怒地呵斥周兴说： 我无罪被冤屈杀害，死了也不放过你！ 
English: Zhou Xing said: You are a prisoner, how can you play? Jiang Rong angrily rebuked Zhou Xing and said: I am innocent and was unjustly killed, and I will not let you go when I die!

古文：遂斩之，尸乃激扬而起，蹭蹬十余步，行刑者踏倒。还起坐，如此者三，乃绝。虽断其头，似怒不息，无何周兴死。
现代文：于是把江融斩了。但江融的尸体却激昂地站起来，蹒跚地走了十多步，行刑的人用脚踹倒，他还是坐起来，象这样起来三次才断气，虽然头掉了，还好象气愤不停的样子。不久周兴死了。
English: So they beheaded Jiang Rong. However, Jiang Rong's corpse stood up excitedly and staggered more than ten steps. The executioner knocked him down with his foot, but he still sat up. He got up like this three times before he passed away. Although his head fell off, he seemed to be angry all the time. Zhou Xing died soon after.

古文：李昭德
现代文：李昭德
English: Li Zhaode

古文：唐凤阁侍郎李昭德，威权在己。宣出一敕云： 自今已后，公坐徒，私坐流，经恩百日不首，依法科罪。 
现代文：唐朝凤阁侍郎李昭德大权在握，有一次他公布一条敕令说： 从今以后，公开犯罪判服劳役，偷偷犯罪判流放，经过一百天不自首的按法律冶罪。 
English: Li Zhaode, the steward of Fengge in the Tang Dynasty, held great power. Once he issued a royal edict saying, "From now on, those who openly commit crimes will be sentenced to forced labor, those who secretly commit crimes will be sentenced to exile, and those who do not surrender after one hundred days will be punished according to law."

古文：昭德先受孙万荣贿财，奏与三品，后万荣据营州反，货求事败，频经恩赦，以百日不首，准脏断绞。
现代文：这以前昭德就接受了孙万荣的贿赂，奏报授与三品官。后来孙万荣在营州反叛朝廷，贿赂的事被揭露。多次经恩赦，依照一百天不自首的规定，按章办理没收赃物判绞刑。
English: Prior to this, Zhao De had accepted Sun Wan Rong's bribe and was awarded the third-class official. Later, Sun Wan Rong rebelled against the imperial court in Yingzhou, and the bribe was revealed. After being pardoned many times, according to the rule of not surrendering for one hundred days, he was sentenced to hang for confiscating stolen goods according to regulations.

古文：弓嗣业
现代文：弓嗣业
English: Yumi-tsugyo

古文：唐洛州司马弓嗣业、洛阳令张嗣明，造大枷，长六尺，阔四尺，厚五寸。
现代文：唐朝洛州司马弓嗣业和洛阳县令张嗣明，造了一个长六尺，宽四尺，厚五寸的大枷。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Luozhou Sima Yu Zi Ye and Luoyang County's Zhang Zi Ming made a large yoke that was six feet long, four feet wide and five inches thick.

古文：倚前，人莫之犯。
现代文：在这之前，没有人犯罪。
English: Before that, no one had committed a crime.

古文：后嗣明及嗣业，资遣逆贼徐真北投突厥，事败，业等自著此枷，百姓快之也。周兴
现代文：后来嗣明和嗣业二人资助钱财让逆贼徐真向北投奔突厥，事情暴露了，嗣业等人自己带上了所做大枷。百姓都拍手称快。周兴
English: Later, Tsugimei and Tsugimei both provided money and resources to help the traitor Xu Zhen go north to Turkey. The affair was exposed, and Tsugimei and others took the shackles with them. The people applauded. Zhou Xing

古文：唐秋官侍郎周兴，与来俊臣对推事。
现代文：唐朝秋官侍郎周兴同来俊臣共同审理案件。
English: Zhou Xing, the attendant of the autumn official of the Tang Dynasty, came to jointly hear the case.

古文：俊臣别奉进止鞫兴，兴不之知也。
现代文：来俊臣另外奉旨随时可以审判周兴。周兴不知道这件事。
English: Lai Junchen also ordered that Zhou Xing could be tried at any time. Zhou Xing did not know about this.

古文：及同食，谓兴曰： 囚多不肯承，若为作法？ 
现代文：等到他们两个人一同吃饭时，俊臣对周兴说： 现在有些囚犯不承认罪行，你看怎么办呢？ 
English: When the two of them were eating together, Jun Chen said to Zhou Xing, "Nowadays, some prisoners do not admit their crimes. What do you think should be done?

古文：兴曰： 甚易也，取大瓮，以炭四面炙之，令囚人处之其中，何事不吐？ 
现代文：周兴说： 这好办，拿来一口大瓮，在四面烧上炭火烤，让犯人进入瓮里，什么事敢不说？ 
English: Zhou Xing said, "This is easy to do. Take a bite of big clam, burn it with charcoal on all sides, and let the prisoner enter the clam. What would you not dare to say?

古文：即索大瓮，以火围之，起谓兴曰： 有内状勘老兄，请兄入此瓮。 
现代文：然后就找了一口大瓮，用火围上瓮。俊臣起来对周兴说： 宫内有人状告老兄，我奉命调查，请兄进到这个瓮里吧！ 
English: Then he looked for a large cauldron and surrounded it with fire. The young vassal stood up and said to Zhou Xing: "Someone in the imperial court has sued my brother. I have been ordered to investigate. Please let my brother enter this cauldron!"

古文：兴惶恐叩头，咸即款伏，断死，放流岭南。
现代文：周兴又惊惶又害怕连忙磕头，把罪行全都招认了。后来判死刑，流放到岭南。
English: Frightened and scared, Zhou Xing quickly confessed to all the crimes. Later, he was sentenced to death and exiled to Lingnan.

古文：所破人家，流者甚多，为仇家所杀。
现代文：被他所破败的人家，流放岭南的很多，最终被仇家所杀。
English: He ruined many people's homes, exiled many to Lingnan, and was eventually killed by his enemies.

古文：传曰： 多行无礼必自及 ，信哉！
现代文：传曰： 多行无礼必然要牵扯自己。 可信啊！
English: Legend has it: if you are rude, you are bound to get yourself into trouble.

古文：鱼思咺
现代文：鱼思咺
English: Fish think about it

古文：唐鱼思咺有沈思，极巧。上欲造匦，召工匠，无人作得者。
现代文：唐朝有个人叫鱼思咺，这个人凡事能深入思考，心灵手巧，皇上想要做个收进书言事的小匣子，召工匠制作，但没有能作得好。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man called Yu Sijun. This man was able to think deeply about everything, and his mind was dexterous. The emperor wanted to make a small box for storing books and words, and called for craftsmen to make it, but they couldn't do it well.

古文：咺应制为之，甚合规矩，遂用之。
现代文：鱼思咺应召制作一个，很合规格，于是就采用了。
English: Fisheye was called upon to produce one, which met the specifications very well, so it was adopted.

古文：无何有人投匦言咺，云： 徐敬业在扬州反，咺为敬业作刀轮以冲阵，杀伤官军甚众。 
现代文：不久有人投书于小匣子，是告鱼思咺的，说：徐敬业在扬州造反，鱼思咺给他制造了刀轮来冲我们的阵地，杀伤了很多官军。
English: Not long after, someone put a letter in a small box, telling Yu Siyuan that: "Xu Jingye rebelled in Yangzhou. Yu Siyuan made him a blade wheel to attack our position and killed many government troops.

古文：推问具承，诛之。
现代文：后来审问鱼思咺，他都承认了，把他杀了。
English: Later, they interrogated Yu Sijuan, he confessed, and they killed him.

古文：为法自毙，乃至于此。
现代文：自作自受，到了这种地步。
English: It's self-inflicted, it's come to this.

古文：索元礼
现代文：索元礼
English: So Won Rei

古文：唐索元礼，为铁笼头以讯囚。
现代文：唐朝有个索元礼，造了一个铁笼头来审问囚犯。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, a man named Suo Yuanli built an iron cage to interrogate prisoners.

古文：后坐赃贿，不承，使人曰： 取公铁笼头。 
现代文：后来他犯了贿赂罪，不承认。一个使臣说： 拿他的铁笼头来！ 
English: He later pleaded guilty to bribery and denied it, prompting one envoy to say: "Bring him before me in chains!"

古文：礼即承伏。
现代文：索元礼立刻就认罪伏法了。
English: Suo Yuanli immediately pleaded guilty and resigned.

古文：张楚金
现代文：张楚金
English: Zhang Chukin

古文：唐张楚金为秋官侍郎，奏反逆人持敕免死，家口即绞斩及配没入官为奴婢等。
现代文：唐朝张楚金当秋官侍郎。他上奏说： 反叛的人如果有敕令可以免死，但其家口就要被处死刑或绞或斩，或者发配没收入官当奴婢。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Chukin served as the attendant of the autumn official. He made a report saying: If a rebel has a royal order, he can be spared death, but his family will be sentenced to death or hanged or beheaded, or sent to work as slaves without income.

古文：并入律。
现代文：并把这话写入法律条文。
English: And this is written into the law.

古文：后楚金被罗织反，持敕免死，男子十五以上斩，妻子配没。
现代文：后来张楚金被人虚构造反，拿着敕令免于死罪，但他家男子十五岁以上都被斩首，妻和子发配没收。
English: Later, Zhang Chukin was falsely framed and pardoned from the death penalty, but all the men in his family over the age of fifteen were beheaded, and his wife and children were confiscated.

古文：识者曰：为法自毙，所谓交报也。
现代文：有见识的人说：制定了法令却使自己致死，真是所说的互相报应啊。
English: Those with insight say, "Mutual retribution is indeed what you call it when you make a law and get yourself killed."

古文：崔日知
现代文：崔日知
English: Cui Ritchi

古文：唐京兆尹崔日知处分长安万年及诸县左降流移人，不许暂停，有违晷刻，所由决杖。
现代文：唐朝的京兆尹崔日知在处理长安万年县及其它各县被降职发配流放的人时，不许有一时地停留，如果违反停了一会，都要施以杖刑。
English: When dealing with those who were demoted and exiled in Chang'an Wan Nian County and other counties, the Jing Zhao Yin Cui Rizhi of the Tang Dynasty was not allowed to stay for a while, and if the violation stopped for a while, they would be punished with a cane.

古文：无何，日知贬歙县丞，被县家催，求与妻子别不得。
现代文：不久，日知被贬到歙县任县丞，县府的人催他快走，他要求和妻与子等告别一下都不行。
English: Not long after, Nichi was demoted to the post of county magistrate in Min County. The people at the county government urged him to leave quickly, and he couldn't even say goodbye to his wife and children.

古文：苏颋
现代文：苏颋
English: Su Shi

古文：唐尚书苏颋，少时有人相之云： 当至尚书，位终二品。 
现代文：唐朝的尚书苏颋，年轻时有人给他相面说： 你能当官到尚书，能当到二品官。 
English: The Tang Dynasty's Shangshu Su Shi, when he was young, someone said to him: "You can become an official to Shangshu, you can become a second-class official.

古文：后至尚书三品，病亟，呼巫觋视之，巫云： 公命尽，不可复起。 
现代文：后来作到尚书三品官，得病很重，找一个男巫给他看。巫说： 公的命已经尽了，不可能再好转。 
English: Later, when he became the third-ranked official in Shangshu, he fell seriously ill and sought out a male sorcerer to show him. The sorcerer said, "The public's life is over, it can't get any better."

古文：颋因复论相者之言，巫云： 公初实然，由作桂府时杀二人，今此二人地下诉公，所司减二年寿，以此不至二品。 
现代文：苏颋就谈起相面人的话。巫说： 公当初确实是这样，由于你在桂州作官时杀了两个人，现在这两个人在地府里告你，司命的官减了你二年的寿命，因此你不能达到二品。 
English: Su Qian talked about the face-to-face person. Wu said: It was really like this in the beginning, because you killed two people when you were an official in Guizhou, and now these two people are suing you in the government, and the official of the Sifu has reduced your life expectancy by two years, so you can't reach the second grade.

古文：颋夙莅桂州，有二吏诉县令，颋为令杀吏。
现代文：苏颋原来在桂州作官，有两个小官吏告县令，苏颋为了保护县令杀了二吏。
English: Su Shi was originally an official in Guizhou. Two minor officials sued the county government. Su Shi killed two officials in order to protect the county government.

古文：乃嗟叹久之而死。
现代文：他于是叹息了很久死了。
English: He then sighed and died for a long time.

古文：李之
现代文：李之
English: Li Zhi

古文：唐王悦为唐昌令，杀录事李之而不辜。
现代文：唐朝王悦任唐昌县令，他无辜杀了录事李之。
English: King Yue of Tang Dynasty was the magistrate of Tangchang County. He innocently killed Luo Zhizhi.

古文：之既死，长子作灵语曰： 王悦不道，枉杀予，予必报。 
现代文：李之死后，李之的长子作灵语说： 王悦不讲仁义道德，杀我太冤狂，一定要报仇。 
English: After Li Zhi's death, Li Zhi's eldest son made a spiritual saying: Wang Yue does not talk about benevolence, righteousness and morality, killing me is too vindictive, he must take revenge.

古文：其声甚厉。经数日，悦昼坐厅事，忽拳殴其腰，闻者殷然，惊顾无人。
现代文：他的声音很严厉，经过几天后，王悦白天在厅堂里办事，忽然有拳头打他的腰，听到的人听得很确实，他吃惊地看看周围并没有外人。
English: His voice was very stern. A few days later, Wang Yue was working in the hall during the day. Suddenly, a fist hit his waist. The person who heard it heard it very clearly. He was surprised to see that there were no outsiders around.

古文：既暮，击处微肿焉，且痛。其日，李之男又言曰： 吾已击王悦，正中要害处，即当杀之。 
现代文：到了晚上，被打的地方有些微肿，而且疼痛，当天，李之的儿子说： 我已经打了王悦，正打在要害的地方，不久就要杀了他。 
English: In the evening, the place where he was beaten was slightly swollen and painful. On the same day, Li Zhi's son said: "I have beaten Wang Yue, I am hitting him at the critical point, I will kill him soon."

古文：悦疾甚，则至蜀郡谒医，不愈。
现代文：王悦病得很厉害，到蜀郡去找医生看，没好。
English: Wang Yue was very ill and went to Shu County to see a doctor. He was not well.

古文：未死之前日，李之命其家造数人馔，仍言曰： 吾与客三人至蜀郡，录王悦，食毕当行。 
现代文：王悦临死的前一天，李之让他们的家人做几个人的饭，还说： 我与三个客人到蜀郡去收录王悦，吃完饭就该走。 
English: The day before Wang Yue's death, Li Zhi asked their family members to prepare a meal for several people, and said: I and three guests will go to Shu County to collect Wang Yue. After eating, it's time to leave.

古文：明日而悦死。 
现代文：第二天王悦就死了。
English: Wang Yue died the next day.

古文：悦肿溃处。正当右肾，即李之所为也。
现代文：王悦发肿溃烂的地方，正是右肾，这是李之干的。
English: Wang Yue's swollen and festering place is the right kidney, which is Li Zhizhong's doing.

古文：唐王皇后
现代文：唐王皇后
English: The Queen of Tang

古文：唐惠妃武氏，有专房之宠，将谋夺嫡。
现代文：唐朝惠妃武氏，有专房之宠。将要阴谋夺取嫡亲的地位。
English: The Tang Dynasty's Empress Hui Wu, a favorite of the concubines, will conspire to seize the position of the legitimate parent.

古文：王皇后性妒，稍不能平。玄宗乃废后为庶人。
现代文：王皇后嫉妒，稍微表现出忿愤不平的样子，玄宗就废掉了皇后贬为平民。
English: The king and queen were jealous and showed a bit of resentment, so Xuanzong abolished the queen and reduced her to a commoner.

古文：肤受日闻，及太子之废也，玄宗访于张九龄。
现代文：这浮泛不实的情况逐渐传开，牵扯到太子也将被废。玄宗就访问张九龄。
English: This fictitious situation gradually spread, and the prince was implicated and would also be deposed. Xuanzong visited Zhang Jiuling.

古文：对曰： 太子天下本也，动之则摇人心。
现代文：九龄回答说： 太子是天下的根本，如果一动必然会使人心不稳。
English: The nine-year-old replied, "The prince is the foundation of the world. If there is a movement, it will inevitably make people feel unstable.

古文：太子自居东宫，未闻大恶，臣闻父子之道，天性也，子有过。父恕而掩之，无宜废绝。
现代文：太子自己住在东宫，没听说有什么大的过错。我听说父子关系是天性，子有过错，父亲就要宽恕掩盖一下，不应该废掉而绝父子之情。
English: The prince himself lives in the East Palace, and I have not heard of any major mistakes. I heard that the father-son relationship is natural, the son is at fault, the father should forgive and cover up, and the father-son relationship should not be abolished.

古文：且其恶状未著，恐外人窥之，伤陛下慈父之道。 
现代文：再说太子的过错还没有明显地暴露出来，恐怕外人窥探他的太子之位，又挫伤了陛下作慈父的常情。 
English: Moreover, the prince's wrongdoing has not yet been clearly exposed, and I am afraid that outsiders will pry into his position as prince and hurt His Majesty's feelings as a loving father.

古文：玄宗不悦，隐忍久之。
现代文：玄宗听后不高兴，隐瞒忍耐了好长时间。
English: Xuanzong was not happy after hearing this, but he concealed his displeasure for a long time.

古文：李林甫等秉政，阴中计于武妃，将立其子以自固，武妃亦结之。
现代文：这时朝廷中李林甫等人掌握大权，暗中给武妃出主意，要她立自己的儿子以巩固地位，武妃也就同他们联合起来。
English: At this time, Li Linfu and others in the imperial court seized power and secretly suggested to Empress Wu that she should appoint her own son to consolidate her position. Empress Wu then joined forces with them.

古文：乃先黜九龄而废太子，太子同生鄂王瑶、光王琚同日拼命，海内痛之，号为三庶。
现代文：于是先罢免了张九龄然后废了太子，太子的亲弟鄂王瑶、光王琚同一天被处死。全国都为他们悲痛，称为三庶。
English: As a result, Zhang Julin was first dismissed and then the crown prince was abolished. The prince's younger brothers, Hwangtao and Kwangtao, were executed on the same day. The whole country mourned for them, and they were called the three illegitimate children.

古文：太子既冤，武氏及左右屡见为祟，宫中终夜相恐，或闻鬼声叫笑，召觋巫视之，皆曰三庶为厉。
现代文：太子已经被冤杀，武氏王妃及左右侍从们多次见他作鬼，宫中整夜处于恐惧之中，有时听到鬼的叫声和笑声。召来男巫看视，都说是三庶作的祸害。
English: Prince Takeshi has been unjustly killed. Princess Takeshi and her attendants have seen him many times as a ghost. The palace is in fear all night long, and sometimes they hear the cries and laughter of the ghost. Calling a male witch to watch is said to be the scourge of the three evils.

古文：先是收鄂王光王，行刑者射而瘗之，乃命改葬，祝而酹之。
现代文：以前那时收押了鄂王光王，行刑的人把他们射死然后埋起来，现在命令改葬了，设祭坛祝愿酹酒也没有用。
English: Back then, Hwang Kuan Wang was taken into custody, and the executioners shot them to death and then buried them. Now, the order has been changed, and there is no use in setting up an altar to wish for alcohol.

古文：武妃死，其厉乃息，玄宗乃立肃宗为太子，林甫之计不行，惕然惧矣。
现代文：直到武妃死，祸患才停息。玄宗就又立肃宗为太子。李林甫的计策没有实行。
English: The calamity did not cease until the death of Empress Wu. Emperor Xuanzong then appointed Emperor Suizong as crown prince. Li Linfu's plan was not carried out.

古文：三庶人以二十五年四月二十二日死，武妃至十二月而甍，识者知有神通焉。
现代文：时刻处于警惕和恐惧之中。三庶人在二十五年四月二十二日死，武妃到十二月死。明白的人都知道这是有神灵感应啊！
English: Constantly on the alert and in fear, the three commoners died on April 22nd, 25th, and Princess Wu died in December. Those who know better know that this was divine inspiration!

古文：杨慎矜
现代文：杨慎矜
English: by Yang Shengkun

古文：唐监察御史王抡为朔方节度判官，乘驿，在途暴卒，而颜色不变，犹有暖气，惧不敢殡。
现代文：唐朝监察御史王抡任朔方节度判官。有一天乘车到驿馆去，在途中突然死了，死后脸色一点儿也没变，还有暖气，人们都害怕不敢殡葬。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, the inspector Wang Xizhi was appointed as the judge of the Shuo Fang Festival. One day, he took a car to the Xizhong Pavilion, and suddenly died on the way. After his death, his face did not change at all. There was also heating, and people were afraid to bury him.

古文：凡十五日复生，云：至冥司，与冥吏语，冥吏悦之，立于房内。
现代文：十五天后。又活了，他说：到了冥司，和冥吏谈话，冥吏很喜欢他，他就站在房内。
English: Fifteen days later, when he was alive again, he said, "When I got to Hades, I had a conversation with the Necromancer. The Necromancer liked him very much, and he stood in the room.

古文：吏出，抡试开其案牍，乃杨慎矜于帝所讼李林甫、王鉷也，已断王鉷族灭矣，于是不敢开，置于旧处而谒王。
现代文：冥吏出去了，王抡就试着打开他的案卷，原来是杨慎矜向皇帝所诉讼李林甫、王鉷的案卷，已经判王鉷灭族了。于是不敢再往下翻，放到原处等进见冥王。
English: When the official went out, Wang Yao tried to open his case file. It turned out that the case file of Li Linfu and Wang Yao, which Yang Sheng Yao sued the emperor for, had already sentenced Wang Yao to exterminate the tribe. Therefore, he did not dare to turn it down again, put it in its original place and wait to see the evil king.

古文：王庭前东西廊下皆垂帘，坐抡帘下，慎矜兄弟入，见王称冤。
现代文：冥王庭前东西游廊下都垂着帘子，冥王来了就坐在王抡站着的那个屋子的帘下，这时慎矜兄弟进来了，见王都齐声喊冤。
English: Curtains were hanging under both the east and west corridors in front of the Hades Court. When Hades arrived, he sat under the curtain of the room where Wang Yao was standing. At this time, the brothers Shen Yao came in, and they all cried out in unison.

古文：王曰： 已族王鉷，即当到矣。 
现代文：王说： 已经判灭王鉷全家，马上就要到了。 
English: And the king said, The sentence to destroy the whole house of the king of Assyria is on its way.

古文：须臾，锁鉷至。兼其子弟数人，皆械系面缚，七窍流血，王令送讯所。于是与慎矜同出，乃引抡即苏。
现代文：不一会儿，用枷索锁着王鉷来到，还有他的子弟几人，都带着脚镣手铐，七窍流血。王命令把他们带到审讯的地方，于是与慎矜一同出来，这才拉了王抡一把，王抡立刻就苏醒了。
English: After a short while, Wang Yao, who was chained with chains, arrived, as well as several of his sons, all of whom were shackled and handcuffed, and bleeding from every orifice. The king ordered them to be taken to the place of interrogation, so they came out together with Shen Yao. It was only then that Wang Yao pulled Wang Yao's arm, and Wang Yao immediately woke up.

古文：月余，有邢鉷之事，王鉷死之。
现代文：一个多月以后，发生了邢鉷之事。王鉷死在这件事上。
English: More than a month later, something terrible happened. Wang Xuan died in this incident.

古文：师夜光
现代文：师夜光
English: "Shi Yakko"

古文：唐师夜光者，蓟门人。
现代文：唐朝有个僧师叫夜光的人，家在蓟门。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a monk named Yaguang who lived in Shimen.

古文：少聪敏好学，雅尚浮屠氏，遂为僧，居于本郡。
现代文：少年时就聪慧敏捷喜欢学习，崇敬佛家，于是就当了和尚，住在本郡。
English: When he was a boy, he was smart, quick, liked to study, and revered Buddhism, so he became a monk and lived in this county.

古文：仅十年，尽通内典之奥。
现代文：仅十年的时间，师夜光完全理解了佛家经典著作的奥妙。
English: It took only ten years for Shiyaku to fully understand the mystery of the Buddhist classics.

古文：又有沙门惠达者，家甚富，有金钱巨万，贪夜光之学，因与为友。
现代文：还有一个出家人叫惠达，他家很富有，有金钱巨万。因为佩服夜光有学问，所以和他交上了朋友。
English: There is also a monk named Huida, whose family is very rich and has a huge amount of money. Because he admires Yaguang and has knowledge, he made friends with him.

古文：是时玄宗皇帝好神仙释氏，穷索名僧方士，而夜光迫于贫，不得西去，心常怏怏。
现代文：当时玄宗皇帝崇尚神仙佛家，想在全国找名僧道士。然而夜光由于贫穷不能西去长安，心中怏怏不乐。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong advocated the immortals and Buddhists, and wanted to find famous monks and Taoists throughout the country. However, because of poverty, Yaguang could not go to Chang'an, and his heart was not happy.

古文：惠达知之，因以钱七十万资其行，且谓夜光曰： 师之学艺材用，愚窃以为无出于右者，圣上拔天下英俊，吾子必将首出群辈，沐浴恩渥。
现代文：惠达了解到这一情况后，就拿出七十万钱资助他去长安。
English: After Huida learned of this situation, he took out 700,000 yuan to help him go to Chang'an.

古文：自此托迹缁徒，为明天子臣，可翘足而待也。
现代文：并且对夜光说： 你的学艺和才能，我私下认为没有再高过你的了。
English: And he said to Yaguang: Your learning and talent, I privately believe, are no higher than yours.

古文：然当是时，必有拥篲子门，幸无忘半面之旧。 夜光谢曰： 幸师厚贶我得遂西上，倘为君之五品，则以报师之惠矣。 
现代文：然而那个时候必然是富贵荣华，希望你不要忘了我们还有半面之交。 夜光拜谢说： 多亏师傅您赠送给我这么多钱，使我能够西去长安。如果我能当上五品官，我就能报答师傅对我的恩惠了。 
English: However, that time must have been rich and glorious, I hope you don't forget that we still have a half-face friendship. Night Light said, "Thanks to Master, you have given me so much money so that I can go to Chang'an. If I can become the fifth grade official, I will be able to repay Master's favor to me."

古文：夜光至长安，因赂九仙公主左右，得召见命内臣选硕学僧十辈，与方士议论，夜光在选，演畅玄奥，发挥疑义，群僧无敢比者。
现代文：夜光到了长安，贿赂了九仙公主的亲信，得到在温泉被召见的机会，玄宗命内臣选拔十名博学的僧人，同有才能有方术的人辩论。夜光被选入其中。他的演讲流畅玄奥，广征博引，并能有所发挥，其他的僧人没有敢和他较量的。
English: When Yaguang arrived in Chang'an, he bribed a close confidant of the Nine Immortal Princess, and was given the opportunity to be summoned to a hot spring. Emperor Xuanzong ordered his vassals to select ten learned monks to debate with those who had talent in the arts. Yaguang was chosen as one of them. His speech was fluent and profound, widely read and cited, and he was able to play a role. Other monks did not dare to compete with him.

古文：上奇其辩，诏赐银印朱绶，拜四门博士，日侍左右，赐甲第，洎金钱缯綵以千数，时号幸臣。
现代文：皇上对他的辩才很惊奇，就下诏赐给他银印和红绶带。拜为四门博士，每天都在皇帝身边，又赐甲第，赏金钱缯綵等上千数。当时号称幸臣。
English: The emperor was very surprised by his eloquence, so he gave him a silver seal and a red ribbon. He was worshipped as a four-door doctor, and he was at the emperor's side every day. He was also awarded thousands of medals, money, and other awards. At that time, he was known as Yuko-sen.

古文：惠达遂自蓟门入长安访之，夜光闻惠达至，以为收债于己，甚不怿。
现代文：惠达听到这些情况就从蓟门到长安去探访他，夜光听说惠达来了，以为是来找自己要债，很不高兴。
English: When Huida heard of these circumstances, he went from Shimen to Chang'an to visit him. When Yaguang heard that Huida had come, he thought that he had come to ask for a debt, and was very unhappy.

古文：惠达悟其旨，因告去。
现代文：惠达明白了他的心理，就告别他回蓟门去了。
English: Huida understood his psychology and said goodbye to him and went back to the gate.

古文：既以北归月余，夜光虑其再来，即密书与蓟门帅张廷珪： 近者惠达师至辇下，诬毁公缮完兵革，将为逆谋，人亦颇有知者。
现代文：已经回到蓟门一个多月了，夜光担心他再来，就写了一封密信送给蓟门帅张廷珪，信中说： 近来惠达到皇帝这里，诬陷诽谤你现在训练军队，准备军用物资，将要谋反，有很多人都知道这样事了。
English: He had been back at the Imperial Palace for more than a month. Yaguang was worried that he might come again, so he wrote a secret letter to Zhang Tingyao, the commander of the Imperial Palace. The letter said, "Recently Hui reached the emperor here, slandered and slandered you, saying that you are now training the army, preparing military supplies, and plotting a rebellion. Many people know about this.

古文：以公之忠，天下莫不闻之，积毁销金，不可不戒。 
现代文：凭公您这样忠心为国，谁都知道的，积聚烈火可以溶化金子，不能不防备。 
English: With your loyalty as a country, everyone knows that the accumulation of fire can melt gold, and we must be prepared.

古文：廷珪惊怒，即召惠达鞭杀之。
现代文：廷珪看完信又吃惊又愤怒，立刻就把惠达捉来用鞭子打死了。
English: After reading the letter, Ting Yao was surprised and angry. He immediately caught Huida and beat him to death with a whip.

古文：后数日，夜光忽见惠达来庭中，骂夜光曰： 我以七十万钱资汝西上，奈何遽相诬谤，使我冤死，何负我之深也！ 
现代文：过了几天，夜光忽然看见惠达来到厅堂，骂夜光说： 我拿七十万钱资助你西上，你为什么这么快就诬陷诽谤我，使我含冤而死，为什么背弃我到这么严重的地步！ 
English: A few days later, Yaguang suddenly saw Huida come to the hall, scolded Yaguang and said: I took seven hundred thousand money to support you in the west, why did you frame and slander me so quickly, causing me to die unjustly, why did you betray me to such a serious extent!

古文：言讫，遂跃而上，珪拽夜光，久之乃亡所见，师氏家僮咸见之。
现代文：说完就跳上来，扯拽夜光，过了很长时间才看不见什么，师夜光的家僮都看见了。
English: After he finished speaking, he jumped up and tugged on the glow. It took a long time before he could see anything, but all the members of the glow's family could see.

古文：其后数日，夜光卒。
现代文：这以后仅几天的时间，夜光死了。
English: Just a few days after that, the glow died.

古文：崔尉子
现代文：崔尉子
English: Cui Fuzi

古文：唐天宝中，有清河崔氏，家居于荥阳。母卢氏，干于治生，家颇富。
现代文：唐朝天宝年间，有个姓崔的清河人，家住在荥阳，老母卢氏，经营买卖，家中很富有。
English: During the Tianbao period of the Tang Dynasty, there was a man from Qinghe with the surname Cui. His family lived in Fenyang. His mother, Lu, ran a business and the family was very wealthy.

古文：有子策名京都，受吉州大和县尉，其母恋故产，不之官。为子娶太原王氏女，与财数十万，奴婢数人。
现代文：她有个儿子在京都榜上有名，受官到吉州大和县作县尉。她的母亲留恋故乡的家产，不想到儿子作官的地方去，给儿子娶了太原王家的女儿，并给钱财几十万，奴婢好几个人，前往大和县赴任。
English: She had a son who was famous on the Kyoto list and was appointed as a prefectural officer in Yamato County, Kishu. Her mother was homesick for her hometown and did not want to go to the place where her son was an officer. She married the daughter of the Taihara royal family to her son, and gave him hundreds of thousands of money and several slaves to go to Yamato County.

古文：赴任，乃谋赁舟而去，仆人曰： 今有吉州人姓孙，云空舟欲返，佣价极廉，倘与商量，亦恐稳便。 
现代文：于是就计划租船去。仆人说： 现在有个吉州人姓孙，他说想要空着船返回，租价很便宜，如果和他商量，恐怕很稳妥。 
English: So they planned to rent a boat. The servant said, "There is a man named Sun from Jizhou. He says he wants to return with an empty boat. The rental price is very cheap. If we discuss it with him, I'm afraid it will be safe."

古文：遂择发日，崔与王氏及婢仆列拜堂下，泣别而登舟。
现代文：于是就选择出发的日子，崔就和王氏以及随走的奴婢们排着在堂下跪拜，流着眼泪告别母亲上了船。
English: So they chose the day of departure, and Cui boarded the ship with Wang and the attendant servants and maids, kneeling in a row under the main hall and bidding farewell to her mother with tears streaming down her face.

古文：不数程，晚临野岸，舟人素窥其囊橐，伺崔尉不意，遽推落于深潭，佯为拯溺之势。
现代文：不知走了多远，到晚间靠在荒野的岸边，撑船的人早就偷看了他们的行李，认为财货很多而起了坏心。看崔尉不注意，突然把崔尉推到深潭里，假装要救被淹的人的样子。
English: I don't know how far they went, but by the evening they were on the shore of the wilderness. The paddlers had already peeked at their luggage, thought they had a lot of goods, and felt bad. Seeing that Lieutenant Cui was not paying attention, they suddenly pushed him into the deep pool, pretending to save the flooded people.

古文：退而言曰： 恨力救不及矣！ 
现代文：回来说： 可恨我尽力救也来不及了。 
English: He came back and said, "I'm sorry, but it's too late to try to save them."

古文：其家大恸，孙以刃示之，皆惶惧。
现代文：王氏及跟随的奴婢们都悲痛大哭，姓孙的就拿出刀来逼迫他们，大家都很惊慌害怕，连气也不敢喘。
English: Mr. Wang and the slaves and maidservants who followed him were in tears of grief. Mr. Sun took out his sword to chase them. Everyone was panicked and afraid, not daring to breathe.

古文：无复喘息。是夜，抑纳王氏。
现代文：这天夜里，姓孙的强娶王氏。
English: That night, Qiang, surnamed Sun, married Wang.

古文：王方娠，遂以财物居于江夏，后王氏生男，舟人养为己子，极爱焉。
现代文：王氏正怀孕，于是就凭着那些财物在江夏定居了。后来王氏生了一个男孩，姓孙的撑船人供养他象自己的孩子一样，特别喜爱他。
English: Ms. Wang was pregnant, so she settled in Jiangxia with those belongings. Later, Ms. Wang gave birth to a boy. The boatman, surnamed Sun, provided for him like his own child and loved him very much.

古文：其母亦窃诲以文字，母亦不告其由。
现代文：他的母亲也偷偷地教他识字，但并不告诉他以前的事。
English: His mother also secretly taught him to read, but did not tell him about her past.

古文：崔之亲老在郑州，讶久不得消息。积望数年。
现代文：崔尉的母亲在郑州，很惊讶这么长时间没有崔尉一家的消息，盼望了很多年。
English: Captain Cui's mother in Zhengzhou was surprised that there had been no news of Captain Cui's family for such a long time, and had been looking forward to it for many years.

古文：天下离乱，人多飘流，崔母分与子永隔矣。
现代文：此时天下大乱，很多人都四散漂泊流浪。崔尉的老母也认为与儿子是永远分隔了。
English: At this time, the world was in turmoil, and many people were scattered and wandering. Lieutenant Cui's mother also thought that she was separated from her son forever.

古文：尔后二十年，孙氏因崔财致产极厚，养子年十八九，学艺已成，遂遣入京赴举。
现代文：这以后二十年，姓孙的凭崔尉的钱财发了家，以致家财很富足。养崔子到十八九岁了，学问技艺已成。就让他入京去考举人。
English: Twenty years later, Sun, surnamed Cui, made a fortune with the money and wealth of the captain, so that the family was very rich. After raising Cui Zi to the age of eighteen or nineteen, his knowledge and skills were complete. He let him go to Beijing to take the examination.

古文：此子西上，途过郑州，去州约五十里，遇夜迷路，常有一火前引，而不见人。
现代文：这孩子西上京城，路上经过郑州，离郑州还大约有五十多里路的时候，正赶在晚上迷了路。但觉有一盏灯在前面引路，却看不见人，崔子就跟着灯走。
English: This child went west to Beijing, passing through Zhengzhou on the way, and when he was still about fifty miles away from Zhengzhou, he lost his way in the evening. But he felt that there was a light leading the way in front, but he could not see anyone, so Cui Zi followed the light.

古文：随火而行，二十余里，至庄门，扣开以寄宿。主人容之，舍于厅中，乃崔庄也。其家人窃窥，报其母曰： 门前宿客，面貌相似郎君。 
现代文：让他在厅中住。这个庄园原来是崔庄。家人暗中看看崔子，就报告老母说： 门前边那个寄宿的客人，面貌很象我们家的郎君。 
English: Let him live in the hall. This manor used to be Cui Zhuang. The family secretly looked at Cui Zi, and reported to the old mother: The guest who was lodging in front of the door looked very much like our family's husband.

古文：家人又伺其言语行步，辄无少异，又白其母。
现代文：家人又看他的言语行动，则没有多少异样，又去告诉老母。
English: When his family saw his words and actions, they didn't think much of it and went to tell his mother.

古文：母欲自审之，遂召入升堂，与之语话，一如其子，问乃孙氏矣。其母又垂泣，其子不知所以。母曰： 郎君远来，明日且住一食。 
现代文：老母想自己看看，就招呼崔子进了上屋，和他谈话，觉得同自己的儿子一模一样，一问才知他姓孙，老母又掉下眼泪，崔子也不知怎么办是好，老母说： 郎君远道而来，住下明天吃一顿饭再走吧！ 
English: The old mother wanted to see for herself, so she invited Cui Zi into the upper room, talked with him, and felt exactly the same as her own son. It was only when she asked him that she knew his surname was Sun. The old mother shed tears again, and Cui Zi didn't know what to do. The old mother said: My husband has come a long way, let's stay and have a meal tomorrow before we leave!

古文：此子不敢违长者之意，遂诺之。
现代文：崔子不敢违背这个老人的好意，就答应了。
English: Cui Zi did not dare to go against the good will of the old man, so she agreed.

古文：亦有奉赠，努力早回。 此子至春，应举不捷，却归至郑州，还过母庄。母见欣然，遂留停歇数日，临行赠赀粮，兼与衣一副曰： 此是吾亡子衣服，去日为念，今既永隔，以郎君貌似吾子，便以奉赠。 
现代文：第二天，老母见崔子要告别离去，就出声大哭，对崔子说： 郎君不要对我这么哭感到吃惊，当年我只有一个儿子，以前因为要赴任，那以后就断绝了消息，到现在已经二十年了，今天看见你的相貌举止太象我的儿子，不知不觉就悲痛罢了。郎君往西去，回来的那天一定要经过 崔子到那年春天，应考不中，回到郑州，又经过崔庄，老母很高兴，就留他多住了几天，临走时赠送给他钱物，还送给他一件衣服。然后说： 这是我那死了的儿子的衣服，以前是留作纪念的，现在既然永远也看不着了，因郎君相貌象我的儿子，就把它赠送给你。 
English: The next day, when the old lady saw that Cui Zi was about to leave, she cried loudly and said to Cui Zi, "Brother-in-law, don't be surprised that I'm crying so much. Back then, I only had one son. Before, because I had to go to work, after that, I cut off the news. It's been twenty years now. Today, I saw that your appearance and demeanor are too much like my son's. Unconsciously, it's just grief. Brother-in-law, when you go west and come back, you must go through Cui Zi until the spring of that year. If

古文：号哭而别，他时过此，亦须相访。
现代文：号哭着告别。崔子说： 以后再经过这里，我也要来探访。 
English: Crying and waving goodbye, Cui Zi said, "I will pass by here again in the future, I also want to visit."

古文：此子却归，亦不为父母言之。
现代文：崔子回到家里也没有向父母说这些事。
English: When Cui Zi returned home, she did not tell her parents about these things.

古文：后忽著老母所遗衣衫，下襟有火烧孔。
现代文：后有一天，忽然穿上老母所赠的那件衣服，下襟有一个火烧的小孔。
English: Then one day, he suddenly put on the dress that his mother had given him, and there was a small hole in the lower collar.

古文：其母惊问： 何处得此衣？ 
现代文：崔母吃惊地问： 在什么地方得到的这件衣服？ 
English: Surprised, Mother Cui asked, "Where did you get this dress?"

古文：乃述本末。
现代文：崔子才叙述了前前后后的经过。
English: Cui Zicai described the process before and after.

古文：母因屏人，泣与子言其事： 此衣是吾与汝父所制，初熨之时，误遗火所爇，汝父临发之日，阿婆留此以为念。
现代文：崔母就屏退了外人，哭着对崔子说了以前的事。 这件衣服是我给你的父亲作的，在熨烫的时候不小心掉下点火烧了。你父亲临出发那天，我的婆婆留下这件衣服作纪念。
English: I made this dress for your father, but it accidentally caught fire when I was ironing it. On the day your father was about to leave, my mother-in-law left this dress as a souvenir.

古文：比为汝幼小，恐申理不了，岂期今日神理昭然。 
现代文：我看你太幼小，恐怕你申诉论理不成，那想到现在是神使我们的事将要昭雪。 
English: I think you're too young, I'm afraid you can't argue your case, the thought that now God has made us things will come to light.

古文：其子闻言恸哭，诣府论冤，推问果伏。
现代文：崔子听完母亲的话后大声痛哭。到官府里去申诉了冤情。经过审问果然是事实，姓孙的伏法招供了。
English: After listening to her mother's words, Cui Zi cried loudly and bitterly. She went to the government office to complain about the grievances. After interrogation, it was indeed the truth, and Fuba, surnamed Sun, confessed.

古文：诛孙氏，而妻以不早自陈，断合从坐，其子哀请而免。
现代文：杀了姓孙的。但因为崔尉的妻子不能早日到官陈述，判她应该问罪，因崔子悲哀地请求而免除处罪。
English: However, because Lieutenant Cui's wife was unable to make an early report to the authorities, she was found guilty of the crime, but was exempted from punishment due to Cui Zhe's plaintive plea.

