古文：吴汉字子颜，南阳宛人也。
现代文：吴汉字子颜，南阳郡宛县人。
English: Wu Han Zi Yan, from Nanyang County.

古文：家贫，给事县为亭长。
现代文：家贫，供职为县的亭长。
English: His family was poor, and he worked as the county's pavilion manager.

古文：王莽末，以宾客犯法，乃亡命至渔阳，资用乏，以贩马自业，往来燕、蓟间，所至皆交结豪杰。
现代文：王莽末年，因宾客犯法，就脱其名籍逃亡到渔阳。因资用缺乏，以贩马为业，往来于燕、蓟之间，所到之处都交结豪杰。
English: In the last years of Wang Mang's life, because a guest had broken the law, he fled to Yuyang, breaking away from his family name. Due to a lack of funds, he sold horses for a living, and went back and forth between Yan and Handan, meeting heroes everywhere he went.

古文：更始立，使使者韩鸿徇河北。
现代文：更始即位，派遣使者韩鸿去河北招降。
English: The emperor was enthroned and sent an envoy, Han Hong, to Hebei to invite the emperor to abdicate.

古文：或谓鸿曰： 吴子颜，奇士也，可与计事。 鸿召见汉，其悦之，遂承制拜为安乐令。
现代文：有人对韩鸿说 ：吴子颜，是位奇士，可以与他计事。 韩鸿召见吴汉，很高兴，就以帝命拜他为安乐县县令。
English: Someone said to Han Hong: "Wu Ziyan is a miracle worker, you can make a deal with him." Han Hong was very happy to see Wu Han, and worshiped him as the Anle County magistrate with the imperial command.

古文：会王郎起，北州扰惑。
现代文：恰逢王郎兴起，北州扰乱困惑。
English: Coinciding with the rise of Wang Lang, Beizhou was confused.

古文：汉素闻光武长者，独欲归心。
现代文：吴汉素来听说光武是位长者，独想归心于光武。
English: Wu Han had always heard that Guangwu was an elder and wanted to be close to him.

古文：乃说太守彭宠曰： 渔阳、上谷突骑，天下所闻也。
现代文：就对太守彭宠说： 渔阳、上谷突击敌军的骑兵，是天下闻名的。
English: He said to the eunuch Peng Ciao: Yuyang and Shanggu's cavalry charge against the enemy is famous all over the world.

古文：君何不合二郡精锐，附刘公击邯郸，此一时之功也。 宠以为然，而官属皆欲附王郎，宠不能夺。
现代文：你为什么不集合二郡的精锐，归附刘公攻击邯郸呢，这是难得的功劳哩。 彭宠以为对，而下面官属都想归附王郎，彭宠不能夺其志。
English: Why don't you gather the elites of the two counties to join Liu Gong and attack Zang, this is a rare achievement. Peng Ciao thought he was right, but the officials and subordinates all wanted to join Wang Lang, Peng Ciao couldn't win their hearts.

古文：汉乃辞出，止外亭，念所以谲众，未知所出。
现代文：吴汉于是辞出，止于外亭，想设法讹诈众人，还没有想出办法。
English: Wu Han then resigned, stopped at the outer pavilion, tried to blackmail everyone, and has not yet come up with a way.

古文：望见道中有一人似儒生者，汉使人召之，为具食，问以所闻。
现代文：看到路上有一个儒生模样的人，吴汉使人把他召来，为他具备了食物，问他听到了些什么。
English: Seeing a Confucian-looking man on the road, Wu Han had someone call him over, provided him with food, and asked him what he had heard.

古文：生因言刘公所过，为郡县所归；邯郸举尊号者，实非刘氏。
现代文：儒生因此说刘公所过之处，郡县都归心于他；邯郸那个妄自举尊号的，确实不是刘氏宗室。
English: Therefore, Confucianism said that wherever Liu Gongsheng passed, counties and counties were attached to him; the one who arrogantly raised his honorary title was indeed not Liu's ancestral family.

古文：汉大喜，即诈为光武书，移檄渔阳，使生赍以诣宠，令县以所闻说之，汉复随后入。
现代文：吴汉大喜，即诈为光武亲笔书信，移檄到渔阳，使儒生带交彭宠，令他把所听到的话去说服彭宠，吴汉也跟着到渔阳。
English: Wu Han was overjoyed, that is, he was deceived by the letter written by Guangwu himself, moved to Yuyang, made Confucius bring it to Peng Cai, and asked him to persuade Peng Cai with what he had heard. Wu Han also followed Yuyang.

古文：宠甚然之。
现代文：彭宠很以为然。
English: Peng Ciao was very impressed.

古文：于是遣汉将兵与上谷诸将并军而南，所至击斩王郎将帅。
现代文：于是派遣吴汉率兵与上谷诸将会师南进，所到之处击斩王郎将帅。
English: Therefore, he sent Wu Han and his soldiers south with Kamitani's generals, and killed Wang Lang and his generals wherever they went.

古文：及光武于广阿，拜汉为偏将军。
现代文：追及光武于广阿，拜吴汉为偏将军。
English: Pursuit and Guangwu in Guang'a, Bai Wu Han as a partial general.

古文：既拔邯郸，赐号建策侯。
现代文：攻拔邯郸以后，赐号建策侯。
English: After the attack, he was given the title of Jianzhe Hou.

古文：汉为人质厚少文，造次不能以辞自达。
现代文：吴汉为人秉性忠厚但少文采，仓卒之间不能以言词表达其意。
English: Wu Han was a loyal person, but he was not very literate. He could not express his thoughts in words when he was in a hurry.

古文：邓禹及诸将我知之。数相荐举，及得召见，遂见亲信，赏居门下。
现代文：邓禹及诸将多知道他，多次荐举他，等到召见，光武就亲信他了，常居于门庭之下。
English: Deng Yu and other generals knew him well and recommended him many times. When he was summoned, Guangwu trusted him and often lived under the gate.

古文：光武将发幽州兵，夜召邓禹，问可使行者。
现代文：光武将发幽州之兵，夜间召邓禹，问谁可充当此任。
English: Guangwu dispatched soldiers from Yuzhou and summoned Deng Yu at night to ask who could fill the post.

古文：禹曰： 间数与吴汉言，其人勇鸷有智谋，诸将鲜能及者。 即拜汉大将军，持节北发十郡突骑。
现代文：邓禹说 ：我曾经多次与吴汉交谈，他为人勇敢而有智谋，诸将很少有能赶得上他的。 即拜吴汉为大将军，命他持符节到北面发十郡突击敌军的骑兵。
English: Deng Yu said: I have talked with Wu Han many times. He is a brave and resourceful person, and few generals can catch up with him. That is, he worshipped Wu Han as a great general and ordered him to take the code to the north to send ten counties of cavalry to attack the enemy army.

古文：更始幽州牧苗曾闻之，阴勒兵，敕诸郡不肯应调。
现代文：更始幽州牧苗曾听说，暗中调兵，命令诸郡不要应调发兵。
English: At the beginning of Yuzhou, Mu Miao had heard that troops were secretly transferred and ordered the counties not to send troops.

古文：汉乃将二十骑先驰至无终。
现代文：吴汉就率领二十骑先奔驰到无终。
English: Wu Han led the twenty horsemen gallop to no end.

古文：曾以汉无备，出迎于路，汉即捴兵骑，收曾斩之，而夺其军。
现代文：苗曾以为吴汉无防备，出迎于路途，吴汉即指挥兵骑，收苗曾而斩之，而夺取其军马。
English: Miao had thought that Wu Han was defenseless, and came out to meet him on the road. Wu Han then commanded the cavalry, but Miao cut him down and captured his war horse.

古文：北州震骇，城邑莫不望风弭从。
现代文：北州震动惊骇，各城邑莫不望风服从。
English: Beizhou was shocked by the tremors, and every city and town had to obey the wind.

古文：遂悉发其兵，引而南，与光武会清阳。
现代文：于是发动其全部兵卒，引而向南，与光武会师清阳。
English: He then mobilized all of his soldiers and led them south to Qingyang, together with the Kuo Wu Kai division.

古文：诸将望见汉还，士马甚盛，皆曰： 是宁肯分兵与人邪？ 及汉至莫府，上兵簿，诸将人人多请之。
现代文：诸将望见吴汉回来，士马甚为强盛，都说 ：他是否肯分兵与别人呢？ 等到吴汉到了将帅治事之所，呈上军士的名簿，诸将人人多请收其军。
English: When the generals saw that Wu Han had returned and his army was very strong, they all said, "Is he willing to divide his army with others?" When Wu Han arrived at the general's headquarters and presented his list of officers, the generals all invited more of his army.

古文：光武曰： 属者恐不与人，今所请又何多也？ 诸将皆惭。
现代文：光武说 ：以前恐怕他不肯与人，现在提出请求的为什么又这样多呢？ 诸将都感到很惭愧。
English: Mitsutake said, "I'm afraid he wouldn't cooperate before, so why are there so many requests now? The generals all feel very ashamed."

古文：初，更始遣尚书令谢躬率六将军攻王郎，不能下。
现代文：起初，更始派遣尚书令谢躬率领六将军攻王郎，不能攻下。
English: At first, Shang Shuling sent Xie Mu to lead six generals to attack Wang Lang, but they could not capture him.

古文：会光武至，共定邯郸，而躬裨将虏掠不相承禀，光武深忌之。
现代文：刚好光武到，共同平定邯郸，而谢躬裨将抢劫虏掠不请示报告，光武深为憎恨。
English: Just as Guangwu arrived, they jointly pacified the war, but Xie Mibai would not report the robbery and plunder, and Guangwu was deeply hated.

古文：虽俱在邯郸，遂分城而处，然每有以慰安之。
现代文：虽都在邯郸，还是分城而处，然而经常安慰他。
English: Although they are both in Handan, they still live in different parts of the city, but they often comfort him.

古文：躬勤于职事，光武常称曰 谢尚书真吏也 ，故不自疑。
现代文：谢躬勤于职事，光武常称赞说： 谢尚书是个真正的官吏哩。 所以自己不怀疑。
English: Guangwu often praised Xie for his diligence in his duties, saying: Xie Shangshu is a true official, so I don't doubt him.

古文：躬既而率其兵数万，还屯于邺。
现代文：谢躬既而率其兵数万，还屯于邺。
English: Even though Xie Mu led tens of thousands of soldiers, he still stayed in Handan.

古文：时光武南击青犊，谓躬曰： 我追贼于射犬，必破之。
现代文：当时光武南击青犊，对谢躬说： 我追击贼兵于射犬，必破贼。
English: At that time, Guangwu Nan hit the youth, and said to Xie Mu: I chased the thief soldiers with the shooting dog, and I will break the thief.

古文：尤来在山阳者，势必当惊走。
现代文：尤来在山阳者，必定会惊走。
English: If you come to Sanyang, you will surely be surprised.

古文：若以君威力，击此散虏，必成禽也。 躬曰： 善。 及青犊破，而尤来果北走隆虑山，躬乃留大将军刘庆、魏郡太守陈康守邺，自率诸将军击之。
现代文：如果以君的威力，攻击这些散虏，必胜无疑。 谢躬说： 好。 到青犊被击破，尤来果然北走隆虑山。谢躬就留大将军刘庆、魏郡太守陈康守邺，自己率领诸将军攻击青犊。
English: If you use your power to attack these scatterers, there is no doubt that you will win. Xie Mu said: Good. When Qingcheng was defeated, Yu Lai really went north to the high mountains. Xie Mu left the general Liu Qing and the governor of Wei County Chen Kang Shouqi, and led the generals to attack Qingcheng.

古文：穷寇死战，其锋不可当，躬遂大败，死者数千人。
现代文：穷寇奋力死战，其锋锐不可当，谢躬于是大败，死者数千人。
English: Poor Koko fought to the death, his edge was impossibly sharp, and he was soundly defeated, with thousands dead.

古文：光武因躬在外，乃使汉与岑彭袭其城。
现代文：光武因谢躬在外，就遣吴汉与岑彭袭击其城。
English: Since Guangwu bowed out in gratitude, he sent Wu Han and Zi Peng to attack his city.

古文：汉先令辩士说陈康曰： 盖闻上智不处危以侥幸，中智能因危以为功，下愚安于危以自亡。
现代文：吴汉先遣辩士说服陈康说 ：我听说上智之人不处危以求侥幸，中智之人能因危以为功，下愚之人安于危以自取灭亡。
English: Wu Han sent an advance debater to persuade Chen Kang to say: I have heard that the most intelligent people do not seek luck in danger, the middle-class people can take credit for danger, and the lower-class people are at risk to self-destruct.

古文：危亡之至，在人所由，不可不察。
现代文：危亡之到来，是由于人所造成，不可不察。
English: The arrival of peril is caused by man and cannot be ignored.

古文：今京师败乱，四方云扰，公所闻也。
现代文：现在京师败乱，四方纷纭扰乱，公是知道的。
English: Now the Beijing division is in disarray, the four parties are in turmoil, and the public knows it.

古文：萧王兵强士附，河北归命，公所见也。
现代文：萧王兵强士附，河北归命于他，这是公看到的。
English: Xiao Wang, a military strongman, was attached, and Hebei was ordered to him, which was publicly seen.

古文：谢躬内背萧王，外失众心，公所知也。
现代文：谢躬内背萧王，外失众心，这是公所知道的。
English: It is public knowledge that Xiao Wang, who is grateful and humble, has lost the hearts of the public.

古文：公今据孤危之城，待灭亡之祸，义无所立，节无所成。不若开门内军，转祸为祸，免下愚之败，收中智之功，此计之至者也。 康然之。
现代文：公现在据守孤危之城，等待灭亡之祸，忠义无所立，节气无所成，不如开门迎接汉兵，转祸为福，免下愚之败，收中智之功，这是最好的计哩！ 
English: It is better to open the door to welcome the Chinese soldiers, turn misfortune into blessing, avoid foolish defeat, and gain wisdom. This is the best plan!

古文：于是康收刘庆及躬妻子，开门内汉等。
现代文：陈康以为然。于是陈康收刘庆及谢躬妻子，开门迎接汉兵入城。
English: Chen Kang thought so. Therefore, Chen Kang received Liu Qing and Xie Mu's wife and opened the door to welcome the Han soldiers into the city.

古文：及躬从隆虑归邺，不知康已反之，乃与数百骑轻入城。
现代文：等到谢躬从隆虑回邺，不知陈康已反，就与数百骑轻装入城。
English: When Xie Wen returned from his deliberation, unaware that Chen Kang had turned against him, he entered the city with hundreds of lightly loaded horses.

古文：汉伏兵收之，手击杀躬，其众悉降。
现代文：汉伏兵将他拿下，以手击杀谢躬，他的部众全投降了。
English: The Han ambush soldiers took him down, killed him with their hands, and all his subordinates surrendered.

古文：躬字子张，南阳人。
现代文：谢躬字子张，南阳郡人。
English: Xie Mizi Zhang, from Nanyang County.

古文：初，其妻知光武不平之，常戒躬曰： 君与刘公积不相能，而信其虚谈，不为人备，终受制矣。 躬不纳，故及于难。
现代文：起初，他妻子知道光武不能与他和睦相处，常劝戒谢躬说： 你与刘公在一起不和睦，而你却相信他的假话，不作准备，最终要受制于他的。 谢躬不接受，所以受了难。
English: At first, his wife knew that Guangwu could not get along with him, and she often admonished Xie Mu, saying, "You and Liu Gong do not get along well together, but you believe his lies, do not prepare, and will eventually be controlled by him. Xie Mu did not accept, so he suffered.

古文：光武北击群贼，汉常将突骑五千为军锋，数先登陷陈。
现代文：光武北击群贼，吴汉常常率领突击骑兵五千为前锋，几次先登攻陷贼阵。
English: Guangwu attacked the bandits from the north, and Wu Han often led 5,000 assault cavalry as the vanguard, and several times he was the first to attack and trap the bandits.

古文：及河北平，汉与诸将奉图书，上尊号。
现代文：等到河北平定，吴汉与诸将捧着地图与书籍，敬上皇帝尊号。
English: When Hebei was pacified, Wu Han and his generals held up maps and books, and revered the emperor's honorific title.

古文：光武即位，拜为大司马，更封舞阳侯。
现代文：光武即帝位，拜吴汉为大司马，更封为舞阳侯。
English: Guangwu is the imperial throne, Bai Wu Han is the grand steed, and Maoyang Hou is the crown prince.

古文：建武二年春，汉率大司空王梁，建义大将军朱祐，大将军杜茂，执金吾贾复，扬化将军坚镡，偏将军王霸，骑都尉刘隆、马武、阴识，共击檀乡贼于邺东漳水上，大破之。降者十余万人。
现代文：建武二年春，吴汉率大司空王梁、建义大将军朱祐、大将军杜茂、执金吾贾复、扬化将军坚镡、偏将军王霸、骑都尉刘隆、马武、阴识，共击檀乡贼于邺东的漳水上，大破贼兵，投降的达十多万人。
English: In the spring of the second year of Jianwu, Wu Han, led by the major general Ku Wang Liang, the major general of Jianyi Zhu Yu, the major general Du Mao, the commander Jin Wujia Fu, the general Yang Hua Jianqian, the general Wang Ba, the cavalry captain Liu Long, Ma Wu, and Yin Xue, jointly attacked the bandits in the east of Shandong on the Shanshui River, smashed the bandits, and more than 100,000 people surrendered.

古文：帝使使者玺书定封汉为广平侯，食广平、斥漳、曲周、广年，凡四县。
现代文：帝派遣使者以玺书定封吴汉为广平侯，食广平、斥漳、曲周、广年，共四县。
English: The emperor dispatched an envoy to seal Wu Han as Guangping Hou in the imperial edict, and the four counties were named Guangping, Kuching, Quzhou and Guangnian.

古文：复率诸将击邺西山贼黎伯卿等，及河内脩武，悉破诸屯聚。
现代文：吴汉复率诸将击邺西山贼黎伯卿等，追到河内武，攻破贼兵所有屯聚。
English: Wu Han Fu led all the generals to defeat the West Shan bandits, such as Lie Bo, and chased them to Hanoi, where they broke through all the encampments of the bandits.

古文：车驾亲幸抚劳。
现代文：光武亲自赶来抚问慰劳。
English: Mitsutake himself came to offer his condolences.

古文：复遣汉进兵南阳，击宛、涅阳、郦、穰、新野诸城、皆下之。
现代文：复遣吴汉进兵南阳郡，击宛、涅、阳、郦、穰、新野诸城，都攻下了。
English: Wu Han marched into Nanyang County and captured the cities of Shawan, Ne, Yang, Handan, Handan, and Nien.

古文：引兵南，与秦丰战黄邮水上，破之。
现代文：引兵向南，与秦丰战黄邮水上，破秦丰。
English: He led his troops to the south and fought with Qin Feng on the Yellow River, defeating Qin Feng.

古文：又与偏将军冯异击昌城五楼贼张文等，又攻铜马、五幡于新安，皆破之。
现代文：又与偏将军冯异击昌城五楼贼张文等，又攻铜马、五幡于新安，都攻破了。
English: He also defeated Zhang Wen, the fifth-floor thief of Changcheng, together with General Feng Yin, and attacked Bronze Horse and Wuhan in Xin'an.

古文：明年春，率建威大将军耿弇、虎牙大将军盖延，击青犊于轵西，大破降之。
现代文：第二年春，吴汉率建威大将军耿弇、虎牙大将军盖延，击青犊于轵西，大破并迫其投降。
English: In the spring of the following year, Wu Han, led by General Geng Yao of Jianwei and General Gai Yan of Huya, attacked Qingcheng in the west of Shaanxi, defeated it and forced it to surrender.

古文：又率骠骑大将军杜茂、强弩将军陈俊等，围苏茂于广乐。
现代文：又率骠骑大将军杜茂、强弩将军陈俊等，围苏茂于广乐。
English: He also led the cavalry general Du Mao and the strong cavalry general Chen Jun to surround Su Mao in Guangle.

古文：刘永将周建别招聚收集得十余万人，救广乐。
现代文：刘永将周建另招聚收集得十余万人，救援广乐。
English: Liu Yong recruited Zhou Jian to gather more than 100,000 people to rescue Guangle.

古文：汉将轻骑迎与之战，不利，堕马伤膝，还营，建等遂连兵入城。
现代文：吴汉将轻骑迎与之战，不利，从马上坠落下来伤了膝部，回营，周建等于是连兵进城。
English: Wu Han rode lightly into battle against him, to no avail. He fell off his horse and injured his knee, and returned to camp. Zhou Jian was like a company of soldiers entering the city.

古文：诸将谓汉曰： 大敌在前而公伤卧，众心惧矣。 汉乃勃然裹创而起，椎牛飨士，令军中曰： 贼众虽多，皆劫掠群盗， 胜不相让，败不相救 ，非有仗节死义者也。
现代文：诸将对吴汉说 ：大敌在前而公因伤而卧，众心害怕了。 吴汉乃发怒变色裹好膝部创伤而起，杀牛饱飨士卒，传令军中说 ：贼众虽多，都是些劫掠的群盗，胜了各不相让，败了各不相救，并非有仗忠节愿为义而死的。
English: They will say to Wu Han, "The great enemy is in front of us, but the public is lying down because of injuries, and everyone's hearts are afraid." Wu Han did not get angry, changed color, wrapped his knee wounds, and started to kill cows full of soldiers. The heralds said, "Although there are many thieves, they are all robbers, and they do not concede victory to each other, and they do not save each other. It is not a battle of loyalty, but a day to die for righteousness."

古文：今日封侯之秋，诸君勉之！ 于是军士激怒，人倍其气。
现代文：今天是建功封侯的良机，诸君多加勉励。 于是军士激怒，士气倍增。
English: Today is a good opportunity to build on the achievements of the feudal lords, and the lords are more encouraged. As a result, the sergeant is infuriated and morale is doubled.

古文：旦日，建、茂出兵围汉。
现代文：一早，周建、苏茂出兵围吴汉。
English: In the morning, Zhou Jian and Sumo sent troops to surround Wuhan.

古文：汉选四部精兵黄头吴河等，及乌桓突骑三千余人，齐鼓而进。
现代文：吴汉挑选四部精兵黄头吴河等，以及乌桓突骑三千多人，一齐鼓噪而进。
English: Wu Han selected four elite soldiers, including the Yellow-Headed Wu He, and more than three thousand Wu Huan cavalrymen, and they rode forward together.

古文：建军大溃，反还奔城。
现代文：周建军大溃，反身奔回城中。
English: The Zhou Jianjun army was routed and ran back to the city.

古文：汉长驱追击，争门并入，大破之，茂、建突走。
现代文：吴汉长驱追击，争门并力而入，大破建、茂军，苏茂、周建突围而走。
English: Wu and Han chased and attacked, and they entered the gate together. They broke through the encirclement of Jian and Maojun, and Su and Zhou broke through the encirclement.

古文：汉留杜茂、陈俊等守广乐，自将兵助盖延围刘永于睢阳。
现代文：吴汉留杜茂、陈俊等守广乐，自己率兵助盖延围刘永于睢阳。
English: Wu Han left Du Mao, Chen Jun and others to guard Guangle, and led his own troops to help encircle Liu Yong in Fenyang.

古文：永既死，二城皆降。
现代文：刘永死后，二城都投降了。
English: After Liu Yong's death, both cities surrendered.

古文：明年，又率陈俊及前将军王梁，击破五校贼于临平，追至东郡箕山，大破之。
现代文：第三年，又率领陈俊及前将军王梁，击破五校贼于临平，追到东郡的箕山，大破贼军。
English: In the third year, he also led Chen Jun and former general Wang Liang to defeat the Five Thieves in Linping and chase them to Shaoshan in Dong County.

古文：北击清河长直及平原五里贼，皆平之。
现代文：又北击清河长直及平原五里贼，都平定了。
English: The north also attacked the Qinghe Changzhi and the plain Wuliangye, both of which were leveled.

古文：时，鬲县五姓共逐守长，据城而反。
现代文：当时鬲县五姓共同驱逐守长，占据县城而反。
English: At that time, the five surnames of Handan County jointly expelled the warden and occupied the county seat.

古文：诸将争欲攻之，汉不听，曰： 使鬲反者，皆守长罪也。
现代文：诸将争着要进攻，吴汉不听，说： 使鬲谋反的，都是守长的罪过。
English: The generals were all vying to attack, but Wu Han would not listen, saying, "It is the fault of the captain who instigated the rebellion."

古文：敢轻冒进兵者斩。 乃移檄告郡，使收守长，而使人谢城中。
现代文：敢轻率冒险进兵的当斩。 就移檄告郡，让他们逮捕守长，而使人对城中表示感谢。
English: If anyone dared to march into the city, he was to be executed, and the city was to be thanked by the people of the county for arresting the warden.

古文：五姓大喜，即相率归降。
现代文：五姓大喜，就相继率众归降。
English: Five surnamed Daxi were the first to surrender.

古文：诸将乃服，曰： 不战而下城，非众所及也。 
现代文：诸将于是心服，说： 不战而使全城归降，不是他人所能做到的。 
English: Zhu Zhu was convinced and said, "It is not possible for others to make the whole city surrender without a fight."

古文：冬，汉率建威大将军耿弇、汉忠将军王常等，击富平、获索二贼于平原。
现代文：冬，吴汉率领建威大将军耿弇、汉忠将军王常等，攻击富平、获索二贼于平原。
English: In winter, Wu Han, led by General Geng Wei and General Wang Chang of Han Zhong, attacked Fuping and captured the two thieves on the plain.

古文：明年春，贼率五万余人夜攻汉营，军中惊乱，汉坚卧不动，有顷乃定。
现代文：第四年春，贼率五万余人乘夜攻汉营，军中惊乱，吴汉坚守不动，过了一阵子军心才安定。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, the bandits led by more than fifty thousand people attacked the Han camp at night, the army was in turmoil, Wu Han stood firm, and after a while, the hearts of the soldiers were stable.

古文：即夜发精兵出营突击，大破其众。
现代文：随即乘夜发精兵出营突击，大破其部众。
English: Then, the night-haired elite soldiers stormed out of the camp and defeated their subordinates.

古文：因追讨余党，遂至无盐，进击勃海，皆平之。
现代文：因而进一步讨伐余党，进到无盐县，进击勃海，都得到平定。
English: As a result, the further crusade against the remnants of the party, into Wuxi County, and into the Bohai Sea, have all been pacified.

古文：东方悉定，振旅还京师。
现代文：又从征董宪，围朐城。第五年春，攻拔朐城。斩董宪。东方全部平定，整顿部队回京师。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, the city was attacked. Dong Xian was killed. The East was completely pacified, and the rectification troops returned to Beijing.

古文：会隗嚣畔，夏，复遣汉西屯长安。
现代文：恰逢隗嚣反叛，夏，再派遣吴汉西屯长安。
English: Coinciding with the tumultuous rebellion, Xia again dispatched Wu Han to Xi Tun Chang'an.

古文：八年，从东驾上陇，遂围隗嚣于西城。
现代文：建武八年，跟从光武上陇，于是围困隗嚣于西城。
English: In the eighth year of Jianwu, he followed Guangwu to the capital, and the siege raged in Xicheng.

古文：帝敕汉曰： 诸郡甲卒但坐费粮食，若有逃亡，则沮败众心，宜悉罢之。 汉等贪并力攻嚣，遂不能遣，粮食日少，吏士疲役，逃亡者多，及公孙述救至，汉遂退败。
现代文：帝命令吴汉说 ：各郡士卒徒费粮食，如果逃亡，就沮丧败乱众心，应全部遣散。 吴汉等却贪着用这些人共同攻隗嚣，于是不肯遣散，结果粮食日渐减少，官吏士卒疲于劳役，逃亡的增多，等到公孙述援救隗嚣的兵到，吴汉于是败退。
English: The emperor ordered Wu Han to say, "Each county magistrate should spend grain on foot, and if they run away, they will frustrate and defeat the hearts of the people, and they should all be dismissed." However, Wu Han and others were greedy to use these people to jointly attack the tumult, so they refused to be dismissed. As a result, the grain gradually decreased, the officials and magistrates were tired of labor service, and the number of escapees increased. When the sons-in-law arrived to rescue the tumultuous soldiers, Wu Han was defeated and retreated.

古文：十一年春，率征南大将军岑彭等伐公孙述。
现代文：建武十一年春天，率征南大将军岑彭等伐公孙述。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year of the Jianwu era, the generals who led the conquest of Nantai, such as Zou Peng and Faku Gongsun, were exiled.

古文：及彭破荆门，长驱入江关，汉留夷陵，装露桡船，将南阳兵及弛刑募士三万人溯江而上。
现代文：等到岑彭破了荆门，长驱入江关，吴汉留在夷陵，建造短楫船只，运载南阳兵及招募来的解除枷锁的刑徒三万人溯江而上。
English: By the time Zi Peng broke through the gate of Jing and drove the Long March into Jiangguan, Wu Han remained in Yiling, building short raft ships to carry the Nanyang soldiers and the 30,000 convicts recruited to break the shackles up the river.

古文：会岑彭为刺客所杀，汉并将其军。
现代文：恰逢岑彭被刺客所杀，吴汉就兼率其军。
English: At the same time that Ku Peng was killed by the Assassins, Wu Han also led his army.

古文：十二年春，与公孙述将魏党、公孙永战于鱼涪津，大破之，遂围武阳。
现代文：建武十二年春天，与公孙述将领魏党、公孙永战于鱼涪津，大破其军，于是围攻武阳。
English: In the spring of the 12th year of Jianwu, he fought with Gongsun Su, the general of the Wei Party, and Gongsun Yong in Uluotsin, defeated his army, and then besieged Wuyang.

古文：述遣子婿史兴将五千人救之。
现代文：公孙述派遣子婿史兴率领五千人相救。
English: Gongsun dispatched his son-in-law Shi Xing to lead five thousand people to rescue him.

古文：汉迎击兴，尽殄其众，因入犍为界。
现代文：吴汉迎击史兴，全歼其众，因而进入犍为地界。
English: Wu Han attacked Shixing and wiped out his entire army, thus entering the territory of Yunnan.

古文：诸县皆城守。
现代文：诸县都据城而守。
English: All the prefectures depended on the city for protection.

古文：汉乃进军攻广都，拔之。
现代文：吴汉就进军攻广都，攻下了。
English: Wu Han marched into Guangdu and captured it.

古文：遣轻骑烧成都市桥，武阳以东诸小城皆降。
现代文：派遣轻骑烧掉了成都市桥，武阳以东诸小城都投降了。
English: The dispatch of light cavalry burned the bridge of Chengdu, and all the small towns east of Wuyang surrendered.

古文：帝戒汉曰： 成都十余万众，不可轻也。
现代文：光武训戒吴汉说 ：成都有十多万部队，不可轻视。
English: Light martial arts training Wu Han said: Chengdu has more than one hundred thousand troops, which should not be taken lightly.

古文：但坚据广都，待其来攻，勿与争锋。
现代文：只要坚固地据守广都，待他们来攻时，不要与他们争锋。
English: As long as you firmly defend Guangdu, when they attack, don't fight with them.

古文：若不敢来，公转营迫之，须其力废，乃可击也。 汉乘利，遂自将步骑二万余人进逼成都，去城十余里，阻江北为营，作浮桥，使副将武威将军刘尚将万余人屯于江南，相去二十余里。
现代文：如果他们不敢来攻，公转营强迫他们接战，必须等到他们精疲力竭，才可以发起攻击。 吴汉乘胜率步骑二万余人进逼成都，离城十余里，据江北险要为营，作浮桥，派副将武威将军刘尚率万余人屯兵于江南，两营相二十余里。
English: If they did not dare to attack, the imperial army forced them to fight, and they had to wait until they were exhausted before they could launch an attack. Wu Han took advantage of the victory rate to ride more than twenty thousand people into Chengdu, more than ten miles away from the city, and according to the north of the river, he wanted to camp and make a pontoon bridge. He sent Vice Admiral Wu Wei General Liu Shang and more than ten thousand people to camp in the south of the river, and the two battalions were more than twenty miles apart.

古文：帝闻大惊，让汉曰： 比敕公千条万端，何意临事勃乱！
现代文：帝听到消息大惊，责备吴汉说： 历来对公下过许多指令，为什么事到临头又乱套了呢？
English: The emperor was shocked to hear the news and scolded Wu Han, saying, "I have always given many orders to the emperor. Why did things go wrong at the last minute?

古文：既轻敌深入，又与尚别营，事有缓急，不复相及。
现代文：既轻敌深入，又与刘尚另建营垒，如事情急迫，就来不及了。
English: If things are urgent, it will be too late.

古文：贼若出兵缀公，以大众攻尚，尚破，公即败矣。
现代文：贼如果出兵牵制你，而以大兵攻刘尚，刘尚被攻破了，公也就败了。
English: If a thief sends troops to hold you back, but attacks Liu Shang with soldiers, Liu Shang will be broken, and the public will be defeated.

古文：幸无它者，急引兵还广都。 诏书未到，述果使其将谢丰、袁吉将众十许万，分为二十余营，并出攻汉。
现代文：现在还幸亏没有其他，令你急引兵回广都。 诏书没有到达，公孙述果使其将谢丰、袁吉率众十多万，分为二十多营，齐出攻击吴汉。
English: Now, fortunately, there is no other reason for you to hastily bring your troops back to Guangdu. The imperial edict did not arrive, and the result of Gongsun's report made him divide the more than one hundred thousand people led by Xie Feng and Yuan Ji into more than twenty battalions and attack Wuhan.

古文：使别将将万余人劫刘尚，令不得相救。
现代文：派遣别将率万余人劫刘尚，令二处彼此不能相救。
English: The dispatching generals led more than 10,000 people to kidnap Liu Shang, making the two places unable to save each other.

古文：汉与大战一日，兵败，走入壁，丰因围之。
现代文：吴汉与蜀兵大战一天，兵败，走入军营中，谢丰因而围住。
English: One day after the battle between Wu Han and Shu soldiers, he was defeated and went into the military camp. As a result, Xie Feng was surrounded.

古文：汉乃召诸将厉之曰： 吾共诸君逾越险阻，转战千里，所在斩获，遂深入敌地，至其城下。
现代文：吴汉就召诸将振奋地说 ：我与诸君逾越险阻，转战千里，所到都斩敌获胜，于是深入敌境，到其城下。
English: Wu Han then summoned his generals and said excitedly, "I and my lords have surmounted the perilous obstacles, traveled thousands of miles, defeated the enemy wherever we went, and then penetrated deep into the enemy's territory, to the city's outskirts.

古文：而今与刘尚二处受围，势既不接，其祸难量。
现代文：现在与刘尚二处受围，势不能相接，其后果难以估量。
English: Now he and Liu Shang are besieged in two places, unable to meet, and the consequences are difficult to estimate.

古文：欲潜师就尚于江南，并兵御之。
现代文：我想秘密出兵与刘尚会师江南，并力御敌。
English: I want to secretly send troops to join Liu Shang in the south of the Yangtze River and fight against the enemy.

古文：若能同心一力，人自为战，大功可立；如其不然，败必无余。
现代文：如能同心协力，人自为战，大功就可建立；否则必败无疑。
English: If we can make concerted efforts and fight for ourselves, great achievements can be made; otherwise, we will undoubtedly fail.

古文：成败之机，在此一举。 诸将皆曰 诺 。
现代文：成败之机，在此一举。 诸将都说 ：好。 
English: The opportunity for success or failure is in this one move. The generals all say: Good.

古文：于是飨士秣马，闭门三日不出，乃多树幡旗，使烟火不绝，夜衔枚引兵与刘尚合军。
现代文：于是让兵士和马匹吃得饱饱的，关闭营门三天不出，就多树立旗幡，使烟火不绝，乘夜衔枚疾走引兵与刘尚合军。
English: So he let the soldiers and horses eat their fill, closed the camp gate for three days, set up more banners, so that the fireworks would not cease, and took the night to lead the soldiers to join forces with Liu Shang.

古文：丰等不觉，明日，乃分兵拒江北，自将攻江南。
现代文：谢丰等没有察觉，第二天，就分兵拒江北，自己率军攻江南。
English: Unnoticed by Xie Feng and others, the next day, he divided his troops to resist the north of the river and led his own army to attack the south of the river.

古文：汉悉兵迎战，自旦至晡，遂大破之，斩谢丰、袁吉，获甲首五千余级。
现代文：吴汉率全军迎战，自早至下午，大破蜀兵，斩谢丰、袁吉，获甲士首级五千多级。
English: Wu Han led the whole army into battle, and from the morning to the afternoon, he defeated Shu soldiers, killed Xie Feng and Yuan Ji, and won more than five thousand first-class officers.

古文：于是引还广都，留刘尚拒述，具以状上，而深自谴责。
现代文：于是引还广都，留刘尚拒公孙述，上书报告光武，而且深深进行自我谴责。
English: As a result, he was banished back to Guangzhou, leaving Liu Shang to refuse to report to his grandson, report to Guangwu, and deeply self-condemn.

古文：帝报曰： 公还广都，甚得其宜，述必不敢略尚而击公也。
现代文：光武回答说 ：你回广都，很是适宜，公孙述必不敢忽略刘尚而攻击你了。
English: Guangwu replied, "It is very appropriate for you to go back to Guangdong. Gongsun Su will not dare to ignore Liu Shang and attack you."

古文：若先攻尚，公从广都五十里悉步骑赴之，适当值其危困，破之必矣。 自是汉与述战于广都、成都之间，八战八克，遂军于其郭中。
现代文：如果他先攻刘尚，你从广都五十里率全部步骑赴敌，刚好遇到他的危困，必可破蜀兵了。 自此以后吴汉与公孙述战于广都、成都之间，八战八胜，于是进军于外城。
English: If he attacked Liu Shang first, you should ride to the enemy with all your cavalry at a distance of 50 miles from Guangdu, and if you happened to meet him in peril, you would surely defeat the Shu soldiers. Since then, Wu Han and Gongsun have been fighting in Guangdu and Chengdu, with eight battles and eight victories, so they marched into the outer city.

古文：述自将数万人出城大战，汉使护军高午、唐邯将数万锐卒击之。
现代文：公孙述自己率军数万人出城大战，吴汉使护军高午、唐邯率领数万精兵锐卒迎击。
English: According to Gongsun, he led an army of tens of thousands of people out of the city to fight, Wu Han sent a convoy at high noon, and Tang Xi led tens of thousands of elite soldiers to meet the attack.

古文：述兵败走，高午奔陈刺述，杀之。
现代文：公孙述败走，高午快速奔向敌阵刺杀公孙述，把他杀了。
English: Gongsun Shu was defeated and ran away. Gao Gao quickly ran to the enemy camp to assassinate Gongsun Shu and killed him.

古文：事已见《述传》。旦日城降，斩述首传送洛阳。
现代文：次日晨成都开门投降，斩公孙述首传送到洛阳。
English: In the morning of the next day, Chengdu opened its doors and surrendered, and Zeng Gongsun's head was sent to Luoyang.

古文：明年正月，汉振旅浮江而下。
现代文：第二年正月，吴汉整顿军旅浮江而下。
English: In the first month of the second year, the Wu Han rectification army marched down the Floating River.

古文：至宛，诏令过家上冢，赐谷二万斛。
现代文：到达宛城，诏令吴汉过家上冢祭祖，赐谷二万斛。
English: Arriving at Wancheng, he ordered Wu Han to go to the ancestor of the family and give him 20,000 baht.

古文：十五年，复率扬武将军马成、捕虏将军马武北击匈奴，徙雁门、代郡、上谷吏人六万余口，置居庸、常山关以东。
现代文：建武十五年，再率扬武将军马成、捕虏将军马武北击匈奴，把雁门、代郡、上谷官吏人民六万余口，迁徙安置到居庸关、常山关以东。
English: In the fifteenth year of Jianwu, Yangwu's general Ma Cheng and captive general Ma Wu led the army north to attack the Xiongnu, and relocated more than 60,000 people of officials from Yanmen, Dayi County and Shanggu to Juyongguan and east of Changshanguan.

古文：十八年，蜀郡守将史歆反于成都，自称大司马，攻太守张穆，穆逾城走广都，歆遂移檄郡县，而宕渠杨伟、朐〈月忍〉徐容等，起兵各数千人以应之。
现代文：建武十八年，蜀郡守将史歆在成都谋反，自称大司马，进攻太守张穆，张穆越过城墙逃奔广都，史歆就移檄到郡县，而宕渠杨伟、朐月忍徐容等，各起兵数千人以响应史歆。
English: In the 18th year of the Jianwu era, Shu County's commander-in-chief, Shifu, plotted a rebellion in Chengdu, claiming to be the grand steed. He attacked the commander-in-chief, Zhang Mu. Zhang Mu fled across the city wall to Guangdu. Shifu then moved to the county, and Yang Wei, Xing Yue and Xu Rong went to the canal. Thousands of soldiers were raised in response to Shifu.

古文：帝以歆昔为岑彭护军，晓习兵事，故遣汉率刘尚及太中大夫臧宫将万余人讨之。
现代文：帝因史歆以前是岑彭的护军，知道并演练过军事，所以派遣吴汉率领刘尚及太中大夫臧宫率万余人前往讨伐。
English: Diying Shiqin had previously been a bodyguard of Zi Peng, and knew and practiced military affairs, so he sent Wu Han to lead Liu Shang and the Tai Zhong Doctor Gong Gong to lead more than ten thousand people to the crusade.

古文：汉入武都，乃发广汉、巴、蜀三郡兵围成都，百余日城破，诛歆等。
现代文：吴汉进入武都，就发广汉、巴、蜀三郡兵围成都，百多天后城被攻破，杀了史歆等。
English: When Wu Han entered Wudu, he sent troops from Guanghan, Ba and Shu counties to encircle Chengdu. More than a hundred days later, the city was breached, killing Shi Yan and others.

古文：汉乃乘桴沿江下巴郡，杨伟、徐容等惶恐解散，汉诛其渠帅二百余人，徙其党与数百家于南郡、长沙而还。
现代文：吴汉乘筏沿江而下巴郡，杨伟、徐容等惶恐解散，吴汉杀其大帅二百多人，将其党与百家迁徙到南郡、长沙。
English: Wu Han took the rafts along the river and disbanded in Jiaoba County, Yang Wei, Xu Rong and others panicked. Wu Han killed more than two hundred of his generals and moved his party and hundreds of families to Nan County and Changsha.

古文：汉性强力，每从征伐，帝未安，恒侧足而言。
现代文：而吴汉性格好强持力，每从征伐，帝颇不安，放心不下。
English: However, Wu Han had a strong and resilient personality, and whenever he embarked on a campaign, the emperor was quite uneasy and could not be reassured.

古文：诸将见战陈不利，或多惶惧，失其常度。
现代文：往常诸将见战阵不利，有的人惶恐畏惧，失去了常度。
English: As usual, the generals were at a disadvantage in the battle, and some people panicked and lost their temper.

古文：汉意气自若，方整厉器械，激扬士吏。
现代文：而吴汉意气如常，正整治器械，激励士吏。
English: However, Wu Han is as enthusiastic as ever. He is tidying up the equipment and motivating the officials.

古文：帝时遣人观大司马何为，还言方修战攻之具，乃叹曰： 吴公差强人意，隐若一敌国矣！ 每当出师，朝受诏，夕即引道，初无办严之日。
现代文：帝时常派人去看看大司马在干什么，回报说他正在修理战攻器具，帝叹道： 吴公比较使人满意，其威重若一敌国了。 每当出师，早晨接受了命令，日落前就上路，连办理行装的时间都没有。
English: The emperor often sent someone to see what the grand steed was doing, and in return he said that he was repairing the battle equipment, the emperor sighed: Wu Gong is more satisfactory, his dignity is like an enemy country. Whenever he left the division, he received the order in the morning and went on the road before sunset, and he did not even have time to handle the loading.

古文：故能常任职，以功名终。
现代文：所以能够常任要职，以功名终其一生。
English: As a result, he was able to hold important positions and live the rest of his life with the glory of his achievements.

古文：及在朝廷，斤斤谨质，形于体貌。
现代文：等到回到朝廷，慎重精察，形于体貌。
English: Wait until you get back to the Imperial Court, carefully inspect it, and form it into a figure.

古文：汉尝出征，妻子在后买田业。
现代文：吴汉曾在出征后，妻子在家购置田业。
English: After Wu Han went to the front, his wife went home to buy farmland.

古文：汉还，让之曰： 军师在外，吏士不足，何多买田宅乎！ 遂尽以分与昆弟外家。
现代文：吴汉回后，责让妻子说 ：军师在外，官吏士卒供养不足，何必多买田宅？ 于是尽数分给昆弟们和外家。
English: After Wu Han returned, he ordered his wife to say, "Since the military instructors are away, and the officials and scholars are not well provided for, why do you need to buy more farmhouses? Therefore, give as many points as possible to the Kun brothers and foreign families."

古文：二十年，汉病笃。
现代文：建武二十年，吴汉病危。
English: In the 20th year of Jianwu, Wu Han became critically ill.

古文：车驾亲临，问所欲言。
现代文：光武亲临看望，问吴汉有什么话交代。
English: Guangwu visited Wu Han in person and asked him what he had to say.

古文：对曰： 臣愚无所知识，惟愿陛下慎无亦攵而已。 及薨，有诏悼愍，赐谥曰忠侯。
现代文：吴汉说 ：臣愚昧无知，只愿陛下慎重不要轻易赦免罪犯而已。 等到去世，有诏书悼悯，赐谥号忠侯。
English: Wu Han said, "O foolish and ignorant vassal, I only wish that Your Majesty would be careful not to pardon criminals so easily. Wait until you die, issue an edict of condolence, and bestow the title of loyal vassal."

古文：发北军五校、轻车、介士送葬，如大将军霍光故事。
现代文：发北军五校、兵车、甲士为其送葬，如大将军霍光以前的丧礼一样。
English: The Northern Army sent five schools, chariots, and soldiers to attend his funeral, just like the previous funeral of General Huo Guang.

古文：子哀侯成嗣，为奴所杀。
现代文：子哀侯吴成嗣位，为奴所杀。
English: His son, Wu Chengzhi, was killed by a slave.

古文：二十八年，分汉封为三国：成子旦为灈阳侯，以奉汉嗣；旦弟盱为筑阳侯；成弟国为新蔡侯。
现代文：建武二十八年，划分吴汉封地为三国，吴成儿子吴旦为氵瞿阳侯，以奉吴汉祭祀；吴旦弟吴盱，为筑阳侯；吴成弟吴国为新蔡侯。
English: In the 28th year of Jianwu, Wu Han's fiefdoms were divided into three countries. Wu Cheng's son Wu Dan was the lord of Shanyang, and was dedicated to the worship of Wu Han; Wu Dan's younger brother Wu Xi was the lord of Chikuyang; and Wu Cheng's younger brother Wu Guo was the new lord of Cai.

古文：旦卒，无子，国除。
现代文：吴旦死，因无子，封国撤除。
English: After the death of Wu Dan, because he had no son, the fief was revoked.

古文：建初八年，徙封盱为平春侯，以奉汉后。
现代文：建初八年，徙封吴盱为平春侯，以奉吴汉后嗣。
English: In the eighth year after the founding of the dynasty, Wu Xi was transferred to Pingchun and became the heir of Wu Han.

古文：盱卒，子胜嗣。
现代文：吴盱死，子吴胜嗣位。
English: Wu Sheng died, and his son Wu Sheng became the heir.

古文：初，汉兄尉为将军，从征战死，封尉子彤为安阳侯。
现代文：起初，吴汉兄吴尉为将军，跟从征伐战死，封吴尉子吴彤为安阳侯。
English: At first, Wu Han's elder brother Wu Jun was a general and died following the conquest. Wu Jun, the son of Wu Jun, was given the title of Prince of Anyang.

古文：帝以汉功大，复封弟翕为褒亲侯。
现代文：帝以吴汉功劳大，又封吴汉弟吴翕为褒亲侯。
English: The emperor praised Wu Han for his great achievements, and also named Wu Han's younger brother, Wu Xi, as an honorary prince.

古文：吴氏侯者凡五国。
现代文：吴氏一家封侯的有五个。
English: The Wu family had five feudal lords.

古文：初，渔阳都尉严宣与汉俱会光武于广阿，光武以为偏将军，封建信侯。
现代文：起初，渔阳都尉严宣，与吴汉都与光武会于广阿，光武以严宣为偏将军，封建信侯。
English: At the beginning, Yuyang's captain Yan Xuan, Wu Han Du and Guangwu met in Guang'a. Guangwu took Yan Xuan as a partial general, a feudal nobleman.

古文：论曰：吴汉自建武世，常居上公之位，终始倚爱之亲，谅由质简而强力也。
现代文：史官评论道：吴汉自建武之世，官常居上公之位，始终得到光武的倚重亲信，想必是由于他的忠诚简朴而强劲有力吧。
English: The historian commented, "Wu Han had always been trusted by Guangwu since he founded the Wu dynasty. His loyalty must have been simple but powerful.

古文：子曰 刚毅木讷近仁 ，斯岂汉之方乎！
现代文：孔子说 ：刚毅、朴实、迟钝少言近于仁。 这岂不是吴汉的比方吗？
English: Confucius said: "Fortitude, simplicity, dullness, and few words are closer to benevolence." Isn't this the parable of Wu and Han?

古文：昔陈平智有余以见疑，周勃资朴忠而见信。
现代文：以前陈平足智多谋而见疑，周勃资质忠朴而见信。
English: In the past, Chen Ping's resourcefulness was suspect, while Zhou Bo's qualities were simple and trustworthy.

古文：夫仁义不足以相怀，则智者以有余为疑，而朴者以不足取信矣。
现代文：仁义不足以相依，则智者以多谋而见疑，而朴者以智不足而取信了。
English: If benevolence and righteousness are not enough to depend on each other, then the wise will be suspicious because of their plotting, while the naive will be trusted because of their lack of wisdom.

古文：盖延字巨卿，渔阳要阳人也。
现代文：盖延字巨卿，渔阳郡要阳县人。
English: Gai Yanzhi Jiuqing, Yuyang County, Yangyang County.

古文：身长八尺，弯弓三百斤。
现代文：身长八尺，能挽弓三百斤。
English: He is eight feet tall and can bend a bow of three hundred pounds.

古文：边俗尚勇力，而延以气闻，历郡列掾、州从事，所在职办。
现代文：边疆风俗崇尚勇力，而盖延以勇气闻名。并为郡列掾、州从事，所在都能尽职办事。
English: Borderland customs advocate courage, and Gaiyan is famous for courage. It is engaged in county, county, and state, and can do its duty.

古文：彭宠为太守，召延署营尉，行护军。
现代文：彭宠为太守，召盖延署职营尉，代理护军。
English: Peng Jia as the governor, Zhao Gaiyan as the deputy battalion commander, acting as the escort.

古文：及王郎起，延与吴汉同谋归光武。
现代文：王郎兴起时，盖延与吴汉一起设法归光武。
English: When Wang Lang was on the rise, Gai Yan and Wu Han tried to return to Guangwu.

古文：延至广阿，拜偏将军，号建功侯，从平河北。
现代文：盖延到广阿，拜为偏将军，号为建功侯，跟从平定河北。
English: Gai extended to Guang'a, worshipped as a partial general, called for the construction of a meritorious service, and followed the pacification of Hebei.

古文：光武即位，以延为虎牙将军。
现代文：光武即位，以盖延为虎牙将军。
English: Guangwu ascended the throne, and Gaien became General Koga.

古文：建武二年，更封安平侯。
现代文：建武二年，更封为安平侯。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, he was given the title of Anping Hou.

古文：遣南击敖仓，转攻酸枣、封丘，皆拔。
现代文：派他南击敖仓，转攻酸枣县、封丘县，都攻拔了。
English: He sent him south to attack Kamakura, and then attacked Azabu County and Fuchu County, both of which were conquered.

古文：其夏，督驸马都尉马武、骑都尉刘隆、护军都尉马成、偏将军王霸等南伐刘永，先攻拔襄邑，进取麻乡，遂围永于睢阳。
现代文：当年夏天，督率驸马都尉马武、骑都尉刘隆、护军都尉马成、偏将军王霸等南伐刘永，先攻下襄邑，进而攻取麻乡县，于是围刘永于睢阳。
English: In the summer of that year, Liu Yong, the commander of the Southern Expedition, led by Captain Ma Wu, Captain Liu Long, Captain Ma Cheng, and General Wang Ba, first conquered Xiangyue, then conquered Asiang County, and then surrounded Liu Yong in Shenyang.

古文：数月，尽收野麦，夜梯其城入。
现代文：数月，尽收田野之麦，乘夜以梯入其城。
English: For several months, they collect as much wheat as possible from the fields and take a ladder at night to enter the city.

古文：永惊惧，引兵走出东门，延追击，大破之。
现代文：刘永惊惧，引兵逃出东门，盖延追击，大破刘永军。
English: Liu Yong was alarmed. He led his troops out of the east gate, and Gai Yan chased and defeated Liu Yong's troops.

古文：永弃军走谯，延进攻，拔薛，斩其鲁郡太守，而彭城、扶阳、杼秋、萧皆降。
现代文：刘永弃军逃奔谯，盖延进攻，攻薛县，杀了他的鲁郡太守，而彭城、扶阳、杼秋、萧县都投降了。
English: Liu Yongzheng's army fled and fled, Gai Yan attacked, attacked Xue County, killed his Lu County governor, and Pengcheng, Fuyang, Shuqiu and Xiao County all surrendered.

古文：又破永沛郡太守，斩之。
现代文：又攻破刘永沛郡太守，把他杀了。
English: He also attacked and killed Liu Yongpei, the governor of the county.

古文：永将苏茂、佼彊、周建等三万余人救永，共攻延，延与战于沛西，大破之。
现代文：刘永部将苏茂、佼疆、周建等三万余人救刘永，共攻盖延，盖延与他们战于沛西，大破其军。
English: Liu Yongbu led more than 30,000 people, including Su Mao, Kiao Jiang and Zhou Jian, to rescue Liu Yong and jointly attack Gai Yan. Gai Yan fought with them in the west of Peixi and defeated their army.

古文：永军乱，遁没溺死者大半。
现代文：刘永军乱，落水溺死者大半。
English: Liu Yong's army mutinied, and most of the dead drowned.

古文：永弃城走湖陵，苏茂奔广乐。
现代文：刘永弃城走湖陵，苏茂奔广乐。
English: Liu Yong abandoned the city and went to the lakes and mausoleums, while Sumo went to the opera.

古文：延遂定沛、楚、临淮，修高祖庙，置啬夫、祝宰、乐人。
现代文：盖延就平定了沛、楚、临淮等地，修了高祖庙，设立啬夫、祝宰、乐师，以主持庙祀。
English: Gai Yan leveled Pei, Chu, Linhuai and other places, built Gao Zu Temple, and set up a miser, celebrant, and musician to preside over the temple worship.

古文：三年，睢阳复反城迎刘永，延复率诸将围之百日，收其野谷。
现代文：建武三年，睢阳再反，迎回刘永，盖延再率诸将围攻百日之久，收取田间麦子。
English: In the third year of Jianwu, Fenyang rebelled again, welcomed back Liu Yong, and Ge Yan led the generals to besiege for 100 days and collect wheat from the fields.

古文：永乏食，突走，延追击，尽得辎重。
现代文：刘永缺粮，突围而走，盖延追击，尽获其辎重。
English: Liu Yong was short of food, broke through the encirclement, and was pursued by Gai Yan, who gained all his weight.

古文：永为其所杀，永弟防举城降。
现代文：刘永被部将所杀，刘永弟刘防举城投降。
English: Liu Yong was killed by the general, Liu Yong's younger brother Liu Bei surrendered the city.

古文：四年春，延又击苏茂、周建于蕲，进与董宪战留下，皆破之。
现代文：建武四年春，盖延又击苏茂、周建于蕲县，进与董宪战于留县，都破敌。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Jianwu, Gai Yan attacked Sumo, Zhou Jianwu in Jixian County, and entered into a battle with Dong Xian in Lvuxian County, all of which broke the enemy.

古文：因率平狄将军庞萌攻西防，拔之。
现代文：因此率平狄将军庞萌攻西防县，攻下了。
English: Therefore, he led General Ping Di Pang Meng to attack Xifang County and conquered it.

古文：复追败周建、苏茂于彭城，茂、建亡奔董宪，董宪将贲休举兰陵城降。
现代文：再追击击败周建、苏茂于彭城，苏茂、周建逃奔董宪，董宪部将贲休举兰陵城投降。
English: They then pursued and defeated Zhou Jian and Sumo in Pengcheng. Sumo and Zhou Jian fled to Dongxian, and Dongxian's troops surrendered Lanling City.

古文：宪闻之，自郯围休。
现代文：董宪听到，自郯围贲休。
English: Upon hearing this, Dong Xian broke off the siege.

古文：时，延及庞萌在楚，请往救之。
现代文：当时盖延及庞萌在楚，请求前往援救。
English: At that time, Gai Yan and Pang Meng were in Chu and requested to go to the rescue.

古文：帝敕曰： 可直往捣郯，则兰陵必自解。 延等以贲休城危，遂先赴之。
现代文：帝命令说： 可直往捣郯，兰陵之围必解。 盖延等以贲休城危，于是先赴。
English: The emperor ordered: "You can go straight to Mashu, but the siege of Lanling must be resolved." Gai Yan waited for Shu to end the danger of the city, so he went ahead.

古文：宪逆战而阳败，延等逐退，因拔围入城。
现代文：董宪迎战而诈败，盖延等将其逐退，因而破围入城。
English: Dong Xian entered the battle and was defeated, while Gai Yan and others drove them back, thus breaking the siege and entering the city.

古文：明日，宪大出兵合围，延等惧，遽出突走，因往攻郯。
现代文：第二天，董宪大出军合围，盖延军畏惧，急忙出城突围而走，因往攻郯。
English: The next day, when Dong Xianda marched out to encircle the city, Gai Yan's army was afraid and hurried out of the city to break through the encirclement.

古文：帝让之曰： 间欲先赴郯者，以其不意故耳。
现代文：帝责备说： 原来令你先赴攻郯，是出敌不意。
English: The emperor scolded, "You were ordered to attack first, but the enemy caught you unawares.

古文：今既奔走，贼计已立，围岂可解乎！ 延等至郯，果不能克，而董宪遂拔兰陵，杀贲休。
现代文：现在既已奔走，贼军的计谋已立定了，兰陵之围岂可解吗！ 盖延等到郯，果然攻不下，而董宪就攻拔了兰陵，杀了贲休。
English: Now that he has fled, and the cunning of the robber army has been established, can the siege of Lanling be broken? Gai Yan waited until, but was unable to attack, and then Dong Xian attacked Lanling and killed 休.

古文：延等往来要击宪别将于彭城、郯、邳之间，战或日数合，颇有克获。
现代文：盖延等往来邀击董宪别将于彭城、郯、邳之间，或者每天战上数合，略有些收获。
English: Guiyan and others invited Dong Xianbei to come and go between Pengcheng, Handan and Handan, or to go to the battlefield every day, with a little bit of gain.

古文：帝以延轻敌深入，数以书诫之。
现代文：帝以盖延轻敌深入，几次以诏书训诫。
English: Emperor Yige extended the light enemy deep, several times with the edict of exhortation.

古文：及庞萌反，攻杀楚郡太守，引军袭败延，延走，北渡泗水，破舟楫，坏津梁，仅而得免。
现代文：等到庞萌谋反，攻杀楚都太守，引军袭击打败盖延，盖延逃，北渡泗水，把舟楫破坏掉，把桥梁拆除掉，仅以身免。
English: Wait until Pang Meng plots a rebellion, attacks and kills the Chudu Taishou, leads an army to attack and defeat Gai Yan, Gai Yan flees, and heads to Surabaya, destroys the rafts, and demolishes the bridges, only to be spared.

古文：帝自将而东，征延与大司马吴汉、汉忠将军王常、前将军王梁、捕虏将军马武、讨虏将军王霸等会任城，讨庞萌于桃乡，又并从征董宪于昌虑，皆破平之。
现代文：帝率军东征，征召盖延与大司马吴汉、汉忠将军王常、前将军王梁、捕虏将军马武、讨虏将军王霸等会师任城，讨伐庞萌于桃乡，又一起从征董宪于昌虑，都攻破平定了。
English: The emperor led the army to march eastward, conscripted Gai Yan and the major general Ma Wuhan, the Han general Wang Chang, the former general Wang Liang, the captive general Ma Wu, and the captive general Wang Ba, etc. to fight against Pang Meng in Taoxiang, and together from the conscription of Dong Xian in Changxian, all were defeated and leveled.

古文：六年春，遣屯长安。
现代文：建武六年春，派其屯兵长安。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Jianwu, he sent his troops to Chang'an.

古文：九年，隗嚣死，延西击街泉、略阳、清水诸屯聚，皆定。
现代文：建武九年，隗嚣死，盖延西击街泉、略阳、清水三县诸屯聚，都平定了。
English: In the ninth year of the Jianwu era, Yan Han died, and the three counties of Jiequan, Liaoyang, and Qingshui in the west of Gaiyan were leveled.

古文：十一年，与中郎将来歙攻河池，未克，以病引还，拜为左冯翊，将军如故。
现代文：建武十一年，与中郎将来歙攻河池，不克，以病引回，拜为左冯翊，领兵如故。
English: In the eleventh year of the Jianwu era, he and his middle brother would attack Hechi, but he was taken back due to illness. He was worshipped as Zuo Fengjun and led the army as before.

古文：十三年，增封定食万户。
现代文：建武十三年，增加封邑定食万户。
English: In the 13th year of the Jianwu era, the number of households with Fongyi set meals has increased.

古文：十五年，薨于位。
现代文：建武十五年，病逝于位。
English: Jianwu 15 years old, died of illness in office.

古文：子扶嗣。
现代文：子盖扶嗣位。
English: Zigei was elevated to the position of heir.

古文：扶卒，子侧嗣。
现代文：扶死，子盖侧嗣位。
English: He died, and the position of heir to the child's side became vacant.

古文：永平十三年，坐与舅王平谋反，伏诛，国除。
现代文：永平十三年，因与舅父王平谋反，被杀，封国废除。
English: In the thirteenth year of Yongping, he was killed for plotting a rebellion with his uncle Wang Pingru, and the state was abolished.

古文：永初七年，邓太后绍封延曾孙恢为芦亭侯。
现代文：永初七年，邓太后继封盖延曾孙盖恢为芦亭侯。
English: In the seventh year of the Yongzheng era, Empress Dowager Deng's great-grandson, Ga Gao Jian, succeeded Gao Jian as Prince of Luting.

古文：恢卒，子遂嗣。
现代文：盖恢死后，子盖遂嗣位。
English: After Gai's death, his son Gai succeeded to the throne.

古文：陈俊字子昭，西阳西鄂人也。
现代文：陈俊字子昭，是南阳郡西鄂。
English: Chen Jun Zi Zhao is from Nanyang County, West Hubei Province.

古文：少为郡吏，更始立，以宗室刘嘉为太常将军，俊为长史。
现代文：年轻时为郡吏。更始立，以宗室刘嘉为太常将军，陈俊为长史。
English: He was a county magistrate when he was young. He was also the first to appoint his family members Liu Jia as Taizang General and Chen Jun as Changshi.

古文：光武徇河北，嘉遣书荐俊，光武以为安集掾。
现代文：光武攻掠河北，刘嘉以书信推荐陈俊，光武以陈俊为安集掾。
English: Guangwu invaded Hebei, Liu Jia recommended Chen Jun in a letter, and Guangwu selected Chen Jun as the leader of Anji.

古文：从击铜马于清阳，进至蒲阳，拜强弩将军。
现代文：跟从光武击铜马于青阳，进到蒲阳，拜为强弩将军。
English: Following the path of Guangwu's bronze horse in Qingyang, he went to Puyang to pay homage to General Qiang Yu.

古文：与五校战于安次，俊下马，手接短兵，所向必破，追奔二十余里，斩其渠帅而还。
现代文：与五校战于安次，陈俊下马，手接短兵，所到之处贼必破，追奔二十余里，杀其大帅而回。
English: Chen Jun dismounted from his horse and picked up a short soldier. Wherever he went, the thief would break through. He chased the thief for more than 20 miles, killed the thief, and then returned.

古文：光武望而叹曰： 战将尽如是，岂有忧哉！ 五校引退入渔阳，所过虏掠。
现代文：光武望而叹道 ：如果战将都像他这样，还有什么可忧的呢！ 五校引退入渔阳，所到之处虏劫抢。
English: Guangwu looked at him and sighed, "If all generals are like him, what is there to worry about?" The five generals retired to Yuyang, and everywhere they went they were robbed and plundered.

古文：俊言于光武曰： 宜令轻骑出贼前，使百姓各自坚壁，以绝其食，可不战而殄也。 光武然之，遣俊将轻骑驰出贼前。
现代文：陈俊对光武说 ：应令轻骑出现于贼军之前，使百姓各自坚守壁垒，以断绝贼军粮食，就可以不战而歼灭敌人了。 光武以为然，派遣陈俊率领轻骑驰出于贼前。
English: Chen Jun said to Guangwu: The light cavalry should be ordered to appear before the thief army, so that the people would each hold fast to the barriers, so as to cut off the thief army's food, and then the enemy could be destroyed without a fight. Guangwu thought so, and sent Chen Jun to lead the light cavalry to ride out in front of the thieves.

古文：视人保壁坚完者，敕令固守；放散在野者，因掠取之。
现代文：见到百姓保守壁垒坚固完好的，就令其固守；放散在外的，就掠取过来。
English: When he saw that the people were keeping the walls strong and intact, he made them hold fast; when they were scattered, he plundered them.

古文：贼至无所得，遂散败。
现代文：这样贼兵到了一无所得，就散败了。
English: In this way, when the robber soldiers got nothing, they were defeated.

古文：及军还，光武谓俊曰： 困此虏者，将军策也。 及即位，封俊为列侯。
现代文：等到回师，光武对陈俊说： 困扰这些贼虏的。
English: When he returned to his division, Guangwu said to Chen Jun: "You should trouble these thieves.

古文：建武二年春，攻匡贼，下四县，更封新处侯。
现代文：是将军的策略哩。 光武即位，封陈俊为列侯。建武二年春，攻匡贼，攻下四个县，更封新处侯。
English: It was the general's strategy. Guangwu ascended the throne, and Chen Jun was made a vassal lord. In the spring of the second year of Jianwu, he attacked the Kuomintang, captured four counties, and was made a new vassal lord.

古文：引击顿丘，降三城。
现代文：引击顿丘，三城投降。
English: Lead attack on Dongqiu, Sanzhong surrendered.

古文：其秋，大司马吴汉承制拜俊为强弩大将军，别击金门、白马贼于河内，皆破之。
现代文：当年秋，大司马吴汉承帝命拜陈俊为强弩大将军，另击金门、白马贼于河内，都攻破了。
English: In the autumn of that year, Grand Master Ma Wu Hancheng ordered Chen Jun to be a strong general, and he attacked the Golden Gate and the White Horse Thief in Hanoi.

古文：四年，转徇汝阳及项，又拔南武阳。
现代文：建武四年，转攻汝阳及项，又攻拔南武阳。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, he attacked Ruyang and Xiang, and attacked Nanwuyang.

古文：是时，太山豪杰多拥众与张步连兵，吴汉言于帝曰： 非陈俊莫能定此郡。 于是拜俊太山太守，行大将军事。
现代文：这时太山豪杰多数拥有部众与张步连兵，吴汉对光武说： 非陈俊莫能平定此郡。 于是拜陈俊为太山太守，代理大将军事。
English: At this time, most of the Taishan heroes had subordinates and Zhang Buren soldiers, and Wu Han said to Guangwu: If not Chen Jun, I can't subdue this county. Therefore, Bai Chen Jun was the governor of Taishan and the acting military general.

古文：张步闻之，遣其将击俊，战于嬴下，俊大破之，追至济南，收得印绶九十余，稍攻下诸县，遂定太山。
现代文：张步听说，派遣其部将攻击陈俊，战于嬴下，陈俊大破其军，追到济南，收得印绶九十多颗，随着攻下诸县，平定太山。
English: Zhang Bu heard that he would send his troops to attack Chen Jun and fight under his command. Chen Jun defeated his army, chased it to Jinan, collected more than ninety seals, conquered counties, and pacified Taishan.

古文：五年，与建威大将军耿弇共破张步。
现代文：建武五年，与建威大将军耿弇共破张步。
English: In the fifth year of Jianwu, he broke the tension with Geng Yao, the general of Jianwei.

古文：事在《弇传》。
现代文：事载《耿弇传》。
English: Reported in "Geng Yingzong Biography."

古文：时，琅邪未平，乃徙俊为琅邪太守，领将军如故。
现代文：这时琅笽没有平定，于是迁陈俊为琅笽太守，领将军事一如过去。
English: At this time, Yunnan was not pacified, so Chen Jun was transferred to be the governor of Yunnan, leading the military as in the past.

古文：齐地素闻俊名，入界，盗贼皆解散。
现代文：齐地素来听到陈俊的威名，陈俊一到，盗贼都解散了。
English: Qi Di had always heard of Chen Jun's prestige. As soon as Chen Jun arrived, the thieves dispersed.

古文：俊将兵击董宪于赣榆，进破朐贼孙阳，平之。
现代文：陈俊率军攻击董宪于赣榆县，进军攻破朐贼孙阳，琅笽平定了。
English: Chen Jun led the army to attack Dong Xian in Yuxian County, marched to break Sun Yang, the thief of Yuxian, and leveled Yuxian.

古文：八年，张步畔，还琅邪，俊追讨，斩之。
现代文：建武八年，张步叛，回到琅笽，陈俊发兵追讨，斩张步。
English: In the eighth year of Jianwu, Zhang Bu rebelled and returned to Handan. Chen Jun sent troops to pursue and cut off Zhang Bu.

古文：帝美其功，诏俊得专征青、徐。
现代文：帝赞美其功，诏令陈俊得以专征青、徐两州。
English: The emperor praised his achievement and ordered Chen Jun to specially enlist in Qing and Xu provinces.

古文：俊抚贫弱，表有义，检制军吏，不得与郡县相干，百姓歌之。
现代文：陈俊抚慰贫弱，表彰有义，约束军吏，不得干预郡县的事情，百姓歌颂。
English: Chen Jun soothe the poor and weak, commend the righteous, restrain military officials, must not interfere in county affairs, and praise the people.

古文：数上书自请，愿奋击陇、蜀。
现代文：几次上书自请，愿意奋击隗嚣和公孙述。
English: He has written to me several times to invite me to write to him, and he is willing to fight the clamor and tell me about his grandchildren.

古文：诏报曰： 东州新平，大将军之功也。
现代文：诏书回答说： 东州刚刚平定，是大将军的功劳。
English: The edict replied: Dongzhou has just been pacified, and it is the great general's achievement.

古文：负海猾夏，盗贼之处，国家以为重忧，且勉镇抚之。 
现代文：东州近海扰乱，是盗贼藏身之地，朝廷以此地为重忧，请暂且勉力镇抚。 
English: The disturbance off the coast of Dongzhou is a place for thieves to hide. The imperial court is very worried about this, so please try your best to calm things down.

古文：十三年，增邑，定封祝阿侯。
现代文：建武十三年，增加食邑，定封为祝阿侯。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jianwu, the number of food villages was increased, and it was sealed as Zhu A Hou.

古文：明年，征奉朝请。
现代文：明年，征召回京奉朝请。
English: Next year, please be drafted back to Beijing to serve the Emperor.

古文：二十三年卒。
现代文：建武二十三年去世。
English: Jianwu died 23 years ago.

古文：子浮嗣，徙封薪春侯。
现代文：子陈浮嗣位，徙封蕲春侯。
English: Chen's son, Chen Fu, was given the position of heir to the throne, and was given the title of prince in the spring.

古文：浮卒，子专诸嗣。
现代文：浮死，子陈专诸嗣位。
English: He died, and his son Chen Zong became the heir.

古文：专诸卒，子笃嗣。
现代文：专诸死，子陈笃嗣位。
English: Zong died and his son Chen Duc succeeded him.

古文：臧宫字君翁，颍川郏人也。
现代文：臧宫字君翁，是颍川郡郏县人。
English: Gong Gong is a native of Tongchuan County, Shandong Province.

古文：少为县亭长、游徼，后率宾客入下江兵中为校尉，因从光武征战，诸将多称其勇。
现代文：年轻时为县亭长、游徼，后来率领宾客加入下江兵中为校尉，因此跟从光武征战，诸将多称赞他的勇敢。
English: When he was young, he was the head of the county pavilion and a tour guide. Later, he led the guests to join the soldiers of the Lower River as a lieutenant. Therefore, he followed Guangwu to fight, and the generals praised his bravery.

古文：光武察宫勤力少言，甚亲纳之。
现代文：光武考察臧宫勤勉出力少言，很亲切地接待他。
English: Guangwu inspected the Summer Palace diligently, and received him very cordially.

古文：及至河北，以为偏将军，从破群贼，数陷陈却敌。
现代文：等到了河北，以他为偏将军，跟从击破群贼，多次攻陷敌阵击退敌军。
English: When he arrived in Hebei, he was appointed as a general, and he followed to break the bandits, and repeatedly attacked the enemy's lines to repel the enemy.

古文：光武即位，以为侍中、骑都尉。
现代文：光武即位，以他为侍中、骑都尉。
English: When Mitsutake ascended the throne, he became a chamberlain and a captain.

古文：建武二年，封成安侯。
现代文：建武二年，封成安侯。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, he was given the title of Anhou.

古文：明年，将突骑与征虏将军祭遵击更始将左防、韦颜于涅阳、郦，悉降之。
现代文：第二年，率领突击骑兵与征虏将军祭遵攻击更始将左防、韦颜于涅阳、郦，左、韦都投降了。
English: In the second year, he led the assault cavalry to attack and capture the general Saizong Zun, and at the same time, the commanders of the left defense, Wei Yan, Nieyang, Handan, Zuo and Wei all surrendered.

古文：五年，将兵徇江夏，击代乡、钟武、竹里，皆下之。
现代文：建武五年，率领兵攻江夏，击代乡、钟武、竹里，都攻下了。
English: In the fifth year of Jianwu, he led the troops to attack Jiangxia, and captured the townships of Baidai, Zhongwu, and Zhuli.

古文：帝使太中大夫持节拜宫为辅威将军。
现代文：帝使太中大夫持符节拜臧宫为辅威将军。
English: The emperor sent Taizhong Dafu to hold a festival of symbols to pay homage to the Imperial Palace as the general of Fu Wei.

古文：七年，更封期思侯。
现代文：七月，更封期思侯。
English: In July, I'm looking forward to the renewal period.

古文：击梁郡、济阴，皆平之。
现代文：击梁郡、济阴都平定了。
English: Beiliang County and Jiyin County have been pacified.

古文：十一年，将兵至中卢，屯骆越。
现代文：建武十一年，率兵到中卢县，屯兵骆越。
English: In the eleventh year of Jianwu, he led his troops to Zhonglu County and set up a garrison in Luowei.

古文：是时，公孙述将田戎、任满与征南大将军岑彭相距于荆门，彭等战数不利，越人谋畔从蜀。
现代文：这时公孙述部将田戎、任满与征南大将军岑彭相拒于荆州，岑彭等数战都不利，越人准备谋反归蜀。
English: At this time, Gongsun Shube refused to send Tian Rong, who had completed his term of office, to Jingzhou with the Southern Expeditionary Army General Zou Peng. Several battles such as Zou Peng were unfavorable, and the Yue people were preparing to rebel and return to Shu.

古文：官兵少，力不能制。
现代文：臧宫兵少，力不能制。
English: The number of soldiers in the Imperial Palace is small, and the strength cannot be controlled.

古文：会属县送委输车数百乘至，宫夜使锯断城门限，令车声回转出入至旦。
现代文：恰好各属县送转运车辆数百乘到，臧宫乘夜派人锯断城门门槛，推车出入，令车声响到清晨。
English: Just as hundreds of delivery and transfer vehicles from each county arrived, the Summer Palace sent people at night to saw off the threshold of the city gate, pushing the car in and out, making the car sound until the early morning.

古文：越人候伺者闻车声不绝，而门限断，相告以汉兵大至。
现代文：越人侦察者听到车声不断，而城门门槛也断了，互相通报说汉兵大队伍到了。
English: The Vietnamese scouts heard the sound of cars constantly, and the threshold of the city gate was also broken, informing each other that a large contingent of Chinese soldiers had arrived.

古文：其渠帅乃奉牛、酒以劳军营。
现代文：其大帅乃奉献牛酒以慰劳军营。
English: His grand marshal offered cow wine to console the labor camp.

古文：宫陈兵大会，击牛酾酒，飨赐慰纳之，越人由是遂安。
现代文：臧宫陈兵大会，杀牛洒酒，飨赐慰劳接纳，越人由此逐步安定下来。
English: The palace veterans' meeting, the killing of cattle, the sprinkling of wine, and the acceptance of consolation, the Yue people gradually settled down.

古文：宫与岑彭等破荆门，别至垂鹊山，通道出秭归，至江州。
现代文：臧宫与岑彭等破荆门，另到垂鹊山，通道出秭归，到江州。
English: Gonggong and Zhaopeng, and other broken gates, and then to the Liao Mountains, and the passage from Liao to Jiangzhou.

古文：岑彭下巴郡，使宫将降卒五万，从涪水上平曲。
现代文：岑彭攻下巴郡，使臧宫率领投降士卒五万，从涪水上平曲。
English: Yao Peng conquered Jianba County and forced Yao Gong to lead fifty thousand soldiers to surrender, and leveled the city from the Yanshui River.

古文：公孙述将延岑盛兵于沈水，时宫众多食少，转输不至，而降者皆欲散畔，郡邑复更保聚，观望成败。
现代文：公孙述部将延岑以大军陈于沈水，这时臧宫兵多粮少，运输不到，五万降卒都想散伙反叛，各郡邑都只想自保，以观望成败。
English: Gongsun Shube led a large army from Yancheng to Shenshui. At this time, the palace soldiers had little food and could not be transported. Fifty thousand soldiers wanted to split up and rebel. Counties and counties only wanted to protect themselves and wait and see whether they would succeed or fail.

古文：宫欲引还，恐为所反，会帝遣谒者将兵诣岑彭，有马七百匹，宫矫制取以自益，晨夜进兵，多张旗帜，登山鼓噪，右步左骑，挟船而引，呼声动山谷。
现代文：臧宫想引兵回去，恐为降卒所反。恰逢这时帝派谒者率兵到岑彭下，有马七百匹，臧宫假托帝旨取来武装自己，乘夜进兵，多张旗帜，登山击鼓呼号，右是步兵左是骑兵，挟着船只而进，呼号之声震动山谷。
English: It was at this time that the emperor sent the imperial eunuch to Zhaopeng with an army of seven hundred horses. The imperial eunuch pretended to take the emperor's order to arm himself, and marched into the valley at night with a number of flags, mountaineering drums and horns, with infantry on the right and cavalry on the left, and ships in between. The sound of the horns shook the valley.

古文：岑不意汉军卒至，登山望之，大震恐。
现代文：延岑不意汉兵骤到，登山观望，极为震恐。
English: Yan Xun unexpectedly saw the Chinese soldiers suddenly arrive, climbed the mountain to watch, and was extremely shocked.

古文：宫因从击，大破之。斩首溺死者万余人，水为之浊流。
现代文：臧宫因而纵兵进击，大破蜀兵，斩首及溺死者万余人，水都染红了。
English: As a result, a column of soldiers marched into the Summer Palace, destroying the Shu soldiers, decapitating and drowning more than 10,000 people, and the water turned red.

古文：延岑奔成都，其众悉降，尽获其兵马珍宝。
现代文：延岑奔回成都，其部众全部投降，全部俘获了蜀的兵马珍宝。
English: Yan Xuan rushed back to Chengdu, all of his subordinates surrendered, and all of them captured Shu's precious soldiers and horses.

古文：自是乘胜追北，降者以十万数。
现代文：自此乘胜追击，蜀兵投降的达十万人。
English: Since then, they have been pursuing victory, and as many as 100,000 Shu soldiers have surrendered.

古文：军至平阳乡，蜀将王元举众降。
现代文：进军到平阳乡，蜀将王元举众投降。
English: Marching into Pingyang Township, Shu general Wang Yuan led the troops to surrender.

古文：进拔绵竹，破涪城，斩公孙述弟恢，复攻拔繁、郫。
现代文：进军攻拔绵竹，破涪城，斩公孙述弟公孙恢，再攻拔繁县、郫县。
English: They marched to attack and conquer Mianzhu, broke through the city of Zou, beheaded the younger brother of Gongsun Shu, Gongsun Wei, and then attacked and conquered the counties of Shengxian and Zou.

古文：前后收得节五，印绶千八百。
现代文：前后收得符节五，印绶一千八百。
English: Around the time of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th month.

古文：是时，大司马吴汉亦乘胜进营逼成都。
现代文：这时大司马吴汉也乘胜进兵直逼成都。
English: At this time, the commander Ma Wuhan also took advantage of the victory and marched into Chengdu.

古文：宫连屠大城，兵马旌旗甚盛，乃乘兵入小雒郭门，历成都城下，至吴汉营，饮酒高会。
现代文：臧宫连克大城，兵马旌旗都很强盛，就纵兵入小雒郭门，经巡成都城下，到吴汉营，饮酒大宴会。
English: The imperial palace was surrounded by a large city, and the terra-cotta warriors, horses and banners were very strong. The soldiers marched straight into the small gate of the imperial palace, and after a tour of the city of Chengdu, they went to the Wuhan camp, and had a big drinking banquet.

古文：汉见之甚欢，谓宫曰： 将军向者经虏城下，震扬威灵，风行电照。
现代文：吴汉见他很欢喜，对臧宫说： 将军来时经贼兵城下，震扬了威力，行走如风，照耀如电。
English: Wu Han was very happy to see him, and said to Ye Gong: When the general came, he passed under the city of thieves and soldiers, and his power trembled. He walked like the wind and shone like electricity.

古文：然穷寇难量，还营愿从它道矣。 宫不从，复路而归，贼亦不敢近之。
现代文：然而穷寇难以估量，回去时希望你改行他道。 臧宫不听，仍从原路而归。贼兵也不敢接近。
English: However, the poor robber is hard to estimate, and when you go back, he hopes that you will change to another path. The Summer Palace does not listen, but still returns from the original path. The robber soldiers do not dare to approach.

古文：进军咸门，与吴汉并灭公孙述。
现代文：进军咸门，与吴汉共灭公孙述。
English: Sun Su, who marched into Hammen and fought with the Wu and Han armies to exterminate the Gong, recounts.

古文：帝以蜀地新定，拜宫为广汉太守。
现代文：帝以蜀地新定，拜臧宫为广汉太守。
English: The emperor chose Shunde, Shunde as the capital of Shu, and Baisheng Palace as the capital of Guanghan.

古文：十三年，增邑，更封酂侯。
现代文：建武十三年，增加食邑，更封赞阝侯。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Jianwu era, the number of food villages increased, and the title of "Celebrated Mayor" was conferred.

古文：十五年，征还京师，以列侯奉朝请，定封朗陵侯。
现代文：武十五年，征召回京师，以列侯奉朝请，定封朗陵侯。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Wu Dynasty, he was called back to Beijing to serve the imperial court as a vassal, and was given the title of Langling.

古文：十八年，拜太中大夫。
现代文：建武十八年，拜太中大夫。
English: In the 18th year of the Jianwu era, he became a middle-ranking doctor.

古文：十九年，妖巫维汜弟子单臣、傅镇等，复妖言相聚，入原武城，劫吏人，自称将军。
现代文：建武十九年，妖巫维汜弟子单臣、傅镇等，再次以妖言相聚，入原武城，劫掠官吏人民，自称将军。
English: In the 19th year of the Jianwu era, the sorcerer Wei Zhen's disciples, including Shan Zhen and Fu Zhen, gathered again with the help of sorcery, entered the original Wucheng, plundered the officials and people, and called themselves generals.

古文：于是遣宫将北军及黎阳营数千人围之。
现代文：于是派遣臧宫率北军及黎阳营数千人将单臣等围住。
English: As a result, thousands of soldiers from the Northern Army and the Liyang Battalion led by Gonggu were sent to encircle the lone vassal.

古文：贼谷食多，数攻不下，士卒死伤。
现代文：贼粮食多，几次都没能攻下，士卒有死伤。
English: Thieves had more grain, but failed to capture it several times, and soldiers were killed and wounded.

古文：帝召公卿诸侯王问方略，皆曰 宜重其购赏 。
现代文：帝召集公卿诸侯王问方略，都说： 应加重悬赏。 
English: When the emperor summoned the nobles and princes to ask for advice, they all said: the reward should be increased.

古文：时，显宗为东海王，独对曰： 妖巫相劫，势无久立，其中必有悔欲亡者。
现代文：当时显宗为东海王，独回答说 ：妖巫相劫，其势不可久立，其中必有悔悟而想逃亡的。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong was the king of the East Sea. Du Du replied, "When witches and devils band together, their power cannot last long. Some of them must repent and want to escape."

古文：但外围急，不得走耳。
现代文：但外面围得紧，逃不出来。
English: But they are tightly surrounded on the outside, and there is no escape.

古文：宜小挺缓，令得逃亡，逃亡则一亭长足以禽矣。 帝然之，即敕宫彻围缓贼，贼众分散，遂斩臣、镇等。
现代文：应稍为放松包围，让他们逃亡，逃亡得只需一个亭长就可以活捉他们了。 帝以为然，即令臧宫撤围缓贼，贼众逃亡分散，于是斩单臣、傅镇等。
English: The encirclement should be loosened a little, and they should be allowed to escape, and it only takes one warden to escape to capture them alive. The emperor thought so, so he ordered the withdrawal of the siege of the Imperial Palace to slow down the thieves, and the thieves fled and dispersed, and then executed Shancheng and Fu Zhen.

古文：宫还，迁城门校尉，复转左中郎将。
现代文：臧宫回，迁为城门校尉，又转迁为左中郎将。
English: He was transferred to the castle gate as a captain of the castle gate, and then to the left middle captain.

古文：击武溪贼，至江陵，降之。
现代文：击武奚谷贼，到江陵，贼投降。
English: Strike at the bandits in Shibuya, and the bandits will surrender in Gangneung.

古文：宫以谨信质朴，故常见任用。
现代文：臧宫因谨慎守信朴实，所以常见任用。
English: Because of his prudence, trustworthiness and simplicity, Gong Gong was often appointed.

古文：后匈奴饥疫，自相分争，帝以问宫，宫曰： 愿得五千骑以立功。 帝笑曰： 常胜之家，难与虑敌，吾方自思之。 二十七年，宫乃与杨虚侯马武上书曰： 匈奴贪利，无有礼信，穷则稽首，安则侵盗，缘边被其毒痛，中国忧其抵突。
现代文：后来匈奴发生饥荒病疫，内部自相纷争，帝以此问臧宫，臧宫说 ：愿率五千骑以立功。 帝笑着说：常胜之家，难与谋划敌国之事，我正自己考虑哩。 建武二十七年，臧宫与相虚侯马武上书奏说 ：匈奴贪利，没有礼信，穷则以头叩地称臣，安定则向外侵盗，边境被其荼毒创痛，中国忧其顶撞唐突。
English: Later, the Xiongnu suffered from famine and disease, leading to internal strife, and the emperor asked the imperial court about this. The imperial court said, "I would like to lead five thousand horsemen to perform meritorious service." The emperor smiled and said, "I am thinking about the difficulties and plans of the enemy country, the home of eternal victory." In the 27th year of the Jianwu era, the imperial court and the false prince Mabu wrote: "The Xiongnu are greedy and have no etiquette, the poor praise their vassals with head-knocking, the stable invade and steal from the outside, the border is hurt by their

古文：虏今人畜疫死，旱蝗赤地，疫困之力，不当中国一郡。
现代文：现在匈奴人畜疫死，旱蝗将地上之物食尽，病疫困顿，其力量抵不住中国的一个郡。
English: Now the Huns are dying of the plague, the locusts are devouring everything on the ground, the disease is in trouble, and its strength cannot withstand a county in China.

古文：万里死命，县在陛下。
现代文：万里垂死的生命，悬诸陛下之手。
English: Thousands of dying lives hang in the balance.

古文：福不再来，时或易失，岂宜固守文德而堕武事乎？
现代文：时机易失，福不再来，怎么能固守文德而废弃武事呢？
English: Time is fleeting, and good fortune never comes. How can one stick to literature and morals while abandoning martial arts?

古文：今命将临塞，厚县购赏，喻告高句骊、乌恒、鲜卑攻其左，发河西四郡、天水、陇西羌胡击其右。
现代文：现在派遣大将到塞北，重金悬赏，喻告高句丽、乌桓、鲜卑发兵攻其左，发河西四郡兵马并天水、陇西羌胡攻其右。
English: Now they are sending a general to the northern part of the island, offering a heavy reward, telling Goguryeo, Wuhuan and Xianbei to attack the left side, and sending soldiers and horses from the four counties west of the river to attack the right side, including Tianshui and Xianxi.

古文：如此，北虏之灭，不过数年。
现代文：这样，北虏之灭，不过数年即可成功。
English: In this way, the extermination of the Hokkaidō people can be achieved in just a few years.

古文：臣恐陛下仁恩不忍，谋臣狐疑，令万世刻石之功不立于圣世。 诏报曰： 《黄石公记》曰， 柔能制刚，弱能制强 。
现代文：臣恐陛下仁恩不忍，谋臣疑惑，以至万世刻石树碑之功不立于当代圣世。 诏书回答说 ：《黄石公记》上说 ：柔能制刚，弱能制强。 
English: The courtiers feared that His Majesty's benevolence would not endure, and that he would have doubts about the courtiers, so that the achievement of engraving stone and tree monuments for all time would not stand in the contemporary holy world. The imperial edict replied: "The Yellowstone Chronicle" said: "The soft can control the hard, and the weak can control the strong."

古文：柔者德也，刚者贼也，弱者仁之助也，强者怨之归也。
现代文：柔就是德，刚就是贼，弱者有仁为之帮助，强者是怨恨的归宿。
English: Softness is virtue, hardness is a thief, the weak are helped by benevolence, and the strong are the home of resentment.

古文：故曰有德之君，以所乐乐人；无德之君，以所乐乐身。
现代文：所以说有德之君，以其所乐者乐人；无德之君，以其所乐而独乐其身。
English: Therefore, it is said that a virtuous ruler is happy with those who are happy with him; a non-virtuous ruler is happy only with himself.

古文：乐人者其乐长，乐身者不久而亡。
现代文：能乐人者其乐必长久，独乐其身者不久而亡。
English: Those who can enjoy themselves will enjoy themselves for a long time. Those who only enjoy themselves will soon die.

古文：舍近谋远者，劳而无功；舍远谋近者，逸而有终。
现代文：舍近谋远的，往往劳而无功；舍远谋近的，往往安逸而有终局。
English: Those who do not care about the near and seek the far, often labor in vain; those who do not care about the far and seek the near, are often comfortable and have an end.

古文：逸政多忠臣，劳政多乱人。
现代文：政治安逸就多忠臣，政事劳苦就多乱人。
English: Those who are politically at ease tend to be more loyal, while those who work hard at politics tend to be more chaotic.

古文：故曰务广地者荒，务广德者强。
现代文：所以说力求扩大地盘的反而荒芜，力求推行德政的就会强盛。
English: Therefore, it is said that those who strive to expand their territory will become barren, and those who strive to implement German politics will become strong.

古文：有其有者安，贪人有者残。
现代文：以自己所有为满足的得到安宁，贪人家之所有的导致毁灭。
English: He who is satisfied with what he has is at peace, but he who covets what others have is destroyed.

古文：残灭之政，虽成必败。
现代文：残暴之政，虽成于一时最终必败。
English: A tyrannical government, though it may succeed for a time, must ultimately fail.

古文：今国无善政，灾变不息，百姓惊惶，人不自保，而复欲远事边外乎？
现代文：现在国家没有良好的政治，灾变不停息，百姓惊震惶恐，人民不能自保，而还想远征边外吗？
English: Now that the country does not have a good political system, the cataclysms do not stop, the people are shocked and frightened, the people cannot protect themselves, but still want to go on an expedition abroad?

古文：孔子曰： 吾恐季孙之忧，不在颛臾。
现代文：孔子说： 我恐怕季孙的忧患，不在颛臾。 
English: Confucius said: I am afraid that the sorrow of the Qisun is not in the world.

古文：且北狄尚强，而屯田警备传闻之事，恒多失实。
现代文：且北狄还很强大，而从屯田警备传闻得来的情报，常片面而失真实。
English: Moreover, the Northern Di is still very powerful, and the information obtained from the rumours of the Tonden guards is often one-sided and untrue.

古文：诚能举天下之半以灭大寇，岂非至愿；苟非其时，不如息人。 自是诸将莫敢复言兵事者。
现代文：果然能举天下的一半而灭大寇，难道不是最大的愿望吗；但如果不得其时，那就不如让人们休养生息。 自此以后诸将没有哪个敢再谈兵事的了。
English: Isn't it the greatest wish to be able to raise half of the world and destroy the great robber; but if it's not the time, then it's better to let people recuperate and live. From now on, no one will dare to talk about military affairs.

古文：宫永平元年卒，谥曰愍侯。
现代文：臧宫于永平元年去世，谥为愍侯。
English: Gong Gong died in the first year of the Yongping Dynasty, and Gong became Gong Hou.

古文：子信嗣。信卒，子震嗣。
现代文：子臧信嗣位，信卒，子臧震嗣位。
English: Sons and daughters of believers are heirs, and sons and daughters of believers are heirs, and sons and daughters of unbelievers are heirs.

古文：震卒，子松嗣。
现代文：震卒，子臧松嗣位。
English: Shochiku died, and his son Matsuzo succeeded him.

古文：元初四年，与母别居，国除。
现代文：元初四年，与母另居，封国被废。
English: In the first four years of the Yuan Dynasty, he lived separately from his mother, and the feudal state was abolished.

古文：永宁元年，邓太后绍封松弟由为郎陵侯。
现代文：永宁元年，邓太后继封臧松弟臧由为朗陵侯。
English: In the first year of the Yongning era, the Dowager Empress Dowager Deng succeeded to the title of Empress Dowager Song, and her younger brother Empress Dowager Yu became the Prince of Langling.

古文：论曰：中兴之业，诚艰难也。
现代文：史官评论道：中兴的事业，真是很艰难的。
English: The historian commented: ZTE's business is really very difficult.

古文：然敌无秦、项之强，人资附汉之思，虽怀玺纡绂，跨陵州县，殊名诡号，千队为群，尚未足以为比功上烈也。
现代文：然敌人没有秦皇、项羽那样强大，人们还怀抱着归附汉朝的思想，虽怀玉玺官印，跨越州县，假托各种名义或伪号，千队为群，还不足以为与显贵高官比功劳哩。
English: However, the enemy was not as powerful as the Qin Emperor and Xiang Yu, and people still harbored the idea of adhering to the Han Dynasty. Although they carried jade official seals, crossed states and counties, assumed various names or aliases, and formed thousands of troops, it was not enough to compare their merits with those of prominent high-ranking officials.

古文：至于山西既定，威临天下，戎竭丧其精胆，群帅贾其余壮，斯诚雄心尚武之几，先志玩兵之日。
现代文：等到山西平定，威临天下，戎羯丧其精胆，群帅贾其余勇，这真是雄心尚武之良机，乘胜习兵之时哩。
English: Wait until Shanxi is pacified and dominates the world, the army will lose its courage, and the soldiers will lose their courage. This is really a good opportunity to be ambitious and take advantage of the time to train soldiers.

古文：臧宫、马武之徒，抚鸣剑而抵掌，志驰于伊吾之北矣。
现代文：臧宫、马武之徒，抚剑抵掌，其志驰于伊吾的北面了。
English: To the north of Igo, the followers of Kaguya and Mabu, with their swords in their hands, are making their way.

古文：光武审《黄石》，存包桑，闭玉门以谢西域之质，卑词币以礼匈奴之使，其意防盖已弘深。岂其颠沛平城之围，忍伤黥王之陈乎？
现代文：光武审识《黄石公记》，常自危惧而不安，关闭玉门以谢西域的人质，词币礼以答匈奴的使者，他的防御意识已经很宏大深远了，难道他是担心像高祖一样颠沛于平城之围，不忍像高祖一样亲击黥布时在阵上负伤吗？
English: Guangwu was familiar with the "Yellowstone Chronicles," he was often anxious and uneasy, he closed the Jade Gate to thank the hostages in the western region, and gave a speech to answer the messenger of the Xiongnu. His defense awareness was already very broad and far-reaching. Was he worried that he would be overwhelmed by the siege of Pingcheng like Gao Zu, and could not bear to be injured in the battle when he personally struck the cocoon like Gao Zu?

