古文：九年春，毛伯来求金。
现代文：九年春季，毛伯卫前来求取丧仪。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, Mao Bowei came to ask for a funeral ceremony.

古文：夫人姜氏如齐。
现代文：文公夫人姜氏到齐国。
English: Mr. Wen's wife, Ms. Jiang, went to Qi Province.

古文：二月，叔孙得臣如京师。
现代文：二月，叔孙得臣到了京都。
English: In February, his great-great-grandson Tokuomi arrived in Kyoto.

古文：辛丑，葬襄王。
现代文：辛丑日，安葬周襄王。
English: On the fateful day, King Zhou Xiang was buried.

古文：晋人杀其大夫先都。
现代文：晋国杀掉自己的大夫先都。
English: Jin killed his own doctor first.

古文：三月，夫人姜氏至自齐。
现代文：三月，夫人姜氏从齐国归来。
English: In March, Mrs. Jiang returned from Qi Province.

古文：晋人杀其大夫士縠及箕郑父。
现代文：晋国杀掉自己的大夫士縠和箕郑父。
English: Jin killed their own doctors Zou and Zou Zheng.

古文：楚人伐郑。
现代文：楚国讨伐郑国。
English: Chu attacked Zheng.

古文：公子遂会晋人、宋人、卫人、许人救郑。
现代文：公子遂与晋国、宋国、卫国。许国一起援救郑国。
English: He then joined Jin, Song, and Hui in rescuing Zheng.

古文：夏，狄侵齐。
现代文：夏季，狄人侵犯齐国。
English: In the summer, the Di people invaded Qi.

古文：秋八月，曹伯襄卒。
现代文：秋季八月，曹伯襄去世。
English: In the autumn of August, Cao Boxiang passed away.

古文：九月癸酉，地震。
现代文：九月癸酉日，发生地震。
English: On the third day of September, an earthquake occurred.

古文：冬，楚子使椒来聘。
现代文：冬季，楚国子越椒前来聘问。
English: In winter, Chu Guo Zi Yue Zhao came to ask questions.

古文：秦人来归僖公、成风之襚。
现代文：秦国人前来向死去的僖公和成风赠送衣衾。
English: The people of Qin came to present the coats and aprons to the deceased Zou Gong and Cheng Feng.

古文：葬曹共公。
现代文：安葬葬曹共公。
English: Rest in peace, Comrade Cao.

古文：九年春，王正月己酉，使贼杀先克。
现代文：九年春季，周王朝历法的正月初二日，晋灵公派遣凶手杀死了先克。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, on the second day of the first month of the Zhou Dynasty calendar, Jin Linggong dispatched a murderer to kill Xian Ke.

古文：乙丑，晋人杀先都、梁益耳。
现代文：十八日，晋国人杀死了先都、梁益耳。
English: On the 18th, the people of Jin killed the former capital, Liang Yili.

古文：毛伯卫来求金，非礼也。
现代文：毛伯卫前来求取丧仪，这是不合礼的。
English: It is not proper for Mao Bowei to come to ask for funeral rites.

古文：不书王命，未葬也。
现代文：没有记载说这是天子的命令，这是由于周襄王还未安葬。
English: There is no record that this was ordered by the Son of Heaven, because King Zhou Xiang was not yet buried.

古文：二月，庄叔如周。葬襄王。
现代文：二月，庄叔去成周参加襄王的葬礼。
English: In February, Zhuang uncle went to Cheng Zhou to attend the funeral of King Xiang.

古文：三月甲戌，晋人杀箕郑父、士縠、蒯得。
现代文：三月二十八日，晋国人杀死了箕郑父、士縠、蒯得。
English: On March 28th, the people of Jin killed Zhen Zheng, Shi Zheng, and Xing De.

古文：范山言于楚子曰： 晋君少，不在诸侯，北方可图也。 
现代文：范山对楚穆王说： 晋国国君年少，心意不在于称霸诸侯，北方是可以打主意的。 
English: Fan Shan said to King Chumu: The king of Jin is young, and his intention is not to dominate the princes. The north can make up its own mind.

古文：楚子师于狼渊以伐郑。
现代文：楚王在狼渊出兵来攻打郑国。
English: King Chu sent troops to attack Zheng Guo from Wolouyuan.

古文：囚公子坚、公子尨及乐耳。
现代文：囚禁了公子坚、公子尨和乐耳。
English: He imprisoned Gongzijian, Gongzijuan and Le'er.

古文：郑及楚平。
现代文：郑国和楚国讲和。
English: Zheng and Chu made peace.

古文：公子遂会晋赵盾、宋华耦、卫孔达、许大夫救郑，不及楚师。
现代文：公子遂会合晋国赵盾、宋国华耦、卫国孔达、许国大夫，救援郑国，没有碰上楚军。
English: The prince then rallied Zhao Dun of Jin, Hua Kuan of Song, Kunda of Wei, and Doctor Xu to rescue Zheng, but did not encounter the Chu army.

古文：卿不书，缓也，以惩不恪。
现代文：《春秋》没有记载卿的名字，由于他们出兵迟缓，以此惩戒他们的办事不严肃认真。
English: "Spring and Autumn" did not record the names of the lords, because they were slow to send troops, thus punishing them for not taking their duties seriously.

古文：夏，楚侵陈，克壶丘，以其服于晋也。
现代文：夏季，楚国入侵陈国，攻下壶丘，因为陈国归服了晋国。
English: In the summer, Chu invaded Chen and conquered Hujiao, because Chen submitted to Jin.

古文：秋，楚公子朱自东夷伐陈，陈人败之，获公子茷。
现代文：秋季，楚国公子朱从东夷进攻陈国，陈国军队打败了他，俘虏了公子茷。
English: In autumn, Prince Zhu of Chu attacked Chen from Dongyi. Chen's army defeated him and captured Prince Yao.

古文：陈惧，乃及楚平。
现代文：陈国害怕了，就同出国讲和。
English: Chen Guo was afraid, so he made peace with the foreigners.

古文：冬，楚子越椒来聘，执币傲。
现代文：冬季，楚国子越椒前来聘问，拿着礼物很傲慢。
English: In winter, Chu Guo Zi Yue Jiao came to ask questions, and he was very arrogant with the gifts.

古文：叔仲惠伯曰： 是必灭若敖氏之宗。
现代文：叔仲惠伯说： 这个人必然会使若敖氏的宗族灭亡。
English: Uncle Zhong Huibo said, "This man will surely cause the destruction of the Wakao clan."

古文：傲其先君，神弗福也。 
现代文：向他的先君表示傲慢，神灵不会降福给他。 
English: Show arrogance to his forefathers, and the gods will not bless him.

古文：秦人来归僖公、成风之襚，礼也。
现代文：秦国人前来向死去的僖公和成风赠送衣衾，这是合于礼的。
English: The Qin people came to present the coats of arms to the deceased Zou Gong and Cheng Feng, which was appropriate.

古文：诸侯相吊贺也，虽不当事，苟有礼焉，书也，以无忘旧好。
现代文：诸侯之间互相吊丧贺喜，虽然不及时，如果符合礼仪，《春秋》就要加以记载，以表示不忘记过去的友好。
English: Although it is not timely, if it is in line with etiquette, "Spring and Autumn" should be recorded to show that the past friendship is not forgotten.

