古文：苗民奇肱西北荒小人于阗乌苌汉槃陀国苏都识匿国马留
现代文：苗民奇肱西北荒小人于阗乌苌汉槃陀国苏都识匿国马留
English: Miao people live in the mysterious northwest desert, and the little people live in Wuzhen, Hanzhong, Sudo, Shizhong, and Malu.

古文：武宁蛮悬渡国飞头獠蹄羌扶楼交趾南越尺郭顿逊堕婆登国
现代文：武宁蛮悬渡国飞头獠蹄羌扶楼交趾南越尺郭顿逊堕婆登国
English: Wu Ning overran the country, flew to the south of Vietnam, invaded the south of Vietnam, invaded the south of Vietnam, invaded the south of Vietnam.

古文：哀牢夷诃陵国真腊国留仇国木客缴濮国木饮州阿萨部
现代文：哀牢夷诃陵国真腊国留仇国木客缴濮国木饮州阿萨部
English: Lamenting the death of the enemy of the state of Jinla, the enemy of the state of Jinling, the enemy of the state of Jinla, the enemy of the state of Jinla, the enemy of the state of Jinla, and the enemy of the state of Jinla

古文：孝忆国婆弥烂国拨拔力国昆吾绣面獠子五溪蛮堕雨儿
现代文：孝忆国婆弥烂国拨拔力国昆吾绣面獠子五溪蛮堕雨儿
English: filial piety, filial piety, filial piety, filial piety

古文：苗民
现代文：苗民
English: Miao people

古文：西荒中有人焉，面目手足皆人形，而腋下有翼，不能飞，名曰苗民。
现代文：西方边远的地方有一种人，面目手脚都是人的样子，但腋下长有翅膀，不过不能飞，名称叫苗民。
English: In a faraway place in the West, there is a kind of person with a human-like face, hands and feet, but with wings under the arms, but unable to fly. His name is Miao Min.

古文：书曰：窜三苗于三危，四裔，为人饕餮，淫佚无理，舜窜之于此。
现代文：《尚书》上说： 把三苗族流放到三危山和四方极远的地方。苗民为人贪吃、纵欲放荡，没有伦理，所以舜才把他们流放到那里。 
English: "Shangshu" said: Exile the Sanmiao people to a place far away from the Three Dangerous Mountains and the four directions. The Miao people are greedy, debauched, and have no ethics, so I only exiled them there.

古文：奇肱
现代文：奇肱
English: Wondrous

古文：奇肱国，其民善为机巧，以杀百禽。
现代文：奇肱国的百姓擅长制作巧妙的机械，来杀死各种禽鸟。
English: The people of the Land of Enchantment are adept at crafting ingenious machines to kill all manner of birds.

古文：能为飞车，从风远行。
现代文：还能制造飞车，随风飞到很远的地方。
English: They can also make flying cars that can fly far away with the wind.

古文：汤时，西风久下，奇肱人车至于豫州界中。
现代文：商汤的时候，总是刮西风，所以奇肱的飞车飞到了豫州一带。
English: During the Shang Tang, the west wind always blows, so the miraculous flying car flew to the area around Henan Province.

古文：汤破其车，不以示民。
现代文：商汤打落了他们的飞车，也不把飞车给百姓看。
English: Shangtang shot down their flying car, and did not show the flying car to the people.

古文：后十年，东风复至，乃使乘车遣归。
现代文：以后过了十年，东风又刮起来了，于是让他们乘着飞车归国了。
English: Ten years later, the east wind began to blow again, so they were allowed to return home on a fast train.

古文：其国去玉门西万里。
现代文：他们的国家在玉门西边有一万里。
English: Their country is ten thousand li west of the Jade Gate.

古文：西北荒小人
现代文：西北荒小人
English: Northwest wasteland villain

古文：西北荒中有小人长一寸，其君朱衣玄冠，乘辂车，马引，为威仪居处。人遇其乘车，抵而食之，其味辛。终年不为物所咋，并识万物名字。
现代文：他们的国君身穿红衣。头戴黑帽，乘坐着马拉的大车，住处十分庄严、讲究。人类如果遇到乘车的小人国皇帝，把他抓住吃下去，味道很辣，以后就不怕任何东西了，并能识别各种东西的名字，还能杀死人肚子里的寄生虫。
English: Their sovereign is dressed in red. He wears a black cap, rides in a horse-drawn carriage, and lives in a very solemn and exquisite place. If a human encounters a Lilliputian emperor riding in a carriage, grab him and eat him, the taste is very spicy, and he will not be afraid of anything in the future, and can recognize the names of various things, and can also kill parasites in the human stomach.

古文：又杀腹中三虫，三虫死，便可食仙药也。
现代文：寄生虫死了，就可以服用仙药了。
English: Once the parasite is dead, you can take the elixir.

古文：于阗
现代文：于阗
English: Yu Zhen

古文：后魏，宋云使西域，行至于阗国。
现代文：后魏时宋云出使西域，到了于阗国。
English: In the late Wei Dynasty, Song Yun sent an envoy to the western region and arrived in Yunnan.

古文：国王头著金冠，以鸡帻，头垂二尺生绢，广五寸，以为饰。
现代文：那里的国王头戴金冠，像鸡冠，冠上垂着二尺长的生绢，宽五寸，以此作为装饰。
English: The king there wears a golden crown on his head, like a cock's crown, with a two-foot-long, five-inch-wide gourd hanging from it as a decoration.

古文：威仪有鼓角金钲，弓箭一具，戟二枚，槊五张。左右带刀，不过百人。
现代文：仪仗有皮鼓、号角、铜锣、一副弓箭、两把戟、五把槊。带刀侍从不超过一百人。
English: The ceremonial games include a leather drum, a trumpet, a bronze gong, a pair of bows and arrows, two gongs and five gongs. There are never more than a hundred attendants with swords.

古文：其俗妇人袴衫束带，乘马驰走，与丈夫无异。
现代文：他们的妇女像男人一样穿长裤和衣衫，腰间扎着带子。骑着马奔驰，与男子没有什么不同。
English: Their women wear trousers and shirts like men, with belts around their waists, and ride horses like men.

古文：死者以火焚烧，收骨葬之，上起浮图。
现代文：死了的人用火焚烧，骨头收起来埋葬，上面修起一座塔。
English: The dead were burned with fire, the bones were collected and buried, and a tower was built over them.

古文：居丧者剪发，长四寸，即就平常。
现代文：守丧的人要剪去头发。等头发长出四寸，守丧期就算结束。
English: Mourners should cut their hair. If the hair grows more than four inches, the mourning period is over.

古文：唯王死不烧，置之棺中，远葬于野。
现代文：只有国王不烧，而是装到棺材中，远远地埋在野外。
English: Only the king did not burn, but was placed in a coffin and buried far away in the field.

古文：乌苌
现代文：乌苌
English: Wuzhen

古文：乌苌国，四熟之稻，苗高没骆驼，米大如小儿指。
现代文：乌苌国的稻米一年成熟四次，稻苗很高，能没过骆驼，米粒大如小孩的指头。
English: The rice in Uzbekistan ripens four times a year. The rice seedlings are tall and can reach the height of a camel. The grains of rice are as big as a child's finger.

古文：又乌苌国民，有死罪，不立杀刑。唯徙空山，任其饮啄。
现代文：还有乌苌国的百姓犯了死罪也没有杀死的刑法，只是把犯人送到空山中，任凭他喝水吃东西。
English: There are also people in Wuzhen who have committed capital crimes and have not killed the criminal law, but only sent the prisoner to the empty mountain and let him drink water and eat.

古文：事涉疑似，以药服之，清浊则验，随事轻重，则当时即决。
现代文：事情如果属于可疑的，就让可疑的人服一种药，清白还是不清白就验证出来了，根据情节的轻重，当场立刻作出判决。
English: If the matter is suspicious, let the suspicious person take a medicine, and the innocence or innocence will be verified. According to the seriousness of the circumstances, a judgment will be made immediately on the spot.

古文：汉槃陀国
现代文：汉槃陀国
English: Hangeul Tha State

古文：汉槃陀国正在山顶。自葱岭已西，水皆西流。
现代文：汉槃陀国恰好在山顶上，从葱岭以西，水都向西流。
English: Hanzhongda country is just on the top of the mountain, and the water flows westward from the west of the green mountains.

古文：世人云，是天地之中，其土人民，决水以种。
现代文：世上的人说，这里是天地的中间，那里的人，都引水种地。
English: And they of the world say, This is the great city, which reigneth between the heaven and the earth.

古文：闻中国待雨而种，笑曰： 天何由可期也？ 
现代文：他们听说中国要等下了雨再种地，笑着说： 有什么理由要去指望天啊？ 
English: They had heard that China had to wait for rain before planting, and said with a smile: "What reason is there to rely on God?

古文：苏都识匿国
现代文：苏都识匿国
English: Su Du Zhentan Country

古文：苏都识匿国有野叉城，城旧有野叉，其窟见在。
现代文：苏都识匿国有座野叉城，这城中过去有野人，野人住过的洞还有。
English: There is a fortified city in Suzu Province. There used to be wild men in this city, and there are caves where wild men used to live.

古文：人近窟住者五百余家，窟口作舍，设关钥，一年再祭。
现代文：人们靠近洞窟住的有五百多家。洞窟口盖上房屋，里面设置门闩，一年到洞窟前祭祀两次。
English: There are more than 500 people living near the cave. Houses are built at the mouth of the cave, gates are set up inside, and sacrifices are held twice a year in front of the cave.

古文：人有逼窟口，烟气出，先触者死，因以尸掷窟中。
现代文：人如果靠近了洞窟的口，烟气冒出来，先接触的就会死去，于是就把尸体扔到洞窟中。
English: If you get close to the mouth of the cave and smoke comes out, the first person to touch it will die, so they throw the body into the cave.

古文：其窟不知深浅。马留
现代文：那个洞窟不知有多深。马留
English: I don't know how deep that cave is.

古文：马伏波有余兵十余家，不返，居寿洽县，自相婚姻，有二百户。
现代文：后汉光武时的伏波将军马援的部队，有十几股余部没有返回内地，留住在寿洽县。他们内部互相联姻，繁衍到二百家。
English: After the Han Dynasty, more than a dozen remnants of the troops of General Ma Yuan of Fubo did not return to the mainland and stayed in Shuchai County. They intermarried and multiplied to 200 families.

古文：以其流寓，号马留，饮食与华同。
现代文：因他们寄居他乡，所以号称 马留 。他们的饮食跟中国人相同。
English: They are called Maru because they live in a foreign country. Their diet is the same as that of the Chinese.

古文：山川移铜柱入海，以此民为识耳。
现代文：山河改道，马援当年立的铜柱已没入海中，只有这里的马留人才能找到它的位置。
English: Mountains and rivers have been rerouted, and the copper pillar erected by Ma Yuan has sunk into the sea. Only the Malians here can find its location.

古文：武宁蛮
现代文：武宁蛮
English: Wu Ningman

古文：峡中俗，夷风不改。
现代文：三峡一带的人仍没有改掉夷人的风气。
English: People in the Three Gorges area still haven't changed their barbarian ways.

古文：武宁蛮好著芒心接离，名曰亭绥。
现代文：武宁的蛮子好戴着中间起尖的帽子，把它叫作 亭绥 。
English: The barbarians of Wu Ning like to wear a hat with a point in the middle, and call it a pavilion.

古文：以稻记年月葬时。
现代文：用稻子的生长、收割时间来记载年月和死人埋葬的时间。
English: The growth and harvest time of the rice is used to record the years and the time of burial of the dead.

古文：以笄向天，谓之刺北斗。
现代文：他们把束发的簪子指向天空，把这称作 刺北斗 。
English: They point their hair braids into the sky and call it the "Pied Piper."

古文：相传磐瓠初死，置于树上，以笄刺之，其后化为象。
现代文：相传磐瓠刚死时，放在树上，用束发簪子刺它，那以后就变成了象征。
English: According to legend, when Iwatsuki died, he was placed on a tree and stabbed with a hairpin, after which he became a symbol.

古文：临邑县有雁翅以御者。悬渡国
现代文：悬渡国乌耗西面有个悬渡国。
English: Suspended country There is a suspended country to the west of Wuxi.

古文：乌耗西有悬渡国，山溪不通，引绳而渡，朽索相引二千里。
现代文：山溪隔断了道路，便扯了绳子渡河，绳子连起来有二千里。
English: The mountain stream cut off the road, so they pulled a rope to cross the river, and the rope was connected for two thousand miles.

古文：土人佃于石间，垒石为室，接手而饮，所谓猿饮也。
现代文：当地人在石头之间种地，用石头垒成房子，喝水用手捧着喝，这就是人们所说的 猿饮 吧。
English: Local people cultivate land between the stones, build houses with stones, and drink water with their hands. This is what people call "ape drinking."

古文：飞头獠
现代文：飞头獠
English: Fei Tou Zou

古文：邺鄯之东，龙城之西南，地广千里，皆为盐田。
现代文：邺鄯的东面，龙城的西南，有广阔千里的土地。
English: To the east of Handan and southwest of Longcheng, there is a vast land stretching for thousands of miles.

古文：行人所经，牛马皆布毡卧焉。
现代文：都是盐碱地，走路的人经过此处，休息的时候连牛马都得铺上毡卧在上面。
English: It's all saline, pedestrians walk through it, and even cows and horses have to lie down on it when resting.

古文：岭南溪洞中，往往有飞头者，故有飞头獠子之号。
现代文：五岭以南的溪洞中，常常有头能飞的人，所以有 飞头獠子 的名称。
English: In the caves south of Wuling, there are often people with flying heads, hence the name "flying head lice."

古文：头飞一日前，颈有痕，匝项如红缕，妻子遂看守之。
现代文：在头飞走的前一天，脖子上就有痕迹，绕脖子一圈像一根红线，妻和孩子便看守着。
English: The day before the head flew away, there were marks on the neck, a circle around the neck like a red line, and the wife and children kept watch.

古文：其人及夜，状如病，头忽离身而去。
现代文：这人到了夜晚，样子像有病似的，头忽然离开身子就飞走了。
English: When evening came, the man looked ill, and his head suddenly left his body and flew away.

古文：乃于岸泥，寻蟹蚓之类食之，将晓飞还，如梦觉，其腹实矣。
现代文：头落在河岸边的泥中，找些螃蟹、蚯蚓之类的东西吃，将要天亮时才飞回来，像做梦忽然醒了似的，然而却觉得肚子里已经很饱了。
English: He would land on his head in the mud on the riverbank, find some crabs, earthworms and the like to eat, and fly back at dawn. It was as if he had suddenly woken up from a dream, but he felt that his stomach was already full.

古文：梵僧菩萨胜又言，阇婆国中有飞头者，其人无目瞳子。聚落时。有一人据于民志怪。
现代文：佛教僧人菩萨胜又说，阇婆国中也有头能飞去的人，那种人眼眶里没瞳孔，在头突然落下的时，有一个人根据这个人的情况记下了这怪异的事情。
English: Buddhist monk Bodhisattva Sheng also said that there was a man in Saba who had a head that could fly, a man who had no pupils in his eyelids, and when his head suddenly fell off, someone recorded this strange event based on the man's condition.

古文：南方落民，其头能飞，其欲所祠，名曰虫落，因号落民。
现代文：南方的落民，他们的头能飞，他们祠庙中供祀的神名字叫 虫落 ，于是称他们为 落民 。
English: The fallen people in the south, their heads can fly, and the name of the god they worship in their ancestral temples is Insect Fall, so they are called fallen people.

古文：昔朱桓有一婢，其头夜飞。
现代文：从前朱桓有一个婢女，她的头在夜晚能飞走。
English: Once upon a time, Zhu Huan had a maid whose head could fly away at night.

古文：《王子年拾遗》言，汉武时，因墀国有南方有解形之民，能先使头飞南海，左手飞东海，右手飞西海，至暮，头还肩上，两手遇疾风，飘于海外。
现代文：《王子年拾遗记》中说，汉武帝时因墀国的南方有能分解身体的人，能先让头飞到南海，左手飞到东海，右手飞到西海。到了晚上，头回到肩上，两只手遇到了猛烈的风，飘飞到了海外。
English: According to "The Prince's Yearbook," Emperor Hanwu, because there were people in the south of the country who could decompose the body, he could first let his head fly to the South Sea, his left hand fly to the East Sea, and his right hand fly to the West Sea. In the evening, his head returned to his shoulders, and his two hands encountered a fierce wind and drifted overseas.

古文：又南方有落头民，其头能飞，以耳为翼，将晓，还复著体。
现代文：又传说，南方有落头民，他们的头能飞，用耳朵作翅膀，天快亮时又回到他的身体上。
English: It is also said that there are people in the south who have lost their heads. Their heads can fly, use their ears as wings, and return to their bodies at dawn.

古文：吴时往往得此人也。蹄羌
现代文：孙吴时常常得到这种人。蹄羌
English: At the time of Sun Wuxi, he often got this kind of person.

古文：蹄羌之国，其人自膝已下，有毛。如马蹄。
现代文：蹄羌国的人，膝盖以下都长着毛，脚像马蹄。
English: People in the country of horseshoe crabs have hair below their knees, and their feet are like horseshoes.

古文：常自鞭其胫。日行百里。
现代文：他们经常自己鞭打自己的小腿，每天能走百余里。
English: They often self-flagellate their calves and can walk more than a hundred miles a day.

古文：扶楼
现代文：扶楼
English: Handrails

古文：周成王七年，南垂有扶楼之国，其人能机巧变化，易形改服。
现代文：周成王七年时，南部边境有个扶楼国。那个国的人能机巧变化，改变自己的形体和服装。
English: When Zhou Cheng Wang was seven years old, there was a country on the southern border of China called Fu Lou. People in that country could change their appearance and clothing.

古文：大则兴云起雾，小则入于纤毫之里。
现代文：大能使云雾出现，小能进入细小的东西里边。
English: The great can make clouds appear, and the small can get into small things.

古文：缀金玉毛羽为衣裳。
现代文：穿着装饰着金玉毛羽的衣服，能从口中吐出云喷出火。
English: Dressed in clothes decorated with golden feathers, he can spit out clouds and fire from his mouth.

古文：能吐云喷火，鼓腹则如雷霆之声。
现代文：鼓起肚子传出声音像很响的雷。有的人能变成巨象、狮子、龙、蛇、狗、马的样子。
English: They are large enough to rise into the clouds, and small enough to burrow into the fine dust.

古文：或化为巨象狮子龙蛇犬马之状，或变虎，或口中吐人于掌中，备百兽之乐，旋转屈曲于指间。
现代文：有的能变成虎，有的口中能吐出人，立在手掌上。他们还能做各种野兽的娱乐，在手指间能旋转弯曲做出各种动作。
English: Some can turn into tigers, some can spit out people from their mouths and stand on the palms of their hands. They can also entertain all kinds of beasts, and can rotate and bend their fingers to perform various actions.

古文：见人形，或长数分，或复数寸。
现代文：这些小人有的才几分高，有的也只有几寸高，神奇怪诞，在当时是大显身手。
English: Some of these little people were only a little bit tall, some were only a few inches tall, and they were very strange and grotesque. At that time, they were very skillful.

古文：神怪欻忽，炫于时，乐府皆传此伎，代代不绝。故俗谓婆侯伎，则扶楼之音讹替也。
现代文：国家的乐府中也传入这种技艺，而且代代相传，所以人们称他们为婆侯技，原来是 扶楼 这个音被传错了。
English: This technique was also introduced into the country's music schools, and was passed down from generation to generation, so people called it the "grandmother technique." Originally, it was the "foothill" technique, but the sound was passed down incorrectly.

古文：交趾
现代文：交趾
English: Toe to toe

古文：交趾之地，颇为膏腴，从民居之，始知播植。
现代文：交趾那地方很肥沃，自从有人住在那里后，才刚刚懂得播种耕田。
English: The area is very fertile, and since people have lived there, they have only just learned how to sow fields.

古文：厥土惟黑壤，厥气惨雄，故今称其田为雄田，其民为雄民。
现代文：那里的土壤都是黑色的，那里的气都是雄气，所以现在把那里的田地叫作雄田，那里的百姓叫雄民。
English: The soil there is all black, and the spirit there is all male, so now the fields there are called male fields, and the people there are called male people.

古文：有君长，亦曰雄王；有辅佐焉，亦曰雄侯。
现代文：那里有君王，也称雄王，辅佐王的大臣也叫雄侯。
English: There is a king there, also known as King Jung, and the vice-king's minister is also called King Jung.

古文：分其地以为雄将。
现代文：国王把那里的土地分成几块，封给那些有功的 雄将 们。
English: The king divided the land there into several pieces and granted it to the meritorious generals.

古文：南越
现代文：南越
English: South Vietnam

古文：南越民不耻寇盗，其时尉陀治番禺，乃兴兵攻之。
现代文：南越人向来不以偷盗抢劫为耻。当年尉陀的官府在番禺，于是就派兵攻打。
English: South Vietnamese people have never been ashamed of stealing and robbing. When Ito's government was in Panyu, he sent troops to attack it.

古文：有神人适下，辅佐之。家为造弩一张，一放，杀越军万人，三放，三万人。
现代文：正好有天神降临帮助，神为他们每家造了一张弓弩，弓弩放一次就杀了一万南越军，放三次就杀了三万南越军。
English: Just at that time, the gods came to help. The gods made a crossbow for each of their families. If the crossbow was fired once, it would kill 10,000 South Vietnamese troops, and if it was fired three times, it would kill 30,000 South Vietnamese troops.

古文：陀知其故，却垒息卒，还戎武宁县下，乃遣其子始为质，请通好焉。
现代文：尉陀知道是什么原因，就赶快停战，把越军撤回到武宁县，并把他的儿子尉始送去作人质，要求和他们友好往来。
English: Knowing what the reason was, Lt. To quickly called a truce and withdrew the Vietnamese army back to Muning County, and sent his son Lt. To as a hostage, demanding friendly relations with them.

古文：尺郭
现代文：尺郭
English: shakugaku

古文：南有人焉，周行天下，其长七丈，腹围如其长。朱衣缟带，以赤蛇绕其项。
现代文：南方有一种人，能走遍天下。他们身高七丈，肚子周长也有七丈；穿着红色衣服，系白色的带子，把赤蛇围在自己脖子上。
English: In the south, there is a kind of person who can travel all over the world. They are seven-feet tall, with a belly circumference of seven-feet; they wear red clothes, tie a white ribbon, and wrap a red snake around their neck.

古文：不饮不食，朝吞恶鬼三千，暮吞三百。
现代文：不喝水，也不吃饭，早晨能吞下三千恶鬼，傍晚能吞下三百。
English: Without drinking water or eating, he can swallow three thousand evil spirits in the morning and three hundred in the evening.

古文：此人以鬼为食，以雾为浆，名曰尺郭，一名食邪，一名黄父。
现代文：这种人把鬼作为食物，把雾作为饮料。名字叫尺郭，另一个名叫食邪，还有一个名叫黄父。
English: This kind of person takes ghosts as food and fog as drink. His name is Shakugo, another one is called Food Evil, and another one is called Yellow Father.

古文：顿逊
现代文：顿逊
English: Tonson

古文：顿逊国，梁武朝，时贡方物。
现代文：顿逊国在梁武帝时，经常进贡一些地方特产。
English: During the reign of Emperor Liangwu, Dongxun often paid tribute for some local specialties.

古文：其国在海岛上，地方千里，属扶南北三千里。
现代文：那个国家在海岛上，土地纵横千里，跟扶南国北界接壤处有三千里。
English: That country is on an island, its land is thousands of miles long and wide, and it shares a 3,000-mile northern border with South Hunan Province.

古文：其俗，人死后鸟葬。
现代文：那个国家的风俗是人死后进行鸟葬。
English: The custom in that country is to perform a bird burial after death.

古文：将死，亲宾歌舞送于郭外，有鸟如鹅而色红，飞来万万，家人避之，鸟啄肉尽，乃去。
现代文：人将要死时，亲戚来宾唱着歌跳着舞把人送到城外，立刻会飞来很多的鸟，这种鸟像鹅而颜色是红的。这时家里人就都躲避起来，鸟把死人的肉啄吃了后，就飞走了。
English: When a person is about to die, relatives and guests sing songs and dance to send the person out of the city. Immediately, many birds will fly. This bird is like a goose and its color is red. At this time, the family members all hide. After the bird eats the flesh of the dead person, it flies away.

古文：即烧骨而沉海中也。
现代文：人们马上把死人骨头烧了；然后把骨灰沉入海里。
English: People immediately burned the bones of the dead; then they sank the ashes into the sea.

古文：堕婆登国
现代文：堕婆登国
English: A Fallen Grandmother Arrives in China

古文：堕婆登国在林邑东，南接诃陵，西接述黎。
现代文：堕婆登国在林邑国东面，南边和诃陵国接壤，西边毗邻述黎国。
English: It is located in the east of Linyi Province, borders with Fuling Province to the south, and is adjacent to Suru Li Province to the west.

古文：种稻，每月一熟。
现代文：堕婆登国种稻子，每月成熟一次。
English: The fallen woman went to the country to plant rice, which matures once a month.

古文：有文字，书于贝多叶。
现代文：死了的人口里塞入金缸。
English: Dead people stuffed into a golden bowl.

古文：死者口实以金缸，贯于四支，然后加以婆律膏及檀沉龙脑，积薪燔之。
现代文：并使它跟四肢相连。这样之后再把婆律膏和檀沉龙脑等香料涂到尸体上，然后，堆起木柴把尸体烧掉。
English: This was followed by smearing the corpse with spices such as bori paste and sandalwood tarragon, and then piling up the wood to burn the body.

古文：哀牢夷
现代文：哀牢夷
English: The Sorrowful Prisoner

古文：哀牢夷，其先有妇人名沙壶，居牢山。
现代文：哀牢夷的祖先是一位名叫沙壶的妇女，这个妇女住在牢山。
English: The ancestor of Lai Kiu Yi was a woman named Sand Jug, who lived in Lai Shan.

古文：捕鱼水中，若有所感，妊孕十月而生十子，今西南夷其裔也。
现代文：有一次她在水中捕鱼时，忽然好像有什么感觉，于是怀孕十个月后生下了十个孩子，现在的西南夷就是她的后代。
English: Once, when she was fishing in the water, she suddenly seemed to feel something, so after ten months of pregnancy, she gave birth to ten children, and the present Southwest Yi are her descendants.

古文：诃陵国
现代文：诃陵国
English: Fuling Province

古文：诃陵在真腊国之南，南海洲中，东婆利，西堕婆，北大海。
现代文：诃陵国在真腊国的南面，在南海的海岛中，东靠婆利，西邻堕婆登，北面是大海。
English: Fuling Province is in the south of Jinla Province, in the islands of the South China Sea, east of Bori, west of Padang, and north of the sea.

古文：竖木为城，造大屋重阁，以棕皮覆之。
现代文：城墙是用竖起的木头构成的，建造的屋子很大，上面有多层阁楼，用棕树皮覆盖屋顶。
English: The walls were made of standing timber, the houses were large, with multi-storey attics, and the roofs were covered with palm bark.

古文：以象牙为床，以柳花为酒，饮之亦醉。
现代文：他们用象牙做床，用柳花做酒，喝了它也能醉。
English: They make their beds of ivory, and their wine of willows, and are drunken with it.

古文：以手撮食。
现代文：他们都用手抓食物吃。
English: They all eat by grabbing food with their hands.

古文：有毒，与常人居止宿处，即令身上生疮。
现代文：诃陵人有毒。如果他们跟汉人在一起住宿，就会使汉人身上生疮。
English: Fuling people are poisonous. If they stay with Han people, they will cause sores on Han people.

古文：与之交会，即死。
现代文：汉人若与他们发生性关系，马上就会死。
English: If Han Chinese have sex with them, they will die immediately.

古文：若旋液，沾著草木即枯。
现代文：他们的尿液如果沾在草木上，草木就干枯。
English: If their urine gets on the grass, the grass withers.

古文：俗以椰树为酒，味甘，饮之亦醉。
现代文：他们用椰汁制酒，酒味甜，但喝了它也能醉。
English: They make a liquor out of coconut juice. It's sweet, but you can get drunk on it.

古文：真腊国
现代文：真腊国
English: Shinra Province

古文：真腊国在欢州南五百里。
现代文：真腊国在欢州南面五百里。
English: Jinla Province is 500 miles south of Hanzhou.

古文：其俗，有客设槟榔龙脑香蛤屑等，以为赏宴。
现代文：那里有这样的风俗，来了客人之后，主人设槟榔、龙脑香、蛤屑之类的东西，用来招待。
English: There is a custom where, after the arrival of guests, the host sets out things such as betel nut, camphor, and sawdust to serve as an invitation.

古文：其酒比之淫秽，私房与妻共饮，对尊者避之。
现代文：他们的酒十分地不干净，在自己的房间里与妻子一起饮酒。对高贵的人，妻子则要回避。
English: Their wine is very impure, and they drink it in their own rooms with their wives, but the wives of the nobles are to be avoided.

古文：又行房，不欲令人见，此俗与中国同。
现代文：行男女之事时，是不愿意让别人看见的，这一点和中国是相同的。
English: When doing things for men and women, they don't want others to see, and this is the same as in China.

古文：国人不着衣服，见衣服者，共笑之。
现代文：真腊国的人不穿衣服，看见有穿衣服的人，大家都笑话他。
English: People in Mana don't wear clothes, but when they see someone wearing clothes, everyone laughs at him.

古文：俗无盐铁，以竹弩射虫鸟。
现代文：那里没有盐和铁器，用竹子造的弓箭猎杀飞禽走兽。
English: There is no salt or iron tools, and they hunt birds and animals with bows and arrows made of bamboo.

古文：留仇国
现代文：留仇国
English: Remaining enemy states

古文：炀帝令朱宽征留仇国，还，获男女口千余人并杂物产，与中国多不同。
现代文：隋炀帝命令朱宽征讨留仇国。回来时，俘获男女一千多口。还有各种各样的物产，大多与中国的不一样。
English: Emperor Sui Xuan ordered Zhu Guang to invade the enemy country. When he returned, he captured more than a thousand men and women. There were also a variety of goods, most of which were different from China.

古文：缉木皮为布，甚细白，幅阔三尺二三寸。
现代文：其中有用树皮搓线织成的布，很精细很洁白，幅宽三尺二三寸。
English: Among them, a cloth woven with bark twine, very fine and very white, with a width of three feet two and three inches.

古文：亦有细斑布，幅阔一尺许。
现代文：也有细斑布，幅宽一尺左右。
English: There is also a fine striped fabric, about a foot wide.

古文：又得金荆榴数十斤，木色如真金，密致，而文采盘蹙有如美锦，甚香极精。可以为枕及案面，虽沉檀不能及。
现代文：又带回金荆榴数十斤，木质的颜色像真金，纹路细密，而花纹色彩盘绕皱缩就像美丽的锦绣，很香又很精致，可用它做枕头和桌面，即使是沉檀木也赶不上它。
English: He also brought back dozens of cattails. The color of the wood is like real gold, the grain is fine, and the color of the pattern is coiled and wrinkled like beautiful brocade. It is very fragrant and delicate. It can be used as a pillow and a table. Even the sedimentary sandalwood can't keep up with it.

古文：彼土无铁。朱宽还至南海郡，留仇中男夫壮者，多加以铁钳锁，恐其道逃叛。
现代文：他们的国家不出产铁，朱宽回到南海郡，把留仇俘虏中健壮的男人大多用铁钳锁着，怕他们途中叛乱或逃跑。
English: Their country did not produce iron, so Zhu Guang returned to Nanhai County and locked up most of the able-bodied men among the remaining prisoners with iron shackles, fearing that they might rebel or escape on the way.

古文：还至江都，将见，为解脱之。
现代文：回到扬州时，拜见皇上之前便给他们解下铁钳。
English: When he returned to Yangzhou, he loosened the shackles before meeting the emperor.

古文：皆手把钳，叩头惜脱，甚于中土贵金。
现代文：他们却手把铁钳，叩头舍不得解下，胜过中国人对金子的看重。
English: They, however, clutch their shovels in their hands and are reluctant to remove their heads, outweighing the value that the Chinese place on gold.

古文：人形短小，似昆仑。
现代文：留仇人形体矮小，像昆仑奴。
English: The Remaining Enemy puppet is short and small, like Kunlun.

古文：木客
现代文：木客
English: Woodcutter

古文：郭仲产《湘州记》云，平乐县西七十里，有荣山，上多有木客。形似小儿，歌哭衣裳，不异于人。而伏状隐现不测。
现代文：郭仲产的《湘州记》上说，平乐县西面七十里处，有座荣山，山上有不少木客，形体像小孩，他们也能唱歌、哭泣，衣服裤子跟常人没有什么不同，而他们的行踪不定，难以发现。
English: Guo Zhongzang's "Hunan Chronicle" said that 70 miles west of Pingle County, there is a Rongshan. On the mountain, there are many woodcrafters, shaped like children, they can also sing and cry, their clothes and pants are no different from ordinary people, and their whereabouts are uncertain and difficult to find.

古文：宿至精巧。时市易作器，与人无别。就人换物亦不计其值。
现代文：他们住处极为精巧，有时买卖物品和器具，他们跟人交换物品时也不计较物品的价钱。
English: They live in extremely elaborate dwellings, sometimes buying and selling goods and utensils, and they exchange goods with people without considering the price of the goods.

古文：今昭州平乐县
现代文：郭仲产书中说的平乐县，就是现在的昭州平乐县。
English: The Pingle County mentioned in Guo Zhong's birth record is the present-day Pingle County in Zhaozhou.

古文：缴濮国
现代文：缴濮国
English: Country of origin

古文：永昌郡西南一千五百里，有缴濮国。
现代文：永昌郡西南一千五百里的地方，有个缴濮国。
English: In a place 1,500 miles southwest of Yongchang County, there is a country of submission.

古文：其人有尾，欲坐，辄先穿地作穴，以安其尾。若邂逅误折其尾，即死也。
现代文：那里的人们都长着尾巴，想坐下时，就得先把地上挖个坑，来放置他们的尾巴，如果万一不慎弄折了尾巴，那人马上就会死去。
English: People there all have tails, and if you want to sit down, you have to dig a hole in the ground to put your tail in. If you accidentally break your tail, you will die immediately.

古文：木饮州
现代文：木饮州
English: Wooden drinking bowl

古文：木饮州，朱崖一州。其地无泉，民不作井，皆仰树汁为用。
现代文：木饮州是朱崖的一个州，那里没有泉水，百姓也不打井，都依靠树的汁液解决用水问题。
English: Muzhuizhou is a prefecture of Zhuya, where there is no spring water, and the people do not dig wells. They all rely on the sap of trees to solve water problems.

古文：阿萨部
现代文：阿萨部
English: Assab

古文：阿萨部，多猎虫鹿，剖其肉，重叠之，以石压沥汁。
现代文：阿萨部族的人，大多把猎获的各种野物或鹿剖开，割下它们的肉，叠放在一块，上面压上石头，榨出汁液。
English: The people of the Asa tribe, for the most part, cut open various wild animals or deer that they have hunted, cut off their meat, stacked them on top of each other, pressed stones on top of them, and squeezed out the juice.

古文：税波斯拂林等国米及草子酿于肉汁之中，经数日，即变成酒，饮之可醉。
现代文：再把从波斯、拂林等国买来的米，还有草籽都放入汁液中发酵，经过几天，肉汁就变成了酒。喝了它也能醉。
English: Then, rice bought from Persia, the Middle East, and other countries, as well as grass seeds, are fermented in the juice, and after a few days, the gravy turns into wine. It can also be drunk.

古文：孝忆国
现代文：孝忆国
English: A Country of Filial Piety

古文：孝忆国，界周三千余里。
现代文：孝忆国国界周长三千多里。
English: The perimeter of China's national border is more than 3,000 miles.

古文：在平川中，以木为栅，周十余里。栅内百姓二千余家，周围木栅五百余所。
现代文：处在平原中，用木料建造篱笆，周长十多里，栅栏内居住百姓二千多家，遍及全国的木栅栏有五百多处。
English: Located in the plains, it is surrounded by wooden fences with a circumference of more than ten miles. More than two thousand people live in the fence, and there are more than five hundred wooden fences throughout the country.

古文：气候常暖，冬不凋落。宜羊马，无驼牛。
现代文：孝忆国气候经常很温暖，冬天草木也不凋落，适合养羊养马，没有骆驼和牛。
English: Xiaoying's climate is often very warm, and the plants and trees do not fall in winter. It is suitable for raising sheep and horses, and there are no camels or cattle.

古文：俗性质直，好客侣。
现代文：孝忆人性格质朴直率，很好客。
English: Xiao Yi's personality is simple and straightforward, and he is very hospitable.

古文：躯貌长大，褰鼻，黄发绿睛，赤髭被发，面如血色。
现代文：他们身高脸大，大鼻子，黄头发，绿眼珠，胡髭是红色的，头发披散着，脸色像血。
English: They are tall, with big faces, big noses, yellow hair, green eyes, red beards, loose hair and faces like blood.

古文：战具唯矟一色。
现代文：他们的武器只有槊这一种。
English: Their only weapon is a crossbow.

古文：宜五谷，出金铁，衣麻布。
现代文：那里适合种植五谷，还出产金和铁。那里的人穿麻布衣服。
English: It was a good place to grow grain, and it produced gold and iron. People there wore linen clothes.

古文：举俗事妖，不识佛法，有妖祠三百余所。
现代文：全国都有供奉妖物的风俗，不懂得佛法，共有供奉妖物的祠堂三百多处。
English: All over the country, there are customs of worshipping monsters without understanding Buddhism. There are more than three hundred ancestral halls that worship monsters.

古文：马步兵一万。
现代文：骑兵和步兵共有一万人。
English: There were ten thousand horsemen and foot soldiers.

古文：不尚商贩，自称孝忆人。
现代文：不重视商业，自称为孝忆人。
English: He does not attach importance to business and calls himself a filial son.

古文：丈夫妇人俱佩带。
现代文：男人和妇女都佩带着带子。
English: Both men and women wear belts.

古文：每一日造食，一月食之，常吃宿食。
现代文：一天做的饭，够吃一个月，所以常吃剩饭。
English: One day of cooking is enough to eat for a month, so I often eat leftovers.

古文：仍通国无井及河涧，所有种植，待雨而生。
现代文：全国既没有井也没有河溪，所有种植的东西，都依赖雨水生长。
English: There are neither wells nor streams in the whole country, and everything that is planted depends on rainwater to grow.

古文：以纩铺地，承雨水用之。
现代文：用丝绵絮铺地，用以接收雨水，以便使用。
English: The ground is covered with silky lint to catch rainwater so that it can be used.

古文：穿井即苦，海水又咸。
现代文：打井出的水都是苦的，海水又是咸的。
English: The water from the wells is bitter, and the sea is salty.

古文：土俗伺海潮落之后，平地收鱼以为食。
现代文：他们习惯等海潮退后，捡鱼类来作为食物。
English: They used to wait for the tide to recede and collect fish to eat.

古文：婆弥烂国
现代文：婆弥烂国
English: A nation in mourning

古文：婆弥烂国去京师二万五千五百五十里。
现代文：婆弥烂国距离京师二万五千五百五十里。
English: China is 25,550 miles away from Beijing.

古文：此国西有山，巉岩峻险，上多猿，猿形绝长大，常暴田种，每年有二三十万。
现代文：西部有山，高峻陡峭险恶，山上有很多猿猴。猿猴的形体又高又大，常常把田地里的种子挖出来，每年下山毁田的猿猴有二三十万。
English: There are mountains in the west, high, steep and dangerous, and there are many monkeys on the mountains. The monkeys are tall and large, and they often dig up the seeds in the fields. There are 2.3 million monkeys who go down the mountains to destroy the fields every year.

古文：国中起春已后，屯集甲兵，与猿战。
现代文：立春以后，他们集中驻扎军队，与猿猴作战。
English: After the beginning of spring, they concentrated and stationed troops to fight against the monkeys.

古文：虽岁杀数万，不能尽其巢穴。
现代文：虽然每年杀掉数万猿猴，仍不能从根本上把猿猴全部杀死。
English: Although tens of thousands of apes are killed every year, it is still not possible to kill all the apes.

古文：拨拔力国
现代文：拨拔力国
English: Countries with the greatest pulling power

古文：拨拔力国在西南海中，略不识五谷，食肉而已。
现代文：拨拔力国在西南方的大海中。国人对五谷毫无所知，只知道吃肉。
English: The country is located in the southwestern part of the ocean. The local people know nothing about Gotani, but they know how to eat meat.

古文：常针牛畜脉取血，和乳生饮。
现代文：他们常针刺牛等牲畜的血脉管采血，和在奶中生喝。
English: They often prick the blood vessels of cattle and other livestock to collect blood, and drink it raw in milk.

古文：无衣，唯腰下用羊皮掩之。
现代文：也没有衣服，只用羊皮把腰以下部分盖住。
English: They had no clothes either, only sheepskins to cover them from the waist down.

古文：其妇人洁白端正，国人自掠卖与外国商人，其价数倍。
现代文：那个国家的妇女皮肤白皙五官端正，国内的人就把她们抢来卖给外国人，那价钱比国内高出好几倍。
English: The women of that country are fair-skinned, with neat features, and the people in the country snatch them up and sell them to foreigners at a price that is several times higher than in the country.

古文：土地唯有象牙及阿未香。
现代文：当地上只出产象牙和阿未香。
English: Only ivory and ambergris are produced locally.

古文：波斯商人欲入此国，团集数千人，赍緤布，没老幼共刺血立誓，乃市其物。
现代文：波斯国的商人打算进入这个国家，聚集了数千人，带着緤布，拨拔力人让波斯人不分老少都刺血立誓，才买了波斯人的东西。
English: The merchants of Persia, intending to enter the country, gathered thousands of people, carrying sackcloth, and made the Persians, young and old alike, take a blood oath before they would buy Persian goods.

古文：自古不属外国。
现代文：这个国家自古没附属过外国。
English: This country has never been attached to a foreign country since ancient times.

古文：战用象牙排，野牛角矟，衣甲弓矢之器，步兵二十万。
现代文：他们作战用象牙盾牌、野牛角槊、铠甲、弓箭之类的武器，步兵有二十万。
English: They fought with weapons such as ivory shields, buffalo horns, armor, bows and arrows, and had 200,000 infantry.

古文：大食频讨袭之。
现代文：大食国屡次讨伐袭击过这个国家。
English: The country has been the target of repeated attacks by the big-eating nation.

古文：昆吾
现代文：昆吾
English: Kunwoh

古文：昆吾陆盐，周十余里，无水，自生朱盐。
现代文：昆吾国的土地上全是陆盐，周围十多里都没有水，会自然地出现粉末状的盐。
English: The land of Kunwu is completely covered with land salt, and there is no water for more than ten miles around. Naturally, powdered salt will appear.

古文：月满则如积雪，味甘；月亏则如簿霜，味苦；月尽，盐亦尽。
现代文：月圆时就像积雪，盐的味道是甜的；月缺时就像一层薄薄的霜，味道是苦的；没有月亮时，盐也就没有了。
English: When the moon is full, it is like snow, and the taste of salt is sweet; when the moon is absent, it is like a thin layer of frost, and the taste is bitter; when there is no moon, there is no salt.

古文：又其国累堑为丘，象浮图，有三层。
现代文：那个国家多次挖沟取土堆成小丘，像塔，分三层。
English: In that country, trenches have been dug many times to heap the earth into mounds, like towers, divided into three layers.

古文：尸乾居上，尸湿居下。
现代文：干尸体放在上层，湿尸体放在下层。
English: The dry corpses were placed on the upper level and the wet corpses on the lower level.

古文：以近葬为至孝，集大毡屋，中悬衣服彩缯，哭化之。
现代文：把死者埋在近处被看作是最孝敬的，人们聚集在一个大毡屋中，中间悬着死者的衣服和彩缯，人们哭着就把尸体烧了。
English: It was considered most respectful to bury the dead nearby, and people gathered in a large mortuary, with the dead person's clothes and coffin hanging in the middle, and cried as they burned the body.

古文：绣面獠子
现代文：绣面獠子
English: Embroidered satin

古文：越人习水，必镂身以避蛟龙之患。
现代文：越地的人熟悉水性，他们一定在身体上雕镂花纹图案，以避免蛟龙的危害。
English: The people of Yueji are familiar with water, and they must carve patterns on their bodies to avoid the harm of dragonflies.

古文：今南中有绣面獠子，盖雕题之遗俗也。
现代文：现在江南一带有在脸上刺上花纹的仡佬族人，大概就是雕绘额头的旧风俗的流传吧。
English: Now, a group of Dongnang people in the south of the Yangtze River have embroidered patterns on their faces, which is probably the spread of the old custom of carving foreheads.

古文：五溪蛮
现代文：五溪蛮
English: Wuxi Man

古文：五溪蛮，父母死，于村外阁其尸，三年而葬。
现代文：五溪的蛮人，当父母死后，就把他们的尸体放置在村外，三年后再埋葬。
English: The savages of Wuxi, when their parents died, placed their bodies outside the village and buried them three years later.

古文：打鼓路歌，亲属饮宴舞戏，一月余日。
现代文：葬时，打着鼓，在路上唱着歌，亲属们宴会，吃喝跳舞做游戏，这样一个多月。
English: For more than a month, they played drums at the funeral, sang songs on the road, relatives held a banquet, ate, drank, danced and played games.

古文：尽产为棺，余临江高山，半助凿龛以葬之，山上悬索下柩，弥高者以为至孝，即终身不复祠祭。
现代文：他们不惜用光了全部的钱财做棺材，然后把棺材抬到面临江水的高山的半山腰上。人们帮助死者家属在石壁上凿出一个小阁子似的山洞，安葬死者。然后从山上用绳索把棺材吊放下去，棺材安放得越高，人们就认为是最孝顺的，就可终生不用再进行祭礼。
English: They did not hesitate to use up all the money to make a coffin, and then carried the coffin to the mid-mountain of the mountain facing the river. People helped the families of the deceased to dig a small cave-like cave on the stone wall to bury the dead. Then the coffin was lowered from the mountain with a rope. The higher the coffin was placed, the more filial the people were considered to be, and they did not have to perform the ritual for the rest of their lives.

古文：初遭丧，三年不食盐。
现代文：凡首次遇到丧事的，家人三年不吃食盐。
English: If it is the first time for a family to experience a funeral, they will not eat salt for three years.

古文：堕雨儿
现代文：堕雨儿
English: Fallen Rain Child

古文：魏时，河间王子充家，雨中有小儿八九枚，堕于庭，长五六寸许。
现代文：魏时，在河间的王子充家，下雨的时候，有八九个小孩随着雨落到院子里，高只有五六寸左右。
English: When it rained, eight or nine children fell into the courtyard with the rain, only about five or six inches high.

古文：自云，家在海东南，因有风雨，所飘至此。
现代文：小孩们自己说，家在海的东南方，因遇到大风雨，被刮到这里。
English: The children themselves say that their home is in the south-eastern part of the sea and that they were blown here due to the heavy winds and rain.

古文：与之言，甚有所知，皆如史传所述。
现代文：跟他们谈话，觉得他们颇有知识，所说的事情都像史书上所叙述的那样。
English: You talk to them, you think they're very knowledgeable, and everything they say is like what's in the history books.

