古文：海瑞丘橓吕坤郭正域
现代文：海瑞，字汝贤，琼山人，乡试中举。
English: Hai Rui, Zi Ru Xian, Qiong Shan Ren, village test middle school.

古文：海瑞，字汝贤，琼山人。举乡试。
现代文：进京都，不久伏宫门之外上书《平黎策》，请求在海南设道置县，以便安定乡土。
English: He entered Kyoto, and shortly after, he wrote "Ping-Li-Zhe" outside the gate of the Imperial Palace, requesting the establishment of a county in Hainan in order to stabilize the countryside.

古文：入都，即伏阙上《平黎策》，欲开道置县，以靖乡土。
现代文：有识之士认为他很有气魄。
English: Those in the know say he has a lot of spirit.

古文：识者壮之。署南平教谕。御史诣学宫，属吏咸伏谒，瑞独长揖，曰： 台谒当以属礼，此堂，师长教士地，不当屈。 
现代文：他担任南平教谕的时候，御史到学宫去，下属官吏都伏地拜见，只有海瑞是直身作揖，并说： 如果到御史台拜见，当以下属礼拜他，这个厅堂，是师长教士的地方，不应该屈身。 
English: When he served as Nanping's preceptor, the prelate went to the palace of learning, and all the subordinate officials prostrated themselves before him. Only Hai Rui prostrated himself, and said, "If you come to pay homage to the prelate, the following clergy should worship him. This hall is a place for teachers and priests, and you should not bow down."

古文：迁淳安知县。
现代文：调职为淳安知县。
English: Transferred to Junanchi County.

古文：布袍脱粟，令老仆艺蔬自给。
现代文：穿布袍吃粟米，让老仆种蔬菜自给。
English: Wear a cloth robe to eat corn, let the old servant grow vegetables for self-sufficiency.

古文：总督胡宗宪尝语人曰： 昨闻海令为母寿，市肉二斤矣。 
现代文：总督胡宗宪曾对人说： 昨天听说海县令替母亲祝寿，买了两斤肉。 
English: Governor Hu Zongxian once said to people: Yesterday, I heard that Haixian ordered to congratulate his mother on her birthday and bought two pounds of meat.

古文：宗宪子过淳安，怒驿吏，倒悬之。
现代文：宗宪的儿子经过淳安，恼恨驿吏，将他倒吊起来。
English: After passing through Chun'an, the son of Zongxian became angry with the officials and had him hanged upside down.

古文：瑞曰： 曩胡公按部，令所过毋供张。
现代文：海瑞说： 以往胡公巡视部属，命令途经处不要铺张供给。
English: Hai Rui said: In the past, when Hu Gong inspected his subordinates, he ordered them not to be extravagant in their supplies.

古文：今其行装盛，必非胡公子。 
现代文：现在他的行装华丽，必定不是胡公的儿子。 
English: Now that he's dressed up, he's definitely not Hu Gong's son.

古文：发雚金数千，纳之库，驰告宗宪，宗宪无以罪。
现代文：就把从袋中发现的几千两银子，缴进府库，他飞马报告宗宪，宗宪没有罪责他。
English: He paid the several thousand taels of silver found in the bag into the government treasury, and he reported to Zong Xian on horseback. Zong Xian did not blame him.

古文：都御史鄢懋卿行部过，供具甚薄，抗言邑小不足容车马。
现代文：都御史鄢懋卿巡视路过，海瑞的供给很简便，抗争说小镇不能容纳车马。
English: Shih Chieng, the governor of the capital, passed by on his inspection tour. The supply of Hai Rui was very simple, and they protested that the town could not accommodate horses and carriages.

古文：懋卿恚甚。
现代文：懋卿非常恼恨。
English: Lord Zou was very angry.

古文：然素闻瑞名，为敛威去，而属巡盐御史袁淳论瑞及慈谿知县霍与瑕。
现代文：然而素闻海瑞的声名，只好收敛威风离去，但吩咐巡盐御史袁淳给海瑞和慈溪知县霍与瑕治罪。
English: However, knowing the reputation of Hai Rui, he had no choice but to restrain himself and leave, but he ordered Yuan Jun, the inspector of salt, to punish Hai Rui and Cixi Zhixian.

古文：与瑕，尚书韬子，亦抗直不谄懋卿者也。
现代文：霍与瑕，是尚书霍韬的儿子，也耿直不谄媚懋卿。
English: Ho and Ko are the sons of Shangshu Hoo-soo, and they are also the sons of Geng Zhi-fu, who is not a fan of Lord Soo.

古文：时瑞已擢嘉兴通判，坐谪兴国州判官。
现代文：当时海瑞已经升任嘉兴通判，却被贬为兴国州判官。
English: At that time, Hai Rui had been promoted to Jiaxing magistrate, but was demoted to Xingguozhou magistrate.

古文：久之，陆光祖为文选，擢瑞户部主事。
现代文：很久以后，陆光祖为户部文选郎，提拔海瑞任户部主事。
English: After a long time, Lu Guangzu became the head of the household, and promoted Hai Rui to be the head of the household.

古文：时世宗享国日久，不亲朝，深居西苑，专意斋醮。
现代文：当时世宗在位已久，不理朝政，深居西苑，专心致意于斋戒。
English: At that time, Sejong had been on the throne for a long time, ignored the court politics, lived in Seiyuan, and devoted himself to fasting.

古文：督抚大吏争上符瑞，礼官辄表贺。
现代文：督抚大吏争相呈献吉祥符瑞，礼官动辄上表祝贺。
English: Supervisors and officials scrambled to present auspicious charms, and etiquette officials were on hand to offer congratulations.

古文：廷臣自杨最、杨爵得罪后，无敢言时政者。
现代文：朝廷大臣自从杨最、杨爵被治罪以后，没有敢讲当时政务的。
English: Since Yang Chaoyang and Yang Jie were punished, the ministers of the Imperial Court have not dared to talk about the government affairs at that time.

古文：四十五年二月，瑞独上疏曰：
现代文：四十五年二月，海瑞单独上书说：
English: In February 1945, Hai Rui wrote in a separate letter:

古文：臣闻君者天下臣民万物之主也，其任至重。
现代文： 我听说君王是天下臣民万物的主宰，他的责任重大。
English: I have heard that the king is the master of all things of the world's subjects, and his responsibility is great.

古文：欲称其任，亦惟以责寄臣工，使尽言而已。
现代文：想要称职，也唯有把职责寄托在大臣身上，使他们尽情进言。
English: If you want to be competent, the only way is to entrust the duties to the ministers and let them do their best.

古文：臣请披沥肝胆，为陛下陈之。昔汉文帝贤主也，贾谊犹痛哭流涕而言。
现代文：我冒死请求，替陛下陈述。 以前的汉文帝本就是贤明君主，贾谊尚且痛哭流涕地进言。
English: I made a desperate plea on behalf of His Majesty. The former Emperor Hanwen was a wise monarch, and Jia Yi still spoke with tears in his eyes.

古文：非苛责也，以文帝性仁而近柔，虽有及民之美，将不免于怠废，此谊所大虑也。
现代文：这不是苛求，因为文帝性情仁慈近于柔弱，虽然有惠民的好事，也不免懈怠废弃，这是贾谊最忧虑的。
English: This is not demanding, because the benevolence of Emperor Wen's disposition is close to softness. Although there are good things to benefit the people, it is inevitable to slack off and abandon them. This is what Jia Yi is most worried about.

古文：陛下天资英断，过汉文远甚。
现代文：陛下天资英武果断，远远超过汉文帝。
English: His Majesty's talent and determination far surpass those of Emperor Hanwen.

古文：然文帝能充其仁恕之性，节用爱人，使天下贯朽粟陈，几致刑措。
现代文：然而文帝能够扩展仁慈宽容的性情，节制耗费，体恤人民，使天下钱贯腐朽粟粮陈积，几乎终止刑罚。
English: However, Emperor Wen was able to expand the benevolent and tolerant disposition, restrain expenditure, sympathize with the people, and make the world's money run through the rotten millet grain and accumulate, almost ending the punishment.

古文：陛下则锐精未久，妄念牵之而去，反刚明之质而误用之。
现代文：陛下却锐利精明不多久，就被妄念牵移开去，背离刚明的品质而且错误地用人。
English: His Majesty, however, was sharp and shrewd, and not long after, he was carried away by a delusion, deviated from the upright quality and employed people wrongly.

古文：至谓遐举可得，一意修真，竭民脂膏，滥兴土木，二十余年不视朝，法纪弛矣。
现代文：以至宣称飞升可以求得，一心修炼本性，用尽百姓的脂膏，泛兴土木，二十多年不理朝政，法纪松弛。
English: So much so that he claimed that he could achieve a meteoric rise, that he was bent on cultivating his innate qualities, that he had exhausted the people's resources, that he was promoting civil engineering, that he had ignored the imperial government for more than twenty years, and that his legal discipline was slack.

古文：数年推广事例，名器滥矣。
现代文：几年间局势发展，名称礼器混乱。
English: As the situation has developed over the past few years, the names and etiquette have become confused.

古文：二王不相见，人以为薄于父子。
现代文：不见两位皇太子，人们认为父子情谊浅薄。
English: Without the two crown princes, the father-son relationship is considered shallow.

古文：以猜疑诽谤戮辱臣下，人以为薄于君臣。
现代文：因为猜疑诽谤屠戮侮辱大臣，人们认为君臣情谊浅薄。
English: Because of suspicion, slander, slaughter, and insulting the minister, people think that the friendship between the monarch and the subjects is shallow.

古文：乐西苑而不返，人以为薄于夫妇。
现代文：乐于呆在在西苑享乐不归皇宫，人们认为夫妇情谊浅薄。
English: They are happy to stay in the West Garden for pleasure rather than return to the palace, and people think that the couple's friendship is shallow.

古文：吏贪官横，民不聊生，水旱无时，盗贼滋炽。
现代文：小吏贪污官宦骄横，民不聊生，水旱灾害不断，盗贼日益猖獗。
English: Petty officials are corrupt, officials are arrogant, people are lazy, floods and droughts continue, and thieves are increasingly rampant.

古文：陛下试思今日天下，为何如乎？
现代文：陛下试想现在的天下，是怎么样呢？
English: Your Majesty, try to imagine the world today. What would it be like?

古文：迩者严嵩罢相，世蕃极刑，一时差快人意。
现代文： 近来，严嵩被罢免相职，严世蕃被判处极刑，一时间大快人心。
English: Recently, Yan Song was removed from the position of official and Yan Shijun was sentenced to capital punishment, which made people happy for a while.

古文：然嵩罢之后，犹嵩未相之前而已，世非甚清明也，不及汉文帝远甚。
现代文：然而严嵩罢相后如同严嵩没有任相职之前一样，世道不是很清明，远远赶不上汉文帝。
English: However, after Yan Song stepped down as emperor, just as before Yan Song assumed the position of emperor, the world was not very clear, far from catching up with Emperor Hanwen.

古文：盖天下之人不直陛下久矣。
现代文：大概天下的人对陛下有看法已经很久了。
English: People around the world have probably had an opinion about His Majesty for a long time.

古文：古者人君有过，赖臣工匡弼。
现代文：古时人君有过错，依靠大臣匡扶矫正。
English: In ancient times, if a person made a mistake, he had to rely on the minister to correct it.

古文：今乃修斋建醮，相率进香，仙桃天药，同辞表贺。
现代文：现在皇上仍然修斋建祭坛，争相敬香，送仙桃献天药，大臣都做表称贺赞颂。
English: Even now, the emperor is still fasting, erecting altars, competing to worship incense, sending peaches to offer heavenly medicine, and the ministers are all congratulating and praising him.

古文：建宫筑室，则将作竭力经营；购香市宝，则度支差求四出。
现代文：建宫殿筑居室，要竭力经营；采集香料收购珠宝，府库开支四出。
English: To build a palace, to build a living room, we must do our best to operate; to collect spices and purchase jewelry, the treasury's expenses are fourfold.

古文：陛下误举之，而诸臣误顺之，无一人肯为陛下正言者，谀之甚也。
现代文：陛下错误地兴起，大臣们错误地顺从，没有一个人愿意向陛下正确陈述，阿谀之风严重。
English: His majesty wrongly arose, his ministers wrongly obeyed, no one was willing to correctly report to his majesty, and there was a serious imamate.

古文：然愧心馁气，退有后言，欺君之罪何如！
现代文：然而他们内心惭愧、气馁，告退后又背地议论。这种欺骗君主的罪孽又怎样呢？
English: But they were ashamed and disheartened, and they turned away and plotted behind the king's back. What about this sin of deceiving the king?

古文：夫天下者，陛下之家，人未有不顾其家者，内外臣工皆所以奠陛下之家而磐石之者也。
现代文： 天下是陛下的家。没有不顾念家的人，朝廷内外的大臣都为陛下的家奠基则这家坚如磐石。
English: The whole world is His Majesty's home. There is no one who does not care about home, and ministers both inside and outside the Imperial Court have laid the foundation for His Majesty's home, which is as solid as a rock.

古文：一意修真，是陛下之心惑。
现代文：一心修炼本性，这是陛下的心智迷惑。
English: Cultivating one's nature with one's heart is a mental confusion of His Majesty.

古文：过于苛断，是陛下之情偏。
现代文：过分苛求武断这是陛下的偏激。
English: Your Majesty is being too demanding and arbitrary.

古文：而谓陛下不顾其家，人情乎？
现代文：说陛下不顾念家，合乎人之常情吗？
English: Is it right to say that His Majesty does not care about his family?

古文：诸臣徇私废公，得一官多以欺败，多以不事事败，实有不足当陛下意者。
现代文：大臣们徇私损公，谋得一个官职多数因欺诈丧失，多数因不干事而丧失，实在不能合乎陛下的心意。
English: It is really not to His Majesty's liking for ministers to seek personal gain at the expense of the public good, to obtain an official post and then lose most of it through fraud, and to lose most of it through incompetence.

古文：其不然者，君心臣心偶不相值也，而遂谓陛下厌薄臣工，是以拒谏。
现代文：否则，君心臣心偶然不合，就称陛下讨厌刻薄大臣，因此拒绝劝谏。
English: Otherwise, if the hearts of the prince and the vassal do not coincidentally coincide, he will say that his majesty hates the mean minister and therefore refuses to persuade him.

古文：执一二之不当，疑千百之皆然，陷陛下于过举，而恬不知怪，诸臣之罪大矣。
现代文：抓住一两个不适当的人，就怀疑成千上百的人都这样，使陛下做出错误的举动，却坦然不见怪，大臣们的罪行大着呢。
English: To catch one or two improper persons, and to suspect thousands of others of the same, and to induce his Majesty to do wrong, and yet not to be surprised, is the great crime of ministers.

古文：《记》曰 上人疑则百姓惑，下难知则君长劳 ，此之谓也。
现代文：史书说： 皇帝犹豫不决则老百姓迷惑，对下情难知晓则君王长期劳累 ，这正是呀。
English: The history book says: When the emperor hesitates, the people are confused; when it is difficult to know the situation, the monarch is tired for a long time. This is exactly the case.

古文：且陛下之误多矣，其大端在于斋醮。
现代文： 陛下的失误很多，其中最大的失误是斋祭。
English: His Majesty has made many mistakes, the biggest of which was the breaking of the fast.

古文：斋醮所以求长生也。
现代文：斋祭是求长生。
English: The fasting festival is to seek eternal life.

古文：自古圣贤垂训，修身立命曰 顺受其正 矣，未闻有所谓长生之说。
现代文：自古圣贤传下训诫，修身立命称 顺应自然保全正命 ，没有听到长生的说法。
English: Since ancient times, sages have preached the precepts of "self-cultivation and self-improvement" and "adhering to nature and preserving a righteous life," but no one has heard of the concept of eternal life.

古文：尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武，圣之盛也，未能久世，下之亦未见方外士自汉、唐、宋至今存者。
现代文：尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武等最圣贤的人，没有能够长命于世，退而言之，也没有见到从汉唐、宋到现在有活着的方士。
English: None of the most saintly and wise people, such as Yao, Shun, Yu, Tang, Wen, and Wu, were able to live long in the world. In other words, there are no living magicians from the Han, Tang, and Song dynasties.

古文：陛下受术于陶仲文，以师称之。
现代文：陛下接受陶仲文的方术，称他为师。
English: His Majesty accepted Tao Zhongwen's method and called him his teacher.

古文：仲文则既死矣，彼不长生，而陛下何独求之？
现代文：陶仲文却已经死了，他不能长生，唯独陛下能长生么？
English: But Tao Zhongwen is already dead. He can't live forever, but can His Majesty live forever?

古文：至于仙桃天药，怪妄尤甚。
现代文：仙桃天药，更加怪诞荒谬。
English: More grotesque absurdity from the fairy godmother.

古文：昔宋真宗得天书于乾祐山，孙奭曰： 天何言哉？
现代文：从前宋真宗在乾佑山获得天书，孙说 天怎么讲话？哪里来书 。
English: Once upon a time, Song Zhenzong obtained a heavenly book from Mount Qianyu. Sun said, "How does heaven speak? Where is the book from?"

古文：岂有书也！ 桃必采而后得，药必制而后成。今无故获此二物，是有足而行耶？
现代文：桃子必须采摘才能得到，药必须焙制才能成，现在无缘无故得到这两件东西，是它们有脚可行吗？
English: Peaches have to be picked before they can be obtained, and medicines have to be baked before they can be made. Now these two things can be obtained for no reason. Are they feasible because they have feet?

古文：曰天赐者，有手执而付之耶？
现代文：称 天赐 有手执掌来交付吗？
English: Is there a hand on the handle to deliver it?

古文：此左右奸人，造为妄诞以欺陛下，而陛下误信之，以为实然，过矣。
现代文：这是左右奸诈的人，制造荒诞的事来欺骗陛下，陛下错误地相信了，认为是真的，是过失啊。
English: These are treacherous people, who fabricate absurd things to deceive Your Majesty, and Your Majesty mistakenly believes them to be true, which is a mistake.

古文：陛下将谓悬刑赏以督责臣下，则分理有人，天下无不可治，而修真为无害已乎？
现代文： 陛下又说用刑赏来督导大臣，分派人加以治理，天下没有不能治理的事，那么修炼本性就对自己没有损害吗？
English: His Majesty also said that he uses punishment and reward to supervise ministers and assigns people to govern them. There is nothing in the world that cannot be governed, so is there no harm in cultivating one's own nature?

古文：太甲曰： 有言逆于汝心，必求诸道；有言逊于汝志，必求诸非道。 
现代文：太甲说： 有言论与自己心事相反，必须求证道理；有言论恭顺自己的志趣，必须求证它没有道理。 
English: Taiga said: If there is a statement that is contrary to one's own thoughts, one must seek proof; if there is a statement that is obedient to one's own interests, one must seek proof that it is unreasonable.

古文：用人而必欲其唯言莫违，此陛下之计左也。
现代文：任用人必须唯唯诺诺与自己不相违抗，陛下的这种方针不好。
English: An appointee must be loyal and not contradict himself. This is not a good policy for His Majesty.

古文：既观严嵩，有一不顺陛下者乎？
现代文：观察严嵩，有一件不顺从陛下的事吗？
English: Observe Yan Song, is there a matter of disobeying your majesty?

古文：昔为同心，今为戮首矣。
现代文：过去是一条心，现在是罪魁祸首。
English: It used to be a heart, now it's a culprit.

古文：梁材守道守官，陛下以为逆者也，历任有声，官户部者至今首称之。
现代文：梁材守道守官，陛下认为是叛逆，但他历任有声望的，在户部做过官的人至今首推他。
English: His Majesty considers Liang Jia to be a renegade, but he has always had a reputation, and people who have served as officials in the household department have been the first to promote him.

古文：然诸臣宁为嵩之顺，不为材之逆，得非有以窥陛下之微，而潜为趋避乎？即陛下亦何利于是。
现代文：然而各位大臣宁愿像严嵩一样恭顺，不取法梁材的叛逆，不是察看陛下的错误，而是暗暗地回避，陛下由此得到什么好处。
English: However, the ministers prefer to be as obedient as Yan Song, not to take the traitorous rebellion as a legal framework, not to inspect His Majesty's mistakes, but to secretly evade, what benefits does His Majesty get from this.

古文：陛下诚知斋斋无益，一旦翻然悔悟，日御正朝，与宰相、侍从、言官讲求天下利害，洗数十年之积误，置身于尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武之间，使诸臣亦得自洗数十年阿君之耻，置其身于皋、夔、伊、傅之列，天下何忧不治，万事何忧不理。
现代文： 陛下如果能确实知晓斋祭无益，一旦翻然悔悟，天天到正朝，与宰相、侍从、言官商讨天下的利害，清洗数十年累积的过失，置身于尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武圣贤之中，使大臣们自己也洗刷数十年阿谀君王的羞耻，置身于皋、夔、伊、傅的行列，何患天下不能治理好，何患万事不被梳理顺。
English: Your Majesty, if you can truly know that the fasting festival is useless, once you have come to repentance, you should discuss the interests of the world with the prime minister, attendants, and spokespersons every day to the Zheng Dynasty, clean up the accumulated mistakes of decades, and put yourself among the,, 禹,汤, 文, and 武 sages, so that the ministers themselves can also wash away the shame of the king of decades, and put themselves in the ranks of,, 伊, and 傅. What troubles the world cannot be governed well, and what troubles everything cannot be sorted out.

古文：此在陛下一振作间而已。
现代文：这只是陛下振作一下的事。
English: It's just to cheer you up, Your Majesty.

古文：释此不为，而切切于轻举度世，敝精劳神，以求之于系风捕影、茫然不可知之域，臣见劳苦终身，而终于无所成也。
现代文：放弃它不做，热衷于轻举度世，伤精劳神，在捕风捉影、茫然不知之中寻求修炼本性，我看终身劳苦，却最终一无所成。
English: Abandoning it does not do, keen to live lightly, painstakingly working hard, seeking to cultivate nature while chasing the wind and catching the shadow, in a daze, I see lifelong toil, but ultimately nothing.

古文：今大臣持禄而好谀，小臣畏罪而结舌，臣不胜愤恨。
现代文：现在大臣取俸禄而喜好阿谀，小官吏害怕被治罪就闭口不语，我很愤恨。
English: I am very indignant that ministers now take a salary and prefer to be puppets, while minor officials keep silent for fear of being punished.

古文：是以冒死，愿尽区区，惟陛下垂听焉。
现代文：因此冒死罪，愿尽绵薄之力，唯求陛下赐恩。 
English: Therefore, I dare to commit the crime of death, and I am willing to do my best to implore the grace of His Majesty.

古文：帝得疏，大怒，抵之地，顾左右曰： 趣执之，无使得遁！ 
现代文：世宗接到奏章，非常恼怒，扔到地上，环视左右的人喊： 赶快抓住他，不要让他逃跑了。 
English: When Sejong received the letter, he was very angry and threw it on the ground. He looked around at the people around him and shouted, "Hurry up and catch him, don't let him escape."

古文：宦官黄锦在侧曰： 此人素有痴名。
现代文：宦官黄锦在旁边说： 这个人素有痴名。
English: Eunuch Huang Jin said next to him, "This man has an idiotic name.

古文：闻其上疏时，自知触忤当死，市一棺，诀妻子，待罪于朝，僮仆亦奔散无留者，是不遁也。 
现代文：听说他上奏章的时候，自知触犯皇上该死，就买了一副棺材，告别妻儿，在朝廷等候治罪，童仆也都逃散，没有人留下，他不会逃离。 
English: When he heard that he had offended the emperor, he knew that he deserved to die, so he bought a pair of coffins, said goodbye to his wife and children, and awaited punishment at the court. His servants also fled, leaving no one behind. He would not flee.

古文：帝默然。少顷复取读之，日再三，为感动太息，留中者数月。
现代文：沉默不语，过会儿又取过奏章阅读，一天读了几遍，被它感动而叹息，将奏疏留在中宫几个月。
English: He was silent. Later, he took the score and read it. He read it several times a day. He was moved by it and sighed. He left the score in the palace for several months.

古文：尝曰： 此人可方比干，第朕非纣耳。 
现代文：曾说： 此人可以与比干相配，但是我不是商纣。 
English: He once said: "This person can match the comparison, but I'm not a negotiator.

古文：会帝有疾，烦懑不乐，召阁臣徐阶议内禅，因曰： 海瑞言俱是。
现代文：遇上过问患病，烦懑不乐，召见内阁大臣徐阶商议传位的事，说： 海瑞所讲的都是实话。
English: In the event that Hai Rui was sick, tired and unhappy, he summoned the cabinet minister Xu Qi to discuss the matter of passing the position, saying: What Hai Rui said is the truth.

古文：朕今病久，安能视事。 
现代文：我现在病了很久，怎么能巡视朝廷事务。 
English: I have been ill for a long time now, how can I inspect the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：又曰： 朕不自谨惜，致此疾困。
现代文：又说： 我不自我谨慎珍惜，招致这场病患。
English: He also said: "I did not take care of myself and caused this illness."

古文：使朕能出御便殿，岂受此人诟詈耶？ 
现代文：假使我能到便殿去，怎么会遭此人的骂呢？ 
English: If I can go to the toilet, how can I be scolded by this person?

古文：遂逮瑞下诏狱，究主使者。
现代文：于是逮捕海瑞投放到诏狱，追究主使人。
English: As a result, Hai Rui was arrested and sent to Dajia Prison, and the mastermind was investigated.

古文：寻移刑部，论死。
现代文：不久把他移交刑部，判处死罪。
English: He was soon handed over to the penal department and sentenced to death.

古文：狱上，仍留中。
现代文：案宗上报后，仍被留在世宗手中。
English: After the case file was reported, it was still left in the hands of Sejong.

古文：户部司务何以尚者，揣帝无杀瑞意，疏请释之。
现代文：户部司务何以尚揣摸皇帝没有杀海瑞的意思，上书请求释放他。
English: The head of the household department wondered why the emperor did not intend to kill Hai Rui, and sent a letter requesting his release.

古文：帝怒，命锦衣卫杖之百，锢诏狱，昼夜搒讯。
现代文：世宗发怒，命令锦衣卫将他杖击百次，禁锢在诏狱，昼夜棒击审讯。
English: Sejong was furious and ordered Jin Rongwei to beat him with a cane a hundred times, imprison him in the imperial prison, and interrogate him day and night.

古文：越二月，帝崩，穆宗立，两人并获释。
现代文：过了两个月，皇帝去世，穆宗即位，两人都被释放。
English: Two months later, the emperor died and Mu Zong ascended to the throne. Both were released.

古文：帝初崩，外庭多未知。
现代文：世宗刚死，外界大都不知道。
English: Sejong just died, and the outside world doesn't know much about him.

古文：提牢主事闻状，以瑞且见用，设酒馔款之。
现代文：提牢主事听了，以为海瑞将被任用，设宴款待他。
English: After listening to the host, he thought that Hai Rui would be appointed to the role, and set up a banquet to entertain him.

古文：瑞自疑当赴西市，恣饮啖，不顾。
现代文：海瑞自己疑心要赴刑场，放纵饮用，不顾虑什么。
English: Hai Rui himself suspected that he wanted to go to the execution site, indulged in drinking, and did not care about anything.

古文：主事因附耳语： 宫车适晏驾，先生今即出大用矣。 
现代文：主事就附在他耳边说： 皇帝去世了，先生即将出狱效力了。 
English: The head clerk whispered in his ear: "The emperor has died, and my master is about to be released from prison.

古文：瑞曰： 信然乎？ 
现代文：海瑞问： 真的？ 
English: Hai Rui asked: Really?

古文：即大恸，尽呕出所饮食，陨绝于地，终夜哭不绝声。
现代文：随即大哭，将吃进的东西全呕吐了，倒在地上，整夜哭泣不停。
English: She immediately burst into tears, vomited up everything she had eaten, fell to the ground, and cried all night long.

古文：既释，复故官。
现代文：不久获释，恢复旧职。
English: He was soon released and returned to his old job.

古文：俄改兵部。擢尚宝丞，调大理。
现代文：很快改派到兵部，提拔为尚宝丞，调任大理寺。
English: He was soon reassigned to the military department, promoted to Shang Bao Zheng, and transferred to Dali Temple.

古文：隆庆元年，徐阶为御史刘康所劾，瑞言： 阶事先帝，无能救于神仙土木之误，畏威保位，诚亦有之。
现代文：隆庆元年，徐阶被御史齐康弹劾，海瑞说： 徐阶侍从先帝，没有能终止神仙土木的过失，畏惧龙威保全职位，的确有罪。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, Xu Jia was impeached by the Grand Historian Qikang. Hai Rui said: Xu Jia, a servant of the former emperor, failed to terminate the fault of the immortal civil engineer, feared Long Wei to maintain his position, and was indeed guilty.

古文：然自执政以来，忧勤国事，休休有容，有足多者。
现代文：然而自从他执政以来，忧患国事，肚量宽弘，值得称赞。
English: However, since he has been in power, he has been worried about national affairs and has a broad stomach, which is commendable.

古文：康乃甘心鹰犬，捕噬善类，其罪又浮于高拱。 
现代文：齐康甘心做鹰犬，搏噬好人，他的罪又高过高拱。 
English: Qikang is willing to be a hawk-dog, devouring good people, and his sin is higher than the high arch.

古文：人韪其言。
现代文：人们赞同他的说法。
English: People agree with him.

古文：历两京左、右通政。
现代文：历任两京左、右通政。
English: Successive governors of the two capital cities, Left and Right, have been Tsuchimasa.

古文：三年夏，以右佥都御史巡抚应天十府。属吏惮其威，墨者多自免去。
现代文：隆庆二年夏天，以右佥都御史身份巡抚应天的十府，下属官吏害怕他的威严，有劣迹的人大都自动免职。
English: In the summer of the second year of the Longqing era, he became the governor of the ten prefectures of Yingtian with the status of the right-hand capital governor. The subordinate officials were afraid of his majesty, and most people with bad deeds were automatically dismissed.

古文：有势家朱丹其门，闻瑞至，黝之。
现代文：有势力的人家用朱丹漆门，听说海瑞来了，又漆成黑色。
English: Powerful people used to paint their doors with vermilion. When they heard that Hai Rui was coming, they painted them black.

古文：中人监织造者，为减舆从。
现代文：监理纺织营造的人，被减去众多随从。
English: The man who oversaw textile construction was shorn of a large entourage.

古文：瑞锐意兴革，请浚吴淞、白茆，通流入海，民赖其利。素疾大户兼并，力摧豪强，抚穷弱。
现代文：海瑞锐意革故鼎新，奏请疏浚吴淞、白茆，让河水畅流入海，百姓因此受益，他一贯痛恨大户兼并土地，极力折损豪强，安抚贫穷羸弱。
English: Hai Rui Rui wanted to change the old and make it new. He requested to dredge the Wuzhong and Baiyun Rivers, so that the river water could flow smoothly into the sea, and the people would benefit from it. He always hated the annexation of land by big families, and tried his best to break down the strong and pacify the poor and weak.

古文：贫民田入于富室者，率夺还之。徐阶罢相里居，按问其家无少贷。
现代文：贫民的田地被富户兼并，一概替他们夺回，徐阶罢免相位居住乡里，海瑞一样查问其家里的情况而不宽免。
English: The fields of the poor were annexed by the rich, and all of them were recaptured for them. Xu Jia was removed from the position of living in the countryside, and Hai Rui also investigated the situation in his home and was not pardoned.

古文：下令飚发凌厉，所司惴惴奉行，豪有力者至窜他郡以避。
现代文：他的命令雷霆万钧，有司惶恐奉行，有势力的豪强为了躲避，逃往其他郡。
English: His orders were obeyed with fear and trembling, and powerful nobles fled to other counties to avoid him.

古文：而奸民多乘机告讦，故家大姓时有被诬负屈者。
现代文：奸民往往乘机告发，所以大姓人家时常有遭诬告蒙冤屈的。
English: Rogue citizens often take the opportunity to sue, so it is not uncommon for big families to be falsely accused and suffer grievances.

古文：又裁节邮传冗费。
现代文：他又裁减邮传冗费。
English: He also cut postal and telecommunications costs.

古文：士大夫出其境率不得供顿，由是怨颇兴。都给事中舒化论瑞，滞不达政体，宜以南京清秩处之，帝犹优诏奖瑞。
现代文：士大夫离开了该地一律不提出供饮食，因此怨言很多，都给事中舒化批评海瑞迂腐不通晓政体，应该把他置于南京的清闲之地，穆宗仍然优待海瑞下诏奖励。
English: When the scholar-official left the area, he did not offer to provide food and drink, so there were many complaints, all of which were alleviated by criticizing Hai Rui for being pedantic and not understanding the political system. He should have been placed in a place of leisure in Nanjing. Mu Zong still treated Hai Rui favourably and rewarded him.

古文：已而给事中戴凤翔劾瑞庇奸民，鱼肉搢绅，沽名乱政，遂改督南京粮储。
现代文：不久给事中戴凤翔弹劾海瑞庇护奸民，鱼肉官吏，沽名钓誉扰乱政事，于是调他督职南京粮储。
English: Soon after the incident, Dai Fengxiang impeached Hai Rui for sheltering traitors, fish and meat officials, and corrupt officials for disrupting political affairs, and then transferred him to the post of supervisor of the Nanjing Grain Reserve.

古文：瑞抚吴甫半岁。小民闻当去，号泣载道，家绘像祀之。
现代文：海瑞抚慰吴地刚半年，百姓听说他将离去，哭声载道，绘像在家中祭祀。
English: Just half a year after Hai Rui comforted Wu Di, the people heard that he would be leaving, crying loudly and making sacrifices at home.

古文：将履新任，会高拱掌吏部，素衔瑞，并其职于南京户部，瑞遂谢病归。
现代文：他即将就任新职，遇上高拱主管吏部，此人一向怀恨海瑞，将他的职务并入南京户部，于是海瑞告病回家。
English: He was about to take up his new post when he met Gao Gong, the head of the personnel department, who had always held a grudge against Hai Rui and merged his post into the Nanjing household department, so Hai Rui went home sick.

古文：万历初，张居正当国，亦不乐瑞，令巡按御史廉察之。
现代文：万历初年，张居正主持朝政，也不喜欢海瑞，指使巡按御史考察他的清廉。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, Zhang Ju, who was presiding over court politics, did not like Hai Rui and ordered the inspector to investigate his integrity.

古文：御史至山中视，瑞设鸡黍相对食，居舍萧然，御史叹息去。
现代文：御史到山中察看，海瑞真诚地招待他，两人对坐用餐，房舍狭小，御史叹息着离去。
English: Mishi went to the mountains to investigate, and Hai Rui sincerely invited him. The two sat opposite each other for dinner. The house was small, and Mishi left with a sigh.

古文：居正惮瑞峭直，中外交荐，卒不召。
现代文：张居正害怕海瑞的耿直，虽然朝廷内外交相推荐，他始终不召见海瑞。
English: Zhang Juzheng was afraid of Hailui's bravery. Although he was recommended by the foreign minister of the imperial court, he never summoned Hailui.

古文：十二年冬，居正已卒，吏部拟用左通政。
现代文：万历十五年冬天，居正已死，吏部拟任用他做左通政。
English: In the winter of the fifteenth year of Wanli, Ju Zheng was already dead, and the cadre department planned to appoint him as the left channel.

古文：帝雅重瑞名，畀以前职。
现代文：神宗很看重海瑞的名声，授予他旧职。
English: Shenzong valued Hai Rui's reputation and gave him his old position.

古文：明年正月，召为南京右佥都御史，道改南京吏部右侍郎，瑞年已七十二矣。疏言衰老垂死，愿比古人尸谏之义，大略谓： 陛下励精图治，而治化不臻者，贪吏之刑轻也。
现代文：第二年正月招他任南京右佥都御史，又改任南京吏部右侍郎，海瑞当年七十二岁，上书陈述衰老将死，愿比附古人尸谏的大义，大略讲： 陛下励精图治，但政治还不理想，原因是贪婪官吏的刑罚轻了。
English: In the first month of the second year, he was appointed as the Right Attendant of the Capital of Nanjing, and he was also appointed as the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Administration Department. Hai Rui was seventy-two years old at the time, and he submitted a letter stating that he was about to die of old age, and he would like to add the great justice of the ancient people's corpse, roughly speaking: His Majesty is working hard, but the politics are not ideal, because the punishment of greedy officials is light.

古文：诸臣莫能言其故，反借待士有礼之说，交口而文其非。
现代文：大臣们不能谈论缘由，反而借助待士有礼的说法，对此赞不绝口掩饰其过失。
English: Ministers can't talk about the reasons, instead they cover up their failings with polite words of praise.

古文：夫待士有礼，而民则何辜哉？ 
现代文：待士有礼，但是百姓又有什么罪刑呢？ 
English: The attendants are polite, but what are the punishments for the common people?

古文：因举太祖法剥皮囊草及洪武三十年定律枉法八十贯论绞，谓今当用此惩贪。
现代文：于是他列举太祖剥皮囊草的刑罚以及洪武三十年的定律贪污八十贯处绞刑的例证，称现在应该用这些刑罚惩治贪官。
English: He then cited the punishment of the great-grandfather's flaying as well as the examples of the 30-year law of Hongwu and the 80-year hanging for corruption, saying that these punishments should now be used to punish corrupt officials.

古文：其他规切时政，语极剀切。
现代文：其他方面时政的谋划，话语非常切实。
English: In other aspects of the current political planning, the discourse is very practical.

古文：独劝帝虐刑，时议以为非。
现代文：唯独劝皇帝施行酷刑，当时舆论认为不妥。
English: However, he only advised the emperor to carry out torture, which was considered inappropriate by public opinion at the time.

古文：御史梅鹍祚劾之。
现代文：御史梅昆鸟祚弹劾他。
English: Impeach him with all due haste.

古文：帝虽以瑞言为过，然察其忠诚，为夺鹍祚俸。
现代文：神宗虽然认为海瑞的言语过分，但明了他的忠诚，撤了昆鸟祚的职。
English: Although Shenzong thought that Hai Rui's words were excessive, he understood his loyalty and removed the post of Kunjiao.

古文：帝屡欲召用瑞，执政阴沮之，乃以为南京右都御史。
现代文：神宗屡次打算召用海瑞，执政的人暗中阻拦，于是任命他为南京右都御史。
English: Shenzong repeatedly planned to summon Hai Rui, but the people in power secretly blocked him, so he appointed him as the leader of Nanjing's right-wing capital.

古文：诸司素偷惰，瑞以身矫之。
现代文：南京各官向来苟且懒惰，海瑞身体力行矫正此风。
English: The officials in Nanjing have always been scrupulous and lazy, and Hai Rui has been working hard to correct this.

古文：有御史偶陈戏乐，欲遵太祖法予之杖。
现代文：有位御史偶尔演戏取乐，海瑞打算遵循太祖法令杖责他。
English: There is an imperial historian who occasionally plays for fun, and Hai Rui intends to discipline him in accordance with the law of the great ancestor.

古文：百司惴恐，多患苦之。
现代文：百司惶恐，都患其苦。
English: Panic ensues, and everyone suffers.

古文：提学御史房寰恐见纠擿，欲先发，给事中钟宇淳复怂恿，寰再上疏丑诋。
现代文：提学御史房寰担心被纠察和揭发，准备先行发难，给事中钟宇淳也鼓动，房寰再次上书对海瑞丑化诋毁。
English: Fusang, the head of the school, was worried about being picketed and exposed, and prepared to attack first. Zhongwu Jun also encouraged him, and Fusang once again wrote a letter to defame and slander Hai Rui.

古文：瑞亦屡疏乞休，慰留不允。
现代文：海瑞也多次上书请求退休，神宗安抚挽留，不同意他辞职。
English: Hai Rui also repeatedly wrote to request retirement, but Shenzong appeased him and did not agree to his resignation.

古文：十五年，卒官。
现代文：万历十五年，海瑞死在职任上。
English: After fifteen years, Hai Rui died in office.

古文：瑞无子。
现代文：海瑞无儿子。
English: Hai Rui has no son.

古文：卒时，佥都御史王用汲入视，葛帏敝籝，有寒士所不堪者。因泣下，醵金为敛。
现代文：死时，佥都御史王用汲进他家察看，发现他用的是穷寒的士人都不能忍受的麻布帐和破竹箱，王用汲哭泣着退下，凑钱给他送葬。
English: At the time of his death, Emperor Wuzhong inspected his house and found that he had used a sackcloth tent and a broken bamboo box, which were unbearable for a poor scholar. Wuzhong wept and retreated to collect money for his funeral.

古文：小民罢市。
现代文：百姓罢市。
English: The people went on strike.

古文：丧出江上，白衣冠送者夹岸，酹而哭者百里不绝。
现代文：丧事在江上举行，穿戴白衣帽的送葬人夹岸，哭着洒酒祭奠的人百里不绝。
English: The funeral was held on the river. Mourners wearing white coats and hats waded ashore, and there was a steady stream of mourners crying and sprinkling wine.

古文：赠太子太保，谥忠介。
现代文：神宗追封他为太子太保，谥号忠介。
English: Emperor Shenzong crowned him Crown Prince Taibo, with the posthumous title of Taisuke.

古文：瑞生平为学，以刚为主，因自号刚峰，天下称刚峰先生。
现代文：海瑞生平学行，主要是刚强，因为他自号刚峰，天下人称他为刚峰先生。
English: Hai Rui Shengping's learning process was mainly strong and tough, because he called himself Kongfeng. People all over the world called him Mr. Kongfeng.

古文：寻拜南京吏部尚书，卒官。
现代文：他曾说： 想天下治理安平，必须推行井田制。
English: He once said: If we want to have a peaceful world, we must implement the Ida system.

古文：赠太子太保，谥简肃。
现代文：不得已就推行限田制，再不行就实行均税制，尚且可以保存古人的遗志。 
English: If necessary, the limited field system will be implemented, if not, the flat tax system will be implemented, and the legacy of the ancients can be preserved.

古文：橓强直好搏击，其清节为时所称云。
现代文：所以自从任县令到巡抚，他都致力清丈田亩，颁行一条鞭法。
English: Therefore, since he was appointed as the county magistrate to the governor, he has been committed to clearing the fields and issuing a whip law.

古文：吕坤，字叔简，宁陵人。万历二年进士。
现代文：主要意思在于利民，不过行事不能说没有偏颇。吕坤，字叔简，宁陵人，万历二年的进士。
English: The main intention is to benefit the people, but the actions cannot be said to be unbalanced. Lü Kun, nicknamed Uncle Jane, from Ningling, has been a member of the Communist Party for two years.

古文：为襄垣知县，有异政。
现代文：担任襄垣知县，有卓著的政绩。
English: He served as the governor of Xiangqi County and had outstanding political achievements.

古文：调大同，征授户部主事，历郎中。
现代文：调往大同，授职为户部主事，历任郎中。
English: He was transferred to Datong, appointed as the head of the household department, and successively became a junior vassal.

古文：迁山东参政、山西按察使、陕西右布政使。
现代文：调任山东参政、山西按察使、陕西右布政使。
English: He was transferred to Shandong to participate in politics, to Shanxi as an inspector, and to Shaanxi as a political envoy.

古文：擢右佥都御史，巡抚山西。
现代文：升任右佥都御史，巡按山西。
English: He was promoted to the post of Right Deputy Metropolitan Historian and went on a tour of Shanxi.

古文：居三年，召为左佥都御史。
现代文：过了三年，被召回任左佥都御史。
English: Three years later, he was recalled to the post of Zuozhongduoshi.

古文：历刑部左、右侍郎。
现代文：历任刑部左、右侍郎。
English: He served as the Left and Right Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：二十五年五月，书疏陈天下安危，其略曰：
现代文：万历二十五年五月上奏陈述国家的安危，大意是说：
English: In May of the 25th year of Wanli, the report on the state of national security was issued, to the effect that:

古文：窃见元旦以来，天气昏黄，日光黯淡，占者以为乱徵。
现代文： 我私下以为从元旦以来，天气昏黄，日光暗淡，占卜的人认为是乱世的征兆。
English: Privately, I thought that since New Year's Day, the weather has been gloomy and the sun has been dim, which soothsayers consider to be a sign of chaos.

古文：今天下之势，乱象已形，而乱势未动。天下之人，乱心已萌，而乱人未倡。
现代文：现在国家的形势，已经出现混乱的迹象，还没爆发。全国的民众，已经萌发祸乱之心，却还没有人倡导。
English: The current situation of the country has already shown signs of chaos, but it has not yet erupted. The people of the whole country have already sprouted the heart of calamity, but no one has advocated it.

古文：今日之政，皆播乱机使之动，助乱人使之倡者也。
现代文：现在的政治，都是播下祸乱的机会使人行动，帮助骚乱的人使之得以首倡的借口。
English: The politics of the moment are an opportunity to sow chaos, an excuse to act, to help the rioters get started.

古文：臣敢以救时要务，为陛下陈之。
现代文：我斗胆将救世的要务，向陛下陈述。
English: I have dared to present to your majesty the task of saving the world.

古文：自古幸乱之民有四。
现代文：自古有四种人对祸乱感到高兴。
English: Since ancient times, there have been four types of people who take pleasure in calamity.

古文：一曰无聊之民。饱温无由，身家俱困，因怀逞乱之心，冀缓须臾之死。
现代文：一是无依靠的人，得不到温饱，自己和家庭都困窘，就怀有骚乱的想法，希望延缓即将死去的生命。
English: On the one hand, there are people who have no one to rely on, who can't get food and clothing, and who are embarrassed for themselves and their families. They harbor the idea of rioting, hoping to delay the life that is about to die.

古文：二曰无行之民。气高性悍，玩法轻生，居常爱玉帛子女而不得，及有变则淫掠是图。
现代文：二是无德行的人，心气高亢性格强悍，对生命轻率，藐视法律，平常爱慕玉帛和女人却得不到，等到有变乱就图谋劫掠。
English: On the other hand, there are those who are without virtue, high-spirited, strong-willed, reckless with life, contemptuous of the law, who usually adore jewels and women but can't get them, and when there is turmoil, they try to plunder.

古文：三曰邪说之民。白莲结社，遍及四方，教主传头，所在成聚。
现代文：三是信奉邪教的人，白莲教的社团，遍及四方，教主与小头目成群。
English: The third is the people who believe in the cult, the White Lotus cult associations, spread all over the four directions, the church leaders and the ringleaders are in groups.

古文：倘有招呼之首，此其归附之人。
现代文：倘若有首领召唤，他们就会归附。
English: If a leader calls, they will come.

古文：四曰不轨之民。乘衅蹈机，妄思雄长。
现代文：四是行为不轨的人，乘混乱之机，妄想称雄。
English: The fourth is a person who behaves improperly, takes advantage of the chaos, and delusionally claims to be a hero.

古文：惟冀目前有变，不乐天下太平。
现代文：只希望目前有变乱，不喜欢天下太平。
English: I just hope that there is turmoil at the moment, I don't like the world being at peace.

古文：陛下约己爱人，损上益上，则四民皆赤子，否则悉为寇仇。
现代文：陛下约束自己爱护别人，自己受损却使百姓受益，那么四种人都会成为赤诚的百姓，否则就会全部成为仇敌。
English: If His Majesty restrains himself from loving others, and benefits the people even if he is harmed, then all four kinds of people will become sincere people, otherwise they will all become enemies.

古文：今天下之苍生贫困可知矣。自万历十年以来，无岁不灾，催科如故。
现代文： 现在天下苍生的贫困很清楚，从万历十年以来，没有一年无灾害，催收的课税依旧。
English: Now the poverty of all living beings in the world is very clear. Since the tenth year of Wanli, there has been no year without disasters, and the collection of taxes is still the same.

古文：臣久为外吏，见陛下赤子冻骨无兼衣，饥肠不再食，垣舍弗蔽，苫藁未完；流移日众，弃地猥多；留者输去者之粮，生者承死者之役。
现代文：我长期在京城外做官，看到陛下的赤子受冻却没有遮体的衣服，饥肠辘辘，吃了上顿无下顿，房屋没有遮盖，连茅草房子也不完整；流民一天天增加，废弃的土地很多；留下的人负担走了的人的粮食，活着的人承担死了的人的劳役。
English: I worked as an official outside the capital for a long time, and I saw His Majesty's infant son suffering from the cold without clothes to cover his body, hungry, eating everything, the house was not covered, even the thatched house was not complete; the number of displaced people was increasing day by day, and there was a lot of abandoned land; those who remained were burdened with the food of those who had left, and those who were alive were responsible for the labor of those who had died.

古文：君门万里，孰能仰诉？
现代文：国君的门庭辽阔万里，谁能仰望申诉。
English: The gate of the sovereign is vast, and who can look up to appeal.

古文：今国家之财用耗竭可知矣。
现代文：现在国家的财政开支耗尽的情况很清楚。
English: It is now clear that the country is running out of money.

古文：数年以来，寿宫之费几百万，织造之费几百万，宁夏之变几百万，黄河之溃几百万，今大工、采木费，又各几百万矣。
现代文：多年来修建寿宫耗资近百万两，织造耗资百万两，宁夏的变乱耗资近百万两，黄河决堤耗资近百万两，现在国家大工程、采木费又各有近百万两。
English: Over the years, the construction of the Shugu Palace cost nearly one million taels, weaving cost up to one million taels, the riots in Ningxia cost nearly one million taels, the breaking of the Yellow River cost nearly one million taels, and now the national grand project and logging costs each have nearly one million taels.

古文：土不加广，民不加多，非有雨菽涌金，安能为计？
现代文：土地没有扩展，百姓没有增多，没有天降豆类、地冒黄金的好事，怎么办呢？
English: If the land does not expand, if the people do not increase, if there is no heaven-sent legumes, if the land does not produce gold, what should we do?

古文：今国家之防御疏略可知矣。
现代文：现在国家的防御概况很清楚。
English: The country's defence profile is now clear.

古文：三大营之兵以卫京师也，乃马半羸敝，人半老弱。
现代文：三大营的兵马护卫京城，马匹有一半羸弱衰老，人员有半数年老体弱。
English: Three large battalions of soldiers and horses guard the capital. Half of the horses are frail and old, and half of the personnel are a few years old and infirm.

古文：九边之兵以御外寇也，皆勇于挟上，怯于临戎。
现代文：九处边关的兵马是为了抵御外敌的却都勇于挟制皇上，害怕与北方少数民族作战。
English: The soldiers and horses stationed at the nine border gates were brought in to defend against foreign enemies, but they all dared to blackmail the emperor and were afraid to fight against the northern ethnic minorities.

古文：外卫之兵以备征调资守御也，伍缺于役占，家累于需求，皮骨仅存，折冲奚赖？
现代文：外卫的兵马是预备征调和支援守备的，却因为劳役的占用使队伍缺员。家庭拖累于生计，仅存皮骨，军府何所依赖？
English: The soldiers and horses of the outer guard are prepared for conscription and support, but because of the occupation of laborers, the team is short-staffed. Families are burdened with livelihoods, only skin and bones remain, what does the military rely on?

古文：设有千骑横行，兵不足用，必选民丁。
现代文：假设有千名骑兵横行四方，国家就兵马不够用，必然选择百姓中的壮丁。
English: Assuming that there are a thousand cavalrymen rampaging in all directions, the country will not have enough soldiers and horses, and will inevitably choose the strong men among the people.

古文：以怨民斗怨民，谁与合战？
现代文：用怨愤的百姓与怨愤的百姓战斗，与谁联合作战？
English: Using the resentful people to fight the resentful people, with whom to fight jointly?

古文：人心者，国家之命脉也。
现代文： 人心是国家的命脉。
English: The human heart is the lifeblood of a nation.

古文：今日之人心，惟望陛下收之而已。
现代文：现在的人心，只希望陛下收聚罢了。
English: Right now, all we can hope for is that His Majesty gathers the hearts of the people.

古文：关陇气寒土薄，民生实艰。
现代文：关、陇的气候寒冷、土地贫瘠，百姓的生活实在艰辛。
English: The climate in Guan and Handan is cold, the land is barren, and the people's lives are really hard.

古文：自造花绒，比户困趣逼。
现代文：织造花绒，户户贫困于逼纳。
English: Weaving floral velvet, households are impoverished due to forced acceptance.

古文：提花染色，日夜无休，千手经年，不成一匹。
现代文：提花染色，日夜不得休息，一千只手历时一年也完不成一匹。
English: Jacquard dyeing, day and night can not rest, a thousand hands after a year can not complete a horse.

古文：他若山西之，苏、松之锦绮，岁额既盈，加造不已。
现代文：其他的如山西的纟由，苏、松的锦绮，每年的定额完成后，又不断加造。
English: Others, such as Shanxi reeds, and Su and pine brocades, are continuously added after the annual quota is completed.

古文：至饶州磁器，西域回青，不急之须，徒累小民敲骨。
现代文：至于饶州的磁器，西域的回青，不急需的东西，徒然使百姓受敲骨之累。
English: As for the porcelain of Raozhou and the epoxy of the western region, it is not something that is urgently needed, and it is in vain to make the people suffer the fatigue of bone-breaking.

古文：陛下诚一切停罢，而江南、陕西之人心收矣。
现代文：陛下确实能停罢一切，就收聚了江南、陕西的民心。 就采木而言。
English: His Majesty was indeed able to stop everything and win the hearts and minds of the people in the south of the Yangtze River and Shaanxi Province.

古文：以采木言之。
现代文：一丈八尺的粗木，不算百年的树木。
English: An eight-foot-tall tree is not a hundred-year-old tree.

古文：丈八之围，非百年之物。深山穷谷，蛇虎杂居，毒雾常多，人烟绝少，寒暑饥渴瘴疠死者无论矣。乃一木初卧，千夫难移，倘遇阻艰，必成伤殒。
现代文：深山穷谷，蛇虎杂居，毒雾缭绕，人烟稀少，因为寒暑饥渴患痢疾死亡的人不谈。就是一根木材刚放倒，千人也难以移动，倘若遇上阻隔艰辛，必然出现伤亡。
English: Deep mountains and valleys, snakes and tigers living together, poisonous fog swirling around, few people, not to mention those who die of dysentery due to cold, heat, hunger and thirst. Even if a piece of wood is just put down, it is difficult for a thousand people to move, and if they encounter obstacles and hardships, there will inevitably be casualties.

古文：蜀民语曰： 入山一千，出山五百 。哀可知也。
现代文：蜀地百姓称 入山一千人，出山剩五百 ，哀怨很清楚。
English: The people of Shu said that one thousand people went into the mountains, and only five hundred came out. Their grief was very clear.

古文：至若海木，官价虽一株千两，比来都下，为费何止万金！
现代文：至于像海木，虽然官价是一株一千两银子，等到运抵京城，费用何止一万两。
English: As for the sea trees, although the official price is one thousand taels of silver, when they arrive in the capital, the cost is more than ten thousand taels.

古文：臣见楚、蜀之人，谈及采木，莫不哽咽。
现代文：我看到楚、蜀的百姓，谈到采伐木料，没有人不哽咽。
English: I see the people of Chu and Shu, and when it comes to logging, no one can help but choke.

古文：苟损其数，增其直，多其岁月，减其尺寸，而川、贵、湖广之人心收矣。
现代文：假设减少数量，增加价值，多给些时间，减小尺寸，就收聚了川、贵、湖广的民心。 就采矿而言。
English: If we reduce the quantity, increase the value, give more time, and reduce the size, we will win the hearts and minds of people in Sichuan, Guizhou, and Hunan.

古文：以采矿言之。南阳诸府，比岁饥荒。生气方苏，菜色未变。
现代文：南阳各府，年年闹饥荒，刚刚恢复生机，脸上的饥饿之色还没改变。
English: Nanyang's prefectures, ravaged by famine year after year, have just regained their vitality, and the color of hunger on their faces has not changed.

古文：自责报殷户，是半已惊逃。
现代文：自从责令报告殷实的人家，但是半数已经惊恐地逃亡了。
English: Since being ordered to report to their families, however, half have fled in terror.

古文：自供应矿夫工食、官兵口粮，而多至累死。
现代文：自从不供应矿夫和官兵的口粮，多数人都快累死。
English: Since they never supplied rations for miners and officers and soldiers, most of them died of exhaustion.

古文：自都御史李盛春严旨切责，而抚按畏罪不敢言。
现代文：自从都御史李盛春下严令责罚，抚按又怕治罪不敢说话。
English: Ever since Li Shengchun, the Grand Historian of the Capital, issued strict orders to punish and punish, they have been afraid to speak out.

古文：今矿沙无利，责民纳银，而奸人仲春复为攘夺侵渔之计。
现代文：现在矿砂没有利润，责令百姓交纳银两，而奸人仲春又设计掠夺蚕食。
English: Now that there is no profit in mineral ore, the people are ordered to pay two silver coins, and the traitor Zhongchun also plans to plunder and encroach.

古文：朝廷得一金，郡县费千倍。
现代文：朝廷得到一两银子，郡县的开支上千倍。
English: The imperial court received one or two pieces of silver, and the county's expenses increased a thousandfold.

古文：诚敕戒使者，毋散砂责银，有侵夺小民若仲春者，诛无赦，而四方之人心收矣。
现代文：果真下令告诫使者，不要乱征银两，有像仲春一样侵犯、掠夺百姓的人，杀无赦，就收聚了四方的人心。
English: If he really ordered and admonished the envoys not to indiscriminately collect silver and gold, and if there were people like Zhongchun who violated and plundered the people and killed without mercy, he would win the hearts of the people in all four directions.

古文：宫店租银收解，自赵承勋造四千之说，而皇店开。
现代文： 官店的租银收取、押送，从赵承勋时达到四千，因而开设了皇店。
English: The rent of the official store was four thousand yuan from the time of Zhao Chengxun, and thus the imperial store was opened.

古文：自朝廷有内官之遣，而事权重。
现代文：自从朝廷派遣太监，因而事权加重。
English: Since the imperial court dispatched eunuchs, the situation has become more serious.

古文：夫市井之地，贫民求升合丝毫以活身家者也，陛下享万方之富，何赖于彼？
现代文：市井是贫民谋取丝毫之利以养家饣胡口的场所，陛下享有全国的财富，对它有什么依赖？
English: The market is a place where the poor seek the slightest profit to feed their families. Your Majesty enjoys the wealth of the whole country. What is your dependence on it?

古文：且冯保八店，为屋几何，而岁有四千金之课。
现代文：况且冯保有八家店铺，有多少房屋，每年却有四千两的课税。
English: Moreover, Feng owns eight stores, how many houses, but he has to pay 4,000 taels of taxes every year.

古文：课既四千，征收何止数倍。
现代文：课税既然有四千两，征收的数目何止几倍。
English: Since there are 42,000 taxes to be levied, the amount to be collected has increased many times over.

古文：不夺市民，将安取之？
现代文：不掠夺市井的百姓，钱怎么能得来？
English: How can you get money without robbing the common people?

古文：今豪家遣仆设肆，居民尚受其殃，况特遣中贵，赐之敕书，以压卵之威，行竭泽之计，民困岂顾问哉？
现代文：现在富家派仆人开设店铺，居民尚且遭殃，况且特派的显赫的太监，受赐诏书，逞压卵之威，施行竭泽而渔的行为，难道还顾忌百姓的困苦吗？
English: Now that the rich send their servants to open shops, and the residents are still suffering, and moreover, the special eminent eunuchs, who have been given the imperial edict, have the power to suppress the eggs and carry out the act of exhausting the fish, do they still care about the hardships of the people?

古文：陛下撤还内臣，责有司输课，而畿甸之人心收矣。
现代文：陛下撤回太监，责令有司输送课税，就收聚了京郊的人心。
English: His Majesty withdrew the eunuchs and ordered the tax collector to collect the tax, which won the hearts of the people in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：天下宗室，皆九庙子孙。
现代文： 天下的宗室，都是九庙先祖的子孙。
English: The world's patriarchs are all descendants of the ancestors of the Nine Temples.

古文：王守仁、王锦袭盖世神奸，藉隔数千里，而冒认王弼子孙；事隔三百年，而妄称受寄财产。
现代文：王守仁、王锦袭是盖世的神奸。籍贯相距数千里，却冒充是王弼的子孙；事情相隔三百年，却妄称接受寄存的财产。
English: Wang Shouren and Wang Jinsai are traitors to the world. They come from thousands of miles away, but pretend to be the descendants of Wang Qian; the events are three hundred years apart, but they claim to accept the deposited property.

古文：中间伪造丝纶，假传诏旨，明欺圣主，暗陷亲王，有如楚王衔恨自杀，陛下何辞以谢高皇帝之灵乎？
现代文：其间伪造圣旨，假传诏令，明地欺骗圣上，暗中陷害亲王，有的人像楚王含恨自杀，陛下拿什么话来告慰高皇帝？
English: In the meantime, they forged the imperial decree, falsified the imperial edict, openly deceived the emperor, and secretly framed the prince. Some people, like King Chu, committed suicide out of hatred. What words did His Majesty use to console Emperor Gao?

古文：此两贼者，罪应诛殛，乃止令回籍，臣恐万姓惊疑。
现代文：这两个贼人罪当诛杀，仅停止命令回归原籍，我担心万众惊讶生疑。
English: I'm worried that everyone will be surprised and suspicious when these two thieving criminals fight and kill, only to stop the order to return to their place of origin.

古文：诚急斩二贼以谢楚王，而天下宗藩之心收矣。
现代文：果真马上斩决两名贼人以告慰楚王，就收聚天下宗族藩府人的心。
English: If Gu Zhen immediately executed the two thieves in order to console King Chu, he would win the hearts of the people of the clan and the government.

古文：崇信伯费甲金之贫，十厢珠宝之诬，皆通国所知也。
现代文： 崇信伯费甲金的贫困，十箱珠宝的谣言，都是全国知晓的。
English: The poverty of Chongxin Bofei Jiajin, the rumor of ten boxes of jewelry, are known throughout the country.

古文：始误于科道之风闻，严追犹未为过。
现代文：开始错在科道道听途说，严加追查也不为过。
English: The initial mistake was based on hearsay and hearsay, and a strict investigation is not out of the question.

古文：今真知其枉，又加禁锢，实害无辜。
现代文：现在真正知道他受冤枉，又做禁锢，确实是加害无辜。
English: Now he truly knows that he was wrongly convicted and imprisoned, and that he did indeed harm an innocent person.

古文：请还甲金革去之禄，复五城厂卫降斥之官，而勋戚之人心收矣。
现代文：请归还费甲金被剥夺的俸禄，为五城厂卫中被降职的人恢复官职，就收聚了功臣、外戚的人心。
English: Please return the salary that Fei Jia Jin was deprived of, and reinstate the official position for the people who were demoted from the five-city factory guard. This will gather the hearts of meritorious soldiers and relatives.

古文：法者所以平天下之情。
现代文： 法律是平定天下的力量。
English: The law is the power to pacify the world.

古文：其轻其重，太祖既定为律，列圣又增为例。
现代文：它的轻重，太祖已经定为准则，列位圣祖又增添则例。
English: Its importance, Taizu has been set as a standard, and the canonization of the Holy Ancestors has been added as an example.

古文：如轻重可以就喜怒之情，则例不得为一定之法。
现代文：如果轻重可以依照喜怒的情况，那么则例不能成为确定的法令。
English: An example cannot be a definitive law if the weighting can vary according to emotions.

古文：臣待罪刑部三年矣，每见诏狱一下，持平者多拂上意，从重者皆当圣心。
现代文：我在刑部供职多年，每次看到诏狱一下达，主张公平的人大都有违皇上的意愿，主张严惩的人都合乎皇上的心意。
English: I have been working in the Criminal Investigation Department for many years. Every time I see the arrival of the imperial edict, those who advocate fairness are mostly against the emperor's wishes, and those who advocate severe punishment are in line with the emperor's intentions.

古文：如往年陈恕、王正甄、常照等狱，臣等欺天罔人，已自废法，陛下犹以为轻，俱加大辟。然则律例又安用乎！
现代文：像往年陈恕、王正甄、常照等人的狱案，我们欺骗上天哄骗百姓，已经自己废止了法令，陛下还认为判轻了，全部施加处死极刑，这样律例又有什么作用呢？
English: Like the prison cases of Chen Shou, Wang Zheng Zhen, Chang Zhao and others in previous years, we have deceived heaven and earth and deceived the people. We have repealed the law ourselves. Your Majesty also thinks that the sentence is light and imposes the death penalty on all of them. What is the effect of such a law?

古文：诚俯从司寇之平，勉就祖宗之法，而囹圄之人心收矣。
现代文：果真遵从刑部公平的裁决，鼓励遵奉祖宗的法规，就收聚了狱中人心。
English: If they truly obey the fair ruling of the criminal justice department and encourage people to follow the laws of their ancestors, they will win the hearts and minds of people in prison.

古文：自古圣明之君，岂乐诽谤之语。
现代文： 自古圣明的君主，难道乐意听诽谤的话吗？
English: Would the sovereign, ever holy, listen to slander?

古文：然而务求言赏谏者，知天下存亡，系言路通塞也。
现代文：然而力求谏言、奖赏劝谏的人，知道国家的存亡与言路的畅通或堵塞相关。
English: However, those who strive to persuade and reward persuasion know that the survival of the country is related to the smooth flow or blockage of the speech path.

古文：比来驱逐既多，选补皆罢。
现代文：近来驱逐的人很多，选举和候补都罢除了。
English: There have been a lot of expulsions recently, and elections and alternates have been eliminated.

古文：天阍邃密，法座崇严，若不广达四聪，何由明照万里？
现代文：皇宫紧闭，帝位崇高，如果不广泛运用耳目观察，怎么能让圣人的圣明普照万里。
English: The imperial palace is tightly closed, the imperial throne is lofty, if we do not widely use our eyes and ears to observe, how can we let the saint's holy light shine everywhere?

古文：今陛下所闻，皆众人之所敢言也，其不敢言者，陛下不得闻矣。
现代文：现在陛下听到的，都是大家敢讲的事情，他们不敢讲的事情，陛下听不到。
English: What Your Majesty hears now is what everyone dares to say, and what they dare not say, Your Majesty does not hear.

古文：一人孤立万乘之上，举朝无犯颜逆耳之人，快在一时，忧贻他日。
现代文：一人孤立在万乘之上，整个朝廷没有冲犯龙颜讲逆耳之言的人，一时快乐，却存忧他日。
English: A person isolated in Wanxiang, the entire court did not offend Longyan, who spoke against the ear, was happy for a while, but worried about the next day.

古文：陛下诚释曹学程之系，还吴文梓等官，凡建言得罪者，悉分别召用，而士大夫之心收矣。
现代文：陛下果真释放曹学程，恢复吴文梓的官职，凡是因劝谏被治罪的人，全部将他们分别录用，就收聚了士大夫的心。
English: His Majesty did indeed release Cao Xuecheng and reinstate Wu Wenzhi, and all those who were sentenced for persuasion were hired separately, which won the hearts of the officials.

古文：朝鲜密迩东陲，近吾肘腋，平壤西邻鸭绿，晋州直对登、莱。
现代文： 朝鲜紧临我东部边疆，接近我们的肘腋，平壤西边邻近鸭绿江，晋州正对着登州、莱州。
English: North Korea is close to our eastern border, close to our elbow, the west side of Pyongyang is near the Yalu River, and Jinzhou is facing Dengzhou and Laizhou.

古文：倘倭夷取而有之，籍众为兵，就地资食，进则断我漕运，退则窥我辽东。
现代文：倘若倭寇夺取了它，聚众当兵。就地取得给养，进攻可以切断我们的漕运线，退守可以窥视我们辽东。
English: If the Japanese invaders seized it, they would gather a large number of soldiers and obtain supplies on the spot. If they attacked, they could cut off our transportation routes, and if they retreated, they could spy on our Liaodong.

古文：不及一年，京城坐困，此国家大忧也。
现代文：不到一年，京城受困，这是国家的大忧患。
English: In less than a year, the capital city is in trouble, which is a great sorrow for the country.

古文：乃彼请兵而二三其说，许兵而延缓其期；力穷势屈，不折入为倭不止。
现代文：他们请求援兵就推三推四，答应派兵又延缓时间；等到力量穷尽势力折转，他们不投靠倭寇不会终结。
English: When they asked for reinforcements, they were pushed back three or four times, and when they agreed to send troops, the time was delayed again. When their strength was exhausted and their power turned around, they would not stop relying on the wako.

古文：陛下诚早决大计，并力东征，而属国之人心收矣。
现代文：陛下果真早先确定大计，全力东征，就可以收聚属国的人心。
English: If His Majesty had really decided on a grand plan earlier and made an all-out eastward expedition, he would have been able to win the hearts and minds of the people of his country.

古文：四方输解之物，营办既苦，转运尤艰。
现代文： 全国输送的财物，筹办很苦，转运更艰辛。
English: It is very difficult to organize the transportation of assets across the country, and it is even more difficult to transfer them.

古文：及入内库，率至朽烂，万姓脂膏，化为尘土。
现代文：等到送入内库，大抵已经腐朽糜烂，万姓之民的脂膏，化为尘土。
English: By the time they are sent to the inner storehouse, most of them have already rotted and decayed, and the grease of all the people has turned into dust.

古文：倘岁一稽核，苦窳者严监收之刑，朽腐者重典守之罪。一整顿间，而一年可备三年之用，岁省不下百万，而输解之人心收矣。
现代文：倘若一年核查一次，东西苦恶粗劣就对监收的人施加严刑，腐朽了就对负责看守的人判重刑，整顿一次，一年的物资可以够三年享用，每年节省不下百万两，就收聚了输送、押解人的心。
English: If there is an inspection once a year, and if the goods are bad or shoddy, the person in charge of collecting them will be severely punished; if they are rotten, the person in charge of guarding them will be sentenced to a heavy penalty; if there is a rectification once a year, the materials can be used for three years, and the annual savings will be no less than one million taels, the hearts of the people transporting and escorting will be gathered.

古文：自抄没法重，株连数多。
现代文： 自从抄家、没收财物法令严重，株连的人很多。
English: Since the house-searching and confiscation of property laws have become more severe, many people have joined stock companies.

古文：坐以转寄，则并籍家资。
现代文：因为转寄而治罪，就没收家产。
English: If a crime is committed because of forwarding, the family property will be confiscated.

古文：诬以多赃，则互连亲识。
现代文：被诬告藏私，就会互相株连亲人和熟识的朋友。
English: If you are falsely accused of being selfish, you will alienate relatives and familiar friends.

古文：宅一封而鸡豚大半饿死，人一出则亲戚不敢藏留。
现代文：住宅一旦被查封，鸡猪大半饿死，人一扫地出门，亲戚就不敢收留、隐藏。
English: Once the house is sealed up, most of the chickens and pigs starve to death, and people are swept out of the house, relatives will not dare to take them in and hide them.

古文：加以官吏法严，兵番搜苦，少年妇女，亦令解衣。
现代文：加上官吏严酷，兵丁严密搜索，年轻的妇女，也命令解开衣裳。
English: In addition, officials were harsh, soldiers searched closely, and young women were ordered to undress.

古文：臣曾见之，掩目酸鼻。
现代文：我曾目睹过，我遮掩上眼睛，鼻子发酸。
English: I've seen it before, I cover my eyes, my nose is running.

古文：此岂尽正犯之家、重罪之人哉？
现代文：这些难道都是元凶的家、罪行深重的人吗？
English: Are these all the families of the culprits, people who have committed serious crimes?

古文：一字相牵，百口难解。
现代文：一字牵连，众口难辩解。
English: One word implicates, and it is difficult to justify.

古文：奸人又乘机恐吓，挟取资财，不足不止。
现代文：奸人又乘机恐吓，榨取钱财，不足数不罢休。
English: The fraudsters also took advantage of the opportunity to intimidate and extort money, and did not stop until they had enough.

古文：半年之内，扰遍京师，陛下知之否乎？
现代文：半年之中，骚扰整座京城，陛下知不知道？
English: For half a year, they have been harassing the entire capital city. Does Your Majesty know about this?

古文：愿慎抄没之举，释无辜之系，而都下之人心收矣。
现代文：希望对抄家、没收财产的举动慎重行事，释放无辜囚禁的人，就收聚了京城人的心。
English: The hope that they would act cautiously with regard to house searches and the confiscation of property, and that they would release innocent prisoners, won the hearts of the people of Kyoto.

古文：列圣在御之时，岂少宦官宫妾，然死于箠楚者，未之多闻也。
现代文： 列位圣祖在位时，难道缺少宦官、宫妾？然而死于鞭笞之下的事，却听到很少。
English: Was there a shortage of eunuchs and concubines during the reign of the Holy Ancestors? However, it is rare to hear of them dying under the lash.

古文：陛下数年以来，疑深怒盛。
现代文：陛下几年来，疑心重怒气大。
English: Your Majesty has been suspicious and angry for several years.

古文：广廷之中，狼籍血肉，宫禁之内，惨戚啼号。厉气冤魂，乃聚福祥之地。
现代文：广庭中，血肉狼藉，宫禁内，惨叫啼呼。负气的冤魂，汇聚在福祥圣地。
English: In the courtyard, flesh and blood, in the palace, screaming and shouting. Negative evil spirits, gathered in the holy place of blessing.

古文：今环门守户之众，皆伤心侧目之人。
现代文：现在门口守卫的人，都是伤心、侧目而视的人。
English: The people guarding the door now are sad, sidelong-looking people.

古文：外表忠勤，中藏憸毒。
现代文：外表忠诚、勤勉，心中埋藏毒谋。
English: Outwardly loyal and diligent, he harbors a poisonous plot in his heart.

古文：既朝暮不能自保，即九死何爱一身。
现代文：既然早晚不能保存自己，九死又何求一生。
English: Since sooner or later you can't save yourself, it's better to die than to live.

古文：陛下卧榻之侧，同心者几人？暮夜之际，防患者几人？
现代文：陛下的卧榻边，有几个同心的人，深夜，几个人在防御祸患，我暗自担忧。
English: At your Majesty's bedside, there are a few like-minded people. In the middle of the night, a few people are guarding against evil. I am secretly worried.

古文：臣窃忧之。愿少霁威严，慎用鞭扑，而左右之人心收矣。
现代文：希望陛下稍敛威严，慎施鞭笞，就收聚了左右人的心。
English: I hope that His Majesty will be a little more dignified and will use his whip sparingly to win the hearts and minds of those around him.

古文：祖宗以来，有一日三朝者，有一日一朝者。
现代文： 祖宗以来，有一天三次朝见的，有一天上一次朝的。
English: Since the time of our ancestors, there has been one day when we saw three mornings, and one day when we saw the last morning.

古文：陛下不视朝久，人心懈弛已极，奸邪窥伺已深，守卫官军祇应故事。
现代文：陛下很久不临朝，人心已经懈怠到极点，奸邪积淀很深重，守卫的官军只例行公事。
English: His Majesty has not come to the Imperial Court for a long time, the people's hearts have been slack to the extreme, the accumulation of treachery is very deep, and the guard of the official army is only a routine matter.

古文：今乾清修造，逼近御前，军夫往来，谁识面貌？
现代文：现在修造乾清宫，接近皇上住地。军夫往来，谁认识相貌。
English: Now, the Qianqing Palace is under construction, close to the emperor's residence. Soldiers come and go, but who knows their faces.

古文：万一不测，何以应之？
现代文：万一发生不测的事，怎么应付。
English: In case something unexpected happens, how to deal with it.

古文：臣望发宫钥于质明，放军夫于日昃。
现代文：我希望在天明时发放宫门钥匙，在太阳西斜的时候将军夫放出。
English: I hope that the keys to the palace gates will be handed out at dawn, and the generals will be released when the sun sets.

古文：自非军国急务，慎无昏夜传宣。
现代文：不是紧急军政事务，切忌在黑夜传旨宣诏。
English: If it is not an urgent military and political matter, it is a must not to deliver the edict in the dark.

古文：章奏不答，先朝未有。
现代文：不答理奏章，先朝没有此事。
English: If you don't answer the question, it didn't happen the other morning.

古文：至于今日，强半留中。
现代文：至于现在，大部分留在皇宫。
English: For now, most remain at the palace.

古文：设令有国家大事，邀截实封，扬言于外曰 留中矣 ，人知之乎？
现代文：设想有国家大事奏报，被人截留却对外宣告 留在皇宫 ，人们知道吗？
English: Imagine someone intercepting a report on a national event and then announcing to the outside world, "Stay at the Imperial Palace," do people know that?

古文：愿自今章疏未及批答者，日于御前发一纸，下会极门，转付诸司照察，庶君臣虽不面谈，而上下犹无欺蔽。
现代文：希望将至今还没有批示答复的奏章，每天由陛下发一纸之令，下发到会极门，转交诸司核察，可望做到君臣虽然没有面谈，但是上下仍没有欺诈、蒙蔽。
English: It is hoped that the transcript of the reply, which has not yet been issued, will be issued by His Majesty on a daily basis and sent to the gate of the meeting to be submitted to the departments for verification. It is hoped that although the monarchs and ministers have not been interviewed, there is still no fraud or deception.

古文：臣观陛下昔时励精为治，今当春秋鼎盛，曾无夙夜忧勤之意，惟孜孜以患贫为事。
现代文： 我看到陛下昔日励精图治，现在正值鼎盛的年月，不曾有早晚忧患的情况，只常常担忧贫困。
English: I see that His Majesty, who used to work hard, is now in his prime years. He has never been worried about the future, but is often worried about poverty.

古文：不知天下之财，止有此数，君欲富则天下贫，天下贫而君岂独富？
现代文：不懂得全国的财富，只有这个数额，国君想富裕，天下人受贫困，天下人贫困，国君难道能单独富裕。
English: They do not understand that the wealth of the whole country is only this amount. If the sovereign wants to be rich, everyone in the world will be impoverished. If everyone in the world is impoverished, can the sovereign be rich alone?

古文：今民生憔悴极矣，乃采办日增，诛求益广，敛万姓之怨于一言，结九重之仇于四海，臣窃痛之。
现代文：现在百姓们很憔悴，采办却一天天增加，诛杀的范围更加广阔，将万姓百姓的怨忿归咎一人，在全国结下九重的仇恨，我暗感悲痛。
English: Now the people are very angry, but the crimes are increasing day by day, and the scope of the killings is more extensive. I secretly feel sad that the anger of all the people is blamed on one person, and the hatred is ninefold in the whole country.

古文：使六合一家，千年如故，即宫中虚无所有，谁忍使陛下独贫？
现代文：使统一的国家，千年不变，即使宫中物资空虚，谁忍心让陛下独受贫困。
English: For a unified country, unchanging for a thousand years, even if the palace is empty of goods, who would have the heart to let His Majesty suffer poverty alone.

古文：今禁城之内，不乐有君。
现代文：现在禁城中，不以拥有国君而欢乐。
English: Now, in the Forbidden City, there is no joy in having a sovereign.

古文：天下之民，不乐有生。怨讟愁叹，难堪入听。
现代文：全国的百姓，不以拥有生命而欢乐，怨言愁叹，不堪入耳。
English: The people of the whole country are not happy to have life, and their complaints and sorrows are unbearable to hear.

古文：陛下闻之，必有食不能咽，寝不能安者矣。
现代文：陛下听到此事，必将吃不下饭，睡不安稳觉。
English: When His Majesty hears about this, he will not be able to eat and will not be able to sleep well.

古文：臣老且衰，恐不得复见太平，吁天叩地，斋宿七日，敬献忧危之诚。
现代文：我年老体弱，恐怕不能再看到天下太平，拜祭天地，斋戒七天，敬献忧患安危的诚挚之心希望陛下暗地实行臣的劝谏。
English: I am old and frail, and I am afraid that I will not be able to see the world at peace again. I sincerely hope that His Majesty will secretly implement my advice.

古文：惟陛下密行臣言，翻然若出圣心警悟者，则人心自悦，天意自回。
现代文：翻然像发自圣心的警觉、醒悟，那么人们自然心中充满喜悦，天意自然会回归。
English: If it is like the alertness and awakening from the Sacred Heart, then people's hearts will naturally be filled with joy, and God's will will naturally return.

古文：苟不然者，陛下他日虽悔，将何及耶！
现代文：倘若不然，陛下日后虽然后悔，也来不及了呀。 
English: If not, His Majesty will regret it later, but it will be too late.

古文：疏入，不报。
现代文：奏疏呈送上去，皇帝没有答复。
English: There has been no response since the complaint was filed.

古文：坤遂称疾乞休，中旨许之。
现代文：吕坤就称病告退，宫中传旨准许了他的要求。
English: Lü Kun announced that he was retiring due to illness, and the imperial court granted his request.

古文：于是给事中戴士衡劾坤机深志险，谓石星大误东事，孙鑛滥杀不辜，坤顾不言，曲为附会，无大臣节。
现代文：因此给事中戴士衡弹劾吕坤心计深，野心大，称石星大误东征，孙钅广乱杀无辜，吕坤看到了却没有讲话，曲意附和，没有大臣的气节。
English: Therefore, during the incident, Dai Shih-heng impeached Lü Kun as a scheming and ambitious person, saying that Shi Xing made a big mistake in the eastward expedition, Sun Bingguang killed innocents indiscriminately, Lü Kun saw it but did not speak, the melody was harmonious, and there was no minister's temperament.

古文：给事中刘道亨言往年孙丕扬劾张位，位疑疏出坤手，故使士衡劾坤。
现代文：给事中刘道亨称往年孙丕扬弹劾张位，张位怀疑奏疏出自吕坤的手，所以指使戴士卫弹劾吕坤。
English: During the incident, Liu Daoheng said that Sun Yat-sen's impeachment of Zhang Yi in previous years was a mistake, and Zhang Yi suspected that Lu Kun was behind the incident, so he ordered Daishi Wei to impeach Lu Kun.

古文：位奏辨。
现代文：张位上奏辩解。
English: Zhang is on the defensive.

古文：帝以坤既罢，悉置不问。
现代文：皇帝认为吕坤已经被罢免，全然置之不理。
English: The emperor thought that Lü Kun had been deposed and completely ignored him.

古文：初，坤按察山西时，尝撰《闺范图说》，内侍购入禁中。
现代文：起初，吕坤任山西按察使，曾经撰写《闺范图说》，宫中太监购买带入禁宫。
English: At the beginning, Lü Kun was an inspector in Shanxi Province. He once wrote "The Tale of the Maiden," which was bought by a court eunuch and brought to the Forbidden City.

古文：郑贵妃因加十二人，且为制序，属其伯父承恩重刊之。
现代文：郑贵妃趁机增加十二个人，并为他们制定秩序，嘱咐她的伯父郑承恩重新刊印。
English: Zheng Guifei took the opportunity to add twelve people and set an order for them, and ordered her uncle Zheng Cheng'en to reprint.

古文：士衡遂劾坤因承恩进书，结纳宫掖，包藏祸心。
现代文：戴士卫就弹劾吕坤让郑承恩敬呈书籍，与内室勾结，包藏祸心。
English: Daishi Wei impeached Lü Kun for letting Zheng Cheng En present books, colluding with the inner chamber, and harboring evil intentions.

古文：坤持疏力辨。
现代文：吕坤上奏争辩。
English: Lü Kun began to argue.

古文：未几，有妄人为《闺范图说》跋，名曰《忧危竑议》，略言： 坤撰《闺范》，独取汉明德后者，后由贵人进中宫，坤以媚郑贵妃也。
现代文：不久，有不法的人为《闺范图说》做跋，称作《忧危议》，大意讲： 吕坤撰写《闺范》，唯独选取汉代的明德后，皇后由贵人晋升而住在中宫，吕坤是献媚于郑贵妃。
English: Soon, there was an illegal person who made a proposal for "The Tale of the Young Maidens," which was called "The Worry and Danger Discussion," to the effect that: Lu Kun wrote "The Tale of the Young Maids," but after selecting Mingde of the Han Dynasty, the empress was promoted from a noblewoman and lived in the Middle Palace, and Lu Kun was devoted to Zheng Guifei.

古文：坤疏陈天下忧危，无事不言，独不及建储，意自可见。 
现代文：吕坤上奏陈述国家的忧患，无事不谈，唯独不谈设置皇储，意图显而易见。 
English: The intention of Lu Kun's report on the state of the country's worries is obvious. He does not talk about anything, except setting up a crown prince.

古文：其言绝狂诞，将以害坤。
现代文：它的话语狂乱，荒诞，将危害吕坤。
English: Its words are frantic, absurd, and will harm Lü Kun.

古文：帝归罪于士衡等，其事遂寝。
现代文：皇帝将罪过归咎于戴士卫等人，此事才平息。
English: The emperor blamed the crime on Daishi Wei and others, and the matter calmed down.

古文：坤刚介峭直，留意正学。
现代文：吕坤刚强正直，注重正统的学术。
English: Lyu Kun is tough and honest, with a focus on orthodox scholarship.

古文：居家之日，与后进讲习。
现代文：在家闲居的时候与后学探讨、研习。
English: When idling at home, discuss and study with after-school.

古文：所著述，多出新意。
现代文：他的著作，颇有新意。
English: His work is quite innovative.

古文：初，在朝与吏部尚书孙丕扬善。后丕扬复为吏部，屡推坤左都御史未得命，言： 臣以八十老臣保坤，冀臣得亲见用坤之效。
现代文：起初，他在朝廷与吏部尚书孙丕扬相好，后来孙丕扬再度担任尚书，屡次推举吕坤担任左都御史没能成功，称： 我以一名八十岁的老臣的名誉保举吕坤，希望我能亲眼看到任用吕坤的效果。
English: At first, he befriended Sun Qiangyang, the Secretary of the General Staff, in the imperial court. Later, Sun Qiangyang again served as the Secretary of the General Staff. He repeatedly nominated Lyu Kun as the Governor of the Left Capital, but he was not successful. He said, "I nominated Lyu Kun with the honor of an eighty-year-old minister. I hope I can see the effect of appointing Lyu Kun with my own eyes."

古文：不效，甘坐失举之罪，死且无憾。 
现代文：没有成效，我甘愿受举荐失当的惩罚，死而无憾。 
English: If there is no result, I am willing to accept the punishment of improper recommendation and die without regret.

古文：已，又荐天下三大贤，沈鲤、郭正域，其一即坤。
现代文：此后，又推荐国家的三大贤士，沈鲤、郭正域，其中还有一位就是吕坤。
English: Since then, he has also recommended the country's three great sages, Shen Qi and Guo Zhengqi, one of whom is Lu Kun.

古文：丕扬前后推荐，疏至二十余上，帝终不纳。
现代文：孙丕扬先后举荐，上奏达二十多次，皇帝始终没采纳。
English: Sun Yat-sen successively recommended it, and it was sent to the emperor more than 20 times, but the emperor never adopted it.

古文：福王封国河南，赐庄田四万顷。
现代文：福王分封到河南，赏赐的庄田达四万顷。
English: Fu Wang was assigned to Henan Province, and was rewarded with 40,000 hectares of farmland.

古文：坤在籍，上言： 国初分封亲藩二十有四，赐田无至万顷者。
现代文：吕坤在任，上奏说： 开国初期分封了二十四位亲王，赏赐的田亩没有上万顷的。
English: When Lü Kun was in office, the report said: In the early days of the founding of the country, twenty-four princes were appointed, and the number of rewarded acres did not exceed ten thousand hectares.

古文：河南已封周、赵、伊、徽、郑、唐、崇、潞八王，若皆取盈四万，占两河郡县且半，幸圣明裁减。 
现代文：河南已经分封了周、赵、伊、徽、郑、唐、崇、潞等八个王，如果都达四万顷，将占两河郡县一半的土地，希望皇帝加以裁减。 
English: Henan has already assigned eight kings, including Zhou, Zhao, Yi, Hui, Zheng, Tang, Chong, and Zou. If they all reach 40,000 hectares, they will account for half of the land in the counties of the two rivers. I hope the emperor will reduce it.

古文：复移书执政言之。
现代文：又向执政阁臣陈述此意。
English: He also stated this intention to the ruling cabinet ministers.

古文：会廷臣亦力争，得减半。
现代文：遇上朝廷大臣们也极力争辩，皇帝减少了一半的赏赐。
English: When the imperial court ministers met, they also argued vigorously, and the emperor reduced the reward by half.

古文：卒，天启初，赠刑部尚书。
现代文：他去世后，在天启初年，被赠封为刑部尚书。
English: After his death, in the first year of the apocalypse, he was awarded the title of the Minister of Justice.

古文：郭正域，字美命，江夏人。万历十一年进士。
现代文：郭正域，字美命，江夏人，万历十一年的进士。
English: Guo Zhengyi, Zhi Meimei, Jiangxia people, Wanli eleven-year-old recruits.

古文：选庶吉士，授编修，与修撰唐文献同为皇长子讲官。
现代文：选为庶吉士，授职为编修，与修撰唐文献同时担任皇长子的老师。
English: He was selected as the second son of the Emperor, and was given the post of editor, and at the same time served as the teacher of the eldest son of the Emperor.

古文：皆三迁至庶子，不离讲帷。
现代文：他们二人都经三次调官后升为庶子，没有离开过讲坛。
English: Both of them, after being transferred three times, were promoted to the position of an illegitimate son, and have never left the pulpit.

古文：每讲毕，诸内侍出相揖，惟二人不交一言。
现代文：每次讲授完毕，诸位内侍出来相互揖拜，只是他们两人从不跟别人交谈。
English: After each lecture, the maids come out to pay homage to each other, but the two of them never talk to others.

古文：出为南京祭酒。诸生纳赀许充贡，正域奏罢之。
现代文：他出京担任南京祭酒时，学生们交钱就可以换取贡生资格，郭正域上奏罢除了此事。
English: When he went to Beijing to serve as the head of the Nanjing Festival, students could pay money in exchange for tribute qualification. Guo Zhengwei appealed the matter.

古文：李成梁孙以都督就婚魏国徐弘基家，骑过文庙门，学录李维极执而抶之。
现代文：李成梁的孙子任都督，到魏国公徐弘基家中完婚，骑马经过文庙门，学录李维极抓住并鞭笞了他。
English: Li Chengliang's grandson, Ren Tudou, got married at the home of Wei Guogong Xu Hongji, and rode past the Wenmiao Gate. Li Weiguo caught and whipped him.

古文：李氏苍头数十人蹋邸门，弘基亦至。
现代文：李氏的奴仆数十人践蹋府第，徐弘基也去了。
English: Dozens of Li's servants entered the capital, and Xu Hongji also went there.

古文：正域曰： 今天子尚皮弁拜先圣，人臣乃走马庙门外乎？
现代文：郭正域称： 现在天子尚且以常服拜祭先圣，臣子却从庙门外骑马奔驰这应该吗？
English: Guo Zhengwei said, "Nowadays, the heavenly son is still worshiping the first saint with regular services, but the vassal is riding a horse from outside the temple gate. Is this right?

古文：且公侯子弟入学习礼，亦国子生耳，学录非抶都督也。 
现代文：况且公侯子弟上学学习礼仪，也是国子监的学生呀，学录并非鞭笞了都督。 
English: Moreover, the prince's children go to school to study etiquette, and they are also students of the State Preschool.

古文：令交相谢而罢。
现代文：命令他们相互道歉算了。
English: Don't order them to apologize to each other.

古文：三十年，征拜詹事，复为东宫讲官。
现代文：万历三十年他被征召为詹事，又担任东宫的教师。
English: For thirty years, he was conscripted as a Zhanji, and also served as a teacher in the East Palace.

古文：旋擢礼部右侍郎，掌翰林院。
现代文：不久升任礼部右侍郎，负责翰林院。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, in charge of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：三十一年三月，尚书冯琦卒，正域还署部事。
现代文：三十一年三月，尚书冯琦去世，郭正域回礼部主持事务。
English: In March of the 31st year, Shangshu Fengyao passed away, and Guo Zhengwei presided over the ceremonial affairs department.

古文：夏，庙飨，会日食，正域言： 《礼》，当祭日食，牲未杀，则废。
现代文：夏天，庙祭，遇上日蚀，郭正域说： 《礼》说，正祭祀时出现日蚀，牲畜还没杀，就作罢。
English: In summer, temple festival, when there is a solar eclipse, Guo Zhengwei said: "Rite" says, if there is a solar eclipse at the time of sacrifice, if the livestock has not been killed, it should not be done.

古文：正域谓祀事不虔，由上不躬祀所致。
现代文：初一应该是专门的补救时间，第二天早晨祭祀宗庙。 
English: The first day of the new year is supposed to be a special time for making amends, and the next morning there is a ritual at the ancestral temple.

古文：请下诏饬厉，冬至大祀，上必亲行。
现代文：神宗依从了。刚出雨露陪同祭祀的人大都称病。郭正域称祭祀不虔诚，由于皇上没有亲自祭祀，皇上必须亲自参加。
English: The majority of the people who accompanied the ritual called in sick as soon as the rain and dew set in. Guo Zhengqi said that the ritual was impious, and since the emperor did not personally perform the ritual, the emperor must personally attend.

古文：帝然之，而不能用。
现代文：神宗认为该如此，却不能实行。
English: Shenzong believes that this should be the case, but it cannot be implemented.

古文：初，正域之入馆也，沈一贯为教习师。
现代文：起初，郭正域进入学馆，沈一贯是教习师。
English: At first, Guo Zhengwei entered the school, Shen has always been a teacher.

古文：后服阕授编修，不执弟子礼，一贯不能无望。
现代文：后来他担任编修，没有行弟子之礼，沈一贯不会没有埋怨。
English: Later, he served as an editor, but did not do the disciple's salute. Shen would never complain.

古文：至是，一贯为首辅，沈鲤次之。
现代文：此时，沈一贯是首辅，沈鲤是次辅。
English: At this time, Shen has always been the first assistant, and Shen Yao is the second assistant.

古文：正域与鲤善，而心薄一贯。
现代文：郭正域与沈鲤友好，却心中看不起沈一贯。
English: Guo Zhengwei is friendly with Shen Yi, but he always looks down on Shen Yi in his heart.

古文：会台官上日食占，曰： 日从上食，占为君知佞人用之，以亡其国。 
现代文：遇上台官上奏日蚀的占卜，说： 太阳从上方受蚀，占卜预告是皇帝结识并任用了奸人，将亡国。 
English: When confronted with the prediction of the eclipse made by a Taiwanese official, he said: The sun will be eclipsed from above, and the prediction is that the emperor has met and appointed a traitor who will ruin the country.

古文：一贯怒而詈之，正域曰： 宰相忧盛危明，顾不若瞽史邪？ 
现代文：沈一贯恼怒地咒骂，郭正域称： 宰相忧患国家的盛衰，却不如乐官史官吗？ 
English: Shen always cursed angrily, Guo Zhengwei said: Is the prime minister, who worries about the rise and fall of the country, not as good as the music official and historian?

古文：一贯闻之怒。
现代文：沈一贯听说后更恼怒。
English: Shen was even more angry after hearing this.

古文：两淮税监鲁保请给关防，兼督江南、浙江织造，鲤持不可，一贯拟予之，正域亦力争。
现代文：两淮的税监鲁保请求提供印信，兼管江南、浙江的织造，沈鲤坚持不同意，沈一贯打算授予他，郭正域也极力争辩。
English: Lu Bao, the tax inspector of the two Huai, requested to provide the seal, and he was also in charge of the weaving of Jiangnan and Zhejiang. Shen Yao insisted on disagreeing, Shen always intended to grant him, and Guo Zhengwei also vigorously argued.

古文：秦王以嫡子夭未生，请封其庶长子为世子，屡诏趣议。
现代文：秦王因为嫡子很久没有诞生，请求分封他的庶长子做世子，多次下诏催促商议。
English: As his legitimate son had not been born for a long time, King Qin requested that his eldest illegitimate son be given the title of heir, and repeatedly issued an edict urging discussion.

古文：前尚书冯琦持不上，正域亦执不许。
现代文：前任尚书冯琦坚决不上奏，郭正域也坚持不同意。
English: His predecessor, Shangshu Fengyao, resolutely refused to play, and Guo Zhengwei also firmly disagreed.

古文：王复请封其他子为郡王，又不可。
现代文：秦王又请求分封其他的儿子做郡王，又不同意，沈一贯派大宦官拿皇帝的命令威胁他们。
English: King Qin also requested that his other sons be made county kings, but they did not agree. Shen always sent grand eunuchs to threaten them with the emperor's orders.

古文：一贯使大珰以上命胁之，正域榜于门曰： 秦王以中尉进封，庶子当仍中尉，不得为郡王。妃年未五十，庶子亦不得为世子。 
现代文：郭正域在门前张榜称： 秦王由中尉受封，庶子应当仍做中尉，不能做郡王。王妃的年纪不到五十岁，庶子也不能做世子。 
English: Guo Zhengwei put up a banner in front of the gate, saying: "The Qin king was crowned by a lieutenant, the illegitimate son should still be a lieutenant, and cannot be the county king. The empress is under fifty years old, and the illegitimate son cannot be the heir.

古文：一贯无以难。
现代文：沈一贯没法为难他。
English: Shen has never been able to stump him.

古文：及建议欲夺黄光升、许论、吕本谥，一贯与朱赓皆本同乡也，曰： 我辈在，谁敢夺者！ 
现代文：等到他建议剥夺黄光升、许论、吕本的谥号时，沈一贯与朱赓都是吕本的同乡，称： 我们在位，谁敢剥夺？ 
English: When he proposed to deprive Huang Guangsheng, Xu On and Lü Ben of their honorary titles, Shen, who had always been a fellow villager of Lü Ben with Zhu Xi, said: We are in power, who would dare to deprive us?

古文：正域援笔判曰： 黄光升当谥，是海瑞当杀也。
现代文：郭正域执笔批驳： 黄光升应当授谥号，海瑞就该杀。
English: Guo Zhengwei penned a rebuttal: Huang Guangsheng should be awarded the honorary title, and Hai Rui should be killed.

古文：许论当谥，是沈炼当杀也。
现代文：许论应当授谥号，沈谏就该杀了。
English: Xu Rong should be given a posthumous name, and Shen Rong should be killed.

古文：吕本当谥，是鄢懋卿、赵文华皆名臣，不当削夺也。 
现代文：吕本应当授谥号，鄢懋柳、赵文华都是有名的大臣，不应当削夺官籍。 
English: Lvben should be given a title of honor, and Zou Liu and Zhao Wenhua are both famous ministers. They should not be deprived of their official status.

古文：议上，举朝韪之，而卒不行。
现代文：意见呈送上，满朝称是，却最终没有施行。
English: The opinion was submitted, the Manchurian government said yes, but in the end it was not implemented.

古文：正域既积忤一贯，一贯深憾之。
现代文：郭正域与沈一贯积怨后，沈一贯很憎恨他。
English: Guo Zhengwei and Shen have always had a grudge against each other, and Shen has always hated him.

古文：会楚王华奎与宗人华勣等相讦，正域复与一贯异议，由此几得危祸。
现代文：遇上楚王华奎与宗族的华翧等人相互攻击，郭正域又与沈一贯产生意见分歧，因此几乎形成致命之祸。
English: When Chu King Hua Kui and his clan's Hua Xi and others attacked each other, Guo Zhengqi and Shen always had differences of opinion, which almost led to a fatal disaster.

古文：先是，楚恭王得废疾，隆庆五年薨，遗腹宫人胡氏孪生子华奎、华壁。
现代文：此前，楚恭王得绝症，隆庆五年去世，留下宫人胡氏的遗腹孪生儿子华奎、华壁。
English: Previously, King Chu Gong had become terminally ill and died in the fifth year of Longqing, leaving behind Hu's posthumous twin sons, Hua Kui and Hua Bi.

古文：或云内官郭纶以王妃兄王如言妾尤金梅子为华奎，妃族人如纟孛奴王玉子为华壁。
现代文：有人称宫中小臣郭纶将王妃的哥哥王如言的小老婆尤金梅的儿子冒充华奎，王妃的族人王如悖的家奴王玉的儿子冒充华壁。
English: Some people said that Guo Wei, a middle and junior minister of the palace, impersonated the son of Yu Jinmei, the younger wife of Wang Rongyan, the elder brother of Wang Rongyan, as Hua Kui, and the son of Wang Yu, the son of Wang Rongren, a relative of Wang Rongren, as Hua Qi.

古文：仪宾汪若泉尝讦奏之，事下抚按。
现代文：仪宾汪若泉曾经上奏揭发，事情交给抚按办理。
English: Wang Ruoquan, the vice-premier of the Communist Party of China (CPC), once made a public announcement, and the matter was handed over to Fuzhan for handling.

古文：王妃持甚坚，得寝。
现代文：王妃坚决否认，事情才平息。
English: The Princess emphatically denied that the matter had been resolved.

古文：万历八年，华奎嗣王，华壁亦封宣化王。
现代文：八年华奎继承王位，华壁也被封为宣化王。
English: Eight years later, Hua Kui succeeded to the throne, and Hua Pi was also named King of Xuanhua.

古文：宗人华勣者，素强御忤王。
现代文：宗族人华翧一向强烈地反对，攻击楚王。
English: The clansman Hua Wei has always strongly opposed and attacked King Chu.

古文：华勣妻，如言女也。
现代文：华翧的妻子是王如言的女儿。
English: Hua Tuo's wife is Wang Rugen's daughter.

古文：是年遣人讦华奎异姓子也，不当立。
现代文：当年派人攻击华奎是异姓人的儿子，不应当立为王。
English: At that time, they sent people to attack Hua Kui, saying that he was the son of a man with a different surname and should not be made king.

古文：子木惧，召华勣令更易月日以上。
现代文：沈一贯嘱咐通政使沈子木，阻止把奏章呈交皇帝。一个月后楚王弹劾华翧的奏章送到了，才呈送此奏章。
English: Shen had always ordered the political envoy Shen Zi Mu to prevent the report from being submitted to the emperor. A month later, the report of King Chu's impeachment of Hua Xi arrived, and only then was this report submitted.

古文：旨并下部。
现代文：皇帝下令礼部评议。
English: The emperor ordered a review of the ritual department.

古文：正域请敕抚按公勘，从之。
现代文：不久，华翧进京上诉。皇帝下令交给礼部处理。郭正域请求指令抚按大臣公平地核查，皇帝听从了。
English: Not long after, Hua Wei went to Beijing to appeal. The emperor ordered that the case be handed over to the Ministry of Ceremonies. Guo Zhengwei requested that the order be verified fairly by the minister, and the emperor obeyed.

古文：初，一贯属正域毋言通政司匿疏事。及华勣疏上，正域主行勘。
现代文：起初，沈一贯嘱咐郭正域不要讲出通政司隐瞒奏章的事情，等到华翧的奏章呈上，郭正域主持调查。
English: At first, Shen had always instructed Guo Zhengwei not to reveal the fact that Tong Zhengji had concealed the transcript. When Hua Wei's transcript was submitted, Guo Zhengwei presided over the investigation.

古文：一贯言亲王不当勘，但当体访。正域曰： 事关宗室，台谏当亦言之。 
现代文：沈一贯称亲王不应当受调查，但应当体面查访，郭正域说： 事情关系到宗室，台谏应当也谈谈此事。 
English: Shen has always said that the prince should not be investigated, but should be visited in a dignified manner. Guo Zhengwei said: The matter is related to the family, and Taiwan should also talk about the matter.

古文：一贯微笑曰： 台谏断不言也。 
现代文：沈一贯微笑地说： 台谏绝对不会说。 
English: Shen always said with a smile, "Taiwanese people would never say that."

古文：及帝从勘议，楚王惧，奉百金为正域寿，且属毋竟楚事，当酬万金，正域严拒之。
现代文：等到皇帝听从了调查的主张，楚王惊慌，拿出百两黄金替郭正域祝寿，并嘱托不要清查楚王的事，将拿出一万两白银酬谢，郭正域严辞拒绝了。
English: When the emperor listened to the suggestion of the investigation, King Chu panicked, took out one hundred and two gold to wish Guo Zhengwei a happy birthday, and asked him not to investigate the matter of King Chu, he would take out ten thousand two silver rewards, Guo Zhengwei strictly refused.

古文：已而湖广巡抚赵可怀、巡按应朝卿勘上，言详审无左验，而王氏持之坚，诸郡主县主则云 罔知真伪 ，乞特遣官再问。
现代文：不久湖广巡抚赵可怀、巡按应朝卿核实上报，称详细审查却没有得到佐证，而且王氏态度很坚定，各位郡主、县主都说 不知道真伪 ，请求特派官员再做查询。
English: Not long after, the inspector general of Hougang, Zhao Kehai, and the inspector should verify the report with the emperor, saying that the detailed examination was not supported, and Wang's attitude was very firm. All the county heads and county heads said that they did not know the authenticity, and requested the special officials to make further inquiries.

古文：诏公卿杂议于西阙门，日晏乃罢。
现代文：诏令公卿在西阙门发表意见，天晚了才散去。
English: The Emperor ordered the nobles to express their opinions at the West Gate, and they dispersed late in the day.

古文：议者三十七人，各具一单，言人人殊。
现代文：参加议论的有三十七人，各执一辞，每人的意见都不同。
English: Thirty-seven people took part in the discussion, each with a different opinion.

古文：李廷机以左侍郎代正域署部事，正域欲尽录诸人议，廷机以辞太繁，先撮其要以上。
现代文：李廷机以左侍郎身份代替郭正域负责礼部事务，郭正域想详尽记录各人的评议，李廷机认为言辞太繁杂，先摘取要点上奏皇帝。
English: Li Tingji replaced Guo Zhengwei as the left attendant and was in charge of the ceremonial affairs. Guo Zhengwei wanted to record everyone's comments in detail. Li Tingji thought that the words were too complicated, so he first extracted the main points and played the emperor.

古文：一贯遂嗾给事中杨应文、御史康丕扬劾礼部壅阏群议，不以实闻。
现代文：沈一贯就唆使给事中杨应文、御史康丕扬弹劾礼部阻塞群臣的评议，不汇报实情。
English: Shen has always instigated Yang Yingwen and Gu Shi Kangyuang to impeach the Ministry of Ceremonies, block the review of the ministers, and not report the truth.

古文：正域疏辨，且发子木匿疏、一贯阻勘及楚王馈遗状。
现代文：郭正域上奏辩解，并揭发沈子木隐瞒奏章、沈一贯阻挠勘查以及楚王馈赠钱财的情况。
English: Guo Zhengwei made a defense on the record, and exposed the situation of Shen Zi Mu concealing the record, Shen consistently obstructing the survey, and King Chu giving away money.

古文：一贯益恚，谓正域遣家人导华勣上疏，议令楚王避位听勘，私庇华勣。
现代文：沈一贯更加恼恨，称郭正域派家仆指导华翧上奏，提议皇帝下令楚王避位听候审查，私下庇护华翧。
English: Shen has always been more angry, saying that Guo Zhengyi sent his servants to guide Hua Jun to play, proposed that the emperor order King Chu to abdicate to await the review, and privately sheltered Hua Jun.

古文：当是时，正域右宗人，大学士沈鲤右正域，尚书赵世卿、谢杰、祭酒黄汝良则右楚王。
现代文：当时，郭正域偏袒楚王的宗人，大学士沈鲤重视郭正域，尚书赵世卿、谢杰，祭酒黄汝良却赞助楚王。
English: At that time, Guo Zhengwei favored King Chu's ancestor, university scholar Shen Yi valued Guo Zhengwei, and scholars Zhao Shijing, Xie Jie, and Huang Ruliang sponsored King Chu.

古文：给事中钱梦皋遂希一贯指论正域，词连次辅鲤。
现代文：给事中钱梦皋就迎合沈一贯抨击郭正域，话语牵连到次辅沈鲤。
English: In the middle of the matter, Qianmengtao pandered to Shen and consistently criticized Guo Zhengwei, and the discourse involved the second assistant of Shen Yu.

古文：应文又言正域父懋尝笞辱于楚恭王，故正域因事陷之。
现代文：杨应文又称郭正域的父亲郭懋曾经受到楚恭王的鞭笞，所以郭正域趁机陷害楚王。
English: Yang Yingwen, also known as Guo Zhengwei's father Guo Gan, was once whipped by King Chu Gong, so Guo Zhengwei took the opportunity to frame King Chu.

古文：正域疏辨，留中不报。
现代文：郭正域上奏辩解，留在宫中没有答复。
English: Guo Zhengwei played a defense and left the palace without a reply.

古文：一贯、鲤以楚事皆求去，廷机复请再问。
现代文：沈一贯、沈鲤因为楚王的事情都请求离去，李廷机又请求再做追究。
English: Because of the matter of King Chu, Shen Zong and Shen Yao both requested to leave, and Li Tingji also requested to investigate further.

古文：帝以王嗣位二十余年，何至今始发，且夫讦妻证，不足凭，遂罢楚事勿按。
现代文：神宗认为楚王即位二十多年，为什么到现在才揭发，况且丈夫攻击，妻子作证，不能作为凭证，于是罢除了对楚王一事的追究。
English: Shenzong thought that King Chu has been on the throne for more than 20 years, why has it only been revealed now, moreover, the husband's attack and the wife's testimony cannot be used as evidence, so he stopped the investigation of King Chu.

古文：正域四疏乞休去。
现代文：郭正域四次上奏请求离去。
English: Guo Zhengwei made four requests to leave.

古文：楚王既得安，遂奏劾正域，大略如应文言；且讦其不法数事，请褫正域官。
现代文：楚王感到安全后，就上奏弹劾郭正域，大意与杨应文所说一样；并且揭发了他几件违法的事情，请求剥夺郭正域的官职。
English: After King Chu felt safe, he called for the impeachment of Guo Zhengwei, to the same effect as Yang Yingwen said; and exposed him to several illegal things, requesting that Guo Zhengwei be stripped of his official position.

古文：诏下部院集议。廷机微刺正域，而谓其已去，可无苛求。
现代文：神宗下交部院集体讨论，李廷机稍稍指责郭正域，却称他已经离职可以不再苛求。
English: During a group discussion at the Shensong Lower Jiaotong Institute, Li Tingji slightly criticized Guo Zhengwei, but said that he had already left the post and could no longer be demanding.

古文：给事中张问达则谓藩王欲进退大臣，不可训，乃不罪正域，而令巡按御史勘王所讦以闻。
现代文：给事中张问达却称藩王想有晋升或贬责大臣的权势，不足为训，于是没有治郭正域的罪却命令巡按御史调查楚王所揭发的事，做出报告。
English: However, Zhang Qida said that the king of the domain wanted to have the power to promote or reprimand the minister, which was not enough for training, so he ordered the inspector to investigate the matter revealed by the king of Chu and make a report.

古文：俄而妖书事起。
现代文：不久，兴起妖书的事情。
English: Soon after, the phenomenon of ghost books began to emerge.

古文：一贯以鲤与己地相逼，而正域新罢，因是陷之，则两人必得重祸，乃为帝言臣下有欲相倾者为之。
现代文：沈一贯认为沈鲤与自己地位相近，而且郭正域刚被罢免，因此陷害他，那么两人必受重创，于是对神宗讲此事是大臣中有人相互倾轧所为。
English: Shen has always believed that Shen Yong is close to his own position, and Guo Zhengwei has just been removed from office, so if he is framed, then both of them will be hit hard, so he told Shen Zong that the matter was caused by someone in the ministry.

古文：盖微引其端，以动帝意。
现代文：是想稍稍挑起事端，以触动皇上。
English: He wanted to stir things up a bit to get the Emperor's attention.

古文：亡何，锦衣卫都督王之祯等四人以妖书有名，指其同官周嘉庆为之。
现代文：不久，锦衣卫都督王之祯等四人认为妖书有名，说是其同僚周嘉庆所作。
English: Soon, four people, including the grand vizier Wang Zhixuan, thought the book was famous and said it was written by their colleague Zhou Jiaqing.

古文：东厂又捕获妖人皦生光。
现代文：东厂又捕捉了妖人生光。
English: The east plant has also captured the demon light.

古文：巡城御史康丕扬为生光讼冤，言妖书、楚事同一根柢，请少缓其狱，贼兄弟可授首阙下。
现代文：巡城御史康丕扬替生光鸣冤，称妖书、楚事是同一回事，请求稍稍延缓刑罚，造乱的兄弟可以将首领献给朝廷。
English: The inspector of the city, Kang Xiangyang, expressed his grievances on behalf of Zeng Guang, saying that Yanshu and Chu affairs were the same thing, and requested a slight delay in the punishment, and that the brothers who caused the disturbance could offer the leader to the imperial court.

古文：意指正域及其兄国子监丞正位。
现代文：意思是指郭正域和他的哥哥国子丞郭正位。
English: It refers to Guo Zhengwei and his brother Guo Zhengyi.

古文：帝怒，以为庇反贼，除其名。一贯力救始免。
现代文：神宗恼怒，认为庇护叛贼，将他除名，沈一贯极力救助才幸免。
English: Shen Zong was furious, thinking that he had protected a traitor and expelled him, but he was spared only after Shen Zong tried his best to save him.

古文：丕扬乃先后捕僧人达观、医者沈令誉等，而同知胡化则告妖书出教官阮明卿手。
现代文：康丕扬先后捕获僧人达观、医生沈令誉等人，但是同知胡化却告发妖书出自教官阮明卿之手。
English: Kang Rongyang successively captured the monk Dagon, the doctor Shen Rongyong and others, but his friend Hu Hu denounced the occult book from the hand of the instructor Ruan Mingqing.

古文：未几，厂卫又捕可疑者一人曰毛尚文。
现代文：不久，厂卫又捕获一名叫毛尚文的嫌疑犯。
English: Not long after, the guards also captured a suspect named Mao Shangwen.

古文：数日间锒铛旁午，都城人人自危。
现代文：几天中锁链声相闻，都城中人人自危。
English: In the past few days, everyone in the capital has heard about the chain.

古文：嘉庆等皆下诏狱。
现代文：周嘉庆等人都被投入诏狱。
English: Zhou Jiaqing and the others were all thrown into the imperial prison.

古文：嘉庆旋以治无验，令革任回籍。
现代文：周嘉庆当即因没有证据，下令革职回乡。
English: Zhou Jiaqing immediately ordered him to resign and return to his hometown because there was no evidence.

古文：令誉故尝往来正域家，达观亦时时游贵人门，尝为正域所搒逐，尚文则正域仆也。一贯、丕扬等欲自数人口引正域，而化所讦阮明卿，则钱梦皋婿。
现代文：沈令誉以前曾经往来于郭正域的家，达观也时常游访贵人的门庭，曾经被郭正域驱逐，毛尚文却是郭正域的仆人，沈一贯、康丕扬等人想从这几个人的口词中引出郭正域，但是胡化所揭发的阮明卿，是钱梦皋的女婿。
English: In the past, Shen Ling Rong used to visit Guo Zhengwei's home, and Dakun also often visited the nobleman's courtyard. He was once expelled by Guo Zhengwei, but Mao Shangwen was Guo Zhengwei's servant. Shen Cong and Kang Rongyang wanted to draw Guo Zhengwei out of the words of these people, but Ruan Mingqing, who was exposed by Hu Hu, was Qian Mengyao's son-in-law.

古文：梦皋大恚，上疏显攻正域，言： 妖书刊播，不先不后，适在楚王疏入之时。
现代文：钱梦皋大为愤恨，上奏公开攻击郭正域，称： 妖书刊印传播，不前不后，恰好在楚王的奏章呈送到的时候。
English: Enraged, Qian Mengyao publicly attacked Guo Zhengwei at the beginning of the recital, saying: "The publication and dissemination of the demonic book is in full swing, just at the time when King Chu's recital was presented.

古文：盖正域乃沈鲤门徒，而沈令誉者，正域食客，胡化又其同乡同年，群奸结为死党。
现代文：大概郭正域是沈鲤的门徒，而沈令誉是郭正域的食客，胡化又是他的同乡且同年中举，一群妖人结成死党。
English: Guo Zhengwei was probably a disciple of Shen Yao, while Shen Lingtuo was a diner of Guo Zhengwei, Hu Hua was his countryman and was promoted in the same year, and a group of sorcerers formed a deadly alliance.

古文：乞穷治根本，定正域乱楚首恶之罪，勒鲤闲住。 
现代文：请求治断根本，判定郭正域为祸害楚王的罪魁祸首，勒令沈鲤在家闲住。 
English: Guo Zhengwei was judged to be the main culprit of the evil of King Chu, and ordered Shen Yao to stay at home.

古文：帝令正域还籍听勘，急严讯诸所捕者。
现代文：神宗命令郭正域回原籍听候审查，赶紧严刑审讯几位被捕的人。
English: Shenzong ordered Guo Zhengwei to return to his hometown to await the review, and quickly severely interrogated several arrested people.

古文：达观拷死，令誉亦几死，皆不承。
现代文：达观被拷打致死，沈令誉也几乎死去，都不承认。
English: Daguan was tortured to death, and Shen Ling Rong almost died, but they did not admit it.

古文：法司迫化引正域及归德。
现代文：法司逼迫胡化诬告郭正域和归德公。
English: The Justice Department forced Hu Hua to falsely accuse Guo Zhengqi and Gui Deguang.

古文：归德，鲤所居县也。
现代文：归德是沈鲤所住的县名。
English: Kuide is the name of the county where Shen Yu lived.

古文：化大呼曰： 明卿，我仇也，故讦之。
现代文：胡化大声呼喊： 阮明卿是我的仇人，所以告发他。
English: Hu Hua shouted loudly: "Sir Nguyen Minh is my enemy, so denounce him."

古文：正域举进士二十年不通问，何由同作妖书？
现代文：郭正域考取进士后二十年没有通音信，怎么一起撰写妖书？
English: Guo Zhengwei did not have a voice mail for twenty years after taking the entrance examination, how can he write a ghost story together?

古文：我亦不知谁为归德者。 
现代文：我也不知道谁是归德。 
English: I also don't know who is returning to Germany.

古文：帝知化枉，释之。
现代文：神宗知道胡化冤枉，释放了他。
English: Shenzong knew that Hu Hu was innocent and released him.

古文：都督陈汝忠掠讯尚文，遂发卒围正域舟于杨村，尽捕媪婢及佣书者男女十五人，与生光杂治，终无所得。
现代文：都督陈汝忠审讯毛尚文，又派兵在杨村包围了郭正域的船，将老妇、婢女和书童等十五名男女全部逮捕，与生光一起拷问，最终没有收获。
English: The governor Chen Ruzhong interrogated Mao Shangwen, and also sent soldiers to surround Guo Zhengwei's ship in Yangcun, arresting all fifteen men and women, including old women, maids and schoolchildren, and torturing them together with Shengguang. In the end, there was no gain.

古文：汝忠以锦衣告身诱尚文曰： 能告贼，即得之。 
现代文：陈汝忠拿锦衣告身引诱毛尚文说： 能够告发乱贼，就能得到它。 
English: Chen Ruzhong seduced Mao Shangwen by wearing a brocade dress and said: If you can denounce the bandits, you can get it.

古文：令引令誉，且以乳媪龚氏十岁女为徵。
现代文：让他诬告沈令誉，并且由奶妈龚氏十岁的女儿作证明。
English: Let him falsely accuse Shen Rong Rong, and let the ten-year-old daughter of the wet nurse Zou Rong testify.

古文：比会讯，东厂太监陈矩诘女曰： 汝见妖书版有几？ 曰： 盈屋。 
现代文：等到会审，东厂太监陈矩追问女孩说： 你看到几种妖书的版本？ 回答： 满屋。 
English: Waiting for the hearing, the East Factory eunuch Chen矩 questioned the girl and said: How many versions of the demon book did you see? Answer: A full house.

古文：矩笑曰： 妖书仅二三纸，版顾盈屋邪？ 
现代文：陈矩笑着说： 妖书只有两三张纸，版本怎么有满屋呢？ 
English: Chen Rui said with a smile, "There are only two or three pieces of paper in the demon book, so how can there be a full house for the edition?"

古文：诘尚文曰： 令誉语汝刊书何日？ 
现代文：责问毛尚文说： 沈令誉告诉你哪天刊印妖书？ 
English: Mao Shangwen said, "Shen Lingyou, can you tell me when the demon book will be published?"

古文：尚文曰： 十一月十六日。 
现代文：毛尚文回答： 十一月十六日。 
English: Mao Shangwen replied: November 16th.

古文：戎政尚书王世扬曰； 妖书以初十日获，而十六日又刊，将有两妖书邪？ 
现代文：兵部尚书王世扬说道： 妖书在初十查获，而十六号又刊印，有两本妖书吗？ 
English: Wang Shiyang, the head of the Military Department, said, "The evil book was discovered in the tenth grade, and it was published on the 16th. Are there two evil books?"

古文：拷生光妻妾及十岁儿，以针刺指爪，必欲引正域，皆不应。
现代文：拷问生光的妻妾和十岁的儿子，用针刺穿手指，必求诬告郭正域，都没成功。
English: Torturing his wife, concubine, and ten-year-old son, pricking his fingers with a needle, and trying to falsely accuse Guo Zhengwei were all unsuccessful.

古文：生光仰视梦皋、丕扬，大骂曰： 死则死耳，奈何教我迎相公指，妄引郭侍郎乎？ 
现代文：生光仰视钱梦皋、康丕扬，大骂道： 死就死吧，为什么教唆我迎合你们的心愿，胡乱诬告郭侍郎呢？ 
English: Shouguang looked up at Qian Mengtao and Kang Xiangyang and cursed loudly, "Death is death. Why did you instigate me to meet your wishes and falsely accuse Guo Jirong?

古文：都御史温纯等力持之，事渐解，然犹不能具狱。
现代文：都御史温纯等人极力维护，事情才渐渐化解，然而仍然不能结案。
English: The situation was gradually resolved, but the case still could not be closed.

古文：光宗在东宫，数语近侍曰： 何为欲杀我好讲官？ 
现代文：光宗在东宫，多次对身边的侍从说： 为什么想杀我的好讲官呢？ 
English: At the East Palace, Guangzong repeatedly said to the attendants around him, "Why does the good preacher want to kill me?

古文：诸人闻之皆惧。
现代文：众人听到此话都很惊惧。
English: Everyone was shocked to hear this.

古文：詹事唐文献偕其僚杨道宾等诣一贯争之，李廷机亦力为之地，狱益解。
现代文：詹事唐文献与同僚杨道宾等人到沈一贯处争辩，李廷机也极力要求落实，案狱更加缓解。
English: Zhan Zhi Tang Literature and his colleague Yang Daobin and others went to Shen's home to argue, Li Tingji also strongly demanded implementation, and the prison sentence was further eased.

古文：刑部尚书萧大亨具爰书，犹欲坐正域。
现代文：刑部尚书萧大亨准备文告，仍想治郭正域的罪。
English: Shangshu Xiao Tycoon of the Criminal Investigation Department is preparing a statement, and still wants to punish Guo Zhengwei's crime.

古文：郎中王述古抵稿于地，大亨乃止。
现代文：郎中王述古将稿纸扔到地上，萧大亨才作罢。
English: The steward, Wang Shugu, threw the manuscript paper to the ground, and only then did Xiao Dajeng stop writing.

古文：遂坐生光极刑，释诸波及者，而正域获免。
现代文：于是判处生光死刑，释放了诸位受牵连的人，郭正域获得幸免。
English: As a result, Shoko was sentenced to death, all those implicated were released, and Guo Zhengwei was spared.

古文：方狱急时，逻卒围鲤舍及正域舟，铃柝达旦。
现代文：当狱案危急的时候，巡逻兵围困了沈鲤的住处和郭正域的乘船，铃声和打更的梆子声通宵达旦。
English: When the prison case was in crisis, patrolmen besieged Shen Yao's residence and Guo Zhengwei's boat, ringing bells and playing gongs all night long.

古文：又声言正域且逮，迫使自裁。
现代文：又传说郭正域已被逮捕，迫使他自杀。
English: It is also said that Guo Zhengwei has been arrested, forcing him to commit suicide.

古文：正域曰： 大臣有罪，当伏尸都市，安能自屏野外？ 
现代文：郭正域回答： 大臣有罪，应当在都市受处决，怎么能自己抛尸荒野。 
English: Guo Zhengwei replied: The minister is guilty and should be executed in the city, how can he throw his body into the wilderness?

古文：既而幸无事，乃归。
现代文：不久，幸而无事，才回乡。
English: Soon, fortunately without incident, he returned to his hometown.

古文：归三年，巡按御史史学迁勘上楚王所讦事，无状。
现代文：回乡三年，巡按御史史学迁上奏楚王所揭发的事情的调查报告，无罪。
English: After returning to his hometown for three years, the investigation report of the matter revealed by the king of Chu was reported by the inspector of history and history studies, and he was not guilty.

古文：给事顾士琦因请召还正域，不报。
现代文：给事中顾士琦趁机请求召回郭正域，皇帝没有答复。
English: During the incident, Gu Shizhen took the opportunity to request the recall of Guo Zhengwei, but the emperor did not reply.

古文：正域博通载籍，勇于任事，有经济大略，自守介然，故人望归之。
现代文：郭正域知识广博，勇于承担重任，有经邦济世的大略，严于律己，所以人们敬重他。
English: Guo Zhengwei has extensive knowledge, has the courage to take on heavy responsibilities, has a general plan for the country and the world, and is strict in his discipline, so people respect him.

古文：扼于权相，遂不复起，家居十年卒。
现代文：被当权的宰相扼制，不能再受任用，在家居住十年后去世。
English: Stifled by the chancellor in power, he could no longer be appointed, and died after living at home for ten years.

古文：后四年，赠礼部尚书。
现代文：四年后，被赠封为礼部尚书。
English: Four years later, he was awarded the title of "Shang Shu" of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：光宗遗诏，加恩旧学，赠太子少保，谥文毅，官其子中书舍人。
现代文：光宗的遗诏，加恩泽于旧学，赠封他为太子少保，谥号文毅，将他的儿子录用为中书舍人。
English: Guangzong's last will and testament, endeared him to the old school, bestowed him with the title of princeling minor protector, nicknamed Wen Yi, and hired his son as a Chinese scholar.

