古文：郑德璘赵璟卢迈赵璟包谊薛少殷袁孝叔
现代文：郑德璘赵璟卢迈赵璟包谊薛少殷袁孝叔
English: Zheng Deguan, Zhao Jiao, Luma Zhao Jiao, Baoji Xue, Shao Yan, Yuan Xiaozhu

古文：郑德璘
现代文：郑德璘
English: Zheng Deyao

古文：贞元中，湘潭尉郑德璘，家居长沙。有亲表居江夏，每岁一往省焉。
现代文：唐德宗贞元年间，湘潭县尉郑德璘家住在长沙，有表亲在江夏，每年去探望一次。
English: During the reign of Emperor Dezong of Tang Dynasty in the first year of the 21st century, the Xiangtan County Lieutenant Zheng Dejun's family lived in Changsha. He had cousins in Jiangxia and visited them once a year.

古文：中间涉洞庭，历湘潭，多遇老叟棹舟而鬻菱芡，虽白发而有少容。
现代文：中途须渡过洞庭湖，经过湘潭。经常遇见一个老头，划船卖菱角和芡实，虽然老头的头发已经白了，可脸上的皮肤仍像年轻人一样。
English: On the way, they had to cross Dongting Lake and pass through Xiangtan Lake. They often met an old man rowing a boat to sell loquat and ramie. Although the old man's hair had turned white, the skin on his face still looked like that of a young man.

古文：德璘与语，多及玄解。
现代文：郑德璘与他交谈，内容多涉及玄学。
English: Zheng Deyao had a conversation with him, the content of which mostly involved metaphysics.

古文：诘曰： 舟无糗粮，何以为食？ 叟曰： 菱芡耳。 
现代文：郑德璘问老头： 船上没有粮食，您吃什么？ 老头说： 菱角和芡实。 
English: Zheng Deyao asked the old man: There is no food on the ship, what will you eat? The old man said: Loquat and ramie.

古文：德璘抵江夏，将返长沙。
现代文：郑德璘喜欢喝酒，经常携带好酒 松醪春 去江夏。
English: Zheng Deyao likes to drink, and often carries good wine from Songtaichun to Jiangxia.

古文：驻舟于黄鹤楼下，傍有鹾贾韦生者，乘巨舟。
现代文：每次遇到老头，都邀请他一同喝酒，老人没有一次不喝，却也不说感谢的话。
English: Every time I meet an old man, I invite him to have a drink with me. The old man never skips a drink, but he never says a word of thanks.

古文：亦抵于湘潭。其夜与邻舟告别饮酒。
现代文：有一次，郑德璘到达江夏后返回长沙，船停泊在黄鹤楼下。有个叫韦生的盐商，乘坐一条大船要去湘潭，当晚与邻船的人饮酒话别。
English: Once, when Zheng Deyu returned to Changsha after arriving in Jiangxia, the ship was moored at Huanghe. A salt merchant named Wei Sheng took a big ship to go to Xiangtan. That night, he had a farewell drink with the people from the neighboring ship.

古文：韦生有女，居于舟之舵橹。邻女亦来访别。二女同处笑语。
现代文：韦生有个女儿也住在船的后舱，邻船的女儿也去访问告别，二人边谈边笑。
English: Ms. Wesson has a daughter who also lives in the back of the boat, and a daughter from a neighboring boat also visited to say goodbye, chatting and laughing with her.

古文：夜将半，闻江中有秀才吟诗曰： 物触轻舟心自知，风恬浪静月光微。
现代文：快到半夜的时候，听到江上有个秀才高声朗诵一首诗： 物触轻舟心自知，风恬浪静月光微。
English: When it was almost midnight, I heard a talented man on the river reciting a poem in a loud voice: Things are light, the boat knows itself, the wind is rough, the waves are calm, and the moon is faint.

古文：夜深江上解愁思，拾得红蕖香惹衣。 
现代文：夜深江上解愁思，拾得红蕖香惹衣。 
English: At night, I went to the river to relieve my sadness, and found red fennel.

古文：德璘舟与韦氏舟，同离鄂渚信宿。及暮又同宿。
现代文：第二天早上，两女所乘的船各奔东西。郑德璘的船和韦生的船同时离开鄂州的停泊地，到了晚上两条船又停泊在一起。
English: The next morning, the two women's boats went their separate ways. Zheng Deyao's boat and Wei Sheng's boat left the berth in Ezhou at the same time. In the evening, the two boats moored together again.

古文：至洞庭之畔，与韦生舟楫，颇以相近。韦氏美而艳，琼英腻云，莲蕊莹波，露濯蕣姿，月鲜珠彩。于水窗中垂钩。
现代文：到了洞庭湖里，两条船行驶得很近。韦生的女儿美丽妖艳，皮肤雪白细腻，姿态幽雅，衣裙华丽，在船舱中临水的窗子旁垂钓。
English: When they arrived at Dongting Lake, the two boats were sailing very close to each other. Wesson's daughter, beautiful and enchanting, with delicate snow-white skin, elegant posture, and gorgeous dress, was fishing in the cabin next to the window facing the water.

古文：德璘因窥见之，甚悦。
现代文：郑德璘偷偷观察，产生爱意。
English: Zheng Deyu surreptitiously observed, produced love.

古文：遂以红绡一尺，上题诗曰： 纤手垂钩对水窗，红蕖秋色艳长江。
现代文：他在一尺红绡上题了一首诗： 纤手垂钩对水窗，红蕖秋色艳长江。
English: He inscribed a poem on a one-foot kestrel: "A skillful hand hangs on the water window, and the kestrel brings the autumn colors to the Yangtze River."

古文：既能解珮投交甫，更有明珠乞一双。 
现代文：既能解佩投交甫，更有明珠乞一双。 
English: It is not only able to solve the problem of casting and delivering, but also has a pair of pearls.

古文：强以红绡惹其钩，女因收得。
现代文：然后将红绡挂在韦生女儿的钩上。
English: He then hung the kestrel on the hook of Ms. Wesson's daughter.

古文：吟玩久之，然虽讽读，即不能晓其义。
现代文：韦生的女儿收到红绡和题诗之后，反复阅读玩赏，却无法理解诗中的含义。
English: After receiving the poem, Ms. Wesson's daughter repeatedly read and enjoyed it, but could not understand the meaning of the poem.

古文：女不工刀札，又耻无所报，遂以钩丝而投夜来邻舟女所题红笺者。
现代文：韦生的女儿不会写字，又觉得拿不出什么东西来回报郑德璘，很不好意见，便将那天晚上邻船女抄录诗句的红绫挂在钩上，抛给郑德璘。
English: Wesson's daughter couldn't write, and felt that she couldn't give anything back to Zheng Deyao. She didn't like the idea very much, so she hung the red kite, on which the girl from the next boat had copied a poem that night, on a hook and threw it to Zheng Deyao.

古文：德璘谓女所制，凝思颇悦，喜畅可知。然莫晓诗之意义，亦无计遂其款曲。
现代文：郑德璘以为红绫上所题的诗句是韦生的女儿所作，心里非常高兴，然而不能理解诗中的意思，无法与韦生的女儿倾述衷情。
English: Zheng Deyao thought that the poem on the red ribbon was written by Wei Sheng's daughter. She was very happy, but she could not understand the meaning of the poem and could not share her heart with Wei Sheng's daughter.

古文：将暮，有渔人语德璘曰： 向者贾客巨舟，已全家殁于洞庭耳。 
现代文：韦生的女儿将收到的红绡系在胳膊上，非常珍惜。湖面上月白风清，韦生的大船突然扬帆加速，这时风势增大，波涛涌起，郑德璘的小船不敢追赶，心中非常焦急怨恨。
English: Wesson's daughter fastened the red cormorant she received on her arm and treasured it very much. On the lake, the moon was white and the wind was clear. Wesson's big boat suddenly set sail and accelerated. At this time, the wind increased and the waves surged. Zheng Deyao's small boat did not dare to catch up, and his heart was very anxious and resentful.

古文：德璘大骇。神思恍惚，悲婉久之，不能排抑。
现代文：第二天黄昏，打渔的人告诉郑德璘说： 昨天开走那个客商的大船，已经全家沉没在洞庭湖里。 郑德璘听了大惊，不觉精神恍惚，悲伤的心情难以抑制和排除。
English: At dusk the next day, the fisherman told Zheng Deyao that: Yesterday, the merchant's big boat was taken away, and the whole family had sunk in Dongting Lake. Zheng Deyao was shocked and unconsciously lost his mind, and the sad mood was difficult to suppress and eliminate.

古文：将夜，为吊江姝诗二首曰： 湖面狂风且莫吹，浪花初绽月光微。
现代文：当天晚上，做了两首诗表示祭奠，题为 吊江姝 。一首是： 湖面狂风且莫吹，浪花初绽月光微。
English: On the evening of the same day, two poems were written to express the tribute, entitled "Hanging on the River." One is: The lake is windy and cannot be blown, and the moonlight is faint at the beginning of the waves.

古文：沉潜暗想横波泪，得共鲛人相对垂。 
现代文：沉潜暗想横波泪，得共鲛人相对垂。 
English: Sinking in the dark, I want to cry, so I have to hang out with other people.

古文：又曰： 洞庭风软荻花秋，新没青蛾细浪愁。
现代文：另一首是： 洞庭风软荻花秋，新没青蛾细浪愁。
English: The other one is: Dongting wind is soft, the flowers are in autumn, and the new moth is sad.

古文：泪滴白苹君不见，月明江上有轻鸥。 
现代文：泪滴白苹君不见，月明江上有轻鸥。 
English: The white drops of tears are missing, and there is a light ripple on the Yueming River.

古文：诗成，酹而投之。
现代文：然后将诗笺投入水中，对天地祈祷，非常虔诚。
English: Then he threw the poem into the water and prayed to heaven and earth. He was very pious.

古文：精贯神祗，至诚感应，遂感水神，持诣水府，府君览之，召溺者数辈曰： 谁是郑生所爱？ 
现代文：于是感动了水神，派人送信给水府。府君看了信后，将溺水者召集起来，问： 谁是郑德璘所爱的人？ 
English: The god of water was so moved that he sent a messenger to Suifu. After the governor read the letter, he gathered the drowning people together and asked: Who was the person Zheng Deyu loved?

古文：而韦氏亦不能晓其来由。
现代文：而韦生的女儿也不知道怎么回事。
English: And Wesson's daughter doesn't know what happened.

古文：有主者搜臂，见红绡而语府君，曰： 德璘异日是吾邑之明宰，况曩有义相及，不可不曲活尔命。 
现代文：有主持者上前挨个检查溺水者的胳膊，见到韦生女儿胳膊上的红绡后告诉府君说： 郑德璘以后是我们这里的地方官，况且这么重情义，我们应该设法将她救活。 
English: A moderator came forward to check the arms of the drowning people one by one. After seeing the red ribbon on the arm of Wei Sheng's daughter, he told Fu Jun: Zheng Dejun will be our local official here, and besides, the situation is so serious, we should try to save her.

古文：因召主者，携韦氏送郑生。
现代文：于是府君叫主持者领着韦生的女儿送给郑德璘。
English: As a result, the prefectural governor asked the host to lead Wei Sheng's daughter to give it to Zheng Dejun.

古文：道将尽，睹一大池，碧水汪然，遂为主者推堕其中。或沉或浮，亦甚困苦。
现代文：韦生的女儿见府君只是一个老头。她跟主持者快走出去，没有碰到什么障碍，走到头看见一个大水池，池中碧水荡漾。主持者将她推落池中，半沉半浮，非常难受。
English: Ms. Wesson's daughter thought that Mr. Fuchun was just an old man. She and the host quickly walked out, without encountering any obstacles. When she got to the end, she saw a large pool, with clear water rippling in it. The host pushed her down into the pool, half-sinking, half-floating, very uncomfortable.

古文：时已三更，德璘未寝，但吟红笺之诗，悲而益苦。
现代文：这时已是三更时分，郑德璘未睡，仍在阅读红绫上的诗句。
English: By this time, it was 3 a.m. and Zheng Deyao was still awake, still reading the poem on the gong.

古文：忽觉有物触舟。然舟人已寝，德璘遂秉炬照之，见衣服彩绣似是人物。
现代文：忽然感觉有什么物体碰到船上，然而船上的人都睡着了，郑德璘手持蜡烛来到船边一照，看见有彩色绣花的衣服，似乎是个人。
English: Suddenly, he felt something hit the boat. However, everyone on the boat was asleep. Zheng Deya, holding a candle, went to the side of the boat and took a picture. He saw clothes with colorful embroidered flowers. It seemed to be a person.

古文：惊而拯之，乃韦氏也，系臂红绡尚在。
现代文：急忙救了上来，一看竟是韦生的女儿，胳膊上的红绡还在。
English: I hurriedly rescued her, and when I looked up, I saw that she was actually Weson's daughter, with the red scabbard still on her arm.

古文：德璘喜骤。
现代文：郑德璘欣喜异常。
English: Zheng Deyao was overjoyed.

古文：良久，女苏息。及晓，方能言。
现代文：过了许久，韦生的女儿苏醒过来，直到天亮，才能说话。
English: After a long time, Wesson's daughter woke up and couldn't speak until dawn.

古文：乃说府君感而活我命。
现代文：她述说： 是府君受了感动，才救我性命。 
English: She said: "It was Fuchun who was moved to save my life.

古文：德璘曰： 府君何人也？ 
现代文：郑德璘问： 府君是什么人？ 
English: Zheng Deyao asked: Who is Fuchun?

古文：终不省悟。
现代文：但一直没能搞清楚。
English: But I haven't been able to figure it out.

古文：遂纳为室，感其异也，将归长沙。
现代文：于是郑德璘娶韦生的女儿为妻，感到她的经历很奇异。然后他们回到长沙。
English: So Zheng Deyu married Wei Sheng's daughter, feeling that her experience was very strange. Then they returned to Changsha.

古文：后三年，德璘常调选，欲谋醴陵令。
现代文：在这以后的三年里，郑德璘经常调任新的官职。
English: In the next three years, Zheng Deyao was frequently transferred to new official positions.

古文：韦氏曰： 不过作巴陵耳。 德璘曰： 子何以知？ 
现代文：他想谋求醴陵县令，韦生的女儿说： 不过只能去巴陵。 郑德璘问： 您怎么知道？ 
English: He wanted to seek the order of Fuling County, and Wei Sheng's daughter said, "But you can only go to Baling." Zheng Deyao asked, "How do you know?"

古文：韦氏曰： 向者水府君言是吾邑之明宰，洞庭乃属巴陵，此可验矣。 
现代文：韦生的女儿说： 当时水府君说你是我们这里的地方官，洞庭属于巴陵县，这次可以验证。 
English: Wesson's daughter said: At that time, Mizufukun said that you are our local official here, Dongting belongs to Baling County, and this time it can be verified.

古文：德璘志之。选果得巴陵令。
现代文：郑德璘记在心里，结果新的任命果然是巴陵县令。
English: Zheng Dejun remembered in his mind that the new appointment was indeed the order of Baling County.

古文：及至巴陵县，使人迎韦氏。舟楫至洞庭侧，值逆风不进。
现代文：到了巴陵后，他派人去接韦生的女儿，船驶到洞庭湖，正赶上逆风，船无法前进。
English: After arriving in Baling, he sent someone to pick up Wei Sheng's daughter. The boat sailed to Dongting Lake, and was caught in a headwind, so the boat could not move forward.

古文：德璘使佣篙工者五人而迎之，内一老叟，挽舟若不为意，韦氏怒而唾之。
现代文：郑德璘派去迎接韦生女儿的五个人当中，有一个老头，驾船似乎漫不经心地不肯使劲。韦生的女儿生气地斥责他。
English: Among the five people Zheng Deyao sent to meet Wei Sheng's daughter, there was an old man who seemed to be carelessly driving the boat and refused to work hard. Wei Sheng's daughter angrily rebuked him.

古文：叟回顾曰： 我昔水府活汝性命，不以为德，今反生怒。 
现代文：老头回头说： 我过去在水府救活你的性命，你不记着我的恩德，反而对我发怒。 
English: The old man looked back and said, "I used to save your life in Suifu, but instead of remembering my kindness, you are angry with me.

古文：韦氏乃悟，恐悸，召叟登舟，拜而进酒果，叩头曰： 吾之父母，当在水府，可省觐否？ 
现代文：韦生的女儿明白过来，非常害怕。她请老头上船，拜见后摆上酒菜，磕头说： 我的父母，应该还在水府，可以去探望吗？ 
English: Wesson's daughter came to understand and was very afraid. She invited the old man to the boat, and after the meeting, they served wine and vegetables. The old man said, "My parents should still be in Suifu, can I visit them?"

古文：曰： 可。 
现代文：老头回答说： 可以。 
English: A: Yes.

古文：须臾，舟楫似没于波，然无所若。
现代文：不一会儿，他们所乘的船只似乎沉入水中，然而却没有痛苦的感觉。
English: A moment later, the boat they were on seemed to sink into the water, but there was no feeling of pain.

古文：俄到往时之水府，大小倚舟号恸。访其父母。父母居止俨然，第舍与人世无异。
现代文：很快到了水府，大大小小围着船大哭，韦生的女儿找到了父母，她的父母行为举止像活着时一样，居住的房屋与人世间也没什么不同。
English: Soon, they arrived at Suifu, and everyone was crying around the boat. Wei Sheng's daughter found her parents. Her parents behaved as if they were still alive, and the house they lived in was no different from the real world.

古文：韦氏询其所须，父母曰： 所溺之物，皆能至此。但无火化，所食唯菱芡耳。 
现代文：韦生的女儿问父母需要什么？她的父母说： 掉到水里的东西都能到达这里，但是没有火来蒸煮加工，所以吃的只有菱角和芡实。 
English: Her parents said, "Anything that falls into the water can get here, but there's no fire to cook it, so all we can eat is sardines and anchovies."

古文：持白金器数事而遗女曰： 吾此无用处，可以赠尔。不得久停。 
现代文：又拿出数件白金器具递给女儿说： 这些东西在这里没有用处，可以送给你，你不能在这里久留。 
English: He also took out several platinum utensils and handed them to his daughter, saying, "These things are of no use here. I can give them to you. You can't stay here for long."

古文：促其相别。
现代文：催促女儿回去。
English: Urge your daughter to go back.

古文：韦氏遂哀恸别其父母。
现代文：韦生的女儿哭着同父母告别。
English: Wesson's daughter cried as she said goodbye to her parents.

古文：叟以笔大书韦氏巾曰： 昔日江头菱芡人，蒙君数饮松醪春。
现代文：那个老头拿笔在韦生女儿的头巾上写道： 昔日江头菱芡人，蒙君数饮松醪春。
English: The old man took a pen and wrote on the headscarf of Wei Sheng's daughter: Once upon a time, there was a man who was born in the head of the river.

古文：活君家室以为报，珍重长沙郑德璘。 
现代文：活君家室以为报，珍重长沙郑德璘。 
English: Changsha Zheng Deyu is treasured by the living family.

古文：书讫，叟遂为仆侍数百辈，自舟迎归府舍。
现代文：写完，老头便率领奴仆和侍从数百人，从船边回归水府。
English: After writing, the old man led hundreds of servants and attendants back to Suifu from the side of the ship.

古文：俄顷，舟却出于湖畔。一舟之人，咸有所睹。
现代文：一会儿，船又浮出水面，一船的人，都目睹这件事。
English: A moment later, the boat surfaced again, and everyone on board witnessed the event.

古文：德璘详诗意，方悟水府老叟，乃昔日鬻菱芡者。
现代文：郑德璘仔细分析老头写在头巾上的诗，方才明白水府的老头，就是当时在小船上卖菱角和芡实那个老头。
English: Zheng Deyao carefully analyzed the poem written by the old man on the headscarf, and only then did he understand that the old man in Shuifu was the old man who was selling loquats and tampons on a small boat at that time.

古文：岁余，有秀才崔希周投诗卷于德璘，内有江上夜拾得芙蓉诗，即韦氏所投德璘红笺诗也。
现代文：一年后，有个叫崔希周的秀才拿自己所写的诗请教于郑德璘。其中有一首： 江上夜拾得芙蓉 的诗，就是韦生女儿所赠送给他的红绫上那首诗。
English: A year later, a talented poet named Cui Xizhou asked Zheng Deyao for advice on his poems. One of them was "The River Picks Up Hibiscus at Night," the poem on the red envelope that Wei Sheng's daughter had given him.

古文：德璘疑诗，乃诘希周。
现代文：郑德璘对这首诗产生怀疑，询问崔希周。
English: Zheng Deyao had doubts about the poem and asked Cui Xizhou.

古文：对曰： 数年前，泊轻舟于鄂渚，江上月明，时当未寝，有微物触舟，芳馨袭鼻。取而视之，乃一束芙蓉也。
现代文：崔希周回答说： 几年前，我的小船停泊在鄂州，江上月明，我睡不着觉，感到有微小的物体碰到小船上，并且芳香扑鼻，捞上来一看，是一束芙蓉花。
English: Cui Xizhou replied: A few years ago, my boat was anchored in Ezhou. It was moonlight on the river. I couldn't sleep. I felt a tiny object hit the boat, and it smelled very fragrant. When I pulled it up, it was a bunch of hibiscus flowers.

古文：因而制诗既成，讽咏良久。 
现代文：因此我做了这首诗，并且高声朗诵很久，这全都是实话。 
English: So I made this poem, and I recited it out loud for a long time, and it's all true.

古文：德璘叹曰： 命也。 
现代文：郑德璘感叹说： 这就是命啊！ 
English: Zheng Deyu sighed and said: This is life!

古文：然后不敢越洞庭。
现代文：从此他不敢轻易经过洞庭湖。
English: Since then, he has not dared to pass through Dongting Lake.

古文：德璘官至刺史。
现代文：郑德璘做官做到刺史。
English: Zheng Deyao made history as an official.

古文：赵璟卢迈
现代文：赵璟卢迈
English: Zhao Yulumai

古文：赵璟、卢迈二相国皆吉州人，旅众呼为赵七卢三。
现代文：赵璟和卢迈两位丞相都是吉州人，当地老百姓称他们为赵七和卢三。
English: The two prime ministers, Zhao Qi and Lumai, were both from Jizhou, and the local people called them Zhao Qi and Lu San.

古文：赵相自微而著，盖为是姚旷女婿，姚与独孤问俗善，因托之，得湖南判官，累奏官至监察。
现代文：赵璟从平民升为高官，全靠着他是姚旷的女婿。姚旷与独孤问俗关系很好，将赵璟的前程托付给他。他先将赵璟安排为湖南判官，又多次向上推荐，使赵璟提升为监察。
English: Zhao Wei rose from a commoner to a high-ranking official, all thanks to his being the son-in-law of Yao Yuan. Yao Yuan had a very good relationship with Duolun, and entrusted Zhao Wei's future to him. He first arranged Zhao Wei as a Hunan judge, and repeatedly recommended Zhao Wei upwards, so that Zhao Wei was promoted to a supervisor.

古文：萧相复代问俗为潭州，有人又荐于萧，萧留为判官，至侍御史。
现代文：萧丞相将赵璟留任为判官，又后升任为侍御史。萧入朝为相。赵璟主持留守事务。
English: Minister Xiao Zheng left Zhao Wei as a judge, and later he was promoted to be an attendant. Xiao entered the court as a minister. Zhao Wei presided over the affairs left behind.

古文：萧入，主留务，有美声，闻于德宗，遂兼中丞，为湖南廉使。
现代文：由于赵璟政绩突出，名声很好，德宗知道后，又让他兼任中丞，为湖南廉访使。
English: Because of Zhao Wei's outstanding political achievements and good reputation, after Dezong knew about it, he also made him concurrently serve as the vice-chairman of the Central Military Commission, making him Hunan's highest-ranking unlicensed envoy.

古文：及李泌入相，不知之。
现代文：等到李泌做了丞相，不知道这些情况。
English: Li Jie did not know about these circumstances until he became prime minister.

古文：俄而以李元素知璟湖南留务事，而诏璟归阙。
现代文：后来李元素代替赵璟为湖南留守事务，皇帝将赵璟调回京城。
English: Later, Li Yingxuan took the place of Zhao Yao to stay in Hunan, and the emperor transferred Zhao Yao back to Beijing.

古文：璟居京，慕静，深巷杜门不出。元素访之甚频。元素乃泌相之从弟。
现代文：赵璟在京城居住，喜欢安静，整天呆在家中不出门，李元素来访很频繁，他是丞相李泌的表弟。
English: Zhao Wei lives in Beijing, likes to be quiet, stays at home all day and does not leave the house. Li Ye is a frequent visitor. He is the cousin of Prime Minister Ri Su.

古文：璟因访别元素于青龙寺，谓之曰： 赵璟亦自合有官职，誓不敢怨人。诚非偶然耳，盖得于日者。 
现代文：一次赵璟拜访李元素后在青龙寺分手，对李元素说： 我赵璟也应该有个职位，虽然闲居在家，但我不敢怨天尤人，目前这种状况不是偶然的，这全是命运。 
English: Once, Zhao Yao broke up with Li Xuan at the Qinglong Temple after visiting him. He said to Li Xuan: I, Zhao Yao, should also have a position. Although I am idle at home, I dare not complain about others. This current situation is not accidental, it is all fate.

古文：仍密问元素年命。
现代文：并悄悄问李元素自己今年的命运怎么样？
English: And quietly asked Li Yingxuan how is his fate this year?

古文：曰： 据此年命，亦合富贵人也。 
现代文：李元素说： 根据你今年的命相，也应该是个有大富大贵的人。 
English: Li Yingyuan said, "According to your fortune this year, you should also be a very wealthy person.

古文：元素因自负，亦不言泌相兄也。
现代文：李元素因为自负，没有告诉赵璟自己是李泌丞相的表弟。
English: Because of his arrogance, Li Ye did not tell Zhao Zhen that he was the cousin of Premier Li Kejun.

古文：顷之，德宗忽记得璟，赐封，拜给事中。
现代文：一天，德宗忽然想起赵璟仍闲居在家，召他来让他回话，起用他为给事中。
English: One day, Dezong suddenly remembered that Zhao Yao was still idle at home, called him to let him talk back, and appointed him as an assistant.

古文：泌相不测其由。会有和戎使事，出新相关播为大使，张荐、张或为判官。泌因判奏璟为副使。
现代文：李泌不知道其中的原因，恰巧有出使邻国的差事，新相关播为大使，张荐和张或为判官，李泌推荐赵璟为副使。
English: Li Xiu did not know the reason for this, but he happened to be sent on an errand to a neighboring country. The newly relevant person became the ambassador, Zhang recommended and Zhang was the judge, and Li Xiu recommended Zhao Wei as the deputy envoy.

古文：未至蕃，右丞有缺，宰相上多。德宗曰： 赵璟堪为此官。 
现代文：没等到达出使的国家，右丞相的位置出现空缺。宰相提出候选人名单，德宗说： 赵璟可以担任这个官职。 
English: The prime minister presented a list of candidates, and Dezong said, "Zhao Ye can hold this post."

古文：追赴拜右丞。
现代文：于是派人追上赵璟，任命为右丞相。
English: So he sent someone to catch up with Zhao Zhen and appointed him as the Minister of the Right.

古文：不数月，迁尚书左丞平章事。
现代文：过了几个月又改任尚书左丞平章事。
English: A few months later, he was reassigned to the post of Shoshu Zuojohei Shoji.

古文：作相五年，薨于位。
现代文：担任丞相五年，死在位上。
English: He served as chancellor for five years and died in office.

古文：赵璟
现代文：赵璟
English: Zhao Wei

古文：赵相璟为入蕃副使，谓二张判官曰： 前几里合有河，河之边有柳树，树下合有一官人，着惨服立。 
现代文：丞相赵璟当出使邻国的副使时，对两个姓张的判官说： 前面几里地远应该有一条河，河边有一棵柳树，树下站着一名官员。 
English: When dispatching a deputy envoy from a neighboring country, the chancellor Zhao Wei said to two judges surnamed Zhang: There should be a river a few miles ahead, a willow tree by the river, and an official standing under the tree.

古文：既而悉然，官人置顿官也。
现代文：走了一会儿，果然见到的景物同赵璟所说的一样。官员就是管理驿站的官。
English: After walking for a while, the scenery I saw was exactly the same as what Zhao Yao had said. The official was the one who managed the station.

古文：二张问之，赵曰： 某年三十前，已梦此行，所以不怨他时相。 
现代文：两位张判官问赵璟是如何知道的。赵璟说： 我三十之前，就已经梦到了有这次行动，所以不埋怨那时的丞相。
English: The two judges asked Zhao Wei how he knew. Zhao Wei said: I dreamed of this operation before I was thirty, so I don't blame the prime minister at the time.

古文：赵相将薨之时，长安诸城门金吾家，见一小儿，豹犊鼻，携五色绳子，觅赵相其人。见者知异。
现代文：赵璟丞相临死之前，长安各个城门的守护兵丁都看见过一个小孩，系着豹皮的围裙，带着一条五色绳子，寻找丞相赵璟，看见的人都知道不吉利。
English: Before the death of Premier Zhao Rongcheng, the guards of all the city gates of Chang'an had seen a child, wearing a leopard skin apron and carrying a five-colored rope, looking for Premier Zhao Rongcheng. Everyone who saw it knew it was unlucky.

古文：不经数日，赵薨。
现代文：过了不几天，赵璟就死了。
English: A few days later, Zhao Yao died.

古文：包谊
现代文：包谊
English: including friendship

古文：唐包谊者，江东人也，有文词。
现代文：唐朝有个叫包谊的，是江东人，很有文才。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a person called Bao Jiao, who was from the eastern part of the Yangtze River and was very talented in literature.

古文：初与计偕，至京师，赴试期不及。宗人祭酒佶怜之，馆于私第。
现代文：当初他赶考来到京城，但是误了考期，同宗人唐佶祭酒很替他惋惜。让他住在自己家里。
English: At first, he came to the capital in time for the exam, but he missed the exam period. His family member, Tang Yao, felt very sorry for him and let him live in his own home.

古文：谊多游佛寺。无何，搪突中书舍人刘太真。
现代文：包谊每天去佛寺游玩，无意中冒犯了中书舍人刘真。
English: He went to visit a Buddhist temple every day, unintentionally offending Liu Zhen, the librarian.

古文：太真睹其色目，即举人也。
现代文：刘真见他的穿戴举止是个举人，便叫人询问他。
English: When Liu Zhen saw that his manner of dress was that of a gentleman, he called for someone to question him.

古文：命一价询之，谊勃然曰： 进士包谊，素不相识，何劳致问？ 太真甚衔之。以至专访其人于佶。
现代文：包谊发怒说： 进士包谊，素不相识，有什么可问的！ 太真非常生气，以致于专门派人去查访佶。
English: Bao Yi said angrily, "I don't know you, but I have something to ask you!" He was so angry that he sent someone to investigate Yan.

古文：佶闻谊所为，大怒，因诘责，遣徙他舍。
现代文：佶听说包谊的无礼行为，非常生气，训斥他一番后，将他赶到别处去了。
English: Hearing about the rude behavior of the friend, Zou was very angry. After reprimanding him, he drove him to another place.

古文：谊亦无怍色。
现代文：包谊一点也不感到惭愧。
English: He is not at all ashamed of his friendship.

古文：明年，太真主文，志在致其永弃，故过杂文，俟终场明遣之。
现代文：第二年，太真主考，想要借机报复包谊，使他真放弃前程，故意出了很难的文章。
English: In the second year, he failed the entrance examination, and he wanted to take the opportunity to take revenge on Bao's friendship, so he really gave up his future and deliberately published a difficult article.

古文：既而自悔曰： 此子既忤我，从而报之，是我为浅丈夫也。
现代文：等到考试结束，将包谊贬低一番后赶了出去。一会儿，他又后悔了，心里想：此人既然得罪了我，我便报复他，不是大丈夫所为。
English: At the end of the examination, he belittled and chased away the fraternity. After a while, he regretted it and thought to himself, "Since this person has offended me, I will take revenge on him. This is not the right thing to do."

古文：但能永废其人，何必在此。 
现代文：况且我能永远阻挡他的前程吗？何必如此呢！
English: Besides, can I block his way forever? Why should I?

古文：于是放入策。
现代文：于是放过包谊，使他的试卷合格。
English: So he let go of the friendship and passed his exam.

古文：太真将放榜，先呈宰相。
现代文：太真在将要张榜公布考中举子的名单之前，先将名单送给宰相审阅。
English: Taizhen will first send the list to the Prime Minister for review before publishing the list of the candidates in the exam.

古文：榜中有姓朱人及第。时宰以璟近为大逆，未欲以此姓及第，亟遣易之。
现代文：榜中有个姓朱的人，宰相忌讳同朱泚同姓的人，不想让姓朱的中榜，急令换一个人。
English: There is a person with the surname Zhu in the list, and the prime minister does not like people with the same surname as Zhu Xi. He does not want to have a person with the surname Zhu in the middle of the list, so he urgently ordered to change someone.

古文：太真错谔趋出，不记他人，唯记谊。及谊谢恩，方悟己所恶也。
现代文：太真慌忙去找人，因为记不清其他人的名字，只记住了包谊的名字，便将包谊换上，等包谊进来谢恩。这时他才想起来，包谊正是他所厌恶的人。
English: He was in such a hurry to find someone, because he couldn't remember the names of the other people. He only remembered the name of the pack, and then he changed the pack to him, and waited for the pack to come in. That's when he remembered that the pack was exactly the person he hated.

古文：因明言。及知得丧非人力也，盖假手而已。
现代文：所以他说： 功名得失不由人，全都是假借人来完成而已。 
English: That's why he said, "It's not up to people to gain or lose fame, it's all done by fake people."

古文：薛少殷
现代文：薛少殷
English: by Xue Shaoyin

古文：河东薛少殷举进士。忽一日，暴卒于长安崇义里。
现代文：河东薛少殷去考进士，突然有一天暴死在长安崇义里。
English: Hedong Xue Shaoyin went to take the entrance examination and died suddenly one day in Chongyi, Chang'an.

古文：有一使持牒，云： 大使追。 
现代文：有一差人持公文说： 大使召见。 
English: A clerk with an official letter said: "The ambassador is calling for you."

古文：引入府门。
现代文：将他带进一座官府的大门。
English: He was taken to the gate of a government office.

古文：既入，见官府，即鲜于叔明也。
现代文：进去以后，见到的官员原来是鲜于叔明。
English: After entering, the officials he saw turned out to be little more than cronies.

古文：少殷欲有所诉。叔明曰： 寒食将至，何为镂鸡子食也？ 
现代文：薛少殷刚想要说话，鲜于叔明说： 寒食节就要到了，为什么煮鸡吃？ 
English: Xue Shaoying just wanted to speak, but Shian Yu Shuming said: The cold food festival is coming, why eat boiled chicken?

古文：东面有一僧，手持宝塔。扇双开，少殷已在其中。
现代文：东边有一个和尚，手中拿着宝塔，塔门大开，将薛少殷装了进去。
English: On the east side, there was a monk, holding a pagoda in his hands, the gate of which was wide open, and he loaded Xue Shaoyin inside.

古文：叔明曰： 日某方欲上事，和尚何为救此人？ 
现代文：鲜于叔明说： 今天我刚要处理公务，和尚为什么解救此人？ 
English: Mian Yu Shuming said: Today I just had to deal with official business, why did the monk rescue this person?

古文：乃迫而出，令引少殷见判官。
现代文：然后迫使薛少殷走出宝塔，叫人领他去见判官。
English: They then forced Xue Shaoyin out of the pagoda and ordered him to be brought before a judge.

古文：及出门之西院，阍者入白。逡巡，闻命素服乃入。
现代文：出了一个门进了西院，看门的人进去通报后退了来出，叫他穿上丧服进去。
English: He went out a door and entered the West Courtyard. The doorkeepers informed him that he had entered and then backed away, telling him to put on his mourning clothes and go inside.

古文：所见乃亡兄也。
现代文：薛少殷进去一看，接见他的竟是死去的哥哥。
English: When Xue Shaoyin looked inside, he was greeted by his dead brother.

古文：叙泣良久，曰： 吾以汝未成名，欲荐汝于此，分主公事。故假追来，非他也。 
现代文：交谈痛哭了很长时间，他哥哥说： 我因为你到现在还没有功名，想要推荐来这里，帮助我分担公务，所以派人将你找来，没有别的意思。 
English: After a long, tearful conversation, his brother said, "I sent someone to find you because you haven't done anything yet, and I wanted to recommend you to come here and help me with my duties. I didn't have any other intention.

古文：少殷时新婚，恳不愿住。
现代文：薛少殷那时刚刚结婚，恳求不要让他来。
English: Xue Shaoying had just got married at the time and begged him not to come.

古文：兄曰： 吾同院有王判官，职居西曹。
现代文：他哥哥说： 我同院有个王判官，职位在西曹。
English: His brother said: I have a magistrate in the same court, the position is in Xizhao.

古文：汝既来此，可以一谒而去。 
现代文：你既然到此，可以拜见他以后再走。 
English: Since you're here, you can see him before you leave.

古文：乃命少殷于西院见之，接待甚厚。
现代文：于是让薛少殷在西院拜见了王判官。
English: So he had Xue Shaoyin visit Wang Gangjun in the Western Courthouse.

古文：俄闻备馔，海陆毕备。
现代文：王判官热情款待薛少殷，一会儿，就准备好了酒菜，山珍海味都有。
English: Judge Wang warmly entertained Xue Shaoying, and in a short time, the wine and dishes were ready, including mountain delicacies and seafood.

古文：未食，王判官忽起，顾见向者持塔僧。
现代文：没等吃，王判官忽然站了起来，扭头看见手里拿着宝塔的和尚。
English: Without waiting to eat, Wang Jianjun suddenly stood up, turned his head and saw a monk holding a pagoda in his hand.

古文：僧曰： 不可食，食之则无由归矣。 少殷曰： 饥甚，奈何？ 
现代文：和尚对薛少殷说： 不能吃，吃了就没有办法回去了。 薛少殷说： 饿得厉害，怎么办？ 
English: The monk said to Xue Shaoying, "If you can't eat, there's no way you can go back." Xue Shaoying said, "I'm so hungry, what should I do?"

古文：僧曰： 唯蜜煎姜可食。 
现代文：和尚说： 只有蜂蜜煎姜片可以吃。 
English: Monk said: Only honey fried ginger slices can be eaten.

古文：乃取食之。
现代文：于是薛少殷拿过来吃了。
English: So Xue Shaoyin took it and ate it.

古文：而王判官竟不至。
现代文：和尚说： 可以走了。 
English: The monk said, "You may go."

古文：僧曰： 可去矣。 
现代文：薛少殷起身准备走，哭着请求哥哥让他回去。
English: Xue Shaoying got up to leave, crying and begging his brother to let him go back.

古文：少殷复出，诣兄泣，且请去。
现代文：他哥哥知道无法挽留，便带他走进自己的府内，同意他回去。
English: His brother knew he couldn't keep him, so he took him into his house and agreed to let him go back.

古文：兄知不可留，乃入白官府，许之。少殷曰： 既得归人间，愿知当为何官？ 
现代文：薛少殷说： 既然能回人间，我想知道我将来能当什么官？ 他哥哥说： 这个不能随便说出来，你知道又有什么用！ 
English: Xue Shaoying said, "Since I can return to the human world, I want to know what kind of official I can be in the future." His brother said, "You can't just say this, you know, what's the use?"

古文：兄曰： 此甚难言，亦何用知之？ 恳请，乃召一吏，取籍寻阅，不令见之。
现代文：薛少殷一再恳求，他哥哥便叫来一个差人，取来名册翻阅寻找，却不让他看。
English: Xue Shaoyin pleaded again and again, and his brother called a policeman to take the roster and look for it, but did not let him see it.

古文：曰： 汝后年方成名，初任当极西得之，次历畿赤簿尉，又一官极南。此外吾不得知。 
现代文：然后对他说： 你后年才能考中功名，一开始当的官在很远的西方，以后在京城任赤簿尉。然后又当官去很远的南方，再往后我就不知道了。 
English: Then he said to him, "You will only be able to pass the middle school examination next year. In the beginning, you were an official in the far west, and later you were a Red Book officer in Beijing. Then you became an official in the far south, and after that I don't know.

古文：临别，兄曰： 吾旧使祗承人李俊，令随汝去。有危急，即可念之。 
现代文：临分手时，他哥哥又说： 我原来的衙役叫李俊，叫他跟你去，有危急的时候需要保护，你就叫他。 
English: When they were about to part, his brother also said: My former bodyguard's name is Li Jun, ask him to go with you. If you need protection in a crisis, call him.

古文：既去，每遇危际，皆见其僧前引。
现代文：薛少殷告别哥哥往回走，每当遇到危难之时，都看见那个和尚在前面引路。
English: Xue Shaoying said goodbye to his brother and walked back. Whenever he encountered a crisis, he saw the monk leading the way.

古文：少殷曰： 弟子素不相识，和尚何乃见护如此？ 
现代文：薛少殷说： 我与你素不相识，和尚为什么这样保护我？ 
English: Xue Shaoyin said, "I have never met you, why does the monk protect me like this?"

古文：僧曰： 吾为汝持金刚经，故相护尔。 
现代文：和尚说： 我负责超度你，所以保护你。 
English: The monk said, "I am in charge of you, so I will protect you."

古文：既醒，具述其事。
现代文：随即薛少殷醒了，对别人讲了所梦到的事。
English: Soon after, Xue Shaoyin woke up and told others about the dream.

古文：后年春，果及第。
现代文：后年春天，他果然考中成名。
English: In the spring of the following year, he became famous in the middle school entrance examination.

古文：秩满，遇赵昌为安南节度，少殷与之有旧，求为从事，欲厌极南之官。
现代文：不长时间，被任命为秘书省正字，被派做出使西边邻国的判官。回来后改任同官县主簿，任期满了，遇到赵昌被任命为安南节度使。薛少殷与他有老交情，求他帮忙，不想去很远的南方做官。
English: Not long after, he was appointed the secretary of the provincial party secretary, and was sent to be the judge of the neighboring countries in the west. After returning, he was transferred to be the chief official of the county. When his term of office was over, he met Zhao Chang, who was appointed as the Annan Festival envoy. Xue Shaoyin had an old friendship with him and asked him for help. He did not want to go to the far south to be an official.

古文：昌许之。曰： 乘递之镇，未暇有表。至江陵，当以表请。
现代文：赵昌答应了，说： 办理交接的时候，没有时间起草报告，到了江陵，我一定为你请示求情。 
English: Zhao Chang agreed and said, "When I was handling the handover, I didn't have time to draft a report. When I got to Jiangling, I will definitely ask for your forgiveness."

古文：及表至，少殷寻以丁母忧。
现代文：等到赵昌为他帮忙请示的时候，薛少殷的母亲去世了，他在家守丧。
English: By the time Zhao Chang asked for his help, Xue Shaoying's mother had passed away, and he was at home in mourning.

古文：服除，选授万年县尉。
现代文：等到服丧期满，被授予万年县尉。
English: When the mourning period was over, he was awarded the title of County Lieutenant for 10,000 years.

古文：时青淄卒吏与驸马家童斗死，京兆府不时奏。
现代文：后来，青衣兵丁与驸马家的僮仆打斗，将僮仆打死。京兆府不断将此事报告皇帝，德宗发怒。
English: Later, a soldier from Tsing Yi fought with a servant of the Tsushima family and killed him. The Kyosho government kept reporting the incident to the emperor, and Emperor Dezong became enraged.

古文：德宗赫怒，时少殷主贼曹一日，乃贬高州雷泽县尉。
现代文：这时恰巧薛少殷刚刚主持贼曹。一天，就被贬到南方的高州雷泽当县尉。
English: At this time, it just so happened that Xue Shaoyin had just presided over the Thief Cao. One day, he was demoted to the south of Gaozhou Leize as a county lieutenant.

古文：十余年备历艰苦，而李俊常有所护。
现代文：十多年受尽艰难，而李俊经常守护在他身边。
English: For more than ten years, he has suffered hardships, and Li Jun has always been by his side.

古文：及顺宗嗣位，有诏收录贬官，少殷移至桂阳，与贬官李定同行，过水勒马，与一从人言，即李俊也。
现代文：等到顺宗继位下诏书登记录用被贬的官员。薛少殷被调往桂阳，与另一名被贬的官员李定同行。在过一条河时，勒住马同一个随从说话，就是李俊。
English: After Shunzong's succession to the throne, an imperial edict was issued to record the names of officials who had been demoted. Xue Shaoying was transferred to Guiyang, where he accompanied another demoted official, Li Ding. When crossing a river, he stopped his horse to talk to a follower, Li Jun.

古文：云： 某月日已足，拜别而去。 
现代文：李俊说： 我跟随您的日期已满。 然后拜别而去。
English: Li Jun said: My date to follow you is over. Then he said goodbye and left.

古文：少殷曰： 吾兄言官止于此，李俊复去，将不久矣。 
现代文：薛少殷说： 我哥哥讲，我做官到此为止，李俊已经走了，我没有多长时间了。 
English: Xue Shaoying said: My brother said, I've been an official up to now, Li Jun has already left, I don't have much time left.

古文：李定惊惨其事，因问，具以告之。
现代文：李定觉得非常惊讶，问他什么原因。
English: Li Ding felt very surprised and asked him why.

古文：数日而卒。
现代文：薛少殷将事情的经过讲了。
English: Xue Shaoyin recounted the story.

古文：袁孝叔
现代文：过了不几天，薛少殷就死了。
English: A few days later, Xue Shaoying died.

古文：袁孝叔者，陈郡人也。少孤，事母以孝闻。
现代文：袁孝叔袁孝叔是陈郡人，幼年丧父，对待母亲很孝顺远近闻名。
English: Yuan Xiao's uncle Yuan Xiao's uncle was from Chen County. He lost his father at a young age and was known to be very filial to his mother.

古文：母尝得疾恍惚，逾日不痊。
现代文：他的母亲曾经得了一种病，神志恍惚，很多天也不好。
English: His mother had an illness, she was delirious, she was not well for many days.

古文：孝叔忽梦一老父谓曰： 子母疾可治。 
现代文：孝叔忽然梦见一个老头对他说： 你母亲的病能治好。 
English: Uncle Xiao suddenly dreamed that an old man said to him: Your mother's illness can be cured.

古文：孝叔问其名居，不告，曰： 明旦迎吾于石坛之上，当有药授子。 
现代文：孝叔问他叫什么名字，住在哪里，老头不告诉他，只对他说： 明天迎接我在石坛之上，我有药给你。 
English: His uncle asked him what his name was and where he lived. The old man did not tell him, but only said to him: "Meet me tomorrow on the stone altar. I have medicine for you."

古文：及觉，乃周览四境，所居之十里，有废观古石坛，而见老父在焉。
现代文：睡醒后，孝叔找遍了四周，在离家十里的地方，发现一座废道观，里面有座古石坛，真有个老头在石坛上。
English: After waking up, Uncle Xiao searched all around. At a place ten miles away from home, he found an abandoned Taoist temple with an ancient stone altar inside. There really was an old man on the stone altar.

古文：孝叔喜，拜迎至于家。
现代文：孝叔大喜，恭恭敬敬地将老头迎接回家。
English: The filial uncle was overjoyed and respectfully welcomed the old man home.

古文：即于囊中取九灵丹一丸，以新汲水服之，即日而瘳。
现代文：老头从口袋里拿出一丸九灵丹，让孝叔的母亲用新汲的水送下，第二天孝叔母亲的病就好了。
English: The old man took out a whole nine-leaf clover from his pocket and asked Xiao uncle's mother to send it down with freshly drawn water. The next day, Xiao uncle's mother's illness was cured.

古文：孝叔德之，欲有所答，皆不受。
现代文：孝叔对老头非常感激，想要送钱物来答谢老头，老头全都不要。
English: Uncle Xiao was very grateful to the old man. If he wanted to send money or something to thank the old man, the old man didn't want it at all.

古文：或累月一来，然不详其所止。
现代文：以后老头每个月来一次，然而不知道他住在什么地方。
English: After that, the old man came once a month, but he didn't know where he lived.

古文：孝叔意其能历算爵禄，常欲发问，而未敢言。
现代文：孝叔认为他能推算人的命运，常常想问他，但是一直没敢开口。
English: Uncle Xiao thought he could predict people's fates. He often wanted to ask him, but he never dared to speak up.

古文：后一旦来而谓孝叔曰： 吾将有他适，当与子别。 
现代文：一天老头来了后对孝叔说： 我要到别的地方去了，从此与你分别。 
English: One day, the old man came and said to Uncle Xiao: "I'm going somewhere else, and I'm separating from you.

古文：于怀中出一编书以遗之。曰： 君之寿与位，尽具于此。事以前定，非智力所及也。今之躁求者，适足徒劳耳。
现代文：然后从怀里取出一卷书递给孝叔，说： 你的寿命和功名全写在里面，事情都是一定的，现在世上那些急于求成的人，注定是徒劳的。
English: Then he took out a book from his arms and handed it to Uncle Xiao, saying, "Your life span and achievements are all written in it. Everything is predetermined. Those in the world who are in a hurry to achieve something are doomed to futility.

古文：君藏吾此书，慎勿预视。但受一命，即开一幅。
现代文：你收藏我这本书，小心不要事先翻看，每得到一次任命，便打开一页。
English: If you keep my book, be careful not to look through it beforehand, and open a page every time you get an appointment.

古文：不尔，当有所损。 
现代文：不然，对你不利。 
English: If you don't, it will be to your detriment.

古文：孝叔跪受而别。
现代文：孝叔跪下接受赠书后，就和老头分手了。
English: After Uncle Xiao knelt down to accept the gift book, he broke up with the old man.

古文：后孝叔寝疾，殆将不救。其家或问后事。
现代文：一次，孝叔得病卧床，似乎无法医治了，家里人问他如何安排后事？
English: Once, when Xiao Uncle was bedridden with an illness that seemed incurable, his family asked him how he planned to deal with the aftermath.

古文：教叔曰： 吾为神人授书一编，未曾开卷，何遽以后事问乎？ 
现代文：孝叔说： 我有神仙传授的一卷书，未曾开卷，何必着急问死后的事呢？ 
English: Uncle Xiao said, "I have a book that was taught to me by the gods, but I haven't opened it yet. Why should I be in a hurry to ask about what happens after death?"

古文：旬余，其疾果愈。
现代文：十多天以后病果然好了。
English: After more than ten days, the illness was cured.

古文：后孝叔以门荫调授密州诸城县尉，五转蒲州临晋县令。
现代文：后来，孝叔靠家族的影响，当上了密州诸城县尉，经过五次调动，做了蒲州临晋县令。
English: Later, relying on the influence of his family, Uncle Xiao became the lieutenant of Zhucheng County, Mizhou, and after five transfers, he became the county magistrate of Linjin County, Puzhou.

古文：每之任，辄视神人之书，时日无差谬。
现代文：每次接受新的任命，总是看一看神仙留下的书，书中所写的时日和实际毫无差错。
English: Every time I accept a new appointment, I always take a look at the book left by the immortal, and there is no error in the time and reality written in the book.

古文：后秩满，归阌乡别墅，因晨起，欲就中栉，忽有物坠于镜中，类蛇而有四足。
现代文：后来任期满了，孝叔回归阌乡别墅居住。一天早晨起床，刚要梳头，忽然有一个东西掉到镜子上，像是一条蛇却有四只脚，孝叔受惊吓摔倒在地上。
English: Later, when his term of office was over, he returned to live in a villa in his hometown. One morning, he got up and was just about to comb his hair when something suddenly fell onto the mirror. It looked like a snake, but it had four legs. He was startled and fell to the ground.

古文：孝叔惊仆于地，因不语，数日而卒。
现代文：之后他便不会说话，没有几天就死了。
English: He couldn't speak after that and died a few days later.

古文：后逾月，其妻因阅其笥，得老父所留之书，犹余半轴。
现代文：过了一个月，孝叔的妻子整理他的遗物，发现了老头留下的书，似乎还有半卷没有翻看过。
English: After a month, Uncle Xiao's wife sorted through his belongings and found a book left behind by the old man. It seemed that there was still half a volume that he had not read.

古文：因叹曰： 神人之言，亦有诬矣。书尚未尽，而人已亡。 
现代文：因此而感叹地说： 神仙说的话，也有不准的时候，书还没看完，而人就死了。 
English: Therefore, he lamented, "There are times when the words spoken by the gods are not accurate, and people die before they have finished reading the book."

古文：乃开视之，其后唯有空纸数幅，画一蛇盘镜中。
现代文：于是翻开书看，见到后半部只有几幅空纸，上面画着一条盘在镜子上的蛇。
English: So he opened the book and saw only a few empty pages in the second half, on which was drawn a snake on a mirror.

