古文：于昶裴宣礼吴思玄银山老人崔文简姚待吕文展长安县系囚李虚卢氏陈利宾王宏田氏
现代文：于昶裴宣礼吴思玄银山老人崔文简姚待吕文展长安县系囚李虚卢氏陈利宾王宏田氏
English: Wu Sigen, the old man of Yinshan, Cui Wenjian, Yao Zhi, Lvwen Zhan, the director of An County, Li Hulu, the prisoner of the lineage, Chen Libin, Wang Hongda

古文：于昶
现代文：于昶
English: Yu Zhen

古文：唐于昶，天后朝任并州录事参军。
现代文：唐朝的于昶，天后朝时任并州录事参军。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, it was Yu Yao, and in the Later Tang Dynasty, it was Zhou Luo Ji who joined the army.

古文：每至一更后，即喘息流汗，二更后愈。
现代文：每当到了一更之后，就喘息流汗；二更后就好了。
English: Every time I got to the first one, I was panting and sweating; after the second one, I was fine.

古文：妻柳氏将召医工，昶密曰： 自无他苦，但昼决曹务，夜判冥司，事力不任身。 
现代文：他的妻子柳氏要找个医生，于昶却神秘地说： 我并没有更多的苦痛。只是白天做官府的事，晚上做冥司的事，有些力不胜任罢了。 
English: His wife, Ms. Liu, wanted to find a doctor, but Yu Yao said mysteriously, "I don't have any more pain. It's just that I'm not competent enough to do the things of the government during the day and the things of the dead at night."

古文：每知有灾咎，即阴为之备，都不形言，凡六年。
现代文：每当知道有灾害和过失，就暗中事先做准备，表面上都不说，一共过了六年。
English: Whenever they knew of disasters and mistakes, they secretly prepared in advance, and did not say anything on the surface. A total of six years have passed.

古文：后丁母艰，持金刚经，更不复为冥吏，因极言此功德力，令子孙讽转。
现代文：以后他的母亲死去了，他开始念金刚经，再不去做冥司的官吏了。极力地说这是功德的力量。并让他的子孙诵读经书。
English: After his mother died, he began to recite the Diamond Sutra and no longer wanted to be an official of the Nether Realm. He insisted that it was the power of merit. He also had his children and grandchildren recite scriptures.

古文：后为庆州司马，年八十四，将终，忽闻异香，非代所有，谓左右曰： 有圣人迎我往西方。 
现代文：以后做了庆州司马，年龄八十四岁，将要死，忽然闻到奇异的香味，并不是平时有过的。他对左右的人说： 有圣人迎接我到西方去。 
English: Later he became the Gyeongju Sima. He was eighty-four years old and about to die. Suddenly, he smelled a strange fragrance, something he had never smelled before. He said to the people around him, "A saint is greeting me to go to the West."

古文：唐裴宣礼。
现代文：说完就死了。裴宣礼
English: After saying this, he died.

古文：天后朝为地官侍郎，常持金刚经。坐事被系，宣礼忧迫，唯至心念经，枷锁一旦自脱。
现代文：唐朝的裴宣礼，天后朝时做了地官侍郎。常念金刚经，犯了罪被抓入狱，宣礼忧愁急迫，只诚心念经。一天枷锁自己脱落。
English: Bae Xuanli of the Tang Dynasty, became a local official's attendant in the late Qing Dynasty. Often recited the Diamond Sutra, committed a crime and was arrested, recited the sutra with sorrow and urgency, and sincerely recited the sutra. One day, the shackles fell off.

古文：推官亲访之，遂得雪免。
现代文：推官亲自来问他，得到免罪。
English: The magistrate came to question him in person and he was exonerated.

古文：御史任植同禁，亦念经获免。
现代文：御史任植也一起被监禁，也因念金刚经而获免。
English: Goshi Rinzai was also imprisoned, but was also released for reciting the Diamond Sutra.

古文：吴思玄
现代文：吴思玄
English: Wu Shixuan

古文：唐吴思玄，天后朝为太学博士，信释氏。
现代文：唐代吴思玄，天后朝中做了太学博士，信佛教，每天念两遍金刚经。
English: Wu Shixuan of the Tang Dynasty, who became a doctor of science in the late Qing Dynasty, believed in Buddhism and read the Diamond Sutra twice a day.

古文：持金刚经日两遍，多有灵应。后稍怠，日夜一遍。
现代文：很有灵验。后来，他就松懈了，每天每夜只念一遍。
English: It was very effective. Later, he slacked off and only read it once every day and night.

古文：思玄在京病，有巫褚细儿言事如神，星下祈祷。
现代文：思玄病在京城，有一个巫婆叫褚细儿的料事如神，她正在星下祈祷时。
English: In the capital of China, there is a witch named Juxiel, who is said to be a god. She is praying under the stars.

古文：思玄往就见，细儿惊曰： 公有何术，鬼见皆走？ 
现代文：思玄诚心念经，三天后哥哥的病好了。思玄曾在渭桥上看见一个老人。
English: Sigen sincerely recited the sutra, and three days later his brother's illness was cured. Sigen once saw an old man on the bridge.

古文：思玄私负于渭桥见一老人，年八十余，著粗服，问之，曰： 为所生母服。 
现代文：年龄八十多岁。穿着粗麻布的衣服，就问他，他回答说： 是为我的生母穿孝服。 
English: He was in his eighties and was dressed in a burlap sack. When asked, he replied, "I'm wearing it for my birth mother."

古文：思玄怪之，答曰： 母年四十三时，有异僧教云： 汝欲长寿否？
现代文：思玄感到很奇怪。他回答说， 母亲在四十三岁的时候，有一个怪和尚教导说： 你想长寿吗？
English: Si Xuan felt very strange. He replied, "When my mother was forty-three years old, a strange monk taught her: 'Do you want to live a long life?

古文：但念金刚经。 
现代文：只要念金刚经。 
English: Just recite the Diamond Sutra.

古文：母即发心，日念两遍，终一百七。
现代文：母亲就下决心，每天念经两遍。死时已经一百○七岁了。
English: My mother made up her mind to recite the sutras twice a day. She was 107 years old when she died.

古文：姨及邻母诵之，并过百岁。今遵母业。已九十矣。 
现代文：姨母及邻家的老婆婆诵读真经，也都活到百岁，现在我仍继承母亲的遗业，已经活了九十岁了。
English: My aunt and my neighbor's grandmother both lived to be 100 years old. Now I am still carrying on my mother's legacy and have already reached the age of 90.

古文：银山老人
现代文：银山老人
English: The Silver Mountain Old Man

古文：饶州银山，采户逾万，并是草屋。
现代文：饶州银山，采矿的人家超过一万户，并且住的都是草房。
English: In Raozhou Yinshan, there are more than ten thousand mining households, and they all live in grass houses.

古文：延和中火发，万室皆尽，唯一家居中，火独不及。
现代文：唐睿宗延和年间起火。一万家都被烧毁，只有一家住在中间，火唯独不烧他家。
English: Tang Ruizong started a fire in the Yanhe era. Ten thousand houses were burned, only one lived in the middle, the fire only did not burn his house.

古文：时本州杨体几自问老人，老人对曰： 家事佛持金刚经。 
现代文：当时本州的杨体几自己去问老人，老人回答说： 家里信佛念金刚经。 
English: At that time, a few Yangtie people in Honshu went to ask the old man themselves, and the old man replied: The family believes in Buddhism and recites the Diamond Sutra.

古文：崔文简
现代文：崔文简
English: Cui Wenjian

古文：唐崔文简，先天中任坊州司马。属吐蕃奄至州城，同被驱掠，锁械甚严。
现代文：唐朝崔文简，唐玄宗先天年中任坊州司马，原附属于唐朝的吐蕃人掩袭州城，一起被俘虏。用枷锁紧紧地锁上。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Cui Wenjian and Tang Xuanzong were appointed as the provincial governors of Fangzhou the day before yesterday. The Tubo people, who were originally affiliated with the Tang Dynasty, attacked the provincial capital and were captured together. They were tightly locked with shackles.

古文：至心念经，三日，锁忽自开。
现代文：崔文简诚心念经，三天后，枷锁忽然自己开了。
English: Cui Wenzhen sincerely recited the sutra, and three days later, the shackles suddenly opened by themselves.

古文：虏疑有奸，棰挞，具以实对。
现代文：抓的人疑心他有诈，就用棍子拷打他。
English: The arresting officer suspected him of cheating and beat him with a stick.

古文：问曰： 汝有何术？ 答云： 念金刚经。 
现代文：他把情况如实说了，又问他： 你有什么本领？ 回答说： 念金刚经。 
English: He told the truth about the situation and asked him, "What skills do you have?" He replied, "Reciting the Diamond Sutra."

古文：复令锁之，念未终又解。
现代文：于是又叫人再给他锁上让他念，结果经未念完，枷锁又自己开了。
English: So he asked someone to lock him up again so that he could read it. As a result, he did not finish reading it, and the shackles opened by themselves.

古文：众皆叹异，遂送出境。
现代文：大家都非常惊异，于是就释放他，送他出境。
English: Everyone was very surprised, so they released him and sent him abroad.

古文：姚待
现代文：姚待
English: Yao Zhitong

古文：唐姚待，梓州人，常持金刚经，并为母造一百部。
现代文：唐朝人姚待，是梓州人。常常念金刚经。并为他的母亲写了一百部。
English: The Tang Dynasty's Yao Jidi, a native of Zizhou, often recited the Diamond Sutra and wrote a hundred copies of it for his mother.

古文：忽有鹿驯戏，见人不惊，犬亦不吠，逡巡自去。
现代文：忽然有一只鹿玩耍嬉戏，看见人也不惊慌。狗也不叫，徘徊而去。
English: Suddenly, there was a deer playing. It didn't panic when it saw a person. The dog didn't bark, but wandered away.

古文：有人宰羊，呼待同食，食了即死。
现代文：有一个人杀羊，叫姚待一起吃，吃了之后姚待就死了。
English: A man killed a sheep and asked Yao Jie to eat it with him. After eating it, Yao Jie died.

古文：使者引去，见一城门上有额，遂令入见王。
现代文：见一使者引他进去，看见一城门上有匾额，就让他进入拜见阎王。
English: Seeing a messenger leading him in, and a sign on one of the gates, he let him in to see the king of hell.

古文：王呼何得食肉，待云： 虽则食肉，比元持经。 
现代文：阎王大声吆喝为什么要吃肉。姚待说： 虽然吃肉，我原来还是念经的。 
English: Yan Wang shouted loudly, "Why do you want to eat meat?" Yao Ji said, "Although I eat meat, I used to recite scriptures."

古文：王称善，曰： 既能持经，何不断肉？ 
现代文：阎王称好说： 既然能念经，为什么不戒掉肉呢？ 
English: Yan Wang was pleased and said, "Since you can recite scriptures, why don't you give up meat?"

古文：遂得生，为母写经。
现代文：于是他又复生，继续为母亲写经书。
English: So he came back to life and continued to write scriptures for his mother.

古文：有屠儿李回奴请一卷，焚香供养。回奴死后，有人见于冥间，枷锁自脱，亦生善道。
现代文：有一个屠夫叫李回奴的请去一卷，烧香供奉，回奴死后，有人在冥间看见他，枷锁是自己脱落的，也托生到好去处了。
English: There was a butcher who asked Li Huisong to please go and make a roll, burn incense and offer it. After Huisong's death, someone saw him in the netherworld. The shackles had come off by themselves, and they were taken to a good place.

古文：吕文展
现代文：吕文展
English: Lu Wenxuan

古文：唐吕文展，开元三年任阆中县丞，雅好佛经，尤专心持诵金刚经，至三万余遍，灵应奇异。
现代文：唐朝的吕文展，开元三年任阆中县丞。爱好佛经。更专心诵读金刚经，达三万多遍，特别有灵验。
English: Lu Wenxuan of the Tang Dynasty, in the third year of the first century, he was appointed as the county magistrate of Yuzhong County. He loved Buddhist scriptures. He also devoted himself to reciting the Diamond Sutra more than thirty thousand times, which was particularly effective.

古文：年既衰暮，三牙并落，念经恳请，牙生如旧。
现代文：年龄已经老了，三颗牙一齐脱落。就念真经恳切请求。结果牙长得象以前一样。
English: When he was old, all three of his teeth fell out at the same time. He prayed earnestly and earnestly. As a result, his teeth grew as before.

古文：在阆中时，属亢旱，刺史刘浚令祈雨，仅得一遍，遂获沛然。
现代文：在阆中时，连年大旱，刺吏刘浚命令祈雨，他只念了一遍经书，就下了大雨。
English: When he was in middle school, there was a severe drought for several years. Liu Jun, a thornbill, ordered him to pray for rain. He only read the scripture once, and then it rained heavily.

古文：又若霖潦，别驾使祈晴，应时便霁。前后证验非一，不能遍举。
现代文：又一次苦于雨大水涝，别驾让他祈求天晴，结果立刻便雨停天晴，前后验证了不只一次，不能一一列举。
English: Once again suffering from heavy rain and floods, don't let him pray for a sunny day. As a result, the rain immediately stopped and the weather cleared. This has been verified more than once, and cannot be enumerated.

古文：长安县系囚
现代文：长安县系囚
English: Chang'an County Detainees

古文：唐长安县死囚，入狱后四十余日，诵金刚经不辍口。临决脱枷，枷头放光，长数十丈，照耀一县。
现代文：唐朝长安县犯死罪的囚犯，入狱后四十多天，诵金刚经而不停口，等临到处决时枷锁自己脱落，枷锁头放出光，长达几十丈，照耀着整个县城。
English: The prisoners who committed capital crimes in Chang'an County during the Tang Dynasty recited the Diamond Sutra without stopping for more than forty days after being imprisoned. When they were about to be executed, their shackles fell off, and the shackle head emitted light, which was several tens of meters long and shone throughout the county.

古文：县令奏闻，玄宗遂释其罪。
现代文：县令上奏皇上，玄宗就下令免除他的刑罚。
English: The prefectural order was reported to the emperor, and Emperor Xuanzong ordered that he be exempted from punishment.

古文：李虚
现代文：李虚
English: Li Xiu

古文：唐开元十五年，有敕天下村坊佛堂；小者并拆除，功德移入侧近佛寺；堂大者，皆令闭封。
现代文：唐玄宗开元十五年，皇帝下令天下的村坊佛堂：小的全部拆除，功德移记到附近的佛寺里。佛堂大的，都令其关闭。
English: In the fifteenth year of the reign of Emperor Tang Xuan Zong, the emperor ordered the demolition of all Buddhist temples in villages around the world: all the small ones were demolished, and their merits were transferred to nearby Buddhist temples. The large Buddhist temples were ordered to be closed.

古文：天下不信之徒，并望风毁拆，虽大屋大像，亦残毁之。
现代文：天下不信佛的人，都闻风而动纷纷拆毁佛堂，即使是大庙和大佛像，也被拆毁。
English: People who don't believe in Buddhism all over the world have moved to demolish Buddhist temples, even the Great Temple and the Great Buddha statue have been demolished.

古文：敕到豫州，新息令李虚嗜酒倔强，行事违戾，方醉而州符至，仍限三日报。
现代文：命令到了豫州，新息县令李虚嗜好喝酒性格倔强。做事暴戾，正喝醉酒而州符送到了，仍然限三天执行上报。
English: When the order arrived in Yuzhou, Xinxi County ordered Li Hui, who had a penchant for drinking and a stubborn personality. He was violent in his work, and was drunk when the certificate arrived. He was still limited to three days to submit the report.

古文：虚见大怒，便约胥正，界内毁拆者死。
现代文：李虚看见大怒。就告诉手下官吏，界内有敢拆毁佛堂的人处死。
English: Li Hui saw the fury and told his officials that anyone who dared to demolish the Buddhist temple would be put to death.

古文：于是一界并全。
现代文：因此一县之内的佛堂保全无损。
English: Therefore, the preservation of Buddhist temples within a prefecture is intact.

古文：虚为人，好杀愎戾，行必违道，当时非惜佛宇也，但以忿限故全之，全之亦不以介意。
现代文：李虚为人，好杀而刚愎暴戾，做事一定违背常理。当时并不是可惜佛宇的损害，只是因为限期太短而忿怒，就偏偏保全它。
English: Li Hui was a man with a penchant for killing and a violent temper, and his actions must have been contrary to common sense. At the time, he did not regret the damage to the Buddha, but he was angry because the deadline was too short, so he preserved it.

古文：岁余，虚病，数日死。
现代文：保全了佛宇，也不把它放在心上。过了一年多，李虚病了，几天后死了。
English: After more than a year, Li Yu fell ill and died a few days later.

古文：时正暑月，隔宿即敛。明日将殡，母与子绕棺哭之。夜久哭止，闻棺中若指爪戛棺声。
现代文：当时正赶上是暑天，隔一天就入殓了，第二天将要出殡，母亲和儿子围着棺材哭他，夜深哭声停止了，听到棺材里象指爪敲打棺材的声音。
English: At that time, it was just in time for the hot weather, the coffin would be buried the next day, and the funeral would be held the next day. The mother and son cried around the coffin. In the dead of night, the crying stopped, and they heard the sound of the coffin beating the coffin like fingernails.

古文：初疑鼠，未之悟也。
现代文：起初疑心是老鼠，没有注意。
English: At first the suspicion was mice, not attention.

古文：斯须增甚，妻子惊走。母独不去，命开棺。左右曰： 暑月恐坏。 
现代文：不一会声音更强，妻子惊慌而跑，唯独母亲不走，叫打开棺材，左右的人说： 暑天恐怕尸已烂。 
English: After a while, the noise got louder and louder. My wife panicked and ran, but my mother didn't leave. She called for the coffin to be opened, and people around her said, "I'm afraid the corpse has rotted in the heat."

古文：母怒，促开之，而虚生矣。
现代文：母亲发怒，催促打开棺材，而李虚复活了。
English: Her mother became angry and urged the coffin to be opened, and Li Xiu came back to life.

古文：身颇疮烂，于是浴而将养之，月余平复。
现代文：身上好象长了很多烂疮，于是洗了澡并且好好地调养。一个多月才恢复起来。
English: He seemed to have a lot of sores on his body, so he took a shower and took care of himself. It took him more than a month to recover.

古文：虚曰：初为两卒拘至王前，王不在，见阶前典吏，乃新息吏也，亡经年矣。
现代文：李虚说：当初被两个士兵抓到阎王面前。阎王不在，去见阶前的典使，原来是新息县的官吏。
English: Li Xiu said: At first, he was caught by two soldiers and brought before the king of hell. When the king of hell was not there, he went to see the envoy in front of him, who turned out to be an official from Xinxi County.

古文：见虚拜问曰： 长官何得来？ 虚曰： 适被录而至。 
现代文：死了近一年了，看见李虚拜见并问他： 你怎么来的？ 李虚说： 刚被招来的。 
English: He had been dead for nearly a year when he saw Li Xiu coming to see him and asked him, "How did you come here?" Li Xiu said, "I was just called here."

古文：吏曰： 长官平生，唯以杀害为心，不知罪福，今当受报，将若之何！ 
现代文：官吏说： 长官平生，只是以杀人害人为快，不知道是不是可负罪乞福？今天应当受到报应，这可怎么办？ 
English: The official said: "In your whole life, you've only enjoyed killing and harming people. Don't you know that you could be held guilty? Today, you should be punished. What should you do?

古文：虚闻惧，请救之。吏曰： 去岁拆佛堂，长官界内独全，此功德弥大。长官虽死，亦不合此间追摄。
现代文：李虚听到后感到害怕，请求救他，官吏说： 去年拆佛堂，唯独长官你的界内的佛堂保全了，这个功德最大，你虽然死了，也不应由这里来拘你。
English: After hearing this, Li Xiu felt scared and asked for help. The official said, "Last year, a Buddhist temple was demolished. However, the prefect alone preserved the Buddhist temple within your jurisdiction. This is the greatest merit. Even though you are dead, you should not be detained from here."

古文：少间王问，更勿多言，但以此对。 
现代文：过了一会阎王审问时，不要多说别的，只是讲这件事。 
English: When you are interrogated by the king of hell after a while, don't talk about anything else, just talk about this.

古文：虚方忆之，顷王坐。主者引虚见王，王曰： 索李明府善恶簿来。 
现代文：李虚正想怎么说时，一会阎王坐下，主管的人领李虚见阎王，王说： 拿李明府的善恶簿子来！ 
English: When Li Xizheng was trying to decide what to say, the king of hell sat down for a while. The person in charge took Li Xizheng to see the king of hell. The king said, "Bring the book of good and evil from Li Mingfu!"

古文：即有人持一通案至，大合抱，有二青衣童子亦隧文案。
现代文：就有一个人拿一通卷案，有一大抱。又有二个青衣童子跟随着。
English: There was one person with a case and a big arm, and two boys in blue followed.

古文：王命启牍唱罪，阶吏读曰： 专好割羊脚。 
现代文：王命他们打开文案念罪。阶吏读到： 专门好割羊脚。 
English: The king ordered them to open the document and read the crime. The bailiff read: It is especially good for cutting the feet of sheep.

古文：吏曰： 合杖一百，仍割其身肉百斤。 
现代文：吏说： 应打一百棍，并割掉他身上的肉一百斤。 
English: And the officers said, He shall be beaten with a hundred stripes, and they shall take an hundred pounds of flesh out of him.

古文：王曰： 可令割其肉。 
现代文：王说： 可以开始割他的肉。 
English: And the king said, Let the cutting of his flesh begin.

古文：虚曰： 去岁有敕拆佛堂，毁佛像，虚界内独存之，此功德可折罪否？ 
现代文：李虚说： 去年有圣旨要拆毁佛堂，毁掉佛像。我的界内的佛堂独自保存下来，这个功德可以减轻罪过吗？ 
English: Li Hui said, "Last year, there was a sacred edict to demolish the Buddhist temple and destroy the Buddha statues. The Buddhist temple in my realm has been preserved by itself. Can this merit mitigate the sin?

古文：王惊曰： 审有此否？ 
现代文：王惊讶问道： 确有此事么？ 
English: Surprised, Wang asked: Is this really happening?

古文：吏曰： 无 。
现代文：官吏说： 没有记载。 
English: The official said: There is no record.

古文：新息吏进曰： 有福簿在天堂，可检之。 
现代文：新息县的官吏上前说： 有福簿在天堂，可以验证一下。 
English: An official from Xinxi County came forward and said, "The book of fortune is in heaven. You can verify it."

古文：王曰： 促检， 殿前垣南有楼数间，吏登楼检之，未至。
现代文：王说： 赶快验证！ 殿前墙南有几间楼房，官吏上楼去验证，还没有回来。
English: Wang said: Quickly verify! There are several buildings south of the front wall of the palace. The officials went upstairs to verify and have not yet returned.

古文：有二僧来至殿前，王问师何所有，一答曰： 常诵金刚经。 
现代文：这时有二个和尚来到殿前，王问师傅有什么功德，其中一个答道： 常诵金刚经。 
English: At this time, two monks came to the front of the hall. The king asked the master what his merits were, and one of them replied, "Chanting the Diamond Sutra."

古文：一曰： 常读金刚经。 
现代文：一个说： 常读金刚经。 
English: One said, "I often read the Diamond Sutra."

古文：王起合掌曰： 请法师登阶。 
现代文：王站起拍着手说： 请法师上来！ 
English: Wang stood up, clapped his hands and began to speak: "Mage, please come up!"

古文：王座之后，有二高座，右金左银，王请诵者坐金座，读者坐银座。
现代文：王的座位之后，又有二个高座，右边的是金的，左边的是银的。王请能诵金刚经的坐金座，读经的坐银座。
English: After the king's throne, there are two high seats. The one on the right is made of gold, and the one on the left is made of silver. The king should invite those who can recite the Diamond Sutra to sit on the gold seat, and those who can read the Sutra to sit on the silver seat.

古文：坐讫开经，王合掌听之。诵读将毕，忽有五色云至金座前，紫云至银座前，二僧乘云飞去，空中遂灭。
现代文：坐下之后打开经书，王合掌而听，诵读将要完了，忽然有五色祥云到金座前，紫色祥云到银座前。二位和尚乘云飞走，在空中消失了。
English: After sitting down, he opened the scripture book. Wang put his hands together and listened. He was about to finish reading. Suddenly, five-colored auspicious clouds appeared in front of the golden throne, and purple auspicious clouds appeared in front of the silver throne. The two monks flew away on the clouds and disappeared in the air.

古文：王谓阶下人曰： 见二僧乎？
现代文：王对阶下的人说： 看见两个和尚了吗？
English: The king said to his attendants, "Do you see the two monks?"

古文：皆生天矣！ 
现代文：都升天了。 
English: They're all going to heaven.

古文：于是吏检善簿至，唯一纸，因读曰： 去岁敕拆佛堂，新息一县独全，合折一生中罪，延年三十，仍生善道。 
现代文：这时官吏检验善事簿回来了，只有一张纸，于是读到： 去年下令拆毁佛堂，唯独新息一县保全了佛堂，应免去一生中的罪，延长寿命三十年，然后托生在好地方。 
English: At this time, the official's inspection of the good deed book came back, only a piece of paper, and then read: Last year ordered the demolition of the Buddhist temple, but Xinxi County preserved the Buddhist temple, should be exempted from the sin of life, extend life for thirty years, and then be born in a good place.

古文：言毕，罪簿轴中火出，焚烧之尽。
现代文：念完，罪簿轴中出火。把它烧尽。
English: After reading, a fire broke out in the shaft of the crime book. Burn it to the ground.

古文：王曰： 放李明府归。 
现代文：王说： 放李明府回去。 
English: Wang said: Let Li Mingfu go back.

古文：仍敕两吏送出城南门，见夹道并高楼大屋，男女杂坐，乐饮笙歌。虚好丝竹，见而悦之。
现代文：仍下令让两个官吏把他送出城南门。看见一夹道及高楼大屋，男女围坐，玩乐喝酒吹笙唱歌，李虚喜爱丝竹乐，看见了很高兴。
English: He still ordered two officials to escort him out of the south gate of the city. He was happy to see a road and a high-rise building, men and women sitting around, playing, drinking, bragging and singing. Li Xiu loved silk bamboo music.

古文：两吏谓曰： 急过此无顾，顾当有损。 
现代文：两个官吏对他说： 快过去此地，不要去管他们，管他们就要受害。 
English: Two officials said to him, "Hurry over here. Don't interfere with them. If you interfere with them, you will suffer."

古文：虚见饮处，意不能忍行，伫立观之。
现代文：李虚看见喝酒处，说什么也走不动了，站在那观看。
English: When Li Hui saw the drinking place, he could not move and stood there watching.

古文：店中人呼曰： 来 。
现代文：店中的人招呼道： 请进来！ 
English: The people in the store called out: Please come in!

古文：吏曰： 此非善处，既不相取信，可任去。 
现代文：官吏说： 这可不是个好地方，既然你不相信，随你去吧。 
English: The official said, "This is not a good place to be. Since you don't believe, go ahead."

古文：虚未悟，至饮处，人皆起，就坐，奏丝竹，酒至，虚酬酢毕，将饮之，乃一杯粪汁也，臭秽特甚。
现代文：李虚没有明白，到了饮酒处人都站起来。李虚便坐下，弹奏丝竹，酒拿来了，李虚回敬完毕，将要饮酒，却是一杯粪汁，特别臭。
English: Li Xiyu did not understand that when it came to drinking, everyone stood up. Li Xiyu then sat down, played silk bamboo, brought the wine, Li Xiyu finished bowing, was going to drink, but it was a cup of dung juice, very smelly.

古文：虚不肯饮，即有牛头狱卒，出于床下，以叉刺之，洞胸，虚遽连饮数杯，乃出。
现代文：李虚不肯喝，就有牛头卒从床底下出来，用叉刺他。在他的胸上刺一个窟窿。李虚立刻连喝几杯，才出来。
English: When Li Xiu refused to drink, a bulldog came out from under the bed and stabbed him with a fork, piercing a hole in his chest. Li Xiu immediately drank several cups before coming out.

古文：吏引虚南，入荒田小径中，遥见一灯炯然，灯旁有大坑，昏黑不见底，二吏推堕之，遂苏。
现代文：官吏领着李虚向南，进入荒野小道上，远远地看见有一盏灯亮着，灯旁有一个大坑。昏暗不见底。二个官吏推落他，于是李虚苏醒了。
English: The officials led Li Xiu to the south and onto the wilderness path. In the distance, he saw a light on and a large pit next to the light. The darkness was bottomless. Two officials pushed him down, and Li Xiu woke up.

古文：李虚素性凶顽，不知罪福，而被酒违戾，以全佛堂，明非己之本心也。然犹身得生天，火焚罪簿，获福若此，非为善之报乎！
现代文：李虚一向性格凶狠顽固，不知罪福，而喝酒违法，保全了佛堂，本不是他自己的本意，然而还得到复生，火烧他的罪簿，得到这样的福，难道不是行善的报应吗？
English: Li Hui has always been a fierce and stubborn character, unaware of his sins and blessings, but drinking alcohol illegally and preserving the Buddhist temple was not his original intention. However, he was revived, his criminal record was burned, and he received such a blessing. Isn't it the reward of doing good?

古文：与夫日夜精勤，孜孜为善，既持僧律，常行佛言，而不离生死，未之有也。
现代文：那么，日夜精心勤奋，孜孜不倦地做善事，既按和尚的戒律约束自己，又常常按佛祖的教导做事的人就必然会脱离生死，超然物外的。
English: Then, a person who is meticulously diligent day and night, tirelessly doing good deeds, and who not only restrains himself according to the precepts of the monk, but also often does things according to the teachings of the Buddha, will inevitably be free from life and death, and transcendent.

古文：卢氏
现代文：卢氏
English: Mr. Lu

古文：唐开元中，有卢氏者，寄住滑州。
现代文：唐玄宗开元年间，有一个姓卢的，寄住在滑州。
English: During the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty, there was a man surnamed Lu who stayed in Slanting.

古文：昼日闲坐厅事，见二黄衫人入门，卢问为谁，答曰： 是里正，奉帖追公。 
现代文：白天闲坐在厅堂中，看见二个穿黄衫的人进来。卢问是谁。答： 是里正，奉命拘你。 
English: Sitting idly in the hall during the day, he saw two men in yellow shirts enter. Lu asked who they were. Answer: Yes, Li Zheng, I have been ordered to detain you.

古文：卢甚愕然，问何故相追，因求帖观，见封上作卫县字，遂开，文字错谬，不复似人书，怪而诘焉。
现代文：卢非常惊恐，问什么原因来拘他，向他要帖子看。看见封上写卫县的字样，就打开，上面的文字错得很多，又不象是人写的。奇怪地问他。
English: Lu was very alarmed and asked why he was being detained and asked him to look at the envelope. When he saw the word "Weixian" written on the envelope, he opened it. The writing on it was very wrong and didn't look like it was written by a human. He questioned him strangely.

古文：吏言奉命相追，不知何故。
现代文：吏说奉命拘你，不知道是什么原因。
English: The officer said that he had been ordered to detain you, but he didn't know why.

古文：俄见马已备在阶下，不得已上马去。顾见其尸，坐在床上，心甚恶之。
现代文：不一会看见马已经在台阶下了，卢不得已上了马，回头看见他的尸体，坐在床上。心里非常厌恶。
English: After a while, he saw that the horse had already gone down the steps, so he had no choice but to mount the horse. He looked back and saw his dead body sitting on the bed. He was disgusted.

古文：仓卒之际，不知是死，又见马出不由门，皆行墙上，乃惊愕下泣，方知必死，恨不得与母妹等别。
现代文：急忙之际，不知道是死了，又看见马不从门走，都从墙上走，于是惊惧而泪下，才知道一定是死了，悔恨没有和母亲妹妹们告别。
English: When she was in a hurry, she didn't know if she was dead, and saw that the horses didn't go through the door, they all went through the wall, so she was frightened and cried, only to know that she must be dead, and regretted not saying goodbye to her mother and sisters.

古文：行可数十里，到一城，城甚壮丽。
现代文：走了几十里，到了一座城，城非常壮丽。
English: After walking for dozens of miles, we arrived at a city, a very magnificent city.

古文：问此何城，吏言乃王国，即追君所司。
现代文：问这是什么城，吏说是王国，就是主管拘你的。
English: Ask what city it is, and they will tell you that it is a kingdom.

古文：入城后，吏欲将卢见王。
现代文：进入城后，吏想要让卢去见阎王，从一个院子经过。
English: After entering the city, the officials wanted to let Lu go to see the king of hell, passing through a courtyard.

古文：经一院过，问此何院，吏曰： 是御史大夫院。 因问院大夫何姓名，云： 姓李名某。 卢惊喜，白吏曰： 此我表兄。 
现代文：问这是什么院。吏说： 这是御史大夫院 。又问院大夫的姓名，告诉他姓李名某。卢氏惊喜，告诉官吏说： 这是我的表兄。 
English: He asked what kind of hospital it was. The official said, "This is the Goshidaifu Hospital." He also asked the name of the hospital doctor and told him his surname was Li Na. Mr. Lu was surprised and told the official, "This is my cousin."

古文：令吏通刺，须臾便出，相见甚喜，具言平昔，延入坐语。
现代文：让官吏通报一下。不一会就出来了，两个人相见以后很高兴，都诉说着生平的事。又请他进去坐下谈话。
English: Let the official announce it. Soon he came out, the two were happy to see each other, and both talked about their lives. He was also invited to go in and sit down to talk.

古文：大夫谓曰： 弟之念诵，功德甚多，良由金刚经是圣教之骨髓，乃深不可思议功德者也。 
现代文：大夫对他说： 你念诵经书，功德很大。因为金刚经是佛教的精髓，是高深而不可思议的功德。 
English: The doctor said to him, "Your merit in reciting the Diamond Sutra is great, because the Diamond Sutra is the essence of Buddhism. It is a profound and incredible merit.

古文：卢初入院中，见数十人，皆是衣冠。其后太半系在网中，或无衣，或露顶。
现代文：卢氏初到院中，看见几十个人，都是穿衣戴帽的，他们的后面的人多半被扣在网中，有的没有穿衣，有的露出头顶。
English: When Mr. Lu first arrived at the hospital, he saw dozens of people, all dressed and wearing hats. Most of the people behind them were caught in the net, some without clothes, some with their heads exposed.

古文：卢问： 此悉何人？ 
现代文：卢氏问： 这些都是什么人？ 
English: Lu asked: Who are these people?

古文：云是阳地衣冠，网中悉缘罪重，弟若能为一说法，见之者悉得升天。遂命取高座，令卢升座诵金刚般若波罗密经，网中人已有出头者。
现代文：听到的人都能升天。于是叫拿出一个高座，让卢氏升坐吟诵金刚般若波罗密经。网中的人已经有露出头来的，念到一半之后，都从地上起来。
English: Anyone who hears it will be able to ascend to heaven. Therefore, they called for a high seat to be brought out, so that Lu could sit up and chant the Diamond Prajnaparamita Sutra. The people in the net had already uncovered their heads, and after half of the recitation, they all got up from the ground.

古文：及入谒见，王呼为法师，致敬甚厚。
现代文：有的肥衣大袖，有的乘车驾云，等吟诵完了，投生的人都散尽了。等进入拜见阎王，阎王称呼他法师，表示深厚的敬意。
English: Some wear fat clothes and big sleeves, and some ride in a chariot, and by the time they have finished chanting, all those who have been reincarnated have dispersed. They then go to see the king of hell, and the king of hell calls him mage, expressing his deep respect.

古文：王云： 君大不可思议，算又不尽，叹念诵之功。 
现代文：王说： 你太不可思议了。你的寿命又不尽，感叹念经的功劳。 
English: The king said: "You are so incredible. Your lifespan is not exhausted, and you lament the merit of reciting the sutras.

古文：寻令向吏送之回。
现代文：下令让官吏送他回去。
English: He was ordered to be taken back by officials.

古文：既至舍，见家人披头哭泣，尸卧地上，心甚恻然。
现代文：回到家里之后，看见家人披头哭泣，尸体躺在地上。心里非常悲伤。
English: After returning home, I saw my family members crying and the dead bodies lying on the ground. I felt very sad.

古文：俄有一婢从庭前入堂，吏令随上阶，及前，魂神忽已入体，因此遂活。
现代文：忽然有一个婢女从院子前进入厅堂。官吏让他随着上了台阶，到了跟前，魂魄忽然就进入尸体中，因此卢氏便复活了。
English: Suddenly, a servant girl entered the hall from the courtyard. The official asked him to follow her up the steps. When he reached her, the soul suddenly entered the corpse, and Lu Shi was revived.

古文：陈利宾
现代文：陈利宾
English: Chen Libin

古文：陈利宾者，会稽人，弱冠明经擢第。善属文，诗入《金门集》，释褐长城尉。
现代文：陈利宾是会稽人，不到二十岁时通经书选入科第，擅长写文章，诗编入《金门集》。任长城尉的官。
English: Chen Libin was an auditor of the association. When he was less than twenty years old, he was elected to the Science Division of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. He was good at writing articles, and his poems were included in the "Golden Gate Collection." He served as an officer of the Great Wall.

古文：少诵金刚经，每至厄难，多获其助。
现代文：他从小读金刚经，每当遇到危险困难，多次得到帮助。
English: He had been reading the Diamond Sutra since childhood, and whenever he encountered dangerous difficulties, he received help many times.

古文：开元中，宾自会稽江，行之东阳，会天久雨，江水弥漫，宾与其徒二十余船同发，乘风挂帆。
现代文：开元年间，利宾从会稽江坐船，走到东阳，正赶上下了好几天的雨，江水弥漫。利宾和他的旅伴二十多只船一齐出发，乘风挂帆。
English: During the first year of the year, Libin took a boat from Heji River to Dongyang. He was just catching up with the rain that had been falling for several days, and the river was full of water. Libin and his travel companions set out together in more than twenty boats, and sailed with the wind.

古文：须臾，天色昧暗，风势益壮，至界石窦上，水拥阏众流而下，波涛冲击，势不得泊。其前辈二十余舟，皆至窦口而败。
现代文：不一会，天色昏暗，风势更猛，行到界石窦，江水拥着这些船只顺流而下，波涛冲击，船无法靠岸，在他前面的二十多条船，都冲到窦口沉没了，利宾船上的摆船人吓坏了，利宾急忙吟诵金刚经。
English: After a while, the sky darkened, the wind became more violent, and they reached the boundary stone Dou, the river water swept these ships down the river, the waves hit, the ship could not dock, and more than twenty ships in front of him all rushed to Doukou and sank. The boatman on Libin's boat was frightened, and Libin hurriedly chanted the Diamond Sutra.

古文：舟人惧，利宾忙遽诵金刚经，至众流所，忽有一物，状如赤龙，横出扶舟，因得上。
现代文：到了前面那些船沉没的地方，忽然有一个东西，形状象一条赤龙，横出水面扶着船，船顺利地通过了。
English: When they reached the place where the previous boats had sunk, something shaped like a red dragon suddenly rose out of the water and supported the boat. The boat passed through the water smoothly.

古文：议者为诵经之功。
现代文：大家议论说这是吟诵金刚经的功劳。
English: Everyone said it was the merit of reciting the Diamond Sutra.

古文：王宏
现代文：王宏
English: Wang Hong

古文：王宏者，少以渔猎为事。
现代文：王宏，年少以打猎为生。
English: Wang Hong used to hunt for a living when he was young.

古文：唐天宝中，尝放鹰逐兔，走入穴。
现代文：唐代天宝年间，曾经放鹰去追兔，兔跑入一洞穴。
English: During the Tenpo era of the Tang Dynasty, an eagle was once released to chase a rabbit, and the rabbit ran into a cave.

古文：宏随探之，得金刚般若经一卷，自此遂不猎云。
现代文：王宏进洞去找，得到了一卷金刚般若经，从此就不再打猎了。
English: Wang Hong went into the cave to look for it, got a volume of the Diamond Prayer Book, and stopped hunting from then on.

古文：田氏
现代文：田氏
English: The Tian Clan

古文：易州参军田氏，性好畋猎，恒养鹰犬为事。
现代文：易州参军田氏，本性爱好打猎。长期饲养鹰狗为业。
English: Mr. Jianjun Tian from Yizhou likes hunting by nature. He has been raising eagles and hounds for a long time.

古文：唐天宝初，易州放鹰，于丛林棘上见一卷书，取视之，乃金刚经也。
现代文：唐朝天宝年初，在易州放鹰，在丛林的荆棘上看见一卷书。拿起来一看，是金刚经。
English: At the beginning of the Tang Dynasty's Tianbao, an eagle was released in Yizhou, and a book was seen on the thorns in the jungle. When I picked it up, I saw it was the Diamond Sutra.

古文：自尔发心持诵，数年，已诵二千余遍，然畋猎亦不辍。
现代文：从这开始发自内心地诵读，几年后已诵二千多遍了。然而打猎的事也未停止。
English: From then on, he began to recite it from the bottom of his heart, and after a few years he had recited it more than two thousand times. However, the hunting did not stop.

古文：后遇疾，暴卒数日，被追至地府，见诸鸟兽，周回数亩，从己徵命。
现代文：以后得了病，突然死了几天。被拘到地府中，看见许多的鸟兽，几亩地大的一大片，向着他讨命。
English: After that, he fell ill and died suddenly a few days later. He was detained in the underworld and saw many birds and beasts, a large area several acres in size, pleading for his life.

古文：顷之，随到见王，问罪何多也，田无以对。王令所由领往推问。
现代文：不一会，跟着见到了阎王，问罪有多少，田氏没有什么辩解的，阎王就命令领的人带去审问。
English: After a while, Yan Wang saw him and asked him how many crimes he had committed. Tian had nothing to say in his defense, so Yan Wang ordered his men to bring him in for questioning.

古文：其徒十人，至吏局，吏令启口，以一丸药掷口中，便成烈火遍身。
现代文：他的徒弟十人，到了官吏的地方，官吏命他们开口，把一丸药送到口中，就变成烈火烧遍全身。
English: When ten of his disciples arrived at the official's place, the official ordered them to open their mouths, put a pill in their mouths, and their whole bodies were consumed by fire.

古文：须臾灰灭，俄复成人，如是六七辈。
现代文：不一会成了一堆灰，一会又变成人。象这样六七个人。
English: One minute you're a pile of ashes, the next minute you're human again. Six or seven people like that.

古文：至田氏，累三丸而不见火状，吏乃怪之。
现代文：等到田氏，连给他吃三丸药而不见火发，官吏更感到奇怪，又领他去见阎王。
English: When they got to Mr. Tian, they even gave him three pills and he didn't get a fever. The officials were even more surprised and took him to see the king of hell.

古文：复引见王，具以实白，王问在生作何福业，田氏云： 初以畋猎为事。
现代文：把实情全部禀告。王问田氏在世作了什么福事。田氏说： 起初以打猎为生。 
English: The king asked what good deeds Mr. Tian had done in his life. Mr. Tian said: At first, he made a living from hunting.

古文：王重问，云： 在生之时，于易州棘上得金刚经，持诵已二千余遍。 
现代文：王又问，回答说： 在世时，在易州荆棘上得到金刚经，吟诵已经二千多遍了。 
English: The king asked again and replied, "During my lifetime, I obtained the Diamond Sutra from the thorns of Yizhou. I have recited it more than two thousand times.

古文：王云： 正此灭一切罪。 
现代文：阎王说： 正是这个才灭掉了你的一切罪过。 
English: The king of hell said, "This is what has wiped out all your sins."

古文：命左右检田氏福簿，还白如言。
现代文：于是命左右检查田氏的福簿。查后和说一样。
English: So he checked Mr. Tian's book of good luck. The result was the same.

古文：王自令田氏诵经，才三纸，回视庭中禽兽，并不复见。
现代文：阎王就命田氏诵读经书，才读了三页，再环视院子中的禽兽，都不见了。
English: The king of hell ordered Tian to recite the scripture, and he only read three pages before looking around at the animals in the courtyard. They were all gone.

古文：诵毕，王称美之，云： 诵二千遍，延十五年寿。 
现代文：读完后，阎王称赞他说： 背诵二千遍，延长寿命十五年。 
English: After reading it, Yan Wang praised him and said, "Recite it two thousand times to extend your life by fifteen years."

古文：遂得放还。
现代文：于是田氏被放回去复生了。
English: As a result, Mr. Tian was allowed to come back to life.

