古文：王立周绍为傅曰： 寡人始行县，过番吾，当子为子之时，践石以上者皆道子之孝。
现代文：赵武灵王立周绍为王子的傅佐之官，说： 寡人起初视察县邑，路过番吾，当时您还很年轻，比乘马石高的人都称道您的孝心。
English: Zhao Wuling Wang appointed Zhou Shao as the prince's Fu Zuo's official, saying: At the beginning, many people visited the county town and passed by Fanu. At that time, you were still very young, and people higher than Ma Shi praised your filial piety.

古文：故寡人问子以璧，遗子以酒食，而求见子。
现代文：所以寡人把玉壁馈赠给您，把酒食赠予您，而要求拜见您。
English: That's why so many people give you gifts of jade walls, give you gifts of wine and food, and ask to see you.

古文：子谒病而辞。
现代文：可是您托病推辞了。
English: But you declined, citing illness.

古文：人有言子者曰： 父之孝子，君之忠臣也。 
现代文：有人谈论您说： 父亲的孝子，是君王的忠臣。 
English: It has been said of you, "A father's son is a king's son."

古文：故寡人以子之知虑，为辩足以道人，危足以持难，忠可以写意，信可以远期。
现代文：所以寡人认为您的智谋巧言完全可以引导别人，纯正的为人完全可以扶助危难，忠诚可以表露心意，守信可以长久不变。
English: Therefore, many people think that your wit and clever words can completely guide others, a pure person can completely help in times of danger, loyalty can show your heart, and trustworthiness can remain unchanged for a long time.

古文：诗云 服难以勇，治乱以知，事之计也。
现代文：逸诗说： 用勇气征服困难，用智慧治理动乱，这是对事情谋划的结果。
English: Yishi said: Conquering difficulties with courage, governing turmoil with wisdom, this is the result of planning things.

古文：立傅以行，教少以学，义之经也。
现代文：设立辅佐之官根据品行，教导年轻人依靠学问，这是仁义的规范。
English: It is the norm of benevolence and righteousness to establish assistant officials according to moral conduct and to teach young people to rely on learning.

古文：循计之事，失而累；访议之行，穷而不忧。 
现代文：遵循计谋办的事情，失败了而没有负担，经过咨询议沦的行动，处于困境而不忧愁。 
English: To follow a well-planned course of action, to fail without burden, to act after consultation, to be in a predicament without grief.

古文：故寡人欲子之胡服以傅王乎。 
现代文：所以寡人想让您穿上胡服辅佐王子。 
English: That's why so many people want you to put on the uniform of an assistant prince.

古文：周绍曰： 王失论矣，非贱臣所敢任也。 
现代文：周绍说： 大王选择有失，不是臣下所敢担任的职务。 
English: Zhou Shao said: The great king made a wrong choice, and it is not a position that a vassal dares to hold.

古文：王曰： 选子莫若父，论臣莫若君。
现代文：赵武灵王说： 挑选儿子没有谁能赶得上父亲，选择臣子没有谁能赶得上国君。
English: King Zhao Wuling said: No one can catch up with his father in choosing a son, and no one can catch up with the sovereign in choosing a vassal.

古文：君，寡人也。 
现代文：国君就是我。 
English: I am the sovereign.

古文：周绍曰： 立傅之道六。 
现代文：周绍说， 设立辅佐之官的标准有六条。 
English: Zhou Shao said that there are six standards for the establishment of assistant officers.

古文：王曰： 六者何也? 
现代文：赵武灵王说： 六条标准是什么？ 
English: Zhao Wuling Wang said: What are the six standards?

古文：周绍曰： 知虑不躁达于变，身行宽惠达于礼，威严不足以易于位，重利不足以变其心，恭于教而不快，和于下而不危。
现代文：周绍说： 有智谋不狡猾通晓事物的变化，自身行为宽厚仁慈明白礼仪，威严不能改变他按照职位行使权力，重利不能够改变他的心意，对于教化恭谨而不放纵，对属下和蔼而不虚伪。
English: Zhou Shao said: He is resourceful, not cunning; he is familiar with the changes of things; his behavior is lenient and kind; he understands the etiquette; the majesty cannot change him to exercise power according to his position; the heavy interest cannot change his mind; he is respectful and not indulgent for the edification; he is kind and not hypocritical to his subordinates.

古文：六者，傅之才，而臣无一焉。
现代文：具有这六条，才是辅佐的人才，可是臣下不具备一条。
English: With these six, it is the talent of the assistant, but the vassal does not have one.

古文：隐中不竭，臣之罪也。
现代文：隐瞒实情不竭尽全力，是臣下的罪过。
English: It is the fault of the vassal to conceal the truth and not to do his best.

古文：傅命仆官，以烦有司，吏之耻也。
现代文：顺从君命玷污官职，而麻烦官吏，是官吏的耻辱。
English: Obedience to the king's command defiles one's office, and troubling the officials is a disgrace to the officials.

古文：王请更论。 
现代文：请君玉改变选择。 
English: Please change your choice.

古文：王曰： 知此六者，所以使子。 
现代文：赵武灵王说： 了解六条标准，所以委派您担任这个职位。 
English: Zhao Wuling Wang said: I understand the six standards, so I have appointed you to this position.

古文：周绍曰： 乃国未通于王胡服。
现代文：周绍说： 如今国内的民众还没有明白君王穿胡服的意思。
English: Zhou Shao said: Nowadays, the people in the country have not yet understood the meaning of the emperor wearing Hu clothing.

古文：虽然，臣，王之臣也，而王重命之，臣敢不听令乎? 
现代文：即使这样，臣下是君王的臣子，而君王又任命我重要职位，臣下敢不听从命令吗？ 
English: Even so, a vassal is a vassal of the king, and the king has appointed me to an important position. Do vassals dare to disobey orders?

古文：再拜，赐胡服。
现代文：周绍再次拜谢了君王的信任，赵武灵王赏赐给他胡服。
English: Zhou Shao once again thanked the king for his trust, and King Zhao Wuling rewarded him with Hu clothing.

古文：王曰： 寡人以王子为子任，欲子之厚爱之，无所见丑。
现代文：赵武灵王说： 寡人把辅佐王子的事作为您的职责，想让您很好地爱护他，不要让他露出什么丑恶的地方。
English: Zhao Wuling Wang said, "Many people regard it as your duty to assist the prince, and want you to take good care of him, and not let him show any ugliness.

古文：御道之以行义，勿令溺苦于学。
现代文：驾驭引导他实行仁义，不要让他因为沉溺于诵习之事而困苦。
English: Guide him to practice benevolence and righteousness, and do not make him suffer because he indulges in recitation.

古文：事君者，顺其意，不逆其志。
现代文：事奉国君的人，应该顺从君王的心意，不违背君王的意志。
English: Those who serve the sovereign should follow the sovereign's heart and not go against the sovereign's will.

古文：事先者，明其高，不倍其孤。
现代文：事奉先君的人，彰明先君的高尚，不背叛先君的遗孤。
English: Those who served the late emperor, highlight the nobility of the late emperor, do not betray the late emperor's bereaved family.

古文：故有臣可命，其国之禄也。
现代文：所以有这样的臣子可以任命，大概是国家的福气。
English: Therefore, it is probably a blessing for the country that such a vassal can be appointed.

古文：子能行是，以事寡人者毕矣。
现代文：您能做到这样，事奉寡人的职责就完成了。
English: If you can do that, your job as a servant is done.

古文：《书》云： 去邪无疑，任贤勿贰。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 去掉邪恶没有疑心，任用贤能没有贰心。 
English: "Shangshu" said: There is no hesitation in eliminating evil, and there is no hesitation in appointing virtuous people.

古文：寡人与子，不用人矣。 
现代文：寡人用您，就不用别人了。 
English: If no one uses you, you don't need anyone else.

古文：遂赐周绍胡服衣冠，贝带黄金师比，以傅王子也。
现代文：于是赏赐周绍胡人的衣服帽子、有装饰的革带、用黄金做成的胡带之钩，来辅佐王子。
English: So he rewarded Zhou Shaohu with clothes, a cap, a decorated leather belt, and a hook for a mustache made of gold to assist the prince.

