古文：周广白岑张万福王彦伯李祐妇元颃梁革梁新赵鄂高骈田令孜于遘颜燧
现代文：周广白岑张万福王彦伯李祐妇元颃梁革梁新赵鄂高骈田令孜于遘颜燧
English: Zhou Guangbai, Zhang Manfu, Wang Yanbo, Li Yu, Ren Yuan, Liang Ge, Liang Xin, Zhao Egao, Tian Lingzhi, and Yan Yanqi

古文：周广
现代文：周广
English: Zhou Guang

古文：开元中，有名医纪明者，吴人也。尝授秘诀于隐士周广。
现代文：唐玄宗开元年间，有位叫纪明的名医，是吴地人，他曾传授秘诀给隐士周广。
English: During the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, there was a famous doctor named Ji Ming, a native of Wu, who taught secrets to the hermit Zhou Guang.

古文：观人颜色谈笑，便知疾深浅。言之精译，不待诊候。
现代文：学得秘诀后，周广察颜观色，谈笑之间就能知道病患的程度，说得非常详细具体，无须诊脉检查。
English: After learning the secret, Zhou Guang can know the degree of the patient by observing the color of the face and the color of the eyes, and by talking and laughing. He speaks very detailed and specific, and there is no need to check the pulse.

古文：上闻其名，征至京师。令于掖庭中召有疾者，俾周验焉。
现代文：玄宗听说周广的大名，征召他进京，并召集宫中有病的人到宫中偏房等候，让周广试验一下。
English: Xuanzong heard of Zhou Guang's great name and summoned him to Beijing. He also summoned the sick people in the imperial court to wait in a side room of the palace for Zhou Guang to test them.

古文：有宫人，每日昃则笑歌啼号，若中狂疾。而又足不能及地。
现代文：有一宫人，每天午后就又笑又唱又啼号，好象中邪得了狂病，并且还脚不能着地。
English: There is a man in a palace who laughs and sings and toots his horn every afternoon, as if he were possessed by a demon and unable to set foot on the ground.

古文：周视之曰：此必因食且饱，而大促力，顷复仆于地而然也。
现代文：周广看后说：这人一定是因为吃得太饱，紧接着又干了重活，不一会又跌倒在地而引起的。
English: Zhou Guang said after watching: This person must have been caused by eating too much, then doing heavy work, and then falling to the ground.

古文：周乃饮以云母汤。
现代文：周广给他服用云母汤，不久这个人就停止癫狂。
English: Zhou Guang gave him some mica soup, and soon the man stopped being mad.

古文：既已，令熟寐，寐觉，乃失所苦。
现代文：周广使他熟睡，睡醒后，就没有了以前的痛苦。
English: Zhou Guang let him sleep soundly, and after waking up, there was no previous pain.

古文：问之。乃言：尝因大华宫主载诞三日。宫中大陈歌吹。某乃主讴者，懼其声不能清。且常食狘蹄羹，遂饱。而当筵歌数曲。
现代文：周广问他，他说：曾因大华宫主人摆生日宴会三天，宫中布置大型歌舞乐队，我是主唱，声音不响亮，常吃猪蹄羹，吃饱后就去宴席上唱歌，唱完后就觉得咽中特别热。
English: Zhou Guang asked him, he said: Once, because the owner of the Dahua Palace held a birthday banquet for three days, a large song and dance band was arranged in the palace. I was the lead singer, my voice was not loud, I often ate pig's trotter soup, and when I was full, I went to sing at the banquet. After singing, I felt my throat was particularly hot.

古文：曲罢，觉胸中甚热，戏于砌台乘高而下。
现代文：我们几个人就去高台上玩耍，从上面往下跳。
English: A few of us went to play on the high platform and jumped down from above.

古文：未及其半，复有后来者所激，因仆于地。
现代文：我还未跳到一半，后面有一个人又跑了下来。撞着了我，因此跌倒在地，很长时间才醒过来。
English: I wasn't halfway through the jump when a guy behind me ran down again, bumped into me and I fell to the ground and it took me a long time to wake up.

古文：久而方苏而病狂，因兹足不能及地也。
现代文：就得了这狂病，脚也不能着地。玄宗感到非常惊异。
English: He got this crazy disease, and his feet couldn't touch the ground. Xuanzong was very surprised.

古文：上大异之。有黄门奉使，自交广而至，拜舞于殿下。周顾谓曰：此人腹中有蛟龙，明日当产一子，则不可活也。
现代文：有一个黄门奉使，从交广来到这里，在大殿上行大礼参拜，周广看了看他说：这个人腹中有条蛟龙，它明天必定生下一子，如果不及时治疗他就不能活了。
English: There was a Yellow Gate envoy from Jia Guang who came here and paid a grand visit to the main hall. Zhou Guang looked at him and said, "This man has a dragon in his belly. It will surely give birth to a son tomorrow. If he is not treated in time, he will not be able to live."

古文：上惊问黄门曰：卿有疾否？
现代文：玄宗吃惊地问黄门奉使，说：你有病吗？
English: Surprised, Xuanzong asked the Huangmen envoy, "Are you ill?

古文：乃曰：臣驰马大庾岭，时当大热，既困且渴，因于路傍饮野水，遂腹中坚痞如石。
现代文：奉使说：臣骑马奔驰在大庾岭时，当时天气炎热，臣又乏又渴，就在路边河沟里喝了生水，于是腹中就长了一个如坚石般的肿块。
English: The envoy said: When the minister was riding on horseback in Dalatling, the weather was hot at that time, the minister was tired and thirsty, and he drank raw water in the roadside ditch. As a result, a stone-like lump grew in his stomach.

古文：周即以消石雄黄，煮而饮之。
现代文：周广马上用硝石、雄黄煮水给他喝。
English: Zhou Guang immediately boiled water with saltpeter and rhubarb for him to drink.

古文：立吐一物，不数寸，其大如指。
现代文：刚刚喝完，就从口中吐出一物，不过几寸长、手指大小的东西。
English: As soon as he had finished drinking, he spat something out of his mouth, but it was only a few inches long and about the size of a finger.

古文：细视之，鳞甲备具，投之以水，俄顷长数尺。
现代文：仔细一看，身上长有鳞、甲，投放在水中，不一会就长到好几尺长。
English: If you look closely, it has scales and scales on its body. If you put it in water, it will grow to several feet long in no time.

古文：周遽以苦酒沃之，复如故形。
现代文：周广急忙用苦酒把它泡上，它又恢复到了原来那么大小。
English: Zhou Guang quickly soaked it with bitters, and it returned to its original size.

古文：以器覆之。明日，器中已生一龙矣。
现代文：周广用器具盖上，第二天，器皿中已生出一条小龙。
English: Zhou Guang used the utensil to cover it. The next day, a baby dragon was born in the utensil.

古文：上深加礼焉，欲授以官爵。周固请还吴中。
现代文：玄宗非常礼待周广，想要授他官爵，周广坚持要回家乡吴地。
English: Xuanzong treated Zhou Guang with great courtesy and wanted to give him a title of nobility, but Zhou Guang insisted on returning to his hometown of Wudi.

古文：上不违其意，遂令还乡。
现代文：玄宗没有违背他的意愿，让他回到故乡。
English: Xuanzong did not go against his wishes and let him return to his hometown.

古文：水部员外刘复为周作传，叙述甚详。
现代文：水部员外刘复为周广作传，对他的事迹叙述得很详细。
English: Liu Fu, a member of the Ministry of Water Resources, wrote a biography of Zhou Guang, describing his deeds in great detail.

古文：白岑
现代文：白岑
English: White stork

古文：白岑曾遇异人传发背方，其验十全。
现代文：白岑曾遇一位异人传给他治疗背部毒疮的验方。
English: Bai Xuan once met a stranger who passed on to him the test formula for the treatment of poisonous sores on the back.

古文：岑卖弄以求利。
现代文：用验方试着给人治背疽，全都治好了。
English: The experimenter tried to cure the people of diphtheria, and they were all cured.

古文：后为淮南小将，节度高适胁取之。
现代文：为了得到利益，岑拿着验方到处炫耀。
English: In order to make a profit, they flaunt the test method everywhere.

古文：其方然不甚效。岑至九江为虎所食，驿吏于囊中乃得真本。
现代文：后来岑做了淮南一个小军官，节度使高适威胁他交出了验方，但那方子已不象从前那么灵验。白岑到了九江被老虎吃了，驿吏在他的包裹中得到了发背方真本。
English: Later, Bai Xuan became a small officer in Huainan Province. He was threatened by Gao Si and had to hand over the recipe, but the recipe was no longer as effective as before. Bai Xuan was eaten by a tiger in Jiujiang, and the officials got the original recipe in his package.

古文：太原王升之写以传布。
现代文：太原王升之把它抄写下来，传播出去。
English: Wang Shengzhi of Taiyuan copied it down and spread it.

古文：张万福
现代文：张万福
English: Zhang Manfu

古文：柳芳为郎中，子登疾重。
现代文：郎中柳芳，他的儿子柳登患重病。
English: His son, Liu Deng, is seriously ill.

古文：时名医张万福初除泗州，与芳故旧，芳贺之，具言子病。
现代文：当时名医张万福刚到泗州拜官授职，他与柳芳是老相识。
English: At that time, Zhang Manfu, a famous doctor, had just arrived in Zhangzhou for the investiture ceremony. He and Liu Fang were old acquaintances.

古文：惟持故人一顾也。张诘旦候芳，芳遽引视登。
现代文：柳芳前来祝贺，并向他陈述了儿子的病情，希望依靠老朋友去给儿子治病。第二天，张万福一大早就等候着柳芳，柳芳急急忙忙来了，领着张万福去看儿子柳登。
English: Liu Fang came to congratulate him and told him about his son's illness, hoping to rely on his old friend to cure his son. The next day, Zhang Manfu waited for Liu Fang early in the morning. Liu Fang hurriedly came and led Zhang Manfu to see his son, Liu Deng.

古文：遥见登顶曰：有此顶骨，何忧也？
现代文：见到了柳登。远远望着他的头顶说：他有这样的头骨，你担什么心？
English: When he saw Liu Deng, he looked at the top of his head from afar and said, "He has such a skull, what are you worried about?"

古文：因诊脉五六息。复曰：不错，寿且逾八十。
现代文：说着便给柳登诊了一会儿脉，又说：不错，他的寿数在八十以上。
English: Saying this, he examined Liu Deng's pulse for a while, and then said, "That's right, his life expectancy is over eighty."

古文：乃留芳数十字。谓登曰：不服此亦得。
现代文：于是留下数十字的药方，对柳登说：不服这药也可以。
English: So he left a prescription with several crosses and said to Liu Deng: "You can refuse to take this medicine."

古文：后登为庶子，年至九十。
现代文：后来柳登成为一般百姓，活到九十岁。
English: Later, Liu Deng became an ordinary citizen and lived to the age of ninety.

古文：王彦伯
现代文：王彦伯
English: Wang Yanbo

古文：荆人道士王彦伯天性善医，尤别脉。
现代文：荆州有一位道士叫王彦伯，天性擅长医术，尤其擅长识别不同的脉象。
English: There is a Taoist in Jingzhou named Wang Yanbo, who is naturally good at medicine, especially at identifying different pulse patterns.

古文：断人生死寿夭，百不差一。
现代文：断定人是生，是死，是长寿还短命，百分之百的准确。
English: It is one hundred percent accurate to determine whether a person is alive or dead, long-lived or short-lived.

古文：裴胄尚书有子，忽暴中病。众医拱手。
现代文：尚书裴胄有个儿子。忽然得了急病，众医生都认为不能治好，不敢再给他治了。
English: Shangshu Pei Yao had a son. He suddenly fell ill, and all the doctors thought that he could not be cured. They dared not treat him any further.

古文：或说彦伯，遽迎使视之。
现代文：有的让去找王彦伯。裴胄忙去接王彦伯给儿子看病。
English: Some of them let him go to find Wang Yanbo. Pei Yao hurried to pick up Wang Yanbo to see his son.

古文：候脉良久，曰：都无疾。
现代文：王彦伯诊好一会儿脉，说：他一点病也没有。
English: Wang Yanbo checked his pulse for a while and said, "He's not sick at all.

古文：乃煮散数味，入口而愈。
现代文：于是王彦伯煮几味散药，裴胄的儿子服用后就好了。
English: As a result, Wang Yanbo boiled up some herbal medicine, and Pei Yao's son felt better after taking it.

古文：裴问其状，彦伯曰：中无鳃鲤鱼毒也。
现代文：裴尚书问儿子的病情，王彦伯说：中无鳃鲤鱼毒了。
English: When Bae Shangshu asked about his son's condition, Wang Yanbo said, "There is no eel poison in it."

古文：其子实因鲙得病。
现代文：他的儿子确实因为生食鱼片而得病。
English: His son did get sick from eating raw fish.

古文：裴初不信，乃鲙鲤鱼无鳃者，令左右食之。
现代文：开始裴胄不信，于是切无鳃鱼肉，让手下人吃。
English: At first, Pei Yao didn't believe him, so he cut out the eel meat and let his subordinates eat it.

古文：其疾悉同。始大惊异焉。
现代文：这些人吃了生鱼片，果然全都患了和他儿子一样的病。裴尚书这才感到惊异。
English: These people had eaten raw fish and all of them had the same illness as his son. Pei Shangshu was surprised.

古文：又彦伯自言：医道将行。
现代文：又，王彦伯自言自语说：我要开始行医了！
English: In addition, Wang Yanbo said to himself: I want to start practicing medicine!

古文：列三四灶，煮药于庭。老幼塞门而请。
现代文：于是他在庭院中摆设三、四个炉灶，煮上各种药，男女老少上门来讨。
English: So he set up three or four stoves in the courtyard and boiled all kinds of medicines. Men, women and children came to the house to discuss.

古文：彦伯指曰：热者饮此，寒者饮此，风者饮此，气者饮此。
现代文：王彦伯指点着说：患热病的人服用这个，患寒病的人服用这个，患邪风病的人服用这个，患气病的人服用这个。
English: Wang Yanbo pointed and said: People suffering from fever should take this, people suffering from cold should take this, people suffering from evil wind should take this, and people suffering from gas should take this.

古文：各负钱帛来酬，无不效者。
现代文：人们各自拿着钱和布匹来酬谢他。吃过他的药，没有不见效的。
English: They each took money and cloth to thank him. They had taken his medicine, and it had worked.

古文：李祐妇
现代文：李祐妇
English: Li Yuzhen

古文：李祐为淮西将。元和十三年，送款归国。
现代文：李祐任淮西将，唐宪宗元和十三年他押送钱粮回京去了。
English: Li Yu served as the general of Huaixi, and in the thirteenth year of Tang Xian Zongyuan, he escorted money and grain back to Beijing.

古文：裴度破吴元济，入其城。官军有剥妇人衣至裸体者。
现代文：这时裴度战败吴元济，攻进城中，官兵有扒女人衣服，甚至扒光的人。
English: At this time, Baidu defeated Wu Yuanji and invaded the city. The officers and soldiers stole women's clothes, and even stripped them naked.

古文：祐有新妇姜氏，怀孕五月矣，为乱卒所劫，以刀划其腹。
现代文：李祐的新婚娘子姜氏，已怀孕五个月了，被入城乱军士兵劫持，用刀划开了她的腹部。
English: Li Yu's newlywed daughter, Jiang, who was five months pregnant, was abducted by soldiers who entered the city and slashed her abdomen with a knife.

古文：姜氏气绝踣地。
现代文：姜氏气绝跌倒在地。
English: Jiang's spirits fell to the ground.

古文：祐归见之，腹开尺余，因脱衣襦裹之。
现代文：李祐从国都回来，看娘子腹开一尺多长，于是他脱下衣服，包扎好娘子的伤口。
English: When Li Yu returned from the capital, he saw that his daughter's abdomen was more than a foot long, so he took off his clothes and bandaged his daughter's wound.

古文：一夕复苏。
现代文：过了一夜，娘子苏醒过来。
English: After one night, the girl woke up.

古文：傅以神药而平。
现代文：李祐给她伤口敷上神药，伤口合好如初。
English: Li Yu applied the divine medicine to her wound, and the wound healed as well as before.

古文：满十月，产一子。朝廷以祐归国功，授一子官。
现代文：怀孕满十月，她生下一个儿子，朝廷因为李祐回都送钱粮有功，授予他儿子官爵。
English: She became pregnant in October and gave birth to a son. The imperial court awarded his son a title of nobility because Li Yuhai had done a good job of sending money and grain.

古文：子曰行修，年三十余，为南海节度。
现代文：李祐的儿子李行修。三十多岁时任南海节度使。
English: Li Yu's son, Li Xingxiu, served as the envoy to the Nankai Festival when he was in his thirties.

古文：罢归，卒于道。
现代文：后来，辞官回乡，死在归家的路上。
English: Later, the judge returned to his hometown and died on his way home.

古文：元颃
现代文：元颃
English: Yuanxuan

古文：唐时京城有医人忘其姓名。
现代文：唐朝时，京城里有位医生，忘记了他的姓名了。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a doctor in Beijing whose name I have forgotten.

古文：元颃中表间，有一妇人从夫南中，曾误食一虫。常疑之，由是成疾，频疗不损。
现代文：在元颃与中表之间有一位妇女跟随丈夫来到南中，她曾经误吃一条虫子，心中老犯疑，因此而得病，不断地治疗，病也不见好转。
English: Between the Yuan Dynasty and the Middle Ages, there was a woman who followed her husband to the Southern Middle Ages. She had once eaten a worm by mistake, and was always suspicious in her heart. As a result, she became ill and was constantly treated, but her illness did not improve.

古文：请看之。医者知其所患。乃请主人姨奶中谨密者一人，预戒之曰：今以药吐泻，但以盘盂盛之。当吐之时，但言有一小虾蟆走去。然切不得令病者知是诳绐也。
现代文：又请京城这位医生看视，这位医生知道他患病的原因，就请奶妈中与她亲近又慎重小心的人，事先告诫她说：现在用药让她吐泄，用盘盂装着，在她吐的时候，只说有一小虾蟆逃走了，但是千万不能告诉她是在欺骗她。
English: He also asked the doctor in Beijing to take a look at him. The doctor knew the cause of his illness, so he asked one of the nannies who was close to her and careful to warn her in advance: "Now use medicine to make her vomit, put it in a tray, and when she vomits, just say that a small shrimp has escaped, but you must not tell her that she is deceiving her."

古文：其奶仆遵之，此疾永除。
现代文：她的奶妈遵从医嘱，她的病就地去掉了。
English: Her wet nurse followed the doctor's orders, and her illness was cured immediately.

古文：又有一少年，眼中常见一小镜子。俾医工赵卿诊之。
现代文：又，有一少年，常感觉有一小镜子在眼前晃动，让医生赵卿给他诊治。
English: In addition, there is a boy who often feels that a small mirror is shaking in front of his eyes and asks the doctor Zhao Qing to treat him.

古文：与少年期，来晨以鱼鲙奉候。少年及期赴之。
现代文：赵卿和少年约会，说第二天早晨用生鱼片招待他，少年如期赴约。
English: Zhao Qing went on a date with the boy and said that he would treat him to sashimi the next morning, and the boy went to the appointment as scheduled.

古文：延于内，且令从容。候客退后方接。
现代文：少年被引进到里面，并且告诉他要耐心等待不要着急，等客人走了以后就来见他。
English: The boy was ushered inside and told to be patient and wait for the guests to leave.

古文：俄而设台子，止施一瓯芥醋，更无他味，卿亦未出。
现代文：不一会儿在他面前又摆上一台桌，上面放上一小盆芥醋，再就没有别的食物了，赵卿也没出来。
English: Soon, another table was set up in front of him, and a small pot of mustard vinegar was placed on it. There was no other food, and Zhao Qing did not come out.

古文：迨禺中，久候不至。
现代文：少年一直等到将近中午。等了这么长时间，赵卿也没有来。
English: The boy waited until nearly noon. After waiting for such a long time, Zhao Qing did not come.

古文：少年饥甚，且闻醋香，不免轻啜之。
现代文：少年非常饿了，又闻到醋的香味，忍不住轻轻喝了一小口。
English: The boy was very hungry and smelled the scent of vinegar. He couldn't help but take a sip.

古文：逡巡又啜之。觉胸中豁然，眼花不见，因竭瓯啜之。
现代文：犹豫一下又喝了一口，这时少年顿觉心中开阔，眼睛也不花了，于是把盆中的醋全喝光了。
English: After hesitating for a moment, he took another sip. At this time, the boy suddenly realized that his heart was wide open and his eyes were not spent, so he drank all the vinegar in the basin.

古文：赵卿知之，方出。
现代文：赵卿知道他把醋全喝了这才从里面出来。
English: Zhao Qing knew that he had drunk all the vinegar before he came out of it.

古文：少年以啜醋惭谢。
现代文：少年因为喝了醋。
English: The boy was fined for drinking vinegar.

古文：卿曰：郎君先因吃鲙太多，酱醋不快。又有鱼鳞在胸中，所以眼花。
现代文：很不好意思地向赵卿道谢。赵卿说：小伙子，以前你因为吃生鱼片太多，酱醋放得不适量，还有鱼鳞留在胸中，所以你就眼花。
English: Embarrassed, he thanked Zhao Qing. Zhao Qing said, "Young man, in the past, because you ate too much sashimi, you didn't put the right amount of sauce and vinegar, and there were fish scales left in your chest, you were dazzled.

古文：适来所备酱醋，只欲郎君因饥以啜之。果愈此疾。
现代文：刚才所以准备酱醋，是只想让你因饥饿，把它喝了，果然治好这病。
English: That's why I prepared soy sauce and vinegar just now. I just wanted you to drink it because you were hungry, and it really cured the disease.

古文：烹鲜之会，乃权诈也。
现代文：说吃鲜鱼片的约会，是骗你的。
English: If you say you have a date to eat fish and chips, you're lying to yourself.

古文：请退谋朝餐。
现代文：请回去吃早饭吧。
English: Please go back and have breakfast.

古文：他妙多斯类也。
现代文：赵卿有很多象这类有趣的事。
English: Zhaoqing has a lot of interesting things like this.

古文：梁革
现代文：梁革
English: Beam leather

古文：金吾骑曹梁革得和扁之术，太和初，为宛陵巡官。
现代文：金吾骑曹梁革得到了和与扁鹊的医术，唐文宗太和初年任宛陵巡官。
English: King Wu, riding Cao Liangge, obtained the same medical skills as Bian Que. Tang Wen Zongtao was appointed as the inspector of Wanling Mausoleum in the first year.

古文：按察使于敖有青衣曰莲子，念之甚厚。
现代文：按察使于敖有个婢女名唤莲子，他非常想占有她。
English: According to the inspector, Yu Yao had a maid named Lian Zi, and he really wanted to possess her.

古文：一旦以笑语获罪，斥出货焉，市吏定直曰七百缗。
现代文：一天，莲子因为说了句笑话而被治罪，又被赶出去卖掉，市吏定价七百串钱。
English: One day, Lian Zi was punished for telling a joke, and then she was driven out and sold. The city officials set the price at seven hundred bunches of money.

古文：从事御史崔某者闻而召焉，请革评其脉。
现代文：当时有从事御史崔某人听说了，把莲子召来。请梁革给她诊脉。
English: At that time, someone who was engaged in gosthui heard about it and called Lian Zi. Please ask Liang Ge to give her the diagnosis.

古文：革诊其臂曰：二十春无疾之人也。
现代文：梁革在她手臂上切脉说：二十岁，无病之人。
English: Liang Ge cut a vein in her arm and said: "Twenty years old, disease-free person.

古文：崔喜留之，送其直于敖。
现代文：崔某高兴地把她留下，派人送钱给于敖。
English: Cui Mou was happy to keep her and sent someone to give money to Yu Yao.

古文：敖以常深念也，一怒而逐之，售于不识者斯已矣。
现代文：于敖因为平时极想占有莲子，一怒之下把她赶走，如今卖给了不认识的人一切都完了。
English: Because Yu Yao desperately wanted to possess the lotus seed, he drove her away in anger, and now he has sold it to an unknown person. Everything is over.

古文：闻崔宠之不悦，形于颜色。
现代文：她听说崔某很宠爱莲子，心中很不高兴，就显示在脸上。
English: She heard that Cui was very fond of lotus seeds, and she was very unhappy, which showed on her face.

古文：然已去之，难复召矣，常贮于怀。
现代文：然而人已经走了，难再招回来，只好常在心中思念了。
English: However, people have already left, and it is difficult to invite them back, so I often miss them in my heart.

古文：未一年，莲子暴死。
现代文：不到一年，莲子突然死去。
English: Less than a year later, Lian Zi suddenly died.

古文：革方有外邮之事，回见城门，逢柩车，崔人有执绋者。问其所葬，曰：莲子也。
现代文：这时梁革到外面传递文件、书信去了，回来时走到城门，遇见棂车从那里经过，有崔某手下助葬的人，梁向他询问，葬的是谁，他说：是莲子。
English: At this time, Liang Ge went outside to deliver documents and letters. When he came back, he walked to the city gate and met a carriage passing by. There was a funeral helper from Cui's team. Liang asked him who was buried, and he said: it was Lian Zi.

古文：呼载归，而奔告崔曰：莲子非死，盖尸蹶耳。
现代文：梁革听说，呼喊着让把棂车运回去，忙又奔跑回去告诉崔某，说：莲子没死，是尸蹶呵！
English: Hearing this, Liang Ge shouted for the cart to be taken back, and hurriedly ran back to tell Cui Mou, saying, "Lotus Seed is not dead, it is a corpse!"

古文：向者革入郭，遇其柩，载归而往请苏之。
现代文：方才我进城，遇见她的棂车，我让把她运回来了，现在让我把她救活吧！
English: I have just entered the city, I met her carriage, I had her transported back, now let me save her life!

古文：崔怒革之初言，悲莲子之遽夭。勃然曰：匹夫也，妄惑诸侯，遂齿簪裾之列。
现代文：崔某生气梁革当初说的话，又伤心莲子的突然中途死去，脸色大变说：你这个东西啊，你随心所欲迷惑诸侯，好趁机与富贵显达的人齐齿并列。
English: Cui was angry with Liang Ge's words at the beginning, and saddened by the sudden death of Lian Zi, and his face changed dramatically, saying: You, this thing, do whatever you want to confuse the lords, so that you can take advantage of the opportunity to stand side by side with the rich and prominent people.

古文：汝谓二十春无疾者，一年而死。
现代文：你说她二十岁，是无病之人，可不到一年就死了。
English: You said she was twenty years old, a healthy person, but she died less than a year later.

古文：今既葬矣，召其柩而归，脱不能生，何以相见？
现代文：如今就要下葬，你招她棂车回来，也已是肉骨分离不能复生了，我们还怎么见面呢？
English: Now she is about to be buried. If you invite her to come back by carriage, she is already separated from her body and cannot be revived. How can we meet again?

古文：革曰：此固非死，盖尸蹶耳。
现代文：梁革说：莲子本来没死，是突然昏倒，不省人事。
English: Liang Ge said: Lian Zi did not die originally, but suddenly fainted and was unconscious.

古文：苟不能生之，是革术不仁于天下，何如就死以谢过言。
现代文：如果我不能让她复活，我梁革此生不再行医，我就以死来向您道歉怎么样？
English: If I can't bring her back to life, and I choose not to practice medicine for the rest of my life, how about I apologize to you by dying?

古文：乃令破棺出之。
现代文：于是让打开棺材，抬出莲子。
English: So let the coffin be opened and the lotus seeds brought out.

古文：遂刺其心及脐下各数处，凿去一齿，以药一刀圭于口中。
现代文：梁革在莲子的心、脐下几处穴位行针，又凿掉一颗牙，把一刀圭药灌进口中。
English: Liang Ge inserted needles at several points in the heart and under the armpit of the lotus, chiseled off a tooth, and poured a dose of medicine into the entrance.

古文：衣以单衣，卧空床上，以练素缚其手足，有微火于床下。曰：此火衰，莲子生矣。
现代文：让莲子只穿着单衣，把她放在没有行李的板床上，再用白织练子绑住她的四肢。之后在床下生上温火，说：这火灭了，莲子就活了。
English: He asked her to wear only a singlet, put her on a board bed with no luggage, and then tied her limbs with a white loincloth. After that, he built a warm fire under the bed and said: "If this fire is extinguished, Lotus will live."

古文：且戒其徒，煮葱粥伺焉。
现代文：要记住，千万不要让火太旺。煮好葱粥守候着。
English: Remember, never let the fire get too hot. Cook the spring onion porridge and wait.

古文：其气通若狂者，慎勿令起，逡巡自定。定而困，困即解其缚，以葱粥灌之，遂活矣。
现代文：她的气缓的要是猛烈，千万不要让她起来，过一小会儿自己就稳定了，之后她会感到很疲乏，就马上给她解开绑绳，给她喝葱粥，她就活了。
English: If her breath is heavy, do not let her get up. After a short while, she will stabilize herself. After that, she will feel very tired. Immediately untie her and give her some green onion porridge. She will live.

古文：正狂令起，非吾之所知也。
现代文：在她缓气猛烈的时候让她起来，我可就不知该怎么办了。
English: I don't know what to do when she's having a fit of the vapours and I have to get her up.

古文：言竟，复入府谓崔曰：莲子即生矣。
现代文：梁革说完，回到府中对崔某：莲子一会就活了。
English: After Liang Ge finished speaking, he returned to the prefectural government and told Cui Mou: Lian Zi will live for a while.

古文：崔大释其怒，留坐厅事。
现代文：崔某的怒气消了，留梁革在客厅里招待她。
English: After Cui's anger subsided, Ruo Liangge invited her to the living room.

古文：俄而莲子起坐言笑。
现代文：一会莲子坐起来有说有笑。
English: After a while, Ren Zi sat up and started talking and laughing.

古文：界吏报敖，敖飞牍于崔，莲子复生，乃何术也。
现代文：界吏把事禀告给于敖，于敖飞递书信给崔某，问他莲子复活，究竟是什么医术。
English: The magistrate reported the matter to Yu Jun, and Yu Jun sent a letter to Cui Mou, asking him what kind of medical technique it was to resurrect a lotus seed.

古文：仍与革偕归。入门则莲子来迎矣，敖大奇之。
现代文：于敖与梁革一同归来，进门时莲子出门迎接，于敖很奇怪。
English: Yu Xuan and Liang Ge returned together, and when they entered the door, Lian Zi came out to greet them. Yu Xuan was very strange.

古文：且夫莲子事崔也，非素意，因劝以与革。
现代文：让莲子侍奉崔某，并不是于敖的本意，所以劝崔某把莲子给梁革。
English: It was not Yu Yao's intention to have the lotus seed serve Cui, so he persuaded Cui to give the lotus seed to Liang Ge.

古文：崔亦恶其无齿，又重敖，遂与革。
现代文：这时崔某因为莲子没了一颗门牙而讨厌她，就重又把莲子还给于敖。于是于敖把莲子送给梁革。
English: At this time, Cui hated Lianzi because she did not have a front tooth, so he returned Lianzi to Yu Yu. Therefore, Yu Yu gave Lianzi to Liang Ge.

古文：革得之，以神药缚齿，未逾月而齿生如故。
现代文：梁革得到莲子，用神药敷在莲子的缺齿处，不到一个月就长出了和原来一样的牙。
English: Liang Ge obtained the lotus seed and used the divine medicine to apply it on the missing tooth of the lotus seed. In less than a month, the same tooth as the original one grew out.

古文：太和壬子岁，调金吾骑曹，与莲子偕在辇下。
现代文：太和壬子年，调动金吾骑曹，梁革与莲子并肩走在辇下。
English: In the year of the Dragon and the Horse, Kingo was summoned to ride Cao, and Liang Ge and Lian Zi walked side by side under the yoke.

古文：其年秋，高损之以其元舅为天官，即日与相闻，故熟其事而言之。
现代文：那年秋天，高损之任用他大舅为天官，当天就说给他知道了，所以很了解他们的事情，就说了出去。
English: In the autumn of that year, Gao Zhizhi appointed his uncle as a heavenly official, and on the same day he told him that he knew it, so he knew their things very well, so he told them.

古文：梁新赵鄂
现代文：梁新赵鄂
English: Liang Xin Zhao E

古文：唐崔铉镇渚宫。
现代文：唐时，崔铉镇守江陵。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Cui Han Zhen guarded Jiangling.

古文：有富商船居。
现代文：当时有一位富商，停船在这里。
English: At that time, there was a rich merchant who stopped his ship here.

古文：中夜暴亡，待晓，气犹末绝。邻房有武陵医工梁新闻之。乃与诊视曰：此乃食毒也。
现代文：半夜，那商人突然死了，天亮时还未断气，附近房间里有位从武陵来的医生梁新听说后，就去给他诊视，说：这是食物中毒啊！
English: In the middle of the night, the merchant suddenly died, and at dawn he was still breathing. When Liang Xin, a doctor from Wuling, heard about it from a nearby room, he went to see him and said: "This is food poisoning!"

古文：三两日非外食耶？
现代文：这两三天没有到外面吃饭吗？
English: Haven't you eaten out in the last two or three days?

古文：仆夫曰：主翁少出舫，亦不食于他人。
现代文：仆夫说：我家主人很少出船去，也不在别人那吃饭。
English: The servant said, "My master rarely goes out on the boat and does not eat with others.

古文：梁新曰：寻常嗜食何物？
现代文：梁新说：他平常喜欢吃什么食物？
English: Liang Xin said: What kind of food does he usually like to eat?

古文：仆夫曰：好食竹鸡，每年不下数百只。
现代文：仆夫说：喜欢吃竹鸡，每年不少于几百只。
English: The servant said, "I like to eat bamboo chickens. I eat no less than a few hundred every year.

古文：近买竹鸡，并将充馔。
现代文：最近买了竹鸡，并拿它做菜肴。
English: Recently, I bought a bamboo chicken and used it to make a dish.

古文：梁新曰：竹鸡吃半夏。必是半夏毒也。
现代文：梁新说：竹鸡吃半夏，一定是半夏的毒啊。
English: Liang Xin said, "If you eat bamboo chicken for half a summer, it must be half a summer's poison."

古文：命捣姜捩汁，折齿而灌，由是而苏。
现代文：梁新命捣姜挤汁，折断牙齿灌进去。因此，那人苏醒过来了。
English: Liang Xinming pounded ginger juice and broke his teeth to pour it in. As a result, the man came to his senses.

古文：崔闻而异之，召至，安慰称奖。资以仆马钱帛入京，致书于朝士，声名大振。仕至尚药奉御。
现代文：崔铉听说了这事，感到惊奇，就召梁新来，赞扬夸奖了一番，后又送给他仆人马匹，钱和布匹让他去京城，并写信给朝廷的官员，推荐梁新。到京城后，梁新名声大振，官做到尚药奉御。
English: Upon hearing of this, Cui Lan was surprised and summoned Liang Xin, praised and praised him, and then gave him servants, horses, money and cloth to let him go to Beijing, and wrote to the officials of the court to recommend Liang Xin. After arriving in Beijing, Liang Xin's reputation soared, and the officials did their best to serve him.

古文：有一朝士诣之，梁曰：何不早见示？
现代文：有一朝士到梁新这来看病，梁新看后说：怎么不早来看？
English: Once, a doctor came to Liang Xin to see him. After seeing him, Liang Xin said, "Why didn't you come to see me earlier?"

古文：风疾已深矣。请速归，处置家事，委顺而已。
现代文：风疾已经很重了，请快点回去，处理家中事情，顺其自然吧。
English: The wind disease is already very serious, please hurry back, deal with things at home, and let it be.

古文：朝士闻而惶遽告退，策马而归。时有鄜州马医赵鄂者，新到京都。
现代文：朝士听了慌忙告辞退去。朝士骑马走在回家的路上，这时有位鄜州的马医叫赵鄂的人，最近来到京城。
English: After listening to his hasty resignation, the Asashi retreated. As he was riding his horse on his way home, there was a horse doctor from Ganzhou called Zhao E, who had recently arrived in Beijing.

古文：于通衢自榜姓名，云攻医术。
现代文：他在四通八达的大道上立榜标名，告示人们：专攻医术。
English: He put up a sign on a major thoroughfare, telling people that he specialized in medicine.

古文：此朝士下马告之，赵鄂亦言疾危，与梁生之说同。
现代文：朝士路过这里，看见告示便下马，把自己的病情说给赵鄂。赵鄂也说他病情严重，与梁新说的相同。
English: An attendant passed by, saw the notice and got off his horse to tell Zhao E about his illness. Zhao E also said that his illness was serious, which was the same as what Liang Xin said.

古文：谓曰：即有一法，请官人剩吃消梨，不限多少。咀龁不及，捩汁而饮。或希万一。
现代文：赵鄂对朝士说：就有一个办法，请官人多吃消梨，不要限量，嘴吃来不及，就挤汁水喝，或许还有万分之一的希望。
English: Zhao E said to the morning person: there is a way, please officials eat more pear, do not limit the amount, the mouth is too late to eat, squeeze juice and drink, perhaps there is a hope of one in ten thousand.

古文：此朝士又策马而归。以书筒质消梨，马上旋龁。
现代文：这位朝士又骑马继续往家赶，用书筒装消梨，在马背上立即就开始吃，到家后，十多天里只吃消梨。
English: The officer continued to ride home on horseback, loaded pears with a bookcase, and immediately began to eat on horseback. After arriving home, he only ate pears for more than ten days.

古文：行到家，旬日唯吃消梨，烦觉爽朗，其恙不作。
现代文：渐渐病情好转，过去总觉烦闷，如今变得爽朗了，他的病再也没有犯。
English: Gradually, his condition improved. In the past, he always felt bored, but now he has become cheerful, and his illness has not recurred.

古文：却访赵生感谢，又访梁奉御，且言得赵生所教。梁公惊异，且曰：大国必有一人相继者。
现代文：朝士返回京城拜访赵鄂向他致谢，又去拜访梁奉御，谈话间又说到赵鄂让吃消梨的事情，梁公感到惊奇，并且说：若大一个国家一定要有继承的人。
English: The Emperor's attendants returned to Beijing to visit Zhao E to thank him, and then went to visit Liang Bong. During the conversation, they also talked about Zhao E's decision to eat the pear. Liang Gong was surprised and said, "If a country is great, there must be someone to inherit it."

古文：遂召赵生，资以仆马钱帛，广为延誉，官至太仆卿。
现代文：于是召见赵鄂，资助他仆人、马匹和钱及布匹，并广泛作宣传扩大他的声誉。赵鄂官做到太仆卿。
English: So he summoned Zhao E, supported him with servants, horses, money and cloth, and made extensive propaganda to expand his reputation.

古文：又省郎张廷之有疾，诣赵鄂。才诊脉，说其疾宜服生姜酒一盏，地黄酒一杯。
现代文：又，省郎张廷之有病，到赵鄂那去看，刚一诊脉，就说：这病应该服用生姜酒一盏，地黄酒一杯。
English: In addition, the provincial governor Zhang Tingzhu had an illness and went to Zhao Auna to see him. As soon as the diagnosis was made, he said, "For this illness, you should take one bottle of ginger wine and one glass of yellow wine."

古文：仍谒梁新，所说并同，皆言过此即卒。自饮此酒后，所疾寻平。
现代文：他还去请梁新为他看视，两个人所说一样，都说只能按量服用这两种药酒，不然就得死。
English: He also went to ask Liang Xin to keep an eye on him. Both of them said the same thing, that he could only take these two kinds of medicinal liquor in the right amount, otherwise he would die.

古文：他日为时相坚虐一杯，诉之不及，其夕乃卒。
现代文：自从饮了这两种药酒后，张廷之的病渐渐好了。后来，张廷之作了宰相，他硬是节制不住自己，就喝了一杯白酒，来不及说什么话，那天晚上就死了。
English: After drinking these two medicinal liquors, Zhang Tingzhi's illness gradually improved. Later, when Zhang Tingzhi became prime minister, he couldn't control himself and drank a glass of liquor. Before he could say anything, he died that night.

古文：时论为之二妙。
现代文：当时人们议论，梁、赵二人的医术高明，是两位妙手。
English: At that time, people said that Liang and Zhao's medical skills were excellent, and they were two great hands.

古文：高骈
现代文：高骈
English: Takatsuki

古文：江淮州郡，火令最严，犯者无赦。
现代文：江淮一带的州郡。火令是最严厉的，违犯火令的人一律严惩决不放过。
English: The fire order is the most severe, and those who violate the fire order will be severely punished.

古文：盖多竹屋，或不慎之，动则千百间立成煨烬。
现代文：当地多盖竹屋，倘若不小心，一着火千百间房屋就立刻化为灰烬。
English: There are many bamboo houses in the area. If you are not careful, thousands of houses will be burnt to ashes.

古文：高骈镇维扬之岁，有术士之家延火，烧数千户。
现代文：高骈镇守维扬的时候，有位术士家着火漫延开了。
English: When the town of Takatsuki was under siege, a sorcerer's house caught fire and spread.

古文：主者录之，即付于法。
现代文：烧毁了几千家。主持防火的人把这事记录下来。
English: Thousands of homes have been destroyed, and fire managers are taking note.

古文：临刃，谓监刑者曰：某之愆尤，一死何以塞责。
现代文：依法惩办，临刑时，术士对行刑的人说：我犯下的罪过，用一死怎么能抵得了呢？
English: Punished according to the law, at the time of sentencing, the sorcerer said to the executioner: How can I pay for the crime I committed with one death?

古文：然某有薄技，可以传授一人，俾其救济后人，死无所恨矣。
现代文：但是我有点小技术，可以传授给一个人，让他救济后人，我就死而无撼了。
English: But I have a little bit of technology that I can pass on to someone so that they can help future generations, and then I'll be dead.

古文：时骈延待方术之士，恒如饥渴。
现代文：当时高骈很长时间就请求接待方术之士，他寻求方术之士的心情如饥似渴。
English: At that time, Gao Jun had been asking for a long time to receive the Fang Wushu practitioners. He was so hungry and thirsty to seek out the Fang Wushu practitioners.

古文：监行者即缓之，驰白于骈。
现代文：监刑者听了这位术士的一番话后，立刻暂缓执行，骑马飞驰去告诉高骈。
English: After listening to the words of the sorcerer, the jailer immediately suspended the execution and rode off to tell Gao Yao.

古文：骈召入，亲问之。
现代文：高骈召术士进来，亲自问他。
English: Gao Yao called the sorcerer in and asked him in person.

古文：曰：某无他术，唯善医大风。
现代文：术士说：我没有别的技术，只善于治麻风病。
English: The sorcerer said, "I have no other skill but curing leprosy."

古文：骈曰：可以核之。
现代文：高骈说：可以验证一下。
English: Gao Yao said: You can verify it.

古文：对曰：但于福田院选一最剧者，可以试之。
现代文：术士回答说：只在福田院里选一个最严重的病人，可以试一下。
English: The sorcerer replied, "Just choose the sickest one in Fukuda-in, and you can try it."

古文：遂如言。乃置患者于密室中，饮以乳香酒数升，则懵然无知，以利刀开其脑缝。
现代文：于是依照术士说的，选了一个最重的病人。术士把病人送进一个密室中，给他喝了几升乳香酒，酒后病人就朦胧迷胡什么也不知道了。
English: So, according to the sorcerer's words, the sickest one was chosen. The sorcerer took the patient into a secret room and gave him several litres of frankincense. After drinking, the patient was dazed and did not know anything.

古文：挑出虫可盈掬，长仅二寸。然以膏药封其疮，别与药服之，而更节其饮食动息之候。
现代文：术士用快刀剖开他的脑缝，从里面挑出一条二寸之长的小虫，然后用膏药封住疮口，又另外给药内服。而且特别注意病人节制饮食，运动和休息都要有规律。
English: The sorcerer cut open his brain with a knife and pulled out a two-inch-long worm, then sealed the wound with a plaster and administered another dose of medicine. In addition, special attention was paid to the patient's diet, exercise and rest should be regular.

古文：旬余，疮尽愈。才一月，眉须已生，肌肉光净，如不患者。
现代文：十多天，病人的疮口全好了，刚刚一个月，眉毛胡须都已经长出来了，肌肉光滑洁净，与没患过麻疯病的人一样。
English: After more than ten days, the patient's sores were completely healed. Just one month later, his eyebrows and whiskers had grown out, and his muscles were smooth and clean, just like those of a person who had never suffered from leprosy.

古文：骈礼术士为上客。
现代文：高骈礼待这位术士，尊他为上客。
English: Gao Yao treated the sorcerer with courtesy and honored him as a guest.

古文：田令孜
现代文：田令孜
English: Tianlingzi Mountain

古文：长安完盛日。
现代文：长安城又恢复了原来繁华的盛况。
English: Chang'an City has regained its former prosperity.

古文：有一家于西市卖饮子。
现代文：有一家在西市卖汤药。
English: There's a company in West City that sells soup medicine.

古文：用寻常之药，不过数味，亦不闲方脉，无问是何疾苦，百文售一服。千种之疾，入口而愈。
现代文：用的是平常药，不过几味，不限制药方和脉象，不问是什么病痛，一百文卖一付，千种疾病，服下就好。
English: It uses ordinary medicine, but a few flavors, does not limit the prescription and pulse, does not ask what kind of ailment, sells for a hundred dollars, a thousand diseases, just take it.

古文：常于宽宅中，置大锅镬，日夜锉斫煎煮，给之不暇。
现代文：这家常年在宽敞的宅院中，设置大锅，白天黑夜地剉、砍、煎、煮供给汤药，没有一点空闲。
English: In the spacious courtyard of this house, a large pot is set up all year round to simmer, chop, fry, and boil soup medicine day and night. There is no time to spare.

古文：人无远近，皆来取之，门市骈罗，喧阗京国，至有赍金守门，五七日间，未获给付者。获利甚极。
现代文：人们不管远近都纷纷前来买药。门前拥挤，喧闹声响遍京城，以至要花钱雇人看守门户。来买药的人，有的等了五七天，还未买到药。这家获利特别多。
English: People come from near and far to buy the medicine. The front of the door is crowded, the noise is loud all over the capital, so that it costs money to hire someone to guard the portal. Some people who come to buy the medicine have waited for five or seven days and have not yet bought the medicine. This company makes a lot of profit.

古文：时田令孜有疾，海内医工召遍。
现代文：当时田令孜有病，海内的医生都让他看遍了。
English: At that time, Tian Ling Ze was ill, and the doctors in Hainan had him see everything.

古文：至于国师待诏，了无其征。
现代文：至于宫中御医、与待命供奉内廷的医师，全都诊断不出来他患的是什么病。
English: As for the court physician and the physicians on standby to serve the inner court, none of them could diagnose what illness he was suffering from.

古文：忽见亲知白田曰：西市饮子，何访试之。
现代文：忽然他的亲信白田说：西市卖汤药，不妨试一下。
English: All of a sudden, his close confidant, Shirota, said, "Saiichi sells yakitori, you might as well try it."

古文：令孜曰：可。
现代文：田令孜说：可以。
English: Tian Lingzi said, "Yes."

古文：遂遣仆人，驰乘往取之。
现代文：于是派仆人骑马去取药。
English: So he sent his servant on horseback to fetch the medicine.

古文：仆人得药，鞭马而回。将及近坊，马蹶而覆之。
现代文：仆人拿到药，策马回来，将要到牌坊附近的时候，马颠簸不停，药全撒了。
English: When the servant got the medicine and rode back, he was about to get close to the archway, but the horse kept thrashing and the medicine was completely scattered.

古文：仆既惧其严难，不复取云。
现代文：仆人惧怕主人威严，难以交待，不敢再去。
English: Servants fear the majesty of their masters, find it difficult to communicate, and dare not go back.

古文：遂诣一染坊，丐得池脚一瓶子，以给其主。
现代文：于是到一染坊，乞求得到一瓶染料残液拿回来给了田令孜。
English: So he went to a dyeing factory and begged for a bottle of leftover dye to take back and give to Tian Lingzi.

古文：既服之，其病立愈。
现代文：田令孜服了下去，病立刻就好了。
English: Tian Ling diligently obeyed, and the illness was immediately cured.

古文：田亦只知病愈，不知药之所来，遂赏药家甚厚。
现代文：田令孜只知道自己的病好了，却不知道药是从哪里来的。便厚赏了卖汤药这家。
English: Tian Lingzi only knew that his illness was cured, but did not know where the medicine came from. He rewarded the family selling the soup medicine.

古文：饮子之家，声价转高。
现代文：卖汤药这家，声价比以前更高了。
English: The asking price of this company, which sells soup and medicine, is higher than before.

古文：此盖福医也。
现代文：这是福医啊！
English: This is a blessing for doctors!

古文：近年，邺都有张福医者亦然。
现代文：近年，邺都有个叫张福的医生，情况也是这样。
English: In recent years, there has been a doctor named Zhang Fu, and the situation is the same.

古文：积货甚广，以此有名，为番王挈归塞外矣。
现代文：他家积贮的财物特别多，因此有了名气，后来被一蕃王带回塞外了。
English: His family amassed a particularly large amount of wealth and became famous as a result. They were later taken out of the country by a warlord.

古文：于遘
现代文：于遘
English: Yu Zhen

古文：近朝中书舍人于遘，尝中盅毒，医治无门。
现代文：近年朝中，有个中书舍人叫于遘，曾经中了盅毒，没有地方能医治。
English: In recent years, there has been a caller to the Chinese Academy of Sciences, named Yu Yu, who had been poisoned by radium and had nowhere to go for treatment.

古文：遂长告，渐欲远适寻医。
现代文：于是请了长假，渐渐地想要去远方寻找医生。
English: So he took a long vacation and gradually wanted to go far away to find a doctor.

古文：一日，策杖坐于中门之外。忽有钉铰匠见之。
现代文：一天，于遘柱杖坐在二门外边，忽被一钉铰匠看见，问他说：你怎么瘦弱，疲倦成这样啊？
English: One day, when Yu Xizhu was sitting outside the two gates, he was suddenly seen by a nail cutter, who asked him, "How did you become so thin and tired?"

古文：问曰：何苦而羸苶如是？
现代文：于遘立刻向他陈述了一番。
English: Yu Yao immediately made a statement to him.

古文：于即为陈之。匠曰：某亦曾中此，遇良工。为某钤出一蛇而愈。
现代文：匠人说：我也曾中过盅毒，遇到一位良医，为我钳出一条蛇，病就好了。
English: The craftsman said, "I was also poisoned by a snake, and I met a good doctor who pulled out a snake for me, and my illness was cured.

古文：某亦传得其术。
现代文：我也学会了这种技术。
English: I also learned this technique.

古文：遘欣然，且祈之。
现代文：于遘很高兴，并且祈求匠人给他治病。
English: Yu Yao was very happy and begged the craftsman to cure him.

古文：彼曰：此细事耳，来早请勿食，某当至矣。
现代文：匠人说：这是细致的活，明天早上请不要吃饭，我来给你治病。
English: The craftsman said, "This is delicate work. Please don't eat tomorrow morning. I'll treat your illness."

古文：翊曰果至。
现代文：第二天，匠人果然来了。
English: The next day, the craftsman did come.

古文：请遘于舍檐下，向明张口。执钤俟之。及欲夹之，差跌而失。则又约以来日。
现代文：他让于遘到屋檐下，面向亮处张开嘴，他拿着钳等待着，到了要夹时，差点跌倒，没有夹成，就又约第二天再来。
English: He let the cocoon go under the eaves and opened his mouth to the light. He held the cocoon and waited. When it was time to clamp it, he almost fell down. When it wasn't clamped, he decided to come back the next day.

古文：经宿复至。定意伺之，一夹而中。
现代文：又过了一夜匠人又来了，他决心伺机夹住这条蛇。这次，一夹就夹住了。
English: Another night passed, and the carpenter came again. He decided to wait for an opportunity to catch the snake. This time, he caught it in one fell swoop.

古文：其蛇已及二寸许，赤色，粗如钗股矣。
现代文：那蛇已经长到二寸多长了，红色，钗股般粗细。
English: The snake had grown to more than two inches long, red and as thick as a gill.

古文：遽命火焚之。
现代文：匠人急忙用火把它烧了。
English: The craftsman quickly set it on fire.

古文：遘遂愈。复累除官，至紫微而卒。
现代文：于遘的病好了，又多次拜官授职，一直做到紫微令才死去。
English: Yu Yao's illness was cured, and he was promoted many times, until he died.

古文：其匠亦不受赠遗。但云：某有誓救人。
现代文：那位匠人也不接受礼品，只说：我发过誓要救人。
English: The carpenter did not accept the gift either, saying only: "I have sworn to save people."

古文：唯饮数觞而别。
现代文：他在于家只饮了几杯酒，就离去了。
English: He had only had a couple of drinks at home and left.

古文：颜燧
现代文：颜燧
English: Yan Xuan

古文：京城及诸州郡阛阓中，有医人能出盅毒者，目前之验甚多。
现代文：从京城到各州郡的街道上，有位能够逐出盅毒的医生术士，目前得到了验证的很多。
English: On the streets from the capital to every state and county, there is a doctor-warrior who can expel the poison, and many of them have been verified.

古文：人皆惑之，以为一时幻术，膏肓之患，即不可去。
现代文：人们感到迷惑，以为是一时的幻术，病至膏肓是不能治好的。
English: People feel confused, thinking that it is a temporary illusion, and that the disease cannot be cured.

古文：郎中颜燧者，家有一女使抱此疾，常觉心肝有物唼食，痛苦不可忍。
现代文：郎中颜燧，家中有一个使女患有这种病。她常常感到心肝中有东西在吃食，痛得她痛苦不堪。
English: There is a maid in my family who suffers from this disease. She often feels that something in her heart is eating, and it pains her so much.

古文：累年后瘦瘁，皮骨相连，胫如枯木。
现代文：几年后，她瘦弱困病，只剩下皮包着骨头了。小腿好似两根枯木一般。
English: A few years later, she was emaciated and emaciated, with only skin covering her bones. Her lower legs looked like two pieces of dead wood.

古文：偶闻有善医者，于市中聚众甚多，看疗此病。
现代文：颜燧偶然听说有良医，在市中心给人看病，那里聚集着许多人，看他为别人治疗这种病。
English: Yan Qi heard by chance that there was a good doctor who treated people in the city center, where many people gathered to see him treat others with this disease.

古文：颜试召之。
现代文：颜燧试着召他来为使女治病。
English: Yan Qi tried to summon him to cure her.

古文：医生见曰：此是蛇盅也，立可出之。
现代文：医生看见病人说：这是蛇盅。马上就可以取出来。
English: The doctor saw the patient and said, "It's a boa constrictor. You can take it out right away."

古文：于是先令炽炭一二十斤，然后以药饵之。
现代文：于是他先让人将一二十斤木炭烧旺，然后用药做诱饵。
English: So he first had someone burn ten or twenty kilos of charcoal, and then used medicine as bait.

古文：良久，医工秉小钤子于傍。
现代文：过了许久，医生拿着小钳子站在病人身傍。
English: After a long time, the doctor took a pair of tweezers and stood next to the patient.

古文：于时觉咽喉间有物动者，死而复苏。
现代文：这时使女觉得咽喉间有东西在动，象是死了又复活似的。
English: At that moment, the maid felt something move in her throat, as if she had died and come back to life.

古文：少顷，令开口，钳出一蛇子长五七寸，急投于炽炭中燔之。
现代文：不一会儿，医生让她张开嘴，从她嘴钳出一条五七寸长的小蛇。医生急忙把它抛进炽热的炭火中去。
English: After a while, the doctor asked her to open her mouth, and out of her mouth came a five-and-a-half-inch-long snake. The doctor quickly threw it into the hot coals.

古文：燔蛇屈曲，移时而成烬，其臭气彻于亲邻。
现代文：蛇烧得弯转扭曲，不一会儿变成了灰烬，它的臭味直扩散到左邻右舍。
English: The snake burned, twisted and turned into ashes in no time, and its stench spread right to the neighbors.

古文：自是疾平，永无吃心之苦耳。
现代文：从此使女的病好了，永远没有了心被噬咬的痛苦了。
English: From then on, the maid's illness was cured, and she never had the pain of having her heart eaten away.

古文：则知活变起虢肉徐甲之骨，信不虚矣。
现代文：这才知道老子使徐甲死而复活的事，是真的，不是假的了。
English: It was only then that I knew that the story of Lao Zi bringing Xu Jia from the dead back to life was real, not fake.

