古文：范睢至秦，王庭迎，谓范睢曰： 寡人宜以身受令久矣。
现代文：范雎来到秦国，秦王亲自到宫殿前面的庭院里迎接他，秦王对范雎说： 我早就该聆听你的言论和教诲了。
English: When Fan Ye came to Qin, the king of Qin himself went to the courtyard in front of the palace to welcome him. The king of Qin said to Fan Ye, "I should have listened to your words and teachings a long time ago."

古文：今者义渠之事急，寡人日自请太后。
现代文：如今却又碰上要急于处理义渠国的事务，我每天又要亲自给太后问安。
English: Now, however, I have to rush to deal with the affairs of the country, and I have to greet the empress dowager in person every day.

古文：今义渠之事已，寡人乃得以身受命。
现代文：现在义渠的事已经处理完毕，我这才能够亲自聆听你的教诲了。
English: Now that the matter of righteousness has been settled, I am able to listen to your teachings in person.

古文：躬窃闵然不敏，敬执宾主之礼。 
现代文：我深深感到自己愚钝，现在让我来行宾主礼仪吧。 
English: I feel deeply stupid, now let me do the host's etiquette.

古文：范睢辞让。
现代文：范雎表示了谦让。
English: Fan Ye expressed his modesty.

古文：是日见范睢，见者无不变色易容者。
现代文：这一天，凡是见到范雎的人，没有不对他肃然起敬、另眼相看的。
English: On this day, everyone who saw Fan Qi did not fail to respect him and look at him with different eyes.

古文：秦王屏左右，宫中虚无人，秦王跪而请曰： 先生何以幸教寡人？ 
现代文：秦王把左右的人支使出去，宫中只剩下他们两人，秦王直起腰腿，跪身请求说： 先生怎么来教导我呢？ 
English: The king of Qin sent out the attendants to the left and right, and only the two of them remained in the palace. The king of Qin straightened his waist and legs, knelt down and begged, "How can a teacher come and teach me?"

古文：范睢曰： 唯唯。 
现代文：范睢只是 啊啊 了两声。
English: Fan Ye just let out two "ah ah"s.

古文：有间，秦王复请，范睢曰： 唯唯。 
现代文：过了一会儿，秦王再次请求，范睢还是 啊啊 了两声。
English: After a while, Qin Wang once again asked Fan Ye to say "ah" twice.

古文：若是者三。
现代文：就这样一连三次。
English: Repeat like this three times.

古文：秦王跽曰： 先生不幸教寡人乎？ 
现代文：秦王又拜请说： 先生真的不教导我了吗？ 
English: Qin Wang also asked: "Is it true that my teacher doesn't teach me?"

古文：范睢谢曰： 非敢然也。
现代文：范睢便恭敬地解释说： 我不敢这样。
English: Fan Ye then respectfully explained: I don't dare to do that.

古文：臣闻始时吕尚之遇文王也，身为渔父而钓于渭阳之滨耳。若是者，交疏也。
现代文：我听说，当初吕尚与文王相遇的时候，他还是一个在渭河钓鱼的渔夫，那个时候他们关系很陌生疏远。
English: I heard that when Lushang and King Wen first met, he was still a fisherman fishing in the Li River. At that time, their relationship was very strange and distant.

古文：已一说而立为太师，载与俱归者，其言深也。
现代文：此后，吕尚一进言，就被尊为太师，和文王同车回去，这是因为他谈得很深入的缘故。
English: After that, as soon as Lü Shang made a speech, he was revered as a great teacher and went back with King Wen in the same car, because he had a very in-depth discussion.

古文：故文王果收功于吕尚，卒擅天下而身立为帝王。
现代文：所以文王终于因吕尚而建立了功业，最后掌握了天下的大权，自己立为帝王。
English: Therefore, King Wen finally established his career due to Lushang, and finally seized the power of the world and established himself as the emperor.

古文：即使文王疏吕望而弗与深言，是周无天子之德，而文、武无与成其王也。
现代文：如果文王当时疏远吕尚，不与他深谈，周朝就不可能有天子的圣德，而文王、武王也不可能成就帝王霸业。
English: If King Wen had alienated Lushan at that time and did not have in-depth discussions with him, the Zhou Dynasty would not have been able to have the virtue of the son of Heaven, and King Wen and King Wu would not have been able to achieve imperial hegemony.

古文：今臣，羁旅之臣也，交疏于王，而所愿陈者，皆匡君之之事，处人骨肉之间，愿以陈臣之陋忠，而未知王心也，所以王三问而不对者是也。
现代文：现在，我只是个旅居在秦国的宾客，与大王陌生疏远，但想陈述的又是纠正君王政务的问题，而且还会涉及到君王的骨肉之亲。我本想尽我的愚忠，可又不知大王的心意如何，所以大王三次问我，我都没有回答。
English: Now, I am just a guest living in Qin. I am a stranger and estranged from the great king, but I want to report on the issue of correcting the king's government affairs, and it will also involve the king's relatives. I wanted to do my best, but I didn't know what the king's intentions were, so the king asked me three times, and I didn't answer.

古文：臣非有所畏而不敢言也，知今日言之于前，而明日伏诛于后，然臣弗敢畏也。
现代文：我并不是害怕不敢进言。我知道，今天在大王面前说了，明天可能就会有杀生之祸。
English: It's not that I'm afraid to speak out. I know that if I speak out today in front of the king, there could be a massacre tomorrow.

古文：大王信行臣之言，死不足以为臣患，亡不足以为臣忧，漆身而为厉，被发而为狂，不足以为臣耻。
现代文：但是，我并不畏惧，大王真能按照我的策略去做，我即使身死，也不会以为是祸患；即使流亡，也不会以此为忧虑；即使不得已漆身为癞，披发为狂，也不会以此为耻辱。
English: However, I am not afraid. The great king can really do according to my strategy. Even if I die, I will not consider it a disaster; even if I go into exile, I will not worry about it; even if I have to paint my body and wear my hair crazy, I will not consider it a disgrace.

古文：五帝之圣而死，三王之仁而死，五伯之贤而死，乌获之力而死，奔、育之勇焉而死。
现代文：五帝是天下的圣人，但终究要死；三王是天下的仁人，但终究要死；五霸是天下的贤人，但终究要死；乌获是天下的大力士，但终究要死；孟贲、夏育是天下的勇士，但终究要死。
English: The Five Emperors are the saints of the world, but they will eventually die; the Three Kings are the benevolent people of the world, but they will eventually die; the Five Overlords are the wise men of the world, but they will eventually die; Wu Guo is the great wrestler of the world, but he will eventually die; Meng Xuan and Xia Yu are the warriors of the world, but they will eventually die.

古文：死者，人之所必不免也。
现代文：死，是所有人都无法避免的，这是自然界的必然规律。
English: Death is inevitable.

古文：处必然之势，可以少有补于秦，此臣之所大愿也，臣何患乎？
现代文：如果能够稍补益于秦国，这就是我最大的愿望，我还有什么担忧的呢？
English: If I can add a little benefit to Qin, this is my greatest wish. What else should I be worried about?

古文：伍子胥櫜载而出昭关，夜行而昼伏，至于凌水，无以饵其口，坐行蒲服，乞食于吴市，卒兴吴国，阖庐为霸。
现代文：伍子胥当年是躲藏在口袋里逃出昭关的，他晚上出行，白天躲藏，到了凌水，吃不上饭饿着肚皮，双膝跪地，双手爬行，在吴市讨饭度日，但终于帮助阖庐复兴了吴国，使吴王阖庐建立了霸业。
English: At that time, Wu Ziqi hid in his pocket to escape from Zhaoguan. He traveled at night and hid during the day. When he arrived at Lingshui, he was hungry and could not eat. He crawled on his hands and knees to beg for food in Wuxi. However, he finally helped Wu Ziqi to revive Wuxi and make Wuxi Wangqi establish hegemony.

古文：使臣得进谋如伍子胥，加之以幽囚，终身不复见，是臣说之行也，臣何忧乎？
现代文：如果让我像伍子胥一样能呈献计谋，即使遭到囚禁，终生不再出狱，只要能实现我的计谋，我又有什么担忧的呢？
English: If I, like Wu Zi Hua, can present a strategy, even if I am imprisoned, I will never get out of prison for the rest of my life, as long as I can realize my strategy, what should I worry about?

古文：箕子、接舆，漆身而为厉，被发而为狂，无益于殷、楚。
现代文：当初殷韩的箕子，楚国的接舆，漆身为癞，披发为狂，却终究无益于殷、楚。
English: At first, Yin Han's mule, Chu's yakitori yakitori, was lacquered and hairless, but in the end it did not benefit Yin and Chu.

古文：使臣得同行于箕子、接舆，漆身可以补所贤之主，是臣之大荣也，臣又何耻乎？
现代文：如果使我与箕子、接舆有同样的遭遇，也漆身为癞，只要有益于圣明的君王，这就是我最大的光荣，我又有什么可感到耻辱的呢？
English: If I am to suffer the same fate as the lame and the crippled, and if I am also to become a lame man, so long as I am useful to the king of light, this is my greatest glory, and what have I to be ashamed of?

古文：臣之所恐者，独恐臣死之后，天下见臣尽忠而身蹶也，是以杜口裹足，莫肯即秦耳。
现代文：我所担心的是，我死了以后，人们见到这样尽忠于大王，终究还是身死，因此人们都会闭口不言、裹足不前，不肯到秦国来。
English: What I'm worried about is that after I die, if people see me being so loyal to the great king, they will eventually die, so people will keep their mouths shut, their feet bound, and refuse to come to Qin.

古文：足下上畏太后之严，下惑奸臣之态；居深宫之中，不离保傅之手；终身暗惑，无与照奸；大者宗庙灭覆，小者身以孤危。
现代文：大王对上畏惧太后的威严，对下又迷惑于大臣的虚伪，住在深宫之中，不离宫中侍奉之人之手，终身迷惑糊涂，不能了解坏人坏事。这样，大而言之，则会使得国家遭受灭亡之祸，小而言之，则使得自己处于孤立危境。
English: On the one hand, the great king is afraid of the grandeur of the empress dowager; on the other hand, he is confused by the hypocrisy of the ministers; he lives in the depths of the palace and does not leave the hands of those who serve in the palace; he is confused all his life and cannot understand the bad people and bad things. In this way, on the whole, he will cause the country to suffer the scourge of destruction, and on a small scale, he will put himself in danger of isolation.

古文：此臣之所恐耳!
现代文：这就是我所担心害怕的。
English: That's what I'm worried about.

古文：若夫穷辱之事，死亡之患，臣弗敢畏也。
现代文：如果我死了，秦国却治理的很好，这比我活着要好得很多。 
English: If I die, Qin will be well governed, which is much better than if I were still alive.

古文：臣死而秦治，贤于生也。 
现代文：秦王跪身说： 先生怎么说出这样的话呢？
English: Qin Wang knelt down and said, "How could the teacher say such a thing?

古文：秦王跽曰： 先生是何言也!夫秦国僻远，寡人愚不肖，先生乃幸至此，此天以寡人慁先生，而存先王之庙也。
现代文：秦国是个偏僻边远的国家，我又是一个没有才能的愚人，先生能到敝国来，这是上天让我来请教先生，使得先王留下来的功业不至中断。
English: Qin is a remote and distant country, and I am a stupid person with no talent. If you can come to Shandong, it is because God has asked me to consult you, so that the work left behind by the former king will not be interrupted.

古文：寡人得受命于先生，此天所以幸先王而不弃其孤也。
现代文：我能接受先生的教导，这是上天要先生扶助先王，不抛弃我。
English: I can accept my master's teaching. It is God's will that my master should support the late king and not abandon me.

古文：先生奈何而言若此！
现代文：先生怎么说出这样的话呢？
English: How could the teacher say such a thing?

古文：事无大小，上及太后，下至大臣，愿先生悉以教寡人，无疑寡人也。 
现代文：今后事无大小，上至太后，下及大臣，所有一切，都希望先生一一给我教导，千万不要对我有什么疑惑。 
English: In the future, no matter how big or small the matter is, everyone from the emperor to the empress dowager, from the minister down to the minister, all of them, hope that you will teach me one by one, and never have any doubts about me.

古文：范睢再拜，秦王亦再拜。
现代文：范睢因而再次拜谢，秦王也再次回拜。
English: Fan Ye therefore bowed again, and Qin Wang also bowed again.

古文：范睢曰： 大王之国，北有甘泉、谷口，南带泾、渭，右陇、蜀，左关、阪；战车千乘，奋击百万。
现代文：范睢说： 大王的国家，北有甘泉、谷口，南绕泾水和渭水的广大地区，西南有陇山、蜀地，东面有函谷关、崤山；战车有千辆，精兵有百万。
English: Fan Rong said: The country of the great king has Ganquan and Taniguchi in the north, the vast areas around Surabaya and Surabaya in the south, Shaoshan and Shudi in the southwest, and Hangtuguan and Shaoshan in the east; there are a thousand chariots and a million elite soldiers.

古文：以秦卒之勇，车骑之多，以当诸侯，譬若驰韩卢而逐蹇兔也，霸王之业可致。
现代文：拿秦国兵卒的勇敢，车骑的众多，来抵挡诸侯国，就如猛犬追赶跛免一般，轻易就可造成霸王的功业。
English: Taking the bravery of the Qin soldiers and the numerous chariots and horses to resist the vassal states, just like a fierce dog chasing a donkey, can easily cause the work of the overlord.

古文：今反闭而不敢窥兵于山东者，是穰侯为国谋不忠，而大王之计有所失也。 
现代文：如今反而闭锁函谷关门，兵卒不敢向山以东诸侯窥视一下，这是秦国穰侯魏冉为秦国谋划不忠实，导致大王的决策失误啊！ 
English: Now, on the contrary, they have closed the gates of Hanyu, and the soldiers dare not look at the princes to the east of the mountain. This is the result of Qin's disloyalty to Wei Ran, who plotted for Qin, and led to the great king's decision-making mistakes!

古文：王曰： 愿闻所失计。 
现代文：秦王说： 我希望能听你说说失策在哪里。 
English: Qin Wang said: I hope I can listen to you talk about where the mistakes are.

古文：睢曰： 大王越韩、魏而攻强齐，非计也。
现代文：范睢说： 大王越过韩、魏的国土去进攻强齐，这不是好的计谋。
English: Fan Ye said: It is not a good strategy for the Great King to attack Qiang Qi across the territories of Han and Wei.

古文：少出师，则不足以伤齐；多之则害于秦。
现代文：派出的士兵少了，不足以使齐国有损伤；兵多了，则对秦国有害。
English: If the number of soldiers sent is small, it is not enough to cause damage to Qi; if the number of soldiers is large, it is harmful to Qin.

古文：臣意王之计欲少出师，而悉韩、魏之兵则不义矣。
现代文：我来为大王考虑这个计谋，如果秦国少派兵力，而让韩、魏派出全部的兵力，这样做就显得不够道义。
English: Let me consider this stratagem for the great king. If Qin dispatches a small number of troops, but lets Han and Wei send all their troops, it would be immoral.

古文：今见与国之不可亲，越人之国而攻，可乎？
现代文：现在显而易见的是，盟国之间不可以亲近，却越过他们的国土去进攻别的国家，这样做合适吗？
English: It is now clear that allies should not be intimate with each other, but is it appropriate to cross their territory to attack other countries?

古文：疏于计矣!
现代文：很显然是谋划得过于粗疏了！
English: Clearly, the plan was too crude!

古文：昔者齐人伐楚，战胜，破军杀将，再辟千里，肤寸之地无得者，岂齐不欲地哉，形弗能有也。
现代文：过去齐国攻打楚国，打了大胜仗，攻破了楚国的军队，擒杀了它的将帅，两次拓展疆域千里，但到最后连寸土也没得到，这难道是齐国不想得到土地吗？疆界形势不允许它占有啊！
English: In the past, Qi attacked Chu, won a great victory, defeated the army of Chu, killed its general, and twice expanded its territory by thousands of miles, but in the end it did not even get an inch of land. Is this because Qi does not want to get land? The border situation does not allow it to occupy it!

古文：诸侯见齐之罢露，君臣之不亲，举兵而伐之，主辱军破，为天下笑。
现代文：诸侯见齐国士卒疲弊君臣不和睦，就起兵来攻打它，齐缗王出走，军队被攻破，遭到天下人的耻笑。
English: When the princes saw that the soldiers of Qi were exhausted, the monarchs and ministers were not in harmony, they raised an army to attack it. The king of Qi fled, the army was defeated, and it was laughed at by the world.

古文：所以然者，以其伐楚而肥韩、魏也。
现代文：落得如此下场，就因为齐伐楚而使韩、魏获得土地壮大起来的缘故。
English: It ended up like this because Han and Wei gained land and became powerful as a result of the war.

古文：此所谓藉贼兵而赍盗食者也。
现代文：这就是所说的借给强盗兵器而资助小偷粮食啊！
English: This is what is meant by lending robbers weapons to finance the theft of grain!

古文：王不如远交而近攻，得寸则王之寸，得尺亦王之尺也。
现代文：王不如采取联合远国而进攻较近国家的策略，得到一寸土地就是王的已寸土地，得到一尺地就是王的一尺地。
English: It is better for the king to adopt the strategy of uniting distant countries and attacking closer countries. If you get an inch of land, it is the king's inch of land. If you get a foot of land, it is the king's foot of land.

古文：今舍此而远攻，不亦缪乎？
现代文：如今舍近而攻远，这难道不是错误吗？
English: Isn't it a mistake now to attack from afar rather than from close by?

古文：且昔者，中山之地，方五百里，赵独擅之，功成、名立、利附，则天下莫能害。
现代文：从前，中山国的土地，方圆有里，赵国单独把它吞并，功业也成就了，声名也树立了，利益也得到了，天下也没能把赵国怎么样。
English: Once upon a time, the land of Zhongshan Province was surrounded by mountains, and Zhao Province alone annexed it. Accomplishments were also made, reputation was established, and benefits were obtained. The world could not do anything to Zhao Province.

古文：今韩、魏，中国之处，而天下之枢也。
现代文：如今韩、魏的形势，居各诸侯国的中央，是天下的枢纽。
English: Today, the situation of Han and Wei is at the center of all the principalities, and is the hub of the world.

古文：王若欲霸，必亲中国而以为天下枢，以威楚、赵。
现代文：大王如果想要成就霸业，一定先要亲近居中的国家而用它做天下的枢纽，来威胁楚国和赵国。
English: If the great king wants to achieve hegemony, he must first be close to the middle country and use it as the hub of the world to threaten Chu and Zhao.

古文：赵彊则楚附，楚彊则赵附。
现代文：赵国强盛，那么楚就要附秦；楚国强盛，那么赵就要附秦。
English: If the state of Zhao is strong, then Chu will attach Qin; if the state of Chu is strong, then Zhao will attach Qin.

古文：楚、赵附则齐必惧，惧必卑辞重币以事秦，齐附而韩、魏可虚也。 
现代文：楚、赵都来附秦，齐国一定恐慌，齐国恐慌肯定会卑下言辞，加重财礼来服侍秦国。如果齐国归附，那么韩、魏就有虚可乘了。 
English: Chu and Zhao both came to annex Qin, Qi must have panicked, and the panic of Qi would certainly lower the rhetoric and increase the wealth to serve Qin. If Qi was annexed, then Han and Wei would have something to take advantage of.

古文：王曰： 寡人欲亲魏，魏多变之国也，寡人不能亲。
现代文：秦王说： 寡人本想亲睦魏国，但魏的态度变幻莫测，寡人无法亲善它。
English: King Qin said: Many people originally wanted to be friendly with Wei, but Wei's attitude is unpredictable, and few people can be friendly with it.

古文：请问亲魏奈何？ 
现代文：请问怎么办才能亲魏呢？ 
English: What should I do to be able to kiss Wei?

古文：范睢曰： 卑辞重币以事之。
现代文：范睢说： 用卑下的言辞，加重财礼来服侍它。
English: Fan Ye said: Serve it with despicable words and increased wealth and ceremony.

古文：不可，削地而赂之。不可，举兵而伐之。 
现代文：这样不行，就割地贿赂它，这样还不行，就起兵来攻伐它。 
English: If that doesn't work, they'll cut the land and bribe it. If that doesn't work, they'll raise an army to fight it.

古文：于是举兵而攻邢丘，邢丘拔而魏请附。
现代文：于是起兵来攻打邢丘，邢丘被攻陷，而魏国果然来请求归附。
English: As a result, troops were raised to attack Shaoqiu, Shaoqiu was conquered, and the State of Wei actually came to request its annexation.

古文：曰： 秦、韩之地形，相错如绣。
现代文：范睢说： 秦、韩两国的地形，相交纵如锦绣。
English: Fan Rong said: The topography of Qin and South Korea intersect vertically like a brocade.

古文：秦之有韩，若木之有蠢，人之病心腹。
现代文：秦旁有韩存在，就像树木有虫，人有心腹之疾一样。
English: Han exists next to Qin, just as trees have insects and people have diseases of the heart and abdomen.

古文：天下有变，为秦害者莫大于韩。
现代文：天下一朝有变，危害秦国的，没有比韩国再大的。
English: The world is changing, and there is no greater threat to Qin than Korea.

古文：王不如收韩。 
现代文：王不如使韩归附于秦。 
English: It would be better for the emperor to contain South Korea.

古文：王曰： 寡人欲收韩，不听，为之奈何？ 
现代文：秦王说： 寡人打算使韩来附，韩不听从，可怎么办呢？ 
English: King Qin said, "Many people are trying to make Han Han submit, but Han Han won't listen, so what should we do?

古文：范睢曰： 举兵而攻荥阳，则成皋之路不通；北斩太行之道，则上党之兵不下；一举而攻荥阳，则其国断而为三。
现代文：范睢说： 起兵攻打荥阳，那么成皋的道路就不通了；北部截断太行的道路，那么上党的兵也就不能南下了；一举而拿下荥阳，那么韩国将分成孤立的三块。
English: Fan Yu said: If the army attacks Poyang, then the road to Chengdu will be impassable; if the road to Taihang is cut off in the north, then the soldiers of the party will not be able to go south; if Poyang is taken at one stroke, then South Korea will be divided into three isolated pieces.

古文：魏、韩见必亡，焉得不听？
现代文：韩国看到自身将要覆亡，怎么能够不听从呢？
English: How could South Korea, seeing its own imminent demise, not comply?

古文：韩听而霸事可成也。 
现代文：韩国一顺从，那么霸业就可以成功了。 
English: As soon as South Korea complies, then hegemony can succeed.

古文：王曰： 善。 
现代文：秦王说： 这很好！ 
English: Japan is preparing to send an envoy to South Korea.

