古文：朱异字彦和，吴郡钱唐人也。
现代文：朱异字彦和，吴郡钱塘人。
English: Zhu Xizhi, a native of Qiantang, Wuxi County.

古文：祖昭之，以学解称于乡。
现代文：祖父朱昭之，因为学问通达在家乡享有名望。
English: His grandfather, Zhu Zhaozhi, was renowned in his hometown for his knowledge.

古文：叔父谦之字处光，以义烈知名。
现代文：叔父朱谦之字处光，以侠义刚烈知名。
English: Uncle Zhu Qian is known for his chivalry and bravery.

古文：年数岁，所生母亡，昭之假葬于田侧，爲族人朱幼方燎火所焚。
现代文：谦之几岁时候，生母去世，父亲昭之把她临时埋在田边，被同族人朱幼方放火烧田时烧掉了。
English: When he was a few years old, his birth mother died, and his father, Akiyuki, buried her temporarily on the edge of the field. She was burned by his compatriot, Zhu Yufang, when he set fire to the field.

古文：同産姊密语之，谦之虽小，便哀感如持丧，长不昏娶。
现代文：谦之的同母姐姐偷偷告诉他，他虽然年幼，就能悲痛得像是守丧一样，长大了也不婚娶。
English: His mother's sister secretly told him that although he was young, he could grieve like a mourner, and would not marry when he grew up.

古文：齐永明中，手刃杀幼方，诣狱自系。
现代文：齐永明年间，他亲手杀了朱幼方，然后到官自首。
English: In the middle of the Qiyong year, he killed Zhu Youfang with his own hands, and then turned himself in to the authorities.

古文：县令申灵勖表上之。齐武帝嘉其义，虑相报复，乃遣谦之随曹武西行。
现代文：县令申灵勖上奏朝廷，齐武帝赞许他的义气，怕两家互相报复，就派他跟随曹武到西部去。
English: County magistrate Shen Ling reported to the imperial court, and Emperor Qiwu praised his loyalty. Fearing that the two families would retaliate against each other, he sent him to the west to follow Cao Wu.

古文：将发，幼方子怿于津阳门伺杀谦之。
现代文：将要出发时，幼方的儿子朱怿在津阳门等候刺杀了谦之。
English: When they were about to leave, the young man's son, Zhu Xi, waited at the Tsuyang Gate and assassinated Qian Zhi.

古文：谦之兄巽之，即异父也，又刺杀怿。
现代文：谦之的哥哥巽之，就是朱异的父亲，又刺杀了朱怿。
English: Hanzhi's brother, Zhu Zhi, the father of Zhu Yizhong, also assassinated Zhu Yizhong.

古文：有司以闻。武帝曰： 此皆是义事，不可问。 
现代文：有关部门官员把这情况上报，齐武帝说： 这些都是属于大义之事，不可审讯。 
English: The officials of the relevant departments reported this situation, and Emperor Qiwu said: These are all matters of justice and cannot be tried.

古文：悉赦之。
现代文：把两家全部赦免。
English: The two families were completely pardoned.

古文：吴兴沈顗闻而叹曰： 弟死于孝，兄殉于义，孝友之节，萃此一门。 
现代文：吴兴沈靑听说了叹息道： 弟弟死于孝，哥哥循于义，孝敬父母和友爱兄弟的气节，会集到他们一家了。 
English: Hearing this, Wu Xing Shenya sighed, "My younger brother died of filial piety, my elder brother followed righteousness, and the spirit of filial piety, respect for parents, and brotherly love will gather in their family."

古文：巽之字处林，有志节，着辩相论。
现代文：巽之字处林，有志气节操，著《辩相论》。
English: He is the author of "Dialogue of the Phases."

古文：幼时，顾欢见而异之，以女妻焉。
现代文：小时候，顾欢见了觉得他与众不同，把女儿嫁给他。
English: As a child, Gu Huan saw that he was different and married his daughter to him.

古文：仕齐官至吴平令。
现代文：他在齐朝官作到吴平县令。
English: He rose through the ranks of officials in the Qi Dynasty to become the governor of Wuping County.

古文：异年数岁，外祖顾欢抚之，谓其祖昭之曰： 此儿非常器，当成卿门户。 
现代文：朱异几岁的时候，外祖父顾欢抚摸着他，对他爷爷朱昭之说： 这孩子不是一般材料，会光耀你的门庭。 
English: When Zhu Yiren was a few years old, his maternal grandfather Gu Huan touched him and said to his grandfather Zhu Zhaozhi: This child is not ordinary material, he will shine in your front yard.

古文：年十馀，好群聚蒱博，颇爲乡党所患。
现代文：十几岁时，喜欢聚众赌博，成为家乡的祸害。
English: As a teenager, he liked to gamble in large groups and became a scourge in his hometown.

古文：及长，乃折节从师。
现代文：等长大后，却改弦更张从师求学。
English: However, after growing up, he changed his mind and decided to study under a teacher.

古文：梁初开五馆，异服膺于博士明山宾。
现代文：梁朝初年开设五经书馆，朱异信服并就学于博士明山宾。
English: In the first year of the Liang Dynasty, the Five Classics Library was opened. Zhu Yixin was convinced and studied under Dr. Ming Shanbin.

古文：居贫，以佣书自业，写毕便诵。
现代文：他生活贫困，靠给别人抄书维持生活，抄写完了自己就诵读起来。
English: He lived in poverty and supported himself by copying books for others. When he had finished copying, he began to read himself.

古文：遍览五经，尤明礼、易。
现代文：他通读了《五经》，尤其对《礼》、《易》钻研得透彻。
English: He read through the "Five Classics," especially the "Ritual" and "Elegy," which he studied thoroughly.

古文：涉猎文史，兼通杂艺，博弈书算，皆其所长。
现代文：还涉猎文学史学，兼通各种技艺，六博、围棋、书画、算术，都是他的专长。
English: He also dabbles in literature and history, and is also proficient in various skills, including chess, Go, painting and calligraphy, and arithmetic, all of which are his specialties.

古文：年二十，出都诣尚书令沈约，面试之，因戏异曰： 卿年少，何乃不廉？ 
现代文：二十岁时离开家乡，到京都拜见尚书令沈约，沈约对他进行面试后，跟他开玩笑说： 你这么年轻，怎么这样不廉洁呢？ 
English: At the age of twenty, he left his hometown and went to Kyoto to meet Shang Shuling and Shen You. After Shen You interviewed him, he joked with him: You are so young, why are you so dishonest?

古文：异逡巡未达其旨，约乃曰： 天下唯有文义棋书，卿一时将去，可谓不廉也。 
现代文：朱异疑惑不明其意，沈约于是说： 天下只有诗文、弈棋、书法这些本事，你一下全都拿走了，可以说是不廉洁啊。 
English: Zhu Yiyi's doubt was unclear, so Shen Yu said: There are only poems, games, and calligraphy skills in the world, and you took them all at once, which can be said to be dishonest.

古文：寻上书言建康宜置狱司，比廷尉。敕付尚书详议，从之。
现代文：不久沈约上书说建康城应该设一个司法部门，等同中央的廷尉，皇帝下令交尚书省仔细研究，最后批准了这个建议。
English: Soon after, Shen Yuan wrote a letter saying that Jiankang should have a judicial department, equivalent to the imperial lieutenant of the central government. The emperor ordered that it be submitted to the Ministry of Education and Culture for careful study, and finally approved the proposal.

古文：旧制，年二十五方得释褐，时异适二十一，特敕擢爲扬州议曹从事史。
现代文：按照旧制，年龄二十五岁才能作官，当时朱异刚二十一岁，朝廷特别下诏提拔他为扬州议曹从事史。
English: According to the old system, officials could only be appointed at the age of twenty-five. At that time, Zhu Yigang was twenty-one years old, and the imperial court specially promoted him to Yangzhou Councillor to engage in history.

古文：寻有诏求异能之士，五经博士明山宾表荐异： 年时尚少，德备老成，在独无散逸之想，处闇有对宾之色。器宇弘深，神表峰峻。
现代文：不久有诏令要寻求有特殊才能的人士，《五经》博士明山宾上表荐举朱异，说他 年纪尚轻，却已品德优良而老成持重，在人背后一人独处时也没有胡思乱想，还是行为端正如对宾客，器宇不凡，神采超拔。
English: Soon, there was a decree to seek out people with special talents. "Five Classics" doctor Mingshan recommended Zhu Rong to the guests, saying that he was still young, but he had a good moral character and was old-fashioned. When he was alone, he did not think about anything. He still behaved as if he were a guest. He was extraordinary and brilliant.

古文：金山万丈，缘陟未登；玉海千寻，窥映不测。加以珪璋新琢，锦组初构，触响铿锵，遇采便发。
现代文：好比万丈金山，还未攀援到顶；就像千寻玉海，已能窥见幽深；又好比玉器才加雕琢，锦带刚刚编织，是钟磬只要触动便会铿锵作响，是鲜花只管采摘就会开放。
English: It is like a mountain of gold that has not yet climbed to the top; it is like a sea of jade that has been able to glimpse the depths; it is like jade that has just been carved, the brocade has just been woven, the bell will ring as soon as it is touched, and the flowers will open as soon as they are picked.

古文：观其信行，非唯十室所稀，若使负重遥途，必有千里之用。 
现代文：观察他的诚信行为，不只是十家也难出一个，如果委他以重任，一定能是栋梁之材 。
English: Observing his honest behavior, it is difficult for more than ten families to find one. If he is entrusted with an important task, he will surely be a pillar.

古文：武帝召见，使说孝经、周易义，甚悦之，谓左右曰： 朱异实异。 
现代文：武帝召见朱异，让他讲说《孝经》、《周易》的意义，听后很满意，对左右的人说： 朱异的确是奇异。 
English: Emperor Wu summoned Zhu Yiyi and asked him to explain the meaning of "The Book of Filial Piety" and "Zhou Yi." After listening, he was very satisfied and said to the people around him: "Zhu Yiyi is indeed strange.

古文：后见明山宾曰： 卿所举殊得人。 
现代文：后来见到明山宾又说： 你所荐举的人很合适。 
English: Later, when he saw Mingshan Bin, he said, "The person you recommended is very suitable.

古文：仍召直西省，俄兼太学博士。
现代文：于是召他到中书省值班，不久又兼太学博士。
English: He was then called to duty at the Chinese Ministry of Education, and was soon promoted to Doctor of Science.

古文：其年，帝自讲孝经，使异执读。
现代文：那一年，武帝亲自讲解《孝经》，让朱异诵读。
English: That year, Emperor Wu personally explained the "Filial Piety Sutra" and had Zhu Yixing recite it.

古文：迁尚书仪曹郎，入兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：又改任尚书仪曹郎，入宫兼中书通事舍人。
English: He was also appointed as the secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, and entered the Imperial Palace as the secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：后除中书郎，时秋日，始拜，有飞蝉正集异武冠上，时咸谓蝉珥之兆。
现代文：后来又被任为中书郎，当时是秋天，委任仪式刚开始，有蝉飞落到朱异帽子上，当时人们都说这是要加蝉珥装饰升官的兆头。
English: Later, he was appointed to the post of Chushuro. At that time, it was autumn and the appointment ceremony had just begun. A cicada flew down onto Zhu Ying's hat. At the time, people said that this was a sign that the post would be decorated with cicadas.

古文：迁太子右卫率。
现代文：后升任太子右卫率。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of the prince's right guard.

古文：普通五年，大举北侵，魏徐州刺史元法僧遣使请举地内属，诏有司议其虚实。
现代文：普通五年，梁朝大举北侵，魏徐州刺史元法僧派使者来请求以全境归降，武帝让有关官员们讨论他投降的真伪。
English: In the following five years, the Liang Dynasty launched a large-scale invasion of the north, the Wei and Xuzhou dynasties sent envoys to request the surrender of the whole territory, and Emperor Wu asked the relevant officials to discuss the authenticity of his surrender.

古文：异曰： 自王师北讨，克获相继，徐州地转削弱，咸愿归罪。
现代文：朱异说： 自从王师北伐，连战连胜，徐州的地盘已经缩小，魏国人都愿意归顺。
English: Zhu Ying said: Since Wang Shih's Northern Expedition and his consecutive victories, the territory of Xuzhou has shrunk, and the people of Wei are willing to submit.

古文：法僧惧祸，其降必非僞也。 
现代文：法僧也怕大祸临头，他的投降一定不是假的。 
English: The Dharma monk is also afraid of the impending disaster, and his surrender must not be fake.

古文：帝仍遣异报法僧，并敕衆军应接，受异节度。
现代文：武帝就派朱异去告知元法僧，并命令各路军队接应，受朱异指挥。
English: Emperor Wu sent Zhu Rong to inform the former monk, and ordered all armies to respond and be commanded by Zhu Rong.

古文：及至，法僧遵承朝旨，如异策焉。
现代文：到徐州后，法僧听从梁朝的意旨，如朱异所说的一样。
English: After arriving in Xuzhou, the monk obeyed the will of the Liang Dynasty, just as Zhu Yizhong said.

古文：迁散骑常侍。
现代文：朱异后升任散骑常侍。
English: Promoted to Sangetsu-no-Zenshi.

古文：异容貌魁梧，能举止，虽出自诸生，甚闲军国故实。
现代文：朱异容貌魁梧，举止有风度，虽然是读书人出身，却熟悉政治军事方面的旧事。
English: Zhu Yian has a burly appearance and a personable demeanor. Although he was born as a reader, he is familiar with the old political and military affairs.

古文：自周舍卒后，异代掌机密，其军旅谋谟，方镇改换，朝仪国典，诏诰敕书，并典掌之。
现代文：自周扌舍死后，朱异代替他作中书舍人，掌管机要，国家的军事计划，地方官员任免，朝廷仪式与国家庆典，皇帝的诏书文告敕令，都归他主持掌管。
English: After the death of Zhou Enshi, Zhu Yiyi replaced him as the chief of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office.

古文：每四方表疏，当局簿领，谘详请断，填委于前，异属辞落纸，览事下议，纵横敏赡，不暂停笔，顷刻之间，诸事便了。
现代文：经常是各地的报告，本部的文书，谘询情况的，请求裁决的，满满地堆在面前，朱异一面考虑一面落笔，一面阅文一面批示，敏捷周严，笔一刻不停，顷刻之间，所有公务便处理完毕。
English: Reports from various regions, documents from the head office, status of consultations, requests for rulings are often piled up in front of him. Zhu Rong ponders, writes, reads, and gives instructions. He is quick and meticulous, writing non-stop, and all official business is completed in an instant.

古文：迁右卫将军。啓求于仪贤堂奉述武帝老子义，敕许之。
现代文：改任右卫将军，上书请求在仪贤堂讲解武帝的《老子义》，武帝批准了。
English: He was reassigned to the post of General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, and submitted a request to explain Emperor Wu's "Lao Zi Yi" in the Hall of Ceremonies, which was approved by Emperor Wu.

古文：及就讲，朝士及道俗听者千馀人，爲一时之盛。
现代文：等到讲授时，朝廷官员和社会上道俗听众有千余人，成为一时盛况。
English: By the time of the lecture, there were more than a thousand people in the audience, including court officials and members of the public, making it a momentous occasion.

古文：时城西又开士林馆以延学士，异与左丞贺琛递日述武帝礼记中庸义。
现代文：当时城西又开设士林馆招揽学士，朱异与尚书左丞贺琛轮番去讲述武帝的《礼记中庸义》。
English: At that time, the Shilin Museum was opened in the west of the city to recruit scholars, and Zhu Yixing and Shang Shuzhong He Ying took turns to narrate Emperor Wu's "Rites and Decrees of the Middle Ages."

古文：皇太子又召异于玄圃讲易。
现代文：皇太子又召朱异到玄圃讲《易》。
English: The crown prince also invited Zhu Rong to the garden to speak about Yi.

古文：大同八年，改加侍中。
现代文：大同八年，改加封侍中。
English: In the eighth year of the same year, he was given the additional title of Junior Chamberlain.

古文：异博解多艺，围碁上品，而贪财冒贿，欺罔视听，以伺候人主意，不肯进贤黜恶。
现代文：朱异博通多种技艺，围棋水平上乘，但贪财受贿，欺下瞒上，看皇上眼色行事，不肯推荐贤士贬黜坏人。
English: Zhu Yi was well-versed in a variety of skills. He was an excellent Go player, but he was greedy for money, took bribes, deceived and concealed, and acted under the emperor's eye. He refused to recommend good men and disparaged bad men.

古文：四方饷馈，曾无推拒，故远近莫不忿疾。
现代文：各地的赠送，从不拒绝，因此招致到处痛恨。
English: Gifts from all over the country, never refused, thus causing hatred everywhere.

古文：起宅东陂，穷乎美丽，晚日来下，酣饮其中。
现代文：在东陂营造房舍，极其奢华，太阳西斜，就到那里吃喝玩乐。
English: Houses are built in Donglu, which are extremely luxurious, and the sun sets in the west, so people go there to eat, drink and have fun.

古文：每迫曛黄，虑台门将阖，乃引其卤簿自宅至城，使捉城门停留管钥。
现代文：每到黄昏时，怕台门关了回不去，就带上他的卤簿从东陂的宅第到台城，让卤簿把城门钥匙掌握。
English: Whenever it got to dusk, afraid that the gate would be closed and he would not be able to get back, he would take his ledger from Donglu's house to Taicheng, and let the ledger hold the key to the gate.

古文：既而声势所驱，熏灼内外，産与羊侃相埒。
现代文：后来权势益盛，炙手可热，家产和羊侃相当。
English: Later, power and influence became more and more prosperous, and the hot hand was hot, and the family property was equivalent to that of a sheep.

古文：好饮食，极滋味声色之娱，子鹅炰鰌不辍于口，虽朝谒，从车中必齎饴饵。
现代文：喜欢吃喝，极尽滋味声色的享受，嘴里不断嫩鹅烤泥鳅，即使去上朝，跟随的车里也一定要带上好吃的东西。
English: I like to eat and drink, enjoy the taste and sound to the full, and my mouth is constantly moist from roasting a tender goose. Even if I go to the morning, I must bring something delicious in the car that follows.

古文：而轻傲朝贤，不避贵戚。人或诲之，异曰： 我寒士也，遭逢以至今日。
现代文：然而对于朝中的士族贵戚态度轻蔑傲慢，有人劝他不要这样，朱异说： 我出身寒门，碰上机会才得到今天的地步。
English: However, he was contemptuous and arrogant towards the nobles and aristocrats in the court. Someone advised him not to do so. Zhu Ying said, "I came from a poor family and only got to where I am today by chance.

古文：诸贵皆恃枯骨见轻，我下之，则爲蔑尤甚。我是以先之。 
现代文：这班贵人都仗恃他们死去的祖宗炫耀门第而轻视我，我要是对他们恭谦，他们就更瞧不起我，因此我就要先瞧不起他们。 
English: All these nobles despise me because they boast of their dead ancestors. If I were to be humble to them, they would despise me even more, so I will despise them first.

古文：自徐勉、周舍卒后，外朝则何敬容，内省则异。
现代文：自从徐勉、周扌舍死后，掌权的外朝有何敬容，宫内有朱异。
English: Since the death of Xu and Zhou Enshi, there has been a great deal of respect for the ruling dynasties.

古文：敬容质悫无文，以纲维爲己任，异文华敏洽，曲营世誉，二人行异而俱见幸。
现代文：敬容质朴谨慎不善文辞，以国家政务为己任；朱异富于文采聪敏博学，想方设法沽名钓誉。二人行为不同而都受到宠幸。
English: Respectful, simple, prudent, and not good at words, he took national government affairs as his duty; Zhu Yixing was rich in literature, clever and erudite, and tried his best to win fame and reputation. Both of them were favored because of their different behaviors.

古文：异在内省十馀年，未尝被谴。
现代文：朱异在内省十余年，从未受过责备。
English: Zhu Yi has never been reproached for more than ten years of introspection.

古文：司农卿傅岐尝谓异曰： 今圣上委政于君，安得每事从旨。
现代文：司农卿傅岐曾经对朱异说： 如今圣上把国家重任委托给先生，您怎么可以什么事都一味顺从圣上的意思呢？
English: The Secretary of Agriculture Fu Qi once said to Zhu Yiming: Now that the Holy Father has entrusted the important task of the country to you, how can you blindly obey the Holy Father's will in everything?

古文：顷者外闻殊有异论。 
现代文：近来听说外边很有些闲话啊。 
English: I've heard there's been a lot of gossip out there lately.

古文：异曰： 政言我不能谏争耳。
现代文：朱异回答说： 这正说明我不能违背皇上的意思来争辩。
English: Zhu Rong replied, "This just shows that I can't argue against the emperor's will.

古文：当今天子圣明，吾岂可以其所闻干忤天听。 
现代文：如今天子圣明，我怎么能以道听途说来干扰天子的视听呢。 
English: If the Son of God is holy, how can I use hearsay to interfere with the Son of God's vision and hearing?

古文：太清二年，爲中领军，舍人如故。
现代文：太清二年，任中领军，中书舍人的职务不变。
English: In the second year of the Taiching Dynasty, he was appointed as the leader of the middle army, and the duties of the middle school students remained unchanged.

古文：初，武帝梦中原尽平，举朝称庆，甚悦，以语异曰： 吾生平少梦，梦必有实。 
现代文：当初，梁武帝梦见中原全部平定，满朝称庆，非常高兴，告诉朱异说： 我平时很少做梦，但一做梦就会应验。 
English: At first, Emperor Liangwu dreamt that the Central Plains had been completely pacified. The Manchurian government was very happy and congratulated him. He told Zhu Yiyi, "I rarely dream, but when I do, my dream will come true."

古文：异曰： 此宇内方一之征。 
现代文：朱异说： 这是天下一统的征兆。 
English: Zhu Ying said: This is a sign of the unification of the world.

古文：及侯景降，敕召群臣廷议，尚书仆射谢举等以爲不可许。
现代文：等到侯景要求投降，武帝召集群臣上朝讨论，尚书仆射谢举等人认为不能答应。
English: When Hou Jing asked for surrender, Emperor Wu summoned a group of courtiers to go to the North to discuss. Shang Shufu, Shie Xie Zhuo and others thought that they could not agree.

古文：武帝欲纳之，未决，尝夙兴至武德合口，独言： 我国家犹若金瓯，无一伤缺，承平若此，今便受地，讵是事宜？
现代文：武帝想接纳侯景，但还决定不下来。曾有一次早起来到武德阁，自言自语说： 我们国家好像金瓯一样，完整无缺，如此太平无事，如今轻易地增加土地，难道合乎情理吗？
English: Emperor Wu wanted to receive Houjing, but he still decided not to come down. Once upon a time, he got up early to go to the Wude Pavilion and said to himself: Our country is like a golden calf, complete and perfect, so peaceful and tranquil. Now it is easy to increase land. Is it reasonable?

古文：脱至纷纭，悔无所及。 
现代文：万一招致什么麻烦，就后悔莫及了。 
English: In the unlikely event that the move causes any trouble, there will be no time to regret it.

古文：异探帝微旨，答曰： 圣明御宇，上应苍玄，北土遗黎，谁不慕仰，爲无机会，未达其心。
现代文：朱异揣摸武帝的心思，回答说： 如今圣明治理天下，上合天意，北国的遗民百姓，谁不仰慕我朝？只是没有机会，无法实现他们的心愿。
English: Zhu Yi guessed Emperor Wu's thoughts and replied, "Nowadays, the Holy Ming Dynasty rules the world. It is God's will that Shanghe should rule the world. The remaining people in the northern country, who do not admire our dynasty? However, they do not have the opportunity to realize their wishes.

古文：今侯景分魏国太半，远归圣朝；若不容受，恐绝后来之望。 
现代文：如今侯景割据地盘占东魏的大半，从远方来归顺我朝，如果不予接纳，恐怕断绝了后来人的希望。 
English: Today, most of the Eastern Wei territory is occupied by Houjing, who came from afar to submit to our dynasty. If he is not accepted, I am afraid that the hope of later generations will be cut off.

古文：帝深纳异言，又感前梦，遂纳之。
现代文：武帝很同意他的话，又想到以前的梦，于是就接纳了侯景。
English: Emperor Wu agreed with his words and thought of his previous dream, so he accepted Houjing.

古文：及贞阳侯败没，帝忧曰： 今勿作晋家事乎？ 
现代文：等到贞阳侯萧渊明被东魏战败俘虏，武帝忧愁地说： 如今难道要学晋朝的榜样了吗？ 
English: When the Zhengyang lord Xiao Yuanming was defeated and captured by the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Wu said sadly, "Do we have to follow the example of the Jin Dynasty now?"

古文：寻而贞阳自魏遣使述魏相高澄欲申和睦。敕有司定议。
现代文：不久萧渊明从东魏派人来转达东魏丞相高澄要求讲和的意思，武帝让有关官员商议。
English: Soon, Xiao Yuanming sent someone from the Eastern Wei Dynasty to convey the meaning of the East Wei Minister Gao Cheng's request for peace, and Emperor Wu let the relevant officials discuss.

古文：异又议以和爲允，帝从之。
现代文：朱异又说以讲和为适当，武帝听从了他的意见。
English: Zhu Yixing also said that it was appropriate to make peace, and Emperor Wu listened to his opinion.

古文：其年六月，遣建康令谢挺、通直郎徐陵使北通好。
现代文：当年六月，派遣建康令谢挺、通直郎徐陵出使北方与东魏和好。
English: In June of that year, Jiankang ordered Xie Ting and Tong Naorong Xuling to send envoys to the north.

古文：时侯景镇寿春，疑惧，累啓请绝和，及致书与异饷金二百两，又致书于制局监周石珍令具申闻。
现代文：当时侯景镇守寿春，怕自己被梁朝出卖而感到疑惧，屡次上书梁武帝请求不要与魏讲和，并写信给朱异，送他黄金二百两，又给制局监周石珍写信，请他在朝廷上给自己说话。
English: At that time, Hou Jingzhen Shouchun, fearing that he would be betrayed by the Liang Dynasty, felt suspicious and repeatedly wrote to Emperor Liang Wu to request that he not make peace with Wei, and wrote to Zhu Yi to give him two hundred taels of gold. He also wrote to Zhou Shizhen, the Supervisor of the Bureau of Weights and Measures, to ask him to speak for himself at the court.

古文：异纳其金而不停北使，景遂反。
现代文：朱异收下了他的赠金却没有阻止朝廷派使节和东魏议和，侯景于是造反。
English: Zhu Yixing accepted his donation but failed to prevent the imperial envoys from negotiating a peace treaty with the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and Hou Jing rebelled.

古文：初，景谋反，合州刺史鄱阳王范、司州刺史羊鸦仁并累有啓闻。异以景孤立寄命，必不应尔，乃谓使曰： 鄱阳王遂不许国家有一客！ 
现代文：当初，侯景酝酿造反时，合州刺史鄱阳王萧范、司州刺史羊鸦仁都屡次有奏章上报，朱异认为侯景亡命投靠，孤单寄身梁朝，一定不会造反，就对萧范派来报奏的信使说： 鄱阳王竟然不能容许国家有一位客人吗！ 
English: At the beginning, when Hou Jing was brewing a rebellion, Hezhou's secretary Shenyang Wang Xiao Fan and Shizhou's secretary Yang Raven Ren both repeatedly submitted their reports. Zhu Ying believed that Hou Jing, who had defected and was alone in the Liang Dynasty, would certainly not rebel. He said to the messenger sent by Xiao Fan to report: Can King Shenyang actually not allow the country to have a guest!

古文：并不爲闻奏。
现代文：把他们的奏章都压住不上报。
English: They can't get their songs in the paper.

古文：及贼至板桥，使前寿州司马徐思玉先至求见于上，上召问之，思玉紿称反贼，请闲陈事。
现代文：等贼兵到了板桥，侯景派前寿州司马徐思玉先来求见武帝，武帝召问他，思玉谎称反对侯景，请回避众人再奏事。
English: When the bandits arrived at Banqiao, Xu Siyu, the former Shoushu Sima of the Houjing faction, first came to see Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu summoned him. Siyu lied that he was against Houjing. Please avoid everyone and report the matter again.

古文：上将屏左右，舍人高善宝曰： 思玉从贼中来，情僞难测，安可使其独在殿上。 
现代文：武帝正要左右退出，舍人高善宝说： 思玉从贼军方面来，真假难辨，怎能让他一人独自和皇上留在殿上呢。 
English: Emperor Wu was about to withdraw left and right, but Gao Zhenbao said: Siyu came from the rebel army, it is difficult to distinguish whether it is true or not. How can he be left alone with the emperor in the palace?

古文：时异侍坐，乃曰： 徐思玉岂是刺客邪？
现代文：当时朱异在场陪坐，反驳说： 徐思玉难道是刺客吗？
English: At that time, Zhu Yiyu, who was present, countered: Is Xu Siyu really an assassin?

古文：何言之僻。 
现代文：说的也太离奇了吧。 
English: That's just too bizarre.

古文：善宝曰： 思玉已将临贺入北，讵可轻信。 
现代文：善宝说： 思玉已经把临贺王引到故国去了，怎能轻信他。 
English: Zhenbao said, "Sidama has already led King Lin He to his home country, how can I trust him?"

古文：言未卒，思玉果出贼啓，异大惭。
现代文：话没说完，思玉果然掏出侯景的书信，朱异非常惭愧。
English: Before she had finished speaking, Siyu pulled out Houjing's letter. Zhu Ying was very ashamed.

古文：贼遂以讨异及陆验爲名。
现代文：侯景遂即以讨伐朱异和陆验为名进逼建康。
English: Hou Jing then went to Jiankang in the name of fighting Zhu Yiyi and Lu Xun.

古文：及景至城下，又射啓言 朱异等蔑弄朝权，轻作威福，臣爲谗臣所陷，欲加屠戮。
现代文：等侯景兵临城下，又射上书信说： 朱异等人专断朝政，作威作福，我被奸臣陷害，想杀害我。
English: When Hou Jing's soldiers came to the outskirts of the city, they also shot off a letter saying: Zhu Yi and others are arbitrarily ruling the imperial government, acting as a tyrant and a blessing. I was framed by a treacherous vassal who wanted to kill me.

古文：陛下诛异等，臣敛辔北归 。
现代文：陛下如果杀了朱异等人，我就勒马北还。 
English: If Your Majesty kills Zhu Rong and the others, I will fight back.

古文：帝问简文曰： 有是乎？ 
现代文：武帝问太子萧纲说： 有这样的事吗？ 
English: Emperor Wu asked Prince Xiao Gang: Is there such a thing?

古文：对曰： 然 。
现代文：萧纲回答说： 有。 
English: Xiao Gang replied: Yes.

古文：帝召有司将诛之，简文曰： 贼特以异等爲名耳，今日杀异，无救于急，适足贻笑将来。
现代文：武帝召有关官员要杀朱异，萧纲说： 侯景不过以杀朱异等人为借口罢了，今天杀朱异，救不了眼前的急难，只会被后世取笑。
English: Emperor Wu summoned the relevant officials to kill Zhu Rong, and Xiao Gang said: "Hou Jing is just using the killing of Zhu Rong and others as an excuse. Killing Zhu Rong today will not save the immediate difficulties, but will only be laughed at by future generations.

古文：若祅氛既息，诛之未晚。 
现代文：等叛乱平定以后，再杀他也不晚。 
English: After the rebellion is quelled, it will not be too late to kill him.

古文：谋之不臧，褰我王度。 
现代文：武帝就没这样做。朱异正得势时，满朝官员无不对他又怕又恨，即使皇太子也对他心怀不满。
English: Emperor Wu did not do so. When Zhu Yizheng gained power, the officials of the Manchu Dynasty feared and hated him, and even the crown prince was dissatisfied with him.

古文：又制围城赋，末章云： 彼高冠及厚履，并鼎食而乘肥。
现代文：到这时候城内人们全都怨恨朱异，皇太子作四言《愍乱诗》道： 悯彼坡田，叹此氛雾，信用奸佞，误国前途。 又作《围城赋》，末尾有这样的句子： 看那人高冠厚履，食列鼎乘肥马。
English: At this time, the people in the city all resented Zhu Yi, and the crown prince composed the four-sentence "Disturbing Poem" as follows: Pity the fields, lament the atmosphere, betray the trust, mislead the future of the country. He also composed "Siege Fu," at the end of which there is such a sentence: Look at that man with a high crown and thick shoes, riding a fat horse.

古文：升紫霄之丹地，排玉殿之金扉。
现代文：登帝宫之丹墀，穿玉殿之金扉。
English: Climbing to the top of the Imperial Palace, wearing the golden door of the Jade Hall.

古文：陈谋谟之啓沃，宣政刑之福威。
现代文：参政事与谋国策，处显要作福作威。
English: When it comes to participating in politics and seeking national policies, it is important to do your best.

古文：四郊以之多垒，万邦以之未绥。
现代文：因为他四郊到处营垒，因为他天下狼烟横飞。
English: Because he's camped out all over the suburbs, because he's been all over the world.

古文：问豺狼其何者？
现代文：问豺狼是哪个？
English: Ask the jackal who he is.

古文：访虺蜴之爲谁？ 
现代文：看毒虫他是谁？ 
English: Look at the toadstool. Who is he?

古文：并以指异。
现代文：都是指的朱异。
English: They all refer to Zhu Xiang.

古文：又帝登南楼望贼，顾谓异曰： 四郊多垒，谁之罪欤？ 
现代文：另外有一次武帝登南城楼观察敌情，回头问朱异说： 四郊这么多营垒，是谁的罪过呢？ 
English: On another occasion, Emperor Wu went to the South Tower to observe the situation of the enemy, and asked Zhu Ying: With so many camps in the suburbs, whose fault is it?

古文：异流汗不能对。惭愤发病卒，时年六十七。
现代文：朱异出了一身冷汗，不敢回答，因此既羞惭又生气发病而死，享年六十七岁。
English: Zhu Ying broke out in a cold sweat and did not dare to answer, so she was both ashamed and angry. She died of the disease at the age of sixty-seven.

古文：诏赠尚书右仆射。
现代文：下诏追赠为尚书右仆射。
English: The following posthumous edict was written by his right-hand man.

古文：旧尚书官不以爲赠，及异卒，武帝悼惜之，方议赠事，左右有善异者，乃啓曰： 异生平所怀，愿得执法。 
现代文：以前尚书官不用来赠人，朱异死后，武帝感到悲痛惋惜，这才商议追赠的事，左右有和朱异关系好的，就进言说： 朱异生平的愿望，是想作执法官。 
English: Previously, officials were not used to bestow gifts. After Zhu Yi's death, Emperor Wu felt sorrow and regret. It was only then that they discussed the matter of posthumous gifts. Zhu Yi had a good relationship with Zhu Yi, so he said: Zhu Yi's life's wish is to be a magistrate.

古文：帝因其宿志，特有此赠。
现代文：武帝因为这是他的夙愿，才特地赠予他。
English: Emperor Wu gave him the horn because it was his long-cherished wish.

古文：异居权要三十馀年，善承上旨，故特被宠任。历官自员外常侍至侍中，四官皆珥貂，自右卫率至领军，四职并驱卤簿，近代未之有也。
现代文：朱异揽大权三十多年，善于迎合武帝的心思，所以特别受到宠幸重用，历任官阶从员外常侍到侍中，四任官职皆佩珥貂，从右卫率到领军，四个职位都有卤簿供使唤，这是近代从来没过的。
English: Zhu Yixuan held power for more than 30 years. He was good at catering to the thoughts of Emperor Wu, so he was especially favored and reused. The successive ranks of officials ranged from outside attendant to attendant, and the four official positions were all worn, from the right guard leader to the leader of the army, and the four positions had a ledger for use, which has never happened in modern times.

古文：异及诸子自潮沟列宅至青溪，其中有台池翫好，每暇日与宾客游焉。
现代文：朱异和他几个儿子的房宅从潮沟一直排列到青溪，里边有台观池塘等游乐设施，每到闲暇时就和宾客在其中游玩。
English: Zhu Rong and several of his sons' houses are arranged from the tidal ditch to the Qingxi River. There are amusement facilities such as the Taiguan Pond inside, and they play with guests in it whenever they have free time.

古文：四方馈遗，财货充积，性吝啬，未尝有散施。
现代文：各地送的礼物，堆得满满的，朱异生性吝啬，从来不肯分送给别人。
English: The gifts sent from all over the country were piled high, and Zhu Xi was naturally stingy, never willing to share them with others.

古文：简文被闭，摛不获朝谒，因感气疾而卒，年七十八。赠侍中、太子詹事，諡贞子。长子陵，最知名。陵字孝穆。
现代文：厨房里的珍馐菜肴多得经常腐烂，每月要扔掉十几车，可是即使他的儿子们和姬妾们也都不肯给一点儿。他撰写有《礼》、《易》讲疏和仪注文集百余篇。徐陵，字孝穆。
English: The amount of rare dishes in the kitchen often rotted, and he had to throw away more than a dozen carts every month, but even his sons and concubines refused to give a bit. He wrote more than a hundred articles including "Li," "Yi," "Lecture" and "Order Collection." Xu Ling, the word filial piety.

古文：母臧氏，尝梦五色云化爲凤，集左肩上，已而诞陵。
现代文：他母亲臧氏，曾经梦见五色彩云化为凤鸟，停在自己的左肩上，后来便生下徐陵。
English: His mother, Ms. Zou, once dreamed that a five-colored cloud turned into a phoenix and landed on her left shoulder. Later, she gave birth to Xu Ling.

古文：年数岁，家人携以候沙门释宝志，宝志摩其顶曰： 天上石麒麟也。 
现代文：当他几岁时，家里人带他去问候僧人释宝志，释宝志抚摸着他的头顶说： 这是天上的石麒麟啊！ 
English: When he was a few years old, his family took him to greet the monk Shibaoshi. Shibaoshi stroked the top of his head and said, "This is the heavenly stone unicorn!"

古文：光宅寺慧云法师每嗟陵早就，谓之顔回。
现代文：光宝寺的慧云法师总是感叹于徐陵的早熟，称他为颜回。
English: Huiyun Mage of Guangbao Temple always laments the precociousness of Xu Ling, calling him Yan Hui.

古文：八岁属文，十三通庄、老义。
现代文：八岁时他能写诗文，十三岁便通晓《庄子》、《老子》的本义。
English: At the age of eight, he was able to write poetry, and at the age of thirteen, he was familiar with the true meaning of "Zhuang Zi" and "Lao Zi."

古文：及长，博涉史籍，从横有口辩。
现代文：长大以后，博览各种文籍，性情豪放而有口才。
English: When he grew up, he was well-versed in all kinds of literature and books. He had a free-spirited and eloquent disposition.

古文：父摛爲晋安王谘议，王又引陵参宁蛮府军事。
现代文：他父亲徐扌离任晋安王谘议，晋安王又召徐陵参与宁蛮府军事。
English: His father, Xu Rong, left his post to consult with the King of Jinan, and the King of Jinan also called Xu Ling to participate in the military of Ningbanfu.

古文：王立爲皇太子，东宫置学士，陵充其选。
现代文：晋安王被立为皇太子后，在东宫设置学士，徐陵也是其中之一。
English: After Jinan Wang was appointed crown prince, he set up a bachelor in the East Palace, and Xu Ling was also one of them.

古文：稍迁尚书度支郎。
现代文：又迁任尚书度支郎。
English: Later, he was promoted to Shang Shudo Shiro, and left Beijing to become the governor of Shangyu County.

古文：出爲上虞令。
现代文：后徐陵出任上虞县令。
English: Later, Xu Ling served as Shangyu County magistrate.

古文：御史中丞刘孝仪与陵先有隙，风闻劾陵在县赃汙，因坐免。
现代文：御史中丞刘孝仪原先和徐陵有仇隙，他听人传说徐陵在县里贪污和收受贿赂，便弹劾他，于是坐罪免职。
English: Historian Liu Xiaoyi originally had a grudge against Xu Ling. He heard rumors that Xu Ling was corrupt and took bribes in the county, so he impeached him and removed him from office.

古文：久之，爲通直散骑侍郎。
现代文：过了很久，又被任命为通直散骑侍郎。
English: After a long time, he was again appointed to the post of Tsuchida Sanzhijirō.

古文：梁简文在东宫，撰长春殿义记，使陵爲序。
现代文：梁简文帝在东宫时，撰写了《长春殿义记》，让徐陵写序。
English: When Emperor Liang Jianwen was in the East Palace, he wrote "Changchun Palace Records," and let Xu Ling write the preface.

古文：又令于少傅府述己所制庄子义。
现代文：又让徐陵到少傅府撰写自己所主持的《庄子义》一书。
English: He also sent Xu Ling to Shao Fu Fu to write the book "Zhuang Zi Yi," which he himself presided over.

古文：太清二年，兼通直散骑常侍使魏，魏人授馆宴宾。
现代文：太清二年，徐陵兼任通直散骑常侍出使魏国，魏人在馆内设宴请客。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, Xu Ling also served as the ambassador of the State of Wei, and the Wei people held a banquet in the hall to invite guests.

古文：是日甚热，其主客魏收嘲陵曰： 今日之热，当由徐常侍来。 
现代文：当天极热，魏国主客魏收开玩笑地对徐陵说： 今天这样热，肯定是徐常侍带来的。 
English: One day it was very hot. Wei Se Ye, who was hosting the banquet, scoffed and said, "Today's heat must have been brought on by the tobacconists."

古文：陵即答曰： 昔王肃至此，爲魏始制礼仪；今我来聘，使卿复知寒暑。 
现代文：徐陵随即回答说： 以前王肃来到这里，开始给魏国制定礼仪；今天我来聘问，让你们又知道冷热了！ 
English: Xu Ling immediately replied: Wang Su came here a long time ago and began to establish the etiquette for Wei; today I come to ask questions and let you know what is hot and what is cold!

古文：收大惭。
现代文：魏收听后，大感羞愧。
English: Wei Hui was very ashamed.

古文：齐文襄爲相，以收失言，囚之累日。
现代文：当时齐文襄帝还担任宰相，他认为魏收失言，便将他关闭了一整天。
English: At that time, Emperor Qibin Xiangdi was still serving as prime minister. He thought Wei Jie had made a slip of the tongue, so he shut him down for the whole day.

古文：及侯景入寇，陵父摛先在围城之内，陵不奉家信，便蔬食布衣，若居哀恤。
现代文：当侯景入侵时，徐陵的父亲徐扌离早就在围城之内，他收不到父亲的家信，便只吃素食，穿粗布衣服，就像服丧一样。
English: When Houjing invaded, Xu Ling's father, Xu Yiming, was already in the besieged city. He could not receive his father's letters, so he only ate vegetarian food and wore coarse cloth clothes, just like mourning.

古文：会齐受魏禅，梁元帝承制于江陵，复通使于齐。
现代文：这时，正值魏国禅让于齐，梁元帝在江陵承制，又派徐陵为使者和齐国通问。
English: When Qi accepted the Wei-Zen concession, Emperor Liang Yuan in Gangneung followed the will of Emperor Wu, that is, the emperor's throne, and sent envoys to Qi.

古文：陵累求复命，终拘留不遣，乃致书于仆射杨遵彦，不报。
现代文：徐陵到齐以后，多次请求回南朝复命，但齐国却一直拘留他不让回去。于是，他写了一封信给仆射杨遵彦，但也没有接到回复。
English: After Xu Ling arrived in Qi, he repeatedly requested to return to the Southern Dynasty to answer for his life, but the State of Qi kept detaining him and would not allow him to return. Therefore, he wrote a letter to Yang Zunyan, but did not receive a reply.

古文：及魏平江陵，齐送贞阳侯明爲梁嗣，乃遣陵随还。
现代文：当西魏讨平江陵之后，齐国送贞阳侯萧渊明继承梁国国君之位，这才派徐陵随他回梁。
English: When the Western Wei Dynasty razed the Jiangling Mausoleum, the State of Qi sent Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming to succeed Liang Guo Guojun. It was only then that Xu Ling was sent back to Liang with him.

古文：太尉王僧辩初拒境不纳，明往复致书，皆陵辞也。
现代文：太尉王僧辩起初在边境上拦阻不肯接纳，萧渊明反复写信，都是由徐陵撰文。
English: First Lieutenant Wang Sangyan was initially blocked at the border and refused to be admitted, and Xiao Yuanming repeatedly wrote letters, all of which were written by Xu Ling.

古文：及明入，僧辩得陵大喜，以爲尚书吏部郎，兼掌诏诰。
现代文：当萧渊明入梁之后，王僧辩得到徐陵，大为高兴。任命他当了尚书吏部郎，兼撰写诏诰之职。
English: When Xiao Yuanming was enthroned, Wang Sangyan was very happy to receive Xu Ling and appointed him as the secretary of the imperial secretary and the writer of the imperial edict.

古文：其年陈武帝诛僧辩，仍进讨韦载，而任约、徐嗣徽乘虚袭石头，陵感僧辩旧恩，往赴约。
现代文：当年，陈武帝杀了王僧辩，又进讨韦载，而任约、徐嗣徽乘虚而入，攻打石头城。徐陵感激王僧辩以前对自己的知遇之恩，便跑去投靠任约。
English: In that year, Emperor Chen Wu killed Wang Sangfei, and then went to Wei Zai, while Ren Jiao and Xu Shihui took advantage of the situation to attack Stone Town. Xu Ling was grateful to Wang Sangfei for his knowledge before, so he ran to rely on Ren Jiao.

古文：约平，武帝释陵不问，以爲尚书左丞。
现代文：任约被讨平之后，陈武帝把徐陵放了，并不问罪，而任命他为尚书左丞。
English: After Ren Rong was subdued, Emperor Chen Wu released Xu Ling without charge and appointed him as Shang Shuling.

古文：绍泰二年，又使齐。
现代文：绍泰二年，又派他出使齐国。
English: In the second year of Shao Tai, he was again sent as an envoy to Qi.

古文：还除给事黄门侍郎，秘书监。
现代文：回来之后，又任命他为给事黄门侍郎、秘书监。
English: After returning, he also appointed him as the Yellow Gate Attendant and Secretary Supervisor.

古文：陈受禅，加散骑常侍。
现代文：陈朝接受梁禅位后，又加封他为散骑常侍。
English: After the Chen Dynasty accepted Liang Zhengyi, he was also given the title of Zhou Xuanjie.

古文：天嘉四年，爲五兵尚书，领大着作。
现代文：天嘉四年，担任了五兵尚书，兼领大著作。
English: In the four years of Tianjia, he served as the five soldiers of Shangshu, and also led the great works.

古文：六年，除散骑常侍，御史中丞。
现代文：六年，被任命为散骑常侍、御史中丞。
English: In the sixth year, he was appointed a samurai in charge of horseback riding and a junior secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：时安成王顼爲司空，以帝弟之尊，权倾朝野。
现代文：当时，安成王陈顼任司空，他身为皇帝的亲弟，地位尊贵，权倾于朝野。
English: At that time, Ancheng Wang Chen Rong served as Siku, who, as the emperor's younger brother, held a distinguished position and wielded power over the court and the country.

古文：直兵鲍僧叡假王威风，抑塞辞讼，大臣莫敢言，陵乃奏弹之。
现代文：直兵鲍僧睿借着安成王的威风，阻止别人告状，大臣们没人敢说话，徐陵却出来弹劾他。
English: Direct soldier Baosongrui used the prestige of King Ancheng to prevent others from suing, and no ministers dared to speak, but Xu Ling came out to impeach him.

古文：文帝见陵服章严肃，若不可犯，爲敛容正坐。
现代文：陈文帝见徐陵服饰、奏章十分端整严肃，一副凛然不可侵犯的样子，不禁为之收容而正坐。
English: Chen Wendi saw that Xu Ling's clothing and the music chapter were very neat and serious, with a dignified and inviolable appearance, and he could not help but sit up straight.

古文：陵进读奏状，时安成王殿上侍立，仰视文帝，流汗失色，陵遣殿中郎引王下殿。
现代文：徐陵进读奏章时，安成王正在殿上侍立，他仰视文帝，汗流浃背，面容失色。徐陵派殿中郎送安成王下殿。
English: When Xu Ling read the music chapter, King Ancheng was standing in the hall. He looked up at Emperor Wen, sweating profusely, and his face was discolored. Xu Ling sent the palace eunuch to escort King Ancheng to the palace.

古文：自是朝廷肃然。
现代文：从此以后，朝廷上下肃然。
English: From then on, the imperial court was awestruck.

古文：迁吏部尚书，领大着作。
现代文：又改任吏部尚书，兼领大著作。
English: He was also appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and was also in charge of major works.

古文：陵以梁末以来，选授多失其所，于是提举纲维，综核名实。时有冒进求官，驰竞不已者，乃爲书宣示之，曰： 永定之时，圣朝草创，干戈未息，尚无条序。
现代文：徐陵认为从梁朝末年以来，选举任用官员大多失去其原来的规矩，于是制定了有关原则制度，全面审核每人的名实是否相符，有冒进求官的，到处奔走钻营的，他便写信公开告诉他们说： 永定年间，圣朝草创之初，干戈未曾平息，尚无条令秩序。
English: Xu Ling believed that since the end of the Liang Dynasty, the election and appointment of officials had mostly lost their original rules, so he formulated a relevant principle system to comprehensively check whether the name and fact of each person were consistent. There were those who ventured into the office and ran around everywhere. He wrote a letter to them and said: In the Yongding years, at the beginning of the Holy Dynasty, the fighting had not subsided and there was no order.

古文：府库空虚，赏赐悬乏，白银难得，黄劄易营。
现代文：府库空虚，赏赐空乏，白银难得，委任书易办。
English: The treasury is empty, rewards are scarce, silver is hard to come by, letters of appointment are easy to obtain.

古文：权以官阶，代于钱绢，义在抚接，无计多少。
现代文：权且以官阶代替钱财绢帛，本义在于安抚接纳，不计官员多少。
English: The original meaning is to appease and accept, regardless of the number of officials.

古文：致令员外常侍，路上比肩，谘议参军，市中无数，岂是朝章应其如此。
现代文：致使员外郎、常侍之官，在路上比肩摩踵；谘议、参军之属，市内人员无数，这岂是朝廷典章所应如此？
English: An envoy's retainer, a courtier's equerry, stand shoulder to shoulder on the road; members of the advisory council, members of the army, and innumerable people in the city. Is this really what the imperial court ceremony should be like?

古文：今衣冠礼乐，日富年华，何可犹作旧意，非理望也。
现代文：如今衣冠礼乐制度，日加完备，年有增益，怎能仍按旧例，作非理之望？
English: Now that the crown ceremony is constantly prosperous, how can it still be performed according to the previous plan?

古文：所见诸君多踰本分，犹言大屈，未谕高怀。
现代文：所见诸君多已职务超越本分，仍说大受委屈，未能满足更高的愿望。
English: As you can see, many of you have gone beyond the call of duty, but still say that you are greatly aggrieved and unable to meet higher aspirations.

古文：若问梁朝朱领军异亦爲卿相，此不踰其本分耶？
现代文：如有人问梁朝的朱异也担任卿相，这难道不是超过其本分吗？
English: If someone asks Zhu Rong of the Liang Dynasty to also serve as the Minister of the Interior, isn't this exceeding his duty?

古文：此是天子所拔，非关选序。
现代文：这是由皇帝亲自拔擢起来的，和选官的程序无关。
English: This is an award and commendation from the emperor, and has nothing to do with the selection and awarding of officials according to their ranks.

古文：梁武帝云： 世间人言有目色，我特不目色范悌。 
现代文：梁武帝说： 世上的人都说有不同眼色，我就特别看不上范悌。 
English: Liang Wu Di said: People in the world say that people have different eye colors, I especially do not like Fan Ye.

古文：宋文帝亦云： 人岂无运命，每有好官缺，辄忆羊玄保。 
现代文：宋文帝也说： 人怎么会没有运气，每当有好官位时，我就想起羊玄保。 
English: Song Wendi also said: How can people have no luck? Whenever I have a good official position, I think of Yang Xuanbao.

古文：此则清阶显职，不由选也。
现代文：这类清高又显贵的职务，不是从选任而来的。
English: Such high and noble offices do not come from election.

古文：既忝衡流，诸贤深明鄙意。 
现代文：我既身居选职，请诸贤深明我的心意。 
English: Since I am in the elective position, I ask all the sages to deeply understand my will.

古文：自是衆咸服焉。
现代文：于是众人都感到信服了。
English: And everyone was convinced.

古文：时论比之毛玠。
现代文：当时的议论将他比为毛王介。
English: The talk at the time compared him to Mao Wangsui.

古文：及宣帝入辅，谋黜异志者，引陵预其议。
现代文：当宣帝入朝辅政时，策划废黜那些有贰心的人，他让徐陵一起参与计谋。
English: When Emperor Xuancheng entered the auxiliary government, he planned to depose those who had evil intentions, and he asked Xu Ling to participate in the scheme.

古文：宣帝即位，封建昌县侯。
现代文：宣帝即位后，封徐陵为建昌县侯。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuan, Fong Xuling became the marquis of Jianchang County.

古文：太建中，爲尚书左仆射，抗表推周弘正、王劢等。
现代文：太建年间，准备让徐陵担任尚书左仆射，他上表反对并推荐周弘正、王劢等人。
English: During the Tai Jian years, he was prepared to let Xu Ling serve as Shang Shuxi's right-hand man, but he objected and recommended Zhou Hongzheng, Wang Xuan and others.

古文：帝召入内殿，曰： 卿何爲固辞而举人乎？ 
现代文：皇帝召他进入内殿，问他： 你为什么坚决推辞而另外推荐别人呢？ 
English: The emperor called him into the inner hall and asked him: Why did you firmly refuse and recommend someone else?

古文：陵曰： 弘正旧蕃长史，王劢太平中相府长史，张种帝乡贤戚，若选贤旧，臣宜居后。 
现代文：徐陵说： 周弘正原是您任藩王时的长史，王劢是太平年间的宰相府长史，张种是皇上本乡的贤人贵戚，如果要选拔贤人旧臣，我理应居于后面。 
English: Xu Ling said: Zhou Hong Zhengyuan is the long history of when you were the king of the domain, Wang Qian is the prime minister of the Taiping years, Zhang Zeng is a wise man and noble relative of the emperor's hometown, if you want to select a wise man and old minister, I should stay behind.

古文：固辞累日，乃奉诏。
现代文：他坚决推辞了几天，才奉旨任职。
English: He adamantly refused for a few days, before accepting the post.

古文：及朝议北侵，宣帝命举元帅，衆议在淳于量，陵独曰： 不然。
现代文：当朝议准备北伐时，宣帝让朝臣举荐元帅人选。众人都认为淳于量合适，独有徐陵说： 不见得。
English: When the imperial court was discussing preparations for the Northern Expedition, Emperor Xuanzong asked his courtiers to recommend candidates for marshal. Everyone agreed that Jun was the right choice, but Xu Ling said, "Not necessarily."

古文：吴明彻家在淮左，悉彼风俗，将略人才，当今无过者。 
现代文：吴明彻家在淮北，很熟悉当地风俗民情，是位有谋略的将才，当今没有人能超过他。 
English: Wu Mingche's family is in Huaibei. He is very familiar with the local customs and folk customs. He is a strategic talent. No one can surpass him today.

古文：于是争论数日不能决，都官尚书裴忌曰： 臣同徐仆射。 
现代文：于是争论了几天仍不能作出决定。都官尚书裴忌说： 我赞同徐仆射的意见。 
English: So they argued for several days and still couldn't come to a decision. The city official, Shangshu Peihui, said: I agree with Xu Puxia's opinion.

古文：陵应声曰： 非但明彻良将，忌即良副也。 
现代文：徐陵随即说： 不仅吴明彻是良将，裴忌也是很好的副帅。 
English: Xu Ling immediately said, "Not only is Wu Mingche a good general, Pei Bo is also a good second-in-command.

古文：是日诏明彻爲大都督，令忌监军事，遂克淮南数十州地。
现代文：当天便下诏任命吴明彻为大都督，任命裴忌任监军事，于是攻克了淮南的几十州土地。
English: On the same day, he issued an edict to appoint Wu Mingche as the grand governor, and appointed Pei Yi as the military commissar, thus conquering dozens of counties in Huainan.

古文：宣帝因置酒，举杯属陵曰： 赏卿知人。 
现代文：宣帝便设酒庆贺，举杯给徐陵说： 赏给你知人的功劳。 
English: Emperor Xuan then set out the celebratory wine, raised a glass to Xu Ling and said: "I award you the merit of your acquaintance.

古文：七年，领国子祭酒，以公事免侍中、仆射。
现代文：太建七年，任国子祭酒，徐陵因为公事的原因被免去侍中、仆射官职。
English: In the seventh year of Tai Jian, he was appointed as the son of the country, and Xu Ling was removed from the position of the attendant and the shooting officer because of business reasons.

古文：寻加侍中，给扶。
现代文：但不久又加侍中，赐给手杖。
English: However, he was soon made an aide-de-camp and given a cane.

古文：十三年，爲中书监，领太子詹事。
现代文：十三年，任太子詹事。
English: For thirteen years, he served as Prince Zhan Zhi.

古文：以年老累表求致事，宣帝亦优礼之，诏将作爲造大斋，令陵就第摄事。
现代文：他以年老为由，多次上表请求辞职，陈宣帝也格外对他优厚和礼遇，诏令将作监给他盖了大斋房，让他到斋中处理事务。
English: On the grounds of his old age, he repeatedly petitioned for his resignation. Chen Xuandi also treated him with special kindness and courtesy. The imperial edict assigned him the post of overseer, built him a large office, and let him handle affairs in the office.

古文：后主即位，迁左光禄大夫、太子少傅。
现代文：陈后主即位以后，徐陵改任左光禄大夫，太子少傅。
English: After Emperor Chen's accession to the throne, Xu Ling was reassigned to the post of Doctor of the Left Guanglu, and became the Prince's Younger Brother.

古文：至德元年卒，年七十七，诏赠特进。
现代文：至德元年去世，当年七十七岁，下诏追赠特进。
English: He died in the first year of the German era, at the age of seventy-seven, and was posthumously awarded a special promotion.

古文：初，后主爲文示陵，云他人所作。
现代文：起初，陈后主曾经自己写了诗文去给徐陵看，却说是别人所写的。
English: At first, Empress Chen once wrote a poem herself to show to Xu Ling, but said it was written by someone else.

古文：陵嗤之曰： 都不成辞句。 
现代文：徐陵嘲笑说： 连辞句都不像样子。 
English: Xu Ling scoffed and said, "Even his resignation doesn't look like him."

古文：后主衔之，至是諡曰章僞侯。
现代文：陈后主因此而怀恨在心，这时便谥为 章伪侯 。
English: As a result, Empress Chen harbored a grudge against him, at which time he was known as Zhang Hukou.

古文：陵器局深远，容止可观，性又清简，无所营树，俸禄与亲族共之。
现代文：徐陵器量宏大深远，举止有风度，本性又爱清静简朴，不营产业，俸禄和亲族们一起共用。
English: Xu Ling's wealth is vast and far-reaching, his demeanor is graceful, his nature is quiet and simple, he does not run a business, and he shares his salary with his relatives.

古文：太建中，食建昌户，户送米至水次，亲戚有贫匮者，皆召令取焉，数日便尽。
现代文：太建年间，他的食邑户在建昌，当食邑户送米到水边时，亲戚中有贫困的，他都让去取走，几天之内便被取光。
English: During the Tai Jian period, his restaurant family was in Jianchang. When the restaurant family sent rice to the water's edge, he let the relatives who were poor take it away, and within a few days they were taken away.

古文：陵家寻致乏绝。
现代文：徐陵自己家里不久便断绝粮食了。
English: Xu Ling's own family soon ran out of food.

古文：府僚怪问其故，陵云： 我有车牛衣裳可卖，馀家有可卖不？ 
现代文：府吏们很奇怪地问他什么原因，徐陵回答说： 我还有坐车、牛和衣裳可以卖，别的家里有可出卖的东西吗？ 
English: The government officials were very surprised and asked him why. Xu Ling replied: I still have a car, a cow and clothes to sell. Does anyone else in the family have anything to sell?

古文：其周给如此。
现代文：他就是这样周济别人。
English: That's how he makes ends meet.

古文：少而崇信释教，经论多所释解。
现代文：徐陵从小就崇信佛教，对佛经多能训释讲解。
English: Xu Ling has believed in Buddhism since he was a child, and he can explain the teachings of the sutras.

古文：后主在东宫，令陵讲大品经，义学名僧，自远云集，每讲筵商较，四坐莫能与抗。
现代文：陈后主在东宫当太子时，让徐陵讲解《大品经》，佛门义学中的名僧，都从远方云集而来，每当在讲堂上探讨时，四座没有人能和他抗衡。
English: When Empress Chen was the crown prince in the East Palace, she asked Xu Ling to explain the "Da Pin Jing." Famous monks in the study of Buddhism gathered from far and wide. Whenever they discussed it in the lecture hall, no one could compete with him.

古文：目有青精，时人以爲聪慧之相也。
现代文：他眼中有青色瞳子，当时人都认为是聪明的相貌。
English: He had blue pupils in his eyes, which was considered an intelligent look at the time.

古文：自陈创业，文檄军书及受禅诏策，皆陵所制，爲一代文宗。
现代文：自从陈朝创业以来，文檄军书以及受禅的诏书策文，都是徐陵所写的，被人称为一代文宗。
English: Since the founding of the Chen Dynasty, the Wen Xing Junshu and the Zhao Shou Zhewen, both of which were written by Xu Ling, have been called the generation of the Wenzong.

古文：亦不以矜物，未尝诋诃作者。
现代文：但他也不以此来傲视别人，也不曾诋毁和指斥其他写诗文的人。
English: But he did not use it to look down on others, nor did he denigrate and denounce other writers of poetry.

古文：其于后进，接引无倦。
现代文：他对于后进的人，都热心接待推荐，一点都不感到倦乏。
English: For those who are lagging behind, he is eager to receive recommendations and does not feel tired at all.

古文：文、宣之时，国家有大手笔，必命陵草之。
现代文：陈文帝、陈宣帝时，国家有重大的文字要写时，一定让徐陵起草。
English: During the reigns of Chen Wendi and Chen Xuandi, when the country had important texts to write, Xu Ling was always asked to draft them.

古文：其文颇变旧体，缉裁巧密，多有新意。
现代文：他的文章能改变旧体，剪裁十分巧妙而严密，多有新意。
English: His articles are mostly variations on the old style, well-organized, detailed and ingenious, and often contain new ideas.

古文：每一文出，好事者已传写成诵，遂传于周、齐，家有其本。
现代文：每一文章写出，好事者已经传抄出来并能朗诵，于是他的文章流传到了周、齐，家家都有他的文集。
English: Every time an article is written, the good-doer has copied it and can recite it, so his article has spread to Zhou and Qi, and every family has his anthology.

古文：后逢丧乱，多散失，存者三十卷。
现代文：后来遇到战乱，大多散失了，留存下来有三十卷。
English: After the death and disaster, most of them were lost, and only thirty volumes remained.

古文：陵有四子：俭、份、仪、僔。
现代文：徐陵有四个儿子：徐俭、徐份、徐仪、徐亻尊。
English: Xu Ling had four sons: Xu Jian, Xu Fen, Xu Yi, and Xu Xizong.

