古文：文王问太公曰： 守土奈何？ 
现代文：文王询问太公说： 如何才能更好的守卫国土呢？ 
English: King Wen asked the Grand Duke, "How can we better defend the country?"

古文：太公曰： 无疏其亲，无怠其众，抚其左右，御其四旁。无借人国柄，借人国柄，则失其权。
现代文：太公答道： 不要疏远宗族，不要怠慢天下的百姓，要安抚左右近邻，要控制天下四方，不要把治理国家的权利交给他人，交给他人，君主就会失去自己的权威。
English: "Don't alienate your clan, don't neglect the people of the world, appease your immediate neighbors to the left and right, control the four corners of the world, and don't give the right to govern the country to others. If you give it to others, the monarch will lose his authority."

古文：无掘壑而附丘，无舍本而治末。
现代文：不要挖掘沟壑去堆积土丘，不要舍弃根本去追逐枝末。
English: Don't dig ditches to make mounds, don't abandon the roots to chase the twigs.

古文：日中必彗，操刀必割，执斧必伐。
现代文：太阳正当午时，要抓紧时间晒东西；手中有刀子，要抓紧时间宰割；手中执有斧钺，要抓紧时机征伐。
English: When the sun is at noon, it is necessary to seize the opportunity to sunbathe; when there is a knife in hand, it is necessary to seize the opportunity to slaughter; when there is an axe in hand, it is necessary to seize the opportunity to conquer.

古文：日中不彗，是谓失时；操刀不割，失利之期；执斧不伐，贼人将来。
现代文：正午阳光充足时不曝晒就会失去机会；拿起刀子不宰割也会丧失时机，手执斧钺不杀敌，敌人就会乘虚而至。
English: When there is plenty of sunshine at noon, if you don't expose yourself, you will lose the opportunity; if you don't pick up a knife, you will lose the opportunity; if you don't kill the enemy with an axe, the enemy will take advantage of the opportunity.

古文：涓涓不塞，将为江河。荧荧不救，炎炎奈何；两叶不去，将用斧柯。
现代文：涓涓细流不堵塞，将会汇成滔滔江河；微弱的火星不扑灭，将会酿成熊熊烈火而无可奈何；刚萌芽的两片嫩叶不撷除，最终必得用斧柯去砍伐。
English: If a trickle of water is not stopped, it will turn into a torrent; if a weak spark is not extinguished, it will turn into a raging fire and nothing can be done about it; if two young leaves that have just sprouted are not removed, they will eventually have to be cut down with an axe.

古文：是故人君从事于富。
现代文：所以，君主必须努力使国家变得富足。
English: Therefore, the monarch must strive to make the country rich.

古文：不富无以为仁，不施无以合亲。
现代文：不富足就不能实行仁政，不行仁政就不能团结宗亲。
English: Without affluence, benevolent politics cannot be implemented, and without benevolent politics, it is impossible to unite the patriarchs.

古文：疏其亲则害，失其众则败。
现代文：疏远自己的宗亲就会受害，失去自己的百姓就会失败。
English: If you alienate your kinsmen, you will suffer; if you lose your own people, you will fail.

古文：无借人利器，借人利器，则为人所害，而不终于世。 文王曰： 何谓仁义？ 
现代文：不要将国家的统治权力交给别人，统治权力交给别人，就会被人所害，不能善终。 文王问道： 什么是仁义呢？ 
English: Don't hand over the power to rule the country to others. If you hand over the power to rule to others, you will be harmed by others and will not end well. King Wen asked: What is benevolence and righteousness?

古文：太公曰： 敬其众，合其亲。
现代文：太公回答说： 尊重自己的百姓，团结自己的宗亲。
English: The grand duke replied, "Respect your own people and unite with your ancestors."

古文：敬其众则和，合其亲则喜，是谓仁义之纪。
现代文：尊重百姓就会和睦，团结宗亲就会欢喜。这就是施行仁义的准则。
English: Respect the people and there will be harmony, unite the relatives and there will be joy. This is the principle of practicing benevolence.

古文：无使人夺汝威，因其明，顺其常。
现代文：不要让人篡夺了你的权力，要做到明察是非，顺着常理行事。
English: Don't let people usurp your power, see right from wrong, and act according to common sense.

古文：顺者任之以德，逆者绝之以力。
现代文：对于顺从自己的人，就施加恩惠并任用；对于反对自己的人，就用武力消灭。
English: For those who obey him, he shows favor and appoints them; for those who oppose him, he destroys them by force.

古文：敬之勿疑，天下和服。 
现代文：遵循上述原则而毫不迟疑，天下人自然就会信服了。 
English: If you follow the above principles without hesitation, the world will naturally be convinced.

