古文：十年春，王三月，及齐平。
现代文：十年春季，周历三月，鲁国和齐国讲和。
English: In the spring of the 10th year, in March of the lunar calendar, Lu and Qi declared peace.

古文：夏，公会齐侯于夹穀。
现代文：夏季，定公与齐侯在夹穀会面。
English: In the summer, Dingong and Qi Hou met in Jiangu.

古文：公至自夹穀。
现代文：定公从齐侯回来。
English: Sadamasa came back from Chihou.

古文：晋赵鞅帅师围卫。
现代文：晋国的赵鞅率领军队包围卫国。
English: Zhao Jun of Jin led an army to encircle the defenders.

古文：齐人来归郓、讙、龟阴田。
现代文：齐国人来鲁国归还郓地、讙地、龟阳的土地。
English: The people of Qi came to the State of Lu to return the lands of Shantian, Shantian and Guiyang.

古文：秋，叔孙州仇、仲孙何忌帅师围郈。
现代文：秋季，叔孙州仇、仲孙何忌率领军队包围郈地。
English: In autumn, the great-uncle Sun Quan and the great-great-grandson He Gui led an army to encircle Handan.

古文：宋乐大心出奔曹。
现代文：宋国的乐大心逃到曹国。
English: Song Dynasty's Le Daishin fled to Cao Dynasty.

古文：宋公子地出奔陈。
现代文：宋国的公子地逃到陈国。
English: The nobles of Song fled to Chen.

古文：冬，齐侯、卫侯、郑游速会于安甫。
现代文：冬季，齐侯、卫侯、郑国的游速在安甫会见。
English: In winter, Qi Hou, Wei Hou and Zheng Guo's Yuhai met in Anfu.

古文：叔孙州仇如齐。
现代文：叔孙州仇到齐国去。
English: Uncle Sun Zhou took revenge and went to Qi Province.

古文：宋公之弟辰暨仲佗、石彄出奔陈。
现代文：宋国国君的弟弟辰和仲佗、石彄逃到陈国。
English: Song Guo Guojun's younger brothers, Chen, Zhongye and Shijie, fled to Chen.

古文：十年春，及齐平。
现代文：十年春季，鲁国和齐国讲和。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, Lu and Qi made peace.

古文：夏，公会齐侯于祝其，实夹穀。
现代文：夏季，鲁定公在祝其会见齐景公，祝其也就是夹谷。
English: In the summer, Lu Ding Gong wished him a meeting with Qi Jing Gong, wishing him a valley.

古文：孔丘相。
现代文：孔丘相礼。
English: Confucius saluted.

古文：犁弥言于齐侯曰： 孔丘知礼而无勇，若使莱人以兵劫鲁侯，必得志焉。 
现代文：犁弥对齐景公说： 孔丘懂得礼而缺乏勇，如果派莱地人用武力劫持鲁侯，一定可以如愿以偿。 
English: Gongyi said to Qi Jinggong, "Confucius knows courtesy but lacks courage. If the Philae people use force to kidnap Lu Hou, they will surely get what they want.

古文：齐侯从之。
现代文：齐景公听从了。
English: Qi Jinggong obeyed.

古文：孔丘以公退，曰： 士兵之！
现代文：孔丘领着定公退出，说： 士兵拿起武器攻上去！
English: Kongqiu led Dingong out and said, "Soldiers, take up arms and attack!"

古文：两君合好，而裔夷之俘，以兵乱之，非齐君所以命诸侯也。裔不谋夏，夷不乱华，俘不干盟，兵不偪好，于神为不祥，于德为愆义，于人为失礼，君必不然。 
现代文：两国的国君会见友好，而边远的东夷俘虏用武力来捣乱，这不是齐君所以对待诸侯的态度，边远不能图谋中原，东夷不能搅乱华人，俘虏不能侵犯盟会，武力不能逼迫友好，这些对于神明来说是大不吉祥的，对于德行来说是丧失道义的，对于人们来说是丢弃礼仪，君王必定不会这样做。 
English: The sovereigns of the two countries meet with friendship, while the prisoners of the outlying Eastern Yi use force to disrupt. This is not the attitude of Qi Jun towards the princes. The outlying areas cannot plot against the Central Plains, the Eastern Yi cannot disrupt the Chinese, the prisoners cannot violate the alliance, and force cannot force friendship. These are very unlucky for the gods, lose morality for virtue, and discard etiquette for people. The monarch will certainly not do this.

古文：齐侯闻之，遽辟之。
现代文：齐景公听了以后，很快就让莱地人避开。
English: After hearing this, Qi Jinggong quickly asked the Laidi people to move away.

古文：将盟，齐人加于载书曰： 齐师出竟，而不以甲车三百乘从我者，有如此盟。 
现代文：将要盟誓，齐国人在盟书上加上一句话说： 如果齐军出境，而鲁国不派三百辆甲车跟随我们的话，有盟誓为证！ 
English: They will have to swear an oath, and the Qi people will add a sentence to the agreement: If the Qi army leaves the country, and the Lu country does not send three hundred armored vehicles to follow us, there is an oath to prove it!

古文：孔丘使兹无还揖对曰： 而不反我汶阳之田，吾以共命者，亦如之。 
现代文：孔丘让兹无还作揖回答说： 你们不归还我们汶阳的土田，让我们用来供应齐国的需要，也有盟誓为证！ 
English: Confucius replied, "If you do not return to us the soil of Bunyang, and let us use it to supply the needs of Qi, there is an oath to prove it!

古文：齐侯将享公，孔丘谓梁丘據曰： 齐、鲁之故，吾子何不闻焉？
现代文：齐景公准备设享礼招待定公。孔丘对梁丘据说： 齐国、鲁国旧有的典礼，您为什么没有听说过呢？
English: Confucius said to Liang Qiu, "Why haven't you heard of the ancient ceremonies of Qi and Lu?

古文：事既成矣，而又享之，是勤执事也。
现代文：事情已经完成了，而又设享礼，这是麻烦了执事。
English: The thing was done, and the feast was set, which troubled the deacon.

古文：且牺象不出门，嘉乐不野合。
现代文：而且牺尊、象尊不出国门，钟磐不在野外合奏。
English: Moreover, sacrificial statues, statues of elephants and other wine vessels cannot be taken out of the palace gate, and the music of the court cannot be played in the wilderness.

古文：飨而既具，是弃礼也。
现代文：设享礼而全部具备这些东西，这是不合礼仪的。
English: It is not proper etiquette to have all these things at a wedding.

古文：若其不具，用秕稗也。
现代文：如果不具备，那就像秕子稗子一样轻微而不郑重。
English: If you don't have it, it's as light as a feather duster.

古文：用秕稗君辱，弃礼名恶，子盍图之？
现代文：像秕子稗子一样的礼节，这是君王的耻辱。
English: It is the shame of kings to have the manners of mules.

古文：夫享，所以昭德也。不昭，不如其已也。 
现代文：不合礼仪，就名声不好，您何不考虑一下呢！
English: If it's not polite, you'll get a bad reputation. Why don't you think about that?

古文：乃不果享。
现代文：享礼，是用来宣扬德行的。
English: In the end, Qi cancelled the banquet.

古文：齐人来归郓、讙、龟阴之田。
现代文：不能宣扬，不如不用。 于是终于没有设享礼。齐国人前来归还郓地、讙地、龟阳的土地。
English: If you can't preach it, it's better not to use it. So, finally, there was no ceremony. The people of Qi came to return the land of Shantian, Shantian and Guiyang.

古文：晋赵鞅围卫，报夷仪也。
现代文：晋国的赵鞅包围卫国，这是为了报复夷仪那次战役。
English: Zhao Wei of Jin besieged Wei, this was in retaliation for the battle of Yiyi.

古文：初，卫侯伐邯郸午于寒氏，城其西北而守之，宵。
现代文：当初，卫侯在寒氏进攻邯郸午，攻破城的西北角而派兵据守。
English: At first, Wei Hou sent troops to defend the northwest corner of the city after the Han clan attacked at noon.

古文：及晋围卫，午以徒七十人门于卫西门，杀人于门中，曰： 请报寒氏之役。 
现代文：到晚上邯郸午的军队溃散，等到晋国包围卫国，邯郸午带了七十个徒兵进攻卫国西门，在城门里杀了人，说： 用这来报复寒氏那次战役。 
English: By mid-afternoon in the evening, the army had dispersed. By mid-afternoon, Jin had encircled Wei Guo. At midday, he led seventy foot soldiers to attack Wei Guo's West Gate, killed people at the gate, and said, "I will use this to avenge the battle of Han."

古文：涉佗曰： 夫子则勇矣，然我往，必不敢启门。 
现代文：涉佗说： 这个人算得是勇敢了，然而我前去，他们一定不敢开门。 
English: Watanabe said, "This man is brave, but if I go there, they won't dare to open the door."

古文：亦以徒七十人，旦门焉，步左右，皆至而立，如植。
现代文：也带领士兵七十人，早晨攻打城门，走向城门左右两边，全部站定，像树木一样不动。
English: In the morning, he attacked the city gate with seventy soldiers, marching to the right and left of the gate. They all stood as still as trees.

古文：日中不启门，乃退。
现代文：到中午不开城门，这才退回去。
English: They didn't open the gates until noon, and then they retreated.

古文：反役，晋人讨卫之叛故，曰： 由涉佗、成何。 
现代文：回兵以后，晋国人责问卫国背叛的原因，卫国人说： 由于涉佗、成何。 
English: After the return of the troops, the people of Jin asked the reason for the betrayal of the patriots, and the patriots said: "Because of what?

古文：于是执涉佗以求成于卫。
现代文：晋国人因此逮捕了涉佗，以此向卫国要求讲和。
English: As a result, the Jin people arrested Shanzhao, as a way of demanding peace from the Qing Dynasty.

古文：卫人不许，晋人遂杀涉佗。
现代文：卫国人不答应，晋国人就杀了涉佗。
English: When the defenders did not agree, the Jin people killed Shifeng.

古文：成何奔燕。
现代文：成何逃亡到燕国。
English: Cheng He fled to Yan Province.

古文：君子曰： 此之谓弃礼必不钧。《诗》曰： 人而无礼，胡不遄死。 
现代文：君子说： 这叫做不讲礼仪，两个人的罪过必然轻重不同，《诗》说： 做人而不讲礼仪，为什么不快点死？ 
English: The gentleman said: This is called not speaking of etiquette, the sins of two people are necessarily different in weight. The poem said: To be human and not speak of etiquette, why not die quickly?

古文：涉佗亦遄矣哉。 
现代文：涉佗死得也算很快了。 
English: Watanabe died rather quickly.

古文：初，叔孙成子欲立武叔，公若藐固谏曰： 不可。 
现代文：当初，叔孙成子想要立武叔做继承人，公若藐坚决劝谏说： 不行。 
English: At first, uncle and grandson Cheng Zi wanted to make Uncle Wu the heir, but he was adamant and said, "No."

古文：成子立之而卒。
现代文：成子还是立了武叔然后死去。
English: Still, Nariko raised Uncle Takeshi and died.

古文：公南使贼射之，不能杀。
现代文：公南派坏人用箭暗射公若，没有成功。
English: Gongnan sent a villain to shoot Gongzhu with an arrow, but without success.

古文：公南为马正，使公若为郈宰。
现代文：公南做马正，就让公若做郈地宰臣。
English: If Gongnan is Ma Zheng, then let Gongruo be Xuanji Zaisen.

古文：武叔既定，使郈马正侯犯杀公若。弗能。
现代文：武叔在大局已定之后，派郈地的马正侯犯谋杀公若，没有能办到。
English: After the overall situation had been determined, Uncle Wu sent Ma Zhenghou, a criminal from Shandong Province, to murder the prince, but he was not able to do it.

古文：其圉人曰： 吾以剑过朝，公若必曰，谁之剑也？
现代文：侯犯的管马人说： 我拿着剑经过朝廷，公若一定会问这剑是谁的。
English: The bailiff's steward said, "I passed through the imperial court with a sword in my hand. If I were a prince, I would certainly ask who this sword belonged to."

古文：吾称子以告，必观之。吾伪固，而授之末，则可杀也。 
现代文：我告诉他是您的，公若一定要细看这剑，我假装不懂礼节而把剑尖递给他，就可以杀死他了。 
English: I told him he was yours, and if the duke insisted on having a closer look at the sword, I could kill him by pretending not to understand the etiquette and handing him the tip of the sword.

古文：使如之。
现代文：侯犯就派他照办。
English: The criminal ordered him to do so.

古文：公若曰： 尔欲吴王我乎？ 
现代文：公若说： 你要把我当吴王吗？ 
English: If the prince says, "Will you treat me as the king of Wu?"

古文：遂杀公若。
现代文：管马人就杀死了公若。
English: The man in charge of the horses killed the young prince.

古文：侯犯以郈叛。武叔懿子围郈，弗克。
现代文：侯犯带领郈地人叛变，武叔包围郈地，没有攻下。
English: Hou Guanzhong led the people of Handan to rebel, and Uncle Wu encircled Handan, but failed to capture it.

古文：秋，二子及齐师复围郈，弗克。
现代文：秋季，武叔、公南两个人和齐军再次包围郈地，也没有攻下。
English: In the autumn, Uncle Wu, Gongnan two people and the Qi army once again encircled Shantian, but did not capture it.

古文：叔孙谓郈工师驷赤曰： 郈非唯叔孙氏之忧，社稷之患也。
现代文：武叔对郈地的工匠官驷赤说： 郈地不仅是叔孙氏的忧虑，而且是国家的祸患，将要怎么办？ 
English: Uncle Wu said to the craftsman official of Handan: Handan is not only the concern of the uncle and grandson, but also the scourge of the country. What will happen?

古文：将若之何？ 对曰： 臣之业，在《扬水》卒章之四言矣。 
现代文：驷赤说： 下臣的事情在《扬之水》这首诗最后一章的四个字上了。 
English: Zou Chia said: The matter of the vassal is in the four words of the last chapter of the poem "Yang's Water."

古文：叔孙稽首。
现代文：叔孙向他叩头。
English: Uncles and grandsons kowtow to him.

古文：驷赤谓侯犯曰： 居齐、鲁之际，而无事，必不可矣。
现代文：驷赤就对侯犯说： 处在齐国、鲁国之间而不事奉哪一国，必定是不行的。
English: Gong Chia said to the criminal: "It is not possible to be between Qi and Lu and not serve either country.

古文：子盍求事于齐以临民？
现代文：您何不请求事奉齐国以统治百姓？
English: Why don't you ask to serve Qi to rule the people?

古文：不然，将叛。 
现代文：不这样，他们将会叛变的。 
English: Otherwise, they will mutiny.

古文：侯犯从之。
现代文：侯犯听从了他的话。
English: The prisoner obeyed his words.

古文：齐使至，驷赤与郈人为之宣言于郈中曰： 侯犯将以郈易于齐，齐人将迁郈民。 
现代文：齐国的使者来到，驷赤和郈地人在郈地宣布说： 侯犯准备把郈地和齐国交换，齐国人准备迁走郈地的百姓。 
English: The envoys from Qi arrived, and the people from Zhai and Zhai announced in Zhai that: The criminals were preparing to exchange Zhai with Qi, and the people from Qi were preparing to move the people from Zhai.

古文：众兇惧。
现代文：大家都很害怕。
English: Everyone is scared.

古文：驷赤谓侯犯曰： 众言异矣，子不如易于齐。
现代文：驷赤对侯犯说： 大家的意见和您不同，您不如把郈地和齐国人交换。
English: Gong Chia said to the criminal: Everyone's opinion is different from yours, you might as well exchange Gong Di with the people of Qi.

古文：与其死也，犹是郈也。而得纾焉，何必此？齐人欲以此偪鲁，必倍与子地。
现代文：所得到的等于这块郈地，而且可以缓和后患，为什么非死抱着这里不放？齐国人想借此逼迫鲁国，必然加倍给您土地。
English: What you get is equal to this piece of ploughed land, and it can alleviate the after-effects. Why not hold on to it until death? If the people of Qi want to use this to persecute Lu, they will surely double the land given to you.

古文：且盍多舍甲于子之门，以备不虞？ 侯犯曰： 诺。 
现代文：而且何不多准备一些皮甲，放在门里以防意外？ 侯犯说： 对。 
English: And why not prepare some leather armor and put it in the door to prevent accidents? The criminal said: Yes.

古文：乃多舍甲焉。
现代文：于是就多准备些皮甲放在门里。
English: So they prepared more leather coats and put them inside the door.

古文：侯犯请易于齐，齐有司观郈，将至。
现代文：侯犯请求在齐国换一块土地，齐国的官员要求视察郈地。
English: The prisoner requested to exchange a piece of land in Qi, and the officials of Qi requested to inspect the stolen land.

古文：驷赤使周走呼曰： 齐师至矣！ 
现代文：将要到达，驷赤派人遍绕全城喊着说： 齐国的军队到了！ 
English: When they were about to arrive, the Jurchens sent people all around the city shouting: "The Qi army has arrived!"

古文：郈人大骇，介侯犯之门甲，以围侯犯。
现代文：郈地人十分害怕，穿上侯犯准备好的皮甲来包围侯犯。
English: The local people were very scared and put on the leather coats prepared by the prisoners to surround the prisoners.

古文：驷赤将射之。侯犯止之曰： 谋免我。 
现代文：驷赤要射这些人，侯犯阻止他，说： 想办法让我免除祸难。 
English: The jailer wanted to shoot these people, but the prisoner stopped him, saying, "Find a way to save me from this calamity."

古文：侯犯请行，许之。
现代文：侯犯请求出走，大家答应了。
English: The prisoner asked to leave, and everyone agreed.

古文：驷赤先如宿，侯犯殿。
现代文：驷赤先去宿地，侯犯走在最后。
English: Criminals go to their destination first, criminals go last.

古文：每出一门，郈人闭之。
现代文：每出一道门，郈地人就关上这道门。
English: Every time a door opens, the people of Shunde close it.

古文：及郭门，止之曰： 子以叔孙氏之甲出，有司若誅之，群臣惧死。 
现代文：到了外城门，大家拦住侯犯说： 您带着叔孙氏的皮甲出去，官员们如果因此而要治罪，臣下们害怕被杀。 
English: When they arrived at the outer city gate, they stopped the criminal and said, "You are going out with your uncle's leather coat. If officials want to punish you for this, your subjects are afraid of being killed.

古文：驷赤曰： 叔孙氏之甲有物，吾未敢以出。 
现代文：驷赤说： 叔孙氏的皮甲有标记，我没有敢带出去。 
English: "Uncle Sun's leather coat has a mark on it. I didn't dare to take it out.

古文：犯谓驷赤曰： 子止而与之数。 
现代文：侯犯对驷赤说： 您留下来同他们数数。 
English: The criminal said to the red-haired man: You stay and count with them.

古文：驷赤止而纳鲁人。
现代文：驷赤留下，而接纳了鲁国人。
English: He stayed behind and accepted the Lu people.

古文：侯犯奔齐，齐人乃致郈。
现代文：侯犯逃亡到齐国。齐国人就把郈地送还给鲁国。
English: The culprits fled to Qi, and the people of Qi gave the land back to Lu.

古文：宋公子地嬖蘧富猎，十一分其室，而以其五与之。
现代文：宋国的公子地宠信蘧富猎，把家产分成十一份，给了蘧富猎五份。
English: The nobles of the Song Dynasty favored Xuan Fuhong, dividing the family income into eleven parts and giving five parts to Xuan Fuhong.

古文：公子地有白马四。公嬖向魋。魋欲之。
现代文：公子地有四匹白马，宋公宠信向魋，向魋想要这四匹马。
English: There are four white horses in the prince's land. Song Gong's favorite letter is to Xiang Yao, and Xiang Yao wants these four horses.

古文：公取而朱其尾鬣以与之。
现代文：宋景公把马牵来，在马尾、马鬣上涂上红颜色给向魋。
English: Song Jing Gong brought his horse and painted the horse's tail and bridle with red color to attract Xiang Yu.

古文：地怒，使其徒抶魋而夺之。
现代文：公子地生气，派手下人打了向魋一顿并且夺回马匹。
English: Enraged, he sent his followers to whip the mule and recapture the horse.

古文：魋惧，将走。公闭门而泣之，目尽肿。
现代文：向魋害怕，准备逃走，宋景公关上门对向魋哭泣，眼睛都哭肿了。
English: Afraid of Xiang Yao and ready to run away, Song Jing PR shut the door and cried to Xiang Yao. His eyes were swollen from crying.

古文：母弟辰曰： 子分室以与猎也，而独卑魋，亦有颇焉。
现代文：宋景公的同母兄弟辰对公子地说： 您把家产分给猎，而惟独看不起魋，这也是不公平的。
English: Song Jinggong's half-brother Chen said to him, "It's not fair that you allocate your family's wealth to hunting, but only look down on quail.

古文：子为君礼，不过出竟，君必止子。 
现代文：您平日对国君有礼，至多不过出国，国君必挽留您。 
English: If you are courteous to the sovereign on a daily basis, at most you can go abroad, but the sovereign will keep you.

古文：公子地出奔陈，公弗止。
现代文：公子地逃亡陈国，宋景公没有挽留他。
English: Chen Guo bravely fled, but Song Jinggong did not detain him.

古文：辰为之请，弗听。
现代文：公子辰为他请求，宋景公不听。
English: Prince Chen pleaded for him, but Song Jinggong did not listen.

古文：辰曰： 是我迋吾兄也。
现代文：公子辰说： 这是我欺骗了我哥哥。
English: He said, "It was I who deceived my brother."

古文：吾以国人出，君谁与处？ 
现代文：我领着国内的人们出国，国君和谁处在一起？ 
English: I lead the people of my country abroad. Who is the sovereign with?

古文：冬，母弟辰暨仲佗、石彄出奔陈。
现代文：冬季，宋景公同母兄弟辰和仲佗、石彄逃亡到陈国。
English: In winter, Song Jinggong's maternal brothers, Chen He, Zhong Yao and Shi Yao, fled to Chen Province.

古文：武叔聘于齐。齐侯享之，曰： 子叔孙！
现代文：武叔到齐国聘问，齐景公设享礼招待他，说： 子叔孙！
English: Uncle Wu came to Qi to ask questions, and Qi Jing publicly invited him to a banquet, saying, "Uncle!

古文：若使郈在君之他竟，寡人何知焉？
现代文：如果郈地在君王其他的边境上，寡人知道什么呢？
English: If it lands on the king's other border, who knows?

古文：属与敝邑际，故敢助君忧之。 
现代文：这里刚好和敝邑交界，所以敢帮助您分担忧愁。 
English: It's right on the border with Shan'eup, so I dare to help you out of your worries.

古文：对曰： 非寡君之望也。
现代文：武叔回答说： 这不是寡君的愿望。
English: Uncle Wu replied, "This is not the desire of a widower.

古文：所以事君，封疆社稷是以。敢以家隶勤君之执事。
现代文：我们所以事奉君王，是为了国家疆土的安全，岂敢为了家臣而劳驾君王的执事？
English: We serve the sovereign for the sake of the security of the country's territory. How dare we serve the sovereign's steward for the sake of our vassals?

古文：夫不令之臣，天下之所恶也。君岂以为寡君赐？ 
现代文：不好的臣下，是天下所共同讨厌的，君王难道用这来作为对寡君的赏赐？ 
English: Bad vassals are universally detested. Does the king use this as a reward for his vassal?

