古文：李琰之祖莹常景李琰之，字景珍，小字默蠡，陇西狄道人，司空韶之族弟。早有盛名，时人号曰神童。
现代文：李琰之，字景珍，小字默蠡，陇西狄道人，司空李韶的同族弟弟。少小时即有盛名，当时人称为神童。
English: Li Shizhi, the younger brother of Siku Li Shizhi, was famous at an early age, and was known as a child prodigy.

古文：从父司空冲雅所叹异，每曰： 兴吾宗者，其此兒乎？ 
现代文：族父司空李冲很是为他自豪，每每与人说： 兴盛我李氏宗族的，不就是这个孩子吗？ 
English: The patriarch, Siku Li Chong, is very proud of him. He often says to people: Isn't it this child who has made my Li clan prosperous?

古文：恆资给所须，爱同己子。
现代文：李冲经常提供琰之所必须的东西，爱怜同于自己的孩子。
English: Li Chong often provides the necessities for Zou, and loves and pities his own children.

古文：弱冠举秀才，不行。
现代文：少年时李琰之被推荐为秀才，不愿前行。
English: When he was a boy, Li Yanzhi was recommended as an outstanding talent, but he was reluctant to move forward.

古文：曾游河内北山，便欲有隐遁意。
现代文：曾经游历河内北山，便产生了隐居的念头。
English: Once he traveled to the northern mountains of Hanoi, he had the idea of living in seclusion.

古文：会彭城王勰辟为行台参军，苦相敦引。
现代文：恰逢彭城王元勰征他为行台参军，苦相邀请。
English: Pengcheng Wang Yuanxuan conscripted him to go to Taiwan to join the army, and invited him.

古文：寻为侍中李彪启兼著作郎，修撰国史。
现代文：不久又为李彪推荐兼任著作郎，编修国史。
English: Soon after, he was recommended by Li Biao to work as a writer and compiler of national history.

古文：稍迁国子博士，领尚书仪曹郎中，转中书侍郎、司农少卿、黄门郎，修国史。
现代文：渐迁国子博士，领任尚书仪曹郎中，转任中书侍郎，司农少卿、黄门郎，修编国史。
English: Gradually, Dr. Kuniko was transferred to the position of Junior Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, and then to the positions of Junior Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, Junior Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, Junior Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, Junior Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, and Junior Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, and Editor of the National History.

古文：迁国子祭酒，转秘书监、兼七兵尚书。
现代文：又升任国子祭酒，转任秘书监，兼七兵尚书。
English: He was also promoted to the post of Kuniko Matsuri Sake, then to the post of Secretary Supervisor, and finally to the post of Shichibyo Shoji.

古文：迁太常卿。
现代文：升任太常卿。
English: He was promoted to Taijo-kyo.

古文：孝庄初，太尉元天穆北讨葛荣，以琰之兼御史中尉，为北道军司。
现代文：孝庄帝初年，太尉元天穆北伐葛荣，任命李琰之兼御史中尉，任北道军司。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaozhuang, Lieutenant Yuan Tianmu in the Northern Expedition appointed Ge Rong, who was also Lieutenant Li Xizhi, as the military governor of the North.

古文：还，除征东将军，仍兼太常。
现代文：师还，升任征东将军，仍兼太常职。
English: He was also promoted to General of the Eastern Expeditionary Force, which was still a full-time position.

古文：出为卫将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：李琰之出任卫将军、荆州刺史。
English: Li Yanzhi became Wei general, Jingzhou stabbed history.

古文：顷之，兼尚书左仆射、三荆二郢大行台。
现代文：不久，兼任尚书左仆射、三荆二郢大行台。
English: Soon, he also served as Shangshu Zuopuzha, Sanjing Erqian and Dangdai.

古文：寻加散骑常侍。
现代文：很快又加授散骑常侍。
English: Not long after, Guo Jun was appointed as a horseback riding attendant.

古文：琰之虽以儒素自业，而每语人言 吾家世将种 ，自云犹有关西风气。
现代文：李琰之虽然以读书耕种为世代祖业，但他每次与人谈到家世，总是说我家本是将种，自己还说自己身上还带有关西风气。
English: Although Li Yanzhi's ancestral profession was reading and farming, every time he talked about his family history with others, he always said that his family was originally a farmer, and he also said that he still had the Western culture.

古文：及至州后，大好射猎，以示威武。
现代文：等他到州上任之后，大好射猎，以显示武威。
English: After he took office in the state, he went on a shooting spree to show his prowess.

古文：尔朱兆入洛，南阳太守赵修延以琰之庄帝外戚，诬琰之规奔萧衍，袭州城，遂被囚执，修延仍自行州事。
现代文：朱兆进入洛阳，南阳太守赵修延以李琰之是庄帝外戚，诬告李琰之打算逃奔萧衍，袭击州城，于是李琰之被抓了起来，赵修延便自己代理州中事务。
English: Zhu Zhao entered Luoyang. Zhao Xiuyan, the governor of Nanyang, falsely accused Li Xunzhi of being the maternal relative of Emperor Zhuang. Li Xunzhi intended to flee to Xiaoyan and attack the state capital. As a result, Li Xunzhi was arrested, and Zhao Xiuyan acted as his own agent in state affairs.

古文：城内人斩修延，还推琰之厘州任。
现代文：城内人斩了赵修延，还是推举李琰之到州上任。
English: People in the city cut off Zhao Xiuyan, but still elected Li Xizhi to the state to take office.

古文：出帝初，征兼侍中、车骑大将军、左光禄大夫、仪同三司。
现代文：出帝初年，朝廷征拜他兼任侍中、车骑大将军、左光禄大夫、仪同三司。
English: In the first year after his accession to the throne, he was recruited by the Imperial Court to serve concurrently as an aide-de-camp, general of cavalry and chariots, doctor of the left hand, and the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：永熙二年薨。
现代文：李琰之于永熙二年逝世。
English: Yongxi died two years later.

古文：赠侍中、骠骑大将军、司徒公、雍州刺史，谥曰文简。
现代文：朝廷赠他为侍中、骠骑大将军、司徒公、雍州刺史，谥称文简。
English: The imperial court gave him the titles of chamberlain, grand general of cavalry, prince of Sidu, and prince of Yongzhou, and he was nicknamed "Wen Jian."

古文：琰之少机警，善谈，经史百家无所不览，朝廷疑事多所访质。
现代文：李琰之少年机警，擅长言谈，经史百家书籍无所不看，朝廷遇到疑难事情经常征询他的意见。
English: Li Yanzhi was a quick-witted young man, good at talking, reading hundreds of books on history, and the imperial court often asked him for advice in difficult situations.

古文：每云： 崔博而不精，刘精而不博；我既精且博，学兼二子。 
现代文：李琰之经常说： 崔博而不精，刘精而不博，我既精且博，学识包括二人之长。 
English: Li Yanzhi often said: Cui Bo is not smart, Liu Jing is not smart, I am both smart and smart, and my knowledge is the best of the two.

古文：谓崔光、刘芳也。
现代文：崔、刘指的是崔光、刘芳二人。
English: Cui and Liu refer to Cui Guang and Liu Fang.

古文：论者许其博，未许其精。
现代文：而评论的人赞同他学识广博，却不同意他学识精湛。
English: Reviewers, meanwhile, agreed that he was well-read, but disagreed that he was well-read.

古文：当时物议，咸共宗之，又自夸文章，从姨兄常景笑而不许。
现代文：当时舆论，都同意这种看法。李琰之又自夸自己的文章，堂姨兄常景只是微笑，并不附和。
English: At that time, the public opinion agreed with this view. Li Yanzhi also boasted of his article, while his cousin Changjing only smiled and did not agree.

古文：每休闲之际，恆闭门读书，不交人事。
现代文：每当官休之日，总是闭门读书，不交来接往。
English: Whenever it's a public holiday, they always study behind closed doors and don't see each other.

古文：尝谓人曰： 吾所以好读书，不求身后之名，但异见异闻，心之所愿，是以孜孜搜讨，欲罢不能。
现代文：曾经对人说： 我之所以喜欢读书，不求身后之名，只是因为奇闻异见，是我心之所好，所以我孜孜不倦、搜寻探讨，欲罢而不能。
English: I once said to someone, "The reason why I like to read, and I don't want to be known by my last name, is just because I like strange stories and opinions, which is what my heart wants, so I work tirelessly, search and explore, and I can't stop.

古文：岂为声名劳七尺也？
现代文：哪里是为了自家声誉而劳碌七尺之躯呀？
English: Where is the seven-foot body that labors for its own reputation?

古文：此乃天性，非为力强。 
现代文：这是天性，并不是强己为之。 
English: It's nature, it's not a choice.

古文：前后再居史职，无所编缉。
现代文：李琰之前后两次任史官，无所编撰。
English: Li Xi served as a historian twice before and twice after, but nothing has been compiled.

古文：安丰王延明，博闻多识，每有疑滞，恆就琰之辨析，自以为不及也。
现代文：安丰王元延明，博闻多识，但每有疑难问题，总是找李琰之为其辨析，自以为才识不如李琰之。
English: Anfeng Wang Yuan Yanming is well-informed and knowledgeable, but whenever there is a difficult problem, he always looks for Li Xi as his analysis, and he thinks that his knowledge is not as good as Li Xi's.

古文：二子纲、惠，并从出帝入关。
现代文：两个儿子李纲、李惠，都跟随出帝入关。
English: His two sons, Li Gang and Li Hui, followed him into the imperial palace.

古文：祖莹，字元珍，范阳遒人也。
现代文：祖莹，字元珍，范阳遒人。
English: Zu Ying, Zi Yuan Zhen, Fan Yang Xingren.

古文：曾祖敏，仕慕容垂为平原太守。
现代文：曾祖祖敏，在慕容垂政权中任平原太守。
English: Zeng Zu Zumin, who served as the governor of the plain during the Murongtli regime.

古文：太祖定中山，赐爵安固子，拜尚书左丞。
现代文：太祖平定中山，赐给他安固子爵位，拜授尚书左丞。
English: The great-grandfather pacified Zhongshan, gave him the viscountcy of Anggu, and conferred the title of Shangshu Zuo.

古文：卒，赠并州刺史。
现代文：死后，朝廷赠他为并州刺史。
English: After his death, the imperial court presented him with the imperial seal of annexation.

古文：祖嶷，字元达。
现代文：祖嶷，字元达。
English: Zu Xi, Zi Yuan Da.

古文：以从征平原功，进爵为侯，位冯翊太守，赠幽州刺史。
现代文：因为从驾出征平原的功劳，晋爵为侯，位至冯翊太守，死后朝廷赠他为幽州刺史。
English: Because of his service to the plains, he was given the title of prince and became the regent of Fenghuang. After his death, the imperial court gave him the title of prince of Yuzhou.

古文：父季真，多识前言往行，位中书侍郎，卒于安远将军、钜鹿太守。
现代文：父亲祖季真，很熟悉前言往事，官至中书侍郎，卒于安远将军、巨鹿太守任上。
English: His father, Zu Ji Zhen, was very familiar with the preface and the past, he was a high-ranking official and a junior secretary, and he died in the service of General Anyuan and Koga Taishu.

古文：莹年八岁，能诵《诗》、《书》；十二，为中书学生。好学耽书，以昼继夜，父母恐其成疾，禁之不能止。常密于灰中藏火，驱逐僮仆，父母寝睡之后，燃火读书，以衣被蔽塞窗户，恐漏光明，为家人所觉。
现代文：祖莹八岁，便能诵读《诗经》、《尚书》，十二岁，为中书学生，刻苦好学，不分昼夜地读书，父母担心他会读出病来，想制止他这样做但却不行，他经常在炭灰之中藏着火种，赶走书僮仆人，父母睡觉之后，用衣服遮住窗户，以防止光线漏出去，被家人发觉。
English: At the age of eight, Zu Ying was able to recite "The Book of Songs" and "The Book of Songs." At the age of twelve, he was a middle school student, eager to learn, and read day and night. His parents were worried that he would read out his illness, and wanted to stop him from doing so, but could not. He often hid kindling in the soot to drive away the servants. After his parents went to bed, they covered the windows with clothes to prevent the light from leaking out, which was discovered by his family.

古文：由是声誉甚盛，内外亲属呼为 圣小兒 。
现代文：由此他的声誉更高了，内外亲属都叫他为 圣小儿 。
English: As a result, his reputation grew even higher, and his relatives at home and abroad called him "Holy Child."

古文：尤好属文，中书监高允每叹曰： 此子才器，非诸生所及，终当远至。 
现代文：祖莹尤其喜欢写文章，中书监高允每每赞叹说： 这青年富有才识，不是其他学生能赶得上的，他一定会有大出息的。 
English: In particular, he likes to write articles. Gao Yunlong, the supervisor of Chinese books, often laments: This child's talent and knowledge are not what other students can catch up with, and he will eventually have a great future.

古文：时中书博士张天龙讲《尚书》，选为都讲。
现代文：当时中书博士张天龙讲授《尚书》，选他为都讲。
English: At this time, Zhang Tianlong, a doctor of Chinese calligraphy, lectured on "Shangshu" and was promoted to be a tutor.

古文：生徒悉集，莹夜读书劳倦，不觉天晓。
现代文：学生们都来了，祖莹晚上读书太劳累了，竟不知天亮了。
English: The students have all come. Zu Ying is too tired from studying in the evening, and she doesn't even know it's dawn.

古文：催讲既切，遂误持同房生赵郡李孝怡《曲礼》卷上座。
现代文：上课时间已到，忙乱中祖莹误把同房学生赵郡的李孝怡一本《曲礼》拿到讲台上去了。
English: Class time has arrived. In the rush, Zu Ying mistakenly took a copy of "Song and Dance" by her roommate, Li Xiaoyi from Zhao County, to the podium.

古文：博士严毅，不敢还取，乃置《礼》于前，诵《尚书》三篇，不遗一字。
现代文：博士十分严厉，祖莹不敢回去换书，于是只好把《曲礼》放到案桌上，念诵《尚书》文三篇，竟不漏一字。
English: The doctor was very strict, and Zu Ying did not dare to go back and change the book, so she had no choice but to put the "Song of Songs" on the desk and recite three "Shang Shu" texts, without missing a word.

古文：讲罢，孝怡异之，向博士说，举学尽惊。
现代文：讲完之后，孝怡觉得很奇怪，查明原委，就向博士说了这件事，惹得学中师生，大为惊奇。
English: After the lecture, Xiaoyi felt very strange. After ascertaining the original committee, she told the doctor about this matter, which caused the teachers and students at the middle school to be very surprised.

古文：后高祖闻之，召入，令诵五经章句，并陈大义，帝嗟赏之。
现代文：后来高祖听说此事，召他入内宫，要他诵背五经章句，并讲述大义，皇帝惊叹不已。
English: Later, Gaozu heard about this and summoned him to the inner palace to recite passages from the Five Classics and tell him about the Great Righteousness. The emperor was stunned.

古文：莹出后，高祖戏卢昶曰： 昔流共工于幽州北裔之地，那得忽有此子？ 
现代文：祖莹出去之后，高祖开玩笑地对卢昶说： 过去流放共工的幽州北边荒凉地方，怎么会冒出这样的孩子来？ 
English: After Zu Ying went out, Gao Zu jokingly said to Lu Lu: How could such a child appear in the desolate place on the north side of Yuzhou, where co-workers were exiled in the past?

古文：昶对曰： 当是才为世生。 
现代文：卢昶说： 当是才为世而生。 
English: Lu Xu replied: It should be said that this person was born in my family.

古文：以才名拜太学博士，征署司徒、彭城王勰法曹行参军。
现代文：祖莹以才学名声被任命为太学博士。征授司徒、彭城王元勰的法曹参军。
English: Zu Ying was appointed as a doctor of science with a reputation for talent in learning, and conscripted scholars and legal experts such as Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun to join the army.

古文：高祖顾谓勰曰： 萧赜以王元长为子良法曹，今为汝用祖莹，岂非伦匹也？ 
现代文：高祖对勰说： 萧赜以王元长为子良法曹，今天我为你任命祖莹，这岂不可以与之匹敌了吗？ 
English: Gao Zu said to Zou: Xiao Zou took Wang Yuanzhong as Zili's legal expert, today I appoint Zou Ying for you, is this not comparable?

古文：敕令掌勰书记。
现代文：命祖莹为彭城王元勰幕府书记。
English: Ying, the founder of the dynasty, was appointed as the secretary of Yuan Shao.

古文：莹与陈郡袁翻齐名秀出，时人为之语曰： 京师楚楚袁与祖，洛中翩翩祖与袁。 
现代文：祖莹与陈郡的袁翻齐名秀出，当时人编了一首歌谣说： 京师楚楚，袁与祖；洛中翩翩，祖与袁。 
English: Zu Ying and Chen County's Yuan Fu have the same reputation and stand out from the crowd. At that time, people said that the two of them: the most moving talent in Beijing is Yuan Fu and Zu Ying, and the handsome boy in Luoyang City is Zu Ying and Yuan Fu.

古文：再迁尚书三公郎。
现代文：又迁任尚书三公郎。
English: He was also transferred to the position of Shosho Sanko-ro.

古文：尚书令王肃曾于省中咏《悲平城》诗，云： 悲平城，驱马入云中。
现代文：尚书令王肃曾经在衙门里吟咏一首《悲平城诗》，诗说： 悲平城，驱马入云中。
English: Shang Shuling ordered Wang Su to chant a "Pathetic Pingcheng Poem" in the gate of the palace. The poem said: "Pathetic Pingcheng, drive your horse into the clouds."

古文：阴山常晦雪，荒松无罢风。 
现代文：阴山常晦雪，荒松无罢风。 
English: The gloomy mountains are often shrouded in haze, the wind is wild and the snow is fierce, and the tops of the pine trees in the wilderness are constantly stirred by the cold wind.

古文：彭城王勰甚嗟其美，欲使肃更咏，乃失语云： 王公吟咏情性，声律殊佳，可更为诵《悲彭城》诗。 
现代文：彭城王元勰很是为其文辞优美所嗟叹，想让王肃再吟，可是语出差错： 王公您吟咏情性，词语声律，都特别优美，是不是可以再吟一遍《悲彭城诗》。 
English: Pengcheng Wangyuanqian was very impressed by the beauty of his words. He wanted Wang Su to recite it again, but he made a mistake: Wang Gong, the emotion of your recitation and the rhythm of your words are particularly beautiful. Can you recite the "Pathetic Pengcheng Poem" again?

古文：肃因戏勰云： 何意《悲平城》为《悲彭城》也？ 
现代文：王肃一听，开玩笑说： 怎么《悲平城》变成了《悲彭城》了。 
English: Wang Su listened and said jokingly: How did "Pathetic Pingcheng" become "Pathetic Pengcheng"?

古文：勰有惭色。
现代文：元勰顿时脸红。
English: The original satin is a bit of a shame.

古文：莹在座，即云： 所有《悲彭城》，王公自未见耳。 
现代文：祖莹当时在座，就说： 有《悲彭城》，只不过是王公您没有见过。 
English: Zu Ying, who was present at the time, said: There is "Pathetic Pengcheng," but you haven't seen it.

古文：肃云： 可为诵之。 
现代文：王肃说： 能否读来听听。 
English: Wang Su said, "Can you recite it for me?"

古文：莹应声云： 悲彭城，楚歌四面起。尸积石梁亭，血流睢水里。 
现代文：祖莹应声诵读： 悲彭城，楚歌四面起；尸积石梁亭，血流睢水里。 
English: Zu Ying chanted in response, "What a pity, Pengcheng, the sad song of Chu is sung everywhere, the bodies of the soldiers are piled up in the stone pavilion, and the blood of the soldiers will turn the water red."

古文：肃甚嗟赏之。
现代文：王肃听罢，很是惊叹。
English: Wang Su listened in amazement.

古文：勰亦大悦，退谓莹曰： 即定是神口。
现代文：勰也大为高兴，回来对祖莹说： 当时你定是神口。
English: Zou was also very happy and came back to Zu Ying to say: At that time, you must have been the mouth of God.

古文：今日若不得卿，几为吴子所屈。 
现代文：今天若不是你，我非得被吴子所屈不可。 
English: If it wasn't for you today, I'd have to be subjugated by Wu Zi.

古文：为冀州镇东府长史，以货贿事发，除名。
现代文：祖莹任冀州镇东府长史，因贿赂一事败露，被除名。
English: Zu Ying, who was appointed as the governor of Jizhou Town East Prefecture, was exposed for accepting bribes, and was removed from office.

古文：后侍中崔光举为国子博士，仍领尚书左户部。
现代文：后来侍中崔光推荐他为博士，仍领授尚书左户部职。
English: Later, the chamberlain, Cui Guang, recommended him for a doctorate, and he was still awarded the position of the left household department of Shangshu.

古文：李崇为都督北讨，引莹为长吏。
现代文：李崇以都督身份北征，引莹为其长史。
English: Li Chong led the Northern Expedition as the governor of the capital and has a long history.

古文：坐截没军资，除名。
现代文：因军资被人截没，又被除名。
English: Due to the confiscation of military funds, he was removed from the list.

古文：未几，为散骑侍郎。
现代文：没多久，任散骑侍郎。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a samurai.

古文：孝昌中，于广平王第掘得古玉印，敕召莹与黄门侍郎李琰之，令辨何世之物。
现代文：孝昌年间，在广平王府第挖得古代宝印，皇帝下诏让祖莹与黄门侍郎李琰之辨别为什么时候的东西。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaochang, an ancient treasure seal was unearthed at the Guangping Palace, and the emperor ordered Zu Ying and the Yellow Gate's steward, Li Xuan, to find out what it was.

古文：莹云： 此是于阗国王晋太康中所献。 
现代文：祖莹说： 这是于阗国王在晋朝太康年间献给皇上的礼物。 
English: Zu Ying said, "This was a gift from King Yuxuan to the emperor during the Taikang period of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：乃以墨涂字观之，果如莹言，时人称为博物。
现代文：于是用墨涂字验看，果然像祖莹所说那样，当时人称他为博物多识的专家。
English: He printed it out with ink on the word, and sure enough, as he said, people called him a "naturalist" at the time.

古文：累迁国子祭酒，领给事黄门侍郎，幽州大中正，监起居事，又监议事。
现代文：累迁国子祭酒，领给事黄门侍郎，幽州大中正，监察记录皇帝起居事，又监督朝议事宜。
English: He was in charge of distributing the wine for the national son's festival, and he was also the attendant of the Yellow Gate and the vice-president of Yuzhou University. He supervised the record of the emperor's residence and the morning's proceedings.

古文：元颢入洛，以莹为殿中尚书。
现代文：元颢来到洛阳，任祖莹为殿中尚书。
English: Yuan Shao led the rebel army to occupy Luoyang, and appointed Zu Ying as the palace's chancellor.

古文：庄帝还宫，坐为颢作诏罪状尔朱荣，免官。
现代文：庄帝还宫，因他替元颢起草诏书，列举朱荣罪状，免官。
English: Emperor Zhuang returned to the palace and dismissed Zhu Rong because he had drafted an edict on behalf of Yuan Shao, listing Zhu Rong's crimes.

古文：后除秘书监，中正如故。
现代文：后来，朝廷又提拔他为秘书监，中正官职如故。
English: Later, he was appointed secretary-supervisor, and Zhongzheng's official position remained unchanged.

古文：以参议律历，赐爵容城县子。
现代文：因他参加讨论律历，朝廷赐他爵位容城县子。
English: Because of his participation in the discussion of the legal calendar, the imperial court gave him the title of Yeongseong County Son.

古文：坐事系于廷尉。
现代文：因事被囚廷尉狱中。
English: He was also detained in the lieutenant's prison for a crime.

古文：前废帝迁车骑将军。
现代文：前废帝升任他为车骑将军。
English: The former deposed emperor was promoted to General of Chariots and Cavalry.

古文：初，庄帝末，尔朱兆入洛，军人焚烧乐署，钟石管弦，略无存者。
现代文：当初，庄帝末年，朱兆入洛阳，军人焚烧掌音乐的官署，钟石管弦等各种乐器，无一幸存。
English: At first, in the last years of Emperor Zhuang, when Zhu Zhaorong entered Luoyang, the soldiers burned the government office of palm music, the bell stone orchestra and other musical instruments, and none of them survived.

古文：敕莹与录尚书事长孙稚、侍中元孚典造金石雅乐，三载乃就，事在《乐志》。
现代文：皇帝令祖莹与录尚书事长孙稚、侍中元孚掌管制造各种乐器，三年就制造完成，具体情况记在《乐志》。
English: The emperor ordered Zu Ying and Sun Wuzhong, the chief secretary of the Record Office, and Yuan Fu, the chamberlain, to take charge of the manufacture of various musical instruments. The manufacture was completed in three years, and the specific situation was recorded in the "Music History."

古文：迁车骑大将军。
现代文：升为车骑大将军。
English: He was transferred to the post of general of the cavalry.

古文：及出帝登阼，莹以太常行礼，封文安县子。
现代文：等到出帝登基，祖莹以太常行礼，被封为文安县子。
English: By the time the emperor was enthroned, Zu Ying had performed the rite of the ethereal ether and was crowned the Prince of Wen'an County.

古文：天平初，将迁鄴，齐献武王因召莹议之。
现代文：天平初年，都将迁邺，齐献武王就此事召见祖莹讨论。
English: In the first year of Tianping, they will all be relocated, and Qi Xianwu Wang summoned Zu Ying to discuss this matter.

古文：以功迁仪同三司，进爵为伯。
现代文：因功迁升仪同三司，晋爵为伯。
English: Due to his meritorious service, he was promoted to the same rank as the Third Division, and received a promotion to the peerage.

古文：薨，赠尚书左仆射、司徒公、冀州刺史。
现代文：逝世，朝廷赠他为尚书左仆射、司徒公、冀州刺史。
English: After his death, the imperial court gave him the titles of Shangshu Zuopuzha, Stogong and Jizhou Shishi.

古文：莹以文学见重，常语人云： 文章须自出机杼，成一家风骨。何能共人同生活也？ 
现代文：祖莹以文学为世人所重，他常对人说： 文章必须自出匠心，成一家风骨，怎能道别人可以说出的呢？ 
English: Zu Ying regards literature as the most important thing in the world. He often says to people, "Articles must be created with ingenuity and become the backbone of a family. How can others say the same thing?"

古文：盖讥世人好偷窃他文以为己用。
现代文：大概这话说的是世人喜欢剽窃他人文字，以作己用的现象。
English: This probably refers to the fact that people like to plagiarize other people's writing for their own use.

古文：而莹之笔札，亦无乏天才，但不能均调，玉石兼有，制裁之体，减于袁、常焉。
现代文：祖莹的文章，也不是没有天才的火花，只是不能调整统一，玉石都有，剪裁功夫，却不如袁、常二人。
English: Zu Ying's article is not without a spark of genius, but it cannot be adjusted and unified. There are all kinds of jade, but it is not as good as Yuan and Chang.

古文：性爽侠，有节气，士有穷厄，以命归之，必见存拯，时亦以此多之。
现代文：祖莹性情豪爽，气节很高，士人有什么麻烦事，托命于他，他必然会尽力相救，当时人也因此夸奖他。
English: Zu Ying had a splendid temperament and a high temperament. If there was any trouble with a scholar, he would entrust it to him, and he would certainly do his best to help. People praised him for this at the time.

古文：其文集行于世。
现代文：祖莹的文集流行于世。
English: Zu Ying's literary works are very popular in the world.

古文：子珽，字孝征，袭。
现代文：子祖王廷，字孝征，袭其爵位。
English: His son, Wang Ting, surnamed Xiao Zheng, succeeded to his title.

古文：常景，字永昌，河内人也。
现代文：常景，字永昌，河内人。
English: Changjing, the character Yongchang, a native of Hanoi.

古文：父文通，天水太守。
现代文：父常文通，终官天水太守。
English: His father, Tsunefumi Tsuchimoto, eventually held the post of Tensui Taishu.

古文：景少聪敏，初读《论语》、《毛诗》，一受便览。
现代文：常景少时聪慧敏捷，初读《论语》、《毛诗》，一受便览。
English: When he was young, Changjing was intelligent and agile. When he read "Analects" and "Mao Poetry" for the first time, he was fascinated by them.

古文：及长，有才思，雅好文章。
现代文：等到长大，有才思，雅好文章。
English: Only when they grow up can they think quickly and write well.

古文：廷尉公孙良举为律博士，高祖亲得其名，既而用之。
现代文：廷尉公孙良举荐他为博士，高祖亲得其名，既而用之。
English: The courtier Gongsun Liang recommended him as a doctor, Gao Zu got his name and used it.

古文：后为门下录事、太常博士。
现代文：后来任门下录事、太常博士。
English: Later, he served as a disciple's clerk, and later as a doctor.

古文：正始初，诏尚书、门下于金墉中书外省考论律令，敕景参议。
现代文：正始初年，帝诏尚书、门下在金墉中书外省考查讨论律令，帝命常景参与议论。
English: At the beginning of the first year, the Emperor Shangshu and his disciples discussed the Ritsuryo at the Provincial Examination of the Jinyu Middle School, and the Emperor Shoujing participated in the discussion.

古文：世宗季舅护军将军高显卒，其兄右仆射肇私托景及尚书邢峦、并州刺史高聪、通直郎徐纥各作碑铭，并以呈御，世宗悉付侍中崔光简之，光以景所造为最，乃奏曰： 常景名位乃处诸人之下，文出诸人之上。 
现代文：魏世宗小舅护军将军高显去世，其兄右仆射高肇私下托常景及尚书邢峦、并州刺史高聪、通直郎徐纥各作碑铭，一并呈上。世宗都交给侍中崔光，让他评说，光认为常景所撰的为最好，于是启奏说： 常景名位在诸人之下，文字出于诸人之上。 
English: Wei Shizong's brother-in-law, General Gao Xian, died, and his brother's right-hand man, She Gao Zhao, privately commissioned Changjing and Shang Shuxuan, as well as the statesmen Gao Cong and Tong Zhi Lang Xu Yi, to make inscriptions, which were presented together. Shizong gave them to the chamberlain, Cui Guang, and asked him to comment on them. Guang thought that what Changjing had written was the best, so the prelude said: Changjing's fame is below all people, and the writing is above all people.

古文：遂以景文刊石。
现代文：于是把常景的文字刊刻在石头上面。
English: Therefore, the words of Changjing were engraved on the stone.

古文：肇尚平阳公主，未几主薨，肇欲使公主家令居户制服，付学官议正施行。
现代文：高肇娶平阳公主，没多久，公主便死了，高肇想使公主家令居庐制丧服，交付学官讨论施行。
English: Gao Zhao married Princess Pingyang. Not long after, the princess died. Gao Zhao wanted to make the princess's family wear mourning clothes and submit it to the scholar to discuss and implement.

古文：尚书又以访景，景以妇人无专国之理，家令不得有纯臣之义，乃执议曰： 丧纪之本，实称物以立情；轻重所因，亦缘情以制礼。
现代文：尚书又访询常景，常景认为妇人无专国之理，家令不得有纯臣之义，于是执议说： 丧纪之本，实际应称物以立情；礼制轻重也应依情况而定。
English: Shangshu also inquired about Changjing. Changjing believed that there was no reason for a woman to be the ruler of a country, and that the family order should not have the meaning of a pure vassal. Therefore, he said: "The book of eulogies, in fact, should be based on the situation; the importance of etiquette should also depend on the situation.

古文：虽理关盛衰，事经今古，而制作之本，降杀之宜，其实一焉。
现代文：虽然理关盛衰，事经今古，而制作之本，降杀之宜，其实都是一个道理。
English: Although the reason for the rise and fall is ancient, the reason for the production and the reason for the killing are actually the same.

古文：是故臣之为君，所以资敬而崇重；为君母妻，所以从服而制义。
现代文：所以臣子为了君主，应该尊敬而崇重礼制；为君母妻，所以从服而制义。
English: Therefore, for the sake of the monarch, the vassal should respect and reverence the etiquette; for the sake of the prince's mother and wife, the vassal should obey and establish righteousness.

古文：然而诸侯大夫之为君者，谓其有地土，有吏属；无服文者，言其非世爵也。
现代文：然而诸侯大夫之被称为君的，是说他有土地，有吏属，没有服文的，是说其非世爵也。
English: However, if a vassal was called a prince, it meant that he owned land, had officials, and did not have to serve as a vassal. It also meant that he was not a peer.

古文：今王姬降适，虽加爵命，事非君邑，理异列土。
现代文：而今王姬降从，虽加有爵命，但事非君邑，理异列土。
English: And now Wang Ji's submission, although he was given a knighthood, was not a matter of nobility, but a matter of principle.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：诸王开国，备立臣吏，生有趋奉之勤，死尽致丧之礼；而公主家令，唯有一人，其丞已下，命之属官，既无接事之仪，实阙为臣之体。
现代文：诸王开国，备立臣吏，生有趋奉君王之勤，死了就应尽其致丧之礼；而公主家令，只有一人，其丞以下，都由属官任命，他们但既无接事之仪，实缺为臣之礼。
English: At the founding of the kingdoms, officials were appointed to serve the king. They were born to serve the king, and when they died, they should perform their funeral rites. However, there was only one princess's family, whose junior and junior officials were appointed by subordinate officials. However, since they did not have the ceremony of engagement, they really lacked the ceremony of being a vassal.

古文：原夫公主之贵所以立家令者，盖以主之内事脱须关外，理无自达，必也因人。
现代文：循察公主之贵所以立家令的，大致是因要他们主之内事接应外务，理无自达，必也因人。
English: According to the princess, the reason for the establishment of the family order was roughly because they wanted their master's internal affairs to be responsive to external affairs. There was no reason for this, but it must have been caused by someone.

古文：然则家令唯通内外之职，及典主家之事耳，无关君臣之理，名义之分也。
现代文：然而家令只通内外之职，及掌主人家中的事情罢了，与君臣之理无关，名分上有分别。
English: However, the family order only applied to internal and external duties, and only governed the affairs of the master's household. It had nothing to do with the principle of monarch and vassal, and there was a difference in the name.

古文：由是推之，家令不得为纯臣，公主不可为正君明矣。
现代文：由此推论，家令不能作为纯粹意义上的臣子，公主不可为正君的道理就很明确了。
English: From this deduction, it is clear that the heir cannot be a vassal in the pure sense, and the princess cannot be the legitimate monarch.

古文：且女人之为君，男子之为臣，古礼所不载，先朝所未议。
现代文：而且女人之为君，男子为臣，古礼之中不见记载，先朝之上不见讨论。
English: Moreover, a woman's status as a prince, and a man's as a vassal, are not recorded in the ancient rites, and were not discussed in the previous dynasty.

古文：而四门博士裴道广、孙荣乂等以公主为之君，以家令为之臣，制服以斩，乖谬弥甚。
现代文：而四门博士裴道广、孙荣义等以公主为君，以家令为臣，制臣子的丧服而服丧，乖异谬妄太过。
English: However, the four scholars, including Pei Daoguang and Sun Rongyi, take the princess as the sovereign, the family order as the vassal, and the vassal's mourning clothes as the mourning clothes, which is too strange and absurd.

古文：又张虚景、吾难羁等，不推君臣之分，不寻致服之情，犹同其议，准母制齐，求之名实，理未为允。
现代文：又张虚景、吾难羁等不推寻君臣名分，不寻查造服的情况，犹同其议，按丧母制度服丧，求之名实，理为未当。
English: In addition, Zhang Fuxing and Wu Nanguo did not seek the title of prince and minister, did not investigate the situation of making clothes, and still argued with them, according to the mourning system, and sought the name and reality, which was unreasonable.

古文：窃谓公主之爵，既非食菜之君；家令之官，又无纯臣之式。
现代文：窃谓公主之爵，既非食菜之君；家令之官，又无纯臣之式。
English: The title of Baron of the Princess is neither the ruler of the cuisine, nor the official of the household, nor the style of the pure vassal.

古文：若附如母，则情义罔施；若准小君，则从服无据。
现代文：若比附如母，则情义不当。如准依小君，则从服无据。
English: If you are attached like a mother, then the situation is inappropriate. If you are attached like a child, then you have no reason to obey.

古文：案如经礼，事无成文；即之愚见，谓不应服。 
现代文：案查经书礼制，事无成文；依臣愚见，谓不应服。 
English: If a case is investigated according to the scripture and etiquette system, there will be no written record; if it is based on a minister's foolish opinion, it is said that it should not be obeyed.

古文：朝廷从之。
现代文：朝廷依从他的意见。
English: The court followed his advice.

古文：景淹滞门下，积岁不至显官，以蜀司马相如、王褒、严君平、扬子云等四贤，皆有高才而无重位，乃托意以赞之。
现代文：常景淹留门下省数年，不至显官，以蜀司马相如、王褒、严君平、扬子云等四贤，都有高才而无重位，于是托意以赞之。
English: Changjing stayed in the province under his tutelage for several years, but did not become a prominent official. The four sages, including Shu Shima, Wang Bao, Yan Junping, and Yang Ziyun, were all highly talented and did not hold important positions, so he praised them.

古文：其赞司马相如曰： 长卿有艳才，直致不群性。
现代文：其赞司马相如说： 长卿有艳才，直致不群性。
English: His admirer, Sima Xiangru, said: Changqing has a bright talent and is not a gregarious person.

古文：郁若春烟举，皎如秋月映。
现代文：郁若春烟举，皎如秋月映。
English: If Iku is in the spring, he will be in the autumn.

古文：游梁虽好仁，仕汉常称病。
现代文：游梁虽好仁，仕汉常称病。
English: Although Yu Liang is a good person, he often complains of illness.

古文：清贞非我事，穷达委天命。 
现代文：清贞非我事，穷达委天命。 
English: Chastity is not my business, poverty is the fate of the committee.

古文：其赞王子渊曰： 王子挺秀质，逸气干青云。
现代文：其赞王子渊说： 王子挺秀质，逸气干云霄。
English: Of his praise, Ojiyafuchi said, "Ojiyafuchi is of excellent quality, and has a wonderful spirit.

古文：明珠既绝俗，白鹄信惊群。
现代文：明珠既绝俗，白鹄信惊群。
English: Mingzhu is extremely vulgar, and Bai Yuxin is shocking.

古文：才世苟不合，遇否途自分。
现代文：才世苟不合，遇否途自分。
English: Talent is not compatible with the world, in case of failure, you have to be yourself.

古文：空枉碧鸡命，徒献金马文。 
现代文：空枉碧鸡命，徒献金马文。 
English: Wasting the life of a chicken, sacrificing the life of a horse.

古文：其赞严君平曰： 严公体沉静，立志明霜雪。
现代文：其赞严君平说： 严公体沉静，立志明霜雪。
English: His praise Yan Junping said: Yan Gongtian calm, determined to clear the snow.

古文：味道综微言，端蓍演妙说。
现代文：味道综微言，端蓍演妙说。
English: The taste is complex and subtle, but the end result is exquisite.

古文：才屈罗仲口，位结李强舌。
现代文：才屈罗仲口，位结李强舌。
English: The tongue of the wise is strong, but the mouth of the fool is weak.

古文：素尚迈金贞，清标陵玉彻。 
现代文：素尚迈金贞，清标陵玉彻。 
English: Su Shang Mai Jin Zhen, Qing Bei Ling Yucheng.

古文：其赞扬子云曰： 蜀江导清流，扬子挹余休。
现代文：其赞扬子云说： 蜀江导清流，扬子挹余休。
English: Ziyun praised it, saying: "The Shu River leads to a clear stream, and the Yangzi River leads to a rest.

古文：含光绝后彦，覃思邈前修。
现代文：含光绝后彦，覃思邈前修。
English: Containing the light of the last empress dowager, the thought of the last empress dowager.

古文：世轻久不赏，玄谈物无求。
现代文：世轻久不赏，玄谈物无求。
English: The world has not appreciated it for a long time, and there is no demand for mystical things.

古文：当途谢权宠，置酒独闲游。 
现代文：当途谢权宠，置酒独闲游。 
English: On the way, he thanked the authorities and enjoyed a leisurely walk with a bottle of wine.

古文：景在枢密十有余年，为侍中崔光、卢昶、游肇、元晖尤所知赏。
现代文：常景在枢密部门十多年，被侍中崔光、卢昶、游肇、元晖尤其赏识。
English: Changjing has been in the privy council for more than ten years, and is especially appreciated by the chamberlains Cui Guang, Lu Wei, You Zhao, and Yuan Qi.

古文：累迁积射将军、给事中。
现代文：累迁积射将军、给事中。
English: Cumulative accumulated shooting general, in the middle of the matter.

古文：延昌初，东宫建，兼太子屯骑校尉，录事皆如故。
现代文：延昌初年，东宫建起后，常景兼任太子屯骑校尉，录事职都仍旧。
English: In the first year of Yanchang, after the construction of the East Palace, Changjing also served as the prince's cavalry lieutenant, and his duties as a recorder were still the same.

古文：其年受敕撰门下诏书，凡四十卷。
现代文：这一年受敕撰门下诏书，共四十卷。
English: In the same year, he was commissioned to compile the Emperor's rescript, a total of forty volumes.

古文：尚书元苌出为安西将军、雍州刺史，请景为司马，以景阶次不及，除录事参军、襄威将军，带长安令。
现代文：尚书元苌出为安西将军、雍州刺史，请常景为司马，因景阶次不够，除任录事参军、襄威将军，带长安令。
English: Shang Shuyuan was selected as the general of Anxi and Yongzhou was selected as the historian, and Changjing was selected as the Sima, but because the rank was not enough, he was removed from the record to join the army, General Xiang Wei, with the Chang'an order.

古文：甚有惠政，民吏称之。
现代文：很有惠政，百姓官吏都很是称赞他。
English: He was very benevolent, and the people and officials praised him.

古文：先是，太常刘芳与景等撰朝令，未及班行。
现代文：这以前，太常刘芳与常景等人撰写朝令，没有来得及颁布施行。
English: Originally, the imperial edict was written by Liu Fang Taizang together with Changjing and others, but was not issued.

古文：别典仪注，多所草创。未成，芳卒，景纂成其事。
现代文：另外典掌仪注，多有草创，未成，刘芳去世，常景纂成其事。
English: In addition, there were many drafts, but none were completed, Liu Fang died, and Changjing was never completed.

古文：及世宗崩，召景赴京，还修仪注。
现代文：及世宗逝世，朝廷召常景赴京，还修仪注。
English: After Shizong's death, the imperial court summoned Changjing to Beijing, where he was given a ceremonial annotation.

古文：拜谒者仆射，加宁远将军。
现代文：拜授谒者仆射，加宁远将军。
English: Paying homage to the deceased, the general Kanin is far away.

古文：又以本官兼中书舍人。
现代文：又以本官兼中书舍人官职。
English: He also resigned from his post as a vice-chancellor.

古文：后授步兵校尉，仍舍人。
现代文：后来授步兵校尉，仍为舍人。
English: Later, he was awarded the rank of infantry lieutenant colonel, but he remained a layman.

古文：又敕撰太和之后朝仪已施行者，凡五十余卷。
现代文：又敕撰太和年间以后朝仪已施行的，共五十卷。
English: In addition, he compiled a total of fifty volumes of the rites that have been carried out since the Taowa era.

古文：时灵太后诏依汉世阴邓二后故事，亲奉庙祀，与帝交献。
现代文：当时灵太后下诏令依汉代阴、邓二位皇后旧例，自己亲奉朝祀，让帝交替献祭。
English: At that time, the Empress Dowager Ling issued an imperial edict in accordance with the old practice of the empresses of the Han Dynasty and the two empresses of the Deng Dynasty, to personally worship the emperor and let the emperor sacrifice alternately.

古文：景乃据正，以定仪注，朝廷是之。
现代文：常景于是据正例，以定朝仪，朝廷肯定了他的做法。
English: So, according to the usual practice, the imperial court affirmed his practice of using the imperial rescript.

古文：正光初，除龙骧将军、中散大夫，舍人如故。
现代文：正光初年，除任龙骧将军、中散大夫，舍人如故。
English: In the first year of Zheng Guang, Emperor Ming gave a lecture on etiquette at the Guozi Temple, and Sidu Cui Guang gave a lecture on scripture.

古文：时肃宗行讲学之礼于国子寺，司徒崔光执经，敕景与董绍、张彻、冯元兴、王延业、郑伯猷等俱为录义。
现代文：当时肃宗在国子寺行讲学之礼，司徒崔光执经，帝敕常景与董绍、张彻、冯元兴、王延业、郑伯猷等一起录经义。
English: At that time, Su Zong gave a lecture at Guozi Temple, Stut Choe Kwang chanted the sutras, and Emperor Gao Changjing recorded the sutras together with Dong Shao, Zhang Che, Feng Yuanxing, Wang Yanye, and Zheng Boqin.

古文：事毕，又行释奠之礼，并诏百官作释奠诗，时以景作为美。
现代文：事完后，又行释奠之礼，并诏百官写释奠诗，大家的诗作中常景的诗最好。
English: After the event was over, the ceremony of explanation and commemoration was held again, and it was announced that all the officials would write an explanation and commemoration poem. Of all the poems, the poem of the common scene was the best.

古文：是年九月，蠕蠕主阿那瑰归阙，朝廷疑其位次。高阳王雍访景，景曰： 昔咸宁中，南单于来朝，晋世处之王公、特进之下。
现代文：这年九月，蠕蠕主阿那环归顺朝廷，朝廷不知应把他安在什么位置合适，高阳王元雍访问常景，常景说： 往日咸宁年间，南单于来朝，晋代朝廷把他放在王公、特进之下。
English: In September of that year, Anahing, the leader of the Cormorants, returned to the Shun court. The court did not know where to place him. Goyang Wang Yuan Yong visited Changjing. Changjing said: In the days of Xianning, Nan Dan Yu came to the court, and the court of the Jin Dynasty placed him under the prince and the special envoy.

古文：今日为班，宜在蕃王、仪同三司之间。 
现代文：今天应该把他放在蕃王、仪同三司之间。 
English: Today, he should be placed between the king of eunuchs, the etiquette and the three departments.

古文：雍从之。
现代文：元雍听从了他的意见。
English: Yuan Yong followed his advice.

古文：朝廷典章，疑而不决，则时访景而行。
现代文：当时朝廷典章，疑而不决的，则询访于常景而定。
English: At that time, if there was any doubt about the imperial edict, it was decided by asking the common people.

古文：初，平齐之后，光禄大夫高聪徙于北京，中书监高允为之娉妻，给其资宅。
现代文：当初，平定齐地之后，光禄大夫高聪徙于北京，中书监高允为他娶妻，给他钱财房宅。
English: At first, after the peaceful settlement, Guanglu doctor Gao Cong migrated to Beijing. Gao Yun, the Chinese book supervisor, married him and gave him money and a house.

古文：聪后为允立碑，每云： 吾以此文报德，足矣。 
现代文：高聪后来为高允立碑，他经常说： 我以此文报答他的恩德，足矣。 
English: Gao Cong later erected a monument for Gao Yun, and he often said: I repay his kindness with this document, it is enough.

古文：豫州刺史常绰以未尽其美。
现代文：豫州刺史常绰认为未尽其美。
English: Changjing appreciated Gao Yun's talent and ability, and wrote an "Ode to the Last Virtue" for him.

古文：景尚允才器，先为《遗德颂》，司徒崔光闻而观之，寻味良久，乃云： 高光禄平日每矜其文，自许报允之德，今见常生此《颂》，高氏不得独擅其美也。 
现代文：常景推崇高允才学器识，先作《遗德颂》，司徒崔光听说后观看其文，寻味良久，说： 高光禄平时每每矜夸其文，自认为可以报答高允之德，今天见到常生此颂，高氏便不能独擅其美了。 
English: Gao Guanglu was praised by the common people for his ability to learn from Gao Yuncai. His first work was "Ode to the Legacy of Virtue." After hearing about Gao Guanglu and watching his poem, he was intrigued for a long time and said: "In normal times, Gao Guanglu praised his poem every day. He thought that he could repay Gao Yuncai's virtue. Today, when I see this poem, Gao can't be so good at it.

古文：侍中崔光、安丰王延明受诏议定服章，敕景参修其事。
现代文：侍中崔光、安丰王元延明受诏议定服章之仪，帝敕常景参加讨论。
English: Chamberlains Cui Guang and Anfeng Wangyuan Yanming receive the ceremonial insignia of the imperial insignia, and Empress Dowager Changjing takes part in the discussion.

古文：寻进号冠军将军。
现代文：不久进号冠军将军。
English: Soon after, the general was given the title of champion.

古文：阿那瑰之还国也，境上迁延，仍陈窘乏。
现代文：阿那环率众投魏，他在国境上迁延时日，又陈部下饥饿疲乏，难以前进。
English: Anahuan led the crowd to Wei, he delayed the time at the border, and Chen's subordinates were hungry and tired, and it was difficult to advance.

古文：遣尚书左丞元孚奉诏振恤，阿那瑰执孚过柔玄，奔于漠北。
现代文：帝派尚书左丞元孚奉诏抚恤，阿那环抓住元孚经过柔玄，奔往漠北。
English: The emperor dispatched Shangshu Zuojo to Yuan Fu, and Anahuan seized Yuan Fu, passed through Zhuoxuan, and rushed to the north of the desert.

古文：遣尚书令李崇、御史中尉兼右仆射元纂追讨，不及。
现代文：帝派尚书令李崇、御史中尉兼右仆射元纂领兵追讨，没有赶上。
English: The emperor sent Shang Shuling Li Chong and his lieutenant and right-hand man Shao Yuan Zuo to lead the troops to investigate, but they did not catch up.

古文：乃令景出塞，经瓫山，临瀚海，宣敕勒众而返。
现代文：又令常景出塞，经瓮山，临翰海，让他宣诏召大军回朝。
English: He also ordered Changjing out of the fortress, through Lushan and Linhanhai, and let him issue an edict to call the large army back to the imperial court.

古文：景经涉山水，怅然怀古，乃拟刘琨《扶风歌》十二首。
现代文：常景跋山涉水，怅然怀古，模仿刘琨《扶风歌》作诗十二首。
English: Changjing waded through the mountains, reminiscent of ancient times, and imitated Liu Ye's "Fufu Song" to write twelve poems.

古文：进号征虏将军。
现代文：进号为征虏将军。
English: He was promoted to General of Conscripts.

古文：孝昌初，兼给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：孝昌初年，兼任给事黄门侍郎。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, he also served as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：寻除左将军、太府少卿，仍舍人。
现代文：不久又除左将军、太府少卿，仍为舍人。
English: Soon after, he was removed from the position of General of the Left and promoted to Taifu Shokei, but he still refused to resign.

古文：固辞少卿不拜，改授散骑常侍，将军如故。
现代文：他坚决推辞少卿职不拜，改授散骑常侍，将军如故。
English: He resolutely refused to accept the post of Shaoqing, and instead was awarded the title of Sanzhishi, and remained a general.

古文：徐州刺史元法僧叛入萧衍，衍遣其豫章王萧综入据彭城。
现代文：徐州刺史元法僧叛入萧衍政权，萧衍派其豫章王萧综入据彭城。
English: Xuzhou Zishi Yuan Fa Monk defected to the Xiao Yan regime, Xiao Yan sent his Yu Zhang Wang Xiao Zuo to Pengcheng.

古文：时安丰王延明为大都督、大行台，率临淮王彧等众军讨之。
现代文：当时安丰王元延明为大都督、大行台、都督观机部分。常景经洛，于是作铭文。
English: At that time, Anfeng Wang Yuan Yanming was the Grand Governor, the Grand Governor, and the Governor's observation part. Changjing passed through Luo, so he made an inscription.

古文：既而萧综降附，徐州清复，遣景兼尚书，持节驰与行台、都督观机部分。景经洛汭，乃作铭焉。是时，尚书令萧宝夤，都督崔延伯，都督、北海王颢，都督、车骑将军元恆芝等并各出讨，诏景诣军宣旨劳问。
现代文：这时，尚书令萧宝夤、都督崔延伯，都督、北海王元颢，都督、车骑将军元恒芝等都一一出讨，帝诏常景到军中宣旨劳问。
English: At this time, Shang Shuling Xiao Baojun, Governor Cui Yanbo, Governor, Beihai Wang Yuanjun, Governor, Cavalry General Yuan Hengzhi, etc. all came out to discuss, and Emperor Changjing went to the army to ask questions.

古文：还，以本将军授徐州刺史。
现代文：还朝，以本将军授徐州刺史。
English: Also in the morning, this general was awarded the history of Xuzhou.

古文：杜洛周反于燕州，仍以景兼尚书为行台，与幽州都督、平北将军元谭以御之。
现代文：杜洛周在燕州反叛，帝仍以常景兼尚书为行台，与幽州都督、平北将军元谭一起抵御叛军。
English: Du Luo Zhou rebelled in Yanzhou, and the emperor still took the common scene and the noble book as the platform, and together with the governor of Yuzhou and the general of Pingbei, Yuan Tan, resisted the rebels.

古文：景表求勒幽州诸县悉入古城，山路有通贼之处，权发兵夫，随宜置戍，以为防遏。
现代文：常景上表请求统幽州各县人马都入古城，山路有通往敌人的地方，权发兵夫，随其设戍，以为防敌之处。
English: The standing scene above the table requests that all the people from all the counties of Yuzhou enter the ancient city, the mountain road has a place leading to the enemy, the right to send soldiers, and then set up a palanquin to defend against the enemy.

古文：又以顷来差兵，不尽强壮，今之三长，皆是豪门多丁为之，今求权发为兵。
现代文：又因一向以来差兵，兵马不尽强壮，今之三长，都是豪门或多丁卒的人充任，请求权且征其为兵。
English: Also, since soldiers have always been dispatched, soldiers and horses are not as strong as they used to be, and the current three generals are all wealthy people or people with many children, they have the right to request and recruit them as soldiers.

古文：肃宗皆从之。
现代文：肃宗都依从了他的意见。
English: Su Zong followed his advice.

古文：进号平北将军。
现代文：进号为平北将军。
English: His codename was General Pingbei.

古文：别敕谭西至军都关，北从卢龙塞，据此二嶮，以杜贼出入之路。
现代文：另敕元谭西到军都关，北据卢龙塞，据此二险，以堵塞敌人出入之路。
English: In addition, Yuan Tanxi went to the military capital, north to Lulongse, according to this two risks, in order to block the enemy's way in and out.

古文：又诏景山中险路之处，悉令捍塞。
现代文：又诏常景在山中路险的地方，都令捍塞。
English: In addition, the scenic spots in the middle of the mountain where the road is dangerous are blocked.

古文：景遣府录事参军裴智成发范阳三长之兵以守白闰，都督元谭据居庸下口。
现代文：常景派府中录事参军裴智成征发范阳三长之兵据守白山闰，都督元谭据居庸、下口。
English: Changjing sent the record of the prefectural government to join the army, Pei Zhicheng sent the soldiers of Fanyang Sanzhong to guard Bai Shan Yue, and the governor, Yuan Tan, went to the lower mouth.

古文：俄而安州石离、冗城、斛盐三戍兵反，结洛周，有众二万余落，自松岍赴贼。
现代文：不多久，安州、石离、冗城、斛盐三个戍关军人反叛，勾结杜洛周，共有二万多人，从松岍赴敌而去。
English: Not long after, Anzhou, Shiyan, Zoucheng, and Yan'an, three Shaoguan soldiers rebelled, colluding with Duoluo Zhou, a total of more than twenty thousand people, from Songtao to the enemy.

古文：谭勒别将崔仲哲等截军都关以待之。
现代文：元谭统别将崔仲哲等截堵军都关以待叛军。
English: The former General Tan did not pay attention to the rebel forces, leaving Choi Chung Chul and other blocking forces behind.

古文：仲哲战没，洛周又自外应之，腹背受敌，谭遂大败，诸军夜散。
现代文：仲哲战没，洛周又从外面呼应，元谭腹背受敌，于是大败，军队夜晚四散而去。
English: Zhongzhe lost the battle, Luo Zhou echoed from the outside, and Yuan Tan suffered from the enemy, so he was defeated, and the army dispersed at night.

古文：诏以景所部别将李琚为都督，代谭征下口，降景为后将军，解州任，仍诏景为幽安玄等四州行台。
现代文：帝诏以常景所部别将李琚为都督，代替元谭征伐下口，降常景为后将军，解除州职，仍诏常景为幽、安、玄、□四州行台。
English: The emperor decreed that Changjing would become the governor of the capital in place of Yuan Tan, and that Changjing would be demoted to rear admiral and removed from the post of prefect, but Changjing would remain as the capital of four prefectures: Yu, An, Xuan, and □.

古文：贼既南出，钞掠蓟城，景命统军梁仲礼率兵士邀击，破之，获贼将御夷镇军主孙念恆。
现代文：敌人既向南侵出，抄掠蓟城，常景命统军梁仲礼率军攻击，打败敌人，擒获敌将御夷镇军主孙念恒。
English: The enemy had already invaded the south and plundered the city of Handan. Changjing's unified army, led by Liang Zhongli, attacked, defeated the enemy, and captured Sun Nianheng, the commander of the army in the town of Goyi.

古文：都督李琚为贼所攻，蓟城之北军败而死。
现代文：都督李琚为贼所攻，在蓟城北面军败身死。
English: The governor, Li Qian, was attacked by thieves and was killed in the defeat of the army north of Lucheng.

古文：率属城人御之，贼不敢逼。
现代文：常景率城人抵御敌人，敌人不敢进逼。
English: The city's people always resist the enemy, and the enemy does not dare to advance.

古文：洛周还据上谷。
现代文：杜洛周还军据守上谷。
English: Drouot returned to defend the upper valley.

古文：又遣别将重破之于州西虎眼泉，擒斩及溺死者甚众。
现代文：帝授景为平北将军、光禄大夫，行台如故。杜洛周派他的都督王曹纥真、马叱斤等人率部到蓟州城南，抢掠百姓粮食，遇上连天阴雨，敌人疲劳。
English: Emperor Zhujing was the general of Pingbei and the doctor of Guanglu, and the line was the same as before. Du Luo Zhou sent his governor Wang Cao Yuzhen, Ma Zhejing and others to the south of Luzhou to loot the people's grain, encountering continuous cloudy weather and rain, and the enemy was tired.

古文：后洛周南围范阳，城人翻降，执刺史延年及景送于洛周。
现代文：常景与都督于荣、刺史王延年在粟园设兵。断其归路，大败敌人，斩杀曹纥真。洛周率众南往范阳，城人投降，抓住刺史延年及常景送往杜洛周处。
English: Changjing and the governor of the capital, Yu Rong, and Zhang Shi Wang Yan Nian set up an army in Maoyuan. They cut off their way back, defeated the enemy, and killed Cao Yuzhen. Luo Zhou led the people south to Fanyang, the city people surrendered, seized Zhang Shi Yan Nian and Changjing and sent them to the area around Du Luo.

古文：洛周寻为葛荣所吞，景又入荣。
现代文：洛周不久被葛荣吞没，常景又入葛荣众中。
English: Luo Zhou was soon swallowed up by Ge Rong, and Changjing joined Ge Rong's crowd.

古文：荣破，景得还朝。
现代文：葛荣被灭之后，常景得以还朝。
English: After Ge Rong was eliminated, Changjing was able to return to the imperial court.

古文：永安初，诏复本官，兼黄门侍郎，又摄著作，固辞不就。
现代文：永安元年，帝诏复其本官，兼任黄门侍郎，又摄领著作，常景固辞不就。
English: In the first year of the Yongan era, Emperor Xuanzong was reinstated as his own official, concurrently serving as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain, and also supervising the writing of books. However, Changjing was adamant.

古文：二年，除中军将军、正黄门。
现代文：二年，除任中军将军，正黄门。
English: Two years later, he was removed from his post as general of the Chinese army and was sent to the yellow gate.

古文：先是，参议《正光壬子历》，至是赐爵高阳子。
现代文：这以前，参加讨论《正光壬子历》，到这时赐爵高阳子。
English: Before that, he took part in the discussion of "Zhengguang Jinshi Calendar" and was awarded the title of Gaoyangzi at that time.

古文：元颢内逼，庄帝北巡，景与侍中、大司马、安丰王延明在禁中召诸亲宾，安慰京师。
现代文：元颢内逼，庄帝北逃，常景与侍中、大司马、安丰王元延明在宫廷中召集众亲臣宾戚，安慰京师。
English: As Emperor Zhuang was forced to flee to the north, Prince Yuan Yanming, the Prince of Anfeng, along with Prince Changjing, the Grand Steward, and the Grand Steward, gathered all the relatives and guests in the court to comfort the emperor.

古文：颢入洛，景仍居本位。
现代文：元颢入洛，常景仍居本位。
English: Yuan Xuan entered Luo, but Changjing still remained at the same level.

古文：庄帝还宫，解黄门。
现代文：庄帝还宫，解除了他的黄门职。
English: Emperor Zhuang returned to the palace and relieved him of his position as Yellow Gate.

古文：普泰初，除车骑将军、右光禄大夫、秘书监。
现代文：普泰初年，除授车骑将军、右光禄大夫、秘书监。
English: In the first year of Putai, he was promoted to General of Chariot and Cavalry, Doctor of Uguanglu, and Secretary Supervisor.

古文：以预诏命之勤，封濮阳县子。
现代文：以参预起草诏书命诰之勤，封为濮阳县子。
English: He participated in the pre-drafting of the imperial edict and was awarded the title of the son of Poyang County.

古文：后以例追。
现代文：后依例追夺。
English: After that, it's pursuit as usual.

古文：永熙二年，监议事。
现代文：永熙二年，监议事。
English: Soon, he was promoted to champion general.

古文：景自少及老，恆居事任。
现代文：常景从年少到白头，常居官任。
English: From a young age to an old man, Changjing often held official positions.

古文：清俭自守，不营产业，至于衣食，取济而已。
现代文：他清廉俭省，不营办产业，至于衣食之类，够用就觉得行了。
English: He is frugal and thrifty, does not run an industry, and as far as food and clothing are concerned, he feels that enough is enough.

古文：耽好经史，爱玩文词，若遇新异之书，殷勤求访，或复质买，不问价之贵贱，必以得为期。
现代文：喜爱经史书籍，喜欢玩弄文词，如碰到新奇的书籍，则孜孜求访，或用手上的东西抵押购买，不问价钱贵贱，必定要把东西弄到手。
English: He is fond of history and loves to read literary works.

古文：友人刁整每谓曰： 卿清德自居，不事家业，虽俭约可尚，将何以自济也？
现代文：友人刁整经常对他说： 卿清德自居，不置家业，虽说俭约可推崇，但你凭什么养家糊口呢？
English: If you come across a book you haven't seen before, you should always try your best to get hold of it. If you buy a book, you should never ask how much it costs, you should always aim to get it. A friend of mine often said to him: You claim to have pure morals, you don't buy anything. Although your frugality is commendable, what will you live on?

古文：吾恐挚太常方餧于柏谷耳。 
现代文：我担心你这情况会出现挚太常饥饿于鯢谷的情形。 
English: I'm afraid you're going to find yourself in a situation where you're starving in Shibuya all the time.

古文：遂与卫将军羊深矜其所乏，乃率刁双、司马彦邕、李谐、毕祖彦、毕义显等各出钱千文而为买马焉。
现代文：便与卫将军羊深怜其所乏，率刁双、司马彦邕、李谐、毕祖彦、毕义显等人各出钱一千文为他买马。
English: He deeply sympathized with Wei Shogun Yang about his lack of money, and led his followers, such as Gong Shuang, Sima Yanqian, Li Jin, Bi Zuyan, Bi Yixian, and others, to each pay one thousand mon to buy a horse for him.

古文：天平初，迁鄴，景匹马从驾。
现代文：天平初年，帝都迁邺，常景只有匹马从驾。
English: In the first year of the balance of power, the imperial capital was relocated, and only horses rode in the carriage.

古文：是时诏下三日，户四十万狼狈就道，收百官马，尚书丞郎已下非陪从者尽乘驴。
现代文：当时诏书宣布仅三天，四十万户人民狼狈上路，收百官马匹，尚书丞郎以下不是陪从圣驾的都乘驴而行。
English: At that time, the imperial edict announced that in just three days, 400,000 households would set out on the road, collecting hundreds of official horses. Those who did not accompany the sacred driver, including Shang Shujelang, would travel by donkey.

古文：齐献武王以景清贫，特给车牛四乘，妻孥方得达鄴。
现代文：齐献武王以常景清贫，特别拨给牛车四乘，妻小才得行至邺城。
English: Qi Xianwu the king with the usual scenery of poverty-stricken, specially allocated to the ox-drawn carriage four-seater, his wife had to go to Lucheng.

古文：后除仪同三司，仍本将军。
现代文：后来除任仪同三司，仍为本将军。
English: Later, in addition to the appointment ceremony and the three divisions, he was still the general.

古文：武定六年，以老疾去官。
现代文：武定六年，以老病去官。
English: Wu Ding was six years old when he went on sick leave.

古文：忠介剖心于白日，耿节沉骨于幽灵。
现代文：帝诏说： 几杖为礼，安车养老，敬齿尊贤，是从古以来的风尚。
English: Emperor Zhao said: A few canes as a salute, a secure car for the elderly, and respect for the elderly have been the fashion since ancient times.

古文：因斯愚智之所机，倚伏之所系，全亡之所依，其在逊顺而已哉。
现代文：常景才艺业能精通，文史渊洽，历事三京，前后五十年，朝章言归，俸禄无余，家徒四壁，应予怜恤，以彰旌元老。
English: Those who are able to be proficient in arts and crafts, have a profound knowledge of literature and history, have lived in the three capitals for fifty years before and after, have a good reputation with the emperor, have ample salary, and are surrounded by family members and disciples, should be pitied, and honored as elders.

古文：呜呼鉴之！
现代文：可特给右光禄待遇，以终养其身。 
English: Wu Ding died eight years later.

古文：呜呼鉴之！
现代文：武定八年去世。
English: Wu Ding died eight years later.

古文：景所著述数百篇，见行于世，删正晋司空张华《博物志》及撰《儒林》、《列女传》各数十篇云。
现代文：常景所著文数百篇，流行于世，删正晋司空张华《博物志》，又撰《儒林》、《列女传》各数十篇。
English: He wrote hundreds of essays, which were popular in the world. He also edited the "Natural History" by Jinshi Ku Zhanghua, and wrote dozens of "Julin" and "Biographies of Women."

古文：长子昶，少学识，有文才。
现代文：长子昶，少学识，但有文才。
English: The eldest son is shy, lacks knowledge, but has literary talent.

古文：早卒。
现代文：早卒。
English: He died at an early age.

古文：昶弟彪之。永安中，司空行参军。
现代文：昶弟彪之，永安年间，任司空行参军。
English: His younger brother Biao Zhi joined the army during the Yongan era.

