古文：皇祐二年，吴中大饥，时范仲淹领浙西，发粟及募民存饷，为术甚备。
现代文：原文宋朝皇祐二年，吴州一带闹大饥荒，当时范仲淹治理浙西，下令散发米粮赈灾。
English: In the second year of Emperor Yu of the Song Dynasty, there was a great famine in the area of Wuzhou. At that time, Fan Zhongyan governed western Zhejiang and ordered the distribution of rice grain to relieve the famine.

古文：吴人喜竞渡，好为佛事。
现代文：并鼓励百姓储备粮食，救荒的措施非常完备。吴州民俗喜好赛舟，并且笃信佛教。
English: The people of Wuzhou are encouraged to stockpile grain, and the measures to relieve the famine are very complete. Wuzhou folk customs like to race boats, and they firmly believe in Buddhism.

古文：仲淹乃纵民竞渡，太守日出宴于湖上。
现代文：范仲淹于是鼓励百姓举行划船比赛，自己也日日在湖上宴饮。
English: Fan Zhongyan then encouraged the people to hold a rowing race, and he also feasted on the lake every day.

古文：自春至夏，居民空巷出游。
现代文：从春至夏，当地的百姓几乎天天都扶老携幼在湖边争看赛船。
English: From spring to summer, local people take their children to watch boat races on the lake almost every day.

古文：又召诸佛寺主守，谕之曰： 今岁工价至贱，可以大兴土木。 
现代文：另外，范仲淹又召集各佛寺住持，对他们说： 饥岁荒年工钱最是低廉，正是寺院大兴土木的大好时机。 
English: In addition, Fan Zhongran also called together the abbots of various Buddhist temples and said to them: The years of famine and famine are the cheapest years for labor, and it is a great opportunity for temples to carry out large-scale construction.

古文：于是诸寺工作并兴。
现代文：于是各寺庙住持无不招募工人大肆兴建。
English: As a result, the abbots of all the temples recruited workers to build them.

古文：又新仓廒吏舍，日役千夫。
现代文：范仲淹又招募工人兴建官家谷仓及吏卒官舍，每天募集的工人多达一千人。
English: Fan Zhongran also recruited workers to build official barns and official residences. Up to one thousand workers were recruited every day.

古文：监司劾奏杭州不恤荒政，游宴兴作，伤财劳民。
现代文：掌监察的官员，认为范仲淹不体恤荒年财政困难，竟鼓励百姓划船竞赛，寺院大兴土木，既劳民又伤财，所以上奏弹劾范仲淹。
English: The official in charge of supervision believed that Fan Zhongyan did not sympathize with the financial difficulties of the year of famine, and encouraged the people to participate in the rowing competition and the construction of the temple, which hurt both the people and the money. Therefore, the impeachment of Fan Zhongyan was filed.

古文：公乃条奏： 所以如此，正欲发有余之财，以惠贫者，使工技佣力之人，皆得仰食于公私，不致转徙沟壑耳。 
现代文：范仲淹上奏说： 臣所以鼓励百姓宴游湖上，寺院、官府大兴土木，其用意正是借有余钱可花的百姓，嘉惠贫苦无依的穷民，使得靠出卖劳力生活的百姓，能依赖官府与民间所提供的工作机会生活，不致背井离乡，饿死荒野。 
English: Fan Zhongran said in his report: The reason why the minister encouraged the people to go on a tour of the lake, the temples, and the government to carry out large-scale civil engineering, the intention is to borrow the people who have extra money to spend, and benefit the poor and destitute, so that the people who live by selling labor can rely on the work opportunities provided by the government and the people, and do not leave the village and starve to death in the wilderness.

古文：是岁唯杭饥而不害。
现代文：这年全国的大饥荒，只有杭州一带的百姓没有受到严重的灾害。
English: This year, there was a nationwide famine, and only the people in the Hangzhou area did not suffer serious disasters.

古文：《周礼》荒政十二，或兴工作，以聚失业之人。
现代文：《周礼》记载，连续十二年的饥荒，主政者应尽量提供百姓工作机会，减少失业人口。
English: "Zhou Li" recorded that after twelve consecutive years of famine, political leaders should try to provide people with work opportunities and reduce the unemployed population.

古文：但他人不能举行，而文正行之耳。
现代文：可惜一般主政者都做不到，只有范仲淹做到了。
English: Unfortunately, ordinary politicians are not able to do it, only Fan Zhongran did it.

古文：凡出游者，必其力足以游者也。游者一人，而赖游以活者不知几十人矣。
现代文：凡是可以外出宴游者，一定是具有宴游的财力，一人外出宴游，而靠此人宴游花费的金钱生活的，不知道有几十人。
English: Anyone who can go out for a party must have the financial resources to go out for a party. There are dozens of people who go out for a party alone and live off the money they spend on the party.

古文：万历时吾苏大荒，当事者以岁俭禁游船。富家儿率治馔僧舍为乐，而游船数百人皆失业流徙，不通时务者类如此。
现代文：明朝万历年间，苏州一带闹饥荒，主政者下令禁止百姓游船，于是富家子弟日日在僧院宴饮，而靠划船生活的船家，都因失业而背井离乡，主政者的愚昧，不识时务，大都如此。
English: During the Ming and Wanli dynasties, there was a famine in the Suzhou area, and the ruler ordered a ban on people cruising. As a result, the children of the rich feasted in the monastery every day, while the boatmen, who lived by rowing, all left the village due to unemployment. The ruler's ignorance and lack of knowledge of current affairs were largely responsible for this.

