古文：太祖武皇帝，沛国谯人也，姓曹，讳操，字孟德，汉相国参之后。
现代文：太祖武皇帝，沛国谯县人，姓曹名操，字孟德，是西汉相国曹参的后代。
English: The great-great-grandfather of Emperor Wu, a native of Pei Guoqian County, surnamed Cao Mengchao, alias Mengde, was a descendant of the Western Han Dynasty statesman Cao Sanrou.

古文：桓帝世，曹腾为中常侍大长秋，封费亭侯。
现代文：东汉桓帝在位时，曹腾担任中常侍大长秋，被封为费亭侯。
English: When Emperor Kuan of the Eastern Han Dynasty was on the throne, Cao Teng served as the Vice-Regent of the Great Changqiu and was named Fei Ting Hou.

古文：养子嵩嗣，官至太尉，莫能审其生出本末。
现代文：他的养子名曹嵩，继承了他的封爵，曾官至太尉，但没有人知道他是从谁家过继来的。
English: His adopted son, Cao Song, inherited his knighthood and rose to the rank of first lieutenant, but no one knows from which family he was adopted.

古文：嵩生太祖。
现代文：曹嵩生下了太祖。
English: Cao Song gave birth to Taizu.

古文：太祖少机警，有权数，而任侠放荡，不治行业，故世人未之奇也；惟梁国桥玄、南阳何颙异焉。
现代文：太祖年少时就机灵能干，遇事会随机应变，但放浪形骸，意气用事，不注意德行和学业的修养，所以当时的人都没有认为他有才能，只有梁国人桥玄、南阳人何颙两人认为他有才能。
English: When the great-grandfather was young, he was clever and capable, and he would make random contingencies in the event of an emergency. However, he was a vagabond, full of ambition, and did not pay attention to the cultivation of virtue and study. Therefore, people at that time did not think that he had talent. Only Liang Guozhong, Qiao Xuan, and Nanyang people thought that he had talent.

古文：玄谓太祖曰： 天下将乱，非命世之才不能济也，能安之者，其在君乎！ 
现代文：桥玄曾对太祖说： 天下将大乱，不是治国安邦的才能不能拯救，能平定天下的，恐怕就是你吧！ 
English: Qiao Xuan once said to his great-grandfather: The world will be in chaos. It is not the ability to govern the country that cannot save it. If anyone can pacify the world, I am afraid it is you!

古文：年二十，举孝廉为郎，除洛阳北部尉，迁顿丘令，征拜议郎。
现代文：太祖二十岁时，被推举为孝廉，做了郎官，后又任洛阳北部尉，升任为顿丘县令，又被召入朝廷做议郎。
English: When the great-grandfather was 20 years old, he was promoted to the rank of filial piety and became a vassal, and later he was appointed as the northern lieutenant of Luoyang, promoted to the county magistrate of Dongqiu County, and was also summoned to the imperial court to be a mediator.

古文：光和末，黄巾起。
现代文：汉灵帝光和末年，发生黄巾军起义。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Hanling, the Yellow Turban Rebellion broke out.

古文：拜骑都尉，讨颍川贼，迁为济南相。
现代文：太祖被任命为骑都尉统领羽林骑兵，讨伐颍川的贼寇，后升任为济南国国相。
English: The great-grandfather was appointed as a cavalry captain to lead the Ulin cavalry, to fight the bandits of the Luchuan River, and was later promoted to the Minister of State of Jinan Province.

古文：国有十余县，长吏多阿附贵戚，赃污狼藉，于是奏免其八；禁断淫祀，奸宄逃窜，郡界肃然。
现代文：济南国辖区有十几个县，各县长官大都攀附皇亲国戚，贪赃枉法，声名败坏，所以太祖上奏皇帝，罢免了其中八个人。又禁止过分祭祀鬼神，违法作乱的人仓皇地逃跑，一时济南国中秩序井然，百姓安居乐业。
English: There are more than a dozen counties under the jurisdiction of Jinan Province. Most of the county governors are close to the relatives of the emperor, corrupt and corrupt, and their reputation has been tarnished. Therefore, the great-grandfather ascended to the emperor and dismissed eight of them. He also prohibited the excessive sacrifice of ghosts and gods, and the people who broke the law and caused chaos fled in panic. For a while, there was order in Jinan Province, and the people lived and worked in peace.

古文：久之，征还为东郡太守；不就，称疾归乡里。
现代文：过了许久，被召回朝廷担任东郡太守，但没有赴任，以生病为由回了故乡。
English: After a long time, he was recalled to the imperial court to serve as the governor of Dong County, but he did not take up the post and returned to his hometown on the grounds that he was ill.

古文：顷之，冀州刺史王芬、南阳许攸、沛国周旌等连结豪杰，谋废灵帝，立合肥侯，以告太祖，太祖拒之。
现代文：不久，冀州刺史王芬、南阳许攸、沛国周旌等人网罗天下英雄，密谋废掉汉灵帝，拥立合肥侯为皇帝，他们把这件事告诉太祖，太祖拒绝了他们。
English: Not long after, Jizhou conspirators Wang Fen, Nanyang Xu You, and Pei Guo Zhou Qi and others plotted to depose Han Ling and install Hefei as emperor. They told this to Taizu, but Taizu rejected them.

古文：芬等遂败。
现代文：王芬等谋反事件就失败了。
English: Wang Fen and other conspiracies failed.

古文：金城边章、韩遂杀刺史郡守以叛，众十余万，天下骚动。
现代文：金城人边章、韩遂斩杀刺史、郡守作乱，聚集了十多万人，一时天下动荡不安。
English: Jincheng people's border chapter, Han Sui's assassination, and the county governor's rebellion gathered more than one hundred thousand people, and the whole country was in turmoil.

古文：征太祖为典军校尉。会灵帝崩，太子即位，太后临朝。
现代文：朝廷征召太祖为典军校尉，恰逢汉灵帝去世，太子刘辩即位，由何太后掌握朝中大权。
English: The imperial court conscripted the great-great-grandfather as a lieutenant of the imperial army, which coincided with the death of Han Lingdi, the enthronement of the prince Liu En, and the control of the supreme power of the dynasty by the Empress Dowager He.

古文：大将军何进与袁绍谋诛宦官，太后不听。
现代文：大将军何进与袁绍密谋诛杀宦官，太后未同意他们的作法。
English: General He Jin conspired with Yuan Shao to kill eunuchs, but the empress dowager did not approve of their actions.

古文：进乃召董卓，欲以胁太后，卓未至而进见杀。
现代文：何进便召董卓入京，想要以此胁迫太后。但董卓还没有到京城，何进就被杀害了。
English: He Jin then summoned Dong Zhuo to Beijing in an attempt to coerce the empress dowager. However, Dong Zhuo had not yet arrived in Beijing when He Jin was killed.

古文：卓到，废帝为弘农王而立献帝，京都大乱。
现代文：董卓到了之后，立即废皇帝为弘农王，另立刘协为献帝，京都之中乱如麻团。
English: After the arrival of Dong Zhuo, the emperor was immediately dethroned as the King of Hongnong, and Liu Xie was set up as the Emperor, and there was chaos in Kyoto.

古文：卓表太祖为骁骑校尉，欲与计事。
现代文：董卓上奏举荐太祖做骁骑校尉，准备与他共同商议朝政。
English: Dong Zhuo Shangso recommended that Taizu be made a lieutenant of the imperial cavalry, and prepared to discuss imperial politics with him.

古文：太祖乃变易姓名，间行东归。
现代文：太祖改名换姓，向东走小路逃往家乡。
English: The great-grandfather changed his name and fled to his hometown by taking a path to the east.

古文：出关，过中牟，为亭长所疑，执诣县，邑中或窃识之，为请得解。
现代文：出虎牢关，途经中牟县时，引起当地亭长怀疑，被抓回县城。城中有人暗中认出他，为他求情，得以释放。
English: When he was passing through Zhongmou County, he aroused the suspicion of the local mayor and was arrested back in the county seat. Someone in the city secretly recognized him, pleaded for him and was released.

古文：卓遂杀太后及弘农王。
现代文：董卓此时已除掉太后和弘农王。
English: At this time, Dong Zhuo had already eliminated the Empress Dowager and the King of Hongnong.

古文：太祖至陈留，散家财，合义兵，将以诛卓。
现代文：太祖到了陈留县，变卖家产，募集义军，准备征讨诛杀董卓。
English: The great-grandfather arrived in Chenliu County, sold his family property, recruited rebels, and prepared to fight and kill Dong Zhuo.

古文：冬十二月，始起兵于己吾，是岁中平六年也。
现代文：十二月，才在己吾县树旗起兵，这时已是汉灵帝中平六年。
English: It was only in December that troops were raised in Shufan, Jiwu County, by which time it had been six years since the death of Emperor Hanling.

古文：初平元年春正月，后将军袁术、冀州牧韩馥、豫州刺史孔伷、兖州刺史刘岱、河内太守王匡、勃海太守袁绍、陈留太守张邈、东郡太守桥瑁、山阳太守袁遗、济北相鲍信同时俱起兵，众各数万，推绍为盟主。太祖行奋武将军。
现代文：汉献帝初平元年正月，后将军袁术、冀州牧韩馥、豫州刺史孔伷，兖州刺史刘岱、河内太守王匡、勃海太守袁绍、陈留太守张邈、东郡太守桥瑁、山阳太守袁遗、济北国相鲍信同时起兵讨伐董卓，他们都拥兵数万，推举袁绍为盟主，太祖代理任奋武将军。
English: At the beginning of the first month of the first year of the Heian period, the later generals Yuan Shu, Jizhou Mu Han Rong, Yuzhou Zishi Kong Rong, Bozhou Zishi Liu Rong, Hanoi Taishu Wang Kuang, Bo Hai Taishu Yuan Shao, Chen Liu Taishu Zhang Rong, Dong County Taishu Qiao Rong, Sanyang Taishu Yuan Yu, and Jibei State Minister Bao Xin simultaneously raised an army to fight against Dong Zhuo. They all had tens of thousands of soldiers, elected Yuan Shao as the leader, and the great-grandfather was acting as General Tengwu.

古文：二月，卓闻兵起，乃徙天子都长安。
现代文：这年二月，董卓听闻各地兴兵征讨自己的消息，就胁迫献帝迁都长安。
English: In February of this year, Dong Zhuo heard the news that soldiers were being recruited from all over the country, and he forced the emperor to move the capital to Chang'an.

古文：卓留屯洛阳，遂焚宫室。
现代文：董卓仍统兵驻守洛阳，纵火烧毁了皇宫。
English: Dong Zhuo still stationed his troops in Luoyang and set fire to the imperial palace.

古文：是时绍屯河内，邈、岱、瑁、遗屯酸枣，术屯南阳，伷屯颍川，馥在邺。
现代文：这时袁绍驻兵河内，张邈、刘岱、桥瑁、袁遗驻兵酸枣，袁术驻兵南阳，孔伷驻兵颍川，韩馥驻兵邺城。
English: At this time, Yuan Shao was stationed in Hanoi, Zhang Ye, Liu Ye, Qiao Ye, and Yuan Yi were stationed in Zhouzhuang, Yuan Shiu was stationed in Nanyang, Kong Ye was stationed in Fenchuan, and Han Ye was stationed in Fencheng.

古文：卓兵强，绍等莫敢先进。
现代文：董卓军力强盛，袁绍等都害怕当先遣军。
English: Dong Zhuo's military strength was strong, and Yuan Shao and others were afraid to be the first to send troops.

古文：太祖曰： 举义兵以诛暴乱，大众已合，诸君何疑？
现代文：太祖说： 我们义军是诛杀叛乱，现各路军兵都已会合，诸位还疑虑什么呢？
English: The great-grandfather said: Our rebel army is fighting and killing the rebellion. Now that all the armies have gathered, what are you still hesitating about?

古文：向使董卓闻山东兵起，倚王室之重，据二周之险，东向以临天下；虽以无道行之，犹足为患。
现代文：如果董卓先前获知太行山东起兵的消息，倚仗天子的威势，占据洛阳一带的险要地方，派兵东进控制天下，尽管他的行动是不道义的，对我们来说仍然是很大的忧患。
English: If Dong Zhuo had previously learned the news of Taihang's invasion of Shandong, relied on the power of the Son of Heaven, occupied the critical areas around Luoyang, and sent troops eastward to control the world, although his actions were immoral, it would still be a great sorrow for us.

古文：今焚烧宫室，劫迁天子，海内震动，不知所归，此天亡之时也。
现代文：如今他烧毁宫殿，挟持天子西迁，天下惊恐，百姓不知依靠什么人，这正是天意要使他灭亡的契机。
English: Now he has burned down the palace, taken the Son of Heaven hostage and moved to the west, the whole world is terrified, and the people do not know who to rely on. This is precisely the opportunity that Providence wants to bring about his demise.

古文：一战而天下定矣，不可失也。 
现代文：一战就能安定天下，机会不可失去。 
English: The world can be stabilized with one war, and the opportunity must not be lost.

古文：遂引兵西，将据成皋。
现代文：便领兵西进，准备攻占成皋县。
English: He then led his troops westward, preparing to capture Chengye County.

古文：邈遣将卫兹分兵随太祖。
现代文：只有张邈派部将卫兹率领一部分军队协助太祖。
English: Only the Zhangye faction led by Wei Zi led a part of the army to assist Taizu.

古文：到荥阳汴水，遇卓将徐荣，与战不利，士卒死伤甚多。
现代文：太祖部队到了荥阳汴水，与董卓部将徐荣遇上，双方激战，太祖军队失利，将士死伤很多。
English: Taizu's troops arrived in Shiyang and Surabaya, and met with Dong Zhuo's general Xu Rong. The two sides fought fiercely. Taizu's army lost, and many soldiers were killed and injured.

古文：太祖为流矢所中，所乘马被创，从弟洪以马与太祖，得夜遁去。
现代文：太祖在激战中被流箭射中，坐骑也受了伤，他的堂弟曹洪把自己的战马让给太祖，太祖才得以连夜逃离险境。
English: In the fierce battle, Taizu was shot by a stray arrow, and his horse was also injured. His cousin Cao Hong gave his horse to Taizu, and Taizu was able to escape the danger overnight.

古文：荣见太祖所将兵少，力战尽日，谓酸枣未易攻也，亦引兵还。
现代文：徐荣见太祖带的兵虽少，但都能齐心奋战，坚持了一天，认为酸枣不易攻克，也领兵返回。
English: Xu Rong saw that although there were few soldiers with the great-grandfather, they could all fight together. He insisted for a day, thinking that it was not easy to overcome the sour jujube, and he also led the soldiers back.

古文：太祖到酸枣，诸军兵十余万，日置酒高会，不图进取。
现代文：太祖回到酸枣，见到各路军队有十多万人，却终日宴饮大吃大喝，不思大业。
English: When the great-grandfather returned to Suizhu, he saw that there were more than one hundred thousand soldiers from all over the country, but they were feasting all day, eating and drinking, and not thinking about the great cause.

古文：太祖责让之，因为谋曰： 诸君听吾计，使勃海引河内之众临孟津，酸枣诸将守成皋，据敖仓，塞轘辕、太谷，全制其险；使袁将军率南阳之军军丹、析，入武关，以震三辅：皆高垒深壁，勿与战，益为疑兵，示天下形势，以顺诛逆，可立定也。
现代文：太祖前去教训责备他们，趁机谋划说： 诸位听我的计谋，让勃海太守袁绍率河内郡的部队到孟津；酸枣的各路将领驻守成皋，控制敖仓，封锁頧辕、太谷二关，占据所有险要之地；再让袁术将军率领南阳的军队进军丹水县和析县，挺进武关，以威震三辅地区；各路大军都建筑高垒城墙、深挖沟壕，避免与敌正面交战，多设疑兵，迷惑敌方，彰明我们的行动是以正义讨伐叛逆，天下就可以快速平定。
English: The great-grandfather went to teach them a lesson and reproach them, and took the opportunity to make a plan: "Listen to my plan, let the Bohai governor Yuan Shao lead the troops of Hanoi County to Mengjin; the generals of the various routes of the Yangtze River should be stationed in Chengdu, control Yingcang, seal off Yingcang and Taigu Second Pass, and occupy all the critical places; and let General Yuan Shu lead the army of Nanyang to march into Danshui County and Wuxing County, advance into Wuguan, and dominate the three auxiliary regions; the armies of all routes should build high walls and dig trenches to

古文：今兵以义动，持疑而不进，失天下之望，窃为诸君耻之！ 
现代文：现已以正义召集了各路军队，却瞻前顾后，不敢进兵，使天下百姓绝望，我本人替你们感到羞耻！ 
English: Now you have rallied the armies of justice, but look behind you, and dare not advance, and have brought the people of the world to despair. I myself am ashamed of you!

古文：邈等不能用。
现代文：张邈等人没有采纳他的计谋。
English: Zhang Ye and others did not adopt his strategy.

古文：太祖兵少，乃与夏侯惇等诣扬州募兵，刺史陈温、丹杨太守周昕与兵四千余人。还到龙亢，士卒多叛。至铚、建平，复收兵得千余人，进屯河内。
现代文：太祖因兵力不足，便与夏侯惇等人一起到扬州召募士兵，扬州刺史陈温、丹杨太守周昕把四千多名士兵交接给他，回到龙亢县时，大部分兵士都叛逃了，到了轾县、建平县，又重新招募了一千多士兵，进驻河内郡。
English: Due to the shortage of troops, the great-grandfather went to Yangzhou with Xia Houyi and others to recruit soldiers. Chen Wen, Yangzhou's chief secretary, and Zhou Qi, Yangzhou's governor, handed over more than four thousand soldiers to him. When he returned to Longyan County, most of the soldiers had defected. He went to Handan County and Jianping County, and recruited more than one thousand soldiers and stationed them in Hanoi County.

古文：刘岱与桥瑁相恶，岱杀瑁，以王肱领东郡太守。
现代文：刘岱与桥瑁互相怨恨，刘岱杀死桥瑁，让王肱兼任东郡太守。
English: Liu Ye and Qiao Ye resented each other. Liu Ye killed Qiao Ye and made Wang Ye concurrently the governor of Dong County.

古文：袁绍与韩馥谋立幽州牧刘虞为帝，太祖拒之。
现代文：袁绍与韩馥密谋要立幽州牧刘虞为皇帝，被太祖拒绝。
English: Yuan Shao and Han Kui plotted to make Yuzhou herdsman Liu Yu emperor, but were rebuffed by Emperor Taizu.

古文：绍又尝得一玉印，于太祖坐中举向其肘，太祖由是笑而恶焉。
现代文：袁绍曾得到一块玉印，在席中推到太祖肘边让他看，太祖便笑了笑，却十分厌恶。
English: Yuan Shao once received a piece of jade seal. He pushed it to his great-grandfather's elbow in the middle of the table to let him see it. The great-grandfather smiled, but was very disgusted.

古文：二年春，绍、馥遂立虞为帝，虞终不敢当。
现代文：汉献帝初平二年春，袁绍、韩馥推举刘虞做皇帝，但刘虞终究没有敢答应。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Heian period, Yuan Shao and Han Zhi nominated Liu Yu to be emperor, but Liu Yu finally did not dare to accept.

古文：夏四月，卓还长安。
现代文：这年四月，董卓回到长安。
English: In April of this year, Dong Zhuo returned to Chang'an.

古文：秋七月，袁绍胁韩馥，取冀州。
现代文：七月，袁绍威逼韩馥，夺取了冀州。
English: In July, Yuan Shaowei forced the Han Dynasty to surrender and seized Jizhou.

古文：黑山贼于毒、白绕、眭固等。十余万众略魏郡、东郡，王肱不能御，太祖引兵入东郡，击白绕于濮阳，破之。
现代文：黑山贼寇于毒、白绕、眭固等率领十多万人到魏郡、东郡等地劫掠，王肱无力抵抗，太祖领兵赶往东郡，在濮阳同白绕遭遇，大破贼兵。
English: The Montenegrin bandits led more than a hundred thousand people to Wei County, Dong County and other places to loot and pillage. Wang Yao was powerless to resist, and his great-grandfather led the soldiers to Dong County. He encountered Bai Yu in Fenyang and defeated the bandits.

古文：袁绍因表太祖为东郡太守，治东武阳。
现代文：袁绍为此上奏朝廷，推举太祖为东郡太守，郡治设在东武阳。
English: For this reason, Yuan Shao appealed to the imperial court to nominate his great-grandfather as the governor of Dong County, with the county seat located in Dongwuyang.

古文：三年春，太祖军顿丘，毒等攻东武阳。太祖乃引兵西入山，攻毒等本屯。
现代文：初平三年春，太祖军队驻扎在顿丘，于毒等进犯东武阳，太祖统兵向西进入黑山，袭击于毒在黑山的大本营。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Heian period, Emperor Taizu's army was stationed in Dongqiu, and invaded Dongbuyang from Yugu, etc. Emperor Taizu's unified army entered Montenegro from the west and attacked Yugu's base camp in Montenegro.

古文：毒闻之，弃武阳还。
现代文：于毒听到消息后，放弃东武阳回师。
English: After hearing the news, Yu Yan gave up his plans to return to Dongwuyang.

古文：太祖要击眭固，又击匈奴於夫罗於内黄，皆大破之。
现代文：太祖于半途阻击眭固，又在内黄县攻击匈奴人于夫罗，把他们全部都打败。
English: In the middle of the way, the great-grandfather blocked the entrenchment, and attacked the Huns in Yufuo in Inner Huang County, defeating them all.

古文：夏四月，司徒王允与吕布共杀卓。
现代文：这年四月，司徒王允与吕布联合杀死董卓。
English: In April of this year, Wang Yun and Lü Bu jointly killed Dong Zhuo.

古文：卓将李傕、郭汜等杀允攻布，布败，东出武关。
现代文：董卓的部将李傕、郭汜等又杀死了王允，攻打吕布。吕布兵败，向东逃出武关。
English: Dong Zhuo's subordinates Li Yu, Guo Yu and others killed Wang Yun and attacked Lv Bu. Lv Bu was defeated and fled east out of Wuguan.

古文：傕等擅朝政。
现代文：朝政被李莈等人把持。
English: The imperial court was controlled by Li Xi and others.

古文：青州黄巾众百万入兖州，杀任城相郑遂，转入东平。
现代文：青州黄巾军百万之众攻入兖州，杀死任城国相郑遂，又转入东平境内。
English: The million-strong Qingzhou Yellow Turban Army invaded Zhangzhou, killed Rencheng Guoxiang Zheng Sui, and then entered the territory of Dongping.

古文：刘岱欲击之，鲍信谏曰： 今贼众百万，百姓皆震恐，士卒无斗志，不可敌也。观贼众群辈相随，军无辎重，唯以钞略为资，今不若畜士众之力，先为固守。
现代文：兖州刺史刘岱准备出兵拦截，济北国相鲍信劝阻说： 现在贼寇人过百万，百姓都惶恐不安，我部士气低落，不能与他们正面交锋；我观察贼兵随营有成群老少，缺少军用物资，仅靠抢掠供给部队，现在我们不如先养精蓄锐，先固守城池。
English: Liu Ye, the governor of Zhangzhou, prepared to send troops to intercept them, but was dissuaded by Bao Xin, the minister of North Jeolla Province, who said, "Nowadays, there are more than a million bandits and robbers, and the people are panicked and anxious. The morale of our troops is low, and we cannot confront them head-on. I have observed that the bandits are accompanied by hordes of old and young soldiers, and there is a shortage of military supplies, and the troops are only supplied by looting. Now, we should first keep our spirits up, and first firmly defend the city.

古文：彼欲战不得，攻又不能，其势必离散，后选精锐，据其要害，击之可破也。 
现代文：他们求战不得，又攻城不下，势必离散，然后我们再选派精兵强将，占据险要的地势，到时就可一举攻破贼寇。 
English: They can't fight, they can't attack the city, they're bound to disperse, and then we'll choose a strong general to occupy the critical situation, and then we can defeat the bandits at one stroke.

古文：岱不从，遂与战，果为所杀。
现代文：刘岱不听，就带兵与黄巾军交战，最后被杀死了。
English: Liu Bei did not listen, and led soldiers to fight against the Yellow Turban Army, and was eventually killed.

古文：信乃与州吏万潜等至东郡迎太祖领兖州牧。
现代文：鲍信便和州吏万潜等人一同到东郡去迎接太祖，请他担任兖州牧。
English: Bao Xin then went to Dong County together with the state official Wan Qian and others to meet Taizu and asked him to serve as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：遂进兵击黄巾于寿张东。信力战□死，仅而破之。
现代文：太祖带兵在寿张县东向黄巾军发动进攻，鲍信力战身亡，勉强击溃贼军。
English: Taizu led the troops to launch an attack on the Yellow Turban Army in the east of Shouzhang County. Bao Xinli was killed in the battle, barely defeating the invaders.

古文：购求信丧不得，众乃刻木如信形状，祭而哭焉。
现代文：太祖悬赏寻找鲍信的尸体，没有找到，众人只好用木头刻出鲍信的形象，祭奠并哀悼他。
English: The great-grandfather offered a reward to search for Bao Xin's body, but it was not found, so the people had to use wood to carve an image of Bao Xin to pay tribute and mourn him.

古文：追黄巾至济北。乞降。
现代文：太祖追赶黄巾军一直到了济北，黄巾求降。
English: Taizu chased the Yellow Turban Army all the way to Jibei, and the Yellow Turban Army begged for surrender.

古文：冬，受降卒三十余万，男女百余万口，收其精锐者，号为青州兵。
现代文：这年冬天，太祖得降兵三十多万，男女百姓一百多万人，收编了其中的精锐，组成 青州兵 。
English: In the winter of that year, Taizu was forced to disband more than 300,000 soldiers and more than one million men and women, and recruited the best of them to form the Qingzhou Army.

古文：袁术与绍有隙，术求援于公孙瓒，瓒使刘备屯高唐，单经屯平原，陶谦屯发干，以逼绍。
现代文：这时袁术和袁绍产生了矛盾。袁术向公孙瓒求援，公孙瓒派刘备驻军在高唐、单经驻军在平原、陶谦驻军在发干，来逼迫袁绍。
English: At this time, a conflict arose between Yuan Shuxu and Yuan Shao. Yuan Shuxu asked Gongsun Yao for help, and Gongsun Yao sent Liu Bei's garrison in Gaotang, Shanjing's garrison in the plain, and Tao Qian's garrison in Bajian to persecute Yuan Shao.

古文：太祖与绍会击，皆破之。
现代文：太祖和袁绍联兵共同进军，把他们都打败了。
English: The great-grandfather and Yuan Shao marched together and defeated them all.

古文：四年春，军鄄城。
现代文：初平四年春，太祖驻军在鄄城。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of the Heian period, Emperor Taizu stationed troops in Shicheng.

古文：荆州牧刘表断术粮道，术引军入陈留，屯封丘，黑山余贼及于夫罗等佐之。
现代文：荆州牧刘表切断袁术的粮道，袁术率领进入陈留郡，驻扎在封丘，黑山贼寇余部和于夫罗等都援助他。
English: Jingzhou Mu Liu table cut off Yuan Shuxu's food supply, Yuan Shuxu led the march into Chenliu County, stationed in Fengqiu, the rest of the Montenegrin Kleptocrats and Yufuo all assisted him.

古文：术使将刘详屯匡亭。太祖击详，术救之，与战，大破之。
现代文：袁术派部将刘详驻守匡亭，太祖率兵攻打刘详，袁术带兵救援，双方激战，太祖大获全胜。
English: Yuan Shou sent Liu Zhao to garrison Kuangting, Taizu led the troops to attack Liu Zhao, Yuan Shou led the troops to rescue, the two sides fought fiercely, and Taizu won a complete victory.

古文：术退保封丘，遂围之，未合，术走襄邑，追到太寿，决渠水灌城。
现代文：袁术兵败，退守到封丘，太祖率军包围，未能形成合围之势，袁术又逃往襄邑。太祖追到太寿，决开渠水灌入城中。
English: Yuan Shuxi was defeated and retreated to Fengqiu. Taizu led the army to encircle and failed to form a encirclement. Yuan Shuxi fled to Xiangyi. Taizu chased him to Taishou and broke open the canal to flood the city.

古文：走宁陵，又追之，走九江。
现代文：袁术逃往宁陵，太祖又追击他，袁术只得逃往九江。
English: Yuan Shuxu fled to Ningling, the great-grandfather pursued him, and Yuan Shuxu had to flee to Jiujiang.

古文：夏，太祖还军定陶。
现代文：这年夏天，太祖收兵，驻扎在定陶县。
English: In the summer of that year, Taizu conscripted soldiers and stationed them in Dingtao County.

古文：下邳阙宣聚众数千人，自称天子；徐州牧陶谦与共举兵，取泰山华、费，略任城。
现代文：下邳县阙宣聚集数千人，自称皇帝；徐州牧陶谦也与他一同出兵，攻占泰山郡的华县、费县，夺取任城。
English: Several thousand people gathered in Yuxuan, Jiaozuo County, claiming to be the emperor; Xuzhou Mu Tao Qian also sent troops with him to conquer Huaxian and Feixian in Taishan County and capture Rencheng.

古文：秋，太祖征陶谦，下十余城，谦守城不敢出。
现代文：秋天，太祖征讨陶谦，攻克城池十多座，陶谦紧闭城门，不敢出兵。
English: In autumn, Emperor Taizu conquered more than ten cities and towns, but Tao Qian closed the gates tightly and did not dare to send troops.

古文：是岁，孙策受袁术使渡江，数年间遂有江东。
现代文：这一年，孙策受袁术的派遣过江，几年后就占据了江东一带。
English: That year, Sun Ce was sent by Yuan Shu to cross the river, and a few years later he occupied the eastern part of the river.

古文：兴平元年春，太祖自徐州还，初，太祖父嵩，去官后还谯，董卓之乱，避难琅邪，为陶谦所害，故太祖志在复雠东伐。
现代文：汉献帝兴平元年春，太祖从徐州返回兖州。当初，太祖的父亲曹嵩辞官回到谯县，因发生董卓之乱，到琅邪避难，结果被陶谦杀害，所以太祖立志讨伐陶谦，以报父仇。
English: In the spring of the first year of the reign of Emperor Xingping, Emperor Taizu returned from Xuzhou to Ganzhou. At the beginning, Emperor Taizu's father, Cao Song, returned to Ganzhou to take refuge from the Dong Zhuo Rebellion, and was killed by Tao Qian as a result. Therefore, Emperor Taizu decided to fight Tao Qian to avenge his father.

古文：夏，使荀彧、程昱守鄄城，复征陶谦，拔五城，遂略地至东海。还过郯，谦将曹豹与刘备屯郯东，要太祖。太祖击破之，遂攻拔襄贲，所过多所残戮。
现代文：这年夏，太祖派荀彧、程昱驻守鄄城，自己则领军再次征讨陶谦，接连攻克五座城池，夺取了直至东海郡的大片地盘，收兵经过郯县时，陶谦的部将曹豹和刘备驻军郯东，截击太祖，太祖击败了他们，太祖又乘胜攻下襄贲县，所经之处，大多进行残酷的屠杀。
English: In the summer of the same year, Emperor Taizu sent Gao and Cheng Qi to garrison the city of Handan, while he led the army to once again conquer Tao Qian, conquering five cities in succession and seizing a large area as far as Donghai County. When the army passed through Handan County, Tao Qian's generals Cao Bao and Liu Bei, who were stationed in the eastern part of Handan County, intercepted Emperor Taizu and defeated them. Emperor Taizu also took advantage of the victory to conquer Xiangfan County, and carried out brutal massacres wherever he went.

古文：会张邈与陈宫叛迎吕布，郡县皆应。
现代文：适逢张邈和陈宫叛乱，迎接吕布，各郡县纷纷响应。
English: When Zhang Ye and Chen Gong rebelled and met Lv Bu, all counties responded in succession.

古文：荀彧、程昱保鄄城，范、东阿二县固守，太祖乃引军还。
现代文：荀彧、程昱保住了鄄城，范县和东阿县也因死守而幸免，太祖才领兵返回。
English: Yao and Cheng Yao were able to save Lucheng, and Fan County and Dong'a County were also spared due to their dogged defense. It was only then that Taizu led the troops back.

古文：布到，攻鄄城不能下，西屯濮阳。
现代文：吕布一到，就进攻鄄城，没有攻下，后率军向西进，驻扎在濮阳。
English: As soon as Lü Bu arrived, he attacked Shicheng, but failed to capture it. Later, he led his army westward and stationed it in Shuyang.

古文：太祖曰： 布一旦得一州，不能据东平，断亢父、泰山之道乘险要我，而乃屯濮阳，吾知其无能为也。 
现代文：太祖说： 吕布一天之中便攻下一州，却不占领东平，切断亢父、泰山之间的通道，凭险要地势拦击我，反而驻兵濮阳，我因此断定他没有大的作为。 
English: The great-grandfather said: Lvbu attacked a prefecture in one day, but did not occupy Dongping, cut off the passage between his father and Mount Taishan, and stopped me at the risk of the situation, but instead stationed soldiers in Poyang. I therefore concluded that he did not have much to do.

古文：遂进军攻之。
现代文：于是率军攻打吕布。
English: He then led his army to attack Lvbu.

古文：布出兵战，先以骑犯青州兵。
现代文：吕布出战，先派骑兵冲散 青州兵 。
English: Lvbu went to war and sent cavalry to scatter the Qing soldiers.

古文：青州兵奔，太祖陈乱，驰突火出，坠马，烧左手掌。
现代文：青州兵四散奔逃，太祖军阵势大乱，他飞马冒火突围，掉下马来，烧伤了左手掌。
English: The Qing soldiers scattered and fled. The Tai Zu army was in chaos. He broke out of the encirclement on his flying horse, fell off the horse and burned his left hand.

古文：司马楼异扶太祖上马，遂引去。
现代文：行军司马楼异扶太祖上马，带他冲出重围。
English: Marching Sima Louyi helped his great-grandfather onto his horse and led him out of the encirclement.

古文：未至营止，诸将未与太祖相见，皆怖。
现代文：未到营地之前，众将因为没有见到太祖，十分害怕。
English: Before arriving at the camp, the crowd will be very scared because they haven't seen Taizu.

古文：太祖乃自力劳军，令军中促为攻具，进复攻之，与布相守百余日。
现代文：太祖勉强支撑，带伤慰问部队，命令部队赶做攻城的器械，准备再次进军攻打吕布，两军相持一百多天。
English: The great-grandfather reluctantly supported and comforted the wounded troops, ordered the troops to rush to make instruments for attacking the city and prepare to march again to attack Lvbu, and the two armies held each other for more than a hundred days.

古文：蝗虫起，百姓大饿，布粮食亦尽，各引去。
现代文：这时闹起了蝗灾，百姓们饥饿不堪，吕布军中的粮食也吃光了，于是双方各自撤兵。
English: At this time, the locust plague broke out, the people were starving, and the grain in the Lvbu army was exhausted, so both sides withdrew their troops.

古文：秋九月，太祖还鄄城。
现代文：这年九月，太祖回到了鄄城。
English: In September of that year, Taizu returned to Shicheng.

古文：布到乘氏，为其县人李进所破，东屯山阳。
现代文：吕布兵至乘氏县，被当地人李进击败，东退驻守山阳。
English: Lvbu soldiers went to Jingshi County, where they were defeated by a local man, Li Jin, and retreated east to garrison Sanyang.

古文：于是绍使人说太祖，欲连和。
现代文：此时袁绍派人劝说太祖，想与太祖和解，联合行动。
English: At this time, Yuan Shao sent someone to persuade Taizu to reconcile with him and take joint action.

古文：太祖新失兖州，军食尽，将许之。
现代文：太祖刚失去了兖州，大军的粮食已经吃尽了，太祖想答应袁绍。
English: The great-grandfather had just lost Zhangzhou, and the army had run out of food, so he was going to agree to Lvbu.

古文：程昱止太祖，太祖从之。
现代文：程昱劝阻太祖，太祖听从了他。
English: Cheng Yu dissuaded the great-grandfather, and the great-grandfather obeyed him.

古文：冬十月，太祖至东阿。
现代文：当年十月，太祖来到东阿县。
English: In October of that year, Taizu came to Donga County.

古文：是岁谷一斛五十余万钱，人相食，乃罢吏兵新募者。
现代文：这一年一斛谷米价值五十多万钱，以至于出现 人吃人 ，太祖便解散了刚招募来的新兵。
English: This year, a bowl of rice was worth more than half a million dollars, so much so that when cannibalism broke out, Taizu disbanded the newly recruited soldiers.

古文：陶谦死，刘备代之。
现代文：此时陶谦已死，刘备代替他做了徐州牧。
English: At this time, Tao Qian had already died, and Liu Bei replaced him as the leader of Xuzhou.

古文：二年春，袭定陶。济阴太守吴资保南城，未拔。
现代文：献帝兴平二年春，太祖率兵袭击定陶，因济阴太守吴资奋力保卫定陶南城，未能攻克。
English: In the spring of the second year of Emperor Xingping's reign, Emperor Taizu led an army to attack Dingtao. However, Emperor Wu Zi, the governor of Jianyin, struggled to defend the southern city of Dingtao and was unable to conquer it.

古文：会吕布至，又击破之。
现代文：正巧吕布来到，太祖又将他击败。
English: It just so happened that Lv Bu arrived, and Taizu defeated him again.

古文：夏，布将薛兰、李封屯钜野，太祖攻之，布救兰，兰败，布走，遂斩兰等。
现代文：这年夏，吕布派薛兰、李封驻守钜野，太祖前往偷袭，吕布带兵救援，但薛兰已经兵败，吕布只好退回，就斩杀了薛兰等。
English: In the summer of that year, Lü Bu sent Xue Lan and Li Feng to stay in the wilderness. Taizu went to make a surprise attack, and Lü Bu led soldiers to rescue him. However, Xue Lan had already been defeated, and Lü Bu had no choice but to retreat, so he killed Xue Lan and others.

古文：布复从东缗与陈宫将万余人来战，时太祖兵少，设伏，纵奇兵击，大破之。
现代文：吕布又会合陈宫所带一万多人从东缗来攻打，此时太祖兵少，设下伏兵，出军攻击，大破吕布。
English: Lvbu also rallied more than ten thousand people led by Chen Gong to attack from Donglu. At this time, Taizu was short of soldiers, set up an ambush, attacked, and destroyed Lvbu.

古文：布夜走，太祖复攻，拔定陶，分兵平诸县。
现代文：吕布连夜逃走，太祖追击，又攻克定陶，分兵驻守平定诸县。
English: Lvbu fled in the middle of the night, Taizu chased and defeated Dingtao, and a detachment of soldiers was stationed to pacify the counties of Ding.

古文：布东奔刘备，张邈从布，使其弟超将家属保雍丘。
现代文：吕布向东投奔刘备，张邈与吕布同行，让他弟弟张超带家属驻守雍丘。
English: Lv Bu went east to join Liu Bei, Zhang Ye went with Lv Bu, and let his brother Zhang Chao and his family stay in Yongqiu.

古文：秋八月，围雍丘。
现代文：这年八月，太祖围攻雍丘。
English: In August of that year, Taizu besieged Yongqiu.

古文：冬十月，天子拜太祖兖州牧。
现代文：十月，天子封太祖为兖州牧。
English: In October, Tianzifeng Taizu became the herdsman of Zhangzhou.

古文：十二月，雍丘溃，超自杀。
现代文：十二月，雍丘守军溃败，张超自杀身亡。
English: In December, the Yongqiu defenders were defeated, and Zhang Chao committed suicide.

古文：夷邈三族。
现代文：太祖诛杀张邈三族。
English: The great-great-grandfather killed the three clans of Zhangye.

古文：邈诣袁术请救，为其众所杀，兖州平，遂东略陈地。
现代文：张邈前往袁术处请救兵，结果被他的部下所杀。兖州平定后，就率军向东攻打陈国。
English: Zhang Qian went to Yuan Shu's office to ask for help, but was killed by his subordinates. After the suppression of Zhangzhou, Zhang Qian led his army eastward to attack Chen Province.

古文：是岁，长安乱，天子东迁，败于曹阳，渡河幸安邑。
现代文：这一年，长安城中大乱，献帝东迁，护卫军在曹阳被乱党打败，献帝渡过黄河到安邑县。
English: In this year, there was a big riot in Chang'an City, and Emperor Xian moved to the east. The escort army was defeated by the ruffians in Caoyang, and Emperor Xian crossed the Yellow River to Anyi County.

古文：建安元年春正月，太祖军临武平，袁术所置陈相袁嗣降。
现代文：汉献帝建安元年正月，太祖率军到了武平，袁术任命的陈国国相袁嗣向太祖投降。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Jianan led the army to Wuping, and Chen Guo Guo Yuan, who was appointed by Yuan Shu, surrendered to Emperor Jianan.

古文：太祖将迎天子，诸将或疑，荀彧、程昱劝之，乃遣曹洪将兵西迎，卫将军董承与袁术将苌奴拒险，洪不得进。
现代文：太祖准备去迎接献帝，众将中有人产生疑虑，惟有荀彧、程昱极力劝说，便派曹洪带兵西行，迎接献帝，卫将军董承和袁术部将苌奴据险阻止，曹洪军队无法前进。
English: The great-grandfather was preparing to meet the emperor, but some of the generals had doubts. Only Zheng and Cheng were able to persuade him, so they sent Cao Hong and his soldiers to the west to meet the emperor. Guards generals Dong Cheng and Yuan Zhubei stopped Cao Hong's army at all costs. Cao Hong's army could not advance.

古文：汝南、颍川黄巾何仪、刘辟、黄邵、何曼等，众各数万，初应袁术，又附孙坚。
现代文：汝南、颍川一带的黄巾何仪、刘辟、黄邵、何曼等人，都有数万之众。当初追随袁术，后又依附孙坚。
English: There are tens of thousands of Huangban He Yi, Liu Bi, Huang Shao, He Man and others in the area of Runan and Lu River. At first, they followed Yuan Shu, and later they followed Sun Jian.

古文：二月，太祖进军讨破之，斩辟、邵等，仪及其众皆降。
现代文：二月，太祖派兵征讨，大败贼军，刘辟、黄邵被斩首，何仪及其部众投降。
English: In February, Emperor Taizu sent soldiers to investigate and defeated the rebel army. Liu Bi and Huang Shao were beheaded, while He Yi and his subordinates surrendered.

古文：天子拜太祖建德将军，夏六月，迁镇东将军，封费亭侯。
现代文：献帝封太祖为建德将军，六月，又升任为镇东将军，封为费亭侯。
English: The emperor's great-grandfather was given the title of General Jian De, and in June, he was promoted to General Zhen Dong and given the title of Fei Ting Hou.

古文：秋七月，杨奉、韩暹以天子还洛阳，奉别屯梁。
现代文：七月，杨奉、韩暹护送献帝回洛阳，杨奉另派兵驻守梁县。
English: In July, Yang Bong and Han Sie escorted Emperor Xian back to Luoyang, and Yang Bong also sent troops to garrison Liang County.

古文：太祖遂至洛阳，卫京都，暹遁走。
现代文：太祖便赶到洛阳，保卫京都，韩暹逃走。
English: Emperor Taizu then rushed to Luoyang to defend Kyoto, while Han Siem fled.

古文：天子假太祖节钺，录尚书事。
现代文：献帝授予太祖符节、黄钺，让他统领内外诸军，领尚书事务，总揽朝政。
English: Emperor's tribute was awarded to the great ancestor Fu Jie and Huang Qi, allowing him to command the armies at home and abroad, to lead the affairs of Shangshu, and to take the lead in the overall administration of the dynasty.

古文：洛阳残破，董昭等劝太祖都许。
现代文：此时洛阳城已残破不堪，董昭等人力劝太祖迁都许县。
English: At this time, Luoyang City was in ruins, and Dong Zhao and others used their power to persuade Emperor Taizu to move to Duxu County.

古文：九月，车驾出轘辕而东，以太祖为大将军，封武平侯。
现代文：九月，献帝车驾出頧辕关，向东进发。献帝任命太祖为大将军，封为武平侯。
English: In September, Emperor Xian's carriage drove out of Shaoguan and headed east. Emperor Xian appointed Emperor Taizu as the grand general and crowned him as Wuhing.

古文：自天子西迁，朝廷日乱，至是宗庙社稷制度始立。
现代文：自从献帝被董卓威逼西迁长安，朝廷日渐混乱，直到此时，各项祭祀制度才又确立起来。
English: Since Emperor Xian was forced by Dong Zhuowei to move west to Chang'an, the imperial court became increasingly chaotic. It was not until this time that various sacrificial systems were established.

古文：天子之东也，奉自梁欲要之，不及。
现代文：献帝迁都许县时，杨奉准备在梁县拦截，但错过了时机。
English: When the emperor was moved to Xu County, Yang Bong was ready to intercept him in Liang County, but he missed the opportunity.

古文：冬十月，公征奉，奉南奔袁术，遂攻其梁屯，拔之。
现代文：这年十月，曹公领兵征讨杨奉，杨奉南逃到袁术那里，于是曹公进攻他在梁县的驻军，占据了梁县。
English: In October of that year, Cao Gong led an army to recruit Yang Bong, and Yang Bongnan fled to Yuan Shou, so Cao Gong attacked his garrison in Liang County and occupied Liang County.

古文：于是以袁绍为太尉，绍耻班在公下，不肯受。
现代文：这时献帝封袁绍为太尉，袁绍以职位在曹公之下而深感耻辱，不肯接受。
English: At this time, Yuan Shao was presented to the emperor as a captain. Yuan Shao was deeply humiliated by his position under Cao Gong and refused to accept it.

古文：公乃固辞，以大将军让绍。
现代文：曹公便坚决辞去自己的职位，把大将军之职让给了袁绍。
English: Cao Gong then resolutely resigned from his post and ceded the post of general to Yuan Shao.

古文：天子拜公司空，行车骑将军。
现代文：因此，献帝任命曹公为司空，代理车骑将军。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xian appointed Cao Gong as the deputy commander of the cavalry.

古文：是岁用枣祗、韩浩等议，始兴屯田。
现代文：这一年，曹公又采纳了枣祗、韩浩等人的建议，开始实行屯田制。
English: In the same year, Cao Gong also adopted the suggestions of Zaozhuang, Han Hao and others and began to implement the garrison system.

古文：吕布袭刘备，取下邳。
现代文：吕布袭击刘备，攻占了下邳。
English: Lv Bu attacked Liu Bei and captured the Lower Yangtze River.

古文：备来奔。程昱说公曰： 观刘备有雄才而甚得众心，终不为人下，不如早图之。 
现代文：刘备投奔曹公，程昱劝说曹公： 依我看刘备有雄才大略，又深得民心，最终不会居于人下，不如趁早除掉他。 
English: Liu Bei ran to Cao Gong, Cheng Yao persuaded Cao Gong: In my opinion, Liu Bei has great talent, and is deeply popular, and will not live under the people in the end. It is better to get rid of him as soon as possible.

古文：公曰： 方今收英雄时也，杀一人而失天下之心，不可。 
现代文：曹公回答： 如今正是招揽贤才之时，为杀一人而失天下人心，这样不行。 
English: Cao Gong replied: Now is the time to recruit talents, to kill one person and lose the hearts of the world, this is not possible.

古文：张济自关中走南阳。济死，从子绣领其众。
现代文：张济从关中逃到南阳，他死后，侄子张绣统领他的人马。
English: Zhang Jie fled from Guanzhong to Nanyang. After his death, his nephew Zhang Xiu led his troops.

古文：二年春正月，公到宛。
现代文：建安二年正月，曹公到达宛县。
English: In the first month of the second year of Jian'an, Cao Gong arrived in Wan County.

古文：张绣降，既而悔之，复反。
现代文：张绣投降，不久又后悔，重又反叛。
English: Zhang Xiu surrendered, soon regretted it, and rebelled again.

古文：公与战，军败，为流矢所中，长子昂、弟子安民遇害。
现代文：曹公前往讨伐，遭到失败，自己被流箭射中，大儿子曹昂、侄子安民被杀死。
English: Cao Gong went to the crusade, was defeated, he was shot by a stray arrow, and his eldest son Cao Ang and nephew An Min were killed.

古文：公乃引兵还舞阴，绣将骑来钞，公击破之。
现代文：曹公就领兵退回舞阴县，张绣率骑兵抄袭，被曹公击败。
English: Cao Gong led the troops back to Muyin County. Zhang Shuxiu led the cavalry to copy the move and was defeated by Cao Gong.

古文：绣奔穰，与刘表合。
现代文：张绣逃往穰县，与刘表合兵。
English: Zhang Xiu fled to Jixian County and joined forces with Liu Biao.

古文：公谓诸将曰： 吾降张绣等，失不便取其质，以至于此。吾知所以败。
现代文：曹公对众将说： 我让张绣等人投降，却犯了没有立即扣押人质的错误，所以遭到了失败。
English: Cao Gong said to the generals: I let Zhang Xiu and others surrender, but I made the mistake of not immediately seizing the hostages, so I failed.

古文：诸卿观之，自今已后不复败矣。 
现代文：我了解了失败的原因，请大家看着，从今以后我不会再失败了。 
English: I have understood the reason for my failure. Please look at me. From now on, I will not fail again.

古文：遂还许。
现代文：便撤兵回许都。
English: The troops were then withdrawn back to the capital.

古文：袁术欲称帝于淮南，使人告吕布。
现代文：袁术准备在淮南称帝，派人告诉吕布。
English: Yuan Shou was preparing to proclaim himself emperor in Huainan, and sent someone to tell Lv Bu.

古文：布收其使，上其书。
现代文：吕布扣押了使者，把他的信呈送给朝廷。
English: Lü Bu detained the envoy and presented his letter to the imperial court.

古文：术怒，攻布，为布所破。
现代文：袁术大怒，派兵攻打吕布，被吕布击败。
English: Enraged, Yuan Shuxu sent troops to attack Lvbu and was defeated by Lvbu.

古文：秋九月，术侵陈，公东征之。
现代文：这年九月，袁术率军进犯陈国，曹公率兵东征。
English: In September of that year, Yuan Shou led an army to attack Chen Guo, and Cao Gong led an army to the east.

古文：术闻公自来，弃军走，留其将桥蕤、李豊、梁纲、乐就；公到，击破蕤等，皆斩之。
现代文：袁术听说曹公亲自出征，就弃军逃走，留下部将桥蕤、李丰、梁纲、乐就；曹公一到，便击败了桥蕤等人，把他们全部斩首。
English: When Yuan Shu heard that Cao Gong had personally set out for the war, he abandoned the army and fled, leaving his subordinates Qiao Wei, Li Feng, Liang Gang and Le Du behind. As soon as Cao Gong arrived, he defeated Qiao Wei and the others and beheaded them all.

古文：术走渡淮。公还许。
现代文：袁术逃回淮南，曹公回到许都。
English: Yuan Shu fled back to Huainan, Cao Gong returned to Xu Du.

古文：公之自舞阴还也，南阳、章陵诸县复叛为绣，公遣曹洪击之，不利，还屯叶，数为绣、表所侵。
现代文：曹公从舞阴回来以后，南阳、章陵等县重新反叛，归附张绣，曹公派曹洪去征讨，师出不利。曹洪撤军，驻守叶县，又多次遭到张绣、刘表的袭击。
English: After Cao Gong returned from Muyin, Nanyang, Zhangling and other counties rebelled again, and were annexed by Zhang Xiu. Cao Gong sent Cao Hong to collect troops, but the division was unfavorable. Cao Hong withdrew and garrisoned Ye County, and was repeatedly attacked by Zhang Xiu and Liu Biao.

古文：冬十一月，公自南征，至宛。
现代文：这年十月，曹公亲自南征，来到宛城。
English: In October of that year, Cao Gong personally went to the south and came to Wancheng.

古文：表将邓济据湖阳。
现代文：刘表的部将邓济占据湖阳，曹公攻下湖阳，活捉邓济。
English: Liu Biao's troops occupied Hoyang with Deng Zi, Cao Gong attacked Hoyang and captured Deng Zi alive.

古文：攻拔之，生擒济，湖阳降。
现代文：湖阳城军民投降。攻打舞阴，也攻占了。
English: The army and people of Hoyang City surrendered. They attacked and occupied Dangyin.

古文：攻舞阴，下之。三年春正月，公还许，初置军师祭酒。
现代文：建安三年正月，曹公回到许都，初次设置军师祭酒的官职。
English: In the first month of the third year of Jian'an, Cao Gong returned to Xu Du, and for the first time set up the official post of the military master's sacrificial wine.

古文：三月，公围张绣于穰。
现代文：三月，曹公在穰县包围了张绣。
English: In March, Cao Gong surrounded Zhang Xiuwu in Handan County.

古文：夏五月，刘表遣兵救绣，以绝军后。
现代文：五月，刘表救援张绣，派兵切断曹军的后路。
English: In May, Liu Bei came to the rescue of Zhang Xiu and sent soldiers to cut off Cao Jun's retreat.

古文：公将引还，绣兵来，公军不得进，连营稍前。
现代文：曹公撤退，张绣追击，曹军不能前行，于是结成连营，慢慢前进。
English: Cao Gong retreated, Zhang Xiu pursued, Cao's army could not advance, so they formed a joint battalion and slowly advanced.

古文：公与荀彧书曰： 贼来追吾，虽日行数里，吾策之，到安众，破绣必矣。 
现代文：曹公在给荀彧的信中写道： 贼军紧追我军，虽然我们每天只能走几里路，但我算计好了，到安众县时，一定会打败张绣。 
English: Cao Gong wrote in a letter to Zou: The bandit army is in hot pursuit of our army. Although we can only walk a few miles a day, I have calculated that when we reach Anzhong County, we will definitely defeat Zhang Xiu.

古文：到安众，绣与表兵合守险，公军前后受敌。公乃夜凿险为地道，悉过辎重，设奇兵。
现代文：到了安众县，张绣和刘表联军守在险要地方，曹军前后受敌，曹公派人乘天黑在险要处挖凿一条地道，把辎重物资全部偷运过去，又设下伏兵。
English: When they arrived at Anzhong County, Zhang Xiu and Liu Biao's joint army was stationed in a dangerous place. Cao Cao's army was surrounded by enemies. Cao Gong sent people to dig a tunnel in the dark at a dangerous place, smuggled all the heavy materials, and set up an ambush.

古文：会明，贼谓公为遁也，悉军来追。
现代文：此时已天亮，贼军认为曹公已逃走，全军追赶。
English: At this time, it was already dawn, the bandits thought Cao Gong had fled, and the whole army chased after him.

古文：乃纵奇兵步骑夹攻，大破之。秋七月，公还许。
现代文：曹公便派出步兵、骑兵两面夹攻，把贼军打得大败。七月，曹公回到许都。
English: Cao Gong then sent infantry and cavalry to attack on both sides, defeating the invaders. In July, Cao Gong returned to Xudu.

古文：荀彧问公： 前以策贼必破，何也？ 
现代文：荀彧问曹公： 战前您料定一定会打败贼兵，有何根据呢？ 
English: Zou asked Cao Gong: Before the war, you predicted that you would surely defeat the bandits. What is the basis for this?

古文：公曰： 虏遏吾归师，而与吾死地战，吾是以知胜矣。 
现代文：曹公回答： 敌人拦截我回归的部队，与我拼死作战，我由此知道一定会胜利。 
English: Cao Gong replied: The enemy intercepted my returning troops and fought with me to the death, so I knew that I would definitely win.

古文：吕布复为袁术使高顺攻刘备，公遣夏侯惇救之，不利。
现代文：吕布又帮助袁术，派高顺攻打刘备，曹公派夏侯惇去救援，曹军失败。
English: Lv Bu also helped Yuan Shu, sent Gao Shun to attack Liu Bei, Cao Gong sent Xia Houyi to rescue, Cao's army failed.

古文：备为顺所败。
现代文：刘备被高顺击败。
English: Liu Bei was defeated by Gao Shun.

古文：九月，公东征布。
现代文：九月，曹公东征吕布。
English: In September, Cao Gong's eastward expedition to Lvbu began.

古文：冬十月，屠彭城，获其相侯谐。
现代文：十月，大肆屠杀彭城的守军和百姓，活捉了彭城国相侯谐。
English: In October, the defenders and people of Pengcheng were massacred, and the Pengcheng Guozhong Houjun was captured alive.

古文：进至下邳，布自将骑逆击。大破之，获其骁将成廉。
现代文：曹军继续前进，来到下邳。吕布亲自率骑兵迎战，结果被曹公打得大败，他的勇将成廉也被活捉。
English: Cao's army continued to advance and came to the lower moat. Lü Bu personally led the cavalry to meet the battle. As a result, he was defeated by Cao Gong, and his brave general Cheng Lian was also captured alive.

古文：追至城下，布恐，欲降。
现代文：曹军乘胜追击，直逼城下。
English: Cao's army took advantage of the victory to pursue and drove them right under the city.

古文：陈宫等沮其计，求救于术，劝布出战，战又败，乃还固守，攻之不下。
现代文：吕布十分害怕，想要投降，陈宫等人阻止了他的计划，他们一边向袁术请求救兵，一边鼓励吕布出城迎战，再次失败后，就退回城中坚守。曹军攻城，一时难以奏效。
English: Lü Bu was very scared and wanted to surrender, but Chen Gong and others stopped his plan. While asking Yuan Shu to rescue the soldiers, they encouraged Lü Bu to go out of the city to fight. After another failure, they retreated back to the city to hold on. Cao's army attacked the city, which was not effective for a while.

古文：时公连战，士卒罢，欲还，用荀攸、郭嘉计，遂决泗、沂水以灌城。
现代文：此时因连续作战，曹军已疲惫不堪，准备收兵，便采用荀攸、郭嘉的计谋，挖开泗水和沂水，淹灌下邳城。
English: At this time, due to continuous fighting, Cao's army was exhausted and ready to withdraw, so he used the strategy of Yuyou and Guo Jia to dig up the Surabaya and Surabaya waters and flood the lower Surabaya city.

古文：月余，布将宋宪、魏续等执陈宫，举城降，生禽布、宫，皆杀之。
现代文：过了一个多月，吕布的部将宋宪、魏续等人抓住陈宫，献城投降，曹公活捉吕布、陈宫，把他们全部杀掉。
English: After more than a month, Lu Bu's subordinates Song Xian, Wei Zhai and others seized Chen Gong and surrendered the city. Cao Gong captured Lu Bu and Chen Gong alive and killed them all.

古文：太山臧霸、孙观、吴敦、尹礼、昌豨各聚众。布之破刘备也，霸等悉从布。
现代文：太山郡臧霸、孙观、吴敦、尹礼、昌豨等人各自聚集队伍，在吕布攻打刘备时，都跟随吕布。
English: Diao Ba, Sun Guan, Wu Tun, Yin Li, Chang Qi and others from Taishan County gathered their own teams and followed Liu Bei when he attacked Liu Bei in Lvbu.

古文：布败，获霸等，公厚纳待，遂割青、徐二州附于海以委焉，分琅邪、东海、北海为城阳、利城、昌虑郡。
现代文：吕布失败后，曹公擒获了臧霸等人，对他们盛情款待，还分割青州、徐州靠近海边的地方委任他们治理，又从琅笽、东海、北海三个郡国中分出部分地区，设置城阳、利城、昌虑郡。
English: After the defeat of Lvbu, Cao Gongyi won the support of Yanba and others, and treated them with great hospitality. He also divided Qingzhou and Xuzhou into areas close to the coast and appointed them to govern. He also separated some areas from the three counties of Qi, Donghai and Beihai, and set up the counties of Chengyang, Licheng and Changxian.

古文：初，公为兖州，以东平毕谌为别驾。
现代文：当初，曹公任兖州牧时，任命东平人毕谌为别驾。
English: At the beginning, when Cao Gong was appointed as the pastoralist of Zhangzhou, he appointed the Dongping people Bi Yao as the other driver.

古文：张邈之叛也，邈劫谌母弟妻子；公谢遣之，曰： 卿老母在彼，可去。 
现代文：张邈叛乱，劫走了毕谌的母亲、弟弟、妻子和儿女，曹公便辞退毕谌，对他说： 你的老母亲在叛贼那里，你也可以离开我。 
English: Zhang Ye rebelled and kidnapped Bi Ye's mother, brother, wife and children. Cao Gong dismissed Bi Ye and said to him, "Your old mother is with the traitors, you can leave me too."

古文：谌顿首无二心，公嘉之，为之流涕。
现代文：毕谌向曹公叩头，表示决不因此而怀有二心，曹公十分赞赏他的行动，并感动得流下了眼泪。
English: Bi Yu bowed down to Cao Gong and said that he would never have second thoughts because of this. Cao Gong fully appreciated his actions and was moved to tears.

古文：既出，遂亡归。
现代文：毕谌离开曹公后，就跑到张邈那里，归附了张邈。
English: After Bi Qian left Cao Gong, he ran to Zhang Qian and joined Zhang Qian.

古文：及布破，谌生得，众为谌惧，公曰： 夫人孝于其亲者，岂不亦忠于君乎！
现代文：等到吕布被打败，毕谌被活捉时，众人为他担心，曹公说： 凡是孝敬父母的人，难道不也是忠君之人吗？
English: When Lü Bu was defeated and Bi Gan was captured alive, everyone was worried about him. Cao Gong said, "Isn't everyone who respects their parents also loyal to the emperor?

古文：吾所求也。 
现代文：这正是我所需要的人。 
English: That's exactly the kind of person I need.

古文：以为鲁相。
现代文：封他为鲁国国相。
English: He was appointed as the Minister of State of the State of Lu.

古文：四年春二月，公还至昌邑。
现代文：建安四年二月，曹公回师昌邑县。
English: In February of the 4th year of Jianan, Cao Gong returned to his teacher in Changyi County.

古文：张杨将杨丑杀杨，眭固又杀丑，以其众属袁绍，屯射犬。
现代文：张杨被部将杨丑杀死，杨丑又被眭固所杀，带领他的部队归附袁绍，驻扎在射犬邑。
English: Zhang Yang was killed by his subordinate, Yang Jiu, and Yang Jiu was killed by Xie Gu, who led his troops to Yuan Shao and stationed them in Shining Inu.

古文：夏四月，进军临河，使史涣、曹仁渡河击之。
现代文：四月，曹军到了黄河岸边，派史涣、曹仁渡过黄河进攻眭固。
English: In April, Cao's army reached the shore of the Yellow River, and sent Shi Yan and Cao Ren across the Yellow River to attack Shigu.

古文：固使杨故长史薛洪、河内太守缪尚留守，自将兵北迎绍求救，与涣、仁相遇犬城。
现代文：眭固命令张杨原来的长吏薛洪和河内太守缪尚原地驻防，自己则领兵北行，迎接袁绍，请求援兵，不料却和史涣、曹仁在犬城遭遇。
English: Gonggu ordered Zhang Yang's former officials Xue Hong and Muxang, the former governor of Hanoi, to stay in place to defend the city, while he himself led the troops north to meet Yuan Shao and request reinforcements. However, he unexpectedly encountered Shi Xi and Cao Ren in Incheng.

古文：交战，大破之，斩固。
现代文：两军交战，曹军大胜，眭固被斩首。
English: The two armies fought, Cao's army won a great victory, and Gonggu was beheaded.

古文：公遂济河，围射犬。
现代文：曹公就渡过黄河，包围射犬。
English: Cao Gong crossed the Yellow River and surrounded the shooting dogs.

古文：洪、尚率众降，封为列侯，还军敖仓。以魏种为河内太守，属以河北事。
现代文：薛洪、缪尚率众投降，被封为列侯。曹公率军回到敖仓，任命魏种为河内太守，把黄河以北的地方都托付给他治理。
English: Xue Hong and Muxang led the crowd to surrender and were named as vassals. Cao Gong led the army back to Kamakura, appointed Wei Zheng as the governor of Hanoi, and entrusted him with the administration of the area north of the Yellow River.

古文：初，公举种孝廉。
现代文：当初，曹公举荐魏种为孝廉。
English: At first, Cao Gong recommended Wei Zong to Xiao Lian.

古文：兖州叛，公曰： 唯魏种且不弃孤也。 
现代文：兖州叛乱时，曹公说： 只有魏种将不会反叛我。 
English: During the rebellion in Zhangzhou, Cao Gong said: Only the Wei race will not rebel against me.

古文：及闻种走，公怒曰： 种不南走越、北走胡，不置汝也！ 
现代文：当听到魏种逃走的消息，曹公愤怒地说： 只要你魏种南逃不到越地，北逃不到胡地，我一定不会饶恕你！ 
English: When he heard the news of Wei Zong's escape, Cao Gong said angrily: "As long as you Wei Zong Nan can't escape to Yue, and North can't escape to Hudi, I won't forgive you!"

古文：既下射犬，生禽种，公曰： 唯其才也！ 
现代文：等到攻下射犬，活捉魏种时，曹公又说： 只因他是个有才能的人啊！ 
English: When he had captured the shooting dog and captured Wei Zeng alive, Cao Gong said, "Only because he is a talented person!"

古文：释其缚而用之。
现代文：就松开他的绳子，仍然重用他。
English: Then loosen his ropes and still reuse him.

古文：是时袁绍既并公孙瓒，兼四州之地，众十余万，将进军攻许，诸将以为不可敌，公曰： 吾知绍之为人，志大而智小，色厉而胆薄，忌克而少威，兵多而分画不明，将骄而政令不一，土地虽广，粮食虽丰，适足以为吾奉也。 
现代文：这时袁绍已击溃公孙瓒，兼并了青、冀、幽、并四州的土地，有士兵十多万，准备进军攻打许都。众将都认为难以抵挡，曹公说： 我知道袁绍的为人，志向大却缺少智谋，外强中干，心胸狭窄，缺少威严，虽兵多但指挥不当，将领们的骄横使政令不能统一，所以他虽然土地广阔，粮食丰富，但这正好作为献给我的礼物。 
English: At this time, Yuan Shao had already defeated Gongsun Qian and annexed the lands of Qing, Hebei, Yu and Shizhou, with more than one hundred thousand soldiers ready to march to attack Xu Du. The generals all thought it was difficult to resist, Cao Gong said: I know Yuan Shao is a person, with great ambition but lack of wisdom, outwardly strong but dry, narrow-minded, lack of majesty, although there are many soldiers but improper command, the arrogance of the generals makes it impossible to unify the government orders, so although he has a vast land and abundant food, this is just a gift for me.

古文：秋八月，公进军黎阳，使臧霸等入青州破齐、北海、东安，留于禁屯河上。
现代文：八月，曹公进军黎阳县，命臧霸等人进入青州，攻下齐国、北海国、东安国，留下于禁驻守在黄河边上。
English: In August, Cao Gong marched into Liyang County and led his troops into Qingzhou. They conquered Qi, Beihai, and Dong'an provinces, and remained stationed on the edge of the Yellow River.

古文：九月，公还许，分兵守官渡。
现代文：九月，曹公回到许都，分兵防守官渡。
English: In September, Cao Gong returned to Xu Du and sent troops to defend Guandu.

古文：冬十一月，张绣率众降，封列侯。
现代文：十一月，张绣率众投降，被封为列侯。
English: In November, Zhang Xiu led the people to surrender and was made a vassal.

古文：十二月，公军官渡。
现代文：十二月，曹公军队驻扎官渡。
English: In December, Cao Gong's army stationed in Guandu.

古文：袁术自败于陈，稍困，袁谭自青州遣迎之。
现代文：袁术自从在陈国失败后，势力逐渐衰弱，袁谭从青州派人迎接他。
English: After Yuan Shuxu's defeat in Chen Guo, his power gradually weakened. Yuan Tan sent someone from Qingzhou to meet him.

古文：术欲从下邳北过，公遣刘备、朱灵要之。
现代文：袁术想从下邳北面通过，曹公派刘备、朱灵在途中拦截。
English: Yuan Shuxu wanted to pass through the north side of the lower moat. Cao Gong sent Liu Bei and Zhu Ling to intercept him on the way.

古文：会术病死。
现代文：正巧袁术因病而死。
English: Coincidentally, Yuan Shuxu died of illness.

古文：程昱、郭嘉闻公遣备，言于公曰： 刘备不可纵。 
现代文：程昱、郭嘉听说曹公派出刘备，就对曹公说： 不该放走刘备。 
English: When Cheng Yu and Guo Jia heard that Cao Gong had sent Liu Bei, they said to Cao Gong, "You shouldn't have let Liu Bei go."

古文：公悔，追之不及。
现代文：曹公也后悔了，忙派人追赶却没有追上。
English: Cao Gong also regretted it. He was busy sending people to chase him, but they couldn't catch up.

古文：备之未东也，阴与董承等谋反，至下邳，遂杀徐州刺史车胄，举兵屯沛。
现代文：刘备还没有走之前，私下与董承等人商议谋反，到了下邳，便杀死徐州刺史车胄，领兵驻守沛县。
English: Before Liu Bei left, he privately negotiated with Dong Cheng and others to plot a rebellion. When he arrived at the Lower Yangtze River, he killed Xuzhou Jishi Chejun and stationed his army in Pei County.

古文：遣刘岱、王忠击之，不克。
现代文：曹公派刘岱、王忠攻打刘备，没有取胜。
English: Cao Gong sent Liu Wei and Wang Zhong to attack Liu Bei, but they did not win.

古文：庐江太守刘勋率众降，封为列侯。
现代文：庐江太守刘勋率部投降，被封为列侯。
English: The governor of the Min River, Liu Xun, led his troops to surrender and was made a vassal lord.

古文：五年春正月，董承等谋泄，皆伏诛。
现代文：建安五年正月，董承等人的反叛阴谋败露，都被处死。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of Jian'an, the rebel plot of Dong Cheng and others was exposed, and they were all executed.

古文：公将自东征备，诸将皆曰： 与公争天下者，袁绍也。今绍方来而弃之东，绍乘人后，若何？ 
现代文：曹公想亲率兵马东征刘备，众将都劝阻说： 与您争夺天下的人是袁绍，如今袁绍要来讨战，您却弃之不顾，而要东征刘备，倘若袁绍乘机从背后进攻，该怎么办呢？ 
English: Cao Gong wanted to personally lead the soldiers and horses to the east to attack Liu Bei, but the generals dissuaded him, saying: The person who is competing with you for the world is Yuan Shao. Now Yuan Shao wants to fight, but you ignore him and want to attack Liu Bei. If Yuan Shao takes the opportunity to attack from behind, what should he do?

古文：公曰： 夫刘备，人杰也，今不击，必为后患。
现代文：曹公回答： 刘备是个大英雄，现在不除掉他，以后一定会成为心腹大患。
English: Cao Gong replied: Liu Bei is a great hero. If we don't get rid of him now, he will definitely become a great threat to us in the future.

古文：袁绍虽有大志，而见事迟，必不动也。 
现代文：袁绍虽然有远大的志向，但反应迟钝，不会马上出兵。 
English: Although Yuan Shao had lofty aspirations, he was slow to react and would not immediately send troops.

古文：郭嘉亦劝公，遂东击备，破之，生禽其将夏侯博。
现代文：郭嘉也支持曹公的看法，于是东征刘备，把他打败，活捉了他的部将夏侯博。
English: Guo Jia also supported Cao Gong's view, so he sent Liu Bei to the East, defeated him, and captured his subordinate Xia Houbo alive.

古文：备走奔绍，获其妻子。
现代文：刘备逃走投奔袁绍，但捉住了他的妻儿。
English: Liu Bei fled to Yuan Shao, but caught his wife and son.

古文：备将关羽屯下邳，复进攻之，羽降。
现代文：刘备的大将关羽驻守下邳，曹公又乘胜进攻，羽投降。
English: Liu Bei's general Guan Yu garrisoned the lower moat, Cao Gong attacked again, and Yu surrendered.

古文：昌豨叛为备，又攻破之。
现代文：昌豨先前叛变投靠了刘备，此时也被打败。
English: Chang Kui had previously defected to Liu Bei, and was also defeated at this time.

古文：公还官渡，绍卒不出。
现代文：曹公回师官渡，袁绍最后也没有出兵。
English: Cao Gong returned his division to Guandu, but Yuan Shao did not send troops in the end.

古文：二月，绍遣郭图、淳于琼、颜良攻东郡太守刘延于白马，绍引兵至黎阳，将渡河。
现代文：二月，袁绍派郭图、淳于琼、颜良攻打驻守白马的东郡太守刘延，袁绍领兵到黎阳，准备渡过黄河。
English: In February, Yuan Shao sent Guo Tu, Juny Qiong, and Yan Liang to attack Liu Yan, the governor of Dong County, who was stationed in Baima. Yuan Shao led the troops to Liyang, preparing to cross the Yellow River.

古文：夏四月，公北救延。
现代文：四月，曹公北上救援刘延。
English: In April, Cao Gong went north to rescue Liu Yan.

古文：荀攸说公曰： 今兵少不敌，分其势乃可。
现代文：荀攸劝说曹公： 如今我军兵少，比不上敌军，必须分散敌军的兵力才行。
English: Zou You persuaded Cao Gong: Today, our army is small, not as big as the enemy's. We must disperse the enemy's forces.

古文：公到延津，若将渡兵向其后者，绍必西应之，然后轻兵袭白马，掩其不备，颜良可禽也。 
现代文：主公先领兵到延津，做出好像要渡过黄河，断敌后路的样子，袁绍一定会分兵向西应战。那时主公以轻袭部队偷袭白马，攻其不备，一定能活捉颜良。 曹公听从了他。
English: The lord first led the soldiers to Yanjin, and made it look as if he was going to cross the Yellow River and cut off the enemy's rear path. Yuan Shao would certainly send a detachment of soldiers to the west to fight. At that time, the lord attacked Baima with a light attack force. If he was not prepared, he would certainly be able to capture Yan Liang alive. Cao Gong obeyed him.

古文：公从之。绍闻兵渡，即分兵西应之。
现代文：袁绍听说曹公要渡黄河，就分兵西去应战。
English: Yuan Shao heard that Cao Gong wanted to cross the Yellow River, so he divided his army and went west to fight.

古文：公乃引军兼行趣白马，未至十余里，良大惊，来逆战。
现代文：曹公领兵昼夜兼行，直奔白马，离白马还有十多里，颜良闻讯大感意外，忙来迎战。
English: Cao Gong led the soldiers both day and night, straight to Baima, more than ten miles away from Baima. Yan Liang was very surprised to hear the news and rushed to meet the battle.

古文：使张辽、关羽前登，击破，斩良。遂解白马围，徙其民，循河而西。
现代文：曹公命张辽、关羽先与敌军交战，击败敌军，斩杀了颜良，解了白马之围，后把当地的居民全部迁走，沿着黄河向西转移。
English: Cao Gong ordered Zhang Liao and Guan Yu to fight the enemy army first, defeat the enemy army, kill Yan Liang, solve the siege of Baima, and then move all the local residents along the Yellow River to the west.

古文：绍于是渡河追公军，至延津南。
现代文：此时袁绍已渡过黄河，追击曹军，一直到了延津关的南面。
English: At this time, Yuan Shao had already crossed the Yellow River and chased Cao's army all the way to the south of Yanjin Pass.

古文：公勒兵驻营南阪下，使登垒望之，曰： 可五六百骑。 有顷，复白： 骑稍多，步兵不可胜数。 
现代文：曹公阻止军队前进，在白马山南坡安下营寨，派人登高察望敌情，报告说： 袁军约有骑兵五、六百。 过了一会，又报告： 骑兵还在增多，步兵不计其数。 
English: Cao Gong stopped the army from advancing, set up a camp on the southern slope of Mount Baima, and sent people to climb up and observe the enemy situation. He reported: Yuan's army has about five or six hundred cavalry. After a while, he also reported: The cavalry is still increasing, and the infantry is countless.

古文：公曰： 勿复白。 
现代文：曹公说： 不要再报告了。 
English: Cao Gong said: Don't report any more.

古文：乃令骑解鞍放马。
现代文：就下令骑兵解下马鞍，放开战马。
English: he ordered the cavalry to dismount and let the horses loose.

古文：是时，白马辎重就道。
现代文：这时，从白马缴获来的辎重物资满道皆是。
English: At this time, the heavy materials seized from Hakuba were strewn all over the road.

古文：诸将以为敌骑多，不如还保营。
现代文：众将认为敌人骑兵太多，不如退回保守营寨。
English: The generals thought that there were too many enemy cavalry, and it would be better to retreat to a conservative camp.

古文：荀攸曰： 此所以饵敌，如何去之！ 
现代文：只有荀攸说： 这正是为了引诱敌人，为何要退回呢？ 
English: Only Zou You said: This is just to lure the enemy, why should we retreat?

古文：绍骑将文丑与刘备将五六千骑前后至。
现代文：袁绍的骑兵大将文丑与刘备带着五六千骑兵先后赶到。
English: Yuan Shao's cavalry generals Wen Gou and Liu Bei arrived successively with five or six thousand cavalry.

古文：诸将复白： 可上马。 
现代文：众将又说： 可以出兵了。 
English: The generals also said: It is time to send in the troops.

古文：公曰： 未也。 
现代文：曹公却说： 时候还未到。 
English: Cao Gong, however, said: The time has not yet come.

古文：有顷，骑至稍多，或分趣辎重。公曰： 可矣。 
现代文：一会，敌人的骑兵又增加了一些，有的去抢夺军用物资。曹公说： 可以上马出击了。 
English: After a while, the enemy's cavalry increased and some of them went to snatch military supplies. Cao Gong said, "You can mount your horse and attack."

古文：乃皆上马。时骑不满六百，遂纵兵击，大破之，斩丑。
现代文：于是还不到六百的曹军骑兵，就挥马出击，大败敌军，文丑也被杀。
English: As a result, less than six hundred cavalrymen of Cao's army waved their horses and attacked, defeating the enemy army, and Wenwu was also killed.

古文：良、丑皆绍名将也，再战，悉禽，绍军大震。
现代文：颜良、文丑都是袁绍手下有名的战将，再次出战，都被擒获，袁绍的部队都很震惊。
English: Yan Liang and Wen Jiu, both famous generals under Yuan Shao, fought again and were captured. Yuan Shao's troops were shocked.

古文：公还军官渡。绍进保阳武。
现代文：曹公回师官渡，袁绍进军保卫阳武县。
English: Cao Gong returned his division to Guandu, and Yuan Shao marched to defend Yangwu County.

古文：关羽亡归刘备。
现代文：关羽又叛逃到刘备那里。
English: Guan Yu also defected to Liu Bei.

古文：八月，绍连营稍前，依沙□为屯，东西数十里。
现代文：八月，袁绍前后连营，积极推进，并依沙丘扎寨，东西军营长达数十里。
English: In August, Yuan Shao camped in front and behind, actively pushed forward, and encamped along the sand dunes, with the east and west camps stretching for dozens of miles.

古文：公亦分营与相当，合战不利。
现代文：曹公也分开阵营，与袁军相对抗，但交战失利。
English: Cao Gong also separated his camp and fought against Yuan's army, but lost the battle.

古文：时公兵不满万，伤者十二三。
现代文：此时曹公的军队不到一万，其中还有受伤的二三千。
English: At this time, Cao Gong's army was less than ten thousand, of which two or three thousand were injured.

古文：绍复进临官渡，起土山地道。
现代文：袁绍又重新进军，进逼官渡，堆土山，挖地道。
English: Yuan Shao again marched in, forced the officials to cross the river, piled up mountains of earth, and dug tunnels.

古文：公亦于内作之，以相应。
现代文：曹公也在营中堆山挖沟，以抵抗袁军。
English: Cao Gong also piled up mountains and dug ditches in the camp to resist Yuan's army.

古文：绍射营中，矢如雨下，行者皆蒙楯，众大惧。
现代文：袁绍令士兵向曹营放箭，一时箭如雨下，营内走路的人都得举着盾牌，众人都很恐慌。
English: Yuan Shao ordered the soldiers to shoot arrows at Cao Ying. For a moment, the arrows rained down. People walking in the camp had to hold up shields, and everyone was very panicked.

古文：时公粮少，与荀彧书，议欲还许。
现代文：这时曹军粮食缺少，曹公给荀彧写了一封信，和他商量，准备撤回许都。
English: At this time, Cao Jun's army was short of food, and Cao Gong wrote a letter to Zhai, and discussed with him, preparing to withdraw Xu Du.

古文：彧以为 绍悉众聚官渡，欲与公决胜败。
现代文：荀彧认为： 袁绍全部兵马都集于官渡，准备与主公决一胜负。
English: Zou thought: Yuan Shao's entire army and horses were gathered in Guandu, ready to fight the lord.

古文：公以至弱当至强，若不能制，必为所乘，是天下之大机也。
现代文：主公用最弱的军队抵挡最强的军队，如果不能胜敌，则被敌胜，这是成败的关键时刻。
English: The Lord uses the weakest army to resist the strongest army. If he cannot defeat the enemy, he will be defeated by the enemy. This is the critical moment of success or failure.

古文：且绍，布衣之雄耳，能聚人而不能用。
现代文：况且袁绍不过是一个普通的人才而已，能聚集人，却不能正确调用。
English: Moreover, Yuan Shao is just an ordinary talent. He can gather people, but he can't call them correctly.

古文：夫以公之神武明哲而辅以大顺，何向而不济！ 
现代文：凭着主公的聪明威武，雄才大略，再加上奉天子之命讨伐叛乱，怎么会不胜利呢！ 
English: Relying on the wisdom and might of the lord, the great talent, and the order of the son of heaven to fight the rebellion, how could there not be a victory!

古文：公从之。
现代文：曹公听从了他。
English: Cao Gong obeyed him.

古文：孙策闻公与绍相持，乃谋袭许，未发，为刺客所杀。
现代文：孙策听说曹公与袁绍相持不下，便密谋袭击许都，结果还没有出兵，就被刺客杀死。
English: When Sun Ce heard that Cao Gong and Yuan Shao couldn't stand each other, he plotted to attack Xu Du. As a result, he was killed by the assassins before he could send troops.

古文：汝南降贼刘辟等叛应绍，略许下。
现代文：汝南投降的贼寇刘辟等发动叛乱，作为袁绍的内应，抢劫许都附近城郊。
English: Liu Bi, the bandit who surrendered in the south of the country, and others launched a rebellion and, as a response to Yuan Shao, robbed the suburbs near Xudu.

古文：绍使刘备助辟，公使曹仁击破之。
现代文：袁绍派刘备去援助刘辟，曹公令曹仁出军，打败刘备。
English: Yuan Shao sent Liu Bei to aid Liu Bei, and Cao Gong ordered Cao Ren to go out and defeat Liu Bei.

古文：备走，遂破辟屯。
现代文：刘备仓惶回逃，于是曹军攻克了刘辟的军营。
English: Liu Bei panicked and fled back, so Cao's army conquered Liu Bei's camp.

古文：袁绍运谷车数千乘至，公用荀攸计，遣徐晃、史涣邀击，大破之，尽烧其车。
现代文：袁绍几千辆运粮的军车来到，曹公采用荀攸的计谋，派徐晃、史涣截击，大败袁军，烧毁全部粮车。
English: Yuan Shao's several thousand grain-carrying military vehicles arrived, and Cao Gong, using the stratagem of Zou You, sent Xu Qiang and Shi Yan to intercept, defeated Yuan's army, and burned all the grain trucks.

古文：公与绍相拒连月，虽比战斩将，然众少粮尽，士卒疲乏。
现代文：曹公与袁绍相持几个月，虽然每次交锋都斩杀袁军的大将，但兵少粮尽，士气低落。
English: Cao Gong and Yuan Shao held each other for several months. Although the general of Yuan's army was killed in every encounter, the soldiers were short of food and their morale was low.

古文：公谓运者曰： 却十五日为汝破绍，不复劳汝矣。 
现代文：曹公对运粮的人说： 半月后，一定打败袁绍，不再劳累你们了。 
English: Cao Gong said to the grain carriers: "After half a month, we will surely defeat Yuan Shao, and you will no longer be tired."

古文：冬十月，绍遣车运谷，使淳于琼等五人将兵万余人送之，宿绍营北四十里。
现代文：十月，袁绍派兵运粮，命淳于琼等五人带一万多人护送，在袁绍大寨北面四十里的地方宿营。
English: In October, Yuan Shao sent soldiers to transport grain, and five people, including Shun Yu Qiong, accompanied by more than ten thousand people, camped in a place forty miles north of Yuan Shao Dazhai.

古文：绍谋臣许攸贪财，绍不能足，来奔，因说公击琼等。
现代文：袁绍的谋士许攸贪财，袁绍不能满足他的要求，便来投奔曹公，趁机劝说曹公派兵抄袭淳于琼等人。
English: Xu You, Yuan Shao's advisor, was greedy for money. Yuan Shao could not meet his demands, so he came to Cao Cao and took advantage of the opportunity to persuade Cao to send soldiers to copy Chun Yu Qiong and others.

古文：左右疑之，荀攸、贾诩劝公。
现代文：曹公左右的人都不相信他，只有荀攸、贾诩二人劝说曹公采纳他的建议。
English: The people around Cao Gong did not believe him, and only two people, Zou You and Jia Jun, persuaded Cao Gong to accept his suggestion.

古文：公乃留曹洪守，自将步骑五千人夜往，会明至。
现代文：曹公让曹洪留守大营，亲自率领五千人，连夜出发，在天亮前赶到。
English: Cao Gong asked Cao Hong to stay behind at the camp, and he personally led five thousand people to set out overnight and arrived before dawn.

古文：琼等望见公兵少，出陈门外。公急击之，琼退保营，遂攻之。
现代文：淳于琼等看曹公的人少，就在营外摆开阵势，曹公下令冲击；淳于琼退回营内固守，曹军攻打营寨。
English: Junyu Qiong and others who were watching Cao Gong were few in number, so they set up a position outside the camp, and Cao Gong ordered an attack; Junyu Qiong retreated inside the camp and held fast, and Cao's army attacked the camp.

古文：绍遣骑救琼。
现代文：袁绍派骑兵救援淳于琼。
English: Yuan Shao sent cavalry to rescue Chun Yu Qiong.

古文：左右或言 贼骑稍近，请分兵拒之 。
现代文：左右有人说： 敌人骑兵越来越近了，请派兵迎敌。 
English: Some people said: The enemy cavalry is getting closer and closer, please send troops to meet the enemy.

古文：公怒曰： 贼在背后，乃白！ 
现代文：曹公大怒说： 等敌人到了背后再来报告。 
English: Cao Gong said angrily, "Wait until the enemy is behind you, then report to me."

古文：士卒皆殊死战，大破琼等，皆斩之。
现代文：曹军殊死奋战，把淳于琼等打得大败，把他们杀死。
English: Cao Jun fought with all his might and defeated Jun Yu Qiong and others and killed them.

古文：绍初闻公之击琼，谓长子谭曰： 就彼攻琼等，吾攻拔其营，彼固无所归矣！ 
现代文：袁绍听闻曹公攻打淳于琼，对大儿子袁谭说： 趁他攻打淳于琼，我们偷袭他的大本营，他肯定就无处可归了。 
English: Yuan Shao heard that Cao Gong attacked Chun Yu Qiong and said to his eldest son Yuan Tan: If we take advantage of his attack on Chun Yu Qiong and raid his base camp, he will definitely have nowhere to go.

古文：乃使张合、高览攻曹洪。
现代文：便派张郃、高览攻打曹洪。
English: He then sent Zhang Xuan and Gao Zhan to attack Cao Hong.

古文：合等闻琼破，遂来降。
现代文：张郃等人听说淳于琼兵败，就来投降了曹公。
English: When Zhang Ye and others heard that Jun Yu Qiong had been defeated, they came to surrender to Cao Gong.

古文：绍众大溃，绍及谭弃军走，渡河。
现代文：袁绍的军队一败涂地，袁绍和袁谭等弃军逃跑，渡过黄河。
English: Yuan Shao's army suffered a crushing defeat. Yuan Shao and Yuan Tan abandoned the army and fled across the Yellow River.

古文：追之不及，尽收其辎重图书珍宝，虏其众。
现代文：曹军追赶不及，但缴获了他们的全部辎重物资，图册书藏，珍珠宝物，俘虏了大量士兵。
English: Cao's army was not able to catch up, but they captured all their heavy materials, picture books, pearl treasures, and captured a large number of soldiers.

古文：公收绍书中，得许下及军中人书，皆焚之。
现代文：曹公在得到的袁绍的书信中，发现了许都的官员和自己军队里的人给袁绍的信件，立即全部烧掉了。
English: Cao Gong found letters to Yuan Shao from officials in Xudou and members of his own army in the letters he received from Yuan Shao, and immediately burned them all.

古文：冀州诸郡多举城邑降者。
现代文：冀州各郡见曹公打败了袁绍，纷纷献城投降。
English: When the counties of Jizhou saw that Cao Gong had defeated Yuan Shao, they surrendered one after another.

古文：初，桓帝时有黄星见于楚、宋之分，辽东殷馗，善天文，言后五十岁当有真人起于梁、沛之间，其锋不可当。
现代文：当初，汉桓帝时，楚国和宋国一带天空中出现了一颗土星，辽东人殷馗擅长观天文，预言五十年后将有真龙天子诞生在梁国和沛国一带，其势锐不可挡。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Huan, a Saturn appeared in the sky around the states of Chu and Song. The people of East Liaoning were good at observing the heavens, and it was prophesied that fifty years later, a dragon god would be born in the states of Liang and Pei, and his momentum would be unstoppable.

古文：至是凡五十年，而公破绍，天下莫敌矣。
现代文：到现在正好总共五十年，而且曹公打败了袁绍，天下没有人能抵挡了。
English: It has been a total of fifty years now, and Cao Gong has defeated Yuan Shao, and no one in the world can resist.

古文：六年夏四月，扬兵河上，击绍仓亭军，破之。
现代文：建安六年四月，曹公在黄河岸边显示兵力，攻打袁绍在仓亭的驻军，击败了袁军。
English: In April of the sixth year of Jianan, Cao Gong showed his strength on the banks of the Yellow River, attacked Yuan Shao's garrison in Cangting, and defeated Yuan's army.

古文：绍归，复收散卒，攻定诸叛郡县。
现代文：袁绍逃往冀州后，又收罗打散的士兵，攻占、平定了那些叛变的郡县。
English: After Yuan Shao fled to Jizhou, he gathered the scattered soldiers from Luo and conquered and pacified those rebellious counties.

古文：九月，公还许。
现代文：九月，曹公回到许都。
English: In September, Cao Gong returned to Xudu.

古文：绍之未破也，使刘备略汝南，汝南贼共都等应之。
现代文：袁绍未败之时，派刘备攻占汝南郡，汝南的贼寇共都等人都归附刘备。
English: When Yuan Shao was still undefeated, he sent Liu Bei to capture Runan County, and all the bandits and communists in Runan were attached to Liu Bei.

古文：遣蔡扬击都，不利，为都所破。
现代文：曹公派蔡扬攻打共都，战斗失利，被共都打败。
English: Cao Gong sent Cai Yang to attack the Communists, but he lost the battle and was defeated by the Communists.

古文：公南征备。
现代文：曹公南征刘备。
English: Cao Gong Nanzhe Liu Bei.

古文：备闻公自行，走奔刘表，都等皆散。
现代文：刘备听说曹公亲自领兵征讨自己，便逃走投奔刘表，共都等人也四散逃命去了。
English: Liu Bei heard that Cao Gong personally led the soldiers to recruit him, so he ran away and joined Liu Biao, and everyone else scattered and fled for their lives.

古文：七年春正月，公军谯，令曰： 吾起义兵，为天下除暴乱。
现代文：建安七年正月，曹公驻军谯县，下令说： 我举义旗，招兵马，是为了铲除天下暴乱。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of Jian'an, Cao Gong stationed his troops in Yixian County and issued an order: I raise the banner of righteousness and recruit soldiers and horses in order to eradicate the world's riots.

古文：旧土人民，死丧略尽，国中终日行，不见所识，使吾凄怆伤怀。
现代文：可是我的乡人都要死光了，我在境内走了一天，没有看见一个熟识之人，这种情形真叫我悲伤。
English: But all my countrymen are dying. I walked for a day in the country and did not see a single familiar person. This situation really saddens me.

古文：其举义兵已来，将士绝无后者，求其亲戚以后之，授土田，官给耕牛，置学师以教之。为存者立庙，使祀其先人，魂而有灵，吾百年之后何恨哉！ 
现代文：自从我起兵以来，将士们凡是牺牲了没有后代的，让他的亲戚过继作为他的后嗣，官府分给他们田地，配给耕牛，设置学校，派专人教育他们，给他们修建宗庙，使他们能够祭祀自己的祖先，如果魂魄有灵，我死也没有什么后悔的了！ 
English: Since I took up arms, I have made every general who has sacrificed a horse and has no descendants to be adopted by his relatives as his heir. The government has given them fields, distributed cattle, set up schools, sent special people to educate them, and built ancestral temples for them so that they can sacrifice their ancestors. If the soul has a spirit, I will have nothing to regret when I die!

古文：遂至浚仪，治睢阳渠，遣使以太牢祀桥玄。
现代文：又到了浚仪县，治理好睢阳渠，又派使者用牛、羊、猪三牲的祭品去祭祀已故太尉桥玄。
English: He also went to Dzhungyi County to manage the Suiyang Canal, and sent an envoy to offer sacrifices of cattle, sheep, and pigs to the late Taiyi Qiao Xuan.

古文：进军官渡。
现代文：然后，又进军官渡。
English: Then, he was promoted to the rank of officer.

古文：绍自军破后，发病欧血，夏五月死。
现代文：袁绍自从部队被打败以后，得病吐血，五月就去世了。
English: After Yuan Shao's troops were defeated, he became ill and vomited blood. He died in May.

古文：小子尚代，谭自号车骑将军，屯黎阳。
现代文：他的小儿子袁尚接替了他的职位，袁谭自封为车骑将军，驻守在黎阳。
English: His youngest son, Yuan Shang, took over his position, and Yuan Tan appointed himself as a cavalry general, stationed in Liyang.

古文：秋九月，公征之，连战。谭、尚数败退，固守。
现代文：这年九月，曹公征讨他们，连续作战，袁氏兄弟多次战斗失败，退回城中坚守。
English: In September of that year, Cao Gong enlisted them and fought continuously. The Yuan brothers lost many battles and retreated to the city to hold out.

古文：八年春三月，攻其郭，乃出战，击，大破之，谭、尚夜遁。
现代文：建安八年三月，曹公攻打黎阳城外城，袁氏兄弟出战，曹军奋勇冲击，大败袁军，袁谭、袁尚连夜逃走。
English: In March of the eighth year of Jianan, Cao Gong attacked the outer city of Liyang City, Yuan brothers went to war, Cao's army bravely attacked and defeated Yuan's army, Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang fled at night.

古文：夏四月，进军邺。
现代文：四月，曹公进军邺城。
English: In April, Cao Gong marched into Lucheng.

古文：五月还许，留贾信屯黎阳。
现代文：五月回许都，留贾信驻守黎阳。
English: After returning to Xudu in May, Jiaxin stayed in Liyang.

古文：己酉，令曰： 司马法 将军死绥 ，故赵括之母，乞不坐括。
现代文：五月二十日，曹公下令说： 兵书《司马法》上规定： 将军临阵脱逃要处以死刑 ，所以有赵括的母亲请求不因儿子兵败被牵连获罪一说。
English: On May 20th, Cao Gong issued an order saying, "According to the "Sima Law," a military manual, a general who escapes from the front is to be sentenced to death, so Zhao Guan's mother asked not to be implicated in her son's military defeat.

古文：是古之将者，军破于外，而家受罪于内也。
现代文：所以古往今来的将军，军队在外作战失败，家人却在朝内受罪。
English: That is why generals and armies throughout the ages have failed in foreign wars, while their families have suffered at the hands of the government.

古文：自命将征行，但赏功而不罚罪，非国典也。
现代文：可我调兵遣将，领兵征战，只奖有功之人，而不罚有过之人，这不是国家的法律。
English: However, it is not the law of the country that I should dispatch soldiers, lead soldiers to war, and only reward those who have meritorious deeds, but not punish those who have committed crimes.

古文：其令诸将出征，败军者抵罪，失利者免官爵。 
现代文：现在公布命令：以后众将出征，打败仗的要依法治罪，作战失败的罢免爵位。 
English: Now announce the order: In the future, generals will go to war, and those who lose the war must be punished according to the law, and those who fail in battle will be removed from their titles.

古文：秋七月，令曰： 丧乱已来，十有五年，后生者不见仁义礼让之风，吾甚伤之。
现代文：七月，曹公又颁布政令： 自战乱以来，已有十五年了，年青人没见过仁义礼让的风范，我为此非常担忧。
English: In July, Cao Gong also issued a decree: It has been fifteen years since the war, and young people have not seen the manners of benevolence, righteousness and courtesy. I am very worried about this.

古文：其令郡国各修文学，县满五百户置校官，选其乡之俊造而教学之，庶几先王之道不废，而有以益于天下。 
现代文：现公布法令：从今以后，各郡国要提倡和研究儒家经典，有五百户的县就要设置学校，选拔当地优秀学生入校，这样或许可以使圣贤的思想不致废弃，有利于天下。 
English: The decree is hereby promulgated: From now on, all counties and states shall promote and study the Confucian classics, and counties with 500 households shall set up schools and select local outstanding students to enter the schools. This may prevent the abandonment of the thoughts of sages and is beneficial to the world.

古文：八月，公征刘表，军西平。
现代文：八月，曹公征讨刘表，军队驻扎在西平县。
English: In August, Cao Gong enlisted Liu Biao, and the army was stationed in Xiping County.

古文：公之去邺而南也，谭、尚争冀州，谭为尚所败，走保平原。
现代文：先前曹公离开邺城南下时，袁谭、袁尚为争夺冀州而交战，袁谭被袁尚打败，逃到平原县坚守。
English: Earlier, when Cao Gong left Shicheng to go south, Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang fought for Jizhou. Yuan Tan was defeated by Yuan Shang and fled to Pingyuan County to hold out.

古文：尚攻之急，谭遣辛毗乞降请救。
现代文：袁尚攻城很急切，袁谭派辛毗到曹公处投降，请求救兵。
English: Yuan Shang was very eager to attack the city. Yuan Tan sent Xin Pi to Cao Gong's place to surrender and ask for help.

古文：诸将皆疑，荀攸劝公许之，公乃引军还。
现代文：众将都存有疑虑，荀攸劝说曹公答应下来，于是曹公带兵返回。
English: The generals all had doubts, and Yan You persuaded Cao Gong to agree, so Cao Gong returned with his soldiers.

古文：冬十月，到黎阳，为子整与谭结婚。
现代文：十月，曹公到了黎阳，让儿子曹整娶袁谭的女儿为妻。
English: In October, Cao Gong went to Liyang and asked his son Cao Zhengyu to marry Yuan Tan's daughter.

古文：尚闻公北，乃释平原还邺。
现代文：袁尚听到曹公北返的消息，撤走了平原的围兵，回到邺城。
English: Yuan Shang heard the news of Cao Gong's return to the north, withdrew the encircling soldiers from the plain, and returned to Lucheng.

古文：东平吕旷、吕翔叛尚，屯阳平，率其众降，封为列侯。
现代文：东平县的吕旷、吕翔叛离袁尚，驻军阳平县，带着自己的部队投降了曹公，被封为列侯。
English: Lyu Kuang and Lyu Xiang of Dongping County rebelled against Yuan Shang, and the garrison of Yangping County surrendered to Cao Gong with their own troops and were made vassals.

古文：九年春正月，济河，遏淇水入白沟以通粮道。
现代文：建安九年正月，曹公率兵渡过黄河，截断淇水，引入白沟，来打通运粮的通道。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of Jian'an, Cao Gong and his soldiers crossed the Yellow River, cut off the water, and introduced a white ditch to open the channel for transporting grain.

古文：二月，尚复攻谭，留苏由、审配守邺。
现代文：二月，袁尚又攻打袁谭，只留下苏由、审配守卫邺城。
English: In February, Yuan Shang attacked Yuan Tan again, leaving only Su Yu, the adjudicator, to guard Lucheng.

古文：公进军到洹水，由降。
现代文：曹公率兵到了洹水，苏由投降。
English: Cao Gong led his soldiers to Surabaya, and Su You surrendered.

古文：既至，攻邺，为土山、地道。
现代文：一到邺城就发动攻击，堆起土山，挖掘地道。
English: As soon as they arrived in Handan, they launched an attack, piling up mounds of earth and digging tunnels.

古文：武安长尹楷屯毛城，通上党粮道。
现代文：武安县令尹楷驻守毛城，保持通往上党的粮道畅通。
English: Yin Kai, the governor of Wu'an County, was stationed in Mao City to keep the grain route to Shangdang unimpeded.

古文：夏四月，留曹洪攻邺，公自将击楷，破之而还。
现代文：四月，曹公留下曹洪攻打邺城，自己带兵攻打尹楷，打败尹楷后又回师邺城。
English: In April, Cao Gong left Cao Hong to attack Lucheng, and led his troops to attack Yin Kai. After defeating Yin Kai, he returned to Lucheng.

古文：尚将沮鹄守邯郸，又击拔之。
现代文：袁尚的部将沮鹄守卫邯郸县，曹军又攻占了邯郸。
English: Yuan Shang's general Depuyi guarded Jixian County, Cao's army conquered Jixian.

古文：易阳令韩范、涉长梁岐举县降，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：易阳县县令韩范、涉县县长梁岐献城投降，赐给他们关内侯的封爵。
English: Han Fan, the county magistrate of Yiyang County, and Liang Qi, the county magistrate of Wanzhou County, surrendered the city and were given the title of Guan Nei Marquis.

古文：五月，毁土山、地道，作围壍，决漳水灌城；城中饿死者过半。
现代文：五月，曹军毁去土山和地道，绕邺城挖了一圈大壕沟，挖开漳水河淹灌邺城；城中的人饿死了一大半。
English: In May, Cao's army destroyed the earthen mounds and tunnels, dug a large trench around the city of Handan, and dug the Handan River to flood Handan; most of the people in the city starved to death.

古文：秋七月，尚还救邺，诸将皆以为 此归师，人自为战，不如避之 。
现代文：七月，袁尚回兵救邺城，众将都认为： 这是回返驻地的部队，人人都会奋力作战，不如避开他们。 
English: In July, when Yuan Shang's troops returned to save Handan City, the generals all thought: This is the troops returning to the garrison, everyone will fight hard, it is better to avoid them.

古文：公曰： 尚从大道来，当避之；若循西山来者，此成禽耳。 
现代文：曹公说： 袁尚如果从大道上返回，就应该避让；如果沿着西山而来，这次就会被捉住。 
English: Cao Gong said: If Yuan Shang returns from the main road, he should give way; if he comes along the West Mountain, he will be caught this time.

古文：尚果循西山来，临滏水为营。
现代文：袁尚果然沿着西山前来，靠着滏水河扎下营寨。
English: Yuan Shang came along the West Mountain and camped by the Surabaya River.

古文：夜遣兵犯围，公逆击破走之，遂围其营。
现代文：半夜里派兵偷袭围城的曹军。曹公迎战袁军，大败袁军，并下令乘胜包围他们的营寨。
English: In the middle of the night, Cao sent soldiers to attack the besieging Cao army. Cao Gong fought against the Yuan army, defeated the Yuan army, and ordered to take advantage of the victory to surround their camp.

古文：未合，尚惧，故豫州刺史阴夔及陈琳乞降，公不许，为围益急。
现代文：还没等到合围，袁尚就害怕了，派原来的豫州刺史阴夔和陈琳请求投降。曹公没有答应，加紧围攻。
English: Before the encirclement was complete, Yuan Shang was afraid and sent the original Yuzhou spies, Shi Yin and Chen Lin, to ask for surrender. Cao Gong did not agree and intensified the siege.

古文：尚夜遁，保祁山，追击之。
现代文：袁尚连夜逃走，退守祁山，曹军追击不止。
English: Yuan Shang fled in the night and retreated to Lushan. Cao's army pursued him relentlessly.

古文：其将马延、张顗等临陈降，众大溃，尚走中山。
现代文：袁将马延、张靑等人临阵投降，袁军瓦解，袁尚逃往中山国。
English: Yuan ordered Ma Yan, Zhang Ye and others to surrender, Yuan's army disintegrated, and Yuan Shang fled to Zhongshan.

古文：尽获其辎重，得尚印绶节钺，使尚降人示其家，城中崩沮。
现代文：曹军缴获了袁军全部辎重物资，还得到了袁尚的印章、绶带、符节、斧钺，又让袁军降兵举着这些东西给他们城中家属看，城中人心慌乱。
English: Cao's army captured all the heavy materials of Yuan's army, and also got Yuan Shang's seal, sash, rune, and axe, and let the Yuan army's soldiers carry these things to show their families in the city. The hearts of the people in the city were in turmoil.

古文：八月，审配兄子荣夜开所守城东门内兵。
现代文：八月，审配哥哥的儿子审荣趁夜打开自己守卫的城东门，纳曹军入城。
English: In August, Zi Rong, the son of Zi's elder brother, took advantage of the night to open the east gate of the city that he was guarding, and Nacao's army entered the city.

古文：配逆战，败，生禽配，斩之，邺定。
现代文：审配迎战失败，被活捉后斩首，邺城平定了。
English: He was captured alive and beheaded, and the city of Fucheng was pacified.

古文：公临祀绍墓，哭之流涕；慰劳绍妻，还其家人宝物，赐杂缯絮，廪食之。
现代文：曹公亲自到袁绍墓旁祭祀，痛哭不已；还慰藉袁绍的妻子，送还他家的仆人和珍宝，又赐给各种丝绸棉絮，令官府供给他们衣食。
English: Cao Gong himself went to Yuan Shao's tomb to offer sacrifices, weeping bitterly; he also consoled Yuan Shao's wife, sent back his family's servants and treasures, and gave them all kinds of silk lint, ordering the government to provide them with food and clothing.

古文：初，绍与公共起兵，绍问公曰： 若事不辑，则方面何所可据？ 
现代文：当初袁绍与曹公一起举兵之时，袁绍曾问曹公： 如果功业不成，那么四方有什么地方可以据守呢？ 
English: At the beginning, when Yuan Shao and Cao Gong raised an army together, Yuan Shao asked Cao Gong: If the work is not accomplished, then what place can the four sides defend?

古文：公曰： 足下意以为何如？ 
现代文：曹公问： 您认为怎么办好呢？ 
English: Cao Gong asked: What do you think should be done?

古文：绍曰： 吾南据河，北阻燕、代，兼戎狄之众，南向以争天下，庶可以济乎？ 
现代文：袁绍回答： 我南面据守黄河，北面依靠燕、代之地的险要，再加以戎、狄的兵力，然后南进争夺天下，这样或许可以成大事了吧？ 
English: Yuan Shao replied: I will defend the Yellow River in the south, and rely on Yan, the land of the land, in the north, and then add the troops of the Eun and Di, and then go south to compete for the world, so maybe it can be a big deal?

古文：公曰： 吾任天下之智力，以道御之，无所不可。 
现代文：曹公回答： 我运用天下所有有才智的人的力量，用先王的思想驾驭他们，没有什么是不能成功的。 
English: Cao Gong answered: I use the power of all the talented people in the world and use the thoughts of the previous king to control them. Nothing is impossible to succeed.

古文：九月，令曰： 河北罹袁氏之难，其令无出今年租赋！ 
现代文：九月，曹公颁布命令： 黄河以北遭受袁氏父子之害的百姓，不交今年的租税。 
English: In September, Cao Gong issued an order: People north of the Yellow River who suffered from the Yuan father and son would not pay this year's tax.

古文：重豪强兼并之法，百姓喜悦。
现代文：又加重了处罚豪强兼并土地的法令，百姓都很高兴。
English: It also increased the punishment for the annexation of land by the powerful, and the people are very happy.

古文：天子以公领冀州牧，公让还兖州。
现代文：献帝下令让曹公兼任冀州牧，曹公便辞去了兖州牧的职务。
English: Emperor Xian ordered Cao Gong to also serve as Jizhou magistrate, and Cao Gong then resigned from the post of Zhangzhou magistrate.

古文：公之围邺也，谭略取甘陵、安平、勃海、河间。
现代文：曹公包围邺城的时候，袁谭攻占了甘陵县、安平国、勃海国、河间国几地。
English: When Cao Gong besieged Lucheng, Yuan Tan conquered several places in Ganling County, Anping Province, Bohai Province, and Hema Province.

古文：尚败，还中山。
现代文：袁尚战败后，逃回中山国。
English: After Yuan Shang was defeated, he fled back to Zhongshan.

古文：谭攻之，尚奔故安，遂并其众。
现代文：袁谭又进攻中山国，袁尚只得逃往故安县，袁谭就吞并了他的部队。
English: Yuan Tan also attacked Zhongshan Province. Yuan Shang had to flee to Guo'an County. Yuan Tan then annexed his troops.

古文：公遗谭书，责以负约，与之绝婚，女还，然后进军。
现代文：曹公写信给袁谭，谴责他违背约定，并与他断绝儿女婚姻关系，让她的女儿回娘家去，然后进军讨伐。
English: Cao Gong wrote a letter to Yuan Tan, condemning him for breaking the agreement, and breaking off the marriage relationship between his children and him, letting her daughter go back to her mother's house, and then marching to the crusade.

古文：谭惧，拔平原，走保南皮。
现代文：袁谭很害怕，从平原县撤出，跑到南皮县固守。
English: Yuan Tan was very scared and withdrew from Pingyuan County, running to Nanpi County to hold fast.

古文：十二月，公入平原，略定诸县。
现代文：十二月，曹公进入平原县，收回被袁谭攻占的郡县。
English: In December, Cao Gong entered Pingyuan County to recover the counties occupied by Yuan Tan.

古文：十年春正月，攻谭，破之，斩谭，诛其妻子，冀州平。
现代文：建安十年正月，曹公对袁谭发起进攻，打败了袁军，把袁谭斩首，并杀死了他的妻子儿女，冀州被平定了。
English: In the first month of the tenth year of Jianan, Cao Gong launched an attack on Yuan Tan, defeated Yuan's army, beheaded Yuan Tan, and killed his wife and children. Jizhou was pacified.

古文：下令曰： 其与袁氏同恶者，与之更始。 
现代文：曹公又颁布命令： 凡是与袁氏一同做过坏事的人，允许他们改过自新。 
English: Cao Gong also issued an order: Anyone who had done bad things with the Yuan Clan was allowed to reform.

古文：令民不得复私雠，禁厚葬，皆一之于法。
现代文：又命令百姓们不得再报私仇，禁止铺张浪费办丧事，违法的人一概依法惩处。
English: He also ordered the people not to take personal vengeance, prohibit extravagant and wasteful funerals, and punish all those who violate the law.

古文：是月，袁熙大将焦触、张南等叛攻熙、尚，熙、尚奔三郡乌丸。
现代文：这个月内，袁熙的大将焦触、张南等反叛，攻打袁熙、袁尚，他们二人逃往辽西、上谷、右北平三郡的乌丸地区。
English: During this month, Yuan Xi's generals Jiao Zi, Zhang Nan and others rebelled and attacked Yuan Xi and Yuan Shang. The two of them fled to the Wumaru area in the three counties of West Liao, Shanggu and Right Beiping.

古文：触等举其县降，封为列侯。
现代文：焦触等人献出县城投降，被封为列侯。
English: Jiaozhu and others surrendered the county seat and were made feudal lords.

古文：初讨谭时，民亡椎冰，令不得降。
现代文：当初讨伐袁谭时，一些百姓逃避破冰行船的差事，曹公下令官吏们不准接受他们投降。
English: At the beginning of the campaign against Yuan Tan, some people evaded the task of breaking the ice to sail, and Cao Gong ordered the officials not to accept their surrender.

古文：顷之，亡民有诣门首者，公谓曰： 听汝则违令，杀汝则诛首，归深自藏，无为吏所获。 
现代文：不久，逃亡的人有到军中自首的，曹公对他们说： 接受你们自首，就违背了军令；杀死你们，又处死了认罪之人。你们最好回去躲藏起来吧，不要让官吏们捉着。 
English: Before long, some of the fugitives surrendered to the army. Cao Gong said to them: "If you accept to surrender, you have violated the military order; kill you, and execute those who confessed. You had better go back and hide, don't let the officials catch you."

古文：民垂泣而去；后竟捕得。
现代文：百姓们流着泪走了，最终都被捕获。
English: The villagers left in tears and were eventually captured.

古文：夏四月，黑山贼张燕率其众十余万降，封为列侯。
现代文：这年四月，黑山贼寇张燕率领十多万人马投降，被封为列侯。
English: In April of that year, the Montenegrin bandit Zhang Yan led more than a hundred thousand people to surrender and was made a vassal.

古文：故安赵犊、霍奴等杀幽州刺史、涿郡太守。
现代文：故安赵犊、霍奴等人杀死了幽州刺史、涿郡太守。
English: The late An Zhaoqi, Huo Nu and others killed Yuzhou Shishi, the governor of Shixian County.

古文：三郡乌丸攻鲜于辅于犷平。
现代文：三郡地区的乌丸族在犷平攻打鲜于辅。
English: The Ugamaru people of the three counties in the region rarely fought in Suiping.

古文：秋八月，公征之，斩犊等，乃渡潞河救犷平，乌丸奔走出塞。
现代文：八月，曹公带兵出征，把赵犊等人斩首，又渡过潞河救援犷平。乌丸人逃到塞外。
English: In August, Cao Gong led his soldiers on a military expedition, beheaded Zhao Yao and others, and crossed the Wei River to rescue Suiping. The people of Wumaru fled outside of Tibet.

古文：九月，令曰： 阿党比周，先圣所疾也。
现代文：九月，曹公又颁布命令： 结党营私，互相勾结，是古代圣贤们所痛恨的事情。
English: In September, Cao Gong also issued an order: "The ancient sages abhorred the practice of forming parties and colluding with each other.

古文：闻冀州俗，父子异部，更相毁誉。
现代文：听说冀州一带的风俗，父子各立宗派，或相互诽谤，或胡乱吹捧。
English: I heard that the custom in the Jizhou area is that the father and son set up their own sects, either slandering each other, or touting wildly.

古文：昔直不疑无兄，世人谓之盗嫂；第五伯鱼三娶孤女，谓之挝妇翁；王凤擅权，谷永比之申伯，王商忠议，张匡谓之左道：此皆以白为黑，欺天罔君者也。
现代文：从前直不疑连哥哥都没有，却有很多人诽谤他与嫂子通奸；第五伯鱼娶了三位夫人，三个夫人都无父，却有人诬蔑他殴打自己岳丈；王凤专权，把持朝政，谷永却将他与贤相申伯相提并论；王商忠正不阿，张匡却诋毁他搞歪门邪道：这些都是颠倒黑白，欺骗上天蒙蔽君王的事情。
English: In the past, there was no doubt that he did not even have a brother, but many people slandered him for adultery with his sister-in-law; the fifth fisherman married three wives, and all three wives had no father, but some people slandered him for beating his father-in-law; Wang Feng had absolute power and controlled the court and government, but Gu Yong compared him to the sage Shen Bo; Wang Shangzhong was not righteous, but Zhang Kuang slandered him for engaging in crooked ways: these were all things that reversed black and white, deceived heaven and blinded the king.

古文：吾欲整齐风俗，四者不除，吾以为羞。 
现代文：我将整治社会风俗，上面列举的四项陋习不革除，是我终生的耻辱。 
English: I will rectify the social customs, and the four bad habits listed above will not be eliminated, which is my lifelong shame.

古文：冬十月，公还邺。
现代文：十月，曹公回到了邺城。
English: In October, Cao Gong returned to Lucheng.

古文：初，袁绍以甥高干领并州牧，公之拔邺，干降，遂以为刺史。
现代文：当初，袁绍让他的外甥高干担任并州牧，曹公攻克邺城的时候，高干投降，曹公让他担任刺史。
English: At first, Yuan Shao had his nephew Gao Gan assume the position of provincial governor, and when Cao Gong attacked Kejiang, Gao Gan surrendered, and Cao Gong had him assume the position of chief historian.

古文：干闻公讨乌丸，乃以州叛，执上党太守，举兵守壶关口。
现代文：高干听说曹公前往讨伐乌丸族，就在并州叛乱，挟持了上党太守，派兵守住壶关口。
English: When Gao Gan heard that Cao Gong was going to fight the Wumaru tribe, he rebelled in Bianzhou, took the Shang Party governor hostage, and sent soldiers to guard Juguankou.

古文：遣乐进、李典击之，干还守壶关城。
现代文：曹公派乐进、李典二人前去平叛。高干退到壶关城固守。
English: Cao Gong sent two men, Lejin and Li Dian, to suppress the rebellion. Gao Gan retreated to Kuguan City and held fast.

古文：十一年春正月，公征干。
现代文：建安十一年正月，曹公亲自领兵征讨高干。
English: In the first month of the 11th year of Jianan, Cao Gong personally led the army to recruit high-ranking cadres.

古文：干闻之，乃留其别将守城，走入匈奴，求救于单于，单于不受。
现代文：高干听说后，就留下其他将领守壶关城，自己逃到匈奴，向匈奴单于求救，但单于没有出兵。
English: After hearing this, Gao Gan left the other generals guarding Juguan City and fled to the Xiongnu himself. He only asked the Xiongnu for help, but did not send troops.

古文：公围壶关三月，拔之。
现代文：曹公围困壶关城三个月后攻下了它。
English: Cao Gong besieged Guancheng and captured it three months later.

古文：干遂走荆州，上洛都尉王琰捕斩之。
现代文：于是高干逃到荆州，被上洛县都尉王琰抓住并斩首。
English: As a result, Gao Gan fled to Jingzhou, where he was caught by Shangluo County's captain Wang Qi and beheaded.

古文：秋八月，公东征海贼管承，至淳于，遣乐进、李典击破之，承走入海岛。
现代文：八月，曹公东征海贼管承，到了淳于县，派遣乐进、李典进攻并击败他，管承逃到海岛上去了。
English: In August, Cao Gong led the Eastern Expedition against the pirates, and when he arrived in Chunyu County, he sent Lejin and Li Dian to attack and defeat him. Guancheng fled to the island.

古文：割东海之襄贲、郯、戚以益琅邪，省昌虑郡。
现代文：分割东海郡的襄贲、郯、戚三个县以扩充琅邪郡，撤销了昌虑郡。
English: Divided Donghai County into three counties, namely, Xiangfan, Handan and Qizhi, to expand Handan County, and revoked Changxian County.

古文：三郡乌丸承天下乱，破幽州，略有汉民合十余万户。
现代文：三郡乌丸趁天下大乱之机，攻破幽州，抢掠汉族百姓十多万户。
English: The three counties of Wumaru took advantage of the chaos in the world to invade Yuzhou and plunder more than one hundred thousand households of Han people.

古文：袁绍皆立其酋豪为单于，以家人子为己女，妻焉。
现代文：袁绍曾把他们的酋长和首领都立为单于，并把本族人的女儿作为自己的女儿，嫁给他们为妻。
English: Yuan Shao singled out their chiefs and chieftains, and took the daughters of his own people as his own daughters and married them.

古文：辽西单于蹋顿尤强，为绍所厚，故尚兄弟归之，数入塞为害。
现代文：其中辽西单于蹋顿势力尤其强大，最受袁绍厚待，所以袁尚兄弟来投奔他，他们多次侵入边塞抢掠。
English: Among them, the forces of Western Liao and Shandong were particularly strong, and they were treated most generously by Yuan Shao. Therefore, the Yuan Shang brothers came to join him, and they repeatedly invaded the frontier fortress to plunder it.

古文：公将征之，凿渠，自呼扨入泒水，泒音孤。
现代文：曹公准备征讨乌丸，先开凿河渠，从呼沲河直到泒水，命名平虏渠。
English: Cao Gong was preparing to conquer Wuyuan. First, he dug a canal from the Hulun River to the Yanshui River, and named it the Pingrui Canal.

古文：名平虏渠；又从泃河口泃音句。凿入潞河，名泉州渠，以通海。十二年春二月，公自淳于还邺。
现代文：又从泃句河口凿通潞河，起名叫泉州渠，通向大海。建安十二年二月，曹公自淳于返回邺城。
English: In addition, from the mouth of the Shugu River, the Shugu River was chiseled, called the Quanzhou Canal, leading to the sea. In February of the 12th year of Jian'an, Cao Gong Zichun returned to Shicheng.

古文：丁酉，令曰： 吾起义兵诛暴乱，于今十九年，所征必克，岂吾功哉？
现代文：二月初五，又下令说： 自我举起义旗，平定暴乱到现在，已整整十九年了，这期间每战必胜，难道这是我一个人的功劳吗？
English: On the fifth day of the second month, he also issued an order: It has been nineteen years since I raised the banner of righteousness and quelled the rebellion. During this time, every battle will be victorious. Is this the merit of me alone?

古文：乃贤士大夫之力也。
现代文：这都是贤才智士、文武百官尽忠尽力的结果呀！
English: All of this is the result of the loyalty and efforts of the sages, scholars and military officials!

古文：天下虽未悉定，吾当要与贤士大夫共定之；而专飨其劳，吾何以安焉！
现代文：现在虽然天下还没有完全太平，还需我和他们一起去平定，但是我独享功劳，怎能安心呢！
English: Now, although the world is not completely peaceful, I still need to go with them to pacify it, but I alone enjoy the credit, how can I be at ease!

古文：其促定功行封。 
现代文：应该尽快给大家论功行赏。 
English: We should reward everyone as soon as possible.

古文：于是大封功臣二十余人，皆为列侯，其余各以次受封，及复死事之孤，轻重各有差。
现代文：于是大封功臣，功劳卓著的二十多人封为列侯，其余的也论功行赏，依次受封，还免除为国死难者子女的徭役租税，轻重各有差别。
English: As a result, more than twenty people who had made outstanding contributions were made lords of the manor, and the rest were also rewarded for their services and successively awarded. The children of those who died for the country were also exempted from the tax on corvée, with each having a different weight.

古文：将北征三郡乌丸，诸将皆曰： 袁尚，亡虏耳，夷狄贪而无亲，岂能为尚用？
现代文：曹公想要北征三郡乌丸，众将都说： 袁尚只不过是个四散逃亡的敌人而已，乌丸人又贪财忘义，不讲究亲朋交情，怎么能被袁尚利用呢？
English: Cao Gong wanted to take the Northern Expedition to the three counties of Wumaru, and the generals all said: Yuan Shang is just an enemy who has fled everywhere. The people of Wumaru are greedy and forgetful, and do not pay attention to friends and relatives. How can they be used by Yuan Shang?

古文：今深入征之，刘备必说刘表以袭许。
现代文：如今大兵深入其境征伐，刘备一定会劝说刘表袭击许都。
English: Now that the soldiers are marching deep into its territory, Liu Bei will certainly persuade Liu Biao to attack Xu Du.

古文：万一为变，事不可悔。 
现代文：万一真的发生变故，就会悔恨不及。 
English: In the unlikely event that something really does go wrong, there will be a lot of regret.

古文：惟郭嘉策表必不能任备，劝公行。
现代文：惟有郭嘉断定刘表不会信任刘备，劝说曹公出兵。
English: However, Guo Jia concluded that Liu Biao would not trust Liu Bei, and persuaded Cao Gong to send troops.

古文：夏五月，至无终。
现代文：五月，曹公带兵来到无终县。
English: In May, Cao Gong and his soldiers came to Muxian County.

古文：秋七月，大水，傍海道不通，田畴请为乡导，公从之。
现代文：七月，遇上发大水，靠海边的道路都不通，田畴请求当向导，曹公答应了。
English: In July, when there was a big flood, the road by the sea was impassable. Tian Zhen requested to be a guide, and Cao Gong agreed.

古文：引军出卢龙塞，塞外道绝不通，乃堑山堙谷五百余里，经白檀，历平冈，涉鲜卑庭，东指柳城。
现代文：田畴带领大军出了卢龙塞，塞外道路被断绝不通，只好挖山填谷五百余里，经过白檀县，穿越平冈县，深入鲜卑族的居住地，向东奔向柳城县。
English: Tian Zang led the army out of Lulongse. The roads out of Lulongse were cut off and impassable, so they had to dig mountains and fill valleys for more than five hundred miles, passing through Baidang County, crossing Pinggang County, going deep into the settlements of the Xinbei people, and running eastward to Liucheng County.

古文：未至二百里，虏乃知之。
现代文：距柳城二百多里的时候，贼寇就已得知消息。
English: When he was more than two hundred miles away from Liucheng, the thief had already learned the news.

古文：尚、熙与蹋顿、辽西单于楼班、右北平单于能臣抵之等将数万骑逆军。
现代文：袁尚、袁熙与蹋顿，以及辽西单于楼班、右北平单于能臣抵之等带几万骑兵前来迎战。
English: Yuan Shang, Yuan Xi and Xingtang, as well as Liao Xi Shan in Louban and Right Beiping Shan in Nengshen, came to meet the battle with tens of thousands of cavalry.

古文：八月，登白狼山，卒与虏遇，众甚盛。
现代文：八月，曹公登上白狼山，突然与敌兵遭遇，敌人数量很多。
English: In August, Cao Gong ascended the White Wolf Mountain and suddenly encountered a large number of enemy soldiers.

古文：公车重在后，被甲者少，左右皆惧。
现代文：当时曹公的辎重物资都在后面，穿战甲的人很少，左右随从有些害怕。
English: At that time, Cao Gong's heavy supplies were all in the back, there were few people wearing armor, and the left and right followers were a little scared.

古文：公登高，望虏陈不整，乃纵兵击之，使张辽为先锋，虏众大崩，斩蹋顿及名王已下，胡、汉降者二十余万口。
现代文：曹公登上高处，望见敌军队伍混乱不整，就率军主动出击，命张辽为先锋，乌丸军四散崩溃，蹋顿以及部族中许多有名之王都被斩首，胡、汉两族投降的有二十多万。
English: Cao Gong ascended to a high place, saw that the enemy's army was in disarray, and led the army to take the initiative to attack. Zhang Liao was appointed as the vanguard, the Wumaru army collapsed in all directions, and many famous kings in the Htun and tribes were beheaded. More than two hundred thousand people from the Hu and Han tribes surrendered.

古文：辽东单于速仆丸及辽西、北平诸豪，弃其种人，与尚、熙奔辽东，众尚有数千骑。
现代文：辽东单于速仆丸及辽西、右北平的众位首领，抛下他们的族人，与袁尚、袁熙逃往辽东，仅剩下几千骑兵。
English: In Liaodong, only the leaders of Suopu Maru, West Liaoning, and Right Beiping left their tribesmen and fled to Liaodong with Yuan Shang and Yuan Xi, leaving only a few thousand cavalry.

古文：初，辽东太守公孙康恃远不服。
现代文：当初，辽东太守公孙康倚仗地域偏远，不服从管辖。
English: At first, the Liaodong governor, Sun Kang, relied on the remoteness of the region and did not submit to the jurisdiction.

古文：及公破乌丸，或说公遂征之，尚兄弟可禽也。
现代文：等到曹公打败了乌丸，有人劝曹公应该征伐公孙康，那样就可活捉袁氏兄弟。
English: After Cao Gong defeated Wu Maru, someone advised Cao Gong to invade Gongsun Kang, so that he could capture the Yuan brothers alive.

古文：公曰： 吾方使康斩送尚、熙首，不烦兵矣。 
现代文：曹公说： 我正要叫公孙康砍掉袁尚、袁熙的脑袋并送来，不用再派兵了。 
English: Cao Gong said: I was just about to ask Gongsun Kang to cut off the heads of Yuan Shang and Yuan Xi and send them to me. There is no need to send more soldiers.

古文：九月，公引兵自柳城还，康即斩尚、熙及速仆丸等，传其首。
现代文：九月，曹公带兵从柳城回返，公孙康立即把袁尚、袁熙、速仆丸等人斩首，把头送到曹公军中。
English: In September, when Cao Gong and his soldiers returned from Liucheng, Gongsun Kang immediately beheaded Yuan Shang, Yuan Xi, Hayabusa Maru and others and sent their heads to Cao Gong's army.

古文：诸将或问： 公还而康斩送尚、熙，何也？ 
现代文：有的将领问： 主公回兵，而公孙康却砍下他们脑袋送来，这是什么缘故呢？ 
English: Some generals asked, "Why is it that the hero is returning to the army, but the son-in-law, Kang, has cut off their heads and sent them here?

古文：公曰： 彼素畏尚等，吾急之则并力，缓之则自相图，其势然也。 
现代文：曹公说： 公孙康速来就惧怕袁尚等人，我攻打太急，他们就会合力对付我们，暂缓进攻，他们就会自相残杀，这是必然的！ 
English: Cao Gong said: Gongsun Kang quickly came to fear Yuan Shang and others. If I attack too quickly, they will join forces to deal with us. If we delay the attack, they will kill each other. This is inevitable!

古文：十一月至易水，代郡乌丸行单于普富卢、上郡乌丸行单于那楼将其名王来贺。
现代文：十一月，曹公到达易水岸边，代郡乌丸代理单于普富卢、上郡乌丸代理单于那楼带领本族的知名头领赶来庆贺。
English: In November, Cao Gong arrived at the shore of the Yishui River. On behalf of the county, the representative of the county of Wumaru arrived in Pufu Lu, and the representative of the county of Wumaru arrived in that floor to lead the well-known leaders of the tribe to celebrate.

古文：十三年春正月，公还邺，作玄武池以肄舟师。
现代文：建安十三年正月，曹公回到邺城，开凿玄武池训练水军。
English: In the first month of the 13th year of Jian'an, Cao Gong returned to Lucheng and dug out the Xuanwu Pool to train the navy.

古文：汉罢三公官，置丞相、御史大夫。
现代文：这时，朝廷废除了三公，设置丞相、御史大夫。
English: At this time, the imperial court abolished the three nobles and established the position of chancellor and chief historian.

古文：夏六月，以公为丞相。
现代文：六月，曹公被任命为丞相。
English: In June, Cao Gong was appointed chancellor.

古文：秋七月，公南征刘表。
现代文：七月间，曹公南征刘表。
English: In July, Cao Gong marched south to conquer Liu Biao.

古文：八月，表卒，其子琮代，屯襄阳，刘备屯樊。
现代文：八月，刘表病死，他的儿子刘琮接替其职位，驻守襄阳，刘备驻守樊城。
English: In August, Liu Biao died of illness, and his son Liu Hui took over his position, stationed in Xiangyang, and Liu Bei stationed in Lucheng.

古文：九月，公到新野，琮遂降，备走夏口。
现代文：九月，曹公率兵抵达新野县，于是刘琮投降，刘备逃往夏口。
English: In September, Cao Gong and his soldiers arrived in Shinyo County, whereupon Liu Ye surrendered and Liu Bei fled to Xia Kou.

古文：公进军江陵，下令荆州吏民，与之更始。
现代文：曹公进兵江陵，命荆州一带的官吏和百姓同他们一样实行新法规。
English: Cao Gong marched into Jiangling, and ordered the officials and people in the Jingzhou area to implement the new regulations in the same way.

古文：乃论荆州服从之功，侯者十五人，以刘表大将文聘为江夏太守，使统本兵，引用荆州名士韩嵩、邓义等。
现代文：还评定荆州降官的功劳，封侯的有十五人，任命原刘表手下的大将文聘为江夏太守，让他领管自己原本的兵马，并举荐任用荆州名士韩嵩、邓义等人。
English: He also appraised the merits of Jingzhou's demotion of officials, of which there were fifteen, and appointed General Wen, who was originally Liu Biao's subordinate, as the governor of Jiangxia, and let him take charge of his original soldiers and horses, and recommended the appointment of Jingzhou celebrities Han Song, Deng Yi and others.

古文：益州牧刘璋始受征役，遣兵给军。
现代文：益州牧刘璋开始接受征兵和纳税，遣送士兵补充军队。
English: Liu Ye, a herdsman in Yizhou, began to accept conscription and pay taxes, and sent soldiers to supplement the army.

古文：十二月，孙权为备攻合肥。公自江陵征备，至巴丘，遣张憙救合肥。
现代文：十二月，孙权帮助刘备进攻合肥，曹公从江陵发兵征讨刘备，到达巴丘山，派张睯去援救合肥。
English: In December, Sun Quan helped Liu Bei to attack Hefei. Cao Gong sent troops from Jiangling to recruit Liu Bei, arrived at Bachu Mountain, and sent Zhang Ye to rescue Hefei.

古文：权闻憙至，乃走。
现代文：孙权得知张睯到来，才撤兵离开。
English: When Sun Quan learned of Zhang Ye's arrival, he withdrew his troops and left.

古文：公至赤壁，与备战，不利。于是大疫，吏士多死者，乃引军还。
现代文：曹公抵达赤壁，与刘备交战，战斗失利，这时发生了大瘟疫，官兵死了很多，曹公便带兵北回。
English: Cao Gong arrived at Chibi, fought with Liu Bei, and lost the battle. At this time, a great plague occurred, many officers and soldiers died, and Cao Gong led the soldiers back to the north.

古文：备遂有荆州、江南诸郡。
现代文：于是刘备占领了荆州所辖的江南各郡县。
English: As a result, Liu Bei occupied all counties south of the Yangtze River under the jurisdiction of Jingzhou.

古文：十四年春三月，军至谯，作轻舟，治水军。
现代文：建安十四年三月，曹公进军到了谯县，制造快船，操习水军。
English: In March of the 14th year of Jian'an, Cao Gong marched into Shixian County, built a clipper ship, and trained the navy.

古文：秋七月，自涡入淮，出肥水，军合肥。
现代文：七月间，曹军从涡水进入淮河经过淝水，在合肥驻军。
English: In July, Cao's army entered the Huai River from the Vortex Water, passed through the Surabaya River, and garrisoned troops in Hefei.

古文：辛未，令曰： 自顷已来，军数征行，或遇疫气，吏士死亡不归，家室怨旷，百姓流离，而仁者岂乐之哉？
现代文：八月二十四日，曹公下令说： 最近几年来，军队多次远征，有时还遇到瘟疫，官兵都有死亡，不能再回家乡，夫妻难以团聚，百姓流离失所，这难道是仁爱之人愿意看到的么？
English: On August 24, Cao Gong issued an order: In recent years, the army has made many expeditions, sometimes encountering plague, officers and soldiers have died, they can no longer return to their hometowns, it is difficult for husbands and wives to reunite, and the people have been displaced. Is this what a benevolent person would like to see?

古文：不得已也。
现代文：是不得已才这样做。
English: It had to be done.

古文：其令死者家无基业不能自存者，县官勿绝廪，长吏存恤抚循，以称吾意。 
现代文：特此命令：凡是死的士兵家中没有产业，难以维持生活的，政府不得停止供应食粮，官吏必须慰问救济他们，这才合我意。 
English: I hereby order: If any dead soldiers have no property in their homes and it is difficult for them to make a living, the government must not stop the supply of food, and officials must give them consolation and relief. This is what I want.

古文：置扬州郡县长吏，开芍陂屯田。
现代文：这年又在扬州设置郡县长官，开垦芍陂屯田。
English: In the same year, county governors were set up in Yangzhou to open up new towns.

古文：十二月，军还谯。
现代文：十二月，率领军队回到谯县。
English: In December, he led the army back to Jixian.

古文：十五年春，下令曰： 自古受命及中兴之君，曷尝不得贤人君子与之共治天下者乎！
现代文：建安十五年春天，又颁布命令： 自古以来，凡是开国和中兴的君主，谁不是靠贤人君子帮助共治天下呢！
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year of Jian'an, he also issued an order: Since ancient times, all the monarchs who founded and developed countries have relied on the help of wise men and gentlemen to rule the world.

古文：及其得贤也，曾不出闾巷，岂幸相遇哉？
现代文：君主得到贤才，足不出巷，这难道是侥幸碰上的吗？
English: Is it a fluke that the monarch gets a genius and does not have to go to the streets?

古文：上之人不求之耳。
现代文：是高高在上的执政者不去寻访罢了。
English: It's just that the higher-ups in power don't go looking for them.

古文：今天下尚未定，此特求贤之急时也。 孟公绰为赵、魏老则优，不可以为滕、薛大夫 。
现代文：如今天下还未平定，这是正需要贤才的时候。孔子说： 孟公绰作赵、魏两家的家臣之长，是多多有余的，却不能作滕、薛二小国的大夫。 
English: Confucius said: Meng Gong, who was called the head of the vassals of the Zhao and Wei dynasties, is more than enough, but he cannot be the doctor of the small states of Teng and Xue.

古文：若必廉士而后可用，则齐桓其何以霸世！
现代文：假如一定要廉洁之士才能任用，那齐桓公怎能称霸天下呢？
English: If an honest person must be appointed, then how can King Qigong dominate the world?

古文：今天下得无有被褐怀玉而钓于渭滨者乎？
现代文：难道现在天下就真没有像吕尚那样富有才华却穿着破衣服在渭水边垂钓的人吗？
English: Is there really no one in the world who is as talented as Lushang, but who wears torn clothes and goes fishing at the edge of the reeds?

古文：又得无盗嫂受金而未遇无知者乎？
现代文：又有没有像陈平那样被诬与嫂子私通，接受贿赂却还没有遇到赏识自己的人吗？
English: Have you ever been accused of adultery with your sister-in-law like Chen Ping, accepted bribes, but have yet to meet someone who appreciates you?

古文：二三子其佐我明扬仄陋，唯才是举，吾得而用之。 冬，作铜雀台。
现代文：各位一定要帮我明察举荐出身低微的有才之士，只要有才就举荐，使我能够重用他们。 这年冬天，建铜雀台。
English: All of you must help me to recommend talented people from humble backgrounds, as long as there are talents, so that I can reuse them.

古文：十六年春正月，天子命公世子丕为五官中郎将，置官属，为丞相副。
现代文：建安十六年正月，汉献帝任命曹公的世子曹丕作五官中郎将，并安置所属官员，让他做副丞相。
English: In the first month of the 16th year of Jian'an, Emperor Han Xian appointed Cao Cao's son Cao Yu to be the five-ranked vice-commander, and placed officials under him to make him vice-commander.

古文：太原商曜等以大陵叛，遣夏侯渊、徐晃围破之。
现代文：太原商曜等人据守大陵县反叛，曹公派夏侯渊、徐晃带兵包围大陵，打败了商曜。
English: Taiyuan Shangyou and others rebelled in Daling County, Cao Gong sent Xia Houyuan and Xu Huan to encircle Daling with soldiers and defeated Shangyou.

古文：张鲁据汉中，三月，遣钟繇讨之。公使渊等出河东与繇会。
现代文：张鲁占据汉中郡。三月，曹公派钟繇前去征讨，又命令夏侯渊等人从河东郡出兵，与钟繇会合。
English: Zhang Lu occupied Hanzhong County. In March, Cao Gong sent Zhong Xuan to go to collect, and ordered Xia Houyuan and others to send troops from Hedong County to meet with Zhong Xuan.

古文：是时关中诸将疑繇欲自袭，马超遂与韩遂、杨秋、李堪、成宜等叛。
现代文：这时，占据关中的各将都怀疑钟繇要袭击自己，于是，马超与韩遂、杨秋、李堪、成宜等人起兵反叛。
English: At this time, the generals occupying the pass all suspected that Zhong Xuan was going to attack him, so Ma Chao, Han Sui, Yang Qiu, Li Kan, Cheng Yi and others rebelled.

古文：遣曹仁讨之。
现代文：曹公派曹仁去讨伐他们。
English: Cao Gong sent Cao Ren to fight them.

古文：超等屯潼关，公敕诸将： 关西兵精悍，坚壁勿与战。 
现代文：马超等人驻守潼关；曹公告诫众将说： 关西兵勇敢强悍，你们坚守营寨，不得与他们交战。 
English: Ma Chao and others were stationed at Shaoguan; Cao announced and admonished the crowd saying: "Kansai soldiers are brave and strong, you must hold fast to the camp and must not fight with them.

古文：秋七月，公西征，与超等夹关而军。
现代文：七月间，曹公西征，与马超的军队隔着潼关对峙驻军。
English: In July, Cao Gong marched west and confronted Ma Chao's army across Shaoguan.

古文：公急持之，而潜遣徐晃、朱灵等夜渡蒲阪津，据河西为营。
现代文：曹公拖住马超的部队，暗中派徐晃、朱灵等将乘天黑渡过蒲阪津，占领黄河以西，安营扎寨。
English: Cao Gong held back Ma Chao's troops and secretly sent Xu Ak, Zhu Ling, and others to take advantage of the darkness to cross the Busanzin, occupy the west of the Yellow River, and set up camp.

古文：公自潼关北渡，未济，超赴船急战。
现代文：曹公在潼关北面强渡黄河，还未渡完，马超赶来，猛攻曹军船只。
English: Cao Gong forcibly crossed the Yellow River in the north of Shaoguan. Before he had finished crossing, Ma Chao arrived and stormed Cao Jun's ships.

古文：校尉丁斐因放牛马以饵贼，贼乱取牛马，公乃得渡，循河为甬道而南。
现代文：校尉丁斐见情况危急，就放出大批牛马引诱贼兵，贼兵争抢牛马，队形大乱，曹公才得以渡过黄河，沿河边向南修筑通道。
English: Seeing that the situation was critical, school captain Ding Fei released a large number of oxen and horses to lure the bandits. The bandits fought for the oxen and horses, and the formation was chaotic. Cao Gong was able to cross the Yellow River and build a passage along the river to the south.

古文：贼退，拒渭口，公乃多设疑兵，潜以舟载兵入渭，为浮桥，夜，分兵结营于渭南。
现代文：贼兵败退，占据渭口抵抗，曹公便多设疑兵，暗中用船将部队送入渭水，架设浮桥，乘夜分兵在渭水南岸扎营。
English: When the bandits retreated and occupied Hekou, Cao Gong set up more suspicious soldiers, secretly sent troops into Surabaya by boat, erected a pontoon bridge, and camped on the southern shore of Surabaya at night.

古文：贼夜攻营，伏兵击破之。
现代文：贼军于夜间偷袭曹营，曹公派伏兵将他们击败。
English: The invaders attacked Cao's camp at night, and Cao sent an ambush to defeat them.

古文：超等屯渭南，遣信求割河以西请和，公不许。
现代文：马超等人驻守渭南，派人送信，以割让黄河以西为条件求和，曹公不答应。
English: Ma Chao and others stationed in southern Anhui sent messengers to ask for peace on the condition of ceding the west of the Yellow River, but Cao Gong did not agree.

古文：九月，进军渡渭。超等数挑战，又不许；固请割地，求送任子，公用贾诩计，伪许之。
现代文：九月，出兵渡过渭水，马超等人多次挑战，曹公并不应战；再三请求割地，并让自己的儿子做人质求和，曹公听从贾诩之计，假意先应下来。
English: In September, he sent troops to cross Surabaya. Ma Chao and others made many challenges, but Cao Gong did not fight. He repeatedly asked to divide the land, and asked his son to be a hostage to sue for peace. Cao Gong listened to Jia Xuan's plan and pretended to come down first.

古文：韩遂请与公相见，公与遂父同岁孝廉，又与遂同时侪辈，于是交马语移时，不及军事，但说京都旧故，拊手欢笑。
现代文：韩遂请求与曹公会面。曹公与韩遂的父亲同一年被举为孝廉，又与韩遂是平辈，因此两人马靠马在阵前谈了很长时间，不谈军事，只叙朋友旧事，说到高兴处，二人拍手大笑。
English: Han Sui requested a meeting with Cao Gong. Cao Gong and Han Sui's father were elevated to filial piety in the same year, and Han Sui was a peer, so the two men talked for a long time before the battle. They did not talk about the military, but only about old friends. When it came to pleasure, the two men clapped their hands and laughed.

古文：既罢，超等问遂： 公何言？ 
现代文：会见结束后，马超问韩遂： 曹公说了些什么？ 
English: After the meeting, Ma Chao asked Han Sui: What did Cao Gong say?

古文：遂曰： 无所言也。 
现代文：韩遂回答： 没说什么。 
English: Han Sui replied: I didn't say anything.

古文：超等疑之。
现代文：于是马超等人对他产生了猜疑。
English: As a result, Ma Chao and others became suspicious of him.

古文：他日，公又与遂书，多所点窜，如遂改定者；超等愈疑遂。
现代文：过了几天，曹公又给韩遂写了封信，上面故意涂改许多地方，好像是韩遂改的。马超等人更加怀疑。
English: A few days later, Cao Gong again wrote a letter to Han Sui, deliberately altering many parts of it, as if Han Sui had altered it. Ma Chao and others were even more suspicious.

古文：公乃与克日会战，先以轻兵挑之，战良久，乃纵虎骑夹击，大破之，斩成宜、李堪等。
现代文：于是曹公与他们约定日期会战，先用轻装部队挑逗敌军，打了很长时间后，派出精锐骑兵夹攻，大败他们，成宜、李堪等都被斩首。
English: As a result, Cao Gong agreed with them on the date of the battle, first using light troops to tease the enemy army, and after a long time of fighting, he sent elite cavalry to attack, defeated them, and Cheng Yi, Li Kan and others were beheaded.

古文：遂、超等走凉州，杨秋奔安定，关中平。
现代文：韩遂、马超等人逃到凉州，杨秋到安定郡，关中平定了。
English: Han Sui, Ma Chao and others fled to Liangzhou, Yang Qiu to Anding County, and Guanzhong was pacified.

古文：诸将或问公曰： 初，贼守潼关，渭北道缺，不从河东击冯翊而反守潼关，引日而后北渡，何也？ 
现代文：众将有的问曹公： 开始时，贼兵守卫潼关，渭水以北没有防守之兵，我们不从河东出去攻打冯翊，反而在潼关与敌兵对峙，拖延许久才北渡黄河，这是为何？ 
English: Some of the generals asked Cao Gong: At the beginning, the robber soldiers guarded Shaoguan, and there were no defensive soldiers north of Surabaya. We did not go out to attack Fengyuan from the east of the river, but confronted the enemy soldiers in Shaoguan. Why did it take so long to cross the Yellow River?

古文：公曰： 贼守潼关，若吾入河东，贼必引守诸津，则西河未可渡，吾故盛兵向潼关；贼悉众南守，西河之备虚，故二将得擅取西河；然后引军北渡，贼不能与吾争西河者，以有二将之军也。
现代文：曹公回答： 贼兵占据潼关，如果我军进入河东，贼兵必将带兵守住黄河各渡口，我们就不能渡到河西；我故意重兵逼进潼关，贼兵全力来守南边渡口，西河的防备空虚，因此徐晃、朱灵二将才能轻易占领西河。在此之后我带大军北渡黄河，贼兵不敢与我们争夺西河，是因为有他们二将的军队。
English: Cao Gong replied: Thieves occupy Shaoguan. If our army enters the east of the river, the thieves will certainly take soldiers to guard the ferries of the Yellow River, and we will not be able to cross to the west of the river. I deliberately forced heavy troops into Shaoguan. Thieves use all their strength to guard the southern ferry, and the defense of the West River is empty. Therefore, Xu Xing and Zhu Ling II can easily occupy the West River. After this, I took a large army to the north of the Yellow River. Thieves do not dare to compete with us for the West River, because they have two generals of the army.

古文：连车树栅，为甬道而南，既为不可胜，且以示弱。
现代文：连结战车，树起栅栏，做通道向南前进，既是创造了敌军不能取胜的条件，同时又向敌人示弱，麻痹他们。
English: Linking chariots, erecting fences, and making passages to advance southward not only created conditions in which the enemy army could not win, but also showed weakness to the enemy and paralyzed them.

古文：渡渭为坚垒，虏至不出，所以骄之也；故贼不为营垒而求割地。
现代文：渡过渭水后建造深沟固垒，敌军挑战不应，是为了使敌军骄傲自大；所以贼军不造营垒，只求割地讲和。
English: After crossing the Surabaya River, the enemy should not challenge the construction of a deep ditch fortification, in order to make the enemy proud; therefore, the thief army did not build a fortification, but only sought to make peace.

古文：吾顺言许之，所以从其意，使自安而不为备，因畜士卒之力，一旦击之，所谓疾雷不及掩耳，兵之变化，固非一道也。 
现代文：我顺着他们的意思答应下来，之所以依着他们的意图，是为了使他们自以为平安无事而毫无防备。我军此时蓄精养锐，一旦出击，就有迅雷不及掩耳之势。用兵之道，本来不能墨守成规，只求一种方法。 
English: I agreed according to their wishes, and the reason why I followed their intentions was to make them think that they were safe and unprepared. At this time, our army was sharpening its skills, and once it attacked, it would be too fast to hide. The way of using soldiers could not originally stick to the rules, but only wanted one way.

古文：始，贼每一部到，公辄有喜色。
现代文：当初，贼兵每到一支部队，曹公就面露喜色。
English: At first, Cao Gong was happy to see the soldiers of the bandit army every time they arrived at a unit.

古文：贼破之后，诸将问其故。
现代文：贼兵被打败以后，众将问他高兴的原因。
English: After the defeat of the bandits, the crowd will ask him why he is happy.

古文：公答曰： 关中长远，若贼各依险阻，征之，不一二年不可定也。
现代文：曹公回答： 关中地域广阔，如果贼兵各自依险阻抵抗，征伐他们，没有一二年的时间不能平定。
English: Cao Gong replied: Guanzhong is a vast area. If the bandits resist and conquer each other at their own risk, it will take less than a year or two to subdue them.

古文：今皆来集，其众虽多，莫相归服，军无适主，一举可灭，为功差易，吾是以喜。 
现代文：如今都聚集于此，虽然人数众多，但都彼此不服，没有统一的主帅。这样，消灭敌人容易成功，我所以高兴。 
English: Now they are all gathered here, although there are many people, but they are not satisfied with each other, there is no unified coach. In this way, it is easy to succeed in eliminating the enemy, so I am happy.

古文：冬十月，军自长安北征杨秋，围安定。
现代文：十月，曹军从长安出发，北征杨秋，包围了安定。
English: In October, Cao's army started from Chang'an and marched north to Yangqiu, encircling the stable.

古文：秋降，复其爵位，使留抚其民人。
现代文：杨秋投降，又恢复了他的爵位，让他留下安抚百姓，治理所管辖的地区。
English: Yang Qiu surrendered and restored his title, leaving him to pacify the people and govern the area under his jurisdiction.

古文：十二月，自安定还，留夏侯渊屯长安。
现代文：十二月，从安定返回，留下夏侯渊驻守长安。
English: In December, he returned from the stable, leaving Xia Houyuan stationed in Chang'an.

古文：十七年春正月，公还邺。
现代文：建安十七年正月，曹公回到邺城。
English: In the first month of the 17th year of Jianan, Cao Gong returned to Lucheng.

古文：天子命公赞拜不名，入朝不趋，剑履上殿，如萧何故事。
现代文：汉献帝命令曹公朝拜时赞礼官不必在旁点名唱礼，入朝时可以不像别的大臣那样小步快走，可以穿靴、佩剑，就像以前的西汉丞相萧何那样。
English: Emperor Han Xian ordered that when Cao Gong paid homage to the emperor, the eulogist did not have to sing the name of the emperor, and when entering the imperial court, he could not walk fast like other ministers, but could wear shoes and a sword, just like the former Western Han Emperor Xiao He.

古文：马超余众梁兴等屯蓝田，使夏侯渊击平之。
现代文：马超的余党梁兴等人驻守蓝田县，曹公命令夏侯渊出兵征伐，平定了他们。
English: Ma Chao's remaining followers, Liang Xing and others, were stationed in Lantian County. Cao Gong ordered Xia Houyuan to send troops to subjugate and pacify them.

古文：割河内之荡阴、朝歌、林虑，东郡之卫国、顿丘、东武阳、发干，钜鹿之廮陶、曲周、南和，广平之任城，赵之襄国、邯郸、易阳以益魏郡。
现代文：划割出河内郡的荡阴、朝歌、林虑等县，东郡的卫国、顿丘、东武阳、发干等县，巨鹿郡的睰陶、曲周、南和等县，广平郡的任城县，赵郡的襄国、邯郸、易阳县以扩充魏郡。
English: The counties of Hangyin, Chaoga and Linxian in Hanoi County, the counties of Weiguo, Dongqiu, Dongwuyang and Fanggan in Dong County, the counties of Juntao, Quzhou and Nanhe in Jugu County, the county of Rencheng in Guangping County, and the counties of Xiangguo, Handan and Yiyang in Zhao County were carved out to expand Wei County.

古文：冬十月，公征孙权。
现代文：十月，曹公出征讨伐孙权。
English: In October, Cao Gong went out to fight Sun Quan.

古文：十八年春正月，进军濡须口，攻破权江西营，获权都督公孙阳，乃引军还。
现代文：建安十八年正月，曹公进军濡须口，攻破孙权在长江以西的营寨，抓住了孙权的都督公孙阳，然后回师。
English: In the first month of the 18th year of Jianan, Cao Gong marched into Nuxukou, broke through Sun Quan's camp west of the Yangtze River, captured Sun Quan's governor, Sun Yang, and then returned to his division.

古文：诏书并十四州，复为九州。
现代文：此时，汉献帝下诏合并十四州，恢复九州的建制。
English: At this time, Emperor Han Xian issued an edict to merge the fourteen prefectures and restore the organization of Kyushu.

古文：夏四月，至邺。
现代文：四月，曹公回到邺城。
English: In April, Cao Gong returned to Lucheng.

古文：五月丙申，天子使御史大夫郗虑持节策命公为魏公曰：
现代文：五月初十，汉献帝派御史大夫郗虑拿着皇帝的符节到邺城，策封曹公为魏公，策文说：
English: On the 10th day of the 5th month of the year, Emperor Han Xian sent the Grand Historian Zou Sheng to Shicheng with the Emperor's rune festival, to seal Cao Gong as Wei Gong. The inscription said:

古文：朕以不德，少遭愍凶，越在西土，迁于唐、韂当此之时，若缀旒然，宗庙乏祀，社稷无位；髃凶觊觎，分裂诸夏，率土之民，朕无获焉，即我高祖之命将坠于地。
现代文： 因我无德，小时就遭忧患和灾难，被远远地劫持到长安，后又流亡到唐、卫。那时，我四处漂泊，祖宗的祠庙无人祭祀，国无固定疆界；群雄都觊觎皇位，割裂天下，全国的百姓，我无法管治，我汉高祖开创的基业快崩溃了。
English: Because of my lack of virtue, I suffered sorrow and disaster at an early age. I was abducted far away to Chang'an, and later I was exiled to Tang and Wei. At that time, I was wandering around. My ancestors' ancestral temples had no one to offer sacrifices to, and the country had no fixed borders. Heroes were all vying for the throne, dividing the world and the people of the whole country. I was unable to govern, and the foundation created by my ancestor Han Gao was about to collapse.

古文：朕用夙兴假寐，震悼于厥心，曰 惟祖惟父，股肱先正，其孰能恤朕躬 ？
现代文：我早起晚睡，不敢安息，内心痛苦异常，祷告说： 我的祖宗啊，有才能的先臣们，谁能怜悯我呢？ 
English: I wake up early and go to bed late, I do not dare to rest, my heart is in great pain, and I pray: O my ancestors, talented ministers, who can have pity on me?

古文：乃诱天衷，诞育丞相，保乂我皇家，弘济于艰难，朕实赖之。
现代文：于是感动了上天，诞生了曹丞相，保护我们皇室平安，在艰难之中把我拯救出来，使我有了依仗。
English: As a result, heaven was moved, and Cao Chengxian was born to protect the peace of our imperial family, to save me in the midst of difficulties, and to give me a foothold.

古文：今将授君典礼，其敬听朕命。
现代文：如今要举行授您魏公的典礼，请您敬听我的命令。
English: Now the ceremony of conferring the title of Duke of Wei on you is about to take place. Please listen to my order.

古文：昔者董卓初兴国难，髃后释位以谋王室，君则摄进，首启戎行，此君之忠于本朝也。
现代文： 先前董卓作乱，使国家蒙难，各地郡守放弃自己的政务，一同解救王室之乱。您督促众人进军，并率先与贼兵交战，可见您对王室的忠诚。
English: Previously, Dong Zhuo caused chaos and made the country suffer, and county governors from all over the country gave up their government affairs to save the royal family together. You urged everyone to march into the army and took the lead in fighting the bandits, which shows your loyalty to the royal family.

古文：后及黄巾反易天常，侵我三州，延及平民，君又翦之以宁东夏，此又君之功也。
现代文：后来黄巾军违背天命，发动叛乱，侵占三州，祸乱波及百姓，您又铲除他们，平定东方，这又是您的功劳。
English: Later, the Yellow Turbans, in violation of the Mandate of Heaven, launched a rebellion and occupied the three states. The calamity spread to the people. You eradicated them and pacified the East. This is again your achievement.

古文：韩暹、杨奉专用威命，君则致讨，克黜其难，遂迁许都，造我京畿，设官兆祀，不失旧物，天地鬼神于是获乂，此又君之功也。
现代文：韩暹、杨奉二人专权，乱发命令，您讨伐他们，清除他们引起的动乱，又把都城迁到许县，建造京都，重设百官，修建宗庙，恢复先代的规章制度、文物，此举使天地鬼神都得到安宁，这也是您的功劳。
English: Han Siem and Yang used their exclusive power to issue random orders. You fought them, cleared up the turmoil they caused, moved the capital to Xu County, built Kyoto, re-established the hundred officials, built the ancestral temple, and restored the rules and regulations and cultural relics of the previous generation. This move brought peace to heaven and earth, ghosts and gods. This is also your merit.

古文：袁术僭逆，肆于淮南，慑惮君灵，用丕显谋，蕲阳之役，桥蕤授首，棱威南迈，术以陨溃，此又君之功也。
现代文：袁术称帝造反，在淮南横行一时，但也惧怕您的神威。您施展宏谋，在蕲阳战役中，斩首桥蕤，威势不断，继续南行，使袁术丧命，部下崩溃，这又是您的功劳。
English: Yuan Shou called the emperor a rebel and rampaged in Huainan for a while, but he was also afraid of your divine power. You carried out a grand strategy, in the Battle of Poyang, beheaded the bridgehead, continued to travel south, and caused Yuan Shou's death and the collapse of his subordinates. This is again your merit.

古文：回戈东征，吕布就戮，乘辕将返，张杨殂毙，眭固伏罪，张绣稽服，此又君之功也。
现代文：回师东征，诛杀吕布；班师途中，处死张杨，眭固认罪受死，张绣俯首称臣，这又是您的功劳。
English: On the way back from the eastward expedition, you fought and killed Lü Bu; on the way back from the eastward expedition, you executed Zhang Yang, Zeng Gu pleaded guilty and was put to death, and Zhang Xiu prostrated himself before you and praised you. This is again your merit.

古文：袁绍逆乱天常，谋危社稷，凭恃其众，称兵内侮，当此之时，王师寡弱，天下寒心，莫有固志，君执大节，精贯白日，奋其武怒，运其神策，致届官渡，大歼丑类，俾我国家拯于危坠，此又君之功也。
现代文：袁绍淆乱天纲，举行叛乱，阴谋颠覆国家，倚仗兵多将广，起兵侵凌朝廷，这时，国家兵少力小，普天之众，个个心惊胆寒，无人有坚定的信心，忠于国家的您运用您的神机妙算，亲赴官渡指挥作战，歼灭众多贼兵，把国家从危难中拯救出来，这又是您的功劳。
English: Yuan Shao confused the order of heaven, held a rebellion, plotted to subvert the country, relied on a large number of generals, and raised an army to encroach on the imperial court. At that time, the national soldiers were small and weak, and the people of the whole world were scared and cold, and no one had firm confidence. You, who were loyal to the country, used your magic tricks to personally go to Guandu to command the battle, annihilate many thief soldiers, and save the country from danger. This is also your merit.

古文：济师洪河，拓定四州，袁谭、高干，咸枭其首，海盗奔迸，黑山顺轨，此又君之功也。
现代文：率师渡过黄河，开拓平定四州。袁谭、高干二人都被斩首，众海盗四散逃窜，黑山贼寇投靠朝廷，这又是您的功劳。
English: You led your division across the Yellow River, opened up and pacified four provinces. Yuan Tan and Gao Gan were both beheaded, the pirates fled in all directions, and the Montenegrin thieves and robbers sided with the imperial court. This is again your achievement.

古文：乌丸三种，崇乱二世，袁尚因之，逼据塞北，束马县车，一征而灭，此又君之功也。
现代文：三郡乌丸，已两代作乱，袁尚依靠他们，盘踞在塞北，您率军翻山越岭，一战消灭他们，这又是您的功劳。
English: The three counties of Wumaru have been in turmoil for two generations. Yuan Shang relied on them and entrenched himself in northern Saipan. You led your army over the mountains and eliminated them in one battle. This is again your achievement.

古文：刘表背诞，不供贡职，王师首路，威风先逝，百城八郡，交臂屈膝，此又君之功也。
现代文：刘表背叛朝廷，不再上贡，您率军出发，神威先行，荆州诸郡，望风而降，这又是您的功劳。
English: Liu table betrayed the imperial court, no longer paid tribute, you led the army to set off, Shenwei ahead, Jingzhou counties, hoping for the wind, this is your merit.

古文：马超、成宜，同恶相济，滨据河、潼，求逞所欲，殄之渭南，献馘万计，遂定边境，抚和戎狄，此又君之功也。
现代文：马超和成宜狼狈为奸，据守黄河、潼关，企图称王称霸，您在渭水南将他们消灭，杀敌数万，安定了边境，与戎狄和好，这又是您的功劳。
English: Ma Chao and Cheng Yi acted as spies, guarded the Yellow River and Shaoguan, and tried to dominate the king. You eliminated them in the south of Surabaya, killed tens of thousands of enemies, stabilized the border, and made peace with the army. This is your achievement.

古文：鲜卑、丁零，重译而至，箄于、白屋，请吏率职，此又君之功也。
现代文：鲜卑族、丁零族，到京城朝见；箅于族、白屋族，俯首称臣，这又是您的功劳。
English: The Xianbei and Dingzi people came to the capital to see the emperor; the Zouyu and Baiya people bowed their heads and praised the emperor. This is again your achievement.

古文：君有定天下之功，重之以明德，班□海内，宣美风俗，旁施勤教，恤慎刑狱，吏无苛政，民无怀慝；敦崇帝族，表继绝世，旧德前功，罔不咸秩；虽伊尹格于皇天，周公光于四海，方之蔑如也。
现代文：您有平定天下的大功，您用德行教化民众，使天下秩序井然，宣传改善风俗，不断向百姓施以教导，小心谨慎地施以刑罚，使官吏们不施行苛政，百姓没有狡诈之心；您极其尊崇皇帝的亲族，使没有后人的能被继承下来，对于以前德高功大之人，无不发给合理的俸禄；即使像伊尹那样德高及于皇天，周公那样光照四海的贤人，与您相比，也如您。
English: You have made great contributions to the pacification of the world. You have used virtue to educate the people, to keep the world in order, to promote the improvement of customs, to constantly teach the people, to carefully impose punishments, so that officials do not exercise harsh government, and the people do not have cunning hearts. You highly respect the emperor's relatives, so that no descendants can be inherited. For those who were highly virtuous before, you must pay them a reasonable salary. Even if they are as virtuous as the emperor, like Yi Yin, and as bright as the four seas, like Zhou Gong, they are like you.

古文：朕闻先王并建明德，胙之以土，分之以民，崇其宠章，备其礼物，所以藩韂王室，左右厥世也。
现代文： 我听说先代的帝王分封大德之人，要赏赐给他土地，分给他百姓。彰显他的地位，为他准备典礼文物。之所以这样做，是为了让他保卫王室辅佐君王。
English: I have heard that the previous emperors were to reward the person who was awarded the title of great virtue, give him land, give him people, highlight his status, and prepare ceremonial relics for him. The reason for this was to let him defend the royal family and assist the king.

古文：其在周成，管、蔡不静，惩难念功，乃使邵康公赐齐太公履，东至于海，西至于河，南至于穆陵，北至于无棣，五侯九伯，实得征之，世祚太师，以表东海；爰及襄王，亦有楚人不供王职，又命晋文登为侯伯，锡以二辂、虎贲、鈇钺、秬鬯、弓矢，大启南阳，世作盟主。
现代文：在周成王时，管叔和蔡叔作乱，他们被平定后，成王顾念有功之臣，使派邵康公赐给齐国姜太公所辖的土地：东到大海、西到黄河、南到穆陵关、北到无棣边境，各种王侯、九州长官有罪，都可以征讨，世代担任太师，以彰其功绩；到了周襄王时，也有楚国人不称臣也不献贡，又命晋文王为诸侯的盟主，赏赐给他两辆辂车、勇士、铁钺、美酒和弓箭，开垦南阳的大片土地封给他，让其世代担任诸侯盟主。
English: In the time of King Zhou Cheng, Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai made a disturbance. After they were subdued, King Cheng, thinking of his meritorious vassals, sent Shao Kang to give the land under the jurisdiction of Jiang Taigong of Qi Province: east to the sea, west to the Yellow River, south to the Muling Pass, and north to the borderless border. All kinds of princes and nine prefects were guilty and could be collected. They served as grand masters for generations to highlight their achievements. In the time of King Zhou Xiang, there were also Chu people who did not praise or pay tribute. He also ordered King Jinwen to be the leader of

古文：故周室之不坏，繄二国是赖。
现代文：所以周王室不灭，完全依靠齐国和晋国。
English: Therefore, the Zhou royal family will not disappear, and it will fully rely on Qi and Jin.

古文：今君称丕显德，明保朕躬，奉答天命，导扬弘烈，缓爰九域，莫不率俾，功高于伊、周，而赏卑于齐、晋，朕甚恧焉。
现代文：如今您功德显赫，维护社稷，顺应天理，奠定巨大的功业，平定九州，没有人不清楚的。您的功劳比伊尹、周公还高，但赏赐比齐太公、晋文公少，我感到很惭愧。
English: Today, no one is unaware of your outstanding achievements in upholding the social order, obeying the laws of heaven, laying the foundation for great undertakings, and pacifying Kyushu. Your achievements are higher than those of Yi Yin and Zhou Gong, but I feel very ashamed that you have been awarded less than Qi Taigong and Jinwen Gong.

古文：朕以眇眇之身，托于兆民之上，永思厥艰，若涉渊冰，非君攸济，朕无任焉。
现代文：我以此渺小之身，居在亿万百姓之上，常常忧虑执政的艰难，如临深渊，如履薄冰，如果没有您的辅助，我定不能胜任。
English: In this small body, I stand on top of hundreds of millions of people, and I am often worried about the difficulties of governing, such as approaching the abyss, such as walking on thin ice. Without your assistance, I will not be able to do it.

古文：今以冀州之河东、河内、魏郡、赵国、中山、常山、钜鹿、安平、甘陵、平原凡十郡，封君为魏公。
现代文：现在把冀州的河东、河西、魏郡、赵国、中山、常山、巨鹿、安平、甘陵、平原共十个郡县都赏给您，封您为魏公。
English: Now, we are awarding you a total of ten counties and counties in Jizhou, including Hedong, Hexi, Wei County, Zhao Guo, Zhongshan, Changshan, Julu, Anping, Kanling and Plains, and awarding you the title of Wei Gong.

古文：锡君玄土，苴以白茅；爰契尔龟，用建頉社。
现代文：赐给您用白茅草包的黑土，您可以去烧龟占卜，修建魏国的宗庙社稷。
English: Give you the black soil wrapped with white thatch, you can go to burn turtles for divination, and build Wei's ancestral temple.

古文：昔在周室，毕公、毛公入为卿佐，周、邵师保出为二伯，外内之任，君实宜之，其以丞相领冀州牧如故。
现代文：从前在周朝时，毕公、毛公都曾入朝作公卿，周公、邵公不但在朝中作太师、太保，也在外作一方之伯。内外兼职，对于您是非常合适的，您仍以丞相的身份兼任冀州牧。
English: In the past, during the Zhou Dynasty, Bi Gong and Mao Gong both entered the imperial court as nobles. Zhou Gong and Shao Gong not only served as grandmaster and grand marshal in the imperial court, but also as an uncle on the other side. It is very suitable for you to work part-time at home and abroad, and you still serve as the Jizhou Patriarch as the prime minister.

古文：又加君九锡，其敬听朕命。
现代文：另赐给您九锡，您敬听我的命令。
English: I will also give you nine hundred shekels of silver. Please obey my orders.

古文：以君经纬礼律，为民轨仪，使安职业，无或迁志，是用锡君大辂、戎辂各一，玄牡二驷。
现代文：因为您制定礼制法律，给百姓规定行为规范，使他们遵纪守法，没有人怀有二心。所以赐给您金辂车、战车各一辆，黑红色的公马八匹。
English: Because you have established a code of etiquette and a code of conduct for the people, so that they obey the rules and abide by the law, no one has any second thoughts. Therefore, I will give you one gold chariot, one chariot, and eight black and red stallions.

古文：君劝分务本，穑人昏作，粟帛滞积，大业惟兴，是用锡君衮冕之服，赤舄副焉。
现代文：因您教导百姓们互相帮助、崇本务农，使农民努力耕织，积蓄了大量的粮食和布帛，国业兴旺发达，所以赏给您绣龙的礼服和礼帽，配上一双红色的鞋子。
English: Because you taught the people to help each other, respected farming, made farmers work hard to weave, accumulated a large amount of grain and cloth, and the national industry flourished, you were awarded a dragon-embroidered dress and hat, with a pair of red shoes.

古文：君敦尚谦让，俾民兴行，少长有礼，上下咸和，是用锡君轩县之乐，六佾之舞。
现代文：因您推崇谦虚礼让的美德，使百姓们效仿实行，老少之间互相礼让，上下之间彼此和睦，所以赏给您三面悬挂的乐器，用六队三十六人的舞蹈。
English: Because you extolled the virtues of modesty and courtesy, so that the people would follow your example and practice, mutual courtesy between the old and the young, and harmony between the upper and lower classes, you were awarded with musical instruments hanging on three sides, and a dance with six teams of thirty-six people.

古文：君翼宣风化，爰发四方，远人革面，华夏充实，是用锡君朱户以居。
现代文：因您以教令感化百姓，远达四方，使边远不发达民族都洗心革面，中原地区更加充实富有，所以赐给您红门的房子。
English: Because you have influenced the people with your teachings, reaching far and wide, so that the remote and underdeveloped peoples have cleansed their hearts and faces, and the Central Plains have become more prosperous, so I give you the Red Gate House.

古文：君研其明哲，思帝所难，官才任贤，髃善必举，是用锡君纳陛以登。
现代文：因您研究先王的智慧，思考连尧帝都为难的事情，选择官员只看其有无才德，凡优秀人才一定被举荐，所以赐给您上殿登阶的权力。
English: Because of your study of the wisdom of the former king, thinking about the things that even Emperor Xuan found it difficult to do, the selection of officials only depends on whether they have talent, and all outstanding talents must be recommended, so you are given the power to ascend to the palace.

古文：君秉国之钧，正色处中，纤毫之恶，靡不抑退，是用锡君虎贲之士三百人。
现代文：因您执掌国家大权，为政庄严，不偏不倚，即使有一丝一点的恶行，也要加以斥责和黜退，所以赐给您三百名勇士。
English: Three hundred warriors have been given to you because you hold the power of the state, are dignified and impartial, and even if there is the slightest evil deed, it must be rebuked and repelled.

古文：君纠虔天刑，章厥有罪，犯关干纪，莫不诛殛，是用锡君鈇钺各一。
现代文：因您小心谨慎的督察刑罚，公布揭露那些罪犯，凡触犯国家法律的，没有不被惩处的，所以赐给您铁、钺各一件。
English: Because of your careful supervision of punishments, the publication and exposure of those criminals, who violated the laws of the country, did not go unpunished, so I give you a piece of iron and a shovel.

古文：君龙骧虎视，旁眺八维，掩讨逆节，折冲四海，是用锡君彤弓一，彤矢百，玈弓十，玈矢千。
现代文：因您高瞻远瞩，旁观八方，征讨乱臣贼子，捍卫四海平安，所以赐给您红色的弓一张，红色的箭一百支，黑色的弓十张，黑色的箭一千支。
English: Because of your far-sightedness, observation in all directions, enlistment of disorderly vassals and thieves, and protection of the peace of the four seas, I give you one red bow, one hundred red arrows, ten black bows, and one thousand black arrows.

古文：君以温恭为基，孝友为德，明允笃诚，感于朕思，是用锡君秬鬯一卣，珪瓒副焉。
现代文：因您以温良恭俭为根本，以孝顺双亲、友爱兄弟为美德，聪明、守信、笃实、忠诚，感动了我的心，所以赏给你美酒一卣，还配玉制的钩子一把。
English: Because you are gentle and frugal as the foundation, with filial piety to your parents and brotherly love as virtues, clever, trustworthy, honest and loyal, you have touched my heart, so I will give you a bottle of fine wine and a pair of jeweled hooks.

古文：魏国置丞相已下髃卿百寮，皆如汉初诸侯王之制。
现代文：魏国可以设置丞相以下的百官，都像西汉初年各诸侯王的建制一样。
English: The state of Wei could set up hundreds of officials below the rank of chancellor, just like the establishment of princes in the early years of the Western Han Dynasty.

古文：往钦哉，敬服朕命！简恤尔众，时亮庶功，用终尔显德，对扬我高祖之休命！
现代文：望您到魏国后，恭敬地服从我的命令，选拔、安抚您的部下，随时明察政事，完成您的伟大功德，弘扬汉高祖宏伟的事业！ 
English: I hope that after you come to Wei, you will respectfully obey my orders, select and pacify your subordinates, keep a close eye on political affairs at all times, fulfill your great merits, and carry forward the great cause of Han Gaozu!

古文：秋七月，始建魏社稷宗庙。
现代文：这年七月，开始修建魏国的社稷和宗庙。
English: In July of that year, the construction of the Wei state shrine and ancestral temple began.

古文：天子聘公三女为贵人，少者待年于国。
现代文：汉献帝聘娶了曹公的三个女儿，封他们为贵人，其中年纪最小的暂时留在魏国，等长大后再进宫。
English: Emperor Han Xian married Cao Gong's three daughters and made them noblemen. The youngest of them stayed in Wei for a while, and entered the palace after she grew up.

古文：九月，作金虎台，凿渠引漳水入白沟以通河。
现代文：九月，曹公修筑金虎台，开凿渠道，把漳河水引入白沟，流入黄河。
English: In September, Cao Gong built the Golden Tiger Platform and dug a channel to bring the water of the Min River into the White Ditch and flow into the Yellow River.

古文：冬十月，分魏郡为东西部，置都尉。
现代文：十月，把魏郡分为东西两部分，设置都尉。
English: In October, Wei County was divided into two parts, east and west, and a governor was appointed.

古文：十一月，初置尚书、侍中、六卿。
现代文：十一月，魏国开始设置尚书、侍中、六卿等官职。
English: In November, the state of Wei began to set up official positions such as Shangshu, Zhanzhong, and Liujing.

古文：马超在汉阳，复因羌、胡为害，氐王千万叛应超，屯兴国。
现代文：马超在汉阳郡，又依靠羌人和其他少数民族作乱，氐王千万，也叛变响应马超，他们驻守在兴国。
English: In Hanyang County, Ma Chao also relied on the Qiang people and other ethnic minorities to create turmoil, and tens of thousands of Qiang people also mutinied in response to Ma Chao. They were stationed in Xingguo.

古文：使夏侯渊讨之。
现代文：曹公命夏侯渊讨伐他们。
English: Cao Gong ordered Xia Houyuan to fight them.

古文：十九年春正月，始耕籍田。
现代文：建安十九年正月，曹公开始亲耕籍田。
English: In the first month of the 19th year of Jianan, Cao Gong began to personally cultivate his family farm.

古文：南安赵衢、汉阳尹奉等讨超，枭其妻子，超奔汉中。
现代文：南安郡赵衢、汉阳郡尹奉等人率兵讨伐马超，杀了他的妻子儿女，马超逃往汉中。
English: Zhao Wei of Nan'an County, Yin Bong of Hanyang County and others led troops to fight Ma Chao, killed his wife and children, and Ma Chao fled to Hanzhong.

古文：韩遂徙金城，入氐王千万部，率羌、胡万余骑与夏侯渊战，击，大破之，遂走西平。
现代文：韩遂迁移到金城，进入氐王千万的部落里，率领羌族一万多骑兵与夏侯渊交战，被夏侯渊打得大败，韩遂逃往西平郡。
English: Han Sui migrated to Jincheng, entered the tribe of Shao Wang ten million, led more than ten thousand cavalry of the Shao people to fight against Xia Houyuan, was defeated by Xia Houyuan, and Han Sui fled to Xiping County.

古文：渊与诸将攻兴国，屠之。
现代文：夏侯渊与众将一同进攻兴国，屠戮金城。
English: Xia Houyuan and the others will attack Xingguo and slaughter Jincheng.

古文：省安东、永阳郡。
现代文：撤销了安东、永阳两郡。
English: Andong and Yongyang counties were revoked.

古文：安定太守毋丘兴将之官，公戒之曰： 羌，胡欲与中国通，自当遣人来，慎勿遣人往。
现代文：安定郡新任太守毋丘兴要赴任，曹公告诫他说： 羌族想与中国往来，自会派人前来，注意千万别派人前去。
English: When the new governor of Anding County, Zhu Xing, was about to take office, Cao Xuan warned him: "If the Yao people want to have dealings with China, they will send people to you. Be careful not to send people to you."

古文：善人难得，必将教羌、胡妄有所请求，因欲以自利；不从便为失异俗意，从之则无益事。 
现代文：好人难得，坏人一定会教唆羌族求得非分之物，以便自己从中渔利，要是不答应，就是不领受他们的好意，要是答应了，于国不利。 
English: A good person is rare, a bad person will definitely instigate the Yao people to get something they don't deserve, so that they can benefit from it. If they don't agree, they won't receive their goodwill, and if they do agree, it will be detrimental to the country.

古文：兴至，遣校尉范陵至羌中，陵果教羌，使自请为属国都尉。
现代文：毋丘兴上任后，派校尉到羌人那里，范陵果然唆使羌人，请求自己作属国校尉。
English: However, after he took office, he sent a school captain to the Xiong people, and Fan Ling really instigated the Xiong people to ask him to be a national school captain.

古文：公曰： 吾预知当尔，非圣也，但更事多耳。 
现代文：曹公说： 我预知事情一定会这样，这不是因为我是先知的圣人，只是经历的事情多罢了。 
English: Cao Gong said, "I foresaw that things would be like this. It's not because I'm a prophet saint, it's just that I've experienced more things."

古文：三月，天子使魏公位在诸侯王上，改授金玺，赤绂、远游冠。
现代文：三月，汉献帝把魏公的地位迁升到诸侯王之上，改授给他金印章、红色绶带和远游冠。
English: In March, Emperor Han Xian elevated Wei Gong's status to that of a prince, and gave him the golden seal, red sash and crown.

古文：秋七月，公征孙权。
现代文：七月，曹公出军讨伐孙权。
English: In July, Cao Gong marched out to fight Sun Quan.

古文：初，陇西宋建自称河首平汉王，聚众枹罕，改元，置百官，三十余年。
现代文：当初，陇西郡宋建自称河首平汉王，在木包罕聚众为乱，改年号，设百官，已有三十多年了。
English: At the beginning, Song Jian of Shaanxi County claimed to be the king of the Ping Han Dynasty in Heshou. He gathered many people in Mubo to cause chaos, changed the year name, and set up hundreds of officials. It has been more than 30 years.

古文：遣夏侯渊自兴国讨之。
现代文：曹公派夏侯渊从兴国发兵征讨他。
English: Cao Gong sent Xia Houyuan from Xingguo to recruit him.

古文：冬十月，屠枹罕，斩建，凉州平。
现代文：这年十月，攻占木包罕县城，杀死宋建，凉州被平定。
English: In October of that year, they captured the county seat of Muboahan, killed Song Jian, and subdued Liangzhou.

古文：公自合肥还。
现代文：曹公从合肥还军邺城。
English: Cao Gong returned to Lucheng from Hefei.

古文：十一月，汉皇后伏氏坐昔与父故屯骑校尉完书，云帝以董承被诛怨恨公，辞甚丑恶，发闻，后废黜死，兄弟皆伏法。
现代文：十一月，汉献帝皇后伏氏因从前给她做屯骑校尉的父亲伏完的一封信而犯罪，信上说献帝因董承被杀而怨恨曹公，言辞十分恶毒，被发觉后，伏氏被取消皇后称号，处以死刑，她的兄弟也被诛杀。
English: In November, Empress Fuxi of the Han Emperor Xian committed a crime because of a letter she received from her father Fucan, who was a cavalry captain. The letter said that Emperor Xian hated Cao Gong because of the death of Dongcheng, and the words were very vicious. After it was discovered, Empress Fuxi was stripped of her title and sentenced to death, and her brother was also beaten to death.

古文：十二月，公至孟津。
现代文：十二月，曹公到达孟津。
English: In December, Cao Gong arrived in Mengjin.

古文：天子命公置旄头，宫殿设钟虡。
现代文：汉献帝命曹公出行时设置和皇帝一样的先驱骑兵，宫殿中摆设刻着猛兽的钟磬大架。
English: When Han Xianti ordered Cao Gong to travel, he set up the same vanguard cavalry as the emperor, and the palace was decorated with a large rack of bell towers engraved with ferocious beasts.

古文：乙未，令曰： 夫有行之士未必能进取，进取之士未必能有行也。
现代文：十二月十九日，曹公下令说： 有德之士，未必能够上进；上进之士，未必都能有德。
English: On December 19th, Cao Gong ordered: "Those who have virtue may not be able to advance; those who advance may not have virtue.

古文：陈平岂笃行，苏秦岂守信邪？
现代文：陈平难道有德吗？苏秦难道守信吗？
English: Does Chen Ping really have virtue? Does Su Qin really keep his word?

古文：而陈平定汉业，苏秦济弱燕。
现代文：但陈平奠定了汉朝的基业，苏秦却辅佐弱小的燕国渡过难关。
English: However, Chen Ping laid the foundation of the Han Dynasty, while Su Qin helped the weak Yan Kingdom to overcome difficulties.

古文：由此言之，士有偏短，庸可废乎！
现代文：由此而论，才智之士即使有缺点，难道就不能重用吗？
English: On this basis, can't a talented person be reused even if he or she has shortcomings?

古文：有司明思此义，则士无遗滞，官无废业矣。 
现代文：各级官府要仔细考虑，弄清这一点，那么，有才能的人就不致被遗漏，不致不被提拔。 
English: All levels of government should carefully consider and clarify this, so that talented people will not be left out and will not be promoted.

古文：又曰： 夫刑，百姓之命也，而军中典狱者或非其人，而任以三军死生之事，吾甚惧之。
现代文：又说： 刑罚，有关百姓的生命，如果军队中主管刑狱的官员有不称职的，却把三军将士生死之大权委任给他，我非常害怕。
English: He also said: Penalties, the lives of the people, if there is an incompetent officer in the army in charge of prisons, but has delegated to him the power of life and death of the three armies, I am very afraid.

古文：其选明达法理者，使持典刑。 于是置理曹掾属。
现代文：应该选用通晓法律的人，让他主持刑罚。 因此又设置曹掾属之职。
English: A person who is familiar with the law should be selected to preside over the punishment, which is why the post of Cao Yu's subordinate was established.

古文：二十年春正月，天子立公中女为皇后。
现代文：建安二十年正月，汉献帝把曹公的二女儿立为皇后。
English: In the first month of the 20th year of Jianan, Emperor Han Xian made Cao Gong's two daughters empresses.

古文：省云中、定襄、五原、朔方郡，郡置一县领其民，合以为新兴郡。
现代文：撤销云中、定襄、五原、朔方四郡，各郡设一县治，合并四县为新兴郡。
English: The four counties of Yunzhong, Dingxiang, Wuhuan and Shuofang were revoked, each county was set up with one county government, and the four counties were merged into a new county.

古文：三月，公西征张鲁，至陈仓，将自武都入氐；氐人塞道，先遣张合、朱灵等攻破之。
现代文：三月，曹公西征张鲁，抵达陈仓县，准备从武都郡进入氐族部落；氐族人挡住道路，曹公派张合、朱灵等人进攻并击败他们。
English: In March, Cao Gong marched west to conquer Zhanglu and arrived at Chencang County, preparing to enter the Yao tribe from Wudu County; the Yao people blocked the road, and Cao Gong sent Zhang He, Zhu Ling and others to attack and defeat them.

古文：夏四月，公自陈仓以出散关，至河池。
现代文：四月，曹公从陈仓出发，经大散关，到达河池县。
English: In April, Cao Gong departed from Chencang and arrived in Hechi County after passing through Dazangguan.

古文：氐王窦茂众万余人，恃险不服，五月，公攻屠之。
现代文：氐王窦茂带领手下一万多人，自恃地势险要，并不服从，五月，曹公向他们发动进攻，将他们全部诛杀。
English: Shao Wang Doumao led more than ten thousand people, claiming that the situation was imminent, and did not obey. In May, Cao Gong launched an attack on them and killed them all.

古文：西平、金城诸将曲演、蒋石等共斩送韩遂首。
现代文：西平、金城将领麴演、蒋石等人一起杀了韩遂，把他的首级献给曹公。
English: Xiping, Jincheng's general Zhenyuan, Jiang Shi and others killed Han Sui and dedicated his head to Cao Gong.

古文：秋七月，公至阳平。
现代文：七月，曹公到达阳平。
English: In July, Cao Gong arrived in Yangping.

古文：张鲁使弟韂与将杨昂等据阳平关，横山筑城十余里，攻之不能拔，乃引军还。
现代文：张鲁让他的弟弟张卫和部将杨昂占据阳平关，沿山腰修筑十多里长的城墙，曹军难以攻克，便撤军而走。
English: Zhang Lu let his brother Zhang Wei and his subordinate Yang Ang occupy Yangping Pass and build a ten-mile-long wall along the mountainside. Cao's army was difficult to conquer, so they withdrew.

古文：贼见大军退，其守备解散。
现代文：贼兵见曹公领兵退走，便解除了这里的防备。
English: When the thief soldiers saw Cao Gong leading the soldiers retreat, they relieved the defenses here.

古文：公乃密遣解□、高祚等乘险夜袭，大破之，斩其将杨任，进攻韂，韂等夜遁，鲁溃奔巴中。
现代文：曹公暗中派解忄剽、高祚等人冒险乘夜偷袭，把敌军打得大败，杀了将领杨任，又攻打张卫，张卫等人连夜逃走。张鲁溃不成军，逃往巴中。
English: Cao Gong secretly sent Jie Qi, Gao Qi and others to take the risk of sneaking attack at night, defeated the enemy army, killed the general Yang Ren, and attacked Zhang Wei. Zhang Wei and others fled overnight. Zhang Lu Lu did not join the army and fled to Bachung.

古文：公军入南郑，尽得鲁府库珍宝。
现代文：曹公大军进入南郑县，张鲁府库中的珍宝全被缴获。
English: Cao Gong's army entered Nan Zheng County, and all the precious treasures in Zhanglu's treasury were seized.

古文：巴、汉皆降。
现代文：巴郡、汉中郡全部投降。
English: Ba County and Hanzhong County all surrendered.

古文：复汉宁郡为汉中；分汉中之安阳、西城为西城郡，置太守；分锡、上庸郡，置都尉。
现代文：把汉宁郡的名称恢复为汉中郡；划出汉中郡的安阳、西城新设西城郡，设太守；分设锡郡、上庸郡，设置都尉。
English: The name of Hanning County will be restored to Hanzhong County; the counties of Anyang and Xicheng of Hanzhong County will be delimited, and Xicheng County will be newly established, with a governor-general; the counties of Xixi County and Shangyong County will be separated, and captains will be established.

古文：八月，孙权围合肥，张辽、李典击破之。
现代文：八月，孙权围攻合肥，被张辽、李典击败。
English: In August, Sun Quan besieged Hefei and was defeated by Zhang Liao and Li Dian.

古文：九月，巴七姓夷王朴胡、賨邑侯杜濩举巴夷、賨民来附，于是分巴郡，以胡为巴东太守，濩为巴西太守，皆封列侯。
现代文：九月，巴郡的七姓夷王朴胡、宗贝邑侯杜濩率巴地夷人和宗贝民前来归附，于是把巴郡分为东西两部分，让朴胡作巴东太守，杜砆作巴西太守，都封为列侯。
English: In September, Ba County's seven surnamed barbarian kings, Pak Hu and Zongbei's lord Dujuan, led the barbarian barbarians and Zongbei's people to annex the county. Therefore, Ba County was divided into two parts, with Pak Hu as the governor of the eastern part of the county and Dujuan as the governor of the western part of the county. Both were made princes.

古文：天子命公承制封拜诸侯守相。
现代文：汉献帝命令曹公依天子之意，分封任命诸侯、太守、国相。
English: Emperor Han Xian ordered Cao Gong to appoint princes, governors, and ministers according to the will of heaven.

古文：冬十月，始置名号侯至五大夫，与旧列侯、关内侯凡六等，以赏军功。
现代文：十月，开始设置直到五大夫的各种爵位，与以前的列侯、关内侯加在一起共六等，用来封赏有战功的人。
English: In October, various titles of nobility, up to the Five Great Lords, began to be set up. Together with the former vassals and vassals, there were a total of six ranks, which were used to reward those who had distinguished themselves in the war.

古文：十一月，鲁自巴中将其余众降。
现代文：十一月，张鲁从巴中率残部来降。
English: In November, Zhang Lu came down from the remaining part of the middle school graduation rate.

古文：封鲁及五子皆为列侯。
现代文：曹公封张鲁及其五个儿子为列侯。
English: Cao Gong made Zhang Lu and his five sons vassals.

古文：刘备袭刘璋，取益州，遂据巴中；遣张合击之。
现代文：刘备袭击刘璋，夺取益州，占领巴中；曹公派张郃前去征讨。
English: Liu Bei attacked Liu Bei, captured Yizhou, and occupied Bazhong; Cao Gong sent Zhang Ye to go and fight.

古文：十二月，公自南郑还，留夏侯渊屯汉中。
现代文：十二月，曹公自南郑返回，留下夏侯渊驻守汉中。
English: In December, Cao Gong returned from Nan Zheng, leaving Xia Houyuan stationed in Hanzhong.

古文：二十一年春二月，公还邺。
现代文：建安二十一年二月，曹公回到邺城。
English: In February of the 21st year of Jian'an, Cao Gong returned to Lucheng.

古文：三月壬寅，公亲耕籍田。
现代文：三月初三，他亲自到籍田中耕种。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, he personally went to his home field to cultivate.

古文：夏五月，天子进公爵为魏王。
现代文：五月，汉献帝又加封曹公为魏王。
English: In May, Emperor Han Jian of the Han Dynasty crowned Cao Gong as the King of Wei.

古文：代郡乌丸行单于普富卢与其侯王来朝。
现代文：代郡乌丸代理单于普富卢和部下的侯王来朝见汉献帝。
English: On behalf of the county of Wumaru, the agent in Pufulu and his subordinate Hou Wang came to the court to see Han Xiandi.

古文：天子命王女为公主，食汤沐邑。
现代文：献帝封魏王的女儿为公主，并赐给她汤沐为食邑地。
English: The emperor made the daughter of the king of Wei a princess and gave her a bowl of soup to eat.

古文：秋七月，匈奴南单于呼厨泉将其名王来朝，待以客礼，遂留魏，使右贤王去卑监其国。
现代文：七月，匈奴南单于呼厨泉率领他的名王来朝贺，魏王用客礼款待他们，并留他们住在魏国，让右贤王去卑监管他们的国家。
English: In July, the Xiongnu Nanshan led his great-great-great-grandson to the morning greetings at Hukouquan. The Wei King treated them with hospitality and let them stay in Wei, and let the right-hand king go to Hebei to supervise their country.

古文：八月，以大理钟繇为相国。
现代文：八月份，魏王任命大理钟繇担任魏国国相。
English: In August, the king of Wei appointed Dali Zhongyao as the minister of state of Wei.

古文：冬十月，治兵，遂征孙权，十一月至谯。
现代文：十月，魏王训练军队，然后征伐孙权，十一月到了谯县。
English: In October, Wei Wang trained the army, and then went to conquer Sun Quan. In November, he went to Min County.

古文：二十二年春正月，王军居巢，二月，进军屯江西郝溪。
现代文：建安二十二年正月，魏王驻军居巢，二月进军，驻扎在江西郝溪。
English: In the first month of the 22nd year of Jianan, the Wei king stationed troops in the nest, marched into the army in February, and was stationed in Jiangxi Qixi.

古文：权在濡须口筑城拒守，遂逼攻之，权退走。
现代文：孙权在濡须口修筑城墙抵抗，魏王率军猛攻，孙权败退奔走。
English: Sun Quan built the city wall at Nuxukou to resist, Wei Wang led the army to attack, Sun Quan was defeated and fled.

古文：三月，王引军还，留夏侯惇、曹仁、张辽等屯居巢。
现代文：三月，魏王带兵返回，留下夏侯惇、曹仁、张辽等人驻守居巢。
English: In March, Wei Wang returned with his soldiers, leaving Xia Houyao, Cao Ren, Zhang Liao and others to guard the nest.

古文：夏四月，天子命王设天子旌旗，出入称警跸。
现代文：四月，汉献帝命令魏王使用皇帝专用的旌旗，出入时和皇帝一样加强警戒，清理道路上的行人。
English: In April, Emperor Han Xian ordered the Wei king to use the emperor's special banner, to strengthen vigilance when entering and leaving, and to clear pedestrians on the road.

古文：五月，作泮宫。
现代文：五月，建造学宫。
English: In May, the school palace was built.

古文：六月，以军师华歆为御史大夫。
现代文：六月，魏王任命军师华歆作魏国的御史大夫。
English: In June, the king of Wei appointed the military strategist Hua Wei as the imperial historian of Wei.

古文：冬十月，天子命王冕十有二旒，乘金根车，驾六马，设五时副车，以五官中郎将丕为魏太子。
现代文：十月，汉献帝命令魏王冠冕上用只有皇帝才能用的十二根玉串，乘坐特制的金根车，套着六匹马，配着五彩从车；同时，献帝还任命五官中郎将曹丕为魏王的太子。
English: In October, Emperor Xian of Han ordered the crown of the Wei king to use twelve jade strings that only the emperor could use, to ride a specially made golden chariot, to harness six horses, and to wear a multicolored chariot; at the same time, Emperor Xian also appointed the five officials to make Cao Wei the prince of the Wei king.

古文：刘备遣张飞、马超、吴兰等屯下辩；遣曹洪拒之。
现代文：刘备派张飞、马超、吴兰等人驻守下辩；魏王令曹洪迎击他们。
English: Liu Bei sent Zhang Fei, Ma Chao, Wulan and others to guard the debate; Wei Wang ordered Cao Hong to meet them.

古文：二十三年春正月，汉太医令吉本与少府耿纪、司直韦晃等反，攻许，烧丞相长史王必营，必与颍川典农中郎将严匡讨斩之。
现代文：建安二十三年正月，汉朝太医令吉平与少府耿纪、司直韦晃等密谋反叛，偷袭许都，火烧丞相长史王必的兵营，王必和颍川典农中郎将严匡带兵讨伐，将他们都诛杀了。
English: In the first month of the 23rd year of Jian'an, the imperial physician of the Han Dynasty ordered Jiping to conspire with Shofu Gengji, Sizhong Weiqiao and others to rebel, secretly attacked Xudu, burned the barracks of the Minister of War Shi Wangbi, and Wangbi and Luanchuan Dian Nongzhongro led the soldiers to fight, and killed them all.

古文：曹洪破吴兰，斩其将任夔等。
现代文：曹洪击败吴兰，杀了他的部将任夔等人。
English: Cao Hong defeated Wu Lan and killed his subordinate Ren Zang and others.

古文：三月，张飞、马超走汉中，阴平氐强端斩吴兰，传其首。
现代文：三月，张飞、马超逃往汉中，阴平道氐族人强端杀了吴兰，献上他的首级。
English: In March, Zhang Fei and Ma Chao fled to Hanzhong, and the Yi people of Yinping Road brutally killed Wulan and presented his head.

古文：夏四月，代郡、上谷乌丸无臣氐等叛，遣鄢陵侯彰讨破之。
现代文：四月，代郡、上谷乌丸族无臣氐等人反叛，魏王派鄢陵侯曹彰领兵征讨并击败了他们。
English: In April, Daigun, Shanggu, Wumaru, Wusongye and others rebelled, and the Wei king sent Cao Zhang, the lord of Fuling, to lead the army to fight and defeat them.

古文：六月，令曰： 古之葬者，必居瘠薄之地。
现代文：六月，魏王下令说： 古代丧葬，一定要用贫瘠的土地。
English: In June, the Wei king ordered: "For ancient funerals, we must use barren land."

古文：其规西门豹祠西原上为寿陵，因高为基，不封不树。
现代文：如今我把西门豹祠以西的高原地带划为墓地，就照原来的地基的高度，不再培土加高，也不种树。
English: Now, I have designated the highland area west of the West Gate Leopard Shrine as a cemetery, according to the height of the original foundation, no longer raising the soil, nor planting trees.

古文：周礼頉人掌公墓之地，凡诸侯居左右以前，卿大夫居后，汉制亦谓之陪陵。
现代文：《周礼》上说由冢人掌管国家墓地，所有的诸侯葬在王墓左右靠前的地方，卿大夫葬在后面，汉朝的制度称之为陪葬。
English: "Zhou Li" said that the state cemetery would be managed by the Xiong people, and all the princes would be buried in the front of the king's tomb on the left and right, and the doctor would be buried in the back. The Han Dynasty's system was called "accompanying burial."

古文：其公卿大臣列将有功者，宜陪寿陵，其广为兆域，使足兼容。 
现代文：凡是公卿大臣和众将有功之人，都应在寿陵陪葬，要扩大墓地的范围，让它足能容下众人。 
English: All the noblemen and ministers and all the meritorious people should be buried in the mausoleum, and the scope of the cemetery should be expanded to accommodate everyone.

古文：秋七月，治兵，遂西征刘备，九月，至长安。
现代文：七月，魏王操练士兵，然后西征刘备，九月，到了长安。
English: In July, Wei Wang drilled soldiers, then Liu Bei went to the West, and in September, he arrived in Chang'an.

古文：冬十月，宛守将侯音等反，执南阳太守，劫略吏民，保宛。
现代文：十月，宛城守将侯音等人反叛，擒获南阳太守，抢劫官吏和百姓，据守宛城。
English: In October, the governor of Wancheng, Hou Yin, and others rebelled, captured the governor of Nanyang, robbed officials and people, and took control of Wancheng.

古文：初，曹仁讨关羽，屯樊城，是月使仁围宛。
现代文：当初，曹仁征讨关羽，驻扎在樊城，当月派曹仁包围了宛城。
English: At first, Cao Ren sent troops to besiege Guan Yu and stationed them in Handan. That month, Cao Ren sent troops to besiege Wancheng.

古文：二十四年春正月，仁屠宛，斩音。
现代文：建安二十四年正月，曹仁攻破宛城，侯音被斩首。
English: In the first month of the 24th year of Jian'an, Cao Ren conquered Wancheng, and Hou Yin was beheaded.

古文：夏侯渊与刘备战于阳平，为备所杀。
现代文：夏侯渊与刘备在阳平开战，被刘备诛杀。
English: Xia Houyuan went to war with Liu Bei in Yangping and was killed by Liu Bei.

古文：三月，王自长安出斜谷，军遮要以临汉中，遂至阳平。
现代文：三月，魏王从长安出兵经过斜谷，派出先头部队扼守险要之处向汉中进军。
English: In March, the king of Wei dispatched troops from Chang'an through the valley and sent the vanguard troops to defend the crucial points and march to Hanzhong.

古文：备因险拒守。
现代文：刘备倚仗险要地势顽抗。
English: Liu Bei defied the dangerous situation and stubbornly resisted.

古文：夏五月，引军还长安。
现代文：五月，魏王回师长安。
English: In May, Wei Wang returned to his master, Chang'an.

古文：秋七月，以夫人卞氏为王后。
现代文：七月，魏王的夫人卞氏被立为王后。
English: In July, the Wei king's wife, Lady Zou, was made queen.

古文：遣于禁助曹仁击关羽。
现代文：魏王派于禁协助曹仁攻打关羽。
English: The Wei king sent Yu Kang to help Cao Ren attack Guan Yu.

古文：八月，汉水溢，灌禁军，军没，羽获禁，遂围仁。
现代文：八月，汉水泛滥，淹灌了于禁的军队，全军覆没后，于禁被关羽活捉，关羽乘机包围了曹仁。
English: In August, the Han River flooded and inundated Yu Han's army. After the entire army was wiped out, Yu Han was captured alive by Guan Yu, who took the opportunity to encircle Cao Ren.

古文：使徐晃救之。
现代文：魏王派徐晃去救援。
English: Wei Wang sent Xu Qiao to the rescue.

古文：九月，相国钟繇坐西曹掾魏讽反免。
现代文：九月，魏相国钟繇因为西曹掾魏讽谋反而被罢免。
English: In September, Wei Xiangguo Zhongyao was removed from office for plotting a rebellion against the Western Zhao Dynasty.

古文：冬十月，军还洛阳。
现代文：十月，大军回师洛阳。
English: In October, the army returned to Luoyang.

古文：孙权遣使上书，以讨关羽自效。
现代文：孙权派使者来送信，希望征讨关羽以示自己的忠心。
English: Sun Quan sent an envoy to send a message, hoping to persuade Guan Yu to show his loyalty.

古文：王自洛阳南征羽，未至，晃攻羽，破之，羽走，仁围解。
现代文：魏王从洛阳发兵南征关羽，大军还未到，徐晃向关羽进攻，并将他打败，关羽逃走，曹仁被解围。
English: The Wei king sent troops from Luoyang to conquer Guan Yu. Before the large army arrived, Xu Xuan attacked Guan Yu and defeated him. Guan Yu fled and Cao Ren was relieved.

古文：王军摩陂。
现代文：魏王在摩陂驻下。
English: The Wei king was stationed in Mogao.

古文：二十五年春正月，至洛阳。
现代文：建安二十五年正月，魏王到洛阳。
English: In the first month of the 25th year of Jian'an, Wei Wang went to Luoyang.

古文：权击斩羽，传其首。
现代文：孙权打败关羽并将他斩首，献上了他的首级。
English: Sun Quan defeated Guan Yu and beheaded him, presenting his head to the emperor.

古文：庚子，王崩于洛阳，年六十六。
现代文：正月二十三日，魏王在洛阳去世，终年六十六岁。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month, Wei Wang died in Luoyang at the age of 66.

古文：遗令曰： 天下尚未安定，未得遵古也。
现代文：临终时说： 天下还未安定，不能遵循古代的旧制。
English: On his deathbed, he said: The world is not yet stable, and it is impossible to follow the old system of antiquity.

古文：葬毕，皆除服。
现代文：下葬以后，即便除去丧服。
English: After the burial, even if the funeral clothes are removed.

古文：其将兵屯戍者，皆不得离屯部。
现代文：凡是带兵在外戍守的将领，都不准离开驻守之地。
English: All generals with troops stationed abroad are not allowed to leave the garrison.

古文：有司各率乃职。
现代文：官吏们要各尽其职。
English: Government officials should each do their duty.

古文：敛以时服，无藏金玉珍宝。 谥曰武王。
现代文：装殓用当时所穿的衣服，不要放金银珠宝作陪葬。 魏王谥号为 武王 。
English: Use the clothes worn at the time for decoration, and do not put gold and silver jewelry to accompany the funeral.

古文：二月丁卯，葬高陵。
现代文：二月二十一日，安葬在高陵。
English: On February 21, he was buried in Goryo.

古文：评曰：汉末，天下大乱，雄豪并起，而袁绍虎摉四州，强盛莫敌。
现代文：评曰：东汉末年，天下大乱，群雄四起，袁绍虎视四州，兵强地广，无人能敌。
English: The commentary said: At the end of the Eastern Han Dynasty, the world was in turmoil, four strongmen arose, Yuan Shao and the tiger saw four states, the army was strong and vast, and no one could be an enemy.

古文：太祖运筹演谋，鞭挞宇内，閴申、商之法术，该韩、白之奇策，官方授材，各因其器，矫情任算，不念旧恶，终能总御皇机，克成洪业者，惟其明略最优也。
现代文：太祖运筹帷幄，高瞻远瞩，东征西讨，足迹遍九州，运用申不害、商鞅的治国之方，兼采韩信、白起的奇谋妙策，视才授官，克制自己的感情，不计私怨，最终能够总揽朝政大权，完成建国大业，是因为他的聪明才智超出常人的缘故。
English: It is because of his extraordinary intelligence that he was able to win the supreme political power and complete the great cause of founding the country. He was able to plan ahead, take a far-sighted and far-sighted view, march east and west, and travel all over Kyushu. He was able to govern the country using the principle of "do no harm" and "negotiation," as well as the strategy of "collecting Korean letters" and "creating a brilliant plan." He was promoted according to his ability, restrained his emotions, and did not care about personal grudges.

古文：抑可谓非常之人，超世之杰矣。
现代文：他也真可以称得上是一个非凡的人物，超绝一世的豪杰吧！
English: He can also truly be called an extraordinary person, an extraordinary hero!

