古文：蒋琛张遵言
现代文：蒋琛张遵言
English: Chiang Kai-shek followed Zhang's advice

古文：蒋琛
现代文：蒋琛
English: Jiang Yu

古文：霅人蒋琛，精熟二经，常教授于乡里。
现代文：湖南簨县人蒋琛，精通诗经书经，曾经在乡间教书。
English: Jiang Wei, a native of Handan County, Hunan Province, is proficient in poetry and scripture and used to teach in the countryside.

古文：每秋冬，于霅溪太湖中流，设网罟以给食，常获巨龟，以其质状殊异，乃顾而言曰：虽入余且之网。俾免刳肠之患。
现代文：每到秋冬之际，就在霅溪或太湖中张网打鱼。有一次，他捕到一只大龟，看这大龟长得很特殊，就看着它说，虽然你进了我的渔网，但我免了你被烹煮开膛之苦，就放了你吧。
English: Once, he caught a large turtle. Seeing that the turtle was very special, he looked at it and said, "Although you have entered my fishing net, I have spared you the suffering of being boiled and disemboweled. Let me set you free."

古文：既在四灵之列，得无愧于鄙叟乎？
现代文：都说龟是四灵之一，你这个大龟能对我这个穷老头有点什么报答吗？
English: It is said that the turtle is one of the four spirits. Can you, this big turtle, repay me, this poor old man, with something?

古文：乃释之。龟及中流，凡返顾六七。
现代文：大龟游向湖去时，不时回头看了六七次。
English: As the turtle swam towards the lake, it looked back six or seven times.

古文：后岁余，一夕风雨晦冥。
现代文：一年多后，有一天湖面上风雨大作，湖中波涛汹涌。
English: More than a year later, one day there was a storm on the lake, and the waves in the lake were rough.

古文：闻波间汹汹声，则前之龟扣舷人立而言曰：今夕太湖霅溪松江神境会，川渎诸长，亦闻应召。
现代文：只见那只大龟伏在蒋琛的船边，象人似的站着说，今晚太湖神、霅溪神和松江神聚会，很多江神河神也被请前来参加。
English: I only saw that big turtle crouching on the edge of Jiang Chen's boat, standing like a man and saying, "Tonight, the gods of Taihu Lake, Lixi Creek and Songjiang River are gathering, and many river gods and river gods have also been invited to attend."

古文：开筵解榻，密迩渔舟。
现代文：到时他们要饮酒作乐，怕会贴近你的鱼船。
English: By then they'll be drinking and carousing, afraid to get too close to your fishing boat.

古文：以足下淹滞此地，持网且久，纤鳞细介，苦于数网。脱祸之辈，常怀怨心。
现代文：你老长年在这里打渔，捕了不少鱼鳖虾蟹。就是那些从你网中逃脱的，也对你很怨恨。
English: You have been fishing here for a long time and have caught a lot of fish, shrimps and crabs. Even those who have escaped from your net are very resentful of you.

古文：恐水族乘便，得肆胸臆。
现代文：这次他们大聚会时会乘机报复你以发泄对你的仇怨。
English: This time when they get together, they will take the opportunity to take revenge on you and vent their hatred towards you.

古文：昔日恩遇，常贮悫诚，由斯而来，冀答万一。
现代文：过去你放我生还，我十分感恩，所以特来通知你，以报恩于万一。
English: I'm very grateful that you let me live in the past, so I've come to inform you, just in case.

古文：能退咫尺以远害乎？琛曰：诺。
现代文：希望你离这是非之地远远的，以免受到伤害。蒋琛感谢地说，我知道了。
English: I hope you are far away from this wrong place, so as not to be harmed. Jiang Wei said thankfully, I know.

古文：遂于安流中，缆舟以伺焉。
现代文：就把船停在一个僻静的湾子里，把船系好等着看。
English: He anchored the boat in a secluded bay, tied it up and waited.

古文：未顷，有龟鼍鱼鳖，不可胜计，周匝二里余，蹙波为城，遏浪为地。
现代文：不一会儿，就见到成千上万的鱼鳖虾蟹等涌出水面，在水面二里宽的范围内，它们兴起波浪，波浪就变成了城，弄平了水面成了土地。
English: Soon, I saw thousands of fish, shrimp, crabs, etc. gushing out of the water. Within a two-mile-wide area of the water surface, they raised waves. The waves turned into a city, flattening the water surface into land.

古文：开三门，垣通衢，异怪千余。
现代文：城有三个门，城里有宽阔的街道。
English: The city has three gates, and the city has broad streets.

古文：皆人质螭首，执戈戟，列行伍，守卫如有所待。
现代文：有成千的水族，都长着人的身子和龙头，手持刀枪，整整齐齐地列着队，象在等侍什么。
English: There are thousands of aquarians, all with human bodies and dragon heads, armed with knives and guns, neatly lined up, as if waiting for something.

古文：续有蛟蜃数十，东西驰来，乃吁气为楼台，为琼宫珠殿，为歌筵舞席，为座裀褥，顷刻毕备。
现代文：接着又有几十个蛟龙和大蛤蜊，从东方游来。它们吐出的气立刻变出了楼台宫殿，还变出了歌舞宴席、座椅褥垫，这些都只在片刻间准备好了。
English: Then, dozens of dragonflies and dragonflies swam in from the east, and the breath they exhaled immediately conjured up the balcony of the palace, the song and dance banquet, and the seat cushions, all of which were ready in just a few moments.

古文：其尊田径罍器皿玩用之物，皆非人世所有。又有神鱼数百，吐火珠，引甲士百余辈，拥青衣黑冠者，由霅溪南津而出。
现代文：宫殿里的陈设和用品都是人间所没有的。又有几百个神鱼吐着火珠，引导着一百多士兵，簇拥着一黑衣黑帽的大王，从霅溪的南河口涌了过来。
English: The furnishings and utensils in the palace are unmatched in the world, and hundreds of divine fish spitting fireballs, leading more than a hundred soldiers, and swarming around a great king dressed in black and wearing a black hat, came from the south estuary of the Lugu River.

古文：复见水兽术亦数百，衔耀，引铁骑二百余，拥朱衣赤冠者，自太湖中流而来。
现代文：又见几百个水霅嘴里叼着闪耀的灯引导着二百多骑士，拥着一位红衣红帽的大王，从太湖中流赶来。
English: I also saw hundreds of otters with shining lanterns in their mouths leading more than two hundred knights, holding a great king in a red robe and hat, coming from the middle of Taihu Lake.

古文：至城门，下马交拜，溪神曰：一不展觌，五纪于兹虽鱼雁不绝，而笑言久旷。
现代文：他们到了城门口，两个大王下马见礼。溪神说，咱们分别转眼五百年了，虽然常常通信，却不能直接见面，使我能亲受指教，心里常感空旷寂寞。
English: When they arrived at the gate of the city, the two great kings dismounted and saluted. "We have been separated for five hundred years, although we often correspond, we cannot meet directly, so that I can receive instruction in person, and I often feel empty and lonely.

古文：勤企盛德，衷肠惄然。
现代文：湖神说，我的心中也和你一样啊！
English: The god of the lake said, "In my heart, I am just like you!"

古文：湖神曰：我心亦知此。
现代文：两个人又一次作揖谦让才进了城门。
English: Once again, the two men had to make concessions before they could enter the city gate.

古文：揖让次，有老蛟前唱曰：安流王上马。
现代文：这时只听一个老蛟在远处喊报，安流王已经上马了！
English: At this time, all I could hear was a crone in the distance shouting that the king of An Lue had mounted his horse!

古文：于是二神之候焉。
现代文：于是溪、湖二神恭敬地站着等候。
English: So the two gods of the brook and the lake stood and waited respectfully.

古文：则有衣虎豹之衣，朱其额，青其足，执蜡炬，引旌旗戈甲之卒，凡千余，拥紫衣朱冠者，自松江西派而至。
现代文：这时就见一个神人穿着虎豹皮衣，额头赤红双脚乌黑，手里举着火把，引导着几千旌旗仪仗和士兵，拥着一位紫衣红帽的大王，从松江西面来到城前。
English: At this time, I saw a godman wearing a tiger and leopard skin, with a red forehead and black feet, holding a torch in his hands, leading several thousand flags and soldiers, and holding a great king in a purple dress and red hat, from the west side of the Songjiang River to the front of the city.

古文：二神迎于门，设礼甚谨，叙暄凉竟。
现代文：溪神和湖神在城门口十分恭敬地迎接，礼仪十分周到。
English: The god of the brook and the god of the lake are greeted very respectfully at the gate of the city, and the etiquette is very thoughtful.

古文：江神曰：此去有将为宰执者北渡，而神貌未扬，行李甚艰。
现代文：问过了安康后，松江神说，也有一位将要当宰相的要经过这里向北去。
English: After inquiring about his health, Matsue no Kami said that there was also a man who was going to be prime minister who was going to pass through here to go north.

古文：恐神不识不知，事须帖屏翳收风，冯夷息浪。
现代文：这位宰相长相很平常，也没带更多的侍从仪仗，怕各位神仙不认识他，还望诸位多多关照，不要兴波作浪，让他借道平安地赶路。
English: This prime minister looks very ordinary, and does not bring more attendants. He is afraid that the gods do not know him. He also hopes that you will pay more attention, do not make waves, and let him pass safely.

古文：斯亦上帝素命，礼宜躬亲。候吾子清尘，得免举罚否。
现代文：其实这位宰相也是奉上天之命去办事，按理说我应该护送他，但我想各位都是德高望重的，不会因没有我护送而难为他吧。
English: As a matter of fact, this prime minister was also sent by God to carry out his duties. It is reasonable to say that I should escort him, but I think that you are all highly respected and will not be difficult for him without my escort.

古文：然窃于水滨拉得范相国来，足以补其尤矣。
现代文：这次我在江边把范蠡相国硬拉来参加咱们的聚会，就算是补偿我的失礼吧。
English: This time, I dragged Fan Yuxiang to our party by the river, even if it was to make up for my lack of courtesy.

古文：乃有披褐者，仗剑而前，溪湖神曰：钦奉实久。
现代文：这时就有一个身披斗篷手执宝剑的人走上前来。溪湖神说，对范相国我是钦佩很久了。
English: At this time, a man wearing a cloak and holding a sword came forward. Creek God said, I have admired the country of Fan for a long time.

古文：范君曰：凉德韦泯，吴人怀恩，立祠于江濆，春秋设薄祀。为村醪所困，遂为江公驱来。
现代文：范蠡说，我由于生前为官有德，江南人感恩，为我在江边立了祠，经常以酒肉供奉我，我今天喝醉了，被松江神拉来了。
English: Fan Qi said, "Because I was a dignified official in my lifetime, people in the south of the Yangtze River are grateful to me. They have built a shrine for me on the edge of the river and often worship me with wine and meat. I got drunk today and was pulled here by the god of the Songjiang River.

古文：唐突盛宴，益增惭慄。
现代文：以我的身份能参加这样高贵的聚会，实在既惶恐又荣幸。
English: It is both a thrill and an honor to be able to participate in such a noble gathering in my capacity.

古文：于是揖让入门。
现代文：于是六神一起入席就坐。
English: So the six deities entered the hall together and sat down.

古文：既即席。则有老蛟前唱曰：湘王去城二里，俄闻軿阗车马声。则有绿衣玄冠者，气貌甚伟，驱殿亦百余。
现代文：这时又听见老蛟在远处喊道，湘水神离城还有二里远了！不一会就听见车声隆隆，一位绿衣黑帽的人，带着几百随从，气宇轩昂地走进来了。
English: At this time, I also heard Lao Zi shouting in the distance, "Xiang Shui Shen is still two miles away from the city!" Soon after, I heard the rumble of a car, and a man in a green coat and black hat, with several hundred followers, walked in excitedly.

古文：既升阶，与三神相见。曰：适辄与汨罗屈副使俱来。
现代文：进了宫殿，和三个神至相施礼后说，我是和汨罗江屈副使一同来的。
English: After entering the palace and bowing to the three gods, he said, "I have come together with the deputy envoy of Jiao Luo Jiang Qu.

古文：乃有服饰与容貌惨悴者，伛偻而进。
现代文：只见衣服破旧面容憔悴的屈原躬着身子走进来。刚入席。
English: Just then, a haggard-looking Kuwahara, dressed in shabby clothes, walked in, bowing. He had just taken his seat.

古文：方即席，范相笑谓屈原曰：被放逐之臣负波涛之困，谗痕谤迹骨销未灭，何惨面目，更猎其杯盘？
现代文：范相国就嘲笑屈原说，你这个当初被朝廷放逐的官儿，在水里呆了这么多年，是不是当年被诬陷的那些事还没洗净，才这么悲愁吗？说着还把屈原面前的杯盘抢了过来。
English: Fan Xianguo scoffed at Qu Yuan and said, "You, the official who was exiled by the imperial court, have stayed in the water for so many years. Is it because you haven't been cleansed of the things you were framed for that you are so sad?" He also snatched up the cup and plate in front of Qu Yuan.

古文：屈原曰：湘江之孤魂，鱼腹之余肉，焉敢将喉舌酬对相国乎？
现代文：屈原说，我一个湘江的孤魂，被鱼虾吃剩下的身子，怎敢和你这高贵的相国争辩呢？
English: Qu Yuan said, I am a lonely soul of the Xiangjiang River, the rest of my body eaten by fish and shrimp, how dare I argue with your noble country?

古文：然无闻穿七札之箭，不射笼中之鸟；刜洪锺之剑；不剐几上之肉。
现代文：然而你难道没听说过，能穿透七层竹板的箭，不射笼中的小鸟，能劈开大钟的剑，不会用来切桌上的肉。
English: However, haven't you heard that an arrow that can pierce through seven layers of bamboo will not shoot a bird in a cage, and a sword that can split a large clock will not be used to cut meat on the table.

古文：且足下亡吴霸越，功成身退，逍遥于五湖之上，辉焕于万古之后。
现代文：范相国你生前灭了吴国使越国成了霸主，功成身退，活着时逍遥在江湖上，死后万世传颂。
English: Fan Xiangguo, you annihilated the State of Wu during your lifetime and made the State of Yue become the overlord. You achieved great success and retired. When you were alive, you roamed freely in the country. After your death, you will be praised for all eternity.

古文：故鄙夫窃仰重德盛名，不敢以常意奉待。何今日戏谑于绮席，恃意气于放臣？则何异射病鸟于笼中，剐腐肉于几上？
现代文：我素来敬仰你范蠡的功德和盛名，从来不敢有一点不敬，今天你却在这样隆重的宴会上当众嘲笑我这个被诬陷放逐的人，这和用利箭射笼中的病鸟，用宝剑切桌上的烂肉，有什么不同？
English: I have always admired the merits and fame of your Fan Xuan, and have never dared to be disrespectful, but today, at such a grand banquet, you publicly ridiculed me, a person who was framed and exiled. What is the difference between this and using sharp arrows to shoot sick birds in a cage and using a sword to cut rotten meat on the table?

古文：窃于君子惜金镞与利刃也。
现代文：我真替你可惜你那利箭和快刀啊！
English: I feel sorry for you with your sharp arrows and swords!

古文：于是湘神动色，命酒罚范君。
现代文：一番话说得湘神也感动了，就命罚范蠡喝酒。
English: Hunan God was also moved by a few words, and punished Fan Qi with death by drinking.

古文：君将饮，有女乐数十辈，皆执所习于舞筵。
现代文：范相国刚要喝酒，几十个舞女就开始献歌舞为宴会助兴。
English: As soon as Fan Xianguo was about to drink, dozens of dancers began to perform songs and dances to entertain the party.

古文：有俳优扬言曰：皤皤美女，喝《公无渡河歌》。
现代文：这时有一位艺人大声报告说，现在请一位最美的女子唱歌！于是一位美女唱起了《公无渡河歌》。
English: At this time, an entertainer loudly announced, "Now ask one of the most beautiful women to sing!" So a beautiful woman sang "The Song of the Public Without Crossing the River."

古文：其词曰：浊波扬扬兮凝晓雾，公无渡河兮公竟渡。
现代文：歌中唱道，浊波扬扬兮凝晓雾，公无渡河兮公竟渡。
English: In the song, it is sung that the waves are rising and the fog is congealing, but no one is crossing the river.

古文：风号水激兮呼不闻，捉衣看入兮中流去。
现代文：风号水激兮呼不闻，捉衣看入兮中流去。
English: The wind was blowing and the water was raging, but I couldn't hear it. I caught hold of my clothes and watched it go down the stream.

古文：流排衣兮随步没，沈尸深入兮蛟螭窟。
现代文：浪排衣兮随步没，沉尸深入兮蛟螭窟。
English: The row of clothes disappeared with the passage of time, and the corpse sank deeper into the cave.

古文：蛟螭尽醉兮君血干，推出黄沙兮泛君骨。
现代文：蛟螭尽醉兮君血干。推出黄沙兮泛君骨。
English: Drunk blood drains from the gourd, and yellow sand drips from the bone.

古文：当时君死兮妾何适，遂就波澜兮合魂魄。
现代文：当时君死兮妾何适，遂就波澜兮合魂魄。
English: At that time, when you were dying, your concubine did not know what to do, and then you were swept away by the waves.

古文：愿持精卫衔石心，穷取河源塞泉脉。
现代文：愿持精卫衔石心，穷取河源塞泉脉。
English: It is willing to hold the spirit of the spirit of the spirit of the spirit of the spirit of the spirit of the spirit of the spirit of the spirit of the spirit of the spirit of the spirit.

古文：歌竟，俳优复扬言：谢秋娘舞《采桑曲》。
现代文：歌毕，艺人又报说，现在请谢秋娘舞采桑曲。
English: After the song, the artist reported again, "Now, please ask Xie Qiu Niang to dance the mulberry song."

古文：凡十余迭，曲韵哀怨。
现代文：谢秋娘伴着《采桑曲》翩然起舞，曲子反复了十余次，音乐十分哀怨。
English: Xie Qiu's daughter danced with the accompaniment of "Mulberry Picking Song," the song was repeated more than ten times, and the music was very sad.

古文：舞未竟，外有宣言：申徒先生从河上来，徐处士与鸱夷君自海滨至。
现代文：舞还没完，外面又有人报说申徒先生从河上来，徐处士与鸱夷君从海上来了。
English: Before the dance was over, someone outside reported that Mr. Shen Tu had come up from the river, and Officer Xu and Mr. Zou Yijun had come from the sea.

古文：于是朱弦雅张，清管徐奏。
现代文：屈原说，我终于今天有了知音朋友了。
English: Qu Yuan said, "I finally have a friend today."

古文：酌瑶觥，飞玉觞。陆海珍味，靡不臻极。舞竟，俳优又扬言：曹娥喝喝《怨江波》。
现代文：这时乐队奏起了笙管笛箫和大琴，宴会上珏杯闪光，山珍海味不断地呈送上来，好大的排场。谢秋娘舞完后，艺人又报，现在由曹娥唱《怨江波》！
English: At this time, the band played the gong, flute, gong and harp. At the banquet, the gong cup was sparkling, and the mountain and sea delicacies were constantly presented, a great spectacle. After Xie Qiu Niang's dance, the artist reported again, and now Cao E is singing "Bitter River"!

古文：凡五叠，琛所记者唯三。
现代文：于是曹娥就在宴前唱了起来。《怨江波》共有五段，蒋琛只记下了三段。
English: So Cao E began to sing before the banquet. "Resentment of the River" has a total of five paragraphs, but Jiang Ye only wrote down three.

古文：其词曰：悲风淅淅兮波绵绵，芦花万里兮凝苍烟。
现代文：歌词是，悲风淅淅兮波绵绵，芦花万里兮凝苍烟。
English: The lyrics are, the sad wind is gusty and undulating, and the reeds are full of smoke.

古文：虬螭窟宅兮渊且玄，排波叠浪兮沈我天。
现代文：虬螭窟宅兮渊且玄，排波迭浪兮沈我天。
English: The grotto house is deep and mysterious, the row of waves is repetitive and sinks my heaven.

古文：所复不全兮身宁全，溢眸恨血兮往涟涟。
现代文：所复不全兮身宁全，溢眸恨血兮往涟涟。
English: The body is tranquil but not completely recovered, and the eyes are bloodshot and hateful.

古文：誓将柔荑扶锯牙之啄，空水府而藏其腥涎。
现代文：誓将柔荑扶锯牙之啄，空水府而藏其腥涎。
English: I vow to be flexible, support the tooth of the tooth, empty the water, and hide the ugly tooth.

古文：青娥翠黛兮沉江壖，碧云斜月兮空婵娟。
现代文：青娥翠黛兮沉江壖，碧云斜月兮空婵娟。
English: The sky is blue and the river is sinking, the clouds are lowering and the moon is setting.

古文：吞声饮恨兮语无力，徒扬哀怨兮登歌筵。
现代文：吞声饮恨兮语无力，徒扬哀怨兮登歌宴。
English: Swallowing and drinking hatred, speech is weak, and going to a song banquet in vain.

古文：歌竟，四座为之惨容。
现代文：曹娥唱完，座上的人们都很哀伤。
English: After Cao E finished singing, everyone in the audience was sad.

古文：江神把酒，太湖神起舞作歌曰：白露溥兮西风高，碧波万里兮翻洪涛。
现代文：这时江神举酒，请太湖神起来边歌边舞，唱道，白露溥兮西风高，碧波万里兮翻洪涛。
English: At this time, the god of the river held up a cup of wine and invited the god of the lake to stand up and sing and dance. The dew was white, the west wind was high, and the waves were blue.

古文：莫言天下至柔者，载舟复舟皆我曹。
现代文：莫言天下至柔者，载舟复舟皆我曹。
English: It is said that those who are the most conciliatory in the world are the first to board and the last to leave.

古文：江神倾杯，起舞作歌曰：君不见，夜来渡口拥千艘，中载万姓之脂膏。
现代文：这时江神干了一杯，也载歌载舞地唱道，君不见，夜来渡口拥千艘。中载万姓之脂膏。
English: At this time, the river god drained a cup, and also sang and danced, "I can't see you, there are a thousand boats coming to the ferry port at night.

古文：当楼船泛泛于叠流，恨珠贝又轻于鸿毛。
现代文：当楼船泛泛于叠浪，恨珠贝又轻于鸿毛。
English: When the houseboat pervades the waves, the pearl mussel is lighter than the feather.

古文：又不见，潮来津亭维一舠，中有一士青其袍。
现代文：又不见，潮来津亭维一舠，中有一士青其袍。
English: Not to be seen again, the tide came to Tsintingwei, and one of them was Qingqibao.

古文：赴宰邑之良日，任波吼而风号。
现代文：赴宰邑之良日，任波吼而风号。
English: On a fine day in Zaiyun, let the waves roar and the wind blow.

古文：是知溺名溺利者，不免为水府之腥臊。
现代文：是知溺名溺利者，不免为水府之腥臊。
English: Those who are addicted to fame and profit will inevitably become the scourge of Suifu.

古文：湘王持杯，霅溪神歌曰：山势萦回水脉分，水光山色翠连云。
现代文：接着湘王持杯请霅溪神歌唱道，山势萦回水脉分，水光山色翠连云。
English: Then, holding a cup, Hunan Wang invited the god of the Song of the River to sing, and the mountains returned to the water vein, and the water sparkled and the mountains were covered with clouds.

古文：四时尽入诗人咏，役杀吴兴柳使君。
现代文：四时尽入诗人咏，役杀吴兴柳使君。
English: At four o'clock, he entered the poet's coffin and killed Wu Xingliu.

古文：酒至溪神，湘王歌曰：渺渺烟波接九嶷，几人经此泣江篱。
现代文：酒令传到溪神，湘王歌唱道，渺渺烟波接九嶷，几人经此泣江篱。
English: The wine was sent to the god of the stream, the king of Hunan sang a song, the misty smoke waves caught up with the nine ripples, and several people passed through this weeping river hedge.

古文：年年绿水青山色，不改重华南狩时。
现代文：年年绿水青山色，不改重华南狩时。
English: Year after year, the green water is blue-green, and it does not change when it is time to go to South China.

古文：于是范相国献境会夜宴诗曰：浪阔波澄秋气凉，沈沈水殿夜初长。
现代文：接着相国范蠡献诗一首祝贺夜宴：浪阔波澄秋气凉，沉沉水殿夜初长。
English: Then, Fan Rong, a fellow countryman, dedicated a poem to the congratulatory evening banquet: "The waves are broad, the autumn breeze is cool, and the night is long in the sunken hall."

古文：自怜休退五湖客，何幸追陪百谷王。
现代文：自怜休退五湖客，何幸追陪百谷王。
English: The self-pitying retreat of the Five Lakes guest, what luck to accompany the King of the Hundred Valleys.

古文：香袅碧云飘风席，觥飞白玉滟椒浆。
现代文：香袅碧云飘风席，觥飞白玉滟椒浆。
English: Champagne clouds float in the breeze, and white jade pickled pepper paste flies.

古文：酒酣独泛扁舟去，笑入琴高不死乡。
现代文：酒酣独泛扁舟去，笑入琴高不死乡。
English: The drunkard will go by boat, and the laughing man will go by piano.

古文：徐衍处士献《境会夜宴并简范诗》曰：珠光龙耀火燑燑，夜接朝云宴渚宫。
现代文：这时徐衍徐处士紧接着范蠡献诗一首，珠光龙耀火燑燑，夜接朝云宴渚宫。
English: At this time, Xu Yanxu, the magistrate, immediately followed by Fan Jun, presented a poem, the pearl dragon blazed with fire, and in the evening the morning cloud banquet was held at Nagisa Palace.

古文：凤管清吹凄极浦，朱弦闲奏冷秋空。
现代文：凤管清吹凄极浦，朱弦间奏冷秋空。
English: The clear sound of the phoenix wind is amazing, and the cold autumn sky is interspersed with vermilion strings.

古文：论心幸遇同归友，揣分惭无辅佐功。
现代文：论心幸遇同归友，揣分惭无辅佐功。
English: On the other hand, if you are fortunate enough to meet a fellow returnee, there is nothing to be ashamed of.

古文：云雨各飞真境后，不堪波上起悲风。
现代文：云雨各飞真境后，不堪波上起悲风。
English: After all the clouds and rain have flown away, a sad wind rises unbearably.

古文：屈大夫左持杯，右击盘。朗朗作歌曰：凤骞骞以降瑞兮，患山鸡之杂飞。
现代文：这时屈原大夫左手举杯，右手敲着盘子，声音朗朗地作了一首歌，凤骞骞以降瑞兮，患山鸡之杂飞。
English: At this time, Dr. Qu Yuan raised his glass with his left hand, tapped the plate with his right hand, and loudly made a song.

古文：玉温温以呈器兮。国碱砆之争辉。
现代文：玉温温以呈器兮，因碱砆之争辉。
English: The jade is warmed in a vessel, and shines brightly because of the alkali.

古文：当候门之四辟兮，瑾嘉谟之重扉。
现代文：当侯门之四辟兮，瑾嘉谟之重扉。
English: The four gates of Danghou Gate and the heavy gate of Jiamou Gate.

古文：既瑞器而无庸兮，宜昏暗之相微。
现代文：既瑞器而无庸兮，宜昏暗之相微。
English: It is not necessary to be a perfect match, but it is better to be a little dim.

古文：徒刳石以为舟兮，顾沿流而志违。
现代文：徒刳石以为舟兮，顾沿流而志违。
English: The hikers think they are on a boat, but they are going against their will.

古文：将刻木而作羽兮，与超腾之理非。
现代文：将刻木而作羽兮，与超腾之理非。
English: There is a difference between chopping wood and making feathers, and being super-excited.

古文：矜孑孑于空阔兮，靡群援之可依。
现代文：矜孑孑于空阔兮，靡群援之可依。
English: Wandering in the vastness of space, you can rely on the support of the crowd.

古文：血淋淋而滂流兮，顾江鱼之腹而将归。
现代文：血淋淋而傍流兮，顾江鱼之腹而将归。
English: Bloody and by the side of the stream, Gujiang fish's belly will return.

古文：西风萧萧兮湘水悠悠，白芷芳歇兮江篱秋。
现代文：西风萧萧兮湘水悠悠，白芷芳歇兮江篱秋。
English: The westerly wind blows, the Xiangshui River flows, the egrets sing, and the rivers flow.

古文：日晼晼兮川云牧，棹回起兮悲风幽。
现代文：日晼晼兮川云收，棹回起兮悲风幽。
English: The sun sets, the clouds part, the clouds return, and a gloomy wind blows.

古文：羁魂汨没兮，我名永浮。
现代文：羁魂汨没兮，我名永浮。
English: My name will live forever.

古文：碧波虽涸兮，厥誉长流。
现代文：碧波虽涸兮，厥誉长流。
English: Although the green wave has dried up, his reputation continues to grow.

古文：向使甘言顺行于曩昔，岂今日居君王之座头。
现代文：向使甘言顺行于曩昔，岂今日居君王之座头。
English: If in days of yore you walked in the counsel of your fathers, are you not now sitting on the throne of a king?

古文：是知贪名徇禄而随世磨灭者，虽正寝而死兮，无得与吾俦。
现代文：是知贪名徇禄而随世磨灭者，虽正寝而死兮，无得与我俦。
English: Those who are greedy for fame and fortune and are destroyed by the world, even though they are sleeping and dying, cannot be with me.

古文：当鼎足之嘉会兮，获周旋于君侯。
现代文：当鼎足之嘉会兮，获周旋于诸侯。
English: When it was time to celebrate, he was able to negotiate with the lords.

古文：雕盘玉豆兮罗珍羞，金卮琼斝兮方献酬。
现代文：雕盘玉豆兮罗珍羞，金卮琼斝兮方献酬。
English: The carving plate of yamame beans is rare and shy, and the gold ingot is rare and shy.

古文：敢写心兮歌一曲，无诮余持杯以淹流。
现代文：敢写心兮歌一曲，无诮余持杯以淹流。
English: Dare to write a song with your heart, and you can hold a cup and drown in it.

古文：申屠先生献《境会夜宴诗》曰：行殿秋未晚，水宫风初凉。谁言此中夜，得接朝宗行。灵鼍振冬冬，神龙耀煌煌。
现代文：这时申屠先生献诗助兴说：行殿秋未晚，水宫风初凉。谁言此中夜，得接朝宗行。灵鼍振冬冬，神龙耀煌煌。
English: At this time, Mr. Shen Tu dedicated a poem to Juxing, saying: "It's not too late to go to the autumn palace, and it's not too early to go to the water palace. Who says it's the middle of the night, it's time to go to the morning monastery. The coffin vibrates in the winter, and the divine dragon shines brightly."

古文：红楼压波起，翠幄连云张。
现代文：红楼压波起，翠幄连云张。
English: The pressure wave of the Red House rises, and the Jade Dragonfly rises.

古文：玉箫冷吟秋，瑶瑟清含商。
现代文：玉箫冷吟秋，瑶瑟清含商。
English: Tamakazura coldly chants the autumn, and Kanso clear and contains the merchant.

古文：贤臻江湖叟，贵列川渎王。
现代文：贤臻江湖叟，贵列川渎王。
English: Zhenzhen Jianghu, Guile King.

古文：谅予衰俗人，无能振穨纲。
现代文：谅予衰俗人，无能振穨纲。
English: Forgive the degenerate vulgarians, they are incapable of reforming themselves.

古文：分辞昏乱世，乐寐蛟螭乡。
现代文：分辞昏乱世，乐寐蛟螭乡。
English: Parting words dizzy, happy sleep in the countryside.

古文：栖迟幽岛间，几见波成桑。
现代文：栖迟幽岛间，几见波成桑。
English: Among the islands of Suizhiyu, I saw several waves of mulberry trees.

古文：尔来尽流俗，难与倾壶觞。
现代文：尔来尽流俗，难与倾壶觞。
English: It's hard not to fall in love with it.

古文：今日登华筵，稍觉神扬扬。
现代文：今日登华筵，稍觉神扬扬。
English: Today, I ascended the Great Wall of China, feeling a little elated.

古文：方欢沧浪侣，邃恐白日光。
现代文：方欢沧浪侣，遽恐白日光。
English: Fang Huan Cang Lang couple, extremely afraid of white sunlight.

古文：海人瑞锦前，岂敢言文章。
现代文：海人瑞锦前，岂敢言文章。
English: In front of the Sea People Ruijin, how dare you say such a thing.

古文：聊歌灵境会，此会诚难忘。
现代文：聊歌灵境会，此会诚难忘。
English: It's an unforgettable song-and-dance session.

古文：鸱夷君衔杯作歌曰：云集大野兮血波汹汹，玄黄交战兮吴无全垄。
现代文：鸱夷君这时也干了一杯作了一首歌，云集大野兮血波汹汹，玄黄交战兮吴无全垄。
English: At this time, Qian Yijun also drank a cup and made a song. The crowd gathered wildly, the blood waves were fierce, and the Xuanhuang and Wu were at war.

古文：既霸业之将坠，宜嘉谟之不从。
现代文：既霸业之将坠，宜嘉谟之不从。
English: Even if hegemony falls, Yijia Miao will not follow.

古文：国步颠蹶兮，吾道遘凶。
现代文：国步颠蹶兮吾遘凶。
English: The country is in turmoil, and we are the villains.

古文：处鸱夷之大困，入渊泉之九重。
现代文：处鸱夷之大困，入渊泉之九重。
English: It is difficult to get out of the desert, but it is easy to get into the spring.

古文：上帝愍余之非辜兮，俾大江鼓怒其冤踪。
现代文：上帝愍余之非辜兮，俾大江鼓怒其冤踪。
English: Let the great river of God's wrath be unleashed against the evildoers.

古文：所以鞭浪山而疾驱波岳，亦粗足展余拂郁之心胸。
现代文：所以鞭浪山而疾驱波岳，亦粗足展余拂郁之心胸。
English: Therefore, I whip the mountain waves and swiftly drive away the waves, and I also show my rough feet and beat the depressed heart.

古文：当灵境之良宴兮，谬尊俎之相容。
现代文：当灵境之良宴兮，谬尊俎之相容。
English: When there is a good banquet in the spirit realm, the two are compatible.

古文：击箫鼓兮撞歌钟，吴讴赵舞兮欢未极。
现代文：击箫鼓兮撞歌钟，吴讴赵舞兮欢未极。
English: The gongs and drums are beating and the bells are ringing, and Wu Gan Zhao is dancing and having a great time.

古文：遽军城晓鼓之冬冬，愿保上善之柔德，何行乐之地兮难相逢。
现代文：遽军城晓鼓之冬冬。愿保上善之柔德，何行乐之地兮难相逢。
English: In the winter of the military city, the winter of the morning drum. I wish to preserve the kindness and gentleness, which is hard to meet in the place of entertainment.

古文：歌终，毚郡城楼早鼓绝，洞庭山寺晨钟鸣。
现代文：唱完这首歌，霅郡城楼的更鼓已敲尽，洞庭山庙里的晨钟已响了，一时江水上什么都消失了。
English: After singing this song, the gongs of the castle tower in the county of Yunnan were exhausted, the morning bell in the Dongting Mountain Temple had already rung, and everything on the river disappeared.

古文：而飘风勃兴，玄云四起，波间车马音犹合沓。
现代文：然而风声阵阵，黑云四起，水波间还能隐约听到车马声伴着浪涛声，片刻后就什么都没有了。
English: However, there were gusts of wind, black clouds all around, and the sound of cars and horses could be faintly heard between the waves, accompanied by the sound of waves. After a while, there was nothing.

古文：顷之，无所见。曙色既分，巨龟复延首于中流。顾眄琛而去。
现代文：天将明时，那只大龟又在湖中伸出头来，看了几眼蒋琛，然后就没入湖中。
English: Just before dawn, the turtle poked its head out of the lake again, took a few glances at Jiang Chen, and then disappeared into the lake.

古文：张遵言
现代文：张遵言
English: Zhang Zunyan

古文：南阳张遵言，求名下第，途次商山山馆。
现代文：南阳张遵言，赶考没有中，回乡时路上住在商山一个旅店。
English: Nanyang Zhang Zunyan, did not pass the exam, and lived in a hotel in Shangshan on the way back to his hometown.

古文：中夜晦黑，因起厅堂督刍秣，见东墙下一物，凝白耀人。
现代文：半夜时天很黑，张遵言起来看看仆人给马添草料没有。忽然见东墙下有个东西，非常白，亮得耀眼。
English: In the middle of the night, when it was very dark, Zhang Zongyan got up to see if the servant had given the horse more hay. Suddenly, he saw something under the east wall, very white and bright.

古文：使仆者视之，乃一白犬，大如猫，须睫爪牙皆如玉，毛彩清润，悦怿可爱。
现代文：叫仆人去看，是一只白色的狗，象猫那样大，浑身皮毛和爪子牙齿都象玉，色彩特别光洁，十分可爱。
English: He called his servant to look at it. It was a white dog, as big as a cat, with its fur all over its body, and its claws and teeth resembling beads. The color was particularly bright, and it was very cute.

古文：遵言怜爱之，目为捷飞，言骏奔之甚于飞也。
现代文：遵言十分喜欢它，给它起名叫捷飞，意思是说这狗跑起来象飞一样。
English: Zunyan liked it so much that he named it Jiefei, which means that the dog runs like a fly.

古文：常与之俱，初令仆人张至诚袖之，每饮饲，则未尝不持目前。
现代文：他常常和这白狗在一起，起初让仆人张志诚装在袖子里带着。张遵言每次吃饭，都要把那白狗弄到面前。
English: He was often with the white dog, and at first he asked his servant Zhang Zhicheng to carry it in his sleeve. Zhang Zunyan said that every time he ate, he would bring the white dog in front of him.

古文：时或饮令不快，则必伺其嗜而啖之。苟或不足，宁遵言辍味，不令捷飞之不足也。
现代文：如果狗不爱吃东西，张遵言就想法做它喜欢吃的东西来喂它。如果饭食不够了，宁肯自己不吃，也要省出来给白狗吃。
English: If the dog does not like to eat, Zhang Zunyan thinks of making something it likes to eat to feed it. If the meal is not enough, he would rather not eat it himself, but also save it for the white dog.

古文：一年余，志诚袖行，意以懈怠，由是遵言每行，自袖之。
现代文：一年多白狗一直在仆人袖子里呆着，仆人好象有点不耐烦了，张遵言就把白狗要来放在自己袖子里，而且喂得更加精心。
English: The white dog had been in the servant's sleeve for more than a year. The servant seemed to be a little impatient, so Zhang Zunyan put the white dog in his own sleeve, and fed it more carefully.

古文：饮食转加精爱，夜则同寝，昼则同处，首尾四年。
现代文：夜里和狗一同睡，白天和狗呆在一起，整整四年过去了。
English: Four whole years have passed, sleeping with the dog at night and staying with the dog during the day.

古文：后遵言因行于梁山路，日将夕，天且阴，未至所诣，而风雨骤来。
现代文：有一次张遵言到梁山去，天色将晚而越来越阴，仍然没到目的地，又忽然下起了大雨。
English: Once, Zhang Zunyan went to Liangshan. The sky was getting darker and darker, and he still hadn't reached his destination. Suddenly, it started to rain heavily.

古文：遵言与仆等隐大树下，于时昏晦，默无所睹。
现代文：张遵言只好和仆人躲在大树下避雨。当时天昏地暗，什么也看不见，忽然发现那小白狗不见了。
English: Zhang Zunyan and his servant had to hide under a tree to avoid the rain. At that time, the sky was dark and nothing could be seen. Suddenly, the little white dog was gone.

古文：忽失捷飞所在，遵言惊叹，命志诚等分头搜讨，未获次。忽见一人，衣白衣，长八尺余，形状可爱。
现代文：遵言非常着急，就让仆人四处去找，正在找的时候，忽然看见一个人，有八尺多高，穿着白衣，长得很英俊可爱。
English: Zongyan was very anxious, so he asked his servant to search everywhere. While he was searching, he suddenly saw a man, more than eight feet tall, dressed in white, very handsome and lovely.

古文：遵言豁然如月中立，各得辨色。
现代文：当时就觉得好象在月亮下站着，什么都看得很清楚。
English: At that time, I felt like I was standing under the moon and could see everything clearly.

古文：问白衣人何许来，何姓氏，白衣人曰：我姓苏，第四。
现代文：就问白衣人从那儿来，姓什么。白衣人说：我姓苏，排行第四。
English: He asked the man in white where he was from and what his last name was. The man in white said, "My last name is Su, and I'm fourth."

古文：谓遵言曰：我已知子姓字矣。
现代文：又对遵言说，我已经知道你的姓名了。
English: He also said to Zunyan, "I already know your name."

古文：君知捷飞去处否？则我是也。
现代文：你的白狗不是丢了吗？我就是啊。
English: Didn't you lose your white dog? I did.

古文：君今灾厄合死，我缘爱君恩深，四年已来，能活我至于尽力辍味，曾无毫厘悔恨，我今誓脱子厄。
现代文：你眼前有必死的大难了，可是我对你十分敬爱，四年以来，你能够养着我，甚至都舍出自己的饭食来喂我，而且毫不后悔。
English: You are facing a life-and-death situation, but I have great respect for you. For the past four years, you have been able to take care of me, even giving up your own food to feed me, and you have never regretted it.

古文：然须损十余人命耳。
现代文：所以我今天一定要救你逃脱大难，然而会搭上十多条命哩。
English: That's why I have to save you from a big disaster today, but it will cost more than ten lives.

古文：言仡，遂乘遵言马而行，遵言步以从之。
现代文：说完，就骑上遵言的马，遵言步行跟在后面。
English: Having said this, he mounted Zunyan's horse, and Zunyan followed behind on foot.

古文：可十里许，遥见一塚上有三四人，衣白衣冠，人长丈余，手持弓箭，形状瑰伟。
现代文：走了有十里地，远远看见一个坟上有三四个人。穿白衣戴白帽子，个个都有一丈多高，手里拿着刀剑，非常威严。
English: After walking for about ten miles, I saw three or four people standing on a grave in the distance. They were dressed in white and wore white hats. They were all tall and held swords in their hands. They were very dignified.

古文：见苏四郎，俯偻迎趋而拜，拜讫，莫敢仰视。
现代文：可是他们见到苏四郎后，立刻伏在地上跪拜迎接。拜完也不敢抬头。
English: But when they saw Sushiro, they immediately prostrated themselves on the ground and bowed down to greet him. They didn't dare to look up after the bow.

古文：四郎问何故相见，白衣人曰：奉大王帖，追张遵言秀才。
现代文：四郎问他们有什么事，他们说，奉大王的公文，捉拿秀才张遵言。
English: Shiro asked them what was the matter, and they said, "According to the king's edict, we are to capture Shuchai Zhang."

古文：言讫，偷目盗视遵言。
现代文：说完，还不住地偷看张遵言。
English: After that, he kept peeking at Zhang Zunyan.

古文：遵言恐，欲踣地。
现代文：遵言非常害怕，差点跌倒在地上。
English: Zunyan was so scared that he almost fell to the ground.

古文：四郎曰：不得无礼，我与遵言往还，君等须与我且去。
现代文：苏四郎说，不许无礼！我与遵言同行同止，你们快给我走开！
English: Su Shiro said, "Don't be rude! I'm going along with Zunyan. Get out of my way!"

古文：四人忧恚啼泣。
现代文：那四个白衣人一听就吓得哭了起来。
English: The four white-clad people burst into tears at the sound.

古文：而四郎谓遵言曰：勿忧惧，此辈亦不能戾吾。
现代文：四郎对遵言说，别担心，他们不敢把我怎么样。
English: Shiro said to Zunyan, "Don't worry, they wouldn't dare to do anything to me.

古文：更行十里，又见夜叉辈六七人，皆持兵器，铜头铁额，状貌可憎恶，跳梁企踯，进退狞暴。
现代文：又走了十里，看见有几个象夜叉的家伙，都拿着刀枪，个个铜头铁额，模样十分可憎，他们蹦蹦跳跳，作出十分凶残的样子。
English: He walked another ten miles, and saw several men like the nightingale, all holding swords and guns, each with a copper head and iron forehead, their appearance was very disgusting, they were jumping up and down, making a very ferocious appearance.

古文：遥见四郎，戢毒慄立，惕伏战悚而拜。
现代文：他们看见苏四郎后，立刻规规矩矩的站住，然后战战兢兢地向四郎叩拜。
English: When they saw Su Shiro, they immediately stopped in an orderly manner, and then tremblingly bowed to Shiro.

古文：四郎喝问曰：作何来？
现代文：四郎喝问，你们在这里干什么？
English: Shiro shouted, "What are you doing here?"

古文：夜叉等霁狞毒为戚施之颜，肘行而前曰：奉大王帖，专取张遵言秀才。
现代文：夜叉们立刻收起狰狞的面孔，换上一副老实可怜的表情，用胳膊爬到四郎跟前说，我们奉大王的命令，专门来抓张遵言秀才。
English: The yakuza immediately withdrew their haggard faces, replaced them with an honest and pitiful expression, and crawled up to Shiro with their arms, saying, "By order of the great king, we have come specifically to capture Zhang Zunyan.

古文：偷目盗视之状如初。四郎曰：遵言我之故人，取固不可也。
现代文：然后都贼眉鼠眼的偷看张遵言。四郎说，张遵言是我的朋友，不准你们抓他！
English: Then they all peeped at Zhang Zunyan with furtive glances. Shiro said, Zhang Zunyan is my friend, you are not allowed to catch him!

古文：夜叉等一时叩地流血而言曰：在前白衣者四人，为取遵言不到，大王已各使决铁杖五百，死者活者尚未分。
现代文：夜叉们立刻不住地叩头，把头都叩得流血了，他们说，刚才那四个白衣人，因为没有抓到张遵言，大王已下令每人挨五百铁棍，现在不知他们是死是活。
English: The night watchmen immediately bowed down and beat their heads until they bled. They said, "Just now, those four white-clad men, because they did not catch Zhang Zunyan, the Great King has ordered that each of them be beaten with five hundred iron rods. Now we don't know if they are dead or alive."

古文：四郎今不与去，某等尽死。
现代文：现在你不让我们把张遵言带走，我们是非死不可了。
English: Now that you won't let us take Zhang Zunyan away, we have no choice but to die.

古文：伏乞哀其性命，暂遣遵言往。
现代文：请立即救我们一条命，暂时让我们把张遵言带走吧。
English: Please save one of our lives immediately. Let's take Zhang Zunyan away for the time being.

古文：四郎大怒，叱夜叉，夜叉等辟易，崩倒者数十步外，流血跳迸，涕泪又言。
现代文：四郎大怒，把夜叉们痛骂了一顿，夜叉吓得屁滚尿流，有的吓得跪到几十步外，但仍然淌着血流着泪不断的请求。
English: Shiro flew into a rage and berated the nightcrawlers. The nightcrawlers were scared out of their wits. Some were so scared that they fell to their knees dozens of paces away, but they still shed blood and tears in their unceasing pleas.

古文：四郎曰：小鬼等敢尔，不然，且急死。
现代文：四郎说，小鬼好大胆，再不滚开，我叫你们立刻都死！
English: Shiro said, "Kid, you're so bold. If you don't get out of here, I'll have you all killed immediately!"

古文：夜叉等啼泣喑呜而去。
现代文：夜叉们又哭又号地跪了。
English: The night watchmen fell to their knees, weeping and wailing.

古文：四郎又谓遵言曰：此数辈甚难与语，今既去，则奉为之事成矣。
现代文：四郎又对遵言说，这些家伙们很难对付，不容易说通，现在他们都被我赶走，事情就算成了。
English: Shiro also said to Zunyong, "These guys are hard to deal with, and it's not easy to reason with them. Now that they've all been driven away by me, the matter is over."

古文：行七八里，见兵仗等五十余人，形神则常人耳，又列拜于四郎前。四郎曰：何故来？
现代文：又走了七八里，见手执刀枪的四五十人，和平常人长得一样。他们列队拜在四郎面前，四郎问，你们来做什么？
English: He walked another seven or eight miles and saw forty or fifty people with swords and guns in their hands, who looked like ordinary people. They lined up and bowed before Shiro. Shiro asked, "What did you come for?"

古文：对答如夜叉等。
现代文：他们回答得和夜叉一样。
English: They answered the same way as the nightingale.

古文：又言曰：前者夜叉牛叔良等七人，为追张遵言不到，尽以付法。
现代文：又说，前面的夜叉牛叔良等七个人，因为没有抓到张遵言，都被法办了。
English: He also said that seven people in front of Yasha Niu Shuliang, because they did not catch Zhang Zunyan, were all prosecuted.

古文：某等惶惧，不知四郎有何术，救得我等全生。
现代文：我们非常害怕，不知四郎你有什么法术，能救我们活命。
English: We are very scared, I don't know what magic you have, Shiro, that can save our lives.

古文：四郎曰：第随我来，或希冀耳。
现代文：四郎说，你们排好队随我来，也许有办法，怎样？
English: Shiro said, "Get in line and follow me. Maybe there's a way. What do you think?"

古文：凡五十人，言可者半。
现代文：那五十个人，有一半跟着走。
English: Half of the fifty men went with him.

古文：须臾，至大乌头门。又行数里，见城堞甚严。有一人具军容，走马而前。传王言曰：四郎远到，某为所主有限，法不得迎拜于路。
现代文：过了一个大黑城门，又走了几里，见城楼上戒备森严，有一个骑马的军官来到四郎面前，传达大王的话说，我应该出城去迎接四郎，但因为我的权力有限，按规定不能到路上迎拜。
English: After passing through a large black gate and walking a few more miles, he saw that the towers of the city were heavily guarded. An officer on horseback came to Shiro and conveyed the words of the great king, saying that I should go out of the city to meet Shiro, but because of my limited power, according to regulations, I could not go to the road to greet him.

古文：请且于南馆小休，即当邀迓。
现代文：先请四郎在南馆休息片刻，我会立刻去迎接您。
English: First, please ask Shiro to take a short break in the South Wing, and I will be there to greet you immediately.

古文：入馆未安，信使相继而召，兼屈张秀才。
现代文：四郎刚在南馆坐下，大王派的信使就跟着来请，并且请张遵言也一同去。
English: As soon as Shiro sat down in the south hall, the courier from the Daio faction followed and invited him, and also asked Zhang Zunyan to go with him.

古文：俄而从行，宫室栏署，皆真王者也。
现代文：他们就一同走。见宫殿楼阁，和人间真正的王一样华贵。
English: And they went on their way, and saw the palace, which was as splendid as if it had belonged to a real king.

古文：入门，见王披兖垂旒，迎四郎而拜，四郎酬拜，礼甚轻易，言词唯唯而已。
现代文：进了宫门，见大王披着长袍、帽子上垂着流苏，迎接四郎，恭敬行礼。四郎只很随便地还了礼，说话也不跟尊敬。
English: When he entered the palace gate, he saw the great king wearing a robe and a cap with tassels hanging from it, greeting Shiro and bowing respectfully. Shiro only bowed casually and did not speak with respect.

古文：大王尽礼，前揖四郎升阶，四郎亦微揖而上。回谓遵言曰：地主之分，不可不迩。
现代文：大王却礼仪很重，揖拜迎下阶来，四郎随便拜了拜就随着走进前殿，还回头小声对遵言说，他是主人，礼仪不能不重。
English: The great king, however, had a very heavy etiquette. He bowed to welcome the lower ranks. Shiro bowed casually as he walked into the vestibule. He also turned back and whispered to Zunyan, "He is the master, the etiquette must be heavy."

古文：王曰：前殿浅陋，非四郎所宴处。
现代文：这时大王说，前殿太简陋，怎能在这里宴请您。
English: At this time, the great king said, the front hall is too simple, how can you have a banquet here.

古文：又揖四郎。凡过殿者三，每殿中皆有陈设盘榻食具供帐之备。
现代文：又请四郎走过了三个大殿，每个殿里都陈设华丽，摆着酒食设着床榻。
English: He also invited Shiro to walk through three large halls, each of which was decorated with ornate furnishings, wine, food, and beds.

古文：至四重殿中方坐，所食之物及器皿，非人间所有。
现代文：到了第四个大殿里，才请四郎和张遵言入席。所吃的东西，用的器具，都和人间不同。
English: It was only in the fourth hall that Shiro and Zhang Zunyan were invited to sit down. What they ate and the utensils they used were all different from those on earth.

古文：食讫，王揖四郎上夜明搂。
现代文：吃完了饭，又请四郎登上夜明楼。
English: After finishing the meal, he invited Shiro to go up to the Yamei Building.

古文：楼上四角柱，尽饰明珠，其光为昼。
现代文：楼上四角柱子上，都装饰着明珠，照得周围如同白天。
English: Upstairs, the four-cornered pillars are adorned with pearls, illuminating the surroundings like daylight.

古文：命酒具乐，饮数巡，王谓四郎曰：有佐酒者，欲命之。四郎曰：有何不可。
现代文：大王安排了酒宴音乐，请四郎宴饮，酒过几巡后，大王对四郎说，我想找人歌舞助兴，不知可不可以？四郎说，为什么不可以呢？
English: The great king arranged the music for the banquet and invited Shiro to join the party. After a few rounds of drinking, the great king said to Shiro, "I'd like to find someone to help with the singing and dancing, do you mind?" Shiro said, "Why not?"

古文：女乐七八人，饮酒者十余人，皆神仙间容貌粒饰耳。
现代文：这时来了七八个舞女，还有十几个善喝酒的人，都象是神仙的容貌和装饰。
English: At this time, seven or eight dancers came, as well as a dozen good drinkers, all with the appearance and decoration of immortals.

古文：王与四郎各衣便服，谈笑亦邻于人间少年。
现代文：这时大王和四郎都换上了便服，在一起说话谈笑，好象是在人间的两个少年朋友。
English: At this time, Daowang and Shiro changed into casual clothes and talked and laughed together, as if they were two young friends in the world.

古文：有顷，四郎戏一美人，美人正色不接。
现代文：过了一会儿，四郎和一个美女调笑，那美女态度很严肃，不理四郎。
English: After a while, Shiro makes fun of a beautiful woman. The beautiful woman is serious and ignores Shiro.

古文：四郎又戏之，美人怒曰：我是刘根妻，不为奉上元夫人处分，焉涉于此。
现代文：四郎又进一步戏她，那美人发怒说，我是刘根的妻子，不是受上元夫人的安排，怎能到这里？
English: Shiro further teased her, and the beautiful woman angrily said, "I am Liu Gen's wife, not arranged by Lady Shangyuan. How can I come here?

古文：君子何容易乎？
现代文：请你放尊重些。
English: Please show some respect.

古文：中间许长史，于云林王夫人会上轻言，某已赠语杜兰香姊妹。
现代文：宴会上曾经有位许长史，在云林王夫人都不敢开的宴会上，口出轻薄之言。我已经对杜兰香讲了这事。
English: At a banquet, there was once a very old woman who, at a banquet that even Lady Yunlin Wang did not dare to host, uttered frivolous words. I have already told this to Dulanxiang.

古文：至多微言，犹不敢掉谑，君何容易欤？
现代文：她也不过上的明珠扑扑地落了下来，四郎就象根本没看见。过了一阵，张遵言好象大梦初醒。
English: She fell head over heels, and Shiro didn't seem to see her at all. After a while, Zhang Zunyan seemed to wake up from a bad dream.

古文：遵言良久懵而复醒，元在树下，与四郎及鞍马同处。四郎曰：君已过厄矣，与君便别。
现代文：一看，自己还在那棵避雨是口出薄言，而不敢过于无礼，四郎怎么可以这样轻狂无礼呢？四郎大怒，用酒杯使劲敲了一下盘子，震得柱子的树下。
English: At first glance, he is still in the shelter of the rain, he is speaking softly, but does not dare to be too rude, how can Shiro be so frivolous and rude? Shiro was furious, he knocked the plate hard with a wine glass, and shook the pillar of the tree.

古文：遵言曰：某受生成之恩已极矣。
现代文：四郎和那匹马也都在跟前。四郎说：你已经逃出了大难，咱俩该分别了。
English: Shiro and the horse were also in front of him. Shiro said, "You have escaped the great disaster. It's time for us to separate."

古文：都不知四郎之由，以归感戴之所。又某之一生，更有何所赖也？
现代文：遵言说：我接受你这样大的恩惠，今后想对你有一点报答，也不知道你在那里，我这一生又有谁可以依靠呢？
English: He said, "I accept such a great favor from you, and I want to repay you a little in the future. I don't even know where you are. Who can I rely on in my life?"

古文：四郎曰：吾不能言。
现代文：四郎说，我不能对你说出我的所在。
English: Shiro said, I can't tell you where I am.

古文：汝但于商州龙兴寺东廊缝衲老僧处问之，可知也。
现代文：你可以到商州龙兴寺，找一个在东廊缝补袈纱的和尚，问他就行。
English: You can go to the Longxing Temple in Shangzhou and find a monk who sews and darns in the east corridor. Just ask him.

古文：言毕，腾空而去。
现代文：说完，腾空飞去了。
English: With that, he took off.

古文：天已向曙，遵言遂整辔适商州，果有龙兴寺。
现代文：这时天色微明，遵言就准备好了马匹，准备上路。到了商州，一打听，果然真有个龙兴寺。
English: At this time, the sky was a little light, and the horses were prepared according to the instructions, ready to go on the road. When I arrived in Shangzhou, I asked around and found out that there really was a Longxing Temple.

古文：见缝衲老僧，遂礼拜。
现代文：找到那位补袈纱的和尚，赶快上前拜见，问四郎的去处和所在。
English: Find the mendicant monk, quickly go up to him and ask him where Shiro is.

古文：初甚拒遵言，遵言求之不已。老僧夜深乃言曰：君子苦求，吾焉可不应？
现代文：起初和尚坚决不对遵言说，后来遵言苦苦哀求，老和尚才在夜深人静时对遵言说，既然你这样苦苦地求我，我就告诉你吧。
English: At first, the monk was adamant that he would not tell Zunyan. Later, he begged him to tell Zunyan. It was only in the dead of night that the old monk said to Zunyan, "Since you are begging me so hard, I will tell you."

古文：苏四郎者，乃是太白星精也；大王者，仙府之谪官也，今居于此。
现代文：四郎，就是太白星精。大王，是仙界贬下来的官，现在管我们这一方。
English: Shiro, that is, the Taibai Star Spirit. Dao, the official who was degraded in the spirit world, is now in charge of our side.

古文：遵言以他事问老僧，老僧竟不对，曰：吾今已离此矣。
现代文：遵言再问别的事，老和尚什么也不说了，说，我现在已经不在这里了。
English: The old monk said nothing, saying, "I'm not here anymore."

古文：即命遵言归，明辰寻之，已不知其处所矣。
现代文：老和尚让遵言快离去。第二天遵言再去时，老和尚已不知去向。
English: The old monk told Zunyan to leave immediately. When Zunyan left again the next day, the old monk did not know where he was going.

