古文：沈君理，字仲伦，吴兴人也。
现代文：沈君理字仲伦，吴兴人。
English: Shen Junli Zi Zhonglun, Wu Xingren.

古文：祖僧畟，梁左民尚书。
现代文：祖父沈僧婴，任梁朝左民尚书。
English: His grandfather, Shen Zangzang, was appointed as Liang Chao's disciple.

古文：父巡，素与高祖相善，梁太清中为东阳太守。
现代文：父亲沈巡，一直和高祖相友好，梁朝太清年中任束阳太守。
English: His father, Shen Jun, had always been friendly with Gao Zu. In the mid-Qing Dynasty, Liang served as the governor of Sokyang.

古文：侯景平后，元帝征为少府卿。
现代文：侯景被平定后，元帝征召他为少府卿。
English: After Houjing was subdued, the Yuan Emperor conscripted him as Shofuqing.

古文：荆州陷，萧詧署金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：荆州失陷，在萧察的官署任金紫光禄大夫。
English: After the fall of Jingzhou, Jin Ziguanglu became a doctor at the government office in Shocha.

古文：君理美风仪，博涉经史，有识鉴。
现代文：沈君理有优美的风度仪表，广泛地涉猎经典史籍，有卓越的见识。
English: Shen Junli has a graceful demeanor, extensively dabbles in classic historical books, and has excellent insight.

古文：起家湘东王法曹参军。
现代文：以出任湘东王法曹参军起家。
English: He started his career by joining the army as a legal assistant to the King of Shandong.

古文：高祖镇南徐州，巡遣君理自东阳谒于高祖，高祖器之，命尚会稽长公主，辟为府西曹掾，稍迁中卫豫章王从事中郎，寻加明威将军，兼尚书吏部侍郎。
现代文：产担镇守南徐州时，逝坚派选星理自塞匮前去晋见直担，直担看重他，命令娶会稽长公主为妻，征召为府西曹掾。稍加提升任中卫豫章王从事中郎，接着加官明威将军，兼尚书吏部侍郎。
English: When Zhotang was guarding the southern Xuzhou, the deceased Jian sent Xing Li to go to meet Zhotang, and Zhotang valued him, ordered him to marry the chief auditor of the association, and conscripted him as the prefect of the west Caoqi. He was promoted to the middle guard Yu Zhang Wang to be the middle guard, and then he was promoted to the general Ming Wei, and he was also the attendant of the bookkeeping department.

古文：迁给事黄门侍郎，监吴郡。
现代文：升任给事黄门侍郎，监理吴郡政事。
English: He was promoted to the post of Huangmen waiter, supervisor of Wu County government affairs.

古文：高祖受禅，拜驸马都尉，封永安亭侯。
现代文：高祖接受挥让后，任命为驸马都尉，封永安亭侯。
English: After Gao Zu accepted the concession, he was appointed as the captain of the imperial horse, and was given the title of Yongan Tingzhou.

古文：出为吴郡太守。
现代文：调出朝廷任呈郡太守。
English: He was transferred from the imperial court to the position of county governor.

古文：是时兵革未宁，百姓荒弊，军国之用，咸资东境，君理招集士卒，修治器械，民下悦附，深以干理见称。
现代文：这时战争没有停止，百姓生活在饥荒凋敝中，军队和国家所用的，都由国家束边的地域供给，沈君理召集士兵，修造整理器械，属下民众乐意归附，以十分能干会办事著称。
English: At this time, the war did not stop, the people lived in famine, and the army and the country were supplied by the state-restricted areas. Shen Junli gathered soldiers, built sorting equipment, and the subordinate people were willing to join. He was known for being very capable.

古文：世祖嗣位，征为侍中，迁守左民尚书，未拜，为明威将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：世担继位，征召为侍中，升任代理左民尚书，没有到任，任明威将军、丹阳尹。
English: He was in charge of the succession, was called up as a chamberlain, and was promoted to the position of acting Left Min Shangshu, but did not take up the post, and was appointed as General Mingwei and Danyang Yin.

古文：天嘉三年，重授左民尚书，领步兵校尉，寻改前军将军。
现代文：天嘉三年，重新任命为左民尚书，领步兵校尉，接着改任前军将军。
English: Three years after Tianjia, he was reappointed as Zuomin Shangshu, leading infantry lieutenant, and then he was reappointed as former army general.

古文：四年，侯安都徙镇江州，以本官监南徐州。
现代文：天嘉四年，侯安都迁移镇守江州，这星理以本身官职监理宜途州政事。
English: In the fourth year of Tianjia, Hou Andu moved the town guard to Jiangzhou, and this star principle used his official position to supervise the political affairs of Yitu Prefecture.

古文：六年，出为仁威将军、东阳太守。
现代文：天嘉六年，调出朝廷任仁威将军、束阳太守。
English: In the sixth year of Tian Jia, the imperial court appointed Ren Wei as general and Sokyang as governor.

古文：天康元年，以父忧去职。
现代文：天康元年。因为父亲逝世去职。
English: He resigned from his position due to the death of his father.

古文：君理因自请往荆州迎丧柩，朝议以在位重臣，难令出境，乃遣令长兄君严往焉。
现代文：这星理因此自己请求前往荆州迎接丧柩，朝廷议论认为在位的重臣，不便让他出境，于是派遣长兄沈君严前往了。
English: This Xing Li therefore requested to go to Jingzhou to meet the funeral. The imperial court argued that it was inconvenient for the reigning chief minister to let him leave the country, so he sent his eldest brother Shen Junyan to go.

古文：及还，将葬，诏赠巡侍中、领军将军，谥曰敬子。
现代文：等到回来，将要安葬，诏令赠给沈巡侍中、领军将军的官衔，谧号叫做敬子。
English: When he comes back, he will be buried, and the imperial edict will give Shen the official title of patrolman and leading general, and his nickname will be Keishi.

古文：其年起君理为信威将军、左卫将军。
现代文：这年起用沈君理为信威将军、左卫将军。
English: Since this year, Shen Junli has been used as Gen. Xinwei and Gen. Zuwei.

古文：又起为持节、都督东衡、衡二州诸军事、仁威将军、东衡州刺史，领始兴内史。
现代文：又起用为持节、都督东衡衡二州诸军事、仁威将军、束衡州刺史，领始兴内史。
English: He was also appointed as Jisetsu, the military governor of Dongheng, the military governor of Nishu, the general of Renwei, the provincial governor of Sokhang, and the leader of Shihsihing's internal history.

古文：又起为明威将军、中书令。
现代文：又起用为明威将军、中书令。
English: He was also appointed as the Mingwei General and the Chushirei.

古文：前后夺情者三，并不就。
现代文：前后夺情三次，都不就任。
English: Three times, he did not take office.

古文：太建元年，服阕，除太子詹事，行东宫事，迁吏部尚书。
现代文：太建元年，服丧期满，任命为太子詹事，管理束宫事务，升任吏部尚书。
English: In the first year of the Tai Jian era, after the mourning period, he was appointed as Prince Zhan's secretary, managed the affairs of the Sokong Palace, and was promoted to the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：二年，高宗以君理女为皇太子妃，赐爵望蔡县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：太建二年，高宗以沈君理的女儿做皇太子的妃子，赐给沈君理望蔡县侯的爵位，食邑五百产。
English: In the second year of the Taijian era, Gaozong made Shen Junli's daughter the crown prince's concubine, and gave Shen Junli the title of Marquis of Cai County, with a stipend of 500 yuan.

古文：四年，加侍中。
现代文：太建四年，加官侍中。
English: Four years later, he was promoted to the position of Samurai Junior Middle Officer.

古文：五年，迁尚书右仆射，领吏部，侍中如故。
现代文：太建五年，升任尚书右仆射，领吏部，侍中职务依旧担任。
English: After five years of Tai Jian, he was promoted to the rank of Shang Shu's right-hand man, and still held the posts of leader and chamberlain.

古文：其年有疾，舆驾亲临视，九月卒，时年四十九。
现代文：这年有病，皇上亲临探枧，九月去世，当时年纪四十九岁。
English: This year he was ill, and the Emperor personally visited him. He died in September, at the age of forty-nine.

古文：诏赠侍中、太子少傅。
现代文：诏令赠给侍中、太子少傅的官衔。
English: The imperial edict bestowed the official title of Samurai Junior Middle Officer and Crown Prince Junior Master on him.

古文：丧事所须，随由资给。
现代文：丧事所需要的，随所用供给。
English: Funeral needs, supply on demand.

古文：重赠翊左将军、开府仪同三司，侍中如故。
现代文：重新赠给翊左将军、开府仪同三司的官衔，侍中官衔依旧保有。
English: He was re-awarded the official titles of General Gongza, Kaifu Yi, and Sanji, but retained the official title of Chamberlain.

古文：谥曰贞宪。
现代文：谧号叫做贞宪。
English: His posthumous name is Zheng Xian.

古文：君理子遵俭早卒，以弟君高子遵礼为嗣。
现代文：沈君理的儿子沈遵俭早死，以弟弟沈君高的儿子沈遵礼为继承人。
English: Shen Junri, the son of Shen Junli, died young and was succeeded by his younger brother Shen Junli, the son of Shen Jungao.

古文：君理第五叔迈，亦方正有干局，仕梁为尚书金部郎。
现代文：沈君理第五个叔叔沈迈，也端平正直有办事的才能气度，在梁朝做官任尚书金部郎。
English: Shen Junli's fifth uncle, Shen Mai, was also honest and had the ability to do things. In the Liang Dynasty, he was an official named Shang Shuxin.

古文：永定中，累迁中书侍郎。
现代文：永定年中，多次提升任中书侍郎。
English: In the middle of the Yongding era, he was promoted several times to the post of junior secretary.

古文：天嘉中，历太仆、廷尉，出为镇东始兴王长史、会稽郡丞，行东扬州事。
现代文：天嘉年中，历任太仆、廷尉，调出朝廷任镇东始兴王长史、会稽郡丞，管理束扬州政事。
English: In the year of Tianjia, the successive eunuchs and courtiers were transferred out of the imperial court to serve as Zhendong Shi Xing Wang Changshi, the county magistrate, and to manage the political affairs of Yangzhou.

古文：光大元年，除尚书吏部郎。
现代文：光大元年，任尚书吏部郎。
English: In the first year of Kōdai, he was appointed as a member of the Shōshiriburō.

古文：太建元年，迁为通直散骑常侍，侍东宫。
现代文：左建元年，升任通直散骑常侍，侍奉束宫。
English: In the first year of Zuo Jian's reign, he was promoted to the position of Tsuchizhong Sanzhijie Zhengzhu, and served the Sokong Palace.

古文：二年卒，时年五十二，赠散骑常侍。
现代文：太建二年去世，当时年纪五十二岁。赠给散骑常侍的官衔。
English: Tai Jian died two years later, when he was fifty-two years old. He was given the official title of straggler.

古文：君理第六弟君高，字季高，少知名，性刚直，有吏能。
现代文：选君理第六个弟弟沈君高，字季高，少年时就为世人所知，性情刚直，有吏治的能力。
English: The sixth brother of Zeng Junli, Shen Jungao, also known as Ji Gao, was known to the world when he was a young boy. He had an upright temperament and the ability to govern officials.

古文：以家门外戚，早居清显，历太子舍人、洗马、中舍人、高宗司空府从事中郎、廷尉卿。
现代文：因为家族门第属于外戚，早居清高显贵的地位，历任太子舍人、洗马、中舍人、高宗司空府从事中郎、廷尉卿。
English: Because the family line belonged to a maternal relative, who held a high and illustrious position early on, successive princes, such as Shorenin, Saima, Nakasherin, and Gaosongji Kufu, were engaged as middlemen and court lieutenants.

古文：太建元年，东境大水，百姓饥弊，乃以君高为贞威将军、吴令。
现代文：左建元年，束边国境内发生大水灾，百姓生活饥馑凋敝，于是任用沈君高为贞威将军、吴县令。
English: In the first year of Zuo Jian, a great flood occurred in the territory of the State of Zhou, and the people were starving. Therefore, Shen Jungao was appointed as the general of Zhenwei and the governor of Wu County.

古文：寻除太子中庶子、尚书吏部郎、卫尉卿。
现代文：接着任命为太子中庶子、尚书吏部郎、卫尉卿。
English: Next, he was appointed as the Prince's middle child, Shosho-Riburiburo, and the Captain of the Imperial Guards.

古文：出为宣远将军、平南长沙王长史、南海太守，行广州事。
现代文：调出朝廷任宣远将军、平南长沙王长史、亩涂太守，管理卢政事。
English: The imperial court appointed General Xuanyuan, King Changshi of Changsha in Pingnan, and Empress Dowager Mu to manage Lu's political affairs.

古文：以女为王妃，固辞不行，复为卫尉卿。
现代文：以沈贾直的女儿为王妃，坚持辞谢不执行，又任卫尉卿。
English: With the daughter of Shen Jia Zhi as the princess, he insisted on not carrying out the resignation, and he was also appointed as the captain of the guards.

古文：八年，诏授持节、都督广等十八州诸军事、宁远将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
现代文：太建八年，诏令任为持节、都督广等十八州诸军事、宁远将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
English: In the eighth year of the Tai Jian era, the imperial edict was issued appointing Jixi as the military commander of the 18 states, Ningyuan as the general, Ping Yue as the middle commander, and Guangzhou as the governor of Guangzhou.

古文：岭南俚、獠世相攻伐，君高本文吏，无武干，推心抚御，甚得民和。
现代文：岭南的俚、签两个民族世代相互攻伐，沈君高本来是文官，没有军事才干，至诚相待安抚治理，很能与民和睦相处。
English: In Lingnan, the two ethnic groups fought against each other for generations. Shen Jungao was originally a civil servant with no military talent. He treated others with sincerity, pacified and governed, and was able to get along well with the people.

古文：十年，卒于官，时年四十七。
现代文：左建十年，去世于在任期间，当时年纪四十七岁。
English: Zuo Jian for ten years, died during his tenure, at the age of forty-seven.

古文：赠散骑常侍，谥曰祁子。
现代文：赠给散骑常侍的官衔，谧号叫做主旺。
English: He was given the official title of "random riding attendant," and his nickname was "Lord Wang."

古文：王瑒，字子玙，司空冲之第十二子也。
现代文：王瑒，字子玙，司空冲的第十二个儿子。
English: Wang Yao, also known as Zi Yao, was the twelfth son of Siu Chong.

古文：沈静有器局，美风仪，举止酝藉。
现代文：性格沉稳安静有才识和度量，风度仪表优美，举止宽容含蓄。
English: His personality is calm and quiet, he has talent and measure, his demeanor is elegant, and his manners are tolerant and reserved.

古文：梁大同中，起家秘书郎，迁太子洗马。
现代文：梁朝大同年问，以出任秘书郎起家，升任太子洗马。
English: In the same year, Liang Chaoda, who started his career as a secretary, was promoted to the position of Prince Saima.

古文：元帝承制，征为中书侍郎，直殿省，仍掌相府管记。
现代文：元帝秉承皇帝旨意，征召他为中书侍郎，在宫殿中的官署办公，仍然负责相府中管理文牍的工作。
English: Emperor Yuan, adhering to the emperor's will, conscripted him as a Chinese book waiter, working in the government office in the palace, still responsible for the work of managing documents in the government office.

古文：出为东宫内史，迁太子中庶子。
现代文：调出任束宫内史，升任太子中庶子。
English: He was transferred to the position of a member of the Imperial Household, and was promoted to the position of an illegitimate child of the crown prince.

古文：丁所生母忧，归于丹阳。
现代文：遭生母之丧，回到丹阳。
English: After the death of his birth mother, he returned to Danyang.

古文：江陵陷，梁敬帝承制，除仁威将军、尚书吏部郎中。
现代文：江陵失陷，梁敬帝秉承皇帝旨意，任命他为仁威将军、尚书吏部郎中。
English: After the fall of Gangneung, Emperor Liang Jian, adhering to the emperor's will, appointed him as the general of Renwei and the vice-minister of the Ministry of Education.

古文：贞阳侯僭位，以敬帝为太子，授瑒散骑常侍，侍东宫。
现代文：贞阳侯僭越登上帝位后，让敬帝做太子，任命王场为散骑常侍，侍奉束宫。
English: After Zhengyang Hou Xuan Yue ascended to the throne, he made Emperor Qian the crown prince and appointed Wang Bao as a horseback riding attendant, serving the Shokun Palace.

古文：寻迁长史兼侍中。
现代文：接着升任长兼侍中。
English: He was then promoted to the post of chancellor and chamberlain.

古文：高祖入辅，以为司徒左长史。
现代文：高祖进入朝廷辅佐，以王场为司徒左长史。
English: Gaozu entered the imperial court as an assistant, with the king's court as the center of the story.

古文：永定元年，迁守五兵尚书。
现代文：永定元年，升任代理五兵尚书。
English: In the first year of Yongding, he was promoted to the deputy of the five soldiers.

古文：世祖嗣位，授散骑常侍，领太子庶子，侍东宫。
现代文：世祖继位，任命为散骑常侍，领太子庶子，侍奉束宫。
English: The ancestor succeeded to the throne, and was appointed as a horseback riding attendant, led the prince's illegitimate son, and served the crown prince.

古文：迁领左骁骑将军、太子中庶子，常侍、侍中如故。
现代文：升任领左骁骑将军、太子中庶子，常侍、侍中职务依旧担任。
English: He was promoted to the rank of General of the Left-Handed Cavalry, the Prince's middle son, the Prince's regular attendant, and still held the position of chamberlain.

古文：瑒为侍中六载，父冲尝为瑒辞领中庶子，世祖顾谓冲曰： 所以久留瑒于承华，政欲使太子微有瑒风法耳。 
现代文：王场任侍中六年，他的父亲王冲曾为王场辞领中庶子职务，世祖顾视着王冲告诉他说： 所以长久地留用王场于太子宫中，正是要使太子稍微有王场的风度仪法哩。 
English: His father, Wang Chong, who had served the royal court as an attendant for six years, had resigned his position as the king's son-in-law. The ancestor looked at Wang Chong and told him: Therefore, keeping the royal court in the prince's womb for a long time is precisely to make the prince have a little royal demeanor and etiquette.

古文：废帝嗣位，以侍中领左骁骑将军。
现代文：废帝继承帝位，任用王场为侍中领左骁骑将军。
English: The deposed emperor succeeded to the imperial throne, and appointed Wang Bao as an attendant leader and left-hand cavalry general.

古文：光大元年，以父忧去职。
现代文：光大元年，因遭父亲之丧去职。
English: In the first year of Guangda, he lost his position due to the death of his father.

古文：高宗即位，太建元年，复除侍中，领左骁骑将军。
现代文：高宗登位，太建元年，又任命为侍中，领左骁骑将军。
English: Gao Zong ascended to the throne, and in the first year of the Tai Jian era, he was also appointed as a chamberlain, leading the left chevron to ride the general.

古文：迁度支尚书，领羽林监。
现代文：升任度支尚书，领羽林监。
English: He was promoted to the post of forest supervisor.

古文：出为信威将军、云麾始兴王长史，行州府事。
现代文：调出朝廷任信威将军、云麾始兴王长史，管理州府政事。
English: General Xinwei, who was appointed by the imperial court, and Wang Changshi, who was appointed by the imperial court, were transferred to manage the state government affairs.

古文：未行，迁中书令，寻加散骑常侍，除吏部尚书，常侍如故。
现代文：尚未前往，升任中书令，接着加官散骑常侍，任命为吏部尚书，常侍职务依旧担任。
English: He had not yet gone there, but he was promoted to the position of the middle secretary, and then he was promoted to the officer riding horseback, appointed as the secretary of the personnel department, and still held the position of the regular attendant.

古文：瑒性宽和，及居选职，务在清静，谨守文案，无所抑扬。
现代文：王场性情宽厚和蔼，到身居选拔人才的职位时，坚持心地洁静不受外界干扰，严谨地根据公文案卷，不曾有所抑扬。
English: Wangfang has a generous and amiable disposition. When he was in the position of selecting talents, he insisted on keeping his mind clean and quiet without interference from the outside world, strictly according to the official document file, and did not restrain himself.

古文：寻授尚书右仆射，未拜，加侍中，迁左仆射，参掌选事，侍中如故。
现代文：接着任命为尚书右仆射，未就任，加官侍中，升任左仆射，参与掌管选拔人才的事务，侍中职务依旧担任。
English: He was then appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man, but did not take up the post. He was promoted to attendant, and was promoted to attendant's left-hand man. He participated in the affairs of controlling the selection of talents, and still held the position of attendant.

古文：瑒兄弟三十馀人，居家笃睦，每岁时馈遗，遍及近亲，敦诱诸弟，并禀其规训。
现代文：王场兄弟三十余人，在家中相处非常和睦，每年时节馈送物品，遍及近亲，敦敦诱导诸位弟弟，都禀受他的正言教诲。
English: There are more than thirty brothers of the royal court, who get along very harmoniously at home. Every year, they send gifts to their close relatives, and they constantly induce their younger brothers to receive his righteous teachings.

古文：太建八年卒，时年五十四。
现代文：太建八年去世，当时年纪五十四岁。
English: Tai Jian died eight years ago, at the age of 54.

古文：赠侍中、特进、护军将军。
现代文：赠给侍中、特进、护军将军的官衔。
English: He was given the official titles of Samurai, Special Envoy, and Escort General.

古文：丧事随所资给。
现代文：丧事随所用供给。
English: Funeral supplies as needed.

古文：谥曰光子。
现代文：谧号叫做鱼迂。
English: 号 is called a fish detour.

古文：瑒第十三弟瑜，字子珪，亦知名，美容仪，早历清显，年三十，官至侍中。
现代文：王瑒第十三个弟弟王瑜，字子珪，也为世人所知，有美丽的容貌仪表，早就历任清贵显要的职务，三十岁时，官做到侍中。
English: Wang Yao's thirteenth brother, Wang Yu, also known to the world as Zi Yao, had a beautiful appearance and manners. He had long held noble and important positions. At the age of thirty, he became an attendant.

古文：永定元年，使于齐，以陈郡袁宪为副，齐以王琳之故，执而囚之。
现代文：永定元年，出使于齐朝，以陈郡人袁宪为副使，齐朝因为王琳的原因，逮捕并囚禁他们。
English: In the first year of Yongding, he was sent to the Qi Dynasty, with Yuan Xian from Chen County as the deputy envoy. The Qi Dynasty arrested and imprisoned them because of Wang Lin.

古文：齐文宣帝每行，载死囚以从，齐人呼曰 供御囚 ，每有他怒，则召杀之，以快其意。
现代文：齐文宣帝每次出行，带着死刑犯随行，齐人叫做 供御囚 ，齐文宣帝每逢因其他事情发怒，就召来杀掉，以畅快他的心情。
English: Whenever Emperor Qimen was on a journey, he would take a death row prisoner with him. This person was called "the prisoner," and whenever Emperor Qimen was angry about something else, he would call on the prisoner to kill him in order to cheer him up.

古文：瑜及宪并危殆者数矣，齐仆射杨遵彦悯其无辜，每救护之。
现代文：王瑜和袁宪一起遭遇危险的情况有数次，查塑仆射荡遵彦怜悯他们无辜，总是救护他们。
English: Wang Yu and Yuan Xian have encountered dangerous situations together several times. Zhaopu minions sympathize with their innocence and always rescue them.

古文：天嘉二年还朝，诏复侍中，顷之卒，时年四十。
现代文：丢塞二年回到朝廷，诏令恢复侍中职务，不久去世，当时年纪四十岁。
English: Dusei returned to the imperial court two years later and was restored to the position of chamberlain by imperial decree. He died soon after, at the age of forty.

古文：赠本官，谥曰贞子。
现代文：赠给本身官衔，谧号叫做贞子。
English: She gave herself an official title, and her nickname was Sadako.

古文：陆缮，字士繻，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：陆缮字士繻，吴郡吴人人。
English: Lu Zuoxing, Wu County, Wu Renren.

古文：祖惠晓，齐太常卿。
现代文：祖父陆惠晓，任齐朝太常卿。
English: His grandfather, Lu Huixiao, was appointed First Secretary of the Qi Dynasty.

古文：父任，梁御史中丞。
现代文：父亲陆丝，在梁朝任御史中丞。
English: His father, Lu Si, held the post of Vice-Minister of History in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：缮幼有志尚，以雅正知名。
现代文：陆缮幼年有远大志向，以高尚正直著称。
English: As a child, Lu Zuo had lofty ambitions and was known for his high integrity.

古文：起家梁宣惠武陵王法曹参军。
现代文：以出任面目宣惠茎堕王法曹参军起家。
English: He started his career by joining the army under the guise of a proclamation benefiting the fallen king Fa Cao.

古文：承圣中，授中书侍郎，掌东宫管记。
现代文：丞圣年间，任命为中书侍郎，负责束宫文牍的管理工作。
English: During the Joseon Dynasty, he was appointed as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters and was responsible for the management of the Sokgu Palace.

古文：江陵陷，缮微服遁还京师。
现代文：江医失陷，陆钟隐蔽身份穿着平民服装逃回京城。
English: After the fall of Jiangji, Lu Zhong fled back to Beijing in civilian clothes, concealing his identity.

古文：绍泰元年，除司徒右长史，御史中丞，以父任所终，固辞不就。
现代文：绍泰元年，任命为司徒右长史，御史中丞，因为父亲所任职务到御史中丞为止，陆缮坚决辞谢不肯就任。
English: In the first year of the Shao Tai Dynasty, he was appointed as the first secretary of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, and the second secretary of the State Council of the People's Republic of China. Because his father held the post until the second secretary of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, Lu Shu resolutely refused to take office.

古文：高祖引缮为司徒司马，迁给事黄门侍郎、领步兵校尉、通直散骑常侍，兼侍中。
现代文：直担引荐陆钟为司徒司马，升任给事黄门侍郎、领步兵校尉、通直散骑常侍，兼任侍中。
English: He was directly responsible for the introduction of Lu Zhong as the tutor of Sima, and was promoted to attendant of Huangmen, captain of the leading infantry, and regular attendant of Tsunzhi Sanzhi, and also served as an attendant.

古文：永定元年，迁侍中。
现代文：丞定元年，升任侍中。
English: In the first year of the Joseon Dynasty, he was promoted to Samurai Junior Middle Officer.

古文：时留异拥割东阳，新安人向文政与异连结，因据本郡，朝廷以缮为贞威将军、新安太守。
现代文：当时留异拥兵割据东堡，新安人向文政舆玺垦连结，因此占据本郡，朝廷任用陆缮为贞威将军、新安太守。
English: At that time, the dissident supporters were divided into the East Fort, and the people of Xin'an were connected to the literary and political world, so they occupied this county. The imperial court appointed Lu Shu as General Zhenwei and the new governor of An.

古文：世祖嗣位，征为太子中庶子，领步兵校尉，掌东宫管记。
现代文：世祖继位，征召为太子中庶子，领步兵校尉，负责管理东宫文牍。
English: He was the heir to the throne, was called up as the prince's middle child, led the infantry lieutenant, and was responsible for the management of the East Palace.

古文：缮仪表端丽，进退闲雅，世祖使太子诸王咸取则焉。
现代文：陆缮仪表端庄漂亮，进退举止安娴高雅，世祖让太子和诸王都以他为标准。
English: Lu Zuo's appearance is dignified and beautiful, and his movements are calm and elegant. The founder of the dynasty let the prince and all the kings use him as a standard.

古文：其趋步蹑履，皆令习缮规矩。
现代文：他们疾走相随的姿式，都命令学习陆缮的规矩。
English: As they gallop along, they are all ordered to learn the rules of the land.

古文：除尚书吏部郎中，步兵如故，仍侍东宫。
现代文：任命陆銮为尚书吏部郎中，步兵校尉的职务依旧担任，仍然侍奉束宫。
English: Appointed Lu Yao as the vice-minister of the Ministry of Education and Culture, he still held the position of an infantry lieutenant, and still served the palace.

古文：陈宝应平后，出为贞毅将军、建安太守。
现代文：陈实应被平定后，调出朝廷任贞毅将军、建安太守。
English: After Chen Shizhi was subdued, he was transferred to the imperial court as General Zhengyi and Governor of Jian'an.

古文：秩满，为散骑常侍、御史中丞，犹以父之所终，固辞，不许，乃权换廨宇徙居之。
现代文：任职期满，任散骑常侍、御史中丞，还是以父亲任御史中丞所终，坚持辞谢，不许可，于是姑且更换官舍移居开来。
English: At the end of his term of office, he was appointed as a knight errant, a courtier, and a junior secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, and his father was appointed as a junior secretary of the Imperial Household Agency. He insisted on resigning and did not allow it, so he changed his official residence and moved away.

古文：太建初，迁度支尚书、侍中、太子詹事，行东宫事，领扬州大中正。
现代文：太建初年，升任度支尚书、侍中、太子詹事，管理东宫事务，领扬州大中正。
English: In the first year of the Taijian era, he was promoted to the posts of Grand Secretary, Vice-Chamberlain, and Prince Zhan, managed the affairs of the East Palace, and led the Yangzhou University.

古文：及太子亲莅庶政，解行事，加散骑常侍，改加侍中。
现代文：到太子亲自处理各种政务，解除陆缮管理束宫的职务，加官散骑常侍，改为加官侍中。
English: The crown prince will personally handle all kinds of government affairs, and the duties of the Land Renovation Administration of the Imperial Palace will be removed, and the position of the official horseback riding attendant will be changed to the official attendant.

古文：迁尚书右仆射，寻迁左仆射，参掌选事，侍中如故。
现代文：升任尚书右仆射，接着升任左仆射，参与掌管选拔人才的事务，侍中职务依旧担任。
English: He was promoted to Shangshu's right-hand man, and then to the left-hand man, and participated in the affairs of selecting talents. He still held the position of attendant.

古文：更为尚书仆射，领前将军。
现代文：改任尚书仆射，领前将军。
English: He was reappointed as Shang Shufu, leading the former general.

古文：重授左仆射，领扬州大中正，别敕令与徐陵等七人参议政事。
现代文：重新任命为左仆射，领扬州大中正，另外韶令陆缮与徐陵等七人参与议论朝政。
English: Zuo Fuxia was reappointed as the leader of Yangzhou University, and seven other people, including Yu Ling, Lu Xuan and Xu Ling, took part in the discussion of imperial politics.

古文：十二年卒，时年六十三。
现代文：太建十二年去世，当时年纪六十三岁。
English: Tai Jian died twelve years later at the age of sixty-three.

古文：赠侍中、特进、金紫光禄大夫，谥曰安子。
现代文：赠给侍中、特进、金紫光禄大夫的官衔，谧号叫做安子。
English: He was given the official title of Samurai, Specially Promoted, and Gold, Purple, and Gold Doctor, and his posthumous name was Anshi.

古文：太子以缮东宫旧臣，特赐祖奠。
现代文：太子因为陆缮是东宫旧臣，特别赐给出殡前夕设奠祭告亡灵的仪式。
English: Since Prince Lu Shu was an old retainer of the Eastern Palace, he was specially given the ceremony of setting up a libation to the dead on the eve of the funeral.

古文：缮子辩惠，年数岁，诏引入殿内，辩惠应对进止有父风，高宗因赐名辩惠，字敬仁云。
现代文：陆缮的儿子陆辩惠，年纪几岁时，韶令引入宫殿中，陆辩惠应答言谈进退举止有父亲的风度，高宗因此给他赐名辩惠，字敬仁。
English: When Lu Yanhui, the son of Lu Xuan, was a few years old, he was brought into the palace by imperial order. Lu Yanhui had a father's demeanor when he answered questions, so Emperor Gaozong gave him the name "Lu Yanhui" and the title "Jinren."

古文：缮兄子见贤，亦方雅，高宗为扬州牧，乃以为治中从事史，深被知遇。
现代文：陆缮兄长的儿子陆见贤，也大方文雅，高宗任扬州的长官时，便以陆见贤任治中从事史，很被赏识得到宠遇。
English: Lu Jianxian, the son of Lu Jianxian's elder brother, was also generous and elegant. When Gao Zong was the governor of Yangzhou, he appointed Lu Jianxian to be in charge of history, which was very appreciated and favored.

古文：历给事黄门侍郎，长沙、鄱阳二王长史，带寻阳太守，少府卿。
现代文：历任给事黄门侍郎，长沙和鄱隧两个王的长史，兼带曼堕太守，少府卿。
English: Successive attendants of the Yellow Gate, the long history of the two kings of Changsha and Yunnan, and the concurrent ruler of Manchukuo, Shao Fuqing.

古文：太建十年卒，时年五十。
现代文：越叁十年去世，当时年纪五十岁。
English: He died ten years later, at the age of fifty.

古文：赠廷尉卿，谥曰平子。
现代文：赠给廷尉卿，谧号叫做平子。
English: It was given to the Lord Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, and his nickname was Hiratsuko.

古文：史臣曰：夫衣冠雅道，廊庙嘉猷，谅以操履敦修，局宇详正。
现代文：史臣曰：士大夫正道，朝廷善则，确实以操行修养深厚，器宇安详端正为标准。
English: Shichen said: "Scholars are on the right path, and the imperial court is on the right path. It is true that the standard is to have a deep cultivation of conduct, and to have a safe and accurate instrument.

古文：经曰 容止可观 ，《诗》言 其仪罔忒 ，彼三子者，其有斯风焉。
现代文：经书上说 容止可观 ，《诗》中有一句话 其仪罔忒 ，那三人，有这种风度呀。
English: The sutra says that tolerance is admirable, and there is a sentence in the "Poetry" that describes their demeanor. The three of them have this demeanor.

