古文：儒者曰： 亲亲有术，尊贤有等。 
现代文：儒家中的人说： 爱亲人应有差别，尊敬贤人也有差别。 
English: Confucians say: There is a difference between loving relatives and respecting sages.

古文：言亲疏尊卑之异也。
现代文：这是说亲疏、尊卑是有区别的。
English: This means that there is a difference between affinity and estrangement, and between superiority and inferiority.

古文：其《礼》曰：丧，父母，三年；妻、后子，三年；伯父、叔父、弟兄、庶子，其；戚族人，五月。
现代文：他们的《仪礼》说：服丧，为父母要服三年，为妻子和长子要服三年；为伯父、叔父、弟兄、庶子服一年；为外姓亲戚服五个月。
English: Their "Ritual" says: for mourning, three years should be served for parents, three years for wife and eldest son; one year for uncle, uncle, brother, and son-in-law; and five months for maternal relatives.

古文：若以亲疏为岁月之数，则亲者多而疏者少矣，是妻、后子与父同也。
现代文：如果以亲、疏来定服丧的年月，则亲的多而疏的少，那么，妻子、长子与父亲相同。
English: If the years of mourning are determined by kinship and estrangement, then kinship is more and estrangement is less, then the wife and eldest son are the same as the father.

古文：若以尊卑为岁月数，则是尊其妻、子与父母同，而亲伯父、宗兄而卑子也。逆孰大焉？
现代文：如果以尊卑来定服丧的年月，那么，是把妻子、儿子看作与父母一样尊贵，而把伯父、宗兄和庶子看成是一样的，有如此大逆不道的吗？
English: If the years of mourning are determined by respect and inferiority, then is it so perverse to regard a wife and son as being as honorable as parents, and to regard an uncle, paternal uncle, and illegitimate child as being the same?

古文：其亲死，列尸弗敛，登堂窥井，挑鼠穴，探涤器，而求其人矣，以为实在，则赣愚甚矣；如其亡也必求焉，伪亦大矣！
现代文：上屋、窥井、掏鼠穴、探看涤器，而为死人招魂。认为还在，愚蠢极了。
English: Sheds, wells, mouseholes, scrubbers, and summoning the spirits of the dead. To think it's still there is folly.

古文：取妻身迎，祗褍为仆，秉辔授绥，如仰严亲；昏礼威仪，如承祭祀。
现代文：如果不在，一定要求，太虚假了。娶妻要亲身迎接，穿着黑色下摆的衣裳，为她驾车，手里拿着缰绳，把引绳递给新妇，就好象承奉父亲一样。婚礼中的仪式，就象恭敬地祭祀一样。
English: If he is not there, it is a false demand. To receive his bride in person, to dress in black, to drive the carriage for her, to hold the bridle in one's hand and hand it to the bride, is like obeying one's father. The ceremony at a wedding is like a respectful sacrifice.

古文：颠覆上下，悖逆父母，下则妻、子，妻、子上侵事亲。若此，可谓孝乎？
现代文：上下颠倒，悖逆父母，与妻子同位。妻子地位抬高了，如此侍奉父母，能叫作孝吗？
English: Upside down, disobeying his parents, in the same place as his wife. The wife's status is elevated, so serving his parents, can it be called filial piety?

古文：儒者： 迎妻，妻之奉祭祀；子将守宗庙。故重之。 
现代文：儒家的人迎娶妻子， 妻子要供奉祭祀，儿子要守宗庙，所以敬重他们。 
English: Confucian people marry a wife, the wife should offer sacrifices, and the son should keep the ancestral temple, so they respect them.

古文：应之曰：此诬言也！
现代文：答道： 这是谎话！
English: Answer: This is a lie!

古文：其宗兄守其先宗庙数十年，死，丧之其；兄弟之妻奉其先之祭祀，弗散；则丧妻子三年，必非以守、奉祭祀也。
现代文：他的宗兄守他先人宗庙几十年，死了，为他服一年丧；兄弟的妻子供奉他祖先的祭祀，不为她们服丧，而为妻、子服三年丧，一定不是因为守奉祭祀的原因。 
English: His brother-in-law, who had kept the ancestral temple of his ancestors for decades, died and was mourned for a year; his brother's wife and children served the sacrificial rites of his ancestors. He did not mourn for them, but mourned for his wife and son for three years, certainly not because of the reason for observing the sacrificial rites.

古文：夫忧妻子以大负累，有曰： 所以重亲也。 
现代文：优待妻、子而服三年丧，有的说道： 这是为了看重亲人。 
English: Some people say they prefer to treat their wives and children well in the three-year mourning period. Others say it's because they value their relatives.

古文：为欲厚所至私，轻所至重，岂非大奸也哉！
现代文：这是想厚待所偏爱的人，轻视重要的人，难道不是大骗子吗？
English: This is to favor those who are favored and despise those who are important. Isn't he a big liar?

古文：有强执有命以说议曰： 寿夭贫富，安危治乱，固有天命，不可损益。
现代文：又顽固地坚持 有命 以辩说道： 寿夭、贫富、安危治乱，本来就有天命，不能减少增加。
English: He also stubbornly insisted that one's life is one's destiny, arguing that one's longevity, poverty and wealth, safety and security, and the ability to control chaos all come from one's destiny, and cannot be reduced or increased.

古文：穷达、赏罚、幸否有极，人之知力，不能为焉！ 
现代文：穷达赏罚，幸运倒霉都有定数。人的知识和力量是无所作为的。 
English: Poverty, reward and punishment, fortune and misfortune all have a fixed number. Man's knowledge and power are powerless.

古文：群吏信之，则怠于分职；庶人信之，则怠于从事。
现代文：一些官吏相信了这些话，则对份内的事懈怠，普通人相信了这些话，则对劳作懈怠。
English: Some officials believed these words and slacked off in their duties, and ordinary people believed these words and slacked off in their work.

古文：吏不治则乱，农事缓则贫，贫且乱，政之本，而儒者以为道教，是贼天下之人者也。
现代文：官吏不治理就要混乱，农事一慢就要贫困。既贫困又混乱，是违背政事的目的的，而儒家的人把它当作教导，是残害天下的人啊。
English: If government officials do not govern, there will be chaos, and if agricultural affairs are slow, there will be poverty. Both poverty and chaos are contrary to the purpose of government affairs, and Confucianists take it as a teaching, and are people who destroy the world.

古文：且夫繁饰礼乐以淫人，久丧伪哀以谩亲，立命缓贫而高浩居，倍本弃事而安怠傲，贪于饮食，惰于作务，陷于饥寒，危于冻馁，无以违之。是若人气，甉鼠藏，而羝羊视，贲彘起。
现代文：造出 命 的说法，安于贫困以傲世。背本弃事而安于懈怠傲慢。贪于饮食，懒于劳作，陷于饥寒，有冻馁的危险，没法逃避。就象乞丐，象田鼠偷藏食物，象公羊一样贪婪地看着，象阉猪一样跃起。
English: To coin a phrase, to be poor and proud, to be idle and proud, to be greedy and lazy, to be hungry and cold, to be in danger of frostbite and unable to escape, to be a beggar, to hide food like a vole, to watch greedily like a ram, to jump like a warthog.

古文：君子笑之，怒曰： 散人焉知良儒！ 
现代文：君子嘲笑他们，他们就说： 庸人怎能知道良儒呢！ 
English: The nobles laughed at them, and they said, "How can a mediocre man know a good man?"

古文：夫夏乞麦禾，五谷既收，大丧是随，子姓皆从，得厌饮食。
现代文：夏天乞食麦子和稻子，五谷收齐了，跟着就有人大举丧事。子孙都跟着去，吃饱喝足。
English: In summer, they begged for wheat and rice, and when the grain harvest was complete, there were large-scale funerals. Their children and grandchildren followed, eating and drinking to their heart's content.

古文：毕治数丧，足以至矣。
现代文：办完了几次丧事，就足够了。
English: After a few funerals, it's enough.

古文：因人之家翠以为，恃人之野以为尊，富人有丧，乃大说喜，曰： 此衣食之端也！ 
现代文：依仗人家而尊贵，依仗人家田野的收入而富足。富人有丧，就非常欢喜，说： 这是衣食的来源啊！ 
English: Who are made rich with the increase of their house, and made rich with the increase of their field: the rich also rejoice when they are made poor, saying, This is the price of his meat.

古文：儒者曰： 君子必服古言，然后仁。 
现代文：儒家的人说： 君子必须说古话，穿古衣才能成仁。 
English: Confucianists say: A gentleman must speak ancient words and wear ancient clothes in order to become a nobleman.

古文：应之曰：所谓古之言服者，皆尝新矣，而古人言之服之，则非君子也？
现代文：答道： 所谓古话、古衣，都曾经在当时是新的。而古人说它穿它，就不是君子吗？
English: He replied, "The so-called ancient sayings and ancient clothing were all new at that time, and the ancients said that if a man wore it, he was a gentleman.

古文：然则必服非君子之服，言非君子之言，而后仁乎？
现代文：那么则必须穿不是君子的衣服，说不是君子的话，而后才为仁吗？ 
English: So, do you have to wear immodest clothes and speak immodest words before you can be benevolent?

古文：又曰： 君子循而不作。 
现代文：又说： 君子只遵循前人做的而不创新。 
English: He also said: A gentleman only follows what his predecessors have done and does not innovate.

古文：应之曰：古者羿作弓，伃作甲，奚仲作车，巧垂作舟；然则今之鲍、函、车、匠，皆君子也，而羿、伃、奚仲、巧垂，皆小人邪？
现代文：回答他说： 古时后羿制造了弓，季伃制造了甲，奚仲制作了车，巧垂制作了船。既然如此，那么今天的鞋工、甲工、车工、木工，都是君子，而后羿、季伃、奚仲、巧垂都是小人吗？ 
English: Answer him: In ancient times, Hou Yi made bows, Qu Yi made armor, Shuzhong made chariots, and Qiaotie made ships. In that case, are today's shoemakers, armourers, chariot makers, and carpenters all gentlemen, while Hou Yi, Qiaotie, Shuzhong, and Qiaotie are all villains?

古文：又曰： 君子胜不逐奔，掩函弗射，施则助之胥车。 
现代文：又说： 君子打了胜仗不追赶逃兵，拉开弓不射箭，敌车走人了岔路则帮助他推车。 
English: He also said: A gentleman does not chase a deserter after winning a battle, does not shoot arrows after drawing a bow, and helps the enemy to push his cart when the enemy's cart is broken.

古文：应之曰： 若皆仁人也，则无说而相与；仁人以其取舍、是非之理相告，无故从有故也，弗知从有知也，无辞必服，见善必迁，何故相？
现代文：回答他说： 如果双方都是仁人，那么就不会相敌，仁人以他取舍是非之理相告，没道理的跟有道理的走，不知道的跟知道的走。说不出理由的必定折服，看到善的必定依从。这怎么会相争呢？
English: Answer him: If both sides are benevolent, then there will be no conflict. The benevolent person tells the other side with his choice of right and wrong, the unreasonable goes with the reasonable, and the ignorant goes with the knowledgeable. Those who cannot tell the reason must submit, and those who see the good must obey. How can this conflict happen?

古文：若两暴交争，其胜者欲不逐奔，掩函弗射，施则助之胥车，虽尽能，犹且不得为君子也，意暴残之国也。
现代文：如果两方暴人相争，战胜的不追赶逃敌，拉弓不射，敌人陷了车帮助推车，即使这些都做了，也不能做君子，也许还是残暴的国人。
English: If two sides of thugs fight, and the winner does not chase the fleeing enemy, does not draw a bow and does not shoot, and the enemy traps the cart and helps to push it, even if he does all these things, he cannot be a gentleman, and may still be a brutal compatriot.

古文：圣将为世除害，兴师诛罚，胜将因用儒术令士卒曰： 毋逐奔，掩函勿射，施则助之胥车。 
现代文：圣将为世上除害，兴师诛伐之，战胜了就将用儒家的方法下令士卒说： 不要追赶逃敌，拉弓不射，敌车陷了帮助推车。 
English: The saint will eliminate harm in the world. He will raise a division to fight the enemy. When he is victorious, he will use the Confucian method to order the soldiers to say: Don't chase the fleeing enemy, don't pull the bow and don't shoot, if the enemy's car is trapped, help push the car.

古文：暴乱之人也得活，天下害不除，是为群残父母而深贱世也，不义莫大矣！ 
现代文：于是暴乱之人得到活命，天下的害不除，这是作为君主父母的还在深重地残害这社会。不义没有比这更大的了！ 
English: As a result, the rioters were spared their lives, and the world was not spared the harm that they, as the parents of a monarch, are still inflicting on society. There is no greater injustice than this!

古文：又曰： 君子若钟，击之则鸣，弗击不鸣。 
现代文：又说： 君子像钟一样，敲了就响，不敲就不响。 
English: He also said, "A gentleman is like a bell. If you strike it, it will ring, but if you do not strike it, it will not ring."

古文：应之曰： 夫仁人，事上竭忠，事亲得孝，务善则美，有过则谏，此为人臣之道也。
现代文：回答说： 仁人事上尽忠，事亲尽孝，有善就称美，有过就谏阻，这才是做人臣的道理。
English: He replied, "In matters of benevolence, one should be loyal, in matters of filial piety, in matters of kindness, one should praise, and in matters of resistance, one should oppose. This is the principle of being a vassal.

古文：今击之则鸣，弗击不鸣，隐知豫力，恬漠待问而后对，虽有君亲之大利，弗问不言；若将有大寇乱，盗贼将作，若机辟将发也，他人不知，己独知之，虽其君、亲皆在，不问不言。是夫大乱之贼也。
现代文：现在若敲他才响，不敲不响，隐藏智谋，懒于用力，安静冷淡地等待君亲发问，然后才作回答。即使对君亲有大利，不问也不说。如果将发生大寇乱，盗贼将兴，就象一种安置好的机关将发动一样，别人不知这事，自己独自知道，即使君亲都在，不问不说，这实际是大乱之贼。
English: Now, if you knock, he will ring, if you do not knock, he will not ring, he hides his wit, he is too lazy to use force, he quietly and coldly waits for the prince to ask a question, and then answers. Even if he has something good for the prince, he does not ask and does not say. If there is going to be a big riot, the thieves will flourish, just like a well-placed organ will start, others do not know about it, he alone knows, even if the prince is there, do not ask and do not say, this is actually a thief of chaos.

古文：以是为人臣不忠，为子不孝，事兄不弟，交遇人不贞良。
现代文：以这种态度作人臣就不忠，作儿子就不孝，事兄就不恭顺，待人就不贞良。
English: With such an attitude, it is disloyal to be a vassal, unfilial to be a son, disobedient to be a brother, and unchaste to treat others.

古文：夫执后不言，之朝，物见利使己，虽恐后言；君若言而未有利焉，则高拱下视，会噎为深，曰： 唯其未之学也。 
现代文：遇事持后退不言的态度。到朝廷上，看到有利自己的东西，唯恐说得比别人迟。君上如果说了于己无利的事，就高拱两手，往下低头看，象饭塞在嘴里一样，说： 我未曾学过。 
English: In the event of an emergency, he has the attitude of retreating and not speaking. When he comes to the court, he sees what is beneficial to himself, lest he speak later than others. If the prince says something that is not beneficial to him, he raises his hands high, looks down, like rice is stuffed in his mouth, and says: I have never studied.

古文：用谁急，遗行远矣。 
现代文：用他虽很急，而他已弃君远走了。 
English: Though it was hasty to use him, he has abandoned you and gone far away.

古文：夫一道术学业仁义者，皆大以治人，小以任官，远施周偏，近以修身，不义不处，非理不行，务兴天下之利，曲直周旋，利则止，此君子之道也。
现代文：凡道术学业都统一于仁义，都是大则以治人，小则以任官，远的博施，近的修身。不义的就不居，无理的就不行。务兴天下之利，各种举动，没有利的就停止。这是君子之道。
English: All Taoist studies are unified in benevolence and righteousness. The most important is to govern people, the least important is to be an official, the farthest is to give alms, and the nearest is to cultivate oneself. Those who are unjust will not live, and those who are unreasonable will not be able to live. In order to promote the interests of the world, all kinds of actions should be stopped if there is no benefit. This is the way of a gentleman.

古文：以所闻孔某之行，则本与此相反谬也！
现代文：从我所听说的孔子的行为，从根本上与此相反。
English: From what I have heard of Confucius's behaviour, it is fundamentally the opposite.

古文：齐景公问晏子曰： 孔子为人何如？ 
现代文：齐景公问晏子说： 孔子为人怎样？ 
English: Qi Jing Gong asked the mule: "What is Confucius like as a person?"

古文：晏子不对。
现代文：晏子不答。
English: The cripple did not answer.

古文：公又复问，不对。
现代文：齐景公又问一次，还是不答。
English: Qi Jing Gong asked again, but still no answer.

古文：景公曰： 以孔某语寡人者众矣，俱以贤人也，今寡人问之，而子不对，何也？ 
现代文：景公说： 对我说孔子人的人很多，都以为是贤人。今我问你，你不回答，为什么？ 
English: Jing Gong said, "Many people have told me that Confucius was a sage. Now I ask you, why don't you answer?

古文：晏子对曰： 婴不肖，不足以知贤人。
现代文：晏子答道： 晏婴不肖，不足以认识贤人。
English: The cripple replied, "It is not enough to know a wise man.

古文：虽然，婴闻所谓贤人者，入人之国，必务合其君臣之亲，而弭其上下之怨。
现代文：虽如此，晏婴听说所谓贤人，进了别国，必要和合君臣的感情，调和上下的怨仇。
English: In spite of this, Xing Ying heard that the so-called wise men had entered another country, and it was necessary to harmonize the feelings of the princes and ministers, and to reconcile the hatred between the upper and lower classes.

古文：孔某之荆，知白公之谋，而奉之以石乞，君身几灭，而白公僇。
现代文：孔子人到楚国，已经知道了白公的阴谋，而把石乞献给他。国君几乎身亡，而白公被杀。
English: When the Confucians arrived in Chu, they already knew about Bai Gong's plot and offered him a stone mendicant. The sovereign almost died, but Bai Gong was killed.

古文：今孔某深虑同谋以奉贼，劳思尽知以行邪，劝下乱上，教臣杀君，非贤人之行也。
现代文：晏婴听说贤人不虚君主的信任，拥有民心而不作乱。对君王说话必然是对别人有利，教导下民必对君上有利。行义可让民众知道，考虑计策可让国君知道。孔子人精心计划和叛贼同谋，竭尽心智以行不正当的事。鼓励下面的人反抗上面，教导臣子杀国君，不是贤人的行为啊。
English: It is said that a wise man does not betray the trust of the monarch, he has the people's heart and does not make a mess. Talking to the king is necessarily beneficial to others, teaching the people will be beneficial to the prince. Doing righteousness can let the people know, considering strategies can let the sovereign know. Confucians carefully plan and conspire with traitors, exhausting their minds to do things that are not right. Encouraging the people below to resist the above, teaching the vassals to kill the sovereign, is not the behavior of a wise man.

古文：入人之国，而与人之贼，非义之类也。
现代文：进入别国，而与叛贼结交，不符合义。
English: It is not right to enter a country and become friends with a traitor.

古文：知人不忠，趣之为乱，非仁义之也。
现代文：知道别人不忠，反而促成他叛乱，不是仁义的行为啊。
English: It is not an act of benevolence to know that someone else is unfaithful, but to cause him to rebel.

古文：逃人而后谋，避人而后言，行义不可明于民，谋虑不可通于君臣，婴不知孔某之有异于白公也，是以不对。 
现代文：避人后策划，避人后言说，行义不可让民众知晓，谋划不让君主知晓。臣晏婴不知道孔子人和白公的不同之处，所以没有回答。 
English: After avoiding the people, he planned, and after avoiding the people, he said that the people should not know about the righteousness, and the monarch should not know about the plan. The minister did not know the difference between Confucius and Bai Gong, so he did not answer.

古文：景公曰： 呜乎！
现代文：景公说： 啊呀！
English: Jing Gong said: Ah!

古文：贶寡人者众矣，非夫子，则吾终身不知孔某之与白公同也。 
现代文：你教给我的很多，不是您，则我终身都不知道孔子人和白公相同。 
English: You taught me a lot, but if it wasn't for you, I would have never known that Confucius and Bai Gong were the same.

古文：孔某之齐见景公，景公说，欲封之以尼溪，以告晏子。
现代文：孔子到齐国，拜见景公。景公高兴，想把尼溪封给他，来告诉晏子。
English: Confucius went to Qi Province and met with King Jing. King Jing was happy and wanted to give him Nixi, so he came to tell Zouzi about it.

古文：晏子曰： 不可！
现代文：晏子说： 不行。
English: The cripple said, "I can't.

古文：夫儒，浩居而自顺者也，不可以教下；好乐而淫人，不可使亲治；立命而怠事，不可使守职；宗丧循哀，不可使慈民；机服勉容，不可使导众。
现代文：儒家，傲慢而自作主张，不可以教导下民；喜欢音乐而混乱人，不可以让他们亲自治民；主张命而懒于作事，不可以让他们任官；崇办丧事哀伤不止，不可以使他们热爱百姓；异服而作出庄敬的表情，不可以使他们引导众人。
English: Confucianism, arrogant and self-assertive, can not teach the people; people who like music and are confused, can not let them be self-governing people; people who advocate life but are lazy in doing things, can not let them be appointed officials; people who advocate mourning and sorrow, can not make them love the people; people who wear different clothes and make solemn expressions, can not make them lead the people.

古文：孔某盛容修饰以蛊世，弦歌鼓舞以聚徒，繁登降之礼以示仪，务趋翔之节以观众；博学不可使议世，劳思不可以补民；累寿不能尽其学，当年不能行其礼，积财不能赡其乐。
现代文：孔子人盛容修饰以惑乱世人，弦歌鼓舞以招集弟子，纷增登降的礼节以显示礼仪，努力从事趋走、盘旋的礼节让众人观看。学问虽多而不可让他们言论世事，劳苦思虑而对民众没什么好处，几辈子也学不完他们的学问，壮年人也无法行他们繁多的礼节，累积财产也不够花费在音乐上。
English: Confucians adorned their faces to confuse the world, encouraged by chordal songs to recruit disciples, increased the etiquette of ascending and descending to show etiquette, and worked hard to engage in the etiquette of walking and circling to let everyone watch. Although they have a lot of knowledge, they should not let them speak about the world, and they are not good for the people because of their hard work and worries. They can't complete their knowledge in several lifetimes, and the adults can't perform their many etiquettes. The accumulated wealth is not enough to spend on music.

古文：繁饰邪术，以营世君；盛为声乐，以淫遇民。
现代文：多方装饰他们的邪说，来迷惑当世的国君；大肆设置音乐，来惑乱愚笨的民众。
English: They embellish their heresies to deceive the princes of the earth, and make their music to bewitch the foolish people.

古文：其道不可以期世，其学不可以导众。
现代文：他们的道术不可公布于世，他们的学问不可以教导民众。
English: Their doctrines are not to be made known to the world, and their learning is not to be taught to the people.

古文：今君封之，以利齐俗，非所以导国先众。 公曰： 善。 
现代文：现在君王封孔子以求对齐国风俗有利，不是引导民众的方法。 景公说： 好。 
English: Now the emperor has named Confucius to align with the country's customs and interests, not as a way to guide the people.

古文：于是厚其礼，留其封，敬见而不问其道。
现代文：于是赠孔子厚礼，而不给封地，恭敬地接见他而不问他的道术。
English: So he presented Confucius with a generous gift, but did not give him a fiefdom, and received him respectfully without asking about his Taoism.

古文：孔某乃恚，怒于景公与晏子，乃树鸱夷子皮于田常之门，告南郭惠子以所欲为。
现代文：孔子人于是对景公和晏子很愤怒。于是把范蠡推荐给田常，告诉南郭惠子，回到鲁国去了。
English: The Confucians were very angry with Jinggong and Zangzi, so they recommended Fan Zang to Tian Chang, told Nan Guo to Huizi, and went back to Lu.

古文：归于鲁，有顷，间齐将伐鲁，告子贡曰： 赐乎！举大事于今之时矣！ 
现代文：过了一段时间，齐国将伐鲁国，告诉子贡说： 赐，现在是举大事的时候了！ 
English: After a period of time, the State of Qi conquered the State of Varu, and told the Zigong, "Granted, now is the time to do great things!

古文：乃遣子贡之齐，因南郭惠子以见田常，劝之伐吴，以教高、国、鲍、晏，使毋得害田常之乱。
现代文：于是派子贡到齐国，通过南郭惠子见到田常，劝他伐吴；以教高、国、鲍、晏四姓，不要妨碍田常叛乱；又劝越国伐吴国。
English: Therefore, he sent Zigong to Qi Province, and through Nanguo Huizi, he saw Tian Chang and advised him to invade Wu; with the four surnames of Jiaogao, Guo, Bao and Zou, he did not interfere with Tian Chang's rebellion; he also advised Yue Province to invade Wu Province.

古文：劝越伐吴，三年之内，齐、吴破国之难，伏尸以言术数，孔某之诛也。
现代文：三年之内，齐国和吴国都遭灭国的灾难，死了大约上亿人，是孔子人杀的呀。
English: Within three years, the states of Qi and Wu both suffered the disaster of national extinction, and about a hundred million people died. It was the Confucians who killed them.

古文：孔某为鲁司寇，舍公家而奉季孙，季孙相鲁君而走，季孙与邑人争门关，决植。
现代文：孔子做了鲁国的司寇，放弃公家利益而去侍奉季孙氏。季孙氏为鲁君之相而逃亡，季孙和邑人争门关，孔子把国门托起，放季孙逃走。
English: Confucius became the governor of Lu, giving up the interests of the public to serve the Qisun clan. The Qisun clan fled for the sake of Lu, Qisun and the townspeople fought over the gate, Confucius held up the national gate and let Qisun escape.

古文：孔某穷于蔡、陈之间，藜羹不糂。
现代文：孔子被困在陈蔡之间，用藜叶做的羹中不见米粒。
English: Confucius was trapped between Chen Cai, and there was not a grain of rice to be seen in the cucumber soup.

古文：十日，子路为享豚，孔某不问肉之所由来而食；号人衣以酤酒，孔某不问酒之所由来而饮。
现代文：第十天，子路蒸了一只小猪，孔子不问肉的来源就吃了；又剥下别人的衣服去沽酒，孔子也不问酒的来源就喝。
English: On the tenth day, Zilu steamed a piglet, and Confucius ate it without asking the source of the meat; he also peeled off other people's clothes to make wine, and Confucius drank it without asking the source of the wine.

古文：哀公迎孔子，席不端弗坐，割不正弗食。
现代文：后来鲁哀公迎接孔子，席摆得不正他不坐，肉割得不正他不吃。
English: Later, Lu Aigong greeted Confucius, but he refused to sit down when the table was improperly set, and refused to eat when the meat was improperly cut.

古文：子路进请曰： 何其与陈、蔡反也？ 
现代文：子路进来请示说： 为何与陈蔡时的相反呢？ 
English: Zi Lu came in and asked: Why is it the opposite of Chen Cai Si?

古文：孔某曰： 来，吾语女：曩与女为苟生，今与女为苟义。 
现代文：孔子说： 来！我告诉你：当时我和你急于求生，现在和你急于求义。 
English: Confucius said: Come! I tell you: at that time I and you were anxious to survive, and now I and you are anxious to seek righteousness.

古文：夫饥约，则不辞妄取以活身；赢鲍，则伪行以自饰。
现代文：在饥饿困逼时就不惜妄取以求生，饱食有余时就用虚伪的行为来粉饰自己。
English: When they are starving, they will do anything to survive, and when they have enough to eat, they will use hypocritical behavior to whitewash themselves.

古文：污邪诈伪，孰大于此？
现代文：污邪诈伪之行，还有比这大的吗？
English: Is there a greater act of corruption and fraud than this?

古文：孔某与其门弟子闲坐，曰： 夫舜见瞽叟孰然，此时天下圾乎？
现代文：孔子和他的弟子闲坐，说： 舜见了瞽叟，蹙躇不安。这时天下真危险呀！
English: Confucius and his disciples sat idly by, saying: "When you see a dragon, you hesitate and are uneasy. At this time, the world is really in danger!"

古文：周公旦非其人也邪？何为舍其家室而托寓也？ 
现代文：周公旦不是仁义之人吧，否则为何舍弃他的家室而寄居在外呢？ 
English: Zhou Gongdan is not a benevolent person, otherwise why did he abandon his home and live abroad?

古文：孔某所行，心术所至也。
现代文：孔子的所行，都出于他的心术。
English: Everything Confucius did was out of his mind.

古文：其徒属弟子皆效孔某：子贡、季路，辅孔悝乱乎卫，阳货乱乎齐，佛肸以中牟叛，漆雕刑残，莫大焉！
现代文：他的朋辈和弟子都效法孔子。子贡、季路辅佐孔悝在卫国作乱；阳货在齐作乱；佛肸以中牟反叛；漆雕开刑杀。残暴没有比这更大的了。
English: His contemporaries and disciples all followed the example of Confucius. Zigong, Qi Lu, and his assistant Confucius wreaked havoc in the defense of the country; Yang Jia wreaked havoc in Qi; the Buddha rebelled with Zhong Mu; and the lacquer carving began to torture and kill. There is no greater cruelty than this.

古文：夫为弟子后生，其师必修其言，法其行，力不足、知弗及而后已。
现代文：凡是弟子对于老师，必定学习他的言语，效法他的行为，直到力量不足、智力不及才作罢。
English: Any disciple of a teacher must learn his words and imitate his actions until he is not strong enough or intelligent enough.

古文：今孔某之行如此，儒士则可以疑矣！
现代文：现在孔子的行为如此，那么一般儒士就可以怀疑了。
English: Now that Confucius is behaving like this, the average Confucian can be suspicious.

