古文：十二日觉宗具骑挈餐，候何君同为清碧溪游。
现代文：十二日觉宗备好马匹带上午饭，等候何君一同去游清碧溪。
English: On the twelfth day, Jue Zong prepared the horses with lunch and waited for He Jun to go swimming in Qingbi Creek.

古文：出寺即南向行，三里，过小纸房，又南过大纸房。
现代文：出寺后马上向南行，三里，走过小纸房，又往南经过大纸房。
English: After leaving the temple, I immediately headed south for three miles, walking past a small paper mill, and then south past a large paper mill.

古文：其东即郡城之西门，其西山下即演武场。
现代文：村东就是府城的西门肘西的山下就是演武场。
English: The east of the village is the west gate of the prefectural capital, and the lower part of the mountain to the west is the martial arts arena.

古文：又南一里半，过石马泉。
现代文：又向南一里半，经过石马泉。
English: Another mile and a half south, past Shima Spring.

古文：泉一方在坡坳间，水从此溢出，冯元成谓其清洌不减慧山。
现代文：一池泉水在坡坳之间，水从此处溢出去，冯元成认为泉水的清冽不比慧山的泉水差。
English: Feng Yuancheng thought that the spring water was no less clear than the spring water of Mount Huishan.

古文：甃为方池，其上有废址，皆其遗也。
现代文：砌成方池，池上有废弃的基址，都是马元成的遗迹。
English: The brick-built square pond, the abandoned foundation on the pond, are all the remains of Ma Yuancheng.

古文：《志》云： 泉中落日照见有石马，故名。 
现代文：《志》书说： 落日下泉水中照见有石马，所以这样起名。 
English: The "Zhi" book says: A stone horse was seen shining in the spring water under the setting sun, hence the name.

古文：又南半里，为一塔寺，前有诸葛祠并书院。
现代文：又往南半里，是一塔寺，寺前有诸葛祠和书院。
English: Half a mile to the south, there is a pagoda-style temple, and in front of the temple is Zhuge's ancestral hall and a college.

古文：又南过中和、玉局二峰。
现代文：又向南经过中和、玉局两座山峰。
English: It also passes the two peaks of Zhonghe and Yucheng to the south.

古文：六里，渡一溪，颇大。
现代文：六里，渡过一条溪水，水很大。
English: Six miles, crossed a stream, the water is very big.

古文：又南，有峰东环而下。
现代文：又向南，有山峰向东方环绕而下。
English: And to the south, there are peaks to the east circling down.

古文：又二里，盘峰冈之南，乃西向觅小径入峡。
现代文：又走二里，绕过峰下山冈的南边，于是向西寻找小径走入峡谷。
English: I walked another two miles, around the south side of the mountain below the peak, and then headed west to find a path into the canyon.

古文：峡中西望，重峰罨同 掩 映，最高一峰当其后，有雪痕一派，独高垂如匹练界青山，有溪从峡中东注，即清碧之下流也。
现代文：从峡中朝西望，重重山峰互相掩映，最高的一座山峰位于峡谷后方，有积雪的痕迹，独自高高下垂，如一匹白绢隔断了青山，有溪水从峡谷中往东流注，这就是清碧溪的下游。
English: Looking westward from the canyon, a number of peaks overlap each other. The highest peak is located at the back of the canyon. There are traces of snow. It hangs high and low on its own, like a white stork separating the mountains. Stream water flows eastward from the canyon. This is the downstream of Qingbi Creek.

古文：从溪北蹑冈西上，二里，有马鬣在左冈之上，为阮尚宾之墓。
现代文：从溪北踏着山冈向西上登，二里，有坟丘在左面山冈之上，是阮尚宾的坟墓。
English: From the north of the creek, climb up the hill to the west, two miles, there is a burial mound on the hill on the left, it is the tomb of Ruan Shangbin.

古文：从其后西二里，蹑峻凌崖。
现代文：从墓地后向西行二里，踏着峻岭登上山崖。
English: From the cemetery, walk west for two miles and climb up the cliff on a steep ridge.

古文：其崖高穹溪上，与对崖骈突如门，上耸下削，溪破其中出。
现代文：这座山崖高高隆起在溪流上，与对面的山崖并立前突如像门扇，上边高耸下面陡削，溪流冲破其中流出去。
English: This cliff rises high above the stream, standing side by side with the opposite cliff, jutting forward like a door, towering above and plunging below, the stream breaks through it and flows out.

古文：从此以内，溪嵌于下，崖夹于上，俱逼仄深窅。
现代文：从此处以内，溪流深嵌在下方，山崖夹立于头顶上，全都狭窄倾斜，幽深杳渺。
English: From here on in, streams nestle deep below, cliffs cling overhead, all narrow and sloping, deep and shadowy.

古文：路缘崖端，挨北峰西入，一里余，马不可行，乃令从者守马溪侧，顾仆亦止焉。
现代文：路沿着山崖顶端，紧靠着北面的山峰向西进去，一里多路，马不能再走，只得命令随行的人在溪边守马，顾仆也停在这里。
English: The road went along the top of the cliff, close to the mountain peak in the north, and went westward for more than a mile. The horse could no longer walk, so he had to order the accompanying people to guard the horse at the edge of the stream. The attendant also stopped here.

古文：余与巢阿父子同两僧溯溪入。
现代文：我与何巢阿父子连同两个和尚逆溪探入。
English: Together with Ho Sona and his father and two monks, I explored the reverse stream.

古文：屡涉其南北，一里，有巨石蹲涧旁，两崖巉石，俱堆削如夹。
现代文：多次涉到澳水的南北两岸，一里，有巨石蹲在山涧旁，两侧山崖上高险的山石，全都陡削地堆积着如同夹道。
English: I repeatedly waded to the north and south banks of the Oshu River. For one mile, there were boulders crouching next to the mountains, and the high-risk rocks on the cliffs on both sides were all steeply piled up like a road.

古文：西眺内门双耸，中劈，仅如一线，后峰垂雪正当其中，掩映层叠，如挂幅中垂，幽异殊甚。
现代文：往西眺望里面的门扇，双双高耸，当中劈开，仅如一条线，后面州摩上下垂的积雪正当其中，互相掩映，层层叠叠，如挂在墙上的条幅垂在中央，特别幽雅奇异。
English: Looking to the west, the inner doors, both high, split in the middle, just like a line, and the snow that hangs down in the back of the Shumo is just right in the middle, covering each other, stacked on top of each other, like a strip hanging on the wall hanging in the center, very elegant and strange.

古文：觉宗辄解筐酌酒，凡三劝酬。
现代文：觉宗总是解下竹筐斟酒，共劝饮了三次。
English: Kyokuzong always opened the bamboo basket to pour the wine, and he was persuaded to drink it three times.

古文：复西半里，其水捣峡泻石间，石色光腻，文理灿然，颇饶烟云之致。
现代文：再向西走半里，溪水捣入峡中奔泻在岩石间，石头的颜色光洁细腻，花纹灿烂，颇富于烟云的意态。
English: Another half-mile to the west, the stream rushes into the gorge and rushes between the rocks, the color of the stone is smooth and delicate, the pattern is brilliant, and it is rich in the attitude of smoke clouds.

古文：于是盘崖而上，一里余，北峰稍开，得高穹之坪。
现代文：从这里绕着山崖上走，一里多，北面的山峰略微敞开，找到一块高高隆起的平地。
English: From here, walk around the cliff for more than a mile, with the northern peak slightly open, to find a high-rising plain.

古文：又西半里，自坪西下，复与涧遇。
现代文：又向西半里，从平地向西下走，再次与山涧相遇。
English: Another half-mile to the west, walking down from the plains to the west, I met the hawthorn again.

古文：循涧西向半里，直逼夹门下，则水从门中突崖下坠，其高丈余，而下为澄潭。
现代文：顺着涧水向西半里，径直逼近夹立的石门下，就见水从石门中突立的石崖上下泻，石崖高一丈多，而下方是澄澈的深潭。
English: Half a mile to the west along the stream, approaching directly under the stone gate, you can see the water cascading down from the stone cliff protruding from the stone gate. The cliff is much higher, and below is a clear deep pool.

古文：潭广二丈余，波光莹映，不觉其深，而突崖之槽，为水所汩，高虽丈余，腻滑不可着足。
现代文：水潭宽二丈多，波光晶莹映照，不觉得水深，而突立石崖上的沟槽，被迅急的水流冲刷，高处虽然仅有一丈多，滑腻光溜得不能落脚。
English: The pool is more than two meters wide, the waves are crystal clear, and the water is not deep, but the grooves on the protruding cliff are scoured by the rapid current. Although the height is only one meter, it is too slippery to land.

古文：时余狎嬉戏之不觉，见二僧已逾上崖，而何父子欲从涧北上，余独在潭上觅路不得。
现代文：当时我只顾玩水没有察觉，见两个和尚已翻越到上面的石崖上，而何家父子想从山涧北边上登，我独自一人在水潭上找路，找不到。
English: At that time, I was just playing in the water without noticing. I saw that two monks had climbed over to the rock cliff above, and a father and son wanted to climb up from the north side of the mountains. I was alone looking for a way on the water pool and could not find it.

古文：遂蹑峰槽，与水争道，为石滑足，与水俱下，倾注潭中，水及其项。
现代文：于是踩着峰上的沟槽上走，与水流争道，被石头滑倒，与流水一起冲下来，倾注在深潭中，水没及脖子。
English: So he stepped on the groove on the peak, fought with the water flow, slipped on the stone, rushed down with the flowing water, and poured into the deep pool, the water was up to his neck.

古文：亟跃而出，踞石绞衣。
现代文：急忙跳出水，坐在岩石上绞去衣服上的水。
English: He quickly jumped out of the water and sat on a rock to wring the water out of his clothes.

古文：攀北崖，登其上，下瞰余失足之槽，虽高丈余，其上槽道，曲折如削，腻滑尤甚；即上有初层，其中升降，更无可阶也。
现代文：攀着北边的山崖，登到它上边，下瞰我失足跌倒的沟槽，虽然高仅一丈多，它上面的沟槽水道，曲曲折折，如像刀削出来一般，尤其滑腻光溜；即使上到它的第一层上，那中间上上下下之处，也没有可以踩踏之处了。
English: Climbing the northern cliff, climbing to the top of it, looking down at the trench where I lost my footing and fell, although it is only one floor high, the trench waterway above it, twists and turns, as if carved out with a knife, is particularly smooth and glossy; even if you climb to its first floor, there is no place to step on the up and down in the middle.

古文：再逾西崖，下觑其内有潭，方广各二丈余，其色纯绿，漾光浮黛，照耀崖谷，午日射其中，金碧交荡，光怪得未曾有。
现代文：再翻越西面的山崖，向下看去，山崖内有水潭，长宽各有二丈多，水色纯绿，波光荡漾，碧玉浮动，照耀在山崖峡谷之中，中午的艳阳照射在水中，金碧交辉，流波激荡，光怪陆离得未曾有过。
English: Then I climbed over the western cliff and looked down. There was a pool inside the cliff, two meters long and two meters wide. The water color was pure green, the waves were rippling, the jasper was floating, shining in the canyon of the cliff, the midday sun was shining in the water, and the waves were stirring. The light was like nothing I had ever seen before.

古文：潭三面石壁环窝，南北二面石门之壁，其高参天，后面即峡底之石，高亦二三丈；而脚嵌颡突颡子，此句的意思是石头下部相嵌，而上部却突出伸张，下与两旁联为一石，若剖半盎，并无纤隙透水潭中，而突颡之上，如檐覆潭者，亦无滴沥抛崖下坠；而水自潭中辄东面而溢，轰倒槽道，如龙破峡。
现代文：水潭三面的石壁环成一个窝，南北两面石门的石壁，高耸入天空中，后面就是峡底的岩石，高处也有两三丈；可石脚下嵌上面前突，飞边与两旁联结为一块岩石，像剖开的半个瓦瓮，并无丝毫缝隙漏水到潭中，前突的崖石之上，如屋檐覆盖在水潭上的地方，也没有水滴从石崖上抛洒下落；然而水从潭中总是向东面溢出去，轰鸣着倒入沟槽水道之中，如天龙冲破峡谷。
English: The stone walls of the three sides of the pool are ringed into a nest. The stone walls of the stone gates on the north and south sides tower into the sky. Behind them is the rock at the bottom of the canyon, and there are also two or three heights in the high places. However, at the foot of the stone, the front protrusion is embedded, and the flying edge is connected to the two sides as a rock, like a half-cracked tile, and there is no slightest gap for water to leak into the pool. On top of the protruding cliff stone, such as the place where the eaves cover the pool, there are no drops of water falling from the

古文：余从崖端俯而见之，亟攀崖下坠，踞石坐潭上，不特影空人心，觉一毫一孔，无不莹彻。
现代文：我从山崖顶端俯身见到此景，急忙攀着山崖坠落下来，坐在潭边的岩石上，不仅山影使人心荡去一切杂念，觉得每一根汗毛每一个毛孔，无不晶莹透彻。
English: I leaned down from the top of the cliff to see this scene, hurriedly climbed the cliff and fell down, sat on the rock at the edge of the pool. Not only does the mountain shadow make people's hearts vibrate away from all distractions, they feel that every hair and every pore is crystal clear.

古文：亟解湿衣曝石上，就流濯足，就日曝背，冷堪涤烦，暖若挟纩，暖和得像裹着丝棉。
现代文：连忙脱下湿衣服晒在石上，就着流水洗脚，就着阳光晒脊背，冷得足以洗去烦恼，暖得好似怀抱着丝棉被。
English: Quickly take off the wet clothes and sunbathe on the stone, wash your feet with running water, and sunbathe your back. It's cold enough to wash away your troubles, and warm enough to cuddle with a silk quilt.

古文：何君父子亦百计援攀援险至，相叫奇绝。
现代文：何君父子也千方百计攀援险途来到，互相高叫奇绝。
English: He Jun and his son also made every effort to come to the aid of the perilous road, shouting at each other.

古文：久之，崖日西映，衣亦渐干，乃披衣复登崖端，从其上复西逼峡门，即潭左环崖之上。
现代文：很久之后，山崖上阳光西射，衣服也渐渐干了，于是披上衣服再登上山崖顶端，从那上面再向西逼近峡中的石门，就在水潭左边环绕的山崖之上。
English: After a long time, the sun was shining on the cliff to the west, and my clothes were getting dry, so I put on my clothes and climbed to the top of the cliff. From there, I approached the stone gate in the gorge to the west, just above the cliff surrounding the left side of the pool.

古文：其北有覆崖庋空，可当亭榭之憩，前有地如掌，平甃若台，可下瞰澄潭，而险逼不能全见。
现代文：它北边有下覆的石崖平架在空中，可以当作亭台楼榭来休息，前方有块如手掌样的地方，平平地砌得好像高台，可以下瞰澄碧的水潭，但险要狭窄的地势不能见到全貌。
English: On the north side of it, there is a low-lying stone cliff in the air, which can be used as a pavilion tower to rest. In front of it, there is a palm-like place, which is flat and built like a high platform. You can look down at the clear water pool, but the almost narrow terrain cannot see the whole picture.

古文：既前，余欲从其内再穷门内二潭，以登悬雪之峰。
现代文：不久向前走，我想从石门内再去游石门内的两个水潭，并上登积雪高悬的山峰。
English: Soon moving forward, I want to go from the stone gate to the two pools in the stone gate, and climb the snow-capped peaks.

古文：何君辈不能从，亦不能阻，但云： 余辈当出待于休马处。 
现代文：何君这帮人不能跟随，也不能阻挡我，只是说： 我们将出去在马匹休息的地方等候。 
English: Ho Jun's group could not follow or stop me, but said, "We will go out and wait at the horses' resting place."

古文：余遂转北崖中垂处，西向直上。
现代文：我于是转过北面山崖中垂之处，向西径直上走。
English: So I turned around the mid-levels of the cliff to the north and walked straight up to the west.

古文：一里，得东来之道，自高穹之坪来，遵之曲折西上，甚峻。
现代文：一里，遇上东边来的路，从高高隆起的平地而来，沿着这条路向西曲折上登，非常陡峻。
English: One mile, I met the road coming from the east, coming from the high uplifted plains, along this road to the west winding up, very steep.

古文：一里余，逾峡门北顶，复平行而西半里，其内两崖石壁，复高骈夹起，门内上流之涧，仍下嵌深底。
现代文：一里多，越过峡中石门北边的顶上，再往西平行半里，这以内两侧山崖的石壁，又并排相夹高高耸起，石门内山涧上游之间，底部仍然深深下嵌。
English: More than a mile, over the top of the north side of the stone gate in the gorge, and then half a mile to the west. The stone walls of the cliffs on both sides of this, and side by side, rise high. Between the upper reaches of the mountains within the stone gate, the bottom is still deeply embedded.

古文：路傍北崖，削壁无痕，不能前度，乃以石条缘崖架空，度为栈道者四五丈，是名阳桥，亦曰仙桥。
现代文：路旁北面的山崖，陡削的石壁上没有裂痕，不能越到前方，就用石条沿着山崖架空，横架为栈道，有四五丈长，这里名叫阳桥，也称为仙桥。
English: The cliff on the north side of the road, there is no crack on the steep-cut stone wall, you can't go forward, so use the stone strip along the cliff overhead, the cross-beam is a trestle, four or five feet long, here called Yangqiao, also known as Xianqiao.

古文：桥之下，正门内之第二潭所汇，为石所亏蔽，不及见。
现代文：桥下边，正是石门内第二个水潭积水的地方，被岩石遮蔽着，来不及见到。
English: Under the bridge, it is the second pool of water in the stone gate, which is covered by rocks, and it is too late to see it.

古文：度桥北，有叠石贴壁间。
现代文：过到桥北，有叠垒的石阶贴在石壁上。
English: Passing to the north of the bridge, there are stone steps attached to the stone wall.

古文：稍北，叠石复北断，乃趁其级南坠涧底。
现代文：稍向北走，叠垒的石阶在北边又断了，就趁着岩石叠成的台阶向南下坠到涧底。
English: A little to the north, the stone steps of the ramparts broke again on the north side, and I took advantage of the steps made of rock to fall south to the bottom of the ravine.

古文：底有小水，蛇行块石间，乃西自第一潭注第二潭者。
现代文：涧底有小溪，蛇一样流淌在石块间，是从西边第一个水潭流注到第二个水潭中的水流。
English: At the bottom of the ravine there is a small stream, which flows like a snake between the stones. It is a stream that flows from the first pool in the west to the second pool.

古文：时第二潭已过而不知，只望涧中西去，两崖又骈对如门，门下又两巨石夹峙，上有石平覆如屋而塞其后，覆屋之下，又水潴其中，亦澄碧渊渟，而大不及外潭之半。
现代文：此时第二个水潭已经错过但不知道，只是望着涧中向西走去，两面的山崖并排相对如像门扇，门下又有两块巨石夹立对峙，上边有块岩石平平地覆盖着如同屋子，但堵住了后面，覆盖的石屋下边，又有水积在其中，也是澄碧的深水潭，只是大处不到外边水潭的一半。
English: At this time, the second pool has been missed, but I don't know, I just looked at the middle of the raft and walked west. The mountain cliffs on both sides are side by side like doors. Under the door, there are two boulders standing face to face. Above, there is a rock flatly covered like a house, but it blocked the back. Under the covered stone house, there is water in it. It is also a clear and deep pool, but it is less than half of the outside pool.

古文：其后塞壁之上，水从上涧垂下，其声潺潺不绝，而前从块石间东注二潭矣。
现代文：它后边堵塞的石壁之上，水流从上边的山涧中垂下来，水声潺潺不绝，然后在前方石块间向东注入第二个深潭去了。
English: Above the blocked stone wall behind it, the water flowed down from the mountains above, the water was incessant, and then a second deep pool was injected eastward between the stones in front of it.

古文：余急于西上，遂从涧中历块石而上。
现代文：我急于向西上登，就从山涧中经过石块上走。
English: In my eagerness to climb west, I scrambled over rocks in the foothills.

古文：涧中于是无纤流，然块石经冲涤之余，不特无污染，而更光腻，小者践之，巨者攀之，更巨者则转夹而梯之。
现代文：涧中从这里起没有纤细的水流，然而石块经过冲刷洗涤之后，不但没有污泥沾染，而且更加滑腻光溜，小些的踩着它走，大些的攀过它走，更大的就转过相夹之处攀登。
English: There is no thin stream of water from here in the reeds, but after the stone has been washed and washed, not only is there no sludge contamination, but it is more slippery and smooth. The smaller ones walk on it, the larger ones climb over it, and the larger ones turn around and climb where they are clamped.

古文：上瞩两崖，危矗直夹，弥极雄厉。
现代文：从上边远望两侧的山崖，危崖矗立，笔直相夹，更加雄伟壮丽。
English: From the top, you can see the cliffs on both sides of the mountain. The cliffs are soaring, clamped together, more majestic and magnificent.

古文：渐上二里，磵石高穹，滑不能上，乃从北崖转陟箐中。
现代文：慢慢上登二里，涧中的岩石高大弯隆，光滑得不能上去，只好从北边的山崖上转而登到山警中。
English: We slowly ascended for two miles. The rock in the middle of the ridge was high and curved, so smooth that we couldn't go up. We had to climb from the cliff on the north side to the ridge.

古文：崖根有小路，为密箐所翳，披之而行。
现代文：山崖脚下有条小路，被浓密的竹丛遮住了，分开竹丛前行。
English: There is a path at the foot of the cliff, which is obscured by a dense thicket of bamboo.

古文：又二里，闻人声在绝壁下，乃樵者拾枯枝于此，捆缚将返，见余，言前已无路，不复可逾。
现代文：又走二里，听见有人声在绝壁下，是打柴的人在此地拾枯枝，捆好后即将返回去，见到我，说起前边已经无路，不再能翻越过去。
English: After walking another two miles, I heard someone's voice under the cliff. It was a woodcutter who was picking up dead branches in this area and was about to return after tying them up. When he saw me, he said that there was no road ahead and he would no longer be able to climb over.

古文：余不信，更从丛篁竹林中披陡而西上。
现代文：我不信妥再拨开成丛的竹林从陡坡往西上爬。
English: I didn't trust myself to climb westward up the steep slope through the bamboo thickets.

古文：其处竹形渐大，亦渐密，路断无痕。
现代文：此处竹子的形体渐渐大起来，也渐渐浓密起来，路断了，毫无踪迹。
English: At this point, the shape of the bamboo gradually became larger and denser, and the path was broken, leaving no trace.

古文：余莽奋力披开辟之意之，去巾解服，攀竹为絙。
现代文：我不着边际地拨开竹丛，去掉头巾脱下衣服，抓住竹子当作绳索，又穿越了一里多。
English: I pushed aside the bamboo thicket, removed my headscarf, took off my clothes, grabbed the bamboo as a rope, and crossed more than a mile.

古文：复逾里余，其下壑底之涧，又环转而北，与垂雪后峰，又界为两重，无从竟升。
现代文：脚下壑谷底的山涧，又环绕着转向北，与后面积雪下垂的山峰，又隔为两层，无法径直上登。
English: The mountains at the bottom of the valley at the foot of the ridge, and around the ridge to the north, and behind the area of snow-drooping peaks, and separated into two layers, unable to climb straight up.

古文：闻清碧涧有路，可逾后岭通漾濞，岂尚当从涧中历块耶？
现代文：听说过清碧涧有路，可以翻越后岭通到漾澳，莫非还是应当从山涧中经由石块走么？
English: Have you heard that there is a road in Qingbijiao that can pass through Houling and lead to Yao'ao? Shouldn't you walk from the mountains through the rocks?

古文：时已下午，腹馁甚，乃亟下；则负刍之樵，犹匍匐箐中。
现代文：此时已是下午，饥肠辘辘，于是急忙下山；就见背负柴草的樵夫，仍爬行在山霄中。
English: By this time it was afternoon, and they were hungry, so they hurried down the mountain; they saw the woodcutter, who was carrying firewood, still crawling in the mountains.

古文：遂从旧道五里，过第一潭，随水而前，观第二潭。
现代文：于是从原路返回五里，经过第一个深潭，顺水向前走，观看了第二个水潭。
English: So he returned five miles from the original road, passed the first deep pool, walked along the water, and watched the second pool.

古文：其潭当夹门逼束之内，左崖即阳桥高横于上，乃从潭左攀蹬隙，上阳桥，逾东岭而下。
现代文：这个水潭正当夹立的石门里边，左边石崖上就是阳桥高高横在上方，于是从水潭左边攀着石缝中的石瞪，登上阳桥，越过东岭下走。
English: Inside the stone gate of this pool, the left stone cliff is the Yangqiao high and wide above, so from the left side of the pool, climb the stone gap in the stone gap, climb the Yangqiao, cross the Dongling and go down.

古文：四里至高穹之坪，望西涧之潭，已无人迹，亟东下沿溪出，三里至休马处。
现代文：四里后来到高高隆起的平地，望见西涧中的水潭旁，已没有人的踪迹，连忙往东下走沿着溪流出来，三里路来到马匹休息的地方。
English: After four miles, I came to a high-elevated plain. I could see a lake in the West Bank. There was no trace of people. I hurriedly walked east along the stream and came to the horses' resting place three miles away.

古文：何君辈已去，独留顾仆守饭于此，遂啜之东出。
现代文：何君一帮人已经离开，单独留下顾仆在此守着饭，于是吃了饭向东出山。
English: He Jun and his group had already left, leaving Gu Min here alone to guard the meal, so they ate the meal and went out of the mountain to the east.

古文：三里半，过阮墓，从墓右下渡涧，由涧南东向上岭。
现代文：三里半，经过阮尚宾的墓，从墓右侧下渡过涧水，由涧南向东上岭。
English: Three and a half miles, past the tomb of Ruan Shangbin, from the right side of the tomb down through Surabaya, from the south of Laos to the east of Shangling.

古文：路当南逾高岭，乃为感通间道；余东逾其余支，三里，下至东麓之半。
现代文：路应该向南翻越高大的山岭，是去感通寺的捷径；我往东越过它的余脉，三里，下到东麓的半中腰。
English: The road should go south over the high mountains, it is a shortcut to Kangtong Temple; I went east over its remnants, three miles, down to the middle of the eastern foothills.

古文：牧者指感通道，须西南逾高脊乃得，复折而西南上跻，望崖而登，竟无路可循也。
现代文：牧人指点，去感通寺的路，必须向西南越过高大的山脊才能到达，就又折向西南上走，望着山崖上登，居然无路可走了。
English: The herdsman pointed out that the way to Shentong Temple had to cross a high ridge to the southwest to reach it, so he turned to the southwest and climbed up, looking at the cliff, but there was no way to go.

古文：二里，登岭头，乃循岭南西行。
现代文：二里，登上岭头，就沿着山岭南侧向西行。
English: After two miles, climb to the top of the ridge and continue west along the south side of the ridge.

古文：三里，乃稍下，度一峡，转而南，松桧翳依形容树木掩映之状，净宇指高空明净高下，是为宕山，而感通寺在其中焉。
现代文：三里，才稍稍下走，越过一条峡谷，转向南，松柏密蔽依稀，佛寺高低错落，这就是宕山，而感通寺就在山中了。
English: After three miles, you have to walk down a bit, cross a canyon, and turn south. Pine and cypress trees are densely covered, and Buddhist temples are scattered from high to low. This is the mountain, and Kangtong Temple is in the middle of the mountain.

古文：盖三塔、感通，各有僧庐三十六房，而三塔列于两旁，总以寺前山门为出入；感通随崖逐这里为随之意林，各为一院，无山门总摄，而正殿所在，与诸房等，正殿之方丈有大云堂，众时何君辈不知止于何所，方逐房探问。
现代文：三塔寺、感通寺，各有僧舍三十六房，而三塔寺的是排列在两旁，全部以寺前的山门作为出入口；感通寺顺着山势依着树林，各自辟为一院，没有山门统摄，而且正殿所在的地方，与各处僧房一样高，正殿的方丈有处大云堂，僧众全以 大云堂 来称呼他而已。
English: Three Pagodas Temple and Kangtong Temple each have thirty-six monks' quarters, while those of the Three Pagodas Temple are arranged on both sides, all with the mountain gate in front of the temple as the entrance; Kangtong Temple follows the mountainside along the woods, each is set up as a hospital, there is no mountain gate, and the place where the main hall is located is as high as the various monks' rooms. The abbot of the main hall has a large cloud hall, and the monks all call him a large cloud hall.

古文：中一房曰斑山，乃杨升阉写韵楼故址，初闻何君欲止此，过其门，方建醮设法于前，知必不在，及不问而去。
现代文：此时不知何君一帮人住在什么地方，就挨房打听。其中一房名叫斑山，是杨升庵写韵楼的故址，起初听说何君打算住在此处，经过门口，正在门前设坛念经做法事，心知必定不在，便不问就离开了。
English: At this time, I did not know where He Jun's group of people lived, so I asked around. One of the rooms was called Banzhan, which was the former site of Yang Sheng's hermitage. At first, I heard that He Jun planned to live here. I passed by the door, and he was setting up an altar in front of the door to recite scriptures and do rituals. I knew he must not be there, so I left without asking.

古文：后有人追至，留还其房。
现代文：后边有人追上来，挽留返回他们房中。
English: Someone in the back catches up and pulls them back into their room.

古文：余告以欲觅同行者，其人曰： 余知其所止，必款斋而后行。 
现代文：我告诉他想要去找同行的人，那人说： 我知道他们住的地方，一定要招待斋饭后再走。 
English: I told him that I wanted to find my companions, and he said: I know where they live, and I must invite them for a meal before I leave.

古文：余视其貌，似曾半面半陌生，半熟悉，而忘从何处，谛审之，知为王赓虞，乃卫侯之子，为大理庠生庠，庠生即学生，向曾于大觉寺会于遍周师处者也。
现代文：我看他的容貌，似乎曾见过一面，但忘了是在什么地方，仔细审视他，知道是王赓虞，是卫侯的儿子，大理府学的生员，从前曾在大觉寺遍周禅师处会过面。
English: Looking at his face, I felt as if I had seen him before, but I had forgotten where, and scrutinized him carefully. I knew that he was Wang Shanyu, the son of Wei Hou, a student of Dali Prefecture, and that we had met in the past at the Zen master's office of Fen Zhou in Daegu Temple.

古文：今以其祖母忌辰，随其父来修蔫于此，见余过，故父子相谂，而挽留余饭焉。
现代文：今天因为是他祖母去世的祭日，跟随他父亲来此施斋做法事，见我路过，父子俩都认出了我，便挽留我吃饭。
English: Today, because it was the anniversary of his grandmother's death, he had come with his father to do some fasting. When I passed by, both father and son recognized me and invited me to eat.

古文：饭间，何君亦令僧来招。
现代文：吃饭时，何君也命令僧人来招唤。
English: During the meal, He Jun also ordered the monk to be summoned.

古文：既饭而暮，遂同招者过大云堂前北上，得何君所止静室，复与之席地而饮。
现代文：饭后天便黑了，于是同来招唤的僧人经过大云堂前边向北往上走，找到何君居住的静室，再与他席地坐下饮酒。
English: After the meal, it got dark, so the monks who had come to be summoned walked northward past the front of the Great Cloud Hall, found the quiet room where He Jun lived, and then sat down to drink with him.

古文：夜月不如前日之皎。
现代文：夜里月光不如前一天那样皎洁。
English: At night, the moonlight is not as bright as it was the day before.

古文：十三日与何君同赴斋别房，因遍探诸院。
现代文：十三日与何君一同去别的僧房赴斋宴，因而探遍了诸处寺院。
English: On the 13th, together with He Jun, they went to another monk's house to attend a feast, and thus explored various temples.

古文：时山鹃花盛开，各院无不灿然。
现代文：这个季节山杜鹃花盛开，各寺院无处不鲜艳灿烂。
English: In this season, the mountain azaleas are in full bloom, and the temples are bright and splendid everywhere.

古文：中庭院外，乔松修竹，间以茶树。
现代文：中庭院外边，高大的苍松修长的翠竹中，间杂着茶树。
English: Outside the central courtyard, tall aspen trees are interspersed with tea trees in the middle of slender green bamboo.

古文：树皆高三四丈，绝与桂相似，时方采摘，无不架梯升树者。
现代文：茶树都有三四丈高，与桂树非常相似，此时正在采摘，无处不是架梯子爬在树上的人。
English: The tea trees are all three or four feet tall, very similar to the katsura tree. At this time, they are being picked, and there is no place for people with ladders to climb the trees.

古文：茶味颇佳，炒而复曝，不免黝黑。
现代文：茶的味道很美，炒后再晒，色泽不免黝黑。
English: The taste of the tea is very beautiful. It is roasted and then sun-dried, and the color is inevitably dark.

古文：已入正殿，出门亦宏敞。
现代文：不久走入正殿，山门也十分宏伟宽敞。
English: Soon you enter the main hall, and the mountain gate is also very grand and spacious.

古文：殿前有石亭，中立我太祖高皇帝即明太祖朱元璋赐僧《无极归云南诗》十八章，前后有御跋。
现代文：殿前有座石亭子，亭中立着我朝太祖高皇帝赐给僧人无极的十八首归云南诗，前后都有高皇帝写的跋。
English: In front of the hall, there is a stone pavilion. The pavilion stands for the eighteen poems to Yunnan, which were given to the monks by Emperor Gao, my great-great-grandfather. There are poems written by Emperor Gao before and after.

古文：此僧自云南入朝，以白马、茶树献，高皇帝临轩见之，而马嘶花开，遂蒙厚眷。
现代文：这个僧人从云南进朝廷，用白马、茶树进贡，高皇帝到轩廊中接见他，当即白马嘶鸣茶花开放，于是受到厚爱。
English: This monk came to the imperial court from Yunnan, bringing tribute in the form of a white horse and tea trees. Emperor Gao received him in the Xuan Gallery, and immediately the white horse neighed and the camellia bloomed, and he was deeply loved.

古文：后从大江还故土，帝亲洒天葩，以江行所过，各赋一诗送之，又令诸翰林大臣皆作诗送归。
现代文：后来从长江返回故乡，皇帝亲自抛洒鲜花，据沿江要走过的地方，各赋了一首诗送给他，又命令翰林院的诸位大臣都作诗送他回归。
English: Later, when he returned to his hometown from the Yangtze River, the emperor himself sprinkled flowers and gave him a poem for each place along the river. He also ordered all the ministers of the Hanlin Academy to write a poem to send him back.

古文：今宸翰原意指帝王宫殿，后作为帝王代称，这里代指朱元璋已不存，而诗碑犹当时所镌者。李中谿《大理郡志》，以奎章指皇帝手笔不可与文献同辑，竟不之录。然其文献门中亦有御制文，何独诗而不可同辑耶？
现代文：今天皇帝手写的文章已不存在，但诗碑还是当时所刻的。李中黔的《大理郡志》认为帝王的诗不能与文献一同辑录，竟然不收录它。不过他的文献类中也有皇帝写的文章，为何唯独诗就不能一同辑录呢？
English: Today, the emperor's handwritten article no longer exists, but the poem monument was still engraved at that time. Li Zhongyao's "Dali County History" thought that the emperor's poem could not be recorded together with the document, but did not include it. However, there were also articles written by the emperor in his document category, so why couldn't the poem be recorded together?

古文：殿东向，大云堂在其北。
现代文：正殿面向东方，大云堂在它的北边。
English: The main hall faces east, with the Great Cloud Hall to its north.

古文：僧为瀹茗设斋。
现代文：僧人为我沏来茶摆上斋饭。
English: The monk brought me tea and served me a meal.

古文：已乃由寺后西向登岭，觅波罗岩。
现代文：过后，就由寺后向西登岭，去找波罗岩。
English: After that, I walked from the back of the temple to Xidanling to find the Poro Rock.

古文：寺后有登山大道二；一直上西北，由清碧溪南峰上，十五里而至小佛光寨，疑与昨清碧溪中所望雪痕中悬处相近，即后山所谓笔架山之东峰矣；一分岐向西南，溯寺南第十九涧之峡，北行六里而至波罗岩。
现代文：寺后有两条登山的大道：一条一直向西北延伸，由清碧溪的南峰上去，十五里后到达小佛光寨，怀疑与昨天在清碧溪中望见的雪迹悬在中央的地方接近，就是后山中所谓的笔架山的东峰了；一条分开岔向西南，溯寺南第十九条山涧的峡谷，往北行六里后到波罗岩。
English: There are two mountaineering roads behind the temple: one extends all the way to the northwest, from the southern peak of Qingbi Creek, and after fifteen miles it reaches Xiaoboguangzhai. It is suspected that the snow traces seen yesterday in Qingbi Creek are close to the central place, which is the eastern peak of the so-called Pen Stand Mountain in the back of the mountain; a separate trail to the southwest traces the canyon of the 19th mountain south of the temple, and after six miles to the north, it reaches Bolo Rock.

古文：波罗岩者，昔有赵波罗栖此，朝夕礼佛，印二足迹于方石上，故后人即以 波罗 名。
现代文：波罗岩这地方，从前有个赵波罗居住在此，朝夕拜佛，印下两个脚印在方形岩石上，所以后人就用 波罗 来起名。
English: This place, Bolo Rock, was once inhabited by a man named Zhao Bolo, who worshipped the Buddha morning and evening and left two footprints on the square rock, so later generations named it after Bolo.

古文：波罗者，乃此方有家道人之称。
现代文：波罗一词，是这地方对有家室的僧人的称呼。
English: Bolo is the local name for a family of monks.

古文：其石今移大殿中为拜台。
现代文：那块岩石如今移到大殿中作为跪拜用的石台。
English: That rock has now been moved to the main hall as a kneeling platform.

古文：时余与何君乔梓骑而行。离寺即无树，其山童然。
现代文：此时我与何乔梓先生骑马前行、离开寺就没有树，这里的山光秃秃的。
English: At this time, I rode ahead with Mr. He Qiao Zi, leaving the temple without a tree, and the mountains here were bare.

古文：一里，由岐向西南登。
现代文：一里，由岔路向西南登山。
English: One mile, climbing from Kushiro to the southwest.

古文：四里，逾岭而西，其岭亦南与对山夹涧为门者。
现代文：四里，越岭往西走，这里的山岭也是向南与对面的山夹住山涧形成门的样子。
English: Four miles, crossing the ridge to the west, the mountain ridge here is also to the south and the opposite mountain clamped the hawthorn to form a gate.

古文：涧底水细，不及清碧，而内峡稍开，亦循北山西入。
现代文：涧底的水流很细，赶不上清碧溪，而里面的峡谷稍微开阔些，也是沿着北山向西延伸进去。
English: The water flow at the bottom of the river is very thin and cannot keep up with the Qingbi Creek, while the canyon inside is slightly wider and extends westward along the North Mountain.

古文：又一里，北山有石横叠成岩，南临深壑。
现代文：又行一里，北山上有岩石横着垒成岩洞，南边面临深深的壑谷。
English: One mile further on, there are rocks on the north mountain that are cut into caves, and the south side faces a deep ravine.

古文：壑之西南，大山前抱，如屏插天，而尖峰齿齿列其上，遥数之，亦得十九，又苍山之具体而微者。
现代文：壑谷的西南方，大山向前环抱，如屏风样高插天空，而且有一齿齿的尖峰排列在山上，远远数了数，也是有十九座山峰，这又是苍山具体而微之处了。
English: In the south-west of Shibuya, the mountains embrace the sky like a screen, and there are jagged spikes on the mountains. There are also nineteen peaks, which is the specific and subtle point of Cangshan.

古文：岩之西，有僧构室三楹，庭前叠石明净，引水一龛贮岩石下，亦饶幽人之致。
现代文：岩洞的西边，有僧人建了三间房子，庭前叠垒的岩石明丽洁净，引了一坑水贮存在岩石下，也让人产生幽思的情趣。
English: On the west side of the rock cave, a monk has built three houses. The rocks in front of the courtyard are bright and clean, and have led to a pool of water stored under the rocks, which also gives rise to a sense of melancholy.

古文：僧瀹茗炙面为饵以啖客。
现代文：僧人煮了茶用面做成饼来给客人吃。
English: The monk boiled tea and made cakes with noodles for the guests to eat.

古文：久之乃别。
现代文：很久之后才道别。
English: It was a long time before they said goodbye.

古文：从旧路六里，过大云堂，时觉宗相待于斑山，乃复入而观写韵楼。
现代文：从原路返回六里，经过大云堂，此时觉宗等候在斑山，就再次进门观览写韵楼。
English: After returning six miles from the original road and passing through Dayundang, at this time, Jiezong was waiting in Banzhan, and once again entered the door to watch the writing rhyme tower.

古文：楼已非故物，今山门有一楼，差可以存迹。
现代文：楼已不是原有的建筑物，今天山门上有一座楼，略微可以保存一点遗迹。
English: The building is no longer the original building. Today, there is a building on the mountain gate, which can slightly preserve a little relic.

古文：问升庵遗墨，尚有二扁通 篇 ，寺僧恐损剥，藏而不揭也。
现代文：打听杨升庵遗下的墨迹，还有两块匾，寺中的僧人害怕损伤剥落，收藏起来不肯揭开。
English: The monks in the temple are afraid of damage and peeling, and refuse to open the collection.

古文：僧复具斋，强吞一盂而别。
现代文：僧人又准备了斋饭，勉强吞下一钵盂后告别。
English: The monk prepared a meal, and after barely swallowing a mouthful, he said goodbye.

古文：其前有龙女树。
现代文：楼前有棵龙女树。
English: There is a dragon maiden tree in front of the building.

古文：树从根分挺三四大株，各高三四丈，叶长二寸半，阔半之，而绿润有光，花白，大于玉兰，亦木莲之类而异其名。
现代文：树从根部分枝生出三四棵大枝，各自高三四丈，树叶长二寸半，宽处是长处的一半，而碧绿润泽有光，花是白色，比玉兰花小，也是木莲一类的植物但名字不同。
English: The tree produces three or four large branches from the root part of the branches, each of which is three to four feet high, the leaves are two and a half inches long, the width is half of the length, and the turquoise is moist and shiny, the flowers are white, smaller than magnolia, and are also plants such as magnolia but with different names.

古文：时花亦已谢，止存数朵在树杪即树梢，而高不可折，余仅折其空枝以行。
现代文：此时花也已凋谢，只留下几朵在树梢上，但高不可折，我仅折下树上的空枝就走了。
English: At this time, the flowers have also withered, leaving only a few on the treetops, but high and unbreakable, I just broke off the empty branches on the tree and left.

古文：于是东下坡，五里，东出大道，有二小塔峙而夹道；所出大道，即龙尾关达郡城者也。
现代文：从这里向东下坡，五里，向东走上大道，有两座小塔夹住道路耸峙；所走上的大道，就是从龙尾关到府城的路。
English: From here, it's downhill to the east, five miles, and you walk east on the avenue, where two small towers stand between the road; the avenue you walk on is the road from Longuoguan to the capital.

古文：其南有小村曰上睦，去郡尚十里。
现代文：塔南边有个小村子叫上睦，离府城还有十里。
English: There is a small village called Shangmou on the south side of the tower, ten miles from the capital.

古文：乃遵道北行，过七里、五里二桥，而入大理郡城南门。
现代文：于是顺着大道往北行，经过七里桥、五里桥两座桥，而后走入大理府城的南门。
English: So I walked north along the boulevard, passing the Shichiri Bridge and the Wuri Bridge, and then walked into the south gate of Dali Fucheng.

古文：经大街而北，过鼓楼，遇吕梦熊使者，知梦熊不来，而乃郎他的儿子，乃即 他 已至。
现代文：经过大街往北走，路过鼓楼，遇上吕梦熊的使者，了解到吕梦熊不来了，但他的儿子已来到。
English: Walking north along the main street, passing the Drum Tower, he met the messenger of Lv Mengxiong and learned that Lv Mengxiong was not coming, but his son had already arrived.

古文：以暮不及往。
现代文：因为天晚来不及前去。
English: Because it's too late to go.

古文：乃出北门，过吊桥而北，折而西北二里，入大空山房而宿。
现代文：于是走出北门，过到吊桥北边，转向西北行二里，进入大空山房住下。
English: So he walked out of the north gate, crossed to the north side of the suspension bridge, turned northwest for two miles, and entered the big empty mountain house to live.

古文：十四日观石于寺南石工家，何君与余各以百钱市一小方。
现代文：十四日在寺南的石匠家观赏石头。何君与我各用一百文钱买了一小方块。
English: On the 14th, we went to a stonemason's house in the south of the temple to look at the stones. He and I each bought a small square with a hundred coins.

古文：何君所取者，有峰峦点缀之妙；余取其黑白明辨而已。
现代文：何君选中的，有峰峦点缀在上边的美妙之处；我选了其中黑白分明容易分辨的而已。
English: What you have chosen is a beautiful place with peaks and ridges dotted above; I have chosen one that is black and white and easy to distinguish.

古文：因与何君遍游寺殿。
现代文：于是与何君遍游寺中的殿宇。
English: As a result, he and He toured the halls of the temple.

古文：是寺在第十峰之下，唐开元中建，名崇圣。
现代文：这座寺院在第十座山峰之下，唐代开元年间建造，名叫崇圣寺。
English: This temple, under the tenth mountain peak, was built in the first year of the Tang Dynasty and is called Chong Sheng Temple.

古文：寺前三塔鼎立，而中塔最高，形方，累十二层，故今名为三塔。
现代文：寺前的三塔像鼎足一样聂立，中间的塔最高，方形，重叠十二层，所以今天称为三塔。
English: The three towers in front of the temple stand like a pinnacle, the middle tower is the highest, square, overlapping twelve layers, so today it is called the Three Towers.

古文：塔四旁皆高松参天。
现代文：塔的四旁全是高大的松树耸入空中。
English: The tower is surrounded by tall pine trees that soar into the sky.

古文：其西由山门而入，有钟楼与三塔对，势极雄壮；而四壁已颓，檐瓦半脱，已岌岌矣。
现代文：寺西由山门进去，有钟楼与三塔相对，气势极其雄伟壮丽；但四面的墙壁已经坍塌，屋檐上的瓦片有一半脱落，已岌岌可危了。
English: Entering the west side of the temple through the mountain gate, there is a bell tower opposite the three towers, which is extremely majestic and magnificent; but the walls on all four sides have collapsed, and half of the tiles on the eaves have fallen off, which is precarious.

古文：楼中有钟极大，径可丈余，而厚及尺，为蒙氏时即南诏统治时期铸，其声闻可八十里。
现代文：楼中有口铜钟非常大，直径大约有一丈多，而壁厚达一尺，是蒙氏时期铸造的，钟声可在八十里外听到。
English: The bronze bell in the building is very large, with a diameter of about a foot more, and the wall is a foot thick. It was cast during the Mongol period, and the bell can be heard eighty miles away.

古文：楼后为正殿，殿后罗列诸碑，而中谿所勒黄华老人书四碑俱在焉。
现代文：钟楼后是正殿，殿后罗列着许多碑，而李中黔所刻的黄华老人书写的四块碑都在其中。
English: Behind the bell tower is the main hall. There are many monuments listed behind the hall, and the four monuments inscribed by the old man Huang Hua and engraved by Li Zhongya are all among them.

古文：其后为雨珠观音殿，乃立像铸铜而成者，高三丈。
现代文：碑后是雨珠观音殿，是用铜铸成的立像，高三丈。
English: Behind the monument is the Yuzu Kannon Hall, a bronze statue three stories tall.

古文：铸时分三节为范，肩以下先铸就而铜已完，忽天雨铜天上下铜雨如珠，众共掬而熔之，恰成其首，故有此名。
现代文：铸造时分为三段制成模子，肩以下先铸成而铜就已用完，忽然间天上落下如珠子一样的铜雨，众人一道用手把铜珠捧来熔化，恰好完成了铜像的头部，所以有了这个名字。
English: When casting, it was divided into three sections to make a mold. The shoulders and below were cast first, and the copper was used up. Suddenly, a rain of copper like beads fell from the sky. Everyone held the copper beads in their hands and melted them together, just completing the head of the bronze statue, hence the name.

古文：其左右回廊诸像亦甚整，而廊倾不能蔽焉。
现代文：殿左右回廊中的众神像也十分整齐，但回廊倒塌得不能蔽风雨了。
English: The statues of the gods in the corridors to the left and right of the hall are also very neat, but the corridors have collapsed and cannot shelter from the wind and rain.

古文：自后历级上，为净土庵，即方丈也。
现代文：从后边沿石阶上去，是净土庵，就是方丈的住处了。
English: From the back, along the stone steps, is the Pure Land Hermitage, the abbot's residence.

古文：前殿三楹，佛座后有巨石二方，嵌中楹间，各方七尺，厚寸许。
现代文：前殿有三开间，佛座后边有两块巨石，嵌在中间两根柱子之间的墙上，各七尺见方，厚一寸左右。
English: The vestibule has three openings, and behind the Buddha's seat there are two huge boulders, embedded in the wall between the two columns in the middle, each seven feet square and about an inch thick.

古文：北一方为远山阔水之势，其波流潆折，极变化之妙，有半舟庋尾烟汀间。
现代文：靠北一块有远山阔水的气势，其中流水波涛潇涸曲折，极尽变化的妙趣，有些如小船只停靠在烟霭绿洲之间。
English: To the north, there is a vast expanse of mountains and water. The flowing water is full of twists and turns, and is extremely varied. Some are like small boats docked in the middle of a smoky oasis.

古文：张石大径二尺，约五十块，块块皆奇，俱绝妙著色山水，危峰断壑，飞瀑随云，雪崖映水，层叠远近，笔笔灵异，去皆能活，水如有声，不特五色灿然而已。其后又有正殿，庭中有白山茶一株，花大如红茶，而瓣簇如之，花尚未尽也。
现代文：南边的一块是高峰重峦叠嶂的景观，它那弥漫的云烟深浅有别，各自达到出神入化的境界。这两块石板与清真寺中枯梅纹的碑座，是大理石中最古老的东西。新采石头中美妙的，没有比得上顺宁张知府寄放在大空山楼中的诸石的了，其中有极其神妙更超过旧石的。因此了解到造物主的创造是越来越奇妙，从此以后，画家的绘画全是俗笔，而画坛可以废除了。前殿后边又有正殿，庭院中有一棵白山茶，花的大小如红山茶，而且花瓣成簇也像红山茶，花还没有开完。
English: The southern one is a landscape of peaks overlapping and overlapping. Its diffuse clouds and smoke are different in depth and light, each reaching a state of ecstasy. These two stone slabs and the monument of the dried plum pattern in the mosque are the oldest things in marble. Among the newly quarried stones, there is nothing more wonderful than the stones deposited by Shuning Zhang Prefecture in the big empty mountain tower, and some of them are extremely magical and even surpass the old stones. Therefore, we understand that the creator's creation is more and more wonderful. From now on, the painter's paintings are all ordinary pens, and the painting table can be abolished. There is a front hall and a

古文：净土庵之北，又有一庵，其殿内外庭除，俱以苍石铺地，方块大如方砖，此亦旧制也；而清真寺则新制以为栏壁之用焉。
现代文：净土庵的北边，又有一座寺庵，佛殿内处的庭院石阶，全是用大理石铺地，方形的石块大小如方砖，这也是旧时制成的；但清真寺则是新制成的，用大理石来作栏杆墙壁。
English: On the north side of the Pure Land hermitage, there is another temple hermitage. The stone steps in the courtyard inside the Buddhist temple are all paved with marble. The square stones are the size of square bricks, which were also made in the old days; but the mosque is newly made, using marble to make the railing walls.

古文：其庵前为玉皇阁道院，而路由前殿东巩门入，绀官三重，后乃为阁，而竟无一黄冠居守，中空户圮，令人怅然。
现代文：此庵前边是玉皇阁道院，而路要由前殿东边的拱门进去，有殿宇三层，后边就是楼阁，但是居然没有一个道士留守，庙中空空，门户倒塌，令人怅怅不快。
English: In front of this hermitage is the Jade Emperor Pagoda Taoist Temple, and the way to enter is through the arch on the east side of the front hall. There are three floors of the temple, and the rear is the castle, but there is not a single Taoist left, the temple is empty, and the portal has collapsed, which is unpleasant.

古文：十五日是日为街子之始。
现代文：十五日这天是街子的头一天。
English: The fifteenth day is the first day of the town.

古文：过寺东石户村，止余环堵数十围，而人户俱流徙已尽，以取石之役开凿大理石的劳役，不堪其累也。
现代文：原来大理城有观音街子的集市，设在城西的演武场中，其由来非常久远。从这一天开始，到十九日才散，十三省的货物无所不至，云南省内的各民族地区的物产也无所不至，听说数年来道路上多险阻，也减少大半了。
English: Originally, Dali City had a market in Guanyin Street, which was located in the martial arts arena in the west of the city. It has a very long history. From the beginning of this day, until the 19th day, goods from 13 provinces were all over the place, and products from various ethnic regions in Yunnan Province were also all over the place. I heard that many dangerous obstacles on the road have been reduced in the past few years.

古文：寺南北俱有石工数十家，今惟南户尚存。
现代文：早餐后，何君骑马同我从寺左去扫祭他的祖坟。
English: After breakfast, He Jun rode with me from the left side of the temple to sweep his ancestral grave.

古文：取石之处，由无为寺而上，乃点苍之第八峰也，凿去上层，乃得佳者。又西上二里半，乃登其茔。
现代文：经过寺东的石户村，只剩下数十圈环绕的墙壁，而匠人居民都已流亡迁徙光了，这是因为采石的劳役，不能忍受这种劳累的原因。又往西上走二里半，才能到何君的祖坟。
English: After passing through the village of Ishido to the east of the temple, there are only a few dozen circles of walls left, and the artisan residents have all emigrated. This is because the laborers of the quarry can not bear this kind of fatigue. And walk two and a half miles to the west to get to He Jun's ancestral grave.

古文：脉自峰顶连珠下坠，前以三塔为案，颇有结聚环护之胜。
现代文：地脉从峰顶如串连的珠子一样下坠，前方以三塔作为桌案，颇有些聚落前结环护的优美之处。
English: The earth vein descends from the peak like a string of beads, with three towers as a table in front, and there are some beautiful places in front of the settlement.

古文：还二里，至寺后，转而南过李中谿墓。乃下马拜之。
现代文：返回来二里，来到寺后，转向南路过李中路墓，于是下马祭拜了他。
English: After returning two miles and arriving at the temple, he turned south and passed Li Zhonglu's tomb, so he dismounted and paid homage to him.

古文：中谿无子，年七十余，自营此穴，傍寺以为皈依在寺旁造墓，为的是皈依佛门，而孰知佛宇之亦为沧桑耶！
现代文：李中骆无子，年龄七十余岁时，自己营造了这个墓穴，靠着寺庙以示阪依佛教，可谁知佛寺也成为沧海桑田了呢！
English: Li Zhongluo had no children, and when he was more than seventy years old, he built this tomb himself, leaning on the temple to show his adherence to Buddhism, but who knew that the Buddhist temple had also become a sea of weeds!

古文：由西石户村入寺饭。
现代文：由石户村向西进寺吃饭。
English: From Ishidomura, head towards Saijinji for dinner.

古文：同巢阿趋街子，且欲入城访吕郎，而中途雨霰大作，街子人俱奔还，余辈亦随之还寺。
现代文：同何巢阿去赶街子，并且想进城去拜访吕家儿郎，可半路上雪珠风雨大作，街子上的人全都往回奔跑，我们这帮人也随着人流返回寺中。
English: I wanted to go to the city to visit Lyu Jia Rong, but it snowed and rained heavily on the way. Everyone on the street ran back, and our group also followed the crowd back to the temple.

古文：十六日巢阿同乃郎往街子，余由西门入叩吕梦熊乃郎。
现代文：十六日何巢阿同他儿子去赶街子，我由西门进城叩拜吕梦熊的儿子。
English: On the sixteenth day, Ho Sona and his son went to the streets, and I went from the West Gate into the city to worship the son of Lv Meng Xiong.

古文：讯其寓，得于关帝庙前，盖西城内之南隅也，时已同刘陶石往街相马矣。
现代文：打听他的寓所，在关帝庙前找到，是在西城内的南隅，此时他已同刘陶石到街子上相马去了。
English: He inquired about his apartment and found it in front of the Guan Di Temple, in the southern corner of the West City. At this time, he and Liu Tao Shi had already gone to the neighborhood.

古文：余乃仍由西门西向一里半，入演武场，俱结棚为市，环错纷纭。
现代文：我于是仍由西门向西行一里半，走入演武场，到处搭了棚子作为市场，环绕错杂，纷纷扰扰。
English: So I still walked a mile and a half west from the West Gate, walked into the martial arts arena, set up sheds everywhere as a market, surrounded by clutter, and disturbed.

古文：其北为马场，千骑交集，数人骑而驰于中，更队以觇高下焉。
现代文：集市北边是赛马场，成千的骑手交集在一起，儿个人骑马奔驰在场中，分为几队轮番出赛以比试高低。
English: On the north side of the bazaar is a racetrack, where thousands of riders come together. Children ride individual horses on the track, and several teams take turns to compete.

古文：时男女杂沓，交臂不辨，乃遍行场市。
现代文：此时男女交杂，交臂擦肩不能分辨，只好在市场上四处走走。
English: At this time, men and women intermingled, arms crossed and shoulders rubbed, and it was impossible to tell them apart, so they had to walk around the market.

古文：巢阿买文已返，刘、吕物色无从，遇觉宗，为饮于市，且觅面为饭。
现代文：何巢阿买文章已返回去，刘陶石、吕家儿郎无法找到，遇上觉宗，为我在集市上做饭，并且找来面当饭。
English: When Liu Tao Shi and Lv Jia Erlang could not be found, I met Jie Zong, who cooked for me at the market and brought me some noodles for dinner.

古文：观场中诸物，多药，多毡布及铜器木具而已，无足观者。
现代文：观看市场上的各种货物，药材很多，有许多毡布及铜器、木制器具而已，没有值得观看的。
English: Watch the various goods on the market, there are many medicinal materials, there are many fabrics and copperware, wooden utensils, but there is nothing worth watching.

古文：书乃吾乡所刻村塾中物及时文数种，无旧书也。
现代文：书籍是我家乡刻印的乡村私塾中用的，还有几种应景的图书，没有旧书。
English: The books are used in the village private school in my hometown, and there are also several books for different occasions. There are no old books.

古文：既暮，返寺中。
现代文：天黑后，返回寺中。
English: After dark, they returned to the temple.

古文：十七日巢阿别而归，约余自金腾东返，仍同尽点苍之胜，目下恐渐热，先为西行可也。
现代文：十七日何巢阿告别回乡，约我从金腾返回东方，仍然一同去游完点苍山的胜景，眼下担心天渐渐热起来了，可以先往西走。
English: On the seventeenth day, He Niao bade farewell to his hometown and asked me to return to the east from Jinteng. We still went to swim together to complete the scenic beauty of Cangshan. At the moment, I was worried that the weather was getting warmer, so I could go west first.

古文：送至寺前，余即南入城。
现代文：送到寺前，我立即向南进城。
English: After being dropped off in front of the temple, I immediately headed south into the city.

古文：遇刘陶石及沙坪徐孝廉，知吕郎已先往马场，遂与同出。
现代文：遇到刘陶石和沙坪的徐孝廉，了解到吕家儿郎已先去赛马场，就与他们一同出城。
English: When Xu Xiaolian met Liu Taoishi and Shaping and learned that Lujia Rong had gone to the racetrack first, he went out of the city with them.

古文：已遇吕，知买马未就。
现代文：不久遇见姓吕的，知道没有买成马。
English: Soon after, I met a man surnamed Lv, and I knew that he hadn't bought a horse.

古文：既而辞吕，观永昌贾人宝石、琥珀及翠生石诸物，亦无佳者。
现代文：既而辞别姓吕的，去观看永昌商人卖的宝石、唬拍及翡翠等物，也没有好东西。
English: Even though I left my family name, Lv, and went to see the gems, baubles and emeralds sold by Yongchang merchants, there was nothing good.

古文：仍觅面为饭。
现代文：仍旧找面当饭吃。
English: They still look for noodles to eat.

古文：饭后觅顾仆不得，乃返寺，而顾仆已先在矣。
现代文：饭后找不到顾仆，只得回寺，而顾仆已先在寺中了。
English: After the meal, he couldn't find the attendant, so he had to go back to the temple, but the attendant was already in the temple.

古文：十八日由东门入城，定巾，买竹箱，修旧箧箱子。
现代文：十八日由东门进城，定购头巾，买了竹箱，修理旧箱子。
English: On the 18th, I entered the city from the east gate, ordered a headscarf, bought a bamboo box, and repaired the old box.

古文：再过吕寓，叩刘、吕二君。
现代文：再次拜访吕家寓所，即见了刘陶石、吕家儿郎两位先生。
English: When I visited Lyu Jia's apartment again, I immediately saw Mr. Liu Tao Shih and Mr. Lyu Jia Er Lang.

古文：吕命其仆为觅担夫，余乃返。
现代文：姓吕的叫他的仆人替我去找挑夫，我于是返回来。
English: Lyu called his servant to find a porter for me, and I returned.

古文：十九日早过吕寓，二君留余饭。
现代文：十九日早上拜访吕家寓所，二位先生留我吃饭。
English: On the morning of the 19th, I paid a visit to the Lyu family's apartment, and the two gentlemen stayed with me for dinner.

古文：同刘君往叩王赓虞父子，盖王亦刘戚也，家西南城隅内。
现代文：同刘君前去叩拜王赓虞父子，原来王家也是刘陶石的亲戚，家在城内西南隅。
English: He went with Liu Jun to pay homage to Wang Xiyu and his son. Originally, the Wang family was also a relative of Liu Tao Shi, and their home was in the southwest corner of the city.

古文：其前即清真寺。
现代文：他家前边就是清真寺。
English: In front of his house is a mosque.

古文：寺门东向南门内大街，寺乃教门沙氏所建，即所谓回回堂也。
现代文：寺门朝东对着南门内的大街，寺是教门中姓沙的人建造的，就是所谓的回回堂了。
English: The temple gate faces the main street in the south gate to the east. The temple was built by a man with the surname of Sha, who was a member of the clergy. This is the so-called Hui Hui Hall.

古文：殿前槛陛窗棂之下，俱以苍石代板，如列画满堂，俱新制，而独不得所谓古梅之石。
现代文：大殿前的门槛台阶窗权之下，全部用大理石代替木板，如满堂陈列着画幅，全是新制的，可唯独找不到所谓有古梅的石座。
English: The threshold in front of the main hall, the steps, and under the window right, all use marble instead of wood. For example, the hall is full of paintings, all of which are new, but you can't find the so-called ancient plum stone seat.

古文：还寺，所定夫来索金加添，余不许。
现代文：回到寺中，讲定的挑夫来要求加价，我不同意。
English: Back in the temple, the designated driver came to ask for a price increase, which I did not agree with.

古文：有寺内僧欲行，余索其定钱，仍掯不即还。
现代文：寺内有僧人打算上路，我要回挑夫的定金，仍作刁难不马上退还。
English: There is a monk in the temple who plans to go on the road. I want to return the driver's deposit, but it is still difficult to return it immediately.

古文：令顾仆往追，抵暮返，曰： 彼已愿行矣。 
现代文：叫顾仆去追，到天黑时返来，说： 他已愿意走了。 
English: And he sent his servant after him, and came in the evening, and said, He is willing to go.

