古文：萧子恪，字景冲，兰陵人，齐豫章文献王嶷第二子也。
现代文：萧子恪字景冲，是兰陵入，齐朝豫章文献王萧嶷的第二子。
English: Xiao Zi, whose family name was Jingchong, was the second son of Lan Ling, a member of the Han dynasty.

古文：永明中，以王子封南康县侯。
现代文：永明年间，因是王子被封为南康县侯。
English: In the middle of the following year, because he was a prince, he was named the first marquis of Nankang County.

古文：年十二，和从兄司徒竟陵王《高松赋》，卫军王俭见而奇之。
现代文：十二岁时，和堂兄司徒竟陵王作的《高松赋》，卫军工俭见了很赏识他。
English: At the age of twelve, he starred in "Takamatsu Fu" with his cousin, Satoru Chokuryo, which was well received by the guards.

古文：初为宁朔将军、淮陵太守，建武中，迁辅国将军、吴郡太守。
现代文：初任宁朔将军、进堕太守，建茎年间，迁任辅国将军、吴郡太守。
English: He was initially appointed as the general of Ningshuo, and later became the deposed daimyo. During the Jianzhu era, he was transferred to be the general of Fu Guo Province and the daimyo of Wu County.

古文：大司马王敬则于会稽举兵反，以奉子恪为名，明帝悉召子恪兄弟亲从七十余人入西省，至夜当害之。
现代文：大司马王敬则在会稽起兵造反，以拥戴子坚为名，旦旦童便把王坦兄弟亲从七十余人召到西省，将要等到夜间杀害他们。
English: On the other hand, the Grand Master Ma Wangjing was instigating a mutiny, and in the name of supporting Zi Jian, Dandan Tong called the Wang Tan brothers and sisters from more than seventy people to the West Province, and was going to wait until night to kill them.

古文：会子恪弃郡奔归，是日亦至，明帝乃止，以子恪为太子中庶子。
现代文：逭时子恪弃吴郡逃奔归来，当日赶到京城，明帝才没有伤害他们。任命王垡为太子中庶子。
English: Emperor Ming did not harm Wang Xizhi, who had abandoned Wu County and fled back to Beijing the same day. He appointed Wang Xizhi as the prince's middle son.

古文：东昏即位，迁秘书监，领右军将军，俄为侍中。
现代文：东昏侯即位，迁任秘书监，领右军将军，不久任侍中。
English: Prince Dongguang ascended the throne, moved to the post of secretary-supervisor, led the right-wing army as general, and soon became a chamberlain.

古文：中兴二年，迁辅国谘议参军。
现代文：中兴二年，迁任辅国谘议参军。
English: Two years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was transferred to an advisory position to advise on joining the army.

古文：天监元年，降爵为子，除散骑常侍，领步兵校尉，以疾不拜，徙为光禄大夫，俄为司徒左长史。
现代文：天监元年，降爵位为子爵，授任散骑常侍，领步兵校尉，因有病没有受任，徙任光禄大夫，不久任司徒左长史。
English: In the first year of the Tenjin era, he was demoted to the rank of viscount, and was appointed as a horseback riding attendant, and an infantry captain. However, he was not appointed due to illness, and was transferred to the post of doctor of Guanglu, and soon became the head of the Stuzo left long history.

古文：子恪与弟子范等，尝因事入谢，高祖在文德殿引见之，从容谓曰： 我欲与卿兄弟有言。
现代文：萧子恪弟子范等人，曾因事入朝谢恩，高祖在文德殿接见他们，从容地对他们说：我想对你们兄弟说几句话。
English: Gaozu met with Xiao Ziqi's disciple Fan and others, who had thanked him for coming to the imperial court, and said to them calmly, "I would like to say a few words to you brothers."

古文：夫天下之宝，本是公器，非可力得。
现代文：天下的宝贵东西，本是名位爵禄，但不可以强力得到它。
English: The most precious thing in the world is the title of nobility, but you can't get it by force.

古文：苟无期运，虽有项籍之力，终亦败亡。
现代文：如果没有机运，虽有项籍的力量，最终还是败亡。
English: If there is no opportunity, although there is the strength of the cadre, it will eventually be defeated.

古文：所以班彪《王命论》云： 所求不过一金，然终转死沟壑 。
现代文：所以墨皑着的《王命论》说：所求取的不过是一金，然而终辗转死在沟壑中。 
English: That's why the famous "The Theory of the King's Life" says, "All I wanted was gold, but I ended up dying in a ditch."

古文：卿不应不读此书。
现代文：你们不应该不读此书。
English: You shouldn't skip this book.

古文：宋孝武为性猜忌，兄弟粗有令名者，无不因事鸩毒，所遗唯有景和。
现代文：宋孝武帝禀性猜忌，他的兄弟稍有美名的，没有不藉事由而毒死的，所能活下来的祇有刘子业。
English: Emperor Song Xiaowu was very suspicious, and his brother, who was a bit famous, was poisoned for no reason. Only Liu Ziyuan survived.

古文：至于朝臣之中，或疑有天命而致害者，枉滥相继，然而或疑有天命而不能害者，或不知有天命而不疑者，于时虽疑卿祖，而无如之何。
现代文：至于朝廷大臣中，或怀疑有天命而杀害，枉错淫滥，无辜受害者相继。然而也有他怀疑人有天命而不能杀害的，或不知他有天命而不怀疑他，那时虽怀疑你们的祖父，然而不知怎样对他。
English: As for the ministers of the imperial court, they either suspected that there was a predestined destiny and killed, wrongfully and lasciviously, innocent victims one after another. However, there were also those who suspected that there was a predestined destiny and could not kill, or did not know that there was a predestined destiny and did not suspect him. At that time, although they suspected your grandfather, they did not know what to do with him.

古文：此是疑而不得。
现代文：这是对人怀疑而不得杀害的。
English: This is why people should be suspected and not killed.

古文：又有不疑者，如宋明帝本为庸常被免，岂疑而得全？
现代文：又有人不被怀疑，如宋明帝本因为平庸没有作为被免脱了，哪裹是被怀疑而得保全。
English: There are also people who are not suspected, such as Song Mingdi, who was exempted because he was mediocre and did nothing, but was suspected and had to be preserved.

古文：又复我于时已年二岁，彼岂知我应有今日？
现代文：又再说我那时已二岁，他怎知道我应有今天。
English: He also said that I was two years old at the time, so how could he know that I should be alive today.

古文：当知有天命者，非人所害，害亦不能得。
现代文：当知有天命的人，不是人所能伤害的，要想伤害也不能成功。
English: When you know that those who have the destiny of heaven are not those who can be harmed by man, you cannot succeed if you want to harm them.

古文：我初平建康城，朝廷内外皆劝我云： 时代革异，物心须一，宜行处分。 
现代文：我初平定建康城，朝廷内外的人都劝我说： 时代变革，人心须一致，应当实行惩罚。 
English: At the beginning of my efforts to pacify and build Kangcheng, people both inside and outside the imperial court advised me: The times are changing, people's hearts must be united, and punishment should be implemented.

古文：我于时依此而行，谁谓不可！
现代文：我在那时依此论而行，谁会说不可以!
English: I went along with it at the time, and who am I to say no!

古文：我政言江左以来，代谢必相诛戮，此是伤于和气，所以国祚例不灵长。
现代文：我正说江左建国以来，要改朝换代就必互相诛戮，这是损伤和气，所以国运照例不能广远绵长。
English: I just said that since the founding of the country by Jiang Zuo, in order to change the dynasty and generation, it is necessary to fight each other. This is damage and qi, so the national movement cannot be extensive and long as usual.

古文：所谓 殷鉴不远，在夏后之世。 
现代文：所谓 夏灭亡的教训就在眼前，殷的后代应以为鉴戒 。
English: The so-called lesson of Xia's death is right in front of us, and Yin's descendants should take it as a warning.

古文：此是一义。
现代文：此是第一个意思。
English: This is the first meaning.

古文：二者，齐梁虽曰革代，义异往时。
现代文：再者，齐朝舆梁朝虽说是革换朝代，但道理上又与往时的革换朝代不同。
English: Furthermore, although the Qi Dynasty and the Liang Dynasty were revolutionary dynasties, they were logically different from the revolutionary dynasties of the past.

古文：我与卿兄弟虽复绝服二世，宗属未远。
现代文：我舆你们兄弟虽已有两代不互服丧，但宗属关系并不远。
English: Although your brothers and I have been estranged for two generations, the family ties are not far apart.

古文：卿勿言兄弟是亲，人家兄弟自有周旋者，有不周旋者，况五服之属邪？
现代文：你不要说兄弟关系很亲，自家兄弟有相互周旋的，也有相互不周旋的，何况是丧服不同疏远的亲属呢?
English: Don't you want to say that the relationship between brothers is very close, that brothers in your own family may or may not interact with each other, not to mention estranged relatives with different mourning clothes?

古文：齐业之初，亦是甘苦共尝，腹心在我。卿兄弟年少，理当不悉。
现代文：齐朝建业之初，也是甘苦共尝，我也有至诚之心，你们兄弟年少，理应不熟悉。
English: At the beginning of the construction of Qi Dynasty, we also shared the joys and sorrows. I also have a sincere heart. Your brothers are young, so they should not be familiar with camels.

古文：我与卿兄弟，便是情同一家，岂当都不念此，作行路事。
现代文：我舆你们兄弟，便是情同一家，难道都不念及这些，做出如同行路不相识的事情。
English: My brothers and sisters, we are all members of the same family. Don't we all think about these things and do things we don't know how to do?

古文：此是二义。
现代文：这是第二个意思。
English: This is the second meaning.

古文：我有今日，非是本意所求。
现代文：我有今日，不是我的本意所求。
English: What I have today is not what I wanted.

古文：且建武屠灭卿门，致卿兄弟涂炭。我起义兵，非惟自雪门耻，亦是为卿兄弟报仇。
现代文：而且齐明帝要屠减你们的家门，使你们兄弟陷入极其困苦的境地，我起义兵讨伐他，不衹是为了自雪门耻，也是为你们兄弟报仇。
English: Moreover, Emperor Qiming wants to slaughter your families and make your brothers fall into a very difficult situation. I rebelled against him, not only to save myself from disgrace, but also to avenge your brothers.

古文：卿若能在建武、永元之世，拨乱反正，我虽起樊、邓，岂得不释戈推奉；其虽欲不已，亦是师出无名。
现代文：你们如果能在明帝、东昏侯之世，拨乱反正，我虽在樊、邓起兵，怎能不放下武器推奉呢；我即使想不放下武器，也是出师无名了。
English: If you were able to set things right in the era of Emperor Ming and Emperor Dongwu, how could I not lay down my arms and serve you, even though I raised an army in the reigns of Emperor Zhou and Emperor Deng? Even if I wanted to lay down my arms, I would have no reputation.

古文：我今为卿报仇，且时代革异，望卿兄弟尽节报我耳。
现代文：我今为你们报仇，而且改换朝代了，希望你们兄弟尽节报效我。
English: Now that I have avenged you and changed dynasties, I hope your brothers will repay me in kind.

古文：且我自藉丧乱，代明帝家天下耳，不取卿家天下。
现代文：而且我自己藉助动乱的政局，取代明帝统一天下，不是夺取你们家的天下。
English: And I myself, with the help of the turbulent political situation, replaced the Ming emperor to unify the country, not to seize the world of your family.

古文：昔刘子舆自称成帝子，光武言 假使成帝更生，天下亦不复可得，况子舆乎 。
现代文：昔刘王舆自称是旦适的儿子，光亘造说 假使盛帝再生，也不可重新得到天下，何况子舆乎 。
English: Once upon a time, Liu Wang Yu claimed to be the son of Danshi, and created the theory that even if Emperor Sheng were to be reborn, he would not be able to regain control of the world.

古文：梁初，人劝我相诛灭者，我答之犹如向孝武时事：彼若苟有天命，非我所能杀；若其无期运，何忽行此，政足示无度量。
现代文：梁朝初年，有人劝我进行诛灭，我回答如向日孝武时事：他若是有天命，我杀害不了他；若是他没有期运，为何急忙这样去做，这样做正足以显示我无度量。
English: In the first year of Liang's reign, someone advised me to carry out annihilation. I replied, "If he has a heavenly destiny, I can't kill him; if he doesn't have a heavenly destiny, why rush to do so? Doing so is enough to show that I have no measure."

古文：曹志亲是魏武帝孙，陈思之子，事晋武能为晋室忠臣，此即卿事例。
现代文：曹志是魏武帝的亲孙，陈思王之子，事奉晋武帝能成为晋室的忠臣，此即是你们的榜样。
English: Cao Zhi is the grandchild of Emperor Weiwu, the son of Emperor Chen Si, and can serve Emperor Jinwu to become a loyal subject of the imperial court. This is your role model.

古文：卿是宗室，情义异佗，方坦然相期，卿无复怀自外之意。
现代文：你们是宗室，情义舆他不同，可以坦然相期，你们不要再怀有自外之意。
English: You are the parents, and your feelings are different from each other. You can date each other with equanimity. Don't harbor any ulterior motives.

古文：小待，自当知我寸心。 
现代文：稍加等待，自当知道我的心愿。
English: Wait a little and you'll see what I mean.

古文：又文献王时，内斋直帐阉人赵叔祖，天监初，入为台齐斋帅，在寿光省，高祖呼叔祖曰： 我本识汝在北第，以汝旧人，故每驱使。
现代文：又文献王时在内斋管账册的太监赵叔祖，天监初年，入任台斋帅，在寿光省，高祖呼叔祖说： 我本在北第认识你，因为你是旧人，所以常支使你。
English: Zhao Shuzu, the eunuch who was in charge of the internal accounting of the eunuch at the time of the document king, the first year of the eunuch, was appointed as the head of the eunuch, in Shuguang Province, Gao Zhou Shuzu said: I originally knew you in Beidai, because you are an old man, so I always support you.

古文：汝比见北第诸郎不？ 
现代文：你近来见到北第的诸郎没有? 
English: Have you seen any of the Northern clansmen lately?

古文：叔祖奉答云： 比多在直，出外甚疏，假使暂出，亦不能得往。 
现代文：叔祖奉答说： 近来多在此当差，出外很少，即使暂出，也无暇到那边去。 
English: The uncle replied, "Recently, I've mostly been on duty here. I rarely go out, and even if I did, I wouldn't have time to go there.

古文：高祖曰： 若见北第诸郎，道我此意：我今日虽是革代，情同一家；但今磐石未立，所以未得用诸郎者，非惟在我未宜，亦是欲使诸郎得安耳。
现代文：高祖说： 如果见到北第诸郎，告诉他们我的意思：我今虽是改换朝代，但舆他们情同一家；衹是今日国家的根基还不稳固，所以没有任用诸郎，不衹是在我不适宜，也是想使诸郎得到安定。
English: Gao Zu said: If you see the Northern Dynasties lords, tell them what I mean: Although I am now changing dynasties, I think they are the same family; either the foundation of today's country is not yet stable, so there is no appointment of lords, or I am not suitable, but I also want to make the lords stable.

古文：但闭门高枕，后自当见我心。 
现代文：让他们闭门高枕，以后自会见我心。 
English: Let them sleep with their heads down behind closed doors and see me in the future.

古文：叔祖即出外具宣敕语。
现代文：叔祖立即出外详细宣告敕语。
English: The uncle immediately went out to announce the slang in detail.

古文：子恪寻出为永嘉太守。
现代文：萧子恪不久出任永嘉太守。
English: Xiao Zi soon became Yongjia's governor.

古文：还除光禄卿，秘书监。
现代文：还京师授任光禄卿，秘书监。
English: He was also awarded the title of Guangluqing, Secretary Supervisor.

古文：出为明威将军、零陵太守。
现代文：出任明威将军、零陵太守。
English: He was appointed as the Mingwei general and the governor of Luling.

古文：十七年，入为散骑常侍、辅国将军。
现代文：十七年，入任散骑常侍、辅国将军。
English: Seventeen years later, he was promoted to Sangi (free rider) regular attendant and Fuukoku no shogun.

古文：普通元年，迁宗正卿。
现代文：普通元年，迁任宗正卿。
English: In the first year of the common era, he was transferred to the position of Sojo-kyo.

古文：三年，迁都官尚书。
现代文：三年，迁任都官尚书。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to the post of metropolitan government official.

古文：四年，转吏部。
现代文：四年，转任吏部尚书。
English: Four years later, he was transferred to the cadre department of Shangshu.

古文：六年，迁太子詹事。
现代文：六年，迁任太子詹事。
English: Six years later, he was transferred to Prince Zhanji.

古文：大通二年，出为宁远将军、吴郡太守。
现代文：大通二年，出任宁远将军、昱型太守。
English: In the second year of his reign, he became the general of Ningyuan and the grand vizier of Shantou.

古文：三年，卒于郡舍，时年五十二。
现代文：三年，在旦郡舍第去世，时年五十二岁。
English: Three years later, he died in Tang County, Shedi, at the age of fifty-two.

古文：诏赠侍中、中书令。
现代文：诏令追赠侍中、中书令。
English: The Imperial Edict posthumously bestowed the title of Samurai Junior High School and the title of Junior High School Senior High School.

古文：谥曰恭。
现代文：谧号为恭。
English: 号恭.

古文：子恪兄弟十六人，并仕梁。
现代文：王恪兄弟有十六人，都在梁朝作官。
English: There were sixteen Wang Ke brothers, all of whom served as officials in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：有文学者，子恪、子质、子显、子云、子晖五人。
现代文：有文才的是子恪、子质、子显、子云、子晖五人。
English: The five people with literary talent are Zi Ke, Zi Zi, Zi Xian, Zi Yun and Zi Yao.

古文：子恪尝谓所亲曰： 文史之事，诸弟备之矣，不烦吾复牵率，但退食自公，无过足矣。 
现代文：王灯曾对所亲近的人说： 文史之事，诸弟都具备了，不用烦劳我再引导他们，衹要退食自公，没有过错就可满足了。
English: Wang Lan once said to those close to him, "All my younger brothers have mastered literature and history. I don't need to trouble myself to guide them. If they want to be self-righteous, they can be satisfied without any fault.

古文：子恪少亦涉学，颇属文，随弃其本，故不传文集。
现代文：王灯年轻时也涉猎学问，很会写文章，随即丢弃原本的意向，所以没有传下文集。
English: Wang Lan also dabbled in learning when he was young, and was very good at writing articles. He then abandoned his original intention, so he did not pass on the following collection.

古文：子瑳，亦知名太清中，官至吏部郎，避乱东阳，后为盗所害。
现代文：子瑳，也很有名声。太清间，官作到吏部郎。躲避战乱来到东阳，后被盗所害。
English: Zixuan, also very famous. During the Qing Dynasty, he worked as an official and became a bureaucrat. He came to Dongyang to escape the war, and was later victimized by a stolen cow.

古文：子范字景则，子恪第六弟也。
现代文：子范字景则，是子恪第六弟。
English: Zi Fan Zeking is Zi Ke's sixth younger brother.

古文：齐永明十年，封祁阳县侯，拜太子洗马。
现代文：齐朝永明十年，封为祁阳县侯，拜授太子洗马。
English: In the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Yongming of the Qi Dynasty, he was given the title of the Marquis of Fenyang County and the title of the Crown Prince of Shima.

古文：天监初，降爵为子，除后军记室参军，复为太子洗马，俄迁司徒主簿，丁所生母忧去职。
现代文：天监初年，降爵位为子爵，授后军记室参军，再任太子洗马，不久迁任司徒主簿，遭逢亲生母亲丧事而离职。
English: In the first year of the Heaven's Inspector, he was demoted to the rank of viscount, and after being awarded the military record office, he joined the army, and was reappointed as the prince of the horse wash, and soon moved to the main book of the scholar, and was separated from his job when his own mother passed away.

古文：子范有孝性，居丧以毁闻。
现代文：王篁有孝性，服丧时因哀伤过度损害健康而闻名。
English: Wang Yao had filial piety, and was known to suffer from excessive grief at the time of mourning.

古文：服阕，又为司徒主簿，累迁丹阳尹丞，太子中舍人。
现代文：服丧期满除服，又任司徒主簿，累经升迁任且盐尹丞，太子中舍人。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was relieved of his duties, and was appointed as the chief bookkeeper of the scholars. After promotion and transfer, he was appointed to the post of Yan Yinzheng, and became the prince's junior subordinate.

古文：出为建安太守，还除大司马南平王户曹属，从事中郎。
现代文：出任建安太守，还京师授任大司马亩垩王户曹属，从事中郎。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Jian'an, and was also awarded the title of grand secretary of the Beijing Division.

古文：王爱文学士，子范偏被恩遇，尝曰： 此宗室奇才也。 
现代文：王喜爱有文才的人，王箠蒙受特殊恩遇，曾说： 他是宗室中的奇才。 
English: The king loved people with literary talent, and Wang Yao received a special favor. He once said: "He is a prodigy in the family."

古文：使制《千字文》，其辞甚美，王命记室蔡薳注释之。
现代文：让他编制《千字文》，文辞甚美，王命记室蔡蓬为文作注释。
English: Let him compile "Thousand Characters," the words are very beautiful, and Cai Peng from Wang Mingji's office is the best commentator.

古文：自是府中文笔，皆使草之。
现代文：从此府中文章，皆让他起草。
English: From this prefectural article, everyone asked him to draft.

古文：王薨，子范迁宣惠谘议参军，护军临贺王正德长史。
现代文：王去世，子范迁任宣惠谘议参军，护军临贺王正擅长史。
English: Wang passed away, his son Fan Qian was appointed as Xuan Hui's adviser to join the army, and the escort Lin He Wang Zheng was good at history.

古文：正德为丹阳尹，复为正德信威长史，领尹丞。
现代文：正擅任且盐尹，他又任正坛信威长史，领尹丞。
English: He was also a member of the Zhengtan, and the leader of the Zhengtan, and the leader of the Zhengtan.

古文：历官十余年，不出籓府，常以自慨，而诸弟并登显列，意不能平，及是为到府笺曰： 上籓首佐，于兹再忝，河南雌伏，自此重升。
现代文：历官十多年，没有离开过藩王府，常因此自我感慨，然而诸弟都获得高位，自己，中不能平衡，当这次他到府任职写信说： 上藩的首佐官，羞愧我在这时担任，在河蛮我屈居人下，自此重升。
English: For more than ten years, each officer had not left the palace of the king of the clan, and often felt sorry for himself. However, his younger brothers had all obtained high positions, and he could not balance himself. When he went to the palace to serve, he wrote: "Commander of the upper clan, I am ashamed that I served at this time, I was inferior to the people in the river, and I have been re-elevated since then.

古文：以老少异时，盛衰殊日，虽佩恩宠，还羞年鬓。 
现代文：因老少不同时，盛衰在不同日，虽然承受恩宠，还是羞愧年龄已老。 
English: Because the old and the young are not at the same time, the rise and fall are on different days, although the grace is received, it is still a shame that the age is old.

古文：子范少与弟子显、子云才名略相比，而风采容止不逮，故宦途有优劣。
现代文：王整年轻时与弟王题、王昼的才名大略相近，而风采容止不及他们，因此他们做官的道路有优劣之分。
English: When Wang Zhengyi was young, his talents were roughly similar to those of his younger brothers Wang Zhi and Wang Rong, but his style was not as good as theirs, so their paths to becoming an official were divided into advantages and disadvantages.

古文：每读《汉书》，杜缓兄弟 五人至大官，唯中弟钦官不至而最知名 ，常吟讽之，以况己也。
现代文：每读《漠书》，至杜缓兄弟 五人至大官。惟中弟拄筮官没有做大然而最知名 。则经常吟讽，以比况自己。
English: Every time I read "The Book of the Desert," I come across the Du Huan brothers. Five of them became high officials. However, the middle brother, the eunuch, did not become a high official, but he is the most famous. He is often sarcastic, comparing himself to himself.

古文：寻复为宣惠武陵王司马，不就，仍除中散大夫，迁光禄、廷尉卿。
现代文：不久又任宣惠逮堕王司马，没有上任，便授中散大夫，迁任光禄、廷尉卿。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to proclaim the arrest of the fallen Wang Sima, and without taking office, he was awarded the title of Zhongshan Doctor, transferred to the position of Guanglu, and became a courtier.

古文：出为戎昭将军、始兴内史。
现代文：出任戎昭将军、直周内史。
English: He was appointed to the post of General Ezoaki, and then to the post of Naoshi Chou.

古文：还除太中大夫，迁秘书监。
现代文：还京师授太中大夫，迁任秘书监。
English: He was also conferred the title of Grandmaster Junior High School Teacher in Beijing and transferred to the post of Secretary Supervisor.

古文：太宗即位，召为光禄大夫，加金章紫绶，以逼贼不拜。
现代文：太塞即位，召任光禄大夫，加金章紫绶，因逼贼没有受任。
English: Emperor Taese ascended to the throne, appointed Guanglu Doctor, and added Jinzhang Zijie, but he was not appointed due to pressure from thieves.

古文：其年葬简皇后，使与张缵俱制哀策文，太宗览读之，曰： 今葬礼虽阙，此文犹不减于旧。 
现代文：这年安葬简皇后，让他与至匡缆一起写哀策文，左塞览读后，说： 今葬礼虽不举行，但此文还不亚于旧时。 
English: This was the year of the funeral of Empress Jane, and he asked him to write a lamentation together with Zhikang Cable. After reading it, he said: Although the funeral is not held now, this article is no less than in the old days.

古文：寻遇疾卒，时年六十四。
现代文：不久得病去世，时年六十四岁。
English: He died of illness shortly afterwards, at the age of 64.

古文：贼平后，世祖追赠金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：贼被平定后，世祖追赠他金紫光禄大夫。
English: After the thief was subdued, the ancestor presented him with a gold and purple doctor's salary.

古文：谥曰文。
现代文：谧号为文。
English: His nickname is Wen.

古文：前后文集三十卷。
现代文：前后有文集三十卷。
English: There are thirty volumes of anthologies.

古文：二子滂、确，并少有文章。
现代文：二子萧滂、萧确，年轻时都会写文章。
English: His two sons, Xiao Wei and Xiao Zhen, both wrote articles when they were young.

古文：太宗东宫时，尝与邵陵王数诸萧文士，滂、确亦预焉。
现代文：太宗在东宫时，曾舆邵陵王敷计诸萧姓的文士，萧滂、萧确也在其中。
English: When Emperor Taizong was in the East Palace, King Shao Ling of Zengwu had the scribes with surnames of Zhu Xiao, Xiao Yu and Xiao Zhen also among them.

古文：滂官至尚书殿中郎，中军宣城王记室，先子范卒。
现代文：萧滂官作到尚书殿中郎，中军宣球王记室，先于萧范去世。
English: Xiao Yingguan worked as the middle-man of Shang Shudun, the Chinese army's Xuanqiu Wang Ji's office, and died before Xiao Fan.

古文：确，太清中历官宣城王友，司徒右长史。
现代文：萧确，太清年间历官宣城王友，司徒右长史。
English: Xiao Zhengyi, Xuancheng Wangyou, and Szeto U Changshi, who were officials during the Qing Dynasty.

古文：贼平后，赴江陵，因没关西。
现代文：贼被平定后，前赴红堕，因而死在关西。
English: After the bandits were subdued, he went to join the Red Army and died in Kansai.

古文：子显字景阳，子恪第八弟也。
现代文：萧题字基盐，是王灯第八弟。
English: Xiao Jizhi is the eighth brother of Wang Lan.

古文：幼聪慧，文献王异之，爱过诸子。
现代文：小时聪慧，塞塞堕器重他，对他的疼爱胜过别的儿子。
English: Smart as a whip, tough as nails, he was loved more than any other son.

古文：七岁，封宁都县侯。
现代文：七岁时，封为空都题堡。
English: At the age of seven, he was awarded the title of "Empty Capital Fortress."

古文：永元末，以王子例拜给事中。
现代文：丞五末年，按王子封官的规制授给事中。
English: At the end of the 5th year of the Joseon Dynasty, he was awarded the title of prince according to the regulations.

古文：天监初，降爵为子。
现代文：天监初年，爵位降为子爵。
English: In the first year of his stewardship, his title was reduced to viscount.

古文：累迁安西外兵，仁威记室参军，司徒主簿，太尉录事。
现代文：累经升迁任安西外兵，仁威记室参军，司徒主簿，太尉录事。
English: He was promoted to the post of Anxi Foreign Soldier, joined the army in the Renwei Records Office, the main book of the scholar, and the record of the captain.

古文：子显伟容貌，身长八尺。
现代文：萧题容貌出众，身高八尺。
English: Xiao Tie has a distinguished appearance and is eight feet tall.

古文：好学，工属文。
现代文：好学，擅长写文章。
English: Good at studying, good at writing articles.

古文：尝著《鸿序赋》，尚书令沈约见而称曰： 可谓得明道之高致，盖《幽通》之流也。 
现代文：曾着《鸿序赋》，尚书令沈约见而称赞说： 可以说有明道的高尚情致，舆《幽通赋》是同一流的。 
English: He once wrote "Hong Sequence Fu" and praised it by saying: It can be said that it has the noble sentiment of the Ming Dynasty, and my "Yutong Fu" is of the same style.

古文：又采众家《后汉》，考正同异，为一家之书。
现代文：又采集众家《后漠》，考正之间的异同，成为一家流派。
English: In addition, they collected "Houmous" from many families, and examined the similarities and differences between them, and became a school.

古文：又启撰《齐史》，书成，表奏之，诏付秘阁。
现代文：又启奏编撰《齐史》，书撰成，上表奏闻，诏令交付秘阁收藏。
English: He also initiated the compilation of "Qi Shi" (Qi History), which was compiled into a book, read aloud on the table, and delivered to the secret cabinet collection by imperial decree.

古文：累迁太子中舍人，建康令，邵陵王友，丹阳尹丞，中书郎，守宗正卿。
现代文：累经升遥任太子中舍人，建尘令，邵陵王友，旦盐尹丞，中书郎，守宗正卿。
English: He was promoted to the positions of the Prince's middle son, Jian Chen Ling, Shao Ling Wang You, Tan Yan Yin Zheng, middle school teacher, and Morimune Zhengqing.

古文：出为临川内史，还除黄门郎。
现代文：出任堕川内史，还京师授黄门郎。
English: He assumed the post of the fallen history of Kawachi Province, and returned to Kyoto to become the teacher of Huangmenro.

古文：中大通二年，迁长兼侍中。
现代文：中大通二年，迁任长兼侍中。
English: In the second year of junior high school, he was transferred to the post of chief and attendant.

古文：高祖雅爱子显才，又嘉其容止吐纳，每御筵侍坐，偏顾访焉。
现代文：高祖极爱子显有才华，又很欣赏他的容止谈吐，每当在御筵陪坐时，特别回视向他询问。
English: Gaozou was very fond of Gaozou's talent, and admired his ability to converse freely. Whenever Gaozou was with Gaozou, Gaozou would look back at Gaozou and ask him questions.

古文：尝从容谓子显曰： 我造《通史》，此书若成，众史可废。 
现代文：曾从容对子显说： 我编撰《通史》，此书若编成，其他史书就可废弃。 
English: Zeng Rong once said to Zixuan: I am compiling "General History." If this book is compiled, other history books can be scrapped.

古文：子显对曰： 仲尼赞《易》道，黜《八索》，述职方，除《九丘》，圣制符同，复在兹日。 
现代文：王题对答说： 住星彰明《易》道，废弃了《八索》，叙述职方，槟除了《九丘》，皇上的编制与此符同，盛大的著作又在今日出现。 
English: Wang Zi said in reply: Shumei clarified the "Yi" road, abandoned the "Hasso" road, described the staff side, and eliminated the "Jiuqiu" road. The emperor's compilation is consistent with this, and grand works have appeared again today.

古文：时以为名对。
现代文：时人认为这是很巧妙的对答。
English: At the time, it was considered a clever riposte.

古文：三年，以本官领国子博士。
现代文：三年，以本官领国子博士。
English: Three years later, he became the head of the department, leading Dr. Kuniko.

古文：高祖所制经义，未列学官，子显在职，表置助教一人，生十人。
现代文：直担编制经义时，没有设置学官，子颢任国子博士，上表设置助教一人，国子生十人。
English: When he was directly responsible for compiling the sutras, he did not set up an academic officer, but appointed his son, Kuniko, as a doctor. In the above table, he set up one assistant professor and ten Kuniko students.

古文：又启撰高祖集，并《普通北伐记》。
现代文：又启奏编撰直担的集子，及《普通北伐记》。
English: It also opened with a performance of the anthology compiled by Jikkan, as well as the "Ordinary Northern Expedition."

古文：其年迁国子祭酒，又加侍中，于学递述高祖《五经义》。
现代文：遣年迁任国子祭酒，又加任侍中，在学问上不断阐述高担着的《五经义》。
English: He was transferred to the position of Kuniko Matsuri sake at the turn of the year, and he was also appointed as an attendant, and he constantly elaborated on the Five Classics, which he held in high regard.

古文：五年，迁吏部尚书，侍中如故。
现代文：五年，迁任吏部尚书，侍中职务如故。
English: Five years later, he was transferred to the cadre department of the Imperial Household Agency, and his position as an attendant remained unchanged.

古文：子显性凝简，颇负其才气。
现代文：萧玺性格庄重而朴实，很恃负自己的才气。
English: Xiao Yao's personality is dignified and simple, and he is very conceited about his talent.

古文：及掌选，见九流宾客，不与交言，但举扇一捴而已，衣冠窃恨之。
现代文：当他主掌选官时，见到九流宾客，不舆他们交言，衹是举扇一挥罢了，士大夫官绅私下都忌恨他。
English: When he was in charge of the selection of officials, he saw the ninth-rate guests, and he did not want to talk to them. It was just a wave of a fan. The scholars, officials and gentry all secretly hated him.

古文：然太宗素重其为人，在东宫时，每引与促宴。
现代文：然而塞塞平素看重他的为人，还在束宫时，常招致舆他促膝共宴。
English: However, Tsetsepin always valued him as a person, and when he was still at Sokgong, he often invited him to a joint banquet.

古文：子显尝起更衣，太宗谓坐客曰： 尝闻异人间出，今日始知是萧尚书。 
现代文：子显曾起身去厕所，太宗对坐客说： 曾听说特异的人近来出现，今日始知是萧尚书。 
English: Zixian once got up to go to the toilet, Taizong said to the guests: I had heard that a special person had recently appeared, and today I learned that it was Xiao Shangshu.

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：他被看重就像这样。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：大同三年，出为仁威将军、吴兴太守，至郡未几，卒，时年四十九。
现代文：大同三年，出任仁威将军、呈璺太守，至郡没有几天，便去世了，时年四十九岁。
English: In the third year of the Datong era, he served as General Ren Wei, and was given the title of Empress Dowager. He died just a few days after arriving in the county, at the age of 49.

古文：诏曰： 仁威将军、吴兴太守子显，神韵峻举，宗中佳器。
现代文：诏令说： 仁威将军、吴兴郡太守子显，风度气韵高超出众，是皇族中最好的人才。
English: The imperial edict said: General Ren Wei, Wuxing County's grand marshal Zixuan, is the best talent among the imperial family.

古文：分竹未久，奄到丧殒，恻怆于怀。
现代文：封官授权不多久，忽然去世，使我心中悲伤。
English: He died suddenly not long after he was authorized to be sealed, which made my heart sad.

古文：可赠侍中、中书令。
现代文：可追赠侍中、中书令。
English: He can be posthumously awarded the title of Samurai Junior and Chushiro.

古文：今便举哀。 
现代文：现在就可以哭悼。 
English: Now you can mourn.

古文：及葬请谥，手诏 恃才傲物，宜谥曰骄 。
现代文：安葬时请赐给他谧号，皇帝亲笔韶令说 恃才傲物，应给他谧号为骄 。
English: At the time of his burial, please give him a nickname. The emperor himself issued a decree saying, "He is a proud man. He should be given the nickname "Pride." "

古文：子显尝为《自序》，其略云： 余为邵陵王友，忝还京师，远思前比，即楚之唐、宋，梁之严、邹。
现代文：子显曾经写了一篇《自序》，序大略说： 我任邵陵王友，有愧于回到京师，远思与前人相比，我就像楚国的唐勒、宋玉，汉朝的严助、邹阳。
English: Zixian once wrote a "self-order," the order roughly said: I am Shao Ling Wangyou, I am worthy of returning to Beijing, I am far-sighted compared to my predecessors, I am like Tangle in Chu, Song Yu, Yan Sui in Han Dynasty, and Shenyang.

古文：追寻平生，颇好辞藻，虽在名无成，求心已足。
现代文：回想我的一生，极喜好诗文的辞藻，虽然没有成名，但心裹也已满足了。
English: Looking back on my life, I am very fond of poetic words. Although I have not become famous, my heart has been satisfied.

古文：天监十六年，始预九日朝宴，稠人广坐，独受旨云： 今云物甚美，卿得不斐然赋诗。 
现代文：但像登高放眼远望，临水送别归人，风动的春晨，月明的秋夜，早来的鸿雁，初啼的黄莺，开花落叶，这样的景色呈现在眼前便情动于心中，每每不能控制自己。
English: However, such as climbing high, looking far and wide, seeing people off at the water's edge, the windy spring morning, the moonlit autumn night, the early wild geese, the yellow chrysanthemums at the beginning of the year, the blossoming and falling leaves, such a scenery is presented in front of the eyes and moves in the heart, and cannot control themselves every time.

古文：诗既成，又降帝旨曰： 可谓才子。 余退谓人曰： 一顾之恩，非望而至。
现代文：前世的贾谊、傅毅、崔驷、马融、邯郸淳、缪袭、路粹等人，都是因文章而显名的，所以我多次献上歌颂之： 今日景色很美，卿能不写出富有文采的诗文。 诗写成后，又传来帝旨： 可称作才子，我退席后对人说： 受到赞扬的恩惠，不是希望就可有的。
English: In my previous life, Jia Youyi, Fu Yi, Cui Zhuang, Ma Rong, Yu Jun, Miao Wei, Lu Qi and others were all famous for their essays, so I have repeatedly presented a song of praise: Today the scenery is beautiful, my lord can not write a rich literary poem. After the poem was written, the imperial order came again: Can be called a talent, I said to people after leaving the table: The grace of being praised is not a hope.

古文：遂方贾谊何如哉？
现代文：逭与买谊相比怎样?
English: How does it compare to buying friendships?

古文：未易当也。 
现代文：恐怕他不能与我相等。 
English: I'm afraid he's not my equal.

古文：每有制作，特寡思功，须其自来，不以力构。
现代文：每有制作，很少去苦心构思，必须让灵感自来，不极力酝酿。
English: Whenever there is a production, I rarely go to the trouble of conceiving it. I have to let the inspiration come from within, without trying too hard to brew it.

古文：少来所为诗赋，则《鸿序》一作，体兼众制，文备多方，颇为好事所传，故虚声易远。 
现代文：年轻以来所写的诗赋，衹有《鸿序》一篇，体裁兼有多法，文笔运用多种，极受到喜好者的传颂，因此虚名轻易地远传。 
English: The poems he has written since he was young, including one in "Hongxue," are multi-genre and multi-purpose, and have been highly praised by fans. Therefore, his false name is easily spread far and wide.

古文：子显所著《后汉书》一百卷，《齐书》六十卷，《普通北伐记》五卷，《贵俭传》三十卷，文集二十卷。
现代文：子显的著作有《后漠书》一百卷，《齐书》六十卷，《普通北伐记》五卷，《贵俭传》三十卷，文集二十卷。
English: Zixian's works include 100 volumes of "The Book of the Desert," 60 volumes of "The Book of Qi," 5 volumes of "The General History of the Northern Expedition," 30 volumes of "The Biography of Guizhong" and 20 volumes of anthologies.

古文：二子序、恺，并少知名。
现代文：二子萧序、萧恺，并在年少时就知名。
English: His second sons, Xiao Zheng and Xiao Yao, became famous when they were young.

古文：序，太清中历官太子家令，中庶子，并掌管记。
现代文：萧序，太清年间历官太子家令，中庶子，并掌管记。
English: Xiao Zheng, during the Qing Dynasty, was a member of the imperial family, the middle child of an illegitimate child, and was in charge of records.

古文：及乱，于城内卒。
现代文：当侯景叛乱时，在城内去世。
English: When Hou Jing rebelled, he died in the city.

古文：恺，初为国子生，对策高第，州又举秀才。
现代文：萧恺，初为国子生，对策成绩最佳，州襄又推举为秀才。
English: Xiao Yao, the first Kuniko student, achieved the best results in countermeasures, and Zhou Xiang was elected as an outstanding talent.

古文：起家秘书郎，迁太子中舍人，王府主簿，太子洗马，父忧去职。
现代文：起家任秘书郎，迁任太子中舍人，王府主簿，太子洗马，居父亲丧离职。
English: He started his career as a secretary, moved to the position of the prince's junior secretary, the king's chief accountant, the prince's groom-to-be, and left his post after his father's death.

古文：服阕，复除太子洗马，迁中舍人，并掌管记。
现代文：服丧期满除服，再授太子洗马，迁任中舍人，并掌管记。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was relieved of his duties, and then he was given the title of prince to wash horses, transferred to the position of middle-ranking official, and was in charge of records.

古文：累迁宣城王文学，中书郎，太子家令，又掌管记。
现代文：累经升迁任宣城王文学，中书郎，太子家令，又掌管记。
English: He was promoted to the post of the king of literature of Xuancheng, the middle school teacher, the prince's family secretary, and in charge of the chronicle.

古文：恺才学誉望，时论以方其父，太宗在东宫，早引接之。
现代文：萧恺的才学声望，时论认为与其父相等，太宗在东宫时，早就召见接待他。
English: When Emperor Taizong was in the East Palace, he had been summoned to receive Xiao Yao, whose academic reputation was considered equal to that of his father.

古文：时中庶子谢嘏出守建安，于宣猷堂宴饯，并召时才赋诗，同用十五剧韵，恺诗先就，其辞又美。
现代文：当时中庶子谢嘏出守建安，在宣猷堂设宴饯行，并召见当时的才子赋诗，同用十五险韵，萧恺诗先写就，诗的文辞又很美。
English: At that time, the middle son, Xie Yao, went to defend Jian'an and held a banquet at Xuan Yao Hall. He summoned the talented poet of the time to compose a poem, using fifteen dangerous rhymes. Xiao Yao's poem was written first, and the wording of the poem was very beautiful.

古文：太宗与湘东王令曰： 王筠本自旧手，后进有萧恺可称，信为才子。 
现代文：太宗舆湘东王令说： 王筠本就是写文章的老手，后辈有萧恺可称赞，确是位才子。 
English: Taizong Wang Ling of Shandong Public Opinion said: Wang Yibon is a veteran of writing articles, and younger generations can praise Xiao Yibin. He is truly a talented person.

古文：先是时太学博士顾野王奉令撰《玉篇》，太宗嫌其书详略未当，以恺博学，于文字尤善，使更与学士删改。
现代文：先前太学博士顾野王奉令撰写《玉篇》，太宗嫌他撰书详略不恰当，因萧恺博学，文字写得更好，便让他舆学士删改。
English: In the past, Dr. Gu Niu, a doctor of theology, was ordered to write the "Jade Chapter." The Emperor suspected that his detailed writing was inappropriate, and because Xiao Yan was erudite and his writing was better, he asked him to revise it.

古文：迁中庶子，未拜，徙为吏部郎。
现代文：迁任中庶子，未受任，徙任吏部郎。
English: He was an illegitimate child when he was transferred to this post, but he was not appointed and was instead transferred to the position of secretary.

古文：太清二年，迁御史中丞。
现代文：太清二年，迁任御史中丞。
English: In the second year of the Taiching period, he was transferred to the post of Goshi chujo.

古文：顷之，侯景寇乱，恺于城内迁侍中，寻卒官，时年四十四。
现代文：不久，侯景叛乱，萧恺在城内迁任侍中，不久在官任上去世，时年四十四岁。
English: Soon after, Houjing rebelled, and Xiao Yao moved to the city to serve as a chamberlain. He died soon after taking office, at the age of forty-four.

古文：文集并亡逸。
现代文：文集都亡逸了。
English: All the anthologies have been lost.

古文：子云字景乔，子恪第九弟也。
现代文：子云字景乔，是子恪第九弟。
English: Ziyun, also known as Jing Qiao, is Zi Jia's ninth brother.

古文：年十二，齐建武四年，封新浦县侯，自制拜章，便有文采。
现代文：十二岁时，齐朝建武四年，被封为新浦县侯，自己写敬受奏章，便有文采。
English: At the age of twelve, four years after the establishment of the Qi Dynasty, he was appointed as the lord of Xinpu County, and he wrote a tribute to himself.

古文：天监初，降爵为子。
现代文：天监初年，爵位降为子爵。
English: In the first year of his stewardship, his title was reduced to viscount.

古文：既长勤学，以晋代竟无全书，弱冠便留心撰著，至年二十六，书成，表奏之，诏付秘阁。
现代文：长大勤学，因晋朝一代没有记载历史的全书，二十岁便留心撰著，至二十六岁时，编撰成书，上表奏之，韶令付秘阁收藏。
English: He was a diligent student, and since the Jin dynasty generation did not have a complete history book, he carefully wrote it at the age of twenty. At the age of twenty-six, he compiled it into a book, played it on the table, and placed it in the secret collection.

古文：子云性沈静，不乐仕进。
现代文：子云性情沉静，不乐意进身作官。
English: Ziyun has a quiet temperament and is not eager to become an official.

古文：年三十，方起家为秘书郎。
现代文：三十岁时，才从家中被征召出来任秘书郎。
English: At the age of thirty, he was called from home to become a secretary.

古文：迁太子舍人，撰《东宫新记》，奏之，敕赐束帛。
现代文：迁任太子舍人，编撰《束宫新记》上奏，敕令赏他束帛。
English: He was transferred to the post of the prince's son-in-law, compiled "Sakuya Shinki" and played on it, and was awarded the title of Sakuya.

古文：累迁北中郎外兵参军，晋安王文学，司徒主簿，丹阳尹丞。
现代文：累经升迁任北中郎外兵参军，晋安王文学，司徒主簿，丹阳尹丞。
English: After promotion and transfer, he was appointed as the foreign soldier to join the army of North Zhongluo, the literature of Jinan King, the main book of Sito, and the role of Danyang Yinzheng.

古文：时湘东王为京尹，深相赏好，如布衣之交。
现代文：时湘束王任京尹，对他深加赏识和喜爱，二人如布衣之交。
English: When Xiangzhu Wang was appointed as Beijing Yin, he deeply appreciated and loved him, and the two were like cloth friends.

古文：迁北中郎庐陵王谘议参军，兼尚书左丞。
现代文：迁任北中郎庐陵王谘议参军，兼尚书左丞。
English: He was transferred to the position of Northern Middle Clerk, and advised Emperor Guiling to join the army. He was also promoted to the position of Second Secretary.

古文：大通元年，除黄门郎，俄迁轻车将军，兼司徒左长史。
现代文：大通元年，授官黄门郎，不久迁任轻车将军，兼司徒左长史。
English: In the first year of Odori, he was given the post of Huangmenro, and soon he was transferred to the post of Light Vehicle General, and also to the post of Shtuzu Choshi.

古文：二年，入为吏部。
现代文：二年，入任吏部。
English: Two years later, he was appointed to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：三年，迁长兼侍中。
现代文：三年，迁任长兼侍中。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to the post of chieftain and chamberlain.

古文：中大通元年，转太府卿。
现代文：中大通元年，转任太府卿。
English: In 1861, he was transferred to the post of Dafu-kyo.

古文：三年，出为贞威将军、临川内史。
现代文：三年，出任贞威将军、临川内史。
English: Three years later, he was appointed as General Zhenwei, and later as Minister of Internal Affairs.

古文：在郡以和理称，民吏悦之。
现代文：在郡以治事和洽得当被称赞，民吏皆喜欢他。
English: In the county, he was praised for his ability to manage affairs and get along well, and the civil servants all liked him.

古文：还除散骑常侍，俄复为侍中。
现代文：还京师授职散骑常侍，不久再任侍中。
English: He was also given the post of strolling equerry in the imperial capital, and was soon appointed to the position of chamberlain.

古文：大同二年，迁员外散骑常侍、国子祭酒，领南徐州大中正。
现代文：大同二年，迁任员外散骑常侍、国子祭酒，领南徐州大中正。
English: In the second year of the same year, he was transferred to the position of non-commissioned officer, horseback riding attendant, Kuniko festival wine, and leader of the South Xuzhou University junior high school.

古文：顷之，复为侍中，祭酒、中正如故。
现代文：随即再任侍中，祭酒、中正职务如故。
English: He was immediately reappointed to the position of chamberlain, and his duties of serving the sacrificial wine and acting as chujo remained unchanged.

古文：梁初，郊庙未革牲牷，乐辞皆沈约撰，至是承用，子云始建言宜改。
现代文：梁朝初年，郊祭庙祭均用没有去皮毛的纯色全牲，祭祀乐辞皆是沈约撰写的，至今承用，子云是最初建言将乐辞作修改的。
English: In the first year of the Liang Dynasty, the suburb festivals and temple festivals all used pure-colored whole animals that had not been skinned. The sacrificial music was written by Shen Yu and has been used ever since. Zi Yun was the first to suggest that the music be modified.

古文：启曰： 伏惟圣敬率由，尊严郊庙，得西邻之心，知周、孔之迹，载革牢俎，德通神明，黍稷苹藻，竭诚严配，经国制度，方悬日月，垂训百王，于是乎在。
现代文：他启奏说： 圣主敬遵成规，郊庙祭祀庄重肃穆，很得西邻国人的心，可与周公、孔子的事迹相比，祭祀时将加工去毛的兽皮放在俎中，德通神明，谷物蓣草藻草，用来竭诚祭天以先祖配享，经理国家的制度，如同悬空的日月，垂训百王，道理就在遣裹。
English: He said in the prelude: The reverence of the Lord is in accordance with the rules, the sacrificial rites of the suburban temples are solemn and solemn, and the hearts of the people in the western neighboring countries are greatly moved, which can be compared with the deeds of Zhou Gong and Confucius. During the sacrificial rites, the processed and de-haired animal skins are placed in the urns. The virtuous gods, the cereals, the herbs and algae, are used to wholeheartedly worship the heavens and share with the ancestors. The system of the manager country, like the hanging sun and moon, teaches hundreds of kings, and the truth is wrapped in the

古文：臣比兼职斋官，见伶人所歌，犹用未革牲前曲。
现代文：臣近来兼职斋官，听到祭祀时乐人所歌，仍是祭祀用没有去皮毛牲畜的旧曲。
English: The minister, who has recently become a part-time sacrificial officer, heard the songs of the musicians during the sacrifices, which are still the old songs of the sacrificial animals without furs.

古文：圜丘视燎，尚言 式备牲牷 ；北郊《諴雅》，亦奏 牲云孔备 ；清庙登歌，而称 我牲以洁 ；三朝食举，犹咏 硃尾碧鳞 。声被鼓钟，未符盛制。
现代文：圜丘祭天的视燎官，还说 式备牲栓 ；北郊祭天奏《诫雅》，也唱 牲玉孔备 ；宗庙祭祀唱歌，而称 我牲以洁 ；三朝奏食举乐，犹咏 朱尾碧鳞，歌声合着鼓钟，遣不符合盛制。
English: According to the eunuch of the Mengqiu Festival of Heaven, it is also said to be prepared with a mortar and pestle; the Northern Suburbs Festival Tenso "Chokoya" also sings "Kodama Kongobi"; the ancestral temple worship sings, and it is called "I sacrifice with purity"; the Three Dynasties Festival plays "Shokuhou" music, and the yakitori is "Zhuwei Bi Qiao," and the singing is accompanied by a drum and a bell, which is not in accordance with the imperial system.

古文：臣职司儒训，意以为疑，未审应改定乐辞以不？ 
现代文：臣职掌儒训，认为这样唱可疑，未能确定应否改定乐辞? 
English: The subordinate official in charge of Confucianism thought that it was doubtful to sing like this, and was unable to determine whether the music should be changed?

古文：敕答曰： 此是主者守株，宜急改也。 
现代文：敕答说： 这是主管者死守狭隘经验，不知变通应急改正。 
English: Zou replied: This is the supervisor's stubborn adherence to narrow experience, and I don't know how to adapt to emergency corrections.

古文：仍使子云撰定。
现代文：便让子云撰定乐辞。
English: He then asked Ziyun to compose the music.

古文：敕曰： 郊庙歌辞，应须典诰大语，不得杂用子史文章浅言；而沈约所撰，亦多舛谬。 
现代文：敕说： 郊庙祭祀用的歌辞，应是典诰中典雅古奥的言辞，不得杂用于书史书中的浅近言辞；而沈约所撰写的，也多有错谬。 
English: Zou said: The words of the songs used in the suburb temples should be the elegant and ancient words in the classics, and should not be mixed with the shallow words in the books of history; and the ones written by Shen Yotai are often wrong.

古文：子云答敕曰： 殷荐朝飨，乐以雅名，理应正采《五经》，圣人成教。
现代文：子云答敕说： 奏盛大的乐歌祭祀天地宗庙，乐应用雅名，理应从《五经》中采取，圣人已有成教。
English: Zi Yun replied, "To play grand music to worship the heaven and earth and the ancestral temple, the music should be taken from the "Five Classics," and the saint has been taught.

古文：而汉来此制，不全用经典；约之所撰，弥复浅杂。
现代文：而从汉朝以来编制的乐辞，不全采用经典；沈约所撰制的，又更加浅陋杂乱。
English: However, the musical diction compiled since the Han Dynasty does not entirely use the classics; the one compiled by Shen Yotong is even more shallow and disorganized.

古文：臣前所易约十曲，惟知牲牷既革，宜改歌辞，而犹承例，不嫌流俗乖体。
现代文：臣前改易沈约撰制的十曲，衹知祭祀用的牲栓已换成皮革，所以应改歌辞，仍然承续成例，不避忌流俗背离了事体。
English: The minister changed the ten pieces of music composed by Shen Yi before, and the animal spigot used for the Shuchi ritual had been replaced with leather, so the lyrics should be changed, but they still followed the example, and did not avoid the custom and deviated from the matter.

古文：既奉令旨，始得发蒙。
现代文：既奉令旨，才得以开拓眼界。
English: It was only after receiving the order that I was able to broaden my horizons.

古文：臣夙本庸滞，昭然忽朗，谨依成旨，悉改约制。
现代文：臣向来平庸固执，现在忽然清醒明白了，我恭敬地依照成旨，全部改正沈约的编制。
English: The minister has always been mediocre and obstinate, but now he has suddenly woken up and understood that I will respectfully amend all the provisions of the Shenyang Treaty in accordance with the intention.

古文：惟用《五经》为本，其次《尔雅》、《周易》、《尚书》、《大戴礼》，即是经诰之流，愚意亦取兼用。
现代文：衹用《五经》为根本，其次采用《尔雅》、《周易》、《尚书》、《大戴礼》，即是经诰一类，愚意也可取来采用。
English: The "Five Classics" is used as the foundation, followed by "Er Ya," "Zhou Yi," "Shang Shu" and "Dadairei," which is a kind of sutra, and the stupidity can also be used.

古文：臣又寻唐、虞诸书，殷《颂》周《雅》，称美是一，而复各述时事。
现代文：臣又探求唐尧、虞舜时期诸书，殷《颂》周《雅》，以赞美为主，而又各述时事。
English: The minister also explored the books of the Tang and Gu Zhou dynasties, Yin "Ode" Zhou "Beauty," with praise as the main theme, and each described current events.

古文：大梁革服，偃武修文，制礼作乐，义高三正；而约撰歌辞，惟浸称圣德之美，了不序皇朝制作事。
现代文：大梁改朝换代天下顺从，偃武修文，制礼作乐，义高夏、殷、周朝；而沈约撰制的歌辞，祇浸渍在称颂圣德的美好，并不叙述皇朝制作事。
English: The Great Beam changed dynasties, and the whole world obeyed the change of dynasties. The war was fought, the texts were revised, and the rites and music were made. The dynasties of Yi Gao, Xia, Yin, and Zhou; and the lyrics composed by Shen Yu were only impregnated to praise the beauty of holiness, and did not describe the work of the imperial dynasty.

古文：《雅》、《颂》前例，于体为违。
现代文：《雅》、《颂》是前例，沈约的编制与体相违。
English: "Ya" and "Ode" are precedents, and the composition of Shen Yotong is contrary to the body.

古文：伏以圣旨所定《乐论》，钟律纬绪，文思深微，命世一出，方悬日月，不刊之典，礼乐之教，致治所成。
现代文：依照圣旨所定的乐论钟律纬绪，文思深刻精微，有治世才能的人一出现，就像日月悬空，不可磨灭的典籍，礼乐的教化，是在太平盛世时制成。
English: According to the dictates of the sacred edict, the music theory of the clock rhythm, the profound and subtle writing, and the emergence of a person with the ability to govern the world are like the sun and the moon hanging in the sky. The indelible classics and the enlightenment of liturgical music were made in the Taiping era.

古文：谨一二采缀，各随事显义，以明制作之美。
现代文：我谨逐一采集，各随事显义，以表明制作的恰当。
English: I would like to collect them one by one, each with a clear meaning, to show the appropriateness of the production.

古文：覃思累日，今始克就，谨以上呈。 
现代文：深思多曰，现在已经完成，恭敬地呈上。 
English: Well thought out, now complete, respectfully submitted.

古文：敕并施用。
现代文：敕令一并使用。
English: 令 should be used together.

古文：子云善草隶书，为世楷法。自云善效钟元常、王逸少而微变字体。
现代文：子云擅长写草隶书，被世人作为楷模法式，自己说擅长效法钟繇、王羲之而稍微变化字体。
English: Ziyun is good at writing cursive handwriting, which is regarded by the world as a model of French style. He said that he is good at following the example of Zhonglu and Wanglu and slightly changing the font.

古文：答敕云： 臣昔不能拔赏，随世所贵，规摹子敬，多历年所。
现代文：答敕说： 臣昔日没有鉴赏能力，随着世人的看法认定珍贵，摹仿王献之的字体，经过许多年。
English: Awei said: In the past, ministers did not have the ability to appreciate, and with the world's opinion that it was precious, it took many years to imitate the font given by the king.

古文：年二十六，著《晋史》，至《二王列传》，欲作论语草隶法，言不尽意，遂不能成，略指论飞白一势而已。
现代文：二十六岁时，编著《晋书》，写到《二王列传》，想写出对草隶书笔法的评论，然而言不尽意，竟没能写成，衹是大略评论飞白体一种笔势罢了。
English: At the age of twenty-six, he edited "Jin Shu" and wrote about "The Tale of the Two Kings" and wanted to write a commentary on the calligraphy of Caozhi. However, he was not satisfied and failed to write it. It was just a rough comment on a brushstroke.

古文：十许年来，始见敕旨《论书》一卷，商略笔势，洞澈字体；又以逸少之不及元常，犹子敬之不及逸少。
现代文：十多年来，始见敕旨《论书》一卷，品评书法笔势，透彻了解字的形体；又认为王羲之不及钟繇，就像王献之赶不上王羲之。
English: For more than ten years, he has seen the volume of Wang Xizhi's "Essay on Books" for the first time, commented on the calligraphy strokes, and thoroughly understood the shape of the characters; he also believes that Wang Xizhi is not as good as Zhong Xizhi, just as Wang Xizhi is not as good as Wang Xizhi.

古文：自此研思，方悟隶式，始变子敬，全范元常。
现代文：自此研思，方醒悟隶书的规式，最初改变的是王献之，全部规范的是钟繇。
English: From this study, the party realized that the rules of the book of regulations were initially changed by Wang Xianzhi, and all the rules were standardized by Zhong Yao.

古文：逮尔以来，自觉功进。 
现代文：从那以来，自己感觉到写字功夫长进了。 
English: Since then, I have felt that my writing skills have improved.

古文：其书迹雅为高祖所重，尝论子云书曰： 笔力劲骏，心手相应，巧逾杜度，美过崔实，当与元常并驱争先。 
现代文：他的书法极被高祖推重，曾评论子云书法说： 笔力刚劲挺拔，心手相应，技巧超出杜度，体美胜过崔寡，当与钟繇竞争高下。 
English: His calligraphy was highly valued by Gao Zu. He once commented on Ziyun's calligraphy, saying: The pen is stiff and upright, the heart and hand are corresponding, the skill exceeds the degree, the body is more beautiful than Cui Guo, and should compete with Zhong Xi.

古文：其见赏如此。
现代文：他被欣赏就像这样。
English: This shows the appreciation for him.

古文：七年，出为仁威将军、东阳太守。
现代文：七年，出任仁威将军、束阳太守。
English: For seven years, he served as General Ren Wei and Sokyang Dazhong.

古文：中大同元年，还拜宗正卿。
现代文：中大同元年，还京师授宗正卿。
English: In the first year of the junior high school, he returned to Beijing to study under Zong Zhengqing.

古文：太清元年，复为侍中、国子祭酒，领南徐州大中正。
现代文：太清元年，再任侍中、国子祭酒，领南徐州大中正。
English: In the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty, he was reappointed as a chamberlain, Kuniko Matsuri sake, leading the South Xuzhou University Junior High School.

古文：二年，侯景寇逼，子云逃民间。
现代文：二年，侯景侵逼宫城，子云逃到民间。
English: Two years later, Houjing invaded and besieged Miyagi, and Ziyun fled to the countryside.

古文：三年三月，宫城失守，东奔晋陵，馁卒于显灵寺僧房，年六十三。
现代文：三年三月，宫城失守，他又东逃晋陵，饿死在显灵寺僧房，时年六十三岁。
English: In March of the third year, Miyagi was lost, he fled to Jinling, starved to death in the monk's house of Xianling Temple, at the age of sixty-three.

古文：所著《晋书》一百一十卷，《东宫新记》二十卷。
现代文：著作有《晋书》一百一十卷，《东宫新记》二十卷。
English: He is the author of 110 volumes of "Jin Shu" and 20 volumes of "Donggong Xin Ji."

古文：第二子特，字世达。
现代文：第二子萧特字世达。
English: The second son, Xiao Te, became Shida.

古文：早知名，亦善草隶。
现代文：很早有名声，也擅长草隶书。
English: He became famous very early and was also good at cursive writing.

古文：高祖尝谓子云曰： 子敬之书，不及逸少。
现代文：高祖曾对萧特说： 子敬的书法不及王薹之。
English: Gao Zu once said to Xiao Te: Zi Jing's handwriting is not as good as Wang Xizhi's.

古文：近见特迹，遂逼于卿。 
现代文：近见萧逸的字迹，直给卿以威胁。 
English: Xiao Yi's handwriting was so close to his face that he threatened him.

古文：历官著作佐郎，太子舍人，宣惠主簿，中军记室。
现代文：历官著作佐郎，太子舍人，宣惠主簿，中军记室。
English: The chronicles of officials, the works of Saro, the prince's concubine, the main book of Xuan Hui, and the Chinese military record room.

古文：出为海盐令，坐事免。
现代文：出任海盐令，因事被罢免。
English: He was removed from his post as sea salt commissioner due to the incident.

古文：年二十五，先子云卒。
现代文：年二十五岁，在王云前去世。
English: He was twenty-five years old and died before Wang Yun.

古文：子晖字景光，子云弟也。
现代文：子晖字景光，是子云的弟弟。
English: Zixuan Ziqing is Ziyun's younger brother.

古文：少涉书史，亦有文才。
现代文：年轻时涉猎书史，也有文才。
English: When he was young, he dabbled in book history, and he also has literary talent.

古文：起家员外散骑侍郎，迁南中郎记室。
现代文：起家任员外散骑侍郎，迁任南中郎记室。
English: The founder of the family was appointed as a samurai outside Sanki, and was transferred to the office of Minami Churo.

古文：出为临安令。
现代文：出任临安令。
English: He assumed the post of Linanling.

古文：性恬静，寡嗜好，尝预重云殿听制讲《三慧经》，退为《讲赋》奏之，甚见称赏。
现代文：性情恬静，少有嗜好，曾参加重云殿听制讲《三慧经》，回来写《讲赋》上奏，很被称赏。
English: She has a quiet disposition and few hobbies. She once attended the recitation of "San Hui Jing" at the Chongyundian Hall, and came back to write the prelude to "Lecture on Fu," which was highly praised.

古文：迁安西武陵王谘议，带新繁令，随府转仪同从事、骠骑长史，卒。
现代文：迁任安西武陵王谘议，带新繁令，随府转任仪同从事、骠骑长史，去世。
English: He was transferred to the Anxi Wuling Wang Consultation, with new regulations, transferred to the government and engaged in ceremonial duties. He had a long history of riding horses and died.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：昔魏藉兵威而革汉运，晋因宰辅乃移魏历，异乎古之禅授，以德相传，故抑前代宗枝，用绝民望。
现代文：陈吏部尚书姚察日：昔日爱翘凭藉兵威而革换了莲曲的命运，因依靠宰辅便改移了魏朝的历法，这不同于古代的禅授，以德相传，所以遏制前代的宗室，用以断绝民望。
English: Chen Li Bu Shangshu Yao saw the day: In the past, Ai Gao changed the fate of the Lotus Sutra by virtue of military prowess, and changed the calendar of the Wei Dynasty by relying on Zaifu. This is different from the ancient Zen teaching, which is passed down from generation to generation, so it is necessary to curb the ancestral family of the previous generation and use it to break the people's hope.

古文：然刘晔、曹志，犹显于朝；及宋遂为废姓。
现代文：然而刘晔、曹志，仍然在新朝显贵；到了塞翅终竟成了废姓。
English: However, Liu Xuan and Cao Zhi were still prominent in the new dynasty; by the time of Sa Ying, they eventually became obsolete surnames.

古文：而齐代，宋之戚属，一皆歼焉。
现代文：而齐朝，是宋朝的亲属，但把宋朝宗室全部歼灭了。
English: However, the Qi Dynasty, a relative of the Song Dynasty, wiped out the entire Song Dynasty family.

古文：其祚不长，抑亦由此。
现代文：其国运不长，或许是由这个原因引起的。
English: Perhaps this is the reason why his national career did not last long.

古文：有梁革命，弗取前规，故子恪兄弟及群从，并随才任职，通贵满朝，不失于旧，岂惟魏幽晋显而已哉。
现代文：梁朝革命，不采取前朝的做法，所以子恪兄弟以及群从，一并按照他们的才能给以职务，通贵满朝，不因他们是旧人而抛弃，难道衹是魏朝昏暗晋朝显著。
English: The revolution of the Liang Dynasty did not adopt the practice of the previous dynasty, so the Zigu brothers and their followers were all given positions according to their talents. They were favored by the Manchu Dynasty and were not abandoned because they were old people. Is it possible that the Wei Dynasty was dim and the Jin Dynasty was conspicuous?

古文：君子以是知高祖之弘量，度越前代矣。
现代文：君子以是知道高祖的宏量，气度超越了前代。
English: Nobles knew Gaozu's magnanimity, and his demeanor surpassed that of previous generations.

