古文：越王勾践栖于会稽之上，乃号令于三军曰： 凡我父兄昆弟及国子姓，有能助寡人谋而退吴者，吾与之共知越国之政。 
现代文：越王勾践兵败退守于会稽山上，于是向三军传令说： 凡是我父老兄弟及同姓的宗族中，有能帮助我谋划打退吴国军队的，我愿同他共同管理越国的国政。 
English: After defeating and retreating to Hechi Mountain, King Gojun of Yue said in a message to the three armies: "If there is anyone among my father's brothers and my clan with the same surname who can help me plan to defeat the Wu army, I am willing to jointly manage the national affairs of Yue."

古文：大夫种进对曰： 臣闻之：贾人夏则资皮，冬则资絺，旱则资舟，水则资车，以待乏也。
现代文：大夫文种进前回答说： 我听说做生意的人，夏天就储备皮货，冬天就储备麻布，旱季就储备舟船，雨季就储备车辆，等待缺货时卖大价钱。
English: Dr. Wenzhuang stepped forward and replied, "I have heard that business people stockpile furs in the summer, linen in the winter, boats in the dry season, and vehicles in the rainy season, and sell them at a high price when they are out of stock.

古文：夫虽无四方之忧，然谋臣与爪牙之士，不可不养而择也。
现代文：平时即使没有四方的袭扰，但谋臣和武将一类的人才，不可不事先选拔培养。
English: In normal times, even if there is no harassment from the four sides, talents such as strategists and generals must be selected and trained in advance.

古文：譬如蓑笠，时雨既至必求之。
现代文：譬如蓑衣和笠帽，雨季到来后一定会派上用场。
English: For example, coats and hats, after the arrival of the rainy season will certainly come in handy.

古文：今君王既栖于会稽之上，然后乃求谋臣，无乃后乎？ 
现代文：现在君王退守到会稽山上以后，才想到寻找谋臣，不也太晚了吗？ 
English: Isn't it too late for the king to think of looking for advisers now that he has retreated to the summit of Mount Hiei?

古文：勾践曰： 苟得闻子大夫之言，何后之有。 
现代文：勾践说： 如果能听到您的高论，有什么晚的。 
English: Gopinath said: If I can hear your high-pitched speech, what is the delay.

古文：执其手而与之谋。
现代文：拉着他的手便和他商量起来。
English: Take him by the hand and reason with him.

古文：遂使之行成于吴，曰： 寡君勾践乏无所使，使其下臣种，不敢彻声闻于天王，私于下执事曰：寡君之师徒不足以辱君矣。
现代文：于是派文种去吴国求和，说： 我们国君勾践没有人可派遣，派下臣我来，不敢当面与吴王谈，私下里跟他的办事人员说：我们国君的军队已不值得屈辱吴王亲自来讨伐了。
English: So he sent Wenzang to Wu to sue for peace, saying, "Our sovereign has no one else to send, so he has sent me as his vassal. I am afraid to talk to the king of Wu in person, so I said to his clerk in private, "Our sovereign's army is no longer worthy of the humiliation of the king of Wu coming to fight in person."

古文：愿以金玉、子女赂君之辱；请勾践女女于王，大夫女女于大夫，士女女于士。
现代文：我们愿意把金玉、美女奉献给吴王作为赔罪；请让勾践的女儿给吴王做女奴，大夫的女儿给吴国的大夫做女奴，士的女儿给吴国的士人做女奴。
English: We are willing to dedicate the gold and jewels and beautiful women to the king of Wu as compensation. Please let the daughter of the coachman be the slave girl for the king of Wu, the daughter of the doctor be the slave girl for the doctor of Wu, and the daughter of the scholar be the slave girl for the scholar of Wu.

古文：越国之宝器毕从，寡君帅越国之众，以从君之师徒，唯君左右之。
现代文：越国的财宝重器全都献上，我们国君率领越国的军队，随从吴王的军队，听凭吴王调遣。
English: The treasures and heavy equipment of Yue were all presented, and our sovereign led the army of Yue, followed the army of King Wu, and listened to the dispatch of King Wu.

古文：若以越国之罪为不可赦也，将焚宗庙，系妻孥，沈金玉于江，有带甲五千人将以致死，乃必有偶。是以带甲万人事君也，无乃即伤君王之所爱乎？
现代文：如果你们认为越国的罪不可宽恕，那我们将烧掉本国的宗庙，与妻子百姓死生同命，把金玉沉入江中。我们有披甲的士兵五千人准备拼死抵抗，那么人数就肯定会翻一倍，因此一共有一万个带甲的士兵为了您而战斗，这不就会伤了吴王所爱的部下吗？
English: If you think that the sin of Vietnam is unforgivable, then we will burn down the ancestral temple of our country, kill our wives and people, and sink the gold into the river. We have five thousand armored soldiers ready to fight to the death, so the number will surely double, so a total of ten thousand armored soldiers will fight for you. Won't this hurt the beloved men of King Wu?

古文：与其杀是人也，宁其得此国也，其孰利乎？ 
现代文：你们与其杀了这些越国人，还不如得到这个国家的臣服，哪个更有利呢？ 
English: Instead of killing these Vietcong, you might as well gain the submission of this country. Which is more advantageous?

古文：夫差将欲听与之成，子胥谏曰： 不可。
现代文：夫差准备听从文种的话跟越国讲和，伍子胥劝告说： 不行。
English: Her husband was ready to listen to the words of literature to make peace with Vietnam, but Wu Ziqi advised: No.

古文：夫吴之与越，仇雠敌战之国也。
现代文：吴国和越国，是天生的敌国。
English: Wu and Yue are natural enemies.

古文：三江环之，民无所移，有吴则无越，有越则无吴，将不可改于是矣。
现代文：三条大江环绕着吴越两国，百姓无处迁移，有吴就不能有越，有越就不能有吴，这是不可改变的事情。
English: Three great rivers surround the two countries of Wu and Yue, and the people have nowhere to migrate. If there is Wu, there can be no Yue, and if there is Yue, there can be no Wu. This is an unchangeable thing.

古文：员闻之，陆人居陆，水人居水。
现代文：我听说，陆地上的人习惯住在陆地，水边的人习惯住在水边。
English: I've heard that people on land are used to living on land, and people by the water are used to living by the water.

古文：夫上党之国，我攻而胜之，吾不能居其地，不能乘其车。
现代文：那些高地上的诸侯国，我们即使进攻并战胜了它，也不能居住在它们的土地上，不能乘坐它们的车辆。
English: Those highland principalities, even if we attack and defeat them, we can't live on their land, we can't ride in their vehicles.

古文：夫越国，吾攻而胜之，吾能居其地，吾能乘其舟。
现代文：而越国，我们进攻并战胜它，就能居住它的土地，乘坐它的舟船。
English: But Viet Nam, if we attack and defeat it, we will be able to live on its land and sail on its ships.

古文：此其利也，不可失也已，君必灭之。
现代文：这是有利的事情，不可失掉良机，君王一定要灭了它。
English: This is a favorable thing, a good opportunity must not be lost, and the monarch must eliminate it.

古文：失此利也，虽悔之，必无及已。 
现代文：失掉这个利益，以后虽然后悔，也必定来不及了。 
English: If you lose this benefit, you will regret it later, but it will be too late.

古文：越人饰美女八人纳之太宰嚭，曰： 子苟赦越国之罪，又有美于此者将进之。 
现代文：越国人把打扮好的八个美女进献给太宰嚭，说： 您如果宽赦越国的罪，还有比这些更美的女子进献给您。 
English: The people of Yue offered eight well-dressed beautiful women to Dazai Yan, saying: If you forgive the sins of Yue, there are more beautiful women to offer to you.

古文：太宰嚭谏曰： 嚭闻古之伐国者，服之而已。
现代文：于是太宰嚭劝谏吴王说： 我听说古代讨伐别的国家，只要它降服就可以了。
English: Then the Dazaifu advised King Wu, saying, "I have heard that in ancient times, it was okay to invade other countries as long as they surrendered.

古文：今已服矣，又何求焉？ 
现代文：如今越国已经服从，还要求什么呢？ 
English: Now that Viet Nam has complied, what more is there to ask for?

古文：夫差与之成，而去之。
现代文：夫差跟越国讲和后，就撤离了越国。
English: After Husbands made peace with Vietnam, he withdrew from Vietnam.

古文：勾践说于国人曰： 寡人不知其力之不足也，而又与大国执雠，以暴露百姓之骨于中原，此则寡人之罪也。
现代文：勾践对国人说： 我不知道我们的国力不足，却与大国结仇，因此连累百姓的尸骨暴露在原野上，这是我的罪过，请允许我改正。 
English: He said to the Chinese people: I did not know that our national strength was insufficient, but I made an enemy of a big country, so I exposed the dead bodies of the people on the plain. This is my sin, please allow me to correct it.

古文：寡人请更。 于是葬死者，问伤者，养生者，吊有忧，贺有喜，送往者，迎来者，去民之所恶，补民之不足。
现代文：于是就埋葬那些战死的人，照顾那些受伤的人，教养活着的人，慰问有丧事的人，祝贺有喜事的人，对离去的人给予帮助，对迁来的人给予安排，废弃百姓所厌恶的规章制度，补充百姓认为不够的事情。
English: So they buried those who died in the war, took care of those who were injured, educated those who were alive, comforted those who had funerals, congratulated those who had happy events, helped those who left, arranged for those who moved, abandoned the rules and regulations that the people disliked, and supplemented what the people thought was not enough.

古文：然后卑事夫差，宦士三百人于吴，其身亲为夫差前马。
现代文：然后卑躬屈膝地事奉夫差，派遣三百个士人去吴国当奴仆，他还亲自走在夫差的马车前为他开路。
English: Then he humbly served his master, dispatching three hundred nobles to serve as slaves in the State of Wu. He also personally walked in front of his master's carriage to clear the way for him.

古文：勾践之地，南至于句无，北至于御儿，东至于鄞，西至于姑篾，广运百里。
现代文：当时勾践统治的土地，南面到句无，北面到御儿，东面到鄞，西面到姑蔑，方圆百里。
English: At that time, the land ruled by Gokou was as far south as Gwangju, as far north as Seoul, as far east as Gyeongnam, and as far west as Busan, covering an area of one hundred miles.

古文：乃致其父母昆弟而誓之曰： 寡人闻，古之贤君，四方之民归之，若水之归下也。
现代文：勾践召集了父老兄弟然后发誓说： 我听说，古代的贤君，四方的民众都愿意归附他，好比水往低处流一样。
English: He called together his father and brothers and swore: "I have heard that the people of the four quarters are willing to follow the ancient sage, just as water flows to the lowest place.

古文：今寡人不能，将帅二三子夫妇以蕃。 令壮者无取老妇，令老者无取壮妻。
现代文：现在我没有这个能耐，但要带领你们各个家庭多生儿育女，使人口繁殖增加起来。 于是下令壮年男子不准娶老妇，老年男子不准娶壮妻。
English: Now I am not able to do this, but I will make your families increase the number of their children, so that your population will multiply.So he ordered that no man should marry an old woman when he was old, and no man should marry a young woman when he was old.

古文：女子十七不嫁，其父母有罪；丈夫二十不娶，其父母有罪。
现代文：姑娘十七岁还不嫁人，她的父母就要论罪；小伙二十岁不娶妻，他的父母也要论罪。
English: If a girl does not marry by the age of seventeen, her parents are to be blamed; if a boy does not marry by the age of twenty, his parents are to be blamed.

古文：将免者以告，公令医守之。
现代文：有要生孩子的报告上去，公家派医生守护。
English: If there is a report that a child is about to be born, the government will send a doctor to watch over the child.

古文：生丈夫，二壶酒，一犬；生女子，二壶酒，一豚。
现代文：生了男孩，赏两壶酒，一条狗；生了女孩，赏两壶酒，一头小猪。
English: If you give birth to a boy, you get two jugs of wine and a dog; if you give birth to a girl, you get two jugs of wine and a pig.

古文：生三人，公与之母；生二人，公与之饩。
现代文：生三胞胎的，公家供给乳母；生双胞胎的，公家供给食物。
English: If triplets are born, the state provides a nanny; if twins are born, the state provides food.

古文：当室者死，三年释其政；支子死，三月释其政。必哭泣葬埋之，如其子。
现代文：嫡子死了，免除三年徭役；庶子死了，免除三个月的徭役，而且勾践一定亲自哭着参加埋葬，像对待自己的儿子一样。
English: When the legitimate son died, he was exempted from three years of corvee service; when the illegitimate son died, he was exempted from three months of corvee service, and he must have cried and attended the burial in person, just as he did with his own son.

古文：令孤子、寡妇、疾疹、贫病者，纳宦其子。
现代文：命令凡是鳏夫、寡妇、有病和贫弱的家庭，由公家供给其子女生活费用。
English: Ordered that all widowers, widows, the sick, and poor families should have their children's living expenses provided by the state.

古文：其达士，洁其居，美其服，饱其食，而摩厉之于义。
现代文：对那些有才干的人，提供他们整洁的住房，给他们穿好的，吃好的，让他们切磋磨练以崇尚正义。
English: For those who are talented, provide them with a tidy house, dress them well, feed them well, and let them train hard to advocate justice.

古文：四方之士来者，必庙礼之。
现代文：对各地来投奔的士人，一定在庙堂里以礼接待。
English: The scholars who came from all over the country must be received with courtesy in the temple.

古文：勾践载稻与脂于舟以行，国之孺子之游者，无不也，无不歠也，必问其名。
现代文：勾践还坐着装载粮食和肥肉的船出行，遇到流浪的年轻人，没有不给吃，不给喝的，一定记下他们的姓名。
English: He also traveled on a ship loaded with grain and fat. When he met young people who were wandering, he did not refuse to give them food or drink. He made sure to write down their names.

古文：非其身之所种则不食，非其夫人之所织则不衣，十年不收于国，民俱有三年之食。
现代文：不是他亲自种出的粮食就不吃；不是他夫人亲自织成的布就不穿。整整十年在国内不收赋税，百姓家里备有三年的存粮。
English: He would not eat grain that he himself had not grown, and he would not wear cloth that his wife had not woven herself. For a full ten years, no taxes were collected in the country, and the people had three years of stored grain in their homes.

古文：国之父兄请曰： 昔者夫差耻吾君于诸侯之国，今越国亦节矣，请报之。 
现代文：越国的父老兄弟向勾践请求说： 过去夫差在诸侯面前使您蒙受耻辱，如今越国已恢复国力，我们请求报复吴国！ 
English: The fathers and brothers of Yue asked Gojun: In the past, your husband humiliated you in front of the princes. Now that Yue has regained its national strength, we ask for revenge on Wu!

古文：勾践辞曰： 昔者之战也，非二三子之罪也，寡人之罪也。
现代文：勾践辞谢说： 过去的战争失利，不是你们的罪过，而是我的罪过。
English: In his farewell speech, he said: "The defeat in the past war was not your fault, but my fault.

古文：如寡人者，安与知耻？请姑无庸战。 
现代文：像我这样的人，哪里值得你们跟我共同承担耻辱，请你们姑且不要言战。 
English: People like me, where it is worth you and I to share the shame, please do not fight.

古文：父兄又请曰： 越四封之内，亲吾君也，犹父母也。
现代文：父兄们又请求说： 越国四境之内，百姓爱我们的国君，就像爱自己的父母一样。
English: The fathers and brothers also pleaded: "Across the four borders of the country, the people love our sovereign, just as they love their own parents.

古文：子而思报父母之仇，臣而思报君之雠，其有敢不尽力者乎？
现代文：儿子想为父母报仇，臣下想为国君报仇，哪有敢不尽全力的！
English: If a son wants to avenge his parents, or a vassal wants to avenge his sovereign, how dare he not do his best!

古文：请复战。 
现代文：请再和吴国打一仗。 
English: Please have another battle with Wu.

古文：勾践既许之，乃致其众而誓之曰： 寡人闻古之贤君，不患其众之不足也，而患其志行之少耻也。
现代文：勾践于是答应了他们的请求，召集国人发誓说： 我听说古代的贤君，不担忧他的军队不够，而担忧他本人的志向操行不够高尚。
English: So he agreed to their request and gathered the people to swear: "I have heard that the ancient sage did not worry that his army was not enough, but that his own aspirations and actions were not noble enough.

古文：今夫差衣水犀之甲者亿有三千，不患其志行之少耻也，而患其众之不足也。
现代文：现在夫差拥有穿着水牛皮铠甲的军队十万三千人，不担忧自己的志向操行不够高尚，却还担忧他的军队不够。
English: Now that he has an army of one hundred and thirty-three thousand men clad in buffalo skin armour, he is not worried that his intentions and actions are not noble enough, but he is also worried that his army is not enough.

古文：今寡人将助天灭之。
现代文：现在我将帮助上天灭掉它。
English: Now I'm going to help God destroy it.

古文：吾不欲匹夫之勇也，欲其旅进旅退。
现代文：我不想要匹夫之勇的士兵，而希望大家统一步调，共同行动。
English: I don't want brave soldiers, I want everyone to pull together and act together.

古文：进则思赏，退则思刑，如此则有常赏。
现代文：前进时就想到奖赏，后退时就想到刑罚，这样才能有赏赐。
English: When you advance, think of a reward, and when you retreat, think of a punishment, so that you can have a reward.

古文：进不用命，退则无耻，如此则有常刑。 
现代文：前进时不听号令，后退时还不知羞耻，这样就会有惩罚。 
English: There will be punishment for not obeying orders when moving forward, and for not knowing the shame of retreating.

古文：果行，国人皆劝，父勉其子，兄勉其弟，妇勉其夫，曰： 孰是君也，而可无死乎？ 
现代文：军队出发了，国人都彼此勉励。父亲勉励儿子，哥哥勉励弟弟，妻子勉励丈夫，大家说： 谁有我们这样好的国君啊，还能不为他拼死作战吗？ 
English: The army set out, and the countrymen encouraged each other. Fathers encouraged their sons, brothers encouraged their brothers, wives encouraged their husbands, and everyone said: "Who has a good king like us, and would not fight to the death for him?"

古文：是故败吴于囿，又败之于没，又郊败之。
现代文：所以在囿这个地方打败了吴军，又在没这个地方打败了吴军，最后在吴国国都的郊外第三次打败了吴军。
English: Therefore, he defeated the Wu army in this place, and defeated the Wu army in that place, and finally defeated the Wu army for the third time in the suburbs of the capital of Wu.

古文：夫差行成，曰： 寡人之师徒，不足以辱君矣。请以金玉、子女赂君之辱。 
现代文：夫差请求讲和，说： 我的军队已经不值得屈辱您亲自讨伐了，请允许我把金玉美女进献给您作为赔罪。 
English: Her husband begged for peace, saying, "My army is no longer worthy of the humiliation of your personal crusade. Please allow me to present the Golden Beauty to you as compensation."

古文：勾践对曰： 昔天以越赐吴，而吴不受命；今天以吴予越，越可以无听天之命，而听君之令乎？
现代文：勾践回答说： 过去上天把越国赐给吴国，而吴国没有接受天命；现在上天又把吴国交给越国，越国难道可以不听天命，却听你的命令吗？
English: Guo Jian replied: In the past, Heaven gave Yue State to Wu State, but Wu State did not accept the Mandate of Heaven; now Heaven has given Wu State to Yue State. Can Yue State not listen to the Mandate of Heaven, but listen to your order?

古文：吾请达王甬句东，吾与君为二君乎。 
现代文：请让我把你送到甬句东去，我和你共同做越国的国君吧。 
English: Please let me send you to the East, and let me be the ruler of Vietnam together with you.

古文：夫差对曰： 寡人礼先壹饭矣，君若不忘周室，而为弊邑宸宇，亦寡人之愿也。
现代文：夫差回答说： 从情礼说，以前我曾有恩于越国，您如果不忘周王室的情面，而给吴国一点屋檐下的地方立脚，也是我的愿望。
English: The messenger replied, "From the point of view of courtesy, I was grateful to Yue Guo in the past. If you do not forget the feelings of the Zhou royal family, and give Wu Guo a foothold under the roof, it is also my wish.

古文：君若曰： 吾将残汝社稷，灭汝宗庙。 
现代文：您如果说： 我将摧残你的社稷，毁坏你的宗庙。 
English: If you say, 'I will destroy your congregation and demolish your temple,'

古文：寡人请死，余何面目以视于天下乎！
现代文：我就只有请求一死，我还有什么脸给天下人看笑话啊！
English: All I can do is beg for death. What kind of face do I have to show to the world?

古文：越君其次也。 遂灭吴。
现代文：您就带领军队进占吴国吧。 
English: You should lead the army to occupy Wu.

