古文：王建安同楼伏连丘堆娥清刘尼奚眷车伊洛宿石来大千周几豆代田周观闾大肥尉拨陆真吕洛拔王建，广宁人也。
现代文：王建，是广宁人。
English: Wang Jian is from Guangning.

古文：祖姑为平文后，生昭成皇帝。
现代文：祖姑是平文皇后，生昭成皇帝。
English: His father's aunt was the empress of Emperor Pingwen, who gave birth to Emperor Shoucheng.

古文：伯祖丰，以帝舅贵重。
现代文：伯祖王丰，因为是帝舅而位高任重。
English: Uncle Feng, because he was the uncle of the emperor, was distinguished and respected.

古文：丰子支，尚昭成女，甚见亲待。
现代文：王丰的儿子王支，娶昭成帝的女儿，很受皇帝的优待。
English: Feng's son Wang Zhi, who married the daughter of Emperor Zhaocheng, was highly trusted.

古文：建少尚公主。
现代文：王建年轻时娶公主为妻。
English: Wang Jian has been married to a princess since he was a child.

古文：登国初，为外朝大人，与和跋等十三人迭典庶事，参与计谋。
现代文：登国初年，任外朝大人，与和跋等十三人轮流执掌政务，参与计议谋划。
English: In the first year after ascending to the throne, he and 13 others, including the emperor, took turns to take charge of government affairs and participate in deliberation and planning.

古文：太祖幸濡源，遣建使慕容垂，辞色高亢，垂壮之。
现代文：太祖到濡源，派遣王建出使慕容垂，王建言辞神采飞扬，受到慕容垂赞许。
English: The great-grandfather went to Nureyuan and dispatched Wang Jian as an envoy to Murongdol. Wang Jian's words were eloquent and praised by Murongdol.

古文：还为左大夫。
现代文：回朝后任左大夫。
English: After his return, he became a doctor of the left.

古文：建兄回，诸子多不顺法，建具以状闻，回父子伏诛。
现代文：王建的哥哥王回，几个儿子多不守法，王建向皇帝一一禀报，王回父子都被处死。
English: Wang Jian's brother, Wang Hui, and several of his sons did not abide by the law. Wang Jian reported to the emperor one by one, and both Wang Hui and his son were executed.

古文：其谨直如此。
现代文：王建就是这样忠谨正直。
English: This is how loyal and honest Wang Jian is.

古文：从征伐诸国。破二十余部，以功赐奴婢数十口，杂畜数千。
现代文：他跟随太祖征伐各国，打败了二十多个部落，因战功被赏赐奴婢数十人，各种牲畜数千头。
English: He followed his great-grandfather in conquering various countries, defeating more than twenty tribes, and was awarded dozens of slaves and thousands of livestock for his war service.

古文：从征卫辰，破之，赐僮隶五千户，为中部大人。
现代文：跟随征伐刘卫辰，打败了他，被赏赐奴仆五十户，任命为中部大人。
English: He followed the conquest of Liu Weichen, defeated him, was awarded fifty slaves, and was appointed as the central adult.

古文：从破慕容宝于参合陂。
现代文：跟随太祖在参合陂打败慕容实。
English: He followed his great-grandfather in defeating Murongshi in Sanghe County.

古文：太祖乘胜将席卷南夏，于是简择俘众，有才能者留之，其余欲悉给衣粮遣归，令中州之民咸知恩德。
现代文：太祖想乘胜扫平南方，于是选拔俘虏，把其中有才能的留下，其他的打算都发给衣服粮食放回去，使中原百姓都知道他的恩德。
English: The great-grandfather wanted to take advantage of the victory to sweep the south, so he selected the captives, kept the talented ones among them, and sent all the other plans to the clothes and grain, so that the Central Plains people would know his kindness.

古文：乃召群臣议之。
现代文：因而召集群臣商议这件事。
English: So he called his ministers together to discuss the matter.

古文：建曰： 慕容覆败于此，国内虚空，图之为易。
现代文：王建说： 慕容实在这裹被打败了，国内空虚，乘虚攻取他的国家是不难的。
English: Wang Jian said: Murong Si has been defeated here, the country is empty, it is not difficult to seize his country by taking advantage of the void.

古文：今获而归之，无乃不可乎？
现代文：如今俘获后却又放回他们，恐怕不合适吧?
English: I'm afraid it would be inappropriate to release them now that they've been captured.

古文：且纵敌生患，不如杀之。 
现代文：况且放纵敌人容易产生后患，不如杀了他们。 
English: Moreover, indulging the enemy is likely to produce sequelae, it is better to kill them.

古文：太祖谓诸将曰： 若从建言，吾恐后南人创乂，绝其向化之心，非伐罪吊民之义。 
现代文：太祖对将领们说： 如果听从王建的意见，我担心南方人以此为戒，断绝了归顺之心，这不是吊民伐罪的本意。 
English: The great-grandfather said to the generals: If you listen to Wang Jianchu's opinion, I am afraid that the southerners will take this as a warning and break their hearts of submission. This is not the intention of hanging the people.

古文：诸将咸以建言为然，建又固执，乃坑之。
现代文：将领们都认为王建说得对，王建又坚持己见，于是活埋了俘虏。
English: The generals all thought that Wang Jianlu was right, and Wang Jianlu insisted on his own opinion, so he buried the prisoners alive.

古文：太祖既而悔焉。
现代文：太祖不久就后悔了。
English: The grandfather soon regretted it.

古文：后从征慕容宝，拜冠军将军。
现代文：后来跟随征伐慕容实，被任命为冠军将军。
English: Later, he followed the conquest of Mu Rongshi and was appointed as the champion general.

古文：并州既平，车驾东出井陉，命建率五万骑先驱启路。
现代文：并州平定以后，太祖向东出行井陉，命令王建率领五万骑兵先行开路。
English: After the state was pacified, Emperor Taizu traveled east to Jingyao and ordered Wang Jian to lead fifty thousand cavalry to open the road ahead.

古文：车驾次常山，诸郡皆降，惟中山、鄴、信都三城不下。
现代文：太祖停驻常山，许多郡都归降了，衹有中山、邺、信都三城不降。
English: The great-grandfather was stationed in Changshan, and many counties were surrendered, including Zhongshan, Handan and Xindu.

古文：乃遣卫王仪南攻鄴，建攻信都，众各五万。
现代文：于是派遣卫王元仪向南攻邺，王建攻打信都，部众各五万人。
English: So they sent Wei Wang Yuan Yi south to attack Shao, and Wang Jian to attack Xindu, with 50,000 men each.

古文：建等攻城六十余日不能克，士卒多伤。
现代文：王建等攻城六十多天不能攻克，而士卒已多数受伤。
English: Wang Jian and others have been unable to conquer the city for more than sixty days, and many soldiers have been injured.

古文：太祖乃自中山幸信都，慕容宝冀州刺史慕容凤夜逾城走，信都降。
现代文：太祖于是从中山前往信都，慕容实的冀州刺史慕容凤夜晚越城逃跑，信都投降。
English: The great-grandfather then traveled from Zhongshan to Xindu. Murong Jizhou stabbed Murong Feng in the night and fled across the city. Xindu surrendered.

古文：车驾幸钜鹿，破慕容宝于柏肆坞，遂进围中山。
现代文：太祖前往钜鹿，在柏肆坞打败慕容宝，于是进兵围攻中山。
English: Taizu went to Elk and defeated Murong Bao in Baihu Dockyard, and then marched to besiege Zhongshan.

古文：宝弃城走和龙，城内无主，百姓惶恐，东门不闭。
现代文：慕容宝弃城逃往和龙，中山城内没有头领，百姓惶惑，束门没有关闭。
English: Murong Bao abandoned the city and fled to Hulong. There was no leader in Zhongshan City, the people were confused, and the gate was not closed.

古文：太祖将夜入乘城，据守其门。
现代文：太祖打算连夜攻入敌城，控制城门。
English: Taizu planned to enter the enemy city overnight and take control of the city gate.

古文：建贪而无谋，意在虏获，恐士卒肆掠，盗乱府库，请俟天明，太祖乃止。
现代文：王建贪婪而没有计谋，一心想获取敌方财物，害怕士兵大肆抢劫，劫掠敌方的府库，请等到天明攻城，太祖就放弃了原来的打算。
English: Wang Jian was greedy and had no strategy. He was bent on acquiring the enemy's property. He was afraid of the soldiers' wanton looting and plundering of the enemy's treasury. He asked them to wait until dawn to attack the city. The great-grandfather gave up his original plan.

古文：是夜，徒河人共立慕容晋麟为主，遂闭门固守。
现代文：这天夜裹，徒河人共同拥立慕容普膦为首领，随即关闭城门坚守城池。
English: That night, the people of Tuhe jointly supported Murong Puyi as their leader, and immediately closed the city gates to defend the city.

古文：太祖乃悉众攻之，连日不拔。
现代文：太祖于是动用全部兵力攻城，连攻几天攻不下。
English: The great-grandfather then used all of his forces to attack the city, and was unable to take it for several days.

古文：使人登巢车临城，招其众曰： 慕容宝捐城奔走，汝曹百姓将为谁守？
现代文：太祖令人登上战车靠近城池，招抚城裹人说： 慕容实弃城逃走，你们要为谁守城?
English: The great-grandfather had people board the chariot near the castle, and he coaxed the people around the castle and said: "Murong abandoned the city and fled. Who do you want to defend the city for?

古文：何不识天命，取死亡也？ 
现代文：为什么不信天命，自取灭亡呢? 
English: Why don't you believe in God's predestination and destroy yourself?

古文：皆曰： 群小无知，但复恐如参合之众，故求全月日之命耳。 
现代文：众人回答说： 我等小人无知，衹是害怕步参合陂众人的后尘，而求保全短暂的性命。 
English: The people answered, "We are fools and ignorant, we are afraid of following in the footsteps of others, and we are trying to preserve our short lives.

古文：太祖闻之，顾视建而唾其面。
现代文：太祖听到这些话，回视王建并且朝他脸上吐唾沫。
English: Hearing these words, the great-grandfather looked back at Wang Jian and spat in his face.

古文：中山平，赐建爵濮阳公。
现代文：中山平定以后，太祖封王建为濮阳公。
English: After Zhongshan was pacified, Wang Jian was given the title of Duke of Shenyang.

古文：乌丸库侲宫鸣聚党为寇，诏建讨平之。
现代文：乌丸库局官鸣聚众劫掠，太祖韶令王建前去讨伐平定。
English: The officials of the Wumaru Library Bureau gathered a crowd to loot and pillage, and Emperor Taizu ordered Wang Jian to go forward to fight and pacify.

古文：迁太仆，徙为真定公，加散骑常侍，冀青二州刺史。
现代文：事后王建升任太仆，改赐爵号真定公，加授散骑常侍、冀州青州二州刺史。
English: After the event, Wang Jian was promoted to the position of eunuch, and his title was changed to Zhendinggong. He was also awarded the title of sanshi (free rider) and the title of Jizhou, Qingzhou and Erzhou.

古文：卒，陪葬金陵。
现代文：去世后，陪葬金陵。
English: After his death, he was buried with Jinling.

古文：初，建兄豆居以建功赐爵即丘候，无子，建以子斤袭兄爵。
现代文：起初，王建的哥哥豆居因王建的功勋被赐予即丘侯爵位，没有儿子，王建让儿子王斤继承哥哥的爵位。
English: At first, Wang Jian's elder brother Dou Ju was given the title of Marquis of Zhiyu due to Wang Jian's meritorious deeds. As he had no son, Wang Jian let his son Wang Jin inherit his elder brother's title.

古文：太守初，给事中，任职用事。
现代文：太宗初年，王斤任给事中，尽职办事。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Wang Jian was appointed to be in charge of affairs and did his duty.

古文：转大长秋。
现代文：改任大长秋。
English: He was reassigned to Dajangqiu.

古文：世祖征赫连昌，遣斤部造攻具。
现代文：世祖征讨赫连昌，派遣王斤主管制造攻战器具。
English: King Sejong conquered Helianchang and dispatched Wang Jian to supervise the manufacture of offensive equipment.

古文：进爵淮南公，加平北将军。
现代文：事后晋爵淮南公，加授平北将军。
English: After the fact, Huainan Gong was promoted to the peerage, and he was awarded the title of General of Pingbei.

古文：时并州胡酋田卜谋反诛，余众不安，遣斤镇虑虒以抚慰之。
现代文：这时并州胡人酋长田卜谋反被杀，部众惶恐不安，世祖派遣王斤镇守虑虎藉以安抚他们。
English: At this time, Tian Bumo, the chief of the Huzhou Hu people, was killed, and the people were panicked and anxious. The ancestor sent Wang Jianzhen to keep an eye on the tiger to appease them.

古文：斤绥静胡魏，甚收声称。
现代文：王丘安抚平定翅人魏人，大获声誉。
English: Wang Qiu gained a great reputation for pacifying the Wei people.

古文：刘义隆遣将到彦之寇河南，世祖西征赫连定，以斤为卫兵将军，镇蒲坂。
现代文：刘羞建派遣将领到彦之侵犯黄河以南，世祖西征赫连定，任命王丘为街兵将军，镇守蒲垣。
English: Liu Shijian dispatched generals to the south of the Yellow River to invade Yan Zi, and appointed Wang Qiu as the general of street soldiers and the town guard of Baguio.

古文：关陇平，斤徙镇长安，假节，镇西将军。
现代文：阗陇地区平定以后，王丘迁移镇守旦昼，加授假节、镇西将军。
English: After the Yunnan region was pacified, Wang Qiu moved the town guard to Danzhong, and was awarded the holiday and the town west general.

古文：斤遂骄矜，不顺法度，信用左右，调役百姓，民不堪之，南奔汉川者数千家。
现代文：王丘于是骄傲自负，不守法度，任用身边的人，役使百姓，百姓无法忍受，往南逃奔汉川的有几千家。
English: As a result, Wang Qiu was proud and conceited, did not abide by the law, appointed people around him to serve the people. The people could not bear it, and several thousand families fled south to Han River.

古文：而委罪于雍州刺史阳文祖、秦州刺史任延明。
现代文：而王斤把罪过推给雍州刺史阳文祖、秦州刺史任延明。
English: Wang Jin, on the other hand, put the blame on Yang Wenzhu of Yongzhou and Ren Yanming of Qinzhou.

古文：世祖召问二人，各以状对。
现代文：世祖召这二人回朝诘问，二人各据实回答。
English: The patriarch summoned the two men back to the imperial court for questioning, and each of them answered truthfully.

古文：世祖知为斤所诬，遣宜阳公伏树覆按虚实，得数十事。
现代文：世祖知道他们被王斤所诬陷，派宜阳公伏树查究实际情况，查出了王斤违法的几十件事。
English: The patriarch knew that they had been framed by Wang Jin, and sent the Yiyang Public Security Bureau to investigate the actual situation, and found out dozens of things that Wang Jin had violated the law.

古文：遂斩斤以徇。
现代文：于是将王斤处斩示众。
English: As a result, Wang Jin was beheaded in front of everyone.

古文：建孙度，太宗时为虎牢镇监军。
现代文：王建的孙子王度，太宗时任虎牢镇监军。
English: Wang Jian's grandson, Wang Du, was the supervisor of the troops in the town of Huye at the time of Emperor Taizong.

古文：世祖即位，徵拜殿中给事，迁尚书。
现代文：世祖即位，王度被征入拜授殿中给事，升任尚书。
English: When the founder of the dynasty ascended the throne, Wang Du was conscripted into the Worship Hall to be given duties, and was promoted to Shang Shu.

古文：从征赫连昌，讨蠕蠕，并有功，赐爵济阳公，加散骑常侍，平南将军。
现代文：跟随世祖征讨赫连昌，讨伐蠕蠕，都有功勋，被赐给爵位为济阳公，加授散骑常侍，平南将军。
English: He was awarded the title of Lord of Jiyang, as well as the title of General of Pingnan.

古文：诏度率五千骑与叔孙建合击刘义隆兗州刺史竺灵秀于湖陆，大破之。
现代文：诏令王度率领五千骑兵与叔孙建在湖陆合击刘义隆的兖州刺史竺灵秀，大败他。
English: He ordered Wang Du to lead five thousand cavalrymen to fight Liu Yilong's son-in-law and grandson-in-law in Huludao and defeated Liu Yilong.

古文：后出镇长安，假节，都督秦、泾、梁益、雍五州诸军事，开府。
现代文：后来出外镇守长安，假节，都督秦、泾、梁、益、雍五州诸军事，开府。
English: Later, he went abroad to guard the town of Chang'an, and on the holiday, the military governors of the five prefectures of Qin, Min, Liang, Yixing, and Yong led the troops to set up the capital.

古文：卒，谥曰庄。
现代文：去世，谧号为庄。
English: After his death, his nickname was Zhuang.

古文：子安都，袭，降爵为侯。
现代文：儿子安都，继承封爵，降爵位为侯。
English: His son, Ando, inherited the title of nobility, but was demoted to marquis.

古文：世祖拜为太子庶子，出为鄯善镇将。
现代文：世祖任命他为太子庶子，出任鄯善镇将。
English: The ancestor appointed him as the prince's illegitimate son, and he served as the commander of Suishan Town.

古文：高宗时，为内都大官。
现代文：高宗时，任内都大官。
English: When Gao Zong was in office, he was a high-ranking official.

古文：卒，子买得袭。
现代文：去世，儿子买得继承爵位。
English: When he died, his son inherited his title.

古文：建曾孙树，以善射有宠于显祖，为内侍长。
现代文：王建的曾孙王树，因擅长射箭受到显祖恩宠，任内侍长。
English: Wang Jian's great-grandson, Wang Shu, was favored by Emperor Xuanzong because he was good at archery, and he served as the chamberlain.

古文：稍迁尚书，赐爵历阳侯，加龙骧将军、员外常侍。
现代文：逐渐升任尚书，被赐给爵位为压垦龌，加授龙骧将军、员外常侍。
English: Gradually, he was promoted to Shangshu, and was given the title of Jiaxuan, as well as the title of Longjing General, and the title of Non-Commissioned Officer.

古文：出为平西将军、泾州刺史。
现代文：出任平西将军、迳业刺史。
English: He was appointed as the general of Pingxi Province, and served as the governor of Shandong Province.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：安同，辽东胡人也。
现代文：安同，是辽东胡人。
English: Andong, Liaodong Hu people.

古文：其先祖曰世高，汉时以安息王侍子入洛。
现代文：他的先祖叫世高，汉朝时作为安息王的侍子来到洛阳。
English: His ancestor, An Shigao, entered Luoyang during the Han Dynasty as an attendant of the Sabbatical King.

古文：历魏至晋，避乱辽东，遂家焉。
现代文：从魏到晋，在辽东避乱，于是就定居在那裹。
English: From the Wei Dynasty to the Jin Dynasty, they fled to Liaodong to escape the turmoil, and thus made this place their home.

古文：父屈，仕慕容暐，为殿中郎将。
现代文：父亲安屈，在慕容晾手下做官，任殿中郎将。
English: His father, Anku, served as an official under Murong Xitong and was appointed to the position of palace vice-commander.

古文：苻坚灭暐，屈友人公孙眷之妹没入苻氏宫，出赐刘库仁为妻。
现代文：苻坚消灭慕容啤，安屈的朋友公孙眷的妹妹没入苻氏宫中，被赐给刘库仁为妻。
English: Zou Jian annihilated Murong Beer. The younger sister of An Qu's friend, Gong Sun Quan, disappeared into Zou's palace and was given to Liu Curen as his wife.

古文：库仁贵宠之。
现代文：库仁看重并宠爱她。
English: Kuren values and cherishes her.

古文：同因随眷商贩，见太祖有济世之才，遂留奉侍。
现代文：安同因跟随公孙眷经商，见太祖有济世之才，就留下来奉侍太祖。
English: Andong stayed to serve his grandfather because he followed his grandsons in business and saw that his grandfather had the ability to benefit the world.

古文：性端严明惠，好长者之言。
现代文：生性端庄严谨、明达宽厚，出言慎重如同长者。
English: An likes to listen to older, more knowledgeable people.

古文：登国初，太祖征兵于慕容垂，事在《窟咄传》。
现代文：登国初年，太祖向慕容垂征调军队，事在《窟咄传》。
English: In the first year after his ascension to the throne, Emperor Taizu conscripted and transferred troops to Murongdiao, as described in "The Tale of the Cave."

古文：同频使称旨，遂见宠异，以为外朝大人，与和跋等出入禁中，迭典庶事。
现代文：安同屡次出使符合帝意，于是受到特殊的尊崇，被任命为外朝大人，与和跋等人出入宫中，轮流主持政事。
English: Andong repeatedly sent envoys in accordance with the emperor's wishes, and thus received special reverence. He was appointed as a foreign dignitary, entering and leaving the palace with Wotan and others, and taking turns to preside over government affairs.

古文：太祖班赐功臣，同以使功居多，赐以妻妾及隶户三十，马二匹，羊五十口，加广武将军。
现代文：太祖分赏功臣，安同因出使的功劳居多，赐给妻妾和奴隶三十户，马二匹，羊五十只，加授广武将军。
English: The great-grandfather distributed awards to meritorious vassals, with Andong receiving the most for his services as an envoy. He gave his wife, concubine, and thirty slaves, two horses, and fifty sheep, as well as the additional award of General Guangwu.

古文：从征姚平于柴壁，姚兴悉众救平，太祖乃增筑重围以拒兴。
现代文：跟随皇上在柴壁征讨姚平，姚兴率全部兵马来救姚平，太祖于是加固工事准备抵挡姚兴。
English: Following the emperor to recruit and fight against Yao Ping at the Great Wall, Yao Xing led all the soldiers and horses to rescue Yao Ping, so Taizu strengthened the construction to prepare to resist Yao Xing.

古文：同进计曰： 臣受遣诣绛督租，见汾东有蒙坑，东西三百余里，径路不通。
现代文：安同献计说： 我曾受派遣到绛县催督租税，看到汾河束面有蒙坑，东西长三百多里，道路不通。
English: An Tong Xian Ke said: I was sent to Lixian County as a tax inspector. I saw that there were pits on the surface of the Lijiang River, which was more than three hundred miles long from east to west, and the road was impassable.

古文：姚兴来，必从汾西，乘高临下，直至柴壁。
现代文：逃兴来，一定从西面过来，居高临下，直达柴壁。
English: To escape, you must come from the west, stay high, and go straight to the chai wall.

古文：如此，则寇内外势接，重围难固，不可制也。
现代文：这样，贼寇就内外形势相接，我们的工事不起作用，不能控制贼寇。
English: In this way, the banditry is linked to the internal and external situation, our construction does not work, and we cannot control the banditry.

古文：宜截汾曲为南北浮桥，乘西岸筑围。
现代文：应当横跨汾水弯曲处修筑南北浮桥，登西岸修筑工事。
English: A north-south floating bridge should be built across the bend of the Surabaya River, and construction work should start on the west bank.

古文：西围既固，贼至无所施其智力矣。 
现代文：西岸的工事牢固了，贼寇就无计可施了。 太祖采纳了他的建议。
English: The siege in the west is solid, and after the enemy comes, there is no way to exert wisdom and strength.

古文：从之。兴果视平屠灭而不能救。
现代文：姚兴果然看着姚干被屠灭而不能相救。
English: Yao Xing watched Yao Gan being slaughtered and couldn't save him.

古文：以谋功，赐爵北新侯，加安远将军。
现代文：因计谋建功，被赐为北新侯，加授安远将军。
English: He was given the title of Beixinhou (北新侯) and the title of General Anyuan (安远将军) for his contribution.

古文：诏同送姚兴将越骑校尉唐小方等于长安。
现代文：韶令安同押送姚兴的将领越骑校尉唐小方等到长安。
English: He ordered the general who escorted Yao Xing to Chang'an, the cavalry captain Tang Xiaofang.

古文：清河王绍之乱，太宗在外，使夜告同，令收合百工伎巧，众皆响应奉迎。
现代文：遣迥工五绍作乱，左塞在外地，派使者连夜告诉宣回，命令他聚集工匠，众人都响应号召奉迎太宗。
English: When the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys of the envoys

古文：太宗即位，命同与南平公长孙嵩并理民讼。
现代文：太宗即位，任命安同与南平公长孙崖共同审理民众诉讼。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, he appointed Andong and Sun Yat-sen, the chief justice of Nanping, to jointly hear civil lawsuits.

古文：又诏与肥如侯贺护持节循察并定二州及诸山居杂胡、丁零，宣诏抚慰，问其疾苦，纠举守宰不法。
现代文：又诏令与肥如侯贺护持符节巡视并定二州及各山居杂胡、丁零，宣读诏书抚慰存恤，询问他们的疾苦，督察检举郡守县令的不法行为。
English: In addition, the imperial edict and the county magistrate inspected and determined the two states and each mountain village to hold the festival, read out the imperial edict to soothe and save the shirt, inquired about their sufferings, and the inspector reported the illegal behavior of the county magistrate.

古文：同至并州，表曰： 窃见并州所部守宰，多不奉法。
现代文：安同到并州，上表说： 见并丛治下的地方长官，多不守法。
English: When Andong arrived in the merged state, the above table said: Look at the local governors under the rule of Andong, most of them do not abide by the law.

古文：又刺史擅用御府针工古彤为晋阳令，交通财贿，共为奸利。
现代文：另外刺史擅自任用御府针工直毖为置隧县令，用财货相勾结，共谋非法利益。
English: In addition, Sashihi arbitrarily appointed the imperial needleworker Naosuke as the county magistrate to set up a tunnel, colluded with goods and goods, and conspired to make illegal profits.

古文：请案律治罪。 
现代文：请依法惩处。 
English: Please punish them according to the law.

古文：太宗从之，于是郡国肃然。
现代文：太宗准奏，于是郡国秩序井然。
English: Taizong played the accordion, and the county was in order.

古文：同东出井陉，至钜鹿，发众四户一人，欲治大岭山，通天门关；又筑坞于宋子，以镇静郡县。
现代文：玄回束出韭座，到堑尘，征发民众每四户一人，准备整治大岭山，开通天门关，而且在塞王修筑土堡，以便安定郡县。
English: Xuan Huizhong set out from the capital and went to Shoucheng to solicit one person from every four households to prepare for the rectification of the Daling Mountain, the opening of the Heaven's Gate, and the construction of an earthen fort in Saiwang in order to stabilize the county.

古文：护疾同得众心，因此使人告同筑城聚众，欲图大事。
现代文：贺护妒忌安回得民心，因此指使人诬告安同筑城聚众，将要谋反。
English: He Guo was jealous that An had won back the hearts of the people, so he ordered people to falsely accuse An and build a city to gather the people, and they were going to rebel.

古文：太宗以同擅徵发于外，槛车徵还，召群官议其罪。
现代文：立塞因宣回在外地擅自征发，用囚车召回他，召集百官议定他的罪行。
English: Lisei announced that he had been conscripted and sent abroad without authorization, recalled him in a prison van, and gathered a hundred officials to discuss his crime.

古文：皆曰： 同擅兴事役，劳扰百姓，宜应穷治，以肃来犯。 
现代文：都说： 安同擅自征调劳役，役使百姓，应当彻底查办，藉以儆戒将来犯法的人。 
English: All of them said: "Andong should thoroughly investigate and deal with the unauthorized recruitment and transfer of labor and the use of the people, and use this as a warning to those who will commit crimes in the future."

古文：太宗以同虽专命，而本在为公，意无不善，释之。
现代文：立塞因宣回虽然独断专行，但本意为公，愿望好，宽恕了他。
English: Although he acted arbitrarily, he had a good intention and a good wish, so he forgave him.

古文：世祖监国，临朝听政，以同为左辅。
现代文：世祖代理国事，临御朝廷处理政事，用安同为左辅。
English: The founder of the dynasty was in charge of state affairs, and the imperial court handled political affairs, with Andong as his left-hand assistant.

古文：太宗征河南，拜同右光禄大夫。
现代文：左塞征讨董回以南，任命安同为右光禄大夫。
English: Zuo Sai was conscripted south of Dong Hui, and An Tong was appointed doctor of Uguanglu.

古文：世祖出镇北境，同与安定王弥留镇京师。
现代文：些担外出安抚北部边境，安同与安定王丘迩留守京师。
English: Some officials went out to pacify the northern border, while Wang Qiuyuan, the minister of peace and stability, stayed in Beijing.

古文：世祖即位，进爵高阳公，拜光禄勋。
现代文：世担即位，窒回晋升爵位为直阳公，拜授光禄勋。
English: Shitan ascended to the throne, and was promoted to the peerage of Naoyang Gong, and was awarded the Guanglu Honor.

古文：寻除征东大将军，冀青二州刺史。
现代文：不久被授任征束大将军、冀直二州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the Conscript General of Ji Province and the Governor of Ji Province.

古文：同长子屈，太宗时典太仓事，盗官粳米数石，欲以养亲。
现代文：塞回的长于玄昼，立塞时主持太仓事务，偷了几石官府的粳米，想用来奉养父母。
English: Longer than the Middle Ages, he presided over the Taicang affairs when he stood up, stole several stones of glutinous rice from the government, and wanted to use it to support his parents.

古文：同大怒，奏求戮屈，自劾不能训子，请罪。太宗嘉而恕之，遂诏长给同粳米。
现代文：安同十分生气，奏请处死安屈，并自责教子无方，请求给予惩罚太宗嘉许且宽宥了他们，并下诏长久供给安同粳米。
English: Entirely enraged, Andong requested that they be put to death, blaming himself for not being able to do anything about it. He asked that they be punished, but Taizong commended and pardoned them, and issued an edict to supply Andong with glutinous rice for a long time.

古文：其公清奉法，皆此类也。同在官明察，长于校练，家法修整，为世所称。
现代文：安同就是这样的清廉无私、遵守法令。安同为官明察，长于考核，治家严整，为世人所称道。
English: Andong is such a clean and selfless person, abiding by laws and regulations. Andong is well-known by the world for being a clear-sighted official, good at assessment, and a strict ruler.

古文：及在冀州，年老，颇殖财货，大兴寺塔，为百姓所苦。
现代文：等到出任冀州地方官，已年老，颇爱财，大修寺庙佛塔，为百姓所厌恶。
English: By the time he became a local official in Jizhou, he was already old, loved money, and was repairing temples and pagodas, which was detested by the common people.

古文：神二年卒。
现代文：神麖二年去世。
English: He died two years later.

古文：追赠高阳王，谥曰恭惠。
现代文：追赠为高阳王，谧号为恭惠。
English: His posthumous name was Gaoyang Wang, and his posthumous nickname was Gonghui.

古文：屈子阳烈，散骑侍郎，赐爵北新子。
现代文：安屈之子阳烈，任散骑侍郎，被赐为北新子。
English: Yang Rong, the son of An Qu, was given the title of Northern Newcomer.

古文：屈弟原，雅性矜严，沉勇多智略。
现代文：安屈的弟弟安原，素性谨严，深沉果敢，富有才智谋略。
English: Anku's younger brother, Andahara, was a strict and prudent person, with a deep courage and a wealth of wisdom and strategy.

古文：太宗时为猎郎，出监云中军事。
现代文：太宗时任猎郎，监督云中军事。
English: Taizong then served as a huntsman, supervising the military in Yunzhong.

古文：时赫连屈丐犯河西，原以数十骑击之，杀十余人。
现代文：当时赫连屈丐侵犯黄河以西，安原率领几十名骑兵迎击，斩杀十几人。
English: At that time, Kherian Kegui invaded the west of the Yellow River, and An Yuan led dozens of cavalry to counterattack, killing more than a dozen people.

古文：太宗以原轻敌，违节度，加其罪责。
现代文：太宗因安原轻敌，违犯纪律，对他加以惩罚。
English: Emperor Taizong punished him for violating discipline by treating Yasuhara as a minor enemy.

古文：然知原骁勇，遂任以为将，镇守云中。
现代文：然而知道安原勇猛，于是任命他为将领，镇守云中。
English: However, knowing Yasuhara's bravery, he appointed him as a general, and the town was safe.

古文：宽和爱下，甚得众心。
现代文：安原宽厚谦和爱护部下，很得部下拥戴。
English: Yasuhara was generous and humble, and loved his subordinates. He was greatly admired by them.

古文：蠕蠕屡犯塞，原辄摧破之。
现代文：蠕蠕屡屡侵犯边塞，安原一次次挫败它。
English: Creeping creep repeatedly invaded the border fortress, and Anyuan defeated it again and again.

古文：以功赐爵武原侯，加鲁兵将军。
现代文：因功被赐给爵位为武原侯，加授鲁兵将军。
English: For his services, he was given the title of Marquis of Wuyuan and promoted to the rank of General Lu He.

古文：世祖即位，徵拜驾部尚书。
现代文：世祖即位，安原被征回，拜任驾部尚书。
English: The ancestor ascended to the throne, and Yasuhara was called back to take over the position of chauffeur.

古文：车驾征蠕蠕大檀。分军五道并进，大檀惊骇北循。
现代文：世祖征讨蠕蠕的大檀，分兵五路并进，大檀惊骇而向北逃遁。
English: The ancestor of the world conquers the creeping giant sandalwood, the detachment of soldiers marches five ways, the giant sandalwood is shocked and flees northward.

古文：迁尚书左仆射、河间公，加侍中、征南大将军。
现代文：安原升任尚书左仆射，晋爵河间公，加授侍中、征南大将军。
English: Yasuhara was promoted to Shoshuzuke, promoted to the peerage as Lord Kawama, conferred the title of Junior Chamberlain, and became a general of the Southern Expeditionary Force.

古文：从征赫连昌，入其城而还。
现代文：跟从征讨赫连昌，攻入他的都城后返回。
English: He followed the conquest of Herenchang, entered its capital and then returned.

古文：车驾北伐，蠕蠕循走。
现代文：皇上北伐，蠕蠕逃走。
English: Emperor's Northern Expedition, creeping away.

古文：世祖闻东部高车在巳尼陂，人畜甚众，将遣袭之。
现代文：世祖得知东部高车在已尼陂，人畜众多，打算派人袭击它。
English: The patriarch learned that the eastern high-speed train was already in Nizhny Novgorod, there were many people and animals, and he planned to send someone to attack it.

古文：诸将皆以为难，世祖不从。
现代文：将领们都认为不能那样，世祖不听。
English: The generals did not think it was possible, and the patriarch did not listen.

古文：遣原与侍中古弼率万骑讨之，大获而还。
现代文：世祖派窒愿与侍中直迩率领骑兵一万讨伐直空，大量俘获而返回。
English: The Sezu faction was willing to lead ten thousand cavalry under the command of Naosuke, a chamberlain, to fight against Jikku, and returned with a large number of prisoners.

古文：车驾征昌黎，原与建宁王崇屯于漠南以备蠕蠕。
现代文：皇上征讨昌黎，安原与建宁王元崇驻扎在沙漠南面防备蠕蠕。
English: When the emperor went to conquer Changli, An Yuan and Jianning Wang Yuan Chong were stationed in the south of the desert to guard against the enemy.

古文：原在朝无所比周，然恃宠骄恣，多所排抑。
现代文：玄愿在朝廷中没有结党营私，然而恃宠妄为，对很多人加以排斥贬抑。
English: In the imperial court, Xuanzang did not form a party, but he was arrogant and excluded and demeaned many people.

古文：为子求襄城公庐鲁元女，鲁元不许。
现代文：他为儿子求娶襄城公卢鲁元的女儿，叠五不答应。
English: He asked his son to marry the daughter of Lu Luyuan, the lord of Xiangcheng, but Juyi Wu refused.

古文：原告其罪状，事相连逮，历时不决。
现代文：窒昼便告发叠元的罪状，但事情相互牵连，久拖不决。
English: The charges against Stack Yuan were announced in the middle of the day, but the case dragged on for a long time.

古文：原惧不胜，遂谋为逆，事泄伏诛。
现代文：安原害怕不能取胜，于是图谋造反，但事情泄漏而被处死。
English: Yasuhara was afraid of not being able to win, so he tried to rebel, but the affair leaked out and he was executed.

古文：临刑上疏曰： 臣闻圣不独明而治，鼎不单足而立，是以荧火之光，犹增日月之曜。
现代文：他临刑前上疏说： 我听说圣明君主不依恃一己的圣明才能治理天下，鼎没有一只脚就能竖立的，因此荧火的微光，还能增加月的光辉。
English: Before his execution, he said, "I have heard that a saintly monarch can rule the world without relying on his own saintliness. The throne can be erected without a single foot, so the glimmer of the fluorescent fire can also increase the brightness of the moon.

古文：先臣同，往因圣运，归身太祖，竭诚戮力，立效于险难之中。
现代文：先父安同，从前顺应本朝运数，投身太祖，竭诚尽力，在艰难险阻中立功。
English: An ancestor, An Tong, used to obey the number of this morning's transport, devoted himself to the great ancestor, made every effort, and worked hard in difficulties and obstacles.

古文：臣以顽暗，忝备股肱。
现代文：我以顽劣的资质，居辅佐的职位。
English: I took the position of assistant with poor qualifications.

古文：陛下恩育，委以朝政，思展微诚，仰报恩泽，而鲁元奸妄，构成贝锦，天威遂加，合门俱戮。
现代文：陛下加意培养，把朝政委派给我，我本想竭诚报答陛下的恩泽，可是鲁元奸邪谄媚，捏造谗言陷害我，天子于是加以惩罚，将我全家处斩。
English: His majesty was kind enough to nurture me and sent me to be a member of the Political Affairs Committee of the State Council. I originally wanted to wholeheartedly repay His majesty's favor, but Lu Yuan deceived me and fabricated slander to frame me. Therefore, the Heavenly Son punished me and beheaded my entire family.

古文：此乃命也，非臣之枉。
现代文：这是命啊，不是我的冤屈。
English: This is life, not my grievance.

古文：但鲁元外类忠贞，内怀奸诈，而陛下任以腹心，恐衅发肘腋。
现代文：衹是鲁元外似忠诚不渝，内心虚伪诡诈，而陛下诚心任用他，恐怕祸患将发生在陛下身边。
English: Although Lu Yuan appears to be loyal and steadfast on the outside, he is deceitful and treacherous on the inside, and His Majesty sincerely appointed him. I am afraid that disasters will occur around His Majesty.

古文：臣与鲁元生为怨人，死为雠鬼，非以私故，谤毁鲁元。
现代文：我与鲁元生前是仇人，死后是仇鬼，不是因为个人恩怨而诽谤诋毁鲁元。
English: Lu Yuan and I were enemies in life, and enemies after death, not because of personal grudges, but to slander and defame Lu Yuan.

古文：不复眷眷，披露诚款。 
现代文：不再依恋反顾，仅为表白忠诚之心。 
English: No more clinging and looking back, just a heart of loyalty.

古文：原弟颉，颉弟聪，为内侍。
现代文：安原的弟弟安颉，安颉的弟弟安聪，任内侍。
English: Yasuhara's younger brother, Yasuchika, and Yasuchika's younger brother, Yasuchika, served as chamberlains.

古文：聪弟蕯，为龙骧将军，给事黄门侍郎，赐爵广宗侯。
现代文：安聪的弟弟安萨，任龙骧将军、给事黄门侍郎，赐爵广宗侯。
English: Ancong's younger brother, Ansa, was appointed the general of Longjing, the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and the prince of Guangzong.

古文：原兄弟外节俭，而内实积聚，及诛后，籍其财至数万。
现代文：安原兄弟外表节俭，而府中多聚敛之财，被杀后，籍没的财物达数万。
English: The Andahara brothers were outwardly frugal, but they amassed a lot of wealth in the government. After they were killed, they lost tens of thousands of dollars in property.

古文：颉，辩慧多策略，最有父风。
现代文：安颉，雄辩聪明富于谋略，最有父亲的风范。
English: An Xun, eloquent, clever and strategic, has the most fatherly demeanor.

古文：太宗初，为内侍长，令察举百僚。
现代文：太宗初年，任内侍长，奉诏监察检举百官。
English: In the first year of Emperor Taizong's reign, he served as chief of staff and supervised and prosecuted hundreds of officials.

古文：纠刺奸慝，无所回避。
现代文：揭发奸恶的人，无所回避。
English: There is no escape for those who expose evil-doers.

古文：尝告其父阴事，太宗以为忠，特亲宠之。
现代文：曾经报告他父亲隐秘的事情，太宗认为他忠诚，特别亲爱宠幸他。
English: Taizong once reported his father's secret affairs, and considered him to be loyal and especially dear to him.

古文：宜城王奚斤，自长安追击赫连昌，至于安定，颉为监军侍御史。
现代文：宜城王奚斤，从长安追击赫连昌，到达安定，安颉任监军侍御史。
English: The king of Yicheng, Shujin, chased Herenchang from Chang'an and arrived in Ding'an. Anhui served as the overseer of the army.

古文：斤以马多疫死，士众乏粮，乃深垒自固。
现代文：奚斤因马多病死，士卒缺粮，于是筑高墙自守。
English: Xing Jin died of illness due to Mado, and the soldiers were short of food, so they built a high wall to protect themselves.

古文：遣太仆丘堆等督租于民间，为昌所败。
现代文：派遣太仆丘堆等人到民间征收租税，被赫连昌打败。
English: He dispatched Taipu Quchu and others to collect taxes from the people, but was defeated by He Lianchang.

古文：昌遂骄矜，日来侵掠，刍牧者不得出，士卒患之。
现代文：赫连吕骄傲自负，天天来劫掠，割草牧马的士卒不能出营，士卒们为此忧虑。
English: Khelianlu was proud and conceited, and came to plunder every day. The soldiers who mowed the grass and pastured the horses could not leave the camp, and the soldiers were worried about this.

古文：颉进计曰： 本奉诏诛贼，今乃退守穷城，若不为贼杀，当以法诛。
现代文：安颉献计说： 原本奉诏杀贼，现在却退守空城，如果不被贼寇杀死，也将依法处斩。
English: An Xuan Xianke said: Originally, I was ordered to kill the thief, but now I am retreating to defend the sky city. If I am not killed by the thief, I will be beheaded according to the law.

古文：进退安有生路？
现代文：进退哪裹有生路?
English: Where is there a way out?

古文：而王公诸将，晏然无谋，将何以报恩塞责？ 
现代文：而王公将领们，不急于谋划对策，将拿什么报答皇上的恩泽，完成自己的职责? 
English: But the prince generals, not eager to plan countermeasures, will take what to repay the emperor's favor and fulfill their duties?

古文：斤曰： 今若出战，则马力不足，以步击骑，终无捷理。
现代文：奚斤说： 现在如果出战，则马匹不足，用步兵攻打骑兵，没有取胜的道理。
English: Yaojin said, "If we go to war now, we won't have enough horses. If we use infantry to fight cavalry, we won't be able to win.

古文：当须京师救骑至，然后步陈击于内，骑兵袭其外。
现代文：应当等京师救援的骑兵到来，然后步兵从裹边攻击，骑兵从外边袭击。
English: They should wait for the cavalry to come to the rescue of the Beijing Division, and then the infantry should attack from the flank, and the cavalry should attack from the outside.

古文：所谓万全之计也。 
现代文：造就是平常所说的万全之策。 
English: Construction is what is commonly referred to as a "catch-all" strategy.

古文：颉曰： 今猛寇游逸于外，而吾等兵疲力屈，士有饥色，不一决战，则死在旦夕，何救兵之可待也！
现代文：安颉说： 现在凶猛的贼寇安逸地在外边游动，而我们的队伍精疲力竭，士卒面有饥色，不冒死决战，就死在旦夕，能等待什么救兵呢!
English: An Xun said, "Now the ferocious bandits are swimming outside at ease, while our troops are exhausted and our soldiers are hungry. If you don't risk a decisive battle, you will die in the blink of an eye. What kind of rescue can you expect?"

古文：等死，当战死，宁可坐受困乎？ 
现代文：与其等死，倒不如战死，难道可以坐受围困吗? 
English: Would it not be better to die in battle than to wait for death? Is it possible to live under siege?

古文：斤犹以马为辞。
现代文：奚斤仍然拿马力不充足作藉日。
English: Xingjin still has insufficient strength to make a loan date.

古文：颉曰： 今兵虽无马，但将帅所乘，足得二百骑。
现代文：安颉说： 现在士卒虽然没有马，但是将帅们骑的马，足有二百匹。
English: An Qian said: Although the soldiers do not have horses now, the generals are riding two hundred horses.

古文：颉请募壮勇出击之，就不能破，可以折其锐。
现代文：我请求招募强健勇敢的士卒出击敌人，即使不能打败，也可以挫伤他们的锐气。
English: I ask you to recruit strong and courageous soldiers to attack the enemy, and if you can't defeat them, you can break their spirit.

古文：且昌狷而无谋，每好挑战，众皆识之。
现代文：而且赫连昌急躁而无谋，往往好挑战，大家都认识他。
English: Moreover, Kherlianchang is impetuous and reckless, often challenging, everyone knows him.

古文：若伏兵奄击，昌可擒也。 
现代文：如果伏兵偷袭，赫连昌是可以捉到的。 
English: If the ambush sneak attack, Herenchang can be caught.

古文：斤犹难之。
现代文：奚斤仍然认为此事难行。
English: Hao Jin still looked puzzled.

古文：颉乃阴与尉眷等谋，选骑待焉。
现代文：安颉于是私下与尉眷等人谋划，选拔骑兵等待时机。
English: Therefore, An Xuan privately plotted with his retainers and other people to select cavalry and wait for the right time.

古文：昌来攻垒，颉出应之。
现代文：赫连昌来攻营垒，安颉出兵应战。
English: Herenchang attacked the camp, and Anhui sent troops to fight.

古文：昌于陈前自接战，军士识昌，争往赴之，会天大风扬尘，昼昏，众乱，昌退。
现代文：赫连昌在阵前亲自迎战，北魏军士认识赫连昌，争相向他奔去。适逢天刮大风扬起尘埃，白昼昏暗，士卒混乱，赫连昌撤退。
English: Helian-Chang personally met the battle before the battle, the Northern Wei army sergeants knew Helian-Chang and rushed to him. When the sky blew a gale and raised dust, the day was dark, the soldiers were confused, and Helian-Chang retreated.

古文：颉等追击，昌马蹶而坠，颉擒昌，送于京师。
现代文：安颉等人追击，赫连昌马倒人落。安颉捉住赫连昌，押送到京师。
English: An Xun and others chased after them, and Herenchang was knocked down. An Xun caught Herenchang and escorted him to the capital.

古文：世祖大悦，拜颉建节将军。赐爵西平公，代堆统摄诸军。
现代文：世担很高兴，任命室垄为建节将军，赐爵酉王公，代替丘堆统领各军。
English: Shetan was very pleased, and appointed Muroran as the general who established the festival, gave him the title of prince, and led all the armies in place of the mound.

古文：斤耻功不在已，轻追昌弟于平凉，败绩。
现代文：奚斤以战功不属于自己为耻，轻率地追击赫连昌的弟弟赫连定到平凉，大败。
English: Shujin was ashamed that his war exploits did not belong to him, and he rashly pursued Helian Chang's younger brother, Helian Ding, until he was defeated.

古文：定将复入长安，诏颉镇蒲坂以拒之。
现代文：赫连定将要再攻入长安，诏令安颉镇守蒲坂抵御他。
English: He Lianding was determined to invade Chang'an again, and he ordered the Anhui town guard, Busaka, to defend against him.

古文：刘义隆遣将到彦之率众寇河南，以援赫连定。
现代文：刘义隆派遣将领到彦之率领军队侵犯黄河以南，藉以救援赫连定。
English: Liu Yilong dispatched the general to invade the south of the Yellow River with the army led by Hanyu to rescue He Lianding.

古文：世祖以兵少，乃摄河南三镇北渡。
现代文：世祖因兵少，于是统率黄河以南三镇向北渡河。
English: Due to a shortage of soldiers, King Sejong led three towns south of the Yellow River to cross the river to the north.

古文：彦之遂列守南岸，至于衡关。
现代文：彦之于是布兵守御南岸，到达冲关。
English: Therefore, Hikoshi and his soldiers marched to the south bank of the river and reached the pass.

古文：世祖西征赫连定，以颉为冠军将军，督诸军击彦之。
现代文：世祖西征赫连定，任命安颉为冠军将军，统领各军攻打彦之。
English: The ancestor of Western Conquest, He Lianding, appointed An Xun as the champion general and led all the armies to attack Yan Zhi.

古文：彦之遣将姚纵夫渡河攻冶坂，颉督诸军击之，斩首三千余级，投水者甚众。
现代文：彦之派遣将领姚纵夫渡董回进攻迨堡，窒垄率各军攻打他，斩杀三千多人，跳入水中的敌兵也很多。
English: Yan Zhi dispatched the general Yao Zongfu to attack the bunker, leading the troops to attack him, killing more than three thousand people, and many enemy soldiers jumped into the water.

古文：遂济河，攻洛阳，拔之，擒义隆将二十余人，斩首五千级。
现代文：接着渡黄河，攻打越昼，攻取该城，捉到刘：羞隆的将领二十多人，斩下首级五千。
English: He then crossed the Yellow River, attacked Yechi, captured the city, captured more than twenty of Liu Shilong's generals, and beheaded five thousand of them.

古文：进攻虎牢，虎牢溃，义隆司州刺史尹冲坠城死。
现代文：进攻虎牢，虎牢被攻破，义隆的旦业刺史尹过跳城而死。
English: Attacking the Tiger's Lair, the Tiger's Lair was breached, and Yan Ye stabbed Shi Yin of Yilong to death by jumping over the city wall.

古文：又与琅邪王司马楚之平滑台，擒义隆将朱修之、李元德及东郡太守申谟，俘获万余人。
现代文：又与堕互旺司马楚之平定滑台，捉住义隆的将领朱脩之、李元德及东邓太守吏谨，俘获一万多人。
English: He also captured the Yilong generals Zhu Shizhi, Li Yuande, and Dongdantai's warden Gui, and captured more than ten thousand people.

古文：乃振旅还京师。
现代文：于是整顿部队返回京师。
English: As a result, the rectification troops returned to the Beijing Division.

古文：神四年卒。
现代文：神四年去世。
English: He died four years later.

古文：赠征南大将军、仪同三司、进爵为王，谥曰襄。
现代文：追赠为征南大将军、仪同三司，晋爵为王，谧号为襄。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Expedition to the South, the three ranks of the Order of the Garter, the title of Prince, and the posthumous name of Jo.

古文：颉为将，善绥士众，及卒，义隆士卒降者，无不叹息。
现代文：安颉任将帅，善于安抚士卒，去世时，投降过来的原义隆所部士兵，无不嗟叹惋惜。
English: When he died, the soldiers of the former Yilong headquarters, who had surrendered, were full of regret.

古文：同弟者，太宗时为乐陵太守。
现代文：同弟者，太宗时任乐陵太守。去世。
English: A fellow disciple, Taizong, was appointed as the guardian of the tomb at the time of his death.

古文：卒。长子国，位至冠军将军，赐爵北平侯，杏城镇将。
现代文：长子国，官至冠军将军，赐爵北平侯，任杏城镇将。
English: The eldest son of the country, the official to the champion general, the peerage of Beiping, the appointment of Xing Town.

古文：国弟难，有巧思。
现代文：国弟难，有灵巧的心思。
English: The younger brother is difficult, has a deft mind.

古文：阳平王杜超督诸将击刘义隆，难参征南军事，以功表为清河太守。
现代文：盐工王丝超统领将领们攻打型盏壁，壹篮参谋征南军事，因功被上表推荐为渣回太守。
English: Wang Sichao, the salt worker, led the generals to attack the wall, and a basket of staff officers were sent to the south for military service. He was recommended by the above table as the Jia Hui governor.

古文：世祖时，诸将频征和龙，皆以难为长史。
现代文：世狙时，众将领屡次征伐扭垄，都用为长史。
English: At the time of the world, the generals repeatedly conquered and twisted ridges, all of which were used as a long history.

古文：凿山堙谷，省力兼功。
现代文：开山填谷，事半功倍。
English: It takes less effort to move mountains and fill valleys.

古文：迁给事中。
现代文：升任给事中。
English: Sheng Shanshui is in the middle of something.

古文：从驾南征，造浮桥于河，以功赐爵清河子。
现代文：跟从皇上南征，在董回上造浮桥，因功被赐给爵位为清河子。
English: Following the Emperor's Southern Expedition, he built a pontoon bridge on the Dong Hui River, and was awarded the title of "Qinghezi" for his achievements.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子平城，袭爵。
现代文：儿子平城，继承爵位。
English: His son, Heizei, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：官至虞曹令。
现代文：官至虞曹令。
English: Yu Cao is the highest-ranking official.

古文：为乙浑所杀。
现代文：被互运杀死。
English: He was killed by the train.

古文：楼伏连，代人也。
现代文：楼伏连，是代地人。
English: Lou Fulian is a local resident.

古文：世为酋帅。
现代文：世代为部落首领。
English: They have been tribal leaders for generations.

古文：伏连忠厚有器量，年十三，袭父位，领部落。
现代文：伏连忠实厚道有度量，年十三岁，继承父位，统领部落。
English: At the age of thirteen, Fulian Zhongzheng, who had a generous heart, inherited his father's throne and led the tribe.

古文：太祖初，从破贺兰部。
现代文：太祖初年，跟从太祖打败贺兰部。
English: In the first year of his grandfather's reign, he followed his grandfather in defeating the Horan clan.

古文：又从平中山，为太守，斩逆贼张翘。
现代文：又跟从平定中山，任太守，斩杀叛贼张翘。
English: He also followed the pacification of Zhongshan, was appointed as the governor, and killed the traitor Zhang Gao.

古文：从征姚平于柴壁，以功赐爵安邑侯。
现代文：跟从到柴壁征讨姚平，因功被赐给爵位为安邑侯。
English: He followed Yao Ping to Chaiqi to enlist, and was given the title of Lord of Anyi for his service.

古文：太祖时，为晋兵将军、并州刺史。
现代文：太祖时，任晋兵将军、并州刺史。
English: At the time of the great-grandfather, he was appointed as the general of the Jin soldiers, and the governor of the state.

古文：伏连招诱西河胡曹成等七十余人，袭杀赫连屈孑吐京护军及其守士三百余人，并擒叛胡阿度支等二百余家。
现代文：伏连招抚西河胡人曹成等七十多人，偷袭杀害赫连屈孑的吐京的护军及其守兵三百多人，并捉拿反叛的胡人阿度支等二百多家。
English: Fulian recruited more than seventy people, including Cao Cheng, a Hu man from the West River, and made a surprise attack on more than three hundred guards and guardsmen of the tutelary army of Tujing, who killed Khelian Qu, and captured more than two hundred rebellious Hu people from Aduxi.

古文：太宗嘉之，拜成等将军，赐爵列侯。
现代文：太宗嘉许他，任命曹成等为将军，赐给爵位为列侯。
English: Emperor Taizong praised him, appointed Cao Cheng and others as generals, and gave him the title of marquis.

古文：徵伏连为内都大官。
现代文：征伏连任内都大官。
English: He was conscripted and reappointed as a high-ranking official in the capital.

古文：世祖即位，进为广陵公，转卫尉，徙光禄勋。
现代文：世祖即位，升爵位为广陵公，改任卫尉，升任光禄勋。
English: The ancestor ascended the throne, was promoted to the peerage of Guangling Gong, was reappointed as a guard lieutenant, and was promoted to Guanglu Xun.

古文：世祖征蠕蠕，伏连留镇京师，进爵为王，加平南大将军。
现代文：世祖征讨蠕蠕，伏连留守京师，晋升爵位为王，加授平南大将军。
English: The founder of the dynasty, Fuli, stayed in Beijing to fight against Crum Crum, and was promoted to the rank of king, and was also awarded the title of General of Pingnan.

古文：又除假节，督河西诸军，镇西大将军，出镇统万。
现代文：又任假节、督黄河以西诸军、镇西大将军，出外镇守统万。
English: He was also appointed as the commander of the troops west of the Yellow River, the general of the west of the town, and went abroad to guard the town.

古文：真君十年薨。谥曰恭王。
现代文：真君十年去世，谧号为恭王。
English: Ten years after the death of King Zhen, his nickname was King Gong.

古文：子真，袭，降爵为公。
现代文：儿子真，继承爵位，降爵位为公。
English: His son, Zhen, will inherit the title of nobility, and the downgrading of the title is official.

古文：从世祖征伐有功，官至散骑常侍，尚书，安北将军。徙为湘东公。
现代文：跟从世担征伐有功，官职做到散骑常侍、尚书、安北将军，改爵号为迩塞公。
English: He was meritorious in conquering and conquering in his lifetime, and achieved the posts of straggling equerry, Shangshu, and Anbei general. His title was changed to Yu Xie Gong.

古文：从征凉州，还，卒于路。
现代文：跟从征伐逮业，返回，在途中去世。
English: He went to the battlefield to arrest the enemy, returned, and died on the way.

古文：谥曰庄公。
现代文：谧号为基公。
English: His posthumous name was Ji Gong.

古文：子干，袭，降爵为侯。
现代文：儿子干，继承爵位，降爵位为侯。
English: His son, Gan, inherited the peerage, but was demoted to marquess.

古文：真次弟大拔，历位尚书、散骑常侍、征西将军，赐爵永平侯。
现代文：真的次弟大拔，历任尚书、散骑常侍、征西将军，被赐给爵位为永平侯。
English: Genuine's second younger brother, Daba, successively held the titles of Shangshu, Sanzhiyan, and General of the Western Expedition, was given the title of Yongping Marquis.

古文：高祖初，为中都大官。
现代文：高祖初年，任中都大官。
English: In Gaozu's first year, he was appointed to the post of Zhongdu Daikan.

古文：卒，赠平东将军、定州刺史，谥曰康。
现代文：去世，追赠为平东将军、定州刺史，谧号为康。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the titles of General Pingdong, Dingzhou Jishi, and his nickname was Kang.

古文：子禀，字法生，袭。
现代文：儿子禀，字法生，继承爵位。
English: His son,, a student of calligraphy, succeeded to the title.

古文：拜太子宫门大夫，稍迁赵郡太守。
现代文：被授任为太子宫门大夫，逐渐升任赵郡太守。
English: He was appointed as the prince's uterus gate doctor, and gradually rose to the post of Zhao County governor.

古文：更满还京，除冠军将军，城门校尉。
现代文：任满返回京师，被任命为冠军将军、城门校尉。
English: He returned to the Beijing Division at the end of his term and was appointed Champion General and Castle Gate Lieutenant.

古文：出为征虏将军，平城镇将。
现代文：出任征虏将军、芒继镇将。
English: Appointed conscript general, Mang Jizhen.

古文：迁朔州刺史，仍本将军。
现代文：迁塑业刺史，仍然带原来的将军衔。
English: The history of the relocation of the plastics industry still carries the original rank of general.

古文：入为卫尉少卿。
现代文：入朝任卫尉少卿。
English: Entered the imperial court and was appointed Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards and Junior Lord of the Palace Guards.

古文：卒，年五十八。
现代文：去世时五十八岁。
English: He died at the age of fifty-eight, fifteen years after the founding of the Republic of China.

古文：赠抚军将军、恆州刺史。
现代文：追赠为抚军将军、恒州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Fuzhu Army and the title of "Hengzhou Sashihong."

古文：子贵宗，武定中，伏波将军、开府水曹参军。
现代文：儿子贵宗，武定年间，任伏波将军、开府水曹参军。
English: Guizong's son, during the Wuding era, was appointed as the general of Fubo and joined the army as the Kefushuizao.

古文：伏连兄孙安文。从征平凉有功，赐爵霸城男，加虎威将军。
现代文：伏连哥哥的孙子安文，跟从皇上征伐芒逸有功，赐爵霸城男，加授虎威将军。
English: Anwen, the grandson of Fulin's elder brother, followed the emperor in the conquest of Mengyi, and was awarded the title of "Man of the City" and the title of "General of Huwei."

古文：后迁三郎幢将。
现代文：后来升任三郎幢将。
English: He was later promoted to Saburo Tadamasa.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：高祖初，以其子毅贵，追赠安东将军，冀州刺史，阳平公，谥曰定。
现代文：高祖初年，因他的儿子楼毅显贵，追赠他为安束将军、冀州刺史、阳平公，谧号为室。
English: In the first year of Gao Zu, because his son Lou Yi was distinguished, he posthumously gave him the titles of General Anzac, Jizhou Sashimi, Yang Ping Gong, and his nickname was Muro.

古文：毅，历位内外，稍迁殿中尚书，散骑常侍，赐爵常山公，加安南将军。
现代文：楼毅，历任朝官和地方官，逐渐升任殿中尚书、散骑常侍，被赐给爵位为常山公，加授安南将军。
English: Lou Yi, successive officials of the imperial court and local officials, gradually rose to the position of courtier and horseback riding attendant in the palace, was given the title of Lord of Changshan, and was awarded the title of General Annan.

古文：迁尚书右仆射。
现代文：升任尚书右仆射。
English: He was transferred to the position of Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：以擒反人梁众保，加侍中，本官如故。
现代文：因捉拿谋反的人梁众保，加授侍中，原官如故。
English: As a result of the arrest of the person who plotted the rebellion, Liang Zongbao was promoted to the position of chamberlain. The original position remains the same.

古文：后例降为侯。
现代文：后依例降乌侯。
English: Later, he was demoted to Wuhou as usual.

古文：出除使持节，镇东将军，定州刺史。
现代文：出任使持节、镇东将军、定州刺史。
English: The envoys Jisai, Zhendong, and Dingzhou were appointed.

古文：时太极殿成，将行考室之礼，引集群臣，而雪不克飨。
现代文：当时太极殿落成，将要举行落成典礼，召集群臣，而天下大雪，以致无法举行祭献。
English: At that time, the Taiji Temple was completed, and the inauguration ceremony was to be held, and the courtiers were to be summoned, but there was heavy snow, so that the offering could not be held.

古文：高祖曰： 朕经始正殿，功构初成，将集百僚，考行大礼。
现代文：高祖说： 我营建正殿，刚刚完成，将要召集百官，行落成大礼。
English: Gaozu said, "I have just completed the construction of the main hall. I am going to call together a hundred officials to perform the grand opening ceremony.

古文：然同云仍结，霏雪骤零，将由寡昧，末能仰答天心，此之不德，咎竟焉在？
现代文：然而浓云集结，纷飞的雪花骤然降落，大概是由于人间浅陋不明事理，未能报答天意。这样缺乏德行的征兆，责任何在?
English: However, thick clouds gathered and flying snowflakes suddenly fell, probably due to the shallowness and irrationality of human beings, who failed to repay the will of heaven. Is there any reason for such a lack of signs of virtue?

古文：卿等宜各陈所怀，以匡不逮。 
现代文：你们应当陈述自己的看法，藉以匡正过错。 
English: You should correct your mistakes by stating your own opinions.

古文：毅稽首对曰： 雪霜风雨，天地之常;夏霖冬霰，四时恆节。
现代文：楼毅跪拜叩头对答说： 雪霜风雨，是自然界的正常现象；夏降小雨，冬落冰粒，是四季通常的变化。
English: Lou Yi kneeled down and kowtowed to answer: The snow, frost, wind and rain are normal phenomena in the natural world; light rain in summer and falling ice particles in winter are normal changes in the four seasons.

古文：今隆冬雪降，固是其时。
现代文：现在隆冬下雪，本来就是应该下雪的时候。
English: Now that it is snowing in the middle of winter, that is exactly when it should be snowing.

古文：又《礼》云： 雨沾服失容，则废 ，礼自古而然，不足为异。 
现代文：而且《礼记》说 雨水浸湿服饰，导致仪容不整，就停止举行礼仪，表明礼仪自古就有类似的情况，不足为怪。 
English: Moreover, the "Rituals" say that rainwater soaked the clothes, causing the appearance to be unkempt, and the ceremony was stopped, indicating that the etiquette has had a similar situation since ancient times, which is not surprising.

古文：高祖曰： 昔刘秀将济，呼沱为之冰合。
现代文：高祖说： 过去刘秀将要渡河，呼沱河为他冰封。
English: Gao Zu said: In the past, Liu Xiu was going to cross the river, and the Hulun River was frozen for him.

古文：但朕德谢古人，不能仰感天意故也。 
现代文：衹是我德行不如古人，不能上感天意的缘故。 
English: It's because I'm not as virtuous as the ancients and can't feel the will of heaven.

古文：后转都督凉河二州、鄯善镇诸军事、凉州刺史。
现代文：后来楼毅改任都督凉河二州、鄯善镇诸军事，凉州刺史。
English: Later, Lou Yi was appointed as the military governor of Lianghe Nishu and Jingsan Town, and the history of Liangzhou was written.

古文：车驾南伐，毅表谏曰： 伏承六军云动，问罪荆扬，吊民淮表，一同瓯越。
现代文：皇上南伐，楼毅上表劝谏说： 听说皇上亲率六军，讨伐荆扬地区的罪人，抚慰进南的百姓，统一瓯越地区。
English: When the emperor went to the south, Lou Yi went to the front to persuade him, saying: I heard that the emperor led six armies to fight the sinners in the Jingyang region, comfort the people in the south, and unify the Xuan Yue region.

古文：但臣愚见，私窃末安。
现代文：不过按照臣下的浅陋之见，私下认为不妥。
English: However, according to the shallow view of his subordinates, he privately thought it was inappropriate.

古文：何者？
现代文：为何造么说呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：京邑新迁，百姓易业，公私草创，生途索然。
现代文：因为迁徙京都，百姓改变生业，公私事业都衹是刚刚开始，生活没有着落。
English: Because of the migration to Kyoto, people have changed their livelihoods, public and private undertakings have just begun, and life has not settled down.

古文：兼往岁弗稔，民多饥馑，二三之际，嗟惋易兴。
现代文：加上往年歉收，百姓大多饱受饥荒，处在这种反覆不定的时候，离心之情容易产生。
English: Coupled with poor harvests in previous years, most of the people are suffering from famine. In this time of repeated uncertainty, feelings of alienation are likely to arise.

古文：天道悠长，宜遵养时晦，愿抑赫斯，以待后日。 
现代文：时光悠长，应当顺应时势积蓄力量等待时机，希望皇上压抑盛怒，以待后日。 
English: The time is long, we should adapt to the current situation, accumulate strength, wait for the opportunity, and hope that the emperor will suppress his anger and wait for the day after.

古文：诏曰： 时不自来，因人则合。
现代文：诏令说： 时机不会自己到来，在于人因势利导。
English: The edict said: The time will not come on its own, but will be guided by human snobbery.

古文：今年人事，殊非昔岁。
现代文：今年的形势，很不同于往年。
English: The situation this year is very different from previous years.

古文：守株之唱，便可停也。
现代文：拘泥保守的倡议，自然可以停止了。
English: The rigidly conservative initiative can naturally be stopped.

古文：阳九利涉，岂卿所知也？ 
现代文：阳九旱灾之年利于渡河，哪裹是你所知道的。 
English: The year of the Yangjiu drought is good for river crossing, as you know.

古文：太和二十一年卒。
现代文：主和二十一年去世。
English: He died at the age of 21.

古文：赐钱二十万，布二百匹。
现代文：皇上赐给钱二十万，布二百匹。
English: The emperor gave him two hundred thousand in money and two hundred horses of cloth.

古文：丘堆，代人也。
现代文：丘堆，是代郡人。
English: Hill heap, is a representative of the county.

古文：美容仪，以忠谨亲侍。
现代文：容貌美好，因为忠诚谨慎而担任皇帝的侍从。
English: Good-looking, loyal and discreet, he served as an attendant to the emperor.

古文：太宗即位，拾遗左右，稍迁散骑常侍。
现代文：太宗即位，丘堆在太宗身边负责补正缺点过失，逐渐升任散骑常侍。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, Yau Hei was responsible for correcting the shortcomings and mistakes around Emperor Taizong, and was gradually promoted to the position of a knight errant.

古文：与叔孙建等讨灭山胡。
现代文：与叔孙建等讨伐消灭山胡。
English: Together with uncle and grandson Jian and others, they fought to exterminate the mountain goose.

古文：刘裕溯河西伐，诏堆与建自河内次枋头以备寇盗。
现代文：刘裕沿黄河西伐，太宗令丘堆与叔孙建从河内到枋头设防。
English: Liu Yu went westward along the Yellow River, and Taizong Lingqiu and his uncles and grandsons went from Hanoi to Shantou to set up fortifications.

古文：姚泓既灭，堆留镇并州。
现代文：姚泓被消灭以后，丘堆留守并州。
English: After Yao Xuan was eliminated, the mounds remained and merged into the state.

古文：赫连屈孑遣三千骑寇河西，堆自并州与游击将军王洛生击走之。
现代文：赫连屈孑派遣三千骑兵侵犯黄河以西，丘堆从并州与游击将军王洛生一道将他击退。
English: Khelien Qu Yuan sent three thousand cavalry to invade the west of the Yellow River, and the hill heap repulsed him from the annexation state together with the guerrilla general Wang Lousheng.

古文：以功赐爵为侯。
现代文：因功赐爵为侯。
English: He was knighted for his services.

古文：世祖监国临朝，堆与太尉穆观等为右弼。
现代文：世祖监国执政，丘堆与太尉穆观等任右弼。
English: The ancestor oversaw the administration of the country, and Yau Tui and Lieutenant Mu Guan were appointed to the right.

古文：世祖即位，进爵临淮公，加镇西将军。
现代文：世祖即位，晋爵临淮公，加授镇西将军。
English: The founder of the dynasty ascended the throne, was given the title of Jinjie Linhuai Gong, and was awarded the title of Zhenxi General.

古文：徙为太仆。
现代文：升任太仆。
English: He was promoted to the position of tsukuda.

古文：世祖征赫连昌，堆与常山王素督步兵三万人为后继。
现代文：世祖征伐赫连昌，丘堆舆常山王元素统领步兵三万人为后续部队。
English: Emperor Xizong led 30,000 infantrymen in the conquest of Helianchang, and the subsequent troops were composed of hilltops and mountain king elements.

古文：昌战败南奔，世祖遣堆与宗正娥清率五千骑略地关右。
现代文：赫连昌战败向南逃奔，世祖派遣丘堆与宗正娥清率领五千骑兵攻打关西。
English: Herenchang was defeated and fled to the south, and Shizuo dispatched Yude and Zong Zheng'e Qing to attack Kansai with five thousand cavalry.

古文：昌贰城守将坚守不下，堆与清攻拔之。
现代文：赫连昌的贰城守将坚守不降，丘堆舆娥清攻克它。
English: The castellan of Helianchang will stand firm and not surrender, and the hilltop will be conquered.

古文：诏堆班师，宜城王奚斤表留堆等进平昌，许之。
现代文：诏令丘堆班师，宜城王奚斤表请留下丘堆进军平定赫连昌，世祖答应他的请求。
English: The king of Yicheng, Wang Shujin, asked the commander of the hill heap division to leave the hill heap and march to Pingding and Helianchang. The ancestor agreed to his request.

古文：堆、斤合军与昌相拒击。
现代文：丘堆、奚斤合军与赫连昌相抵御攻击。
English: The combined forces of the hilltops and Jianjin and Helianchang resisted the attack.

古文：士马乏粮，堆与义兵将军封礼督租于民间，士卒暴掠，为昌所袭，败绩。
现代文：军中缺粮，丘堆与义兵将军封礼到民间催征租税，士兵掠夺，遭到赫连定袭击，大败。
English: There was a shortage of grain in the army, the general of the hill heap and the volunteer soldiers went to the people to collect taxes, the soldiers plundered, and they were attacked by Herending and defeated.

古文：堆将数百骑还城。
现代文：丘堆带着几百名骑兵回营。
English: Hill led several hundred cavalrymen back to camp.

古文：斤追击赫连定，留堆守辎重。
现代文：奚斤追击赫连定，留下丘堆守护辎重。
English: Zou Jian chased Her Lianding, leaving the mound guarding Zou Jian.

古文：斤为定所擒，堆闻而弃甲走长安，复将高凉王礼弃守东走蒲坂。
现代文：结果奚斤战败被赫连定捉拿，丘堆听说后只好丢掉钟甲逃奔回长安，又与高凉王元礼一道放弃长安向东逃奔到蒲坂。
English: As a result, He Jian was defeated and captured by He Lianding. After hearing this, Qiu Dui had no choice but to throw away the bell and flee back to Chang'an. Together with Gao Liang Wang Yuanli, he also abandoned Chang'an and fled eastward to Busan.

古文：世祖大怒，遣西平公安颉斩堆。
现代文：世祖非常恼火，派遣西平公安颉处斩了丘堆。
English: The ancestor was very annoyed and sent Xiping Public Security Bureau to cut off the mound.

古文：延和初，诏曰： 堆，国之肺腑，勋著先朝，西征丧师，遂从军法。
现代文：延和初年，诏令说： 丘堆，国家的重臣，在先朝功勋卓著，西征损失军队，按军法处斩。
English: In the first year of the Yanhe era, the imperial edict said: "Hill heap, the chief minister of the country, distinguished himself in the last dynasty, lost troops in the Western Expedition, and was beheaded according to military law."

古文：国除祀绝，朕甚愍之。
现代文：封国废除，祭祀断绝，我很哀怜他。
English: With the abolition of national enfeoffment and the cessation of religious services, I felt very sorry for him.

古文：可赐其子跋爵淮陵侯，加安远将军。 
现代文：封他的儿子丘跋为淮陵侯，加授安远将军。 
English: He appointed his son Qubo as the Prince of Huairing and promoted him to General of Anyuan.

古文：后征盖吴，战没。
现代文：后来征讨盖吴，战死。
English: Later, Gui Wu was conquered and died in battle.

古文：子麟，袭爵。
现代文：儿子丘麟，继承爵位。
English: His son, Chulin, succeeded to the title.

古文：历位驾部令。
现代文：历任驾部令。
English: Successive driving orders.

古文：出为瑕丘镇将，假平南将军，东海公。
现代文：出任瑕丘镇将、假平南将军、束海公。
English: The general of Koechiu Town, the fake Pingnan General, and Sokhaigong took office.

古文：迁东兗州刺史，卒官。
现代文：升任束兖州刺史，在任期内去世。
English: He was promoted to the post of Sokchon State Historian, but died during his term of office.

古文：娥清，代人也。
现代文：娥清，是代郡人。
English: Ee Ching is a representative of the county.

古文：少有将略，累著战功。
现代文：年轻时有用兵谋略，累建战功。
English: When he was young, he was good at military strategy and accumulated military exploits.

古文：稍迁振威将军。
现代文：逐渐升任振威将军。
English: He was gradually promoted to General Zhenwei.

古文：刘裕遣将朱超石寇平原，至畔城遁还。
现代文：刘裕派遣朱超石侵犯平原，到达畔城后逃回。
English: Liu Yu sent Zhu Chaoishi to invade the plain, and he fled back after reaching the city.

古文：清与长孙道生追之，至河，获其将杨丰。
现代文：娥清与长孙道生率军追到黄河，俘获他的部将杨丰。
English: E Qing and his eldest grandson Dousheng chased the army to the Yellow River and captured his subordinate Yang Feng.

古文：还，拜给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：回来后，被授予给事黄门侍郎。
English: After his return, he was awarded the title of Yellow Gate Waiter.

古文：先是，徒河民散居三州，颇为民害。
现代文：先前，徒河部落散居三州，是民间的大害。
English: Previously, the dispersion of the Hakka tribes in the three states was a great harm to the people.

古文：诏清徙之平城。
现代文：诏令娥清把他们迁移到平城。
English: The Qing Dynasty ordered them to move to Pingcheng.

古文：清善绥抚，徙者如归。
现代文：娥清妥善安抚，使迁移的人如同回家。
English: E Qing properly appeased, so that the displaced people as if back home.

古文：太宗南巡幸鄴，以清为中领军将军，与宋兵将军周几等渡河略地。
现代文：太宗南巡到邺城，任命娥清为中领军将军，与宋兵将军周几等渡黄河扩占土地。
English: Taizong Nan made a tour to Fucheng, appointed E Qing as the general leading the central army, and crossed the Yellow River with Song general Zhou Qi to expand the land.

古文：至湖陆，高平民屯聚林薮，拒射官军，清等诛数千家，虏获万余口。
现代文：到达湖陆，高平民众聚集在山林泽薮，抗拒官军，娥清等因而诛杀几千户，俘获一万多人。
English: When they reached Hulun, Gao's people gathered in the mountains and forests of Zehuan, resisted the government army, and killed several thousand households and captured more than ten thousand people.

古文：赐爵须昌侯。
现代文：被赐为须昌侯。
English: He was given the title of Suchang.

古文：清与几等遂镇枋头。
现代文：娥清与周几等接着镇守位题。
English: E Qing and Zhou Jia and so on, followed by the question of the town's defense.

古文：世祖初，清自枋头还京师，假征南将军，进为东平公。
现代文：世祖初年，毖遣从位灵回京师，假征南将军，晋爵东平公。
English: In the first year of the founder's reign, Shao sent a false general to conquer the south and promoted Dongping to the peerage.

古文：蠕蠕大檀徙居漠南，清与平阳王长孙翰从东道出长川讨之，大获而还。
现代文：蠕蠕大檀迁居漠南，娥清与垩垦旺匡巫盏从束道出行旦贝讨伐他，大量俘获而回。
English: Demu Demu moved to the south of the desert, and Ea Ching and Ea Wang Kuang traveled from Sokdo to fight against him, and returned with a large number of captives.

古文：转宗正卿。
现代文：改任宗正卿。
English: He was reappointed as Sojo-kyo.

古文：寻从征蠕蠕。
现代文：不久跟从世祖征伐蠕蠕。
English: Soon after, he followed his ancestor in the conquest of Cm Cm.

古文：又从平统万，遂与奚斤追赫连昌至安定，与昌相持。
现代文：又跟从平定铲直，接着与罢丘追赶艺龃到岂室，与游塑相持。
English: He also followed the Shovel Straight from Pingding, and then chased the Artful Dodger from Dangqiu to Tamsui, holding hands with You Plastic.

古文：及安颉擒昌，昌弟定西走，斤追之。
现代文：等到玄垄擒获游蛆，游连旦的弟弟游驴向西奔逃，墨丘追赶他。
English: When Xuan Reng Yao captured You Xuan, You Lian Dan's younger brother You Xuan fled to the west, and Mokuo chased after him.

古文：清欲寻水而还，斤不从，遂与斤俱为定所擒。
现代文：塑造想要沿着水路而去，奚斤不听，于是与奚斤都被赫啦捉住。
English: Shaping wanted to go along the waterway, but the cormorant didn't listen, so he and the cormorant were both caught by Hela.

古文：世祖克平凉，乃得还。
现代文：世狙攻克王速，毖遣才得以回来。
English: World snipers defeated Wang Fai, and it was only after being dispatched that he was able to return.

古文：后诏清镇并州，讨山胡白龙于西河，斩白龙父及其将帅，遂屠其城。
现代文：后来诏令塑造镇守差业，在堕回讨伐山塑人皇垄，杀皇垄的父亲及其将帅，接着屠城。
English: Later, the edict was issued to shape the town guards, and in the fall back to the mountain to fight the mountain to shape the person of Wang Rong, kill Wang Rong's father and his commander, and then slaughter.

古文：迁平东将军，与古弼等东讨冯文通。
现代文：升任平束将军，与直回等往东讨伐逼塞逼。
English: He was promoted to the general of Hirazuka, and went to the east to fight with Zhigou and others.

古文：以不急战，文通奔高丽，槛车徵，黜为门卒。
现代文：因没有速战，致使塞通逃奔直丽，鳄渣被用囚车押解回朝，降为守门卒。
English: Due to the lack of a quick battle, Saitong fled to Naoli, and the crocodile was escorted back to the North in a prison wagon and reduced to a gatekeeper.

古文：遂卒于家。
现代文：在家中去世。
English: He died at home.

古文：子延，官至员外散骑常侍，赐爵南平公。
现代文：儿子楼延，官至员外散骑常侍，赐爵南平公。
English: His son, Lou Yan, was an officer and non-commissioned officer riding horseback, and was given the title of Nanping.

古文：刘尼，代人也。
现代文：刘尼，是代郡人。
English: Liu Ni is a representative of the county.

古文：本姓独孤氏。
现代文：本姓独孤氏。
English: His real surname is Doko.

古文：曾祖敦，有功于太祖，为方面大人。
现代文：曾祖，在立担时有功，任方面大人。
English: Great-great-grandfather Zeng Zu, who made a great contribution to the founding of Cangzhou, was appointed to the position of grandmaster.

古文：父娄，冠军将军，卒赠并州刺史。
现代文：父亲刘娄，任冠军将军，去世后被追赠为并州刺史。
English: His father, Liu Wei, was a champion general, and after his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of the state's crown prince.

古文：尼少壮健，有膂力，勇果善射，世祖见而善之，拜羽林中郎，赐爵昌国子，加振威将军。
现代文：刘尼年轻时身体强壮，有体力，勇敢果断善于射箭，世祖接见后就称许他，任命他为羽林中郎，赐爵为昌国王，加授振威将军。
English: When Liu Ni was young, his body was strong, he had physical strength, he was brave and decisive, and he was good at archery. After the ancestor received him, he praised him, appointed him as the middle brother of Ualin, knighted him as the King of Chang, and awarded him the General of Zhenwei.

古文：宗爱既杀南安王余于东庙，秘之，惟尼知状。
现代文：宗爱在束庙杀了南安王五金，秘而不露，衹有刘星知道情况。
English: Zong Ai killed Nan'an Wang Hardware in Sokmiao, but kept it a secret. Only Liu Xing knew the situation.

古文：尼劝爱立高宗。
现代文：塑惶劝塞爱拥立产塞。
English: Shaping panic and persuading people to love and support the production stop.

古文：爱自以负罪于景穆，闻而惊曰： 君大痴人，皇孙若立，岂忘正平时事乎？ 
现代文：塞爱自己因抱愧于景穆皇帝，听到型星的话后吃惊地说： 你太糊涂了，皇孙如果即位，难道会忘记正垩年间的事吗? 
English: Saying that he was ashamed of Emperor Jingmu, Sai Ai was surprised to hear the words of the emperor and said, "You are too confused. If the emperor's grandson ascends the throne, will he forget what happened during the reign of Zheng He?"

古文：尼曰： 若尔，今欲立谁？ 
现代文：刘尼说： 如果这样，打算立谁? 
English: Liu Ni said: If so, who do you plan to appoint?

古文：爱曰： 待还宫，擢诸王子贤者而立之。 
现代文：塞爱说： 等到回宫，选取诸王子中有德行的立为帝。 
English: Zong Ai said, "When you return to the palace, choose a wise prince from among all the princes to be your regent."

古文：尼惧其有变，密以状告殿中尚书源贺，贺时与尼俱典兵宿卫。
现代文：刘尼害怕他有变，暗中把情况告诉了殿中尚书源贺，源贺这时与刘尼都统领军队警卫皇宫。
English: Liu Ni was afraid of him changing, and secretly told the situation to the palace secretary, Yuan He. At that time, both Yuan He and Liu Ni were in command of the army guarding the palace.

古文：仍共南部尚书陆丽谋曰： 宗爱既立南安，还复杀之。
现代文：源贺于是同南部尚书陆丽计议说： 宗爱已经立南安王为帝，随即又杀害了他。
English: Then, Genge discussed the matter with Nanbu no Shosho and Lu Li, saying, "Zo Ai has already made Nan'an king the emperor, and then killed him.

古文：今不能奉戴皇孙，以顺民望，社稷危矣。
现代文：现在不能拥戴皇孙为帝，以顺应民心，国家就危险了。
English: Now it is not possible to support the emperor's grandson as emperor, and the country is in danger of following the popular will.

古文：将欲如何？ 
现代文：你打算怎么办? 
English: What are you going to do?

古文：丽曰： 唯有密奉皇孙耳。 
现代文：陆丽说： 衹有秘密地奉皇孙为帝了。 
English: Lu Li said, "I have secretly made my grandson emperor."

古文：于是贺与尚书长孙渴侯严兵守卫，尼与丽迎高宗于苑中。
现代文：于是源贺与尚书长孙渴侯部署军队守卫，刘尼与陆丽到禁苑中迎立高宗。
English: As a result, Yuan He and Shang Shu's eldest son Thirsty Hou deployed an army guard, and Liu Ni and Lu Li went to the Forbidden Garden to welcome Gao Zong.

古文：丽抱高宗于马上，入京城。
现代文：陆丽抱高宗到马上，进入京城。
English: Lu Li hugged Gao Zong and immediately entered the capital.

古文：尼驰还东庙，大呼曰： 宗爱杀南安王，大逆不道。
现代文：刘尼快马返回束庙，高呼道： 宗爱杀南安王，大逆不道。
English: Liu Ni rode back to the East Temple, shouting: "Zong Ai killed Nan'an Gong, it's a great treason.

古文：皇孙已登大位，有诏，宿卫之士皆可还宫。 
现代文：皇孙已登皇位，有诏令，警卫将士都可以回宫。 
English: The emperor's grandson has ascended to the throne, there is a decree, the guards can return to the palace.

古文：众咸唱万岁。
现代文：众人都高呼万岁。
English: Everyone shouted "Long live!"

古文：贺及渴侯登执宗爱、贾周等，勒兵而入，奉高宗于宫门外，入登永安殿。
现代文：源贺和渴侯立刻拘捕宗爱、贾周等，挥兵返回京城，在宫门外拥戴高宗，入宫登上永安殿。
English: Geng He and Qiu Hou immediately arrested Zong Ai, Jia Zhou and others, returned to the capital with an army, embraced Gao Zong outside the palace gate, and entered the palace and ascended Yongan Hall.

古文：以尼为内行长，进爵建昌侯。
现代文：高宗任命刘尼为内行长，晋爵建昌侯。
English: Gao Zong appointed Liu Ni as the governor of the Inner Court, and promoted Jian Changhou to the peerage.

古文：迁散骑常侍、安南将军。
现代文：升任散骑常侍、安南将军。
English: General Annan was promoted to the rank of knight errant.

古文：又进爵东安公。
现代文：又晋爵束安公。
English: He was also promoted to the peerage as Sakuanko.

古文：寻迁尚书右仆射，加侍中，进封为王。
现代文：不久升任尚书右仆射，加授侍中，进封为王。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Shangshu Righteous Servant of the Emperor, awarded the title of Junior Chamberlain, and was crowned king.

古文：出为征南将军、定州刺史。
现代文：刘尼出任征南将军、定州刺史。
English: Liu Ni became the general of the Southern Expedition, and the history of Dingzhou was written.

古文：在州清慎，然率多酒醉，治日甚少。
现代文：在州清廉谨慎，然而经常喝醉酒，办事的日子很少。
English: In the state of clean and prudent, but often drunk, there are few days of work.

古文：徵为殿中尚书，加侍中，特进。
现代文：征入任殿中尚书，加授侍中、特进。
English: He was conscripted into the Renden Middle School, and was promoted to Samurai Middle School and Special Promotion.

古文：高宗末，迁司徒。
现代文：高宗末年，升任司徒。
English: At the end of Gaozong's life, he was promoted to the post of disciple.

古文：显祖即位，以尼有大功于先朝，弥加尊重，赐别户三十。
现代文：显祖即位，因刘尼在先朝有大功，更加敬重，赐给别户三十。
English: When Emperor Xianzu ascended to the throne, because Liu Ni had made great contributions in the previous dynasty, he was given more respect, and thirty were given to other families.

古文：皇兴四年，车驾北征，帝亲誓众，而尼昏醉，兵陈不整。
现代文：皇兴四年，皇上北征，亲临誓师大会，而刘尼昏醉，军容不整。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xing, the emperor was on his way to the Northern Expedition, and he had to personally lead the people to swear an oath, but Liu Ni was drunk, and the army was not complete.

古文：显祖以其功重，特恕之，免官而已。
现代文：显祖因他功大，特加宽大，仅免官而已。
English: Because of his great merits, Xianzu was given special leniency and was only relieved of his duties.

古文：延兴四年薨。
现代文：延兴四年逝世。
English: Yan Xing died four years later.

古文：子杜生，袭爵。
现代文：儿子社生，继承爵位。
English: His son, a social student, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：世宗时，宁朔将军、步兵校尉。
现代文：世宗时，任宁朔将军、步兵校尉。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, he was appointed General of Ningshuo and Lieutenant of Infantry.

古文：熙平初卒。
现代文：旦哩初年去世。
English: Tanli died the following year.

古文：赠龙骧将军，朔州刺史，谥曰克。
现代文：被追赠为龙骧将军、朔州刺史，谧号为克。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Longjing General and Shuozhou Jishi, and his posthumous name was Zengke.

古文：奚眷，代人也。
现代文：奚眷，是代郡人。
English: His family is from the county.

古文：少有将略。
现代文：年轻时就有用兵谋略。
English: When you're young, you're a strategist.

古文：太祖时有战功。
现代文：太担时立有战功。
English: When there is too much responsibility, there is a war achievement.

古文：太宗时为尚书、假安南将军、虎牢镇将，为寇所惮。
现代文：左塞时任尚书、假安南将军、虚牢镇将，是贼寇所畏惧的将帅。
English: When he was in Zuozai, he was Shoshu, a fake Annan general, and a bogus town marshal. He was the marshal feared by the bandits.

古文：世祖初，为中军、都曹尚书，复镇虎牢，赐爵南阳公，加使持节、侍中、都督豫洛二州河内诸军事、镇南将军，开府。
现代文：世祖初年，任中军、都曹尚书，再次镇守虎牢，被赐给爵位为南阳公，加授使持节、侍中、都督豫洛二州河内诸军事、镇南将军、开府。
English: In the first year of the founder of the dynasty, Cao Shangshu, who was in charge of the Chinese army and the capital, once again guarded the tiger prison. He was given the title of Nanyanggong, and was also awarded the title of envoy, chamberlain, governor of the two provinces of Yulu, Hanoi military, Zhenan general, and Kaifu.

古文：寻徙镇长安。
现代文：不久迁徙镇守长安。
English: The town guard, Chang'an, soon moved there.

古文：世祖幸美稷，眷受诏督诸军，共讨山胡白龙于西河，破之，屠其城，斩首数千级，虏其妻子而还。
现代文：世担到赵罂，垦鲞受命统领各军，共同到酉回讨伐山翅人直董，打败直远，屠杀居民，斩首几千级，俘获他的妻儿而回。
English: The world was entrusted to Zhao Wei, and he was ordered to lead all the armies, and together they went back to Wei to fight against the mountain wing man Zhi Dong, defeated Zhi Yuan, slaughtered the inhabitants, beheaded thousands of levels, captured his wife and children, and returned.

古文：世祖平姑臧，遣眷讨沮渠牧犍弟私署张掖太守宜得。
现代文：世祖平定姑臧，派奚眷讨伐沮渠牧犍的弟弟私自任命的张掖太守宜得。
English: It is fitting that Zhang Xiu, the self-appointed younger brother of the founder of the dynasty, who pacified Gu Zhou and sent him to fight against Qiu Qu and Mu Zhou, should be the first to hold the throne.

古文：宜得奔酒泉，酒泉太守无讳与宜得奔高昌。
现代文：宣彊逃奔迺星，太守签茎与宣彊一同逃奔直昌。
English: Xuan Zang fled to Binxing, and the eunuch Zhi Zhu and Xuan Zang fled to Zhaochang together.

古文：获其二城。
现代文：奚眷取得他的二座城池。
English: He soon acquired his two castles.

古文：后沮渠天周复据酒泉，眷讨平之，虏男女四千余人。
现代文：后来沮渠天周又占据酒泉，奚眷讨伐平定了他，俘获男女四千多人。
English: Later, he occupied Jiuquan again, and was defeated and subdued by the Yan clan, and more than four thousand men and women were captured.

古文：世祖征蠕蠕，以眷为尚书，督偏将出别道，诏会鹿浑海。
现代文：世祖征伐蠕蠕，任命奚眷为尚书，统领偏将从另外一条道路出击，诏令在鹿浑海会师。
English: The Ancestor conquered Cumhuriyet, appointed his son-in-law as Shangshu, and ordered that the leader should attack from another road and meet the division at Lukhunhai.

古文：眷与中山王辰等诸大将俱后期，斩于都南。
现代文：奚眷与中山王元辰等各位大将都没有在规定时间内到达，被处死在都城南边。
English: However, the generals such as Gong Yuxin and Zhongshan Wang Yuanchen did not arrive within the stipulated time and were executed on the south side of the capital.

古文：爵除。
现代文：爵位被废。
English: Peerages abolished.

古文：车伊洛，焉耆胡也。
现代文：车伊洛，是焉耆胡人。
English: Chariot Ilo, is a Yan Xunhu.

古文：世为东境部落帅，恆修职贡。
现代文：世代为东部边界的部落酋长，一贯按时献纳贡品。
English: For generations, the tribal chiefs on the eastern border have always paid their tribute on time.

古文：世祖录其诚款，延和中，授伊洛平西将军，封前部王，赐绢一百匹，绵一百斤，绣衣一具，金带靴帽。
现代文：世祖知其忠诚，延和年间，授任伊洛为平西将军，封为前部王，赐给绢一百匹，绵一百斤，彩绣丝绸衣服一套，金带靴帽。
English: The patriarch knew of his loyalty, and during the Yan He era, he appointed Ilo as the general of Pingxi, named him the king of the front, and gave him one hundred yakitori, one hundred catties of cotton, a set of embroidered silk clothes, and a gold-belted shoe cap.

古文：伊洛大悦，规欲归阙。
现代文：伊洛大喜，打算归朝。
English: Iro is overjoyed and plans to return to the imperial court.

古文：沮渠无讳断路，伊洛与无讳连战，破之。
现代文：沮渠无讳截断道路，伊洛与无讳连续战斗，打败了他。
English: Frustrated, Mujib cut off the road. Ilo fought with Mujib continuously and defeated him.

古文：时无讳卒，其弟安周夺无讳子乾寿兵，规领部曲。
现代文：遣时无讳去世，他的弟弟安周夺取他的儿子干寿的士兵，图谋统领部众。
English: His brother, An Zhou, seized his son, Gan Shou, a soldier, and plotted to rule the people.

古文：伊洛前后遣史招喻，乾寿等率户五百余家来奔，伊洛送之京师。
现代文：伊洛先后派使者以皇上的名义招抚，干寿等率领五百多家来投奔，伊洛送他们到京师。
English: Ilo successively sent emissaries in the name of the emperor to beckon, Gan Shou and others led more than five hundred people to flee, and Ilo sent them to Beijing.

古文：又招喻李宝弟钦等五十余人，送诣敦煌。
现代文：又以皇上的名义招抚李实的弟弟李钦等五十多人，送到敦煌。
English: In the name of the emperor, more than fifty people, including Li Si's brother Li Qin, were sent to Dunhuang.

古文：伊洛又率部众二千余人伐高昌，讨破焉耆东关七城，虏获男女二百人，驼千头，马千匹。
现代文：伊洛又率领部众二千多人征伐高昌，攻破焉耆束关七城，俘获男女二百人，骆驼一千头，马一千匹。
English: Ilo also led more than two thousand people to conquer Gaochang, breaking through seven cities of Yancheng, capturing two hundred men and women, one thousand camels, and one thousand horses.

古文：以金一百斤奉献。
现代文：拿一百斤黄金进献。
English: Take a hundred catties of gold as an offering.

古文：先是，伊洛征焉耆，留其子歇守城，而安周乘虚引蠕蠕三道围歇，并遣使谓歇曰： 尔父已投大魏，尔速归首，当赐尔爵号。 
现代文：先前，伊洛征伐焉耆，留下他的儿子车歇守城，然而安周乘虚带领蠕蠕三路围攻车歇，并派使者对车歇说： 你父亲已投靠大魏，你迅速归降，必定赐给你爵位和名号。 
English: Previously, Ilo had conquered Yan'an, leaving his son Che Xie to defend the city. However, An Zhou, led by Hui, besieged Che Xie three times, and sent an envoy to Che Xie saying: Your father has defected to the Great Wei Dynasty. If you quickly surrender, you will certainly be given a title and name.

古文：歇固守，连战。
现代文：车歇坚守，连续战斗。
English: The team kept the break and continued to fight.

古文：久之，外无救援，为安周所陷，走奔伊洛。
现代文：相持多时，外无援兵，被安周攻占，车歇逃奔伊洛。
English: They held out for a long time without outside reinforcements, were overrun by An Zhou, and fled to Ilo.

古文：伊洛收集遗散一千余家，归焉耆镇。
现代文：伊洛收集逃亡流散的一千多家，回焉董垄。
English: Ilo collected more than a thousand fugitives and exiles, including Dong Reng.

古文：世祖嘉之。正平元年，诏伊洛曰： 歇年尚幼，能固守城邑，忠节显著，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：世坦表彰他正王元年，诏令笆盗说： 车歇年龄还小，能坚守城池，忠诚不二，我很高兴。
English: In the first year of his reign, he was commended by the world. He said: "I am still young, I can hold fast to the castle, I am loyal, and I am very happy.

古文：可遣歇诣阙。 
现代文：可送车歇到朝中来。 
English: You can get a shuttle bus to come in the morning.

古文：伊洛令歇将弟波利等十余人赴都。
现代文：伊洛使车歇带领弟弟波利等十多人奔赴都城。
English: More than ten people, including Ilo's brother Polly, rushed to the capital.

古文：正平二年，伊洛朝京师，赐以妻妾、奴婢、田宅、牛羊、拜上将军，王如故。
现代文：正平二年，伊洛到京师朝见，被赐给妻妾、奴婢、田地房屋、牛羊，授任上将军，前部王如故。
English: In the second year of Zhengping, Ilo went to the imperial court in Beijing and was given a wife and concubine, slaves and maidservants, a farmhouse, cattle and sheep, and was appointed as a general.

古文：兴安二年卒。
现代文：兴安二年去世。
English: Xing'an died two years later.

古文：赠镇西大将军，秦州刺史，谥曰康王。
现代文：追赠为镇西大将军、秦州刺史，谧号为康王。
English: He was posthumously given the titles of Zhenxi Grand General and Qinzhou Zhi Shi, and his posthumous name was Kang Wang.

古文：赐绵绢杂彩五百匹，衣二十七袭。
现代文：赐给绵绢杂色丝织品五百匹，衣服二十七套。
English: Five hundred pairs of mixed-coloured silk fabrics and 27 sets of clothes were given to Mianyu.

古文：葬礼依庐鲁元故事。
现代文：葬礼依照卢鲁元的旧例。
English: The funeral was held according to the old custom of Lulu Yuan.

古文：歇袭爵。
现代文：楼歇继承爵位。
English: Lou He succeeded to the peerage.

古文：皇兴末，拜使持节、平西将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：皂里末年，任使持节、平西将军、辽州刺史。
English: At the end of Sohri's life, he was appointed as the envoy of Jisai, the general of Pingxi, and the governor of Liaozhou.

古文：延兴三年卒。子伯主袭爵。
现代文：廷兴三年去世，儿子值王继承爵位。
English: Tingxing died three years later, and his son Guan Wang inherited the title.

古文：波利，天安二年拜立节将军、乐官侯。
现代文：波利，天安二年被授予立节将军，乐官侯。
English: Polly, in the second year of Tian'an, was awarded the title of Lixi General, and the title of Music Official.

古文：皇兴三年卒，兄子洛都袭爵。
现代文：皇兴三年去世，兄长的儿子洛都继承爵位。
English: Emperor Xing died three years later, and his elder brother's son, Luo Du, inherited the title.

古文：宿石，朔方人也，赫连屈孑弟文陈之曾孙也。
现代文：宿石，是朔方人，是赫连屈孑的弟弟文陈的曾孙。
English: Shukuishi, a native of Shuofang, was the great-grandson of Wen Chen, the younger brother of Heren Qu.

古文：天兴二年，文陈父子归阙，太祖嘉之，以宗女妻焉，赐奴婢数十口，拜为上将军。
现代文：天兴二年，文陈父子归顺朝廷，太祖嘉许他，把宗室之女嫁给他，赐给奴婢数十人，任命他为上将军。
English: In the second year of Tianxing, Wen Chen and his son surrendered to the imperial court. The great-grandfather praised him, married the daughter of the family to him, gave him dozens of slaves, and appointed him as a senior general.

古文：祖若豆根，太宗时赐姓宿氏，袭上将军。
现代文：祖父若豆根，太宗时赐给姓氏为宿氏，继承上将军职位。
English: His grandfather, Wakamune, was given the surname of Shukuji (宿氏) by Emperor Taizong and succeeded to the position of Shangzheng (上将军).

古文：父沓干，世祖时虎贲幢将。
现代文：父亲沓干，世祖时任虎贲幢将。
English: His father was a crane operator, and his father-in-law was a crane operator.

古文：从征平凉有功，拜虎威将军，侍御郎，赐爵汉安男。
现代文：跟从征伐平凉有功，被任命为虎威将军、侍御郎，赐给爵位为漠安男。
English: He was awarded the title of General Huwei, the title of Grand Chamberlain, and the title of Mostan Male.

古文：转中散，迁给事，兼领工曹。
现代文：改任中散，升任给事，兼领工曹。
English: He was reassigned to a middle-ranking position, and was promoted to a sergeant. He also served as a foreman.

古文：从驾讨和龙，以功赐奴婢十七户。
现代文：跟从皇上讨伐和龙，因功被赐给十七户奴婢。
English: He followed the emperor to fight dragons and was given 17 slaves for his service.

古文：真君四年，从驾讨蠕蠕，战没。
现代文：真君四年，跟从皇上讨伐蠕蠕，战死。
English: In the fourth year of his reign, Shinkun followed the emperor on a crusade against the Cimmerians and was killed in battle.

古文：世祖悼惜之，诏求沓干子。
现代文：世祖哀伤惋惜他，诏令寻找沓干的儿子。
English: The patriarch grieved and pitied him, and issued a decree to search for Shikan's son.

古文：时石年甫十一，引见，以幼听归。
现代文：当时宿石才十一岁，被引见，因年幼听任他回去。
English: At that time, Shukuishi was only eleven years old. He was introduced, and he was allowed to go back because he was young.

古文：年十三，袭爵，擢为中散。
现代文：十三岁，继承爵位，提升为中散。
English: At the age of thirteen, he succeeded to a peerage and was promoted to the middle rank.

古文：从驾至江，拜宣威将军。
现代文：跟从皇上到长江，被授任为宣威将军。
English: He followed the emperor to the Yangtze River and was appointed as General Xuan Wei.

古文：兴光中，迁侍御史，拜中垒将军，进爵蔡阳子，典宜官曹。
现代文：兴光年间，升任侍御史，被任命为中垒将军，升爵位为蔡阳子，主持官曹。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xingguang, he was promoted to the position of attendant to the emperor, was appointed as the general of the middle camp, was promoted to the peerage as Cai Yangzi, and presided over the official Cao.

古文：迁内行令。
现代文：升任内行令。
English: Promoted to Internal Affairs.

古文：从幸苑内，游猎，石于高宗前走马，道峻，马倒殒绝，久之乃苏。
现代文：随从到御苑内，游乐打猎，宿石在高宗前骑马疾走，路陡，坐骑倒地宿石昏厥，多时才苏醒。
English: Accompanying to the imperial garden, pleasure hunting, Shukuishi rode a horse in front of Gao Zong, the road was steep, Shukuishi fainted on horseback, and it took him a long time to wake up.

古文：由是御马得制。
现代文：因此御马被制服。
English: As a result, Mima was subdued.

古文：高宗嘉之，赐绵一百斤，帛五十匹，骏马一匹，改爵义阳子。
现代文：高宗嘉许他，赐给绵一百斤，帛五十匹，骏马一匹，改爵号为义阳子。
English: Gao Zong praised him and gave him a hundred catties of cotton, fifty yakitori, and one yakitori horse. He changed his title to Yiyangzi.

古文：尝从猎，高宗亲欲射虎。
现代文：曾经随从打猎，高宗想要亲自射虎。
English: Gao Zong once wanted to shoot a tiger himself.

古文：石叩马而谏，引高宗至高原上。
现代文：宿石勒住马劝谏，引导高宗到高原上。
English: Shukuishi persuaded him to stay and guide Gao Zong to the plateau.

古文：后虎腾跃杀人。
现代文：后来虎跳跃杀人。
English: Later, the tiger leaped to kill.

古文：诏曰： 石为忠臣，鞚马切谏，免虎之害。
现代文：诏令说： 宿石是忠臣，勒马恳切劝谏，避免了虎的危害。
English: The imperial edict said: Shukuishi was a loyal subject, and Lemma earnestly advised him to avoid the harm of the tiger.

古文：后有犯罪，宥而勿坐。 
现代文：以后犯了罪，宽恕而不判罪。 
English: He later committed a crime and was pardoned without being convicted.

古文：赐骏马一匹。
现代文：赐给他一匹骏马。
English: and gave him a fine horse.

古文：尚上谷公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：娶上谷公主，被授予驸马都尉。
English: He married Princess Uetani and was awarded the rank of Lieutenant of Horse.

古文：天安初，迁散骑常侍，吏部尚书，进爵太山公，为北中道都大将。
现代文：天安初年，升任散骑常侍、吏部尚书，升爵位为太山公，任北征中道都大将。
English: In the first year of the Tian'an Dynasty, he was promoted to the position of straggler's equerry and official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was given the title of Lord of Taishan, and was appointed the general of the Northern Expedition and the Central Capital.

古文：延兴元年卒。
现代文：延兴元年去世。
English: Yan Xing died in the first year of the year.

古文：追赠太原王，谥曰康。
现代文：追赠为太原王，谧号为康。
English: His posthumous name was Taiyuan Wang, and his nickname was Kang.

古文：葬礼依庐鲁元故事。
现代文：葬礼依照卢鲁元旧例。
English: The funeral was held according to the old custom of Lulu Yuan.

古文：太和初，子倪袭爵，比部侍御。
现代文：太和初年，儿子宿倪继承爵位。任比部侍御。
English: In the first year of the reign of the Empress Dowager, her son, Shuku Ni, succeeded to the title of nobility. He was appointed as Hibe no Samurai.

古文：来大千，代人也。
现代文：来大干，是代郡人。
English: He came to work hard. He is a representative of the county.

古文：父初真，从太祖避难叱候山，参创业之功，官至后将军，武原侯，与在八议。
现代文：父亲初真，跟从太祖在吐医山避难，参与创业，立下功劳，官至后将军，武原侯，属于拥有减刑免刑特权的八种人。
English: His father, Hatsuchizane, followed his great-grandfather to take refuge in Tuiyishan, participated in entrepreneurship, and made contributions. He was promoted to the rank of general and became the governor of Takehara Province. He belongs to the eight types of people who have the privilege of commutation of sentence.

古文：大千骁果，善骑射，为骑都尉。
现代文：大王勇猛刚毅，擅长骑马射箭，任骑都尉。
English: The great king was brave and strong-willed, good at riding and archery, and was appointed captain.

古文：永兴初，袭爵，迁中散。
现代文：永兴初年，继承爵位，升任中散。
English: In the first year of Yongxing, he succeeded to a peerage and was promoted to Zhongsan.

古文：至于朝贺之日，大千常著御铠，盘马殿前，朝臣莫不嗟叹。
现代文：到朝觐庆贺的日子，大王常穿着皇上赐给的镜甲，在殿前骑着马驰骋迥旋，朝中大臣莫不叹息。
English: On the day of the celebration of the Imperial Court, the great king often wore the mirror armor given by the emperor and rode a horse in front of the palace. The ministers of the Imperial Court could not help but sigh.

古文：迁内幢将，典宿卫禁旅。
现代文：升任内幢将，掌管禁军。
English: Promoted to General of the Inner Palace Guard, in charge of the Forbidden Army.

古文：大千用法严明，上下齐肃。
现代文：大干执法严明，上下整齐严肃。
English: Law enforcement is strict, and it is orderly and serious.

古文：尝从太宗校猎，见虎在高岩上，大千持槊直前刺之，应手而死。
现代文：曾经随从太宗打猎，见虎在高山上，大干握长矛径直向前刺它，随手而死。
English: Once, when he was hunting with Taizong, he saw a tiger on a high mountain, grabbed a spear, stabbed it straight ahead, and died.

古文：太宗嘉其勇壮，又为殿中给事。
现代文：太宗嘉许他的勇猛强壮，又任殿中给事。
English: Emperor Taizong praised him for his bravery and strength, and appointed him to a position in the palace.

古文：世祖践祚，与襄城公庐鲁元等七人俱为常侍，持仗侍卫，昼夜不离左右。
现代文：世祖即位，与襄城公卢鲁元等七人都任常侍，拿着兵器侍卫，昼夜不离左右。
English: When the founder of the dynasty ascended the throne, he was accompanied by seven attendants, including Lu Luyuan, the Duke of Xiangcheng, who guarded the throne day and night with weapons.

古文：从讨赫连昌，共长孙道生与贼交战。
现代文：跟从讨伐赫连昌，同长孙道生与贼军交战。
English: He followed the crusade against Khelianchang and fought against the bandit army with his eldest grandson, Tao Sheng.

古文：道生马倒，为贼所击，大千驰救，贼众散走。
现代文：道生的马倒下，被贼军攻击，大干驱马相救，贼军四散逃走。
English: Dousheng's horse fell down and was attacked by the bandits, Dagan drove the horse to save it, and the bandits scattered and fled.

古文：大千扶道生上马，遂得免。
现代文：大干扶道生上马，因此得以逃脱。
English: Obaseki got on his horse and was able to escape.

古文：从讨蠕蠕，战功居多。
现代文：跟从讨伐蠕蠕，战功占多数。
English: Following the crusade of Cumhuriyet, military exploits accounted for the majority.

古文：迁征北大将军，赐爵庐陵公，镇云中，兼统白道军事。
现代文：升任征北大将军，被赐给爵位为庐陵公，镇守云中，兼统领白道军事。
English: He was promoted to the general of Peking University, given the title of Lord of Fuling, the town guard of Yunzhong, and the military commander of Baidu.

古文：囗贼北叛，大千前后追击，莫不平殄。
现代文：阙贼军向北逃遁，大干前后追击，没有不平定殄灭的。
English: The bandit army fled to the north and was chased back and forth by a large force. There was no way to quell the unrest.

古文：延和初，车驾北伐，大千为前锋，大破虏军。
现代文：延和初年，皇上北伐，大干作为先锋，大败敌军。
English: In the first year of the Yanwa era, the emperor led the Northern Expedition, with Dagan as the vanguard, and defeated the enemy.

古文：世祖以其壮勇，数有战功，兼悉北境险要，诏大千巡抚六镇，以防寇虏。
现代文：世祖因他强健勇敢，屡建战功，加上熟悉北部边境的险要，诏令大干巡察安抚六镇，以防敌人入侵。
English: Because of his strength and bravery, his repeated military exploits, and his familiarity with the perils of the northern border, Shizu ordered a large-scale inspection and pacification of the six towns to prevent enemy invasion.

古文：经略布置，甚得事宜。
现代文：谋划部署，很为得当。
English: The methods of governing the army and the strategic arrangements are all quite appropriate.

古文：后吐京胡反，以大千为都将讨平之。
现代文：后来吐京胡人反叛，任命大干为都将讨伐平定它。
English: Later, the Tujing Hu people rebelled, and the appointment of Dagan led to a crusade to pacify it.

古文：在吐京卒，丧还，停于平城南。
现代文：在吐京去世，尸体运回，停放在乎城南边。
English: He died in Tujing, and his body was brought back and parked on the south side of the city.

古文：世祖出，还，见而问之，左右以对。世祖悼叹者良久。
现代文：世祖外出，返回，看到了就询问，身边的人以实情应对，世祖叹息了许久。
English: The ancestor went out, returned, saw and inquired, the people around him responded with the truth, and the ancestor sighed for a long time.

古文：诏曰： 大千忠勇尽节，功在可嘉，今听丧入殡城内。 
现代文：降诏说： 大干忠诚勇猛，恪守操节，值得嘉许，现在允许他的尸体在城内入棺待葬。 
English: The edict said: "His loyalty, bravery and discipline are commendable, and his body is now allowed to be placed in a coffin in the city for burial."

古文：赠司空，谥曰庄公。
现代文：追赠为司空，谧号为庄公。
English: His posthumous name was Siku, and his posthumous name was Zhuang.

古文：子丘颓，袭爵。
现代文：儿子丘颓，继承爵位。
English: His son, Qiu Jun, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：降为晋兴侯。
现代文：降为晋兴侯。
English: He was demoted to Jin Xing Hou.

古文：拜安远将军。
现代文：任安远将军。
English: General Ren Anyuan.

古文：从驾到江，进右将军。
现代文：跟从皇卜到长江，升任右将军。
English: He followed Emperor Pu to the Yangtze River and was promoted to the position of right general.

古文：和平中，迁中散，转相曹都典奉事。
现代文：和平年间，升任中散，改任相曹都典奉事。
English: During the years of peace, he was promoted to Chusan, and was reassigned to the position of Sang Cao Du Dian.

古文：皇兴四年卒。
现代文：皇兴四年去世。
English: Emperor Xing died four years later.

古文：赠宁南将军，陈留公，谥曰简。
现代文：被迫赠为宁南将军、陈留公，谧号为简。
English: He was forcibly given the titles of Ningnan General and Chen Rukong, and his nickname was Jian.

古文：子蕇袭爵。
现代文：儿子来草继承爵位。
English: His son, Lai Cao, succeeded to the title.

古文：丘颓弟提，官至监御曹给事，冠军将军，兗州刺史，濮阳侯。
现代文：丘颓的弟弟来提，官至监御曹给事，冠军将军，兖州刺史，濮阳侯。
English: The younger brother of Qiu Qi came to mention, the official to supervise Cao gave the matter, the champion general, the state of Zhangzhou, and the prince of Shenyang.

古文：太和十年卒。
现代文：太和十年去世。
English: Taiwa died ten years later.

古文：周几，代人也。
现代文：周几，是代郡人。
English: Zhou Jia is a representative of the county.

古文：父千，有功太祖之世，赐爵须阳侯。
现代文：父亲周千，在太祖时期有功，赐爵顺阳侯。
English: His father, Zhou Qian, was awarded the title of Shunyang Marquis for his meritorious service during the time of the great-grandfather.

古文：坐事死。
现代文：因事获罪被处死。
English: He was sentenced to death.

古文：几少以善骑射为猎郎。
现代文：周几年轻时因擅长骑马射箭任猎郎。
English: When he was young, Zhou Qi was a hunter because he was good at horseback riding and archery.

古文：太宗即位，为殿中侍御史，掌宿卫禁兵，断决称职。
现代文：太宗即位，任殿中侍御史，掌管禁军，果断称职。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, appointed the palace attendants to the history, controlled the forbidden army, and decisively fulfilled his duties.

古文：迁左民尚书。
现代文：升任左民尚书。
English: He was promoted to Sadamin Shojo.

古文：神瑞中，并州饥民游食山东，诏几领众镇博陵之鲁口以安集之。
现代文：神瑞年间，并州饥民向太行山以东流动取食，韶令周几领兵镇守博陵的鲁以便安定辑睦他们。
English: During the Jin and Sui dynasties, the famine-stricken people in Hebei Province migrated to the east of Taihang Mountain to get food. In order to stabilize and pacify them, the Emperor ordered Zhou Qian to lead soldiers to guard Boling Lu.

古文：泰常初，白涧、行唐民数千家负险不供输税，几与安康子长孙道生宣示祸福，逃民遂还。
现代文：泰常初年，白涧、行唐百姓几千家依恃险固的地形不缴纳赋税，周几与安康子长孙道生晓谕祸福。逃民于是返回。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizang, thousands of people from Baiyun and Xingtang, who were clinging to the rugged terrain, did not pay taxes. Zhou Jia and Ankang's eldest son, Sun Daosheng, told them about the misfortunes and blessings. The fugitives then returned.

古文：于时郡县斩叛胡翟猛雀于林虑山，猛雀遗种窜于行唐及襄国。
现代文：当时郡县官在林虑山斩杀叛乱的胡人翟猛雀，猛雀的后代逃窜到行唐和襄国。
English: At that time, the county officials killed the rebellious Hu people in Linxi Mountain, and the descendants of the birds fled to Xingtang and Xiang countries.

古文：几追讨，尽诛之。
现代文：周几追击，把他们全部杀死。
English: Zhou Qi chased and killed them all.

古文：后为宁朔将军，拒司马德宗将刘裕于南，破毛德祖于土楼。以功赐爵交址侯。
现代文：后来任宁朔将军，在南部抵挡司马德宗的将领刘裕，在土楼打败毛德祖因功被赐给爵位为交侯。
English: Later, he was appointed as the general of Ningshuo, resisted the general Liu Yu of the Sima Dezong in the south, and defeated Mao Zedzu in Tulou, and was given a peerage for his service.

古文：世祖以几有智勇，遣镇河南，威信著于外境。
现代文：世祖因周几智勇双全，派遣他镇守黄河以南，威信著称于境外。
English: The world's ancestors sent him to guard the south of the Yellow River because of his great wisdom and courage, and his prestige is well known abroad.

古文：几常嫌奚斤等绥抚关中失和，百姓不附。
现代文：周几平常厌恶奚斤等抚慰关中不能安定和睦，百姓不归附。
English: Zhou Qian usually abhorred appeasement, such as beating, and could not maintain stability and harmony in Guanzhong, and the people did not adhere to it.

古文：每至言论，形于声色。
现代文：每当谈及此事，都义形于色。
English: Whenever the matter is mentioned, it is always in a negative light.

古文：斤等惮焉。
现代文：奚斤等很惧怕他。
English: They are very afraid of him.

古文：进号宋兵将军。
现代文：加官号为宋兵将军。
English: He was given the additional official title of General Song Bing.

古文：率洛州刺史于栗磾以万人袭陕城，卒于军，军人无不叹惜之。
现代文：率领洛州刺史于栗弹用 万人袭击陕城，在军中去世，士卒无不嗟叹惋惜。
English: Luo Zhou's general Shi Yu, who led the attack on Shaanxi City with ten thousand men, died in the army. The soldiers all lamented his death.

古文：归葬京师。
现代文：尸体运回京师安葬。
English: The body was transported back to Beijing for burial.

古文：追赠交耻公，谥曰桓。
现代文：被追赠为交耻公，谧号为桓。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Kojinkong, and his posthumous name was Kan.

古文：子步，袭爵。
现代文：儿子周步，继承爵位。
English: His son, Zhou Bu, inherited the title.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子安国，袭爵。
现代文：儿子安国，继承爵位。
English: His son, Ankoku, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：太和中，讨蠕蠕，失利，伏法。
现代文：太和年间，讨伐蠕蠕，失利，依法被处死刑。
English: During the Taihe era, the crusade failed and he was sentenced to death according to the law.

古文：爵除。
现代文：爵位废除。
English: Peerages abolished.

古文：豆代田，代人也。
现代文：豆代田，是代郡人。
English: Mameshirota is a native of Shirogun.

古文：太宗时以善骑射为内细射。
现代文：太宗时因擅长骑马射箭任内捆射。
English: Taizong was good at horse riding and archery.

古文：从攻虎牢，诏代田登楼射贼，矢不虚发。
现代文：跟从攻打虎牢，诏令代田登楼射杀贼军，箭不虚发。
English: Following the attack on the tiger prison, he ordered Daita to go up to the building to shoot the thief army, and the arrow did not go astray.

古文：与奚斤前锋先入，擒刘义隆将毛德祖并长史、司马三人。
现代文：与前锋奚斤先入虎牢，俘获刘义隆的将领毛德祖和长史、司马三人。
English: He entered the tiger prison first with the striker Hao Jin, and captured Liu Yilong's generals Mao Dezu, Changshi and Sima.

古文：以功迁内三郎。
现代文：因功升任内三郎。
English: Promoted to Uchisaburo for his achievements.

古文：从讨赫连昌，乘胜追贼。入其宫门，门闭，代田逾宫而出。
现代文：跟从讨伐赫连昌，乘胜追击贼军，冲进敌军官门，宫门随之关闭，代田越墙而出。
English: He followed the crusade to Herengchang, took advantage of the victory to pursue the thief army, rushed into the enemy officer's gate, the palace gate was closed, and Daita went out over the wall.

古文：世祖壮之，拜勇武将军。
现代文：世祖赞许他，任命为勇武将军。
English: The ancestor praised him and appointed him as a brave general.

古文：后从驾平昌，以战功赐奴婢十五口，黄金百斤，银百斤。
现代文：后来跟从皇上平定赫连昌，因战功被赐给奴婢十五人，黄金一百斤，白银一百斤。
English: Later, the emperor ordered the subjugation of Herenchang, and fifteen slaves and maidservants were awarded one hundred jin of gold and one hundred jin of silver for their war service.

古文：神中，讨蠕蠕，赐爵关中侯。
现代文：神厅年间，讨伐蠕蠕，被赐给爵位为关中侯。
English: During his years at the Shinto shrine, he was given the title of Kanshu no maro.

古文：从讨平凉，击破赫连定，得奚斤等。
现代文：跟从讨伐平凉，打败赫连定，救出奚斤等。
English: He followed the crusade against Ping Liang, defeated Her Lian Ding, and rescued Jia Jin.

古文：世祖以定妻赐之，诏斤膝行授酒于代田。
现代文：世祖把赫连定的妻子赐给他，诏令奚斤膝行向代田敬酒。
English: The patriarch gave him the wife of He Lianding, and ordered that he kneel down and make a toast to Daejeon.

古文：敕斤曰： 全尔身命者，代田功也。 
现代文：敕命奚斤说： 保全你身体性命的，是代田的功劳。 
English: He said, "It is the merit of Daita that he saved your life and body.

古文：改爵井陉侯，加散骑常侍，右卫将军，领内都幢将。
现代文：改爵号为井陉侯，加授散骑常侍、右卫将军、领内都幢将。
English: He was given the title of Inagi no marquis, as well as the additional titles of straggler, right guard general, and territorial general.

古文：从讨和龙，战功居多，迁殿中尚书，赐奴婢六十口。
现代文：跟从讨伐和龙，战功占多数，升任殿中尚书，被赐给奴婢六十人。
English: He was a follower of the crusade against dragons, and his war exploits accounted for the majority. He was promoted to Shoshu in the palace, and was given 60 slaves.

古文：以前后军功，进爵长广公，加平东将军。
现代文：因前后军功，升爵位为艮广公，加干东将军。
English: Due to his military achievements, he was promoted to the peerage as the general of Jianguang, and the general of Kangdong.

古文：从驾南讨。
现代文：跟从皇上向南讨伐。
English: To follow the emperor's crusade southward.

古文：转太子太保。
现代文：改任太子太保。
English: He was appointed Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：出为统万镇大将。
现代文：出任统万镇大将。
English: He was appointed as the general of Tongwan Town.

古文：兴安中卒。
现代文：玺昼年间去世。
English: He died in the afternoon.

古文：赠侍中，安东大将军，长广王，谥曰恭。
现代文：被追赠为侍中、安东大将军、长广王，谧号为恭。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai, Anton the Great General, and Prince Nagahiro, and his posthumous name was Kyo.

古文：子求周，为内三郎。
现代文：儿子求周，任内三郎。
English: His son, Mochizuki, was appointed as Uchisaburo.

古文：从驾到江，赐爵五等子。
现代文：跟从皇上到江，被赐爵五等子。
English: He followed the emperor to Jiang, and was given the title of the fifth son.

古文：又进爵为侯。
现代文：又升爵位为侯。
English: He was also raised to the peerage as a marquess.

古文：后袭父爵。
现代文：后来继承父亲的爵位。
English: He later inherited his father's title.

古文：为吏部尚书。
现代文：任吏部尚书。
English: He was appointed to the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：皇兴二年卒。
现代文：皇兴二年去世。
English: Emperor Xing died two years later.

古文：赠征北大将军，长广王，谥曰简。
现代文：被追赠为征北大将军、长广王，谧号为简。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of General of the Expedition to the North and King of Changguang, and his posthumous name was Jian.

古文：子多侯袭爵。
现代文：儿子多侯继承爵位。
English: His son Dohuk inherited the title.

古文：周观，代人也。
现代文：周观，是代郡人。
English: Zhou Guan is a representative of the county.

古文：骁勇有膂力，每在军阵，必应募先登。
现代文：勇猛有体力，每每在战斗中，必定响应招募率先出战。
English: He is brave and has physical strength. Whenever he is in battle, he will certainly respond to recruitment and take the lead in battle.

古文：以功进为军将长史，寻转军将。
现代文：因功升任军将长史，不久改任军将。
English: He had a long history of being promoted to the rank of general for his achievements, and was soon promoted to the rank of general.

古文：击赫连屈丐有功，赐爵安川子，迁北镇军将。
现代文：攻打赫连屈丐有功，被赐给爵位为安川子，调任北镇军将。
English: He was given the title of Yasukawa's son and transferred to be the commander of the North Town Army.

古文：世祖即位，从讨蠕蠕。
现代文：世祖即位，跟从讨伐蠕蠕。
English: The ancestor ascends to the throne, followed by the crusade against the Cree.

古文：以军功进为都副将，镇云中。
现代文：因军功升任都副将，镇守云中。
English: He was promoted to vice-general due to his military achievements, and became the town guard of Yunzhong.

古文：神中，又讨蠕蠕，大获，增爵为侯。
现代文：神厅年间，又讨伐蠕蠕，俘获很多，升爵位为侯。
English: During the years of the Shinto shrine, he also fought against worms, captured many, and was knighted.

古文：从征平凉，进爵金城公，迁为都将。
现代文：跟从征讨平凉，升爵位为金城公，升任都将。
English: Following the conquest of Pingliang, he will be promoted to the peerage of Jincheng, and will be promoted.

古文：从破离石胡，加散骑常侍。
现代文：跟从打败离石胡人，加授散骑常侍。
English: Followed by the defeat of the Shihu people, and the reinforcement of the free-riding attendants.

古文：转高平镇将。
现代文：改任高平镇将。
English: He was reappointed as the general of Gaoping Town.

古文：观善抚士卒，号有威名。
现代文：周观善于抚慰士卒，有威望。
English: Zhou Guan is good at soothing his subordinates and has prestige.

古文：真君初，诏观统五军西讨秃发保周于张掖。
现代文：真君初年，韶令周观统领五军向西到张掖讨伐秃发保周。
English: In the first year of Zhenjun, the Emperor ordered Zhou Guan to lead five armies to the west to Zhangye to fight baldness protection Zhou.

古文：徙其民数百家，将置于京师，至武威，辄与诸将私分之。
现代文：迁移他的百姓几百家，准备安置到京师，行至武威，却与将领们私下瓜分了。
English: He relocated hundreds of his people, prepared to resettle them in Beijing, and traveled to Wuwei, but he and the generals privately divided them up.

古文：世祖大怒，黜观为金城侯，改授内都大官。
现代文：世祖十分气愤，降周观的爵位为金城侯，改任内都大官。
English: The patriarch was very angry, and he reduced Zhou Guan's title to the Marquess of Jincheng and appointed him to the highest post in the Inner Capital.

古文：出除平南将军，秦州刺史，复爵金城公。
现代文：出任平南将军、秦州刺史，恢复爵位为金城公。
English: He was appointed as the general of Pingnan and the governor of Qinzhou, and his title of Jincheng was restored.

古文：抚驭失和，民薜永宗聚众于汾曲以叛，观讨永宗，为流矢所中。
现代文：处理民事不当，导致百姓薛永宗在汾水曲折处聚众叛乱。周观讨伐永宗，被流矢射中。
English: The improper handling of civil affairs led to the rebellion of the people of Xue Yongzong at the bend of Surabaya. Zhou Guan fought against Yongzong and was shot by the current.

古文：世祖幸蒲坂，观闻帝至，惊怖而起，疮重遂卒。
现代文：世祖到蒲坂，周观听说皇上来到，惊恐地爬起，致使箭伤加重而去世。
English: When Zhou Guan heard that the emperor was coming, he got up in fright. As a result, his arrow wound worsened and he died.

古文：世祖怒，绝其爵。
现代文：世祖愤怒，取消了他的封爵。
English: The Emperor was furious and cancelled his knighthood.

古文：子豆，初为三郎，迁军将。
现代文：儿子周豆，起初任三郎，升任军将。
English: Zhou's son Zhou Zu, initially named Saburo, rose to the rank of general.

古文：卒于长乐太守。
现代文：任长乐太守时去世。
English: He died while serving as Chōle Taishō.

古文：闾大肥，蠕蠕人也。
现代文：闾大肥，是蠕蠕人。
English: He's a big fat creep.

古文：太祖时，与其弟大泥倍颐率宗族归国。
现代文：太祖时，和他的弟弟大垩倍颐率领宗族归顺本朝。
English: At the time of the great-grandfather, he and his younger brother, Daju Beilun, led the clan to submit to the imperial court.

古文：太祖善之，尚华阴公主，赐爵其思子。
现代文：左祖夸奖他，让他娶萋阴公主为妻，赐爵其思子。
English: Zuo Zu praised him, asked him to marry Princess Suyin, and gave a peerage to his son.

古文：与其弟并为上宾，入八议。
现代文：和他的弟弟都是贵宾，成为有减刑免刑的八种人。
English: He and his younger brother were honored guests, becoming the first of eight people to have their sentences commuted.

古文：太宗即位，进大肥为内都大官，增爵为侯。
现代文：太宗即位，升任去肥为内都大官，升爵位为侯。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, and he was promoted to Dangfei as the Inner Capital Grand Official, and he was promoted to peerage as a marquis.

古文：神瑞中，为都将，讨越勒部于跋那山，大破之。
现代文：神瑞年间，任都将，在跋那山讨伐越勒部，大获全胜。
English: During the reign of King Shen Rui, Ren Zhou fought against Yuelu in Banya Mountain and won a great victory.

古文：泰常初，复为都将，领禁兵讨蠕蠕，获其大将莫孤浑。
现代文：泰常初年，又任都将，率领禁军讨伐蠕蠕，俘获敌军大将莫孤浑。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizang, he led the Forbidden Army to fight against and capture the enemy general Mo Guohun.

古文：宜城王奚斤之攻虎牢也，大肥与娥清领十二军出中道，略地高平、金乡，东至泰山。
现代文：宜城王量丘攻打虑空，左胆与塑造率领十二军出兵中路，占领高平、金乡，向东到童山。
English: Yicheng Wang Rengqiu attacked the empty sky, and led the 12th army to occupy the middle road, occupied Gaoping and Jinxiang, and went east to Tongshan.

古文：假大肥使持节，安阳公，镇抚陈汝。
现代文：授任左胆为临时使持节、塞肠盆，安抚建迪两地。
English: The left gallbladder was appointed as a temporary envoy to hold the festival, plug the intestine basin, and appease the two places of Jiandi.

古文：世祖初，复与奚斤出云中白道讨大檀，破之。
现代文：世担初年，又与罢丘从云主直道进军讨伐左擅，取得胜利。
English: In the first year of the Council of Elders, he marched from Yunshu Zhidao to fight against Zuoxiao, and won the victory.

古文：还为内都大官。
现代文：回朝任内都大官。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he was appointed to the post of Inner Metropolitan Magistrate.

古文：出除使持节，冀青二州刺史，假荥阳公。
现代文：出任使持节、墓直二州刺史，假荣阳公。
English: He was appointed as the envoy of the Jizhi Festival, the tomb of two states, and the false Rongyang.

古文：寻徵还，位特进。
现代文：不久被征召回朝，任命为特进。
English: He was soon called back to the North and appointed as a special envoy.

古文：复出为冀青二州刺史。
现代文：再次出任冀青二州刺史。
English: He once again served as the Jixing Erzhou chief historian.

古文：寻入为内都大官。
现代文：不久召入任内都大官。
English: He was soon called to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：从讨赫连昌，以功授荥阳公。
现代文：跟从讨伐赫连昌，因功被授予荣阳公。
English: He was awarded the title of Rongyang Gong for his contribution to the Herengchang Campaign.

古文：公主薨，复尚濩泽公主。
现代文：公主逝世，又娶濩泽公主为妻。
English: After the death of the princess, he married Princess Heze.

古文：又为都将，击大檀，大破之。
现代文：又任都将，攻打大檀，大获全胜。
English: Both of them attacked the large sandalwood and won a complete victory.

古文：还至渴侯山，遂讨东部高车于巳尼陂。又征平凉，并有功。
现代文：回师到渴侯山，于是到巳尼陂讨伐束部高车。又征讨平凉，都有功劳。
English: He went back to Mt. Thirst, and then went to Minya to fight against the logging of the Sokube high-speed railway. He also fought against the cooling of the climate, and he deserves credit for all of this.

古文：世祖将拜大肥为王，遇疾卒。
现代文：世担将要封左胆为王，却生病去世。
English: Shetan was going to make Zuoying king, but he fell ill and died.

古文：追赠中山王。
现代文：追赠为空山王。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of "Empty Mountain King."

古文：子贺，早卒。
现代文：儿子闾贺，未成年就去世了。
English: His son, Minho, died when he was a minor.

古文：大肥弟驎袭爵。
现代文：大胆的弟弟驎，继承爵位。
English: His bold younger brother, Zou, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：出为仇池镇将。
现代文：出任业电镇将。
English: He will take up the post of general manager of the power station.

古文：卒，无子。
现代文：去世，没有儿子。
English: He died without a son.

古文：弟凤，袭爵。
现代文：弟弟凤，继承爵位。
English: His younger brother Feng succeeded to the peerage.

古文：高宗时为内都大官，出为镇南将军。肆州刺史。
现代文：高宗时任内都大官，出任镇南将军、肆州刺史。
English: Gao Zong was a high-ranking official in the Inner Capital at the time, serving as Zhenan General and Wuzhou Historian.

古文：卒，无子，爵除。
现代文：去世，没有儿子，爵位废除。
English: He died without a son, and his title was abolished.

古文：尉拨，代人也。父那，濮阳太守。
现代文：尉拨，是代郡人，父亲尉那，是濮阳太守。
English: Fei Zhao is a representative of the county, and his father Fei Na is the governor of Shenyang.

古文：拨为太学生，募从兗州刺史罗忸击贼于陈汝，有功，赐爵介休男。
现代文：尉拨在太学读书时，应募跟从兖州刺史罗忸到陈辽两地攻打贼军，有功劳，被赐给爵位为介休昱。
English: When he was a student at Taishu, he was recruited to follow the rebel army from Zhangzhou to Chenliao, and was awarded a knighthood for his meritorious service.

古文：从讨和龙，迁虎贲帅，转千人军将。
现代文：跟从讨伐扭违，升任虎贲帅，改任千人军将。
English: He resigned from the crusade, was promoted to the commander of the Tiger Regiment, and became the commander of the Thousand-man Army.

古文：又从乐平王丕讨和龙。
现代文：又跟从乐干王元丕讨伐和龙。
English: He also followed Lekan Wang Yuanjun to fight against dragons.

古文：除凉州军将，击吐谷浑，获其人一千余落。
现代文：任凉州军将，攻打吐谷浑，俘获它的部众一千多家。
English: As commander of the Liangzhou Army, he attacked Tugu Hun and captured more than a thousand of its troops.

古文：后吐谷浑小将率三百余落来降，寻复亡叛，拨率骑追之，尽获而还。
现代文：后来吐谷运小将率领三百多家来投降，不久又叛逃，尉拨率领骑兵追赶，全部俘获而返回。
English: Later, the junior general Tu Gu Yun led more than three hundred soldiers to surrender, and soon defected again. The lieutenant led the cavalry in pursuit, and all of them were captured and returned.

古文：以功进爵为子。
现代文：因功升爵位为子。
English: He was knighted for his services.

古文：迁晋昌镇将，绥怀边民，甚著称绩。
现代文：升任置旦镇将，安抚关切边民，可称颂的政绩很显著。
English: He was promoted to the post of the mayor of Putian Town to appease the concerned border residents. His praiseworthy political achievements are remarkable.

古文：入为知臣监。
现代文：召回京城任命为知臣监。
English: He was called back to Kyoto and appointed as chizonshu (supervisor of vassals).

古文：出为杏城镇将。在任九年，大收民和，山民一千余家，上郡徙各庐水胡八百余落，尽附为民。
现代文：出任杏城镇将，在任九年，深得民众的信赖，山地居民一千多家、上郡徙、庐水胡人八百多村落，全部归附为百姓。
English: During his nine years in office, he has won the trust of the people. More than one thousand mountain residents, more than eight hundred villages of Shanggongyi and Shishui Hu people have all been attached to the people.

古文：高宗以拨清平有惠绩，赐以衣服。
现代文：直塞因显攫廉洁公正有值得称颂的政绩，赐给他衣服。
English: He gave him clothes for his praiseworthy political achievements in demonstrating honesty, integrity and fairness.

古文：显祖即位，为北征都将。
现代文：显祖即位，任北征都将。
English: Emperor Xianzu ascended to the throne, and he will lead the Northern Expedition.

古文：复为都将，南攻悬瓠，破刘彧将朱湛之水军三千人，拜悬瓠镇将，加员外散骑常侍，进爵安城侯。
现代文：又任都将，向南攻打壁越，打败刘垄的将领苤醒的水军三千人，被任命为悬瓠镇将，加授员外散骑常侍，升爵位为宣越堡。
English: In addition, the commander-in-chief of the three thousand sailors who went south to attack and defeat Liu Reng, the general of Liu Reng, was appointed as the commander of the town of Huanqian, and the non-commissioned officers and non-commissioned officers were added, and the knighthood was promoted to Xuan Yue Fort.

古文：显祖嘉其声效，复赐衣服。
现代文：题担嘉许他的善声和贡献，又赐给他衣服。
English: The title bearer praised him for his good voice and contribution, and gave him clothes.

古文：转平南将军，北豫州刺史。
现代文：改任平南将军、北豫州刺史。
English: He was reappointed as the general of Pingnan Province and the governor of North Henan Province.

古文：后洛州民田智度聚党谋逆。
现代文：后来逊蛙百姓田智度聚集党众谋反。
English: Later, the inferior peasant Tian Zhidu gathered the party to rebel.

古文：诏拨乘传发豫州兵与洛州刺史丘顿击之，获智度，送京师。
现代文：诏令尉攫乘坐驿车去调动逸业军队与盗州刺史丘顿一道攻击叛乱者，俘获翌庐，送往京师。
English: Zhao ordered his lieutenant Zeng to take a stagecoach to mobilize the Yingye army to attack the rebels together with the bandit Schutton, captured the next stagecoach, and sent it to the Beijing division.

古文：拨卒，赠冠军将军，谥敬侯。
现代文：尉拨去世，被追赠为冠军将军，谧号敬侯。
English: He died and was posthumously awarded the title of Champion General. His posthumous name was Jinhou.

古文：陆真，代人也。
现代文：陆真，是代郡乸人。
English: Lu Zhen is the deputy county magistrate.

古文：父洛侯，秦州长史。
现代文：父亲洛侯，秦州长史。
English: His father was Luo Hou, the governor of Qin.

古文：真少善骑射。
现代文：陆真年轻时擅长骑马射箭。
English: When Lu Zhen was young, he was good at horseback riding and archery.

古文：世祖初，以真膂力过人，拜内三郎。
现代文：世担初年，因壁真体力过人，授任内三郎。
English: In the first year of the school's existence, he was given the position of Uchisaburo due to his extraordinary physical strength.

古文：数从征伐，所在摧锋陷阵，前后以功屡受赏赐。
现代文：多次跟从征伐，冲锋陷阵，前后屡次因功受赏赐。
English: He has repeatedly followed the conquest, charged into battle, and has repeatedly been rewarded for his service.

古文：真君中，从讨蠕蠕，以功赐爵关内侯。
现代文：真君年间，跟从讨伐蠕蠕，因功赐爵关内侯。
English: During the reign of Zhenjun, he followed the crusade against the Cum Cum and was awarded the title of Lord of Guanai for his service.

古文：后攻悬瓠，登楼临射城中，弦不虚发。
现代文：后来攻打悬瓠，登楼向城中射箭，箭不虚发。
English: Later, he attacked the hanging anchor, climbed the tower and shot arrows into the city. The arrows did not go astray.

古文：刘义隆将王玄谟众数万人寇滑台，真从世祖讨之。
现代文：刘义隆的将领王玄谟的军队几万人侵犯滑台，陆真跟从世祖讨伐他。
English: Liu Yilong's general Wang Xuanmu's army of tens of thousands invaded the slide, and Lu Zhen followed his ancestor to fight him.

古文：夜与数人乘小船突玄谟军，入城抚慰，登城巡行贼营中，乃还渡河。
现代文：夜间与几个人乘小船突破玄谟军队的防御，入城安抚军民，登上城墙，巡视贼军营垒，然后横渡黄河返回。
English: At night, he and several people took a small boat to break through the defense of the Xuanmu army, entered the city to appease the soldiers and civilians, climbed the city wall, inspected the camp of the thief army, and then crossed the Yellow River to return.

古文：至明，玄谟败走。
现代文：到天亮，玄谟战败逃跑。
English: By dawn, the Xuanmous had fled in defeat.

古文：从驾至江，真再破贼军，拜建武将军，石城子。
现代文：跟从皇上到达长江，陆真两次打败贼军，被授予建武将军、石城子。
English: After arriving at the Yangtze River from the emperor, Lu Zhen defeated the thief army twice and was awarded General Jianwu and Shichengzi.

古文：还攻盱眙，真功居多。
现代文：回师攻打盱眙，陆真的功劳占多数。
English: Lu Zhengyi is credited with most of the achievements.

古文：迁给事中，典太仓事。
现代文：升任给事中，掌管太仓事务。
English: During his promotion, he was in charge of Taicang affairs.

古文：高宗即位，拜冠军将军，进爵都昌侯。
现代文：高宗即位，被任命为冠军将军，升爵位为都昌侯。
English: Gao Zong ascended the throne, was appointed champion general, and was raised to the peerage as Duke of Changzhou.

古文：迁散骑常侍，选部尚书。
现代文：升任散骑常侍，选部尚书。
English: He was promoted to the rank of straggler, and became a member of the Selection Committee.

古文：时丁零数千家寇窃并定，真与并州刺史乞伏成龙自乐平东入，与定州刺史许崇之并力讨灭。
现代文：此时丁零人几千家抢劫并定二州，陆真与并州刺史乞伏成龙从乐平东边进军，与定州刺史许崇之合力讨伐直至平定。
English: At this time, Ding Zi's men robbed several thousand homes and annexed the two prefectures. Lu Zhen and the governor of the annexed prefectures, Xing Chenglong, marched from the eastern side of Leping and joined forces with the governor of the annexed prefectures, Xu Chong, to fight until they were subdued.

古文：从驾巡东海，以真为宁西将军。
现代文：跟从皇上巡察东海，被任命为宁西将军。
English: He followed the emperor to inspect the East China Sea and was appointed general of Ningxi Province.

古文：寻迁安西将军，长安镇将，假建平公。
现代文：不久升任安西将军、长安镇将，被授予临时的建平公。
English: He was soon promoted to General of Anxi and General of Chang'an Town, and was awarded the temporary title of Jianping.

古文：胡贼帅贺略孙聚众千余人叛于石楼。
现代文：胡贼首领贺略孙聚集一千多人在石楼反叛。
English: The leader of the Ku Klux Klan, Hallakson, gathered more than a thousand people to rebel in the stone tower.

古文：真击破之，杀五百余人。
现代文：陆真打败他们，杀死五百多人。
English: Lu Zhen defeated them and killed more than five hundred people.

古文：是时，初置长蛇镇，真率众筑城，未讫，而氐豪仇傉檀等反叛，氐民咸应，其众甚盛。
现代文：逭时，刚刚设置长蛇镇，陆真率领军队筑城，未完工，而氐人首领仇伥檀等反叛，氐人都响应，人数很多。
English: At that time, Changjia Town had just been set up. Lu Zhen led the army to build the city, which was not yet completed, and the leaders of the Xiongnu people rebelled against him. The Xiongnu people responded, and there were many of them.

古文：真击平之，杀四千余人，卒城长蛇而还。
现代文：陆真讨伐平定了他们，杀死四千多人，终于筑成长蛇城而后返回。
English: Lu Zhen's crusade pacified them, killed more than four thousand people, and finally built a snake city and then returned.

古文：东平王道符反于长安，杀雍州刺史鱼玄明，关中草草。
现代文：东平王道符在长安反叛，杀雍州刺史鱼玄明，关中骚动。
English: Dongping Wang Daofu rebelled in Chang'an, killed Yongzhou Zhishu Xuanming, and stirred up trouble in Guanzhong.

古文：以真为长安镇将，赐爵河南公。
现代文：任命陆真为长安镇将，赐给爵位为河南公。
English: Appointed Lu Zhen as the general of Chang'an Town and gave him the title of Henan Gong.

古文：长安兵民，素伏威信，真到，抚慰之，皆怡然安静。
现代文：长安军民，素来信服陆真的威望，陆真到任后，安抚存恤他们，使他们都欣然平静下来。
English: The military and people of Chang'an have always been convinced of Lu Zhen's prestige. After Lu Zhen took office, he appeased and pitied them, so that they all calmed down.

古文：咸阳民赵昌受刘彧署龙骧将军，扇动鄠、盭厔二县，聚党数百人据赤谷以叛。
现代文：咸阳百姓赵昌接受刘或的委任为龙骧将军，煽动鄂、整屋二县，聚集党徒几百人占据赤谷反叛。
English: Zhao Chang, a citizen of Xianyang, accepted Liu Yi's appointment as the general of Longyu, instigated two counties in Hubei and Jieya, and gathered several hundred party members to occupy the rebellion in Akaya.

古文：真与雍州刺史刘邈讨平之，昌单骑走免。
现代文：陆真与雍州刺史刘邈讨伐平定了他们，赵昌独自骑马逃脱。
English: Lu Zhen and Liu Ye, the chief of Yongzhou, fought and defeated them, and Zhao Chang escaped alone on horseback.

古文：后鄠县民王稚兄弟，聚二千余人，招引赵昌。
现代文：后来鄂县百姓王稚兄弟，聚集二千多人，联合趟昌。
English: Later, the people of E County, the Wang Wuchang brothers, gathered more than two thousand people and jointly went to Wuchang.

古文：始平、石安、池阳、灵武四县人皆应之，众至五千，据治谷堡。
现代文：始平、石安、池阳、灵武四县人都起来响应，人数达到五千，占据治谷堡。
English: People from four counties, Shihei, Shek'an, Chiyang, and Lingwu, rose up in response. The number of people reached five thousand, occupying Zhigu Fort.

古文：时诏南郡王李惠等领步骑六千讨昌。
现代文：当时诏令南郡王李惠等率领步兵和骑兵六千讨伐赵昌。
English: At that time, the emperor ordered the king of Nan County, Li Hui, to lead six thousand infantry and cavalry to fight against Zhao Chang.

古文：真以大军未至，虑昌滋蔓，与雍州刺史刘邈讨昌。
现代文：陆真因大军未到，担心赵昌发展起来，与雍州刺史刘邈讨伐赵昌。
English: Lu Zhen was worried about Zhao Chang's development because the large army had not arrived, so he fought Zhao Chang with Liu Xi, the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：昌出营拒战，真击破之，斩昌及贼首三千余级，传首京师，并诛其党与七百余人，获男女一千余口。
现代文：趟昌出营抗击，陆真打败他们，斩取赵昌及贼人首级三千多，把首级传送京师，并且杀戮他的同党七百多人，俘获男女一千多人。
English: Wuchang went out of the camp to resist, Lu Zhen defeated them, cut off more than three thousand heads of Zhao Chang and thieves, transferred the heads to Beijing Division, and killed more than seven hundred of his fellow party members, and captured more than one thousand men and women.

古文：雍州民夷，莫不震伏。
现代文：雍州民众，无不惊惧降服。
English: People of Yongzhou, fearlessly surrender.

古文：在镇数年，甚著威称。
现代文：任镇将几年，功德和声誉很显著。
English: He has served the town for several years, and his merits and reputation are remarkable.

古文：延兴二年卒。
现代文：延兴二年去世。
English: Yanxing died two years later.

古文：归葬京师，谥曰烈。
现代文：尸体运回京师安葬，谧号为烈。
English: The body was transported back to Beijing for burial. His posthumous name was Liu Rong.

古文：子延，字契胡提，颇有气干，袭爵河南公。
现代文：儿子陆延，字契胡提，很有气魄和才干，继承爵位为河南公。
English: Lu Yan's son, surnamed Qi Hu Ti, was very spirited and talented, and succeeded to the title of Henan Gong.

古文：累迁历长安镇将，拜安南将军，济州刺史。
现代文：多次升迁做到长安镇将，任安南将军、济州刺史。
English: He was promoted many times and became the general of Chang'an Town, the general of Annan, and the chief historian of Jeju.

古文：例降，改封汝阳侯。
现代文：依例降低爵位，改封为汝阳侯。
English: As usual, his title was reduced and he was given the title of Ruyang Marquis.

古文：京兆王愉为徐州刺史，以延为愉府司马，带彭城内史。正始初，除武川镇将。
现代文：京兆王元愉任徐州刺史，任用陆延为王府司马，兼任彭城内史正始初年，任武川镇将。
English: Jing Zhao Wang Yuan Yu was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou, appointed Lu Yan as the governor of Wangfu, and also served as the first year of the history of Pengcheng, and served as the general of Wuchuan Town.

古文：入除太仆卿。
现代文：召入任太仆卿。
English: Entered the capital and assumed the post of Taihuko-kyo.

古文：都督沃野、武川、怀朔三镇诸军事，安北将军，怀朔镇大将，加散骑常侍。
现代文：都督沃野、武川、怀朔三镇诸军事、安北将军、怀朔镇大将，加授散骑常侍。
English: The governors of the three towns of Wouno, Takekawa, and Waisaku, the military, the general of Anbei, the general of Waisaku, and the non-commissioned cavalrymen.

古文：正光初，拜金紫光禄大夫，复除太仆卿。
现代文：正光初年，任金紫光禄大夫，又担任太仆卿。
English: In the first year of Zheng Guang, he was appointed as the doctor of Jin Zi Guang Lu, and also served as the eunuch.

古文：受使绥慰秀容，为牧子所害。
现代文：受派遣抚慰秀容，被放牧的人杀害。
English: He was dispatched to soothe Hideyo and was killed by a herdsman.

古文：弟什夤，太府卿，平东将军，光禄大夫。
现代文：弟弟什夤，任太府卿、平东将军、光禄大夫。
English: His younger brother, Shifu, was appointed daifu-kyo, Pingdong general, and Guanglu doctor.

古文：建义初，拜都官尚书。
现代文：建义初年，任都官尚书。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, he was appointed as the official of the capital.

古文：卒于平南将军，光禄大夫。
现代文：任平南将军、光禄大夫时去世。
English: He died while serving as the general of Pingnan and the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：吕洛拔，代人也。
现代文：吕洛拔，是代郡人。
English: Lulobar is a representative of the county.

古文：曾祖渴侯，昭成时率户五千归国。
现代文：曾祖渴侯，昭成帝时率领五千产人归顺本朝。
English: Zengzu thirsted for power, and when Emperor Zhao was crowned, he led five thousand progenitors to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：祖肥，濮阳太守。
现代文：祖父吕肥，是濮阳太守。
English: His grandfather, Lv Fei, was the ruler of Shenyang.

古文：父匹知，世祖时为西部长，荥阳公。
现代文：父亲匹知，世祖时任西部长、封荣阳公。
English: His father, Pichih, was the minister of the west at the time, and his ancestor, Fong Rongyangg.

古文：洛拔以壮勇知名，高宗末为平原镇都将。
现代文：洛拔以刚勇闻名，高宗末年任平原镇都将。
English: Lobar was famous for his bravery, and in the last years of the reign of Emperor Gaozong, the town of Pingyuan was destroyed.

古文：刘彧徐州刺史薜安都归诚，请援。
现代文：刘或的徐州刺史薛安都归顺，请求援助。
English: Liu Bei, Xuzhou, Zhishi, and Xue'an all surrendered and asked for help.

古文：诏遣尉元率众救之，洛拔随元入彭城。
现代文：有韶令派遣尉元率领军队救援他，洛拔跟随尉元进入彭城。
English: There was a royal order to send a lieutenant to lead the army to rescue him, and Lobar followed the lieutenant into Pengcheng.

古文：彧将张永遣将王茂之领兵五千向武原，援其运车。
现代文：刘或的将领张永派遣部将王茂之率领五千士卒前往武原，救助他的运输车辆。
English: Liu Bei's general Zhang Yong dispatched Wang Maozhi and 5,000 soldiers to Wuyuan to rescue his transport vehicle.

古文：元遣洛拔率骑诣武原击之。
现代文：尉元派遣洛拔率领骑兵前往武原攻打他。
English: He sent Lobat to attack him in Takehara with his cavalry.

古文：格战二日，手杀九人，夺贼运车二百余乘，牛二百五十头。
现代文：搏斗两天，亲手杀敌九人，夺取贼军运输车辆二百余辆，牛二百五十头。
English: They fought for two days, killed nine of the enemy with their own hands, and captured more than 200 transport vehicles and 250 head of cattle.

古文：仍共击张永，大败之。
现代文：于是共同攻打张永，大败他。
English: As a result, they jointly attacked Zhang Yong and defeated him.

古文：赐爵成武侯，加建义将军。
现代文：赐爵成武侯，加授建义将军。
English: He was given the title of Baron of Wuhou and the title of General of Jianyi.

古文：年五十六，卒。
现代文：五十六岁时去世。
English: He died at the age of fifty-six.

古文：长子文祖，显祖以其勋臣子，补龙牧曹奏事中散。
现代文：长子文祖，显祖因他是功臣的儿子，选补为龙牧曹奏事中散。
English: The eldest son, Wen Zu, and Xian Zu, because he was the son of a meritorious subject, were chosen to be the Dragon Herdsmen.

古文：以牧产不滋，坐徙于武川镇。
现代文：因饲养的牲畜没有增长，被判刑流放到武川镇。
English: He was sentenced to be exiled to the town of Takekawa because his livestock did not grow.

古文：后文祖以旧语译注皇诰，辞义通辩，超授阳平太守。
现代文：后来文祖用旧语翻译注解《皇诰》，辞义流畅，被越级任命为阳平太守。
English: Later, Bunzu translated and annotated the "Imperial Rescript" in the old language, his words were fluent, and he was appointed Yangping Dazhong by Yue.

古文：未拜，转为外都曹奏事中散。
现代文：还未就任，改任外都曹奏事中散。
English: He had not yet taken office, and was replaced by Gaidu Cao.

古文：后坐事伏法。
现代文：后来因事获罪伏法。
English: He was later convicted for the incident.

古文：史臣曰：仁人之言，必有博利。
现代文：史臣曰：仁者之言，必然利于众人。
English: Shichen said: The words of a benevolent person are inevitably beneficial to everyone.

古文：参合之役，威罚实行，盖王建之罪欤？
现代文：参金堕之战，大量杀戮俘虏，是鱼叁的罪过吗?
English: Is it the fisherman's fault for participating in the War of the Fallen and killing a large number of captives?

古文：安同异类之人，智识入用，任等时俊，当有由哉！
现代文：塞回是外族人，因有智力见识而得到重用，官职等同于当时本族的俊杰，必定是有理由的。
English: There must be a reason why Jie Hui, a foreigner, was given a higher position because of his intelligence and insight, and his official position was equal to that of Junjie, who was from his own ethnic group at that time.

古文：颉擒赫连昌，摧义隆众，遂为名将，未易轻也。
现代文：安颉俘获赫连昌，挫败义隆的军队，成为名将，是不容易的。
English: It was not easy for Antao to capture Helianchang, defeat Yilong's army, and become a famous general.

古文：楼伏连，丘堆，娥清，俱以壮勇，征伐四克。
现代文：楼伏连、丘堆、娥清，都因为壮健勇猛，征战讨伐处处获胜。
English: Loufulian, Qiudui, and Eqing were all strong and brave, and they won everywhere in the campaign.

古文：刘尼忠国翼主，岂徒骁猛之用乎？
现代文：刘尼忠于国家、辅佐君主，岂衹是勇猛?
English: Liu Ni is loyal to the country and supports the monarch. Is he brave?

古文：奚眷将略致位，不能以功名自终。
现代文：奚眷凭用兵的谋略获得官位，可惜不能善终。
English: Yan Yan obtained his official position through the stratagem of using soldiers, but unfortunately it did not end well.

古文：车伊洛自远宅心，异凡戎矣。
现代文：车伊洛从远方诚心归顺朝廷，与普通的西方少数民族不同啊。
English: Cheylo sincerely submitted to the imperial court from afar, unlike ordinary Western ethnic minorities.

古文：宿石等并忠勤勇略，有将帅之才，自致青云，岂徒然也？
现代文：宿石等人都忠诚、勇敢有谋略，有将帅的才能，凭个人努力获得显要的地位，哪裹是无缘无故的呢。
English: They are all loyal, brave, and resourceful. They have the ability to be generals, and have achieved a prominent position through their own efforts. There is no reason for this.

