古文：孙静字幼台，坚季弟也。
现代文：孙静，字幼台，是孙坚的三弟。
English: Sun Jing, also known as Yu Tai, is the third brother of Sun Jian.

古文：坚始举事，静纠合乡曲及宗室五六百人以为保障，众咸附焉。
现代文：孙坚刚兴兵时，孙静集合乡里及宗族子弟共五六百人作为基础部队，大家都依附他。
English: When Sun Jiangang raised an army, Sun Jing gathered a total of five or six hundred people from the village and the children of the clan as the basic troops. Everyone depended on him.

古文：策破刘繇，定诸县，进攻会稽，遣人请静，静将家属与策会于钱唐。
现代文：孙策攻破刘繇，平定各县，进攻会稽，派人迎接孙静，孙静带着家属在钱塘和孙策会面。
English: Sun Ce broke through Liu Ye, pacified all counties, attacked Cui Jing, sent people to meet Sun Jing, and Sun Jing and his family met with Sun Ce in Qiantang.

古文：是时太守王朗拒策於固陵，策数度水战，不能克。
现代文：当时钱塘太守王朗在固陵抗击孙策，孙策几次渡水作战，也未能攻克。
English: At that time, Wang Lang, the governor of Qiantang, fought against Sun Ce in Guling. Sun Ce fought several times across the water, but failed to conquer the city.

古文：静说策曰： 朗负阻城守，难可卒拔。查渎南去此数十里，而道之要径也，宜从彼据其内，所谓攻其无备、出其不意者也。
现代文：孙策说： 好！ 于是假装下令全军说： 最近连日下雨，水很混浊，兵士喝了这些水大多腹痛，命令赶快准备数百口瓦缸澄清饮水。 
English: Sun Ce said, "Good!" Then he pretended to give an order to the whole army, saying, "Recently, it has rained for days on end, the water is very muddy, and most of the soldiers have stomachaches after drinking this water. The order is to quickly prepare hundreds of crock pots to clarify the drinking water."

古文：吾当自帅众为军前队，破之必矣。 策曰： 善。 乃诈令军中曰： 顷连雨水浊，兵饮之多腹痛，令促具罂缶数百口澄水。 至昏暮，罗以然火诳朗，便分军夜投查渎道，袭高迁屯。
现代文：至黄昏时分，准备了很多火堆迷惑王朗，随即分兵连夜赶赴查渎，攻打高迁屯。
English: At dusk, a lot of fires were prepared to confuse Wang Lang, and then the detachment of soldiers rushed overnight to investigate and attack Gao Qiantun.

古文：朗大惊，遣故丹杨太守周昕等帅兵前战。
现代文：王朗大惊，派原来丹杨太守周昕等人率军前来迎战。
English: Wang Lang was shocked and sent the former Tanyang governor Zhou Jun and others to lead the army to meet the battle.

古文：策破昕等，斩之，遂定会稽。
现代文：孙策攻破周昕等并斩杀了他们，于是会稽郡平定。
English: Sun Ce defeated Zhou Qi and others and killed them, so the county was pacified.

古文：表拜静为奋武校尉，欲授之重任，静恋坟墓宗族，不乐出仕，求留镇守。
现代文：孙策上表请任孙静为奋武校尉，想要委以重任，但孙静留念祖宗生活安息的故地，不喜欢出外作官，请求留下镇守。
English: Sun Ce asked Sun Jing to be appointed as the school captain of Fenwu on the table, and wanted to entrust him with an important task, but Sun Jing remembered the ancestral place of life and rest, did not like to go out to work as an official, and asked to stay as a town guard.

古文：策从之。
现代文：孙策答应了他的要求。
English: Sun Ce obeyed him.

古文：权统事，就迁昭义中郎将，终於家。
现代文：孙权主管事务后，就地升任孙静为昭义中郎将，后来在家乡终老。
English: After Sun Quan was put in charge of affairs, Sun Jing was promoted to the position of Shao Yi's middle son, and later died in his hometown.

古文：有五子，暠、瑜、皎、奂、谦。
现代文：孙静有五个儿子，即孙詗、孙瑜、孙皎、孙奂、孙谦。
English: Sun Jing has five sons, namely Sun Yu, Sun Yu, Sun Yu, Sun Yu, and Sun Qian.

古文：暠三子：绰、超、恭。
现代文：孙詗有三个儿子，即孙绰、孙超、孙恭。
English: Sun Yat-sen had three sons, namely, Sun Zuo, Sun Chao, and Sun Qiong.

古文：超为偏将军。
现代文：孙超担任偏将军。
English: Sun Chao served as a partial general.

古文：恭生峻。绰生綝。
现代文：孙恭生孙峻；孙绰生孙綝。
English: Sun Qiong gave birth to Sun Shun; Sun Cao gave birth to Sun Yao.

古文：瑜字仲异，以恭义校尉始领兵众。
现代文：孙瑜，字仲异，以恭义校尉身份开始统帅部队。
English: Sun Yu, with a different last name, began commanding the troops as Captain Qiu Yi.

古文：是时宾客诸将多江西人，瑜虚心绥抚，得其欢心。
现代文：当时宾客和各位将官大多是长江以西之人，孙瑜虚心地安抚大家，大家都很拥戴他。
English: At that time, most of the guests and generals were from west of the Yangtze River. Sun Yu humbly appeased everyone, and everyone loved him.

古文：建安九年，领丹杨太守，为众所附，至万馀人。
现代文：建安九年，孙瑜兼任丹杨太守，众人前来归附，部队扩大至一万多人。
English: In the ninth year of Jianan, when Sun Yu also served as the governor of Danyang, many people came to join him, and the troops expanded to more than ten thousand.

古文：加绥远将军。
现代文：他被加授为绥远将军。
English: He was given the additional title of General Zouyuan.

古文：十一年，与周瑜共讨麻、保二屯，破之。
现代文：建安十一年，孙瑜与周瑜共同征讨麻屯、保屯，大获全胜。
English: In the eleventh year of Jianan, Sun Yu and Zhou Yu jointly solicited Ma Tun and Baotun, and won a great victory.

古文：后从权拒曹公於濡须，权欲交战，瑜说权持重，权不从，军果无功。
现代文：他后来跟随孙权在濡须抗击曹操，孙权想出兵交战，孙瑜劝孙权应守住眼前局势，孙权没有采纳，大军果然无功而返。
English: He later followed Sun Quan to fight against Cao Cao in Wusu. Sun Quan wanted to send troops to fight. Sun Yu advised Sun Quan to keep the current situation. Sun Quan did not accept, and the army returned without any results.

古文：迁奋威将军，领郡如故，自溧阳徙屯牛渚。
现代文：朝廷升任孙瑜为奋威将军，依然兼任郡守，从溧阳迁到牛渚驻守。
English: The imperial court promoted Sun Yu to General Fenwei, still concurrently serving as county governor, and moved from Shenyang to Cowshed.

古文：瑜以永安人饶助为襄安长，无锡人颜连为居巢长，使招纳庐江二郡，各得降附。
现代文：孙瑜任命永安人饶助为襄安县县长，无锡人颜连为居巢县县长，让他们招纳庐江的两郡，都得到依附之人。
English: Sun Yu appointed the Yong'an man Rao Jie as the head of Xiang'an County, and the Wuxi man Yan Lian as the head of Jiuye County, and let them recruit the two counties in the Minjiang River, and they both gained adherents.

古文：济阴人马普笃学好古，瑜厚礼之，使二府将吏子弟数百人就受业，遂立学官，临飨讲肄。
现代文：济阴人马普勤恳学习，喜好古制，孙瑜对他非常优厚，让两个郡府中几百名将领官吏的子弟跟随他学习，于是建立学官，置备饮食讲堂。
English: Ma Pu, a resident of Jilin, studied diligently and liked the old system. Sun Yu was very generous to him and allowed the children of hundreds of generals and officials in the two county capitals to study with him. He then established a school and prepared a dining hall.

古文：是时诸将皆以军务为事，而瑜好乐坟典，虽在戎旅，诵声不绝。
现代文：当时各将领都将军务看得最重，而孙瑜却喜好典籍，虽然身在郡中，但诵读之声从未断绝。
English: At that time, all generals attached great importance to military affairs, but Sun Yu liked classics. Although he was in the county, he never stopped reading.

古文：年三十九，建安二十年卒。
现代文：建安二十年，孙瑜三十九岁时去世。
English: Twenty years after the founding of Jianan, Sun Yu passed away at the age of 39.

古文：瑜五子：弥、熙、耀、曼、纮。
现代文：孙瑜有五个儿子，即孙弥、孙熙、孙火翟、孙曼、孙纮。
English: Sun Yu had five sons, namely, Sun Ya, Sun Xi, Sun Huo, Sun Man and Sun Yao.

古文：曼至将军，封侯。
现代文：孙曼官至将军，被封侯。
English: Sun Man rose to the rank of general and was given the title of lord.

古文：孙皎字叔朗，始拜护军校尉，领众二千馀人。
现代文：孙皎，字叔朗，刚开始被任命为护军校尉，领兵二千多人。
English: Sun Yat-sen, nicknamed "Uncle Lang," had just been appointed as a lieutenant of the escorting army, leading more than two thousand soldiers.

古文：是时曹公数出濡须，皎每赴拒，号为精锐。
现代文：当时曹操多次出兵濡须，孙皎常常前去迎击，都号称精锐之师。
English: At that time, Cao Cao sent out troops several times, and Sun Yat-sen often went to meet the attack, both of which were known as the elite division.

古文：迁都护征虏将军，代程普督夏口。
现代文：后升任都护征虏将军，替代程普督管夏口。
English: Later, he was promoted to the general of garrisoning and conscripting troops, replacing Cheng Pu Guan and Xia Kou.

古文：黄盖及兄瑜卒，又并其军。
现代文：黄盖和孙皎哥哥孙瑜去世后，孙皎收编了他们的部队。
English: After Huang Gai and Sun Xuan's brother Sun Yu passed away, Sun Xuan reorganized their troops.

古文：赐沙羡、云杜、南新市、竟陵为奉邑，自置长吏。
现代文：朝廷赐沙羡、云杜、南新市、竟陵为他的食邑，自己设置官属。
English: The imperial court gave him Shasen, Yundu, Nanxin City, and Jingsling as his food towns, and he set up his own officials.

古文：轻财能施，善於交结，与诸葛瑾至厚，委庐江刘靖以得失，江夏李允以众事，广陵吴硕、河南张梁以军旅，而倾心亲待，莫不自尽。
现代文：孙皎轻视财物乐善好施，善于结朋交友，与诸葛瑾关系最好。他将处理过失之事委任庐江人刘靖，江夏人李允负责一般事务，广陵人吴硕、河南人张梁负责军旅大事，孙皎对他们倾心相待，他们都竭心尽力。
English: Sun Yat-sen despised wealth, loved kindness, was good at making friends, and had the best relationship with Zhuge Liang. He would deal with mistakes by appointing Liu Jing from Minjiang, Li Yun from Jiangxia to be in charge of general affairs, Wu Shuo from Guangling, and Zhang Liang from Henan to be in charge of military affairs. Sun Yat-sen was devoted to them, and they all did their best.

古文：皎尝遣兵候获魏边将吏美女以进皎，皎更其衣服送还之，下令曰： 今所诛者曹氏，其百姓何罪？
现代文：孙皎曾派兵伺机抓获魏国边境守将官吏及美女进献给自己，然后让这些人更换衣服并送他们回去，同时下令说： 今日所要诛讨的是曹氏，他的百姓有什么罪？
English: Sun Yat-sen once sent soldiers to wait for an opportunity to capture the Wei border guards and present the officials and beautiful women to himself, then let these people change their clothes and send them back, and ordered: Today we are going to discuss the Cao clan, what are the sins of his people?

古文：自今以往，不得击其老弱。 由是江淮间多归附者。
现代文：从此以后，不许攻击魏国的老弱百姓。 所以江淮一带的人大多归附他。
English: From then on, he was not allowed to attack the old and weak people of Wei, so most of the people in the area around the Yangtze River and Huai River joined him.

古文：尝以小故与甘宁忿争，或以谏宁，宁曰： 臣子一例，征虏虽公子，何可专行侮人邪！
现代文：他曾因为小事与甘宁大加争吵，有人劝说甘宁，甘宁说： 作为人臣大家是一样的，征虏将军虽是公子，又怎么能独断专行侮辱人呢？
English: He had a big quarrel with Gannin over a small matter. Someone persuaded Gannin, and Gannin said: As a vassal, we are all the same. Although the conscript general is a nobleman, how can he arbitrarily insult people?

古文：吾值明主，但当输效力命，以报所天，诚不能随俗屈曲矣。 权闻之，以书让皎曰： 自吾与北方为敌，中间十年，初时相持年小，今者且三十矣。
现代文：我效忠明主，只当竭尽全力，以报答君主厚遇，确实不能世俗般地屈从无理之人！ 孙权得知后，写信责备孙皎说： 自从我与北方为敌，中间相隔十年了，起初与北方相持时你还年小，现在已将近三十的人。
English: After Sun Quan learned of this, he wrote a letter to rebuke Sun Yao, saying, "Since I became an enemy of the North, there has been a gap of ten years between us. At the beginning, when I was at odds with the North, you were still young. Now, you are nearly thirty years old.

古文：孔子言 三十而立 ，非但谓五经也。
现代文：孔子有言 三十而立 ，不只是指学习五经的事。
English: Confucius said, "Stand up at the age of thirty," and he wasn't just referring to learning the Five Classics.

古文：授卿以精兵，委卿以大任，都护诸将於千里之外，欲使如楚任昭奚恤，扬威於北境，非徒相使逞私志而已。
现代文：将部队交给你统领，将重任交给你担负，在千里之外统领各将领，是想你如楚国任用昭奚恤一样，在北部边境扬名立威，不是白白地让你放纵个人意志。
English: Handing over the troops to you as commander-in-chief, handing over the heavy responsibilities to you to shoulder, and commanding the generals thousands of miles away, is to let you make a name for yourself on the northern border, just as Chu appointed Zhaojun. It is not in vain to let you indulge your personal will.

古文：近闻卿与甘兴霸饮，因酒发作，侵陵其人，其人求属吕蒙督中。
现代文：最近听说你与甘兴霸饮酒，因酒醉发作，侵犯了他，他请求归属吕蒙管辖。
English: Recently, I heard that you were drinking with Gan Xingba, and because you were drunk, you assaulted him, and he asked to be under the jurisdiction of Liumeng.

古文：此人虽粗豪，有不如人意时，然其较略大丈夫也。
现代文：此人虽说粗鲁豪放，有不尽人意的地方，然而他总还算是个大丈夫。
English: Although this person is rude and arrogant, there are unsatisfactory places, but he is still okay.

古文：吾亲之者，非私之也。
现代文：我亲近他，不是偏爱他。
English: I'm close to him, I don't favour him.

古文：我亲爱之，卿疏憎之；卿所为每与吾违，其可久乎？
现代文：我亲近爱护他，你却疏远憎恶他，你所做的事经常和我相反，难道能长久吗？
English: I am close to him and love him, but you are distant and hate him. What you do is often contrary to me. Can it last?

古文：夫居敬而行简，可以临民；爱人多容，可以得众。
现代文：身处家中待人以敬，行事简明，就可以治理百姓；亲爱他人，多加包容，就能得到民心。
English: If you treat people with respect at home and act concisely, you can govern the people; if you love others and are more tolerant, you can win the hearts of the people.

古文：二者尚不能知，安可董督在远，御寇济难乎？
现代文：对此二事都不理解，怎么能够率统大军在远地抵御敌人、解救危难呢？
English: They do not understand either of these two things. How can they lead a large army to resist the enemy in a distant land and relieve the danger?

古文：卿行长大，特受重任，上有远方瞻望之视，下有部曲朝夕从事，何可恣意有盛怒邪？
现代文：你日益长大，特地授予重任，上有远方瞻望期待，下有将领日夜相随，怎么可以随性大怒呢？
English: You are growing up day by day, you are specially given important tasks, you have far-sighted expectations, and you have generals following you day and night. How can you be angry at will?

古文：人谁无过，贵其能改，宜追前愆，深自咎责。
现代文：人谁无过，贵在能改，应追记从前过失，深切地自我责备。
English: People who have no fault, but are able to change, should remember past mistakes and deeply reproach themselves.

古文：今故烦诸葛子瑜重宣吾意。
现代文：现特意麻烦诸葛子瑜加以宣示我的想法。
English: Now, I specially invite Zhuge Ziyu to come and announce my thoughts.

古文：临书摧怆，心悲泪下。 皎得书，上疏陈谢，遂与宁结厚。
现代文：写这封信时，我心中悲切，泪流满面。 孙皎得到书信后，上疏陈情请罪，于是与甘宁结下深厚交情。
English: When I wrote this letter, my heart was sad and my face was full of tears. After Sun Yat-sen received the letter, he pleaded guilty and made a deep friendship with Gan Ning.

古文：后吕蒙当袭南郡，权欲令皎与蒙为左右部大督，蒙说权曰： 若至尊以征虏能，宜用之；以蒙能，宜用蒙。
现代文：后来吕蒙将要攻打南郡，孙权想任命孙皎与吕蒙为左、右部大都督，吕蒙劝说孙权： 如果陛下认为征虏将军有这样的才能，就应该任用他；认为我吕蒙能行，就应该用我吕蒙。
English: Later, when Lv Meng was about to attack Nan County, Sun Quan wanted to appoint both Sun Ye and Lv Meng as the left and right provincial governors. Lv Meng persuaded Sun Quan: If Your Majesty thinks that the conscript general has such talent, you should appoint him; if you think that I, Lv Meng, can do it, you should use me, Lv Meng.

古文：昔周瑜、程普为左右部督，共攻江陵，虽事决於瑜，普自恃久将，且俱是督，遂共不睦，几败国事，此目前之戒也。 权寤，谢蒙曰： 以卿为大督，命皎为后继。 禽关羽，定荆州，皎有力焉。
现代文：过去周瑜、程普是左、右部都督，一起攻打江陵。虽说大事取决于周瑜，而程普自恃自己是沙场老将，而且都是都督，于是两人不和，险些误了国家大事，这正是目前需要警戒的！ 孙权幡然醒悟，向吕蒙道歉说： 让你任大都督，命孙皎做为后续部队。 后来擒获关羽，平定荆州，孙皎有很大功劳。
English: In the past, Zhou Yu and Cheng Pu were the left and right captains, and they attacked Jiangling together. Although major events depended on Zhou Yu, and Cheng Pu considered himself a veteran of the battlefield, and they were both captains, so the two did not get along and almost missed the national event, which is exactly what needs to be alerted at present! Sun Quan suddenly woke up and apologized to Lv Meng and said: Let you be the grand captain and order Sun Yu to be the follow-up force. Later, he won Guan Yu and pacified Jingzhou, and Sun Yu had great merit.

古文：建安二十四年卒。
现代文：建安二十四年，孙皎去世。
English: In the 24th year of Jian'an, Sun Yat-sen passed away.

古文：权追录其功，封子胤为丹杨侯。
现代文：孙权追记他的功劳，封他的儿子孙胤为丹杨侯。
English: Sun Quan remembered his merits and named his son Sun Yat-sen as the Prince of Danyang.

古文：胤卒，无子。
现代文：孙胤去世，无子。
English: Sun Yat-sen died without having any children.

古文：弟晞嗣，领兵，有罪自杀，国除。
现代文：孙胤的弟弟孙日希承袭了爵位，统领军队，后因有罪自杀，封地被取消。
English: Sun Yat-sen, the younger brother of Sun Yat-sen, inherited the title and led the army, but later committed suicide and the fief was abolished.

古文：弟咨、弥、仪皆将军，封侯。
现代文：孙胤另外几个弟弟孙咨、孙弥、孙仪都官至将军，被封侯。
English: Sun Yan's other brothers, Sun Zi, Sun Ya, and Sun Yi, all rose to the rank of general and were given the title of lord.

古文：咨羽林督，仪无难督。
现代文：孙咨为羽林督，孙仪为无难督。
English: Sun Zhao is the governor of the Ural Mountains, and Sun Yi is the governor of Mongolia.

古文：咨为滕胤所杀，仪为孙峻所害。
现代文：孙咨被滕胤所杀，孙仪被孙峻所害。
English: Sun Zhao was killed by Teng Yin, and Sun Yi was killed by Sun Jun.

古文：孙奂字季明。
现代文：孙奂，字季明。
English: Sun Hao, Zi Ming.

古文：兄皎既卒，代统其众，以扬武中郎将领江夏太守。
现代文：他的兄长孙皎去世后，他就接代孙皎统领部队，以扬武中郎将身份兼任江夏太守。
English: After the death of his elder brother Sun Yat-sen, he succeeded Sun Yat-sen as the commander of the troops, and concurrently served as the governor of Jiangxia with the identity of Yang Wuzhong.

古文：在事一年，遵皎旧迹，礼刘靖、李允、吴硕、张梁及江夏闾举等，并纳其善。
现代文：在官一年，遵循孙皎过去的言行，礼待刘靖、李允、吴硕、张梁以及江夏人闾举等，并接纳他们的长处。
English: During his first year in office, he followed the words and deeds of Sun Yat-sen in the past, treated Liu Jing, Li Yun, Wu Shuo, Zhang Liang and Jiangxia people with courtesy, and accepted their strengths.

古文：奂讷於造次而敏於当官，军民称之。
现代文：孙奂不善于表达而对事务很机敏，军队与百姓都称扬他。
English: Sun Yat-sen was not good at expressing himself and was very astute in affairs. Both the army and the people praised him.

古文：黄武五年，权攻石阳，奂以地主，使所部将军鲜于丹帅五千人先断淮道，自帅吴硕、张梁五千人为军前锋，降高城，得三将。
现代文：黄武五年，孙权攻打石阳，孙奂以当地主人身份，派自己的部将鲜于丹率领五千人先截断淮河水道，自己率领吴硕、张梁等五千人马做为大军的前锋，迫高城投降，得到三位将领。
English: In the fifth year of Huangwu, Sun Quan attacked Shiyang. As the local lord, Sun Yat-sen sent his own general, Sheng Yu Dan, to lead 5,000 men to cut off the Huai River waterway. He led Wu Shuo, Zhang Liang and other 5,000 men as the vanguard of the large army, forcing Gaocheng to surrender and gaining three generals.

古文：大军引还，权诏使在前往，驾过其军，见奂军陈整齐，权叹曰： 初吾忧其迟钝，今治军，诸将少能及者，吾无忧矣。 拜扬威将军，封沙羡侯。
现代文：大军返回，孙权下诏让孙奂的部队在前面停下，车驾经过孙奂的军队时，看到孙奂部队军容齐整，孙权感叹地说： 当初我担心他迟钝，现在他治军，将领中很少有人比得上他的，我没有担忧的了。 任命孙奂为扬威将军，封为沙羡侯。
English: When the large army returned, Sun Quan issued an edict to let Sun Yat-sen's troops stop in front of him. When driving past Sun Yat-sen's army, he saw that Sun Yat-sen's troops were well-equipped. Sun Quan said with regret: At first I was worried that he was slow, but now he is leading the army, and few generals are comparable to him, so I am not worried. Sun Yat-sen was appointed as Yang Wei General, and he was given the title of Sha En Hou.

古文：吴硕、张梁皆裨将军，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：吴硕、张梁都担任了裨将军，封爵关内侯。
English: Wu Shuo and Zhang Liang were both promoted to the rank of general and given the title of Kuanai marquis.

古文：奂亦爱乐儒生，复命部曲子弟就业，后仕进朝廷者数十人。
现代文：孙奂也喜欢读书人，又命令亲兵子弟都读书学习，后来这些人在朝中做官的有几十人。
English: Sun Yat-sen also liked people who read, and ordered his own soldiers to read and study. Later, there were dozens of these people working as officials in the court.

古文：年四十，嘉禾三年卒。
现代文：嘉禾四年，孙奂四十岁时去世。
English: Jiahe was four years old when Sun Yat-sen died at the age of forty.

古文：子承嗣，以昭武中郎将代统兵，领郡。
现代文：他的儿子孙承承袭爵位，以昭武中郎将身份接替孙奂领兵，兼职郡守。
English: His son, Sun Chung, inherited the title, and took over as Sun Yat-sen's military leader and part-time county governor as Akitake Churo.

古文：赤乌六年卒，无子，封承庶弟壹奉奂后，袭业为将。
现代文：赤乌六年，孙承去世，无子，孙权封孙承的庶弟孙壹承续孙奂，沿袭旧业担任将领。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of the Red Emperor Wu, Sun Zheng died without a son. Sun Zheng, the younger brother of Sun Zheng, succeeded Sun Zheng as general, continuing the old tradition.

古文：孙峻之诛诸葛恪也，壹与全熙、施绩攻恪弟公安督融，融自杀。
现代文：孙峻诛杀诸葛恪，孙壹与全熙、施绩攻打诸葛恪弟弟、公安督诸葛融，诸葛融自杀。
English: Sun Jun fought and killed Zhuge Ke, Sun Yi and Quan Xi fought and defeated Zhuge Ke's younger brother, the public security governor Zhuge Rong, and Zhuge Rong committed suicide.

古文：壹从镇南迁镇军，假节督夏口。
现代文：孙壹从镇南将军升为镇军将军、持符节，督管夏口。
English: Sun Yi was promoted from the general of Zhennan to the general of the town army, held the sign festival, and supervised Xiakou.

古文：及孙綝诛滕胤、吕据，据、胤皆壹之妹夫也，壹弟封又知胤、据谋，自杀。
现代文：等到孙綝诛杀滕胤、吕据，这两人都是孙壹的妹夫，孙壹的弟弟孙封又知道滕胤、吕据的计划，就自杀了。
English: When Sun Yat-sen killed Teng Yat and Lv Zu, both of them were Sun Yat-sen's brother-in-law. Sun Yat-sen's younger brother, Sun Feng, also knew about Teng Yat-sen's and Lv Zu's plans and committed suicide.

古文：綝遣朱异潜袭壹。
现代文：孙綝派朱异潜行偷袭孙壹。
English: Sun Yat-sen sent Zhu Yi to sneak up on Sun Yi.

古文：异至武昌，壹知其攻己，率部曲千馀口过将胤妻奔魏。
现代文：朱异出兵到武昌，孙壹知道他来攻打自己，率领一千多人士兵带着滕胤的妻子过江投奔魏国。
English: Zhu Yi sent troops to Wuchang, but Sun Yi knew that he had come to attack him. He led more than a thousand soldiers and took Teng Yin's wife across the river to Wei.

古文：魏以壹为车骑将军、仪同三司，封吴侯，以故主芳贵人邢氏妻之。
现代文：魏国任命孙壹为车骑将军、仪同三司，封为吴侯，把过去的魏主曹芳的贵人邢氏送给他为妻。
English: The State of Wei appointed Sun Yi as the General of Chariot and Cavalry, the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Decrees, and appointed him as the Wuhou, and gave him the wife of the noblemen of Cao Fang, the former ruler of Wei.

古文：邢美色妒忌，下不堪命，遂共杀壹及邢氏。
现代文：邢氏容貌漂亮，但内心妒嫉，手下人不堪忍受驱使，于是一起杀了孙壹及邢氏。
English: Shun's appearance was beautiful, but his heart was jealous, and his subordinates could not bear to be driven, so they killed Sun Yi and Shun together.

古文：壹入魏三年死。
现代文：孙壹入魏仅三年就死了。
English: Sun Yat-sen died only three years after his accession to the throne.

古文：孙贲字伯阳。
现代文：孙贲，字伯阳。
English: Sun Yat-sen, also known as Bo Yang.

古文：父羌字圣台，坚同产兄也。
现代文：他的父亲孙羌，字圣台，是孙坚的孪生哥哥。
English: His father, Sun Yat-sen, was the twin brother of Sun Jian.

古文：贲早失二亲，弟辅婴孩，贲自赡育，友爱甚笃。
现代文：孙贲早年父母就去世了，弟弟孙辅还是个婴儿，孙贲自己抚养弟弟，两兄弟情义非常深厚。
English: Sun Yat-sen's parents died early in his life. His younger brother, Sun Fu, was still a baby. Sun Yat-sen raised his younger brother himself. The two brothers were very close.

古文：为郡督邮守长。
现代文：孙贲做过郡里督邮、县长。
English: Sun Yat-sen served as the county postmaster and county governor.

古文：坚於长沙举义兵，贲去吏从征伐。
现代文：孙坚在长沙举义兵起事，孙贲辞去官职跟随孙坚征战。
English: Sun Jian raised a volunteer army to revolt in Changsha, and Sun Yao resigned from his official post to follow Sun Jian into battle.

古文：坚薨，贲摄帅馀众，扶送灵柩。
现代文：孙坚去世，孙贲统领孙坚的军队，扶送孙坚的灵柩。
English: When Sun Jian died, Sun Xuan led Sun Jian's army and escorted Sun Jian's coffin.

古文：后袁术徙寿春，贲又依之。
现代文：后来袁术迁到寿春，孙贲又去依附他。
English: Later, Yuan Shuxu moved to Shuchun, and Sun Yat-sen went to join him.

古文：术从兄绍用会稽周昂为九江太守，绍与术不协，术遣贲攻破昂於阴陵。
现代文：袁术的堂兄袁绍任用会稽人周昂为九江太守，袁绍与袁术关系不好，袁术派遣孙贲在阴陵攻破周昂。
English: Yuan Shou's cousin, Yuan Shao, appointed Zhou Ang as the governor of Jiujiang. The relationship between Yuan Shao and Yuan Shou was not good, and Yuan Shou sent Sun Yat-sen to defeat Zhou Ang in Yinling.

古文：术表贲领豫州刺史，转丹杨都尉，行征虏将军，讨平山越。
现代文：袁术上表让孙贲兼任豫州刺史，转为丹杨都尉，代理征虏将军，讨伐平定山越。
English: Yuan Shuxiu made Sun Yat-sen concurrently serve as the historian of Yuzhou, and he was transferred to the position of Lieutenant Danyang, acting as the general of conscription, to fight and pacify Dingshan Yue.

古文：为扬州刺史刘繇所迫逐，因将士众还住历阳。
现代文：后为扬州刺史刘繇所逼迫驱逐，就带领将士兵卒返回历阳驻守。
English: After being forced out by Yangzhou's warlord Liu Bei, he led the soldiers back to Liyang.

古文：顷之，术复使贲与吴景共击樊能、张英等，未能拔。
现代文：不久，袁术再派孙贲与吴景共同进攻樊能、张英等，未能攻克。
English: Soon after, Yuan Shuxu sent Sun Quan and Wu Jing to jointly attack Huaneng, Zhang Ying and others, but failed to conquer them.

古文：及策东渡，助贲、景破英、能等，遂进击刘繇。
现代文：等到孙策东渡，援助孙贲、吴景攻破张英、樊能等，于是出兵攻打刘繇。
English: When Sun Ce arrived at Dongdu, he helped Sun Quan and Wu Jing to defeat Zhang Ying and Yan Neng, and then sent troops to attack Liu Ye.

古文：繇走豫章。
现代文：刘繇逃往豫章。
English: Liu Bei fled to Yuzhang.

古文：策遣贲、景还寿春报术，值术僣号，署置百官，除贲九江太守。
现代文：孙策派孙贲、吴景回到寿春报告袁术，适逢袁术自己称帝，设置百官，任命孙贲为九江太守。
English: Sun Ce sent Sun Ye and Wu Jing back to Shuchun to report to Yuan Shou, which coincided with Yuan Shou proclaiming himself emperor, appointing hundreds of officials, and appointing Sun Ye as the governor of Jiujiang.

古文：贲不就，弃妻孥还江南。
现代文：孙贲没有到官，抛下妻儿返回江南。
English: Sun Yat-sen did not go to the office and left his wife and children to return to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：时策已平吴、会二郡，贲与策征庐江太守刘勋、江夏太守黄祖，军旋，闻繇病死，过定豫章，上贲领太守，后封都亭侯。
现代文：当时孙策已平定吴郡、会稽两地，孙贲与孙策征讨庐江太守刘勋、江夏太守黄祖，军队大胜而回，得知刘繇病死，就前去平定豫章，孙策上表任孙贲兼任豫章太守，后封为都亭侯。
English: At that time, Sun Ce had already subdued Wu County and the two counties of the Auditing Commission. Sun Ying and Sun Ce then went to discuss Liu Xun, the grand marshal of the Minjiang River, and Huang Zu, the grand marshal of the Jiangxia River. The army returned with a great victory. When Sun Ce learned that Liu Xun had died of illness, he went to subdue Yuzhang. Sun Ce appointed Sun Ying as the grand marshal of Yuzhang, and later he was given the title of Du Ting Hou.

古文：建安十三年，使者刘隐奉诏拜贲为征虏将军，领郡如故。
现代文：建安十三年，汉朝廷使者刘隐奉诏任命孙贲为征虏将军，依然兼任郡守。
English: In the 13th year of Jian'an, Liu Yin, the envoy of the Han Dynasty, appointed Sun Yat-sen as a conscript general, and he still served as the county governor.

古文：在官十一年卒。
现代文：孙贲在官十一年，后来去世。
English: Sun Yat-sen was in office for eleven years and later passed away.

古文：子邻嗣。
现代文：他的儿子孙邻承袭爵位。
English: His son Sun Quan succeeded to the title.

古文：邻年九岁，代领豫章，进封都乡侯。
现代文：孙邻九岁时，代理豫章太守，晋封都乡侯。
English: When Sun Quan was nine years old, he was appointed acting governor of Yuzhang and promoted to the position of provincial governor.

古文：在郡垂二十年，讨平叛贼，功绩脩理。
现代文：担任太守将近二十年，讨伐平定反贼，处理政事很有效果。
English: He served as the governor-general for nearly twenty years. He fought against and pacified anti-thieves, and dealt with political affairs very effectively.

古文：召还武昌，为绕帐督。
现代文：朝廷令他返回武昌后，担任绕帐督。
English: After the imperial court ordered him to return to Wuchang, he served as an accountant.

古文：时太常潘濬掌荆州事，重安长陈留舒燮有罪下狱，濬尝失燮，欲寘之於法。
现代文：当时太常潘氵睿掌管荆州事务，重安县县长陈留人舒燮因罪下狱，潘氵睿曾与舒燮不睦，想用法治他于死地。
English: At that time, Pan Jiarui was in charge of Jingzhou affairs. Chen Lujin Shuxuan, the governor of Chong'an County, was jailed for the crime. Pan Jiarui had been at odds with Shuxuan and wanted to use the rule of law to kill him.

古文：论者多为有言，濬犹不释。
现代文：议论的人多为舒燮求情，潘氵睿还是不放过。
English: Most of the people who are talking about it are pleading for Shu Qian, but Pan Qianrui still won't let it go.

古文：邻谓濬曰： 舒伯膺兄弟争死，海内义之，以为美谭，仲膺又有奉国旧意。
现代文：孙邻对潘氵睿说： 舒伯膺兄弟相争一死，天下人都认为他们有义气，作为美谈，仲膺过去又有侍奉朝廷的想法。
English: Sun Neighbour said to Pan Zhaorai, "The Shu Biao brothers fought to the death, and people all over the world thought that they were virtuous. As a fairy tale, Zhong Wei also had the idea of serving the imperial court in the past.

古文：今君杀其子弟，若天下一统，青盖北巡，中州士人必问仲膺继嗣，答者云潘承明杀燮，於事何如？ 濬意即解，燮用得济。
现代文：现在您杀害他们的子弟，如果天下归一，君王北巡，中原士人一定问到舒仲膺后嗣的情况，回答说是潘承明杀死了舒燮，您对此事该怎么办？ 
English: Now you are killing their sons and daughters. If the whole world were to become one, and the king were to go on a tour of the north, the people of Central Plains would certainly ask about Shuzhong's heirs and reply that Pan Chengming had killed Shuzhong. What should you do about this?

古文：邻迁夏口沔中督、威远将军，所居任职。
现代文：潘氵睿要杀舒燮的想法就消散了，舒燮因此而得救。孙邻升任夏口、沔中督，威远将军，在住地任职。
English: Pan Zhaorai's idea of killing Shu Yao dissipated, and Shu Yao was saved as a result. Sun Neighbour was promoted to the positions of Xia Kou, Vice-governor of Qi, and General Wei Yuan, and served in his place of residence.

古文：赤乌十二年卒。
现代文：孙邻在赤乌十二年去世。
English: Sun Quan died in the twelfth year of Chao Wu.

古文：子苗嗣。
现代文：他的儿子孙苗继承爵位。
English: His son Sun Miao succeeded to the title.

古文：苗弟旅及叔父安、熙、绩，皆历列位。
现代文：孙苗弟弟孙旅及叔父孙安、孙熙、孙绩，都依次取得职位。
English: Sun Miao's younger brother, Sun Li, and his uncles, Sun An, Sun Xi, and Sun Jie, all successively obtained positions.

古文：孙辅字国仪，贲弟也，以扬武校尉佐孙策平三郡。
现代文：孙辅，字国仪，是孙贲的弟弟，以扬武校尉身份辅助孙策平定三郡。
English: Sun Fu, also known as Guoli, was the younger brother of Sun Xuan, and assisted Sun Ce in pacifying the three counties as Yangwu's lieutenant.

古文：策讨丹杨七县，使辅西屯历阳以拒袁术，并招诱馀民，鸠合遗散。
现代文：孙策征讨丹杨七县，派孙辅西往驻守历阳以抗击袁术，并招诱留下的百姓，聚集散落的士兵。
English: Sun Ce conscripted seven counties in Danyang, sent Sun Fu Xi to garrison Liyang to fight Yuan Shu, and invited the remaining people to gather scattered soldiers.

古文：又从策讨陵阳，生得祖郎等。
现代文：又跟随孙策征讨陵阳，擒获祖郎等。
English: He also followed Sun Zeken in his quest for Lingyang, and was awarded the title of Zuro.

古文：策西袭庐江太守刘勋，辅随从，身先士卒，有功。
现代文：孙策西往攻打庐江太守刘勋，孙辅随从前往，身先士卒，立下战功。
English: Sun Ce went west to attack Liu Xun, the grand marshal of the Li River, and Sun Fu followed him, leading the troops and making great achievements in the war.

古文：策立辅为庐陵太守，抚定属城，分置长吏。
现代文：孙策任命孙辅为庐陵太守，平定安抚所属县城，分别设置官员。
English: Sun Ce appointed Sun Fu as the governor of Fuling, pacified and pacified the county seat, and set up officials separately.

古文：迁平南将军，假节领交州刺史。
现代文：后孙辅升为平南将军，持符节兼任交州刺史。
English: Later, Sun Fu was promoted to the rank of General of Pingnan, and also held the post of Secretary of Jiaozhou Province.

古文：遣使与曹公相闻，事觉，权幽系之。
现代文：他派遣使者与曹操暗中来往，事情败露，孙权囚禁了他。
English: He sent emissaries to secretly meet with Cao Cao, but the affair was exposed, and Sun Quan imprisoned him.

古文：数岁卒。
现代文：数年后去世。
English: The wind suddenly picked up in the middle of the river, and the boat almost capsized several times.

古文：子兴、昭、伟、昕，皆历列位。
现代文：孙辅的儿子孙兴、孙昭、孙伟、孙昕，都依次取得官职。
English: Sun Fu's sons, Sun Xing, Sun Zhao, Sun Wei, and Sun Yao, all successively obtained official posts.

古文：孙翊字叔弼，权弟也，骁悍果烈，有兄策风。
现代文：孙翊，字叔弼，孙权的弟弟，他骁勇剽悍、果敢刚烈，有他哥哥孙策的风范。
English: Sun Yat-sen, also known as Uncle Sun, was the younger brother of Sun Quan. He was brave, courageous, and strong-willed. He had the demeanor of his older brother Sun Ce.

古文：太守朱治举孝廉，司空辟。
现代文：太守朱治推举他为孝廉，司空也征召他。
English: Zhu Zhi, the daimyō, recommended him as a filial son, and Siku also conscripted him.

古文：建安八年，以偏将军领丹杨太守，时年二十。
现代文：建安八年，孙翊以偏将军身份兼任丹杨太守，当时他二十岁。
English: In the eighth year of Jian'an, Sun Yat-sen assumed the post of Tanyang governor-general as a part-time general. He was 20 years old at the time.

古文：后卒为左右边鸿所杀，鸿亦即诛。
现代文：后来突然被身边的边鸿所杀，边鸿也立即被处死。
English: Later, he was suddenly killed by his neighbor, Bianhong, who was also immediately executed.

古文：子松为射声校尉、都乡侯。
现代文：孙翊儿子孙松担任射声校尉、都乡侯。
English: Sun Yat-sen's son, Sun Song, served as an artillery officer and the mayor of the capital.

古文：黄龙三年卒。
现代文：黄龙三年，孙松去世。
English: In the third year of Huanglong, Sun Song died.

古文：蜀丞相诸葛亮与兄瑾书曰： 既受东朝厚遇，依依於子弟。
现代文：蜀国丞相诸葛亮给哥哥诸葛瑾的信说： 您既受到东吴的厚待，连子弟也受到恩宠。
English: The letter from Zhuge Liang, the prime minister of Shu, to his brother Zhuge Xi, said: You have been treated well by Dongwu, and even your children have been favored.

古文：又子乔良器，为之恻怆。
现代文：再加上子乔是很优秀的人才，我为他的不幸感到悲痛忧愁。
English: In addition, Zi Qiao is an excellent talent, and I feel sad and sorrowful for his misfortune.

古文：见其所与亮器物，感用流涕。 其悼松如此，由亮养子乔咨述故云。
现代文：见到他送给我的器件物品，感慨流泪。 诸葛亮是如此地悼念孙松，此事由诸葛亮养子诸葛乔咨述，故得以记载下来。
English: Seeing the device items he gave me, I was moved to tears. Zhuge Liang mourned Sun Song so much, the matter was reported by Zhuge Liang's adopted son Zhuge Qiao, so it could be recorded.

古文：孙匡字季佐，翊弟也。
现代文：孙匡，字季佐，是孙翊的弟弟。
English: Sun Kuang, alias Ji Zuo, is Sun Yao's younger brother.

古文：举孝廉茂才，未试用，卒，时年二十馀。
现代文：他被荐举为孝廉、茂才，还没有被试用，就去世了，年二十余岁。
English: He was recommended to be promoted to the ranks of Xiaolian and Maocai, but before he was put on probation, he passed away at the age of 20.

古文：子泰，曹氏之甥也，为长水校尉。
现代文：孙匡儿子孙泰，是曹操家的外甥，担任长水校尉。
English: Sun Kuang's son, Sun Tai, was a nephew of Cao Cao's family and served as the captain of Changshui.

古文：嘉禾三年，从权围新城，中流矢死。
现代文：嘉禾三年，他跟随孙权围攻新城，被流箭射中身亡。
English: In the third year of Jiahe, he followed Sun Quan to besiege Xincheng and was shot dead by a stray arrow.

古文：泰子秀为前将军、夏口督。
现代文：孙泰儿子孙秀担任前将军、夏口督。
English: Sun Tai's son, Sun Xiu, served as a former general and governor of Nha Trang.

古文：秀公室至亲，握兵在外，皓意不能平。
现代文：孙秀是皇族至亲，掌握兵权出兵在外，孙皓心中不安定。
English: Sun Xiu was a close relative of the imperial family, he had the power to dispatch troops, but Sun Yao was unstable in his heart.

古文：建衡二年，皓遣何定将五千人至夏口猎。
现代文：建衡二年，孙皓派何定率五千人到夏口狩猎。
English: In the second year of Jianheng, Sun Yat-sen sent a fixed number of five thousand people to hunt in Naxacou.

古文：先是，民间佥言秀当见图，而定远猎，秀遂惊，夜将妻子亲兵数百人奔晋。
现代文：在那之前，民间传言孙秀将会被谋害，而何定远道而来狩猎，孙秀就很惊惧，当夜带着妻小及亲兵数百人投奔晋国。
English: Prior to that, there was a folk rumor that Sun Xiu would be assassinated, and when he came hunting from a certain distance, Sun Xiu was very alarmed. That night, he rushed to Jin Province with his wife and several hundred soldiers.

古文：晋以秀为骠骑将军、仪同三司，封会稽公。
现代文：晋朝廷让孙秀做骠骑将军、仪同三司，封为会稽公。
English: The Jin Dynasty court asked Sun Xiu to be the general of the cavalry, the third secretary of the ceremony, and the auditor of the meeting.

古文：孙韶字公礼。
现代文：孙韶，字公礼。
English: Sun Yat-sen, the word is "Kongli."

古文：伯父河，字伯海，本姓俞氏，亦吴人也。
现代文：他的伯父孙河，字伯海，本姓俞，也是吴郡人。
English: His uncle Sun He, also known as Bo Hai, whose real surname was Yu, was also from Wuxi County.

古文：孙策爱之，赐姓为孙，列之属籍。
现代文：孙策很喜欢他，赐姓孙氏，将他列名孙氏家族之中。
English: Sun Ce liked him very much and gave him the surname Sun, making him a member of the Sun family.

古文：后为将军，屯京城。
现代文：后来将军，驻守京城。
English: He later became a general and was stationed in Kyoto.

古文：初，孙权杀吴郡太守盛宪，宪故孝廉妫览、戴员亡匿山中，孙翊为丹杨，皆礼致之。
现代文：起初，孙权杀了吴郡太守盛宪，盛宪的故交孝廉妫览、戴员逃入山中躲起来。孙翊是丹杨太守，对他们都以礼相待并招纳他们。
English: At first, Sun Quan killed the governor of Wu County, Sheng Xian, and Sheng Xian's old friend, Xiao Liang, fled into the mountains to hide. Sun Quan was the governor of Danyang, and treated them all with courtesy and recruited them.

古文：览为大都督督兵，员为郡丞。
现代文：妫览担任大都督督兵，戴员是郡丞。
English: Minshan served as the grand military governor of the capital, and Dai was the county magistrate.

古文：及翊遇害，河驰赴宛陵，责怒览、员，以不能全权，令使奸变得施。
现代文：等到孙翊被杀，孙河骑马极速赶往宛陵，怒责妫览、戴员，说他们没有尽心职守，使得奸人的计策得以施行。
English: After Sun Yat-sen was killed, Sun He rode to Wanling as fast as he could on horseback, angrily scolded the inspectors and officers, saying that they had not performed their duties diligently, allowing the traitor's scheme to be carried out.

古文：二人议曰： 伯海与将军疏远，而责我乃耳。
现代文：二人商议说： 孙河与孙翊将军疏远，还这样指责我们。
English: The two men discussed and said, "Sun He is estranged from General Sun Yat-sen, and he also accuses us in this way.

古文：讨虏若来，吾属无遗矣。 遂杀河，使人北迎扬州刺史刘馥，令住历阳，以丹杨应之。
现代文：讨虏将军孙权如果前来，我们都要被杀了。 于是杀死孙河，派人往北迎接扬州刺史刘馥，让他驻守历阳，他们率丹杨部队来响应。
English: If the warlord Sun Quan came, we would all be killed. So they killed Sun He and sent people to the north to meet the Yangzhou warlord Liu Bei and have him stationed in Liyang. They led the Danyang troops to respond.

古文：会翊帐下徐元、孙高、傅婴等杀览、员。
现代文：而孙翊的部下徐元、孙高、傅婴等又杀死妫览、戴员。
English: However, Sun Yat-sen's subordinates, Xu Yuan, Sun Gao, Fu Ying, and others also killed Miao Shan and Dai Jun.

古文：韶年十七，收河馀众，缮治京城，起楼橹，脩器备以御敌。
现代文：孙韶十七岁时，收集孙河的部众，修缮治理京城县，修整制造楼船，修理武器，以此防备敌人。
English: When Sun Yat-sen was seventeen years old, he gathered Sun He's followers, repaired and governed Jingcheng County, repaired and built buildings and ships, and repaired weapons in order to be prepared for the enemy.

古文：权闻乱，从椒丘还，过定丹杨，引军归吴。
现代文：孙权得知丹杨作乱，从椒丘返回，路过平定丹杨，率领军队返回吴郡。
English: When Sun Quan learned that Danyang had made a disturbance, he returned from Jiaokou, passed through Pingding Danyang, and led the army back to Wuxu County.

古文：夜至京城下营，试攻惊之，兵皆乘城传檄备警，讙声动地，颇射外人，权使晓喻乃止。
现代文：夜里到达京城县扎营，尝试着进攻想惊吓孙韶，京城的守兵都登上城墙，传递檄文警戒，喧闹声震天动地，并用射城外之人。孙权派人告知情况，动乱才停止。
English: In the night, they camped in Gyeongseong County and tried to attack to scare Sun Yat-sen. The guards of Gyeongseong went up on the city wall to pass on the warning. The noise was deafening and people outside the city were shot at. Sun Quan sent someone to report the situation, and the turmoil stopped.

古文：明日见韶，甚器之，即拜承烈校尉，统河部曲，食曲阿、丹徒二县，自置长吏，一如河旧。
现代文：第二天孙权见到孙韶，非常器重他，当即授予他承烈校尉之职，统领孙河的军队，并将曲阿、丹徒两县作为孙韶的食邑，并自行设置官吏，一切向过去孙河那样。
English: The next day, Sun Quan saw Sun Yao, held him in high esteem, and immediately appointed him to the post of lieutenant to lead Sun He's army, and designated Qu'a and Dantu counties as Sun Yao's food towns, and set up officials on his own, just as Sun He had done in the past.

古文：后为广陵太守、偏将军。
现代文：后又升任为广陵太守、偏将军。
English: Later, he was promoted to Guangling Taishu (governor of Guangling) and Yangzheng (general).

古文：权为吴王，迁扬威将军，封建德侯。
现代文：孙权做吴王时，升任他为扬威将军，封为建德侯。
English: When Sun Quan was the king of Wu, he was promoted to the rank of Yang Wei General and given the title of Jian De Hou.

古文：权称尊号，为镇北将军。
现代文：孙权登基称帝，任命孙韶为镇北将军。
English: Sun Quan ascended to the throne and named himself emperor, and appointed Sun Ye as the general of Zhenbei.

古文：韶为边将数十年，善养士卒，得其死力。
现代文：孙韶任边将几十年，善于养待士卒，得到他们誓死尽忠。
English: Sun Yat-sen served as a general for decades. He was good at nurturing his subordinates and gaining their loyalty.

古文：常以警疆埸远斥候为务，先知动静而为之备，故鲜有负败。
现代文：他常常致力于边界警备，派人深入敌后侦察敌情，预先探知敌军动静而相应作好准备，故此很少打败仗。
English: He often devoted himself to border guarding, sent people deep behind the enemy to reconnaissance the enemy situation, and detected the enemy's movements in advance and prepared accordingly, so he rarely lost the war.

古文：青、徐、汝、沛颇来归附，淮南滨江屯候皆彻兵远徙，徐、泗、江、淮之地，不居者各数百里。
现代文：青、徐、汝、沛等地有很多百姓前来归附，在长江附近刺探情况的淮南屯的敌军都迁到远处，徐、泗、江、淮一带，各有几百里地没有驻兵住人。
English: There were many people from Qing, Xu, Ru, Pei and other places who came to join. The enemy troops from Huainantun, who were surveying the situation near the Yangtze River, moved far away. There were no soldiers living in the areas of Xu, Min, Jiang and Huai, each of which was several hundred miles away.

古文：自权西征，还都武昌，韶不进见者十馀年。
现代文：自从孙权西征，迁都武昌，孙韶有十几年没有朝见了。
English: Since Sun Quan's expedition to the West and the relocation of the capital to Wuchang, Sun Yat-sen had not seen the emperor for more than ten years.

古文：权还建业，乃得朝觐。
现代文：孙权返回建业，孙韶才得以入朝觐见。
English: Sun Quan returned to Jianye, and it was only then that Sun Yat-sen was able to enter the imperial court.

古文：权问青、徐诸屯要害，远近人马众寡，魏将帅姓名，尽具识之，有问咸对。
现代文：孙权问及青、徐地方各处军营要害之地，远近人马布置多少，魏军将领的姓名，孙韶全都清楚，有问必答。
English: Sun Quan asked about the key locations of the military camps in Qing and Xu regions, how many soldiers and horses were stationed in the vicinity, and the names of the generals of the Wei army. Sun Yao knew everything and had to answer all questions.

古文：身长八尺，仪貌都雅。
现代文：孙韶身长八尺，仪容相貌都很儒雅。
English: Sun Yat-sen is eight feet tall, and his appearance is very elegant.

古文：权欢悦曰： 吾久不见公礼，不图进益乃尔。 加领幽州牧、假节。
现代文：孙权高兴地说： 我很久没有见到公礼，没想到他进步到如此地步。 于是加任孙韶兼任幽州牧，持符节。
English: Sun Quan said happily, "I haven't seen Gong Li for a long time, I didn't expect him to have progressed to such a degree." So, he appointed Sun Yao as Yuzhou's herdsman, holding the Festival of the Characters.

古文：赤乌四年卒。
现代文：赤乌四年，孙韶去世。
English: In the fourth year of Aka's reign, Sun Yat-sen died.

古文：子越嗣，至右将军。
现代文：他的儿子孙越承袭爵位，官至右将军。
English: His son, Sun Yue, succeeded to the title of nobility and was promoted to General of the Right.

古文：越兄楷武卫大将军、临成侯，代越为京下督。
现代文：孙越的哥哥孙楷担任武卫大将军、临成侯，代替孙越做京下督。
English: Sun Yue's elder brother, Sun Kai, served as General of the Imperial Guard and Lin Cheng Hou, replacing Sun Yue as the governor of Beijing.

古文：楷弟异至领军将军，奕宗正卿，恢武陵太守。
现代文：孙楷的弟弟孙异官至领军将军，孙奕官至宗正卿，孙恢官至武陵太守。
English: Sun Kai's younger brother, Sun Yi, rose to the rank of leading general, Sun Yi rose to the rank of Zong Zhengqing, and Sun Hui rose to the rank of Wuling Taishu.

古文：天玺元年，徵楷为宫下镇骠骑将军。
现代文：天玺元年，朝廷征召孙楷为宫下镇骠骑将军。
English: In the first year of the reign of Heaven and Earth, the imperial court summoned Sun Kai to be the general of the palace town cavalry.

古文：初永安贼施但等劫皓弟谦，袭建业，或白楷二端不即赴讨者，皓数遣诘楷。
现代文：当初永安贼人施但等劫持孙皓弟弟孙谦，攻打建业。有人报告说孙楷首鼠二端没有立即出兵征讨，孙皓多次派人诘问孙楷。
English: At first, the Yongan bandits kidnapped Sun Qian's younger brother, Sun Qian, and attacked the construction industry. It was reported that Sun Qian did not immediately send troops to investigate. Sun Qian repeatedly sent people to interrogate Sun Qian.

古文：楷常惶怖，而卒被召，遂将妻子亲兵数百人归晋，晋以为车骑将军，封丹杨侯。
现代文：孙楷经常感到惊恐，而现在突然被征召，就带妻小以及数百亲兵投奔投奔晋国，晋国任命他为车骑将军，并封为丹杨侯。
English: Sun Kai was often frightened, but now that he was suddenly conscripted, he took his wife Xiao and hundreds of his own soldiers to rush to Jin Province. Jin Province appointed him a cavalry general and named him Danyang Hou.

古文：孙桓字叔武，河之子也。
现代文：孙桓，字叔武，是孙河的儿子。
English: Sun Kuan, also known as Uncle Wu, was the son of Sun He.

古文：年二十五，拜安东中郎将，与陆逊共拒刘备。
现代文：二十五岁时，担任安东中郎将，并与陆逊一起抵御刘备。
English: At the age of twenty-five, he served as the general of Andong Zhong Lang, and together with Lu Xun, resisted Liu Bei.

古文：备军众甚盛，弥山盈谷，桓投刀奋命，与逊戮力，备遂败走。
现代文：刘备大军势力很是强盛，满山遍野，孙桓持刀殊死奋战，与陆逊合力同心，刘备战败而走。
English: The forces of Liu Bei's army were very strong. The whole mountain was covered with fields. Sun Huan fought to the death with a sword and joined forces with Lu Xun. Liu Bei was defeated and left.

古文：桓斩上夔道，截其径要。
现代文：孙桓截断上夔门的险要道路，刘备翻山越险，才得以自身逃脱。
English: Sun Huan cut off the dangerous path of the upper gate, and Liu Bei climbed over the mountain to escape.

古文：备逾山越险，仅乃得免，忿恚叹曰： 吾昔初至京城，桓尚小儿，而今迫孤乃至此也！ 桓以功拜建武将军，封丹徒侯，下督牛渚，作横江坞，会卒。
现代文：他惭愧又忿恨地叹息道： 我过去刚到京城，孙桓还是一个小孩，然而今天竟把我逼到如此地步！ 孙桓因功被授予建武将军，封为丹徒侯。至下游都督牛渚，修筑横江坞，刚好就去世了。
English: He sighed with shame and resentment: I had just arrived in Beijing, and Sun Huan was still a child, but today they forced me to such a point! Sun Huan was awarded the title of General Jianwu for his achievements, and was made the vassal of Dantou. As for the downstream governor, Uzunagishi, who built the Yokoe dock, he just happened to die.

古文：评曰：夫亲亲恩义，古今之常。
现代文：评曰:人亲近亲属及君臣大义，是古今的常理。
English: The commentary said: It is common sense from ancient times to modern times that people should be close to their relatives and the monarchs and ministers.

古文：宗子维城，诗人所称。
现代文：长子就像城墙一样可做屏障，是《诗经》所称赞的。
English: The eldest son is like a city wall and can be used as a barrier, which is praised by the "Song of Songs."

古文：况此诸孙，或赞兴初基，或镇据边陲，克堪厥任，不忝其荣者乎！
现代文：更何况这些子孙，有的发扬先祖基业，有的镇守安定边疆，都承担自己的责任，没有对不起这份荣耀！
English: What's more, these descendants, some of whom are carrying forward the heritage of their ancestors, and some of whom are guarding a stable frontier, have all shouldered their own responsibilities, and they are not sorry for this honor!

古文：故详著云。
现代文：所以详细记录并记载他们的生平。
English: Therefore, their lives are recorded and recorded in detail.

