古文：《蚕经》：下蚁，上箔，入簇。
现代文：《蚕经》：将孵化出的蚁蚕，收集到蚕座上饲养时要稀；将蚕布入蚕箔时要稀；放老熟上簇时要稀。
English: "Silkworm Sutra": It is necessary to collect the hatched ant silkworms and raise them on the silkworm seat sparingly; it is necessary to collect the silkworm cloth into the silkworm foil sparingly; it is necessary to collect the cocoons sparingly when the cocoons are old and ripe.

古文：《齐民要术》：蚕老时值雨者，则坏茧，宜于屋内簇之。
现代文：《齐民要术》：蚕老熟的时候，遇上雨天，很容易坏茧，最好在屋内让蚕上簇。
English: "Qi Min Yaoshu": When the silkworms are old and mature, it is easy for the cocoons to deteriorate when it rains. It is best to let the silkworms swarm indoors.

古文：薄布薪于箔上，散蚕讫，又薄以薪覆之。
现代文：在蚕箔上薄薄地铺上一层细枝，将蚕放在上面后，再用柴枝薄薄地覆盖好。
English: Spread a thin layer of twigs on the silkworm foil, place the silkworm on top, and then cover it with a thin layer of twigs.

古文：一槌得安十箔。
现代文：一个蚕架上，可以安置十箔。
English: Ten cranes can be placed on one silkworm frame.

古文：《务本新书》：簇蚕：地宜高平，内宜通风。
现代文：《务本新书》：簇蚕：安置蚕簇的地方，地势要高而平，簇内要通风。
English: "Urushihon Shinsho": Clustered silkworms: where to place the silkworm cluster, the terrain should be high and flat, and the cluster should be ventilated.

古文：匀布柴草，布蚕宜稀；密则热，热则茧难成，丝亦难缲。
现代文：柴草要分布均匀，往簇内安放老蚕时要稀一些，蚕放得密了，容易热蒸；簇中过热，便不容易结成好茧，缲丝也会很困难。
English: The firewood should be evenly distributed. When placing old silkworms in the cluster, they should be thinner. If the silkworms are placed densely, it is easy to steam; if the cluster is overheated, it is not easy to form a good cocoon, and it will be difficult to spin silk.

古文：东北位，并养六畜处、树下、坑上、粪恶流水之地，不得簇。
现代文：在东北方位，和养六畜的地方、树下面，坑边上及有粪臭污染流水的地方，均不可安置蚕簇。
English: In the northeastern part, and in places where six animals are raised, under trees, on the edge of pits, and in places where there is fecal odor polluting running water, it is not possible to place silkworm clusters.

古文：《野语》：如天气暄热，不宜日午簇蚕；蚕老不禁日气晒暴故也。
现代文：《野语》：如若天气炎热，不要在中午放蚕上簇，老蚕经不起日光曝晒。
English: "Yangyu": If the weather is hot, do not release the silkworms at noon, the old silkworms can not withstand the sun exposure.

古文：《士农必用》：治簇之方，惟在干暖，使内无寒湿。
现代文：《士农必用》：修治蚕簇的方法，最重要的是要求干燥和温暖，使簇内没有寒气和湿气。
English: "Essential for farmers": The most important thing in the method of treating the silkworm cluster is to require dryness and warmth, so that there is no cold and moisture in the cluster.

古文：簇中茧病有六：一、簇汗，二、落簇，三、游走，四、变赤蛹，五、变僵，六、黑色。
现代文：簇中的茧病有六种：一为簇汗，二为落簇，三为游走，四为变成赤蛹，五为变僵，六为变成黑色。
English: There are six kinds of rickets in the cluster: one is cluster sweat, two are falling clusters, three are swimming away, four become red warts, five become stiff, and six become black.

古文：簇汗之病，蚕老食叶不净，其叶蒸湿，带叶入簇。故茧亦湿润，此为簇汗。
现代文：簇汗的病因是，老蚕没有把桑叶吃净，残余的桑叶被蒸热潮湿，连同桑叶一同入簇，所以结出的茧也是潮湿的，故称簇汗茧。
English: The cause of cluster sweat is that the old silkworm did not eat the mulberry leaf cleanly, the remaining mulberry leaf was steamed hot and humid, together with the mulberry leaf into the cluster, so the cocoon is also wet, so it is called cluster sweat.

古文：其余五病，皆地湿天寒所致。
现代文：其余的五种茧病，皆因为蚕簇的底下潮湿和天气寒冷所致。
English: The remaining five rickets were all caused by dampness under the cocoon and cold weather.

古文：蚕欲老，可簇地盘，烧令极干，除扫灰净，于上置簇。
现代文：蚕将老熟时，选定可作蚕簇的地方，燃火烧烤，使其极干燥，然后将柴灰扫净，在上面修治蚕簇。
English: When the silkworms are ripe, select a place where they can be made into clusters, fire up the grill to make it extremely dry, then clean the wood ash and fix the clusters on top.

古文：《韩氏直说》：安圆簇：于阜高处，打成簇脚；一簇可六箔蚕。
现代文：《韩氏直说》：安圆簇：在高阜地方，搭成簇脚，一个圆簇，可容纳六箔蚕入簇。
English: "Han's Straight Talk": An round cluster: In the high-Fu region, it is built into a cluster foot, a round cluster that can accommodate six-foiled silkworms into the cluster.

古文：十分中有九分老者宜少掺叶。名 上马桑 。
现代文：箔上的蚕有十分之九老熟时，便可撒少量的桑叶，这次的给叶，名叫 上马桑 。
English: When nine-tenths of the silkworms on the foil are ripe, a small amount of mulberry leaves can be sprinkled. This time, the leaves are given, called the upper mulberry.

古文：就箔上用簸箕般去，宜款手掺于簇上，自东南起头，不令落地。
现代文：从蚕箔上用簸箕搬到蚕簇所在的地方，用手轻轻地将蚕散在簇上，从东南开始散，不要让蚕落在地上。
English: Use a hoe to move the cocoon from the silkworm foil to the place where the silkworm cluster is located. Gently scatter the silkworms on the cluster with your hands, starting from the southeast. Do not let the silkworms fall to the ground.

古文：务令稀匀。
现代文：一定要放得稀一些，均匀一些。
English: The cream must be spread thinly and evenly.

古文：上复覆梢蒿，或豆秸。
现代文：再在上面覆盖上一层梢蒿，或豆秸。
English: A layer of stalks, or pods, is then placed on top.

古文：复掺蚕如前。
现代文：再如同前法将蚕散在上面。
English: As before, scatter the silkworms on top.

古文：至三箔，覆梢倒根在上。如此则簇圆又稳。
现代文：散过三箔以后，再覆盖梢蒿时，应使根部倒立在上，这样做，会使蚕簇又圆，又稳固。
English: After spreading through the three foils, when covering the stalks, the roots should be upside down. Doing so will make the cluster round and stable.

古文：自后蚕可近上掺。
现代文：自此以后，可靠近梢蒿的上部将蚕散下。
English: From then on, the upper part of the reliable trailing shoots scatter the silkworms.

古文：至六箔覆蒿令簇圆；上用箔围苫缴，簇顶如亭子样。防雨。
现代文：至第六箔上簇毕，在簇上覆盖上蒿梢，将簇做成圆形，然后将上部用箔子围，用草苫裹，将簇顶做成如同亭子的顶部那样的圆尖，是为了防雨。
English: At the sixth time, the top of the cluster is covered with a foil and covered with the tops of the cormorants. The cluster is made into a round shape, and then the upper part is covered with foil and wrapped in grass. The top of the cluster is made into a round point like the top of a pavilion, in order to prevent rain.

古文：至晚，又用苫，将簇从下缴至上苫相接。
现代文：到了晚上，再用草苫将簇一直从下部围裹到与顶部的草苫相连接。
English: In the evening, use a straw mat to wrap the cluster from the bottom to the top.

古文：日出高时，卷去；至晚，复缴。
现代文：次日太阳升高时，便将簇周围的草苫卷去，至天色晚时复行裹起。
English: When the sun rises the next day, the grass coils around the cluster are rolled away and wrapped up again when it is late.

古文：三日外，茧成不用。 马头簇 ，亦依上苫缴。柴薪要广、簇又玲珑，中间宜架杆。
现代文：三天过后茧已作成，便不用这样麻烦了。马头簇也要依照上法用草苫围裹，所用的柴草要多，蚕簇比较精致，中间要搭架杆。
English: After three days, the cocoons have been made, so there is no need for such trouble. The horse head cluster should also be wrapped with straw cocoons according to the above method, and more firewood and grass should be used. The silkworm cluster is more delicate, and a pole should be set up in the middle.

古文：蚕多，宜 马头簇 ，簇脚宜南北。
现代文：养蚕多时，适宜采用马头簇。簇的脚架应采取南北的方向放置。
English: When raising silkworms for a long time, it is suitable to use horse head clusters. The foot frame of the cluster should be placed in a north-south direction.

古文：晒簇：上蚕后第三日，辰巳时间，开苫箔日晒；至未时，复苫盖如前。
现代文：晒簇：蚕上簇后的第三天，辰巳时间，打开苫箔让日光照晒；至未时，仍然照原来的样子苫盖好。
English: Sunning: On the third day after the silkworms have emerged from the cocoon, at the stroke of midnight, open the cocoon foil to let the sunlight shine through; until then, the cocoon cover should remain in its original state.

古文：如当日过热，上榰⑨单箔遮日色。
现代文：如果当天日色太热，簇上可支起一层箔来遮蔽阳光。
English: If the sun is too hot that day, a layer of foil can be supported on the cluster to shade the sun.

古文：翻簇：上蚕时，被雨沾湿，雨才止才晴，即选一簇地盘。
现代文：翻簇：如果蚕上簇时，簇被雨淋湿，应在雨刚止，天刚晴时，立即选择好搭架一个蚕簇用的地盘。
English: Turn over the cluster: If the cluster is wet when the silkworm is on the cluster, it should be immediately after the rain, when the weather is fine, immediately choose a good place to set up a silkworm cluster.

古文：如雨湿了，则取干墙土厚覆，治簇之法如前。
现代文：如簇底被雨淋湿，可以用干墙土厚厚地盖上一层。修治蚕簇的方法如前面所述。
English: If the bottom of the cluster is wet with rain, a thick layer of dry wall soil can be used to cover it. The method of repairing the cluster is as described above.

古文：不以成茧不成茧，翻謄迁移别簇，封苫如前。
现代文：不管簇中的蚕茧是已经作成还是没有作成，皆应将旧簇搬动腾出，迁移到别处的新簇，依旧要用苫盖起。
English: Regardless of whether the cocoon in the cluster has been created or not, the old cluster should be moved out and moved to a new cluster elsewhere, still using the cocoon cover.

古文：小雨则不须，但可曝晒。
现代文：如上蚕时，仅遇小雨，便不必翻簇，只需采取晒簇的办法便行了。
English: For example, in the case of silkworms, only in case of light rain, it is not necessary to turn over the clusters, just take the method of drying the clusters.

古文：又有一法：临簇有雨，只于蚕屋中本槌下，地面上安簇；开了门窗，使透风气，早夜或阴雨变寒，则闭门窗，添牛粪火，比翻簇之法，义为妙也。
现代文：另外有一种办法：碰到蚕老熟要上簇，又遇到雨天，只需要在蚕屋内本箔蚕槌下面的地面上安簇便行了。将门窗打开使通风换气，入夜或阴雨天气变寒冷，则将门窗关闭，添加牛粪火，比翻簇的方法又要好多了。
English: In addition, there is another way: when encountering silkworms, it is necessary to make a cluster, and when encountering a rainy day, it is only necessary to make a cluster on the ground under the foil silkworm hammer in the silkworm house. Open the doors and windows to ventilate, and when it gets cold at night or in rainy weather, close the doors and windows, add cow dung fire, and it is much better than the method of turning over the cluster.

古文：又一法：槌箔上、虚撒蒿、槌周围簇梢与蒿，箔苫围之，蚕自作茧，犹胜于雨中簇也。 槽 音支。
现代文：又有一法：在蚕槌的箔上，稍微地撒上一层蒿草，蚕槌四周用枝簇、蒿草、箔、草苫围起来，蚕自然会作茧，此法强过在雨中作簇。
English: There is another method: on the foil of the silkworm hammer, slightly sprinkle a layer of reeds, and surround the silkworm hammer with branches, reeds, foil, and blades of grass. The silkworms will naturally make cocoons. This method is better than making clusters in the rain.

