古文：《齐民要术》：栽种，与桃李同。
现代文：《齐民要术》：梅和杏的种法跟桃李是一样的。
English: "Qi Min Yaoshu": The breeding method of plum and apricot is the same as that of peach and plum.

古文：作白梅：梅子酸，核初成时摘取。
现代文：作白梅法：当梅的果实还是酸的，梅核刚长成时，摘取下来。
English: To make the white plum method: when the fruit of the plum is still sour and the plum kernel has just grown, pick it off.

古文：夜以盐汁渍之，昼则日曝。
现代文：夜间用盐水浸泡，白天放在太阳下面曝晒。
English: Soak them in salt water at night and expose them to the sun during the day.

古文：凡作十宿十浸，十日便成矣。
现代文：共经过十夜十浸，十日十曝，便成功了。
English: After a total of ten nights and ten dips, ten days and ten exposures, they succeeded.

古文：调鼎和齑，所在多入也。
现代文：烹炖肉菜和制作调料面时，都要放进去一些。
English: When cooking meat dishes and making spicy noodles, you should put some in.

古文：作乌梅：亦以梅子核初成时摘取，笼盛，于突上熏之令干，即成矣。
现代文：作乌梅法：也是在梅核刚长成时摘取下来，放入笼中，在烟囱口上熏烤，等到熏干，便算做好了。
English: To make the ume method: it is also picked when the plum kernel has just grown, placed in a cage, smoked on the chimney mouth, and when it is smoked, it is ready.

古文：乌梅入药，不任调食也。
现代文：乌梅专供药用，不作调味品食用。
English: Wume is exclusively used for medicinal purposes and is not eaten as a condiment.

古文：作杏李麸法：杏、李熟时，多收取。盆中研之，生布绞取浓汁，涂盘中，日晒干，以手磨刮取之。
现代文：作杏李麸法：杏和李成熟的时候，多采收一些，放入盆中研磨，用未经漂洗加工的布将浓汁绞出，涂抹在底盘上面，太阳晒干后，用手摩擦着刮揭下来。
English: How to pick apricots and plums: When the apricots and plums are ripe, pick some more, put them in a bowl and grind them. Use a cloth that has not been rinsed to wring out the concentrated juice and spread it on the chassis. After the sun has dried it, rub it with your hands and scrape it off.

古文：可和水为浆，及和米麸，所在人意也。
现代文：可以用水和成浆汤，也可在米麸中放进一些拌和食用，各种食用方法，均按照个人的想法而定。
English: You can use water and starch syrup, or you can put some mix in the rice bran and eat it. All kinds of eating methods are determined according to personal ideas.

古文：《四时类要》：熟杏和肉埋粪土中，至春既生，三月移栽实地。
现代文：《四时类要》：将成熟的杏与果肉一起埋入粪土中。春天出苗以后，至三月间，移栽到地上去。
English: "Four times a year": Mature apricots are buried in the manure together with the pulp. After the seedlings emerge in the spring, they are transplanted to the ground between March and May.

古文：既移，不得更于粪地，必致少实而味苦。
现代文：既经移出，便不应再次栽植到粪土地上去，否则必然结实少而且味苦。
English: Once removed, they should not be replanted on the dung land, otherwise they will inevitably be less strong and bitter.

古文：移须合土。
现代文：移栽时必须带着土。
English: When transplanting, it is necessary to carry soil.

古文：三步一树，穊即味甘。
现代文：三步远栽一棵，栽概果味甘甜。
English: One tree planted three paces away tastes sweet and fruity.

古文：服食之家，尤宜种之。
现代文：服食丹药求神仙的道家，尤其应该种杏。
English: If you are a Taoist who takes elixir and seeks immortality, you should especially grow apricots.

