古文：班固称 儒家者流，盖出于司徒之官，助人君顺阴阳，行教化 者也。
现代文：班固在《汉书·艺文志》中说 儒家这些人，大概来源于司徒之类的官员，是协助国君谐调阴阳，实行教化 的。
English: Ban Gu said in "Hanshu·Geibunshi" that these Confucianists, who probably originated from officials such as Szeto, assisted the sovereign in harmonizing yin and yang and carrying out enlightenment.

古文：圣人所以明天道，正人伦，是以古先哲王率由斯道。
现代文：圣人扬明天道，树立人伦，所以古代的先哲都尊奉儒学。
English: The sage Yang Mingdao established human relations, so the ancient sages all revered Confucianism.

古文：高祖生于边朔，长于戎马之间，因魏氏丧乱之余，属尒朱残酷之举，文章咸荡，礼乐同奔，弦歌之音且绝，俎豆之容将尽。
现代文：高祖出生在边疆地区，在军旅之中成长，正赶上魏代天下大乱，尔朱荣残暴之时，道德败坏，礼乐颓废，高雅的音乐行将灭绝，祭祀不能正常进行。
English: Gaozu was born in the frontier area, and grew up in the midst of military travel. He was just catching up with the world turmoil in the Wei Dynasty and the brutality of Zhu Rong. Morality was corrupt, ceremonial music was decadent, elegant music was about to become extinct, and sacrifices could not be carried out normally.

古文：及仗义建旗，扫清区县，以正君臣，以齐上下；至乎一人播越，九鼎□移，文武神器，顾眄斯在；犹且援立宗支，重安社稷，岂非局名教之地，渐仁义之风与？
现代文：高祖树起义旗，消灭各地割据势力，使君臣纲常得以正常，上尊下卑得以恢复；他自己也英名远播，大权逐渐集于一身，国家政权，垂手可得，但高祖仍然立北魏的宗室为帝，重新使天下稳定，这难道不是恪守名教，使人们感染仁义的风气吗?
English: Gaozhu planted the banner of the uprising, eliminated the separatist forces in various regions, normalized the system of rulers and subjects, and restored the principle of "superiority and inferiority." He himself was famous for a long time, the great power was gradually concentrated in one person, and the national power was within reach, but Gaozhu still established the Northern Wei dynasty as the emperor and re-stabilized the world. Isn't this abiding by the famous religion and infecting people with the ethos of benevolence and righteousness?

古文：属疆埸多虞，戎车岁驾，虽庠序之制有所未遑，而儒雅之道遽形心虑。
现代文：当时国家战事频繁，高祖连年在外征战，虽然学校教育体制没有时间健全，但儒家之道时刻记挂在心上。
English: At that time, the country was frequently at war, and Gao Zu was fighting abroad year after year. Although the school education system did not have time to be sound, he always kept the Confucian way in mind.

古文：魏天平中，范阳卢景裕同从兄礼于本郡起逆，高祖免其罪，置之宾馆，以经教授太原公以下。
现代文：魏天平年间，范阳卢景裕和堂兄卢礼在当地起兵作乱，高祖赦免了他的罪行，把他安置在宾馆裹，用经书教授太原公以下的人员。
English: During the Wei and Tianping dynasties, Fanyang Lu Jingyu and his cousin Lu Lei started a rebellion in the area. Gaozu pardoned his crime, put him in a hotel, and used scriptures to teach people below Taiyuan Gong.

古文：及景裕卒，又以赵郡李同轨继之，二贤并大蒙恩遇，待以殊礼。
现代文：量裕死后，又让赵郡李同轨继续从事这项工作，他们两人都非常受到皇上重视，待为上宾。
English: After Qiao Yu's death, he allowed Zhao County's Li Tonglu to continue this work. Both of them were highly valued by the emperor and served as his guests.

古文：同轨之亡，复征中山张雕、渤海李铉、刁柔、中山石曜等递为诸子师友。
现代文：同轨死后，又征召中山张雕、渤海李铉、刁柔，中山石曜等人相继成为诸子的师友。
English: After the death of the same track, Zhongshan Zhang Zhao, Bohai Li Yao, Gong Rong, Zhongshan Shiyou and others were successively recruited to become teachers and friends of the sons.

古文：及天保、大宁、武平之朝，亦引进名儒，授皇太子诸王经术。
现代文：到了天保、大宁、武平三朝，也都引进名儒，传授皇太子和诸王经学儒术。
English: The three dynasties of Tianbao, Daning, and Wuping also introduced famous Confucianists and taught Confucianism to the crown princes and kings.

古文：然爰自始基，暨于季世，唯济南之在储宫，性识聪敏，颇自砥砺，以成其美，自余多骄恣傲狠，动违礼度，日就月将，无闻焉尔。
现代文：但是从国家建立，一直到末世，仅有济南王作太子时，本性聪明，很用功，学到了儒学，其他人都骄横傲慢狠毒，动不动就违反法度，日积月累，最终默默无闻。
English: However, since the establishment of the country, until the end of the world, only the King of Jinan, when he was crown prince, was naturally intelligent, worked hard, and learned Confucianism. The others were arrogant, arrogant, and vicious. They violated the law at every turn, accumulated over time, and eventually faded into obscurity.

古文：镂冰雕朽，迄用无成，盖有由也。
现代文：就如同在冰上镂花，在朽木上雕刻，以没有丝毫用处而告终，都是有自身的原因的。
English: Just as there are reasons for making flowers on ice and carving on rotten wood that end up being of no use at all.

古文：夫帝子王孙，□性淫逸，况义方之情不笃，邪僻之路竞开，自非得自生知，体包上智，而内有声色之娱，外多犬马之好，安能入便笃行，出则友贤者也。
现代文：帝王家的子孙，本来就贪图安逸，又不注重遵守行为规范，纷纷向放荡不正的邪路上走。他们如果不是生而知之，有极高的智慧，在宫中有声色之娱，在外有犬马渔猎之好，岂能做到入则切实实行儒学，出则舆贤人作朋友呢。
English: The children and grandchildren of the imperial family are naturally greedy for comfort, and do not pay attention to the observance of behavioral norms, and one after another go down the wrong path of debauchery and injustice. If they are not born with knowledge, have extremely high wisdom, have loud entertainment in the palace, and have good hunting and fishing outside, will they be able to practice Confucianism when they enter, and make friends with wise people when they leave?

古文：徒有师傅之资，终无琢磨之实。
现代文：徒然有好的老师，却没有可供雕琢的人才。
English: It is in vain to have a master to teach, after all, there is no real achievement in cultivating morality.

古文：下之从化，如风靡草，是以世冑之门，罕闻强学。
现代文：下面的人也效法这种情况，如同风吹草低一样，所以王公贵族之家，很少听说有学习用功的。
English: The people below also follow this situation, just as the wind-blown grass is low, so the royal family is rarely heard of studying hard.

古文：若使贵游之辈，饰以明经，可谓稽山竹箭，加之以括羽，俯拾青紫，断可知焉。
现代文：如果贵族子弟都能用各种经书丰富自己，就可算稽山上的竹箭，加上了羽毛，高官厚禄俯拾即是，断然无疑。
English: If the children of aristocrats can enrich themselves with all kinds of scriptures, they can be regarded as the bamboo and arrows on the mountain, with feathers added, and the high-ranking officials are richly rewarded, there is no doubt.

古文：而齐氏司存，或失其守，师、保、疑、丞皆赏勋旧，国学博士徒有虚名，唯国子一学，生徒数十人耳。
现代文：然而在北齐一朝，有时就失于保守，师、保、疑、丞的官职衹能授予有功劳的贵族，国学博士徒有虚名，仅在国子监裹，有几十个学生而已。
English: However, in Northern Qi, once a dynasty, it sometimes lost its conservatism. The official posts of teacher, guarantor, doubter, and consul could only be awarded to noblemen with merit, and the doctor of Chinese classics only had a false name. Only in Guozihong, there were only dozens of students.

古文：欲求官正国治，其可得乎？
现代文：这种状态还想要官吏正派、国家长治久安，难道能做得到吗?
English: Can this state of affairs be maintained if we still want officials to be decent and the country to enjoy long-term stability?

古文：冑子以通经仕者唯博陵崔子发、广平宋游卿而已，自外莫见其人。
现代文：贵族之弟以经学闻名而当官的仅博陵崔子发、广平宋游卿而已，除此之外就不值一提了。
English: The younger brother of the aristocrat is famous for his study of the classics, and only Boling Cui Zifan and Guangping Song Youqing are in office. Other than that, he is not worth mentioning.

古文：幸朝章宽简，政网疏阔，游手浮惰，十室而九。
现代文：幸而国家朝政宽松，整天无事可做的人，占了十分之九。
English: Fortunately, the country's government is lenient, and those who have nothing to do all day account for nine out of ten.

古文：故横经受业之侣，遍于乡邑；负笈从宦之徒，不远千里。
现代文：所以手捧着经书来求学的人，遍及乡村城邑；背著书箱走上仕途的人，也不远千里而来。
English: Therefore, people who study and receive education are all over the countryside; people who carry a bookcase to work as an official are thousands of miles away.

古文：伏膺无怠，善诱不倦。
现代文：学生求知毫不懈怠，老师循循善诱。
English: Students do not slack off in their pursuit of knowledge, and teachers encourage them to do so.

古文：入闾里之内，乞食为资；□桑梓之阴，动逾千数。
现代文：学生到乡村寄食为生；在桑梓树下稍作休息，动不动就超过上千人。
English: Students live by sending food to the countryside; more than a thousand people gather under the mulberry trees for a short break.

古文：燕、赵之俗，此□尤甚。
现代文：根据燕、趟地区的风俗，这类人更多。
English: According to the customs of Yan and Wai regions, there are more such people.

古文：齐制：诸郡并立学，置博士助教授经，学生俱差逼充员，士流及豪富之家皆不从调。
现代文：按照北齐的制度：各郡都设立学校，设置博士助教讲授经书，学生都被迫进入学校充当生员，名流和豪富人家的子弟却都不听从调派。
English: According to the Beiqi system: all counties set up schools, set up doctoral teaching assistants to teach scriptures, students are forced to enter schools to serve as students, but the children of celebrities and wealthy families do not obey the assignment.

古文：备员既非所好，坟籍固不关怀，又多被州郡官人驱使。
现代文：学校的学生并非真心喜欢读书，所以他们根本不关心书本，又经常被州郡官吏驱使。
English: The students at the school don't really like reading, so they don't care about books at all, and they are often driven by state and county officials.

古文：纵有游惰，亦不检治，皆由上非所好之所致也。
现代文：即使有人懒惰不好好读书，也没有人加以处罚，这种局面都是由于皇上不喜欢读书造成的。
English: Even if someone is lazy and does not study well, no one is punished, this situation is caused by the emperor's dislike of reading.

古文：诸郡俱得察孝廉，其博士、助教及游学之徒通经者，推择充举。
现代文：各州郡奉命考察孝廉，博士、助教和游学的生员中凡是通解经书的，都有资格被推荐选拔。
English: All prefectures and counties have been ordered to inspect the filial piety, and all Ph.D. students, teaching assistants, and students on study tours who are good at interpreting scriptures are eligible to be recommended for selection.

古文：射策十条，通八以上，听九品出身，其尤异者亦蒙抽擢。
现代文：十条考试题，祇要答对其中的八条，就给予九品出身，成绩优异的还可以破格提拔。
English: Ten examination questions, only eight of which need to be answered to be given nine grades of birth, and those with excellent grades can also be exceptionally promoted.

古文：凡是经学诸生，多出自魏末大儒徐遵明门下。
现代文：所有研习经学的诸生，大都出自魏末大儒徐遵明的门下。
English: All the students of classics are mostly from the school of Xu Zunming, a great scholar at the end of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：河北讲郑康成所注周易。
现代文：徐遵明在河北讲授郑康成注的《周易》。
English: Xu Zunming teaches Zheng Kangcheng's "Zhou Yi" in Hebei.

古文：遵明以传卢景裕及清河崔瑾，景裕传权会，权会传郭茂。
现代文：他传给了卢景裕和清河崔瑾，卢景裕又传给权会，权会传给郭茂。
English: He passed it on to Lu Jingyu and Qinghe Cui Wei, Lu Jingyu passed it on to the Rights Association, and the Rights Association passed it on to Guo Mao.

古文：权会早入京都，郭茂恒在门下教授。
现代文：权会很早的时候就来到了京城，郭茂经常在他门下教授。
English: Guo came to Beijing very early in his career, and Guo Mao often taught under him.

古文：其后能言易者多出郭茂之门。
现代文：此后，能讲解《周易》的学者大都出自郭茂的门下。
English: Since then, most scholars who can explain "Zhou Yi" have come from Guo Mao's disciples.

古文：河南及青、齐之间，儒生多讲王辅嗣所注周易，师训盖寡。
现代文：河南和青州、齐州地区的儒生大都学习王辅嗣注的《周易》，但从师学习的人比较少。
English: Most of the Confucian students in Henan, Qingzhou and Qizhou regions study the "Zhou Yi" annotated by Wang Fuxi, but there are relatively few who study under a teacher.

古文：齐时儒士，罕传尚书之业，徐遵明兼通之。
现代文：北齐时的儒生，很少有学习《尚书》的，徐遵明对《尚书》也很精通。
English: Few Confucian scholars in the Northern Qi Dynasty studied Shangshu, but Xu Zunming was well versed in Shangshu.

古文：遵明受业于屯留王总，传授浮阳李周仁及渤海张文敬及李铉、权会，并郑康成所注，非古文也。
现代文：他从师于屯留王总，然后传给了浮阳李周仁、渤海张文敬和李铉、权会，都是郑康成的注本，并不是古文《尚书》。
English: He studied under Tunliu Wang Zong, and then passed it on to Fuyang Li Zhou Ren, Bohai Zhang Wenking and Li Yao, and the power association, all of which are Zheng Kangcheng's commentaries, not the ancient text "Shang Shu."

古文：下里诸生，略不见孔氏注解。
现代文：乡里的读书人都没有见过孔注《尚书》。
English: Most Confucian scholars in the countryside have not seen the commentary on the ancient text "Shang Shu" by Kong An Guo.

古文：武平末，河间刘光伯、信都刘士元始得费甝义疏，乃留意焉。
现代文：武平末年，河间刘光伯、信都刘士元发现费彪作的《义疏》，于是人们开始留意古文《尚书》。
English: In the last years of the Wu-Ping Dynasty, Liu Guangbo and Liu Shiyuan discovered the "Yisiao" by Fei Biao, so people began to pay attention to the ancient text "Shangshu."

古文：其诗、礼、春秋尤为当时所尚，诸生多兼通之。
现代文：儒家经典中以《诗经》、《礼记》、《春秋》最流行，许多读书人都能兼通。
English: Among the Confucian classics, "The Book of Songs," "The Book of Rites" and "Spring and Autumn" are the most popular, and many readers can read them all.

古文：三礼并出遵明之门。
现代文：《三礼》都是徐遵明传授的。
English: "Three Rites" were all taught by Xu Zunming.

古文：徐传业于李铉、沮□、田元凤、冯伟、纪显敬、吕黄龙、夏怀敬。
现代文：徐传给李铉、沮俊、田元凤、冯伟、纪显敬、吕黄龙、夏怀敬。
English: Xu passed it on to Li Qian, Dejun, Tian Yuanfeng, Feng Wei, Ji Xianjing, Lv Huanglong and Xia Huaijing.

古文：李铉又传授刁柔、张买奴、鲍季详、邢峙、刘昼、熊安生。
现代文：李铉又传给刁柔、张买奴、鲍季详、邢峙、刘昼、熊安生。
English: Li Qian also taught Gong Rou, Zhang Mian Niu, Bao Jizhao, Xie Jiao, Liu Rong, and Xiong An Sheng.

古文：安生又传孙灵晖、郭仲坚、丁恃德。
现代文：熊安生又传给孙灵晖、郭仲坚、丁恃德。
English: Xiong Ansheng also taught Sun Lingyao, Guo Zhongjian and Ding Rongde.

古文：其后生能通礼经者多是安生门人。
现代文：后来能通解《礼经》的大都是安生的学生。
English: Later, most of the students who were able to understand the "Book of Rites" were Anson's students.

古文：诸生尽通小戴礼，于周、仪礼兼通者十二三焉。
现代文：诸生都能通晓《小戴礼记》，能同时精通《周礼》、《仪礼》的占了十分之二三。
English: All sentient beings can understand the "Diary of Xiao Dai," and those who can simultaneously master the "Weekly Rituals" and "Rites" account for two-thirds of ten.

古文：通毛诗者多出于魏朝博陵刘献之。
现代文：精通《毛诗》的大都是魏朝博陵刘献之的学生。
English: Most of the students who are proficient in "Mao Shi" are the students of Liu Xianzhi of Bo Ling in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：献之传李周仁，周仁传董令度、程归则，归则传刘敬和、张思伯、刘轨思。
现代文：刘献之传给李周仁，李周仁传给董令度、程归则，程归则传给刘敬和、张思伯、刘轨思。
English: Liu Xizhen passed it on to Li Zhouren, Li Zhouren passed it on to Dong Rongdu and Cheng Gui Zi, and Cheng Gui Zi passed it on to Liu Jinghe, Zhang Sibo and Liu Liusi.

古文：其后能言诗者多出二刘之门。
现代文：以后能讲解《诗经》的大多出自二刘门下。
English: Most of the scholars who were later able to explain "The Book of Songs" were disciples of Er Liu.

古文：河北诸儒能通春秋者，并服子慎所注，亦出徐生之门。
现代文：河北能通解《春秋》的，都使用服子慎的注本，也是徐遵明传授的。
English: Those in Hebei Province who are able to solve "Spring and Autumn" all use the annotation by Fuzishen, which was also taught by Xu Zunming.

古文：张买奴、马敬德、邢峙、张思伯、张雕、刘昼、鲍长暄、王元则并得服氏之精微。
现代文：张买奴、马敬德、邢峙、张思伯、张雕、刘昼、鲍长暄、王元则都学到了服注的精髓。
English: Zhang Mianu, Ma Jingde, Zhiqi, Zhang Sibo, Zhang Zhao, Liu Rong, Bao Changyu, and Wang Yuan all learned the essence of clothing infusion.

古文：又有□觊、陈达、潘叔度虽不传徐氏之门，亦为通解。
现代文：另外还有卫觊、陈达、潘叔度，虽然不是向徐遵明学习的，但也能达到通解的程度。
English: In addition, there are Wei Wei, Chen Da and Pan Shudu. Although they are not learning from Xu Zunming, they can also reach the level of general solution.

古文：又有姚文安、秦道静初亦学服氏，后更兼讲杜元凯所注。
现代文：另外姚文安、秦道静开始也学服子慎的注本，后来又兼带讲解杜元凯注本。
English: In addition, Yao Wen'an and Qin Daojing also began to study Fuxishen's annotation book, and later also Du Yuankai's annotation book.

古文：其河外儒生俱伏膺杜氏。
现代文：河外儒生都学习杜氏的注本。
English: Kawagoe Confucianism students all study Toji's commentaries.

古文：其公羊、谷梁二传，儒者多不措怀。
现代文：对《公羊传》、《谷梁传》，都不太留心。
English: They don't pay much attention to "The Story of the Ram" and "The Story of Gu Liang."

古文：论语、孝经，诸学徒莫不通讲。
现代文：《论语》、《孝经》，各人都要通习讲解。
English: "The Analects" and "The Filial Piety Sutra" are to be studied and explained by everyone.

古文：诸儒如权会、李铉、刁柔、熊安生、刘轨思、马敬德之徒多自出义疏。
现代文：像权会、李铉、刁柔、熊安生、刘轨思、马敬德等人都是自己注疏典籍。
English: Like the rights association, Li Ying, Gong Rou, Xiong An Sheng, Liu Lusi, Ma Jingde and others are self-annotated classics.

古文：虽曰专门，亦皆粗习也。
现代文：虽然是专门的学业，但也都是粗略地研习。
English: Although it is a specialized study, it is also a rough study.

古文：今序所录诸生，或终于魏朝，或名宦不达，纵能名家，又阙其由来及所出郡国，并略存其姓名而已。
现代文：本书收录的儒生，有的终身生活在魏朝，有的仕途不顺，即使名气可以独成一家，但对其生平事迹和家乡籍贯缺乏记载，仅是保留姓名而已。
English: Some of the Confucian scholars included in this book lived their entire lives in the Wei Dynasty, while others did not have a successful career. Even if fame can make a family, there is a lack of records of their life and hometown, and they only retain their names.

古文：俱取其尤通显者列于儒林云。
现代文：所以选择了最有名的列入《儒林》。
English: So I chose the most famous one, which is included in "Julin."

古文：熊安生名在周史，光伯、士元着于隋书，辄不重述。
现代文：熊安生的名字见于周史，刘光伯、刘士元归入《隋书》，本书不再重述。
English: Xiong Ansheng's name appears in the History of Zhou, and Liu Guangbo and Liu Shiyuan are included in the Sui Dynasty Book, which will not be repeated in this book.

古文：李铉，字宝鼎，渤海南皮人也。
现代文：李铉，字宝鼎，渤海南皮人。
English: Li Kun, Zi Baoding, and Nanpi people from Bohai.

古文：九岁入学，书急就篇，月余便通。
现代文：九岁入学，抄写《急就篇》，一个多月就能懂能通。
English: Enrolled in school at the age of nine, copied "Emergency Edition," and was able to understand and communicate in more than a month.

古文：家素贫苦，常春夏务农，冬乃入学。
现代文：家中素来贫困，常常春夏在家务农，冬季才到学校学习。
English: The family has always been poor, and they often farmed at home in the spring and summer, and only went to school in the winter.

古文：年十六，从浮阳李周仁受毛诗、尚书，章武刘子猛受礼记，常山房□受周官、仪礼，渔阳鲜于灵馥受左氏春秋。
现代文：十六岁时，向浮阳李周仁学习《毛诗》、《尚书》，向童茎刘王猛学《礼记》，向堡灿虚丛学《周官》、《仪礼》，向渔阳鲜于灵馥学《左氏春秋》。
English: At the age of sixteen, he learned "Mao Poetry" and "Shang Shu" from Fuyang Li Zhouren, "Rituals" from Tong Zhu Liu Wang Meng, "Zhou Guan" and "Rituals" from Fuxiang Xuanqiu, and "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi" from Yuyang Xian and Lingyao.

古文：铉以乡里无可师者，遂与州里杨元懿、河间宗惠振等结侣诣大儒徐遵明受业。
现代文：他认为家乡没有可以做自己老师的人了，就和同州的握五懿、河间宗惠振等人结伴去向大儒徐遵明拜师受学。
English: He thought that there was no one in his hometown who could be his teacher, so he went to study under the great scholar Xu Zunming together with others from the same state, such as Ji Wuzhen and Kawama Zong Huizhen.

古文：居徐门下五年，常称高第。
现代文：学习了五年，经常名列前茅。
English: Studied for five years, often top of the class.

古文：二十三，便自□居，讨论是非，撰定孝经、论语、毛诗、三礼义疏及三传异同、周易义例合三十余卷。
现代文：二十三岁时，自己潜心隐居，探讨论述是非，撰写了《孝经》、《论语》、《毛诗》、《三礼义疏》和《三传异同》、《周易义例》共三十多卷。
English: At the age of twenty-three, he immersed himself in seclusion, explored and discussed the rights and wrongs, and wrote more than thirty volumes of "Filial Piety," "Analects," "Mao Poems," "Three Rites and Precepts," "Three Traditions and Their Similarities," and "Three Precepts and Their Similarities" and "Three Precepts and Their Similarities."

古文：用心精苦，曾三冬不畜枕，每至睡时，假寐而已。
现代文：他极其刻苦，竟然有三年不用枕头睡觉，每到入睡时，仅是坐着打瞌睡而已。
English: He worked so hard that for three years he didn't sleep with a pillow, and when he did fall asleep, he just sat and dozed.

古文：年二十七，归养二亲，因教授乡里，生徒恒至数百。
现代文：二十七岁，回到家中奉养父母，于是就在乡里教书，前来求学的学生经常有几百人。
English: At the age of twenty-seven, he returned home to support his parents, so he taught in the countryside. There were often hundreds of students who came to study.

古文：燕、赵间能言经者，多出其门。
现代文：燕、赵地区能够讲解经书的，大都出自他的门下。
English: Most of the scholars who can explain scriptures in Yan and Zhao regions are from his school.

古文：年三十六，丁父丧。
现代文：三十六岁时，父亲去世而为父亲守丧。
English: When he was thirty-six years old, his father died and he went to his father's funeral.

古文：服阕，以乡里寡文籍，来游京师，读所未见书。
现代文：服丧期满后，因为乡间书籍缺乏，就到京师游历，想看看没有读到的书。
English: After the mourning period, because of the lack of books in the countryside, he traveled to Beijing to see the books he had not read.

古文：州举秀才，除太学博士。
现代文：州裹举荐他为秀才，授太学博士。
English: He was recommended by the state as an outstanding talent and was awarded a doctorate.

古文：武定中，李同轨卒后，高祖令世宗在京妙简硕学，以教诸子。
现代文：亘迈年间，奎回轨去世，直担让世塞仔细挑选饱学之士，教授自己的儿子。
English: In the course of many years, Kui Hui died, directly responsible for letting Shisei carefully select well-educated people to teach his son.

古文：世宗以铉应旨，征诣晋阳。
现代文：世宗推荐了李丝，被征召到晋阳。
English: Sejong recommended Li Si, who was called up to Jinyang.

古文：时中山石曜、北平阳绚、北海王晞、清河崔瞻、广平宋钦道及工书人韩毅同在东馆，师友诸王。
现代文：当时中山石曜、北平阳绚、担忧型垂、遣回崔盐、卢垩宋钦道和擅长书法的堕超都在束馆，教导诸王。
English: At that time, Zhongshan Shiyou, Beiping Yanghuang, Zhengtian Zhuang, sent back Cui Yan, Lu Ying Song Qin Dao, and Po Chao, who was good at calligraphy, were all in Sokuan, teaching the kings.

古文：铉以去圣久远，文字多有乖谬，感孔子必也正名之言，乃喟然有刊正之意。
现代文：奎铉认为年代久远，典籍中的文字有很多错误，有感于孔子 必也正名 造句话，毅然要加以刊正。
English: Kuijun believes that the age is long, and there are many mistakes in the texts of the classics. Inspired by Confucius, he will also make a correct sentence, and resolutely correct it.

古文：于讲授之暇，遂览说文，爰及仓、雅，删正六艺经注中谬字，名曰字辨。
现代文：在讲课之余，翻阅《说文》和《三仓》、《尔雅》等书，删除改正六艺经书和注解中的错字，他把这部著作定名为《字辨》。
English: In addition to lectures, he read "Shuowen" and "Sancang" and "Erya" and other books, and deleted and corrected the typos in the six art scriptures and annotations. He named this work "Zhiban."

古文：显祖受禅，从驾还都。
现代文：显祖接受挥位后，李铉随从回到都城。
English: After Xianzu accepted the position, Li Xi returned to the capital.

古文：天保初，诏铉与殿中尚书邢卲、中书令魏收等参议礼律，仍兼国子博士。
现代文：天保初，皇上下诏他和殿中尚书邢邵、中书令魏收等人商议制订礼律，兼任国子博士。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpo era, the emperor and his courtiers discussed the establishment of the etiquette with Shang Shushun Shao and Wei Hui, who were in the palace, and concurrently served as Kuniko's doctor.

古文：时诏北平太守宋景业、西河太守綦毌怀文等草定新历，录尚书平原王高隆之令铉与通直常侍房延佑、国子博士刁柔参考得失。
现代文：当时诏令北平太守宋景业、西河太守綦母怀文等人起草制订新历，绿尚书平原王高隆之命李铉和通直常侍房延佑、国子博士刁柔参考旧历的对错。
English: At that time, the Emperor ordered the Beiping Governor Song Jingye and the Xihe Governor Yanmu Huaiwen to draft and formulate a new calendar, and the Green Shangshu Plain King Gaolong's order of Li Xuan and Tong Zhi's constant attendant Yan You, and Dr. Guo Zi's Guo Rou to refer to the right and wrong of the old calendar.

古文：寻正国子博士。
现代文：不久任国子博士。
English: He was soon appointed as Dr. Kuniko.

古文：废帝之在东宫，显祖诏铉以经入授，甚见优礼。
现代文：废帝作太子时，显祖命李铉到宫中讲授经义，对他很是优待。
English: When the former emperor was crown prince, Emperor Xianzu ordered Li Xi to go to the palace to lecture on the sutras, and he was treated very favorably.

古文：数年，病卒。
现代文：几年后因病去世。
English: He died of illness a few years later.

古文：特赠廷尉少卿。
现代文：特别追赠廷尉少卿。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Imperial Lieutenant, Junior Lord.

古文：及还葬故郡，太子致祭奠之礼，并使王人将送，儒者荣之。
现代文：运回故乡安葬时，太子亲自来祭奠，并且派遣手下属员护送，儒学之士都引以为荣。
English: When he was transported back to his hometown for burial, the prince himself came to pay his respects and sent his subordinates to escort him. Confucian scholars are proud of this.

古文：杨元懿、宗惠振官亦俱至国子博士。
现代文：杨元懿、宗惠振后来也成为国子博士
English: Yang Yuanjun and Zong Huizhen later became Dr. Kuniko

古文：刁柔，字子温，渤海人也。
现代文：刁柔，字子温，渤海人。
English: She's soft, warm, and from the Bohai Sea.

古文：父整，魏车骑将军、赠司空。
现代文：父亲刁整，任魏车骑将军，追赠司空。
English: His father, Hao Zhe, was appointed general of the Wei chariot and cavalry, and was posthumously awarded the title of Sifu.

古文：柔少好学，综习经史，尤留心礼仪。
现代文：刁柔小时候勤奋好学，广涉经史，尤其喜爱礼仪。
English: When she was a child, Gong Rong was diligent and eager to learn. She was well versed in history and especially loved etiquette.

古文：性强记，至于氏族内外，多所谙悉。
现代文：记忆力很强，氏族内外之事都很熟悉。
English: They have a strong memory and are familiar with things both inside and outside the clan.

古文：初为世宗挽郎，出身司空行参军。
现代文：最初为世宗的挽郎，任司空行参军。
English: At first, he was Sejong's henchman, but he later joined the army.

古文：丧母，居丧以孝闻。
现代文：母亲去世为母亲守丧，因孝而知名。
English: He mourned the death of his mother and was known for his filial piety.

古文：永安中，除中坚将军、奉车都尉，加冠军将军、中散大夫。
现代文：永安年间，任中坚将军、奉车都尉，加冠军将军、中敞大夫。
English: During the Yongan era, he served as a core general, a lieutenant of Fengche, a champion general, and a junior doctor.

古文：元象中，随例到晋阳，高祖以为永安公府长流参军，又令教授诸子。
现代文：五墓年间，按例到置屋，直担任命他为丞玄公府长流参军，命他教自己几个孩子读书。
English: During the five years of the tomb, he went to the ochiya as usual, and he was ordered to join the army as the head of the joseon gongfu line, and he was ordered to teach his children to read.

古文：天保初，除国子博士、中书舍人。
现代文：天惺初，任国子博士、中书舍人。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, he was appointed as a doctor of Kuniko and a scholar of Chinese literature.

古文：魏收撰魏史，启柔等与同其事。
现代文：魏收编写魏史，启奏皇上让刁柔共同参与其事。
English: Wei Hui compiled the Wei history, and the emperor let Gong Rong participate in it.

古文：柔性颇专固，自是所闻，收常所嫌惮。
现代文：刁柔为人很固执，总认为自己的见解正确，魏收常嫌弃他。
English: Gong Rong is a very stubborn person. He always thinks that his opinion is correct. Wei Hui often dislikes him.

古文：又参议律令。
现代文：旦圣又参与制定律令。
English: Dan Sheng also participated in the formulation of laws and regulations.

古文：时议者以为立五等爵邑，承袭者无嫡子，立嫡孙，无嫡孙，立嫡子弟，无嫡子弟，立嫡孙弟。
现代文：当时人们认为要设立五等爵位和封地，如果继承人没有长子，就立长孙，没有长孙就立长子的弟弟，长子没有弟弟就立长孙的弟弟。
English: At that time, it was thought that a fifth-class peerage and a fiefdom should be established. If the heir did not have a firstborn son, he would appoint a firstborn grandson, if there was no firstborn grandson, he would appoint a younger brother of the firstborn son, and if the firstborn son did not have a younger brother, he would appoint a younger brother of the firstborn grandson.

古文：柔以为无嫡孙，应立嫡曾孙，不应立嫡子弟。
现代文：刁柔认为没有长孙，应该立长曾孙，而不应该立长子的弟弟。
English: Gong Rong thought that since she didn't have an eldest grandson, she should set up an eldest great-grandson, but not a younger brother of the eldest son.

古文：议曰：柔案礼立适以长，故谓长子为嫡子。
现代文：他发表意见说：我认为根据《礼记》的规定要立长子为继承人，所以把长子叫作嫡子。
English: He commented: "I think that according to the provisions of "Li Ji," the eldest son should be appointed as the heir, so the eldest son is called the legitimate son.

古文：嫡子死，以嫡子之子为嫡孙，死则曾、玄亦然。
现代文：嫡子死了。就立长子的儿子为嫡孙，嫡孙死后就依次立曾孙、玄孙为继承人。
English: When the legitimate son died, the eldest son's son became the legitimate grandson, and when the legitimate grandson died, the great-grandson and great-great-grandson became the successors.

古文：然则嫡子之名，本为传重。
现代文：嫡子的设立，本来是为了把家业传之长孙。
English: The eldest son was originally established in order to pass on the family business to the eldest grandson.

古文：故丧服曰： 庶子不为长子三年，不继祖与祢也。 礼记公仪仲子之丧： 檀弓曰：子服伯子曰： 郑注曰： 伯子为亲者讳耳，立子非也。
现代文：所以《礼记丧服》说： 妾所生的儿子三年之内不做长子，不能继承祖先的基业并祭祀祖先。 《礼记》记载了公仪仲子死时的情景： 擅弓说： 这是怎么回事呢，我以前没有听说过，仲子没有立嫡孙反而立庶子为继承人，这是什么原因呢? 
English: Therefore, "The Book of Rites and Funeral Rites" says: "The son born of a concubine does not become the eldest son within three years, and cannot inherit the ancestral inheritance and sacrifice to the ancestors." "The Book of Rites" records the scene at the time of the death of the public ceremony of Nakako: Gambotsu said: "What's going on, I haven't heard of this before, Nakako didn't set up a legitimate grandchild, but set up an illegitimate child as the heir, what's the reason for this?"

古文：文王之立武王，权也。微子嫡子死，立其弟衍，殷礼也。  子游问诸孔子，孔子曰： 注曰： 据周礼。 然则商以嫡子死，立嫡子之母弟，周以嫡子死，立嫡子之子为嫡孙。
现代文：子服伯子说： 仲子也是依古代的礼节的，当初周文王没有立长子伯邑考而立了武王姬发，微子没有立嫡孙盾而立了弟弟衍，所以说仲子依照的是古礼。  郑玄注说： 伯子这是为亲者讳，不立嫡子是错误的。周文王立周武王，是权宜措施。微子的嫡子死了，立弟弟衍，这是根据商礼。  子游就这件事去请教孔子，孔子说： 不应该这样，应该立嫡孙。  注解说： 这是根据《周礼》。 这样就是说商代嫡子死了，就立嫡子的同母弟弟，周代是嫡子死，立嫡子的儿子为嫡孙。
English: Zheng Xuan said, "Zhongzi is also following the ancient etiquette. At the beginning, King Zhouwen did not set up his eldest son Bo Yu Khao, but set up King Wu Ji Fa, and Weizi did not set up his legitimate grandson Dun, but set up his younger brother Yan, so it is said that Zhongzi is following the ancient etiquette. Zheng Xuan said, "Bo Zi, this is for relatives, it is wrong not to set up a legitimate son. King Zhouwen set up King Zhou Wu, it is a stopgap measure. Weizi's legitimate son died, set up his younger brother Yan, this is

古文：故春秋公羊之义，嫡子有孙而死，质家亲亲先立弟，文家尊尊先立孙。
现代文：所以根据《春秋公羊传》的义理，嫡子有了孙子而死，崇尚实际的朝代重视亲缘关系先立弟弟，崇尚文礼的朝代尊重先人先立嫡孙。
English: Therefore, according to the principle of "The Story of the Spring and Autumn Ram," the legitimate son died after having a grandchild, the dynasties advocating practicality valued the relationship of kinship and set up a younger brother first, and the dynasties advocating literature and etiquette respected the ancestors and set up a grandchild first.

古文：丧服云： 为父后者为出母无服。 小记云： 祖父卒而后为祖母后者三年。 为出母无服者，丧者不祭故也。
现代文：《丧服篇》上说： 儿子死在父亲之后，儿子可以不为母亲服丧。 《小记》上说： 祖父去世祖母去世时要守丧三年。 不为被父亲休弃的生母守丧，是因为别人死了她不参加祭礼。
English: The "Funeral Robe" says: After a son's death of his father, the son may not mourn for his mother. The "Small Diary" says: When a grandfather dies, a grandmother must observe a mourning period of three years. Do not mourn for the birth mother who was abandoned by her father, because she does not participate in the ritual because someone else died.

古文：为祖母三年者，大宗传重故也。
现代文：为祖母守丧三年，是由于要把家业传给嫡系长孙。
English: The reason for the three-year mourning period for the grandmother was to pass on the family business to the eldest grandson in the direct line.

古文：今议以嫡孙死而立嫡子母弟，嫡子母弟者则为父后矣。
现代文：如今议论因为嫡孙死了就立嫡子的同母弟弟，嫡子的同母弟弟就成为父亲的后代了。
English: Nowadays, it is said that because the legitimate grandson died, the legitimate son's younger half-brother was born, and the legitimate son's younger half-brother became the father's offspring.

古文：嫡子母弟本非承嫡，以无嫡，故得为父后。
现代文：他本来不应该继承家业，因为没有嫡系长房长子，才得以成为后代。
English: He should not have inherited the family business in the first place, because he did not have a legitimate eldest son to become a descendant.

古文：则嫡孙之弟，理亦应得为父后。
现代文：那么嫡孙的弟弟，按理也应该成为父亲的后代。
English: Then the younger brother of the legitimate grandchild should also be the offspring of the father.

古文：则是父卒然后为祖后者服斩，既得为祖服斩，而不得为传重者，未之闻也。
现代文：这样父亲死后他为祖父母服斩縯，既然能为祖父母服斩缭，却不能传给家业的事，我没有听说过。
English: I've never heard of a case where a father died and left the business to his grandparents, since he was able to do so, but couldn't pass it on to the family business.

古文：若用商家亲亲之义，本不应嫡子死而立嫡孙。
现代文：如果采用商代尚实的做法，本来不应该嫡子死后立嫡孙。
English: If the Shang Dynasty's practical approach had been adopted, the legitimate grandson should not have been established after the death of the legitimate son.

古文：若从周家尊尊之文，岂宜舍其孙而立其弟？
现代文：如果采用周代尚礼的做法，怎么能不立嫡孙而立嫡子的弟弟呢?
English: If the practice of Zhou Dynasty etiquette is adopted, how can the younger brother of the legitimate son be set up instead of the legitimate grandson?

古文：或文或质，愚用惑焉。
现代文：用周代制度或用商代制度，运用起来都很迷惘。《礼记。
English: It is very confusing to use the Zhou Dynasty system or the Shang Dynasty system.

古文：小记复云： 嫡妇不为舅后者则姑为之小功。 注云： 谓夫有废疾他故若死无子不受重者。
现代文：小记》中又说： 嫡子之妇不能成为公公的后代，则婆婆去世时衹能服小功丧。 郑玄解释说： 丈夫残废身有疾病或其他原因去世而没有儿子，则不能传于长孙。
English: Zheng Xuan explained: "If the wife of the legitimate son cannot become the offspring of the father-in-law, then when the mother-in-law dies, she can only make a small contribution.If the husband is disabled, has a disease or dies for other reasons and has no son, then it cannot be passed on to the eldest grandson.

古文：小功，庶妇之服。
现代文：小功，是庶子之妇服丧。
English: Small achievement, is the widow of an illegitimate son mourning.

古文：凡父母于子，舅姑于妇，将不传重于嫡，及将所传重者非嫡，服之皆如□子庶妇也。 言死无子者，谓绝世无子，非谓无嫡子。
现代文：凡是父母对于儿子、公婆对于媳妇，不传于嫡长孙，而所传的不是嫡系，那么嫡系的服丧与其他庶子和媳妇的服丧是一样了。 人们把死后没有儿子的人，叫做绝世无子，并不是说没有嫡子。
English: If the parents of a son, or the parents-in-law of a daughter-in-law, do not pass on their lineage to the eldest son or daughter-in-law, but the lineage is not legitimate, then the death of the legitimate lineage is the same as the death of other sons and daughters-in-law.People call a person who dies without a son "absolutely childless," but this does not mean that there is no legitimate son.

古文：如其有子，焉得云无后？
现代文：如果有儿子，怎么说能没有后代呢?
English: If there is a son, how can there be no offspring?

古文：夫虽废疾无子，妇犹以嫡为名。
现代文：即使丈夫残疾没有儿子，媳妇作嫡媳的名义仍然存在。
English: Even if the husband is disabled and has no son, the name of the daughter-in-law as the legitimate daughter-in-law still exists.

古文：嫡名既在，而欲废其子者，其如礼何！
现代文：名义还在，却想废掉她的儿子，遣将把礼法置于何地呢!
English: She is still nominally alive, but she wants to abolish her son. Where will she put the code of etiquette?

古文：礼有损益，代相沿革，必谓宗嫡可得而变者，则为后服斩，亦宜有因而改。
现代文：礼法也有增删，代代相传，一定要认为嫡子继承制可以改变的话，那么后代服斩缭的丧礼也应该有理由改动了。
English: The etiquette also has additions and deletions, passed down from generation to generation. It must be considered that if the heir succession system can be changed, then the funeral rites of future generations should also have a reason to change.

古文：七年夏卒，时年五十六。
现代文：天保七年夏，刁柔去世，时年五十六岁。
English: In the summer of the seventh year of the Tenpo era, Jiro passed away at the age of fifty-six.

古文：柔在史馆未久，逢勒成之际，志存偏党。
现代文：他在史馆待的时间不长，皇上对《魏书》的编写催逼很聚，其中他对人物的评价有偏颇。
English: He did not stay long at the history museum. The emperor's urging for the compilation of the "Weishu" was very concentrated, and his evaluation of the characters was biased.

古文：魏书中与其内外通亲者并虚美过实，深为时论所讥焉。
现代文：《魏书》中凡是和他有内外亲戚关系的人都文过饰非，深受当时人的讥讽。
English: In the "Weishu," anyone who was related to him inside and outside the country was written about and ridiculed by the people of the time.

古文：冯伟，字伟节，中山安喜人也。
现代文：冯伟，字伟节，中山安喜人。
English: Feng Wei, Zhi Wei Festival, Zhongshan An Xi Ren.

古文：身长八尺，衣冠甚伟，见者肃然敬惮。
现代文：身高八尺，身体强健，让人见了肃然起敬。
English: He is eight feet tall, physically strong, and commands respect.

古文：少从李宝鼎游学，李重其聪敏，恒别意试问之。
现代文：少年时随从李宝鼎游学，由于聪明很受李的赏识，经常试着向他提问。
English: When he was a boy, he accompanied Li Baoding on a study tour. Since his intelligence was highly appreciated by Li, he often tried to ask him questions.

古文：多所通解，尤明礼传。
现代文：冯伟精通多种经典，尤其熟悉《礼传》。
English: Feng Wei is proficient in a variety of classics, and is particularly familiar with "The Biography of Li Zhen."

古文：后还乡里，闭门不出将三十年，不问生产，不交宾客，专精覃思，无所不通。
现代文：后来回到家乡，近三十年闭门不出，不过问家业，不结交宾客，专心致志地学习，以至于无所不通。
English: Later, he returned to his hometown, and for nearly thirty years he did not leave his house, but he asked about his family business, did not make friends with guests, and devoted himself to his studies, so much so that he knew everything.

古文：赵郡王出镇定州，以礼迎接，命书三至，县令亲至其门，犹辞疾不起。
现代文：趟郡王镇守定州的时候，派人以礼相迎，又多次写信，县令亲自到他家中，仍然托病不出。
English: When he went to Guowang Town to guard Dingzhou, he sent someone to greet him with courtesy, and wrote letters many times. The county magistrate personally went to his home, but still couldn't come out because of illness.

古文：王将命驾致请，佐史前后星驰报之，县令又自为其整冠履，不得已而出。
现代文：郡王打算自己来请他，佐史前后相继骑快马到他家中报信，县令亲手为他整理衣冠，不得已而去应召。
English: The county king planned to invite him himself, and Sashi rode a fast horse to his home one after another to report the letter. The county magistrate personally sorted out the crown for him, and had no choice but to answer the call.

古文：王下厅事迎之，止其拜伏，分阶而上，留之宾馆，甚见礼重。
现代文：赵郡王到堂下来迎接，不让他跪拜，从台阶两侧一齐走到厅上，把他安置在宾馆，受到礼待和器重。
English: Zhao Guowang came down to the hall to welcome him, and instead of making him kneel, he walked up to the hall from both sides of the steps, and placed him in a hotel, where he was treated with courtesy and respect.

古文：王将举充秀才，固辞不就。
现代文：郡王想推荐他作秀才，他坚决推辞。
English: The county king wanted to recommend him as a great talent, but he firmly refused.

古文：岁余请还。
现代文：过了一年多请求回家。
English: After more than a year, he asked to go home.

古文：王知其不愿拘束，以礼发遣，赠遗甚厚，一无所纳，唯受时服而已。
现代文：郡王知道冯伟不愿受拘束，依礼送他回家并喂赠了许多东西，他却丝毫没有要，仅接受了一件当时通行的服装。
English: The county king knew that Feng Wei did not want to be restrained, and sent him home according to etiquette and gave him many things. However, he did not want anything at all, and only accepted a piece of clothing that was common at the time.

古文：及还，终不交人事，郡守县令每亲至其门。
现代文：回到家后，始终也不与人来往，郡守县令常常亲自到他家。
English: After returning home, he never interacted with anyone, and the county magistrate often visited his home in person.

古文：岁时或置羊酒，亦辞不纳。
现代文：常有人送来羊和酒，也推辞不受。
English: Sheep and wine are often sent, and no one is turned away.

古文：门徒束修，一毫不受。
现代文：学生的束脩一概不要。
English: Students are not required to wear a headscarf.

古文：耕而饭，蚕而衣，箪食瓢饮，不改其乐，竟以寿终。
现代文：自己耕种吃饭、养蚕穿衣，箪食瓢饮，自得其乐，最后得以寿终。
English: Cultivate their own food, raise silkworms, wear clothes, eat and drink, enjoy themselves, and finally end their lives.

古文：张买奴，平原人也。经义该博，门徒千余人。诸儒咸推重之，名声甚盛。
现代文：张旦恕，芒愿人。经义广博，学生有一千多人，儒士都很推崇他，名气很大。
English: Zhang Danzhong, a disciple of Meng Wei, has more than a thousand students and is widely respected by Confucians. He is very famous.

古文：历太学博士、国子助教，天保中卒。
现代文：历任太学博士、国子助教，玉堡年间去世。
English: Dr. Taigaku and Assistant Professor Kuniko passed away in the same year.

古文：刘轨思，渤海人也。说诗甚精。
现代文：刘勉墨，逊擅人。解说《诗经》非常精到。
English: Liu Yanmo is not a good writer. His interpretation of "The Book of Songs" is very good.

古文：少事同郡刘敬和，敬和事同郡程归则，故其乡曲多为诗者。
现代文：少年时向同郡刘塑塑学习，刘邀塑的老师是同郡的登壁剑，所以他的家乡大都研究《诗经》。
English: When he was a boy, he learned from Liu Shuxing of the same county. The teacher of Liu Shuxing was a wall-climbing sword of the same county, so most of his hometown studied the "Song of Songs."

古文：轨思，天统中任国子博士。
现代文：塾墨在玉统年间任国子博士。
English: Jukumo was appointed as Kuniko doctor during the reign of Emperor Tamatsura.

古文：鲍季详，渤海人也。
现代文：鲍季详，渤海人。
English: Bao Jizhe, a native of Bohai Sea.

古文：甚明礼，听其离文析句，自然大略可解。兼通左氏春秋，少时恒为李宝鼎都讲，后亦自有徒□，诸儒称之。
现代文：很通晓《礼记》，听他讲解其中的文句，自然而然就可以大体明白他还同时精通《左氏春秋》，少年时为李实鼎都讲，协助讲经，后来自己有了大批学生，儒士对他也很称道。
English: He is very familiar with the "Rituals," and listening to his explanation of the phrases in it, it is natural to understand that he is also familiar with the "Spring and Autumn of Zuo." When he was a boy, Li Shiding both spoke and assisted in preaching. Later, he had a large number of students, and the Confucianists were very praiseworthy of him.

古文：天统中，卒于太学博士。
现代文：天统年间，在太学博士任上去世。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tenjo, he passed away while holding the post of Doctor of Taihaku.

古文：从弟长暄，兼通礼传。
现代文：堂弟鲍长暄，精通《礼传》。
English: His cousin, Bao Changyu, is well versed in the "Legend."

古文：武平末，为任城王湝丞相掾，恒在京教授贵游子弟。
现代文：武平末年。任任城王高浩的丞相掾，常常在京城教授贵族子弟。
English: In the last years of the Wu-Ping Dynasty, he was appointed as the chancellor of the city king Gao Hao, and often taught the children of aristocrats in the capital.

古文：齐亡后，归乡里讲经，卒于家。
现代文：北齐亡国后，回到家乡讲授经学，死在家中。
English: After the death of Northern Qi, he returned to his hometown to teach classics and died at home.

古文：邢峙，字士峻，河间鄚人也。
现代文：邢峙，字士峻，河间郑人。
English: Zheng Zhen, Zhi Shun, and Zheng Ren.

古文：少好学，耽玩坟典，游学燕、赵之间，通三礼、左氏春秋。
现代文：少年时好学，致力于典籍，到燕、赵一带游学，精通《三礼》、《左氏春秋》。
English: As a young boy, he was eager to learn, devoted himself to classics, traveled to Yan and Zhao to study, and was proficient in "Three Rites" and "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo."

古文：天保初，郡举孝廉，授四门博士，迁国子助教，以经入授皇太子。
现代文：天保初，郡中举荐为孝廉，授四门博士，升国子助教，到皇宫中教授太子经学。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpo era, he was recommended by the county as Xiaolian, awarded four doctorates, promoted to assistant professor, and went to the imperial palace to teach the prince's study of the classics.

古文：峙方正纯厚，有儒者之风。
现代文：邢峙为人方正淳朴，有儒者风范。
English: His demeanor is upright and simple, with the demeanor of a Confucian.

古文：□宰进太子食，有菜曰 邪蒿 ，峙命去之，曰： 此菜有不正之名，非殿下所宜食。 显祖闻而嘉之，赐以被褥缣纩，拜国子博士。
现代文：厨师为太子送来食物，有一道菜叫 邪蒿 ，邢峙命人端走，说： 遣菜名字不正，殿下不能吃。 显祖听说了这件事嘉奖他，赏给他被褥丝绸，授国子博士。
English: The chef brought food for the prince, and there was a dish called yakitori, which he ordered the waiter to take away, saying, "The name of this dish is not right, and your highness should not eat it." When Emperor Xianzu heard about this, he praised him, gave him a silk bedspread, and awarded him the title of doctor of the nation.

古文：皇建初，除清河太守，有惠政，民吏爱之。
现代文：皇建初，任清河太守，为政宽厚，深受百姓和官吏的爱戴。
English: At the beginning of the imperial construction, he was appointed the governor of Qinghe. He was a generous politician and was deeply loved by the people and officials.

古文：以年老谢病归，卒于家。
现代文：因年老有病回到家中，在家中去世。
English: Due to old age and illness, he returned home and passed away at home.

古文：刘昼，字孔昭，渤海阜城人也。
现代文：刘昼，字孑昭，渤海阜城人。
English: Liu Rong, Zhe Zhao Zhao, from the city of Fuxing in the Bohai Sea.

古文：少孤贫，爱学，负笈从师，伏膺无倦。
现代文：从小丧父，家境贫寒，但喜好学习，常常到外地从师听讲，丝毫不觉疲倦。
English: He lost his father when he was a child, and his family was poor, but he liked to study and often went to other places to listen to teachers. He never felt tired.

古文：与儒者李宝鼎同乡里，甚相亲爱，受其三礼。
现代文：和儒生李宝鼎是同乡，相互很友爱，向李宝鼎学习了《三礼》。
English: He was a fellow villager of Li Baoding, a Confucian scholar, and they were very friendly with each other. He learned "Three Rites" from Li Baoding.

古文：又就马敬德习服氏春秋，俱通大义。
现代文：又向马敬德学习《服氏春秋》，都能通晓大义。
English: They also learned from Ma Jingde about "The Spring and Autumn of the Fufu Clan" and were able to understand the great principles.

古文：恨下里少坟籍，便杖策入都。
现代文：他遣憾乡下没有多少典籍，就骑马来到京城。
English: He regretted that there were not many classics in the countryside, so he rode to the capital.

古文：知太府少卿宋世良家多书，乃造焉。
现代文：了解到太府少卿宋世良家中有很多书，就登门拜访。
English: Learning that there were many books in the home of the Taifu Shaoqing Song Shiliang, he paid a visit.

古文：世良纳之。
现代文：宋世良接纳了他。
English: Song Shiliang accepted him.

古文：恣意披览，昼夜不息。
现代文：刘昼因此能够夜以继日地尽情翻阅。
English: As a result, Liu昼 is able to turn over the pages night after night.

古文：河清初，还冀州，举秀才入京，考策不第。
现代文：曾经作过一篇赋，定名为 六合 ，白认为冠绝当世，常常吟诵。
English: He once wrote a fu, named "Rokko," which he thought was the best in the world, and often recited it.

古文：乃恨不学属文，方复缉缀辞藻，言甚古拙。
现代文：叹惜说： 儒生费尽心力而文章却失于工力，由此可以看出来了。
English: Lamenting, he said: It can be seen that the Confucianism students exerted all their efforts, but the article was lost to manpower.

古文：制一首赋，以 六合 为名，自谓绝伦，吟讽不辍。乃叹曰： 儒者劳而少工，见于斯矣。
现代文：我学习儒家经典二十多年而对策没有录取，刚刚开始练习作文章，就达到这样的地步。 
English: I have been studying Confucian classics for more than twenty years, but I have not been admitted to the countermeasures. I have just begun to practice writing articles, and I have reached this point.

古文：我读儒书二十余年而答策不第，始学作文，便得如是。 曾以此赋呈魏收，收谓人曰： 赋名六合，其愚已甚，及见其赋，又愚于名。 
现代文：曾经把这篇赋呈送魏收品评。
English: I once submitted this article to Wei Gang for product review.

古文：昼又撰高才不遇传三篇。在皇建、大宁之朝，又频上书，言亦切直，多非世要，终不见收采。
现代文：魏收对人说： 赋的名字叫 六合，已经很愚蠢了，看了全文，发现内容比 六合 更愚蠢。 刘昼又写了三篇《高才不遇传》。在皇建、大宁两代多次向皇帝上书，言辞切直，大多批评权贵，所以始终没有被采纳。
English: Wei Hui said to people: Fu's name is Liuhe, which is already very stupid, read the full text, and found that the content is even more stupid than Liuhe. Liu Rong also wrote three "High talents are not passed down." In the two generations of Wang Jian and Daning, he repeatedly wrote to the emperor, his words were forthright, and most of them criticized the powerful, so they were never adopted.

古文：自谓博物奇才，言好矜大，每云： 使我数十卷书行于后世，不易齐景之千驷也。 而容止舒缓，举动不伦，由是竟无仕进。
现代文：他白认为博识多才，言谈自满自夸，常对人说： 假如我的几十卷书流传到后世，即使用齐景公的千马来交换也不换。 可是为人行为懈怠、举止不合礼法，因而最终不能在仕途上有所发展。
English: He did not think that he was knowledgeable and talented, he was self-satisfied and boastful, and often said to people: If my dozens of books were passed down to future generations, even if I used Qi Jinggong's thousands of horses to exchange, it would not change. However, he was slack in his behavior and his manners did not conform to etiquette, so he could not develop in the end.

古文：天统中，卒于家，年五十二。
现代文：天统年间，死在家中，时年五十二岁。
English: He died at home at the age of fifty-two during the reign of Emperor Tenjo.

古文：马敬德，河间人也。
现代文：马敬德，河间人。
English: Ma Jingde, a native of Kawama.

古文：少好儒术，负笈随大儒徐遵明学诗、礼，略通大义而不能精。
现代文：少年时喜好儒学，跟从大儒徐遵明学习《诗经》、《礼记》，稍微懂得大义而不能精通。
English: When he was a boy, he liked Confucianism, and studied "The Book of Songs" and "The Book of Rites" with the great Confucian scholar Xu Zunming. He knew a little about Taoism, but could not master it.

古文：遂留意于春秋左氏，沉思研求，昼夜不倦，解义为诸儒所称。
现代文：于是留心研究《春秋左氏传》，精研沉思，昼夜不倦，他的疏解被其他儒士所称道。
English: As a result, he attentively studied "Chunqiu Zuo's Biography," studied and contemplated, and was tireless day and night. His relaxation was praised by other Confucians.

古文：教授于燕、赵间，生徒随之者□。
现代文：他在燕、赵之间教书，随从学习的人很多。
English: He teaches between Yan and Zhao, and there are many people who study with him.

古文：河间郡王每于教学追之，将举为孝廉，固辞不就。
现代文：河间郡王常在他讲学时来听讲，想举荐他为孝廉，被他坚决推辞。
English: Wang from Kawama County often came to listen to his lectures and wanted to recommend him as a filial son, but he firmly refused.

古文：乃诣州求举秀才，举秀才例取文士，州将以其纯儒，无意推荐。
现代文：他到州裹要求推举为秀才，但推举秀才例来选取文士，州将认为他是个纯粹的儒士，不想举荐他。
English: He went to the prefecture to ask to be recommended as a scholar, but the prefecture considered him to be a pure Confucian and did not want to recommend him.

古文：敬德请试方略，乃策问之，所答五条，皆有文理。
现代文：敬德请求当场考试方略，便问其对策，他回答的五条对策都很有水平。
English: Jingde requested the on-site examination strategy, then asked the countermeasures, and the five countermeasures he answered were all very high level.

古文：乃欣然举送至京。
现代文：州官高兴地选送他去了京城。
English: State officials were happy to send him to the capital.

古文：依秀才策问，唯得中第，乃请试经业，问十条并通。擢授国子助教，迁太学博士。
现代文：按照常例进行秀才策问时，终于入选，又请求考经学，考问的十条都能精通，越级提拔他任国子助教，升太学博士。
English: According to the usual practice, when the examination of outstanding talents was carried out, he was finally selected, and he requested to take the examination of classics, and he was able to master the ten questions of the examination. He was promoted to assistant professor of Kuniko and promoted to Doctor of Theology.

古文：天统初，除国子博士。
现代文：天统初，任国子博士。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Tenmu, he was appointed as Dr. Kuniko.

古文：世祖为后主择师傅，赵彦深进之，入为侍讲。
现代文：世祖为后主挑选老师，赵彦深推荐了他，得以入宫任侍讲。
English: The founder of the dynasty selected a teacher for his heir, and Zhao Yanshen recommended him, and he was able to enter the palace as an attendant speaker.

古文：其妻梦猛兽将来向之，敬德走超丛棘，妻伏地不敢动。
现代文：他的妻子梦见猛兽向他走来，敬德从一丛荆棘上跳了过去。妻子却趴在地上不敢动。
English: His wife had a dream that a ferocious beast was coming towards him. Jingde jumped over a clump of thorns, but his wife lay on the ground, not daring to move.

古文：敬德占之曰： 吾当得大官。
现代文：敬德占卜说： 我要做大官了。
English: Jingde divination said: I want to be a high-ranking official.

古文：超棘，过九卿也。
现代文：从荆棘上跳过去，就是要超过九卿。
English: To jump over the thorns is to jump over the Nine Lords.

古文：尔伏地，夫人也。 后主既不好学，敬德侍讲甚疏，时时以春秋入授。
现代文：你趴在地上，表示要当夫人。 后主不好读书，敬德侍讲的次数较少，不时讲授《春秋》。
English: You lie down on the ground, indicating that you want to be a wife. The queen mother is not good at reading, and the number of lectures given by the attendants is small. From time to time, she teaches "Spring and Autumn."

古文：武平初，犹以师傅之恩，超拜国子祭酒，加仪同三司、金紫光禄大夫，领瀛州大中正，卒。
现代文：武平初，因为是后主的老师，被越级任命为国子祭酒，加仪同三司、金紫光禄大夫，领瀛州大中正，去世。
English: At the beginning of Wuping, because he was the teacher of the heir, he was appointed as the national son's sacrificial wine by the echelon, and he passed away after serving as the third secretary, the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and the leader of Bozhou University Middle School.

古文：赠开府、瀛沧安州诸军事、瀛州刺史。
现代文：追赠为开府，瀛州、沧州、安州诸军事，遍妙刺史。
English: The posthumous gift is to Kaifu, Zhangzhou, Cangzhou and Anzhou militaries, which has a rich history.

古文：其后侍书张景仁封王。
现代文：后来侍书退屋七被封为王。
English: Later, the courtier, Taiya Shichi, was crowned king.

古文：赵彦深云： 何容侍书封王，侍讲翻无封爵。 于是亦封敬德广汉郡王。
现代文：龌遝说： 怎么能允许侍书封王，侍讲反而没有封。 于是敬德也被封为广汉郡王。
English: Zou said, "How can the attendant be allowed to seal the king, but the attendant did not seal the king?" Therefore, Jingde was also sealed as the king of Guanghan County.

古文：子元熙袭。
现代文：儿子元熙承袭爵位。
English: His son, Yuan Xi, inherited the title.

古文：元熙字长明，少传父业，兼事文藻。
现代文：元熙，字长明，少年时就得到父亲的传授，同时留意在辞藻上下功夫。
English: When he was a boy, Yuan Xi, known as Changming, was taught by his father. At the same time, he paid attention to working hard on his vocabulary.

古文：以父故，自青州集曹参军超迁通直侍郎，待诏文林馆，转正员。
现代文：由于父亲的缘故，从青州集曹参军越级升任通直侍郎，待韶文林馆，后来又转成止员。
English: Because of his father, he rose through the ranks from Qingzhou Sicao to join the army and was promoted to the position of Tsunzhi waiter, waited for Wenlin Pavilion, and later became a guard.

古文：武平中，皇太子将讲孝经，有司请择师友。
现代文：武千年问，皇太子要学习《孝经》，有关部门请求挑选老师。
English: Wu Millennium asked that the crown prince should study the "Filial Piety Sutra," and the relevant departments requested to select a teacher.

古文：帝曰： 马元熙朕师之子，文学不恶，可令教儿。 于是以孝经入授皇太子，儒者荣其世载。
现代文：皇上说： 马元熙是我的老师的儿子，学问不错，可以让他教太子。 于是进宫教太子《孝经》，儒士都羡慕他家世代享受皇家的恩宠。
English: The emperor said: Ma Yuanxi is the son of my teacher, his knowledge is good, so he can teach the prince. So he went to the palace to teach the prince "Filial Piety." Confucians are envious of his family's generation enjoying the grace of the royal family.

古文：性和厚，在内甚得名誉，皇太子亦亲敬之。
现代文：元熙宽和仁厚，在朝中名声很好，皇太子对他也很亲近敬重。
English: Yuan Xikang was kind and benevolent, and had a good reputation in the court. The crown prince was also very close to him and respected him.

古文：隋开皇中，卒于秦王文学。
现代文：隋开皇年间，死于秦王文学任上。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui, he died on the post of Qin Wang Literature.

古文：张景仁者，济北人也。
现代文：张景仁，济北人。
English: Zhang Jingren, a native of Jibei.

古文：幼孤家贫，以学书为业，遂工草隶，选补内书生。
现代文：幼年丧父家境贫寒，以学习书法为业，擅长写草书和隶书，被选拔补充为内书生。
English: He was born into a poor family and lost his father at an early age. He studied calligraphy as a career, excelled at writing cursive and cursive, and was selected to be a supplementary student.

古文：与魏郡姚元标、颍川韩毅、同郡袁买奴、荥阳李超等齐名，世宗并引为宾客。
现代文：和魏郡姚元标、颖川韩毅、同郡袁买奴、荣阳李超等人齐名，世宗都延纳为宾客。
English: Yao Yuanbiao, Yingchuan Han Yi, Yuan Mianu and Rongyang Li Chao from Wei County were also invited.

古文：天保八年，□授太原王绍德书，除开府参军。
现代文：天保八年，命他教太原王高绍德书法，任开府参军。
English: In the eighth year of the Tenpo era, he was ordered to teach Taiyuan King Gao Shao De calligraphy, and was appointed to join the army.

古文：后主在东宫，世祖选善书人性行淳谨者令侍书，景仁遂被引擢。
现代文：后主作太子时，世祖挑选擅长书法性情敦厚的人陪同练习，景仁被引荐选中。
English: Later, when the main role was played by the crown prince, the founder of the dynasty selected a person who was good at calligraphy and had a strong temperament to accompany the practice, and Jingren was recommended and selected.

古文：小心恭慎，后主爱之，呼为博士。
现代文：在宫中小心谨慎，后主很喜欢他，叫他博士。
English: Careful in the palace, the queen mother liked him very much and called him doctor.

古文：历太子门大夫、员外散骑常侍、谏议大夫。
现代文：历任太子门大夫、员外散骑常侍、谏议大夫。
English: He was successively appointed as the Prince's gate doctor, the non-member horseback riding attendant, and the deliberation doctor.

古文：后主登祚，除通直散骑常侍。
现代文：后主登基后，任通直散骑常侍。
English: After the emperor ascended to the throne, he appointed Tsunetsuna as his equerry.

古文：及奏，御笔点除 通 字，遂正常侍。
现代文：奏明皇上时，皇上亲笔除去 通直 二字，于是任为散骑常侍。
English: At the time of the imperial edict, the emperor himself removed the word "Tsunanao" from the imperial edict, and so he was appointed as a free-riding attendant.

古文：左右与语，犹称博士。
现代文：手下人和他说话时仍称为博士。
English: His subordinates still address him as Dr. when speaking to him.

古文：胡人何洪珍有宠于后主，欲得通婚朝士，以景仁在内官位稍高，遂为其兄子取景仁第二息子瑜之女。
现代文：胡人何洪珍受到后主的宠幸，想和朝中大臣通婚，因景仁在朝中官位稍高，洪珍就替哥哥的儿子娶了景仁次子子瑜的女儿为妻。
English: He Hongzhen, a Wu person, was favored by the empress dowager and wanted to marry a middle-ranking minister in the court. Since Jingren held a slightly higher position in the court, Hongzhen married the daughter of Jingren's second son Yu for his brother's son.

古文：因此表里，恩遇日隆。
现代文：从此两家互为表裹，彼此提携，受到的恩惠日甚一日。
English: Since then, the two companies have been working side by side, cooperating with each other, and the benefits received are increasing day by day.

古文：景仁多疾，每遣徐之范等治疗，给药物珍羞，中使问疾，相望于道。
现代文：景仁身体多病，皇上常派徐之范等人去为他看病，送去各种药物和珍馐美味，去探问的宦官络绎不绝。
English: Jingren was often ill, and the emperor often sent Xu Zhifan and others to see him. They sent him all kinds of medicines and delicacies, and the eunuchs who came to inquire were endless.

古文：是后，□有司恒就宅送御食。
现代文：此后皇上命令有关人员经常把皇上的食品送到他家。
English: After that, the emperor ordered the relevant personnel to regularly deliver the emperor's food to his home.

古文：迁假仪同三司、银青光禄大夫，食恒山县干。
现代文：升任假仪同三司、银青光禄大夫，享受恒山鉴干禄。
English: He was promoted to the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division.

古文：车驾或有行幸，在道宿处，每送步障为遮风寒。
现代文：皇上有时到各处巡视，在路上停宿时，常送布障给他遮挡风寒。
English: The emperor sometimes went everywhere on inspection, and when he stopped on the road, he often sent cloth barriers to shield him from the wind and cold.

古文：进位仪同三司，寻加开府，侍书、余官并如故。
现代文：升位仪同三司，不久加授开府，侍书、其他官职不变。
English: The promotion ceremony is the same as that of the Third Division, and will soon be followed by the conferment of the office of the Prime Minister. Attendants and other official positions remain unchanged.

古文：每旦须参，即在东宫停止。
现代文：每天早上必须去朝见皇上，在束宫停留。
English: Every morning he had to go to the imperial court to see the emperor, and he had to stop at Sokugo.

古文：及立文林馆，中人邓长颙希旨，奏令总制馆事，除侍中。
现代文：设立文林馆后，宦官邓长颐揣摩皇上的心意，启奏让景仁总管文林馆事宜，任侍中。
English: After the establishment of the Wenlin Museum, the eunuch Deng Changyu guessed the emperor's intention and asked Jingren, the head of the Wenlin Museum, to serve as an attendant.

古文：四年，封建安王。
现代文：四年，封建安王。
English: In four years, feudal An Wang.

古文：洪珍死后，长颙犹存旧款，更相弥缝，得无坠退。
现代文：何洪珍死后，长颐仍然记着旧情，进一步密切两家的关系，使得景仁的势力不至于衰退。
English: After the death of He Hongzhen, Changyu still remembered the old situation and further strengthened the relationship between the two families, so that the power of Jingren would not decline.

古文：除中书监，以疾卒。
现代文：任中书监，以疾而终。
English: He worked as a librarian, but died of an illness.

古文：赠侍中、齐济等五州刺史、司空公。
现代文：追赠侍中，齐州、济州等五州刺史，司空公。
English: Among the posthumously awarded attendants, the history of five states, including Qizhou and Jeju, will be presented to Lord Siku.

古文：景仁出自寒微，本无识见，一旦开府、侍中、封王。
现代文：景仁出身贫寒，本来没有什么远见卓识，很快做了开府、侍中、封为王。
English: Jingren was born poor and had little foresight. He soon became the governor, a chamberlain, and was crowned king.

古文：其妻姓奇，莫知氏族所出，容制音辞，事事庸俚。
现代文：他的妻子姓奇，不知道出身于何氏族，相貌言谈，都很鄙俗。
English: His wife's surname is Qi, I don't know what clan she is from, her appearance and speech are very vulgar.

古文：既诏除王妃，与诸公主、郡君同在朝谒之例，见者为其惭悚。
现代文：朝廷下令封她为王妃，和诸公主、郡君一起朝见时，见过她的人都羞惭惶恐。
English: The court ordered her to be crowned as empress, and when she met with the princesses and county officials, everyone who saw her was ashamed and afraid.

古文：子瑜，薄传父业，更无余伎，以洪珍故，擢授中书舍人，转给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：子瑜，稍稍向父亲学了点知识，再也没有其他的本领。但由于何洪珍的缘故，被提拔为中书舍人，改任给事黄门侍郎。
English: Ziyu, having learned a little knowledge from his father, no longer had any other skills. However, because of He Hongzhen, he was promoted to the position of middle school teacher and was reassigned to the position of Huangmen waiter.

古文：长息子玉，起家员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：长子子玉，出仕为员外散骑侍郎。
English: The eldest son, Tsotama, served as a non-commissioned officer.

古文：景仁性本卑谦，及用胡人、巷伯之势，坐致通显，志操颇改，渐成骄傲。
现代文：景仁为人本来谦恭有礼，等他藉助胡人、宦官的力量，很快飞黄腾达，自己的志向节操都改变，渐渐养成了骄横傲慢。
English: Jingren was originally a humble and courteous person, but with the help of the Hu people and eunuchs, he quickly rose to prominence. His aspirations and principles changed, and he gradually developed into arrogance.

古文：良马轻裘，徒从拥冗，高门广宇，当衢向街。
现代文：出门骑着高头大马，穿着轻暖的皮裘，侍从们前呼后拥，住宅高门广厦，临道当街。
English: Going out on a high horse, wearing a light and warm fur coat, with attendants calling ahead and behind, in the residential Gaomen Guangxia, in the street.

古文：诸子不思其本，自许贵游。
现代文：儿子都不认为原是贫寒出身，自认为是贵族子弟。
English: Neither of his sons thinks he was born poor, but considers himself the son of an aristocrat.

古文：自苍颉以来，八体取进，一人而已。
现代文：自从苍颉造字以来，凭著书法而置身青云的人，仅有景仁一人而已。
English: Since the invention of calligraphy by Heron, only one person, Jingren, has been able to reach the prime of life thanks to calligraphy.

古文：权会，字正理，河间鄚人也。
现代文：权会，字正理，河间郑人。
English: The party of power, the party of reason, the party of Zheng.

古文：志尚沉雅，动遵礼则。
现代文：沉静文雅，一举一动都合乎礼法。
English: He is calm and elegant, and his every move is in accordance with etiquette.

古文：少受郑易，探赜索隐，妙尽幽微，诗、书、三礼，文义该洽，兼明风角，妙识玄象。
现代文：少年时学习郑玄注的《郑易》，潜心钻研其中的奥妙，能够理解其中幽深的含义，对于《诗经》、《书经》、《三礼》也能广泛融会其中的文义，并且懂得占卜的方法，知道天地玄象。
English: When he was a boy, he studied "Zheng Yi" by Zheng Xuanzhu. He devoted himself to delving into the mysteries of it, and was able to understand the profound meaning of it. For "Shijing," "Shujing" and "Sanli," he could also widely integrate the meaning of it, and knew the method of divination, and knew the mysteries of heaven and earth.

古文：魏武定初，本郡贡孝廉，策居上第，解褐四门博士。
现代文：魏武定初年，本郡推选孝廉，他在考策中名列前茅，初任四门博士。
English: In the first year of Wei Wuding, the county elected Xiaolian, who ranked first in the examination, and was appointed as the first four-door doctor.

古文：仆射崔暹引为馆客，甚敬重焉，命世子达拏尽师傅之礼，会因此闻达。
现代文：仆射崔暹延请他作宾客，很敬重他，命世子达擎拜权会为师，权会因此而显达。
English: His servant Choi Siem Yan invited him to be his guest and held him in high esteem. He was said to be a great scholar and worshipped Kwon Kwon as his teacher. Kwon Kwon became famous as a result.

古文：暹欲荐会与马敬德等为诸王师，会性恬静，不慕荣势，耻于左宦，固辞。
现代文：崔暹想推荐他与马敬德等人去教几位王侯，可他性情淡泊，不羡慕荣华富贵，深以做诸王僚属为耻，坚决推辞。
English: Cui Siam wanted to recommend him and Ma Jingde and others to teach several princes, but he was indifferent, did not envy the glory and wealth, and was deeply ashamed of being a member of the royal family, and firmly declined.

古文：暹亦识其意，遂罢荐举。
现代文：崔暹也明白他的心意，打消了推荐的念头。
English: Choi Siam also understood his intention and dismissed the idea of recommending him.

古文：寻被尚书符追著作，修国史，监知太史局事。
现代文：不久尚书下令把他征召到朝中任著作郎，编修国史，负责太史局的事务。
English: Soon after, Shangshu ordered him to be conscripted to the central government as a writer, compiler of national history, and responsible for the affairs of the Imperial History Bureau.

古文：皇建中，转加中散大夫，余并如故。
现代文：皇建年间，加中散大夫，其他宫职依旧。
English: During the construction of the Imperial Palace, Dr. Zhongshan was added, but other palace duties remained the same.

古文：会参掌虽繁，教授不阙。
现代文：虽然权会掌管的事情很多，但从不中断教书。
English: Although the power association is in charge of many things, it never interrupts teaching.

古文：性甚儒懦，似不能言，及临机答难，酬报如响，动必稽古，辞不虚发，由是为儒宗所推。
现代文：他本性柔弱，不善于言谈，但和别人论辩时，总能应声反驳，而且常常能援引古事，有据可依，因此被儒士推重。
English: His nature is weak and he is not good at talking, but when he argues with others, he can always reply and refute, and he can often invoke ancient things and have evidence to rely on, so he is highly regarded by Confucianists.

古文：而贵游子弟慕其德义者，或就其宅，或寄宿邻家，昼夜承闲，受其学业。
现代文：贵族子弟仰慕他的德义，有的直接到他家中请教，有的寄居在他邻居家，利用一切空闲时间向他讨教学业。
English: Noblemen's children admired his virtue, some went directly to his home to ask for advice, some stayed at his neighbor's house, and used all their free time to teach him.

古文：会欣然演说，未尝懈怠。
现代文：权会总是很高兴地为他们讲解，向来没有松懈。
English: The committee was happy to explain and did not slack off.

古文：虽明风角，解玄象，至于私室，辄不及言，学徒有请问者，终无所说。
现代文：权会懂得占卜之术，能解释天象，但涉及别人的隐私家事，就不再说，学生有求教的，也一言不发。
English: The power association understands divination and can explain celestial phenomena, but when it comes to other people's privacy and family affairs, it is no longer said that students have to ask for advice, and they do not say a word.

古文：每云： 此学可知不可言。
现代文：他常常说： 这种学问可以使你了解却不能说出来。
English: He often said: "This kind of learning can make you understand but not speak out."

古文：诸君并贵游子弟，不由此进，何烦问也。 会唯有一子，亦不以此术教之，其谨密也如此。
现代文：你们都是贵族子弟，不用通过遣条途径谋求官职，也就不用费力来问了。 他仅有一个儿子，也不教给他这些，他就是这样严谨。
English: You are all sons of aristocrats, and you don't have to seek a post by sending a postcard, so you don't have to ask.He only has one son, and he doesn't teach him these things, he is so strict.

古文：曾令家人远行，久而不反。
现代文：有一次命家人到远方办事，很久也没有回来。
English: Once a family member of mine went to a distant place to do some business and did not return for a long time.

古文：其行人还，垂欲至宅，乃逢寒雪，寄息他舍。
现代文：出行的人回来，快要到其家的时候，忽然遇到了大雪，祇好寄居在别的地方。
English: When the travelers returned and were about to reach their homes, they suddenly encountered heavy snow, so they decided to stay somewhere else.

古文：会方处学堂讲说，忽有旋风瞥然，吹雪入户。
现代文：权会正在学堂讲课，一股迅疾的旋风，把雪片吹进了门。
English: A swift whirlwind was blowing snowflakes into the door of the school where the rights group was giving a lecture.

古文：会乃笑曰： 行人至，何意中停。 遂命使人令诣某处追寻，果如其语。
现代文：他笑着说： 出行人回来，怎么又在中途停住了。 就派人到某地去找，果真像他所说的那样。
English: He said with a smile, "When the traveler returned, why did he stop again in the middle of the road? He sent someone to look for it somewhere, and it really was as he said.

古文：每为人占筮，小大必中。
现代文：权会每次替人占卜，无论大事小事都能说中。
English: Every time, the authority would do the divination for someone, no matter how big or small.

古文：但用爻辞、彖象以辩吉凶，易占之属，都不经口。
现代文：他占卜吉凶使用爻辞、彖象，其他《易经》上的东西都不用。
English: He divined the auspicious and the inauspicious using the 辞 and 象, and did not use anything else from the I Ching.

古文：会本贫生，无仆隶，初任助教之日，恒乘驴上下。
现代文：权会本来是一介贫士，没有奴仆，刚任助教时，经常骑着一头驴来来往往。
English: Originally, Kwon was a poor man with no servants. When he was a teaching assistant, he often rode a donkey to and from work.

古文：且其职事处多，每须经历，及其退食，非晚不归。
现代文：可官职事务很多，每处都要亲自去，等到回家吃饭时，天就很晚了。
English: However, there are a lot of official affairs, and you have to go everywhere in person. By the time you get home for dinner, it will be very late.

古文：曾夜出城东门，钟漏已尽，会唯独乘驴。
现代文：有一次他在半夜出了束城门，报时的钟声已经听不到了，路上仅有他一人骑着驴前行。
English: Once he went out of the city gate in the middle of the night, the clock bell was no longer heard, and he was the only one riding a donkey on the road.

古文：忽有二人，一人牵头，一人随后，有似相助，其回动轻漂，有异生人。
现代文：忽然出现了两人，一人拉着驴头，一人跟在后面，好像有人暗中帮忙，那两人举动轻飘，和活人不太一样。
English: Suddenly, two people appeared, one holding the donkey's head, one following behind, as if someone was secretly helping. The two people were light-hearted, not quite the same as living people.

古文：渐渐失路，不由本道。
现代文：逐渐迷了路，走的不是原路。
English: He gradually lost his way and took a different path.

古文：会心甚怪之，遂诵易经上篇，一卷不尽，前后二人，忽然离散。
现代文：权会心中觉得奇怪，就朗诵《易经》上篇，一卷没有完，前后两人，忽然分散而去。
English: Guan Hui felt strange in his heart, so he recited the first chapter of the I Ching. He did not finish the first volume, and the two people in front and behind suddenly dispersed and left.

古文：会亦不觉堕驴，因尔迷闷，至明始觉。
现代文：他也不知不觉从驴背上掉下来，昏了过去，到天亮才苏醒。
English: Unknowingly, he also fell off the donkey's back and fainted, only waking up in the morning.

古文：方知堕驴之处，乃是郭外，纔去家数里。
现代文：醒来后发现掉下的地方，正在城外，离自己家仅有几里。
English: When he woke up, he discovered that he had fallen outside the city, just a few miles from his home.

古文：有一子，字子袭，聪敏精勤，幼有成人之量。
现代文：他有一个儿子，字子袭，聪明勤奋，小时候就有成人的胸怀。
English: There was a son who was a charismatic, clever, astute, shrewd and diligent, and had the ability of an adult when he was young.

古文：不幸先亡，临送者为其伤恸，会唯一哭而罢，时人尚其达命。
现代文：不幸早亡，送葬的人都伤心恸哭，他哭了一次就不再哭，当时的人都很推崇他的达观知命。
English: Unfortunately, he died prematurely, and the mourners wept with sadness. He cried once and stopped crying, and people at the time admired his understanding of life.

古文：武平年，自府还第，在路无故马倒，遂不得语，因尔暴亡，时年七十六。
现代文：武平年间，权会从府中回家，半路上马无故跌倒，他受惊失语，暴病而死，时年七十六岁。
English: During the Wuping era, Quan Hui was returning home from the capital. On the way home, Ma fell down for no reason. He was shocked, lost his speech, and died of a violent illness at the age of seventy-six.

古文：注易一部，行于世。
现代文：他曾经注《易经》一部，在当时很流行。
English: He once annotated a part of the I Ching, which was very popular at the time.

古文：会生平畏马，位望所至，不得不乘，果以此终。
现代文：权会生平怕马，但做官又必须骑马，果然因马而死。
English: He was afraid of horses in his life, but he had to ride a horse to become an official, and he died because of a horse.

古文：张思伯，河间乐城人也。善说左氏传，为马敬德之次。
现代文：张思伯，姻碧巡人。擅长讲解《春秋左氏传》，比马敬德稍次。
English: Zhang Sibo, a roly-poly inspector. He is good at explaining "The Biography of Shunqiu Zuo," slightly less than Ma Jingde.

古文：撰刊例十卷，行于时。
现代文：撰写了《刊例》十卷，流行于时。
English: He wrote ten volumes of "Publications," which was popular at the time.

古文：亦治毛诗章句，以二经教齐安王廓。
现代文：同时治《毛诗》章句，用这两种经书教授蛮童工直尘。
English: At the same time, the chapters of "Mao Shi" were used to teach the children's work with these two scriptures.

古文：武平初，国子博士。
现代文：亘迎初，任国子博士。
English: At the beginning of the year, he was appointed as Dr. Kuniko.

古文：张雕，中山北平人也。
现代文：张雕，中山北平人。
English: Zhang Jia, Zhongshan Beiping.

古文：家世贫贱，而慷慨有志节，雅好古学。
现代文：出身于贫贱之家，但为人慷慨有气节，喜好古学。
English: He was born into a poor family, but he was a generous and generous man, with a penchant for ancient studies.

古文：精力绝人，负箧从师，不远千里。
现代文：他精力过人，背着书箱求师学习，不远千里而去。
English: He was a man of great energy. He carried a bookcase on his back to ask for a teacher to study with, and he went thousands of miles away.

古文：□通五经，尤明三传，弟子远方就业者以百数，诸儒服其强辨。
现代文：研通《五经》，尤其通晓《三传》，远方来向他拜师求教的人数以百计，儒士都佩服他高超的论辩能力。
English: He is well versed in the "Five Classics" and especially in the "Three Traditions," and hundreds of people come from far and wide to seek his advice. Confucians all admire his superb argumentative ability.

古文：魏末，以明经召入霸府，高祖令与诸子讲读。
现代文：魏末，由于通晓经义被召入幕府，高祖命他给几个儿子讲授经学。
English: At the end of the Wei Dynasty, he was summoned to the shogunate because of his knowledge of the sutras, and Gaozu ordered him to teach several of his sons.

古文：起家殄寇将军，稍迁太尉长流参军、定州主簿。
现代文：初任殄寇将军，升任太尉长流参军、定州主簿。
English: He was promoted to the rank of captain and joined the army, and became the chief accountant of Dingzhou.

古文：从世宗赴□，除常山府长流参军。
现代文：随从世宗到并州，任常山府长流参军。
English: He followed Shizong to annex the prefecture and joined the army as the head of the Changshan prefecture.

古文：天保中，为永安王府参军事。
现代文：天保年间，任永安王府参军事。
English: During the Tenpo era, the Yongan royal court participated in the military.

古文：显祖崩于晋阳，擢兼祠部郎中，典丧事，从梓宫还邺。
现代文：显祖在晋阳去世后，提拔他兼任祠部郎中，负责丧事，护送棺木回到邺。
English: After the death of Emperor Xianzu in Jinyang, he was promoted to concurrently serve as a member of the ancestral hall, responsible for the funeral and escorting the coffin back to Luoyang.

古文：干明初，除国子博士。
现代文：干明初，任国子博士。
English: At the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, he was appointed as Dr. Kuniko.

古文：迁平原太守，坐赃贿失官。
现代文：升平原太守，因贪污受贿被罢官。
English: The governor of Shohei Plain was dismissed for corruption and bribery.

古文：世祖即位，以旧恩除通直散骑侍郎。
现代文：世祖即位后，感念往日的恩宠任他为通直散骑侍郎。
English: After the Emperor ascended to the throne, he was moved by the grace of the past and appointed him as Tsuchina Sanshiro.

古文：琅邪王俨求博士精儒学，有司以雕应选，时号得人。
现代文：琅邪王高俨寻找精通儒学的博士，有关人员推荐了张雕，人们都认为是选对了人。
English: The evil king Gao Wei was looking for a doctor who was well versed in Confucianism. The relevant personnel recommended Zhang Jia, and people all thought that he was the right person.

古文：寻为泾州刺史。
现代文：不久任泾州刺史。
English: He was soon appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：未几，拜散骑常侍，复为俨讲。值帝侍讲马敬德卒，乃入授经书。
现代文：时间不长，任散骑常侍，再次成为高俨的侍讲，正好皇帝的侍讲马敬德去世，他得以入宫教习经书。
English: It didn't take long for Ren Sanjie, a regular attendant, to once again become Gao Gan's attendant, just as the emperor's attendant Ma Jingde passed away. He was able to enter the palace to teach and study scriptures.

古文：帝甚重之，以为侍读，与张景仁并被尊礼，同入华光殿，共读春秋。
现代文：皇上很倚重他，任命他为侍读，和张景仁同时受到礼遇，一起进入华光殿，共同讲读《春秋》。
English: The emperor was very fond of him and appointed him as an attendant, and he and Zhang Jingren were treated with courtesy and entered the Hua Guang Palace together to read "Spring and Autumn" together.

古文：加国子祭酒，假仪同三司，待诏文林馆。
现代文：加授国子祭酒，假仪同三司，待诏文林馆。
English: In addition, the Kuniko Festival wine will be awarded, the sham ceremony will be held with three divisions, and the Wenlin Pavilion will be built.

古文：胡人何洪珍大蒙主上亲宠，与张景仁结为婚媾。
现代文：胡人何洪珍深受皇上宠爱，和张景仁结成姻亲关系。
English: He Hongzhen, a Wu person, was deeply loved by the emperor, and he and Zhang Jingren became in-laws.

古文：雕以景仁宗室，自托于洪珍，倾心相礼，情好日密，公私之事，雕常为其指南。
现代文：张雕和景仁同宗，依附何洪珍，倾心接纳，感情与日俱增，公私事宜，张雕常常给予指点。
English: Zhang Xiao and Jingren are from the same family. He is attached to He Hongzhen and accepts him wholeheartedly. Their feelings are increasing day by day. In public and private matters, Zhang Xiao often gives advice.

古文：时穆提婆、韩长鸾与洪珍同侍帷幄，知雕为洪珍谋主，甚忌恶之。
现代文：当时穆提婆、韩长鸾和何洪珍一同事奉皇上，知道张雕是洪珍的谋主，对他很忌恨。
English: At that time, Muti, Han Changyu and He Hongzhen, a colleague of the emperor, knew that Zhang Jia was the mastermind of Hongzhen and hated him very much.

古文：洪珍又奏雕监国史。
现代文：洪珍又保奏他监修国史。
English: Hong Zhen also guaranteed that he would supervise the study of national history.

古文：寻除侍中，加开府，奏度支事，大被委任，言多见从。
现代文：不久任侍中，加开府，奏度支事，委以重任，言听计从。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of chamberlain, and was also appointed to the post of secretary of the Imperial Household Agency. He was entrusted with important duties and followed orders.

古文：特□奏事不趋，呼为博士。
现代文：皇上特别允许他奏事时不用快跑，又称他为博士。
English: The Emperor gave him special permission not to run fast when he was playing music, and also called him "Doctor."

古文：雕自以出于微贱，致位大臣，励精在公，有匪躬之节，欲立功效，以报朝恩，论议抑扬，无所回避。
现代文：张雕认为自己出身微贱，却做了大臣，所以对国事励精图治，有奋不顾身的志向，一心要建立功勋来报效朝廷，在朝堂上议论得失，不加回避。
English: Zhang Qiao thought that he was from a lowly family, but he became a minister. Therefore, he was diligent in governing the state affairs, he had the ambition to work hard, he was determined to establish merits to repay the imperial court, and he discussed the gains and losses in the imperial court, and he did not shy away.

古文：宫掖不急之费，大存减省，左右纵恣之徒，必加禁约，数讥切宠要，献替帷扆。
现代文：宫廷中并不急需的花费，大为减省，对皇上身边放纵之徒加以约束，多次抨击权贵，劝谏皇上。
English: In the court, the expenses that were not urgently needed were greatly reduced, the indulgent people around the emperor were restrained, and the powerful and noble were repeatedly criticized and the emperor was persuaded.

古文：上亦深倚仗之，方委以朝政。
现代文：皇上也很倚重他，把朝廷大事都委托他处理。
English: The emperor also relied heavily on him, entrusting him with handling all the important affairs of the imperial court.

古文：雕便以澄清为己任，意气甚高，尝在朝堂谓郑子信曰： 向入省中，见贤家唐令处分极无所以，若作数行兵帐，雕不如邕，若致主尧、舜，身居稷、契，则邕不如我。 其矜诞如此。
现代文：他以澄清朝政为己任，意气风发，在朝廷上曾对郑子信说： 当初我刚到朝廷的时候，见到精明干练的唐邕处理事务得心应手，如果说制作行军账簿，我不如他，但要想帮助皇上作尧、舜，身居稷、契之位，那么唐邕就不如我了。 
English: He took it as his duty to clarify the politics of the imperial court, and he was full of enthusiasm. At the imperial court, he once said to Zheng Zixin: "When I first arrived at the imperial court, I saw the shrewd and capable Tang Xuan handle affairs well. If I were to say that I made marching account books, I would not be as good as him. However, if I wanted to help the emperor to make vows and oaths, and be in the position of vows and covenants, then Tang Xuan would not be as good as me.

古文：长鸾等虑其干政不已，阴图之。
现代文：他说话就是这样狂妄自大。韩长鸾等人担心他会不停干预朝政，暗中想除掉他。
English: Han Changyu and others are worried that he will continue to interfere in the government and secretly want to get rid of him.

古文：会雕与侍中崔季舒等谏帝幸晋阳，长鸾因谮之，故俱诛死。
现代文：正好张雕和侍中崔季舒等人劝皇上到晋阳去，长鸾陷害他，张、崔二人一同被杀。
English: It just so happened that Zhang Zhi and the chamberlains Cui Jishu and others persuaded the emperor to go to Jinyang, and Nagase set him up. Zhang and Cui were both killed.

古文：临刑，帝令段孝言诘之。
现代文：临行刑前，皇上派段孝言去责问他。
English: Before the execution, the emperor sent Duan Xiaogan to scold him.

古文：雕致对曰： 臣起自诸生，谬被抽擢，接事累世，常蒙恩遇，位至开府、侍中，光宠隆洽。
现代文：张雕说： 我本来是一介书生，错误地被选拔做了官，历任两世，常常受皇家的恩泽，官至开府、侍中，宠幸荣耀集于一身。
English: Zhang Zhe said: I was originally a scholar, and I was mistakenly selected to be an official. I have served two generations, and I have often been favored by the royal family. From the position of official to the head of the government, to the position of attendant, I have been favored and honored.

古文：每思尘露，微益山海，今者之谏，臣实首谋，意善功恶，无所逃死。
现代文：自己常想着即使像微尘滴露那样渺小，也对山海有所裨益，这一次进谏，是我首先提出来的，本意好，却造成了恶果，我的死不可逃脱。
English: I often think that even if it is as small as a speck of dew, it will be beneficial to the mountains and seas. This time, I was the first to bring it up. My intention was good, but it caused bad results. My death cannot be escaped.

古文：伏愿陛下珍爱金玉，开发神明，数引贾谊之伦，论说治道，令听览之间，无所拥蔽，则臣虽死之日，犹生之年。 歔欷流涕，俯而就戮，侍□左右莫不怜而壮之，时年五十五。
现代文：希望皇上珍视一切美好的东西，开启视听，多引进像买谊这样的人，讨论治理天下之道，皇上的枧听，不要受到蒙蔽，那么我死了，也像活着一样。 说完就涕泪交流，从容而死，左右侍卫都很同情而钦佩他，时年五十五岁。
English: I hope that the emperor will cherish all the beautiful things, open the audio-visual, introduce more people like Buyi, discuss the way to govern the world, listen to the emperor, don't be deceived, then I'm dead, just like I'm alive. After speaking, I shed tears, and died calmly. The guards on both sides were sympathetic and admired him. He was 55 years old.

古文：子德□等徙于北边，南安之反，德□及弟德揭俱死。
现代文：他的儿子德冲等人被流放到北部，南安谋反时，德冲和弟弟德揭都因战乱而死。
English: His son De Chong and others were exiled to the north. When Nan'an rebelled, De Chong and his brother De Jie both died as a result of the war.

古文：德□和谨谦让，善于人伦，聪敏好学，颇涉文史。
现代文：德冲为人谦和礼让，会识别人才，聪明好学，涉猎文史典籍。
English: He is modest and courteous, knows other people's talents, is smart and eager to learn, and dabbles in literary and historical classics.

古文：以帝师之子，早见旌擢。
现代文：由于是皇帝老师的孩子，很早就得到表彰提拔。
English: Since he was the child of the emperor's teacher, he was commended and promoted very early.

古文：历员外散骑侍郎、太师府掾，入为中书舍人，随例待诏。
现代文：历任员外散骑侍郎、太师府属官，入朝任中书舍人，依例待韶。
English: Successive members of the Imperial Household Agency, who had served as a samurai and a vassal of the Grand Master's Office, and who entered the Imperial Court as a middle school teacher, waited for the imperial edict as usual.

古文：其父之戮也，德□在殿庭执事，目见□酷，号哭殒绝于地，久之乃苏。
现代文：父亲被杀时，德冲正在殿上值班，亲眼看到了父亲遭受的冤屈和酷刑，大哭着昏倒在地，很久才苏醒过来。
English: When his father was killed, Dezhong was on duty in the palace. He saw with his own eyes the injustice and torture his father had suffered. He cried loudly, fainted and fell to the ground. It took him a long time to wake up.

古文：孙灵晖，长乐武强人也。
现代文：孙灵晖，昼乐逮强人。
English: Sun Lingyao, the strong man of the afternoon entertainment.

古文：魏大儒秘书监惠蔚，灵晖之族曾王父也。
现代文：蕴大儒秘书监塞薮，是他本族的曾祖父。
English: His great-grandfather was the great-grandfather of the great-grandfather of the great-grandfather of the great-grandfather of the great-grandfather.

古文：灵晖少明敏，有器度。
现代文：灵晖从小很聪明，有器度。
English: Lingya has been very clever and organized since childhood.

古文：惠蔚一子早卒，其家书籍多在焉。
现代文：塞茵有一个儿子早死，家中的书籍都还保存着。
English: Sein had a son who died young, and all the books in the family are still preserved.

古文：灵晖年七岁，便好学，日诵数千言，唯寻讨惠蔚手录章疏，不求师友。
现代文：灵晖七岁时，非常好学，每天诵读几千字，他读书衹读惠蔚亲手抄录的奏章，不求师访友。
English: When Lingyao was seven years old, he was very good at learning. He recited several thousand words every day. He read and re-read Hui Wei's hand-copied musical scores, and did not ask his teacher to visit friends.

古文：三礼及三传皆通宗旨，然就鲍季详、熊安生质问疑滞，其所发明，熊、鲍无以异也。
现代文：《三礼》、《三传》都能通晓大义，又去向鲍季详、熊安生请教不明白之处，他所阐发的文义，熊、鲍二人也不能提出异议。
English: Both "Three Rites" and "Three Traditions" are able to understand the great meaning, and they went to Bao Jizhao and Xiong Ansheng to ask for advice on what is not clear. The meaning of the text he explained, Xiong and Bao can not raise objections.

古文：举冀州刺史秀才，射策高第，授员外将军。
现代文：被冀州刺史举荐为秀才，策问时成绩优秀，授员外将军。
English: He was recommended by Jizhou Zhishi as an outstanding talent, with excellent results in questioning, and was awarded the rank of general.

古文：后以儒术甄明，擢授太学博士。
现代文：后来由于能阐发儒学，被提拔为太学博士。
English: Later, because of his ability to explain Confucianism, he was promoted to Doctor of Theology.

古文：迁北徐州治中，转潼郡太守。
现代文：升任北徐州治中，又改任潼郡太守。
English: He was promoted to the position of North Xuzhou Provincial Vice-governor, and was also reappointed to the position of Zhang County Governor.

古文：天统中，敕令朝臣推举可为南阳王绰师者，吏部尚书尉瑾表荐之，征为国子博士，授南阳王经。
现代文：天统年间，皇上命大臣推举可以作南阳王高绰老师的人，吏部尚书尉瑾上表推荐灵晖，召为国子博士，为南阳王讲授经书。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong, the minister of the emperor's mission selected a person who could be the teacher of Nanyang Wang Gaoqiao, and the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Shang Shufu, recommended Lingzhao on the table, called him to be a doctor of the country, and taught scriptures for Nanyang Wang.

古文：王虽不好文学，亦甚相敬重，启除其府咨议参军。
现代文：高绰虽然不爱学文，对他却很敬重，奏明皇上让他任本府谘议参军。
English: Although Gao Piao did not like to study literature, he was highly respected, and Emperor Ming asked him to advise the government on joining the army.

古文：绰除定州刺史，仍随之镇。
现代文：高绰任定州刺史时，他也随同前往。
English: When Gao Pu was appointed as the governor of Dingzhou, he also went with him.

古文：绰所为猖□，灵晖唯默默忧□，不能谏止。
现代文：高绰行为放肆凶狠，他衹能默默地替他担心，不能劝阻。
English: Gao Piao's behavior is impudent and ferocious. He can only silently worry about him and cannot be dissuaded.

古文：绰欲以管记马子结为咨议参军，乃表请转灵晖为王师，以子结为咨议。
现代文：南阳王想任命管记马子结为谘议参军，就上表请求改任灵晖为王师，使子结为谘议。
English: Nanyang Wang wanted to appoint Guan Ji Ma Zi Jie as an advisory member of the army, so he requested the above table to be changed to Lingyao as Wang Shi, and the envoy Zi Jie as an advisory member.

古文：朝廷以王师三品，启奏不合。
现代文：朝中大臣认为王师属三品之官，高绰的奏章不合规定。
English: The Minister of the Imperial Household Agency thought that Wang Shi was a three-ranked official, and the high-ranking medal was not in accordance with the regulations.

古文：后主于启下手答，云 但用之 ，仍手报南阳书，并依所奏。
现代文：后主在表章上批示，说 可以任用 ，并且亲自给高绰回信，同意他的请求。
English: After that, the owner wrote on the form, saying that he could be appointed, and personally replied to Gao Zhuo, agreeing to his request.

古文：儒者甚以为荣。
现代文：儒士对灵晖受到的恩宠都很羡慕。
English: Confucians are very envious of the graces received by the coffin.

古文：绰除大将军，灵晖以王师领大将军司马。
现代文：高绰任大将军时，灵晖以王师领大将军司马。
English: When Gao Zhuo was appointed as the general, the coffin was led by Wang Shi and the general Sima.

古文：绰诛，停废。
现代文：高绰被杀后，不再兼任。
English: After Gao Pu was killed, he was no longer concurrently in charge.

古文：从绰死后，每至七日及百日终，灵晖恒为绰请僧设斋，转经行道。
现代文：自从高绰死后，每到亡七和百曰的祭日，灵晖就常请来僧人设斋，为他念经行道。
English: Since Gao Zhuo's death, every time there is a festival on the seventh and hundredth day of his death, the coffin often invites monks to set up a fast and recite scriptures for him.

古文：齐亡后数年卒。
现代文：齐灭亡后不几年，灵晖就去世了。
English: A few years after Qi's death, Lingyao passed away.

古文：子万寿，聪识机警，博涉□书，礼传俱通大义，有辞藻，尤甚诗咏。
现代文：儿子万寿，聪明机警，博览群书，《三礼》、《三传》都能通晓大义，有文才，尤其擅长诗歌。
English: Son Wan Shou, clever and alert, well-read, "Three Rites" and "Three Traditions" can understand the Great Righteousness, has literary talent, and is especially good at poetry.

古文：齐末，阳休之辟为开府行参军。
现代文：北齐末年，阳休之征召他为开府行参军。
English: In the last years of the Northern Qi Dynasty, Yang Xiu was called up to join the army for the march to the capital.

古文：隋奉朝请、滕王文学、豫章长史。
现代文：隋时为奉朝请、滕王文学、豫章长史。
English: In the Sui Dynasty, it was called Fengchongbei, Tengwang Literature, and Yuanzhang Changshi.

古文：卒于大理司直。
现代文：死时任大理司直。
English: At the time of his death, he was in charge of Dali Sinao.

古文：马子结者，其先扶风人也。
现代文：马子结，他的祖先是扶风人。
English: Ma Zi Jie, his ancestor was a wind fitter.

古文：世居凉土，太和中入洛。
现代文：世代住在西凉，太和年间迁到洛阳。
English: They lived in Xilang for generations, and moved to Luoyang during the Taiga era.

古文：父祖俱清官。
现代文：祖父、父亲都是清要之官。
English: His grandfather and father were both high-ranking officials.

古文：子结兄弟三人，皆涉文学。
现代文：子结兄弟三人，都涉猎文学。
English: The three Ziyu brothers are all involved in literature.

古文：阳休之牧西兖，子廉、子尚、子结与诸朝士各有诗言赠，阳总为一篇酬答，即诗云 三马俱白眉 者也。
现代文：阳休之在西兖州时，子廉、子尚、子结三兄弟和朝中大臣都写了诗送行，阳休之作了一篇酬答，诗中提到的 三马俱白眉 ，就是指子结三兄弟。
English: When Yang Xiuzhi was in Xishuanzhou, the three brothers Zi Lian, Zi Shang, and Zi Jie, as well as the Minister of the Central Government, all wrote poems to see him off. Yang Xiuzhi wrote a reward and reply, and the Three Horse Club Bai Mei mentioned in the poem was the three brothers of Fingers Jie.

古文：子结以开府行参军擢为南阳王管记，随绰定州。
现代文：他由开府行参军提升为南阳王管记，随从高绰到定州。
English: He was promoted from joining the army in Kaifu to Nanyang Wang Guanzhi, and followed from Gaoqiao to Dingzhou.

古文：绰每出游猎，必令子结走马从禽。
现代文：每次高绰出外打猎，一定要让子结骑着马追赶禽兽。
English: Every time Gao Pei goes out to hunt, he must let Zixu ride a horse to chase the animals.

古文：子结既儒缓，衣垂帽落，或噭或啼，令骑驱之，非坠马不止，绰以为欢笑。
现代文：子结是儒生，行动迟缓，衣服被挂破了，帽子也掉了，产鳇又哭又叫，让他骑马驱赶，每次王钟不从马上摔下来绝不会停止，直鳇以此为乐。
English: Zi Jie is a Confucian, his movement is slow, his clothes are torn, his hat has fallen off, his calf is crying and screaming, let him ride a horse to drive it away, every time Wang Zhong does not fall off the horse, he will never stop, and Zhi Jie enjoys this.

古文：由是渐见亲狎，启为咨议云。
现代文：由此二人的关系越来越亲密，奏明朝廷任谘议参军。
English: As a result, the relationship between the two men became closer and closer, and they asked the Ming court for advice on joining the army.

古文：石曜，字白曜，中山安喜人，亦以儒学进。
现代文：石曜，字白曜，中山安喜人，也凭着儒学得以当官。
English: Shi You, Zi Bai You, and Zhongshan An Xijin were also able to become officials thanks to Confucianism.

古文：居官至清俭。
现代文：居官极其清廉。
English: Resident officials are extremely clean and honest.

古文：武平中黎阳郡守，值斛律武都出为兖州刺史，武都即丞相咸阳王世子，皇后之兄，性甚贪暴。
现代文：武平年间任黎阳郡太守，正好斛律武都出任兖州刺史，武都是丞相咸阳王的世子，皇后的兄长，为人贪暴。
English: During the Wuping era, he served as the governor of Liyang County. It just so happened that the ruler of Lirut, Wudu, also served as the governor of Zhangzhou. Wudu was the son of the prime minister, King Xianyang, and the elder brother of the empress. He was a violent man.

古文：先过□县，令丞以下聚敛绢数千匹以遗之。
现代文：先经过卫县，命令从县丞以下人员搜集了几千匹绢送给他。
English: After passing through Wei County, he ordered that several thousand yakitori be collected from people below the county magistrate and sent to him.

古文：及至黎阳，令左右讽动曜及郡治下县官。
现代文：到了黎阳，叫手下人去给石曜和其他县官示意。
English: When he arrived in Liyang, he asked his subordinates to go and signal to Shiyou and other county officials.

古文：曜手持一缣而谓武都曰： 此是老石机杼，聊以奉赠。
现代文：石曜拿着一匹缣对他说： 造匹缣是老石织的，姑且送给你吧。
English: Shi You took a horse and said to him, "The horse is made of old stone, let me give it to you."

古文：自此来并须出于吏民，吏民之物，一毫不敢辄犯。 武都亦知曜清素纯儒，笑而不责。
现代文：其他的东西都来自百姓，百姓之物，我一丝一毫也不敢动用。 武都也知道石曜是清廉的儒士，也就一笑而不为难他。
English: Other things are from the people, the people's things, I do not dare to use them at all. Wudu also knows that Shi You is an incorruptible Confucianist, so he laughs and does not embarrass him.

古文：着石子十卷，言甚浅俗。
现代文：石曜着有《石子》一书共十卷，语言很通俗。
English: Shiyou wrote a book called "Shishi" in ten volumes, and the language is very popular.

古文：后终于谯州刺史。
现代文：后来去世时任谯州刺史。
English: Later, when he died, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：此外行事史阙焉。
现代文：其他事迹史书上没有记载。
English: Other deeds are not recorded in the history books.

古文：赞曰：大道既隐，名教是遵，以斯建国，以此立身。
现代文：赞曰：大道已经隐没，惟有遵循名教，凭其建国，凭其立身。
English: Zang said: The avenue has disappeared, only by following the famous religion, by virtue of its founding, by virtue of its foundation.

古文：帝图杂霸，儒风未纯，何以不坠，弘之在人。
现代文：皇帝一心图谋霸业，儒风不能保持纯正，礼教之所以没有衰退，全靠儒士发扬光大。
English: The emperor was bent on hegemony, the Confucianism could not remain pure, and the reason why there was no decline in the teaching of etiquette was entirely due to the Confucianists.

