古文：夫学者载籍极博，犹考信于六艺。
现代文：学者们涉猎的书籍虽然很多，但是还要从《六经》里考察真实可信的记载。
English: Although scholars dabble in many books, they still need to examine the true and credible records from the "Six Classics."

古文：诗书虽缺，然虞夏之文可知也。
现代文：《诗经》《尚书》虽然残缺不全，但是还可以从记载虞、夏两代的文字中考察清楚。
English: Although the "Song of Songs" and "Song of Songs" are incomplete, they can still be examined clearly from the records of the two generations of Yu and Xia.

古文：尧将逊位，让於虞舜，舜禹之间，岳牧咸荐，乃试之於位，典职数十年，功用既兴，然後授政。
现代文：唐尧将要退位时，把帝位让给虞舜；虞舜把帝位让给夏禹之际，四方诸侯和州牧都来推荐，这才把他放在帝王位置上加以考察试用。主持国政几十年，功绩卓著以后，才把政权交给他。
English: When Tang Xuan was about to abdicate, he ceded the imperial throne to Yu Quan; when Yu Quan ceded the imperial throne to Xia Yu, the princes of the four directions and the provincial governors came to recommend him, which put him in the position of emperor to be examined and tested. After presiding over national affairs for decades and outstanding achievements, he was handed over to him.

古文：示天下重器，王者大统，传天下若斯之难也。
现代文：这表示天下是极贵重的宝器，帝王是极重要的统绪，所以传授政权是如此地郑重审慎啊！
English: This means that the world is an extremely valuable treasure, and the emperor is an extremely important unifier, so it is very prudent to pass on the power!

古文：而说者曰尧让天下於许由，许由不受，耻之逃隐。
现代文：可是诸子杂记里说：唐尧想把天下让给许由，许由不仅不接受，反而以此为耻辱，于是逃走隐居起来。
English: However, Zhuzi Miscellany said: Tang Xuan wanted to give the world to Xu Rong, but Xu Rong not only did not accept it, but took it as a disgrace, so he fled and went into seclusion.

古文：及夏之时，有卞随、务光者。
现代文：到了夏朝，又出现了不接受商汤让位的卞随、务光。
English: In the summer of the dynasty, there were also followers and emissaries who did not accept the abdication of Shang and Tang.

古文：此何以称焉？
现代文：这又如何颂扬他们呢？
English: How is that glorifying them?

古文：太史公曰：余登箕山，其上盖有许由冢云。
现代文：太史公说：我登上箕山，说是山上可能有许由的坟墓。
English: Taishigong said, "I climbed Lushan Mountain and said that there might be a grave on the mountain.

古文：孔子序列古之仁圣贤人，如吴太伯、伯夷之伦详矣。
现代文：孔子依次论列古代的仁人、圣人、贤人，如吴太伯、伯夷这些人，都非常详细。
English: Confucius listed the ancient benevolent people, saints and sages, such as Wu Tai Bo and Bo Yi, in great detail.

古文：余以所闻由、光义至高，其文辞不少概见，何哉？
现代文：我认为所听到的许由、务光的德行是最高尚的，但是经书里连一点大略的文字记载也见不到，这是为什么呢？
English: I think that what I have heard about the virtues of forgiveness and light-heartedness is the most noble, but I can't see even a general written record in the scriptures. Why is that?

古文：孔子曰： 伯夷、叔齐，不念旧恶，怨是用希。 
现代文：孔子说： 伯夷、叔齐不记以往的仇恨，因而怨恨也就少了。 
English: Confucius said: Peers and uncles alike do not remember the hatred of the past, so there is less resentment.

古文： 求仁得仁，又何怨乎？ 
现代文： 他们追求仁德，就得到了仁德，又有什么怨恨呢？ 
English: They pursue benevolence, they obtain benevolence, and what is there to hate?

古文：余悲伯夷之意，睹轶诗可异焉。
现代文：我对伯夷的意志深表同情，看到他们未被经书载录的遗诗，又感到很诧异。
English: I deeply sympathize with the will of the Boi, and I am surprised to see their poems that have not been recorded in the scriptures.

古文：其传曰：伯夷、叔齐，孤竹君之二子也。
现代文：他们的传记上说：伯夷、叔齐是孤竹君的两个儿子。
English: Their biographies say: Bo Yi and Uncle Qi are the two sons of Lone Bamboo.

古文：父欲立叔齐，及父卒，叔齐让伯夷。
现代文：父亲想要立叔齐为国君，等到父亲死了，叔齐要把君位让给伯夷。
English: His father wanted to make Uncle Qi the ruler of the country, but when his father died, Uncle Qi wanted to give the throne to Bo Yi.

古文：伯夷曰： 父命也。 
现代文：伯夷说： 这是父亲的遗命啊！ 
English: Bo Yi said: This is my father's last will and testament!

古文：遂逃去。
现代文：于是逃走了。
English: So he ran away.

古文：叔齐亦不肯立而逃之。
现代文：叔齐也不肯继承君位逃走了。
English: Uncle Qi also refused to inherit the throne and fled.

古文：国人立其中子。
现代文：国人只好拥立孤竹君的次子。
English: The Chinese people had no choice but to support the second son of the lonely bamboo.

古文：於是伯夷、叔齐闻西伯昌善养老，盍往归焉。
现代文：这时，伯夷、叔齐听说西伯昌能够很好地赡养老人，就想何不去投奔他呢！
English: At this time, Bo Yi and Uncle Qi heard that Xibeichang could well support the elderly, so they thought why not go to him!

古文：及至，西伯卒，武王载木主，号为文王，东伐纣。
现代文：可是到了那里，西伯昌已经死了，他的儿子武王追尊西伯昌为文王，并把他的木制灵牌载在兵车上，向东方进兵去讨伐殷纣。
English: However, when he got there, Xibeichang was already dead. His son, King Wu, named Xibeichang as the King of Literature, and carried his wooden spirit tablet on a chariot to march to the East to fight Yin Xi.

古文：伯夷、叔齐叩马而谏曰： 父死不葬，爰及干戈，可谓孝乎？
现代文：伯夷、叔齐勒住武王的马缰谏诤说： 父亲死了不葬，就发动战争，能说是孝顺吗？
English: He said, "My father died and was not buried, so I started a war. Can I say that I am a filial son?"

古文：以臣弑君，可谓仁乎？ 
现代文：作为臣子去杀害君主，能说是仁义吗？ 
English: As a courtier to kill the monarch, can it be said to be benevolence?

古文：左右欲兵之。
现代文：武王身边的随从人员要杀掉他们。
English: King Wu's entourage wanted to kill them.

古文：太公曰： 此义人也。 
现代文：太公吕尚说： 这是有节义的人啊。 
English: Grand Duke Lushang said, "This is a man of principle."

古文：扶而去之。
现代文：于是搀扶着他们离去。
English: So I helped them to leave.

古文：武王已平殷乱，天下宗周，而伯夷、叔齐耻之，义不食周粟，隐於首阳山，采薇而食之。
现代文：等到武王平定了商纣的暴乱，天下都归顺了周朝，可是伯夷、叔齐却认为这是耻辱的事情，他们坚持仁义，不吃周朝的粮食，隐居在首阳山上，采摘野菜充饥。
English: By the time King Wu had quelled the riots caused by the debate, the whole world had surrendered to the Zhou Dynasty. However, Bo Yi and Uncle Qi thought this was a disgrace. They insisted on benevolence and righteousness, refused to eat the grain of the Zhou Dynasty, and lived in seclusion on Shouyang Mountain, picking vegetables to satisfy their hunger.

古文：及饿且死，作歌。其辞曰： 登彼西山兮，采其薇矣。
现代文：到了快要饿死的时候，作了一首歌，那歌辞是： 登上那西山啊，采摘那里的薇菜。
English: When it came to the time when she was about to starve to death, she composed a song, the words of which were: "Climb that western mountain and pick the vegetables there."

古文：以暴易暴兮，不知其非矣。
现代文：以暴臣换暴君啊，竟认识不到那是错误。
English: It is a mistake to exchange a tyrant for a tyrant without realizing it.

古文：神农、虞、夏忽焉没兮，我安適归矣？
现代文：神农、虞、夏的太平盛世转眼消失了，哪里才是我们的归宿？
English: Shennong, Yu and Xia's peaceful prosperity vanished in the blink of an eye. Where is our home?

古文：于嗟徂兮，命之衰矣！ 
现代文：唉呀，只有死啊，命运是这样的不济！ 
English: Alas, there is only death, fate is such a bummer!

古文：遂饿死於首阳山。
现代文：于是饿死在首阳山。
English: As a result, he starved to death on Shouyang Mountain.

古文：由此观之，怨邪非邪？
现代文：从这首诗看来，他们是怨恨还是不怨恨呢？
English: According to this poem, are they resentful or not?

古文：或曰： 天道无亲，常与善人。 
现代文：有人说： 天道是没有偏私的，总是经常帮助好人。 
English: Some people say: The heavenly way is not selfish, and always helps good people.

古文：若伯夷、叔齐，可谓善人者非邪？
现代文：像伯夷、叔齐应该说是好人呢，还是不该说是好人呢？
English: Should people like Bo Yi and Uncle Qi be said to be good people, or should they not be said to be good people?

古文：积仁絜行如此而饿死！
现代文：他们如此地积累仁德，保持高洁的品行，却终于饿死！
English: In this way, they accumulate benevolence, maintain high moral conduct, but finally starve to death!

古文：且七十子之徒，仲尼独荐颜渊为好学。然回也屡空，糟糠不厌，而卒蚤夭。
现代文：再说，孔子七十名得意的学生里，只有颜渊被推重为好学，然而颜渊总是穷困缠身，连粗劣的食物都吃不饱，终于过早地死去了。
English: Moreover, of Confucius's seventy students who excelled, only Yan Yuan was considered to be eager to learn. However, Yan Yuan was always in poverty, unable to eat even poor food, and eventually died prematurely.

古文：天之报施善人，其何如哉？
现代文：天道对好人的报偿又是怎样的呢？
English: What is the reward of good people in heaven?

古文：盗跖日杀不辜，肝人之肉，暴戾恣睢，聚党数千人横行天下，竟以寿终。
现代文：盗跖成天杀无辜的人，烤人的心肝当肉吃，凶残放纵，聚集党徒几千人在天下横行，竟然长寿而终。
English: Stealing and killing innocent people, roasting people's hearts and eating them like meat, indulging in cruelty, gathering thousands of party members to run amok in the world, and ending up with a long life.

古文：是遵何德哉？
现代文：这是遵循的什么道德呢？
English: What is the morality of this?

古文：此其尤大彰明较著者也。
现代文：这是极大而又显著的事啊。
English: It's a big, obvious thing to do.

古文：若至近世，操行不轨，专犯忌讳，而终身逸乐，富厚累世不绝。
现代文：至于说到近代，那些不走正路专门违法犯禁的人，却能终生安逸享乐，过着富裕优厚的生活，世世代代都不断绝。
English: As far as modern times are concerned, those who do not take the right path and only break the law, but can enjoy a lifetime of comfort and enjoyment, and live a rich and noble life, have been extinct for generations.

古文：或择地而蹈之，时然後出言，行不由径，非公正不发愤，而遇祸灾者，不可胜数也。
现代文：而有的人，选好地方才肯迈步，适宜的机会才肯说话，走路，不敢经由小路，不是公正的事决不发愤去做，像这样小心审慎而遭祸灾的人，数都数不过来。
English: On the other hand, there are people who choose the right place to walk, the right opportunity to speak, walk, do not dare to pass through the path, and never do anything that is not fair. There are countless people like this who are careful and prudent and suffer misfortune.

古文：余甚惑焉，傥所谓天道，是邪非邪？
现代文：我深感困惑不解。倘若有所谓天道，那么这是天道呢，不是天道呢？
English: I am deeply puzzled. If there is a so-called heavenly way, then is this the heavenly way or not?

古文：子曰： 道不同不相为谋 ，亦各从其志也。
现代文：孔子说： 思想不一致的人，不能相互商量。 也只有各人按着自己的意志行事。
English: Confucius said, "People who do not think alike cannot consult with each other, and each must act according to his own will."

古文：故曰： 富贵如可求，虽执鞭之士，吾亦为之。如不可求，从吾所好 。 岁寒，然後知松柏之後凋 。
现代文：所以他又说： 假如富贵是可以寻求得到的话，即使作个卑的赶车人，我也愿去做；假如寻求不到，那还是依照自己的爱好去做。  到了严寒季节，才知道松柏是最后凋谢的。 
English: Therefore, he also said, "If wealth and nobility can be sought after, even if I am a lowly driver, I would like to do it; if I cannot seek it, then I will do it according to my own hobbies.

古文：举世混浊，清士乃见。
现代文：整个社会混乱污浊的时候，品行高洁的人才会显露出来。
English: When the whole society is chaotic and filthy, people with high moral standards will emerge.

古文：岂以其重若彼，其轻若此哉？
现代文：这难道不是因为有的人把富贵安乐看得那么重，才显得另一些人把富贵安乐看得那么轻吗？
English: Isn't it because some people attach so much importance to wealth and comfort that others seem to regard wealth and comfort so lightly?

古文： 君子疾没世而名不称焉。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子所怕的是一直到死而名不被称述。 
English: Confucius said: What a gentleman fears is not to be mentioned by name until he dies.

古文：贾子曰： 贪夫徇财，烈士徇名，夸者死权，众庶冯生。 
现代文：贾谊说： 贪财的人为财而死，重义轻生的人为名而献身，矜夸而贪图权势的人为争权而丧生，平民百姓则贪生而恶死。 
English: Jia Yi said: Those who are greedy for money will die for money, those who are greedy for righteousness will die for fame, those who are boastful and greedy for power will die for power, and the common people will die for greed.

古文： 同明相照，同类相求。 
现代文：《易经》上说： 同样明亮的东西，就会相互映照，同属一类的事物，自然相互感应。 
English: "I Ching" says: Things that are equally bright will reflect each other, and things that belong to the same category will naturally interact with each other.

古文： 云从龙，风从虎，圣人作而万物睹。 
现代文： 彩云随着龙吟飞腾，谷风随着虎啸而兴起，圣人述作，才使万物本来的面目显露出来。 
English: Colorful clouds soar with the chirping of dragons, and valley winds rise with the roar of tigers. It is only through the writings of sages that the true nature of all things is revealed.

古文：伯夷、叔齐虽贤，得夫子而名益彰。
现代文：伯夷、叔齐虽然有贤德，只有得到孔子的称赞，名声才愈加显赫。
English: Although Bo Yi and Shu Qi were virtuous, it was only when they were praised by Confucius that their fame became more prominent.

古文：颜渊虽笃学，附骥尾而行益显。
现代文：颜渊专心好学，也只是因为追随孔子，他的德行才更加显著。
English: Yan Yuan was devoted to learning, and it was only because he followed Confucius that his virtue was more prominent.

古文：岩穴之士，趣舍有时若此类，名堙灭而不称，悲夫！
现代文：岩居穴处的隐士，或名声晓达，或湮没无闻，有时也是这样的，像这样的人如果名声埋没得不到称扬，多么可惜啊！
English: The hermit in the cave of the rock, either famous or unknown, sometimes the same, it is a pity that such a man cannot be praised if his reputation is not buried!

古文：闾巷之人，欲砥行立名者，非附青云之士，恶能施于後世哉？
现代文：穷乡僻壤的士人要砥励德行，树立名声，如果不依靠德隆望尊的人，怎么能扬名后世呢！
English: The scholars in the remote and impoverished areas should do their best to practice virtue and establish a reputation. If they do not rely on the people who look up to De Long, how can they make a name for themselves in the future?

