古文：知伯从韩、魏兵以攻赵，围晋阳而水之，城下不沉者三板。
现代文：知伯胁从韩、魏的军队一道进攻赵国。军队把晋阳城包围起来，引河水淹城池，离淹城只有三丈。
English: Zhi Bo Guo attacked Zhao together with the armies of Han and Wei. The army surrounded Jinyang City and flooded the city pond with river water, only three meters away from the flooded city.

古文：郗疵谓知伯曰； 韩、魏之君必反矣。 
现代文：郄疵对知伯说： 韩、魏两国的国君肯定会背叛我们。 
English: Yan Qi said to Zhibo: The sovereigns of Han and Wei will surely betray us.

古文：知伯曰： 何以知之? 
现代文：知伯问： 何以见得？ 
English: Zhibo asked: How come?

古文：郗疵曰： 以其人事知之。
现代文：郄疵说： 从他们的脸上和军事形势上判断就可以知道。
English: From their faces and the military situation, you can tell.

古文：夫从韩、魏之兵而攻赵，赵亡，难必及韩、魏矣。
现代文：我们跟随韩、魏两国军队进攻赵国，可以想见如果赵国灭亡，那灾难必然会降到韩、魏头上。
English: We followed the armies of Han and Wei to attack Zhao. We can imagine that if Zhao fell, the disaster would inevitably fall on Han and Wei.

古文：今约胜赵而三分其地。今城不没者三板，臼灶生蛙，人马相食，城降有日，而韩魏之君无熹志而有忧色，是非反如何也? 
现代文：虽然贤君跟韩、魏相约灭赵以后就和韩、魏三分赵国领土，可是现在晋阳只差三丈就被淹没，连石臼和炉灶都生了青蛙，饿到了人马相食的地步，晋阳被攻陷指日可待，然而韩、魏君主不但不喜，反倒忧愁，这不是表明他们将要背叛还是什么呀？ 
English: Although Emperor Xianjun made an agreement with Han and Wei to exterminate Zhao, he and Han and Wei divided the territory of Zhao three times, but now Jinyang is only three meters away from being submerged. Even the stone mill and the stove have given birth to frogs, hungry to the point of cannibalism. Jinyang is about to be invaded. However, the Han and Wei monarchs are not only displeased, but sad. Is this not an indication that they will betray or what?

古文：明日，知伯以告韩、魏之君曰： 郗疵言君之且反也。 
现代文：第二天，知伯就把这话告诉韩、魏两国君主，说： 郄疵说两位君主就要背弃盟约。 
English: The next day, Zhi Bo told this to the emperors of Han and Wei, saying, "It is said that the two emperors are about to renege on the treaty.

古文：韩、魏之君曰： 夫胜赵而三分其地，城今且将拔矣。
现代文：韩、魏两君说： 灭掉赵国以后我们三国可以三分赵地，而且晋阳马上就要陷落。
English: Han and Wei said: After eliminating Zhao, our three countries can divide Zhao into three parts, and Jinyang will soon fall.

古文：夫二家虽愚，不弃美利于前，背信盟之约，而为危难不可成之事，其势可见也。
现代文：韩、魏两君虽然愚笨，也不至于放弃眼前的利益，甚至背弃盟约去做那种不可能做到的事，这是很明显的。
English: It is obvious that Han and Wei, although stupid, will not give up their immediate interests, or even renege on the treaty to do the impossible.

古文：是疵为赵计矣，使君疑二主之心，而解于攻赵也。
现代文：这种形势发展的结局是可以预见的。可是郄疵在为赵国谋划，以便使贤君怀疑韩、魏两国，进而瓦解三国攻赵的盟约。
English: The outcome of this development of the situation was predictable. However, Yan Qi planned for Zhao to make the wise men doubt Han and Wei, and then break up the alliance of the three countries to attack Zhao.

古文：今君听谗臣之言，而离二主之交，为君惜之。 
现代文：如今贤君竟听信奸臣的谗言，而离间韩、魏两国的邦交，我们真为贤君感到惋惜。 
English: Now that Xianjun has actually listened to the insults of his treacherous vassal, and the diplomatic relations between South Korea and Wei have been severed, we really feel sorry for Xianjun.

古文：趋而出。
现代文：说完就快步出去了。
English: After saying that, he left at a brisk pace.

古文：郗疵谓知伯曰： 君又何以疵言告韩、魏之君为? 
现代文：郄疵又来对知伯说： 贤君为什么要把臣的话告诉韩、魏王呢？ 
English: Yan Qi said to Zhi Bo again, "Why did Xian Jun tell his words to Han and Wei Wang?

古文：知伯曰： 子安知之? 
现代文：知伯说： 你怎么知道我告诉了他们了呢？ 
English: Zhibo said, "How do you know I told them?"

古文：对曰： 韩、魏之君视疵端而趋疾。 
现代文：郄疵说： 因为韩、魏两王临走时，使劲用眼睛瞪了我一眼才快步走开。 
English: Yan Qi said: Because when the Han and Wei kings were about to leave, they stared at me with their eyes before quickly walking away.

古文：郗疵知其言之不听，请使于齐，知伯遣之。
现代文：郄疵见知伯不采纳自己的建议，就主动请求知伯派他到齐国去，于是知伯就派他去齐国。
English: Seeing that Zhi Bo did not accept his own suggestion, Yan Yanqi took the initiative to ask Zhi Bo to send him to Qi, so Zhi Bo sent him to Qi.

古文：韩、魏之君果反矣。
现代文：不久韩、魏君主果然叛变了。
English: Soon after, the Han and Wei monarchs did indeed defect.

