古文：黄帝问曰：余闻天以六六之节，以成一岁，人以九九制会，计人亦有三百六十五节，以为天地，久矣。不知其所谓也？
现代文：黄帝问道：我听说，天以六六之节构成一岁，地以九九制会应之，而人又有三百六十五穴与天地相应，这些说法已听到很久了，但不知是什么道理呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "I have heard that the day of the 66th day of the month is the beginning of the year, the earth will respond with the 99th day of the month, and man has 365 holes corresponding to heaven and earth. These sayings have been heard for a long time, but I don't know what the reason is.

古文：岐伯对曰：昭乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯答：你提的问题很高明啊！
English: Q: Your question is very clear!

古文：请遂言之。
现代文：请让我就此问题谈谈看法。
English: Please allow me to express my views on this issue.

古文：夫六六之节，九九制会者，所以正天之度，气之数也。
现代文：六六之节是指用干支配合计数的六十天轮回六次为一年，用来确定天道的尺度；九九制会是指用长度为九寸的黄钟律管标定的乘九的长度测量天道的准度，以应和万物气化的度数。
English: The sixty-six section refers to using the sixty-day cycle of the dry governing total count to six times a year to determine the scale of the heaven channel; the ninety-nine system meeting refers to using the length of nine multiplied by the length of the yellow bell-shaped tube with a length of nine inches to measure the accuracy of the heaven channel to correspond to the degree of vaporization of all things.

古文：天度者，所以制日月之行也；气数者，所以纪化生之用也。
现代文：天度，是计算日、月的运行轨迹的。气数，是标志万物化生之用的。
English: The celestial degree is used to calculate the movement of the sun and the moon, and the gas number is used to mark the incarnation of all things.

古文：天为阳，地为阴，日为阳，月为阴，行有分纪，周有道理，日行一度，月行十三度而有奇焉。
现代文：天属阳，地属阴；日属阳，月属阴，它们的运行有一定的轨迹，其环周也有一定的度数，每一昼夜，日行一度，月行十三度有余。
English: Heaven belongs to the sun, earth belongs to the shade; the sun belongs to the sun, the moon belongs to the shade. Their movement has a certain trajectory, and their circumference also has a certain degree. Every day and night, the sun travels once, and the moon travels more than thirteen degrees.

古文：故大小月三百六十五日而成岁，积气余而盈闰矣。
现代文：所以，大月、小月加起来三百六十五天成为一岁，由于月亮运行的分度不足，节气有盈余，于是产生了闰月。
English: Therefore, the large moon and the small moon add up to three hundred and sixty-five days to become one year old. Due to the insufficient degree of the moon's movement, there is a surplus of solar terms, resulting in a leap month.

古文：立端于始，表正于中，推余于终，而天度毕矣。
现代文：确定了岁首冬至日为天度年的开始，用圭表的日影确定正午的时间，随着日月的运行而推算节气的盈余，直到岁尾，整个天度的变化就可以完全计算出来了。
English: It was determined that the winter solstice on the first day of the year was the beginning of the celestial year, the time of noon was determined by the shadow of the cuckoo clock, and the surplus of solar terms was calculated with the movement of the sun and the moon. Until the end of the year, the entire celestial change could be fully calculated.

古文：帝曰：余已闻天度矣。愿闻气数，何以合之？
现代文：黄帝说：我已经明白了天度，我还想知道气数是怎样与天度配合的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "I have already understood Heaven. I still want to know how the qi number fits with Heaven."

古文：岐伯曰：天以六六为节，地以九九制会。天有十日，日六竟而周甲，甲六覆而终岁，三百六十日法也。
现代文：岐伯说：天以六六为节制，地以九九之数配合天道的准度，天有十干，代表十日，十干循环六次而成一个周甲，周甲重复六次而一年终了，这是三百六十日的计算方法。
English: Qi Bo said: The heaven is controlled by 66 and the earth by 99 to match the accuracy of the heavenly way. The heaven has 10 stems, representing 10 days. The 10 stems cycle six times to form a week, and the week repeats six times to end the year. This is the calculation method of 360 days.

古文：夫自古通天者，生之本，本于阴阳，其气九州九窍，皆通乎天气。
现代文：自古以来懂得天道的人都知晓，生命存在的根本，在于天地阴阳的变化，地的九州，人的九窍，都与天气相通。
English: Since ancient times, people who know the way of heaven have known that the fundamental existence of life lies in the changes of the yin and yang of heaven and earth. The Kyushu of the earth and the nine points of the human body are all connected to the weather.

古文：故其生五，其气三。
现代文：所以说，天衍生五行，而阴阳又依盛衰消长各分为三。
English: Therefore, the heavens are derived from the five elements, and the yin and yang are divided into three according to the rise, fall, and wane.

古文：三而成天，三而成地，三而成人。三而三之，合则为九，九分为九野，九野为九脏。
现代文：三气合而成天，三气合而成地，三气合而成人，三三而合成九气，在地分为九州，在人体分为九脏。
English: The three qi combine to form heaven, the three qi combine to form earth, the three qi combine to form an adult, and the three qi combine to form nine qi. The earth is divided into Kyushu, and the human body is divided into nine viscera.

古文：故形脏四，神脏五，合为九脏以应之也。
现代文：所以说，有形的脏有四个，藏神的脏有五个，合成九脏，以应天地之气。
English: Therefore, it is said that there are four corporeal stains, five stains of the god of Tibet, and nine synthetic stains, corresponding to the atmosphere of heaven and earth.

古文：帝曰：余已闻六六九九之会也，夫子言积气盈闰，愿闻何谓气？
现代文：黄帝说：我已经明白了天的六六之节，大地和人的九九制会，以及它们相互配合的道理。先生说气的盈余积累成为闰月，我想听您讲一下是什么气呢？
English: Huang Di said, "I have already understood the heavenly 66th day, the 99th day of the earth and man, and the reason for their mutual cooperation. Mr. said that the surplus of qi accumulated into a leap month, I would like to hear what is qi?

古文：请夫子发蒙解惑焉。
现代文：请您启发我的蒙昧，解释我的疑惑！
English: Please enlighten my ignorance and explain my doubts!

古文：岐伯曰：此上帝所秘，先师传之也。
现代文：岐伯说：这是上天秘而不宣的理论，先师传授给我的。
English: Qibo said, "This is the secret and undisclosed theory of Heaven, which was taught to me by my former teacher.

古文：帝曰：请遂闻之。
现代文：黄帝说：就请全部讲给我听。
English: Huang Di said, "Please tell me everything."

古文：岐伯曰：五日谓之候，三候谓之气，六气谓之时，四时谓之岁，而各从其主治焉。
现代文：岐伯说：五日称为一候，三候称为一气，六气称为一时，四时称为一岁，而一岁的四时，则各随五行中的一行来主管当时的气候变化。
English: Qibo said: "Five days are called a season, three seasons are called a season, six seasons are called a season, four seasons are called a year, and the four seasons of a year are in charge of the climate change at that time with one of the five elements.

古文：五运相袭，而皆治之，终期之日，周而复始，时立气布，如环无端，候亦同法。
现代文：五运随递相承袭，各有当旺之时，到一年终结时，再从头开始循环，一年分为四时，四时分布六个节气，逐步推移，如环无端，每一节气中再分三候，也是这样的推移下去。
English: The five movements are inherited from successive phases, each of which has a peak time, until the end of the year, and then start the cycle from the beginning. The year is divided into four hours, and six solar terms are distributed at four o'clock. It gradually changes, like a ring without end, and each solar term is divided into three terms, and it will continue like this.

古文：故曰：不知年之所加，气之盛衰，虚实之所起，不可以为工矣。
现代文：所以说，不知当年所加临的主气、客气什么，不知道主气、客气盛衰变化，以及由此引起的人体虚实的原因，那就不能做医生。
English: Therefore, if you don't know what kind of dominant and submissive qualities you had at that time, if you don't know the rise and fall of dominant and submissive qualities, as well as the causes of the human body's falsity and truth, then you can't be a doctor.

古文：帝曰：五运之始，如环无端，其太过不及如何？
现代文：黄帝说：五种气的运行周而复始，如环无端，它的太过与不及是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said: The operation of the five kinds of qi is repetitive, like a ring without reason. How is it too much or too little?

古文：岐伯曰：五气更立，各有所胜，盛虚之变，此其常也。
现代文：岐伯说：五种气更迭主宰时令，互有克制，从而有盛衰的变化，这是正常的现象。
English: Qi Bo said: Five kinds of air changes dominate the season, and there is mutual restraint, so there are changes in the rise and fall, which is a normal phenomenon.

古文：帝曰：平气何如？
现代文：黄帝说： 平气 是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said: How is the calm?

古文：岐伯曰，无过者也。
现代文：岐伯说：就是没有太过或不及的情况。
English: Qi Bo said: There is no such thing as too much or too little.

古文：帝曰：太过不及奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：太过或不及的情况怎样呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What happens if it is too much or too little?

古文：岐伯曰：在经有也。
现代文：岐伯说：这些情况在经书中都有记载。
English: Qi Bo said: These situations are recorded in the scriptures.

古文：帝曰：何谓所胜？
现代文：黄帝说：什么叫做克制？
English: The Yellow Emperor said: What is restraint?

古文：岐伯曰：春胜长夏，长夏胜冬，冬胜夏，夏胜秋，秋胜春，所谓得五行时之胜，各以气命其脏。
现代文：岐伯说：春克长夏，长夏克冬，冬克夏，夏克秋，秋克春，这就是时令根据五行规律而互相克制的情况。
English: Qi Bo said: "Chun Ke Chang Xia, Chang Xia Ke Winter, Winter Ke Summer, Shake Autumn, Shake Spring, this is the situation where the seasons restrain each other according to the law of the five elements.

古文：帝曰：何以知其胜？
现代文：同时，时令又依其五运之气的属性来分别影响各脏。
English: At the same time, the seasons also affect each organ according to the attributes of its five auspicious qi.

古文：岐伯曰：求其至也，皆归始春，未至而至，此谓太过，则薄所不胜，而乘所胜也，命曰气淫。
现代文：黄帝说：怎样知道它们之间的相克情况呢？岐伯说：首先要推求气候到来的时间，一般从立春日开始向下推算。如果主气时令未到而客气的气候先到，称为 太过 ，太过就会使客气侵侮其不能克制的主气，加倍地欺凌其克制的主气，这就叫做 气淫 。
English: Huangdi said, "How do you know the competitive situation between them?" Qi Bo said, "First of all, we must deduce the time of the arrival of the climate, generally starting from the beginning of the spring. If the dominant season does not arrive and the polite climate arrives first, it is called too much, too much will make the polite abuse its uncontrollable dominant, and doubly bully its restrained dominant, which is called temper.

古文：不分邪僻内生，工不能禁。
现代文：分不出发生 气淫 的特殊情况，致使邪气内扰于人，医生就不能控制了。
English: The doctor can't control the special condition of not being able to distinguish the occurrence of qi mania, which causes the evil qi to interfere with the person.

古文：至而不至，此谓不及，则所胜妄行，而所生受病，所不胜薄之也，命曰气迫。
现代文：主气时令已到而客气的气候未到，称为 不及 ，不及则客气所克制的主气因缺乏制约而妄行，客气所生的主气因缺乏资助而困弱，其所不能克制的主气则会更加受到侵迫，这就叫做 气迫 。
English: The season of the main wind has arrived, but the weather of the main wind has not yet arrived, which is called "not enough," "not enough," the main wind restrained by the main wind is unrestrained and runs wild, the main wind generated by the main wind is weak due to lack of funding, and the main wind that cannot be restrained will be more harassed, which is called "pressure."

古文：所谓求其至者，气至之时也。谨候其时，气可与期。
现代文：所说的要推求正常气候到来的时间和气候的太过与不及，就是要根据正常的气候为标准来衡量季节气候到来的早或晚。
English: What is meant by asking when the normal weather will arrive and whether the weather is too hot or too cold is to measure the early or late arrival of seasonal weather according to the normal weather standard.

古文：失时反候，五治不分，邪僻内生，工不能禁也。
现代文：要谨慎地观察时令气候的变化，预测气候到来的时间。假如实际气候与主气时令的正常气候相反，又不能分辨出五运之气，就会邪病内扰人体，医生就不能控制了。
English: It is necessary to carefully observe the changes in the seasonal climate and predict the time of the arrival of the climate. If the actual climate is opposite to the normal climate of the main season, but cannot distinguish the five winds of fortune, the evil disease will disturb the human body, and the doctor cannot control it.

古文：帝曰：有不袭乎？
现代文：黄帝说：五运之气有没有不按照次序更替的情况呢？
English: Huang Di said: Is there any situation in which the five winds of fortune do not change in order?

古文：岐伯曰：苍天之气，不得无常也。
现代文：岐伯说：司天的五运之气，在四时中的分布不能没有常规。
English: Qi Bo said: The distribution of the five auspicious elements in the four hours of the day cannot be without a routine.

古文：气之不袭是谓非常，非常则变矣。
现代文：如果五运之气不按规律依次更替，就是反常的现象，反常就会使人发生病变。
English: If the five elements of luck do not change in sequence according to the law, it is an abnormal phenomenon. An abnormality will cause people to develop lesions.

古文：帝曰：非常而变奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：反常气候会使人发生什么样的病变呢？
English: Huang Di said: What kind of lesions will abnormal climate make people have?

古文：岐伯曰：变至则病，所胜则微，所不胜则甚，因而重感于邪则死矣。
现代文：岐伯说：气候变化剧烈就容易导致人生病，如在某一时令出现的反常气候，为当旺的主气所能制胜，则其病轻微；若为当旺主气所不能制胜，则其病深重；而若同时感受其他邪气，就会造成死亡。
English: Qi Bo said: if the climate changes drastically, it is easy to cause people to fall ill. If the abnormal weather that occurs at a certain time is able to win for the prevailing wind, the illness will be mild; if it is unable to win for the prevailing wind, the illness will be severe; and if other evil spirits are felt at the same time, it will cause death.

古文：故非其时则微，当其时则甚也。帝曰：善。
现代文：所以，反常气候的出现，不在其所克制的当旺主气的时令，病就轻微；若恰在其所克制的当旺主气的时令，则病深重。黄帝说：好。
English: Therefore, if the abnormal weather does not occur in the season when the emperor's spirit is at its peak, the illness will be mild; if it does occur in the season when the emperor's spirit is at its peak, the illness will be severe. Huang Di said: Good.

古文：余闻气合而有形，因变以正名。天地之运，阴阳之化，其于万物，孰少孰多，可得闻乎？
现代文：我听说由于天地之气相合而生成有形的万物，又因为天地之气的变化多端以至万物形态各异，并根据各自差异来确定万物不同的名称。天地之间，五运之气，阴阳的变化，它们对于万物的生成，就其作用而言，哪个少些，哪个多些，可以听你讲一讲吗？
English: I have heard that because of the combination of the qi of heaven and earth, tangible things are created, and because of the many changes in the qi of heaven and earth, the forms of all things are different, and the names of all things are determined according to their differences. Between heaven and earth, the qi of the five elements, the changes of yin and yang, which of them is less and which is more for the creation of all things, in terms of their functions, can I listen to you?

古文：岐伯曰：悉乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯说：问的实在详细呀！
English: Qibo said: Your question is very comprehensive!

古文：天至广不可度，地至大不可量，大神灵问，请陈其方。
现代文：天极其广阔，不可测度；地极其博大，也很难计量，像您这样伟大神灵的圣主既然发问，就请让我陈述一下其中的道理吧。
English: Since heaven is very vast and immeasurable, and the earth is very large and difficult to measure, since the Lord of such a great god as you has asked, please let me explain the reason.

古文：草生五色，五色之变，不可胜视。草生五味，五味之美，不可胜极。
现代文：草木显现五色，而五色的变化，是看也看不尽的；草木产生五味，而五味的醇美，是尝也尝不完的。
English: Grasses and trees show five colors, and the changes in the five colors cannot be fully seen; plants produce five flavors, and the mellow taste of the five flavors cannot be fully tasted.

古文：嗜欲不同，各有所通。
现代文：人们对色味的嗜欲不同，而各色味是分别与五脏相通的。
English: People have different appetites for color, and each color is related to the five internal organs.

古文：天食人以五气，地食人以五味。
现代文：天供给人们以五气，地供给人们以五味。
English: Heaven provides people with the five elements, and earth provides people with the five tastes.

古文：五气入鼻，藏于心肺，上使五色修明，音声能彰。
现代文：五气由鼻吸入，贮藏于心和肺，其气上升，使面部五色明润，声音洪亮。
English: The five qi is inhaled through the nose and stored in the heart and lungs. Its qi rises, making the face bright and the voice loud.

古文：五味入口，藏于肠胃，味有所藏，以养五气，气和而生，津液相成，神乃自生。
现代文：五味入于口中，贮藏于肠和胃，经消化吸收，五味精微内注五脏以养五脏之气，脏气和谐就能有生化机能，津液随之生成，生命精气神的活力也就自然产生了。
English: The five tastes are put into the mouth, stored in the intestines and stomach, and after digestion and absorption, the five tastes are finely infused into the five viscera to nourish the five visceral qi. When the five visceral qi are in harmony, biochemical functions can be performed, and juice can be produced. The vitality of the life essence god is naturally produced.

古文：帝曰：藏象何如？
现代文：黄帝说：内藏外象是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is the inside and outside of Tibet like?"

古文：岐伯曰：心者，生之本，神之变也，其华在面，其充在血脉，为阳中之太阳，通于夏气。
现代文：岐伯说：心，是生命的根本，为神所居之处，其荣华表现于面部，其充养的组织在血在脉，为阳中的太阳，与夏天的气相通。
English: Qi Bo said: The heart is the foundation of life, the place where God resides. Its glory is expressed on the face, its nourishing tissue is in the blood, it is the sun in the sun, and it communicates with the summer qi.

古文：肺者，气之本，魄之处也，其华在毛，其充在皮，为阳中之太阴，通于秋气。
现代文：肺，是气的根本，为魄所居之处，其荣华表现在汗毛，其充养的组织在皮肤，为阳中之少阴，与秋天的气相通。
English: The lung is the foundation of qi, the place where the soul resides. Its glory is manifested in the hair, its nourishing tissue in the skin, it is the lesser yin in the yang, and it is connected to the qi of autumn.

古文：肾者，主蛰，封藏之本，精之处也，其华在发，其充在骨，为阴中之少阴，通于冬气。
现代文：肾，主蛰伏，是封藏真气的根本，为阴精所居之处，其荣华表现在头发，其充养的组织在骨，为阴中之太阴，与冬天的气相通。
English: The kidney, the main resting place, is the root of the sealed true qi, the place where the yin spirit lives. Its glory is manifested in the hair, its nourishing tissue is in the bones, it is the yin of the yin, and it communicates with the winter qi.

古文：肝者，罢极之本，魂之居也，其华在爪，其充在筋，以生血气，其味酸，其色苍，此为阳中之少阳，通于春气。
现代文：肝，是罢极之本，为魂所居之处，其荣华表现在手指、脚趾的指甲，其充养的组织在筋，可以生养血气，其味酸，其色苍青，为阳中之少阳，与春天的气相通。
English: The liver is the foundation of the body, the place where the soul resides. Its glory is manifested in the fingernails and toenails. Its nourishing tissue is in the sinews, which can produce and nourish blood gas. Its taste is sour, and its color is pale blue. It is the lesser yang in the middle of the yang, and communicates with the spring qi.

古文：脾、胃、大肠、小肠、三焦、膀胱者，仓廪之本，营之居也，名曰器，能化糟粕，转味而入出者也，其华在唇四白，其充在肌，其味甘，其色黄，此至阴之类，通于土气。
现代文：脾、胃、大肠、小肠、三焦、膀胱，是仓廪之本，为营气所居之处，因其功能像是盛贮食物的器皿，故称为器，它们能吸收水谷精微，化生糟粕，管理饮食五味的转化、吸收和排泄，其荣华在口唇四旁的白肉，其充养的组织在肌肉，其味甘，其色黄，都为至阴一类，与土气相通。
English: The spleen, stomach, large intestine, small intestine, trigeminal nerve, and urinary bladder are the origin of qing qi and the place where qing qi resides. They are called qing qi because their function is like a vessel for storing food. They can absorb the watery essence, transform it into waste, and manage the transformation, absorption, and excretion of the five flavors of food. Its glory is in the white meat around the lips, and its nourishing tissue is in the muscles. Its taste is sweet, and its color is yellow. They are all of the yin and yang category, and are connected with the earthy qi.

古文：凡十一脏，取决于胆也。
现代文：以上十脏功能的发挥，都取决于胆气的升发。
English: The exertion of the above-mentioned functions of the ten viscera depends on the rise of the gallbladder.

古文：故人迎一盛，病在少阳；二盛，病在太阳；三盛，病在阳明；四盛，已上为格阳。
现代文：所以说，人迎脉大于平时一倍，病在少阳；大两倍，病在太阳；大三倍，病在阳明；大四倍以上，为阳气太过，阴无以通，称为 格阳 。
English: Therefore, it is said that a person's pulse is twice as large as usual, and the disease is in the lesser yang; twice as large, the disease is in the sun; three times as large, the disease is in the sunshine; more than four times as large, the yang is too much, and the yin has no way to pass, called Geyang.

古文：寸口一盛，病在厥阴；二盛，病在少阴；三盛，病在太阴；四盛，已上为关阴。
现代文：寸口脉大于平时一倍，病在厥阴；大两倍，病在少阴；大三倍，病在太阴；大四倍以上，为阴气太过，阳无以交，称为 关阴 。
English: If the pulse is twice as large as usual, the disease is in Jueyin; if it is twice as large, the disease is in Shaoyin; if it is three times as large, the disease is in Taiyin; if it is more than four times as large, it is too much Yin and not enough Yang, and is called Guanyin.

古文：人迎与寸口俱盛四倍以上为关格，关格之脉赢，不能极于天地之精气，则死矣。
现代文：若人迎脉与寸口脉俱大于常时四倍以上，为阴阳气俱盛，不得相荣，称为 关格 。关格之脉盈盛太过，标志着阴阳极为亢盛，不再能够达于天地阴阳经气平和调顺的状态，会很快死去。
English: If a person's pulse is more than four times greater than usual, the yin and yang are in full vigor and should not be glorified, which is called a "gap." If the pulse of the gap is too abundant, it indicates that the yin and yang are extremely vigorous, and can no longer reach the state where the yin and yang of heaven and earth are peacefully adjusted by the qi, and will soon die.

