古文：公仪仲子之丧，檀弓免焉。仲子舍其孙而立其子，檀弓曰： 何居？
现代文：公仪仲子的嫡子死了，他不立嫡孙为继承人，却立他的庶子为继承人。
English: The legitimate son of Gongyi Zhongzi died. He did not appoint his legitimate grandson as the heir, but appointed his illegitimate son as the heir.

古文：我未之前闻也。 趋而就子服伯子于门右，曰： 仲子舍其孙而立其子，何也？ 
现代文：为了表示对这种作法的讽刺，檀弓故意戴着免去吊丧，并且说： 究竟是怎么回事啊？
English: In order to express the irony of this practice, the sandalwood bow was deliberately worn to avoid mourning, and said: What's the matter?

古文：伯子曰： 仲子亦犹行古之道也。
现代文：我可从来没听说过这样的作法。 他快步走到门右边去问子服伯子，说： 仲子舍其嫡孙而立其庶子，道理何在？ 
English: He quickly walked to the right side of the door to ask Zifu Bozi, saying, "What is the reason for Nakako to abandon his legitimate grandson and raise his illegitimate son?"

古文：昔者文王舍伯邑考而立武王，微子舍其孙腯而立衍也；夫仲子亦犹行古之道也。 
现代文：伯子为仲子打掩护说： 仲子也不过是沿袭古人的成例而已。过去，周文王舍弃嫡子伯邑考而立武王，宋微子不立嫡、孙腯而立其弟衍，所以说仲子也不过是沿袭古人的成例而已。 
English: In the past, Zhou Wen Wang abandoned his legitimate son Boi Kuo and set up King Wu, Song Weizi did not set up a legitimate son, and Sun Yat-sen set up his younger brother Yan, so it is said that Nakako is just following the example of the ancients.

古文：子游问诸孔子，孔子曰： 否！立孙。 
现代文：后来，孔子的弟子子游就此事请教孔子，孔子回答说： 公仪仲子的作法是不对的，应当立嫡孙为后。 
English: Later, Confucius' disciple Ziyu asked Confucius for advice on this matter, and Confucius replied: The practice of the public ceremony matchmaker is wrong, and the legitimate grandchild should be appointed as the heir.

古文：事亲有隐而无犯，左右就养无方，服勤至死，致丧三年。
现代文：侍奉双亲，对其过失不可称扬，不可直言冒犯，或左或右地精心侍候，任劳任怨，直至双亲下世，极其哀痛地守丧三年。
English: Serve your parents, do not praise them for their faults, do not offend them openly, or wait for them carefully on the left or right, do whatever you want, until your parents die, and mourn for three years with great sorrow.

古文：事君有犯而无隐，左右就养有方，服勤至死，方丧三年。
现代文：侍奉国君，对其过失已经直言不讳地加以规劝，如果再有人问起国事，也不妨直言其得失。精心伺候，恪尽职守，任劳任怨，直到国君去世，就比照丧父的礼节守丧三年。
English: If you have served the sovereign, you have been bluntly reprimanded for your mistakes. If someone else asks about state affairs, you may as well be blunt about their gains and losses. You have served diligently, fulfilled your duties, and worked hard until the sovereign passed away. Then, you should observe the mourning for three years according to the etiquette of the deceased father.

古文：事师无犯无隐，左右就养无方，服勤至死，心丧三年。
现代文：侍奉老师，对其过失不可直言冒犯，但也不能总是缄默，像对待双亲那样地精心侍候，直到老师去世，虽然不披麻戴孝，但三年之中心中的悲伤犹如丧失亲人一般。
English: If you serve a teacher, you must not openly offend his faults, but you can't always be silent, and you must serve him carefully as you did with your parents. Until the teacher died, although he didn't wear filial piety, the sadness in the middle of three years was like the loss of a loved one.

古文：季武子成寝，杜氏之葬在西阶之下，请合葬焉，许之。
现代文：季武子建成一座住宅，其宅地原是杜氏墓地，杜家有人就葬在西阶之下。杜家新死了人，请求季武子允许合葬，季武子同意了。
English: Jiwuko built a house, the site of which was originally the cemetery of the Du family, and some members of the Du family were buried under the west steps. The newly deceased members of the Du family asked Jiwuko for permission to be buried together, and Jiwuko agreed.

古文：入宫而不敢哭。
现代文：杜氏后人进入季武子的宅院不敢哭泣。
English: Descendants of the To clan do not dare to cry when they enter Ji Takeko's house.

古文：武子曰： 合葬非古也，自周公以来，未之有改也。
现代文：季武子说： 合葬不是古制。自周公以来才有合葬，后来再没有改变。
English: Jiwuko said, "Combining funerals is not an old system. It has only been done since Zhou Gong, and it has not changed since then.

古文：吾许其大而不许其细，何居？ 
现代文：我既然允许杜家人合葬，而不允许杜家人哭泣，这是什么道理？ 
English: Since I allowed the Du family to be buried together, but did not allow the Du family to cry, what is the reason?

古文：命之哭。
现代文：于是让他们尽情哭泣。
English: So they let them cry as much as they want.

古文：子上之母死而不丧。
现代文：子上的出母死了，但子上没有为她穿孝服。
English: My son's mother-in-law died, but he didn't wear a suit of piety for her.

古文：门人问诸子思曰： 昔者子之先君子丧出母乎？ 
现代文：子思的门人感到迷惑不解，就请教子思说： 从前您的父亲为出母带不带孝？ 子思回答说： 带孝。 
English: Zi Si's disciple was puzzled, so he asked Zi Si: "Didn't your father show filial piety when he married?" Zi Si replied: "He did.

古文：曰： 然 。 子之不使白也丧之。何也？ 
现代文：门人又问： 那么您不让您的儿子子上为出母挂孝，这是何道理？ 
English: The gatekeeper also asked, "Then why don't you let your son become a filial son to his mother?

古文：子思曰： 昔者吾先君子无所失道；道隆则从而隆，道污则从而污。
现代文：子思回答说： 从前我父亲的作法并不失礼。依礼，该提高规格时就提高，该降低规格时就降低。
English: Zisi replied, "In the past, my father's practice was not impolite. According to etiquette, when it was time to raise the standard, he would raise it, and when it was time to lower the standard, he would lower it.

古文：伋则安能？
现代文：我孔伋怎么敢和先父相比呢？
English: How dare I compare myself to my father?

古文：为伋也妻者，是为白也母；不为伋也妻者，是不为白也母。 
现代文：我的原则是：只要是我孔伋的妻子，自然也就是阿白的母亲；只要不是我孔伋的妻子，自然也就不是阿白的母亲。 
English: My principle is: as long as I am the wife of Confucius, I am naturally the mother of Abai; as long as I am not the wife of Confucius, I am naturally not the mother of Abai.

古文：故孔氏之不丧出母，自子思始也。
现代文：所以，孔家的人不为出母挂孝，是从子思开始的。
English: Therefore, people in the Confucian family do not hold filial piety for the sake of motherhood, but begin with filial piety.

古文：孔子曰： 拜而后稽颡，颓乎其顺也；稽颡而后拜，颀乎其至也。
现代文：孔子说： 三年之丧，孝子有两种拜法。一种是先拜而后叩头，这种拜法突出了对宾的恭敬，于礼为顺。
English: Confucius said: In the third year of mourning, there are two kinds of worship for the filial son. One is to bow first and then kowtow. This kind of worship highlights the respect for the guests and is in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：三年之丧，吾从其至者。 
现代文：一种是先叩头而后拜，这种拜法突出了孝子的哀思，于情为至。
English: One is to bow first and worship later. This kind of worship highlights the filial son's sorrow and is full of emotion.

古文：孔子既得合葬于防，曰： 吾闻之：古也墓而不坟；今丘也，东西南北人也，不可以弗识也。 
现代文：三年之丧，应强调的是哀戚之心，所以我赞成后一种拜法。 孔子终于把父母合葬于防之后，说： 我听说，古时的墓地上是不积土为坟的。现在我是个四处奔波的人，不可不做个标志。 
English: After three years of mourning, what should be emphasized is the heart of mourning, so I agree with the latter kind of worship. Confucius finally buried his parents together in Fang and said: I heard that in ancient cemeteries, there was no soil for the grave. Now I am a person who rushes around, I must make a sign.

古文：于是封之，崇四尺。
现代文：于是就在墓上积土，高四尺。
English: As a result, an axe-shaped grave head was built, four feet high.

古文：孔子先反，门人后，雨甚；至，孔子问焉曰： 尔来何迟也？ 
现代文：孔子先从墓地回家，弟子们还在墓地照料，一阵大雨之后，弟子们才来到家。孔子问他们，说： 你们怎么回来的这般晚？ 
English: Confucius first came home from the cemetery, his disciples were still tending to the graves. After a heavy rain, his disciples came home. Confucius asked them, "How did you come back so late?"

古文：曰： 防墓崩。 
现代文：弟子们答道： 防地的墓因雨而坍塌了，我们在那里修墓。 
English: The disciples replied, "The tomb on the defensive wall collapsed because of the rain, and we are repairing the tomb there."

古文：孔子不应。
现代文：孔子没有作声。
English: Confucius did not respond.

古文：三，孔子泫然流涕曰： 吾闻之：古不修墓。 
现代文：弟子们以为孔子没有听见，连着说了三遍。这时，孔子才伤心地流下眼泪，说： 我听说过，古人是不在墓上积土的。 
English: The disciples thought that Confucius did not hear them, so he said it three times in succession. At this time, Confucius sadly shed tears and said, "I have heard that the ancients did not pile up earth on their tombs.

古文：孔子哭子路于中庭。
现代文：孔子在正室前的庭里哭子路。
English: Confucius was crying in the garden in front of his lawful wife.

古文：有人吊者，而夫子拜之。
现代文：有人来慰问，孔子就以丧主的身份回拜。
English: When someone came to offer condolences, Confucius responded as the bereaved.

古文：既哭，进使者而问故。
现代文：哭过以后，孔子召见从卫国来报信的使者，问子路死的情况。
English: After he had wept, Confucius summoned the messenger who had come from the north to deliver the news, and asked him about the circumstances of Zi Lu's death.

古文：使者曰： 醢之矣。 
现代文：使者说： 被砍成了肉酱。 
English: The messenger said, "Chopped up into meat paste."

古文：遂命覆醢。曾子曰： 朋友之墓，有宿草而不哭焉。 
现代文：孔子听后就让人将正要吃的肉酱倒掉，不忍吃它。曾子说： 朋友的墓上有了隔年的草，就不该再哭了。 
English: When Confucius heard this, he had someone pour out the meat sauce he was about to eat, as he could not bear to eat it. Zengzi said, "If there is grass from the next year on the grave of a friend, one should no longer weep."

古文：子思曰： 丧三日而殡，凡附于身者，必诚必信，勿之有悔焉耳矣。
现代文：子思说： 人死了三天而行殡礼，这时，凡是随尸体入殓的物品，一定要考虑周密，一丝不苟，合乎励志，不妄增减，以免日后有所遗憾。
English: Zisi said: When a person dies for three days and a funeral ceremony is held, any items that are buried with the body must be carefully considered, meticulous, consistent with inspiration, and not increased or decreased, so as to avoid regret in the future.

古文：三月而葬，凡附于棺者，必诚必信，勿之有悔焉耳矣。
现代文：三个月以后下葬，这时，凡是随棺入圹的物品，一定要考虑周密，一丝不苟，合乎礼制，不妄增减，以免日后有遗憾。
English: After three months of burial, at this time, all the items that are buried with the coffin must be considered carefully, meticulously, in accordance with etiquette, and not increased or decreased, so as to avoid regret in the future.

古文：丧三年以为极，亡则弗之忘矣。
现代文：虽然服丧以三年为极限，但除丧以后也不应该忘掉双亲。
English: Although the mourning period is limited to three years, parents should not be forgotten after the mourning period.

古文：故君子有终身之忧，而无一朝之患。故忌日不乐。 
现代文：所以君子一辈子都在怀念双亲，但任何时候都不能因思亲过度而有损身体。因此，在忌日是不自娱自乐的。 
English: Therefore, a gentleman misses his parents all his life, but at no time can he damage his body by thinking too much about them. Therefore, he does not entertain himself on the day of his death.

古文：孔子少孤，不知其墓。殡于五父之衢。
现代文：孔子很小就死了父亲，所以不知道其父之墓是浅殡在五父之衙的。
English: Confucius was very young when his father died, so he did not know that his father's grave was shallowly buried in the Five Fathers' Tomb.

古文：人之见之者，皆以为葬也。
现代文：问了一些见到的人，都以为是葬。
English: I asked some people who saw it, and they all thought it was a funeral.

古文：其慎也，盖殡也。
现代文：孔子不知如何办才好。
English: Confucius did not know what to do.

古文：问于郰曼父之母，然后得合葬于防。
现代文：最后问到曼父的母亲，才知道是殡。然后才能够将母亲和父亲合葬于防。
English: Finally, I asked about my father's mother, only to find out that it was a funeral. Then I was able to bury my mother and father together in Dongguan.

古文：邻有丧，舂不相；里有殡，不巷歌。
现代文：邻居有丧事，即使在舂米时也不可喊号子。邻里有停殡待葬的，就不要在街巷中唱歌。
English: If there is a funeral in your neighborhood, you should not shout a bugle call, even if it is during the rice harvest. If there is a funeral in your neighborhood, you should not sing in the streets.

古文：丧冠不緌。
现代文：戴丧冠不应使冠缨打好结后还有下垂部分。
English: Wearing a funeral wreath should not cause the wreath to have a sagging part after the wreath is knotted.

古文：有虞氏瓦棺，夏后氏墍周，殷人棺椁，周人墙置翣。
现代文：虞舜时开始用瓦棺，但尚无椁。夏代则瓦棺之外，又加堲周为椁。殷人开始用木材做内棺和外椁。周人则除木制棺椁以外，又加上两样遮挡灵柩的装饰物：墙和翣。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, people began to use earthenware coffins, but there were no coffins yet. During the reign of Emperor Xia, people used earthenware coffins in addition to earthenware coffins. The Yin people began to use wood to make inner coffins and outer coffins. The Zhou people, in addition to wooden coffins, added two decorations to cover the coffin: walls and coffins.

古文：周人以殷人之棺椁葬长殇，以夏后氏之墍周葬中殇、下殇，以有虞氏之瓦棺葬无服之殇。
现代文：周人用殷代的棺椁来葬十六岁至十九岁的夭殇者，用夏代的堲周制度葬十二岁至十五岁的夭殇者，用舜时的瓦棺葬七岁以下的夭殇者。
English: Zhou people used Yang Dynasty coffins to bury children between the ages of sixteen and nineteen, the Xia Dynasty coffins for children between the ages of twelve and fifteen, and earthenware coffins for children under the age of seven.

古文：夏后氏尚黑；大事敛用昏，戎事乘骊，牲用玄。
现代文：夏代崇尚黑色，办丧事入殓都在黄昏，战车驾以黑马，祭祀用黑色的牺牲。
English: The Xia Dynasty advocated black, funerals were held at dusk, chariots were driven by black horses, and sacrifices were made in black.

古文：殷人尚白；大事敛用日中，戎事乘翰，牲用白。
现代文：殷人崇尚白色，办丧事入殓都在正午，战车驾以白马，祭祀用白色的牺牲。
English: The Yin people advocate white, the funeral is held at noon, the chariot is driven by a white horse, and the sacrifice is made of white.

古文：周人尚赤；大事敛用日出，戎事乘騵，牲用骍。
现代文：周人崇尚赤色，办丧事入殓都在日出，战车驾以赤马，祭祀用赤色的牺牲。
English: Zhou advocated the color red, and funerals were held at sunrise, chariots were driven by red horses, and sacrifices were made in red.

古文：穆公之母卒，使人问于曾子曰： 如之何？ 
现代文：鲁穆公的母亲去世了，派人去向曾子讨教说： 丧事该怎么办？ 
English: Rumu's mother passed away and sent someone to ask his great-grandson for advice: What should I do about the funeral?

古文：对曰： 申也闻诸申之父曰：哭泣之哀、齐斩之情、饘粥之食，自天子达。
现代文：曾子回答说： 我听我的父亲讲过：通过哭泣来抒发悲哀，通过披麻带孝来表示纪念父母对己的无限恩情，通过喝粥度日来表示孝子的食不甘味，所有这些，上自天子，下至庶人，不分贵贱，都是一样的。
English: Zeng Zi replied, "I heard my father say: to express sorrow by crying, to commemorate the infinite kindness of parents to oneself by wearing a hemp belt, and to express the sweetness of food by drinking porridge. All of these are the same, from the Son of Heaven down to the common people, regardless of rank.

古文：布幕，卫也；縿幕，鲁也。 
现代文：用布来做殡时所用的棺罩，这是卫国的习俗；用帛来做殡时所用的棺罩，这是鲁国的习俗。
English: It is the custom of the motherland to use cloth to make the coffin cover used in funerals; it is the custom of Lu to use straw to make the coffin cover used in funerals.

古文：晋献公将杀其世子申生，公子重耳谓之曰： 子盖言子之志于公乎？ 
现代文：此属小节，不必尽同。 晋献公将要杀害他的太子申生。公子重耳对申生说： 您怎么不把受诬陷的情况向父亲讲明白呢？ 
English: This is a small section, it doesn't have to be all the same. For example, Prince Jinxian is going to kill his prince Shen Sheng. The prince said to Shen Sheng with a heavy ear: Why don't you explain the situation of being framed to your father?

古文：世子曰： 不可，君安骊姬，是我伤公之心也。 
现代文：太子说： 不可以。父亲他老人家不可一天没有骊姬，我如果把事情讲明，骊姬必然得罪，这样一来，岂不是伤了他老人家的心吗？ 
English: The prince said, "No. My father and his old man can't go a day without her. If I explain the matter clearly, she will surely be offended. Won't this hurt his old man's heart?"

古文：曰： 然则盖行乎？ 
现代文：重耳说： 那么为什么不逃往他国呢？ 太子说： 不可。
English: Chong Er said, "Then why not flee to another country?" The prince said, "No."

古文：世子曰： 不可，君谓我欲弒君也，天下岂有无父之国哉！
现代文：他老人家给我加上的罪名是谋害君父。试想，普天之下哪里有接纳谋害君父之人的国家呢，我能逃到哪里去呢？ 
English: His old man accused me of plotting to kill my father. Imagine, where in the world is there a country that would accept someone who plotted to kill my father? Where could I flee to?

古文：吾何行如之？ 使人辞于狐突曰： 申生有罪，不念伯氏之言也，以至于死，申生不敢爱其死；虽然，吾君老矣，子少，国家多难，伯氏不出而图吾君，伯氏苟出而图吾君，申生受赐而死。 
现代文：申生派人向狐突诀别说： 我申生有罪，没有听从您的劝告，以至于陷于死地。我个人并不觉得自己死得可惜。尽管如此，想到国君年纪已老，继承人年龄又小，国家正处于多事之秋，您又不出山为我们的国君出谋划策。这使我放心不下。如果您肯出山为我们的国君出谋划策，申生将怀着对您的感激而死。 
English: Shen Sheng sent a person to say goodbye to Foxtrot: I Shen Sheng is guilty, I did not listen to your advice, so I fell to my death. I personally do not feel that I am sorry to die. Nevertheless, when I think of the king's old age, the heir's young age, and the country is in the autumn of many things, you do not go to the mountain to advise our king. This reassures me. If you are willing to go to the mountain to advise our king, Shen Shen Sheng will die with gratitude to you.

古文：再拜稽首，乃卒。
现代文：申生行过再拜稽首之礼，就自杀了。
English: Shen Sheng bowed his head and committed suicide.

古文：是以为 恭世子 也。
现代文：由于申生一味敬顺事上，所以谥为 恭世子 。
English: Because Shen Sheng was so eager to go along with things, he was known as the son of a virtuous man.

古文：鲁人有朝祥而莫歌者，子路笑之。
现代文：鲁国有个人，早上行过大祥除服之祭，晚上就唱起歌来了。子路听见了，就讥笑此人为乐过速。孔子则说： 由！
English: There was a man in the State of Lu, who in the morning had performed the Great Rite of Removing His Clothes, and in the evening had begun to sing. Zilu heard this, and he mocked the man for enjoying himself too quickly. Confucius said, "Stop!

古文：夫子曰： 由，尔责于人，终无已夫？三年之丧，亦已久矣夫。 
现代文：你责备别人就没个头了吗！三年之丧，时间也够长了，很多人连这一点还做不到呢。 
English: Three years of mourning is a long time, and many people can't even do that.

古文：子路出，夫子曰： 又多乎哉！
现代文：子路出去以后，孔子又说： 又多说话了。
English: After Zi Lu left, Confucius said, "You have spoken too much.

古文：逾月则其善也。 
现代文：他再过一个月再开始娱乐就好了！ 
English: He only has to wait another month for the fun to start!

古文：鲁庄公及宋人战于乘丘。
现代文：鲁庄公领兵与宋国军队战于乘丘。
English: The general-in-chief of Luzhuang and the Song army fought at Jianqiu.

古文：县贲父御，卜国为右。
现代文：鲁庄公所乘的战车上，县贲父负责驾车，卜国负责保卫。
English: On the chariot of Luzhuang Gong, the county magistrate is responsible for driving, and the county magistrate is responsible for defending.

古文：马惊，败绩，公队。
现代文：驾车的马忽然受惊乱跑，把庄公从车上摔了下来。
English: The horse driving the car suddenly panicked and ran wildly, knocking Zhuang Gong off the car.

古文：佐车授绥。公曰： 末之卜也。 县贲父曰： 他日不败绩，而今败绩，是无勇也。 
现代文：幸亏副车上的人递给庄公登车的引绳，把他拉上了副车。庄公说： 马惊失列，是驾车者的责任。
English: Fortunately, the person on the second car handed Zhuang Gong the rope to board the car and pulled him onto the second car. Zhuang Gong said: The driver is responsible for the horse getting out of line.

古文：遂死之。圉人浴马，有流矢在白肉。
现代文：我没有事先占卜一下驾车者的人选，所以事情才会这样。 
English: I didn't have a preconceived notion of who the driver was going to be, so that's how it happened.

古文：公曰： 非其罪也。 
现代文：庄公说： 原来如此。
English: Zhuang said: That's how it is.

古文：遂诔之。
现代文：是我错怪县贲父了。 
English: I was wrong to blame the county magistrate.

古文：士之有诔，自此始也。
现代文：于是就写了一篇表彰死者功德的诔文。士这一阶层也能有诔，就是从这件事开始的。
English: So he wrote a eulogy praising the deceased's merits. It was from this incident that the idea that this class of people could also have eulogies began.

古文：曾子寝疾，病。
现代文：曾子卧病在床，病得很厉害。
English: Zeng Zi was sick in bed. He was very ill.

古文：乐正子春坐于床下，曾元、曾申坐于足，童子隅坐而执烛。
现代文：他的弟子乐正子春坐在床下，他的儿子曾元、曾申坐在脚旁。一个小孩子坐在角落里，手执火炬。
English: His disciple Le Zheng Zichun sat under the bed, his sons Zeng Yuan and Zeng Shen sat at his feet, and a small child sat in the corner holding a torch.

古文：童子曰： 华而睆，大夫之箦与？ 子春曰： 止！ 
现代文：小孩子看到曾子身下的竹席，便说： 多么漂亮光滑呀！是大夫用的竹席吧？ 子春说： 别作声！ 
English: A child saw the bamboo seat under Zeng Zi and said, "How beautiful and smooth it is! Is it a doctor's bamboo seat?" Zichun said, "Be quiet!"

古文：曾子闻之，瞿然曰： 呼！ 
现代文：曾子听到了，猛然惊醒过来，有气无力地出了口气。
English: Zeng Zi heard this and suddenly woke up, gasping for breath.

古文：曰： 华而睆，大夫之箦与？ 
现代文：小孩子又说： 多么漂亮光滑呀！是大夫用的竹席吧？ 曾子说： 是的。
English: The child also said: How beautiful and smooth it is! Is it a bamboo seat for a doctor? Zengzi said: Yes.

古文：曾子曰： 然，斯季孙之赐也，我未之能易也。
现代文：这是季孙送的，我因为病重，未能把它换掉。
English: It was sent by Qisun, and I couldn't replace it because I was seriously ill.

古文：元，起易箦。 
现代文：元呀，起来把席子换掉! 
English: Yuan, get up and change the mats!

古文：曾元曰： 夫子之病革矣，不可以变，幸而至于旦，请敬易之。 
现代文：曾元说： 您老人家的病已经很危险了，不可以移动。希望能等到天亮，再为您换掉它。 
English: Zeng Yuan said, "Your old man's illness has become very dangerous, and he can't move. I hope you can wait until dawn to change it for him."

古文：曾子曰： 尔之爱我也不如彼。
现代文：曾子说： 你爱我的心意还不如那个小孩子。
English: Zeng Zi said, "You love my heart even less than that little child.

古文：君子之爱人也以德，细人之爱人也以姑息。吾何求哉？
现代文：君子的爱人，是考虑如何成全他的美德；小人的爱人，则是考虑如何让他苟且偷安。
English: The lover of a gentleman thinks about how to perfect his virtue; the lover of a villain thinks about how to keep him safe.

古文：吾得正而毙焉斯已矣。 
现代文：此刻我还求什么呢？我能够合乎礼仪地死去，我的愿望就满足了。 
English: At this point, what more could I ask for? I could die with dignity and my wish would be fulfilled.

古文：举扶而易之。反席未安而没。
现代文：于是，他们抬起曾子换席，换过后再把曾子放回席上，还没有放好，曾子就断气了。
English: As a result, they lifted Zengzi to change seats. After changing, they put Zengzi back on the seat. Before he was put back on the seat, Zengzi passed away.

古文：始死，充充如有穷；既殡，瞿瞿如有求而弗得；既葬，皇皇如有望而弗至。
现代文：双亲刚死的时候，孝子满腔悲痛，好像日子没法子再过下去殡殓以后，孝子的眼神不定，好像在寻找什么而又找不到的，埋葬以后，孝子仿徨无依，好像在盼望亲人归来而又盼不的样子。
English: When the parents had just died, the filial son was full of grief, as if there was no way to live any longer. After the funeral, the filial son's eyes were uncertain, as if he was looking for something and could not find it. After the burial, the filial son was lost, as if he was hoping for the return of his relatives but could not hope for it.

古文：练而慨然，祥而廓然。
现代文：周年以后，就感慨时间过得太快。
English: After the anniversary, I felt that time had passed too quickly.

古文：邾娄复之以矢，盖自战于升陉始也。
现代文：除服以后，还觉得内心相当空虚。邾娄人用箭来招魂，是从升陉之战以后开始的。
English: After taking off his uniform, he still felt a great emptiness in his heart. It was after the Battle of Seungcheon that he began to use arrows to summon spirits.

古文：鲁妇人之髽而吊也，自败于台鲐始也。
现代文：鲁国妇人露着髻去吊丧的习惯，是从狐髽之战失败后开始的。
English: Lu women's habit of going to funerals bare-breasted began after their defeat in the War of the Fox and the Stag.

古文：南宫縚之妻之姑之丧，夫子诲之髽曰： 尔毋从从尔，尔毋扈扈尔。盖榛以为笄，长尺，而总八寸。 
现代文：南宫縚的妻子死了婆婆，孔子教她做丧髻的方法说： 你不要把丧髻做得太高，也不要做得太大。
English: When Nan Gongyao's wife's mother-in-law died, Confucius taught her how to make the funeral wreath, saying, "You should not make the funeral wreath too tall, nor should you make it too big.

古文：孟献子禫，县而不乐，比御而不入。
现代文：用榛木做簪子，其长一尺；束发的布条，其剩余垂下的部分是八寸长。 
English: A piece of birch wood is used for the braid, which is one foot long; the remaining hanging part of the piece of cloth is eight inches long.

古文：夫子曰： 献子加于人一等矣！ 
现代文：孟献子行过谭祭以后，家中的乐器仍然悬而不奏，可以有妇人侍寝也不入住室之门。
English: After Meng Xianzi performed the Tan Festival, the musical instruments at home were still suspended and did not play, and there could be a woman's attendant who did not enter the door of the room.

古文：孔子既祥，五日弹琴而不成声，十日而成笙歌。
现代文：孔子说： 一般人都做不到这一点，献子能够做到，真是过人一等啊！ 孔子在大祥后五天开始弹琴，但弹不成声调；在大祥后逾月的又一旬里欢笙，其声调就和谐了。
English: Confucius said, "Ordinary people can't do this, but it's amazing that a devoted son can do it!" Confucius began to play the piano five days after the Great Xiang Festival, but he couldn't reach the right tone. After more than a month after the Great Xiang Festival, he rejoiced again, and his tone became harmonious.

古文：有子盖既祥而丝屦组缨。
现代文：有子大概是祥祭一结束，就穿上有丝饰的鞋子和戴上用丝带作缨的帽子，这未免早了点。
English: As soon as the auspicious festival was over, Ariko put on shoes with silk decorations and a hat with a ribbon as a ribbon, which was a bit early.

古文：死而不吊者三：畏、厌、溺。
现代文：死了而不值得临吊的有三种情况：含冤不白而自裁者、行止危险之下被压死者和游泳逞能被淹死者。
English: There are three types of death that are not worthy of hanging: those who commit suicide out of self-justification, those who are crushed under the danger of their actions, and those who drown while trying to swim.

古文：子路有姊之丧，可以除之矣，而弗除也，孔子曰： 何弗除也？ 
现代文：子路为出嫁的姐姐服丧，到了可以除服的日子他还不除。孔子就问他： 为什么还不除服呢？ 
English: Zilu mourned for his sister who was about to be married, but when the day came for him to remove his clothes, he did not remove them. Confucius asked him, "Why do you still not remove your clothes?"

古文：子路曰： 吾寡兄弟而弗忍也。 
现代文：子路说： 我的兄弟很少，所以不忍心到了九个月就除服啊！ 
English: Zilu said: My brothers are few, so I can't bear to take off my clothes at nine months!

古文：孔子曰： 先王制礼，行道之人皆弗忍也。 
现代文：孔子说： 先王制定的礼，对于正人君子来说，就是教他要适当控制感情的。 
English: Confucius said, "The etiquette established by the late king, for the upright gentleman, is to teach him to properly control his emotions.

古文：子路闻之，遂除之。
现代文：子路听了，就立即除掉了丧服。
English: Hearing this, Zi Lu immediately took off his mourning clothes.

古文：大公封于营丘，比及五世，皆反葬于周。
现代文：太公封于齐，都营丘。因太公留朝为太师，死后遂葬于周。
English: Emperor Taigong was enthroned in Qi, Duyingqiao. Because Emperor Taigong stayed in the court as the Grand Master, he was buried in Zhou after his death.

古文：君子曰： 乐乐其所自生，礼不忘其本。
现代文：此后，其五代子孙虽死于齐，也都随太公葬于周。君子说： 音乐，还是故国的声音最好听。礼的精神，也是不忘其本。 
English: Since then, although all five generations of his children and grandchildren have died, they have all been buried in Zhou with the Grand Duchess. The gentleman said: Music, or the voice of the motherland, is best to listen to. The spirit of etiquette is also not forgotten.

古文：古之人有言曰：狐死正丘首。仁也。 
现代文：古人有句俗话说： 狐狸死了，也要头对着狐穴所在的方向，这也是不忘其本啊！ 
English: The ancients had a saying: When the fox is dead, you should also face the direction of the foxhole.

古文：伯鱼之母死，期而犹哭。
现代文：伯鱼的出母死了，过了周年，他还在哭。
English: My uncle's mother-in-law died, and after the anniversary, he was still crying.

古文：夫子闻之曰： 谁与哭者？ 
现代文：孔子听见了，就问 是谁在哭呀？ 
English: When Confucius heard this, he asked, "Who is crying?"

古文：门人曰： 鲤也。 
现代文：他的弟子说： 是鲤在哭。 
English: His disciple said, "It is the baboon who is crying."

古文：夫子曰： 嘻！
现代文：孔子发出不满的说： 太过分了！ 
English: Confucius said indignantly, "This is too much!

古文：其甚也。 
现代文：伯鱼听到后，就不再哭了。
English: After hearing this, the fish stopped crying.

古文：伯鱼闻之，遂除之。舜葬于苍梧之野，盖三妃未之从也。
现代文：舜死后被葬于苍梧之野，大概他的三位妃子都没有与他合葬。
English: After his death, he was buried in Cangwu's Field, and it is likely that none of his three concubines were buried with him.

古文：季武子曰： 周公盖祔。 
现代文：季武子说： 大概从周公开始才有夫妇合葬之事。 
English: Jiwuko said: It was probably from the time of Zhou Gong that married couples were buried together.

古文：曾子之丧，浴于爨室。
现代文：为曾子料理丧事时，其家属在厨房中为死者烧浴汤，这是失礼的。
English: It is impolite for the family members to boil bath soup for the deceased in the kitchen when they are preparing for the funeral of the great-grandson.

古文：大功废业。
现代文：服大功之丧要停止一切学业，以免干扰哀思。
English: To avoid disturbing his grief, he had to stop all his studies after receiving the award.

古文：或曰： 大功，诵可也。 
现代文：但是也有人说：服大功之丧，口诵诗歌还是可以的，只是不可奏乐。
English: However, some people say that it is still possible to recite poetry after a great achievement, but it is not possible to play music.

古文：子张病，召申祥而语之曰： 君子曰终，小人曰死；吾今日其庶几乎！ 
现代文：子张病危时，召申祥来，并告诉他说： 君子之死叫作终，小人之死叫作死。
English: When Zi Zhang was critically ill, he called Shen Xiang to him and told him: "The death of a gentleman is called the end, the death of a villain is called death.

古文：曾子曰： 始死之奠，其余阁也与？ 
现代文：我这一辈子大概差不多可以称作 终，了吧。 曾子说： 人刚死时所设的祭奠，用的是架子上剩余的现成食物吧？ 
English: Zeng Zi said, "When a person has just died, do they use the leftover ready-made food on the shelf for a memorial service?

古文：曾子曰： 小功不为位也者，是委巷之礼也。
现代文：曾子说： 小功之服不按照亲疏的序列而哭，那是居于陋巷的庶人之礼。
English: Zeng Zi said: Xiao Gong's clothes do not cry according to the order of kinship and estrangement, which is the common courtesy of the common people living in the alley.

古文：子思之哭嫂也为位，妇人倡踊；申祥之哭言思也亦然。 
现代文：子思哭其嫂，就讲究亲疏的序列，由他的妻子先跳跃跺脚地哭，然后他才跟着哭。申祥之哭言思，也有这种讲究。 
English: When Zi Si cried for his sister-in-law, he paid attention to the familiar sequence. His wife first jumped and stomped to cry, and then he followed. Shen Xiang's crying words and thoughts also have this kind of attention.

古文：古者，冠缩缝，今也，衡缝；故丧冠之反吉，非古也。
现代文：古时候无论吉冠凶冠都直缝的，现在的吉冠是横缝的，凶冠仍然直缝，看起来正和吉冠相反，这并不意味着古代也是这样的。
English: In ancient times, both auspicious and inauspicious crowns were straight-stitched. Nowadays, auspicious and inauspicious crowns are cross-stitched, and inauspicious crowns are still straight-stitched. It looks just the opposite of auspicious and inauspicious crowns. This does not mean that it was the same in ancient times.

古文：曾子谓子思曰： 汲！
现代文：曾子对子思自夸说： 伋！
English: Zeng Zi said to Zisi boastfully: "Ha!

古文：吾执亲之丧也，水浆不入于口者七日。 
现代文：我父亲刚死的时候，我一点不吃一点不喝达到了七天。 
English: When my father died, I didn't eat or drink for seven days.

古文：子思曰： 先王之制礼也，过之者俯而就之，不至焉者，跂而及之。
现代文：子思说： 先王的制礼，已经是折衷人情而制定标准，行礼过分者应该自己委曲点以期符合标准，而行礼欠缺者应该自己加把劲以期达到标准。
English: Zisi said: The former king's etiquette system is already a compromise of human feelings to set standards. Those who overdo the etiquette should set their own curvature points in order to meet the standards, while those who lack etiquette should exert themselves in order to meet the standards.

古文：故君子之执亲之丧也，水浆不入于口者三日，杖而后能起。 
现代文：所以，君子在父亲刚死的时候，不吃不喝三天也就可以了，尽管只是三天，可孝子也要扶着丧杖才能立起身来。 
English: Therefore, when a gentleman's father has just died, it is all right for him not to eat or drink for three days. Although it is only for three days, the filial son must also hold the funeral staff to stand up.

古文：曾子曰： 小功不税，则是远兄弟终无服也，而可乎？ 
现代文：曾子说： 依礼，小功之服，在丧期已过才听到丧信，就不用追服。
English: Zengzi said, "According to the etiquette, it is appropriate to wear the uniform of minor merit. If you hear the funeral letter after the period of mourning has passed, you do not need to wear the uniform.

古文：伯高之丧，孔氏之使者未至，冉子摄束帛、乘马而将之。
现代文：如此说来，对于在远处去世的从祖兄弟根本就谈不上有丧服了，这样做合适吗？ 
English: So, is it appropriate for a distant grandparent to have no funeral clothes at all?

古文：孔子曰： 异哉！徒使我不诚于伯高。 
现代文：伯高死了，孔子派去致吊送礼的使者还没到，孔子的弟子冉有就代为准备了一份含有一束帛四匹马的礼物往吊，并称说是奉了孔子之命。
English: Bo Gao died, and before the messenger sent by Confucius to present the gift arrived, Confucius' disciple Ran You prepared a gift containing a bunch of four horses to be hung, and said that it was ordered by Confucius.

古文：伯高死于卫，赴于孔子，孔子曰： 吾恶乎哭诸？
现代文：孔子听说后，说： 真奇怪！这平白让我失去了对伯高的诚信。 伯高死于卫国，其家属派人来向孔子报丧。孔子说： 我在什么地方哭伯高呢？
English: When Confucius heard of this, he said, "How strange! This has caused me to lose my trust in BoGao. BoGao died in the Great Patriotic War, and his family sent someone to inform Confucius of his death. Confucius said, "Where should I weep for BoGao?"

古文：兄弟，吾哭诸庙；父之友，吾哭诸庙门之外；师，吾哭诸寝；朋友，吾哭诸寝门之外；所知，吾哭诸野。
现代文：如果是兄弟，我在祖庙里哭他；父亲的朋友，我在庙门外哭他；老师，我在正寝里哭他；朋友，我在正寝门外哭他；只是互通姓名的泛泛之交，我在野外哭他。
English: If it were a brother, I would weep for him in the ancestral temple; a father's friend, I would weep for him outside the temple gate; a teacher, I would weep for him in his bed; a friend, I would weep for him outside his bed; just a general friend with a mutual name, I would weep for him in the field.

古文：于野，则已疏；于寝，则已重。
现代文：对于伯高来说，在野外哭他，嫌得交情太浅；在正寝哭他，又显得礼数太重。
English: For Baigao, crying for him in the wild is too shallow; crying for him while he is sleeping is too formal.

古文：夫由赐也见我，吾哭诸赐氏。 
现代文：他是通过子贡和我见面认识的，我还是到子贡家哭他吧。 于是，命子贡代为丧主。
English: He met and got to know me through Zigong, so I decided to go to Zigong's house to cry for him.

古文：遂命子贡为之主，曰： 为尔哭也来者，拜之；知伯高而来者，勿拜也。 
现代文：因为这和丧之正主不同，所以特地交代子贡： 是为了你本人的关系来哭的，你就拜谢；为了和伯高有交情而来哭的，就用不着你来拜谢。 
English: Because this is different from mourning the rightful owner, he specifically explained the tribute: If you cry because of your personal relationship, you should give thanks; if you cry because you have a friendship with BoGao, you don't need to give thanks.

古文：曾子曰： 丧有疾，食肉饮酒，必有草木之滋焉。
现代文：曾子说： 居丧期间生病，可以吃肉喝酒，还必须加上草木的滋味。 
English: Zengzi said, "If you fall ill during the mourning period, you can eat meat and drink wine, but you must also add the taste of plants.

古文：以为姜桂之谓也。 
现代文：所谓 草木 ，指的是生姜和肉桂。
English: The so-called herbs refer to ginger and cinnamon.

古文：子夏丧其子而丧其明。
现代文：子夏因为死了儿子而哭瞎了眼睛。
English: Zoxia was crying her eyes out because her son was dead.

古文：曾子吊之曰： 吾闻之也：朋友丧明则哭之。 
现代文：曾子去慰问他，说： 我听说过，朋友丧失了视力，应该为他难过得哭一场。 
English: Zeng Zi went to console him and said, "I have heard that a friend has lost his eyesight. I should be sad and cry for him."

古文：曾子哭，子夏亦哭，曰： 天乎！
现代文：说完就哭了。子夏也跟着哭，说： 天啊！
English: After she finished, she cried. Zixia also cried and said, "Oh my God!

古文：予之无罪也。 
现代文：我是无罪的，怎么落此下场！ 
English: I'm innocent, how did it come to this!

古文：曾子怒曰： 商，女何无罪也？
现代文：曾子一听动了气，说： 商！你怎么无罪呢？
English: Upon hearing this, Zeng Zi became angry and said, "Merchant, how can you be innocent?

古文：吾与女事夫子于洙泗之间，退而老于西河之上，使西河之民疑女于夫子，尔罪一也；丧尔亲，使民未有闻焉，尔罪二也；丧尔子，丧尔明，尔罪三也。
现代文：我和你都在洙、泗之间跟着我们的老师学习本领，年纪大了，你就回到了西河地区，也没听说你如何称扬老师，倒是使西河的居民把你比作我们的老师，这是你的第一条罪过。你的双亲死了，居丧期间，你也没有让当地居民看到你有什么好的表现，这是你的第二条罪过。死了儿子，你就哭瞎了眼睛，说明你把儿子看得比老子还重要，这是你的第三条罪过。
English: You and I both learned our skills from our teachers. When you were older, you returned to the West River area. I didn't hear how you praised your teachers. Instead, you made the residents of the West River compare you to our teachers. This is your first sin. Your parents died, and during the mourning period, you didn't let the local residents see any good performance from you. This is your second sin. When your son died, you cried your eyes out, indicating that you regarded your son as more important than Lao Zi. This is your third sin.

古文：而曰女何无罪与！ 
现代文：等等，你怎么会是没有罪过呢？ 
English: Wait, how can you be innocent?

古文：子夏投其杖而拜曰： 吾过矣！
现代文：子夏听得很服气，就抛开手杖下拜说： 我错了！
English: Hearing this, Zixia was very convinced, so she put down her cane and bowed down and said, "I was wrong!

古文：吾过矣！
现代文：我错了！
English: I was wrong!

古文：吾离群而索居，亦已久矣。 
现代文：我离开朋友而独居，时间也太久了！ 
English: I've been living alone, away from my friends, for too long!

古文：夫昼居于内，问其疾可也；夜居于外，吊之可也。
现代文：大白天还呆在正寝之中，就像生病了，亲朋好友就可以前往探病。夜里睡在中门以外，就像居丧的模样，亲朋好友就可以前往吊丧。
English: If you sleep during the day, it's like you're sick, so your friends and relatives can visit you. If you sleep outside the middle door at night, it's like you're in mourning, so your friends and relatives can visit you.

古文：是故君子非有大故，不宿于外；非致齐也、非疾也，不昼夜居于内。
现代文：因此，君子不是由于居丧，是不会在中门外睡觉的；不是祭前的斋戒，不是生病，不会无论白天黑夜都呆在正寝之中。
English: Therefore, a gentleman will not sleep outside the middle gate, not because of mourning, not because of fasting before the festival, not because of illness, and not because of sleeping all day and night.

古文：高子皋之执亲之丧也，泣血三年，未尝见齿，君子以为难。
现代文：高子羔在为父亲守丧时，无声而泣了三年，从来没有笑过。君子认为这是一般人做不到的。
English: During his father's funeral, Gao Zi Lam cried silently for three years and never smiled. The gentleman thought that this was something that ordinary people couldn't do.

古文：衰，与其不当物也，宁无衰。齐衰不以边坐，大功不以服勤。
现代文：丧服的制作皆有法度，如果所穿的丧服不合法度，那就乱了规矩，还不如不穿丧服呢。
English: There are rules for making mourning clothes. If the mourning clothes you wear are not legal, then the rules are out of order. It's better not to wear mourning clothes.

古文：孔子之卫，遇旧馆人之丧，入而哭之哀。
现代文：身穿齐衰，就不可偏倚而坐。身著大功，就不可去干下力的活儿。孔子到卫国去，正碰上过去下榻的馆舍的主人去世，就进去吊丧，哭得也很伤心。
English: When Confucius went to the imperial capital, he found that the owner of the guesthouse where he had stayed had passed away, so he went there to mourn and wept bitterly.

古文：出，使子贡说骖而赙之。
现代文：哭罢出来，让子贡解下骖马送给丧家。
English: Crying out, let Zigong untie the horse and give it to the bereaved family.

古文：子贡曰： 于门人之丧，未有所说骖，说骖于旧馆，无乃已重乎？ 
现代文：子贡说： 对于你的学生的死，你都从来没有解下骖马相赠，而现在要解下骖马赠给过去下榻的主人之家，未免礼数太重了吧？ 
English: Zigong said, "For the death of your student, you have never given a gift of a donkey, and now you want to give a gift of a donkey to the owner's house where you used to stay. Isn't it too much to ask?

古文：夫子曰： 予乡者入而哭之，遇于一哀而出涕。
现代文：孔子说： 我刚才进去哭他，恰巧悲从中来而流泪。
English: Confucius said, "Just now I went in to weep for him, and it so happened that sorrow came out of him and he shed tears.

古文：予恶夫涕之无从也。
现代文：我讨厌那种光空流眼泪而没有实际的同情表示的作法。
English: I hate the practice of shedding tears without any real expression of sympathy.

古文：小子行之。 
现代文：你还是照我说的去办吧！ 
English: Just do what I tell you!

古文：孔子在卫，有送葬者，而夫子观之，曰： 善哉为丧乎！
现代文：孔子在卫国的时候，有人送葬，而孔子在一旁观看，说： 这丧事办得真好啊！
English: When Confucius was defending the country, there was a funeral procession, and Confucius watched from the sidelines and said, "This funeral was really well done!"

古文：足以为法矣，小子识之。 
现代文：完全可以作为人们的傍样。你们要好生记住。 
English: You can totally be a role model for people. You have to remember that.

古文：子贡曰： 夫子何善尔也？ 
现代文：子贡说： 老师为什么称赞那丧事办得好呢？ 
English: Zigong said: Why did the teacher praise the funeral for being well done?

古文：曰： 其往也如慕，其反也如疑。 子贡曰： 岂若速反而虞乎？ 
现代文：孔子回答说： 那孝子在送葬的路上，就像婴儿之思慕其亲而哭泣不止；下葬后回来，又像是担心亲人的神灵不能跟着一道回来而迟疑不前。 子贡说： 恐怕还不如快点回家准备安神的虞祭吧？ 
English: Confucius replied, "On the way to the funeral, the filial son was like a baby, thinking of his relatives and crying endlessly; after the funeral, he came back, and hesitated as if he was worried that the gods of his relatives could not come back together. Zigong said, "I'm afraid I'd better hurry home to prepare for the auspicious festival of Anshin."

古文：子曰： 小子识之，我未之能行也。 
现代文：孔子说： 你们要好生记住这个榜样，连我也做不到他那样呢！ 
English: Confucius said: You should always remember this example, even I can't do what he did!

古文：颜渊之丧，馈祥肉，孔子出受之，入，弹琴而后食之。
现代文：颜渊之死，到了大祥之祭，其家送来祭神的肉。孔子到门外接受，进到屋里，先弹了一会儿琴，然后才吃。
English: When Yan Yuan died, his family sent him meat to offer to the gods at the grand blessing festival. Confucius accepted it outside the door, went inside, played the piano for a while, and then ate it.

古文：孔子与门人立，拱而尚右，二三子亦皆尚右。
现代文：孔子与其弟子们一道站立时，他抱拳的姿势是右手在外，弟子们也都右手在外。
English: When Confucius stood with his disciples, he held his fist with his right hand outstretched, and his disciples also held their right hands outstretched.

古文：孔子曰： 二三子之嗜学也，我则有姊之丧故也。 
现代文：孔子说： 你们这些弟子太喜欢学我了。我右手在外，是因为有姐姐之丧的缘故啊！ 
English: Confucius said, "You disciples are too fond of learning from me. My right hand is missing because of my sister's death!"

古文：二三子皆尚左。
现代文：弟子们明白了过来，就都改为左手在外。
English: When the disciples came to understand, they all changed it to the left hand.

古文：孔子蚤作，负手曳杖，消摇于门，歌曰： 泰山其颓乎？
现代文：孔子一早起来，背着两手，拖着手杖，悠闲自得地在门外踱步，口中唱着： 泰山要崩塌了吧？
English: Confucius got up early in the morning, put his hands behind his back, dragged his cane, leisurely paced outside the door, singing in his mouth: "Is Mount Tai about to collapse?

古文：梁木其坏乎？
现代文：大梁将折断了吧？
English: The girder is going to break, right?

古文：哲人其萎乎？ 
现代文：哲人将凋零了吧？ 
English: Philosophers will wither away, right?

古文：既歌而入，当户而坐。
现代文：唱罢走进屋里，对着门坐下。
English: After singing, I went back inside and sat facing the door.

古文：子贡闻之曰： 泰山其颓，则吾将安仰？
现代文：子贡听到歌声，说： 泰山如果崩塌，叫我们仰望什么呢？
English: When Zigong heard the singing, he said, "If Mount Tai collapses, what will we have to look up to?

古文：梁木其坏、哲人其萎，则吾将安放？
现代文：大梁如果折断，哲人如果凋零，叫我们依靠谁呢？
English: If the beam breaks, if the philosopher withers, on whom shall we rely?

古文：夫子殆将病也。 
现代文：听歌中之意，夫子大概要生病了吧？ 
English: The teacher is probably sick, right?

古文：遂趋而入。夫子曰： 赐！
现代文：于是就快步走进屋里。 孔子说： 赐，你怎么这么晚才来呀！
English: So he walked quickly into the room, and Confucius said, "Why did you come so late?

古文：尔来何迟也？夏后氏殡于东阶之上，则犹在阼也；殷人殡于两楹之间，则与宾主夹之也；周人殡于西阶之上，则犹宾之也。
现代文：夏代停枢于东阶之上，那是还把死者当作主人看待的。
English: The Natsushiro, anchored above the East Steps, also regarded the dead as its masters.

古文：而丘也殷人也。予畴昔之夜，梦坐奠于两楹之间。
现代文：殷人停枢于两楹之间，那是介乎宾主之间的位置。
English: The host stands between the two cymbals, which is the position between the guests.

古文：夫明王不兴，而天下其孰能宗予？
现代文：周人停枢于西阶之上，那是把死者当作宾客看待的。
English: Zhou Ren stopped at the top of the west staircase, which regarded the dead as guests.

古文：予殆将死也。 
现代文：我是殷人的后代。
English: I am a descendant of the Yin people.

古文：盖寝疾七日而没。
现代文：昨天夜里，我梦见自己安坐在两楹之间。
English: Last night, I dreamed that I was sitting comfortably between two reeds.

古文：孔子之丧，门人疑所服。
现代文：既没有明王兴起，天下有谁会把我当作立于两楹之间的国君那样尊重呢？
English: Since there has been no rise of a bright king, who in the world would respect me as a sovereign who stands between two mountains?

古文：子贡曰： 昔者夫子之丧颜渊，若丧子而无服；丧子路亦然。
现代文：这样看来，我大概是快死了吧、 过这番话以后，孔子大概病了七八天就去世了。果不其然，说，尹
English: So it looks like I'm about to die. After these words, Confucius fell ill for about seven or eight days and died. Sure enough, he said,

古文：请丧夫子，若丧父而无服。 
现代文：孔子去世的时候，他的弟子们都不清楚该为老师穿哪一等丧服。
English: When Confucius died, his disciples didn't know what kind of mourning clothes to wear for their teacher.

古文：孔子之丧，公西赤为志焉：饰棺、墙，置翣设披，周也；设崇，殷也；绸练设旐，夏也。
现代文：子贡说： 以前夫子哀悼颜渊，其悲痛如同丧子一样，但不穿任何丧服。哀悼子路时也是这样。让我们悼念夫子，就像悼念父亲一样，但也不穿任何丧服。 
English: Zigong said, "In the past, when a husband and wife mourned Yan Yuan, their grief was like that of a bereaved son, but they did not wear any mourning clothes. This is also the case when mourning a son. Let's mourn the husband and wife, just like mourning the father, but also do not wear any mourning clothes.

古文：子张之丧，公明仪为志焉；褚幕丹质，蚁结于四隅，殷士也。子夏问于孔子曰： 居父母之仇如之何？ 
现代文：孔子的丧事，是公西赤为之设计的有帷慌，帷慌外有婴，灵枢上系有披带，为了装饰棺木，棺外设乘杆这些都是周代的制度；车上设置崇牙状的旌旗，这是殷代的制度；用素锦缠绕旗杆，上挑着宽为二尺二寸长为八尺的黑布蟠，这是夏代的制度。
English: The funeral of Confucius was designed by Gong Xiqi for which there was a drape, a baby outside the drape, a cape on the hinge, and a riding pole outside the coffin to decorate the coffin. These were the systems of the Zhou dynasty; a banner in the shape of a dragon's tooth was set up on the vehicle, which was the system of the Yin dynasty; the flagpole was wrapped with plain brocade, and a black cloth with a width of two feet and two inches and a length of eight feet was put on top, which was the system of the Xia dynasty.

古文：夫子曰： 寝苫枕干，不仕，弗与共天下也；遇诸市朝，不反兵而斗。 曰： 请问居昆弟之仇如之何？ 
现代文：子张的丧事，是公明仪为之设计的：用红布做成紧贴棺身的棺罩，在棺罩的四角画着像蚂蚁交错爬行的纹路。这是殷代的士礼。子夏向孔子请教说： 对于杀害父母的仇人应该怎么办？ 孔子说：礴 睡在草垫子上，枕着盾牌，不担任公职，时刻以报仇雪恨为念，决心不和仇人并存于世。不论到什么地方，武器都不离身。
English: Zizhang's funeral was designed by Gongmingyi: the coffin lid was made of red cloth and fitted tightly to the body of the coffin, and the four corners of the coffin lid were painted with a pattern resembling ants crawling in a staggered manner. This was the Yin Dynasty's scholarly etiquette. Zixia asked Confucius for advice: What should be done with an enemy who killed her parents? Confucius said: "A dragon sleeps on a grass mat, with a shield on her pillow, does not hold any public office, is always bent on revenge, and is determined not to coexist with her enemies. No matter where she goes, she never

古文：曰： 仕弗与共国；衔君命而使，虽遇之不斗。 曰： 请问居从父昆弟之仇如之何？ 
现代文：即令是在市上或公门碰到了，拔出武器就和他拚命。 子夏又间： 请何对杀害亲兄弟的仇人应该怎么办？ 
English: Even if they met him in the market or at a public gate, they would pull out their weapons and fight for his life.Zhong Xia Mian: What should I do with the enemy who killed my brother?

古文：曰： 不为魁，主人能，则执兵而陪其后。 
现代文：孔子说： 不和仇人在同一国家担任公职。
English: Confucius said: Do not hold public office in the same country as the enemy.

古文：孔子之丧，二三子皆绖而出。
现代文：如果是奉君命出使而和仇人相遇，应当以君命为重，暂不与之决斗。 子夏又问怎么办？ 
English: If you are dispatched by order of the king and encounter the enemy, you should take the king's life as the most important and not fight with him for the time being. What should Zoxia do?

古文：群居则绖，出则否。
现代文：孔子说： 报仇的时候，弟带头，自己手执武器随后协助。 
English: Confucius said: "When taking revenge, the younger brother should take the lead, and he should hold the weapon in his own hand and then assist.

古文：易墓，非古也。
现代文：孔子去世以后，他的弟子们都在头上缠一条孝布一根麻带。
English: After the death of Confucius, his disciples all wrapped a piece of filial cloth and a piece of linen around their heads.

古文：子路曰： 吾闻诸夫子：丧礼，与其哀不足而礼有余也，不若礼不足而哀有余也。祭礼，与其敬不足而礼有余也，不若礼不足而敬有余也。 
现代文：但只有在弟子们聚在一起时才这样戴孝，出门办事就不戴了。整治墓地的草木，不使荒秽，并非古来如此。子路说： 我听夫子说过：举行丧礼，与其哀痛不足而冥器衣袅之类有余，还不如冥器衣袅之类不足而哀痛有余；举行祭礼，与其恭敬不足而祭品有余，还不如祭品不足而恭敬有余。 
English: But it is only when the disciples are gathered together that they show such filial piety. They do not show it when they go out to do business. It has not been like this for a long time. Zilu said: I heard the master say: holding funerals, instead of lacking grief, but having enough of the necromancer's cloak, is better than lacking necromancer's cloak but having enough of grief; holding sacrifices, instead of lacking respect, but having enough of sacrifices, is better than lacking sacrifices but having enough of respect.

古文：曾子吊于负夏，主人既祖，填池，推柩而反之，降妇人而后行礼。
现代文：曾子到负夏吊丧。主人已经行过祖奠，设了池，把柩车装饰妥当，正要出葬，见到曾子来吊，深感荣幸，就又把柩车掉头向内，但却又使家中妇女仍然停留在两阶之间，然后行礼拜谢。
English: Zeng Zi's funeral was held in the summer of the following year. The owner had already conducted the ancestor's memorial service, set up a pool, and decorated the carriage appropriately. He was about to leave for the funeral. When he saw Zeng Zi coming to carry out the funeral, he felt deeply honored. He turned the carriage inward again, but the women in the family remained between the two tiers, and then performed a prayer of thanksgiving.

古文：从者曰： 礼与？ 
现代文：随从者问曾子说： 这样做合乎礼吗？ 
English: A follower asked Zengzi: "Is it proper to do this?

古文：曾子曰： 夫祖者且也；且，胡为其不可以反宿也？ 
现代文：曾子巧辩说： 祖奠的 祖 字是暂且的意思，既然是暂且的祭奠，把柩车掉头向内有何不可呢！ 
English: Zeng Zi cleverly argued: The word "Zou" in "Zou Dian" means "temporary." Since it is a temporary memorial, why not turn the carriage inside out?

古文：从者又问诸子游曰： 礼与？ 子游曰： 饭于牖下，小敛于户内，大敛于阼，殡于客位，祖于庭，葬于墓，所以即远也。
现代文：随从者又就此事请教子游，说： 这样做合乎礼吗尸子游说： 在正寝的南墉下饭含，在正寝的当门处小敛，在表示主位的东阶上大敛，在表示客位的西阶上停枢，在祖庙的堂下举行最后告别的祖奠，最后葬于野外的墓里。
English: The follower also asked Guo Ziyu about this matter, saying, "Is it proper to do this?" Guo Ziyu said, "It is proper to hold the meal under the south niche of the deceased, to hold a small funeral at the door of the deceased, to hold a large funeral on the east step of the deceased, to hold a funeral on the west step of the deceased, to hold a final farewell memorial service for the deceased under the hall of the ancestral temple, and finally to bury the deceased in an open grave.

古文：故丧事有进而无退。 
现代文：从始死到下葬的整个过程，是一步一步地由近而远。
English: The whole process from the beginning of death to the burial is a step-by-step process from near and far.

古文：曾子闻之曰： 多矣乎，予出祖者。 
现代文：所以，办理丧事，有进而无退。 曾子听了，大为折服，说： 比我解释的祖奠强多了！ 
English: Therefore, there is no turning back when it comes to handling funerals. Zeng Zi listened and was greatly impressed, saying, "This is much stronger than my explanation of the Ancestor's Burial!

古文：曾子袭裘而吊，子游裼裘而吊。
现代文：曾子掩着正服上襟，以凶服的装束去吊丧。
English: Zeng Zi covered the collar of his formal dress and went to the funeral in his formal attire.

古文：曾子指子游而示人曰： 夫夫也，为习于礼者，如之何其裼裘而吊也？ 
现代文：子游却敞开正服上襟，以吉服的装束去吊丧。曾子指着子游对众人说： 你们看这个人，号称礼学专家，怎么竟穿着吉服来吊丧了？ 
English: Zengzi pointed at Ziyou and said to the crowd: "Look at this man, who is known as an expert in etiquette, how come he came to the funeral wearing a lucky outfit?

古文：主人既小敛、袒、括发；子游趋而出，袭裘带绖而入。
现代文：小敛以后，主人袒衣而露出左臂，去掉发髻上的笋缅，重新用麻束发。
English: After the small restraint, the owner undressed and exposed his left arm, removed the braided hair on the bun, and re-used the hemp bundle hair.

古文：曾子曰： 我过矣，我过矣，夫夫是也。 子夏既除丧而见，予之琴，和之不和，弹之而不成声。
现代文：这个人的做法才是对的。 子夏在除掉丧服之后去进见孔子。孔子递给他一张琴，他调不好弦，也弹不成调。
English: Zixia took off his mourning clothes and went to see Confucius. Confucius handed him a lute, but he could not tune the strings, nor could he play in tune.

古文：作而曰： 哀未忘也。
现代文：就站起来说： 这是因为悲哀还没有忘掉。
English: He stood up and said: This is because the sorrow has not been forgotten.

古文：先王制礼，而弗敢过也。 
现代文：先王制定的礼，我也不敢勉强超过。 
English: I don't dare to exceed the etiquette established by the late king.

古文：子张既除丧而见，予之琴，和之而和，弹之而成声，作而曰： 先王制礼不敢不至焉。 
现代文：子张在除掉丧服之后去进见孔子。孔子递给他一张琴，他调弦也能调好，弹奏也能成调。站起来说： 先王制定的礼，我也不敢不努力做到。 
English: After removing his mourning clothes, Zi Zhang went to see Confucius. Confucius handed him a lute, which he could tune and play well. Zi Zhang stood up and said, "I dare not fail to try my best to follow the etiquette established by the late King."

古文：司寇惠子之丧，子游为之麻衰牡麻绖，文子辞曰： 子辱与弥牟之弟游，又辱为之服，敢辞。 
现代文：司寇惠子死了，子游作为朋友前去吊丧，但穿的吊服很特别，衰是麻衰，纽是牡麻经。文子辞谢说： 舍弟生前承蒙您和他交往，死了又承蒙您为他服此种吊服，真是不敢当。 
English: When Siko Keiko died, Ziyu went to the funeral as a friend, but he wore a very special hanging robe. The hanging robe was a special robe. The hanging robe was a special robe. The hanging robe was a special robe. The hanging robe was a special robe. Fumiko said in her thank-you speech, "My deceased brother asked me to wear this hanging robe for him when he was alive, and when he died, I asked you to wear this hanging robe for him. I can't believe it."

古文：子游曰： 礼也。 
现代文：子游说： 这是符合礼的。 
English: Child lobby: This is proper.

古文：文子退反哭，子游趋而就诸臣之位，文子又辞曰： 子辱与弥牟之弟游，又辱为之服，又辱临其丧，敢辞。 子游曰： 固以请。 
现代文：文子没有觉察到子游的用意，就又退回原位，继续哭泣。子游看到文子还不自觉 就快步走到家臣们哭吊的位置上。文子见子游就错了位，又来辞谢说： 舍弟生前承蒙您和他交往，又承蒙您为他服吊服，而且还劳驾参加丧礼，实在不敢当。 子游说： 千万不要客气。 
English: Fumiko did not notice Ziyu's intention to leave, so she returned to her original position and continued to cry. When Ziyu saw Fumiko, she unconsciously walked quickly to the place where her vassals were crying. When Fumiko saw Ziyu, she was in the wrong place, and she came to thank him again, saying, "I'm really humbled by the fact that you took the time to socialize with my brother-in-law when he was alive, and that you took the time to dress him in formal attire, and that you even went to the trouble of attending his funeral." Ziyu said, "Don't be polite."

古文：文子退，扶适子南面而立曰： 子辱与弥牟之弟游，又辱为之服，又辱临其丧，虎也敢不复位。 
现代文：文子这才明白子游的用意，于是退下，扶出惠子的嫡子虎南面而立，就主人的正位，并说： 舍弟生前承蒙您和他交往，死后又承蒙您为他服吊服，而且还劳驾参加丧礼，虎敢不回到主人的正位上来拜谢吗？ 
English: It was only then that Fumiko understood Ziyu's intention, so she stepped back and helped out Keiko's legitimate son, Tora Minami, to stand in the master's rightful place, and said, "My brother-in-law allowed you to socialize with him during his lifetime, and after his death, he allowed you to dress him in formal attire, and you even went to the trouble of attending the funeral. Would Tora dare not return to the master's rightful place to offer thanks?

古文：子游趋而就客位。
现代文：子游见目的已经达到，就连忙由臣位走向客位。
English: When Ziyu saw that his goal had been achieved, he hurriedly moved from the position of subject to that of guest.

古文：将军文子之丧，既除丧，而后越人来吊，主人深衣练冠，待于庙，垂涕洟，子游观之曰： 将军文氏之子其庶几乎！亡于礼者之礼也，其动也中。 
现代文：将军文子死了，其子已经守丧三年，遥远的越国人前来吊丧。主人身穿深衣，祖庙受吊，而且悄悄地淌着眼泪流着鼻涕除掉丧服，头戴练冠，而此时又有不迎宾，在。子游见到了，大为赞赏，说： 将军文子的儿子真不简单，礼文上没有的礼节，他做得是那么得体。 
English: General Fumiko died, and his son had been in mourning for three years. People from the distant country of Yue came to pay their respects. The master was dressed in dark clothes, the ancestral temple was hanged, and he quietly shed tears and snot to remove the mourning clothes, wearing a practice crown, and at this time he did not welcome guests. Ziyu saw it, was greatly appreciated, and said: General Fumiko's son is really not simple, there is no etiquette in the ritual, he did it so well.

古文：幼名，冠字，五十以伯仲，死谥，周道也。
现代文：幼小时称呼其名。二十岁行过冠礼以后，则称呼其字。五十岁以后只称呼其排行，或伯或仲或叔或季。死后称其溢号。
English: When you are young, you call it by its name. When you are twenty, you call it by its kanji after performing the coronation. After the age of fifty, you only call it by its rank, or bo, or chu, or shu, or ji. After death, you call it by its exclamation mark.

古文：绖也者实也。
现代文：这是周朝的制度。
English: This is the system of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：掘中溜而浴，毁灶以缀足；及葬，毁宗躐行，出于大门－─殷道也。
现代文：绖是有实际内容的，那就是表示内心的哀戚。在正寝的中央掘坑来浴尸，把灶拆毁，用其砖来拘束死者之脚；到了出葬的时候，毁掉庙墙而凌越行神之位，不经中门就直接把柩车拉出大门。这是殷代的制度。
English: The yakitori has a practical content, that is, it expresses the sorrow of the heart. The yakitori bathes the corpse in the central excavation pit while it is sleeping, demolishes the stove, and uses its bricks to restrain the feet of the deceased; at the time of burial, it destroys the temple wall and crosses the position of the walking god, and pulls the yakitori directly out of the gate without passing through the middle gate. This is the system of the Yin Dynasty.

古文：学者行之。
现代文：跟着孔子学习的人，往往效法殷制。
English: Those who study with Confucius often follow his example.

古文：子柳之母死，子硕请具。
现代文：子柳的母亲死了，他的弟弟子硕请求备办葬具。
English: Ziliu's mother died, and his younger brother, Disciple Shuo, requested that funeral arrangements be made.

古文：子柳曰： 何以哉？ 
现代文：子柳说： 钱从哪里来呢？ 
English: Cillia said: Where does the money come from?

古文：子硕曰： 请粥庶弟之母。 
现代文：子硕说： 让我们把庶弟的母亲卖了吧。 
English: Zishuo said, "Let's sell my younger brother's mother."

古文：子柳曰： 如之何其粥人之母以葬其母也？
现代文：子柳说：埋子 我们怎么可以卖别人之母以葬自己之母呢？
English: Zoryu said, "How can we sell someone else's mother to bury our own?"

古文：不可。 
现代文：这绝对使不得。 
English: This battle cannot be fought alone.

古文：既葬，子硕欲以赙布之余具祭器。
现代文：罢母亲，子硕想用剩下的亲朋赠送助办丧事的钱财置办祭器，柳说： 这也使不得。
English: The mother said that the son wanted to use the money donated by the remaining relatives and friends to help with the funeral to buy a sacrificial vessel. Liu said: This is also impossible.

古文：子柳曰： 不可，吾闻之也：君子不家于丧。请班诸兄弟之贫者。 
现代文：我听说过，君子是不靠办丧事发家的。这些剩余的钱财，让我们分给兄弟中的贫困者吧。 
English: I have heard it said that a gentleman does not make his money by attending funerals. Let us give the rest of our money to the poorest of our brothers.

古文：君子曰： 谋人之军师，败则死之；谋人之邦邑，危则亡之。 
现代文：君子说： 如果为国君的军事行动谋划，不幸失败，就应引咎自裁。
English: The gentleman said: If you plan a military operation for the sovereign and it fails, you should blame yourself.

古文：公叔文子升于瑕丘，蘧伯玉从。
现代文：如果为国君谋划如何保卫国都，不幸国都处于危险之中，就应引咎接受放逐，让开贤路。 
English: If you plan how to defend the capital for the sovereign, and unfortunately the country is in danger, you should accept exile and give way.

古文：文子曰： 乐哉斯丘也，死则我欲葬焉。 
现代文：公叔文子登上瑕丘，蘧伯玉也跟了上去。文子说： 瑕丘的山水太招人喜欢了！如果我死了，就想葬在这里。 
English: Uncle Fumiko climbed up Kakeoka, and Zouhogyoku followed. Fumiko said, "The landscape of Kakeoka is so attractive! If I die, I want to be buried here."

古文：蘧伯玉曰： 吾子乐之，则瑗请前。 
现代文：莲伯玉说： 您既然喜欢，我自然也喜欢，我愿先死，抢先葬于此地。 
English: Lianbo Yu said: Since you like it, I naturally like it too. I would like to die first and be buried here first.

古文：弁人有其母死而孺子泣者，孔子曰： 哀则哀矣，而难为继也。
现代文：弃邑有个人死了母亲，其哭声像幼儿哭母，任情号哭，全无节奏。孔子说： 这种哭法，就表达悲哀而言没啥说的，问题在于一般人都学不了。
English: In an abandoned village, a man's mother died, and his crying was like that of a toddler crying for his mother. He was allowed to cry, and there was no rhythm at all. Confucius said: This kind of crying has nothing to say about expressing sadness. The problem is that ordinary people can't learn it.

古文：夫礼，为可传也，为可继也。
现代文：礼在制定的时候，就要考虑如何才能传给后代，如何才能使人人都可做到。
English: When formulating a ritual, it is necessary to consider how it can be passed on to future generations, and how it can be made accessible to everyone.

古文：故哭踊有节。 
现代文：所以，丧礼中的哭泣和顿足，都是有一定之规的。 
English: Therefore, there are certain rules for crying and stamping one's feet at funerals.

古文：叔孙武叔之母死，既小敛，举者出户，出户袒，且投其冠括发。
现代文：叔孙武叔的母亲死了，小敛罢，抬尸的人们将尸体抬出寝门，叔孙武叔跟着出门，直到这时候他才袒露左臂，去掉原来发髻上的异缅，重新用麻束发。
English: Uncle Sun Wu's mother died, so he had to be restrained. The pallbearers carried the corpse out of the bedroom door, and Uncle Sun Wu followed them out the door. It was only then that he uncovered his left arm, removed the birthmarks from his original hair bun, and wore his hair in a hemp bun again.

古文：子游曰： 知礼。 
现代文：子游说： 这也算懂得礼节吗？ 
English: Sub-lobbying: Does this count as knowing etiquette?

古文：扶君，卜人师扶右，射人师扶左；君薨以是举。
现代文：搀扶生病的国君，太仆之官扶其右，射人之官扶其左。国君死后，迁尸、正尸的工作，也由此二官如此办理。
English: After the death of the sovereign, the work of moving and dressing the body was also handled in this way by the two officials.

古文：从母之夫，舅之妻，二夫人相为服，君子未之言也。
现代文：姨丈去世了，舅母去世了，曾经受过他们恩惠的外甥该服什么丧服呢，君子从来没有讲过。
English: An uncle has died, an aunt has died, and the gentleman has never said what kind of mourning clothes his nephew, who once received their favor, should wear.

古文：或曰同爨缌。
现代文：有的人说：既然同吃一个灶上的饭，可以服绍麻。
English: Some people say: Since we eat the same meal on the same stove, we can share the broth.

古文：丧事，欲其纵纵尔；吉事，欲其折折尔。
现代文：办丧事，要有急迫的样子；办吉事，要有从容的态度。
English: When holding a funeral, one should appear to be in a hurry; when holding a auspicious event, one should have a calm attitude.

古文：故丧事虽遽，不陵节；吉事虽止，不怠。
现代文：然而，丧事虽然要急急地办，却不可隔越步骤；吉事虽然有喘口气的时间，但也不可懈怠。
English: However, although the funeral must be carried out urgently, it must not skip steps; although there is time to take a breath, it must not be slackened.

古文：故骚骚尔则野，鼎鼎尔则小人。
现代文：所以，如果操之过急，就显得粗野；如果节奏过于缓慢，就像是无知的小人模样。
English: So if it's too fast, it's rude; if it's too slow, it's ignorant.

古文：君子盖犹犹尔。
现代文：君子办事总是快慢适中。
English: A gentleman always does things quickly, slowly and moderately.

古文：丧具，君子耻具，一日二日而可为也者，君子弗为也。
现代文：送死用的棺木、衣物之类东西，君子以事先准备齐全为耻。那些一两天内可以赶制出来的东西，君子是不会事先做好的。
English: For things such as coffins and clothing for the dead, a gentleman would be ashamed to prepare everything in advance. For things that can be made in a day or two, a gentleman would not prepare them in advance.

古文：丧服，兄弟之子犹子也，盖引而进之也；嫂叔之无服也，盖推而远之也；姑姊妹之薄也，盖有受我而厚之者也。
现代文：丧服中规定：为侄子就如同为儿子，都穿齐衰不杖期的丧服，这是为了表示亲近而提高丧服等级；嫂子和小叔之间互不穿孝，这是为了表示男女有嫌而有意把关系疏远；姑、姊妹出嫁以后，不再为之服期而降服大功，是因为她们对我的爱心已经转移到丈夫身上，与此同时，他们的丈夫把期的重服也承受了过去。
English: In the mourning clothes, it is stipulated that: for the nephews as well as for the sons, they all wear the mourning clothes of the waning period, which is to express the closeness and raise the level of the mourning clothes; the sister-in-law and the uncle do not wear filial piety between each other, which is to express the dislike of men and women and intentionally alienate the relationship; after the aunt and sister get married, they will no longer serve the period and surrender the great credit, because their love for me has been transferred to the husband, at the same time, their husband's heavy service has also endured the past.

古文：食于有丧者之侧，未尝饱也。
现代文：孔子在死了亲属的人旁边吃饭，从来没有吃饱过。
English: Confucius ate next to dead relatives and never had enough to eat.

古文：曾子与客立于门侧，其徒趋而出。
现代文：曾子和客人站在门旁，有个弟子快步要出门。
English: Zeng Zi and a guest were standing by the door, and a disciple was hurrying to leave.

古文：曾子曰： 尔将何之？ 
现代文：曾子问道： 你要到哪里去？ 
English: Zeng Zi asked, "Where are you going?"

古文：曰： 吾父死，将出哭于巷。 
现代文：弟子说： 我父亲死了，我要到巷子里去哭。 
English: The disciple said, "My father is dead. I'm going to the alley to cry."

古文：曰： 反，哭于尔次。 
现代文：曾子说： 回去吧，就在你住的房间里哭。 
English: Zengzi said, "Go back and cry in your room."

古文：曾子北面而吊焉。
现代文：然后曾子面向北，就宾位而向弟子致吊。
English: Zeng Zi then turned to the north and offered his seat to the disciple.

古文：孔子曰： 之死而致死之，不仁而不可为也；之死而致生之，不知而不可为也。
现代文：孔子说： 孝子以器物送葬，从而认定死者是无知的，这种态度缺乏爱心，不可以这样做。
English: Confucius said, "It is not proper for a filial son to bury his dead relative with utensils, thereby assuming that the deceased was ignorant. Such an attitude lacks love.

古文：是故，竹不成用，瓦不成味，木不成斫，琴瑟张而不平，竽笙备而不和，有钟磬而无簨虡，其曰明器，神明之也。 
现代文：孝子以器物送葬，从而认定死者是有知的，这种态度缺乏理智，也不可以这样做。所以，送葬的器物既不能取消，也不能做得像活人用的那样完美。送葬的竹器，没有滕缘，不好使用；瓦盆漏水，不好用来洗脸；木器也没有精心雕研；琴瑟虽然张上了弦，但没有调好音阶；竿笙的管数也不少，但就是吹不成调；钟磐不缺，但没有悬挂钟馨的架子。
English: Therefore, the funeral ware cannot be canceled, nor can it be made as perfect as that used by living people. The bamboo ware used for funerals does not have a ridge, so it is not easy to use; the tile basin leaks, so it is not easy to wash the face; the wooden ware is not carefully carved; the lyre has strings, but the scale is not adjusted well; the number of pipes of the pole is not small, but it cannot be blown into a tune; there is no shortage of bells, but there is no shelf for hanging bells.

古文：有子问于曾子曰： 问丧于夫子乎？ 
现代文：这样的送葬器物就叫做 明器 ，意思是把死者当作神明来看待的。 有子向曾子问道： 你从夫子那里可曾听说过如何对待丢掉官职？ 
English: Such funerary objects are called "Ming ware," which means that the dead are regarded as gods.Atsuko asked Zonko, "Did you ever hear from your father-in-law about how to deal with losing one's official position?"

古文：曰： 闻之矣：丧欲速贫，死欲速朽。 
现代文：曾子说： 倒是听夫子说过：丢掉官职，最好快点贫穷；死了，最好快点烂掉。 
English: Zeng Zi said, "On the contrary, I heard my teacher say, 'If you lose your official position, you'd better become poor quickly; if you die, you'd better rot away quickly.'

古文：有子曰： 是非君子之言也。 
现代文：有子说： 这不像是君子应该说的话。 
English: Ariko said, "That doesn't sound like something a gentleman would say."

古文：曾子曰： 参也闻诸夫子也。 
现代文：曾子说： 这是我亲耳从夫子那里听到的呀！ 
English: Zengzi said, "This is what I heard from the master with my own ears!"

古文：有子又曰： 是非君子之言也。 
现代文：有子仍然坚持说： 这不像是君子应该说的话。 
English: Still, Ms. Ariko insisted, "It doesn't seem like something a gentleman should say."

古文：曾子曰： 参也与子游闻之。 
现代文：曾子说： 是我与子游一道听到夫子这样讲的。 
English: Zeng Zi said, "It was me and Ziyu who heard the master say this.

古文：有子曰： 然，然则夫子有为言之也。 
现代文：有子说： 那么，我相信夫子是这样说过。
English: Ariko said, "Well, I believe that's what the teacher said."

古文：曾子以斯言告于子游。
现代文：但是，夫子一定是有所针对才这样讲的。 曾子把这番对话告诉了子游。
English: However, the teacher must have had something to do with it. Zengzi told this conversation to Ziyu.

古文：子游曰： 甚哉，有子之言似夫子也。
现代文：子游说： 真了不得，有子的话太像夫子了！
English: Son lobbying: Unbelievable, the words of a son are too much like the words of a master!

古文：昔者夫子居于宋，见桓司马自为石椁，三年而不成。夫子曰： 若是其靡也，死不如速朽之愈也。 
现代文：从前夫子住在宋国，见到桓司马为自己制造石撑，花了三年功夫还没做好，夫子就说： 像他这样的奢侈，死了，还不如快点烂掉为好。 
English: Once upon a time, when his father-in-law was living in the Song Dynasty, he saw Huan Sima making stone braces for himself. It took him three years of hard work, but he still couldn't do it. His father-in-law said, "If a luxury like him dies, it's better to rot away quickly."

古文：死之欲速朽，为桓司马言之也。
现代文：死了最好快点烂掉，这是针对桓司马说的。
English: If you die, it's best to rot away quickly. This was said in reference to Huan Sima.

古文：南宫敬叔反，必载宝而朝。
现代文：南宫敬叔丢官以后，每次返国，一定满载珍宝去晋渴国君。
English: After the loss of his official position, every time he returned to the country, he must be loaded with treasures to promote the country's thirst.

古文：夫子曰： 若是其货也，丧不如速贫之愈也。 
现代文：夫子说： 像他这样的行贿以求官，丢了官，还不如快点贫穷为好。 
English: He said, "If you bribe your way to a position like this and lose it, it's better to become poor quickly."

古文：丧之欲速贫，为敬叔言之也。 
现代文：丢掉官职，最好快点贫穷，这是针对南宫敬叔说的 。
English: If you lose your official position, it's better to become poor quickly, this is what Nan Gong Jing Uncle said.

古文：曾子以子游之言告于有子，有子曰： 然，吾固曰：非夫子之言也。 曾子曰： 子何以知之？ 
现代文：曾子又把子游这番话讲给有子，有子说： 这就对了。我本来就说过 这不像夫子所讲的嘛。 ，曾子说： 你是怎么知道的呢？ 
English: Zeng Zi also told the story of Ziyu to Ariko. Ariko said, "That's right. I had already said that it's not like what the master said." Zeng Zi said, "How did you know that?"

古文：有子曰： 夫子制于中都，四寸之棺，五寸之椁，以斯知不欲速朽也。
现代文：有子说： 夫子当中都宰时，曾经规定，内棺四寸厚，外撑五寸厚，就凭这一点就可以知道夫子是不主张人死了就快点烂掉的。
English: Atsuko said, "When my husband and I were both at the mortuary, it was stipulated that the inner coffin should be four inches thick and the outer coffin should be five inches thick. Based on this, we can know that my husband does not advocate that people should die and then quickly rot away.

古文：昔者夫子失鲁司寇，将之荆，盖先之以子夏，又申之以冉有，以斯知不欲速贫也。 
现代文：还有，从前夫子丢掉了鲁国司寇的官职，将要应聘到楚国去作官，就先派子夏去安排，接着又加派冉有去帮办，就凭这一点就可以知道夫子是不主张丢了官就速贫的。 
English: Furthermore, once upon a time, when Fuzi lost his post as the governor of the province of Lu and was about to apply for a post in the province of Chu, he first sent Zixia to make arrangements, and then sent Ran You to be his deputy. From this, we can see that Fuzi did not advocate losing his post and immediately becoming poor.

古文：陈庄子死，赴于鲁，鲁人欲勿哭，缪公召县子而问焉。
现代文：齐国大夫陈庄子死了，遣人告丧于鲁。鲁君不想为陈庄子哭，但又怕得罪齐国。于是穆公召见县子，问他此事该咋办才好。
English: Dr. Chen Zhuangzi of Qi died, and the funeral was sent to Lu. Lu did not want to cry for Chen Zhuangzi, but he was afraid of offending Qi. So Mu Gong called him to the county and asked him how to handle the matter.

古文：县子曰： 古之大夫，束修之问不出竟，虽欲哭之，安得而哭之？
现代文：县子说： 古代的大夫，根本谈不上和邻国有什么交往，即令是你想为他哭吊，也没有那种机会。
English: The county magistrate said, "Ancient doctor, there is no way to have any contact with neighboring countries. Even if you want to cry for him, there is no such opportunity.

古文：今之大夫，交政于中国，虽欲勿哭，焉得而弗哭？
现代文：现在的大夫，把持国政，与诸侯交往频繁，即令是你不想为他哭吊，又怎能办得到呢？
English: The current doctor, who is in charge of state affairs, has frequent contacts with princes. Even if you don't want to cry for him, how can you do it?

古文：且且臣闻之，哭有二道：有爱而哭之，有畏而哭之。 
现代文：不过，我听人说过，哭有两种哭法，有的是因为爱他而哭，有的是因为怕他而哭。 
English: But I've heard it said that there are two ways to cry: to cry because you love him, or to cry because you're afraid of him.

古文：公曰： 然，然则如之何而可？ 县子曰： 请哭诸异姓之庙。 
现代文：穆公说： 你讲的道理不错，问题是具体应该怎么办才能把事情应付过去。 县子说： 建议您在异姓的祖庙中哭他。 
English: Mu Gong said: Your reasoning is right, the question is what should be done in order to cope with the past. Xuan Zi said: I suggest you cry for him in the ancestral temple with a different surname.

古文：于是与哭诸县氏。
现代文：于是穆公就到县氏的祖庙去哭。
English: So Mu Gong went to the ancestral temple of the county clan to cry.

古文：仲宪言于曾子曰： 夏后氏用明器，示民无知也；殷人用祭器，示民有知也；周人兼用之，示民疑也。 
现代文：仲宪对曾子说： 夏代用不堪使用的明器陪葬，是要向人民表示死者是无知觉的。殷人用可以使用的祭器陪葬，是要向人民表示死者是有知觉的。周人兼用明器和祭器，是要向人民表示，死者是有知或无知还难于肯定。 
English: Zhong Xian said to Zeng Zi: Xia Dai buried the deceased with an unusable ceremonial vessel to show the people that the deceased was unconscious; Yin buried the deceased with a usable ceremonial vessel to show the people that the deceased was conscious; Zhou used both the ceremonial vessel and the ceremonial vessel to show the people that the deceased was knowledgeable or ignorant, but it was difficult to be sure.

古文：曾子曰： 其不然乎！
现代文：曾子说： 恐怕不是这样吧！
English: Zengzi said: I'm afraid that's not the case!

古文：其不然乎！
现代文：恐怕不是这样吧！
English: I'm afraid that's not the case!

古文：夫明器，鬼器也；祭器，人器也；夫古之人，胡为而死其亲乎？ 公叔木有同母异父之昆弟死，问于子游。
现代文：上古的人干嘛要认定死去的亲人就毫无知觉了呢！ 公叔朱有个同母异父的兄弟死了，向子游请教该服什么丧服。
English: Why did the ancients think that dead relatives were unconscious? Uncle Zhu had a half-brother who died, and he asked Ziyu for advice on what to wear for the funeral.

古文：子游曰： 其大功乎？ 
现代文：子游说： 可能是大功吧？ 
English: Child lobbying: Could it be a great success?

古文：狄仪有同母异父之昆弟死，问于子夏，子夏曰： 我未之前闻也；鲁人则为之齐衰。 
现代文：狄仪有个同母异父的兄弟死了，向子夏请教该服什么丧服。子夏说： 这种情况，我过去没有听说过。只知道鲁国的作法是为他服齐衰。 
English: Di Yi's half-brother died, and she asked Zixia for advice on what kind of mourning clothes to wear. Zixia said, "I have never heard of such a situation before. I only know that the Lu country's practice is to wear matching clothes for him."

古文：狄仪行齐衰。
现代文：于是狄仪就服齐衰。
English: As a result, Di Yi resigned herself to her fate.

古文：今之齐衰，狄仪之问也。
现代文：现在人们为同母异父兄弟服齐衰，就是经狄仪这一间才定下来的。
English: Nowadays, people dress alike for half-brothers and half-sisters, which was decided by Di Yi.

古文：子思之母死于卫，柳若谓子思曰： 子，圣人之后也，四方于子乎观礼，子盖慎诸。 
现代文：子思的母亲在父亲死后改嫁到卫国，现在死了，子思前去奔丧。卫国有个叫柳若的对子思说： 您是圣人的后代，各地的人都在关注您如何为嫁母持丧，您可得当心一点。 
English: Zisi's mother had remarried in the old country after her father's death, and now she was dead, and Zisi went to mourn her. In the old country, a man named Liu Ruo said to Zisi, "You are the descendant of a saint, and people everywhere are watching how you mourn for your mother-in-law. You should be careful."

古文：子思曰： 吾何慎哉？
现代文：子思说： 我有什么可当心的！
English: Zisi said: What should I beware of?

古文：吾闻之：有其礼，无其财，君子弗行也；有其礼，有其财，无其时，君子弗行也。
现代文：我听说，按礼的规定趣该做的，如果财力不足，君子是无法行礼的。按礼的规定应该做，财力也足够，但没有机会，君子也是无法行礼的。
English: I've heard that a gentleman can't make a courtesy call if he doesn't have enough money to do it. A gentleman can make a courtesy call if he has enough money, but a gentleman can't make a courtesy call if he doesn't have the opportunity.

古文：吾何慎哉！ 
现代文：我有什么可当心的呢！ 
English: What do I have to be careful of?

古文：县子琐曰： 吾闻之：古者不降，上下各以其亲。
现代文：县子琐说： 我听说，古时候，并不因为自己尊贵，就将期以下的旁系亲属丧服降等，无论是长辈或晚辈，都按照本来的亲缘关系为服。
English: Guanzizo said: I heard that in ancient times, it was not because of their dignity that they would lower the mourning clothes of collateral relatives below the period, whether they were elders or juniors, in accordance with the original kinship.

古文：滕伯文为孟虎齐衰，其叔父也；为孟皮齐衰，其叔父也。 
现代文：举例来说，滕伯文以国君之尊为孟虎服齐衰，因为孟虎是滕伯文的叔父；而滕伯文又为孟皮服齐衰，因为滕伯文又是孟皮的叔父。 
English: For example, Meng Hu is the uncle of Teng Bo Wen, and Teng Bo Wen is the uncle of Meng Pi, and Teng Bo Wen is the uncle of Meng Pi, and Teng Bo Wen is the uncle of Meng Pi.

古文：后木曰： 丧，吾闻诸县子曰：夫丧，不可不深长思也，买棺外内易，我死则亦然。 
现代文：后木说： 关于办丧事，我听县子说过： 办丧事，不可不深思长虑。买的棺木要内外平滑。 我死了也希望这样办。 
English: Houki said, "Regarding funeral arrangements, I heard a prefectural governor say, 'When arranging a funeral, you must think long and hard. The coffin you buy should be smooth inside and out. When I die, I want it to be like this.

古文：曾子曰： 尸未设饰，故帷堂，小敛而彻帷。 
现代文：曾子说： 尸体尚未沐浴、整容、穿衣，所以在堂上张起帷幕。
English: Zengzi said: The corpse had not yet been bathed, groomed, or dressed, so a curtain was raised over the hall.

古文：仲梁子曰： 夫妇方乱，故帷堂，小敛而彻帷。 
现代文：小敛后尸体已经装扮好，于是撤下帷幕。 仲梁子则说： 人刚死，主人主妇正在手忙脚乱之中，所以在堂上张起帷幕。小敛后诸事已经停当，于是撤下帷幕。 
English: After Xiao Yan had dressed up the corpse, the curtain was taken down. Zhong Liangzi said: The person had just died, and the master and mistress were in a hurry, so a curtain was put up in the hall. After Xiao Yan had put everything in order, the curtain was taken down.

古文：小敛之奠，子游曰： 于东方。 
现代文：小敛时的祭奠，子游说： 祭品放在尸体的东方。 
English: The son lobbied for a memorial at the time of Xiao Yan's death: Offerings should be placed to the east of the corpse.

古文：曾子曰： 于西方，敛斯席矣。 
现代文：曾子却说： 放在尸体的西方。而且不是放在地上，而是放在席上。 
English: Zengzi, however, said, "Put it to the west of the body. And not on the ground, but on the seat."

古文：小敛之奠在西方，鲁礼之末失也。
现代文：小敛的祭奠物品放在尸体西方，是沿用鲁国末世的错误礼俗。
English: Placing the small sacrificial objects to the west of the corpse is an erroneous etiquette from the last days of the Lu Kingdom.

古文：县子曰： 绤衰繐裳，非古也。 子蒲卒，哭者呼灭。子皋曰： 若是野哉。 
现代文：县子说：这不合乎古制 如今的人都好用粗葛作衰，用细而疏的麻布作裳，子蒲死了，有人在哭的时候喊着他的名子。子皋说： 这么不懂礼数！ 
English: The county magistrate said, "This is not in keeping with the old system. Nowadays, people like to wear coarse plaid and thin, sparse linen. Zibo died, and some people called out his name when they were crying. Zibo said, "They don't know the number of courtesies!"

古文：哭者改之。
现代文：那人听到后就改正了过来。
English: The man corrected himself on hearing this.

古文：杜桥之母之丧，宫中无相，以为沽也。
现代文：杜桥的母亲去世了，殡宫中没有赞礼的人，论者以为太粗略了。
English: When Du Qiao's mother died, there was no eulogy at the funeral home, which commentators thought was too cursory.

古文：夫子曰： 始死，羔裘玄冠者，易之而已。 
现代文：夫子说： 亲戚刚死，穿着羔裘玄冠这种吉服来吊的人，要改为素冠深衣才妥。 
English: Her husband said, "If a relative has just died, and a person comes to visit wearing a lucky costume such as a lamb's crown, it is only proper to change to a plain crown and dark clothing.

古文：羔裘玄冠，夫子不以吊。
现代文：羔裘玄冠，夫子是不会穿着它去吊丧的。
English: The master would not go to a funeral wearing a black crown.

古文：子游问丧具，夫子曰： 称家之有亡。 子游曰： 有亡恶乎齐？ 
现代文：子游向孔子请教送终物的厚薄相称就行。子游说：品的数量问题。
English: Ziyou asked Confucius to send the finished product in a proportionate thickness. Ziyou said: the quantity of the product is the most important.

古文：夫子曰： 有，毋过礼；茍亡矣，敛首足形，还葬，县棺而封，人岂有非之者哉！ 
现代文：夫子说： 和家庭财力 如何掌握厚与薄的标准呢？  如果财力雄厚，也不可超过礼数的规定。如果财力不足，夫子说：只要衣被可以遮体，敛毕就葬，用手拉着绳子下棺，如此尽力而为，也不会有人责怪他失礼呀。 
English: If one's financial resources are strong, one should not exceed the prescribed number of etiquette. If one's financial resources are insufficient, the master said, as long as the clothes can cover the body, the body can be buried after being restrained, and the rope can be pulled under the coffin by hand, and one can do his best in this way, no one will blame him for being impolite.

古文：司士贲告于子游曰： 请袭于床。 子游曰： 诺。 
现代文：司士责对子游说： 我想在床上为尸体穿衣。 子游说： 可以。 
English: "I want to dress the body on the bed," the magistrate pleaded with his son.

古文：县子闻之曰： 汰哉叔氏！
现代文：县子听了，就说： 叔氏太自大了！
English: When the prefectural governor heard this, he said, "Uncle is too arrogant!

古文：专以礼许人。 
现代文：听他的口气，好像礼是由他制定似的。 
English: From the tone of his voice, it was as if he had set the etiquette.

古文：宋襄公葬其夫人，酰醢百瓮。
现代文：宋襄公葬其夫人时，陪葬器皿中有一百个瓮装着醋和肉酱。
English: When Song Xiang publicly buried his wife, there were a hundred urns filled with vinegar and meat sauce in the funerary utensils.

古文：曾子曰： 既曰明器矣，而又实之。 
现代文：曾子评论说：以实物呢。 既然叫做明器，就表明它是不堪使用的，干嘛又要填以食物呢？
English: Zeng Zi commented: "It's a real thing. Since it's called a revealing tool, it shows that it's unusable, why should it be filled with food?

古文：孟献子之丧，司徒旅归四布。夫子曰： 可也。 
现代文：孟献子的丧事办完以后，司徒派下士把未用完的别人赠送助办丧事的财帛归还各地原主，孔子说： 这件事办得漂亮。 
English: After the funeral of Meng Xianzi was over, Confucius sent a corporal to return the unused money donated by others to help with the funeral to the original owners in various regions. Confucius said: This matter was done beautifully.

古文：读赗，曾子曰： 非古也，是再告也。 
现代文：在柩车将要启动之前，将助丧人的名单及其赠送的财物进行宣读，曾子说： 这种作法不合乎古制，这是重复的宣读。 
English: Before the hearse is about to start, the list of those who helped the deceased and their donated belongings is read out. Zengzi said: This practice does not conform to the old system. It is a repetitive reading.

古文：成子高寝疾，庆遗入，请曰： 子之病革矣，如至乎大病，则如之何？ 
现代文：成子高卧病在床。庆遗进来请示说： 您的病已经危险了，万一不治，那怎么办？ 
English: Cheng Zi Gao was sick in bed. Qing Yi came in and asked: Your illness is already dangerous. What if it doesn't get better?

古文：子高曰： 吾闻之也：生有益于人，死不害于人。
现代文：子高说： 我听说： 活着应有益于人，死了也不应有害于人。 
English: Zigao said, "I have heard that it is good for a person to be alive, and it is not bad for a person to be dead.

古文：吾纵生无益于人，吾可以死害于人乎哉？
现代文：我纵然活着的时候无益于人，难道我能死了还要危害于人吗！
English: Even though I am of no use to anyone while I am alive, can I still be harmful to people after I die?

古文：我死，则择不食之地而葬我焉。 
现代文：我死后，拣一块不长庄稼地方把我埋掉好了。 
English: When I die, pick a place where there are no crops and bury me.

古文：子夏问诸夫子曰： 居君之母与妻之丧。 
现代文：子夏请教夫子说； 遇到国君的母亲、妻子的丧事该怎么办？ 
English: Zixia asked her tutor, "What should I do if I come across the funeral of the mother or wife of a sovereign?"

古文： 居处、言语、饮食衎尔。 
现代文：孔子说： 旧常的住处、言谈、饮食，基本照常。 
English: Confucius said: The usual place of residence, speech, and diet are basically as usual.

古文：宾客至，无所馆。
现代文：远道的宾客来到，没有住处。
English: The guests came from far away and had no place to stay.

古文：夫子曰： 生于我乎馆，死于我乎殡。 
现代文：夫子说： 既然是朋友，活着就由我负责安排住宿，死了就由我安排殡硷。 
English: He said, "Since we are friends, if I live, I will be responsible for arranging accommodation, and if I die, I will arrange the funeral."

古文：国子高曰： 葬也者，藏也；藏也者，欲人之弗得见也。
现代文：国子高说： 葬，就是藏的意思。为什么说是藏呢，因为人死了叫人厌恶，所以就想叫人不能够看见。
English: Kunitsigao said, "Buried means hidden. Why do you say hidden? Because people are disgusted by the dead, so you want people not to be able to see.

古文：是故，衣足以饰身，棺周于衣，椁周于棺，土周于椁；反壤树之哉。 
现代文：所以，只要衣袅足以遮盖身体，内棺能够包住衣袅，外棺能够包住内棺，墓扩能够容下外棺，就行了。
English: Therefore, as long as the mantle is enough to cover the body, the inner coffin can wrap around the mantle, the outer coffin can wrap around the inner coffin, and the tomb expansion can accommodate the outer coffin, it's fine.

古文：孔子之丧，有自燕来观者，舍于子夏氏。
现代文：何必还要聚土成坟、植树为标志呢？ 埋葬孔子的时候，有人从遥远的燕国赶来参观，来人住在子夏家里。
English: Why is it necessary to gather soil to make a grave and plant trees as a sign? When Confucius was buried, people came from as far away as Yan Province to visit and stay at Zixia's home.

古文：子夏曰： 圣人之葬人与？
现代文：子夏说： 这难道是圣人在葬人吗？
English: Zixia said, "Is this a saint burying someone?"

古文：人之葬圣人也。子何观焉？
现代文：不过是我们这些人在葬圣人罢了，对于您来说有什么值得看的呢？
English: It's just that we are burying a saint. What's worth seeing for you?

古文：昔者夫子言之曰： 吾见封之若堂者矣，见若坊者矣，见若覆夏屋者矣，见若斧者矣。 
现代文：过去夫子曾经谈及筑坟的样式，说： 我见过坟筑得有像堂基的，有像堤防的，有像两檐飞出的门廊的，有像斧头刃向上的。
English: In the past, the master once talked about the style of building tombs, saying: I have seen tombs built like a foundation, like a dike, like a porch with two pillars flying out, and like an axe blade pointing up.

古文：从若斧者焉。
现代文：我身后就要斧头刃向上的形式。 
English: Behind me is the shape of an axe blade pointing upwards.

古文：马鬣封之谓也。
现代文：斧头刃向上的形式，俗名叫作马露封。
English: In the form of an axe blade pointing upwards, it is commonly known as a horse seal.

古文：今一日而三斩板，而已封，尚行夫子之志乎哉！ 
现代文：我们今天为他筑坟，一天之内就聚土四尺来高，筑成了斧头刃向上的形式，这也算我们完成了夫子的遗愿吧。 
English: Today we are building a grave for him. In one day, we have gathered four feet of soil and built it in the shape of an axe blade pointing upwards. We have fulfilled my husband's last wish.

古文：妇人不葛带。有荐新，如朔奠。
现代文：妇人在除去孝服之前，一直都是麻腰带，不换成葛腰带。如果对死者举行荐新之祭，其规格应比照朔奠。
English: Before removing the filial piety, the woman has always been a hemp belt, not a kudzu belt. If a memorial service is held for the deceased, the specifications should be changed accordingly.

古文：既葬，各以其服除。
现代文：下葬以后，各等亲属都要除去原来的丧服，改受轻服。
English: After the burial, all relatives should remove the original mourning clothes and wear light clothes.

古文：池视重溜。
现代文：柩车上设池的面数，比照他生前居室的重露。
English: The number of faces of the pool on the carriage is compared to the exposure of his living room before his death.

古文：君即位而为椑，岁一漆之，藏焉。
现代文：诸侯一即位，就应该为他做好贴身的内棺，每年漆它一遍，棺中还要填入东西，不可使之空虚。
English: As soon as a prince ascends the throne, he should have a close-fitting inner coffin made for him, and it should be painted once a year. The coffin should also be filled with something so that it is not empty.

古文：复、楔齿、缀足、饭、设饰、帷堂并作。
现代文：招魂、楔齿、缀足、饭含；打扮尸体、在堂上张起帷幕，这些都是在断气后要连续进行的项目。
English: Conjuring spirits, wedge teeth, decorating feet, including rice; dressing the corpse, raising the curtain on the hall, these are all projects that must be carried out continuously after the breath is cut off.

古文：父兄命赴者。君复于小寝、大寝，小祖、大祖，库门、四郊。
现代文：报丧的人，士由孝子本人派遣，大夫以上由父兄代为派遣。
English: Those who reported their death were dispatched by their sons and sons-in-law, and doctors and above were dispatched by their fathers and brothers.

古文：丧不剥，奠也与？
现代文：国君招魂的地方多之处、群庙、太祖庙？
English: There are many places for the sovereign to summon the spirits, group temples, ancestral temples?

古文：祭肉也与？既殡，旬而布材与明器。
现代文：按由近而远的顺序是：燕居之室、办公库门和四郊。办丧事时，需要用布盖住祭品的，是所有的祭品呢？
English: According to the order from near and far: Yanju's room, the office door and the four suburbs. When holding a funeral, is it all the offerings that need to be covered with a cloth?

古文：朝奠日出，夕奠逮日。
现代文：还是只盖住牲肉？殡后第十天，就得置办撑材和明器。
English: Or is it just to cover the meat? On the tenth day after the funeral, you have to provide the supporting material and a light.

古文：父母之丧，哭无时，使必知其反也。
现代文：朝奠在日出时举行，夕奠在太阳尚未落山时举行。父母死后，孝子一想到伤心之处就哭，是为了让父母的神魂能循着哭声回家。
English: The morning offering is held at sunrise, and the evening offering is held when the sun has not yet set. After the death of a parent, a filial son cries when he thinks of the place of sorrow, so that the spirit of the parents can follow the cries back home.

古文：练，练衣黄里、縓缘，葛要绖，绳屦无絇，角瑱，鹿裘衡长袪，袪裼之可也。
现代文：小祥以后的服装，是以煮练过的熟布作的中衣，其衬里是黄色，镶浅红色的边。腰经改麻为葛。脱去草鞋，换上麻绳编织的鞋，但仍然没有鞋鼻。
English: After Xiao Xiang's time, clothing consisted of a boiled, well-worn cloth, the lining of which was yellow with a light red border. The waist was changed from linen to georgette. The straw shoes were removed and replaced with shoes made of twine, but they still did not have a toe.

古文：有殡，闻远兄弟之丧，虽缌必往；非兄弟，虽邻不往。
现代文：悬在耳旁的充耳是角质的。鹿裘的袖子可以加宽加长，袖口还可以镶边。家中有丧事，刚殡敛完毕，又听到远房兄弟去世，即令和死者是绍麻之亲，再远也必须赶去哭吊。
English: The earflaps hanging next to the ears are horny. Deer antler sleeves can be widened and lengthened, and the cuffs can also be edged. There is a funeral at home, just after the funeral, and they hear that a distant brother has died, even if the deceased is a relative of Shaoma, they must rush to cry and hang.

古文：所识其兄弟不同居者皆吊。
现代文：但是，如果没有任何兄弟关系，就是比邻而居也不去哭吊。
English: However, if there is no brotherly relationship, even if they live next to each other, they will not cry.

古文：天子之棺四重；水兕革棺被之，其厚三寸，杝棺一，梓棺二，四者皆周。
现代文：这四层棺，都是上下与四周合围的。棺盖和棺身用皮带束紧，纵向束两道，横向束三道。每一道的棺盖与棺身的接缝处，都要加个桦铆紧。
English: These four-layer coffins are closed from top to bottom and all around. The coffin lid and the body of the coffin are tightly bound with a belt, two longitudinal bundles and three horizontal bundles. A clamp must be added at the joint of the coffin lid and the body of the coffin in each direction.

古文：棺束缩二衡三，衽每束一。伯椁以端长六尺。
现代文：撑用柏树的近根部分来做，每段木料长六尺。
English: The support is made of the near-root part of the cypress tree, each piece of wood is six feet long.

古文：天子之哭诸侯也，爵弁绖缁衣；或曰：使有司哭之，为之不以乐食。
现代文：天子在遥哭诸侯之死时，头上戴的是爵弃，身上穿的是瑙色之衣。
English: When the Son of Heaven was weeping at the death of the princes, he was wearing a crown on his head and a white robe on his body.

古文：天子之殡也，菆涂龙輴以椁，加斧于椁上，毕涂屋，天子之礼也。
现代文：然后在积木上涂以泥巴，不使木间有隙。然后再从撑的上方给棺材套上绣有黑白相间的斧形图案的棺罩。然后再在停上继续积木为屋顶，最后再加以通体的涂抹。这是天子殡的礼数。
English: Then, mud is applied to the blocks so that there are no gaps between them. Then, a coffin cover with a black and white axe-shaped pattern is placed over the coffin from the top of the support. Then, the coffin is stopped and the blocks are used as the roof. Finally, the entire coffin is painted. This is the ritual for the funeral of the heavenly son.

古文：唯天子之丧，有别姓而哭。
现代文：只有在天子的丧事里，是区别同姓、异姓、庶姓而排列哭位的。
English: Only in the funeral of the son of heaven, is the difference between the same surname, different surname, and common surname and the arrangement of the crying place.

古文：鲁哀公诔孔丘曰： 天不遗耆老，莫相予位焉，呜呼哀哉！尼父！ 
现代文：鲁哀公悼念孔子说： 上天不把这样一位年高德助的人给我留下，现在没有人来帮助我治理国家了。呜呼哀哉，尼父！ 
English: Lu Aigong mourned for Confucius, saying, "Heaven would not leave me with such an old and virtuous helper, and now there is no one to help me govern the country. Alas, my father!

古文：国亡大县邑，公、卿、大夫、士皆厌冠，哭于大庙，三日，君不举。
现代文：国家如果丢失了大的县邑，公、卿、大夫、士都要头戴丧冠，身穿素服，在太庙里哭三天，向列祖列宗请罪。
English: If the country loses a large county or town, the princes, nobles, doctors, and officials must wear mourning crowns on their heads, wear plain clothes, weep for three days in the imperial temple, and ask the ancestors for forgiveness.

古文：或曰：君举而哭于后土。
现代文：在这三天之内，国君吃饭不准动荤。
English: During these three days, the sovereign is not allowed to eat.

古文：孔子恶野哭者。
现代文：另外一种说法是：国君率领群臣哭于社。
English: Another way of putting it is that the sovereign led his ministers in weeping to the shrine.

古文：未仕者，不敢税人；如税人，则以父兄之命。
现代文：孔子厌恶不依礼数号哭的人。作子弟的如果尚未出仕，就不敢把家中的东西随便送人。如果必须送人，则应当说这是秉承父兄之命。
English: Confucius abhors those who do not obey the number of crying. If you are a younger brother, if you have not yet served, do not dare to give away the things in your home. If you have to give them away, you should say that this is upholding the orders of your father and brother.

古文：士备入而后朝夕踊。
现代文：国君之丧，每天的朝夕踊，要等到士全部到齐才可以开始。
English: The mourning of the sovereign, the daily morning and evening dances, can only begin when all the priests are present.

古文：祥而缟，是月禫，徙月乐。
现代文：大祥祭之后，孝子就开始换上编冠。在这一个月举行谭祭，下一个月就可以奏乐了。
English: After the Taisho Festival, the filial son began to put on the crown. In this month, the Tan Festival was held, and the next month, the music could be played.

古文：君于士有赐帟。
现代文：国君对于士，在特殊情况下可赐与帝，用作覆棺的承尘。
English: The sovereign may, under special circumstances, bestow the title of emperor on a samurai to be used as a coffin cover.

