古文：兀欲，东丹王突欲子也。
现代文：兀欲，是束丹王突欲的儿子。
English: He is the son of Tsukui, the son of Tsukui, the king of Soktan.

古文：突欲奔于唐，兀欲留不从，号永康王。
现代文：突欲投奔到后唐，兀欲留下没有跟去，虢称永康王。
English: He suddenly wanted to go to the Later Tang Dynasty, but he did not want to stay there, so he called himself Yongkang Wang.

古文：契丹好饮人血，突欲左右姬妾，多刺其臂吮之，其小过辄挑目、刲灼，不胜其毒。
现代文：契丹人喜好饮人血，突欲左右的姬妾，常被他刺破手臂吸血，犯了小过失就被挖眼，割肉火烤，姬妾受不了他的残害。
English: The Khitan liked to drink human blood, and his concubines, who had sudden desires, were often pricked by him to suck blood. If he committed a minor fault, his eyes were gouged out, his flesh was cut and roasted, and his concubines could not bear his mutilation.

古文：然喜宾客，好饮酒，工画，颇知书。
现代文：但他喜欢宾客，好饮酒，擅长绘画，很懂书法。
English: But he likes guests, drinks well, is good at drawing, and knows calligraphy very well.

古文：其自契丹归中国，载书数千卷，枢密使赵延寿每假其异书、医经，皆中国所无者。
现代文：他从契丹投奔到中原去时，用车载去几千卷书，枢密使趟延寿常借其中的异书、臀经，都是中原所没有的。
English: When he rushed from Khitan to the Central Plains, he used his car to carry several thousand volumes of books, of which the special books and the Sutra of the Buttocks, which were not available in the Central Plains, were often borrowed by the Privy Council envoy Wat Yan Shou.

古文：明宗时，自滑州朝京师，遥领武信军节度使，食其俸，赐甲第一区，宫女数人。
现代文：唐明宗时，他从滑州到京师朝拜；迁领武信军节度使，领节度使俸禄，赐给一处住宅，几个官女。
English: When Tang Mingzong was the emperor, he went from Slanting to Beijing to pay homage to the emperor; he transferred the military envoys of Wu Xin to the capital, paid the envoys a salary, and gave them a house and several court ladies.

古文：契丹兵助晋于太原，唐废帝遣宦者秦继旻、皇城使李彦绅杀突欲于其第。晋高祖追封突欲为燕王。
现代文：契丹兵在太原援助后晋，唐废帝派宦官秦继曼、皇城使李彦绅把突欲杀死在家中，晋高祖追封突欲为燕玉。
English: The Khitan soldiers came to Jin's aid in Taiyuan, and the deposed emperor of Tang sent eunuch Qin Jiman and the imperial city sent Li Yansheng to kill Xu Zhi at home, and the ancestors of Jin Gao chased and sealed Xu Zhi as Yan Yu.

古文：德光灭晋，兀欲从至京师。
现代文：耶律德光消灭后晋，兀欲跟随到京师。
English: After the annihilation of Yelu Deguang and the Jin Dynasty, he wanted to follow them to Beijing.

古文：德光杀继旻、彦绅，籍其家赀，悉以赐兀欲。
现代文：德光杀掉秦继曼、李彦绅，抄没他们的家财，全部拿来赐给兀欲。
English: De Guang killed Qin Jiman and Li Yan Sheng, confiscated their family wealth, and gave it all to Zou Yi.

古文：德光死栾城，兀欲与赵延寿及诸大将等俱入镇州。
现代文：德光死在乐城，兀欲和趟延寿以及大将们都进入镇州。
English: De Guang died in Lecheng, and Zou Zi and Tong Yan Shou and the generals all entered Zhenzhou.

古文：延寿自称权知军国事，遣人求镇州管钥于兀欲，兀欲不与。
现代文：趟延寿自称暂代管军国事，派人向兀欲索求镇州的朗匙，兀欲不给他。
English: Yan Shou, who claimed to be temporarily in charge of the military affairs of the country, sent someone to request the key to Zhenzhou from Yan Zhi, but Yan Zi refused to give it to him.

古文：延寿左右曰： 契丹大人聚而谋者汹汹，必有变，宜备之。
现代文：赵延寿手下的人说： 契丹各部首领聚集，而谋议的人喧扰不安，必定有变，应当防备他们。
English: Zhao Yanshou's men said: "When the heads of all departments of the Khitan gather, and the people who are deliberating are noisy and uneasy, there must be changes, and they should be guarded against.

古文：今中国之兵，犹有万人，可以击虏；不然，事必不成。 
现代文：如今中原的军队，还有一万人，可用来攻打他们；不这样，必定不能成事。 
English: Now the Central Plains Army, with another ten thousand men, can be used to attack them; otherwise, it will certainly not succeed.

古文：延寿犹豫不决。
现代文：赵延寿犹豫不决。
English: Zhao Yanshou hesitated.

古文：兀欲妻，延寿以为妹，五月朔旦，兀欲召延寿及张砺、李崧、冯道等置酒，酒数行，兀欲谓延寿曰： 妹自上国来，当一见之。 
现代文：兀欲的妻子，趟延寿称她妹妹。五月初一早晨，兀欲召赵延寿和张砺、李崧、冯道等人摆酒宴，酒过数巡，兀欲对赵延寿说： 你妹妹从上国来，应当见她一下。 
English: On the morning of the first day of May, Zhao Yan Shou was invited by his wife, Zhao Yan Shou, to a banquet with Zhang Xuan, Li Yan and Feng Dao. After several rounds of drinks, Zhao Yan Shou said to Zhao Yan Shou, "Your sister has come from Shangguo, you should see her for a while."

古文：延寿欣然与兀欲俱入。
现代文：趟延寿高兴地和兀欲一起进去。
English: Wai Yan Shou happily went in with Zou Zi.

古文：食顷，兀欲出坐，笑谓砺等曰： 燕王谋反，锁之矣。
现代文：过了一顿饭功夫，兀欲出来坐下。笑着对张砺等人说： 燕王谋反，把他锁起来了。
English: After a hard-working meal, Zou wanted to come out and sit down. He smiled and said to Zhang Ye and others: "Yan Wang plotted a rebellion and locked him up."

古文：诸君可无虑也。 
现代文：各位不必担心。 
English: You don't have to worry.

古文：又曰： 先帝在汴州与我算子一茎，许我知南朝军国事，昨闻寝疾，无遗命，燕王安得自擅邪？ 
现代文：又说： 先帝在汴州时给我一根算子，答应让我掌管南朝军国事，昨天听说他卧病不起，没有遣嘱，燕王怎能擅自行事呢？ 
English: He also said, "When the late emperor was in Zhangzhou, he gave me an operator and promised to let me be in charge of the military and state affairs of the Southern Dynasty. Yesterday, I heard that he was bedridden and unable to do anything without a mandate. How can King Yan do anything without permission?"

古文：砺等罢去。
现代文：张砺等人罢宴离去。
English: Zhang Ye and others left the banquet.

古文：兀欲召延寿廷立而诘之，延寿不能对。
现代文：兀欲召趟延寿站在庭上责问他，趟延寿不能回答。
English: He wanted to call out to Yan Shou to stand in the court and scold him, but Yan Shou couldn't answer.

古文：乃遣人监之，而籍其家赀。
现代文：于是派人看管他，抄没了他的家产。
English: So they sent someone to take care of him and confiscated his property.

古文：兀欲宣德光遗制曰： 永康王，大圣皇帝之嫡孙，人皇王之长子，可于中京即皇帝位。 
现代文：兀欲宣布耶律德光的遗书说： 永康王，是大圣皇帝的嫡孙，人皇王的长子，可在中京即皇帝位。 
English: He wanted to announce that Yeludoguang's suicide note said: King Yongkang, the great-grandson of the great-saint emperor, the eldest son of the human king, can be the emperor in Zhongjing.

古文：中京，契丹谓镇州也。
现代文：中京，是契丹对镇州的称呼。
English: Zhongjing is the name given by the Khitan to the town-state.

古文：遣使者告哀于诸镇。
现代文：他派使臣向各镇报丧。
English: He sent envoys to report the death to the towns.

古文：萧翰闻德光死，弃汴州而北，至镇州，兀欲已去。
现代文：萧翰获知耶律德光死，弃汴州北归，到达镇州，兀欲已离开。
English: When Xiao Han learned that Yerutde Guang had died, he abandoned Zhangzhou and returned to the north, arriving in Zhenzhou. He had already left Zhangzhou.

古文：翰以骑围张砺宅，执砺而责曰： 汝教先帝勿用胡人为节度使，何也？ 
现代文：萧翰率骑兵包围张砺的住宅，抓获张砺责问说： 你曾教先帝不要用契丹人做节度使，为什么？ 
English: Xiao Han led the cavalry to surround Zhang Xuan's residence. Zhang Xuan was captured and asked: You once taught the former emperor not to use the Khitan people as guards. Why?

古文：砺对不屈，翰锁之。
现代文：张砺回答时没有屈服，萧翰把他关起来。
English: Zhang Ye did not give in when he answered, and Xiao Han locked him up.

古文：是夕，砺卒。
现代文：遭天晚上，张砺死去。
English: In the evening of the day of the accident, Zhang Ye passed away.

古文：兀欲为人俊伟，亦工画，能饮酒，好礼士，德光尝赐以绢数千匹，兀欲散之，一日而尽。
现代文：兀欲长相英俊魁梧，也擅长绘画，能喝酒，喜好礼待士人，德光曾赐给他几千匹绢，兀欲把绢分发掉，一天就送完了。
English: He wanted to be handsome and burly, also good at painting, able to drink, and liked to treat people with courtesy. De Guang had given him several thousand horses. He wanted to distribute the horses, and it was done in one day.

古文：兀欲已立，先遣人报其祖母述律。
现代文：兀欲登位后，先派人报告他的祖母述律氏。
English: After he wanted to ascend to the throne, he first sent someone to inform his grandmother about the Suritsu clan.

古文：述律怒曰： 我兒平晋取天下，有大功业，其子在我侧者当立，而人皇王背我归中国，其子岂得立邪？ 
现代文：述律氏发怒说： 我儿平定后晋夺取天下，有大功劳，他在我身边的儿子应当继位，而人皇王违背我归附中原，他的儿于难道能继位吗？ 
English: Suru Ritsu said angrily, "It was my son who conquered the whole country after the pacification, and he deserves great credit. His son who is close to me should succeed to the throne, but Emperor Ningen disobeyed me and annexed Central Plains. Can his son succeed to the throne?

古文：乃率兵逆兀欲，将废之。
现代文：于是率兵迎击兀欲，准备废掉他。
English: So he led an army to fight against the evil desire and prepared to abolish it.

古文：兀欲留其将麻答守镇州，晋诸将相随德光在镇州者皆留之而去。
现代文：兀欲留下他的将领麻苔守镇州，他还把跟随德光到达镇州的后晋将相们都留下，然后离去。
English: Xing wanted to leave his general Mete to guard Zhenzhou, and he also left all the post-Jin generals who followed De Guang to Zhenzhou, and then left.

古文：以翰林学士徐台符、李汗从行，与其祖母述律相距于石桥。
现代文：让翰林学士徐台符、李斡随行，和他的祖母述律氏在石桥相拒。
English: Let Hanlin scholars Xu Taifu and Li Yuxuan accompany him, and oppose his grandmother Shu Li in the stone bridge.

古文：述律所将兵多亡归兀欲。
现代文：述律氏率领的士兵很多逃到兀欲那里。
English: Many of the soldiers led by the Suritsu clan fled there.

古文：兀欲乃幽述律于祖州。
现代文：兀欲于是把述律氏幽禁在祖州。
English: He therefore wanted to confine the Suritsu clan to their homestead in Zuzhou.

古文：祖州，阿保机墓所也。
现代文：祖州，是阿保机坟墓所在地。
English: Zuzhou is the location of the tomb of Aboki.

古文：述律为人多智而忍。
现代文：述律氏为人足智多谋而又残忍。
English: The Suritsu clan was resourceful and cruel.

古文：阿保机死，悉召从行大将等妻，谓曰： 我今为寡妇矣，汝等岂宜有夫。 
现代文：阿保机死后，她将随行大将等人的妻子全部召来，对她们说： 我现在成寡妇了，你们难道该有丈夫吗？ 
English: After Ah Boker's death, she summoned all the wives of the generals and others who had accompanied her and said to them: I am now a widow. Should you have a husband?

古文：乃杀其大将百余人，曰： 可往从先帝。 
现代文：于是杀掉随行大将一百多人，说： 你们可去跟随先帝。 
English: So he killed more than a hundred of the general's entourage and said: You can follow the former emperor.

古文：左右有过者，多送木叶山，杀于阿保机墓队中，曰： 为我见先帝于地下。 
现代文：手下犯有过失的人，多被送到木叶山，在阿保机墓洞中杀掉，说： 替我在地下问候先帝。 
English: Those of his subordinates who committed mistakes were mostly sent to Mubei Mountain, where they were killed in the tomb of A Bao Ji, saying, "Say hello to the former emperor for me underground."

古文：大将赵思温，本中国人也，以材勇为阿保机所宠，述律后以事怒之，使送木叶山，思温辞不肯行。
现代文：大将赵思温，原是中原人，靠才智勇猛受到阿保机宠信，述律氏后来因事迁怒于他，派人送他去木叶山，趟思温不愿去。
English: General Zhao Siwen, originally from the Central Plains, was favored by Ah Bocchi thanks to his intelligence and bravery. Later, the Suru Ritsu clan became angry with him for the incident and sent someone to take him to Mubei Mountain, but Siwen did not want to go.

古文：述律曰； 尔，先帝亲信，安得不往见之？ 
现代文：述律氏说： 你是先帝的亲信，怎能不去见他？ 
English: Suritsu said, "You are a close confidant of the former emperor, how can you not go to see him?

古文：思温对曰： 亲莫如后，后何不行？ 
现代文：赵思温回答说： 和先帝亲近的没有人比得上你，你为什磨不去？ 
English: Zhao Siwen replied, "No one who is close to the former emperor is as good as you. Why do you persist?

古文：述律曰： 我本欲从先帝于地下，以子幼，国中多故，未能也。
现代文：述律氏说： 我原想随先帝到地下，因儿子年幼，国中多事，役能去。
English: Mr. Suritsu said: I originally wanted to go underground with the former emperor, because my son is young, there are many things going on in the country, and I can go.

古文：然可断吾一臂以送之。 
现代文：但可以砍断我一条手臂送去。 
English: But you can cut off one of my arms and send it to me.

古文：左右切谏之，乃断其一腕，而释思温不杀。
现代文：手下人急切谏阻，纔砍断一只手腕，而放过趟思温没有杀。
English: His subordinates were eager to resist. He chopped off one of his wrists, but he did not kill Su Wen.

古文：初，德光之击晋也，述律常非之，曰： 吾国用一汉人为主可乎？ 
现代文：当初，德光攻打后晋时，述律氏曾反对他，说： 我国用一个汉人做君主行吗？ 
English: At the beginning of the Jin Dynasty, after De Guang's attack, the Suru Ritsu clan opposed him, saying, "Is it right for our country to have a Han Chinese as the monarch?

古文：德光曰： 不可也。 
现代文：德光说： 不行。 
English: De Guang said, "No."

古文：述律曰： 然则汝得中国不能有，后必有祸，悔无及矣。 
现代文：述律氏说： 既然如此，那么你占领中原也不能统治它，以后必定有灾祸，后悔莫及了。 
English: Suritsu said, "In that case, if you occupy the Central Plains, you will not be able to rule it. There will surely be disasters in the future, and you will regret it.

古文：德光死，载其尸归，述律不哭而抚其尸曰： 待我国中人畜如故，然后葬汝。 
现代文：德光死后，车子载着他的尸体回来，述律氏不哭，却抚摸着他的尸体说： 等我国中人畜依旧时，然后再安葬你。 
English: After the death of De Guang, the car carrying his body came back. Su Lu did not cry, but stroked his body and said: "Wait until the people and animals in our country are still the same, and then bury you."

古文：已而兀欲囚之，后死于木叶山。
现代文：不久，兀欲囚禁她，她后来死在木叶山。
English: Soon, he wanted to imprison her, and she later died in Mujiashan.

古文：兀欲更名阮，号天授皇帝，改元曰天禄。
现代文：兀欲改名叫阮，号称天授皇帝，改年号叫天禄。
English: He wanted to change his name to Nguyen, calling himself Emperor Tianju, and his era name to Tianlu.

古文：是岁八月，葬德光于木叶山，遣人至镇州召冯道、和凝等会葬。
现代文：逭年八月，在木叶山安葬耶律德光，派人到镇州召冯道、和凝等人会葬。
English: In August of the same year, Ye Li Deguang was buried in Mubei Mountain, and people were sent to Zhenzhou to invite Feng Dao, He Geng and others to attend the funeral.

古文：使者至镇州，镇州军乱，大将白再荣等逐出麻答。据定州，已而悉其众以北。
现代文：使臣到达镇州，镇州军队作乱，大将白再荣等人赶跑麻苔，占据定州，不久全部北归。
English: The envoys arrived in Zhenzhou, the Zhenzhou army rioted, General Bai Zairong and others ran away, occupied Dingzhou, and soon all returned to the north.

古文：麻答者，德光之从弟也。
现代文：麻苔，是德光的堂弟。
English: Mende is Deguang's cousin.

古文：德光灭晋，以为邢州节度使，兀欲立，命守镇州。
现代文：德光消灭后晋，任为邢州节度使，兀欲登位，任命他守镇州。
English: After the elimination of Deguang, Jin was appointed as the envoy of the Bozhou Festival, and he wanted to ascend to the throne, and appointed him to guard Zhenzhou.

古文：麻答尤酷虐，多略中国人，剥面，抉目，拔发，断腕而杀之，出入常以钳凿挑割之具自随，寝处前后挂人肝、胫、手、足，言笑自若，镇、定之人不胜其毒。
现代文：麻苔尤其残酷暴虐，常常掠夺中原人，剥脸皮，挖眼睛，拔头发，砍断手腕再杀掉，出入常常随身带着钳凿挑割的工具，寝室前后挂上人的肝脏、小腿、手、足，而谈笑自如。镇、定二州的人都受不了他的残害。
English: Mende was particularly cruel and tyrannical. He often preyed on the Central Plains people, skinning their faces, gouging out their eyes, pulling out their hair, chopping off their wrists and then killing them. He often went in and out of the house with a chisel, hanging human livers, calves, hands and feet in front of and behind his bedroom, while he talked and laughed freely. The people of the town and the two states of Ding could not stand his cruelty.

古文：麻答已去，冯道等乃南归。
现代文：麻苔逃去后，冯道等人纔南归。
English: After the lichen fled, Feng Dao and others returned to the south.

古文：汉乾祐元年，兀欲率万骑攻邢州，陷内丘。
现代文：后漠干佑元年，冗欲率领一万骑兵攻打邢州，攻陷内丘。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Gansu, Redundancy led ten thousand cavalry to attack Zhangzhou and capture Neiqiu.

古文：契丹入寇，常以马嘶为候。
现代文：契丹进犯，常根据马叫预测胜负。
English: When the Khitan attack, they often predict the outcome of the battle based on the calls of the horses.

古文：其来也，马不嘶鸣，而矛戟夜有光，又月食，虏众皆惧，以为凶，虽破内丘，而人马伤死者太半。
现代文：这次他们来时，马不嘶叫，而且晚上矛戟发光，又碰上月食，契丹人都害怕了，认为不吉祥，虽然攻破了内丘，但人马死伤一大半。
English: This time, when they came, the horses did not neigh, and in the evening the lances glowed, and there was a lunar eclipse. The Khitans were afraid and thought it was not auspicious. Although they broke through the inner mound, more than half of the men and horses were killed and injured.

古文：兀欲立五年，会诸部酋长，复谋入寇，诸部大人皆不欲，兀欲强之。
现代文：兀欲登位五年，招会各部酋长，商量再次进犯，各部首领都不愿意，兀欲强迫他们。
English: He wanted to ascend to the throne for five years, invited the chiefs of all ministries, and discussed attacking again. The chiefs of all ministries were not willing, but he wanted to force them.

古文：燕王述轧与太宁王呕里僧等率兵杀兀欲于大神淀。
现代文：燕王述轧和太空玉堕里僧等人率兵在大神淀杀掉兀欲。
English: The Swallow King narrates the roll and the Space Jade Fallen Monk and others lead an army to kill the evil desire in Daishen Yodo.

古文：德光子齐王述律闻乱，走南山。
现代文：耶律德光的儿子齐王述律听说作乱，逃跑到南山。
English: The son of Yelu Deguang, the king of Qi, Shulutong, heard that there was a disturbance and fled to Nanshan.

古文：契丹击杀述轧、呕里僧，而迎述律以立。
现代文：契丹人攻杀述轧、呕里僧，而迎立述律。
English: The Khitan attacked and killed the sutra-wielding monks, but welcomed the sutra law.

古文：述律立，改元庆历，号天顺皇帝，后更名璟。
现代文：述律登位，改年号叫应历，号称天顺皇帝，后来改名叫璟。
English: Su Lu ascended the throne, changed his name to Ying Li, and was known as Emperor Tianshun. Later, he changed his name to Yu.

古文：述律有疾，不能近妇人，左右给事，多以宦者。
现代文：述律有病，不能接近妇人，在左右办事的，多任用宦官。
English: If a scribe was ill and unable to approach a woman, and had to run errands left and right, more eunuchs were appointed.

古文：然畋猎好饮酒，不恤国事，每酣饮，自夜至旦，昼则常睡，国人谓之 睡王 。
现代文：但喜好打猎饮酒，不问国事，每次畅饮，从晚上到黎明，白天常睡觉，国人叫他 睡王 。
English: But he likes to hunt and drink, does not ask about state affairs, drinks every time, from evening to dawn, and often sleeps during the day. The Chinese call him "sleeping king."

古文：初，兀欲常遣使聘汉，使者至中国而周太祖入立。
现代文：当初，兀欲曾派使臣出使后漠，使臣到达中原时，周太祖登位。
English: At first, Zou Zi sent an envoy to Houba, and when the envoy arrived in Central Plains, Zhou Taizu ascended to the throne.

古文：太祖复遣将军硃宪报聘，宪还而兀欲死。
现代文：周太祖又派将军朱宪回访问候，朱宪返回而兀欲死去。
English: Zhou Taizu also sent the general Zhu Xian back to visit. Zhu Xian returned and wanted to die.

古文：述律立，遂不复南寇。
现代文：述律登位，就不再南侵。
English: If he succeeds to the throne, there will be no more invasion of the south.

古文：显德六年夏，世宗北伐，以保大军节度使田景咸为淤口关部署，右神武统军李洪信为合流口部署，前凤翔节度使王晏为益津关部署、侍卫亲军马步都虞候韩通为陆路都部署。
现代文：颢德六年夏，周世宗北伐，任保大军节度使田景咸为淤口关部署，右神武统军李洪信焉合流口部署，前凤翔节度使王晏为益津关部署，侍卫亲军马步都虞候韩通焉陆路都部署。
English: In the summer of the sixth year of the Xingde Emperor, Zhou Shizong led the Northern Expedition. He was in charge of guarding the great army and deployed Tian Jingshan at the mouth of the Yangtze River, Li Hongxin of the Right Divine Martial United Army was deployed at the confluence of the Yangtze River and the Yangtze River, Wang Qian was deployed at the mouth of the Yangtze River before the Fengxiang Festival, and the bodyguards of the pro-army marched to the capital and waited for the land route to be deployed.

古文：世宗自乾宁军御龙舟，艛船战舰，首尾数十里，至益津关，降其守将，而河路渐狭，舟不能进，乃舍舟陆行。
现代文：周世宗从干奎里乘龙舟，楼船战舰，首尾迤逦敷十里，到达益津关，降服守将，但河道逐渐狭窄，船不能前行，于是舍船从陆地进军。
English: Zhou Shizong took a dragon boat and a warship from Gankuili to Yijin Pass, but the river became narrow and the boat could not go forward, so he left the boat and marched from the land.

古文：瓦桥淤口关、瀛莫州守将，皆迎降。
现代文：瓦桥淤口关、瀛州、莫州守将，都迎接大军而投降了。
English: The shoguns of Guqiao Juchu Pass, Zhangzhou and Mozhou all surrendered in the face of the large army.

古文：方下令进攻幽州，世宗遇疾，乃置雄州于瓦桥关、霸州于益津关而还。
现代文：正下令进攻幽州时，周世宗患病，于是在瓦桥关设置雄州、在益津关设置霸州而返回。
English: When Zhou Shizong was ordering the attack on Yuzhou, he fell ill and returned to set up Xiongzhou at Wabiao Pass and Baizhou at Yijin Pass.

古文：周师下三关、瀛、莫，兵不血刃。
现代文：后周军攻克三关、瀛、莫二州，兵不血刃。
English: Later, the Zhou army conquered Sankuan, Handan and Mo Erzhou, and the soldiers were bloodless.

古文：述律闻之，谓其国人曰： 此本汉地，今以还汉，又何惜耶？ 
现代文：述律获知后，对国人说： 这些原是汉地，现在还给汉人，又有什么可惜的呢？ 
English: After learning of the law, he said to the Chinese people: These were originally Han lands, and now they have been returned to the Han people. What is there to be sorry about?

古文：述律后为庖者因其醉而杀之。
现代文：述律后来被厨师趁他喝醉的时候杀掉。唉！
English: The storyteller was later killed by the cook while he was drunk. Alas!

古文：呜呼！自古夷狄服叛，虽不系中国之盛衰，而中国之制夷狄，则必因其强弱。
现代文：自古以来夷狄的归服或反叛，虽然不能决定中原的盛衰，但中原能否控制夷狄却必须取决于他们的强弱。
English: The submission or rebellion of the Yidi since ancient times, although it cannot determine the rise and fall of the Central Plains, but whether the Central Plains can control the Yidi must depend on their strength.

古文：予读周《日历》，见世宗取瀛、莫、定三关，兵不血刃，而史官讥其以王者之师，驰千里而袭人，轻万乘之重于萑苇之间，以侥倖一胜。
现代文：我读后周的《日历》，见周世宗攻取瀛、莫二州，平定三关，兵不血刃，而史官却讥讽他以帝王之师。驰聘千里袭击别人，在荒野地区冒万乘之尊的危险，来侥幸取得一次胜利。
English: When I read the following week's "Calendar," I saw that Zhou Shizong captured Shantou, Modya and Shanzhou, and pacified Sankuan without bloodshed, but the historian ridiculed him as the emperor's teacher. He traveled thousands of miles to attack others, and risked everything in the wilderness area to achieve a fluke victory.

古文：夫兵法，决机因势，有不可失之时。
现代文：兵法讲求因势决断，机不可失。
English: The law of war requires that a decision must be made according to the situation, and an opportunity must not be lost.

古文：世宗南平淮甸，北伐契丹，乘其胜威，击其昏殆，世徒见周师之出何速，而不知述律有可取之机也。
现代文：周世宗南平淮甸，北伐契丹，凭借他胜利的威风，攻打昏庸懈怠的敌人，世人祇见后周军出兵多么快，而不明白这时攻述律有可以取胜的机会。
English: Zhou Shizong of the Southern Pinghuadian and Northern Qidan, by virtue of his victorious grandeur, attacked the enemy's drowsiness and slackness. The world only saw how quickly the Zhou army dispatched troops, but did not understand that at this time, attacking the law had a chance to win.

古文：是时，述律以谓周之所取，皆汉故地，不足顾也。
现代文：当时，述律认为后周攻取的，都是汉人旧地，不值得顾惜。
English: At that time, Su Liu believed that what was conquered in the following weeks was all the old land of the Han people, and it was not worth worrying about.

古文：然则十四州之故地，皆可指麾而取矣。
现代文：既然如此，那么十四个州的旧地，都可挥手而取。
English: That being the case, the old territory of fourteen states can be taken away with a wave of the hand.

古文：不幸世宗遇疾，功志不就。
现代文：不幸周世宗患病，未能成就他的功业志向。
English: Unfortunately, Zhou Shizong fell ill and was unable to achieve his career ambitions.

古文：然瀛、莫、三关，遂得复为中国之人，而十四州之俗，至今陷于夷狄。
现代文：但瀛、莫、三关的百姓，因而得以又成为中原的人，而那十四个州的大众，至今陷于夷狄。
English: But the people of Shan, Mo, and Sanguan were able to become the people of the Central Plains, and the people of the fourteen states have been trapped in Yidi so far.

古文：彼其为志岂不可惜，而其功不亦壮哉！
现代文：周世宗的志愿难道不可珍视，而他的功业难道不也很伟大吗！
English: Shouldn't Zhou Shizong's volunteering be treasured, and shouldn't his achievements be great?

古文：夫兵之变化屈伸，岂区区守常谈者所可识也！
现代文：用兵打仗的变化屈伸，难道是区区墨守陈规的人所能懂得的吗！
English: Is it possible for those who stick to the old rules to understand the changes in the use of soldiers in war?

古文：初，萧翰闻德光死，北归，有同州郃阳县令胡峤为翰掌书记，随入契丹。
现代文：当初，萧翰听说耶律德光死了，北归，同州合阳县令胡矫任萧翰的掌书记，随他进入契丹。
English: At first, Xiao Han heard that Yelu Deguang had died, and he returned to the north. Hu Jiaoren, the governor of Heyang County in the same province, was appointed as Xiao Han's secretary and followed him into Khitan.

古文：而翰妻争石，告翰谋反，翰见杀，峤无所依，居虏中七年。
现代文：而萧翰的妻子妒嫉争宠，告萧翰谋反，萧翰被杀，胡娇无所依附，在契丹住了七年。
English: But Xiao Han's wife, jealous of his favor, accused Xiao Han of plotting a rebellion. Xiao Han was killed, and Hu Jiao had nothing to cling to. She lived in Qidan for seven years.

古文：当周广顺三年，亡归中国，略能道其所见。
现代文：后周广顺三年时，逃回中原，大略能够谈出他经历的事情。
English: Later, when Zhou Guangshun was three years old, he fled back to the Central Plains and was roughly able to talk about what he had experienced.

古文：云： 自幽州西北入居庸关，明日，又西北入石门关，关路崖狭，一夫可以当百，此中国控扼契丹之险也。
现代文：他说： 从幽州西北进入居庸关，第二天，再向西北进入石门关，关路陡狭，一人当关可以抵挡百人，这是中原控扼契丹的险要之地。
English: He said: From the northwest of Yuzhou, enter Juyong Pass, and the next day, enter Shimen Pass to the northwest. The pass is steep and narrow, and one person can resist a hundred people. This is a critical place for the Central Plains to control the Khitan.

古文：又三日，至可汗州，南望五台山，其一峰最高者，东台也。
现代文：再走三天，到达可汗州，南望五台山，其中最高的一个山峰，是柬台。
English: After another three days of walking, we arrived in Khanzhou, looking south at Mount Wutai, the highest peak of which is Mount Cambodia.

古文：又三日，至新武州，西北行五十里有鸡鸣山，云唐太宗北伐闻鸡鸣于此，因以名山。
现代文：再走三天，到达新武州，向西北走五十里有座鸡呜山，据说唐太宗北伐时在这里听见鹦叫，因而用来给山取名。
English: After another three days of walking, they reached Xinwuzhou. Walking northwest, there was a chicken mountain. It is said that during the Northern Expedition of Tang Taizong, he heard a parrot here, which was used to name the mountain.

古文：明日，入永定关，此唐故关也。
现代文：第二天，进入永定关，这是唐朝的旧关。
English: The next day, enter Yongding Pass, which is the old pass of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：又四日，至归化州。
现代文：再走四天，到达归化州。
English: After another four days of walking, they reached the naturalization state.

古文：又三日，登天岭，岭东西连亘，有路北下，四顾冥然，黄云白草，不可穷极。
现代文：再走三天，登上天岭，岭的东西连绵不断，只有一条北下的山路，四面望去十分高速幽深，在黄云白草之间，望不到尽头。
English: After another three days of walking, we reached Tianling. The ridge is continuous from one end to the other. There is only one mountain road to the north. Looking around, it is very high-speed and deep. Between the yellow clouds and white grass, there is no end in sight.

古文：契丹谓峤曰： 此辞乡岭也，可一南望而为永诀。 
现代文：契丹人对我说： 这里叫做辞乡岭，可以向南再望一次，以后就再也见不到了。 
English: The Khitan said to me: This is called Jishengling, you can look south once more, but you will never see it again.

古文：同行者皆恸哭，往往绝而复苏。
现代文：同行的人都痛哭起来，有的人哭得昏倒又苏醒过来。
English: Those who were with him began to weep bitterly, and some of them fainted from weeping and woke up.

古文：又行三四日，至黑榆林，时七月，寒如深冬。
现代文：又走三四天，到达黑榆林，这时是七月，却像深冬一样寒冷。
English: After another three or four days of walking, we arrived at the Black Maple Forest. It was July, but it was as cold as the dead of winter.

古文：又明日，入斜谷，谷长五十里，高崖峻谷，仰不见日，而寒尤甚。
现代文：第二天，进入斜谷，谷长五十里，在高崖深谷中，抬头看不见太阳，尤其寒冷。
English: The next day, entering the valley, the valley is fifty miles long, in the high cliff deep valley, looking up can not see the sun, especially cold.

古文：已出谷，得平地，气稍温。
现代文：走出山谷后，来到平地，天气纔逐渐暖和。
English: After going out of the valley, we came to the flatland, and the weather gradually became warm.

古文：又行二日，渡湟水。
现代文：再走两天，波过湟水河。
English: After another two days of walking, we crossed the Surabaya River.

古文：又明日，渡黑水。
现代文：第二天，渡过黑水河。
English: The next day, we crossed the Heishui River.

古文：又二日，至汤城淀，地气最温，契丹若大寒，则就温于此。
现代文：再走两天，到达汤城淀，天气最暖和，契丹人在最冷的时候，就到这里避寒。
English: After another two days of walking, they arrived at Tangcheng Yodo. The weather was at its warmest, and the Khitan people came here to escape the cold when it was at its coldest.

古文：其水泉清冷，草软如茸，可藉以寝。
现代文：这里水泉清冷，草像丝绒一样柔软，可以躺在上面睡觉。
English: Here the water springs are cold and the grass is as soft as velvet, so you can lie down and sleep on it.

古文：而多异花，记其二种：一曰旱金，大如掌，金色烁人；一曰青囊，如中国金灯，而色类蓝可爱。
现代文：有很多奇花，记下两种：一种叫旱金花，手掌那么大，金色耀人；一种叫青囊花，像中原的金灯，而颜色近蓝草，十分可爱。
English: There are many strange flowers. Take note of two of them: one is called aronia, which is as big as the palm of your hand and has a dazzling golden color; one is called columbine, which is like the golden lamp of the Central Plains, and the color is close to bluegrass, which is very lovely.

古文：又二日，至仪坤州，渡麝香河。
现代文：再走雨天，到达仪坤州，渡过麝香河。
English: Then walk in the rain, arrive in Yikunzhou, and cross the Yuxiang River.

古文：自幽州至此无里候，其所向不知为南北。
现代文：从幽州到这里路上没有方位里程标记，经过的方向不知是南还是北。
English: From Yuzhou to here, there is no directional mileage mark on the road, and it is not known whether the direction is south or north.

古文：又二日，至赤崖。翰与兀欲相及，遂及述律战于沙河。
现代文：再走雨天，到达赤崖，以前萧翰和兀欲就是在这里相遇，于是同述律在沙河作战。
English: After that, they walked in the rain until they reached the cliff. It was here that Xiao Han and Zou Li met before, so they fought together in the Sand River.

古文：述律兵败而北，兀欲追至独树渡，遂囚述律于扑马山。
现代文：述律兵败而逃，兀欲追到独树渡，于是把述律囚禁在扑马山。
English: Su Li ran away from the defeated soldiers and wanted to chase them to Duksudo, so he imprisoned Su Li in Pama Mountain.

古文：又行三日，遂至上京，所谓西楼也。
现代文：再走三天，就到达上京，就是所谓西楼。
English: After another three days, you will reach Shangjing, which is the so-called West Building.

古文：西楼有邑屋市肆，交易无钱而用布。
现代文：西楼有城屋市场，交易不用钱而用布。
English: There is a chateau market in the west building. Transactions are conducted without money, but with cloth.

古文：有绫锦诸工作、宦者、翰林、伎术、教坊、角牴、秀才、僧、尼、道士等，皆中国人，而并、汾、幽、蓟之人尤多。
现代文：有制作绫锦的各种工匠、宦官、翰林学士、技艺人、教坊乐人、角斗士、秀才、僧人、尼姑、道士等，都是中原人，而并、汾、幽、蓟四州的人尤其多。
English: All kinds of craftsmen, eunuchs, scholars, artists, musicians, gladiators, scholars, monks, nuns, Taoists, etc. who make brocade are from the Central Plains, and there are especially many people from the four prefectures of Hebei, Fujian, Yunnan and Fujian.

古文：自上京东去四十里，至真珠寨，始食菜。
现代文：从上京东行四十里，到达真珠寨，纔吃到蔬菜。
English: After traveling forty miles from the eastern part of Shangjing to Zhuzhai, the baboons were able to eat vegetables.

古文：明日，东行，地势渐高，西望平地松林郁然数十里。
现代文：第二天，束行，地势逐渐升高，西望平地上茂密的松林有几十里速。
English: The next day, we set out, and the terrain gradually rose. Looking west, we could see the dense pine forest on the plain for dozens of miles.

古文：遂入平川，多草木，始食西瓜，云契丹破回纥得此种，以牛粪覆棚而种，大如中国冬瓜而味甘。
现代文：于是进入平川，有很多草木，开始吃到西瓜，据说这是契丹攻破回纥得到瓜种，用牛粪盖棚种植，长得像中原的冬瓜那样大，而昧甜。
English: He then entered the Hirakawa River, where there were many plants and trees, and began to eat watermelons. It is said that this was due to the Khitan breaking through the reeds to obtain watermelon seeds, which were planted in a shed covered with cow dung, and grew to be as large and sweet as the winter melons of the Central Plains.

古文：又东行，至褭潭，始有柳，而水草丰美，有息鸡草尤美，而本大，马食不过十本而饱。
现代文：再束行，到达裹潭，纔有柳树，而水草丰美，有一种息鸡草特别肥美，茎很粗，马不过吃十根就饱了。
English: Then they set off again, arriving at the pool, dotted with willows, while the aquatic plants are plentiful. There is a kind of pheasant grass that is particularly fat and has a thick stem. A horse can only eat ten roots before it is full.

古文：自褭潭入大山，行十余日而出，过一大林，长二三里，皆芜荑，枝叶有芒刺如箭羽，其地皆无草。
现代文：从褒潭进入大山，走十多天出山，经过一处大树林，两三里长，都是芜荑树，枝叶上长有像箭羽一样的芒刺，地上完全没有草。
English: From Baotan into the mountains, walk more than ten days out of the mountains, through a large forest, two or three miles long, are eucalyptus trees, the branches and leaves have spines like arrows, and there is no grass on the ground.

古文：兀欲时卓帐于此，会诸部人葬德光。
现代文：兀欲当时在这里立帐，会同各部人安葬耶律德光。
English: He wanted to set up an account here at that time, and together with members of various departments, he buried Yerud Deguang.

古文：自此西南行，日六十里，行七日，至大山门，两高山相去一里，而长松丰草，珍禽野卉，有屋室碑石，曰： 陵所也。 
现代文：从这里往西南方走，每天走六十里，走了七天，到达大山门，两座高山相距一里，而有高松沃草，珍禽野花，又有房屋碑石，据人说： 这是陵地。 
English: From here, walk southwest, walk sixty miles a day, walk for seven days, and reach Dashanmen. The two high mountains are one mile apart, and there are high pines and grasses, rare birds and wildflowers, and house monuments. According to people: This is a burial ground.

古文：兀欲入祭，诸部大人惟执祭器者得入。
现代文：兀欲进去祭祀，各部首领只有手持祭器的纔能进入。
English: If you want to enter the ritual, the leaders of each department can only enter if they are holding the sacrificial vessels.

古文：入而门阖。
现代文：进去后门就关上了。
English: Once inside, the back door was closed.

古文：明日开门，曰 抛盏 ，礼毕。
现代文：第二天开门，叫声 抛盏 ，礼仪就结束。
English: Open the door the next day, shout, throw a ball, and the etiquette is over.

古文：问其礼，皆秘不肯言。 
现代文：问这是什么礼，都保密不愿说。 
English: When asked what kind of gift it was, she was reluctant to say.

古文：峤所目见囚述律、葬德光等事，与中国所记差异。
现代文：胡矫所见囚禁述律、安葬耶律德光等事，和中原的记载很不相同。
English: The records of the Hu Jiaoxing Institute are very different from those of the Central Plains, as they only mention the imprisonment of Zhu Li and the burial of Ye Li Deguang.

古文：已而翰得罪被锁，峤与部曲东之福州。
现代文：不久，萧翰获罪被关起来，胡娇和他的部下束去福州。
English: Soon after, Xiao Han was convicted and imprisoned, and Hu Jiao and his subordinates were sent to Fuzhou.

古文：福州，翰所治也。
现代文：福州，是萧翰管的地方。
English: Fuzhou is where Xiao Han grew up.

古文：峤等东行，过一山，名十三山，云此西南去幽州二千里。
现代文：胡蠕等人束行，经过一座山，名叫十三山，据说这里西南距幽州二千里。
English: Hu Demu and the others set out, passing a mountain called the Thirteen Mountains, which is said to be two thousand miles southwest of Yuzhou.

古文：又东行，数日，过卫州，有居人三十余家，盖契丹所虏中国卫州人，筑城而居之。
现代文：再束行，几天后，经过卫州，有三十多家住户，大概是契丹俘虏的中原卫州人，在这里筑城住下。
English: A few days later, after passing through Weizhou, more than thirty households, probably the Central Plains Weizhou people captured by the Khitan, built a city and lived here.

古文：峤至福州而契丹多怜峤，教其逃归，峤因得其诸国种类远近。
现代文：胡娇到达福州，而契丹人很怜惜他，教他逃回，胡娇因而得知各国种族远近分布。
English: Hu Jiao arrived in Fuzhou, and the Khitans took pity on him and told him to flee back. As a result, Hu Jiao learned that the races of various countries are distributed far and wide.

古文：云： 距契丹国东至于海，有铁甸，其族野居皮帐，而人刚勇。
现代文：他说： 从契丹国东面到海，有铁甸族，这一族野居用皮帐，族人刚强勇猛。
English: He said: "From the east of Khitan to the sea, there is the Tiedian tribe. This tribe lives in the wild with leather tents. The tribe is strong and brave.

古文：其地少草木，水咸浊，色如血，澄之久而后可饮。
现代文：那里草木很少，水咸而混浊，颜色像血，沉淀很久纔能喝。
English: There are few plants and trees, and the water is salty and muddy, the color is like blood, and it takes a long time to settle, so you can't drink it.

古文：又东，女真，善射，多牛、鹿、野狗。
现代文：再向东，是女真族，善于射箭，有很多牛、鹿、野狗。
English: Further east are the Jurchen, who are good at archery and have many cattle, deer and wild dogs.

古文：其人无定居，行以牛负物，遇雨则张革为屋。
现代文：他们没有固定的住所，用牛驮物而行，遇上雨就铺开皮子做屋。
English: They don't have a fixed abode. They make do with what they can scavenge from the cattle, and when it rains, they spread out their skins to make a shelter.

古文：常作鹿鸣，呼鹿而射之，食其生肉。
现代文：常学鹿叫，唤出鹿射死它们，吃生鹿肉。
English: Always learning deer calls, calling out deer, shooting them, eating raw venison.

古文：能酿糜为酒，醉则缚之而睡，醒而后解，不然，则杀人。
现代文：能酿糜子做酒，一旦喝醉就得将他捆起来让他睡觉，酒醒后纔解开，不这样，他就会杀人。
English: He can brew hazelnuts to make wine. If he gets drunk, he has to be tied up and put to sleep. When he wakes up, he has to be untied. Otherwise, he will kill someone.

古文：又东南，渤海，又东，辽国，皆与契丹略同。
现代文：再往东南，是渤海国，再往东，是辽国，风俗都和契丹大略相同。
English: Further to the south-east is the Bohai Kingdom, and further to the east is the Liao Kingdom, whose customs are roughly the same as the Khitan.

古文：其南海曲，有鱼盐之利。
现代文：南面海边，出产鱼、盐。
English: South of the coast, producing fish and salt.

古文：又南，奚，与契丹略同，而人好杀戮。
现代文：再往南，是奚国，风俗和契丹大略相同，而那里的人喜好杀人。
English: Further south is the country of Shan, whose customs are more or less the same as the Khitan, and where people like to kill.

古文：又南至于榆关矣，西南至儒州，皆故汉地。
现代文：再往南，就到达榆关了，西南到儒州，都是过去汉人的地盘。
English: Further south, you will reach Shaoguan, and from southwest to Confucius, it is all the territory of the Han people in the past.

古文：西则突厥、回纥。
现代文：契丹西面则是突厥、回纥。
English: To the west of Khitan are Turkic and Uighur.

古文：西北至妪厥律，其人长大，髦头，酋长全其发，盛以紫囊。
现代文：西北到妪厥律，那里的人长得高大，头发长，酋长保留全部头发，用紫色袋子装着。
English: From the northwest to the Yangtze River Delta, the people there are tall and have long hair, and the chiefs keep all their hair and wear it in a purple bag.

古文：地苦寒，水出大鱼，契丹仰食。
现代文：那里天气极寒，水中出产大鱼，契丹人靠这种鱼生活。
English: The weather there is extremely cold, and the water produces large fish, on which the Khitans live.

古文：又多黑、白、黄貂鼠皮，北方诸国皆仰足。
现代文：又有很多黑、白、黄色的貂鼠皮，北方各国都靠他们供应。
English: There are also a lot of black, white and yellow musk deer skins, and the northern countries all rely on them for supplies.

古文：其人最勇，邻国不敢侵。
现代文：那里的人很勇敢，邻国不敢侵犯他们。
English: The people there are so brave that neighbouring countries do not dare to encroach on them.

古文：又其西，辖戛，又其北，单于突厥，皆与妪厥律略同。
现代文：他们的西面，是辖戛，辖戛北面，是单于突厥，风俗都和妪厥律大略相同。
English: Their west side is ruled by the Qiang, and their north side is ruled by the Qiang, both of which are Turkic, and their customs are roughly the same as those of the Qiang.

古文：又北，黑车子，善作车帐，其人知孝义，地贫无所产。
现代文：再往北，是黑车子，善于制作车帐，那里的人懂得孝义，土地贫瘠不长什么东西。
English: Further north, there are black wagons, good at making wagons, where people understand filial piety, and the land is barren and nothing grows.

古文：云契丹之先，常役回纥，后背之走黑车子，始学作车帐。
现代文：据说契丹的祖先，曾被回纥奴役，后来背离他们逃跑到黑车子，纔开始学制作车帐。
English: It is said that the ancestors of the Khitan were once enslaved by the Uighurs, but later broke away from them and fled to the Black Car, where the Uighurs began to learn how to make carriages.

古文：又北，牛蹄突厥，人身牛足，其地尤寒，水曰瓠河，夏秋冰厚二尺，春冬冰彻底，常烧器销冰乃得饮。
现代文：黑车子再往北，是牛蹄突厥，身子像人脚像牛足，这里尤其寒冷，有条瓠觎河，夏秋冰厚二尺，春冬冰结到河底，常常用器皿烧化冰块纔有水喝。
English: Further north, the Black Chariot is a Turk's hoofed ox, with a body like a human's and feet like a cow's. It is particularly cold here. There is a river, the summer and autumn ice is two feet thick, and in spring and winter the ice is frozen to the bottom of the river. People often use utensils to melt the ice and drink the water.

古文：东北，至韈劫子，其人髦首，披布为衣，不鞍而骑，大弓长箭，尤善射，遇人辄杀而生食其肉，契丹等国皆畏之。
现代文：牛蹄突厥往东北，到达韈劫子，那里的人头发长，披上布当衣穿，骑马不要马鞍，用大弓长箭，尤其善于射箭，遇上人就杀掉生吃人肉，契丹等国都怕他们。
English: Cattle-hoofed Turks went to the northeast and arrived at Qinhuangzi, where the people had long hair, wore cloth clothes, rode horses without saddles, used long bows and arrows, and were particularly good at archery. If they encountered people, they would kill them and eat human flesh. The Khitan and other countries were afraid of them.

古文：契丹五骑遇一韈劫子，则皆散走。
现代文：契丹若五个骑兵遇上一个韈劫子人，就都会逃散。
English: In Khitan, if five horsemen met a kidnapper, they would all run away.

古文：其国三面皆室韦，一曰室韦，二曰黄头室韦，三曰兽室韦。
现代文：此国三面都是室韦，第一种叫室韦，第二种叫黄头室韦，第三种叫兽室韦。
English: All three sides of this country are muroi. The first kind is called muroi, the second kind is called yellow-headed muroi, and the third kind is called animal muroi.

古文：其地多铜、铁、金、银，其人工巧，铜铁诸器皆精好，善织毛锦。
现代文：那里大量出产铜、铁、金、银，人们都手巧，铜铁器物都做得很精美，并善于织毛锦。
English: There, copper, iron, gold, and silver were produced in large quantities, and the people were skilled with their hands. Copper and iron utensils were beautifully made, and they were good at weaving woolen brocades.

古文：地尤寒，马溺至地成冰堆。
现代文：此地很寒冷，马小便到地上就成了冰堆。
English: It's so cold here that horses urinate on the ground and it turns into a pile of ice.

古文：又北，狗国，人身狗首，长毛不衣，手捕猛兽，语为犬嗥，其妻皆人，能汉语，生男为狗，女为人，自相婚嫁，穴居食生，而妻女人食。
现代文：再往北，是狗国，身子像人头像狗，毛发很长，不穿衣服，徒手搏击猛兽，说话像狗叫，他们的妻子则都像人样，会漠话，生男像狗生女像人，相互嫁娶，洞居，吃生食，而妻子女儿吃人食。
English: Further north is the land of the dogs. Their bodies are like humans, their heads are like dogs, their hair is long, they wear no clothes, they fight wild beasts with their bare hands, they talk like dogs, their wives are like humans, they are indifferent, their men are like dogs, their women are like humans, they marry each other, live in caves, and eat raw food, while their wives and daughters eat canned food.

古文：云尝有中国人至其国，其妻怜之使逃归，与其箸十余只，教其每走十余里遗一箸，狗夫追之，见其家物，必衔而归，则不能追矣。 
现代文：据说曾有中原人来到该国，该国人的妻子可怜他，让他逃回去，给他十多只筷子，教他每跑十多里就扔下一根，狗丈夫追他时，见到自家的东西，必定会衔回去，就不能追了。 
English: It is said that there was once a Central Plainsman who came to the country. The man's wife took pity on him and let him escape back home. She gave him more than ten chopsticks and taught him to throw one away every ten miles or so. When the husband chased him and saw something from his own home, he would be sure to take it back, and he would not be able to chase it.

古文：其说如此。
现代文：他说的就是这样。
English: That's what he said.

古文：又曰： 契丹尝选百里马二十匹，遣十人赍干饣少北行，穷其所见。
现代文：又说： 契丹曾挑选二十匹百里马，派十人带着干粮北行，要他们探索到所能到达的地方。
English: He also said: Khitan once selected twenty hundred-horse chariots and sent ten men north with dry rations, telling them to explore as far as they could.

古文：其人自黑车子，历牛蹄国以北，行一年，经四十三城，居人多以木皮为屋，其语言无译者，不知其国地、山川、部族、名号。
现代文：这些人从黑车子出发，经过牛蹄突厥国向北，走了一年，经过四十三个城，那些居民多用树皮建屋，他们的语言没有人能翻译，不知他们的国土、山川、部族、名号叫什么。
English: These people set out from the Black Car and travelled north through the Turkic lands on the back of a cow for a year, passing through forty-three cities. The inhabitants mostly built their houses from tree bark. No one could translate their language, and they did not know what their land, mountains, rivers, tribes, or names were.

古文：其地气，遇平地则温和，山林则寒冽。
现代文：那里的天气，遇平地则温和，遇山林则寒冷。
English: The weather there is mild when it is flat and cold when it is mountainous.

古文：至三十三城，得一人，能铁甸语，其言颇可解，云地名颉利乌于邪堰。
现代文：到第三十三个城时，遇到一个人，会铁甸话，他说的大多能听懂，说地名叫颉利乌于邪堰。
English: When he reached the thirty-third city, he met a man who could speak the local dialect, and most of what he said was understandable.

古文：云 自此以北，龙蛇猛兽、魑魅群行，不可往矣 。
现代文：还说 从这里往北，龙蛇猛兽和妖魔鬼怪成群出役，不能去了 。
English: He also said that from here to the north, dragons, serpents, beasts of prey, and demons and monsters would come out to fight in droves, and he couldn't go.

古文：其人乃还。
现代文：这些人纔返回。
English: These people are not coming back.

古文：此北荒之极也。 
现代文：这是北荒的尽头了。 
English: This is the end of the Northern Desert.

古文：契丹谓峤曰： 夷狄之人岂能胜中国？
现代文：契丹人对胡矫说： 夷狄人哪能战胜中原？
English: The Khitan people said to Hu Jia: How can the Yidi people defeat the Central Plains?

古文：然晋所以败者，主暗而臣不忠。 
现代文：但篷晋之所以被打败，是由于君主昏昧而臣子不忠。 
English: However, the reason why Tongjin was defeated was because the monarch was dim-witted and the vassals were disloyal.

古文：因具道诸国事，曰： 子归悉以语汉人，使汉人努力事其主，无为夷狄所虏，吾国非人境也。 
现代文：因而对他详细谈起各国情况，说： 你回去都告诉汉人，让汉人努力事奉他们的君主，不要受夷狄的扩掠，我国不是人住的地方。 
English: Therefore, he spoke to him in detail about the situation of each country, saying: Go back and tell the Han people, let the Han people work hard to serve their monarch, do not be plundered by the Yidi, our country is not a place where people live.

古文：峤归，录以为《陷虏记》云。
现代文：胡娇回来后，记录下来写成《陷虏记》。
English: After Hu Jiao returned, he recorded it and wrote it down as "Trapper's Diary."

