古文：或谓公仲曰： 听者听国，非必听实也。
现代文：有人对公仲说： 处理政事的人要多从国人那里听取意见，并不一定要从贵族那里听取。
English: Some people said to Gongzhong: Those who deal with political affairs should listen more to the opinions of the Chinese people, and not necessarily listen to the nobles.

古文：故先王听谚言于市，愿公之听臣言也。
现代文：因此毙王从市井中听取俗谚，希望您也能听一听臣下的意见。
English: Therefore, the king of death listens to the proverbs from the market. I hope you can listen to the opinions of your subjects.

古文：公求中立于秦，而弗能得也，善公孙郝以难甘茂，劝齐兵以劝止魏，楚、赵皆公之仇也。
现代文：您在秦王那里请求让韩国不倾向齐、魏任何一方，秦王没有答应，您就亲近公孙郝为难甘茂，勉励齐国军队并鼓励进攻魏国，楚国、赵国都成了您的仇敌。
English: You asked the Qin King not to let Korea lean toward either Qi or Wei, but the Qin King did not agree, so you became close to Gongsun Qian, encouraged the Qi army and encouraged the attack on Wei, and Chu and Zhao became your enemies.

古文：臣恐国之以此为患也，愿公之复求中立于秦也。 
现代文：臣下担心韩国将以此为祸患，希望您再次向秦王请求允许韩国保持中立。 公仲说： 那该怎么做呢？ 
English: His subjects are worried that Korea will use this as a scourge, and hope that you will once again ask King Qin to allow Korea to remain neutral.Kongzhong said: So what should we do?

古文：公仲曰： 奈何? 对曰： 秦王以公孙郝为党于公而弗之听，甘茂不善于公而弗为公言，公何不因行愿以与秦王语?
现代文：那个人回答说： 秦王认为公孙郝亲近您，因而不会听信公孙郝，甘茂同您不友好不会替您说话，您何不通过行愿来向秦王传话呢？
English: The man replied, "Qin Wang thinks that Gongsun Ye is close to you, so he will not listen to Gongsun Ye. If Gan Mao is not friendly with you, he will not speak for you. Why don't you send a message to Qin Wang by making a wish?

古文：行愿之为秦王臣也公，臣请为公谓秦王曰： 齐、魏合与离，于秦孰利?
现代文：行愿傲秦王的大匝很公正，臣下请求让行愿替您对秦王说： 齐国、魏国联合与分裂，哪砷情况对秦国有利？
English: Emperor Qin's imperial edict was very just. His vassals asked him to let Emperor Qin make the edict on their behalf. He said to Emperor Qin, "If Qi and Wei were united and divided, which situation would be beneficial to Qin?"

古文：齐、魏别与合，于秦孰强? 
现代文：齐国、魏国背离与联合，对于秦国来说，哪种情况会使秦国更强大？ 
English: For Qin, what kind of situation will make Qin stronger?

古文：秦王必曰： 齐、魏离，则秦重；合，则秦轻。齐、魏别，则秦强；合，则秦弱。 
现代文：秦王一定会说： 齐、魏分裂，秦国地位就显得重要，齐、魏联合，秦国就无足轻重。
English: The king of Qin will surely say: If Qi and Wei split, the status of Qin will be important, but if Qi and Wei unite, Qin will be insignificant.

古文：臣即曰： 今王听公孙郝以韩、秦之兵应齐而攻魏，魏不敢战，归地而合于齐，是秦轻也，臣以公孙郝为不忠。
现代文：齐、魏背离，秦国就会更强大，齐、魏联合，秦国就会变得弱小。臣下就会让行愿说： 如今大王听信公孙郝，用韩国、秦国的军队响应齐国而去进攻魏国，魏国不敢应战，将土地归入齐国，同齐国联合，这样秦国就变得无足轻重了，臣下认为公孙郝不忠心。
English: If Qi and Wei deviate, Qin will become stronger; if Qi and Wei unite, Qin will become weaker. His vassals will let him do as he pleases, saying, "Now the great king has listened to Sun Yat-sen, and has responded to Qi by attacking Wei with the armies of Korea and Qin. Wei does not dare to fight, and has incorporated the land into Qi and united with Qi. As a result, Qin has become insignificant. His vassals think that Sun Yat-sen is not loyal."

古文：今王听甘茂，以韩、秦之兵据魏而攻齐，齐不敢战，不求割地而合于魏，是秦轻也，臣以甘茂为不忠。
现代文：现在如果大王听信甘茂，用韩国、秦国的军队凭据魏国攻打齐国，齐国不敢应战，不要求魏国割让土地就同魏国讲和，这样秦国也会变得无足轻重，臣下认为甘茂不忠心。
English: Now, if the Great King listens to Ganmao and uses the armies of South Korea and Qin to attack Qi on the basis of Wei, Qi will not dare to fight, and will make peace with Wei without demanding that Wei cede land. In this way, Qin will also become insignificant, and his vassals will think that Ganmao is not loyal.

古文：故王不如令韩中立以攻齐，齐王言救魏以劲之，齐、魏不能相听，久离兵史。
现代文：因此大王不如让韩国保持中立来打击齐国，大王声言援救魏国来壮大魏国的声势，齐国、魏国彼此不会听从，一定会长时期遭受战事的困扰。
English: Therefore, it is better for the king to let South Korea remain neutral to crack down on Qi, and for the king to rescue Wei to strengthen Wei's momentum. Qi and Wei will not listen to each other, and they will certainly be plagued by war for a long time.

古文：王欲，则信公孙郝于齐，为韩取南阳，易谷川以归，此惠王之愿也。
现代文：大王想这样做，就可以让公孙郝取信子齐国，替韩国攻取魏国的南阳，换得韩国的谷川归属秦国，这是惠王的愿望。
English: If the great king wanted to do so, he could have Gongsun seize Nobuko of Qi, conquer Nanyang of Wei for Korea, and exchange Tanigawa of Korea for Qin. This was the wish of King Hui.

古文：王欲，则信甘茂于魏，以韩、秦之兵据魏以郄齐，此武王之愿也。
现代文：大王想那样做，就可以让甘茂取信于魏国，用韩国、秦国的军队凭据魏国来打击齐国，这是武王的愿望。
English: If the king wanted to do that, he could have Ganmao gain the trust of Wei and use the armies of Korea and Qin to attack Qi on the basis of Wei. This was King Wu's wish.

古文：臣以为令韩以中立以劲齐，最秦之大急也。
现代文：臣下认为让韩国保持中立来攻击齐国，是秦国最紧迫的事。
English: His vassals thought that it was the most urgent matter for Qin to persuade Korea to remain neutral and attack Qi.

古文：公孙郝党于齐而不肯言，甘茂薄而不敢谒也，此二人，王之大患也。
现代文：公孙郝亲近齐国而不肯对公仲说，甘茂受到冷遇而不敢进言，这两个人，是大王的祸根，希望大王慎重考虑这件事情。 
English: Gongsun Yao was close to Qi Guo, but refused to say anything to Gongzhong. Ganmao was treated coldly and did not dare to say anything. These two people are the bane of the king. I hope the king will carefully consider this matter.

