古文：乌蒙、乌撒、东川、芒部，古为窦地、的巴、东川、大雄诸甸，皆唐乌蒙裔也。
现代文：乌蒙、乌撒、东川、芒部，是古代的窦地、的巴、东川、大雄各甸，都是唐朝乌蒙人的后裔。
English: Umong, Usa, Dongchuan and Mangbu are all descendants of the Umong people of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：宋有封乌蒙王者。
现代文：宋朝时，还有人被封为乌蒙王。
English: During the Song Dynasty, there was another person who was named the King of Wumeng.

古文：元初置乌蒙路，遂以东川、芒部皆隶于乌蒙、乌撒等处宣慰司。
现代文：元朝初年设置乌蒙路，便把东川、芒部隶属于乌蒙、乌撒等地的宣慰司。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Umong Road was set up, and Dongchuan and Mangbe were subordinated to the Xuanliao Division of Umong, Usa and other places.

古文：乌撒富盛甲诸部，元时尝置军民总管府，而于东川置万户府。
现代文：在各部之中，数乌撒最富裕强盛，元朝时曾在该地设置军民总管府，在东川则设置万户府。
English: Among the ministries, Zuwusa was the wealthiest and most powerful. During the Yuan Dynasty, the Military and Civilian General Administration Office was set up there, and the Government of Ten Thousand Households was set up in Dongchuan.

古文：地势并在蜀之东南，与滇、黔坏土相接，皆据险阻深，与中土声教隔离。
现代文：乌撒、东川都位于蜀的东南方，与滇、黔相接，地势险恶，他们的声音和教化都与中原不同。
English: Usa and Dongchuan are both located in the southeast of Shu. They are adjacent to Kunlun and Yunnan, and the terrain is treacherous. Their voices and enlightenment are different from those of the Central Plains.

古文：明太祖既平蜀，规取云南，大师皆集于辰、沅，欲并剪诸蛮以通蜀道。
现代文：明太祖平定蜀地后，想攻取云南，便把大军都集中到辰州、沅州，试图削弱各蛮族的势力以打通往蜀地的道路。
English: After the Ming Emperor Taizu conquered Shu, he wanted to conquer Yunnan, so he concentrated his large army in Chenzhou and Zhangzhou, trying to weaken the power of the barbarians to fight his way to Shu.

古文：洪武十四年遣内臣赍敕谕乌蒙、乌撒诸部长曰： 西南诸部，自古及今，莫不朝贡中国。
现代文：洪武十年皇帝派宦官带着诏书去见乌蒙、乌撒各部的酋长，说 ：西南地区各部落，从古到今，无不向中国朝觐进贡。
English: In the tenth year of Hongwu, the emperor sent a eunuch with an edict to the chieftains of the Umong and Usa, saying: All the tribes in the southwest region, from ancient times to the present, have paid tribute to the Chinese pilgrimage.

古文：朕受天命为天下主十有五年，而乌蒙、乌撒、东川、芒部、建昌诸部长犹桀骜不朝。
现代文：我接受天命成为天下的主人已经有十五年了，而乌蒙、乌撒、东川、芒部、建昌各部落酋长还桀骜不驯，不来朝觐我。
English: It's been fifteen years since I accepted the heavenly mandate to become the master of the world, and the tribal chiefs of Umun, Usa, Dongchuan, Mangbe, and Jianchang are still stubborn and won't come to pay me homage.

古文：朕已遣征南将军颍川侯、左副将军永昌侯、右副将军西平侯率师往征。
现代文：我已经派遣征南将军颍川侯、左副将军永昌侯、右副将军西平侯带领军队前来征讨。
English: I have dispatched the southward-conquering general Shichuan Hou, the left deputy general Yongchang Hou, and the right deputy general Xiping Hou to lead the army to come and fight.

古文：犹恐诸部长未喻朕意，故复遣内臣往谕。
现代文：但怕你们各部的酋长还没理解我的意思，所以再派遣宫中的大臣前来告诉你们。
English: But I'm afraid that the chiefs of your ministries haven't understood my meaning, so I'll send a minister from the palace to come and tell you.

古文：如悔罪向义，当即躬亲来朝，或遣人入贡，亟摅诚款，朕当罢兵，以安黎庶。
现代文：如果你们悔罪向我投诚，就应当立即亲自来朝觐我，或者派人来向朝廷献贡物，快点抒发投诚的意向，我就停止发兵，以便黎民百姓安生乐业。
English: If you repent of your sins and pledge allegiance to me, you should immediately come to pay homage to me in person, or send someone to pay tribute to the imperial court, and quickly express your intention to pledge allegiance. I will stop sending troops so that the people of Li can live and work safely.

古文：尔共省之。 
现代文：你们可以一起检讨一下这件事。 
English: You can review the matter together.

古文：时征南将军傅友德已分遣都督胡海洋等帅师五万，由永宁趋乌撒，复自率师由曲靖循格孤山而南，以通永宁之兵，捣乌撒。
现代文：此时，征南将军傅友德已经派遣都督胡海洋等人带五万军队，从永宁向乌撒进发；又亲自率兵从曲靖沿着格孤山向南，与永宁的军队相通，直捣乌撒。
English: At this time, the general of the Southern Expedition, Fu Youde, had already sent the governor Hu Haiyang and others with fifty thousand troops from Yongning to Usa; he also personally led the troops from Qujing along the Geqiao Mountain to the south, communicated with the Yongning army, and directly attacked Usa.

古文：时元右丞实卜闻海洋兵至，乃聚兵赤水河以拒之。
现代文：这时，元朝的右丞相实卜听到胡海洋的军队已到，便聚集军队到赤水河抵抗。
English: At this time, the Yuan Dynasty's Minister of the Right, Shibu, heard that Hu Hai's army had arrived, and he gathered his army to the Chashui River to resist.

古文：及闻大军继进，皆遁。
现代文：又听到明朝的大军继续开进来了，便都逃跑了。
English: When they heard that the Ming army was still advancing, they all ran away.

古文：友德令诸军筑城，版闸方具，蛮寇大集。
现代文：傅友德命令各军修筑城墙。待到刚刚收集到筑墙用的夹板和闸时，蛮族人全集中起来并围了过来。
English: Fu Youde ordered all the armies to build the city wall. When they had just collected the splints and gates for building the wall, the barbarians all gathered and surrounded them.

古文：友德屯兵山冈，持重以待。
现代文：傅友德把军队安扎在山冈上，慎重地观察着局势。
English: Fu Youde stationed his troops on the hill and carefully observed the situation.

古文：既知士勇可用，乃纵兵接战。
现代文：等了解到自己的土兵还有勇气打仗时，便派军队与蛮族人接战。
English: When he realized that his native soldiers still had the courage to fight, he sent troops to fight the barbarians.

古文：有芒部土酋率众来援，实卜兵与合，锋甚锐。
现代文：有芒部的酋长率人来增援，实卜的军队与芒部酋长会合后，锋头很锐利。
English: The chief of Mangbu came with reinforcements, and after the meeting between the army of Sridhb and the chief of Mangbu, the front was very sharp.

古文：大军鼓噪而前，其酋长多中槊坠马死。
现代文：明朝大军擂鼓呐喊着前进，蛮族的酋长多被长矛击中坠马而死。
English: The great army of the Ming Dynasty marched forward to the sound of drums and shouts. Most of the barbarian chieftains were hit by spears and fell from their horses to their deaths.

古文：大军益奋，蛮众力不支，大溃，斩首三千，获马六百，实卜率众遁。
现代文：明朝大军更加奋勇，蛮族人力不可支，大量逃散，明军斩杀了三千敌人，缴获马匹六百。实卜率着众人逃跑了。
English: The Ming army was even more courageous. The barbarians had too much manpower and fled in large numbers. The Ming army killed three thousand enemies and captured six hundred horses. Shibu led the people to escape.

古文：遂城乌撒，克七星关以通毕节，又克可渡河，于是东川、乌蒙、芒部诸蛮震詟，皆望风降附。
现代文：于是明军便在乌撒筑城，攻克七星关，打通通向毕节的道路；又攻克了可渡河。这样东川、乌蒙、芒部的各蛮族都受到震慑，望风归降。
English: As a result, the Ming army built a city in Usa, conquered Qixing Pass, opened the road to Bijie, and conquered the Kodu River. In this way, the barbarians of Dongchuan, Umong, and Mangbu were all deterred and surrendered.

古文：十五年置东川、乌撒、乌蒙、芒部诸卫指挥使司，诏谕诸部人民。
现代文：洪武十五年设置东川、乌撒、乌蒙、芒部各卫指挥使司，皇帝下诏将此告诉各部落的人民。
English: In the 15th year of Hongwu, Dongchuan, Wusa, Umong, and Mangbu were set up, and the emperor issued an edict to inform the people of each tribe.

古文：以云南已降附，宜益效顺中国，以享升平。
现代文：因为云南已向朝廷投降归附，所以应该更加顺从朝廷，以便享受太平。
English: Since Yunnan had already surrendered to the imperial court, it should be more obedient to the imperial court in order to enjoy peace.

古文：复谕诸部长曰： 今置邮传通云南，宣率土人，随其疆界远迩，开筑道路，各广十丈，准古法，以六十里为一驿。
现代文：不久，皇帝下诏书给各部酋长说： 现今我们设置的邮传通向云南，你们应该带领当地人民，随你们的疆界远近开筑道路。所开的道路要有十丈宽，以古法为准，每六十里设一个驿站。
English: Not long after, the emperor issued an imperial decree to the chiefs of various ministries, saying: The postal service we have set up now leads to Yunnan. You should lead the local people to build roads as far as your borders. The roads you open should be ten feet wide, in accordance with the ancient law, and there should be a post station every sixty miles.

古文：符至奉行。 
现代文：等到令符一到你们就开始筑路。 
English: As soon as the decree arrives, you will begin to build the road.

古文：又敕征南将军友德等曰： 乌蒙、乌撒、东川、芒部诸酋长虽已降，恐大军一还，仍复啸聚。
现代文：给征南将军傅友德等人下诏说 ：乌蒙、乌撒、东川、芒部各酋长虽然已经投降，但怕军队一撤回，他们又聚在一起叛乱。
English: He issued an edict to the Southern Expeditionary General Fu Youde and others, saying: Although the Umong, Usa, Dongchuan, and Mangbu chiefs have surrendered, they are afraid that once the army withdraws, they will gather together again to rebel.

古文：符到日，悉送其酋长入朝。 
现代文：所以在令符到达的那天，你们全部护送他们的酋长进京城朝觐。 
English: Therefore, on the day of the arrival of the warrants, you all escorted their chiefs to the capital for the hajj.

古文：又谕以贵州已设都指挥使，然地势偏东，今宜于实卜所居之地立司，以便控制，卿其审之。 
现代文：并又说 ：贵州已经设置了都指挥使，但那里地处偏远，现今应该在原实卜居住的地方成立一个司，以便于控制，你们可仔细考虑此事。 
English: He also said: Guizhou has already set up a metropolitan command, but the place is remote. Now, a department should be set up in the place where Shibu used to live in order to facilitate control. You can carefully consider this matter.

古文：已，乌撒诸蛮复叛，帝谕友德曰： 乌撒诸蛮伺官军散处，即有此变，朕前已虑之，今果然。
现代文：之后，乌撒各蛮族人又叛乱，皇帝对傅友德说 ：乌撒各蛮族是看到官军都分散驻扎了，才发生现在的变乱的。我以前曾考虑过这种情况，现今果然发生了。
English: After that, the barbarians of Usaac revolted again, and the emperor said to Fu Youde: "The barbarians of Usaac saw that the official army was dispersed and stationed, and that's why the current turmoil occurred. I had considered this situation before, and now it's really happened."

古文：然云南之地如曲靖、普安、乌撒、建昌，势在必守，其东川、芒部、乌蒙，未可遽守也。
现代文：云南之地如曲靖、普安、乌撒、建昌等，是一定要坚守的，而东川、芒部、乌蒙等地，不可慌忙地守。
English: Places in Yunnan such as Qujing, Pu'an, Wusa, Jianchang, etc. must be firmly defended, while Dongchuan, Mangbe, Umong and other places should not be hurriedly defended.

古文：且留屯大军荡埽诸蛮，戮其渠长，方可分兵守御耳。 
现代文：况且，只有把大军留屯下来，扫荡各蛮族，杀死他们的长官，才能分兵守卫。 
English: Moreover, only by keeping a large army camped, sweeping the barbarians, and killing their chiefs, could the soldiers be divided and guarded.

古文：乃命安陆侯吴复为总兵，平凉侯费聚副之，征乌撒、乌蒙诸叛蛮。
现代文：于是便任命安陆侯吴复为总兵，平凉侯费聚为副总兵，征讨乌撒、乌蒙等叛乱的蛮族。
English: As a result, Anlu marquis Wu Fu was appointed as commander-in-chief, and Pingliang marquis Feizhu was appointed as deputy commander-in-chief, to subjugate Usa, Umong and other rebellious barbarians.

古文：并谕勿与蛮战于关索岭上，当分兵掩袭，直捣其巢，使彼各奔救其家不暇，必不敢出以抗大师。
现代文：皇帝又告诫傅友德等不要与蛮族在关索岭上战斗，应当分开兵力掩护袭击，直捣他们的老巢，使他们各自奔回老家去救其家人，不敢顾及外面，这样他们一定不敢出来抗击明朝的大军。
English: The emperor also admonished Fu Youde and others not to fight with the barbarians on Guanso Ridge. They should separate their forces to cover the attack and directly attack their nests, so that they would rush back to their hometowns to save their families, not daring to care about the outside world. In this way, they would not dare to come out to fight against the great army of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：俟三将军至，破擒之。
现代文：等到三位将军都到了，再攻破敌人防线，捉拿他们。
English: Wait until all three generals have arrived, then break through the enemy lines and capture them.

古文：是月，副将军西平侯沐英自大理还军，会友德击乌撒，大败其众，斩首三万余级，获马牛羊万计，余众悉遁，复追击破之。
现代文：该月，副将军西平侯沐英从大理回师，与傅友德会合后袭击乌撒，大败敌人，斩杀敌人三万多。缴获马、牛、羊数以万计。其余的敌人全都逃跑，明军又追击并打败他们。
English: In the same month, the vice-general Xiping Hou Muying returned from Dali to join Fu Youde and attacked Usa, defeated the enemy, killed more than 30,000 enemies, and captured tens of thousands of horses, cattle and sheep. The rest of the enemies all fled, and the Ming army chased and defeated them.

古文：帝谕友德等，师捷后，必戮其渠魁，使之畏惧。搜其余党，绝其根株，使彼智穷力屈，诚心款附，方可留兵镇守。
现代文：皇帝告诉傅友德等人，在军队获胜后，一定要杀其长官，使他们害怕，并搜寻余党，断绝祸根，使他们智力穷尽而力量削弱，诚心诚意地投诚依附于朝廷，这样才能留兵把守。
English: The emperor told Fu Youde and others that after the victory of the army, they must kill their superiors, make them afraid, and search for the remaining party, cut off the root of the evil, make them exhausted and weakened, and sincerely adhere to the court, so as to keep the soldiers.

古文：又谕宜乘兵势修治道途，令土酋谕其民，各输粮一石以给军，为持久计。
现代文：又告诉他们应该乘着军队的胜势修筑道路，并让当地酋长告诉当地百姓，每户各输送粮食一石给军队，作为长久的考虑。
English: He also told them that they should take advantage of the army's victory to build roads, and let the local chiefs tell the local people that each household should send one stone of grain to the army as a long-term consideration.

古文：十六年以云南所属乌撒、乌蒙、芒部三府隶四川布政使司。
现代文：洪武十六年将云南所属的乌撒、乌蒙、芒部三府隶属于四川布政使司。
English: In the 16th year of Hongwu's reign, the three prefectures of Wusa, Umong and Mangbe, which belonged to Yunnan, were subordinated to the Sichuan Political Envoy Division.

古文：乌蒙、乌撒、东川、芒部诸部长百二十人来朝，贡方物。
现代文：乌蒙、乌撒、东川、芒部各部落酋长一百二十人来京城朝觐皇上，贡献土产。
English: One hundred and twenty chiefs from the Umon, Usa, Higashikawa, and Manbu tribes came to the capital to pay homage to the emperor and contribute local produce.

古文：诏各授以官，赐朝服、冠带、锦骑、钞锭有差。
现代文：皇帝下诏各按他们的等级授以官衔、朝服、冠带、锦绮和钞锭。
English: According to their ranks, the emperor gave each of them official titles, imperial robes, crowns, brocades and banknotes.

古文：其乌撒女酋实卜，加赐珠翠。
现代文：给乌撒部落的女酋长实卜，加赐珍珠翡翠。
English: To the female chief of the Usa tribe, Shibu, he bestowed the pearl emerald.

古文：芒部知府发绍、乌蒙知府阿普病卒，诏赐绮衣并棺殓之具，遣官致祭，归其柩于家。
现代文：芒部的知府发绍、乌蒙的知府阿普病逝，皇帝下诏赐予绮衣和殓尸的棺木，派官员去致祭，并把他们的灵柩送到家。
English: The governor of Mangbu, Fasao, and the governor of Umong, Apu, died of illness. The emperor issued an edict to bestow the coffins of the empresses and empresses, sent officials to offer sacrifices, and sent their coffins home.

古文：十七年割云南东川府隶四川布政府司，并乌撒、乌蒙、芒部皆改为军民府，而定其赋税。
现代文：十七年割出云南的东川府，使其隶属于四川布政使司，并把乌撒、乌蒙、芒部都改为军民府，确定其赋税定额。
English: In the 17th year, Dongchuan Prefecture in Yunnan was carved out, making it subordinate to the Sichuan Provincial Government, and the Usa, Umong, and Mangbu were all changed to military and civilian prefectures, and their tax quotas were determined.

古文：乌撒岁输二万石，毡衫一千五百领；乌蒙、东川、芒部皆岁输八千石，毡衫八百领。
现代文：乌撒每年输送粮食二万石，毡毛制的衣衫一千五百领；乌蒙、东川、芒部都每年输粮食八千石，毡毛衣衫八百领。
English: Usa sends 20,000 koku of grain and 1,500 collars of woolen shirts every year; Umun, Dongchuan and Mangbu all send 8,000 koku of grain and 800 collars of woolen shirts every year.

古文：又定茶盐布疋易马之数，乌撒岁易马六千五百匹，乌蒙、东川、芒部皆四千匹。
现代文：又给上述四个军民府确定茶、盐、布匹与马的交易数量，乌撒每年须交易马六千五百匹，乌蒙、东川、芒部各四千匹。
English: In addition, the above-mentioned four military and civilian governments were asked to determine the number of transactions of tea, salt, cloth and horses. Usa had to trade six thousand five hundred horses each year, Umun, Dongchuan and Mangbu four thousand each.

古文：凡马一匹，给布三十疋，或茶一百斤，盐如之。
现代文：凡一匹马，交易时给布三十匹，或给茶一百斤，给盐也一样。
English: For every horse sold for cloth, thirty are sold, for tea, a hundredweight, and for salt, the same.

古文：实卜复贡马，赐绮钞。
现代文：实卜又向朝廷贡献马匹，皇上赏赐给她绮衣和钱钞。
English: Shubh also donated horses to the court, and the emperor rewarded her with a robe and money.

古文：十八年，乌蒙知府亦德言，蛮地刀耕火种，比年霜旱疾疫，民饥窘，岁输之粮无从徵纳。
现代文：十八年，乌蒙知府亦德上奏说蛮族地区属刀耕火种，连年遭受霜冻、干旱和疾病的侵袭，百姓饥荒穷困，每岁必须输送给朝廷的粮食无法征收和缴纳。
English: In the 18th year, the Umong Chifu also made a report saying that the barbarian areas were slash and burn, suffered from frost, drought and disease for years on end, the people were starving and poor, and the grain that had to be sent to the imperial court every year could not be collected and paid.

古文：诏悉免之。
现代文：皇帝下诏全给免除了。
English: All of them were exempted from the edict issued by Emperor Mu.

古文：二十年徵乌撒知府阿能赴京。
现代文：二十年征调乌撒知府阿能到京城。
English: Twenty years later, Usa prefectural governor Aneng was transferred to the capital.

古文：二十一年命西平侯沐英南征。
现代文：二十一年朝廷命令西平侯沐英征讨南方。
English: In 1921, the imperial court ordered Xiping marquis Mu Ying to invade the south.

古文：英言，东川强盛，据乌山路作乱，罪状已著，必先加兵。
现代文：沐英说东川强盛，占据乌山路进行叛乱，其罪状已经显著，可对东川先用兵。
English: Mu Ying said that Dongchuan Qiangsheng, who occupied Wushan Road to carry out the rebellion, has already been convicted, and he can use troops against Dongchuan Qiangsheng.

古文：但其地重关複岭，上下三百余里，人迹阻绝，须以大兵临之。
现代文：但是东川地势上下有三百多里，都是崇山峻岭，人迹少见的地方，必须以大军压境才行。
English: However, there are more than three hundred miles up and down the terrain of the East River, all of which are high mountains and steep ridges. In places where people are rare, it is necessary to suppress the border with a large army.

古文：帝命颍国公傅友德仍为征南将军，英与陈醒为左桓副将军，率诸军进讨。
现代文：皇帝便任命颍国公傅友德仍为征南将军，沐英和陈桓为左右副将军，率领各路军队进剿讨伐。
English: The emperor then appointed Fu Youde, the governor of Shandong Province, as the general of the southward expedition, and Mu Ying and Chen Huan as the vice-generals of the left and right, leading the armies of all directions into the campaign.

古文：敕友德等曰： 东川、芒部诸夷，种类皆出于罗罗。
现代文：皇帝还对傅友德等人说： 东川、芒部各蛮夷族人，都来源于罗罗人。
English: The emperor also said to Fu Youde and others: The barbarian tribesmen of Dongchuan and Mangbu all originated from the Luo Luo people.

古文：厥后子姓蕃衍，各立疆场，乃异其名曰东川、乌撒、乌蒙、芒部、禄肇、水西。
现代文：后来各姓人口繁衍，便各立疆场，自称为东川、乌撒、乌蒙、芒部、禄肇、水西。
English: Later, the population of each surname multiplied, and they each established their own territory, calling themselves Dongchuan, Usa, Umong, Mangbe, Lukzhao, and Shuixi.

古文：无事则互起争端，有事则相为救援。
现代文：他们之间平时互起争端，而一旦有事时则会互相救援。
English: They usually quarrel with each other, but will come to each other's rescue in the event of an emergency.

古文：若唐时阁罗凤亡居大理，唐兵追捕，道经芒部诸境，君蛮聚众据险设伏。
现代文：像唐朝时，阁罗凤逃跑后居住在大理，唐朝的军队去追捕他，路过芒部等人的境内时，各蛮族都聚集起来占据险要之地设下埋伏。
English: For example, during the Tang Dynasty, Gao Luofeng lived in Dali after escaping, and the Tang Dynasty army went to hunt him down. When passing through the territory of Manbu and others, all the barbarians gathered to occupy the critical place and set up an ambush.

古文：唐将不备，遂堕其计，丧师二十万，皆将帅无谋故也。
现代文：唐军将领没有防备，于是中了对方的计谋，丧失军队达二十万人。这都是因为唐军将帅没有谋划的缘故。
English: The Tang generals were unprepared, so they fell into the other side's schemes and lost 200,000 troops. This was all because the Tang generals did not have a plan.

古文：今须预加防闲，严为之备。 
现代文：现今你们要预先设防，严格准备应付这种情况。 
English: Now you have to be on your guard, very prepared to deal with that.

古文：乌撒军民府叶原常献马三百匹、米四百石于征南将军，以资军用，且愿收集士兵从征。
现代文：乌撒军民府的叶原常向征南将军进献马三百匹、米四百石，给军队备用，并且愿意收集土兵跟官军一起出征。
English: Ye Yuan of the People's Government of the U.S.S.R. Army often presented three hundred horses and four hundred kilos of rice to the general of the Southern Expedition, to be kept in reserve for the army, and was willing to collect local soldiers to go to war with the government army.

古文：英等以闻，从之。
现代文：沐英等将此事向朝廷上报，朝廷同意。
English: Mu Ying and others reported the matter to the imperial court, which agreed.

古文：复命景川侯曹震、靖宁侯叶升等分讨东川，平之，捕获叛蛮五千五百三十八人。
现代文：又命令景川侯曹震、靖宁侯叶升等分别征讨东川，平定了叛蛮，捕获了叛乱的蛮族人五千五百三十八人。
English: He also ordered Jingchuan vassal Cao Zhen and Jingning vassal Ye Sheng to separately subjugate Dongchuan, quelled the rebellion and captured 5,538 rebellious barbarians.

古文：二十三年，乌撒土知府阿能，乌蒙、芒部土官，各遣子弟入监读书。
现代文：二十三年，乌撒土知府阿能，乌蒙、芒部的土官，各遣送子弟入国子监读书。
English: In the 23rd year, the governors of Aneng, Umeng, and Mangbu in the Usa Tujifu sent their children to study in the state kindergarten.

古文：二十七年，乌撒知府卜穆奏，沾益州屡侵其地，命沐春谕之。
现代文：二十七年，乌撒知府卜穆上奏，说沾益州屡次侵夺他们的土地，皇上命令沐春去谕告他们。
English: In the 27th year, Bu Mu, the governor of Usa Province, issued a proclamation saying that Jin Yi Prefecture had repeatedly invaded their land, and the emperor ordered Mu Chun to go and tell them.

古文：二十八年，户部言： 乌撒、乌蒙、芒部、东川岁赋毡衫不如数，诏已免徵。
现代文：二十八年，户部上奏说 ：乌撒、乌蒙、芒部、东川每年的赋税和毡毛衣衫上交不足数，皇上已下诏书免征了。
English: In the 28th year, the head of the household reported to the emperor, saying, "The annual taxes of Usa, Umon, Mangbe, and Higashikawa, as well as the number of socks and sweaters submitted, are insufficient. The emperor has issued an edict exempting them from taxation."

古文：今有司仍追之，宜申明。 
现代文：现今有关官府仍在追讨，应该申明此事。 
English: Currently, the relevant authorities are still pursuing the matter, and it should be clarified.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：二十九年，乌蒙军民府知府实哲贡马及毡衫。
现代文：二十九年，乌蒙军民府知府实哲向朝廷进贡马匹和毡毛衣衫。
English: In the 29th year, the Umong army and the prefect of the prefecture, Shizhe, paid tribute to the imperial court with horses and embroidered sweaters.

古文：自是，诸土知府三年一入贡，以为常，或有恩赐，则进马及方物谢恩。
现代文：从此，这些土知府三年入朝廷献贡物一次，成为常规，其间有人受到朝廷的恩赐，则会进献马匹和土产以表示谢恩。
English: From then on, it became customary for these prefectures to pay tribute to the imperial court once every three years. During this time, if someone received a gift from the imperial court, they would offer horses and local produce to show their gratitude.

古文：宣德七年，兵部侍郎王骥言，乌蒙、乌撒土官禄昭、尼禄等，争地仇杀，宜遣官按问。
现代文：宣德七年，兵部侍郎王骥上奏说，乌蒙、乌撒的土官禄昭、尼禄等人，由于争夺地盘互相仇杀，应派官员去巡察。
English: In the seventh year of Xuande's reign, the attendant of the military department, Wang Xuan, made a report saying that the local governors of Umun and Usa, Lu Zhao and Nero, should send officials to inspect because they were fighting each other for territory.

古文：八年遣行人章聪、侯琏赍敕往谕，仍敕巡按与三司官往平之。
现代文：八年派行人章聪、侯琏带着皇帝的诏书前往当地，又让巡按和三司官前去平息这种仇杀。
English: In the eighth year, he sent Zhang Cong and Hou Yi to the local area with the emperor's edict, and asked the patrol and the three officials to quell the vendetta.

古文：设乌蒙儒学教授、训导各一员。
现代文：同时设置乌蒙儒学教授一人、儒学训导一人。
English: At the same time, one professor of Umon Confucianism and one tutor of Confucianism were set up.

古文：以通判黄甫越言，元时本府向有学校，今文庙虽存，师儒未建。
现代文：又因当地的通判黄甫越上奏说，元朝时本军民府一向有学校，现今文庙虽然还保存着，但儒学教师没有建立起来。
English: Also, because of the local magistrate Huang Fu Yue's report, he said that in the Yuan Dynasty, this military and civilian government always had a school. Although the Wen Temple is still preserved today, a Confucianism teacher has not been established.

古文：乞除教官，选俊秀子弟入学读书，以广文治，从之。
现代文：乞求皇上除了选派教官外，还应选送有俊秀之才的子弟入学校读书，以便推广文治。皇帝同意。
English: He begged the emperor not only to send instructors, but also to send talented children to school in order to promote the study of literature. The emperor agreed.

古文：正统七年裁乌撒军民府通判、推官、知事、检校各一员。
现代文：正统七年裁减乌撒军民府通判、推官、知事、检校各一名。
English: In the seventh year of the orthodoxy, the U.S.A. Army was reduced by one civilian magistrate, adjudicator, governor, and inspector.

古文：十一年裁乌蒙、东川知事、检校各一员，并革乌撒、乌蒙递运所。
现代文：十一年裁减乌蒙、东川军民府的知事、检校各一名，并革除乌撒、乌蒙的递适所。
English: In the eleventh year, the number of governors and inspectors of the Usa and Umon and Dongchuan Military and People's Government was reduced by one each, and the Usa and Umon offices were abolished.

古文：景泰元年敕谕乌撒、乌蒙诸府土官普茂等，以贵州诸苗叛乱，恐滋蔓邻近，宜戒严防守，毋听贼众诱惑，倘来逼犯，便当剿杀。
现代文：景泰元年，皇帝下诏书给乌撒、乌蒙各军民府的土官普茂等人，告诉他们贵州各地苗人叛乱，恐怕祸害会滋蔓到邻近地区，要他们严加戒备防范，不要去听叛乱贼人的诱惑。要是叛乱的贼人敢来进逼侵犯，应当剿灭杀死他们。
English: In the first year of Jingtai, the emperor issued an edict to the Usa, the Umong, the local officials of the army and the people's government, and others, telling them that the Miao people rebelled in various parts of Guizhou, and that they should be afraid that the scourge would spread to the neighboring areas. They should be on high alert and not listen to the temptations of the rebel thieves. If the rebel thieves dare to come in and invade, they should be exterminated and killed.

古文：时乌撒进万寿表逾期，部议宜究，诏以远人宥之。
现代文：此时乌撒向朝廷进献万寿表过了期，礼部讨论应该追究罪责，而皇帝认为他们是边远之人，下诏宽恕了他们。
English: At this time, Usa presented the table of longevity to the court, but it was overdue. The ceremonial department discussed whether they should be held accountable, but the emperor considered them to be outcasts and pardoned them with the following edict.

古文：嗣后，朝贡过期及表笺不至者，朝廷率以土官多从宽贷，应赏者给其半。
现代文：此后，他们来朝觐进贡过了日期和应该上呈的表笺没有呈上来，朝廷都以他们是土官从宽处理，而应该给的奖赏只给一半。
English: After that, they came to pay tribute to the imperial court after the due date had passed and the required forms had not been submitted. The imperial court treated them leniently because they were local officials, and only gave them half of the reward that should have been given.

古文：天顺元年，镇守四川中官陈清等奏，芒部所辖白江蛮贼千余备作乱，攻围筠连县治，敕御史项愫会镇巡官捕之。
现代文：天顺元年，镇守四川的中官陈清等人上奏说，芒部所管辖的白江地区的蛮族有一千多人作乱，攻打包围了筠连县的县治。皇帝让御史项愫会同镇巡官一起去捕获。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, Chen Qing, the middle-ranking official of the town guard of Sichuan, and others reported that more than a thousand barbarians in the Baijiang area under the jurisdiction of the Mangbu made a riot, attacked and surrounded the county government of Qilian County. The emperor asked the historian Xiang Yu to go with the town inspector to capture.

古文：成化十二年，乌撒知府陇旧等奏，同知刚正抚字有方，蛮民信服，今九年秩满，乞再任三年，以慰群望。
现代文：成化十二年，乌撒知府陇旧等人向朝廷上奏，说同知刚正按抚有方，蛮族人信服他，现今他九年的任期届满，我们乞求皇上给他留任三年，以安抚众人。
English: In the twelfth year of Chenghua, Usa Chifu and others appealed to the imperial court, saying that Tong Zhi Gang Zheng had a way to appease, the barbarians had convinced him, and now that his nine-year term had expired, we begged the emperor to give him three years to appease everyone.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：弘治十四年，乌撒所辖可渡河巡检司言： 自闰七月二十七日，大雷雨不止，至二十九日，水涨山崩地裂，山呜如牛吼，地陷涌出清泉数十派，冲坏庐舍桥梁及压死人口牲畜无算。
现代文：弘治十四年，乌撒军民府所管辖的可渡河巡检司上奏说 ：从闰七月二十七日起，天降大雷雨不止，到二十九日，洪水暴涨，山崩地裂，山中有鸣叫声像牛吼一样，大地陷落涌出清泉水几十脉，冲坏了房屋桥梁，压死人口牲畜无数。
English: In the 14th year of Hongzhi, the Kodu River Patrol and Inspection Division under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army and People's Government reported to the emperor: From the 27th day of July, the sky fell heavy thunderstorms, and on the 29th day, the flood surged, the landslide cracked, the singing in the mountains was like a cow's roar, the land fall gushed out dozens of clear spring water, washed away houses and bridges, and crushed countless people and livestock.

古文：又本府阿都地方，八月亦暴风雨，田土渰没二百余处，死者三百余人。 
现代文：本军民府阿都这个地方，八月份也下暴风雨，田地淹没达二百多处，死了三百多人。 
English: In August, there was also a storm in this area of our own Minfu Adu, flooding more than two hundred fields and killing more than three hundred people.

古文：正德十五年讨斩芒部僰蛮阿又磉等。
现代文：正德十五年，讨伐斩杀了芒部覺蛮人阿又磉等。
English: In the fifteenth year of Zhengde, the crusade killed the barbarian Ah Matai and others.

古文：初，芒部土舍陇寿，与庶弟陇政及兄妻支禄争袭仇杀。
现代文：当初，芒部土舍陇寿，与他的异母兄弟陇政和其兄长的妻子支禄争夺官位继承权而发生仇杀。
English: At first, there was a feud between his half-brother, Minzheng, and his older brother's wife, Jiroku, over the right to inherit the official post.

古文：所部僰蛮阿又磉等乘机倡乱流劫。
现代文：其部下覺蛮人阿又磉等乘机支持作乱抢劫。
English: His subordinates thought he was a barbarian, and they took the opportunity to support the banditry.

古文：事闻，命镇守中官会抚按官捕治。
现代文：该事上报朝廷后，朝廷命令镇守中官会同抚按官一起去捕获来治罪。
English: After the matter was reported to the imperial court, the court ordered the town guard lieutenant-governor to go with the officials to capture and punish the crime.

古文：至是，贵州参政傅习、都指挥许诏，督永宁宣抚司女土官奢爵等，讨擒阿又磉等四十三人，斩一百十九级，事乃定。
现代文：这样，贵州参政傅习、都指挥许诏、督永宁宣抚司女土官奢爵等人一起，讨伐擒获了阿又磉等四十三人，斩杀一百一十九人，这件事才平息。
English: In this way, Guizhou's Sanzheng Fu Xi, Du Du commander Xu Zhao, Du Yongning, Xuan Fu diocesan officials, and others fought and captured forty-three people such as Amatao, and killed one hundred and nineteen people, before the matter subsided.

古文：嘉靖元年命芒部护印土舍陇寿袭知府，免赴京。
现代文：嘉靖元年朝廷让芒部护印土舍陇寿继承知府职位，免于赴京城朝觐。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing era, the imperial court allowed Mangbe no Hoin Toshe no Shou to succeed to the position of prefectural governor, exempting him from going to the imperial court in Beijing.

古文：故事，土官九品以上，皆保送至京乃袭。
现代文：按以前的惯例，土官达九品以上的，都要保送到京城才能继承官位。
English: According to the previous practice, local officials with nine or more pins must be sent to the capital to inherit the official position.

古文：时寿、政等争袭，不敢离任。
现代文：此时因陇寿、陇政互相争夺继承权，所以不敢离开。
English: At this time, he did not dare to leave due to the fact that his father and his father-in-law were competing for the right of succession.

古文：朝廷以嫡故立寿，恐寿赴京而政等北隙为乱，故有是命。
现代文：朝廷因为陇寿是嫡出，所以让陇寿继承，但怕陇寿赴京城时陇政等人乘机作乱，所以才有上面免于赴京城朝觐的命令。
English: The imperial court allowed Gong Shou to succeed to the throne because Gong Shou was a legitimate child, but fearing that Gong Shou would go to the capital, Gong Zheng and others would take advantage of the opportunity to make trouble, so there was an order from above to exempt Gong Shou from going to the capital for the pilgrimage.

古文：然政与支禄倚乌撒土舍安宁等兵力，仇杀如故。
现代文：但陇政和支禄依仗乌撒土舍安宁等人的兵力，依然像以前一样仇杀。
English: However, Yan Zheng and Jiro relied on the military strength of Usa, Tosa, Anning and others, and still killed each other as before.

古文：坝底参将何卿请于巡抚许廷光，发土兵二万五千人，命贵州参将杨仁等将之，受何卿节制，相机进剿政、禄佯听抚，乞缓师，而令贼党阿黑等掠周泥站、七星关，复遣阿核等纠集诸苗，剽掠毕节诸处，杀伤官军，毁官民房屋甚众。
现代文：坝底参将何卿向巡抚许廷光请求发土兵二万五千人，由贵州参将杨仁等率领，接受何卿的节制，相机进剿。陇政、支禄表面上听从招抚，而暗地里让他们的同党阿黑等人抢劫周泥站、七星关，又派遣阿核等人纠集各地苗人，剽窃抢劫毕节各地，杀伤官军，毁坏官房民房很多。
English: The governor of Guizhou, Yang Ren, led by the governor of Guizhou, He Jing, requested the governor of Guizhou, Xu Tingguang, to send 25,000 soldiers to Guizhou, and accepted the restraint of He Jing. On the surface, the governor of Guizhou and the governor of Guizhou obeyed the invitation, but secretly, they let their fellow party members, Ah Hei and others, rob the Zhou mud station and Qixing Pass. They also sent Ah Jiu and others to gather Miao people from all over the country to steal and rob all over the country, kill and injure officials and soldiers, and destroy many government buildings and private houses.

古文：兵部言贼势猖獗，宜速征。
现代文：兵部认为贼人的气势很猖獗，应尽快征讨。
English: The military department believes that the momentum of thieves is very rampant and should be collected as soon as possible.

古文：于是可卿等进剿，斩首二百余级，俘二十余人，降其众数百，政败奔乌撒，卿檄乌撒土舍安宁、土妇奢勿擒之。
现代文：这样，何卿等人便带兵进剿，斩杀二百多人，俘虏二十多人，数百人投降。陇政失败后逃到乌撒，何卿发文给乌撒土舍安宁、女首领奢勿，要他们将陇政抓起来。
English: In this way, He Xing and others led soldiers into Wuxi, killed more than two hundred people, captured more than twenty people, and hundreds of people surrendered. After the defeat of Wuxi, He Xing fled to Wuxi, He Xing sent a letter to Wuxi to keep the peace, not to indulge in female leaders, and asked them to arrest Wuxi.

古文：安宁佯许诺，仅以阿核等尸献，竟不出政，兵久不解。
现代文：安宁表面上答应，但仅献出阿核等人的尸体，拒不献出陇政，官军驻扎了很久也解不出来。
English: On the surface, Anning agreed, but he only offered the bodies of Ah Jiu and others, and refused to offer the imperial regalia. After the government troops had been stationed for a long time, they were unable to solve the problem.

古文：都御史汤沐以闻，诏切责诸将及守巡官罪，而革何卿冠带，令剿贼自赎。
现代文：都御史汤沐将此事上报朝廷，皇帝下诏责罚了各位将领和守巡官，革去了何卿的冠带，令他剿灭贼人自己赎罪。
English: Metropolitan Shitang reported the matter to the imperial court, and the emperor issued an edict to punish the generals and guards inspectors, stripping He Xie of his crown belt and ordering him to exterminate the thieves and atone for his sins.

古文：四年，政诱杀寿，夺其印。
现代文：嘉靖四年，陇政诱杀了陇寿，夺走了他的官印。
English: In the fourth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, He Zheng killed He Shou and took away his official seal.

古文：巡抚王軏、巡按刘黻各上其事。
现代文：巡抚王车兀、巡按刘黻各把此事呈报朝廷。
English: The procurator Wang Chejun and the procurator Liu Ye each reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：黻言从蛮情，立支禄便。
现代文：刘黻上奏说不如顺从蛮族人的情况，扶立支禄算了。
English: Liu Ye said in his speech that it was not as good as obeying the barbarians, so Fu Li Zhi Luo did not count.

古文：軏以陇政、支禄怙终稔恶，戕朝廷命吏，罪不可赦。
现代文：而王车兀则认为陇政、支禄作恶多端，残害朝廷任命的官吏，罪行不可赦免。
English: Wang Chejun, on the other hand, believed that Gongzheng and Jiroku had committed many evils and had killed officials appointed by the imperial court, and that their crimes could not be pardoned.

古文：乃命镇巡官谕安宁，缚政、禄及诸助恶者。
现代文：于是朝廷便命令镇巡官告诉安宁，让他把陇政、支禄和其他助恶之人全都绑起来。
English: As a result, the court ordered the town inspector to tell Anning that he had to tie up all those who aided and abetted Yan Zheng, Jiroku, and others.

古文：时政已为官军擒于水西，追获芒部印信，前后斩首六百七十四级，生擒一百六十七人，招抚白乌石等四十九寨，以捷闻。
现代文：此时陇政已在水西被官军擒获，追击中缴获了芒部的印信，前后共斩杀了敌人六百七十四人，生擒一百六十七人，招抚了白乌石等四十九个村寨，捷报传到了朝廷。
English: At this time, Yanzheng had been captured by the government army in west of Shuixi, and during the pursuit, the seal of Mange was captured. A total of 674 enemies were killed, 167 were captured alive, and 49 villages such as Baiwuxi were besieged. The good news reached the imperial court.

古文：贵州巡按刘廷簠言： 乌撒所献阿核等尸，及水西所缚陇政，真伪未可信，恐首恶尚在，不无后虑，请核实。 
现代文：贵州巡抚刘廷说 ：乌撒所献出来的阿核等人的尸体，还有在水西生擒的陇政，是真是假不好确定，恐怕首恶还在，不能没有后虑，请求派人核实。 
English: Liu Ting, the governor of Guizhou, said: "It is not easy to determine whether the bodies of Ah Jiu and others presented by the Usa, as well as the tyrannical government in the west of the water, are true or false. I am afraid that the chief evil is still there. We must not hesitate to ask someone to verify.

古文：五年，兵部奏： 芒部陇氏，衅起萧墙，骚动两省，王师大举，始克荡平。
现代文：五年，兵部上奏说 ：芒部的陇氏，家族内部挑起事端，其骚扰牵动了两个省，朝廷大军去进剿，才扫荡平息。
English: In the fifth year, the Hyobusho (Ministry of Military Affairs) reported: "A member of the Manchu clan, the Zou family, stirred up trouble within the family, and their harassment affected two provinces. The imperial army went to the Zou, and only then was the disturbance calmed down.

古文：今其本属亲支已尽，无人承袭，请改为镇雄府，设流官知府统之。
现代文：现今他们本宗支的亲族已经断绝了，没有人可以继承知府的官位，因此请求将芒部军民府改为镇雄府，设置流官知府来统领这个地方。
English: Now that their relatives in the main branch of the clan have died out, no one can succeed to the post of prefectural governor. Therefore, they requested that the prefectural government of Mangbe be changed to the prefectural government of Zhenxiong, and that a prefectural governor be set up to govern this place.

古文：分属夷良、毋响、落角利之地，为怀德、归化、威信、安静四长官司，使陇氏疏属阿济、白寿、祖保、阿万四人统之。
现代文：把原属芒部军民府的夷良、毋响、落角利，分为怀德、归化、威信、安静四个长官司，让陇氏的远亲阿济、白寿、祖保、阿万四个人来统领这四个长官司。
English: He divided the four chief magistrates originally belonging to the Military and People's Department of the Manchukuo Army and People's Government into four chief magistrates: Yi Liang, Niu Xiang and Luo Jiao, and divided them into four chief magistrates: Huai De, Nucleation, Prestige and Tranquility, and appointed four distant relatives of the Qin clan, namely, Aji, Bai Shou, Zu Bao and Ah Wan, to command these four chief magistrates.

古文：如程番府例，令三年一入朝，贡马十二匹，而以通判程洸为试知府。 
现代文：就像程番府的情况一样，让他们三年入朝廷朝觐献贡物一次，所献的贡马必须有十二匹，再让通判程，做试知府。 
English: Just as in the case of Chengfanfu, they were allowed to enter the imperial court once every three years to offer tribute, and the tribute horses must have twelve horses, and then they were allowed to pass judgment and become test prefectures.

古文：六年，芒部贼沙保等谋复珑氏，拥陇寿子胜纠众攻陷镇雄城，执程洸，夺其印，杀伤数百人，洸奔毕节。
现代文：六年，芒部的贼人沙保等人密谋恢复陇氏家族的地位，拥戴陇寿的儿子陇胜，纠集众人，攻陷镇雄城，逮捕了程，夺走了他的印信，杀伤了数百人，程后来逃奔到毕节。
English: In the sixth year, Sa Bao, a thief from Mangde, and others conspired to restore the status of the Zou family. They gathered all the people, including Zou Sheng, the son of Zou Shou, captured the town of Zhenxiong, arrested Cheng, took away his seal, and killed and injured hundreds of people. Cheng later fled to Bijie.

古文：事闻，兵科给事中郑自壁等言： 镇雄初设流官，蛮情未服，而有司失先事之防，不亟收遣裔陇胜，而令沙保得拥孺子，致煽祸一方。
现代文：此事上报后，兵科给事中郑自壁等人上奏说： 镇雄府刚设置流官，蛮族人没服，而有关官府事先没有防备，没有搜寻陇氏遗留下来的后裔陇胜，却让沙保得以拥戴一个小孩子，致使他造成一方祸害。
English: After the matter was reported, the military science department made a report to Zheng Zibai and others in the matter, saying: Zhenxiongfu had just set up a stream official, the barbarians were not satisfied, and the relevant government offices did not prepare in advance, did not search for the descendants of the remaining descendants of the Yi clan, but allowed Sabo to hold a small child, causing him to cause a disaster.

古文：宜速遣总兵何卿并力剿寇。 
现代文：应该尽快派遣总兵何卿尽力进剿。 
English: General Ho Ching should be dispatched as soon as possible to do his best to enter the city.

古文：于是兵部覆言： 陇胜非真陇寿子，故议设流官，有司抚循失策，遂生叛乱。
现代文：兵部对此的答复是 ：陇胜不是陇寿的真儿子，所以才讨论说设置流官的。有关官司安抚失策，才发生叛乱。
English: The military department's answer to this was: He Sheng was not the true son of He Shou, and that was why they discussed setting up a second-tier official. It was only after the court tried to appease this misstep that the rebellion occurred.

古文：沙保罪不容诛，当剿。
现代文：沙保罪该万死，应当剿灭他。
English: Sha Bao's crime deserves death, he should be annihilated.

古文：何卿方守松潘，势难相援，宜亟趣都御史王廷相之任，并敕总兵牛桓调兵速进。 
现代文：何卿刚刚守卫松潘，势必很难增援，应该去请都御史王廷相，并让总兵牛桓调兵快速进剿。 
English: As He Qing had just guarded Songpan, it was bound to be difficult to bring in reinforcements. He should have invited the governor of the capital, Wang Tingxiang, and had the commander-in-chief, Niuhuan, quickly bring in reinforcements.

古文：时沙保出镇雄府印乞降，然尚持两端，欲立土官如故。
现代文：此时，沙保拿出镇雄府的印信乞求投降，但他还保留了两端印，像以前一样想立土官。
English: At this time, Sha Bao took out the seal letter of Zhenxiong Prefecture to beg for surrender, but he still retained the two ends of the seal, as before he wanted to establish a local official.

古文：四川抚按以保狡悍不可驯，檄泸州守备丁勇击之。又遣使劳赐芒部抚夷郤良佐，使计擒沙保。
现代文：四川抚按认为沙保狡猾剽悍不可驯服，发文给泸州守备丁勇，让他带兵打击沙保；又派使者慰劳和赏赐芒部的抚夷却良佐，让他使计活捉沙保。
English: Sichuan Fuxian thought that Shabao was cunning and tough and could not be tamed, and sent a letter to the Zhangzhou guard Ding Yong, asking him to lead an army to fight Shabao; he also sent an envoy to comfort and reward Fuxi's subordinate Fucheliang, asking him to catch Shabao alive.

古文：保怒，复叛。
现代文：沙保听说后很恼怒，又叛乱。
English: After hearing this, Shabo was very angry and rebelled.

古文：七年，川、贵诸军会剿，败沙保等，擒斩三百余级，招抚蛮罗舅妇以千计。
现代文：嘉靖七年，四川、贵州的各路军队会剿叛军，打败了沙保等人，擒获斩杀了三百多人，招抚蛮族人男女数以千计。
English: In the seventh year of Jiajing, the armies of Sichuan and Guizhou joined forces to defeat the rebels, defeated Shabao and others, captured and killed more than three hundred people, and lured thousands of barbarian men and women.

古文：捷闻，设镇雄流官如旧。
现代文：捷报传到朝廷后，仍然设置镇雄流官。
English: After the news of the victory reached the imperial court, officials of the Zhenxiong school were still set up.

古文：而芒部、乌撒、毋响苗蛮陇革等复起，攻劫毕节屯堡，杀掠士民，纷纷见告。
现代文：芒部、乌撒、毋响的苗人、蛮族的陇革等又起来作乱，攻打和抢劫毕节的屯堡，杀死抢劫当地的士民，这些情况纷纷上报上来。
English: The Mangbe, the Usa, the silent Miao people, and the barbarian Jia Ge, and so on, once again rose in revolt, attacked and robbed the fortress of Bijie, killed and robbed the local people, and these situations were reported one after another.

古文：兵部尚书李承勋以伍文定专主用兵为失计，疏及之。而御史杨彝复言芒部改土易流非长策，又时值荒馑，小民救死不赡，何能趣战。
现代文：兵部尚书李承勋认为伍文定专主用军事手段解决问题是失策；而御史杨彝又说芒部改土官换流官不是长久之策，此时又碰上饥荒，小百姓救死都来不及，怎么还有心思作战呢。
English: Li Chengxun, secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, believed that it was a mistake for the dictator Wu Wending to use military means to solve the problem; and the governor of Shi Yangxuan also said that it was not a long-term strategy for the Ministry of Military Affairs to change officers. At this time, there was a famine, and it was too late for the common people to save their lives. How could they still have the will to fight?

古文：时帝亦轸念灾伤，令罢芒部兵，俟有秋再议征讨。
现代文：此时，皇帝亦辗转思念灾伤情况，命令不要对芒部用兵，等秋收以后再讨论征讨之事。
English: At this time, the emperor also turned his thoughts to the disaster and ordered that no soldiers should be used against Mangbe, and that the matter of conscription should be discussed after the autumn harvest.

古文：于是四川巡抚唐凤仪言： 乌蒙、乌撒、东川诸土官，故与芒部为唇齿。
现代文：于是四川巡抚唐凤仪说 ：乌蒙、乌撒、东川各地的土官，以前与芒部是唇齿关系。
English: As a result, Tang Fengyi, the governor of Sichuan, said: The local officials of Umeng, Wusa, and all over the East River used to have a lip-to-tooth relationship with Mangbu.

古文：自芒部改流，诸部内怀不安，以是反者数起。
现代文：自从芒部改设流官，各部落内心不安，这样起来造反的有好几起。
English: Since Mangbu was reorganized as a stream official, each tribe has been uneasy, and there have been several cases of rebellion.

古文：今怀德长官阿济等虽自诡擒贼，其心固望陇胜得一职，以存陇后。
现代文：现今怀德长官阿济等人虽然自己诡称擒贼，内心还是希望陇胜得到一个官职，以保存陇氏后代。
English: Today, despite the fact that they call themselves Shanso thieves, officials such as Governor Aji still hope that Shansheng will get an official post in order to preserve the descendants of the Shanso clan.

古文：臣请如宣德中复安南故事，俯顺舆情，则不假兵而祸源自塞。 
现代文：我请求皇上像宣德中年恢复安南的事情一样，顺从舆论民心，这样不用动兵而祸源就自己消了。 
English: I ask the emperor to obey public opinion and the will of the people, just as Xuan De did when he revived Annan in his middle age. In this way, the source of the calamity will be eliminated without mobilizing troops.

古文：川、贵巡按戴金、陈讲等奏如凤仪言。
现代文：四川、贵州的巡按戴金、陈讲等人给皇帝上奏，所说的意见与唐凤仪一样。
English: The inspectors from Sichuan and Guizhou, such as Dai Jin and Chen Le, reported to the emperor, and the opinions expressed were the same as those of Tang Fengyi.

古文：金又以首恶如毋响、祖保等，宜剿诛以折其骄气，始下抚处之令，许生献沙保等，待阿济以不死，然后复陇胜故职，或降为知州。
现代文：戴金又提议说首恶之徒如毋响、祖保等，应该剿杀以折损他们的骄气，再开始下招抚安置之令，让他们答应献出活的沙保，不处死阿济，这样之后再恢复陇胜以前的职位，或把他降为知州。
English: Dai Jin also proposed that the chief villains such as Nei Xuan, Zu Bao, etc. should be killed to break their pride, and then begin to issue the order of appeasement and resettlement, so that they would promise to offer a live Sabo, not to execute Azi, and then resume the previous position of Xuan Sheng, or reduce him to Zhizhou.

古文：其长官或因或革，或分隶，庶操纵得宜，恩威并著。
现代文：他们的长官或者因袭原官职，或者革去官职，或者分开隶属于别人。这些都应该操纵得当，恩威并用。
English: Their chiefs either inherited their original posts, or were dismissed from their posts, or were separately subordinated to others. All of these should be handled properly, and both grace and power should be used.

古文：章下部覆，乃革镇雄流官知府，而以陇胜为通判，署镇雄府事。
现代文：这个奏章交给兵部，兵部答复后，便革去了镇雄的流官知府，封陇胜为通判，处理镇雄府的事务。
English: This report was submitted to the Ministry of Military Affairs. After the Ministry of Military Affairs responded, it dismissed Zhenxiong's line of officials from the prefectural government, and sealed his victory as a general judgment to deal with the affairs of Zhenxiong Prefecture.

古文：令三年后果能率职奉贡，准复知府旧衔。
现代文：他三年之后果然能够顺从朝廷敬奉贡物，便准许他恢复知府的旧官衔。
English: Three years later, he was indeed able to obey the court and pay tribute, and he was allowed to resume his old official title of prefect.

古文：时嘉靖九年四月也。
现代文：这时正是嘉靖九年四月。
English: This was in April of the ninth year of Jiajing.

古文：三十九年命勘东川阿堂之乱。
现代文：嘉靖三十九年朝廷下令平定东川阿堂的叛乱。
English: In the 39th year of Jiajing, the imperial court ordered the suppression of the rebellion of Dongchuan Atang.

古文：初，东川土知府禄庆死，子位幼，妻安氏摄府事。
现代文：当初，东川土知府禄庆死，其儿子禄位年幼，便由其妻安氏摄理知府事务。
English: At first, when the governor of Higashikawa Province, Rokui, died and his son, Rokui, was still young, his wife, Anshi, took over the administration of the governor's office.

古文：有营长阿得革颇擅权，谋夺其官。
现代文：其部下有营长阿得革擅权自用，想夺取土知府的官位。
English: One of his subordinates, Battalion Commander Adige, used his power for his own purposes and wanted to seize the post of governor.

古文：因先求烝安氏不得，乃纵火焚府治，走武定州，为土官所杀。
现代文：因而他就先向安氏求婚，安氏没答应他，他就纵火焚烧了土兵知府官署，逃到武定州，结果被土官所杀。
English: As a result, he first proposed marriage to An, but An did not agree, so he set fire to the governor's office and fled to Wuding Prefecture, where he was killed by local officials.

古文：得革子堂奔水西，贿结乌撒土官安泰，入东川，囚安氏，夺其印。
现代文：阿得革的儿子阿堂逃奔到水西，贿赂勾结乌撒土官安泰，带兵进入东川，囚禁了安氏，夺走其土知府的印信。
English: Adek's son, Ado, fled to the west of the water, bribed and colluded with the Usa local official, Antai, and led soldiers into the East River, imprisoning the An clan and taking away the seal of their local government.

古文：贵州宣慰安万铨故与禄氏姻连，乃起兵攻阿堂所居寨，破之。
现代文：贵州宣慰安万铨以前与禄庆家有姻亲关系，便起兵攻打阿堂所居住的村寨，结果破寨而入。
English: Guizhou Xuanjie Anwan had been related to the Luqing family by marriage before, so he raised an army to attack the village where Ah Tong lived. As a result, he broke into the village.

古文：堂妻阿聚携幼子奔沾益州土官安九鼎。万铨胁九鼎，取阿聚及幼子杀之。
现代文：阿堂的妻子阿聚带着小儿逃到沾益州的土官安九鼎那里，安万铨威胁安九鼎交出阿聚，杀死了阿聚和其小儿子。
English: A-Tang's wife, A-Ju, fled with their child to the local official, An Jiuding, in Zhanyi Prefecture. An Wanju threatened An Jiuding to hand over A-Ju, and killed A-Ju and his young son.

古文：堂以是怨九鼎，时相攻击。
现代文：阿堂因此怨恨安九鼎，时常互相攻击。
English: As a result, A-Tang resented An Jiu-Ting, and they often attacked each other.

古文：堂兵侵罗雄州境，九鼎及禄位与罗雄土官者浚等，各上书讼堂罪。
现代文：阿堂带兵侵扰到罗雄州境内时，安九鼎、禄位和罗雄州土官者浚等人，分别上书朝廷诉讼阿堂的罪行。
English: When A-tang led soldiers to invade the territory of Luoxiang, An Jiuding, Luo Yi and Luoxiang local officials Zhajun and others separately submitted a letter to the court to prosecute A-tang's crime.

古文：诏下云、贵、四川抚按官会勘。
现代文：皇帝下诏让云南、贵州、四川的抚按官一起去审核此事。
English: The emperor decreed that the governors of Yunnan, Guizhou and Sichuan should review the matter together.

古文：堂听勘于车洪江，具服罪，愿献所劫府印并沾益、罗雄人口牲畜及侵地，乞贷死。
现代文：阿堂在车洪江上听从朝廷官员的审核，表示有罪，愿意献出自己所抢来的东川府土知府的印信，归还掳掠来的沾益州、罗雄州的人口、牲畜和土地，乞求宽恕自己的死罪。
English: On the Chehong River, A-tang obeyed the examination of the court officials, expressed his guilt, and was willing to offer the seal of Tochi-fu, Dongchuan Prefecture, which he had robbed, return the people, livestock and land of Zhangye and Luoxiong Provinces, and beg for forgiveness for his capital crime.

古文：时位及弟僎已前殁，官府因讯禄氏所当袭者，堂以己幼子诡名禄哲以报。
现代文：此时禄位和其弟弟禄已经死了，官府就讯问禄氏家族中有谁可以继承土知府官位，阿堂就以自己小儿子冒名禄哲报给官府。
English: At this time, Rokui and his younger brother, Roku, had already died. The government inquired as to which member of the Roku family could inherit the position of Tochifu official, and Ado reported to the government under the name of his younger son, Roku Chetsu.

古文：据府印如故，复与九鼎治兵相攻。
现代文：这样阿堂就像以前一样窃据了土知府的印信，又与安九鼎互相攻打起来。
English: In this way, Ado, as before, stole the seal of the governor's office and fought with An Jiuding.

古文：九鼎诉之云南巡抚游居敬，谓堂怙乱，请致讨，且自诡当率所部为前锋，必擒堂以献。
现代文：安九鼎就诉讼到云南巡抚游居敬那里，说阿堂作乱，请求讨伐他，并诡称自己愿意带领部下作为讨伐的前锋，把阿堂捉来献给游居敬。
English: On the lawsuit, An Jiu Ding went to the Yunnan governor You Jiejing, saying that Ah Tong had caused a disturbance, and asked him to fight against him. He also said that he was willing to lead his subordinates as the vanguard of the fight, and capture Ah Tong to dedicate it to You Jiejing.

古文：居敬信之，遂上疏言堂念恶不悛，请专意进剿，为地方除害。
现代文：游居敬相信了他，便给朝廷上疏说阿堂旧恶不改，请求专心一意地去剿灭他，为地方上除害。
English: Yu Juqing believed him, and sent a message to the imperial court, saying that Ah Tong would not change his evil ways, and asking them to devote themselves to exterminating him and eliminating harm to the local area.

古文：帝允部议，行川、贵抚按会勘具奏。
现代文：皇帝同意兵部讨论的结果，让四川、贵州的抚按官一同去审核清楚后上报情况。
English: The emperor agreed with the results of the discussion of the military department, and asked the officials of Sichuan and Guizhou to go together to review and report the situation.

古文：居敬遽调土汉兵五万余进剿。
现代文：游居敬便征调土兵和汉族士兵五万多人前去进剿。
English: Yu Ju Kei then conscripted and transferred more than 50,000 soldiers from the local people and Han soldiers to march to Jinshan.

古文：云南承平久，一旦兵动，费用不赀，赋敛百出，诸军卫及有司土官舍等乘之为奸利，远近骚动。
现代文：云南已经安定了很长时间，一旦要动兵，费用不够，于是赋敛百出。各军卫和有关官府的土官土舍乘机捞取私利，结果弄得远近骚动。
English: Yunnan has been stable for a long time. When it comes to mobilizing troops, the cost is not enough, so there is a lot of money to be made. The military guards and the local officials of the relevant government offices took advantage of the opportunity to seek personal gain. As a result, there was uproar far and wide.

古文：巡按王大任言： 逆堂夺印谋官，法所必诛。
现代文：巡抚王大任给皇帝上奏说 ：逆贼阿堂窃夺印信谋取官位，按法律当杀。
English: The governor Wang Dairen sent a report to the emperor, saying: The traitor Ah Tong stole the seal letter to seek an official position, and should be killed according to the law.

古文：第彼犹借朝廷之印以约土蛮，冒禄氏之宗以图世职，而四川之差税办纳以时，云、贵之邻坏未见侵越，此其非叛明矣。
现代文：但是他借重朝廷的官印约束当地的蛮族，冒充禄氏的宗亲以图谋世代继承官职，而四川的差役赋税在他办理下交纳得及时，云南、贵州与他相邻的地方没有发现他有侵越行为，这说明他不是背叛朝廷去作乱已经很明显的了。
English: However, he relied on the official seal of the imperial court to restrain the local barbarians, and pretended to be the ancestor of the Lu clan in an attempt to inherit the official post for generations. And the taxation of Sichuan was paid in a timely manner under his management. Yunnan and Guizhou, the places adjacent to him, did not find that he had invaded. This shows that he did not betray the imperial court to make trouble.

古文：其与九鼎治兵相攻，彼此俱属有罪。
现代文：至于阿堂与安九鼎之间带兵互相攻击，彼此双方都有罪。
English: As for A-tang and An Jiu-ding leading soldiers to attack each other, both sides are guilty.

古文：居敬乃信一偏之诡辞，违会勘之明旨，轻动大众，恐生意外患。
现代文：游居敬偏信一方的诡话，违反了皇上要我们一起审核该事的圣旨，轻易地动用大军，恐怕会生出意外的祸患来。
English: Wandering about, listening to the sophistry of one side, violating the emperor's sacred will that we should examine the matter together, and easily mobilizing a large army, I'm afraid an unexpected disaster will occur.

古文：且外议籍籍，谓居敬入九鼎重贿，欲为雪怨，及受各土官赂，攘盗帑积，皆有实迹。
现代文：而且外面议论纷纷，说游居敬接受了安九鼎的大宗贿赂。为报怨仇而接受各土官的贿赂，使得偷盗横生，这都有实迹可查。
English: Moreover, there was a lot of discussion outside, saying that Youjijing accepted a large amount of bribes from Anjiuding. In order to take revenge, he accepted bribes from various local officials, making theft rampant, all of which can be verified.

古文：请亟罢居敬，暂停征剿为便。 
现代文：请求皇上赶快罢免游居敬的官职，暂时停止征讨进剿行为为好。 
English: It would be better to ask the emperor to quickly remove Youji from his official post and temporarily suspend the act of soliciting bribes.

古文：乃命逮居敬。
现代文：皇帝便下令逮捕游居敬。
English: The emperor then ordered the arrest of Youji.

古文：时堂闻大兵至东川，逃深箐，诸将分兵于新旧诸城，穷搜不获，地方民夷大遭屠掠。
现代文：此时阿堂听说朝廷大军到达东川，逃到深山躲起来了，各位将领分别带兵到新旧各城里去搜寻，却没有抓到他，而地方上的汉族和蛮族百姓却遭到大的屠杀和抢劫。
English: At this time, A-tang heard that the imperial army had reached the Dongchuan River and had fled to the mountains to hide. The generals led their troops to the old and new cities to search, but they did not catch him, while the local Han and barbarian people were massacred and robbed.

古文：四十年，营长者阿易谋于堂之心腹母勒阿济等，掩杀堂于戛来矣石之地，其子阿哲就擒，哲时年八岁。事虽定，而府印不知所在。
现代文：嘉靖四十年，营长者阿易与阿堂的心腹母勒阿济等人密谋，在戛来矣石地区杀死阿堂，阿堂八岁的儿子阿哲被擒，此事虽然平定了，但土知府的官印不知在哪儿。
English: In the 40th year of Jiajing, the battalion commander A Yi conspired with A-tang's confidante Le Azi and others to kill A-tang in the Qalaiyeishi area. A-tang's eight-year-old son A-tse was arrested. Although the matter was settled, the official seal of the prefectural government is unknown.

古文：于是安万铨取东川府经历印，畀禄位妻宁著署之，以照磨印畀罗雄土官者浚，而以宁著女妻者浚子。
现代文：于是安万铨便取东川府以前所使用的印信，交给禄位的妻子宁著，让她代理东川府事务，又把照磨印交给罗雄州土官者浚，让宁著的女儿嫁给者浚的儿子为妻。
English: Therefore, An Wanzhong took the seal letter previously used by Dongchuan Prefecture, and gave it to the wife of Luo Di, Ning Zhe, so that she could represent the affairs of Dongchuan Prefecture. He also gave the seal letter to the local official of Luoxiang, Zhajun, so that the daughter of Ning Zhe could marry the son of Zhajun.

古文：仍留水西兵三千于东川，为宁著防卫。
现代文：安万铨还将水西的兵马三千人留在东川，以保卫宁著。
English: An Wanzhong also left three thousand soldiers and horses west of the water in the East River to defend Ning.

古文：水西与东川邻，万铨本水西土官，故议者谓其有阴据东川之志。
现代文：水西与东川相邻，安万铨本来是水西的土官，所以有议论说安万铨有阴谋占据东川的志向。
English: Mizusai is adjacent to Higashi-gawa River, and Anmanen was originally a local official of Mizusai, so there is a rumor that Anmanen has a plot to occupy Higashi-gawa River.

古文：巡按王大任以诛阿堂闻，因言： 东川地方残伤，该府三印悉为土官部置，请通敕川、贵总督及镇巡官，按究各土官私擅标署之罪。
现代文：巡抚王大任把诛杀阿堂的事上报朝廷，并说： 东川这个地方受了残害损伤，现今该府的三个印信都是土官自己交接部署的，请求朝廷让四川、贵州的总督和镇巡官去探究各土官私自擅立官署的罪行。
English: The governor, Wang Dairen, reported the incident of the beating and killing of Atang to the imperial court, and said: This place in Dongchuan has suffered damage and injury, and now the three emblems of the prefecture are all transferred and deployed by the local officials themselves. He requested the imperial court to let the governor of Sichuan and Guizhou and the town inspector investigate the crimes of the local officials who set up government offices without permission.

古文：并访禄氏支派之宜立，与所以处阿哲者。 
现代文：并让他们访查禄氏支系宗亲中有没有可以继承官位的人，以及处置阿哲事宜。 
English: They also asked them to find out whether there was anyone in the Chalu branch of the family line who could inherit the official position, and to deal with the matter of Atzhe.

古文：部覆报可。
现代文：兵部答复上报的意见可行。
English: It is feasible for the Ministry of Military Affairs to respond to the opinions reported.

古文：四十一年铸给四川东川府印。初，阿堂既诛，索府印不获，人疑为安万铨所匿，及是屡勘，印实亡失。
现代文：嘉靖四十一年朝廷重新给四川东川府铸造印信，当初之时，阿堂已经被杀，却找不到土知府的印信，有人怀疑是被安万铨藏起来了。等到屡次调查审核，才知道印信实在是丢失了。
English: In the 41st year of Jiajing, the imperial court re-minted the seal letter to Sichuan Dongchuan Prefecture. At the beginning, Atang had already been killed, but the seal letter of Tochi Prefecture could not be found. Some people suspected that it was hidden by An Wanzhong. It was not until repeated investigations and audits that it was known that the seal letter was really lost.

古文：而禄位近派悉绝，惟同六世祖有幼男阿采。
现代文：禄位这一支的近亲已经全部灭绝了，只有与他在七代以前是同一祖先的近亲还有一个小男孩阿采。
English: All the close relatives of this branch of the Luki family have died out, except for a small boy, Atse, who is a close relative of the same ancestor as he was seven generations ago.

古文：抚按官雷贺、陈瓒请以采袭禄氏职，姑予同知衔，令宁著署掌，后果能抚辑其众，仍进袭知府。
现代文：抚按官雷贺、陈瓒请求皇上让阿采继承禄位的职位，但暂时给他一个同知的官衔，让宁著管理知府事务，以后要是果然能够安抚笼络住她属下的百姓，则仍然让她继承土知府的职位。
English: Fuxian officials Lei He and Chen Zhe requested the emperor to let Atse Tsuru inherit the position of the lucrative post, but temporarily give him an official title of the same name, let Ning manage the affairs of the prefectural government, and later, if she was able to appease the people under her, still let her inherit the post of the prefectural government.

古文：其新印请更名，以防奸伪。
现代文：而给他们新铸的印信，请改名称，以防有人假骗假冒。
English: and give them a newly minted stamped letter, please change the name, in case someone pretends to be fake.

古文：有旨不必更，余如议。
现代文：皇帝下圣旨说印信就不要改名称了，其余的就照雷贺、陈瓒说的办。
English: The emperor decreed that the seal should not change its name, and the rest was done according to Lei He and Chen Xi.

古文：先是，乌撒与永宁、乌蒙、沾益、水西诸土官，境土相连，世戚亲厚，既而以各私所亲，彼此构祸，奏讦纷纭，详四川《永宁土司传》中，当事者颇厌苦之。
现代文：在此之前，乌撒与永宁、乌蒙、沾益、水西各土官土壤相连，世代都是亲戚，彼此亲情浓厚。后来各土官各自亲近包庇自己的近亲，彼此构祸，向朝廷上奏时纷纷攻击对方。这种情况在四川《永宁土司传》中有详细记载，当事人对此也颇为讨厌和为难。
English: Prior to this, Usa was connected to the local officials of Yongning, Umeng, Zhanyi, and Shuixi, and they were all relatives for generations, with a strong affinity for each other. Later, each local official was close to and protected his close relatives, plotted against each other, and attacked each other in succession when reporting to the imperial court. This situation was recorded in detail in the Sichuan "Yongning Local History," and the parties were quite annoyed and embarrassed by this.

古文：万历六年乃令照蛮俗罚牛例处分，务悔祸息争，以保境安民，然终不能靖也。
现代文：万历六年朝廷还让他们按照蛮族人习俗以罚牛来做处分，务必使他们悔过，停息纷争，以保护境内百姓的平安，但最终也没有彻底清除纷争。
English: After six long years, the imperial court still punished them according to the customs of the barbarians with the punishment of cattle. It was necessary to make them repent and stop the disputes in order to protect the peace of the people in the country, but in the end, the disputes were not completely eliminated.

古文：三十八年诏东川土司并听云南节制。
现代文：万历三十八年皇帝下诏让东川土司听从云南的节制。
English: In the 38th year of Wanli, the emperor issued an edict to make Dongchuan Toji obey Yunnan's restraint.

古文：时巡按邓氵美疏称： 蜀之东川逼处武定、寻甸诸郡，只隔一岭，出没无时，朝发夕至。
现代文：当时巡按邓氵美给皇帝上疏时称： 四川的东川府，与云南的武定、寻甸各郡紧挨着，它们之间只隔一个山岭，早晨出发傍晚就能到达。
English: At that time, when Deng Xiaomei, the inspector-general, gave the imperial edict to the emperor, he said: Dongchuan Prefecture in Sichuan is right next to Wuding and Xiangdian counties in Yunnan. There is only one mountain range between them. You can leave in the morning and arrive in the evening.

古文：其酋长禄寿、禄哲兄弟，安忍无亲，日寻干戈。
现代文：东川的酋长禄寿、禄哲两兄弟，没有亲情，每天都要动干戈相争。
English: The two brothers, Lu Shou and Lu Zhe, the chiefs of Dongchuan, have no kinship, and they have to fight each other every day.

古文：其部落以劫杀为生，不事耕作。
现代文：他们的部落也是以抢劫杀戮为生，不从事耕作。
English: Their tribe also lives by robbing and killing, and does not engage in farming.

古文：蜀辖辽远，法纪易疏。
现代文：四川距东川路途遥远，法纪容易疏松。
English: Sichuan is far away from Dongchuan, and the laws and regulations are easy to relax.

古文：滇以非我属内，号令不行。
现代文：云南虽距东川很近，但不属其管辖范围，所以号令也传不过去。
English: Although Yunnan is very close to the East River, it is not under its jurisdiction, so the signal cannot be passed.

古文：以是骄蹇成习，目无汉法。
现代文：因此东川府的蛮族人骄横成性，眼中没有汉族的法律以约束自己。
English: As a result, the barbarians of Dongchuan prefecture became arrogant and had no regard for the laws of the Han people to restrain themselves.

古文：今惟改敕滇抚兼制东川。 因条三利以进，诏从之。
现代文：现今只有请皇上把东川府改由云南巡抚去管制。 
English: At present, we can only ask the emperor to transfer control of Dongchuan Prefecture to the Yunnan governor.

古文：先是，四川乌撒军民府，云南沾益州，虽滇、蜀异辖，宗派一源。
现代文：他还向皇帝陈述这样做的三个有利因素，皇帝下诏书同意他的提议。此前，四川的乌撒军民府与云南的沾益州，虽然各由四川和云南管辖，但它们的人口族属是同源的。
English: He also presented the emperor with three favorable factors for doing so, and the emperor agreed to his proposal in an imperial edict. Previously, the U.S.S.A. Military Government in Sichuan and Zhangyizhou in Yunnan, although each governed by Sichuan and Yunnan, had the same ethnicity.

古文：明初大军南下，女土官实卜与夫弟阿哥二人，率众归顺，授实卜以乌撒土知府，授阿哥以沾益土知州。
现代文：明朝初年大军南下时，女土官实卜与她丈夫的弟弟阿哥二人，率部下归顺明朝廷，朝廷授予实卜乌撒土知府的官衔，授予阿哥沾益土知州的官衔。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, when the large army went south, the female land officer Shibu and her husband's younger brother, Ako, led their subordinates to submit to the Ming Dynasty. The court awarded Shibu the official title of Usa Tochifu and awarded Ako the official title of Chizhou Tochifu.

古文：其后，彼绝此继，通为一家。
现代文：此后，这一边没人了就由那一边继承，他们两家就通为一家了。
English: After that, when there was no one left on one side, the other side took over, and the two families became one.

古文：万历元年，沾益女土官安素仪无嗣，奏以土知府禄墨次子继本州，即安绍庆也。
现代文：万历元年，沾益州的女土官安素仪没有后代，便上奏朝廷让土知府禄墨的第二个儿子继承本州土知州的职位，这就是安绍庆。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, An Su Yi, the female local official of Jin Yizhou, had no descendants, so she appealed to the imperial court to let the second son of the Tochifu Lu Mo inherit the position of Tochizhou in Honshu. This is An Shao Qing.

古文：已，禄墨及长子安云龙与两孙俱殁，安绍庆奏以次子安效良归宗，袭土知府。
现代文：后来禄墨及其长子安云龙和两个孙子都死了，安绍庆便上奏朝廷让他的第二个儿子安效良归还本宗，继承土知府的职位。
English: Later, Lu Mo, his eldest son An Yunlong, and his two grandsons all died, and An Shaoqing appealed to the imperial court to allow his second son An Xuliang to return to the original sect and inherit the post of provincial governor.

古文：安云龙之妻陇氏，即镇雄女土官者氏之女也，以云龙虽故，尚有遗孤，且挟外家兵力，与绍庆为敌。
现代文：安云龙的妻子陇氏，就是镇雄州女土官者氏的女儿，虽然安云龙死了，但还有遗孤，且依仗着外家的兵力，与安绍庆作对为敌。
English: An Yunlong's wife, the Zou clan, was the daughter of the female local official of the town of Xiongzhou. Although An Yunlong died, there were still orphans, and they relied on foreign troops to oppose An Shaoqing.

古文：绍庆则以陇氏所出，明系假子，亦倚沾益兵力，与陇氏为难。
现代文：安绍庆则认为陇氏所生的子女，都不是安云龙亲生的为由，也倚仗沾益州的兵力，给陇氏难堪。
English: An Shaoqing, on the other hand, believed that the children born to the Gong family were not the reason for the birth of An Yunlong, and also relied on the military strength of Yizhou, which was embarrassing to the Gong family.

古文：彼此仇杀，流毒一方。
现代文：两家彼此间仇杀，一方受害。
English: The two families have a vendetta against each other, and one side is the victim.

古文：士民连名上奏，事行两省会勘，历十有四年不结。
现代文：当地士民连名上奏，朝廷派两省官员一同审核，历十四年之久还是没有结果。
English: The local people submitted their names one after another, and the imperial court sent officials from the two provinces to examine them together. After fourteen long years, there was still no result.

古文：是年，安云翔奏称： 陇氏有子官保，今已长成。
现代文：这一年安云翔上奏时声称 ：陇氏有儿子名叫安官保，现已长大成人。
English: This year, when An Yunxiang performed at the concert, he claimed: Mr. Zou has a son named An Guanbo, who is now an adult.

古文：效良倚父兵，强图窃据，杀戮无辜。 
现代文：安效良倚仗其父亲的兵力，强行图谋窃据官位，杀害无辜百姓。 
English: Relying on his father's military strength, Ahn Kuk Ryong forcibly plotted to steal official positions and kill innocent people.

古文：因极言效良不可立者数事。
现代文：因而他竭力上疏列举了数件不能立安效良为土知府的事情。
English: As a result, he tried his best to enumerate a few things that could not be done safely and effectively as governor.

古文：三十九年，廷臣议行川、贵大吏勘报。
现代文：万历三十九年，朝廷大臣商议让四川、贵州的大官去审核事实后上报朝廷。
English: In the 39th year of the Wanli calendar, the ministers of the imperial court discussed to let the great officials of Sichuan and Guizhou go to review the facts and report to the imperial court.

古文：贵州抚臣以土官争职在云南，而为害在黔、蜀，必得三省会勘，始可定狱。
现代文：贵州的抚按大臣认为土官是在云南争夺官职，但为害到了贵州和四川，必须三个省的官员一起审核，才能定罪。
English: Guizhou's Fuzhou Minister believes that the local officials are competing for official positions in Yunnan, but in order to harm Guizhou and Sichuan, officials from the three provinces must be examined together before they can be convicted.

古文：帝命速勘，乃命陇鹤书承袭镇雄土知府。
现代文：皇帝命令快速审核后，才任命陇鹤书继承镇雄州的土知府。
English: After a quick review of the emperor's order, he appointed Zou Henshu to succeed Zhenxiong Prefecture.

古文：鹤书，原名阿卜，自其始祖陇飞沙献土归顺，授为世职知府，五传而为庶鲁卜，别居于果利地，又四传而为庶禄姑，别居夷良、七欠头地，又五传而陇氏之正支斩矣。
现代文：陇鹤书，原名阿卜，从其始祖陇飞沙献出土地归顺朝廷后，世代都被授予知府的职位，传了五代到庶鲁卜时，分出来居住在果利这个地方，又传了四代到庶禄姑时，又分出来居住到夷良和七欠头。庶禄姑之后又传了五代，陇氏这一门的正宗子孙便断绝了。
English: Shanshanshu, whose original name was Ab, was granted the position of prefectural governor after his ancestor, Shansha, offered up his land to the imperial court. Five generations of Shanshanshanshanshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshinshins

古文：水西安尧臣赘于禄，欲奄有之，众论不平，始有驱安立陇之奏，奉旨察立陇后。
现代文：水西的安尧臣入赘到了禄墨家，想占有禄墨家的官职财产，大家感觉不平，才有驱逐安氏扶立陇氏的奏章，当地官员遵奉圣旨去察寻扶立陇氏的后代。
English: The An family from west of the water entered the Luo Mo family and wanted to take possession of the official property of the Luo Mo family. Everyone felt uneasy, and only then did they expel the An family from the Fu Li Yao family. Local officials followed the sacred will to investigate and find the descendants of the Fu Li Yao family.

古文：女官者氏以阿固应。
现代文：女土官者氏就把阿固推荐出来。
English: A female local government official recommended Ago.

古文：阿固者，鲁卜之六世孙，而易名陇正名者也。
现代文：阿固，是庶鲁卜的第六世孙，他改名为陇正名。
English: Ago, the sixth-generation grandson of Rub, changed his name to Tsuchimasa.

古文：于是主立阿固，而先立其父阿章。
现代文：这样主张扶立阿固的，就先扶立了阿固的父亲阿章。
English: Those who advocate the installation of Ago in this way, first installed Ago's father, Ah Zhang.

古文：章寻病死，阿固不为夷众所服，往复察勘。
现代文：阿章不久病死，阿固又不为蛮族百姓所信服，朝廷又派官吏来来回回地考察审核。
English: A Zhang soon died of illness, A Gu was not convinced by the barbarian people, and the imperial court sent officials back and forth to investigate and review.

古文：者氏及四十八目、十五火头等共推阿卜。
现代文：者氏和当地的四十八目、十五火头等头领共同推举阿卜。
English: Mr. Teh and local leaders such as the forty-eighth and fifteenth fire chiefs jointly nominated Ab.

古文：阿卜者，禄姑之五世孙，咸以为长且贤，而者氏且以印献，遂定立阿卜，而以阿固充管事，从巡抚乔应星之议也。
现代文：阿卜，是庶禄姑的第五世孙，大家都认为他是长辈而且很贤明，者氏还把官印都献出来交给他了，于是就决定扶立阿卜，让阿固充当管事。这是听从了巡抚乔应星的建议的结果。
English: Ab, the fifth-generation grandson of Empress Rokko, was considered by everyone to be an elder and very wise, and the clan also presented the official seal to him. Therefore, it was decided to appoint Ab and let Ago serve as steward. This was the result of listening to the suggestion of the governor Qiao Yingxing.

古文：四十一年，乌撒土舍安效良初与安云翔争立，朝廷以嫡派立效良。
现代文：万历四十一年，乌撒土舍安效良开始时与安云翔争夺继承官位的权利，朝廷认为安效良是嫡系便扶立了安效良。
English: In the 41st year of Wanli, when the Usa Toushe An Kuei Liang began to compete with An Yun Xiang for the right to inherit the official post, the imperial court believed that An Kuei Liang was the legitimate line and established An Kuei Liang.

古文：云翔数为乱，谋逐效良，焚劫乌撒。
现代文：这样安云翔便几次作乱，图谋赶走安效良，焚烧和抢劫乌撒。
English: In this way, An Yunxiang made several disturbances, attempted to drive away An Yuxiang, and burned and robbed Usa.

古文：四川抚按上其事，以效良为云龙亲侄，云翔乃其堂弟，亲疏判然，效良自当立。
现代文：四川抚按把此事上报朝廷时说：安效良是安云龙的亲侄子，安云翔则是他的堂弟，亲疏关系是很分明的，安效良自然应当继承官位。
English: When Sichuan Fuxian reported the matter to the imperial court, he said: An Xuliang is the nephew of An Yunlong, and An Yunxiang is his cousin. The relationship is very clear, and An Xuliang should naturally inherit the official position.

古文：云翔扰害地方，欺冈朝廷，罪原难赦，但为奸人指使，情可原，姑准复冠带。
现代文：安云翔骚扰为害于地方，欺骗蒙蔽朝廷，其罪行原本是难以赦免的，但考虑到他是受奸人的指使才这样做的，情有可原，暂且准许他恢复冠带。
English: An Yunxiang harassed to the detriment of the localities, deceived and blinded the imperial court, his crime was originally difficult to pardon, but considering that he was instructed by the traitor to do so, it is reasonable to temporarily allow him to restore the crown.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上同意了他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：四十三年，云南巡按吴应琦言： 东川土官禄寿、禄哲争袭以来，各纵部众，越境劫掠。
现代文：万历四十三年，云南巡抚吴应琦给皇帝上奏说： 自东川的土官禄寿、禄哲争夺继承官位的权利以来，各自纵容其属下的人越境抢劫。
English: In the 43rd year of the lunar calendar, the governor of Yunnan, Wu Yingtao, sent a report to the emperor, saying: Since the local officials of Dongchuan, Lu Shou and Lu Zhe, competed for the right to inherit the official post, they each connived at the cross-border robbery of their subordinates.

古文：拥众千余，剽掠两府，浃旬之间，村屯并扫，荼毒未有如此之甚者。
现代文：他们都拥有一千多人，抢劫两府之地，十天之内，扫荡了村屯，百姓所受的毒害还没有像这样严重过的。
English: They all have more than a thousand people, robbing the land of the two prefectures, and within ten days, sweeping the villages and towns. The poisoning of the people has not been as serious as this.

古文：或抚或剿，毋令养祸日滋。 
现代文：朝廷对他们或是招抚或是进剿，请尽快定夺，不要使祸害一天甚于一天。 
English: Whether the imperial court is trying to cajole or coerce them, please make a decision as soon as possible, and don't make the disaster last longer than a day.

古文：下所司勘奏。
现代文：皇帝把该提议交给有关官府去审核后再上报。
English: The emperor submitted the proposal to the relevant government departments for review before reporting it.

古文：贵州巡按御史杨鹤言： 乌撒土官，自安云龙物故，安咀与安效良争官夺印，仇杀者二十年。
现代文：贵州巡按御史杨鹤说 ：乌撒的土官，自从安云龙亡故以后，安咀与安效良争夺官位，互相仇杀已有二十年。
English: Guizhou Inspector-General Yang He said: Since the death of An Yunlong, the local official of Wusa, An Tsui and An Xuliang have been competing for official positions and have been feuding with each other for 20 years.

古文：夷民无统，盗寇蜂起，堡屯焚毁，行贾梗绝者亦二十年。
现代文：当地百姓没人统领，盗贼四起，村堡屯寨遭焚遭毁，行人商贾绝迹也有二十年了。
English: There is no one to lead the local people, thieves are on the rise, villages and towns have been burned and destroyed, and it has been twenty years since pedestrians and merchants disappeared.

古文：是争官夺印者蜀之土官，而蹂践糜烂者黔之赤子。
现代文：这里面，争官夺位的是四川的土官，受蹂躏受破坏的是贵州的百姓。
English: In this, it is the local officials of Sichuan who are vying for power, and the people of Guizhou who have been ravaged and destroyed.

古文：诚改隶于黔，则弹压既便，干戈可戢。 
现代文：如果把乌撒改成隶属于贵州，这样弹压就很方便，军队可随时进剿。 
English: If the Usa is changed to be subordinate to Guizhou, it will be very convenient to bounce, and the army can enter the city at any time.

古文：又言： 乌撒者，滇、蜀之咽喉要地。
现代文：他又说 ：乌撒，是云南、四川的咽喉要地。
English: He also said: "Usa is a crucial place for Yunnan and Sichuan.

古文：臣由普安入滇，七日始达乌撒。
现代文：我从普安进入云南，需要七天才能到达乌撒。
English: I entered Yunnan from Pu'an, and it took me seven days to get to Wuxia.

古文：见效良之父安绍庆据沾益，当曲靖之门户。
现代文：看见安效良的父亲安绍庆占据沾益州，那是曲靖的门户。
English: Seeing An Shaoqing, the father of An Xue Liang, occupy Zhan Yizhou, that was the gateway to Qujing.

古文：效良据乌撒，又扼滇、蜀之咽喉。
现代文：安效良占据乌撒，又卡住了云南、四川的咽喉。
English: An Xuliang occupied Wusa, and stuck in the throat of Yunnan and Sichuan.

古文：父子各据一方，且坏地相接，无他郡县上司以隔绝钤制之，将来尾大不掉，实可寒心。
现代文：他们父子俩各占据一方，而且彼此的地壤互相连接，没有其他郡县把他们离开，也没有别的上级官府钳制他们，将来人们尾大不掉时，其情形就使人寒心了。
English: Their fathers and sons each occupy one side, and the soil of each side is connected to each other, no other counties leave them, and no other higher government office controls them. In the future, when people do not leave, their situation will be chilling.

古文：盖黔有可制之势，而无其权；蜀有遥制之名，而无其实。诚以为隶黔中便。 
现代文：只有贵州有钳制他们的条件，可又没有节制他们的名义。因此，我认为将乌撒隶属于贵州最好。 
English: Only Guizhou has the conditions to control them, but does not control them in name. Therefore, I think it is best to subordinate Usa to Guizhou.

古文：帝命所司速议。
现代文：皇帝命令有关官府尽快讨论此事。
English: The emperor ordered the relevant government departments to discuss the matter as soon as possible.

古文：泰昌元年，云南抚按沈儆炌等言：蜀之东川，业奉朝命兼制，然事权全不相关。
现代文：泰昌元年，云南抚按沈儆火介等人给皇帝上奏说： 四川的东川，我们已奉朝廷的命令参与节制，但事情与权利全没有关系。
English: In the first year of the Taichang era, Yunnan Fuzhang, Shen Qi, Hu Jia and others submitted a report to the emperor, saying: "Dongchuan of Sichuan, we have been ordered by the imperial court to participate in the restraint, but the matter has nothing to do with power.

古文：禄千钟、禄阿伽纵贼披猖，为患不已。
现代文：禄千钟、禄阿伽纵容贼人作乱，祸患不绝。
English: Luo Qianling, Luo Aga connived with thieves to make trouble, and the calamity continued.

古文：是东川虽隶蜀，而相去甚远，虽不隶滇，而祸实震邻。
现代文：这是因为东川虽然隶属于四川，但两者相距很远，它虽然不隶属于云南，但祸患相连。
English: This is because although Dongchuan belongs to Sichuan, the two are very far apart. Although it does not belong to Yunnan, the disasters are connected.

古文：宜特敕蜀抚按，凡遇袭替，务合两省会勘。
现代文：因此应该特别谕告四川的抚按官，凡是碰到继承或替代官位的事，务必要会合两省的官员一同审核。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to specifically instruct the officials of Sichuan Province that any matter of succession or replacement must be reviewed jointly by officials of the two provinces.

古文：蜀察其世次，滇亦按无侵犯，方许起送，亦羁縻绥静之要术也。 
现代文：四川方面考察他们的世系秩序情况，而云南方面则考察他们有没有侵犯行为，这样做之后，才允许他们被起用，这也是统治约束以保持地方安静太平的重要方法啊！ 
English: The Sichuan side examined the situation of their lineage order, while the Yunnan side examined whether they had any infringements, and only after doing so did they allow them to be used, which is also an important way of governing constraints to keep the place quiet and peaceful!

古文：诏下所司。
现代文：皇帝下诏交有关机关讨论。
English: The emperor sent an imperial edict to the relevant authorities for discussion.

古文：时诸土司皆桀骜难制，乌撒、东川、乌蒙、镇雄诸府地界，复相错于川、滇、黔、楚之间，统辖既分，事权不一，往往轶出为诸边害。
现代文：此时，各土司都桀骜不驯，难于节制。乌撒、东川、乌蒙、镇雄各军民府的地界交错复杂地分布于川、滇、黔、楚之间，分别统辖，权力不统一，往往一越出范围就成为边疆的祸患。
English: At this time, all the local governors were unruly and difficult to control. The geographical boundaries of the Usa, Dongchuan, Umong, and Zhenxiong militaries and people's governments were staggered and complexly distributed between Sichuan, Shan, Shan, and Chu. They were governed separately, and their powers were not unified. As soon as they went beyond their scope, they often became the scourge of the frontier.

古文：故封疆大吏纷纷陈情，冀安边隅，而中枢之臣动诿勘报，弥年经月，卒无成画，以致疆事日坏。
现代文：所以边疆的大臣纷纷向朝廷陈述情况，希望边疆地区保持安定，而中央的大臣一动就推诿审核上报以后再说。时间过去一年又一年，一月又一月，最终也没有决定，致使边疆地区的事情一天比一天糟。
English: Therefore, the ministers of the border regions reported the situation to the imperial court one after another, hoping that the border regions would remain stable, while the ministers of the central government prevaricated at every move, saying that they would review and report later. Time passed year after year, month after month, and ultimately no decision was made, causing things in the border regions to get worse day by day.

古文：播州初平，永宁又叛，水西煽起，东川、乌蒙、镇雄皆观望骑墙，心怀疑二。
现代文：播州刚刚平定，永宁又起来叛乱，水西又被煽动造反，东川、乌蒙、镇雄等地都是骑墙观望，胸怀二心的。
English: Banzhou has just been pacified, Yongning has rebelled again, and Shuixi has been incited to rebel again. Dongchuan, Umeng, Zhenxiong and other places are riding the wall to watch, with two hearts.

古文：于是安效良以乌撒首附逆于邦彦，并力攻陆广，复合沾益贼围罗平，陷沾益，为云南巡抚闵洪学所败。
现代文：这样一来，安效良以乌撒首领的身份在邦彦依附于叛乱者，合力攻击陆广，又同沾益州的贼人一起包围罗平，攻陷沾益，结果被云南巡抚闵洪学所打败。
English: In this way, An Xuliang, as the leader of the Usa, attached himself to the rebels in Bangyan, jointly attacked Lu Guang, and surrounded Luoping with the thieves of Zangyizhou, and attacked Zangyizhou. As a result, he was defeated by the governor of Yunnan, Zhai Hongxue.

古文：洪学以兵力不继，好语招之，令擒贼自赎，效良亦佯为恭顺。
现代文：闵洪学因为兵力不足，就好言好语招抚了安效良，让他擒拿贼人自己替自己赎罪。安效良表面上也装得恭敬顺从。
English: Because of the shortage of troops, Gong Hongxue spoke kindly to An Yingliang and let him take the thief to atone for himself. On the surface, An Yingliang also pretended to be respectful and obedient.

古文：又见黔师出陆广，滇师出沾益，水、乌之势已成骑虎，遂合永宁、水西诸部三十六营，直抵沾益，对垒城下五日。
现代文：不久，安效良又发现贵州的军队从陆广出发，云南的军队从沾益出发，水西、乌撒的叛乱已成骑虎难下之势，就会合永宁、水西的各部三十六营叛军，直接抵达沾益州，在城下与官军对垒五天。
English: Soon, An Xuliang also discovered that Guizhou's army set out from Luguang, Yunnan's army set out from Zhanyi, and the rebellion in western and western Shu had become a difficult situation. He would join the 36 battalions of rebels in Yongning and western Shu, directly arrived in Zhanyi, and confronted the government army for five days under the city.

古文：副总兵袁善、宣抚使沙源等督将士力战，出奇兵破之，效良败死。
现代文：副总兵袁善、宣抚使沙源等督促将士奋力战斗，出奇兵攻破叛军，安效良失败而死。
English: Yuan Shan, the vice-commander-in-chief, and Shayuan, the vice-commander-in-chief, urged the soldiers to fight hard. Surprisingly, the soldiers defeated the rebels and died in a safe and successful defeat.

古文：妻安氏无子，妾设白生其爵、其禄。
现代文：安效良的妻子安氏没有生儿子，他的妾名叫设白，生有安其爵、安其禄二个儿子。
English: His wife, An, did not have a son. His concubine, named Shibai, had two sons, Ankijaku and Ankiroku.

古文：二妇素不相能，安氏居盐仓，设白母子居抱渡。
现代文：妻妾之间素来不和，安氏居住在盐仓，设白母子居住在抱渡。
English: There has always been discord between the wives and concubines, with the An family living in Shiokura and the Bai mother and son living in Hodu.

古文：安氏遂代效良为土官，然亦未绝其爵，其爵亦以安氏为安位姐，不敢抗。
现代文：安氏于是代替安效良成为土官，但是她也没有拒绝与安其爵往来，安其爵也因为安氏是安位的姐姐，不敢有所违抗。
English: An then became a local official in place of An Xuliang, but she did not refuse to deal with An Qizhe, and An Qizhe did not dare to resist because An was An's sister.

古文：崇祯元年，四川巡抚差官李友芝赍冠带奖赏其爵母子，令管乌撒。
现代文：崇祯元年，四川巡抚差官李友芝带冠带去奖赏安其爵母子，让他们管理乌撒。
English: In the first year of the Chongzhen era, the Sichuan patrol officer Li Youzhi went with a crown to reward the mother and son of An Qizhe and let them manage the Usa.

古文：安氏恶分，始绝其爵。
现代文：安氏遂与安其爵交恶，断绝与他往来。
English: An then fell out with An Qizhe and cut off contact with him.

古文：其爵夜袭安氏盐仓，不克，与设白、其禄逃东川界，为东川所拒，而抱渡又失。
现代文：安其爵乘夜间袭击安氏居住地盐仓，没有成功，便与设白、安其禄一起逃往东川，被东川拒绝了，而他们原来居住地抱渡也丧失了。
English: An Qizhe took advantage of the night to attack An's place of residence, Shiokura, without success, and then fled to Dongchuan with Shibai and An Qilu. He was rejected by Dongchuan, and their original place of residence, Bodu, was also lost.

古文：李友芝为请于制府，发滇兵三千援其爵，滇抚不应。
现代文：李友芝为他们向制府请命，要求派三千滇兵去支援安其爵，云南巡抚不答应。
English: For their sake, Li Youzhi asked the government to send three thousand soldiers to support An Qizhe, but the Yunnan governor did not agree.

古文：安氏惧，谋迎沾益土官安边为婚，授之乌撒以拒其爵。
现代文：安氏害怕，图谋与沾益州的土官安边结婚，将乌撒交给安边以抗拒安其爵。
English: Afraid, the An clan plotted to marry An Bian, a local official in Zhanyi Prefecture, and give Usa to An Bian to resist An Qizhuang.

古文：安边亦欲偶安氏以拒其禄，以催粮为名至建昌。
现代文：安边也想与安氏结为配偶以抗拒安其禄，便以催粮食的名义到建昌。
English: Anbian also wanted to marry An to resist An Qilu, so he went to Jianchang in the name of urging grain.

古文：安氏遂迎边至盐仓成婚。
现代文：安氏于是将安边迎到盐仓成婚。
English: The An clan then welcomed An Bian to Shiokura to get married.

古文：一时皇皇谓水西必纠沾、乌入犯。
现代文：一时间盛传水西一定会纠集沾益州、乌撒府进犯内地。
English: For a while, the west with abundant water will certainly gather JinYi Prefecture and Wusa Prefecture to invade the mainland.

古文：云南巡抚谢存仁以闻，存仁因移镇曲靖以观变。
现代文：云南巡抚谢存仁将此传闻上报朝廷，并自己坐镇到曲靖以观察事情的变化。
English: The governor of Yunnan, Xie Cunren, reported this rumor to the imperial court and went to Qujing to observe the changes.

古文：安边、安氏请复乌撒卫以自赎。
现代文：安边、安氏请求朝廷恢复乌撒卫以赎自己的罪。
English: Anbei and the An clan asked the imperial court to restore Usawei to atone for their sins.

古文：二年，总督朱燮元调集汉土兵，列营沾益，趣滇抚会兵进乌撒境。
现代文：崇祯二年，总督朱燮元调集了汉族兵和土兵，在沾益州前安扎下来，准备与云南巡抚的兵马会合后一起向乌撒境内进发。
English: In the second year of Chongzhen, Governor Zhu Rongyuan mobilized Han soldiers and local soldiers, and settled down in front of Jianyizhou to prepare to march into the territory of Wuxia after meeting with the soldiers and horses of the Yunnan governor.

古文：安边、安氏逃避偏桥。
现代文：安边、安氏逃到偏桥避难。
English: Yasubei and Anji fled to a bridge for shelter.

古文：大兵入盐仓，拔难民一千余人。
现代文：大军进入盐仓后，救出难民一千多人。
English: After the large army entered the salt warehouse, they rescued more than a thousand refugees.

古文：师还，安边、安氏复还盐仓，遣人至军前，请俟乌城克复，束身归命，意实缓师。
现代文：大军撤回后，安边、安氏又回到盐仓，派人到官军帐前，请求等他们拿下乌城后，一定会约束自身等待朝廷的命令再行动，实际上这是他们的缓兵之计。
English: After the withdrawal of the large army, An Bian and the An clan returned to Yan Cang and sent someone to the government army's office to request that after they took Ucheng, they would restrain themselves and wait for the order of the imperial court to act again. In fact, this was their delaying tactic.

古文：乃复发兵逐安边、安氏，以盐仓授其爵。
现代文：于是明军又出发驱赶安边和安氏，把盐仓授予安其爵。
English: As a result, the Ming army also set out to drive out Anbian and the An clan, awarding the salt warehouse to An Qixuan.

古文：兵至望城坡，遇贼哨骑百余，麾兵奋击，贼尽奔箐中，遂复乌撒城。
现代文：明军到达望城坡时，碰到贼人望哨的骑兵一百多人，朱燮元指挥军队奋勇出击，贼人全逃奔到竹林里，于是又攻下了乌撒城。
English: When the Ming army reached the slope overlooking the city, they encountered more than a hundred cavalrymen who were watching for the thief. Zhu Xuan commanded the army to boldly attack. The thieves all fled to the bamboo forest, and then they captured Usa City.

古文：安边驻三十里外，拥兵求见，谕令束身归诚。
现代文：安边驻扎在三十里以外的地方，带兵到军前要求求见总督朱燮元，朱燮元让他把自己绑起来前来投降。
English: Anbian was stationed in a place thirty miles away, and he led his soldiers to the front of the army and demanded to see the governor, Zhu Xuanyuan. Zhu Xuanyuan told him to tie himself up and come to surrender.

古文：边夜遁，遂弃盐仓，入九龙囤。
现代文：安边乘夜逃跑，放弃盐仓，进入九龙囤。
English: Abe escapes by night, abandons the salt warehouse and enters Kowloon Tong.

古文：乌撒陷贼八年，至是始复。
现代文：乌撒被贼人攻陷了八年，至此才开始收复。
English: It has been eight years since Usa was invaded by thieves, and it is only now that the recovery has begun.

古文：乃召其爵来盐仓，令约束九头目以守，且令图献安边、安氏。
现代文：总督朱燮元便把安其爵招到盐仓来，让他约束当地的九头目以守卫乌撒，并让他筹划把安边、安氏捉住献出来。
English: Governor Zhu Rongyuan then summoned An Qizhe to Yancang, asked him to restrain the local ninth head to guard Usa, and asked him to plan to capture and offer An Bian and An Shi.

古文：其爵以盐仓残毁，乞移乌撒城，从之。
现代文：安其爵认为盐仓已经残破，乞求允许他到乌撒城办公，朱燮元同意了。
English: An Qijie thought that the salt warehouse had been destroyed and begged to be allowed to work in Wuxia City. Zhu Rongyuan agreed.

古文：时其爵署乌撒知府，其禄署沾益知州，虽懦稚颇忠顺，其母亦颇有主持，能得众。
现代文：此时，安其爵暂任乌撒知府，安其禄暂任沾益州知州。虽然他们都较稚嫩小心，但颇为忠心顺从朝廷，他们的母亲也颇能主持事务。
English: At this time, An Qizhen temporarily served as the governor of Usa Province, and An Qilu temporarily served as the governor of Jianye Province. Although they were both relatively young and cautious, they were quite loyal and obedient to the imperial court, and their mother was also quite able to preside over affairs.

古文：安边屡乞降于总督朱燮元，用藉水西安位代申，以边实绍庆嫡孙，宜袭知州，请罪其爵、其禄。
现代文：因此他们都能得人心。安边屡次向总督朱燮元乞降，并藉水西的安位代申其意。安位认为安边实际上是安绍庆的嫡系孙子，应该继承知州的职位，请求总督责罚安其爵、安其禄。
English: As a result, they were able to win the hearts and minds of the people. Anbian repeatedly begged Governor Zhu Rongyuan to abdicate, and used the throne of Shuixi to express his wishes. The throne believed that Anbian was actually the legitimate grandson of An Shaoqing, and should inherit the position of Chizhou, and asked the Governor to punish An Qizhe and An Qilu.

古文：燮元曲为调护，欲予以职衔，分乌撒安置之。
现代文：朱燮元从中委曲调停，想授职衔给安边，把乌撒分开以安置安边。
English: Zhu Rongyuan, the mediator of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, wanted to give the title to An Bian, and separate the Usa to accommodate An Bian.

古文：云南抚按坚执不可，以安边令其党勒兵于野马川，复以千金诱其爵头目，日为并吞沾、乌计。
现代文：云南抚按坚决不同意，认为安边让其同党停兵于野马川，又以千金利诱安其爵手下的头目，为他日并吞沾益州和乌撒做准备。
English: Yunnan Fuxi resolutely disagreed, believing that Anbian let his fellow party members halt their troops at Mustang River, and also lured the leaders of his subordinates with thousands of dollars to prepare for his annexation of Zhanzhangyizhou and Usa.

古文：万一其爵被袭，则乌撒失，而前功尽弃。
现代文：万一安其爵被安边袭击，则乌撒会失守，这样就会前功尽弃。
English: In the unlikely event that Ankijaku were to be attacked by Anbi, Usa would be left defenseless, which would be the end of his career.

古文：乌撒失，沾益危，而全滇动摇，非但震邻，实乃切肤。
现代文：乌撒失守，沾益州就危险了，这样整个云南都会动摇，这不但会使邻省震动，实际上乃是切肤之害。
English: If Wuzha is lost and Zhanyizhou is in danger, then the whole of Yunnan will be shaken. This will not only shake the neighboring provinces, but is actually a great harm.

古文：竟不行。
现代文：最后，总督朱燮元的意图没有执行。
English: In the end, Governor Zhu Rongyuan's intention was not carried out.

古文：安边乃乞师于安位，纳之沾益，而逐其禄，时安氏在也。
现代文：于是安边就向安位借兵，把军队安在沾益州，驱逐了安其禄。此时安氏还在世。
English: As a result, Anbei borrowed soldiers from An, stationed the army in Zhan'yizhou, and expelled Anqilu. At this time, An was still alive.

古文：既而安氏死。安位与之贰，其禄乃假手罗彩令者布发难，边遄死。
现代文：不久安氏死了，安位与安边有了贰心，安其禄便假手于罗彩令者布向安边发难，安边一急之下死了。
English: Soon after, An died, and An and An Bian had a falling out. An Qilu then pretended to join hands with Luo Cai's commander Bu to attack An Bian, and An Bian died in a hurry.

古文：又令人杀平夷长官王大庆，大庆闻而逃，乃杀其弟。
现代文：安其禄不久带兵到沾益州，诡称自己是为其叔叔报仇，土民全都归附于他，于是安其禄又占有了沾益州。
English: Angelo soon led an army to Tsimshian, claiming that he was avenging his uncle, and the natives all joined him, so Angelo took possession of Tsimshian.

古文：为横二十年。巡按御史张鸾请治之，得实，伏诛，遂改马湖府为流官知府。建昌卫，本邛都地。
现代文：而此时中原地区流寇作乱正急，朝廷已经没能力再过问边疆的事了。建昌卫，是原来的邛都。
English: At this time, the Central Plains region was in the throes of a bandit rebellion, and the imperial court was no longer able to ask questions about the frontier. Jianchangwei was the original capital.

古文：汉武帝置越巂郡。
现代文：汉朝武帝时期，此地设置了越郡。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty, Yue County was established here.

古文：随、唐皆为巂州。
现代文：隋唐两朝此地都称为州。
English: Sui and Tang dynasties both referred to this place as a prefecture.

古文：至德初，没于吐番。贞元中收复。
现代文：唐朝至德初年，该地被吐番所吞没，贞元中年才收复回来。
English: In the first year of the Tang dynasty to the German era, the area was engulfed by the Toban, and it was not until the middle of the Zhenyuan era that it was recovered.

古文：懿宗时，为蒙诏所据，改建昌府，以乌、白二蛮实之。
现代文：唐朝懿宗统治时期，该地被蒙诏所占据，改成建昌府，把乌、白二个蛮族的人口充实到该地。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty, the area was occupied by Meng Yao and changed to Jianchang Prefecture, enriching the population of the two barbarian tribes of Wu and Bai to the area.

古文：元至元间，置建昌路，又立罗罗斯宣慰司以统之。
现代文：元朝至元年间，该地设置了建昌路，同时又设立罗罗斯宣慰司以统管该地区。
English: Between the Yuan Dynasty and the First Year of the Yuan Dynasty, Jianchang Road was set up in the area, and at the same time, the Luo Luo Xuan comfort department was set up to supervise the area.

古文：洪武五年，罗罗斯宣慰安定来朝，而建昌尚未归附，十四年遣内臣赍敕谕之，乃降。
现代文：明朝洪武五年，罗罗斯宣慰安定前来朝觐皇帝，但建昌路还没有归附明朝。十四年，皇帝派宦官带着皇帝的敕谕去见他们，建昌路才向明朝投降。
English: In the fifth year of Hongwu in the Ming Dynasty, Luo Ross comforted and came to the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, but Jianchang Road had not yet been annexed to the Ming Dynasty. In the 14th year, the Emperor sent eunuchs to see them with the Emperor's edict, and Jianchang Road surrendered to the Ming Dynasty.

古文：十五年置建昌卫指挥使司。
现代文：十五年明朝廷在此设置建昌卫指挥使司。
English: In the 15th year of the Ming Dynasty, the Imperial Court set up the Jianchangwei Command and General Staff here.

古文：元平章月鲁帖木儿等自云南建昌来贡马一百八十匹，并上元所授符印。
现代文：元朝的平章月鲁帖木儿等人从云南建昌来京城给朝廷献贡马一百八十匹，并上缴了元朝皇帝给他们所授的符印。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, Ping Zhangyue Lutemur and others from Jianchang, Yunnan Province, came to Beijing to present 180 tribute horses to the imperial court, and handed over the seal given to them by the Yuan Emperor.

古文：诏赐月鲁帖木儿绮衣、金带、靴袜，家人绵布一百六十疋、钞二千四百四十锭。
现代文：明太祖下诏给月鲁帖木儿赏赐了绮衣、金带、靴袜，给他的家人赏赐了绵布一百六十匹，钱钞二千四百四十锭。
English: Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty gave Yue Lütjelmur a silk robe, a gold belt, shoes and socks, and 160 pieces of cotton cloth and 2,440 banknotes to his family.

古文：以月鲁帖木儿为建昌卫指挥使，月给三品俸赡其家。
现代文：封月鲁帖木儿为建昌卫指挥使，每月给他三品官才有的俸禄，让他赡养家人。
English: Lu Tiemuer was appointed as Jianchangwei's commanding officer, and he was given a monthly salary only given to third-rank officials, so that he could support his family.

古文：十六年，建昌土官安配及土酋阿派先后来朝，贡马及方物，皆赐织金文绮、衣帽、靴袜。
现代文：十六年，建昌卫的土官安配及当地的酋长阿派先后来朝觐皇帝，向皇帝进献马匹和土产，皇帝都给他们赏赐织金花纹的绮衣、帽子和靴袜。
English: In the 16th year of Jianchangwei's reign, the local officials and the local chieftain Apai made a pilgrimage to the emperor. They presented horses and local products to the emperor. The emperor rewarded them with gold embroidered coats, hats and socks.

古文：十八年，月鲁帖木儿举家来朝，请遣子入学，厚赐遣之。
现代文：十八年，月鲁帖木儿全家来朝觐，请求朝廷允许他选派儿子来入学，皇帝给他们的赏赐很丰厚。
English: In the eighteenth year, the whole family of Yue Lu and Timur came to the hajj and asked the court to allow him to send his son to school. The emperor gave them a very rich reward.

古文：二十一年，建昌府故土官安思正妻师克等来朝，贡马九十九匹。
现代文：二十一年，建昌府已故土官安思正的妻子师克等人来朝觐，向皇帝献贡马九十九匹。
English: In the 21st year, Shike, the wife of the late local official An Sizheng of Jianchang Prefecture, and others came to the pilgrimage to offer 99 tribute horses to the emperor.

古文：诏授师克知府，赐冠带、袭衣、文绮、钞锭，因命师克讨东川、芒部及赤水河叛蛮。
现代文：皇帝下诏授师克知府职位并赏赐给她冠带、官服、有花纹的绮衣和钱钞，还命令师克讨伐东川、芒部及赤水河等地叛乱的蛮族。
English: The emperor conferred upon Shi Ke the position of prefectural governor and gave her a crown sash, an official uniform, a patterned silk robe and money, and ordered Shi Ke to fight the rebellious barbarians in Dongchuan, Mangbu and Cheshui River.

古文：二十三年，安配遣子僧保等四十二人入监读书。
现代文：二十三年，安配选派儿子安僧保等四十二人进国子监读书。
English: In the 23rd year, 42 people, including Anpai's son An Zangbo, were sent to study under the supervision of the state.

古文：二十五年，致仕指挥安配贡马，诏赐配及其把事五十三人币纱有差。
现代文：二十五年，已辞官的指挥安配向朝廷献贡马，皇帝下诏按等级差别给安配和他的把事五十三人赏赐钱钞。
English: In the 25th year, the retired commander Anpai presented a tribute horse to the imperial court, and the emperor issued a decree to award money and banknotes to Anpai and his 53 subordinates according to the difference in rank.

古文：已而月鲁帖木儿反，合德昌、会川、迷易、柏兴、邛部并西番土军万余人，杀官军男妇二百余口，掠屯牛，烧营屋，劫军粮，率众攻城。
现代文：不久，月鲁帖木儿造反，会合德昌、会川、迷易、柏兴、邛部和西番的土军一万多人，杀死官军男女二百多人，掠夺军屯里的牛，烧毁营房，劫夺军粮，并带人攻打城堡。
English: Soon after, Yue Lutemur rebelled, gathering more than ten thousand Turkish soldiers from Dechang, Huichuan, Meili, Baoxing, Shibu and Xiban, killing more than two hundred men and women of the government army, plundering cattle in the army camp, burning barracks, robbing military food, and leading people to attack the castle.

古文：指挥使安的以所部兵出战，败之，斩八十余级，擒其党十余人。
现代文：指挥使安的带领自己所属的军队出战，打败了叛军，斩杀敌人八十多人，生擒叛军的同党十多人。
English: Commander Jian'an led his own army into battle, defeated the rebels, killed more than eighty of the enemy, and captured more than ten of the rebels.

古文：贼退屯阿宜河，转攻苏州。
现代文：叛军撤退驻扎到阿宜河，转而进攻苏州。
English: The rebels retreated and camped on the Ayi River, attacking Suzhou instead.

古文：指挥佥事鲁毅率精骑出西门击之，贼众大集，毅且战且却，复入城拒守。
现代文：指挥佥事鲁毅率领精锐骑兵从西门出来拦击敌人，叛军集中起来对付鲁毅，鲁毅便且战且退，又退入城中坚守拒敌。
English: Command anecdote Lu Yi led the elite cavalry out of the West Gate to intercept the enemy, the rebels concentrated to deal with Lu Yi, Lu Yi then fought and retreated, and retreated into the city to hold out against the enemy.

古文：贼围城，毅乘间遣壮士王旱突入贼营，斫贼，贼惊遁。
现代文：叛军包围了城市，鲁毅乘间歇机会派遣壮士王旱突然冲入敌军营中，砍杀敌人，叛军受惊而逃。
English: The rebels encircled the city, and Lu Yi took advantage of the intermittent opportunity to send a strong man, Wang Han, to suddenly rush into the enemy camp, cut down the enemy, and the rebels were frightened and fled.

古文：于是置建昌、苏州二军民指挥使司及会川军民千户所，调京卫及陕西兵万五千余人往戍之。
现代文：于是朝廷设置了建昌、苏州二个军民指挥使司，在会川设置一个军民千户所，调集京城的卫兵和陕西的军队一万五千多人前去戍守。
English: As a result, the imperial court set up two military and civilian command envoys in Jianchang and Suzhou, set up a military and civilian thousand households in Huichuan, and mobilized more than 15,000 guards from Beijing and troops from Shaanxi to defend the capital.

古文：仍谕将士互相应援，设伏出奇，并谕擒首献者赏千金。
现代文：皇帝谕告各将士要互相响应支援，设埋伏出奇兵打击敌人，并谕告若有人抓住叛军首领来献，则赏赐千金。
English: The emperor ordered all soldiers to support each other, set up ambushes to attack the enemy, and ordered that if anyone caught the rebel leader to offer, they would be rewarded with thousands of gold.

古文：复谕总兵官凉国公蓝玉，以月鲁帖木儿诡诈，不可信其降，致缓师养祸。
现代文：他还谕告总兵官凉国公蓝玉，说月鲁帖木儿诡诈多计，不能完全相信他的投降，以致出师缓慢养成祸患。
English: He also told the commander-in-chief, Liang Guogong, that Yue Lütjelmur was deceitful and scheming, and that he could not fully trust his surrender, so that his departure from the division would slowly develop into a disaster.

古文：四川都指挥使瞿能率各卫兵至双狼寨，擒伪千户段太平等，贼众大溃，月鲁帖木儿败遁。
现代文：四川都指挥使瞿能带领各卫军队到达双狼寨，活捉了伪千户段太平等人，普通贼众大多溃散，月鲁帖木儿失败后逃跑。
English: The commander of the Sichuan capital enabled Gong to lead all the guards to the double wolf village, captured the pseudo thousand households too equal, most of the common thieves were dispersed, and Yue Lu Tie Mu'er fled after failing.

古文：官军入德昌，能遂调指挥同知徐凯分兵入普济州搜捕。
现代文：瞿能督促军队追捕，攻下托落寨。又转战前进到打冲河三里所时，与月鲁帖木儿相遇，又大败他们，俘虏了他们五百多人，淹死叛军一千多，缴获牛、马无数。
English: He was able to urge the army to pursue, capture and besiege. And when he turned to fight and advanced to three miles of the Dachong River, he met with Yue Lutemur, and defeated them, captured more than five hundred of them, drowned more than a thousand rebels, and captured countless cattle and horses.

古文：复驾桥于打冲河，遣指挥李华引兵追托落寨余孽，进至水西，斩月鲁帖木儿把事七人，其截路寨土蛮长沙、纳的皆中矢死。
现代文：官军进入德昌后，瞿能调遣指挥同知徐凯分兵进入普济州搜捕敌人；又在打冲河上架桥，派遣指挥李华率兵追击托落寨内的残余叛军。军队开到水西时，斩杀月鲁帖木儿手下的把事七人，截路寨的蛮族人长沙、纳的等都中箭而死。
English: After the government army entered Dechang, Yan Neng dispatched commanding comrade Xu Kai's detachment to enter Puji County to search for the enemy; he also built a bridge on the Taochong River and dispatched commanding Li Hua to lead the troops to pursue the remaining rebels in the abandoned village. When the army drove to the west of the water, they killed seven people under the command of Yue Lutemur, and the barbarians Changsha and Na who cut off the village were killed by arrows.

古文：能还攻天星、卧漂诸寨，皆克之，先后俘杀千八百余人。
现代文：瞿能回师后又攻克天星、卧漂各寨，俘虏和杀死敌人一千八百多人。
English: After he was able to return to his division, he conquered Tianxing and Jiaofu villages, capturing and killing more than 1,800 of the enemy.

古文：月鲁帖木儿遁入柏兴州。
现代文：月鲁帖木儿逃进柏兴州。
English: Yue Lu and Timur fled to Baoxing Prefecture.

古文：帝遣谕蓝玉曰： 月鲁帖木儿信其逆党达达、杨把事等，或遣之先降，或亲来觇我，不可不密为防。
现代文：皇帝派人给蓝玉送谕告说 ：月鲁帖木儿信任他手下的同党达达、杨把事等人，或者派遣他们先来投降，或者亲自来试探我方情况，不可不严密防范。
English: The emperor sent someone to send a message to Blue Jade, saying: Yue Lütjelmu'er trusted his fellow party members Dada and Yang Toutai, and either sent them to surrender first, or personally came to test our situation, and it was imperative to take strict precautions.

古文：其柏兴州贾哈喇境内麽些等部，更须留意。 
现代文：对柏兴州贾哈喇境内的么些人部落，更要留意。 
English: More attention should be paid to some human tribes in the territory of Jahara in Baoxing Prefecture.

古文：贾哈喇者，麽些洞土酋也。
现代文：贾哈喇，是么些洞的当地酋长。
English: Jahara is the local chief of some of the caves.

古文：初，王师克建昌，授以指挥之职，自是从月鲁帖木儿叛。
现代文：原初时期官军攻克建昌时，朝廷授以他指挥的职位，这次他跟随月鲁帖木儿叛乱。
English: In the early days, when the government army conquered Jianchang, the court awarded him the position of commander. This time, he followed Yue Lütjelm's rebellion.

古文：玉率兵至柏兴州，遣百户毛海以计诱致月鲁帖木儿并其子胖伯，遂降其众，送月鲁帖木儿京师，伏诛。
现代文：蓝玉率兵到柏兴州，派遣百户毛海用计谋抓住月鲁帖木儿及其儿子胖伯，降服了他们手下的众人，把月鲁帖木儿解送到京师，伏法诛杀。
English: Blue Jade led an army to Baoxing Prefecture, and sent the Hundred Households of Mao Hai to capture Yue Lutemur and his son, Fat Bo, using stratagems. They subdued the people under their command, and sent Yue Lutemur to the Beijing Division, where he was killed.

古文：玉因奏： 四川地旷山险，控扼西番。
现代文：蓝玉因此上奏皇帝： 四川地域广阔山势险要，能够控制西番。
English: Therefore, Blue Jade played the emperor: Sichuan's vast mountainous region is in a critical situation and can control the West Bank.

古文：松、茂、碉、黎当吐番出入之地，马湖、建昌、嘉定俱为要道，皆宜增屯卫。 
现代文：松潘、茂州、碉门和黎州是吐番进出之地，马湖、建昌、嘉定等地都是重要的通道，都应该增加屯兵守卫。 
English: Songpan, Maozhou, Qimen and Lizhou are the entrances and exits of Tuban, and Mahu, Jianchang, Jiading and other places are important channels, and the garrison should be increased.

古文：报可，命玉班师。
现代文：皇帝认为此议可行，命令蓝玉班师回朝。
English: The emperor thought that this proposal was feasible and ordered the Blue and White Division to return to the imperial court.

古文：二十七年，麽些洞蛮寇打冲河西守堡，都督徐凯击败之。
现代文：洪武二十七年，么些洞的蛮族人入侵打冲河的西守堡，都督徐凯将他们击败。
English: In the 27th year of Hongwu, the barbarians from Zhouzhuang invaded the west fortress of Dachonghe, and the governor Xu Kai defeated them.

古文：二十九年，威龙土知州普习叛。
现代文：二十九年，威龙土知州普习反叛。
English: In the 29th year, Wailong Tujizhou rebelled against Pu Xi.

古文：普习，月鲁帖木儿妻兄也。
现代文：普习，是月鲁帖木儿妻子的兄长。
English: Pu Xi is the elder brother of Yue Lu's wife.

古文：官军捕之，普习中流矢死。
现代文：官军去逮捕他时，普习被流箭射死。
English: When government troops went to arrest him, he was shot dead with a stray arrow.

古文：三十一年，徐凯等平卜木瓦寨，执贾哈喇，送京师，诛之。
现代文：三十一年，徐凯等人平定了卜木瓦寨，逮住了贾哈喇，将其解送到京城，按法处决了。
English: In the 31st year, Xu Kai and others leveled Bu Muwazhai, arrested Jahara, deported him to Beijing, and executed him according to the law.

古文：寨地峻险，三百陡绝，下临大江，江流悍急，不可行舟，惟一道仅可通人行。
现代文：这个卜木瓦寨地势险峻，三面都是陡沿绝壁，下面是大江，江水很急，无法行舟，只有一条路可以行人。
English: This Bumu Walled City is steep and precipitous, with steep cliffs on three sides. Below is the Yangtze River. The water is very swift, making it impossible to row a boat, and there is only one road for pedestrians.

古文：官军至，辄自上投石，不得进。
现代文：官军到达时，他们就从寨上向下掷石头，官军无法进入。
English: When the government army arrived, they threw stones down from the stockade, and the government army could not enter.

古文：凯乃断其汲道困之，寇穷促，凯督将士抵其寨，力攻破之，遂就擒。
现代文：徐凯便切断了他们的取水之路，把他们围困起来，等他们无法坚守而惶急时，徐凯便督促将士进抵该寨，奋力攻破他们的防守，于是生擒了贾哈喇。
English: Xu Kai then cut off their water supply route and besieged them. When they were unable to hold out and panicked, Xu Kai urged the soldiers to enter the village and break through their defense, thus capturing Jahara alive.

古文：因改建昌路为建昌卫，置军民指挥使司。
现代文：这样一来，朝廷就把建昌路改为建昌卫，设置军民指挥使司。
English: As a result, the imperial court changed the name of Jianchang Road to Jianchang Road, and set up the Military and Civilian Command and Control Division.

古文：安氏世袭指挥使，不给印，置其居于城东郭外里许。
现代文：让安氏家族的人世袭指挥使职位，但不给他们印信，让他们居住在建昌卫城东郭外一里远的地方。
English: Let the people of the An family inherit the post of commander and envoy, but do not print letters to them, let them live one mile away from the eastern citadel of Jianchang Acropolis.

古文：所属有四十八马站，大头土番、僰人子、白夷、麽些、作佫鹿、保罗、鞑靼、回纥诸种散居山谷间。
现代文：建昌卫统属有四十八个马站，大头土番、覺人子、白夷、么些、亻各鹿、倮罗、鞑靼、回纥等蛮族人都杂居在山谷之间。
English: There are 48 horse stations in Jianchangwei. The barbarian tribes such as the Dagou Dangfang, the Jiehanzi, the Baiyi, the Motsa, the Yingge Deer, the Jiao Luo, the Tartar, and the Hui Yi all live together in the valley.

古文：北至大渡，南及金沙江，东抵乌蒙，西讫盐井，延袤千余里。
现代文：该卫北至大渡、南达金沙江，东抵乌蒙，西及盐井，地域宽达一千多里。
English: The Wei stretches from Dadu in the north to Jinsha River in the south, and from Umeng in the east to Yanjing in the west, covering an area of more than 1,000 miles.

古文：以昌州、普济、威龙三州长官隶之，有把事四人，世辖其众，皆节制于四川行都指挥使司。
现代文：建昌卫军民指挥使司统领昌州、普济、威龙三个州的长官，下面有把事四人，世代管辖属下的百姓。他们全都接受四川行都指挥使司的节制。
English: The commander-in-chief of the Jianchang Garrison and People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat

古文：西南土官，安氏殆为称首。
现代文：西南地区的土官，安氏家族居首位。
English: The An family is the top landowner in the southwestern region.

古文：配六世孙安忠无后，妻凤氏管指挥使事。
现代文：安配的六世孙安忠没有后嗣，其妻凤氏便管理指挥使事务。
English: Sun Anzhong, the sixth generation of Anpai, had no heirs, so his wife, Feng, managed the affairs of the commander.

古文：凤氏死，族人安登继袭，复无子，妻瞿氏管事，以族人世隆嗣。
现代文：凤氏死后，安忠的族人安登继承指挥使职位，他又没有儿子，便由其妻瞿氏管理事务，后由族人安世隆继承官职。
English: After the death of Feng, Anden, a member of Anzhong's tribe, succeeded to the post of commander. As he had no son, his wife, Zou, took over the management of the affairs, and then the member of Anshilong's tribe succeeded to the post.

古文：世隆复无子，继妻禄氏管事。
现代文：安世隆又没有儿子，便由他的后妻禄氏掌管指挥使事务。
English: Since An Shilong did not have a son, his second wife, Lu Ke, took charge of the commanding officer's affairs.

古文：禄死，以族侄安崇业嗣。
现代文：禄氏死后，让安世隆的侄子安崇业继承指挥使官位。
English: After the death of the Lu family, let An Shilong's nephew, An Chongye, succeed to the post of commander.

古文：崇业与禄氏不相能，因养那固为假子，其奴禄祈从臾构难，岁仇杀。
现代文：安崇业原与禄氏不和，禄氏就收养那固为干儿子，禄氏的家奴禄祈从中阿谀奉承挑拨那固与安崇业的关系，使得他们每年都互相仇杀。
English: An Chongye was not on good terms with the Luk clan. The Luk clan adopted Nagu as their adopted son. The Luk clan's family, the Luks, used flattery to instigate the relationship between Nagu and An Chongye, causing them to fight each other every year.

古文：镇巡官谳之，杀那固而戍禄祈，事遂平。
现代文：镇巡官将此事审判定案，杀了那固，让禄祈去戍守边关，彼此间的仇杀才得以平息。
English: The town inspector put the matter to a final trial, killed Nagu, and let Lukqi guard the border. Only then could the feud between them be settled.

古文：安氏所辖四驿，曰禄马、阿用、白水、泸沽，各百里有差。
现代文：安氏家族所管辖的四个驿所，其名分别为禄马、阿用、白水、泸沽，各驿所之间相差有百里之遥。
English: The names of the four stations under the jurisdiction of the An family are Loma, Anyi, Baishui, and Zou, and there is a hundred-mile difference between each station.

古文：其凉山拖郎、桐槽、热水诸番，则以强弱为向背。
现代文：凉山地区的拖郎、桐槽、热水等番族，以自己势力的强弱，对明朝廷或归附或背反。
English: In the Liangshan region, the Trawler, Tung Groove, Hot Water and other clans, with their own strengths and weaknesses, either joined or rebelled against the Ming court.

古文：所领昌州等三长官司，皆在卫东、西、南三百里内。
现代文：建昌卫所统领的昌州等三个长官司，都分布在卫所东、西、南三面三百里的范围内。
English: Jianchang Sanatorium, which is headed by Changzhou and three other prefectural governments, are all located within a three-hundred-mile radius to the east, west and south of the sanatorium.

古文：洪武十八年，土官卢尼姑、吉撒加、白氐等归附，皆令世袭为知州。
现代文：洪武十八年，土官卢尼姑、吉撒加、白氐等归附朝廷，朝廷都让他们世代相袭做知州。
English: In the 18th year of Hongwu, the local governors Lu Nigu, Jisaga, Baekje, etc. were annexed to the imperial court, and the imperial court made them all inherit Chizhou from generation to generation.

古文：月鲁帖木儿之乱，诸州皆废革。
现代文：月鲁帖木儿叛乱后，各州都被废除。
English: The states were abolished after the Timurid Revolt.

古文：永乐元年复置，悉改为长官司，仍隶建昌。
现代文：永乐元年又恢复建置，不过将原来的州全改为长官司，仍隶属于建昌卫。
English: In the first year of Yongle, construction resumed, but the original prefecture was completely changed to the chief magistrate's office, still subordinated to Jianchangwei.

古文：洪武十六归附，以随征东川、芒部劳，授世袭副千户。居所治城外，所辖僰蛮仅八百户。
现代文：建昌卫所辖的千户所有三个：礼州，打冲河和德昌。礼州，是汉朝的苏示县；打冲河，是唐朝的沙野城；德昌，是元朝的定昌路。
English: There are three thousand households under the jurisdiction of Jianchangwei: Leizhou, Dachonghe and Dechang. Leizhou is Su Shi County in the Han Dynasty; Dachonghe is Shanyang City in the Tang Dynasty; Dechang is Dingchang Road in the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：茂州，古冉〈马龙〉国地。
现代文：茂州，就是古代的冉国所在地。
English: Maozhou is the ancient seat of Ran.

古文：汉武帝置汶山郡，宣帝为北部都尉。
现代文：汉武帝时在该地设置汶山郡，汉宣帝时称北部都尉。
English: At the time of Emperor Hanwu, Wenshan County was set up in this area, and at the time of Emperor Han Xuan, it was called the Northern Captain.

古文：隋为蜀州，寻改会州。
现代文：隋朝时称为蜀州，不久改为会州。
English: It was called Shuzhou during the Sui Dynasty, and was soon changed to Hezhou.

古文：唐贞观改茂州。
现代文：唐朝贞观年间改为茂州。
English: During the Zhenguan period of the Tang Dynasty, it was changed to Maozhou.

古文：宋、元仍旧，治汶山县。
现代文：宋朝和元朝时仍为茂州，官府所在地是汶山县。
English: During the Song Dynasty and the Yuan Dynasty, it was still Maozhou, and the seat of the government was in Wenshan County.

古文：洪武六年，茂州权知州杨者七及陇木头、静州、岳希蓬诸土官来朝贡。
现代文：洪武六年，茂州的权知州杨者七及陇木头、静州、岳希蓬等土官一起到京城来朝贡。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu's reign, Yang Zhisheng, the governor of Quanzhou, Yang Zhisheng, the governor of Maozhou, and the local officials such as He Mu Tou, Jingzhou, and Yue Xipeng came to the capital to pay tribute.

古文：十一年置茂州卫指挥使司。
现代文：十一年朝廷设置茂州卫指挥使司。
English: In the eleventh year, the imperial court set up the Moxiu Military Command and General Staff.

古文：时四川都司遣兵修灌县桥梁至陶关，汶川土酋孟道贵疑之，集部落阻陶关道。
现代文：此时，四川的都司派兵修筑从灌县到陶关的桥梁，汶川土著人的酋长孟道贵对此举颇有疑忌，招集本部落人堵塞了陶关的道路。
English: At this time, the governor of Sichuan sent soldiers to build a bridge from Gan County to Taoguan. The chief of the indigenous people of Wenchuan, Meng Daogu, was quite suspicious of this move, and summoned the tribesmen to block the road to Taoguan.

古文：都司遣指挥胡渊、童胜等统兵分二道击之，一由石泉，一由灌口。
现代文：都司便派指挥胡渊、童胜等人带兵分二路袭击他们。一路从石泉出发，另一路从灌口出发。
English: The prefectural government then sent commanders Hu Yuan, Tong Sheng and others with soldiers to attack them in two ways. One way started from Shiquan, and the other way started from Huankou.

古文：由灌口者进次陶关，蛮众伏两山间，投石崖下，兵不能进。
现代文：由灌口出发的军队前进驻扎在陶关时，蛮族人埋伏在两山之间，向山崖下投掷石块，军队无法前进。
English: When the army that set out from Gankou advanced and was stationed in Taoguan, the barbarians lay in ambush between the two mountains, throwing stones at the foot of the cliff, and the army was unable to advance.

古文：适汶川土官来降，得其间道。乃选勇士卷旗甲，乘夜潜出两山后，迟明从山顶张旗帜，发火炮，蛮惊溃。
现代文：此时正好汶川的土官前来投降，提供了小路，陶关的官军便挑选出勇士带上旗帜和甲仗，乘着夜色悄悄地绕到两山后面，天色未明时就在山顶上张开旗帜，点燃火炮，蛮族人都受惊而逃。
English: At this time, the local officials of Wenchuan came to surrender and provided a path. The Taoguan government army then selected warriors to bring flags and armor, and quietly took advantage of the night to go around behind the two mountains. When it was still dark, they opened the flag on the top of the mountain and lit the artillery. The barbarians were frightened and fled.

古文：师进雁门关，道险，蛮复据之。
现代文：军队开到雁门关时，道路险阻，蛮族人便又占据了该地。
English: When the army drove to Yanmen Pass, the road was dangerous, and the barbarians occupied the place again.

古文：乃驻平野，得小舟渡，至龙止铁冶寨，击破之。
现代文：官军便驻扎在平地上，用小船渡过去，到龙止的铁冶寨，击破了蛮族人。
English: The government army was stationed on the plain and used small boats to cross over to Longji's Tieye village, where they defeated the barbarians.

古文：其由石泉者次泥池，蛮悉众拒。
现代文：从石泉出发的那一路军队驻扎在泥池，蛮族人集结起来抗拒官军。
English: All the way from Shiquan, the army was stationed in the mud pool, and the barbarians gathered to resist the government army.

古文：千户薛文突阵射却之，士卒奋击，大败其众。
现代文：千户薛文带人用弓箭把蛮族人射退后，士兵们奋勇出击，大败蛮族人。
English: After Qianhu Xuewen and his men drove the barbarians back with bows and arrows, the soldiers bravely attacked and defeated the barbarians.

古文：两军遂会于茂州，杨者七迎降，以者七仍领其州。
现代文：两路军队于是在茂州会师，杨者七出来投降并迎接官军，官军便仍然让杨者七统领该州事务。
English: The armies of the two sides then joined forces in Moxiu. Yang Zheqi came out to surrender and meet the government army. The government army still let Yang Zheqi lead the affairs of the state.

古文：乃诏立茂州卫，留指挥楚华将兵三千守之。
现代文：皇帝下诏书设立茂州卫，把指挥楚华留下，让其带三千人马守卫茂州卫所。
English: The emperor issued an edict to establish the Moxiu Garrison, leaving the commander, Chu Hua, with three thousand horses to guard the Moxiu Garrison.

古文：十五年，者七阴结生番，约日伏兵陷城。
现代文：十五年，杨者七暗地里勾结没有顺服朝廷的番族人，双方约定好日期埋伏下兵力准备攻打城池。
English: In the fifteenth year, Yang secretly colluded with the tribunes who did not obey the imperial court, and the two sides agreed on a good date to ambush the troops and prepare to attack the city.

古文：有小校密告于官，遂发兵捕斩者七。
现代文：有小军校将此消息秘密地告诉了官府，官府便派兵捉拿并斩杀了杨者七。
English: A small military school secretly informed the government of this news, and the government sent soldiers to capture and kill Yang Zhaqi.

古文：生番不之觉，如期入寇，官军掩击败之，于是尽徙羌民于城外。
现代文：番族人没有察觉事情有了变故，按期入侵，官军便掩杀出去将番族人打败。从此，官府便把羌族人全都迁到城外居住。
English: The Bans didn't notice that things had changed, and invaded as scheduled. The government army then went out to defeat the Bans. From then on, the government moved all the Yi people to live outside the city.

古文：正德二年，太监罗籥奏，茂州所辖卜南村、曲山等寨，乞为白人，愿纳粮差。
现代文：正德二年，太监罗硁向朝廷上奏，说茂州所管辖的卜南村、曲山等村寨的人，都向官府要求做白人，愿意向朝廷缴纳粮税和差役。
English: In the second year of Zhengde, the eunuch Luo Zheng appealed to the imperial court, saying that the people of Bunan Village, Qu Mountain and other villages under the jurisdiction of Muzhou had all requested the government to be white and were willing to pay grain tax and dispatch duty to the imperial court.

古文：其俗以白为善，以黑为恶。
现代文：那里的习俗是以白为好，以黑为恶。
English: The custom there is to regard white as good and black as evil.

古文：礼部覆，番人向化，宜令入贡给赏。
现代文：礼部的答复认为番族人向往汉化，就应该让他们进献贡物并给以奖赏。
English: The response from the Ministry of Ceremonies was that if the Banshu people yearned for Sinicization, they should be allowed to offer tributes and be rewarded.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝答应了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十四年，巡抚马昊调松潘兵，攻小东路番寨，而茂州核桃沟上、下关番蛮惧，遂纠白石、罗打鼓诸寨生番，攻围城堡，游击张杰败绩。
现代文：十四年，巡抚马昊征调松潘的军队去攻打小东路番族人的村寨，茂州核桃沟上关和下关的番族人感到害怕，于是便纠集白石、罗打鼓等村寨的没有汉化的番族人进攻和包围城堡，游击张杰率人抗击，失败了。
English: In the 14th year, the inspector Ma Hao sent Songpan's army to attack the villages of the Xiaodonglu Qiang people. The Qiang people in the upper and lower parts of the Maozhou Walnut Gully were afraid, so they gathered the Qiang people who had not been Hanized in villages such as Baishi and Luo Du Drum to attack and encircle the castle. The guerrilla Zhang Jie led the resistance and failed.

古文：十五年，巡抚盛应期奏，绰头番犯松州，总兵张杰克之，复犯雄溪屯，指挥杜钦败之，烟崇等寨皆降。
现代文：十五年，巡抚盛应期上奏，说绰头的番族人进犯松州，总兵张杰收复了松州；他们又进犯雄溪屯，指挥杜钦将他们打败，烟崇等村寨的番族人都向官军投降了。
English: In the 15th year, the governor Sheng gave a speech at the meeting, saying that the bravest of the Qiang people attacked Songzhou, and the general Zhang Jie regained Songzhou; they also attacked Xiongxitun, commanded by Duqin, and defeated them, and the Qiang people in Yanzong and other villages surrendered to the government army.

古文：万历十九年，威、茂诸番作乱，攻破新桥，乘势围普安等堡。
现代文：万历十九年，威远、茂州各地的番族人作乱，攻破了新桥，并乘势包围了普安等城堡。
English: In the 19th year of Wanli, the Qiang people in various parts of Wiyuan and Muzhou rebelled, broke through the new bridge, and took advantage of the situation to surround Pu'an and other castles.

古文：四川巡抚李尚忠檄诸路兵追剿过河，普安诸堡得以保全。
现代文：四川巡抚李尚忠传檄文给各路兵马，让他们过河追击和剿灭作乱的番族人，普安等城堡才得以保全。
English: The Sichuan governor, Li Shangzhong, sent a message to the soldiers and horses to cross the river to pursue and destroy the troublemakers, and the castles such as Pu'an could be preserved.

古文：茂州地方数千里，自唐武德改郡会州，领羁縻州九，前后皆蛮族，向无城郭。
现代文：茂州这个地方方圆有几千里，从唐朝武德年间改为会州郡后，统领有九个羁縻州，前后居住的都是蛮族人，向来没有城郭。
English: There are thousands of miles around this place in Maozhou. After it was changed to Huizhou County during the Wude period of the Tang Dynasty, it ruled nine Guizhou counties. All of them were inhabited by barbarians, and there was never a castle.

古文：宋熙宁中，范百常知茂州，民请筑城，而蛮人来争。
现代文：宋朝熙宁中年，范百常做茂州的知州，百姓请求修筑城墙，蛮族人便来破坏。
English: In the middle of the Song Dynasty, when Fan Baizhang was Chizhou of Maozhou, the people requested to build a city wall, and the barbarians came to destroy it.

古文：百常与之拒，且战且筑，城乃得立。
现代文：范百常便带兵抗拒蛮族人，一边战斗一边修筑，这样城墙才建立起来。
English: Fan Baichang led the troops to resist the barbarians, fighting and building at the same time, so that the city wall was built.

古文：自宋迄元，皆为羌人所据，不置州县者几二百年。
现代文：从宋朝到元朝，占据这里的都是羌族人，已有二百年没在此设置州县了。
English: From the Song Dynasty to the Yuan Dynasty, it was occupied by the Yi people, and there has not been a prefecture here for two hundred years.

古文：洪武十一年平蜀，置垒溪右千户所，隶茂州卫。
现代文：洪武十一年朝廷平定四川后，设置了迭溪右千户所，隶属于茂州卫。
English: In the eleventh year of Hongwu, after the imperial court had subdued Sichuan, it set up the Right-Thousand-Households Office in Diexi, which was affiliated with Muzhou Wei.

古文：而置威茂道，开府茂州，分游击以驻叠溪，规防始立。
现代文：又设置威茂道，将府第设在茂州，分一名游击带兵驻扎迭溪，这样规防才开始确立。
English: In addition, the Weimao Road was set up, the prefecture was set up in Maozhou, and a guerrilla with soldiers was stationed in Diexi, so that the regulation and prevention began to be established.

古文：然东路生羌，白草最强，又与松潘黄毛鞑相通，出没为寇，相沿不绝云。
现代文：但是东路没有汉化的羌族人、白草人最为强盛，他们又与松潘黄毛鞑人相互勾通，经常出没为盗，相沿成习无法断绝。
English: However, in the east, the Dong people and Bai Cao people, who did not convert to Chinese, were the most powerful. They also colluded with the Songpan and Huangmao people, often stealing from each other, and they could not break the habit of following each other.

古文：其通西域要路，为桃坪，即古桃关也，有绳桥渡江。
现代文：这里通向西域的要道是桃坪，即古代的桃关，有绳索建成的桥梁可供渡江。
English: The main road leading to the western region here is Taoping, that is, the ancient Taoguan. There are bridges made of ropes to cross the river.

古文：守桃坪者，为陇木司。
现代文：守卫桃坪的，是陇木长官司。
English: The guardian of Taoping is the chief magistrate of Zhangmu.

古文：茂州长官司三：曰陇木，曰静州，曰叠溪。
现代文：茂州有三个长官司，分别是陇木、静州、迭溪。
English: There are three chief magistrates in Maozhou, namely, Shunmu, Jingzhou and Diexi.

古文：陇木长官司，其长官即陇木里人也。洪武时归附，授承直郎，世袭长官，岁贡马二匹。
现代文：陇木长官司的长官是陇木里的人，洪武年间归附朝廷，被授予承直郎，可世袭长官职位，每年向皇帝进献贡马二匹。
English: The head of the chief magistrate of Zhangmu is a person from Zhangmu. During the Hongwu era, it was attached to the imperial court and was awarded to Chengzhi Lang. The position of chief magistrate can be hereditary, and two tribute horses are presented to the emperor every year.

古文：所属玉亭、神溪十二寨，俱为编氓，有保长统之。
现代文：其下属玉亭、神溪等十二个村寨，居住的都是编入户籍的百姓，由保长统领他们。
English: Its subordinate Yuting, Shenxi and other twelve villages are all inhabited by people who have been registered with the household registration, and they are led by the head warden.

古文：静州长官司，其地即唐之悉唐县，其长官亦静州里人也。
现代文：静州长官司，是以前唐朝悉唐县的所在地，其长官也是静州里的人。
English: Jingzhou Guanzi was the seat of Tang County in the Tang Dynasty. Its governor was also from Jingzhou.

古文：袭官贡马，与陇木同。
现代文：他们继承官位、进献贡马，与陇木相同。
English: They inherited official positions and contributed tribute horses, the same as the camphor trees.

古文：正德间，与岳希蓬、节孝为乱，攻茂城，断水道七日。
现代文：正德年间，他们与岳希蓬、节孝一起作乱，攻打茂城，切断了供水之道达七日之久。
English: During the Zhengde era, they, together with Yue Xibong and Jie Xiao, created a disturbance, attacked Mucheng, and cut off the water supply for seven days.

古文：节孝弟车勺潜引水以济我军。
现代文：节孝的弟弟车勺偷偷地引水救济明朝官军。
English: Setsuko's younger brother, Chezoh, secretly brought water to help the Ming government army.

古文：事平，使车勺袭职，辖法虎、核桃沟八寨，俱编户为氓，亦有保长统之。
现代文：叛乱平息后，让车勺继承长官司长官的职位，管辖法虎、核桃沟八个村寨，把当地的百姓全编入户籍，由保长来统领他们。
English: After the rebellion was quelled, he let Chezhao succeed to the post of Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief of the Chief.

古文：叠溪千户所，永乐四年置。领长官司二：曰叠溪，在治北一里；曰郁即，在治西十五里。
现代文：迭溪千户所，是永乐四年设置的，统领有二个长官司：一个称迭溪长官司，设置在千户所所治北面一里远的地方；另一个称郁即长官司，在所治西面十五里远的地方。
English: There are two chief magistrates in charge of the Dyehi Thousand Households' Administration, which was set up in the fourth year of Yongle. One is called the Dyehi Chief Magistrates' Administration, and is located one mile north of the Thousand Households' Administration; the other is called the Yuku Chief Magistrates' Administration, and is located fifteen miles west of the Administration.

古文：叠溪郁氏，洪武十五年归附，给印世袭，凡三年贡马四匹。
现代文：迭溪的郁氏，洪武十五年才归附朝廷，朝廷授给官印，让他们世袭为官，每三年向朝廷进贡马四匹。
English: It took Hongwu, a member of the Iu clan from Diexi, 15 years to become a vassal of the imperial court. The imperial court granted him the official seal, made him an official by heredity, and presented four horses to the imperial court as tribute every three years.

古文：长官所辖河东熟番八寨，皆大姓，及马路、小关七族。
现代文：迭溪长官司长官管辖河东汉化的八个村寨的番人和马路、小关七个家族。
English: The Chief of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Division of the Chief of the Division of the Division of the

古文：其土舍辖河西小姓六寨。
现代文：那八个村寨汉化了的番人都是大姓人家。该长官司的土舍则管辖河西六个村寨的小姓人家。
English: The guardians of the eight villages that have been Hanized are all families with the surname Da, while the chief magistrate's mansion is under the jurisdiction of families with the surname Xia in six villages in Hexi.

古文：地土广远。饶畜产，稞麦路积。
现代文：迭溪长官司土地广阔，畜产富饶，青稞、麦子沿路相积。
English: The land of the Chief Magistrate's Office is vast, the livestock production is rich, and the barley and wheat are piled up along the road.

古文：人皆枭黠，名虽熟番，与生番等。
现代文：这里的人都枭雄狡黠，名义上虽已是汉化了的番人，实际上与没有汉化的番人是一样的。
English: The people here are cunning and crafty. Although they are nominally the guardians of Sinicization, they are actually the same as the guardians without Sinicization.

古文：郁即长官啖保，万历十八年与黑水、松坪称兵，攻新桥，明年伏诛。
现代文：郁即长官司的官名叫口敢保，万历十八年与黑水、松坪等地番族人一起举兵，攻打新桥，第二年伏法被杀。
English: The chief magistrate's official name was Kuchikanbo, and in 18 B.C. he raised an army with the Banshu people from Heishui, Songping and other places to attack Xinqiao. He was killed the following year.

古文：汉关墩附近诸小姓，旧属郁即，至是改属叠溪。
现代文：汉关墩附近的各小姓人家，原先隶属于郁即，至此改为隶属于迭溪。
English: The small families in the vicinity of Hankuan Pass were originally affiliated with Yuxiao, but now belong to Diixi.

古文：初，都督方政平历日诸寨，设长宁安抚司，隶松潘。
现代文：当初，都督方政平定历日等村寨时，设置了长宁安抚司，隶属于松潘。
English: At first, when the prefectural governor Fang Zhengping set a date to pacify the villages, he set up the Changning Pacification Division, which was affiliated with Songpan.

古文：至正统元年，总兵蒋贵言其辽阔，亦改隶于叠溪守御千户。
现代文：正统元年，总兵蒋贵认为松潘地域太辽阔了不好统领，便将长宁安抚司改由迭溪守御千户来管辖。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, the general soldier Jiang Gui thought that the Songpan region was too vast to be governed, so he changed the Changning Pacification Department to be governed by the Diei River Guard.

古文：松潘，古氐羌地。
现代文：松潘，是古代氐羌人的地方。
English: Songpan is a place where people lived in ancient times.

古文：西汉置护羌校尉于此。
现代文：西汉时期设置了护羌校尉。
English: During the Western Han Dynasty, the post of "guardian lieutenant" was established.

古文：唐初置松州都督，广德初，陷于吐蕃。
现代文：唐朝初年，此地设置松州都督，广德初年被吐蕃攻陷。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the governor of Songzhou was set up here, and the first year of Guangde was invaded and conquered by Tubo.

古文：宋时，吐蕃将潘罗支领之，名潘州。
现代文：宋朝时期，吐蕃将领潘罗支统领该地，名为潘州。
English: During the Song Dynasty, the land was ruled by the Tubo general Pan Luo, and was called Pan Zhou.

古文：元置吐蕃宣慰司。
现代文：元朝在此设置吐蕃宣慰司。
English: The Yuan Dynasty set up the Tujia Xuanliao Division here.

古文：洪武十二年，命平羌将军御史大夫丁玉定其地，敕之曰： 松潘僻在万山，接西戎之境，朕岂欲穷兵远讨，但羌戎屡寇边，征之不获已也。
现代文：洪武十二年，朝廷命令平羌将军御史大夫丁玉去平定该地区。皇帝对丁玉说： 松潘地方偏僻，处于万山之中，与西戎之地接壤。我并不是想穷兵远征，而是羌戎族人屡次侵犯我们的边关，每次征讨都没有收获，这次是不得已而为之。
English: In the twelfth year of Hongwu, the imperial court ordered Pingyao General and Chief Historian Ding Yutu to pacify the region. The emperor said to Ding Yutu: Songpan is a remote place, located in the mountains, bordering the land of Xi Rong. I did not want to go on a punitive expedition, but the Qiong Rong people repeatedly violated our border. Each time there was no harvest, this time it was out of necessity.

古文：今捷至，知松州已克，徐将资粮于容州，进取潘州。
现代文：现今捷报传来，知道松州已被你们攻克，你们应慢慢地将军用物资和粮食储存在容州，去攻打潘州。
English: Now that the news of victory has come, knowing that Songzhou has been conquered by you, you should slowly store military supplies and grain in Rongzhou and go to attack Panzhou.

古文：若尽三州之地，则叠州不须穷兵，自当来服。
现代文：如果将三个州全部占领，则对迭州不需要用兵，他们自己便会来投降的。
English: If all three states were occupied, there would be no need to send troops to Texas; they would surrender on their own.

古文：须择士勇者守纳都、叠溪路，其驿道无阻遏者，不可守也。
现代文：你们应该挑选勇敢的士卒守卫纳都、迭溪两路，其驿道没有什么阻遏，则不必守卫。
English: You should select brave soldiers to guard the two roads of Nadu and Diixi. If there is nothing to stop them, they do not need to be guarded.

古文：来降诸戎长，必遣入朝，朕亲抚谕之。 
现代文：凡来投降的各位戎族酋长，一定要把他们送到京城来朝觐，我将亲自安抚他们。 
English: All the chieftains of the Eunuchs who have come to surrender must be sent to the capital for a pilgrimage. I will personally pacify them.

古文：遂并潘州于松州，置松州卫指挥使司。
现代文：于是便把潘州并入松州，设置松州卫指挥使司。
English: As a result, Panzhou was merged into Songzhou, and the Songzhou Ambassadorial Division was established.

古文：丁玉遣宁州卫指挥高显城其地。
现代文：丁玉派宁州卫指挥高显在该地筑起城墙。
English: Ding Yu sent Gao Xian, the commander of the Ningzhou Garrison, to build a city wall in the area.

古文：十三年，帝以松州卫远在山谷，屯种不给，馈饷为难，命罢之。
现代文：十三年，皇帝认为松州卫远在山谷之中，军队驻扎和耕种不方便，粮饷难以解决，便下命令将松州卫罢了。
English: In the thirteenth year, the emperor thought that Songzhou Weiyuan was in the valley, it was inconvenient to station and cultivate the army, and it was difficult to solve the grain shortage, so he ordered to abandon Songzhou Weiyuan.

古文：未几，指挥耿忠经略其地，奏言松州为番蜀要害地，不可罢，命复置。
现代文：不久，指挥耿忠来管理经营该地方，向朝廷上奏说松州是四川番族人的要害之地，不能罢，已命令将松州卫建置恢复了。
English: Not long after, commander Geng Zhong came to manage and operate the place, and reported to the imperial court that Songzhou was a key place for the Sichuan Bans, and he had ordered Songzhou Weijianji to be restored.

古文：十四年置松潘等处安抚司，以龙州知州薛文胜为安抚使，秩从五品。
现代文：十四年，设置了松潘等地的安抚司，以龙州的知州薛文胜为安抚使，官秩为从五品。
English: In the 14th year, the Pacifying Division was set up in Songpan and other places, with Longzhou's Chizhou Xue Wensheng as the pacifying envoy, and the official rank was from the fifth grade.

古文：又置十三族长官司，秩正七品：曰勒都，曰阿昔洞，曰北定，曰牟力结，曰蛒匝，曰祈命，曰山洞，曰麦匝，曰者多，曰占藏先结，曰包藏先结，曰班班，曰白马路。
现代文：又设置十三族长官司，其长官的官秩为正七品。这十三族长官司分别称为：勒都、阿昔洞、北定、牟力结、虫各匝、祈命、山洞、麦匝、者多、占藏先结、包藏先结、班班、白马路。
English: In addition, thirteen chief magistrates were set up, and the official rank of their chiefs was up to the seventh grade. These thirteen chief magistrates were respectively called: Le Du, Aksu-dong, Beiding, Muli-dong, Mushigakko-dong, Pray for life, Mountain-cave, Wheat-field, Many people, Occupy Tibet, Encircle Tibet, Class-class, and Baima Road.

古文：棋后复隶松潘者，长官司四，曰阿思，曰思囊儿，曰阿用，曰潘斡寨；安抚司四，曰八郎，曰阿角寨，曰麻儿匝，曰芒儿者。
现代文：后来又隶属于松潘的长官司有四个：阿思、思囊儿、阿用、潘斡寨；安抚司也有四个：八朗、阿角寨、麻儿匝、芒儿者。
English: Later, there were also four chief magistrate's offices subordinated to Songpan: A Si, Si Cang, A Ying, Pan Yu Zhai; there were also four pacification offices: Bailang, A Jiao Zhai, Ma Rong, Meng Rong.

古文：后又以思曩日安抚司附焉。
现代文：后来又把思囊日安抚司附到松潘。
English: Later, he also attached the think tank, the Japan Pacification Department, to Songpan.

古文：诸长官司每三年入贡，赏赐如例。
现代文：各长官司每三年向朝廷进贡物一次，皇帝也按惯例给予赏赐。
English: Every three years, the chief magistrates brought tribute to the imperial court, and the emperor also gave rewards according to the usual practice.

古文：十五年，占藏先结等土酋来朝，贡马一百三匹，诏赐绮钞有差。
现代文：十五年，占藏先结等地的土著酋长来京城朝觐，献贡马一百零三匹，皇帝下诏按他们的等级分别赏赐绮衣和钱钞。
English: In the 15th year, the aboriginal chiefs who occupied Tibet and other places came to the capital for a pilgrimage, offering 103 tribute horses. The emperor issued an edict to reward them with clothing and money according to their rank.

古文：十六年，秋忠言： 臣所辖松潘等处安抚司属各长官司，宜以其户口之数，量其民力，岁令纳马置驿，而籍其民充驿夫，供徭役。 
现代文：十六年，耿忠向皇帝上奏说： 我所管辖的松潘等处安抚司所隶属的各长官司，应该按他们所拥有的户口数和百姓所能有的力量，每年让他们缴纳马匹设置驿站，征籍当地百姓为驿夫，提供徭役。 
English: In 166, Geng Zhong made a report to the emperor, saying: "The chief magistrates of the Songpan and other pacification departments under my jurisdiction should, according to the number of household registrations they have and the strength of the people, let them pay horses to set up a post every year, enlist local people as widowers, and provide them with a post.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：既而松潘羌民作乱，官兵讨平之。甃松州及叠溪城。
现代文：不久，松潘的羌族百姓作乱，官兵讨伐平定了叛乱，在松州和迭溪城内以砖修井。
English: Soon, the Dong people in Songpan rioted, and the officers and soldiers fought to quell the rebellion, using bricks to build wells in Songzhou and Diexi.

古文：十七年，松潘八积族老虎等寨蛮乱。官兵击破之，获马一百二十，犏牛三百，牦牛九十。
现代文：十七年，松潘八积族老虎等村寨的蛮族人作乱，官军将乱军击破，缴获马匹一百二十匹，犏牛三百头，牦牛五百九十头。
English: In the seventeenth year, the barbarians in the village, such as the Tiger of the Songpan-Hachizeki people, started a riot. The government army defeated the rioters and captured 120 horses, 300 yaks, and 590 yaks.

古文：景川侯曹震请择良马贡京师，余给军，其犏牛、牦牛非中国所畜，令易粮饷犒军，从之。
现代文：景川侯曹震请求朝廷允许他们挑选良马献到京城，其余的马分配给当地的官军，至于犏牛、牦牛不是中原所能养的，可以让当地蛮族人拿粮饷来换，以这粮饷犒赏军队。
English: The lord of Jingchuan, Cao Zhen, requested the imperial court to allow them to select good horses to be presented to the capital, and the remaining horses to be distributed to the local government troops. As for the yaks and snails, which could not be raised in the Central Plains, the local barbarians could exchange them for grain to reward the troops.

古文：十八年，松州羌反。
现代文：皇帝同意了。
English: The emperor agreed.

古文：成都卫指挥成信等率兵攻其牟力等寨，破之。
现代文：十八年，松州的羌族人造反，成都卫指挥成信等带兵攻破了羌族人的牟力等村寨。
English: In the 18th year, the Yi people of Songzhou rebelled, and Chengdu Wei commander Chengxin led the troops to break through the villages of the Yi people such as Mouli.

古文：兵还，又遇贼三千人于道，复击败之，追至乞刺河乃还。
现代文：回军时，在路上与三千叛军遭遇，又打败他们，一直追击到乞剌河才回师。
English: When returning to the army, he encountered three thousand rebels on the road, defeated them again, and pursued them all the way to the Beggar River before returning to the division.

古文：二十年改松州卫松潘等处军民指挥使司，改松潘安抚司为龙州。
现代文：二十年，将松州卫改为松潘等处军民指挥使司，将松潘安抚司改为龙州。
English: Twenty years ago, Songzhou Wei was changed to Songpan and other military and civilian command and envoy departments, and Songpan Pacification Department was changed to Longzhou.

古文：二十一年，杂贡生番则路、南向等引草地生番千余人寇潘州阿昔洞长官司，杀伤人口。
现代文：二十一年，朵贡地区没有汉化的番族人则路、南向等带领草地地区没有汉化的番族人一千多，抢劫了潘州的阿昔峒长官司，杀伤了不少人。
English: In the 21st year, more than a thousand uncultured clansmen in grassland areas led by Zhelu, Nanxiang and other uncultured clansmen in the Dogon region robbed the Aksu chief magistrate of Pan Prefecture and killed and injured many people.

古文：指挥周助率马步军同松潘卫军讨之，番寇率众迎战，千户刘德破之，斩首三十四级，获马三十余匹。
现代文：指挥周助带领骑兵和步兵会同松潘卫的军队一起前去讨伐，抢劫了的番族人也率领众人前来迎战，千户刘德攻破了番族人的阵营，斩获首级三十四个，缴获马匹三十多匹。
English: Commander Zhou Zuo led the cavalry and infantry together with Songpan Wei's army to go to the crusade. The robbed guardsmen also led the crowd to come to fight. Chihou Liu De broke through the guardsmen's camp, captured thirty-four first-class horses, and captured more than thirty horses.

古文：贼溃，渡河四十余里，复收败卒屯聚。
现代文：贼人溃散，渡过河逃了四十多里后，又收集起残兵在一起屯驻。
English: The thieves dispersed, crossed the river and fled more than forty miles, and then gathered up the remnants of the soldiers and stationed them together.

古文：指挥周能追击之，斩首一百三十余级，获马六十余匹，溺死甚众，群番远遁。
现代文：指挥周能带兵追击，斩杀了他们一百三十多人，缴获马匹六十余匹，溺死的人马很多，番族人因此逃得远远的。
English: Commander Zhou Neng led the troops in pursuit, killed more than one hundred and thirty of them, captured more than sixty horses, and drowned a lot of people and horses. As a result, the Qiang people fled far away.

古文：二十六年，西番思曩日等族来归，进马百三十匹，命给金铜信符并赐文绮袭衣。
现代文：二十六年，西番的思曩日等家族前来归附朝廷，向朝廷进献马三十匹，皇帝命令授给他们铜制的镀金信符，赏赐给他们有花纹的绮衣官服。
English: In the 26th year, families such as the Xifan's Shifang and other families came to attach themselves to the imperial court and presented thirty horses to the imperial court. The emperor ordered to give them copper-plated gold letters and give them fancy embroidered official clothes.

古文：宣德二年，麻儿匝顺化，喇嘛著八让卜来归。
现代文：宣德二年，麻儿匝长官司顺从朝廷逐渐汉化，喇嘛著八让卜也前来归附。
English: In the second year of the Xuande Emperor's reign, the chief magistrate, Maerchen, gradually converted to Han Chinese in obedience to the imperial court, and the lamas also came to convert to Han Chinese after making eight concessions.

古文：置麻儿匝安抚司，以喇嘛著八让卜为安抚。
现代文：朝廷就设置了麻儿匝安抚司，任命喇嘛著八让卜为安抚。
English: The imperial court set up a pacification department and appointed a lama with eight concessions as a pacifier.

古文：麻儿匝在阿乐地，去松潘七百余里。
现代文：麻儿匝在阿乐境内，离松潘有七百多里。
English: Maerjun is in the territory of Ale, more than seven hundred miles away from Songpan.

古文：初，著八让卜时侵掠边民及遮八郎安抚司朝贡路。
现代文：当初，著八让卜时常侵犯边境，掠夺边境居民，并阻挡八郎安抚司前往朝廷献贡。
English: At first, Hachiro often violated the border, plundered the border residents, and blocked Hachiro from going to the imperial court to pay tribute.

古文：松潘卫指挥吴玮遣人招之，因遣其侄完卜来贡献，言其地广民众，过于八郎，请置宣抚司以辖之。
现代文：松潘卫指挥吴玮派人前去招抚他，他就派他的侄子前来献贡物，并说他统治的地区地广人多，比八郎要大，请求设置宣抚司来管辖该地。
English: Songpan Wei commander Wu Gan sent someone to appease him, and he sent his nephew to offer tribute, and said that the area he ruled was large and more populous than Hachiro, and requested the establishment of a courtier to govern the area.

古文：帝命置安抚，遣敕谕之。
现代文：皇帝命令设置安抚司，派人送诏书给他。
English: The emperor ordered to set up a pacification department and sent someone to deliver an imperial edict to him.

古文：四川巡按等奏松潘卫所辖阿用等寨蛮寇，拥众万余，伤败官军，请讨之。
现代文：四川巡按等官员上奏皇帝，说松潘卫所管辖的阿用等村寨的蛮族人，拥有一万多人，经常伤害打败官军，请求朝廷派兵征讨他们。
English: Officials such as the Sichuan patrols appealed to the emperor, saying that the barbarians in villages such as Anyu under the jurisdiction of Songpan Wei had more than 10,000 people, often hurt and defeated the official army, and requested the court to send soldiers to recruit them.

古文：帝意边将必有激之者。
现代文：皇帝认为这种作乱一定是哪个边关将领激起来的。
English: The emperor thought that the disturbance must have been instigated by some frontier general.

古文：既四川都司奏至，言并非番寇。实由千户钱宏因调发松潘官军往征交址，众惮行，宏诡言番寇至，当追捕，冀免调。
现代文：不久四川都司的奏章传到朝廷，说这并不是番族人入侵，而是千户钱宏征调松潘的官军前去征讨交，大家都不愿去，钱宏便诡称番人已来入侵，应当派人追捕，希望免除征调。
English: Soon, a report from the governor of Sichuan was sent to the imperial court, saying that this was not an invasion by the Qiang people, but that Qian Hong had summoned the official army of Songpan from a thousand households to go and negotiate. Everyone did not want to go, and Qian Hong said that the guards had come to invade and that someone should be sent to hunt them down, hoping to be exempted from the conscription.

古文：又领军突入麦匝诸族，逼取牛马，致番人忿怨。
现代文：接着他又带领军队突然进入麦匝各大姓家族地区，强行从他们那儿索取牛马，致使番族人忿怒怨恨。
English: Then he suddenly led his army into the areas of the major families in the wheat fields, and forcibly demanded cattle and horses from them, causing the anger and resentment of the tribals.

古文：复以大军将致讨慑之，番众惊溃，约黑水生番为乱。
现代文：为此他又用大军将出来讨伐他们来威慑番族人，番族百姓惊慌而逃，便约黑水地区没有汉化的番族人前来作乱。
English: For this reason, he also used a large army to fight them to deter the tribals. The tribals panicked and fled, and the tribals who had not been Sinicized in the Heishui area came to make trouble.

古文：帝命逮宏等，而责诸司怠玩边务，亟捕诸伤官军者。
现代文：皇帝了解情况后，命令逮捕钱宏等人，责备各司怠慢边关事务，玩忽职守，让他们急速捕获那些打伤官军的人。
English: After learning about the situation, the emperor ordered the arrest of Qian Hong and others, accused all departments of neglecting border affairs and neglecting their duties, and let them quickly capture those who injured the official army.

古文：遣都指挥佥事蒋贵往，同松潘卫指挥吴玮招抚番寇，令调附近诸卫军二万人以行。
现代文：接着朝廷派都指挥佥事蒋贵前往该地区，同松潘卫指挥吴玮一起去招抚入侵的番族人，又命令附近各卫所调拨二万军队跟随他们行动。
English: Next, the imperial court sent the commander of the Ancients, Jiang Gui, to the region, and together with the commander of the Songpan Guards, Wu Gan, they went to appease the invading tributaries, and ordered the nearby guards to allocate twenty thousand troops to follow them.

古文：时贼围松潘、叠溪、茂州，断索桥，官军与战皆败，出掠绵竹诸县，官署民居皆被焚毁，镇抚侯琏死之。
现代文：此时，作乱的贼人已包围了松潘、迭溪、茂州，切断绳索桥，官军与他们接战都失败了。他们出来到绵竹各县抢劫，官署和民居都被烧毁，镇抚侯琏也以身殉职。
English: At this time, the rioting thieves had surrounded Songpan, Diexi, and Maozhou, and cut off the rope bridge. The government army failed to engage them in battle. They came out to rob all the counties in Mianzhu. Government offices and residences were burned, and the town supervisor, Hou Yi, also died in the line of duty.

古文：蜀王护卫官校七千人来援，命都督陈怀与指挥蒋贵等合师亟讨之，而枭宏于松潘以徇，并窜诸将之贪淫玩寇者。
现代文：蜀王派遣护卫官校七千人前来支援，命令都督陈怀与指挥蒋贵等将军队集中一起去征讨，将钱宏在松潘斩首示众，将各位将领中的贪淫者和玩忽职守者放逐。
English: The king of Shu dispatched seven thousand guards from the officer's school to come to support, ordered the governor Chen Huai and the commander Jiang Gui to gather the army together to collect, behead Qian Hong in Songpan, and banish the adulterers and derelicts of duty among the generals.

古文：三年，陈怀等率诸军屡败贼于圪答坝、叶棠关，夺永镇等桥，复叠溪，抚定祁命等十族，又招降渴卓等二十余寨，松潘平。
现代文：三年，陈怀等人率领各军在圪答坝、叶棠关等地屡次打败贼人，夺取了永镇等桥梁，收复迭溪，安抚平定了祁命等十大家族，又招降了渴卓等二十多个村寨，松潘的叛乱才平定下来。
English: In three years, Chen Huai and others led the armies to repeatedly defeat the bandits in the areas of Lunda Dam and Ye Tangguan, captured the bridges such as Yongzhen, recovered the Diyi Creek, pacified the ten major families such as Xingmen, and recruited more than twenty villages such as Xizhuo. Only then was the rebellion of Songpan settled down.

古文：八年，八部安抚司及思囊儿十四族朝贡之使陛辞，令赍敕还谕其土官，俾约束所辖蛮民，安分循理，毋作过以取罪戾。
现代文：八年，八部安抚司和思囊儿等十四大姓家族的朝贡使者向皇帝告辞，皇帝让他们带敕书回去告诉他们的土官，要他们约束他们辖区内的蛮族百姓，安分守己遵循法理，不要去犯过错以免获罪。
English: In the eighth year, the tributary emissaries of the fourteen largest families, such as the eight pacifiers and the thinkers, bid farewell to the emperor. The emperor asked them to take the letter back to tell their local officials to restrain the barbarian people in their jurisdiction, keep the peace and abide by the law, and do not make mistakes so as not to be guilty.

古文：九年，敕指挥佥事方政、蒋贵等抚剿松潘。
现代文：九年皇帝命令指挥佥事方政、蒋贵等去招抚和进剿松潘。
English: In the ninth year, the emperor ordered the commanding officers Fang Zheng and Jiang Gui to appease and pacify Songpan.

古文：政等至，榜谕祸福，威、茂诸卫俱听命，惟松潘、叠溪所辖任昌、巴猪、黑虎等寨梗化。
现代文：方政等人到达后，张榜告诉百姓什么是祸，什么是福。威远、茂州等卫所都听从号令，惟有松潘、迭溪所辖的任昌、巴猪、黑虎等村寨顽固不化。
English: After Fang Zheng and others arrived, Zhang Pang told the people what was bad luck and what was good luck. Wei Yuan, Maozhou and other sanitariums all obeyed the order, but the villages under the jurisdiction of Songpan and Diexi, such as Renchang, Baoji and Heihu, stubbornly refused to change.

古文：政令指挥赵得、宫聚等以次进兵，平龙溪等三十七寨，班师还。
现代文：方政命令指挥赵得、宫聚等按次序进兵，平定了龙溪等三十七个村寨，凯旋回师。
English: The central government ordered the commanders Zhao De, Gong Ju and others to march into the army in order, and thirty-seven villages such as Longxi were leveled, and the division made a triumphant return.

古文：命蒋贵佩平蛮将军印，镇守松潘。
现代文：朝廷命令蒋贵佩戴平蛮将军的印，镇守松潘。
English: The imperial court ordered Chiang Kai-shek to wear the seal of General Pingban and to appoint Songpan as the town watchman.

古文：十年，贵奏，比因番人不靖，松潘、叠溪诸处仓粮，销殆尽，别无储积。
现代文：十年，蒋贵上奏章，说近来因为番族人作乱，松潘、迭溪各地仓库里的粮食已支销一空，没有储存积蓄了。
English: Ten years later, Chiang Kai-shek made a report, saying that recently, due to the turmoil caused by the Phan people, the grain in the warehouses in Songpan and Diexi had been completely spent, and there was no storage.

古文：帝命户部于四川岁运之数，量益二分给之。
现代文：皇帝命令户部从四川每年运送的粮食中，抽出二分来支援蒋贵。
English: The emperor ordered the Household Division to allocate two-thirds of the annual grain shipments from Sichuan to support Chiang Kai-shek.

古文：正统三年，岩州长官司让达作乱，侵杂道诸边，要道长官安白诉于朝。
现代文：正统三年，岩州长官司的让达作乱，侵犯杂道等边关。杂道的长官安白向朝廷控诉此事。
English: In the third year of the orthodox rule, Iwakami no kanshi's troops caused a disturbance and violated the side roads and other border gates. The chief of the side roads, Anpaku, complained about this to the Imperial Court.

古文：帝命四川三司往谕之，皆归服。
现代文：皇帝命四川的三个司前去劝谕他们，他们都归顺服从朝廷。
English: The emperor ordered the three magistrates of Sichuan to go and advise them, and they all submitted to the imperial court.

古文：四年，松潘指挥赵得奏： 祁命族番寇商巴作乱，官军捕擒之。
现代文：四年，松潘的指挥赵得上奏说： 祁命族的番人商巴作乱，官军已将其擒获。
English: In the fourth year, Zhao De, the commander of Songpan, said in his report: Shangba, the watchman of the Humen people, caused a disturbance, and the government army has captured him.

古文：其弟小商巴复聚浦江、新塘等关，据险劫掠，乞发大军剿除。 
现代文：商巴的弟弟小商巴又在浦江、新塘等关聚众，据险抢劫，请求派大军前来剿灭清除。 
English: Shangba's younger brother, Xiao Shangba, also gathered people in Pujiang, Xintang and other places, and, according to the danger of robbery, requested that a large army be sent to eliminate and eliminate.

古文：帝命李安弃总兵官，王翱参赞军务，调成都左卫官军及松潘土兵，合二万人征之。
现代文：皇帝任命李安为总兵官，王翱为参赞军务，征调成都左卫的官军及松潘的士兵，合起来为二万人前去征讨。
English: The emperor appointed Li An as the chief military officer, Wang Qi as the military affairs counselor, and conscripted the official army of Chengdu Zuowei and the soldiers of Songpan, altogether 20,000 people went to enlist.

古文：已，翱知商巴为都指挥赵谅所陷，乃按诛谅而释商巴等，事遂已。
现代文：之后，王翱了解到商巴是被都指挥赵谅所陷害才作乱的，于是王翱便杀了赵谅，释放了商巴等人，叛乱才平息。
English: Later, Wang Yao learned that Shangba was framed by the Du Du commander Zhao Zheng to start the rebellion, so Wang Yao killed Zhao Zheng, released Shangba and others, and the rebellion was quelled.

古文：九年，松潘指挥佥事王杲奏： 比者，黑虎等寨番蛮攻围椒园、松溪等关堡，杀伤官民。
现代文：正统九年，松潘指挥佥事王杲上奏说： 近来，黑虎等村寨的番族人攻打椒园、松溪等地的关隘和城堡，打死打伤不少官民。
English: In the ninth year of orthodoxy, Songpan's conductor, Wang Xuan, recited the following anecdote: Recently, the black tigers and other villagers of the Qiang people attacked the pepper garden, the pine creek and other places of the pass and the castle, killing and injuring many officials and civilians.

古文：欲行擒剿，恐各寨惊疑，应谕能擒贼者重赏之。 
现代文：我们想去进剿捉拿他们，又怕各村寨引起惊疑猜忌，希望朝廷谕告他们谁能擒拿叛贼就重赏谁。 
English: We want to go in and capture them, but we are afraid that the villages will be suspicious, and we hope that the court will tell them that whoever can capture the traitors will be rewarded.

古文：报可。
现代文：朝廷认为此建议可行。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：十年，黑虎寨贼首多儿太伏诛。
现代文：十年，黑虎寨的叛贼首领多儿太伏法被杀。
English: Ten years ago, the traitor leader of Black Tiger Village, Dor Taifu, was killed.

古文：初，多儿太掠茂州境，为官军所获，诚而释之。
现代文：原先，多儿太抢劫茂州境内时被官军抓获，官军将其训诫一番后就释放了。
English: Originally, Doerta was caught by the government army while robbing the territory of Mengzhou. The government army released him after admonishing him.

古文：未几，复纠诸寨入掠。
现代文：不久，他又纠集各寨的番族人进来抢劫。
English: Not long after, he gathered the guards from each village to come in and loot.

古文：帝命序班祁全往谕诸寨，擒多儿太至京，枭其首。
现代文：皇帝命令序班祁全前往该地谕告各寨，把多儿太擒拿到京城，斩首示众。
English: The emperor ordered the whole party to go to the place and tell the villages to bring the Dowager Empress Dowager to the capital and behead her.

古文：十一年以寇深为佥都御史，提督松潘兵备。
现代文：十一年任命寇深为佥都御史，负责松潘的军事守备。
English: In the eleventh year, he appointed Koshin as the governor of Songdo, responsible for the military defense of Songpan.

古文：时松潘皆已向化，惟歪地骨鹿簇二十寨不服，命督高广、王杲等剿之。
现代文：此时松潘都已向化朝廷，只有歪地骨鹿族的二十个村寨不服，朝廷便命令高广、王杲等人前去进剿。
English: At this time, all of Songpan had been converted to the imperial court, and only the twenty villages of the Xidi Bone Deer tribe were not satisfied, and the imperial court ordered Gao Guang, Wang Yao and others to go to the imperial court.

古文：设思曩日安抚司，以阿思观为之使，隶松潘卫。
现代文：之后，设置思曩日安抚司，任命阿思观为安抚使，隶属于松潘卫。
English: After that, he set up the Sino-Japanese Pacification Division and appointed Asikun as the pacification envoy, affiliated with Songpanwei.

古文：先是，阿思观父端葛，洪武中归顺，给金牌抚番，至阿思观又能招抚，故有是命。
现代文：此前，阿思观的父亲端葛，在洪武中年归顺朝廷，朝廷授予他金牌，让其招抚番族人。至阿思观时又有能力招抚其众，所以朝廷便任命他为安抚使。
English: Previously, A Si Gu's father, Duang Ge, surrendered to the imperial court in the middle of the Hongwu era. The imperial court awarded him a gold medal and allowed him to appease the tribunes. When A Si Gu was able to appease his people, the imperial court appointed him as a pacifying envoy.

古文：景泰三年，镇守松潘刑部左侍郎罗绮等奏： 雪儿卜寨贼首卓时芳等，烟崇寨贼首阿儿结等，累年纠合于安化关劫掠。
现代文：景泰三年，镇守松潘的刑部左侍郎罗绮等人上奏说 ：雪儿卜寨的贼人首领卓时芳，烟崇寨贼人首领阿儿结等人，连年纠集人在安化关抢劫。
English: In the third year of Jingtai, the town guard of Songpan, the left attendant of the criminal department, Luo Luo and others, reported that: the thief leader Zhuo Shifang of Sherbuzhai, the thief leader of Yanzongzhai, and others, have been gathering people to rob Anhua Pass for years.

古文：臣会师抵其巢穴，斩首不计其数，生擒卓时芳、阿儿结等，枭斩于市。 
现代文：我们会合军队抵达他们的巢穴，斩杀敌人不计其数，活捉了卓时芳、阿儿结等人，将其斩首于闹市之中示众。 
English: Our combined forces arrived at their lair, killed countless enemies, captured Zhuo Shifang, Ah Jie and others alive, and beheaded them in the middle of the city.

古文：七年，提督松潘罗绮复奏： 松潘土番王永习性儿犷，尝杀其土官高茂林男妇五百余口，及故土官董敏子伯浩等二十余人。
现代文：七年，松潘的提督罗绮又上奏说 ：松潘当地的番族人王永，习性凶残粗犷，曾杀死土官高茂林家的男女五百多口人，杀死已经亡故的土官董敏的儿子伯诰等二十多人。
English: In the seventh year, Songpan's admiral, Luo Gan, reported again: Wang Yong, a local clan member of Songpan, had a ferocious and brutal nature. He had killed more than five hundred men and women of the local official, Gao Maolin, and had killed more than twenty people, including Bo Gan, the son of the deceased local official, Dong Min.

古文：今又纠合番蛮，攻劫地方。
现代文：现今他又纠集番族中的蛮人，攻打、抢劫地方。
English: Nowadays, he also gathers the barbarians among the tributaries to attack and rob the place.

古文：臣与指挥周贵等统领官军，直抵桑坪，已将永等诛灭，边境肃清。 
现代文：我与指挥周贵等统领官军，直接抵达桑坪，已将王永等人诛杀消灭了，这样边境地区已经肃清。 
English: I, together with commander Zhou Gui and other commanders of the official army, arrived directly in Sangping and have eliminated Wang Yong and others, so the border area has been cleared.

古文：降敕褒赏。
现代文：皇帝降旨褒奖他们。
English: The emperor decreed that they should be rewarded.

古文：天顺五年，番众入龙安、石泉等处，扰粮道。
现代文：天顺五年，番族人进入龙安、石泉等地，骚扰运粮通道。
English: In the fifth year of Tianshun, the Banshu people entered Long'an, Shiquan and other places, harassing grain transportation channels.

古文：六年敕松潘总兵许贵曰： 叙州蛮贼出没为患，比松潘尤甚，其驰往会剿。 
现代文：六年，皇帝给松潘总兵许贵下令说 ：叙州的蛮族贼人出没为患，造成的祸害比松潘更厉害，你赶快带兵前去会剿。 
English: In the sixth year, the emperor ordered Xu Gui, the general of the Songpan soldiers, saying, "The barbarian thieves in Shuzhou have infested the country, causing more harm than Songpan. You should quickly lead your soldiers to the meeting.

古文：贵闻命，会兵叙州，追讨昔乖件、莫洞、都夜三寨，分兵两哨，克硬寨四十余，斩首一千一百余级。
现代文：许贵听到命令后，带兵到叙州会合，追击讨伐昔乖件、莫洞、都夜三个寨子，把军队分成两哨，攻克了四十多个防守坚固的寨子，斩杀敌人一千一百多人。
English: After listening to the order, Xu Gui led the soldiers to the meeting in Shuzhou, pursued and attacked the three fortresses of Guobing, Moudong and Duye, divided the army into two posts, conquered more than forty fortified fortresses, and killed more than 1,100 enemies.

古文：成化二年，镇守太监阎礼奏： 松、茂、叠溪所辖白草坝等寨，番羌聚众五百人，越龙州境剽掠。
现代文：成化二年，镇守大监阎礼上奏说 ：松潘、茂州、迭溪所管辖的白草坝等寨子，番族羌人聚集了五百人，越过龙州境出来剽劫。
English: In the second year of Chenghua, Yan Li, the town guard superintendent, said in his report: In the White Grass Dam and other stockades under the jurisdiction of Songpan, Muzhou, and Diexi, 500 people of the Banshu Yi people gathered and crossed the border of Longzhou to loot.

古文：白草番者，唐吐蕃赞普遗种，上下凡十八寨。
现代文：白草的番人，是唐朝吐蕃赞普的后裔，上下共有十八个寨子。
English: The keeper of the white grass is a descendant of the Tang Dynasty Tujing Zampu, with a total of eighteen stockades up and down.

古文：部曲素强，恃其险阻，往往剽夺为患。 
现代文：他们的私兵素来强壮，倚仗他们的地势险阻，往往劫夺百姓成为祸患。 
English: Their private armies have always been strong, relying on their precarious terrain, often robbing the people and becoming a scourge.

古文：四年，礼复奏： 白草诸番拥众寇安县、石泉诸处，因各军俱调征山都掌蛮，致指挥王璟备御不谨。
现代文：四年，阎礼又上奏说 ：白草等番族人纠集众人进犯安县、石泉等地，因为各军都被征调去讨伐山都掌的蛮族人，致使指挥王瞡守备防卫无法严密。 
English: In the fourth year, Yan Li again made a report, saying that the Bai Cao and other Ban people gathered everyone to attack An County, Shiquan and other places, because all the armies were conscripted to fight the barbarians in the mountains, which made the commander Wang Xi unable to maintain a tight defense.

古文：命副总兵卢能剿之。
现代文：朝廷便命令副总兵卢能前去进剿。
English: The imperial court then ordered the vice-commander-in-chief Lu Neng to go to the capital.

古文：能遣指挥阎斌巡边至庙子沟，番贼三百突至，杀伤相当。
现代文：卢能派指挥阎斌去巡逻边境，到庙子沟时，番族贼人三百突然出现，双方接战后死伤相当。
English: Luneng sent commander Yan Bin to patrol the border, and when he arrived at Miao Zi Gou, three hundred Qiang thieves suddenly appeared. Both sides suffered similar casualties after the battle.

古文：斌以失机逮治。
现代文：阎斌以失机罪被逮捕。
English: Yan Bin was arrested on charges of causing an accident.

古文：九年，巡抚夏埙奏： 黑虎寨贼首夜合等攻关堡，左参将宰用、兵备副使沈琮督兵驰诣松溪堡败之，斩获夜合等三十六级。 
现代文：九年，巡抚夏埙上奏说： 黑虎寨贼人首领夜合等抢劫和攻打关隘城堡，左参将宰用、兵备副使沈琮督促军队赶往松溪堡将贼人打败，斩获夜合等三十六人的首级。 
English: In the ninth year, the governor Xia Yao said in his report: the leader of the thieves of the Black Tiger Village, Yeha, robbed and attacked the castle of Guanqiao. The left-hand general Zhai Ye, and the deputy commander of the army, Shen Yao, urged the army to rush to the Songxi Fort to defeat the thieves, and won the heads of 36 people such as Yeha.

古文：松潘指挥佥事尧彧奏： 臣与兵备沈琮分剿白马路水土、茹儿等番寨，大克之。
现代文：松潘指挥佥事尧也上奏朝廷 ：我与兵备沈琮分别围剿白马路水土、茹儿等番族人的寨子，都将它们攻克了。 
English: Songpan's commanding officer's anecdote was also reported to the imperial court: I and the soldiers of Shen Yi separately besieged the White Horse Road, soil and water, Ru'er and other guardsmen's stockade, and conquered them all.

古文：弘治二年，松潘番寇杀伤平夷堡官军，命逮指挥以下各官治之。
现代文：弘治二年，松潘的番族人杀伤了平夷堡的官军，朝廷命令将指挥以下的各级官员都逮捕起来治罪。
English: In the second year of the Hongzhi era, the people of Songpan killed and wounded the government army of Pingyi Fort, and the imperial court ordered that all officials at all levels below the command be arrested and punished.

古文：三年免思曩日安抚等十六族明年朝觐，以守臣言其地方灾伤也。
现代文：三年免除思曩日安抚等十六族第二年进京朝觐皇帝的任务，原因是当地的守卫大臣说当地遭受了灾害损伤。
English: Three years of exemption from the task of appeasing the Sixteen Ethnicities including the Sixteen Ethnicities in the second year of the Emperor's visit to Beijing, due to the fact that the local guard minister said that the local area had suffered disaster damage.

古文：七年，松潘空心寨番贼犯边，都指挥佥事李镐败之。
现代文：七年，松潘空心寨的番族贼人侵犯边境地区，都指挥佥事李镐将他们击败。
English: In the seventh year, the Qiang thieves of Songpan hollow heart village invaded the border area, and they were all defeated by the command of An Zhi Li.

古文：十三年，番贼入犯松潘坝州坡抵关，势益獗。 
现代文：十三年，番族贼人侵犯松潘坝州的坡抵关，势力猖獗。
English: In the thirteenth year, the Qiang thieves invaded the slope of Songpan Bajou, and the forces were rampant.

古文：命逮指挥汤纲等，而敕巡抚张瓒调汉、土官兵五万，由东南二路分剿，破白羊岭、鹅饮溪等三十一寨，斩四百余级。
现代文：朝廷命令将指挥汤纲等人逮捕问罪，让巡抚张瓒调集汉族和当地的官兵五万人，从东南二路分别进剿，攻破了白羊岭、鹅饮溪等三十一个寨子，斩杀敌人四百多名。
English: The imperial court ordered the commander Tang Gang and others to be arrested and questioned, and ordered the inspector Zhang Jun to mobilize 50,000 Han and local officers and soldiers to enter the city from the southeast second road separately, break through the thirty-one castles such as Baiyangling and Gezi Creek, and kill more than four hundred enemies.

古文：商巴等二十六族皆纳款。
现代文：商巴等二十六大姓家族全部投诚。
English: Twenty-six major families, including the Shangba family, all joined the revolution.

古文：十四年复攻黄头、青水诸寨，前后杀获男妇七百余人，赭其碉房九百，坠崖死者不可胜计，诸番稍靖。
现代文：十四年张瓒又向黄头、青水等寨子发动攻击，前后共杀死和俘虏男女七百多人，烧毁他们的碉堡房屋九百间，番族人中坠崖而死者无法统计。这样，各地番族人才稍为安静一些。
English: Fourteen years later, Zhang Ye attacked the fortresses of Huang Tou and Qing Shui, killing and capturing more than seven hundred men and women, burning down nine hundred of their fortified houses, and the deaths of clansmen who fell off cliffs were beyond count. In this way, the clansmen of all regions were a little quieter.

古文：正德元年，巡抚刘洪奏： 祈命族八长官司所摄番众多至三十寨，少亦二十余寨，环布松潘两河。
现代文：正德元年，巡抚刘洪上奏说： 祈命族的八个长官司所统摄的番族人多达三十个寨子，最少也有二十多寨，成环形分布在松潘两条河上。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, the inspector Liu Hong said: The eight chief officials of the Qiming people took a total of up to thirty wards, and at least more than twenty wards, which were distributed in a ring shape on the two rivers of Songpan.

古文：其土官已故子孙，自应承袭。
现代文：那里的土官已经亡故，其子孙自然应该继承官职。
English: The local magistrate there has died, and his descendants should naturally inherit the post.

古文：今宜察勘，有原降印信者，方许袭。 
现代文：现今应该去察看审核，有原来投降时所授印信者，方可继承官位。 
English: Now is the time to review the approval process. Only those who have the letter issued at the time of the original surrender can succeed to the post.

古文：报可。
现代文：朝廷认为可行。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：十六年，松潘卫熟番八大禳等作乱，同知杜钦平之。
现代文：十六年，松潘卫已汉化的番族人八大禳等人作乱，同知杜钦将他们平定。
English: In the 16th year of the Joseon Dynasty, Songpan Wei, who had been converted to Han Chinese, and other members of the Ban people, including Badaju, started a riot, which was put down by Duqin.

古文：嘉靖五年命都督佥事何卿镇守松潘。
现代文：嘉靖五年朝廷命令都督佥事何卿去镇守松潘。
English: In the fifth year of Jiajing, the imperial court ordered the governor to send He Xing to the town of Songpan.

古文：时黑虎五寨及乌都、鹁鸽诸番叛，卿次第平之，降者日至。
现代文：此时，黑虎五个寨子及乌都、鹁鸽等地各番族人叛乱，何卿率兵相继平定，每天都有来降的人。
English: At this time, the Five Villages of the Black Tiger, as well as the Udu, Zou Pigeon and other places where various tribesmen rebelled, were successively subdued by He Xing and his soldiers, with people coming and going every day.

古文：卿有威望，在镇十七年，松潘以宁。
现代文：何卿有威望，镇守松潘十七年，该地一直很安宁。
English: Heqing has prestige, and has been the town guard of Songpan for seventeen years. The area has always been very peaceful.

古文：二十三年以北警召卿入卫，继之者李爵、高冈凤，未几皆为巡抚劾罢。
现代文：二十三年朝廷因北方边疆吃紧，召走了何卿，继任的是李爵、高冈凤，不久他们都被巡抚弹劾罢免了。
English: In 1923, the imperial court was in a tight spot due to the northern border, and summoned He Qing, who was succeeded by Li Jie and Gao Gangfeng. They were both impeached and dismissed by the governor soon after.

古文：二十六年复命卿往镇。
现代文：二十六年朝廷便又任命何卿去镇守松潘。
English: In the 26th year, the imperial court appointed He Qing to be the town guard of Songpan.

古文：时白草番乱，卿会巡抚张时彻讨擒渠恶数人，俘斩九百七十余级，克营寨四十七，毁碉房四千八百，获马牛器械储积无算。
现代文：此时，白草的番族人作乱，何卿会同巡抚张时彻前去讨伐，擒拿了首恶分子数人，俘虏和斩杀了九百七十多人，攻克营寨四十七个，捣毁碉堡四千八百个，缴获马、牛、器械和储积物资无法计算。
English: At this time, the Qiang people of Bai Cao rioted, and He Xing, together with the governor Zhang Shicheng, went to the front to fight, captured several villains, captured and killed more than 970 people, conquered 47 camps, destroyed 4,800 bunkers, and captured horses, cattle, equipment and stored materials beyond calculation.

古文：终嘉靖世，松潘镇号得人，边境安堵焉。
现代文：终嘉靖皇帝一世，松潘地区的镇守官号令深得人心，边境安宁如堵。
English: After the death of Emperor Jiajing I, the post of town guard in Songpan was popular, and the border was quiet.

古文：初，龙州薛文胜于洪武六年来降，命仍知龙州。
现代文：最初，龙州的薛文胜在洪武六年来投降时，朝廷仍然任命他做龙州知州。
English: At first, when Xue Wensheng of Longzhou surrendered to Hongwu after six years, the imperial court still appointed him as Longzhou chizhou.

古文：既置松潘安抚司，命文胜为安抚使。
现代文：后来设置松潘安抚司，就任命薛文胜为安抚使。
English: Later, the Songpan Pacification Division was set up, and Xue Wensheng was appointed as the pacification envoy.

古文：既置松州卫，仍以松潘为龙州。
现代文：后又设置松州卫，松潘仍称为龙州。
English: Later, Songzhouwei was set up, and Songpan was still called Longzhou.

古文：宣德七年升龙州为宣抚司，以土知州薛忠义为宣抚使。
现代文：宣德七年龙州升为宣抚司，任命土知州薛忠义为宣抚使。
English: In the seventh year of Xuande, Longzhou was promoted to the post of the Special Envoy, and Tochi Prefecture's Xue Zhongyi was appointed as the Special Envoy.

古文：龙州者，汉阴平道也。
现代文：龙州，是汉朝时期的阴平道。
English: Longzhou was Yinping Road during the Han Dynasty.

古文：宋景定间，临邛进士薛严来守是州，捍卫有功，得世袭。
现代文：宋朝景定年间，临邛进士薛严来镇守该州，在捍卫外敌时有功，便得以世袭官职。
English: During the Jingding period of the Song Dynasty, the Linyi-trained soldier Xue Yan came to guard the state, and he was able to inherit the official post because of his achievements in defending foreign enemies.

古文：自文胜归附，其部长李仁广、王祥皆输粮饷有功，亦得世袭。
现代文：自从薛文胜归附朝廷，他手下的部落酋长李仁广、王祥等都因运输粮饷有功，也得以世袭官职。
English: Since Xue Wensheng was annexed to the imperial court, his tribal chiefs Li Renguang and Wang Xiang have been successful in transporting grain and rice, and have also been able to inherit official positions.

古文：及宣德中，以征松潘功，升州为宣抚使，仁广为副使，祥为佥事，各统兵五百世守白马、白草、木瓜番地。
现代文：等到宣德中年，他们又因征讨松潘有功，龙州升为宣抚司时，薛忠义升任宣抚使，李仁广升为副宣抚使，王祥升为佥事，并让李仁广和王祥二人各统领五百人马世代镇守白马、白草、木瓜等番族人地区。
English: In the middle of Xuande's reign, when Longzhou was promoted to the position of Xuanfu, Xue Zhongyi was promoted to the position of Xuanfu envoy, Li Renguang was promoted to the position of deputy Xuanfu envoy, and Wang Xiang was promoted to the position of anecdote, and Li Renguang and Wang Xiang were each given the task of leading five hundred people for generations to guard Bai Ma, Bai Cao, Papaya and other areas of the Guan people.

古文：至嘉靖四十四年，宣抚薛兆乾与副使李蕃相仇讦，兆乾率众围执蕃父子，殴杀之。
现代文：到嘉靖四十四年，宣抚使薛兆乾与副宣抚使李蕃有仇互相攻讦，薛兆乾便领手下人包围了李蕃的家，将李蕃父子捆起来殴打致死。
English: In the 44th year of Jiajing, Xue Zhaokian, the procurator, and Li Qian, the deputy procurator, had a feud and attacked each other. Xue Zhaokian led his men to surround Li Qian's home, tied up Li Qian and his son, and beat them to death.

古文：抚按檄兵备佥事赵教勘其事。
现代文：抚按传书给兵备佥事赵教，要他审查这件事。
English: Fuzhang sent a letter to Zhao Jiao about the incident and asked him to review the matter.

古文：兆乾惧，与母陈氏及诸左右纠白草番众数千人，分据各关隘拒命，绝松潘饷道。
现代文：薛兆乾感到害怕，便与其母亲陈氏和手下的骨干纠集白草的番族人数千，分别占据各关隘，拒绝听从朝廷的命令，并切断松潘的输饷粮道。
English: Xue Zhaokian felt scared, so he and his mother Chen and the backbone of his staff gathered thousands of white-grass tributaries, occupied each pass separately, refused to obey the orders of the imperial court, and cut off Songpan's food supply.

古文：胁佥事王华，不从，屠其家。
现代文：他们又去胁迫佥事王华跟随他们造反，没有成功，便杀死王华全家人。
English: They also tried to coerce Wang Hua to follow them and rebel, but without success, they killed Wang Hua's entire family.

古文：居民被焚掠者无算。
现代文：该地居民被烧被劫者无以计数。
English: Countless residents of the area were burned and robbed.

古文：是年春，与官军战，不利，求救于上下十八族番蛮，皆不应。
现代文：该年春天，他们与官军接战，形势不利，便转向上下十八族的番族蛮人求救，没人响应他们。
English: In the spring of that year, they fought with the government army, and the situation was unfavorable, so they turned to the barbarians of the Bans, one of the 18 ethnic groups, for help, but no one responded to them.

古文：兆乾率其家属奔至石坝，官军追及之，就擒。
现代文：薛兆乾便率其家人逃奔到石坝，官军追赶上他们，将其活捉。
English: Xue Zhaogan then led his family to flee to Shiba. The government army caught up with them and captured them alive.

古文：四十五年，兆乾伏诛，籍其家，母及其党二十二人皆以同谋论斩，余党悉平。
现代文：四十五年，薛兆乾伏法被诛杀，其家产被朝廷籍没，他的母亲和同党二十二人都以同谋罪被斩首，其余党徒全被平定。
English: In 45 years, Xue Zhaokian was killed, his family property was confiscated by the imperial court, his mother and 22 party members were beheaded for complicity, and the remaining party members were all subdued.

古文：遂改龙州宣抚司为龙安府，设立流官如马湖，而割保宁之江油、成都之石泉二县分隶之。
现代文：于是朝廷便将龙州宣抚司改为龙安府，像马湖一样，设立流官来管理该地，并将保宁的江油县和成都的石泉县分割出来隶属于龙安府。
English: As a result, the imperial court changed the Longzhou Relief Division to Long'an Prefecture, and, like Ma Hu, set up a magistrate to manage the place, and divided Jiangyou County in Boryeong and Shiquan County in Chengdu to belong to Long'an Prefecture.

古文：万历八年，雪山国师喇嘛等四十八寨，勾北边部落为寇，围漳腊，守备张良贤破之。
现代文：万历八年，雪山的国师喇嘛率四十八个寨子的人马，勾结北部边疆的部落共同入侵。他们包围了漳腊，守备张良贤将其击败。
English: In the eighth year of Wanli, the Lama of the State Division of the Snow Mountain led forty-eight men and horses of the stockade and colluded with the tribes of the northern frontier to jointly invade. They surrounded Bala and defeated Zhang Liangxian.

古文：犯镇虏，百户杜世仁力战，城得全，世仁死焉。
现代文：他仍又侵犯镇虏，百户杜世仁奋力迎战，镇虏城倒是得以保全，杜世仁却战死了。
English: He still encroached on Zhenroup. Hundred households of Du Shiren fought against him. Zhenroup was preserved, but Du Shiren died in the battle.

古文：又犯制台，良贤复击之，追至思答弄，连战大破之，火落赤之侄小王子死焉。
现代文：他们又侵犯制台，张良贤将其击败，并追到思答弄，连续几战都将其打败。敌人火落赤的侄子小王子也被打死。
English: They also encroached on the command post, Zhang Liangxian defeated them, and chased them to Shidafu, defeating them in several consecutive battles. The enemy's red-hot nephew Xiao Yuanzhong was also killed.

古文：十九年，巡按李化龙言： 松潘为四川屏蔽，叠、茂为松潘咽喉。
现代文：十九年，巡按李化龙说 ：松潘是四川的屏障，迭溪、茂州是松潘的咽喉之地。
English: In 1919, patrolman Li Hualong said: Songpan is the barrier of Sichuan, and Duixi and Maozhou are the throat of Songpan.

古文：番戎作梗，松潘力不能支，宜移四川总兵于松潘以备防御。 
现代文：番族人戎族人在此作乱，光靠松潘自身的防卫力量无法支撑，应将四川总兵移到松潘，以加强防御。 
English: The Bang people and the Rong people are wreaking havoc here, which cannot be supported by Songpan's own defense forces alone. The Sichuan army should be moved to Songpan to strengthen the defense.

古文：是时叠、茂诸番众纠结为乱，镇巡官率兵剿之，俘馘八百余级，番寇亦斩其部长黑卜、白什等，献功赎罪。
现代文：此时迭溪、茂州各番族相互纠集起来作乱，镇巡官带兵前去进剿，俘获敌人八百多人。番族人也将其部落酋长黑卜、白什等人斩首，以向官军献功赎罪。
English: At this time, the various clans of Dyeki and Maozhou gathered together to make trouble, and the town inspector led the troops to advance into the city, capturing more than 800 enemies. The clansmen also beheaded their tribal chiefs, Heib, Baish and others, to atone for their sins by offering their services to the government army.

古文：而松坪诸恶屯据大雪山顶，诸将卒搜讨，亦有斩获。
现代文：而松坪地区作乱的番族人，在大雪山的山顶上屯居，各位将士前去搜寻讨伐，也有敌人被杀或被俘。
English: However, the Bans, who caused the disturbance in the Songping area, settled on the top of the Da Xue Mountain. The soldiers went to search for and fight them, and some of the enemies were killed or captured.

古文：以捷闻，遂设平武县于龙安府。
现代文：该捷报传到朝廷后，朝廷便在龙安府设置了一个平武县。
English: After the report reached the imperial court, the court set up a Pingwu County in Longan Prefecture.

古文：松潘以孤城介绝域，寄一线馈运路于龙州，制守为难。
现代文：松潘在边疆地区是一座孤城，仅靠龙州的一条运粮道路与其相通，防卫很困难。
English: Songpan is a lonely city in the frontier area. It is connected to Longzhou only by a grain transportation road, and it is very difficult to defend.

古文：洪武时欲弃者数，以形胜扼险，不可罢，乃内修屯务，外辑羌戎，因俗拊循，择人为理，番众相安者垂四十余年。
现代文：洪武年间几次都想放弃，只是因为其地势险要，不能弃置，便在城内屯驻军队，在城外与羌族人、戎族人通和，因循当地人的习俗，挑选精明强干的人前来治理，这样番族百姓安宁了将近四十多年。
English: During the years of Hongwu, he wanted to give up several times, but because its terrain was dangerous and could not be abandoned, he stationed troops in the city, made peace with the Yi people and the Rong people outside the city, followed the local customs, and selected clever and strong people to come and govern. In this way, the Pan people have been peaceful for nearly forty years.

古文：及宣德初，调兵启衅，致动干戈，自是置镇建牙，宿重兵以资弹压，亦时服时叛。
现代文：等到宣德初年，官军调兵挑起事端，以致大动干戈，驻扎重兵以弹压当地蛮族，当地蛮族人也是时而顺服时而叛乱。
English: In the first year of Xuande, the government army sent troops to stir up trouble, leading to a large-scale civil war, stationed heavy troops to suppress the local barbarians, and the local barbarians were sometimes obedient and sometimes rebellious.

古文：自漳腊以北即为大荒，斯筹边者之所亟图也。
现代文：自漳腊以北的地方即是荒漠之地，这是筹划边疆治理者应急待考虑的事啊！
English: The area north of Bora Bora is a desert. This is a matter for contingency planning by those who manage the border.

古文：天全，古氐羌地。
现代文：天全，是古代氐羌族人的居住地。
English: Tianquan is the ancient residence of the Yi people.

古文：五代孟蜀时，置碉门、黎、雅、长河西、鱼通、宁远六军安抚司。宋因之，隶雅州。
现代文：五代的孟蜀时期，在此设置了碉门、黎州、雅州、长河西、鱼通、宁远六个军民安抚司，宋朝因袭了五代孟蜀时期的设置，让这六个安抚司隶属于雅州。
English: During the five-generation Mengshu period, six military and civilian pacification departments were set up in Shimen, Lizhou, Yazhou, West Changhe, Yutong, and Ningyuan. The Song Dynasty followed the five-generation Mengshu period and made these six pacification departments subordinate to Yazhou.

古文：元置六安抚司，属土番等处宣慰司，后改六番招讨，又分置天全招讨司。
现代文：元朝也设置六个安抚司，隶属于土番等处宣慰司，后来改为六番招讨，又分别设置了天全招讨司。
English: The Yuan Dynasty also set up six pacification departments, which were subordinate to the relief departments of the local governors and other departments. Later, they were changed to the sixth recruitment and recruitment departments, and the Tianquan recruitment and recruitment department was set up separately.

古文：明初并为天全六番招讨司，隶四川都司。
现代文：明朝初年又将上述建置合并为天全六番招讨司，隶属于四川都司。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the above-mentioned buildings were merged into the Tianquan Sixth Recruitment Office, which was affiliated with the Sichuan Capital Office.

古文：洪武六年，天全六番招讨使高英遣子敬严等来朝，贡方物。
现代文：洪武六年，天全六番招讨使高英派遣儿子高敬严等人前来朝觐皇帝、进贡土产。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu and the sixth year of Tianquan, Gao Ying sent his son Gao Jian and others to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：帝赐以文绮龙衣。以英为正招讨，杨藏卜为副招讨，秩从五品，每三岁入贡，赐予甚厚。
现代文：皇帝赏赐给他们有龙纹的绮衣，任命高英为正招讨，杨藏卜为副招讨，官秩为从五品，每三年向朝廷进贡一次，皇帝都给他们很丰厚的赏赐。
English: The emperor rewarded them with dragon-patterned robes, appointed Gao Ying as the chief recruiter, Yang Zangbu as the deputy recruiter, the official rank was from the fifth grade, and they paid tribute to the imperial court once every three years. The emperor gave them a very rich reward.

古文：二十一年，杨藏卜来朝，言茶户向与西番贸易，岁收其课。
现代文：二十一年，杨藏卜来朝觐，向皇帝说种茶户一向与西番人相互贸易，官府每年都征收课税。
English: In the twenty-first year, Yang Zangbu came to the imperial court and told the emperor that tea growers had always traded with the Westerners, and the government levied taxes every year.

古文：近在官收买，额遂亏，乞从民便，许之。
现代文：近年来茶叶由官府收买，课税亏空，乞求朝廷还是随百姓的便为好，容许民间买卖。
English: In recent years, tea has been bought up by the government, tax collection has fallen short, and it is better to beg the imperial court to let the people do as they please and allow private trade.

古文：先是，高敬严袭招讨使，偕杨藏卜奏请简土民为兵，以守边境，诏许之。
现代文：皇帝同意了。此前，高敬严继承了招讨使的职务，和杨藏卜一起上奏朝廷，请求允许他们挑选当地百姓为兵，以守卫边境，皇帝下诏同意了。
English: The emperor agreed. Previously, Gao Jing Yan had inherited the post of recruiting envoy, and together with Yang Zangbu appealed to the imperial court, requesting permission to select local people as soldiers to guard the border, and the emperor agreed.

古文：敬严等遂招选土民，教以战阵，得马步卒千余人。
现代文：高敬严等人于是招收挑选了当地的百姓，将打仗的阵法教给他们，这样他们得到了骑兵和步兵一千多人。
English: Gao Jingyan and others then recruited and selected the local people and taught them the laws of war, so they got more than a thousand cavalry and infantry.

古文：至是藏卜来朝，奏其事，诏更天全六番招讨司为武职，令戍守边界，控制西番。
现代文：到这次杨藏卜前来朝觐时，向皇帝奏明该事，皇帝下诏将天全六番招讨司改为武职，命令他们戍守边疆，控制西番人。
English: When Yang Zangbu came to the imperial court this time, he reported the matter to the emperor, and the emperor issued an edict to change the Tianquan Sixth Recruitment Division into a military post, and ordered them to guard the border and control the western guards.

古文：三十一年，帝谕左都督徐增寿曰： 曩因碉门拒长河西口，道路险隘，以致往来跋涉艰难，市马数少。
现代文：三十一年，皇帝告诉左都督徐增寿说 ：以前因为碉门挡住了长河西的门口，道路又险又窄，以至于人员往来跋涉很艰难，故买卖马匹很少。
English: In the 31st year, the emperor told Zuo-duke Xu Zengshou that: In the past, because the gate blocked the entrance to the west of the Yangtze River, the road was dangerous and narrow, so that it was difficult for people to travel back and forth, so there was little horse trading.

古文：今闻有路自碉门出枯木任场径抵长河西口，通杂道长官司，道路平坦，往来径直，可即檄所司开拓，以便往来。 
现代文：现今听说从碉门出枯木任场有路直抵长河西的门口，通往杂道长官司，而且道路平坦，人员往来可直达，可马上传送檄文给有关机构，让他们前去开拓此路，以便于人员往来。 
English: Now I have heard that there is a road from the gate of the dead wood yard to the west of the Yangtze River, leading to the entrance of the chief magistrate's office. Moreover, the road is flat, and people can come and go directly. You can immediately send a letter to the relevant agencies, and let them go to open up this road, so that people can come and go.

古文：永乐二年，高敬让来朝，并贺立皇太子，且遣其子虎入国子学，赐虎衣衾等物。
现代文：永乐二年，高敬让来朝觐，并祝贺皇帝立皇太子，还派其儿子高虎入国子监学习，皇帝将衣服和被子赏赐给他。
English: In the second year of Yongle, Gao Jingzhang came to the hajj, and congratulated the emperor on the establishment of the crown prince. He also sent his son Gao Hu to study in the custody of the state. The emperor gave him clothes and a quilt.

古文：十年，敬让遣子虎贡马。
现代文：十年，高敬让派儿子高虎进京贡献马匹。
English: Ten years later, Gao Jing sent his son Gao Hu to Beijing to contribute horses.

古文：初，虎入国学读书，以丁母忧去，至是服阕还监，皇太子命礼部赐予如例。
现代文：当初，高虎进国子监读书，因母亲想念他而离去，现又回到国子监，皇太子命令礼部按以前的惯例给他赏赐礼物。
English: At first, Gao Hu went to the state nursery to study, but he left because his mother missed him. Now he has returned to the state nursery. The crown prince ordered the ceremonial department to reward him with a gift according to the previous practice.

古文：宣德五年，六番招讨司奏： 旧额岁办乌茶五万斤，二年一次，运付碉门茶马司易马。
现代文：宣德五年，六番招讨司上奏说 ：以前规定每年办理乌茶五万斤，二年一次运送到碉门付给茶马司去交换马匹。
English: In the fifth year of Xuande's reign, the sixth summoning of the chief steward said: Previously, it was stipulated that fifty thousand catties of black tea should be handled every year, and once every two years it should be transported to the gate to pay the tea steward to exchange horses.

古文：今户部令再办芽茶二千二百斤，山深地瘠，艰于采办，乞减其数。 
现代文：现今户部又下令还要办理芽茶二千二百斤，这里是深山，土地贫瘠，采茶很艰难，请求朝廷减免该办理的茶叶数量。 
English: At present, the Household Ministry has also ordered that another 2,200 kilos of bud tea be processed. This is deep in the mountains, the land is barren, and tea harvesting is very difficult. I request the Imperial Court to reduce and exempt the amount of tea leaves to be processed.

古文：帝令免乌茶只办芽茶。
现代文：皇帝下令减免乌茶只办理芽茶。
English: The emperor ordered the reduction and exemption of black tea only for bud tea.

古文：十年命高凤署天全六番招讨司事。
现代文：十年，任命高凤管理天全六番招讨司的事务。
English: Ten years ago, Gao Feng was appointed to manage the affairs of Tianquan Sixth Recruitment Division.

古文：先是，敬让以罪下狱死。
现代文：此前，高敬让因犯罪被投进监狱，死在狱中。
English: Previously, Gao Jingjan was thrown into prison for a crime and died in prison.

古文：至是，其子凤乞袭父职。
现代文：至此，高敬让的儿子高凤乞求允许他继承其父的官位。
English: At this point, Gao Jingzhang's son, Gao Feng, begged to be allowed to inherit his father's position.

古文：帝念其祖有抚绥功，命暂理招讨事。
现代文：皇帝念他的祖先在抚绥番族人方面有功劳，就让他暂时处理招讨司事务。
English: The emperor thought that his ancestor had made a great contribution to the Fushanban people, so he asked him to temporarily handle the affairs of the recruiting office.

古文：正统四年命凤袭。
现代文：正统四年，正式任命高凤为招讨司招讨。
English: After four years of orthodoxy, Gao Feng was officially appointed as the solicitor of the solicitor.

古文：正德十五年，招讨高文林父子称兵乱，副招讨杨世仁亦助恶。
现代文：正德十五年，招讨高文林父子俩举兵作乱，副招讨杨世仁也帮助他们作恶。
English: In the 15th year of Zhengde's reign, Gao Wenlin and his two sons were recruited to raise an army to create turmoil, and Yang Shiren was also recruited to help them commit evil.

古文：命四川抚按官讨之。
现代文：朝廷便命令四川抚按官前去讨伐。
English: The imperial court then ordered Sichuan Fuzhi to go to the front to fight.

古文：初，文林等与芦山县民争田构衅，知县处置失宜，致叛乱。
现代文：当初之时，高文林与芦山县的百姓争夺田地，挑起了争端。芦山县的知县处理问题不当，致使他们发生叛乱。
English: At the beginning, Gao Wenlin and the people of Lushan County competed for land and provoked a dispute. Lushan County's Zhixian handled the problem improperly, causing them to rebel.

古文：逾年，讨斩文林，擒其子继恩，择其宗人承袭。
现代文：过了一年，讨伐的官军斩杀了高文林，生擒了高文林的儿子高继恩，在高氏宗族中选择了一人来继承官位。
English: A year later, the crusading government army killed Gao Wenlin and took Gao Wenlin's son Gao Jiong alive, and chose a person from the Gao clan to inherit the official position.

古文：初，天全招讨司治碉门城，元之碉门安抚司也，在雅州境。
现代文：早先，天全招讨司的治所在碉门城，就是元朝时期的碉门安抚司，在雅州境内。
English: Earlier, the headquarters of Tianquan Zhaotongji was in Qimen City, which was the Qimen Pacification Division during the Yuan Dynasty, in Yazhou.

古文：明初，宣慰余思聪、王德贵归附，始降司为州，设雅州千户所，而设碉门百户，近天全六番之界。
现代文：明朝初年，宣慰余恩聪、王德贵归附朝廷，开始将安抚司降为州，设置雅州千户所，在碉门设置百户所，靠近天全六番的边界。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Yu Encong and Wang Degui were annexed to the imperial court, and the Department of Pacification was downgraded to a prefecture, and a thousand-household post was established in Yazhou and a hundred-household post was established in Qimen, close to the border of Tianquan.

古文：又置茶课司以平互市。
现代文：后又设置茶课司平衡相互间的贸易。
English: Later, the Tea Division was set up to balance the trade between the two.

古文：盖其地为南诏咽喉，三十六番朝贡出入之路。
现代文：这个地方是南诏的咽喉之地，三十六番人进京朝贡时出入的必经之路。
English: This place is the place of the throat of Nanzhao, and it is the only way for the 36th person to enter and leave the capital when paying tribute.

古文：三十六番者，皆西南诸部落，洪武初，先后至京，授职赐印。
现代文：所谓的三十六番，都是西南地区各部落，洪武初年，先后到京城，被朝廷授予职务赐给官印。
English: The so-called thirty-six, are all tribes in the southwestern region, Hongwu first year, successively to the capital, was awarded by the court to the official seal.

古文：立都指挥使二：曰乌斯藏，曰朵甘。为宣慰司者三：曰朵甘，曰董卜韩胡，曰长河西鱼通宁远。为招讨司者六，为万户府者四，为千户所者十七，是为三十六种。
现代文：朝廷在他们中设立了二个都指挥使：乌斯藏和朵甘；设立三个宣慰司：朵甘、董卜韩胡和长河西境内鱼通的宁远；设立了六个招讨司、四个万户府、十七个千户所。这些合起来共三十六种，故称三十六番。
English: Among them, the imperial court set up two general envoys: Wuszang and Dong Gan; set up three comfort stations: Dong Gan, Dong Bu Hanhu and Ningyuan in the west of the Yangtze River; set up six recruiting stations, four million households, and seventeen thousand households. Together, these are a total of thirty-six types, so they are called thirty-six.

古文：或三年，或五年一朝贡，其道皆由雅州入，详《西番传》。
现代文：他们或者每隔三年，或者每隔五年进京朝贡一次，进京时都从雅州进入。此事详见本书的《西番传》。
English: They paid tribute to the imperial court in Beijing either every three years or every five years, and when they entered the capital, they all entered from Yazhou. This is detailed in the book "The Legend of Western Fan."

古文：黎州，汉沈黎郡地。
现代文：黎州，是汉朝时的沈黎郡所在地。
English: Lizhou was the location of Shenli County during the Han Dynasty.

古文：《史记》称越巂以东北，君长以十数，筰都最大。
现代文：《史记》上说越的东北方有十多个君长，其中的笮都最大。
English: "Histories" said that there were more than ten monarchs in the northeast of Vietnam, of which the Yongdu was the largest.

古文：自唐蒙通夜郎，邛、筰之君请为内臣，因置筰都县，复曰旄牛县。
现代文：自从唐蒙与夜郎沟通后，邛都、笮都的君长都请求成为中央王朝的大臣，因而在该地设置了笮都县，又称旄牛县。
English: Since Tang Meng communicated with Yelang, the rulers of Shidu and Shidu requested to become the minister of the Central Dynasty, thus setting up Shidu County, also known as Snail County, in this place.

古文：元鼎中，以为沈黎郡。
现代文：元鼎中年，成为沈黎郡。
English: In his middle age, Yuan Ding became the leader of Shenli County.

古文：唐割雅、巂二州置黎州。
现代文：唐朝时，将雅州、州割出来设置了黎州。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Yazhou and Zhouzhou were separated and Lizhou was established.

古文：天宝初，改为洪源郡，寻改汉源。
现代文：天宝初年又将黎州改为洪源郡，不久又改为汉源。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, Lizhou was changed to Hongyuan County, and soon it was changed to Hanyuan.

古文：宋属成都路。元属土番等处宣慰司。
现代文：宋朝时该地隶属于成都路，元朝时该地隶属于上番等处宣慰司。
English: During the Song Dynasty, this area was under the jurisdiction of Chengdu Road, and during the Yuan Dynasty, it was under the jurisdiction of the Department of Consolation.

古文：洪武八年省汉源县，置黎州长官司，以芍德为长官。
现代文：洪武八年，在汉源县设置黎州长官司，任命芍德为长官。
English: In the eighth year of Hongwu, he set up the Li Governor's Office in Hanyuan County and appointed Zou De as the governor.

古文：德，云南人，马姓。
现代文：芍德是云南人，姓马。
English: Yan De is from Yunnan Province and his surname is Ma.

古文：祖仕元，世袭邛部州六番招讨使。
现代文：他的祖上曾在元朝为官，世代承袭邛部州六番招讨使的官职。
English: His ancestor had been an official in the Yuan Dynasty, inheriting the official position of the sixth recruiting envoy of Hebei Province for generations.

古文：明氏据蜀，德兄安复为黎州招讨使。
现代文：明氏占据四川后，芍德的兄长马安又被任命为黎州招讨使。
English: After the Ming Dynasty occupied Sichuan, Zhengde's brother Ma'an was appointed as the recruiting envoy of Li Prefecture.

古文：明氏亡，蛮民溃散，德奉母还居邛部。
现代文：明氏亡故后，蛮族百姓溃散，芍德带着母亲回到邛部居住。
English: After the death of the Ming Dynasty, the barbarian people dispersed, and Yan De took his mother back to live in Xibe.

古文：至是，四川布政司招之，德遂来朝贡马，请置长官司。
现代文：至此，四川布政司招抚他，芍德便前来朝觐进献贡马，请求朝廷设置长官司。
English: At this point, the political secretary of Sichuan Province courted him, and Shunde came to the imperial court to present a tribute horse and request the imperial court to set up a chief magistrate.

古文：诏以德为黎州长官，赐印及衣服绮帛，十一年升为黎州安抚司，即以德为使。
现代文：皇帝下诏任命芍德为黎州的长官，赏赐给他官印和衣服丝帛。十一年，黎州升格为安抚司，芍德被任命为安抚使。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict appointing Xingde as the governor of Lizhou, and awarded him with an official seal and a silk robe. In the eleventh year, Lizhou was upgraded to a pacification department, and Xingde was appointed as a pacification envoy.

古文：十四年，德遣使贡马。
现代文：十四年，芍德派使者进京贡献马匹。
English: In the 14th year, Zhengde sent an envoy to Beijing to donate horses.

古文：诏赐德钞五十四锭、文绮七疋。
现代文：皇帝下诏赏赐给芍德钱钞五十四锭、有花纹的丝绸七匹。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict awarding Shunde with fifty-four pieces of banknotes and seven pieces of patterned silk.

古文：自是，三年一入贡。
现代文：从此，他便每隔三年进贡一次。
English: From then on, he paid tribute every three years.

古文：弘治十四年命黎州安抚隶四川都司。
现代文：弘治十四年朝廷命令将黎州安抚司隶属于四川都司。
English: In the 14th year of the Hongzhi era, the imperial court ordered that the Lizhou Pacification Division be subordinated to the Sichuan Capital Division.

古文：万历十九年，安抚马祥无后，妻瞿氏掌司事，取瞿姓子抚之，将有他志。
现代文：万历十九年，安抚马祥没有后嗣，其妻瞿氏掌管安抚司事务，招了一个瞿姓的孩子来抚养，将另有所谋。
English: In the 19th year of the Wanli era, Ma Xiang, the pacifier, had no heir. His wife, Ms. Zou, was in charge of the affairs of the pacifier department, and she recruited a child with the surname Zou to raise. She would have other plans.

古文：祥侄上舍居松坪者，遂兴兵攻城，夺印，番众乘机剽掠。
现代文：居住在松坪的马祥的侄子土舍便兴兵攻城，夺走了官印，番族人便乘机抢劫。
English: Ma Xiang's nephew, Toushe Benxing, who lived in Songping, attacked the city, took away the official seal, and the Bans took advantage of the opportunity to loot.

古文：时参将吴文杰方有征东之役，移师剿平之。
现代文：此时参将吴文杰正好有征东的任务，便把军队带过来将作乱的番族人剿灭平定。
English: At this time, the general Wu Wenjie happened to have the task of conquering the East, so he brought the army to quell the rebellious Qiang people.

古文：二十四年降黎州安抚司为千户所，立所治于司南三十里大田山坝。
现代文：二十四年，朝廷将黎州安抚司降为千户所，将千户所的所治建在原安抚司南面三十里远的大田山坝，并将原安抚司的编户分成上下各七枝。
English: In 1924, the imperial court downgraded the Li Prefecture to a thousand households, and built the thousand households office in Datanshanba, 30 miles south of the original appeasement department, and divided the former appeasement department into seven branches.

古文：分上七枝编户，属大渡河千户所，下七枝仍属松坪马氏约束。
现代文：上七枝的编户隶属于大渡河千户所，下七枝的编户仍由松坪的马氏约束。
English: The editors of the upper seven branches belong to the Dadu River Thousand Households, and the editors of the lower seven branches are still bound by the Ma family in Songping.

古文：松坪在司之东南，自炒米城直接峨眉，高山峻坂三百余里，皆安抚族人居之。
现代文：松坪在原安抚司的东南面，从炒米城出来径直与峨眉相连，高山峻岭有三百多里，都是受招抚的番族人在那儿居住。
English: Songping is in the southeast of the original appeasement department, and it is directly connected to Emei from the fried rice city. There are more than three hundred miles of high mountains and steep hills, all of which are inhabited by the invited tributaries.

古文：黎、雅诸蛮，宋时屡为边患。
现代文：黎州、雅州的各蛮族，宋朝时屡屡成为边疆的祸患。
English: The barbarian tribes of Lizhou and Yazhou repeatedly became the scourge of the frontier during the Song Dynasty.

古文：明兴，以诸蛮皆天全六番诸部，散居于二州之境，遂于黎州设安抚，于天全六番设招讨，以示羁縻。
现代文：明朝建立后，认为散居在这二个州境内的蛮族人，都是天全六番的各部落，于是便在黎州设置安抚，在天全六番设置招讨，对蛮族人实行羁縻政策。
English: After the establishment of the Ming Dynasty, it was believed that the barbarians scattered in these two states were all the tribes of Tianquan VI, so they set up pacification in Lizhou, set up solicitation in Tianquan VI, and implemented a policy of restraint on the barbarians.

古文：而雅州所属，与招讨所辖之蛮民，境土相连，时有争讼。
现代文：隶属于雅州的蛮族人与天全六番招讨司所管辖的蛮族人，因为彼此土地相连，时常发生争讼。
English: The barbarians belonging to Yazhou and the barbarians under the jurisdiction of the Tianquan Sixth Summoning Division, because they are connected to each other's land, often have disputes.

古文：徼外大、小木瓜种分三枝，腻乃卜最强，世居西河。
现代文：边界之外的大木瓜、小木瓜地区的番族人可分为三支，其中的一支腻乃卜最为强大，世代居住在西河。
English: The Banshu people in the Papaya and Papaya regions outside the border can be divided into three branches, one of which is the most powerful, and has lived in the West River for generations.

古文：初属马湖土官安氏钤辖，自马湖改流，诸瓜叛入邛部，归岭氏。
现代文：早先他们归马湖的土官安氏管辖，自从马湖改由流官治理后，大小木瓜的番族人叛乱，并入邛部，归岭氏管辖。
English: Earlier, they were under the jurisdiction of the local official of Ma Lake, the An clan. Since Ma Lake was changed to be governed by the local official, the guards of the Papaya and Papaya rebelled, merged into the Shabu, and came under the jurisdiction of the Ling clan.

古文：其地自西河至凉山、雪山诸处，周围蟠据。
现代文：他们盘踞在从西河到凉山、雪山之间的地域内。
English: They are entrenched in the region between the West River and the Liangshan and Snowy Mountains.

古文：嘉靖末，诸瓜畜牧蕃盛，时窥边，邛部长官岭柏不能制，嘉、峨、犍为诸边皆为侵扰。
现代文：嘉靖末年，大小木瓜地区的畜牧繁盛，时常窥伺边界地区，邛部的长官岭柏无法制止他们，嘉、峨、犍为等边关地区都受到他们的侵扰。
English: At the end of the Jiajing Dynasty, the large and small papaya regions were prosperous in animal husbandry, and they often spied on the border areas. Ling Bai, the governor of Hebei Province, was unable to stop them, and the border areas such as Jia, Ega and Handan were all disturbed by them.

古文：镇巡官督邛部兵捕之，瓜兵益炽，乃议大征，分建昌、越巂、马湖三路兵进讨。
现代文：镇巡官督促邛部的军队去捕捉他们，大小木瓜的番族军队侵扰更为厉害。朝廷便决定大规模前去征讨，于是大军分建昌、越、马湖三路出发。
English: The town inspector urged Xibe's army to capture them, and the large and small Papaya's tributary army intruded even more severely. The court then decided to go on a large-scale campaign, and the large army set out from Jianchang, Yue and Mahu.

古文：瓜部始惶骇请降，愿岁贡马方物，乃定。
现代文：大小木瓜地区的番族人开始惶恐骇怕，请求投降，愿每年向朝廷贡献马匹和土产，这样事情才平定下来。
English: Pan tribesmen in the Great and Small Papaya region began to panic, asking for surrender, and were willing to contribute horses and local products to the imperial court every year, so that things would calm down.

古文：其地四千八百四十余亩，徵粮四百四十余石，输峨眉县。
现代文：大小木瓜地区有四千八百四十多亩土地，每年征收粮食四百四十多石，全输送到峨眉县。
English: There are more than 4,840 mu of land in the Da Xiao Papaya area, and more than 440 kilos of grain are collected every year, all of which are transported to Emei County.

古文：明初与安抚司同置者，有大渡河守御千户所。
现代文：明朝初年与安抚司一起设置的还有大渡河守御千户所。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the Dadu River Governor's Office was established together with the Pacifying Division.

古文：唐时，河平广可通漕，戍将一不守，则黎、雅、邛、嘉、成都皆动摇。
现代文：唐朝时，大渡河水流平广，可通漕运，戍将一旦失守，则黎州、雅州、邛州、嘉州、成都都会动摇。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the Dadu River flowed smoothly and was navigable by rowing boats. Once the Yangtze River was lost, Lizhou, Yazhou, Zhangzhou, Jiazhou and Chengdu would all be shaken.

古文：宋建隆三年，王全斌平蜀，以图来上。
现代文：宋朝建隆三年，王金斌平定四川，将图献给朝廷。
English: In the third year of Jianlong of the Song Dynasty, Wang Jinbin conquered Sichuan and presented the map to the imperial court.

古文：议者欲因兵威复越巂，艺祖以玉斧画图曰： 外此，吾不有也。 
现代文：有大臣提议乘着军威收复越，艺祖用玉斧画图说： 该地在境外，我们无法占有。 
English: A minister proposed to take advantage of the military's power to recover Fu Yue, and the art founder drew a map with a jade axe and said: This place is outside the country, we cannot occupy it.

古文：自是之后，河中流忽陷下五六十丈，水至此，汹涌如空中落，船筏不通，名为噎口，殆天设险以限内外云。
现代文：从此之后，大渡河中的水流忽然下落了五六十丈，水流到此处时汹涌澎湃尤如从天而降，船和筏都无法通行，故名叫噎口。这大概是上天自动设置天险以区分境内境外吧！
English: From then on, the water flow in the Dadu River suddenly dropped by fifty or sixty meters. When the water flowed to this place, it surged and surged as if falling from the sky. Boats and rafts could not pass, so it was called Hukou. This is probably heaven automatically setting natural hazards to distinguish between inside and outside the country!

