古文：开当
现代文：开当
English: Kaitang

古文：有慕开典铺者，谋之人曰： 需本几何？ 
现代文：有一个人，羡慕开当铺的人收入高，就请教别人： 开一个当铺需要多少本钱？ 
English: One person, envious of the high income of people who open pawnshops, asked others: How much capital does it take to open a pawnshop?

古文：曰： 大典万金，小者亦须千计。 
现代文：别人回答说： 如果开大当铺，需要上万金，开小当铺也得上千金。 
English: Someone else replied: "If you open a large pawnshop, you will need tens of thousands of dollars, and if you open a small pawnshop, you will also need thousands of dollars.

古文：其人大骇而去。
现代文：问的人听了，大吃一惊地走了。
English: The questioner listened and walked away startled.

古文：更请一人问之，曰： 百金开一钱当亦可。 
现代文：又向另外一个人请教，那人对他说： 开当铺，只要有一百金的本钱就行了。 
English: He asked another man for advice, and the man said to him, "To open a pawnshop, all you need is a capital of one hundred gold coins.

古文：又辞去。
现代文：那人听了后，又走了。
English: The man listened and then left.

古文：最后一人曰： 开典如何要本钱，只须店柜一张，当票数纸足亦。 
现代文：最后又请教一个人，这人说： 开当铺哪还要什么本钱？只要有一张柜台，有一本当票就够了。 
English: Finally, he asked another person for advice. This person said, "What kind of capital is needed to open a pawnshop? As long as there is a counter, one ticket is enough."

古文：此人乃欣然。择期开典。
现代文：那人听了，便很高兴地选了个好日子开张营业了。
English: The man listened and happily chose a good day to open for business.

古文：至日，有持物来当者。验收讫，填空票计之。
现代文：接着就有一个人拿了东西来当，他验收完后，就给当东西的人开了一张空头当票。
English: Next, there was a person who took something as a pawn. After he finished the acceptance, he opened a short pawn ticket for the pawnbroker.

古文：当者索银，答曰： 省得称来称去，费坏许多手脚。待你取赎时，只将利银来交便了。 
现代文：当东西的人向他要钱，他说： 你拿着这当票就行了，省得银子称来称去的麻烦，你在取赎东西时，把利钱给我就行了。 
English: When someone asked him for money, he said, "Just take this pawn ticket and save yourself the trouble of weighing things. When you redeem something, just give me the interest."

古文：酒煮滚汤
现代文：酒煮滚汤
English: Boiled wine soup

古文：有以淡酒宴客者。客尝之，极赞府上烹调之美。
现代文：有个人请客人喝酒，酒味很淡，客人尝了，就称赞他家很会烹调。
English: A man invited guests to drink wine. The wine tasted very light, and when the guests tasted it, they praised his family for their cooking skills.

古文：主曰： 粗肴未曾上桌，何以见得？ 
现代文：主人说： 简单的饭菜还没有上桌，怎能说得上好呢？ 
English: The host said, "A simple meal hasn't been served yet, how can it be said well?

古文：答曰： 不必论其他，只这一味酒煮白滚汤，就妙极了。 
现代文：客人说： 别的不说，就这一道酒煮白开水，就妙极了。 
English: The guest said, "Other than that, boiled water with this wine is wonderful."

古文：大眼
现代文：大眼
English: Big Eyes

古文：主人自食大鱼，却烹小鱼供宾，误遗大鱼眼珠于盘，为客所觉。
现代文：有个人自己吃大鱼，却做小鱼给客人吃，一不小心把大鱼的眼珠留在盘子里，被客人发现。
English: One person ate a big fish himself, but made a small fish for the guests to eat, and accidentally left the big fish's eyeballs on the plate, which was discovered by the guests.

古文：因戏言： 欲求鱼种，归蓄之池。 
现代文：客人开玩笑说： 想要种鱼，放在鱼池里。 
English: The guest joked: If you want to grow fish, put them in a fish pond.

古文：主谦曰： 此小鱼耳，有何足取。 
现代文：主人谦虚地说： 这个是小鱼，有什么值得要的。 
English: The owner said modestly, "This is a small fish, what is it worth?

古文：客曰： 鱼虽小，难得这双大眼睛。 
现代文：客人说： 鱼虽然小，但是难得有这双大眼睛。 
English: The guest said: Although the fish is small, it is rare to have these big eyes.

古文：萝葡作证
现代文：萝葡作证
English: Testimony of Luo Guo

古文：有学博者，宰鸡一只，伴以萝葡制馔，邀请青衿二十辈食之。
现代文：有个学识渊博的人，杀了一只鸡，加上萝卜做成菜，邀请二十位朋友来吃饭。
English: A learned man killed a chicken, cooked it with turnips, and invited twenty friends to dinner.

古文：鸡魂赴冥司告曰： 杀鸡供客，此是常事，但不合一鸡供二十余客。 
现代文：鸡死之后，它的魂灵到九泉之下阎罗王那里去告状说： 杀鸡给客人吃，这本来是正常的事，但也不应该一只鸡供二十个客人吃。 
English: After the chicken died, its spirit went to the King of Hell to complain, saying, "It is normal to kill a chicken for guests to eat, but it is not right to kill a chicken for twenty guests to eat.

古文：冥司曰： 恐无此理。 
现代文：冥司问： 恐怕没有这样的事。 
English: There's no such thing, I'm afraid.

古文：鸡曰： 萝葡作证。 
现代文：鸡说： 萝卜可以作证。 
English: The chicken said, "The turnip can testify to that."

古文：及拘萝葡审问，答曰： 鸡你欺心，那日供客，只见我，何曾见你。 
现代文：等到抓来了萝卜审问时，萝卜却说： 鸡你昧着良心说话，那天待客，只看见我，什么时候见到过你？ 
English: When they caught and interrogated the turnip, the turnip said: "Chicken, you speak without conscience, that day you were entertaining guests, you only saw me, when did you see you?

古文：博士家风类如此。
现代文：博士家的风气就这样啊。
English: That's just the way it is in the Ph.D. family.

古文：出外难
现代文：出外难
English: Difficulty going out

古文：客人雇船往杭州，清早打米煮饭，梢婆背着客人将淘过湿米偷起一大碗，放在灶头里，客人瞧见不便明言，坐在官舱内，连声高叫曰： 在家千日难，出外一时好。 
现代文：有个客人雇船前往杭州，清早洗米煮饭，划船的老婆婆背着客人，把淘过的湿米偷起一大碗，藏在锅台的里边，正好被客人看见。客人不好意思明说，就坐在船舱里高声说： 在家千日难，出外一时好。 
English: There was a guest who hired a boat to go to Hangzhou. In the early morning, he washed rice and cooked rice. The boat's mother-in-law was carrying the guest on her back. She stole a large bowl of washed wet rice and hid it inside the pan, just in time to be seen by the guest. The guest was too embarrassed to say so, so he sat in the cabin and said aloud: "It's hard at home, but it's good to get away for a while."

古文：梢婆曰： 客人说错了，在家千日好，出外一时难，因何反说呢？ 
现代文：划船的老婆婆说： 客人您说错了，在家千日好，出外一时难，为什么说反了呢？ 
English: The boating mother-in-law said: Guest, you said it wrong, it is good to be at home for a thousand days, it is difficult to go out for a while, why did you say the opposite?

古文：客人曰： 你既晓得我难，把灶头里一碗米，求你放在锅里罢。 
现代文：客人道： 既然你知道我难，把锅台里的一碗米，求你放在锅里吧！ 
English: Guest: Since you know how difficult it is for me, please put the bowl of rice in the pan!

古文：厕吏
现代文：厕吏
English: Toilet attendant

古文：一吏人贪婪无厌，遇物必取，人无不被害者。
现代文：一个官吏贪得无厌，看见东西一定要拿，没有人不被他坑害的。
English: A bureaucrat is insatiably greedy, he must take what he sees, and no one is safe from him.

古文：友人戏之曰： 观汝所为，他日出身除是管厕混斯无所耳。 
现代文：有个朋友开玩笑地对他说： 我看你的所作所为，以后你除了管厕所，才能不浑水摸鱼捞一把。 
English: A friend jokingly said to him, "I see what you've done. In the future, you'll only be able to fish in muddy water if you're also a toilet attendant."

古文：吏曰： 我若司厕，一般有钱欲登厕者，禁之不许，彼必赂我；本不登厕者，逼之登厕，彼无奈何，岂患不赂我耶？ 
现代文：这个官吏却说： 我如果管厕所，一般有钱的想上厕所的人，不让他用，他一定会贿赂我；原来不想上厕所的，逼他上厕所，他没有办法，难道还愁他不贿赂我吗？ 
English: However, this official said: If I were in charge of the toilet, the average rich person who wanted to go to the toilet would not let him use it, he would certainly bribe me; if he did not want to go to the toilet, he could not force him to go to the toilet, is he still worried that he would not bribe me?

古文：各挑行李
现代文：各挑行李
English: Baggage claim

古文：兄弟三人经商投宿，共买一鱼烹调在案，长兄唱驻云飞一句曰： 这个鱼我要中间一段儿。 
现代文：长兄唱驻云飞中的一句道： 这个鱼儿我要中间一段儿。 
English: The eldest brother sang a line from the opera "Jing Yunfei": I want this fish to be in the middle.

古文：二兄唱曰： 我要头和尾，谁敢来争嘴。 
现代文：二兄唱道： 我要头和尾，谁敢来争嘴？ 
English: The second brother sang: I want the head and the tail, who dares to argue?

古文：三弟曰： 喳，汤儿是我的。 
现代文：三弟唱道： 喳，汤儿是我的。 
English: The third brother sang, "Oh, the soup is mine.

古文：仆夫初犹觊望，或得沾味，闻此则绝望矣，进前作揖唱曰： 告君知，明日登程，各自挑行李，那时节辛勤怨得谁，那时节辛勤怨得谁？ 
现代文：仆人最初还在那偷偷地看，以为或许能够跟着尝到点儿味，听到这儿，就彻底失望了，上前作揖唱道： 告君知，明日登程，各自挑行李，那时节辛勤怨得谁，那时节辛勤怨得谁？ 
English: At first, the servant was secretly looking there, thinking that he might be able to get a little taste of it. When he heard it here, he was completely disappointed and came forward to sing: Tell you what, tomorrow we'll set off, and each of us will pick up our luggage. Who will be sorry for the hard work at that time? Who will be sorry for the hard work at that time?

古文：谢赏
现代文：谢赏
English: Acknowledgement

古文：一官坐堂，偶撒一屁，自说 爽利 二字。
现代文：有位官吏坐在公堂上，偶然放了一个屁。于是自言自语地说： 爽利！ 
English: A government official was sitting in the courtroom when he accidentally let out a fart. He said to himself, "Wow!

古文：众吏不知，误听以为 赏吏 ，冀得欢心，争跪禀曰： 谢老爷赏！ 
现代文：他手下的官吏们不知道，听成了 赏吏 二字，于是都希望得到大人的欢心。便争着跪下说： 谢老爷奖赏。 
English: The officials under his command did not know that they had heard the word "reward," so they all hoped to win the master's favor. They knelt down and said, "Thank you, master, for the reward."

古文：请神
现代文：请神
English: Please God

古文：一吝者，家有祷事，命道士请神，乃通诚请两京神道。
现代文：有个吝啬鬼，家遇祈祷之事，让道士请神驱邪，道士恳请两京神道。
English: There was a miser who, when his family was in need of prayer, asked a Taoist to invoke the gods to drive out evil, and the Taoist implored the Two Cities Shinto.

古文：主人曰： 如何请这远的？ 
现代文：主人说： 为何请远的？ 
English: The owner said, "Why do you have to go so far away?

古文：道士答曰： 近处都晓得你的情性，说请他，他也不信。 
现代文：道士回答说： 近处的神都晓得你的秉性，说请他，他也不信。 
English: The priest replied, "The gods nearby know your disposition. If you ask them, they won't believe you."

古文：好放债
现代文：好放债
English: Good money lenders

古文：一人好放债。家已贫矣，止馀斗粟，仍谋煮粥放之。
现代文：有个人好放债，家里已穷了，只剩斗米，仍计划煮粥放债。
English: There is a person who is good at lending money. His family is poor and only has a bucket of rice left. He still plans to cook porridge and lend money.

古文：人问曰： 如何起利？ 
现代文：别人问他： 怎样收取利息？ 
English: Someone asked him: How to collect interest?

古文：答曰： 讨饭。 
现代文：那人回答说： 讨饭。 
English: The man replied: Begging.

古文：大东道
现代文：大东道
English: Great host

古文：好善者曰： 闻当日佛好慈悲，曾割肉喂鹰，投崖喂虎，我，欲效之。
现代文：有个好行善的人说： 听说佛祖慈悲好行善，曾经割自己的肉喂老鹰，并投下悬崖喂老虎。
English: A do-gooder said, "I heard that the Buddha, the Compassionate, was a do-gooder. He once cut up his own flesh to feed eagles, and threw it off a cliff to feed tigers.

古文：但鹰在天上，虎在山中，身上有肉，不能使啖。
现代文：我要仿效他，但老鹰在天上，老虎在深山里，我身上的肉他们吃不到。
English: I want to imitate him, but the eagle is in the sky, the tiger is in the mountains, and they can't eat my flesh.

古文：夏天蚊子甚多，不如舍身斋了蚊。 
现代文：夏天蚊虫极多，不如舍身斋济蚊虫算了。 
English: There are a lot of mosquitoes in the summer, so it's better to stay home and feed the mosquitoes.

古文：乃不挂帐，以血伺蚊。
现代文：于是不再挂蚊帐，以血喂蚊虫。
English: As a result, mosquito nets are no longer hung and mosquitoes are fed with blood.

古文：佛欲试其虔诚，变一虎啖之。其人大叫曰： 小意思吃些则可，若认真这样大东道，如何当得起！ 
现代文：佛祖想要试验他是否虔诚，变做一只老虎来吃他，那人大叫道： 小意思吃点倒可以，但如果真的来了这样一个大吃客，叫我如何担当得起。 
English: The Buddha wanted to test his piety by turning him into a tiger and eating him. The man shouted, "It's okay to eat sparingly, but if such a big eater really comes, how can I bear the responsibility?"

古文：打半死
现代文：打半死
English: Beat half to death

古文：一人性最贪，富者语之曰： 我白送你一千银子，与我打死了罢。 
现代文：有个人十分贪婪，富人对他说： 我白送你一千两银子，让我打死你吧。 
English: There was a man who was very greedy. The rich man said to him, "I will give you one thousand taels of silver for nothing. Let me beat you to death."

古文：其人沉吟良久，曰： 只打我半死，与我五百两何如？ 
现代文：那人沉吟半晌，回答道： 只打我半死，给我五百两怎么样？ 
English: The man mumbled and replied, "How about only beating me half to death and giving me five hundred taels?

古文：命穷
现代文：命穷
English: Desperate

古文：乡下亲家新制佳酿，城里亲家慕而访之，冀其留饮。
现代文：乡下亲家新酿了好酒，城里亲家听说后去拜访，希望能留下饮酒。
English: Relatives in the country have newly brewed good wine, and relatives in the city visit after hearing about it, hoping to stay and drink.

古文：适亲家他往，亲母命子款待，权为荒榻留宿。
现代文：恰巧乡下亲家外出了，亲家母让儿子招待，勉强留他在破屋子里住宿。
English: It just so happened that his parents were out of town, and his mother invited her son to stay with her, reluctantly letting him stay in a dilapidated house.

古文：其亲母卧房止隔一壁，亲家因未得好酒到口，方在懊闷，值亲母桶上撒尿，恐声响不雅，努力将臀夹紧，徐徐滴沥而下。
现代文：亲家母卧室与他只隔一壁。亲家因为没喝到好酒，正在烦恼，恰巧亲家母在桶上撒尿，因恐声响不雅，便尽力把屁股夹紧，尿徐徐滴沥而下。
English: His mother's bedroom was just one wall away from him. The family was fretting because they hadn't drunk enough good wine. It just so happened that the mother was peeing in a bucket, and for fear of making an indecent noise, she did her best to squeeze her bottom, and the urine trickled down.

古文：亲家听见，私自喜曰： 原来才在里面滴酒哩。想明早得尝其味矣。 
现代文：亲家听见了，暗自高兴地说： 原来刚刚在里面滤酒哩，想明早可以尝到酒味了。 
English: When the relatives heard this, they said with secret joy: "I just filtered the wine in there, and I think I'll be able to taste it tomorrow morning."

古文：亲母闻言，不觉失笑，下边松动，尿声急大，亲家拍掌叹息曰： 真是命穷，可惜滤酒榨袋。又撑破了。 
现代文：亲家母听到他说的话，不由得失笑，下边松动，尿声且急又大，亲家拍掌叹息道： 真是没有好命，可惜滤酒的袋子又撑破了。 
English: When his mother heard what he said, she couldn't help but laugh hysterically, her lower lip quivered, and she urinated loudly and urgently. She clapped her hands and sighed, "It's really not a good life, but it's a pity that the filtered wine bag broke again."

古文：兄弟种田
现代文：兄弟种田
English: Brothers grow crops

古文：有兄弟合种田者，禾既熟，议分。
现代文：有兄弟俩合伙种田，庄稼已经成熟，二人商议如何分配。
English: Two brothers have a partnership in farming. The crops have matured, and the two are discussing how to divide them.

古文：兄谓弟曰： 我取上截，你取下截。 
现代文：哥哥对弟弟说： 我要上半截，你要下半截。 
English: The older brother said to his younger brother, "I'll take the first half, and you take the second half."

古文：弟讶其不平，兄曰： 不难，待明年，你取上，我取下，可也。 
现代文：弟弟听了十分吃惊，认为不公，哥哥回答说： 这好办，等到明年，你要上半截，我要下半截。 
English: The younger brother was very surprised to hear this and thought it was unfair. The older brother replied, "That's easy to do. Next year, you'll get half and I'll get half."

古文：至次年，弟催兄下谷种，兄曰： 我今年意欲种芋头哩。 
现代文：弟弟同意了。到了第二年春天，弟弟催促哥哥播种，哥哥说： 我今年打算要种芋头哩。 
English: The younger brother agreed. In the spring of the following year, the younger brother urged the older brother to sow, and the older brother said, "I'm going to plant taro this year."

古文：合伙做酒
现代文：合伙做酒
English: Wine-making partnership

古文：甲乙谋合本做酒，甲谓乙曰： 汝出米，我出水。 
现代文：甲乙两人商议合伙酿酒，甲对乙说： 你出米，我出水。 
English: Two people, A and B, were discussing a partnership to brew wine. A said to B: You produce rice, I produce water.

古文：乙曰： 米若我的，如何算账？ 
现代文：乙说： 米如果我出，最后如何算账？ 
English: B said: If I sell rice, how will the final account be settled?

古文：甲曰： 我绝不亏心，到酒熟时。只还我这些水罢了。
现代文：甲说： 我绝不占你的便宜，到酿好酒时，只把水还给我，其余的全都归你。 
English: A said, "I will never take advantage of you. When the wine is ready, just give me back the water, and the rest is all yours."

古文：其余多是你的。 翻脸
现代文：翻脸
English: U-turn

古文：穷人暑月无帐，复惜蚊烟费，忍热拥被卧。
现代文：有个穷人暑天没有蚊帐，又吝惜点蚊香觉得太浪费，忍耐暑热盖被而睡。
English: There was a poor man who did not have a mosquito net on a hot day, and felt that it was too wasteful to spare some mosquito incense, so he endured the heat and slept with a quilt.

古文：蚊其面，邻家有一鬼脸，借而带之。
现代文：蚊子叮咬他的脸，于是，他向邻居借来一个鬼脸带在脸上。
English: Mosquitoes were biting his face, so he borrowed a grimace from a neighbor to wear on his face.

古文：蚊口不能入，谓曰： 汝不过惜一文钱耳，如何便翻了脸？ 
现代文：蚊子咬不着他的脸，说道： 你不过吝惜一文钱罢了，为何便翻了脸？ 
English: The mosquito couldn't bite his face, and said, "You just begrudge a penny, why did you turn your face?"

古文：画像
现代文：画像
English: Image from

古文：一人要写行乐图，连纸笔颜料，共送银二分。
现代文：有个人请画师画一幅行乐图，连同纸笔颜料在内，共给了画师二分银子。
English: A person asked an artist to draw a music scene, and gave the artist a total of two silver coins, including paper and paint.

古文：画者乃用水墨于荆川纸上，画出一背像。其人怒曰： 写真全在容颜，如何写背？ 
现代文：于是画师用墨水在荆川纸上画了一背。那人见了大怒道： 画像全在人的容貌，为什么画背？ 
English: So the artist used ink to draw a back on the Jingchuan paper. When the man saw it, he angrily said: The image is all in the person's appearance, why draw the back?

古文：画者曰： 我劝你莫把面孔见人罢。 
现代文：画师说： 我劝你莫把面孔见人吧。 
English: The painter said: I advise you not to show your face.

古文：许日子
现代文：许日子
English: A few days later

古文：一人性极吝啬，从无请客之事。
现代文：有个人极其吝啬，从来没请过客。
English: There was a man who was extremely stingy and never invited guests.

古文：家僮偶持碗一篮，往河边洗涤，或问曰： 你家今日莫非宴客耶？ 
现代文：家里的仆僮偶尔拿一篮碗，到河边去洗涤，有人问道： 你家今天莫非要请客吗？ 
English: The servants of the family occasionally took a basket of bowls and went to the river to wash them. Someone asked: Does your family want to have guests today?

古文：僮曰： 要我家主人请客，除非那世里去！ 
现代文：仆僮回答说： 要我家主人请客，除非下辈子。 
English: The servant replied, "I don't want my master to invite me, except in my next life."

古文：主人知而骂曰： 谁要你轻易许下他日子！ 
现代文：主人知道了此事骂道： 谁让你轻易许下他日子。 
English: When his master learned of this, he scolded him: "Who made you promise him your life so easily?

古文：携灯
现代文：携灯
English: Carrying a lamp

古文：有夜饮者，仆携灯往候。
现代文：有个夜间在外饮酒的人，仆人携灯去接他。
English: There was a man out drinking at night, and the servants went to fetch him with a lamp.

古文：主曰： 少时天便明，何用灯为？ 
现代文：主人说： 再过一会天就亮了，拿灯来有什么用呢？ 
English: The owner said, "It will be light in a little while, so what's the use of bringing a lamp?

古文：仆乃归。
现代文：仆人于是回去了。
English: So the servant went away.

古文：至天明，仆复往接。主责曰： 汝大不晓事，今日反不带灯来，少顷就是黄昏，叫我如何回去？ 
现代文：到了天亮，仆人又去接他，主人责怪道： 你太不懂得事理，现在反而不带灯来，一会就是黄昏，叫我怎么回去？ 
English: At dawn, the servant went to fetch him again, and the master reproached him: "You are too unreasonable, and now you don't bring a lamp, and soon it will be dusk. How can I go back?

古文：不留客
现代文：不留客
English: Do not leave guests

古文：客远来久坐，主家鸡鸭满庭，乃辞以家中乏物，不敢留饭。
现代文：有个客人远道而来，坐了很久，主人家里本是鸡鸭满院，但仍然借口说家里缺少东西，不敢留客人吃饭。
English: A guest came from far away and sat for a long time. The host's house was full of chickens and ducks, but he still used the excuse that there was something missing at home and did not dare to keep the guest for dinner.

古文：客即借刀，欲杀己所乘马治餐。
现代文：客人马上借刀，打算杀掉自己骑的马做饭。
English: The guest immediately borrowed a knife, intending to kill the horse he was riding and cook it.

古文：主曰： 公如何回去？ 
现代文：主人说： 那你怎么回去？ 
English: The owner said: So how do you get back?

古文：客曰： 凭公于鸡鸭中，告借一只，我骑去便了。 
现代文：客人说： 请你在鸡鸭中借我一只，我骑着就是了。 
English: The guest said, "Please lend me one of your chickens and ducks. I'll just ride it."

古文：不留饭
现代文：不留饭
English: Don't leave food out

古文：一客坐至晌午，主绝无留饭之意。适闻鸡声，客谓主曰： 昼鸡啼矣。 
现代文：一个客人坐到中午，主人毫无留饭之意，正好赶上鸡叫，客人对主人说： 鸡报时该吃午饭了。 
English: A guest sat until noon, the host had no intention of leaving a meal, just in time for the rooster to crow. The guest said to the host: It's time to eat lunch when the rooster crows.

古文：主曰： 此客鸡不准。 
现代文：主人说： 这只待客的鸡报时不准。 
English: The owner said, "This chicken is not allowed to announce when it is waiting for guests.

古文：客曰： 我肚饥是准的。 
现代文：客人说： 我肚饥是准的。 
English: The guest said, "I'm definitely hungry."

古文：射虎
现代文：射虎
English: Shooting Tiger

古文：一人为虎衔去，其子执弓逐之，引满欲射。
现代文：一个人被老虎叼去，他的儿子拿着弓箭去追赶，拉开弓箭要射。
English: A man was being chased by a tiger. His son chased after him with a bow and arrow. He drew the bow and arrow to shoot.

古文：父从虎口遥谓其子曰： 我儿须是兜脚射来，不要伤坏了虎皮，没人肯出价钱。 
现代文：父亲从虎口里远远地对儿子喊道： 我儿一定要射老虎的脚，不要伤坏了虎皮，不然没人肯出好价钱。 
English: The father shouted to his son from far away from the tiger's mouth: My son must shoot the tiger's foot, do not damage the tiger's skin, otherwise no one will offer a good price.

古文：吃人
现代文：吃人
English: Cannibalism

古文：一人远出回家，对妻云： 我到燕子矶，蚊虫大如鸡。
现代文：有个人出远门回家后对妻子说： 我到燕子矶，蚊虫大如鸡。
English: A man came home from a long trip and said to his wife, "When I went to Swallow Islet, the mosquitoes were as big as chickens.

古文：后过三山硖，蚊虫大如鸭。
现代文：后过三山硖，蚊虫大如鸭。
English: After the three mountains, the mosquitoes are as big as ducks.

古文：昨在上新河，蚊虫大如鹅。 
现代文：昨在上新河，蚊虫大如鹅。 
English: In Shangxinhe yesterday, the mosquitoes were as big as geese.

古文：妻云： 呆子，为甚不带几只来吃。 
现代文：妻子说： 呆子，为什么不带几只回来吃。 
English: His wife said: "Stupid man, why don't you bring a few back to eat.

古文：夫笑曰： 它不吃我就够了，你还敢想去吃它！ 
现代文：丈夫笑道： 它不吃我就够了，你还敢想去吃它。 
English: The husband laughed, "It's enough if it doesn't eat me, how dare you want to eat it."

古文：悭吝
现代文：悭吝
English: Sparing no expense

古文：一人性最悭吝，忽感痨瘵之疾，医生诊视云： 脉气虚弱，宜用人参培补。 
现代文：有个人性情最为吝啬，忽然得了痨瘵之病，医生诊断说： 脉气虚弱，最好用人参补补身体。 
English: There was a person with the most stingy personality, who suddenly got ringworm disease. The doctor diagnosed: the pulse is weak, it is best to supplement the body with ginseng.

古文：病者惊视曰： 力量绵薄，惟有委命听天可也。 
现代文：病人十分吃惊，看着医生说： 身体虚弱，只好听天由命。 
English: The patient was very surprised, looked at the doctor and said, "I'm so weak, I have to accept my fate."

古文：医生曰： 参既不用，须以熟地代之，其价颇贱。 
现代文：医生说： 人参如果不用，必须用熟地代替，其价钱很贱。 
English: The doctor said, "If you don't use ginseng, you must substitute it with cooked ginseng, which is very inexpensive.

古文：病者摇首曰： 费亦太过，愿死而已。 
现代文：病人摇头说： 破费太过，情愿去死。 
English: The patient shook his head and said, "It's too expensive, I'd rather die."

古文：医知其吝啬，乃诈言曰： 别有一方，用干狗屎调黑糖一二文服之，亦可以补元神。 
现代文：医生晓得他吝啬，便欺骗他说： 还有一药方，用干狗屎和红糖一二钱服下去，也可以补身子。 
English: The doctor knew that he was stingy, so he tricked him by saying, "There's also a prescription that can be taken with dried dog feces and brown sugar for a couple of bucks, and it can also replenish the body.

古文：病者跃然起问： 不知狗屎一味，可以秃用否？ 
现代文：病人兴奋地问道： 不晓得狗屎一味，可以单独用吗？ 
English: The patient asked excitedly, "I don't know shit, can I use it alone?"

古文：卖粉孩
现代文：卖粉孩
English: Selling baby powder

古文：一人做粉孩儿出卖，生意甚好。谓妻曰： 此后只做束手的，粉可稍省。 
现代文：一个人做粉孩儿出卖，生意甚好，他对妻子说： 以后只做没有手的，那样可节省一些粉。 
English: A man had a flour mill and sold it. Business was very good. He said to his wife, "In the future, we will only make things without hands, that way we can save some flour."

古文：果卖去。
现代文：结果也卖掉了。
English: It ended up being sold.

古文：又曰： 此后做坐倒的，当更省。 
现代文：那人又对妻子说： 以后只做坐着的，那样更节省。 
English: The man also said to his wife: "From now on, I'll only do sitting, it's more economical that way."

古文：仍卖去。
现代文：结果仍然卖掉了。
English: It still ended up being sold.

古文：乃曰： 如今做头而卧者，不更省乎！ 
现代文：接着又对妻子说： 如果做低头躺着的，不更节省吗？ 
English: Then he said to his wife: "Wouldn't it be more economical to do it lying down?"

古文：及做就，妻提起看曰： 省则省矣，只是看看不像个人了。 
现代文：等到做完了，妻子拿起来说： 省倒是省了，只是看看不像人了。 
English: When it was finished, my wife picked it up and said, "It's a saving, but it doesn't look like a person anymore."

古文：独管裤
现代文：独管裤
English: Singlet trousers

古文：一人谋做裤而吝布，连唤裁缝，俱以费布辞去。
现代文：有个人想做一条裤子，又怕多费布，一连找了好几个裁缝，都因为嫌费布没做成。
English: There was a man who wanted to make a pair of trousers, but was afraid of spending too much money on the fabric. He went to several tailors in a row, but none of them could make it because they didn't want to spend money on the fabric.

古文：落后一裁缝曰： 只须三尺足矣。 
现代文：最后一个裁缝说： 只需要三尺布就足够了。 
English: The last of the tailors said, "Only three feet of cloth are needed.

古文：其人大喜，买布与之，乃缝一脚管，令穿两足在内。
现代文：那个人十分高兴，买布交给了裁缝。裁缝于是缝了一只裤腿，让他把两腿穿在里边。
English: The man was so happy that he gave the cloth to the tailor, who sewed a leg of the trousers and let him put his legs inside.

古文：其人曰： 迫甚，如何行得？ 
现代文：那人说： 着急的时候，如何行走？ 
English: The man said, "How can you walk when you are in a hurry?"

古文：缝匠曰： 你脱煞要省，自然一步也行不开的。 
现代文：裁缝说： 你死命要省，自然一步也行走不了了。 
English: The tailor said: You have to save your life, you can't walk a single step.

古文：莫想出头
现代文：莫想出头
English: Don't even think about it.

古文：一性吝者，买布一丈，命裁缝要做马衣一件，裤一条，袜一双，余布还要做顶包巾。
现代文：有个人十分贪吝，买了一丈布，欲让裁缝做一件马褂、一条裤子、一双袜子，剩余的布还要做顶帽子。
English: There was a man who was very greedy. He bought a pile of cloth and wanted the tailor to make a horse's mane, a pair of trousers, a pair of socks, and the remaining cloth to make a hat.

古文：匠每以布少辞去。
现代文：许多裁缝都因为布不够用而不为他做。
English: Many tailors did not make clothes for him because they did not have enough cloth.

古文：落后一裁缝曰： 我做只消八尺，倒与你省却两尺，何如？ 
现代文：最后有个裁缝说： 我做只需用八尺，还可以省下两尺，怎么样？ 
English: Finally, a tailor said: I only need to use eight feet of thread, but I can save two feet, how about that?

古文：其人大喜，缝者竟做成一长袋，将此人从头顶口用绳收紧。
现代文：那人听了十分高兴。裁缝竟然做成一个长口袋，将那人从头套到脚，之后用绳绑紧袋口。
English: The tailor made a long bag, put the man in it from head to foot, and then tied the mouth of the bag with a rope.

古文：其人曰： 气闷极矣。 
现代文：那人说： 太气闷了。 
English: The man said, "It's too stuffy."

古文：匠曰： 遇着你这悭吝鬼，自然是气闷的。省是省了，要想出头却难哩。 
现代文：裁缝回答道： 遇着你这个吝啬鬼，自然是要气闷的，布省是省了，但想要出头却难哩！ 
English: The tailor replied, "When you are a miser, it is natural to be gloomy. It is easy to save cloth, but it is difficult to get ahead.

古文：因小失大
现代文：因小失大
English: A little goes a long way

古文：自造方便觅利者，遥见一人撩衣，知必小解。
现代文：有个人在路旁建了一个厕所，目的是截获过路人的大小便。有一天，该人远远看见一个行人撩起上衣，知道那人要小便。
English: A man who built a toilet on the side of the road to catch the urine and faeces of passers-by one day saw a man in the distance lift up his shirt and knew he was about to urinate.

古文：恐其往所对邻厕，乃伪为出恭，而先踞其上。小解者果赴己厕。
现代文：他怕行人便在旁边他人家的厕所，于是假装大便，抢先蹲到他人家厕所，行人果然去了自己家的厕所。
English: He was afraid of pedestrians and went to the toilet at someone else's house, so he pretended to defecate and squatted down to the toilet at someone else's house first. The pedestrian actually went to the toilet at his own house.

古文：其人不觉，偶撒一屁，带下粪来，乃大悔恨，曰： 何苦因小失大。 
现代文：该人蹲在他人厕所，偶然放了一屁，带下粪来，于是十分懊悔，说： 何苦因小失大。 
English: The person squatted in someone else's toilet, accidentally farted and brought down excrement, so he was very remorseful and said, "What a great deal of suffering for a small loss."

古文：七德
现代文：七德
English: Seven Degrees

古文：一家延师，供馔甚薄。
现代文：有户人家聘请了一个教书先生，供给的饭食很差。
English: One family hired a teacher, but the food was bad.

古文：一日，宾主同坐，见篱边一鸡，指问主人曰： 鸡有几德？ 
现代文：有一天，主人与教书先生坐在一起，看到篱边一只鸡，教书先生指着鸡向主人问道： 鸡有几德？ 
English: One day, the master and the tutor were sitting together and saw a chicken on the edge of the fence. The tutor pointed at the chicken and asked the master: "What virtues does the chicken have?"

古文：主曰： 五德。 
现代文：主人说： 五德。 
English: The master said, "Five virtues."

古文：师曰： 以我看来，鸡有七德。 
现代文：教书先生说： 以我看来，鸡有七德。 
English: The teacher said: In my opinion, the chicken has seven virtues.

古文：问： 为何多了二德？ 
现代文：主人问： 为什么多了二德？ 
English: The host asked: Why are there two more Germans?

古文：答曰： 我便吃得，你却舍不得。 
现代文：教书先生回答说： 我便吃得，你却舍不得。 
English: The teacher replied, "I can eat it, but you can't help it.

古文：粪鸡
现代文：粪鸡
English: Chicken poop

古文：东家供师甚薄，久不买荤。
现代文：有户人家供给教书先生的饭食很差，很长时间也没有荤菜。
English: One family's meal for the teacher was very poor, and there was no stew for a long time.

古文：一日，粪缸内淹死一鸡子，烹以为馔，师食而疑之。问其徒。
现代文：有一天粪缸内淹死一只鸡，煮后给先生吃。先生尝后感到可疑，问其学生，学生以实相告。
English: One day, a chicken drowned in a cesspool and was cooked and given to the teacher to eat. The teacher felt suspicious after tasting it and asked his students. The students told him the truth.

古文：徒以实告，师愤甚。
现代文：先生十分愤怒。
English: The teacher was furious.

古文：少顷，主人进馆，师忙执笤帚一把，塞其口中，逼使尽食。
现代文：不一会儿，主人进屋，先生急忙拿起笤帚，塞进主人嘴中，逼他全部吃了。
English: After a while, the owner entered the house, and the teacher hurriedly picked up the chopsticks, shoved them into the owner's mouth, and forced him to eat them all.

古文：东家曰： 笤帚如何吃得？ 
现代文：主人说： 笤帚怎么能吃？ 
English: The owner said, "How can you eat cormorants?

古文：师曰： 你既不肯吃笤帚，如何倒叫先生吃粪鸡。 
现代文：先生说： 你既不肯吃笤帚，为何反倒让我吃粪鸡！ 
English: The teacher said, "Since you don't want to eat crickets, why do you want me to eat chicken poop instead!"

古文：恶神
现代文：恶神
English: The Evil God

古文：一神道险恶，塞者必用生人祭祷。
现代文：有个恶神极其险恶凶残，如有求于他，必得用活人去祭奠。
English: There is an evil god who is extremely dangerous and cruel. If you ask for him, you will have to use living people to worship him.

古文：有酬愿者，苦乏人献，特于供桌中挖孔，藏身在桌下，而伸头于桌面，俟神举箸，头忽缩下。
现代文：有个人要实现一桩心愿打算求恶神帮忙，由于缺少活人祭奠十分苦恼，于是在供桌上挖了一个洞，把身子藏在桌下，头伸出桌面。等到恶神举起筷子去夹，头突然缩回。
English: There was a man who wanted to fulfill a wish and was going to ask the evil god for help. He was very distressed due to the lack of a living sacrifice, so he dug a hole in the offering table, hid his body under the table, and stuck his head out of the table. When the evil god lifted up his chopsticks to clip it, his head suddenly retracted.

古文：神大怒，骂曰： 这班小鬼都是贼，才得举箸，如何就没有了。 
现代文：恶神大怒，骂道： 这些小鬼都是贼，才举起筷子，怎么一下子就一点没有了？ 
English: The evil god was furious and scolded, "These little devils are all thieves, they just picked up their chopsticks, why did they suddenly run out?

古文：下饭
现代文：下饭
English: After dinner

古文：二子同餐，问父用何物下饭，父曰： 古人望梅止渴，可将壁上挂的腌鱼，望一望吃一口，这就是下饭了。 
现代文：两个儿子一同吃饭，问父亲用什么东西下饭，父亲说： 古人望梅止渴，你们可将墙壁上挂的咸鱼干，看一眼吃一口，这样下饭就行了。 
English: The two sons were eating together and asked their father what they should use for dinner. The father said, "The ancients looked to plums to quench their thirst. You can take a look at the dried salted fish hanging on the wall and take a bite. This will be fine for dinner."

古文：二子依法行之。
现代文：两个儿子依言而行。
English: The two sons did as they were told.

古文：忽小者叫云： 阿哥多看了一眼。 
现代文：忽然小儿子叫道： 哥哥多看了一眼。 
English: Suddenly, the younger son called out, "My brother took an extra look."

古文：父曰： 咸杀了他。 
现代文：父亲回答说： 咸死他。 
English: His father replied: "Kill him.

古文：吃榧伤心
现代文：吃榧伤心
English: Eat your heart out

古文：有担榧子在街卖者，一人连吃不止。
现代文：有个人挑着榧子在街上卖，一个人连吃不止。
English: There was a man selling hazelnuts on the street, and he couldn't stop eating them.

古文：卖者曰： 你买不买，如何只吃？ 
现代文：卖榧子的人说： 你到底买不买，为什么只管吃？ 
English: The hazelnut seller said, "Whether you buy hazelnuts or not, why just eat them?

古文：答曰： 此物最能养脾。 
现代文：那人回答道： 这种东西最能养脾。 
English: The man replied, "This kind of thing is the best for building up the spleen."

古文：卖者曰： 你虽养脾，我却伤心。 
现代文：卖榧子的人说： 你虽然养脾，我却伤心。 
English: The mule-seller said, "Though you have kept your temper, I am sad.

古文：卖肉忌赊
现代文：卖肉忌赊
English: Meat sellers should be avoided

古文：有为儿孙做马牛者。临终之日，呼诸子而问： 我死后，汝辈当如何殡殓？ 
现代文：有个人为儿孙做了一辈子牛马，临死之前叫来儿子问道： 我死了之后，你们打算如何安葬我？ 
English: There was a man who had worked all his life to provide for his children and grandchildren. Before he died, he called his son and asked, "After I die, how do you plan to bury me?"

古文：长子曰： 仰体大人惜费之心，不敢从厚，缟衣布衾，二寸之椁，墓道仅以土封。 
现代文：大儿子说： 我们已领会您怕浪费的心思，所以不敢厚葬，打算用粗布盖上尸体，里面用二寸厚的内棺，外面用一寸厚的套棺，坟墓只用土埋。 
English: The eldest son said: We have understood your fear of waste, so we do not dare to bury thickly. We plan to cover the body with a coarse cloth, use a two-inch-thick inner coffin inside, a one-inch-thick outer coffin, and bury the grave only with soil.

古文：翁攒眉良久，责其多费。
现代文：老头皱眉良久，责备他太浪费。
English: The old man frowned for a long time, accusing him of being wasteful.

古文：次子曰： 衣衾棺椁，俱不敢用，但择稿荐一条，送于郊外，谓之火葬而已。 
现代文：二儿子说： 衣服、被盖、内棺、外棺，都不敢用，只用一条草帘子，把尸体送到郊外，用火烧掉就行了。 
English: The second son said, "I don't dare to use the clothes, the bed cover, the inner coffin, or the outer coffin. I'll just use a grass curtain to take the body to the suburbs and burn it with fire."

古文：翁锋疾其过奢。
现代文：老头仍然认为过于奢侈。
English: The old man still thinks it's too extravagant.

古文：三子默喻父意，乃诡词，以应曰： 吾父爱子之心，无所不至，既经殚力于生前，岂惜捐躯于死后？
现代文：三儿子内心领会了父亲的心意，便谎言应答道： 父亲爱子之心，无微不至，既然生前拼命劳作，难道在死后会吝惜捐躯吗？
English: The third son, having understood his father's intention, replied with a lie: A father's love for his son is beyond reproach. Since he worked so hard during his lifetime, will he begrudge his death after his death?

古文：不若以大人遗体，三股均分，暂作一日之屠儿，以享百年之遗泽，何等不好？ 
现代文：不如把您的遗体，砍成三段分给三个儿子，以充当一天的屠肉卖给他人，这样便可实现父亲的遗愿，是再好不过的了。 
English: It would have been better if your body had been cut into three parts and given to your three sons, who would have sold it to others as a day's worth of meat, thus fulfilling your father's last wish.

古文：翁乃大笑曰： 吾儿此语，适获我心。 
现代文：老头于是大笑说： 我儿的这番话，正对我的心思。 
English: The old man then laughed loudly and said: My son's words are just right for my heart.

古文：复戒之曰： 对门王老三。惯赖肉钱，断断不可赊。 
现代文：接着又告诫儿子说： 对门王老三，一贯好赖肉钱，千万不要赊给他。 
English: Next, he admonished his son, saying, "As opposed to the gate king Lao San, who has always been greedy for money, don't give it to him.

古文：咬嚼不过
现代文：咬嚼不过
English: Can't help but chew

古文：一人死后，转床殡殓，诸亲及众妇绕灵而哭。
现代文：有个人死后，换床殡殓，诸亲及众妇女围绕着灵柩哭泣。
English: After the death of a person, the funeral bed is changed, and relatives and many women cry around the coffin.

古文：只见孝帏裂碎，到处飞扬，皆称怪像。
现代文：忽然孝帏裂碎，到处飞扬。
English: Suddenly, the filial piety shattered and flew everywhere.

古文：特往关魂问之。乃曰： 无他。只是当众人咬嚼不过耳。 
现代文：众人都觉得奇怪，特去问神，神回答说： 没有别的，只不过是被众人吵闹不堪忍受罢了。 
English: All the people were amazed and went to inquire of God, and God answered, "Nothing, except that the uproar of the people has become too much to bear.

古文：蘸酒
现代文：蘸酒
English: Sake brewing

古文：有性吝者，父子在途，每日沽酒一文，虑其易竭，乃约用箸头蘸尝之。
现代文：父子俩十分吝啬。有一次二人赶路，每天买酒一文，担心酒易喝尽，便约定用筷头蘸着吃。
English: Both father and son are very stingy. Once, when they were in a hurry, they bought a bottle of wine for a penny a day. Worried that the wine would run out, they agreed to eat it with chopsticks.

古文：其子连蘸二次，父责之曰： 如何吃这般急酒！ 
现代文：其儿子连蘸两次，父亲斥责儿子说： 为何吃这样急酒。 
English: The father scolded his son twice, saying, "Why did you drink so quickly?

古文：吞杯
现代文：吞杯
English: Swallowing a cup

古文：一人好饮，偶赴席，见桌上杯小，遂作呜咽之状。
现代文：有个人好喝酒，偶然去参加宴席，见桌上酒杯很小，于是装做呜咽之态。
English: There was a man who liked to drink, and he happened to go to a banquet. Seeing that the glasses on the table were very small, he pretended to be in a state of sobbing.

古文：主人惊问其故，曰： 睹物伤情耳。先君去世之日，并无疾病，因友人招饮，亦似府上酒杯一般，误吞入口，咽死了的。
现代文：主人问他为何呜咽，那人回答说： 睹物伤情啊，先父去世那天，并无疾病，而是由于朋友相邀饮酒，也像您府上的酒杯一样小，误吞入口，因此被噎死了。
English: The owner asked him why he was sobbing, and the man replied: "I'm sorry, but on the day my father died, he didn't have an illness, but was strangled to death because a friend invited him to drink alcohol, which was also as small as the wine glass in your house, and he swallowed it by mistake.

古文：今日复见此杯，焉得不哭？ 
现代文：今天又见一样小的酒杯，怎能不哭？ 
English: Today I saw the same small wine glass, how can I not cry?

古文：好酒
现代文：好酒
English: Good wine

古文：父子扛酒一坛，路滑跌翻，其父大怒，子伏地痛饮。抬头谓父曰： 快些来么，难道你还要甚菜？ 
现代文：父子俩抬着一坛酒，路滑跌翻了，父亲大怒，儿子趴在地上猛喝撒在地上的酒，抬起头对父亲说： 快趴下喝呀，难道你还要什么菜？ 
English: The father and son were carrying a jar of wine, the slide fell over, the father was furious, the son lay on the ground and drank the wine that had been scattered on the ground. He looked up and said to his father: Come on, lie down and drink. What more do you want?

古文：恋席
现代文：恋席
English: Love seat

古文：客人恋席，不肯起身。
现代文：有个客人贪恋酒席，不肯起身。
English: There was a guest who loved to drink and refused to get up.

古文：主人偶见树上一大鸟，对客曰： 此席坐久。盘中肴尽，待我砍倒此树，捉下鸟来，烹与执事侑酒，何如？ 
现代文：主人碰巧看见树上有只大鸟，便对客人说： 这宴席已吃很久了，盘里的菜也没了，等我砍倒那棵大树，捉下那只鸟来，煮熟给您下酒，怎么样？ 
English: The host happened to see a large bird in a tree, and said to his guest: "This banquet has been eaten for a long time, and the dishes are all gone. How about I cut down the big tree, catch the bird, cook it, and serve you wine?

古文：客曰： 只恐树倒鸟飞矣。 
现代文：客人说： 只怕树倒鸟就飞啦。 
English: The guest said: Even if the tree falls, the bird will fly.

古文：主云： 此是呆鸟，他死也不肯动身的。 
现代文：主人说： 这是只呆鸟，死也不肯动身的。 
English: The owner said: "It's a stubborn bird, it won't leave until it's dead."

古文：恋酒
现代文：恋酒
English: Love of wine

古文：一人肩挑磁壶，各处货卖。
现代文：有个人肩挑磁壶，到处去卖。
English: A man carried a magnetic kettle on his shoulder and went everywhere to sell it.

古文：行至山间，遇着一虎，咆哮而来。其人怆甚，忙将一壶掷去，其虎不退。再投一壶，虎又不退。
现代文：有一天走到山间，遇到一只老虎，咆哮而来，此人十分慌恐，忙将一个磁壶掷去，老虎仍不肯退走，又投一个磁壶，老虎还是不退。
English: One day, walking in the mountains, he came across a tiger that was roaring. The man was very panicked and rushed to throw a jug, but the tiger still refused to leave. He threw another jug, but the tiger still refused to leave.

古文：投之将尽，止存一壶，乃高声大喊曰： 畜生畜生，你若去，也只是这一壶，你就不去，也只是这一壶了！ 
现代文：磁壶即将投尽，只剩下一个磁壶，于是高声大叫道： 畜生畜生，你如果离开，也只是这一个磁壶了，你即便不离开，也只是这一个磁壶了。 
English: The jug was about to be emptied, and only one jug was left, so he shouted in a loud voice: Damn, damn, if you leave, it's only this one jug, and if you don't leave, it's only this one jug.

古文：四脏
现代文：四脏
English: Four dirty

古文：一人贪饮过度，妻子私相谋议曰： 屡劝不听，宜以阴事动之。 
现代文：有个人贪饮过度，妻子和儿子暗地相商说： 多次劝止他喝酒都不见效，宜用惊险之事吓唬他。 
English: There was a man who drank too much. His wife and son said to each other in secret: Repeatedly trying to dissuade him from drinking did not work. It would be better to scare him with thrilling things.

古文：一日，大饮而哕。
现代文：有一天那人吃猪下水喝酒，酒后呕吐了不少污物。
English: One day, the man ate pork dripping and drank alcohol. After drinking, he vomited a lot of filth.

古文：子密袖猪膈，置哕中，指以谓曰： 凡人具五脏，今出一脏矣，何以生耶？ 
现代文：儿子在袖子里密藏猪膈，放到吐出的污物之中，并指着对父亲说： 凡人共有五脏，现在你吐出一脏，靠什么活呢？ 
English: The son hid the pig's trotters in his sleeve and put them in the vomited filth. Pointing to his father, he said, "All human beings have five internal organs. Now that you have vomited out one of your internal organs, what will you live on?"

古文：父熟视曰： 唐三藏尚活世，况我有四脏乎！ 
现代文：父亲仔细看了一会说： 唐三藏只有三脏还能活，况且我有四脏呢？ 
English: My father took a closer look and said, "Tang Sanzang only has three internal organs and can still live. What's more, I have four internal organs?"

古文：寡酒
现代文：寡酒
English: Too little wine

古文：一人以寡酒劝客，客曰： 不如拿把刀来杀了我罢。 
现代文：有个人用寡酒劝客，客人说： 不如拿把刀来杀了我罢。 
English: One man tried to dissuade his guests with a bottle of wine. The guest said: "It would be better to take a knife and kill me."

古文：主愕然，问： 劝酒无非好意，何出此言？ 
现代文：主人十分吃惊，问道： 劝酒全是好意，为何说这样的话？ 
English: The owner was very surprised and asked: "The wine advice is all well-intentioned, why would you say such a thing?

古文：客曰： 其实当你寡不过了。 梦戏酌
现代文：客人说： 其实我以为你要寡我。 梦戏酌
English: The guest said: Actually, I thought you wanted to marry me.

古文：一人梦赴戏酌，方定席，为妻惊醒，乃骂其妻。
现代文：有一个人在睡梦中赴宴看戏，刚举杯，还未饮，忽然被妻子打扰醒了，于是大骂妻子。
English: A man was attending a banquet and watching a play in his sleep. He had just raised his glass, but had not yet drunk, when he was suddenly awakened by his wife, who scolded him.

古文：妻曰： 不要骂，趁早睡去，戏文还未半本哩。 
现代文：妻子说： 不要骂，趁早睡去，戏文还没演唱到一半呢。 
English: My wife said, "Don't curse, go to sleep as soon as possible, the play hasn't been sung halfway through yet."

古文：梦美酒
现代文：梦美酒
English: Dream Wine

古文：一好饮者，梦得美酒，将热而饮之。忽被惊醒，乃大悔曰： 早知如此，恨不冷吃。 
现代文：有个好喝酒的人，做梦时得到好酒，打算热了以后再喝，突然被惊醒，于是十分懊悔，说： 早知如此，不如趁冷喝了。 
English: There was a man who was a good drinker. He had a dream in which he was given good wine. He intended to drink it after it had warmed up, but was suddenly awakened. He was very remorseful and said, "I should have known better than to drink it when it was cold."

古文：截酒杯
现代文：截酒杯
English: Cut-off glasses

古文：使僮斟酒不满，客举杯细视良久，曰： 此杯太深，当截去一段。 
现代文：仆僮斟酒不满，客人举杯端视许久，说： 此杯太深，应当截去一段。 
English: The servant was not satisfied with the pouring of the wine, the guest raised his glass and looked at it for a long time, saying: This glass is too deep, it should be cut off a section.

古文：主曰： 为何？ 
现代文：主人说： 为什么？ 
English: The owner said, "Why?

古文：客曰： 上半段盛不得酒，要他何用？ 
现代文：客人说： 上半截盛不得酒，要它有什么用？ 
English: The guest said, "There is no wine in the first half of the set, what is the use of it?"

古文：切薄肉
现代文：切薄肉
English: thinly sliced meat

古文：主有留客饭，仅用切肉一碗，既嚣且少。
现代文：主人留客吃饭，仅供切肉一碗，既薄又少。
English: The host invites the guests to dinner, but only serves them a bowl of minced meat, which is both thin and scarce.

古文：乃作诗以诮之。曰： 君家之刀利且锋，君家之手轻且松。
现代文：客人于是作诗一首讥诮说： 君家之刀利且锋，君家之手轻且松。
English: The guest then wrote a mocking poem, saying: The sword of the royal family is sharp and sharp, but the hand of the royal family is light and weak.

古文：切来片片如纸同，周围披转无二重。
现代文：切来片片如纸同，周围披转无二重。
English: The cut pieces are like pieces of paper, and there is no double twisting around.

古文：推窗忽遇微小风，顿然吹入五云中。
现代文：推窗忽遇微小风，顿然吹入五云中。
English: The sliding window suddenly encountered a slight breeze and was suddenly blown into the clouds.

古文：忙忙令人觅其踪，已过巫山十二峰。 
现代文：忙忙令人觅其踪，已过巫山十二峰。 
English: Busy people are looking for its trace, and it has passed the twelve peaks of Wushan.

古文：满盘多是
现代文：满盘多是
English: The market is mostly full

古文：客见座上无肴，乃作意谢主人，称其太费。
现代文：客人见桌子上面没有菜肴，于是故意感谢主人，说其太破费。
English: When the guest saw that there were no dishes on the table, he deliberately thanked the host, saying that it was too expensive.

古文：主人曰： 一些菜也没有，何云太费？ 
现代文：主人说： 一点菜也没有，怎能说太破费？ 
English: The owner said: "There's not a single dish, how can you say it's too expensive?

古文：客曰： 满盘都是。 
现代文：客人说： 满桌子都是。 
English: The guest said: "The table is full of them.

古文：主人曰： 菜在那里？ 
现代文：主人说： 菜在哪里？ 
English: The owner said: Where is the food?

古文：客指盘曰： 这不是菜，难道是肉不成？ 
现代文：客人指着空盘子说： 这不是菜，难道是肉不成？ 
English: The guest pointed to the empty plate and said, "This isn't a dish, isn't it just meat?"

古文：滑字
现代文：滑字
English: Sliding word

古文：一家延师，供膳菲薄。
现代文：有户人家聘请了一个教书先生，供给的饭食十分微薄。
English: One family has hired a teacher, but the meals provided are very meagre.

古文：时值天雨，馆僮携午膳至，肉甚少。
现代文：有一天正赶上下雨，主人家的仆僮送来午饭，肉很少。
English: One day, just as it was about to rain, the servants of the master's family brought lunch, but there was very little meat.

古文：师以其来迟，欲责之。僮曰： 天雨路滑故也。 
现代文：教书先生借口送饭晚了，要斥责他。仆僮说： 是天下雨路滑的缘故。 
English: The teacher wanted to reprimand him on the pretext of delivering the meal late. The servant said, "It's because of the rain and slippery roads."

古文：师曰： 汝可写滑字我看，如写得出，便饶你打。 
现代文：教书先生说： 你可以写个 滑 字给我看，如果写得出来，便饶了你。 
English: The teacher said, "You can write a slide and show it to me. If you can write it, I'll forgive you."

古文：僮曰： 一点儿，一点儿，又是斜坡一点儿。其余都是骨了。 
现代文：仆僮说： 一点儿，一点儿，又是斜坡一点儿，其余都是骨了。 
English: The servant said, "A little bit, a little bit of grass, and a little bit of slope, and the rest is bone."

古文：不见肉
现代文：不见肉
English: No meat in sight

古文：一母命子携萝卜一篮，往河洗涤，久之不归。
现代文：有个妇女让儿子带一篮萝卜到河里去洗，过了很长时间还没回来。
English: One woman asked her son to take a basket of radishes to the river to wash them, but he did not return for a long time.

古文：母往寻之，但存萝卜。知儿失足坠河，淹死水中。因大哭曰： 我的肉，我的肉，但见萝卜不见肉。 
现代文：母亲到河边去找他，只见到萝卜，知道儿子失足掉进河里，被河水淹死，于是痛哭道： 我的肉，我的肉，只见萝卜不见肉。 
English: His mother went to the river to look for him, but found only turnips. Knowing that her son had fallen into the river and was drowned, she cried bitterly, "My meat, my meat, I can only see turnips, but no meat."

古文：和头多
现代文：和头多
English: And head more.

古文：有请客者，盘飧少而和头多，因嘲之曰： 府上的食品，忒煞富贵相了。 
现代文：有个人请客，每盘都是肉少而搭配的菜多，客人于是嘲讽道： 府上的食品，太富贵相了。 
English: A person invited guests, each plate is less meat and more dishes to go with it, the guest then mocked: The food in the house is too rich.

古文：主问： 何以见得？ 
现代文：主人问： 何以见得？ 
English: The host asked: How come?

古文：曰： 葱蒜萝卜，都用鱼肉片子来拌的，少刻鱼肉上来，一定是龙肝凤髓做和头了。 
现代文：客人回答说： 葱蒜萝卜，都用鱼肉片子做配莱；等一会儿鱼肉上来，一定是龙肝凤髓做配菜了。 
English: The guest replied, "All the onions, garlic, and radishes are made with fish fillets as a side dish; when the fish meat comes out, the dragon liver and phoenix pith must have been made as a side dish.

古文：盛骨头
现代文：盛骨头
English: Stirring the bones

古文：一家请客，骨多肉少。
现代文：有户人家请客，骨多肉少。
English: There is a family that invites guests, and the bones are more meaty and less starchy.

古文：客曰： 府上的碗想是偷来的。 
现代文：客人说： 府上的碗想是偷来的。 
English: The guest said: I think the bowl in the house was stolen.

古文：主人骇曰： 何出此言？ 
现代文：主人十分震惊，说： 为何说出这样的话？ 
English: The owner was shocked and said, "Why would you say that?"

古文：客曰： 我只听见人家骂说， 偷我的碗，拿去盛骨头。  
现代文：客人说： 我听见有人骂道： 偷我的碗，拿去盛骨头！  
English: The guest said, "I heard someone curse, 'Steal my bowl, take my bones!'

古文：收骨头
现代文：收骨头
English: Collecting the bones

古文：馆僮怪主人每食必尽，只留光骨于碗，乃对天祝曰： 愿相公活一百岁，小的活一百零一岁。 
现代文：家僮怨恨主人每次吃饭必定吃光，只在碗里留下骨头，于是对天祝愿说： 愿您活到一百岁，小的活到一百零一岁。 
English: Iecheng grudged that his master must have eaten up every meal, leaving only bones in the bowl, so he made a wish to the heavens: "May you live to be a hundred years old, and the little one live to be a hundred and one years old."

古文：主问其故，答曰： 小人多活一岁，好收拾相公的骨头。 
现代文：主人问仆僮为何这样祝愿，仆僮回答说： 小人我多活一岁，好给您收骨头。 
English: The master asked the servant why he made such a wish, and the servant replied, "Little man, I want to live one more year so that I can collect your bones."

古文：涂嘴
现代文：涂嘴
English: Mouth painting

古文：或有宴会，座中客贪馋不已，肴梗既尽。馆僮愤怒而不敢言，乃以锅煤涂满嘴上，站立旁侧。
现代文：在一次宴席上，宴席上的人贪吃不已，菜肴已经吃光，家僮愤怒而不敢说，于是用锅底灰涂满嘴巴，站立旁边。
English: At a banquet, the people at the banquet were greedy, the dishes had been eaten up, and the housekeeper was angry and did not dare to speak, so she smeared her mouth with the bottom of the pot and stood next to it.

古文：众人见而讶之，问其嘴间何物，答曰： 相公们只顾自己吃罢了，别人的嘴管他则甚。 
现代文：众人看见后十分惊讶，问他嘴上是什么东西，仆僮回答说： 你们的嘴只顾自己吃就是了，别人的嘴管它干什么！ 
English: The people were very surprised when they saw it, and asked him what was on his mouth. The servant replied: "Your mouth is only concerned with what you eat, other people's mouths don't care what it does!"

古文：索烛
现代文：索烛
English: Candles

古文：有与善啖者同席，见盘中俱尽，呼主翁拿烛来。
现代文：有个人与一个贪吃的人一起吃饭，见菜盘已光，便招呼主人拿蜡烛来。
English: A man was dining with a glutton and, seeing that the plate was empty, called to his host to bring a candle.

古文：主曰： 得无太早乎？ 
现代文：主人说： 是不是太早了？ 
English: The owner said, "Isn't it too early?"

古文：曰： 我桌上已一些不见了。 
现代文：那人回答说： 我桌上已经什么都看不见了。 
English: The man replied, "I can't see anything on my desk anymore."

古文：借水
现代文：借水
English: Borrowed water

古文：一家请客，失分一箸。
现代文：有户人家请客吃饭，少摆了一双筷子。
English: One family invited guests to dinner, but they didn't bring a pair of chopsticks.

古文：上菜之后，众客朝拱举箸。
现代文：众人举起筷子互让吃菜，没拿到筷子的那个人不动地看着。
English: Everyone raised their chopsticks and let each other eat the vegetables. The person who didn't get the chopsticks looked on impassively.

古文：其人袖手而观。徐向主人曰： 求赐清水一碗。 
现代文：等了一会儿，那人对主人说： 请您赐给我一碗清水。 
English: After waiting for a while, the man said to his master, "Please give me a bowl of clean water."

古文：主问曰： 何处用之？ 
现代文：主人问道： 干什么用？ 
English: The owner asked: What is it for?

古文：答曰： 洗干净了指头，好拈菜吃。 
现代文：那人回答说： 洗干净了指头，好拈菜吃。 
English: The man replied, "I have washed my fingers, so I can eat the stew."

古文：善求
现代文：善求
English: Asking for help

古文：有做客异乡者，每入席，辄狂啖不已，同席之人甚恶之。
现代文：有个在外乡做客的人，每次入席吃饭，都狂吃不停，同桌的人都很厌恶他。
English: There was a man who was a guest in a foreign town. Every time he sat down to eat, he ate like crazy. The people at his table all disliked him.

古文：因问曰： 贵处每逢月蚀。
现代文：因此有人问他： 你们家乡每逢月蚀怎么办？ 
English: So someone asked him: What do you do in your hometown every time there is a lunar eclipse?

古文：问： 如何求法？ 曰： 合掌了手，对黑月说道： 阿弥陀佛，脱煞凶了，求你省可吃些，剩点与人看看罢。  
现代文：回答说： 官府里的人穿公服聚集起来，率领军人拿着武器击鼓奏乐，等到月亮出来之后散去。 那人也向同席的人问道： 贵处的做法也是相同的吗？ 回答说： 敝处不是那样做，只是善于祈求。 那人问如何求法，回答道： 合掌对天狗说： 阿弥陀佛，请你发点慈悲少吃些吧，剩下点给大家看看吧。  
English: The official replied, "People in government offices gather in their official uniforms and lead soldiers with weapons to beat drums and play music, and then disperse after the moon rises." The man also asked the people at the table, "Is your practice the same?" He replied, "It's not like that, I'm just good at praying." The man asked how to seek the Dharma, and replied, "The clapping of hands said to Tengu, "Amitabha Buddha, please show some compassion and eat less, and let everyone see what's left."

古文：好啖
现代文：好啖
English: Good morning.

古文：甲好啖，手不停箸，问乙曰： 兄如何箸也不动？ 
现代文：甲好吃，手不停筷，问乙道： 你为何不动筷子？ 
English: A: It's delicious, I can't stop using chopsticks, asks B: Why don't you move your chopsticks?

古文：乙还问曰： 兄如何动也不住？ 
现代文：乙反问道： 你为何动筷不停？ 
English: B asked: Why do you keep moving your chopsticks?

古文：同席不认
现代文：同席不认
English: Co-sitting disapproval

古文：有客馋甚，每入座。辄餮餐不已。
现代文：有个人极馋，每次入席都旁若无人，贪吃不已。
English: There is a man who is extremely greedy. Every time he sits down to a meal, it is as if no one is there. He is insatiable.

古文：一日与之同席，自言曾会过一次。友曰： 并未谋面，想是老兄错认了。 
现代文：有一次，友人和他一起吃饭，贪吃者说曾和他见过一面，朋友说： 我们并没有见过面，想是老兄您认错了。 
English: Once, a friend had dinner with him. The glutton said he had met him before. The friend said, "We haven't met. I think you've made a mistake, my friend."

古文：及上菜后，啖者低头大嚼，双箸不停。
现代文：等到上菜后，贪吃者低头大嚼，两支筷子忙个不停。
English: After waiting for the dish to be served, the glutton bows his head and munches away, while the two chopsticks keep busy.

古文：彼人大悟。曰： 是了，会便会过一次，因兄只顾吃菜，终席不曾抬头，所以认不得尊容，莫怪莫怪。 
现代文：友人突然醒悟，说： 对了，见面确实见过一次，因你只顾吃菜，整个宴席间不曾抬头，所以不认识您的尊容，莫怪莫怪。 
English: My friend suddenly woke up and said, "By the way, I did meet you once, because you only ate vegetables and didn't look up during the entire banquet, so I don't know your face, which is strange."

古文：喜属犬
现代文：喜属犬
English: He is a dog

古文：一酒客讶同席者饮啖太猛，问其年，以属犬对。
现代文：有个酒客见一个同席的人吃喝极猛，感到十分惊讶，便问那人有多大岁数了，那人回答说： 属狗。 
English: One drinker was so surprised to see a fellow diner eating and drinking so much that he asked the man how old he was. The man replied: "A dog."

古文：客曰： 幸是属犬，若属虎，连我也都吃下肚了。 
现代文：酒客说： 幸亏属狗，如果属虎，连我也都吃下肚了。 
English: The drinker said: Fortunately it was a dog, but if it had been a tiger, it would have eaten me up.

古文：问肉
现代文：问肉
English: Ask the meat

古文：一人与瞽者同席。先上东坡肉一碗，瞽者举箸即钳而啖之。
现代文：有个人与一个盲人同席，先上来一碗东坡肉，盲人拿起筷子马上夹了一块吃起来。
English: There was a person who was sitting at the same table with a blind man. First, he brought up a bowl of Dongpo meat. The blind man picked up his chopsticks and immediately took a piece to eat.

古文：同席者恶甚。少焉复来捞取，盘中已空如也。
现代文：那人十分厌恶，不一会儿盲人又来夹肉，盘中已经没了。
English: The man was disgusted, and soon the blind man came back with another piece of meat, which was no longer on the plate.

古文：问曰： 肉有几块？ 
现代文：盲人问道： 一共有几块肉？ 
English: The blind man asked, "How many pieces of meat are there?"

古文：其人愤然答曰： 九块。 
现代文：那人没好气地回答道： 九块。 
English: The man angrily replied, "Nine dollars."

古文：瞽者曰： 你倒吃了八块么。 
现代文：盲人说： 你倒吃了八块吗？ 
English: And the blind man said unto him, Hast thou eaten of the loaves?

古文：吃黄雀
现代文：吃黄雀
English: Eat yellow finches

古文：两人同席共饮，碗内有黄雀四只，一人贪食其三，谓同席者曰： 兄何不用？ 
现代文：两个人同席饮酒，碗里共有四只黄雀，其中一人贪吃三只以后，对同席的人说： 你为何不吃？ 
English: Two people were drinking wine at the same table. There were four yellow finches in the bowl. After one of them had devoured three of them, he said to the people at the table: "Why don't you eat them?"

古文：其人曰： 索性放在兄腹中，省得他们拆了对。 
现代文：同席的人回答说： 索性吃到你肚子里，省得他们拆了对。 
English: A fellow diner replied: "It's better to get it into your stomach so they don't pull it out."

古文：罚变蟹
现代文：罚变蟹
English: Penalty crabs

古文：一人见冥王，自陈一生吃素，要求个好轮回。
现代文：有个人死后见了冥王，自述一生吃素，要求有个好托生。
English: There was a man who, after his death, saw the king of the underworld. He said that he had been a vegetarian all his life and asked for a good life.

古文：王曰： 我哪里查考，须剖腹验之。 
现代文：冥王说： 我无法考查，只得剖腹检验。 
English: Hades said, "I can't be examined, I have to be dissected."

古文：既剖，但见一肚馋涎。
现代文：剖腹后，只见一肚子馋水。
English: After a cesarean section, all I can see is a belly full of water.

古文：因曰： 罚你去变一只蟹，依旧吐出了罢。 
现代文：于是冥王判道： 罚你去变一只螃蟹，照旧把涎水吐出来算了。 
English: So Hades said, "I'll punish you by making you turn into a crab, but don't spit out the pus as usual."

古文：不吃素
现代文：不吃素
English: Vegetarianism

古文：一人遇饿虎，将遭啖，其人哀恳曰： 圈有肥猪，愿将代己。 
现代文：有个人遇到饥饿的老虎，老虎要吃他。那人哀求老虎说： 我家圈有肥猪，愿意用肥猪代替自己给你吃。 
English: A man encountered a hungry tiger, and the tiger wanted to eat him. The man begged the tiger, saying, "There is a fat pig in my family circle, and I am willing to use the fat pig to eat you instead of myself."

古文：虎许之，随至其家。
现代文：老虎答应了，跟随他到了家里。
English: The tiger agreed and followed him home.

古文：唤妇取猪喂虎，妇不舍曰： 所有豆腐颇多，亦堪一饱。 
现代文：该人招呼妻子取肥猪喂老虎，妻子舍不得，说： 家里的豆腐极多，也够老虎吃饱了。 
English: The man invited his wife to take a fat pig and feed it to the tiger. The wife could not resist and said, "We have a lot of tofu at home, and the tiger has enough to eat."

古文：夫曰： 罢么，你看这样一个狠主客，可肯吃素的么？ 
现代文：丈夫说： 算了吧，你看这样一个凶狠的来客，难道是肯于吃素的吗？ 
English: The husband said: Forget it, look at such a ferocious guest, is he willing to be a vegetarian?

古文：淡酒
现代文：淡酒
English: Light wine

古文：有人宴客用淡酒者，客向主人索刀。主问曰 要他何用？ 
现代文：有人请客吃饭，用很淡的酒招待。客向主人借一把刀，主人问： 要刀干什么？ 
English: A guest was invited to dinner and was served very light wine. The guest asked the host to lend him a knife. The host asked: "What do you need a knife for?"

古文：曰： 欲杀此壶。 
现代文：客人说： 用刀杀酒壶。 
English: The guest said: Kill the wine jug with a knife.

古文：又问： 壶何可杀？ 
现代文：主人又问； 为啥要杀它？ 
English: The owner asked again; why kill it?

古文：答曰： 杀了他，解解水气。 
现代文：客人说： 杀了它，解解水气。 
English: The guest said, "Kill it, dissolve the water vapor."

古文：淡水
现代文：淡水
English: Freshwater

古文：河鱼与海鱼攀亲，河鱼屡往，备扰海鱼。
现代文：河里的鱼与海里的鱼结亲家，河鱼经常去打扰海鱼。
English: The fish in the river and the fish in the sea are relatives, and the river fish often disturb the sea fish.

古文：因语海鱼： 亲家，何不到小去处下顾一顾？ 
现代文：因此对海鱼说： 亲家，何不到我家去玩玩？ 海鱼欣然同意。
English: So he said to the fish, "Dear, why don't you come to my house to play?" The fish readily agreed.

古文：海鱼许焉。河鱼归曰： 海头太太至矣。 
现代文：河鱼回家对妻子说： 海里亲家母来了。 
English: The river fish went home and said to his wife, "The mother of my family has come from the sea."

古文：遣手下择深港迎之。
现代文：派手下选一深水处迎接。
English: He sent his men to pick a place in deep water to meet them.

古文：海鱼甫至港口便返，河鱼追问其故，答曰： 我吃不惯贵处这样淡水。 
现代文：海鱼刚到港口边就返回去了，河鱼追问原因，海鱼答： 我吃不惯你家这样的淡水。 
English: The saltwater fish just arrived at the port and went back. The river fish asked why, and the saltwater fish replied, "I'm not used to eating freshwater like your home."

古文：索米
现代文：索米
English: Somi

