古文：戊午九月初三日出白岳榔梅庵，至桃源桥。
现代文：戊午年九月初三日从白岳山榔梅庵出来，到桃源桥。
English: On the third day of early September in the year of Wu Wu, he came out of Baiyue Mountain to Taoyuan Bridge.

古文：从小桥右下，陡甚，即旧向黄山路也。
现代文：顺小桥右侧下山，很陡，就是原来去黄山所走的路。
English: Go down the right side of Shun Xiaoqiao Bridge, it is very steep, it is the original way to go to Huangshan.

古文：七十里，宿江村。
现代文：行程七十里，在江村住宿。
English: The journey is seventy miles, with accommodation in Jiangcun.

古文：初四日十五里，至汤口。
现代文：初四这天行十五里，到汤口。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month, I walked 15 miles to Tangkou.

古文：五里，至汤寺，浴于汤池。
现代文：又走五里，到达汤寺，在汤池沐浴。
English: After another five-mile walk, they arrived at Tang Temple, where they bathed in the hot spring pool.

古文：扶杖望硃砂庵而登。
现代文：手拄拐杖、遥望着殊砂庵攀登。
English: Handcuffed on crutches, looking into the distance as they climb up the Susa-an.

古文：十里，上黄泥冈。
现代文：十里，登上黄泥冈。
English: Ten miles, up the yellow mud hill.

古文：向时云里诸峰，渐渐透出，亦渐渐落吾杖底。
现代文：刚才云雾笼罩的群峰渐渐地显露出来，也渐渐地落在我的拐杖下。
English: Gradually, the mist-shrouded peaks began to reveal themselves, and gradually fell beneath my crutches.

古文：转入石门，越天都之胁而下，则天都、莲花二顶，俱秀出天半，路旁一岐东上，乃昔所未至者，遂前趋直上，几达天都侧。
现代文：转进石门，从天都峰侧面穿越而下，于是天都、莲花两座峰顶，都秀丽地突出在天空中。路边有一条岔路往东上，是我从前没走过的，于是往前顺岔路直上，几乎上到天都峰侧面。
English: I turned into the stone gate and went down from the side of Tiantu Peak, so the two peaks of Tiantu and Lotus were beautifully protruding in the sky. There was a fork in the road to the east, which I had never walked before, so I went straight up along the fork, almost up to the side of Tiantu Peak.

古文：复北上，行石罅中。
现代文：又往北上，在石缝中穿行。
English: Further north, through a crevice in the rock.

古文：石峰片片夹起；路宛转石间，塞者凿之，陡者级之，断者架木通之，悬者植梯接之。
现代文：一片片石峰夹着路耸起，路在石峰之间弯来转去，阻塞的地方被凿开，陡峭的地方修出阶梯，断裂的地方搭木通过，悬空处安置梯子连接。
English: Pieces of stone pinnacles rise up between the road, the road bends around between the stone pinnacles, the blocked places are chiseled, the steep places are repaired with ladders, the broken places are covered with trees, and the suspended places are connected with ladders.

古文：下瞰峭壑阴森，枫松相间，五色纷披，灿若图绣。
现代文：往下俯瞰，壑谷峻峭、阴森，枫树和松树相互夹杂，五彩殡纷，像图画、锦绣一样灿烂。
English: Looking down, Shibuya is steep and gloomy, maple and pine trees are mixed with each other, colorful and colorful, as brilliant as pictures and brocades.

古文：因念黄山当生平奇览，而有奇若此，前未一探，兹游快且愧矣！
现代文：于是想到游黄山应是有生以来的奇览，却还有如此的奇异景致前次没有探寻过，这一次重游真是既痛快又惭愧啊！
English: So I thought that visiting Huangshan should be a lifetime adventure, but there are still such strange scenery that I have not explored before. This time, revisiting is really both enjoyable and shameful!

古文：时夫仆俱阻险行后，余亦停弗上；乃一路奇景，不觉引余独往。
现代文：这时仆人都因山路险阻而落在后面，我也停下来不朝上走；而一路的奇景，不知不觉地吸引我独自前往。
English: At this time, the servants were all left behind because of the mountain road obstacles, and I also stopped going up; and the wonderful scenery along the way unconsciously attracted me to go alone.

古文：既登峰头，一庵翼然，为文殊院，亦余昔年欲登未登者。
现代文：登上峰头后，一座庙如鸟翅张开，名文殊院，也是我前年想攀登而没有登的地方。
English: After climbing to the top of the peak, a temple spreads out like a bird's wing. The famous Wenshu Academy is also a place I wanted to climb last year but didn't.

古文：左天都，右莲花，背倚玉屏风，两峰秀色，俱可手擥同揽。
现代文：左边是夭都峰，右边是莲花峰，背靠玉屏峰，莲花、天都两峰的秀美山色。近得似乎可以伸手揽住。
English: On the left is the Yodu Peak, on the right is the Lotus Peak, backed by the Jade Screen Peak, the beautiful mountain color of the Lotus and the Heavenly Capital. It seems to be so close that you can reach out and grab it.

古文：四顾奇峰错列，众壑纵横，直黄山绝胜处！
现代文：环顾四周，奇峰高下错落排列，壑谷众多而纵横交叉，真是黄山上最绝妙的胜景。
English: Looking around, the strange peaks are staggered in height, and the valleys are numerous and criss-cross. It is truly the most wonderful scenery on Huangshan Mountain.

古文：非再至，焉知其奇若此？
现代文：如果不是第二次到黄山，哪里会知道黄山竟有如此奇妙的景色呢？
English: If not the second time to Huangshan, where would you know that Huangshan actually has such a wonderful scenery?

古文：遇游僧澄源至，兴甚勇。
现代文：巧遇云游僧人澄源也登上此峰，于是游兴更为高涨。
English: Cheng Yuan, a wandering monk, also climbed this peak by chance, so the interest in travel was even higher.

古文：时已过午，奴辈适至。
现代文：过了中午，仆人们才来到。
English: The servants did not arrive until after midday.

古文：立庵前，指点两峰。
现代文：站在文珠院前，指着天都、莲花两峰点评。
English: Standing in front of the Confucius Institute, he pointed to the Heavenly Capital and the two peaks of the lotus flower.

古文：庵僧谓： 天都虽近而无路，莲花可登而路遥。
现代文：庵中的僧人说： 天都峰虽然离得近，却没有路上去；莲花峰有路上去，路程却很远。
English: The monk in the hermitage said: Although the Heavenly Capital Peak is close, there is no road to go; the Lotus Peak has a road to go, but the distance is very far.

古文：只宜近盼天都，明日登莲顶。 
现代文：只宜从近处观赏天都峰，明天攀登莲花峰顶。 
English: It is only appropriate to view the Tiantu Peak from a close distance and climb the Lotus Peak tomorrow.

古文：余不从，决意游天都。
现代文：我不听，决心游览天都峰。
English: I didn't listen and decided to visit Tiandu Peak.

古文：挟澄源、奴子仍下峡路。
现代文：和澄源、仆人一齐从原路下到峡谷。
English: He went down the original path to the canyon together with Sumimoto and the servants.

古文：至天都侧，从流石蛇行而上。
现代文：到达天都峰侧，顺着流石像蛇一样地爬行而上。
English: Reaching the side of the Tiantu Peak, I crawled up the rocks like a snake.

古文：攀草牵棘，石块丛起则历块，石崖侧削则援崖。
现代文：抓扯草木荆棘攀援，石块丛密而起就从中穿越，石崖陡斜则扒崖而行。
English: Clinging to the thorns and thistles of the grass and trees to climb, clumped stones to climb through, and steep cliffs to climb.

古文：每至手足无可着处，澄源必先登垂接。
现代文：每当遇到手脚无着落的之处，必然是澄源先爬上去再伸手接我。
English: Whenever I come across a place where my hands and feet have no place to land, it is inevitable that Cheng Yuan climbs up first and then reaches for me.

古文：每念上既如此，下何以堪？
现代文：一想到上去已经如此艰难，就想到又怎么下来呢？
English: When you think about how hard it is to get to the top, how do you get back down?

古文：终亦不顾。
现代文：最终什么也不顾了。
English: In the end, nothing mattered.

古文：历险数次，遂达峰顶。
现代文：经历了数次危险，终于登上了天都峰顶。
English: After experiencing several dangers, he finally climbed to the top of the Tiantu Peak.

古文：惟一石顶壁起犹数十丈，澄源寻视其侧，得级，挟予以登。
现代文：峰顶上只有一块耸起数十丈高的岩石，澄源在岩石旁边寻找、观察，发现石阶，便扶持着我攀登。
English: At the top of the peak, there is only one rock that rises dozens of feet high. Cheng Yuan searched and observed next to the rock, found stone steps, and supported me to climb.

古文：万峰无不下伏，独莲花与抗耳。
现代文：万座山峰无一不低伏在脚下，唯独莲花峰能与之抗衡。
English: All the ten thousand peaks are at your feet, only the Lotus Peak can compete with them.

古文：时浓雾半作半止，第一阵至，则对面不见。
现代文：此时浓雾忽起忽止，每当一阵浓雾飘来，就是对面都看不见。
English: At this time, the dense fog suddenly stopped, and every time a thick fog came, it was impossible to see the opposite side.

古文：眺莲花诸峰，多在雾中。
现代文：眺望莲花诸峰，大多笼罩在云雾之中。
English: Looking out over the lotus pinnacles, mostly shrouded in mist.

古文：独上天都，予至其前，则雾徙于后；予越其右，则雾出于左。
现代文：只有在天都峰上，我走到前面，云雾则落在身后；我越到右侧，云雾便从左侧升起。
English: Only on Tiantu Peak, when I walked to the front, the clouds fell behind me; when I walked to the right, the clouds rose from the left.

古文：其松犹有曲挺纵横者；柏虽大于如臂，无不平贴石上、如苔藓然。
现代文：顶上还有横枝弯曲、主干挺拔的松树；柏树的枝干虽然有手臂粗，却全都平贴在岩石上，像苔醉一样。
English: On the top there are also pine trees with crooked branches and straight trunks; the branches of cypress trees, although they have thick arms, are all flat on the rock, like moss.

古文：山高风巨，雾气去来无定。
现代文：山高风大，雾气来去不定。
English: The mountain is high and windy, and the fog comes and goes.

古文：下盼诸峰，时出为碧峤尖而高的山，时没为银海。
现代文：往下看群峰，有时露出碧绿色的尖顶，有时又淹没为银色的云海。
English: Look down at the peaks, sometimes revealing turquoise spires, sometimes submerged in a silver sea of clouds.

古文：再眺山下，则日光晶晶，别一区宇也。
现代文：再眺望山下，则是阳光明亮，是另外一个世界。
English: Looking down the mountain, the sun is shining brightly, and it's another world.

古文：日渐暮，遂前其足，手向后据地，坐而下脱。
现代文：夜色渐渐临近，于是把脚朝前伸出去，用手在后面据地，坐着往下滑行。
English: Night was closing in, so he put his feet out in front of him, put his hands behind his back, sat down and slid down.

古文：至险绝处，澄源并肩手相接。
现代文：滑到最险要的地方，澄源便肩、手并用地接住我。
English: When I slipped to the most dangerous place, Chengyuan caught me with his shoulder and hand.

古文：度險，下至山坳，暝色已合。
现代文：穿过惊险地段，下到山坳时，暮色已经降临。
English: After passing through the thrilling section and descending to the foothills, dusk had already fallen.

古文：复从峡度栈以上，止文殊院。
现代文：又顺着峡谷越过栈道而上，到文殊院住宿。
English: We also went up along the canyon over the footpath to stay at Wenshu Yuan.

古文：初五日平明，从天都峰坳中北下二里，石壁岈然。
现代文：初五这天天一亮，从天都峰山坳中往北下二里路，石壁森严。
English: At the break of dawn on the fifth day of the first month of the year, there was a two-mile road heading north from the middle of the Heavenly Capital Peak Mountain, and the stone wall was steep.

古文：其下莲花洞正与前坑石笋对峙，一坞幽然。
现代文：壁下的莲花洞正正和洞前的石笋对峙，整个小山坞十分幽雅。
English: The Lotus Cave under the wall is in direct confrontation with the stalagmite in front of the cave, and the entire small dock is very elegant.

古文：别澄源，下山至前岐路侧，向莲花峰而趋。
现代文：和澄源告别后下山，来到昨天有岔道的路边，向莲花峰奔去。
English: After bidding farewell to Chengyuan, I went down the mountain, came to the roadside where there was a fork yesterday, and ran towards Lotus Peak.

古文：一路沿危壁西行，凡再降升，将下百步云梯，有路可直跻莲花峰。
现代文：一路上沿陡壁往西行，一共两上两下，快要下到百步云梯，有路可以直登莲花峰。
English: All the way along the steep wall to the west, a total of two up and two down, about to go down to the hundred-step ladder, there is a way to climb the lotus peak.

古文：既陟而磴绝，疑而复下。
现代文：向上攀登后，石阶却断了，怀疑有误而又往下走。
English: After climbing up, the stone steps broke, and I suspected something was wrong and went back down.

古文：隔峰一僧高呼曰： 此正莲花道也！ 
现代文：隔壁峰上一位僧人高呼道： 这正是上莲花峰的路！ 
English: On the next peak, a monk shouted, "This is the way to Lotus Peak!"

古文：乃从石玻侧度石隙。
现代文：于是从石坡旁边穿越石缝。
English: So I walked from the side of the slope through the stone gap.

古文：径小而峻，峰顶皆巨石鼎峙，中空如室。从其中叠级直上，级穷洞转，屈曲奇诡，如下上楼阁中，忘其峻出天表也。
现代文：山路狭窄而陡峻，峰顶上全是巨石鼎立，巨石之中中空如室，从其中层叠的石阶直上，石阶尽头处山洞转向，弯弯曲曲，奇异非常，如同在楼阁中上上卞下，忘却了这里的地势高出天外。
English: The mountain road is narrow and steep. On the top of the peak, there are huge boulders standing on top of each other. In the middle of the boulders, there is a hollow like a room. From there, the cascading stone steps go straight up. At the end of the stone steps, there is a cave to turn to. It is very curvy. It is very strange. It is like being in a mansion and looking up and down, forgetting that the terrain here is beyond the heavens.

古文：一里得茅庐，倚石罅中。
现代文：走了一里，见一茅屋傍靠在石缝间。
English: After walking for a mile, I saw a thatched cottage leaning against a crevice in the stone.

古文：徘徊欲开，则前呼道之僧至矣，僧号凌虚，结茅于此者，遂与把臂陟顶。
现代文：正犹疑着想再往上登，先前高呼的僧人来到了。僧人法号凌虚，是盖此茅屋的人，于是和凌虚手挽手、共同攀登顶峡。
English: While hesitating to climb further, the monk who had been chanting earlier arrived. The monk's Buddhist name was Ling Qiu, the man who built this hut, so he and Ling Qiu climbed the canyon together, arm in arm.

古文：顶上一石，悬隔二丈，僧取梯以度。
现代文：顶上的一块巨石，隔开二丈宽，僧人取来梯子才度过去。
English: At the top, there was a huge boulder, separated by two feet. The monk took a ladder to get over it.

古文：其巅廓然开阔舒朗，四望空碧，即天都亦俯首矣。
现代文：莲花峰顶十分开阔，环顾四周澄碧的天空，即使天都峰也俯首屈居了。
English: The peak of Lotus Peak is very open. Looking around at the clear blue sky, even the Heavenly Capital Peak is bowing down.

古文：盖是峰居黄山之中，独出诸峰上，四面岩壁环耸，遇朝阳霁色，鲜映层发，令人狂叫欲舞。
现代文：大体上莲花峰位于黄山正中，独自高出众峰之上，四面岩壁环抱耸立，遇上云雾散尽、朝阳当空的晴朗天气，层层山峦映照、焕发着清新的色彩，景致美得令人狂叫起舞。
English: In general, the Lotus Peak is located in the middle of Huangshan Mountain, which is uniquely high above the other peaks. The rock walls surround it on all four sides. When the clouds disperse and the morning sun is in the sky, it is a sunny day. The layers of hawthorn reflect and radiate fresh colors. The scenery is so beautiful that it makes people scream and dance.

古文：久之，返茅庵，凌虚出粥相饷，啜一盂，乃下。
现代文：过了很久，返回茅屋，凌虚端出粥款待，喝了一碗，然后下山。
English: After a long time, he returned to the thatch house, served porridge as a treat, drank a bowl, and then went down the mountain.

古文：至岐路侧，过大悲顶，上天门。
现代文：走到岔路边，经过大悲顶，登上天门。
English: Walk to the side of the narrow road, pass through the Great Path, and ascend to the Heavenly Gate.

古文：三里，至炼丹台。循台嘴而下，观玉屏风、三海门诸峰，悉从深坞中壁立起。
现代文：三里，到炼丹台，沿着台嘴而下，看到玉屏峰、三海门等众山峰，全都从深谷中壁立而起。
English: After three miles, you will arrive at Chingdantai and walk down along the platform to see the peaks of Yuping Peak, Sanhaimen and other mountains, all of which rise up from the middle of the deep valley.

古文：其丹台一冈中垂，颇无奇峻，惟瞰翠微之背，坞中峰峦错耸，上下周映，非此不尽瞻眺之奇耳。
现代文：炼舟台山冈居中低垂，并不十分奇异险峻，只是俯视青山之背，山谷中峰峦交错耸立，上下四周相互映衬，不在冈上就不能尽情眺望这些奇景。
English: Lying in the middle of the low-hanging hills of Zhouzhoudaishan, it is not very strange and precipitous, but it overlooks the back of the green mountains, the peaks in the valley are staggered and towering, and the top and bottom are contrasted with each other. If you are not on the hill, you will not be able to enjoy these wonders.

古文：还过平天矼，下后海，入智空庵，别焉。
现代文：返回的路上经过平天班，下到后海，进智空僧人的庵中，和智空告别。
English: On the way back, he passed through Ping Tianban, went down to Houhai, entered the hermitage of the monks of Zhikang, and bid farewell to Zhikang.

古文：三里，下狮子林，趋石笋矼，至向年所登尖峰上。
现代文：行三里，到狮子林，朝石笋斑奔去，来到前年所登过的尖峰上。
English: I walked three miles, went to the lion forest, ran towards the rocky ridges, and came to the peak I had climbed the year before.

古文：倚松而坐，瞰坞中峰石回攒，澡繢满眼如画的景色满眼，始觉匡庐、石门，或具一体，或缺一面，不若此之闳博宏大丰富富丽也！
现代文：傍靠松树坐下，俯瞰山谷中峰石环绕簇拥，彩画般的景色尽收眼底，才觉得庐山石门有的只具备一种景致，有的欠缺某一方面，不如这里宏大、广博、丰富和壮丽！
English: Sitting next to the pine trees, overlooking the valley, surrounded by pinnacles and clustered together, with the picturesque scenery stretching as far as the eye can see, I feel that some of the Lushan Stone Gate only has one kind of scenery, and some lack a certain aspect, but it is not as grand, extensive, rich and magnificent as here!

古文：久之，上接引崖，下眺坞中，阴阴觉有异。
现代文：坐了一阵，登上接引崖，往下朝坞中眺望。山坞阴森，让人觉得不同寻常。
English: I sat for a while, climbed up the jetty cliff and looked down into the morning dock. The dock was gloomy, which made me feel unusual.

古文：复至冈上尖峰侧，践流石，援棘草，随坑而下，愈下愈深，诸峰自相掩蔽，不能一目尽也。
现代文：又来到冈上尖峰侧边，踩着流石，拉着荆棘杂草，顺坑而下，愈下愈深，群峰互相掩蔽，不能一目了然。
English: I also came to the side of the peak on the hill, stepping on the stones, pulling the thorns and weeds, going down the pit, getting deeper and deeper, the peaks cover each other, it is not clear at a glance.

古文：日暮，返狮子林。
现代文：太阳落山时，返回狮子林。
English: When the sun sets, return to the lion forest.

古文：初六日别霞光霞客之弟，从山坑向丞相原下七里，至白沙岭，霞光复至。
现代文：初六这天和僧人霞光告别，顺山坑去皿相原。往下走七里，到白沙岭，霞光僧人又来到。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, I said goodbye to the monk Xia Guang and went to the plateau along the mountain pit. I walked seven miles down to Baisha Ridge, and the monk Xia Guang came again.

古文：因余欲观牌楼石，恐白沙庵无指者，追来为导。
现代文：因为我想去观览牌楼石，霞光担心白沙庵没人指路，追来为我作向导。
English: Because I wanted to go to the viewing platform, Xia Guang was worried that there was no one to show me the way to Baishaan, so she followed me to be my guide.

古文：遂同上岭，指岭右隔坡，有石丛立，下分上并，即牌楼石也。
现代文：于是一同登白沙岭，霞光指着岭右边隔壁的山坡，坡上丛石耸立，丛右下部分离、上部并连，这就是牌楼石。
English: So they ascended the Baisha Ridge together. Xia Guang pointed to the hillside next to the right side of the ridge. A cluster of boulders stood on the slope. The lower right part of the cluster was separated, and the upper part was connected. This is the arched stone.

古文：余欲逾坑溯涧，直造其下。
现代文：我想越过坑谷、溯涧沟而上，直达牌楼石下。
English: I want to go over the valley and up the ravine, straight to the foot of the stone.

古文：僧谓： 棘迷路绝，必不能行。
现代文：霞光说： 荆棘遍布，根本没有路，肯定不能走。
English: Xia Guang said: There are thorns everywhere, there is no road at all, I definitely can't walk.

古文：若从坑直下丞相原，不必复上此岭；若欲从仙灯而往，不若即由此岭东向。 
现代文：如果顺着坑谷直下垂相原，不必再登白沙岭；如果想从仙灯洞前往，不如就沿白沙岭往东走。 
English: If you go straight down the valley, you don't have to climb Baisha Ridge again; if you want to go from Xiantang Cave, it's better to go east along Baisha Ridge.

古文：余从之，循岭脊行。
现代文：我听从他的话，沿着岭脊走。
English: I followed his advice and walked along the ridge.

古文：岭横亘天都、莲花之北，狭甚，旁不容足，南北皆崇峰夹映。
现代文：白沙岭横贯在天都峰、莲花峰的北面，十分狭窄，旁侧无法落脚，南北都有高大的山峰夹峙映衬。
English: Baisha Ridge runs across the north face of Tiantu Peak and Lotus Peak. It is very narrow, and it is impossible to land on the side. There are tall peaks in the north and south.

古文：岭尽北下，仰瞻右峰罗汉石，圆头秃顶，俨然二僧也。
现代文：到岭尽头处往北下，抬头看右边的罗汉石峰，圆头秃顶，像两位僧人。
English: At the end of the ridge, head north and look up at the Luohan stone peak on the right. It is round-headed and bald, like two monks.

古文：下至坑中，逾涧以上，共四里，登仙灯洞。
现代文：下到坑谷中，越过沟涧而上，一共走四里，登上仙灯洞。
English: Down to the valley, across the gully and up, a total of four miles, up to the Fairy Lantern Cave.

古文：洞南向，正对天都之阴。
现代文：洞口朝南，正对天都峰的北面。
English: The mouth of the cave faces south, directly facing the north face of Tiantu Peak.

古文：僧架阁连板于外，而内犹穹然，天趣未尽刊削除也。
现代文：僧人在洞外架起木板阁道和洞相连，而洞内仍然深弯，天然的情趣没有被完全破坏。
English: On the outside of the cave, the monks have built a boardwalk to connect it to the cave, but the inside of the cave is still deeply curved, and the natural charm has not been completely destroyed.

古文：复南下三里，过丞相原，山间一来地耳。
现代文：又往南下三里，经过承相原。皿相原是山中一块狭小的平地而已。
English: Another three miles to the south, past Shoaibara. Sarasobara is just a small flat area in the mountains.

古文：其庵颇整，四顾无奇，竟不入。
现代文：这里的庵很工整，一看四周没有奇特之处，没进去。
English: The hermitage here is very well-made. At first glance, there is nothing unusual about it. I didn't go inside.

古文：复南向循山腰行，五里，渐下。
现代文：又往南沿山腰行，五里，慢慢下山。
English: I walked south along the mountainside for another five miles, slowly descending.

古文：涧中泉声沸然，从石间九级下泻，每级一下有潭渊碧，所谓九龙潭也。
现代文：涧中泉声沸腾，泉水从岩石中分九级往下泻，每一级飞泉下面都有碧绿色的深潭，这就是所说的九龙潭。
English: The sound of the fountain in the middle of the pond is boiling. The spring water is divided into nine levels and flows down from the rock. Under each level of the fountain, there is a turquoise-green deep pool. This is the so-called Kowloon Pool.

古文：黄山无悬流飞瀑，惟此耳。
现代文：黄山中没有飞流的瀑布，唯一的一处便是这里。
English: There is no flying waterfall in Huangshan, the only one is here.

古文：又下五里，过苦竹滩，转循太平县路，向东北行。
现代文：又下五里，经过苦竹滩，转向去太平县的路，往东北行。
English: Another five miles down, past the Bitter Bamboo Beach, turn to the road to Taiping County, heading northeast.

