古文：成汭杨蔚欧阳澥伊璠顾彦朗李甲房知温窦梦征许生杨鼎夫牛希济阴君文字贫妇支戬
现代文：成汭杨蔚欧阳澥伊璠顾彦朗李甲房知温窦梦征许生杨鼎夫牛希济阴君文字贫妇支戬
English: 

古文：成汭
现代文：成汭
English: Succeeded by

古文：唐天祐中，淮师围武昌，杜洪中令乞师于梁王。
现代文：唐朝天祐中年，淮师攻打围困武昌，杜洪中令派人向梁王求救。
English: When Emperor Tianyu was in his middle years, the Huai army attacked and besieged Wuchang, and Du Hong sent someone to King Liang for help.

古文：梁与荆方睦，乃讽成中令汭帅兵援之。
现代文：梁王和荆州方面的关系很好，便同意让成中令汭率领军队去援救。
English: Liang Wang and Jingzhou had a good relationship, so they agreed to let Chengzhong Linyi lead the army to rescue.

古文：汭欲往亲征，乃力造巨舰一艘，三年而成，号曰和州载。
现代文：汭想要亲自出战，叫人造了一艘巨大的战船，三年才造完，起名叫做 和州载号 。
English: He wanted to go to war in person, so he had a huge warship built. It took three years to complete, and it was named the "Wazhou Jiao" (和州载号).

古文：舰上列厅宇洎司局，有若衙府之制。
现代文：船上有几层大小船舱，设立各种官职和组织，实行类似于官署衙门里那样的建制。
English: There are several floors of large and small cabins on the ship, and various official positions and organizations have been established, implementing a system similar to that of the government office.

古文：幕寮俯仰，不措一辞。
现代文：号称 船高与山齐，船大截断海 ，其余部分的华丽和壮观也可想而知了。
English: It is said that the height of the ship is as high as the mountains, the ship cuts off the sea, and the other parts are gorgeous and spectacular.

古文：唯孔目吏杨厚赞成之。舟次破军山下，为吴师纵燎而焚之，汭竟溺死，兵士溃散。先是改名曰汭，字即水内也。水内之死，岂前兆乎。
现代文：各级将官和参谋人员虽然对造这样大的船有意见，但是由于惧怕汭的威严和独断专行，也只能与他周旋，不敢提一句意见，只有孔目杨厚表示赞成修造大船。大船出征驶到军山下，被吴在师放火烧毁，汭掉到水里淹死，兵将败逃。 汭 字分开念是水内，死在水里岂不是应了前兆吗！
English: Although generals and staff officers at all levels have opinions on the construction of such a large ship, but because they are afraid of the majesty and arbitrariness of Wu, they can only deal with him and dare not mention a word of advice. Only Kong Mue Yang Hou expressed his approval of building a large ship. The big ship sailed to the foot of the mountain, was set on fire and burned by Wu's division, and the anchor fell into the water and drowned, and the soldiers would escape.

古文：湖南及朗州军入江陵，俘载军民职掌伎巧僧道伶官，并归长沙，改汭之名。和州之说，前定矣。
现代文：后来湖南和朗州的军队进入江陵，将抓到的士兵百姓、江湖艺人、能工巧匠，甚至和尚、道士全都带回长沙。改名为 汭 以有 和州 的说法，真是事先确定的。
English: Later, the armies of Hunan and Lanzhou entered Jiangling and brought all the captured soldiers and civilians, artists, craftsmen, and even monks and Taoists back to Changsha. The change of name to "Changzhou" was really predetermined.

古文：杨蔚
现代文：杨蔚
English: Yang Wei

古文：唐杨蔚使君典洋源。道者陈休复每到州，多止于紫极宫。弘农甚思一见，而颖川辄便他适。
现代文：唐朝刺史杨蔚到洋源出任洋州刺史，道士陈休复每次到洋州都住在紫极官，刺史很想见他，而陈休复总是又到别处去了。
English: Yang Wei, a Tang dynasty assassin, went to Yangyuan to serve as a foreign assassin. Every time Taoist Chen Xufu went to a foreign country, he stayed at the imperial palace. The assassin wanted to see him very much, but Chen Xufu always went somewhere else.

古文：乃谓诸道士曰： 此度更来，便须申报。 
现代文：刺史对众道士说： 下次再来，一定要报告。 
English: Sashihi said to all the priests: Next time you come, be sure to report.

古文：或一日再至，遽令申白。
现代文：一天陈休复又来了，道士们立即报告给杨蔚。
English: One day, Chen Xiufu came again, and the Taoists immediately reported to Yang Wei.

古文：迩后秩满无恙，不谕其言。无何又授此州，亦终考限。
现代文：一会儿，州里的兵马举着旗帜仪仗保护着杨蔚来到观外，刺史和道士见面互相行礼问候。杨蔚说： 久闻道长的大名，今天有幸相见，请不要认为太突然，将我以后还能当什么官告诉我。 
English: For a moment, soldiers and horses from the prefecture held up flags to protect Yang Wei, who came to watch from the sidelines. When he and the Taoist priest met, they bowed to each other and greeted each other. Yang Wei said: I have known the daimyo of the Taoist priest for a long time, and I am fortunate to meet him today. Please don't think it's too sudden, and tell me what kind of official I can be in the future.

古文：罢后又除是郡。凡三任。
现代文：陈休复将杨蔚请到观内，对杨蔚说： 你将任三次刺史，再就没什么可说的了。 
English: Chen Xiufu invited Yang Wei to the auditorium and said to Yang Wei: You will be allowed to make history three times, and then there is nothing more to say.

古文：竟殒于邦。即三为刺史之说，果在于此乎？
现代文：杨蔚不太高兴，因为他已经当了两个郡的刺史，现在正是第三个地方。
English: Yang Wei is not very happy, because he has been the history of two counties, and now it is the third place.

古文：杨公季弟汭，为愚话之。
现代文：从此他常常认为现任洋州作为终老的地方，后来任期满了，他也没有什么病，以为陈休复说的不准，过了不久朝廷又续任他为本州刺史，期满后又任命一次，连续三任，死在任职期间。 任三次刺史 的话果然应验了，以上这些事情是杨蔚最小的弟弟杨王比告诉我的。
English: From then on, he often thought that the current Yangzhou was the place where he would live out the rest of his life. Later, when his term of office was over, he did not have any illness. He thought that Chen Xiufu's words were not allowed. Soon after, the imperial court continued to appoint him as the state's historian. After the expiration of the term, he was appointed once again, for three consecutive terms, and died during his term of office. The words of the three-time historian have indeed come true. Yang Wangbi, the youngest brother of Yang Wei, told me these things.

古文：欧阳澥
现代文：欧阳澥
English: Ouyang Xuan

古文：欧阳澥者，四门之孙也。
现代文：欧阳澥是欧阳四门的孙子。
English: Ouyang Xuan is the grandson of Ouyang Shimen.

古文：薄善词赋，出入场中，近二十年。
现代文：少稍稍见长于吟诗做赋，参加科举考试近二十年。
English: He is a little bit better at chanting, and has been taking part in the imperial examinations for nearly twenty years.

古文：善和韦中令在阁下，澥则行卷及门。凡十余载，未尝一面，而澥庆吊不亏。
现代文：韦中令善主持考试，欧阳澥拿着自己的文章登门求教，但十多年也没有见到韦中令一面，然而他不论韦家婚丧嫁娶都上门请安送礼，从来不曾间断。
English: Wei Zhongling presided over the examination, Ouyang Yao took his article to the door to ask for advice, but he had not seen Wei Zhongling for more than ten years. However, he came to the door to ask for gifts regardless of the Wei family's wedding and never stopped.

古文：韦公虽不言，而意甚怜之。
现代文：韦中令虽然没说什么，但心中对他很是可怜惋惜。
English: Although Wei Zhongling did not say anything, he felt very sorry for him.

古文：中和初，公随驾至西川，命相。
现代文：中和初年，韦中令跟随皇帝去西川，被皇帝任命为宰相。
English: In the first year of Zhonghe, Wei Zhongling followed the emperor to Xichuan and was appointed prime minister by the emperor.

古文：时澥寓居汉南，公访知行止，以私书令襄帅刘巨容，俾澥计偕。
现代文：当时欧阳澥寄居在汉南，韦宰相知道以后，写了一封信给襄阳大帅巨容，让他推荐录用欧阳澥做官。
English: At that time, Ouyang Jie was living in Hannan. After Prime Minister Wei learned of this, he wrote a letter to Xiangyang Dashuai Jujong, asking him to recommend Ouyang Jie as an official.

古文：巨容得书大喜，待以厚礼，首荐之外，资以千余缗，复大宴于府幕。
现代文：巨容得到信后非常高兴，对待欧阳澥如上宾，推荐他做官外，又送给他上千贯钱，并在官署设宴待他。
English: After receiving the letter, Gao Rong was very happy. He treated Ouyang Quan as if he were his honored guest, recommended him for a position outside the government, gave him thousands of yuan, and hosted a banquet for him at the government office.

古文：既而撰日遵路。无何，一夕心病而卒。
现代文：过后选择日期送他去上任，然而他突然发作心脏病死了。
English: After choosing a date to send him to office, however, he died of a sudden heart attack.

古文：巨容因籍澥答书，呈于公。公览之抚然。因曰： 十年不见，灼然不错。 
现代文：巨容将欧阳澥写给宰相的感谢信送给韦宰相看，韦宰相看完说： 十年没有见到我的面，这次也没当上官，命运安排得多么明显不会有错。 
English: Gao Rong showed the letter of thanks written by Ouyang Zhe to the prime minister to Wei Zhe. After reading it, Wei Zhe said, "I haven't seen my face for ten years, and this time I didn't become a senior official. How clearly fate has arranged things can't be wrong."

古文：伊璠
现代文：伊璠
English: Ilium

古文：黄巢污践宫阙，与安朱之乱不侔。
现代文：黄巢攻入京城，与安禄山和朱泚的叛乱不同。
English: Huang Chao's invasion of the capital is different from the rebellion of An Lushan and Zhu Xi.

古文：其间尤异，各为好事传记。
现代文：特别是这期间发生的事情尤其不一样，为一些好事的人流传记录下来。
English: In particular, what happened during this period is particularly different, for some good things have been recorded by people.

古文：独前泾阳令伊璠，为戎所得，屡脱命于刃下。其后血属相失，村服晦行，及蓝关，为猛兽搏而食之。患祸之来，其可苟免？
现代文：当时的官员、商人、农民、手工艺人带着妻子儿女偷偷逃出城外的人多得没法计算，其中有的人在贼兵占据好几个月的情况下，终日逃避，竟幸运得没有和贼兵正面遭遇。只有前泾阳县县令伊璠被贼兵抓住，但是却屡次在刀下逃脱性命。后来他和家人走散，换上村民百姓的衣服，偷偷逃到蓝关，竟被猛兽吃了。真是灾祸来了，怎么能够逃脱呢？
English: At that time, officials, merchants, farmers, and craftsmen secretly fled the city with their wives and children. There were too many people to count. Some of them were lucky enough not to meet the bandits face-to-face when the bandits occupied the city for several months. Only the former governor of Shiyang County, Ili, was caught by the bandits, but he repeatedly escaped death under the sword. Later, he and his family dispersed, changed into the clothes of the villagers, secretly fled to Lankan, and were eaten by the beasts. It was really a disaster, how could he escape?

古文：顾彦朗
现代文：顾彦朗
English: Gu Yichang

古文：东川顾彦朗，以蔡叔向为副使。感微时之恩，惟为戎倅而尝加敬。
现代文：东川的顾彦郎任蔡叔向为副使，是为了报答在未发达时蔡叔向对他的照顾，虽然是下级，都很尊敬。
English: Gu Yichang of Dongchuan was appointed as the deputy envoy of Cai Xiang, in order to repay Cai Xiang's care for him when he was underdeveloped, although he was a lower level, he was respected.

古文：其弟彦晖嗣袭，酷好洁净，尝嫌人臭，左右薰香而备给使。
现代文：后来顾彦郎的弟弟顾颜晖继承了他哥哥的官职。顾彦晖有爱干净的洁癖，总是嫌弃别人身上有臭味，他左右的人每天都洗澡薰香以准备他的招唤。
English: Later, Gu Yanjun, the younger brother of Gu Yichang, inherited his brother's official position. Gu Yichang had a love of cleanliness, always disliked people with a bad smell, and the people around him took a bath every day to prepare for his call.

古文：幕寮皆中朝子弟，亦涉轻薄。
现代文：他所任用的官员和参谋也大都是朝中贵族的子弟，轻薄腐化没有真实本领。
English: Most of the officials and staff officers appointed by him are also the sons of the aristocracy of the dynasty, and they have no real skill in light and thin corruption.

古文：韦太尉照度，收复蜀城，以彦晖为招讨副使。
现代文：太尉韦昭度带兵收复成都，任用顾彦晖为招讨副使。
English: Lieutenant Wei Zhaodu led the troops to recapture Chengdu and appointed Gu Yanjun as the deputy envoy.

古文：在军中，每旦率幕官同谒掌武，而蜀先主预焉，共轻忽之。虽昭度亦嫌其不恭。
现代文：在行军作战中，顾彦晖每天早晨率领众将官和参谋人员拜见太尉的时候，原来的蜀主在场他们都很傲慢地对待，就连太尉韦昭度也觉得他太狂妄。
English: During the marching operations, when Gu Yanjun led the generals and staff officers to visit the captain every morning, they all treated the presence of the original Shu lord with arrogance. Even the captain Wei Zhaodu thought he was too arrogant.

古文：彦晖袭兄位。尔后为蜀主所破，手刃一家，郎官温术等毙焉，先是蔡叔向职居元寮，乃顾氏之心膂，与所辟朝士，优游樽俎，不相侔矣。小顾既是尊崇，嫌其掣肘。
现代文：顾彦晖是世袭得来的爵位，后来被蜀主打败，杀了他的全家，郎官温术等也被蜀主杀了。原来因为蔡叔向职居元寮，是顾家的亲信骨干，和顾彦晖可偏爱的那些贵族子弟的吃喝玩乐不问军务完全不同，顾彦晖对蔡叔向又敬又怕，嫌他掣肘碍事。
English: Gu Yanqi was a hereditary title. Later, he was defeated by Shu Shu and his entire family was killed, including his son-in-law Wen Shu. Originally, because Uncle Cai Xiangxing lived in Yuanliao, he was a trusted member of the Gu family. He was completely different from the aristocratic children whom Gu Yanqi could favor in eating, drinking, and playing, regardless of military affairs. Gu Yanqi respected and feared Uncle Cai Xiangxing, and did not want him to get in the way.

古文：王先生因其隙，宣言以间之。且曰： 拈却蔡中丞，看尔得否？ 
现代文：蜀王先生知道他们的关系出现了裂痕，便使离间计进一步挑拨他们之间的关系，散布流言说叔向讲过： 不用蔡叔向，看他顾彦晖还能干成什么事？ 
English: Mr. Shu Wang knew that there was a rift in their relationship, so he used the divider to further provoke the relationship between them, spreading the rumor that Uncle Xiang had said: "Without Cai Xiang, look at him, what else can Gu Yanjun do?"

古文：由是叔向辞职闲居，王乃举军而伐之。
现代文：结果逼迫得蔡叔向只好辞职回家闲居。蜀王乘机出兵攻打顾彦晖。
English: As a result, Cai Xiangxiang was forced to resign and go home to idle. Shu Wang took the opportunity to send troops to attack Gu Yanlu.

古文：在蜀，有术士朱洽者，常谓人曰： 二顾虽位尊方镇，生无第宅，死无坟墓。 
现代文：蜀郡，有个叫朱洽的江湖术士经常对别人说： 顾彦明和顾彦晖虽然镇守一方，官高位尊，但是都活着没有房宅，死了没有坟墓。 
English: Zhu Cai, a sorcerer in Shuxi County, often said to others: Although Gu Yanming and Gu Yanqi were town guards and high-ranking officials, they lived without a house and died without a grave.

古文：人莫谕之。
现代文：人们都不能理解。
English: People don't understand.

古文：或曰：二顾自天德军小将，际会立功，便除东川，弟兄迭据。
现代文：他还说： 顾彦郎和顾彦晖从天德军中的小将遇到机会立了战功，便得到了镇守东川的官职。
English: He also said: Gu Yichang and Gu Yichang were young generals in the German army, and when they had the opportunity to make a contribution to the war, they were given the official position of the town guard of Dongchuan.

古文：大顾相薨，遗命焚骸，归葬丰州，会多事未果。至小顾狼狈之日，送终之礼又阙焉。
现代文：顾彦郎临死的时候嘱咐将他火化，以使将来将他的骨灰带回家乡丰州安葬，但是因为当时事情太多没办成，等到顾彦晖死的更加狼狈，连送终的葬礼都没有。
English: When Gu Yichang was on the verge of death, he ordered that he be cremated so that his ashes could be brought back to his hometown of Toyosu for burial in the future. However, because there were too many things that had not been done at the time, when Gu Yichang passed away, there was not even a final funeral.

古文：即朱氏言，于斯验矣。李甲
现代文：完全应验了朱洽所说的话。李甲
English: This completely fulfilled what Zhu Cai had said. Li Jia paused.

古文：唐天祐初，有李甲，本常山人。逢岁饥馑，徙家邢台西南山谷中。
现代文：唐朝天祐初年，有个叫李甲的常山人，因为遇到了灾荒年景，将全家搬到邢台西南的山谷中居住，每天打柴维持生活。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, a man from Changshan named Li Jia moved his whole family to live in a valley in the southwest of Xingtai because of the years of disaster and famine. He had to collect firewood every day to make a living.

古文：曾夜至大明山下，值风雨暴至，遂入神祠以避之。
现代文：有一次他夜间来到大明山下，正赶上暴风雨，便躲进神庙里面避雨。
English: Once he came to the foot of Daming Mountain at night, just in time for a storm, and hid inside the temple to avoid the rain.

古文：俄及中宵，雷雨方息。
现代文：一直到半夜，雷雨才停止。
English: The thunderstorms didn't let up until midnight.

古文：甲即寝于庙宇之间，松柏之下。
现代文：李甲只好睡在庙里的松柏树下。
English: Li Jia had to sleep under a pine tree in the temple.

古文：须臾有呵殿之音，自远而至。
现代文：过了一会儿，他忽然听到有官员出行时前呼后拥的吆喝声，由远而近。
English: After a while, he suddenly heard the shouts of officials as they traveled, from far and near.

古文：见旌旗闪闪，车马阗阗，或擐甲胄者，或执矛戟者，或危冠大履者，或朝衣端简者，揖让升阶，列坐于堂上者十数辈，方且命酒进食。
现代文：随即又看见旌旗招展，听到车马行进的声音。来的人中有的身披武将的盔甲，有的拿着长矛，有的戴着高高的帽子，穿着宽大的鞋子，还有的穿着官服，拿着象简，他们互相谦让着登上台阶，按顺序坐在堂上，大约有十多个人。坐下之后，摆上酒宴，笑谈畅饮。
English: Then he saw the flag flying and heard the sound of chariots and horses. Some of the people who came were dressed in warrior armor, some were holding spears, some were wearing high hats and wearing wide shoes, and some were wearing official uniforms and holding elephants. They humbly allowed each other to climb the steps and sit in the hall in order, about more than ten people. After sitting down, they set up a banquet, laughed and talked and drank.

古文：欢语良久，其东榻之长，即大明山神也，体貌魁梧，气岸高迈。
现代文：坐在东面的第一个人是大明山神，他身材高大魁梧，气宇轩昂。
English: The first person to sit in the east is Daiming Mountain God. He is tall and burly, with an air of grandeur.

古文：其西榻之首，即黄泽之神也，其状疏而瘦，其音清而朗。更其次者，云是漳河之伯。余即不知其名。
现代文：坐在西面的第一个人是黄泽水神，他瘦小干枯，但说话的声音却清晰宏亮，他旁边坐的是漳河河伯，其余的就不知道是谁了。
English: The first person to sit in the west is Huang Ze Shui Sheng. He is thin and withered, but his voice is clear and loud. Sitting next to him is Luo He He Bo. The rest don't know who he is.

古文：坐谈论，商榷幽明之事。
现代文：他们谈论探讨着阴间和人世的事。
English: They talk about and speculate about the afterlife and the hereafter.

古文：其一曰： 禀命玉皇，受符金阙。太行之面，清漳之湄，数百里间，幸为人主，不敢逸豫怠惰也，不敢曲法而徇私也，不敢恃尊而害下也。兢兢惕惕，以承上帝，用治一方。
现代文：其中的一个说： 我在天宫接受玉皇大帝的任命，管理太行山一侧到清河和漳河岸边方圆数百里的广大地区，虽然受命主持一切，但不敢懒惰懈怠，贪图安乐；不敢贪赃枉法，徇私舞弊；不敢倚仗地位，欺压下属和百姓，兢兢业业，认真治理这一方土地上的一切，以便报答天帝。
English: One of them said: "In the Heavenly Palace, I accepted the appointment of the Jade Emperor to manage the vast area of several hundred miles on the side of Taihang Mountain to the banks of the Qing River and the Min River. Although I was ordered to preside over everything, I did not dare to be lazy and lazy and seek happiness; I did not dare to be greedy and selfish; I did not dare to rely on my position and oppress my subordinates and the people; I worked hard and seriously governed everything on this side of the land in order to repay the Heavenly Emperor."

古文：故岁有丰登之报，民无扎瘥之疾。我之所治，今兹若是。 
现代文：所以年年有丰收的喜报，百姓安居乐业，没有瘟疫流行，我所治理的这个地方，如今就达到了这个程度。
English: That is why every year there is good news of a bumper harvest, the people live and work in peace, and there is no plague epidemic. The place I govern has now reached this level.

古文：其一曰： 清冷之域，泱漭之区，西聚大巅，东渐巨浸，连陂凑泽，千里而遥。
现代文：另一人着说： 我治理的地方人烟稀少，区域辽阔，西靠大山，东临大海，湖泊连着沼泽，有千里之遥。
English: Another writer said: The place I govern is sparsely populated, the area is vast, the west is close to the mountains, the east is close to the sea, the lakes are connected to the swamps, and it is thousands of miles away.

古文：余奉帝符，宅兹民庶，虽雷电之作由己也，风波之起由己也，鼓怒驰骤，人罔能制予。
现代文：我秉承上天的旨意，管理这广大的区域和民众，打雷下雨由我作主，刮风掀浪由我指挥，人是不能干涉我的行动的。
English: I, upholding the will of heaven, administer this vast region and the people. I am the master of thunder and rain, and I am the commander of wind and waves. People cannot interfere with my actions.

古文：予亦非其诏命，不敢有为也；非其时会，不敢沿溯也。正而御之，静而守之，遂致草木茂焉，鱼鳖蕃焉，感卤磊块而滋殖，萑蒲蓊郁而发生。
现代文：但我若不是奉了上天的命令，也不敢做任何事情。不是季节应该变化的时候，我不敢违反常规随便安排，尽职尽责地治理守护这一方土地，致使这里的草木茂盛，鱼鳖繁衍，水土滋润，芦苇薄草生长得郁郁葱葱。
English: But I wouldn't dare to do anything if I wasn't commanded by the heavens. It's not the time when the seasons should change, I wouldn't dare to violate the casual arrangements, diligently manage and protect this side of the land, so that the plants here are lush, the fish are proliferating, the water and soil are moist, and the reed grass grows lush.

古文：上天降鉴，亦幸无横沴尔。 
现代文：更加幸运的是上天派来巡视检查的官员，也没有随意干涉和胡乱指挥的现象。
English: Even more fortunately, the officials sent by heaven to inspect and inspect did not arbitrarily interfere and randomly command.

古文：此故予之所职耳，何假乎备言。 座上佥曰： 唯唯。 
现代文：又一人说： 崇山峻岭，沟壑纵横，高低不平，有各种飞禽走兽生长出没，不让他们伤害百姓是我的职责，不用我来一一陈述和表白，来应付上天的审查。 
English: Another said: "Mountains and hills are lofty, ravines are vertical and horizontal, high and low are uneven, and all kinds of birds and beasts grow and haunt. It is my duty to prevent them from harming the people. I don't have to make statements and confessions one by one to cope with God's scrutiny.

古文：大明之神，忽扬目盱衡，咄嗟长叹而谓众实曰： 诸公镇抚方隅，公理疆野，或水或陆，各有所长。然而天地运行之数，生灵厄会之期，巨盗将兴，大难方作。
现代文：大家都点头称是。这时大明山神忽然举目扬眉，唉声叹气地对众人说： 大家镇守一方，管理万物，或是在湖泊，或是在陆地，各有所长，然而天地运行的法则所决定，人类生灵的厄运即得来临，到时候盗贼兴起作乱，灾难降临。
English: Everyone nodded yes. At this time, Daming Mountain God suddenly raised his eyebrows and said to the crowd with a sigh: Everyone is on the same side, managing all things, either in lakes or on land, each with their own strengths. However, according to the law of the operation of heaven and earth, the doom of human beings is about to come. At that time, thieves will rise to cause chaos, and disaster will come.

古文：虽群公之善理，其奈之何？ 
现代文：虽然大家善于治理，但也无可奈何。 
English: Although we are good at governance, there is nothing we can do.

古文：众咸问： 言何谓也？ 
现代文：大家一齐问他： 你根据什么这样说呢？ 
English: And they asked him, saying, Wherefore sayest thou these things?

古文：大明曰： 余昨上朝帝所，窃闻众圣论将来之事，三十年间，兵戎大起。黄河之北，沧海之右，合屠害人民六十余万人。
现代文：大明山神说： 我昨天上天去朝拜玉皇大帝，偷偷听到了众位上仙在议论将来的事情。他们说以后三十年里，战乱不断，死伤人民六十余万人。
English: Daming Mountain God said, "I went up to heaven yesterday to worship the Jade Emperor. I overheard all the immortals discussing the future. They said that in the next 30 years, there would be constant wars, and more than 600,000 people would be killed and injured.

古文：当是时也，若非积善累仁，忠孝纯至者，莫能免焉。
现代文：到时候，如果不是仁义行善，忠孝两全的至诚君子，都不能幸免。
English: At that time, if it is not benevolence, righteousness and good deeds, the most sincere gentleman of loyalty and filial piety will not be spared.

古文：兼西北方有华胥遮毗二国，待兹人众，用实彼士焉。
现代文：再加上西北方向的华胥和遮毗两个国家，乘机侵犯中原领土。
English: In addition, two countries in the northwest, Hualien and Zhabei, took the opportunity to invade the Central Plains territory.

古文：岂此生民寡祐，当其杀戮乎？ 众皆颦蹙相视曰： 非所知也。 
现代文：难道老百姓就无法保护，就应该遭受屠杀吗？ 大家听了，都皱着眉头，互相看着说： 这些我们都不知道。 
English: Is it possible that the common people cannot be protected, that they should be slaughtered? Everyone listened, frowned, looked at each other and said: We don't know any of this.

古文：食既毕，天亦将曙，诸客各登车而去。
现代文：大家吃喝完了，天已拂晓，便各自登车而去。
English: After everyone finished eating and drinking, it was already dawn, so they all boarded the bus and left.

古文：大明之神，亦不知所在。
现代文：大明山神也不知道上哪里去了。
English: Daming Mountain God also does not know where he went.

古文：及平旦，李甲神思怳然，有若梦中所遇。
现代文：等到天亮以后，李甲精神恍惚，好像是在做梦，回到家里以后，他将遇到的事情详细记录下来，并告诉了邻居中有知识、有威望的人。
English: After the dawn, Li Jia was in a daze, as if he was in a dream. After returning home, he recorded the things he encountered in detail and told the knowledgeable and prestigious people in the neighborhood.

古文：既归，具以始末书而志之。言于邻里之贤者，自后三十余载，庄皇与梁朝对垒河岸，战阵相寻。及晋宋，戎虏乱华，干戈不息，被其涂炭者，何啻乎六十万焉。
现代文：从这以后三十多年，庄皇与梁朝各自守在黄河岸边，找机会攻击对方，等到后晋和宋韩，西边的蕃邦国家侵犯中原，刀兵四起，战乱不断，被战争杀害的老百姓不止六十万人。
English: From then on, for more than 30 years, Zhuang Emperor and Liang Dynasty each guarded the banks of the Yellow River, looking for opportunities to attack the other side. By the time the Later Jin and Song Han dynasties, as well as the western Shan State, invaded the Central Plains, there were four swords and soldiers, constant wars, and more than 600,000 people were killed in the war.

古文：今详李生所说，殆天意乎？
现代文：今天详细记录下来李甲所说的事情，想问一问，这只是上天的意思呢？
English: Today, I have recorded in detail what Li Jia said. I would like to ask, is this just God's will?

古文：非人事乎？
现代文：还有没有人为的因素呢？
English: Are there also non-human factors?

古文：房知温
现代文：房知温
English: Fang Zhiwen

古文：故青帅房公知温，少年与外弟徐裀为盗于衮郓之境，昼则匿于古冢。
现代文：已故的青州节度使房知温，年轻的时候和表弟徐裀在衮州和郓城一带当盗贼，白天藏身在古墓里面。
English: The late Qingzhou Festival made Fang Zhiwen, when he was young, and his cousin Xu Xi were thieves in Zhangzhou and Lucheng areas, hiding in ancient tombs during the day.

古文：一夕遇雨未出间，二鬼至。
现代文：有一天晚上下雨，他们没有出去，有两个鬼来了。
English: One night it rained, they didn't go out, and two ghosts came.

古文：一鬼曰： 此有节度上主，宜缓之。 
现代文：一个鬼说： 这儿有节度使大人，我们应该等一会儿。 
English: A ghost said, "There is a festival here, so we should wait a while."

古文：来宵汝当宿于他所，吾独在此以验之。 
现代文：房知温和他的表弟都听到了。他们互相问对方说： 刚才外面说的话你听到了吗？ 徐裀说： 听到了。 
English: Fang Zhiwen and his cousin both heard it. They asked each other, "Did you hear what was said outside just now?" Xu Yao said, "I heard it."

古文：迨夕，二鬼又至。一鬼复曰： 昨夜贵人尚在矣。 
现代文：房知温说： 我和你不知道是谁，明天晚上你到别的地方去睡，我自己在这里验证一下。 等到第二天晚上，两个鬼又来了，一个鬼又说： 昨天晚上的贵人还在。 
English: Fang Zhiwen said: You and I don't know who it is, tomorrow night you will go to sleep somewhere else, I will verify it here myself.Wait until the next night, two ghosts came again, and one ghost said: The noble person from last night is still there.

古文：房闻之喜。后果节制数镇，官至太师中书令东平王。
现代文：房知温听了很高兴，后来他果然当官节制许多地方，最后当上了太师中书令东平王。
English: Fang Zhiwen was very pleased to hear this, and later he did indeed become an official to control many places, and finally became the Grand Master of the Middle Shire, Dongping Wang.

古文：则知晋书说魏阳元闻鬼以三公呼之，为不谬矣。
现代文：由此可知晋书目上所说的魏阳元听到鬼称他为三公的记载，是不错的。
English: From this, it can be seen that the record of Wei Yangyuan hearing the ghost call him the three princes mentioned in Jin's bibliography is good.

古文：窦梦征
现代文：窦梦征
English: Dou Mengsheng

古文：朱梁翰林窦学士梦征，以文学称于世。
现代文：朱梁翰林窦梦征，因为有很高的文学修养而非常有名望。
English: Zhu Lianghan Lin Dou Mengzheng is very famous for his high literary accomplishment.

古文：时两浙钱尚父有元帅之命。
现代文：当时朝廷将授予两浙的钱尚父为元帅。
English: At that time, the imperial court will be awarded two Zhejiang Qian Shang father as a marshal.

古文：窦以钱公无功于本朝，僻在一方，坐邀渥泽，不称是命，乃抱麻哭于朝。
现代文：窦梦征认为钱尚父没为朝廷立下什么功劳，却独自镇守一方，坐享朝廷的恩惠，很不称职，便在上朝的时候手捧奏章哭着对此事加以评论。
English: Dou Mengsheng thought that Qian Shanglu's father did not do anything for the imperial court, but he kept one side alone and enjoyed the grace of the imperial court, which was very incompetent. When he went to the imperial court, he held the song in his hand and cried to comment on this matter.

古文：翌日，窦谪掾于东州。
现代文：第二天，窦梦征被贬官到东州。
English: The next day, Dou Mengsheng was demoted to Dongzhou.

古文：及失意被谴，尝郁郁不乐。
现代文：从他遭谴责被贬官开始，心中一直不高兴。
English: From the time he was denounced and demoted, he was never happy.

古文：曾梦有人谓曰： 君无自苦，不久当复故职。然将来慎勿为丞相。
现代文：有一天他梦到一个人对他说： 你不要不高兴，不久就会官复原职，但是将来注意不要当丞相。
English: One day he dreamed of a man who said to him: "Don't be upset, you will soon be reinstated, but be careful not to become prime minister in the future."

古文：苟有是命，当万计避之。 
现代文：如果皇帝想任命你为丞相，你一定要千方百计的推辞。
English: If the emperor wants to appoint you as chancellor, you must do everything possible to decline.

古文：其后窦复居禁职。有顷，迁工部侍郎。
现代文：后来窦梦征果然官复原职，不久又升任工部侍郎，就是丞相之一。
English: Later, Dou Mengsheng was restored to his post, and soon he was promoted to the position of the Chamberlain of the Ministry of Works, which was one of the positions of the Prime Minister.

古文：窦忽忆梦中所言，深恶其事。然已受命，不能逊避。
现代文：窦梦征忽然想起梦中那人所说过的话，所以非常厌恶这个官职，可是已经接受了任命，没有办法推辞逃避，果然没过多久他就死了。
English: Dou Mengsheng suddenly remembered what the man in the dream had said, so he was very disgusted with this official post, but he had already accepted the appointment, there was no way to refuse and escape, and he died not long after.

古文：许生
现代文：许生
English: Xu Sheng

古文：汴州都押衙朱仁忠家有门客许生，暴卒，随使者入冥。经历之处，皆如郡城。
现代文：汴州都押衙朱仁忠的门下食客许生突然死去，跟随着阴间派来的使者走入阴间，经过的地方和人间的城镇一样。
English: Xu Sheng, a diner under the tutelage of Zhu Renzhong, died suddenly, following the messenger sent by the underworld into the underworld, passing through the same places as the towns of the human world.

古文：忽见地堆粟千石，中植一牌曰： 金吾将军朱仁忠食禄。 生极讶之。
现代文：许生看到地上堆着几千石粮食，中间插着一个木牌写着： 金吾将军朱仁忠的俸禄粮食 许生非常惊讶。
English: Xu Sheng was very surprised to see several thousand stones of grain piled up on the ground, with a wooden plate inserted in the middle that read: Kingu General Zhu Renzhong's salary grain.

古文：洎至公署，使者引入一曹司。主吏按其簿曰： 此人乃误追之矣。 
现代文：等来到官署，使者将他领到一间公堂之上，主事官员按着帐簿说： 这个人抓错了。 
English: When he arrived at the government office, the emissary led him to a public hall. The leading official looked at the ledger and said, "This man made a mistake.

古文：谓生曰： 汝可止此，吾将白于阴君。
现代文：又对许生说： 你可以等在这里，我去跟阴君说明情况。
English: He also said to Xu Sheng: You can wait here, I will explain the situation to Yin Jun.

古文：然慎忽窥吾簿。 
现代文：但是你要注意，不要翻看我的帐簿。 
English: But be careful not to look at my books.

古文：吏既出，生潜目架上有签牌曰： 人间食料簿。 
现代文：说完就出去了。许生抬头看架上有一个标签写着： 人间食物簿 。
English: After saying this, he left. Xu Sheng looked up and saw a label on the shelf that read: The Human Food Book.

古文：生潜忆主人朱仁忠不食酱，可知其由。遂披簿求之，多不晓其文。
现代文：许生想起主人朱仁忠不吃酱，想要知道其原因，便将那本帐簿拿下来翻阅，但是看不懂上面的大多数文字。
English: Xu Sheng remembered that his master Zhu Renzhong did not eat sauce, and wanted to know the reason, so he took down the account book and flipped through it, but he could not understand most of the words on it.

古文：逡巡，主吏大怒。已知其不慎，裀目责之。
现代文：一会儿，主管官员回来了，发现许生偷看帐簿后非常生气，瞪着眼睛责备他。
English: After a while, the officer in charge came back and found that Xu Sheng was very angry after he peeked at the account book, and he scolded him with a glare in his eyes.

古文：生恐惧谢过，告吏曰： 某乙平生受朱仁忠恩，知其人性不食酱，是敢窃食簿验之。愿恕其罪。 
现代文：许生害怕地承认自己的错误，对官员说： 我平时受到朱仁忠的恩惠，知道他不吃酱，所以偷看帐簿加以验证，请你原谅我的罪过。 
English: Xu Sheng was afraid to admit his mistake and said to the official: I usually receive Zhu Renzhong's favor and know that he does not eat sauce, so I peeked at the account book to verify it. Please forgive my sin.

古文：吏怒稍解，自取食簿，于仁忠名下，注大豆三合。
现代文：官员的怒气消了一点，拿过帐簿，在朱仁忠的名字下批注： 加大豆三合 。
English: The official's anger dissipated a little, he took the account book and made a note under Zhu Renzhong's name: Add soybeans.

古文：吏遂遣前使者引出放还。
现代文：然后命令先前那个使者带领朱仁忠回去。
English: He then ordered the former emissary to lead Zhu Renzhong back.

古文：其径路微细，随使者而行。忽见一妇女，形容憔悴，衣服褴褛，抱一孩子，拜于道旁。谓生曰： 妾是朱仁忠亡妻，顷年因产而死，竟未得受生。
现代文：他们走的是一条小路，许生跟着使者走着，忽然遇到一个妇女，面容憔悴，衣衫褴褛。还抱着一个小孩，在道旁对他们行礼，对许生说： 我是朱仁忠死去的妻子，那年因为难产而死，竟没有得到轻生。
English: They were walking along a path. Xu Sheng was walking with the emissary when he suddenly encountered a woman with a haggard face and ragged clothes. She was also holding a child and bowed to them on the roadside. She said to Xu Sheng: "I am Zhu Renzhong's dead wife. I died that year because of a difficult birth, but I didn't have an easy birth.

古文：饥寒尤甚，希君济以准资缗数千贯。 
现代文：现在饥寒交迫，希望您能资助我几千贯钱。 
English: Now I'm hungry and cold, I hope you can help me raise a few thousand yuan.

古文：生以无钱辞之。
现代文：许生以没钱为理由，不答应她的要求。
English: Xu Sheng did not agree to her request, citing lack of money as the reason.

古文：妇曰： 所求者楮货也。
现代文：妇女说： 我所要的是纸钱，你只要将纸钱焚烧就可以了。
English: The woman said, "What I want is paper money. All you have to do is burn it."

古文：君还魂后，可致而焚之。兼望仁忠与写金光明经一部忏之，可指生路也。 
现代文：另外还要告诉朱仁忠为我抄写部《金光明经》表示忏悔，可以为我求得一条超生的路。 
English: In addition, I also want to tell Zhu Renzhong to express repentance for my copying of the "Golden Light Sutra" and that he can find a way for me to be born again.

古文：既而先行，直抵相国寺，将其阈，为使者所推，踣地而寤。
现代文：他们继续往前走，来到相国寺。许生刚要跨过门坎，使者在后面一推，他跌倒在地上醒了。
English: They walked on and arrived at Shokoku-ji Temple. Xu Sheng was just about to step over the threshold when the messenger gave him a shove from behind, causing him to fall to the ground and wake up.

古文：仁忠既悲喜，问其冥间之事。
现代文：朱仁忠又悲又喜，询问他阴间的事情。
English: Zhu Renzhong, both sad and happy, asked him about the things in the underworld.

古文：生曰： 君非久，必任金吾将军。 
现代文：许生说： 您不久能当金吾将军。 
English: Xu Sheng said: You will soon be able to become Kingo General.

古文：言其牌粟之事，又话见君亡妻，言其形实无差。
现代文：又将看到他的俸禄牌和他死去的妻子的事说了，所说的长相一点不差。
English: He also talked about seeing his pay-slip and his dead wife, and his looks were spot on.

古文：后与仁忠同食，乃言自君亡后，忽觉酱香，今嗜之颇甚，乃是注大豆三合之验也。
现代文：后来和朱仁忠一起吃饭，朱仁忠说： 自从你死以后，我忽然觉得吃酱很香，现在吃得很多，这就是批注加大豆三合的验证吧。 
English: Later, he and Zhu Renzhong had a meal together. Zhu Renzhong said, "Since you died, I suddenly feel that eating sauce is very fragrant, and now I eat a lot of it. This is the verification of the comment on the three-ingredient jelly bean soup."

古文：自尔朱写经毕，许生燔纸数千。其妇于寐中辞谢而去。
现代文：朱仁忠写完《金光明经》，许生烧了几千贯纸钱，朱仁忠的妻子在梦中感谢告辞而去。
English: After Zhu Renzhong finished writing the "Golden Light Sutra," Xu Sheng burned thousands of paper money. Zhu Renzhong's wife thanked him in her dream and left.

古文：朱果为金吾将军。
现代文：后来朱仁忠果然当上了金吾将军。
English: Later, Zhu Renzhong became General Kingo.

古文：显晦之事，不差毫厘矣。杨鼎夫
现代文：阴间所得到的预示，同事物的真实情况分毫不差。杨鼎夫
English: The foreshadowing received by the underworld is no worse than the real situation of the object.

古文：进士杨鼎夫富于词学，为时所称。
现代文：进士杨鼎夫善于吟诗作词，为人们所称赞。
English: Scholar Yang Dingfu was good at composing poetry and was praised by people.

古文：顷岁，会游青城山。过皂江，同舟者约五十余人。至于中流，遇暴风漂荡，其船抵巨石，倾覆于洪涛间。
现代文：近年，他与别人一同去青城山游玩，同船五十多人一同横渡皂江，船到江心，突然遇到大风将船吹离航线，撞到巨石上，顷刻之间便沉没在波涛之间。
English: In recent years, he went to Qingcheng Mountain to play with others, crossed the Soap River with more than 50 people in the same boat, and when the boat reached the center of the river, he suddenly encountered a strong wind that blew the boat off course, hit a boulder, and sank between the waves in an instant.

古文：同济之流，尽沉没底。独鼎夫似有物扶助，既达岸，亦困顿矣。
现代文：同船上的人都沉到江底淹死了，唯独杨鼎夫似乎有什么东西托着他送到岸边，这时他已经没有力气了。
English: Everyone on the boat sank to the bottom of the river and drowned, except for Yang Dingfu, who seemed to have something holding him to the shore, by which time he had no strength left.

古文：遽有老人以杖接引，且笑云： 元是盐里人，本非水中物。 
现代文：突然来了个老头，用手杖将他拉到岸上来，并且笑着对他说： 你应该是盐里的人，本来就不是水中的东西。 
English: Suddenly an old man came, pulled him ashore with his cane and said to him with a smile: You should be a man of the salt, not something in the water.

古文：后为权臣安思谦幕吏，判榷盐院事，遇疾暴亡。
现代文：杨鼎夫上岸后没来得及致谢，突然失去了老人的踪影，他作了一首诗作为纪念。回到成都后，他将这段经历告诉知心朋友，但谁也不明白 盐里人 的意思。
English: Yang Dingfu didn't have time to say thank you after he got ashore, and suddenly lost track of the old man. He made a poem as a memorial. After returning to Chengdu, he told this experience to his close friends, but no one understood the meaning of "people in the salt."

古文：男文则，以属分料盐百余斤裹束，将上蜀郊营葬。
现代文：后来他当上了有权势的大臣安思谦的参谋，协助处理专卖食盐的案件，突然得病死了。天热有味，使用粗盐一百多斤将他裹束起来，运到郊外埋了。
English: Later, he became a staff adviser to the powerful minister An Si Qian, helping to deal with the case of a salt monopoly, and suddenly fell ill and died. The weather was hot and humid, and more than a hundred kilos of coarse salt was used to wrap him up and bury him in the suburbs.

古文：至是盐里之词方验。
现代文：到这时， 盐里人 的话才得以验证。
English: It was only then that the words of the people of Yanli could be verified.

古文：鼎夫旧记诗曰： 青城山峭皂江寒，欲度当时作等闲。
现代文：杨鼎夫当时作的诗是： 青城山峭皂江寒，欲渡当时作等闲。
English: The poem that Yang Dingfu wrote at that time was: Qingcheng Mountain, steep, cold, cold, cold.

古文：棹逆狂风趋近岸，舟逢怪石碎前湾。
现代文：棹逆狂风趋近岸，舟逢怪石碎前湾。
English: The boat was approaching the shore against the strong wind, and the boat encountered a strange rock in front of the bay.

古文：手携弱杖仓皇处，命出洪涛顷刻间。
现代文：手携弱杖仓皇处，命出洪涛顷刻间。
English: Hand-in-hand with a weak cane, you can reach the top of the mountain, and your life will be over in an instant.

古文：今日深恩无以报，令人差记雀衔环。 
现代文：今日深恩无以报，令人羞记雀衔环。 
English: Today, deep gratitude is unrequited, and it is shameful to remember the sparrow ring.

古文：牛希济
现代文：牛希济
English: Niu Xiji

古文：蜀御史中丞牛希济，文学繁赡，超于时辈。
现代文：蜀国的御史中丞牛希济，文章写得很好，远远超过了同年龄的人。
English: The article is well written, far more than people of the same age.

古文：自云：早年未出学院，以词科可以俯拾。
现代文：他自己说： 早几年我还在学校里学习，如果考文章诗词我就可以轻易地被录取。 
English: He said: "In the early years, I was still studying at school, so if I took the essay and poetry test, I could easily be accepted.

古文：或梦一人介金曰： 郎君分无科名，四十五已上，方有官禄。 
现代文：有一天他做了一个梦，梦中有一个披着金甲的人对他说： 你命中没有考取功名的福份，到四十五岁以上才能当官。 
English: One day he had a dream, in which a man in a golden armor said to him, "You are not fortunate enough to win fame in your life. You cannot become an official until you are over forty-five years old."

古文：觉而异之。
现代文：他醒了以后感到非常奇怪。
English: He woke up feeling very strange.

古文：旋遇丧乱，流寓于蜀，依季父也。
现代文：随后他便遇上了战乱，逃到蜀郡，寄居在叔父家里。
English: Then he was caught up in the war and fled to Shu County, where he lived with his uncle.

古文：仍以气直嗜酒，为季父所责。
现代文：因为心情不好他经常喝酒，被救父斥责了一顿。
English: He often drank because he was in a bad mood, and his rescuer scolded him.

古文：旅寄巴南，旋聆开国，不预劝进。又以时辈所排，十年不调。
现代文：他又跑到巴南，正碰上开邦立国，他想要进出，又被同龄的人所排挤，十年的时间没有得到升迁。
English: He ran to Banan again, just as the founding of the state of Kai Province was taking place. He wanted to get in and out, but was crowded out by people of the same age, and did not get promoted for ten years.

古文：为先主所知，召对，除起居郎，累加至宪长。
现代文：被先主知道了，将他找来考查，任命为居郎，逐渐升到宪长。
English: When he was found out by the lord, he was called in for an examination, appointed as kuro, and gradually rose to the position of kencho.

古文：是知向者之梦，何其神也。
现代文：这时候他才知道，当时做的梦是多么的灵验。
English: That's when he realized how powerful his dream had been.

古文：阴君文字
现代文：阴君文字
English: Yinjun characters

古文：顷岁有一士人，尝于寝寐间若被官司追摄，因随使者而去。
现代文：近年来有一个男子，曾经在睡觉做梦的时候被官差追捕，尾随官差而去。
English: In recent years, there was a man who was once chased by officers while he was sleeping and dreaming, and he followed the officers away.

古文：行经一城，云是镇州，其间人物稀少。
现代文：经过一座城镇，官差说是镇州，城里人很稀少。
English: After passing through a town, the police said it was a township, and there were very few people in the town.

古文：又经一城，云是幽州，其间人物众广。
现代文：又经过一座城镇，说是幽州，城里人物众多热闹。
English: It also passed through a town, said to be Yuzhou, where there were many lively characters.

古文：士人乃询使者曰： 镇州萧疏，幽州繁盛，何其异乎？ 
现代文：男子问官差说： 镇州人少，而幽州人多热闹，相差得太悬殊了。 
English: The man asked the official and said: There are fewer people in Zhenzhou, but more people in Yuzhou. The difference is too great.

古文：使者曰： 镇州虽然少人，不日亦当似幽州矣。 
现代文：官差说： 镇州虽然人少，但不久也会像幽州一样。 
English: The official said: Although there are few people in Zhenzhou, it will soon be like Yuzhou.

古文：有顷至一处，有若公府。
现代文：一会儿，到了一个地方，有座官府，里面有个大官。
English: After a while, we arrived at a place where there was a government office with a high-ranking official inside.

古文：中有一大官，见士人至前，即曰： 误追此人来，宜速放去。 
现代文：看到男子走过来，大官说： 这个人是抓错的，应该立刻放回去。 
English: Seeing the man coming over, the officer said: "This person was grabbed by mistake and should be put back immediately.

古文：士人知是阴司，乃前启阴官曰： 某虽蒙放还，愿知平生官爵所至。 
现代文：男子知道这是阴间，走上前去向大官请求说： 我虽然被放回去，但是还想知道一生能当什么官？ 
English: The man knew that this was the underworld, and he stepped forward to plead with the official, saying, "Even though I have been released, I still want to know what kind of official I can be for the rest of my life.

古文：阴官命取纸一幅，以笔墨画纸，作九个围子。别取青笔，于第一个围子中，点一点而与之。
现代文：大官叫人拿来一张纸，拿起笔在纸上画了九个圆圈，又拿起一支绿笔，在第一个圆圈里点了一笔，然后把它交给男子。
English: The magistrate called for a piece of paper. He took a pen and drew nine circles on the paper. He also took a green pen and marked the first circle, and then handed it to the man.

古文：士人置诸怀袖，拜谢而退。
现代文：男子小心地放在怀里，表示感谢后退了出去。
English: The man put it carefully in his arms, thanked him and walked away.

古文：及寤，其阴君所赐文字，则宛然在怀袖间，士人收藏甚秘。
现代文：男子睡醒后阴间大官给他的纸张文字还在怀里，他小心秘密地收藏了起来。
English: After the man woke up, the paper text given to him by the great official of the underworld was still in his arms. He carefully and secretly collected it.

古文：其后镇州兵士，相继杀伤甚众。故知阴间镇州，即日人众，当不谬耳。
现代文：后来镇州军队互相残杀，伤亡很多，这才知道了阴间官差所说阴间镇州不久人多的话不是随便说的。
English: Later, the Zhenzhou army killed each other, and there were many casualties. It was only then that I knew that the words of the Infernal Officer saying that there would soon be more people in the Infernal Zhenzhou were not said casually.

古文：其士人官至冀州录事参军，缣缕而卒。
现代文：后来男子当上了冀州录事参军，最后在贫困中死去。
English: Later, the man joined the army in Jizhou and eventually died in poverty.

古文：阴官画九围子者，乃九州也，冀州为九州之第一，故点之；其点青者，言士人只止于录事参军，绿袍也。
现代文：阴间大官所画的九个圆圈，就是指九州，所以加点。点是绿色的，是说男子最终只能做到录事参军，穿绿色袍子。
English: The nine circles drawn by the Great Officer of the Underworld refer to Kyushu, so add a dot. The dot is green, which means that men can only join the army and wear green robes in the end.

古文：贫妇
现代文：贫妇
English: Women living in poverty

古文：谚云：一饮一啄，系之于分。
现代文：民间谚语说： 一饮一啄，系之于分。 
English: A folk proverb says: One drink, one bowl, makes a difference.

古文：斯言虽小，亦不徒然。
现代文：意思是说，人们的饮食衣物，都是命运所决定的。话虽然少，但也不是白说的。
English: This means that people's diet and clothing are all determined by fate. Although the words are few, they are not said in vain.

古文：常见前张宾客澄言，顷任镇州判官日，部内有一民家妇，贫且老，平生未尝获一完全衣。或有哀其穷贱，形体袒露，遗一单衣。
现代文：曾经听从前的客人张澄说过，他前几年任镇州判官的时候，街上一个老百姓家的妇女，又老又穷，一辈子没穿过一件完整的衣服，有的人看她太穷了，破衣服露出了身体，便给她一件单衣服。
English: I once heard a former guest, Zhang Cheng, say that when he was the judge of the town and county a few years ago, a woman from an ordinary family on the street, who was old and poor, had never worn a complete dress in her life. Some people thought she was too poor, and her torn clothes showed her body, so they gave her a single dress.

古文：其妇得之，披展之际，而未及体，若有人自后掣之者，举手已不知衣所在。
现代文：她将衣服拿到手里后，正往身上披，还没等碰到身体，好像后面有人夺了过去，举手之间衣服就不知道哪里去了。
English: After she got the clothes in her hands, she was putting them on her body, and before she even touched her body, it was as if someone had grabbed her from behind, and she didn't know where the clothes had gone between her hands.

古文：此盖为鬼所夺也。
现代文：这都是鬼给夺去了。
English: It was all taken away by the ghost.

古文：支戬
现代文：支戬
English: Shikotsu

古文：江左有支戬者，余干人，世为小吏，至戬，独好学为文。窃自称秀才。
现代文：江左有个余干人叫支戬，世代都是当小官的，传到他这一辈，他却喜欢做文章，并自称为秀才。
English: There is a cadre on the left bank of the Yangtze River called Shikang, who has been a minor official for generations. It has been passed down to his generation, but he likes to write articles and calls himself a genius.

古文：会正月望夜，时俗取饭箕，衣之衣服，插箸为嘴，使画盘粉以卜。
现代文：每当正月十五，当地的风俗是取一支簸箕，盖一件衣服，上面插一根筷子作嘴，使筷子在簸箕里的面粉上写字来预测吉凶。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month, the local custom is to take a broom, cover a piece of clothing, and insert a chopstick as a mouth, so that the chopsticks can write on the flour in the broom to predict good or bad luck.

古文：戬见家人为之，即戏祝曰： 请卜支秀才他日至何官？ 
现代文：支戬见家里人都在忙着预测自己的吉凶，他也走过去开玩笑地说： 请预测支秀才将来能当什么官？ 
English: Seeing that his family members were busy predicting their fortunes, he also walked over and jokingly said: Please predict what kind of official Shih Xiu Cai will be in the future?

古文：乃画粉宛成司空字。
现代文：只见筷子在面粉上写了两个字，好像是 司空 。
English: I saw the chopsticks write two words on the flour, which seemed to be "司空."

古文：又戬尝梦至地府，尽阅名簿，至己籍云： 至司空，年五十余。 
现代文：支戬还曾经做梦到阴曹地府，将花名册都翻阅了。看到自己那一页上写着： 官到司空，寿命五十多 。
English: Shizhao also once had a dream about the Yin Cao Di Fu, and flipped through the roster. He saw himself on the page that read: "Official to secretary, life expectancy more than fifty years."

古文：他人籍不可记，唯记其友人郑元枢云： 贫贱无官，年四十八。 
现代文：别人的都记不清了，只记得朋友邓元枢是 贫贱不能当官，寿命四十八 。
English: I can't remember anyone else, except my friend Deng Yuanzhu, who was too poor to be an official and lived to the age of 48.

古文：元枢后居浙西，廉使徐知谏宾礼之，将荐于执政，行有日矣，暴疾而卒。
现代文：邓元枢后来搬迁到浙西，廉使徐知谦对他很好，推荐他给执政，请示的公文已经发出好几天了。
English: Deng Yuanzhu later moved to West Zhejiang, and the corrupt official Xu Zhikian was very kind to him and recommended him to the government. The official document of the request has been issued for several days.

古文：实年四十八。
现代文：他忽然得病死了，死时正好是四十八岁。
English: He suddenly fell ill and died, exactly forty-eight years old.

古文：戬后为金陵观察判官，检校司空。
现代文：支戬后来当了金陵观察判官、检校司空，他经常把这些事说给亲戚朋友听。
English: Shikun later became the Jinling observation judge and school inspector, and he often told these things to relatives and friends.

古文：恒以此事话于亲友，竟卒于任，年五十一。
现代文：最后他死在任职期间，死的时候五十一岁。
English: He eventually died in office, at the age of fifty-one.

