古文：黄权字公衡，巴西阆中人也。
现代文：黄权字公衡，巴西郡阆中人。
English: Huang Quan, also known as Huang Quan, is a native of Jiaozhong, Brazil County.

古文：少为郡吏，州牧刘璋召为主簿。时别驾张松建议，宜迎先主，使伐张鲁。
现代文：年少时做过郡中吏役，益州牧刘璋征召他做主簿，当时别驾刘松建议应该迎接刘备，让他征讨张鲁。
English: When he was a young man, he served as a county middle official, and Yizhou herdsman Liu Wei recruited him to be the master book. At that time, Liu Song suggested that Liu Bei should be welcomed and Zhang Lu should be recruited.

古文：权谏曰： 左将军有骁名，今请到，欲以部曲遇之，则不满其心，欲以宾客礼待，则一国不容二君。
现代文：黄权劝谏说: 左将军刘备有骁勇名声，现在请他过来，如果想用部下之礼对待他，就不能使他满足，如果用宾客之礼对待他，那一国不能有两位君王。
English: Huang Quan advised him, "Left General Liu Bei has a reputation for bravery. Now invite him over. If you want to treat him with the courtesy of a subordinate, you cannot satisfy him. If you treat him with the courtesy of a guest, there cannot be two kings in that country.

古文：若客有泰山之安，则主有累卵之危。
现代文：如果客人有泰山般的安稳，那君主就有累卵般的危难。
English: If the guest has the stability of Mount Tai, then the monarch has the peril of the egg.

古文：可但闭境，以待河清。 
现代文：现在可以守边境以等待时局稳定。 
English: Now we can guard the border and wait for the situation to stabilize.

古文：璋不听，竟遣使迎先主，出权为广汉长。
现代文：刘璋没有听从，最后派使者迎接刘备，并让黄权出京作广汉县县长。
English: Liu Bei did not listen, and finally sent an envoy to meet Liu Bei, and let Huang Quan leave Beijing to become the governor of Guanghan County.

古文：及先主袭取益州，将帅分下郡县，郡县望风景附，权闭城坚守，须刘璋稽服，乃诣降先主。
现代文：等到刘备攻击夺取益州，将帅们分别占领了益州各郡县，各郡县都望风依附孙权，黄权紧闭城门坚守。直到刘璋投降才前往到刘备那投降。
English: When Liu Bei attacked and captured Yizhou, the generals occupied each county and county of Yizhou separately. Each county and county was dependent on Sun Quan, and Huang Quan kept the city gate closed. They did not go to Liu Bei to surrender until Liu Bei surrendered.

古文：先主假权偏将军。及曹公破张鲁，鲁走入巴中，权进曰： 若失汉中，则三巴不振，此为割蜀之股臂也。 
现代文：刘备让黄权代理偏将军，等到曹操攻破张鲁，张鲁逃奔进入巴中，黄权进谏说: 如果是去汉中，那三巴之地就无法振兴，这是割去了蜀地的大腿与手臂啊。 
English: When Cao Cao defeated Zhang Lu and Zhang Lu fled to Ba Zhong, Huang Quan Jin said, "If you go to Hanzhong, you will not be able to revitalize the place of Sanba. This is cutting off the thighs and arms of Shu."

古文：於是先主以权为护军，率诸将迎鲁。
现代文：于是刘备以黄权作为护军，率领各将迎接张鲁。
English: As a result, Liu Bei took Huang Quan as a bodyguard and led the generals to meet Zhang Lu.

古文：鲁已还南郑，北降曹公，然卒破杜濩、朴胡，杀夏侯渊，据汉中，皆权本谋也。
现代文：张鲁已经返回南郑，又往北投降曹操，但突然攻破杜濩、朴胡，杀了夏侯渊，占据汉中，都是黄权的计谋。
English: Zhang Lu had already returned to South Zheng, and went north to surrender to Cao Cao, but suddenly defeated Du Xi, Pak Hu, killed Xia Houyuan, and occupied Hanzhong, all of which were the plots of Huang Quan.

古文：先主为汉中王，犹领益州牧，以权为治中从事。
现代文：刘备自立为汉中王，依然兼任益州牧，让黄权作治中从事。
English: Liu Bei established himself as the king of Hanzhong, and still concurrently served as the herdsman of Yizhou, leaving Huang Quan to deal with the administration.

古文：及称尊号，将东伐吴，权谏曰： 吴人悍战，又水军顺流，进易退难，臣请为先驱以尝寇，陛下宜为后镇。 
现代文：等到刘备登基，将要往东征讨吴国，黄权劝谏说: 吴人强悍善战，再加上大军顺流而下，进军容易退兵难，臣请求作为先驱以探敌人虚实，陛下应该坐镇后方。 
English: When Liu Bei ascended to the throne, he was going to go to the East to fight against the State of Wu. Huang Quan advised him, "Wu people are strong and good at fighting, and with a large army coming down the river, it is easy to advance and difficult to retreat. I request you to be a pioneer to probe the enemy's truth and falsehood. Your Majesty should sit in the rear of the town."

古文：先主不从，以权为镇北将军，督江北军以防魏师；先主自在江南。
现代文：刘备没有听从黄权的建议，让黄权做镇北将军，带领江北军队，防御魏国军队，刘备自己在江南。
English: Liu Bei did not listen to Huang Quan's suggestion to let Huang Quan be the general of Zhenbei and lead the army north of the Yangtze River to defend the Wei army. Liu Bei himself was in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：及吴将军陆议乘流断围，南军败绩，先主引退。
现代文：等到吴国将军陆议趁着长江水流冲破蜀军的包围，蜀军江南的部队战败先，刘备撤军。
English: When Lu Rong, the general of Wu, took advantage of the Yangtze River to break through the encirclement of the Shu army, the troops of the Shu army south of the Yangtze River were defeated, and Liu Bei withdrew.

古文：而道隔绝，权不得还，故率将所领降于魏。
现代文：但返回的道路阻隔，黄权不能返回蜀地，所以率领所带领的部下投降魏国。
English: However, the road to return was blocked, and Huang Quan could not return to Shu, so he led his subordinates to surrender to Wei.

古文：有司执法，白收权妻子。先主曰： 孤负黄权，权不负孤也。 
现代文：蜀国有关部门依法执行，上报将黄权的妻子儿女收押，刘备说: 我辜负了黄权，他没有辜负我。 
English: The relevant departments of Shu carried out according to the law and reported the detention of Huang Quan's wife and children. Liu Bei said: I failed Huang Quan, he did not fail me.

古文：待之如初。
现代文：依然像过去一样对待他的家人。
English: He still treats his family as he did in the past.

古文：魏文帝谓权曰： 君舍逆效顺，欲追踪陈、韩邪？ 
现代文：魏文帝曹丕对黄权说: 您舍弃悖逆天命的人而效忠顺应天命的人，是想要效法陈平、韩信的做法吗？ 
English: Wei Emperor Cao Pi said to Huang Quan, "Do you want to follow the practices of Chen Ping and Han Xin by abandoning those who defy the decrees of Heaven and being loyal to those who obey the decrees of Heaven?"

古文：权对曰： 臣过受刘主殊遇，降吴不可，还蜀无路，是以归命。
现代文：黄权回答说: 臣受过刘备的特殊礼遇，既不能投降吴国，也无路返回蜀地，所以归顺我朝。
English: Huang Quan replied, "The minister received special courtesy from Liu Bei. He could neither surrender to the State of Wu nor return to the State of Shu. Therefore, he surrendered to my dynasty.

古文：且败军之将，免死为幸，何古人之可慕也 文帝善之，拜为镇南将军，封育阳侯，加侍中，使之陪乘。
现代文：况且败军之将，免于一死就是幸事，还有什么羡慕古人的呢？ 魏文帝很是赞赏，任命他为镇南将军，封为育阳侯，加官侍中，让他陪坐同乘一辆车。
English: Moreover, it is a blessing for a defeated general to be spared a single death. What else is there to envy the ancients for? Emperor Wei was very appreciative and appointed him as the general of Zhenan, the lord of Yuyang, and the second-ranked officer, and let him accompany him in a car.

古文：蜀降人或云诛权妻子，权知其虚言，未便发丧，后得审问，果如所言。
现代文：蜀国投降的人有人说，黄权的家中家属已被诛杀，黄权知道是虚假之话。没有立即发丧，后来经过确切消息，果然像黄权所说的。
English: Some people said that Huang Quan's family members had been killed, but Huang Quan knew it was a lie. There was no immediate mourning, but later, after receiving accurate information, it was as Huang Quan had said.

古文：及先主薨问至，魏群臣咸贺而权独否。
现代文：等到刘备去世的消息传来，魏朝的群臣都相互庆祝，而只有黄权没有笑。
English: When the news of Liu Bei's death came, the ministers of the Wei Dynasty all celebrated with each other, but only Huang Quan did not laugh.

古文：文帝察权有局量，欲试惊之，遣左右诏权，未至之间，累催相属，马使奔驰，交错於道，官属侍从莫不碎魄，而权举止颜色自若。
现代文：魏文帝察觉到黄权很有气量，想要使他震惊，派部下召见黄权，趁他还没来，催促他的人接二连三，使者骑马催促，络绎不绝，官属侍从都胆战心惊，而黄泉言谈举止，神色自若。
English: Wei Wen Di noticed that Huang Quan was very energetic and wanted to shock him. He sent his subordinates to summon Huang Quan. While he was still absent, his people urged him one after another. The messengers rode horses and urged him incessantly. The officials and attendants were afraid, but Huang Quan spoke and behaved with self-confidence.

古文：后领益州刺史，徙占河南。
现代文：后来黄权兼任益州刺史，又调任到河南。
English: Later, Huang Quan concurrently served as the chief historian of Yizhou and was transferred to Henan.

古文：大将军司马宣王深器之，问权曰： 蜀中有卿辈几人？ 
现代文：大将军司马懿非常器重黄权，问他说: 蜀地有多少像你这样的人呢？ 
English: General Sima Qian was very concerned about Huang Quan and asked him: How many people like you are there in Shu?

古文：权笑而答曰： 不图明公见顾之重也！ 
现代文：黄权笑着回答说: 没有料到您如此看重我。 
English: Huang Quan replied with a smile: I didn't expect you to value me so much.

古文：宣王与诸葛亮书曰： 黄公衡，快士也，每坐起叹述足下，不去口实。 
现代文：司马懿给诸葛亮写信说: 黄公衡是快意之士，每次谈论起您，都赞不绝口，不改初言。 
English: Sima Wei wrote to Zhuge Liang, saying: Huang Gongheng is a cheerful person, every time he talks about you, he is full of praise and does not change his first words.

古文：景初三年，蜀延熙二年，权迁车骑将军、仪同三司。
现代文：景初三年，蜀延熙二年，黄权升任为车骑将军，仪同三司。
English: In the third year of Jingchu and the second year of Shu Yanxi, Huang Quan was promoted to the general of chariot and cavalry.

古文：明年卒，谥曰景侯。
现代文：第二年去世，谥号为景侯。
English: He died the following year, and his nickname became Jinghou.

古文：子邕嗣。
现代文：他的儿子黄邕继承爵位。
English: His son Huang Qi succeeded to the title.

古文：邕无子，绝。
现代文：黄邕无子，所以爵位无人继承。
English: Huang Qi had no son, so there was no one to inherit the title.

古文：权留蜀子崇，为尚书郎，随卫将军诸葛瞻拒邓艾。
现代文：黄权留在蜀地的儿子黄崇，担任尚书郎，跟随卫将军诸葛瞻抗击邓艾。
English: Huang Quan's son Huang Chong, who remained in Shu, served as Shang Shulang and followed the Wei general Zhu Gezhan to fight Deng Ai.

古文：到涪县，瞻盘桓未进，崇屡劝瞻宜速行据险，无令敌得入平地。
现代文：到了涪县，诸葛瞻盘桓不前，黄崇多次劝诸葛瞻应该以急速前往占据要地，不要让敌人得以进入平地。
English: When Zhuge Zhan arrived in Lixian County, Zhuge Zhan hesitated to move forward. Huang Chong repeatedly advised Zhuge Zhan that he should quickly go to occupy the important place and not allow the enemy to enter the plain.

古文：瞻犹与未纳，崇至于流涕。
现代文：诸葛瞻依旧不采纳，黄崇以至于痛哭流涕。
English: Zhuge Zhan still refused to accept it, and Huang Chong burst into tears.

古文：会艾长驱而前，瞻卻战至绵竹，崇帅厉军士，期於必死，临陈见杀。
现代文：适逢邓艾率军长期长驱而入，诸葛瞻且战且退到了绵竹，黄崇统帅军队激励将士，与敌决一死战，在战场上被杀害。
English: Just as Deng Ai led the army into the long-term drive, Zhuge looked forward and fought and retreated to Mianzhu, Huang Chong, the commander-in-chief of the army, inspired the soldiers, fought a deadly battle with the enemy, and was killed on the battlefield.

古文：李恢字德昂，建宁俞元人也。
现代文：李恢，字德昂，建宁郡俞元县人。
English: Li Kudao, alias De'ang, a native of Jianning County, Jiangyuan County.

古文：仕郡督邮，姑夫爨习为建伶令，有违犯之事，恢坐习免官。
现代文：当过军中的督邮，他的姑父爨习是建伶县县的县令，有犯法之事，李恢因为他的事而被免官。
English: When he was a postal inspector in the army, his uncle Lu Xi was the county magistrate of Jianye County. There was a violation of the law, and Li Wei was dismissed because of his affair.

古文：太守董和以习方土大姓，寝而不许。
现代文：太守董和因为爨习是地方上的大姓，所以将他的事压下，并保留住李恢的官位。
English: Because Gong Xi was a big name in the local area, the Tai Shou Donghe suppressed his case and retained Li Hui's official position.

古文：后贡恢于州，涉道未至，闻先主自葭萌还攻刘璋。
现代文：后来又举荐李恢到周州中，他还没有到州府，得知刘备从葭萌返回攻打刘璋。
English: Later, he recommended Li Wei to Zhou Middle School. He had not yet arrived at the prefectural government when he learned that Liu Bei had returned from Qimeng to attack Liu Ye.

古文：恢知璋之必败，先主必成，乃讬名郡使，北诣先主，遇於绵竹。
现代文：李恢知道刘璋必败，刘备必成，所以就假借郡中的使者，往北去拜见刘备，在绵竹相遇。
English: Li Jia knew that Liu Xuan would be defeated and Liu Bei would be victorious, so he borrowed an envoy from the county to go north to meet Liu Bei, and they met in Mianzhu.

古文：先主嘉之，从至雒城，遣恢至汉中交好马超，超遂从命。
现代文：刘备很赞赏他，让他跟随直到雒城，并派他到汉中跟马超交好，马超于是从命归附。
English: Liu Bei appreciated him very much, let him follow him to Shicheng, and sent him to Hanzhong to make friends with Ma Chao. Ma Chao then followed his orders.

古文：成都既定，先主领益州牧，以恢为功曹书佐主簿。
现代文：成都平定后，刘备兼任益州牧，任命李恢为功曹书佐、主簿。
English: After Chengdu was pacified, Liu Bei concurrently served as the pastor of Yizhou, and appointed Li Guo as the assistant of Gong Cao and the chief bookkeeper.

古文：后为亡虏所诬，引恢谋反，有司执送，先主明其不然，更迁恢为别驾从事。
现代文：后来他被投降的俘虏诬陷，说他参与谋逆，执法部门将他押送到刘备面前，刘备知道事实不是这样，又升迁他为州中别驾从事。
English: Later, he was framed by the surrendered prisoners, saying that he was involved in treason, and the law enforcement department escorted him to Liu Bei. Liu Bei knew that this was not the case, and promoted him to work as a state middle school student.

古文：章武元年，庲降都督邓方卒，先主问恢： 谁可代者？ 
现代文：章武元年，庲降都督邓方去世，刘备问李恢说: 谁能代替邓方呢？ 
English: In the first year of Zhangwu, Liu Bei asked Li Huai: "Who can replace Deng Fang?

古文：恢对曰： 人之才能，各有长短，故孔子曰 其使人也器之。
现代文：李恢回答说: 人的才能各有长短，所以孔子说: 要依据他的才能而任用他 。
English: Li Wei replied, "People's talents have their own strengths and weaknesses, so Confucius said, "Appoint him according to his talents."

古文：臣窃不自揆，惟陛下察之。 先主笑曰： 孤之本意，亦已在卿矣。 
现代文：况且明主在上那下臣就会尽职，所以先零战役，赵充国说 不如用老臣 ，臣自不量力，希望陛下明察。 刘备笑着说: 我的本意也是有意于你。 
English: Moreover, it is clear that the lord will do his duty when the vassal does his duty, so Zhao Chongguo said that it is better to use the old vassal, the vassal will not do his best, and hoped that his majesty would notice. Liu Bei smiled and said: My original intention is also interested in you.

古文：遂以恢为庲降都督，使持节领交州刺史，住平夷县。
现代文：于是，就任命李恢为庲降都督，让他持符节任交州刺史，治所在平夷县。
English: As a result, he appointed Li Huai as the governor of the ceded capital, and let him hold the title of the governor of Jiaozhou Province, and the capital was located in Pingyi County.

古文：先主薨，高定恣睢於越巂，雍闿跋扈於建宁，朱褒反叛於牂牁。
现代文：刘备去世后，高定在越巂横行，雍凯在建宁跋扈，朱褒在牂牁反叛。
English: After Liu Bei's death, Gaoding ran rampant in Yueyang, Yongkai was rampant in Jianning, and Zhu Bo rebelled in Handan.

古文：丞相亮南征，先由越巂，而恢案道向建宁。
现代文：丞相诸葛亮南征，先经由越巂，而李恢取道向建宁。
English: The southern expedition of the chancellor Zhuge Liang passed through Yueqi first, while Li Hui took the road to Jianning.

古文：诸县大相纠合，围恢军於昆明。时恢众少敌倍，又未得亮声息，绐谓南人曰： 官军粮尽，欲规退还，吾中间久斥乡里，乃今得旋，不能复北，欲还与汝等同计谋，故以诚相告。 
现代文：各县大联合，在昆明将李恢的部队围困，当时李恢的兵数比敌人少数倍，又没有得知诸葛亮的消息，就假意对南人说: 大军粮草已尽，想要撤退，我们离开家乡很久，现在得以返回，假如不能回到北面，就打算与你们同谋造反，所以以实相告。 
English: At that time, the number of Li Guo's soldiers was a few times less than that of the enemy, and without knowing the news of Zhuge Liang, he pretended to say to the people in the south: The great army has run out of grain and grass, we want to retreat, we have been away from home for a long time, now we can return, if we can't return to the north, we plan to conspire with you to rebel, so we told them the truth.

古文：南人信之，故围守怠缓。於是恢出击，大破之，追奔逐北，南至槃江，东接牂牁，与亮声势相连。
现代文：南人相信了这些话，所以对李恢部队的围困开始怠慢松懈，于是李恢率军出击，大破敌军，一直追逐败军，往南到了槃江，东面到了牂牁，和诸葛亮率领的部队互相呼应。
English: The southerners believed these words, so they began to slacken the siege of Li Huai's troops. Therefore, Li Huai led the army to attack, broke the enemy army, and chased the defeated army all the way south to the Minjiang River and east to the Fen River, and the troops led by Zhuge Liang echoed each other.

古文：南土平定，恢军功居多，封汉兴亭侯，加安汉将军。
现代文：南方平定后，李恢因为军功最多，被封为汉兴亭侯，加官安汉将军。
English: After the pacification of the south, Li Huai was awarded the title of Han Xingting Hou and promoted to Anhan General because he had the most military exploits.

古文：后军还，南夷复叛，杀害守将。
现代文：后来大军返回，南方少数民族再次反叛，杀害当地守将。
English: Later, the large army returned, and the southern ethnic minorities rebelled again, killing the local commander.

古文：恢身往扑讨，鉏尽恶类，徙其豪帅于成都，赋出叟、濮耕牛战马金银犀革，充继军资，于时费用不乏。
现代文：李恢亲自前往征讨，铲除叛贼中的恶人，将他们的首领迁往成都，从叟、濮少数民族中征调耕牛，战马，金银，犀角，皮革以供应军用，所以在当时这些方面的物资没有缺乏。
English: Li Jia personally went to collect, root out the evildoers among the traitors, relocate their leaders to Chengdu, and conscript farm cattle, war horses, gold and silver, rhinoceros horns, and leather from the Yao and Qiang ethnic minorities to supply the military, so there was no shortage of these materials at that time.

古文：建兴七年，以交州属吴，解恢刺史。更领建宁太守，以还居本郡。
现代文：建兴七年，交州归属东吴，解除了李恢的刺史职位，改为兼任建宁太守，让他返回本郡居住。
English: In the seventh year of Jianxing, Jiaozhou belonged to Dongwu. Li Hui was relieved of the post of chief historian, and was concurrently appointed as the governor of Jianning. He was allowed to return to his county to live.

古文：徙居汉中，九年卒。子遗嗣。
现代文：后来又迁居汉中。建兴九年，李恢去世，他的儿子李遗继承爵位。
English: Later, he moved to Hanzhong. In the ninth year of Jianxing, Li Wei died, and his son Li You inherited the title.

古文：恢弟子球，羽林右部督，随诸葛瞻拒邓艾，临陈授命，死于绵竹。
现代文：李恢弟弟的儿子李球，是羽林右部督，跟随诸葛瞻抗击邓艾，临阵受命，在绵竹战死。
English: Li Kui, the son of Li Hui's younger brother, was the right-hand governor of Hualin. He followed Zhuge Zhan to fight against Deng Ai. He was ordered to take part in the battle and died in Mianzhu.

古文：吕凯字季平、永昌不韦人也。
现代文：吕凯字季平，永昌郡不韦县人。
English: Lu Kai Zi Jiping, Yongchang County, a native of Fuwa County.

古文：仕郡五官掾功曹。时雍闿等闻先主薨於永安，骄黠滋甚。
现代文：他在军中担任五官掾功曹，当时雍闿等人得知刘备在永安去世，骄矜愈加滋长。
English: He served in the army as the fifth official, Gong Gong Cao. When Yong Xuan and others learned that Liu Bei had died in Yong'an, their pride grew even more.

古文：都护李严与闿书六纸，解喻利害，闿但答一纸曰： 盖闻天无二日，土无二王，今天下鼎立，正朔有三，是以远人惶惑，不知所归也。 
现代文：都护李严给雍闿写了一封六张纸的信，向他说明其中的利害，雍闿只回答一张纸说: 听说天无二日，国无二主，现在天下鼎立，有三种不同的历法，所以在远处的人心中惶恐，不知归附哪里。 
English: Li Yan, the guardian of the capital, wrote a six-page letter to Yong Xuan, explaining the situation to him. Yong Xuan replied with only one piece of paper, saying, "I have heard that there is no second day, no second master of the country, and now there are three different calendars in the world, so people in the distance are frightened and don't know where to turn.

古文：其桀慢如此。
现代文：他的狂悖傲慢到如此地步。
English: His arrogance is so over the top.

古文：闿又降於吴，吴遥署闿为永昌太守。
现代文：雍闿又向东吴投降，东吴遥任雍闿为永昌太守。
English: Yongzheng also surrendered to Dongwu, and Dongwu appointed Yongzheng as the governor of Yongchang.

古文：永昌既在益州郡之西，道路壅塞，与蜀隔绝，而郡太守改易，凯与府丞蜀郡王伉帅厉吏民，闭境拒闿。
现代文：永昌在益州郡的西面，道路阻隔，跟蜀地隔绝，又改换了太守人员，吕凯和复丞，蜀郡人王伉一起率领和激励，官吏百姓，闭守四境，抵御雍闿。
English: Yongchang is in the west of Yizhou County, the road is blocked, it is isolated from Shu, and the governor-general personnel have been changed. Lu Kai and Fuzhong, the people of Shu County, led and encouraged the officials and the people, closed the four borders, and resisted the Yongle.

古文：闿数移檄永昌，称说云云。凯答檄曰： 天降丧乱，奸雄乘衅，天下切齿，万国悲悼，臣妾大小，莫不思竭筋力，肝脑涂地，以除国难。
现代文：永凯多次给永昌发布檄文，劝诱吕凯，吕凯回答檄文说: 上天降下灾乱，英雄趁机四起，天下咬牙切齿，万邦都心中悲痛。臣民无论大小，都想着忠诚尽力，肝脑涂地，免除国难。
English: Yongkai repeatedly sent Yongchang an imperial edict to persuade Lükai, and Lükai replied to the imperial edict, saying: Heaven sends down disasters and turmoil, heroes seize every opportunity, the world gnashes its teeth, and all nations are heartbroken. All subjects, no matter how big or small, are thinking about loyalty and doing their best, with their hearts in their mouths, to avoid a national disaster.

古文：伏惟将军世受汉恩，以为当躬聚党众，率先启行，上以报国家，下不负先人，书功竹帛，遗名千载。
现代文：想到将军您世代深受汉家恩典，我认为您应当亲自招集人马，率先行动，向上报答国家，对下不负先人，以求功劳能书于史册，留名千载。
English: Thinking of the generals of your generation who have been deeply blessed by the Han family, I think that you should personally recruit personnel, take the lead in action, repay the country, and live up to your predecessors, so that you can write your name in the history books for a thousand years.

古文：何期臣仆吴越，背本就末乎？
现代文：哪想到您向东吴臣服，背叛根本呢。
English: Who would have thought that you would surrender to the East and betray the West?

古文：昔舜勤民事，陨于苍梧，书籍嘉之，流声无穷。
现代文：过去舜帝勤勉于百姓正事，在苍梧去世，史籍都赞赏他，流芳千古。
English: In the past, Emperor Yao was diligent in the affairs of the people. After Emperor Gowu passed away, historical records praised him, and he has been loved for thousands of years.

古文：崩于江浦，何足可悲！
现代文：他葬身江南，多么悲伤。
English: He died in the south of the Yangtze River. How sad.

古文：文、武受命，成王乃平。先帝龙兴，海内望风，宰臣聪睿，自天降康。
现代文：周文王、周武王承受天命，周成王才能平定天下，先帝承受天命，海内外风归附，朝臣聪明敏锐，上天降下安康。
English: King Zhouwen and King Zhouwu received the mandate of heaven, only King Zhoucheng could pacify the world, the former emperor received the mandate of heaven, the winds at home and abroad were favorable, the courtiers were clever and keen, and peace and prosperity descended from heaven.

古文：而将军不睹盛衰之纪，成败之符，譬如野火在原，蹈履河冰，火灭冰泮，将何所依附？
现代文：而将军您看不到盛衰的记载，成败的征兆，就像野火燎原，人踏冰河，一旦火灭冰消，您将依附什么呢？
English: But general, you cannot see the record of rise and fall, the signs of success and failure, just like wildfires, people treading on glaciers. Once the fire is extinguished, what will you cling to?

古文：曩者将军先君雍侯，造怨而封，窦融知兴，归志世祖，皆流名后叶，世歌其美。
现代文：过去将军您的先父雍侯，与汉朝结怨却受封，窦融知道东汉将兴，所以归顺世祖，都是留名后世的，世代歌颂他们的美德。
English: In the past, your forefather, Yong Hou, was a general. He had a grudge against the Han Dynasty, but was given a title of nobility. Dou Rong knew that the Eastern Han Dynasty would prosper, so he obeyed his ancestors. All of this is recorded for posterity, and generations will sing of their virtues.

古文：今诸葛丞相英才挺出，深睹未萌，受遗讬孤，翊赞季兴，与众无忌，录功忘瑕。将军若能翻然改图，易迹更步，古人不难追，鄙土何足宰哉！
现代文：现在丞相诸葛亮英才杰出，在事情未开始前就觉察到，接受先主的托孤遗命，辅佐汉室兴隆，跟众人相处无所偏差，奖赏功劳不记小过如果将军能幡然醒悟，改变图谋，重新走向正道，那古代贤人不难追记，永昌这块小地方哪里足够您管理呢？
English: Now the prime minister, Zhuge Liang, is a brilliant and outstanding person. He was aware of the matter before it started. He accepted the last will and testament of the forefather, assisted Han Xinglong, and got along with everyone without any deviations. If the general can suddenly wake up, change his plans, and return to the right path, then it is not difficult for the ancient sages to remember. Where is Yongchang, this small place, enough for you to manage?

古文：盖闻楚国不恭，齐桓是责，夫差僣号，晋人不长，况臣於非主，谁肯归之邪？
现代文：楚国对周朝不敬，齐桓公问责，夫差僭号称霸，晋国抑制它的势力增长，更何况，你所臣服的并不是明主，谁肯归附呢？
English: Chu did not respect Zhou Dynasty, Qi Huan held accountable, Zhishan claimed hegemony, Jin restrained the growth of its power. What's more, what you submit to is not the clear master, who would want to be attached?

古文：窃惟古义，臣无越境之交，是以前后有来无往。
现代文：我认为古人大义，为臣者不和境外之人交往，所以前后和您有来往。
English: I think that the ancients were right, for the courtiers did not socialize with people outside the country, so I had contacts with you before and after.

古文：重承告示，发愤忘食，故略陈所怀，惟将军察焉。 
现代文：再次收到您的檄文，我发愤忘食的大略陈述心中所想，希望将军仔细考虑。 
English: Once again, I received your obituary, and I angrily outlined my thoughts, hoping that the general would consider them carefully.

古文：凯威恩内著，为郡中所信，故能全其节。
现代文：吕凯的威势信誉在军内很显著，被郡中人信赖，所以能保全自己的名节。
English: The prestige of Lü Kai is very prominent in the military, and he is trusted by the people in the county, so he can protect his name.

古文：及丞相亮南征讨闿，既发在道，而闿已为高定部曲所杀。
现代文：等到丞相诸葛亮往南征讨雍闿，大军已出发在路上，而雍闿已经被高定的部下所杀。
English: By the time the chancellor Zhuge Liang went to the south to fight for Yongzheng, the large army had already set out on the road, and Yongzheng had been killed by high-ranking subordinates.

古文：亮至南，上表曰： 永昌郡吏吕凯、府丞王伉等，执忠绝域，十有馀年，雍闿、高定偪其东北，而凯等守义不与交通。臣不意永昌风俗敦直乃尔！ 
现代文：诸葛亮到了南方，上表说: 永昌郡吏吕凯、府丞王伉等坚守忠义守卫边境，已有十多年，雍闿、高定在东北方面威逼他们，而吕凯等人坚守正义不与他们来往，没有想到永昌地区的风俗竟如此敦厚正直。 
English: Zhuge Liang arrived in the south, the above table said: Yongchang County officials Lü Kai and Fuzhong Wang Yao and others have been loyal to the border for more than ten years. Yong Liang and Gaoding have threatened them in the northeast, while Lü Kai and others adhere to justice and do not deal with them. I did not expect the customs in Yongchang area to be so thick and honest.

古文：以凯为云南太守，封阳迁亭侯。
现代文：就任命吕凯为云南太守，封为阳迁亭侯。
English: He appointed Lü Kai as the governor-general of Yunnan and named him Yang Qianting.

古文：会为叛夷所害，子祥嗣。而王伉亦封亭侯，为永昌太守。
现代文：此时是否吕凯被叛乱的少数民族杀害，他的儿子吕翔继承爵位，而王伉也被封为亭侯，担任永昌太守。
English: At this time, whether Lu Kai was killed by the rebellious ethnic minorities, his son Lu Xiang inherited the title of nobility, and Wang Qian was also named the prince and served as the Yongchang governor.

古文：马忠字德信，巴西阆中人也。少养外家，姓狐，名笃，后乃复姓，改名忠。
现代文：马忠字德信，巴西巴西郡阆中县人，年少时靠外祖父家抚养，姓狐名笃，后来才恢复马姓，改名为忠。
English: Ma Zhong (Chinese: 马忠; pinyin: Ma Zhōng) is a native of Yuzhong County, Brazil. When he was young, he was brought up by his maternal grandfather's family, and his surname was Fuchu. Later, he changed his surname back to Ma and changed his name to Zhong.

古文：为郡吏，建安末举孝廉，除汉昌长。
现代文：他担任郡吏，建安末年被推举为孝廉，担任汉昌县县长。
English: He served as a county official, and at the end of Jian'an's life, he was promoted to Xiaolian and served as the head of Hanchang County.

古文：先主东征，败绩猇亭，巴西太守阎芝发诸县兵五千人以补遗阙，遣忠送往。
现代文：刘备东征，在褫亭战败，巴西太守阎芝征发各县士兵五千人，以弥补缺漏，并派马忠将部队送到前线。
English: Liu Bei's eastern expedition was defeated at Fengting, and the Brazilian governor Yan Zhi conscripted and dispatched five thousand soldiers from each county to make up for the shortfall, and sent Ma Zhong to send the troops to the front line.

古文：先主已还永安，见忠与语，谓尚书令刘巴曰： 虽亡黄权，复得狐笃，此为世不乏贤也。 
现代文：刘备已返回永安，见到马忠和他交谈，对尚书令刘巴说:  虽然失去了黄权，又得到狐笃，这是世间不缺乏贤才啊。 
English: Liu Bei had returned to Yong'an, saw Ma Zhong talking with him, and said to Liu Ba, the commander of Shang Shuling: Although he lost Huang Quan and gained Fu Du, there is no shortage of sages in the world.

古文：建兴元年，丞相亮开府，以忠为门下督。
现代文：建兴元年，丞相诸葛亮建牙开府，以马忠为门下督。
English: In the first year of Jianxing, the chancellor Zhuge Liang Jianya opened the capital, with Ma Zhong as the governor.

古文：三年，亮入南，拜忠牂牁太守。
现代文：建兴三年，诸葛亮进入南方，任命马忠为牂牁太守。
English: In the third year of Jianxing, Zhuge Liang entered the south and appointed Ma Zhong as the Grand Prince.

古文：郡丞朱褒反。
现代文：郡丞朱褒反叛。
English: The county magistrate Zhu Bo rebelled.

古文：叛乱之后，忠抚育恤理，甚有威惠。
现代文：叛乱之后，马忠赈济安抚百姓，在百姓中很有威望。
English: After the rebellion, Ma Zhongxun helped to pacify the people, and enjoyed great prestige among the people.

古文：八年，召为丞相参军，副长史蒋琬署留府事。又领州治中从事。
现代文：建兴八年，马忠被征召为丞相参军，副长史蒋琬留在府中主管事宜，马忠又兼任州治中从事。
English: In the eighth year of Jianxing, Ma Zhong was conscripted to join the army as chancellor, vice-governor Shi Jiangyu remained in charge of the affairs of the government, and Ma Zhong also served as a member of the state government.

古文：明年，亮出祁山，忠诣亮所，经营戎事。
现代文：第二年，诸葛亮出兵祁山，马忠到了诸葛亮的处所，参谋军事。
English: In the second year, Zhuge Liang marched out of Lushan, and Ma Zhong arrived at Zhuge Liang's place as a military staff officer.

古文：军还，督将军张嶷等讨汶山郡叛羌。
现代文：大军返回，督将军张仪等人征讨汶山郡叛乱的羌人。
English: The large army returned, and the governor-general Zhang Yi and others went to recruit the rebels of Wenshan County.

古文：十一年，南夷豪帅刘胄反，扰乱诸郡。徵庲降都督张翼还，以忠代翼。
现代文：建兴十一年，南方少数民族首领刘胄反叛，侵扰各郡，朝廷征召服降都督张翼回朝，让马忠代替张翼。
English: In the eleventh year of Jianxing, the leader of the southern ethnic minorities, Liu Xuan, rebelled and invaded the counties. The imperial court conscripted the capitulated governor Zhang Ying to return to the North, and let Ma Zhong replace Zhang Ying.

古文：忠遂斩胄，平南土。
现代文：马忠斩杀了刘昼，平定了南方。
English: Ma Zhong killed Liu Rong and pacified the south.

古文：加忠监军奋威将军，封博阳亭侯。
现代文：朝廷封马忠为将军，奋威将军，封为博阳亭侯。
English: The imperial court hailed Ma Zhong as a general, Fenwei as a general, and Bo Yangting as a prince.

古文：初，建宁郡杀太守正昂，缚太守张裔於吴，故都督常驻平夷县。
现代文：当初，建宁郡杀害太守正昂，并将太守张裔捆绑送到吴国，过去都督经常驻守在平夷县。
English: At first, Jianning County killed the governor Zheng Aang, and sent the governor Zhang He to the State of Wu. In the past, the governor was often stationed in Pingyi County.

古文：至忠，乃移治味县，处民夷之间。
现代文：到了马忠任官，将治所移到治味县，处在中原和少数民族之间。
English: When Ma Zhong became an official, he moved the institute to Zhimi County, which is located between the Central Plains and ethnic minorities.

古文：又越巂郡亦久失土地，忠率将太守张嶷开复旧郡，由此就加安南将军，进封彭乡亭侯。
现代文：再加上越巂郡已经失去控制很久，马忠率领太守张裔恢复旧郡，因此朝廷派人加官马忠为安南将军，晋封为彭乡亭侯。
English: In addition, Yuexiu County had been out of control for a long time, and Ma Zhong led the eunuch Zhang Xuan to restore the old county. Therefore, the imperial court sent people to promote Ma Zhong to General Annan and promoted him to Pengxiangting.

古文：延熙五年还朝，因至汉中，见大司马蒋琬，宣传诏旨，加拜镇南大将军。
现代文：延熙五年，马忠返回朝中，被派到汉中，拜见大司马蒋琬，宣读诏旨，被加封为镇南大将军。
English: In the fifth year of Yanxi, Ma Zhong returned to the Middle Kingdom of Korea and was sent to the Middle Kingdom of Hanzhong. He met with the Chief Secretary Ma Jiangyao, read out the imperial edict, and was awarded the title of Zhenan Grand General.

古文：七年春，大将军费祎北御魏敌，留忠成都，平尚书事。
现代文：延熙七年，大将军费祎率军北御魏军，留下马忠留守成都，任平尚书事。
English: In the seventh year of Yanxi, the great general Fei Xi led the army of the Northern Wei Army, leaving Ma Zhong to stay in Chengdu, and appointed Ping Shang as secretary.

古文：祎还，忠乃归南。
现代文：费祎返回，马忠才返回南方。
English: Fei Yao returned and Ma Zhongcai returned to the south.

古文：十二年卒，子脩嗣。
现代文：延熙十二年，马忠去世，他的儿子马脩继承爵位。
English: In the twelfth year of Yanxi, Ma Zhong died, and his son Ma Jun inherited the title.

古文：忠为人宽济有度量，但诙啁大笑，忿怒不形於色。
现代文：马忠为人宽容大度，很有气量，但喜爱幽默大笑，愤怒不表现出来。
English: Ma Zhong is a tolerant and generous person, with a lot of energy, but he likes to laugh with humor, and does not show anger.

古文：然处事能断，威恩并立，是以蛮夷畏而爱之。
现代文：但是遇事能遇事果断，恩威并立，所以少数民族都畏惧又爱戴他。
English: However, he is resolute in the face of adversity and has a reputation for benevolence, which is why ethnic minorities both fear and love him.

古文：及卒，莫不自致丧庭，流涕尽哀，为之立庙祀，迄今犹在。
现代文：等到他去世，他们都亲自前来吊丧，痛哭流涕，并为他建立祠庙，至今还在。
English: When he died, they came to mourn him in person, shed tears, and built a temple for him, which is still there.

古文：张表，时名士，清望逾忠。
现代文：张表，是当时的名士，清廉和名望超过马忠。
English: Zhang Biao was a famous person at that time. He was more honest and honorable than Ma Zhong.

古文：阎宇，宿有功幹，於事精勤。
现代文：阎宇，向来很有功劳，做事时很精明能干。
English: Yan Yu, has always been very meritorious, very shrewd and capable when doing things.

古文：继踵在忠后，其威风称绩，皆不及忠。
现代文：他在马忠之后，他的威势和功绩都比不上马忠。
English: After Ma Zhong, his prestige and achievements are not as good as Ma Zhong.

古文：王平字子均，巴西宕渠人也。
现代文：王平，字子均，巴西郡宕渠人。
English: Wang Ping, known as "Zi Jun," was a man from Dangdu County, Brazil.

古文：本养外家何氏，后复姓王。
现代文：原本养在外祖父何氏家中，后来回复王姓。
English: Originally raised in the home of his maternal grandfather Ho, he later reverted to the surname Wang.

古文：随杜濩、朴胡诣洛阳，假校尉，从曹公征汉中，因降先主，拜牙门将、裨将军。
现代文：跟杜濩、朴胡到了洛阳，担任校尉，跟随曹操征讨汉中，又投降了刘备，被封为牙门将、裨将军。
English: He went to Luoyang with Du Qian and Park Hu, served as a school captain, followed Cao Cao to fight the Han Dynasty, and surrendered to Liu Bei, and was named the keeper of the gate and the general of the army.

古文：建兴六年，属参军马谡先锋。谡舍水上山，举措烦扰，平连规谏谡，谡不能用，大败於街亭。
现代文：建兴六年，隶属于参军马谡，担任先锋，马谡舍弃水源将部队驻扎在山上，部队分支调配很混乱，王平接连规劝马谡，马谡都不采纳。
English: After six years of construction, it was subordinated to Ma Xun, who joined the army and served as a pioneer. Ma Xun abandoned the water source and stationed the troops on the mountain. The deployment of troop branches was very chaotic. Wang Ping repeatedly advised Ma Xun, but Ma Xun did not accept.

古文：众尽星散，惟平所领千人，鸣鼓自持，魏将张郃疑其伏兵，不往偪也。
现代文：后来在街亭战败，部队都四处离散，只有王平带领数千人，击鼓鸣金监守阵地，魏军将领张颌怀疑他有伏兵，不敢逼近。
English: Later, they were defeated in the street pavilion, and the troops were scattered everywhere. Only Wang Ping led thousands of people, beating drums and ringing gold to guard the position. The Wei general Zhang Qian suspected that he had an ambush and dared not approach.

古文：於是平徐徐收合诸营遗迸，率将士而还。
现代文：于是王平慢慢收拢其他部队，缓慢前行，率领将士撤退返回。
English: As a result, Wang Ping slowly gathered other troops, slowly marched forward, and led the soldiers to retreat and return.

古文：丞相亮既诛马谡及将军张休、李盛，夺将军黄袭等兵，平特见崇显，加拜参军，统五部兼当营事，进位讨寇将军，封亭侯。
现代文：丞相诸葛亮诛杀马谡以及将军张休、李盛，剥夺将军黄袭等人所率领的部队，只有王平受到特别的恩宠，加封为参军，统帅五部兵马，监管营地事宜，并晋升为讨寇将军，封为亭侯。
English: The chancellor Zhuge Liang killed Ma Jun and the generals Zhang Xiu and Li Sheng, and deprived the troops led by the general Huang Qi. Only Wang Ping received special grace, and was given the title of joining the army, commanding five troops and horses, supervising camp affairs, and was promoted to the general of anti-piracy, and was given the title of prince.

古文：九年，亮围祁山，平别守南围。魏大将军司马宣王攻亮，张郃攻平，平坚守不动，郃不能克。
现代文：建兴九年，诸葛亮出兵祁山，王平另外率兵驻守南围，魏国大将军司马懿进攻诸葛亮，张郃进攻王平，王平坚守不动，张郃没有能攻克。
English: In the ninth year of Jianxing, Zhuge Liang sent troops to Lushan, Wang Ping and other soldiers were stationed in the southern perimeter. Wei general Sima Yu attacked Zhuge Liang, Zhang Yu attacked Wang Ping, Wang Ping held fast, and Zhang Yu was unable to conquer.

古文：十二年，亮卒於武功，军退还，魏延作乱，一战而败，平之功也。
现代文：建兴十二年，诸葛亮在武功去世，大军退还，魏延作乱，一次交战就战败了，都是王平的功劳。
English: In the twelfth year of Jianxing, Zhuge Liang died in martial arts, the great army was returned, Wei Yan made a riot, and was defeated in one battle, all of which were the merit of Wang Ping.

古文：迁后典军、安汉将军，副车骑将军吴壹住汉中，又领汉中太守。
现代文：后来被升任为后典军，安汉将军，副车骑将军吴壹驻守汉中，又兼任汉中太守。
English: Later, he was promoted to the rear of the army, General Anhan, Vice-Chariot and Cavalry General Wu Yi stationed in Hanzhong, and also served as the commander of Hanzhong.

古文：十五年，进封安汉侯，代壹督汉中。
现代文：建兴十五年，晋封为安汉侯，代替吴壹驻守汉中。
English: Jianxing fifteen years, was promoted to An Han, replaced Wu Yi stationed in Hanzhong.

古文：延熙元年，大将军蒋琬住沔阳，平更为前护军，署琬府事。
现代文：延熙元年，大将军蒋琬驻守在沔阳，王平调任为前护军，主管府中事宜。
English: In the first year of the Yanxi Dynasty, the great general Jiang Yu was stationed in Fenyang, and Wang Ping was transferred to be the former escort, in charge of the affairs of the government.

古文：六年，琬还住涪，拜平前监军、镇北大将军，统汉中。
现代文：延熙六年，蒋琬返回涪县，王平被任命为前监军、镇北大将军，统管汉中。
English: In the sixth year of Yanxi, Chiang Kai-shek returned to Jixian, and Wang Ping was appointed as the former supervisor of the army, the general of Zhenbei, and in charge of Hanzhong.

古文：七年春，魏大将军曹爽率步骑十馀万向汉川，前锋已在骆谷。
现代文：延熙七年春，魏国大将军曹爽率领步兵骑兵十多万出兵汉川，前锋部队已在骆古。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of Yanxi, Cao Shuang, the general of Wei Guoda, led more than 100,000 infantry and cavalry troops to Hanchuan, and the forward troops were already in Luogu.

古文：时汉中守兵不满三万，诸将大惊。或曰： 今力不足以拒敌，听当固守汉、乐二城，遇贼令入，比尔间，涪军足得救关。 
现代文：当时汉中的守兵不足三万，将领们都很震惊，有人说: 现在实力不足以抵抗敌军，应当固守汉、乐二城，如果遭遇敌人就让他进来，很快，涪县的援军就足以援救这里。 
English: At that time, there were less than 30,000 guards in Hanzhong, and the generals were shocked. Some people said: Now the strength is not enough to resist the enemy army, we should stick to Hanzhong and Le Second City, and if we encounter the enemy, let him come in. Soon, the reinforcements from Lixian County will be enough to rescue here.

古文：平曰： 不然。
现代文：王平说: 不能这样。
English: Wang Ping said, "It can't be like this.

古文：汉中去涪垂千里。贼若得关，便为祸也。今宜先遣刘护军、杜参军据兴势，平为后拒；若贼分向黄金，平率千人下自临之，比尔间，涪军行至，此计之上也。 
现代文：汉中距离涪县将近千里，敌军如果得了关口，一定会作乱，现在应该先派刘护军、杜参军占据兴势山，王平作为后援，如果敌军分兵进攻黄金，我就率领千人亲自下山迎接，不用多久，涪县援军赶到，这才是上计。 
English: Hanzhong is nearly a thousand miles away from Jixian. If the enemy army gains the pass, it will surely cause chaos. Now, Liu Guo and Du Zhan should be sent to occupy Xingchi Mountain, and Wang Ping should be sent as a backup. If the enemy detachment attacks the gold, I will personally lead a thousand people down the mountain to meet them. It will not take long for the reinforcements from Jixian to arrive. This is the top plan.

古文：惟护军刘敏与平意同，即便施行。涪诸军及大将军费祎自成都相继而至，魏军退还，如平本策。
现代文：只有护军刘敏跟王平的想法相同，随即实行，涪县各军还有大将军费祎从成都相继赶来，魏军撤退，都像王平原本的计策。
English: Only Liu Min, the escort, had the same idea as Wang Ping, and immediately put it into practice. The troops from various counties in Jixian, as well as General Fei Yao from Chengdu, arrived one after another, and the Wei army retreated, all of which were similar to Wang Ping's original strategy.

古文：是时，邓芝在东，马忠在南，平在北境，咸著名迹。
现代文：这时，邓芝在东面，马忠在南面，王平在北境，都很有名望。
English: At this time, Deng Zhi in the east, Ma Zhong in the south, and Wang Ping in the north were all famous.

古文：平生长戎旅，手不能书，其所识不过十字，而口授作书，皆有意理。
现代文：王平生长在部队之中，不会写字，认识的字也不过十个，但他口授写书，都很有道理。
English: Wang Ping grew up in the army. He couldn't write and knew only ten characters, but he dictated books, and it all made sense.

古文：使人读史、汉诸纪传，听之，备知其大义，往往论说不失其指。
现代文：他让别人读《史记》《汉书》等传记给他听，能了解其中的意思，往往谈论起来，没有失掉其中的要旨。
English: He asked others to read biographies such as "Histories" and "Chinese Classics" to him. He could understand their meaning and often talked about them without losing their essence.

古文：遵履法度，言不戏谑，从朝至夕，端坐彻日，忄画无武将之体，然性狭侵疑，为人自轻，以此为损焉。
现代文：他遵守法度，言语间都没有戏谑，从早到晚，端坐终日，没有武将的强势，但是性情狭隘多疑，经常很看轻自己，并因此受到损害。
English: He abides by the law, there is no banter between words, from morning to night, sitting all day long, without the strength of a military commander, but the temperament is narrow and suspicious, often underestimates himself, and is therefore damaged.

古文：十一年卒，子训嗣。
现代文：延熙十一年，王平去世，他的儿子王训继承爵位。
English: In the eleventh year of Yanxi, Wang Ping died, and his son Wang Xun inherited the title.

古文：初，平同郡汉昌句扶忠勇宽厚，数有战功，功名爵位亚平，官至左将军，封宕渠侯。
现代文：当初，王平的同郡人，汉昌人句扶忠厚宽容，多次建立战功，功名爵位仅在王平之下，官至左将军，被封为宕渠侯。
English: At the beginning, Wang Ping's compatriots in Hanchang were extremely loyal and tolerant, and they repeatedly achieved military exploits. They were only ranked lower than Wang Ping in terms of military achievements. He was promoted to the rank of General of the Left and was given the title of "lord of the canal."

古文：张嶷字伯岐，巴郡南充国人也。
现代文：张嶷，字伯岐，巴郡南充国人。
English: Zhang Qian, a native of Nanchong, Ba County.

古文：弱冠为县功曹。
现代文：二十岁时就做了县中功曹。
English: At the age of twenty, he became a county middle school honor student.

古文：先主定蜀之际，山寇攻县，县长捐家逃亡，嶷冒白刃，携负夫人，夫人得免。
现代文：刘备平定蜀地的时候，山中盗匪攻打县城，县长弃家逃跑，张嶷冒着敌人的刀剑，带着夫人逃出县城，得以夫人免于一难。
English: When Liu Bei was subduing Shu, bandits in the mountains attacked the county seat, the county governor abandoned his home and fled, and Zhang Ye braved the enemy's sword and fled the county seat with his wife, so that his wife was spared.

古文：由是显名，州召为从事。
现代文：因此显名。
English: Hence its prominence.

古文：时郡内士人龚禄、姚伷位二千石，当世有声名，皆与嶷友善。
现代文：州中征召他做从事，当时境内的士人龚禄、姚伷都是官位两千石的大臣，在当时很有名望，他们都跟张嶷很友好。
English: He was recruited to work in the middle of the state. At that time, Zhang Lu and Yao Jun, both officials in the territory, were ministers with a rank of two thousand koku. They were very famous at that time, and they were very friendly with Zhang Jun.

古文：建兴五年，丞相亮北住汉中，广汉、绵竹山贼张慕等钞盗军资，劫掠吏民，嶷以都尉将兵讨之。
现代文：建兴五年，丞相诸葛亮往北驻守汉中，广汉、绵竹的山贼张慕等人抢夺军资，劫掠百姓，张嶷以都尉的身份率兵征讨。
English: In the fifth year of Jianxing, the chancellor Zhuge Liang was stationed in the north of Hanzhong, and the bandits of Guanghan and Mianzhu, such as Zhang Mu, robbed military funds and plundered the people, and Zhang Xuan led the soldiers to enlist as a captain.

古文：嶷度其鸟散，难以战禽，乃诈与和亲，克期置酒。
现代文：张嶷估计他们已经四处离散，但难以靠战斗擒获，就假装与他们和亲，约定日子，备办酒席。
English: Zhang Xuan estimated that they had dispersed everywhere, but it was difficult to capture them by fighting, so he pretended to be friends with them, agreed on a date, and prepared a banquet.

古文：酒酣，嶷身率左右，因斩慕等五十馀级，渠帅悉殄。
现代文：饮酒正酣，张嶷亲自率领左右侍从，趁机将张慕等五十多人斩杀，部队的首领都被一网打尽。
English: When the drinking was in full swing, Zhang Ye personally led the attendants on his right and left, and took the opportunity to kill more than fifty people, including Zhang Mu. The leaders of the troops were all killed.

古文：寻其馀类，旬日清泰。
现代文：随后，追讨其余贼人，十天之后地方就安定了。
English: Subsequently, the remaining thieves were tracked down, and ten days later the area was stabilized.

古文：后得疾病困笃，家素贫匮，广汉太守蜀郡何祗，名为通厚，嶷宿与疏阔，乃自轝诣祗，讬以治疾。
现代文：后来，张嶷病得很重，家中又一向贫困，广汉太守，蜀郡人何衹，名为通厚，张嶷向来与他没有什么交情，但他自己坐车到住处托他为自己治病。
English: Later, Zhang Rong was very ill, and his family had always been poor. He Rong, the governor of Guanghan and a native of Shu County, was named Tong Hou. Zhang Rong had never had any friendship with him, but he took the car to his residence and asked him to treat his illness.

古文：祗倾财医疗，数年除愈。
现代文：何衹倾尽家财，为张嶷治病，几年后就病愈了。
English: He Yao poured all his family's wealth into treating Zhang Yao's illness, and after a few years, the illness was cured.

古文：其党道信义皆此类也。
现代文：张嶷崇尚大义大都如此。
English: This is the case with most of Zhang Ye's works.

古文：拜为牙门将，属马忠，北讨汶山叛羌，南平四郡蛮夷，辄有筹画战克之功。
现代文：他被任命为牙门将，隶属于马忠，率军往北征讨汶山叛乱的羌人，又往南平定过四郡少数民族叛乱，经常有出谋划策，克敌制胜的功劳。
English: He was appointed as the keeper of the gate of teeth, and was subordinate to Ma Zhong. He led the army to the north to fight the rebels in Wenshan, and went to the south to settle the rebellion of the ethnic minorities in four counties. He often had the merit of devising strategies to defeat the enemy.

古文：十四年，武都氐王苻健请降，遣将军张尉往迎，过期不到，大将军蒋琬深以为念。
现代文：建兴十四年，武都郡的氐人王符健请求归降，派将军张尉前去迎接，过了约定日期还没有到，大将军蒋琬心中很是忧虑。
English: In the 14th year of Jianxing, Wang Fujian, a native of Wudu County, requested to surrender and sent General Zhang Yi to meet him. The agreed date had not yet arrived, and General Jiang Wei was very worried.

古文：嶷平之曰： 苻健求附款至，必无他变，素闻健弟狡黠，又夷狄不能同功，将有乖离，是以稽留耳。 
现代文：张嶷估计说: 苻健请求归降很诚恳，一定不会有变故，平时听说苻健的弟弟很狡诈，而且胡人不可能一起来归附，恐怕将有背离的情况，所以才滞留罢了。 
English: Zhang Yao estimated: He Jian's request to surrender is very sincere, there will be no change. I usually heard that He Jian's brother is very cunning, and it is impossible for Hu people to surrender together. I am afraid that there will be deviations, so I just stay.

古文：数日，问至，健弟果将四百户就魏，独健来从。
现代文：过了几天消息传来，苻健的弟弟果然带着四百户人投奔魏国，只有苻健前来归顺。
English: A few days later, news came that Gong Jian's younger brother had indeed fled to Wei with four hundred families, but only Gong Jian came to submit.

古文：初，越巂郡自丞相亮讨高定之后，叟夷数反，杀太守龚禄、焦璜，是后太守不敢之郡，只住安上县，去郡八百馀里，其郡徒有名而已。
现代文：当初越巂郡自从丞相诸葛亮征讨高定之后，叟部少数民族多次叛乱，杀害了太守龚禄、焦隍，后来的太守都不敢到此任职，只在安定县，距离郡中治所有八百多里，这个郡所只是虚有其名。
English: At first, Yuexiu County, since the chancellor Zhuge Liang's enlistment and discussion of high-ranking officials, the minority ethnic groups in the province rebelled many times and killed the governors of Yulu and Jiaozuo. Later governors did not dare to serve here. Only in Anding County, more than eight hundred miles away from the county's central government, this county seat is just a mere name.

古文：时论欲复旧郡，除嶷为越巂太守，嶷将所领往之郡，诱以恩信，蛮夷皆服，颇来降附。
现代文：当时朝中议论，想要恢复旧郡，任命张嶷为越巂太守，张嶷带领属下前往郡中，用恩惠信义昭宥他们，各地少数民族都很信服，前来归顺。
English: At that time, there was a discussion between the central government and the central government that they wanted to restore the old county, and they appointed Zhang Qian as the governor of Yueqin. Zhang Qian led his subordinates to the middle of the county and showed them kindness and loyalty. Ethnic minorities from all over the country were convinced and came to submit.

古文：北徼捉马最骁劲，不承节度，嶷乃往讨，生缚其帅魏狼，又解纵告喻，使招怀馀类。
现代文：又北部边境的捉马族非常骁勇，不愿意接受管制，张嶷前往征讨，将他们的首领魏狼生擒，又将其释放回去告诉其他人，让他招揽其他人。
English: Moreover, the Huima people on the northern border were very brave and unwilling to accept control. Zhang Jun went to recruit them, killed their leader Wei Wolang, and then released him to tell others and let him recruit others.

古文：表拜狼为邑侯，种落三千馀户皆安土供职。
现代文：张嶷上表请封魏狼为邑侯，其部族的三千多户都留在原地并有任职。
English: Zhang Ye invited Wei Wolf to be the mayor of the city on the table, and more than three thousand households of his tribe remained in the same place and held office.

古文：诸种闻之，多渐降服，嶷以功赐爵关内侯。
现代文：其他部族得知后，大多渐渐归附，张嶷因功劳被赐封爵位为关内侯。
English: After the other tribes learned about it, most of them gradually joined in, and Zhang Ye was awarded the title of Guanaihou for his services.

古文：苏祁邑君冬逢、逢弟隗渠等，已降复反。
现代文：苏祁邑君冬逢、冬逢的弟弟隗渠等人，已经投降又再次反叛。
English: Su Yueyun, Dongfeng, Dongfeng's younger brother, Xuanqiu, and others had already surrendered and rebelled again.

古文：嶷诛逢。逢妻，旄牛王女，嶷以计原之。
现代文：张嶷诛杀了冬逢，冬逢的妻子是牦牛王的女儿，张嶷用计策宽恕了他们。
English: Zhang Ye killed Dongfeng, Dongfeng's wife is the daughter of the snail king, Zhang Ye used the strategy to forgive them.

古文：而渠逃入西徼。
现代文：而隗渠逃往西部边境。
English: He fled to the western border.

古文：渠刚猛捷悍，为诸种深所畏惮，遣所亲二人诈降嶷，实取消息。
现代文：隗渠刚猛强悍，是各部都很畏惧的，他派遣两名亲信假装向张嶷投降，实际是为了获取消息。
English: He sent two cronies to pretend to surrender to Zhang Ye in order to obtain information.

古文：嶷觉之，许以重赏，使为反间，二人遂合谋杀渠。
现代文：张嶷发觉后，对二人许以重赏，让他们行反间计，二人就合谋杀死了隗渠。
English: After Zhang Jun's discovery, he promised a heavy reward to the two and let them plot against each other. The two of them then conspired to murder Yan Quan.

古文：渠死，诸种皆安。
现代文：隗渠死后，各部落都安定下来。
English: After the death of Qianqiu, all tribes settled down.

古文：又斯都耆帅李求承，昔手杀龚禄，嶷求募捕得，数其宿恶而诛之。
现代文：另外有斯都部落首领李求承，过去亲手杀了龚禄，张嶷招募人抓获了他，历数他所犯的罪行，后将他诛杀了。
English: In addition, there was the leader of the Sidu tribe, Li Qucheng, who in the past had personally killed Gonglu. Zhang Ye's recruiters captured him, counted the crimes he had committed, and then killed him.

古文：始嶷以郡郛宇颓坏，更筑小坞。
现代文：开始张嶷因为越巂郡境外的住所和房舍都毁坏了，又另外修建了一个小屋。
English: At the beginning, Zhang Ye built another hut because his residence and house outside Yueyuan County were all destroyed.

古文：在官三年，徙还故郡，缮治城郭，夷种男女莫不致力。
现代文：张嶷在官三年，转回调任回原来的郡中，修缮城墙，少数民族男女没有不出力的。
English: After three years in office, Zhang Ye was transferred back to the original county to repair the city wall. Ethnic minority men and women did not fail to work hard.

古文：定莋、台登、卑水三县去郡三百馀里，旧出盐铁及漆，而夷徼久自固食。
现代文：定作、台登、卑水三个县，距离郡中治所有三百多里，过去出产盐铁和漆，而当地的少数民族长期据为自己的收益。
English: The three counties of Setouchi, Taitung, and Heshui, all of which are more than three hundred miles away from Zhongzhi County, used to produce salt iron and lacquer, and the local ethnic minorities have long relied on them for their own income.

古文：嶷率所领夺取，署长吏焉。
现代文：张嶷率领部下夺取这些物资，在那里设立官署。
English: Zhang Ye led his subordinates to seize these materials and set up an office there.

古文：嶷之到定莋，定莋率豪狼岑，槃木王舅，甚为蛮夷所信任，忿嶷自侵，不自来诣。
现代文：张嶷到了定莋，定莋的百姓率领豪强，少数民族首领郎岑，是槃木王的舅父，少数民族很是信任他，对张嶷侵占他们的利益非常愤怒，不来拜见张嶷。
English: Zhang Ye arrived in Dingyao. The people of Dingyao were led by a strong and courageous leader, the ethnic minority leader Lang Ye, who was the uncle of the King of Xingmu. The ethnic minorities trusted him very much and were very angry at Zhang Ye's encroachment on their interests. They did not come to visit Zhang Ye.

古文：嶷使壮士数十直往收致，挞而杀之，持尸还种，厚加赏赐，喻以狼岑之恶，且曰： 无得妄动，动即殄矣！ 
现代文：张嶷派十多名壮士前去收押狼岑，鞭打后杀死，将他的尸体送还他的部族，并对其厚加奖赏，向他们宣告狼岑的罪恶，并且说: 不要擅自妄动，叛乱就消灭你们部落的人。 
English: Zhang Ye sent more than ten strong men to arrest Wolfenstein, whipped and killed him, sent his body back to his tribe, and rewarded him generously, proclaiming the evil of Wolfenstein to them, and saying: Don't act arbitrarily, rebellion will destroy your tribe.

古文：种类咸面缚谢过。嶷杀牛飨宴，重申恩信，遂获盐铁，器用周赡。
现代文：那些人都反绑双手前来谢罪，张嶷杀牛设宴款待他们，重新声明恩威信义，于是获得了盐铁产业，物资非常丰富。
English: Those people all tied their hands in return and came to apologize for their sins. Zhang Xuan killed a cow and held a banquet to entertain them. They once again declared their loyalty. As a result, they obtained the salt and iron industry and were very rich in materials.

古文：汉嘉郡界旄牛夷种类四千馀户，其率狼路，欲为姑婿冬逢报怨，遣叔父离将逢众相度形势。
现代文：汉嘉郡界的旄牛部族有四千多户，他们的首领狼，想要为自己的姑父冬逢报仇，就派自己的叔父离率领部下去观察形势。
English: There are more than 4,000 yakitori families in Hanga County. Their leader, Wolf, wanted to take revenge for his uncle Dongfeng, so he sent his uncle to leave the leadership to observe the situation.

古文：嶷逆遣亲近赍牛酒劳赐，又令离逆逢妻宣畅意旨。
现代文：张嶷反过来派亲近之人送油和酒犒劳赏赐他们，又让离前去看望冬逢的妻子，让他宣布张嶷的想法。
English: Zhang Xuan, in turn, sent people close to him to send oil and wine to reward them, and let him go to visit his wife in winter, and let him announce Zhang Xuan's idea.

古文：离既受赐，并见其姊，姊弟欢悦，悉率所领将诣嶷，嶷厚加赏待，遣还。旄牛由是辄不为患。
现代文：离受到赏赐后，又见到自己的姐姐，两姐弟十分欢喜，于是将他们率领的人马来拜见张嶷，张嶷对他们厚加赏赐和款待，让他们回去，旄牛部族从此不再成为祸患。
English: After receiving the reward, he was overjoyed to see his sister and two younger siblings again, so he invited the people led by them to visit Zhang Ye. Zhang Ye generously rewarded and entertained them, and let them go back. The snail tribe would no longer be a scourge.

古文：郡有旧道，经旄牛中至成都，既平且近；自旄牛绝道，已百馀年，更由安上，既险且远。
现代文：郡中过去有道路，经过旄牛中部抵达成都，既平坦又洁净，自从毛旄牛部族断绝道路后，这条路不能通行已经百余年了，于是改由安上通往成都，道路既艰险又偏远。
English: There used to be a road in the county, passing through the middle of the yakitori to reach Chengdu, which is both flat and clean. Since the Mao Yakitori tribe cut off the road, this road has not been passable for more than a hundred years, so it was changed from Anshang to Chengdu. The road is both difficult and remote.

古文：嶷遣左右赍货币赐路，重令路姑喻意，路乃率兄弟妻子悉诣嶷，嶷与盟誓，开通旧道，千里肃清，复古亭驿。
现代文：张嶷派左右侍从带着钱财货物赐给狼路，又令狼路的姑姑转达自己的意思，狼路就率领兄弟妻子都来拜见张嶷，张嶷和他们盟誓，开通旧道，千里的路一朝肃清，又设置了驿站。
English: Zhang Ye sent his attendants to Wolf Road with money and goods, and asked Wolf Road's aunt to convey his will. Wolf Road led his brothers and wives to visit Zhang Ye. Zhang Ye swore to them that he would open the old road, clear the thousand-mile road in one morning, and set up a post station.

古文：奏封路为旄牛〈田句〉毗王，遣使将路朝贡。
现代文：张仪上表请求任狼路为旄牛之王，派使节带着狼路入朝进贡。
English: Zhang Yi made a request for Ren Wollu to be the king of snails, and sent an envoy to bring Wollu to the court to pay tribute.

古文：后主於是加嶷怃戎将军，领郡如故。
现代文：后主刘禅就加封张嶷为抚戎将军，像过去一样担任太守。
English: Later, Lord Liu Zhen added Zhang Ye as the general of Fuxiong and served as the governor-general as in the past.

古文：嶷初见费祎为大将军，恣性汎爱，待信新附太过，嶷书戒之曰： 昔岑彭率师，来歙杖节，咸见害於刺客，今明将军位尊权重，宜鉴前事，少以为警 后祎果为魏降人郭脩所害。
现代文：张嶷初见费祎，他担任大将军，性情泛爱，但对他人信任太过，张嶷写信告诫他说: 过去岑彭率师而来，来熻手持符节，都被刺客杀害，现在您位高权重，应该以前事为戒，稍稍警惕。 后来费祎果然被魏国的投降之人郭脩所害。
English: When Zhang Ye first met Fei Ye, he was a general with a loving nature, but he trusted others too much. Zhang Ye wrote a letter to him, admonishing him: "In the past, when Nie Peng led his division, he came to you holding a rune, and both of them were killed by assassins. Now that you are in a position of great power, you should be aware of the past and be a little wary. Later, Fei Ye was indeed victimized by Guo Ye, the capitulator of Wei.

古文：吴太傅诸葛恪以初破魏军，大兴兵众以图攻取。
现代文：东吴的太傅诸葛恪，因为刚攻破魏军，大兴兵马想要进攻。
English: Daxing soldiers and horses wanted to attack because they had just defeated the Wei army.

古文：侍中诸葛瞻，丞相亮之子，恪从弟也，嶷与书曰： 东主初崩，帝实幼弱，太傅受寄讬之重，亦何容易！
现代文：侍中诸葛瞻，是丞相诸葛亮的儿子，是诸葛恪的堂弟，张嶷给他写信说: 东吴国主刚刚驾崩，后主实在是很年幼弱小，太傅受遗命之重，多么不容易啊！
English: Zhuge Zhan, a chamberlain, was the son of the chancellor Zhuge Liang, and a cousin of Zhuge Ke, and Zhang Ye wrote to him saying: The ruler of the Eastern Wu Kingdom has just passed away, and his heir apparent is really very young and weak, and it is not easy for the emperor to bear the weight of his last will and testament.

古文：亲以周公之才，犹有管、蔡流言之变，霍光受任，亦有燕、盖、上官逆乱之谋，赖成、昭之明，以免斯难耳。
现代文：像周公那样的才干，尚且有着管仲、蔡叔的流言变故，霍光接受任命，还有燕王旦、盖长公主、上官桀等人的谋逆之乱，仰赖周成王、汉昭帝的明达，才能免于这样的祸患罢了。
English: As talented as Zhou Gong was, he still had the rumors of Guanzhong and Uncle Cai, the appointment of Huo Guang, as well as the rebellious plots of Yan Wangdan, Princess Gai, Shangguan Xuan and others. It was only by relying on the wisdom of King Zhou Cheng and Emperor Han Zhao that he was able to avoid such calamities.

古文：昔每闻东主杀生赏罚，不任下人，又今以垂没之命，卒召太傅，属以后事，诚实可虑。
现代文：过去每次听说东吴国主杀生赏罚，不委任下人，又现在已极佳，又在即将去世前，突然召见太傅，将后事嘱托，实在是可以考虑的。
English: In the past, every time I heard that the ruler of the Eastern Wu Kingdom rewarded and punished those who killed without appointing subordinates, and now it is already excellent, and before he was about to die, he suddenly summoned Taifu to entrust the future, it is really possible to consider.

古文：加吴、楚剽急，乃昔所记，而太傅离少主，履敌庭，恐非良计长算之术也。
现代文：再加上吴、楚之地的百姓性情剽悍急躁，都是过去所记载的，而太傅离开少主，在敌人的地盘中步履维艰，恐怕不是长久的良好计策啊。
English: In addition, the people of the land of Wu and Chu have a fierce and impatient temperament, which has been recorded in the past, and the Taifu leaving the Shoshu and struggling in the enemy's territory is probably not a good long-term strategy.

古文：虽云东家纲纪肃然，上下辑睦，百有一失，非明者之虑邪？
现代文：虽然说东吴法纪井然，上下和睦，但百有一失，难道不是明智之人的谋略吗？
English: Although it is said that the East and the West are well-disciplined and harmonious, but there is always a mistake, isn't it the strategy of a wise person?

古文：取古则今，今则古也，自非郎君进忠言於太傅，谁复有尽言者也！
现代文：效法古代来做现在的准则，现在就和古代一样，如果不是您向太傅进忠言，还有谁能说这些话呢？
English: If you don't give advice to Taifu, who else can say these things?

古文：旋军广农，务行德惠，数年之中，东西并举，实为不晚，愿深采察。 
现代文：大军退回，推广农桑，推行德政恩惠，几年之间吴蜀共同起兵，实在还不晚呢，希望你好好的考虑这件事。 
English: It is not too late for the army to return, to promote the agricultural mulberry, to promote the German political favors, and to jointly raise an army in Wu Shu in a few years. I hope you will consider this matter well.

古文：恪竟以此夷族。嶷识见多如是类。
现代文：诸葛恪最后因此被灭族，张嶷的见多识广大多像这样子。
English: Zhuge Ke was finally exterminated as a result, and Zhang Ye's erudition and knowledge were mostly like this.

古文：在郡十五年，邦域安穆。
现代文：张嶷在郡中十五年，城中安稳。
English: Zhang Ye has been in the county middle school for fifteen years, and he is stable in the city.

古文：屡乞求还，乃徵诣成都。
现代文：他多次请求返回京城，朝廷就征召他到成都。
English: He repeatedly requested to return to Beijing, and the imperial court summoned him to Chengdu.

古文：民夷恋慕，扶毂泣涕，过旄牛邑，邑君襁负来迎，及追寻至蜀郡界，其督相率随嶷朝贡者百馀人。
现代文：当地百姓都很留恋他，扶着车马流着泪追随，他经过旄牛县，县中的邑君带着老少来迎接他，一直追到蜀郡县内，首领率领相随前来朝贡的有一百多人。
English: The local people are very nostalgic for him, supporting the chariots and horses to follow with tears. He passed through Yagyu County, and the townspeople in the county came to meet him with the old and the young, and chased him all the way to Shu County. There were more than a hundred people who came to pay tribute with the leaders.

古文：嶷至，拜荡寇将军，慷慨壮烈，士人咸多贵之，然放荡少礼，人亦以此讥焉，是岁延熙十七年也。
现代文：张嶷入朝后，被任命为荡寇将军，他为人慷慨壮烈，世人都很看重他，但是放荡不注重礼节，很多人也因此讥讽他，这一年是延熙十七年。
English: After Zhang Xuan entered the imperial court, he was appointed the general of the robber bands. He was a generous and strong man, and the world valued him very much. However, he did not pay attention to propriety, and many people ridiculed him for it. This year is the 17th year of Yanxi.

古文：魏狄道长李简密书请降，卫将军姜维率嶷等因简之资以出陇西。
现代文：魏朝的狄道长李简写密信前来请降，卫将军姜维率领张嶷等人看着李简的资助资助出兵陇西。
English: Li Jian, the head of Di Dao in the Wei Dynasty, wrote a secret letter to request surrender, and Wei General Jiang Wei, led by Zhang Ye and others, watched Li Jian's financial support to send troops to the west of Shaanxi.

古文：既到狄道，简悉率城中吏民出迎军。
现代文：到了狄道，李简率领城中的全部官吏百姓出来迎接蜀军。
English: When they arrived in Dido, Li Jian led all the officials and people in the city to come out to meet the Shu army.

古文：军前与魏将徐质交锋，嶷临陈陨身，然其所杀伤亦过倍。
现代文：在军前跟魏朝将领徐质交锋，张嶷临阵身死，但他所杀伤的敌人也有很多。
English: In front of the army, he had a confrontation with the Wei Dynasty general Xu Jian, and Zhang Xuan was killed in the battle, but he also killed many enemies.

古文：既亡，封长子瑛西乡侯，次子护雄袭爵。
现代文：他去世之后，朝廷封他的长子张瑛为西乡侯，次子张护雄继承爵位。
English: After his death, the imperial court made his eldest son Zhang Ying the lord of Xixiang, and his second son Zhang Youxiong inherited the title.

古文：南土越巂民夷闻嶷死，无不悲泣，为嶷立庙，四时水旱辄祀之。
现代文：南方的越巂郡的百姓少数民族得知张嶷去世，大家都很悲痛，并为他建立祠庙，一年四季水旱季节都祭祀他。
English: When the ethnic minority people of Yuexiu County in the south learned of Zhang Ye's death, they were very sad. They built a temple for him and worshiped him all year round.

古文：评曰：黄权弘雅思量，李恢公亮志业，吕凯守节不回，马忠扰而能毅，王平忠勇而严整，张嶷识断明果，咸以所长，显名发迹，遇其时也。
现代文：评曰：黄权宽洪大度，气量宏大，李恢怀着对公家功业的志向，吕凯守着节操不肯改变，马忠勤劳又果毅，王平忠勇而又严整，张嶷能明察又果断，他们都是以自己的所长而得以显名发达，是因为正得其时啊。
English: The review said: Huang Quan is broad-minded and magnanimous, Li Hui is ambitious for public service, Lu Kai adheres to discipline and refuses to change, Ma Zhong is diligent and resolute, Wang Ping is loyal and courageous, and Zhang Ye is clear-sighted and decisive. They are all famous and developed with their own strengths, because it is the right time.

