古文：韩褒，字弘业，颍川颍阳人也。
现代文：韩褒字弘业，颍川颍阳人。
English: Han Bao Zi Hongye, Shichuan Shiyangren.

古文：祖环，魏平凉郡守、安定郡公。
现代文：祖父韩瞔，官魏平凉郡守、安定郡公。
English: His grandfather, Han Zheng, was the governor of Wei Pingliang County and the head of Anning County.

古文：父演，恆州刺史。
现代文：父韩演，曾任恒州刺史。
English: His father, Han Yun, was once the governor of Hengzhou.

古文：褒少有志尚，好学而不守章句。
现代文：韩褒少年时就有不俗的志向，喜欢读书而又不拘守章句。
English: When he was a young boy, Han Bo had a great ambition, he liked to read and did not stick to the rules.

古文：其师怪问之，对曰： 文字之间，常奉训诱，至于商较异同，请从所好。 
现代文：他的老师感到奇怪，询问原因，韩褒回答说 ：读书常常是为了从中得到教益，至于商榷考较其异同，则是各有所好。 
English: His teacher was puzzled and asked why, to which Han Bo replied: "Reading books is often to learn from them, but as for business examinations, their differences are better than their similarities.

古文：师因此奇之。
现代文：老师因此而把韩褒看作奇人。
English: As a result, the teacher regards Han Bo as a miracle worker.

古文：及长，涉猎经史，深沈有远略。
现代文：长大之后，韩褒熟读经史，深沉而有远大谋略。
English: After growing up, Han Bo was familiar with reading history, and had a profound and far-reaching strategy.

古文：属魏室丧乱，避地夏州。
现代文：适逢魏国战乱，韩褒躲避到夏州。
English: When war broke out in Wei, Han Bo fled to Xiazhou.

古文：时周文帝为刺史，素闻其名，待以客礼。
现代文：这个时候，周文帝任夏州刺史，平常就听说过韩褒的名字，将韩褒当作客人来对待。
English: At this time, Emperor Zhou Wen, who was in charge of the history of Xiazhou, usually heard the name of Han Bo, and treated Han Bo as a guest.

古文：及贺拔岳为侯莫陈悦所害，诸将遣使迎周文。
现代文：等到贺拔岳被侯莫陈悦杀害，诸将派遣使者迎接周文帝。
English: By the time He Batyue was killed by Hou Mo Chen Yue, various emissaries would be sent to meet Emperor Zhou.

古文：周文问以去留之计，褒曰： 此天授也，何可疑乎！ 
现代文：周文帝征询韩褒的意见，问他是去还是留，韩褒说 ：这是上天的授意，还有什么怀疑的呢？ 
English: Emperor Wen of Zhou solicited Han Bo's opinion and asked him whether he wanted to go or stay. Han Bo said, "This is God's will. What is there to doubt?"

古文：周文纳焉。
现代文：周文帝采纳了韩褒的建议。
English: Emperor Zhou adopted Han Bo's suggestion.

古文：及为丞相，引为录事参军。赐姓侯吕陵氏。
现代文：等到周文帝为丞相，引荐韩褒为录事参军，赐姓侯吕陵氏。
English: Wait until Emperor Zhou Wen is the prime minister, introduce Han Bo to join the army as a conscript, and give him the surname of Hou Luling.

古文：大统初，迁行台左丞，赐爵三水县伯、丞相府从事中郎，出镇淅、郦。
现代文：西魏文帝大统初年，升任行台左丞，赐爵三水县伯、丞相府从事中郎，出京镇守淅、郦二地。
English: In the first year of the Western Wei Emperor Wenzong, he was promoted to Gangdai Zuojie, given the title of Sanshui County magistrate, and engaged in the middle-ranking position at the Prime Minister's Office, and went to Beijing to guard the capital and two provinces.

古文：居二年，徵拜丞相府司马，进爵为侯。
现代文：过了两年，升任丞相府司马，晋爵位为侯。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to the post of secretary of the chancellor's office, and given the title of marquis.

古文：出为北雍州刺史。
现代文：出任北雍州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the chief historian of North Yongzhou.

古文：州带北山，多有盗贼。
现代文：雍州北面一带多山，山中多有盗贼。
English: The area north of Yongzhou is mountainous, and there are many thieves in the mountains.

古文：褒密访之，并豪右所为也，而阳不之知。
现代文：韩褒私下查访，发现都是当地豪强干的。
English: Han Bo paid a private visit and found that it was all the work of local strongmen.

古文：厚加礼遇，谓曰： 刺史起自书生，安知督盗？
现代文：他表面上装做不知道这事，还用更丰厚的礼仪对待他们，对他们说 ：我原是书生，哪里知道缉拿盗贼之事？
English: On the surface, he pretended not to know about it, and treated them with even more lavish etiquette, saying to them: I used to be a student, how did I know about catching thieves?

古文：所赖卿等共分其忧耳。 
现代文：还要依靠诸位为我分担忧愁才是。 
English: I also have to rely on you to worry about me.

古文：乃悉召杰黠少年素为乡里患者，置为主帅，分其地界，有盗发而不获者，以故纵论。
现代文：于是就把百姓平常就害怕的那些凶悍狡黠的少年悉数召来，任命主帅，划分地界，捕捉盗贼。若有偷盗抢劫之类的事发生，而又没有抓获盗贼，就以故意纵逃罪论处。
English: So he summoned all those fierce and cunning boys whom the people usually feared, appointed a commander, divided the territory, and caught the thieves. If there were thefts and robberies, and the thieves were not caught, they would be punished with the crime of intentional evasion.

古文：于是诸被署者莫不惶惧，皆首伏曰： 前盗发者，并某等为之。 
现代文：于是，那些被召来的人没有一个不害怕的，都低头认罪，说 ：从前发生的盗窃之事，都是我们这些人干的。 
English: And there was not a man among them that was not afraid, and they all fell down, and confessed, and said, We have sinned, and have committed all the thefts that have ever been committed.

古文：所有徒侣，皆列其姓名，或亡命隐匿者，并悉言其所在。
现代文：并将同伙的姓名都开列出来，有些逃命在外和隐藏起来的人的地址，也都一一说了出来。
English: He also listed the names of his accomplices and the addresses of some of those who had fled for their lives or were hiding.

古文：褒乃取盗名簿藏之，因大榜州门曰： 自知行盗者，可急来首，即除其罪。
现代文：韩褒把盗贼的名单藏起来，在州门张布大榜，榜文称： 自知行盗有罪的人，可迅速来自首，即免除其罪。
English: Han Bo hid the list of thieves and put up a large poster at the state gate. The poster said: Those who are guilty of theft can quickly surrender, that is, they are absolved of their crime.

古文：尽今月不首者，显戮其身，籍没妻子，以赏前首者。 
现代文：到了这个月底还不来自首的人，当众屠戮其身，妻子儿女籍没入官，用以奖赏先前首告的人。 
English: By the end of the month, those who had not yet turned themselves in were publicly butchered, and their wives and children were stripped of their official titles, which were used to reward those who had previously turned themselves in.

古文：旬日之间，诸盗咸悉首尽。
现代文：十日之内，诸盗贼全部来自首了。
English: Within ten days, all the thieves had turned themselves in.

古文：褒取名簿勘之，一无差异，并原其罪，许以自新，由是群盗屏息。
现代文：韩褒取出名单一一查验，无一差错，就一并免除了他们的罪，让他们悔过自新。因为这件事情，群盗就从此洗手不干了。
English: Han Bo took out the list, checked it one by one, and found no mistakes. He also absolved them of their sins and let them repent. Because of this matter, the bandits have since washed their hands of it.

古文：入为给事黄门侍郎，迁侍中，除都督、西凉州刺史。
现代文：韩褒入京任给事黄门侍郎，升任侍中。改任都督、西凉州刺史。
English: Han Bo entered Beijing and was given the post of Huangmen waiter, and was promoted to the position of chamberlain. He was then appointed the governor of the capital, and became the governor of West Liangzhou.

古文：羌胡之俗，轻贫弱，尚豪富。
现代文：羌胡风俗，看不起贫穷弱小之人，崇尚豪强富裕。
English: beards, despise the poor and the weak, and worship the powerful and the rich.

古文：豪富之家，侵渔百姓，同于仆录。
现代文：豪门富户鱼肉平民百姓，把他们视同仆人和奴隶。
English: Wealthy families prey on the common people, treating them like servants and slaves.

古文：故贫者日削，豪者益富。
现代文：所以贫穷的人越来越穷，豪富之家越来越富。
English: So the poor get poorer and the rich get richer.

古文：褒乃悉募贫人，以充兵士，优复其家，蠲免徭赋。
现代文：韩褒就把贫穷的人都招募在一起，让他们当兵，优待其家人，免除他们的徭役赋税。
English: Han Bo recruited poor people together, made them soldiers, gave preferential treatment to their families, and exempted them from paying taxes.

古文：又调富人财物以振给之。
现代文：又调拨富人的财物赈济穷人。
English: He also distributed the goods of the rich to the poor.

古文：每西城商货至，又先尽贫者市之。
现代文：每逢西域的商货到西凉，先让穷人买卖。
English: Whenever goods from the western region come to Xiliang, the poor are allowed to buy and sell first.

古文：于是贫富渐均，户口殷实。
现代文：于是贫富的差距缩小了，家家户户都富起来。
English: As a result, the gap between the rich and the poor narrowed, and every household became richer.

古文：废帝元年，为会州刺史。
现代文：西魏废帝元年，改任会州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Western Wei Dynasty, he was reappointed as a member of the State History Commission.

古文：后以骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，进爵为公，累迁汾州刺史。
现代文：后来，以骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，晋爵为公。又改任汾州刺史。
English: Later, he was given the titles of General of the Horse Cavalry, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Jin Jie. He was also appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：先是，齐寇数入，人废耕桑，前后刺史，莫能防扞。
现代文：赴任之前，北齐时常侵犯，当地人无法耕种。前后几任刺史，都没有办法抵御齐国入侵。
English: Before he took office, Northern Qi frequently invaded, and the local people could not farm. The previous and subsequent presidents had no way to resist the invasion of Qi.

古文：褒至，适会寇来，乃不下属县。
现代文：韩褒上任时，恰逢齐国入侵，韩褒就没到所属各县去。
English: When Han Bo took office, coinciding with the invasion of Qi, Han Bo did not go to the counties he belonged to.

古文：人既不备，以故多被抄掠。
现代文：当地人没有防备，所以财物被齐寇掳掠很多。
English: The locals were unprepared, so many of their belongings were looted by the Cheka.

古文：齐人喜于不觉，以为州先未集兵，今还必不能追蹑，由是益懈，不为营垒。
现代文：齐兵很高兴当地人没有防范，认为汾州先前没有聚集兵力防御，如今必定还是不会来追击，因此更加懈怠，没有构筑营垒。
English: Qi soldiers were glad that the locals did not take precautions, believing that Zhangzhou had not previously gathered troops for defense, and now they would certainly not come to pursue, so they were more slack and did not build a camp.

古文：褒已先勒精锐，伏北山中，分据险阻，邀其归路。
现代文：韩褒已事先集中了精锐部队，埋伏在北山中，分别占据险要，阻断齐兵的归路。
English: Han Bo had concentrated his elite troops in advance, and they lay in ambush in the northern mountains, separately occupying the critical points and blocking the return route of the Qi soldiers.

古文：乘其众怠，纵伏击之，尽获其众。
现代文：待齐兵路过时，乘其松懈无备，突出伏兵攻击，将齐兵全部俘获。
English: While waiting for the Qi soldiers to pass by, he took advantage of their laxness and unpreparedness to attack the ambushed soldiers, and captured all the Qi soldiers.

古文：故事，获生口者，并送京师，褒因是奏曰： 所获贼众，不足为多，俘而辱之，但益其忿耳。
现代文：按照惯例，抓获的俘虏，要一起送往京师。韩褒于是上书奏道 ：俘虏的齐兵，不算太多。如果因为是俘虏而侮辱他们，只会增加齐人的愤怒。
English: According to the usual practice, captured prisoners were to be sent to the capital together. Han Bo then wrote a letter saying: The captured Qi soldiers were not too many. If they were insulted because they were prisoners, it would only increase the anger of the Qi people.

古文：请一切放还，以德报怨。 
现代文：请求把他们全部放回，用恩德来回报怨恨。 
English: A plea to put them all back, to repay the grudge with grace.

古文：有诏许焉。
现代文：诏令准奏。
English: The imperial edict was carried out.

古文：自此抄兵颇息，迁河州总管，仍转凤州刺史。
现代文：自此以后，齐兵来骚扰的情况就少多了。韩褒升任河州总管，又转任凤州刺史。
English: Since then, there have been far fewer cases of harassment by the Qi soldiers. Han Bo was promoted to the post of the chief administrator of Hezhou, and then transferred to the post of the chief historian of Fengzhou.

古文：寻以年老请致事，诏许之。
现代文：不久，就以年老请求辞官还乡，诏令准许。
English: Soon after, he requested permission to return to his hometown on the grounds that he was too old, which was granted by imperial edict.

古文：天和五年，拜少保。
现代文：天和五年，官拜少保。
English: Ten years and five years later, he was promoted to Junior Security Officer.

古文：褒历事三帝，以忠厚见知。
现代文：韩褒历事三朝帝王，因忠厚而为皇帝所知。
English: Han Bo was the emperor of three dynasties and was known for his loyalty to the emperor.

古文：武帝深相敬重，常以师道处之，每入朝见，必有诏令坐，然始论政事。
现代文：周武帝十分敬重他，常以老师之礼对待他。每逢韩褒入朝觐见，必定是先有诏令坐，然后才开始议论政事。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu held him in high esteem and often treated him as a teacher. Whenever Han Bo entered the imperial court, he always sat down with the imperial edict before discussing politics.

古文：卒，赠泾、岐、燕三州刺史，谥曰贞。
现代文：死后，赠泾、岐、燕三州刺史，谥号为贞。
English: After her death, she was given the posthumous names of, 岐, and燕. Her posthumous name was Zhen.

古文：子弘安、弘智，并知名。
现代文：子继伯继承爵位。供职隋朝，官至卫尉少卿。
English: His son succeeded his peerage. He served in the Sui Dynasty, rising to the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards.

古文：张轨，字元轨，济北临邑人也。父崇，高平令。
现代文：张轨字元轨，济北临邑人，父张崇，曾任高平令。
English: Zhang Gui, also known as Yuan Gui, was born in Linyi, Jibei Province. His father, Zhang Chong, was a Gaoping official.

古文：轨少好学，志识开朗。
现代文：张轨自幼喜爱读书，志大识广。
English: Zhang Rail has loved reading since childhood and has a broad knowledge.

古文：初在洛阳，家贫，与乐安孙树仁为莫逆之友，每易衣而出，以此见称。
现代文：当初住在洛阳，家中贫穷，与乐安人孙树仁成为莫逆之交，常常是你穿着我的衣服，我穿着你的衣服结伴外出，并因此受到人们的称赞。
English: At the beginning, I lived in Luoyang, my family was poor, and I became inseparable friends with Sun Shujin, a person from Le'an. You often wore my clothes, and I went out with you wearing your clothes, and people praised me for it.

古文：轨常谓所亲曰： 秦、雍之间，必有王者。 
现代文：张轨常常对亲近的人说 ：秦雍两地之间，必定有王者出现。 
English: Zhang Rail often said to people close to him: Between Qin and Yong, there must be a king.

古文：尔硃氏败后，遂杖策入关。
现代文：朱氏失败后，张轨驰马入关中。
English: After Zhu's failure, Zhang Rail's horse entered the customs.

古文：贺拔岳以轨为记室参军。典机密。
现代文：贺拔岳任命张轨为记室参军，掌管机密要务。
English: He Batyue appointed Zhang Liao as the secretary to join the army, in charge of confidential affairs.

古文：寻转仓曹。
现代文：很快转任仓曹。
English: He was soon transferred to Cang Cao.

古文：时谷籴踊贵，或有请贷官仓者，轨曰： 以私害公，非吾宿志。
现代文：这时正值谷价猛涨，有人让他把官仓的粮食拿出去卖高价。张轨说： 为了个人而损害大家，不是我想要干的。
English: At this time, grain prices were skyrocketing, and someone asked him to take the grain from the government warehouse and sell it at a high price. Zhang Liao said: I don't want to harm everyone for the sake of individuals.

古文：济人之难，讵得相违？ 
现代文：应该帮助人度过危难，怎么能够反而乘人之危呢？ 
English: If we are supposed to help people get through a crisis, how can we instead take advantage of their peril?

古文：乃卖所服衣物，籴粟以振其乏。
现代文：他卖掉了穿的衣服，买粮食救济贫穷的人。
English: He sold the clothes he was wearing to buy food to help the poor.

古文：及岳被害，周文帝以轨为都督，从征侯莫陈悦。
现代文：贺拔岳被杀害后，周文帝任命张轨为都督，一起征讨侯莫陈悦。
English: After He Batur was killed, Emperor Zhou appointed Zhang Rail as the governor of the capital, and together they fought against Hou Mo and Chen Yue.

古文：悦平，使于洛阳，见领军斛斯椿。
现代文：平定了侯莫陈悦，张轨出使洛阳，面见洛阳领军斛斯椿。
English: Hou Mo and Chen Yue were pacified, Zhang Rail sent an envoy to Luoyang, and met Luoyang's leading army, Shisqin.

古文：椿曰： 高欢逆谋，已传行路，人情西望，以日为年，未知宇文何如贺拔也？ 
现代文：斛斯椿说： 高欢阴谋篡政之事，到处都在传说。人心都向往西面，在这里度日如年。不知宇文和贺拔相比怎么样？ 
English: Gao Huan's conspiracy to usurp power is a legend everywhere. People's hearts yearn for the West, and they spend their days here as if they were years old. I don't know how Uwen compares to He Ba.

古文：孝武西迁，除中书舍人，封寿张县子，肃著作佐郎，修起居注，迁给事黄门侍郎，兼吏部郎中。
现代文：张轨说： 宇文公文足以治理国家，武足以平定叛乱。至于见识之高、谋事之远，不是我这个愚笨之人所能测度的。 斛斯棒说： 确实像你说的这样的话，宇文公真是可依恃的人啊！ 周文帝为行台，任张轨为郎中。
English: Zhang Liao said, "Uwen Gongwen is enough to govern the country, and Wu Rong is enough to quell the rebellion. As for how far-sighted and far-sighted he is, it is not something that I, a stupid person, can measure." Zou Shibo said, "Indeed, as you said, Uwen Gong is really a person you can lean on! Emperor Zhou Wen is the leader, and Zhang Liao is his junior.

古文：出为河北郡守。
现代文：出京任河北郡守。
English: He went to Beijing to serve as Hebei County Governor.

古文：在郡三年，声绩甚著，临人政术，有循吏之美。
现代文：在河北郡守任三年，声名政绩都十分显著，治理有术，有循吏之美称。
English: He has been in office for three years in Hebei County, and his reputation and political achievements are very remarkable. He is known for his skillful governance and his reputation as a disciplinarian.

古文：大统间言宰人者，多推尚之。
现代文：大统年间商议宰相人选，许多人推举张轨。
English: During the Great Reign, the candidates for prime minister were discussed, and many people recommended Zhang Rong.

古文：入为丞相府从事中郎，行武功郡事。
现代文：入京任丞相府从事中郎，代掌武功郡事。
English: Entered the capital and was appointed to the chancellor's office, where he worked as a middle-ranking official and was in charge of military affairs.

古文：章武公导出镇秦州，以轨为长史。
现代文：章武公宇文导为秦州刺史，任命张轨为长史。
English: Zhang Wukong's literary guidance is the history of Qin State, and Zhang Liao's appointment is the long history.

古文：废帝元年，进车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
现代文：西魏废帝元年，晋位为车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of the Western Wei Dynasty, he was promoted to the general of chariot and cavalry, the third secretary of ceremony and etiquette, and the attendant of horseback riding.

古文：二年，赐姓宇文氏，行南秦州事。
现代文：二年，赐姓宇文，代行南秦州事。
English: Two years later, he was given the surname Uwen and became the acting governor of South Qin Province.

古文：李彦，字彦士，梁郡下邑人也。
现代文：恭帝二年，升任度支尚书，又任陇右府长史。死在任上，谥号为质。李彦字彦士，梁郡下邑人。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Gong, he was promoted to Doushi Shangshu, and was also appointed as the governor of Shiyu Prefecture. He died in office, and his posthumous name was given as a pledge. Li Yan (李彦) was a resident of Shimo-eup, Liang County.

古文：祖光之，魏淮南郡守。
现代文：祖父李光之，任魏淮南郡守。
English: His grandfather, Li Guangzhi, was the governor of Weihuainan County.

古文：父静，南青州刺史。
现代文：父李静，官任南青州刺史。
English: Her father, Li Jing, was the official historian of South Qingzhou.

古文：彦少有节操，好学慕古。
现代文：李彦少年时就有气节操行，喜爱读书，仰慕古风。
English: When Li Yan was a boy, he had a strong will, loved to read, and admired the ancient style.

古文：孝昌中，解褐奉朝请。
现代文：孝昌年间，入朝为官。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaochang, he entered the imperial court and became an official.

古文：孝武入关，兼著作佐郎，修起居注。
现代文：孝武帝入主关中，李彦兼任著作佐郎修起居注。
English: Emperor Xiaowu entered the main gate, and Li Yan concurrently served as the author of "Saro Osamu's Residence Note."

古文：大统初，除通直散骑侍郎，累迁左户郎中。
现代文：大统初年，授通直散骑侍郎之职，又改任左户郎中。
English: In the first year of the grand unification, he was given the post of Jikisanjijijiro, and was also reassigned to the position of Sado Roju.

古文：十二年，省三十六曹为十二部，改授户部郎中，封平阳县子。
现代文：大统十二年，精简三十六曹为十二部。李彦改任户部郎中，封平阳县子。
English: In the twelfth year of the Great Reunification, the Thirty-six Cao were reduced to twelve. Li Yan was reappointed as a junior member of the household department and was given the title of Pingyang County son.

古文：废帝初，拜尚书右丞，转左丞。
现代文：废帝初年，升尚书右丞，转左丞。
English: In the first year of the deposed emperor, Shosho was promoted to Shujo, and then to Sajo.

古文：彦在尚书十有五载，属军国草创，庶务殷繁，留心省阁，未尝懈怠。
现代文：李彦在尚书省任职十五年，参与军国大事，杂务繁多，尽心尽责，从未懈怠。
English: Li Yan has served in Shangshu for fifteen years. He has participated in military and national affairs, and has a lot of chores. He is conscientious and never slacks off.

古文：断决如流，略无疑滞。
现代文：处理事情果断迅速，一点也不耽搁。
English: Deal with things decisively and quickly, without delay.

古文：台阁莫不叹其公勤，服其明察。
现代文：台阁同仁没有人不赞扬他公正勤劳，不佩服他见事英明的。
English: There is no one among his cabinet colleagues who does not praise his fairness and diligence, and admire his wisdom.

古文：迁给事黄门侍郎，仍左丞。
现代文：改任给事黄门侍郎，后仍任尚书左丞。
English: He was reassigned to the post of Huangmen waiter, and later he still held the post of Shangshu Zuo.

古文：赐姓宇文氏。
现代文：赐姓宇文氏。
English: He was given the surname Umun.

古文：出为鄜州刺史。
现代文：出京为州刺史。
English: The departure from Kyoto is a milestone in the history of the prefecture.

古文：六官建，改授军司马，进爵为伯。
现代文：李彦因东夏还未平定，故辞刺史之职，诏令允准。升任兵部尚书，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，仍兼任著作郎。
English: Since the Eastern Xia had not yet been pacified, Li Yan resigned from the post of scribe, which was approved by the imperial edict. He was promoted to the post of military secretary, the post of cavalry general, and the post of secretary of the Kaifu ceremony. He also served as a scribe.

古文：彦性谦恭，有礼节，虽居显要，于亲党之间恂如也。
现代文：朝廷设六官建制，李彦改任军司马，晋爵号为伯。李彦生性谦恭，有礼节，虽官居要职，对亲戚朋友同僚仍然谦恭有礼。
English: The Imperial Court set up a six-branch system, and Li Yan was changed to the Secretary of the Army, and his peerage was given to Bo. Li Yan was naturally courteous and polite, and although he held important positions, he was still courteous and polite to his relatives, friends, and colleagues.

古文：轻财重义，好施爱士，时论以此称之，然素多疾，而勤于莅职，虽沈顿枕席，犹理务不辍，遂至于卒。
现代文：轻财物，重义气，喜助人，爱文士，时论因此而对他称赞备至。然而，因为平常身体多病，又勤勤恳恳地恪守职责，即使是病倒在床，仍不停止处理事务，以至于病死。
English: He was a man of few possessions, a man of great integrity, a kind and helpful man, and a lover of literature, for which he was often praised. However, because he was often ill and diligently fulfilled his duties, even when he was sick in bed, he did not stop working on his business, and he died of his illness.

古文：谥曰敬。
现代文：谥号为敬。
English: His nickname is Zeng.

古文：彦临终遗诫其子等曰： 昔人以窾木为椟，葛累为缄，下不乱泉，上不泄臭，实吾平生之志也。但事既矫枉，恐为世士所讥。
现代文：临终的时候，李彦告诫儿子等人说： 过去有人用空木作为棺材，再用藤条捆扎起来，下不紊乱泉水，上不泄露气味。这其实也是我平生的志愿，但是，事情做得过头了，恐怕世人要说三道四。
English: On his deathbed, Li Yan cautioned his son and others, saying: "In the past, some people used empty wood as coffins, then tied them with rattan, sprinkled spring water, and did not leak odor. This is actually my lifelong wish, but things have been overdone, and I'm afraid the world will have something to say.

古文：今可敛以时服，葬于硗脊之地，勿用明器、刍涂及仪卫等。
现代文：如今，可以用现在的衣服装殓，把我埋葬在坚硬而贫瘠的地方，不要用玉器、草饰和仪仗之类的陪葬品。
English: Now, I can be dressed in my current clothes and buried in a hard and barren place, without the use of funerary objects such as jade, grass ornaments and ceremonial weapons.

古文：尔其今哉。 
现代文：你们要把我的话放在心上啊！ 
English: You must take my words to heart!

古文：朝廷嘉焉。不夺其志。
现代文：朝廷赞赏他这种薄葬的想法，就按他的意愿做了。
English: The court appreciated his idea of a light funeral and did as he wished.

古文：子升明嗣。
现代文：子癉明继承父亲的爵位。
English: Zixu Ming inherited his father's title.

古文：少历显职。
现代文：年纪不大就做了高官。
English: He became a high-ranking official at a young age.

古文：大象末，太府中大夫、仪同大将军。
现代文：大象末年，官至太府中大夫、仪同大将军。
English: In the last years of his life, he rose through the ranks to the position of Taifu Junior Doctor and General of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：仕隋，终于齐州刺史。
现代文：供职隋朝，官终齐州刺史。
English: He served in the Sui Dynasty, and eventually became the governor of Qizhou.

古文：辛庆之，字余庆，陇西狄道人也。
现代文：子仁政，官长安县长。义军至长安，以罪诛之。辛庆之字余庆，陇西狄道人。
English: Zi Rensheng, the governor of Chang'an County, the leader of the rebels to Chang'an, was sentenced to death. Xinqing's word is Yuqing, and he was a Taoist.

古文：世为陇右著姓。
现代文：辛姓世代为陇西大姓。
English: The generation with the surname Xin is the largest in Shaanxi Province.

古文：父显宗，冯翊郡守，赠雍州刺史。
现代文：父辛显宗，官至冯翊郡守，赠雍州刺史。
English: His father, Xin Xianzong, was a high-ranking official and the governor of Fengye County, and he was given the title of Yongzhou Sashihong.

古文：庆之少以文学徵诣洛阳，对策第一，除秘书郎。
现代文：辛庆之少年时就因文采出众被征召到洛阳，对策取得第一，授官秘书郎。
English: When Xinqing was a boy, he was conscripted to Luoyang for his outstanding literary work. He won the first prize for his countermeasures and was awarded the post of secretary.

古文：属尔硃氏作乱，魏孝庄帝令司空杨津为北道行台，节度山东诸军以讨之。
现代文：时逢朱氏叛乱，魏孝庄帝令司空杨津为北道行台，指挥太行山以东的军队讨伐。
English: At the time of the Zhu rebellion, Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Wei Dynasty ordered Siku Yangjin to serve as the governor of North Gangdai and to command the army to the east of Taihang Mountain.

古文：津启庆之为行台左丞，与参谋议。
现代文：杨津起用辛庆之为行台左丞，参与军机大事。
English: Yang Tzu started to use Xin Qing as a go-between to participate in military affairs.

古文：至鄴，闻孝庄帝崩，遂出兗、冀间，谋结义徒，以赴国难。
现代文：到了邺城，得知孝庄帝驾崩的消息，辛庆之往来兖州和冀州之间，计划聚集义兵，救国家之危难。
English: When he arrived in Handan, he learned the news of Emperor Xiaozhuang's death. Xinqing traveled back and forth between Handan and Jizhou, planning to gather volunteers to save the country from danger.

古文：寻而节闵帝立，乃还洛阳。
现代文：不久，节闵帝即位，辛庆之就回到了洛阳。
English: Soon after, Emperor Jiechi ascended to the throne, and Xin Qingzhi returned to Luoyang.

古文：及贺拔岳为行台，复启庆之为行台吏部郎。
现代文：后来，贺拔岳为行台，重新起用辛庆之为行台吏部郎。
English: Later, He Baduyue became the governor of Xingtai and re-appointed Xinqing Ding as the governor of Xingtai.

古文：大统初，从周文帝东讨，为行台左丞。
现代文：大统初年，跟随周文帝东向讨伐，任行台左丞。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he followed Emperor Zhou Wen in the eastward crusade, and was appointed as the left assistant of Emperor Gaotai.

古文：六年，行河东郡事。
现代文：大统六年，代掌河东郡诸事。
English: In the sixth year of the Great Reunification, he was in charge of various affairs in Hedong County.

古文：九年，入为丞相府右长史，兼给事黄门侍郎，除度支尚书，复行河东郡事。
现代文：九年，入京为丞相府右长史，兼任给事黄门侍郎，授度支尚书之职，复任河东郡守。
English: In the ninth year, he entered Beijing as the chancellor of the imperial court, concurrently served as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, was awarded the post of Shishangshu, and was reinstated as the governor of Hedong County.

古文：迁南荆州刺史，加仪同三司。
现代文：改任南荆州刺史，加官仪同三司。
English: He was reappointed as the South Jingzhou Provincial Historian, and was promoted to the same position as the Third Division.

古文：庆之位遇虽隆，而率性俭素，车马衣服亦不尚华侈。
现代文：辛庆之虽然职高位隆，却任性自然，勤俭朴素，车马衣服，亦不要求华丽奢侈。
English: Although Xin Qingzhi is a high-ranking official, he is headstrong and natural, thrifty and simple, and does not require luxurious clothes.

古文：志量淹和，有儒者风度，特为当时所重。
现代文：志量宏大，有读书人的风度，特别为时议所推重。
English: He is ambitious and has the demeanor of a reader, which is especially important at this time.

古文：又以其经明行修。令与卢诞等教授诸王。
现代文：又因他精通经籍，操行高尚，受命与卢诞等人教授诸王。
English: Also, because of his proficiency in the classics and noble conduct, he was ordered to teach the kings with Lu Xizhao and others.

古文：庆帝二年，拜秘书监。
现代文：废帝二年，升任秘书监。
English: He was promoted to the position of secretary superintendent two years after the fall of the emperor.

古文：卒官。
现代文：死于官任。
English: He later died in office.

古文：子加陵，主寝上士。
现代文：子加授陵主寝上士。
English: His son was promoted to staff sergeant in charge of the mausoleum.

古文：庆之族子昂。
现代文：同族兄弟之子辛昂。
English: Sinon, the son of a brother from the same clan.

古文：昂字进君。
现代文：辛昂字进君。
English: Xin'angzhi Jinjun.

古文：数岁便有成人志行。
现代文：刚刚几岁就有成人的志向和行为。
English: At just a few years old, they have the aspirations and behaviors of adults.

古文：有善相人者，谓其父仲略曰： 公家虽世载冠冕，然名德富贵，莫有及此兒者。
现代文：有一个善于相面的人对辛昂的父亲仲略说 ：你们家虽然世世代代都有当官的，但名气、德行、富贵，没有人能赶上这个孩子。 
English: A person who was good at making friends said to Xin'an's father Zhonglu: Although your family has had officials for generations, no one can catch up with this child in terms of fame, virtue and wealth.

古文：仲略亦重昂志气。
现代文：仲略也很看重辛昂的志气，认为相面师说的很对。
English: Zhongli also values Cynon's ambition, and believes that the physiognomist is right.

古文：深以为然。年十八，侯景辟为行台郎中。
现代文：辛昂十八岁那年，侯景任命他为行台郎中。
English: When Xin'an was 18 years old, Hou Jing appointed him as a middle-ranking official in the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：景后来附，昂遂入朝，除丞相府行参军。
现代文：侯景后来归附北魏，辛昂于是入朝为官，任丞相府行参军。
English: Houjing was later annexed to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and Xin'an then entered the imperial court as an official, serving as chancellor of the imperial court and joining the army.

古文：后追论归朝勋，封襄城县男。
现代文：后来追论侯景归附北魏的功劳，辛昂因功封襄城县男爵。
English: Later, the merits of Houjing were attributed to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and Xin'an was awarded the title of Baron of Xiangcheng County.

古文：及尉迟迥伐蜀，昂占募从军。
现代文：尉迟迥进伐西蜀，辛昂应募随军。
English: Ye Xizhi marched into West Shuxi, and Xin'an was recruited to join the army.

古文：蜀平，迥表昂为龙州长史，领龙安郡事。
现代文：平定西蜀后，尉迟迥上表请任辛昂为龙州长史，兼任龙安郡守。
English: After subduing West Shuxu, he appointed Xin'an as the governor of Long An County and the governor of Long An County.

古文：州带山谷，旧俗生梗。
现代文：沿龙州一带都是山谷，民俗粗豪梗直。
English: All along the Longzhou area are valleys, and the folk customs are rude and obstreperous.

古文：昂威惠洽著，吏人畏而爱之。
现代文：辛昂恩威并施，当地吏民既畏惧而又喜爱他。
English: The local officials and people both feared and loved him.

古文：成都一方之会，风俗舛杂，迥以昂达于从政，复表昂行成都令。
现代文：成都是一方的都会，风俗相杂。尉迟迥因辛昂精于理政，又上表荐辛昂代理成都令。
English: Chengdu is a metropolis on the one hand, and the customs are mixed. Due to Xing'ang's proficiency in governance, he recommended Xing'ang as the acting Chengdu governor.

古文：昂到县。便与诸生与祭文翁学堂，因共欢宴，谓诸生曰： 子孝臣忠，师严友信，立身之要，如斯而已。
现代文：辛昂到了成都县治，就与县学诸生拜祭文翁学堂，因共欢宴，对诸生说： 子要孝，臣要忠，师要严，友要信，为人立身的根本，不过就是这些。
English: When Xin'an became the county magistrate of Chengdu, he and all the students of the county school went to worship the festival of the Wenweng School, and because they had a feast together, he said to all the students: Children should be filial, subjects should be loyal, teachers should be strict, and friends should be faithful. These are the fundamentals of being a good person.

古文：若不事斯语，何以成名？
现代文：如果不按这些话去做，凭什么成就功名？
English: If you don't act according to these words, on what basis can you claim credit for your achievements?

古文：各宜自勉，克成令誉。 
现代文：各自应该自己努力，成就美好的名声。 
English: Everyone should make their own efforts to achieve a good reputation.

古文：昂言切理至，诸生等并深感悟，归而告其父老曰： 辛君教诫如此，不可违之。 
现代文：辛昂的话说得实在而在理，诸生都十分感动，回去告诉他们的父老说： 辛君教诲告诫这样做，不可违背了他的好意。 
English: Hsin Aung's words were true and reasonable, and all the sentient beings were very moved. They went back and told their fathers: Hsin Jun's teachings and admonitions to do this must not go against his good intentions.

古文：于是井邑肃然，咸从其化。
现代文：于是成都县境秩序井然，人们都被辛昂的话感化了。
English: As a result, the borders of Chengdu County were well-ordered, and people were inspired by Xin'an's words.

古文：迁梓潼郡守。
现代文：改任梓潼郡守。
English: He was reappointed as the governor of Zaozhuang County.

古文：六官建，入为司隶上士，袭爵繁昌县公。
现代文：朝廷设立六官的建制后，入京任司隶上士，袭爵繁昌县公。
English: After the establishment of the six-official system by the imperial court, he entered Beijing as a staff sergeant and became a hereditary peer of Hanchang County.

古文：保定二年，为小吏部。
现代文：保定二年，任职小吏部。
English: After two years in Baoding, he was assigned to the petty officers' department.

古文：时益州殷阜，军国所资，经途艰险，每苦劫盗。
现代文：其时益州富足，国家需要的东西，从益州运出，沿途十分艰难，且常常被劫盗。
English: At that time, Yizhou was rich, and the things needed by the country were transported from Yizhou, along a very difficult route, and were often robbed.

古文：诏昂使于益、梁，军人之务皆委决焉。
现代文：诏令辛昂出使益州和梁州，两州的军事都由辛昂处理。
English: Zhao ordered Xin'an to dispatch troops to Yi Province and Liang Province. The military affairs of both provinces were handled by Xin'an.

古文：昂抚导荒梗，颇得宁静。
现代文：辛昂安抚开导灾民，运送物品的道路就安宁下来了。
English: Xin'an calmed down the disaster victims, and the road for transporting goods calmed down.

古文：天和初，陆腾讨信州蛮，诏昂便于通、渠等州运粮馈之。
现代文：天和初年，陆腾征讨信州蛮人，诏令辛昂从通州、渠州等地运送粮草给陆腾的大军使用。
English: In the first year of Tianhe, Lu Teng conquered Shinshu barbarians and ordered Xin'an to transport grain and grass from Tongzhou, Quzhou and other places to Lu Teng's army for use.

古文：时临、信、楚、合等诸州人庶多从逆，昂谕以祸福，赴者如归。
现代文：这个时候，临、信、楚、合等各州的百姓多顺从叛逆。辛昂晓以利害福祸，很多人便归顺而来。
English: At this time, many people in the provinces of Lin, Xin, Chu, He and so on obeyed the rebellion. Xin Anxiao took advantage of the benefits and disadvantages, and many people came to obey.

古文：乃令老弱负粮，壮夫拒战，莫有怨者。
现代文：辛昂令老弱之人背负粮食，让精壮的男子拒敌作战，大家毫无怨言。
English: Xin'an made the old and weak people carry grain, and let the strong men refuse to fight, and everyone had no complaints.

古文：使还，属巴州万荣郡人反叛，围郡城，昂于是遂募通、开二州，得三千人，倍道兼行，出其不意。
现代文：出使方还，又遇巴州万荣郡人反叛，围攻郡城。辛昂于是招募通、开二州之民，得三千精壮，快速赶赴巴州，以求出其不意。
English: The dispatching party also encountered the rebellion of the people of Wanrong County, Bazhou, and besieged the county seat. Xin'an then recruited the people of Tong and Kai of the two states, got three thousand strong, and quickly rushed to Bazhou in order to surprise them.

古文：又令其众皆作中国歌，直趣贼垒。
现代文：又令众军士高唱中原的歌曲，直取叛军营垒。
English: He also ordered all the sergeants to sing the songs of the Central Plains and directly take the rebel camp.

古文：谓有大军赴救，望风瓦解。
现代文：叛军以为有大军来救，闻风而散。
English: The rebels thought that a large army would come to their rescue, but the wind blew them away.

古文：朝廷嘉其权以济事，诏梁州总管、杞国公亮即于军中赏昂奴婢二十口，缯彩四百匹。
现代文：朝廷表彰辛昂行权宜救巴州之围的事，诏令梁州总管、杞国公宇文亮即于军中赏赐辛昂奴婢二十人，彩缎四百疋。
English: The imperial court commended Xin'ang for acting expediently to save the siege of Bazhou, and ordered the general manager of Liangzhou and the governor of Shandong Province, U Wenliang, to reward 20 slaves and maids of Xin'ang in the army with 400 baht.

古文：又以昂威信布于宕梁，遂表为渠州刺史。
现代文：又因辛昂威望信誉广布于宕渠，就命辛昂为渠州刺史。
English: In addition, because Xin'an's prestige and credibility were widely spread in the canal, he ordered Xin'an to make history in the canal.

古文：转通州。
现代文：转任通州刺史。
English: He was transferred to the post of Tongzhou chief historian.

古文：推诚布信，甚得夷獠欢心。
现代文：辛昂以诚相待，广布信义，甚得北方夷獠的欢心。
English: Xin'an treated each other with sincerity and spread sincerity, and even won the favor of the northern barbarians.

古文：秩满还京，首领皆随昂诣阙朝觐。
现代文：任满回京，夷獠首领都随辛昂进京朝觐。
English: After returning to Beijing, the leaders of the barbarians followed Xin'an to the imperial court in Beijing.

古文：恭帝初，徵拜黄门侍郎。
现代文：朝廷因辛昂同化融合夷部落，提升辛昂为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Due to Xing'ang's assimilation and integration of the Yi tribe, the imperial court promoted Xing'ang to the general of the imperial cavalry and the three divisions of the imperial guard.

古文：卒官。子宣礼，柱国府参军。
现代文：这时，晋公宇文护执掌朝政，辛昂稍稍被宇文护看重一些，武帝颇为怨恨辛昂。
English: At this time, Jin Gong Uwenfo was in charge of the imperial government, and Xin'an was slightly more important to Uwenfo, and Emperor Wu was quite resentful of Xin'an.

古文：杜杲，字子晖，京兆杜陵人也，祖建，魏辅国将军，赠蒙州刺史。
现代文：等到宇文护被诛杀，辛昂又受刑罚之苦，抑郁难伸，因此就死去了。杜杲字子晖，京兆杜陵人。祖父杜建，魏辅国将军，死赠蒙州刺史。
English: By the time Yu Wenzhou was killed, Xin'an had suffered punishment and depression, so he died. Du Xi Zi Zi, a resident of Beijing Zhaotong Mausoleum. Grandfather Du Jian, a general of Wei and Sui Dynasties, died as a gift to Mengzhou Zhishi.

古文：父皎，仪同三司、武都郡守。
现代文：父杜皎，仪同三司，官武都郡守。
English: His father, Du Xuan, was an official of the Third Division of the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the governor of Wudu County.

古文：杲学涉经史，有当世干略，其族父攒，清贞有识鉴，深器重之，常曰： 吾家千里驹也。 
现代文：杜杲学涉经史，有超世才干谋略。他的同族父辈杜攒，清明正直，有识鉴人才之能，十分器重杜杲，常说 ：杜杲是我家的千里驹。 
English: Du Xi's studies are related to the history of the scriptures, and he has a great talent for strategizing. He is a descendant of Du Xi's parents, who are clean and honest, and have the ability to discern talent. Du Xi is very important, and it is often said that: Du Xi is my family's great-grandson.

古文：攒时仕魏，为黄门侍郎，兼度支尚书、卫大将军、西道大行台，尚孝武妹新丰公主，因荐之朝廷。
现代文：杜攒当时供职魏朝，任黄门侍郎，兼任度支尚书、卫大将军、西道大行台，娶孝武妹新丰公主，因此将杜杲推荐给朝廷。
English: Du Nan was working for the Wei Dynasty at the time, serving as the Yellow Gate waiter, doubling as the governor of Shandong Province, the general of the Wei Dynasty, and the governor of the Western Road, and married Xiaowu's younger sister, Xinfeng Princess. Therefore, Du Nan was recommended to the imperial court.

古文：永熙三年，起家奉朝请。
现代文：永熙三年，入京为奉朝请。
English: In the third year of Yongxi, he entered Beijing to serve the emperor.

古文：周明帝初，为脩城郡守。
现代文：周明帝初，任修城郡守。
English: At the beginning of the Zhou Ming Dynasty, he was appointed governor of Xiucheng County.

古文：属凤州人仇周贡等构乱，攻逼脩城，杲信洽于人，部内遂无叛者。
现代文：适逢凤州人仇周贡等人作乱，攻逼修城。杜杲广施信义于人，所辖之内没有叛乱的人。
English: At the right time, the people of Fengzhou, such as Qiu Zhou Gong, made a riot, attacked and forced the city to be rebuilt. Du Yu extended his loyalty to the people, and there were no rebels within his jurisdiction.

古文：寻率郡兵与开府赵昶合势，并破平之。
现代文：不久，率领郡兵与开府赵昶合兵，一起平定叛乱。
English: Soon, he led the county soldiers and the soldiers of Kaifu Zhao Ying together to quell the rebellion.

古文：入为司会上士。
现代文：入京任司会上士。
English: Entered the capital and was appointed to the post of Senior Sergeant.

古文：初，陈文帝弟安成王顼为质于梁，及江陵平，顼随例迁长安。
现代文：当初，陈文帝的弟弟安成王陈顼在后梁为人质。到了平定江陵，陈顼依旧例迁往长安。
English: At first, Chen Wendi's younger brother, Ancheng Wang Chen Qi, was a hostage in Houliang. When he arrived in Pingdingjiangling, Chen Qi still moved to Chang'an.

古文：陈人请之，周文帝许而未遣。
现代文：陈国请求放还陈顼，周文帝虽然答应，却没有放他回去。
English: Chen Guo requested that Chen Xi be released, but although Zhou Wendi agreed, he did not let him go back.

古文：至是，帝欲归之，命杲使焉。
现代文：到杜杲入京为司会上士的时候，周文帝想放陈顼回陈国，就命杜杲为使者到陈国。
English: When Dujuan entered Beijing as an emissary, Zhou Wendi wanted to send Chen Rong back to Chen Province, so he ordered Dujuan to go to Chen Province as an emissary.

古文：陈文帝大悦，即遣使报聘，并赂黔中数州地，仍请画野分疆，永敦邻好。
现代文：陈文帝十分高兴，当即派遣使者答谢，并将黔中几个州割让给周国，请求划分疆界，永结睦邻之好。
English: Chen Wendi was very pleased, and immediately sent an envoy to thank him, and ceded several states in Yunnan to Zhou Guo, requesting the delimitation of boundaries and the establishment of good-neighborliness.

古文：以杲奉使称旨，进授都督，行小御伯，更往分界。
现代文：杜杲因出使称旨，提升为都督，领小御伯，又前往负责划分疆界。
English: Due to his mission, Du Xuan was promoted to the governor of the capital, the leader of the small imperial uncle, and he was also responsible for dividing the borders.

古文：陈于是归鲁山郡。
现代文：陈国于是归还鲁山郡给周国。
English: Chen Guo then returned Lushan County to Zhou Guo.

古文：帝乃拜顼柱国大将军，诏杲送之还国。
现代文：周文帝于是封陈顼柱国大将军，诏令杜杲送陈顼回国。
English: Emperor Zhou then made Chen Shanzhu the Grand General of the State and ordered Du Xi to send Chen Shanzhu back to China.

古文：陈文帝谓杲曰： 家弟今蒙礼遣，实是周朝之惠。
现代文：陈文帝对杜杲说 ：我的弟弟如今承蒙贵国以礼送回，实在是周朝的恩惠。
English: Chen Wenti said to Du Juan: My younger brother is now being sent back to you as a gift from your country. This is truly a favor from the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：然不还鲁山，亦恐未能及此。 
现代文：然而，陈国如果不归还鲁山郡，恐怕周朝也未必肯放我弟弟回来吧！ 
English: However, if Chen Guo does not return Lushan County, I am afraid that Zhou Dynasty may not be willing to let my brother come back!

古文：杲答曰： 安成之在关中，乃咸阳一布衣耳。
现代文：杜杲回答道 ：安成王在关中，乃是咸阳城的一个平民百姓。
English: Du Juan replied, "King Ancheng is in Guanzhong. He is a commoner from Xianyang City.

古文：然是陈之介弟，其价岂止一城？
现代文：然而，他却是您的弟弟，其价值岂止是一座城池？
English: However, he is your younger brother. Isn't he worth more than a city?

古文：本朝亲睦九族，恕己及物，上遵太祖遗旨，下思继好之义，所以发德音者，盖为此也。
现代文：我朝亲睦九族，宽恕兼及于物，上遵从太祖遗旨，下思继友好之意，我朝所以把您的弟弟送回来，就是这个原因。
English: It is for this reason that I am sending your brother back to you, for the sake of amity among the nine tribes, for the sake of forgiveness, for the sake of obeying the will of the great-grandfather, and for the sake of friendship.

古文：若知止侔鲁山，固当不贪一镇。
现代文：如果认为您的弟弟等同于一个鲁山郡，我朝固然不应贪得那一个小镇子。
English: If you think that your younger brother is equivalent to a Lushan County, I certainly should not covet that small town.

古文：况鲁山梁之旧地，梁即本朝籓臣，若以始末言之，鲁山自合归国。
现代文：况且鲁山郡原是梁国的土地，梁国是我朝的藩臣，若按前后来说，鲁山郡自然应该归于我国。
English: Moreover, Lushan County was originally the land of Liang Guo, who was a vassal of our dynasty. If you look at it logically, Lushan County should naturally belong to our country.

古文：云以寻常之土，易已骨肉之亲，使臣犹谓不可，何以闻诸朝廷！ 
现代文：若说是用平平常常的一片土地，来交换自己的骨肉之亲，我尚且认为不妥，怎么能说给朝中大臣听呢！ 
English: If it is said that it is not proper to exchange one's own flesh and blood relative for an ordinary piece of land, how can it be said to the Minister of the Middle Kingdom!

古文：陈文帝惭恧久之，乃曰： 前言戏之耳！ 自是接遇有加常礼。
现代文：陈文帝甚感惭愧，许久才说： 前面那些话不过是开开玩笑罢了！ 
English: Chen Wendi felt very ashamed, and it took him a long time to say: Those previous words were just a joke!

古文：及还，引升殿，亲降御座，执手以别。
现代文：自此以后，陈国的接待超出了常礼。杜杲回国时，随人来到大殿，陈文帝下座迎接，执手道别。
English: Since then, Chen Guo's reception has gone beyond the usual etiquette. When Du Juan returned to China, he came to the Great Hall with others to greet Chen Wendi and bid him farewell.

古文：朝廷嘉之，授大都督、小载师下大夫，行小纳言，复聘于陈。
现代文：朝廷嘉奖杜杲，授予大都督、小载师下大夫，行小纳言，再次出使陈国。
English: The imperial court commended Du Xuan, awarded him the title of grand governor, promoted him to the position of junior doctor, and sent Chen Guo on another mission.

古文：及华皎来附，诏令卫公直、都督元定等援之。
现代文：及华皎来投奔周国，诏令卫公宇文直、都督元定等增援。
English: And Hua Wei came to Zhou, and ordered reinforcements such as Wei Gong U Wenzhong and Governor Yuan Ding.

古文：定等并没。
现代文：元定等全军覆没。
English: The whole army, including Yuan Ding, was wiped out.

古文：自是连兵不息，东南搔动。
现代文：自此以后，连年征战不息，东南边境骚动不安。
English: Since then, the war has continued year after year, and the southeastern border has been in turmoil.

古文：武帝授杲御正中大夫，使陈，论保境息人之意。
现代文：武帝任命杜杲为御正中大夫出使陈国，陈说安定边境罢兵安民之意。
English: Emperor Wu appointed Du Xuan as the imperial middle doctor to dispatch Chen Guo, Chen said that the intention of stabilizing the border and the safety of the people.

古文：陈宣帝遣其黄门侍郎徐陵谓杲曰： 两国通好，彼朝受我叛人，何也？ 
现代文：陈宣帝派遣黄门侍郎徐陵对杜杲说 ：我们两国是友好邻邦，周国接受我国的叛徒，为什么呢？ 
English: Emperor Chen Xuan dispatched the Yellow Gate chamberlain Xu Ling to Du Juan to say: Our two countries are friendly neighbors, Zhou accepts our traitors, why?

古文：杲曰： 陈主昔在本朝，非慕义而至，主上授以柱国，位极人臣，子女玉帛，备礼将送，今主社稷，孰谓非恩？
现代文：杜杲说 ：陈国君主当初在我周朝，不是仰慕礼义而至，我们主上授给他柱国之职，使之位极人臣，子女玉帛，准备礼物派人送回。今日陈国君主的社稷，谁说不是周朝的恩德？
English: Du Juan said, "In the early days of my Zhou Dynasty, the Emperor of Chen did not come to admire courtesy and righteousness. Our Lord bestowed upon him the position of pillar state, making him a very important minister. His daughter, Yulong, prepared a gift and sent it back to him. Today, the empress of the Emperor of Chen, who is to say that this is not the kindness of the Zhou Dynasty?"

古文：郝烈之徒，边人狂狡，曾未报德，而先纳之。
现代文：郝烈一类人是边境百姓中的狂徒，陈国君主未曾报德，而先接纳郝烈那些狂徒。
English: The fierce people are the fanatics among the border people. The Chen monarch did not repay the kindness, but first accepted the fierce fanatics.

古文：今受华氏，正是相报。
现代文：我国如今接纳华皎，正是对陈国接受郝烈的报复。
English: By accepting Hua Wei, our country is now receiving fierce retaliation against Chen Guo.

古文：过自彼始，岂在本朝！ 
现代文：过错自你们开始，不在我国！ 
English: The fault begins with you, not with our country!

古文：陵曰： 彼纳华皎，志图吞噬。
现代文：徐陵说： 你们接纳华皎，志在吞并陈国。
English: Xuling said: You have accepted Hua Wei and are aiming to annex Chen Guo.

古文：此受郝烈。容之而已。
现代文：我们这里接纳郝烈，只是给他个存身之地而已。
English: We accept the violent here, we just give them a place to exist.

古文：且华皎方州列将。窃邑叛亡。
现代文：再说，华皎是一州将领，窃州邑叛亡。
English: Moreover, Hua Wei was a general of a prefecture, who plundered a prefecture and rebelled.

古文：郝烈一百许户，脱身逃窜。
现代文：郝烈所领仅一百人来户。脱身逃窜。
English: Only a hundred people came to the house, led by a fierce warrior. They escaped and fled.

古文：大小有异，岂得同年而语乎？ 
现代文：大小不一样，怎么能够相提并论呢？ 
English: The size is not the same, how can it be compared?

古文：杲曰： 大小虽殊，受降一也。
现代文：杜杲说： 大小虽然不一样，接受降敌是一样的。
English: Du Juan said: Although the size is not the same, it is the same to accept the surrender of the enemy.

古文：若论先后，本朝无失。 
现代文：若论先后，我国没有过错。 
English: If we talk about succession, our country is not at fault.

古文：陵曰： 周朝送主上还国，既以为恩，卫公共元定度江，孰云非怨？
现代文：徐陵说： 周朝送我国国君回国，既然认为是恩德，那么，卫公和元定等渡江来攻，谁说不是怨恨呢？
English: Xu Ling said: Zhou Dynasty sent our sovereign back to China. Since it is considered to be a blessing, then, Wei Gong and Yuan Ding and others crossing the river to attack, who says it is not a grudge?

古文：计恩与怨，亦足相埒。 
现代文：算一算恩德和怨恨，亦足以相抵了。 
English: It is enough to count the kindness and the resentment.

古文：杲曰： 元定等军败身囚，其怨已灭。
现代文：杜杲说： 元定等人兵败被俘，怨恨已消失了。
English: Du Juan said: Yuan Ding and the others were defeated and captured, and the grudge has disappeared.

古文：陈主负扆冯玉，其恩犹在。
现代文：陈国君主面南称帝，恩德还在。
English: Emperor Chen faces south and proclaims himself emperor, while Empress Dowager Ende is still at large.

古文：且怨由彼国，恩起本朝，以怨酬恩，未之闻也。 
现代文：何况怨恨起于你们的陈国，恩德始于我国。拿怨恨酬谢恩德，我还没有听说过这样的事情呢！ 
English: What's more, resentment originated in your Chen Guo, and benevolence began in our country. I have never heard of such a thing as taking resentment as a reward for benevolence!

古文：陵笑而不答。
现代文：徐陵笑而不答。
English: Xu Ling laughed and did not answer.

古文：杲因陈和通之便，陵具以闻。
现代文：杜杲于是陈说两国修好的好处，徐陵原原本本地报告给陈宣帝。
English: Du Qian then told Chen about the benefits of the two countries mending fences. Xu Lingyuan had originally reported to Chen Xuandi from home.

古文：陈宣许之，遂遣使来聘。
现代文：陈宣帝答应杜杲之请，于是就派遣使臣来周朝通好。
English: Emperor Chen Xuan agreed to Du Qian's request, so he sent an envoy to Zhou to negotiate.

古文：建德初，授司城中大夫，仍使于陈。
现代文：建德初年，杜杲任司城中大夫，仍旧出使到陈国。
English: In the first year of Jiande, Du Xuan was appointed as the chief physician of the city, and was still sent to Chen Province.

古文：宣帝谓杲曰： 长湖公军人等虽筑馆处之，然恐不能无北风之恋。
现代文：陈宣帝对杜杲说 ：长湖公元定等人虽然住在我国，但是恐怕不会没有故国之思。
English: Chen Xuandi said to Du Juan: Although people such as Changhu A.D. and Ding live in our country, I am afraid that they will not be without thoughts of their homeland.

古文：王褒、庾信之徒既羁旅关中，亦当有南枝之思耳。 
现代文：王褒、庚信那些人既然被困在关中，也会有思乡之念。 
English: Wang Bao and Geng Xin, since they are trapped in the detention center, will also have homesickness.

古文：杲揣陈宣意欲以元定军将士易王褒等，乃答之曰： 长湖总戎失律，临虽苟免，既不死节，安用此为！
现代文：杜杲揣摸陈宣帝的意思，是想用元定军将士交换王褒等人，就回答说： 元定统兵失律，遇到危难苟且偷生，既不能以死殉节，哪里还用得着这样做！
English: Du Qian guessed the meaning of Chen Xuan Di, that he wanted to exchange Wang Bao and others with the soldiers of the Yuan Ding Army, and replied: The Yuan Ding soldiers are out of order, and when they are in danger, they steal their own lives. Neither can they be martyred by death, but they still need to do so!

古文：且犹牛之一毛，何能损益。
现代文：再说，元定对于我国，如同牛之一毛，有什么帮助和损失呢！
English: Besides, for our country, like the hair of a cow, what are the benefits and losses of the Yuan Dynasty?

古文：本朝之议，初未及此。 
现代文：我国的和议，当初并没有涉及这个。 
English: Our peace talks did not initially cover this.

古文：陈宣帝乃止。
现代文：陈宣帝就不说什么了。
English: Chen Xuandi did not say anything.

古文：及杲还，至石头，又遣谓之曰： 若欲合从，共图齐氏，能以樊、邓见与，方可表信。 
现代文：杜杲回国时，到了石头城。陈宣帝又派人对杜杲说 ：若想南北联合，共同对付齐国，周国能把樊城、邓州给我国，方可表示诚意。 
English: When Du Qian returned to China, he arrived at Stone City. Chen Xuandi also sent people to Du Qian to say: If you want to unite North and South and jointly deal with Qi, Zhou can give our country Shicheng and Dengzhou, and then you can express your sincerity.

古文：杲答曰： 合从图齐，岂唯弊邑之利？
现代文：杜杲答道： 南北联合对付齐国，难道只是有利于我国？
English: Du Juan replied: Is the north-south joint action against Qi only beneficial to our country?

古文：必须城镇，宜待得之于齐。
现代文：如果一定想得到城镇的话，应该从齐国那里得。
English: If you really want to get towns, you should get them from Qi Province.

古文：先索汉南，使臣不敢闻命。 
现代文：先索要汉南之地再谈联合，我是不敢听从的。 
English: To ask for the land of Hannan first and then talk about unification, I dare not obey.

古文：还，除司仓中大夫，又使于陈。
现代文：回国后，任司仓中大夫，又出使于陈国。
English: After returning to China, he served as the secretary of the Cangzhong doctor and was sent to Chen Province.

古文：杲有辞辩，闲于占对，前后将命，陈人不能屈，陈宣帝甚敬异之。
现代文：杜杲有辞令辩才，熟悉谈判之事，前后数次奉命出使陈国，陈国的人都不能让他屈服，陈宣帝非常敬佩他。
English: Du Xuan had a talent for rhetoric and argumentation, and was familiar with negotiations. He was ordered to send envoys to Chen several times. The people of Chen could not make him give in. Emperor Chen Xuan admired him very much.

古文：时元定已卒，乃礼送开府贺拔华及定棺枢，杲受之以归。
现代文：那时元定已经死了，陈国就按照礼仪送还开府贺拔华和元定的棺柩，杜杲接受后护送回国。
English: At that time, Yuancheng was already dead, and Chen Guo, in accordance with the etiquette, sent back the coffin of He Bahu and Yuancheng to Kaifu. Du Xi accepted the coffin and escorted it back to China.

古文：除河东郡守，迁温州刺史，赐爵义兴县伯。
现代文：授官河东郡守，升任温州刺史，赐爵义兴县伯。
English: He was awarded the post of Hedong County Governor, promoted to the post of Wenzhou Provincial Historian, and given the title of Yixing County Count.

古文：大象元年，徵拜御正中大夫，复使陈。
现代文：大象元年，入京任御正中大夫，又一次出使陈国。
English: In the first year of the elephant, he entered Beijing as a high-ranking junior high school doctor, and once again dispatched Chen Guo.

古文：二年，除申州刺史，加开府仪同大将军，进爵为侯。
现代文：二年，任申州刺史，加开府仪同大将军，晋爵位为侯。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the prefect of Shenzhou, and was promoted to the general of Kaifu, and was given the title of marquis.

古文：除同州刺史。
现代文：任同州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the governor of the same prefecture.

古文：隋开皇元年，以杲为同州总管，进爵为公。
现代文：隋开皇元年，任命杜杲为同州总管，晋爵位为公。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, Du Xuan was appointed as the chief administrator of the same state, and the promotion to knighthood was public.

古文：赠冀州刺史，谥曰戴。
现代文：很快又升任工部尚书。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of the head of the engineering department.

古文：子儒。宗懔，字元懔，南阳涅阳人也。
现代文：二年，任西南道行台兵部尚书。不久就因病而死。宗懔字元懔，南阳涅阳人。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the military commander of Xiangyang, Southwest China. He died of illness soon after. He was from Nanyang, Neiyang.

古文：八世祖孙，永嘉乱，讨陈敏有功，封柴桑县侯，除宜都郡守。
现代文：八世祖宗承，永嘉之乱时，讨伐陈敏有功，封为紫阳县侯，授宜都郡守之职。
English: According to the 8th generation ancestor Zongzong, when the Yongjia Rebellion broke out, Chen Min fought bravely and was awarded the title of Ziyang County Marquis and the post of Yidu County Governor.

古文：卒官。
现代文：死于任上。
English: He later died in office.

古文：子孙因居江陵。
现代文：宗氏子孙因此居于江陵。
English: As a result, Muneshige's descendants live in Gangneung.

古文：父高之，梁山阴令。
现代文：父亲宗高之，梁时任山阴令。
English: His father was Zong Gao, and Liang Shijian was a member of the San Yin Order.

古文：懔少聪敏，好读书，昼夜不倦，语辄引古事，乡里呼为 小兒学士 。
现代文：宗懔自幼聪明精敏，喜爱读书，昼夜不知疲倦，一说话就引用前人故事，乡里都称他是 小儿学士 。
English: Ever since he was a child, Zong Yao was clever and sensitive. He loved to read, and was tireless day and night. Whenever he spoke, he quoted stories from the past. The villagers called him a child scholar.

古文：梁大同六年，举秀才。以不及二宫元会，例不对策。
现代文：梁大同六年，举秀才，因为没有赶上南北二宫元旦正会，依例不能对策。
English: Liang Datong for six years, because he did not catch up with the New Year's Day meeting of the North and South Second Palace, he could not take countermeasures as usual.

古文：及梁元帝镇荆州，谓长史刘之遴曰： 贵乡多士，为举一有意少年。 
现代文：梁元帝出镇荆州，对长史刘之遴说： 你们家乡多才干之士，替我举荐一个有情意的少年。 
English: Emperor Liang Yuan left the town of Jingzhou and said to the selection of Changshi Liu: Your hometown multi-talented people, recommend a passionate boy for me.

古文：之遴以懔应命，即日引见，令兼记室。
现代文：之遴举荐宗懔，当天就引见给梁元帝，令兼任记室。
English: On the same day, he presented it to Emperor Liang Yuan, who also appointed him as the secretary.

古文：尝夕被召宿省，使制《龙川庙碑》，一夜便就。
现代文：曾经夜晚被召至元帝府，奉命撰写《龙川庙碑》，一夜之间就写好了。
English: Once, he was summoned to the Yuan imperial palace at night and was ordered to write "Longchuan Temple Monument," which was written overnight.

古文：诘朝呈上，梁元帝叹美之。
现代文：天亮呈交给梁元帝，梁元帝大加赞美。
English: It was presented to Emperor Liang Yuan at dawn, and Emperor Liang Yuan praised it greatly.

古文：后历临汝、建城、广晋三县令。
现代文：宗懔后历任临汝、建城、广晋三个县的县令。
English: After Zonglu, he successively served as the county magistrate of three counties: Linru, Jiancheng, and Guangjin.

古文：遭母忧去职，哭辄欧血，两旬之内，绝而复苏者三。
现代文：逢母丧，辞职守孝，一哭就吐血，二十天内，哭死而又苏醒的情况就有三次。
English: For every mother's death, resignation, filial piety, and spitting up blood when crying, there are three cases of crying to death and waking up within twenty days.

古文：每旦有君乌数千集于庐舍，候哭而来，哭止而去，时论以为孝感所致。
现代文：每天早上，都有数千只鸟聚集在他家的草房上，宗懔一哭，它们就飞来，哭声一停，群鸟就飞去。当时的人认为这是宗懔的孝行感动了群鸟，所以才有这种情况。
English: Every morning, thousands of birds gathered in his family's meadow. As soon as Zong Yao started to cry, they would fly in, and as soon as the crying stopped, the birds would fly away. People at the time thought that it was Zong Yao's filial piety that moved the birds, and that's why it was like this.

古文：梁元帝即位，擢为尚书侍郎，封信安县侯，累迁吏部尚书。
现代文：梁元帝即位，提升宗懔为尚书侍郎，封爵信安县侯，多次升迁至吏部尚书。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan ascended to the throne, promoted Zongqi to the position of Shangshu's attendant, knighted as the Prince of Xin'an County, and promoted to the position of Shangshu's official several times.

古文：懔父高之先为南台书侍御史，犯宪。
现代文：宗懔父宗高之先任南台书侍御史，触犯了律令。
English: Zonglu's father, Zonggao, violated the ritsuryo code by becoming the first person to serve as Nantai's secretary-general.

古文：懔愿父释罪，当终身菜食。
现代文：宗懔希望开释父罪，而自己愿意终身以菜为食。
English: Zonglu hopes to absolve his father's sins, and he is willing to eat vegetables for life.

古文：高之理雪，故懔菜食，乡里称之。
现代文：宗高之后来辨明无罪，所以宗懔就一直以菜为食，受到乡人的称赞。
English: After Zonggao came to identify innocence, so Zongyao has been eating vegetables and has been praised by the villagers.

古文：在元帝府，府中多言其矫。
现代文：宗懔在元帝府，府中的人多说宗懔这样做是装出来的。
English: Zonglu is in the former imperial capital, and many people in the capital say that Zonglu is just pretending.

古文：至是，大进鱼肉，国子祭酒沛国刘珏让之曰： 本知卿不忠，犹谓卿孝。
现代文：到了这个时候，宗懔便大食鱼肉，国子祭酒沛国人刘责备他说： 我本来只知道你不忠，但还认为你孝。
English: By this time, Zonglu had become a big eater of fish and meat. Liu, a national son-sacrifice wine-drinker, reproached him, saying, "I only knew that you were unfaithful, but I still thought you were filial.

古文：今日便是忠孝并无。 
现代文：如今你这样做就是忠孝都没有了。 
English: Nowadays, if you do that, you lose your loyalty.

古文：懔不能对。
现代文：宗懔不能回答。
English: Zonglu couldn't answer.

古文：懔博学有才藻，口未尝誉人，朋友以此少之。
现代文：宗懔学问渊博，很有文采，从来不曾称赞过什么人，因此朋友很少。
English: Zonglu is well-read, very literate, and has never praised anyone, so he has few friends.

古文：初，侯景平后，梁元帝议还建鄴，唯懔劝都渚宫，以乡在荆州故也。
现代文：当初，平定侯景之后，梁元帝想迁都建邺，只有宗懔劝元帝都渚宫，这是因为他的家乡在荆州的缘故。
English: At first, after subduing Houjing, Emperor Liang Yuan wanted to move the capital to Jianye. Only Zongye advised Emperor Yuan to move the capital to Nagisa Palace, because his hometown was in Jingzhou.

古文：及江陵平，与王褒等入关。
现代文：等到江陵平定，宗懔与王褒等进入关中。
English: When Gangneung was pacified, Zong Yao and Wang Bao entered Guanzhong.

古文：周文帝以懔名重南土，甚礼之。
现代文：周文帝因为宗懔是江南有名的人物，十分尊重他。
English: Because Zonglu was a famous person in the south of the Yangtze River, Emperor Zhou highly respected him.

古文：周孝闵帝践祚，拜车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：周孝闵帝即位，任命宗懔为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Emperor Zhou Xiaohui ascended to the throne and appointed Zonglu as the general of chariot and cavalry and the third secretary of ceremony and etiquette.

古文：明帝即位，又与王褒等在麟趾刊定群书，数蒙宴赐。
现代文：明帝即位，宗懔又与王褒等人在麟趾殿刊定各种书籍，多次承蒙皇帝赐宴。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, Zonglu and Wang Bao and others published various books in Linzi Palace, and received the emperor's blessing on many occasions.

古文：保定中，卒。
现代文：保定年间去世。
English: He died in Baoding.

古文：有集二十卷行于世。
现代文：有文集二十卷流传后世。
English: A collection of twenty volumes has been handed down to the world.

古文：刘璠，字宝义，沛人也。
现代文：刘璠字宝义，沛国人。六世祖刘敏。
English: Liu Xi Zi Baoyi, Pei Guo Ren. Sixth-generation ancestor Liu Min.

古文：六世祖敏，以永嘉乱，徙居广陵。
现代文：永嘉之乱中迁居广陵。
English: He moved to Guangling during the Yongjia Rebellion.

古文：父臧，性方正，笃志好学，居家以孝闻。
现代文：父刘臧，性格耿直，志向笃诚，爱好学习，以孝行闻名乡里。
English: His father, Liu Yao, had a straightforward personality, sincere aspirations, a love of learning, and was well known in the village for his filial piety.

古文：仕梁，为著作郎。
现代文：出仕梁朝，任著作郎。
English: Served in the Liang Dynasty and became a scholar.

古文：璠九岁而孤，居丧合礼。
现代文：刘璠九岁时死了父亲，居丧合乎礼义。
English: Liu Yao's father died when he was nine years old, and it was proper for him to stay at home to mourn.

古文：少好读书，兼善文笔。
现代文：自幼喜爱读书，很会写文章。
English: She has loved reading since she was a child and is very good at writing articles.

古文：十七，为上黄侯萧晔所器重。
现代文：十七岁时，就深得上黄侯萧晔的器重。
English: At the age of seventeen, he was deeply influenced by Huang Hou Xiao Wei.

古文：范阳张绾，梁之外戚，才高口辩，见推于世。
现代文：范阳人张绾，梁朝宫室的外戚，才华出众，富于辩才，为当世所推崇。
English: Fan Yang's Zhang Ye, a relative of Liang Chaogong's wife, was outstanding in talent, rich in debating ability, and was highly respected by the contemporary world.

古文：以晔懿贵，亦假借之。
现代文：因为萧晔身份高贵，张绾也借助萧晔的名望。
English: Because Xiao Yao's status was noble, Zhang Yao also took advantage of Xiao Yao's reputation.

古文：璠年少未仕，而负才使气，不为之屈。
现代文：刘璠年少还未出仕，自恃有才而逞才使气，不甘居张绾之下。
English: At a young age, Liu Ye had not yet entered the service, and he was not willing to be subordinate to Zhang Ye.

古文：绾尝于新渝侯宅，因酒后诟京兆杜杲曰： 寒士不逊。 
现代文：张绾曾于新渝侯宅第，借着酒力辱骂京兆尹杜杲 ：寒士不逊。 
English: Zhang Ye used to abuse Jing Zhaoying Du Yao in the residence of a Xinwu courtier by means of alcohol: "You are a cold person.

古文：璠厉色曰： 此坐谁非寒士？ 
现代文：刘璠正言厉色地说 ：在座的各位谁不是寒士？ 
English: Liu Ye said with a straight face: Who among you is not a cold person?

古文：璠本意在绾，而晔以为属己，辞色不平。
现代文：刘璠的本意是说张绾，而萧晔认为是说他的，便有不悦之色。
English: Liu Ye's intention was to say Zhang Ye, but Xiao Ye thought it was about him, so there was something unpleasant about it.

古文：璠曰： 何王之门不可曳长裾也！ 
现代文：刘璠道： 哪一个王门不能混得个座位！ 
English: Liu Wei said: Which king's gate can not be mixed with a seat!

古文：遂拂衣而去。
现代文：就拂衣而去。
English: He just whisked away.

古文：晔谢之，乃止。
现代文：萧晔急忙向他道歉，刘璠这才没有走。
English: Xiao Yao hurriedly apologized to him, but Liu Yao did not leave.

古文：后随晔在淮南。璠母在建康遘疾，璠弗之知。
现代文：后来随萧晔到淮南，刘璠的母亲病在建康，刘璠不知道这件事。
English: Later, with Xiao Yao to Huainan, Liu Yao's mother was ill in Jiankang. Liu Yao did not know about this.

古文：尝忽一日举身楚痛，寻而家信至，云其母病。
现代文：有一天，忽然浑身疼痛起来，不大一会，家中信息传来，说他的母亲病了。
English: One day, he suddenly felt pain all over his body. Shortly after, a message came from home saying that his mother was ill.

古文：璠即号泣戒道，绝而又苏。
现代文：刘璠当即哀号上道，死而复苏。
English: Liu Ye immediately went to the road to wail and was revived from the dead.

古文：当身痛之辰，即母死之日。
现代文：正当他浑身疼痛的时候，就是母亲病逝之日。
English: It was the day of his mother's death, when he was in pain all over.

古文：居丧毁瘠，遂感风气，服阕后一年，犹杖而后起。
现代文：守丧期间，哀毁损身，因此而感受风寒。服丧满后一年，还需要拄着木杖才能起身。
English: During the mourning period, the mourners lost their strength and felt cold as a result. One year after the mourning period, they still needed to carry a cane to get up.

古文：及晔终于毗陵，故吏多分散，璠独奉晔丧还都，坟成乃退。
现代文：萧晔死于毗陵，原来的部属多四散而去。刘璠一个人扶萧晔的灵柩回京城，安葬后才走。
English: Xiao Wei died in the imperial mausoleum, and most of his former subordinates dispersed. Liu Wei alone helped Xiao Wei's coffin back to Beijing, and only left after he was buried.

古文：梁简文寺在东宫，遇晔素重，诸不送者多被劾责，唯璠独被优尝赏。
现代文：梁简文帝此时为东宫太子，平常就很看重萧晔，那些不送灵柩的人多被弹劾指责，只有刘璠一个受到奖赏。
English: At this time, Emperor Liang Jianwen was the crown prince of the East Palace, and he usually valued Xiao Wei very much. Those who did not send the coffin were mostly impeached and criticized, and only Liu Wei was rewarded.

古文：解褐王国常侍，非其好也。
现代文：任命刘璠为王国常侍，不是刘璠所喜好的。
English: The appointment of Liu Ye as a royal equerry was not to Liu Ye's liking.

古文：璠少慷慨，好功名，志欲立事边城，不乐随牒平进。
现代文：刘璠少年时慷慨有大志，喜好功名，想建功立业于边庭，对平平稳稳地晋升不感兴趣。
English: When he was a young man, Liu Yao was generous and ambitious. He was fond of fame, and wanted to make achievements in the courtyard. He was not interested in a smooth and steady promotion.

古文：曾宜丰侯萧脩出为北徐州刺史，即请为其轻车府主簿，兼记室参军。
现代文：适逢宜丰侯萧修出任北徐州刺史，刘璠即自请为其轻车府主簿，兼任记室参军。
English: At the right time, Xiao Xiu of Yifeng Hou served as the chief historian of North Xuzhou, and Liu Wei volunteered to be the main bookkeeper of the Light Vehicle Office, and also served as the record office to join the army.

古文：脩为梁州，又板为中记室，补华阳太守。
现代文：萧修任梁州刺史，刘璠又请为中记室，补任华阳太守。
English: Xiao Xiu was appointed as the secretary of Liangzhou, and Liu Zhen was appointed as the secretary of Huayang and the governor of Huayang.

古文：属侯景度江，梁室大乱，脩以璠有才略，甚亲委之。
现代文：逢侯景渡江，梁朝大乱，萧修认为刘璠有才干谋略，十分信任他并委以重任。
English: Feng Houjing crossed the river, the Liang Dynasty was in turmoil, Xiao Xiu believed that Liu Ye had the ability to strategize, he trusted him very much and entrusted him with an important task.

古文：时寇难繁兴，未有所定，璠乃喟然赋诗以见志。
现代文：这时，寇虏四起，国家没有安定，刘璠慨然赋诗以言其志。
English: At this time, the invaders were on the rise, the country was not stable, and Liu Ye was moved to write a poem to express his aspirations.

古文：其末章曰： 随会平王室，夷吾匡霸功。
现代文：其诗末章云 ：随会平王室，夷吾匡羁功。
English: At the end of the poem, there is an epilogue: "Heir to the Taira royal family, I will do my best."

古文：虚薄而时用，徒然慕昔风。 
现代文：虚簿无时用，徒然慕昔风。 
English: An empty book is of no use at any time, and it is vain to yearn for the past.

古文：脩开府，置佐史，以璠为谘议参军，仍领记室。
现代文：萧修成立府署，设置僚属，任命刘璠为咨议参军，仍兼记室。
English: Xiao Xiu set up a prefectural office, set up subordinates, appointed Liu Wei as a consultant to join the army, and still served as a secretary.

古文：梁元帝承制，授树功将军、镇西府谘议参军。赐书曰： 邓禹文学，尚或执戈；葛洪书生，且云破贼。
现代文：梁元帝即位，授刘璠树功将军、镇西府咨议参军之职，赐书说： 邓禹文学之士，尚且执戈从军；葛洪本是书生，尚谈破贼之事。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan ascended to the throne and conferred the position of General Liu Yuxu Gong and Zhenxi Prefecture Consultation to join the army, and gave a letter saying: Deng Yu, a man of literature, still served in the army; Ge Hong, who was a student of literature, still talked about breaking the thieves.

古文：前修无远，属望良深。 
现代文：前贤不远，对你寄予很大希望。 
English: The former is not far away, and I have great hopes for you.

古文：元帝寻以脩绍鄱阳之封，且为雍州刺史，复以璠为为脩平北府司马。
现代文：不久，元帝就让萧修继承鄱阳的封地，并且任命为雍州刺史，又任命刘璠为萧修平北府司马。
English: Soon after, Emperor Yuan let Xiao Xiu inherit the fief of Fenyang, and appointed him as the prefect of Yongzhou, and appointed Liu Ye as Xiao Xiu Ping's Northern prefectural secretary.

古文：及武陵王纪称制于蜀，以璠为中书侍郎。
现代文：武陵王萧纪自立于蜀，任命刘璠为中书侍郎。
English: King of Wuling, Xiao Ji, established himself in Shu and appointed Liu Ye as the secretary.

古文：遣召璠，使者八反，乃至蜀。
现代文：遣使召刘璠至，使者往返八次，刘璠才来到西蜀。
English: He sent an envoy to summon Liu Bei, and the envoy went back and forth eight times before Liu Bei came to Xishu.

古文：又以为黄门侍郎，令长史刘孝胜深布心腹，使工画《陈平度河归汉图》以遗之。
现代文：萧纪又任命刘璠为黄门侍郎，令长史刘孝胜安排心腹之人，让画师画《陈平渡河归汉图》送给刘璠。
English: Xiao Ji also appointed Liu Hui as a Yellow Gate attendant, and ordered the chief historian Liu Xiaosheng to arrange a confidant to have an artist paint "Chen Ping Crossing the River to the Han Dynasty" to give to Liu Hui.

古文：璠苦求还，中记室韦登私曰： 殿下忍而蓄憾，足下不留，将致大祸。
现代文：刘璠苦苦请求东还，中记室韦登私下对他说： 殿下宽忍而又留有遗憾，你若是不留下来，将要招致大祸。
English: Liu Bei pleaded with Dong Ya, and Wei Deng, the chief secretary, said to him in private: Your highness is tolerant and has some regrets. If you don't stay, you will bring about a big disaster.

古文：脱使盗遮于葭萌，则卿殆矣。
现代文：如果派人在葭萌关阻截你，那么你就要完了。
English: If you send someone to intercept you at the junction, then you are finished.

古文：孰若共构大厦，使身名俱美哉！ 
现代文：不如共图大计，使身名都有好处！ 
English: It's not as good as the overall plan, so it's good to have a good name!

古文：璠正色曰： 卿欲缓颊于我邪？
现代文：刘璠正色说 ：你想婉言劝阻我吗？
English: Liu Zhenzheng said, "Do you want to dissuade me gently?

古文：我与府侯分义已定，岂以宠辱夷险易其心乎！
现代文：我与府侯的名分礼义已定，岂能因荣辱安危而改变我的心呢！
English: I have already decided on the name, rank, and courtesy of the prefect, but can I change my heart because of the honor, disgrace, and danger?

古文：丈夫立志，当死生以之耳。
现代文：大丈夫立志，应当为其志而死生。
English: It is all right to set one's mind on something, one should live and die for one's goal.

古文：殿下方布大义于天下，终不逞志于一人。 
现代文：殿下刚刚施大义于天下，终不会逼迫我一个人吧。 
English: Your Royal Highness has just made the world a better place. You won't persecute me alone after all.

古文：纪知不为己用，乃厚赠而遣之。
现代文：萧纪知道刘璠不能为己所用，就赠他许多东西送他走了。
English: Xiao Ji knew that Liu Ye could not be used for himself, so he gave him a lot of things to send him away.

古文：临别，纪又解其佩刀赠璠曰： 想见物思人。 
现代文：临别时，萧纪又解下佩刀赠给刘璠，说： 但愿你见到刀能想起我。 
English: At the time of parting, Xiao Ji removed his sword and presented it to Liu Ye, saying: I hope you can think of me when you see the sword.

古文：璠曰： 敢不奉扬威灵，克翦奸宄。 
现代文：刘璠说： 怎敢不奉扬您的威灵，剪除奸佞。 
English: Liu Ye said, "How dare I not praise your virtuous spirit and cut off the traitors.

古文：纪于是遣使拜脩为益州刺史，封随郡王，以璠为府长史，加蜀郡太守。
现代文：萧纪于是派遣使者拜萧修为益州刺史，封爵随郡王，任命刘璠为随郡王府长史，加官蜀郡太守。
English: Xiao Ji then sent an envoy, Bai Xiaoshu, to serve as the governor of Yizhou, knighted as the governor of Su County, and appointed Liu Wei as the governor of Su County and the governor of Shu County.

古文：还至白马西，属达奚武军已至南郑，璠不得入城，遂降武。
现代文：刘璠辞还，至白马西边，适逢达奚武的军队已到了南郑，刘璠入城不得，就投降了达奚武。
English: Liu Bei also resigned, to the west of Baima, when the army of Daguangwu had arrived in Nanzheng. Liu Bei was not allowed to enter the city, so he surrendered to Daguangwu.

古文：周文帝素闻其名，先戒武曰： 勿使刘璠死。 
现代文：周文帝往日就听说过刘璠的大名，事先告戒达奚武： 不要伤害了刘璠。 
English: Zhou Wendi had heard of Liu Bei's great name in the past, and he warned Dabiwu in advance: Don't hurt Liu Bei.

古文：故武先令璠赴阙。
现代文：所以，达奚武先令刘璠赴京见周文帝。
English: Therefore, Liu Bei went to Beijing to see Emperor Zhou Wenzong.

古文：周文见之如旧，谓仆射申徽曰： 刘璠佳士，古人何以过之！ 
现代文：周文帝和刘璠一见如故，对仆射申徽说 ：刘璠是一个了不起的人，即使是古人也比不过他！ 
English: When Emperor Zhou and Liu Bei saw each other, he said to his servant Shen Hui: "Liu Bei is a great man. Even the ancients were no match for him!"

古文：徽曰： 晋人灭吴，利在二陆。
现代文：申徽说 ：晋人消灭吴国，利在于陆逊、陆抗。
English: Shen Hui said, "If the Jin people were to destroy the State of Wu, it would be to the benefit of Lu Xun and Lu Qi.

古文：明公今平梁汉，得刘璠也。 
现代文：您今日平梁汉，得到了刘璠。 
English: Today, you are Ping Lianghan, and you have obtained Liu Xuan.

古文：时南郑尚拒守，达奚武请屠之，周文将许焉，唯令全脩一家而已。
现代文：这时，南郑守军还在坚守，达奚武请求屠城，周文帝准备答应达奚武之请，命他仅保全萧修一家人而已。
English: At this time, South Zheng's garrison was still holding out, and Zhou Wendi was ready to agree to Daguangwu's request to slaughter the city, ordering him only to save Xiao Xiu's family.

古文：璠乃请之于朝，周文怒而不许也。
现代文：刘璠上朝求情，周文帝恼怒刘璠多事，不答应他的请求。
English: Liu Bei pleaded for mercy to the Shang Dynasty. Zhou Wendi was angry with Liu Bei for many reasons and did not agree to his request.

古文：璠泣而固请，移时不退。
现代文：刘璠哭诉着坚意求情，过了一个时辰还不退下。
English: Liu Yao cried and pleaded for mercy, and did not back down even after an hour had passed.

古文：柳仲礼侍侧，曰： 此烈士也。 
现代文：柳仲礼侍立在旁，说： 此人真是贞烈之士！ 
English: Liu Zhongli stood by and said, "This man is truly a virtuous man!"

古文：周文既纳萧脩降，又许其反国。
现代文：周文帝既已答应萧修投降，又准许他回国。
English: Emperor Zhou had already agreed to Xiao Xiu's surrender and allowed him to return to China.

古文：脩至长安累月，未之遣也。
现代文：可是萧修到长安几个月了，还没有让他回国。
English: However, Xiao Xiu has been in Chang'an for several months, and he has not been allowed to return to China.

古文：璠因侍宴，周文曰： 我于古谁比？ 
现代文：刘璠因此宴请周文帝，周文帝说： 古人谁和我能比？ 
English: As a result, Liu Bei invited Zhou Wendi to a banquet. Zhou Wendi said, "Who among the ancients can compare with me?

古文：曰： 常以公命世英主，汤、武莫逮。
现代文：刘璠说： 我常常以为您是盖世英明之主，成汤和周武王都赶不上您。
English: Liu Wei said: I often thought that you were the master of world-class wisdom. Cheng Tang and King Zhou Wu could not keep up with you.

古文：今日所见，曾是齐桓、晋文之不若。 
现代文：今日看来，真是连齐桓、晋文也比不过。 
English: Today, it seems that even Qi Kuan and Jinwen are no match.

古文：周文曰： 我不得比汤、武，望与伊、周为匹，何桓、文之不若乎？ 
现代文：周文帝说： 我即便不能和成汤、周武相比，也希望能与伊尹、周公相匹敌，怎么会连齐桓、晋文都不如呢？ 
English: Zhou Wendi said: Even if I cannot be compared to Cheng Tang and Zhou Wu, I hope to be comparable to Yi Yin and Zhou Gong. How can even Qi Huan and Jinwen be inferior?

古文：对曰： 齐桓存三亡国，晋文不失信于伐原。 
现代文：刘璠回答道： 齐桓存三亡之国，晋文公伐原不失信义。 
English: Liu Yao replied, "In a country with three dynasties, the Jin and the Wen dynasties did not lose their faith.

古文：语未终，周文抚掌曰： 我解尔意，欲激我耳。 
现代文：话未说完，周文帝抚掌说： 我明白你的意思了，你是想激将我啊！ 
English: Before he had finished speaking, Zhou Wendi stroked his palm and said: I understand what you mean, you are trying to excite me!

古文：即命遣脩。
现代文：当即命令遣返萧修。
English: Xiao Xiu was immediately ordered to be repatriated.

古文：脩请与璠俱还，周文不许。
现代文：萧修请求和刘璠一起回国，周文帝没有答应。
English: Xiao Xiu requested to return to China with Liu Bei, but Emperor Zhou did not agree.

古文：以璠为中外府记室，迁黄门侍郎、仪同三司。
现代文：任命刘璠为中外府记室，升任黄门侍郎、仪同三司。
English: Liu Wei was appointed to the Central and Foreign Prefectural Records Office, and was promoted to the Yellow Gate Chamberlain and the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：尝卧疾居家，对雪兴感，乃作《雪赋》以遂志焉。
现代文：曾经卧病在家，对雪而生感慨，于是就作《雪赋》寄托心志。
English: Once, when he was sick at home, he was moved by the snow, so he wrote "Snow Fist" to express his feelings.

古文：初，萧脩在汉中与萧纪笺，及答西魏书、移襄阳文，皆璠辞也。
现代文：当初，萧修在汉中给萧纪的书信，以及《答西魏书》、《移襄阳文》，都是刘璠写的。
English: At first, Xiao Xiu's letters to Xiao Ji in Hanzhong, as well as "Answering the West Wei Book" and "Moving to Xiangyang," were all written by Liu Yu.

古文：周明帝初，授内史中大夫，掌纶诰。
现代文：周明帝初年，授内史中大夫，掌管诏书。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhou Ming, he was awarded the title of doctor of internal history and was in charge of the imperial rescript.

古文：寻封平阳县子。
现代文：很快即封爵平阳县子。
English: He was soon given the title of peer of Pingyang County.

古文：在职清白简亮，不合于时。左迁同和郡守。
现代文：任职清白简亮，与世俗不合，贬为同和郡守。
English: The post is clear and concise, incompatible with the secular world, and is demoted to the position of Tonghe County Governor.

古文：璠善于抚御，莅职未期，生羌降附者五百余家。
现代文：刘璠善于安抚防御，任职不到一年，羌将投降归附者多达五百余家。
English: Liu Bei was good at appeasing the defenders. In less than a year in office, more than five hundred families surrendered to him.

古文：前后郡守多经营以致赀产，唯璠秋毫无所取。
现代文：前后几任郡守多为自己经营，收罗财产，只有刘璠一丝一毫也没有取。
English: Several county governors before and after mostly operated for themselves and collected property, only Liu Ye did not take anything at all.

古文：妻子并随羌俗，食麦衣皮，始终不改。
现代文：妻子子女都随羌人风俗，吃麦子，穿毛皮，始终不改。
English: His wife and children follow the customs of the Xiongnu people, eating wheat and wearing furs, and have never changed.

古文：洮阳、洪和二郡羌常越境诣璠番讼理。
现代文：洮阳、洪和二郡的羌族人常常越境到刘璠处，请刘璠审理讼案。
English: The Yi people in Shenyang, Honghe and the two counties often cross the border to Liu Ye's place to ask Liu Ye to hear the case.

古文：蔡公广时镇陇右，嘉其善政。
现代文：蔡公宇文广其时镇守陇右，嘉奖刘璠理政有方。
English: At that time, Cai Gongyu Wenguang was the right-hand man of the town guard, and commended Liu Bei for being a rational and political person.

古文：及迁镇陕州，欲启璠自随，羌人乐从者七百人，闻者莫不叹异。
现代文：后来，宇文广出镇陕州，想让刘璠跟随他去陕州，羌人愿意跟刘璠去陕州的人有七百人，听说这件事的人都赞叹惊奇不已。
English: Later, Yu Wenguang went to Shaanxi Province, and he wanted Liu Xuan to follow him to Shaanxi Province. There were seven hundred people who were willing to go to Shaanxi Province with Liu Xuan. Everyone who heard about this was amazed.

古文：陈公纯作镇陇右，引为总管府司录，甚礼敬之。
现代文：陈公宇文纯镇守陇右，引拔刘璠为总管府司录，十分敬重他。
English: Chen Gongwu Wenzhong was appointed as the right-hand man of the commander-in-chief, and Liu Wei was promoted to the chief administrator's secretary. He was highly respected.

古文：勒成一家，行于世。
现代文：死于官任。著有《梁典》三十卷，有文集二十卷，并行于世。
English: He died in office. He was the author of 30 volumes of "The Liang Dynasty" and 20 volumes of literary works.

古文：行本，璠兄子也。
现代文：刘行本，刘璠兄之子。
English: Liu Xingben, the son of Liu Ye's brother.

古文：父环，仕梁，历职清显。
现代文：其父瞔，任职于梁朝，为官清正。
English: His father, Zou, served in the Liang Dynasty and was an official of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：行本起家梁武陵王国常侍。
现代文：行本初任武陵王国常侍。
English: Gyomoto was the first to serve as a samurai in the Kingdom of Wuling.

古文：遇萧脩以梁州北附，遂与叔父璠归周，寓居新丰。
现代文：后遇萧修以梁州北附于周朝，遂与叔父刘一起归顺周朝，寓居在新丰。
English: Later, Xiao Xiu was attached to the Zhou Dynasty in the north of Liangzhou, and then he and his uncle Liu joined the Zhou Dynasty and lived in Xinfeng.

古文：每以讽读为事，精力忘疲，虽衣食乏绝，晏如也。
现代文：常常把诵读书籍作为自己的事情，精力旺盛，不知疲惫，虽然缺吃少穿，亦怡然自得。
English: He often regards reading books as his own business. He is full of energy and never tired. Although he is short of food and clothing, he is also happy and content.

古文：性刚烈，有不可夺之志。
现代文：性情刚烈，志向坚定不移。
English: He has a strong character and unwavering ambition.

古文：周大冢宰宇文护引为中外府记室。
现代文：周大冢宰宇文护引用为中外府记室。
English: Yu Wenbao, the vice-president of Zhou University, referred to it as the central and foreign prefectural record office.

古文：武帝亲总万机，转御正中士，兼领起居注。
现代文：武帝亲自执政，刘行本转任御中正中士，兼领起居注。
English: Emperor Wu personally ruled the country, and Liu Xingben was transferred to the post of imperial middle-ranking sergeant, concurrently leading the imperial household.

古文：累迁掌朝下大夫。
现代文：屡屡升迁至掌朝下大夫。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the position of junior doctor.

古文：周代故事，天子临轩，掌朝典笔砚，持至御坐，则承御大夫取进之。
现代文：周朝旧例，天子驾临宫殿，掌朝主管笔墨纸砚，端到御座边，由承御大夫进取。
English: In the old Zhou Dynasty, when the heavenly son arrived at the palace, he was given a pen, ink and paper by the head of the court, and brought to the throne, where he was examined by the imperial doctor.

古文：及行本为掌朝，将进笔于帝，承御复欲取之。
现代文：到行本任掌朝，准备将笔呈递给皇帝，承御大夫又要来取。
English: When he arrived at the imperial court, he was preparing to present the pen to the emperor, and the imperial doctor came to pick it up.

古文：行本抗声曰： 笔不可得。 
现代文：行本高声道 ：不能拿笔去！ 
English: Conductor: I can't take a pen with me!

古文：帝惊视问之，行本曰： 臣闻设官分职，各有司存。
现代文：武帝吃惊地看着，问他为何这样，行本答道 ：我听说设官分职，各有各的职责范围。
English: Emperor Wu looked at him in surprise and asked him why he was like that, to which he replied, "I heard that officials are assigned different duties, and each has their own area of responsibility."

古文：臣既不得佩承御刀，承御亦焉得取臣笔？ 
现代文：我既然不能佩带承御之刀，承御怎么能来取我的笔呢？ 
English: If I can't carry my sword, how can I get my pen?

古文：帝曰： 然。 
现代文：武帝说 ：有道理。 
English: Taizong said, "Yes."

古文：因令二司各行所职。
现代文：于是就命令二司各行其职。
English: He then ordered the two departments to carry out their duties.

古文：及宣帝嗣位，多失德，行本切谏忤旨，出为河内太守。
现代文：及宣帝继位，多有失德之事，行本直言切谏忤旨，贬出京城任河内太守。
English: and the proclamation of the emperor's succession, there were many cases of immorality, and he was outspoken in his actions, dismissing the capital to serve as the governor of Hanoi.

古文：及尉迟迥作乱，攻怀州，行本率吏人拒之，拜仪同，赐爵文安县子。
现代文：尉迟迥发动叛乱，进攻怀州，行本率领属下抵抗。升任仪同，赐爵文安县子。
English: He launched a rebellion and attacked Waizhou, leading his subordinates to resist. He was promoted to the same rank and given a peerage as the son of Wen'an County.

古文：隋文帝践祚，拜谏议大夫，检校中书侍郎。
现代文：隋文帝登基，行本官任谏议大夫，检校中书侍郎。
English: Emperor Sui Wen ascended to the throne, and the official in charge of the line was appointed as the doctor of the imperial edict, and the junior secretary of the inspection school.

古文：上尝怒一郎，于殿前笞之。
现代文：文帝曾憎恨一名郎官，令人在殿前痛笞。
English: Emperor Wen once hated a vassal, which caused an uproar in front of the palace.

古文：行本进曰： 此人素清，其过又小。 
现代文：行本进谏说 ：此人平日清正，他的过错又小。 
English: Gyomoto Jinran said, "This person is usually honest, and his mistakes are small.

古文：上不顾。
现代文：文帝不予理睬。
English: Emperor Wen ignored it.

古文：行本正当上前曰： 陛下不以臣不肖，令臣在左右。
现代文：行本郑重走上前说 ：陛下不认为为臣不肖，令臣侍在左右。
English: Gyomoto solemnly stepped forward and said, "Your Majesty doesn't think it's unseemly for a vassal to have a vassal attendant to his right and left.

古文：臣言若是，陛下安得不听？
现代文：臣之言若说得对，陛下怎能不听？
English: If the minister's words are right, how can His Majesty not listen to him?

古文：臣言若非，当致之于理，安得轻臣而不顾？
现代文：臣之言若不对，应当使之归于正理，怎么能够轻视臣子而不予理睬呢？
English: If the words of a vassal are not right, they should be made right. How can you despise a vassal and ignore him?

古文：臣所言非私！ 
现代文：臣子所说的不是个人的事情！ 
English: What the courtier said is not a personal matter!

古文：因置笏于地而退，上敛容谢之，遂原所笞者。
现代文：于是把手板扔在地上就退朝了。文帝收敛怒容向行本道歉，就原谅了那个受笞的郎官。
English: So he threw the tablet on the ground and retired from the imperial court. Emperor Wen restrained his anger and apologized to Gyobon, and forgave the ejected vassal.

古文：时天下大同，四夷内附，行本以党项羌密迩封域，最为后服，上表劾其使者曰： 臣闻南蛮遵校尉之统，西域仰都护之威。
现代文：此时天下大同，四夷归附，行本因党项羌人封疆很近，到了最后才归服，上表弹劾羌人使者 ：臣听说南蛮听从校尉的统治，西域仰敬都护的威名。
English: At this time, the whole country was the same, the four barbarians were annexed, and the action was due to the party issue, the barbarians were very close to sealing the territory, and it was not until the end that they surrendered, the above table impeached the barbarian envoy: the minister heard that Nanban obeyed the rule of the captain, and the western region respected the prestige of the tutelage.

古文：比见西羌，鼠窃狗盗，不父不子，无君无臣，异类殊方，于斯为下。
现代文：等到看见西羌，鼠窃狗盗，父不父，子不子，君臣没有分别，四夷之人，西羌最为低下。
English: Wait until you see Xidi, rats steal dogs and steal, father does not have a father, son does not have a son, there is no difference between princes and ministers, people from the four provinces, Xidi is the lowest.

古文：不悟羁縻之惠，讵知含养之恩，狼戾为心，独乖正朔。
现代文：不省悟维系他们的惠心，哪里知道天朝含养的恩德，凶狠残暴，背离正统。
English: Without reflection, they maintain their benevolence. Who knows where the benevolence nurtured by the heavenly government, the ferocity and brutality, and the deviation from orthodoxy come from.

古文：使人近至，请付推科。 
现代文：羌人使者新近才至，请求交付推科论罪。 
English: An emissary from the Xiongnu had recently arrived, requesting that the case be handed over to the Inquisition.

古文：上奇其志。
现代文：文帝认为行本志向不凡。
English: Wen Di thought that the performance was extraordinary.

古文：雍州别驾元肇言于上曰： 有一州吏，受人馈钱二百文，律令杖一百。
现代文：雍州别驾元肇对文帝说 ：有一个州吏，接受了别人送给他的二百文钱，按律令打一百杖。
English: The Yongzhou bailiff Yuan Zhao said to Emperor Wen: There was a state official who accepted the two hundred monies given to him by others and, according to the law, beat him with a hundred canes.

古文：然臣下车之始，与其为约。
现代文：然而，臣刚到雍州时就和他有约定。
English: However, the minister had an appointment with him as soon as he arrived in Yongzhou.

古文：此吏故违，请加徒一年。 
现代文：这个州吏故意违反，请求加徒刑一年。 
English: The state official pleaded guilty to willful misconduct and asked for an additional year in prison.

古文：行本驳之曰： 律令之行，盖发明诏。
现代文：行本驳斥他说： 律令的实行，是为了阐明皇上的诏令。
English: The text refutes him: The implementation of the ritsuryo is to clarify the emperor's edict.

古文：今肇乃敢重其教命，轻忽宪章，亏法取威，非人臣之礼。 
现代文：如今元肇竟然敢于重视他的教命，轻视法令，损法以取威，不是人臣应有之礼。 
English: Nowadays, Yuan Zhao dares to attach importance to his religious orders, despise laws and regulations, and undermine the law in order to gain prestige, which is not the proper behavior of a vassal.

古文：上嘉之，赐绢百匹。
现代文：文帝嘉奖行本，赐给他绢一百匹。
English: Emperor Wen gave him a hundred horses.

古文：拜太子左庶子，领书侍御史如故。
现代文：行本升任太子左庶子，和从前一样领书侍御史。
English: Gyomoto was promoted to the position of the Prince's left illegitimate son, and as in the past, he became the chief secretary to the Emperor.

古文：皇太子虚襟敬惮。
现代文：皇太子虚心敬畏他。
English: The crown prince is modestly in awe of him.

古文：时唐令则为左庶子，太子昵狎之，每令以弦歌教内人。
现代文：这时唐令则任左庶子，太子过分亲近唐令则，经常让他教授宫女唱歌。
English: At this time, the Tang Emperor was the second son, and the prince was too close to the Tang Emperor, often letting him teach the princess to sing.

古文：行本责之曰： 庶子当匡太子以正道，何嬖昵房帷之间哉！ 
现代文：行本责备唐令则说 ：庶子之职，应当引导太子走正道，为何让他沉溺于房帷之间呢！ 
English: Gyobon reproached the Tang Dynasty and said, "It is the duty of the son-in-law to guide the prince to the right path, why should he indulge himself between the curtains!"

古文：令则甚惭而不能改。
现代文：令则非常惭愧，却不能改正。
English: On the other hand, I am very ashamed, but I can't correct it.

古文：时沛国刘臻、平原明克让、河南陆爽等并以文学为太子所亲。
现代文：这时，沛国人刘臻、平原人明克让、河南人陆爽等人都因文采出众而受到太子的宠爱。
English: At this time, Liu Zhen from Pei Province, Ming Kezhang from the plains, Lu Shuang from Henan Province, and others were favored by the prince for their outstanding literature.

古文：行本怒其不能调护，每谓三人曰： 卿等正解读书耳。 
现代文：行本对唐令则不能调教维护太子甚为恼怒，常常对三人说 ：你们要读正经之书。 
English: Gyobon was very angry with the Tang Dynasty for not being able to discipline and protect the crown prince, and often said to the three of them, "You must read serious books."

古文：时左术率长史夏侯福为太子所昵，尝于閤内与太子戏。
现代文：左卫率长史夏侯福受到太子的亲昵，曾经在阁房里和太子嬉戏。
English: Left guard leader Shi Xia Houfu was loved by the prince and once played with him in an attic.

古文：福大笑，声闻于外。
现代文：夏侯福大笑，声音传到外面。
English: Xia Houfu laughed loudly, the sound carried outside.

古文：行本时在閤下闻之，待其出，数之曰： 汝何小人，敢为亵慢！ 
现代文：行本这时在阁外听到了，等夏侯福出来，指责他道： 你是何等小人，敢亵慢太子！ 
English: At this time, Gyobon heard it outside the palace, and waited for Xia Houfu to come out, accusing him: "What a villain you are, how dare you insult the prince!"

古文：因付执法者推之。
现代文：于是就把夏侯福交给执法人审问。
English: As a result, Xia Houfu was handed over to law enforcement for questioning.

古文：太子为请，乃释之。
现代文：太子为他求情，才把他放了。
English: The prince only released him after he pleaded for his release.

古文：太子尝得良马，令福乘而观之。
现代文：太子曾经得到一匹好马，令夏侯福骑出来看看。
English: The prince once got a good horse and let Xia Houfu ride it out.

古文：太子甚悦，因欲令行本复乘。
现代文：太子非常高兴，就想让行本再骑一骑。
English: The prince was very happy and wanted to give Gyomoto another ride.

古文：行本正色曰： 至尊置臣于庶子位，欲辅导殿下以正道，非为殿下作弄臣。 
现代文：行本正色道 ：皇上把我放在庶子的位子上，是想让我辅导殿下走正道，不是让殿下戏耍着玩的。 
English: The correct way to behave: The Emperor put me in the position of a son-in-law in order to have me guide His Royal Highness in the correct way, not to have His Royal Highness play around.

古文：太子惭而止。
现代文：太子甚为惭愧，就放弃了这种念头。
English: The prince was so ashamed that he gave up the idea.

古文：复以本官领大兴令，权贵惮其方正，无敢至其门者。
现代文：又以本官领大兴令，权贵忌惮他行事刚正，没有人敢上他的门。
English: Moreover, he was regarded as a great leader by his superiors. The powerful feared his uprightness, and no one dared to go to his door.

古文：由是请托路绝，吏人怀之。
现代文：因此请托之路断绝了，吏人颇为怀念他。
English: As a result, the road to trusteeship was cut off, and officials rather missed him.

古文：未几，卒于官，上甚伤惜之。
现代文：不久，卒于官任，文帝非常伤心和惋惜。
English: Soon after, he died in office, and Emperor Wen was very sad and regretful.

古文：及太子废，上曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：到了太子被废，文帝说： 可悲啊！
English: When the crown prince was deposed, Emperor Wen said, "How sad!

古文：若使刘行本在，勇当不及此乎！ 
现代文：假如刘行本还活着，太子杨勇不至于到这个地步！ 
English: If Liu Xingben were still alive, Prince Yang Yong would not have reached this point!

古文：行本无子。
现代文：行本没有儿子。
English: The author does not have a son.

古文：柳遐，字子升，河东解人，宋太尉元景从孙也。
现代文：柳遐字子癉，河东解人，宋太尉元景的从孙。
English: Yanukovych, the son of Yanukovych, the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son.

古文：祖叔珍，义阳内史，事见《南史》。
现代文：祖父柳叔珍，官任义阳内史，事迹见《南史》。
English: His grandfather, Liu Shuzhen, was appointed as the official historian of Yiyang, and his deeds are described in "Southern History."

古文：父季远，梁宜都太守。
现代文：父柳季远，梁朝时任宜都太守。
English: His father, Liu Jiyuan, was appointed governor of Yidu during the Liang Dynasty.

古文：遐幼而爽迈，神彩嶷然，髫岁便有成人之量。
现代文：柳遐自幼豪爽超俗，神采嶷然，小小的年纪就有成年人的气量。
English: From a young age, Yanagisawa was a charismatic and eccentric person. At a young age, he had the energy of an adult.

古文：笃好文学，动合规矩。
现代文：十分喜爱文学，做事都符合规矩。
English: He is very fond of literature and does everything according to the rules.

古文：其世父庆远特器异之，谓曰： 吾昔逮事伯父太尉公，尝谓吾云： 我昨梦汝登一楼，甚峻丽，吾以坐席与汝。
现代文：他的伯父柳庆远特别器重他，对他说： 我昔日侍奉伯父太尉公，伯父曾对我说： 我昨夜梦见你登上一座高大壮丽的楼房，我把座席交给了你。
English: His uncle, Liu Qingyuan, was particularly fond of him and said to him, "I used to serve my uncle, the First Lieutenant. My uncle once said to me, "I dreamed last night that you climbed a tall and magnificent building, and I gave you a seat."

古文：汝后名宦必达，恨吾不及见耳。 
现代文：你日后名望官位必定显要，遗憾的是我见不到了。 
English: Your future prestigious position must be significant, unfortunately I can't see it.

古文：吾向聊复昼寝，又梦将昔时坐席还以赐汝，汝之官位当复及吾。
现代文：我往日也曾白天稍稍睡一会儿，又梦见将往日得到的座席还赠给你。你的官位应当能够赶得上我。
English: I used to sleep a little during the day, and I dreamed that I would give you back the seat I got in the past. Your position should be able to catch up with me.

古文：特宜勉励，以应嘉祥也。 
现代文：你一定要好好努力，以应吉祥之兆。 
English: You must work hard to respond to the auspicious signs.

古文：梁西昌侯藻镇雍州，遐时年十二，以百姓礼修谒，风仪端肃，进止详雅。
现代文：梁西昌侯萧藻镇守雍州时，柳遐才十二岁，他按老百姓的礼节谒见西昌侯，风度仪态端庄严肃，进退高雅。
English: When Liang Xichang Hou Xiao Zhaozhen was guarding Yongzhou, Liu Xuan was only twelve years old. He met Xichang Hou according to the etiquette of the common people, with a dignified and serious demeanor and elegant progress.

古文：藻羡之，试遣左右践遐衣裾，欲观其举措。
现代文：萧藻很欣赏他，让手下的人踩住他的衣襟，想借此看看他的反映。
English: Xiao Mo admired him very much, and asked his men to step on the collar of his coat to see his reflection.

古文：遐徐步稍前，曾不顾盼。
现代文：柳遐慢慢地朝前走了一点，根本不回头来看。
English: The willow warbler slowly walked forward a little, not looking back at all.

古文：仕梁稍迁尚书功论郎。
现代文：出仕梁朝，不久升任尚书功论郎。
English: He served the Liang Dynasty and was soon promoted to the post of Shang Shuxu Gong Rong Rong.

古文：陈郡谢举时为仆射，引遐与语，甚嘉之，顾谓人曰： 江汉英灵见于此矣。 
现代文：陈郡人谢举此时任尚书仆射，传唤柳遐来交谈，非常欣赏他，回头对人说 ：江汉的英才俊杰在这里见到了。 
English: At this time, the people of Chen County thanked Ren Shangshu for his service and summoned Liu Ye to have a conversation. They admired him very much and turned to the people and said, "We have seen the great talent Junjie from Jianghan here."

古文：岳阳王萧詧于襄阳承制，授遐吏部郎，赐爵闻喜公。
现代文：岳阳王萧鮞在襄阳秉承皇帝的旨意，授予柳遐吏部郎之职，赐爵号闻喜公。
English: Yueyang King Xiao Jie in Xiangyang, adhering to the emperor's will, awarded Liu Jie the post of secretary, and gave him the title of Wen Xi Gong.

古文：寻进位持节、侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：不久又晋升为持节、侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Jisetsu, Chamberlain, Cavalry Major General, and Kaifu-gi and Sanji.

古文：及詧践帝位于江陵，以襄阳来归，辞詧曰： 陛下中兴鼎业，龙飞旧楚。
现代文：及萧鮞在江陵称帝，举襄阳以归附北朝，柳遐向萧鮞辞别道： 陛下中兴盛业，雄居于古楚之地。
English: And Xiao Yao proclaimed himself emperor in Jiangling and raised Xiangyang to join the Northern Dynasty. Liu Yao bade farewell to Xiao Yao: "Your majesty has prospered and lived in the land of ancient Chu."

古文：臣昔因幸会，早奉名节，理当以身许国，期之始终。
现代文：臣昔日幸会陛下，早授官位，按理应该以身许国，以求有始有终。
English: In the past, if a vassal was fortunate enough to be granted an early official rank, it was reasonable for him to pledge allegiance to the country in order to have a beginning and an end.

古文：自晋氏南迁臣宗族盖寡，从祖太尉、世父仪同、从父司空，并以位望隆重，遂家于金陵；唯留先臣独守坟栢，尝诫臣等，使不违此志。
现代文：自从晋朝南迁，臣宗族随迁的少，从祖太尉、世父仪同、从父司空，都是职位高声望大，就在金陵安下家来。只留下臣之先人独守家园，曾经告诫臣等，不要违背先人之志。
English: Since the southward migration of the Jin Dynasty, there have been few vassals who have moved with their families. From the ancestor Taiyi, the world father Yi Tong, and the father Siku, all of whom held high-prestige positions, they settled down in Jinling. Only the ancestors of the vassals were left to defend their homeland. They had warned the vassals not to violate the wishes of their ancestors.

古文：今襄阳既入北朝，臣若陪随銮跸，进则无益尘露，退则有亏先旨。 
现代文：如今襄阳既然已经入于北朝，臣若陪从陛下，进则无益于行程，退则有违先人的意思。 
English: Now that Xiangyang has been incorporated into the Northern Dynasty, if a vassal accompanies His Majesty, it is not beneficial to advance on the journey, and it is against the will of the predecessors to retreat.

古文：詧重违其志，遂许之，因留乡里，以经籍自娱。
现代文：萧鮞嘉许他的志向，就答应了他。柳遐因此留在家乡，埋头经籍，自得其乐。
English: Xiao Yao appreciated his ambition and agreed to work with him. Therefore, Liu Yao stayed in his hometown, immersed himself in his studies, and enjoyed himself.

古文：周文帝、明帝频征，固辞以疾。
现代文：周文帝、明帝频频征召，柳遐因疾病坚辞不受。
English: Zhou Wendi and Ming Di were frequently conscripted, but Liu Ye refused to be conscripted due to illness.

古文：及詧殂，遐举哀，行旧臣之服。
现代文：及萧鮞死，柳遐甚为哀痛，按照旧臣的礼仪服丧。
English: When Xiao Yao died, Liu Yao was very sad and mourned in accordance with the etiquette of the old minister.

古文：保定中，又徵之，遐始入朝，授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、霍州刺史。
现代文：保定年间，朝廷再次征召，柳遐这时才入朝，任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、霍州刺史之职。
English: During the Baoding period, the imperial court was once again conscripted, and it was only at this time that Liu Ye came to the imperial court, holding the posts of grand cavalry general, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Hozhou Sashishi.

古文：遐导人务先以德，再三不用命者，乃微加贬异，示耻而已。
现代文：柳遐训导人务必先施以德，施德再三而不听从命令的，才稍加贬斥，只是让人知道羞耻而已。
English: Yanukovych's instructors must first instill virtue, and those who repeatedly fail to follow orders are only slightly reprimanded, just to make people aware of their shame.

古文：其下感而化之，不复为过，咸曰： 我君仁惠如此，其可欺乎！ 
现代文：他的部下受到感染而服其化，不再做什么错事，都说： 我们的长官这样仁慈施惠，怎么能够欺骗他呢！ 
English: His subordinates were infected and became obedient, no longer doing anything wrong, and they all said: "How could our benevolent and beneficent leader deceive him like this!"

古文：卒，赠金、安二州刺史。
现代文：柳遐死后，赠金、安二州刺史。
English: After Liu Yao's death, he was given a gold medal, and the history of An Erzhou was written.

古文：遐有至行。
现代文：柳遐有非常人所及的德行。
English: Yanagisawa has a virtue that few can match.

古文：初为州主簿，其父卒于扬州，遐自襄阳奔赴，六日而至，哀感行路，毁悴不可识。
现代文：当初任州主簿时，其父亲死在扬州，柳遐自襄阳奔丧，六天到达，一路悲哀过度，形貌损毁，人们都认不出来了。
English: When he was the chief registrar of the state, his father died in Yangzhou. Liu Yao rushed from Xiangyang to attend his father's funeral and arrived six days later. He was sad all the way and his appearance was ruined. People couldn't recognize him.

古文：后奉丧西归。中流风起，舟中人相顾失色。
现代文：后来奉父亲灵柩西归，中流忽起大风，舟中的人相顾失色。
English: Later, when Bong's father's coffin returned to the west, a strong wind suddenly arose in the middle of the stream, and the people in the boat lost interest in each other.

古文：遐抱棺号恸，诉天求哀，俄顷风止浪息。
现代文：柳遐抱着棺木悲号恸哭，向天诉说哀告，很快风止浪静。
English: Holding the coffin in her arms, Liu Yao wailed a mournful wail, and spoke a lament to the heavens. The wind soon died down.

古文：其母尝乳间发疽，医云： 此疾无可救理，唯得人吮脓，或望微止其痛。 
现代文：他的母亲乳间曾生有毒疮，医生说： 这种病没有什么办法可治，只有找人吮吮疮中的脓水，或许可以希望减轻点疼痛。 
English: His mother had suffered from poisonous sores between her breasts, and the doctor said, "There is no cure for this disease. The only way is to look for pus in the sores, and perhaps we can hope to alleviate some of the pain."

古文：遐应声即吮，旬日遂瘳。
现代文：声音未落，柳遐就吸吮起来，过了十来天慢慢地痊愈了。
English: Before the sound subsided, Liu Xuan sucked it up and slowly recovered after about ten days.

古文：咸以为孝感所致。
现代文：人们都认为这是柳遐的孝行感动了神灵的缘故。
English: People believe that this is because the gods were moved by Liu Yao's filial piety.

古文：性又温裕，略无喜愠之容。
现代文：柳遐性格温和宽厚，喜怒不形于色。
English: Yanagisawa's personality is gentle and generous, and he never loses his temper.

古文：弘奖名教，未尝论人之短。
现代文：弘扬奖励名教，从来不论人之过。
English: Carry forward and reward the great teachings, and never overlook the faults of others.

古文：尤尚施与，家无余财。
现代文：特别乐善好施，家中无多余的钱财。
English: They are especially good at charity and don't have any extra money at home.

古文：临终遗诫簿葬，其子等并奉行之。
现代文：临终嘱咐薄葬，其子辈遵嘱而行。
English: On his deathbed, he ordered a short funeral, and his children followed his instructions.

古文：有十子，靖、庄最知名。
现代文：有十个儿子，柳靖、柳庄最为有名。
English: They had ten sons, of whom Liu Jing and Liu Zhuang are the most famous.

