古文：一世人材，自可给一世之用。
现代文：一世人才，自然可以满足一世之用。
English: A once-in-a-lifetime talent can naturally meet a once-in-a-lifetime need.

古文：苟有以致之，无问其取士之门如何也。
现代文：只要能够网罗人才，不必计较取士的途径、方法如何。
English: As long as you can attract talent, you don't have to worry about how to get them.

古文：今之议者，多以科举经义、诗赋为言，以为诗赋浮华无根柢，不能致实学，故其说常右经而左赋。是不然。
现代文：当今以经义、诗赋取士，有人认为诗赋浮华无根底，不能选拔具有真才实学的士人，因而住往推崇经义而贬低诗赋，其实，这种看法是不正确的。
English: Nowadays, scholars are selected on the basis of sutras and poems. Some people think that poetry is flashy and baseless, and scholars with real talent and practical knowledge cannot be selected. Therefore, they tend to respect sutras and poems, but belittle poetry. In fact, this view is incorrect.

古文：成周之时，下及列国，皆官人以世，周之刘、单、召、甘，晋之韩、赵、荀、魏，齐之高、国、陈、鲍，卫之孙、宁、孔、石，宋之华、向、皇、乐，郑之罕、駟、国、游，鲁之季、孟、藏、展，楚之斗、蒍、申、屈，皆世不乏贤，与国终毕。
现代文：从西周初年直至战国时代，官员都是世卿世禄制，也即世袭制。周朝的刘、单、召、甘，晋国的韩、赵、荀、魏，齐国的高，国、陈、鲍，卫国的孙、宁、孔、石，宋国的华、向、皇、乐，郑国的罕、駟、国、游，鲁国的季、孟、藏、展，楚国的斗、蒍、申、屈等著名家族，都是世代不乏贤才，直至其国覆亡。
English: From the beginning of the Western Zhou Dynasty to the Warring States period, officials were appointed according to the hereditary system. The famous families such as Liu, Shan, Zhao and Gan of the Zhou Dynasty, Han, Zhao, Zou and Wei of the Jin Dynasty, Gao, Guo, Chen and Bao of the Qi Dynasty, Sun, Ning, Kong and Shi of the Wei Dynasty, Hua, Xiang, Wang and Le of the Song Dynasty, Han, Zang, Guo and You of the Zheng Dynasty, Ji, Meng, Zang and Zhan of the Lu Dynasty, and Dou, Zang, Shen and Qu of the Chou Dynasty, were all famous families with

古文：汉以经术及察举，魏、晋以州乡中正，东晋、宋、齐以门第，唐及本朝以进士，而参之以任子，皆足以尽一时之才。
现代文：汉代以经术及察举，魏、晋时代以九品中正制，东晋、南朝以门第，唐朝及本朝以进士取士，而参用任子之法，这些方法都足以取尽一世之才。
English: In the Han Dynasty, they used the method of sutra and survey, in the Wei and Jin Dynasties, they used the method of nine grades, middle and high, in the Eastern Jin and Southern Dynasties, they used the method of disciple, in the Tang Dynasty and the present dynasty, they used the method of appointment, and these methods are all sufficient to exhaust the talent of a lifetime.

古文：则所谓科目，特借以为梯阶耳！
现代文：由此可见，所谓的取士科目，不过是被用来作为阶梯而已！
English: From this it can be seen that the so-called apprenticeship subjects are merely being used as a ladder!

古文：经义、诗赋，不问可也。
现代文：至于是以经义为主，还是诗赋为主取士，完全可以不必过问。
English: As for whether to take the sutra as the main source or the poem as the main source, there is no need to ask.

