古文：列御寇之齐，中道而反，遇伯昏瞀人。
现代文：列御寇到齐国去，走到中途又折了回来，遇上伯昏瞀人。
English: The imperial envoys went to Qi Province, and when they reached the halfway point, they turned around and came back, where they met the people of Boduo.

古文：伯昏瞀人曰： 奚方而反？ 
现代文：伯昏瞀人问道： 什么事情让你又折了回来？ 
English: "Why did you come back in the middle of the journey?

古文：曰： 吾惊焉。 
现代文：列御寇说： 我感到惊恐不安。 
English: She said: "I felt scared and uneasy.

古文：曰： 恶乎惊？ 
现代文：伯昏瞀人又问： 什么原因使你惊惶不安？ 
English: Bodhidharma asked again: What is the reason for your anxiety?

古文：曰： 吾尝食于十浆而五浆先馈。 
现代文：列御寇说： 我曾在十家卖饮料的店子里饮用，却有五家事先就给我送来。 
English: Li Mikou said, "I used to drink at ten beverage stores, but five of them brought it to me in advance.

古文：伯昏瞀人曰： 若是则汝何为惊已？ 
现代文：伯昏瞀人说： 像这样的事，你怎么会惊惶不安呢？ 
English: Mr Bo said: "How can you not be alarmed by something like this?

古文：曰： 夫内诚不解，形谍成光，以外镇人心，使人轻乎贵老，而赍其所患。
现代文：列御寇说： 心中情欲不能排遣，形容举动会有光仪神采；以这样的外貌镇服人心，使人对我的尊重胜过对老人的尊重，这将会招致祸患。
English: Li Miko said: "In my heart, I cannot get rid of lust, and my actions can be described as glamorous; with such an appearance, I can win people's hearts and make people respect me more than they respect the old man, which will lead to disaster.

古文：夫浆人特为食羹之货，无多余之赢，其为利也薄，其为权也轻，而犹若是，而况于万乘之主乎！
现代文：卖浆人只不过是做些小本的饮食买卖，没有多少赢余，获利微薄，权势轻微，还如此待我，更何况是万乘的国君呢？
English: The seller of syrup is just doing some small-scale catering business, there is not much surplus, the profit is meager, the power is slight, and they still treat me like this, let alone the king of Wanxiao?

古文：身劳于国而知尽于事。彼将任我以事，而效我以功。
现代文：国君身体为国家损耗，才智为政事消耗，他们会把重任托付给我并考察我的功绩。
English: The body of the sovereign is a drain on the state, the intellect is a drain on the government, they will entrust me with important tasks and examine my merits.

古文：吾是以惊。 
现代文：我正因为这个缘故才惊惶不已。 
English: That's why I'm freaking out.

古文：伯昏瞀人曰： 善哉观乎！
现代文：伯昏瞀人说： 你的观察与分析妙啊！
English: "What a great opinion you have!" said Bo Dumoulin.

古文：女处已，人将保汝矣！ 
现代文：你就等着吧，人们会归附你的！ 
English: You just wait, people will flock to you!

古文：无几何而往，则户外之屦满矣。
现代文：没过多久，伯昏瞀人前去看望列御寇，见门外摆满了鞋子。
English: It didn't take long for the man from Bo to go to Reiko's house and see that the shoes of the visitors outside the door were already full.

古文：伯昏瞀人北面而立，敦杖蹙之乎颐。立有间，不言而出。
现代文：伯昏瞀人面朝北方站着，竖着拐杖撑住下巴，站了一会儿，一句话没有就出去了。
English: Bo Dum Diao stood with his face to the north, holding his crutch upright to support his chin. He stood for a moment and left without saying a word.

古文：宾者以告列子，列子提屦，跣而走，暨于门，曰： 先生既来，曾不发药乎？ 
现代文：接待客人的人告诉列御寇，列御寇提着鞋子，光着脚就跑了出来，赶到门口，说： 先生既然来了，怎么不说一句教导的话呢？ 
English: The person who was receiving the guests told the legionnaires, and the legionnaires ran out with their shoes and bare feet, rushed to the door, and said, "Since the teacher is here, why don't you say a word of instruction?"

古文：曰： 已矣，吾固告汝曰：人将保汝。果保汝矣！
现代文：伯昏瞀人说： 算了算了，我本来就告诉你说人们会归附你，果真归附你了。
English: Bodhidharma said, "Forget it, I told you that people would follow you, and they did.

古文：非汝能使人保汝，而汝不能使人无保汝也，而焉用之感豫出异也。
现代文：不是你能使人归附你，而是你不能使人不归附你。你何必这样讨人欢喜而显现得与众不同呢？
English: It is not that you can make people like you, but that you cannot make people not like you. Why do you have to be so pleasing and appear different?

古文：必且有感，摇而本性，又无谓也。
现代文：必定是有什么东西撼动了你的本性，而你又无奈何。
English: Something must have shaken your nature, and you are helpless.

古文：与汝游者，又莫汝告也。彼所小言，尽人毒也。
现代文：跟你交游的人中无人劝诫你，他们机巧的言论，全是毒害人的。
English: None of your companions will admonish you, and all their witty sayings are poisonous.

古文：莫觉莫悟，何相孰也。
现代文：你却不醒不悟，竟同他们混熟。
English: But you did not wake up, and you have become familiar with them.

古文：巧者劳而知者忧，无能者无所求，饱食而敖游，汎若不系之舟，虚而敖游者也！
现代文：逗人爱的智巧，你要丢掉才好。灵巧的人多劳累，聪明的人多忧患，不用智巧的人无所求。填饱肚子就自由自在地遨游，像不受缆索牵绊飘忽在水中的船只一样，这才是心境虚无而自由遨游的人。 
English: If you want to lose your charming cleverness, you'd better lose it. Clever people are more tired, clever people are more worried, and people who don't need cleverness have nothing to look forward to. They travel freely when they have enough to eat, like a ship drifting in the water without being tripped by a cable. This is a person who is free to travel without a mood.

古文： 郑人缓也，呻吟裘氏之地。祗三年而缓为儒。河润九里，泽及三族，使其弟墨。
现代文：郑国有个名叫缓的人在裘氏地方读书，只用了三年就成了儒生，像河水滋润沿岸的土地一样施惠乡里，泽及三族，并且使他的弟弟成为墨家的学人。
English: There was a man named Zeng in Zheng who studied in the Qiu area. It took him only three years to become a Confucian, and he benefited the township, the lake and the three ethnic groups like the land along the river, and made his younger brother a scholar of the Mo family.

古文：儒墨相与辩，其父助翟。
现代文：儒家、墨家不能相容而相互争辩，缓的父亲则站在墨家一边。
English: Confucianism and Mohism are incompatible and argue with each other, but Zeng's father stands on the side of Mohism.

古文：十年而缓自杀。其父梦之曰： 使而子为墨者，予也，阖尝视其良？
现代文：过了十年缓愤而自杀，他的父亲梦见他说： 让你的儿子成为墨家，还是我的功劳。
English: Ten years later, he killed himself in a fit of anger. His father had a dream in which he said to him, "I'm the one who made your son a painter."

古文：既为秋柏之实矣。 
现代文：怎么不看看我的坟墓，我已变成秋天的柏树而结出了果实！ 
English: Why don't you look at my grave, I have turned into an autumn cypress tree and bear fruit!

古文：夫造物者之报人也，不报其人而报其人之天，彼故使彼。
现代文：造物者所给予人们的，不会赋予人的才智和能力而是赋予人们的自然本性。
English: What the Creator gives people does not endow them with talents and abilities, but with their natural nature.

古文：夫人以己为有以异于人，以贱其亲。
现代文：缓的弟弟具备了墨家的禀赋因而能使他成为墨家学人。
English: His younger brother, who is slow to learn, has the talent of the Mo family and can thus become a Mo scholar.

古文：齐人之井饮者相捽也。故曰：今之世皆缓也。自是有德者以不知也，而况有道者乎！
现代文：缓总认为自己有什么与众不同的地方才这样轻侮他的父亲，就跟齐人自以为挖井有功而与饮水的人抓扯扭打一样，看来如今社会上的人差不多都是像缓这样贪天之功以为己有的人。自以为生活中总是这样，有德行的人却并不知道这样的情况，更何况是有道的人啊！
English: It seems that people in today's society are almost all greedy people who think they have earned their place in life. They think that life is always like this, but virtuous people don't know this, let alone virtuous people!

古文：古者谓之遁天之刑。
现代文：古时候人们称这种贪天之功的做法是违背自然规律而受到刑戮。
English: In ancient times, people said that this practice of coveting the merits of the heavens violated the laws of nature and were punished.

古文：圣人安其所安，不安其所不安；众人安其所不安，不安其所安。
现代文：圣哲的人安于自然，却不适应人为的摆布；普通人习惯于人为的摆布，却不安于自然。
English: A saintly person is at ease with nature, but does not adapt to being manipulated by man; an ordinary person is accustomed to being manipulated by man, but is uneasy with nature.

古文： 庄子曰： 知道易，勿言难。
现代文：庄子说： 了解道容易，不去谈论却很困难。
English: Zhuo Zi said: It is easy to understand Tao, but it is very difficult not to talk about it.

古文：知而不言，所以之天也。知而言之，所以之人也。
现代文：了解了道却不妄加谈论，这是通往自然的境界；了解了道却信口谈论，这是走向人为的尘世。
English: To understand the Way but not to talk about it is to go to the realm of nature; to understand the Way but to talk about it is to go to the artificial world.

古文：古之人，天而不人。 
现代文：古时候的人，体察自然而不追求人为。 
English: In ancient times, people observed nature and did not pursue artificiality.

古文：朱泙漫学屠龙于支离益，单千金之家，三年技成而无所用其巧。
现代文：朱泙漫向支离益学习屠龙的手艺，耗尽了千金家产，三年学成却没有地方施展他的手艺。
English: Zhu Yimang learned dragon-slaying techniques from Zhiyi Maru. He exhausted his family's wealth, and after three years of study, he had no place to display his skills.

古文：圣人以必不必，故无兵；众人以不必必之，故多兵。顺于兵，故行有求。
现代文：圣人不把必然的事当真，所以没有纷争；众人把不必然的事情当必然，所以纷争风起，顺纷争走，所以有贪求的行为。
English: The sages do not take the inevitable as true, so there is no dispute; the people take the inevitable as inevitable, so the disputes arise and go along with the disputes, so there is the behavior of greed.

古文：兵，恃之则亡。
现代文：纷争，依恃它就会灭亡。
English: quarrel, cling to it and perish.

古文：小夫之知，不离苞苴竿牍，敝精神乎蹇浅，而欲兼济道物，太一形虚。
现代文：普通人的心智，离不开交际应酬，把精神消耗在浅薄的事物中，还幻想普济天下，引导众物，以达到物我两忘的境界。
English: The mind of an ordinary person is inseparable from social intercourse, and consumes the spirit in shallow things. It also fantasizes about saving the world and guiding all things, so as to achieve the realm of forgetting both things and myself.

古文：若是者，迷惑于宇宙，形累不知太初。
现代文：像这样是为宇宙形体所迷惑，劳累形体不识太初的境况。
English: Like this, it is confused by the cosmic form, and the exhausted form does not know the original situation.

古文：彼至人者，归精神乎无始，而甘冥乎无何有之乡。
现代文：像那至人，精神归向于无始的境界，沉湎于无何有之乡。
English: Like that person, the spirit returns to the beginningless realm, indulging in the land of nothingness.

古文：水流乎无形，发泄乎太清。
现代文：水流于无形，自然流在虚寂的境界。
English: Water flows in the formless, natural flow in the realm of emptiness.

古文：悲哉乎！
现代文：可悲啊！
English: How sad!

古文：汝为知在毫毛而不知大宁。 
现代文：这些普通人反将心智用在琐碎的小事上，而不知道大宁的境界。
English: These ordinary people, on the other hand, use their minds on trivial matters, but do not know the realms of the Daning.

古文：宋人有曹商者，为宋王使秦。
现代文：宋国有个叫做曹商的人，为宋君偃出使秦国。
English: In Song, there was a man called Cao Shang, who sent an envoy to Qin for Song.

古文：其往也，得车数乘。王说之，益车百乘。
现代文：他前往秦国的时候，得到宋王赠与的数辆车子；秦王十分高兴，又加赐车辆一百乘。
English: When he went to Qin, he was given several cars by King Song; King Qin was very pleased and gave him another hundred cars.

古文：反于宋，见庄子，曰： 夫处穷闾厄巷，困窘织屦，槁项黄馘者，商之所短也；一悟万乘之主而从车百乘者，商之所长也。 
现代文：曹商回到宋国，见了庄子说： 身居偏僻狭窄的里巷，贫困到自己的编织麻鞋，脖颈干瘪面色饥黄，这是我不如别人的地方；一旦有机会使大国的国君省悟而随从的车辆达到百乘之多，这又是我超过他人之处。 
English: When Cao Shang returned to Song, he met Zhuangzi and said, "Living in a remote and narrow alley, being so poor that I have to weave my own hemp shoes, and having a withered neck and a yellow face from hunger, this is where I am inferior to others; once I have the opportunity to make the sovereign of a great country reflect, and the number of vehicles that follow me reaches a hundred times, this is where I am superior to others.

古文：庄子曰： 秦王有病召医。破痈溃痤者得车一乘，舐痔者得车五乘，所治愈下，得车愈多。
现代文：庄子说： 听说秦王有病召请属下的医生，破出脓疮溃散疖子的人可获得车辆一乘，舔治痔疮的人可获得车辆五乘，凡是疗治的部位越是低下，所能获得的车辆就越多。
English: Zhuangzi said: It is said that if Qin Wang is ill, he will call for a doctor from his subordinates. People who break out scabies and lice can get a vehicle, and people who lick and treat hemorrhoids can get five vehicles. The lower the treated area, the more vehicles can be obtained.

古文：子岂治其痔邪？何得车之多也？
现代文：你难道给秦王舔过痔疮吗，怎么获奖的车辆如此之多呢？你走开吧！ 
English: Have you been licking hemorrhoids for Qin Wang, how can there be so many award-winning vehicles? Go away!

古文：子行矣！ 鲁哀公问乎颜阖曰： 吾以仲尼为贞幹，国其有瘳乎？ 
现代文：鲁哀公向颜阖问道： 我想把仲尼任命为大臣，国家有希望了吧？ 
English: Lu Aigong asked Yan Qi: I want to appoint Zhongni as a minister, is there any hope for the country?

古文：曰： 殆哉圾乎！
现代文：颜阖说： 危险了，实在是危险啊！
English: Yan Qi said, "It's dangerous, it's really dangerous!

古文：仲尼方且饰羽而画，从事华辞。以支为旨，忍性以视民，而不知不信。受乎心，宰乎神，夫何足以上民！
现代文：孔子正热心雕琢文饰，追求华丽的辞章，把枝节当主干，矫饰自然性情以夸示于民众，不明智也不诚信，让他的内心被这些虚情主宰，怎么能领导人民呢！
English: Confucius is zealously carving ornaments, pursuing ornate phrases, taking branches and branches as the mainstay, preening natural temperament to show off to the people. It is unwise and dishonest to let his heart be dominated by these false feelings, how can he lead the people!

古文：彼宜女与予颐与，误而可矣！
现代文：孔子果真适合你吗？或者他真能恩惠人民吗？
English: Is Confucius really suitable for you? Or can he really benefit the people?

古文：今使民离实学伪，非所以视民也。为后世虑，不若休之。
现代文：那一定会误事的。让人民背离朴实而学类伪，这不是教化人民的办法，为后世着想，不如尽早放弃这个打算。
English: That would certainly be a mistake. It is not the way to educate the people to turn away from simplicity and learn falsehood. For the sake of future generations, it is better to abandon this plan as soon as possible.

古文：难治也！ 
现代文：孔子是很难治理好国家的。 
English: Confucius said that it is difficult to govern a country well.

古文：施于人而不忘，非天布也，商贾不齿。虽以事齿之，神者弗齿。
现代文：施与别人恩惠却总忘不了让人回报，远不是自然对普天之下广泛而无私的赐予。
English: It is far from being a widespread and selfless gift of nature to the whole world.

古文：为外刑者，金与木也；为内刑者，动与过也。
现代文：施恩图报的行为商人都瞧不起，即使有什么事情必须与他交往，内心也是瞧不起的。
English: Merchants look down on the behavior of the newspaper, and even if they have to deal with him in some way, they look down on him in their hearts.

古文：宵人之离外刑者，金木讯之；离内刑者，阴阳食之。
现代文：施加皮肉之刑的，不外乎是金属或木质的刑具；给内心世界带来惩罚的，则是自身的烦乱和行动的过失。
English: It is no more than a metal or wooden instrument that inflicts physical punishment; it is one's own turmoil and the fault of one's actions that bring punishment to the inner world.

古文：夫免乎外内之刑者，唯真人能之。
现代文：小人受到皮肉之刑，是用刑具加以拷问；小人内心受到惩罚，则是阴气阳气郁积所造成的侵害。
English: When a villain is punished physically, he is tortured with torture tools; when a villain is punished mentally, it is a violation caused by the accumulation of yin and yang.

古文：孔子曰： 凡人心险于山川，难于知天。
现代文：能够免于内外刑辱的，只有真人才可做到。孔子说： 人心比山川还要险恶，比探知天象还要困难。
English: Confucius said: "The human heart is more treacherous than a mountain stream, and more difficult to penetrate than a celestial elephant."

古文：天犹有春秋冬夏旦暮之期，人者厚貌深情。
现代文：自然尚有春夏秋冬和早晚变化的一定周期，人却貌容忠厚而情感内敛。
English: Nature still has a certain cycle of spring, summer, autumn, winter and morning and evening changes, but people are loyal and emotionally restrained.

古文：故有貌愿而益，有长若不肖，有慎狷而达，有坚而缦，有缓而悍。
现代文：有的人貌似老实却内心骄溢，有的人貌似长者却心术不正，有的人外貌圆顺而内心刚直，有的人外貌坚实而内心散漫，有的人表面舒缓而内心焦躁。
English: Some people look honest but are arrogant at heart, some people look like elders but are mentally dishonest, some people have a round appearance but are upright at heart, some people have a solid appearance but are diffuse at heart, and some people have a soothing appearance but are anxious at heart.

古文：故其就义若渴者，其去义若热。
现代文：所以人们趋义急如干渴，弃义急如避热。
English: Therefore, people are as anxious to attain righteousness as they are to quench their thirst, and as anxious to abandon righteousness as they are to avoid the heat.

古文：故君子远使之而观其忠，近使之而观其敬，烦使之而观其能，卒然问焉而观其知，急与之期而观其信，委之以财而观其仁，告之以危而观其节，醉之以酒而观其侧，杂之以处而观其色。
现代文：因此君子总是让他到远处来观察他是否忠诚，让他近身来观察他是否恭敬，让他处理繁难的事务来观察他的才能，向他突然提问来观察他的心智，与他紧急期约来观察他的信用，把财物托付给他来观察他的廉洁，告诉他危难的处境来观察他的节操，让他喝醉来观察他的仪态，使男女杂处来观察他的色态。
English: Therefore, a gentleman always lets him go to a distance to observe whether he is loyal, let him come close to observe whether he is respectful, let him deal with difficult matters to observe his ability, ask him sudden questions to observe his mind, make an emergency appointment with him to observe his credibility, entrust him with property to observe his integrity, tell him about a critical situation to observe his discipline, let him get drunk to observe his manners, and make men and women everywhere observe his color.

古文：九徵至，不肖人得矣。 
现代文：观察这九种征验，不好的人也就能挑拣出来了。 
English: Observing these nine kinds of enlistment tests, bad people can also be picked out.

古文：正考父一命而伛，再命而偻，三命而俯，循墙而走，孰敢不轨！
现代文：正考父首次被任命为士便逢人躬着背，再次任命为大夫便深深地弯着腰，第三次任命为卿更谦恭地俯下身子，总是让开大道顺着墙根快步急走，态度如此谦下谁还敢干出不轨之事！
English: During the examination, when my father was first appointed as a sergeant, he bowed his back to everyone. When he was reappointed as a doctor, he bent down deeply. When he was appointed as a lord for the third time, he bowed down more humbly. He always left the road and walked quickly along the wall. With such a humble attitude, who would dare to do something wrong!

古文：如而夫者，一命而吕钜，再命而于车上舞，三命而名诸父。孰协唐许？
现代文：如果是凡夫俗子，首次任命为士就会傲慢矜持，再次任命为大夫就会在车上手舞足蹈，第三次任命为卿就要人呼叔称伯了，像这样谁还会成为唐尧、许由那样谦让的人呢？
English: If you are an ordinary person, the first time you are appointed as a scholar, you will be arrogant and reserved, the second time you are appointed as a doctor, you will be dancing in the car, and the third time you are appointed as a lord, you will be called uncle. Who will become a humble person like Tang Jun and Xu You?

古文：贼莫大乎德有心而心有睫，及其有睫也而内视，内视而败矣！
现代文：最大的祸害莫过于有意培养德行而且有心眼，等到有了心眼就会以意度事主观臆断，而主观臆断必定导致失败。
English: The greatest evil is to have the intention to cultivate virtue and the mind-eye, and when you have the mind-eye, you will judge things subjectively, and subjective judgment will inevitably lead to failure.

古文：凶德有五，中德为首。
现代文：招惹凶祸的官能有心、耳、眼、舌、鼻五种，内心的谋虑则是祸害之首。
English: The heart, ears, eyes, tongue, and nose are the five organs that cause evil, and the inner thoughts are the first cause of evil.

古文：何谓中德？
现代文：什么叫做内心谋虑的祸害呢？
English: What do you call the scourge of internal deliberation?

古文：中德也者，有以自好也而吡其所不为者也。
现代文：所谓内心谋虑的祸害，是指自以为是而诋毁自己所不赞同的事情。
English: The so-called scourge of internal deliberation refers to the self-righteousness and vilification of things that they do not agree with.

古文：穷有八极，达有三必，形有六府。
现代文：困厄窘迫源于以下八个方面的自恃与矜持，顺利通达基于以下三种情况的必然发展，就像身形必具六个脏腑一样。
English: Distress comes from the following eight aspects of self-restraint and restraint, smoothly leading to the inevitable development based on the following three situations, just as the body must have six internal organs.

古文：美、髯、长、大、壮、丽、勇？
现代文：貌美、须长、高大、魁梧、健壮、艳丽、勇武、果敢，八项长处远远胜过他人，于是依恃傲人必然导致困厄窘迫。
English: Beautiful, long-haired, tall, burly, robust, gorgeous, brave, courageous, eight strengths far surpass others, so clinging to arrogant people will inevitably lead to distress and embarrassment.

古文：敢，八者俱过人也，因以是穷；缘循、偃仰、困畏，不若人三者俱通达；知慧外通，勇动多怨，仁义多责，六者所以相刑也。达生之性者傀，达于知者肖，达大命者随，达小命者遭。
现代文：因循顺应、俯仰随人、困厄怯弱而又态度谦下，三种情况都能遇事通达。自恃聪明炫耀于外，勇猛躁动必多怨恨，倡导仁义必多责难。通晓生命实情的人心胸开阔，通晓真知的人内心虚空豁达，通晓长寿之道的人随顺自然，通晓寿命短暂之理的人也能随遇而安。
English: There are three types of people who are able to handle any situation well: those who conform, those who follow others, and those who are weak and timid but humble. Those who boast of being clever and show off, those who are brave and impetuous are more likely to be resented, and those who advocate benevolence and righteousness are more likely to be criticized. Those who know the truth of life are open-minded, those who know the truth are open-minded, those who know the truth of life are open-minded, those who know the truth of life are open-minded, those who know the truth of longevity are open-minded, and those who know the truth of longevity are open-

古文：人有见宋王者，锡车十乘。以其十乘骄稚庄子。
现代文：有个人去拜见宋王，宋王赐给他车马十乘，他依仗这些车马向庄子炫耀。
English: There was a man who went to see King Song. King Song gave him ten chariots and horses, and he used them to show off to Zhuangzi.

古文：庄子曰： 河上有家贫恃纬萧而食者，其子没于渊，得千金之珠。其父谓其子曰： 取石来锻之！
现代文：庄子说： 河边有一户贫穷靠编织苇席为生的人家，他的儿子潜入深渊，得到一枚价值千金的珍珠，父亲对儿子说： 拿过石块来锤坏这颗宝珠！
English: Zhuangzi said, "There was a poor family living by the river and making a living by weaving carpets. Their son dived into the abyss and got a pearl worth thousands of gold. The father said to his son, "Take some stones and break this pearl!"

古文：夫千金之珠，必在九重之渊而骊龙颔下。子能得珠者，必遭其睡也。
现代文：价值千金的宝珠，必定出自深深的潭底黑龙的下巴下面，你能轻易地获得这样的宝珠，一定是遇到龙在打盹儿。
English: A pearl of great value must come from deep under the jaws of a black dragon at the bottom of the lake. If you can easily obtain such a pearl, you must have encountered a dragon napping.

古文：使骊龙而寤，子尚奚微之有哉！ 
现代文：倘若黑龙醒过来，你还想活着回来吗？ 
English: If the black dragon awakens, do you still want to come back alive?

古文：今宋国之深，非直九重之渊也；宋王之猛，非直骊龙也。
现代文：现如今宋国危机深重，远不只是九重深渊；而宋王的凶残，也远不只是黑龙那样。
English: Nowadays, the crisis of the Song Dynasty is profound, far more than a nine-fold abyss; and the ferocity of the Song King is far more than that of the Black Dragon.

古文：子能得车者，必遭其睡也；使宋王而寐，子为赍粉夫。 
现代文：你能从宋王那里获得十乘车马，也一定是遇上宋王打盹儿了。倘若宋王一旦醒过来，你也就必将粉身碎骨了 。
English: If you can get ten chariots and horses from Song Wang, you must have met Song Wang's hiccups. If Song Wang wakes up, you will be crushed.

古文：或聘于庄子，庄子应其使曰： 子见夫牺牛乎？
现代文：有人来聘请庄子。庄子答复他的使者说： 你见过那准备用作祭祀的牛牲吗？
English: Someone came to hire Shōzō. Shōzō replied to his messenger: "Have you seen the cattle that are to be used as sacrifices?

古文：衣以文绣，食以刍叔。及其牵而入于大庙，虽欲为孤犊，其可得乎！ 
现代文：用织有花纹的锦绣披着，给它吃草料和豆子，等到牵着进入太庙杀掉用于祭祀，就是想要做个没人看顾的小牛，难道还可能吗？ 
English: Is it still possible to dress a calf in embroidered brocade, feed it with herbs and beans, take it to the temple and kill it for sacrifice, only to have it become a neglected calf?

古文：庄子将死，弟子欲厚葬之。
现代文：庄子快要死了，弟子们打算厚葬他。
English: Chuang Tzu was about to die, and his disciples planned to give him a grand funeral.

古文：庄子曰： 吾以天地为棺椁，以日月为连璧，星辰为珠玑，万物为赍送。
现代文：庄子说： 我以天地为棺椁，以太阳和月亮为连璧，把星星当作珍珠，把万物当作陪葬品。
English: Zhuo Zi said: I take heaven and earth as the coffin, the sun and the moon as the link, the stars as pearls, and all things as funeral goods.

古文：吾葬具岂不备邪？
现代文：我的丧葬用品难道还不齐备吗？
English: Aren't my funeral supplies ready yet?

古文：何以加此！ 
现代文：还有比这更好的么！ 
English: It doesn't get any better than this!

古文：弟子曰： 吾恐乌鸢之食夫子也。 
现代文：弟子们说： 我们担心乌鸦和老鹰吃掉你尸体！ 
English: The disciples said, "We are afraid that the crows and eagles will eat your corpse!"

古文：庄子曰： 在上为乌鸢食，在下为蝼蚁食，夺彼与此，何其偏也。 
现代文：庄子说： 天葬让乌鸦和老鹰吃，土葬让蝼蛄和蚂蚁吃，从乌鸦老鹰那里夺过来给蝼蛄蚂蚁，为什么这样偏心呢！
English: Zhuangzi said, "Heavenly burial is for crows and eagles to eat, earth burial is for grasshoppers and ants to eat, and it is taken from crows and eagles and given to grasshoppers and ants. Why such eccentricity?

古文：以不平平，其平也不平；以不徵徵，其徵也不徵。
现代文：用偏见去追求均平，这样的均平绝对不是自然的均平；用人为的感应去应验外物，这样的应验绝不是自然的感应。
English: Using prejudice to pursue evenness, such evenness is definitely not natural evenness; using artificial induction to respond to external objects, such response is definitely not natural induction.

古文：明者唯为之使，神者徵之。
现代文：自以为明智的人只会被外物所驱使，精神世界完全超脱于物外的人才会自然地感应。
English: People who think they are wise will only be driven by external things, and those who are completely detached from the spiritual world will naturally respond.

古文：夫明之不胜神也久矣，而愚者恃其所见入于人，其功外也，不亦悲夫！
现代文：自以为明智的人早就比不上精神世界完全超脱的人，可是愚昧的人还总是自恃偏见而沉溺于世俗和人事，他们的功利只在于追求身外之物，这不很可悲吗！
English: Isn't it sad that people who think they are wise are no match for those who are completely detached from the spiritual world, but foolish people always indulge in the mundane and the personal because of their prejudices. Their usefulness lies only in the pursuit of things outside themselves.

