古文：昔唐虞之臣，敷奏以言；秦汉之辅，上书称奏。
现代文：昔日尧舜时代的臣子，在表述政事及意见时都口头表达，到了秦汉时期，给皇帝上的公文叫作 奏 。
English: In the past, courtiers in the Han Dynasty expressed their political affairs and opinions verbally. During the Qin and Han Dynasties, the official documents sent to the emperor were called "play."

古文：陈政事，献典仪，上急变，劾愆谬，总谓之奏。奏者，进也。
现代文：陈述国家大事，进献礼仪典章，报告紧急变故，弹劾官员的错误，统统称为 奏 。 奏 ，即 进言 之意。
English: The presentation of national events, the presentation of ceremonial awards, the reporting of emergencies, and the impeachment of officials' mistakes are all referred to as "play." Play, that is, the meaning of "speech."

古文：言敷于下，情进于上也。
现代文：是臣子进奏陈述，把情况说给天子听。
English: It is the vassal who makes a statement and tells the situation to the emperor.

古文：秦始立奏，而法家少文。
现代文：秦始皇建立秦朝后确立 奏 的名称，但是当政的法家人物缺少文采。
English: After the founding of the Qin Dynasty by the First Emperor of Qin, the name of 奏 was established, but the legal figures in power lacked literary talent.

古文：观王绾之奏勋德，辞质而义近；李斯之奏骊山，事略而意诬：政无膏润，形于篇章矣。
现代文：看丞相王绾上书称颂始皇功德，语言质朴而意义浅近，李斯的《治骊山陵上书》，叙事简略且内容虚假。政治没有恩泽，从奏章上就看得出。
English: Look at the letter of the Prime Minister Wang Xi praising the merits of the First Emperor, the language is simple and the meaning is shallow, and Li Si's "Curing the Mountains and Tombs Letter," the narrative is simple and the content is false. Politics has no grace, as can be seen from the song.

古文：自汉以来，奏事或称 上疏 ，儒雅继踵，殊采可观。
现代文：汉代之后，向皇帝陈述政事有时称作 上疏 ，使用的是儒雅的文辞，文采突出。
English: After the Han Dynasty, the presentation of government affairs to the emperor was sometimes referred to as Shangzhu, using elegant words and outstanding prose.

古文：若夫贾谊之务农，晁错之兵事，匡衡之定郊，王吉之劝礼，温舒之缓狱，谷永之谏仙，理既切至，辞亦通辨，可谓识大体矣。
现代文：像贾谊陈述农业重要性的《论积贮疏》，晁错议论对外用兵的《言兵事疏》，匡衡建议订立郊祀之礼的《奏徙南北郊》，王吉劝谏实行先王礼制的《上宣帝疏言得失》，路温舒建议以德政代替酷法的《尚德缓刑书》，谷永劝谏皇帝不要沉溺神仙方术的《说成帝距绝祭祀方术》等。
English: For example, Jia Yi stated the importance of agriculture in the "Discussion on the accumulation and storage of resources," Zhou Er discussed the use of foreign soldiers in the "Discussion on the use of foreign soldiers," Kuang Heng suggested the establishment of a suburb ritual in the "Song of the North and South Suburbs," Wang Ji advised the implementation of the previous king's ritual system in the "Proclamation of the Emperor," Lu Wenshu suggested the use of German politics instead of the cool method in the "Book of Impartiality," and Gu Yong advised the emperor not to indulge in the magic method of "Saying that the emperor is far away from the ritual method," etc.

古文：后汉群贤，嘉言罔伏，杨秉耿介于灾异，陈蕃愤懑于尺一，骨鲠得焉。
现代文：这些奏疏说理中肯周全，文辞明白通畅，是符合奏章体制的。东汉也有很多贤臣，从来不把好的评论隐匿不发，杨秉上疏发表对灾异的见解，陈蕃上疏表达对赏罚制度的愤懑，表现得非常有骨气。
English: There were also many wise men in the Eastern Han Dynasty who never concealed their good comments. Yang Bingzhangzo expressed his views on the calamity, and Chen Bingzhangzo expressed his indignation at the reward and punishment system, showing great backbone.

古文：张衡指摘于史职，蔡邕铨列于朝仪，博雅明焉。
现代文：张衡上疏指摘史官修史中的不当，蔡邕上疏对比朝廷制度的不合理，这些人都是学识渊博、见地明确的人。
English: Zhang Heng Shangsuo pointed out the inappropriateness of the historian's revision of history, and Cai Xuan Shangsuo compared the irrationality of the imperial court system. These people are all knowledgeable and clear-sighted people.

古文：魏代名臣，文理迭兴。若高堂天文，黄观教学，王朗节省，甄毅考课，亦尽节而知治矣。
现代文：曹魏时期，有文采和理论修养的人接连出现，比如高堂隆借天象变动劝谏皇帝不建豪华宫室，黄观奏请有关教学的事情，王朗奏请皇帝节省，甄毅建议对选拔官员进行考核等，这些奏疏都是臣子们恪尽职守的证明。
English: During the Cao Wei period, people with literary and theoretical training appeared one after another. For example, Gao Tonglong borrowed the celestial phenomenon to persuade the emperor not to build a luxurious palace, Huang Guanzhong asked the emperor to save money, Wang Langsong asked the emperor to save money, and Zhen Yi suggested that the selection officials should be evaluated. These are all proofs that the courtiers fulfilled their duties.

古文：晋氏多难，灾屯流移。刘颂殷劝于时务，温峤恳恻于费役，并体国之忠规矣。
现代文：西晋多难，祸患不断，刘颂罢相后仍关心国家大事，上疏陈事；温峤对劳民伤财感到不安而上疏劝谏。
English: West Jin Province was difficult and plagued by constant disasters. After Liu Song stepped down, he was still concerned about national affairs and tried to keep a low profile. Wen Wei was uneasy about the damage to the people's wealth and tried to keep a low profile.

古文：夫奏之为笔，固以明允笃诚为本，辨析疏通为首。
现代文：这些都是体察国事的衷心劝谏啊！ 奏 这种文体，根本在于明确可信忠厚诚信，强调辨别分析和通达事理。
English: These are all heartfelt exhortations from someone who understands state affairs. The essence of this style is to be clear, trustworthy, loyal and honest, and to emphasize discernment, analysis and reason.

古文：强志足以成务，博见足以穷理，酌古御今，治繁总要，此其体也。
现代文：只有意志坚定的人才能胜任，广博的见识以穷达事理；参考古人来驾驭今事，抓住要害以处理繁杂：这就是 奏 的基本要领。
English: Only a person with a strong will can be competent, and a wide range of knowledge is based on poverty and reason; refer to the ancients to control the present, grasp the key to deal with the complex: this is the basic essentials of playing.

古文：若乃按劾之奏，所以明宪清国。
现代文：至于揭发检举罪过的奏文，是用以严明法纪、廓清国政的。
English: As for the petition to expose and prosecute the crime, it is used to strictly clarify the legal discipline and clarify the national politics.

古文：昔周之太仆，绳愆纠谬；秦有御史，职主文法；汉置中丞，总司按劾；故位在鸷击，砥砺其气，必使笔端振风，简上凝霜者也。
现代文：从前周代的太仆，专门负责纠正过失和错误；秦代的御史大夫，负责掌管弹劾法令和文书；汉代设置御史中丞，则是主管弹劾罪过的监察官。所以，既然身为执法严厉的监察官，就应磨炼其气势，以求把弹奏写得像笔下生风、纸上结霜那样劲厉。
English: In the previous Zhou Dynasty, the Taifu was specifically responsible for correcting faults and errors; in the Qin Dynasty, the goshi daifu was in charge of impeachment decrees and documents; in the Han Dynasty, the goshi chujo was set up as the ombudsman in charge of impeachment offenses. Therefore, since it is a strict law enforcement ombudsman, it is necessary to hone its momentum in order to write the play as vigorously as the brush strokes and the frosting on the paper.

古文：观孔光之奏董贤，则实其奸回；路粹之奏孔融，则诬其衅恶。
现代文：读汉代孔光对董贤的弹奏，是如实列举其罪行；汉末路粹对孔融的奏本，却是捏造罪名。
English: Reading the Han Dynasty Kong Guang's play on Dong Xian is a truthful enumeration of his crimes; the Han Dynasty Lu Zi's play on Kong Rong is a fabrication of charges.

古文：名儒之与险士，固殊心焉。
现代文：由此可见，在弹奏的写作上，名儒和险士的用心是大不相同的。
English: From this, it can be seen that in the writing of playing, the intentions of famous Confucians and adventurers are very different.

古文：若夫傅咸劲直，而按辞坚深；刘隗切正，而劾文阔略：各其志也。
现代文：至于西晋傅咸，为人刚劲正直，因此弹奏写得有力而深刻；东晋刘隗虽严峻正直，他的弹奏却写得有些粗疏：这也是各有其不同的情志所致。
English: As for Fu Xian of the Western Jin Dynasty, he was a tough and honest person, so his playing was powerful and profound; Liu Xuan of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, although he was stern and honest, his playing was a bit rough: this was also due to their different sentiments.

古文：后之弹事，迭相斟酌，惟新日用，而旧准弗差。
现代文：后世的弹奏文，相互参酌，在不断运用中虽有新的发展，但和古代的基本格式没有什么大的差别。
English: Although there are new developments in the continuous use of later generations of music, there is no big difference from the basic format of ancient times.

古文：然函人欲全，矢人欲伤，术在纠恶，势必深峭。
现代文：可是，制造铠甲的工匠是为了使人安全，制造弓箭的工匠，却是希望使人受其伤害；弹奏是为了纠正罪恶，也就势必写得深刻严峻。
English: However, the craftsman who makes armor is to make people safe, the craftsman who makes bows and arrows, but hopes to make people hurt by them; the playing is to correct the evil, so it is bound to be written in a profound and serious way.

古文：《诗》刺谗人，投畀豺虎；《礼》疾无礼，方之鹦猩。
现代文：《诗经》里面批判毁谤好人的谗人，说要把这种人投给豺狼虎豹；《礼记》中痛恨无礼的人，把他比作鹦鹉和猩猩。
English: In the "Book of Songs," he criticized the eunuchs who slandered good people, saying that such people should be cast to the wolves and tigers; in the "Book of Rites," he hated the impolite people, comparing him to a parrot and an orangutan.

古文：墨翟非儒，目以羊彘；孟轲讥墨，比诸禽兽。
现代文：墨翟攻击儒家，称之为公羊和大猪；孟轲讥讽墨家，就比之为禽兽。
English: Meng Tao attacked Confucianism, calling it a ram and a pig; Meng Tao mocked Confucianism, likening it to a beast.

古文：《诗》、《礼》、儒墨，既其如兹，奏劾严文，孰云能免。
现代文：《诗经》、《礼记》、儒家、墨家，尚且如此，严峻的弹奏之文，又怎能避免？
English: "The Book of Songs," "The Book of Rites," Confucianism, and Mohism, even so, how can we avoid the grim text of the performance?

古文：是以世人为文，竞于诋诃，吹毛取瑕，次骨为戾，复似善骂，多失折衷。
现代文：所以，一般人写这种文章，都是竞相辱骂，吹毛求疵，尖刻得深透骨髓，甚至以谩骂为能，大都失于折中。
English: Therefore, the average person writing this kind of article is competing to abuse, nitpicking, cutting deeply into the bone marrow, and even using abuse as a skill, most of which are lost in the middle.

古文：若能辟礼门以悬规，标义路以植矩，然后逾垣者折肱，捷径者灭趾，何必躁言丑句，诟病为切哉！
现代文：如果开辟礼的大门和义的道路，就可以此为准则，对不通过 礼门 越墙而过的人，就砍他的手，不走 义路 而走小道的人，就断他的脚；何须用暴躁丑恶的言辞，以无理谩骂为工巧呢？
English: If you open the gates of propriety and the way of righteousness, this can be the standard. For those who do not pass through the gate of propriety and go over the wall, cut off his hand. For those who do not walk the path of righteousness, but walk the path of the narrow way, cut off his foot. Why do you need to use violent and ugly words and unjustified abuse as a skill?

古文：是以立范运衡，宜明体要。
现代文：所以，确立规范，衡量取舍，应以表达要义为主。
English: Therefore, the establishment of norms and the measurement of trade-offs should be based on the essence of expression.

古文：必使理有典刑，辞有风轨，总法家之裁，秉儒家之文，不畏强御，气流墨中，无纵诡随，声动简外，乃称绝席之雄，直方之举耳。启者，开也。
现代文：必须做到说理有常规，用辞有法度，取法家的判断精神，用儒家的文辞采饰，不畏强暴的权势，使盛气流贯于笔墨之中；也不放任诡诈欺骗的人，使声势振动于竹简之外，这就可说是御史大夫的杰作，正直的壮举了。所谓 启 ，就是开。
English: It must be said that there is a reason and a rule, the use of words has a law, the spirit of judgment of the legalists is taken, the Confucian rhetoric is used, and the violent power is not afraid to make the air flow through the pen and ink; nor is the deceitful person allowed to make the sound vibrate outside the bamboo strips. This can be said to be the masterpiece of the doctor of history, a feat of honesty. The so-called 启 is to open.

古文：高宗云 启乃心，沃朕心 ，取其义也。
现代文：商王武丁曾说， 打开你的心窍，浇灌我的心灵 ； 启 就是取这个意思。
English: The merchant king Wuding once said, "Open your heart and water my soul"; Kai means this.

古文：孝景讳启，故两汉无称。
现代文：西汉景帝名 启 ，为了避讳，所以两汉时期的奏启不用 启 这个名称。
English: The name of Emperor Jing of the Western Han Dynasty was Kai, so in order to avoid taboo, the name Kai was not used during the two Han dynasties.

古文：至魏国笺记，始云启闻。奏事之末，或云 谨启 。
现代文：到魏代的笺表中，才开始用 启闻 ，或者在奏事的最后说 谨启 。
English: It was not until the Wei Dynasty that the use of "啟闻" or "谨启" at the end of a report began to be used in official records.

古文：自晋来盛启，用兼表奏。
现代文：晋代以后， 启 的运用相当普遍，而兼有表奏的作用。
English: After the Jin Dynasty, the use of 啟 was quite common, and it also played the role of a prelude.

古文：陈政言事，既奏之异条；让爵谢恩，亦表之别干。
现代文：在陈述政见、议论国事上， 启 是 奏 的分支；在辞让封爵、感谢恩典方面， 启 是 表 的枝干。
English: In the presentation of political views and discussion of national affairs, it is a branch of the play; in the resignation, knighthood and gratitude, it is a branch of the table.

古文：必敛饬入规，促其音节，辨要轻清，文而不侈，亦启之大略也。
现代文：奏启的写作，必须整饬得合于法度，紧缩音节，抓住要害，简明轻快，有一定的文采，但不能浮夸，这就是 启 的基本要领了。
English: In the writing of the opening, it is necessary to rectify and conform to the law, condense syllables, grasp the key, be concise and brisk, have a certain literary style, but not be pompous. This is the basic essentials of the opening.

古文：又表奏确切，号为谠言。
现代文：此外， 表  奏 这类文体讲求言辞的确切，成为 谠言 。
English: In addition, the expression of this kind of style speaks of the exactness of the words, and becomes a gossip.

古文：谠者，正偏也。
现代文：所谓 谠 ，也就是纠正偏差的意思。
English: The so-called, that is, the meaning of correcting the deviation.

古文：王道有偏，乖乎荡荡，矫正其偏，故曰谠言也。
现代文：如果 表  奏 出现了偏差，就是对《尚书》 不偏不倚，才能让王道久远广阔 的违背。
English: If there is a deviation in the performance, it is an unbiased violation of the "Shang Shu" in order to make the royal road long and broad.

古文：孝成称班伯之谠言，言贵直也。
现代文：只有说话不出现偏颇，才能叫作 谠言 。
English: Only when speech is not biased can it be called criticism.

古文：自汉置八能，密奏阴阳，皂囊封板，故曰封事。
现代文：汉成帝称赞班伯说出的话就是所谓的 谠言 ，就是因为他的话中正而没有偏倚。
English: Han Chengdi praised the words uttered by Bamber as the so-called "criticism," because his words were correct and unbiased.

古文：晁错受书，还上便宜。后代便宜，多附封事，慎机密也。
现代文：晁错受委派学习《尚书》，回去后就上奏说 便宜 ，所以后代 便宜 一类的奏书，都会加上密封，是为了保守其中的秘密。
English: He was assigned to study "Shangshuo" by mistake, and when he returned, he wrote "Cheap" on it, so future generations of "Cheap" books will be sealed in order to keep the secret.

古文：夫王臣匪躬，必吐謇谔，事举人存，故无待泛说也。
现代文：王臣不考虑自身的安危，说出来的话一定是正直的，活着的意义就是做好政事，所以用不着说空话。总结：
English: Wang Chen did not consider his own safety, and what he said must be honest. The meaning of life is to do a good job in politics, so there is no need to say empty words.

古文：赞曰∶皂饰司直，肃清风禁。
现代文：要整顿必讲直话的监察机构，以肃清政教风纪。
English: It is necessary to rectify the watchdog agencies, which must be forthright, in order to clean up the political and educational ethics.

古文：笔锐干将，墨含淳酖。
现代文：奏启的写作，笔要如宝剑那样锐利，墨要像剧毒的鸩酒那样猛烈。
English: The pen should be as sharp as a sword, and the ink should be as strong as poisoned wine.

古文：虽有次骨，无或肤浸。
现代文：虽应深入刺骨，但不要用谗言伤人。
English: Although you should go deep into the bone, don't hurt people with insults.

古文：献政陈宜，事必胜任。
现代文：这样，用奏启来提供政见，陈述事宜，就一定能胜任其事。
English: In this way, the use of recitation to provide political opinions and state matters will certainly be able to do its job.

