古文：大驭掌驭玉路以祀。
现代文：大驭负责驾驭王的玉路而前往祭祀。
English: The great charioteer is responsible for driving the king's jade road to the temple.

古文：及犯軷，王自左驭，驭下祝，登，受辔，犯軷，遂驱之。
现代文：到行辕祭时，王由车左边的位置控驭着车马不使行进，由大驭下车向较神祝告，祝告完毕而后登车，从王手中接过马缰绳，驾车碾过祭辕神的土山，于是驱车前进。
English: When it was time to perform the burnt offering, the king controlled the chariot and horse from the position on the left side of the chariot so that they did not have to travel, and the charioteer got out of the chariot to congratulate the god. After the congratulation, he boarded the chariot, took the horse reins from the king, and drove the chariot over the earthen hill where the burnt offering was made, and then drove the chariot forward.

古文：及祭，酌仆，仆左执辔，右祭两轵，祭軓，乃饮。
现代文：祭祀辕神时，王使人酌酒献给大驭，大驭左手握马缰，右手用酒祭车的两轵，又祭车轨，祭毕才次酒。
English: When offering sacrifices to the god of wine, the king would have people drink wine and offer it to Dazai. Dazai would hold the saddle in his left hand, and in his right hand he would hold the two halves of the sacrificial chariot with the wine, as well as the sacrificial chariot track, and then offer the second wine.

古文：凡驭路，行以肆夏，趋于采荠。凡驭路仪，以鸾和为节。戎仆掌驭戎车，掌王倅车之政，正其服，犯軷，如玉路之仪。
现代文：掌管有关王的戎车的副车的政令，规正乘副车者的服装。为王驾驭戎车举行辕祭碾土山而过，如同大驭驾玉路的礼仪。
English: The decree in charge of the sidecar of the king's chariot prescribes the clothing of the sidecar riders. For the king to drive the chariot, a festival is held to grind the mountain, just like the etiquette of driving the jade road.

古文：凡巡守及兵车之会，亦如之。
现代文：如果王外出巡守或参加兵车之会，也这样行軷祭。
English: If the king is out on patrol or taking part in a chariot procession, the wreath-laying ceremony is also performed in this way.

古文：掌凡戎车之仪。
现代文：负责规正所有兵车的仪法。
English: Responsible for regulating the etiquette of all chariots.

古文：齐仆掌驭金路，以宾。
现代文：齐仆负责为王驾驭金路以接待宾客。
English: The courtiers are responsible for steering the golden carriage for the king to receive guests.

古文：朝觐、宗遇、飨食，皆乘金路。其法仪，各以其等为车送逆之节。
现代文：诸侯春朝、秋觐、夏宗、冬遇而王用飨礼和食礼款待诸侯时，都乘金路迎送诸侯，迎送的仪法是，各依诸侯等级的高低，作为迎送远近的节度。
English: In the Spring, Autumn, Summer, and Winter, when the princes were received by the princes, and the king entertained the princes with feasts and dinners, the princes were welcomed by the golden road. The ceremony of welcoming the princes was, according to the level of the princes, as a ceremony of welcoming far and near.

古文：道仆掌驭象路以朝、夕、燕出入，其法仪如齐车。
现代文：道仆负责为王驾驭象路而早晚上朝，或燕游时进出，其仪法同齐车一样。
English: The Taoist servant is responsible for driving the elephant road for the king, and enters and exits early in the morning and evening, or when the swallow swims. Its etiquette is the same as that of the carriage.

古文：掌贰车之政令。
现代文：掌管有关象路的副车的政令。
English: The decree in charge of the by-pass on the Xiang Road.

古文：田仆掌驭田路，以田以鄙，掌佐车之政。
现代文：田仆负责为王驾驭田路，用以田猎，用以巡视野地。
English: The field servant is responsible for driving the field road for the king, for hunting in the fields, and for surveying the fields.

古文：设驱逆之车，令获者植旌。
现代文：掌管有关田路的副车的政令。设置驱赶野兽的车和拦击野兽的车。树立旌旗令猎获禽兽的人献兽。
English: A decree was issued to control the auxiliary vehicles on the fields and roads, set up a vehicle to drive away wild animals and a vehicle to stop wild animals, and set up a banner to order those who hunted animals to sacrifice animals.

古文：及献，比禽。
现代文：到献禽兽的时候，将禽兽分类清点。
English: At the time of animal sacrifice, the animals are sorted and counted.

古文：凡田，王提马而走。诸侯晋，大夫驰。
现代文：凡田猎，为王驾车就控制着马而缓慢地跑，为诸侯驾车就抑制着马不使快跑，为大夫驾车就放马奔驰。
English: In field hunting, the king driving the car controls the horse and runs slowly, the princes driving the car restrains the horse from running fast, and the doctor driving the car lets the horse gallop.

古文：驭夫掌驭贰车従车使车，分公马而驾治之。
现代文：驭夫负责驾驭王车的副车、群臣的从车和使者之车。
English: The charioteer is responsible for driving the second carriage of the royal carriage, the carriage of the courtiers and the carriage of the emissaries.

古文：校人掌王马之政。
现代文：分类调习公马。校人掌管有关王马的事务。
English: Classify and train the stallions. The school staff is in charge of the affairs related to the stallions.

古文：辨六马之属，种马一物，戎马一物，齐马一物，道马一物，田马一物，驽马一物。
现代文：辨别六种马的类别：种马为一类，戎马为一类，齐马为一类，道马为一类，田马为一类，驽马为一类。
English: Distinguish six stallion categories: stallion is a class, army horse is a class, zima is a class, road horse is a class, field horse is a class, and draught horse is a class.

古文：凡颁良马而养。乘之，乘马一师，四圉；三乘为皂，皂一趣马；三皂为系，系一驭夫；六系为厩，厩一仆夫；六厩成校，校有左右；驽马三良马之数，丽马一圉，八丽一师，八师一趣马，八趣马一驭夫。
现代文：凡把良马分配给养马官喂养：每乘四匹马设一名圉师，设四名圉；每三乘十二匹马为一皂，每皂设一趣马；每三皂三十六匹马为一系，每系设一驭夫；每六系二百一十六匹马为一厩，每厩设一仆夫；六厩为一校，有左右二校。每厩驽马数是每厩良马数的三倍，每丽两匹驽马设一圉，八丽十六匹驽马设一圉师，八圉师一百二十八匹驽马设一趣马，八趣马一千零二十四匹驽马设一驭夫。
English: Whoever distributes good horses to horse breeders for feeding: for every four horses, there shall be one groom and four grooms; for every three to twelve horses, there shall be one saddle, and for each saddle, there shall be one hobby horse; for every three to six horses, there shall be one line, and for each line, there shall be one rider; for every six lines of two hundred and sixteen horses, there shall be one stable, and for each stable, there shall be one servant; for every six stables, there shall be one school, and there shall be two left and right schools. The number of horses per stable is three times the number of good horses per stable. For every

古文：天子十有二闲，马六种；邦国六闲，马四种；家四闲，马二种。
现代文：天子有马十二闲，马有六种。诸侯每国有马六闲，马有四种。卿大夫每家邑有马四闲，马有二种。
English: There are twelve kinds of horses in Tianzi, six kinds of horses. There are six kinds of horses and four kinds of horses in every state. There are four kinds of horses and two kinds of horses in every county.

古文：凡马，特居四之一，春祭马祖，执驹；夏祭先牧，颁马，攻特；秋祭马社，臧仆；冬祭马步，献马讲驭夫。
现代文：凡养马，雄性的马居四分之一。春季祭祀马祖，举行执驹礼。夏季祭祀先牧，将公马与母马分开饲养，阉割公马。秋季祭祀马社，挑选优秀的驾车人。冬季祭祀马步，献马给王，挑选和训练驭夫。
English: Where horses are kept, a quarter of the stallions are male. In the spring, a horse-breeding festival is held, and a stallion-breeding ceremony is held. In the summer, a shepherd's festival is held, in which the stallions are raised separately from the mares, and the stallions are castrated. In the autumn, a horse society is held, and excellent drivers are selected. In the winter, a horse-walking festival is held, in which horses are offered to the king, and drivers are selected and trained.

古文：凡大祭祀、朝觐、会同，毛马而颁之，饰币马，执扑而従之。
现代文：凡举行大祭祀、大朝觐、大会同，选择毛色相同的马以供驾王车，并分授给乘马的人。
English: Whenever a grand ritual, grand pilgrimage, or general assembly is held, a horse of the same color is chosen to drive the royal chariot and given to the rider.

古文：凡宾客，受其币马。
现代文：洗刷币马以备王赠赐，赠赐时拿着马鞭跟在马后。
English: He washes the horse to prepare it for the king's gift. When the gift is given, he rides behind the horse with a whip.

古文：大丧，饰遣车之马。
现代文：凡前来朝聘的宾客，接受他们献给王的币马。
English: All the guests who came to pay their respects to the king received coins and horses, which they presented to him.

古文：及葬，埋之。
现代文：有大丧，洗刷驾遣车的马；葬后，埋掉草扎的马。
English: If there is a great funeral, wash the horse that drove the cart; after the funeral, bury the horse with grass.

古文：田猎，则帅驱逆之车。
现代文：举行田猎，就率领驱赶和拦击野兽的车。
English: When a field hunt is held, he will lead the car to drive away and stop the beast.

古文：凡将事于四海山川，则饰黄驹。
现代文：凡王巡守途中将祭祀四方山川，就洗刷用于祭祀的黄马。
English: On the way of the Van Wang's patrol, he washed the yellow horse that was used for the sacrifice from the mountains and rivers in all four directions.

古文：凡国之使者，共其币马，凡军事，物马而颁之，等驭夫乙禄，宫中之稍食。
现代文：凡王国派出的使者，供给将赠赐诸侯的币马。凡有军事行动，挑选毛色和力量符合要求的马而加以分配。区别驭夫等养马官俸禄的等差，以及他们的属吏的食粮。
English: For every messenger sent out by the kingdom, provisions will be given to the nobles. For every military action, horses of the required color and strength will be selected and distributed. The difference between the salaries of horse breeders such as drivers, and the food of their subordinates.

古文：趣马掌赞正良马，而齐其饮食，简其六节，掌驾说之颁。
现代文：趣马负责协助校人正确地喂养调教良马，调剂它们的饮食，观察它们的进、退、行、止、驰、骤六个方面。
English: Fun Horse is responsible for assisting school staff in correctly feeding and training good horses, adjusting their diet, and observing their progress, retreat, walk, stop, gallop, and gallop in six aspects.

古文：辨四时之居治，以听驭夫。
现代文：负责安排王马驾车和卸车的次序，辨别四季王马所应居处的地方和治马的事，而听从驭夫的指挥。
English: It is responsible for arranging the order of driving and unloading the king horse, distinguishing the place where the four-season king horse should live and managing the horse, and obeying the command of the driver.

古文：巫马掌养疾马而乘治之，相医而药攻马疾。
现代文：巫马负责疗养病马，通过遛马观察马的疾病所在而加以治疗，协助医者用药治疗马的疾病，从校人那里领取财物以供治疗的开支。
English: Wuma is responsible for nursing sick horses, observing and treating the horse's disease by riding the horse, assisting the doctor to use medicine to treat the horse's disease, and receiving property from the school to pay for the treatment.

古文：受财于校人，马死，则使其贾粥之，入其布于校人。
现代文：马死了，就让贾人把死马的皮、骨卖掉，而把所卖的钱上交校人。
English: When the horse died, he asked Jia Ren to sell the skin and bones of the dead horse, and give the money to the schoolmaster.

古文：牧师掌牧地，皆有厉禁而颁之。
现代文：牧师掌管牧地，都设有藩篱和禁令而颁授给养马宫。
English: Pastoralists manage the pastures, each with fences and prohibitions, which are awarded to the stables.

古文：孟春焚牧，中春通淫，掌其政令。
现代文：春正月焚烧牧地的陈草，春二月使马交配，掌管有关的政令。
English: In the first month of spring, the old grass in the pasture is burned, and in the second month of spring, the horses are made to mate, and the relevant government orders are issued.

古文：凡田事，赞焚莱。
现代文：凡举行田猎，协助山虞和泽虞焚烧荒草，以开辟田猎场地。
English: Whenever a field hunt is held, help the Sangu and Zegu to burn the weeds to open up the field hunting grounds.

古文：庾人掌十有二闲之政教，以阜马，佚特，教駣、攻驹，及祭马祖，祭闲之先牧，及执驹，散马耳，圉马。
现代文：庾人掌管有关十二闲王马的政教，以使马盛壮，使马用之而不过于劳累，教习珧马，阉割公马以及春季祭祀马祖，夏季祭祀发明用闲养马的先牧以及举行执驹礼，使马习惯声音的刺激，教圉人养马。
English: The eunuchs are in charge of the political and religious affairs of the twelve idle kings and horses, so as to make the horses prosperous and strong, so that the horses can be used without being overworked, teach the breeding of horses, castrate the male horses, and the spring ritual of Mazu, the summer ritual of pioneering the invention of idle horses, and hold the eunuch ceremony, so that the horses get used to the stimulation of sound, and teach the eunuchs to raise horses.

古文：正校人员选，马八尺以上为龙，七尺以上为騋，六尺以上为马。
现代文：选择可任圉师、圉人的人员而对他们的才能加以评定。马高八尺以上称作龙，高七尺以上称作骤高六尺以上称作马。
English: A horse with a height of eight feet or more is called a dragon, a horse with a height of seven feet or more is called a dragon and a horse with a height of six feet or more is called a horse.

古文：圉师掌教圉人养马，春除蓐、衅厩，始牧，夏庌马，冬献马。
现代文：圉师负责教圈人养马。春天除去马厩中铺垫的草，为新建的马厩行衅礼，开始放牧马。夏天把马系到庑下。冬天向王献马。
English: In the spring, the stables are cleared of the padded grass and the newly built stables are inaugurated, and the horses are put out to pasture. In the summer, the horses are tied under the yoke. In the winter, the horses are presented to the king.

古文：射则充椹质，茨墙则剪阖。
现代文：习射就供给椹板做靶子。建草屋就修剪所覆盖的草。
English: Training shooters use a cutting board as a target, while builders prune the grass they cover.

古文：圉人掌养马刍牧之事，以役圉师。
现代文：圉人掌管饲养和放牧马的事，而听从圉师指使。
English: The groom is in charge of the rearing and herding of the horse, but follows the instructions of the groom.

古文：凡宾客、丧纪，牵马入陈。
现代文：凡接待宾客，或有丧事，就牵马进来陈列。
English: Whoever receives guests, or has a funeral, will bring in a horse and display it.

古文：廞马，亦如之。
现代文：陈列用作明器的驾遣车的马也一样。
English: The same applies to the horses used to drive the cart, which are also on display.

古文：职方氏掌天下之图，以掌天下之地，辨其邦国、都鄙、四夷、八蛮、七闽、九貉、五戎、六狄之人民，与其财用九谷、六畜之数要，周知其利害，乃辨九州之国，使同贯利。
现代文：职方氏掌管天下的地图，以掌握天下的土地，辩别各诸侯国、王畿内的采邑、四夷国、八蛮国、七闽国、九貉国、五戎国、六狄国的人民，以及他们的财物、九谷、六畜的数目，遍知他们的有利和不利条件所在。
English: The Shukukata clan controlled the map of the world in order to grasp the land of the world, identify the people of the various vassal states, the imperial cities within the kingdoms, the four barbarian states, the eight barbarian states, the seven barbarian states, the nine barbarian states, the five barbarian states, and the six barbarian states, as well as their property, the nine valleys, and the number of cattle, and know their favorable and unfavorable conditions.

古文：东南曰扬州，其山镇曰会稽，其泽薮曰具区，其川三江，其浸五湖，其利金、锡、竹箭，其民二男五女，其畜宜鸟、兽，其谷宜稻。
现代文：辨别九州内的国家，使各国都有他们共同的事业和利益。东南是扬州，它的山镇是会稽，它的大泽是具区，它的河流有三江，它的可资灌溉的浸有五湖，它的特产有金、锡、竹箭，它的人民的男女比例是二比五，那里宜于畜养鸟兽，宜于种植稻谷。
English: Distinguish the countries in Kyushu, so that all countries have their common cause and interests. The southeast is Yangzhou, its mountain town is Hefei, its Ozawa is Gubei, its rivers have three rivers, its irrigation can be soaked in the five lakes, its special products are gold, tin, bamboo and arrow, its male to female ratio is two to five, it is suitable for raising birds and beasts, and it is suitable for planting rice.

古文：正南曰荆州，其山镇曰衡山，其泽薮曰云瞢，其川江、汉，其浸颍、湛，其利丹、银、齿、革，其民一男二女，其畜宜鸟、兽，其谷宜稻。
现代文：正南是荆州，它的山镇是衡山，它的大泽是云梦，它的河流有长江、汉水，它的可资灌溉的浸有颍水、湛水，它的特产布丹砂、银、象牙、皮革，它的人民的男女比例是一比二，那里宜于畜养鸟兽，宜于种植稻谷。
English: Directly south is Jingzhou, its mountain town is Hengshan, its Ozawa is Yunmeng, its rivers are Yangtze River and Han River, its capital irrigation is soaked with brackish water and waterlogged, its special products are butane sand, silver, ivory and leather, its male-female ratio is one to two, it is suitable for raising animals and birds, and it is suitable for planting rice.

古文：河南曰豫州，其山镇曰华山，其泽薮曰圃田，其川荧雒，其浸波溠，其利林、漆丝枲，其民二男三女，其畜宜六扰，其谷宜五种。
现代文：河南是豫州，它的、山镇是华山，它的大泽是圃田，它的河流有济水、雒水，它的可资灌溉的浸有波水、灌水，它的特产有竹木、漆、丝、麻，它的人民的男女比例是二比三，那里宜于畜养马、牛、羊、猪、狗、鸡，宜于种植黍、稷、豆、麦、稻。
English: Henan is Yuzhou, its mountain towns are Huashan, its Ozawa is the rice paddies, its rivers have fresh water and brackish water, its irrigation can be irrigated with wave water and irrigation, its special products are bamboo, lacquer, silk and hemp, its male to female ratio is two to three, it is suitable for raising horses, cattle, sheep, pigs, dogs and chickens, and it is suitable for planting alfalfa, alfalfa, beans, wheat and rice.

古文：正东曰青州，其山镇曰沂山，其泽薮曰望诸，其川淮泗，其浸沂沐，其利蒲鱼，其民二男二女，其畜宜鸡、狗，其谷宜稻、麦。
现代文：正东是青州，它的山镇是沂山，它的大泽是望诸，它的河流有淮水、泗水，它的可资灌溉的浸有沂水、沭河，它的特产有蒲柳、海鱼，它的人民的男女比例是二比三，那里宜于畜养鸡、狗，宜于季中植稻、麦。
English: Directly to the east is Qingzhou, its mountain town is Shaoshan, its Ozawa is Wangzhu, its rivers are Huai Shui and Shaoshui, its irrigation resources are immersed in Shaoshui and Shaoshe, its special products are bulbul and sea fish, its male to female ratio is two to three, it is suitable for raising chickens and dogs, and it is suitable for planting rice and wheat in the middle of the season.

古文：河东曰兖州，其山镇曰岱山，其泽薮曰大野，其川、河、，其浸卢维，其利蒲鱼，其民二男三女，其畜宜六扰，其谷宜四种。
现代文：河东是兖州，它的山镇是泰山，它的大泽是大野，它的河流有河水、沸水，它的可资灌溉的浸有卢水、潍水，它的特产有蒲柳、海鱼，它的人民的男女比例是二比三，那里宜于畜养马、牛、羊、猪、狗、鸡，宜于种植黍、稷、稻、麦。
English: The east of the river is Luzhou, its mountain town is Mount Tai, its Ozawa is Ohno, its rivers have river water and boiling water, its irrigation can be soaked with Lu water and brackish water, its special products are bulgogi and sea fish, and its male to female ratio is two to three. It is suitable for raising horses, cattle, sheep, pigs, dogs and chickens, and it is suitable for planting alfalfa, alfalfa, rice and wheat.

古文：正西曰雍州，其山镇曰岳山，其泽薮曰弦蒲，其川泾、汭，其浸渭、洛，其利玉石，其民三男二女，其畜宜牛、马，其谷宜黍、稷。
现代文：正西是雍州，它的山镇是岳山，它的大泽是弦蒲，它的河流有泾水、 衲水，它的可资灌溉的浸有渭水、洛水，它的特产有玉石，它的人民的男女比例是三比二，那里宜于畜养牛、马，宜于种植黍、稷。
English: Directly to the west is Yongzhou, its mountain town is Yue Mountain, its large lake is Zengpu, its rivers are Surabaya and Surabaya, its irrigation resources are soaked in Surabaya and Luo, its special products are jade, and the male to female ratio of its people is three to two. It is suitable for raising cattle and horses, and it is suitable for planting oaks and maples.

古文：东北曰幽州，其山镇曰医无闾，其泽曰貕养，其川河、；其浸时，其利鱼、盐，其民一男三女，基畜宜四扰，其谷宜三种。
现代文：东北是幽州，它的山镇是医无阊山，它的大泽是貘养，它的河流有河水、沸水，它的可资灌溉的浸有淄水、时水，它的特产有海鱼、盐，它的人民的男女比例是一比三，那里宜于畜养马、牛、羊、猪，宜于种植黍、稷、稻。
English: The northeast is Yuzhou, its mountain towns are medicine-free mountains, its Ozawa is rearing cattle, its rivers have river water and boiling water, its irrigation resources are soaked in brackish water and seasonal water, its special products are sea fish and salt, and the male to female ratio of its people is one to three. It is suitable for raising horses, cattle, sheep and pigs, and it is suitable for planting lettuce, alfalfa and rice.

古文：河内曰冀州，其山镇曰霍山，其泽薮曰杨纡，其川漳，其浸汾、潞，其利松柏，其民五男三女，其畜宜牛羊，其谷宜黍、稷。
现代文：河内是冀州，它的山镇是霍山，它的大泽是杨纡，它的河流有漳水，它的可资灌溉的浸有汾水、潞水，它的特产有松、柏，它的人民的男女比例是五比三，那里宜于畜养牛、羊，宜于种植黍、稷。
English: Hanoi is Jizhou, its mountain town is Huoshan, its Ozawa is Yangshuo, its rivers have brackish water, its irrigation can be soaked with brackish water and brackish water, its special products are pine and cypress, the male to female ratio of its people is five to three, it is suitable for raising cattle and sheep, and it is suitable for planting alfalfa and alfalfa.

古文：正北曰并州，其山稹曰恒山，其泽薮曰昭余祁，其川虖池，呕夷，其浸涞易，其利布帛，其民二男三女，其畜宜五扰，其谷宜五种，乃辨九服之邦国，方千里曰王畿，其外方五百曰侯服，又其外方五百里曰甸服，又其外方五百里曰男服，又其外方五百里曰采服，又其外方五百里曰卫服，又其外方五百里曰蛮服。又其外方五百里曰夷服，又其外方五百里曰镇服，又其外方五百里曰藩服。
现代文：正北是并州，它的山镇是恒山，它的大泽是昭余祁，它的河流有虖池水、呕夷水，它可资灌溉的浸有涞水、易水，它的特产有布、丝织品，它的人民的男女比例是二比三，那里宜于畜养马、牛、羊、狗、猪，宜于种植黍、稷、豆、麦、稻。辨别九服的诸侯国。地方千里的是王畿，王畿之外方五百里是侯服，侯服之外方五百里是甸服，甸服之外方五百里是男服，男服之外方五百里是采服，采服之外方五百里是卫服，卫服之外方五百里是蛮服，蛮服之外方五百里是夷服，夷服之外方五百里是镇服，镇服之外方五百里是藩服。
English: Its due north is Bianzhou, its mountain town is Hengshan, its Ozawa is Zhaoyu, its rivers are Dianchi and Tuyi, its irrigable water is salty and brackish, its special products are cloth and silk. The male-female ratio of its people is two to three. It is suitable for raising horses, cattle, sheep, dogs and pigs, and it is suitable for planting alfalfa, millet, beans, wheat and rice. Distinguish the nine service countries. The place thousands of miles away is Wangji, five hundred miles away from Wangji is Houfu, five hundred miles away from Houfu is Dianfu, five hundred miles away from Dianfu

古文：凡邦国千里，封公以方五百里，则四公；方四百里，则六侯，方三百里，则七伯；方二百里，则二十五子；方百里，则百男，以周知天下。
现代文：凡分封诸侯国，地方千里，分封方五百里的公国，可以分封四个公；分封方四百里的侯国，可以分封六个侯；分封方三百里的伯国，可以分封七个伯；分封方二百里的子国，可以分封二十五个子；分封方百里的男国，可以分封一百个男：根据这个比例就可遍知天下的诸侯国数。
English: For every vassal state with a territory of 1,000 li, and a principality with a territory of 500 li, four princes can be vassalized; for a vassal state with a territory of 400 li, six princes can be vassalized; for a county with a territory of 300 li, seven counties can be vassalized; for a son state with a territory of 200 li, 25 sons can be vassalized; for a son state with a territory of 100 li, 100 sons can be vassalized: according to this ratio, the number of vassal states can be known all over the world.

古文：凡邦国小大相维，王设其牧，制其职，各以其所能；制其贡，各以其所有。
现代文：凡诸侯国，小国与大国相互维系，王为他们设置州牧，制定诸侯国君臣应行的职责，各依照他们的所能；制定诸侯国应缴纳的贡赋，各依照他们国家之所有。
English: In all the vassal states, the small states and the great states maintain a mutual relationship. The king sets up provincial governors for them, and sets forth the duties to be performed by the vassals of the vassal states, each according to their ability; and sets forth the tribute to be paid by the vassal states, each according to what their country possesses.

古文：王将巡守，则戒于四方曰：各修平乃守，考乃职事，无敢不敬戒，国有大刑。
现代文：王将巡守天下，就预先发文书告诫四方，说： 各自搞好你们境内的治安，检察你们迎接王的准备情况，有敢不严肃认真的，王国有重刑。 
English: The king will patrol the world, and he will send a letter in advance to warn the four sides, saying: "Each of you should do a good job of security in your territory, inspect your preparations for welcoming the king. If you dare not be serious, the kingdom will have a heavy penalty.

古文：及王之所行，先道，帅其属而巡戒令。
现代文：到王启程前往所巡视之国时，就做先导，率领下属而巡视该国执行戒令的情况。
English: When the king leaves for the country he is inspecting, he will lead the way and lead his subordinates to inspect the implementation of the order in the country.

古文：王殷国，亦如之。
现代文：王在附近的诸侯国接见众来朝的诸侯时，也这样做。
English: The king did the same when he received all the princes who came to the court in the nearby principalities.

古文：土方氏掌土圭之法，以致日景，以土地相宅，而建邦国都鄙，以辨土宜土化之法，而授任地者。
现代文：土方氏掌管运用土圭的方法，通过测度日影，以度量土地的方位和远近而观测可居住的地方，建立诸侯国和采邑，辨别土地所宜种植的作物和所宜采取的改良方法，授给掌管使用土地之法的官吏。
English: The Hijikata clan was in charge of applying the Toku method, by measuring the shadow of the sun, observing the habitable places by measuring the position and proximity of the land, establishing vassal states and townships, identifying the crops suitable for planting and the improvement methods suitable for the land, and awarding the officials in charge of the land use law.

古文：王巡守，则树王舍。
现代文：王外出巡守，就在王的行宫周围树立藩篱。
English: When the king is out on patrol, they set up a fence around the king's palace.

古文：怀方氏掌来远方之民，致方贡，致远物而送逆之，达之以节，治其委积、馆舍、饮食。
现代文：怀方氏负责使远方的人民前来归附，命令六服之内的方国进献贡赋，命令远方国家进献土特产，而对他们负责迎送，发给他们旌旗或玺节以便通行，办理他们途中所需的粮草、馆舍和饮食。
English: The Waifang clan was responsible for making people from far away come to attach themselves, ordering the Fang countries within the six counties to pay tribute, ordering the distant countries to donate local products, and was responsible for welcoming them, issuing them with flags or banners for passage, and handling the grain and grass, accommodation and food they needed on their way.

古文：合方氏掌达天下之道路，通其财利，同其数器，壹其度量，除其怨恶，同其好善。
现代文：合方氏负责使天下道路通达，使天下财物流通，使天下计数方法和称量轻重的器具统一，长度和容量的标准一致，消除国家间的仇怨，使天下的好尚相同。
English: Hefang is responsible for making the world's roads passable, making the world's financial flows flow, making the world's counting methods and weighing light and heavy appliances unified, the length and capacity standards consistent, eliminating hatred between countries, and making the world's goods the same.

古文：训方氏掌道四方之政事，与其上下之志，诵四方之传道。
现代文：训方氏负责向王叙说四方诸侯国的政事，和他们君臣的心志，向王诵说四方诸侯国世代传说的往古圣贤事迹。
English: The Xuefang clan was responsible for telling the king about the political affairs of the four principalities and the aspirations of their princes and ministers, and reciting to the king the legends of the ancient sages and sages of the four principalities.

古文：正岁，则布而训四方，而观新物。
现代文：夏历正月初一，就布告天下而训导四方人民，注意观察新出现的物产器械。
English: On the first day of the first month of the lunar calendar, he announced to the world and instructed the people of the four directions to pay attention to the observation of new products and equipment.

古文：形方氏掌制邦国之地域，而正其封疆，无有华离之地，使小国事大国，大国比小国。
现代文：形方氏掌管制定诸侯国的地域，规正它们的疆界，不要有不正或相互绝离的土地。使小国服事大国，大国亲睦小国。
English: The Kataho clan is in charge of drawing up the regions of the vassal states, adjusting their borders, and not having any land that is illegitimate or cut off from each other. Make small countries serve big countries, and big countries get along with small countries.

