古文：十八日，别调御诸君。
现代文：十八日辞别了夏调御等各位。
English: On the 18th, I said goodbye to everyone at the summer transfer window.

古文：十五里，午至麻姑坛。
现代文：走十五里，中午到达麻姑坛。
English: Walk for fifteen miles, and at noon, you will arrive at the Mahogany Altar.

古文：又西二里，坞穷。
现代文：又往西二里，走到山坞尽头。
English: Another two miles to the west, to the end of the dock.

古文：循南山上，又二里转出五老西南，是为五老坳。
现代文：顺南山往上走，又行二里转出五老峰西南面，这里是五老坳。
English: Go up along the Nanshan Mountain, and turn two miles to the southwest of the Wulao Peak. Here is the Wulao Hut.

古文：于是循北山上，又二里为篾竹岭，越岭二里为丹霞洞，又西上一里为王仙岭，越岭又西一里为张村，皆前所历之道也。
现代文：从坳中顺北山往上爬，又走二里为蔑竹岭，越过岭二里为丹霞洞，又往西上一里为王仙岭，越过岭又往西走一里为张村，这一段都是前些日子走过的路。
English: Climbing up from the Shunbei Mountain in Shanzhong, walking two miles to Shizhu Ridge, crossing the ridge for two miles to Danxia Cave, walking one mile to the west to Wangxian Ridge, crossing the ridge and walking one mile to the west to Zhangcun, this section is all the road traveled in the previous days.

古文：于是又西平行山半，四里，逾朱君岭，复沿山半行。
现代文：从张村又往西沿半山腰平平地走，四里，翻过朱君岭，又沿着半山腰走。
English: From Zhangcun, go west along the mid-mountain and walk flatly for four miles, turn over Zhujunling, and walk along the mid-mountain.

古文：深竹密树，弥山绘谷，五里，石坪。
现代文：深竹密树，长满山间，将山谷装点得如一幅彩画，红的叶，红的花，点缀掩映在深绿丛中，这山叫鞋山。走五里，到石坪。
English: Deep bamboo dense trees, grow all over the mountains, decorate the valley like a painting, red leaves, red flowers, embellishment hidden in the deep green bushes, this mountain is called Shoe Mountain. Walk five miles to Shizhong.

古文：山环一谷，随水峡而入，中甚圆整，万山之上，得此一龛，亦隐居之所，惜为行道踏破云帏耳。
现代文：山峦环绕着一个山谷，沿水峡进去，谷中地形圆而齐整，千万座山岭之上，得到如此一块地方，也可作隐居的处所了，可惜这如云中帐幕的地方被来往的道路踏破了。
English: The mountains surround a valley, along the water canyon into the valley, the terrain is round and neat, on top of thousands of mountains, to get such a place, can also be used as a place of seclusion, but unfortunately this place like a tent in the clouds was broken by the road.

古文：居民数十家，以造纸为业。
现代文：谷中住着几十户人家，以造纸为业。
English: Dozens of families live in the valley, making paper.

古文：自石坪复登岭，岭峻而长，共五里始达岭头，即芙蓉东过之脊也。
现代文：从石坪起又攀山岭，那岭险峻而且长，共走五里才到达岭头，它是芙蓉峰往东穿越过来的山脊。
English: The ridge is steep and long, and it takes a total of five miles to reach the ridge top, which is the ridge that the Hibiscus Peak crosses to the east.

古文：脊二重，俱狭若堵墙，东西连属。
现代文：山脊有两层，都窄得如一堵墙，东西相连。
English: The ridge has two layers, both as narrow as a wall, connected to each other.

古文：脊南为南城属，下有龙潭古刹脊北为临川属。
现代文：山脊南面为南城县属地，脊下有座龙潭古寺，因为在深谷中，道路小，未能下去。山脊北面为临川县属地。
English: The southern side of the ridge belongs to Nancheng County, and there is a Longtan Ancient Temple under the ridge, because the road is small in the deep valley and cannot go down. The northern side of the ridge belongs to Linchuan County.

古文：度脊而西即芙蓉山，自南而北高亘于众山之上。
现代文：越过山脊向西就是芙蓉山，它自南向北高高地绵亘在众山上面。
English: Over the ridge to the west is Mount Hibiscus, which stretches high above the mountains from south to north.

古文：其山之东则临川、南城之界。西则宜黄属矣。
现代文：芙蓉山的东面就是临川县和南城县的交界处，西面则是宜黄县的属地。
English: The east side of Mount Hibiscus is the junction of Linchuan County and Nancheng County, and the west side is the territory of Yihuang County.

古文：循山之东北又上里许，山开一箝东北向，是为芙蓉庵，昔祠三仙，其今僧西庵葺为佛宇，遂宿其中。
现代文：顺芙蓉山的东北面又往上走一里左右，山中裂开一条浅而窄的坑谷，朝向东北面，这就是芙蓉庵的所在处，庵中原来供奉三个仙人，如今僧人将西庵修葺为佛寺，于是住宿在寺内。
English: Along the northeast side of Mount Hibiscus, walk up another mile or so. A shallow, narrow valley opens up in the middle of the mountain. Towards the northeast, this is where Hibiscus Hermitage is located. Originally, three hermits were enshrined in the hermitage, but now the monks have renovated the west hermitage into a Buddhist temple, so they stay in the temple.

古文：十九日，从庵侧左登，皆小径，直跻一里，出峰上。
现代文：十九日从庵左侧往上攀登，都是小路，直往上一里，到达峰顶上。
English: On the 19th, I climbed up from the left side of the hermitage. It was all small paths, all the way up to the top of the mountain.

古文：又平行峰顶，北最高处为三仙石。
现代文：又从峰顶上平平地走，峰顶北面最高处为三仙石。
English: From the top of the peak, walk flatly. The highest point on the north side of the peak is Sanxian Stone.

古文：登其上，东眺黄仙峰，已不能比肩；南眺军峰，直欲竞峻；芙蓉之南，有陈峰山在十里内，高杀于芙蓉，而削峭形似，盖芙蓉之来脉也。
现代文：登上三仙石，向东眺望黄仙峰，已不能和我所站的地方比高低；向南眺望军峰，像是要与此山比险峻似的；芙蓉山的南面，有座陈峰山，相距在十里以内，它没有芙蓉山高，但陡峭险峻，与芙蓉山相似，它是芙蓉山的来脉。
English: Climbing the Three Immortals Rock, looking eastward at the Huangxian Peak, I can no longer compare the height with the place where I stand; looking southward at the Military Peak, it seems to be more precipitous than this mountain; on the south side of the Hibiscus Mountain, there is a Chenfeng Mountain, less than ten miles away, it is not as high as the Hibiscus Mountain, but it is steep and precipitous, similar to the Hibiscus Mountain, it is the origin of the Hibiscus Mountain.

古文：凭眺久之，从峰北小径西下里许，与石坪西来之大道合。
现代文：站在高处眺望了许久，从峰北面的小路往西朝下走一里左右，路就与从石坪向西过来的大路汇合。
English: I stood at a high place and looked out for a long time. I walked about a mile down from the path on the north side of the peak to the west, and the path merged with the main road coming from the stone pavement to the west.

古文：又下五里，忽路分南北。
现代文：又下行五里，路忽然分往南北两头。
English: Another five miles down, the road suddenly splits north-south.

古文：始欲从南，既念大路在北，宜从北行，遂转而北，始有高篁丛木。
现代文：开初想从南边走，随即想到大路在北边，应从北边走，于是折往北，山间这才有高竹丛林。
English: At first, I wanted to go from the south, but then I thought that the highway was in the north, and I should go from the north, so I turned north, and there was a high bamboo jungle in the mountains.

古文：又西下一里，始有壑居塍垅，名曰烂泥田。
现代文：又往西下行一里，山谷中开始有民户居住，有高低分布的田地，地名叫烂泥田。
English: Another mile down to the west, there are private households living in the valley, with high and low fields, called Rotten Mud Fields.

古文：复逾岭西下一里，更循岭而登二里，直蹑峰头，名曰揭烛尖。
现代文：又翻越一座山岭往西下行一里，再顺山岭攀登二里，直登上一个峰头，叫揭烛尖，从揭烛尖西南朝下走二里，为南坑。
English: He also climbed over a mountain ridge to the west for one mile, then climbed two miles along the mountain ridge, climbed up to a peak, called the candelabra, and walked two miles from the southwest of the candelabra to the south pit.

古文：又名避暑营。从尖西南下二里，是为南坑。有涧自东南来，四山环绕，中开一壑，水口紧束，湾环北去。
现代文：有条山涧水从东南方流来，四面山峦环绕，中间是编块谷地，水口处山峰紧夹，河湾向北环绕而去。
English: There is a mountain stream flowing from the southeast, surrounded by mountains on all sides, with a valley in the middle. At the water's mouth, the mountain peaks are tightly clamped, and the bay is surrounded to the north.

古文：有潘、吴二姓绾控扼水口而居，独一高门背水朝尖，雄撮一坞之胜。
现代文：有姓潘和姓吴的两家人扼水口而居，只有一扇高大的门背向水流朝着揭烛尖，这两户人家雄踞高处，成了整个山坞中的优美景观。
English: Two families, surnamed Pan and surnamed Wu, live at the water's edge, with only one tall door facing away from the water and toward the tip of the candle. The two families occupy a commanding height, creating a beautiful landscape in the entire dock.

古文：随水出其后，数转而出，一里，有水自北而来，二水合而南，路随之。
现代文：沿水流走出那两户人家的后面，又转了几个弯出了山坞，一里后，有条水从北面流来，两水汇合而往南流，路沿水走。
English: The water flowed out from behind the two houses, turned a few corners and came out of the dock. A mile later, a stream of water came from the north, the two waters converged and flowed south, and the road followed the water.

古文：一里，转而西，共八里，西逼高峰，有水自南来会，合而北去，有桥跨之，曰港口桥。
现代文：行一里，折往西，共走八里，往西逼近一座高峰，有条水从南面流来交汇，然后流往北，有座桥横架在水流上，叫港口桥。
English: Walk one mile, turn west, walk a total of eight miles, westward approaching a peak, there is a water flowing from the south to meet, and then flow to the north, there is a bridge across the water, called the port bridge.

古文：循左麓而北，又转西行，北渡溪，共五里，得大坞，曰上坪。
现代文：沿山峰左麓往北行，又折往西，往北渡过溪水，共五里，见到个大山坞，叫上坪。
English: I walked north along the left foot of the mountain, turned west, and crossed the stream to the north, a total of five miles, and saw a large dock called Shangping.

古文：过上坪石梁，水注而北，路西折登山，迤逦而上，五里至杉木岭。
现代文：越过上坪的石梁，水往北流去，路折向西面山上，曲折地向上爬，共五里到杉木岭。
English: After crossing the stone beam of Shangping, the water flows to the north, turns to the west on the mountain, and climbs up tortuously, a total of five miles to Sugimuling.

古文：逾岭下二里，山坞紧逼，有故家宅，其中曰君山，皆黄氏也。
现代文：翻过岭头向下走二里，山坞狭窄，中间有些官宦人家的住宅，居中的那幢名叫君山，全村都是姓黄的人家。
English: Turn over the ridge and walk down for two miles, the dock is narrow, there are some residences of government officials in the middle, the one in the middle is called Junshan, and the whole village is home to people with the surname Huang.

古文：饭而出隘，五岭上矮岭。
现代文：吃过饭走出山隘，行五里登上矮岭。
English: After dinner, I walked out of the mountain pass and walked five miles to the top of the ridge.

古文：逾岭共五里，出杨坊，南行为坑阴，乃宜邑钜同 巨 聚。
现代文：越过岭共走五里，出了杨坊，从杨坊往南行为杭阴，那是宜黄县的一个大村落。
English: After walking five miles across the ridge, they came out of Yangfang. From Yangfang, they went south to Hangyin, a large village in Yihuang County.

古文：西行七里，宿车上。
现代文：从杨坊往西行七里，投宿在车上。
English: From Yangfang, travel west for seven miles and stay in a car.

古文：二十日，鸡再鸣，自车上载月西行，即与大溪遇。
现代文：二十日鸡叫第二遍时，顶着明月从车上往西走，就与一条大溪相遇。
English: On the 20th day, when the rooster crowed for the second time, walking west from the car with the bright moon in front of him, he encountered a large stream.

古文：已而溪直南下，路西入山。
现代文：我想它就是墟上那条从南往北流的溪水，它发源于军峰，经杭阴流到此处。
English: I think it is the stream that flows from south to north on the market. It originates from Junfeng and flows through Hangyin to here.

古文：又五里，登岭。
现代文：随后溪水直往南流去，而路向西进入山中。
English: The stream then flows straight south, while the road heads west into the mountains.

古文：又三里，逶迤至岭隘，有屋跨其间，曰黄岭。
现代文：又走五里，登上一座山岭。又爬三里，曲折地到达岭隘上，有间屋子在岭隘上，这岭叫黄岭。
English: He walked another five miles and ascended a mountain ridge. He climbed another three miles and reached the meandering ridge. There was a house on the ridge. This ridge was called Huangling.

古文：下岭二里，大溪复自南来。
现代文：下了岭二里，一条大溪又从南面流来。
English: Two miles down the ridge, a large stream flows from the south.

古文：渡溪，天始明，山始大开。
现代文：渡过溪水，天才明，山才远远地分隔开。
English: After crossing the stream, the sky is clear and the mountains are far apart.

古文：随溪西北行五里，有塔立溪口小山上，塔之西北即宜黄城也。
现代文：沿溪水往西北走五里，有座塔矗立在溪口的小山上，塔的西北面就是宜黄城。
English: Five miles northwest along the stream, there is a tower standing on a hill at the mouth of the stream. The northwest side of the tower is Yiguang City.

古文：又有一大溪西南自东壁巡司来，直抵城东，有长木桥之；水遂北与东溪合，有大石桥架其上，曰贯虹；再北，则一小溪循城西北而东入大溪，亦有桥跨其上，曰丰乐。
现代文：又有一条大溪从西南的东壁巡检司流来，直抵县城东边，有根长木头横在溪上成为桥梁；溪水就流往北方与东溪汇合，有座大石桥架在东溪上，叫贯虹桥；再往北，一条小溪顺城西北往东流入大溪，也有座桥架在溪上，叫丰乐桥。
English: There is also a large stream flowing from the southwest of the East Wall Patrol and Inspection Division, reaching the east side of the county seat. There is a long tree across the stream to become a bridge; the stream water flows to the north and merges with the East Stream. There is a large stone bridge on the East Stream, called Jianhong Bridge; further north, a creek flows along the northwest of the city to the east and flows into the creek. There is also a bridge on the stream, called Fengle Bridge.

古文：是日抵宜黄东门贯虹桥之旅肄，觅得静闻，始出，亟呼饭饭静闻，与之北过丰乐桥，上狮子岩。
现代文：这天抵达宜黄县城东门外贯虹桥边的旅店，找到静闻时，他刚好出门来，急忙喊住他吃了饭。饭后，静闻和我往北走，跨过丰乐桥，攀上狮子岩。
English: On this day, when I arrived at the hotel on the edge of the rainbow bridge outside the east gate of Yiwu County, and found Jing Wen, he just came out of the door and hurriedly called him to eat. After dinner, Jing Wen and I walked north, crossed the Fengle Bridge, and climbed the Lion Rock.

古文：岩回盘两层，兀立三溪会合之北冲，大溪由此北下抚州者也。
现代文：此岩盘绕两层，直立在三条溪流汇合处的北边山冲里，大溪就是由这山冲里往北流下抚州府去的。
English: This rock is coiled in two layers and stands upright in the northern mountain stream at the confluence of three streams. The large stream flows northward from this mountain stream to Fuzhou.

古文：已而西经城北，至新城北门。
现代文：旋即往西经过城北，到新城北门。
English: Turn immediately west through the north of the city to the north gate of the new city.

古文：北一里，过黄备桥。
现代文：往北走一里，跨过黄备桥。
English: Walk north for one mile and cross the Huang Bei Bridge.

古文：又西北一里，北入山，得仙岩。
现代文：又往西北走一里，向北进入山中，见到仙岩。
English: Walk another mile to the northwest, go north into the mountains, and you'll see the Fairy Rocks.

古文：岩高峙若列锦层，上穹下逼，其西垂忽透壁为门，穿石而入，则众山内閟ì闭，若另一世界。
现代文：这岩高高耸立，如同排列着一层层锦绣，上边弯隆下边狭窄，忽然见到岩西边崖壁的下端是贯通的，形成石门，穿过石门进去，众山掩映，极其幽静，像是另外一个世界。
English: This rock stands tall, as if lined with layers of brocade, the upper side is curved and the lower side is narrow. Suddenly, the lower end of the cliff wall on the west side of the rock is penetrated, forming a stone gate. Enter through the stone gate, the mountains are hidden, extremely quiet, like another world.

古文：而是岩甚薄，不特南面壁立，而北面穹覆更奇，其穿透之隙，正如度之通天岩，亦景之最奇者也。
现代文：这岩很薄，不只南面耸立如壁，而且北面弯隆遮掩，更加奇异，那贯穿崖壁的缝隙，正如赣州府的通夭岩，也是自然景观中最奇妙的。
English: This rock is very thin. Not only does it tower like a wall on the south side, but it is also covered by a slope on the north side. Even more bizarre, the gap that runs through the cliff wall, just like the Tongyao Rock in Zhangzhou, is also the most wonderful in the natural landscape.

古文：三里，仍入城之北门。
现代文：从仙岩下来走三里，仍进入城北门。
English: After walking three miles from Xianyan, you still enter the north gate of the city.

古文：盖是城东濒溪为旧城，而西城新辟，一城附其外，缭绕诸峰，因之高下。
现代文：大概这座城东面濒临溪流的是旧城，而西面的城是新营造的，它外面还有一重城墙，那外城墙依众山峰的地势环绕，高低起伏。
English: Presumably the city on the east side of the stream is the old city, while the city on the west is newly built, and there is also a heavy wall outside it. The outer wall is surrounded by the topography of the mountains and rises and falls.

古文：经城三里，出南门。
现代文：经过城三里，出了城南们。
English: After three miles of the city, they came out of the south of the city.

古文：循东壁南来之溪西南行，五里，过四应山之东麓。
现代文：沿东壁巡检司南面来的溪水往西南行，五里后经过四应山东麓。
English: Along the east wall, the stream water coming from the south of the inspection and quarantine department goes to the southwest, and after five miles it passes through the eastern foot of Mount Siying.

古文：又十五里，有小峰兀立溪上作狰狞之状，其内有谭襄敏此人曾与戚继光大破倭寇墓焉。又二里，过玉泉山下，山屏立路右若负扆，仰瞻峭拔，有小庐架崖半。
现代文：又继续走五十里，有座小山峰直立在溪岸边，显出狰狞的形态，山中有谭襄敏的墓。又走二里，经过玉泉山下，这山屏风般立在路右边，如在路后立起一道高大的屏障，仰望上去高峻陡直，有间小屋架在崖壁半中腰。
English: I continued walking for another fifty miles, and there was a small peak standing upright on the bank of the stream, showing the shape of a beak, and there was a tomb of Tan Xiangmin in the mountain. I walked another two miles, passing under the Yuquan Mountain, and this mountain stood like a screen on the right side of the road, as if erecting a tall barrier behind the road. Looking up, it was tall and steep, and there was a hut half way up the cliff.

古文：欲从之，时膝以早行，忽肿痛不能升。
现代文：本想登山，但我的膝部因为早行的缘故，忽然肿痛得不能抬高。
English: Originally, I wanted to climb the mountain, but because of my early walking, my knee suddenly swelled up and I couldn't raise it.

古文：又随大溪南行三里，有小溪自西来注，即石蛩即拱之下流也，始舍大溪溯小溪，折而西入三里而得石蛩寺。
现代文：又沿大溪往南行三里，有条小溪从西面流来注入大溪中，它就是石蛰那条溪水的下游，我们这才离开大溪溯小溪而行，折往西进去三里到了石蛰寺。
English: We also followed the stream for three miles to the south. A small stream flowed from the west and flowed into the stream. It was the downstream of the stream in Shiqiao. We then left the stream and followed the small stream. We turned west and went three miles to Shiqiao Temple.

古文：寺新创，颇宏整。
现代文：寺是新建的，很宏大整洁。
English: The temple is newly built, very grand and tidy.

古文：寺北有矗崖立溪上，半自山顶平剖而下，其南突兀之峰犹多，与之对峙为门，而石蛩之岭正中悬其间，而寺倚其东麓。
现代文：寺北有座陡峭的山崖立在溪岸上，它从山顶往下平平地破裂为两半，它南面还有好多高耸的山峰与它对峙着形成门，石蛋寺所在山岭正好悬立在中间，而寺就背靠在岭的东麓。
English: To the north of the temple, there is a steep cliff standing on the bank of the stream. From the top of the mountain down, it breaks into two halves. To the south of it, there are many towering peaks facing it to form a gate. The mountain range where the stone egg temple is located is right in the middle, and the temple backs up against the eastern foot of the ridge.

古文：仰望之，只见峰顶立石轰然，不知其中空也。
现代文：仰望岭上，只见峰顶立着崩裂开的大石头，而不知道石头中间是空的。
English: Looking up at the ridge, you can only see the cracked big stone at the top of the peak, but you don't know that the middle of the stone is empty.

古文：是晚宿寺中，以足痛不及登蛩。
现代文：这晚宿在寺中，因为脚痛未能攀登石蛰寺。
English: This night's accommodation was in a temple, as I couldn't climb Shizuku-ji Temple because of my sore feet.

古文：二十一日，晨餐后，亟登蛩。
现代文：二十一日早餐后，赶忙攀登石蛋寺。
English: After breakfast on the twenty-first day, I hurriedly climbed the Stone Egg Temple.

古文：是峰东西横跨，若飞梁天半，较贵溪之仙桥，高与大俱倍之，而从此西眺，只得其端。
现代文：石蛰寺所在的山峰横跨东西，如同半空中飞架着的桥梁，与贵溪县的仙桥相比，高和大都有两倍，而从寺中向西眺望，只能看见它的一端。
English: The mountain peak on which Shihou Temple is located spans from east to west, like a bridge suspended in mid-air. Compared to the Xianqiao Bridge in Guixi County, it is twice as high and twice as large, but when looking west from the temple, only one end of it can be seen.

古文：从寺北转入峡中，是为万人缘。
现代文：从寺北面转进山峡中，为万人缘。
English: From the north side of the temple, it turns into a mountain gorge and is popular with everyone.

古文：由万人缘南向而登，仰见一峰中高迥。
现代文：由万人缘向南攀登，仰见竹影摇曳，一座山峰中间通着洞，矗立在很远的高处。
English: Climbing south from Wanren, I looked up and saw the bamboo shadow swaying. A mountain peak with a hole in the middle stood at a high place far away.

古文：南瞰乱峰兀突，于是出桥南，还眺飞梁之上，石痕横叠，有缀庐嵌室，无路可登。
现代文：从石中间穿进去，向南俯瞰，乱峰突兀。溪声和山色，显出另一种景象，仿佛不再是人世间。从此处走出石桥南面，回头眺望那飞架的石梁上面，石纹纵横交叠，连缀镶嵌着小屋，没有路可以登上去。
English: Entering from the middle of the stone, looking down to the south, the turbulent peaks are abrupt. The sound of the stream and the mountain color show another scene, as if it is no longer the human world. From here, walk out of the south side of the stone bridge, look back at the top of the flying stone beam, the stone stripes are overlapping, interlaced with huts, there is no way to climb up.

古文：徘徊久之，令人不能去。
现代文：徘徊了许久，一只山鹤直往上疾飞而去，响声传遍稀疏的竹丛间，让人舍不得离去。
English: After wandering for a long time, a mountain crane flew straight up and away, and the sound spread throughout the sparse bamboo thickets, making people reluctant to leave.

古文：盖是桥之南，其内石原裂两层，自下而上，不离不合，隙俱尺许。
现代文：这座石桥的南边，内侧的石头原来是裂成两层的，从下层到上层之间，离得不远也没合在一起，中间的缝隙都有一尺左右。
English: On the south side of this stone bridge, the stone on the inner side was originally split into two layers. From the lower layer to the upper layer, they are not far apart and do not fit together. The gaps in the middle are about one foot.

古文：由隙攀跻而上，可达其上层，而隙夹逼仄，转身不能伸曲，手足无可攀蹑，且以足痛未痊，怅怅还寺。
现代文：从缝隙中攀上去，可到达上层，然而缝隙狭窄，身体不能转动伸屈，手脚没有可以攀援踩踏的地方，而且因为脚痛未好，所以就怅然若失地回到了寺中。
English: Climbing up from the gap, you can reach the upper floor, but the gap is narrow, the body cannot turn and flex, there is no place for the hands and feet to climb and step on, and because the foot pain is not good, so he returned to the temple in a daze.

古文：问道寺僧，僧云： 从桥内裂隙而登蹑甚难。
现代文：向寺中僧人打听路，僧人说： 从桥内侧裂开的缝隙攀登很难。
English: When he asked a monk at the temple for directions, the monk said, "It's difficult to climb through the crack on the inside of the bridge.

古文：必去衣脱履，止可及其上层，而从上垂绠，始可引入中层。 
现代文：一定得脱掉衣服鞋子，并且只可以到达上层，然后从上层垂下绳索，才可以顺绳索滑入中层。 
English: You must take off your clothes and shoes, and can only reach the upper level, and then hang down the rope from the upper level before you can slide along the rope into the middle level.

古文：僧言如此，余实不能从也，乃于石蛩饭而行。
现代文：僧人如此说，我是实在不能如此做的，于是在石蛰寺吃了饭就走了。
English: The monk said, "I really can't do that," so he ate at Sekkaku-ji Temple and left.

古文：五里，由小路抵玉泉山下，遂历级直登。
现代文：行五里，由小路抵达玉泉山下，便拾级直往上登。
English: After walking for five miles, they arrived at the foot of Yuquan Mountain via a small path, and then climbed straight up.

古文：其山甚峻，屏立溪之西北，上半俱穹崖削壁，僧守原叠级凿崖，架庐峰侧一悬峰上。
现代文：此山很峻峭，屏风般耸立在溪流西北边，它的上半部都是弯隆的高崖陡直的石壁，僧人守原在崖壁间凿出一级级石瞪，架了间小屋在山顶侧面一个悬空的山峰上。
English: This mountain is very steep. It stands like a screen on the northwest side of the stream. Its upper half is made up of steep, high cliffs and sheer stone walls. The monk Shouyuan hewed out a first-class stone tower between the cliff walls and erected a small hut on a hanging peak on the side of the summit.

古文：三面凭空，后复离大山石崖者丈许，下隔深崖峡。
现代文：小屋三面凌空，后面又距离大山的石崖一丈左右，下面是高崖深峡。
English: The three sides of the hut are soaring into the sky, and behind it is a stone cliff about a meter away from the mountain, and below is the high cliff deep gorge.

古文：时庐新构，三面俱半壁，而寂不见人。
现代文：当时小屋刚刚新建，三面都才砌起一半墙壁，但静悄悄不见一人。
English: At that time, the hut had just been built, and only half of the walls had been built on three sides, but no one could be seen.

古文：余方赏其虚圆无碍，凭半壁而看后崖。
现代文：我欣赏小屋的这种三面虚空浑然无碍的状态，靠着半截墙壁观看屋后的右崖。
English: I appreciate the three-sided emptiness of the hut in its unobstructed state, leaning against the half-cut wall to look at the right cliff behind the house.

古文：久之，一人运土至，询之，曰： 僧以后壁未全，将甃而塞之也。 
现代文：许久后，有个人运土上来，我间他何故，他说： 僧人因为后壁还缺着半截，打算将它砌满。 
English: After a long time, a man came up to me with a pile of earth. I asked him why, and he said, "The monks are planning to fill in the back wall because it's still missing half of it."

古文：问僧何在，曰： 业从山下跻级登矣！ 
现代文：问他那僧在何处，回答说： 已经从山下沿石瞪登上来了。 
English: When he asked him where the monk was, he replied: "He has climbed up from the bottom of the mountain along the rocky cliff.

古文：因坐候其至，为之画即划、策划之意曰： 汝虑北风吹神像，何不以木为龛坐，护置室中，而空其后壁，正可透引山色。
现代文：于是我坐着等候他来到，为他谋划道： 你若担心北风吹着神像，何不用木材制成佛完，将神像放置在当中，而空着小屋的后壁，正好可以让山中景色全都映照进来。
English: So I sat and waited for him to come and planned for him: If you are worried about the north wind blowing the statue, why not make a wooden Buddha and place the statue in the middle, while the back wall of the hut is empty, just so that all the scenery in the mountains can be reflected.

古文：造物之悬设此峰，与尔之绾架此屋，皆此意也。
现代文：造物主悬空架设这座山峰和你控扼峰头构筑此屋，本意都是如此。
English: This is what the Creator intended when he suspended this mountain and you held the top of the mountain to build this house.

古文：必甃而塞之，失此初心矣。 
现代文：假使把它砌满而堵塞起来，就不是原来的意愿了。 
English: If it were to be filled in and blocked up, that would not be the original intention.

古文：僧颔之，引余观所谓玉泉者。
现代文：僧人点头表示赞同，又领我观看所说的玉泉。
English: The monk nodded his approval and led me to see the Jade Spring.

古文：有停泓一穴，在庐侧石灶之畔，云三仙卓锡而出者，而不知仙之不杖锡也。
现代文：有一潭不流动的深水，在小屋边的石灶旁，传说是因为有三个仙人用锡杖捅地涌出来的，然而殊不知仙人是不用锡杖的。
English: There is a pool of stagnant deep water, next to the stone stove by the hut, which is said to have been created by three fairies who splashed it with a tin cane. However, it is not known for certain that fairies do not use a tin cane.

古文：下玉泉，三里，出襄敏墓前。
现代文：下了玉泉山，走三里，出了谭襄敏墓前。
English: Went down the Jade Spring Mountain, walked three miles, and came out in front of Tan Xiangmin's tomb.

古文：又随溪一里，由小路从山北行，盖绕出玉泉山之东北也。
现代文：又顺溪走一里，由小路从玉泉山北面行，大约已绕出了它的东北面。
English: I walked along the stream for another mile, taking the path from the north side of Yuquan Mountain, and I had already gone around the northeast side of it.

古文：最北又有马头山，突兀独甚，在路左。
现代文：玉泉山的最北边又有座马头山，突兀独耸，位于路左边。
English: At the northernmost edge of Yuquan Mountain, there is another mountain, Mount Ma Tou, which rises abruptly and is located on the left side of the road.

古文：过白沙岭，望西峰尖亘特甚，折而东之，是为北华山。
现代文：经过白沙岭，望见西面有座山峰特别尖峭地横亘着，折往东面，这是北华山。
English: After passing through Baisha Ridge, we can see a particularly steep mountain in the west. Turning to the east, this is North Mount Huashan.

古文：山顶佛宇被灾，有僧募饭至，索而食之。
现代文：山顶的佛寺遭了灾，有僧人讨饭回来，我们索要了些吃了。
English: The Buddhist temple at the top of the mountain was hit by the disaster. A monk came back begging for food, so we asked for some to eat.

古文：下山二里，入南门，北登凤凰山。
现代文：下了山二里，进入宜黄县南门，然后往北攀登凤凰山。
English: After descending the mountain for two miles, I entered the south gate of Yihuang County, and then climbed the Phoenix Mountain to the north.

古文：其山兀立城之东北，城即因之，北而峭削，不烦雉堞也。
现代文：这山直立在城东北，城墙就是就着山势修筑的，因为北面山势峻峭陡直，所以不再需要修筑城墙上的矮墙。
English: This mountain stands upright in the northeast of the city, and the city wall was built on top of the mountain, because the mountain to the north is steep and straight, so it is no longer necessary to build a low wall on the city wall.

古文：下山，出北水关，抵逆旅已昏黑矣。
现代文：下了山，走出北水关，回到旅店已经天黑了。
English: After descending the mountain and walking out of Hokushuikuan, it was already dark when we returned to the hotel.

