古文：杨士奇，名寓，以字行，泰和人。
现代文：杨士奇，名寓，以字行，泰和人。
English: Yang Shiqui, famous residence, famous for calligraphy, Thai and human.

古文：早孤，随母适罗氏，已而复宗。
现代文：早年丧父，随母改嫁罗氏，不久复宗。
English: His father died at an early age, and his mother remarried into the Luo clan, and the family soon returned to the Buddhist fold.

古文：贫甚。
现代文：家境非常贫寒。
English: His family was very poor.

古文：力学，授徒自给。
现代文：他致力于学问，靠教授生徒来自给。
English: He is committed to learning, teaching his students to be self-sufficient.

古文：多游湖、湘间，馆江夏最久。
现代文：多次游历于湖、湘之间，以馆居江夏的时间最长。
English: He traveled many times between the lake and Hunan, and spent the longest time in Jiangxia.

古文：建文初，集诸儒修《太祖实录》，士奇已用荐征授教授当行，王叔英复以史才荐。
现代文：建文初年，皇上召集儒生修撰《太祖实录》，士奇已经被推荐为教授参加编修，王叔英又以士奇有史才而推荐他。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, the emperor summoned Confucian students to compile the "Ancestor's Record." Shi Qi had already been recommended as a professor to participate in the editing, and Wang Shuying recommended him for his historical talent.

古文：遂召入翰林，充编纂官。
现代文：士奇于是被召入翰林院，任编纂官。
English: Shi Qi was then summoned to the Hanlin Academy and appointed as a compiler.

古文：寻命吏部考第史馆诸儒。
现代文：不久皇上命吏部考核史馆的儒生。
English: Soon after, the emperor ordered officials to examine the history museum's Confucian students.

古文：尚书张紞得士奇策，曰： 此非经生言也。 
现代文：尚书张得到士奇的策论，说： 这不是读经书生的言论。 
English: "This is not the speech of a student of the scriptures," said Shang Shuxu Zhang, who was taken aback by the strategy.

古文：奏第一。
现代文：把他上奏为第一名。
English: Play him up top.

古文：授吴王府审理副，仍供馆职。
现代文：士奇被授予吴王府审理副官，仍担任史馆职务。
English: Shiji was awarded the vice-officer of the court of the King of Wu, and still held the post of the history museum.

古文：成祖即位，改编修。
现代文：成祖即位后改任编修官。
English: After Emperor Chengzu ascended to the throne, he was reassigned to the position of editor.

古文：已，简入内阁，典机务。数月进侍讲。
现代文：不久，被选进内阁，主管枢机事务，数月后升为侍讲。
English: Soon after, he was elected to the cabinet, in charge of cardinal's affairs, and a few months later he was promoted to the position of aide-de-camp.

古文：永乐二年选宫僚，以士奇为左中允。
现代文：永乐二年选拔内宫臣僚，任命士奇为左中允。
English: In the second year of Yongle, he selected the inner palace ministers and appointed Shiqi as Zuozhongyong.

古文：五年进左谕德。
现代文：五年升任左谕德。
English: Five years later, he was promoted to Zuozukude.

古文：士奇奉职甚谨，私居不言公事，虽至亲厚不得闻。
现代文：士奇奉职非常谨严，居家时从不谈论公事，即使是至亲好友也不让他们知道。
English: Shiji is very careful in his duties. When he is at home, he never talks about his work. Even his closest friends don't let them know.

古文：在帝前，举止恭慎，善应对，言事辄中。
现代文：在皇帝面前，他举止恭敬谨慎，善于应对，所谈论的事情常能切中要害。
English: In front of the emperor, he behaved respectfully and cautiously, was good at coping, and the things he talked about were often to the point.

古文：人有小过，尝为揜覆之。
现代文：别人有小过，常为他们掩盖。
English: Others have small, often for them to cover up.

古文：广东布政使徐奇载岭南土物馈廷臣，或得其目籍以进。
现代文：广东布政使徐奇运来岭南的土特产馈赠给廷巨，有人得到送礼清单，上呈给皇上。
English: Guangdong cloth political envoy Xu Qiyun came to Lingnan to give gifts of local special products to Ting Jiu. Someone got the gift list and presented it to the emperor.

古文：帝阅无士奇名，召问。
现代文：皇上见上面没有士奇的名字，便将他召来询问。
English: When the emperor saw that there was no strange name on it, he called him in for questioning.

古文：对曰： 奇赴广时，群臣作诗文赠行，臣适病弗预，以故独不及。
现代文：士奇回答说 ：徐奇赴广东时，群臣作诗文为他送行，臣当时正患病，没有参加，所以唯独我没有赶上。
English: Shiqi replied: When Xuqi went to Guangdong, the courtiers wrote poems to see him off. The minister was ill at the time and did not attend, so I did not catch up.

古文：今受否未可知，且物微，当无他意。 
现代文：现在我是否得到礼物还不知道，况且礼物很轻，应当没有别的意思。 
English: Now I don't know if I got a gift, and the gift is very light, there should be no other meaning.

古文：帝遽命毁籍。
现代文：皇上于是命人将名单烧掉。
English: The emperor then ordered someone to burn the list.

古文：六年，帝北巡，命与蹇义、黄淮留辅太子。
现代文：六年，皇上北巡，命士奇与蹇义、黄淮留下辅佐太子。
English: In the sixth year, the emperor was on a tour of the north, and Meishi, Shunyi, and Huang Huai remained as assistant crown princes.

古文：太子喜文辞，赞善王汝玉以诗法进。
现代文：太子喜欢文学辞章，赞誉王汝玉以诗法谋取进身之阶。
English: The prince likes literary phrases and praises Wang Ruyu for using poetry to get ahead.

古文：士奇曰： 殿下当留意《六经》，暇则观两汉诏令。
现代文：士奇说 ：殿下应当留心读《六经》，闲暇时间则看看两汉的诏令。
English: Shiki said, "Your highness should read the Six Classics attentively, and in his spare time look at the imperial edicts of the Han Dynasty.

古文：诗小技，不足为也。 
现代文：诗是小技，不足以治国安邦。 
English: Poetry is a minor skill, not enough to govern the country.

古文：太子称善。
现代文：太子称善。
English: The prince praised it as good.

古文：初，帝起兵时，汉王数力战有功。
现代文：当初，皇上起兵时，汉王多次力战有功。
English: In the beginning, when the emperor raised an army, the Han king fought valiantly many times.

古文：帝许以事成立为太子。
现代文：皇上允诺事成之后将他立为太子。
English: After the Emperor's promise was fulfilled, he was appointed as the Crown Prince.

古文：既而不得立，怨望。
现代文：但后来汉王没有得立，便产生怨望情绪。
English: But later, when Han Wang did not succeed, resentment arose.

古文：帝又怜赵王年少，宠异之。
现代文：皇上又可怜赵王年少，对他特别宠爱。
English: The emperor also pitied Zhao Wang for his young age and was particularly fond of him.

古文：由是两王合而间太子，帝颇心动。
现代文：于是这两位王爷联合离间太子，皇上颇为心动。
English: As a result, the two princes jointly divorced the crown prince, and the emperor was quite moved.

古文：九年还南京，召士奇问监国状。
现代文：九年皇上回南京，召见士奇询问太子监国的情况。
English: In the ninth year, the emperor returned to Nanjing and summoned Shi Qi to inquire about the situation of the prince's tutelage.

古文：士奇以孝敬对，且曰： 殿下天资高，即有过必知，知必改，存心爱人，决不负陛下托。 
现代文：士奇说他很孝敬，并且说： 殿下天资很高，即使有了过失也一定要弄清楚，然后加以改正。他存心爱人，决不辜负陛下的重托。 
English: Shiki said that he was very respectful, and said: His Royal Highness is very talented, even if there is a mistake, he must find out and then correct it. He loves his people and never fails to live up to His Majesty's trust.

古文：帝悦。
现代文：皇上高兴。
English: Desong is very happy.

古文：十一年正旦，日食。
现代文：十一年元旦，有日食。
English: On the eleventh day of the new year, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：礼部尚书吕震请勿罢朝贺。
现代文：礼部尚书吕震请不要罢朝贺。
English: Please don't miss the morning greetings from Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Shangshu Lvzhen.

古文：侍郎仪智持不可。
现代文：侍郎仪智说不可。
English: You can't tell a waiter from a maidservant.

古文：士奇亦引宋仁宗事力言之。遂罢贺。
现代文：士奇也引宋仁宗故事极力主张不可朝贺。
English: Shi Qi also quoted Song Renzong's story and strongly advocated that there should be no morning greetings.

古文：明年，帝北征。
现代文：于是罢朝贺。第二年，皇上北征。
English: As a result, the parade was called off. The following year, the emperor left for the Northern Expedition.

古文：士奇仍辅太子居守。
现代文：士奇仍辅佐太子留守。
English: Shiki is still away with the crown prince.

古文：汉王谮太子益急。
现代文：这时汉王更急迫地诬陷太子。
English: At this time, Han Wang became more eager to frame the crown prince.

古文：帝还，以迎驾缓，尽征东宫官黄淮等下狱。
现代文：皇上回京时，以迎驾迟缓的罪名，将黄淮等东宫属官全部投进监狱。
English: When the emperor returned to Beijing, he threw Huang Huai and all other officials of the Eastern Palace into prison on the charge of delaying the welcome.

古文：士奇后至，宥之。
现代文：士奇后到，得到皇上宽宥。
English: He was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：召问太子事。
现代文：皇上召问有关太子的事情。
English: The emperor summoned me to ask about the prince.

古文：士奇顿首言： 太子孝敬如初。凡所稽迟，皆臣等罪。 
现代文：士奇叩头说道 ：太子与当初一样孝敬，所有迎驾拖沓迟缓的过失，都是臣等的罪过。 
English: Shiki kowtowed and said, "The prince is as filial as he was in the beginning, and all the mistakes of delaying the welcome are the sins of the vassals."

古文：帝意解。
现代文：皇上的怒意才消除。
English: Only then did the emperor's anger subside.

古文：行在诸臣交章劾士奇不当独宥，遂下锦衣卫狱，寻释之。
现代文：行在所的大臣一起上书弹劾士奇，说不该唯独宽宥他。于是将士奇投入锦衣卫监狱，不久获释。
English: The ministers present at the time jointly wrote a letter to impeach Shiqi, saying that he should not be pardoned alone. Shiqi was then thrown into Jinbei Prison, and was soon released.

古文：十四年，帝还京师，微闻汉王夺嫡谋及诸不轨状，以问蹇义。
现代文：十四年，皇上回京师，听到有关汉王阴谋夺嫡以及其他不轨行为的一些传闻，便问蹇义。
English: Fourteen years later, when the emperor returned to Beijing, he heard rumors of a plot by the king of Han to seize the throne and other irregularities, and he asked Shunyi about it.

古文：义不对，乃问士奇。
现代文：蹇义不答，于是问士奇。
English: He didn't answer, so I asked him why.

古文：对曰： 臣与义俱侍东宫，外人无敢为臣两人言汉王事者。
现代文：士奇回答说 ：臣与蹇义都在东宫侍奉太子，外人都不敢对我们两人说及汉王的事。
English: Shichi replied, "Both my father and Shunyi served the crown prince in the East Palace. Outsiders would not dare to speak to either of us about the king of Han."

古文：然汉王两遣就藩，皆不肯行。
现代文：但汉王两次被遣到他的藩国去，他都不肯去。
English: However, Han Wang was sent to his domain twice, but he refused to go.

古文：今知陛下将徙都，辄请留守南京。
现代文：现在他知道陛下将要迁都，总是请求留守南京。
English: Now that he knows that His Majesty is going to move the capital, he always asks to stay in Nanjing.

古文：惟陛下熟察其意。 
现代文：望陛下好好考虑他的用意。 
English: I would ask His Majesty to consider his intentions.

古文：帝默然，起还宫。
现代文：皇上默然不语，起身回宫。
English: The Emperor remained silent, got up and went back to the palace.

古文：居数日，帝尽得汉王事，削两护卫，处之乐安。
现代文：几天后，皇上全部获知了汉王所做的事情，便削夺了他的两个护卫，把他安置在乐安。
English: A few days later, when the emperor was fully informed of what Han Wang had done, he took away his two bodyguards and placed him in Le An.

古文：明年进士奇翰林学士，兼故官。
现代文：第二年进升士奇为翰林学士，兼任原职。
English: In the second year, Jin Sheng Shiqi became a bachelor of Hanlin, and also held his original position.

古文：十九年改左春坊大学士，仍兼学士。
现代文：十九年改任左春坊大学士，仍兼学士。
English: In nineteen years, he was appointed as a scholar of Zuochunfang University, still a bachelor.

古文：明年复坐辅导有阙，下锦衣卫狱，旬日而释。
现代文：第二年又犯辅导有误的过失，被投进锦衣卫监狱，十天后获释。
English: The following year, he was again found guilty of incorrect guidance and was sent to Jinlingwei Prison. He was released ten days later.

古文：仁宗即位，擢礼部侍郎兼华盖殿大学士。
现代文：仁宗即位后，被提升为礼部侍郎兼华盖殿大学士。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Ninsong, he was promoted to the post of chamberlain of the Ceremonial Department and a scholar of the Huagai Palace.

古文：帝御便殿，蹇义、夏原吉奏事未退。
现代文：皇上御临便殿，蹇义、夏原吉奏完事还没有退下。
English: At the Emperor's coronation, Shinyi and Natsuhara Yoshitaka had not yet retired after the performance.

古文：帝望见士奇，谓二人曰： 新华盖学士来，必有谠言，试共听之。 
现代文：皇上望见士奇，对两人说： 新华盖殿大学士来了，他肯定有正直的言论，让我们来听听。 
English: Seeing the surprise, Emperor Wang said to the two, "A scholar from Xinhuagetian University is here. He must have honest remarks. Let's listen to him."

古文：士奇入言： 恩诏减岁供甫下二日，惜薪司传旨征枣八十万斤，与前诏戾。 
现代文：士奇上前说道 ：圣恩减少岁供的诏令才下两天，惜薪司便传出圣旨要征收八十万斤枣子，这与前日的诏令不符。 
English: Shiki stepped forward and said, "It has only been two days since the edict was issued to reduce the annual offering, but the paymaster has issued an edict to collect 800,000 jin of jujube, which is inconsistent with the previous day's edict.

古文：帝立命减其半。
现代文：皇上立即命令减去半数。
English: The emperor immediately ordered half of the money to be deducted.

古文：服制二十七日期满，吕震请即吉。
现代文：按制度丧服要穿二十七日，期满后吕震请换上吉服。
English: According to the system, the mourning clothes should be worn on the 27th, and after the expiration of the period, Lv Zhen should change to the auspicious clothes.

古文：士奇不可。
现代文：士奇说不行。
English: You can't say that.

古文：震厉声叱之。
现代文：吕震厉声呵斥他。
English: Lü Zhen shouted at him.

古文：蹇义兼取二说进。
现代文：蹇义将这两种意见进呈给皇上。
English: Xinyi presented these two opinions to the emperor.

古文：明日，帝素冠麻衣绖而视朝。
现代文：第二天，皇上头戴白帽，身穿麻衣，腰系麻带来视朝。
English: The next day, the emperor, wearing a white cap on his head, dressed in a linen suit, and a linen belt around his waist, went to see the emperor.

古文：廷臣惟士奇及英国公张辅服如之。
现代文：廷臣中只有士奇和英国公张辅与皇上一样着丧服。
English: Among the courtiers, only Shiki and the British courtier Zhang Fu were dressed in the same mourning clothes as the emperor.

古文：朝罢，帝谓左右曰： 梓宫在殡，易服岂臣子所忍言，士奇执是也。 
现代文：罢朝后，皇上对左右的人说： 先帝梓宫还停殡待葬，改易服装岂是做臣子的所忍心说的？士奇做得对。 
English: After the abdication, the emperor said to the people around him: The previous emperor Zi Gong also suspended the funeral to be buried, is it really necessary for a courtier to change his clothes? Shiji is right.

古文：进少保，与同官杨荣、金幼孜并赐 绳愆纠缪 银章，得密封言事。
现代文：士奇进位少保，与同官杨荣、金幼孜一起得到皇上赐给的 绳愆纠缪 银章，可以将奏章密封后再上呈谈论政事。
English: Shi Qi, promoted to the rank of Junior Public Security Officer, together with his colleagues Yang Rong and Jin Yu Ze, received the Silver Medal of the Cord and Rope given by the emperor. After sealing the medal, it can be presented to discuss political affairs.

古文：寻进少傅。
现代文：不久升为少傅。
English: He was soon promoted to sous-chef.

古文：时藩司守令来朝，尚书李庆建议发军伍余马给有司，岁课其驹。
现代文：当时布政使、郡守县令来朝见，尚书李庆建议把军队多余的马匹发给有关官员，然后国家每年向他们征收马驹。
English: At that time, the political envoy and the county magistrate came to see the emperor, and Li Qing suggested that the army's surplus horses should be sent to the relevant officials, and then the state would collect horse manure from them every year.

古文：士奇曰： 朝廷选贤授官，乃使牧马，是贵畜而贱士也，何以示天下后世。 
现代文：士奇说 ：朝廷选拔贤才授予官职，现在让他们去牧马，这是贵畜生而贱士啊。怎么向天下后世交待呢？ 
English: Shichi said, "The imperial court selects and grants official positions to sages, now let them go to herd horses. This is a noble animal, but not a gentleman. How should we tell this to the world and future generations?"

古文：帝许中旨罢之，已而寂然。
现代文：皇上允诺发中旨取消这一做法，但过后便寂然无闻了。
English: The emperor promised to issue an imperial edict to abolish this practice, but after that it fell on deaf ears.

古文：士奇复力言。又不报。
现代文：士奇又极力建言，但不见回音。
English: Shiqi also tried his best to make suggestions, but there was no response.

古文：有顷，帝御思善门，召士奇谓曰： 朕向者岂真忘之。
现代文：不久，皇上御临思善门，召见士奇，对他说 ：我先前哪能是真的忘了这件事？
English: Not long after, the Emperor came to Shizan's door, summoned Shichi, and said to him, "How could I have really forgotten this before?

古文：闻吕震、李庆辈皆不喜卿，朕念卿孤立，恐为所伤，不欲因卿言罢耳，今有辞矣。 
现代文：听说吕震、李庆这帮人都不喜欢你，朕念你孤身一人，恐怕被他们伤害，所以不想因为你的反对而停罢这件事。现在有辞了。 
English: I've heard that Lu Zhen, Li Qing and the others don't like you. I miss you being alone, and I'm afraid they'll hurt you, so I don't want to stop this because of your objection. Now I have an excuse.

古文：手出陕西按察使陈智言养马不便疏，使草敕行之。
现代文：于是拿出陕西按察使陈智写的《养马不便疏》，让士奇起草敕令颁行。
English: Therefore, he took out the "Inconvenience of Raising Horses" written by Chen Zhi, the Shaanxi inspector, and allowed Shiqi to draft and issue the order.

古文：士奇顿首谢。
现代文：士奇叩头称谢。
English: Shiki bowed his head in thanks.

古文：群臣习朝正旦仪，吕震请用乐，士奇与黄淮疏止。
现代文：群臣练习朝贺元旦的礼仪，吕震请求用音乐，士奇与黄淮上疏请停止不用。
English: The courtiers practice the etiquette of the morning greeting on New Year's Day. Lu Zhen requests that the music be used. Shi Qi and Huang Huai request that the music be stopped.

古文：未报。
现代文：没见答复。
English: There was no response from the Imperial Court.

古文：士奇复奏，待庭中至夜漏十刻。
现代文：士奇再奏，在殿庭中一直等到夜漏十刻。
English: The strange re-enactment continued in the courtyard until 10 o'clock at night.

古文：报可。
现代文：答复说： 可。 
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：越日，帝召谓曰： 震每事误朕，非卿等言，悔无及。 
现代文：过了一天，皇上召士奇，对他说： 吕震每事都要误我，要不是有爱卿等人的争辩，真是后悔不及。 
English: After a day, the emperor was surprised and said to him, "Lu Zhen, you always get me wrong. If it weren't for the argument of Ai Xing and others, I would have regretted it.

古文：命兼兵部尚书，并食三禄。
现代文：命士奇兼兵部尚书，并享受三职俸禄。
English: He was also a member of the Ministry of Military Affairs and enjoyed the salary of the third rank.

古文：士奇辞尚书禄。
现代文：士奇辞掉了尚书的俸禄。
English: Shiqi resigned from the salary of Shangshu.

古文：帝监国时，憾御史舒仲成，至是欲罪之。
现代文：皇上监国时，不满意御史舒仲成，这时想加罪于他。
English: When the emperor was in charge of the country, he was not satisfied with Shuzhongcheng, and wanted to punish him.

古文：士奇曰： 陛下即位，诏向忤旨者皆得宥。
现代文：士奇说： 陛下即位后，曾下诏宽宥原先所有忤逆圣旨的人。
English: Shiki said, "After His Majesty ascended to the throne, he issued an edict to pardon all those who had previously disobeyed the sacred edict.

古文：若治仲成，则诏书不信，惧者众矣。
现代文：现在如果将仲成治罪，则诏书就会失去信用，害怕的人就多了。
English: Now, if a crime is committed, the edict will lose credibility, and more people will be afraid.

古文：如汉景帝之待卫绾，不亦可乎。 
现代文：您就像汉景帝对待卫绾一样，难道不可以吗？ 
English: You are just like Emperor Han Jing treated Emperor Wei, isn't that right?

古文：帝即罢弗治。
现代文：皇上便放弃将仲成治罪。
English: The emperor then gave up the idea of punishing Nakacho.

古文：或有言大理卿虞谦言事不密。
现代文：有人说大理寺卿虞谦谈论事情时不注意保密。
English: Some people say that Yu Qian, Lord of Dali Temple, does not pay attention to confidentiality when talking about things.

古文：帝怒，降一官。
现代文：皇上大怒，将他降官一级。
English: The emperor was furious and demoted him one rank.

古文：士奇为白其罔，得复秩。
现代文：士奇为他辩白，虞谦得以复职。
English: Shichi defended him, and Yu Qian was reinstated.

古文：又大理少卿弋谦以言事得罪。
现代文：又大理寺少卿弋谦因上书言事而得罪。
English: In addition, Zou Qian, the junior secretary of Dali Temple, was offended by the words and deeds in the letter.

古文：士奇曰： 谦应诏陈言。若加之罪，则群臣自此结舌矣。 
现代文：士奇说 ：弋谦响应诏书陈述自己的观点，如果加罪给他，则群臣从此以后将不敢说话了。 
English: Shiqi said: Zou Qian stated his views in response to the edict. If he is punished, the ministers will not dare to speak from now on.

古文：帝立进谦副都御史，而下敕引过。
现代文：皇上马上升弋谦为副都御史，并下敕令承认错误。
English: Emperor Ma Zengxing appointed Zou Qian as vice-metropolitan historian, and issued an imperial edict admitting the error.

古文：时有上书颂太平者，帝以示诸大臣，皆以为然。
现代文：当时有人上书歌颂太平，皇上拿给大臣们看，他们都以为然。
English: At that time, someone published a book praising Taiping. The emperor showed it to his ministers, and they all thought it was true.

古文：士奇独曰： 陛下虽泽被天下，然流徙尚未归，疮痍尚未复，民尚艰食。
现代文：唯独士奇说： 陛下虽然恩泽广布于天下，但还有流离失所的人，天下的疮痍还没有愈合，人民生活还很艰难。
English: However, Shi Qi said: Although His Majesty's grace has been widely spread throughout the world, there are still displaced people, the devastation of the world has not yet healed, and people's lives are still very difficult.

古文：更休息数年，庶几太平可期。 
现代文：还要休养生息几年，才可望看到天下太平。 皇上说 ：对。 
English: It will take a few more years of recuperation before we can expect to see peace in the world.The emperor said, "Yes."

古文：帝曰： 然。 因顾蹇义等曰： 朕待御等以至诚，望匡弼。
现代文：随即对蹇义等人说 ：我以满腔至诚对待各位爱卿，望你们匡正辅佐。
English: He then said to Shinyi and the others, "I have treated all of you with the utmost sincerity, and I hope that you will be my loyal assistants."

古文：惟士奇曾五上章，卿等皆无一言。
现代文：但士奇曾五次上书，而你们皆没有一言。
English: Butch wrote five times, and none of you said a word.

古文：岂果朝无阙政，天下太平耶？ 
现代文：难道说朝廷真的没有失政，天下太平了吗？ 
English: Does this mean that the imperial court really did not lose power and that the world is at peace?

古文：诸臣惭谢。
现代文：诸位大臣惭愧而退。
English: The ministers retreated in shame.

古文：是年四月，帝赐士奇玺书曰： 往者朕膺监国之命，卿侍左右，同心合德，徇国忘身，屡历艰虞，曾不易志。
现代文：这年四月，皇上赐给士奇玺书说 ：以前我肩负监国使命，爱卿你侍候于左右，我们同心同德，一起献身国事，公而忘私，多次经历艰难，意志不曾动摇。
English: In April of this year, the emperor gave the book to Shi Qianlu, saying: "Previously, I shouldered the mission of supervising the country. Your Excellency, you have served on both sides. We are of the same mind, dedicated to national affairs, public and selfless, have experienced difficulties many times, and our will has never wavered.

古文：及朕嗣位以来，嘉谟入告，期予于治，正固不二，简在朕心。
现代文：自我即位以来，你进献佳计，期望我治好国家，忠贞不二，这些我都记在心里。
English: Since I came to the throne, I have kept in mind that you have proposed good plans, expected me to heal the country, and have been loyal to me.

古文：兹创制 杨贞，一印赐卿，尚克交修，以成明良之誉。 
现代文：兹创制 杨贞一印 赐给爱卿。尚望努力修身，以成就英明贤良之美誉。 
English: I hereby create the Yang Zhen 1st Seal and give it to Ai Qing. I hope he will work hard to cultivate his body to achieve the reputation of wisdom and virtue.

古文：寻修《太宗实录》，与黄淮、金幼孜、杨溥俱充总裁官。
现代文：不久修纂《太宗实录》，士奇与黄淮、金幼孜、杨溥都充任总裁官。
English: Soon after, the "Taizong Record" was compiled, and Shiqi, Huang Huai, Jin Yuzi, and Yang Hui all served as president.

古文：未几，帝不豫，召士奇与蹇义、黄淮、杨荣至思善门，命士奇书敕召太子于南京。
现代文：不久，皇上病危，将士奇和蹇义、黄淮、杨荣召到思善门，命令士奇写敕令将太子从南京召回。
English: Not long after, the emperor was critically ill, and he summoned Shiji, Zhai Yi, Huang Huai, and Yang Rong to Shishan Gate, and ordered Shiji to write an imperial edict to recall the prince from Nanjing.

古文：宣宗即位，修《仁宗实录》，仍充总裁。
现代文：宣宗即位后，编修《仁宗实录》，士奇仍充任总裁官。
English: After Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, he edited the "Nanzong Record," and Shiji still served as the president.

古文：宣德元年，汉王高煦反。
现代文：宣德元年，汉王高煦造反。
English: In the first year of the Xuande Emperor, King Gaozong of Han rebelled.

古文：帝亲征，平之。
现代文：皇上亲自出征，平定了叛乱。
English: The emperor himself went to war and quelled the rebellion.

古文：师还，次献县之单家桥，侍郎陈山迎谒，言汉、赵二王实同心，请乘势袭彰德执赵王。
现代文：回师途中，经过献县单家桥时，侍郎陈山前来拜见，说汉王、赵王实是同心合谋，请求乘势袭击彰德，擒拿赵王。
English: On the way back to the division, when passing the Xianxian single-family bridge, the waiter Chen Shan came to see him, saying that King Han and King Zhao were really in a conspiracy, and asked him to attack Zhangde and capture King Zhao.

古文：荣力赞决。
现代文：杨荣极力赞成。
English: Yang Rong strongly agreed.

古文：士奇曰： 事当有实，天地鬼神可欺乎？ 
现代文：士奇说： 论事应当有事实根据，天地鬼神难道可以欺骗吗？ 
English: Shiqi said: There should be a factual basis for the matter. Can heaven and earth and ghosts and gods be deceived?

古文：荣厉声曰： 汝欲挠大计耶！
现代文：杨荣厉声说道 ：你想阻挠大计吗？
English: Yang Rong said sharply: Do you want to obstruct the grand plan?

古文：今逆党言赵实与谋，何谓无辞？ 
现代文：现在逆党都说赵王实是参与了计划，怎能说没有根据？ 
English: Now the opposite party all say that Zhao Wangshi participated in the plan, how can it be said to be unfounded?

古文：士奇曰： 太宗皇帝三子，今上惟两叔父。
现代文：士奇说： 太宗皇帝有三个儿子，所以当今皇上只有两个叔父。
English: Shiqi said: Emperor Taizong had three sons, so the current emperor only has two uncles.

古文：有罪者不可赦，其无罪者宜厚待之，疑则防之，使无虞而已。何遽加兵，伤皇祖在天意乎？ 
现代文：有罪的当然不可赦免，而无罪的应当好好地对待他。如果对他有怀疑的话，加以防范，不使产生祸患就行了，何必急于动武，而伤害了皇祖在天之意呢？ 
English: Of course, the guilty should not be pardoned, but the innocent should be treated well. If there is any doubt about him, it is enough to prevent him from causing harm. Why rush to use force and hurt the emperor's ancestors in the will of heaven?

古文：时惟杨溥与士奇合。
现代文：当时只有杨溥与士奇意见一致。
English: At that time, only Yang Mi and Shi Qi had the same opinion.

古文：将入谏，荣先入，士奇继之，阍者不纳。
现代文：士奇将去谏阻皇上，而杨荣已先进去了，士奇想跟着进去，但被守门卫士挡住了。
English: Shiji is going to stop the emperor, but Yang Rong has already gone ahead. Shiji wants to follow, but is blocked by the gatekeeper.

古文：寻召义、原吉入。
现代文：一会儿皇上召蹇义、夏原吉进去。
English: After a while, the Emperor summoned Shunyi and Natsuhara Yoshitaka to come in.

古文：二人以士奇言白帝。
现代文：两人把士奇的话告诉了皇上。
English: The two told the strange words to the emperor.

古文：帝初无罪赵意，移兵事得寝。
现代文：皇上开始本就没有加罪于赵王的意思，移师讨伐赵王的事终于得以止息。
English: From the beginning, the emperor did not intend to add to Zhao Wang's guilt, and the transfer of teachers to fight Zhao Wang was finally stopped.

古文：比还京，帝思士奇言，谓曰： 今议者多言赵王事，奈何？ 
现代文：等到回京后，皇上思考士奇的话，对他说 ：现在人们多在议论赵王的事，怎么办？ 
English: After returning to Beijing, the emperor thought about the strange words and said to him, "Nowadays, people are mostly talking about King Zhao, what should we do?"

古文：士奇曰： 赵最亲，陛下当保全之，毋惑群言。 
现代文：士奇说 ：赵王是您最亲的人，陛下应该保全他，不要被群臣的议论所迷惑。 
English: Shichi said, "King Zhao is your closest relative. Your majesty should protect him and not be confused by the discussions of your ministers."

古文：帝曰： 吾欲封群臣章示王，令自处何如？ 
现代文：皇上说 ：我想将群臣的奏章封好，送给赵王看，让他自己处理，你看怎么样？ 
English: The emperor said, "I want to seal the records of the ministers and give them to King Zhao to read, and let him deal with them himself. What do you think?"

古文：士奇曰： 善，更得一玺书幸甚。 
现代文：士奇说 ：好，如再得一封玺书更好。 
English: Shiki said, "Yes, it would be better to get another letter."

古文：于是发使奉书至赵。
现代文：于是皇上派使者将玺书送到赵国。
English: Therefore, the emperor sent an envoy to bring the imperial edict to Zhao.

古文：赵王得书大喜。
现代文：赵王得到书信后大喜，哭着说： 我可以活下去了。 
English: After receiving the letter, Zhao Wang was overjoyed, crying and saying, "I can go on living."

古文：泣曰： 吾生矣。 即上表谢，且献护卫，言者始息。
现代文：马上上表称谢，并且献出护卫。人们的议论这才停息。
English: He immediately put on a show of thanks and offered an escort. That's when people stopped talking.

古文：帝待赵王日益亲而薄陈山。
现代文：皇上对待赵王日益亲近，而陈山则受到了冷遇。
English: The emperor treated Zhao Wang with increasing closeness, while Chen Shan received a cold reception.

古文：谓士奇曰： 赵王所以全，卿力也。 
现代文：皇上对士奇说 ：赵王能够得以保全，全仗了爱卿之力。 
English: The emperor said to Shiji, "If King Zhao can be saved, the power of Aicheng will be completely exhausted."

古文：赐金币。
现代文：赐给士奇金币。
English: Give Shiki a gold coin.

古文：时交阯数叛。
现代文：当时交趾多次反叛。
English: At that time, Kōtetsu rebelled several times.

古文：屡发大军征讨，皆败没。
现代文：朝廷屡次派大军征讨，都失败了。
English: The imperial court repeatedly sent large armies to conquer the country, but they all failed.

古文：交阯黎利遣人伪请立陈氏后。
现代文：交趾黎利派人伪请封立陈氏的后代。
English: Li Lili, a close friend, sent someone to falsely invite the descendants of the Chen clan.

古文：帝亦厌兵，欲许之。
现代文：皇上也厌兵了，想准许他的请求。
English: The Emperor was also fed up with the soldiers and wanted to grant his request.

古文：英国公张辅、尚书蹇义以下，皆言与之无名，徒示弱天下。
现代文：英国公张辅、尚书蹇义以下的人，都说许给他没有理由，这样做只能是向天下示弱。
English: British public Zhang Fu, Shang Shuxuan Yi and others said that there was no reason to give him permission, and doing so could only show weakness to the world.

古文：帝召士奇、荣谋。
现代文：皇上召见士奇、杨荣来商议。
English: The emperor summoned Shiqi and Yang Rong to discuss.

古文：二人力言： 陛下恤民命以绥荒服，不为无名。
现代文：两人坚持说 ：陛下体恤人民的生命，对边远地区采取安抚政策，不能说没有理由。
English: The two insisted: His Majesty has compassion for the lives of the people and cannot be said to have no reason for adopting a pacification policy for remote areas.

古文：汉弃珠厓，前史以为美谈，不为示弱，许之便。 
现代文：汉朝放弃珠崖，前代史家把它作为美谈，而不认为是示弱。准许交趾人的请求为便。 
English: The Han Dynasty gave up the pearl cliff, and the previous generation of historians regarded it as a beautiful talk, not as a sign of weakness. It was convenient to grant the request of the friends.

古文：寻命择使交阯者。
现代文：不久命令挑选出使交趾的使者。
English: Soon the order was given to pick out the emissaries who were in league with him.

古文：蹇义荐伏伯安口辨。
现代文：蹇义推荐伏伯安能言善辩。
English: Fu Bo'an can speak well and argue well.

古文：士奇曰： 言不忠信，虽蛮貊之邦不可行。
现代文：士奇说 ：如果言语不忠不信，即使到蛮貊民族地区也行不通。
English: Shiqi said, "If words are not faithful, even if you go to the barbarian ethnic areas, it will not work."

古文：伯安小人，往且辱国。 
现代文：伏伯安是个小人，出使交趾只会让国家蒙受耻辱。 
English: Fu Bo'an is a villain, and making diplomatic overtures will only bring disgrace to the country.

古文：帝是之，别遣使。
现代文：皇上同意他的意见，另外派遣了使者。
English: The emperor agreed with his opinion and sent another envoy.

古文：于是弃交阯，罢兵，岁省军兴巨万。
现代文：于是放弃交趾，罢兵，每年省下的军费达数万。
English: As a result, they gave up fraternizing and went on strike, saving tens of thousands of dollars in military expenses each year.

古文：五年春，帝奉皇太后谒陵，召英国公张辅、尚书蹇义及士奇、荣、幼孜、溥，朝太后于行殿。
现代文：五年春，皇上陪同皇太后拜祭陵墓，召英国公张辅、尚书蹇义和士奇、杨荣、金幼孜、杨溥到行殿朝见皇太后。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, the emperor accompanied the empress dowager to visit the mausoleum, and summoned the British officials Zhang Fu, Shang Shuxun Yi and Shiqi, Yang Rong, Jin Yuzi, and Yang Hui to the hall to see the empress dowager.

古文：太后慰劳之。
现代文：太后慰劳了他们。
English: The Empress consoled them.

古文：帝又语士奇曰： 太后为朕言，先帝在青宫，惟卿不惮触忤，先帝能从，以不败事。
现代文：皇上又对士奇说 ：太后曾对朕说，先帝在青宫时，只有你不怕触犯先帝，而先帝也能听从你的劝谏，所以才不会把事情弄糟。
English: The emperor also said to Shiqi: The empress dowager once said to me, when the former emperor was in the Qing Palace, only you were not afraid to offend the former emperor, and the former emperor could also listen to your advice, so he would not mess things up.

古文：又诲朕当受直言。 
现代文：太后还教诲我应当接受梗直的言论。 
English: The Queen Mother also admonished me that I should accept blunt speech.

古文：士奇对曰： 此皇太后盛德之言，愿陛下念之。 
现代文：士奇答道 ：这都是皇太后盛德之言，愿陛下好好体会。 
English: Shiki replied, "These are the words of Empress Dowager Shengde. I hope Your Majesty will understand them well."

古文：寻敕鸿胪寺。士奇老有疾，趋朝或后，毋论奏。
现代文：不久皇上敕令鸿胪寺，说士奇老而有病，趋朝如果落后了，不要照章论奏。
English: Soon after, the emperor sent an order to Hongye Temple, saying that Shi Qi was old and sick, and if he fell behind, he should not play according to the rules.

古文：帝尝微行，夜幸士奇宅。
现代文：皇上曾微服出行，晚上幸临士奇家。
English: The emperor used to travel in light clothing, and in the evening he would go to a strange house.

古文：士奇仓皇出迎，顿首曰： 陛下奈何以社稷宗庙之身自轻？ 
现代文：士奇仓皇出来迎接，叩头说道： 陛下一身的安危关系到宗庙国家，奈何不自加珍重？ 
English: Shichikura came out to meet the emperor, and the kowtow said: His Majesty's safety is related to the country of his ancestral temple, so why not cherish it?

古文：帝曰： 朕欲与卿一言，故来耳。 
现代文：皇上说： 想与你谈一谈，所以就来了。 
English: The emperor said, "I wanted to talk to you, so I came."

古文：后数日，获二盗，有异谋。
现代文：过了几天，抓到两个强盗，发现他们有特别的阴谋。
English: A few days later, they caught two robbers and discovered that they had a special plot.

古文：帝召士奇，告之故。且曰： 今而后知卿之爱朕也。 
现代文：皇上召见士奇，把这事告诉了他，然后说： 现在才知道你对朕的爱护。 
English: The emperor summoned Shizue, told him about this, and then said, "Now I know that you love me.

古文：帝以四方屡水旱，召士奇议下诏宽恤，免灾伤租税及官马亏额者。
现代文：皇上因四方屡有水旱灾害，便召见士奇，讨论下诏宽恤百姓，免除受灾严重地区的租税，承养官马因受灾而导致亏损的也免以课税。
English: Due to the frequent floods and droughts in the four directions, the emperor was called to see the miracle, and under discussion, he issued an edict to be lenient to the people, exempting the tax from the severely affected areas, and exempting the tax from the losses caused by the disaster.

古文：士奇因请并蠲逋赋薪刍钱，减官田额，理冤滞，汰工役，以广德意。民大悦。
现代文：士奇趁机请求免除拖欠的赋税、薪炭钱和牧草钱，减少官田租额，审理滞留的冤案，停止工程建设，以广布爱民之德。
English: Shi Qi took advantage of the opportunity to request the exemption of arrears of taxes, salaries and pasture money, reduce the rent of government land, hear the unjust cases of detention, stop the construction of projects, and widely spread the virtue of loving the people.

古文：逾二年，帝谓士奇曰： 恤民诏下已久，今更有可恤者乎？ 
现代文：百姓非常高兴。过了两年，皇上对士奇说： 体恤人民的诏书已经下了很久了，现在还有要抚恤的吗？ 
English: The people were very happy. Two years later, the emperor said to Shichi, "It's been a long time since you issued the edict to sympathize with the people. Do you still need to be sympathetic?

古文：士奇曰： 前诏减官田租，户部征如故。 
现代文：士奇说 ：先前的诏书说要减少官田的租率，但户部仍照旧额征收。 
English: Shiki said: The previous imperial edict said that the rent rate of government-owned land should be reduced, but the household department still levied the same amount.

古文：帝怫然曰： 今首行之，废格者论如法。 
现代文：皇上不高兴地说 ：现在首先推行这一政策，不执行的依法论罪。 
English: The Emperor was displeased and said, "Now is the time to first implement this policy, and if it is not carried out, it will be a crime according to the law."

古文：士奇复请抚逃民，察墨吏，举文学、武勇之士，令极刑家子孙皆得仕进。
现代文：士奇又请安抚逃亡的百姓，考察贪官污吏，选举长于文学和有勇武的人才，令被判了极刑的人的子孙都可以进入仕途为官。
English: He also asked the judges to appease the fleeing people, investigate corrupt officials, and elect people who are good at literature and brave, so that the descendants of those who were sentenced to capital punishment can enter the career as officials.

古文：又请廷臣三品以上及二司官，各举所知，备方面郡守选。
现代文：又请让三品以上的廷臣和布政司、按察司长官，各自推荐所了解的人才，以备各部门和地方郡守选用。
English: In addition, please let the courtiers with three or more court ranks and the political secretary and the chief inspector recommend the talents they know, so that they can be selected by various departments and local county magistrates.

古文：皆报可。
现代文：答复都说可行。
English: All replied in the affirmative.

古文：当是时，帝励精图治，士奇等同心辅佐，海内号为治平。
现代文：当时，皇上励精图治，士奇等人齐心辅佐，海内称颂为国家大治、天下太平。
English: At that time, the emperor worked hard to rule the country, assisted by Shichi and others, and was praised at home as the great ruler of the country and the world was at peace.

古文：帝乃仿古君臣豫游事，每岁首，赐百官旬休。
现代文：皇上于是仿效古代君臣游玩的故事，每年春节，给百官放假十天。
English: The emperor then imitated the story of the ancient monarchs and their courtiers, and gave the officials a ten-day holiday during the Spring Festival every year.

古文：车驾亦时幸西苑万岁山，诸学士皆从。赋诗赓和，从容问民间疾苦。
现代文：皇上车驾也时常到西苑万岁山游玩，学士们一路相随，互相赋诗唱和，从容地询问民间疾苦。
English: The emperor's chauffeur also often went to the West Garden to visit Mount Wan Rai, and the scholars followed along the way, singing and humming to each other, and calmly inquiring about folk diseases.

古文：有所论奏，帝皆虚怀听纳。
现代文：大臣有什么论谏疏奏，皇上都虚心地听从和采纳。
English: The emperor humbly listened to and accepted whatever the minister had to say.

古文：帝之初即位也，内阁臣七人。
现代文：皇上刚即位时，内阁大臣有七人。
English: When the Emperor ascended the throne, there were seven cabinet ministers.

古文：陈山、张瑛以东宫旧恩入，不称，出为他官。
现代文：其中陈山、张瑛是皇上做东宫太子时的旧恩，但因不称职，已经出任别官。
English: Among them, Chen Shan and Zhang Ying were the emperor's old favorites when he was the crown prince of the East Palace, but because of incompetence, they have been appointed to other posts.

古文：黄淮以疾致仕。
现代文：黄淮因病退休。
English: Huang Huai retired due to illness.

古文：金幼孜卒。
现代文：金幼孜已去世。
English: Kim Yo Jong has passed away.

古文：阁中惟士奇、荣、溥三人。
现代文：内阁中只剩下士奇、杨荣、杨溥三人。
English: There are only three people left in the cabinet: Shiqi, Yang Rong and Yang Hui.

古文：荣疏闿果毅，遇事敢为。
现代文：杨荣豪放开朗，果断刚毅，办事敢作敢为。
English: Yang Ronghao is open-minded, resolute and courageous, and dares to do things.

古文：数从成祖北征，能知边将贤否、厄塞险易远近、敌情顺逆。
现代文：他曾多次跟随成祖北征，对守边将领贤明与否，边防要塞的险易远近，敌情的顺逆，都有了解。
English: He had followed the Northern Expedition of Cheng Zu many times, and had an understanding of the wisdom of the border guard generals, the dangers of the border fortress, and the ups and downs of the hostile situation.

古文：然颇通馈遗，边将岁时致良马。
现代文：但他也颇通馈赠之道，守边将领每年常有良马送给他。
English: However, he was also well-versed in the art of gift-giving, and the garrison commander often gave him a good horse every year.

古文：帝颇知之，以问士奇。
现代文：皇上对此颇有了解，便问士奇。
English: The Emperor was quite aware of this and asked Shizuru.

古文：士奇力言： 荣晓畅边务，臣等不及，不宜以小眚介意。 
现代文：士奇极力辩解说： 杨荣精通边防事务，这一点臣等都不如他。不应该因这点小缺点而对他产生介意。 
English: Shiqi tried his best to defend himself, saying: Yang Ronglu is well versed in border defense affairs, which is something that ministers and others are not as good at as him. We should not be concerned about him because of this small shortcoming.

古文：帝笑曰： 荣尝短卿及原吉，卿乃为之地耶？ 
现代文：皇上笑着说 ：杨荣曾经揭你和夏原吉的短，你难道反而要为他说话吗？ 
English: The emperor said with a smile: Yang Rong once exposed the shortcomings of you and Xia Yuanji, do you want to speak for him instead?

古文：士奇曰： 愿陛下以曲容臣者容荣。 
现代文：士奇说： 愿陛下就像宽容臣的过错一样宽容杨荣。 
English: Shiqi said, "May Your Majesty be as tolerant of Yang Rong as You are of the faults of Your ministers."

古文：帝意乃解。
现代文：皇上这才消除了介意。
English: It was only then that Mingzong put his heart into it.

古文：其后，语稍稍闻，荣以此愧士奇，相得甚欢。
现代文：后来，这些话渐渐传开了，杨荣为此觉得愧对士奇，两人相处得更好了。
English: Later, these words gradually spread, Yang Rong felt ashamed for this, and the two got along better.

古文：帝亦益亲厚之，先后所赐珍果、牢醴、金绮衣、币、书器无算。
现代文：皇上对他也更加亲善，先后赐给的珍贵果品、牛羊美酒、锦衣金币、书籍器用无数。
English: The emperor was also more friendly to him, and gave him precious fruits, cattle, sheep, wine, gold coins, and countless books.

古文：宣宗崩，英宗即位，方九龄。军国大政关白太皇太后。
现代文：宣宗逝世，继位的英宗年方九岁，军国大政都禀报太皇太后。
English: After the death of Emperor Xuanzong, Empress Dowager Yingzong ascended the throne at the age of nine.

古文：太后推心任士奇、荣、溥三人，有事遣中使诣阁谘议，然后裁决。
现代文：太后放心任用士奇、杨荣、杨溥三人，有事情便派中宫使者到内阁商议，然后做出决定。
English: The empress dowager appointed Shiqi, Yang Rong, and Yang Hui with confidence. If there was a matter, she would send an emissary from the Middle Court to the cabinet for discussion, and then make a decision.

古文：三人者亦自信，侃侃行意。
现代文：三人也很自信，从容地理政。
English: The three of them are also very confident, and they calmly go about their business.

古文：士奇首请练士卒，严边防，设南京参赞机务大臣，分遣文武镇抚江西、湖广、河南、山东，罢侦事校尉。
现代文：士奇首先请训练士兵，加强边防，设南京参赞机务大臣，分派文武官员镇抚江西、湖广、河南、山东，罢设侦事校尉。
English: Shi Qi first of all requested to train soldiers, strengthen border defense, set up the Nanjing Counsellor and Minister of Mechanical Affairs, assigned civil and military officials to Zhenfu Jiangxi, Huguang, Henan and Shandong, and set up an investigator lieutenant.

古文：又请以次蠲租税，慎刑狱，严核百司。
现代文：又请逐步减免租税，慎重执法量刑，严格考核百官。
English: In addition, please gradually reduce and exempt taxes, carefully enforce the law and impose punishments, and strictly evaluate all officials.

古文：皆允行。
现代文：太后都允许推行。
English: All are allowed to go into effect.

古文：正统之初，朝政清明，士奇等之力也。
现代文：正统初年，朝政清明，可以说是士奇等人的功劳。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, the government of the dynasty was clear, which can be said to be the merit of Shiji and others.

古文：三年，《宣宗实录》成，进少师。
现代文：三年，《宣宗实录》修成，士奇升为少师。
English: Three years later, the "Proclamation of the True Teaching" was completed, and Shi Qi was promoted to junior teacher.

古文：四年乞致仕。
现代文：四年请求退休。
English: Four years of asking to retire.

古文：不允。敕归省墓。
现代文：皇上不允许，敕令回家扫墓。
English: The emperor did not allow it, and ordered him to go home and sweep the graves.

古文：未几，还。
现代文：不久，回京。
English: Soon, Li Quan came back.

古文：是时中官王振有宠于帝，渐预外庭事，导帝以严御下，大臣往往下狱。
现代文：这时宦官王振为皇上所宠爱，逐渐干预外朝的事务，教导皇上用严刑对待大臣，大臣往往被投入狱中。
English: At this time, the eunuch Wang Zhenrong was the emperor's favorite, gradually intervening in the affairs of the foreign court, teaching the emperor to treat the minister with severe punishment, and the minister was often thrown into prison.

古文：靖江王佐敬私馈荣金。
现代文：靖江王佐敬私下送金给杨荣。
English: Jingjiang Wang Sa Jing privately sent money to Yang Rong.

古文：荣先省墓，归不之知。
现代文：杨荣当时回家扫墓，回来后不知道这事。
English: At the time, Yang Rong went home to sweep the grave and did not know about it after returning.

古文：振欲借以倾荣，士奇力解之，得已。
现代文：王振想借此排挤杨荣，士奇极力调解，才得以无事。
English: Wang Zhen wanted to use this to oust Yang Rong, and Shi Qi tried his best to mediate, but nothing happened.

古文：荣寻卒，士奇、溥益孤。
现代文：杨荣不久去世，士奇、杨溥更加孤立了。
English: Yang Rong died soon after, and Shiqi and Yang Hui became even more isolated.

古文：其明年遂大兴师征麓川，帑藏耗费，士马物故者数万。
现代文：第二年于是发大军征讨麓川，国库钱财大量耗费，士卒战马以及物质损失达数万。
English: In the following year, a large army was sent to conquer the Luchuan River, costing the national treasury a great deal of money and treasure, and resulting in the loss of tens of thousands of soldiers and horses as well as material damage.

古文：又明年，太皇太后崩，振势益盛，大作威福，百官小有牴牾，辄执而系之。
现代文：又过了一年，太皇太后去世，王振的势力更盛，他大作威福，百官稍有触犯，马上逮捕入狱。
English: Another year passed, the great empress dowager died, and Wang Zhen's power increased. He was a great tyrant, and if any of his officials committed a minor offense, they were immediately arrested and imprisoned.

古文：廷臣人人惴恐，士奇亦弗能制也。
现代文：廷臣人人震恐，士奇也无法制止他。
English: The courtiers were terrified, and Shih Qi was powerless to stop him.

古文：士奇既耄，子稷傲很，尝侵暴杀人。
现代文：士奇既已年老，儿子杨稷非常傲慢，曾经侵凌弱者，犯下杀人之罪。
English: Shichi is already old, and his son Yang Mi is very arrogant. He once abused the weak and committed the crime of murder.

古文：言官交章劾稷。
现代文：言官纷纷弹劾杨稷。
English: Government officials have impeached Yang Jie.

古文：朝议不即加法，封其状示士奇。
现代文：朝廷商议不马上对他绳之以法，先把他的罪状拿给士奇看。
English: The imperial court deliberated not to bring him to justice immediately, but to show him the charges first.

古文：复有人发稷横虐数十事，遂下之理。
现代文：又有人揭发杨稷残暴施虐的数十件事，于是杨稷受到审判。
English: Someone else exposed dozens of incidents of Yang Hui's brutality and abuse, so Yang Hui was put on trial.

古文：士奇以老疾在告。天子恐伤士奇意，降诏慰勉。
现代文：年老有病的士奇受到控告，皇上怕他身心受到伤害，便下诏安慰劝勉。
English: The emperor, fearing that he would be harmed physically and mentally, issued an imperial edict of consolation and exhortation.

古文：士奇感泣，忧不能起。
现代文：士奇感动而泣，从此忧愤不能起。
English: Shiji was moved to tears, and has not been able to be sad or angry since.

古文：九年三月卒，年八十。
现代文：九年三月去世，终年八十岁。
English: He died in March 1997, at the age of 80.

古文：赠太师，谥文贞。
现代文：赠太师，谥文贞。
English: The bestowed Grand Master, Yu Wenzhen.

古文：有司乃论杀稷。
现代文：有关官员于是依法诛杀杨稷。
English: The officials concerned then killed Yang Qi in accordance with the law.

古文：初，正统初，士奇言瓦剌渐强，将为边患，而边军缺马，恐不能御。
现代文：当初，正统初年，士奇说瓦剌逐渐强盛，将成为边防的祸患，而边防军缺少马匹，恐怕不能抵御。
English: At the beginning, in the first year of orthodoxy, Shi Qi said that the corrugated iron gradually became strong and would become the scourge of the border guards, and the border guards lacked horses and were afraid that they could not resist.

古文：请于附近太仆寺关领，西番贡马亦悉给之。
现代文：请让他们于附近的太仆寺领取马匹，另外西番的贡马也全部拨给他们。
English: Please let them collect the horses from the nearby Taipo Temple. In addition, all the tribute horses from the West Ward will also be allocated to them.

古文：而于谦、周忱、况锺之属，皆用士奇荐，居官至一二十年，廉能冠天下，为世名臣云。
现代文：士奇死后不久，也先果然入侵，遂发生了土木堡之难。有识之士还在怀念他的话。士奇还很善于知人，好推荐贫寒之士，所推荐的还有些是开始不认识的。
English: Shortly after Shiki's death, the first invasion did indeed take place, and then the Civilian Fort Difficulty occurred. People of insight still remember his words. Shiki was also very good at making acquaintances, good at recommending poor and poor people, and some of those recommended were initially unknown.

古文：次子〈禾道〉，以荫补尚宝丞。
现代文：像于谦、周忱、况钟等人，都是得到士奇的推荐，当了一二十年的官。
English: Like Yu Qian, Zhou Zhen, Zhou Zhong and others, they were all recommended by Shi Qiu and served as officials for ten or twenty years.

古文：成化中，进太常少卿，掌司事。杨荣，字勉仁，建安人，初名子荣。
现代文：他们的廉洁和才能冠绝于天下，成为当代的名臣。杨荣，字勉仁，建安人，初名子荣。
English: Their integrity and talent are the best in the world, and they have become famous contemporary ministers. Yang Rong, Zi Ren Ren, Jian An Ren, Hatsunai Zi Rong.

古文：建文二年进士。
现代文：建文二年中进士。
English: Jianwen 2nd year, junior high school graduate.

古文：授编修。
现代文：被授予编修官。
English: Awarded the title of editor.

古文：成祖初入京，荣迎谒马首曰： 殿下先谒陵乎，先即位乎？ 
现代文：成祖刚进入京师时，杨荣迎谒在马前说 ：殿下是先拜谒太祖陵呢，还是先即位？ 
English: When Cheng Zu had just entered Beijing, Yang Rongying said in front of Ma: "Will Your Highness first visit the tomb of Emperor Xizong, or will you ascend the throne first?"

古文：成祖遽趣驾谒陵。
现代文：成祖马上驱驾拜谒太祖陵。
English: Chengzu immediately drove to pay homage to the Great Ancestor's Mausoleum.

古文：自是遂受知。
现代文：杨荣从此受到知任。
English: Since then, Yang Rong has been promoted.

古文：既即位，简入文渊阁，为更名荣。
现代文：成祖即位后，把杨荣选入文渊阁，为他改名为荣。
English: After Chengzu ascended to the throne, he selected Yang Rong to enter Wenyu Pavilion and changed his name to Rong.

古文：同值七人，荣最少，警敏。
现代文：一同当值的七人中，杨荣年龄最小，也非常警敏。
English: Of the seven people on duty, Yang Rong is the youngest and is also very alert.

古文：一日晚，宁夏报被围。召七人，皆已出，独荣在，帝示以奏。
现代文：有天晚上，宁夏来报告说被围，皇上召七人，他们都已出去，只有杨荣在，皇上将奏报给他看。
English: One evening, Ningxia came to report that it was besieged. The emperor summoned seven people, and they all went out. Only Yang Rong was there, and the emperor showed him the report.

古文：荣曰： 宁夏城坚，人皆习战，奏上已十余日，围解矣。 
现代文：杨荣说： 宁夏城很坚固，人民又都习战，从发出奏报到现在已过了十几天了，宁夏城之围应该已经解了。 
English: Yang Rong said, "Ningxia City is very strong, and the people are accustomed to war. It has been more than ten days since the report was issued. The siege of Ningxia City should have been lifted.

古文：夜半，果奏围解。
现代文：到夜半时，果然有奏报来说围已解了。
English: By midnight, there was indeed a report that the siege had been resolved.

古文：帝谓荣曰： 何料之审也！ 
现代文：皇上对杨荣说 ：你怎么预测得这么准？ 
English: The emperor said to Yang Rong, "How did you make such an accurate prediction?"

古文：江西盗起，遣使抚谕，而令都督韩观将兵继其后。
现代文：江西有盗贼发生，皇上遣使者去招抚，而令韩观率兵随后出发。
English: There was a thief in Jiangxi, the emperor sent an envoy to appease him, and Han Guan and his soldiers then set off.

古文：贼就抚奏至，帝欲赐敕劳观。
现代文：贼人接受招抚的奏报传到，皇上想赐敕慰劳韩观。
English: A report came in that the thief had accepted the caress, and the emperor wanted to bestow the consolation on Han Guan.

古文：荣曰： 计发奏时，观尚未至，不得论功。 
现代文：杨荣说 ：推算奏报发出时，韩观还没到达，不应给他论功。 
English: Yang Rong said: When the calculation report was issued, Han Guan had not yet arrived, and he should not be given credit.

古文：帝益重之，再迁至侍讲。
现代文：皇上更加敬重他，再升他为侍讲。
English: The emperor respected him even more, and promoted him to the position of courtier.

古文：太子立，进右谕德，仍兼前职，与在直诸臣同赐二品服。
现代文：太子建立后，杨荣进升右谕德，仍兼前职，与在内阁当值的诸臣同被赐给二品官服。
English: After the establishment of the princeling, Yang Rongjin was promoted to the right, still holding the former post, and was given the second-class official uniform along with the ministers on duty in the cabinet.

古文：评议诸司事宜，称旨，复赐衣币。
现代文：他评议各部门事宜，都合皇上意旨，又被赐给衣服钱币。
English: He reviewed the affairs of various departments, complied with the emperor's wishes, and was given clothes and coins.

古文：帝威严，与诸大臣议事未决，或至发怒。
现代文：皇上非常威严，与大臣们议事不能决断时，常常发怒。
English: The emperor was very dignified, and when he couldn't reach a decision in his discussions with his ministers, he often flew into a rage.

古文：荣至，辄为霁颜，事亦遂决。
现代文：杨荣一到，皇上脸色便转好了，而事情也决定了。
English: As soon as Yang Rong arrived, the emperor's countenance changed for the better and the matter was decided.

古文：五年，命往甘肃经画军务，所过览山川形势，察军民，阅城堡。
现代文：永乐五年他受命前往甘肃经划军务，所过之处他都观察山川形势，了解军民情况，检查城堡。
English: In Yongle's fifth year, he was ordered to go to Gansu to oversee military affairs. Everywhere he went, he observed the mountain and river situation, learned about the military and civilian situation, and inspected the castle.

古文：还奏武英殿。
现代文：回来后他在武英殿向皇上汇报，皇上非常高兴。
English: After returning, he reported to the Emperor at the Imperial Palace. The Emperor was very pleased.

古文：帝大悦，值盛暑，亲剖瓜啖之。
现代文：当时正值盛暑，皇上亲自切瓜给他吃。
English: It was the height of summer at the time, and the emperor personally cut up a melon for him to eat.

古文：寻进右庶子，兼职如故。
现代文：不久他升为右庶子，仍兼前职。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of the second son, still holding the previous position.

古文：明年以父丧给传归。
现代文：第二年他父亲去世，皇上让他乘驿车回去。
English: The following year, his father died, and the Emperor asked him to return by stagecoach.

古文：既葬，起复视事。
现代文：父亲下葬后，他被召回任事。
English: After his father's funeral, he was called back to work.

古文：又明年，母丧乞归。帝以北行期迫不许，命同胡广、金幼孜扈从。
现代文：又过了一年，母亲去世，杨荣请求回家，皇上因北行日期临近，没有批准，命他同胡广、金幼孜扈从北行。
English: A year later, after his mother passed away, Yang Rong requested to return home. As the date of his trip to the north was approaching, the emperor did not approve and ordered him to travel to the north with Hu Guang and Jin Yuzhen.

古文：甘肃总兵官何福言脱脱不花等请降，需命于亦集乃。
现代文：甘肃总兵官何福说脱脱不花等人请求投降，要求在亦集乃受命。
English: He Fu, the chief military officer of Gansu, said that people such as Dudu, Dudu, Dudu and others requested surrender, and the request was received in Yeshi.

古文：命荣往甘肃偕福受降，持节即军中封福宁远侯。
现代文：皇上命杨荣往甘肃与何福一起受降，持节就在军中封何福为宁远侯。
English: The emperor ordered Yang Rong to go to Gansu to accept the surrender together with He Fu, and the festival was held in the middle of the army, and He Fu was sent to Ningyuan.

古文：因至宁夏，与宁阳侯陈懋规画边务。
现代文：杨荣顺便到宁夏，与宁阳侯陈懋规划边防事务。
English: Yang Rong went to Ningxia to plan border defense affairs with Ningyang marquis Chen Yao.

古文：还陈便宜十事。帝嘉纳之。
现代文：回来后他上奏十项建议，皇上很欣赏地采纳了。
English: When he returned, he presented ten suggestions, which the Emperor accepted with great appreciation.

古文：八年从出塞，次胪朐河。
现代文：八年，他随从皇上出塞，到达胪朐河。
English: Eight years later, he followed the emperor out of the citadel and arrived in the Li River.

古文：选勇士三百人为卫，不以隶诸将，令荣领之。
现代文：皇上挑选出三百名勇士做护卫，但不交给别的将领，而是交给杨荣统领。
English: The emperor selected three hundred warriors to serve as guards, but he did not give them to other generals, but to Yang Rong, the commander-in-chief.

古文：师旋，饷不继。荣请尽以供御之余给军，而令军中有余者得相贷，入塞，官为倍偿。
现代文：回师时，粮饷供应不上，杨荣请将供给皇上的剩余部分拨给部队，还令军中有剩余粮食的可以相互借贷，等入塞后国家加倍偿还。
English: When returning to the division, the supply of grain can not be supplied, Yang Rong asked to allocate the remaining part of the emperor's supply to the troops, and also allowed the surplus grain in the army to borrow from each other, so that the country would double the repayment after entering the blockade.

古文：军赖以济。
现代文：部队因此得以渡过难关。
English: As a result, the troops were able to overcome the difficulties.

古文：明年乞奔丧，命中官护行。
现代文：第二年他请求奔丧，皇上命宦官为他护行。
English: The following year, he requested to be buried, and the emperor ordered eunuchs to escort him.

古文：还询闽中民情及岁丰歉，荣具以对。
现代文：回来后皇上询问他福建民情以及当年收成情况，杨荣都一一做了回答。
English: After returning, the emperor asked him about the people's living conditions in Fujian and the harvest of that year. Yang Rong answered all of them.

古文：寻命侍诸皇孙读书文华殿。
现代文：不久命他侍候诸皇孙在文华殿读书。
English: Soon after his death, he waited on the imperial grandchildren as they studied at the Palace of Literature.

古文：十年，甘肃守臣宋琥言，叛寇老的罕逃赤斤蒙古，且为边患。
现代文：十年，甘肃守臣宋琥上书说： 叛寇老的罕逃到赤斤蒙古，将成为边患。 
English: Ten years ago, the Gansu governor Song Yue said in a letter: "The old traitor Han fled to Mongolia and will become a borderline.

古文：乃复遣荣至陕西，会丰城侯李彬议进兵方略。
现代文：皇上于是派杨荣到陕西，会同丰城侯李彬商议进兵方略。
English: The emperor then sent Yang Rong to Shaanxi to consult with Fengcheng marquis Li Bin on the strategy for entering the army.

古文：荣还奏言： 隆冬非用兵时，且有罪不过数人，兵未可出。 
现代文：杨荣回来后上奏说 ：隆冬不是用兵时节，而且有罪的不过数人，不应该出兵。
English: After his return, Yang Rong made a report, saying, "Midwinter is not the time to send troops, and there are only a few guilty people, so we should not send troops."

古文：帝从其言，叛者亦降。
现代文：皇上听从他的建议，叛逆的人也投降了。
English: The emperor followed his advice, and the rebels surrendered.

古文：明年复与广、幼孜从北巡。
现代文：第二年杨荣又与胡广、金幼孜随从北巡。
English: The following year, Yang Rong accompanied Hu Guang and Jin Yuzi on the northern inspection tour.

古文：又明年征瓦剌，太孙侍行。
现代文：再过一年征伐瓦剌时，太孙侍行。
English: A year later, when the campaign against the Wawu was launched, the great-grandson was in attendance.

古文：帝命荣以间陈说经史，兼领尚宝事。
现代文：皇上命杨荣闲暇时间向太孙解释经史，兼管尚宝司事务。
English: The emperor ordered Yang Rong to spend his leisure time explaining the history of the sutras to his grandson, and also to manage the affairs of Shang Baozi.

古文：凡宣诏出令，及旗志符验，必得荣奏乃发。
现代文：凡是宣诏出令，以及旗志符验，都要得到杨荣的奏报之后，皇上才发出。
English: Whenever the emperor issued an edict, as well as the verification of the banner, the emperor issued it only after receiving Yang Rong's report.

古文：帝尝晚坐行幄，召荣计兵食。
现代文：有一天晚上皇上坐在行幄中，召杨荣去商议部队的粮饷问题。
English: One evening, the emperor was sitting in the procession and summoned Yang Rong to discuss the issue of food rations for the troops.

古文：荣对曰： 择将屯田，训练有方，耕耨有时，即兵食足矣。 
现代文：杨荣回答说 ：选择将领进行屯田，训练有方，耕种有时，这样便可以做到粮饷充足了。 
English: Yang Rong replied, "Choose generals to carry out the military garrison, train well, and cultivate sometimes, so that the grain supply can be sufficient."

古文：十四年与金幼孜俱进翰林学士，仍兼庶子，从还京师。
现代文：十四年，杨荣和金幼孜一同进升为翰林学士，仍兼庶子，随从皇上回到京师。
English: In the 14th year, Yang Rong and Jin Yuzi were promoted to Hanlin Baccalaureate together, still an illegitimate child, and returned to Beijing from the emperor.

古文：明年复从北征。
现代文：第二年又随从北征。
English: The following year, he followed the Northern Expedition.

古文：十六年，胡广卒，命荣掌翰林院事，益见亲任。
现代文：十六年，胡广去世，命杨荣掌管翰林院事务。杨荣更见亲任。
English: Sixteen years later, Hu Guang passed away, and Yang Rong was appointed to be in charge of the affairs of the Hanlin Academy. Yang Rong was personally in charge.

古文：诸大臣多忌荣，欲疏之，共举为祭酒。
现代文：大臣们多嫉妒杨荣，想让皇上疏远他，于是他们共同推举杨荣为祭酒。
English: The ministers were jealous of Yang Rong and wanted to alienate him from the emperor, so they jointly selected Yang Rong as the sacrificial wine.

古文：帝曰： 吾固知其可，第求代荣者。 
现代文：皇上说 ：我当然知道他可以胜任，现在要找可以代替他的人。 
English: The emperor said, "Of course I know he can do the job, now I have to find someone who can replace him."

古文：诸大臣乃不敢言。
现代文：大臣们才不敢再说话。
English: Ministers are afraid to speak out.

古文：十八年进文渊阁大学士，兼学士如故。
现代文：十八年，杨荣进升文渊阁大学士，仍兼学士。
English: In the 18th year, Yang Rongjin was promoted to Bachelor of Literature at Yuange University, still a bachelor.

古文：明年定都北京。
现代文：第二年定都北京。
English: The following year, the capital was moved to Beijing.

古文：会三殿灾，荣麾卫士出图籍制诰，舁东华门外。
现代文：正值三殿失火，杨荣指挥卫士抢出图籍制诰，抬到东华门外。
English: At the time of the fire in the third hall, Yang Rong commanded the guards to snatch the tombstone and carry it outside the Donghua Gate.

古文：帝褒之。
现代文：皇上褒奖他。
English: The Emperor commended him.

古文：荣与幼孜陈便宜十事。报可。
现代文：杨荣和金幼孜上奏十项建议，回报说可行。
English: Yang Rong and Jin Yuzi made ten suggestions, which were said to be feasible.

古文：二十年，复从出塞，军事悉令参决，赉予优渥。
现代文：二十年杨荣又随从皇上出塞，军事都令他参与决策，给他的赏赐非常优厚。
English: For twenty years, Yang Rong followed the emperor out of the country, and the military made him participate in decision-making, and gave him a very generous reward.

古文：师还，劳将士，分四等赐宴，荣、幼孜皆列前席，受上赏。
现代文：回师后，慰劳将士，分为四等赐宴，杨荣和金幼孜都位列前席，受到上赏。
English: After returning to their teachers, the consoled soldiers were divided into four classes of the banquet, Yang Rong and Jin Yuzi were all in the front row, and were rewarded.

古文：已，复下诏征阿鲁台。
现代文：后来，皇上又下诏征阿鲁台。
English: Later, the emperor issued an imperial edict to recruit Aru Tai.

古文：或请调建文时江西所集民兵。
现代文：有人请求调建文时期江西所征集的民兵。
English: Some people have requested that the militias recruited in Jiangxi during the Wen Dynasty be mobilized.

古文：帝问荣。荣曰： 陛下许民复业且二十年，一旦复征之，非示天下信。 
现代文：皇上将此事问杨荣，杨荣说： 陛下允许百姓复业将近二十年了，现在一旦征集他们，不能向天下表示信用。 
English: The admiral asked Yang Rong about this. Yang Rong said, "Your Majesty has allowed the people to resume work for nearly twenty years. Now, once they are recruited, they cannot express their trust to the world.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：明年从出塞，军务悉委荣，昼夜见无时。
现代文：第二年杨荣随从出塞，凡军务都交给杨荣处理，不分昼夜，可以随时请见。
English: The next year, Yang Rong followed him out of the country, and all military affairs were handed over to Yang Rong to deal with. You can see him at any time, day or night.

古文：帝时称 杨学士 ，不名也。
现代文：皇上当时称他为杨学士，而不称其名。
English: At that time, the emperor referred to him as Yang Baozhuang, but did not mention his name.

古文：又明年复从北征。
现代文：又过了一年，杨荣又随从北征。
English: A year later, Yang Rong followed the Northern Expedition.

古文：当是时，帝凡五出塞，士卒饥冻，馈运不继，死亡十二三。
现代文：当时，皇上已五次出塞，士卒饥冻，后勤供给不继，士卒死亡十分之二三。
English: At that time, the emperor had already made five trips to the fortress, the soldiers were starving, the logistics supply was not continuous, and the death of the soldiers was two-thirds of a tenth.

古文：大军抵答兰纳木儿河，不见敌。
现代文：大军抵达答兰纳木儿河，还不见敌人。
English: The large army arrived at the Talanamur River and did not see the enemy.

古文：帝问群臣当复进否，群臣唯唯，惟荣、幼孜从容言宜班师。
现代文：皇上问群臣是否应继续进军。群臣唯唯诺诺，只有杨荣和金幼孜从容说应该班师。
English: The emperor asked the courtiers whether they should continue marching. The courtiers were all in agreement, only Yang Rong and Jin Yuzi said that they should be the leaders.

古文：帝许之。
现代文：皇上批准了。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：还次榆木川，帝崩。
现代文：回到榆木川时，皇上驾崩。
English: When he returned to the Hinokigawa River, the emperor was dead.

古文：中官马云等莫知所措，密与荣、幼孜入御幄议。
现代文：宦官马云等人不知所措，秘密与杨荣、金幼孜进入御幄商议。
English: Eunuch Ma Yun and others were at a loss, secretly entering into negotiations with Yang Rong and Jin Yuzi.

古文：二人议：六师在外，去京师尚远，秘不发丧。以礼敛，熔锡为椑，载舆中。
现代文：两人说，现在六师在外，离京师尚远，应秘不发丧，依礼装殓后，熔锡铸成棺材，装在车上，一路照平常一样供应饮食。
English: The two said that now the Sixth Division is out, and it is still far from the Beijing Division, it should be kept secret. After decorating according to etiquette, the molten tin was cast into a coffin and placed on the car, and meals were served as usual along the way.

古文：所至朝夕进膳如常仪，益严军令，人莫测。
现代文：他们还进一步严申军令，人们都不知道发生了变故。
English: They also further tightened the military order, and people did not know what had happened.

古文：或请因他事为敕，驰报皇太子。
现代文：有人请以别的事情发出敕令，飞驰报告皇太子。
English: Someone please issue a royal command about something else and hurry to report to the crown prince.

古文：二人曰： 谁敢尔！
现代文：两人说 ：谁敢这样？
English: The two said, "Who would dare do such a thing?"

古文：先帝在则称敕，宾天而称敕，诈也，罪不小。 众曰： 然。 
现代文：先帝还在时可以称敕，现在先帝仙逝了还称敕，这是欺骗，罪行不小。 众人说 ：是。 
English: When the former emperor was still alive, he could be praised, but now that the former emperor has passed away, he is still praised. This is deception, and the crime is not small. Many people said, "Yes."

古文：乃具大行月日及遗命传位意，启太子。
现代文：于是将先帝逝世的月日以及遗命传位之意，报告太子。
English: He then reported to the crown prince the month and day of the former emperor's death, as well as the meaning of the imperial succession.

古文：荣与少监海寿先驰讣。
现代文：杨荣与少监海寿先驰往京师报丧。
English: Yang Rong and Junior Superintendent Hai Shou first drove to Beijing to report the death.

古文：既至，太子命与蹇义、杨士奇议诸所宜行者。
现代文：杨荣到后，太子命他与蹇义、杨士奇讨论所有应该实行的事情。
English: After Yang Rong arrived, the prince ordered him to discuss with Zhai Yi and Yang Shiqi all the things that should be implemented.

古文：仁宗即位，进太常卿，余官如故。
现代文：仁宗即位后，杨荣进升太常寺卿，仍兼前职。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, Yang Rongjin was promoted to the post of the Lord of Taiji Temple, still holding his previous post.

古文：寻进太子少傅、谨身殿大学士。
现代文：不久进升为太子少傅、谨身殿大学士。
English: He was soon promoted to Taishi shofu (Junior Master of the Prince's Household) and Gimmitoden University scholar.

古文：既而有言荣当大行时，所行丧礼及处分军事状。帝赐敕褒劳，赉予甚厚。进工部尚书，食三禄。
现代文：过后有人说到先帝逝世时，杨荣所办理的丧礼和处理军事的情况，皇上赐敕褒奖慰劳，赐予非常丰厚，并进升他为工部尚书，享受三职俸禄。
English: Later, it was said that when the former emperor died, Yang Rong handled the funeral and the handling of the military situation, and the emperor gave him a reward and consolation, which was very rich, and he was promoted to the Ministry of Industry and enjoyed a three-year salary.

古文：时士奇、淮皆辞尚书禄，荣、幼孜亦固辞。不允。
现代文：当时杨士奇、黄淮都辞去尚书俸禄，杨荣、金幼孜也坚决推辞，但皇上不允。
English: At that time, Yang Shiji and Huang Huai both resigned from Shangshu Hanlu, and Yang Rong and Jin Yuzi also firmly refused, but the emperor was not pleased.

古文：宣德元年，汉王高煦反。帝召荣等定计。
现代文：宣德元年，汉王朱高煦造反，皇上召杨荣等人来定计。
English: In the first year of Xuande, the Han king Zhu Gaozhen rebelled, and the emperor summoned Yang Rong and others to make a final calculation.

古文：荣首请帝亲征，曰： 彼谓陛下新立，必不自行。
现代文：杨荣最先请皇上亲征，他说： 他以为陛下刚刚登基，肯定不会亲自出行。
English: Yang Rong first invited the emperor to come. He said: He thought that His Majesty had just ascended to the throne and would certainly not travel in person.

古文：今出不意，以天威临之，事无不济。 
现代文：现在出其不意，临之以天威，没有办不成的事。 
English: Now, out of the blue, by the grace of God, there is nothing that cannot be done.

古文：帝从其计。
现代文：皇上听从他的计策。
English: Emperor Ming accepted his suggestion.

古文：至乐安，高煦出降。师还，以决策功，受上赏，赐银章五，褒予甚至。
现代文：回师后，以决策之功，杨荣得到上赏，被赐给五枚银章，给予很高的褒奖和赐予。
English: After returning to his teacher, Yang Rong was rewarded for his decision-making, was awarded five silver medals, and was given high praise and gifts.

古文：三年从帝巡边，至遵化。
现代文：三年杨荣随皇上巡边，到达遵化。
English: Three years later, Yang Rong accompanied the emperor on his inspection tour and arrived in Zunhua.

古文：闻兀良哈将寇边，帝留扈行诸文臣于大营，独命荣从。
现代文：听说兀良哈将要犯边，皇上将扈从的文臣都留在大营，只命杨荣跟从。
English: Hearing that Gong Liang Ha was about to cross the border, the emperor ordered all his vassals to remain in the camp, leaving Yang Rong to follow.

古文：自将轻骑出喜峰口，破敌而还。
现代文：杨荣自率轻骑出喜峰口，破敌而还。
English: Yang Rong rode out of the Qifeng mouth, defeated the enemy and returned.

古文：五年进少傅，辞大学士禄。
现代文：五年杨荣进升为少傅，辞去大学士的俸禄。
English: Five years later, Yang Rongjin was promoted to the position of junior professor, and his salary as a university professor was increased.

古文：九年复从巡边，至洗马林而还。
现代文：九年他又随从皇上巡边，到洗马林而返。
English: Nine years later, he returned from the emperor's inspection tour to Shimaring.

古文：英宗即位，委寄如故。
现代文：英宗即位后，对杨荣委寄如故。
English: After Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, he continued to send letters to the Yang Rong Committee.

古文：正统三年，与士奇俱进少师。
现代文：正统三年，他与杨士奇都进升少师。
English: In the third year of orthodoxy, both he and Yang Shichi were promoted to junior division.

古文：五年乞归展墓，命中官护行。
现代文：五年，他请求回家扫墓，皇上命宦官护行。
English: In the fifth year, he asked to go home to sweep the grave, and the emperor ordered the eunuch to escort him.

古文：还至武林驿而卒，年七十。
现代文：回到武林驿时杨荣去世，终年七十岁。
English: When he returned to Wulin, Yang Rong passed away at the age of 70.

古文：赠太师，谥文敏，授世袭都指挥使。
现代文：赠太师，谥号文敏，授予世袭都指挥使。
English: He was given the title of Grand Master and the posthumous name of Wenmin. He was also awarded the title of Hereditary Metropolitan Commander.

古文：荣历事四朝，谋而能断。
现代文：杨荣历事四朝，谋而能断。
English: Yang Rong has been through four dynasties, and he is able to break through.

古文：永乐末，浙、闽山贼起，议发兵。
现代文：永乐末年，浙江、福建山贼起事，朝廷计划发兵。
English: At the end of Yongle's reign, mountain bandits in Zhejiang and Fujian revolted, and the imperial court planned to send troops.

古文：帝时在塞外，奏至，以示荣。
现代文：皇上当时在塞外，奏书送到后，皇上拿给杨荣看。
English: The emperor was out of the country at the time. After the report was delivered, the emperor showed it to Yang Rong.

古文：荣曰： 愚民苦有司，不得已相聚自保。
现代文：杨荣说 ：愚民苦于有关官员的压迫，不得已相聚自保。
English: Yang Rong said: The people are suffering from the oppression of the relevant officials, and they have no choice but to gather together to protect themselves.

古文：兵出，将益聚不可解。
现代文：现在大兵一出，他们将聚集得更多，从而难以调解。
English: Now, as soon as the soldiers come out, they will gather more and it will be difficult to mediate.

古文：遣使招抚，当不烦兵。 
现代文：如果遣使者去招抚，当不用烦劳师旅。 
English: If you send a messenger to woo, don't bother to travel.

古文：从之，盗果息。
现代文：皇上听从他的意见，盗贼果然平息了。
English: The emperor listened to his advice, and the thieves calmed down.

古文：安南之弃，诸大臣多谓不可，独荣与士奇力言不宜以荒服疲中国。
现代文：放弃安南时，大臣们多认为不可，只有杨荣和杨士奇极力主张不宜以荒服之地拖累中国。
English: When Annan was given up, most of the ministers thought it was impossible. Only Yang Rong and Yang Shiqui strongly advocated that China should not be dragged down by the country.

古文：其老成持重类如此。
现代文：他老成持重的表现多是如此。
English: That's how he's always been with the weight.

古文：论事激发，不能容人过。
现代文：他论事常情绪激昂，不能容人之过。
English: He is often very emotional about things and cannot tolerate anyone's mistakes.

古文：然遇人触帝怒致不测，往往以微言导帝意，辄得解。
现代文：但遇有别人触怒了皇上，导致不测时，他往往以微言劝导皇上，从而使他们得以免祸。
English: However, when someone else angered the emperor and caused an accident, he often advised the emperor with a few words, so that they could be spared.

古文：夏原吉、李时勉之不死，都御史刘观之免戍边，皆赖其力。
现代文：夏原吉、李时勉之不死，都御史刘观之得免戍边，都赖杨荣之力。
English: Xia Yuanji and Li Shizhen are immortal, and Liu Guanzhong, the governor of the capital, is exempt from punishment. They all rely on Yang Rong's strength.

古文：尝语人曰： 事君有体，进谏有方，以悻直取祸，吾不为也。 
现代文：他曾对人说： 事君有体，进谏有方，是我的原则。感情用事，怀着怒火进言，从而得到祸害，是我所不为的。 
English: He once said to a man, "It is my principle to do what is right, not what is expedient. I will not use my emotions and speak with anger, thereby bringing disaster upon myself.

古文：故其恩遇亦始终无间。
现代文：所以他受皇帝的恩宠始终无间。
English: Therefore, he was always favored by the emperor.

古文：重修《太祖实录》及太宗、仁、宣三朝《实录》，皆为总裁官。
现代文：重修《太祖实录》以及太宗、仁宗、宣宗三朝的实录，他都担任总裁官。
English: He served as the president of the re-editing of the "Taiso Record" and the records of the three dynasties of Emperor Taizong, Emperor Renzong and Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：先后赐赉，不可胜计。
现代文：先后得到的赏赐，不可胜计。
English: There is no limit to the rewards you can receive.

古文：会吏部尚书乔宇罢，召旦代之，未至，为给事中陈洸所劾，勒致仕。
现代文：他性喜宾客，虽然成了显贵也仍旧非常随和，所以士人多归向。有人认为杨荣处理国家大事，不愧唐代的姚崇，而他不拘小节的个性，也颇像姚崇。
English: Although he became a dignitary, he was still very easy-going, so many scholars turned to him. Some people thought that Yang Rong handled national affairs, worthy of the Tang Dynasty's Yao Chong, and his informal personality was also quite like Yao Chong.

古文：年七十余卒。杨溥，字弘济，石首人。
现代文：杨荣家很富有，曾孙杨晔做建宁卫指挥时，因被罚钱而败尽。杨溥，字弘济，石首人。
English: Yang Rong's family was very wealthy. When his great-grandson Yang Hui was the conductor of the Jianningwei Orchestra, he lost everything because he was fined. Yang Hui, surnamed Hongji, was the head of the family.

古文：与杨荣同举进士。授编修。
现代文：与杨荣是同科进士，授编修官。
English: He and Yang Rong are fellow students of the same subject and have been awarded the title of editor-in-chief.

古文：永乐初，侍皇太子为洗马。
现代文：永乐初年，为洗马官侍奉皇太子。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he served the crown prince as a horse-washing official.

古文：太子尝读《汉书》，称张释之贤。
现代文：太子有一次读《汉书》，称赞张释之有贤才。
English: The crown prince once read "Chinese Classics" and praised Zhang Xizhong's talent.

古文：溥曰： 释之诚贤，非文帝宽仁，未得行其志也。 
现代文：杨溥说 ：释之诚然有贤才，但如果不是汉文帝宽厚仁爱，他也无法施展他的抱负。 
English: Yang Hui said, "It is true that Xie Zizhu has great talent, but if it were not for Emperor Hanwen's generosity and benevolence, he would not have been able to fulfill his ambition.

古文：采文帝事编类以献。
现代文：于是摘取汉文帝的事迹，分类编好，献给太子。
English: Therefore, the deeds of Emperor Hanwen were extracted, classified and compiled, and dedicated to the prince.

古文：太子大悦。
现代文：太子非常高兴。
English: The prince was very happy.

古文：久之，以丧归。
现代文：不久，因亲丧回家守孝。
English: Soon after, he returned home to mourn the loss of his relatives.

古文：时太子监国，命起视事。
现代文：当时太子监国，便强令他回京任职。
English: At that time, the crown prince was the supervisor of the country, so they forced him to return to Beijing.

古文：十二年，东宫遣使迎帝迟，帝怒。
现代文：十二年，东宫派使者迎接皇上太迟，皇上大怒。
English: In the twelfth year, the East Palace sent an envoy to meet the emperor too late, and the emperor was furious.

古文：黄淮逮至北京系狱。
现代文：黄淮被逮到北京，关进监狱。
English: Huang Huai was arrested in Beijing and sent to prison.

古文：及金问至，帝益怒曰： 问何人，得侍太子！ 
现代文：等金问到来时，皇上更加愤怒，说 ：金问是什么人，也能侍奉太子？ 
English: When Kimchi arrived, the emperor became even more angry, saying, "Who is Kimchi that he can serve the crown prince?"

古文：下法司鞫，连溥，逮系锦衣卫狱。
现代文：将他交给司法部门审问。杨溥受到牵连，被逮进锦衣卫监狱。
English: He was handed over to the judicial department for interrogation. Yang Qi was implicated and arrested and taken to Jinlingwei Prison.

古文：家人供食数绝。而帝意不可测，旦夕且死。
现代文：在狱中，家人供应的食物多次断绝，而皇上的心意也不可预测，随时都有可能死去。
English: In prison, the food supplied by his family was cut off several times, and the emperor's mind was unpredictable, and he could die at any time.

古文：溥益奋，读书不辍。
现代文：但杨溥却更加勤奋读书，从不间断。
English: However, Yang Hui studied more diligently and never stopped.

古文：系十年，读经史诸子数周。
现代文：狱中十年，他把经书史籍通读了好几遍。
English: During his ten years in prison, he read through the scriptures and history books several times.

古文：仁宗即位，释出狱，擢翰林学士。
现代文：仁宗即位，杨溥获释出狱，升为翰林学士。
English: Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, Yang Hui was released from prison and promoted to Hanlin Scholar.

古文：尝密疏言事。
现代文：他曾秘密上书议论政事。
English: He used to write about politics in secret.

古文：帝褒答之，赐钞币。
现代文：皇上对他加以褒奖，赐给钞币。
English: The emperor rewarded him by giving him money.

古文：已，念溥由己故久困，尤怜之。
现代文：后来，皇上想到由于自己的缘故而使杨溥久困狱中，更特别同情他。
English: Later, the emperor thought of Yang Xinglong being in prison for his own reasons, and felt especially sorry for him.

古文：明年建弘文阁于思善门左，选诸臣有学行者侍值。
现代文：第二年在思善门左边建弘文阁，在各大臣中选择有才学、品行好的人入阁值班。
English: In the second year, the Hongwen Pavilion was built on the left side of the Shishan Gate. Among the ministers, people with talent and good conduct were selected to be on duty in the pavilion.

古文：士奇荐侍讲王进、儒士陈继，蹇义荐学录杨敬、训导何澄。
现代文：士奇推荐侍讲王进、儒士陈继，蹇义推荐学录杨敬、训导何澄。
English: Shiqi recommended the attendant speaker Wang Jin, the Confucianist Chen Ji, Shiyi recommended the student Yang Jing, and the tutor He Cheng.

古文：诏官继博士，敬编修，澄给事中，日值阁中。
现代文：皇上命授予陈继博士官，杨敬编修官，何澄为给事中，每天到阁中值班。
English: Emperor's order was given to Chen Ji as a doctoral officer, Yang Jing as an editor-in-chief, and He Cheng as an assistant, and they were on duty in the cabinet every day.

古文：命溥掌阁事，亲授阁印，曰： 朕用卿左右，非止学问。欲广知民事，为治道辅。
现代文：又命杨溥掌管阁事，并亲自授予他阁印，说 ：朕把爱卿留在左右使用，不仅只是为了学问，还想广泛了解民情，以有助于治理国家。
English: He also ordered Yang Jie to take charge of the cabinet affairs, and personally awarded him the cabinet seal, saying, "I keep Ai Qing around to use, not only for learning, but also to widely understand the people's conditions, so as to help govern the country."

古文：有所建白，封识以进。 
现代文：你有什么建议要报告，可以密封后上呈。 
English: If you have any suggestions to report, you can submit them after sealing.

古文：寻进太常卿，兼职如故。
现代文：不久升为太常寺卿，仍兼旧职。
English: He was soon promoted to Lord of Taijo-ji Temple, still holding his old post.

古文：宣宗即位，弘文阁罢，召溥入内阁，与杨士奇等共典机务。
现代文：宣宗即位后，罢设弘文阁，把杨溥召入内阁，与杨士奇等人共同主管枢机事务。
English: After Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, he set up the Hongwen Pavilion, called Yang Xi into the cabinet, and was jointly in charge of cardinal affairs with Yang Shichi and others.

古文：居四年，以母丧去，起复。
现代文：四年后，因母亲去世辞职，守孝期满后又出来任职。
English: Four years later, due to the death of his mother, he resigned, and after the term of filial piety expired, he came back to office.

古文：九年迁礼部尚书，学士值内阁如故。
现代文：宣德九年升任礼部尚书，仍以学士衔在内阁当值。
English: Xuan De was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies nine years later, and still serves in the cabinet with a bachelor's degree.

古文：英宗初立，与士奇、荣请开经筵。豫择讲官，必得学识平正、言行端谨、老成达大体者数人供职。
现代文：英宗刚即位，杨溥与杨士奇、杨荣请求开设讲经筵，一定要预先选好几位学识平正、言行端正谨严、老成而识大体的人来担任讲官。
English: Soon after Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, Yang Hui, Yang Shichi and Yang Rongtuo requested the opening of a lecture hall, and it was necessary to pre-select several people who were well-educated, well-spoken, well-behaved, mature and knowledgeable to serve as lecturers.

古文：且请慎选宫中朝夕侍从内臣。
现代文：又请求慎重选择在宫中朝夕侍从皇上的内臣。
English: He also requested that the emperor's vassals who served the emperor in the morning and evening should be carefully selected.

古文：太后大喜。
现代文：太后非常高兴。
English: The Queen Mother was overjoyed.

古文：一日，太后坐便殿，帝西向立，召英国公张辅及士奇、荣、溥、尚书胡濙入。谕曰： 卿等老臣，嗣君幼，幸同心共安社稷。 
现代文：一天，太后在便殿落座，皇上面西站立，召英国公张辅和杨士奇、杨荣、杨溥、尚书胡氵荧进去，太后对他们说： 你们都是老臣了，现在皇上年幼，望你们同心协力，共同维护国家的安定。 
English: One day, the empress dowager sat down in the throne room, and the emperor stood on the west side of the throne and called the British officials Zhang Fu and Yang Shiqi, Yang Rong, Yang Hui, and Shang Shuxu to enter. The empress dowager said to them: You are all old ministers, and now the emperor is young. I hope you will work together to maintain the stability of the country.

古文：又召溥前曰： 仁宗皇帝念卿忠，屡加叹息，不意今尚见卿。 
现代文：太后又召杨溥上前，说： 仁宗皇帝念卿忠诚，多次发出叹息，不想今天还能见到你。 
English: The empress dowager called Yang Xuan forward again and said, "Emperor Renzong is loyal to you, and he has repeatedly sighed that he does not want to see you again today.

古文：溥感泣，太后亦泣，左右皆悲怆。
现代文：杨溥感动而泣，太后也泣，左右的人也都很悲伤。
English: Yang Mi was moved to tears, the empress dowager also cried, and everyone around her was sad.

古文：始仁宗为太子，被谗，宫僚多死诏狱，溥及黄淮一系十年，濒死者数矣。
现代文：当初仁宗做太子时，受到诬陷，东宫属官许多死于诏狱之中，杨溥和黄淮一关就是十年，几次差点死去。
English: When Rinzong was crown prince, he was falsely accused, and many officials of the Eastern Court died in the imperial prison. Yang Hui and Huang Huai were imprisoned for ten years, and they almost died several times.

古文：仁宗时时于宫中念诸臣，太后亦久怜之，故为溥言之如此。
现代文：仁宗常常在宫中惦念他们，太后对他们也一直很同情，所以才对杨溥说了这番话。
English: Rinzong often thought about them in the palace, and the empress dowager had always been very sympathetic to them, which is why she said this to Yang Hui.

古文：太后复顾帝曰： 此五臣，三朝简任，俾辅后人。
现代文：太后又对皇上说： 这五位大臣，经过三朝皇帝的选任，足以辅佐后人。
English: The empress dowager also said to the emperor: These five ministers, after being appointed by the emperors of the three dynasties, are enough to assist future generations.

古文：皇帝万几，宜与五臣共计。 
现代文：皇帝政事繁忙，应当与这五位共同商议。 
English: The emperor is busy with political affairs and should consult with these five people.

古文：正统三年，《宣宗实录》成，进少保、武英殿大学士。
现代文：正统三年，《宣宗实录》修成，杨溥升少保，武英殿大学士。
English: In the third year of orthodoxy, the "Proclamation of the True Faith" was completed, and Yang Jian Sheng was promoted to the junior high school, and became a scholar of the Wuying Temple.

古文：溥后士奇、荣二十余年入阁，至是乃与士奇、荣并。
现代文：杨溥比杨士奇、杨荣晚二十年入阁，到此于是与他们并列。
English: Yang Hui entered the cabinet twenty years later than Yang Shichi and Yang Rong, so he is now on a par with them.

古文：六年归省墓，寻还。
现代文：六年回家扫墓，不久回京。
English: Six years later, he came home to sweep the graves, and soon returned to Kyoto.

古文：是时，王振尚未横，天下清平，朝无失政，中外臣民翕然称 三杨 。
现代文：这时，王振还没有骄横，天下清平，朝廷没有败政，内外臣民一致称赞 三杨 。
English: At this time, Wang Zhen was not arrogant, the world was peaceful, the imperial court did not defeat the government, and the subjects at home and abroad unanimously praised Sanyang.

古文：以居第目士奇曰 西杨 ，荣曰 东杨 ，而溥尝自署郡望曰南郡，因号为 南杨 。
现代文：以府第所在的方位称杨士奇为西杨，杨荣为东杨，而杨溥曾自称自己的郡望是南郡，所以被称为南杨。
English: According to the location of the prefecture, Yang Shichi is called West Yang, Yang Rong is called East Yang, and Yang Hui once claimed that his county was South County, so he was called South Yang.

古文：溥质直廉静，无城府。
现代文：杨溥朴实正直，廉洁好静，没有城府。
English: Yang Hui is simple and honest, clean and quiet, and has no city government.

古文：性恭谨，每入朝，循墙而走。
现代文：个性恭敬谨慎，每次上朝，都顺着墙跟走。
English: Respectful and cautious, he follows me along the wall every morning.

古文：诸大臣论事争可否，或至违言。溥平心处之，诸大臣皆叹服。
现代文：大臣们论事时争辩不下，有的甚至口出秽言，杨溥却平心静气地处理，大臣们为之叹服。
English: The ministers couldn't help but argue when discussing the matter, and some even used foul language, but Yang Hui handled it calmly, and the ministers were impressed.

古文：时谓士奇有学行，荣有才识，溥有雅操，皆人所不及云。
现代文：当时人们说杨士奇有学者风范，杨荣有才干见识，杨溥有高尚的品德，这些都是别人比不上的。
English: At that time, people said that Yang Shiqui had scholarly demeanor, Yang Rong had talent and insight, and Yang Hui had noble character, all of which were unmatched by others.

古文：比荣、士奇相继卒，在阁者马愉、高谷、曹鼐皆后进望轻。
现代文：到杨士奇、杨荣相继去世，在内阁的马愉、高谷、曹鼐都是后进，名望不高。
English: By the time Yang Shichi and Yang Rong passed away one after another, Ma You, Takaya, and Cao Pi, who were in the cabinet, were all laggards with low reputations.

古文：溥孤立，王振益用事。
现代文：杨溥独木难支，王振便进一步专权用事。
English: Yang Zhen alone is difficult to support, and Wang Zhen will further exercise exclusive power.

古文：十一年七月，溥卒，年七十五。
现代文：十一年七月，杨溥去世，终年七十五岁。
English: On July 11, Yang Mi passed away at the age of 75.

古文：赠太师，谥文定。
现代文：赠太师，谥号文定。
English: He was given the title of Grand Master, and his posthumous name was Wenzing.

古文：官其孙寿尚宝司丞。
现代文：授予他的孙子寿为尚宝司丞。
English: Awarded to his grandson, Hisamitsu, as Shobo Shijo.

古文：后三年，振遂导英宗北征，陷土木，几至大乱。
现代文：三年后，王振便引导英宗北征，结果在土木堡陷入包围，几乎酿成大乱。
English: Three years later, Wang Zhen led the northern expedition of Yingzong, and as a result, he was besieged in the earthen fort, which almost led to chaos.

古文：时人追思此三人者在，当不至此。
现代文：当时人怀念三杨，认为如果他们还在，不会发生这样的结局。
English: At the time, people were nostalgic for Sanyo, thinking that if they were still there, this outcome would not happen.

古文：而后起者争暴其短，以为依违中旨，酿成贼奄之祸，亦过刻之端也。
现代文：而后起者却争相揭露他们的短处，以为由于他们违心执行中旨，终于酿成了阉官为患的祸害。这种言论也太过于刻薄了。
English: The latter, on the other hand, were eager to expose their shortcomings, and thought that because they had carried out the central idea against their will, they had finally brought about the evil of eunuchs. This kind of speech was also too mean.

