古文：诸葛恪字元逊，瑾长子也。
现代文：诸葛恪传，诸葛恪，字元逊，诸葛瑾的长子。
English: Zhuge Ke, Zhuge Ke, Zi Yuan Xiong, the eldest son of Zhuge Yao.

古文：少知名。
现代文：他年少时就有才名。
English: He became famous at a young age.

古文：弱冠拜骑都尉，与顾谭、张休等侍太子登讲论道艺，并为宾友。
现代文：二十岁被任命为骑都尉，与顾谭、张休等人侍奉太子孙登讲授道艺，并与他们交为朋友。
English: At the age of twenty, he was appointed as a cavalry captain. Together with Gu Tan, Zhang Hui and others, he served the prince's children and grandchildren as a lecturer of Taoism, and became friends with them.

古文：从中庶子转为左辅都尉。
现代文：从中庶子转为左辅都尉。
English: He was promoted from middle child to left assistant captain.

古文：恪父瑾面长似驴。孙权大会群臣，使人牵一驴入，长检其面，题曰诸葛子瑜。
现代文：诸葛恪的父亲诸葛瑾脸长似驴，孙权大会朝臣时，让人牵一头驴进殿，用长标签贴在驴脸上，在标签上题写 诸葛子瑜 几个字。
English: Zhuge's father, Zhuge Ziyu, had a face that resembled a donkey. When Sun Quan was a courtier, he had a man lead a donkey into the palace, stick a long label on the donkey's face, and write "Zhuge Ziyu" on the label.

古文：恪跪曰： 乞请竺益两字。
现代文：诸葛恪跪下说： 恳请让我用笔加上两个字。 
English: Zhuge Ke knelt down and said: Please let me add two words with a pen.

古文：因听与笔。
现代文：孙权同意并给了他一支笔。
English: Sun Quan agreed and gave him a pen.

古文：恪绩其下曰： 之驴。 举座欢笑，乃以驴赐恪。
现代文：诸葛恪在标签上续写了 之驴 二字，在座的人都欢笑起来，于是孙权将驴给了诸葛恪。
English: Zhuge Ke continued to write the word "donkey" on the label, and everyone present laughed, so Sun Quan gave the donkey to Zhuge Ke.

古文：他日复见，权问恪曰： 卿父与叔父孰贤？ 对曰： 臣父为优。 权问其故。
现代文：又有一天见到诸葛恪，孙权问他说： 你的叔父和你父亲哪个强些？ 诸葛恪回答说： 我父亲强些。 
English: One day he saw Zhuge Ke, and Sun Quan asked him, "Which is stronger, your uncle or your father?" Zhuge Ke replied, "My father is stronger."

古文：对曰： 臣父知所事，叔父不知，以是为优。 权又大噱。
现代文：孙权问其原因，诸葛恪回答说： 我的父亲知道该为什么人做事，叔父却不知道，所以我父亲要强些。 孙权又欢笑起来。
English: Sun Quan asked the reason, Zhuge replied: My father knows why people should do things, but my uncle does not know, so my father should be stronger. Sun Quan laughed again.

古文：命恪行酒，至张昭前，昭先有酒色，不肯饮。曰： 此非养老之礼也。 
现代文：他叫诸葛恪给大家依次敬酒，斟到张昭面前，张昭已有点醉意，不肯再饮，对诸葛恪说： 这不是敬老的礼节。 
English: He asked Zhuge Ke to give everyone a toast in turn, and poured it in front of Zhang Zhao. Zhang Zhao was already a little drunk and refused to drink any more. He said to Zhuge Ke: "This is not the etiquette of respect for the elderly.

古文：权曰： 卿其能令张公辞屈，乃当饮之耳。 
现代文：孙权说： 你能叫张公理屈辞穷，那么他就不得不饮这杯酒了。 
English: Sun Quan said, "If you can make Zhang Gong Li bend over, then he will have to drink this glass of wine."

古文：恪难昭曰： 昔师尚父九十，秉旄仗钺，犹未告老也。
现代文：于是诸葛恪反诘张昭说： 从前太师姜尚九十岁，还执旗持钺，仍未告老。
English: Therefore, Zhuge Ke rebutted Zhang Zhao and said: Former Grand Master Jiang Shang was ninety years old, still holding the banner and holding the scepter, still not old.

古文：今军旅之事，将军在后，酒食之事，将军在先，何谓不养老也？ 昭卒无辞，遂为尽爵。
现代文：如今领兵作战的事，将军您在后，饮酒吃饭的事，将军您在前，怎能说这不是敬老呢？ 张昭终于无话可说，于是饮干杯中的酒。
English: Now, when it comes to leading soldiers into battle, when you are behind the general, when it comes to drinking and eating, when you are in front of the general, how can you say that this is not respect for the elderly? Zhang Zhao finally had nothing to say, so he drank the wine in the toast.

古文：后蜀好，群臣并会，权谓使曰： 此诸葛恪雅使至骑乘，还告丞相，为致好马。 
现代文：后来蜀国的使者来到吴国，群臣都来会见，孙权对蜀使说： 这个诸葛恪向来喜欢骑马，您回去告诉您们丞相，为他送一匹好马来。 
English: Later, the envoy from Shu came to Wu, and all the ministers came to meet him. Sun Quan said to the Shu envoy, "This Zhuge Ke has always liked riding horses. Go back and tell your prime ministers to send him a good horse."

古文：恪因下谢，权曰： 马未至面谢何也？ 
现代文：诸葛恪便马上跪拜致谢，孙权说： 马还没有送来谢什么呢？ 
English: Zhuge immediately knelt down to thank him, and Sun Quan said, "What hasn't Ma sent to thank me?

古文：恪对曰： 夫蜀者陛下之外厩，今有恩诏，马必至也，安敢不谢？ 
现代文：诸葛恪答说： 蜀国是陛下的外面马厩，今天有此恩诏，马是一定会送来的，我岂敢不谢恩？ 
English: Zhuge Ke replied, "Shu is your majesty's outside stables. Today, there is this edict that horses will definitely be sent. How dare I not thank you?"

古文：恪之才捷，皆此类也。
现代文：诸葛恪的才思，都如上面相类。
English: Zhuge Ke's talents are similar to the above.

古文：权甚异之，欲试以事，令守节度。
现代文：孙权觉得他很不寻常，打算安排具体政事考察他，命他代理节度一职。
English: Sun Quan thought he was very unusual, and planned to arrange a specific political investigation of him, and ordered him to act as a representative of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：节度掌军粮谷，文书繁猥，非其好也。
现代文：节度职任是掌管军队粮草，公文繁杂，不是他所喜欢做的事。
English: The duty of the regent is to control the army's grain and grass, and it is not something he likes to do.

古文：恪以丹杨山险，民多果劲，虽前发兵，徒得外县平民而已。其余深远，莫能禽尽，屡自求乞为官出之。三年可得甲士四万。
现代文：诸葛恪考虑到丹杨郡山道险阻，百姓大多果敢强劲，虽说以前曾发兵剿击，但只得到一些边缘县份的平民，其余的人皆因居住在深山远林之中，不能全部抓获，故多次自己恳求任丹杨地方主政人员去招降引诱那些人出山，三年可以得到兵卒四万。
English: Zhuge Ke took into account that the mountain roads in Danyang County were dangerous and the people were mostly brave and strong. Although he had previously sent troops to fight, he only got some civilians from the edge counties. The rest of the people could not be captured all because they lived in the deep mountains and forests. Therefore, he repeatedly implored the local leading politicians in Danyang to recruit and lure those people out of the mountains. In three years, he could get forty thousand soldiers.

古文：众议咸以 丹杨地势险阻，与吴郡、会稽、新都、鄱阳四郡邻接，周旋数千里，山谷万重，其幽邃民人，未尝人城邑，对长吏，皆仗兵野逸，白首于林莽。
现代文：大家都认为丹杨地势险阻，与吴郡、会稽、新都、鄱阳四郡为邻相连，绵亘数千里，山谷上万重，其中居住僻远深山老林里的人，从未进过城市，没有见过官长，他们都身带兵器在山野活动，一生生活在深山之中，一直到白头至死。
English: Everyone agrees that the terrain of Danyang is perilous. It is adjacent to the four counties of Wu County, Huancheng, Xindu and Fenyang. It stretches for thousands of miles and has thousands of valleys. Among them are people who live in remote mountains and old forests. They have never entered a city and have never seen a government official. They all carry weapons in the mountains and fields and live in the mountains all their lives until they die.

古文：逋亡宿恶，咸共逃窜。
现代文：那些逃犯惯匪，都纠合逃窜其中。
English: Those fugitives and habitual bandits are all entangled in the escape.

古文：山出铜铁，自铸甲兵。
现代文：山中生产铜、铁，他们自制兵器铠甲。
English: The mountains produce copper and iron, and they make their own weapons and armor.

古文：俗好武习战，高尚气力，其升山赴险，抵突丛棘。若鱼之走渊，猨狖之腾木也。
现代文：其地习俗爱好武功熟知打仗，崇尚武力勇气，他们登山越险，穿越荆棘丛林，就如鱼游深渊，猿猴在树林中攀援跳跃。
English: Their local customs are fond of martial arts, familiar with war, advocating the courage of force, they climb mountains and cross the danger, cross thorny jungles, just like fish swimming in the abyss, and monkeys climbing and jumping in the woods.

古文：时观间隙，出为寇盗，每致兵征伐，寻其窟藏。
现代文：他们不时窥伺可乘之机，出山而为寇盗，每每迫使官府出兵征讨，寻找他们的藏身巢穴。
English: From time to time, they spy an opportunity to take advantage of it, go out of the mountains and become robbers, and force the government to send soldiers to investigate, looking for their hiding place.

古文：其战则蜂至，败则鸟窜，自前世以来，不能羁也 。皆以为难。
现代文：他们作战时蜂涌而至，败仗时如鸟兽而窜逃。自前代以来，一直不能控制他们，都认为治服他们实在很难。
English: When they fight, they swarm, and when they are defeated, they flee like birds and beasts. Since the previous generation, they have not been able to control them, and they all think that it is really difficult to subdue them.

古文：恪父瑾闻之，亦以事终不逮，叹曰： 恪不大兴吾家，将大赤吾族也。 
现代文：诸葛恪父亲诸葛瑾听说这种情况，也认为这种事情不会取得最后的成功，叹气说： 恪儿不能使我们家庭兴旺，将使我们遭灭族之祸！ 
English: Zhuge Liang's father Zhuge Liang heard about this situation and also thought that this kind of thing would not be successful in the end. He sighed and said, "If my son cannot make our family prosperous, he will cause us to suffer from the scourge of genocide!"

古文：恪盛陈其必捷。
现代文：诸葛恪极力陈述他一定能获得其事成功的理由。
English: Zhuge Ke was at pains to explain why he was certain to succeed.

古文：权拜恪抚赵将军，领丹杨太守，授棨戟武骑三百。
现代文：孙权任命诸葛恪为抚越将军，兼丹杨太守，授予他执瞈戟的仪仗骑兵三百。
English: Sun Quan appointed Zhuge Ke as the general of Fu Yue and also the governor of Danyang, and awarded him 300 honorable cavalrymen.

古文：拜毕，命恪备威仪，作鼓吹，导引归家，时年三十二。
现代文：授官仪式完毕，命令诸葛恪布置好仪仗队，擂鼓吹号，列队开道回家，当时他三十二岁。
English: After the investiture ceremony, he ordered Zhuge Ke to arrange a good guard of honor, sound the trumpet and march home. He was thirty-two years old at the time.

古文：恪到府，乃移书四部属城长空。令各保其疆界，明立部伍，其从化平民，悉令屯居。
现代文：诸葛恪上任到郡府，就致书邻近四郡所属地方的主管官长们，要求他们各自保守好自己辖区的疆界，建立和整顿军队，那些接受归服教化的平民，全都让他们安定居处。
English: When Zhuge Ke took office at the county government, he sent a letter to the competent officials of the localities belonging to the four counties in the vicinity, demanding that they each maintain the boundaries of their own jurisdiction, establish and rectify the army, and those civilians who accept the conversion to Christianity, all let them live in a stable place.

古文：乃分内诸将，罗兵幽阻，但缮藩篱，不与交锋，候其谷稼将熟，辄纵兵芟刈，使无遗种。
现代文：于是分兵部署将领，分别守住险要地段，只修缮好防御工事，不与山越人交锋，等待庄稼将要成熟时，便开出部队收割，连种子也不给留下。
English: As a result, the generals of the detachment were deployed to guard the dangerous areas separately, only repairing the fortifications, not fighting with the mountaineers, and waiting for the crops to mature, then the troops would be harvested, not even leaving seeds.

古文：旧谷既尽，新田不收，平民屯居，略无所入，于是山民饥穷，渐出降首。
现代文：旧粮已被吃尽，新粮又不能收，平民也已定居，一点粮食也不能进山，于是山越人饥饿穷困，逐渐出山投降。
English: The old grain has been eaten up, the new grain cannot be harvested, the civilians have also settled, and no grain can enter the mountains. As a result, the people of Shan Yue are starving and impoverished, and are gradually leaving the mountains to surrender.

古文：恪乃复敕下曰： 山民去恶从化，皆当抚慰，徙出外县，不得嫌疑，有所执拘。 
现代文：诸葛恪又告谕下属说： 山越百姓去掉恶习接受教化，都应当安抚慰问，迁到外县定居，不得嫌弃怀疑，对他们不得执留拘捕。 
English: Zhuge Ke also told his subordinates: If the people of Shan Yue should get rid of bad habits and accept enlightenment, they should be comforted and moved to settle outside the county. They must not abandon their suspicions and they must not be detained.

古文：臼阳长胡伉得降民周遗，遗旧恶民，困迫暂出，内图叛逆，伉缚送言府。
现代文：臼阳县县长胡伉得到降民周遗，周遗从前是恶刁之人，因困迫暂时出山投降，内心却图谋叛乱，胡伉将他绑送到郡府。
English: Hu Yao, the governor of Usuyang County, obtained the surrender of Zhou Ye. Zhou Ye was once a villain, who was forced to surrender temporarily due to hardship, but his heart was plotting a rebellion. Hu Yao took him to the county government.

古文：恪以伉违教，遂斩以徇，以状表上。
现代文：诸葛恪认为胡伉违背自己的教谕，于是将他斩首示众，并将此事写上奏章上报朝廷。
English: Zhuge believed that Hu Yao violated his edict, so he beheaded him in public, and reported the matter to the imperial court in a report.

古文：民闻伉坐执人被戮，知官惟欲出之而已，于是老幼相携而出，岁期，人数皆如本规。
现代文：山民们听说胡伉因捉人犯罪被杀，知道官府只是想要他们出山而已，于是他们扶老携幼相继出山，满一年后，所得到的人数全如诸葛恪原先预计的那样。
English: The mountain villagers heard that Hu Yao was killed for the crime of capturing people, and knew that the government only wanted them to go out of the mountain. So they helped the elderly and their children to go out of the mountain one after another. After a full year, the number of people they got was exactly as Zhuge Ke originally expected.

古文：恪自领万人，余分给诸将。
现代文：诸葛恪自己督领一万人，其余三万分发给各位将领。
English: Zhuge Ke himself supervised 10,000 people, and the remaining 30,000 were distributed to the generals.

古文：权嘉其功，遣尚书仆射薛综劳军。
现代文：孙权嘉赏诸葛恪的功劳，派尚书仆射薛综前往慰劳军队。
English: Sun Quan commended Zhuge Ke for his service and sent Shang's servant, Xue Xie, to the army of consolation.

古文：综先移恪等曰： 山越恃阻，不宾历世，缓则首鼠，急则狼顾。
现代文：薛综先致书诸葛恪等人说： 山越部族倚仗险要地势，不肯归服已有几代人，放松他们则扰乱不止，逼急他们则狼狈而窜。
English: Xue Zomei first sent a letter to Zhuge Ke and others saying: The Shan Yue tribes rely on a precarious situation, and have been unwilling to submit for several generations. If they relax, they will be disturbed, and if they are forced, they will be confused.

古文：皇帝赫然，命将西征，神策内授，武师外震。
现代文：皇上震怒，命令将军西往进讨，朝内授以神奇计谋，军队威风震动四方。
English: The emperor was furious and ordered his generals to march westward to discuss the matter. The imperial court was presented with a miraculous plan, and the army's power shook the four directions.

古文：兵不染锷，甲不沾汗。
现代文：兵器不染血迹，铠甲不沾汗水。
English: Weapons are not stained with blood, armor is not stained with sweat.

古文：元恶既枭，种党归义，荡涤山薮，献戎十万。
现代文：元凶受刑枭首，党徒归服道义，扫荡涤除深山寇穴，进献俘虏补充军队十万之众。
English: The main culprit was sentenced to death, the party members returned to the service of morality, and the army of 100,000 people was replenished by sweeping and clearing the deep mountain burglary pit and sacrificing prisoners.

古文：野无遗寇，邑罔残奸。
现代文：山野没有留下一个匪寇，城邑再无残余奸徒。
English: There is not a single bandit left in the mountains, and there are no remaining traitors in the towns.

古文：既扫凶慝，又充军用。
现代文：既扫除凶寇，又充实兵员。
English: Not only to sweep away the bandits, but also to enrich the soldiers.

古文：藜莜稂莠，化为善草。魑魅魍魉，更成虎土。
现代文：杂草稗莠，都化变为有益的草禾；魑魅魍魉，转变成猛虎般勇士。
English: Weeds and thistles are transformed into beneficial grasses; thistles and thistles are transformed into tiger-like warriors.

古文：虽实国家威灵之所加，亦信无帅临履之所致也。
现代文：虽说实为朝廷威德施加于他们所致，也肯定为元帅亲自督率指挥所成。
English: Although it is true that the imperial edict was imposed on them, it is also certain that the marshal personally supervised and commanded it.

古文：虽《诗》美执讯，《易》嘉折首，周之方、召，汉之卫、霍，岂足以谈？
现代文：虽说《诗经》赞美俘获敌人只审讯祸首，《易经》嘉赏处置降敌只杀掉罪魁，周朝的方叔、召伯虎，汉朝的卫青、霍去病，岂能同将军的功劳相提并论？
English: Although the "Song of Songs" praises the capture of the enemy only to interrogate the villain, the "I Ching" commends the disposal of the enemy only to kill the culprit, the Zhou Dynasty's Uncle Fang, the Summoning of the Bo Tiger, the Han Dynasty's Wei Qing, and the Ho to the disease, can it be compared with the general's merit?

古文：功轶古人，勋超前世。
现代文：您的功绩超越古人，勋劳盖过前代。
English: Your achievements surpass those of the ancients, and your service surpasses that of previous generations.

古文：主上欢然，遥用叹息。
现代文：主上欢欣喜悦，遥远地赞叹您的功绩。
English: Rejoice, O Lord, with joy, and let your works praise you afar off.

古文：感《四牡》之遗典，思饮至之旧章。故遣中台近官，迎致稿赐，以旌茂功，以慰劬劳 拜恪威北将军，封都乡侯。
现代文：他有感于《四牡》表述的慰劳胜利归来的遗典，思慕凯旋祭告祖庙庆贺的礼制，故此派遣尚书台近侍官员，迎接犒赏将军全军将士，以表彰您的大功，慰问辛劳的将士。 诸葛恪被授任为威北将军。封都乡侯。
English: He was impressed by the ceremony of consoling the victorious return of labor described in "The Four Masters" and thought of the ceremonial system of the triumphal return ceremony to congratulate the ancestral temple, so he sent Shang Shudai's close attendant official to greet the generals and soldiers of the whole army, to commend your great service, and to commiserate with the hard-working soldiers. Zhuge Ke was appointed as the general of Weibei. He was given the title of the capital township.

古文：恪乞率众佃庐江皖口，因轻兵袭舒，掩得其民而还。
现代文：他恳求率领部众在庐江、皖口一带驻扎并耕种农田，借此用轻兵袭击舒县，驱使那里的百姓随他返回。
English: He entreated and led his followers to stay and cultivate farmland in the areas of Minjiang and Shigou, and used this opportunity to attack Shuxian with light troops and drive the people there to return with him.

古文：复远遣斥候，观相径要，欲图寿春，权以为不可。
现代文：又派遣侦察人员前往远处，察看道路和险要之地，企图夺取寿春，孙权认为不可行。
English: Sun Quan also sent scouts to the distance to inspect the roads and dangerous places in an attempt to capture Shuchun, which Sun Quan thought was not feasible.

古文：赤乌中，魏司马宣王谋欲攻恪。权方发兵应之，望气者以为不利，于是徒恪屯于柴桑。
现代文：赤乌年间，魏国司马懿谋划打算攻打诸葛恪，孙权正准备出兵应战，观星象气数的人认为出兵不利，于是孙权让诸葛恪将军队转移到柴桑驻扎。
English: During the Qing and Wu dynasties, Sima Qian of Wei planned to attack Zhugeqiao, while Sun Quan was preparing to send troops to fight. Stargazers believed that sending troops was unfavorable, so Sun Quan asked Zhugeqiao to transfer the army to Chaisang.

古文：与丞相陆逊书曰： 杨敬叔传述清论，以为方今人物凋尽，守德业者不能复几，宜相左右。更为辅车，上熙国事，下相珍惜。
现代文：诸葛恪写信给丞相陆逊说： 杨敬叔传述清高的理论，认为当今的人才所剩无几，坚守道德和事业的人已经没有几人，应当相互配合，互相依存，对上兴隆国家大事，在下互相珍重爱惜。
English: Zhuge Ke wrote a letter to the prime minister, Lu Xun, saying: Yang Jingshu passed down the theory of Qinggao, and believed that today's talents are few, and there are few people who adhere to morality and career. They should cooperate with each other, depend on each other, cherish and cherish each other for the prosperity of national affairs.

古文：又疾世俗好相谤毁，使已成之器，中有损累。
现代文：又嫉恨世俗之人互相毁谤，使已有所成就的人才，中途受到压抑损伤；将受进用的人才，情绪不乐思想不欢。
English: Moreover, they are envious of the worldly people who slander each other, so that the talents who have achieved something are suppressed and damaged in the middle; the talents who will be used are not happy with their emotions and thoughts.

古文：将进之徒，意不欢笑，闻此喟然，诚独击节。
现代文：我听到这些喟然长叹，实在让人私下拍节激愤。
English: I hear these groans and sighs, and it really makes me furious in private.

古文：愚以为君子不求备于一人，自孔氏门徒大数三干，其见者七十二人。至于子张、子路、子贡等七十之徒，亚圣之德，然犹各有所短，师辟由喭，赐不受命，岂况下此而无所阙？
现代文：我认为君子对一个人不应求全责备，即使孔子门徒大约三千，其中特别突出的也只七十二人，至于子张、子路、子贡等七十余人，有亚圣之德，然而犹各有其所短，颛孙师偏激、仲由鲁莽、端木赐不安分守己，更何况他们之下者就没有不足之处？
English: I think that a gentleman should not seek full blame for one person. Even if there are about three thousand disciples of Confucius, only seventy-two of them are particularly prominent. As for the seventy-odd people such as Zizang, Zilu and Zigong, they have the virtue of sub-saint. However, each has its shortcoming. The great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-

古文：且仲尼不以数予之不备而引以为友，不以人所短弃其所长也。
现代文：况且孔子不因这几位有缺点而不把他们当作朋友，不因人所短而弃其所长。
English: Moreover, Confucius did not regard these men as friends because of their shortcomings, nor did he discard their merits because of their shortcomings.

古文：加以当今取士，宜宽于往古，何者？
现代文：加之当今选拔人才，应比古人要宽，为什么呢？
English: In addition, today's selection of talents should be wider than the ancients. Why?

古文：时务从横，而善人单少，国家职司，常苦不充。
现代文：现在社会形势变化复杂，德才兼备者少，国家各部门官员，常常苦于无合适者担任。
English: Nowadays, the social situation is complex and changeable. There are few people who are both virtuous and talented, and officials in various departments of the state often suffer from the lack of suitable people to serve.

古文：苟令性不邪恶，志在陈力，便可奖就，骋其所任。
现代文：如果他本性不奸邪，志在奉献才力，便可奖拔任用，让他在职任上尽量发挥自己才干。
English: If he is not a traitor by nature and is willing to devote his talents, he can be rewarded and appointed, so that he can make the best use of his talents in his duties.

古文：若于小小宜适，私行不足，皆宜阔略，不足缕责。 且士诚不可纤论苛克，苛克则彼贤圣犹将不全，况其出入者邪？
现代文：红潮网如果在大体上适合称职，个人私生活有不足之处，都应当宽容，不应当事事计较责备。况且对有才能的人实在不能在一些细小事情上苛刻要求，苛刻则圣贤也将难为全人，何况与他们相差甚远的常人呢？
English: Hongtao.com, if you are generally suitable for a competent position, and there are shortcomings in your personal life, you should be tolerant, and you should not blame everything. Moreover, talented people really cannot be demanding in some small things, and it is difficult for saints and sages to be demanding, let alone ordinary people who are far from them.

古文：故曰以道望人则难，以人望人则易，贤愚可知。
现代文：故此说用道德条文来看人则难，用人比人来看人则易，这样是贤是愚就可知了。
English: Therefore, it is said that it is difficult to use moral provisions to look at people, but it is easier to use people to look at people. In this way, it is possible to know whether one is wise or foolish.

古文：自汉末以来，中国土大夫如许子将辈，所以更相谤讪，或至为祸，原其本起。非为大仇，惟坐克己不能尽如礼，而责人专以正义。
现代文：自汉末以来，中原士大夫如许子将之类，之所以不断互相毁谤讥议，有时甚至引起祸端，究其原因，并非为了什么深仇，只不过因为自己本身不能用礼教标准相约束，反而专以公正道义指责别人。
English: Since the end of the Han Dynasty, the reason why NAKAHARA Shidafu, such as Hsu Zi Zong, constantly slandered and ridiculed each other, sometimes even causing misfortune, was not because of any deep hatred, but because they themselves could not be restrained by the standards of etiquette, but instead accused others exclusively with fairness and morality.

古文：夫己不如礼，则人不服。责人以正义，则人不堪。
现代文：自己不遵从礼制，别人就不服；以公正道义不公正地指责别人，则别人就不会接受。
English: If you do not follow the etiquette, others will not accept it; if you accuse others unfairly in the name of justice and morality, others will not accept it.

古文：内不服其行，外不堪其责，则不得不相怨。
现代文：内心不佩服对方的行为，又不愿忍受对方的责备，则不会不产生相互怨忿。
English: If you don't admire the other person's behavior and don't want to bear the other person's reproach, there will be mutual resentment.

古文：相怨一生，则小人得容其间。
现代文：相互怨忿一产生，则小人就会乘机在中间钻空子。
English: As soon as mutual resentment arises, the villain will take the opportunity to drill a hole in the middle.

古文：得容其间，则三至之言，浸润之谮，纷错交至。虽使至明至亲者处之，犹难以自定。况已为隙，且未能明者乎？
现代文：小人钻了空子，则多道转传的谣言，日积月累的谮毁，纷乱交杂一起到来，即使让非常了解非常亲近的人听到这些话，也难于辨真定假，何况已有隔阂，且本就不明事理的人呢？
English: If the villain has taken advantage of the loophole, then the rumors spread by multiple channels, the destruction accumulated over time, and the chaos come together. Even if people who know each other very well and are very close to each other hear these words, it is difficult to determine the truth and falsehood. What about people who are already estranged and do not know the truth?

古文：是故张、陈至于血刃，萧、朱不终其好，本由于此而已。
现代文：所以张耳、陈余到了操刀互相残杀的地步，萧育、朱博友好不能坚持到头，其原因就在这里。
English: Therefore, Zhang Er and Chen Yu have come to the point of killing each other, and Xiao Yu and Zhu Bo's friendship cannot last to the end. This is the reason.

古文：夫不舍小过，纤微相责，久乃至于家户为怨，一国无复全行之士也。 恪知逊以此嫌己，故遂广其理而赞其旨也。
现代文：不放过别人的过失，在细微的事情上相互指责，久而久之就会造成家家户户互相埋怨，整个国家也不会有德行操守完善无缺的人才了。 诸葛恪知道陆逊听了谗言而猜疑自己，故此多方阐述这个道理而盛赞它的深刻旨意。
English: Not letting go of the mistakes of others, blaming each other in minor matters, over time will cause each family to complain about each other, and the whole country will not have people with perfect moral conduct. Zhuge Ke knew that Lu Xun listened to the criticism and suspected himself, so he explained this principle in many ways and praised its profound intention.

古文：会逊卒，恪迁大将军，假节，驻武昌，代逊领荆州事。
现代文：适逢陆逊去世，诸葛恪被升任为大将军，假节，驻守武昌，接替陆逊兼任荆州刺史。
English: At the time of Lu Xun's death, Zhuge Ke was promoted to the rank of general, stationed in Wuchang during the Spring Festival, and succeeded Lu Xun as the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：久之，权不豫，而太子少，乃征恪以大将军领太子太傅，中书令孙弘领少傅。
现代文：过了较长时间，孙权生了病，而太子年少，于是征召诸葛恪以大将军身份兼任太子太傅，令中书令孙弘兼任太子少傅。
English: After a long period of time, Sun Quan fell ill, and the prince was young, so Zhuge Ke was summoned to serve as the prince's daifu in the capacity of the general, and Sun Hong was also appointed as the prince's daifu.

古文：权疾困，召恪、弘及太常滕胤、将军吕据、侍中孙峻，属以后事。
现代文：孙权病危时，召见诸葛恪、孙弘及太常滕胤、将军吕据、侍中孙峻，托付他们以后事。
English: When Sun Quan was critically ill, he summoned Zhuge Ke, Sun Hong and Taizhong Teng Tien, General Lv Jian, and Vice Admiral Sun Jun, entrusting them with future affairs.

古文：翌日，权薨。
现代文：次日，孙权去世。
English: The next day, Sun Quan passed away.

古文：弘素与恪不平，惧为恪所治，秘权死问，欲矫诏除恪。
现代文：孙弘一向与诸葛恪不和，害怕被压抑惩治，便封锁了孙权去世的消息，企图假传皇帝诏书除掉诸葛恪。
English: Sun Hong, who had always been at odds with Zhuge, was afraid of being suppressed and punished, so he blocked the news of Sun Quan's death and attempted to remove Zhuge with a fake imperial edict.

古文：峻以告恪，恪请弘咨事，于坐中诛之，乃发丧制服。
现代文：孙峻将这些情况告知诸葛恪，诸葛恪请孙弘商议事情，在座席上将孙弘杀死，于是穿起丧服发布孙权去世的消息。
English: Sun Jun informed Zhuge Keqiao of these circumstances, Zhuge Keqiao asked Sun Hong to discuss the matter, killed Sun Hong on the seat, and then put on mourning clothes to release the news of Sun Quan's death.

古文：与弟公安督融书曰： 今月十六日乙未，大行皇帝委弃万国，群下大小，莫不伤悼。
现代文：诸葛恪给弟弟公安督诸葛融写信说： 本月十六日乙未，已故皇帝舍离万邦，全国臣民，莫不悲伤哀悼。
English: Zhuge wrote a letter to his brother Zhuge Rong, the inspector of public security, saying: On the 16th day of this month, the late emperor departed from the world, and the subjects of the whole country are in sorrow and mourning.

古文：至吾父子兄弟，井受殊恩，非徒凡庸之隶，是以悲恸，肝心圮裂。
现代文：至于我们父子兄弟，都受过他赐予的特殊恩典，不同于一般的下属，故此悲恸异常，心肝碎裂。
English: As for our father and brothers, they all received a special grace from him, different from ordinary subordinates, so the grief is extraordinary and the heart is broken.

古文：皇太子以丁酉践酋号，哀喜交并，不知所措。
现代文：皇太子于丁酉日继位登基，我悲哀和喜悦交错，不知所措。
English: When the Crown Prince ascended the throne on Ding Xi Day, I was overwhelmed with a mixture of sadness and joy.

古文：吾身受顾命，辅相幼主，窃自揆度；才非博陆而受姬公负图之托，惧忝丞相辅汉之效；恐损先帝委付之明，是以忧惭惶惶，所虑万端。
现代文：我身受临终遗命，辅佐幼主，私下考虑，自己才力不及博陆侯霍光，而受周公辅佐成王的托付，担心不能取得霍光辅助汉昭帝的成就，恐怕有损先帝委以重任的英明，故而忧虑惭愧，惶惶不安，思虑万端。
English: I was entrusted by Zhou Gongfu to assist Emperor Han Zhao, but I was afraid that I would not be able to achieve the achievements of Emperor Han Zhao. I was worried that I would not be able to achieve the achievements of Emperor Han Zhao. I was worried that I would not be able to help Emperor Han Zhao. I was worried and ashamed. I was worried and anxious.

古文：且民恶其上，动见瞻观，何时易哉？
现代文：况且百姓厌恶统治者，一有动静就受到他们的注视，何时才能改变这种情况呢？
English: Moreover, the people detest the rulers and are watched by them at every move. When can this situation be changed?

古文：今以顽钝之姿，处保傅之位，艰多智寡，任重谋浅，谁为唇齿？
现代文：现在我以愚笨的资质，处于保傅的高位，艰难繁多而谋智不足，任务沉重而谋略短浅，谁能与我相互帮助呢？
English: Now that I am stupidly qualified to be in a high-ranking position, with many difficulties and insufficient wisdom, with heavy tasks and short-sighted strategies, who can help each other with me?

古文：近汉之世，燕、盖交遘，有上官之变，以身值此，何敢怡豫邪？
现代文：近代汉朝，燕王与盖长公主互相勾结，于是上官桀等人谋乱，现在我处境与其时差不多，怎敢安逸犹豫呢？
English: In the modern Han Dynasty, Yan Wang and Guichang Princess colluded with each other, so Shangguan Zou and others plotted a riot. Now I am in a similar situation to that time, how dare I hesitate?

古文：又弟所在，与贼犬牙相错，当于今时整顿军具，率厉将士，警备过常，念出万死，无顾一生，以报朝廷，无忝尔先。
现代文：又你所驻守的地方，与敌寇地界犬牙交错，现在应当整顿军用器械，激励将士，警戒防备要比平时更要加强，考虑到不辞万死，不顾自己生命，以报效朝廷，不辱没我们的先人。
English: In addition, the place where you are stationed is intertwined with the enemy's encroachment on the territorial boundary. Now it is necessary to rectify military equipment, encourage soldiers, and strengthen vigilance and preparedness more than usual, taking into account the need to die, regardless of one's own life, in order to serve the imperial court and not humiliate our ancestors.

古文：又诸将备守各有境界，犹恐贼虏闻讳，恣睢寇窃。
现代文：另外诸将防守各自的地界，尤应担心贼寇听到皇帝逝去的消息，放肆入寇。
English: In addition, they will defend their respective territorial boundaries. In particular, they should be worried that the bandits will hear the news of the emperor's death and dare to invade.

古文：边邑诸曹，已别下约敕，所部督将，不得妄委所戍，径来奔赴。
现代文：边境各级官署，已经另下约束文书，所属各部带兵将官，不得任意放弃自己防守军务，径直赶回奔丧。
English: The border authorities at all levels have been bound by another binding document, and the generals of the subordinate ministries must not arbitrarily give up their defensive military affairs and go straight back to work.

古文：虽怀怆但不忍之心，公义夺私，伯禽服戎，若苟违戾，非徒小故。
现代文：虽说都怀有悲痛难已的心情，但公义夺私情，伯禽丧服未除即率军出征，如果违犯，就绝非小错了。
English: Although both of them are in a grief-stricken mood, justice takes precedence over personal feelings. If they violate this rule, it is by no means a small mistake.

古文：以亲正疏，古人明戒也。 
现代文：以亲近的人作榜样以便纠察他人，这是古人的明确告诫。 
English: It is a clear admonition of the ancients to follow the example of one's near and dear ones in order to keep a check on others.

古文：恪更拜太傅。
现代文：诸葛恪被改授为太傅。
English: Zhuge Ke was promoted to Taifu.

古文：于是罢视听，息校官，原逋责，除关税，事崇恩泽，众莫不悦。
现代文：于是取消密置视听之事，裁除军政冗员，免除拖欠的赋税，取消货运关税，各项政事都顾及到给百姓以恩惠利益，国人无不欢悦。
English: As a result, the secret installation of audio-visual equipment was cancelled, redundant military and political personnel were laid off, tax arrears were exempted, and freight tariffs were cancelled. All government affairs were taken into account to give the people favors and benefits, which made the Chinese people very happy.

古文：恪每出入，百姓延颈思见其状。
现代文：诸葛恪每次外出，百姓都引颈相望，都想看看他的形象。
English: Every time Zhuge Ke went out, the people all looked at each other, all wanting to see his image.

古文：初，权黄龙元年迁都建业。二年筑东兴堤遏湖水。
现代文：当初，孙权在黄龙元年迁都建业，黄龙二年修筑东兴堤以拦挡巢湖水。
English: At first, Sun Quan moved the capital in the first year of the Yellow Dragon to build the industry, and in the second year of the Yellow Dragon to build the Dongxing dike to block the water of Chaohu Lake.

古文：后征淮南，败，以内船，由是废不复修。
现代文：后来征伐淮南，反被湖内敌兵船只打败，于是堤废再不修治。
English: Later, the conquest of Huainan was defeated by the enemy ships in the lake, so the embankment was abandoned.

古文：恪以建兴元年十月会众于东兴，更作大堤，左右结山侠筑两城，各留千人，使全端、留略守之，引军而还。
现代文：诸葛恪于建兴元年十月，在东兴征集民众，再筑大堤，左右两端连结山岭各筑城一座，每城留守一千人，派全端、留略分别守卫两城，他自己亲率大军返归建业。
English: In October of the first year of the Jianxing Dynasty, Zhuge Ke collected people from Dongxing and built a large dike, connecting the mountains on the left and right ends to build one city each, leaving behind a thousand people in each city. He sent the whole army and a detachment to guard the two cities separately, and he himself led the army back to the construction industry.

古文：魏以吴军入其疆土，耻于受侮，命大将胡遵、诸葛诞等率众七万，欲攻围两坞，图坏堤遏。
现代文：魏国以吴军进入自己疆界，耻于受辱，命令大将胡遵、诸葛诞等率兵七万，打算围攻那两座城堡，企图毁坏阻遏湖水的大堤。
English: Embarrassed by the humiliation of having the Wu army enter its borders, Wei ordered the generals Hu Zun and Zhuge Xing to lead 70,000 soldiers to besiege the two castles and attempt to destroy the large dike that held back the lake water.

古文：恪兴军四万，晨夜赴救。
现代文：诸葛恪发兵四万，日夜兼程赶往援救。
English: Zhuge Ke dispatched 40,000 soldiers to rush to the rescue day and night.

古文：遵等敕其诸军作浮桥度，陈于堤上，分兵攻两城。
现代文：胡遵等命令各部造浮桥渡湖，将部队安置堤上，分兵进攻两城。
English: Hu Zun ordered all ministries to build a pontoon bridge across the lake, place the troops on the embankment, and attack the two cities.

古文：城在高峻，不可卒拔。
现代文：城筑建在高险之处，仓促难于攻拔。
English: The city is built in a high-risk place, and it is difficult to attack and attack in a hurry.

古文：恪遣将军留赞、吕据、唐咨、丁奉为前部。
现代文：诸葛恪派将军留赞、吕据、唐咨、丁奉为先头部队。
English: Zhuge Ke sent generals Remzan, Lvzheng, Tangzhe and Ding Bong as the leading troops.

古文：时天寒雪，魏诸将会饮，见赞等兵少，而解置铠甲，不持矛戟。
现代文：当时天寒下雪，魏军众将领聚会饮酒，见留赞等人兵少，于是解放铠甲，不操矛戟。
English: At that time, it was cold and snowy, and the generals of the Wei army gathered to drink alcohol. Seeing that Ruizan and other soldiers were few, they freed the armor and did not use spears.

古文：但兜鍪刀楯，倮身缘遏，大笑之，不即严兵。
现代文：只是带着头盔拿着刀与盾牌，解除戎装在堤岸嬉闹，并且大声欢笑，不严整军阵。
English: Just with a helmet holding a knife and shield, unarmored frolic on the embankment, and laugh out loud, loosely aligned.

古文：兵得上，便鼓噪乱斫。
现代文：留赞等部队一上岸就鼓噪呐喊，拼命乱砍乱杀。
English: As soon as the troops such as Remzan came ashore, they shouted loudly and killed indiscriminately.

古文：魏军惊扰散走，争渡浮桥，桥坏绝，自投于水，更相蹈藉。
现代文：魏军受到惊扰四散逃走，争着抢渡浮桥，桥坏绳断，纷纷跌入水中，又自相践踏。
English: The Wei army was alarmed and fled in all directions, fighting to seize the pontoon bridge, breaking the bridge rope, falling into the water one after another, and trampling each other.

古文：乐安太守恒嘉等同时并没，死者数万。
现代文：乐安太守桓嘉等同时淹死，魏兵死者数万人。
English: Le An Taishou Huan Jia and others drowned at the same time, and tens of thousands of Wei soldiers died.

古文：故叛将韩综为魏前军督，亦斩之。
现代文：过去叛变投魏的将领韩综为魏军前军督，也被斩杀。
English: Han Zong, the general who had defected to Wei in the past and was the former military governor of the Wei army, was also beheaded.

古文：获车乘牛马驴骡各数千，资器山积，振旅而归。
现代文：缴获魏军车辆牛马驴骡各数千，物资军器堆积如山，吴军整顿队伍凯旋而归。
English: Thousands of Wei vehicles, horses, oxen, donkeys, and donkeys were captured, and mountains of supplies and military equipment were piled up. The Wu Army's rectification team made a triumphant return.

古文：进封恪阳都侯，加荆扬州牧，督中外诸军事，赐金一百斤，马二百匹，缯布各万匹。
现代文：朝廷晋封诸葛恪为阳都侯，加授荆州、扬州州牧，督率朝内外诸项军事，赐黄金一百斤、马二百匹、丝帛、棉布各一万匹。
English: The imperial court promoted Zhuge Ke to the position of Yang capital, awarded him the title of Jingzhou and Yangzhou provincial governor, and gave him the command of various military affairs at home and abroad. He was given one hundred catties of gold, two hundred horses, and ten thousand silk reeds and cotton cloths.

古文：恪遂有轻敌之心，以十二月战克，明年春，复欲出军。
现代文：诸葛恪于是产生轻敌的思想，刚在十二月战胜敌人，第二年春上，便又打算出兵。
English: Zhuge Ke then had the idea of belittling the enemy. Just after defeating the enemy in December, in the spring of the following year, he again planned to send troops.

古文：诸大臣以为数出罢劳，同辞谏恪，恪不听。
现代文：诸位大臣认为多次出征将士劳困，一齐劝说诸葛恪，诸葛恪不听。
English: The ministers thought that the soldiers who had been to the front several times would be too exhausted, and together they tried to persuade Zhuge Ke, but Zhuge Ke would not listen.

古文：中散大夫蒋延或以固争，扶出。
现代文：中散大夫蒋延坚决争辩，被强挟出殿。
English: Zhongshan doctor Jiang Yan argued resolutely and was forced out of the hall.

古文：恪乃着论谕众意曰： 夫天无二日，土无二王，王者不务兼并天下而欲垂祚后世，古今未之有也。
现代文：诸葛恪于是撰写文章晓谕众人说： 天上没有两个太阳，地上难容两个皇帝，做皇帝者不致力于兼并天下而只想把帝位传给后世，古今都未曾有过。
English: Zhuge Ke then wrote an article to tell everyone: There are not two suns in the sky, and it is difficult to have two emperors on the earth. There has never been an emperor who is not committed to annexing the world, but only wants to pass the throne to future generations.

古文：昔战国之时，诸候自恃兵强地广，互有救援，谓此足以传世，人莫能危。
现代文：从前战国时期，诸侯各自依恃兵强地广，互有救援，认为这样可以将政权传与后世，他人不能危害。
English: In the past, during the Warring States period, the princes relied on each other's vast military strength and mutual assistance, believing that this would allow them to pass on the regime to future generations, and that others could not be harmed.

古文：凡敌国欲相吞，即仇雦欲相除也，有仇而长之，祸不在己，则在后人，不可不为远虑也。
现代文：由是放松自己占据天下的情怀，害怕劳苦，致使秦国日益强大，终于将他们吞并，这都是史实。近代刘景升拥有荆州，兵众十万，财粮如山，但他不及时趁曹操力量尚很微弱时，与他尽力竞争，而坐观曹操强大起来，吞灭诸袁。
English: It is a historical fact that the Qin State became increasingly powerful by relaxing its desire to occupy the world and fearing toil, and finally annexed them. In modern times, Liu Jingsheng had Jingzhou, 100,000 soldiers, and mountains of wealth and grain, but he did not take advantage of Cao Cao's weak strength in time to compete with him as much as possible, and watched Cao Cao become strong and devour thousands of yuan.

古文：昔伍子胥曰： 越十年生聚，十年教训，二十年之外，吴其为沼乎！ 夫差自恃强大，闻此邈然，是以诛子胥而无备越之心，至于临败悔之，岂有及乎？
现代文：北方全部平定之后，曹操即亲率三十万大军杀向荆州，当时虽说有智谋之人，但却不能再为其筹划良计。于是刘景升的儿子，反缚双臂请求投降，成为囚虏。举凡敌对国家都想互相吞并，就像有仇的双方都想互相除掉对方一样。有仇敌而任其强大，祸患不在自己，则殃及后人，不可不作长远的考虑。过去伍子胥说： 越国十年生聚，十年教训，二十年之外，吴国就成为战败后的泥沼！ 夫差自恃强大，听说此话不屑一顾。于是诛杀伍子胥而无防备越国的思想，以至于临到败亡时才悔恨，难道这还来得及吗？
English: After the north was completely pacified, Cao Cao led 300,000 troops to Jingzhou. Although he was a man of wisdom, he could no longer plan a good plan for it. So Liu Jingsheng's son, instead of tying his arms, asked for surrender and became a prisoner. All hostile countries want to annex each other, just as both sides with enemies want to get rid of each other. If you have an enemy and let it be strong, the disaster is not in yourself, it will affect future generations, and you must consider the long term. In the past, Wu Zixuan said: Vietnam is ten years old, ten years of lessons, twenty years later, Wuxi will become a

古文：越小于吴，尚为吴祸，况其强大者邪？
现代文：越国小于吴国，尚为吴国之祸患，何况那些强大的国家呢？
English: Yue State is smaller than Wu State, but it is still the scourge of Wu State, let alone those powerful countries?

古文：昔秦但得关西耳，尚以并吞六国，今贼皆得秦、赵、韩、魏、燕齐九州之地，地悉戎马之乡，士林之薮。
现代文：过去秦国仅有函谷关以西地盘，尚能以此并吞六国，如今贼寇全部占有秦、赵、韩、魏、燕、齐六国九州之地，其地都是出产军马、产生人才的地方。
English: In the past, Qin only had territory to the west of the Hangeul Pass, and was still able to annex the Six Kingdoms. Today, the bandits have occupied all of Qin, Zhao, Han, Wei, Yan, and Qi in the Six Kingdoms of Kyushu, all of which are places that produce war horses and talent.

古文：今以魏比古之秦，土地数倍；以吴与蜀比古穴国，不能半之。
现代文：如今用魏国比较古代秦国，土地多出几倍，以吴国、蜀国比较古代六国，不足六国的一半。
English: Today, Wei is used to compare ancient Qin with several times more land, while Wu and Shu are used to compare the six ancient states, which is less than half of the six countries.

古文：然所以能敌之，但以操时兵众于今适尽，而后生者未悉长大，正是贼衰少未盛之时。
现代文：然而今日所以能够抵抗魏国，是因为曹操手上的兵员，到现在已损耗殆尽，而后来出生的人还未长成，正是敌人衰弱兵少尚未强盛之际。
English: However, the reason why it is possible to resist Wei today is that the soldiers in Cao Cao's hands have been depleted by now, and those who were born later have not yet grown up. It is precisely when the enemy is weak and has few soldiers and is not yet strong.

古文：加司马懿先诛王淩，续自陨毙，其子幼弱，而专彼大任，虽有智计之士，未得施用。
现代文：加之司马懿先诛杀王凌，接着自己毙命，他的儿子还小，而独掌大权，虽有智谋之士，但得不到重用。
English: In addition, Sima Yu first killed Wang Ling and then killed himself. His son was still young, but he held great power. Although he was a clever man, he did not get much use.

古文：当今伐之，是其厄会。
现代文：当下去征伐魏国，正值它遭厄运之时。
English: To go ahead with the conquest of Wei at the very time when it was doomed.

古文：圣人急于趋时，诚谓今日。
现代文：圣人迫切地抓紧时机，说的即是今日天下形势。
English: The sage urgently grasped the opportunity, saying that this is the situation in the world today.

古文：若顺众人之情，怀偷安之计，以为长江之险可以传世；不论魏之终始，而以今日遂轻其后。此吾所以长叹息者也。
现代文：如果顺从众人的想法，怀着偷安的打算，以为长江天险可以世代把持，不考虑魏国的前后变化，而以今日的状况轻视它以后的发展，这正是我深为长叹的缘故。
English: If we follow the ideas of many people, with the intention of stealing peace, thinking that the Yangtze River natural hazards can be controlled for generations, without considering the changes in Wei, and despise its future development with today's situation, this is precisely the reason for my deep sigh.

古文：自本以来，务在产育，今者贼民岁月繁滋，但以尚小，未可得用耳。
现代文：自古以来，以增长人口为急务，现在贼国之民年年月月在繁育增长，只是年龄还小，尚不能役用而已。
English: Since ancient times, population growth has been a top priority. Now, the population of the kleptocracy is increasing year by year and month by month, but it is still too young to be useful.

古文：若复十数年后，其众必倍于今，而国家劲兵之地，皆已空尽，唯有此见众可以定事。
现代文：如果再过十年后，魏国的人口一定比今天增长一倍，而我们国家强兵驻守的地方，却都告空虚，惟有现在的军队众多，可以作出大事。
English: If another ten years pass, the population of Wei will surely double compared to today, but the places where our country's strong soldiers are stationed will all be empty. Only the current army is numerous and can do great things.

古文：若不早用之，端坐使老，复十数年，略当损半，而见子弟数不足言。
现代文：如果不早早用兵，徒然呆坐使他们逐渐衰老，再过十多年，大略要减少一半人力，而现今子弟人数到那时也不值得一提。
English: If soldiers are not used early, and if they are allowed to grow old sitting idly by, in a little more than ten years the manpower will be roughly halved, and the current number of children will not be worth mentioning by then.

古文：若贼众一倍，而我兵损半，虽复使伊、管图之，未可如何。
现代文：如果贼方兵力增加一倍，而我方兵力减损一半，虽再有伊尹、管仲来筹划大事，也不可能有什么办法。
English: If the armed forces of the bandits are doubled, while our armed forces are reduced by half, there will be no way around it, even if there are Yi Yun and Guanzhong to plan the event.

古文：今不达远虑者，必以此言为迂。
现代文：如今不通晓长远计谋的人，一定会认为我的话过于迂阔不实。
English: Those who do not understand the long-term strategy today will certainly think that my words are too broad and untrue.

古文：夫祸难未至而豫忧虑，此固众人之所迂也。
现代文：祸患没有到来而预先忧虑，这本是众人所认作迂阔的事。
English: Worrying in advance of a calamity that never comes is considered by many to be a waste of time.

古文：及于难至，然后顿颡，虽有智者，又不能图。
现代文：等到患难临头，然后屈膝叩首，即使有智谋的人，又不能想出办法了。
English: Even the wisest of men cannot find a way out of the impending calamity until they have bowed their knees and prostrated themselves.

古文：此乃古今所病，非独一时。
现代文：这是古今通病，并非一时的特殊道理。
English: This has been a common problem from ancient times to the present, and is not a temporary special reason.

古文：昔吴始以伍员为迂，故难至而不可救。
现代文：从前吴国开始认为伍子胥迂腐，故此大难临头而无法解救。
English: In the past, the State of Wu began to think that Wu Zixuan was a pedant, so this great difficulty was imminent and could not be relieved.

古文：刘景升不能虑十年之后，故无以治其子孙。
现代文：刘景升不能深虑十年以后的事，故此没有什么遗留子孙。
English: Liu Jingsheng could not think deeply about what happened ten years later, so there were no remaining descendants.

古文：今恪无具臣之才，而受大吴萧、霍之任，智与众同思不经远，若不及今日为国斥境，俯仰年老，而仇敌更强。欲刎颈谢责，宁有补邪？
现代文：今天诸葛恪我无充数大臣的才能，而受大吴国像萧何、霍光一样的重任，智慧同于一般人，思虑并不深远，如果不在当前及时为国家开疆拓土，瞬息以至老年，而仇敌那时更为强大，到时刎颈自杀以谢罪责，也对事情无所补益了。
English: Today, Zhuge Liang and I do not have enough talent to be ministers, but the Great State of Wu is entrusted with the same heavy responsibilities as Xiao He and Huo Guang. The wisdom is the same as that of ordinary people, and the thoughts are not far-reaching. If we do not open up the country's territory in a timely manner, we will soon reach old age, and the enemy will be more powerful at that time. At that time, there will be no benefit to the matter if we commit suicide.

古文：今闻众人或以百姓尚贫，欲务闲息，此不右其虑其大危而其小勤者也。
现代文：现在听大家之言，有的以为百姓尚且贫苦，想让他们尽量有时间休养生息，这是不知道忧虑大危难，而只乐于在小事情上致力。
English: Now listen to everyone's words, some people think that the people are still poor and want to give them as much time as possible to recuperate. This is because they do not know the worries and dangers, but are only willing to work on small things.

古文：昔汉祖幸已自有三秦之地，何不闭关守险以自娱乐，空出攻楚，身被创痍，介胄生虮虱，将士厌困苦，岂甘锋刃而忘安宁哉？
现代文：从前汉高祖幸运已得到三秦之地，但为何不闭关守险，自享娱乐，却出关攻打西楚，身带创伤，衣服盔甲都生了虮虱，将士疲于困苦，难道是他喜爱冒锋刃之险而忘弃安宁吗？
English: Once upon a time, the founder of the Han Dynasty was fortunate to have obtained the land of Sanqin, but why did he not close the gate to guard the danger and enjoy the entertainment, but he went out to attack the West Chu, with trauma, his clothes and armor were raw, and his soldiers were tired of hardship. Is it that he likes to take the risk of the blade and forget peace?

古文：虑于长久不得两存者耳！
现代文：是考虑敌我两方不能长期共存啊！
English: Considering that the two sides cannot co-exist for a long time!

古文：每览荆邯说公孙述以进取之图，近风家叔父表陈与贼争竞之计，未尝不喟然叹息也。
现代文：每次阅读荆邯劝说公孙述出兵图谋天下的见解，近日见到我家叔父上表阐述与曹贼争竞天下的计策，没有不感慨叹息的。
English: Every time I read the opinions of Jing Xuan persuading his grandson to send soldiers to plot the world, I recently saw my uncle's above table explaining the strategy of competing with Cao Cao, and I couldn't help but sigh with emotion.

古文：夙夜反侧，所虑如此，故聊疏愚言，以达二三君子之末。
现代文：我整夜辗转反侧，所思虑的就是这些。故此分条陈述自己愚见，送至各位君子手旁。
English: I have been tossing and turning all night, and all I can think about is this. Therefore, I am sending this itemized statement of my stupidity to you gentlemen.

古文：若一朝陨殁志画不立，贵令来世知我所忧，可思于后， 众皆以恪此论欲必为之辞，然莫敢复难。
现代文：如果有天我死去，志向计划不得实现，也想让后世知我所忧之事，可在以后思求解决之法。 众人都认识到诸葛恪这篇论说是想为自己坚持出兵寻找借口，然而却无人敢再辩难。
English: If one day I die, and my ambitious plan cannot be realized, I also want to let future generations know what I am worried about, so that they can think about a solution later.Everyone recognized that Zhuge Ke was trying to find an excuse for his insistence on sending troops, but no one dared to argue anymore.

古文：丹杨太守聂友素与恪善。书谏恪曰： 大行皇帝本有遏东关之计，计未施行。
现代文：丹杨太守聂友一向与诸葛恪友好，他写信劝谏诸葛恪说： 已故皇帝本来就有遏敌东关的计划，只是未付施行。
English: Danyang Taishu Shanyou has always been friendly with Zhuge Ke, he wrote a letter to persuade Zhuge Ke, saying: The late emperor originally had a plan to stop the enemy from entering Dongguan, but it has not been implemented.

古文：今公辅赞大业，成先帝之志。寇远自送，将士凭赖威德，出身用命，一旦有非常之功，岂非宗庙神灵社稷之福邪！
现代文：现在您辅佐大业，完成先帝遗志，敌寇自远道前来送死，我将士们凭靠皇朝威德，献身效命，一旦建立非常功绩，岂非宗庙神灵社稷的福祉！
English: Now you are assisting the great cause, fulfilling the last wishes of the former emperor, and the enemy bandits have come from far away to send you to death. I will rely on the virtue of the imperial dynasty and devote myself to serving life. Once you establish a great achievement, will it not be the welfare of the ancestral temple spirit community?

古文：宜且案兵养锐，观衅而动。
现代文：现在应当按兵不动蓄精养锐，观察时机再行动。
English: Now is the time to stay calm, stay focused, and wait for the right moment to act.

古文：今乘此势欲复大出，天时未可。
现代文：如今乘着打了胜仗的形势，想再大举出兵，天时并不有利。
English: Now, taking advantage of the situation of having won the war, it is not a good time to want to send troops again.

古文：而苟任盛意，私心以为不安。 
现代文：而勉强任意行事，我私下心里不安。 
English: But I am secretly uneasy about being forced to act arbitrarily.

古文：恪题论后，为书答友曰： 足下虽有自然之理，然未见大数。
现代文：诸葛恪写出那篇论说文章后，写信答复聂友说： 足下所言虽有自然之理，然而没有看到时势大局。
English: After Zhuge Ke wrote the essay, he wrote a letter in reply to Zou You, saying: Although what you have just said is natural, you have not seen the overall situation.

古文：熟省此论，可以开悟矣。 于是违众出军，大发州郡二十万众，百姓骚动，始失人心。
现代文：仔细看看我的这篇论说，就可以开启思想了。 于是违背众人意愿出兵，大量征发各州郡兵卒二十万人，百姓骚动不安，于是开始失去民心。
English: Take a close look at this article of mine, and you will be able to open your mind. So, contrary to the wishes of the people, troops were sent out, and a large number of 200,000 soldiers from each state and county were conscripted. The people were agitated and uneasy, and they began to lose the people's hearts.

古文：恪意欲曜威淮南，驱略民人。而诸将或难之曰： 今引军深入，疆场之民，必相率远遁，恐兵劳而功少，不如止围新城。
现代文：诸葛恪心里想炫耀武力于淮南，驱赶百姓，而众将领中有人提出疑问说： 现在率军深入，边境上的百姓必定相率远避，恐怕士兵劳苦而收效甚微，不如只围困合肥新城。
English: Zhuge had in mind to show off force in Huainan and drive away the people, but some of the generals raised a question, saying: Now that the army is in-depth, the people on the border must be avoided at the same rate. I am afraid that the soldiers will work hard and have little effect. It is better to just besiege Hefei New City.

古文：新城困，救必至，至而图之，乃可大获。 
现代文：新城被我方围困，敌人救兵必然要来，敌人救兵一到再用计打败他们，便可大获全胜。 
English: Xincheng is besieged by our side, the enemy rescuers are bound to come, and once the enemy rescuers arrive and defeat them with strategies, they can win a complete victory.

古文：恪从其计，回军还围新城。
现代文：诸葛恪听从了这一建议，回军退而包围新城。
English: Zhuge Ke listened to this suggestion and withdrew his troops to encircle Xincheng.

古文：攻守连月，城不拔。
现代文：战斗持续几个月，新城并未攻下。
English: The battle lasted for several months, but the new town was not taken.

古文：士卒疲劳，因暑饮水，泄下、流肿，病者大半，死伤涂地。
现代文：士卒劳苦不堪，因天气酷热而饮用生水，患腹泄以至两腿发肿，病者大半，到处是死伤之人。
English: The soldiers were overworked. Due to the extremely hot weather, they had to drink raw water. They suffered from diarrhea and even had swollen legs. Most of them were sick, and there were dead and injured people everywhere.

古文：诸营吏日白病者多，恪以为作，欲斩之，自是莫敢言。
现代文：各营军官天天报告病人很多，诸葛恪认为他们说假话，要杀汇报的人，自此再没有人敢报告了。
English: The officers of each battalion reported many patients every day. Zhuge believed that they were lying and wanted to kill those who reported. Since then, no one dared to report.

古文：恪内惟失计，而耻城不下，忿形于色。
现代文：诸葛恪内心认识到攻新城是失策，然而耻于攻城不下，愤怒的神色挂在脸上。
English: Zhuge Ke knew in his heart that attacking the new city was a mistake, but he was still ashamed of attacking the city, with an angry look on his face.

古文：将军朱异有所是非，恪怒，立夺其兵。
现代文：将军朱异表示了一些不同的看法，诸葛恪大怒，立即剥夺他的兵权。
English: General Zhu Rong expressed some different opinions, Zhu Ge was furious and immediately deprived him of his military power.

古文：都尉蔡林数陈军计，恪不能用，策马奔魏。
现代文：都尉蔡林多次陈述用兵计谋，诸葛恪都不采纳，于是他驰骑投奔魏国而去。
English: Captain Cai Lin repeatedly stated that he would use military tactics, but Zhuge Ke did not adopt it, so he rode to Wei and left.

古文：魏知战士罢病，乃进救兵。
现代文：魏国得知吴国兵士疲困多病，于是挺进援兵。
English: Wei learned that the soldiers of Wu were exhausted and sickly, so they marched in to help.

古文：恪引军而去。
现代文：诸葛恪率军撤退。
English: Zhuge Ke retreated with his army.

古文：士卒伤病，流曳道路，或顿仆坑壑，或见略获，存记忿痛，大小呼嗟。
现代文：士兵们病伤很多，掉队者沿路都是，有的倒毙于坑沟中，有的被魏军所俘虏，活着的愤恨不已，死去的使人痛心，全军上下呼天抢地。
English: Many soldiers were injured, and the stragglers were all along the road. Some fell dead in the ditch, and some were captured by the Wei army. Those who were alive were full of resentment, and those who died were heartbroken. The whole army shouted to the heavens and the earth.

古文：而恪宴然自若。出住江渚一月，图起田于浔阳，诏召相衔，徐乃旋师。
现代文：而诸葛恪却安然自若，出营往江中小洲上住了一个月，企图在氵寻阳建立田园，召他回朝的诏书接踵而至，他才慢慢班师回京。
English: Zhuge Ke, however, remained calm and composed. He went to live on a small island in the middle of the Yangtze River for a month in an attempt to establish an idyllic life in Suixiangyang. The imperial edict calling him back to the North came one after another, and he slowly returned to Beijing.

古文：由此众庶失望，而怨黩兴矣。
现代文：从此全国百姓对他感到失望，而怨忿情绪由是产生。
English: Since then, the nation has been disappointed with him, and resentment has been brewing.

古文：秋八月军还，陈兵导从，归入府馆。
现代文：当年秋八月军队返回建业，诸葛恪排列队伍，仪仗队导引他回到大将军府。
English: In the autumn and August of that year, the army returned to Jianye, Zhuge Ke arranged a team, and the honor guard led him back to the general's palace.

古文：即召中书令孙嘿，厉声谓曰： 卿等何敢妄数作诏？ 
现代文：随即他见中书令孙嘿，厉声责问说： 你们怎敢几次妄作诏书？ 
English: Immediately after that, he saw the imperial edict ordering Sun Hei to leave, and sternly scolded him, saying, "How many times do you dare to make imperial edicts?

古文：嘿惶惧辞出，因病还家。
现代文：孙嘿恐惧辞谢出来，借口生病回了家。
English: Afraid, Sun Hei resigned and returned home on the pretext that he was ill.

古文：恪征行之后，曹所奏署令长职司，一罢更选，愈治威严，多所罪责，当进见者无不竦息。
现代文：诸葛恪出征离京后，选曹所奏准任命的令、长各职官员，全被罢免重新任命。他更为显示威严，经常怪罪责备他人，要进见他的人，无不诚惶诚恐。
English: After Zhuge Ke left for the expedition and left Beijing, he was dismissed and re-appointed as the chief of all officials, and the order of the election of Cao was approved. He showed more dignity, often blaming and blaming others, and those who wanted to see him were sincerely afraid.

古文：又改易宿卫，用其亲近。复敕兵严，欲向责、徐。
现代文：又改换宫中警卫部队，用他自己亲近的人担任，又命令军队整装待发，准备进军青州、徐州一带。
English: He also changed the guard force in the palace, using people close to him, and ordered the army to be ready to march into Qingzhou and Xuzhou.

古文：孙峻因民之多怨，众之所嫌，构恪欲为变，与亮谋，置酒请恪。
现代文：孙峻因为百姓对诸葛恪的怨恨，以及大家对诸葛恪的憎恶，就构陷诸葛恪想发动变乱，于是与孙亮合谋，置备酒席宴请诸葛恪。
English: Sun Jun, because of the people's resentment of Zhuge Ke, as well as everyone's hatred of Zhuge Ke, framed Zhuge Ke for wanting to start a riot, so he conspired with Sun Liang to prepare a banquet for Zhuge Ke.

古文：恪将见之夜，精爽扰动，通夕不寐。
现代文：诸葛恪将要晋见孙亮的头天晚上，精神烦躁不安，通宵不寐。
English: The night before Zhuge was to meet Sun Liang, he was restless and couldn't sleep all night.

古文：明将盥漱，闻水腥臭，侍者授衣，衣服亦臭。
现代文：天亮起床洗漱，闻到水里有腥臭味，侍者递给他衣服，衣服也有臭味。
English: He woke up at dawn to wash and smelled a foul odor in the water. The waiter handed him some clothes, which also smelled bad.

古文：恪怪其故，易衣易水，其臭如初，意惆怅不悦。
现代文：诸葛恪对此感到奇怪，换水换衣，但臭味依旧，他感到惆怅不乐。
English: Zhuge Ke felt strange about this. He changed the water and changed his clothes, but the smell was still there. He felt unhappy.

古文：严毕趋出，犬衔引其衣，恪曰： 犬不欲我行乎？ 
现代文：他整装后快步走出来，狗咬住了他的衣服。诸葛恪说： 狗不想让我去吗？ 
English: After he was dressed, he walked out at a brisk pace, and the dog bit his clothes. Zhuge said: "Does the dog not want me to go?

古文：还坐，顷刻乃复起，犬又衔其衣，恪令从者逐犬，遂升车。
现代文：回来坐下，过了一会儿又起身，狗又来咬住了他的衣服，他令随从赶跑了狗，于是登车上路。
English: He came back and sat down, and after a while he got up again, and the dog bit his clothes again. He told his attendant to chase the dog away, so he got on the bus and went on his way.

古文：初，恪将征淮南，有孝子着缞衣入其阁中，从者白之，令外诘问，孝子曰： 不自觉入。 
现代文：起初，诸葛恪将要出征淮南时，有位孝子穿着丧服走进内屋，随从的人禀报了这件事，诸葛恪命令孝子出来并审问他，孝子说： 不知不觉地就进来了。 
English: At first, Zhuge Ke ordered his son to come out and interrogate him when Zhuge Ke was about to leave for Huainan. One of Zhuge's sons walked into the inner room wearing mourning clothes, and his entourage reported the incident. Zhuge Ke ordered his son to come out and interrogate him.

古文：时中外守备，亦悉不见，众皆异之。
现代文：当时内外守卫的兵士，都没有看到，大家都是觉得奇怪。
English: At that time, the soldiers guarding inside and outside did not see it, and everyone felt strange.

古文：出行之后，所坐厅事屋栋中折。
现代文：出征之后，他所坐办事厅堂的大梁中间断折。
English: After he left for the front, the beam of the office building he was sitting in snapped in half.

古文：自新城出住东兴，有白虹见其船，还拜蒋陵，白虹复绕其车。
现代文：自新城回来住在东兴，有白虹出现在他的船上，他回来拜祭蒋陵，白虹又绕环他的车子。
English: He came back from Xincheng and lived in Dongxing. A white rainbow appeared on his boat. He came back to pay homage to the Mausoleum of Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, and a white rainbow encircled his car.

古文：及将见，驻车宫门，峻已伏兵于帷中，恐恪不时入，事泄，自出见恪曰： 使君若尊体不安，自可须后，峻当具白主上。 
现代文：将要晋见时，停车在宫门，孙峻已在帷帐中埋伏好了士兵，担心诸葛恪不按时进来使事情败露，便亲自出来见诸葛恪说： 您的尊体如果不太舒服，自然可以改日晋见，我自会向主上禀告。 
English: When he was about to meet Zhuge Liang, he parked his car at the palace gate. Sun Jun had already ambushed the soldiers in the curtains. Worried that Zhuge Liang would not come in on time and cause the matter to be exposed, he came out to meet Zhuge Liang in person and said, "If your revered body is not very comfortable, you can naturally meet Zhuge Liang another day. I will report to the Lord."

古文：欲以尝知恪。
现代文：想以此试探诸葛恪。
English: I wanted to use this as a way to probe Zhuge's motives.

古文：恪答曰： 当自力入。 
现代文：诸葛恪回答说： 我应当自己撑着身体进宫。 
English: Zhuge Ke replied: I should enter the palace on my own.

古文：散骑常侍张约、朱恩等密书与恪曰： 今日张设非常，疑有他故。 
现代文：散骑常侍张约、朱恩等秘密递上条子给诸葛恪： 今天的布署不同往常，怀疑有其他变故。 
English: Zhang You, Zhu En and other stragglers secretly handed Zhu Ge a piece of paper: Today's deployment is different from usual, and it is suspected that there have been other changes.

古文：恪省书而去。未出路门，逢太常滕胤，恪曰： 卒腹痛，不任人。 
现代文：诸葛恪看了字条后省悟抽身离去，还未出宫殿大门，遇到太常滕胤，诸葛恪说： 我突然腹痛，不便入宫。 
English: After reading the note, Zhuge Ke said, "I suddenly have a stomachache, and it is inconvenient to enter the palace.

古文：胤不知峻阴计，谓恪曰： 君自行旋未见，今上置酒请君，君已至门，宜当力进。 
现代文：滕胤不知道孙峻的阴谋，对诸葛恪说： 您自出征回京后还未朝见，今日主上置酒席宴请您，而您已到了宫门，应该勉力进去为好。 
English: Teng Tan didn't know about Sun Jun's plot, and said to Zhuge Ke: You haven't seen the emperor since you returned to Beijing from the expedition. Today, the emperor is holding a banquet for you, and you have already arrived at the palace gate. You should try your best to get in.

古文：恪踌躇而还，剑履上殿。谢亮，还坐。
现代文：诸葛恪犹豫着又返回来，带剑穿靴上殿，拜谢孙亮，回身坐下。
English: Zhuge Ke hesitantly came back, brought his sword, put on his shoes, went to the hall, bowed to Sun Liang, turned around and sat down.

古文：设酒，恪疑未饮，峻因曰： 使君病未善平，当有常服药酒，自可取之。 
现代文：斟上酒后，诸葛恪怀疑有毒而没有喝。于是孙峻说： 您的病还未痊愈，应当带有常服的药酒，可以自己拿出来喝。 
English: After pouring the wine, Zhuge Gu suspected that it was poisonous and did not drink it. So Sun Jun said: Your illness has not yet been cured, it should come with the usual medicinal wine, you can take it out and drink it yourself.

古文：恪意乃安，别饮所赍酒。
现代文：诸葛恪的心才定下来，另喝自己准备的酒。
English: Zhuge Ke only settled down to drink the wine he had prepared.

古文：酒数行，亮还内，峻起如厕，解长衣，着短服，出曰： 有诏收诸葛恪！ 
现代文：酒过数巡后，孙亮回到内殿。孙峻起身上厕所，脱掉长衣，更换短装，出来说： 有诏书拘捕诸葛恪。 
English: After several rounds of wine, Sun Liang returned to the inner hall. Sun Jun got up and went to the toilet, took off his robe, changed his shorts, and came out to say: There is an edict to arrest Zhuge Ke.

古文：恪惊起，拔剑未得，而峻刀交下。
现代文：诸葛恪惊起，剑还未拔出鞘，而孙峻的刀已接连砍下。
English: Zhuge Jia was startled. The sword had not yet been unsheathed, but Sun Jun's sword had been cut down one after another.

古文：张约从旁斫峻，裁伤左手，峻应手所约断右臂。
现代文：张约从旁边砍孙峻，伤其左手，孙峻随手回砍张约，砍断了他的右臂。
English: Zhang You slashed Sun Jun from the side, injuring his left hand. Sun Jun slashed Zhang You in return, cutting off his right arm.

古文：武卫之士皆趋上殿，峻云： 所取者恪也，今已死。 
现代文：武装的卫兵们都跑上殿，孙峻说： 要抓的是诸葛恪，现已死去。 
English: The armed guards all ran up to the hall, and Sun Jun said, "The one we want to catch is Zhuge Ke, who is now dead.

古文：悉令复刃，乃除地更饮。
现代文：于是命令刀剑入鞘，将地打扫干净又继续饮酒。
English: He then ordered the sword to be sheathed, cleaned the floor and continued drinking.

古文：先是，童谣曰： 诸葛恪，芦苇单衣蔑钩落，于何相求成子阁。 
现代文：先前，有童谣唱道： 诸葛恪，芦苇单衣篾钩落，于何相求成子阁。 
English: Previously, there was a nursery rhyme that sang: Zhuge cucumber, reed single coat hook and drop, in what phase to become a child.

古文：成子阁者，反语石子冈也。
现代文：成子阁的反语即石子冈。
English: The epithet of Choshi-kaku is Ishizigaoka.

古文：建业面有长陵，名曰石子冈，葬者依焉。
现代文：建业城南有一条长长的丘陵，名为 石子冈 ，是埋葬死人的地方。
English: To the south of Jianye, there is a long hill called Shishioka, where the dead are buried.

古文：钩落者，校饰革带，世谓之钩络带。
现代文：钩落，就是校饰皮带的东西，民间称它为 钩络带 。
English: Hook-and-drop is what decorates the belt, and people call it a hook-and-loop belt.

古文：恪果以苇席裹其身而篾束其腰，投之于此冈。
现代文：诸葛恪死后果然被苇席裹了身体用竹篾束在腰上，被抛尸在石子冈。
English: After Zhuge Ke's death, his body was wrapped in bamboo shoots and thrown into Shishioka.

古文：恪长子绰，骑都尉，以交关鲁王事，权遣付恪，令更教诲，恪鸩杀之。
现代文：诸葛恪的长子诸葛绰，任骑都尉，因为与鲁王事件有牵连，孙权遣送他回家交付诸葛恪，让诸葛恪教诲他，诸葛恪用鸩酒将他毒杀。
English: Zhuge Ke's eldest son, Zhuge Chu, was appointed as a cavalry captain. Because he was implicated in the Lu Wang Incident, Sun Quan sent him home to Zhuge Ke, let Zhuge Ke teach him, and Zhuge Ke poisoned him with alcohol.

古文：中子竦，长水校尉。
现代文：次子诸葛竦，任长水校尉。
English: His second son, Zhuge Liang, became the first lieutenant of Changshui.

古文：少子建，步兵校尉。
现代文：小儿子诸葛建，任步兵校尉。
English: His youngest son, Zhuge Jian, became an infantry captain.

古文：闻恪诛，车载其母而走。
现代文：听说诸葛恪被诛杀，他们用车子载着自己的母亲逃走。
English: Hearing that Zhuge was beaten to death, they fled with their mother in the car.

古文：峻遣骑督承追斩竦于白都。
现代文：孙峻派遣骑督刘承追赶至白都将诸葛竦杀死。
English: Sun Jun dispatched the cavalry commander Liu Cheng to chase and kill Zhuge Liang.

古文：建得渡江，欲北走魏，行数千里，为追兵所逮。
现代文：诸葛建渡过长江，想往北投奔魏国，走了几十里，为追兵所逮捕。
English: Zhuge Jian crossed the Yangtze River, wanted to go to Beitou to Wei, walked dozens of miles, and was arrested by the pursuit.

古文：恪外甥都乡侯张震及常侍朱恩等，皆夷三族。
现代文：诸葛恪的外甥都乡侯张震及常侍朱恩等人，都被诛灭三族。
English: Zhuge Ke's nephew, Zhuxiang marquis Zhang Zhen, and his attendant Zhu En were among those who were annihilated.

古文：初，竦数谏恪，恪不从，常忧惧祸。
现代文：其初，诸葛竦多次劝谏诸葛恪，诸葛恪不听从，因此诸葛竦常常忧惧招致灾祸。
English: At the beginning, Zhuge Liang repeatedly advised Zhuge Ke, but Zhuge Ke did not listen, so Zhuge Liang was often afraid of inviting disaster.

古文：及亡，临淮臧均表乞收葬恪曰： 臣闻震雷电激，不崇一朝，大风冲发，杀有极日。
现代文：诸葛恪死后，临淮人臧均上表恳求收葬诸葛恪说： 为臣听说雷震电闪，不会一整天，大风激扬，很少终日不停，总是要接着布云播雨，用以滋润万物，是故天地发威，不能整天整旬，帝王发怒，不应任意纵情。
English: After Zhuge Ke's death, Lin Huai's followers made a petition to have Zhuge Ke's tomb closed, saying: "For a vassal who hears thunder and lightning, it won't last all day. When the wind blows, it rarely lasts all day. It must always be followed by clouds and rain to moisten all things. That is why heaven and earth are powerful and cannot be orderly all day. When the emperor is angry, he should not indulge in any indulgence.

古文：然犹继以云雨，因以润物，是则天地之威，不可经日浃辰，帝王之怒，不宜讫情尽意，臣以狂愚，不知忌讳，敢冒破灭之罪，以邀风雨之会。伏念故太傅诸葛恪得承祖考风流之烈，伯叔诸父遭汉祚尽，九州鼎立，分托三方，并履忠勤，熙隆世业。
现代文：为臣狂妄无知，不知忌讳，胆敢冒灭身破家之罪，来请求君上降下恩泽。伏念已故太傅诸葛恪能承继祖先所遗留的杰出功业，他的几位伯父叔父遭遇汉朝国祚已尽，九州鼎立，分别依身于魏、蜀、吴三方，都能勤勉忠贞，兴隆帝王事业。
English: As a minister, he is arrogant and ignorant, knows no taboos, and dares to commit the crime of breaking up the family, to ask the prince to grant grace. In memory of the late Taifu Zhuge, he was able to inherit the outstanding achievements left by his ancestors. Several of his uncles and uncles suffered the Han Dynasty's national disgrace and died, and Kyushu stood tall. Depending on Wei, Shu, and Wu, they could be diligent and loyal, and the emperor's career could flourish.

古文：爰及于恪，生长王国，陶育圣化，致名英伟，服事累纪，祸心未萌，先帝委以伊、周之任，属以万机之事。
现代文：及至诸葛恪，生长吴国之地，受吴主教化陶冶，致令名声英伟，服侍吴主几十年，没有萌生祸乱之心，先帝委付他伊尹、周公一样的大任，将日理万机的大事交付他。
English: As far as Zhuge Ke, he grew up in the land of Wu, was educated by the bishop of Wu, and made a great reputation. He served the Lord of Wu for decades, and did not have the heart of disaster. The former emperor entrusted him with the same great responsibility as Yi Yin and Zhou Gong, and entrusted him with the important matter of Japan.

古文：恪索性刚履，矜己陵人，不能敬守神器，穆静帮内，兴功暴师，未期三出，虚耗士民，空竭府藏，专擅国宪，废易由意，假刑劫众，大小屏息。
现代文：诸葛恪生性刚愎，骄气凌人，不能慎重地保持国家政权，让国内和平安定，而为了建功使军队长期奔劳在野，不及三年就出兵三次，白白损失百姓士卒，使国家府库物资用尽，独自专持国家大权，任意罢免任用官吏，凭借刑法威吓众人，上下官员都不敢出声。
English: Zhuge was born with stubbornness, arrogant and domineering, unable to prudently maintain state power and keep the country peaceful and stable, and in order to build up merit, he made the army work in the field for a long time, dispatched troops three times in less than three years, lost the people's soldiers in vain, exhausted the state treasury, monopolized state power, arbitrarily dismissed appointed officials, and intimidated everyone with criminal law. Officials at all levels did not dare to speak out.

古文：侍中武卫将军都乡候俱受先帝嘱寄之诏，见其奸虐，日月滋甚，将恐荡摇宇宙，倾危社稷，奋其威怒，精贯昊天，计虑先于神明，智勇百于荆、聂，躬持白刃，枭恪殿堂，勋超朱虚，功越东牟。
现代文：侍中武卫将军都乡侯孙峻与他一道受先帝嘱托的诏命，看到他奸邪暴虐，日益滋盛，担心将使天下动乱，倾覆危害社稷。于是奋其威怒，精诚贯通云天，计虑胜过神明，智勇百倍于荆轲、聂政，亲自手持白刃，诛杀诸葛恪于殿堂之上，其功绩超过朱虚侯、东牟侯。
English: Sun Jun, the general of the Imperial Household Guards, who was entrusted with the imperial command by the former emperor, saw that his treachery and tyranny were becoming more and more prosperous, and feared that he would cause turmoil in the world and overthrow the social order. So he exerted his might and fury, penetrated heaven and earth with diligence, was wiser and braver than the gods, was a hundred times more courageous than Jing Xi and Yan Zheng, and personally held a white blade and killed Zhuge, who was above the hall of fame. His achievements exceeded those of Zhu Xiu and Dong Mou.

古文：国之元害，一朝大除，驰首徇示，六军喜踊，日月增光，风尘不动，斯实宗庙之神灵，天人之同验也。
现代文：国家大害，一朝根除，车载他的首级展示于众，六军喜乐欢跃，日月增光，风尘平息，实为祖先之神灵，天人之共验。
English: The national calamity was eradicated at once, his severed head was displayed to the public, the six armies rejoiced and exulted, the sun and moon increased in brightness, and the wind and dust subsided. He was indeed the ancestor's deity, the common experience of heaven and man.

古文：今恪父子三首，悬市积日，观者数万，詈声成风。
现代文：如今诸葛父子三人首级，悬市示众数日，观看的人几万，咒骂声汇积如风。
English: Nowadays, the heads of the three heads of Zhuge father and son have been displayed for several days, watched by tens of thousands of people, and the curses have accumulated like the wind.

古文：国之大刑，无所不震，长老孩幼，无不华见。
现代文：国家的大刑，无处不受震动，男女老幼，无不观看。
English: The country's capital punishment, everywhere shaken, men and women, young and old, all watching.

古文：人情之于品物，乐极则哀生，见恪贵盛，世莫与贰，身处台辅，中间历年，今之诛夷，无异禽兽，观讫情反，能不憯然！
现代文：人的思想，在观察事物时总是乐极生悲，看到诸葛恪显贵隆盛，世人无与为比，身处三公之位，已是居间多年，今日受到诛杀灭族，如禽兽受宰无异，观罢此般情景就会产生相反的感情，能不悲戚伤感？
English: When observing things, people's thoughts are always full of joy and sadness. Seeing Zhuge Liang's magnificence and prosperity, the world is incomparable. Being in the position of the Three Kingdoms, he has been living in the middle for many years. Today, he is being killed and exterminated, just like animals are slaughtered. Watching such a scene will produce the opposite feelings. Can you not be sad and sad?

古文：且已死之人，与土壤同域，凿掘斫刺，无所复加。
现代文：何况已死去了的人，与土壤同归一处，凿、挖、砍、刺，再也不能施加罚刑。
English: Moreover, those who have died are one with the soil, chiseled, dug, cut, stabbed, and can no longer inflict punishment.

古文：愿圣朝稽则乾坤，怒不极旬，使其乡邑若故吏民收以士伍之服，惠以三寸之棺。
现代文：希望圣明的朝廷效法乾坤，震怒不越旬日，让他的同乡或过去的部下，以一般的兵士服装来收殓他，赐给他三寸薄棺。
English: It is hoped that the court of Shengming will follow the example of others and let his fellow countrymen or former subordinates receive him in ordinary soldier's clothing and give him a three-inch thin coffin.

古文：昔项籍受殡葬之施，韩信获收敛之恩，斯则汉高发神明之誉也。
现代文：从前项羽也得到殡葬之赐，韩信也获得收殓之恩，这就使汉高祖显扬神明的声誉。
English: Formerly, Xiang Yu also received the gift of funeral and burial, and Han Xin also received the grace of acceptance, which made Han Gao Zu show his reputation as a god.

古文：惟陛下敦三皇之仁，垂哀矜之心，使国泽加于辜戮之骸，复受不已之恩，于以扬声遐方，沮劝天下，岂不弘哉！
现代文：以陛下笃行三皇之仁，布施哀悯之心，使朝廷的恩泽加施到受刑者的尸骸，使他们再次受到不尽之恩，以此显扬声名到遥远之地，劝勉警戒天下之人，岂不恢弘广大吗？
English: Would it not be grand and expansive for His Majesty to practice the benevolence of the three emperors, to bestow compassion, to cause the grace of the imperial court to be bestowed upon the corpses of the tortured, so that they may once again receive inexhaustible grace, and in this way to make a name for Himself in distant lands, and to exhort and warn the people of the world?

古文：昔栾布矫命彭越，臣窃恨之，不先请主上，而专名以肆情，其得不诛，实为幸耳。
现代文：从前栾布违反汉高祖诏令去祭奠彭越，我曾私下认为这种作法可恨，不先请示主上，而专门为了博得名声而恣意妄为，他没有被处死，实在是大幸。
English: In the past, Zibo violated the edict of Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty to commemorate Peng Yue. I once privately thought that this practice was hateful. Without first asking the Lord, he acted arbitrarily in order to gain fame. He was lucky not to be executed.

古文：今臣不敢章宣愚情以露天恩，谨伏手书，冒昧陈闻，乞圣朝哀察。 于是亮、峻听恪故吏敛葬，遂求之于石子冈。
现代文：如今为臣不敢公开表示自己愚昧的情意，以露泄皇上恩德，只好恭敬地草拟这份表章，冒昧说明自己的想法，恳求圣明的朝廷哀怜省察。 于是孙亮、孙峻听任诸葛恪过去的下属去将他尸体收殓安葬，他们由是在石子冈找到了他的尸体。
English: Now, the vassal did not dare to openly express his foolish feelings, and in order to expose the emperor's kindness, he had no choice but to respectfully draft this badge, dare to explain his thoughts, and implore the holy imperial court for pity and reflection. Therefore, Sun Liang and Sun Jun allowed Zhuge Ke's past subordinates to collect and bury his body, and they found his body in Shishioka.

古文：始恪退军还，聂友知其将败。书与滕胤曰： 当人强盛，河山可拔，一朝羸缩，人情万端，言之悲叹。 
现代文：当初，诸葛恪撤军返还，聂友知道他将要败亡，写信给滕胤说： 当人处于强盛之时，可令山动河移，一旦陷于败弱之地，人们对他的态度就会各式各样。
English: At the beginning, Zhuge Ke withdrew his troops and returned. Xing You knew that he was about to be defeated and wrote to Teng Yin saying: When a person is in a strong position, he can move mountains and rivers. Once he is in a weak position, people's attitudes towards him will be varied.

古文：恪诛后，孙峻忌友。
现代文：说到这里令人悲伤叹息。 
English: It's sad to say.

古文：欲以为郁林太守，友发病忧死。
现代文：诸葛恪被诛杀后，孙峻忌恨聂友，打算调他为郁林太守，聂友发病忧愤而死。
English: After Zhuge Ke was killed, Sun Jun hated Yao You and planned to make him the governor of Yulin. Yao You died of grief and anger.

古文：友字文悌，豫章人也。
现代文：聂友，字文悌，豫章郡人。
English: He is a native of Yuanzhang County.

古文：滕胤字承嗣，北海剧人也。
现代文：滕胤传，滕胤，字承嗣，北海剧县人。
English: Teng Tan Chuan, Teng Tan, the successor of the word, is a resident of Hokkai Drama County.

古文：伯父耽，父胄，与刘繇州里通家。以世扰乱，渡江依繇。
现代文：他的伯父滕耽、父亲滕胄，与刘繇是州里的世交，因为世道扰乱，渡江依附刘繇。
English: His uncle, Teng Tan, and his father, Teng Yao, were friends with Liu Yao in the state. Because of the disruption of the world, Wujiang adhered to Liu Yao.

古文：孙权为车骑将军，拜耽右司马，以宽厚称，早卒，无嗣。
现代文：孙权为车骑将军时，任命滕耽为右司马，滕耽以宽仁厚道而著称，去世早，没有后人。
English: When Sun Quan was the general of cavalry and cavalry, he appointed Teng Tan as his right-hand man. Teng Tan was known for his benevolence and kindness. He died early and had no descendants.

古文：胄善属文，权待以宾礼，军国书疏，常令损益润色之，亦不幸短命。
现代文：滕胄善于写文章，孙权以宾客之礼待他，军事、国家的文书，常常让他修改润色，也不幸短命。
English: Teng Yao was good at writing articles. Sun Quan treated him as a guest. He often asked him to touch up military and state documents. Unfortunately, his life was short-lived.

古文：权为吴王，迫录旧恩，封胤都亭侯。
现代文：孙权为吴王，追忆过去恩义，封滕胤都亭侯。
English: Sun Quan is King of Wu, recalling past gratitude, and Futen Tan is the prince of Duqing.

古文：少有节操，美容仪。
现代文：滕胤从小就有志节操守，容仪俊美。
English: Since he was a child, Teng Tan has had a strong work ethic and a handsome appearance.

古文：弱冠尚公主。
现代文：成年后娶公主为妻。
English: When he grows up, he marries the princess.

古文：年三十，起家为丹杨太守，徙吴郡、会稽，所在见称。
现代文：年三十，开始出任丹杨太守，转任吴郡、会稽太守，所到之处都受到赞赏。
English: In 1930, he began to serve as the governor of Danyang, and was transferred to the governor of Wu County and the auditor of the association. He was appreciated everywhere he went.

古文：太元元年，权寝疾，诣都，留为太常；与诺葛恪等俱受遗诏辅政。
现代文：太元元年，孙权重病卧床，滕胤回到京都，留下为太常，与诸葛恪一起受遗诏辅政。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, when Sun Quan was seriously ill in bed, Teng Yat returned to Kyoto and remained as the Taijō, and together with Zhuge Ke, received the imperial edict to assist the government.

古文：孙亮即位，加卫将军。
现代文：孙亮登基后，加授滕胤卫将军。
English: After Sun Liang ascended to the throne, General Teng Yanwei was awarded.

古文：恪将悉众伐魏。胤谏恪曰： 君以丧代之际，受伊、霍之托，入安本朝，出摧强敌，名声振于海内，天下莫不震动，万姓之心，冀得蒙君而息。
现代文：诸葛恪准备率领全部军队攻打魏国，滕胤劝谏他说： 您在先王去世新君继位时，接受了伊尹、霍光一样的重托，入则安定本国朝政，出则摧毁强大外敌，名声传扬全国，天下无不震动，百姓的心愿，期望得以依赖您而安宁。
English: Zhuge Ke prepared to lead the entire army to attack Wei. Teng Yin advised him: "When the previous king died and was succeeded by a new monarch, you accepted the same important commission as Yi Yin and Huo Guang. When you came in, you stabilized your country's imperial government. When you left, you destroyed a powerful foreign enemy. Your reputation spread throughout the country. The whole world was shaken. The people's wishes and expectations were to be able to rely on you and be at peace.

古文：今猥以劳役之后，兴师出征，民疲力屈，远主有备。若攻城不克，野略无获，是丧前劳而招后责也。
现代文：如今在大兴劳役之后，兴师出征，百姓疲惫、国力亏虚，远方国家的君主有所防备，如果攻城而不能克，野战而无所获，这就会丧失以前的功绩而招致以后的责备。
English: Nowadays, after the Great Rejuvenation of Labor Service, the rejuvenated soldiers go to war, the people are tired, the national strength is deficient, and the monarchs of distant countries are prepared. If the city is attacked and cannot be defeated, and there is no gain in the field, this will lose the previous achievements and cause future reproach.

古文：不如案甲息师，观隙而动。
现代文：不如按兵息师，伺机而行。
English: It's better to follow the soldiers and wait for an opportunity.

古文：且兵者大事，事以众济，众苟不悦，君独安之？ 
现代文：况且出兵作战是重大事情，此事要靠大众才能成功，众人如果不高兴，您岂得独自安心？ 
English: Moreover, sending troops to fight is an important matter. It depends on the public to succeed. If the public is not happy, do you have to be at ease alone?

古文：恪曰： 诸云不可者，皆不见计算，怀居苟安者也，而子复以为然，吾何望焉？
现代文：诸葛恪说： 大家说不可出兵，是他们都无计虑，心怀苟且偷安的思想，而您也认为他们是对的，我还有什么指望？
English: Zhuge Ke said, "Everyone says that it is impossible to send troops, they are all thoughtless, scrupulous and peace-stealing thoughts, and you also think that they are right, what hope do I have?

古文：夫以曹劳暗劣，而政在私门，彼之臣民，固有离心。
现代文：因为曹芳昏聩无能，而他的政权被控制在臣下手中，他的臣民本就怀有离心。
English: Because Cao Fang was feeble and incompetent, and his political power was controlled by his vassals, his subjects were already suspicious of him.

古文：今吾因国家之资，借战胜之威，则何往而不克哉！ 
现代文：如今我利用国家的力量，凭借战胜的威势，则所向之处哪能不获胜？ 
English: Now that I am using the power of the state, with the might of victory, where can I go without winning?

古文：以胤为都下督，掌统留事。
现代文：他以滕胤为都下督，总管留守事务。
English: He appointed Teng Tan as the second-in-command of the capital and the chief administrator of matters concerning those who stayed behind.

古文：胤白日接宾客，夜省文书，或通晓不寐。
现代文：滕胤白天接待宾客，夜间批阅文件，有时通宵不眠。
English: Teng Tan receives guests during the day, approves documents at night, and sometimes does not sleep all night.

古文：孙峻字子远，孙坚弟静之曾孙也。
现代文：孙峻传，孙峻，字子远，孙坚的弟弟孙静的曾孙。
English: Sun Junzhuan, Sun Jun, Zizi Yuan, Sun Jian's brother, Sun Jing's great-grandson.

古文：静生皓，皓生恭，为散骑侍郎。
现代文：孙静生孙詗。孙詗生孙恭，孙恭任散骑侍郎。
English: Sun Jing gave birth to Sun Xuan, Sun Xuan gave birth to Sun Qiong, and Sun Qiong became a horseback riding attendant.

古文：恭生峻。
现代文：孙恭生孙峻。
English: Sun Qingsheng and Sun Jun.

古文：少便弓马，精果胆决。
现代文：孙峻年少时就熟知射箭驰马，精明果敢、胆大决断。
English: When he was young, Sun Jun was familiar with archery and horseback riding. He was shrewd, courageous and decisive.

古文：孙权末，徙武卫都尉，为侍中。
现代文：孙权在位末年，孙峻为武卫都尉，任侍中。
English: In the last years of Sun Quan's reign, Sun Jun was appointed Captain of the Imperial Guard and served as a chamberlain.

古文：权临薨，受遗辅政，领武卫将军，故典宿卫，封都乡侯。
现代文：孙权临去世前，孙峻受遗诏辅朝政，兼任武卫将军，此职按例主管宿卫军，封爵都乡侯。
English: Before the death of Sun Quan, Sun Jun received the posthumous imperial edict to assist the imperial government, and also served as the General of the Imperial Guard. In this position, he was in charge of the Home Guard, and was knighted as the head of a township.

古文：既诛诸葛恪，迁丞相大将军，督中外诸军事、假节，进封富春侯。
现代文：诸葛恪被诛杀后，孙峻被升为丞相大将军，督管朝廷内外各项军务、假节，晋封为富春侯。
English: After Zhuge Ke was killed, Sun Jun was promoted to General of the Chancellery, in charge of all military affairs and festivals inside and outside the imperial court, and was promoted to Fuchun.

古文：滕胤以恪子竦妻父辞位。峻曰： 鲧、禹罪不相及，滕侯何为？ 
现代文：滕胤因是诸葛恪的儿子诸葛竦的岳父而辞职，孙峻说： 鲧和禹罪过不相连累，滕侯您这是何必呢？ 
English: Teng Yan resigned because he was the father-in-law of Zhuge Yao, the son of Zhuge Kao. Sun Jun said: "Yu and Zhuge Yao are not related. Teng Hou, why do you need this?

古文：峻、胤虽内不沾洽，而外相包容，进胤爵高密侯，共事如前。
现代文：孙峻、滕胤内心虽相互不融洽合意，但外表上都相互包容，孙峻晋封滕胤的爵位为高密侯，仍像以前一样共事。
English: Although Sun Jun and Teng Ying did not agree with each other in their hearts, they tolerated each other on the outside. Sun Jun promoted Teng Ying to the rank of Gaomi, and they still worked together as before.

古文：峻素无重名，骄矜险害，多所刑杀，百姓嚣然。
现代文：孙峻一向没有显赫的声名，骄矜阴险，过多施刑杀人，百姓怨声载道。
English: Sun Jun has never had a prominent reputation. He is arrogant and insidious. He has carried out too many executions and murders, and the people have complained about this.

古文：又奸乱宫人，与公主鲁班私通。
现代文：他还奸淫宫女，与公主鲁班私通。
English: He also fornicated with the princess Luban.

古文：五凤元年，吴侯英谋杀峻，英事泄死。
现代文：五凤元年，吴侯孙英企图谋杀他，因事情败露孙英被处死。
English: Wu Hou Sun Ying attempted to murder him in the first year of the Wufeng era, and Sun Ying was executed for failing to reveal the affair.

古文：二年，魏毋丘俭、文钦以众叛，与魏人战于乐嘉，峻帅骠骑将军吕据、左将军留赞袭寿春，会钦败降，军还。
现代文：五凤二年，魏国将领毋丘俭、文钦率部叛乱，与魏军在乐嘉作战，孙峻率领骠骑将军吕据、左将军留赞袭击寿春，正碰上文钦战败来向吴军投降，吴军返回。
English: In the 2nd year of Wufeng, the Wei generals Beocu Jian and Wen Qin led a rebellion and fought with the Wei army in Lejia. Sun Jun led the cavalry general Lv Zhen and the left general Leuzan to attack Shuchun. They were defeated by the Wu army and surrendered to the Wu army, and the Wu army returned.

古文：是岁，蜀使来聘，将军孙仪、孙邵綝恂等欲因会杀峻。
现代文：当年，蜀国使者来访问，将军孙仪、张怡、林恂等企图借会见蜀使之机杀死孙峻。
English: In that year, the emissary of Shu came to visit, and generals Sun Yi, Zhang Yi, Lin Ye and others tried to use the opportunity to meet Shu to kill Sun Jun.

古文：事泄，仪等自杀，死者数十入，并及公主鲁育。
现代文：事情败露，孙仪等自杀而亡，死者数十人，并株连到公主鲁育。
English: After the affair was exposed, Sun Yi and others committed suicide and died. Dozens of people died, including Princess Lu Yu.

古文：峻欲城广陵，朝臣知其不可城，而畏之莫敢言。
现代文：孙峻打算修筑广陵城，朝中大臣们明白那里无法修城，但都惧怕孙峻，故无人敢讲。
English: Sun Jun planned to build Guangling City. The ministers of the two Koreas understood that the city could not be built there, but they were all afraid of Sun Jun, so no one dared to speak out.

古文：唯滕胤谏止，不从，而功竟不就。
现代文：只有滕胤劝谏他，孙峻不听，而此项工程最终未能完成。
English: Only Teng Tan advised him, but Sun Jun did not listen, and the project was ultimately not completed.

古文：其明年，文钦说峻征魏，峻使钦与吕据、车骑刘纂、镇南朱异、前将军唐咨自江都人淮、泗，以图青、徐。
现代文：第二年，文钦劝说孙峻征伐魏国，孙峻派遣文钦与吕据、车骑将军刘纂、镇南将军朱异、前将军唐咨从江都进军淮、泗一带，图谋攻占青、徐二州。
English: In the second year, Wenqin persuaded Sun Jun to invade Wei, and Sun Jun sent Wenqin and Lv Zhen, the cavalry general Liu Zuo, the Zhenan general Zhu Ying, and the former general Tang Zhi from Jiangdu to march into the Huai and Min regions, in an attempt to capture the two states of Qing and Xu.

古文：峻与胤至石头，因饯之，领从者百许人入据营。
现代文：孙峻与滕胤到达石头城，借此为他们饯行，孙峻带领随从百多人进入吕据的军营。
English: Sun Jun and Teng Yin arrived at Stone Town, and took advantage of this to walk for them. Sun Jun led more than a hundred people into the military camp of Lushihong.

古文：据御军齐整，峻恶之，称心痛去。
现代文：吕据指挥军队整齐严谨，孙峻心里讨厌他，就推说心痛离去。
English: Lv Guan commanded the army neatly and strictly. Sun Jun hated him in his heart, so he said he was sad to leave.

古文：遂梦为诸葛恪所击，恐惧发病死，时年三十八，以后事付綝。
现代文：于是他梦见被诸葛恪所击，因恐惧发病死去，时年三十八岁，将后事托付孙綝。
English: So he dreamed that he was struck by Zhuge Ke, died of fear, at the age of thirty-eight, and entrusted his future to Sun Yat-sen.

古文：孙綝字子通，与峻同祖。
现代文：孙綝传，孙綝，字子通，与孙峻同一祖父。
English: Sun Yat-sen, Sun Yat-sen, Zizi Tong, and Sun Jun share the same grandfather.

古文：綝父绰为安民都尉。
现代文：孙綝父亲孙绰为安民都尉。
English: Sun Yao's father, Sun Zuo, was an Anmin lieutenant.

古文：綝始为偏将军，及峻死，为待中武卫将军，领中外诸军事，代知朝政。
现代文：孙綝起始为偏将军，及至孙峻死后，为侍中武卫将军，兼管朝廷内外各项军务，接替孙峻主持朝政。
English: From the beginning, Sun Yat-sen was a partial general, and after the death of Sun Jun, he was a general of the Middle Palace Guards, in charge of various military affairs both inside and outside the imperial court, and succeeded Sun Jun in presiding over the imperial government.

古文：吕据闻之大恐，与诸督将连名，共表荐滕胤为丞相，綝以胤为大司马，代吕岱驻武昌。
现代文：吕据听到这一消息，十分恐惧，与众部督将领联名，共上表举荐滕胤为丞相，孙綝改滕胤为大司马，接替吕岱驻守武昌。
English: When Lü heard this news, he was very frightened, and he and the other governors and generals jointly recommended that Teng Tan be made chancellor, and Sun Yat-sen recommended that Teng Tan be made grand steward, to take over Lü's post in Wuchang.

古文：据引兵还，使人报胤，欲共废綝綝闻之，遣从兄虑将兵逆据于江都，使中使敕文钦、刘纂、唐咨等合众击据，遣侍中左将军华融、中书丞丁晏告胤取据，并喻胤宜速去意，胤自以祸及，因留融、晏，勒兵自卫，召典军扬崇、将军孙咨，告以綝为乱，迫融等使有书难綝綝不听，表言胤反，许将军刘丞以封爵，使率兵骑急攻围胤。
现代文：吕据领兵返回，派人报知滕胤，想一道废黜孙綝。孙綝听到这一消息，派遣堂兄孙虑领兵在江都迎击吕据，派宫中使者去命令文钦、刘纂、唐咨等联合部队进击吕据，派侍中左将军华融、中书丞丁晏告诉滕胤攻取吕据，并有劝喻滕胤应速往之意。滕胤自认为祸患涉及到自己，因而扣留华融、丁晏，部署兵卒以自卫，召典军杨崇、将军孙咨，告知他们说孙綝作乱，迫使华融等写信责难孙綝。孙綝不听，上表说滕胤谋反，许诺将军刘丞封爵，让他率领兵马急速攻打围困滕胤。
English: When Sun Yat-sen heard this news, he dispatched his cousin Sun Qian to lead an army to attack Liusheng in the Yangtze River. He also sent an emissary to the palace to order the joint forces of Wenqin, Liu Cao, Tang Zhao and others to attack Liusheng. He also sent the attendants, the left-wing general Hua Rong and the middle-ranking general Ding Qi, to tell Teng Yat-sen to attack Liusheng. He also had the intention of advising Yu Teng-yin to hurry. Teng Yat-sen thought that the disaster involved himself, so he detained Hua Rong and Ding Qi, deployed soldiers to defend himself

古文：胤又劫融等使诈诏发兵。
现代文：滕胤又胁迫华融等人，让他们假造诏书征调部队。
English: Teng Yat also coerced Hua Rong and others to have them forge an edict to conscript troops.

古文：融等不从，胤皆杀之。
现代文：华融等人不从，滕胤将他们全部杀死。
English: Hua Rong and others did not obey, and Teng Ying killed them all.

古文：胤颜色不变，谈笑若常。
现代文：滕胤神色不变，谈笑如常。
English: Teng Tan's expression remains unchanged, and he is chatting and laughing as usual.

古文：或劝胤引兵至苍龙门， 将士见公出，必皆委綝就公 。
现代文：有人劝滕胤领兵前往苍龙门，将士们看到滕公出来，一定都离开孙綝来归附滕公。
English: Some people advised Teng Tan to lead the army to Soryu Gate. When the generals saw Teng Gong coming out, they must have all left Sun Yat-sen to join Teng Gong.

古文：时夜已半，胤恃与据期。又难举兵向富，乃约令部曲，说吕侯以在近道，故皆为胤尽死，无离散者。
现代文：当时已是半夜，滕胤仗着与吕据有约，又难于发动军队开进宫门，于是命令约束部下，说吕侯已在很近的路上，故此他的部下都能为他拼死，无人逃离。
English: It was already the middle of the night, Teng Tan had an appointment with Lü Zhigu, and it was difficult to mobilize the army to enter the palace gate, so he ordered to restrain his subordinates, saying that Lü Hou was already on the road very close, so his subordinates could die for him, no one fled.

古文：时大风，比晓，据不至。
现代文：其时正刮大风，将近拂晓，吕据未到。
English: It was blowing a gale at the time, it was nearly dawn, and Lucheng had not yet arrived.

古文：綝兵大会，遂杀及将士数十人，夷胤三族。
现代文：孙綝的军队已大规模会集，于是杀滕胤和他的几十个将士，夷灭滕胤三族。
English: Sun Yat-sen's army had assembled on a large scale, so he killed Teng Yat and dozens of his soldiers, and exterminated Teng Yat's three clans.

古文：綝迁大将军，假节，封永宁侯，负贵倨傲，多行无礼。
现代文：孙綝被升任为大将军，假节、封爵永宁侯，他仗恃地位尊贵而非常傲慢，经常做出无礼的事。
English: Sun Yat-sen was promoted to the rank of general, and he was knighted as Yongning Hou. He was very arrogant due to his noble status, and often did disrespectful things.

古文：初，峻从弟虑与诸葛恪之谋，峻厚之，至右将军、无难督，授节盖，平九官事。
现代文：其初，孙峻的堂弟孙虑参与诛杀诸葛恪的阴谋，孙峻对他十分厚待，他官至右将军、无难督，授予符节车盖，总管九官事务。
English: At the beginning, Sun Jun's cousin, Sun Xian, took part in the conspiracy to kill Zhuge Ke, and Sun Jun treated him very generously. He was given the title of Right General, Governor of No Difficulty, granted the cap of the rune car, and was in charge of the affairs of nine officials.

古文：綝遇虑薄于峻时，虑怒，与将军王惇谋杀綝綝杀惇。
现代文：孙綝给孙虑的待遇比孙峻时要薄，孙虑很恼火，与将军王昶企图谋杀孙綝。
English: Sun Qian was treated worse than Sun Jun. Sun Qian was very angry and tried to murder Sun Qian with the general Wang Qian.

古文：虑服药死。
现代文：孙綝杀死王昶，孙虑服毒药而死。
English: Sun Qian killed Wang Qian, while Sun Qian took poison and died.

古文：魏大将军诸葛诞举寿春叛，保城请降。
现代文：魏国大将军诸葛诞占据寿春叛离魏国，保住寿春城向东吴请降。
English: Zhuge Zi, the great general of Wei, occupied Shuchun and defected from Wei. He kept Shuchun City and asked Dongwu to surrender.

古文：吴遣文钦、唐咨、全端、全怿等三万人救之。
现代文：吴国派遣文钦、唐咨、全端、全怿等率领三万人马前往救援。
English: The State of Wu dispatched Wenqin, Tangzhi, Quanfeng, Quanzhang and others to lead 30,000 horses to the rescue.

古文：魏镇南将军王基围入诞。钦等突围城。
现代文：魏国镇南将军王基围困诸葛诞，文钦等突围进入城中。
English: The Wei general Wang Ji besieged Zhugezi, and Wenqin broke through the siege and entered the city.

古文：魏悉中外军二十余万增诞之围。
现代文：魏国倾派朝廷内外全部军队二十余万增加对诸葛诞的保卫。
English: The Wei dynasty dispatched more than 200,000 troops inside and outside the imperial court to increase the protection of Zhuge's birthday.

古文：朱异帅三万人屯安丰城，为文钦势。
现代文：朱异率领三万人驻扎安丰城，作为文钦的接应。
English: Zhu Yixing led 30,000 people to stay in Anfeng City as a response to Wen Qin.

古文：魏兖州刺史州泰据异于阳渊，异败退，为泰所追，死伤二干人。
现代文：魏国兖州刺史州泰在阳渊抗击朱异，朱异败退，被州泰追杀，死伤两千人。
English: In Yangyuan, Zhu Yiyi was opposed by Shizhou Shuzhou Tai of Wei, and Zhu Yiyi was defeated and chased by Shuzhou Tai, resulting in the death and injury of two thousand people.

古文：林于是大发率出屯镬里，复遣异率将军丁奉、黎斐等五万人攻魏，留辎重于都陆。
现代文：孙綝于是大规模派出兵卒驻扎镬里，又派遣朱异率领将军丁奉、黎斐等部五万人攻打魏国，将辎重留在都陆。
English: As a result, Sun Yat-sen sent a large number of soldiers to be stationed in Yili. He also sent Zhu Yixing to lead 50,000 soldiers from Ding Bong, Lai Fei and other provinces to attack Wei, leaving most of them in Duluth.

古文：异屯黎浆，遣将军任度、张震等慕勇敢六千人，于屯西六里为浮桥夜渡，筑偃月垒。
现代文：朱异驻扎黎浆，派遣将军任度、张震等招募勇敢壮士六千人，于驻地西面六里处架浮桥夜里渡江，筑起偃月形营垒。
English: Zhu Yi stationed in Lipo, dispatched generals Nandu and Zhang Zhen to recruit six thousand brave men, built a pontoon bridge six miles west of the garrison, crossed the river at night, and built a crescent-shaped camp.

古文：为魏监军石苞及州泰所破，军却退就高。
现代文：被魏国监军石苞及州泰所攻破，吴军撤退到高地。
English: They were defeated by the Wei Guozhong's troops from Shijiazhuang and Zhutai, and the Wu army retreated to the highlands.

古文：异复作车箱围趣五木城。苞、泰攻异，异败归，而魏太山太守胡烈以奇兵五千诡道袭都陆，尽焚异资粮。
现代文：朱异再作车箱围进逼五木城，石苞、州泰攻打朱异，朱异失败而归，而魏国太山太守胡烈用奇兵五千从隐秘小路偷袭都陆，将朱异的军资粮草焚烧干净。
English: Zhu Rong again made a box of cars to encircle and besiege Wugu City, Shijiazhuang and Zhutai attacked Zhu Rong, Zhu Rong failed and returned, while Hu Li, the governor of Taishan in Wei, used five thousand soldiers to sneak into the capital from a secret path and burned Zhu Rong's military supplies and grain.

古文：綝授兵三万人使异死战，异不从，綝斩之于镬里，而遣弟恩救。会诞败引还。
现代文：孙綝授予朱异三万人让他拼死作战，朱异不服从，孙綝将他斩杀于镬里，而派弟弟孙恩去援救，正赶上诸葛诞战败，孙恩便带兵退还。
English: Sun Yat-sen awarded Zhu Yi 30,000 men and told him to fight to the death. Zhu Yi disobeyed, and Sun Yat-sen killed him in the battle. Sun Yat-sen sent his brother Sun En to rescue him, but he was defeated just before the birth of Zhuge, and Sun En returned with his soldiers.

古文：綝既不能拔出诞，而丧败士众，自戮名将，莫不怨之。
现代文：孙綝既不能救出诸葛诞，又使军队损丧大量兵卒，并亲自诛杀名将，故此无人不怨恨他。
English: Sun Yat-sen was not only unable to rescue Zhuge Zheng, but also caused the army to lose a large number of soldiers, and personally killed a famous general, so no one resented him.

古文：綝以孙亮始亲政事，多所难问，甚惧。
现代文：孙綝因为孙亮开始亲理政事后，对自己多有诘难，故此十分害怕。
English: Sun Yat-sen was very afraid of Sun Liang because he had a lot of difficulties after Sun Liang began to take charge of the government.

古文：还建业，称疾不朝。筑室干朱雀桥南，使弟威远将军据入苍龙宿卫，弟武卫将军恩、偏将军干、长水校尉闿分屯诸营，欲以专朝自固。
现代文：回到建业后，称说有病不上朝，在朱雀桥南面修筑宫室，派弟弟威远将军孙据进入苍龙做宿卫，弟弟武卫将军孙恩、偏将军孙干、长水校尉孙分别驻守各军营，打算以此专揽朝政加固自己的地位。
English: After returning to Jianye, he said that he would not go to the imperial court if he was ill, and built a palace room on the south side of the Suzaku Bridge. He sent his younger brother, General Sun Jian, to enter the Soryu Palace to act as a bodyguard. His younger brothers, General Sun En, General Sun Quan, and Lieutenant Sun of Changshui, were stationed in various military camps, with the intention of strengthening his position by monopolizing the imperial court.

古文：亮内嫌綝，乃推鲁育见杀本末，责怒虎林督朱熊、熊弟外部督朱损不匡正孙峻，乃令丁奉杀熊于虎林，杀损于建业。
现代文：孙亮内心厌恶孙綝，于是追究公主鲁育被杀害的原委，责备怨怒虎林督朱熊、朱熊的弟弟外部督朱损，不能匡正孙峻，于是命令丁奉杀死朱熊于虎林，杀死朱损于建业。
English: Sun Liang loathed Sun Qian in his heart, so he investigated the reason for the killing of the princess Lu Yutang, blamed the angry tiger forest inspector Zhu Xiong and Zhu Xiong's brother, the external inspector Zhu Zu, for not being able to rectify Sun Jun, and ordered Ding Bong to kill Zhu Xiong in the tiger forest and kill Zhu Zu in Jianye.

古文：綝入谏不从，亮遂与公主鲁班、太常全尚、将军刘承议诛綝亮妃，綝从姊女也，以其谋告綝綝率众夜袭全尚，遣弟恩杀刘承于苍龙门外，遂围宫。
现代文：孙綝入宫劝谏，孙亮不采纳，孙亮于是与公主鲁班、太常全尚、将军刘承商议诛杀孙綝。孙亮的妃子，是孙綝堂姐的女儿，她将这一谋划告知孙綝。孙綝率领兵众夜里袭击全尚，派弟弟孙恩在苍龙门外杀死刘承，于是进围皇宫。
English: Sun Liang consulted with Princess Luban, Emperor Taizang, and General Liu Cheng to kill Sun Xuan. Sun Liang's concubine, who was the daughter of Sun Xuan's cousin, told Sun Xuan about this plan. Sun Xuan led the troops to attack Quanzhang at night, and sent his brother Sun En to kill Liu Cheng outside the Dragon Gate, and then entered the imperial palace.

古文：使光禄勋盂宗告庙废亮，召群司仪曰： 少帝荒病昏乱，不可以处大位，承宗庙，以告先帝废之。
现代文：孙綝派光禄勋孟宗祭告宗庙废黜孙亮，召集群臣商议说： 少帝荒淫昏乱，不能够处于皇位上，奉祀宗庙，已祭告先帝将他废黜。
English: Sun Yat-sen sent the Guanglu Hon Mengzong to summon the ancestral temple to depose Sun Liang, and summoned a group of courtiers to discuss: The young emperor is wild and confused, he cannot be on the throne, he worships the ancestral temple, he has summoned the former emperor to depose him.

古文：诸君若有不同者，下异议。 
现代文：各位如有不同意见者，就下庭提出异议。 
English: If you have a different opinion, raise an objection to the lower court.

古文：皆震怖。曰： 唯将军令。 
现代文：众人都很震惊恐惧，说： 惟将军令是听。 
English: Everyone was shocked and frightened, saying, "But the general is following orders."

古文：綝遣中书郎李祟夺亮玺绶，以亮罪状班告远近。
现代文：孙綝派遣中书郎李崇夺去孙亮的印玺绶带，将孙亮的罪状颁布各地。
English: Sun Yat-sen dispatched the scholar Li Chong to take away Sun Liang's seal ribbon, and the charges against Sun Liang were promulgated throughout the country.

古文：尚书桓彝不肯署名，綝怒杀之。
现代文：尚书桓彝不肯署名，孙綝大怒将他杀死。
English: Shangshu Kuancheng refused to sign, and Sun Yat-sen killed him in a rage.

古文：典军施正劝綝征立琅邪王休，綝从之。遣宗正楷奉书于休曰： 綝以酶才，见授大任，不能辅导陛下。
现代文：典军施正劝孙綝征立琅王牙王孙休，孙綝听从了这一建议，派遣宗正孙楷进奉书信给孙休说： 我以浅薄的才能，被授予重任，不能辅佐引导陛下。
English: Shi Zheng, commander of the imperial army, advised Sun Yat-sen to recruit Sun Xiu, the King of Zhao, the King of Zhao. Sun Yat-sen listened to this suggestion and dispatched Zong Zheng, Sun Kai-jin, to send a letter to Sun Xiu saying, "I was given a heavy task with a shallow talent and cannot assist and guide Your Majesty.

古文：顷月以来，多所造立。亲近刘承，悦于美色；发吏民妇女，料其好者，留于宫内，取兵弟十八已下三千余人，习之苑中，连日续夜，大小呼嗟，败坏藏中矛戈五千余枚，以作戏具。
现代文：近几个月以来，他多次任意妄作，亲近刘承，迷悦女色，征调官员百姓家中的女子，挑选出漂亮者，留在后宫之中，挑选出部队中十八岁以下的年轻人三千多名，在宫苑中操演，日以继夜地吵吵嚷嚷，毁坏武库所藏的矛戟五千多枝，用来为戏闹的器具。
English: In recent months, he has repeatedly made arbitrary actions, getting close to Liu Cheng, bewitching women, recruiting women from the homes of officials, selecting beautiful women and keeping them in the harem, selecting more than 3,000 young people under the age of 18 in the army, performing in the palace courtyard, making noise day and night, and destroying more than 5,000 spears in the arsenal, which were used as playthings.

古文：朱据先帝旧臣，子男熊、损皆承父之基，以忠议自立，昔杀小主。自是大主所创，帝不复精其本未，便杀熊、损，谏不见用。诸下莫不侧息。
现代文：朱据是先帝的老臣，他的儿子朱熊、朱损都能继承父亲的事业，能自守忠诚道义，从前杀害小公主，本是大公主起始设谋，而皇帝不重新查清事情的原委，便杀死朱熊、朱损，对他劝谏他不采纳，各位下臣无不惶恐禁声。
English: Zhu Zheng was a veteran minister of the former emperor. His sons, Zhu Xiong and Zhu Zai, were able to inherit their father's business, and they were able to maintain loyalty and morality. In the past, they killed the little princess. Originally, it was the great princess who started the plot. But the emperor did not re-examine the original commission of the matter, so he killed Zhu Xiong and Zhu Zai, and advised him not to accept it. All the subordinates were afraid to speak out.

古文：帝于宫中作小船三百余艘，成以金银，师工昼夜不息。
现代文：皇帝在宫内造小船三百余艘，用金银饰成，工匠日夜不停地干。
English: The emperor built more than three hundred small boats in the palace, decorated with gold and silver, and craftsmen worked day and night.

古文：太常全尚，累世受恩，不能督诸宗亲，而全端等委城就魏。
现代文：太常全尚，几代蒙受圣恩，不能督察自己的各位亲属，而全端等人弃城投奔魏国。
English: Too often, after several generations of divine grace, they were unable to supervise their relatives, and the whole family abandoned the city and fled to Wei.

古文：尚位过重，曾无一言以谏陛下，而与敌往来，使传国消息，惧必倾危社稷。
现代文：全尚权位过于显要，却没有发一句劝谏陛下的话，反而与敌人往来，派人传递国家的消息给敌国，恐怕他必定会危害毁灭社稷。
English: He who is too important to be advised by his majesty, and converses with the enemy, and sends messengers to carry tidings of his country to the enemy, will, I fear, bring about the ruin of the commonwealth.

古文：推案旧典，运集大王，辄以今月二十七日擒尚斩承。
现代文：推究依据过去典制，气运集于大王身上，故此在本月二十七日擒拿全尚、斩杀刘承。
English: According to the previous system, the great king had the most luck, so on the 27th of this month, he captured Quanzhang and killed Liu Cheng.

古文：以帝为会稽王，遣楷牵迎。
现代文：让皇帝为会稽王，派孙楷前来奉迎大王。
English: Let the emperor be the king of the meeting and send Sun Kai to come and welcome the great king.

古文：百寮喁喁。
现代文：百官翘首，夹道欢迎。 
English: A hundred officials bowed their heads in welcome.

古文：立任道侧。 綝遣将军孙耽送亮之国，徙尚于零陵，迁公主于豫章。
现代文：孙綝派遣将军孙耽送孙亮前往封邑，流放全尚到零陵，迁全公主到豫章。
English: Sun Yat-sen sent his general Sun Tan to escort Sun Liang to Fongyi, exiled Quanzhang to Luling, and moved Quanzhang to Yuanzhang.

古文：綝意弥溢，侮慢民神，遂烧大桥头伍子胥庙，又坏浮屠祠，斩道人。
现代文：孙綝越发志傲意满，轻侮辱损百姓敬奉的神灵，下手烧毁大桥头的伍子胥庙，又拆毁佛教寺庙，斩杀道人。
English: Sun Yat-sen became more and more arrogant and insolent. He lightly insulted the deities worshipped by the people, burned the Wuzihuan Temple at the head of the bridge, demolished Buddhist temples, and killed Taoists.

古文：休既即位，称草莽臣。诣阙上书曰： 臣伏自省，才非干国，因缘肺腑，位极人臣，伤锦败驾，罪负彰露，寻愆惟阙，夙夜忧惧。
现代文：孙休即位后，孙綝自称草莽臣，到宫门上书说： 臣自我反省，不是主持国家大政之才，只因是皇上近亲，地位才居于群臣之上，损伤皇帝名声，污坏皇位，罪责昭彰，寻究罪过，日夜忧惧。
English: After Sun Xiu's accession to the throne, Sun Yat-sen, who called himself the most reckless vassal, wrote a letter to the palace gate saying: "Self-reflection is not the ability to preside over national politics. It is only because you are a close relative of the emperor that you have a higher status than other vassals. You have damaged the emperor's reputation, tarnished the imperial throne, revealed your guilt, investigated your sins, and worried day and night.

古文：臣闻天命棐谌，必就有德，是以幽、厉失度，阂宣中兴，陛下圣德，纂承大统，宜得良辅；以协雍熙，虽尧之盛，犹求稷契之佐；以协明圣之德。
现代文：为臣听说天命辅助诚信，必定亲近有德之人，故此周幽、厉二王失去法度，而宣王中兴。陛下有圣明的德行，继承帝业，应得贤良辅佐，以此调谐朝政，即使唐尧那样德行盛广，尚且需要后稷与契的辅佐，以协助明圣的德行。
English: As a vassal, he heard that it was the destiny of heaven to support honesty, and he must be close to people with virtue. Therefore, Zhou Yu and King Li II lost their law degree, and King Xuan Zhongxing was promoted. His Majesty has the virtue of holiness, inherits the imperial inheritance, and deserves the assistance of virtuous people to tune the court politics. Even if the virtue is as extensive as that of Tang Xi, he still needs the assistance of Houyi and Qi to assist the virtue of holiness.

古文：古人有言： 陈力就列，不能者止。 臣虽自展竭，无益庶政，谨上印绶节钺，退还田里，以避贤路。 休引见慰喻。
现代文：古人有言： 显出能力就列位任职，没有能力就辞官离任。 为臣虽然竭力施展自己的能力，但对各种朝政没有什么补益。谨此呈上印玺绶带符节斧钺，退归故里，以此给贤者让出道路。 
English: The ancients had a saying: Those who show ability are promoted to higher posts, while those who lack ability are dismissed from their posts. Although vassals exert themselves to the best of their ability, they are of little benefit to the various dynasties. I hereby present to you the seal, ribbon, emblem, and axe, and return to my hometown, thereby giving way to the wise.

古文：又下诏曰： 朕以不德，守藩于外，值兹际会，群公卿士，暨于朕躬，以奉宗庙。
现代文：孙休召见并劝慰开导他，又下诏书说： 朕以无德之身，驻守藩国于朝外，值此变革机会，各位公卿士大夫，找到我这个人，让我奉祀宗庙。
English: Sun Xiu summoned him and exhorted and enlightened him, and also issued an edict saying: I am a man of no virtue, stationed outside the imperial court. On the occasion of this opportunity for change, gentlemen, find me this person and let me worship the ancestral temple.

古文：朕用抚然，若涉渊冰。
现代文：朕因此怅然，如涉深渊、薄冰。
English: As a result, I feel as if I am wading into an abyss, on thin ice.

古文：大将军忠计内发，扶危定倾，安康社稷，功勋赫然。
现代文：大将军忠诚的计谋出于内心，扶危定倾，安定康复社稷，功勋赫然。
English: The general's loyal strategy comes from his heart, helping the crisis, stabilizing and rehabilitating the society, and his achievements are amazing.

古文：昔汉孝宣践阼，霍光尊显，褒德赏功，古今之通义也。
现代文：从前汉宣帝登基，霍光尊贵显赫，褒扬贤德、奖赏功绩，这是贯通古今的道理。
English: In the past, Emperor Xuan of the Han Dynasty ascended to the throne, and Huo Guang was honored and distinguished, and his virtues were praised and his merits were rewarded. This is a principle that runs through the ages.

古文：其以大将军为丞相、荆州牧，食五县。 
现代文：现以大将军为丞相、荆州牧，食邑五县。 
English: At present, the grand general is the chancellor, Jingzhou pasture, and five counties of Shiyi.

古文：恩为御史大夫、卫将军，据右将军。皆县侯。
现代文：孙恩任御史大夫、卫将军，孙据任右将军，都被封爵县侯。
English: Sun En was appointed as goshi taifu and wei shogun, and Sun Zheng was appointed as ujo shogun, and both were given the title of duke and county governor.

古文：干杂号将军、亭侯。
现代文：孙干为杂号将军，封爵亭侯。
English: Sun Gan became a general with the rank of general and was given the title of Baron.

古文：闿亦封亭侯。
现代文：孙也被封爵亭侯。
English: Sun was also made a peer.

古文：綝一门五侯，皆典禁兵，权倾人主，自吴国朝臣未尝有也。
现代文：孙綝一家五侯，都掌管禁卫军，权力超过君主，自吴有国以来朝中大臣不曾有过此事。
English: The five princes of the Sun Yat-sen family were all in charge of the imperial guard, and their power exceeded that of the monarch. This had not happened to a minister of the central government since the time of Wu Youguo.

古文：綝奉牛酒诣休，休不受，赍诣左将军张布。酒酣，出怨言曰： 彻废少主时，多劝吾自为之者。
现代文：孙綝进献牛、酒给孙休，孙休未接受。他转送给左将军张布，饮酒正酣时，他口出怨言说： 当初废黜少主时，很多人劝我自己做皇帝。
English: Sun Haojin offered cattle and wine to Sun Xiu, but Sun Xiu did not accept them. He sent them to the left general Zhang Bu. When he was drinking, he complained: "When I was dethroned, many people advised me to become emperor.

古文：吾以陛下贤明，故迎之。
现代文：我认为陛下贤明，故此迎立他为帝。
English: I think your majesty is wise, so I welcome him as emperor.

古文：帝非我不立，今上礼见拒，是与凡臣无异，当复改图耳。 
现代文：皇帝不是我不得立，如今上献礼物被拒绝，这是待我与一般大臣没什么两样，我应当重新改变安排。 
English: I was not made emperor without my consent, and now that the offer of a gift has been rejected, I am being treated no differently from an ordinary minister, and I should change the arrangement.

古文：布以言闻休，休衔之。巩其有变，数加赏赐，又复加恩侍中，与綝分省文书。
现代文：张布将孙綝的话告诉孙休，孙休心中怀恨，担心孙綝作乱，故多次赏赐孙綝，又再加授孙恩为侍中，与孙綝共同审阅文书。
English: Zhang Bu told Sun Quan's words to Sun Xiu. Sun Xiu harbored resentment in his heart, fearing that Sun Quan would make trouble, so he rewarded Sun Quan many times, and additionally awarded Sun En as an attendant, and reviewed documents together with Sun Quan.

古文：或有告綝怀怨侮上欲图反者，休执以付綝，綝杀之。
现代文：有人密告孙綝怀恨在心欺侮皇上企图谋反，孙休将此人抓起来交给孙綝。孙綝将此人杀死。
English: Someone tipped off Sun Yat-sen that he harbored hatred in his heart and was trying to rebel against the emperor. Sun Xiu arrested this person and handed him over to Sun Yat-sen. Sun Yat-sen killed this person.

古文：由是愈惧，因孟宗求出屯武昌，休许焉，尽敕所督中营精兵万余人，皆令装载，所取武库兵器，咸令给与。
现代文：自此更加恐惧，通过孟宗请求外任驻守武昌，孙休答应他的请求，命令孙綝督率的中营精兵一万多人，全都跟随孙綝上船启程，孙綝取出的武库中的兵器，也全让他们带走。
English: From then on, he was even more afraid. Through Meng Zong, he asked for an outside officer to be stationed in Wuchang. Sun Xiu agreed to his request and ordered more than ten thousand elite soldiers of the middle camp, led by Sun Yat-sen, to all follow Sun Yat-sen on the ship and set sail. The weapons in the arsenal taken out by Sun Yat-sen were also all taken away by them.

古文：将军魏邈说休曰 綝居外必有变 ，武卫士施朔又告 綝欲反有征 休密问张布，布与丁奉谋于会杀綝永安元年十二月丁卯，建业中谣言明会有变。綝闻之，不悦。
现代文：将军魏邈劝孙休说： 孙綝屯居京都之外必定会叛变。 武卫士施朔又报告说 孙綝企图谋反已有迹象 。孙休秘密询问张布，张布与丁奉设谋在腊祭聚会时杀孙綝。永安元年十二月七日，建业城内谣传明天腊祭聚会有事故发生，孙綝听说后，心中不快。
English: General Wei Wei advised Sun Hui that: Sun Hui will certainly rebel if he stays outside of Kyoto. Wu guard Shi Shuo also reported that there were signs that Sun Hui was planning to rebel. Sun Hui secretly asked Zhang Bu, and Zhang Bu and Ding Bong plotted to kill Sun Hui at the Wax Festival gathering. On December 7, Yong'an year, there was a rumor in Jianye City that there would be an accident at the Wax Festival gathering tomorrow. After hearing this, Sun Hui was unhappy.

古文：夜大风发木扬沙，綝益恐。
现代文：夜里大风拔树飞沙，孙綝更加恐怖。
English: In the night, a strong wind uprooted trees and sent sand flying. Sun Yat-sen was even more terrified.

古文：戊辰腊会，綝称疾。
现代文：初八日腊祭聚会，孙綝推辞有病。
English: On the eighth day of the first lunar month, Sun Yat-sen had to cancel the Wax Festival gathering because he was ill.

古文：休强起之，使者十余辈。綝不得已，将人，众止焉。
现代文：孙休强令他起身，派来的使者有十几批，孙綝不得已，准备入宫，他手下人阻止他。
English: Sun Xiu forcibly ordered him to get up. There were more than a dozen groups of emissaries sent. As a last resort, Sun Yat-sen prepared to enter the palace, but his subordinates stopped him.

古文：綝曰： 国家屡有命，不可辞。可豫整兵，令府内起火，因是可得速还。 
现代文：孙綝说： 朝廷多次命令，不能推辞，可以预先整顿好队伍，让府中起火，借此我就能很快回来。 
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "The Imperial Court has ordered me many times, and I can't refuse. I can reorganize my team in advance, and set the palace on fire. This will allow me to return quickly."

古文：遂入，寻而火起，綝求出，休曰： 外兵自多，不足烦丞相也。 
现代文：于是入宫，不一会府中火起，孙綝请求出宫，孙休说： 外面兵士很多，没必要麻烦丞相。 
English: Therefore, after entering the palace, a fire broke out in the palace. Sun Yat-sen requested to leave the palace. Sun Xiu said, "There are many soldiers outside, there is no need to trouble the prime minister."

古文：綝起离席，奉、布目左右缚之。綝叩首曰： 愿徙交州。 
现代文：孙綝起身离去座席，丁奉、张布用眼神示意手下人将他捆起来，孙綝叩头说： 我愿被流放到交州。 
English: Sun Yat-sen got up and left his seat. Ding Bong and Zhang Bu signaled with their eyes to their subordinates to tie him up. Sun Yat-sen bowed and said, "I am willing to be exiled to Jiaozhou."

古文：休曰： 卿何以不徙滕胤、吕据？ 
现代文：孙休说： 你为什么不流放滕胤、吕据？ 
English: Sun Xiu said, "Why didn't you exile Teng Ying and Lv Zuo?"

古文：綝复曰： 愿没为官奴。 
现代文：孙綝又说： 我愿被沦为官家奴仆。 
English: Sun Yat-sen also said, "I am willing to be reduced to a servant of the government."

古文：休曰： 何不以胤、据为奴乎！ 
现代文：孙休说： 怎么不让滕胤、吕据沦为官奴！ 
English: Sun Xiu said, "How can we prevent Teng Ying and Lv Zhi from being reduced to official slaves!"

古文：遂斩之。以綝首令其众曰： 诸与綝同谋皆赦。 
现代文：于是将孙綝斩首，并提着孙綝的头命令他的部下说： 所有与孙綝同谋的人都被赦免。 
English: So he beheaded Sun Yat-sen and, holding up Sun Yat-sen's head, ordered his men to say: "All those who conspired with Sun Yat-sen are pardoned."

古文：放仗者五千人。
现代文：当时放下兵器的有五千人。
English: Five thousand people laid down their weapons at that time.

古文：闿乘船欲北降，追杀之。
现代文：孙乘船企图北降魏国，被追兵赶上杀掉。
English: Sun attempted to sail north to Wei, but was caught and killed by pursuing soldiers.

古文：夷三族。
现代文：夷灭孙綝三族。
English: Sun Yat-sen's three clans were exterminated.

古文：发孙峻棺，取其印绶，綝其木而埋之，以杀鲁育等故也。
现代文：发掘孙峻的棺材，取出他的印玺绶带，砍毁棺材再把尸体埋下，这是因为他杀了公主鲁育等人的缘故。
English: They dug up Sun Jun's coffin, took out his ink ribbon, cut up the coffin and buried the body, because he had killed Princess Lu Yu and others.

古文：綝死时年二十八。
现代文：孙綝死时二十八岁。
English: Sun Yat-sen was twenty-eight years old when he died.

古文：休耽与峻、綝同族，特除其属籍，称之曰故峻、故綝云。
现代文：孙休耻与孙峻、孙綝同族，特地从宗族名册中删除他们的名字，称他们为 故峻 、 故纟林 。
English: Sun Xiu Shan was of the same clan as Sun Jun and Sun Yao, and he specifically deleted their names from the family register, calling them Old Jun and Old Yao Lin.

古文：休又下诏曰： 诸葛恪、滕胤、吕据盖以无罪为峻、綝兄弟所见残害，可为痛心，促皆改葬，各为祭奠。
现代文：孙休又下诏说： 诸葛恪、滕胤、吕据都是无罪而被故峻、故纟林兄弟所残害，真叫人痛心，马上给他们改葬，分别为他们祭奠。
English: Sun Xiu also issued an edict saying: Zhuge Cucumber, Teng Tien and Liusheng were all innocent and were killed by the late Jun and the late Yulin brothers. It is truly heartbreaking. They should be reburied immediately, and memorial services should be held for them separately.

古文：其罹恪等事见远徙者，一切召还。
现代文：凡受诸葛恪等连累被流放远方的人，一律召回京都。 
English: All those who had been exiled to faraway places by Zhuge and others were called back to Kyoto.

古文：濮阳兴字子元，陈留人也。
现代文：濮阳兴传，濮阳兴，字子元，陈留人。
English: Shanyang Xingzhuan, Shanyang Xing, Zhizi Yuan, Chen Liu Ren.

古文：父逸，汉末避乱江东，官至长沙太守。
现代文：他的父亲濮阳逸，汉朝末年躲避战乱到江东，官至长沙太守。
English: His father, Pu Yangyi, fled to the east of the Yangtze River at the end of the Han Dynasty to escape the war, and rose to the position of the governor of Changsha.

古文：兴少有士名，孙权时除上虞令，稍迁至尚书左曹，以五官中郎将使蜀，还为会稽太守。
现代文：濮阳兴少时有才士的声名，孙权时期任上虞县县令，逐渐升至尚书左曹，以五官中郎将的身份出使蜀国，回朝后任会稽太守。
English: When he was young, Shenyang Xing had a reputation as a talented man. During the reign of Sun Quan, he served as the county magistrate of Shangyu County. Gradually, he rose to the rank of Shangshu Zuo. He was dispatched to Shu Province as a middle-ranking official, and after returning to the imperial court, he was appointed as the grand steward of the imperial court.

古文：时琅邪王休居会稽，兴深与相结。
现代文：当时琅王牙王孙休居住会稽，濮阳兴与他交结深厚。
English: At that time, Sun Xiu, the king of Shanyang, was a resident of Shanyang, and Shanyang Xing had a deep relationship with him.

古文：及休即位，征兴为太常卫将军、平军国事，封外黄侯。
现代文：及至孙休登位，征召濮阳兴为太常卫将军、负责军国事务，封爵外黄侯。
English: And when Sun Xiu ascended to the throne, he conscripted Puyang Xing to be the general of Tai Changwei, responsible for military affairs, and he was knighted and promoted to Huang Hou.

古文：永安三年，都尉严密建丹杨湖田，作浦里塘。
现代文：永安三年，都尉严密修建丹杨湖田，筑浦里塘。
English: In the three years of Yongan, the captain carefully built Danyang Lake and Tsukuba Litang.

古文：诏百官会议，咸以为用功多而田不保成，唯兴以为可成。
现代文：孙休诏令百官相聚商议，都认为费工太多而湖田不能保证造成，只有濮阳兴认为可以成功。
English: Sun Xiu Dahal ordered all the officials to gather and discuss. All of them thought that the effort was too much and that Huda could not guarantee the result. Only Fenyang Xing thought that it could be successful.

古文：遂会诸兵民就作，功佣之费不可胜数，士卒死亡，或自贼杀，百姓大怨之。
现代文：于是召集众多兵士、百姓前去兴修，工程所费人力财力不可胜数，士卒死的死、逃的逃，还有的自杀，百姓十分怨恨濮阳兴。
English: As a result, many soldiers and common people were summoned to work on the construction. The manpower and financial resources expended on the project were countless. There were deaths of soldiers, escapes, and suicides. The common people were very resentful of Puyang Xing.

古文：兴迁为丞相，与休宠臣左将军张共布相表里，邦内失望。
现代文：濮阳兴被升为丞相，与孙休的重臣左将军张布相互勾结，国人大失所望。
English: Sun Yangxing was promoted to chancellor, and colluded with Sun Hui's chief minister, General Zhang Bu, to the great disappointment of the National People's Congress.

古文：七年七月，休薨。
现代文：永安七年七月，孙休去世。
English: In July of the seventh year of Yongan, Sun Xiu passed away.

古文：左典军万彧素与乌程侯孙皓善，乃劝兴、布，于是兴、布废休适子而迎立皓。
现代文：左典军万素来与乌程侯孙鰑友好，于是劝濮阳兴、张布废黜孙休的嫡子而迎立孙皓为帝。
English: The Sadan troops had always been friendly with the Ucheng vassal, Sun Yat-sen, so they persuaded Sun Yangxing and Zhang Bu to depose Sun Xiu's legitimate son and install Sun Yat-sen as emperor.

古文：皓既践阼，加兴侍中，领青州牧。
现代文：孙皓登位后，加授濮阳兴为侍郎，兼任青州牧。
English: After Sun Yat-sen's ascension to the throne, Gong Yangxing was awarded the title of chamberlain, and also served as the herdsman of Qingzhou.

古文：俄彧谮兴、布追悔前事。
现代文：不久万谮毁说濮阳兴、张布悔恨原先迎立孙皓为帝。
English: Not long after, Wanyu Rui said that Puyang Xing and Zhang Bu regretted that they had originally made Sun Yat-sen emperor.

古文：十一年朔入朝，皓因收兴、布，徙广州，道追杀之，夷三族。
现代文：当年十一月初一日上朝时，孙皓借机收捕濮阳兴、张布，将他们流放到广州，又派人在半路上追杀他们，并夷灭他们的三族。
English: On the morning of the first day of November of that year, Sun Yat-sen seized the opportunity to capture Fenyang Xing and Zhang Bu, exiled them to Guangzhou, and sent people to chase them halfway and destroy their three tribes.

