古文：○豆卢革豆卢革，父瓚，唐舒州刺史。
现代文：豆卢革，父亲豆卢瓒，唐舒州刺史。
English: Zhu Ruge, the father of Zhu Lujun, is the history of Tang Shuzhou.

古文：豆卢为世名族，唐末天下乱，革避地之中山，唐亡，为王处直掌书记。
现代文：豆卢为世代名族，唐末天下大乱，豆卢革迁家避祸来到中山，唐灭亡后，任王处直的掌书记。
English: Doulu was a famous family for generations. At the end of the Tang Dynasty, the world was in turmoil. Doulu moved his family to Zhongshan to avoid disaster. After the fall of the Tang Dynasty, he was appointed the secretary of Wang Zhanzhong.

古文：庄宗在魏，议建唐国，而故唐公卿之族遭乱丧亡且尽，以革名家子，召为行台左丞相。
现代文：唐庄宗在魏州时，拟议建立唐国，而过去的唐公卿士大夫家族遭逢战乱丧亡殆尽，因豆卢革是名门之后，召为行台左丞相。
English: When Tang Zhuangzong was in Weizhou, he proposed the establishment of Tang, and the past Tang noble family of scholars and magistrates was destroyed in the war, and after the Zhu Ruge was a famous family, he was called to be the Minister of the Left of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：庄宗即位，拜同中书门下平章事。
现代文：唐庄宗即位，拜为同中书门下平章事。
English: Tangzhuangzong ascended the throne, and he was honored as a peer of the same school.

古文：革虽唐名族，而素不学问，除拜官吏，多失其序，常为尚书郎萧希甫驳正，革颇患之。
现代文：豆卢革虽然是唐的名门望族，但不学无术，任命官吏，多不合规矩，常常被尚书郎萧希甫驳斥纠正，豆卢革对这事很恼火。
English: Although Zhu Ruge was a member of a prestigious family in Tang, he was uneducated and unskilled, appointed officials, and often did not follow the rules. He was often refuted and corrected by Shang Shulang Xiao Xifu. Zhu Ruge was very angry about this.

古文：庄宗已灭梁，革乃荐韦说为相。
现代文：唐庄宗消灭梁后，豆卢革于是推荐韦说任相。
English: After Tang Zhuangzong eliminated Liang, Doulu Ge then recommended Wei Xiang as minister.

古文：说，唐末为殿中侍御史，坐事贬南海，后事梁为礼部侍郎。
现代文：韦说，唐末任殿中侍御史，因罪眨官南海，后来在梁任礼部侍郎。
English: Wei said that at the end of the Tang Dynasty, he was appointed as the attendant of the history in the palace, and because of his crime, he was sent to Nankai, and later he was appointed as the attendant of the ceremonial department in Liang.

古文：革以说能知前朝事，故引以佐己，而说亦无学术，徒以流品自高。是时，庄宗内畏刘皇后，外惑宦官、伶人，郭崇韬虽尽忠于国，而亦无学术，革、说俯仰默默无所为，唯诺崇韬而已。
现代文：豆卢革因韦说熟悉前朝旧事，因此推蔫他辅佐自己，而韦说也不学无术，只是以门第自负这时，唐庄宗在宫内怕刘皇后，在外受宦官、伶人的蛊惑，郭崇韬虽然对国家竭尽忠诚，但也不学无术，豆卢革、韦说随人俯仰，默默无所作为，只是附和郭崇韬罢了。
English: At this time, Tangzhuangzong was afraid of Empress Liu in the palace, and was being tempted by eunuchs and meddlers outside. Guo Chongzhen, although he was extremely loyal to the country, was not unskilled. Zhu Ruge and Wei said that they followed others and did nothing, but only echoed Guo Chongzhen.

古文：唐、梁之际，仕宦遭乱奔亡，而吏部铨文书不完，因缘以为奸利，至有私鬻告敕，乱易昭穆，而季父、母舅反拜侄、甥者，崇韬请论以法。
现代文：唐、梁交替换代的时候，做官的人遭逢战乱逃亡，而吏部铨选官吏的文件不齐备，于是借机谋取私利，以至于出现私自出卖告敕，随便改变辈分，而季父、母舅反而拜侄、甥的情况，郭崇韬请求依法论处。
English: When Tang and Liang Jiao were replaced, the officials were forced to flee due to the war, and the documents for the selection of officials by the cadre department were not complete, so they took the opportunity to seek personal gain, so that there were cases of self-betrayal, arbitrarily changing the line of succession, while the third father and maternal uncle paid tribute to their nephews and nephews. Guo Chongyi requested that the situation be dealt with according to law.

古文：是时唐新灭梁，朝廷纪纲未立，议者以为宜革以渐，而崇韬疾恶太甚，果于必行，说、革心知其未可，而不能有所建言。
现代文：这时唐刚刚消灭梁，朝廷的规章制度还没有建立，议事的人认为应当逐渐革除弊端，而郭崇韬痛恨恶人太厉害，办事很果断，韦说、豆卢革心中明白这样做不行，却不能提出什么好建议。
English: At this time, Tang had just eliminated Liang, the rules and regulations of the imperial court had not yet been established, the negotiators believed that the drawbacks should be gradually eliminated, while Guo Chongzhen hated the wicked too much and acted very decisively, Wei said. In his heart, Zhu Ruge understood that this was not possible, but he could not put forward any good suggestions.

古文：是岁冬，选人吴延皓改亡叔告身行事，事发，延皓及选吏尹玫皆坐死，尚书左丞判吏部铨崔沂等皆贬，说、革诣阁门待罪。
现代文：这年冬，候选的官吏昊延皓涂改已经死去的叔叔的任命状做官，事情败露后，昊延皓和铨选官吏的尹玫都因罪被处死，尚书左丞兼吏部铨崔沂等人都被贬官，韦说、豆卢革到合门等待治罪。
English: This winter, the candidate official, Hao Yanjun, altered the dead uncle's appointment letter to become an official. After the affair was revealed, Hao Yanjun and the candidate official, Yin Mei, were both executed for the crime. Shang Shuxu Zuoxiao and the official, Wei Cuijun, were all demoted. Wei said, "Duluge is waiting for the crime to be punished."

古文：由是一以新法从事，往往以伪滥驳放而毙踣羁旅、号哭道路者，不可胜数。
现代文：从此一律按新的法律处理事情，往往因非法随意委派官吏而倒毙他乡、在道路上悲号哭泣的人，数不胜敷。
English: Since then, all matters have been handled in accordance with the new law, and there are countless people who have died in their hometowns due to the illegal and arbitrary appointment of officials, and who are crying in grief on the road.

古文：及崇韬死，说乃教门人上书言其事，而议者亦以罪之。
现代文：到郭崇韬死后，韦说于是让门人上书为他的事喊冤，而议事的人还是认为他有罪。
English: After Guo Chongyao's death, Wei said he asked the doorkeeper to write a letter to complain about him, but the people in charge still thought he was guilty.

古文：是岁，大水，四方地连震，流民殍死者数万人，军士妻子皆采稆以食。
现代文：这年，大水成灾，四面八方都连续发生地震，流亡的百姓饿死的有几万人，士兵和他们的妻子儿女都采野谷子来吃。
English: In that year, floods became a catastrophe, earthquakes occurred continuously in all directions, tens of thousands of exiled people starved to death, and soldiers and their wives and children harvested wild rice to eat.

古文：庄宗日以责三司使孔谦，谦不知所为。
现代文：唐庄宗天天以此责问三司使孔谦，孔谦不知所措。
English: Every day, Tang Zhuangzong asked the three departments to make Kong Qian, and Kong Qian was at a loss.

古文：枢密小吏段徊曰： 臣尝见前朝故事，国有大故，则天子以硃书御札问宰相。
现代文：枢密院小官段徊说： 我曾见前朝旧例，国家有大灾难，那么天子就用红色书札责问宰相。
English: A minor official of the Privy Council, Duan Wang, said: I have seen the old case of the previous government, the country had a great disaster, then the emperor used a red bookmark to question the prime minister.

古文：水旱，宰相职也。 
现代文：水灾和干旱，归宰相管。 
English: Floods and droughts fall under the purview of the prime minister.

古文：庄宗乃命学士草诏，手自书之，以问革、说。
现代文：唐庄宗于是命令学士起草诏书，亲手书写，用来责问豆卢革、韦说。
English: Tang Zhuangzong then ordered the scholar to draft an edict and write it with his own hand, to be used to reprimand Zhu Ruge and Wei Zuo.

古文：革、说不能对，第曰： 陛下威德著于四海，今西兵破蜀，所得珍宝亿万，可以给军。
现代文：豆卢革、韦说不能回答，只是说： 陛下的威仪恩德流布四面八方，如今西面的军队攻破蜀，得到的珍宝价值亿万，可以用来赏给军队。
English: Zhu Ruge and Wei Wei said that they could not answer, but only said: His Majesty's dignity and virtue spread in all directions, and now the western army has defeated Shu, and the treasure obtained is worth hundreds of millions, which can be used to reward the army.

古文：水旱，天之常道，不足忧也。 
现代文：至于水灾干旱，是老天常要发生的事情，不值得忧虑。 
English: As for floods and droughts, they are natural occurrences and not worth worrying about.

古文：革自为相，遭天下多故，而方服丹砂炼气以求长生，尝呕血数日，几死。
现代文：垒虐革自从任宰相以来，碰上天下多灾多难，而正吃丹砂炼气以求长生不老，曾吐血几天，几乎死去。
English: Ever since he was appointed as the prime minister, he has encountered many disasters and difficulties in the world. While he was eating the cinnamon sand to purify the air in order to live forever, he vomited blood for a few days and almost died.

古文：二人各以其子为拾遗，父子同省，人以为非，遽改佗官，而革以说子为弘文馆学士，说以革子为集贤院学士。
现代文：豆卢革、韦说二人各自都任他们的儿子做拾遣，父子同在一个省，人们认为木对，于是改任别的官职，因而豆卢革任韦说的儿子为弘文馆学士，韦说任豆卢革的儿子为集贤院学士。
English: Zhu Ruge and Wei said that both of them let their sons do the dispatching. The father and son were in the same province, and people thought that they were the same, so they were reassigned to other official positions. Therefore, Zhu Ruge said that Wei's son was a bachelor of the Hongwu Academy of Literature, and Wei said that Ren Zhu Ruge's son was a bachelor of the Jixian Academy.

古文：庄宗崩，革为山陵使，庄宗已祔庙，革以故事当出镇，乃还私第，数日未得命，而故人宾客趣使入朝。
现代文：唐庄宗死，豆卢革任山陵使，唐庄宗被拊祭在宗庙后，豆卢革按照旧例应当外出任职，于是回到家中，几天都没有得到任命，而他的朋友宾客们催他上朝。
English: After the death of Tangzhuangzong and the sacrificial offering of Tangzhuangzong in the ancestral temple of Tangzhuangzong, according to the old custom, Zhu Ruge should go out to serve, so he returned home. He was not appointed for several days, and his friends and guests urged him to go to the imperial court.

古文：枢密使安重诲诟之于朝曰： 山陵使名尚在，不俟改命，遽履新朝，以我武人可欺邪！ 
现代文：枢密使安重诲在朝廷上骂他说： 山陵使的官名还在，不等到另外任命，就迫不及待到新的朝廷来，认为我是武臣好欺骗吗！ 
English: The Privy Councilor An Chongzhen scolded him in court, saying: "The official title of the mountain envoy is still in place. Without waiting for another appointment, you can't wait to come to the new court. Do you think I am a vassal who is good at deception?"

古文：谏官希旨，上疏诬革纵田客杀人，说坐与邻人争井，遂俱罢。
现代文：谏官迎合安重诲的意旨，上疏诬告豆卢革放纵田客杀人，韦说因和邻居争夺水井有罪，于是都被罢官。
English: The eunuchs catered to the intention of An Chongyun, Shang So falsely accused Zhu Ruge of indulging in the killing of farmers, Wei said that he was guilty of competing with his neighbors for wells, so they were all dismissed.

古文：革贬辰州刺史，说溆州刺史，所在驰驿发遣。
现代文：豆卢革被贬为辰州刺史，韦说被贬为淑州刺史，一路上用驿马遣送。
English: Zhu Ruge was demoted to Chenzhou and Wei Xian was demoted to Shuzhou, and they were sent away on horses.

古文：宰相郑珏、任圜三上章，请毋行后命，不报。
现代文：宰相郑珏、任圜三次上书，请求不要继续加罪，没有回答。
English: Prime Minister Zheng Rong and Ren Rong wrote three times, asking not to continue to add to the crime, but there was no answer.

古文：革复坐请俸私自入，说卖官与选人，责授革费州司户参军，说夷州司户参军，皆员外置同正员。
现代文：豆卢革又因请求俸禄私财归自己，韦说卖官给候选的官吏，责授豆卢革为费州司户参军，韦说为夷州司户参军，都在编制外安置待遇同正式编制。
English: In addition, because of the request of Doulu Ge for the salary and private wealth to himself, Wei said that he sold the official to the candidate official, ordered Doulu Ge to join the army for the Feizhou steward, and Wei said that he joined the army for the Yizhou steward, both are in the preparation of the external placement treatment and the official preparation.

古文：已而窜革陵州，说合州，皆长流百姓。
现代文：不久放逐豆卢革到陵州，韦说到合州，均为长期流放百姓。
English: Not long after, Douluge was exiled to Lingzhou, and Wei said that he was exiled to Hezhou, both of which were long-term exiles.

古文：初，说尝以罪窜之南海，遇赦，还寓江陵，与高季兴相知，及为相，常以书币相问遗。
现代文：当初，韦说曾因罪流放到南海，受到赦免，回来住在江陵，和高季兴成为知己，到担任宰相后，常常写信送钱慰问他。
English: At first, Wei said that he had been exiled to the South China Sea for a crime, was pardoned, returned to live in Gangneung, and became a confidant of Gao Jixing. After serving as prime minister, he often wrote letters to send money to comfort him.

古文：唐兵伐蜀，季兴请以兵入三峡，庄宗许之，使季兴自取夔、忠、万、归、峡等州为属郡。
现代文：唐军讨伐蜀，高季兴请求率兵进三峡，唐庄宗同意了，派高季兴自己攻取夔、忠、万、归、峡等州作为他的属郡。
English: The Tang army fought against Shu, Gao Jixing requested to lead the troops into the Three Gorges, Tang Zhuangzong agreed, and sent Gao Jixing to conquer the states of Shun, Zhong, Wan, Gui, and Xia as his subordinate counties.

古文：及破蜀，季兴无功，而唐用佗将取五州。
现代文：到攻破蜀时，高季兴没有战功，而唐派别的将领攻取了这五个州。
English: By the time of the attack on Shu, Gao Jixing had no military merit, and the generals of the Tang faction had captured these five states.

古文：明宗初即位，季兴数请五州，以谓先帝所许，朝廷不得已而与之。
现代文：唐明宗刚即位，高季兴多次请求这五个州归他管，说是先帝同意了的，朝廷迫不得已就把这五个州划归他了。
English: As soon as Tang Mingzong ascended the throne, Gao Jixing repeatedly requested that the five provinces be placed under his control, saying that the former emperor had agreed to this. The imperial court had no choice but to assign the five provinces to him.

古文：及革、说再贬，因以其事归罪二人。
现代文：到豆卢革、韦说再次被贬官时，于是拿这件事归罪他们二人。
English: When he arrived in Douluge, Wei said that he was demoted again, so he blamed the two of them for the incident.

古文：天成二年夏，诏陵、合州刺史监赐自尽。
现代文：天成二年夏，诏令陵、合二州刺史监督他们二人自杀。
English: In the summer of the second year of Tiancheng, they both committed suicide.

古文：革子升，说子涛，皆官至尚书郎，坐其父废。
现代文：豆卢革的儿子豆卢升，韦说的儿子韦涛，都做官到尚书郎，因他们父亲的罪被罢废。
English: Duluge's son, Dulu-sheng, and Wei-tang's son, Wei-tao, both served as officials in Shangshulang and were dismissed for their father's crimes.

古文：至晋天福初，涛为尚书膳部员外郎，卒。
现代文：到晋天福初年，韦涛任尚书膳部员外郎，死。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jintianfu, Wei Tao, a member of Shangshu's kitchen staff, died.

古文：○卢程卢程，不知其世家何人也。
现代文：卢程，不知道他的祖先是什么人。
English: Lu Cheng doesn't know who his ancestors are.

古文：唐昭宗时，程举进士，为盐铁出使巡官。
现代文：唐昭宗时，卢程考中进士，任盐铁出使巡官。
English: At the time of Tang Zhaozong, Lu Cheng entered the middle school examination, and was appointed the inspector of the dispatch of salt and iron.

古文：唐亡，避乱燕、赵，变服为道士，游诸侯间。
现代文：唐灭亡后，在燕、赵一带逃难，改变服饰做了道士，在诸侯之间游荡。
English: After the fall of the Tang Dynasty, he fled to Yan and Zhao regions, changed his dress to become a Taoist, and wandered among the princes.

古文：豆卢革为王处直判官，卢汝弼为河东节度副使，二人皆故唐时名族，与程门地相等，因共荐之以为河东节度推官。
现代文：豆卢革任王处直的判官，卢汝弼任河东节度副使，二人都是过去唐的名门望族，和卢程的门第相当，因而一起推荐他任河东节度推官。
English: Zhu Ruge was appointed as the judge of Wang Shanzhi, and Lu Ruchen was appointed as the deputy envoy of the Hedong Festival. Both of them were famous families of the Tang Dynasty in the past, and they were of the same class as Lu Cheng, so they recommended him to be appointed as the deputy of the Hedong Festival.

古文：庄宗尝召程草文书，程辞不能。
现代文：唐庄宗曾召卢程起草文书，卢程推辞说不会写。
English: Tang Zhuangzong once summoned Lu Cheng to draft a document, but Lu Cheng refused to write it.

古文：其后战胡柳，掌书记王诚殁于阵，庄宗还军太原，置酒谓监军张承业曰： 吾以卮酒辟一书记于坐。 
现代文：后来在胡柳打仗，掌书记王缄职死沙场，唐庄宗回师驻扎在太原，摆酒宴对监军张承业说： 我用一杯酒在酒席上召一个书记。 
English: Later, when the war was fought in Huliu, the secretary Wang Xizhong died in the battlefield. Tangzhuang Zonghu's division was stationed in Taiyuan. At a banquet, he said to the army supervisor Zhang Chengye: I used a glass of wine to summon a secretary at the banquet.

古文：因举卮属巡官冯道。
现代文：于是举起酒杯向巡官冯道祝酒。
English: He then raised his glass to make a toast to Inspector Feng Dao.

古文：程位在道上，以尝辞不能，故不用，而迁程支使。
现代文：卢程的官位在冯道之上，因为曾经推辞说不会写，因此没有任用他，而改任卢程为支使。
English: Lu Cheng's official rank was higher than Feng Dao's, because he had once said that he could not write, so he was not appointed, and Lu Cheng was reappointed as the supporting envoy.

古文：程大恨曰： 用人不以门阀而先田舍兒邪！ 
现代文：卢程十分遣憾地说： 用人不依照门第高低而先用乡巴佬吗！ 
English: Lu Cheng said regretfully, "If you don't employ people according to their social class, why not employ a redneck first?"

古文：庄宗已即位，议择宰相，而卢汝弼、苏循已死，次节度判官卢质当拜，而质不乐行事，乃言豆卢革与程皆故唐时名族，可以为相，庄宗以程为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：唐庄宗登位后，拟议选任宰相，而卢汝弼、苏循已经死了，依次节度判官卢质应当拜为宰相，而卢质不喜欢承担事务，于是有人说豆卢革和卢程都是过去唐时的名门望族，可以任为宰相，唐庄宗任卢程为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: After Tangzhuangzong ascended the throne, it was proposed that he should be elected as prime minister, but Lu Ruqi and Su Cun were already dead, and Lu Qian, the next judge of the imperial court, should be appointed as prime minister, but Lu Qian did not like to take on affairs. Therefore, some people said that Zhu Ruge and Lu Cheng were both famous families in the past Tang Dynasty and could be appointed as prime minister, and Tangzhuangzhuangzhuan Lu Cheng was the attendant of Chinese books and the same rank.

古文：是时，朝廷新造，百度未备，程、革拜命之日，肩舆导从，喧呼道中。
现代文：这时，朝廷刚刚建立，百废待兴，卢程、豆卢革接受任命那天，轿子引路随行，在路上喧板。
English: At this time, the imperial court had just been established and was in need of revitalization. On the day that Lu Cheng and Dou Luge accepted the appointment, the palanquin led the way and was noisy on the road.

古文：庄宗闻其声以问左右，对曰： 宰相檐子入门。 
现代文：唐庄宗听到声音后询问手下人，回答说： 宰相的轿子进宫门了。 
English: After hearing the sound, Tang Zhuangzong questioned his subordinates and replied: "The prime minister's palanquin has entered the palace gate.

古文：庄宗登楼视之，笑曰： 所谓似是而非者也。 
现代文：唐庄宗登上楼看，笑着说： 这就是人们所说的似是而非。 
English: Tang Zhuozong went upstairs to have a look and said with a smile: "This is what people call a paradox.

古文：程奉皇太后册，自魏至太原，上下山险，所至州县，驱役丁夫，官吏迎拜，程坐肩舆自若，少忤其意，必加笞辱。
现代文：卢程带着皇太后的封册，从魏州到太原，上下于高山险地，所到州县，驱使壮丁为他们做事，官吏们迎候拜见，卢程坐在轿子上神态自若，稍稍不顺他的意，一定要加以鞭打羞辱。
English: Lu Cheng took the Queen's Envelope with him from Weizhou to Taiyuan, up and down in the high mountain danger zone, so he went to the prefectures and counties to drive the young men to do things for them. The officials were waiting to see him. Lu Cheng sat on the sedan chair with a self-assured attitude. If he was a little dissatisfied, he must be whipped and humiliated.

古文：人有假驴夫于程者，程帖兴唐府给之，府吏启无例，程怒笞吏背。
现代文：有人向卢程借驴夫，卢程下柬帖令兴唐府派驴夫，兴唐府的官吏说没有先例，卢程发怒鞭打官吏的背。
English: Some people borrowed donkeys from Lu Cheng. Lu Cheng then ordered the Xingtang government to send donkeys. The officials of the Xingtang government said that there was no precedent. Lu Cheng got angry and whipped the officials' backs.

古文：少尹任圜，庄宗姊婿也，诣程诉其不可。
现代文：少尹任圜，是唐庄宗的姐夫，到卢程那里说不能这样。
English: Young Yin Renzhong, the brother-in-law of Tang Zhuozong, went to Lu Cheng and told him that this was unacceptable.

古文：程戴华阳巾，衣鹤氅，据几决事，视圜骂曰： 尔何虫豸，恃妇家力也！
现代文：卢程头戴华阳巾，穿着鹤羽大衣，靠着几案处理辜情，盯着任圜骂道： 你是什么东西，依仗老婆家的势力！
English: Lu Cheng, wearing a Chinese silk scarf on his head and a crane feather coat, relied on several cases to deal with the situation, stared at Ren Yao and scolded: What are you, relying on the power of the old woman's family!

古文：宰相取给州县，何为不可！ 
现代文：宰相向州县取东西，有什么不行！ 
English: The prime minister can't take things from prefectures and counties!

古文：圜不对而去，夜驰至博州见庄宗。
现代文：任圜没有答话离去，晚上飞马赶到博州进见唐庄宗。
English: Ren Yao left without a reply. In the evening, Fei Ma rushed to Boshou to see Tang Zhuozong.

古文：庄宗大怒，谓郭崇韬曰： 朕误相此痴物，敢辱予九卿！ 
现代文：唐庄宗大怒，对郭崇韬说： 我误把这个傻东西当成宰相，怎敢羞辱我的九卿！ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong was furious and said to Guo Chongyi: "I mistakenly took this stupid thing as the prime minister, how dare you humiliate my nine nobles!"

古文：趣令自尽，崇韬亦欲杀之，赖卢质力解之，乃罢为右庶子。
现代文：迫令卢程自杀，郭崇韬也想杀掉他，幸亏卢质奋力解救，于是罢为右庶子。
English: Lu Cheng was forced to commit suicide, Guo Chongyi also wanted to kill him, but luckily Lu Qian fought hard to save him, so he became the right son.

古文：庄宗入洛，程于路坠马，中风卒，赠礼部尚书。
现代文：唐庄宗进入洛阳，卢程在路上从马上摔下来，中风而死，赠礼部尚书。
English: Tang Zhuangzong entered Luoyang, Lu Cheng fell off his horse on the way, died of a stroke, and presented the gift department with a book.

古文：○任圜任圜，京兆三原人也。
现代文：任圜，京兆三原人。
English: Ren Zheng, a native of Beijing, Zhao and San Yuan.

古文：为人明敏，善谈辩，见者爱其容止，及闻其论议纵横，益皆悚动。
现代文：为人聪明机敏，能言菩辩，见过他的人喜欢他的容貌举止，到听到他纵横自如地谈论问题后，都更加受到震动。
English: Smart, quick-witted and articulate, those who met him liked his appearance and demeanor, and were even more impressed when they heard him speak freely about issues.

古文：李嗣昭节度昭义，辟圜观察支使。
现代文：李嗣昭任昭义节度使，征召任圜任观察支使。
English: Li Zhi Zhao was appointed as the special envoy of the Shouyi Festival, and was called up to serve as the observer of the festival.

古文：梁兵筑夹城围潞州，逾年而晋王薨，晋兵救潞者皆解去。
现代文：梁军修筑夹城包围潞州，过了一年晋王死去，营救潞州的晋兵都散去。
English: Liang's army besieged Luzhou with the construction of the sandwich city. After a year, Jin Wang died, and the Jin soldiers who rescued Luzhou dispersed.

古文：嗣昭危甚，问圜去就之计，圜劝嗣昭坚守以待，不可有二心。
现代文：李嗣昭很危急，向任圜询问是去还是留，任圜劝说李嗣昭坚守等待，不能有二心。
English: Li Shizhao was in a critical condition. He asked Ren Zheng whether he should go or stay. Ren Zheng persuaded Li Shizhao to stick to waiting. There could be no second thoughts.

古文：已而庄宗攻破梁夹城，闻圜为嗣昭画守计，甚嘉之，由是益知名。
现代文：不久唐庄宗攻破梁的夹城，听说任圜焉李嗣昭策划坚守的计谋，十分赞赏他，从此更加出名。
English: Soon after, Tangzhuangzong attacked the city between the beams, and heard that Ren Xuan and Li Shizhao had planned a strategy to hold out. He highly appreciated him and became even more famous.

古文：其后嗣昭与庄宗有隙，圜数奉使往来，辨释谗构，嗣昭卒免于祸，圜之力也。
现代文：后来李嗣昭和唐庄宗发生矛盾，任圜多次奉命在他们之间来往，分辩消除谗言陷害，李嗣昭最终免受灾祸，是任圜的功劳。
English: Later, conflicts arose between Li Shih and Showa Tangzhuangzong, and Ren Hui was ordered to go back and forth between them many times, to resolve disputes and eliminate slander and frame-ups. It is to Ren Hui's credit that Li Shih Zhao was ultimately spared from disaster.

古文：嗣昭从庄宗战胡柳，击败梁兵，圜颇有功，庄宗劳之曰： 儒士亦破体邪？
现代文：李嗣昭跟随唐庄宗在胡柳打仗，击败梁军，任圜功劳不小，唐庄宗慰劳他说： 儒生也伤身体吗？
English: Li Shizhao followed Tangzhuangzong to fight in Huliu, defeating Liang's army. Ren Zheng's contribution was not small. Tangzhuangzong consoled him, saying: "Do Confucians also hurt their bodies?

古文：仁者之勇，何其壮也！ 
现代文：仁人的勇敢，多么壮烈啊！ 
English: The bravery of the benevolent, how magnificent!

古文：张文礼弑王镕，庄宗遣嗣昭讨之。
现代文：张文礼杀死王镕，唐庄宗派李嗣昭讨伐他。
English: Zhang Wenli killed Wang Yao, and the Tangzhuang sectarian Li Shizhao fought against him.

古文：嗣昭战殁，圜代将其军，号令严肃。
现代文：李嗣昭阵亡，任圜代替他统率军队，号令严明。
English: Li Shizhao was killed in battle, and Ren Rong led the army in his place, issuing strict orders.

古文：既而文礼子处球等闭城坚守，不可下，圜数以祸福谕镇人，镇人信之。
现代文：不久张文礼的儿子张处球等关闭城门坚守，不能攻克，任圜多次以祸福利害晓谕镇州人，镇州人相信了他。
English: Soon, Zhang Wenli's son Zhang Duqiu and others closed the city gate and insisted that it could not be conquered. Ren Yu repeatedly told the people of Zhenzhou about the benefits and harms, and the people of Zhenzhou believed him.

古文：圜尝拥兵至城下，处球登城呼圜曰： 城中兵食俱尽，而久抗王师，若泥首自归，惧无以塞责，幸公见哀，指其生路。 
现代文：任圜曾率兵到城下，张处球登上城楼呼叫任圜说： 城中的军队粮食都快完了，而又抵抗朝廷军队很久，如果自己在头上涂泥归顺朝廷，又怕无法承担责任，希望你哀怜我们，为我们指明活路。 
English: Ren Zheng once led his soldiers to the foot of the city, and Zhang Deqiu climbed to the top of the city tower to call Ren Zheng and said: The army in the city is almost out of food, but it has resisted the imperial army for a long time. If you smear mud on your head and surrender to the imperial court, and you are afraid that you cannot bear the responsibility, I hope you will pity us and show us a way out.

古文：圜告之曰： 以子先人，固难容贷，然罚不及嗣，子可从轻。
现代文：任圜告诉他说： 拿你的父亲来说，固然难以宽恕，但罪罚不殃及后代，你可从轻处理。
English: Ren Zheng told him: For your father, although it is difficult to forgive, but the crime does not affect future generations, you can treat it lightly.

古文：其如拒守经年，伤吾大将，一朝困竭，方布款诚，以此计之，子亦难免。
现代文：至于你拒守一年多，杀伤我的大将，一时窘困无路，纔表露诚意，就此看来，你也难免受到惩罚。
English: As for you, you have refused to defend yourself for more than a year, you are the general who has been killing and wounding me, you have no way out when you are in a predicament, and you show sincerity, from this point of view, you will inevitably be punished.

古文：然坐而待毙，曷若伏而俟命？ 
现代文：但坐而待毙，哪里比得上低头伏罪？ 
English: But what's the penalty for sitting on your hands?

古文：处球流涕曰： 公言是也！ 
现代文：张处球哭泣着说： 你的话对啊！ 
English: Zhang Deqiu cried and said: Your words are right!

古文：乃遣子送状乞降，人皆称圜其言不欺。
现代文：于是派遣儿子送状子求降，人们都称赞任圜的话不骗人。
English: As a result, he sent his son to ask for a demotion, and people praised Ren Zheng's words.

古文：既而佗将攻破镇州，处球虽见杀，而镇之吏民以尝乞降，故得保其家族者甚众。
现代文：不久别的将领攻破镇州，张处球虽然被杀，但镇州的官吏百姓因曾求降，因此得以保全家族的人很多。
English: Soon, other generals invaded Zhenzhou. Although Zhang Duqiu was killed, many officials and people in Zhenzhou were able to save their families because they had asked for surrender.

古文：其后以镇州为北京，拜圜工部尚书，兼真定尹、北京副留守知留守事，为政有惠爱。
现代文：后来以镇州为北京，拜任圜为工部尚书，兼真定尹、北京副留守代理留守事，当政有惠爱之心。
English: Later, he took Zhenzhou as Beijing, Bai Renzhong as the leader of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, and Jin Dingyin as the deputy representative in Beijing. He had a benevolent heart when he was in power.

古文：明年，郭崇韬兼领成德军节度使，改圜行军司马，仍知真定府事。
现代文：第二年，郭崇韬兼领成德军节度使，改任圜任行军司马，仍知真定府事。
English: In the second year, Guo Chongzhen also led the German army to become the festival envoy, and was appointed as the marching steward. He still knew the true situation of the government.

古文：圜与崇韬素相善，又为其司马，崇韬因以镇州事托之，而圜多所违异。
现代文：任圜和郭崇韬素来相处裉好，又任他的行军司马，郭崇韬因而把镇州的事情交托给他，而任圜做事多有违背郭崇韬的地方。
English: Ren Rong and Guo Chongxuan had always gotten along well, and Guo Chongxuan entrusted him with the affairs of the township, while Ren Rong's work often violated Guo Chongxuan.

古文：初，圜推官张彭为人倾险贪黩，圜不能察，信任之，多为其所卖。
现代文：当初，任圜的推官张彭为人阴险贪婪，任圜役能觉察，对他很信任，常常被他出卖。
English: At first, Zhang Peng, Ren Yao's superior officer, was an insidious and greedy person. Ren Yao's subordinates were aware of this, trusted him, and were often betrayed by him.

古文：及崇韬领镇，彭为圜谋隐其公廨钱。
现代文：到郭崇韬统管镇州时，张彭为任圜出谋隐瞒官署的钱财。
English: When Guo Chongyi was in charge of Zhenzhou, Zhang Peng conspired to conceal the money and assets of the government office.

古文：庄宗遣宦者选故赵王时宫人百余，有许氏者尤有色，彭赂守者匿之。
现代文：唐庄宗派宦官挑选过去趟王时的官女一百多人，其中有一个姓许的特别有姿色，张彭贿赂看管宫女的人把她藏起来。
English: The eunuchs of the Tangzhuang sect selected more than a hundred courtesans from the past imperial era. One of them, surnamed Xu, was particularly beautiful. Zhang Peng bribed the person who was looking after her to hide her.

古文：后事觉，召彭诣京师，将罪之，彭惧，悉以前所隐公钱簿书献崇韬，崇韬深德彭，不杀，由是与圜有隙。
现代文：后来事情败露，召张彭到京师，准备将他治罪，张彭害怕，把以前隐藏官府钱财的账本全部献给郭崇韬，郭崇韬很感谢张彭，没有杀他，因此和任圜产生矛盾。
English: Later, the affair was exposed. Zhang Peng was summoned to Beijing to prepare for his punishment. Zhang Peng was afraid and gave Guo Chongyao all the ledgers of the government's hidden money. Guo Chongyao was very grateful to Zhang Peng for not killing him, which led to a conflict with Ren Yao.

古文：同光三年，圜罢司马，守工部尚书。
现代文：同光三年，任圜罢行军司马任，暂时署理工部尚书。
English: In the same year, Ren Rong marched against the military secretary Ma Ren and temporarily dispatched Shang Shu from the Ministry of Science and Technology.

古文：魏王继岌暨崇韬伐蜀，惧圜攻己于后，乃辟圜参魏王军事。
现代文：魏王李继岌和郭崇韬讨伐蜀，怕任圜在背后攻击自己，于是召任圜参与魏王军事。
English: The Wei king Li Jizhe and Guo Chongyi fought against Shu, fearing that Ren Qi would attack him behind his back, so he called Ren Qi to participate in the military of the Wei king.

古文：蜀灭，表圜黔南节度使，圜恳辞不就。
现代文：蜀被消灭后，表奏任圜为黔南节度使，任圜恳切推辞不赴任。
English: After Shu was annihilated, Ren Rong was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Song Dynasty. Ren Rong earnestly declined to take up the post.

古文：继岌杀崇韬，以圜代将其军而旋。
现代文：李继岌杀死郭崇韬，让任圜代替统率他的军队凯旋。
English: Li Ji precariously killed Guo Chongyao and let Renyao lead his army to victory instead.

古文：康延孝反，继岌遣圜将三千人，会董璋、孟知祥等兵，击败延孝于汉州，而魏王先至渭南，自杀，圜悉将其军以东。
现代文：康延孝反叛，李继岌派任圜率三千人，会合董璋、孟知祥等人的军队，在漠州打败康延孝，而魏王先到渭南，自杀身亡，任圜统率他的全部军队向东去。
English: Kang Yanxiao rebelled, Li Jide sent Ren Zheng with three thousand people to join the army led by Dong Zheng, Meng Zhixiang and others to defeat Kang Yanxiao in Muzhou, while Wei Wang first went to southern Anhui, committed suicide and died, and Ren Zheng led his entire army to the east.

古文：明宗嘉其功，拜圜同中书门下平章事，兼判三司。
现代文：唐明宗嘉奖他的功劳，拜任圜为同中书门下平章事，兼判三司。
English: Tang Mingzong commended him for his service, and Bai Renzhong was the first to be awarded a peerage for his services to the school, and was also awarded the title of Third Division.

古文：是时，明宗新诛孔谦，圜选辟才俊，抑绝侥幸，公私给足，天下便之。
现代文：这时，唐明宗刚刚杀掉孔谦，任圜召选有才能的人，压制投机取巧的人，公私富足，天下安逋。
English: At this time, Tang Mingzong had just killed Kong Qian, and was calling for the selection of talented people, the suppression of opportunistic people, public and private prosperity, and world peace.

古文：是秋，韦说、豆卢革罢相，圜与安重诲、郑珏、孔循议择当为相者，圜意属李琪，而珏、循雅不欲琪为相，谓重诲曰： 李琪非无文艺，但不廉耳！
现代文：这年秋，韦说、豆卢革罢宰相任，任圜和安重诲、郑珏、孔循等人拟议选择适合做宰相的人，任圜的意见是让李琪做宰相，而郑珏、孔循素来不想李琪做宰相，对安重诲说： 李琪不是没有文臣的才艺，只是不廉洁罢了！
English: In the autumn of this year, Wei said, Zhu Ruge was appointed as the prime minister, and Ren Qi and An Chongyun, Zheng Qi and Kong Cun, and others proposed to choose the person suitable for the prime minister. Ren Qi's opinion was to let Li Qi be the prime minister, while Zheng Qi and Kong Cun did not want Li Qi to be the prime minister, and said to An Chongyun: Li Qi is not without talent as a scholar, but he is not honest!

古文：宰相，端方有器度者足以为之，太常卿崔协可也。 
现代文：宰相，正直而有器度的人纔足以胜任，太常卿崔协可以。 
English: The Prime Minister, an honest and competent person, is competent enough, and the First Secretary of the Communist Party of China, Cui Xie, can.

古文：重诲以为然。
现代文：安重诲认为对。
English: I think that's right.

古文：佗日，明宗问谁可相者，重诲即以协对。
现代文：有一天，唐明宗询问谁能担任宰相，安重诲就以崔协回答。
English: One day, Tang Mingzong asked who could serve as prime minister, and An Chongzheng replied with Cui Xie.

古文：圜前争曰： 重诲未谙朝廷人物，为人所卖。
现代文：任圜上前争执说： 安重诲不了解朝廷中的人，被人出卖了。
English: Ren Rong stepped forward to argue: An Rong Yao did not understand the people in the imperial court and was betrayed by someone.

古文：天下皆知崔协不识文字，而虚有仪表，号为 没字碑 。
现代文：天下人都知道崔协不识字，而空有一副好仪表，号称 没宇碑 。
English: People all over the world know that Cui Xie is illiterate, but the sky has a good instrument, known as the world monument.

古文：臣以陛下误加采擢，无功幸进，此不知书，以臣一人取笑足矣，相位有几，岂容更益笑端？ 
现代文：我因陛下误加提拔，没有功劳侥幸升官，像我这个不知书达理的人，拿我一个人取笑就够了，宰相的位置有几个，难道能够容忍再增加笑柄吗？ 
English: Because of His Majesty's mistaken promotion, I was promoted without merit. As someone who doesn't know how to read and write, it's enough to make fun of me alone. There are several positions of prime minister. Can we tolerate any more ridicule?

古文：明宗曰： 宰相重位，卿等更自详审。
现代文：唐明宗说： 宰相这个要职，你们再认真考虑。
English: Tang Mingzong said: Prime Minister is an important post, you should seriously consider it.

古文：然吾在籓时，识易州刺史韦肃，世言肃名家子，且待我甚厚，置之此位可乎？
现代文：但我在藩镇时，认识易州刺史章肃，人们说韦肃出身名门，况且待我很好，安在这个职位行吗？
English: But when I was in Hanzhong, I knew Yizhou chief historian Zhang Su. People said that Wei Su was from a famous family, and moreover, he treated me very well. Is it okay for An to be in this position?

古文：肃或未可，则冯书记先朝判官，称为长者，可以相矣！ 
现代文：或许韦肃不行，那么冯书记是前朝的判官，被人称为长者，可以做宰相了！ 
English: Perhaps Wei Su can't, then Secretary Feng is the judge of the former dynasty, known as the elder, and can be the prime minister!

古文：冯书记者，道也。
现代文：冯书记，就是冯道。
English: Secretary Feng, that is Feng Dao.

古文：议未决，重诲等退休于中兴殿廓下，孔循不揖，拂衣而去，行且骂曰： 天下事一则任圜，二则任圜，圜乃何人！ 
现代文：议论没有结果，安重诲等人退下在中兴殿廊下休息，孔循不作揖，拂衣而去，边走边骂说： 天下大事一是任圜说了算，二还是任圜说了算，任圜究竟是什么人！ 
English: The discussion was fruitless, and An Chongyun and the others retreated to rest under the corridor of the ZTE Palace. Confucius did not make a fuss, whisked away his clothes, and scolded as he walked: The world's major events are either decided by Ren Zheng or decided by Ren Zheng. Who is Ren Zheng?

古文：圜谓重诲曰： 李琪才艺，可兼时辈百人，而谗夫巧沮，忌害其能，若舍琪而相协，如弃苏合之丸而取蜣良之转也！ 
现代文：任圜对安重诲说： 李琪的才艺，可以胜过同辈一百人，而说坏话的人巧言败坏他的名声，妒忌毁害他的才能，如果不用李琪而任崔协焉相，那就像舍弃苏合丸而取蜣螂丸了。 
English: Ren Zheng said to An Chongyuan: Li Qi's talent can outperform a hundred of his peers, and those who speak ill of him will ruin his reputation with cunning words, and jealousy will destroy his talent. If you don't use Li Qi and use Cui Xieyuan, it will be like giving up Suaiming and taking cockroach pills.

古文：重诲笑而止。
现代文：安重诲发笑而又忍住了。
English: Yasuchika laughed but held back.

古文：然重诲终以循言为信，居月余，协与冯道皆拜相。
现代文：但安重诲最终认为孔循的话可信，过了一个多月，崔协和冯道都被拜为宰相。
English: However, An Chongyuan finally thought that Kong Cui's words were credible. After more than a month, Cui Xie and Feng Dao were both worshiped as prime ministers.

古文：协在相位数年，人多嗤其所为，然圜与重诲交恶自协始。
现代文：崔协任相多年，人们常常讥笑他的所作所为，而任圜和安重诲从崔协的事开始就相互仇视。
English: Cui Xie has been in power for many years, and people often ridicule what he has done, while Ren Xuan and An Chong Yu have been hostile to each other since the Cui Xie affair.

古文：故事，使臣出四方，皆自户部给券，重诲奏请自内出，圜以故事争之，不能得，遂与重诲辨于帝前，圜声色俱厉。
现代文：过去使臣出使四方，都由户部供给凭信，安重诲上奏请求由宫中发凭信，任圜用旧例和他争执，没有结果，于是和安重诲在皇帝面前争论，任圜声色俱厉。
English: In the past, envoys sent to the four quarters were all provided with credentials by the Household Department, and requests from An Chong Yao were issued with credentials from the palace. Ren Ren used the old example to argue with him, but to no avail. Therefore, he and An Chong Yao argued in front of the emperor, and Ren Ren's voice became increasingly strident.

古文：明宗罢朝，后宫嫔御迎前问曰： 与重诲论者谁？ 
现代文：唐明宗罢朝后，后宫嫔妃上前问道： 和安重诲争执的是谁？ 
English: After Tang Mingzong's abdication, the harem concubine came forward to ask: Who was arguing with An Chongyu?

古文：明宗曰： 宰相也。 
现代文：唐明宗回答说： 是宰相。 
English: Tang Mingzong replied, "He is the prime minister."

古文：宫人奏曰： 妾在长安，见宰相奏事，未尝如此，盖轻大家耳！ 
现代文：宫女上奏说： 我在长安时，看见宰相奏请事情，不曾像他那样，大概是轻视你皇帝罢了！ 
English: The lady-in-waiting said, "When I was in Chang'an, I saw the prime minister playing games, and I have never been like him. He probably just despised your emperor!"

古文：明宗由是不悦，而使臣给券卒自内出，圜益愤沮。
现代文：唐明宗因此不高兴，而发给使臣的凭信最终还是由宫中发出，任圜更加气愤沮丧。
English: Tang Mingzong was not happy about this, and the credential issued to the envoy was eventually issued by the palace. Ren Yu was even more angry and frustrated.

古文：重诲尝过圜，圜出妓，善歌而有色，重诲欲之，圜不与，由是二人益相恶。
现代文：安重诲曾拜访任圜，任圜让他的家妓出来，擅长唱歌而又有姿色，安重诲想要，任圜不给，因此二人更加相互仇视。
English: An Chong Yu had visited Ren Hong, Ren Hong let his house prostitute come out, good at singing and good-looking, An Chong Yu wanted, Ren Hong would not give, so the two were more hostile to each other.

古文：而圜遽求罢职，乃罢为太子少保。
现代文：任圜立即请求罢官，因而罢为太子少保。
English: He immediately requested to be removed from his post, and thus became the Crown Prince's Junior Bodyguard.

古文：圜不自安，因请致仕，退居于磁州。
现代文：任圜觉得不能保全自己，于是请求辞官，退居在磁州。
English: Ren Yu felt that he could not protect himself, so he asked to resign from his post and retired to Magizhou.

古文：硃守殷反于汴州，重诲诬圜与守殷连谋，遣人矫制杀之。
现代文：朱守殷在汴州反叛，安重诲诬告任圜和朱守殷合谋，派人伪造诏书杀他。
English: Zhu Shouyin rebelled in Zhangzhou, An Chongzhen falsely accused Ren Yu of conspiring with Zhu Shouyin, and sent someone to forge an edict to kill him.

古文：圜受命怡然，聚族酣饮而死。
现代文：任圜接到诏命后很平静，招聚族人畅饮后死去。
English: After receiving the imperial edict, Ren Rong was very calm. He gathered the tribesmen for a good drink and then died.

古文：明宗知而不问，为下诏，坐圜与守殷通书而言涉怨望。
现代文：唐明宗知道后不加追问，为此下诏书：因任圜和朱守殷通信有怨恨责备的话而治罪。
English: After learning of this, Emperor Mingzong of Tang did not pursue the matter, and issued the following edict: He was to be punished for the words of resentment and reproach in the correspondence between Ren Zheng and Zhu Shouyin.

古文：愍帝即位，赠圜太傅。
现代文：唐愍帝即位，赠任圜太傅。
English: Emperor Tang Xuan ascended to the throne and bestowed the title of Grand Master on him.

古文：○赵凤赵凤，幽州人也，少以儒学知名。
现代文：趟凤，幽州人，年轻时以儒学出名。
English: Wu Feng, from Yuzhou, was famous for his Confucianism when he was young.

古文：燕王刘守光时，悉黥燕人以为兵，凤惧，因髡为僧，依燕王弟守奇自匿。
现代文：燕王刘守光时，在燕人脸上刻字涂墨作记号让他们当兵，趟凤畏惧，于是剃去头发做和尚，依附燕王的弟弟刘守奇藏起来。
English: When the king of the swallows, Liu Shouguang, engraved and painted ink on the faces of the swallows to mark them as soldiers, the phoenix was afraid, so he shaved off his hair to become a monk and hid himself with Liu Shouqi, the brother of the king of the swallows.

古文：守奇奔梁，梁以守奇为博州刺史，凤为其判官。
现代文：刘守奇逃奔梁，梁任刘守奇为博州刺史，赵凤做他的判官。
English: Liu Shouqi fled to Liang, Liang appointed Liu Shouqi to write the history of Bozhou, and Zhao Feng became his judge.

古文：守奇卒，凤去为郓州节度判官。
现代文：刘守奇死后，赵凤离开任郓州节度判官。
English: After the death of Liu Shouqi, Zhao Feng left his post as judge of the Zhangzhou Festival.

古文：晋取郓州，庄宗闻凤名，得之喜，以为扈銮学士。
现代文：晋攻取郓州，唐庄宗听说遇赵凤的名声，得到他很高兴，任为扈銮学士。
English: When Jin conquered Bozhou, Tang Zhuangzong heard of Zhao Feng's fame. He was very happy to get it, and he was appointed as Bozhong.

古文：庄宗即位，拜凤中书舍人、翰林学士。
现代文：唐庄宗即位。拜赵凤为中书舍人、翰林学士。
English: Tang Zhuangzong ascended to the throne. Bai Zhao Feng became a scholar of Chinese classics and a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：庄宗及刘皇后幸河南尹张全义第，酒酣，命皇后拜全义为父。
现代文：唐庄宗和刘皇后到河南尹张全义家，酒酣耳热，命皇后拜张全义为父亲。
English: Tang Zhuangzong and Empress Liu went to the home of Yin Zhang Quanyi in Henan Province. They drank a lot of wine, and the Empress asked Zhang Quanyi to be her father.

古文：明日，遣宦者命学士作笺上全义，以父事之，凤上书极言其不可。
现代文：第二天，派宦官让学士写笺给张全义，像对父亲般对待他，赵凤上书极力主张不能这样。
English: The next day, an eunuch was sent to ask the scholar to write a letter to Zhang Quanyi, treating him like a father. Zhao Feng insisted in the letter that this should not be done.

古文：全义养子郝继孙犯法死，宦官、伶人冀其赀财，固请籍没，凤又上书言： 继孙为全义养子，不宜有别籍之财，而于法不至籍没，刑人利财，不可以示天下。 
现代文：张全义的养子郝继孙犯法当死，宦官、伶人希望得到他的钱财，坚决请求登记没收，赵凤又上书说： 郝继孙是张全义的养子，不应有另外登记在册的财产，就法律上看他的罪还不到应登记没收财产的程度，执法的人贪财，不能够给天下作榜样。 
English: Zhang Quanyi's adopted son and step-grandson committed crimes and deserved to die. The eunuchs and courtiers hoped to get his money and firmly requested registration and confiscation. Zhao Feng also wrote: Zhang Quanyi's adopted son and step-grandson should not have any other registered property. According to the law, his crime was not serious enough to register and confiscate his property. The law enforcers were greedy and could not set an example for the world.

古文：是时，皇后及群小用事，凤言皆不见纳。
现代文：这时，皇后和众多小人当权，赵凤的话都没有被采纳。
English: At this time, the empress and many villains were in power, and Zhao Feng's words were not accepted.

古文：明宗武君，不通文字，四方章奏，常使安重诲读之。
现代文：唐明宗是个武臣出身的君主，不熟悉文字，各地的章奏，常常让安重诲读给他听。
English: Tang Mingzong was a monarch who was born as a military officer. He was not familiar with the written language, nor with the chansons of various regions, so he often had An Chongxiao read to him.

古文：重诲亦不知书，奏读多不称旨。
现代文：安重诲也是个不读书的人，读章奏常常不合皇帝的意旨。
English: An Chongyun was also a man who did not read books, and reading chapter and verse was often not in accordance with the emperor's wishes.

古文：孔循教重诲求儒者置之左右，而两人皆不知唐故事，于是置端明殿学士，以冯道及凤为之。
现代文：孔循让安重诲找儒生带在身边，但他们两人都不知道唐的旧例，于是设置端明殿学士，让冯道和赵凤担任。
English: Confucius allowed An Chongyuan to find a Confucian scholar to accompany him, but both of them did not know the old case of Tang, so he set up a Duanmingden scholar and let Feng Dao and Zhao Feng serve.

古文：凤好直言而性刚强，素与任圜善，自圜为相，颇荐进之。
现代文：赵凤喜欢说直话而性格刚强，素来和任圜相处很好，自从任圜任宰相后，多次推荐提拔他。
English: Zhao Feng likes to speak frankly and has a strong personality. He has always gotten along well with Ren Hui. Since Ren Hui was appointed prime minister, he has recommended and promoted him many times.

古文：初，端明殿学士班在翰林学士下，而结衔又在官下。
现代文：当初，端明殿学士班位在翰林学士之下，而署衔又署在官名下。
English: At the beginning, the academic class of Duanmingden was under the academic class of Hanlin, and the official title was under the official name.

古文：明年，凤迁礼部侍郎，因讽圜升学士于官上，又诏班在翰林学士上。
现代文：第二年，赵凤升任礼部侍郎，于是有人暗示任圜把学士署衔提升到官名上，又下诏令班位在翰林学士之上。
English: In the second year, Zhao Feng was promoted to the position of the attendant of the Ceremonial Department. Therefore, someone suggested that Ren Zheng elevate the title of the bachelor to the official title, and also issued a decree that the class rank was above the Hanlin bachelor.

古文：圜为重诲所杀，而诬以谋反。
现代文：任圜被安重诲杀害，而诬告他谋反。
English: He was killed by An Chongzhao, who falsely accused him of plotting a rebellion.

古文：是时，重诲方用事，虽明宗不能诘也，凤独号哭呼重诲曰： 任圜天下义士，岂肯谋反！
现代文：适时，安重诲正当权，即使唐明宗也不能责问他，惟独赵凤大哭呼叫安重诲说： 任圜是天下的义士，难道会谋反！
English: When the time was right, An Chong Ch'uan asserted his legitimate rights. Even Tang Mingzong could not question him, but Zhao Feng cried loudly and called out to An Chong Ch'uan, saying, "Ren Ch'uan is the most righteous man in the world, how could he plot a rebellion!

古文：而公杀之，何以示天下？ 
现代文：而你杀了他，拿什么向天下人解释？ 
English: And you killed him. How do you explain that to the world?

古文：重诲惭不能对。
现代文：安重诲羞愧不能回答。
English: Shame I can't answer.

古文：术士周玄豹以相法言人事多中，庄宗尤信重之，以为北京巡官。
现代文：巫师周玄豹用相法预言人间的事很多都说准了，唐庄宗特别相信他，任他为北京巡官。
English: The sorcerer Zhou Xuanbao used the phase method to predict a lot of things in the human world. Tang Zhuozong especially believed in him and appointed him as the Beijing inspector.

古文：明宗为内衙指挥使，重诲欲试玄豹，乃使佗人与明宗易服，而坐明宗于下坐，召玄豹相之，玄豹曰： 内衙，贵将也，此不足当之。 
现代文：唐明宗任内衙指挥使时，安重诲想试探一下周玄豹，于是让另一个人和唐明宗换了衣服穿，而让唐明宗坐在下座，召周玄豹来看相，周玄豹说： 内衙，是重要的将领，这个人不能够担当。 
English: When Tang Mingzong was the commanding officer of the Inner Palace, An Chongyuan wanted to test Zhou Xuanpao, so he asked another person to change clothes with Tang Mingzong, and let Tang Mingzong sit down and call Zhou Xuanpao to see him. Zhou Xuanpao said: The Inner Palace is an important general, this person cannot be in charge.

古文：乃指明宗于下坐曰： 此是也！ 
现代文：于是指着在下座的唐明宗说： 这个人可以！ 
English: So he pointed to Tang Mingzong, who was in the next seat, and said, "This man can dance!"

古文：因为明宗言其后贵不可言。
现代文：于是为唐明宗说，他以后将显贵至极。
English: As a result, Tang Mingzong said that he would be extremely prominent in the future.

古文：明宗即位，思玄豹以为神，将召至京师，凤谏曰： 好恶，上所慎也。
现代文：唐明宗即位后，想起周玄豹觉得他很神奇，准备召他到京师，赵凤劝阻说： 喜好和憎恶是皇上应当谨慎的。
English: After Tang Mingzong's accession to the throne, Zhou Xuanbao thought that Zhou Xuanbao thought he was very magical and prepared to call him to Beijing. Zhao Feng dissuaded him, saying, "The emperor should be cautious about his likes and dislikes.

古文：今陛下神其术而召之，则倾国之人，皆将奔走吉凶之说，转相惑乱，为患不细。 
现代文：现在陛下把他的巫术看得很神奇而召他到京师，那么全国的人，都会忙于吉凶祸福这类说法，相互迷惑，为害不小。 
English: Now that His Majesty has called him to the capital to study his magic, people all over the country will be busy with stories of good luck, evil, misfortune, and good fortune, confusing each other and causing a lot of harm.

古文：明宗遂不复召。
现代文：唐明宗于是不再召周玄豹。
English: Tang Mingzong therefore no longer summoned Zhou Xuanbao.

古文：硃守殷反，明宗幸汴州，守殷已诛，又诏幸鄴。
现代文：朱守殷反叛，唐明宗到汴州，朱守殷被杀后，又下诏去邺都。
English: Zhu Shouyin rebelled, Tang Ming lived in Zhangzhou. After Zhu Shouyin was killed, he issued an edict to go to Zhangdu.

古文：是时，从驾诸军方自河南徙家至汴，不欲北行，军中为之汹汹。
现代文：这时，随行护驾的各军正从河南迁家到汴州，不愿北行，军中因此很喧扰。
English: At this time, the troops accompanying the escort were moving from Henan to Ganzhou, unwilling to go north, so there was a lot of noise in the army.

古文：而定州王都以为天子幸汴州诛守殷，又幸鄴以图己，因疑不自安。
现代文：而定州王都认为天子到汴州诛杀朱守殷，又到邺都是算计自己，于是疑虑不安。
English: However, the king of Dingzhou believed that Tianzi had gone to Zhangzhou to kill Zhu Shouyin, and that he had gone to Handan for his own benefit, so he was worried.

古文：宰相率百官诣阁，请罢幸鄴，明宗不听，人情大恐，群臣不复敢言。
现代文：宰相率领百官到合门，请求停止去邺都，唐明宗不听，人们很害怕，臣子们不再敢说话。
English: The prime minister led a hundred officials to the gate and asked them to stop going to the capital. Tang Mingzong did not listen. People were very afraid, and the courtiers no longer dared to speak.

古文：凤手疏责安重诲，言甚切直，重诲以白，遂罢幸。
现代文：趟凤亲笔上疏责问安重诲，话说得很直切，安重诲以此上奏，于是去邺都的事作罢。
English: Wabi-Feng himself wrote a short rebuke to An Chongyun, and his words were very straightforward. An Chongyun played on this, so let's go to the capital and do the right thing.

古文：有僧游西域，得佛牙以献，明宗以示大臣。
现代文：有一个和尚游历西域后，得到佛牙来进献。唐明宗拿给大臣们看。
English: After a monk traveled to the Western Regions, he received a Buddha's tooth as a gift. Tang Mingzong showed it to the ministers.

古文：凤言： 世传佛牙水火不能伤，请验其真伪。 
现代文：赵凤说： 据说水火都不能损伤佛牙，请求检验这个佛牙的真假。 
English: Zhao Feng said, "It is said that neither water nor fire can damage the Buddha's tooth. I request you to check the authenticity of this Buddha's tooth."

古文：因以斧斫之，应手而碎。
现代文：于是用斧头砍佛牙，佛牙应声而碎。
English: So he chopped the Buddha's tooth with an axe, and the tooth shattered.

古文：是时，宫中施物已及数千，因凤碎之乃止。
现代文：这时，宫中施舍的物品已达敷千件之多，由于趟凤砸碎佛牙纔停止施舍。
English: At this time, the number of donated items in the palace had reached as many as a thousand, and the donation stopped due to the phoenix smashing the Buddha's gums.

古文：天成四年夏，拜门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：天成四年夏，拜为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the summer of the fourth year of Tiancheng, he served as a junior attendant and a junior high school student.

古文：秘书少监于峤者，自庄宗时与凤俱为翰林学士，而峤亦讦直敢言，与凤素善。
现代文：秘书少监于矫，自从唐庄宗时和趟凤都任翰林学士，而于娇也敢于直言揭短，和赵凤素来很友好。
English: The secretary is Ju Jiao, since Tang Zhuang Zongshi and Zai Feng have both been scholars of Hanlin, and Yu Jiao also dares to be outspoken, and Zhao Feng has always been very friendly.

古文：及凤已贵，而峤久不迁，自以材名在凤上而不用，因与萧希甫数非斥时政，尤诋訾凤，凤心衔之，未有以发。
现代文：到赵凤颢贵后，而于娇长久不得升官，自认为才能名声在赵凤之上而受不到重用，因而和萧希甫一起多次抨击时政，特别毁谤非议趟凤，赵凤对他心怀不满，没有找到机会发泄。
English: After Zhao Feng was ennobled, Yu Jiao was not allowed to be promoted for a long time. He thought that his reputation was higher than that of Zhao Feng and could not be reused. Therefore, he and Xiao Xifu repeatedly attacked the current government, especially slandering the non-discussing Feng. Zhao Feng was dissatisfied with him and did not find an opportunity to vent.

古文：而峤与邻家争水窦，为安重诲所怒，凤即左迁峤秘书少监。
现代文：而于娇和邻居争夺水井，为安重诲所不满，趟凤就把于娇降职为秘书少监。
English: However, Yu Jiao and his neighbors were competing for wells, and dissatisfied with An Chongyuan, Wafeng demoted Yu Jiao to the position of secretary and junior supervisor.

古文：峤因被酒往见凤，凤知其必不逊，乃辞以沐发，峤诟直吏，又溺于从者直卢而去。
现代文：于娇于是喝醉了酒去见趟凤，趟凤知道他一定不恭敬，就推托说正在洗头，于娇辱骂当班的官吏，又在随从当班的屋子里小便后离去。
English: Yu Jiao then got drunk and went to see Wafeng. Wafeng knew that he would not be respectful, so he pretended that he was washing his hair. Yu Jiao insulted the officials on duty, and urinated in the room of the attendant.

古文：省吏白凤，峤溺于客次，且诟凤。
现代文：省吏告诉赵凤，于崎在客舍小便，而且辱骂赵凤。
English: The provincial official told Zhao Feng that Yu Qi urinated in the guest house and insulted Zhao Feng.

古文：凤以其事闻，明宗下诏夺峤官，长流武州百姓，又流振武，天下冤之。
现代文：赵凤把这事上奏，唐明宗下诏削夺于娇的官爵，长期流放武州作老百姓，又流放到振武，天下人都觉得他冤枉。
English: Zhao Feng made a fuss about this, and under the Tang and Ming Dynasties, he was stripped of his official title, exiled to Wuzhou for a long time as a commoner, and then exiled to Zhenwu. People around the world felt that he was wronged.

古文：其后安重诲为边彦温等告变，明宗诏彦温等廷诘，具伏其诈，即斩之。
现代文：后来安重诲被边彦温等人诬告发动兵变，唐明宗召边彦温等人到朝廷责问，都伏罪承认自己欺诈，立即杀掉了他们。
English: Later, An Shigong was falsely accused by Bian Yanwen and others of starting a mutiny. Tang Mingzong summoned Bian Yanwen and others to the imperial court for questioning, and they all confessed to their fraud and immediately killed them.

古文：后数日，凤奏事中兴殿，启曰： 臣闻奸人有诬重诲者。 
现代文：几天后，赵凤在中兴殿上奏事情，说： 我听说有诬告安重诲的坏人。 
English: A few days later, Zhao Feng recounted the incident in the ZTE hall, saying: I heard that there were bad people who falsely accused An Chongyuan.

古文：明宗曰： 此闲事，朕已处置之，卿可无问也。 凤曰： 臣所闻者，系国家利害，陛下不可以为闲。 
现代文：唐明宗说： 这是小事，我已经处理了，你可以不过问了 趟凤说： 我听说的事情，关系国家利害，陛下不能认为无关紧要。 
English: Tang Mingzong said: This is a small matter, I have already dealt with it, you can not but ask Wafeng said: What I heard is of national interest, Your Majesty can not think it is unimportant.

古文：因指殿屋曰： 此殿所以尊严宏壮者，栋梁柱石之所扶持也，若折其一栋，去其一柱，则倾危矣。
现代文：于是指着殿屋说： 这个殿之所以尊严宏伟，是由于有栋梁柱石的支撑，如果折断一根栋梁，去掉一块柱石，就会垮掉。
English: Then he pointed to the main hall and said, "The reason why this hall is so dignified and magnificent is because it is supported by pillars. If you break a pillar and remove a pillar, it will collapse.

古文：大臣，国之栋梁柱石也，且重诲起微贱，历艰危，致陛下为中兴主，安可使奸人动摇！ 
现代文：大臣，是国家的栋梁柱石，况且安重诲出身微贱，经历了艰难危险，纔使陛下成为中兴的君主，怎么能让坏人动摇他呢！ 
English: The minister is the pillar of the country, moreover, he came from a humble background, experienced hardships and dangers, and made his majesty a prosperous monarch. How can bad people shake him?

古文：明宗改容谢之曰： 卿言是也。 
现代文：唐明宗改变脸色道歉说： 你说得对啊。 
English: Tang Mingzong changed his face and apologized, saying, "You are right.

古文：遂族彦温等三家。
现代文：于是将边彦温等三家灭族。
English: As a result, three families, including Benihiko's, were exterminated.

古文：其后重诲得罪，群臣无敢言者，独凤数言重诲尽忠。
现代文：后来安重诲获罪，臣子们没有敢说话的，只有赵凤多次说安重诲竭尽忠诚。
English: Later, An Chongyong was found guilty, and the courtiers did not dare to speak, only Zhao Feng repeatedly said that An Chongyong was loyal to the end.

古文：明宗以凤为朋党，罢为安国军节度使。
现代文：唐明宗认为趟凤是同党，罢他焉安国军节度使。
English: Tang Mingzong believed that Zifeng was a member of the same party, so he sent him to be the chief envoy of the National Security Army.

古文：凤在镇所得俸禄，悉以分将校宾客。
现代文：赵凤把在任上所得俸禄，全部用来分给将校宾客们。
English: Zhao Feng used all the salary he earned while in office to distribute to the officers' guests.

古文：清泰二年卒于家。
现代文：唐废帝登位，召为太子太保。
English: Emperor Gaozong ascended the throne and was called to be the Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：○李袭吉李袭吉，父图，洛阳人，或曰唐相林甫之后也。
现代文：因脚病住在家中，病得严重，自己用蓍草占卜，扔下蓍草叹息说： 我家世代没有活遇五十岁的人，又都很贫穷低贱，我现在年龄超过五十而且富贵，还有什么要求呢！ 
English: Living at home due to a foot ailment, he was seriously ill. He divined with rushes, threw down rushes and sighed, saying, "In my family's generation, no one lived to the age of fifty, and everyone was poor and lowly. I am now over fifty years old and rich. What more could I ask for!"

古文：乾符中，袭吉举进士，为河中节度使李都搉盐判官。
现代文：李袭吉，父亲李图，洛阳人，有人说是唐代宰相李林甫的后代。干符年间，李袭吉考中进士，任河中节度使李都的榷盐判官。
English: Li Zaiji, whose father Li Tu was from Luoyang, is said to be a descendant of the Tang Dynasty's prime minister Li Linfu. During the Hanfu era, Li Zai was a student at the Jikeo Middle School and served as a salt adjudicator for the Li capital.

古文：后去之晋，晋王以为榆次令，遂为掌书记。
现代文：后来离开李都到晋，晋王任他为榆次令，于是任为掌书记。
English: Later, he left Li Du for Jin, and the King of Jin appointed him as the second-in-command, and he was appointed as the secretary of the palace.

古文：袭吉博学，多知唐故事。
现代文：李袭吉博学，知道很多唐代的旧事。
English: Li Heji has studied extensively and knows a lot of old things about the Tang Dynasty.

古文：迁节度副使，官至谏议大夫。
现代文：升任节度副使，官做到谏议大夫。
English: He was promoted to vice-minister of the festival, and the official was promoted to doctor of deliberation.

古文：晋王与梁有隙，交兵累年，后晋王数困，欲与梁通和，使袭吉为书谕梁，辞甚辨丽。
现代文：晋王和梁有矛盾，交战多年，后来晋王多次处境艰难，想和梁相互和好，让李袭吉写信向梁说明，文辞十分清晰明丽。
English: Jin Wang and Liang had conflicts and fought for many years. Later, Jin Wang was in a difficult situation many times and wanted to reconcile with Liang. He asked Li Heiji to write a letter to Liang. The wording was very clear and beautiful.

古文：梁太祖使人读之，至于 毒手尊拳，交相于暮夜，金戈铁马，蹂践于明时 ，叹曰： 李公僻处一隅，有士如此，使吾得之，傅虎以翼也！ 
现代文：梁太祖让人读信，读到 毒手尊拳，交相于暮夜，金戈铁马，蹂践于明时 时，感叹说： 李公处在偏僻的一角，有像这样的士人，如果我得到了，就如虎添翼了！ 
English: Liang Taizu had the letter read to him, and when he read "Fierce Hand, Honorable Fist," which was written in the twilight, and "Golden Iron Horse," which was written in the morning, he sighed and said, "Li Gong is in a remote corner, and there is a scholar like this. If I get it, it will be like adding wings to a tiger!"

古文：顾其从事敬翔曰： 善为我答之。 
现代文：回头望着他的随从敬翔说： 好好替我写信答复。 
English: Looking back at his entourage, Qian Xiang said, "Please write a reply for me."

古文：及翔所答，书辞不工，而袭吉之书，多传于世。
现代文：敬翔的回信，书法和言辞都不好，而李袭吉的书信，很多在世上流传。
English: The calligraphy and words of Jingxiang's reply letter are not good, but many of Li Heiji's letters have been circulated around the world.

古文：袭吉为人恬淡，以文辞自娱，天祐三年卒。
现代文：李袭吉为人恬静淡泊，以写文章自乐。天佑三年死。
English: Li Weiji was a quiet and unassuming person, who enjoyed writing articles. He died three years later.

古文：以卢汝弼代为副使。
现代文：以卢汝弼代任副使。
English: Roh Ryu-hyun took over as deputy envoy.

古文：汝弼工书画，而文辞不及袭吉。
现代文：卢汝弼擅长书画，但文章赶不上李袭吉。
English: Lu Ruchen is good at calligraphy and painting, but she can't keep up with Li Zuoji in writing.

古文：其父简求为河东节度使，为唐名家，故汝弼亦多知唐故事。
现代文：他的父亲卢简求任河东节度使，是唐的名门，因此卢汝弼也知道很多唐的旧事。
English: His father, Lu Jian, applied for the post of Hedong Festival Envoy. He was a famous Tang family, so Lu Ruxuan also knew a lot about the old Tang Dynasty.

古文：晋王薨，庄宗嗣为晋王，承制封拜官爵皆出汝弼。
现代文：晋王死，唐庄宗继任晋王，秉承皇帝意旨封拜官爵等事都出自卢汝弼。
English: Jin Wang's death, Tang Zhuozong's succession as Jin King, upholding the emperor's will to appoint officials, and other things all come from Lu Ruyi.

古文：十八年，卒。
现代文：十八年，死。
English: He died 18 years later.

古文：庄宗即位，赠袭吉礼部尚书、汝弼兵部尚书。
现代文：唐庄宗即位，赠李袭吉为礼部尚书、卢汝弼为兵部尚书。
English: Tang Zhuangzong ascended to the throne, and presented Li Heijie with the honorific titles of the Ministry of Rites and Decrees, and Lu Ruyi with the honorific titles of the Ministry of War.

古文：○张宪张宪，字允中，晋阳人也。
现代文：张宪字允中，晋阳人。
English: Zhang Xian is a middle school student and a native of Jinyang.

古文：为人沈静寡欲，少好学，能鼓琴饮酒。
现代文：为人沉静少欲，年轾时好学，会弹琴饮酒。
English: He is a quiet person with few desires. When he was younger, he was eager to learn and could play the piano and drink alcohol.

古文：庄宗素知其文辞，以为天雄军节度使掌书记。
现代文：唐庄宗素来知道他的文章写得好，任他为天雄军节度使掌书记。
English: Tang Zhuozong always knew that his articles were well written, and allowed him to be the secretary of the Tianxiong Army Festival.

古文：庄宗即位，拜工部侍郎、租庸使，迁刑部侍郎、判吏部铨、东都副留守。
现代文：唐庄宗即位，拜为工部侍郎、租庸使，转任刑部侍郎、兼吏部铨、束都副留守。
English: When Emperor Tangzhuangzong ascended the throne, he was appointed as a steward of the Ministry of Industry and a steward of the Ministry of Yeomanry, and then he was transferred to the position of a steward of the Ministry of Justice, and he also served as the vice-governor of the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the deputy governor of Sokoto.

古文：宪精于吏事，甚有能政。
现代文：张宪精通为官之道，很有政绩。
English: Zhang Xian is well versed in the way of being an official and has a lot of political achievements.

古文：庄宗幸东都，定州王都来朝，庄宗命宪治鞠场，与都击鞠。
现代文：唐庄宗到束都，定州王都前来朝见，唐庄宗命令张宪修整击球场，和王都击球。
English: Tang Zhuangzong went to Sokdu, Dingzhou Wangdu came to see him, Tang Zhuangzong ordered Zhang Xian to repair the batting court, and Wangdu batted.

古文：初，庄宗建号于东都，以鞠场为即位坛，于是宪言： 即位坛，王者所以兴也。
现代文：当初，唐庄宗在东都建立国号，把击球场作为即位坛，因此张宪说： 即位坛，是称王的人兴起的地方。
English: At the beginning, Tang Zhuangzong established the national anthem in Dongdu, and used the batting stadium as the throne altar. Therefore, Zhang Xian said: The throne altar is the place where people who worship the king rise up.

古文：汉鄗南、魏繁阳坛，至今皆在，不可毁。 
现代文：汉的鄗南、魏的繁阳坛，到现在都还在，不能毁掉。 
English: The Han's Southern Wei and the Wei's prosperous sun altar are still there, and cannot be destroyed.

古文：乃别治宫西为鞠场，场未成，庄宗怒，命两虞候亟毁坛以为场。
现代文：于是另外在宫廷西面修建擎球场，擎球场还没修好，唐庄宗发怒，命令两个虞候赶快毁掉即位坛作为击球场。
English: As a result, the Qing court was built on the west side of the palace. The Qing court had not yet been repaired, and Tang Zhuangzong became angry and ordered the two statesmen to quickly destroy the throne altar as a batting court.

古文：宪退而叹曰： 此不祥之兆也！ 
现代文：张宪退下叹息说： 这是不祥之兆啊！ 
English: Zhang Xian sighed and said: This is an ominous sign!

古文：初，明宗北伐契丹，取魏铠仗以给军，有细铠五百，宪遂给之而不以闻。
现代文：当初，唐明宗北伐契丹，取来魏的镗甲兵器供给军队，其中有细镗甲五百副，张宪供给军队而设有上奏。
English: At the beginning, Tang Mingzong, the Northern Qidan, took Wei armor weapons to supply the army, including five hundred pairs of fine armor, and Zhang Xian supplied the army and set up a rehearsal.

古文：庄宗至魏，大怒，责宪驰自取之，左右谏之乃止。
现代文：唐庄宗到魏，大怒，责令张宪飞马亲自取回来，手下的人劝阻后纔作罢。
English: Tang Zhuang, who lived in Wei, was furious and ordered Zhang Xian to retrieve the Pegasus in person. His subordinates tried to dissuade him from doing so.

古文：又问宪库钱几何。宪上库簿有钱三万缗，庄宗益怒，谓其嬖伶史彦琼曰： 我与群臣饮博，须钱十余万，而宪以故纸给我。
现代文：又询问张宪钱库中的钱还有多少，张宪奉上钱库的账簿有钱三万缙，唐庄宗更加恼怒，对他宠信的伶官史彦琼说： 我和臣子们赌博，需要十多万钱，而张宪拿过去的账本骗我。
English: He also asked Zhang Xian how much money was left in the treasury. Zhang Xian handed him the account book of the treasury, which had 30,000 baht in it. Tang Zhuozong was even more angry. He said to his favorite eunuch Shi Yanqiong: I gambled with the courtiers and needed more than 100,000 yuan, but Zhang Xian lied to me with the past account book.

古文：我未渡河时，库钱常百万缗，今复何在？ 
现代文：我役渡过黄河时，库钱常常有一百万缯，现在又到哪里去了呢？ 
English: When I used to cross the Yellow River, the treasury often had one million baht. Where has it gone now?

古文：彦琼为宪解之乃已。
现代文：史彦琼替张宪作了解释纔作罢。
English: Shi Yanqiong made an explanation for Zhang Xian.

古文：郭崇韬伐蜀，荐宪可任为相，而宦官、伶人不欲宪在朝廷，枢密承旨段徊曰： 宰相在天子面前，事有非是，尚可改作，一方之任，苟非其人，则为患不细。
现代文：郭崇韬讨伐蜀，推荐张宪可焉宰相，而宦官、伶人不愿张宪留在朝廷，枢密承旨段徊说： 宰相在天子身边，事情有什么不对的地方，还可以改变，一个地方的长官，如果任用的人不合适，那么厉害不小。
English: Guo Chongzhen fought against Shu and recommended Zhang Xian as the prime minister, but the eunuchs and officials did not want Zhang Xian to stay in the imperial court, and the confidential order paragraph lingered, saying: The prime minister is close to the Son of Heaven, if something is not right, it can be changed. If the person appointed is not suitable, then it is not small.

古文：宪材诚可用，不如任以一方。 
现代文：张宪的才能确实可以重用，不如把一个地方交给他管理。 
English: Zhang Xian's talent can indeed be reused, it is better to give him a place to manage.

古文：乃以为太原尹、北京留守。
现代文：于是任为太原尹、北京留守。
English: As a result, he was appointed as Taiyuan Yin and stayed in Beijing.

古文：赵在礼作乱，宪家在魏州，在礼善待其家，遣人以书招宪，宪斩其使，不发其书而上之。
现代文：赵在礼作乱，张宪的家在魏州，趟在礼待他的家人很好，派人拿信招降张意，张意杀掉他的使臣役有拆开信看就交上去了。
English: Zhao was creating a disturbance in etiquette, Zhang Xian's home was in Weizhou, and Wu was treating his family well in etiquette. He sent someone to take the letter to persuade Zhang Yi to surrender, and Zhang Yi killed him. The envoy opened the letter and handed it over.

古文：庄宗遇弑，明宗入京师，太原犹未知，而永王存霸奔于太原。
现代文：唐庄宗被杀，唐明宗进入京师，太原的人还不知道，而永王李存霸逃奔到太原。
English: Tang Zhuangzong was killed, Tang Mingzong entered Beijing, the people of Taiyuan did not yet know, and Yongwang Li Cunba fled to Taiyuan.

古文：左右告宪曰： 今魏兵南向，主上存亡未可知，存霸之来无诏书，而所乘马断其鞦，岂非战败者乎！
现代文：手下人告诉张宪说： 现在魏州的军队南去，皇上的存亡还不知道，李存霸来太原没有诏书，而他骑的马秋带都断了，难道不是被打败的吗！
English: Zhang Xian was told by his subordinates: "Now that the Wei army has gone south, the emperor's survival is still unknown. Li Cunbao did not have an imperial edict when he came to Taiyuan, and the horse and rider's belts he was riding were all broken. Wasn't he defeated?

古文：宜拘之以俟命。 
现代文：应把他抓起来等候命令。 
English: He should be arrested and made to wait for orders.

古文：宪曰： 吾本书生，无尺寸之功，而人主遇我甚厚，岂有怀二心以幸变，第可与之俱死尔！ 
现代文：张宪说： 我原是书生，没有一点功劳，而皇上待我很好，难道怀有二心希望发生变乱？只能和他同死罢了！ 
English: Zhang Xian said: I used to be a scholar, without any merit, and the emperor treated me very well. Do you harbor the hope of turmoil? You can only die with him!

古文：宪从事张昭远教宪奉表明宗以劝进，宪涕泣拒之。
现代文：张宪的随从张昭远教张意向唐明宗上表劝他登皇帝位，张宪哭泣着拒绝了。
English: Zhang Zhaoyuan, a follower of Zhang Xian, instructed Zhang to appeal to Tang Mingzong to make him emperor, but Zhang Xian refused with tears.

古文：已而存霸削发，见北京巡检符彦超，愿为僧以求生，彦超麾下兵大噪，杀存霸。
现代文：不久李存霸割掉头发，见北京巡检符彦超，愿意做和尚求生，符彦超的部下大声喧哗，杀死李存霸。
English: Soon after, Li Cunha cut off his hair. He saw Beijing inspector Fu Yanchao, who was willing to become a monk in order to survive. Fu Yanchao's subordinates shouted loudly and killed Li Cunhao.

古文：宪出奔沂州，亦见杀。
现代文：张宪出逃沂州，也被杀。
English: Zhang Xian fled to Ganzhou and was also killed.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：唉！
English: Alas!

古文：予于死节之士，得三人而失三人焉。
现代文：我对于死于节操的士人，得到三个人而又失去三个人。
English: I have gained three men and lost three in the case of the statesmen who died in the struggle for freedom.

古文：巩廷美、杨温之死，予既已哀之。
现代文：巩廷美、杨温的死，我已经为他们悲哀了。
English: The death of Gong Tingmei and Yang Wen, I have already grieved for them.

古文：至于张宪之事，尤为之痛惜也。
现代文：至于张宪的事情，尤其为他感到悲痛惋惜。
English: As for Zhang Xian, I feel particularly sad and sorry for him.

古文：予于旧史考宪事实，而永王存霸、符彦超与宪传所书始末皆不同，莫得而考正。
现代文：我在旧史中考察张宪的事迹，而永王李存霸、符彦超和张宪的传记所载的事情首尾都不相同，没有人能够考证。
English: I examined the deeds of Zhang Xian in the old history, but the biographies of Yongwang Li Cunba, Fu Yanchao and Zhang Xian contain different things from beginning to end, and no one can verify them.

古文：盖方其变故仓卒之时。传者失之尔。
现代文：大概当仓猝问发生变故的时候，记载的人失传了。
English: Presumably, when something happened to Cang Qianqian, the person recorded was lost.

古文：然要其大节，亦可以见也，宪之志诚可谓忠矣。
现代文：但总括他一生的大节，也能够看出了。张宪的质量确实可以叫做忠诚。
English: But in summing up the major events of his life, it can also be seen that Zhang Xian's quality can indeed be called loyalty.

古文：当其不顾其家，绝在礼而斩其使，涕泣以拒昭远之说，其志甚明。
现代文：当他不顾家人，拒绝趟在礼招降而杀掉他的使者，哭泣着拒绝张昭远的劝说，他的志向是很明白的。
English: When he defied his family, refused to kill his emissary in a gesture of surrender, and wept as he rejected Zhang Zhaoyuan's persuasion, his intentions were clear.

古文：至其欲与存霸俱死，及存霸被杀，反弃太原而出奔，然犹不知其心果欲何为也。
现代文：至于他想和李存霸同死，到李存霸被杀，反而放弃太原出逃，但还是不知道他心里究竟想做什么。
English: As for him wanting to die with Li Cunpah, when Li Cunpah was killed, he gave up Taiyuan and fled, but he still didn't know what he wanted to do.

古文：而旧史书宪坐弃城而赐死，予亦以为不然。
现代文：而旧史记载张宪因弃城出逃而被赐死，我也认为不是这样。
English: However, according to old historical records, Zhang Xian was sentenced to death for abandoning the city and fleeing, which I do not think is true.

古文：予之于宪固欲成其美志，而要在宪失其官守而其死不明，故不得列于死节也。
现代文：我对于张宪固然想成全他美好的志向，但因为他离开自己的职守而又死因不明，因此不能列在《死节传》中。
English: As for Zhang Xian, I certainly want to fulfill his beautiful aspirations, but because he left his duties and the cause of death is unknown, he cannot be listed in the "Dead Section."

古文：○萧希甫
现代文：萧希甫，宋州人。
English: Xiao Xifu, a native of Songzhou.

古文：萧希甫，宋州人也。为人有机辩，多矫激，少举进士，为梁开封尹袁象先掌书记。象先为青州节度使，以希甫为巡官。
现代文：为人机智善辩，矫异偏激，年轻时考中进士，任梁开封尹袁象先的掌书记。袁象先任青州节度使时，任萧希甫为巡官。
English: He was witty and eloquent, with a penchant for correcting people who were different from him. When he was young, he passed the junior high school entrance examination and was appointed as the secretary of Liang Kaifeng and Yin Yuanxiang. When Yuanxiang was the delegate to the Qingzhou Festival, Xiao Xifu was appointed as the inspector.

古文：希甫不乐，乃弃其母妻，变姓名，亡之镇州，自称青州掌书记，谒赵王王镕。
现代文：萧希甫不高兴，于是抛弃他的母亲妻子，改名换姓逃到镇州，自称为青州掌书记，拜见趟王王镕。
English: Xiao Xifu was not happy, so he abandoned his mother and wife, changed his name and fled to Zhenzhou, called himself the chief secretary of Qingzhou, and went to see Wang Wangyao.

古文：镕以希甫为参军，尤不乐，居岁余，又亡之易州，削发为僧，居百丈山。
现代文：王镕任萧希甫为参军，他十分不高兴，遇了一年多，又逃到易州，削发为僧，住在百丈山。
English: Wang appointed him to join the army, and Xiao Xifu was even more unhappy. After more than a year, he fled to Yizhou, shaved off his hair, became a monk, and lived in Baizhang Mountain.

古文：庄宗将建国于魏，置百官，求天下隐逸之士，幽州李绍宏荐希甫为魏州推官。
现代文：庸庄宗准备在魏建国，设置各种官员，招求天下隐逸的士人，幽州李绍宏推荐萧希甫任魏州推官。
English: Yongzhuangzong prepared to establish a state in Wei, set up various officials, invited the world's secluded scholars, and Yuzhou Li Shaohong recommended Xiao Xifu to be the governor of Wei.

古文：庄宗即帝位，欲以知制诰，有诏定内宴仪，问希甫： 枢密使得坐否？ 
现代文：唐庄宗即位后，想任他为知制诰，下诏确定官内宴会的礼仪，询问萧希甫说： 枢密使能出席吗？ 
English: After Tang Zhuangzong ascended to the throne, he wanted to appoint him as the regent, and issued an edict to determine the etiquette of the official banquet. He asked Xiao Xifu, "Can the Privy Council attend?

古文：希甫以为不可。
现代文：萧希甫认为不行。
English: Xiao Xifu did not think it was possible.

古文：枢密使张居翰闻之怒，谓希甫曰： 老夫历事三朝天子，见内宴数百，子本田舍兒，安知宫禁事？ 
现代文：枢密使张居翰听说后发怒，对萧希甫说： 我依次事奉过三朝天子，见过的内宴几百次，你原是个乡巴佬，哪里知道宫廷中的事？ 
English: After hearing this, the confidential envoy Zhang Juhan became angry and said to Xiao Xifu: I have successively served the three dynasties and seen hundreds of banquets. You are originally a country bumpkin. How do you know about the things in the court?

古文：希甫不能对。
现代文：萧希甫不能回答。
English: Xiao Xifu could not answer.

古文：由是宦官用事者皆切齿。
现代文：因此当权的宦官都切齿憎恨他。
English: Therefore, the eunuchs in power hated him with all their teeth.

古文：宰相豆卢革等希宦官旨，共排斥之，以为驾部郎中，希甫失志，尤怏怏。
现代文：宰相豆卢革等人迎合宦官的意旨，一起排挤他，任为驾部郎中，萧希甫不得志，特别怏怏不乐。
English: Prime Minister Douluge and others pandered to the eunuch's wishes, and together they pushed him out and appointed him as the driver's assistant. Xiao Xifu was discouraged and particularly unhappy.

古文：庄宗灭梁，遣希甫宣慰青齐，希甫始知其母已死，而妻袁氏亦改嫁矣。
现代文：唐庄宗消灭梁，派萧希甫宣旨慰问青、齐二州，萧希甫纔知道他的母亲已死，而妻子袁氏也改嫁了。
English: Tang Zhuangzong annihilated Liang and sent Xiao Xifu to send condolences to Qing and Qi Erzhou. Xiao Xifu knew that his mother had died and his wife Yuan had remarried.

古文：希甫乃发哀服丧，居于魏州，人有引汉李陵书以讥之曰： 老母终堂，生妻去室。 
现代文：萧希甫于是致哀服丧，住在魏州，有人引用汉代李陵的信来讽刺他说： 老母终堂，生妻去室。 
English: Xiao Xifu then went into mourning and lived in Weizhou. Someone quoted Li Ling's letter from the Han Dynasty to satirize him, saying: "The old mother is dead, and the new wife has gone to her room."

古文：时皆传以为笑。
现代文：当时都傅作笑话。
English: It was all a joke at the time.

古文：明宗即位，召为谏议大夫。
现代文：唐明宗即位，召任为谏议大夫。
English: Tang Mingzong ascended the throne, and he was appointed as the chief doctor of the imperial court.

古文：是时，复置匦函，以希甫为使，希甫建言： 自兵乱相乘，王纲大坏，侵欺凌夺，有力者胜。
现代文：这时，又设置检举箱，任萧希甫为使，萧希甫建议说： 自从战乱连绵不断，纲纪大坏，欺凌侵夺，有势力的人取胜。
English: At this time, a whistle-blowing box was also set up, with Xiao Xifu as the instigator. Xiao Xifu suggested that: Since the war has been continuous, discipline is very bad, bullying and usurpation, and powerful people win.

古文：凡略人之妻女，占人之田宅，奸脏之吏，刑狱之冤者，何可胜纪？
现代文：大凡抢夺别人的妻子女儿，强占别人的田地房屋，贪官污吏，含冤受刑入狱的人，怎么能说得完。
English: How can I say enough about those who rob other people's wives and daughters, seize other people's fields and houses, corrupt officials, and those who are unjustly imprisoned?

古文：而匦函一出，投诉必多，至于功臣贵戚，有不得绳之以法者。 
现代文：而一旦设置检举箱，投诉的人必定很多，会控告到功臣贵戚，有不能够绳之以法的人。 
English: But once the complaint box is set up, there will certainly be a lot of complainants, and they will sue the relatives of meritorious soldiers, and there will be people who cannot be brought to justice.

古文：乃自天成元年四月二十八日昧爽已前，大辟已上，皆赦除之，然后出匦函以示众。
现代文：于是从天成元年四月二十八日黎明算起，大辟罪以上的犯人，都赦免他们，这之后纔把检举箱展示给众人。
English: Therefore, from the dawn of April 28th of the first year of Tiancheng, all the prisoners who had committed more than major crimes were pardoned. After that, he showed the accusation box to everyone.

古文：初，明宗欲以希甫为谏议大夫，豆卢革、韦说颇沮难之。
现代文：当初，唐明宗想任萧希甫为谏议大夫，豆卢革、韦说多方加以阻止。
English: At first, Tang Mingzong wanted to appoint Xiao Xifu as the doctor of debate, but Zhu Ruge and Wei said that many people tried to prevent it.

古文：其后革、说为安重诲所恶，希甫希旨，诬奏： 革纵田客杀人，而说与邻人争井，井有宝货。 
现代文：后来豆卢革、韦说受到安重诲的嫌恶，萧希甫讨好安重诲，诬告上奏说： 豆卢革放纵田客杀人，而韦说和邻居争夺水井，井里有珍宝财物。 
English: Later, Zhu Ruge and Wei said that they were hated by An Chongzhen, but Xiao Xifu was pleased with An Chongzhen and made a false accusation, saying: Zhu Ruge indulged in killing peasants, while Wei said that he competed with his neighbors for wells, and the wells contained precious property.

古文：有司推劾，井中惟破釜而已，革、说终皆贬死。
现代文：有关官吏追究其罪状，井中只有破锅罢了，豆卢革、韦说最终都贬官而死。
English: When the relevant officials investigated the charges against them, all they found was a broken pot. In the end, both Zhu Ruge and Wei said that they were demoted and died.

古文：明宗赐希甫帛百匹、粟麦三百石，拜左散骑常侍。
现代文：唐明宗赐给萧希甫一百匹丝绸、三百石粮食，拜为左散骑常侍。
English: Tang Mingzong gave Xiao Xifu one hundred horses of silk, three hundred stones of grain, and worshiped him as the left horseman.

古文：希甫性褊而躁进，尝遣人夜叩宫门上变，言河堰牙官李筠告本军谋反，诘旦，追问无状，斩筠，军士诣安重诲求希甫啖之。
现代文：萧希甫性格狭隘而急躁求进，曾派人在晚上敲开宫门报告兵变，称河堰牙官李筠报告他所在的军队谋反，次日早晨，追问没有这事，杀掉李筠，军士们到安重诲那裹要求交出萧希甫要吃了他。
English: Xiao Xifu's character was narrow and impatient for advancement. He once sent someone to knock on the palace door in the evening to report a mutiny, saying that the barrage officer Li Qian reported that the army he was in was plotting a mutiny. The next morning, he asked if there was no such thing, killed Li Qian, and the sergeants went to Anshu to demand the surrender of Xiao Xifu and wanted to eat him.

古文：是时，明宗将有事于南郊，前斋一日，群臣习仪于殿廷，宰相冯道、赵凤，河南尹秦王从荣，枢密使安重诲候班于月华门外。希甫与两省班先入，道等坐廓下不起，既出，希甫召堂头直省朝堂驱使官，责问宰相、枢密见两省官何得不起，因大诟詈。
现代文：这时，唐明宗准备在南郊祭祀，斋戒前一天，臣子们在殿廷上练习礼仪，宰相冯道、趟凤，河南尹秦王李从荣，枢密使安重诲在月华门外等候上朝，萧希甫和两省的官员先进入，冯道等人坐在廊下不起身，出来后，萧希甫召堂头直省朝堂驱使官，责问宰相、枢密使见到两省官员怎么能不起身，因而大肆辱骂。
English: At this time, Tang Mingzong was preparing to offer sacrifices in the southern suburbs. On the day before the fast, the courtiers were practicing etiquette at the court. The prime ministers Feng Dao and Wei Feng, the Henan Yin Qin king Li Congrong, and the confidential envoy An Chongyu were waiting outside the Yuehua Gate for the last morning. Xiao Xifu and the officials from the two provinces entered first. Feng Dao and others sat in the corridor and did not stand up. After they came out, Xiao Xifu called the head of the provincial court to drive the officials. He asked the prime minister and the confidential envoy how they could not stand

古文：是夜，托疾还第。
现代文：这天晚上，称病回家。
English: That night, he called in sick.

古文：月余，坐告李筠事动摇军众，贬岚州司户参军，卒于贬所。
现代文：一个多月后，因告李筠的事情动摇军心，贬为岚州司户参军，死在那里。
English: More than a month later, he was accused of slandering Li Lan, which shook the military's spirit. He was demoted to the position of the secretary of the state of Zhangzhou and joined the army, where he died.

古文：○刘赞
现代文：刘赞，魏州人。
English: Liu Zan, from Weizhou.

古文：刘赞，魏州人也。父玭为县令，赞始就学，衣以青布衫襦，每食则玭自肉食，而别以蔬食食赞于床下，谓之曰： 肉食，君之禄也，尔欲之，则勤学问以干禄；吾肉非尔之食也。 
现代文：父亲刘砒任县令，刘赞刚开始读书，穿着青布衫短袄，每次吃饭刘砒就自己吃肉，而另外拿菜食给刘赞在床下吃，对他说： 肉食，是君主给的俸禄，你想吃的话，就要勤奋读书谋求俸禄；我的肉食，不是你的食物。 
English: Liu Zan's father, Liu Xuan, was a county magistrate, and Liu Zan had just started to study. He wore a blue cloth shirt and shorts. Liu Xuan ate meat himself every time he had a meal, and in addition, he took vegetable food to Liu Zan to eat under the bed. He said to him, "Meat-eating is the reward given by the monarch. If you want to eat, you must diligently study to seek the reward; my meat-eating is not your food."

古文：由是赞益力学，举进士，为罗绍威判官，去为租庸使赵岩巡官，又为孔谦盐铁判官。
现代文：从此刘赞更加努力学习，考中进士。任罗绍威的判官，离开后又任租庸使赵岩的巡官，再任孔谦的盐铁判官。
English: From then on, Liu Zan studied harder and passed the middle school entrance examination. He was appointed as the judge of Roshauwei, and after leaving, he was appointed as the inspector of Zhaoyan, and then as the judge of salt and iron of Kong Qian.

古文：明宗时，累迁中书舍人、御史中丞、刑部侍郎。
现代文：唐明宗时，屡经升迁为中书舍人、御史中丞、刑部侍郎。
English: When he was a member of the Tang and Ming Dynasties, he was repeatedly promoted to the position of chusei, goshi chujo, and attendant of the criminal investigation department.

古文：守官以法，权豪不可干以私。
现代文：做官遵纪守法，权贵豪强不能在他那里谋求私利。
English: Officials should abide by the rules and abide by the law, and the powerful and powerful should not seek personal gain from them.

古文：是时，秦王从荣握兵而骄，多过失，言事者请置师傅以辅道之。
现代文：这时，秦王李从荣掌握重兵而骄横，有不少过失，议事的人请求设置师傅辅助引导他。
English: At this time, Qin King Li Congrong was arrogant in commanding heavy troops and had many faults. The negotiators requested that a master be set up to help guide him.

古文：大臣畏王，不敢决其事，因请王得自择，秦王即请赞，乃拜赞秘书监，为秦王傅。
现代文：大臣们怕秦王，不敢决定这事，于是请求秦王自己选择师傅，秦王就请刘赞，于是拜刘赞为秘书监，任秦王傅。
English: The ministers were afraid of King Qin and did not dare to decide the matter, so they asked King Qin to choose a master himself. King Qin then asked Liu Zan, so Liu Zan was appointed as secretary supervisor and appointed as King Qin's master.

古文：赞泣曰： 祸将至矣！ 
现代文：刘赞哭泣着说： 灾祸要到了！ 
English: Weeping, Liu Zan said, "The disaster is coming!

古文：秦王所请王府元帅官属十余人，类多浮薄倾险之徒，日献谀谄以骄王，独赞从容讽谏，率以正道。
现代文：秦王所请的王府元帅官吏十多人，大多是轻浮浅薄、倾轧阴险的人，天天阿谀奉承让秦王变得骄横无理，只有刘赞从容自若地规劝讽谏，用正道来引导他。
English: The more than ten Wangfu marshal officials invited by King Qin were mostly frivolous, shallow, and insidious people. The daily flattery made King Qin become arrogant and unreasonable. Only Liu Zan calmly advised the ridicule and guided him in the right way.

古文：秦王尝命宾客作文于坐中，赞自以师傅，耻与群小比伍，虽操笔勉强，有不悦之色。
现代文：秦王曾命令宾客们即席写文章，刘赞自以为是师傅，耻于和这群小人为伍，虽然勉强提笔，但显出不高兴的脸色。
English: Qin Wang had ordered the guests to write articles on the spot. Liu Zan thought he was a master and was ashamed to be in the company of these little people. Although he could barely lift his pen, he showed an unhappy face.

古文：秦王恶之，后戒左右赞来不得通，赞亦不往，月一至府而已，退则杜门不交人事。
现代文：秦王讨厌他，后来告诫手下人刘赞来了不得通报，刘赞也不去，每月去王府一次罢了，回来后就闭门不出，不和人交往。
English: King Qin hated him, and later warned his subordinates that Liu Zan's arrival must not be announced, and Liu Zan would not go. He would only go to the royal palace once a month, and when he returned, he would shut the door and not come out, and would not socialize with people.

古文：已而秦王果败死，唐大臣议王属官当坐者，冯道曰： 元帅判官任赞与秦王非素好，而在职不逾月，詹事王居敏及刘赞皆以正直为王所恶，河南府判官司徒诩病告家居久，皆宜不与其谋。
现代文：不久秦王果然罪败而死，唐的大臣们议论秦王的下属官吏中应当因罪法办的人，冯道说： 元帅判官任赞和秦王不是一向要好，而任职不到一个月，詹事王居敏和刘赞都因正直而被秦王憎恶，河南府判官司徒翔称病住在家中很久了，都应当没有参与秦王的阴谋。
English: Not long after, King Qin was defeated and died. The ministers of the Tang Dynasty began to discuss which of King Qin's subordinate officials should be prosecuted for crimes. Feng Dao said: Marshal Judge Ren Zan and King Qin were not always on good terms, but they had been in office for less than a month. Janzhi Wang Jumin and Liu Zan were both hated by King Qin for their honesty. Judge of Henan Prefecture Si Tu Xiang said that he had been ill for a long time and had been living at home, so he should not have participated in King Qin's conspiracy.

古文：而谘议参军高辇与王最厚，辇法当死，其余可次第原减。 
现代文：而咨议参军高辇和秦王相处最好，高辇依法应当处死，其余的人可以依次减免。 
English: However, Gao Gan, who was recommended to join the army, got along best with King Qin. Gao Gan should be executed according to the law, and the rest of the people can be exempted in turn.

古文：硃弘昭曰： 诸公不知其意尔，使秦王得入光政门，当待赞等如何？
现代文：朱弘昭说： 各位不知道他的用意罢了，假知秦土得以进入光政门，会怎样对待刘赞等人呢？
English: Zhu Hongzhao said: You only don't know his intention. If you knew that Qin Tu was able to enter Guangzheng Gate, how would he treat Liu Zan and others?

古文：吾徒复有家族邪！
现代文：我们还有家人宗族吗！
English: Do we still have families and clans!

古文：且法有首从，今秦王夫妇男女皆死，而赞等止其一身幸矣！ 
现代文：而且法律上有首恶与从犯之分，现在秦王夫妇儿女都死了，而刘赞等只处死他们本人就算幸运了！ 
English: Moreover, according to the law, there is a distinction between the chief evil and the accomplice. Now, the Qin Wang couple and their children are all dead, while Liu Zan and others were only sentenced to death. They are lucky!

古文：道等难之。
现代文：冯道等人驳斥他。
English: Feng Dao and others refuted him.

古文：而冯赟亦争不可，赞等乃免死。
现代文：而冯赍也坚持说不能杀，刘赞等人纔免于一死。
English: But Feng Yu also insisted that he could not kill, and Liu Zan and others were spared from death.

古文：于是论高辇死，而任赞等十七人皆长流。
现代文：于是决定处死高辇，而任赞等十七人都被长期流放。
English: As a result, it was decided to execute Gao Yao, while Ren Zhan and 17 others were exiled for a long time.

古文：初，赞闻秦王败，即白衣驾驴以俟，人有告赞夺官而已，赞曰： 岂有天子冢嗣见杀，而宾僚夺官者乎，不死幸矣！ 
现代文：当初，刘赞听说秦王失败，就穿着白衣骑着驴候罪，有人告诉刘赞只是罢官罢了，刘赞说： 难道有天子的长子被杀，而宾客僚属只罢官的事吗，不死就很幸运了！ 
English: At first, when Liu Zan heard that King Qin had failed, he put on a white robe and rode a donkey to await his punishment. Someone told Liu Zan that it was just a dismissal. Liu Zan said, "Is it possible that the eldest son of the Son of Heaven was killed, but the guests and colleagues were only dismissed? You are very lucky if you don't die!"

古文：已而赞长流岚州百姓。
现代文：不久刘赞被长期流放为岚州百姓。
English: Soon, Liu Zan was exiled for a long time as a citizen of Zhangzhou.

古文：清泰二年，诏归田里，行至石会关，病卒。
现代文：清泰二年，诏令回到家乡，走到石会关时，病死。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, when Dahaling returned to his hometown and walked to Shih Huiguan, he died of illness.

古文：○何瓚
现代文：何瓒，闽人，唐末考中进土。
English: He Xuan, Xuanren, entered the earth in the middle of the Tang Dynasty final examination.

古文：何瓚，闽人也，唐末举进士及第。庄宗为太原节度使，辟为判官。
现代文：唐庄宗任太原节度使时，征召为判官。
English: When Tangzhuang Zong was appointed as Taiyuan's envoy, he was conscripted as a judge.

古文：庄宗每出征伐，留张承业守太原，承业卒，瓚代知留守事。
现代文：唐庄宗每次出征，都留下张承业守太原，张承业死后，何瓒代替主持留守事。
English: Every time Tangzhuangzong went on a campaign, he left Zhang Chengye in charge of Taiyuan. After Zhang Chengye's death, He Qian remained in charge instead.

古文：瓚为人明敏，通于吏事，外若疏简而内颇周密。
现代文：何瓒为人聪明机敏，通晓为官之道，外表粗疏简慢而内心颇为周密。
English: He Jian is a clever and astute person, who knows how to be an official. On the outside, he is rough and simple, but on the inside, he is quite thorough.

古文：庄宗建大号于鄴都，拜瓚谏议大夫，瓚虑庄宗事不成，求留守北京。
现代文：唐庄宗在邺都建立国号，拜何瓒为谏议大大，何瓒担心唐庄宗不能成事，请求留守北京。
English: Tangzhuangzong established the country's name in Shidu, and there was much discussion about whether or not to worship him. He was worried that Tangzhuangzong would not be able to accomplish anything, and asked to stay in Beijing.

古文：瓚与明宗有旧，明宗即位，召还，见于内殿，劳问久之，已而以瓚为西川节度副使。
现代文：何瓒和唐明宗有故交，唐明宗即位，召他回来，在内殿接见他，慰劳他很久，不久任何瓒为西川节度副使。
English: He Yan had a long-standing friendship with Tang Mingzong. When Tang Mingzong ascended to the throne, he called him back, received him in the inner hall, and consoled him for a long time. Soon, He Yan became the deputy envoy of the West River Festival.

古文：是时，孟知祥已有二志，方以副使赵季良为心腹，闻瓚代之，亟奏留季良，遂改瓚行军司马。
现代文：这时，孟知祥已有二心，正把副使趟季良当作心腹，听说以何瓒代替赵季良，急忙上奏请求留下趟季良，于是改任何瓒为行军司马。
English: At this time, Meng Zhixiang already had two hearts, he was treating the deputy envoy, Wai Qiliang, as a confidant, when he heard that he would replace Zhao Qiliang with Ho Jun, he hurriedly played a request to leave Wai Qiliang, and then changed any Jun into a marching steed.

古文：瓚耻于自辞，不得已而往，明宗赐予甚厚。
现代文：何瓒耻于自己为自己说话，迫不得已而赴任，唐明宗的赏赐十分丰厚。
English: He is not ashamed to speak for himself, he was forced to take up the post, and the rewards of the Tang and Ming dynasties are very rich.

古文：初，知祥在北京为马步军都虞候，而瓚留守太原，知祥以军礼事瓚，瓚常绳以法，知祥初不乐，及瓚为司马，犹勉待之甚厚。
现代文：当初，孟知祥在北京任马步军都虞候，而何瓒留守太原，孟知祥按军礼事奉何瓒，何瓒常常依熙法律来要求他，孟知祥开始不高兴，到何瓒任司马时，还是勉强对他很好。
English: At first, Meng Zhixiang was in Beijing waiting for the horse and buggy troops, while He Yao stayed in Taiyuan. Meng Zhixiang served He Yao according to military etiquette. He Yao often asked him to follow the laws of Xi. Meng Zhixiang began to be unhappy. When He Yao was appointed Sima, he was still reluctantly good to him.

古文：知祥反，罢瓚司马，置之私第，瓚饮恨而卒。
现代文：孟知祥反叛后，罢免何瓒的司马职务，赦罪回家，何瓒含恨而死。
English: After Meng Zhixiang rebelled, he dismissed He Ying from the post of Sima, pardoned him and sent him home. He Ying died of hatred.

