古文：貂勃常恶田单，曰： 安平君，小人也。 
现代文：貂勃经常中伤田单，说： 安平君是令小人。 
English: Zou Bo often taunted Tian Shan, saying: Anping you are a villain.

古文：安平君闻之，故为酒而召貂勃，曰： 单何以得罪于先生，故常见誉于朝? 
现代文：安平君听到后，故意摆设酒宴召请貂勃，说： 我在什么地方得罪了先生，竟然在朝廷上被您赞美？ 
English: When Anping heard this, he deliberately arranged a banquet to invite Zibo, saying: "Where did I offend you, sir, to be praised by you at court?

古文：貂勃曰： 跖之狗吠尧，非贵跖而贱尧也，狗固吠非其主也。
现代文：貂勃说： 盗跖的狗对尧狂吠，它并不认为盗跖高贵而尧卑贱，狗本来就对不是它主人的人狂吠。
English: Zibo said: The dog of the thief barks madly at the thief. It does not think that the thief is noble and the thief is lowly. The dog originally barks madly at people who are not its owners.

古文：且今使公孙子贤，而徐子不肖。
现代文：再说，如今假如公孙子贤明，而徐子不成器。
English: Besides, nowadays, if one's grandchild is wise, one's son-in-law is not.

古文：然而使公孙子与徐子斗，徐子之狗，犹时攫公孙子之腓而噬之也。
现代文：然而假如公孙子和徐子打起来，徐子的狗，必将扑上去咬公孙子的腿肚子。
English: However, if the great-grandson and Xu Zi fight, Xu Zi's dog will certainly jump up and bite the great-grandson's leg.

古文：若乃得去不肖者，而为贤者狗，岂特攫其腓而噬之耳哉? 
现代文：如果让这狗离开不成器的人，而成为贤明人的狗，难道只是扑上去咬别人腿肚子就完了吗？ 
English: If this dog is allowed to leave an incompetent person and become the dog of a wise person, will it just jump up and bite someone's legs and stomach?

古文：安平君曰： 敬闻命! 
现代文：安平君说： 恭敬地听到您的命令了。 
English: Anping said, "I have respectfully heard your order.

古文：明日，任之于王。
现代文：第二天，就把他推荐给齐襄王。
English: The next day, he recommended him to Qixiang Wang.

古文：王有所幸臣九人之属，欲伤安平君，相与语于王曰： 燕之伐齐之时，楚王使将军将万人而佐齐。
现代文：齐襄王有九个宠幸的侍臣纠合在一起，想要谋害安平君，他们共同对襄王说： 燕国攻打齐国的时候，楚顷襄王派将军淖齿率领万人帮助齐国抵抗燕军。
English: King Qixiang had nine of his favorite courtiers who were entangled together and wanted to assassinate Anping. They all said to King Xiang: When Yan attacked Qi, King Chu and King Xiang sent General Zang Jian to lead ten thousand people to help Qi resist Yan's army.

古文：今国已定，而社稷已安矣，何不使使者谢于楚王? 
现代文：如今都城已经修复，国家已经安定了，为什么不派使者向楚王表示谢意？ 
English: Now that the capital has been restored and the country has stabilized, why not send an envoy to express gratitude to King Chu?

古文：王曰： 左右孰可? 
现代文：襄王说： 左右的人谁可以呢？ 
English: King Xiang said, "Who of the people on the right and the left can leave?

古文：九人之属曰： 貂勃可。 
现代文：这九个人都说： 貂勃可以。 
English: All nine of them said, "It can be done."

古文：貂勃使楚，楚王受而觞之，数日不反。
现代文：貂勃出使到楚国，楚王接受了齐国的谢意并留貂勃饮酒，过了好几天没有回国。
English: Zou Bo sent an envoy to the State of Chu. The King of Chu accepted the gratitude of the State of Qi and kept Zou Bo to drink alcohol. After several days, Zou Bo did not return to China.

古文：九人之属相与语于王曰： 夫一人身，而牵留万乘者，岂不以据势也哉?
现代文：九个人又纠合起来去对襄王说： 一个普通的貂勃，竟然滞留在拥有万辆兵车的国君那里，难道不是因为仰仗田单的势力吗？
English: The nine people then got together again and said to King Xiang: Isn't it because of Tian Shan's power that an ordinary peasant stayed with a sovereign who owned ten thousand chariots?

古文：且安平君之与王也，君臣无礼，而上下无别。
现代文：再说安平君对大王，没有君臣礼节，上下没有个分别。
English: Furthermore, Anping-kun did not have a monarch-subject etiquette for the great king, and there was no distinction between the upper and lower ranks.

古文：且其志欲为不善。
现代文：况且他的心里想要于坏事。
English: Moreover, in his heart he was inclined to do evil.

古文：内牧百姓，循抚其心，振穷补不足，布德于民；外怀戎翟，天下之贤士，阴结诸侯之雄俊豪英。
现代文：他在国内治理百姓，安抚民心，救济穷困补勘不足，对人民广施恩惠，对国外安抚戎狄与天下的贤明之士，暗中结交诸侯中的英雄豪杰。
English: At home, he governed the people, appeased the people's hearts, alleviated poverty, made up for the lack of understanding, and extended favors to the people. Abroad, he appeased the army and the wise men of the world, and secretly made friends with the heroes and heroes among the princes.

古文：其志欲有为也。愿王之察之。 异日，而王曰： 召相单来。 
现代文：他的内心是想要篡位，希望大王详察。 有一天，襄王说： 把相国田单召唤来。 
English: In his heart, he wanted to usurp the throne, and hoped that the great king would take a closer look.One day, King Xiang said: "Summon your father-in-law, Tian Shan."

古文：田单免冠徒跣肉袒而进，退而请死罪。
现代文：田单摘下帽子、光着脚、赤着上身来进见，然后退一步请求死罪。
English: Tian Shan took off his hat, walked barefoot and bare-chested into the courtroom, and then stepped back to plead for the death penalty.

古文：五日，而王曰： 子无罪于寡人，子为子之臣礼，吾为吾之王礼而已矣。 
现代文：过了五天，襄王对田单说： 您对我没有罪过，您尽到您的臣子之礼，我尽到我的君王之礼就行了。 
English: After five days, King Xiang said to Tian Ran, "You have not sinned against me. You only need to do your vassal's duty, and I will do my king's duty."

古文：貂勃从楚来，王赐诸前，酒酣，王曰： 召相田单而来。 
现代文：貂勃从楚国回来，齐襄王当面赏赐他饮酒，酒喝得正高兴，襄王说： 把相国田单叫来。 
English: When Zibo returned from the State of Chu, the King of Qi and Xiang rewarded him with wine in person. He was very happy to drink the wine. The King of Xiang said, "Bring me Tiandan from the neighboring country."

古文：貂勃避席稽首曰： 王恶得此亡国之言乎?
现代文：貂勃离开坐席，向襄王行了九拜之中的最敬之礼说： 大王怎么能说出这种亡国的话呢？
English: Zou Bo left the table, bowed to King Xiang with the highest of nine bows, and said, "How could the great king say such a thing about ruining the country?"

古文：王上者孰与周文王? 
现代文：请大王向上和周文王比一下，谁有才能？ 襄王说： 我不如周文王。 
English: Please compare the great king Shang Shang with King Zhou Wen, who is more talented? King Xiang said: I am not as good as King Zhou Wen.

古文：王曰： 吾不若也。 
现代文：貂勃说： 是的，臣下本来知道不如。
English: Zou Bo said: Yes, it is better for the vassal to know.

古文：貂勃曰： 然，臣固知王不若也。下者孰与齐桓公? 
现代文：请向下和齐桓公比一下，谁有才能？ 襄王说： 我不如齐桓公。 
English: Please go down and compare with Lord Qihuan, who has talent? King Xiang said: I am not as good as Lord Qihuan.

古文：王曰： 吾不若也。 
现代文：貂勃说： 是的，臣下本来知道不如。
English: Zou Bo said: Yes, it is better for the vassal to know.

古文：貂勃曰： 然，臣固知王不若也。然则周文王得吕尚以为太公，齐桓公得管夷吾以为仲父，今王得安平君而独曰 单 。
现代文：既然如此，那么周文王得到吕尚，把他尊为太公，齐桓公得到管仲，把他尊为仲父，如今大王得到安平君却偏偏叫 单 。
English: Since this is the case, then King Zhou Wen got Lushan and honored him as the grand duke, King Qi Huan got Guanzhong and honored him as the stepfather, but now the great king got Anpingjun, but it's all one-sided.

古文：且自天地之辟，民人之治，为人臣之功者，谁有厚于安平君者哉?
现代文：再说自从开天辟地以来，治理百姓的人，作为臣子而建立功勋的人，有谁的功劳能比安平君更大呢？
English: Besides, since the dawn of time, who has governed the people better, who has established merit as a vassal, and whose merit can be greater than Anping?

古文：而王曰 单，单 ，恶得此亡国之言乎?
现代文：可是大王却叫他 单，单 。怎么能说出这种亡国的话呢？
English: But the great king told him to sing, sing. How could he say such words about ruining the country?

古文：且王不能守先王之社稷，燕人兴师而袭齐墟，王走而之城阳之山中。
现代文：再说当初大王不能守卫先王遗留下的国家，燕国人发兵来袭击齐国故城，大王逃到城阳的山中。
English: Moreover, at the beginning, the great king could not guard the country left behind by the previous king, the Yan people sent troops to attack the old city of Qi, and the great king fled to the mountains of Chengyang.

古文：安平君以惴惴之即墨，三里之城，五里之郭，敝卒七千，禽其司马，而反千里之齐，安平君之功也。
现代文：安平君凭借忧惧的即墨城，靠着三里的内城，五里的外城，疲惫的士兵七千，却擒获了燕国的司马骑劫，使千里失地返归齐国，这些都是安平君的功劳。
English: Anping Jun, by virtue of the dreaded Namecheap, relying on the three-mile inner city, the five-mile outer city, and the seven thousand tired soldiers, but captured the Sima horse-riding robbery of Yan Guo and returned the lost land to Qi Guo. These are the merits of Anping Jun.

古文：当是时也，阖城阳而王，城阳、天下莫之能止。
现代文：正当这个时候，如果田单关闭域阳自立为王，城阳、天下的人没有谁能制止他。
English: Just at this time, if Tian Shan closed the domain of the sun and became the king, the city of the sun, and no one in the world could stop him.

古文：然而计之于道，归之于义，以为不可，故为栈道木阁，而迎王与后于城阳山中，王乃得反，子临百姓。
现代文：然而安平君从道义上谋划，从大义出发，认为不能那样做，因此修建栈道木阁，到城阳山中去迎接大王和王后，大王才能返回故国，君临亲附百姓。
English: However, Anping Jun thought that he could not do that, so he built a wooden pavilion and went to meet the great king and queen in the mountains of Chengyang. Only then could the great king return to his home country, and the king's relatives could accompany the people.

古文：今国已定，民已安矣，王乃曰 单 。
现代文：如今国家已经安定，民众已经安生了。大王却叫他 单 。
English: Now that the country is stable and the people are safe, the great king calls him Shan.

古文：且婴儿之计不为此。
现代文：就是小孩如果考虑一下也不会这样傲。
English: Even a child, if he thinks about it, would not be so proud.

古文：王不亟杀此九子者以谢安平君，不然，国危矣! 
现代文：大王不如赶快杀掉这九个人，以向安平君谢罪，不这样做的话，国家就危险了！ 
English: The great king had better kill these nine people as soon as possible in order to apologize to Anping. Otherwise, the country will be in danger!

古文：王乃杀九子而逐其家，益封安平君以夜邑万户。
现代文：襄王于是杀掉这九个人并驱逐了他们的家眷，又把万户的夜邑加封给安平君。
English: King Xiang then killed the nine people and expelled their families, and also sealed the night towns of ten thousand households to Anping.

