古文：曹利用，字用之，赵州宁晋人。
现代文：曹利用，字用之，赵州宁晋县人。
English: Cao Yuanzhi is from Ningjin County, Zhao Province.

古文：父谏，擢明经第，仕至右补阙，以武略改崇仪使。
现代文：父亲曹谏，考取明经，官做到右补阙，后因有军事方面的才能而改任崇仪使。
English: Cao Yu's father, Cao Yu's father, took the examination of the Ming Dynasty, and was promoted to the right to supplement the imperial edict. Later, because of his military talent, he was transferred to the Chongyi envoy.

古文：利用少喜谈辩，慷慨有志操。
现代文：曹利用少年时喜谈善辩，为人慷慨而有节操、大志。
English: Cao took advantage of his youth to be a good debater, a generous person with self-discipline and ambition.

古文：谏卒，补殿前承旨，改右班殿直，迁为鄜延路走马承受公事。
现代文：父亲曹谏死后，他以荫补殿前承旨的官，后改任右班殿直，又被选为延路走马承受公事。
English: After the death of his father, Cao Pi, he was appointed as the first official to receive the imperial edict, and later he was appointed as the right-hand man of the palace, and he was also selected as a long-distance runner to undertake public affairs.

古文：景德元年，契丹寇河北，真宗幸澶州，射杀契丹大将挞览，契丹欲收兵去，使王继忠议和，择可使契丹者。
现代文：景德元年，契丹侵犯河北，宋真宗亲临澶州，射死契丹大将挞览。契丹要收兵退去，朝廷派王继忠主持议和，挑选可以出使契丹的人。
English: In the first year of Jingde, Khitan invaded Hebei, and Song Zhenzong personally went to Bozhou and shot dead the Khitan general Minshang. Khitan wanted to withdraw his troops, and the imperial court sent Wang Jizhong to preside over peace negotiations and select people who could dispatch Khitan.

古文：利用适奏事行在，枢密院以利用应选，帝曰： 此重事也，毋轻用人。 明日，枢密使王继英又荐利用，遂授阁门祗候、崇仪副使，奉书诣契丹军。
现代文：曹利用当时正因汇报事情在朝廷，枢密院便推他为候选人。
English: Cao Rong was in the imperial court at the time to report on the situation, and the Privy Council nominated him as a candidate.

古文：帝语利用曰： 契丹南来，不求地则邀赂尔。
现代文：皇帝说： 这是重要大事，不能随便用人。 
English: The emperor said, "This is an important matter, you can't just hire anyone.

古文：关南地归中国已久，不可许；汉以玉帛赐单于，有故事。 利用愤契丹，色不平，对曰： 彼若妄有所求，臣不敢生还。 帝壮其言。
现代文：第二天，枢密使王继英又推荐曹利用，皇上因此授任他为门祗候、崇仪副使，奉诏书前往契丹军中。皇帝对曹利用说： 契丹人南下入侵，不是要夺取土地便是想求得财物。关南一地归属中国已久，不可许给契丹，汉代用玉帛赐给匈奴单于，有成例在先。 曹利用痛恨契丹，便愤愤不平地对皇帝说： 他们若妄图有所贪求，臣绝不敢活着回来。 皇帝很欣赏他的豪言壮语。
English: The next day, the confidential envoy Wang Jieying also recommended Cao Rong, and the emperor therefore appointed him as the gatekeeper and deputy envoy of Chongyi, and went to the Khitan army with a decree. The emperor said to Cao Rong: The Khitans invaded the south, not to seize land, but to seek wealth. Guannan has belonged to China for a long time, and it is not allowed to give it to the Khitan. The Han Dynasty used the jade scepter to give it to the Xiongnu. There are precedents. Cao Rong hated the Khitan, and indignantly said to the emperor: If they were greedy

古文：利用驰至军中，耶律隆绪母见利用车上，车轭设横板，布食器，召与饮食，其从臣重行坐。
现代文：曹利用飞驰到契丹军中，耶律隆绪的母亲在车上接见了他。车轭上放置一块横板，板上摆放着餐具。请曹利用一同饮食，而随从官吏则分两排陪坐。
English: Cao Rong's mother met him in the car as he sped off to join the Khitan army. A horizontal board was placed on the back of the car, and tableware was placed on the board. Cao Rong invited her to eat with him, while the accompanying officials sat in two rows.

古文：饮食毕，果议关南地，利用拒之。
现代文：吃完后，果然议论割关南地的事，曹利用拒绝了她。
English: After they finished eating, they did indeed discuss the matter of cutting off the South, but Cao Yu rejected her.

古文：遣其臣韩杞来报命，利用再使契丹。
现代文：契丹派官员韩杞与曹利用同来宋廷报命，曹利用奉命再次出使契丹。
English: The Khitans sent officials Han Min and Cao Rong to report to Song Ting. Cao Rong was ordered to send the Khitans again.

古文：契丹母曰： 晋德我，畀我关南地，周世宗取之，今宜还我。 利用曰： 晋人以地畀契丹，周人取之，我朝不知也。
现代文：契丹国母说： 后晋感激我，送给我关南一地，后又被周世宗夺取，今天应还给我。 曹利用说： 后晋人把地送给契丹，后周人又把地夺回，对此我大宋朝不知道。
English: The mother of the Khitan nation said, "The Later Jin dynasty was grateful to me and gave me a piece of land in Guannan, which was later seized by the Zhou dynasty and should be returned to me today." Cao Rong said, "The Later Jin dynasty gave land to the Khitan dynasty, and the Later Zhou dynasty recaptured the land, but I don't know about the Great Song dynasty."

古文：若岁求金帛以佐军，尚不知帝意可否，割地之请，利用不敢以闻。 其政事舍人高正始遽前曰： 我引众以来，图复故地。
现代文：像每年求取一些金银玉帛之类来补助军费，尚不知我们皇帝是否同意，至于割地的请求，我曹利用根本就不敢向皇上报告。 契丹政事舍人高正始竟冲上前来说 ：我们统兵南来，为的是收复故地。
English: As for the request to allocate land, I Cao Rong did not dare to report it to the emperor at all, as I did not yet know whether our emperor would agree to the annual request to obtain some gold, silver, jade and other things to subsidize military expenses. At the beginning of the Khitan political affairs, Gao Zhengyi rushed forward and said: We have come south with all our troops in order to recover our ancestral land.

古文：若止得金帛归，则愧吾国人矣。 利用曰： 子盍为契丹熟计，使契丹用子言，恐连兵结衅，不得而息，非国利也。 契丹度不可屈，和议遂定，利用奉约书以归。
现代文：如只是取得些金银玉帛回去，那会愧对我国人民了。 曹利用说 ：你何不为契丹国仔细想一想，假使契丹按你的话去做，恐怕要与中国结仇打仗，契丹人民得不到休养生息，对国家也没有利。 契丹估计不能使他屈服，便定结和议，曹利用带着和约归国。
English: If you just get some gold, silver and jade to go back, it will be a shame for our people. Cao Rongji said: Why don't you think carefully for the Khitan country, if the Khitan do as you say, I am afraid that you will have to fight with China, the Khitan people will not be able to recover and live, and it will not be beneficial to the country. The Khitan estimated that he could not make him give in, so he concluded a peace negotiation, and Cao Rongji returned to the country with a peace treaty.

古文：擢东上阁门使、忠州刺史，赐第京师。
现代文：后提拔为东上门使、忠州刺史，并赏赐一套在北京的府第。
English: Later, he was promoted to Dongshangmen envoy, Chungju secretary, and awarded a suite of apartments in Beijing.

古文：契丹遣使来聘，遂命利用迎劳之。
现代文：契丹派遣使节来宋朝访问，便命曹利用慰劳接待。
English: Khitan dispatched envoys to visit the Song Dynasty, and then ordered Cao to receive them with consolation.

古文：知宜州刘永规驭下残酷，军校乘众怨，杀永规叛，陷柳城县，围象州，分兵掠广州，岭南骚动。
现代文：宜州知府刘永规用残酷手段驾驭部下，有个军校利用部众对知府的怨恨，刺杀刘永规，发动叛乱，攻陷柳城县，包围象州城，又分兵攻取广州，整个岭南骚动不安。
English: Liu Yonggui, the governor of Yizhou, used cruel means to control his subordinates. There was a military school that took advantage of the resentment of his subordinates against the governor, assassinated Liu Yonggui, launched a rebellion, invaded Liucheng County, encircled Xiangzhou City, and sent troops to capture Guangzhou. The whole of Lingnan was in turmoil.

古文：帝谓辅臣曰： 向者司天占候当用兵，朕固忧远方守将非其人，以起边衅，今果然。
现代文：皇帝对辅佐大臣说 ：先前司天监占候，说应当用兵打仗，朕就担忧远方守将不行，会引起边远地区的灾祸，如今果然如此。
English: The emperor said to the assistant minister, "Previously, when the chief overseer of heaven and earth divined that it was necessary to fight with soldiers, I was worried that it would not be possible to defend far away, and that it would bring disaster to the outlying regions, but now it is true.

古文：曹利用晓方略，尽心于事，其以为广南安抚使。 利用至岭外，遇贼武仙县。
现代文：曹利用这个人精晓策略，又办事尽心，可任命他做广南安抚使。 曹利用前往岭外，在武仙县遇上强盗。
English: Cao took advantage of this man, who knew strategy and did his best, to appoint him as the Guangnan pacification envoy. Cao went to Lingwai and encountered robbers in Wuxian County.

古文：贼持健标，蒙采盾，衣甲坚利，锋镝不能入。
现代文：强贼手持锐利的标枪，护着彩色的盾牌，衣服盔甲坚实，锐箭也射不进。
English: The strong thief holds a sharp javelin in his hand, protected by a colored shield, his clothes and armor are solid, and he can't shoot a sharp arrow.

古文：利用使士持巨斧长刀破盾，遂斩首以徇。
现代文：曹利用让士兵手持大斧长刀先将盾牌砍破，才将强盗斩首示众。
English: Cao Cao ordered the soldiers armed with axes and long knives to cut the shields before beheading the robbers.

古文：岭南平，迁引进使。
现代文：岭南平定后，升任引进使。
English: After Lingnan was pacified, he was promoted to the post of introduction envoy.

古文：历客省使、嘉州防御使，出为鄜延路总管。
现代文：历任客省使、嘉州防御使，后出任延路总管。
English: Successively served as guest provincial envoy, Jiazhou defense envoy, and later served as Yanlu general manager.

古文：大中祥符七年，拜枢密副使，加宣徽北院使、同知院事，进知院事，遂拜枢密使、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：大中祥符七年，任枢密副使，升宣徽北院使、同知院事，又进升为知院事，最后升任枢密使、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the seventh year of the Great Middle Xiangfu, he was appointed as a vice-envoy of the Privy Council, and was promoted to the envoy of Xuanhu North Academy, and the governor of the same academy, and was promoted to the governor of the same academy, and finally he was promoted to the envoy of the Privy Council, and the vice-envoy of the same academy.

古文：利用在位既久，颇恃功。
现代文：曹利用执政时间长了，很有些仗恃自己的功劳而无所顾忌。
English: Cao Rong has been in power for a long time, and he is very proud of his achievements and has no scruples.

古文：天禧二年，辅臣丁谓、李迪争论帝前，迪斥谓奸邪，因言利用与之为朋党。
现代文：天禧二年，辅佐大臣丁谓与李迪在皇帝面前争论，李迪指责丁谓是奸臣，并说曹利用与丁谓是同党。
English: In the second year of Tian Hei, the assistant minister Ding Zuo and Li Di argued in front of the emperor. Li Di accused Ding Zuo of being a traitor, and said that Cao Yu and Ding Zuo were the same party.

古文：利用曰： 以片文遇主，臣不如迪；捐躯以入不测之虏，迪不逮臣也。 迪坐是免，而利用以检校太师兼太子少保为会灵观使，进尚书右仆射。
现代文：曹利用说 ：以一纸文章受到君主的赏识，臣不如李迪；冒着生命危险进入凶险不测的敌军之中，则李迪不及臣。 李迪因此被罢免，而曹利用则以检校太师兼太子少保身份任会灵观使，并进职为尚书右仆射。
English: Cao Yu said, "A subject is not as good as Li Di if he is appreciated by the monarch with a piece of paper, but Li Di is not as good as a subject if he risks his life to enter the dangerous enemy army. Therefore, Li Di was dismissed, and Cao Yu was appointed as the inspector and the minor prince's assistant, and was promoted to the post of Shang Shu's right-hand man.

古文：乾兴初，加左仆射兼侍中、武宁军节度使、景灵宫使，诏如曹彬给公使钱岁万缗。
现代文：乾兴初，升左仆射兼任侍中、武宁军节度使、景灵宫使，皇上又下诏依曹彬待遇每年赐给曹利用一万缗公使钱。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Qianxing, Zheng Zuofei also served as an aide-de-camp, the festival envoy of the Wu Ning army, and the envoy of the Jingling Palace. The emperor also issued an edict according to Cao Bin's treatment to give Cao Bin 10,000 baht of official envoy money every year.

古文：契丹使者萧从顺桀骜，称疾留馆下，不时发。
现代文：契丹使者萧从顺桀骜不羁，借口有病留滞在驻宋国使馆中，时常发病。
English: The Khitan emissary, Xiao Zongxun, was unruly, staying at the embassy in Song on the pretext that he was ill, and often fell ill.

古文：朝廷遣使问劳，相望于道。
现代文：朝廷派去慰问的使者，多得相望于道。
English: The number of emissaries sent by the imperial court to offer condolences was overwhelming.

古文：利用请一切罢之，从顺乃引去。
现代文：曹利用请求把这一切都取消，萧从顺便撤退回国去了。
English: Cao used the request to cancel all of this, and Xiao withdrew from the incident and went back to China.

古文：加司空。
现代文：加封司空之职。
English: The post of capping secretary is no more.

古文：旧制，枢密使虽检校三司兼侍中、尚书令，犹班宰相下。
现代文：旧例，枢密使虽是检校三司兼任侍中、尚书令，但地位仍在宰相之下。
English: Under the old system, even though the Privy Councilor was the third-ranking official in charge of inspecting schools and also served as an attendant and secretary, his position was still below that of the prime minister.

古文：乾兴中，王曾由次相为会灵观使，利用由枢密使领景灵宫使，时重宫观使，诏利用班曾上，议者非之。
现代文：乾兴年间，王曾由副宰相做会灵观使，曹利用由枢密使兼领景灵宫使，当时宫使与观使重复，皇上下诏确定曹利用的地位在王曾之上。
English: During the Qianxing era, the king had the vice-chancellor as the spiritual envoy of the association, and Cao Rongji had the privy envoy and the leader of the spiritual palace. At that time, the palace envoy and the spiritual envoy were repeated, and the imperial edict determined that Cao Rongji's status was higher than that of Wang Zeng.

古文：未几，曾进昭文馆大学士、玉清昭应宫使，将告谢，而利用犹欲班曾上，阁门不敢裁。
现代文：舆论对此有非议。不久，王曾进升为昭文馆大学士、玉清昭应宫使，将举行谢恩仪典时，曹利用仍想让自己排在王曾之上，门不敢裁决。
English: Public opinion was critical of this. Soon, Wang Zengjin was promoted to the Shouwen Academy of Literature and Literature, and Yu Qing Zhao was appointed as an envoy to the palace. When the thanksgiving ceremony was to be held, Cao Yu still wanted to rank himself above Wang Zeng. The gate did not dare to adjudicate.

古文：帝与太后坐承明殿久之，遣押班趣班，阁门惶惧莫知所出，曾抗声目吏曰： 但奏宰臣王曾等告谢。 班既定，而利用怏怏不平。
现代文：皇帝与太后坐在承明殿久等，吩咐按爵位高低依次序进见，门惶恐不知所措，王曾大声看着门官说： 只需报告说宰臣王曾等告谢便可。 次序定下后，曹利用愤愤不平。
English: The emperor and the empress dowager sat and waited for a long time in the Chengming Palace, and ordered that they should proceed in order according to the level of their titles. The door was overwhelmed with fear. Wang Zeng looked loudly at the gate officer and said, "You only need to report that the vice-minister Wang Zeng had waited to say thank you." After the order was set, Cao took advantage of the anger.

古文：帝使同列慰晓之，仍诏宰臣、枢密使序班如故事，而利用益骄，尚居次相张知白上。
现代文：皇帝让他们一同进见以宽慰曹利用，但仍然下诏规定宰臣、枢密使的职位高低依从前旧制所定。然而曹利用更加骄傲自大，职位还排在副宰相张知白之上。
English: The emperor let them go forward together to appease Cao Rong, but still issued an edict stipulating that the positions of vice-ministers and envoys were determined according to the old system. However, Cao Rong was even more arrogant, and his position was ranked higher than that of Vice-Chancellor Zhang Zhibai.

古文：寻召张旻于河阳，为枢密使，利用疑代己，始悔惧焉。
现代文：不久皇帝从河阳召张来做枢密使，曹利用怀疑是朝廷派他来取代自己，因此开始后悔和害怕起来。
English: Not long after, the emperor summoned Zhang from Kheyang to serve as a confidential envoy. Cao suspected that the imperial court had sent him to replace him, so he began to regret and fear.

古文：初，章献太后临朝，中人与贵戚稍能轩轾为祸福，而利用以勋旧自居，不恤也。
现代文：当初，章献皇太后控制朝政，宦官和外戚便有些飞扬跋扈，胡作非为，曹利用以功勋旧臣自居，对他们绝不留情。
English: At the beginning, Empress Dowager Zhang Xian controlled the imperial government, and eunuchs and relatives of the imperial family were somewhat extravagant and indulged in wrongdoings. Cao took advantage of the former vassals to present himself as a meritorious person, and showed no mercy to them.

古文：凡内降恩，力持不予，左右多怨，太后亦严惮利用，称曰 侍中 而不名。
现代文：凡皇后给族人降恩，他总是坚持说不能给。周围很多人都心生怨恨，太后也很顾忌曹利用，称他 侍中 而不称名字。
English: Whenever the empress showed favor to a member of the clan, he always insisted that he couldn't give it. Many people around him harbored resentment, and the empress dowager was also wary of being taken advantage of by Cao, calling him "chamberlain" without giving his name.

古文：利用奏事帘前，或以指爪击带鞓，左右指以示太后曰： 利用在先帝时，何敢尔邪？ 太后颔之。
现代文：曹利用在帘前奏报事情时，有时用手指弹击垂帘的带子，左右的人将此情指给太后看，并说： 曹利用在先帝的时候，怎敢如此？ 太后点头表示已知道。
English: When Cao Rong reported on the events before the curtain, he sometimes flicked the tape of the curtain with his finger. People on both sides pointed this out to the empress dowager and said: How dare Cao Rong do this when he was the former emperor? The empress dowager nodded and said that she already knew.

古文：利用奏抑内降恩难屡却，亦有不得已从之者。
现代文：曹利用想要抑制皇后给族人降恩施赏，但不能屡次抵制，也有不得已同意的。
English: Cao Rongji wanted to restrain the empress from giving a reward to the tribesmen, but he could not repeatedly resist, and he had to agree.

古文：人揣知之，或绐太后曰： 蒙恩得内降辄不从，今利用家媪阴诺臣请，其必可得矣。 下之而验，太后始疑其私，颇衔怒。
现代文：别人揣测知道了他的用意，有人骗太后说： 多次蒙皇后恩赏他都不同意，今天曹利用的老婆私下答应了臣的请求，这次皇后的恩赏一定可以得到了。 当天太后下诏降旨，而果被他同意。太后便开始怀疑曹利用有私情，对他很愤恨。
English: Others speculated that they knew his intention. Someone lied to the empress dowager and said, "He has received the queen's favor many times, but he doesn't agree. Today, Cao Rong's wife privately agreed to the minister's request. This time, the empress dowager's favor can definitely be obtained." On the same day, the empress dowager issued a decree, which was approved by him. The empress dowager began to suspect that Cao Rong had personal feelings, and she was very angry with him.

古文：内侍罗崇勋得罪，太后使利用召崇勋戒敕之，利用去崇勋冠帻，诟斥良久，崇勋恨之。
现代文：内侍罗崇勋犯了罪，太后使曹利用召罗来警告谴责，曹利用取掉他的帽子，斥骂了很久，罗崇勋怀恨他。
English: The courtier Luo Chongxun had committed a crime. The Empress Dowager sent Cao Rong to summon Luo to warn and reprimand him. Cao Rongxun took off his hat and scolded him for a long time. Luo Chongxun hated him.

古文：会从子汭为赵州兵马监押，而州民赵德崇诣阙告汭不法事。
现代文：恰巧曹利用的侄儿曹做赵州兵马监押，而州民赵德崇上京状告曹的不法行为。
English: Coincidentally, Cao Cao's nephew, whom Cao Cao took advantage of, was a prisoner of war in Zhao Province, while Zhao Dezong, a citizen of Zhao Province, went to Beijing to accuse Cao of wrongdoing.

古文：奏上，崇勋请往按治，遂穷探其狱。
现代文：奏折送上后，罗崇勋请求让他前去查处治罪，于是仔细到狱中调查罪情。
English: After the report was submitted, Luo Chongxun asked him to investigate and punish the crime, so he carefully went to the prison to investigate the crime.

古文：汭坐被酒衣黄衣，令人呼万岁，杖死。
现代文：曹所犯之罪是酒醉后穿黄衣，叫别人喊万岁，被依法杖打而死。
English: Cao committed the crime of wearing yellow clothes after getting drunk, calling others to shout "long live," and was beaten to death with a cane according to the law.

古文：初，汭事起，即罢利用枢密使，加兼侍中判邓州。
现代文：当初，曹的事一发现，就免了曹利用的枢密使职务，而降为兼侍中通判邓州。
English: At first, as soon as Cao's affair was discovered, he was relieved of his position as a confidential envoy, which Cao had taken advantage of, and was relegated to serving as a courtier to Dengzhou.

古文：及汭诛，谪左千牛卫将军、知随州。
现代文：到曹被诛后，他又被降为左千牛卫将军，任随州知府。
English: After Cao was arrested, he was demoted to the rank of General of the Left Thousand Cattle Guards and was appointed governor of Suizhou.

古文：又坐私贷景灵宫钱，贬崇信军节度副使，房州安置，命内侍杨怀敏护送；诸子各夺二官，没所赐第，籍其赀，黜亲属十余人。
现代文：后又因私自借贷景灵宫的钱，被贬为崇信军节度使，安置在房州，并命内侍杨怀敏护送；他的儿子们也各降两级，又被没收皇上赏赐的宅第，没收家产，还罢免了他的十多个亲属。
English: Later, because he borrowed money from Jingling Palace, he was relegated to the position of the highest-ranking officer of the Chongxin Army and placed in Fangzhou, and he ordered his inner servant Yang Huimin to escort him; his sons were also each reduced by two levels, and his residence, which was given to him by the emperor, was confiscated, his family property was confiscated, and more than ten of his relatives were dismissed.

古文：宦者多恶利用，行至襄阳驿，怀敏不肯前，以语逼之，利用素刚，遂投缳而绝，以暴卒闻。
现代文：宦官大多恨曹利用，当他来至襄阳驿站时，杨怀敏不肯再走，并用话威逼他，曹利用素来刚烈，于是上吊自杀，杨怀敏以他突然死亡上报。
English: Most of the eunuchs hated Cao Rong. When he came to Xiangyang Railway Station, Yang Huimin refused to leave again and used words to coerce him. Cao Rong was always strong-willed, so he hanged himself. Yang Huimin reported his sudden death.

古文：后其家请居邓州，帝恻然许之，命其子内殿崇班渊监本州税。
现代文：后他的家人请求迁居到邓州，皇帝同情地答应了，并下令让他的儿子内殿崇班曹渊任邓州税监。
English: After his family's request to move to Dangzhou, the emperor sympathetically agreed and ordered his son, Neidong Chongban Caoyuan, to serve as Dangzhou's tax inspector.

古文：利一发禀振恤，且移诘涿州，自是不敢复刺。巡检赵用有罪，坐不察举，改卫州钤辖。
现代文：明道二年，恢复他节度兼侍中的荣誉，后又追赠为太傅，并退还宅第给他的儿子们，赐谥 襄悼 ，又命学士赵概为他制作神道碑，皇帝亲自在碑额上篆书 旌功之碑 ，下诏归还所有的旧有家产。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, he restored the honor of his festival and attendant, and then posthumously awarded him the title of Taifu, and returned the house to his sons, bestowed the title of mourning, and ordered the bachelor Zhao You to make a Shinto monument for him. The emperor personally inscribed on the monument, "Monument of Achievement," and returned all the old family property.

古文：久之，为定州路钤辖，进马步军总管，徙真定、大名府路。历知代、沧、澶、郑、相州，终雄州团练使。杨崇勋，字宝臣，蓟州人。
现代文：曹利用生性勇悍，但很少圆通，致力于裁制侥幸小人，但他的亲朋旧友中却有人因他的关系而当官升职。他因此遭受祸患。但他在朝廷中能尽忠职守，始终不屈服，无罪而死，天下人都说他冤枉。杨崇勋，字宝臣，蓟州人。
English: Cao took advantage of his natural bravery, but he was rarely well-rounded, and he was committed to dealing with "lucky" villains. However, some of his relatives, friends and old friends were promoted to high-ranking positions because of his relationship. He suffered from this misfortune. However, he was able to perform his duties faithfully in the imperial court, and he never gave in. He died without guilt, and the whole world said that he was wronged. Yang Chongxun, a "treasured retainer," was from Zhangzhou.

古文：祖守斌，事太祖为龙捷指挥使。
现代文：祖父杨守斌，奉事宋太祖，任龙捷指挥使。
English: His grandfather, Yang Shubin, served Song Taizu as a commander.

古文：父全美，事太宗为殿前指挥使。
现代文：父亲杨全美，奉事宋太宗，任殿前指挥使。
English: His father, Yang Quanmei, served Song Taizong and was appointed as the palace's former commander.

古文：崇勋以父任为东西班承旨，事真宗于东宫。
现代文：杨崇勋因父亲的荫庇，任东西班承旨，在东宫事奉真宗。
English: Because of the shadow of his father, Yang Chongxun was appointed as the successor of the Eastern and Western Divisions, and served the True Sect in the Eastern Palace.

古文：帝尝曰： 闻若嗜学，吾授若书。 崇勋自是稍通兵法及前代兴废之事。
现代文：皇帝曾对他说 ：听说你很嗜学，我送你书籍。 杨崇勋从此粗通兵法及前代兴衰之事。
English: The emperor once said to him, "I have heard that you are very studious, so I will send you books." From then on, Yang Chongxun learned a lot about military tactics and the rise and fall of previous generations.

古文：真宗即位，迁左侍禁、西头供奉官、寄班祗候。
现代文：宋真宗即位后，他升任右侍禁、西头供奉官、寄班祗候。
English: After the enthronement of Song Zhenzong, he was promoted to the position of right attendant, west head attendant, and sent to wait.

古文：雷有终讨王均，崇勋承受公事，以奏捷擢内殿崇班。
现代文：雷有终征讨王均时，杨崇勋在他手下做事，因战事大捷，他被提升为内殿崇班。
English: During the final campaign against Wang Jun, Yang Chongxun worked under him. Due to the great success of the war, he was promoted to the Inner Court of the Inner Court.

古文：累迁西上阁门使、群牧都监，改副使，以左卫大将军、恩州刺史为枢密都承旨，寻提举枢密诸房、通进银台司事。
现代文：积官升任西上门使、群牧都监，后改为群牧副使，后又从左卫大将军、恩州刺史晋升为枢密都承旨，不久又任提举枢密诸房、通进银台司事等职。
English: He was promoted to the post of the west gate envoy and the inspector of the Gundu District, and later he was changed to the deputy envoy of the Gundu District, and then he was promoted from the General of the Left Division of the Guards and the Secretary of State of Enzhou to the post of the Secretary of the Privy Council, and soon he was appointed to the post of the Secretary of the Privy Council of Zhuang, Tongjin and Yintai.

古文：以英州防御使为马军都虞候、并代州马步军副都总管，留为客省使、领群牧使。
现代文：又从英州防御使升任马军都虞候、并代二州马步军副都总管，又留京师任客省使，兼任群牧使。
English: In addition, he was promoted from the defense minister of Yingzhou to the commander of the horse army, and also served as the deputy commander of the horse army of the two states. He also stayed in Beijing to serve as the guest provincial envoy and concurrently served as the group pastoral envoy.

古文：真宗久不豫，寇准罢。
现代文：宋真宗很久不舒适，寇准被罢免。
English: Song Zhenzong was uncomfortable for a long time, and Kou Jun was dismissed.

古文：入内副都知周怀政谋奉帝为太上皇，传位太子，复相准。
现代文：入内副都知周怀政策谋要立皇帝为太上皇，而传位给太子，再用寇准为宰相。
English: The vice-premier knew that Zhou Huai's policy was to set up the emperor as the last emperor, and pass the throne to the prince, and then use Kojun as the prime minister.

古文：尝以谋访崇勋，崇勋以变告。
现代文：他曾以此计划征询过杨崇勋，杨崇勋将政变阴谋报告朝廷。
English: He had consulted Yang Chongxun with this plan, and Yang Chongxun reported the coup plot to the imperial court.

古文：丁谓得其辞，夜造曹利用，共议发之。
现代文：丁渭得到消息，连夜造访曹利用，共同商议揭发此事。
English: Ding Rong got the news and visited Cao Rong overnight to jointly discuss and expose the matter.

古文：翌日，诛怀政，擢崇勋邓州观察使，不拜，乃以内客省使领桂州观察使，复兼群牧使。
现代文：第二天，处死周怀政，升杨崇勋为邓州观察使，杨崇勋辞绝不受，于是以内客省使身份兼任桂州观察使，仍兼群牧使。
English: The next day, Zhou Huai Zheng was executed, and Yang Chong Xun was promoted to Dengzhou observation envoy. Yang Chong Xun did not accept the resignation, so he concurrently served as Guizhou observation envoy in the capacity of a guest province envoy, and still concurrently served as herdsmen envoy.

古文：初，群牧置使皆以文臣领之，崇勋曰： 马者战备，虽无事，可去邪？ 
现代文：当初，群牧使都由文臣兼任，杨崇勋说： 马是用来备战的，虽太平无事，怎能抛弃呢？ 
English: At the beginning, the group herdsmen were all concurrently appointed by Wenshen, Yang Chongxun said: The horse is used to prepare for war, although it is peaceful, how can it be abandoned?

古文：仁宗即位，以彰德军节度观察留后知陈州，授殿前都虞候、真定府定州路副都总管、知定州，历马军副都指挥使、殿前都指挥使、振武军节度使，拜宣徽南院使兼枢密副使。
现代文：宋仁宗即位后，杨崇勋以彰德军节度观察留后身份任陈州知州，并被授任殿前都虞候、真定府定州路副都总管、定州知州等职，后历任马军副都指挥使、殿前都指挥使、振武军节度使，升宣徽南院使兼枢密副使。
English: After the enthronement of Song Renzong, Yang Chongxun was appointed to Chenzhou Zhizhou with the status of staying behind to observe the festival of the German army, and was awarded the posts of the former prefectural governor of the palace, the deputy chief administrator of Jingshou Road in Jinding Prefecture, and Jingshou Zhizhou. Later, he was successively the deputy commander of the Ma Army, the former prefectural commander of the palace, the commander of the Zhenwu Army, and the deputy commander of the festival, and was promoted to the envoy of the Southern Court of Hunan Province and the confidential deputy envoy.

古文：宫中火，为修葺副使。
现代文：宫中失火后，又任修葺副使。
English: After a fire broke out in the palace, he was appointed vice-envoy to repair the palace.

古文：又历镇南、定武军、山南东道节度使。
现代文：又历任镇南军、定武军、山南东道节度使。
English: He has also served as the envoy of the Zhenan Army, Dingwu Army, and Shannan Host Festival.

古文：章献与仁宗言，先帝最称崇勋质信，可任大事，乃进枢密使。
现代文：章献皇后跟仁宗说：先帝最称赏杨崇勋的质朴和重信，他可担任大事。于是升他为枢密使。
English: Empress Zhang Xian told Emperor Nanzong that the former emperor most appreciated Yang Chongxun's simplicity and sincerity, and that he could take on important responsibilities. Therefore, he was promoted to the position of Privy Envoy.

古文：百官诣洪福院上章懿册，退而立班奉慰，宰相张士逊过崇勋园饮，日中期不至。
现代文：文武百官前往洪福院上章懿皇后的贺册，然后退下排队接受慰勉，当天宰相张士逊到杨崇勋的花园饮酒，到中午没有按时到洪福院。
English: Hundreds of military and civilian officials went to Hongfu Academy to sign the Queen's congratulatory book, and then stood in line to receive condolences. On the same day, Prime Minister Zhang Shisong went to Yang Chongxun's garden to drink alcohol, and did not arrive at Hongfu Academy on time by noon.

古文：御史中丞范讽劾奏，与士逊俱罢，以同平章事、河阳三城节度使判许州。
现代文：御史中丞范讽上奏弹劾，杨崇勋因此事同张士逊都被罢职，他改以同平章事、河阳三城节度使身份离京出任许州知府。
English: Yang Chongxun and Zhang Shixun were both removed from office as a result of the impeachment, and he left Beijing to serve as the governor of Huzhou with the title of Tongping Zhengji and the title of Heyang Sancheng Jiedu.

古文：翌日，改陈州。
现代文：第二天，改任陈州知州。
English: The next day, he was reassigned to Chenzhou Chizhou.

古文：景祐初，怀政家人讼冤，遂罢同平章事，知寿州，徙亳州，复知陈州。
现代文：景初，因周怀政的家人上诉冤枉，杨崇勋又被免去同平章的头衔，改任寿州知州，后调任亳州知州，最后又任陈州知州。
English: At the beginning of Jing, due to the wrongful appeal of Zhou Huai Zheng's family, Yang Chongxun was also exempted from the title of Tongpingzhang, and was transferred to Shoushu Chizhou, then to Zhangzhou Chizhou, and finally to Chenzhou Chizhou.

古文：契丹将渝盟，朝廷择将备边，崇勋请行，复拜同平章事、判定州。
现代文：契丹将要背叛盟约，朝廷选将备战，杨崇勋请求前去，因此又复任同平章事、定州知州。
English: Khitan will betray the covenant, the imperial court will prepare for war, Yang Chongxun asked to go, so he was reinstated as Tongping Zhangji and Dingzhou Zhizhou.

古文：既而老不任事，徙成德军，又徙郑州。
现代文：后来因年老不能担负重任，调为成德军节度，又降为郑州知州。
English: Later, because of his old age, he was unable to shoulder heavy responsibilities, and was transferred to Chengdu German Army and reduced to Zhengzhou Zhizhou.

古文：坐其子宗诲纳赇枉法，以左卫上将军致仕，改太子太保，卒。
现代文：因受儿子杨宗诲受贿枉法的牵连，以左卫上将军职位退休，改封太子太保。
English: Due to his son Yang Zongya being implicated in bribery, he retired from the position of General of the Left Division and was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：赠太尉，溢恭密，寻改谥恭毅。
现代文：不久去世，追赠太尉，谥为 恭密 ，不久又改谥为 恭毅 。
English: He died soon after and was posthumously awarded the rank of captain. His posthumous name was "恭密," which was soon changed to "恭毅."

古文：崇勋性贪鄙，久任军职。
现代文：杨崇勋生性贪婪而浅陋，久任军队职务。
English: Yang Chongxun was born greedy and shallow, and served in the military for a long time.

古文：恃功怙宠，祝萌而弗悟，可悲也已！
现代文：当宋真宗时，每次奏对，总喜放肆大谈中外大事，喜欢中伤别人，人们因此惧怕他。
English: When Song Zhenzong was in power, he was always happy to talk about Chinese and foreign affairs, and liked to slander others, so people were afraid of him.

古文：耆、崇勋二夏奋阘茸，位将相，皆骄侈贪吝，恃私恩，违清议，君子所不取也。狄青，字汉臣，汾州西河人。
现代文：任节度使镇守各藩时，曾派兵卒工匠雕制许多演木偶戏的木偶，再涂上色彩，用船运到京城来卖。狄青，字汉臣，汾州西河县人。
English: When he was in charge of the festival, he sent soldiers and craftsmen to carve many puppets to perform puppet shows, then painted them and shipped them to Beijing for sale.Di Qing, also known as Hanshen, was from Xihe County, Zhangzhou.

古文：善骑射。
现代文：精通骑马射击。
English: He is proficient in horse riding and archery.

古文：初隶骑御马直，选为散直。
现代文：早期是隶属于御马直的一名骑兵，后选做散置。
English: In the early days, he was a cavalryman under Mima Naoshi, and later he was selected as a scatter.

古文：宝元初，赵元昊反，诏择卫士从边，以青为三班差使、殿侍、延州指使。
现代文：宝元初期，西夏赵元昊反叛，朝廷下诏选择卫士到边疆，任命狄青为三班差使、殿侍兼延州指使。
English: At the beginning of the Baoyuan era, Zhao Yuanhao of Western Xia rebelled, and the imperial court issued an edict to select guards to go to the frontier, and appointed Di Qing as the third-class envoy, palace attendant and Yanzhou envoy.

古文：时偏将屡为贼败，士卒多畏怯，青行常为先锋。
现代文：当时前线的偏将屡次被敌军打败，士兵大多畏惧胆怯，狄青行军打仗时经常亲自做先锋。
English: At that time, the front-line commanders were repeatedly defeated by the enemy, the soldiers were mostly afraid and timid, and Di Qing often personally led the vanguard when marching to war.

古文：凡四年，前后大小二十五战，中流矢者八。
现代文：作战四年，前后大小打了二十五场战斗，中乱箭多达八次。
English: Four years of combat, twenty-five battles before and after, up to eight times in the middle.

古文：破金汤城，略宥州，屠咩、岁香、毛奴、尚罗、庆七、家口等族，燔积聚数万，收其帐二千三百，生口五千七百。
现代文：攻陷金汤城，夺取宥州，屠杀了砽咩、岁香、毛奴、尚罗、庆七、家口等部族，焚烧西夏储备的粮食数万石，收缴帐篷二千三百只，俘虏五千七百人。
English: They besieged Jintang City, captured Yuzhou, slaughtered the Zhuang, Ruixiang, Maonu, Shangluo, Qingqi, Yekou and other tribes, burned tens of thousands of kilos of grain from the Western Xia reserve, confiscated 2,300 tents, and took 5,700 prisoners.

古文：又城桥子谷，筑招安、丰林、新砦、大郎等堡，皆扼贼要害。
现代文：又建桥子谷城，筑建招安、丰林、新砦、大郎等城堡，这些城堡都扼制着敌方要害之地。
English: He also built Qiaozidani Castle, Zhao'an Castle, Fenglin Castle, Xinfeng Castle, Dairo Castle and other castles, all of which contained the enemy's key areas.

古文：尝战安远，被创甚，闻寇至，即挺起驰赴，众争前为用。
现代文：安远一战，他受伤很重，但听说敌寇到了，就又挺身飞速赶往，士兵们因此也争先恐后，奋力拼搏。
English: In the battle of Anyuan, he was seriously injured, but when he heard that the enemy had arrived, he rushed to the scene, so the soldiers also scrambled and fought hard.

古文：临敌被发、带铜面具，出入贼中，皆披靡莫敢当。
现代文：临敌作战时，披头散发、带铜面具，出入敌军中，敌人均望风披靡，没人敢挡。
English: When fighting against the enemy, they wear a copper mask and go in and out of the enemy army. The enemy is invincible, and no one dares to stop them.

古文：尹洙为经略判官，青以指使见，洙与谈兵，善之，荐于经略使韩琦、范仲淹曰： 此良将材也。 二人一见奇之，待遇甚厚。
现代文：尹洙任经略判官时，狄青以指使身份求见，尹洙与他谈论军事，很欣赏他，便推荐他给经略使韩琦、范仲淹，并说： 这是良将之材。 二人一见狄青，便认为是个奇才，对他厚礼相待。
English: When Yin Xi served as the judge of the magistrate, Di Qing asked to see him as a guide. Yin Xi talked with him about the military, admired him very much, and recommended him to the magistrate Han Zheng and Fan Zhongyan, saying: This is the material of a good general. When they saw Di Qing, they thought he was a genius and treated him courteously.

古文：仲淹以《左氏春秋》授之曰： 将不知古今，匹夫勇尔。 青折节读书，悉通秦、汉以来将帅兵法，由是益知名。
现代文：范仲淹教他读《左氏春秋》，对他说： 将帅不知古今历史，就只有匹夫之勇。 狄青从此改变志趣，读起书来，终于精通秦汉以来将帅的兵法，因此更加知名。
English: Fan Zhongran taught him to read "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo," and said to him: "If a general does not know ancient and modern history, he will only have the courage of a peacock." Di Qing has since changed his interests, read the book, and finally mastered the military methods of generals since the Qin and Han dynasties, so he is more well-known.

古文：以功累迁西上阁门副使，擢秦州刺史、泾原路副都总管、经略招讨副使，又加捧日天武四厢都指挥使、惠州团练使。
现代文：积功升任西上门副使，后又晋升为秦州刺史、泾原路副都总管、经略招讨副使，又加升为捧日天武四厢都指挥使、惠州团练使。
English: He was promoted to the vice-envoy of Xishangmen, and later he was promoted to the vice-envoy of Qinzhou, the vice-administrator of Suyuan Road, and the vice-envoy of strategic recruitment. He was also promoted to the vice-envoy of Hupeh, Tianwu, Shifeng, and Huizhou.

古文：仁宗以青数有战功，欲召见问以方略，会贼寇渭州，命图形以进。
现代文：宋仁宗因狄青多次建立战功，想要召见他并向他询问军国大计，遇上敌寇侵犯渭州，便命令他画出军事地图送上来。
English: Song Renzong wanted to summon him and ask him about the military plan, because Di Qing had repeatedly established his military exploits. When the enemy invaded Zhangzhou, he ordered him to draw a military map and send it to him.

古文：元昊称臣，徙真定路副都总管，历侍卫步军殿前都虞候、眉州防御使，迁步军副都指挥使、保大安远二军节度观察留后，又迁马军副都指挥使。
现代文：西夏赵元昊称臣降服后，狄青调任真定路副都总管，历任侍卫步军殿前都虞候、眉州防御使，升步军副都指挥使、保大安远二军节度观察留后，又升马步军副都指挥使。
English: After Western Xia Zhao Yuanhao surrendered, Di Qing was transferred to be the deputy chief of the capital of Zhending Road, the successive guards and foot soldiers waited in front of the palace, the defense of Meizhou, the deputy commander of the marching army, and the deputy commander of the marching army after the observation of the festival of the second army in Bao Dayuan.

古文：青奋行伍，十余年而贵，是时面涅犹存。
现代文：狄青在军队中奋斗，十多年后才显贵起来，当时脸上还留有黑疤。
English: Di Qing fought in the army, and only became prominent after more than ten years. At that time, she still had a black scar on her face.

古文：帝尝敕青傅药除字，青指其面曰： 陛下以功擢臣，不问门地，臣所以有今日，由此涅尔，臣愿留以劝军中，不敢奉诏。 以彰化军节度使知延州，擢枢密副使。
现代文：皇帝曾劝狄青敷药除掉黑疤，狄青指着自己的脸说 ：陛下根据功劳提拔臣，而没过问臣的出身门户；臣之所以有今天，就是因这些疤痕，臣希望保留它好鼓励军队，不敢奉行您的命令。 后以彰化军节度使身份任延州知府，又升枢密副使。
English: The emperor had advised Di Qing to apply medicine to remove the black scar. Di Qing pointed to his face and said, "Your majesty promoted your vassal according to his merits, but did not ask about the vassal's birthplace. The reason why the vassal is here today is because of these scars. The vassal wanted to keep it to encourage the army and did not dare to follow your orders. Later, he was appointed governor of Yanzhou with the title of Changhua Military Governor, and was also promoted to Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：皇祐中，广源州蛮侬智高反，陷邕州，又破沿江九州，围广州，岭外骚动。
现代文：皇年间，广源州蛮侬智高反叛，攻陷邕州，又攻破了沿江的九个州，包围广州城，岭外一带骚动不安。
English: During the reign of the emperor, Guangyuan Province's tyrant Nong Zhigao rebelled, invaded Zhangzhou, invaded nine provinces along the Yangtze River, besieged Guangzhou City, and caused turmoil and unrest in the Lingwai area.

古文：杨畋等安抚经制蛮事，师久无功。
现代文：杨畋等安抚使负责处理平定蛮人叛乱，但官军长久没有成绩。
English: Yang Hui and other pacifying envoys were responsible for dealing with the suppression of the barbarian rebellion, but the government army did not achieve any results for a long time.

古文：又命孙沔、余靖为安抚使讨贼，仁宗犹以为忧。
现代文：又命孙沔、余靖做安抚使率官军讨伐叛贼，但仁宗仍放心不下。
English: He also ordered Sun Yat-sen and Yu Jing to pacify and lead the government army to fight against the traitors, but Rinzong still could not be reassured.

古文：青上表请行，翌日入对，自言： 臣起行伍，非战伐无以报国。
现代文：狄青打报告请战，第二天入见皇帝时，他说： 臣当兵出身，除了战场杀敌，没有什么可以报效国家。
English: The next day, when Di Qing went to see the emperor, he said, "As a soldier, I have nothing to offer the country except killing the enemy on the battlefield.

古文：愿得蕃落骑数百，益以禁兵，羁贼首致阙下。 帝壮其言，遂除宣徽南院使、宣抚荆湖南北路、经制广南盗贼事，置酒垂拱殿以遣之。
现代文：希望能带得数百个蕃落骑兵，再加上一些禁兵，去将叛贼的头砍下送回京城。 皇帝佩服他的豪言壮语，于是任命他为宣徽南院使、宣抚荆湖南北路，负责处理广南叛乱之事，并在垂拱殿设酒为他送行。
English: He hoped that he could bring hundreds of disgraced cavalrymen, plus some banned soldiers, to cut off the heads of the traitors and send them back to Beijing. The emperor admired his brave words, so he appointed him as the envoy of the Southern Court of the Xuan Hui Dynasty and the prompter of the South-North Road of Jinghu, responsible for dealing with the rebellion in Guangnan, and set up wine for him to see him off.

古文：时智高还据邕州，青合孙沔、余靖兵次宾州。
现代文：当时侬智高回师重新占据邕州，狄青联合孙沔、余靖的部队进驻宾州。
English: At that time, Nong Zhigao Hui's division reoccupied Bozhou, and Di Qing and the troops of Sun Yat-sen and Yu Jing entered Pennsylvania.

古文：先是，蒋偕、张忠皆轻敌败死，军声大沮。
现代文：在此之前，蒋偕、张忠都因轻敌而战败阵亡，官军声威大衰。
English: Prior to this, both Chiang Kai-shek and Zhang Zhong had been defeated and killed in battle due to their inferiority to the enemy, and the prestige of the government army had fallen drastically.

古文：青戒诸将毋妄与贼斗，听吾所为。
现代文：狄青命令各将不得妄自与叛军接战，而听从他的统一指挥。
English: Di Qing ordered the generals not to fight the rebels on their own, but to obey his unified command.

古文：广西钤辖陈曙乘青未至，辄以步卒八千犯贼，溃于昆仑关，殿直袁用等皆遁。
现代文：广西钤辖陈曙趁狄青还未到，便擅自率步兵八千攻打叛军，溃败于山仑关，殿直袁用等人都逃遁了。
English: Chen Shuchu, the governor of Guangxi, took advantage of the fact that Di Qing had not yet arrived, and led eight thousand infantrymen to attack the rebels without authorization. They were defeated at Shanlun Pass, and Denzhong Yuan and others fled.

古文：青曰： 令之不齐，兵所以败。 晨会诸将堂上，揖曙起，并召用等三十人，按以败亡状，驱出军门斩之。
现代文：狄青说： 号令不一，是部队失败的原因。 早晨集合各将领到堂上，逮捕了陈曙，并召来袁用等三十人，依战败逃跑罪，推出军门斩首。
English: In the morning, they gathered all the generals to the hall, arrested Chen Shuguang, and summoned Yuan Yiming and thirty others, who were found guilty of defection and escape, and were led out of the gate and beheaded.

古文：沔、靖相顾愕眙，诸将股栗。
现代文：孙沔、余靖相视惊愕，而众将领则吓得两腿颤栗。
English: Sun Yat-sen and Yu Jing looked at each other in amazement, while the generals trembled in fear.

古文：已而顿甲，令军中休十日。
现代文：后来军队停止前进，休整十天。
English: Then the army stopped advancing and rested for ten days.

古文：觇者还，以为军未即进。
现代文：侦察的敌人回报，以为官军不会很快进击。
English: The enemy reciprocated the reconnaissance, thinking that the government army would not attack soon.

古文：青明日乃整军骑，一昼夜绝昆仑关，出归仁铺为阵。
现代文：但狄青第二天便集合军队人马，一昼夜就过了山仑关，从归仁铺出来布阵。
English: However, the next day, Diceng gathered an army of men and horses, crossed the mountain pass in one day and night, and spread out from Guiren.

古文：贼既失险，悉出逆战。
现代文：叛军失去了险要阵地后，都出来迎战。
English: After the rebels lost the critical position, they all came out to fight.

古文：前锋孙节搏贼死山下，贼气锐甚，沔等惧失色。
现代文：前锋孙节与叛贼在山下搏斗而死，叛军士气极高，孙沔等人吓得脸色都变了。
English: The forward Sun Jie died in a fight with the rebels at the foot of the mountain. The morale of the rebels was extremely high, and Sun Yao and others were so scared that their faces changed.

古文：青执白旗麾骑兵，纵左右翼，出贼不意，大败之，追奔五十里，斩首数千级，其党黄师宓、侬建中智中及伪官属死者五十七人，生擒贼五百余人，智高夜纵火烧城遁去。
现代文：狄青手举白旗指挥骑兵，从左右两翼冲出，出于叛军意料之外。大败叛军，追击了五十里，斩了数千首级，侬智高同党黄师宓、侬建中、侬智中以及伪官僚吏属被杀死者有五十七人，生擒叛贼五百多人，侬智高在夜间纵火烧城后逃走。
English: Di Qing led the cavalry with a white flag in his hand and rushed out from the left and right wings, which was unexpected by the rebels. He defeated the rebels, chased them for fifty miles, and cut thousands of heads. Fifty-seven people were killed, including Nong Zhigao's fellow party members Huang Shijuan, Nong Jianzhong, Nong Zhigao, and pseudo-bureaucrats, and more than 500 traitors were still alive. Nong Zhigao fled after setting fire to the city at night.

古文：迟明，青按兵入城，获金帛钜万、杂畜数千，招复老壮七千二百尝为贼所俘胁者，慰遣之。
现代文：黎明时，狄青严管着部队开进了邕州城，缴获金银玉帛数以万计，杂畜数千，又招集曾被叛军俘虏胁迫的老壮年人七千二百人，慰抚之后释放、遣散。
English: At dawn, Di Qing drove into Zhangzhou City with his troops under strict control, seized tens of thousands of gold, silver and jade ingots, thousands of livestock, and summoned 7,200 old and strong people who had been coerced by rebel prisoners. After consolation, they were released and discharged.

古文：枭黄师宓等邕州城下，敛尸筑京观于城北隅。
现代文：将黄师宓等人的头挂在邕州城下示众，又敛集叛军尸体在城北角建筑京观。
English: They hung the heads of Huang Shijuan and others at the foot of Zhangzhou City for public display, and gathered the bodies of the rebels to build the Beijing Outlook in the northern corner of the city.

古文：时贼尸有衣金龙衣者，众谓智高已死，欲以上闻。
现代文：当时叛军尸体中有个穿金色龙袍的，部下众人说是侬智高已死，要向朝廷报告。
English: At that time, there was a person wearing a golden dragon robe among the rebel corpses, and many of his subordinates said that Nong Zhigao had died and that they should report to the imperial court.

古文：青曰： 安知非诈邪？
现代文：狄青说： 怎知这不是一个骗局呢？
English: Dicking said, "How do I know it's not a scam?

古文：宁失智高，不敢诬朝廷以贪功也。 初，青之至邕也，会瘴雾昏塞，或谓贼毒水上流，土饮者多死，青殊忧之。
现代文：我宁可说侬智高失踪，也不敢欺骗朝廷来贪求战功。 当初，狄青到邕州时，正遇上这里毒瘴弥漫，有人说是叛军在江水上游放毒，将士饮水而死者很多，狄青非常忧虑。
English: I would rather say that Nong Zhigao has disappeared, rather than dare to deceive the imperial court to covet military exploits. At first, when Di Qing arrived in Zhangzhou, he was confronted with drug lords abounding here. Some people said that the rebels poisoned the upper reaches of the river, and many soldiers drank water and died. Di Qing was very worried.

古文：一夕，有泉涌砦下，汲之甘，众遂以济。
现代文：一夕，有一股泉水从寨下涌出，取来一喝，味道甘美，部队靠此才渡过了难关。
English: One night, a spring of water gushed out from under the castle, and the troops had to rely on it to get through the difficult times.

古文：复为枢密副使，迁护国军节度使、河中尹。
现代文：后复任枢密副使，升护国军节度使、河中尹。
English: After that, he was reinstated as Privy Vice-Minister, and promoted to the position of the National Guard's Chief of Staff, succeeding Kawachu Yin.

古文：还至京师，帝嘉其功，拜枢密使，赐第敦教坊，优进诸子官秩。
现代文：回到京师后，皇帝嘉奖他的功绩，任命他为枢密使，并赏赐给他一套在京师敦教坊的宅第，还特优先给他的儿子们加官进级。
English: After returning to Beijing, the emperor commended his achievements, appointed him as a privy envoy, and awarded him a mansion in Beijing Shidong School. He also gave special priority to his sons for promotion.

古文：初，青既行，帝每忧之曰： 青有威名，贼当畏其来。
现代文：起初，狄青已率部南下后，皇帝常为他担忧说： 狄青有威武的名声，叛军应会害怕他的到来。
English: At first, after Di Qing had led his troops to the south, the emperor often worried about him, saying: Di Qing has a reputation for being powerful, and the rebels should be afraid of his arrival.

古文：左右使令，非青亲信者不可；虽饮食卧起，皆宜防窃发。 乃驰使戒之。
现代文：担任左右传令的人，非狄青的亲信者不可，虽然是饮食起居的时候，都应该防备突然袭击的发动。 
English: Those who act as messengers to the right and left must not be close followers of Diqing, although when eating and living, they should be prepared for the launch of a surprise attack.

古文：及闻青已破贼，顾宰相曰： 速议赏，缓则不足以劝矣。 
现代文：于是派使者飞驰前线训戒。等获悉狄青已打败叛军，皇帝对宰相说： 快快议定恩赏，慢了便起不到奖勉的作用了。 
English: So he sent an envoy to rush to the front line to teach and admonish. When he learned that Di Qing had defeated the rebels, the emperor said to the prime minister: Quickly agree on a reward. If you are slow, the reward will not work.

古文：始，交阯愿出兵助讨智高，余靖言其可信，具万人粮于邕、钦待之。
现代文：起初，交趾人请求出兵帮助朝廷讨伐侬智高，余靖说他们可信，便在邕州、钦州准备了万人的粮草等待他们。
English: At first, the Koji people asked the imperial court to send troops to help them fight Fanon Zhigao. Yu Jing said that they were trustworthy, so he prepared grain and grass for all people in Zhangzhou and Qinzhou to wait for them.

古文：诏以缗钱三万赐交址为兵费，许贼平厚赏之。
现代文：皇帝还下诏用三万缗钱赏赐给交趾国做军费，并许诺平定叛乱后再有厚赏。
English: The emperor also issued an edict to reward the allied countries with 30,000 baht for military expenses, and promised that there would be a rich reward after the rebellion was put down.

古文：青既至，檄余靖无通使假兵，即上奏曰： 李德政声言将步兵五万、骑一千赴援，非其情实。
现代文：狄青到此后，传令余靖不要派使者到交趾借兵，并立即上奏说： 交趾国李德政声称将率步兵五万、骑兵一千赶来支援，不是真的。
English: After that, Di Qing sent a message to Yu Jing, ordering him not to send an envoy to Kota Kinabalu to borrow soldiers, and immediately reported: "Kota Kinabalu's Li Desheng's claim that he will bring 50,000 infantrymen and 1,000 cavalrymen to help is not true.

古文：且假兵于外以除内寇，非我利也。
现代文：而且借外国军队来消灭内寇，对我无利。
English: Moreover, it is not in my interest to use foreign troops to eliminate the intruders.

古文：以一智高而横蹂二广，力不能讨，乃假兵蛮夷，蛮夷贪得忘义，因而启乱，何以御之？
现代文：凭一个侬智高就能横行、蹂躏两广，使朝廷无力讨伐，如果再向野蛮外国借兵，那外国野蛮人贪得无厌，不仁不义，进而发动战乱，又怎么抵御他们呢？
English: With a single man of great wisdom, he can run amok and ravage the two regions, rendering the imperial court powerless to fight. If we again borrow soldiers from barbaric foreign countries, the foreign barbarians will be insatiably greedy, unkind and unjust, and will then start a war. How can we resist them?

古文：请罢交阯助兵。 从之。
现代文：请取消要交趾出兵援助。 
English: Please cancel the military aid.

古文：贼平，人服其有远略。
现代文：意见被采纳。叛军被平定后，人们都佩服他有远略。
English: The advice was taken. After the rebels were subdued, people admired him for his far-sightedness.

古文：青在枢密四年，每出，士卒辄指目以相矜夸。
现代文：狄青任枢密使四年，每当他出现时，士卒总会指着他互相夸奖赞叹。
English: For the four years that Di Qing served as a Privy Councilor, whenever he appeared, the courtiers would always point to him to praise and admire each other.

古文：又言者以青家狗生角，且数有光怪，请出青于外以保全之，不报。
现代文：谏官因狄青家的狗生角，并且多次发光，便请求将他调出京师以便保全他的声誉，但皇上没有答复。
English: The eunuch was incensed by the Diqing family's shenanigans, and repeatedly demanded that he be transferred out of the capital in order to preserve his reputation, but the emperor did not reply.

古文：嘉祐中，京师大水，青避水徙家相国寺，行止殿上，人情颇疑，乃罢青为同中书门下平章事，出判陈州。
现代文：嘉年间，京师发大水，狄青避水将家搬到相国寺，竟在佛殿上居住，民情对此颇有疑惑议论，朝廷便降狄青为同中书门下平章事，离京出任陈州知州。
English: During the Jia years, Beijing was flooded, and Di Qing, to avoid the water, moved his family to Shogoku Temple and actually lived in the Buddhist hall. The people were quite doubtful about this, and the court demoted Di Qing to the same middle school, and left Beijing to serve as Chen Zhou Zhizhou.

古文：明年二月，疽发髭，卒。
现代文：第二年二月，因嘴上生毒疮，病死。
English: In February of the following year, he died of a poisonous ulcer on his mouth.

古文：帝发哀，赠中书令，谥武襄。
现代文：皇帝为他哀悼，追赠他为中书令，赐谥为 武襄 。
English: The emperor mourned for him, posthumously bestowed the title of Chushirei on him, and bestowed the title of Wuxiang on him.

古文：青为人慎密寡言，其计事必审中机会而后发。
现代文：狄青为人缜密寡言，谋事必先仔细考虑成功的把握，选准制胜的机会然后进行。
English: Di Qing is a taciturn person. He must first carefully consider the grasp of success, select the opportunity to win and then proceed.

古文：行师先正部伍，明赏罚，与士同饥寒劳苦，虽敌猝犯之，无一士敢后先者，故其出常有功。
现代文：行军打仗，先整顿队伍，明确赏罚，又与士兵同艰共苦，因此虽然敌人突然袭击，也没有一个士兵敢不冲锋向前，因此他出兵屡建战功。
English: When marching out to fight a war, one should first rectify the ranks, make clear the rewards and punishments, and share the hardships with the soldiers. Therefore, although the enemy suddenly attacked, not a single soldier dared not to charge forward. Therefore, he repeatedly dispatched troops to achieve military exploits.

古文：尤喜推功与将佐。
现代文：尤其喜欢将战功推给辅佐将领。
English: In particular, he likes to give credit to assistant generals.

古文：始，与孙沔破贼，谋一出青，贼既平，经制余事，悉以诿沔，退若不用意者。
现代文：当初，他与孙沔一同击败叛军，战术谋划都出自狄青，但叛乱平定后，处理后事，他便全交给孙沔负责，自己则毫不在意的退出来。
English: At first, together with Sun Yat-sen, he defeated the rebels, and the tactical planning all came from Di Qing. However, after the rebellion was quelled, he left it to Sun Yat-sen to deal with the aftermath. He did not care at all and withdrew.

古文：沔始叹其勇，既而服其为人，自以为不如也。
现代文：孙沔开始时赞叹他的勇猛，这时更钦服他的为人，自以为不如他。
English: At the beginning, Sun Yat-sen admired his bravery, but now he admired him even more and thought he was not as good as him.

古文：尹洙以贬死，青悉力赒其家事。
现代文：尹洙因贬谪而死，狄青全力周济他的家属。
English: After the death of Yin Xi, Di Qing devoted himself to supporting his family.

古文：子谘、咏，并为阁门使。
现代文：狄青的儿子狄咨、狄咏，都任门使。
English: Di Qing's sons, Di Zhao and Di Yao, both served as gatekeepers.

古文：咏数有战功。
现代文：狄咏还多次立过战功。
English: Di Yan has also made war exploits many times.

古文：熙宁元年，神宗考次近世将帅，以青起行伍而名动夷夏，深沈有智略，能以畏慎保全终始，慨然思之，命取青画像入禁中，御制祭文，遣使赍中牢祠其家。
现代文：熙宁元年，宋神宗给近世将帅排名次，认为狄青从行伍出身而名震中外，为人深沉而有谋略，又能谨小慎微，保全名声，有始有终，对狄青颇为感慨和思念，下令取来狄青的画像放进宫中，并亲为他御制祭文，又派遣使者到他家，用中牢的礼节来祭祀。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Song Shensong ranked the modern-day general as the second, believing that Di Qing was born in the army and was famous outside the epicenter, was a deep and strategic person, and could be cautious and prudent, preserve reputation, and had a beginning and an end. He was quite emotional and thoughtful about Di Qing. He ordered to take Di Qing's picture and put it in the palace, and personally prepared a ritual for him, and sent an envoy to his home to use the etiquette of the middle prison to sacrifice.

古文：张玉字宝臣，保定人。
现代文：郭逵，字仲通，他的祖先自邢州徙居洛阳。
English: Guo Wei, also known as Zhong Tong, whose ancestors migrated from Zhangzhou to Luoyang.

古文：郭逵，字仲通，其先自邢徙洛。康定中，兄遵死于敌，录逵为三班奉职，隶陕西范仲淹麾下。仲淹勉以问学。
现代文：康定年间，他的兄长郭遵在对敌作战中阵亡，朝廷因此录用他做三班奉职，隶属于陕西的范仲淹麾下。范仲淹勉励他读书学习。
English: During the Kangding era, his elder brother Guo Zun was killed in battle against the enemy, and the imperial court therefore hired him to do three shifts of duty, under the command of Fan Zhongnong of Shaanxi. Fan Zhongnong encouraged him to read and study.

古文：延安清刚社募兵误杀熟羌，将论死，逵请而免之，活壮士十三人。
现代文：延安人清刚社募兵误杀熟羌，将依法处死，郭逵请求赦免他们，挽救了十三个青年壮士的生命。
English: Yan'an's Qing Gang Society recruited soldiers to kill Rong Zhou by mistake and will be executed according to law. Guo Zhou requested to pardon them and saved the lives of thirteen young strong men.

古文：方议取灵武，逵曰： 地远而食不继，城大而兵不多，未见其利。 未几，泾原任福以全军没，人服其先见。
现代文：当时正讨论夺取灵武城的事，郭逵说： 此地距离很远而我们带的干粮不够，而且此城很大而我方士兵不多，攻夺灵武看不出对我们有利。 不久，泾原人任福攻打灵武时全军覆没，人们都佩服郭逵的先见之明。
English: At that time, the capture of Lingwu City was being discussed, Guo Wei said: This place is very far away and we do not have enough dry grain, and this city is large and we do not have many soldiers, the capture of Lingwu does not seem to be beneficial to us. Soon, the entire army was destroyed when Lingwu was attacked by Renfu, and people admired Guo Wei's foresight.

古文：陈执中安抚京东，奏为驻泊将。
现代文：陈执中任京东安抚使时，奏请调郭逵任驻泊将。
English: When Chen Rongzhong was appointed as the Beijing-Eastern pacification envoy, he requested the transfer of Guo Wei as the resident general.

古文：执中与宾佐论当今名将，共推葛怀敏。
现代文：陈执中曾与宾客助手谈论当代名将，他们都推崇葛怀敏。
English: Chen Xizhong once talked with a guest assistant about contemporary great players, and they all admired Ge Huimin.

古文：逵曰： 怀敏易与尔，他日必败朝廷事。 执中始怒，居数日，问曰： 君何以知葛怀敏非名将而败事邪？ 曰： 喜功徼幸，徒勇无谋，可禽也。 执中叹曰： 君真知兵，怀敏既覆师矣。 为真定兵马监押。
现代文：郭逵却说 ：葛怀敏这样的人太容易做了，而且他日后必会坏了朝廷的大事。 陈执中听了很生气，过了几天问道： 你为何知道葛怀敏算不得名将而且要坏事呢？ 郭逵说 ：侥幸取胜，好大喜功，有勇无谋，因此可以断定。 陈执中叹道 ：你真的精通军事啊，葛怀敏果然兵败了。 任真定兵马监押。
English: Guo Gan, however, said, "A man like Ge Huaimin is too easy to make, and he will surely ruin the important affairs of the imperial court in the future." Chen Jizhong was very angry when he heard this, and asked a few days later, "How did you know that Ge Huaimin was not a famous general and that he wanted to do bad things?" Guo Gan said, "It was a fluke victory, it was a great achievement, and he was brave and reckless, so it can be determined." Chen Jizhong sighed, "You are really proficient in military affairs, Ge Huaimin was defeated. Ren Zhending was placed under military detention."

古文：保州卒叛，田况遣逵往招之。
现代文：保州士兵叛乱，田况派郭逵前往招抚叛军。
English: The soldiers of Hozhou rebelled, and Tiankou sent Guo Gan to appease the rebels.

古文：逵与乱者侍其臻尝同事范仲淹，驰至城下，示以旧所佩紫囊。
现代文：郭逵与叛乱的侍其臻曾同为范仲淹部下，他骑马飞驰到保州城下，用旧时佩戴过的一种紫袋作为标记信物。
English: Guo Qi and his rebel attendant Zizhen had once been Fan Zhongyun's subordinates. He rode a horse to the foot of Bozhou Castle, using a purple bag he had worn in the old days as a token.

古文：臻识之，即与其党韦贵、史克顺皆再拜，邀逵登城。
现代文：侍其臻识得此物，便与同党韦贵、史克顺等都来拜见，并邀请郭逵登城。
English: When his attendant, Zhenren, recognized this object, he and his fellow party members, Wei Gui and Shi Ke Shun, all came to visit, and invited Guo Zhen to the city.

古文：既见，申谕祸福，众或疑不即下，曰： 若降，恐不免。 逵请以身为质，于是开城降。
现代文：见过之后，郭逵向他们讲谕叛乱的严重后果，众人有的疑惑不决，说： 若投降，恐怕也不免死罪。 郭逵便请用自己做人质，于是叛军开城门投降。
English: After seeing them, Guo Gan told them about the serious consequences of the rebellion, and everyone was in doubt, saying, "If you surrender, I'm afraid you will be sentenced to death." Guo Gan then asked to use himself as a hostage, so the rebels opened the city gate and surrendered.

古文：论功加阁门祗候、环庆兵马都监。
现代文：郭逵因功升任门祗候、环庆兵马都监。
English: Guo Wei was promoted to the post of gatekeeper and the inspector of the Huanqing Military Region.

古文：遭母忧，不得解官，凡三请乃许。
现代文：遇上母亲过世，不准辞官，三次上奏请求后才被允许。
English: When his mother died, he was not allowed to resign from his post. He was only allowed to do so after submitting three requests.

古文：庆帅杜杞赆以钱四十万，谢弗受。
现代文：环庆军帅杜杞赠送四十万钱作为吊丧礼费，他谢绝不受。
English: Du Qian, the commander of the Huanqing Army, presented 400,000 yuan as a funeral gift, which he refused to accept.

古文：卒丧，为泾原都监。
现代文：服丧完毕，任泾原都监。
English: After the funeral, he was appointed to the post of Ebara city supervisor.

古文：拔古渭城，转通事舍人，徙河北缘边安抚都监。
现代文：攻占古渭城，升为通事舍人，调任河北缘边安抚都监。
English: He conquered the ancient Lushan City, and was promoted to the position of the supervisor, and was transferred to the position of the supervisor of the peripheral pacification of Hebei Province.

古文：副吴奎使契丹，值其主受尊号，入观礼。
现代文：做吴奎的副手出使契丹时，因正值契丹君主受封尊号，便进去观看典礼。
English: When he was Wu Kuei's deputy and sent out the Khitan envoy, he went in to watch the ceremony because it was the time when the Khitan monarch received the title of nobility.

古文：使还，黜为汾州都监。
现代文：出使回来后，郭逵降职为汾州都监。
English: After returning from the mission, Guo Jun was demoted to the post of the superintendent of Zhangzhou.

古文：庞籍镇河东，俾权忻州。
现代文：庞籍镇守河东时，使郭逵权知忻州。
English: When Pang Zi Zhen was in charge of the eastern part of the river, he made Guo Zi Quan learn about Zhangzhou.

古文：契丹来求天池庙地，籍不能决，以诿逵。
现代文：契丹人来要求天池庙一地，庞籍不能决定，把此事推诿给郭逵。
English: The Khitans came to ask for a site for the Temple of Heaven's Pool, but Pang Zeki could not decide and pushed the matter to Guo Gan.

古文：逵访得太平兴国中故牍，证为王土，檄报之，契丹愧伏。
现代文：郭逵寻访到一太平兴国时的旧木牍，证明此地本为宋国土地，于是发文书回答契丹，契丹人羞愧地服输。
English: Guo Wei visited the old wooden rafts at the time of the Taiping Xingguo, proving that this place was originally the land of the Song Dynasty, so he issued a document to answer the Khitan, and the Khitan were ashamed to lose.

古文：湖北溪蛮彭仕羲叛，加带御器械，为路钤辖兼知澧州。
现代文：湖北溪蛮彭仕羲叛乱，升郭逵带御器械、荆湖北路钤辖兼任澧州知州。
English: Hubei's Hubei River rebelled against Peng Shizhen, and Sheng Guo was appointed as the governor of Shizhou Province. Jing Hubei Road was also appointed as the governor of Shizhou Province.

古文：得蛮亲信为乡导，尽平诸隘，遂破其所居桃花州，仕羲弃城走，众悉降。
现代文：他找得一个彭仕羲的亲信做向导，因此全部收复险隘要地，攻克叛军所居的桃花州，彭仕羲弃城逃走，部众全部投降。
English: He found a close confidant of Peng Shijun to act as a guide. As a result, he was able to recover all of the dangerous areas and conquer Taohua County, where the rebels lived. Peng Shijun abandoned the city and fled, and all of his subordinates surrendered.

古文：迁礼宾使，徙南路钤辖、知邵州。
现代文：郭逵升礼宾使，调任荆湖南路钤辖、邵州知府。
English: Guo Jinsheng, the protocol envoy, was transferred to the jurisdiction of Jinghu South Road and the prefecture of Shaozhou.

古文：武冈蛮反，逵讨平之。
现代文：武冈蛮反叛，郭逵镇压了叛军。
English: Wookang rebelled violently, and Guo Gan suppressed the rebels.

古文：累迁容州观察使。
现代文：积功升任容州观察使。
English: For his achievements, he was promoted to the post of Yongzhou Observation Envoy.

古文：仁宗山陵，以逵掌宿卫。
现代文：宋仁宗的陵墓，由郭逵负责保卫。
English: The mausoleum of Song Renzong, guarded by Guo Gan.

古文：迁殿前都虞候，出为泾原路副都部署。
现代文：又升殿前都虞候，离京出任泾原路副都部署。
English: He also rose to the position of prefectural governor and left Kyoto to serve as deputy governor of Kashihara.

古文：治平二年，以检校太保同签书枢密院，旋出领陕西宣抚使，判渭州。
现代文：治平二年，以检校太保身份任同签书枢密院，随即又调出做陕西宣抚使、渭州知州。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, he was appointed to the Privy Council as a school inspector, and then he was transferred to be the envoy to Shaanxi and Chizhou.

古文：逵虽立军功，而骤跻政地，议者不厌，谏官、御史交论之，不听。
现代文：郭逵虽建立有战功，但骤然跻身政界，舆论不服，谏官、御史都议论过此事，但皇上不听。
English: Although Guo Gan had established his war exploits, he suddenly entered the political world, and public opinion was not satisfied. Eunuchs and imperial historians discussed the matter, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：神宗即位，迁静难军留后，召还。
现代文：宋神宗即位后，升他为静难军留后，召还京城。
English: After the enthronement of Song Shenzong, he was promoted to the Jingnan Army, and after staying there, he was called back to Beijing.

古文：言者复力争，乃改宣徽南院使、判郓州。
现代文：谏官又极力反对，于是改任命郭逵为宣徽南院使、郓州知府。
English: The eunuchs strenuously objected, so Guo Jian was reappointed as the envoy of the Southern Court of Xuanhui and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：至郓七日，徙镇鄜延。
现代文：到郓州才七天，又调去镇守延。
English: Only seven days after arriving in Zhangzhou, he was transferred to the town of Yan.

古文：种谔受嵬名山降，取绥州，夏人遂杀杨定。
现代文：种谔接受西夏人嵬名山的投降，夺取绥州，西夏人因此杀了杨定。
English: Zonglu accepted the surrender of the Xixia people's famous mountain and seized Zhangzhou, so the Xixia people killed Yang Ding.

古文：朝论以边衅方起，欲弃绥。
现代文：朝廷讨论后认为边境战争正在兴起，主张放弃绥州。
English: After the discussion, the imperial court believed that the border war was on the rise, and advocated abandoning Zhangzhou.

古文：逵曰： 虏既杀王官，而又弃绥不守，见弱已甚。
现代文：郭逵说 ：敌人已经杀了王朝的官吏，而如今又抛弃绥州不守，太示弱了。
English: Guo Wei said: The enemy has already killed the officials of the dynasty, and now it is too weak to abandon Zhangzhou.

古文：且名山举族来归，当何以处？ 既而夏人欲以塞门、安远二砦来易，朝廷许之。
现代文：而且嵬名山举族来投奔，又将怎么处置呢？ 后来西夏又要用塞门、安远两寨来交换绥州，朝廷同意。
English: Moreover, what will be the disposition of the Xiangmingshan who raised their families to flee? Later, Xixia also wanted to use Saimen and Anyuan to exchange Zhangzhou, and the imperial court agreed.

古文：逵曰： 此正商于六百里之策也。
现代文：郭逵说： 此正是当年秦国许楚国商於六百里的计策，若不先交出二寨，就不能给绥州。 
English: Guo Wei said: This is exactly the strategy of the merchants of Qin State Xu Chu in the six hundred miles. If you don't hand over Erzhai first, you can't give it to Ganzhou.

古文：非先交二砦，不可与。 遣其属赵禼、薛昌朝与夏使议，唯言砦基，禼曰： 二砦之北，旧有三十六堡，且以长城岭为界，西平王祥符所移书固在也。 虏使惊不能对，乃寝其请。
现代文：并派部下赵、薛昌朝同西夏使者谈判，西夏使者只讲寨基，赵说： 二寨北面，原还有三十六堡，而且以长城岭为分界线，西平王祥符时所写的文书如今还在。 西夏使者惊讶得答不上话来，因此取消了换地的要求。
English: He also sent his subordinates Zhao and Xue Chang to negotiate with the Xixia envoy. The Xixia envoy only talked about the Zhijiang Mountains. Zhao said, "On the north side of the Zhijiang Mountains, there were originally 36 castles, and the Great Wall Ridge was the dividing line. The document written by Xiping Wang Xiangfu is still there. The Xixia envoy was so surprised that he could not answer the question, so he canceled the request to change the land.

古文：初，诏焚弃绥州，逵匿而不下。
现代文：当初，朝廷下诏焚毁、放弃绥州，郭逵却将此令隐藏不传达。
English: At first, the imperial court issued an edict to burn and abandon Zhangzhou, but Guo Gan hid this order and did not communicate it.

古文：至是，帝问大臣，皆莫知，逵始自劾向者违诏旨之罪，帝手诏褒答。
现代文：这时，皇帝询问大臣是怎么回事，大臣们都不知道，郭逵才自己出来承认先前违旨的罪过，皇帝当即手写诏书褒奖。
English: At this time, the emperor asked the minister what was going on. The ministers did not know that Guo Gan had just come out to admit his guilt of violating the previous order. The emperor immediately wrote an imperial edict to commend Guo Gan.

古文：夏人又求以亡命景询易名山，逵曰： 询，庸人也，于事何所轻重！
现代文：西夏人又请求用逃亡到西夏的景询一人来交换嵬名山，郭逵说： 景询，庸人一个，于事无足轻重！
English: The Xixia people also requested that one person, Jingzhen, who had fled to Xixia, be exchanged for the famous mountain, Guo Wei said: "Jingzhen, a mediocre person, is insignificant in this matter!

古文：受之则不得不还名山，恐自是蕃酋无复敢向化矣。 逵诇得杀杨定者首领姓名，谍告将斩之于境以谢罪，逵曰： 是且枭死囚以绐我。 报曰： 必执李崇贵、韩道喜来。 夏人言： 杀之矣。 逵命以二人状貌物色诘问虏，情得，乃执献之。
现代文：如果接受他就不得不将嵬名山送还西夏，我担心从此外蕃夷蛮没有人再敢投奔我教化之邦了。 郭逵又询查到杀害杨定的首犯姓名，间谍告诉他西夏人将会在他们境内处斩这两人以向宋朝请罪，郭逵说： 这只不过是用死囚枭首来骗我国。 因此对西夏人说 ：一定要抓李崇贵、韩道喜二人送来。 西夏人说 ：已经杀了。 郭逵下令根据这两人的形状面貌来查问西夏人，果然找到了两人，于是抓来献给朝廷。
English: If he accepted, he would have to return the famous mountain to Western Xia, and I was worried that no one else from the barbarians would dare to come to our civilized country. Guo Gan also inquired about the name of the first culprit who killed Yang Ding. The spy told him that the Western Xia people would behead the two people in their territory to plead guilty to the Song Dynasty. Guo Gan said, "This is just using the daggers of death row prisoners to deceive our country." Therefore, he said to the Western Xia people, "We must capture Li Chonggui and Han Daoxi and send them to us." The Western Xia people said, "We have already killed them." Gu

古文：加检校太尉、雄武军留后。
现代文：后升任检校太尉、雄武军留后。
English: Later, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant inspector, and remained in the army.

古文：韩绛主种谔计图横山，与逵议出兵。
现代文：韩绛想采用种谔的计谋来夺取横山，就此跟郭逵商议出兵。
English: Han Zheng wanted to use the strategy of sowing seeds to capture Hengshan, so he negotiated with Guo Zheng to send troops.

古文：逵曰： 谔，狂生尔，朝廷徒以家世用之，必误大事。 绛怒，以为沮挠，奏召逵还。
现代文：郭逵说： 种谔，狂生一个，朝廷只因为他家世显贵才任用他，一定会误大事。 韩绛发怒，以为郭逵在给他泼冷水，上奏请求朝廷将郭逵召回去。
English: Guo Yao said: "He is a madman, and the imperial court only appointed him because of his illustrious lineage, which is bound to be a big mistake. Han Yao became angry, thinking that Guo Yao was throwing cold water on him, and he asked the imperial court to call Guo Yao back.

古文：明年，庆州乱，出判永兴，徙秦州。
现代文：第二年，庆州发生叛乱，郭逵出任永兴知府，后调任秦州知府。
English: The following year, there was a rebellion in Gyeongju, and Guo Gan was appointed governor of Yongxing, and later he was transferred to the governor of Qin.

古文：王韶开熙河，逵案其不法。
现代文：王韶主持开挖熙河，郭逵举报他犯法。
English: Wang Yao presided over the excavation of the He River, and Guo Yao reported him for breaking the law.

古文：朝廷遣蔡确鞫之，谓逵诬罔，落宣徽使、知潞州。
现代文：朝廷派蔡确调查，认为郭逵诬告，降职为宣徽使、潞州知府。
English: The imperial court sent Cai Jizhen to investigate and concluded that Guo Jizhen had made a false accusation, and he was demoted to the position of Xuan Hui Envoy and governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：徙太原，复宣徽使。
现代文：后调到太原，复任宣徽使。
English: Later, he was transferred to Taiyuan and reinstated as Xuanhu Envoy.

古文：交阯李乾德陷邕管，召为安南行营经略招讨使兼荆湖、广南宣抚使，请鄜延、河东旧吏士自随。
现代文：交趾人李乾德攻占邕管，朝廷召回郭逵，任命他为安南行营经略招讨使兼荆湖、广南宣抚使。郭逵请他在延、河东的旧部下吏士随他同往。
English: His friend, Li Qiande, seized control of Yunnan Province, and the imperial court recalled Guo Gan, appointing him as the envoy to Annan, the envoy to Jinghu, and the envoy to Guangnan. Guo Gan asked his former subordinates in Yan and Hedong to accompany him.

古文：将行，宴于便殿，赐中军旗章剑甲以示宠。
现代文：出发前，皇帝在便殿设宴送行，赏赐他中军旗章剑甲，以示荣宠。
English: Before departure, the emperor held a banquet in the hall to see him off, and presented him with a Chinese military banner, sword and armor as a token of honor.

古文：次长沙，先遣将复邕、廉；至广西，讨拔广源州，降守将刘应纪；又拔决里隘，乘胜取桄榔、门州，大战富良江，斩伪王子洪真。
现代文：停驻长沙，先遣将收复邕州、廉州；到广西后，攻下广源州，逼降守将刘应纪；又攻下决里隘，乘胜夺取桄榔、门州，大战富良江，斩杀伪王子李洪真。
English: Stationed in Changsha, the advance party will recover Bozhou and Lianzhou; after arriving in Guangxi, they will capture Guangyuan Province and force Liu Yingji to surrender; they will also capture Dueli Pass, take advantage of the victory to seize Handan and Mengzhou, fight in the Fuliangjiang River, and kill the fake prince Li Hongzhen.

古文：乾德穷蹙，奉表归命。
现代文：李乾德被围困，只好被迫表示归服听命宋朝。
English: Li Qiande was besieged and forced to submit to the Song Dynasty.

古文：时兵夫三十万人，冒暑涉瘴地，死者过半。
现代文：当时士兵役夫三十万人，冒着酷暑涉险毒瘴地带，结果死者过半。
English: At that time, soldiers served 300,000 people, braved the heat and ventured into dangerous drug-trafficking areas, resulting in more than half of the deaths.

古文：至是，与贼隔一水不得进，乃班师。
现代文：到此时，与叛贼隔一条河，不能再前进，因此撤兵。
English: At this point, separated from the rebels by a river, it was no longer possible to advance, so the troops withdrew.

古文：坐贬左卫将军，西京安置，屏处十年。
现代文：郭受到处分，被贬为左卫将军，安置在西京，隐居十年。
English: Guo was punished, demoted to the rank of General of the Left Division, placed in West Beijing, and lived in seclusion for ten years.

古文：哲宗立，复左屯卫大将军致仕。
现代文：哲宗即位后，郭逵复职，并以左屯卫大将军身份退休。
English: After the enthronement of Zhezong, Guo Gan was reinstated and retired as the General of the Left Tunwei.

古文：起知潞州，进广州观察使、知河中。
现代文：后又被重新起用为潞州知府，升广州观察使、河中知府。
English: Later, he was reappointed as the prefect of Zhangzhou, promoted to the post of Guangzhou observation envoy, and became the prefect of Hechu.

古文：辞归洛，改左武卫上将军、提举崇福宫，卒。
现代文：辞职回到洛阳，改任左武卫上将军、提举崇福宫，后去世。
English: He resigned and returned to Luoyang, where he was appointed General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard and promoted to the Chongfu Palace. He later died.

古文：辍视朝一日，赠雄武军节度使。
现代文：皇帝为他停止上朝一天，追赠他为雄武军节度使。
English: The emperor paused his enthronement ceremony for him for one day and posthumously awarded him the title of Grand Marshal of the Armed Forces.

古文：逵忼慨喜兵学，神宗尝访八阵遗法，对曰： 兵无常形，是特奇正相生之一法尔。 因为帝论其详。
现代文：郭逵为人慷慨，喜欢军事学，神宗曾向他询问孔明八阵遗法，他回答说： 用兵打仗没有固定的阵形，此八阵也只不过是奇正相生的一种兵法罢了。 并为皇帝讲述详情。
English: Guo Gan was a generous person and liked military science. Shenzong once asked him about the eight-square formation of Confucius, and he replied: There is no fixed formation for fighting with soldiers, and this eight-square formation is just a kind of military technique born of coincidence. And he told the emperor the details.

古文：在延安，使以教兵，久不就。
现代文：在延安时，派人以八阵法教练士兵，长期没有成效。
English: In Yan'an, they sent someone to train soldiers with the eight-battalion method, but it was not effective for a long time.

古文：逵择诸校习金鼓屯营者六十四人，使人教一队，顷刻而成。
现代文：郭逵便挑选众校官中熟习金鼓和屯营扎寨者六十四人，使每一个人教练一队士兵，不多久便练成了。
English: Guo Gan then selected sixty-four school officials who were familiar with the Golden Drum and encampment, and made each of them train a team of soldiers, which was soon completed.

古文：尤善用偏裨，每至所部，令人自言所能，暇日阅按之，故临阵皆尽其技。
现代文：他尤其善于使用偏将、裨将，每到所带领的部队中，便命令各人自己报说有何技能特长，有空时便翻看记住，所以临阵作战都能充分发挥各人的特长技能。
English: He was particularly adept at using superior and subordinate commanders. Whenever he went to the troops he was leading, he would order each of them to report what their special skills were. Whenever he had time, he would look them over and memorize them, so that the front-line operations could give full play to each person's special skills.

古文：李复圭治庆州之败，既斩李信、刘甫，又欲罪鄜延都巡检使白玉。
现代文：李复圭给庆州兵败的将领治罪，既斩了李信、刘甫，又想要将延都巡检使白玉治罪。
English: Li Fugui punished the generals who defeated the Qingzhou soldiers, not only beheaded Li Xin and Liu Fu, but also wanted to punish Bai Yu by making him inspect Yandu.

古文：玉见逵托以后事，且泣言不得终养母。
现代文：白玉求见郭逵，将后事托付给他，且悲泣地说自己不能给母亲养老送终。
English: Bai Yu asked to see Guo Yao, entrusting him with the aftermath, and said sadly that he could not provide his mother with an old-age pension.

古文：逵哀之，不遣，申救甚力，得免。
现代文：郭逵很同情他，不放他回去，并尽力营救，使他免于一死。
English: Guo Yao felt very sorry for him and would not let him go back, and tried his best to rescue him from certain death.

古文：已而玉大捷于新砦，神宗谓逵曰： 白玉能以功补过，卿之力也。 每战，先招怀，后战斗，爱惜士卒，不妄加诛戮。
现代文：后来白玉在新寨一战大捷，宋神宗对郭逵说： 白玉能将功补过，是你的功劳。 每次作战，都先招抚怀柔，然后再打，爱惜士卒，不妄加杀戮。
English: Later, Bai Yu won a great victory in the First World War in Xinzhai, and Song Shenzong said to Guo Gan, "It is your merit that Bai Yu was able to make up for the loss. In every battle, you should first appease Huairou, and then fight, cherish your soldiers, and not kill them in a rash manner.

古文：其杀贼妇女老弱者，皆不赏。
现代文：对杀过敌方妇女老弱病残者的将士，一概不予奖赏。
English: No reward will be given to soldiers who have killed enemy women, the old, the weak and the sick.

古文：虽坐征南无功久废，犹隐然为一时宿将云。
现代文：虽然因南征无功之罪，被长期废置不受重用，但他威武壮烈，仍不失为一时宿将。
English: Although he was disposed of for a long time and not reused due to the crime of no merit in the Southern Expedition, he was still a mighty warrior and a temporary commander.

