古文：卫次公李固言杨收郑朗段文昌崔从郭八郎张宣韩皋
现代文：卫次公李固言杨收郑朗段文昌崔从郭八郎张宣韩皋
English: Wei Zigong, Li Guyan, Yang Jie, Zheng Lang, Duan, Wen Chang, Cui Zi, Guo Bailang, Zhang Xuan, Han Qi

古文：卫次公
现代文：卫次公
English: Weizhigong

古文：唐吏部侍郎卫次公，早负耿介清直之誉。宪宗皇帝将欲相之久矣。
现代文：唐朝吏部侍郎卫次公，早就有耿直清廉的好声誉，宪宗皇帝很久就想任命他为宰相。
English: The Tang Dynasty's secretary of the General Staff, Lord Wei Jikong, already had a good reputation for honesty and integrity. Emperor Gensong had wanted to appoint him as prime minister for a long time.

古文：忽夜召翰林学士王涯草麻，内两句褒美云： 鸡树之徒老风烟，凤池之空淹岁月。 
现代文：一天晚上忽然召来翰林学士起草任命卫次公为宰相的诏书，其中有两句褒奖的话是：鸡树之徒老风烟，凤池之空淹岁月。 
English: One evening, Hanlin the scholar was suddenly summoned to draft the edict appointing Weizhong Rong as prime minister. Among the two words of praise were: "Chickens and trees have been around for a long time, and phoenix ponds have been flooded for centuries."

古文：诘旦，将宣麻。案出，忽有飘风坠地，左右收之未竟，上意中辍，令中使止其事。仍云，麻已出，即放下，未出即止。
现代文：第二天早上，刚要宣布诏书，打开的案卷忽然被风吹到了地上，左右的人想接但没有接住。于是皇帝改变了主意，命令太监停止办理这件事，并且说： 如果诏书已经发下去了，就继续办理执行，如果还没有发出，就停止办理。 
English: The next morning, just as the imperial edict was about to be announced, the open file was suddenly blown to the ground by the wind, and people on both sides tried to pick it up but did not catch it. So the emperor changed his mind, ordered the eunuch to stop handling the matter, and said: If the imperial edict has been issued, continue to handle the implementation, if it has not been issued, stop handling it.

古文：由此遂不拜。终于淮南节度。
现代文：由于这个原因，一直没有任命卫次公为宰相，卫次公死的时候官职是淮南节度使。
English: For this reason, there has been no appointment of Wei Zikong as prime minister. When Wei Zikong died, the official position was the Huainan Festival envoy.

古文：李固言
现代文：又李固言
English: Lee Kuan Yew

古文：相国李固言，元和六年，下第游蜀。遇一姥，言 郎君明年美蓉镜下及第，后二纪拜相，当镇蜀土，某此不复见郎君出将之荣也，愿以季女为托。 
现代文：丞相李固言在元和六年的时候，科举考试未中去蜀郡，遇到一个老妇对她说： 郎君明年芙蓉镜下及第，二十二年后当宰相，并且将镇守蜀郡，我这次看不到你当官的荣耀了，我想将女儿托付给你照顾。 
English: In the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, when the prime minister Li Guogan went to Shu County before the middle of the imperial examination, he met an old woman who said to her: "Rong Jun, next year you will be the prime minister, and after 22 years, you will be in charge of Shu County. This time, I can't see the glory of your official position. I want to entrust my daughter to your care."

古文：明年，果状头及第。
现代文：第二年，李固言果然考中头名状元。
English: In the second year, Li Guoyan won the first place in the middle school entrance examination.

古文：诗赋有人镜芙蓉之目。
现代文：诗赋有人镜芙蓉之目。
English: The poem is entitled "Mirroring the Eye of Hibiscus."

古文：后二十年，李公登庸。
现代文：二十年后，李固言受到皇帝的重用。
English: Twenty years later, Li Guyan was repeatedly used by the emperor.

古文：其姥来谒，李公忘之。
现代文：当年的老妇来拜访他，李固言将她忘记了。
English: The old woman of that time came to visit him, but Li Guogan forgot her.

古文：姥通曰： 蜀民老姥，尝嘱李氏者。 
现代文：老妇提醒他说： 蜀郡老妇，曾经嘱托过李大人的。 
English: The old woman reminded him, "The old woman from Shu County once asked me to do something for Master Li.

古文：李公省前事，具公服谢之，延入中堂。见其女。坐定又曰： 出将入相定矣。 
现代文：李固言想起了当年的事情，穿着官服拜谢了老妇，将她请到大厅里，见了她的女儿，坐下后老妇又说： 当将军做宰相是一定的了。 
English: Li Guoyan remembered the events of that year. Dressed in his official uniform, he bowed to the old woman, invited her to the hall, met her daughter, and after sitting down, the old woman said, "It is certain to be a general and prime minister."

古文：李公为设盛馔，不食。唯饮酒数杯，便请别。
现代文：李固言为她摆设了丰盛的酒宴，但她不吃，只喝了几杯酒，便要告辞。
English: Li Guoyan arranged a sumptuous banquet for her, but she did not eat, only drank a few glasses of wine, and then had to say goodbye.

古文：李固留不得，但言乞庇我女。
现代文：李固言留不住她，她只是说： 一定要照顾我女儿。 
English: Li was adamant that he couldn't keep her. She just said, "You must take care of my daughter."

古文：因赠金皂襦帼，并不受，唯取其妻牙梳一枚，题字记之。
现代文：李固言送给她金银衣物，她不要，只是拿了李固言妻子的一枚象牙梳子，要求李固言题字留作纪念。
English: Li Guojin gave her gold, silver and clothes, but she didn't want them. She just took one of Li Guojin's wife's ivory combs and asked Li Guojin to inscribe it as a souvenir.

古文：李公从至门，不复见。
现代文：李固言将她送到大门口，她便走得不见了。
English: Li Guojin sent her to the gate, and she disappeared.

古文：及李公镇蜀日，卢氏外孙子，九龄不语，忽弄笔砚。
现代文：等到李固言去镇守蜀郡，李固言的女儿嫁给了卢家所生的外孙子，九岁了还不会说话。
English: By the time Li Guyan went to Zhenshu Shu County, Li Guyan's daughter had married Lu's grandchild, who was nine years old and unable to speak.

古文：李戏曰： 尔竟不语，何用笔砚为？ 
现代文：一天他忽然摆弄毛笔和砚台玩，李固言逗他说： 你还不会说话，拿笔砚有什么用？ 
English: One day, he was suddenly playing with a brush and a table, and Li Guo Yan teased him saying, "You still can't speak, what's the use of holding a pen?"

古文：忽曰： 但庇成都老姥爱女，何愁笔砚无用耶？ 
现代文：这小孩忽然说： 只要照顾成都老妇的宝贝女儿，还愁什么笔墨砚台无用。 
English: The child suddenly said, "As long as I take care of the Chengdu old woman's precious daughter, I don't need to worry about anything.

古文：李公惊悟，即遣使分访之。
现代文：李固言忽然想起从前的事，随即派人分头寻找老妇的女儿。
English: Li Guogan suddenly remembered the past, and immediately sent people to search for the old woman's daughter.

古文：有巫董氏者，事金天神，即姥之女。
现代文：有个姓董的女巫，自称是金天神下凡，就是老妇的女儿。
English: There was a witch named Dong, who claimed to be the daughter of an old woman.

古文：言能语此儿，请祈华岳三郎。
现代文：她说： 要叫小孩说话，应祈求华岳三郎。 
English: She said, "If you want your child to speak, you should pray to Hua Yue Saburo."

古文：李公如巫所说，是儿忽能言。
现代文：李固言按女巫所说的去做，小孩从此能说话了。
English: Li Guanzhong did as the witch said, and the child was able to speak from then on.

古文：因是蜀人敬董如神，祈无不应。
现代文：从这以后蜀郡人敬畏姓董的女巫如敬天神，祈求她的事情，没有不应验的。
English: Since then, the people of Shu County have revered the witch surnamed Dong as if she were a deity, and they have never failed to ask her for anything.

古文：富积数百金，怙势用事，莫敢言者。
现代文：她富足得积存了几百两黄金，仗势欺人，没有人敢于说话反对。
English: She was so rich that she had accumulated several hundred taels of gold. She was so powerful that no one dared to speak out against her.

古文：洎相国崔郸来镇蜀，遽毁其庙，投土偶于江，仍判事金天王董氏杖背，递出西界。
现代文：等到丞相崔郸来镇守蜀郡，立即拆毁了金天王的庙，将泥像扔到江里，并且将自称是金天王下凡姓董的女巫打了一顿棍子，押送出蜀郡地界。
English: When the chancellor, Cui Wei, came to defend Shu County, he immediately demolished the temple of King Jin Tianwang, threw the mud statue into the river, and beat the witch who claimed to be King Jin Tianwang, surnamed Dong, with a stick, and escorted her out of the territory of Shu County.

古文：寻在贝州，李公婿卢生舍于家，其灵歇矣。
现代文：她来到贝州，被李固言的女婿卢生收留在家中，她的道行神灵全都没有了。
English: She came to Beizhou and was taken in by Li Guyan's son-in-law Lu Sheng. Her Taoist spirit was completely gone.

古文：李固言初未第时，过洛。
现代文：李固言当初科举考试未中榜时，经过洛阳，有个叫胡芦先生的人。
English: When Li Guyan did not make it to the top of the exam list, there was a man named Mr. Hu Lu who passed through Luoyang.

古文：有胡芦先生者，知神灵间事，曾诣而问命。先生曰： 纱笼中人，勿复相问。 
现代文：知道鬼神之间的事，曾经找这个人算过命。先生说： 纱笼中人，不用相问。 
English: Knowing the things between ghosts and gods, I once asked this person to calculate my fate. The teacher said: People in the sarcophagus, do not ask each other.

古文：及在长安，寓归德里。人言圣寿寺中有僧，善术数。
现代文：等到回到长安，住在归德里，有人说圣寿寺中有个和尚，善于算命，便去请教。
English: When he returned to Chang'an and lived in Gui Delhi, someone told him that there was a monk in the Seongju Temple who was good at fortune-telling, so he went to consult him.

古文：乃往诣之，僧又谓曰： 子纱笼中人。 
现代文：和尚说： 你是纱笼中人。 
English: The monk said: You are a man in a sarong.

古文：是岁元和七年，许孟容以兵部侍郎知举。
现代文：当年，也就是元和七年，许孟容以兵部尚书的身份主持科举考试。
English: In that year, that is, in the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, Xu Meng Rong presided over the imperial examinations as the secretary of the military department.

古文：固言访中表间人在场屋之近事者，问以求知游谒之所。
现代文：李固言找到表亲中在科场做事的人询问，考试前应做什么准备。
English: Li Guoyan found a cousin who worked in the science field and asked him what preparations should be made before the exam.

古文：斯人且以固言文章，甚有声称，必取甲科。
现代文：这个人知道李固言的文章非常有声誉，必然能考中进士。
English: This person knew that Li Guogan's article was very reputable and would surely be able to pass the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：因绐之曰： 吾子须首谒主文，仍要求见。 
现代文：便哄骗他说： 你应该首先去拜见主考官。 
English: and coaxed him: You should go to see the examiner first.

古文：固言不知其误之，则以所业径谒孟容。
现代文：李固言不知道这个人是欺骗他，便拿自己所写的文章去拜见请教许孟容。
English: Li Guoyan did not know that this person was deceiving him, so he took the article he had written and went to see Xu Mengrong for advice.

古文：孟容见其著述甚丽，乃密令从者延之，谓曰： 举人不合相见，必有嫉才者。 
现代文：许孟容见他所写的文章很漂亮，便秘密派人召见他，并对他说： 举子考试之前，是不能和主考官见面的，一定是有嫉妒人才的人唆使。 
English: When Xu Meng Rong saw that the article he had written was very beautiful, he secretly sent someone to summon him and said to him, "Before the entrance examination, you cannot meet with the chief examiner. It must be instigated by someone who is jealous of talent."

古文：使诘之，固言遂以实对。
现代文：便盘问他。李固言将实情告诉了他。
English: He interrogated him. Li Guogan told him the truth.

古文：孟容许第固言于榜首，而落其教者姓名。
现代文：许孟容许诺，让李固言考中第一名，并把教唆他的人的名字勾掉。
English: Xu Mengyun promised to let Li Guyan take the first place in the middle school entrance examination, and to cross out the names of those who instigated him.

古文：乃遣秘焉。既第，再谒圣寿寺，问纱笼中之事。
现代文：李固言考中以后，又去圣寿寺找和尚请教什么是纱笼中人。
English: After the middle school entrance examination, Li Guyan went to the Shengzhu Temple to find a monk to ask him what a person in a sarong was.

古文：僧曰： 吾常于阴府往来，有为相者，皆以形貌，用碧纱笼于庑下。故所以知。 
现代文：和尚说： 我常常在阴间冥府来往，看见凡是能当宰相的人，冥府都以他的身体和形状，用碧纱笼罩着，所以知道。
English: The monk said, "I often go to and fro in the underworld, the Hades, and see anyone who can be prime minister. The underworld is shrouded in gauze with his body and shape, so I know.

古文：固言竟出入将相，皆验焉。
现代文：后来李固言果然出将入相全都应验了。
English: Later, Li Guofeng's words came true and all the predictions came true.

古文：元和初，进士李固言就举。忽梦去看榜，见李固言第二人上第。
现代文：元和初年，进士李固言参加科举考试，梦见去看榜，见李固言是第二名考中进士。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and He, the scholar Li Guyan took part in the imperial examination. He dreamed of looking at the list and saw that Li Guyan was the second in the middle school entrance examination.

古文：及放榜，自是顾言，亦第二人。
现代文：等到真正发榜，却是李顾言中榜，并且也是第二名。
English: When the list was actually released, it was Li Guyan who topped the list, and he was also second.

古文：固言其年又落。
现代文：这一年李固言又没考中。
English: This year, Li Guyan did not pass the exam.

古文：至七年，许孟容下状头登第。
现代文：直到元和第七年，李固言才在许孟容主持的科举考试中考中了头名状元。
English: It was not until the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty that Li Guyan was awarded the first place in the examination of the imperial examination presided over by Xu Meng Rong.

古文：杨收
现代文：杨收
English: Yang Jie

古文：唐国相杨收，江州人。
现代文：唐朝宰相杨收是江州人，祖父是江州府的都押衙。
English: Yang Jie, the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty, was from Jiangzhou, and his grandfather was the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：祖为本州都押衙，父维直，兰溪县主簿，生四子：发、嘏、收、严，皆登进士第。
现代文：父亲叫杨维直，生了四个儿子，名字分别叫杨发、杨嘏、杨收、杨严，全都考中进士。
English: His father was called Yang Weizhi, and he had four sons, whose names were Yang Fa, Yang Yao, Yang Jie and Yang Yan. All of them passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：收即大拜。
现代文：杨收名字的意义是秋天。
English: The meaning of Yang Jie's name is "autumn."

古文：发已下皆至丞郎。
现代文：他儿子的名字分别叫巨、鏻、鉴。
English: The names of his sons are Ju, Yao and Jian respectively.

古文：发以春为义，其房子以柷以乘为名；嘏以夏为义，其房子以照为名；收以秋为义，其房子以巨、鏻、鉴为名；严以冬为义，其房子以注、涉、洞为名。
现代文：杨严名字的意义是冬天，他儿子的名字分别叫注、涉、洞。
English: The meaning of Yang Yan's name is winter, and his son's names are Zhu, Wanzhou and Dong respectively.

古文：尽有文学，登高第，号曰修行杨家。
现代文：全都很有文才，有功名，被称作 修行杨家 。
English: All of them are very talented in literature and have made great achievements. They are known as the "practicing Yang family."

古文：与静恭诸杨，比于华盛。
现代文：与静恭等几家姓杨的都是繁华举盛的家族。
English: Along with Jing Qiong, several surnamed Yang are prosperous families.

古文：收少年，于庐山修业。
现代文：杨收在少年的时候，在庐山读书。
English: When Yang Hui was a teenager, he studied in Lushan.

古文：一日，寻幽至深隐之地，遇一道者谓曰： 子若学道，即有仙分；若必作官，位至三公，终焉有祸。
现代文：一天他观赏风景来到一个游人走不到的隐蔽之处，遇到一个道士对他说： 你如果学道，就有成仙的缘分，如果一定要当官，能够做到最大的官，但是最终有祸。
English: One day, while he was enjoying the scenery, he came to a hidden place where tourists could not go. He met a Taoist priest who said to him: "If you study the Tao, you will have the fate of becoming a immortal. If you must become an official, you can achieve the greatest official, but in the end, there will be disaster."

古文：能从我学道乎？ 
现代文：能跟我学道吗？ 
English: Can you learn from me?

古文：收持疑，坚进取之心，忽其道人之语。他日虽登廊庙，竟罹南荒之殛。
现代文：杨收迟疑了一下，但还是坚定了进取做官的决心。他忽视了道人的话，后来虽然当了宰相，但是最后遭罪死在南荒。郑朗
English: Yang Jie hesitated for a moment, but he still strengthened his determination to be an enterprising official. He ignored the words of Taoists, and later, although he became the prime minister, he was finally killed in Nanba. Zheng Lang

古文：郑朗长庆中，青龙寺僧善知人之术。知名之士，靡不造焉。
现代文：唐穆宗长庆年间，青龙寺的和尚精通预测人命运的法术，有名的人物没有不去拜访的。
English: During the reign of Tang Mu Zong Changqing, the monks of Qinglong Temple were proficient in the magic of predicting people's fate, and there was no famous person who did not visit them.

古文：进士郑朗特谒，了不与语。
现代文：进士郑朗特意去拜会，和尚不同他说话。
English: The scholar Zheng Lang specially went to visit the meeting, but the monk did not speak to him.

古文：及放榜，朗首登第焉。
现代文：等到发榜，郑朗名列第一。
English: When the list was released, Zheng Lang ranked first.

古文：朗未之信也。累日，内索重试，朗果落。
现代文：郑朗不太相信，过了几天，朝廷组织复试，郑果然没有考中。
English: Zheng Lang did not believe it. A few days later, the imperial court organized a retest, and Zheng Lang did not pass the exam.

古文：后却谒青龙僧，怡然相接，礼过前时。
现代文：郑朗又去拜见青龙寺和尚，和尚热情接待，远远超过上次。
English: Zheng Lang also went to visit the monk of Qinglong Temple, and the monk warmly received him, far more than the last time.

古文：朗诘之：僧曰： 前时以朗君无名，若中第，却不嘉。
现代文：郑朗询问原因，和尚说： 上一次，您没有名气，如果真的中了榜，反而不好。
English: Zheng Lang asked the reason, and the monk said: Last time, you didn't have a reputation. If you really made it onto the list, it's not good.

古文：自此位极人臣。 
现代文：从此以后你可以当到最大的官。 
English: From now on, you can become the highest official.

古文：其后果历台铉。
现代文：后来果然成为支撑国家社稷的辅政大臣。
English: Later, he became the Vice-Minister of State to support the country's social development.

古文：段文昌
现代文：段文昌
English: Duan Wenchang

古文：故西川节帅段文昌，字景初。父锷，为支江宰，后任江陵令。
现代文：原来的西川节度使段文昌，字景初，他父亲叫段锷，是支江县宰，后来任江陵县令。
English: The original Nishikawa Setsudou was made by Duan Wenchang. At the beginning of the word scene, his father was called Duan Yao. He was the governor of Shijiang County and later the governor of Gangneung County.

古文：文昌少好蜀文。长自渚宫，困于尘土，客游成都，谒韦南康皋。皋与奏释褐。
现代文：段文昌少年时喜爱蜀地文化，他出生在湖北江陵，生活在平民百姓之中。后来去成都，拜见韦南的康皋，皋为他谋求官职，没有成功。
English: When he was a boy, Duan Wenchang loved the culture of Shoudi. He was born in Jiangling, Hubei Province, and lived among the common people. Later, he went to Chengdu to meet with Kang Xi of Weinan, who unsuccessfully sought a post for him.

古文：道不甚行，每以事业自负。与游皆高士之名。
现代文：他很为自己的才学而自负，交往的都是有才学的名士。
English: He is very proud of his academic ability, and he only associates with famous people with academic ability.

古文：遂去南康之府。金吾将军裴邠之镇梁川，辟为从事，转假廷评。
现代文：后来他又去了南康府，金吾将军裴邠之镇守梁川，聘任他为从事，推荐他参加朝廷对人才的审查录用。
English: Later, he went to Nankangfu, the town guard of Liangchuan, the town of Kingu General Pei Xuan, appointed him to be engaged, and recommended him to participate in the examination of talents by the imperial court.

古文：裴公府罢，因抵兴元之西四十里，有驿曰鹄鸣，滨汉江，前倚巴山。
现代文：裴邠之调离后，他到兴元以西四十里，有个驿站叫鹄鸣，这里前面是汉江，后面是巴山。
English: After Pei Yanzhi's transfer, he went to a station called Yuming, forty miles west of Xingyuan. In front of it was the Han River, and behind it was Bashan.

古文：有清僧依其隈，不知何许人也，常嘿其词。
现代文：有个叫清的和尚在山上修行，不知道是什么地方的人。
English: There is a monk named Qing who practices in the mountains. He doesn't know where he is.

古文：公有府游，闻清僧之异，径诣清公求宿，愿知前去之事。
现代文：他常常感叹一声，忽然说出一句预言，没有不应验的。
English: He often sighed and suddenly uttered a prophecy, which did not go unfulfilled.

古文：自夕达旦，曾无词。忽问蜀中闻极盛旌旆而至者谁？
现代文：段文昌在官府里时，就曾经听说过他的名声，便到他这里住宿，想请教以后的事情，他们从晚上谈到早晨，清忽然问段文昌说： 蜀中旌旗招展，隆重而来的人是谁？ 
English: When Duan Wenchang was in the government office, they had heard of his reputation, so they came to stay with him and wanted to ask him about the future. They talked from the evening to the morning, and suddenly asked Duan Wenchang: "The Shu flag is flying high, who are the people who come here?

古文：公曰： 岂非高崇文乎？ 
现代文：段文昌说： 那是高崇文吧！ 
English: Duan Wenchang said: That is Gao Chongwen!

古文：对曰： 非也，更言之。 
现代文：清说： 不是，你再说一个。 
English: Kiyoshi said, "No, say another one."

古文：公曰： 代崇文者，武黄门也。 
现代文：段文昌说： 代替高崇文的是武黄门。 
English: Duan Wenchang said: The replacement of Gao Chongwen is Wu Huangmen.

古文：清曰： 十九郎不日即为此人，更盛更盛。 
现代文：清说： 十九郎你过不了几天就和此人一样，比他更为显赫。 
English: Kiyoshi said, "Jujuro, in just a few days, you will be just like this man, and even more prominent than him.

古文：公寻征之，便曰： 害风妄语，阿师不知。 
现代文：段文昌询问原因，清却说： 疯颠胡说罢了。 
English: Duan Wenchang asked the reason, but Qing said: "It's just crazy nonsense."

古文：因大笑而已。由是颇亦自负。
现代文：于是两个人大笑，从此段文昌非常自负。
English: As a result, the two laughed loudly, and from this point on, Wenchang became very conceited.

古文：户部员外韦处厚，出开州刺史。段公时任都官员外，判盐铁案。
现代文：户部官员韦处厚出任开州刺史，这时段文昌任都官员外，在审理私贩盐铁的案件，特意将韦处厚送出官署大门。
English: Wei Shuanhou, an official of the Household Department, served as the secretary of Kaizhou. During this period, Wenchang, in addition to being an official of the capital, deliberately sent Wei Shuanhou out of the gate of the government office during the trial of the case of the salt and iron smugglers.

古文：公送出都门，处厚素深于释氏，洎到鹄鸣，失访之，清喜而迎处厚。处厚因问还期，曰： 一年半岁，一年半岁。 
现代文：韦处厚精通佛学，来到鹄鸣请教和尚清，清高兴地迎接韦处厚。韦处厚问自己回来的时间，清回答说： 一年半载，一年半载。 
English: Wei Chuan Hou was well-versed in Buddhism. He came to Kunming to seek advice from the monk Qing. Qing greeted Wei Chuan Hou with joy. Wei Chuan Hou asked him when he would be back. Qing replied, "One and a half years, one and a half years."

古文：又问终止何官？
现代文：韦处厚又问自己最后能当什么官？
English: Wei Shuchuan also asked himself what kind of official he could eventually become?

古文：对曰： 宰相，须江边得。 
现代文：清说： 宰相，必须在江边得到。 
English: Kiyoshi said, "Prime Minister, you must get a boat by the river."

古文：又问终止何处？
现代文：韦处厚又问自己死在什么地方？
English: Wei Zhenhong also asked himself where he died?

古文：僧遂不答。
现代文：和尚不回答。
English: The monk did not answer.

古文：又问段十九郎何如？
现代文：韦处厚问段十九郎段文昌以后怎么样。
English: Wei Zhenguo thickly asked how it would be after the passage of the 19th century and the rise of Wenchang.

古文：答曰： 已说矣，近也近也。 
现代文：清回答说： 已经同他说过了，快了，快了！ 
English: Qing replied, "I already told him, it's coming, it's coming!"

古文：及处厚之归朝，正三岁，重言一年半岁之验。
现代文：等到韦处厚调回来，正好三年时间，应验了清的一年半载加一年半载的说法。
English: By the time Wei was transferred back, it had been exactly three years, fulfilling the saying of a year and a half plus a year and a half.

古文：长庆初，段公自相位节制西川，果符清师之言。
现代文：长庆初年，段文昌以宰相的身份镇守西川，果然符合清的说法。
English: In the first year of the Long Qing Dynasty, Duan Wenchang became the governor of West River as the prime minister, which was in line with the Qing Dynasty.

古文：与邹平公同发帅修清公塔，因刻石记其事焉。
现代文：韦处厚就是弄不明白在江边得到宰相这句话的意思，从而到处请人解释，有人说韦处厚必定是先在浙西夏口任职，从这儿入朝做宰相。
English: Wei Chuanhou just couldn't figure out the meaning of the saying that he became prime minister by the riverside, so he asked people everywhere to explain. Some people said that Wei Chuanhou must have first served in Xiakou, Zhejiang Province, and then entered the imperial court to become prime minister.

古文：又赵宗儒节制兴元日，问其移动。遂命纸作两句诗云： 梨花初发杏花初，甸邑南来庆有余。 
现代文：等到文宗皇帝在江邸即位，第一个任命的就是韦处厚为宰相，到这时清的话才完全得到验证，韦处厚与邹平共同修建清公塔，并刻石记录了上述事情。还就是赵宗儒管理兴元的时候，曾向清公谒问他今后的动向，清公在纸上写了两句诗： 梨花初发杏花初，旬邑南来庆有余。 
English: By the time Emperor Wenzong ascended the throne at the Jiang residence, Wei Shuan Hou was the first to be appointed as prime minister. It was only at this time that the words of the Qing Dynasty were fully verified. Wei Shuan Hou and Zouping jointly built the Qing Dynasty Tower and recorded the above events in stone. It was also when Zhao Zongru was in charge of the Xingyuan Dynasty that he asked Qing Dynasty Gao about his future direction. Qing Dynasty Gao wrote two poems on paper: "Early bloom of pear blossom, early bloom of apricot blossom, early bloom of pear blossom, early bloom of apricot blossom,

古文：宗儒遂考之。清公但云： 害风阿师取次语。 
现代文：赵儒宗问这诗句的含义，清公还是说 疯颠和尚胡说。 
English: Zhao Ruzong asked the meaning of this verse. Qing Gong still said that it was a mad monk's nonsense.

古文：明年二月，除检校右仆射。郑余庆代其位。
现代文：第二年二月，赵宗儒任检校右仆射，郑余庆代移他管理兴元。
English: In February of the following year, Zhao Zongru was appointed as the right-hand man of the inspection school, and Zheng Yuqing was transferred to manage Xingyuan on his behalf.

古文：崔从
现代文：崔从
English: Cui Cong

古文：宝历二年，崔从镇淮南。
现代文：宝历二年，崔从镇守淮南。
English: In the second year of the lunar calendar, Cui was promoted from the town guard of Huainan.

古文：五月三日，瓜步镇申浙右试竞渡船十艘，其三船平没于金山下，一百五十人俱溺死。
现代文：五月三日，瓜步镇报告浙右正在竞渡的十艘船中有三艘沉没在金山脚上的大江里，船上的一百五十人全都淹死。
English: On May 3, Guabuzhen reported that three of the ten boats competing in the Zhejiang right-hand ferry sank in the big river at the foot of the Jinshan Mountain, and all 150 people on board drowned.

古文：从见申纸叹愤。
现代文：崔从看到这件事的报告后既感叹又悲愤。
English: Cui was both saddened and angry after seeing the report of the incident.

古文：时军司马皇甫曙入启事，与从同异之。
现代文：这时军司马皇甫儒进来禀报，大家对这件事都感到很惊奇。
English: At this time, the military secretary Ma Huangfu Rong came in to deliver the report, and everyone was very surprised by this.

古文：座有宋生归儒者语曰： 彼之祸不及怪也。此亦有之，人数相类，但其死不同耳。 
现代文：在座的有个宋生叫归儒的说： 那里的灾祸不算奇怪，这里也有灾祸，死的人数相同，只是死亡的原因不同罢了！ 
English: One of those present, Song Sheng, who had converted to Confucianism, said: The disaster there is not strange, there is also a disaster here, the number of deaths is the same, but the cause of death is different!

古文：浃日，有大宴，陈于广场，百戏俱呈。俄暴风雨，庭前戏者并马数百匹，系在庑下。
现代文：十天以后，在广场上举行盛大的宴会，并且上演各种戏剧，忽然下了一场暴风雨，人和数百匹马都挤在旁边的大屋里面。
English: Ten days later, after a grand banquet had been held in the square, and various plays had been performed, a storm suddenly broke, and people and hundreds of horses were crowded into the large house next door.

古文：迅雷一震，马皆惊奔，大庑数十间平塌，凡居其下者俱压死。
现代文：雷声一响，马匹全都受惊狂奔起来，撞倒了数十间房子，凡是大屋下的人都压死了。
English: At the first clap of thunder, all the horses were startled and ran wild, knocking down dozens of houses and crushing to death everyone under the large houses.

古文：公令较其数，与浙右无一人差焉。郭八郎
现代文：崔从叫人清点死亡人数，竟与浙右死亡的人数一样，一个人都不差。郭八郎
English: Cui Cong called for people to count the number of deaths, but it turned out to be the same as the number of deaths in Zhejiang. Guo Hachiro

古文：河中少尹郑复礼始应进士举，十上不第，困厄且甚。
现代文：河中少尹郑复礼在刚参加科举考试的时候，十次都没有考中，陷入艰难窘迫的境地。
English: When Yin Zhengfulei, a junior high school student in Hechu, just took the imperial examination, he failed the exam ten times and fell into a difficult predicament.

古文：千福寺僧弘道者，人言昼闭关以寐，夕则视事于阴府。
现代文：千福寺有个叫弘道的和尚，人们说他白天关门睡觉，晚上去阴间办事。
English: There is a monk named Hongdao at Senfuku-ji Temple. People say that he closes the door to sleep during the day and goes to the underworld at night.

古文：十祈叩者，八九拒之。
现代文：十个人找他算命，有八九个被他拒绝。
English: Ten people asked him to tell their fortunes, and he turned down eight or nine of them.

古文：复礼方蹇踬愤惋，乃择日斋沐候焉。
现代文：郑复礼正在悲伤发愁的时候，便选择了一个吉日，吃斋沐浴去千福寺等候向弘道和尚请教。
English: When Zheng Fulei was sad and worried, he chose an auspicious day to eat, fast, and bathe at Senfukuji Temple while waiting to ask Hongdao Monk for advice.

古文：道颇温容之，且曰： 某未尝妄泄于人。今茂才抱积薪之叹且久，不能忍耳。
现代文：弘道的态度很温和，并且对他说： 我从来没有将天机泄漏给别人，今天你怀着屡试不中的沮丧心情来找我，我于心不忍，你只要继续努力，就一定能考中成名。
English: Hongdao's attitude was very gentle, and he said to him: I have never leaked the opportunity to others. Today, you come to me with a depressed mood that you can't bear to try again and again. I can't bear it in my heart. As long as you continue to work hard, you will definitely be able to pass the exam and become famous.

古文：勉旃进取，终成美名。
现代文：但是你的事情很特殊，不能随便说啊！ 
English: But your case is very special, you can't just say anything!

古文：然其事类异，不可言也。 郑拜请其期，道曰： 唯君期，须四事相就，然后遂志。
现代文：郑复礼问自己考中成名的时间，弘道说： 考中的日期，必须有四件事作为条件，然后才可以实现你的心愿。
English: Zheng Fuli asked himself when he would become famous in the middle of the exam. Hongdao said: The date of the middle of the exam, there must be four things as a condition, and then you can realize your wish.

古文：四缺其一，则复负冤。
现代文：四件事，缺少一件也不行。
English: Four things, not one thing missing.

古文：如是者骨肉相继三榜。
现代文：像这样，你们骨肉至亲相继考中三榜。
English: Just like this, your flesh and blood relatives have made it to the top three in the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：三榜之前，犹梯天之难。三榜之后，则反掌之易也。 
现代文：三榜之前，要想中榜难如登天，三榜之后，要想中榜易如反掌。 
English: Before the top three, it is very difficult to get into the top three. After the top three, it is very easy to get into the top three.

古文：郑愕视不可喻，则又拜请四事之目。
现代文：郑复礼惊呆了，过一会儿他又问是哪四件事。
English: Zheng Fulei was stunned. After a while, he asked what the four things were.

古文：道持疑良久，则曰： 慎勿言于人，君之成名，其事有四，亦可以为异矣。
现代文：弘道迟疑了很久才说： 你千万不能对别人说，你要成名，条件有四个，所以说很特殊。
English: After hesitating for a long time, Hongdao said, "You must not say to others that you want to become famous. There are four conditions, so it's very special.

古文：其一，须国家改亢元第二年；其二，须是礼部侍郎再知贡举；其三，须是第二人姓张；其四，同年须有郭八郎。
现代文：第一件，必须是改变年号的第二年；第二件，必须是礼部侍郎再次主持科举考试；第三件，考中第二名的必须姓张；第四件，同年参加考试的必须有排行第八的姓郭的举子。
English: In the first case, it must be the second year after the year number was changed; in the second case, it must be the minister of etiquette who presides over the examination again; in the third case, the second place in the examination must be surnamed Zhang; in the fourth case, the person who takes the examination in the same year must have the eighth place surname Guo.

古文：四者阙一，则功亏一篑矣。
现代文：四件事少了一件，便功亏一篑，不能成功。
English: If one of the four things is missing, the effort will be lost and it will not succeed.

古文：如是者贤弟、侄三榜，率须依此。 
现代文：你的弟弟、侄子依次中榜，顺序必须如此。 
English: Your younger brother and nephew are next in line, in that order.

古文：郑虽大疑其说。郁郁不乐，以为无复望也，敬谢而退。
现代文：郑复礼虽然很怀疑他的说法，但是仍然心情沉重，以为没有希望了，便很礼貌地表示感谢之后回去了。
English: Although Zheng Fulei was very suspicious of his statement, he was still heavy-hearted and thought that there was no hope, so he politely thanked him and went back.

古文：长庆二年，人有导其名姓于主文者，郑以且非再知贡举，意甚疑之，果不中第。
现代文：长庆二年，有人将他的名字推荐给主考官。郑复礼因为主考官不是第二次主持考试，对结果没有信心，果然没有考中。
English: In the second year of Changqing, someone recommended his name to the chief examiner. Because the chief examiner did not preside over the exam for the second time, Zheng Fuli did not have confidence in the result, and he did not pass the exam.

古文：直至改元宝历二年，新昌杨公再司文柄，乃私喜其事，未敢泄言。
现代文：直至改国号为宝历的第二年，杨新昌再次担任主考官，郑复礼暗自高兴，没敢对别人说。
English: Until the second year after the country's name was changed to Baoli, Yang Xinchang once again served as the chief examiner. Zheng Fulei was secretly happy and did not dare to tell others.

古文：来春果登第。
现代文：第二年春天果然中榜，第二名果然姓张，叫张知实。
English: In the spring of the second year, he was indeed in the middle of the list, and the second name was indeed Zhang, called Zhang Zhishu.

古文：第二人姓张，名知实，同年郭八郎，名言杨。郑奇叹且久，因纪于小书之抄。私自谓曰，道言三榜率须如此，一之已异，其可至于再乎？
现代文：同时参加考试的有个郭八郎，叫郭言杨。复礼感叹很久，并将此事记录下来，自己对自己说： 弘道说三榜的顺序必须这样，一榜已经够奇怪的了。
English: At the same time, there was a Guo Hachiro, called Guo Yan Yang, who took the exam. He sighed for a long time, recorded the matter, and said to himself: Hongdao said that the order of the three lists must be like this, one list is already strange enough.

古文：至于三乎？
现代文：怎么能再有一次，并且还有第三次呢？ 
English: How can there be a second time and a third time?

古文：次至故尚书右丞韩宪应举。
现代文：下一年该轮到以故的尚书右丞韩宪参加科举考试了。
English: Next year, it will be the turn of the late Han Xian to take part in the exam.

古文：尔后应大和九年举，败于垂成。
现代文：大和二年，科举考试的规模非常大，因为主考官不是第二次主持考试，他果然没有考中。
English: In 1912, the scale of the imperial examinations was very large, because the chief examiner did not preside over the examination for the second time, he did not pass the examination.

古文：直至改元开成二年，高锴再司文柄，右辖私异事，明年果登上第。
现代文：后来又参加大和九年的考试，也只差一点没有考中，直到改国号为开成的第二年，高锴再次担任主考官。韩宪感到奇怪，第二年韩宪果然高中。
English: Later, he also participated in the examination of the ninth year of the Great and Northern War, and he was only a little short of failing the examination. Until the second year after the country name was changed to Kaifeng, Gao Wei once again served as the chief examiner. Han Xian felt strange, and the next year, Han Xian was indeed in high school.

古文：二人姓张，名棠；同年郭八郎，名植。
现代文：第二名叫张棠，同时参加考试的有个郭八郎叫郭植。
English: The second name is Zhang Tang, and there is a Guo Hachiro named Guo Zhi who is taking the exam at the same time.

古文：因又附于小书之末。
现代文：郑复礼又将这件记录下来。
English: Zheng Fulei also recorded this.

古文：三榜虽欠其一，两榜且无小差。
现代文：三榜虽然还差一榜，但两榜都被弘道说对了。
English: Although the third list is still one list short, both lists were said to be right by Hongdao.

古文：闺门之内，私相谓曰： 岂其然乎？ 
现代文：郑复礼在家里说： 难道真像弘道说的一样？ 
English: Zheng Fulei said at home: Is it really like what Hongdao said?

古文：时僧弘道已不知所往矣。
现代文：这时弘道已经不知道上哪里去了。
English: By this time, Hiromichi no longer knew where he had gone.

古文：次至故驸马都尉颢应举，时誉转洽。
现代文：下次该轮到已故的驸马都尉颢参加科举考试了。
English: Next time, it will be the turn of the late Ma Du Fu to take part in the imperial examinations.

古文：至改元会昌之二年，礼部柳侍郎璟再司文柄，都尉以状头及第。
现代文：时机非常巧合，等到改变国号为会昌的第二年，礼部侍郎璟再次主持科举考试。颢考中了头名状元。
English: The timing was very coincidental. In the second year after the country name was changed to Hoechang, the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies again presided over the entrance examination. He got the first place in the entrance examination.

古文：第二人姓张，名潜；同年郭八郎，名京。
现代文：第二名叫张潜，同时参加考试的有个郭八郎叫郭京。
English: The second name is Zhang Qian, and there is a Guo Hachiro named Guo Jing who is taking the exam at the same time.

古文：弘道所说无差焉。张宣
现代文：证明了弘道和尚所说的一点不差。张宣
English: It proves that what Hongdao Monk said is correct. Zhang Xuan

古文：杭州临安县令张宣，宝历中，自越府户曹掾调授本官。
现代文：杭州临安县令张宣在宝历年间，从越府户曹掾调任现职。
English: Zhang Xuan, the governor of Hangzhou's Lin'an County, was transferred from the Yuefu household of Cao Wei to his current position during the Baoli years.

古文：以家在浙东，意求萧山宰。
现代文：因为他的家在浙东，所以想当萧山县令。
English: Because his home is in eastern Zhejiang, he wants to be the governor of Xiaoshan County.

古文：去唱已前三日，忽梦一女子年二十余，修刺来谒。
现代文：公布任命的前三天，他忽然梦见一个二十多岁的女子，通报姓名来见他。
English: Three days before the announcement of his appointment, he suddenly had a dream about a woman in her twenties who came to see him and gave her name.

古文：宣素真介，梦中不与女子见。
现代文：张宣历来严肃谨慎，梦里不接见这个女子。
English: Zhang Xuan has always been serious and cautious. He does not see this woman in his dreams.

古文：女子云： 某是明年邑中之客，安得不相见耶？ 
现代文：女子说： 我是您管辖地方的人，怎么能不相见呢？ 
English: The woman said, "I am from your jurisdiction, how can I not see you?

古文：宣遂见之。
现代文：于是，张宣很严肃地接见了她。
English: As a result, Zhang Xuan received her very seriously.

古文：礼貌甚肃。曰： 妾有十一口，依在贵境，有年数矣。
现代文：女子说： 我们家有十一口人，住在贵县已经许多年了。
English: The woman said, "Our family has eleven members, and we have been living in Guizhou County for many years.

古文：今闻明府将至，故来拜谒。 
现代文：今天听说大人您要来，所以前来拜见。 
English: I heard today that you are coming, so I came to see you.

古文：宣因问县名，竟不对。
现代文：张宣问她所说的是什么县，女子没有回答。
English: Zhang Xuanqian asked her what county she was talking about, but the woman did not answer.

古文：宣告其族人曰： 且志之。
现代文：张宣醒来后，告诉家里的人记住女子所说的县名。
English: After Zhang Xuan woke up, he told the family members to remember the name of the county mentioned by the woman.

古文：及后补湖州安吉县令，宣以家事不便，将退之。
现代文：后来他补缺被任命为湖州安吉县令，他因为离家乡太远不方便，想调换这个职务。
English: Later, he was appointed to fill a vacancy as the county magistrate of Anji County, Huzhou. He wanted to change the position because it was too far from his hometown and inconvenient.

古文：其族人曰： 不然，前夕所梦女子，非 安 字乎？
现代文：他家里的人说： 以前你梦里那个女子，不是个安字吗？
English: The people in his family said, "Wasn't that woman in your dream just an amiable character?

古文：十一口非吉字乎？
现代文：十一口不就是个吉字吗？
English: Isn't every tenth word a lucky word?

古文：此阴骘已定，退亦何益。 
现代文：这说明是命运决定的，调换又有什么好处。 
English: This shows that it is a matter of fate, and what is the benefit of switching.

古文：宣悟且笑曰： 若然，固应有定。 
现代文：张宣明白过来笑着说： 确实，真是命运决定的。 
English: Zhang Xuan smiled knowingly and said, "Indeed, it was really decided by fate."

古文：遂受之。
现代文：于是接受了任命。
English: He accepted the appointment.

古文：及秩满，数年又将选。
现代文：等到任期满了，又将被重新任命。
English: He will be reappointed when his term expires.

古文：时江淮水歉，宣移家河南，固求宋亳一官，将引家往。
现代文：这时江淮一带发生旱灾，张宣将家迁到了河南，所以想就近在宋亳谋求一个官职，以便照顾家方便。
English: At this time, a drought occurred in the area of Jianghuai, and Zhang Xuan moved his family to Henan. Therefore, he wanted to seek a government post in nearby Songshan in order to take care of his family conveniently.

古文：又梦前时女子，颜貌如旧，曰： 明府又当宰邑，妾之邑也。 
现代文：这时他又梦见了上一次那个女子，女子的容颜面貌同过去一样。她说： 您又要当县令了，又是到我所住的县。 
English: At this time, he again dreamed of the woman from the last time. The woman's face was the same as before. She said, "You're going to be the county magistrate again, and you're going to my county again."

古文：宣曰： 某前已为夫人之邑，今岂再授乎？ 
现代文：张宣说： 我已经当了一任夫人家乡的县令，这次怎么能再去呢？ 
English: Zhang Xuan said: I have already been the county magistrate of my hometown for one term, how can I go again this time?

古文：女子曰： 妾自明府罢秩，当即迁之居。今之所止，非旧地。
现代文：女子说： 我自从您任职期满，就立即把家搬了，现在住的已经不是老地方了。
English: The woman said, "Since you finished your term of office, I immediately moved my family, and now I live in a different place.

古文：然往者家属，凋丧略尽，今唯三口为累耳。
现代文：但是，现在我们家已经衰败了，只剩下三口人了。
English: But now our family has fallen apart and there are only three of us left.

古文：明府到后数月，亦当辞去。 
现代文：您去后几个月，也必然辞官而去。 
English: A few months after you leave, you will also inevitably resign.

古文：言讫，似若凄怆，宣亦未谕。
现代文：说完显示出很悲伤的样子，张宣也没有弄清是什么意思。
English: After saying this, he showed a very sad look, and Zhang Xuan did not understand what he meant.

古文：及唱官，乃得杭州临安县令。
现代文：等到公布任命，他当上了杭州临安县令。
English: After the announcement of his appointment, he became the mayor of Hangzhou Lin'an County.

古文：宣叹曰： 三口临字也。数月而去，吾其忧乎？ 
现代文：张宣感叹地说： 三口是个临字， 数月而去 正是我所忧虑的。 
English: Zhang Xuan sighed and said: "Three mouths is an imitation, and it is precisely what I am worried about.

古文：到任半年而卒。
现代文：结果他上任半年就死了。
English: As a result, he died six months after taking office.

古文：韩皋
现代文：韩皋
English: Han Zheng

古文：昌黎韩皋，故晋公滉之支孙。博通经史。
现代文：昌黎韩皋是已故晋公非嫡系的孙子，他博学多才，精通经史。
English: Changli Hanjuan was the illegitimate grandson of the late Jingu. He was a polymath and well versed in the history of scripture.

古文：太和五年，自大理丞调选，平判入第。名第既不绝高，又非驰逐而致，为后辈所谑。时太常丞冯芫除岳州刺史，因说人事固有前定。
现代文：太和五年，从大理寺丞的职位上被调离，在朝廷考查录用官员中被选中，名次既不是很高，也不是科举考试得来，引起后辈们的笑谈，当时太常丞冯芫被任命为岳州刺史，他说人世的事情是命中注定的。
English: In the fifth year of the Taihe era, he was transferred from the position of the Grand Priest of Dali Temple and was selected as an official in the imperial examination. His rank was neither very high nor did he pass the imperial examination, which caused laughter among the younger generation. At that time, the Grand Priest of the Taihe era, Feng Xi, was appointed as the chief priest of Yuezhou. He said that things in this world are predestined.

古文：德皇之末，芫任太常寺奉礼。于时与皋同官。
现代文：德宗皇帝末年，冯芫任太常寺奉礼，与皋一同做事。
English: At the end of Emperor Dezong's reign, Feng Xuan was appointed as an attendant of Taizhong Temple and worked together with Zou.

古文：其年前进士时元佐，任协律郎。
现代文：进士时元佐任协律郎。
English: When he entered the priesthood, he was promoted to the post of assistant magistrate.

古文：三人同约上丁日释奠武成王庙行事。芫住常乐，皋任亲仁，元佐任安邑。芫鼓动，拉二官同之太平兴道西南角。元佐忽云： 某适马上与二贤作一善梦，足下二人皆判入等，何也？请记之。 
现代文：三个人约定在月初的四日，一同去武成王庙游玩，芫住长乐，皋在亲仁上班，当时元佐在安邑上班，冯芫再三鼓动拉着两个人走到太平兴道西南角，他忽然说： 我刚才在马上为你们两个人做了一个好梦，你们二位都被朝廷录用做官，请你们记住今天的事。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the month, the three of them agreed to go to visit the Wucheng Wang Temple together, catch the Changle, and go to work in Kinren. At that time, the deputy governor was working in Anyi. Feng Yu repeatedly encouraged and pulled the two of them to walk to the southwest corner of Taiping Xing Road. He suddenly said: "I just had a good dream for you two. You two have been hired by the imperial court as officials. Please remember today's event."

古文：芫固书之，纪于箧中。
现代文：并将这件事记录在纸上，放到箱子里。
English: He wrote it down on a piece of paper and put it in a box.

古文：宪宗六年，芫判入等，授兴平县尉。
现代文：宪宗六年，冯芫被朝廷录用，授予官平县尉，皋没有心思做官，直到二十七八年后，才被录用。
English: Six years after the enthronement of Emperor Xianzong, Feng Yao was recruited by the imperial court and was awarded the rank of Ping County Lieutenant. He did not have the heart to become an official until 278 years later.

古文：皋实无心望于科第，此后二十七八年，皋方判入等，皆不差忒，芫临发岳阳，召皋，特说当时之事，并取箧中所记以示之，曰： 诸公何足为谑，命使之然。 
现代文：时芫所做的梦全都应验了，没有差错。时芫要去岳阳之前把皋找来，特意讲了当年的事情，并将箱子里的记录拿给皋看，并且说： 大家不要以为这是偶然的，这是命运决定的。 
English: Shi Yan's dreams had all come true, there was no mistake. Before Shi Yan went to Yueyang, he went to find Shi Yan and specifically told him about the events of that year. He showed Shi Yan the records in the box and said, "Don't think this is a coincidence, this is determined by fate."

古文：皋亦去，未尝暂忘，则仆与公，何前后相悬如此？
现代文：于是皋也说了，我也记着此事。然而我和你为什么前后相悬如此。
English: So Zou also said, I also remember this matter. However, why are you and I so far apart?

古文：皋其年授大理正。
现代文：皋在那一年被任命为大理正。
English: In that year, Zou was appointed as the head of Dalizheng.

