古文：张子长桓道愍周临贺胡茂回阮瞻临湘令顾氏江州录事陈素胡章苏韶夏侯恺刘他王戎王仲文
现代文：张子长桓道愍周临贺胡茂回阮瞻临湘令顾氏江州录事陈素胡章苏韶夏侯恺刘他王戎王仲文
English: Zhang Zichang, Huan Dao, Zhou Lin, He Hu, Mao He, Ruan Zhan, Lin Xiang, Gu Shi, Jiangzhou Record, Chen Su, Hu Zhang, Su Xuan, Xia Hou, Liu Ta, Wang Rong, Wang Zhongwen

古文：张子长
现代文：张子长
English: Zhang Zichang

古文：晋时，武都太守李仲文，在邵丧女。
现代文：晋朝时，武都太守李仲文在任上死去一个女儿。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jin, Li Zhongwen, the military governor of the capital, had a daughter die while he was in office.

古文：年十八，权假葬邵城北。
现代文：女儿十八岁，暂且葬在郡城北面。
English: His 18-year-old daughter was temporarily buried in the northern part of the county seat.

古文：有张世之代为邵，世之男字子长，年二十，侍从在廨中。
现代文：后来有个叫张世之的暂时代理郡守的职务，张世之的儿子字子长，二十岁，在衙门里当侍从。
English: Later, there was a man named Zhang Shizhi who temporarily held the position of acting county governor. Zhang Shizhi's son, Zi Chang, twenty years old, worked as an attendant in the gate.

古文：梦一女，年可十七八，颜色不常。自言前府君女，不幸早亡，会今当更生，心相爱乐，故来相见就。
现代文：一天夜里子长梦见一个女子，有十七八岁，容貌美丽，自称是前任长官的女儿，不幸早亡，为今快要复活了，因为喜欢子长，前来幽会。
English: One night, the eldest son dreamed of a woman, seventeen or eighteen years old, with a beautiful face, who claimed to be the daughter of the former governor. Unfortunately, she died early, but now she is about to be resurrected. Because she likes the eldest son, she came to have a tryst.

古文：如此五六夕，忽然昼见，衣服薰香殊绝，遂为夫妻。
现代文：他俩这样夜里幽会了五六天，女子突然在白天出现，衣服上有奇异的香气。子长和女子就作了夫妻。
English: The two of them spent five or six days meeting in the night, and the woman suddenly appeared during the day, with a strange fragrance on her clothes. The son and the woman became husband and wife.

古文：寝息衣皆有洿，如处女焉。
现代文：每次交欢后女子的衣服上都有色污，和处女一样。
English: After each sexual intercourse, the woman's clothes are stained, just like a virgin.

古文：后仲文遣婢视女墓，因过世之妇相问。
现代文：后来李仲文派使女去察看女儿的墓，使女路过张世之家。
English: Later, Li Zhongwen sent a maid to inspect his daughter's grave. The maid passed by Zhang Shiyu's house.

古文：入廨中，见此女一只履，在子长床下，取之啼泣，呼言发冢。持履归，此以示仲文。
现代文：张世之的妻子向她打听，使女就近了张家屋，突然看见张世之儿子张子长的床下有一只女鞋，就一把抓在手里哭了起来，指责张家盗墓，并把女鞋拿回来给李仲文看。
English: Zhang Shizhi's wife asked her about it. The maid approached the Zhang family house and suddenly saw a woman's shoe under the bed of Zhang Zichang, Zhang Shizhi's son. She grabbed it in her hand and burst into tears, accusing the Zhang family of grave robbing, and brought the woman's shoe back to Li Zhongwen.

古文：仲文惊愕，遣问世之：君儿何由得亡女履也？
现代文：李仲文十分惊异，跑去质问张世之说：你儿子怎么会有我死去的女儿的鞋？
English: Li Zhongwen was very surprised and ran to question Zhang Shizhi, saying: "How can your son have my dead daughter's shoes?"

古文：世之呼问，儿具陈本末，李张并谓可怪。
现代文：张世之把儿子叫出来问，儿子如实说了。
English: Zhang Shizhi called his son out and asked him, and his son told him the truth.

古文：发棺视之，女体已生肉，颜姿如故，唯右脚有履。子长梦女曰：我比得生，今为所发，自尔之后，遂死肉烂，不得生矣。
现代文：李仲文和张世之都认为太奇怪，就打开了棺材，一看女儿尸骨上已经长了肉，容貌和生前一样，只有右脚穿着鞋，后来张子长梦见女子来向他哭诉说：我快要复生了，却被打开了棺材，从此以后只能肉烂人死再也不能复活了。
English: Both Li Zhongwen and Zhang Shizhi thought it was too strange, so they opened the coffin. At a glance, the flesh had already grown on their daughter's bones. Her appearance was the same as before she died, only her right foot was wearing shoes. Later, Zhang Zichang had a dream about a woman who came to him crying and saying, "I am about to be reborn, but the coffin was opened. From now on, only the dead can be resurrected.

古文：万恨之心，当复何言？
现代文：我的悲痛和怨恨是说不尽的啊！
English: My grief and resentment are inexhaustible!

古文：泣涕而别。
现代文：女子和张子长哭泣着诀别了。
English: The girl and Zhang Zichang said goodbye with tears.

古文：桓道愍
现代文：桓道愍
English: Huan Dao Bridge

古文：晋桓道愍，谯人也，隆安四年丧妇，内顾甚笃，缠痛无已。其年，夜始寝，视屏风上，见一人手。擎起秉炬，照屏风外，乃其妇也。
现代文：晋朝的桓道愍是谯州人，隆安四年妻子已去世，因为夫妻感情特别好，桓道愍十分悲痛想念，有一天，他夜里刚睡去，看见屏风上有一只手，赶快起来点上蜡烛到屏风外看，竟是妻子，形貌、服饰都和活着时一样。
English: Huan Daojuan of the Jin Dynasty was from Ganzhou. His wife of four years, Longan, had passed away. Because the couple had a particularly good relationship, Huan Daojuan was very sad and missed her. One day, he just went to sleep at night and saw a hand on the screen. He quickly got up and lit a candle to look outside the screen. It was actually his wife. Her appearance and clothing were the same as when she was alive.

古文：形貌装饰俱如生，道愍了不畏惧，遂引共卧。
现代文：道愍一点也不怕，领妻子一同上床躺下，细叙别离情和死生之间的事。道愍说：你死后一直没有音信，怎么突然就回来了？妻子说：想回来谈何容易啊。
English: Not at all afraid, Dousuke led his wife to lie down on the bed together and recounted in detail the events between parting and life and death. Dousuke said, "You haven't heard from me since you died, why did you suddenly come back?" His wife said, "It's so easy to talk about wanting to come back."

古文：言语往还，陈叙存亡，道愍曰：卿亡来初无音影，今夕哪得忽还？答曰：欲还何极。
现代文：人和鬼神是两界两道，各有自己的主管，自己能由得了自己为所欲为吗？我刚嫁你时，没有任何罪过。
English: People and ghosts and gods are two worlds and two paths, each with its own supervisor. Can you do whatever you want? When I first married you, I didn't have any sins.

古文：新妇生时，差无余罪，止恒疑君怜爱婢使，以此妒忌之心，受报地狱，始获免脱。
现代文：后来就怀疑你和丫环有事。我就因为这种嫉妒心，死后被下到地狱受惩罚，刚刚被放出来。
English: Later, I suspected that there was something going on between you and the maidservant. Because of this jealousy, I was punished by being sent to hell after I died, and I have just been released.

古文：今当受生为人，故来与君别也。
现代文：最近我就要转世到人间去了，特来和你告别。
English: Recently, I've been reincarnated to the human world, and I've come to say goodbye to you.

古文：道愍曰：当生何处？
现代文：道愍说：你转世在什么地方？
English: Daodejing said, "Where were you reincarnated?"

古文：可得寻之不？
现代文：能不能找到你？
English: Can we find you?

古文：答曰：但知当生，不测何处。
现代文：妻子说：只知道我该转生了，但不知道是转生在哪里。
English: My wife said, "I only know that I should be reincarnated, but I don't know where to be reincarnated."

古文：一为世人，无容复知宿命，何由相寻求耶？
现代文：一旦成为世上人，就不会知道前世的事了，上哪里去找我呢？
English: Once you become a worldly person, you won't know about your previous life. Where can you go to find me?

古文：至晓辞去，涕泗而别。
现代文：天亮时妻子告辞，哭泣着走了。
English: At dawn, his wife left, crying.

古文：道愍送至步廊下而归，已而方大怖惧，恍惚时积。
现代文：道愍送到前廊下回来，这才觉得十分害怕，好象是多年前的事了。
English: It was only when I came back from taking him to the front porch that I felt really scared, as if it had happened years ago.

古文：周临贺
现代文：周临贺
English: Zhou Linhe

古文：晋义兴人姓周，永和年中，出郭乘马，从两人行。
现代文：晋代义兴人周某，永和年间和两个人一齐骑马出城。
English: Zhou, Yonghe, and two others rode out of the city together.

古文：未至村，日暮。道边有一新小草屋，见一女子出门望，年可十六七，姿容端正，衣服鲜洁，见周过，谓曰：日已暮，前村尚远，临贺讵得至？
现代文：你看天已晚了，前面村子还很远呢。
English: It's too late to see the sky, the village is still far away.

古文：周便求寄宿。
现代文：周某就要求寄宿下来。
English: Zhou then asked to be boarded.

古文：此女为燃火作食。
现代文：姑娘为他点火作饭。
English: The girl lights a fire for him and starts cooking.

古文：向一更，闻外有小儿唤阿香声，女应曰：诺。寻云：官唤汝推雷车。
现代文：将近一更时，听见外面有个小孩叫：阿香！姑娘答应后，外面小孩说：官家叫你去推雷车。
English: When it was almost one o'clock, I heard a child outside call out, "Axiang!" After the girl agreed, the child outside said, "The officials are asking you to push a mine cart."

古文：女乃辞行，云：今有事当去。夜遂大雷雨。
现代文：姑娘就向周某告辞说，我出去有点事。夜里雷雨大作，凌晨姑娘才回来。
English: The girl said goodbye to Zhou, saying, "I had to go out for some reason. There was a big thunderstorm at night, and the girl only came back in the early morning.

古文：向晓女还，周既上马，看昨所宿处，只见一新冢，冢口有马尿及余草。
现代文：周出了屋子上马，回头看昨天的小屋没有了，只有一座新坟，坟口上有马尿和剩下的草料。
English: Zhou went out of the house to mount his horse. Looking back, yesterday's hut was gone. There was only a new grave, with horse urine and leftover grass at the entrance.

古文：周甚惊惋，至后五年，果作临贺太守。
现代文：周某十分吃惊。五年后，周某果然当了临贺太守。
English: Zhou was very surprised. Five years later, Zhou became the governor of Linhe.

古文：胡茂回
现代文：胡茂回
English: Hu Maohui

古文：晋淮南胡茂回，能见鬼，虽不喜见，而不可止。
现代文：晋朝时淮南人胡茂回能看见鬼，虽然他不愿意见，仍然常碰见鬼。
English: Hu Maohu, a native of Huainan, was able to see ghosts during the Jin Dynasty. Although he did not want to admit it, he often encountered ghosts.

古文：后行至扬州，还历阳。城东有神祠，正值民将巫祝祀之。至须臾，有群鬼相叱曰：上官来。
现代文：有一次从扬州回历阳，走到城东一个庙前，当时巫师正领着人们祭神，不一会儿就有一群鬼大呼小叫地说：上司官来了！
English: Once, walking from Yangzhou back to Liyang, in front of a temple in the east of the city, when the sorcerer was leading the people to worship the gods, soon a group of ghosts shouted loudly and said: "The boss is coming!"

古文：各迸出祠去。
现代文：然后就四散逃出神门。
English: Then they scattered and fled out of the city.

古文：茂回顾，见二沙门来，入祠中。
现代文：茂回一看，原来是两个和尚来到庙里。
English: Looking back, it turned out to be two monks who came to the temple.

古文：诸鬼，两两三三相抱持，在祠边草中，望见沙门，皆有怖惧。
现代文：庙里的鬼也三三两两地抱在一起躲在草丛里，他们看见和尚也都很害怕。
English: The ghosts in the temple also hugged each other in twos and threes and hid in the grass. They were also very scared when they saw the monk.

古文：须臾沙门去后，诸鬼皆还祠中。
现代文：过了片刻和尚走了，那群鬼才又回到庙里。
English: After a while, the monk left, and the group of ghosts returned to the temple.

古文：茂回于是精诚奉佛。
现代文：从此茂回就更加虔诚的敬神拜佛了。
English: Since then, he has become more devout in his worship of the Buddha.

古文：阮瞻
现代文：阮瞻
English: Ruan Zhan

古文：阮瞻素秉无鬼论。
现代文：阮瞻向来推崇无鬼论。
English: Ruan Zhan has always advocated the theory that ghosts do not exist.

古文：有一鬼通姓名，作客诣之，寒温，聊谈名理。
现代文：有个鬼来拜访他，至通姓名后问候坐下，两个人谈起了理论学问，鬼客都显得十分有才华。
English: A ghost came to visit him. He greeted him by name and sat down. The two of them talked about theoretical knowledge. The ghost's guests were all very talented.

古文：客甚有才情，末及鬼神事，反复甚苦。客遂屈之，仍作色曰：鬼神古今圣贤所共传，君何独言无？
现代文：最后两个人谈到鬼神，争论得很激烈，鬼要让他屈服便气愤地说：古今的圣贤都承认有鬼神，怎么你就偏偏说没有？
English: When the last two spoke about ghosts and gods, the argument was very heated. The ghost wanted him to give in, so he said angrily: All the sages of the past and present have acknowledged the existence of ghosts and gods, so why are you saying there are none?

古文：即变为异形，须臾便灭。阮嘿然，意色大恶，年余病死。
现代文：说着就现出了鬼的丑恶形象，阮瞻默默地说不出话，气色也十分坏，一年多就病死了。
English: While talking, the ugly image of the ghost appeared, Ruan Zhan could not say a word silently, his appearance was very bad, and he died of illness more than a year later.

古文：临湘令
现代文：临湘令
English: Lin Xiangling

古文：隆安初，陈郡殷氏为临湘令。
现代文：隆安初年，陈郡人殷某当临湘县令。
English: In the first year of Longan, Yin, a resident of Chen County, came to visit the Xiang County government.

古文：县中一鬼，长三丈余，跂上屋，犹垂脚至地。殷入，便来命之。每摇屏风，动窗户，病转甚。
现代文：县里有个鬼，高三丈多，坐在房上脚还垂在地上，殷某一进县衙，这鬼就来找麻烦，不是摇屏风就是摆窗户，而且越来越厉害。
English: There's a ghost in the county. He's taller than three-year-olds, sits on the top of the house with his feet still dangling on the ground, and one day he enters the county hall. This ghost comes looking for trouble, either shaking the screen or swinging the windows, and it's getting worse and worse.

古文：其弟观亦见，恒拔刀在侧，与言争。
现代文：殷某的弟弟也看见了，就拨出刀来站在鬼身旁和鬼吵起来。
English: Yin's younger brother also saw it, and he pulled out a knife to stand next to the ghost and quarrel with the ghost.

古文：鬼语云：勿为骂我，当打汝口破。
现代文：鬼说：你再骂我，我就打破你的嘴！
English: The ghost said, "If you curse me again, I'll break your mouth!"

古文：鬼忽隐形，打口流血。后遂喁偏，成残废人。顾氏
现代文：鬼就突然隐了形把他的嘴打得直流血，后来他的嘴就向上歪着成了残废。顾氏
English: The ghost suddenly disappeared and beat his mouth until it bled, after which his mouth became crooked and deformed.

古文：吴中人姓顾，往田舍。昼行，去舍十余里，但闻西北隐隐。因举首，见四五百人，皆赤衣，长二丈，倏忽而至。三重围之，顾气奄奄不通，辗转不得。
现代文：吴中人顾某回他乡村家去，白天上路，走到离家十几里时，听见西北天空有声音，抬头看，有四五百个穿红衣两丈高的鬼，不一会儿就来到面前，把他层层包围起来，顾某被憋得上不来气也转不了身。
English: Gu, a man from Wuzhong, went back to his rural home. He was on the road during the day. When he was more than ten miles away from home, he heard a sound in the northwest sky. Looking up, there were four or five hundred ghosts wearing red clothes and standing two meters tall. They soon came to his front and surrounded him layer by layer. Gu was stunned and could not turn around.

古文：旦至晡，围不解。口不得语，心呼此斗。
现代文：从早上到下午，一直围着他不让走，顾某说不出话来，只不断在心里向北斗神求告祈祷。
English: From the morning to the afternoon, he was surrounded by people who wouldn't let him go. Gu couldn't speak, but he kept praying to the Big Dipper in his heart.

古文：又食顷，鬼相谓曰：彼正心在神，可舍去。
现代文：又过了一顿饭功夫，鬼们互相说：这人真心敬神，就放了他吧。
English: And after they had eaten, the devils said to one another, "This man really worships God; let him be."

古文：豁为雾除。
现代文：一下子象浓雾散了似地都消失了。
English: All of a sudden, like a thick fog, they disappeared.

古文：顾归舍，病极卧。
现代文：顾某回到家，十分疲累的躺下了。
English: Gu returned home and lay down very tired.

古文：其夕，户前一处，火甚盛而不燃，鬼纷纭相就。或往或来，呼顾谈，或入去其被，或上头而轻于鸿毛，开晨失。
现代文：当天晚上，看见门前一个地方有一堆很旺的火，而火没有火焰，那些鬼都凑在火边跑来跑去，还和顾某谈话，有的鬼跑进屋来揭开顾某的被子，有的还爬到他头上，顾某觉得鬼比鸿毛还轻。天亮时都不见了。
English: That evening, he saw a very strong fire in a place in front of the door, but the fire had no flame. Those ghosts all ran around the fire and talked to Gu. Some ghosts ran into the house to open Gu's quilt, and some even climbed onto his head. Gu felt that the ghosts were lighter than feathers. They were all gone by dawn.

古文：江州录事
现代文：江州录事
English: Jiangzhou Record

古文：晋桓豹奴为江州时，有甘录事者，家在临川郡治下。儿年十三，遇病死，埋著家东群冢之间。旬日，忽闻东路有打鼓倡乐声，可百许人，径到甘家，问：录事在否？
现代文：晋进桓豹奴在江州作官时，手下有个姓甘的录事，家在临川郡管辖的地方，甘录事有个十三岁的儿子病死了，埋在家东面坟地里，几天后，突然听见大路东边有敲鼓奏乐声，听去象有一百多人，一直来到甘录事家，其中有人问：甘录事在家没有？
English: When he was working as an official in Jiangzhou, his subordinate had a subordinate surnamed Gan, whose home was under the jurisdiction of Linchuan County. Gan had a thirteen-year-old son who died of illness and was buried in the cemetery to the east of his home. A few days later, he suddenly heard the sound of drums playing music on the east side of the highway. It sounded like more than a hundred people had come to Gan's home. Some of them asked: Is Gan at home?

古文：故来相诣。贤子亦在此。
现代文：我们特地来拜访，你的儿子也在这里。
English: We've come to pay a special visit, and your son is here.

古文：止闻人声，亦不见其形也。
现代文：光听见人声不见人形。甘录事就搬出两坛子酒招待。
English: As soon as they heard the human voices, they could not see the dolls. Gan Luo took out two jars of wine to invite them.

古文：乃出两罂酒与之，俄倾失去，两罂皆空。
现代文：不一会儿就都走了，再一看两个坛子全空了。
English: After a while, they all left, and when I looked again, both jars were completely empty.

古文：始闻有鼓声，临川太守谓是人戏，必来诣己。
现代文：当时临川太守也听见鼓乐声，以为是艺人演戏，一定会来给自己演的。
English: At that time, the governor of Linkawa also heard the sound of drums and music, and thought that it was an artist performing, so he would definitely come to perform for himself.

古文：既而寂尔不到，闻甘说之，大惊。
现代文：后来听甘录事一说，真吓了一跳。
English: Later, when I listened to the transcript, I was really startled.

古文：陈素
现代文：陈素
English: Chen Su

古文：晋升平元年，剡县陈素家富，娶妇十年无儿。
现代文：晋升平元年，剡县有个陈素，家里很富。
English: In the first year of promotion, there was a Chen Su in Handan County, and his family was very rich.

古文：夫欲娶妾，妇祷祠神明，突然有身。邻家小人妇亦同有，因货邻妇云：我生若男，天愿也；若是女，汝是男者，当交易之。
现代文：但娶妻十年了也没儿子，就想讨小老婆，陈素妻就到庙里祈祷得子，虽然就怀了孕，邻居家一个矮子的老婆也和她同时怀了孕，陈素妻就买通了矮子妻，说：我要是生男，那就是天遂我愿了。要是生个女孩，你生的男孩，咱俩就换。
English: But after ten years of marriage and without a son, he wanted to have a little wife. Chen Su's wife went to the temple to pray for a son. Although she became pregnant, the wife of a dwarf in the neighborhood also became pregnant at the same time. Chen Su's wife bribed the dwarf's wife, saying, "If I give birth to a boy, it will be God's will. If I give birth to a girl, the boy you gave birth to, we will change."

古文：便共将许。
现代文：两个女人都同意了。
English: Both women agreed.

古文：邻人生男，此妇后三日生女，便交取之。
现代文：后来邻家女人果然生了男孩，陈妻三天后生了女孩，就偷偷换过来邻家的男孩。
English: Later, the neighbor's wife gave birth to a boy, and Chen's wife gave birth to a girl three days later, and secretly changed the neighbor's boy.

古文：素忻喜，养至十三。当祠祀，家有老婢，素见鬼，云：见府君家先人，来到门首便住。但见一群小人，来座所食噉此祭。
现代文：这天她说：我看见主人家的祖先来了，但走到家庙门口就不进了，因为看见一群矮子在神座上抢东西吃。陈素听见后很奇怪，就把老女仆找了来，让她等会儿行祭礼时再仔细看看。
English: On this day, she said, "I saw the ancestors of my master's family arrive, but when I got to the door of the temple, I couldn't go in, because I saw a group of dwarfs grabbing something to eat on the throne. Hearing this, Chen Su felt very strange, so she called the old maid and asked her to wait until the sacrificial rites were over before taking a closer look.

古文：父甚疑怪，便迎见鬼人至。
现代文：女仆又看了，说还是和刚才一样。
English: The maid looked again and said the same thing.

古文：祠时转令看，言语皆同。
现代文：陈素就问老婆是怎么回事。
English: Chen Su asked his wife what was going on.

古文：素便入问妇，妇惧，且说言此事。还男本家，唤女归。
现代文：陈妻害怕，就说了和领居矮子妻换儿子的事，结果把男孩送还，把女儿接了回来。
English: Chen's wife was afraid, so she talked about exchanging her son with the dwarf's wife. As a result, she sent the boy back and took her daughter back.

古文：胡章
现代文：胡章
English: Hu Zhang

古文：郯县胡章，与上虞管双，喜好干戈。
现代文：郯县人胡章和上虞县的管双，常在一块练刀枪棍棒。
English: Hu Zhang, a resident of Handan County, and Guan Shuang, a resident of Shangyu County, often practice with swords, guns and clubs at the same place.

古文：双死后，章梦见之，跃刃戏其前，觉甚不乐。明日，以符贴壁。
现代文：管双死后，胡章梦见他拿着刀在自己面前又耍又蹦，醒来后心里很不痛快，就画了一道符贴在墙上避鬼。
English: After Guan Shuang's death, Hu Zhang dreamed that he was playing and jumping in front of him with a knife. When he woke up, he was very unhappy, so he drew a symbol on the wall to avoid ghosts.

古文：章欲近行，已汎舟理楫。忽见双来攀留之，云：夫人相知，情贯千载，昨夜就卿戏。
现代文：胡章最近要出门，已经到江边上了船拿起桨，忽然看见管双跑来挽留说：人间的好朋友应该是永久的。昨天夜里我想找你玩玩，正赶上你睡觉，我就走了。
English: Hu Zhang recently wanted to go out, and had already boarded a boat at the edge of the river to pick up an oar, when he suddenly saw the pair of pipes running to hold him back, saying, "Good friends on earth should be permanent. I wanted to play with you last night, and I left just as you were falling asleep."

古文：值眠，吾即去。
现代文：你却贴了符疏远我。
English: But you put up a sign to distance yourself from me.

古文：今何故以符相厌，大丈夫不体天下之理，我畏符乎？
现代文：你不想想，我是男子汉大丈夫，懂得天下的真理，能怕什么符咒骂？
English: Don't you want to think, I'm a man, I'm okay, I understand the truth of the world, what can I be afraid of?

古文：苏韶
现代文：苏韶
English: Su Shi

古文：苏韶，字孝先，安平人也，仕至中牟令，卒。
现代文：苏韶，字孝先，是安平人，当中牟县令时死了。
English: Su Xi, also known as Xiaoxian, was from Anping and died when he was the county magistrate of Mu County.

古文：韶伯父承，为南中郎军司而亡。
现代文：他的伯父苏承，当南中郎军司时也死去。
English: His uncle, Su Cheng, also died while serving as the military governor of Nan Zhong Lang.

古文：诸子迎丧还，到襄城。第九子节，夜梦见卤簿，行列甚肃，见韶，使呼节曰：卿犯卤簿，罪应髡刑。
现代文：家中子弟迎丧还乡，去到襄城，苏承的九儿子苏节夜里梦见一支阴间的仪仗队，队列严整肃穆，苏韶也在仪仗队里，他看见弟弟苏节，就把他叫过来说：你冲犯了仪仗队，应该受到髡刑。
English: When the youngest son of the family returned to his hometown after his father's death, he went to Xiangcheng. Su Jie, the ninth son of Su Cheng, dreamed at night of an honor guard in the underworld. The queue was strict and solemn. Su Yao was also in the honor guard. When he saw his younger brother Su Jie, he called him over and said: "You broke the honor guard, you should be beaten."

古文：节俛受剃，惊觉摸头，即得断发。
现代文：苏节只好低下头让剃，忽然惊醒，一摸头，果然有很多头发掉了。
English: Su Jie had no choice but to lower his head and let the barber shave it off. Suddenly, he woke up, felt his head, and sure enough, a lot of hair had fallen out.

古文：明暮，与人共寝，梦见韶曰：卿髡头未竞。
现代文：第二天晚上苏节和别人在一个屋睡，梦见苏韶又来了，说：昨天没剃完，接着剃。
English: The next night, Su Jie was sleeping in a room with others. He dreamed that Su Yao came again and said, "I didn't finish shaving yesterday, I'll shave next."

古文：即复剃如前夕。
现代文：又被剃了一通。
English: He was shaved again.

古文：其日暮，自备甚谨，明灯火，设符刻，复梦见韶。
现代文：第三天晚上苏节提高了警惕，点着灯睡，还贴了符咒，但又梦见苏韶来接着剃头。
English: On the evening of the third day, Su Jie raised his vigilance, slept with a light on, and also posted a charm, but he also dreamed of Su Yao coming to shave his head.

古文：髡之如前夕者五。节素美发，五夕而尽。
现代文：这样的鬼剃头持续了五天，苏节的一头美发被剃个精光。
English: This kind of head shaving lasted for five days, and Su Jie's head of hair was completely shaved.

古文：间六七日，不复梦见。后节在车上，昼日，韶自外入。
现代文：后来就不再梦见了，有一天苏节乘车白天行路，忽然看见哥哥苏韶骑着马出现在身边。
English: Later, he no longer dreamed about it. One day, Su Jie was traveling by car during the day, when he suddenly saw his brother Su Yao riding a horse.

古文：乘马，著黑介帻，黄綀单衣，白袜幽履。
现代文：苏韶戴黑头巾，黄麻布衣，白袜子黑鞋，用手扶着苏节的车辕。
English: Su Xi wore a black headscarf, a jute cloth, white socks and black shoes, and supported Su Xi's chariot with her hand.

古文：凭节车辕，节谓其兄弟曰：中牟在此。
现代文：苏节给他的兄弟们说：当中牟县令的哥哥苏韶来了。
English: Su Jie said to his brothers, "Zhongmou County Governor's elder brother Su Shi has come.

古文：兄弟皆愕视，无所见。
现代文：但大家都很吃惊，谁也看不见他。
English: But everyone was so surprised that no one could see him.

古文：问韶：君何由来？
现代文：苏节问：你来作什么？
English: Su Jie asked: What are you going to do?

古文：韶曰：吾欲改葬，即求去。
现代文：苏韶说：我想改葬到别处。
English: Su Wei said: I want to be reburied elsewhere.

古文：曰：吾当更来。
现代文：然后就匆匆告辞，并说还会再来。
English: Then he left in a hurry, saying that he would come again.

古文：出门不见，数日又来。
现代文：果然几天后又来了，兄弟们都来和苏韶一同坐下。
English: Sure enough, a few days later they came again, and the brothers all came to sit down with Su Shi.

古文：兄弟遂与韶坐，节曰：若必改葬，别自敕儿。
现代文：苏节说：哥哥真想改葬，应该告诉你的儿子呀。
English: Su Jie said, "My brother really wants to change the funeral, you should tell your son."

古文：韶曰：吾将为书。
现代文：苏韶说：我这就写封信。
English: Su Yu said, "I'll write a letter right away."

古文：节授笔，韶不肯，曰：死者书与生者异。为节作其字，像胡书出，乃笑，即唤节为书曰：古昔魏武侯，浮于西河，而下中流，顾谓吴起曰： 美哉河山之固，此魏国之宝也。
现代文：苏节给他笔，他不要，说阴间的字和人世不一样，并给苏节写了些字，一看象胡人文字，都笑了，就让苏节替他写信给儿子说：古时魏武侯在西河上乘船漫游，到了中游时对吴起说： 江山多么壮丽啊！这是魏国的宝物呀！ 
English: Su Jie gave him a pen, but he did not want it, saying that the characters in the underworld were different from those in the human world. He also wrote some words for Su Jie, which looked like Hu Ren characters, and they all laughed. He asked Su Jie to write a letter to his son for him, saying: In ancient times, Wei Wuhou roamed the West River by boat. When he reached the middle of the river, he said to Wu Qi: How magnificent the river is! This is a treasure of Wei!

古文：吾性爱好京洛，每往来出入，瞻视邙上。乐哉，万世之墓也。
现代文：而我则特别喜欢京洛一带地方。我在世时，每次来到那一带，放眼看邙山，就由不得高兴地想，这里真是万代比不了的好墓地啊。
English: On the other hand, I particularly like the area around Kyoto. When I was alive, every time I came to that area and looked out over Mount Hiei, I couldn't help but think with joy, this is truly a great cemetery that can't be matched.

古文：北背孟津，洋洋之河；南望天邑，济济之盛。
现代文：这里北靠孟津的滔滔河水，南可以看见雄伟的京城。
English: Here, to the north, you can see the gushing waters of the Mengjin River, and to the south, you can see the majestic capital city.

古文：此志虽未言，铭之于心矣，不图奄忽，所怀未果。
现代文：虽然我没对人说过，但心里一直有这个志向。然而没想到突然就死了，所向往的事也没办成。
English: Although I didn't tell anyone, I always had this ambition in my heart. However, I didn't expect to die suddenly, and the things I longed for didn't come true.

古文：前去十月，便速改葬。
现代文：希望你们十月间给我改葬。
English: I hope you'll give me a proper burial in October.

古文：在军司墓次，买数庙地，便足矣。
现代文：在我伯父苏承的坟旁买几亩地，就行了。
English: Just buy a few mu of land next to my uncle Su Cheng's grave.

古文：节与韶语，徒见其口动，亮气高声，终不为傍人所闻。
现代文：苏节和韶说话，只见他嘴动，声音也很大，但旁边的人谁也听不见。
English: When Su Qie spoke to Yao, only his lips moved and his voice was loud, but no one around him could hear him.

古文：延韶入室，设坐祀之，不肯坐。
现代文：后来苏节请苏韶到屋里去要为他设坛祭礼，苏韶不肯坐，也不肯吃。
English: Later, Su Xi asked Su Yao to go to his house to set up an altar for him. Su Yao refused to sit down or eat.

古文：又无所飨，谓韶曰：中牟平生好酒鱼，可少饮。韶手执杯饮尽，曰：佳酒也。
现代文：苏节说：哥哥生前好喝酒吃鱼，今天就喝一点吧。苏韶就拿起酒杯一饮而尽，并说：好酒！
English: Su Jie said, "My brother liked to drink wine and eat fish when he was alive, let's drink a little today." Su Yao picked up the wine glass and drank it down, saying, "Good wine!

古文：节视杯空，既去，杯酒乃如故。
现代文：苏节看见酒杯干了。但等苏韶走后，酒杯还是满的。
English: Su Jie saw that the wine glass was dry, but it was still full when Su Yao left.

古文：前后三十余来，兄弟狎玩。
现代文：苏韶前后来了三十多次，兄弟二人尽情谈。
English: Su Yao came and went more than 30 times, and the two brothers talked with each other.

古文：节问所疑，韶曰：言天上及地下事，亦不能悉知也。
现代文：苏节问哥哥很多不懂的问题，苏韶说：说起天上地下的事，我也不全知道。
English: Su Jie asked his brother many questions he did not understand. Su Yao said, "When it comes to things in heaven and on earth, I don't know everything.

古文：颜渊、卜商，今见在为修文郎。
现代文：只知道颜渊、卜商现在天上当修文郎。
English: I only know that Yan Yuan and Bu Shang are now Shouwenro in the sky.

古文：修文郎凡有八人，鬼之圣者。今项梁、成贤者、吴季子。
现代文：修文郎一共八个，都是鬼中的圣人，有项梁、成贤者、吴季子这些人。
English: There are a total of eight Shouwen Lang, all of whom are saints among ghosts, including Xiang Liang, Cheng Xian, and Wu Qizi.

古文：节问死何如生，韶曰：无异，而死者虚，生者实，此其异也。
现代文：苏节问死和生有什么不同，苏韶说没什么不同，只不过死者是虚的生者是实的罢了。
English: Su Jie asked what the difference was between death and life. Su Yao said that there was no difference, except that the dead were imaginary while the living were real.

古文：节曰：死者何不归尸体？
现代文：又问死者为什么不归尸体。
English: He also asked why the body was not returned.

古文：韶曰：比如断卿一臂以投地，就剥削之，于卿有患不？
现代文：苏韶说：比如，把你的臂砍下来一只，再砍削那只断臂，你还能感到疼吗？
English: Su Wei said: For example, if you cut off one of your arms, and then cut off the broken arm, can you still feel pain?

古文：死之却骸，如此也。
现代文：死去的尸体，灵魂同样也不会有感觉的。
English: A dead body, a dead soul, is not sentient either.

古文：节曰：厚葬于坟垅，死者乐此否？韶曰：无在也。节曰：若无在，何故改葬？
现代文：苏节又问把死人厚葬在坟墓，死者本人高兴不，苏韶说无所谓，苏节说：既然不在乎你为什么还要求迁坟呢？
English: Su Si also asked if the dead should be buried thickly in the grave, and whether the dead person was happy. Su Shi said that it did not matter. Su Si said: Since you do not care, why do you still ask to move the grave?

古文：韶曰：今我诚无所在，但欲述生时意耳。
现代文：苏韶说：我的确不在乎，只不过是说我活着时的一种想法而已。
English: Su Yu said: I really don't care, it's just a thought I had when I was alive.

古文：弟曰：儿尚小，嫂少，门户坎坷，君顾念否？韶曰：我无复情耳。
现代文：苏节又问：哥哥不思念年轻的嫂嫂和年幼的儿子吗？苏韶说：我死了就没有什么人间情了。
English: Su Si also asked, "Doesn't my brother miss his young sister-in-law and young son?" Su Yao said, "If I die, there will be no human relations.

古文：节曰：有寿命否？
现代文：又问鬼有寿命吗？
English: Do ghosts have a lifespan?

古文：韶曰：各有。
现代文：回答说每个鬼都有自己的寿命。
English: He answered that every ghost has its own lifespan.

古文：节曰：节等寿命，君知之否？
现代文：苏节又问自己的阳寿，苏韶说知道后会告知的。
English: Su Jie also asked about his Yang Shou. Su Yao said that he would let her know when he knew.

古文：曰：知语卿也。
现代文：又问今年发生的瘟疫是怎么回事，苏韶说：太山公刘孔才在阴间想造反，私自在人间抓人为他打仗，现在北帝已经知道刘孔才的阴谋，并把他杀了。
English: When asked about the plague that occurred this year, Su Yao said, "It was the Lord of Taishan, Liu Kongcai, who wanted to rebel in the underworld, so he personally captured people to fight for him in the human world. Now the Northern Emperor has learned of Liu Kongcai's plot and has killed him.

古文：节曰：前梦君剪发，君之卤簿导谁也？
现代文：苏节说：前些日子梦见你剪我的头发，你们那仪仗队是护送谁？
English: Su Si said, "I dreamed a few days ago that you were cutting my hair. Who was escorted by your honor guard?"

古文：韶曰：济南王也。
现代文：回答说：那是济南王。
English: He replied, "That is the king of Jinan."

古文：卿当死，吾念护卿，故以刑论卿。
现代文：你冲犯了仪仗罪应该死，是我护着你，让你受了髡刑就保住了命。
English: You committed a crime of honor and deserved to die. I protected you and saved your life when you were beaten.

古文：节曰：能益生人否？
现代文：又问，鬼能保佑人吗？
English: He also asked, "Can ghosts bless people?"

古文：韶曰：死者时自发意念生，则吾所益卿也。
现代文：回答说：我是由于对弟弟你动了情，才会保护你。
English: And he said, I only kept you because I had compassion on you, my brother.

古文：若此自无情，而生人祭祀以求福，无益也。
现代文：如果是没有感情的死人，活人就是再祭祀求福也没用。
English: If the dead are without emotion, it is useless for the living to offer sacrifices and seek blessings.

古文：节曰：前梦见君，岂实相见否？
现代文：苏节又问：以前梦见你，是你真的来相见吗？
English: Su Jie also asked: I dreamt of you before, did you really come to see me?

古文：韶曰：夫生者梦见亡者，亡者见之也。
现代文：回答说：凡是活人梦见死人，都是死人现形。
English: He answered, "When a living man dreams of a dead man, the dead man appears to him."

古文：节曰：生时仇怨，复能害之否？
现代文：又问：活着时有仇，死后能杀了仇人吗？
English: He also asked, "If you have enemies while you are alive, can you kill them after you die?"

古文：韶曰：鬼重杀，不得自从。
现代文：回答说：鬼杀活人的事由不了鬼自己。
English: He answered, "The devil himself cannot help but kill the living.

古文：节下车，韶大笑节短，云：似赵麟舒。
现代文：苏节下车时，苏韶笑话他个子太矮，说：你简直象赵舒麟了。
English: When Su Jie got off the bus, Su Yao joked that he was too short and said, "You are just like Zhao Shulin."

古文：赵麟舒短小，是韶妇兄弟也。
现代文：赵舒麟个子很小，是苏节的小舅子。
English: Zhao Shulin is very short, and is Su Jie's younger brother-in-law.

古文：韶欲去，节留之，闭门下锁匙，韶为之少住。韶去，节见门故闭，韶已去矣。
现代文：苏韶要走了，苏节挽留他，把门都上了锁。苏韶只留了片刻就不见了，而门都没有开。
English: Su Shi wanted to leave, Su Jie held him back and locked all the doors. Su Shi only stayed for a moment before disappearing, and none of the doors were open.

古文：韶与节别曰：吾今见为修文郎，守职不得来也。
现代文：苏韶走时说，我现在已经当了修文郎了，以后职务繁忙，不能再来了。
English: When Su Shi left, he said, "I've become Shouwen Lang now, and I'll be busy with my duties in the future, so I can't come anymore."

古文：节执手，手软弱，捉觉之，乃别。
现代文：苏节握哥哥的手，手很软弱，只能感到是手而已。
English: Su Jie shakes his brother's hand. The hand is very weak and can only be felt as a hand.

古文：自是遂绝。
现代文：分别后，再也没有见过。
English: After their separation, they never saw each other again.

古文：夏侯恺
现代文：夏侯恺
English: Xia Houyi

古文：夏侯恺，字万仁，病亡。
现代文：夏侯恺。字万仁，得病去世。
English: Xia Houqi, also known as Wanren, fell ill and died.

古文：恺家宗人儿狗奴，素见鬼，见恺数归。
现代文：有个姓夏侯的同宗，他儿子叫狗奴，常见到鬼。
English: There is a member of the same family with the surname Xia Hou. His son is called Dog Son, and he often sees ghosts.

古文：欲取马，及其弟阮公将去。
现代文：狗奴曾看见已死的夏侯恺回家来想取马，然而马却被夏侯恺弟弟阮公偷去了。
English: The dog had seen the dead Xia Houyi coming home to get his horse, but the horse had been stolen by Xia Houyi's younger brother, Ruan Gong.

古文：阮逃狗奴家，解喻，及冬得止。
现代文：阮公逃到狗奴家对狗奴说：把马放在你这里，到了冬天就行了。
English: Ruan Gong fled to the dog's home and said to the dog: "Put the horse here, it will be fine in the winter."

古文：恺长子统，向其家说：昨梦人见缚，与力大争，尔乃得解。
现代文：夏侯恺的长子叫统，对家里人说：昨天我梦见一个人要绑我，我和那人斗了半天才得解脱。
English: Xia Houyao's eldest son, named Tong, told his family members: "Yesterday I dreamed that a man was trying to tie me up. I fought with the man for half a day before I was able to free myself.

古文：语讫，阁门忽有光明为昼，见恺著平上情单衣，入坐如生平。坐西壁大床，悲笑如生时，声讫，便切齿作声，言：人易我门户，诬统藏人。袒衫见缚，赖我遣人救之，得解。
现代文：刚说完，门外突然亮得像白天，只见夏侯恺穿着单衣戴着头巾进了屋，坐在靠西墙的大床上，谈笑悲欢像活着时一样，并咬牙切齿的说：有人糟踏我的名誉，诬隐夏侯统窝藏人，致使他裸露着被擒，全凭我派人救他，才理到解脱。
English: As soon as he had finished speaking, the outside of the door suddenly lit up like daylight. Xia Houjun entered the house wearing a singlet and a headscarf, and sat on a large bed against the west wall, talking, laughing, grieving and rejoicing as if he were still alive. He gritted his teeth and said, "Someone has trampled on my honor, falsely accused Xia Houjun of harboring someone, leaving him naked under the bedclothes. I had to send someone to rescue him before he could be freed."

古文：将数十人，大者在外，八行随恺。
现代文：领来数十个人，大人在外边，小的跟随夏侯恺。
English: Dozens of people were brought in, the adults outside, the little ones following Xia Houyao.

古文：阮牵床离壁，恺见语阮：何取床？
现代文：阮公把床拉离了西墙。夏候恺就现出了身体说：为什么拉床？
English: Ruan Gong pulled the bed away from the west wall. Xia Houya appeared and said: "Why did you pull the bed?

古文：又说：家无主，不成居。
现代文：又说：家里没有妻子，就不成为家。
English: And he said, If there be not a wife in the house, it is not a house.

古文：阮答何不娶妻。
现代文：阮公说：那为什么不娶个老婆呢？
English: Ruan Gong said: Then why not marry a wife?

古文：恺曰：卿与其居尔许年，而作此语也。
现代文：夏侯恺说：你我在一起生活了这么久，怎么能说出这样的话来？
English: Xia Houyao said: You and I have lived together for so long, how can you say such a thing?

古文：诸鬼中当有一人达。
现代文：又说：咱们家死的人中，有一个能有出息。
English: He also said: "Among those who died in our family, there is one who can make a difference.

古文：阮问谁，恺曰：儿辈意，不足悦也。
现代文：阮公问是谁，夏侯恺说：是儿子辈的，不值得高兴。
English: When Ruan Gong asked who it was, Xia Houyao said, "It's my son's generation, I don't deserve to be happy."

古文：呼见孙儿，云：少者气弱，勿令近我。
现代文：喊叫孙子来，恺说：孙子太小，气弱，别让他靠近我。
English: She called her grandson and said, "My grandson is too small and weak. Don't let him come near me."

古文：又说：大女有相，勿辄嫁人。
现代文：又说大女儿命相好，不要随便嫁出去。
English: He also said that the eldest daughter loved life and did not want to get married.

古文：恺问阮：欲见亡女，可呼之。
现代文：夏侯恺又问阮公如果想见他死去的女儿，可以叫他来相见。
English: Xia Houyao also asked Nguyen Quang if he wanted to see his dead daughter, he could ask him to meet.

古文：阮曰：女亡已久，不愿见也。
现代文：阮公说：女儿死了很久了，不想见她。
English: "My daughter has been dead for a long time, and I don't want to see her," Mr. Nguyen said.

古文：恺曰：数欲见父，而禁限未得见。
现代文：夏侯恺说：你女儿几次想见你，但阴间限制得太严，没能见上。
English: Xia Houyao said: Your daughter wanted to see you several times, but the restrictions in the underworld were too strict, so she couldn't see you.

古文：官记室缺，总召十人，不识，书不中，皆得出。
现代文：夏侯恺还说：我本来不应该死，还有九年阳寿，由于阴间缺记事官，一共召去了十个人，我都不认识。他们写的字都没被看中，就都放回阳间了。
English: Xia Houyao also said: I should not have died in the first place, I still have nine years to live. Due to the lack of a registrar in the underworld, a total of ten people were summoned, none of whom I knew. None of the words they wrote were appreciated, and they were all returned to the underworld.

古文：我书中，遂逼留补缺。
现代文：我写的字被选中了，就硬逼着我在阴间补了官缺。
English: The characters I wrote were chosen, and I was forced to fill a vacancy in the underworld.

古文：刘他
现代文：刘他
English: Liu Tao

古文：刘他在下口居，忽有一鬼，来住刘家。
现代文：刘他在下口住时，忽然有一个鬼来到家里。
English: Liu He was choking on his food when a ghost suddenly came to the house.

古文：初因暗，仿佛见形如人，著白布袴。
现代文：起初屋里暗，好象看见鬼现形和人一样，穿着白布裤。
English: At first the room was dark, as if a ghost had appeared, dressed in white trousers.

古文：自尔后，数日一来，不复隐形，便不去。
现代文：从那以后，几天就来一次，也不隐形，还不走。
English: After that, the ghost came to Liu's house once every few days. Later, the ghost stopped hiding its whereabouts and never left.

古文：喜偷食，不以为患，然且难之。初不敢呵骂。
现代文：这鬼爱偷吃的，虽然不害人，但也很讨厌，又不敢骂他。
English: The ghost likes to steal things to eat. Although Liu Chigou did not think it was a scourge, it was difficult to deal with. At first, he did not dare to scold the ghost.

古文：吉翼子者，强梁不信鬼，至刘家。谓主人：卿家鬼何在？唤来，今为卿骂之。
现代文：有个叫吉翼子的，为人倔犟不信鬼，到刘家来问道：你家的鬼在哪里，把他叫来，我替你骂他！
English: A ghost hunter named Ji Yingzi came to Liu's house and asked, "Where is the ghost in your house? Call him, I'll scold him for you!"

古文：即闻屋梁作声。
现代文：这时就听见屋梁上有声音。
English: At that moment, they heard a noise on the roof.

古文：时大有客，共仰视欣，便纷纭掷一物下，正著翼子面。视之，乃主人家妇女亵衣，恶犹著焉。
现代文：当时有很多客人，一齐抬头看，鬼就扔下一个东西来，正好扔到吉翼子的脸上，拿下来一看，是刘妻的内衣，很遭人厌恶，都大笑起来。
English: At that time, there were a lot of guests. They all looked up at the same time, and the ghost threw something at them. It landed right on Ji Yingzi's face. When they took it off, they saw that it was Liu Zhen's underwear. They were disgusted by it, and they all burst out laughing.

古文：有人语刘，此鬼偷食乃食尽，必有形之物，可以毒药中之。
现代文：吉翼子非常气恼，洗了脸跑了。有人对刘他说：这个鬼吃东西东西就没，一定是个有形的东西变的，可以下毒药药他！
English: Ji Yingzi was very angry, washed his face and ran away. Someone said to Liu: "This ghost doesn't eat anything, it must be a tangible thing, you can poison him!"

古文：刘即于他家煮冶葛，取二升汁，密赍还。向夜，令作糜，著于几上，以盆复之。后闻鬼外来，发盆取糜。既吃，掷破瓯出去。
现代文：刘就在别人家煮了二升冶葛汁，偷偷拿回来，这天晚上让妻子做了肉粥，兑上毒药，放在桌上，用盆盖好，后来就听见鬼从外面来，揭开盆子取肉粥，吃了几口就把盆摔破跑出去了。
English: Liu cooked two liters of yakitori juice at someone else's home and secretly took it back. That evening, he asked his wife to make meat gruel, mix it with poison, put it on the table and cover it with a pot. Later, he heard the ghost coming from outside, opened the pot to take the meat gruel, took a few bites and broke the pot and ran out.

古文：须臾，闻在屋头吐，嗔怒非常，仗棒打窗户。
现代文：不一会儿，听见鬼在房头呕吐，而且发怒发狂地敲打窗户。
English: Moments later, the ghost is heard vomiting at the front of the house and furiously banging on the window.

古文：刘先以防备，与斗，亦不敢入户，至四更中，然后遂绝。
现代文：刘他事先已有防备，就和鬼斗了起来。鬼始终没敢再进屋，到四更时分，终于逃掉了，从此再也没来。
English: Liu, who had prepared in advance, fought with the ghost. The ghost never dared to enter the house again. At four o'clock, it finally escaped and never came back.

古文：王戎
现代文：王戎
English: Wang Rong

古文：安丰侯王戎，尝赴人家殡殓。主人治棺未竞，送者悉在厅事上。
现代文：安丰侯王戎有一次到某家参加葬礼，这家棺木还没作好，来送丧的人都在客厅里。
English: Anfeng Hou Wang Rong once attended a funeral in a certain house. The coffin had not yet been made, and all the mourners were in the living room.

古文：安丰车中卧，忽见空中有一异物，如鸟，熟视转大。渐近，见一乘赤马车，一人在中，著帻赤衣，手持一斧。至地下车，径入王车中，回几容之。
现代文：王戎在车里躺着，忽然看见空中有一个怪物，像鸟，看着就渐渐变大，是一辆红马拉的车，车上有个人穿红衣戴头巾，手里拿着一把大斧，车落地后，红衣鬼怪立刻钻进王戎的车里，车里刚刚能挤下两个人。
English: Wang Rong was lying in the car, when he suddenly saw a monster in the sky, like a bird, which gradually grew larger as he watched. It was a red horse-drawn carriage, with a man wearing a red coat and headscarf and holding a large axe in his hand. After the carriage landed, the red-clothed ghost immediately climbed into Wang Rong's carriage, which was just big enough for two people.

古文：良不获已，可乘青牛，令髯奴御之。及乘白马，则可禳之。谓戎：君当致位三公。
现代文：鬼对王戎说：我看你神采不凡，什么事情都逃不过你的眼睛，也有身份，所以来找你，不过我要向你进一言：以后凡是谁家有了殡葬丧事，除非死者是自己的亲人，不要着急去，不然不会得到什么好处，你可以乘青牛，让老仆人赶着，或乘白马，有灾也可免除。
English: The ghost said to Wang Rong, "I think you are extraordinary, nothing can escape your eyes, and you have status, so I came to find you, but I want to say one thing to you: In the future, whoever has a funeral, unless the deceased is your relative, do not rush to go, otherwise you will not get any benefits. You can ride a young ox, let the old servant catch it, or ride a white horse, and you can be exempted from disaster.

古文：语良久，主人内棺当殡，众客悉入，此鬼亦入。既入户，鬼便持斧，行棺墙上。
现代文：又说：你今后能做到三公这样的大官。两人谈了半天，那家棺材已作好准备将死人入殓了，吊唁的人们都进去看，这个鬼也跟过去了，一进屋鬼就站在棺材边子上来回走。
English: He also said, "In the future, you will be able to become a great official like the three kings." The two of them talked for half a day, and the coffin was ready to be placed in the coffin. The mourners all went in to look at it, and the ghost also followed. As soon as it entered the house, the ghost stood on the edge of the coffin and walked back and forth.

古文：有一亲趣棺，欲与亡人诀，鬼便以斧正打其额，即倒地，左右扶出。鬼于棺上视戎而笑，众悉见，鬼变持斧而出。
现代文：有一个死者的亲属凑在棺材旁，想向死者诀别，鬼就用斧子向那人额头打去，那人立刻倒地，被人扶了出去，鬼站在棺材上看着王戎笑了起来，人们都看见了，然后鬼就拿着斧头走了出去。
English: One of the dead man's relatives gathered around the coffin, wanting to say goodbye to the deceased. The ghost hit the man on the forehead with an axe. The man immediately fell to the ground and was helped out. The ghost stood on the coffin and watched Wang Rong laugh. Everyone saw it, and then the ghost took the axe and walked out.

古文：王仲文
现代文：王仲文
English: Wang Zhongwen

古文：王仲文为何南郡主簿，居缑氏县北。
现代文：王仲文是河南郡的主簿，家在缑氏县北。
English: Wang Zhongwen is the chief accountant of Henan County, and his home is in the north of Jinshi County.

古文：得休应归，道经水泽，见后有一白狗，仲文甚之。
现代文：有一次他休假后坐车回郡，路过一个湖塘，看见一个白狗在后面跟着。
English: Once, driving back to the county after a vacation, he passed a lake and saw a white dog trailing behind.

古文：欲便取，忽变如人。长六尺，状似方相。目赤如火，磋齿嚼舌，甚有憎恶。
现代文：王仲文很喜欢狗，就想去抱狗，那狗突然变成了人形，六尺高，象个驱鬼的方相形象凶恶可怕，眼睛像火一样红，错着牙嚼着舌头，面目可憎。
English: Wang Zhongwen liked dogs very much and wanted to hold a dog. The dog suddenly turned into a puppet, six feet tall, with a ferocious and terrible image like a ghost repeller, with eyes as red as fire, and chewing its tongue with its teeth misaligned. The dog's face was disgusting.

古文：欲击之，或却，或欲上车。
现代文：王仲文很讨厌，想打它，它就往后退，还想上车去。
English: Wang Zhongwen is very annoying. When I want to hit him, he backs away and wants to get on the bus.

古文：仲文大怖，便使奴打，不能奈何。
现代文：王仲文吓坏了，就让仆人打。但仆人也奈何不得那鬼怪。
English: Wang Zhongwen was terrified and asked his servant to beat him, but the servant could not resist the ghost.

古文：因下车，佐奴共又打，亦不禁。并力尽，不能复打，于是舍走。
现代文：王仲文就下车。和仆人一起打，仍然制不住鬼，而且打得精疲力尽，不能再打，只好扔下鬼逃走。
English: Wang Zhongwen got out of the car. He fought with the servant, but still could not control the ghost. He was exhausted and could not fight anymore, so he had to throw the ghost down and run away.

古文：告人家，合十余人，持刀捉火，自来视之，便不知所在。
现代文：回到家后，集合起十多个人持刀举着火把，再去找，那鬼已经不见了。
English: After returning home, more than ten people gathered with knives and torches, and then went looking for it. The ghost had disappeared.

古文：月余日，仲文忽复见之，与奴并走，未到人家，伏地俱死。
现代文：过了一个多月，仲文忽然又看见那个鬼怪，仲文和仆人一齐逃走，没到家就都倒地死了。
English: After more than a month, Zhongwen suddenly saw the ghost again. Zhongwen and his servant ran away together, and both of them collapsed and died before reaching home.

