古文：黄帝问曰：愿闻虚实之要。
现代文：黄帝问道：我希望听您谈一谈虚实的的要点，可以吗？
English: Huang Di asked: I would like to listen to you talk about the main points of the truth, is that OK?

古文：岐伯对曰：气实形实，气虚形虚，此其常也，反此者病。
现代文：岐伯回答说：气充实的，形体也壮实；气虚弱的，形体也虚弱，这是一种正常现象，与此相反的，就是一种病态。
English: Qi Bo replied, "When one's qi is strong, one's body is strong; when one's qi is weak, one's body is weak. This is a normal phenomenon, and the opposite is a disease.

古文：谷盛气盛，谷虚气虚，此其常也，反此者病。
现代文：饮食物丰盛的，血气旺盛，饮食物不足的，血气衰弱，这是一种正常现象，与此相反的，就是一种病态。
English: If you drink plenty of food, your blood will be strong. If you don't drink enough food, your blood will be weak. This is a normal phenomenon. The opposite is a disease.

古文：脉实血实，脉虚血虚，此其常也，反此者病。
现代文：脉充实的，血也充实，脉虚弱的，血也衰虚，这是一种正常的现象，与此相反的，就是一种病态。
English: When the pulse is strong, the blood is strong. When the pulse is weak, the blood is weak. This is a normal phenomenon. The opposite is a disease.

古文：帝曰：如何而反？
现代文：黄帝问道：什么样的情况是反常的呢？
English: Huangdi asked: What kind of situation is abnormal?

古文：岐伯曰：气盛身寒，此谓反也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：正气虚弱的，但身体发热，这叫反常。
English: Qibo replied, "It is abnormal to be weak in spirit but feverish in body.

古文：气虚身热，此谓反也。
现代文：吃的多，但血气不足，这叫做反常。
English: Eating a lot, but not enough energy, this is called abnormality.

古文：谷入多而气少，此谓反也。
现代文：吃的少，但是血气多，这叫做反常。
English: Eating less, but gaining weight, is called perversion.

古文：谷不入而气多，此谓反也。
现代文：脉搏盛实，但血少，为反常。
English: The pulse is strong, but the blood is thin, which is abnormal.

古文：脉盛血少，此谓反也。
现代文：脉搏衰弱，但血多，为反常。
English: The pulse is weak, but there is a lot of blood, which is abnormal.

古文：脉少血多，此谓反也。
现代文：气旺盛，但身上怕冷，这是感受了风寒邪气。
English: He is full of energy, but he is afraid of the cold. This is because he has felt the cold wind.

古文：气盛身寒，得之伤寒。
现代文：气虚弱，但身上发热，这是感受了暑热邪气。
English: The qi is weak, but the body heats up. This is the result of feeling the heat and evil qi.

古文：气虚身热，得之伤暑。
现代文：吃的食物多，但血气不足，这是由于失血过多，或湿邪停留于下部。
English: Eating more food, but not enough blood gas, this is due to excessive blood loss, or the dampness stays in the lower part.

古文：谷入多而气少者，得之有所脱血，湿居下也。谷入少而气多者，邪在胃及与肺也。脉小血多者，饮中热也。
现代文：吃的食物少，但血气充盛，这是因为邪气停留于胃并上及于肺。脉小而血多，是饮酒过多，中焦郁热。
English: Eat less food, but the blood is full of qi, this is because the evil spirit stays in the stomach and goes up to the lungs. The pulse is small and the blood is more, it is drinking too much, and the middle jiao is hot.

古文：此之谓也。夫实者，气入也；虚者，气出也。
现代文：脉大而血少，是风邪入于脉中，水汤不进所造成的。实证是邪气的入侵，虚证是正气的外泄。
English: A large vein but little blood is caused by wind and evil entering the vein and water and dew not entering. The positive proof is the invasion of evil, and the false proof is the leakage of righteous.

古文：气实者，热也；气虚者，寒也。
现代文：邪气实，身体发热，正气虚，身体寒冷。
English: The evil qi is solid, the body is hot, the righteous qi is weak, and the body is cold.

古文：入实者，左手开针空也；入虚者，左手闭针空也。
现代文：针刺实证时，应左手开大针孔以泻邪，针刺虚证时，应左手闭合针孔以存正。
English: In the case of positive acupuncture, the left hand should open a large pinhole to relieve the evil, and in the case of false acupuncture, the left hand should close the pinhole to preserve the positive.

