古文：二十有九年春，新延厩。
现代文：二十九年春季，新造延厩。
English: In the spring of 1929, the newly built stables were completed.

古文：夏，郑人侵许。
现代文：夏季，郑国入侵许国。
English: In the summer, the Zheng people invaded Xu Province.

古文：秋，有蜚。
现代文：秋季，发现蜚盘虫。
English: In the autumn, the discovery of the tapeworm was a disaster.

古文：冬十有二月，纪叔姬卒。
现代文：冬季十二月，纪叔姬去世。
English: In the winter of December, Ji Shujie passed away.

古文：城诸及防。
现代文：在诸地和防地筑城。
English: They built cities in various places and fortified areas.

古文：二十九年春，新作延厩，书不时也。
现代文：二十九年春季，新造延厩。《春秋》所以记载这件事，是由于不合时令。
English: In the spring of the 29th year, a new stable was built. "Spring and Autumn" recorded this event because it was out of season.

古文：凡马日中而出，日中而入。
现代文：凡是马，春分时节放牧，秋分时节入马圈。
English: All horses graze during the vernal equinox and enter the stables during the autumnal equinox.

古文：夏，郑人侵许。
现代文：夏季，郑国人入侵许国。
English: In the summer, the Zheng people invaded Xu Province.

古文：凡师有钟鼓曰伐，无曰侵，轻曰袭。
现代文：凡是出兵，有钟鼓之声叫做 伐 ，没有叫做 侵 ，轻装部队快速突击叫做 袭 。
English: Whenever troops are dispatched, the sound of bells and drums is called "war," nothing is called "invasion," and the rapid assault of light-armed troops is called "attack."

古文：秋，有蜚。
现代文：秋季，发现蜚盘虫，成了灾。
English: In the autumn, the discovery of the tapeworm was a disaster.

古文：为灾也。凡物不为灾不书。
现代文：凡是事物不成灾，《春秋》就不加记载。
English: Whenever things do not succeed, "Spring and Autumn" will not be recorded.

古文：冬十二月，城诸及防，书时也。
现代文：冬季十二月，在诸地和防地筑城。
English: In winter, in December, they built the city in various places and fortified areas.

古文：凡土功，龙见而毕务，戒事也。火见而致用，水昏正而栽，日至而毕。
现代文：凡是土木工程，苍龙星出现，此时农事完毕，就要做准备了；大火星出现，就要把用具放到工场上，黄昏，营室星在南方出现，就要筑墙立板，冬至以后不再施工。
English: In all civil engineering projects, when the celestial dragon appears, it is time to prepare after the agricultural work is completed; when the great Mars appears, it is time to put the tools on the workshop; when the camp star appears in the south at dusk, it is time to build the wall plate, and there will be no construction after the winter solstice.

古文：樊皮叛王。
现代文：周大夫樊皮背叛周惠王。
English: Dr. Zhou Bingpi betrayed King Zhou Hui.

