古文：起柔兆困敦，尽阏逢涒滩，凡九年。
现代文：起，止，一共九年。汉章帝建初元年
English: It lasted for a total of nine years, from the beginning of the first year of Emperor Han Zang's reign

古文：肃宗孝章皇帝上建初元年春，正月，诏兗、豫、徐三州禀赡饥民。
现代文：春季，正月，章帝下诏，命令兖州、豫州、徐州等三州官府开仓赈济饥饿的难民。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Zhang issued an edict, ordering the government offices of the three states, including Zhangzhou, Yuzhou and Xuzhou, to open warehouses to help the starving refugees.

古文：上问司徒鲍昱： 何以消复旱灾？ 
现代文：章帝问司徒鲍昱： 怎样消除旱灾？ 
English: Zhang Di asked Szeto Baojun: How to eliminate drought?

古文：对曰： 陛下始践天位，虽有失得，未能致异。
现代文：鲍昱答道： 陛下刚即位，即使有失当之处，也不会导致灾异出现。
English: Bao Wei replied, "Your Majesty has just ascended the throne. Even if there is something improper, it will not lead to a disaster.

古文：臣前为汝南太守，典治楚事，系者千馀人，恐未能尽当其罪。
现代文：我先前曾任汝南太守，负责审理楚王之案，在当地拘禁了一千多人，这些囚犯恐怕不是全都有罪。
English: Previously, I was the governor of Runan Province, responsible for the trial of the King Chu case, and detained more than a thousand people in the area. I am afraid that not all of these prisoners are guilty.

古文：夫大狱一起，冤者过半。
现代文：大案一发，被冤枉者往往超过半数。
English: In the event of a major case, more than half of those who have been wronged are often involved.

古文：又，诸徙者骨肉离分，孤魂不祀。
现代文：此外，由于被流放的人和亲属分离，死后的孤魂得不到祭祀。
English: In addition, because the exiles and their relatives were separated, the departed souls after death could not be offered to the gods.

古文：宜一切还诸徙家。蠲除禁锢，使死生获所，则和气可致。 
现代文：我建议，让流放者全都返回家乡，除去不准作官的禁令，使死者生者各得其所，这样便可召致祥和之气，消除旱象。 
English: I suggest that all the exiles should be allowed to return to their hometowns, that the ban on holding public office should be lifted, and that the dead and the living should be allowed to return to their homes. In this way, the spirit of peace can be invoked and the drought can be eliminated.

古文：帝纳其言。
现代文：章帝采纳了他的建议。
English: The emperor accepted Zou's suggestion.

古文：校书郎杨终上疏曰： 间者北征匈奴，西开三十六国，百姓频年服役，转输烦费；愁困之民足以感动天地。陛下宜留念省察。 
现代文：校书郎杨终上书说： 近年在北方讨伐匈奴，在西方开通三十六国，致使百姓连年服事徭役，转运繁巨而费用浩大。忧愁苦难的人民足以感动天地，陛下应当留意省察！ 
English: Yang, the school scribe, finally wrote: In recent years, the Huns have been fought in the north, and the Thirty-six Kingdoms have been opened in the west, causing the people to serve as couriers year after year. The transportation is complicated and the cost is huge. The sorrowful and suffering people are enough to move heaven and earth. Your Majesty should pay attention and reflect!

古文：帝下其章，第五伦亦同终议。
现代文：章帝将杨终的奏书下交群臣讨论。
English: Emperor Zhang submitted Yang Zhen's report to the courtiers for discussion.

古文：牟融、饱昱皆以为： 孝子无改父之道。
现代文：第五伦也同杨终的意见一致，而牟融、鲍昱都认为： 孝顺之子不改父亲的主张。
English: Fifth Lun also agreed with Yang Zhen's opinion, while Mu Rong and Bao Yao both believed that a filial son would not change his father's opinion.

古文：征伐匈奴，屯戍西域，先帝所建，不宜回异。 
现代文：讨伐匈奴、屯驻西域，都是先帝的决策，不应有所变化。 
English: The crusade against the Huns and the stationing of troops in the western regions were all decisions made by the former emperor and should not be changed.

古文：终复上疏曰： 秦筑长城，功役繁兴；胡亥不革，卒亡四海。
现代文：杨终再度上书说： 秦始皇修长城，工程浩大，徭役频征，胡亥不改前代政策，终于失去了天下。
English: Yang eventually wrote again, saying: "Qin Shihuang built the Great Wall, the project was huge, the labor service was frequent, Hu Hai did not change the previous generation's policy, and finally lost the world.

古文：故孝元弃珠厓之郡，光武绝西域之国，不以介鳞易我衣裳。
现代文：因此，孝元皇帝放弃了珠崖郡，光武皇帝拒绝了西域各国的归附，不能让鱼鳖去掉鳞甲，而穿上我们的衣服。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xiaoyuan gave up Zhuya County, and Emperor Guangwu refused the annexation of Western countries, and could not let the fish hooks remove the scales and put on our clothes.

古文：鲁文公毁泉台，《春秋》讥之曰： 先祖为之而己毁之，不如勿居而已， 以其无妨害于民也；襄公作三军，昭公舍之，君子大其复古，以为不舍则有害于民也。
现代文：春秋时，鲁文公拆毁了泉台，《春秋》讥讽道： 先祖造台而子孙自毁台，还不如只留着它不去居住。 这是由于泉台的存在不会妨害人民。鲁襄公曾建立三军，而被鲁昭公裁撤，君子却赞扬他的复古举动，认为不裁撤便会妨害人民。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, Lu Wen Gong demolished the spring platform. "Spring and Autumn" ironically said: "The ancestors built the platform and the descendants destroyed the platform, it is better to leave it alone and not to live. This is because the existence of the spring platform will not interfere with the people. Lu Xiang Gong once established the Three Armies, but was abolished by Lu Zhao Gong, but the gentleman praised his retro action, believing that not abolishing it would interfere with the people.

古文：今伊吾之役，楼兰之屯兵久而未还，非天意也。 
现代文：如今在伊吾屯田和在楼兰驻防的士卒久不还乡，这不合上天之意。 
English: Today, the soldiers stationed in Igu tonden and Loulan have not returned to their hometowns for a long time, which is not in accordance with God's will.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：章帝接受了他的意见。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：丙寅，诏： 二千石勉劝农桑。罪非殊死，须秋案验。
现代文：正月丙寅，章帝下诏： 二千石官员应大力劝勉百姓从事农耕和桑蚕之业，除非犯有该当斩首之罪，一切案件都等到秋后审理。
English: In the first month of the year, Emperor Zhang issued an edict: officials of 2,000 koku should strongly encourage the people to engage in farming and mulberry silkworm industry. Unless they commit the crime of beheading, all cases will be tried after the autumn.

古文：有司明慎选举，进柔良，退贪猾，顺时令，理冤狱。 
现代文：各部门要审慎地任命官吏，提拔温和良善之士，排除贪婪奸滑的小人，顺应天时节令，清理冤案。 
English: All departments should prudently appoint officials, promote gentle and good men, eliminate greedy and treacherous villains, comply with the order of the day, and clear up unjust cases.

古文：是时承永平故事，吏政尚严切，尚书决事，率近于重。
现代文：当时沿袭明帝旧制，官吏政风崇尚严苛，尚书所作裁决，大多从重。
English: At that time, the old system of the Ming Dynasty was followed, the government officials advocated a strict political style, and the rulings made by Shangshu were mostly heavy-handed.

古文：尚书沛国陈宠以帝新即位，宜改前世苛俗，乃上疏曰： 臣闻先王之政，赏不僭，刑不滥。
现代文：尚书沛国人陈宠认为，章帝新近即位，应当改革前代的这种严苛风气，便上书道： 我听说古代贤君为政，奖赏不过度，刑罚不滥施。
English: Chen Zha, a scholar and patriot, believed that Emperor Zhang, who had recently ascended to the throne, should reform the harsh culture of the previous generation, and wrote: I heard that the ancient wise men were in power, the rewards were not excessive, and the punishments were not excessive.

古文：与其不得已，宁僭无滥。
现代文：在不得已时，宁可过度奖赏，也不滥施刑罚。
English: In a pinch, it is better to reward excessively than to punish excessively.

古文：往者断狱严明，所以威惩奸慝；奸慝既平，必宜济之以宽。
现代文：以往官员判案严厉，因此能够以威力惩治奸恶；而在奸恶清除以后，就必应以宽厚相补。
English: In the past, officials judged cases harshly, so they were able to use force to punish evil-doers; however, after the evil-doers were purged, they should be compensated with leniency.

古文：陛下即位，率由此义，数诏群僚，弘崇晏晏，而有司未悉奉承，犹尚深刻。
现代文：陛下即位以来，多根据这个宗旨行事，屡次诏告群臣，劝勉温和之政。然而有关官员未能完全顺承圣上的旨意，仍然追求苛刻。
English: Since His Majesty's accession to the throne, he has acted largely in accordance with this principle, repeatedly issuing edicts to his ministers, urging them to pursue a policy of moderation. However, the officials concerned have not been able to fully comply with the sacred will, and are still pursuing harshness.

古文：断狱者急于篣格酷烈之痛，执宪者烦于诋欺放滥之文，或因公行私，逞纵威福。
现代文：审案官急于采取严刑拷打的残酷手段，执法者则纠缠于肆意诬陷的文书，或假公济私，作威作福。
English: The adjudicators are eager to adopt the cruel means of severe torture, and the law enforcers are entangled in the documents of wanton frame-up, or the practice of faking public interest for private gain.

古文：夫为政犹张琴瑟，大弦急者小弦绝。
现代文：执政就象琴瑟上弦，如果大弦太紧，小弦就会崩断。
English: Playing politics is like playing the piano. If the strings are too tight, the melody will break.

古文：陛下宜隆先王之道，荡涤烦苛之法，轻薄棰楚以济群生，全广至德以奉天心。 
现代文：陛下应当发扬古代贤君的治国之道，清除那些繁琐苛刻的法令，减轻苦刑以拯救生命，全面推行德政以顺奉天心！ 
English: Your Majesty should carry forward the ancient wise men's way of governing the country, eliminate those cumbersome and harsh laws and regulations, reduce the torture to save lives, and fully implement the moral government to obey the will of Heaven!

古文：帝深纳宠言，每事务于宽厚。
现代文：章帝将他的意见全部采纳，在处理政务时总是依据宽厚的原则。
English: Emperor Zhang adopted all of his opinions and always followed the principle of leniency when dealing with government affairs.

古文：酒泉太守段彭等兵会柳中，击车师，攻交河城，斩首三千八百级，获生口三千馀人。
现代文：酒泉郡太守段彭等人率军在柳中集结，进击车师，攻打交河城，斩杀三千八百人，俘虏三千余人。
English: The governor of Jiuquan County, Duan Peng, and others led the army to assemble in Liuzhong, attack the chariot division, attack and deal with the river city, kill 3,800 people, and capture more than 3,000 people.

古文：北匈奴惊走，车师复降。
现代文：北匈奴惊慌而逃，车师再度投降。
English: The Northern Xiongnu panicked and fled, and the driver surrendered again.

古文：会关宠已殁，谒者王蒙等欲引兵还；耿恭军吏范羌，时在军中，固请迎恭。
现代文：这时，关宠已经去世，谒者王蒙等人打算引兵东归。耿恭的一位军吏范羌当时正在王蒙军中，他坚持要求去救耿恭。
English: At this time, Guan Zhaotong had already passed away, and Wang Meng, the instigator, and others were planning to lead the troops back to the East. A military official of Geng Gong, Fan Xing, was in Wang Meng's army at the time, and he insisted on rescuing Geng Gong.

古文：诸将不敢前，乃分兵二千人与羌，从山北迎恭，遇大雪丈馀，军仅能至。
现代文：将领们不敢前往，便分出两千救兵交给范羌。范羌经由山北之路去接耿恭，途中曾遇到一丈多深的积雪。援军精疲力尽，仅能勉强到达。
English: The generals did not dare to go, so they distributed two thousand rescuers to Fan Yu. Fan Yu went to pick up Geng Gong via the road to the north of the mountain. On the way, he encountered snow that was several feet deep. The reinforcements were exhausted and could only get there with difficulty.

古文：城中夜闻兵马声，以为虏来，大惊。
现代文：耿恭等人夜间在城中听到兵马之声，以为匈奴来了援军，大为震惊。
English: Geng Gong and others were shocked to hear the sound of soldiers and horses in the city at night, thinking that the Xiongnu had brought reinforcements.

古文：羌遥呼曰： 我范羌也，汉遣军迎校尉耳。 
现代文：范羌从远处喊道： 我是范羌，汉朝派部队迎接校尉来了！ 
English: Fan Ye shouted from a distance: I am Fan Ye, the Han Dynasty has sent troops to meet the captain!

古文：城中皆称万岁。
现代文：城中的人齐呼万岁。
English: The people in the city shouted "Long live."

古文：开门，共相持涕泣。
现代文：于是打开城门，大家互相拥抱，痛哭流涕。
English: So they opened the gates and everyone hugged each other and cried bitterly.

古文：明日，遂相随俱归。
现代文：次日，他们便同救兵一道返回。
English: The next day, they returned with the rescuers.

古文：虏兵追之，且战且行。
现代文：北匈奴派兵追击，汉军边战边走。
English: The Northern Xiongnu sent troops to chase them, while the Han army walked side by side.

古文：吏士素饥困，发疏勒时，尚有二十六人，随路死没，三月至玉门，唯馀十三人，衣屦穿决，形容枯槁。
现代文：官兵饥饿已久，从疏勒城出发时，还有二十六人，沿途不断死亡，到三月抵达玉门时，只剩下了十三人。这十三人衣衫褴褛，鞋履洞穿，面容憔悴，形销骨立。
English: The officers and soldiers had been starving for a long time. When they set out from the city of Sule, there were still twenty-six people, and they kept dying along the way. By the time they arrived at the Jade Gate in March, only thirteen people were left. These thirteen people were ragged, their shoes had holes in them, their faces were gaunt, and they were emaciated.

古文：中郎将郑众为恭已下洗沐，易衣冠，上疏奏： 恭以单兵守孤城，当匈奴数万之众，连月逾年，心力困尽，凿山为井，煮弩为粮，前后杀伤丑虏数百千计，卒全忠勇，不为大汉耻，宜蒙显爵，以厉将帅。 
现代文：中郎将郑众为耿恭及其部下安排洗浴，更换衣帽，并上书说： 耿恭以微弱的兵力固守孤城，抵抗匈奴数万大军，经年累月，耗尽了全部心力，凿山打井，煮食弓弩，先后杀伤敌人数以千计，忠勇俱全，没有使汉朝蒙羞。应当赐给他荣耀的官爵，以激励将帅。 
English: Zhonglang Zheng arranged for Geng Gong and his subordinates to take a bath, change their clothes and hats, and sent a letter saying: Geng Gong held the lonely city with a weak army, resisted the tens of thousands of Hun army, exhausted all his strength over the years, dug mountains and wells, cooked bow and arrow, killed and wounded thousands of enemies in succession, was loyal and brave, and did not disgrace the Han Dynasty. He should be given a glorious rank and title to encourage the general.

古文：恭至雒阳，拜骑都尉。
现代文：耿恭到达洛阳后，被任命为骑都尉。
English: After Geng Gong arrived in Luoyang, he was appointed as a cavalry captain.

古文：诏悉罢戊、己校尉及都护官，征还班超。
现代文：章帝下诏，将戊校尉、己校尉和西域都护一并撤销，召班超回国。
English: Emperor Zhang issued an edict to revoke the positions of Captain Wu, Captain Ji, and Captain West, and to recall them to China.

古文：超将发还，疏勒举国忧恐；其都尉黎弇曰： 汉使弃我，我必复为龟兹所灭耳，诚不忍见汉使去。 
现代文：班超将要运身返回，疏勒全国一片忧虑恐慌。疏勒都尉黎说： 汉朝使者抛弃我们，疏勒必定再次被龟兹毁灭，我真不忍见汉朝使者离去！ 
English: Panchao was about to be sent back, and the whole country of Sule was in a state of anxiety and panic. Sule Captain Lai said: The Han Dynasty emissary has abandoned us, Sule will surely be destroyed by the turtle again, I really can't bear to see the Han Dynasty emissary leave!

古文：因以刀自刭。
现代文：于是拔刀刎颈自杀。
English: He then killed himself with a knife to the neck.

古文：超还至于窴，王侯以下皆号泣，曰： 依汉使如父母，诚不可去！ 
现代文：班超在归途中经过于阗，于阗王和贵族群臣全都号啕痛哭，说道： 我们依赖汉朝使者，犹如依赖父母，您确实不能走啊！ 
English: On his way back, Banchao passed by Yuyao. The king of Yuyao and his courtiers all cried bitterly, saying, "We rely on the Han Dynasty emissaries, just like we rely on our parents. You really can't go!"

古文：互抱超马脚不得行。
现代文：他们抱住班超的马腿，使他不能前进。
English: They held onto Ban Chao's horse's leg, preventing him from moving forward.

古文：超亦欲遂其本志，乃更还疏勒。
现代文：班超也想实现自己本来的志愿，于是重新返回疏勒。
English: The head teacher also wanted to realize his original wish, so he returned to Shule.

古文：疏勒两城已降龟兹，而与尉头连兵。
现代文：这时疏勒已有两城投降了龟兹，并与尉头国结盟。
English: At this time, two cities in Shule had already surrendered to Kuez and allied with Yotov.

古文：超捕斩反者，击破尉头，杀六百馀人，疏勒复安。
现代文：班超逮捕斩杀了叛变者，打败尉头国，杀死六百余人。疏勒再度恢复安定。
English: Banchao arrested and killed the mutineers, defeated the enemy and killed more than 600 people. Shule regained stability.

古文：甲寅，山阳、东平地震。
现代文：三月甲寅，山阳、东平两地发生地震。
English: In March, an earthquake occurred in Shanyang, Dongping and Jiuzhaigou.

古文：东平王苍上便宜三事。帝报书曰： 间吏民奏事亦有此言，但明智浅短，或谓倘是，复虑为非，不知所定。
现代文：东平王刘苍上书提出三项建议，章帝下诏答复说： 最近在官员和百姓的奏书中也有此类建议，但我见识才智浅薄，有时认为或许可行，后来又认为不可行，不知如何裁定。
English: The Dongping King Liu Cang put forward three suggestions in his petition, and Emperor Zhang replied in his edict: Recently, there have been such suggestions in the petitions of officials and people, but I have a shallow intellect, sometimes I think it is possible, and later I think it is not feasible, I do not know how to adjudicate.

古文：得王深策，恢然意解；思惟嘉谋，以次奉行。
现代文：读到您深思熟虑写就的奏书，我心豁然开朗。我思考您的治国良策，依次实行。
English: When I read your well-thought-out report, my heart suddenly brightened. I thought about your good policies for governing the country and implemented them one after another.

古文：特赐王钱五百万。 
现代文：特别赏赐给您五百万钱。 
English: A special award of five million dollars has been given to you.

古文：后帝欲为原陵、显节陵起县邑，苍上疏谏曰： 窃见光武皇帝躬履俭约之行，深睹始终之分，勤勤恳恳，以葬制为言；孝明皇帝大孝无违，承奉遵行。
现代文：后来，章帝打算在光武帝的原陵和明帝的显节陵两地设县，刘苍上书劝谏说： 我曾见光武皇帝亲身履行节俭的原则，他深明什么是生命之始与生命之终，恳切地指示丧葬后事。孝明皇帝大孝而不敢有所违背，遵从执行了父命。
English: Later, Emperor Zhang planned to set up counties in the two places of the original tomb of Emperor Guangwu and the tomb of Emperor Xian Jie of the Ming Dynasty. Liu Cang wrote a letter to persuade him, saying: I have seen Emperor Guangwu personally carry out the principle of thrift. He was well aware of what is the beginning of life and the end of life, and earnestly instructed the funeral and post-mortem affairs. Emperor Xiao Ming was very filial and did not dare to disobey, and complied with his father's order.

古文：谦德之美，于斯为盛。
现代文：自谦的美德，这是最为盛大的了。
English: The virtue of self-effacement, this is the grandest.

古文：臣愚以园邑之兴，始自强秦。
现代文：我认为，在皇陵设邑这一制度的出现，始于强暴的秦朝。
English: In the foolish opinion of the vassals, they thought that the construction of the garden village began with Qiangqin.

古文：古者丘陇且不欲其著明，岂况筑郭邑、建都郛哉！
现代文：古代有墓无坟，连葬身的土垅都不要它显著突出地面，何况建立城市、修筑墙垣！
English: In ancient times, there were tombs without graves, and even the mound on which a person was buried did not need to protrude significantly from the ground, let alone build a city and walls!

古文：上违先帝圣心，下造无益之功，虚费国用，动摇百姓，非所以致和气、祈丰年也。
现代文：上违先帝的圣意，下造无用的工程，白白浪费国家资财，使百姓不得安宁，这不是招致祥和之气、祈求丰年的作法。
English: It is not the way to invite the spirit of peace and pray for a prosperous year to violate the sacred will of the former emperor, build useless projects, waste national resources and wealth in vain, and make the people restless.

古文：陛下履有虞之至性，追祖祢之深思，臣苍诚伤二帝纯德之美不畅于无穷也。 
现代文：望陛下履行虞舜的至孝，追念先人的深意。我实在担忧两位先帝的纯洁美德不能够永久流传！ 
English: I hope that His Majesty will honor the filial piety of His Imperial Highness and remember the deep intentions of his predecessors. I am really worried that the pure virtues of the two emperors cannot be passed down forever!

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：章帝这才作罢。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：自是朝廷每有疑政，辄驿使谘问，苍悉心以对，皆见纳用。
现代文：从此，每当朝廷遇到疑难，就派使者乘坐驿车前往咨询，刘苍则尽心答复。他的意见，全都被采纳实施。
English: From then on, whenever the imperial court encountered difficulties, it would send an envoy in a carriage to consult, and Liu Cang would reply wholeheartedly. All of his opinions were adopted and implemented.

古文：秋，八月，庚寅，有星孛于天市。
现代文：秋季，八月庚寅，天市星座出现异星。
English: In autumn, in the month of August, a strange star appears in the constellations of the sky.

古文：初，益州西部都尉广汉郑纯，为政清洁，化行夷貊，君长感慕，皆奉珍内附；明帝为之置永昌郡，以纯为太守。
现代文：先前，益州西部都尉、广汉人郑纯为政清廉，教化夷人貊人。夷人貊人首领对他十分敬慕，全都献上珍宝，归附汉朝。明帝在当地设立了永昌郡，任命郑纯为太守。
English: Previously, Zheng Chun, the captain of the western part of Yizhou and a Guanghan, was politically clean and educated the barbarians. The barbarian leaders admired him very much and all presented precious treasures to the Han Dynasty. Emperor Ming established Yongchang County in the area and appointed Zheng Chun as the governor.

古文：纯在官十年而卒，后人不能抚循夷人。九月，哀牢王类牢杀守令反，攻博南。
现代文：郑纯在任十年去世。后任太守不能安抚夷人，到本年九月，哀牢王类牢杀死郡县长官反叛，进攻博南。
English: Zheng Chun died after ten years in office. His successor, the eunuch, was unable to appease the barbarians, and by September of this year, he had killed the rebellious county magistrate and attacked Bonan.

古文：阜陵王延数怀怨望，有告延与子男鲂造逆谋者；上不忍诛，冬十一月，贬延为阜陵侯，食一县，不得与吏民通。
现代文：阜陵王刘延屡屡心怀不满，有人告发他与儿子刘鲂密谋造反。章帝不忍将刘延处死，冬季十一月，将他贬为阜陵侯，只享有一个县的封地，不许他与官员人民来往。
English: Liu Yan, the King of Fulin, was repeatedly dissatisfied, and someone accused him of plotting a rebellion with his son Liu Yao. Emperor Zhang could not bear to put Liu Yan to death, and in the winter of November, he was relegated to the fief of Fulin, enjoying only one county fief, and he was not allowed to come and go with officials and people.

古文：北匈奴皋林温禺犊王将众还居涿邪山，南单于与边郡及乌桓共击破之。
现代文：北匈奴皋林温禺犊王率领部众返回涿邪山居住。南匈奴单于和汉朝边境郡兵及乌桓部落一同出击，将北匈奴打败。
English: The Northern Xiongnu, led by King Lingwenwen, returned to live in Shiyanshan. The Southern Xiongnu alone, together with the Han Dynasty border county soldiers and Wuhuan tribe, attacked and defeated the Northern Xiongnu.

古文：是岁，南部大饥，诏禀给之。
现代文：本年，南匈奴发生饥荒，章帝下诏为南匈奴供应粮食。
English: This year, famine occurred in Southern Xiongnu, and Emperor Zhang issued an edict to supply grain to Southern Xiongnu.

古文：肃宗孝章皇帝上建初二年
现代文：建初二年
English: Two years after construction

古文：春，三月，甲辰，罢伊吾卢屯兵，匈奴复遣兵守其地。
现代文：春季，三月甲辰，撤销在西域伊吾卢的屯田部队。于是北匈奴再度派兵占领该地。
English: In the spring, at the first hour of March, the military garrisons in the western region of Iguru were abolished, and the Northern Xiongnu once again sent troops to occupy the region.

古文：永昌、越巂、益州三郡兵及昆明夷卤承等，击哀牢王类牢于博南，大破，斩之。
现代文：永昌、越、益州三郡郡兵及昆明夷人卤承等在博南进攻哀牢王类牢，大败哀牢军，斩杀类牢。
English: Yongchang, Yue, Yizhou three counties county soldiers and Kunming Yiren halogen bearing, etc. in Bonan attacked the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king.

古文：夏，四月，戊子，诏还坐楚、淮阳事徙者四百馀家。
现代文：夏季，四月戊子，章帝下诏，准许因楚王之案、淮阳王之案而被流放的四百余户返回故乡。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Zhang issued an edict to allow more than 400 families who had been exiled because of the King Chu and King Huaiyang cases to return to their hometowns.

古文：上欲封爵诸舅，太后不听。
现代文：章帝打算赐封各位舅父，但马太后不同意。
English: Emperor Zhang planned to bestow titles on the uncles, but Empress Maotai did not agree.

古文：会大旱，言事者以为不封外戚之故，有司请依旧典。
现代文：适逢天旱，有人上书说是因为未封外戚的缘故，于是有关部门奏请依照旧制赐封。
English: When there was a drought, someone wrote to say that it was because of a relative who had not been granted a seal, so the relevant departments requested that the seal be granted in accordance with the old system.

古文：太后诏曰： 凡言事者，皆欲媚朕以要福耳。
现代文：马太后下诏说： 那些上书建议封外戚的人，都是要向朕献媚，以谋求好处罢了。
English: The Empress Mathew issued an edict saying, "Those who submitted the letter proposing to ban the foreign relative are just trying to curry favor with me in order to seek benefits.

古文：昔王氏五侯同日俱封，黄雾四塞，不闻澍雨之应。
现代文：从前，王氏家族一日之内有五人一起封侯，而当时黄雾弥漫，并未听说有天降好雨的反应。
English: Once upon a time, the Wang family had five people in one day, and at that time the yellow fog was thick, and they did not hear about the reaction of a good rain.

古文：夫外戚贵盛，鲜不倾覆；故先帝防慎舅氏，不令在枢机之位，又言 我子不当与先帝子等 ，今有司奈何欲以马氏比阴氏乎！
现代文：外戚富贵过盛，很少不倾覆的。所以先帝对他的舅父慎重安排，不放在朝廷要位，还说： 我的儿子不应与先帝的儿子等同。 如今有关部门为什么要将马家同阴家相比呢！
English: So the former emperor carefully arranged for his uncle not to be placed in an important position in the imperial court, and also said: My son should not be equal to the son of the former emperor. Why should the relevant departments compare the Ma family with the Yin family now?

古文：且阴卫尉，天下称之，省中御者至门，出不及履，此蘧伯玉之敬也；新阳侯虽刚强，微失理，然有方略，据地谈论，一朝无双；原鹿贞侯，勇猛诚信；此三人者，天下选臣，岂可及哉！
现代文：况且卫尉阴兴，受到天下人的称赞，宫中的使者来到门前，他连鞋都来不及穿，便急忙出迎，如同蘧伯玉一样恭敬有礼；新阳侯阴就，虽然性格刚强，略失规矩，然而胸有谋略，以手撑地，坐着发表议论，朝中无人能与他相比；原鹿贞侯阴识，勇敢忠诚而有信义。这三个人都是天下群臣中的出类拔萃者，难道能比得上吗！
English: Moreover, the guardsman Yin Xing, praised by the people of the world, the messenger of the palace came to the door, he did not even have time to wear shoes, so he hurried to meet, as respectful and courteous as Zibo Yuping; the new yang lord Yin, although strong in character, slightly out of order, but with a strategic mind, sitting with his hands propped up to make a speech, no one in the court can compare with him; the original deer chaste lord Yin, brave, loyal and faithful. These three people are outstanding among the world's ministers, can they be compared?

古文：马氏不及阴氏远矣。
现代文：马家比阴家差远了。
English: The horse family is far different from the yin family.

古文：吾不才，夙夜累息，常恐亏先后之法，有毛发之罪吾不释，言之不舍昼夜，而亲属犯之不止，治丧起坟，又不时觉，是吾言之不立而耳目之塞也。
现代文：我没有才干，日夜因恐惧而喘息不安，总怕有损先后订立的法则。
English: I have no talent, day and night panting with fear, always afraid of compromising the rules that have been established.

古文：吾为天下母，而身服大练，食不求甘，左右但著帛布，无香蕃之饰者，欲身率下也。
现代文：即便是细小的过失，我也不肯放过，日夜不停地告诫。然而我的亲属们仍然不断犯法，丧葬时兴筑高坟，又不能及时察觉错误，这表明我的话没有人听，我的耳目已被蒙蔽。
English: Even if it was a small mistake, I would not let it go, and I kept warning day and night. However, my relatives still continued to violate the law, build high graves during funerals, and could not detect the mistake in time, which shows that no one listened to my words, and my ears and eyes were blinded.

古文：以为外亲见之，当伤心自敕，但笑言 太后素好俭 。
现代文： 我身为天下之母，然而身穿粗丝之服，饮食不求香甜，左右随从之人只穿普通帛布，不使用熏香饰物，目的就是要亲身做下面的表率。
English: I am the mother of the world, yet I wear coarse silk clothes, I do not seek sweetness in my diet, and those who follow me around only wear ordinary satin cloth and do not use incense ornaments. My goal is to personally set an example for those below.

古文：前过濯龙门上，见外家问起居者，车如流水，马如游龙，仓头衣绿褠，领袖正白，顾视御者，不及远矣。
现代文：本以为娘家人看到我的行为当会痛心自责，但他们只是笑着说 太后一向喜爱节俭 。前些时候，我经过濯龙门，看见那些到我娘家问候拜访的人们，车辆如流水不断，马队如游龙蜿蜒，奴仆身穿绿色单衣，衣领衣袖雪白。回视我的车夫，差得远了。
English: Passing the laundry gantry, I saw the people living in the house, the car was like running water, the horse was like a dragon, the servants wore green sleeves, the collar and sleeves were pure white, but at a glance, driving for me, compared to them, was very different.

古文：故不加谴怒，但绝岁用而已，冀以默愧其心，犹懈怠无忧国忘家之虑。
现代文：我所以对娘家人并不发怒谴责，而只是裁减每年的费用，是希望能使他们内心暗愧。然而他们仍然懈怠放任，没有忧国忘家的觉悟。
English: Therefore, I do not angrily denounce my daughter's family, but only reduce the annual fee, hoping to make them feel ashamed. However, they are still slacking off, without the consciousness of worrying about the country and forgetting about home.

古文：知臣莫若君，况亲属乎！
现代文：了解臣子的，莫过于君王，更何况他们是我的亲属呢！
English: No one knows his subjects better than the king, let alone my relatives!

古文：吾岂可上负先帝之旨，下亏先人之德，重袭西京败亡之祸哉！ 
现代文：我难道可以上负先帝的旨意，下损先人的德行，重蹈前朝外戚败亡的灾祸吗！ 
English: Can I go against the will of the former emperor, undermine the virtues of my predecessors, and repeat the disaster of the defeat of the former imperial family?

古文：固不许。
现代文：她坚持不同意赐封。
English: She was adamant that she did not consent to the investiture.

古文：帝省诏悲叹，复重请曰： 汉兴，舅氏之封侯，犹皇子之为王也。
现代文：章帝看到马太后的诏书后悲哀叹息，再次请求道： 自从汉朝建立，舅父封侯，犹如皇子为王，乃是定制。
English: Emperor Zhang read the empress dowager's edict and was overcome with grief and lamentation. He again asked the empress dowager to say: Han Shuxing, uncle's fief, just like the prince's fief.

古文：太后诚存谦虚，奈何令臣独不加恩三舅乎！
现代文：太后固然存心谦让，却为何偏偏使我不能赐恩给三位舅父！
English: Although the empress dowager was modest in her intentions, why did she make it impossible for me to bestow grace on my three uncles?

古文：且卫尉年尊，两校尉有大病，如令不讳，使臣长抱刻骨之恨。
现代文：而且卫尉马廖年老，城门校尉马防、越骑校尉马光身患大病，如果发生意外，将使我永怀刻骨之憾。
English: What's more, Guardsman Ma Liu's uncle is very old, and the two lieutenants Ma Fang and Ma Guang are seriously ill. If there is a misfortune, it will make me regret holding on to my bones for so long!

古文：宜及吉时，不可稽留。 
现代文：应当趁着吉时赐封，不可延迟。 
English: You should take advantage of the auspicious day, the uncle of the lord of the manor, and do not delay.

古文：太后报曰： 吾反覆念之，思令两善，岂徒欲获谦让之名而使帝受不外施之嫌哉！
现代文：太后回答说： 我反复考虑此事，希望能对国家和马氏双方有益，难道只是想博取谦让的名声，而让皇帝蒙受不施恩于外戚的怨恨吗？
English: The empress dowager replied, "I have repeatedly considered this matter, hoping that it would be beneficial to both the country and the Ma clan. Is it just to gain a reputation for modesty, and let the emperor suffer the resentment of not being kind to his relatives?

古文：昔窦太后欲封王皇后之兄，丞相条侯言： 高祖约，无军功不侯。 
现代文：从前窦太后要封王皇后的哥哥，丞相条侯周亚夫进言： 高祖有规定，无军功者不得封侯。 
English: Once upon a time, Empress Dowager Dou wanted to bestow a title of nobility on Zhou Yafu, the elder brother of Empress Dowager Wang. Zhou Yafu said, "The Emperor Gao had a rule that no one without military merit could be granted a title of nobility.

古文：今马氏无功于国，岂得与阴、郭中兴之后等邪！
现代文：如今马家没有为国立功，怎能与阴家、郭家那些建武中兴时期的皇后家相等呢！
English: Today, the Ma family is not a national merit, how can it be equal to the Yin family and the Guo family, those empresses in the Jianwu period!

古文：常观富贵之家，禄位重叠，犹再实之木，其根必伤。
现代文：我曾观察那些富贵之家，官位爵位重迭，如同一年之中再次结果的树木，它的根基必受损伤。
English: I have often seen the houses of the rich, with their overlapping plots of land, like trees bearing second-fruits, so heavily laden that their roots are bound to suffer.

古文：且人所以愿封侯者，欲上奉祭祀，下求温饱耳；今祭祀则受太官之赐，衣食则蒙御府馀资，斯岂不可足，而必当得一县乎！
现代文：况且人们所以愿封为侯，不过是希望上能以丰足的供物祭祀祖先，下能求得衣食的温饱罢了。如今皇后家的祭祀由太官供给，衣食则享受御府的剩余之物，这难道还不够，而定要拥有一县的封土吗？
English: Moreover, the reason why people wish to be vassals is nothing more than the hope that they will be able to worship their ancestors with plentiful offerings, and that they will be able to obtain food and clothing. Nowadays, the queen's family's sacrifices are provided by the eunuchs, and the food and clothing enjoy the surplus of the imperial court. Isn't this enough, but do you have to have a county's fief?

古文：吾计之孰矣，勿有疑也。夫至孝之行，安亲为上。
现代文：我已深思熟虑，你不要再有疑问！ 儿女孝顺，最好的行为是使父母平安。
English: I have thought it over, and you should no longer have any doubts! Children are filial, and the best action is to bring peace to their parents.

古文：今数遭变异，谷价数倍，忧惶昼夜，不安坐卧，而欲先营外家之封，违慈母之拳拳乎！
现代文：如今不断发生灾异，谷价上涨数倍，我日夜忧愁惶恐，坐卧不安，而皇帝却打算先为外戚赐封，违背慈母的拳拳之心！
English: Nowadays, disasters are constantly occurring, grain prices have risen several times, I am worried and anxious day and night, and I am restless, but the emperor intends to first grant a seal for my relative, contrary to my mother's heart!

古文：吾素刚急，有胸中气，不可不顺也。
现代文：我平素刚强性急，胸有气痛之症，不可以不顺气。
English: I'm normally rigid and impatient, and I have gas pains in my chest. I can't afford to lose my temper.

古文：子之未冠，由于父母，已冠成人，则行子之志。
现代文：儿子未成年，听从父母的教导，成年以后，则按照自己的意愿行事。
English: When a son is a minor, he listens to his parents' instruction, but when he is an adult, he acts according to his own will.

古文：念帝，人君也；吾以未逾三年之故，自吾家族，故得专之。
现代文：我想，你是皇帝，人之君主，当然可以自行其是。但我因你尚未超过三年的服丧期，又事关我的家族，故此专断裁决。
English: I thought, you are the emperor, the ruler of men, of course you can do what you want, but because you have not yet passed the three-year mourning period, and because it concerns my family, I arbitrarily ruled.

古文：若阴阳调和，边境清静，然后行子之志；吾但当含饴弄孙，不能复关政矣。 
现代文：如果天地阴阳之气调和，边境宁静无事，此后你便可以按照自己的意愿行事，而我则只管含糖逗弄小孙，不再干预政事。 
English: If the yin and yang of heaven and earth are reconciled, and the border is quiet, then you can act as you wish, and I will only tease my grandchild with sugar and will no longer interfere in politics.

古文：上乃止。
现代文：章帝这才放弃了这一打算。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：太后尝诏三辅：诸马昏亲有属托郡县、干乱吏治者，以法闻。
现代文：太后曾对三辅下诏： 马氏家族及其亲戚，如有因请托郡县官府，干预扰乱地方行政的，应依法处置、上报。 
English: The Empress Dowager had issued the following edict to the three assistants: If the Ma family and their relatives interfere with or disrupt local administration by requesting the county government, they should be dealt with and reported according to law.

古文：太夫人葬起坟微高，太后以为言，兄卫尉廖等即时减削。
现代文：马太后的母亲下葬时堆坟稍高，马太后对此提出反对意见，她的哥哥卫尉马廖等人就立即将坟减低。
English: When Queen Matthew's mother was buried, the grave was a little higher. Queen Matthew objected to this, and her brother, Lieutenant Marius, and others immediately lowered the grave.

古文：其外亲有谦素义行者，辄假借温言，赏以财位；如有纤介，则先见严恪之色，然后加谴。
现代文：在马家亲属和亲戚中，有行为谦恭正直的，马太后便以温言好语相待，赏赐财物和官位。如果有人犯了微小的错误，马太后便首先显出严肃的神色，然后加以谴责。
English: Among the Ma family members and relatives, if anyone behaved with modesty and honesty, Queen Matthew would treat them with kind words and reward them with wealth and official positions. If someone made a small mistake, Queen Matthew would first look serious and then condemn them.

古文：其美车服、不尊法度者，便绝属籍，遣归田里。
现代文：对于那些车马衣服华美、不遵守法律制度的家属和亲戚，马太后就将他们从皇亲名册中取消，遣送回乡。
English: For those family members and relatives who ride horses, wear fancy clothes, and do not abide by the legal system, Queen Matthew will remove them from the list of royal relatives and send them back to their hometowns.

古文：广平、巨鹿、乐成王，车骑朴素，无金银之饰，帝以白太后，即赐钱各五百万。
现代文：广平王刘羡、钜鹿王刘恭和乐成王刘党，车马朴素无华，没有金银饰物。章帝将此情况报告了太后，太后便立即赏赐他们每人五百万钱。
English: Emperor Zhang reported the situation to the Empress Dowager, and the Empress Dowager immediately rewarded each of them with five million yuan.

古文：于是内外从化，被服如一；诸家惶恐，倍于永平时。
现代文：于是内外亲属全都接受太后的教导和影响，一致崇尚谦逊朴素。外戚家族惶恐不安，超过了明帝时期。
English: As a result, all relatives at home and abroad accepted the teachings and influence of the empress dowager, unanimously advocating modesty and simplicity.

古文：置织室，蚕于濯龙中，数往观视，以为娱乐。
现代文：马太后曾设立织室，在濯龙园中种桑养蚕，并频频前往查看，把这当成一项娱乐。
English: Queen Matthew once set up a weaving room, planted mulberry and raised silkworms in the Dragon Garden, and frequently went to check it out, taking it as a form of entertainment.

古文：常与帝旦夕言道政事，及教授小王《论语》经书，述叙平生，雍和终日。
现代文：她经常与章帝早晚在一起谈论国家大事，教授年幼的皇子读《论语》等儒家经书，讲述平生经历，终日和睦欢洽。
English: She often discussed national affairs with Emperor Zhang in the morning and evening, taught the young prince to read Confucian scriptures such as "The Analects," recounted her life experiences, and lived in harmony with the sun.

古文：马廖虑美业难终，上疏劝成德政曰： 昔元帝罢服官，成帝御浣衣，哀帝去乐府，然而侈费不息，至于衰乱者，百姓从行不从言也。
现代文：马廖担心马太后倡导的美好的事情难以持久，上书劝太后完成德政。他说： 从前元帝取消服官，成帝穿用洗过的衣袍，哀帝撤除乐府，然而奢侈之风不息，最终导致衰落而发生动乱的原因，就在于百姓跟随朝廷所行，而不听信朝廷所言。
English: Maleo was worried that the beautiful things advocated by Queen Matthew would not last, so he wrote a letter to persuade the Queen Mother to complete the German government. He said: From the former emperor, the emperor abolished the civil service, the emperor-to-be wore washed clothes, and the emperor-to-be removed the music hall. However, the luxury continued, eventually leading to the decline and the cause of the turmoil was that the people followed the actions of the court, but did not listen to the words of the court.

古文：夫改政移风，必有其本。
现代文：改变政风民风，一定要从根本着手。
English: To change the political and social climate, we must start from the ground up.

古文：《传》曰：吴王好剑客，百姓多创瘢；楚王好细腰，宫中多饿死。 
现代文：经传说： 吴王好剑客，百姓多伤疤；楚王好细腰，宫中多饿死。 
English: According to legend: King Wu is a good swordsman, the people are more scars; King Chu is a good waiter, the palace is more starving.

古文：长安语曰： 城中好高结，四方高一尺；城中好广眉，四方且半额；城中好大袖，四方全匹帛。 
现代文：长安有谚语说： 城中喜爱高发髻，乡下的发髻高一尺；城中喜爱宽眉毛，乡下的眉毛半前额；城中喜爱大衣袖，乡下的衣袖用了整匹帛。 
English: There is a saying in Chang'an: People in the city like high hairpins, but people in the countryside like hairpins that are one foot higher; people in the city like wide eyebrows, but people in the countryside like eyebrows that are half way up the forehead; people in the city like big sleeves, but people in the countryside wear a whole horse's mane.

古文：斯言如戏，有切事实。
现代文：这些话有如戏言，但切近事实。
English: These words sound like a joke, but they are close to the truth.

古文：前下制度未几，后稍不行，虽或吏不奉法，良由慢起京师。
现代文：前些时候，朝廷颁布制度后没有多久，便有些推行不下去了，虽然这或许是由于官吏不遵奉法令，但实际上是由于京城率先怠慢。
English: Some time ago, not long after the imperial court promulgated the system, some of the implementation could not continue. Although this may be due to officials not following the law, it is actually due to Beijing's negligence.

古文：今陛下素简所安，发自圣性，诚令斯事一竟，则四海诵德，声薰天地，神明可通，况于行令乎！ 
现代文：如今陛下安于俭朴的生活，是出自神圣的天性，假如能将此坚持到底，那么天下人都要称诵道德，美好的名声将传遍天地，同神灵都可以相通，何况是推行法令呢！ 
English: Today, His Majesty's frugal life comes from a divine nature. If we can stick to this to the end, then everyone in the world will praise morality, a good reputation will spread all over the world, and we can communicate with the gods, not to mention the implementation of laws!

古文：太后深纳之。
现代文：太后认为他的话很正确，全部采纳。
English: The Empress Dowager considered his words to be very correct and accepted them in their entirety.

古文：初，安夷县吏略妻卑湳种羌人妇，吏为其夫所杀，安夷长宗延追之出塞。
现代文：起初，安夷县有官吏强抢羌人卑部落的妇女为妻，被那个妇女的丈夫杀死。安夷县长宗延追捕凶手，直至塞外。
English: At first, a bureaucrat in Anyi County forcibly took a woman from a low-ranking tribe as his wife and was killed by the woman's husband. Chang Zongyan of Anyi County pursued the murderer until he was out of the country.

古文：种人恐见诛，遂共杀延而与勒姐、吾良二种相结为寇。
现代文：该部落的羌人害怕受到处罚，就一同杀掉宗延，而与勒姐、吾良两个部落联合，起兵叛变。
English: The Yao people of the tribe were afraid of being punished, so they killed Zong Yan together, and united with the two tribes of Le Sister and Wula to start a mutiny.

古文：于是烧当羌豪滇吾之子迷吾率诸种俱反，败金城太守郝崇。
现代文：在此形势下，烧当羌人部落首领滇吾的儿子迷吾便率领各部落一同造反，打败了金城太守郝崇。
English: In this situation, Shingo's son, Mugu, who was the leader of the Burnt-Dangshan people, led all the tribes to rebel together and defeated Jincheng's governor, Juxiong.

古文：诏以武威太守北地傅育为护羌校尉，自安夷徙居临羌。
现代文：章帝下诏，任命武威太守北地人傅育为护羌校尉，由安夷迁往临羌。
English: Emperor Zhang issued an edict, appointing Wuwei Taishu, the governor of Hokkien, to be the captain of the garrison, and moved from Anyi to Linyi.

古文：迷吾又与封养种豪布桥等五万馀人共寇陇西、汉阳。
现代文：迷吾又和封养部落首领布桥等集结五万余人，一同进攻陇西、汉阳二郡。
English: Megu and the feudal tribal leader Buqiao gathered more than fifty thousand people to attack the two counties of Shaanxi and Hanyang.

古文：秋，八月，遣行车骑将军马防、长水校尉耿恭将北军五校兵及诸郡射士三万人击之。
现代文：秋季，八月，章帝派代理车骑将军马防和长水校尉耿恭率领北军的越骑、屯骑、步兵、长水、射声等五校兵以及各郡的弓弩射手，共三万人，讨伐羌人。
English: In the autumn, in August, Emperor Zhang sent the deputy cavalry general Ma Fang and the Changshui lieutenant Geng Qiong to lead the five school soldiers of the Northern Army, including the cavalry, cavalry, infantry, Changshui, and archers, as well as the archers from each county, a total of 30,000 people, to fight against the barbarians.

古文：第五伦上疏曰： 臣愚以为贵戚可封侯以富之，不当任以职事。
现代文：第五伦上书说： 我认为，对于皇亲国戚，可以封侯使他们富有，但不应当委派职务。
English: The fifth letter said: I think that for the relatives of the emperor, it is possible to make them rich, but they should not be appointed to positions.

古文：何者？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：绳以法则伤恩，私以亲则违宪。
现代文：因为他们若是有了过失，以法制裁就会伤害感情，以亲徇私就会违背国法。
English: Once there is a problem, bringing it to justice will hurt grace, and taking care of personal affairs will violate the legal system.

古文：伏闻马防今当西征，臣以太后恩仁，陛下至孝，恐卒有纤介，难为意爱。 
现代文：听说马防如今将要率军西征，我认为，太后恩德仁慈，皇上至为孝顺，如果突然有了小差错，怕将难以维护亲情。 
English: The minister heard that the Horse Guards were preparing for the Western Expedition, and after the ethereal grace and mercy, His Majesty's filial piety, I am afraid that if there is a small problem, love without punishment, some difficulties.

古文：帝不从。
现代文：章帝不采纳他的意见。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：马防等军到冀，布桥等围南部都尉于临洮，防进击，破之，斩首虏四千馀人，遂解临洮围；其众皆降，唯布桥等二万馀人屯望曲谷不下。
现代文：马防等人的部队到达冀县时，布桥正率羌军在临洮围攻南部都尉。马防发动进攻，打败了布桥，斩杀、俘虏四千余人，于是临洮解围。羌军全部投降，只剩下布桥等二万余人，盘踞在望曲谷，未被攻克。
English: When the troops of Ma Fang and others arrived in Ji County, Bu Qiao was leading the Wei army to besiege the Southern Captain in Linyi. Ma Fang launched an attack, defeated Bu Qiao, killed and captured more than four thousand people, so Linyi lifted the siege. The Wei army all surrendered, leaving only more than twenty thousand people such as Bu Qiao, entrenched in Wangqu Valley, and was not conquered.

古文：十二月，戊寅，有星孛于紫宫。
现代文：十二月戊寅，紫宫星座出现异星。
English: In December, a strange star appeared in the constellation of Virgo.

古文：帝纳窦勋女为贵人，有宠。
现代文：章帝将窦勋的女儿选为贵人，十分宠幸。
English: Emperor Zhang selected Dou Xun's daughter as a noblewoman, which was very fortunate.

古文：贵人母，即东海恭王女沘公主也。
现代文：窦贵人的母亲，就是东海恭王刘强的女儿阳公主。
English: Dou Guiren's mother was Princess Yang, the daughter of Liu Qiang, the King of the East Sea.

古文：第五伦上疏曰： 光武承王莽之馀，颇以严猛为政，后代因之，遂成风化；郡国所举，类多办职俗吏，殊未有宽博之选以应上求者也。
现代文：第五伦上书说： 光武帝继承王莽以后的局面，为政多采用严厉手段，后代沿袭，便成为风气。各郡各封国所举荐的人，多属只会应付公务的庸官，绝少宽宏博学之才，以满足朝廷的需求。
English: The fifth letter said: Emperor Guangwu inherited the situation after Wang Mang, and it became the custom for the government to adopt harsh measures, and the descendants followed suit. The people recommended by counties and fiefdoms were mostly bureaucrats who could only deal with official duties, and very few were broad-minded and learned to meet the needs of the imperial court.

古文：陈留令刘豫，冠军令驷协，并以刻薄之姿，务为严苦，吏民愁怨，莫不疾之。
现代文：陈留县令刘豫和冠军县令驷协，全都作风刻薄，务求严苛，使官民忧伤哀怨，无不痛恨他们。
English: Chenliu County's Liu Yu and Champion County's Liang Xie all have a caustic style and strive to be harsh, making officials and citizens sad and resentful, and they all hate them.

古文：而今之议者反以为能，违天心，失经义；非徒应坐豫、协，亦宜谴举者。
现代文：然而如今的舆论，反而认为他们有能力，这是违反天意，背离经书的义理。不仅应对刘豫、驷协加以惩处，还应谴责那些保举他们的人。
English: However, today's public opinion, on the contrary, believes that they are capable, which is contrary to the will of heaven and deviates from the righteousness of the scriptures. Not only should Liu Yu and Yu Xie be punished, but also those who protect them should be condemned.

古文：务进仁贤以任时政，不过数人，则风俗自化矣。
现代文：一定要提拔任用仁慈贤能者为政，不过几个人，而风气自会转化。
English: In the future, people of benevolence, virtue and ability must be selected to hold positions. As long as there are only a few people, customs can be transformed.

古文：臣尝读书记，知秦以酷急亡国，又目见王莽亦以苛法自灭，故勤勤恳恳，实在于此。
现代文：我曾阅读史书，知道秦朝由于残酷暴虐而亡国，又亲眼看见王莽新朝也因法令苛刻而自行毁灭。我所以恳切地上书劝谏，原因就在于此。
English: I had read the history books and knew that the Qin Dynasty lost the country due to its cruel tyranny, and I saw with my own eyes that the Wang Mang New Dynasty also self-destructed due to its harsh laws and regulations. That is why I earnestly wrote to persuade him.

古文：又闻诸王、主、贵戚，骄奢逾制，京师尚然，何以示远！
现代文：我还听说诸亲王、公主和外戚骄傲奢侈超过了规定，京城尚且这样，如何做外地的榜样！
English: I have also heard that princes, princesses and their relatives are proud and extravagant beyond the norm, and the capital city is still like this, how to set an example for the rest of the world!

古文：故曰： 其身不正，虽令不行。 
现代文：所以孔子说： 自身不正，虽有令而不被执行。 
English: That is why Confucius said, "It is wrong to give an order and not carry it out."

古文：以身教者从，以言教者讼。 
现代文：以身为教，众人跟从；以言为教，众人争讼。 
English: For the teaching of the body is for discipline, but the teaching of the mouth is for correction.

古文：上善之。
现代文：章帝对他的意见表示赞许。
English: The emperor thought Sima Xiangru spoke very well.

古文：伦虽天性峭直，然常疾俗吏苛刻，论议每依宽厚云。
现代文：第五伦虽然天性严厉梗直，却常常痛恨庸俗官吏的苛刻。他的政论，总是以宽厚为其原则。
English: Although he was by nature a stern and upright man, he often abhorred the harshness of vulgar officials, and his politics were always based on the principle of generosity.

古文：肃宗孝章皇帝上建初三年春，正月，己酉，宗祀明堂，登灵台，赦天下。
现代文：建初三年春季，正月己酉，章帝在明堂祭祀列祖列宗。登上灵台，观察天象。大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the third year of its construction, on the first day of the first month, Emperor Zhang offered sacrifices to the ancestors in the Ming Hall. He climbed onto the platform to observe the celestial bodies. He granted a general amnesty to the world.

古文：马防击布桥，大破之，布桥将种人万馀降，诏征防还。
现代文：马防进攻布桥，布桥大败，率领部众一万余人投降。章帝下诏，命令马防回朝。
English: The horse guards attacked the cloth bridge, the cloth bridge was defeated, and more than ten thousand people surrendered. Emperor Zhang issued an edict, ordering the horse guards to return to the North.

古文：留耿恭击诸未服者，斩首虏千馀人，勒姐、烧何等十三种数万人，皆诣恭降。
现代文：留下耿恭讨伐那些尚未归顺的部落，斩杀俘虏了一千余人。于是，勒姐、烧何等十三个部落共数万羌人，全部向耿恭投降。
English: He left Geng Qiong to fight those tribes that had not yet surrendered, and killed and captured more than a thousand people. Therefore, the thirteen tribes, including the Le Sister and the Xiang He, totaled tens of thousands of people, and all surrendered to Geng Qiong.

古文：恭尝以言事忤马防，监营谒者承旨，奏恭不忧军事，坐征下狱，免官。
现代文：耿恭曾因上书奏事冒犯过马防，监军谒者便秉承马防的意思，弹劾耿恭不留意军事。耿恭因罪被召回，逮捕入狱，免去官职。
English: Geng Gong once offended the Horse Guards by submitting a report, and the military overseer, upholding the wishes of the Horse Guards, impeached Geng Gong for not paying attention to the military. Geng Gong was recalled for the crime, arrested and imprisoned, and dismissed from his post.

古文：三月，癸巳，立贵人窦氏为皇后。
现代文：三月癸巳，将贵人窦氏立为皇后。
English: In March, the noble Dou clan was enthroned as empress.

古文：初，显宗之世，治虖沱、石臼河，从都虑至羊肠仓，欲令通漕。
现代文：当初，明帝时曾经治理过滹沱河和石臼河，打算让都虑到羊肠仓两地通航，以运送漕粮。
English: At the beginning, the Ming Dynasty once governed the Minhe River and the Shisu River, intending to allow the Yangtze River to pass through the two places to transport grain.

古文：太原吏民苦役，连年无成，死者不可胜算。
现代文：工程艰巨，太原的官吏和百姓苦于徭役，连年不能完工，死亡者不可胜数。
English: The project was arduous, and Taiyuan's officials and people struggled to complete it. It was not completed for years, and countless people died.

古文：帝以郎中邓训为谒者，监领其事。
现代文：章帝任命中郎将邓训为谒者，主持这一工程。
English: Emperor Zhang appointed Zhong Lang to be the executor of Deng Xun and preside over this project.

古文：训考量隐括，知其难成，具以上言。
现代文：邓训经过考察测量，明白此事难以完成，便将实情一一奏报。
English: After inspection and measurement, Deng Xun understood that this matter was difficult to complete, and reported the facts one by one.

古文：夏，四月，己巳，诏罢其役，更用驴辇，岁省费亿万计，全活徒士数千人。
现代文：本年夏季，四月己巳，章帝下诏，撤销该项工程，改用驴车运粮。停工以后，每年节省开支以亿万计，得以活命的役夫有数千人。
English: In the summer of this year, in April, Emperor Zhang issued an edict to cancel the project and use donkey carts to transport grain. After the suspension of the project, hundreds of millions of dollars were saved every year, and thousands of laborers were able to survive.

古文：训，禹之子也。
现代文：邓训是邓禹之子。
English: Deng Xun is the son of Deng Yu.

古文：闰月，西域假司马班超率疏勒、康居、于窴、拘弥兵一万人攻姑墨石城，破之，斩首七百级。
现代文：闰九月，西域副司马班超率领疏勒、康居、于阗、拘弥等国军队，共一万人，进攻姑墨国石城，将石城攻破，斩杀七百人。
English: In leap September, Ma Bancha, the deputy governor of the western region, led the armies of Shule, Kangju, Yuxuan, Zhenya and other countries, with a total of ten thousand people, to attack Shicheng, Gumo Province, and broke through Shicheng, killing seven hundred people.

古文：冬，十二月，丁酉，以马防为车骑将军。
现代文：冬季，十二月丁酉，任命马防为车骑将军。
English: In winter, in December of Dingwu, Ma Bao was appointed as the general of the cavalry.

古文：武陵漊中蛮反。
现代文：武陵郡中蛮人反叛。
English: The barbarians in Wuling County rebelled.

古文：是岁，有司奏遣广平王羡、巨鹿王恭、乐成王党俱就国。
现代文：本年，有关部门上奏，请派遣广平王刘羡、钜鹿王刘恭、乐成王刘党一同前往他们的封国就位。
English: This year, the relevant departments appealed, please send Guangping Wang Liu Enro, Elk Wang Liu Gong, and Yue Cheng Wang Liu Party together to their fiefdoms to take their places.

古文：上性笃爱，不忍与诸王乖离，遂皆留京师。
现代文：章帝因手足情深，不忍心与诸亲王分离，便将他们全都留在京城。
English: Emperor Zhang had a deep affection for his brothers and sisters and could not bear to be separated from the princes, so he left them all in the capital.

古文：肃宗孝章皇帝上建初四年春，二月，庚寅，太尉牟融薨。
现代文：建初四年春季，二月庚寅，太尉牟融去世。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Jianchu, in February, Geng Yin, Taifu Mou Rong passed away.

古文：夏，四月，戊子，立皇子庆为太子。
现代文：夏季，四月戊子，将皇子刘庆立为太子。
English: In the summer, in April, Empress Dowager Cixi made Prince Liu Qingli the crown prince.

古文：己丑，徙巨鹿王恭为江陵王，汝南王畅为梁王，常山王昞为淮阳王。
现代文：四月己丑，章帝将钜鹿王刘恭改封为江陵王，汝南王刘畅改封为梁王，常山王刘改封为淮阳王。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Liu Gong, the King of the Giant Deer, was transferred to be the King of Jiangling, Liu Chang, the King of Runan, was transferred to be the King of Liang, and Liu Rihong, the King of Changshan, was transferred to be the King of Huaiyang.

古文：辛卯，封皇子伉为千乘王，全为平春王。
现代文：四月辛卯，章帝将皇子刘伉封为千乘王，皇子刘全封为平春王。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the crown prince Liu Ye became the King of Chun Ye, and Liu Quan became the King of Ping Chun.

古文：有司连据旧典，请封诸舅。
现代文：有关部门接连以旧制为依据，请章帝赐封各位舅父。
English: The relevant departments successively based on the old system and asked Emperor Zhang to bestow titles on the uncles.

古文：帝以天下丰稔，方垂无事，癸卯，遂封卫尉廖为顺阳侯，车骑将军防为颍阳侯，执金吾光为许侯。
现代文：章帝因全国丰收，四方边境太平无事，四月癸卯，便将卫尉马廖封为顺阳侯，将车骑将军马防封为颍阳侯，将执金吾马光封为许侯。
English: Due to the bumper harvest across the country and the peace and tranquility on the border between the four sides, Emperor Zhang, at the end of April, made Guardsman Ma Liao the vassal of Shunyang, Chariot and Cavalry General Ma Bo the vassal of Shunyang, and Executioner Jin Wuma the vassal of Xu.

古文：太后闻之曰： 吾少壮时，但慕竹帛，志不顾命。
现代文：太后听到消息后说： 我年轻的时候，只羡慕古人留名史册，心中不顾惜性命。
English: After hearing the news, the empress dowager said, "When I was young, I only envied the ancients for recording their names in the annals of history.

古文：今虽已老，犹戒之在得，故日夜惕厉，思自降损，冀乘此道，不负先帝。
现代文：如今虽已年老，仍然告诫自己不要贪得无厌。我所以日夜警惕，想自我贬损，是希望遵循这一宗旨，不辜负先帝。
English: Although I am old now, I still caution myself not to be insatiably greedy. That is why I am vigilant day and night and want to self-deprecate. I hope to follow this principle and live up to the former emperor.

古文：所以化导兄弟，共同斯志，欲令瞑目之日，无所复恨，何意老志复不从哉！
现代文：因此我劝导兄弟，共守此志，要使闭目身死之日，不再遗憾。不料我这老人的心愿不再被遵从！
English: Therefore, I exhorted my brothers and sisters to share this aspiration, so that the day I close my eyes and die, I will no longer regret it. However, my old man's wish was no longer obeyed!

古文：万年之日长恨矣！ 
现代文：身死之日，我将永怀长恨了！ 
English: Until the day I die, I will always hate you!

古文：廖等并辞让，愿就关内侯，帝不许。
现代文：马廖等人一同辞让，愿降为关内侯，但章帝不许。
English: Both Mario and the others resigned and agreed to be demoted to the position of Guanai marquis, but Emperor Zhang did not allow this.

古文：廖等不得已受封爵而上书辞位，帝许之。
现代文：马廖等人不得已而接受了封爵，但又上书请求辞去官职，章帝应允。
English: As a last resort, Malliau and others accepted a knighthood, but they also sent a letter requesting to resign from their official positions, and Emperor Zhang agreed.

古文：五月，丙辰，防、廖、光皆以特进就第。
现代文：五月丙辰，马防、马廖、马光都以特进身份离开朝廷，前往邸第。
English: In May, Ma Fang, Ma Liao, and Ma Guang all left the imperial court as special envoys and went to the emperor's residence.

古文：甲戌，以司徒鲍昱为太尉，南阳太守桓虞为司徒。
现代文：五月甲戌，将司徒鲍昱任命为太尉，将南阳太守桓虞任命为司徒。
English: In May, Emperor Jiajing appointed the tutor Baojun as the first lieutenant, and the Nanyang governor Huan Yu as the tutor.

古文：六月，癸丑，皇太后马氏崩。
现代文：六月癸丑，皇太后马氏驾崩。
English: In June, the Empress Dowager Ma passed away.

古文：帝既为太后所养，专以马氏为外家，故贾贵人不登极位，贾氏亲族无受宠荣者。
现代文：章帝被马太后抱养以后，只认马氏家族为外家，所以章帝的生母贾贵人不能登御太后之位，贾氏家族没有一人蒙受恩宠荣耀。
English: After Emperor Zhang was raised by Empress Matai, only the Ma family was recognized as a foreign family, so Emperor Zhang's birth mother Jia Guiren could not ascend to the position of empress dowager, and none of the Jia family received grace and glory.

古文：及太后崩，但加贵人王赤绶，安车一驷，永巷宫人二百，御府杂帛二万匹，大司农黄金千斤，钱二千万而已。
现代文：及至太后驾崩，章帝只将贾贵人的绿色绶带改为与诸侯王同级的红色绶带，并赐四马牵拉的座车一辆，永巷宫女二百人，御府各色丝绸二万匹，大司农所藏黄金一千斤，钱两千万，如此而已。
English: When the empress dowager died, Emperor Zhang only changed Jia Guiren's green ribbon to a red ribbon of the same grade as the princes and kings, and gave him a carriage pulled by four horses, two hundred Yongxiang palace maids, twenty thousand imperial silks of various colors, one thousand catties of gold hidden by the chief farmer, and twenty million yuan, and that was all.

古文：秋，七月，壬戌，葬明德皇后。
现代文：秋季，七月壬戌，安葬马太后。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Queen Mother was buried.

古文：校书郎杨终建言： 宣帝博征群儒，论定《五经》于石渠阁。
现代文：校书郎杨终建议： 宣帝曾广召儒生，在石渠阁讨论儒家《五经》《经》、《书经》、《仪礼》、《易经》和《春秋》。
English: Yang, the school scribe, finally suggested: Emperor Xuan Zang once widely summoned Confucian students to discuss the Confucian "Five Classics," "Sutra," "Sutra," "Rite," "I Ching" and "Spring and Autumn" in the stone pavilion.

古文：方今天下少事，学者得成其业，而章句之徒，破坏大体。
现代文：如今天下太平，学者们得以完成事业，但那些只知分析注释文章辞句的人，却破坏了《五经》的主旨。
English: At present, the world is peaceful and tranquil, scholars can complete their work, and the perpetrators of the chapter and verse can destroy the whole.

古文：宜如石渠故事，永为后世则。 
现代文：应当依照石渠阁的先例，重新研究宏扬经书大义，作为后世永久的法则。 
English: We should follow the old example of the stone canal, which will always be the law of future generations.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：章帝采纳了他的建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：冬，十一月，壬戌，诏太常： 将、大夫、博士、郎官及诸儒会白虎观，议《五经》同异。 
现代文：冬季，十一月壬戌，章帝对太常下诏说： 命诸将、大夫、博士、郎官及儒生们在白虎观集会，就众人对《五经》的相同与不同的见解进行讨论。 
English: In the winter, in November, Emperor Zhang issued the following edict to Emperor Taizong: "Command all generals, doctors, scholars, officials, and Confucian scholars to gather at the White Tiger Temple to discuss their common and different views on the Five Classics.

古文：使五官中郎将魏应承制问，侍中淳于恭奏，帝亲称制临决，作《白虎议奏》，名儒丁鸿、楼望、成封、桓郁、班固、贾逵及广平王羡皆与焉。
现代文：章帝命五官中郎将魏应承命发问，侍中淳于恭向上奏报，由章帝亲自出席，作出裁决，将结果记录下来，撰成《白虎议奏》。著名儒家学者丁鸿、楼望、成封、桓郁、班固、贾逵及广平王刘羡都曾参与此会。
English: Emperor Zhang ordered five officials, including a middle-ranking official, to interrogate Wei, and a chamberlain, Jun Yujong, to report to the emperor. Emperor Zhang personally attended, made a ruling, recorded the results, and compiled the "White Tiger Debate." Famous Confucian scholars Ding Hong, Louwang, Chengfu, Huan Yu, Banggu, Jia Qi, and Guangping Wang Liu Qian all participated in this meeting.

古文：固，超之兄也。
现代文：班固是班超之兄。
English: Ban Gu is Ban Chao's older brother.

古文：肃宗孝章皇帝上建初五年春，二月，庚辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：建初五年春季，二月庚辰朔，出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred in the spring of the fifth year of the Jianchu era, in February of the Geng era.

古文：诏举直言极谏。
现代文：章帝下诏，命令举荐 直言极谏 敢于直率批评朝廷的人士。
English: Emperor Zhang issued an edict, ordering the promotion of outspoken people who dare to criticize the imperial court.

古文：荆、豫诸郡兵讨漊中蛮，破之。
现代文：荆州、豫州诸郡郡兵讨伐中蛮人，打败蛮人叛军。
English: The soldiers of Jingzhou and Yuzhou counties fought against the barbarians and defeated the barbarian rebels.

古文：夏，五月，辛亥，诏曰： 朕思迟直士，侧席异闻，其先至者，各已发愤吐懑，略闻子大夫之志矣。
现代文：夏季，五月辛亥，章帝下诏说： 朕希望会见正直的人士，侧坐在席上，聆听新的言论。先来到的，都已倾吐各自的愤懑，朕大致了解贤才们的志趣了。
English: In the summer, in May of Xinhai, Emperor Zhang issued the following edict: I hope to meet with honest people, sit on the side of the table, and listen to new remarks. The first to come have all poured out their anger, and I have a general understanding of the aspirations of the sages.

古文：皆欲置于左右，顾问省纳。
现代文：朕打算将你们全都安排在身边，以备顾问咨询。
English: I intend to keep you all in the loop for consultation.

古文：建武诏书又曰： 尧试臣以职，不直以言语笔札。 
现代文：但光武皇帝在诏书中曾说： 尧以任职能力来考察官员，而不单看他们的言论和文字。 
English: However, Emperor Guangwu once said in his edict: "Officers should be examined on the basis of their ability to perform their duties, not just their words and writings.

古文：今外官多旷，并可以补任。 
现代文：如今地方上有很多官员出缺，你们可一并去补充接任。 
English: Now there are many vacancies for local officials, and you can work together to fill them.

古文：戊辰，太傅赵熹薨。
现代文：五月戊辰，太傅赵熹去世。
English: In May of the same year, Grand Master Zhao Jun passed away.

古文：班超欲遂平西域，上疏请兵曰： 臣窃见先帝欲开西域，故北击匈奴，西使外国，善阝善、于窴即时向化，今拘弥、莎车、疏勒、月氏、乌孙、康居复愿归附，欲共并力，破灭龟兹，平通汉道。
现代文：班超想要完成平定西域的事业，上书请求用兵。他说： 我看到先帝打算开拓西域，所以向北进攻匈奴，向西派使者与各国交往，鄯善、于阗两国立即归附了汉朝。如今拘弥、莎车、疏勒、月氏、乌孙及康居等国都愿再度归附，并准备联合力量消灭龟兹，铲平通往中国道路上的障碍。
English: He said: "I saw that the former emperor planned to explore the western region, so I attacked the Xiongnu to the north, and sent envoys to the west to communicate with various countries. Shanshan and Yunnan were immediately annexed by the Han Dynasty. Today, countries such as Jimei, Yarkand, Shule, Yue, Wusun and Kangju are willing to be annexed again, and are preparing to join forces to eliminate the turtle and smooth the obstacles on the road to China.

古文：若得龟兹，则西域未服者百分之一耳。
现代文：如果攻下龟兹，那么西域地区不服从汉朝的，只剩百分之一而已。
English: If Kuez is conquered, only one percent of the western region will remain unconquered.

古文：前世议者皆曰： 取三十六国，号为断匈奴右臂。 
现代文：前代谈论西域的人都说： 征服三十六国，可称作斩断匈奴的右臂。 
English: The previous generation of people who talked about the Western Regions said: Conquering 36 countries can be called cutting off the right arm of the Xiongnu.

古文：今西域诸国，自日之所入，莫不向化，大小欣欣，贡奉不绝，唯焉耆、龟兹独未服从。
现代文：如今西域各国，自太阳落山处以东，无不向往归顺汉朝，大国小国全都十分踊跃，不断地进贡奉献，唯独焉耆和龟兹拒不服从。
English: Today, all the countries in the Western Regions, from the setting of the sun to the east, all aspire to return to the Han Dynasty. All the big countries and small countries are very enthusiastic and continue to pay tribute. Only Yan Xuan and Guizi refuse to obey.

古文：臣前与官属三十六人奉使绝域，备遭艰厄，自孤守疏勒，于今五载，胡夷情数，臣颇识之，问其城郭小大，皆言倚汉与依天等。
现代文：先前，我曾率领部下三十六人出使绝远的异域，备受艰难困苦，自从孤守疏勒，到如今已有五年。对于异族的情况，我颇有了解。无论询问西域的大国小国，全都一致回答：依赖汉朝，等于依赖上天。
English: Previously, I led thirty-six of my subordinates on a mission to a faraway foreign land, enduring hardships and difficulties. It has now been five years since I have been alone in Shule. I have a good understanding of the situation of foreign peoples. Regardless of whether they inquire about large or small countries in the western region, they all unanimously answer: Relying on the Han Dynasty is tantamount to relying on heaven.

古文：以是效之，则葱领可通，龟兹可伐。
现代文：从这一点能够证明，葱岭可以打通，龟兹可以讨伐。
English: From this point, it can be proved that the green onion can be opened and the tortoise can be fought.

古文：今宜拜龟兹侍子白霸为其国王，以步骑数百送之，与诸国连兵，岁月之间，龟兹可禽。
现代文：如今应将龟兹派到汉朝做人质的王子白霸封为龟兹王，用步骑兵数百人护送，让他同西域各国组成联合部队，数月到一年间便可夺取龟兹。
English: Now, it is necessary to foster the turtle's servant Bai Hao as the king of turtles, send him with hundreds of cavalry and infantry, and join forces with other countries. In a year or a few months, the turtle king can be captured.

古文：以夷狄攻夷狄，计之善者也。
现代文：利用夷狄去打夷狄，这是计策中最高明的计策！
English: It is a good strategy to attack and defeat Yidi with Yidi.

古文：臣见莎车、疏勒田地肥广，草故饶衍，不比敦煌、善阝善间也，兵可不费中国而粮食自足。
现代文：我看到莎车、疏勒的土地肥沃广袤，牧草茂盛，牲畜成群，不象敦煌、鄯善一带，用兵无须消耗中原物资，而粮秣却自给自足。
English: I saw that the land of Yarkand and Shule was fertile and vast, with luxuriant pastures and herds of livestock, unlike the areas of Dunhuang and Jinshan. The use of soldiers did not require the consumption of Central Plains materials, but grain was self-sufficient.

古文：且姑墨、温宿二王，特为龟兹所置，既非其种，更相厌苦，其势必有降者。
现代文：而且姑墨、温宿两国国王系由龟兹特别委任，他们与本国人既非同种，又相互厌恶敌对，迫于形势，一定会有人投降。
English: Moreover, the kings of the two countries, Gumo and Onjuku, were specially appointed by Guze. They were not the same species as the local people, and they hated each other's hostility. Under the pressure of the situation, some people would surely surrender.

古文：若二国来降，则龟兹自破。
现代文：如果这两国归顺了汉朝，那么龟兹便不攻自败。
English: If the two countries of Gumo and Onjuku come down, then the tortoise will be defeated.

古文：愿下臣章，参考行事，诚有万分，死复何恨！
现代文：请将我的奏章交付朝廷讨论，作为决事的参考。真的有一点可行之处，死又有何遗憾！
English: Please submit my report to the Imperial Court for discussion, as a reference for the final decision. There really is something that can be done, what a pity it is to die!

古文：臣超区区特蒙神灵，窃冀未便僵仆，目见西域平定，陛下举万年之觞，荐勋祖庙，布大喜于天下。 
现代文：但微臣班超特别幸运地得到了神灵的保佑，我希望且不要倒下死去，愿亲眼看到西域归顺，陛下举起祝福万年的酒觞，向祖庙祭告献功，向天下宣布大喜。 
English: However, Weizhong Minister Banchao was especially fortunate to be blessed by the gods. I hope that I will not fall down and die, and I hope to see the surrender of the Western Regions with my own eyes. Your Majesty will hold up the wine goblet of blessing for a thousand years, give merit to the ancestral temple festival, and announce great happiness to the world.

古文：书奏，帝知其功可成，议欲给兵。
现代文：奏书呈上，章帝知道这一事业可以成功，便召集群臣商议，准备给班超派兵。
English: After the report was sent up, the emperor knew that he could succeed, and he wanted to give Banchao the horse.

古文：平陵徐幹上疏，愿奋身佐超，帝以幹为假司马，将驰刑及义从千人就超。
现代文：平陵人徐干上书朝廷，愿奋勇出征，做班超的助手。于是章帝将徐干任命为副司马，率领免刑囚徒及志愿从军的义勇，共一千人，到西域听候班超指挥。
English: Xu Gan, a man from Pingling, wrote to the imperial court, saying that he was willing to go to the front and become the assistant of the squad leader. Therefore, Emperor Zhang appointed Xu Gan as the deputy Sima, and he led the released prisoners and the volunteers, a total of one thousand, to the western region to listen to the squad leader's command.

古文：先是莎车以为汉兵不出，遂降于龟兹，而疏勒都尉番辰亦叛。
现代文：此前，莎车认为汉朝不会出兵，便向龟兹投降，疏勒都尉番辰也背叛了汉朝。
English: Previously, Yarko believed that the Han Dynasty would not send troops, so he surrendered to Kuez. Shule Captain Banchen also betrayed the Han Dynasty.

古文：故武帝妻以公主，至孝宣帝卒得其用。
现代文：恰好徐干赶到，班超便和他一同进攻番辰。他们大败番辰，斩杀了一千多人。
English: Just as Xu Gan arrived, Ban Chao attacked Bantian with him. They defeated Bantian and killed more than a thousand people.

古文：今可遣使招慰，与共合力。 帝纳之。肃宗孝章皇帝上建初六年
现代文：如今应当派使者去招抚慰问，使乌孙与我们同心合力。 章帝采纳了他的建议。建初六年
English: Now it is time to send an envoy to solicit condolences, so that Uson can join forces with us. Emperor Zhang accepted his suggestion.

古文：春。二月，辛卯，琅邪孝王京薨。
现代文：春季，二月辛卯，琅邪王刘京去世。
English: In the spring, in February Xinwu, the evil king Liu Jing passed away.

古文：夏，六月，丙辰，太尉鲍昱薨。
现代文：夏季，六月丙辰，太尉鲍昱去世。
English: In the summer, in June, Lieutenant Bao Tong passed away.

古文：辛未晦，日有食之。
现代文：六月辛未晦，出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse will occur on the evening of the 30th.

古文：秋，七月，癸巳，以大司农邓彪为太尉。
现代文：秋季，七月癸巳，将大司农邓彪任命为太尉。
English: In the autumn, in July, Deng Biao, the chief farmer, was appointed to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：武都太守廉范迁蜀郡太守。
现代文：武都太守廉范调任蜀郡太守。
English: Wu Du Taishou Ren Fan was transferred to be the Taishou of Shu County.

古文：成都民物丰盛，邑宇逼侧，旧制，禁民夜作以防火灾，而更相隐蔽，烧者日属。
现代文：成都人民富有，物产丰盛，城中房屋十分拥挤。以往制度规定：禁止人民夜间劳作，以防火灾。然而人们互相隐瞒，暗中用火，结果火灾连日不断。
English: The people of Chengdu are rich, the goods are plentiful, and the houses in the city are very crowded. The previous system stipulated that people were prohibited from working at night to prevent fires. However, people concealed from each other and secretly used fire, resulting in continuous fires.

古文：范乃毁削先令，但严使储水而已。
现代文：于是廉范便撤销了原来的禁令，只严格规定储水防火而已。
English: The shilling was then abolished, but it was strictly prescribed to store enough water for fire protection.

古文：百姓以为便，歌之曰： 廉叔度，来何暮！
现代文：百姓感到便利，他们歌颂廉范道： 廉叔度，来太晚！
English: The people felt it was convenient, and they sang the praises of Lian Fan: Uncle Lian, you came too late!

古文：不禁火，民安作。
现代文：不禁火，民平安。
English: Fire is unavoidable, people are safe.

古文：昔无襦，今五绔。 
现代文：从前没有短上衣，今有五条裤子穿。 
English: Before there were no jackets, now there are five pairs of trousers to wear.

古文：帝以沛王等将入朝，遣谒者赐貂裘及太官食物、珍果，又使大鸿胪窦固持节郊迎。
现代文：章帝因沛王等诸亲王即将入京朝见，派谒者赐给他们貂皮袍、太官食物和珍奇的果品，并让大鸿胪窦固持符节到郊外迎接。
English: Emperor Zhang, King Inpei and other princes were about to enter the imperial court in Beijing. The emissaries gave them ermine robes, food for the eunuchs, and rare fruits, and let the great dragon Jian Dou hold the festival to welcome them to the suburbs.

古文：帝亲自循行邸第，豫设帷床，其钱帛、器物无不充备。
现代文：章帝亲自到各封国设在洛阳的官邸巡视，预备帐床。接待沛王等人所需的钱帛、什器、物品等十分齐备。
English: Emperor Zhang personally went to inspect the official residences in Luoyang of each fongguo to prepare the tent beds. The money bags, utensils, and items needed to receive Pei Wang and others were fully prepared.

古文：肃宗孝章皇帝上建初七年
现代文：建初七年
English: Seven years after construction

古文：春，正月，沛王辅、济南王康、东平王苍、中山王焉、东海王政、琅邪王宇来朝。
现代文：春季，正月，沛王刘辅、济南王刘康、东平王刘苍、中山王刘焉、东海王刘政、琅邪王刘宇来京城朝见。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, King Liu Fu of Pei, King Liu Kang of Jinan, King Liu Cang of Dongping, King Liu Yan of Zhongshan, King Liu Zheng of the East Sea, and King Liu Yu of Shanzhai came to the capital for the imperial court.

古文：诏沛、济南、东平、中山王赞拜不名，升殿乃拜，上亲答之，所以宠光荣显，加于前古。
现代文：章帝下诏，命沛王、济南王、东平王和中山王朝拜时不唱名。四王上殿后才向章帝叩拜，章帝则亲自还礼，以显示对他们的恩宠和给予的荣耀，超过了前代。
English: Emperor Zhang decreed that King Mipo, King Jinan, King Dongping, and the Zhongshan Dynasty would not chant their names when they bowed. The four kings only bowed to Emperor Zhang after entering the palace, and Emperor Zhang personally returned the bow to show their grace and the glory given to them, surpassing the previous generation.

古文：每入宫，辄以辇迎，至省阁乃下，上为之兴席改容，皇后亲拜于内，皆鞠躬辞谢不自安。
现代文：每当他们进宫的时候，章帝就派辇车去接，他们直到禁宫门口才下车步行。章帝见到他们以后，起身迎接，神态恭敬，皇后则亲自在内室参拜。四王全都鞠躬辞谢，心不自安。
English: Whenever they entered the palace, Emperor Zhang would send a carriage to pick them up, and they would not get off the carriage until they reached the entrance of the Forbidden Palace. When Emperor Zhang saw them, he stood up to greet them with a respectful demeanor, while the empress herself paid a visit to the inner room. All four kings bowed their heads in thanks, uneasy in their hearts.

古文：三月，大鸿胪奏遣诸王归国，帝特留东平王苍于京师。
现代文：三月，大鸿胪上奏，请命令诸亲王返回封国。章帝特命东平王刘苍留在京城。
English: In March, the Great Horn was sounded, and the princes were ordered to return to their fiefdoms. Zhang Di specially ordered Dongping King Liu Cang to stay in Beijing.

古文：初，明德太后为帝纳扶风宋杨二女为贵人，大贵人生太子庆。
现代文：当初，马太后为章帝选纳扶风人宋杨的两个女儿为贵人，其中大贵人生下了太子刘庆。
English: At first, the Empress Dowager Matai selected two daughters of Song Yang, a benefactor of Emperor Zhang, as nobles, and one of the nobles gave birth to Prince Liu Qing.

古文：梁松弟竦有二女，亦为贵人，小贵人生皇子肇。
现代文：梁松的弟弟梁竦有两个女儿，也是章帝的贵人，其中小贵人生下了皇子刘肇。
English: Liang Song's brother, Liang Yao, had two daughters, who were also noblemen of Emperor Zhang. One of the noblewomen gave birth to Prince Liu Zhao.

古文：窦皇后无子，养肇为子。
现代文：窦皇后没有儿子，便抚养刘肇，做为自己的儿子。
English: Empress Dou had no son, so she raised Liu Zhao as her own son.

古文：宋贵人有宠于马太后，太后崩，窦皇后宠盛，与母沘阳公主谋陷宋氏，外令兄弟求其纤过，内使御者侦伺得失。
现代文：宋贵人姐妹得到马太后的宠爱。马太后驾崩以后，窦皇后大受章帝恩宠，便同母亲阳公主阴谋陷害宋氏姐妹。她命自己的兄弟在外面搜求宋家的微小过失，让宫中的侍者在内部伺察宋氏姐妹的行动。
English: After the death of Queen Mathew, Empress Dou, greatly favored by Emperor Zhang, plotted with her mother, Princess Yang, to frame the Song sisters. She ordered her brother to search for the Song family's minor faults outside, and let the palace waiters investigate the actions of the Song sisters inside.

古文：宋贵人病，思生兔，令家求之，因诬言欲为厌胜之术，由是太子出居承禄观。
现代文：宋贵人患病，想吃鲜兔，曾吩咐娘家寻找，于是窦皇后就诬告宋贵人要作法诅咒。章帝因此命太子搬出太子宫，到承禄观居住。
English: Song Guiren was ill and wanted to eat fresh rabbit. He had ordered his daughter to look for it, so Empress Dou falsely accused Song Guiren of cursing. Emperor Zhang therefore ordered the prince to move out of the prince's womb and live in Chenglu County.

古文：夏，六月，甲寅，诏曰： 皇太子有失惑无常之性，不可以奉宗庙。
现代文：夏季，六月甲寅，章帝下诏说： 皇太子精神恍惚失常，不能够侍奉宗庙。
English: In the summer, in June, Emperor Zhang issued an edict: The crown prince was mentally deranged and could not serve at the ancestral temple.

古文：大义灭亲，况降退乎！
现代文：大义之下，亲情可灭，何况是贬降？
English: Killing relatives for the greater good, let alone just retreating?

古文：今废庆为清河王。
现代文：今废去刘庆的皇太子名号，改封为清河王。
English: The deposed crown prince Liu Qing is now the king of Qinghe.

古文：皇子肇，保育皇后，承训怀衽，今以肇为皇太子。 
现代文：皇子刘肇，由皇后抚育，在怀抱中就承受教诲。现将刘肇立为皇太子。 
English: Liu Zhao, the prince, was raised by the empress and received teachings in her arms. Now Liu Zhao is the crown prince.

古文：遂出宋贵人姊妹置丙舍，使小黄门蔡伦案之。
现代文：于是将宋贵人姐妹逐出内宫，囚禁丙舍，命小黄门蔡伦负责审问。
English: As a result, Song Guiren's sisters were banished from the Inner Court, imprisoned in He She, and interrogated by Huangmen Cai Lun.

古文：二贵人皆饮药自杀，父议郎杨免归本郡。
现代文：两位贵人双双喝下毒药自杀，她们的父亲、议郎宋杨被免官，逐回原郡。
English: Both of the two dignitaries drank poison and committed suicide. Their father, Song Yang, was removed from office and sent back to his original county.

古文：庆时虽幼，亦知避嫌畏祸，言不敢及宋氏；帝更怜之，敕皇后令衣服与太子齐等，太子亦亲爱庆，入则共室，出则同舆。
现代文：当时刘庆虽然年幼，也知道躲避嫌疑，畏惧灾祸，口中不敢提到宋氏。章帝又生怜惜之心，命令皇后：要使刘庆的衣服和太子一样。太子刘肇也和刘庆十分友爱，他们入则同在一室，出则同乘一车。
English: At that time, although Liu Qing was young, he also knew how to evade suspicion and feared disaster, and dared not mention the Song clan. Emperor Zhang also had a compassionate heart and ordered the empress: to make Liu Qing's clothes the same as the prince. The prince Liu Zhao was also very friendly with Liu Qing, they entered the same room and left the same car.

古文：己未，徙广平王羡为西平王。
现代文：六月己未，将广平王刘羡改封为西平王。
English: On the 23rd, Guangping King Liu En was transferred to Xiping.

古文：秋，八月，饮酎毕，有司复奏遣东平王苍归国，帝乃许之，手诏赐苍曰： 骨肉天性，诚不以远近为亲疏；然数见颜色，情重昔时。
现代文：秋季，八月，在宗庙举行酎礼之后，有关官员再度上奏，请命令东平王刘苍返归封国。
English: In the autumn, in August, after the chu ceremony was held in the ancestral temple, the relevant officials once again appealed to the emperor, asking him to order the Dongping King Liu Cang to return to the country.

古文：念王久劳，思得还休，欲署大鸿胪奏，不忍下笔，顾授小黄门；中心恋恋，恻然不能言。 
现代文：章帝这才应允，并亲手写诏赐给刘苍。诏书说： 骨肉之情，乃是天性，确实不因相隔远近而有亲疏之别。然而我们数次见面，感情愈重于昔时。想到大王久在京师劳累，希望能回国休养，我打算签署大鸿胪的奏书，却又不忍落笔，回望小黄门，授命传送此信。心中恋恋不舍之情，悲伤不能尽言。 
English: It was only then that Emperor Zhang agreed, and personally wrote an edict to give to Liu Cang. The edict said: "Flesh-and-bone affection is natural, and indeed there is no difference in closeness due to distance. However, we have met several times, and feelings are more important than in the past. Thinking that the great king has been working hard in Beijing for a long time and hopes to return home to recuperate, I plan to sign the report of the great king, but I can't bear to put down my pen, look back at Xiao Huangmen, and give the order to transmit this letter. In my heart, I can't express my love and sadness.

古文：于是车驾祖送，流涕而诀；复赐乘舆服御，珍宝、舆马，钱布以亿万计。
现代文：于是章帝亲自祭祀路神，为刘苍送行，洒泪而别。并再次赐给东平王御用衣服器物、珍宝、车马、钱布，价值亿万。
English: As a result, Emperor Zhang personally offered a sacrifice to the god of the road to see Liu Cang off, shed tears and bid farewell, and once again gave the Dongping King royal clothing, precious treasures, chariots and horses, and money cloth, worth hundreds of millions.

古文：九月，甲戌，帝幸偃师，东涉卷津，至河内，下诏曰： 车驾行秋稼，观收获，因涉郡界，皆精骑轻行，无它辎重。
现代文：九月甲戌，章帝临幸偃师县，东行，在卷县渡口渡过黄河，到达河内郡。下诏说： 朕巡视秋季庄稼，查看收获情况，因而进入河内郡界。一路都是轻装前进，并无其它辎重。
English: In September, he traveled eastward from Jiaxuan, Zhangdi, Linhcang, and Nanshi counties, and crossed the Yellow River at the Wuling County ferry port, arriving in Hanoi County. The next edict said: "I will inspect the autumn crops, check the harvest situation, and thus enter the boundaries of Hanoi County. I will travel light all the way, and there will be no other burdens.

古文：不得辄修道桥，远离城郭，遣吏逢迎，刺探起居，出入前后，以为烦扰。
现代文：地方官府不得为此筑路修桥，不得派官吏远离城郭迎接，打听伺候饮食行卧，出出进进，跑前跑后，带来烦扰。
English: Local governments are not allowed to build roads and bridges for this purpose, and they are not allowed to send officials far away from the city walls to meet, inquire, wait for meals, walk, go in and out, run before and after, and cause trouble.

古文：动务省约，但患不能脱粟瓢饮耳。 
现代文：一切举动务求简省，朕只恨自己不能食糙米之饭，饮瓢中之水罢了！ 
English: I only hate that I can't eat brown rice and drink water from a bowl!

古文：己酉，进幸鄴。
现代文：九月己酉，章帝临幸邺城。
English: In September, Emperor Zhang came to Shicheng.

古文：辛卯，还宫。
现代文：九月辛卯，返回京城皇宫。
English: In September, he returned to the Imperial Palace in Kyoto.

古文：冬，十月，癸丑，帝行幸长安，封萧何末孙熊为酂侯。
现代文：冬季，十月癸丑，章帝出行，临幸长安，将萧何的末代子孙萧熊封为侯。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Zhang went to Chang'an, and in Chang'an, Xiao Xiong, the last descendant of Xiao He, was enthroned.

古文：进幸槐里、岐山；又幸长平，御池阳宫，东至高陵。
现代文：并前往槐里、岐山。又临幸长平和池阳宫，东行到高陵。
English: They also went to Bali and Qishan. They also went to the Palace of Prince Happiness Heping Chiyang and went east to Goryeong.

古文：十二月，丁亥，还宫。
现代文：十二月丁亥，返回京城皇宫。
English: In December, Dinghai returned to the Beijing Imperial Palace.

古文：东平献王苍疾病，驰遣名医、小黄门侍疾，使者冠盖不绝于道。
现代文：东平献王刘苍患病，章帝贤急派遣名医和小黄门前往诊治。问病的使者车驾在路上前后不断。
English: When Liu Cang, the king of Dongping, fell ill, Zhang Dixian urgently dispatched a famous doctor and Xiao Huangmen to treat him. The envoy kept driving back and forth on the road.

古文：又置驿马，千里传问起居。
现代文：又设专用驿马，在千里之间传达问候东平王的病情。
English: There is also a special steed to convey greetings to Dongping Wang's illness from thousands of miles away.

古文：肃宗孝章皇帝上建初八年
现代文：建初八年春季，正月壬辰，东平王刘苍去世。
English: In the spring of the eighth year of Jianchu, the first month of Imjin, Dongping King Liu Cang passed away.

古文：春，正月，壬辰，王薨。诏告中傅 封上王自建武以来章奏，并集览焉。 
现代文：章帝下诏，命令东平国中傅： 将东平王自建武以来的奏章加封上送，我要集中阅览。 
English: Emperor Zhang issued an edict, ordering the Dongping Guozhongfu: Send the Dongping King's report since the founding of Jianwu, and I want to read it all.

古文：遣大鸿胪持节监丧，令四姓小侯、诸国王、主悉会葬。
现代文：并派大鸿胪持符节主持治丧，命令樊、阴、郭、马四姓小侯和各封国的亲王、公主都去参加葬礼。
English: He also sent Daihong Zhi to preside over the funeral on the Day of the Sign, and ordered Zhou, Yin, Guo, Ma four surnamed Xiao Hou and the princes and princesses of all fiefdoms to attend the funeral.

古文：夏，六月，北匈奴三木楼訾大人稽留斯等率三万馀人款五原塞降。
现代文：夏季，六月，北匈奴三木楼訾大人稽留斯等，率三万余人到五原塞归降。
English: In the summer, in June, more than 30,000 people from North Hunsan, Miki District, and other areas returned to Wuhansai.

古文：冬，十二月，甲午，上行幸陈留、梁国、淮阳、颍阳；戊申，还宫。
现代文：冬季，十二月甲午，章帝出行，临幸陈留、梁国、淮阳、颍阳。十二月戊申，返回京城皇宫。
English: In winter, on the afternoon of December 1st, Emperor Zhang went on a trip, and was fortunate enough to stay in Chenliu, Liangguo, Huaiyang and Fenyang. In December, he went to Wushen and returned to the Beijing Imperial Palace.

古文：太子肇之立也，梁氏私相庆；诸窦闻而恶之。
现代文：皇子刘肇被立为太子以后，梁家私下互相庆贺。窦家听到这个消息，感到厌恶。
English: After Prince Liu Zhao was crowned crown prince, the Liang family privately congratulated each other. When the Dou family heard the news, they were disgusted.

古文：皇后欲专名外家，忌梁贵人姊妹，数谮之于帝，渐致疏嫌。
现代文：窦皇后想使窦家成为刘肇唯一的舅家，因而忌恨梁贵人姐妹，不断地在章帝面前进行诋毁，逐渐使章帝与她们日益疏远而产生嫌弃之心。
English: Empress Dou wanted the Dou family to become Liu Zhaozhou's only paternal family, so she hated Liang Guiren's sisters and constantly slandered them in front of Emperor Zhang, gradually alienating Emperor Zhang from them and creating a feeling of rejection.

古文：是岁，窦氏作飞书，陷梁竦以恶逆，竦遂死狱中，家属徙九真，贵人姊妹以忧死。辞语连及梁松妻舞阴公主，坐徙新城。
现代文：本年，窦家用匿名书诬告梁竦，使他陷入谋反大罪。梁竦死在狱中，家属被流放到九真，梁贵人姊妹则忧愁而死，梁竦的供词牵连到梁松的妻子舞阴公主，舞阴公主因罪被贬逐到新城。
English: This year, Dou's family used an anonymous letter to falsely accuse Liang Hui, leading him into a serious crime of plotting rebellion. Liang Hui died in prison, his family members were exiled to Jiu Zhen, Liang Guiren's sisters died of grief, Liang Hui's confession implicated Liang Song's wife, Princess Muyin, and Princess Muyin was banished to Xincheng for the crime.

古文：顺阳侯马廖，谨笃自守，而性宽缓，不能教勒子弟，皆骄奢不谨。
现代文：顺阳侯马廖为人谨慎小心，但天性厚道宽容，不能管教约束马家子弟。因此，马家子弟全都骄傲奢侈，为所欲为。
English: Shunyang Houma Liao was a cautious person, but he was kind and tolerant by nature, and he could not discipline and restrain the Ma children. Therefore, the Ma children were all proud and extravagant, and they did whatever they wanted.

古文：校书郎杨终与廖书，戒之曰； 君位地尊重，海内所望。
现代文：校书郎杨终曾给马廖写信，告诫他说： 阁下的地位尊贵显要，四海之内，众人瞩望。
English: Yang, the school scribe, eventually wrote a letter to Ma Liu, admonishing him: Your position is noble and important, and you are watched by everyone in the world.

古文：黄门郎年幼，血气方盛，既无长君退让之风，而要结轻狡无行之客，纵而莫诲，视成任性，览念前往，可为寒心！ 
现代文：您的弟弟、黄门郎马防、马光都还年轻，血气方刚，他们既没有文帝窦皇后的哥哥长君的退让精神，却反而结交一些轻浮狡猾、品行不端的宾朋。您对他们放纵而不加教诲，眼看他们养成了任性的作风。回顾前事，我要为马家感到寒心！ 
English: Your younger brothers, Huangmen Lang, Ma Fang, and Ma Guang, are still young and full of vigor. They do not have the spirit of concession of Emperor Wen's elder brother, Emperor Dou, but on the contrary, they have made friends with some frivolous, cunning, and misbehaving friends. You indulge them without instruction, and see them develop a wayward style. Looking back on the past, I want to feel cold for the Ma family!

古文：廖不能从。
现代文：马廖未能接受他的劝告。
English: Maliau failed to accept his advice.

古文：防、光兄弟资产巨亿，大起第观，弥亘街路，食客常数百人。
现代文：马防、马光兄弟的财产无数，他们大规模地建造宅第，使房屋连绵相接，占满街巷，食客经常有数百之多。
English: The property of Ma Fang and Ma Guang brothers is countless. They built mansions on a large scale, so that the houses are contiguous and occupy the streets and lanes. There are often hundreds of diners.

古文：防又多牧马畜，赋敛羌、胡。
现代文：马防还饲养了大批马匹牲畜，对羌人胡人征收赋税。
English: The Horse Guards also raised a large number of horses and cattle, and levied taxes on the Xiang people and the Hu people.

古文：帝不喜之，数加谴敕，所以禁遏甚备。
现代文：章帝对此感到不悦，屡次下令进行谴责，并处处予以限制。
English: Emperor Zhang was displeased with this and repeatedly ordered to condemn it and restrict it everywhere.

古文：由是权势稍损，宾客亦衰。
现代文：于是马家的权势稍有减损，宾朋也逐渐离去。
English: As a result, the influence of the Ma family has slightly diminished, and the friends and relatives have gradually left.

古文：廖子豫为步兵校尉，投书怨诽。
现代文：马廖的儿子马豫任步兵校尉，投书表示怨恨不满。
English: Malio's son, Ma Yu, was appointed an infantry captain, and he expressed his resentment and dissatisfaction in a letter.

古文：于是有司并奏防、光兄弟奢侈逾僭，浊乱圣化，悉免就国。
现代文：于是有关部门对马豫连同马防、马光兄弟一并进行弹劾，称马防、马光的豪华奢侈，超过他们的身份，扰乱了圣明的礼教。
English: As a result, the relevant departments impeached Ma Yu together with the brothers Ma Fang and Ma Guang, saying that the luxury of Ma Fang and Ma Guang exceeded their status and disrupted the sacred ritual.

古文：临上路，诏曰： 舅氏一门俱就国封，四时陵庙无助祭先后者，朕甚伤之，其令许侯思愆田庐，有司勿复请，以慰朕渭阳之情。 
现代文：建议将马氏兄弟一律免官，命他们前往各自封国。马廖等人即将上路时，章帝下诏说： 舅父一家全都前往封国，四季祭祀陵庙时便没有助祭先后的人了，朕甚感悲伤。今命许侯马光留下，在乡间田庐闭门思过。有关部门不要再提出异议，以慰朕的甥舅之情。 
English: It was suggested that all of Ma's brothers should be dismissed from their posts and they should be ordered to go to their respective fiefdoms. When Maliau and others were about to set out, Emperor Zhang issued an edict saying: My uncle's family all went to the fiefdoms, and there was no one to assist in the four-season ritual at the mausoleum. I feel very sad. I now order Houma Guang to stay and meditate behind closed doors in the rural fields. The relevant departments should no longer raise objections to comfort my nephew's feelings.

古文：光比防稍为谨密，故帝特留之，后复位特进。
现代文：马光较马防谨慎收敛一些，所以章帝特别将他留下，后又恢复他的特进之位。
English: Ma Guang was more cautious than Ma Fang, so Emperor Zhang specially kept him, and later restored his special promotion.

古文：豫随廖归国，考击物故。
现代文：马豫随马廖到封国，被审讯拷打致死。
English: Ma Yu followed Ma Liao to Fongguo and was interrogated and tortured to death.

古文：后复有诏还廖京师。
现代文：后来，章帝又下诏书，命马廖返回京城。
English: Later, Emperor Zhang again issued an imperial edict, ordering Ma Liao to return to Beijing.

古文：诸马既得罪，窦氏益贵盛。
现代文：马家获罪以后，窦家地位愈加显赫。
English: After the Ma family was convicted, the Dou family became more prominent.

古文：皇后兄宪为侍中、虎贲中郎将，弟笃为黄门侍郎，并侍宫省，赏赐累积；喜交通宾客。
现代文：窦皇后的哥哥窦宪任侍中、虎贲中郎将，弟弟窦笃任黄门侍郎，二人同在宫中服务，受到大量赏赐，喜欢结交宾朋。
English: Empress Dowager Dou's brother Dou Xian served as a chamberlain, and his brother Dou Tu served as a Yellow Gate chamberlain. They both served in the palace, received a lot of rewards, and liked to make friends.

古文：司空第五伦上疏曰： 臣伏见虎贲中郎将窦宪，椒房之亲，典司禁兵，出入省闼，年盛志美，卑让乐善，此诚其好士交结之方。
现代文：司空第五伦上书说： 我看到虎贲中郎将窦宪，身为皇后的亲属，统御皇家禁军，出入宫廷，正值壮年，志向美好，恭敬谦让，乐于为善，这诚然是他喜好结交士子的原因。
English: Siku Fifth Lun wrote: I see that the reason for his liking to make friends with Shishi is that, as a relative of the Empress, he is in his prime of life, aspires to be beautiful, is respectful and humble, and is willing to do good.

古文：然诸出入贵戚者，类多瑕衅禁锢之人，尤少守约安贫之节。
现代文：然而那些奔走出入于皇亲国戚门下的人，多有劣迹和罪过，在政治仕途上受到压制，特别缺少守分安贫的节操。
English: However, those who rushed out to join the imperial relatives and relatives, mostly had bad deeds and sins, were suppressed in the political way, and especially lacked the discipline of keeping score and poverty.

古文：士大夫无志之徒，更相贩卖，云集其门，盖骄佚所从生也。
现代文：官僚中的志趣低下之辈，更互相推荐吹捧，大量涌向他的家门，这将是骄傲放纵产生的根源。
English: Bureaucrats with low morals, who recommend and praise each other, flock to his door in large numbers, which will be the root cause of pride and indulgence.

古文：三辅论议者至云： 以贵戚废锢，当复以贵戚浣濯之，犹解酲当以酒也。 
现代文：三辅地区喜好议论的人甚至说： 因贵戚连累而遭贬黜压制，应当重新由贵戚来清洗罪过，犹如应当用酒来解醉一样。 
English: People in the Sanfu area who like to argue even say: If you have been humiliated and oppressed because of your noble relatives, your noble relatives should cleanse you of your sins, just as you should use alcohol to sober up.

古文：诐险趣势之徒，诚不可亲近。
现代文：那些邪僻阴险、趋炎附势之辈，实在不能亲近。
English: It is true that you should not get close to those who are inflamed with power.

古文：臣愚愿陛下、中宫严敕宪等闭门自守，无妄交通士大夫，防其未萌，虑于无形，令宪永保福禄，君臣交欢，无纤介之隙，此臣之所至愿也。 
现代文：我希望陛下和皇后严令窦宪等人闭门自守，不得随便结交官僚士子。防备于祸患萌芽以前，思虑于灾害无形之时，使窦宪永保荣华富贵。而君臣同欢，没有丝毫隔阂，是我最大的愿望！ 
English: I hope that His Majesty and the Empress will strictly order Dou Xian and others to keep their doors closed and not to casually make friends with bureaucrats. Be prepared before disasters sprout, think about disasters when they are invisible, so that Dou Xian will always be prosperous and rich. And it is my greatest wish that monarchs and subjects are happy together, without the slightest separation!

古文：宪恃宫掖声势，自王、主及阴、马诸家，莫不畏惮。
现代文：窦宪倚仗皇后的影响和势力，从亲王、公主，到阴家、马家等外戚，没有人不怕他。
English: Dou Xian relied on the influence and power of the empress. From princes and princesses to relatives such as the Yin family and the Ma family, no one was afraid of him.

古文：宪以贱直请夺泌水公主园田，主逼畏不敢计。
现代文：窦宪曾以低价强买沁水公主的庄园，公主害怕他的权势而不敢计较。
English: Dou Xian once bought Princess Surabaya's manor at a low price. The princess was afraid of his power and did not dare to challenge him.

古文：后帝出过园，指以问宪，宪阴喝不得对。
现代文：后来章帝出行时经过那里，指着庄园向窦宪询问，窦宪暗中喝阻左右的人不得照实回答。
English: Later, when Emperor Zhang was traveling, he passed by there and pointed to the manor to inquire about Dou Xian. People around Dou Xian who were secretly drinking were not allowed to answer truthfully.

古文：后发觉，帝大怒，召宪切责曰： 深思前过夺主田园时，何用愈赵高指鹿为马！
现代文：后来，章帝发现了真相，大为愤怒，把窦宪叫来严厉责备道： 深思以前经过你强夺的公主庄园时，你为什么要采取甚于赵高指鹿为马的欺骗手段！
English: Later, Emperor Zhang found out the truth and was very angry. He summoned Dou Xian and severely reprimanded him, saying: "When you were pondering over the princess's manor that you had seized, why did you take more deceptive means than Zhao Gao's using a deer as a horse!

古文：久念使人惊怖。
现代文：此事多想令人震惊。
English: It's mind-boggling.

古文：昔永平中，常令阴党、阴博、邓叠三人更相纠察，故诸豪戚莫敢犯法者。
现代文：从前，在永平年间，先帝经常命令阴党、阴博、邓叠三人互相监察，所以诸贵戚中没有人敢触犯法律。
English: Once upon a time, during the Yongping era, the former emperor often ordered the three people of Yin Party, Yin Bo and Deng Jia to supervise each other, so no one among the noble relatives dared to violate the law.

古文：今贵主尚见枉夺，何况小民哉！
现代文：如今尊贵的公主尚且横遭掠夺，何况小民呢！
English: Today, the noble princess is still being plundered, not to mention the common people!

古文：国家弃宪，如孤雏、腐鼠耳！ 
现代文：国家抛弃窦宪，就像丢掉一只小鸟和腐臭的死鼠！ 
English: If the country abandons Dou Xian, it will be like throwing away a small bird and a rancid dead rat!

古文：宪大惧，皇后为毁服深谢，良久乃得解，使以田还主。
现代文：窦宪大为恐惧，窦皇后也因此脱去皇后的衣饰深切地表示谢罪。过了很久，章帝的愤怒才告平息，命窦宪将庄园还给公主。
English: Dou Xian was greatly frightened, and the Dou Empress therefore took off the queen's clothing to express her deep remorse. It took a long time for Emperor Zhang's anger to subside, and he ordered Dou Xian to return the manor to the princess.

古文：虽不绳其罪，然亦不授以重任。
现代文：章帝虽对窦宪没有依法治罪，但也不再委以重任。
English: Although Emperor Zhang did not punish Dou Xian according to the law, he no longer entrusted him with important duties.

古文：臣光曰：人臣之罪，莫大于欺罔，是以明君疾之。
现代文：臣司马光曰：臣子的罪恶，莫过于欺骗君主，所以圣明的君主痛恨这种行为。
English: Sima Guang, a courtier, said: "The sin of a courtier is nothing more than deceiving the monarch, so the holy monarch hates this kind of behavior."

古文：孝章谓窦宪何异指鹿为马，善矣；然卒不能罪宪，则奸臣安所惩哉！
现代文：孝章皇帝称窦宪的行为无异于指鹿为马，这是对的；然而他最终不能降罪于窦宪，那么奸臣在哪里受惩诫呢！
English: Emperor Xiaozhang said that Dou Xian's behavior was no different from calling a deer a horse, which was right; however, he ultimately could not reduce the crime to Dou Xian, so where would the traitor be disciplined?

古文：夫人主之于臣下，患在不知其奸，苟或知之而复赦之，则不若不知之为愈也。
现代文：君主对待臣子，困难在于不知道谁是邪恶之辈，假如已经知道而又将他赦免，那还不如不知道更好。为什么这样讲？
English: The difficulty in the monarch's treatment of his vassal is that he does not know who the villain is. If he already knows and pardons him, it is better not to know. Why do you say this?

古文：何以言之？彼或为奸而上不之知，犹有所畏；既知而不能讨，彼知其不足畏也，则放纵而无所顾矣！
现代文：奸臣为非作歹而君主不知，奸臣心中还有所畏惧；君主已知而又不能予以处罚，奸臣便明白君主不值得畏惧，就会放纵大胆而无所顾忌了！
English: If a treacherous vassal does evil without the knowledge of the sovereign, the treacherous vassal still has something to fear; if the sovereign is known but cannot be punished, the treacherous vassal will understand that the sovereign is not to be feared, and will indulge boldly without any scruples!

古文：是故知善而不能用，知恶而不能去，人主之深戒也。
现代文：因此，已知良臣而不能任用，已知恶人而不能铲除，乃是君主的大戒。
English: It is therefore the sovereign's bounden duty to know good ministers and not to appoint them, and to know bad ones and not to remove them.

古文：下邳周纡为雒阳令，下车，先问大姓主名；吏数闾里豪强以对。
现代文：下邳人周纡被任命为洛阳令。他下车伊始，首先询问当地大族的户主姓名。下属官吏便历数里巷豪强的姓名向他报告。
English: Zhou Qi, a person from Lower Yan, was appointed as the Luoyang governor. When he got off the train, he first asked the names of the heads of households of the local large families. The subordinate officials then went through the names of several Li Xiang Gaoqiang to report to him.

古文：纡厉声怒曰： 本问贵戚若马、窦等辈，岂能知此卖菜佣乎！ 
现代文：周纡厉声怒喝： 我问的本是象马家、窦家那样的皇亲国戚，难道会管这些卖菜的贩夫吗！ 
English: Zhou Qian shouted angrily: I was asking the imperial relatives like the Ma family and the Dou family, will they control these vegetable sellers!

古文：于是部吏望风旨，争以激切为事，贵戚跼蹐，京师肃清。
现代文：于是下属官吏按照他的意图，争着用激烈的手段行事。贵戚们畏缩不安而举止收敛，京城不法行为绝迹，秩序井然。
English: As a result, the subordinate officials acted in accordance with his intention, competing with each other and using violent means. The nobles cowered with anxiety and restrained their behavior. Lawlessness in the capital was eliminated, and order was restored.

古文：窦笃夜至止奸亭，亭长霍延拔剑拟笃，肆詈恣口。
现代文：窦笃曾夜行到止奸亭，遭到亭长霍延的阻拦。霍延拔剑指向窦笃，并肆意谩骂。
English: Dou Dou once went to Stop the Traitors Pavilion at night, but was blocked by the pavilion's manager, Hoyen. Hoyen drew his sword and pointed it at Dou Dou, hurling abuse at him.

古文：笃以表闻，诏召司隶校尉、河南尹诣尚书谴问；遣剑戟士收纡，送廷尉诏狱，数日，贳出之。
现代文：窦笃将此事上报章帝。章帝下诏，命司隶校尉、河南尹去见尚书，接受申斥责问；派武装士兵逮捕周纡，押送廷尉诏狱。数日后，将他赦免释放。
English: Dou Dou reported the matter to Emperor Zhang. Emperor Zhang issued an edict, and the commander of the division, Lieutenant Li and Henan Yin went to see Shang Shu to accept the reprimand and interrogation; armed soldiers were sent to arrest Zhou Qi and escort the courtier to the imperial prison. A few days later, he was pardoned and released.

古文：帝拜班超为将兵长史，以徐幹为军司马，别遣卫侯李邑护送乌孙使者。
现代文：章帝任命班超为将兵长史，徐干为军司马。又另派卫候李邑护送乌孙使者回国。
English: Emperor Zhang appointed Banchao as the commander-in-chief of the army, and Xu Gan as the military secretary. He also sent another envoy, Li Yue, to escort the Wusun envoy back to China.

古文：邑到于窴，值龟兹攻疏勒，恐惧不敢前，因上书陈西域之功不可成，又盛毁超： 拥爱妻，抱爱子，安乐外国，无内顾心。 
现代文：李邑到达于阗时，正值龟兹进攻疏勒，他因恐惧而不敢前进，便上书声称西域的功业不可能成功，还大肆诋毁班超，说班超： 拥爱妻，抱爱子，在外国享安乐，没有思念中原之心。 
English: When Li Yiwu arrived in Yunnan, it was the time when the Quez attacked Shule. Because of his fear, he did not dare to advance, so he wrote a letter claiming that the work in the western region could not succeed. He also defamed Ban Chao, saying that Ban Chao: loved his wife, loved his son, enjoyed peace and happiness in a foreign country, and did not miss the heart of the Central Plains.

古文：超闻之叹曰： 身非曾参而有三至之谗，恐见疑于当时矣！ 
现代文：班超听到消息后叹息道： 我虽不是曾参，却碰到曾参所遇的三次谗言，恐怕要受到朝廷的猜疑了！ 于是将妻子送走。
English: After hearing the news, Banchao sighed, "Although I am not a Zengzang, I have encountered the three insults that Zengzang has encountered. I am afraid that I will be suspected by the court!" So he sent his wife away.

古文：遂去其妻。帝知超忠，乃切责邑曰： 纵超拥爱妻，抱爱子，思归之士千余人，何能尽与超同心乎！ 
现代文：章帝知道班超的忠心，便严厉斥责李邑说： 纵然班超拥爱妻，抱爱子，而思念家乡的汉军还有一千余人，为什么能都与班超同心呢！ 
English: Emperor Zhang knew of Ban Chao's loyalty, so he severely reprimanded Li Yu, saying: Even though Ban Chao loved his wife and his son, and there were more than a thousand Han soldiers who missed their hometown, how could they all have the same heart as Ban Chao!

古文：令邑诣超受节度，诏： 若邑任在外者，便留与从事。 
现代文：章帝命令李邑到班超那里听候指挥，并下诏给班超说： 如果李邑在西域能够胜任，就留他随从办事。 
English: Emperor Zhang ordered Li Yiu to go to Ban Chao to await his command, and issued an edict to Ban Chao saying: If Li Yiu is competent in the western region, let him follow the orders.

古文：超即遣邑将乌孙侍子还京师。
现代文：但班超却随即派李邑带领乌孙送往汉朝做人质的王子返回京城。
English: However, the superintendent sent Li Yuping to lead the Uson Samurai back to Beijing.

古文：徐幹谓超曰： 邑前亲毁君，欲败西域，今何不缘诏书留之，更遣它吏送侍子乎？ 
现代文：徐干对班超说： 先前李邑亲口诋毁阁下，想要破坏我们在西域的事业，如今为何不以诏书为理由将他留下，另派其他官员送人质呢？ 
English: Xu Gan said to Banchao: Previously, Li Yurong personally slandered your excellency and wanted to sabotage our cause in the western region. Now, why not use the edict as a reason to keep him and send other officials to take the hostages?

古文：超曰： 是何言之陋也！
现代文：班超说： 这话是多么的浅陋！
English: Banchao said, "How come you don't see it that way?

古文：以邑毁超，故今遣之。
现代文：正是因为李邑诋毁我，所以如今才派他回去。
English: It is because of Li Yu's slander against me that I am now sending him back to China.

古文：内省不疚，何恤人言！
现代文：我自问内心无愧，为什么要怕别人的议论！
English: I act with a clear conscience, and I'm still afraid of what others will say?

古文：快意留之，非忠臣也。 
现代文：为求自己称心快意而留下李邑，不是忠臣所为。 
English: He is not called a loyal retainer because he is venting his personal anger and is trying to keep him.

古文：帝以侍中会稽郑弘为大司农。
现代文：章帝将侍中会稽人郑弘任命为大司农。
English: Emperor Zhang appointed Zheng Hong, the inspector of the Chamberlain's Association, as the Grand Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：旧交趾七郡贡献转运，皆从东冶泛海而至，风波艰阻，没溺相系。
现代文：以往，交趾州所属的七个郡向京城输送贡品，全都经东冶渡海运来。海上风浪颠簸，航程艰险，不断发生船沉人亡的事故。
English: In the past, the seven counties belonging to Koji Prefecture sent tribute to the capital, all of which were transported by sea through Dongye. The sea was rough, the voyage was difficult, and there were constant shipwrecks.

古文：弘奏开零陵、桂阳峤道，自是夷通，遂为常路。
现代文：于是郑弘上书，建议开辟零陵、桂阳的山道。自此，从交趾到内地畅通无阻，这条路便成为常用的干线。
English: As a result, Zheng Hong wrote a letter, suggesting the opening of the mountain road of Ziling and Guiyang. Since then, from Jiaozuo to the mainland, the road has become a commonly used main line.

古文：在职二年，所息省以亿万计。
现代文：郑弘在任两年，节省了亿万经费。
English: Zheng Hong has been in office for two years and has saved hundreds of millions of yuan.

古文：遭天下旱，边方有警，民食不足，而帑藏殷积。
现代文：当时全国大旱，边疆又有警报，人民粮食不足，但国库充实，积存的物资很多。
English: At that time, there was a severe drought across the country, there were warnings on the border, and the people were short of grain, but the state treasury was full and there were a lot of materials in storage.

古文：弘又奏宜省贡献，减徭费以利饥民；帝从之。
现代文：郑弘还上书提出应当免除若干地区的进贡，减轻徭役开支，以利于饥民。章帝采纳了他的建议。
English: In his petition, Zheng Hong also proposed that tribute should be exempted from certain regions and the expenses of corvee service should be reduced to benefit the starving people. Emperor Zhang Rong adopted his suggestion.

古文：肃宗孝章皇帝上元和元年春，闰正月，辛丑，济阴悼王长薨。
现代文：元和元年春季，闰正月辛丑，济阴悼王刘长去世。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Yuan and the first year of the leap year, the first month of the leap year was ugly, and Jiyin mourned the death of King Liu Chang.

古文：夏，四月，己卯，分东平国，封献王子尚为任城王。
现代文：夏季，四月己卯，分出东平国部分封土，将前东平王刘苍之子刘尚封为任城王。
English: In the summer, in April, part of the fief land of Dongping was allocated, and Liu Shangfeng, the son of the former Dongping King Liu Cang, was appointed as the king of the city.

古文：六月，辛酉，沛献王辅薨。
现代文：六月辛酉，沛献王刘辅去世。
English: In June, the king of piety, Liu Bei, passed away.

古文：陈事者多言 郡国贡举，率非功次，故守职益懈而吏事浸疏，咎在州郡。 
现代文：许多人上书指出： 各郡、各封国举荐人才，多不依据功劳大小，因此官吏越来越不尽职，办事效率日趋低落，其责任在于州郡官府。 
English: Many people pointed out in their petitions that: talent recommended by counties and counties are mostly not based on merit, so officials are becoming more and more negligent in their duties, and their work efficiency is getting lower and lower, and their responsibility lies with the state and county government.

古文：有诏下公卿朝臣议。
现代文：章帝下诏命令公卿大臣对此进行讨论。
English: Emperor's edict calls for discussion among court nobles and courtiers.

古文：大鸿胪韦彪上议曰： 夫国以简贤为务，贤以孝行为首，是以求忠臣必于孝子之门。
现代文：大鸿胪韦彪上书说： 朝廷以选拔贤才为职责，而贤才则以孝顺父母为第一要务。因此，要想得到忠臣，就必须到孝子之门访求。
English: The great scholar Wei Biao said in a letter: The imperial court is responsible for selecting talents, and talents are responsible for being filial to their parents. Therefore, if you want to get loyal followers, you must visit the door of filial piety.

古文：夫人才行少能相兼，是以孟公绰优于赵、魏老，不可以为滕、薛大夫。
现代文：人的才干、品行很少能够兼备，所以孟公绰能轻松胜任晋国赵、魏两家的家臣，却做不了滕、薛两国的大夫。
English: It is rare for people to have both talent and behavior. Meng Gongpu was superior to Zhao and Wei Lao, but could not compete with Teng and Xue Daifu. They could not compete with Teng and Xue Guoxiao Zhengxuan.

古文：忠孝之人，持心近厚；锻练之吏，持心近薄。
现代文：忠孝的人，心地较为仁厚；而干练苛刻的官吏，性情较为凉薄。
English: Those who are loyal and filial are more benevolent at heart, while officials who are capable and demanding have a cooler temperament.

古文：士宜以才行为先，不可纯以阀阅。然其要归，在于选二千石。
现代文：选拔人才，应当首先考虑才干品行，不能只根据资历，而问题的关键，在于对二千石官的选用。
English: In the selection of talent, talent and performance should be considered first, not just based on seniority, and the key to the problem lies in the selection of officials of 2,000 koku.

古文：二千石贤，则贡举皆得其人矣。 
现代文：如果二千石官贤能，那么他所举荐的必定都是人才。 
English: If a 2,000-koku official is capable, then the people he recommends must be talented.

古文：彪又上疏曰： 天下枢要，在于尚书，尚书之选，岂可不重！
现代文：他还上书说： 朝廷的机要在尚书，尚书的任命，岂能不慎重！
English: He also sent a letter saying: The power of the court lies in the chancellor, and the appointment of the chancellor cannot but be prudent!

古文：而间者多从郎官超升此位，虽晓习文法，长于应对，然察察小慧，类无大能。
现代文：然而近来尚书多由郎官升任，他们虽然通晓法令条文，擅长应对，但这只是一点小聪明，多没有处理大事的才能。
English: However, in the past, most of them were promoted from junior officials to senior officials. Although they knew grammar and were good at coping with problems, they were only mediocre and did not have the talent to govern the country and keep the people safe.

古文：宜鉴啬夫捷急之对，深思绛侯木讷之功也。 
现代文：虎圈啬夫曾敏捷地回答文帝的询问，但张释之认为不能因此而予以提拔；绛侯周勃质朴而不善于辞令，却建立了不朽的功勋。
English: Tigress had quickly answered Emperor Wen's inquiry, but Zhang Xizhi believed that he could not be promoted because of this; Zhou Bo was simple and not good at rhetoric, but he established an immortal merit.

古文：帝皆纳之。
现代文：圣上应当借鉴史事，三思而行。 
English: The Holy See should learn from history and think twice before acting.

古文：彪，贤之玄孙也。
现代文：章帝将他的意见全部采纳。韦彪是韦贤的玄孙。
English: Emperor Zhang adopted all of his opinions. Wei Biao is the great-great-grandson of Wei Xian.

古文：秋，七月，丁未，诏曰： 律云： 掠者唯得榜、笞、立 ；又《令丙》，棰长短有数。
现代文：秋季，七月丁未，章帝下诏： 汉律规定： 拷问犯人只许使用以下手段：杖击、鞭打、罚站。 此外，《令丙》对刑棍的长短有具体的规定。
English: In the autumn, on July 3rd, Emperor Zhang issued the following edict: According to the provisions of Hanrui, only the following means are allowed to be used to torture prisoners: caning, whipping, and punishment stations. In addition, "Order C" has specific provisions on the length of the torture stick.

古文：自往者大狱已来，掠者多酷，钻钅赞之属，惨苦无极。
现代文：自从先前大狱兴起以来，审案拷问多采用残酷的方式，诸如铁钳锁颈、锥刺肌肤之类，真是惨痛无比。
English: Since the rise of the previous Great Prisons, most of the interrogation methods used in court cases are cruel, such as iron shackles around the neck, skin pricking with cones, and so on. It's really painful.

古文：念其痛毒，怵然动心。
现代文：想到毒刑的苦楚，令人恐惧而心惊！
English: It's so painful, it's heartbreaking.

古文：宜及秋冬治狱，明为其禁。 
现代文：今后应当等到秋冬两季再审理案件，并明确规定禁止事项。 
English: In the future, cases should not be heard until the autumn and winter, and prohibitions should be clearly stipulated.

古文：八月，甲子，太尉邓彪罢，以大司农郑弘为太尉。
现代文：八月甲子，将太尉邓彪免官，任命大司农郑弘为太尉。
English: In August, Emperor Jiazi dismissed Lieutenant Deng Biao from his post and appointed Senior Secretary Nong Zhenghong as a second lieutenant.

古文：癸酉，诏改元。
现代文：八月癸酉，下诏改变年号。
English: At the stroke of August, the following edict changed the year.

古文：丁酉，车驾南巡。
现代文：八月丁酉，章帝到南方巡视。
English: In August, Ding Xi and Zhang Di went on a tour to the south.

古文：诏： 所经道上郡县，无得设储跱。
现代文：下诏说： 沿途所经各州、各县，不得事先积蓄用品。
English: The following edict stated: No supplies should be stockpiled in advance in any of the states or counties along the route.

古文：命司空自将徒支柱桥梁。
现代文：命司空自带工人修架桥梁。
English: Ordered Skytrax to bring its own employee support bridge.

古文：有遣使奉迎，探知起居，二千石当坐。 
现代文：若有派遣使者接驾，打探行踪动静的，要向郡太守问罪。 
English: There are people to welcome, visit and live in, and two thousand koku is a crime.

古文：九月，辛丑，幸章陵；十月，己未，进幸江陵；还，幸宛。
现代文：九月辛丑，章帝临幸章陵。十月，己未，又临幸江陵。在归途之中，又临幸宛城。
English: In September, Emperor Zhang visited the auspicious Zhangling. In October, he visited the auspicious Jiangling. On his way back, he also visited the auspicious Wangcheng.

古文：召前临淮太守宛人硃晖，拜尚书仆射。
现代文：章帝召见前任临淮太守、宛人朱晖，将他任命为尚书仆射。
English: Emperor Zhang summoned his predecessor, Lin Huai, the empress dowager, and his addressee, Zhu Xi, and appointed him as Shang Shu's valet.

古文：晖在临淮，有善政，民歌之曰： 强直自遂，南阳硃季，吏畏其威，民怀其惠。 
现代文：朱晖在临淮任上作了不少好事，人民歌颂道： 刚强自专，南阳朱季，官怕其威，民怀其惠。 
English: Zhu Xi did a lot of good things in the post of Lin Huai, and the people praised him: strong self-discipline, Nanyang Zhu Ji, officials are afraid of his authority, and the people cherish his benefits.

古文：时坐法免，家居，故上召而用之。
现代文：当时朱晖因犯法免职，正在家中闲居，因此章帝召他出来任用。
English: At that time, Zhu Xi was dismissed for breaking the law and was idling at home, so Emperor Zhang called him out for appointment.

古文：十一月，己丑，车驾还宫。
现代文：十一月己丑，章帝返回京城皇宫。
English: In November, Emperor Zhang returned to the imperial palace in Beijing.

古文：尚书张林上言： 县官经用不足，宜自煮盐，及复修武帝均输之法。 
现代文：尚书张林上奏说： 国家经费不足，应当由官府自行煮盐专卖，并恢复武帝时的均输法。 
English: Shangshu Zhang Lin said in his report: National funds are insufficient, the government should sell salt exclusively, and restore the uniform distribution method of the time of Emperor Wu.

古文：硃晖固执以为不可，曰： 均输之法，与贾贩无异，盐利归官，则下民穷怨，诚非明主所宜行。 
现代文：朱晖坚决反对这一建议，他说： 实行均输法，会使官员和商贩没有区别。而将卖盐所得之利归于官府，盐民就会因为贫困产生怨恨，这实在不是圣明君王所应作的事情。 
English: Zhu Rong resolutely opposed this suggestion, saying, "Implementing the equal contribution law will make no difference between officials and merchants. If the profits from the sale of salt are attributed to the government, the salt people will be resentful because of poverty. This is really not something that the Holy Emperor should do."

古文：帝因发怒切责诸尚书，晖等皆自系狱。
现代文：于是章帝大怒，严厉斥责尚书台官员，朱晖等人全都自投监狱等待问罪。
English: As a result, Emperor Zhang flew into a rage, severely reprimanded Shang Shudai officials, and Zhu Xi and others all threw themselves into prison to await arraignment.

古文：三日，诏敕出之，曰： 国家乐闻驳议，黄发无愆。诏书过耳，何故自系！ 
现代文：三天以后，章帝下诏将他们释放，说道： 我乐于听反对的意见，老先生并没有罪，只是诏书的斥责过分罢了，你们为什么要自投监狱！ 
English: Three days later, Emperor Zhang issued an edict to release them, saying: I am willing to listen to opposing opinions. The old gentleman is not guilty, but the edict's reprimand is excessive. Why do you want to throw yourselves in jail!

古文：晖因称病笃，不肯复署议。
现代文：朱晖于是自称病重，不肯再在奏议上署名。
English: Zhu Xi then said that he was too ill and would no longer take part in political deliberation.

古文：尚书令以下惶怖，谓晖曰： 今临得谴让，奈何称病，其祸不细！ 
现代文：尚书令以下官员十分惊慌恐惧，对朱晖说： 如今正面临谴责，怎么可以称病，此祸不小！ 
English: Shang Shuling was very afraid of the following, and said to Zhu Xi: Now that you are facing reproach, why do you say that you can't get sick?

古文：晖曰： 行年八十，蒙恩得在机密，当以死报。
现代文：朱晖说： 我年近八十，而蒙受皇恩，能够参与尚书机密，应当以死相报。
English: Zhu Xi said: I am eighty years old, I have received the emperor's favor and can keep secrets, and I should repay him with my death.

古文：若心知不可，而顺旨雷同，负臣子之义！
现代文：如果我心知事不可行，却顺从旨意附合，那就违背了做臣子的大义！
English: If I can't do what I want, but obey the will and go along with it, then I have violated the great justice of being a courtier!

古文：今耳目无所闻见，伏待死命。 
现代文：如今我耳不听，眼不见，伏身等待诛杀。 
English: Now my ears and eyes can't hear anything, so I'll just wait for death.

古文：遂闭口不复言。
现代文：便闭口不再说话。
English: So he shut up and stopped talking.

古文：诸尚书不知所为，乃共劾奏晖。
现代文：尚书们不知如何是好，于是就一同上书弹劾朱晖。
English: Without knowing what they were doing, they all impeached Zhu Xi together.

古文：帝意解，寝其事。
现代文：章帝怒气已平，便将此事搁置。
English: The emperor understood what everyone meant and did not pursue the matter.

古文：后数日，诏使直事郎问晖起居，太医视疾，太官赐食，晖乃起谢；复赐钱十万，布百匹，衣十领。
现代文：又过了几天，章帝下诏，命值班的郎官问候朱晖，派御医前往诊病，太官送去食物。朱晖这才起来谢恩。章帝又赏赐他十万钱，一百匹布，十套衣服。
English: A few days later, Emperor Zhang issued an edict, and the steward on duty greeted Zhu Xi, sent a doctor to diagnose the disease, and the eunuch sent food. Zhu Xi only got up to thank him. Emperor Zhang also rewarded him with 100,000 yuan, 100 pieces of cloth, and 10 sets of clothes.

古文：鲁国孔僖、涿郡崔骃同游太学，相与论： 孝武皇帝，始为天子，崇信圣道，五六年间，号胜文、景；及后恣己，忘其前善。 
现代文：鲁国人孔僖、涿郡人崔同在太学读书，他们在一起谈论道： 孝武皇帝刚即位的时候，信仰圣人之道，最初五六年的政绩，被人称作胜过文、景二帝。但到后来放纵自己，抛弃了从前的善政。 
English: Confucius, a native of Lu, and Cui, a native of Shixian, were both studying at Taixue. They talked together: When Emperor Xiaowu first came to the throne, he believed in the way of saints, and in the first five or six years of his reign, he was called better than Wen and Jing II. But later he indulged himself and abandoned the previous good governance.

古文：邻房生梁郁上书，告 骃、僖诽谤先帝，刺讥当世 ，事下有司。
现代文：邻屋的另一位太学生梁郁听到议论，上书控告他们： 崔、孔僖诽谤先帝，讽刺当朝。 此案交付有关部门审理。
English: Another student in the neighboring house, Liang Yu, heard the discussion and wrote a letter to sue them: Cui and Kongyao slandered the former emperor and satirized that day. This case was submitted to the relevant departments for trial.

古文：因诣吏受讯。
现代文：崔去见官吏。
English: Cui went to see the official.

古文：僖以书自讼曰： 凡言诽谤者，谓实无此事而虚加诬之也。
现代文：孔僖上书自我申辩说： 但凡说到诽谤，是指无中生有地进行诬蔑。
English: In his self-defense letter, Kong Yu-chu said, "But when it comes to slander, it refers to making slander out of nothing.

古文：至如孝武皇帝，政之美恶，显在汉史，坦如日月，是为直说书传实事，非虚谤也。
现代文：至于孝武皇帝，他政绩上的得失，都显示在汉史上，清楚如日月一样，而我们的议论，只是直述史书记载的事实，并不是诽谤。
English: As for Emperor Xiaowu, the gains and losses of his political achievements are as clear as the sun and the moon in the history of the Han Dynasty, and our discussion is just a straightforward description of the facts recorded in the historical record, not a slander.

古文：夫帝者，为善为恶，天下莫不知，斯皆有以致之，故不可以诛于人也。
现代文：身为皇帝，无论做好事还是坏事，天下人无不知晓，那都是能够了解到的，因此不能对议论者进行责备。
English: As an emperor, no matter whether he does good or bad, no one in the world does not know, it can be understood, so it is impossible to reproach the commentators.

古文：且陛下即位以来，政教未过而德泽有加，天下所具知也，臣等独何讥刺哉！
现代文：况且陛下即位以来，政治、礼教没有过失，而恩德增加，这是天下人俱知的事实。我们偏要讽刺什么呢！
English: Moreover, since His Majesty's accession to the throne, there have been no mistakes in politics, etiquette, and education, while benevolence has increased, which is a fact known to all. Why should we be ironic?

古文：假使所非实是，则固应悛改，傥其不当，亦宜含容，又何罪焉！
现代文：假如我们批评的是事实，那么本应诚心改正，倘若不当，也应包涵，又为什么要向我们问罪！
English: If what we criticize is the truth, then we should sincerely correct it, and if it is improper, we should also forgive it, and why should we be blamed!

古文：陛下不推原大数，深自为计，徒肆私忌以快其意，臣等受戮，死即死耳，顾天下之人，必回视易虑，以此事窥陛下心，自今以后，苟见不可之事，终莫复言者矣。
现代文：陛下不推求研究国家命运，深入考虑本朝国策，而只是大搞个人忌讳，以求快意。我们被诛杀，死就死罢了，只怕天下人定将转过目光，改变看法，以这件事来窥测陛下的心思。从今以后，即使见到不对的事，却终不肯再出来说话了。
English: His Majesty does not seek to study the fate of the country and deeply consider the national policy of this dynasty, but only engages in personal taboos to seek pleasure. We are killed, we die, we die, we are afraid that the world will turn their eyes, change their views, and use this matter to spy on His Majesty's thoughts. From now on, even if they see something wrong, they will not want to come out and speak again.

古文：齐桓公亲扬其先君之恶以唱管仲，然后群臣得尽其心，今陛下乃欲为十世之武帝远讳实事，岂不与桓公异哉！
现代文：春秋时，齐桓公曾亲自公布前任国君的罪恶，向管仲请教处理的办法，从此以后，群臣才尽心地为他效力。而如今陛下却要为远在十世的武帝掩盖事实真相，这岂不是与齐桓公大相径庭！
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, Prince Qi Huan personally announced the sins of the previous sovereign, and asked Guanzhong for advice on how to deal with them. From then on, the courtiers served him wholeheartedly. But now His Majesty wants to cover up the truth for Emperor Wu, who is far away in the tenth generation. Isn't this very different from Prince Qi Huan!

古文：臣恐有司卒然见构，衔恨蒙枉，不得自叙，使后世论者擅以陛下有所比方，宁可复使子孙追掩之乎！
现代文：我担心有关部门会突然定案，让我衔恨蒙冤，不能自作申辩，因而使后世评论历史的人擅将陛下有所比喻，难道可以再要子孙为陛下掩饰吗？
English: I am worried that the relevant departments will suddenly make a final decision, leaving me with a grudge and a grievance, unable to defend myself, thus causing future generations of commentators on history to arbitrarily use His Majesty as a metaphor. Can we ask our children and grandchildren to cover up for His Majesty?

古文：谨诣阙伏待重诛。 
现代文：我谨来到皇宫门前，伏身等候严厉的处罚。 
English: I respectfully went to the imperial court to wait for the re-enactment.

古文：书奏，帝立诏勿问，拜僖兰台令史。
现代文：奏书呈上，章帝立即下诏停止追究，并将孔僖任命为兰台令史。
English: After the report was submitted, Emperor Zhang immediately issued an edict to stop the investigation, and appointed Kong Yu as the official historian of the Lantai Emperor.

古文：十二月，壬子，诏： 前以妖恶禁锢三属者，一皆蠲除之，但不得在宿卫而已。 
现代文：十二月壬子，章帝下诏： 以往因犯有妖言惑众之罪，而父族、母族、妻族遭到禁锢而不准做官的，一律解除禁锢，只是不准到宫廷值宿警卫。 
English: In December of the same year, Emperor Zhang issued an edict: In the past, anyone whose father, mother, or wife had been imprisoned for the crime of using magic to deceive the public, and who was not allowed to become an official, would have their imprisonment lifted, but they would not be allowed to be guards on duty at the palace.

古文：庐江毛义，东平郑均，皆以行义称于乡里。
现代文：庐江人毛义、东平人郑均，都以仁义的行为，称道于乡里。
English: Mao Yi, a native of the Minjiang River, and Zheng Jun, a native of the Dongping River, were both praised in the countryside for their benevolent and righteous behavior.

古文：南阳张奉慕义名，往候之，坐定而府檄适至，以义守安阳令，以捧檄而入，喜动颜色，奉心贱之，辞去。后义母死。征辟皆不至，奉乃叹曰： 贤者固不可测。往日之喜，乃为亲屈也。 均兄为县吏，颇受礼遗，均谏不听，乃脱身为佣，岁馀得钱帛，归以与兄曰： 物尽可复得，为吏坐臧，终身捐弃。 
现代文：郑均规劝他，但遭到了拒绝。于是郑均离家出走，为人帮佣。过了一年多，他把所得钱帛带回家送给哥哥，说道： 钱物用光，可以再得，而当官犯下赃罪，就要终生罢黜。 
English: Zheng Jun advised him, but he refused. So Zheng Jun ran away from home and became a domestic helper. After more than a year, he took the money he earned home and gave it to his brother, saying: Money and goods are used up and can be obtained again, but if an official commits the crime of embezzlement, he will be dismissed for life.

古文：兄感其言，遂为廉洁。
现代文：哥哥被他的话所感动，此后便成为清官。
English: His brother was moved by his words and later became a magistrate.

古文：均仕为尚书，免归。
现代文：郑均官至尚书，后来免官回乡。
English: Zheng Junguan to Shangshu, later dismissed and returned to his hometown.

古文：帝下诏褒宠义、均，赐谷各千斛，常以八月长吏差问起居，加赐羊酒。
现代文：章帝下诏嘉奖毛义、郑均，各赏赐一千斛谷。每年八月，地方官员都要去拜访他们，问候起居平安，并加赐羊、酒。
English: Emperor Zhang issued an edict to commend Mao Yi and Zheng Jun, awarding each of them a thousand mu of rice. Every August, local officials would visit them to wish them a safe life, and give them more sheep and wine.

古文：武威太守孟云上言： 北匈奴复愿与吏民合市。 
现代文：武威太守孟云上书说： 北匈奴愿意恢复同汉朝官民的贸易。 
English: Meng Yun, the military governor of Wuwei, wrote: The Northern Xiongnu is willing to resume trade with the officials and people of the Han Dynasty.

古文：诏许之。
现代文：章帝下诏批准。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict approving it.

古文：北匈奴大且渠伊莫訾王等驱牛马万馀头来与汉交易，南单于遣轻骑出上郡钞之，大获而还。
现代文：于是北匈奴大且渠伊莫訾王等人，驱赶牛马一万余匹前来，准备同汉朝交易。南匈奴单于派轻装骑兵从上郡出发对他们进行袭击，夺取大批牲畜后返回。
English: As a result, the Northern Huns, led by King Imhotep and others, drove more than ten thousand cattle and horses to prepare to trade with the Han Dynasty. The Southern Huns sent light cavalry from the upper county to attack them, captured a large number of livestock and returned.

古文：帝复遣假司马和恭等将兵八百人诣班超，超因发疏勒、于窴兵击莎车。
现代文：章帝又派副司马和恭等率领八百援兵到班超那里去。班超于是征调疏勒、于阗军队进攻莎车。
English: Emperor Zhang also sent eight hundred reinforcements to Ban Chao, led by his deputy Sima and Qiong. Ban Chao then sent troops to Shule and Yu's army attacked Shache.

古文：莎车以赂诱疏勒王忠，忠遂反，从之，西保乌即城。
现代文：莎车向疏勒王忠进行贿赂，忠便背叛了汉朝，跟随莎车，西行到乌即城据守。
English: Yarko bribed Shule Wang Zhong, who then betrayed the Han Dynasty and followed Yarko westward to Wuzhong to defend the city.

古文：超乃更立其府丞成大为疏勒王，悉发其不反者以攻忠。
现代文：于是班超改立疏勒府丞成大为疏勒王，征发所有未叛变的疏勒军队去进攻忠。
English: The superintendent of the school set up a separate Shule government with Fujo Chengda as the king of Shule, and mobilized all the troops that had not rebelled to attack Shule Wangzhong.

古文：使人说康居王执忠以归其国，乌即城遂降。
现代文：又派人游说康居王将忠捉住，带回本国。于是乌即城向班超投降。
English: He also sent someone to lobby King Kangju to capture Tadazane and bring him back to his country. As a result, Wuzhicheng surrendered to Banchao.

