古文：贞观初，太宗谓萧瑀曰： 朕少好弓矢，自谓能尽其妙。
现代文：贞观初年，唐太宗对大臣萧瑀说： 朕从年轻的时候就喜欢张弓射箭，自以为懂得如何识别弓箭的好坏。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Minister Xiao Yu: I have liked to shoot arrows from a young age, and I think I know how to recognize the quality of a bow and arrow.

古文：近得良弓十数，以示弓工。
现代文：近来得到十几把上好的弓箭，就把它们拿给做弓箭的师傅看，弓箭师傅说： 都不好。 
English: Having recently acquired a dozen or so excellent bows and arrows, he showed them to the bow and arrow craftsman. The bow and arrow craftsman said, "They are all no good."

古文：乃曰： 皆非良材也。 
现代文：我询问其中的原因，弓箭师傅说： 木头的中心不端正，那么它的脉理就是歪斜的。
English: When I asked why, the archer said, "If the center of the wood is crooked, then the grain of the wood is crooked."

古文：朕问其故，工曰： 木心不正，则脉理皆邪，弓虽刚劲而遣箭不直，非良弓也。 
现代文：这样的弓虽然刚劲有力，但射出去的箭却不直，所以不是上好的弓。 从这件事中我领悟出很多道理。
English: Although this kind of bow is strong and powerful, the arrows it shoots are not straight, so it is not a good bow.

古文：朕始悟焉。朕以弧矢定四方，用弓多矣，而犹不得其理。况朕有天下之日浅，得为理之意，固未及于弓，弓犹失之，而况于理乎？ 
现代文：我是通过战争取得天下的，所用过的弓箭非常多，而我尚且不懂得识别弓箭的要领；更何况我得到天下的时间还很短，对于治理国家的道理，肯定不比我对弓箭的知识掌握得多。然而，我对弓箭的了解尚有失偏颇，更何况治理国家的要领呢？ 
English: I came to the world through war, I have used a lot of bows and arrows, and I still don't know how to identify the essentials of bows and arrows; moreover, the time I got to the world is still very short, and I certainly don't have a better grasp of the principles of governing the country than my knowledge of bows and arrows. However, my understanding of bows and arrows is still unbalanced, let alone the essentials of governing the country?

古文：自是诏京官五品以上，更宿中书内省，每召见，皆赐坐与语，询访外事，务知百姓利害、政教得失焉。
现代文：从此以后，唐太宗定期召见五品以上的京官和中书内省的官员，每次召见，唐太宗都要赐给他们座位并与他们悉心交谈，仔细询问宫廷外面的事，以便对老百姓的疾苦和政教得失有全面详细的了解。
English: From then on, Emperor Taizong regularly summoned officials of five grades and above in Beijing and officials of Zhongshu Inner Province. Every time he summoned them, Emperor Taizong had to give them seats and carefully talk with them, carefully inquire about things outside the palace, in order to have a comprehensive and detailed understanding of the sufferings of the common people and the gains and losses of politics and religion.

古文：贞观元年，太宗谓黄门侍郎王珪曰： 中书所出诏敕，颇有意见不同，或兼错失而相正以否。
现代文：贞观元年，唐太宗对黄门侍郎王珪说： 中书省所草拟颁发出的文告命令，门下省颇有不同看法，有时还发现错误，有没有指出纠正？
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to the Yellow Gate's attendant Wang Qian: The announcement order drafted and issued by the Ministry of Chinese Literature, the subordinate provinces have quite different opinions, and sometimes errors are found. Has it been pointed out and corrected?

古文：元置中书、门下，本拟相防过误。
现代文：本来设置中书省、门下省，原是为了相互防止发生过错失误。
English: Originally, the Ministry of Education and Culture and the Ministry of Education and Culture were set up in order to prevent mistakes from happening.

古文：人之意见，每或不同，有所是非，本为公事。
现代文：人的意见，常有不同，有正确的也有反对的，追根溯源都是为了公事。
English: People's opinions are often different, some are right and some are against, and tracing the roots is all for the sake of business.

古文：或有护己之短，忌闻其失，有是有非，衔以为怨。或有苟避私隙，相惜颜面，知非政事，遂即施行。
现代文：但有的人对自己护短，不愿听到指出自己的过失，人家有所是非，就在心里暗自怨恨；有的为了避免和人家搞坏关系，互相顾惜面子，明明知道不属政事的范围，仍马上施行。
English: However, some people are self-serving and do not want to hear their own faults pointed out, and secretly harbor resentment in their hearts when others do something wrong; some people, in order to avoid bad relations with others, take care of each other's face, and still implement it immediately even though they know it does not belong to the scope of government affairs.

古文：难违一官之小情，顿为万人之大弊。此实亡国之政，卿辈特须在意防也。
现代文：这种迁就一个官员的私情，可以立刻成为万民的大害，实在是亡国之政，你们特别需要注意防范。
English: This kind of accommodation of an official's personal feelings can immediately become a great harm to all the people. It is really a policy of ruining the country. You need to pay special attention to prevent it.

古文：隋日内外庶官，政以依违，而致祸乱，人多不能深思此理。
现代文：隋朝时候内外大小百官，办理政事没有主见，而酿成祸乱，人们多不能仔细想想其中的道理。
English: At the time of the Sui Dynasty, there were hundreds of officials at home and abroad, and they had no idea how to handle political affairs, which led to disaster. People could not think carefully about the reason.

古文：当时皆谓祸不及身，面从背言，不以为患。后至大乱一起，家国俱丧，虽有脱身之人，纵不遭刑戮，皆辛苦仅免，甚为时论所贬黜。
现代文：当时那些人都以为灾祸不会落到自己身上，当面说好话，背后搬弄是非，总认为没有什么；到后来大乱一起，家和国统统丢失，即使有脱身的人，虽没有遭到刑戮，也是吃尽苦头仅免一死，还会受到世人的舆论谴责。
English: At that time, those people all thought that the calamity would not fall on themselves. They said good things to each other in front of others and played tricks behind their backs. They always thought that there was nothing to it. Later, with the great turmoil, their homes and countries were all lost. Even those who managed to escape, although they were not tortured, had to go through hardships to avoid death. They would also be condemned by the world's public opinion.

古文：卿等特须灭私徇公，坚守直道，庶事相启沃，勿上下雷同也。 
现代文：你们身为大臣特别应该灭除私情，秉公办事，坚守正道，凡事互相启发帮助，不要上下一个腔调。 
English: As ministers, you should especially eliminate personal feelings, act impartially, stick to the right path, inspire and help each other in all things, and do not raise the next tone.

古文：贞观二年，太宗问黄门侍郎王珪曰： 近代君臣治国，多劣于前古，何也？ 
现代文：贞观二年，太宗问黄门侍郎王珪说： 近代帝王和大臣治理国家，多半不如古代，不知是什么原因？ 
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong asked the Yellow Gate attendant Wang Xi, saying: Modern emperors and ministers govern the country, mostly not as well as in ancient times, I don't know why?

古文：对曰： 古之帝王为政，皆志尚清静，以百姓之心为心。
现代文：王珪回答： 古代帝王治理国家，大都崇尚清净无为，以百姓为中心。
English: Wang Yao answered: Ancient emperors governed the country, and most of them advocated purity and inaction, with the people at the center.

古文：近代则唯损百姓以适其欲，所任用大臣，复非经术之士。
现代文：然而近代的君王却是以损害百姓的利益来满足自己的私欲，任用的大臣，也再不是饱学经史的儒雅之士。
English: However, modern monarchs have begun to satisfy their own selfish desires at the expense of the interests of the people, and the ministers they appoint are no longer gentle people who are well-versed in history.

古文：汉家宰相，无不精通一经，朝廷若有疑事，皆引经决定，由是人识礼教，治致太平。
现代文：汉代的宰相没有谁不精通一种经书的，朝廷上有什么解决不了的疑难问题，都引经据典，参照经书来决断，于是，人人懂得礼教，国家太平安定。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was no prime minister who was not proficient in a scripture. Any difficult issues that could not be resolved by the imperial court were decided by quoting scriptures and referring to scriptures. As a result, everyone knew the etiquette and the country was peaceful and stable.

古文：近代重武轻儒，或参以法律，儒行既亏，淳风大坏。 
现代文：但是，近代却重视武功，轻视儒术，或施用刑律来治理国家，从而导致儒术受到破坏，古代淳朴的民风也荡然无存。 
English: However, modern times have attached importance to martial arts, despised Confucianism, or used criminal law to govern the country, which led to the destruction of Confucianism and the loss of the simple folk customs of ancient times.

古文：太宗深然其言。
现代文：太宗听后深有同感。
English: After listening to Taizong, I feel the same way.

古文：自此百官中有学业优长，兼识政体者，多进其阶品，累加迁擢焉。
现代文：从此以后，官员中凡是精通儒学，又懂得治国之道的，大都得以提拔，并委以重任。
English: Since then, most of the officials who are proficient in Confucianism and know how to govern the country have been promoted and entrusted with important tasks.

古文：贞观三年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 中书、门下，机要之司，擢才而居，委任实重。
现代文：贞观三年，太宗对身边的侍臣说： 朝廷设置中书、门下这样的机要部门，选择人才担任官职，他们的任务和作用其实是很大的。
English: In the third year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong said to the attendants around him: The imperial court has set up such important departments as Zhongshu and Menxia to select talents to hold official positions, and their tasks and roles are actually great.

古文：诏敕如有不稳便，皆须执论。
现代文：皇上下达的诏书和命令如果不正确，他们必须大胆地指出来。
English: If the edicts and orders issued by the emperor are incorrect, they must boldly point it out.

古文：比来惟觉阿旨顺情，唯唯苟过，遂无一言谏诤者，岂是道理？
现代文：然而近来我却发现他们只会唯命是从，顺水推舟，没有一个人敢直言进谏，朝廷的官员怎么能够有这样唯唯诺诺的作风呢？
English: Recently, however, I have found that they only obey orders and go with the flow. No one dares to speak out. How can the officials of the imperial court have such a meek style?

古文：若惟署诏敕、行文书而已，人谁不堪？何烦简择，以相委付？
现代文：如果一个官吏只知道发布诏书，抄抄写写，又何必千辛万苦地选择官员，委以重任呢？
English: If a government official only knows how to issue an imperial edict, copy, copy, copy, why go to all the trouble of selecting officials and entrusting them with important tasks?

古文：自今诏敕疑有不稳便，必须执言，无得妄有畏惧，知而寝默。 
现代文：从今以后，上传下达的诏书如果不妥当，官吏必须直接指出来，不能因为害怕冒犯了我的威仪，心中有数却沉默不言、假装糊涂。 
English: From now on, officials must directly point out if the issued edict is inappropriate, and they must not be silent and pretend to be confused because they are afraid of offending my dignity.

古文：贞观四年，太宗问萧瑀曰： 隋文帝何如主也？ 
现代文：贞观四年，太宗问大臣萧瑀： 隋文帝是一个怎样的君主？ 
English: In the fourth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong asked Minister Xiao Yu: What kind of monarch was the Sui Emperor Wen?

古文：对曰： 克己复礼，勤劳思政，每一坐朝，或至日昃，五品已上，引坐论事，宿卫之士，传飧而食，虽性非仁明，亦是励精之主。 
现代文：萧瑀答说： 他是一个勤于政务，遵从礼仪，很有自制力的帝王。每次上朝处理政务都要忙到日落西山，五品以上的官吏，都要与他一起坐谈国事，宿卫之士，废寝忘食，他虽然说不上仁义开明，却也算得上是一个励精图治的君王。 
English: Xiao Wei replied, "He is an emperor who is diligent in government affairs, observes etiquette, and is very self-disciplined. Every time he goes to the imperial court to deal with government affairs, he is so busy that he has to stay up until sunset. Officials with five or more court ranks have to sit down with him to talk about state affairs. He is a member of the palace guard, and he never sleeps. Although he cannot be said to be benevolent and open-minded, he can be counted as a king who works hard to govern.

古文：太宗曰： 公知其一，未知其二。
现代文：太宗说： 你只知其一，不知其二。
English: Taizong said, "You only know one, you don't know the other."

古文：此人性至察而心不明。
现代文：隋文帝虽然性格谨慎周密，但内心并不能明察秋毫。
English: Although Sui Wendi was a cautious and meticulous person, he could not see clearly in his heart.

古文：夫心暗则照有不通，至察则多疑于物。
现代文：心里不能明察秋毫就容易犯错误，即使小心谨慎却也容易疑心重重。
English: It's easy to make mistakes if you can't see things clearly in your heart, and it's easy to be suspicious even if you're careful.

古文：又欺孤儿寡妇以得天下，恒恐群臣内怀不服，不肯信任百司，每事皆自决断，虽则劳神苦形，未能尽合于理。
现代文：他本来是靠欺骗前朝皇帝的遗孤寡妇，夺取江山登上皇位的，所以总是害怕群臣不服，因此，他不肯相信手下的每个官员，每一件事他都自己判断决定，劳神费力，尽管日理万机，最终却事与愿违，而且事情也不是都处理得合情合理。
English: He originally took the throne by deceiving the orphaned widow of the former emperor, so he was always afraid of the disapproval of the courtiers. Therefore, he did not want to trust every official under him, he judged and decided everything on his own. He worked hard, and despite all his efforts, it eventually backfired, and things were not all handled reasonably.

古文：朝臣既知其意，亦不敢直言，宰相以下，惟即承顺而已。
现代文：朝中的大臣虽然知道这点，却不敢指出来。丞相以下的官吏，处理政务都只是敷衍应对。
English: Although the ministers in the imperial court knew this, they did not dare to point it out. The officials below the prime minister only dealt with government affairs in a perfunctory manner.

古文：朕意则不然，以天下之广，四海之众，千端万绪，须合变通，皆委百司商量，宰相筹画，于事稳便，方可奏行。
现代文：我不能像隋文帝那样治理江山，天下如此之大，事情如此之多，千头万绪又变化多端，我怎能一人定夺。只有将政务交给百官商议，由宰相筹划，事情才会稳当，才可以奏请皇上，下令天下执行。
English: I cannot govern the country as Emperor Sui did. The country is so vast, and there are so many things going on, with so many complexities and changes. How can I make decisions alone? Only when government affairs are handed over to a hundred officials for discussion, and are planned by the prime minister, will things be stable, and only then can they be submitted to the emperor and ordered to be implemented by the whole country.

古文：岂得以一日万机，独断一人之虑也。且日断十事，五条不中，中者信善，其如不中者何？
现代文：只靠一个人殚精竭虑是不行的。如果一天处理十件政事，有五件不合理，这已经算是比较好的了，何况还有更差的呢？
English: It is not enough to rely on one person's diligence. If you deal with ten political affairs a day, and five are unreasonable, this is already relatively good, and what's more, there are worse ones?

古文：以日继月，乃至累年，乖谬既多，不亡何待？
现代文：而日积月累，长此以往，错误必然更多，国家不灭亡才怪！
English: However, with the passage of time, there will inevitably be more mistakes, and it is no wonder that the country will not perish!

古文：岂如广任贤良，高居深视，法令严肃，谁敢为非？ 
现代文：为什么不广泛地任用贤良的人才，皇帝在朝廷密切关注政事，严肃法纪，谁还敢胡作非为呢？ 
English: Why not widely appoint virtuous people, the emperor pays close attention to political affairs in the court, serious legal discipline, who would dare to do anything wrong?

古文：因令诸司，若诏敕颁下有未稳便者，必须执奏，不得顺旨便即施行，务尽臣下之意。
现代文：唐太宗于是下令，凡是诏策有失误的地方，官吏必须上奏指出，不能只按照圣旨上的意思办事，必须尽到一个做臣子的职责。
English: Emperor Taizong then ordered that whenever there was a mistake in the imperial edict, officials must report it to the emperor, pointing out that they could not just act according to the will of the emperor, but must fulfill their duties as a vassal.

古文：贞观五年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 治国与养病无异也。病人觉愈，弥须将护，若有触犯，必至殒命。
现代文：贞观五年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 治理国家和养病没有什么不同，病人感觉好起来，就格外需要将息调护，如果触犯禁忌，就会导致死亡。
English: In the fifth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to the ministers of the attendants: There is no difference between governing the country and curing the disease. When the patient feels better, it is especially necessary to adjust the breathing. If the taboo is violated, it will lead to death.

古文：治国亦然，天下稍安，尤须兢慎，若便骄逸，必至丧败。
现代文：治理国家也是这样，天下稍微安定的时候，尤其需要兢兢业业、谨慎小心，如果就此骄奢放纵，必然弄到衰乱覆亡。
English: The same is true of governing the country. When the world is somewhat stable, it is especially necessary to be dedicated, prudent and careful. If you indulge in arrogance, you will inevitably lead to decline and fall.

古文：今天下安危，系之于朕，故日慎一日，虽休勿休。
现代文：如今天下安危，责任都落在我的身上，所以我一天比一天谨慎，即使做好了也不自夸。
English: If today's safety is in danger, the responsibility falls on me, so I am more and more cautious every day, even if I do it well, I will not boast.

古文：然耳目股肱，寄于卿辈，既义均一体。宜协力同心，事有不安，可极言无隐。
现代文：至于起耳目手足作用的，就寄托于你们了，既然君臣是一个整体，就理当协力同心，发现事情做得不稳妥的，要尽量把意见讲出来，不要有什么保留。
English: As for the role of ears, eyes, hands and feet, it is entrusted to you. Since the monarchs and ministers are a whole, it is reasonable to work together as one. If you find that things are not done properly, you should try to express your opinions and do not have any reservations.

古文：傥君臣相疑，不能备尽肝膈，实为国之大害也。 
现代文：倘若君臣互相猜疑，不能讲真心话，实在是国家的大害啊！ 
English: If princes and ministers are suspicious of each other and cannot speak the truth, it is really a great harm to the country!

古文：贞观六年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 看古之帝王，有兴有衰，犹朝之有暮，皆为敝其耳目，不知时政得失，忠正者不言，邪谄者日进，既不见过，所以至于灭亡。
现代文：贞观六年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 纵观古代的帝王，有的兴起有的衰亡，好像有了早晨就必有夜晚一样。这都是由于耳目受到蒙蔽，不了解当时政治的得失，忠诚正直的人不敢直言劝谏，邪恶谄谀的人却一天天得势，君主听不到自己的过失，最终自然灭亡。
English: In the sixth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his attendant ministers: Throughout the ancient emperors, some rise and some decline, as if there is a morning, there must be a night. This is all due to the fact that the ears and eyes are blinded, do not understand the political gains and losses at that time, loyal and honest people dare not speak out, but evil and wicked people gain power day by day, the monarch cannot hear his own mistakes, and eventually die naturally.

古文：朕既在九重，不能尽见天下事，故布之卿等，以为朕之耳目。
现代文：我既然身居九重深宫，不可能对天下的事情都看到，所以委托卿等，作为我的耳目了解下情。
English: Since I live in Jiu Sheng Palace, it is impossible for me to see all the things in the world, so I entrust you to be my eyes and ears to understand the situation.

古文：莫以天下无事，四海安宁，便不存意。
现代文：千万不可以认为天下无事、四海安宁就不在意。
English: We must not think that there is nothing wrong with the world, and that we do not care about peace in the world.

古文：可爱非君，可畏非民。
现代文：可爱的是百姓指出君王的过失，可畏的是上位为难百姓。
English: It is admirable for the people to point out the faults of the monarch, but it is terrible for the people to be embarrassed by their superiors.

古文：天子者，有道则人推而为主，无道则人弃而不用，诚可畏也。 
现代文：做天子的，如果有道，人们就推戴他做人主；如果无道，人们就把他废弃而不用。这真可怕啊！ 
English: As the Son of God, if there is a way, people will accept him as the Lord of men; if there is no way, people will discard him and not use him. This is really terrible!

古文：魏征对曰： 自古失国之主，皆为居安忘危，处治忘乱，所以不能长久。
现代文：魏徵回答说： 从古以来的失国之君，都是因为在安定的时候忘记了危亡，在清平的时候忘记了动乱，所以不能长治久安。
English: Wei Zheng replied, "Since ancient times, all the kings who lost their countries did so because they forgot peril and death in times of stability, and forgot turmoil in times of peace, so they could not maintain long-term peace.

古文：今陛下富有四海，内外清晏，能留心治道，常临深履薄，国家历数，自然灵长。
现代文：如今陛下拥有天下，内外清平安定，能够留心治国的方法，经常保持如临深渊、如履薄冰那样谨慎的姿态，国运自然会长久。
English: Now that His Majesty has the whole world, peace and stability at home and abroad, and can pay attention to the methods of governing the country, and always maintain a cautious attitude as if approaching the abyss and treading on thin ice, the national movement will naturally last long.

古文：臣又闻古语云： 君，舟也；人，水也。水能载舟，亦能覆舟。 
现代文：我又听古人说过： 君主是船，百姓是水，水能浮载船，也能把船掀翻。 
English: I also heard the ancients say: The sovereign is a ship, the people are water, water can float a ship, but it can also overturn a ship.

古文：陛下以为可畏，诚如圣旨。 
现代文：陛下认为百姓的力量可畏，确实讲得很对。 
English: His Majesty was indeed right when he said that the power of the people is formidable.

古文：贞观六年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 古人云： 危而不持，颠而不扶，焉用彼相？ 
现代文：贞观六年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 古人讲过： 国家在危急时不去支持，社稷颠覆时又不能去扶助，哪能要这样的人来做宰相？ 
English: In the sixth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to the attendant ministers: The ancients said: The state does not support in times of crisis, and cannot support when society is subverted. How can such a person be made prime minister?

古文：君臣之义，得不尽忠匡救乎？
现代文：从君臣大义来讲，臣下能不竭尽忠心匡正补救吗？
English: From the perspective of the great justice of the sovereign and the vassal, can the vassal not exhaust his loyalty and rectify the remedy?

古文：朕尝读书，见桀杀关龙逄，汉诛晁错，未尝不废书叹息。
现代文：我常读书，每当看到夏桀杀死关龙逄、汉景帝诛杀晁错时，未尝不抛下书卷叹息。
English: I often read books, and whenever I saw that Xia Yao killed Guan Longtao and Han Jingdi made a mistake, I would not hesitate to throw away the book and sigh.

古文：公等但能正词直谏，裨益政教，终不以犯颜忤旨，妄有诛责。
现代文：你们只要能义正词严地直言劝谏，使有益于政治教化，我绝不会以冒犯尊严、违背旨意而滥责罚你们的。
English: As long as you can speak truthfully, sternly and forthrightly, so that it is beneficial to political education, I will never abuse your dignity and violate your will.

古文：朕比来临朝断决，亦有乖于律令者。公等以为小事，遂不执言。
现代文：我近来亲临朝堂处理政事，也有违背法令的地方，而你们却认为这是小事，不据理力争。
English: Recently, I came to the Imperial Palace to deal with government affairs in person, and there were some violations of laws and regulations, but you thought it was a small matter and fought against it unreasonably.

古文：凡大事皆起于小事，小事不论，大事又将不可救，社稷倾危，莫不由此。
现代文：凡大事都是从小事开始，小事不追究，大事就会坏到不可收拾的地步，国家危亡，都是由此而起。
English: All big things start from small things. If small things are not investigated, big things will deteriorate to an unmanageable level, and the country will be in danger.

古文：隋主残暴，身死匹夫之手，率土苍生，罕闻嗟痛。
现代文：隋炀帝残暴，死于匹夫之手，天下百姓，很少听到有人为他痛惜的。
English: Sui and Qin emperors were brutal and died at the hands of their subordinates. People around the world rarely heard anyone feel sorry for them.

古文：公等为朕思隋氏灭亡之事，朕为公等思龙逄、晁错之诛，君臣保全，岂不美哉！ 
现代文：你们替我想想隋朝灭亡的事情，我为你们想想关龙逢、晁错被杀的教训，君臣之间相互保全，岂不很好！ 
English: You think for me about the demise of the Sui Dynasty, and I think for you about the lessons of close encounters and mistaken killings. Isn't it good for princes and ministers to protect each other?

古文：贞观七年，太宗与秘书监魏征从容论自古理政得失，因曰： 当今大乱之后，造次不可致化。 
现代文：贞观七年，唐太宗和秘书监魏徵漫谈自古以来的治理国家的得失时说： 如今大乱之后，不能急于实现大治。 
English: In the seventh year of Zhenguan, when Tang Taizong and his secretary Guan Weizheng rambled on about the gains and losses of governing the country since ancient times, he said: "Nowadays, after the turmoil, we can't rush to achieve great governance.

古文：征曰： 不然，凡人在危困，则忧死亡；忧死亡，则思化；思化，则易教。
现代文：魏徵说： 不对。大凡人在危难困苦的时候，就忧虑死亡，忧虑死亡就盼望天下太平；盼望天下太平就容易进行教化。
English: Wei Zheng said, "That's not right. Ordinary people worry about death when they are in danger or distress. When they worry about death, they hope for world peace. When they hope for world peace, it is easy to carry out enlightenment."

古文：然则乱后易教，犹饥人易食也。 
现代文：因此大动乱之后容易教化，正像饥饿的人对饮食容易满足。 
English: Therefore, it is easy to be enlightened after a great disturbance, just as it is easy for a hungry person to be satisfied with food.

古文：太宗曰： 善人为邦百年，然后胜残去杀。
现代文：太宗说： 贤明的人治理好国家需要百年之久，才能消灭残虐，废除杀戮。
English: Taizong said: It will take a hundred years for wise people to govern the country well, in order to eliminate cruelty and abolish killing.

古文：大乱之后，将求致化，宁可造次而望乎？ 
现代文：大乱之后，要想大治，怎可在短期内做到呢？ 
English: After the great turmoil, if we want to have a large-scale reform, how can we do it in a short time?

古文：征曰： 此据常人，不在圣哲。
现代文：魏徵说： 这话是对一般人说的，并不能用在圣明的人身上。
English: Wei Zheng said: This was said to ordinary people, and cannot be applied to holy people.

古文：若圣哲施化，上下同心，人应如响，不疾而速，期月而可，信不为难，三年成功，犹谓其晚。 
现代文：如果圣明的人来施行教化，上下同心，人们就会像回声那样迅速响应，事情不求快也会很快推行下去，一年就见成效，看来并非难事，三年成功，还该说太晚了。 
English: If the holy people come to carry out the edification and have the same heart, the people will respond as quickly as the echo, and the matter will be implemented quickly. It seems that it is not difficult to see the results in one year, and it is too late to say that it is successful in three years.

古文：太宗以为然。
现代文：太宗认为魏徵说得对。
English: Taizong thought that Wei Zheng was right.

古文：封德彝等对曰： 三代以后，人渐浇讹，故秦任法律，汉杂霸道，皆欲化而不能，岂能化而不欲？
现代文：封德彝等人对太宗说： 夏、商、周三代以后，百姓日渐浮薄奸诈，所以秦朝专用法律治国，汉朝以仁义杂用刑法治国，都是想教化好百姓，但没有成功，怎么会是可以教化却不去做呢？
English: Fong Deyu and others said to Taizong: After Xia, Shang and the Third Dynasty, the people became more and more devious and treacherous. Therefore, the Qin Dynasty used special laws to govern the country, and the Han Dynasty governed the country with benevolence, justice and punishment. They all wanted to educate the people well, but did not succeed. How could they be educated but not do it?

古文：若信魏征所说，恐败乱国家。 
现代文：如果相信了魏徵的话，恐怕要败乱国家。 
English: If you believe Wei Zheng, I'm afraid you will ruin the country.

古文：征曰： 五帝、三王，不易人而化。行帝道则帝，行王道则王，在于当时所理，化之而已。
现代文：魏徵说： 五帝、三王治国并没有把百姓掉换过就能把他们教化好，施行帝道就成其为帝，施行王道就成其为王，关键在于当时治理者施行了教化而已。
English: Wei Zheng said: The five emperors and three kings did not change the people when they ruled the country, but they could educate them well. If they practiced the emperor's way, they would become emperors, and if they practiced the king's way, they would become kings. The key is that the rulers at that time practiced enlightenment.

古文：考之载籍，可得而知。
现代文：请看古书上的记载就可以知道。
English: Please look at the records in ancient books to find out.

古文：昔黄帝与蚩尤七十余战，其乱甚矣，既胜之后，便致太平。
现代文：从前黄帝与蚩尤作战七十多次，已乱得很厉害，而打胜以后，就能很快太平起来。
English: Once upon a time, the Yellow Emperor fought with Chu You more than seventy times, and it was already very chaotic, but after the victory, it would quickly become peaceful.

古文：九黎乱德，颛顼征之，既克之后，不失其化。
现代文：九黎作乱，颛顼出兵征讨，平定以后，仍不失其为治世。
English: Jiu Li made a riot and sent out soldiers to investigate, and after it was pacified, he still ruled the country.

古文：桀为乱虐，而汤放之，在汤之代，既致太平。
现代文：夏桀昏乱淫虐，商汤把他赶走，在汤统治之时就实现了太平。
English: Xia Yao was lewd and debauched, Shang Tang drove him away, and when Tang ruled, peace was achieved.

古文：纣为无道，武王伐之，成王之代，亦致太平。
现代文：商纣专干无道的事情，周武王便起兵讨伐，到他儿子周成王在位时，也实现了太平。
English: King Zhou Wu raised an army to fight against the mercantile elite, who were doing unscrupulous things, and by the time his son King Zhou Cheng was on the throne, peace had been achieved.

古文：若言人渐浇讹，不及纯朴，至今应悉为鬼魅，宁可复得而教化耶？ 
现代文：如果说百姓日渐浮薄奸诈，再也不会淳朴，那到现在都应变得和鬼魅一样，还能施行教化吗？ 
English: If it is said that the people are becoming more and more devious and treacherous, and will never be simple again, then up to now they should all become like ghosts, and can they still carry out enlightenment?

古文：德彝等无以难之，然咸以为不可。
现代文：封德彝等人想不出什么话来辩驳，可是还认为魏徵的话行不通。
English: Feng Dejun and others could not think of anything to refute, but they still thought that Wei Zheng's words would not work.

古文：太宗每力行不倦，数年间，海内康宁，突阙破灭，因谓群臣曰： 贞观初，人皆异论，云当今必不可行帝道、王道，惟魏征劝我。
现代文：太宗坚持推行教化，毫不懈怠，几年之间，天下康复安定，突厥被打败臣服，因而太宗对群臣说： 贞观初年，人们颇有异议，认为当今必不能搞帝道、王道，只有魏徵劝我推行。
English: Emperor Taizong insisted on carrying out the edification and did not slack off. Within a few years, the world recovered and stabilized, and the Turks were defeated and subjugated. Therefore, Emperor Taizong said to his courtiers: In the first year of Zhenguan, there were quite a few objections. People thought that it was impossible to carry out the imperial way and the royal way today, and only Wei Zheng advised me to carry it out.

古文：既从其言，不过数载，遂得华夏安宁，远戎宾服。
现代文：我听了他的话，不过几年，就做到中原安宁、边远的外族臣服。
English: I listened to his words, but after a few years, I achieved peace in the Central Plains and the submission of the outlying foreign tribes.

古文：突厥自古以来常为中国勍敌，今酋长并带刀宿卫，部落皆袭衣冠。
现代文：突厥从来就是中原的强敌，如今突厥的首领却佩刀值宿禁卫，部落也跟着穿戴中国衣冠。
English: The Turks have always been a strong enemy of the Central Plains, but now the leaders of the Turks wear swords as guards, and the tribes also wear Chinese crowns.

古文：使我遂至于此，皆魏征之力也。 
现代文：使我取得这样的成就，都是魏徵的功劳。 
English: It is all thanks to Wei Zheng that I have achieved such success.

古文：顾谓征曰： 玉虽有美质，在于石间，不值良工琢磨，与瓦砾不别。
现代文：又回头对魏徵说： 玉虽有美好的本质，但藏在石头里，没有好的工匠去雕琢研磨，那就和瓦块碎石没有什么区别。
English: He turned back to Wei Zheng and said: Although jade has a beautiful essence, it is hidden in the stone, and if there is no good craftsman to carve and grind it, it is no different from broken tiles.

古文：若遇良工，即为万代之宝。
现代文：如果遇上好的工匠，就可以成为流传万代的珍宝。
English: If you meet a good craftsman, you can become a treasure that will be passed down for generations.

古文：朕虽无美质，为公所切磋，劳公约朕以仁义，弘朕以道德，使朕功业至此，公亦足为良工尔。 
现代文：我虽没有好的本质被你雕琢研磨，多亏你用仁义来约束我，用道德来光大我，使我能有今天这样的功业，你也确实是一个良好的工匠啊。 
English: Although I do not have a good essence to be carved and polished by you, thanks to your benevolence to restrain me and morality to enlighten me, so that I can have such a career today, you are indeed a good craftsman.

古文：贞观八年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 隋时百姓纵有财物，岂得保此？
现代文：贞观八年，太宗李世民对侍臣们说： 隋朝的时候，老百姓即使拥有财物，但怎能保得住呢？
English: In the eighth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Li Shimin said to his courtiers: During the Sui Dynasty, even if the common people had wealth, how could they survive?

古文：自朕有天下已来，存心抚养，无有所科差，人人皆得营生，守其资财，即朕所赐。
现代文：自从我平定天下以来，一心一意体恤百姓，没有什么差役摊派，每个人都能维持生计，守住自己的钱财，这些都是我赐予他们的。
English: Since I pacified the world, I have given them a single-minded compassion for the people, there is no duty to pay, everyone can make a living and keep their money, these are what I have given them.

古文：向使朕科唤不已，虽数资赏赐，亦不如不得。 
现代文：要是我不停地加收各种赋税，即使多次赏赐资助他们，还不如不这样做。 
English: If I had to keep adding taxes of all kinds, even if I had to give them subsidies again and again, I'd rather not do it.

古文：魏征对曰： 尧、舜在上，百姓亦云 耕田而食，凿井而饮 ，含哺鼓腹，而云 帝何力 于其间矣。
现代文：魏徵听了，回答说： 尧、舜在世的时候，百姓会对尧或舜说 我靠种庄稼获得食物，靠打井取得泉水 。
English: Wei Zheng listened and replied: "Dao, during your lifetime, the people will say to you or me, 'I get food by planting crops and spring water by digging wells.'

古文：今陛下如此含养，百姓可谓日用而不知。 
现代文：现在陛下如此关爱百姓，百姓可能觉得这只是满足了日常所需而什么都不知道。 
English: Now that His Majesty is so concerned about the people, the people may feel that this is just to meet their daily needs and they don't know anything.

古文：又奏称： 晋文公出田，逐兽于砀，入大泽，迷不知所出。
现代文：魏徵觉得这些话说得还不透彻、清楚，还不足以让太宗明白其中的道理，便又向太宗上奏道： 晋文公出去打猎，在砀山这个地方追赶野兽，进入了河水交错的地方，迷失了道路，不知道该从哪儿走出去。
English: Wei Zheng felt that these words were not yet thorough and clear, not enough to let Taizong understand the truth, so he also wrote to Taizong: Jinwen Gong went hunting, chased the beast in this place of Lushan, entered the place where the rivers intersected, lost the road, and did not know where to go.

古文：其中有渔者，文公谓曰： 我，若君也，道将安出？
现代文：不久发现了一个打鱼人，文公对打鱼人说： 我是你的国君，这路该从哪里出去？
English: Not long after, a fisherman was spotted. Wen Gong said to the fisherman: "I am your sovereign, where should I go from here?

古文：我且厚赐若。 
现代文：如果你告诉我，我会重重地赏赐你。 
English: If you tell me, I will reward you handsomely.

古文：渔者曰： 臣愿有献。 
现代文：打鱼的人说： 我愿意带路。 
English: The fisherman said, I will lead the way.

古文：文公曰： 出泽而受之。 
现代文：文公说： 走出这个大泽再领赏吧。 
English: Wengong said: Let's get out of this Osawa and receive the reward.

古文：于是送出泽。文公曰： 今子之所欲教寡人者，何也？
现代文：打鱼的人回答： 鸿鹄要是生活在汹涌澎湃的大河海洋之上，就能保全性命；如果迁徙到小河周围，就会受到猎人弓箭的袭击。
English: The fisherman replied, "If the great egret lives in a large, turbulent river or ocean, it can save its life; if it migrates to a small river, it will be attacked by hunters' bows and arrows.

古文：今君出兽砀，入至此，何行之太远也？ 文公曰： 善哉！ 
现代文：龟鳖只要生活在深水中，就能安然无恙；如果跑到浅水滩，必然会受到打鱼人的威胁。现在你在砀山追捕野兽，一直追赶到了这个地方，是不是走得太远了呢？ 文公听了，大声赞叹： 太好了！ 
English: As long as the turtle dove lives in deep water, it can swim safely; if it runs to the shallow water beach, it will inevitably be threatened by the fisherman. Now you are chasing the beast in Lushan, and have chased it all the way to this place, is it too far? Wen Gong listened and loudly praised: Great!

古文：谓从者记渔者名。
现代文：便命令随行的人记下打鱼人的姓名。
English: He then ordered his entourage to write down the names of the fishermen.

古文：渔者曰： 君何以名？
现代文：打鱼的人说： 你凭什么叫做国君呢？
English: The fisherman said, "Why do you call yourself the king of the country?

古文：君尊天事地，敬社稷，保四国，慈爱万民，薄赋敛，轻租税，臣亦与焉。
现代文：是国君就应该尊奉天地，敬重社稷，保卫边疆，爱护百姓，减轻各种徭役赋税，我也就得到好处了。
English: If you are the ruler of the country, you should respect heaven and earth, respect society, protect the border, love the people, and reduce all kinds of taxes, and I will also benefit.

古文：君不尊天，不事地，不敬社稷，不固四海，外失礼于诸侯，内逆民心，一国流亡，渔者虽有厚赐，不得保也。 
现代文：国君要是不尊天事地，不祭祀社稷之神，不巩固边防，外不结交诸侯，内又丧失民心，一旦国破家亡，我这个打鱼人，即使拥有你丰厚的赏赐，也得不到保全啊。 
English: If the ruler does not respect heaven and earth, does not worship the gods of the community, does not strengthen the border defense, does not make friends with the princes outside, and loses the hearts of the people inside, once the country is ruined, I, the fisherman, even if I have your rich reward, will not be protected.

古文：遂辞不受。 
现代文：打鱼人于是坚决推辞，拒不接受文公的赏赐。 
English: The fisherman then firmly declined, refusing to accept the reward from Wengong.

古文：太宗曰： 卿言是也。 
现代文：太宗听了魏徵的话，称赞道： 好！好！
English: Taizong listened to Wei Zheng's words and praised: Good! Good!

古文：贞观九年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 往昔初平京师，宫中美女珍玩无院不满。
现代文：你说得太对了。 贞观九年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 当年刚刚平定京师，宫中的美女、奇珍玩物，没有一个宫院不是满满的。
English: You are so right. In the ninth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to the ministers of the attendants: In that year, the capital was just conquered, and there was no palace that was not full of beautiful women and rare toys in the palace.

古文：炀帝意犹不足，征求无已，兼东西征讨，穷兵黩武，百姓不堪，遂致亡灭。
现代文：可隋炀帝还是不满足，横征暴敛搜求不止，加上东征西讨，穷兵黩武，弄得百姓无法忍受，于是导致了隋朝灭亡。
English: However, the Sui and Qian Dynasties were still not satisfied. They continued to demand more and more extortion, violence, and searches, as well as the eastward and westward campaigns, and made the people unbearable, which led to the demise of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：此皆朕所目见，故夙夜孜孜，惟欲清净，使天下无事。遂得徭役不兴，年谷丰稔，百姓安乐。
现代文：这些都是我亲眼见到的。因此我每天从早到晚辛勤努力、毫无厌倦，只求清净无为，使天下不生事端，从而做到徭役停罢，五谷丰收，百姓安居乐业。
English: These are all things I have seen with my own eyes. Therefore, I work hard every day from morning to night, without getting tired. I just want to be clean and do nothing, so that there will be no trouble in the world. In this way, I can make sure that the plowing will stop, the harvest will be plentiful, and the people will live and work in peace.

古文：夫治国犹如栽树，本根不摇，则枝叶茂荣。
现代文：治国好比种树，只要树根稳固不动摇，就能枝繁叶茂。
English: Governing a country is like planting a tree. As long as the roots of the tree are firm and unshakable, it can grow branches and leaves.

古文：君能清净，百姓何得不安乐乎？ 
现代文：君主能够实行清净无为，百姓怎会不安居乐业呢？ 
English: If the monarch can practice pure inaction, how can the people not live and work happily?

古文：贞观十六年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 或君乱于上，臣治于下；或臣乱于下，君治于上。
现代文：贞观十六年，太宗问侍臣： 君主昏庸，不理政务，而臣子在下面兢兢业业地料理国事，相较于臣子犯上作乱，而君主清明，哪一个的危害更大呢？ 
English: In the 16th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong asked his courtiers: Which is more harmful, that the monarch is dim-witted and does not attend to government affairs, while the courtiers diligently attend to state affairs below, or that the courtiers commit disorder while the monarch is lucid?

古文：二者苟逢，何者为甚？ 特进魏征对曰： 君心治，则照见下非。诛一劝百，谁敢不畏威尽力？
现代文：魏徵答说： 君主圣明，就能够明察秋毫，对臣子的是非曲直了如指掌，满朝百官谁敢不服，谁敢不尽心尽力为朝廷效力呢？
English: Wei Zhaobao said: The monarch is so wise that he can see through the shadows, and he knows the rights and wrongs of his vassals like the back of his hand. Who among the hundreds of officials throughout the dynasty would dare to disobey, and who would dare not to do their best to serve the imperial court?

古文：若昏暴于上，忠谏不从，虽百里奚、伍子胥之在虞、吴，不救其祸，败亡亦继。 
现代文：但是如果君主昏庸，不听劝告，虽然有百里奚、伍子胥这样的忠臣，依然无法避免祸患，国家败亡是必然的事情。 
English: However, if the monarch is dim-witted and does not listen to advice, even though there are loyal retainers such as Bai Lijun and Wu Zixuan, it is still impossible to avoid disaster, and the country's downfall is inevitable.

古文：太宗曰： 必如此，齐文宣昏暴，杨遵彦以正道扶之得治，何也？ 
现代文：唐太宗说： 可能是这样，但是我看到北齐文宣帝昏庸残暴，大臣杨遵彦却能够用严明的政治匡扶朝纲，使北齐的统治得以维持，这又如何解释呢？ 
English: Tang Taizong said, "It may be so, but how can I explain the fact that I saw that Emperor Xuan of Northern Qi was dull-witted and cruel, but Minister Yang Zunyan was able to maintain the rule of Northern Qi with a strict political program of supporting the dynasty?"

古文：征曰： 遵彦弥缝暴主，救治苍生，才得免乱，亦甚危苦。
现代文：魏徵说： 杨遵彦侍奉的是暴君，他能为天下苍生做好事做实事，使国家幸免于难，的确显得十分艰难。
English: Wei Zheng said: Yang Zunyan is a tyrant, he can do good things for the world, and it is indeed very difficult for the country to survive.

古文：与人主严明，臣下畏法，直言正谏，皆见信用，不可同年而语也。 
现代文：这哪能与国君威严圣明，臣子敬畏守法，敢于进献忠言，君臣之间互相信任支持相提并论啊。 
English: How can this be compared with the majesty and sanctity of the sovereign, the reverence and law-abidingness of the courtiers, the courage to offer loyal advice, and the mutual trust and support between the monarchs and courtiers?

古文：贞观十九年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 朕观古来帝王，骄矜而取败者，不可胜数。
现代文：贞观十九年，太宗对周围的侍臣说： 我看自古以来，那些由于骄傲自大、目中无人而导致亡国的君王，简直多得数不清。
English: In the 19th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong said to the attendants around him: I think that since ancient times, the number of kings who have led to the ruin of the country due to pride and arrogance, and no one in their eyes, is simply countless.

古文：不能远述古昔，至如晋武平吴、隋文伐陈已后，心逾骄奢，自矜诸己，臣下不复敢言，政道因兹弛紊。
现代文：我姑且不说年代久远的事，像晋武帝灭掉吴国、隋文帝征服陈国之后，内心狂妄自大，生活腐朽奢靡，处处不可一世。手下的臣子再没有谁敢多说话，于是国政日渐松弛混乱。
English: Let me not speak of things that happened long ago. For example, after Emperor Jin Wu destroyed the State of Wu and Emperor Sui Wen conquered the State of Chen, the emperor became arrogant, his life was decadent and extravagant, and everything was out of control. None of his subordinates dared to speak out, and the state affairs became increasingly chaotic.

古文：朕自平定突厥、破高丽已后，兼并铁勒，席卷沙漠，以为州县，夷狄远服，声教益广。
现代文：我自从平定突厥、打败高丽、兼并铁勒、席卷沙漠以来，让它们一一成为我的疆土，可以说边境上的外族无不敬畏天威，我国的声威教化从此广布四海。
English: Ever since I pacified the Turks, defeated the Koryo, annexed Tiru, and swept through the deserts, I have let them all become my territory. It can be said that all the foreign tribes on the border are not afraid of heaven, and our country's influence has spread all over the world.

古文：朕恐怀骄矜，恒自抑折，日旰而食，坐以待晨。
现代文：我由此而害怕内心滋长自满情绪，常常自我告诫：要勤于朝政，废寝忘食，不敢怠慢。
English: Because of this, I was afraid that complacency would grow in my heart, and I often admonished myself: I must be diligent in court politics, I must not forget to eat and sleep, and I must not neglect my duties.

古文：每思臣下有谠言直谏，可以施于政教者，当拭目以师友待之。
现代文：每天都期待有臣子大胆直谏，并且可以把它用于国家的政治教化，我要用对待师长那样的礼节对待忠臣。
English: Every day, I expect courtiers to be bold and direct, and I can use it for the political education of the country. I will treat loyal courtiers with the same courtesy as I treat teachers.

古文：如此，庶几于时康道泰尔。 
现代文：如果君臣能做到这样，那么国泰民安的日子就指日可待了。 
English: If you can do this, then the days of Guotai Min'an are just around the corner.

古文：太宗自即位之始，霜旱为灾，米谷踊贵，突厥侵扰，州县骚然。
现代文：太宗刚即位那几年，国家接连发生旱灾、霜灾，粮食的价格很高，再加上突厥的进犯骚扰，州县更加不得安宁。
English: In the first few years of Emperor Taizong's reign, the country was hit by successive droughts and frosts, grain prices were high, and the Turkish invasion and harassment made the prefectures and counties even more restless.

古文：帝志在忧人，锐精为政，崇尚节俭，大布恩德。
现代文：太宗忧心百姓，精心治理国政，提倡节俭，大力广布恩德。
English: Taizong worried about the people, carefully managed state affairs, advocated frugality, and vigorously promoted social welfare.

古文：是时，自京师及河东、河南、陇右，饥馑尤甚，一匹绢才得一斗米。
现代文：当时，从京城到河东、河南、陇右一带地区，饥荒更为严重，甚至到了要一匹好丝才能够买上一斗米的境地。
English: At that time, from Beijing to the areas around Hedong, Henan and Shantou, the famine was more severe, even to the point where it took a good horse to buy a barrel of rice.

古文：百姓虽东西逐食，未尝嗟怨，莫不自安。
现代文：百姓虽然四处奔走寻找食物，但没有一个人埋怨，无不安分守己。
English: Although the people were running around looking for food, no one complained and kept to themselves.

古文：至贞观三年，关中丰熟，咸自归乡，竟无一人逃散。
现代文：到了贞观三年，关中一带大丰收，百姓一个个都回到了自己的家乡，竟然没有一个人逃散。
English: In the third year of Zhenguan, there was a great harvest in the Guanzhong area, and the people all returned to their hometowns one by one. Surprisingly, no one fled.

古文：其得人心如此。加以从谏如流，雅好儒术，孜孜求士，务在择官，改革旧弊，兴复制度，每因一事，触类为善。
现代文：太宗皇帝获得人心竟到了这种程度，加上太宗善于听取意见，喜欢儒家之说，真心诚意寻求有才能的人，任用选拔贤能的官吏，废除旧制度的弊端，建立了许多好的制度，举一反三，触类旁通，使国家秩序井然。
English: This is the extent to which Emperor Taizong won the people's hearts. In addition, Taizong was good at listening to opinions, liked Confucianism, sincerely sought talented people, appointed and selected competent officials, abolished the drawbacks of the old system, and established many good systems.

古文：初，息隐、海陵之党，同谋害太宗者数百千人，事宁，复引居左右近侍，心术豁然，不有疑阻。
现代文：当初，太宗的兄弟加害于他，一同参与的达到一千多人。祸乱被平息之后，太宗仍然任用这些人在他周围做官，大家都心地坦荡，从不互相猜疑。
English: At first, Emperor Taizong's brothers harmed him, with more than a thousand people participating. After the calamity was quelled, Emperor Taizong still appointed these people to be officials around him. Everyone was open-minded and never suspected each other.

古文：时论以为能断决大事，得帝王之体。
现代文：当时大家对此议论纷纷，都认为太宗能正确处理重大的事情，很符合一个帝王的身份。
English: At that time, there was a lot of discussion about this, and everyone thought that Taizong could correctly handle important matters, which was very consistent with the identity of an emperor.

古文：深恶官吏贪浊，有枉法受财者，必无赦免。
现代文：太宗痛恨贪官污吏，有徇私舞弊、接受贿赂行为的，没有一个得以赦免逃脱。
English: Taizong hated corrupt officials, and all of them were guilty of favoritism, fraud, and accepting bribes. None of them were pardoned and escaped.

古文：在京流外有犯赃者，皆遣执奏，随其所犯，置以重法。
现代文：在京城以外贪赃枉法的官员，太宗都会派遣专人，调查情况，根据他所犯的罪行进行严厉惩处。
English: For corrupt officials outside the capital, Taizong will send special personnel to investigate the situation and severely punish them according to the crimes they have committed.

古文：由是官吏多自清谨。
现代文：因此，贞观年间的官员大多清正廉洁，谨慎行事。
English: Therefore, most of the officials during the Zhenguan era were honest and prudent.

古文：制驭王公、妃主之家，大姓豪猾之伍，皆畏威屏迹，无敢侵欺细人。
现代文：不管是王公贵族，还是豪富商贾，都慑于皇帝的威严，一个个不敢作奸犯科，因此欺凌侵占百姓利益的事情销声匿迹。
English: Both princes and nobles, as well as wealthy merchants, were intimidated by the emperor's majesty, and they did not dare to commit treason and crimes, so the bullying and encroachment on the interests of the people disappeared.

古文：商旅野次，无复盗贼，囹圄常空，马牛布野，外户不闭。
现代文：出门旅游或做生意的人，也不会碰上小偷强盗，国家的牢房常常是空的，野外放牧的牛马不用看管，夜晚家家户户的门也不用上锁。
English: Those who go out to travel or do business will not encounter thieves and robbers, the country's prison cells are often empty, the cattle and horses grazing in the field do not have to be guarded, and the doors of every house do not have to be locked at night.

古文：又频致丰稔，米斗三四钱，行旅自京师至于岭表，自山东至于沧海，皆不赍粮，取给于路。
现代文：又加上年年丰收，一斗米才卖三四文钱。外出无论是从京城到岭南岭西，还是从山东到沧海，都用不着准备粮食，在路途中就可以轻易获得。
English: Coupled with the annual harvest, a barrel of rice only sells for three or four pennies. Whether traveling from Beijing to Lingnan and Lingxi, or from Shandong to Canghai, there is no need to prepare grain, and it can be easily obtained on the way.

古文：入山东村落，行客经过者，必厚加供待，或发时有赠遗。此皆古昔未有也。
现代文：在泰山周围的乡村赶路，行人经过这里，都会受到热情的款待，出发时还有东西赠送，这些事情都是亘古未有的。
English: In the villages around Mount Taishan, pedestrians passing through here will be warmly welcomed and given gifts when they leave, all of which are unprecedented.

