古文：七年春，公伐邾。
现代文：七年春季，鲁文公攻打邾国。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, Lu Wenkong attacked and conquered Yunnan.

古文：三月甲戌，取须句。
现代文：三月甲戌日，占取须句这个地方。
English: On Armor Day in March, take over this place.

古文：遂城郚。
现代文：于是修筑城邑。
English: So they built cities.

古文：夏四月，宋公王臣卒。
现代文：夏季四月，宋成公去世。
English: In the summer of April, Song Chenggong passed away.

古文：宋人杀其大夫。
现代文：宋国将自己的大夫杀死。
English: Song killed his own doctor.

古文：戊子，晋人及秦人战于令狐。
现代文：戊子日，晋国和秦国在令狐交战。
English: On the Day of the Rat, Jin and Qin were at war.

古文：晋先蔑奔秦。
现代文：晋国先蔑出使秦国。
English: Jin first sent an envoy to Qin.

古文：狄侵我西鄙。
现代文：狄国侵犯我西面边境。
English: The DPRK has violated our western border.

古文：秋八月，公会诸侯、晋大夫，盟于扈。
现代文：秋季八月，鲁文公与各诸侯及晋国大夫在扈地结盟。
English: In the autumn of August, Lord Luwen formed an alliance with various lords and Jin doctors in Handan.

古文：冬，徐伐莒。
现代文：冬季，徐国讨伐莒国。
English: In the winter, Xu's army invaded and conquered Yan's army.

古文：公孙敖如莒涖盟。
现代文：公孙敖到莒国参加盟会。
English: Gongsun Yao came to Shandong to participate in the alliance.

古文：七年春，公伐邾，间晋难也。
现代文：七年春季，鲁文公发兵攻打邾国，这是鲁国利用晋国内乱的空子。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, Luwen Gong sent troops to attack Shandong, which was a way for Lu to take advantage of the internal turmoil in Jin.

古文：三月甲戌，取须句，寘文公子焉，非礼也。
现代文：三月十七日，占取须句，让邾文公的儿子当守官，这是不合于礼仪的。
English: On the 17th of March, it was considered improper to allow the son of the Duke of Xianwen to serve as a guard.

古文：夏四月，宋成公卒。
现代文：夏季，四月，宋成公死了。
English: In the summer, in April, Song Chenggong died.

古文：于是公子成为右师，公孙友为左师，乐豫为司马，鳞矔为司徒，公子荡为司城，华御事为司寇。
现代文：这时候公子成做右师，公孙友做左师，乐豫做司马，鳞矔做司徒，公子荡做司城，华御事做司寇。
English: At this time, Gongsun Rongcheng was the right division, Gongsun You was the left division, Le Yu was the Sima, Qiqiao Rongcheng was the Sito, Gongzang Rongcheng was the Sicheng, and Hua Youji was the Sikou.

古文：昭公将去群公子，乐豫曰： 不可。
现代文：宋昭公准备杀死公子们。乐豫说： 不行。
English: Song Zhaogong prepared to kill the princes. Le Yu said: No.

古文：公族，公室之枝叶也，若去之，则本根无所庇廕矣。
现代文：公族，是公室的枝叶，如果去掉它，那么树干树根就没有遮盖了。
English: Public figures are the branches and leaves of the public office. If they are removed, then the trunk and roots of the tree will not be covered.

古文：葛藟犹能庇其本根，故君子以为比，况国君乎？
现代文：葛藟还能遮蔽它的躯干和根子，所以君子以它作为比喻，何况是国君呢？
English: Kudzu can also cover its trunk and roots, so a gentleman uses it as a metaphor, let alone a sovereign?

古文：此谚所谓庇焉而纵寻斧焉者也。
现代文：这就是俗话所说 树阴遮蔽，偏偏使用斧子 ，一定不可以。
English: This is the proverbial shade of the tree, but using an axe is definitely not allowed.

古文：必不可，君其图之。亲之以德，皆股肱也，谁敢携贰？
现代文：君王要考虑一下，如果用德行去亲近他们，那就都是左右辅弼的臣子，谁敢有二心？怎么要杀他们呢？ 
English: The prince should consider that if he uses virtue to get close to them, then they are all courtiers of the right and left aides. Who dares to have two hearts? How can he kill them?

古文：若之何去之？ 不听。
现代文：宋昭公不听。
English: Song Zhaogong did not listen.

古文：穆、襄之族率国人以攻公，杀公孙固、公孙郑于公宫。
现代文：穆公、襄公的族人率领国内的人们攻打昭公，在宫里杀了公孙固和公孙郑。
English: The clansmen of Mu Gong and Xiang Gong led the people in the country to attack Zhaogong and killed Gongsun Gu and Gongsun Zheng in the palace.

古文：六卿和公室，乐豫舍司马以让公子卬，昭公即位而葬。
现代文：六卿和公室讲和，乐豫放弃了司马的官职来让给公子卬。昭公即位后安葬被杀的人。
English: The six nobles and the court made peace, and Le Yu gave up the official post of Sima to give it to his son, Zhao. After Zhao Gong ascended the throne, he buried those who had been killed.

古文：书曰： 宋人杀其大夫。 不称名，众也，且言非其罪也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说： 宋人杀其大夫 ，不记载名字，这是由于人多而且他们没有罪。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that: Song people kill their doctors, but do not record their names, this is because there are many people and they are not guilty.

古文：秦康公送公子雍于晋，曰： 文公之入也无卫，故有吕、郤之难。 
现代文：秦康公送公子雍到晋国，说： 晋文公回国的时候没有卫士，所以有吕、郤发动的祸难。 
English: Qin Kangong sent his son Yong to Jin Province, saying: When Jinwen returned to the country, there were no guards, so there was a calamity caused by Lü and Yao.

古文：乃多与之徒卫。
现代文：于是就多给他步兵卫士。
English: So they gave him more bodyguards.

古文：穆嬴日抱大子以啼于朝，曰： 先君何罪？
现代文：穆嬴每天抱着太子在朝廷上啼哭，说： 先君有什么罪？
English: Every day, Mu Zheng held the crown prince in his arms and cried at the court, saying: "What is your predecessor's crime?

古文：其嗣亦何罪？
现代文：他的合法继承人有什么罪？
English: What is the sin of his heir?

古文：舍適嗣不立而外求君，将焉寘此？ 
现代文：丢开嫡子不立，反而到外边去求国君，你们准备怎样安置这个孩子？ 
English: How are you going to place this child, if you do not want to leave your son and instead go outside to plead with the sovereign?

古文：出朝，则抱以適赵氏，顿首于宣子曰： 先君奉此子也而属诸子，曰： 此子也才，吾受子之赐；不才，吾唯子之怨。 
现代文：出了朝廷，就抱着孩子到赵氏家去，向赵盾叩头，说： 先君捧着这个孩子嘱托给您，说： 这个孩子如果成材，我就是受了您的赐予；如果不成材，我就要怨您。 
English: When he left the court, he went to Zhao's house with the child in his arms and bowed to Zhao Dun, saying, "The forefather entrusted this child to you, saying, 'If this child succeeds, I will be blessed by you; if it fails, I will blame you.'

古文：今君虽终，言犹在耳，而弃之，若何？ 
现代文：现在国君虽然去世，话音还在耳边，现在反而丢掉它，怎么办？ 
English: Now, although the sovereign has passed away, the voice is still in our ears, but what if we lose it?

古文：宣子与诸大夫皆患穆嬴，且畏偪，乃背先蔑而立灵公，以御秦师。
现代文：赵盾和大夫们都怕穆嬴，而且害怕威逼，就背弃了先蔑而立灵公为君，并且发兵抵御秦国军队。
English: Zhao Dun and the doctors were afraid of Mu Xi, and they were afraid of intimidation, so they abandoned the pretense and established Ling Gong as the ruler, and sent troops to resist the Qin army.

古文：箕郑居守。
现代文：箕郑留守。
English: Zou Zheng is away.

古文：赵盾将中军，先克佐之。荀林父佐上军。先蔑将下军，先都佐之。
现代文：赵盾率领中军，先克辅助他；荀林父辅助上军；先蔑率领下军，先都辅助他。
English: Zhao Dun led the middle army, and Xian Ke assisted him; Yulin's father assisted the upper army; he led the lower army first, and they all assisted him.

古文：步招御戎，戎津为右。
现代文：步招为赵盾驾御战车，戎津作为车右。
English: Zhao Dun is shown driving the chariot, and Erjin is on the right.

古文：及堇阴，宣子曰： 我若受秦，秦则宾也；不受，寇也。
现代文：到达堇阴。赵盾说： 我们如果接受秦国送公子雍回来，他们就是客人；不接受，他们就是敌人。
English: Zhao Dun said, "If we accept Qin's sending back Prince Yong, they are our guests; if we do not accept, they are our enemies."

古文：既不受矣，而复缓师，秦将生心。
现代文：已经不接受了，而又慢慢地出兵，秦国将会动别的念头。
English: If it does not accept it and slowly sends troops, Qin will have second thoughts.

古文：先人有夺人之心，军之善谋也。
现代文：争取主动而有夺取敌人的决心，这是作战的好谋略。
English: To strive for the initiative and have the determination to seize the enemy, this is a good strategy for fighting.

古文：逐寇如追逃，军之善政也。 
现代文：驱逐敌人好像追赶逃亡者，这是作战的好战术。 
English: It is a good tactic in war to drive out the enemy as if chasing a fugitive.

古文：训卒利兵，秣马蓐食，潜师夜起。
现代文：于是就训练士兵，磨砺武器，把马喂饱，让部队吃饱，隐蔽行动，夜里出兵。
English: So he trained the soldiers, sharpened the weapons, fed the horses, fed the troops, concealed operations, and sent troops out at night.

古文：戊子，败秦师于令狐，至于刳首。
现代文：四月初一日，在令狐打败秦军，一直追到刳首。
English: On the first day of April, the fox defeated the Qin army in Linghu and chased it all the way to the dagger.

古文：己丑，先蔑奔秦，士会从之。
现代文：初二日，先蔑逃亡到秦国，士会跟着他。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, he fled to Qin Province, and his followers followed him.

古文：先蔑之使也，荀林父止之，曰： 夫人、大子犹在，而外求君，此必不行。
现代文：先蔑出使秦国的时候，荀林父劝阻他，说： 夫人和太子还在，反而到外边去求国君，这一定是行不通的。
English: When he sent the emissary to Qin first, Yulin's father dissuaded him, saying, "My wife and the prince are still there, but instead I'm going outside to ask the sovereign. This surely won't work.

古文：子以疾辞，若何？
现代文：您以生病作借口，行吗？
English: You'll use your illness as an excuse, right?

古文：不然将及。
现代文：不这样，祸患将会惹到您身上。
English: Otherwise, disaster will befall you.

古文：摄卿以往可也，何必子？
现代文：派一个代理卿前去就可以了，为什么一定要您去？
English: It is enough to send an acting lord forward, why do you have to go?

古文：同官为寮，吾尝同寮，敢不尽心乎！ 
现代文：在一起做官就是 寮 ，我曾经和您同寮，岂敢不尽我的心意呢？ 
English: Working together as officials is like a dormitory, I once shared a dormitory with you, how dare I not do my best?

古文：弗听。
现代文：先蔑没有听从。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：为赋《板》之三章。又弗听。
现代文：荀林父为他赋《板》这首诗的第三章，又没有听从。
English: Yulin father gave him the third chapter of the poem "Board," but he did not listen.

古文：及亡，荀伯尽送其帑及其器用财贿于秦，曰： 为同寮故也。 
现代文：等到逃亡出国，荀林父把他的妻子儿女和财货全部送到秦国，说： 这是为了同寮的缘故。 
English: After he fled the country, Yulin's father sent his wife, children, and all of their belongings to Qin, saying, "This is because of my roommate."

古文：士会在秦三年，不见士伯。
现代文：士会在秦国三年，没有和先蔑见面。
English: For three years, the scholars' association in Qin did not meet with the leader.

古文：其人曰： 能亡人于国，不能见于此，焉用之？ 
现代文：随行的人说： 能和别人一起逃亡到这个国家，而不能在这里见面，那有什么用处？ 
English: "What's the use of being able to escape to this country with other people and not being able to meet here?

古文：士季曰： 吾与之同罪，非义之也，将何见焉？ 
现代文：士会说： 我和他罪过相同，并不是认为他有道义才跟他来的，见面干什么？ 
English: The magistrate will say: I am guilty of the same crime as him, I did not come to him because I thought he was moral, why did I meet him?

古文：及归，遂不见。
现代文：一直到回国，没有见过面。
English: I didn't see him again until I returned to China.

古文：狄侵我西鄙，公使告于晋。
现代文：狄人侵袭我国西部边境，鲁文公派使者向晋国报告。
English: The Di people invaded the western border of our country, and Luwen sent an envoy to report to Jin.

古文：赵宣子使因贾季问酆舒，且让之。
现代文：赵宣子派贾季去问酆舒，同时责备他。
English: Zhao Xuan Zi sent Jia Ji to interrogate Yu Shu and scolded him at the same time.

古文：酆舒问于贾季曰： 赵衰、赵盾孰贤？ 
现代文：酆舒问贾季说： 赵衰、赵盾哪一个贤明？ 
English: Zou Shu asked Jia Ji: Zhao Zhen, Zhao Dun, which one is wise?

古文：对曰： 赵衰，冬日之日也；赵盾，夏日之日也。 
现代文：贾季回答说： 赵衰，是冬天的太阳；赵盾，是夏天的太阳。 
English: Jia Ji replied: Zhao Zhen is the winter sun; Zhao Dun is the summer sun.

古文：秋八月，齐侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、许男、曹伯会晋赵盾盟于扈，晋侯立故也。
现代文：秋季，八月，齐昭公、宋昭公、卫成公、陈共公、郑穆公、许昭公、曹共公和晋国的赵盾在扈地结盟，这是由于晋灵公即位的缘故。
English: In the autumn, in August, Qi Zhaogong, Song Zhaogong, Weicheng Gong, Chen Gongong, Zheng Mu Gong, Xu Zhaogong, Cao Gongong and Zhao Dun of Jin allied in Handan, which was due to the accession of Jinling Gong.

古文：公后至，故不书所会。
现代文：鲁文公晚到，所以《春秋》没有记载他参加会议。
English: Lu Wen Gong arrived late, so "Spring and Autumn" did not record his participation in the meeting.

古文：凡会诸侯，不书所会，后也。
现代文：凡是和诸侯会盟，如果不记载参加会的国家，就是因为晚到的缘故。
English: If the countries that participated in the association are not recorded, it is because they arrived late.

古文：后至不书其国，辟不敏也。
现代文：晚到，不记载这些国家，这是为了避免弄不清而误记。
English: Late arrivals do not record these countries, this is to avoid confusion and misremembering.

古文：穆伯娶于莒，曰戴己，生文伯，其娣声己生惠叔。
现代文：穆伯在莒国娶妻，名叫戴己，生了文伯；她的妹妹声己，生了惠叔。
English: Mu Bo married a woman named Dai Ji in Shan State and gave birth to Wen Bo; her sister, Xuan Ji, gave birth to Hui Shu.

古文：戴己卒，又聘于莒，莒人以声己辞，则为襄仲聘焉。
现代文：戴己死，穆伯又到莒国行聘，莒国人由于有声己而辞谢，所以就为襄仲行聘。
English: After Dai's death, Mubo went to Shandong to recruit him, but the Shandong people declined the offer because they had their own opinions, so he was recruited by Xiangzhong.

古文：冬，徐伐莒。莒人来请盟。穆伯如莒涖盟，且为仲逆。
现代文：冬季，徐国攻打莒国，莒国人前来请求结盟，穆伯到莒国参加盟会，同时为襄仲迎接莒女。
English: In winter, Xu attacked Yan, Yan people came to ask for alliance, Mu Bo went to Yan to attend the alliance meeting, and at the same time, he came to welcome Xiang Zhong's daughter.

古文：及鄢陵，登城见之，美，自为娶之。
现代文：到达鄢陵，登上城见到莒女，很美丽，就自己娶了她。
English: When he arrived at Fuling and went up to the city, he saw a beautiful maiden and married her himself.

古文：仲请攻之，公将许之。
现代文：襄仲请求攻打穆伯，文公准备答应。
English: Xiangzhong requested to attack Mubo, and Wenguang was ready to agree.

古文：叔仲惠伯谏曰： 臣闻之，兵作于内为乱，于外为寇，寇犹及人，乱自及也。
现代文：叔仲惠伯劝谏说： 下臣听说： 战争起于内部叫做乱，起于外部叫做寇。寇尚且伤人，乱就是自己打自己了。 
English: Uncle Zhong Huibo advised him, "Your vassal has heard that: a war that starts from the inside is called a riot, and one that starts from the outside is called a coup. A coup still hurts people, but a riot is when you fight yourself.

古文：今臣作乱而君不禁，以启寇仇，若之何？ 
现代文：现在臣下作乱而国君不加禁止，如果因此而引起外部敌人的进攻，怎么办？ 
English: Now that the vassals are rioting and the sovereign does not forbid it, what if this provokes an attack from an external enemy?

古文：公止之，惠伯成之。
现代文：文公就阻止襄仲的进攻。
English: Wenguang stopped Xiangzhong's attack.

古文：使仲舍之，公孙敖反之，复为兄弟如初。
现代文：惠伯给他们调解：让襄仲丢开莒女不娶，公孙敖就把莒女送回莒国，重新作为兄弟像起初一样。
English: Huibo mediated between them: let Xiangzhong divorce his daughter and not marry her, and his son-in-law sent his daughter back to his country, and they became brothers again, as they had been in the beginning.

古文：从之。
现代文：襄仲和公孙敖听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：晋郤缺言于赵宣子曰： 日卫不睦，故取其地，今已睦矣，可以归之。
现代文：晋国的郤缺对赵宣子说： 过去卫国不顺服，所以占取它的土地，现在已经顺服，可以还给它了。
English: The lackeys of Jin said to Zhao Xuanzi: In the past, the defenders of Jin did not obey, so they occupied its land, but now they have obeyed and can return it.

古文：叛而不讨，何以示威？
现代文：背叛了不加讨伐，用什么显示声威？
English: Betrayed without a fight, with what show of authority?

古文：服而不柔，何以示怀？
现代文：顺服了不加抚慰，用什么表示关怀？
English: If you obey without consolation, what do you use to show concern?

古文：非威非怀，何以示德？
现代文：不显示声威和不表示关怀，用什么显示德行？
English: If you don't show authority and don't show concern, how can you show virtue?

古文：无德何以主盟？
现代文：没有德行，如何主持盟会？
English: Without virtue, how can you preside over the league?

古文：子为正卿以主诸侯，而不务德，将若之何？
现代文：您作为正卿，主持诸侯之事而不致力于德行，打算怎么办？
English: What are you going to do, as a chancellor, presiding over the affairs of princes without devoting yourself to virtue?

古文：《夏书》曰： 戒之用休，董之用威，劝之以九歌勿使坏。 
现代文：《夏书》说： 把喜事告诉他，用威严督察他，用《九歌》勉励他，不要让他学坏。 
English: "Summer Book" said: Tell him happy things, supervise him with majesty, encourage him with "Nine Songs," and don't let him learn bad.

古文：九功之德皆可歌也，谓之九歌。
现代文：有关九功的德行都可以歌唱，叫做《九歌》。
English: Virtues related to the nine gongs can be sung, which is called "nine songs."

古文：六府、三事，谓之九功。
现代文：六府、三事，叫做九功。
English: Six prefectures, three things, is called nine gongs.

古文：水、火、金、木、土、穀，谓之六府。正德、利用、厚生，谓之三事。
现代文：水、火、金、木、土、谷，叫做六府；端正德行、利于使用、富裕民生，叫做三事。
English: Water, fire, gold, wood, earth, and valleys are called the six prefectures; proper moral conduct, beneficial use, and prosperous people's livelihood are called the three things.

古文：义而行之，谓之德礼。
现代文：合于道义而推行这些，叫做德、礼。
English: To do these things in a moral way is called virtue and propriety.

古文：无礼不乐，所由叛也。
现代文：在上为政无礼，则民不乐，这是叛变之所由来。
English: On the other hand, if the government is disrespectful, the people will not be happy, which is the origin of the mutiny.

古文：若吾子之德莫可歌也，其谁来之？
现代文：像您的德行，没有可以歌唱的，有谁肯来归服？
English: Like your virtue, there is no one who can sing, who is willing to submit?

古文：盍使睦者歌吾子乎？ 
现代文：何不使归服的人歌颂您呢？ 
English: Why not make the converted sing your praises?

古文：宣子说之。
现代文：赵宣子听了这番话很高兴。
English: Zhao Xuanzi was very happy to hear this.

