古文：李曜王铎薛昭纬孔纬宇文翰千字文语乞社山东佐史罗隐卢延让俳优人王舍城顾夐不调子司马都吴尧卿李任为赋
现代文：李曜王铎薛昭纬孔纬宇文翰千字文语乞社山东佐史罗隐卢延让俳优人王舍城顾夐不调子司马都吴尧卿李任为赋
English: Li Youwang, Zhe Xue, Zhao Wei, Kong Wei, Yu Wenhan, Shandong Zashi, Luo Yin, Lu Yan, let the haiku virtuoso Wang Shecheng, Gu Yao, and the non-tonalist Sima Du, Wu Yingqing, Li Ren, be awarded

古文：李曜
现代文：李曜
English: Li You

古文：唐尚书李曜罢歙州，与吴圆交代。
现代文：唐朝时尚书李曜罢任歙州。与新上任的吴圆交代所留之事。
English: Tang Dynasty fashion writer Li You stepped down from his post in Ganzhou and was replaced by the newly appointed Wu Yuan.

古文：有佐酒录事名媚川，聪明敏慧。
现代文：其中有个陪酒妓女名叫媚川，生得聪明可爱。
English: Among them, there was a prostitute named Amekawa, who was born clever and lovely.

古文：李颇留意，而已纳营籍妓韶光，托于替人，令存卹之。
现代文：李曜对她早已留心，可是自己已经纳了营中的歌舞妓韶光为妾，只好托付给吴圆，希望他多给些照顾。
English: Li You had already paid attention to her, but he had already taken the singer and dancer in the camp as a concubine, so he had to entrust her to Wu Yuan, hoping that he would take more care of her.

古文：临发洪饮，不胜离情，有诗曰：经年理郡少欢娱，为习干戈间饮徒。
现代文：临行之前大饮，李曜别情难舍，作诗道：经年理郡少欢娱，为习干戈间饮徒。
English: Before departure, drink a lot, Li Yue is hard to give up, wrote a poem: After years of Li County, less fun, for the practice of inter-war drinking.

古文：今日临行尽交割，分明收取媚川珠。
现代文：今日临行尽交割，分明收取媚川珠。
English: Today, upon delivery, the delivery was completed, and the Amekawa beads were clearly received.

古文：吴答曰：曳履优容日日欢，须言达德倍汍澜。
现代文：吴圆答诗道：曳履优容日日欢，须言达德倍汍澜。
English: Wu Yuan replied with a poem: "Dragging oneself with grace and beauty day after day, one must be able to express oneself well.

古文：韶光今已输先手，领得蠙珠掌内看。
现代文：韶光今已输先手，领得蠙珠掌内看。
English: Yan Guang has now lost the first hand and received the pearl.

古文：王铎
现代文：王铎
English: Wang Yao

古文：唐中书令王铎，位望崇显，率由文雅，然非定乱才。
现代文：唐朝的中书令王铎，地位和名望都很显著，循规蹈矩而又文静儒雅，但不是平定乱世之才。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, the position and fame of Wang Qian, the Chinese scribe, were very prominent. He followed the rules and was calm and elegant, but he was not able to pacify the chaotic world.

古文：出镇渚宫，为都统，以御黄巢。
现代文：朝中命他为都统，出镇渚宫，以抵御黄巢的进攻。
English: In the morning, he was ordered to leave the town and go to Nagisa Palace to fend off the attack of the Yellow Nest.

古文：携姬妾赴镇，而妻妒忌，忽报夫人离京在道。
现代文：上任时只带了姬妾，妻子十分妬忌。一天，忽然有人来报，说夫人已离开京城，正在向这里来的路上。
English: When he took office, he only brought his concubine with him, and his wife was very jealous. One day, someone suddenly reported that his wife had left the capital and was on her way here.

古文：铎谓从事曰：黄巢渐似南来，夫人又自北至，旦夕情味，何以安处？
现代文：王铎对部下说：黄巢渐向南来，而夫人又从北至，这一天的滋味让人太难受，让我如何安静下来。
English: Wang Yao said to his subordinates: "The Yellow Nest is gradually moving to the south, while the Lady is moving from the north. The taste of this day is too unpleasant for people. How can I calm down?"

古文：幕僚戏曰：不如降黄巢。
现代文：幕僚戏言道：我看不如投降黄巢。
English: The aide joked, "I don't see how we can surrender to the Yellow Nest."

古文：王亦大笑。
现代文：王铎也大笑。
English: Wang Yao also laughed loudly.

古文：洎荆州失守，复把潼关，黄巢传语云：令公儒生，非是我敌，请自退避，无污锋刃。
现代文：到了荆州失守时，王铎又被派去把守潼关。黄巢传来话说：你是个读书人，不是我的对手，还是请你自己退走回避吧，免得脏了我的刀刃。
English: When he arrived in Jingzhou and lost the defense, Wang Yao was sent to guard Shaoguan. Huang Chao said: "You are a reader, not my opponent. Please withdraw and evade, lest you dirty my blade."

古文：于是弃关，随僖皇播迁于蜀。
现代文：王铎于是放弃潼关，随着僖皇迁移到四川。
English: Therefore, Wang Qian abandoned Shaoguan and moved to Sichuan along with Emperor Qian.

古文：再授都统，收复京都，大勋不成，竟罹非命。
现代文：后来又授于他都统之职，命他收复京城，不但没有成功，反而获难死于非命。
English: Later, he was given the post of governor-general and ordered to recover the capital, but not only did he not succeed, but he died a violent death.

古文：薛昭纬
现代文：薛昭纬
English: Xue Zhaowei

古文：唐薛昭纬未登第前，就肆买鞋。
现代文：唐代人薛昭纬没考中之前，到鞋店买鞋。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Xue Zhaowei went to a shoe store to buy shoes before taking the middle school entrance examination.

古文：肆主曰：秀才脚第几？
现代文：店主诙谐地问：秀才的脚第几？
English: The shopkeeper jokingly asked: What is the number of the foot of the genius?

古文：对曰：昭纬作脚来。未曾与立行第。
现代文：薛昭纬答道：昭纬是带着脚来的，没有给它立下次序。
English: Xue Zhaowei replied: Zhaowei came with his feet, and did not give it a second order.

古文：孔纬
现代文：孔纬
English: orifice

古文：唐宰相孔纬尝拜官，教坊伶人继至求利市。
现代文：唐人孔纬拜相的时候，教坊的乐手相继登门来求吉利钱。
English: When Confucius, the founder of the Chinese nation, was to be married, the musicians of the music school came one after another to ask for money.

古文：有石野猪独行先到，有所赐，乃谓曰：宅中甚阙，不得厚致，若见诸野猪，幸勿言也。
现代文：有个石野猪自先来到，孔纬对他有所赏赐，并说：家里不宽裕，不能给得太多，要是见到其他野猪，希望别说我赏过你。
English: A stone boar came first, and Kong Wei gave him a reward and said, "My family is not rich, so I can't give you too much. If you see other boars, I hope you won't say that I have rewarded you."

古文：复有一伶至，乃召俯阶，索其笛，指笛窍问曰：何者是《浣溪沙》孔子？
现代文：后来又有一个乐手来，孔纬便把他召到台阶下，要过他的笛子指着上面的眼儿问道：哪个是吹《浣溪沙》的孔子？
English: Later, another musician came, and Kong Wei called him to the bottom of the steps, asked him to pass his flute, pointed to the eyes above, and asked: Which is the Confucius who plays "The Sands of Fenxi"?

古文：伶大笑之。
现代文：那个乐手大笑。
English: The musician burst out laughing.

古文：宇文翰
现代文：宇文翰
English: Umnim Khan

古文：唐道士程子宵登华山上方，偶有颠仆。
现代文：唐朝的一个道士叫程子宵的，登华山的顶端时，偶而摔过几个跟头。
English: A Taoist priest of the Tang Dynasty named Cheng Zixiao, when he was at the top of Denghua Mountain, occasionally fell over several heel heads.

古文：郎中宇文翰致书戏之曰。
现代文：郎中宇文翰给他写信戏言说：不知上得不得。
English: His son-in-law, U Wenhan, wrote him a playful letter saying, "I don't know what to do.

古文：不知上得不得，且怪悬之又悬。
现代文：且怪悬而又悬。
English: And strangely suspended and suspended.

古文：千字文语乞社
现代文：千字文语乞社
English: The Thousand Characters, One Language Begging Society

古文：敬白社官三老等：切闻政本于农，当须务兹稼穑，若不云腾致雨，何以税熟贡新？
现代文：敬告地神及三老等：深知国计民生根本在于农业，因此必须致力于耕耘。可是如果长期干旱无雨，拿什么纳税贡赋？
English: I respectfully advise the gods of the earth and the three elders: we are well aware that the national economy and people's livelihood fundamentally lie in agriculture, so we must be committed to cultivation. However, if there is a long drought without rain, what tax tribute should we pay?

古文：圣上臣伏戎羌，爱育黎首，用能闰余成岁，律吕调阳。
现代文：皇上又怎么能安定边疆，爱惜百姓？又怎能丰衣足食，曲乐和谐激昂？
English: How can the emperor stabilize the frontier and cherish the people? And how can he be well-fed, and the music be harmonious and exciting?

古文：某人等，并景行维贤，德建名立，遂乃肆筵设席，祭祀蒸尝，鼓瑟吹笙，弦歌酒宴，上和下睦，悦豫且康，礼别尊卑，乐殊贵贱，酒则川流不息，肉则似兰斯馨，非直菜重芥姜，兼亦果珍李柰，莫不矫首顿足，俱共接杯举觞，岂徒戚谢欢招，信乃福缘善庆。
现代文：希望老人能饱食烹宰的美味，而我就是饥饿也满足于糟糠。
English: I hope the old man can eat his fill of cooked delicacies, while I am hungry and content with the dregs.

古文：但某乙某索居闲处，孤陋寡闻，虽复属耳垣墙，未曾摄职从政，不能坚持雅操，专欲逐物意移，忆内则执热愿凉，思酒如骸垢想浴，老人则饱饫烹宰，某乙则饥厌糟糠，钦风则空谷传声，仰惠则虚堂习听，脱蒙仁慈隐恻，庶有济弱扶倾，希垂顾答审详，望咸渠荷滴历。
现代文：我们盼望着那难得的佳讯，真心诚意地等待着恩惠的降临。
English: We are looking forward to the rare good news, sincerely waiting for the arrival of grace.

古文：某乙即稽颡再拜。终冀勒碑刻铭，但知悚惧恐惶，实若临深履薄。
现代文：承蒙您的仁慈恻隐之心，能济弱扶倾，希望能看得清楚回答的详细，使所有渠塘的荷花都淋透雨水。我一定叩首再拜，还将修碑刻铭。我们已诚惶诚恐了，就像是走在薄冰上。
English: Thanks to your benevolence and compassion, we can help the weak, and hope to see the details of the answer clearly, so that the lotus flowers of all canals will be drenched with rainwater. I will certainly bow my head and bow again, and I will also repair the monument. We have been terrified, it is like walking on thin ice.

古文：山东佐史
现代文：山东佐史
English: Shandong Sashi

古文：唐山东一老佐史，前后县令，无不遭侮。
现代文：唐朝时山东有一个县衙中的老官吏，前后来过几任县令，没有不受过他侮辱的。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was an old official in a county magistrate in Shandong. He had held several posts of county magistrate before and after, and no one had been insulted by him.

古文：家致巨富。
现代文：后来家中极富有。
English: Later, the family became extremely wealthy.

古文：令初至者，皆以文案试之，即知强弱。
现代文：凡是新来的县令，他都是先以文案试试他，便知道他的水平高低。
English: Whenever there is a new county magistrate, he will first try him with copywriting, and then he will know his level.

古文：有令初至，因差丁造名簿，将身点过。
现代文：有这么一个县官，刚刚到任时，让人制了一个点名簿，然后对每个人查点。
English: There was a prefectural official who, when he had just arrived in office, had someone compile a list of points and then check each person's points.

古文：有姓向名明府者、姓宋名郎君者、姓成名老鼠者、姓张名破袋者，此佐史故超越次第，使其名一处，以观明府强弱。
现代文：这其中有姓向名叫明府的，有姓宋名叫郎君的，有姓成名叫老鼠的，有姓张名叫破袋的。这个老官吏点名时，故意打乱名字的次序，使这些人名重新排在一起，以观察那位县官是强还是弱。
English: Among them were a man surnamed Xiang named Mingfu, a man surnamed Song named Langjun, a man surnamed Cheng named Mouse, and a man surnamed Zhang named Baggage. When the old official counted the names, he deliberately disrupted the order of the names, so that these names were rearranged to observe whether the county official was strong or weak.

古文：先唤张破袋、成老鼠、宋郎君、向明府，其县令但点头而已，意无所问。
现代文：他喊道：张破袋，成老鼠，宋郎君，向明府。只见那县官仅点头而已，没有追问的意思。
English: He called out, "Zhang Bao Bao, into a mouse, Song Lang Jun, to Mingfu." The county official only nodded, with no intention of pursuing the matter.

古文：佐史出而喜曰：帽底可知。
现代文：这老吏出来后喜滋滋地说：底细一眼可看透。
English: After the old official came out, he said happily: "You can see through it at a glance."

古文：竟还即卖之。
现代文：竟然还卖弄炫耀自己。
English: He even flaunted himself.

古文：罗隐
现代文：罗隐
English: Luoyang

古文：唐罗隐与周繇分深，谓隐曰：阁下有女障子诗极好，乃为绝唱。
现代文：唐代的罗隐与周繇情谊很深，周繇对罗隐说：阁下有一首题在屏障上描写女人的诗好极了，可称得上绝唱了！
English: Luo Ying and Zhou Ye of the Tang Dynasty had a deep friendship. Zhou Ye said to Luo Ying, "Your poem about a woman on a barrier is very good. It can be called a masterpiece!"

古文：隐不喻何为也。曰：若教解语应倾国，任是无情也动人。
现代文：罗隐不明白此话何意，周繇背诵道：若教解语应倾国，任是无情也动人。
English: Luo Yin did not understand the meaning of this, and Zhou Ye recited: If the teaching interpretation should be devoted to the country, it is both merciless and moving.

古文：是隐题花诗。
现代文：这是罗隐的题花诗。
English: This is Luo Yin's flower-themed poem.

古文：隐抚掌大笑。
现代文：他击掌大笑。
English: He clapped his hands and laughed.

古文：卢延让
现代文：卢延让
English: Lu Yanjan

古文：唐卢延让业诗，二十五举方登第。
现代文：唐朝时有个叫卢延让的人，致力于诗歌写作。考了二十五次，方考中进士。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Lu Yanjan, who devoted himself to writing poetry. He took the examination 25 times and was promoted to middle school.

古文：卷中有狐冲官道过。狗触店门开之句，租庸调张浚亲见此事，每称赏之。
现代文：试卷中有狐冲官道过、狗触店门开之类的句子、租庸调张浚亲眼见过这些诗句，每每称赞他的诗写得好。
English: In the examination paper, there were sentences such as "Fox-chomping official passed" and "Dog touched the door of the store," and Zhang Jun had seen these poems with his own eyes. He praised his poems for being well written.

古文：又有饿猫临鼠穴，馋犬舔鱼砧句，为中书令成汭所赏。
现代文：还有饿猫临鼠穴、馋犬舔鱼砧的诗句，也被中书令成汭所赞赏。
English: There are also poems about a starving cat in a mousehole and a dog licking a fish's gills, which are also appreciated by Chinese calligraphers.

古文：又有栗爆烧毡破，猫跳触鼎翻，为蜀王建所赏。
现代文：还有栗爆烧毡破、猫跳触鼎翻，也为蜀王建所欣赏。
English: There are also chestnuts bursting and burning, and cats jumping and tumbling, which are also appreciated by Shu Wang Jian.

古文：卢谓人曰：平生投谒公卿，不意得力于猫鼠狗子也。
现代文：卢延让对人说：平生投拜公卿门第，想不到得力于猫、鼠、狗！
English: Lu Yanzhang said to the man, "In your lifetime, you have worshipped the aristocracy, and you are unexpectedly good at cats, mice, and dogs!

古文：人闻而笑之。俳优人
现代文：人们听了都很发笑。俳优人
English: People laughed when they heard it.

古文：唐咸通中，俳优人李可及滑稽谐戏，独出辈流，虽不能托谊谕，然巧智敏捷，亦不可多得。
现代文：唐咸通年间，杂耍艺人李可及滑稽而善开玩笑，而且超出一般人。虽然有点荒唐，但他的乖巧机敏也是不可多得的。
English: During his years at Downton, Lee the juggler was as funny and witty as the next man and, although a little goofy, his quick-wittedness was also rare.

古文：尝因延庆节，缁黄讲论毕，次及倡优为戏。可及褒衣博带，摄齐以升座，自称三教论衡。
现代文：曾有一回延庆节时，道士和尚讲论完毕后，接着要演杂戏，李可及便穿戴上大袍宽带，整理衣装后升座。自称对儒、佛、道三教无所不知晓。
English: Once, during the Yanqing Festival, after the Taoist monk had finished his lecture, he had to perform a variety show. Li Kegui put on a robe and robes, straightened his clothes, and took his seat. He claimed to know everything about Confucianism, Buddhism, and Taoism.

古文：偶坐者问曰：既言博通三教，释迦如来是何人？
现代文：偶尔一位坐着的人问道：你既然说通晓三教，那请问释迦如来是什么人？
English: Occasionally, a seated person asked: Since you say you are familiar with the three teachings, could you please tell me who Shaka Nyorai is?

古文：对曰：妇人。
现代文：李可及说：是妇人。
English: Li Kegui said, "It is a woman."

古文：问者惊曰：何也？
现代文：提问的惊奇道：什么？
English: Surprise of the question: What?

古文：曰：《金刚经》云： 敷座而座 ，或非妇人。
现代文：李可及道：《金刚经》在谈到释迦如来时说： 敷座而座 。
English: Li Keji said, "The Diamond Sutra says about Shaka Tathagata, 'Sit down and sit down.'

古文：何烦夫坐然后儿坐也。
现代文：如果不是妇人，那为什么不厌其烦地讲夫坐然后儿坐呢？
English: If it is not a woman, then why bother telling the husband to sit and then the son to sit?

古文：上为之启齿。
现代文：皇上听后乐得张开嘴。
English: The Emperor opened his mouth in delight.

古文：又问曰：太上老君何人？
现代文：那人又问：太上老君是什么人？
English: The man then asked: "Who is the lady's husband?"

古文：曰：亦妇人也。
现代文：李可及道：也是妇人。
English: Li Keji said, "She is also a woman."

古文：问者益所不谕。
现代文：提问的更加不明白。
English: The nature of the question is even more unclear.

古文：乃曰：《道德经》云： 吾有大患，为吾有身。
现代文：李可及于是说道：《道德经》上引过太上老君的话， 吾有大患，为吾有身。
English: Li Kegui then said: "The Tao Te Ching" quoted the words of the old lady, I have a big problem, because I have a body.

古文：及吾无身，吾有何患 。
现代文：及吾无身，吾有何患？ 
English: And if I have no body, what have I to fear?

古文：傥非为妇人，何患于有娠乎？
现代文：倘若太上老君不是妇人，怎么会患有身孕呢？
English: If the lady-in-waiting is not a woman, how can she be pregnant?

古文：上大悦。
现代文：皇上大为高兴。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was very happy.

古文：又问曰：文宣王何人也？
现代文：那人又问：文宣王是什么人？
English: The man then asked, "Who is King Wenxuan?"

古文：曰：妇人也？
现代文：李可及说：妇人。
English: Li Kegui said, "Woman, get up."

古文：问者曰：何以知之？
现代文：那人道：怎么会知道他是女人？
English: Man: How do you know it's a woman?

古文：曰：《论语》云： 沽之哉，沽之哉，我待价者也。
现代文：李可及道：《论语》记载着文宣王的话呀， 沽之哉，沽之哉，我待价者也。
English: Li Keji said: "The Analects of Confucius recorded the words of King Manxuan, "It is splendid, it is splendid, I am also a bidder."

古文：向非妇人，待嫁奚为？
现代文：如果不是妇人，为什么要等待出嫁呢？
English: If not a woman, why wait to get married?

古文：上意极欢，宠锡颇厚。
现代文：皇上心里极欢悦。于是赐赏极丰厚。
English: The Emperor was overjoyed and rewarded him very generously.

古文：又天复元年，凤翔李茂贞请入朝奏事。昭宗御安福楼，茂贞涕泣陈匡救之言。
现代文：又唐朝天复元年，凤翔李茂贞请求入朝奏事，昭宗召见于安福楼，李茂贞眼泪纵横地陈述了自己救国的主张。
English: In the first year after the restoration of the Tang Dynasty, Fengxiang Li Maozhen made a request to enter the imperial court, and Zhaozong was summoned to Anfu Lou. Li Maozhen tearfully stated her claim to save the country.

古文：时崔相胤密奏曰：此奸人也，未足为信，陛下宜宽怀待之。
现代文：此时宰相崔胤密秘上奏说：李茂贞是个奸人，不可轻信，陛下应宽怀些对待也。
English: At this time, Prime Minister Cui Yan secretly made a report saying: Li Maozhen is a traitor and should not be trusted, and His Majesty should be treated more leniently.

古文：翌日，宴于寿春殿，茂贞肩舆披褐，入金銮门，易服赴宴。
现代文：第二天，皇上在寿春殿赐宴，李茂贞素装乘轿，进入金銮门，换了衣服才去赴宴。
English: The next day, the emperor gave a banquet at Shuchun Palace. Li Maozhen dressed in a sedan, entered the Golden Gate, and changed clothes before going to the banquet.

古文：咸以为前代跋扈，未之有也。
现代文：人们都以为自前代帝王以来，专横跋扈，这样的事从未有过。
English: People thought that nothing like this had ever happened since the previous emperor was so domineering.

古文：时中官韩全诲深结茂贞，崔相惧之，自此亦结朱全忠，竟致汴州迎驾，劫迁入洛之始。以王子带召戎，崔胤比之。
现代文：当时，中官韩全诲与李茂贞结交很深，崔胤对他畏惧。从此以后，也结交了朱全忠。后来到了把皇上强行从开封迁至洛阳时，便让王子带护驾，崔胤守于左右。
English: At that time, Lieutenant-General Han Quanzhong had a deep friendship with Li Maozhen, and Cui Yan was afraid of him. From then on, he also made friends with Zhu Quanzhong. Later, when it came to forcibly relocating the emperor from Kaifeng to Luoyang, he asked the prince to drive with a escort, and Cui Yan kept to the right and left.

古文：先是茂贞入关，放火烧京阙，居人殆尽。
现代文：此前李茂贞进关，放火烧了京城，居民几乎逃尽。
English: Prior to this, Li Maozhen entered the customs, set fire to the capital, and almost all the residents fled.

古文：是宴也，教坊优人安辔新，号茂贞为 火龙子 ，茂贞惭惕俯首。仍窃怒曰：他日会杀此竖子。
现代文：有回宴会，教坊乐手安辔新称李茂贞是火龙子，李茂贞不安地低下头，而背地里怒道：日后定杀这小子。
English: Once, at a banquet, the music teacher An Hao called Li Maozhen a dragon child. Li Maozhen bowed her head uneasily, but secretly fumed, "I'll definitely kill this kid in the future."

古文：安闻之，因请告，往岐下谒茂贞。
现代文：安辔新听说后，便请求到岐下去拜见李茂贞。
English: After hearing this, An Yuxin asked to go to Qizhou to meet Li Maozhen.

古文：茂贞见之，大诟曰：此赋胡颜敢来邪？当求乞耳。
现代文：李茂贞一见他就大骂：你这奸贼还有什么脸回来见我，当来求乞！
English: As soon as Li Maozhen saw him, she shouted at him: "You traitor, you have no face to come back to see me, you should beg!

古文：安曰：只思上谒，非敢有干也。
现代文：安辔新道：只是想拜见，决不敢有任何冒犯。
English: Anhui Xindao: I just want to say hello, I would never dare to offend anyone.

古文：茂贞曰：贫俭若斯，胡不求乞？
现代文：李茂贞道：像你这样的贱骨头，为什么不求乞？
English: Li Maozhen said: A lowly person like you, why not beg?

古文：安曰：京城近日但卖麸炭，便足一生，何在求乞？
现代文：安辔新道：京城这几天虽只卖麸子和烧炭，这就治得很好了，为何还要求乞？
English: Anhui New Road: Although the capital only sells hazelnuts and charcoal these days, it has healed well, why do you still ask for begging?

古文：茂贞大笑而厚赐之。
现代文：李茂贞大笑，厚赏与他。
English: Li Maozhen laughed loudly and was rewarded.

古文：又光化中，朱朴自《毛诗》博士拜相。
现代文：又唐朝光化年间，朱朴由《毛诗》博士拜为宰相。
English: Also, during the Tang Dynasty's rise to power, Zhu Pu rose from a "Mao Poem" scholar to prime minister.

古文：而朴恃其口辩，谓可安致太平。
现代文：朱朴依仗自己能言善辩，说他可安抚天下。
English: Zhu Pu relied on his ability to speak eloquently, saying that he could pacify the world.

古文：由藩王引导，闻于昭宗，遂有此命。
现代文：于是由藩王的引荐，才使昭宗听说他，因此才有此任命。
English: Therefore, it was through the recommendation of the king of the domain that Akimune heard of him, which led to his appointment.

古文：对扬之日，而陈言数条，每言臣必为陛下致之。洎操大柄，殊无所成，自是恩泽日衰，中外腾沸。
现代文：昭宗召他对答的那天，朱朴陈述了几项治国之策。每句话后都说臣一定要为皇上尽力，到握有大权时，没有任何成就，必然是皇恩一天不如一天，内忧外患连绵不断。
English: On the day that Zhaozong summoned him to answer, Zhu Pu stated several policies for governing the country. After each sentence, he said that the vassal must do his best for the emperor. When he held great power, there was no achievement. It was inevitable that the emperor's favor would not be as good as one day, and internal worries and external troubles would continue.

古文：内宴日，俳优穆刀绫作念经行者，至前朗讽曰：若见朱相，即是非相。
现代文：有一天宫中设宴，艺人穆刀绫扮做念经的人，走到朱朴面前大声讥讽道：似乎见到朱相时，又觉得他不相了。
English: One day, a banquet was held in the palace, and the entertainer Mu Zhao, dressed as a person who chants scriptures, walked up to Zhu Pu and said loudly and sarcastically, "It seems that when I see Zhu Xiang, I feel that he is no longer my friend."

古文：翌日出宫。时人语曰：故为相自古有之，君子不耻其言之不出，耳恭之不逮。
现代文：第二天出宫，有人议论道：做宰相的自古有之，君之不耻笑有话不多说的，而耻笑那些态度谦恭却又做不到的人。
English: When he left the palace the next day, some people commented, "Being a prime minister has been around since ancient times. It is not shameful to have a lot to say, but it is shameful to laugh at those who have a humble attitude but cannot do it."

古文：况未丧乱，天下阻兵，虽负荷奇才，不能为计。
现代文：何况国家尚未丧乱，天下驻有重兵，虽然身怀奇才，却拿不出大计。
English: Moreover, the country has not yet fallen into chaos, there are heavy troops stationed all over the world, and although there are wizards, they cannot come up with a grand plan.

古文：而朱朴一儒生，恃区区之辩，欲其整乱，祗取辱焉。
现代文：朱朴不过是一介书生，仅凭三寸不烂之舌，就想要整治乱世，只能是自取其辱。
English: Zhu Pu is nothing more than a scholar. He wants to rectify the chaotic world with just a three-inch tongue, which can only be humiliating.

古文：昭宗开宴，坐定。伶伦百戏在焉。
现代文：难怪他刚刚任职，便被罢官。因而被熟悉他的人大为讥笑。又朱全忠进见昭宗，在昭宣宫设宴。坐下之后，演出了歌舞杂技。
English: It is no wonder that he was dismissed as soon as he took office, and was widely ridiculed by those who knew him. Zhu Quanzhong also went to see Zhaozong and held a banquet at Zhaoxuan Palace. After sitting down, he performed song and dance acrobatics.

古文：九优太史胡趱应曰：酌然如此。固教朝廷如向侍宴臣僚无不失色，梁太祖但笑而已。昭宗不怿，如无奈何。
现代文：先颂扬皇上的功德，然后叙说元勋梁王朱全忠的功绩说：我元勋梁王，五百年间方出这样一个贤人。九优太史胡趱应声道：当然是这样陪宴的臣僚无不大惊失色。朱全忠只是笑了笑，皇上却很不高兴，而无可奈何。
English: He first praised the emperor's merits, and then described the exploits of the former Imperial Knight Liang Wang Zhu Quanzhong, saying, "My former Imperial Knight Liang Wang, it has taken five hundred years to produce such a wise man. The nine eminent emperors Hu Yao said in response, "Of course, the courtiers at such a banquet are all shocked and embarrassed. Zhu Quanzhong just smiled, but the emperor was very unhappy, and there was nothing he could do about it.

古文：趱又自好博奕。
现代文：胡趱一向喜好下棋。
English: Hu Yao has always liked to play chess.

古文：尝独跨一驴，日到故人家棋，多早去晚归。
现代文：经常独骑一驴，到朋友家去玩，多是早晨去晚上才回来。
English: He often rode a donkey by himself and went to a friend's house to play. He usually went in the morning and came back in the evening.

古文：年岁之间，不曾暂辍。
现代文：一年之间，从不间断。
English: It's been going on for a year.

古文：每到其家，主人必戒家童曰：与都知于后院喂饲驴子。
现代文：每到朋友家，主人必然要告诉家童说：到后院去把都知的驴子喂上。
English: Every time you go to a friend's house, the host must tell the children to go to the backyard to feed the donkey.

古文：趱甚感之。
现代文：胡趱很感激他。
English: Hu Yao is very grateful to him.

古文：夜则跨归。
现代文：直到晚上才骑驴回去。
English: I didn't get back on the donkey until the evening.

古文：一日非时宣召，趱仓忙索驴。
现代文：一天，在不该召见的时候突然传来皇上要召他进宫，胡趱慌忙去找驴。
English: One day, when he was not supposed to be summoned, it suddenly came to him that the emperor wanted to call him to the palace, and he hurried to find a donkey.

古文：及牵前至，则觉喘气，通体汗流，乃正与主人拽磑耳。
现代文：等把驴牵到他跟前，只见那驴喘息不止，满身流汗，原来是正在给主人拉磨。
English: When he brought the donkey to him, the donkey was panting and sweating profusely. It turned out that it was pulling the mill for its owner.

古文：趱方知自来与其家拽磨。
现代文：由此，胡趱方知每次来都要给他家拉磨。
English: As a result, Hu Rong Fang Zhi had to grind for his family every time he came.

古文：明早，复展步而至，主人亦曰：与都知抬举驴子。
现代文：第二天早晨，胡趱徒步而来，主人又说：给都知侍候好驴子。
English: The next morning, Hu Yao came on foot, and his master said, "Serve Du Zhi with a good donkey."

古文：曰：驴子今日偶来不得。
现代文：胡趱说：驴子今天偶尔不能来了。
English: Hu Yao said, "Occasionally, the donkey cannot come today.

古文：主人曰：何也？
现代文：主人说：为什么？
English: The owner said, "Why?

古文：趱曰：只从昨回宅，便患头旋恶心，起止未得，且乞假将息。
现代文：胡趱说：从昨日回去，驴子便患上头旋恶心症，动弹不得，而要请假休息。
English: Hu Yao said: Since returning yesterday, the donkey has suffered from dizziness and nausea, unable to move, and has to take time off to rest.

古文：主人亦大笑。
现代文：主人大笑。
English: The host burst out laughing.

古文：□以趱之黠也如是，而不知其所乘，经年与人旋磑亨利，亦数为同人对衔揶揄之。王舍城
现代文：想不到象胡趱这样聪明的人，也不会知道自己骑的驴竟常年在给人家拉磨渔利，因而多次被同事所嘲笑。王舍城
English: One would not expect such a clever person as Hu Rong, nor would one know that the donkey he rode was actually used to grind fish for people all year round, so he was often ridiculed by his colleagues.

古文：伪蜀王先主，未开国前，西域僧至蜀。
现代文：伪蜀王的先主时期，还没有建国。有个西域的和尚来到这里。
English: During the reign of the pseudo-Shu king, the country had not yet been founded. A monk from the western region came here.

古文：蜀人瞻敬，如见释迦。
现代文：蜀人都对他很崇敬，如见佛主释迦牟尼。
English: The people of Shu have great reverence for him, as seen in the case of the Lord Buddha, Sakyamuni.

古文：舍于大慈三学院，蜀主复谒坐于厅，倾都士女，就院不令止之。
现代文：他住在大慈三学院，蜀主前往回拜，坐在大厅上，此时全城的男女，凡是来拜见的都不加制止。
English: He lived in the Third College of the Great Compassionate God. The Lord of Shu went to pay homage to him and sat in the hall. At this time, men and women from all over the city came to visit him without restraint.

古文：妇女列次礼拜，俳优王舍城飘言曰：女弟子勤苦礼拜，愿后身面孔，一切似和尚。
现代文：妇女们排着队依次向他行礼。艺人王舍城道：女弟子们勤苦礼拜，希望他们下跪时的后身，完全像个和尚。
English: The women line up to bow to him in turn.Artist Wang Shecheng: The female disciples pray diligently, hoping that when they kneel, their behinds will look exactly like a monk's.

古文：蜀主大笑。
现代文：蜀先主大笑。
English: Emperor Shu laughed loudly.

古文：顾夐
现代文：顾夐
English: Gu Sheng

古文：伪蜀王先主起自利、阆，号亲骑军，皆拳勇之士。
现代文：伪蜀王先主从利阆起事，称号亲骑军，军中全是勇猛之士。
English: The pseudo-Shu Wang's ancestors rose up from Lishan and were called the pro-riding army. All the soldiers in the army were brave.

古文：四百人分执紫旗，凡战阵，若前军将败，麾紫旗以副之，莫不靡，霆骇星散，未尝挫衄。
现代文：其中有四百人执紫旗，凡在战场上，如有前阵的军队将要战败时，他们便挥动紫旗而助之。莫不所向披靡，霆骇星散，从未失败过。
English: There are four hundred of them holding the purple flag. Whenever on the battlefield, if there is a front-line army that is about to be defeated, they will wave the purple flag to help it. They are invincible, fierce, and have never failed.

古文：此团将卒多达，或至节将至散员，亦享官禄。
现代文：这紫旗团队中的官兵多很显达。都享受官禄。
English: Most of the officers and soldiers in this purple flag team are very distinguished. They all enjoy government salaries.

古文：以之定霸，皆资福人。
现代文：以此来稳定霸业，都是凭借着钱财。
English: In order to stabilize hegemony, they all rely on money.

古文：于时南黑云都，皆紫旗之类也。
现代文：这时期，都与紫旗团是一类的，他们各有名号。
English: During this period, they were all in the same class as the Purple Flag Group, and they all had their own names.

古文：此从各有名号，时顾亦尝典郡，多杂谈谑。
现代文：当时顾夐也曾主管过郡事。
English: At that time, Gu Yao was also in charge of county affairs.

古文：曾造武举，助曰大顺侍郎李吒吒下进士及第，三憨子、姜癞子、张打胸、长小许李嗑蛆、李破肋、李吉了、樊忽雷、日游神、王号驼、郝牛屎、□□贡、陈波斯、罗蛮子。
现代文：常戏闹。曾进行过武选，称之为大顺侍郎李吒吒下进士及第三憨子、姜癞子、张打胸、长小李嗑蛆、李破肋、李吉了、樊忽雷、日游神、王号驼、郝牛屎陈波斯、罗蛮子。
English: There was a lot of drama. There was a military election, which was called the Da Shun Chamberlain, Li Ye, and the Third Mule, Jiang Ye, Zhang Du, Chang Xiao Li Ye, Li Bao Li, Li Ji Ya, Zou Hu Lei, Nichiyu Shen, King Camel, Snail Poop Chen Persia, and Luo Man Zi.

古文：试《亡命山泽赋》、《到处不生草诗》，斯亦麦铁杖、韩擒虎之流也。
现代文：考试科目为亡命山泽赋、到处不生草诗。这纯属也是麦铁杖、韩擒虎之流。
English: The examination subjects are "Desperate Mountains and Forests" and "There is no grass everywhere." This is also a pure lineage of "Wheat Iron Cane" and "Han Xinghu."

古文：不调子
现代文：不调子
English: Out of tune

古文：有不调子，恒以滑稽为事。
现代文：有个叫不调子的，常常以滑稽的方式戏弄人。
English: There was a ruffian who used to tease people in a funny way.

古文：辈流间有慧黠过人，性识机警者，皆被诱而玩之。
现代文：有许多聪明狡黠、灵性而又机警的人，也都被他诱惑而玩耍。
English: There are many clever, cunning, spiritual and alert people who are also tempted and played by him.

古文：尝与一秀士同舟，泛江湖中，将欲登路，同船客有驴瘦劣，尾仍偏，不调子坚劝秀士市之。
现代文：有一次，他曾与一个秀才同坐在一条船上游江，快要靠岸时，见同船的游客中有人牵了一头瘦劣而又长了根偏尾巴的驴，不调子便力劝秀才一定要买下来。
English: On one occasion, he was sitting on a boat on the river with a connoisseur, and when they were about to dock, he saw one of the tourists on the same boat leading a skinny donkey with a long tail, and he tried to persuade the connoisseur to buy it.

古文：秀士鄙其瘦劣，勉之曰：此驴有异相，不同常等。
现代文：秀才嫌弃那驴子太瘦劣，不调子劝勉道：这驴子长相特异，不同寻常。
English: Xiu Cai didn't like the donkey because it was too skinny. He said, "This donkey has a special and unusual appearance.

古文：不得已，高价市之。
现代文：没办法，秀才只好以高价买下。
English: There was nothing he could do, so he had no choice but to buy the crane at a high price.

古文：既舍楫登途，果尪弱，不堪乘跨。
现代文：不久，他们便离船上路，那驴果然身体瘦弱得不能骑。秀才很苦恼。
English: Soon, they left the boat path, and the donkey was indeed too weak to ride. The scholar was very distressed.

古文：其夕，忽值雪，不调曰：得之矣，请贯酒三五杯，然后奉为话其故事。
现代文：不调说：别后悔，这驴绝对不同于别的驴。那天晚上，忽然下起雪来。不调子又道：这驴你买对了。请你买上三五杯酒。然后我给你讲个这样的故事。
English: Not in tune: "Don't regret it, this donkey is absolutely different from other donkeys." That night, it suddenly snowed. Not in tune: "You bought the right donkey. Please buy three or five glasses of wine. Then I'll tell you a story like this."

古文：秀士又侺俯贯而饮之。
现代文：秀士又勉强买来酒与他喝。
English: Hsi also reluctantly bought wine to drink with him.

古文：及举爵，言之曰：君不闻杜荀鹤诗云： 就船买得鱼偏美，踏雪沽来酒倍香 乎？
现代文：等到举杯时，不调子道：你难道没听过杜荀鹤诗中是怎样说的吗？ 就船买得驴偏尾，踏雪沽来酒倍香 。
English: When it came time to raise a glass, he said in an off-key tone, "Haven't you ever heard what it says in the poem about the cuckoo crane: Buy a donkey by the boatload and ride a sleigh to make the wine more fragrant."

古文：请君买驴沽酒者，盖为杜诗有之，非无证据。
现代文：请你买驴买酒，这是杜诗中讲过的，并非没有根据。
English: It is not without basis that I ask you to buy a donkey to buy wine, which is what Du Shi said.

古文：秀士被买而玩之，殊不知觉，至是方悟焉。司马都
现代文：秀才被人玩耍了，自己竟然还不知道。一直到此时才醒悟。司马都
English: The genius has been played with, and he doesn't even know it yet. It's only now that he's woken up. Sima Du

古文：前进士司马都居于青丘，尝以钱二万，托戎帅王师范下军将市丝。
现代文：前进士司马都住在青丘，曾拿了二万钱托戎帅王师范部下的军将给他买丝。
English: The advanced scholar Sima Du lived in Qingqiu, and he once took twenty thousand yuan from the army under the command of Shuai Wang's normal department to buy silk for him.

古文：经年，丝与金并为所没。
现代文：可是过了一年，丝和钱都没影儿了。
English: But a year later, the money and the silk were gone.

古文：都因月旦趋府，谒王公，偶见此人，问之。
现代文：司马都因月初到府上去拜会王师范，恰巧遇上那个人，便向他问起这件事。
English: Sima Du went to visit Wang Shifan at the beginning of the month, and he happened to meet that person and asked him about it.

古文：其人貌状，魁伟胡腮，凶顽发怒，欲自投于井。
现代文：那人的相貌魁梧高大，满脸胡子，样子十分凶狠，却想要去自尽投井。
English: The man, a tall, bearded brute with a fierce look, wanted to commit suicide by jumping into a well.

古文：都徐曰：何至如此，足下吒一抱之髭须，色斯举矣；望千寻之玉甃，井有人焉。
现代文：司马都道：何必如此，你乍起大胡子，怎会是这样的面色。你看看这口深井吧，下面可是有人啊。
English: Sima Du said: "Why do you have to do that? You have a big beard. How can you look like that? Look at this deep well. There are people down there."

古文：王公知之，毙军将于枯木。
现代文：王师范闻知此事，把那个人杀于枯木下。
English: Wang Shifan heard about this and killed the man under a dead tree.

古文：吴尧卿
现代文：吴尧卿
English: Wu Yuxing

古文：唐吴尧卿家于广陵。
现代文：唐朝时，有个叫吴尧卿的人，家住在广陵。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Wu Qianqing who lived in Guangling.

古文：初佣之保于逆旅。
现代文：最初曾受雇于行路途中。
English: He was initially hired on the road.

古文：善书计，因之出入府庭，遂闻于搢绅间。
现代文：此人很有心计。因他经常出入于官府，官场上的人一般都知道他。
English: This man is very cunning. Because he is often in and out of the government, people in the government generally know him.

古文：始为盐铁小吏，性敏辩，于事之利病，皆心记能调，悦人耳目。
现代文：开始只是个管点儿盐铁事物的小官。但此人敏锐而又很有口才，对于许多事情的利弊都能放在心上并能做很好的调节，使人很高兴。
English: At first, he was just a minor official in charge of salt and iron affairs, but he was keen and eloquent, and he was able to keep in mind the pros and cons of many things and make good adjustments, which made people happy.

古文：故丞相李蔚以其能，自首任之。
现代文：丞相李蔚认为他很有能力，便开始启用他。
English: The prime minister, Li Wei, thought he was very capable and started to use him.

古文：高骈因署尧卿知泗州院，兼利国监，寻奏为刺史。
现代文：高骈先授他知泗州院兼利国监，不久又奏请皇上任他做刺史。
English: Gao Yao first awarded him the title of Zhishang State Councilor and State Supervisor of the People's Republic of China, and soon he also asked the emperor to appoint him as a historian.

古文：制命未行，会军变，复归广陵。
现代文：皇上的任命令还未下来，恰逢军变，他只好又回广陵。
English: The emperor's appointment order had not yet come down, coinciding with the military coup, he had to return to Guangling.

古文：顷之，知浙西院，数月而罢。又知扬州院，兼榷粜使。
现代文：不久，又知浙西院，数月后罢职，又知扬州院并兼任榷粜使。
English: Soon, he was also known as the Western Zhejiang Academy, and after a few months he resigned, and he was also known as the Yangzhou Academy and concurrently served as an envoy.

古文：伪朝授尧卿御史大夫。
现代文：伪朝廷还授于他御史大夫之职。
English: The pseudo-royal court also bestowed on him the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：尧卿托附权势，不问贵贱，苟有歧路，纵厮养辈，必敛袵枉以金玉饵之。
现代文：吴尧卿一向依附权势，不讲贵贱，苟且于斜路，即使是奴仆之辈，只要与己有用，也必然是恭敬地以钱财为诱饵去拉拢。
English: Wu Qianqing has always been attached to power and influence. He does not care about the high and the low, but sticks to the slippery road. Even if he is a slave, as long as he is useful to himself, he must respectfully use money as a bait to attract others.

古文：微以失势，虽素约为之死交，则相对终日，不复与言。
现代文：对那些稍稍失去权势的人，虽然平时与人家结为生死之交，而到此时即使相对终日，也不再与人家说一句话。
English: For those who have lost a little power, although they are usually in a life-and-death relationship with others, at this time they will not say a word to others, even if it is relatively all day.

古文：趋利背义如此。
现代文：见利忘义竟然到了这种地步。
English: It has come to this.

古文：权贵无不以贿赂交结之。故不离淮泗，僭窃朱紫，尘污官省。三数年间，盗用盐铁钱六十万缗。
现代文：而对于权贵，则无不以钱物贿赂而去交结，他因此不离淮泗地方，使官风腐败，三年多时间，竟盗用盐铁钱六十万缗。
English: On the other hand, for those in power, there is no way to make a deal without bribing with money and goods. As a result, he did not leave Huai'an, which led to official corruption. For more than three years, he actually embezzled 600,000 baht of salt and iron money.

古文：时王启知两使句务，下尧卿狱，将穷其事，为诸葛殷所保持获全。
现代文：当时王启主管两使句务，将吴尧卿捉拿下狱，要将此案追究到底，后被诸葛殷所保而未获死罪。
English: At that time, Wang Qi, who was in charge of the sentence affairs of the two envoys, arrested Wu Yuqing and put him in prison. He wanted to investigate the case to the end. Later, he was protected by Zhuge Yin and did not receive the death penalty.

古文：及城陷，军人识是尧卿者，咸请啗之。毕师铎不许，夜令尧卿以他服而遁。
现代文：到了城被攻陷时，军人中认得吴尧卿的，都请求把他吃了，毕师铎不准许，晚上叫他换了衣服逃走。
English: When the city was captured, the soldiers who recognized Wu Xuanqing all asked to eat him, but Bi Shizhen did not allow it, and told him to change his clothes and run away in the evening.

古文：至楚州遇变，为仇人所杀，弃尸衢中。
现代文：他逃到楚州又遇变乱，被仇人杀掉，弃尸于大道上。
English: He fled to Chuzhou and was killed in a riot, his body dumped on the main road.

古文：其妻以纸絮苇棺殓之，未及就圹，好事者题其上云：信物一角，附至阿鼻地狱；请去斜封，送上阎罗王。
现代文：是他妻子用纸絮苇棺将他入殓，但也未埋入坟墓。好事者在棺上题道：这就是一个凭证，终于归至无间地狱；让他去请求斜封灵官吧，这次是去找阎王。
English: It was his wife who put him in the coffin with a piece of paper, but he was not buried in the grave. The good-doer inscribed on the coffin: This is a certificate, finally returned to the boundless hell; let him go to request the oblique seal of the spiritual officer, this time to go to hell.

古文：时人以为笑端。
现代文：当时人都以此为笑谈。
English: At the time, everyone laughed about it.

古文：李任为赋
现代文：李任为赋
English: Li Ren for Fu

古文：天成年，卢文进镇邓。
现代文：后唐天成年间，卢文进镇守邓州。
English: After he became an adult in the Tang Dynasty, Lu Wenjin became the town guard of Dangzhou.

古文：因出城，宾从偕至，舍人韦吉亦被召。
现代文：因为要出城，宾客从属一起到来，舍人韦吉也被召请。
English: Because they had to leave the city, the guests arrived together with their subordinates, and Wei Ji, the host, was also invited.

古文：年老，无力控驭，既醉，马逸，东西驰桑林之中，被横枝骨挂巾冠，露秃而奔突。
现代文：韦吉已年老，没有控制马的力气，何况已经酒醉，马又狂奔乱跑，在桑林中东西驰骋，帽子也被树枝挂掉了，露着光秃秃的脑袋四处奔窜。
English: Weggie was too old to control his horse, and he was drunk, and the horse was running wild, galloping up and down in the mulberry grove, his hat hanging from a branch, his bald head bared.

古文：仆夫执从，则已坠矣。
现代文：等仆人将马勒住，他早已坠地。
English: By the time the servants had restrained the horse, he had already fallen to the ground.

古文：旧患肺风，鼻上瘾疹而黑，卧于道周。幕客无不笑者。
现代文：韦吉过去患过肺风病，鼻子上留有黑色斑疹。此刻卧于路旁，幕客无不看着发笑的。
English: Weggie, who had suffered from pneumonic plague in the past and had a black spot on his nose, was lying on the side of the road, with onlookers laughing.

古文：从事令左司郎中李任，祠部员外任瑶，各占一韵而赋之。
现代文：从事令左司郎中李任、祠部员外任瑶各选一韵写一首赋。
English: Engaged in ordering the left-hand sergeant, Li Ren, and the member of the ancestral hall, Gao Yu, to each choose a rhyme and write a poem.

古文：赋项云：当其厅子潜窥，衙官共看，喧呼于麦垄之里，偃仆于桑林之畔。
现代文：李任在赋中写道：当仆人偷看，衙官们一起来看时，他正在麦垅里呼叫，仆卧在桑林旁边。
English: Li Ren wrote in his fable: When the servants peeped and the eunuchs came to look, he was calling in the straw and his servant was lying next to the mulberry tree.

古文：蓝搀鼻孔，真同生铁之椎；腼甸骷髅，宛是熟铜之罐。
现代文：那蓝青的鼻头，真像一个生铁槌；那满脸愧色的瘦弱的身体，宛如一个熟铜罐。
English: That blue-blue nose, really like a raw hammer; that ashamed thin body, like a cooked copper pot.

古文：余不记之。
现代文：其余的就不引用了。
English: I won't quote the rest.

古文：闻之者无不解颐。
现代文：听说的人无不开颜大笑。
English: Everyone who hears about it bursts out laughing.

